Unless your communication is very short, its beginning should tell readers what to expect in the segments that follow. A forecasting statement positioned at the beginning of a communication should focus its organization and scope. This will serve a couple of purposes. First, it will narrow the readers attention to only what needs to be addressed. Second, it will deter some of the readers who you are not intending to write for. This could help in avoiding lawsuits.
By telling your readers about your communication's organization in your beginning you provide them with a framework for understanding the connections among the various pieces of information you convey. This framework substantially increases your communication's usability by helping your readers to see immediately how each new point you make relates to point they have already read. It also helps skimming readers to navigate quickly to the information they are seeking.
Readers want to know from the beginning what a communication does and does not contain. Even if they are persuaded that you are addressing a subject relevant to them, they may still wonder whether you discuss the specific aspects of the subject they want to know about. Often you will tell your readers about the scope of your communication when you tell about its organizations: When you list the topics it addresses, you indicate its scope. There will be times however, when you will need to include additional information. That happens when you your to understand that you are not addressing your subject comprehensively or that you are addressing it from a particular point of view.
Ordinarily, you will have no trouble eliciting a receptive response because you will be communication with fellow employees, customers, and others who want the information you are providing. In certain circumstances, however, your readers may have more negative attitude toward your message. In such situations, you will need to take special care in drafting the beginning of your communication if you are to win a fair hearing for your message. Your readers' initial attitude toward your message will be negative if the answer to any of the following questions is "yes". If that is the case, try to pinpoint the attitudes that are likely to shape your readers reactions to your communication, and then devise your beginning accordingly.
Does your message contain bad news for your readers?
Does your message contain ideas or recommendations that will be unwelcome to your readers?
Do your readers feel distrust, resentment, or competitiveness toward you, your department, or your company?
Are your readers likely to be skeptical of your subject or situation?
Are your readers likely to be suspicious of motives?
The strategy that is most likely to promote a positive initial reaction or to counteract a negative one differs from situation to situation. However, these are the three strategies that often work.
Present yourself as a partner, not as a critic or a competitor. Suggest the you are working with your readers to help solve a problem they want to solve or to achieve a goal they want to achieve.
Delay the presentation of your main point. An initial negative reaction may prompt your readers to aggressively devise counterarguments to each point that follows. Therefore, if you believe that your readers may react negatively to your main point in your beginning. If you delay the presentation of your main point, your readers may consider at least some of your other points objectively before discovering your main point and reacting against it.
Establish your credibility. People are more likely to respond favorably to a message if they have confidence in the person delivering it. Consequently, you can promote openness to your message if you begin by convincing your readers that you are an expert in your subject and are knowledgeable about the situation. This does not mean, however, that you should announce your credentials, you merely burden your readers with unnecessary information. Avoid discussing your qualifications when writing to people, such as your coworkers, who have already formed a favorable opinion of your expertise.
Ask for assistance. Most individuals are more receptive to new ideas when being asked for help. Even if you know everything about the situation, you might not be able to solve it on your own. In these situations it would be beneficial to ask the reader for help. This shows your reader that even if you know everything there is to know on the situation at hand, you don't know everything there is to know. When writing, it is often important not to come off as arrogant or snobbish. Sometimes we have to swallow our pride to get things done. Try to connect with people on the same level. Acting like you know more will invite more negative reaction.
Although the strategies suggested will often encourage openness, don't employ them mechanically. Always keep in mind the particular attitudes, experience and expectations of your readers as you craft the beginning of a communication. You might do this by telling yourself a story about your readers. The central figure in your story should be your reader, an individual if you are writing to one person, or a typical member of your audience if you are writing to a group. Begin your story a few minutes before this person picks up your communication and continue it until the moment he or she reads your first words. Although you would not actually include the story in your communication, creating it can help you decide how to begin.
As you draft the beginning of a communication, ask yourself whether your readers will need any background information to understand what you are going to tell them.
Your readers need to grasp certain general principles in order to understand your specific points.
Your readers are unfamiliar with technical terms you will be using
Your readers are unfamiliar with the situation that you are discussing
Not all background information belongs at the beginning of your communication. Information that pertains only to certain segments should appear at the beginning of those segments. In the beginning of your communication include only background information that will help your readers understand your overall message.
Summaries help busy managers learn the main points without reading the entire document, and they give those readers an overview of the communication's content and organization. For longer communications, especially those that are longer enough to have covers and tables of contents, these summaries are longer and often printed on a separate page.
There is no rule of thumb that tells how long the beginning should be. A good, reader-centered beginning may require only a phrase or may take several pages. You need to give your readers only the information they don't already know.
The reason they should read the communication
The organization and scope of the communication
The background information they need in order to understand and use the communication
If you have given your readers all this information, and have encouraged them to receive your message openly, then you have written a good beginning, regardless of how long or short it is.
Readers' expectations and preferences about the beginning of a communication are shaped by their culture. The suggestions your have just read are suitable for readers in the United States and some other Western countries. However, costume carries widely. You must have good understanding of the communication customs of your readers' culture in order to create an effective opening. If you do not have this understanding, do some research or seek out someone who is from that culture to ask them.
Suppose you learn that your employer is engaged in an action you consider to be unethical. Or you are asked to write something that violates your sense of what is ethical. Should you speak up or express your concerns in writing? New employees are sometimes advised to wait until they have achieved security and status before trying to bring about change. But that means you could spend years before addressing a practice you regard as ethical. Ignoring an unethical act would be seen as unethical in itself. When determining how to draw attention to something you consider to be ethical you face a challenge similar to that of figuring out how to begin a memo in which you will recommend a course of action with which you believe your readers will disagree.
You may someday witness a practice that is so outrageous that you will be willing to risk future promotions and even your job in order to stop it. If you find yourself in that situation, seek the aid of influential people inside your company. If the practice you object to violates the law or a government regulation, alert the appropriate agency. This is called whistle blowing. There are some state and federal laws to protect whistle blowers.
As you plan your letters, e-mail, and other routine communications ask yourself the following:
How well do I know this person?
How much do they know about the topic discussed in the letter?
How will they respond to what I will need to say? In what ways can I use this communication to build rapport for the firm?
What exactly am I trying to accomplish with this message?
What is their attitude toward me and the firm?
How much and what kind of information should I include, based on their profile?
How technical can I be in presenting my message?
What strategies can I use to make this message easy to read and understand?
Micro-organisms are often microscopic and single-celled or unicellular.
When you have reached the point where you feel more or less confident reading, try reading a grammar book in and about the language you are learning. It is not as painful as it sounds and will help you with difficult points. It will be both a review of the basic rules and an introduction to the more subtle aspects of every language. The hindsight will make the basic rules sound more clear and natural and you will be presented with a plethora of model sentences to further reinforce them. You will learn (or just review) the most basic and useful linguistic stuff, e.g.: what is a direct object, an adverb, a nasal consonant, an infinitive, a case, etc. Overall, you will end up with a much clearer and organized picture of the language as a whole.
The Heavenly Stems (HS) and Earthly Branches (EB) of the Year, Month and Day of 2024 in the Hsia Calendar, from January (Month =1) to December (Month=12).
A list of the more complete books in this department are shown below. At the bottom of the page you will find a listing of all the books in this department. Many of these other books have considerable content and are well worth exploring.
This book is written as a practical guide for students struggling to bring their writing up to the level expected of them by their professors and instructors. We have avoided complicated "textbook language" and jargon in favor of plain, easily understood prose. We have simply passed on what has worked well for us in our own experiences as college writers and instructors.
From Rome to the present day, European History puts the whole sweep of history in Europe into context.
The perfect introduction for high school lessons on UK government. It is also a quick guide for people of other nations to get some insight into the arcane governance of the UK with its powerless head of state and all powerful House of Commons.
A history of the nation that shapes our modern world. Perfect as an introduction for both high school in the US and for people from other countries who want to know what makes the US tick.
The ideal way to learn standard Mandarin. There are audio files and copious lessons in how to write as well as understand the language.
A beautifully produced, complete course in French that includes audio files so that you can really learn to speak the language. It has extensive notes on grammar and is suitable as a textbook for high school students in the US and UK up to age 16. It is also an indispensable aid for the older traveller!
How to write a research paper in History
Rhetoric and Writing in the Public Sphere
The Annotated Constitution of the United States
These memory aids aren't true! They're nonsense made up to help you remember the meanings of Russian words.
Russia is too cold to take off your shirt, so Russians have white bellies.
Picture scrubbing a floor on your knees. This chore will make your knees black.
When Russians sit with crossed knees you can see their red socks.
You never see Russians' knees because they wear dark blue pants.
In Russia, caffeinated soft drinks always come in yellow cans, and they have twice the caffeine of American soft drinks, so anything you drink out of a yellow can will make you jolty.
Corey reaches no levee next to the brown Mississippi River.
This book is organized around questions related to topics on the management of groups and teams. In this page, we want to list questions that would be relevant to the topic, to eventually formulate answers for them and incorporate them into the main body of the book.
Feel free to add questions to this list, and to reorganize them or group them together if you see common threads. As the questions are refined, they will be easier to answer.
How can different levels of commitment be avoided during the selection process?
Is it necessary for all team members to be equally committed to a project?
If large disparities exist, how can these be addressed?
How should the team deal with members who are not committed?
How should the team deal with members who have taken on more than their share?
How can teams change membership composition without disrupting the remaining members?
Are some personalities simply unsuited for teamwork?
What should the team and its members do when the tasks seem to be a waste of time?
What should the team do when its mission and goals are ambigous?
How can the team choose an effective course of action when there are varying opinions on what to do?
What can team members do when meetings are ineffective or confrontational?
When should team members be flexible and when should they stick to their guns?
How can team members choose effective task orders, assignments, etc.?
What are some hallmarks of ineffective plans and how can these be avoided?
What makes for effective time management?
How can delegation be used effectively?
How can remote and isolated team members become acculturated?
Is/should culture be established at the outset? Can culture be changed later on?
What are the key social graces all team members should have?
What social criteria are important when selecting members?
What can teams do when members lack proper social graces?
How can teams deal with members who have different technical aptitudes?
What are the conflicting dynamics between older members who have experience, but may lack the technical knowledge of younger members?
What can be done to avoid communication breakdowns?
What should team members do if the leaders motivations are political and do not have the teams best interest at heart?
Should team members ask a leader to step down if they have lost confidence in him or her?
What should a leader do if team members are losing confidence in him or her?
How can leaders encourage healthy communication?
What should people do when their role changes from team member to team leader?
How can leaders remain objective? Should leaders always be objective?
Do different organizations require different leadership styles—eg. government, military, academia etc.?
In a leaderless team, how can one effectively assume the role of the leader?
What cultural differences should team members be aware of?
How can team members ensure that cultural or political differences to not inhibit performance?
Computational neurobiology is the application of mathematical and computational models to problems in neuroscience. It seeks quantitative characterizations of molecular, single-neuron, network, and behavioral dynamics.
Act Governing Relations between the People of the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area Republic of China (Taiwan) Law2003
In case of discrepancies between the Chinese text and English translation, the Chinese text shall prevail.[1]
This Act is specially enacted for the purposes of ensuring the security and public welfare in the Taiwan Area, regulating dealings between the peoples of the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area, and handling legal matters arising therefrom before national unification. With regard to matters not provided for in this Act, the provisions of other relevant laws and regulations shall apply.
The following terms as used in this Act are defined below.
"Taiwan Area" refers to Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, Matsu, and any other area under the effective control of the Government.
"Mainland Area" refers to the territory of the Republic of China outside the Taiwan Area.
"People of the Taiwan Area" refers to the people who have household registrations in the Taiwan Area.
"People of the Mainland Area" refers to the people who have household registrations in the Mainland Area.
The provisions of this Act pertaining to the people of the Mainland Area shall likewise apply to the people of the Mainland Area who reside outside the Mainland Area.
The Mainland Affairs Council, Executive Yuan shall coordinate the handling of all Mainland-related affairs and is designated as the competent authorities of this Act.
The Executive Yuan may set up or designate an institution to handle the affairs relating to any dealings between the peoples of the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area.
The Mainland Affairs Council, Executive Yuan may entrust the institution referred to in the preceding paragraph or any private organization meeting the following criteria to handle the affairs relating to any dealings between the peoples of the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area:
Upon establishment, more than half of its total assets is donated by the government, and
The purpose of its establishment is for handling the affairs relating to any dealings between the peoples of the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area, and the central competent authorities for it or for its business is the Mainland Affairs Council, Executive Yuan.
The Mainland Affairs Council, Executive Yuan or each competent authorities approved by the Executive Yuan in accordance with Paragraph 1 of Article 4-2 may, based on the need and the nature of the affairs to be handled, entrust any accountable, professional, and experienced non-profit juristic person other than those referred to in the preceding two paragraphs on a case-by-case basis to assist the handling of the affairs relating to any dealings between the peoples of the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area; if necessary, it may also be entrusted to execute agreements.
The institution or private organization referred to in the preceding two paragraphs may upon the approval of the entrusting authorities, entrust any other non-profit juristic person as referred to in the preceding paragraph to assist the handling of the affairs relating to any dealings between the peoples of the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area.
The civil servants transferred to the institution or private organization referred to in the preceding Article shall be permitted to return to government services, and when they return, the length of their service at the referred institution or organization may be added to their years of service as civil servants. This provision shall apply mutatis mutandis to those who were transferred prior to the entering into force of this Act or the amendments to this Act.
For the civil servants who do not return to government services after being transferred to the institution or private organization referred to in the preceding Article and receive the retirement benefits, layoff or death compensation from the referred institution or private organization, the Mainland Affairs Council, Executive Yuan shall make the budget to pay them for the years of their service as civil servants before and after the implementation of the new retirement and compensation scheme, based on the lump-sum payment criteria provided for in the relevant laws and regulations governing retirement and compensation scheme applicable to them before their transfer.
For the civil servants who return to government services after being transferred to the institution or private organization referred to in the preceding Article or who receive retirement benefits, layoff or death compensation from the referred institution or private organization, the length of service for which they have received benefits or compensation shall not be calculated in addition thereto.
Rules governing the transfer arrangement, return, calculation of the length of service, ranking determination and any other requirements referred to in Paragraph 1 shall be prescribed by the Examination Yuan in conjunction with the Executive Yuan.
Rules governing the lump-sum payment criteria, the calculation, and budget making shall be prescribed by the Executive Yuan.
The Mainland Affairs Council, Executive Yuan shall coordinate the administration of the matters related to any agreement making between the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area; where the content of the agreement is of professional and technical nature, and suitable to be made by each competent authorities concerned, the administration may be taken charge by the referred competent authorities in conjunction with the Mainland Affairs Council, Executive Yuan upon the approval of the Executive Yuan.
The Mainland Affairs Council, Executive Yuan or each competent authorities approved by the Executive Yuan in accordance with the preceding paragraph may entrust any institution or private organization referred to in Article 4 to negotiate and execute agreements, in the name of the entrusted, with the concerned authorities of the Mainland Area or their delegated juristic person, organization, or any other institution.
The agreement referred to in this Statue means any written document involving the exercise of governmental powers or any matter of political issues, and executed between the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area; any additional protocol, additional provision, protocol executed, agreed minutes, annex, and any other attachment shall constitute an integral part of the agreement.
Where any other non-profit judicial person referred to in Paragraph 3 of Article 4 is entrusted to assist the handling of the affairs or execute agreements, it shall be instructed and supervised by the entrusting authorities, or institution or private organization referred to in Paragraph 1 or 2 of Article 4.
The institution or private organization entrusted in accordance with the provisions of Paragraph 1 or 2 of Article 4 as well as any other non-profit juristic person referred to in Paragraph 3 of Article 4 during the entrusted period, shall comply with the following provisions:
Upon sending delegates to the Mainland Area or any other area to handle the entrusted affairs or any relevant important business, shall apply for approval to, comply with the instructions of, and promptly provide updated reports to the entrusting authorities, institution or private organization referred to in Paragraph 1 or 2 of Article 4; upon sending delegates to the Mainland Area for the other affairs, shall inform in advance the entrusting authorities, institution or private organization referred to in Paragraph 1 or 2 of Article 4.
Its representative and any person handling the entrusted affairs shall have the same obligation of confidentiality as civil servants even after they are discharged of the duty.
Its representative and any person handling the entrusted affairs shall have the same obligation to avoid conflict of interest as civil servants for the handling of the entrusted affairs.
Its representative and any person handling the entrusted affairs shall not negotiate or execute any agreement with the concerned authorities of the Mainland Area or their delegated juristic person, organization or any other institution without the approval of the entrusting authorities.
The institution, private organization, or any other non-profit juristic person entrusted to execute an agreement in accordance with Paragraph 3 of Article 4 or Paragraph 2 of Article 4-2 shall submit the draft agreement through the entrusting authorities to the Executive Yuan for approval before its execution of the agreement.
Any authorities or institution at each local government level of the Taiwan Area shall not negotiate or execute any agreement in any form with any individual, juristic person, organization, or other authorities or institution of the Mainland Area unless authorized by the Mainland Affairs Council, Executive Yuan. The same applies mutatis mutandis to the civil servants, elected public offices at all levels, or local representative organs at all levels.
Any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution shall not execute any agreement involving the governmental powers of the Taiwan Area or political issues with any individual, juristic person, organization, or other authorities or institution of the Mainland Area unless authorized by the Mainland Affairs Council, Executive Yuan or each competent authorities concerned in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Rules governing the entrusting and re-entrusting of any entrusted institution, private organization, or other non-profit juristic person to handle the affairs, or negotiate or execute agreements and the supervision thereof in accordance with the provisions of Paragraph 3 or 4 of Article 4 or Paragraph 2 of Article 4-2 shall be drafted by the Mainland Affairs Council, Executive Yuan and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
To handle the affairs relating to any dealings between the peoples of the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area, the Executive Yuan may permit in accordance with the principle of reciprocity juristic persons, organizations, or any other institutions of the Mainland Area to establish branches in the Taiwan Area.
The matters relating to the granting of permission for the establishment referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be prescribed by law.
Documents produced in the Mainland Area shall be presumed to be genuine provided that they are authenticated by the institution set up or designated, or by the private organization entrusted by the Executive Yuan.
Where any legal process or document is required to be served, or any necessary investigation is required to be conducted in the Mainland Area, judicial authorities may request or entrust the institution or private organization referred to in Article 4 to do so.
The people of the Taiwan Area may not have household registrations in the Mainland Area or hold passports issued by the Mainland Area.
Except for the situations deemed necessary by the authorities concerned out of special consideration, any person who has a household registration in the Mainland Area or holds a passport issued by the Mainland Area in violation of the provisions of the preceding paragraph shall be deprived of its status as the people of the Taiwan Area and its rights of election, recall, initiative, referendum, serving military service or public offices, and any other rights derived from its household registration in the Taiwan Area, and its household registration in the Taiwan Area shall be annulled by the household registration authorities; provided that the responsibilities and obligations resulted from its status as the people of the Taiwan Area are not excused or exempted.
Any of the people of the Taiwan Area who has a household registration in the Mainland Area or holds a passport issued by the Mainland Area before the coming into force of the amendments to this Act is not deprived of its status as the people of the Taiwan Area provided that it submits to the Ministry of Interior relevant proofs that it has had its household registration in the Mainland Area annulled or abandoned its passport issued by the Mainland Area within six months from the coming into force of the amendments to this Act.
Any person deprived of its status as the people of the Taiwan Area in accordance with the provisions of the preceding Article may apply to the Ministry of Interior for permission to recover its status as the people of the Taiwan Area and to reside in the Taiwan Area after its return provided that it has its household registration in the Mainland Area annulled or abandons its passport issued by the Mainland Area.
Rules governing the permission requirements, procedures, means, restriction, revocation, or annulment of permission and any other requirements referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be drafted by the Ministry of Interior and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
No people of the Mainland Area may enter into the Taiwan Area without permission of the competent authorities.
Any of the people of the Mainland Area who are permitted to enter into the Taiwan Area may not engage in any activity inconsistent with the purposes of the permission.
Rules governing the granting of permission referred to in the preceding two paragraphs shall be drafted by the competent authorities concerned and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
Any of the people of the Mainland Area who apply to enter into the Taiwan Area for family reunion, residency, or permanent residency shall be interviewed, fingerprinted, and registered for record; where it fails to be interviewed or fingerprinted, no permission shall be granted to its application for family reunion, residency, or permanent residency. Governing rules thereof shall be prescribed by the competent authorities.
Any person who employs any of the people of the Mainland Area to work in the Taiwan Area shall apply to the competent authorities for permission.
Any of the people of the Mainland Area who are permitted to be employed in the Taiwan Area may not be employed for more than one year, during which it may not change its employer or work; provided, however, that with the permission of the competent authorities, it may change its employer or work in case the employment relationship cannot continue due to its employer's business being shut down or suspended, or any other extraordinary situations.
For any of the people of the Mainland Area who change employers or work according to the proviso in the preceding paragraph, the duration of their employments shall be calculated by combining the periods of employments before and after the change of their employers or work.
If an employer cannot meet its recruitment need after recruiting publicly in the Taiwan Area with an offer of reasonable working terms and after applying to a public placement service office for recruitment registration, the employer may then apply to the Council of Labor Affairs, Executive Yuan for employment of the people of the Mainland Area to fill the vacancies; provided, however, that the employer, during the recruitment period, informs the labor unions or the workers of its business units of the full text of the recruitment notice and posts such notice at the workplace intended for the people of the Mainland Area to work.
The labor contracts for employment of the people of the Mainland Area shall be in fixed-term.
Rules governing the granting of permission and the administration concerned as referred to in Paragraph 1 shall be drafted by the Council of Labor Affairs, Executive Yuan in conjunction with the authorities concerned and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
To meet the employment demand derived from the service sectors opened in accordance with any international agreement, multinational enterprises or enterprises of the Taiwan Area of which their business scales in Taiwan reach certain threshold may employ the people of the Mainland Area with the permission of the competent authorities and not subject to the restriction referred to in the relevant provisions of the preceding six paragraphs and Article 95; rules governing the granting of permission, administration, the business scales of enterprises, employment terms and any other requirements thereof shall be drafted by the Council of Labor Affairs, Executive Yuan in conjunction with the authorities concerned and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
Any person who employs the people of the Mainland Area shall pay an amount of Employment Stabilization Fee to a special account designated by the Council of Labor Affairs, Executive Yuan.
Rules governing the schedule and management of the Fee referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be drafted by the Council of Labor Affairs, Executive Yuan in conjunction with the Ministry of Finance and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
For any of the people of the Mainland Area permitted to work by employment in the Taiwan Area violating any provision of this Act or any other laws and regulations, the competent authorities may revoke or annul the permission.
Any of the people of the Mainland Area whose permissions have been revoked or annulled in accordance with the preceding paragraph shall be ordered to leave the Taiwan Area within a specified time limit and in case of failing to leave by the expiration of the aforementioned time limit, shall be deported in accordance with the provisions of Article 18.
The provisions of the preceding paragraph shall apply where a labor contract is suspended or terminated.
To make any of the people of the Mainland Area enter into the Taiwan Area illegally.
To solicit any of the people of the Taiwan Area to enter into the Mainland Area with the knowledge that the solicited has no permission.
To employ or to continue to employ any of the people of the Mainland Area to work without permission or beyond the scope of the permission.
To act as a middleman in introducing others to commit any act referred to in the preceding sub-paragraph.
Any of the people of the Mainland Area may apply to enter into the Taiwan Area for the purpose of business visit or tourism; regulations thereof shall be prescribed by the competent authorities.
Being a lineal relative by blood or the spouse of any of the people of the Taiwan Area, and of the age of no less than seventy or no more than twelve.
Being the surviving spouse of any of the people of the Taiwan Area who needs to provide care to any of the underage children born by the deceased spouse.
Being any serviceman of the Taiwan Area who was sent over to the Mainland Area for military service and has been staying there since 1945, and its spouse.
Being any former officer or enlisted man of the armed forces captured in battle or in the execution of special missions after the Government moved to Taiwan in 1949, and its spouse.
Bing any person who was sent over to the Mainland Area to study on Government scholarships before the Government moved to Taiwan in 1949, and its spouse.
Being any fishermen or crew who, by reason of breakdown of their vessels, shipwreck, or force majeure, have stayed in the Mainland Area since any date by November 1, 1987 and had household registrations in the Taiwan Area before.
An annual quota may be imposed on the number of permanent residency in the Taiwan Area to be granted to the people of the Mainland Area who apply in accordance with the provisions of Sub-paragraph 1 of the preceding paragraph.
The spouse in the Mainland Area of any person referred to in Sub-paragraphs 3 to 6 of Paragraph 2 may apply for permanent residency in the Taiwan Area together with the application of the referred person; provided, however, that if the applications are not filed together, the referred person may apply on behalf of its spouse after the referred person becomes a permanent resident in the Taiwan Area.
Any of the people of the Taiwan Area who guarantee for any of the people of the Mainland Area for the latter's entry into the Taiwan Area shall assist the authorities concerned in deporting the latter in the event of the latter's failure to leave by the expiration of the authorized duration of stay, and shall bear the expenses incurred in connection therewith.
The deporting authorities may notify the guarantor to pay the expenses referred to in the preceding paragraph within a specified time limit by providing photocopies of relevant receipts and a calculation statement, and shall forward the case in accordance with the laws for compulsory execution in the event of the guarantor's failure to pay by the expiration of the aforementioned time limit.
Making any of the people of the Mainland Area enter into the Taiwan Area illegally.
Where there is more than one person liable for the expenses referred to in the preceding paragraph, these persons shall be jointly and severally liable.
The deporting authorities may notify the guarantor to pay within a specified time limit the expenses referred to in Paragraph 1 by providing photocopies of relevant receipts and a calculation statement, and shall forward the case in accordance with the laws for compulsory execution in the event of the guarantor's failure to pay by the expiration of the aforementioned time limit.
Except otherwise provided for in any other law, any of the people of the Mainland Area permitted to enter into the Taiwan Area may not register itself as candidate for any public office, serve in the government, educational institutions or state enterprises, or organize any political party unless it has had a household registration in the Taiwan Area for at least ten years; unless it has had a household registration in the Taiwan Area for at least twenty years, it may not serve in the intelligence agencies or institutions, or serve in the national defense agencies or institutions as any of following personnel:
Recruited military officers, sergeants and soldiers.
Drafted military officers and sergeants.
Civilian, educational and military contracted personnel.
Any of the people of the Mainland Area who is permitted to enter into the Taiwan Area and has a household registrations in the Taiwan Area may serve as faculty member of any university, researcher of any academic or research institution, or specialist of any social education institution according to relevant laws and regulations without being subject to the limitation to have a household registration in the Taiwan Area for at least ten years as referred to in the preceding paragraph.
Any person referred to in the preceding paragraph shall not assume any responsibility or perform any work involving national security or confidential science-tech research.
Any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Taiwan Area permitted to make any investment or have any technology cooperation in the Mainland Area, after filing with the Ministry of Education for record, may establish in the Mainland Area any school not higher than senior high school exclusively for any of the people of the Taiwan Area (hereinafter "Taiwanese School in the Mainland Area") and may have a kindergarten annexed.
Rules governing the procedures of filing for records, the curriculum, facilities, student recruitment, eligibility of schools for financial awards or assistances, return of students to Taiwan for education, qualification for and accreditation of the salary rank as well as the length of service of any of the people of the Taiwan Area to serve as principal or teacher, and any other related matters of the Taiwanese Schools in the Mainland Area shall be drafted by the Ministry of Education and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
Any student of the Taiwanese Schools in the Mainland Area in compliance with the Rules referred to in the preceding paragraph returning to Taiwan for education may continue its education at any school of the same level in the Taiwan Area.
The provisions of the Civil Servants and Educational Personnel Insurance Law and the National Health Insurance Law related to private schools shall apply mutatis mutandis to the insurance matters of any of the people of the Taiwan Area serving as principal or teacher of any Taiwanese School in the Mainland Area; where the personnel system of a Taiwanese School in the Mainland Area is the same as that of the school at the same level in the Taiwan Area, the relevant provisions of the Private School Law shall apply mutatis mutandis to its retirement, death compensation, and layoff matters.
Any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Taiwan Area, the Mainland Area or any other area may be permitted to recruit students or act as a middleman in the Taiwan Area for any educational institution of the Mainland Area. Rules governing the granting of the referred permission shall be drafted by the Ministry of Education and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
Any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Taiwan Area having income derived from sources in the Mainland Area shall pay income tax thereon together with the income derived from sources in the Taiwan Area; provided, however, that the amount of the income tax already paid in the Mainland Area may be deducted from the amount of the income tax payable.
Where any juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Taiwan Area permitted by the competent authorities in accordance with the provisions of Article 35 to make any investment in the Mainland Area through the company or enterprise it establishes in any third area includes in its tax return the investment income of its company or enterprise in the third area according to the Income Tax Act, the investment income of such company or enterprise derived from the income distributed by the invested company or enterprise in the Mainland Area shall be deemed the income derived from sources in the Mainland Area and taxed according to the preceding paragraph; provided, however, that the amount of income tax paid in the Mainland Area and the third Area against the portion of investment income derived from sources in the Mainland Area may be deducted from the amount of the income tax payable.
The total amount to be credited in accordance with the preceding two paragraphs may not exceed the increment of the income tax payable computed, after including the income derived from sources in the Mainland Area, at the applicable tax rate of the Taiwan Area.
Any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area having income derived from sources in the Taiwan Area shall pay income tax thereon.
Any individual of the Mainland Area residing and staying in the Taiwan Area for at least 183 days in a taxable year shall file consolidated income tax return for its income derived from sources in the Taiwan Area, and the taxing provisions applicable to the people of the Taiwan Area shall apply mutatis mutandis.
Any juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area with a fixed place of business or a business agent shall pay profit-seeking enterprise income tax on its income derived from sources in the Taiwan Area, and the taxing provisions applicable to the profit-seeking enterprises in the Taiwan Area shall apply mutatis mutandis; where it does not have any fixed place of business but has a business agent, its payable profit-seeking enterprise income tax shall be responsible by its business agent, who shall file with each competent tax authorities and pay tax thereto. Where, however, any juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area receives net dividends or net surplus derived from its investment in the Taiwan Area, the amount of which shall not be included in its business income, the tax withholder shall withhold the tax payable in accordance with the prescribed rate upon making payment.
For any individual of the Mainland Area residing and staying in the Taiwan Area for less than 183 days in a taxable year and any juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area without any fixed place of business or business agent, the tax payable for its income derived from sources in the Taiwan Area shall be withheld by the tax withholder in accordance with the prescribed rate upon making payment and not subject to tax return filing; where the income does not fall within the scope of withholding, the taxpayer shall file and pay tax in accordance with the prescribed tax rate, or entrust any individual of the Taiwan Area or any profit-seeking enterprise with a fixed place of business in the Taiwan Area as its agent for tax return filing and payment provided that it cannot file the tax return itself.
The relevant provisions of the Income Tax Act shall apply to the withholding matters referred to in the preceding two paragraphs.
Schedules governing the withholding rates applicable to the income derived from the sources in the Taiwan Area for any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area shall be drafted by the Ministry of Finance and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
For any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area or any company it invests in any third area permitted to invest in the Taiwan Area in accordance with the provisions of Article 73, the tax payable for the dividends distributed to it by the company in the Taiwan Area or surplus distributed to a partner shall not be subject to the provisions of tax return filing provided for in the Income Tax Act provided that the tax withholder designated by the provisions of the Income Tax Act, upon payment, withholds twenty percent of the amount payable or distributable. However, any individual of the Mainland Area residing and staying in the Taiwan Area for at least 183 days in a taxable year shall file consolidated income tax return in accordance with the provisions of Paragraph 2 of the preceding Article.
Where any director, manager, or technical personnel of any juristic person, organization, or other institution which is permitted to make any investment in the Taiwan Area in accordance with the provisions of Article 73, resides and stays in the Taiwan Area for less than 183 days in a taxable year because of its engagement in investment, factory building, market survey or any other temporary work, its salary income paid outside the Taiwan Area by the referred juristic person, organization, or other institution shall not be deemed its income derived from sources in the Taiwan Area.
Any of the retired personnel from the military, government, educational institutions, or state enterprises who receives monthly retirement benefits and intends to go to the Mainland Area to reside there for a long term shall apply to the competent authorities for a lump-sum payment of the retirement benefits, and the competent authorities shall calculate the lump-sum payment the applicant is entitled to based on the applicant's originally approved length of service and the amount of monthly payment received by any person of the same rank presently employed or in service during the month when the application is filed and pay the balance with the aggregate of the monthly retirement benefits the applicant has already received to be deducted from the referred lump-sum payment; if there is no balance or the balance is less than one half of the referred lump-sum payment, the applicant shall be paid in either case with an amount equal to one half of the referred lump-sum payment.
Where any of the personnel referred to in the preceding paragraph has any dependent in the Taiwan Area, it shall acquire the consent of its dependent(s) before its filing of the application.
Where any of the personnel referred to in Paragraph 1 has a household registration in the Mainland Area or holds a passport issued by the Mainland Area but fails to apply for a lump-sum payment of its retirement benefits in accordance with the provisions, its entitlement to the retirement benefits shall be suspended until its status as the people of the Taiwan Area is recovered in accordance with the provisions of Article 9-2.
Where any of the personnel referred to in Paragraph 1 applies for a lump-sum payment of the retirement benefits by fraud or any other unjust means, the authorities such personnel is retired from shall reclaim the amount such personnel has received and refer the case to the judicial authorities if there is any criminal liability involved.
Rules governing the matters related to the application referred to in Paragraph 1 and the suspension and recovery of retirement benefits referred to in Paragraph 3 shall be prescribed by each competent authorities.
Where any of the personnel of the military, government, educational institutions or state enterprises dies during employment, in service or while receiving monthly retirement benefits and has no surviving relative or legal beneficiary in the Taiwan Area, any of its relative or legal beneficiary residing in the Mainland Area may, within five years from the date of its death, apply in writing to the competent authorities, if permitted to enter into the Taiwan Area, for the death payment of the civil servants or military personnel insurance, a lump-sum payment of the death compensation, the balance of military service retirement benefit or a lump-sum payment of the death benefit; provided that the relative or legal beneficiary residing in the Mainland Area may not apply for the death compensation in annual installment or the death benefit in monthly installment. Those who fail to apply before the expiration of the aforementioned time limit shall be deemed to lose their entitlement.
The total of the death payment of the civil servants or military personnel insurance, the lump-sum payment of the death compensation, the balance of military service retirement benefit or the lump-sum payment of the death benefit referred to in the preceding paragraph shall not exceed two million New Taiwan Dollars.
For the death payment of the civil servants or military personnel insurance, the lump-sum payment of the death compensation, the balance of military service retirement benefit or the lump-sum payment of the death benefit reserved in accordance with laws prior to the coming into force of the amendments of July 1, 1997 to this Act, the relative or legal beneficiary residing in the Mainland Area shall within five years beginning from July 1, 1997 apply for the payments in accordance with Paragraph 1, and those who fail to apply before the expiration of the aforementioned time limit shall be deemed to lose their entitlement.
Where any person applying for the payments referred to in the provisions of Paragraph 1 or the preceding paragraph has difficulty in movement due to injury or illness, or the amount of payments it is entitled to is inappropriate to the amount of expenses for its travel to Taiwan, or there is any other special situation, it may be exempt by the competent authorities from entering into the Taiwan Area.
For any payment owed by the government in the Mainland Area and due in accordance with laws or regulations prior to 1949, in situations where the beneficiary is yet to receive any or full payment, no claim shall be processed before national unification.
For those veterans formerly housed in Veterans Homes for care by the Veterans Affairs Commission, Executive Yuan and approved to enter into and reside in the Mainland Area for a long term, the subsistence benefit and injury compensation they are entitled to shall continue to be paid; the same provision shall to those permitted to enter into the Mainland Area for permanent residency prior to the coming into force of the amendment to this Article.
Where a veteran under care is not approved in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph to have a household registration in the Mainland Area or to hold a passport issued by the Mainland Area, its entitlement to the subsistence benefit and injury compensation shall be suspended until its status as the people of the Taiwan Area is recovered in accordance with the provisions of Article 9-2.
Rules governing the matters related to the payment, suspension and recovery of payment of the subsistence benefit and injury compensation referred to in the preceding two paragraphs shall be drafted by the Veterans Affairs Commission, Executive Yuan and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
Any vessels, aircraft or other means of transportation of the Republic of China may sail or fly to the Mainland Area with the permission of the competent authorities. Rules governing the referred permission and administration shall be drafted by the Ministry of Transportation and Communications in conjunction with the authorities concerned and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval within eighteen months after the adoption of the amendment to this Act; and the referred period may be extended if necessary after reporting to the Legislative Yuan for record.
No vessels, aircraft or other means of transportation of the Republic of China may transport any of the people of the Mainland Area to the Taiwan Area or any other country or area outside the Mainland Area.
No people of the Taiwan Area may use any of non-R.O.C. vessels, aircraft or other means of transportation to transport any of the people of the Mainland Area to the Taiwan Area or any other country or area outside the Mainland Area.
Unless permitted by the competent authorities, no Mainland vessels, civil aircraft or other means of transportation may enter into the restricted or prohibited waters of the Taiwan Area or the controlled airspace of the Taipei Flight Information Region.
The restricted or prohibited waters and the controlled airspace referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be published by the Ministry of National Defense.
Rules governing the granting of permission referred to in Paragraph 1 shall be drafted by the Ministry of Transportation and Communications in conjunction with the authorities concerned and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
No foreign vessels, civil aircraft or other means of transportation may directly sail or fly between seaports or airports of the Taiwan Area and those of the Mainland Area; nor may any foreign vessel, civil aircraft or other means of transportation be used to operate scheduled sea or air lines between seaports or airports of the Taiwan Area and those of the Mainland Area via a third area.
Where any of the vessels, civil aircraft or other means of transportation referred to in the preceding paragraph is chartered by, or an investment of, or operated by any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area, the Ministry of Transportation and Communications may restrict or prohibit its entry into the seaports or airports of the Taiwan Area.
The Ministry of Transportation and Communications may remove after approval by the Executive Yuan, if necessary, the prohibition referred to in Paragraph 1 in whole or in part. The current navigation laws and regulations shall apply mutatis mutandis to the administration, transport operation and any other requirements after the referred removal, and if there is any need, the Ministry of Transportation and Communications may prescribe administration rules in consultation with the authorities concerned.
In the event that any civil aircraft of the Mainland enters, without permission, into the controlled airspace of the Taipei Flight Information Region, the authorities in charge of air defense may warn the aircraft to turn away or take any necessary defensive action.
In the event that any vessel of the Mainland enters, without permission, into the restricted or prohibited waters of the Taiwan Area, the competent authorities may drive it away, seize the vessel as well as the cargo and detain the persons on board, or take any necessary defensive action.
With regard to the vessels and cargoes seized and the detained persons referred to in the preceding paragraph, the competent authorities shall take the following measures within three months:
Where the seized vessels and cargoes do not involve any violation of laws, they may be returned; where the violation is serious, they may be confiscated.
The detained persons, after being investigated, shall be transferred to the authorities concerned for custody or deportation in accordance with Article 18 of this Act.
With respect to those Mainland vessels and cargoes seized as well as those persons detained, the actions taken by the competent authorities prior to the coming into force of this Act shall stand.
Except otherwise provided for in any other law, any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Taiwan Area may become a member of or hold a position in any juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area.
Any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Taiwan Area shall not hold any position or become any member of the agencies, institutions or organizations of the Mainland Area which are political parties, the military, the administration or of any political nature and which are prohibited with public notices by the Mainland Affairs Council, Executive Yuan in consultation with each competent authorities concerned.
Any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Taiwan Area holding a position in the Mainland Area or becoming a member thereof shall obtain the permission in any of the following situations:
Any position in or membership of the agencies, organizations or institutions of the Mainland Area which are political parties, the military, the administration or of any political nature and which are not prohibited with public notices in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph.
Where there is a threat to national security or interests, or a need in policy, and each competent authorities concerned has given public notices in consultation with the Mainland Affairs Council, Executive Yuan.
Any individual of the Taiwan Area holding a position or becoming a member of the juristic persons, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area may not engage in any activity detrimental to national security or interests.
The determination of the position or membership referred to in Paragraphs 2 and 3 shall be made by each competent authorities concerned; if there is any doubt, the Mainland Affairs Council, Executive Yuan in conjunction with the authorities concerned and scholars or experts may form a review committee to make a decision.
Rules governing the public notices, permission requirements, application procedures, means of review, administration, and any other requirements referred to in Paragraphs 2 and 3 shall be drafted by the Mainland Affairs Council, Executive Yuan in consultation with each competent authorities concerned and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
Those who had already held positions in or become members of any juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area before the coming into force of the amendments to this Act shall apply to the competent authorities for permission within six months after the date of the coming into force of the rules referred to in the preceding paragraph; those who fail to apply by the expiration of the aforementioned time limit or whose applications are denied shall be deemed without permission.
Unless permitted by each competent authorities concerned, no individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Taiwan Area may engage in any of the following activities:
Any form of cooperative activity with the agencies, institutions, or organizations of the Mainland Area which are political parties, the military, the administration or of any political nature, or which are involved in any political work against Taiwan or affect national security or interests.
Any cooperative activity involving political nature with any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area.
Establishing any juristic person, organization, or other institution of political nature together with any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area.
No cooperative activity of any non-profit seeking juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Taiwan Area with any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area may violate any provision of any law or regulation or involve any content of political nature; provided that the budget and audit reports are required to be submitted to the competent authorities in accordance with the provisions of any other laws and regulations, the cooperative activity shall be reported at the same time to the competent authorities.
Those who had already engaged in any activity referred to in Paragraph 1 before the coming into force of the amendments to this Act and continued it thereafter shall apply to the competent authorities for permission within three months after the date of the coming into force of the amendments to this Act; those who had already engaged in any activity referred to in Paragraph 2 shall file reports within one year after the date of the coming into force of the amendments to this Act; those who fail to apply or file reports by the expiration of the aforementioned time limit or whose applications are denied shall be deemed without permission or filing.
Any authorities, institutions or legislative organs at any local government level of the Taiwan Area shall not form any coalition with any local authorities of the Mainland Area unless the Ministry of Interior in consultation with the Mainland Affairs Council, Executive Yuan reports to the Executive Yuan for consent.
Those who had already engaged in any activity referred to in the preceding paragraph before the coming into force of the amendments to this Act and continued it thereafter shall report to the Executive Yuan for consent within three months after the date of the coming into force of the amendments to this Act. It shall be deemed without consent if by the expiration of the aforementioned time limit, no report for consent is made or the Executive Yuan does not give consent.
Any level of school of the Taiwan Area forming any coalition or engaging in any other cooperative activity of any written agreement with any school of the Mainland Area shall file with the Ministry of Education in advance, and shall not form the referred coalition or engaging in the referred cooperative activity of a written agreement within thirty days after the date when the Ministry of Education receives its complete application; consent shall be deemed given if the Ministry of Education fails to make any decision within thirty days.
The formed coalition or the content of cooperation of the written agreement referred to in the preceding paragraph shall not violation any provision of any law or regulation or involve any content of political nature.
Those who had already engaged in any activity referred to in Paragraph 1 before the coming into force of the amendments to this Act and continued it thereafter shall file with the competent authorities within three months after the date of the coming into force of the amendments to this Act. Those who fail to file by the expiration of the aforementioned time limit or whose applications are denied shall be deemed without filing.
The goods, services or any other matters of the Mainland Area permitted in accordance with this Act may have their advertisement broadcast or published, or any other promotion activity thereof in the Taiwan Area.
The content of the advertisement and activity referred to in the preceding paragraph shall not have any of the following:
Any political propaganda for the Chinese Communist Party.
Violation of any current Mainland policy or any law or regulation of the Government.
Being contrary to the public order or good morals.
The advertisement and activity referred to in Paragraph 1 and the content thereof as referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be determined and disposed by each competent authorities, and if there is any doubt, the Mainland Affairs Council, Executive Yuan in conjunction with the authorities concerned and scholars or experts form a review committee to make a decision.
Rules governing the management of the advertisement and activities referred to in Paragraph 1 except otherwise provided for by the provisions of any other advertisement related laws and regulations shall be drafted by the Mainland Affairs Council, Executive Yuan in consultation with the authorities concerned and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
Any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Taiwan Area permitted by the Ministry of Economic Affairs may make any investment or have any technology cooperation in the Mainland Area; the product or business item of the referred investment or technology cooperation shall be categorized into prohibited and general categories based on the consideration of national security and industry development, and the Ministry of Economic Affairs in consultation with the authorities concerned shall prescribe and publish an item list and the principles of review for individual cases thereof. The investment not more than a certain dollar amount, however, may be made through filing; the referred amount limit shall be published with an order by the Ministry of Economic Affairs.
Any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Taiwan Area may engage in any business dealing with any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area. Where the items thereof require permission or are prohibited as published by the Ministry of Economic Affairs in consultation with the authorities concerned, they shall be in accordance with the provisions.
Any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Taiwan Area may be permitted by the competent authorities to engage in the trade between the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area; rules governing the referred permission, the items and provisions of the imports and exports, the requirements and procedures for opening, the provisions of import and export suspension, and any other requirements for import and export administration shall be drafted by the competent authorities concerned and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
Rules governing the requirements, procedures, means, restrictions of the permission and any other requirements as referred to in Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be drafted by the competent authorities concerned and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
Those who had already made investment or had technology cooperation as referred to in Paragraph 1 without approval before the coming into force of the amendments of July 1, 2002 to this Act shall apply to the Ministry of Economic Affairs for permission within six months after July 1, 2002; those who fail to apply by the expiration of the aforementioned time limit or whose applications are denied shall be deemed without permission.
Any financial, insurance, securities or futures institution of the Taiwan Area or any of its branches in any country or area outside the Taiwan Area may be permitted by the Ministry of Finance to have direct business dealing with any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area or with any of its branches in any country or area outside the Mainland Area.
Any financial, insurance, securities or futures institution of the Taiwan Area establishing a branch in the Mainland Area shall apply with the Ministry of Finance for permission; the referred investment related matters shall be subject to the provisions of the preceding Article.
Rules governing the permission requirements, business scope, procedures, administration, restrictions and any other requirements as referred to in the preceding two paragraphs shall be drafted by the Ministry of Finance and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
If necessary, the Ministry of Finance may restrict or prohibit the direct business dealing prescribed in Paragraph 1 to maintain the stability of the financial market after reporting to the Executive Yuan for approval.
Any publication, motion picture, video program, or radio or television program may be permitted by the competent authorities to be imported into the Taiwan Area, or be distributed, sold, produced, broadcast, or displayed or exhibited in the Taiwan Area.
Rules governing the granting of permission referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be drafted by the Government Information Office, Executive Yuan and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
Chinese historic relics of the Mainland Area permitted by the competent authorities to be imported into the Taiwan Area for public display or exhibition may be re-exported.
If cultural objects and objets d'art of the Mainland Area other than those referred to in the preceding paragraph are found to be in violation of any laws or regulations or detrimental to public order or good morals, the competent authorities may restrict or prohibit their public display or exhibition in the Taiwan Area.
Rules governing the granting of permission referred to in Paragraph 1 shall be drafted by the competent authorities concerned and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
Goods of the Mainland Area shipped or brought into the Taiwan Area shall be treated as imports; their inspection, quarantine, administration, the levying of custom duties and other taxes or surcharges thereon, and their disposition shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the laws and regulations relating to importation.
Goods shipped or brought into the Mainland Area shall be treated as exports; their inspection, quarantine, administration, customs clearance, and disposition shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the laws and regulations relating to exportation.
Rules governing the scope of business activities, permission requirements, application procedures, filing items, required documents, withdrawal, revocation or annulment of the permission, and any other requirements as referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be drafted by the Ministry of Economic Affairs and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
Unless permitted by each competent authorities concerned, no non-profit seeking juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area may establish any liaison office or branch in the Taiwan Area to engage in business activities.
Any non-profit seeking juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area permitted to engage in any business activity in Taiwan may not engage in any activity beyond the scope of the permission.
Rules governing the scope of the permission, permission requirements, application procedures, filing items, required documents, review means, administration matters, restrictions and any other requirements as referred to in Paragraph 1 shall be drafted by each competent authorities concerned and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
Civil matters between the peoples of the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area shall be subject to the laws of the Taiwan Area except otherwise provided for in this Act.
Civil matters between any two or more of the people of the Mainland Area and those between any of the people of the Mainland Area and any foreign national shall be subject to the provisions of the Mainland Area except otherwise provided for in this Act.
Where the provisions of the Mainland Area shall apply in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the provisions of the place of the party's household registration shall apply if there are different provisions in different places of the referred Area.
Where the provisions of the Mainland Area shall apply in accordance with the provisions of this Act, if the Mainland Area does not have any express provision or its provisions provide that the laws of the Taiwan Area shall govern, the laws of the Taiwan Area shall apply.
Where the provisions of the Mainland Area shall apply in accordance with the provisions of this Act, if the applicable provisions are contrary to the public order or good morals of the Taiwan Area, the laws of the Taiwan Area shall apply.
The capacity to act by any of the people of the Mainland Area shall be subject to the provisions of the referred Area; provided, however, that any minor married shall be deemed to have the capacity to act in the Taiwan Area.
The legal personality of any juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area and its capacity to act shall be subject to the provisions of the referred Area.
The legal forms of any act shall be subject to the provisions applicable to the act; provided, however, that the legal forms made in accordance with the provisions of the place of act shall also be valid.
For any act based on a negotiable instrument or securing the rights over such instrument, its legal forms shall be subject to the provisions of the place of act.
Any contract shall be subject to the provisions of the place of contract unless otherwise agreed by the parties of the contract.
Obligations arising in the Mainland Area out of management of affairs without mandate, unjust enrichment or any other legal fact shall be subject to the provisions of the Mainland Area.
The tortious act shall be subject to the provisions of the place of occurrence of injury (locus delicti) except that the laws of the Taiwan Area do not deemed it a tort.
The property rights shall be subject to the provisions of the situs of the property.
The property rights over a right shall be subject to the provisions of the place where the right is created.
Where the situs of a property changes, the acquisition or loss of the property rights shall be subject to the provisions of the situs of the property at the time when the fact establishing the property rights is done.
The property rights of a vessel shall be subject to the provisions of the place of vessel registration; the property rights of aircraft shall be subject to the provisions of the place of aircraft registration.
The legal forms and other legal requirements for marriage or divorce by consent shall be subject to the provisions of the place of act.
Grounds for divorce by judgment shall be subject to the laws of the Taiwan Area.
Where any marriage between any of the people of the Taiwan Area and any of the people of the Mainland Area takes place in the Mainland Area, the matrimonial properties shall be subject to the provisions of the referred Area except for the properties located in the Taiwan Area.
The legal requirements for acknowledging any child born out of wedlock shall be subject to the provisions of the places of household registration of both parties to the acknowledgement applicable at the time of acknowledgement.
The formation and termination of adoption shall be subject to the provisions of the places of household registration of both parties to the adoption.
Where a ward under guardianship is any of the people of the Mainland Area, the guardianship shall be subject to the provisions of the referred Area; provided, however, that where the ward has a residence in the Taiwan Area, the laws of the Taiwan Area shall govern.
The obligations to support shall be subject to the provisions of the place of household registration of the obligor.
Where the deceased is any of the people of the Mainland Area, succession shall be subject to the provisions of the referred Area; provided, however, that the estate located in the Taiwan Area shall be subject to the laws of the Taiwan Area.
The legal requirements for making or revocation and the legal effects of any will of any of the people of the Mainland Area shall be subject to the provisions of the referred Area; provided, however, that the bequest and devise located in the Taiwan Area shall be subject to the laws of the Taiwan Area.
The legal requirements for making or revocation and the legal effects of donation by any of the people of the Mainland Area shall be subject to the provisions of the referred Area; provided, however, that the donated property located in the Taiwan Area shall be subject to the laws of the Taiwan Area.
To the extent not contrary to the public order or good morals of the Taiwan Area, it shall be upheld the legal effects of any civil matter together with any right or obligation thereof created in the Mainland Area, prior to the coming into force of this Act, between any of the people of the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area, or between any two or more of the people of the Mainland Area, or between any of the people of the Mainland Area and any foreign national.
The provisions of the preceding paragraph shall not apply provided that there had been laws or regulations in effect, prior to the coming into force of this Act, restricting the exercise or transfer of the rights referred to therein.
The following debts shall not be repaid prior to national unification:
Outstanding foreign currency bonds issued in the Mainland prior to 1949 and the short-term Gold Bonds of 1949.
Various debts owed by any government bank as well as any other financial institution accepting deposits before their retreat from the Mainland.
Where a couple cannot live together because one spouse is in the Taiwan Area and the other is in the Mainland Area, and either of them was remarried on or before June 4, 1985, no interested party may bring any action to annul the second marriage; for those who were remarried on or after June 5, 1985 and on or before November 1, 1987, the second marriage shall be deemed valid.
In the situation referred to in the preceding paragraph, if both spouses were remarried, their original marriage shall become void from the date of the second marriage of the spouse who is remarried later.
Where any of the adoptive parents already has a child or an adopted child.
Where any of the adoptive parents adopts two or more persons at the same time.
Where the fact of adoption is not certified by any of the institutions set up or designated or by any private organizations entrusted by the Executive Yuan.
Where any of the people of the Mainland Area inherits the estate of any of the people of the Taiwan Area, the heir shall submit a written statement of inheritance to the court of the place of the deceased's domicile within three years from the date of the commencement of succession; those who fail to submit within the aforementioned time limit are deemed to waive the rights of inheritance.
Where any of the people of the Mainland Area inherits the estate of any serviceman in service or any retired serviceman who had no heir in the Taiwan Area and whose estate had been administered by the competent authorities prior to the coming into force of this Act, the statement of inheritance referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be submitted within four years.
Where the commencement of succession took place prior to the coming into force of this Act, the time limits referred to in the preceding two paragraphs shall be calculated from the date of the coming into force of this Act.
Where all the heirs of the estate referred to in Paragraph 1 of the preceding Article are the people of the Mainland Area, any of the heirs and interested parties or the prosecutor may request a court to designate the National Property Bureau, Ministry of Finance as the estate administrator unless otherwise provided for in Article 68.
Where a deceased's estate is required to be registered according to the laws, the estate administrator shall register the estate with the registration authorities concerned.
Rules governing the estate administration referred to in Paragraph 1 shall be drafted by the Ministry of Finance and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
Where any serviceman in service or any retired serviceman dies with no heirs, with heirs unknown, or only with heirs unable to administer the estate, it shall be the competent authorities to administer the estate.
With respect to the deceased's estate referred to in the preceding paragraph, the disposition made by the competent authorities prior to the coming into force of this Act shall stand.
Rules governing the estate administration referred to in Paragraph 1 shall be drafted by the Ministry of National Defense and the Veterans Affairs Commission, Executive Yuan respectively and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
Prior to the coming into force of the amendments of September 18, 1996 to this Act, in situations where any of the people of the Mainland Area fails to complete the inheritance within the time limits as provided for in Article 66, the estate referred to in Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not be taken by the Treasury as required by Paragraph 1 of Article 67 and donated directly by the competent authorities to the Veterans and Veteran Families Foundation for the following purposes,:
Processing of application for and distribution of the estate to the heirs in the Mainland area of the deceased servicemen or the deceased retired servicemen.
Granting of relief to veterans for the severe disasters they sustain.
Granting of scholarship and educational aids to the children of indigent veterans.
Providing any other welfare or service to veterans and veteran families.
The estate distributed upon application as referred to in Sub-paragraph 1 of the preceding paragraph shall be limited to the estate of the deceased servicemen or the deceased retired servicemen that has been included into the Veterans and Veteran Families Foundation.
The charter of the Veterans and Veteran Families Foundation shall be drafted by the Veterans Affairs Commission, Executive Yuan and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
Any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area or any company it establishes in any third area may not acquire, create or transfer any right over any real property in the Taiwan Area without permission of the competent authorities. The land as listed in various sub-paragraphs of Paragraph 1 of Article 17 of the Land Law shall not be for acquisition, encumbrance or lease.
Rules governing the qualifications of applicants, permission requirements, permitted uses, application procedures, filing items, required documents, review means, the disposition for uses not in accordance with the permitted uses and any other requirements as referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be drafted by the competent authorities and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
Where a person acts in the Taiwan Area on behalf of any unrecognized juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area, the actor shall, insofar as such act is concerned, be liable jointly and severally with the referred juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area.
Unless permitted by the competent authorities, no individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area may become a member of or hold a position in any juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Taiwan Area.
Rules governing the granting of permission referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be drafted by the competent authorities concerned and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
Unless permitted by the competent authorities, any individual, juristic person, organization, or other institution of the Mainland Area, or any company it invests in any third area may not engage in any investment activity in the Taiwan Area.
Where any enterprise invested in accordance with the preceding paragraph is established as a company in accordance with the Company Law, the investors are exempt from the requirement to have domestic residence provided for in Paragraph 1 of Article 216 of the same Company Law.
Rules governing the qualifications of investors, permission requirements, procedures, investment means, business items and amount limits, investment percentage, foreign exchange settlement, review and determination, re-investment, filing items and procedures, application format and any other requirements as prescribed in Paragraph 1 shall be drafted by the competent concerned and submitted to the Executive Yuan for approval.
Any enterprise invested in accordance with Paragraph 1 shall file financial statements, the change of shareholding, or any other designated materials in accordance with the provisions of the rules prescribed in the preceding paragraph or the orders of the competent authorities; the competent authorities may send personnel to have an on-site inspection and the invested enterprises shall not avoid, impede, or refuse it.
Where an investor transfers its investment, the transferor in conjunction with the transferee(s) shall apply to the competent authorities for permission.
To the extent that an irrevocable civil ruling or judgment, or arbitral award rendered in the Mainland Area is not contrary to the public order or good morals of the Taiwan Area, an application may be filed with a court for a ruling to recognize it.
Where any ruling or judgment, or award recognized by a court's ruling as referred to in the preceding paragraph requires performance, it may serve as a writ of execution.
The preceding two paragraphs shall not apply until the time when for any irrevocable civil ruling or judgment, or arbitral award rendered in the Taiwan Area, an application may be filed with a court of the Mainland Area for a ruling to recognize it, or it may serve as a writ of execution in the Mainland Area.
Criminal offenses committed in the Mainland Area or in the vessels or aircraft of the Mainland, notwithstanding punishment already executed in the Mainland Area, may still be punishable in accordance with the laws of the Taiwan Area; provided, however, that the punishment may be waived in whole or in part.
In the event that any of the people of the Mainland Area has departed from the Taiwan Area after committing a criminal offense and therefore, is unable to appear in court, the court may stay the proceedings until its appearance; provided, however, that the court may render a judgment declaring not-guilty or waiving punishment without its appearance.
Where one spouse is in the Taiwan Area and the other is in the Mainland Area, and either of them was remarried or lived together with any one other than its spouse for the purpose of cohabitation on or before November 1, 1987, it shall not be prosecuted or punished; the same shall apply to the person it was remarried to or cohabited with.
Any of the people of the Mainland Area who commit treasons outside the Taiwan Area and are permitted to enter into the Taiwan Area shall not be prosecuted or punished if it discloses such fact to the authorities upon application for entrance; the same shall apply to those who enter into the Taiwan Area to participate in conferences or activities approved by the competent authorities and are exempt specifically on a case by case basis from the referred disclosure.
Any of the people of the Mainland Area whose copyrights or other rights are infringed in the Taiwan Area may file a complaint to a prosecutor or a criminal court of the Taiwan Area to the extent that any of the people of the Taiwan Area may enjoy the same right to file a complaint for the similar matters in the Mainland Area.
Any person who violates the provisions of Sub-paragraph 1 of Article 15 shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than one year but not more than seven years, or in addition thereto, a fine of not more than one million New Taiwan Dollars.
Any person who, with an intent to make a profit, commits the offenses referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than three year but not more than ten years, or in addition thereto, a fine of not more than five million New Taiwan Dollars.
Any person who is the leading conspirator of any offense referred to in the preceding two paragraphs shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than five years, or in addition thereto, a fine of not more than ten million New Taiwan Dollars.
Any person who attempts to commit the offenses referred to in the preceding three paragraphs shall be punishable.
Where any owner, operator, or master or captain of any vessel, aircraft or other means of transportation of the Republic of China, or any steersman of any other means of transportation of the Republic of China violates the provisions of Sub-paragraph 1 of Article 15, the competent authorities shall suspend the voyage of the referred vessel, aircraft or other means of transportation of the Republic of China for a limited period of time, or annul the pertinent licenses, and in addition suspend or annul the professional licenses or qualifications of the referred master, captain or steersman.
Where any owner of any vessel, aircraft or other means of transportation of the Republic of China has any of the activities referred to in Paragraphs 1 to 4, or intentionally or with gross negligence causes any third person to use its vessel, aircraft or other means of transportation to engage in any of the activities referred to in Paragraphs 1 to 4, and the main purpose of the referred activities is to transport any of the people of the Mainland Area to enter into the Taiwan Area illegally, the competent authorities may confiscate the vessel, aircraft or other means of transportation. Where an owner knowing that the referred vessel, aircraft or other means of transportation may be confiscated acquires the ownership to avoid the disposition of confiscation, the same provisions shall apply.
In any of the situations referred to in the preceding paragraph, the seizing authorities may confiscate the referred vessel, aircraft or other means of transportation if for which there is no competent authorities concerned.
Any person who is entrusted to assist the handling of matters relating to any dealing between the peoples of the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area or to negotiate or execute agreements and acts beyond the entrusted scope to cause damage to the national security or interests shall be punished with imprisonment of not more than five years, or detention, or in lieu thereof or in addition thereto, a fine of not less than five hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars.
In the situation referred to in the preceding paragraph, apart from those responsible persons who shall be punishable, the juristic persons, organizations, or any other institutions shall also be punished with a fine prescribed in the preceding paragraph.
Any person who enters into the Mainland Area without permission in violation of the provisions of Sub-paragraph 1 of Article 4-4 shall be punished with an administrative fine of not less than three hundred thousand but not more than one million and five hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars.
Any person who violates the provisions of Sub-paragraph 4 of Article 4-4 shall be punished with an administrative fine of not less than two hundred thousand but not more than two million New Taiwan Dollars.
Any person who violates the provisions of Article 5-1 shall be punished with an administrative fine of not less than two hundred thousand but not more than two million New Taiwan Dollars; where the matter of violation is serious or the person commits the same or similar violation again, it shall be punished with imprisonment of not more than five years, or detention, or in lieu thereof or in addition thereto, a fine of not less than five hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars.
In any of the situations referred to in the preceding paragraph, if the actor is a juristic person, organization, or any other institution, the responsible person shall be punished; the referred juristic person, organization, or any other institution shall be in addition punished with a fine prescribed in the preceding paragraph.
Any owner, operator, or master or captain of any vessel, aircraft or other means of transportation of the Republic of China, or any steersman of any other means of transportation of the Republic of China who violates the provisions of Article 28 or Paragraph 1 of Article 28-1, and any of the people of the Taiwan Area who violates the provisions of Paragraph 2 of Article 28-1 shall be punished with imprisonment of not more than three years, or detention, or in lieu thereof or in addition thereto, a fine of not less than one million but not more than fifteen million New Taiwan Dollars; provided, however, that if the referred offense is committed by the master, captain, or the steersman of the vessel, aircraft or other means of transportation of the Republic of China out of its own decision, it is the master, captain, or steersman who shall be punishable.
If the owner or operator of the vessel, aircraft or other means of transportation of the Republic of China referred to in the preceding paragraph is a juristic person, apart from the actor who shall be punishable, the referred juristic person shall be punished with a fine prescribed in the preceding paragraph except that the representative of the juristic person has done its best in preventing the occurrence of the violation.
The provisions of Article 7 of the Criminal Code shall not apply to the situation where, as referred to in Paragraph 1, any of the people of the Taiwan Area transports any of the people of the Mainland Area outside the territory of the Republic of China without permission to any other country or area outside the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area.
In the situation referred to in Paragraph 1, the competent authorities may suspend the sailing, flying or operation of the referred vessel, aircraft or other means of transportation of the Republic of China for a limited period of time, or annul the pertinent licenses or certificates, or in addition, suspend or annul the professional license or qualification of the referred master, captain or steersman.
Any person who violates the provisions of Paragraph 1 or 2 of Article 36 shall be punished with an administrative fine of not less than two million, but not more than ten million New Taiwan Dollars, or in addition thereto, an order that the violation shall be terminated or rectified within a specified time limit; where the violation is not terminated or rectified by the expiration of the aforementioned time limit or the same violation is repeated after the termination, the responsible person shall be punished with imprisonment of not more than three years, detention, or in lieu thereof or in addition thereto, a fine of not more than fifteen million New Taiwan Dollars.
Where any financial, insurance, securities or futures institution of the Taiwan Area or any of its branches in any country or area outside the Taiwan Area violates any order of restriction or prohibition submitted by the Ministry of Finance to the Executive Yuan for approval in accordance with the provisions of Paragraph 4 of Article 36, the responsible person shall be punished with imprisonment of not more than three years, detention, or in lieu thereof or in addition thereto, a fine of not less than one million but not more than fifteen million New Taiwan Dollars.
In the situation referred to in the preceding two paragraphs, apart from those responsible persons who shall be punishable, the financial, insurance, securities and futures institutions shall also be punished with a fine prescribed in the preceding two paragraphs.
The provisions of Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall apply to offenses committed outside the territory of the Republic of China.
Any person who recruits students or acts as middleman in violation of the provisions of Article 23 shall be punished with imprisonment of not more than one year, detention, or in lieu thereof or in addition thereto, a fine of not more than one million New Taiwan Dollars.
Any person who violates the provisions of Sub-paragraph 4 or 5 of Article 15 shall be punished with imprisonment of not more than two years, detention, or in lieu thereof or in addition thereto, a fine of not more than three hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars.
Any person who, with an intent to make a profit, violates the provisions of Sub-paragraph 5 of Article 15 shall be punished with imprisonment of not more than three years, detention, or in lieu thereof or in addition thereto, a fine of not more than six hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars.
If the representative of a juristic person, or the agent or employee or other worker of a juridical or natural person commits any of the offenses referred to in the preceding two paragraphs in execution of its professional duties, apart from the actor who shall be punishable, the referred juridical or natural person shall also be punished with a fine prescribed in the preceding two paragraphs except that the representative of the juristic person or the natural person has done its best in preventing the occurrence of the violation.
Any person who violates the provisions of Sub-paragraph 2 of Article 15 shall be punished with imprisonment of not more than six months, detention, or in lieu thereof or in addition thereto, a fine of not more than one hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars.
If the representative of a juristic person, or the agent or employee or other worker of a juridical or natural person commits the offenses referred to in the preceding paragraph in execution of its professional duties, apart from the actor who shall be punishable, the referred juridical or natural person shall also be punished with a fine prescribed in the preceding paragraph except that the representative of the juristic person or the natural person has done its best in preventing the occurrence of the violation.
Any person who violates the provisions of Paragraph 1 of Article 30 shall be punished with an administrative fine of not less than three million but not more than fifteen millions New Taiwan Dollars, and in addition, any other vessel, civil aircraft or other means of transportation belonging to the same owner or operator of the referred vessel, civil aircraft or other means of transportation may be prohibited from entering into the seaports or airports of the Taiwan Area for a limited period of time.
In the situation where the owner or operator referred to in the preceding paragraph does not have any branch in the Taiwan Area, after the disposition becomes irrevocable, all the vessel, civil aircraft or other means of transportation belonging to the same owner or operator may be restrained by the competent authorities from departing from the seaports or airports of the Taiwan Area until all fines are paid except that a security in the amount of the fine is deposited.
Any person who violates any order of restriction or prohibition issued in accordance with Article 36-1 shall be punished with an administrative fine not less than three million but not more than fifteen million New Taiwan Dollars. If the violator is a bank designated by the Central Bank to conduct foreign exchange operations, the Central Bank shall, according to the severity of the offense, suspend in whole or in part the violator's foreign exchange operations for a limited period of time.
Any person who makes an investment or has technology cooperation in any item of the general categories in violation of the provisions of Paragraph 1 of Article 35 shall be punished with an administrative fine of not less than fifty thousand but not more than twenty-five million New Taiwan Dollars, or in addition thereto, an order that the violation shall be terminated or rectified within a specified time limit; failure for termination or rectification by the expiration of the aforementioned time limit may be punished with consecutive fines.
Any person who makes an investment or has technology cooperation in any item of the prohibited categories in violation of the provisions of Paragraph 1 of Article 35 shall be punished with an administrative fine of not less than fifty thousand but not more than twenty-five million New Taiwan Dollars, or in addition thereto, an order that the violation shall be terminated within a specified time limit; failure for termination by the expiration of the aforementioned time limit or the same violated is repeated after the termination shall be punished with imprisonment of not more than two years, detention, or in lieu thereof or in addition thereto, a fine of not more than twenty-five million New Taiwan Dollars.
Where any juristic person, organization, or other institution commits the offenses referred to in the preceding paragraph, the responsible person shall be punished.
Any person who engages in any business dealing in violation of the proviso of Paragraph 2 of Article 35 shall be punished with an administrative fine of not less than fifty thousand but not more than five million New Taiwan Dollars, or in addition thereto, an order that the violation shall be terminated or rectified within a specified time limit; failure for termination or rectification by the expiration of the aforementioned time limit may be punished with consecutive fines.
For any person who has any trade in violation of the provisions of Paragraph 3 of Article 35, in addition to the punishment inflicted on it in accordance with the provisions of the other laws, the competent authorities may suspend its exportation/importation of goods for a period of not less than two months but not more than one year, or annul its exporter/importer registration.
Any person who violates the provisions of Sub-paragraph 3 of Article 15 shall be punished with an administrative fine of not less than two hundred thousand but not more than one million New Taiwan Dollars.
Any person who violates the provisions of Article 37 shall be punished with an administrative fine of not less than forty thousand but not more than two hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars.
Any publication, motion picture, video program, or radio or television program referred to in the preceding paragraph, irrespective of who owns it, shall be confiscated.
Any person who entrusts to another, is entrusted, or acts on its own to engage in advertisement broadcast or publication, or any other promotion activity in the Taiwan Area for any goods, service, or other item of the Mainland Area other than those prescribed in Paragraph 1 of Article 34, or violates Paragraph 2 of Article 34 or the mandatory or prohibitive provisions of the rules governing the management prescribed in accordance with Paragraph 4 of Article 34 shall be punished with an administrative fine of not less than one hundred thousand but not more than five hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars.
Any advertisement referred to in the preceding paragraph, irrespective of who owns or holds it, shall be confiscated.
Any of the people of the Taiwan Area who have the status referred to in Paragraph 4 of Article 9 and violate the provisions of Paragraph 2 of Article 33 shall be punished with imprisonment of not more than three years, detention, or in lieu thereof or in addition thereto, a fine of not more than five hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars; provided that holding any other position shall be punished with imprisonment of not more than one year, detention, or in lieu thereof or in addition thereto, a fine of not more than three hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars.
Any civil servant other than those referred to in the preceding paragraph who is in service, or has retired or been discharged for not more than three years and violates the provisions of Paragraph 2 of Article 33 shall be punished with imprisonment of not more than one year, detention, or in lieu thereof or in addition thereto, a fine of not more than three hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars.
Any person who does not have the status referred to in the preceding two paragraphs and violates the provisions of Paragraph 2 or 3 of Article 33 shall be punished with an administrative fine of not less than one hundred thousand but not more than five hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars.
Any person who violates the provisions of Paragraph 4 of Article 33 shall be punished with imprisonment of not more than three years, detention, or in addition thereto, a fine of not more than five hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars.
Any civil servant of the status referred to in Sub-paragraph 1, 2, or 5 of Paragraph 4 of Article 9 who has retired or been discharged for not more than three years and violates the provisions of Paragraph 2 of Article 33 shall be deprived of the entitlement to its retirement benefits and any payment related thereto.
For any person referred to in the preceding paragraph who receives monthly retirement benefits, if it violates the provisions of Paragraph 3 of Article 33, its entitlement to the monthly retirement benefits and any payment related thereto shall be suspended until the causes cease to exist.
For any civil servant other than those of the status referred to in Sub-paragraph 1, 2 or 5 of Paragraph 4 of Article 9 who has retired or been discharged for not more than three years and who receives monthly retirement benefits, if it violates the provisions of Paragraph 2 of Article 33, its entitlement to the monthly retirement benefits and any payment related thereto shall be suspended until the causes cease to exist.
Any civil servant of the Taiwan Area who violates the provisions of Paragraph 4 of Article 33 shall be deprived of its entitlement to the monthly retirement benefits and any payment related thereto.
Any person who violates the provisions of Paragraph 1 of Article 33-1 or Paragraph 1 of Article 33-2 shall be punished with an administrative fine of not less than one hundred thousand but not more than five hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars, or in addition thereto, consecutive fines according to the times of violation.
Any person who violates the provisions of Paragraph 2 of Article 33-1 or Paragraph 1 or 2 of Article 33-3 shall be punished with an administrative fine of not less than ten thousand but not more than five hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars, or in addition thereto, an order by the competent authorities that the violation shall be reported or rectified within a specified time limit; failure for reporting or rectification by the expiration of the aforementioned time limit may be punished with consecutive fines according to the times of violation until the reporting or rectification is done.
Any person who violates the provisions of Paragraph 2 of Article 9 shall be punished with an administrative fine of not less ten thousand New Taiwan Dollars.
Any person who violates the provisions of Paragraph 3 of Article 9 or the disposition published by the Executive Yuan as of Paragraph 7 of Article 9 shall be punished with an administrative fine of not less than twenty thousand but not more than one hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars.
Any person who violates the provisions of Paragraph 4 of Article 9 shall be punished with an administrative fine of not less than two hundred thousand but not more than one million New Taiwan Dollars.
Any person who makes an investment in violation of the provisions of Paragraph 1 of Article 73 shall be punished by the competent authorities with an administrative fine of not less than one hundred and twenty thousand but not more than six hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars, and suspension of its shareholder rights, or in addition thereto, an order that the investment shall be ceased or withdrawn within a specified time limit; failure for rectification by the expiration of the aforementioned time limit may be punished, in addition thereto, with consecutive fines until the rectification is done; provided that, if the violator is a branch of foreign company, the company registration authorities shall be informed to revoke or annul the recognition.
Any person who fails to file as required or files untruthfully or incompletely in violation of the provision of Paragraph 4 of Article 73 shall be punished by the competent authorities with an administrative fine of not less than sixty thousand but not more than three hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars, and in addition thereto, an order that the violator shall file, rectify or accept inspection within a specified time limit; failure for filing, rectification or accepting inspection by the expiration of the aforementioned time limit may be punished, in addition thereto, with consecutive fines until the violator files, rectifies or accepts the inspection.
Any enterprise which is permitted to make an investment in accordance with the provisions of Paragraph 1 of Article 73 but violates the investment related provisions of the rules prescribed in accordance with Paragraph 3 of Article 73 shall be punished by the competent authorities with an administrative fine of not less than sixty thousand but not more than three hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars, and in addition thereto, an order that the violator shall rectify within a specified time limit; failure for rectification by the expiration of the aforementioned time limit may be punished, in addition thereto, with consecutive fines until the rectification is done.
Any investor or investing enterprise failing to apply for review and determination or to file as required, or filing untruthfully or incompletely in violation of the provisions of the rules prescribed in accordance with Paragraph 3 of Article 73 shall be punished by the competent authorities with an administrative fine of not less than sixty thousand but not more than three hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars, or in addition thereto, an order that the violator shall apply for review and determination, file, or rectify within a specified time limit; failure for applying for review and determination, filing, or rectification by the expiration of the aforementioned time limit may be punished, in addition thereto, with consecutive fines until the application for review and determination, filing or rectification is done.
Any agent of an investor who intentionally or with gross negligence files untruthfully shall be punished by the competent authorities with an administrative fine of not less than sixty thousand but not more than three hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars.
The competent authorities making a disposition against an investor in accordance with the preceding five paragraphs may serve the agent of the investor or investing enterprise; where the disposition is an administrative fine, it may be enforced against the investing enterprise; the investing enterprise after the enforcement is satisfied has the right to reclaim from the investor and may buy back the shares held by the investor based on the market price with the aforementioned reclaimed amount without being subject to the restriction provided for in Paragraph 1 of Article 167 of the Company Law; the shares bought back shall be disposed in accordance with the provisions of Paragraph 2 of Article 167 of the Company Law.
Where any party engages in business activities without permission in violation of the provisions of Paragraph 1 of Article 40-1, the doer shall be punished with imprisonment of not more than one year, detention, or in lieu thereof or in addition thereto, a fine of not more than one hundred and fifty thousand New Taiwan Dollars and responsible for any civil liabilities; where the doers are more than one, they shall be responsible for the civil liabilities jointly and severally, and the competent authorities shall prohibit the referred party from using the name of the company.
Any party which violates any provision of prohibition or restriction of the rules prescribed by Paragraph 2 of Article 40-1 shall be punished with an administrative fine of not less than twenty thousand but not more than one hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars, and in addition thereto, an order that the violation shall be terminated or rectified within a specified time lime; failure for termination or rectification by the expiration of the aforementioned time limit may be punished with consecutive fines.
Any party which violates the provisions of Paragraph 1 or 2 of Article 40-2 shall be punished with an administrative fine of not more than five hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars, and in addition thereto, an order that the violation shall be terminated within a specified time limit; where the violation is not terminated by the expiration of the aforementioned time limit or the same violation is repeated after the termination, the doer shall be punished with imprisonment of not more than two years, detention, or in lieu thereof or in addition thereto, a fine of not more than five hundred thousand New Taiwan Dollars.
The administrative fines as provided for in this Act shall be imposed by the competent authorities; where the administrative fines imposed in accordance with this Act are required to be paid within specified time limits, failure to pay by the expiration of the aforementioned time limits, the case shall be forwarded for compulsory execution in accordance with laws.
The competent authorities shall request the consent of the Legislative Yuan before permitting direct business transactions or direct sea or air transportation between the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area, or permitting the people of the Mainland Area to enter into the Taiwan Area to work, and if the Legislative Yuan fails to adopt any resolution within one month after the request during its session, the consent is deemed granted.
The competent authorities may permit direct business transactions or direct sea or air transportation between Kinmen, Matsu, Penghu and the Mainland Area as Pilot Program before permitting direct business transactions or direct sea or air transportation between the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area.
The areas for the Pilot Program referred to in the preceding paragraph, which permits direct business transactions or direct sea or air transportation with the Mainland Area and the period for the Pilot Program, as well as the permission for the entry or exit of the transportation vehicles and personnel, the administration of imports/exports, financial dealings, customs clearance, inspection, quarantine, investigation and any other dealings related matters under the referred Program shall be prescribed by the Executive Yuan with implementation rules.
The provisions governing the ports opening for international trade shall apply mutatis mutandis to the matters of sea or air transportation between the areas for the Pilot Program referred to in the preceding paragraph and any sea port, airport, or harbor of the Mainland Area for transportation.
Any goods of the Mainland Area imported to the areas for the Pilot Program may not be transported to the rest of the Taiwan Area without permission; any goods of the Taiwan Area not originated from the areas for the Pilot Program may not be transported to the Mainland Area without permission. However, any goods of the Mainland Area which is for personal use and of small quantity may be mailed to or brought by passengers into the rest of the Taiwan Area; the items of the goods and the limits for its quantity shall be prescribed by the Executive Yuan.
Where there is any threat to national interests or security or there is any other significant cause during the period for the Pilot Program referred to in this Article, the Executive Yuan may terminate by order the implementation of the Pilot Program in part or in whole.
All competent authorities that process applications for permissions and/or issue licenses or certificates may collect processing fees and license fees; the fee schedule shall be prescribed by each competent authorities.
The provisions of the Administrative Procedures Act shall not apply to the handling of the matters related to the dealings between the peoples of the Taiwan Area and the Mainland Area in accordance with this Act.
The Implementing Rules of this Act shall be prescribed by the Executive Yuan.
The date of the coming into force of this Act shall be prescribed by the Executive Yuan.
The countries of the diplomacy board are most importantly organized along the St. Petersburg-Switzerland-North Africa stalemate line. The three countries north of the line are called the Western Triangle while those south are called the Eastern Rectangle. Each half of the board holds 17 centers, so a power must be able to cross the stalemate line in force to achieve victory.
Composed of England, France, Germany and St. Petersburg, the Western Triangle is more geographically spread-out than its eastern counterpart. This provides difficulties for France when trying to gain a solo victory. Closer centers, like Tunis, Italy, and Warsaw require crossing an easily-held stalemate line, while Scandinavia and St. Petersburg are very far away. Thus France has a good record of strong draws, but has only a middling record of wins because it is simply too far away from anything else. England suffers from the same problem—Scandinavia is closer, but it is difficult for England to deploy armies to Central Europe to conquer MUN, and TUN is far away and across a stalemate line. Germany has the best winning record of the three due to his ability to make up for centers that are difficult for him to conquer, for example SPA, POR, and MAR, with closer centers across the stalemate line, usually VIE, TRI, VEN, and SEV.
Composed of Italy, Turkey, Austria, Russia except St. Petersburg, and Tunis, The Eastern Rectangle is geographically more compact than the Western Triangle, but has four powers vying for five neutrals, instead of three powers (and Russia's northern fleet) battling over seven neutral SC's. The extra competition often turns the East into a complete quagmire, allowing one or two Western Powers to clean up and then turn to attack Italy and Russia. Turkey sometimes gains strong draws out of these games, although often the Western power will rush to a quick solo victory while the four Eastern powers battle each other for dominance. Except for Turkey, tucked in its own corner of the board, the powers of the Eastern Rectangle have an easier time breaking through stalemate lines than their Western counterparts. Italy is more prepared to push into the Western Med than France is to break into the east. Austria's home centers are slightly closer to the stalemate line than Germany's, and it is much easier for Austria to take MUN than Germany to take VIE. Russia can ignore stalemate lines completely so long as he holds onto St. Petersburg or maintains fleets in Northern waters.
Other theories of board division contain a Western and an Eastern Triangle and treat Italy as an independent variable. This is based on the effect that a northwardly aggressive Italy can have on the Western Triangle. While attacks into Germany or France rarely yield worthwhile results for Italy, its actions can decide which power is ultimately victorious in the west.
Stalemate Lines are lines that cross the board that have more spaces on one side than the other that are able to be defended by fewer units than the number of SC's they protect. They are quite controversial, especially in the design of variants, and are considered by most to be a weakness of the game because they do not parallel reality. Whereas real war is won by concentration of force in proper areas, the rules of Diplomacy allow for only one unit to occupy one province.
The most important stalemate line runs from St. Petersburg to North Africa, running between the non-supply center territories and Germany until Switzerland, then between PIE and MAR, GOL and SPA, and the Western Mediterranean Sea. This line separates the Western Triangle from the Eastern Rectangle, and it is around this line that most victories are based. To win, most powers conquer everything on their side of the line, and reach for one center on the other side. This is easier the closer the power is to a stalemate line.
These are the standard three-letter abbreviations for provinces, that will be used for the rest of the book. Provinces are sorted first by region (separated into land and sea areas), then alphabetically by name. If there are multiple province abbreviations available, they are listed in order of frequency.
Impassable areas are spaces which are marked on most maps, but not a part of gameplay.
Tunisia is misnamed on the map. The space is called "Tunis", despite the naming rule that only powers' SCs would be named with cities.
Although the game begins in "Spring 1901", Sweden and Norway are separate provinces for gameplay purposes. This is because the map nevertheless reflects the 1914 borders, in Scandinavia as well as the Balkans.
"Livonia" and "Liverpool" conflict, so neither is abbreviated "LIV". "Romania" and "Rome" would conflict, but the former was called "Rumania" instead by Allan Calhammer.
"North Atlantic Ocean", "North Sea", "Norway", "North Africa", and "Norwegian Sea" all begin with "Nor", so none of them use this abbreviation.
Neither "Gulf of Bothnia" or "Gulf of Lyons" are abbreviated "GUL"; see chart.
This material was adapted from the original CK-12 book that can be found here. This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 United States License
North Korea says it has successfully tested an engine designed for an intercontinental ballistic missile.
The new type of engine would guarantee the ability to launch a nuclear strike on the US mainland, the KCNA news agency said.
The human organism consists of trillions of cells all working together for the maintenance of the entire organism. While cells may perform very different functions, all the cells are quite similar in their metabolic requirements. Maintaining a constant internal environment with all that the cells need to survive (oxygen, glucose, mineral ions, waste removal, and so forth) is necessary for the well-being of individual cells and the well-being of the entire body. The varied processes by which the body regulates its internal environment are collectively referred to as homeostasis.
Homeostasis in a general sense refers to stability or balance in a system. It is the body's attempt to maintain a constant internal environment. Maintaining a stable internal environment requires constant monitoring and adjustments as conditions change. This adjusting of physiological systems within the body is called homeostatic regulation.
Homeostatic regulation involves three parts or mechanisms: 1) the receptor, 2) the control center and 3) the effector.
The receptor receives information that something in the environment is changing. The control center or integration center receives and processes information from the receptor. And lastly, the effector responds to the commands of the control center by either opposing or enhancing the stimulus. This is an ongoing process that continually works to restore and maintain homeostasis. For example, in regulating body temperature there are temperature receptors in the skin, which communicate information to the brain, which is the control center, and the effector is our blood vessels and sweat glands in our skin.
Because the internal and external environments of the body are constantly changing and adjustments must be made continuously to stay at or near the set point, homeostasis can be thought of as a synthetic equilibrium.
Since homeostasis is an attempt to maintain the internal conditions of an environment by limiting fluctuations, it must involve a series of negative feedback loops.
When a change of variable occurs, there are two main types of feedback to which the system reacts:
Negative feedback: a reaction in which the system responds in such a way as to reverse the direction of change. Since this tends to keep things constant, it allows the maintenance of homeostasis. For instance, when the concentration of carbon dioxide in the human body increases, the lungs are signaled to increase their activity and expel more carbon dioxide. Thermoregulation is another example of negative feedback. When body temperature rises, receptors in the skin and the hypothalamus sense a change, triggering a command from the brain. This command, in turn, effects the correct response, in this case a decrease in body temperature.
When you are at home, you set your thermostat to a desired temperature. Let's say today you set it at 70 degrees. The thermometer in the thermostat waits to sense a temperature change either too high above or too far below the 70 degree set point. When this change happens the thermometer will send a message to to the "Control Center", or thermostat,which in turn will then send a message to the furnace to either shut off if the temperature is too high or kick back on if the temperature is too low. In the home-heating example the air temperature is the "NEGATIVE FEEDBACK." When the Control Center receives negative feedback it triggers a chain reaction in order to maintain room temperature.
Positive feedback: a response is to amplify the change in the variable. This has a destabilizing effect, so does not result in homeostasis. Positive feedback is less common in naturally occurring systems than negative feedback, but it has its applications. For example, in nerves, a threshold electric potential triggers the generation of a much larger action potential. Blood clotting in which the platelets process mechanisms to transform blood liquid to solidify is an example of positive feedback loop. Another example is the secretion of oxytocin which provides a pathway for the uterus to contract, leading to child birth.
Although Positive Feedback is needed within Homeostasis it also can be harmful at times. When you have a high fever it causes a metabolic change that can push the fever higher and higher. In rare occurrences the body temperature reaches 113 degrees Fahrenheit / 45 degrees Celsius and the cellular proteins stop working and the metabolism stops, resulting in death.
Summary: Sustainable systems require combinations of both kinds of feedback. Generally with the recognition of divergence from the homeostatic condition, positive feedbacks are called into play, whereas once the homeostatic condition is approached, negative feedback is used for "fine tuning" responses. This creates a situation of "metastability," in which homeostatic conditions are maintained within fixed limits, but once these limits are exceeded, the system can shift wildly to a wholly new (and possibly less desirable) situation of homeostasis.
They are ultra-stable, meaning the system is capable of testing which way its variables should be adjusted.
Their whole organization (internal, structural, and functional) contributes to the maintenance of balance.
Physiology is largely a study of processes related to homeostasis. Some of the functions you will learn about in this book are not specifically about homeostasis (e.g. how muscles contract), but in order for all bodily processes to function there must be a suitable internal environment. Homeostasis is, therefore, a fitting framework for the introductory study of physiology.
Where did the term "Homeostasis" come from?
Cruise Control on a car as a simple metaphor for homeostasis
When a car is put on cruise control it has a set speed limit that it will travel. At times this speed may vary by a few miles per hour but in general the system will maintain the set speed. If the car starts to go up a hill, the systems will automatically increase the amount of fuel given to maintain the set speed. If the car starts to come down a hill, the car will automatically decrease the amount of fuel given in order to maintain the set speed. It is the same with homeostasis- the body has a set limit on each environment. If one of these limits increases or decreases, the body will sense and automatically try to fix the problem in order to maintain the pre-set limits. This is a simple metaphor of how the body operates—constant monitoring of levels, and automatic small adjustments when those levels fall below (or rise above) a set point.
A variety of homeostatic mechanisms maintain the internal environment within tolerable limits. Either homeostasis is maintained through a series of control mechanisms, or the body suffers various illnesses or disease. When the cells in the body begin to malfunction, the homeostatic balance becomes disrupted. Eventually this leads to disease or cell malfunction. Disease and cellular malfunction can be caused in two basic ways: either, deficiency (cells not getting all they need) or toxicity (cells being poisoned by things they do not need). When homeostasis is interrupted in your cells, there are pathways to correct or worsen the problem. In addition to the internal control mechanisms, there are external influences based primarily on lifestyle choices and environmental exposures that influence our body's ability to maintain cellular health.
Nutrition: If your diet is lacking in a specific vitamin or mineral your cells will function poorly, possibly resulting in a disease condition. For example, a menstruating woman with inadequate dietary intake of iron will become anemic. Lack of hemoglobin, a molecule that requires iron, will result in reduced oxygen-carrying capacity. In mild cases symptoms may be vague (e.g. fatigue), but if the anemia (British English: anaemia) is severe the body will try to compensate by increasing cardiac output, leading to palpitations and sweatiness, and possibly to heart failure.
Toxins: Any substance that interferes with cellular function, causing cellular malfunction. This is done through a variety of ways; chemical, plant, insecticides, and/or bites. A commonly seen example of this is drug overdoses. When a person takes too much of a drug their vital signs begin to waver; either increasing or decreasing, these vital signs can cause problems including coma, brain damage and even death.
Psychological: Your physical health and mental health are inseparable. Our thoughts and emotions cause chemical changes to take place either for better as with meditation, or worse as with stress.
Physical: Physical maintenance is essential for our cells and bodies. Adequate rest, sunlight, and exercise are examples of physical mechanisms for influencing homeostasis. Lack of sleep is related to a number of ailments such as irregular cardiac rhythms, fatigue, anxiety and headaches.
Genetic/Reproductive: Inheriting strengths and weaknesses is part of our genetic makeup. Genes are sometimes turned off or on due to external factors which we can have some control over, but at other times little can be done to correct or improve genetic diseases. Beginning at the cellular level a variety of diseases come from mutated genes. For example, cancer can be genetically inherited or can be caused due to a mutation from an external source such as radiation or genes altered in a fetus when the mother uses drugs.
Medical: Because of genetic differences some bodies need help in gaining or maintaining homeostasis. Through modern medicine our bodies can be given different aids, from anti-bodies to help fight infections, or chemotherapy to kill harmful cancer cells. Traditional and alternative medical practices have many benefits, but like any medical practice the potential for harmful effects is present. Whether by nosocomial infections, or wrong dosage of medication, homeostasis can be altered by that which is trying to fix it. Trial and error with medications can cause potential harmful reactions and possibly death if not caught soon enough.
The factors listed above all have their effects at the cellular level, whether harmful or beneficial. Inadequate beneficial pathways (deficiency) will almost always result in a harmful waver in homeostasis. Too much toxicity also causes homeostatic imbalance, resulting in cellular malfunction. By removing negative health influences, and providing adequate positive health influences, your body is better able to self-regulate and self-repair, thus maintaining homeostasis.
Each body system contributes to the homeostasis of other systems and of the entire organism. No system of the body works in isolation, and the well-being of the person depends upon the well-being of all the interacting body systems. A disruption within one system generally has consequences for several additional body systems. Here are some brief explanations of how various body systems contribute to the maintenance of homeostasis:
Since the nervous system does not store nutrients, it must receive a continuous supply from blood. Any interruption to the flow of blood may bring brain damage or death. The nervous system maintains homeostasis by controlling and regulating the other parts of the body. A deviation from a normal set point acts as a stimulus to a receptor, which sends nerve impulses to a regulating center in the brain. The brain directs an effector to act in such a way that an adaptive response takes place. If, for example, the deviation was a lowering of body temperature, the effector acts to increase body temperature. The adaptive response returns the body to a state of normalcy and the receptor, the regulating center, and the effector temporarily cease their activities. Since the effector is regulated by the very conditions it produced, this process is called control by negative feedback.
This manner of regulating normalcy results in a fluctuation between two extreme levels. Not until body temperature drops below normal do receptors stimulate the regulating center and effectors act to raise body temperature. Regulating centers are located in the central nervous system, consisting of the brain and spinal cord. The hypothalamus is a portion of the brain particularly concerned with homeostasis; it influences the action of the medulla oblongata, a lower part of the brain, the autonomic nervous system, and the pituitary gland.
The nervous system has two major portions: the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system. The peripheral nervous system consists of the cranial and spinal nerves. The autonomic nervous system is a part of peripheral nervous system and contains motor neurons that control internal organs. It operates at the subconscious level and has two divisions, the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems. In general, the sympathetic system brings about those results we associate with emergency situations, often called fight or flight reactions, and the parasympathetic system produces those effects necessary to our everyday existence.
The endocrine system consists of glands which secrete hormones into the bloodstream. Each hormone has an effect on one or more target tissues. In this way the endocrine system regulates the metabolism and development of most body cells and body systems. To be more specific, the Endocrine system has sex hormones that can activate sebaceous glands, development of mammary glands, alter dermal blood flow and release lipids from adipocytes. MSH can stimulate melanocytes on our skin. Our bone growth is regulated by several hormones, and the endocrine system helps with the mobilization of calcitonin and calcium. In the muscular system, hormones adjust muscle metabolism, energy production, and growth. In the nervous system, hormones affect neural metabolism, regulate fluid/electrolyte balance and help with reproductive hormones that influence CNS development and behaviors. In the Cardiovascular system, we need hormones that regulate the production of RBC's (red blood cells), which elevate and lower blood pressure. Hormones also have anti-inflammatory effects and stimulate the lymphatic system. In summary, the endocrine system has a regulatory effect on basically every other body system.
The integumentary system (the skin) is involved in protecting the body from invading microbes (mainly by forming a thick impenetrable layer), regulating body temperature through sweating and vasodilation/vasoconstriction, or shivering and piloerection (goose bumps), and regulating ion balances in the blood. Stimulation of mast cells also produce changes in blood flow and capillary permeability which can effect the blood flow in the body and how it is regulated. It also helps synthesize vitamin D which interacts with calcium and phosphorus absorption needed for bone growth, maintenance, and repair. Hair on the skin guards entrance into the nasal cavity or other orifices, preventing invaders from getting further into our bodies. Our skin also helps maintain balance by excretion of water and other solutes (i.e.) the keratinized epidermis limits fluid loss through skin. It also provides mechanical protection against environmental hazards. We need to remember that our skin is integumentary; it is our first line of defense.
As the structural framework for the human body, the skeletal system consists mainly of the 206 or so bones of the skeletal system but also includes cartilages, ligaments, and other connective tissues that stabilize and interconnect them. Bones work in conjunction with the muscular system to aid in posture and locomotion. Many bones of the skeleton function as levers, which change the magnitude and direction of forces generated by skeletal muscle. Protection is a pivotal role occupied by the skeletal system, as many vital organs are encased within the skeletal cavities (e.g. cranial and spinal), and bones form much of the structural basis for other body cavities (ex: thoracic and pelvic cavities). The skeletal system also serves as an important mineral reserve. For example, if blood levels of calcium or magnesium are low and the minerals are not available in the diet, they will be taken from the bones. Also, the skeletal system provides calcium needed for all muscular contraction. Finally, red blood cells, lymphocytes and other cells relating to the immune response are produced and stored in the bone marrow.
The muscular system is one of the most versatile systems in the body. The muscular system contains the heart, which constantly pumps blood through the body. The muscular system is also responsible for involuntary (e.g. goose bumps, digestion, breathing) and voluntary (e.g. walking, picking up objects) actions. Muscles also help protect organs in the body's cavities. The muscles in your body contract, which increases your body heat when you're cold. The act of shivering occurs when the internal temperature drops. Muscles around vital organs contract, breaking down ATP and thereby expanding heat, which is then distributed to the rest of the body.
The cardiovascular system, in addition to needing to maintain itself within certain levels, plays a role in maintenance of other body systems by transporting hormones (heart secretes Atrial Natriuretic Peptide and Brain Natriuretic Peptide, or ANP and BNP, respectively) and nutrients (oxygen, EPO to bones,etc.), taking away waste products, and providing all living body cells with a fresh supply of oxygen and removing carbon dioxide. Homeostasis is disturbed if the cardiovascular or lymphatic systems are not functioning correctly. Our skin, bones, muscles, lungs, digestive tract, and nervous, endocrine, lymphatic, urinary and reproductive systems use the cardiovascular system as its "road" or "highway" as far as distribution of things such as nutrients, oxygen, waste products, hormones, drugs, etc. There are many risk factors for an unhealthy cardiovascular system. Some diseases associated are typically labeled "uncontrollable" or "controllable." The main uncontrollable risk factors are age, gender, and a family history of heart disease, especially at an early age.
The cardiovascular system also contains sensors to monitor blood pressure, called baroreceptors, that work by detecting how stretched a blood vessel is. This information is relayed to the Medulla Oblongata in the brain where action is taken to raise or lower blood pressure via the autonomic nervous system.
The lymphatic system has three principal roles. First is the maintenance of blood and tissue volume. Excess fluid that leaves the capillaries when under pressure would build up and cause edema. Secondly, the lymphatic system absorbs fatty acids and triglycerides from fat digestion so that these components of digestion do not enter directly into the blood stream. Third, the lymphatic system is involved in defending the body against invading microbes, and the immune response. This system assists in maintenance, such as bone and muscle repair after injuries. Another defense is maintaining the acidic pH of urine to fight infections in the urinary system. The tonsils are our bodies "helpers" to defend us against infections and toxins absorbed from the digestive tract. The tonsils also protect against infections entering into our lungs.
The respiratory system works in conjunction with the cardiovascular system to provide oxygen to cells within every body system for cellular metabolism. The respiratory system also removes carbon dioxide. Since CO2 is mainly transported in the plasma as bicarbonate ions, which act as a chemical buffer, the respiratory system also helps maintain proper blood pH levels, a fact that is very important for homeostasis. As a result of hyperventilation, CO2 is decreased in blood levels. This causes the pH of body fluids to increase. If acid levels rise above 7.45, the result is respiratory alkalosis. On the other hand, too much CO2 causes pH to fall below 7.35 which results in respiratory acidosis. The respiratory system also helps the lymphatic system by trapping pathogens and protecting deeper tissues within. Note that when you have increased thoracic space it can provide abdominal pressure through the contraction of respiratory muscles. This can assist in defecation.
The organs of the respiratory system include the nose, pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchi and lungs. Together these organs permit the movement of air into the tiny, thin walled sacs of the lungs called alveoli. It is in the alveoli that oxygen from the air is exchanged for the waste product carbon dioxide, which is carried to lungs by the blood so that it can be eliminated from the body.
Without a regular supply of energy and nutrients from the digestive system, all body systems would soon suffer. The digestive system absorbs organic substances, vitamins, ions, and water that are needed all over the body. In the skin, the digestive tract provides lipids for storage in the subcutaneous layer. Note that food undergoes three types of processes in the body: digestion, absorption, and elimination. If one of these is not working, you will have problems that will be extremely noticeable. Mechanics of digestion can include chemical digestion, movements, ingestion absorption, and elimination. In order to maintain a healthy and efficient digestive system, we have to remember the components involved. If these are disturbed, digestive health may be compromised.
Toxic nitrogenous wastes accumulate as proteins and nucleic acids are broken down and used for other purposes. The urinary system rids the body of these wastes. The urinary system is also directly involved in maintaining proper blood volume (and indirectly blood pressure) and ion concentration within the blood. One other contribution is that the kidneys produce a hormone (erythropoietin) that stimulates red blood cell production. The kidneys also play an important role in maintaining the correct water content of the body and the correct salt composition of extracellular fluid. External changes that lead to excess fluid loss trigger feedback mechanisms that act to inhibit fluid loss.
The Reproductive System is unique in that it does little to contribute to the homeostasis of the organism. Rather than being tied to the maintenance of the organism, the reproductive system relates to the maintenance of the species. Having said that, the sex hormones do have an effect on other body systems, and an imbalance can lead to various disorders (e.g. a woman whose ovaries are removed early in life is at much higher risk of osteoporosis).
Excretory System is responsible for removing wastes, excess water and salt in the urine. Regulates the volume and pH of the internal environment. The human excretory system maintains homeostasis by removing metabolic waste such as water, salt and metabolite concentrations in the blood. The kidneys, which are the primary excretory organs, are major organs of homeostasis because they excrete nitrogenous wastes, and regulate water-salt balance and acid base balance. This section will examine the kidney in details.
The living bodies have been characterized with a number of automated processes, which make them self-sustainable in the natural environment. Among these many processes are that of reproduction, adjustment with external environment, and instinct to live, which are gifted by nature to living beings.
The survival of living beings greatly depends on their capability to maintain a stable body temperature irrespective of temperature of surrounding environment. This capability of maintaining body temperature is called thermoregulation. Cold blooded animals, such as reptiles, have somewhat different means of temperature regulation than warm blooded (or homeothermic) animals, such as humans and other mammals. This section is most relevant when considering warm blooded organisms.
Body temperature depends on the heat produced minus the heat lost. Heat is lost by radiation, convection, and conduction, but the net loss by all three processes depends on a gradient between the body and the outside. Thus, when the external temperature is low, radiation is the most important form of heat loss. When there is a high external temperature, evaporation is the most important form of heat loss. The balance of heat produced and heat lost maintains a constant body temperature. However, temperature does vary during the day, and this set point is controlled by the hypothalamus.
Body temperature is usually about 37.4°C, but does vary during the day by about 0.8°C. The lowest daily temperature is when the person is asleep. Temperature receptors are found in the skin, the great veins, the abdominal organs and the hypothalamus. While the ones in the skin provide the sensation of coldness, the hypothalamic (central core) temperature receptors are the most important. The core body temperature is usually about 0.7-1.0°C higher than axillary or oral temperature.
When body temperature drops due to external cold, an important component of protection is vaso-constriction of skin and limb blood vessels. This drops the surface temperature, providing an insulating layer (such as the fat cell layer) between the core temperature and the external environment. Likewise, if the temperature rises, blood flow to the skin increases, maximizing the potential for loss by radiation and evaporation. Thus, if you dilated the skin blood vessels by alcohol ingestion this might give a nice warm glow, but it would increase heat loss (if the external temperature was still low). The major adjustments in cold are to shiver to increase heat production, and constrict blood vessels in the periphery and skin. This helps to minimize heat loss through the skin, and directs blood to the vital internal organs.
Besides the daily variation in body temperature, there are other cyclic variations. In women, body temperature falls prior to ovulation and rises by about 1°C at ovulation, largely due to progesterone increasing the set point. Thyroid hormone and pyrogens also increase the set point.
The basal metabolic rate (BMR) is about 30 calories/sq m/h. It is higher in children than in adults, partly as a result of different surface area to body mass ratio. Due to this relationship, young children are more likely to drop their temperature rapidly; there is greater temperature variation in children than in adults. It is increased by thyroid hormone and decreased by thyroid hormone lack. Different foods can affect BMR and the Respiratory Quotient of foods differ. Carbohydrate 1.0; Protein = 1.0; Fats = 0.7
Blood pressure is expressed as two different numbers. The first number is called the "systolic" blood pressure, and the second is the "diastolic" blood pressure. Systolic blood pressure is the pressure at the time of the cardiac cycle when the heart contracts, forcing blood out(called systole). This is the time of greatest pressure. The Diastolic number comes from the time in the cardiac cycle when pressure is at its lowest, while the heart is refilling with blood. This phase is called Diastole. The blood pressure in large arteries is about 120/80 mmHg. By the time this comes to the capillaries it has partly lost its pulsatile nature and has a pressure of about 35 mmHg. The pressure falls rapidly along the capillary to 15 mmHg at the venous end. This hydrostatic pressure tends to force fluid out of the capillary into the interstitium (the fluid between cells) but balance is maintained by the colloid osmotic pressure (due to protein, principally albumin) of 26 mmHg. Net water movement is small (about 2%) and thus colloid osmotic pressure is the same at the arterial and venous end of the capillary.
At the arterial end of the capillary there is a net outward force of about 11 mmHg while at the venous end the net inward force is about 9 mmHg (ie. -9). There is an imbalance between water movement out and movement back in which leads to an imbalance of about 3 litres/day, which is removed as lymph. There is some albumin in the interstitial tissue and it varies in different organs but the concentration may be up to 10 or 20% of plasma. This gives an interstitial oncotic pressure which causes movement of fluid into the interstitium. However the bulk movement of water is not the way nutrients get to cells. Nutrients diffuse down their concentration gradient as the capillary is very permeable to all small molecules.
The extracellular volume is approximately thirteen litres in a seventy kg person. Ten litres are in the interstitial space and three litres in plasma. The capillaries are the interface between the two compartments and are permeable to most substances with a molecular weight less than 20,000. Thus nutrients can readily diffuse across the wall and go from blood to cell. Despite the high permeability of the capillary water is maintained inside due to the oncotic pressure and only about 2% of the plasma flowing through the capillary moves across the wall.
The blood volume is about 5 litres of which about 3 litres are plasma and about 2 litres red blood cells. The red blood cell volume (haematocrit) is about 43% and the relationship between plasma and blood volume and haematocrit is Blood Volume = Plasma Volume 100/(100 - Ht). Most of the blood is usually in the veins (70%).
Capillaries differ in their permeability throughout the body. Brain capillaries are relatively impermeable due to tight junctions between endothelial cells lining the blood vessels. This is known as the blood brain barrier, or BBB, and helps prevent toxins from entering the brain.
The capillaries, while having a large surface area, only contain about 7% of the blood volume. The arteries and arterioles contain about 15%. Most of the blood is in the veins.
The cell membrane is a bilipid layer that is permeable to water and lipid soluble particles. However, it is impermeable to charged particles. It is the osmolality controlling factor. Osmolality in the cell and interstitial fluid are the same but the anionic and cationic compositions differ.
Made of albumin, the capillary membrane is permeable to everything except proteins. The membranes in different tissues differ. There are fenestrae (or pores) to promote better flow of fluids. Particles weighing over 40,000 have low permeability. It is the oncotic pressure controlling factor. Capillaries in the brain are relatively impermeable while capillaries in liver sinusoids and glomeruli are extremely permeable.
Plasma osmolality is about 290 mosmol/l contributed mainly by sodium (140 mmol/l) and it's accompanying anions. In dehydration water is lost from the body. The rise in osmolality that occurs in the plasma (also sodium rises) causes water to initially move out of the cells along the osmotic gradient. Thus cell volume is initially reduced but cell homeostatic processes subsequently return it towards normal by taking up solute.
In dehydration water is removed from the plasma and thus haematocrit and albumin which have not been lost will have a higher concentration. In volume depletion water and electrolytes are both lost and thus there will be little effect on either sodium concentration or osmolality. As osmolality is not altered there will be no force to pull water out of the cells and cell volume is not affected.
In volume depletion due to blood loss the haematocrit acutely is the same but the resultant fall in blood pressure causes fluid to come out of the interstitium into the vascular compartment and albumin and haematocrit both decrease. When there is volume depletion due to electrolyte and water loss by vomiting or diarrhoea there will be little or no effect on plasma osmolality or sodium concentration. However there will be a small increase in haematocrit and plasma albumin because the volume is lost from the extracellular space and as blood cells and albumin are not lost this increases the concentration.
In volume depletion forces are activated that retain sodium and water in the body. The sodium retention works to a major extent by the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system which is activated by a fall in blood pressure caused by volume depletion. In dehydration, the high osmolality activates ADH secretion which causes water retention. As there is also volume depletion, this activates the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system which causes sodium to be retained. This retention would tend to cause a rise in sodium concentration which is already high but the water retention would correct this. There is no effective receptor that monitors and controls Na concentration by altering sodium excretion. Sodium retaining hormones are predominantly regulated by the volume and blood pressure. Initially in blood loss the haematocrit is not altered but falls as fluid comes in from the interstitial space.
Vasopressin, also called Antidiuretic Hormone (ADH), is the principal compound controlling water balance by decreasing water output by the kidney, and thus decreased urination. It perceives the need by monitoring plasma osmolality and if this is high, vasopressin is secreted. Vasopressin is formed in the hypothalamus and travels down axons to the posterior pituitary where it is stored.
Plasma osmolality is the usual factor regulating vasopressin release but other factors alter the release. Pain and emotion release vasopressin together with the other posterior pituitary hormone oxytocin. Alcohol inhibits the release of vasopressin and thus causes a diuresis. A low plasma volume also releases vasopressin which in high concentration can cause vasoconstriction. These different factors can overcome the usual physiological control of osmolality.
Osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus monitor the plasma osmolality and send a signal down the axon that releases vasopressin from the posterior pituitary gland. Vasopressin travels by the blood to the kidney and binds to a receptor on the basolateral membrane and by a series of cellular events alters the permeability of the luminal membrane to water, thereby increasing the water permeability of the collecting duct and due to osmotic gradients created in the kidney causes water to be retained by the body (ie. an antidiuresis) which provides the other name for vasopressin of antidiuretic hormone.
Vasopressin released by the pituitary binds to a receptor on the basolateral membrane and activates adenyl cyclase which increases cyclic AMP levels in the kidney. This by a series of reactions, some of which involve calcium, cause microfilaments to contract and insert preformed water channels (aquaporins) into the luminal membrane increasing water permeability.
A high plasma osmolality is the important physiological stimulus causing vasopressin release. Urea in plasma in a normal person only has a concentration of 6 mmol/l and thus contributes to only a small part of plasma osmolality. Even if plasma urea is elevated to 30 mmol/l it would not have a significant effect on vasopressin release as membranes (including those of the osmoreceptor cells) are permeable to urea. If there is excessive ADH water is retained and the osmolality and sodium concentration would fall (hyponatraemia). If there is no ADH water is lost and osmolality and sodium concentration would rise (hypernatraemia). While ADH is released if the plasma volume falls the most important factor to restore volume is retention of sodium by the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone and other salt retaining systems.
Sodium is an important cation distributed primarily outside the cell. The cell sodium concentration is about 15 mmol/l but varies in different organs and with an intracellular volume of 30 litres about 400 mmol are inside the cell. The plasma and interstitial sodium is about 140 mmol/l with an extracellular volume of about 13 litres, 1800 mmol are in the extracellular space. The total body sodium, however, is about 3700 mmol as there is about 1500 mmol stored in bones.
The usual sodium intake of an Australian diet is about 180 mmol/d but varies widely (50-400 mmol/day) depending on habit and cultural influences. The body has potent sodium retaining mechanisms and even if a person is on 5 mmol Na+/day they can maintain sodium balance. Extra sodium is lost from the body by reducing the activity of the renin angiotensin aldosterone system which leads to increased sodium loss from the body. Sodium is lost through the kidney, sweat and faeces.
In states of sodium depletion aldosterone levels increase and in states of sodium excess aldosterone levels decrease. The major physiological controller of aldosterone secretion is the plasma angiotensin II level which increases aldosterone secretion. A high plasma potassium also increases aldosterone secretion because besides retaining Na+ high plasma aldosterone causes K+ loss by the kidney. Plasma Na+ levels have little effect on aldosterone secretion.
A low renal perfusion pressure stimulates the release of renin, which forms angiotensin I which is converted to angiotensin II. Angiotensin II will correct the low perfusion pressure by causing constriction of blood vessels and by increasing sodium retention by a direct effect on the proximal renal tubule and by an effect operated through aldosterone. The perfusion pressure to the adrenal gland has little direct effect on aldosterone secretion and the low blood pressure operates to control aldosterone via the renin angiotensin system.
In addition to aldosterone and angiotensin II other factors influence sodium excretion. Thus in high sodium states due either to excess intake or cardiac disease (+ others) atrial peptide is secreted from the heart and by a series of actions causes loss of sodium by the kidney. Elevated blood pressure will also tend to cause Na+ loss and a low blood pressure usually leads to sodium retention. Aldosterone also acts on the sweat ducts and colonic epithelium to conserve sodium. When aldosterone has been activated to retain sodium the plasma sodium tends to rise. This immediately causes release of ADH which causes water to be retained, thus retaining Na+ and H2O in the right proportion to restore plasma volume.
Potassium is predominantly an intracellular ion and most of the total body potassium of about 4000 mmol is inside the cells and the next largest proportion (300-500 mmol) is in the bones. Cell K+ concentration is about 150 mmol/l but varies in different organs. Extracellular potassium is about 4.0 mmol/l and with an extracellular value of about 13 litres, 52 mmol (ie. less than 1.5%) is present here and only 12 mmol in the plasma.
In an unprocessed diet potassium is much more plentiful than sodium and is present as an organic salt while sodium is added as NaCl. In a hunter gatherer K+ intake may be as much as 400 mmol/d while in the Western diet it is 70 mmol/d or less if a person has a minimal amount of fresh fruit and vegetables. Processing of foods replaces K+ with NaCl. While the body can excrete a large K+ load it is unable to conserve K+. On a zero K+ intake or in a person with K+ depletion there will still be a loss of K+ of 30-50 mmol/d in the urine and faeces.
If there is a high potassium intake, e.g. 100 mmol, this would potentially increase the extracellular K+ level 2 times before the kidney could excrete the extra potassium. The body buffers the extra potassium by equilibrating it within the cells. The acid base status controls the distribution between plasma and cells. A high pH (ie. alkalosis >7.4) favours movement of K+ into the cells whilst a low pH (ie. acidosis) causes movement out of the cell. A high plasma potassium increases aldosterone secretion and this increases the potassium loss from the body, restoring balance. This change of distribution with the acid base status means that the plasma K+ may not reflect the total body content. Thus a person with an acidosis (pH 7.1) and a plasma K+ of 6.5 mmol/l could be depleted of total body potassium. This occurs in diabetic acidosis. Conversely a person who is alkalotic with a plasma K+ of 3.4 mmol/l may have normal total body potassium.
In the Australian diet there is about 1200 mg/d of calcium. Even if it was all soluble it is not all absorbed as it combines with phosphates in the intestinal secretions. In addition absorption is regulated by active Vitamin D and increased amounts increase Ca++ absorption. Absorption is controlled by Vitamin D while excretion is controlled by parathyroid hormones. However, the distribution from bone to plasma is controlled by both the parathyroid hormones and vitamin D. There is a constant loss of calcium by the kidney even if there was none in the diet. The excretion of calcium by the kidney and its distribution between bone and the rest of the body is primarily controlled by parathyroid hormone.
Calcium in plasma exists in 3 forms. Ionized, non ionized and protein bound. It is the ionized calcium concentration that is monitored by the parathyroid gland and if low, parathyroid hormone secretion is increased. This acts to increase ionized calcium levels by increasing bone re-absorption, decreasing renal excretion and acting on the kidney to increase the rate of formation of active Vitamin D, and thereby increase gut absorption of calcium.
The usual amount of phosphate in the diet is about 1 g/d but not all is absorbed. Any excess is excreted by the kidney and this excretion is increased by parathyroid hormone. Parathyroid hormone also causes phosphate to come out of bone. Plasma phosphate has no direct effect on parathyroid hormone secretion. However if it is elevated it combines with Ca++ decreasing the ionized Ca++ in plasma, thereby increasing parathyroid hormone secretion.
If you have ever performed heavy manual labor or competed in an athletic event on a very hot day, you may have experienced symptoms of heat exhaustion. Typically these include an elevated core body temperature (above 104F or 40C), profuse sweating, pale color, muscle cramps, dizziness, and in some extreme circumstances, fainting or loss of consciousness.
Heat exhaustion occurs as a consequence of disruption of the body's own system of thermoregulation, the means by which it adjusts temperature. Sweating is the principal means through which the body cools itself down, but diverting blood from other regions toward the skin also serves this purpose. Although sweat allows excess heat to dissipate as the moisture reaches the skin surface, it can also have dangerous implications for blood pressure and volume. As sweating increases, blood volume can drop precipitously, meaning that the brain and other body systems are at risk for insufficient oxygen and nutrient supplies. Furthermore, diverting blood away from other systems and towards the skin compounds the changes in blood volume and blood pressure induced through sweating.
Heat stroke is a far more serious condition. This happens when the body's temperature rises out of control due to the failure of the thermoregulating system. If the body is unable to reduce its temperature due to outside or physical influences, the brain will start to malfunction. Delirium and loss of consciousness set in. The center of the brain controlling the sweat glands will stop functioning, halting the production of sweat. This causes the body's temperature to rise even faster. Furthermore, with the increase of the body's temperature, the metabolic process will speed up causing even more heat in the body. If left untreated this will result in death. One of the easiest ways to spot heat stroke is the skin. If it is flushed due to the increase of blood flow but dry because the sweat glands have stopped secreting, the individual will need prompt medical attention.
The skeletal muscles can shiver to produce heat if the body temperature is too low.
Non-shivering thermogenesis involves the decomposition of fat to produce heat.
Sweating cools the body with the use of evaporation.
The pancreas produces insulin and glucagon to control blood-sugar concentration.
The lungs take in oxygen and give off carbon dioxide, which regulates pH in the blood.
The removal of metabolic waste. This is known as excretion. This is done by the excretory organs such as the kidneys and lungs.
The regulation of body temperature. This is mainly done by the skin.
The regulation of blood glucose level. This is mainly done by the liver and the insulin and glucagon secreted by the pancreas in the body.
Most of these organs are controlled by hormones secreted from the pituitary gland, which in turn is directed by the hypothalamus.
A) When you hold your breath the kidneys will remove CO2 from your blood
B) If you exercise a lot your urine will become more acidic
C) If you have emphysema the kidneys will remove fewer bicarbonate ions from circulation
D) If you hyperventilate the kidneys will counteract the alkalinity by adding hydrogen ions into the blood stream
E) None of the above-the urinary system never works with the respiratory system
A) How long it has been since you last took a breath
E) The build-up of blood pressure that occurs when you don't breathe
B) A cruise control set on your car applies more gas when going up a hill
C) You sweat on a hot summer's day and the blood vessels in your skin vasodilate
D) You get cut and platelets form a clot. This in turn activates the fibrin clotting system and more blood forms clots
Control Center or Integration Center: receives and processes information from the receptor
Effector: responds to the commands of the control center by either opposing or enhancing the stimulus
Negative Feedback: a reaction in which the system responds in such a way as to reverse the direction of change
Positive Feedback: a response is to amplify the change in the variable
A cell is a structure as well as a functional unit of life. Every living thing has cells: bacteria, protozoans, fungi, plants, and animals are the main group of living things. Some organisms are made up of just one cell are called unicellular. (e.g. bacteria and protozoans), but animals, including human beings, are multi-cellular. An adult human body is composed of about 100,000,000,000,000 cells! Each cell has basic requirements to sustain it, and the body's organ systems are largely built around providing the many trillions of cells with those basic needs (such as oxygen, food, and waste removal).
There are about 200 different kinds of specialized cells in the human body. When many identical cells are organized together it is called a tissue (such as muscle tissue, nervous tissue, etc). Various tissues organized together for a common purpose are called organs (e.g. the stomach is an organ, and so is the skin, the brain, and the uterus).
Ideas about cell structure have changed considerably over the years. Early biologists saw cells as simple membranous sacs containing fluid and a few floating particles. Today's biologists know that cells are inconceivably more complex than this. Therefore, a strong knowledge of the various cellular organelles and their functions is important to any physiologist. If a person's cells are healthy, then that person is healthy. All physiological processes, disease, growth and development can be described at the cellular level.
Although there are specialized cells - both in structure and function - within the body, all cells have similarities in their structural organization and metabolic needs (such as maintaining energy levels via conversion of carbohydrate to ATP and using genes to create and maintain proteins).
Here are some of the different types of specialized cells within the human body.
Nerve Cells: Also called neurons, these cells are in the nervous system and function to process and transmit information (it is hypothesized). They are the core components of the brain, spinal cord, and peripheral nerves. They use chemical synapses that can evoke electrical signals, called action potentials, to relay signals throughout the body.
Epithelial cells: Functions of epithelial cells include secretion, absorption, protection, transcellular transport, sensation detection, and selective permeability. Epithelium lines both the outside (skin) and the inside cavities and lumen of bodies.
Exocrine cells: These cells secrete products through ducts, such as mucus, sweat, or digestive enzymes. The products of these cells go directly to the target organ through the ducts. For example, the bile from the gallbladder is carried directly into the duodenum via the bile duct.
Endocrine cells: These cells are similar to exocrine cells, but secrete their products directly into the bloodstream instead of through a duct. Endocrine cells are found throughout the body but are concentrated in hormone-secreting glands such as the pituitary. The products of the endocrine cells go throughout the body in the bloodstream but act on specific organs by receptors on the cells of the target organs. For example, the hormone estrogen acts specifically on the uterus and breasts of females because there are estrogen receptors in the cells of these target organs.
Cells are the smallest structural & functional living units within our body, but play a big role in making our body function properly. Many cells never have a large increase in size like eggs, after they are first formed from a parental cell. Typical stem cells reproduce, double in size, then reproduce again. Most Cytosolic contents such as the endomembrane system and the cytoplasm easily scale to larger sizes in larger cells. If a cell becomes too large, the normal cellular amount of DNA may not be adequate to keep the cell supplied with RNA. Large cells often replicate their chromosomes to an abnormally high amount or become multinucleated. Large cells that are primarily for nutrient storage can have a smooth surface membrane, but metabolically active large cells often have some sort of folding of the cell surface membrane in order to increase the surface area available for transport functions.
Several different molecules interact to form organelles within our body. Each type of organelle has a specific function. Organelles perform the vital functions that keep our cells alive.
The boundary of the cell, sometimes called the plasma membrane, separates internal metabolic events from the external environment and controls the movement of materials into and out of the cell. This membrane is very selective about what it allows to pass through; this characteristic is referred to as "selective permeability." For example, it allows oxygen and nutrients to enter the cell while keeping toxins and waste products out.
The plasma membrane is a double phospholipid membrane, or a lipid bilayer, with the nonpolar hydrophobic tails pointing toward the inside of the membrane and the polar hydrophilic heads forming the inner and outer surfaces of the membrane.
The molecular structure of the cell membrane.22
Proteins and cholesterol molecules are scattered throughout the flexible phospholipid membrane. Peripheral proteins attach loosely to the inner or outer surface of the plasma membrane. Integral proteins lie across the membrane, extending from inside to outside. A variety of proteins are scattered throughout the flexible matrix of phospholipid molecules, somewhat like icebergs floating in the ocean, and this is termed the fluid mosaic model of the cell membrane.
The phospholipid bilayer is selectively permeable. Only small, uncharged polar molecules can pass freely across the membrane. Some of these molecules are H2O and CO2, hydrophobic (nonpolar) molecules like O2, and lipid soluble molecules such as hydrocarbons. Other molecules need the help of a membrane protein to get across. There are a variety of membrane proteins that serve various functions:
Channel proteins: Proteins that provide passageways through the membranes for certain hydrophilic or water-soluble substances such as polar and charged molecules. No energy is used during transport, hence this type of movement is called facilitated diffusion.
Transport proteins: Proteins that spend energy (ATP) to transfer materials across the membrane. When energy is used to provide passageway for materials, the process is called active transport.
Recognition proteins: Proteins that distinguish the identity of neighboring cells. These proteins have oligosaccharide or short polysaccharide chains extending out from their cell surface.
Adhesion proteins: Proteins that attach cells to neighboring cells or provide anchors for the internal filaments and tubules that give stability to the cell.
Receptor proteins: Proteins that initiate specific cell responses once hormones or other trigger molecules bind to them.
Electron transfer proteins: Proteins that are involved in moving electrons from one molecule to another during chemical reactions.
Passive transport describes the movement of substances down a concentration gradient and does not require energy use.
Simple diffusion, or diffusion, is the net movement of substances from an area of higher concentration to an area of lower concentration. This movement occurs as a result of the random and constant motion characteristic of all molecules, (atoms or ions) and is independent from the motion of other molecules. Since, at any one time, some molecules may be moving against the gradient and some molecules may be moving down the gradient, although the motion is random, the word "net" is used to indicate the overall, eventual end result of the movement.
Facilitated diffusion is the diffusion of solutes through channel proteins in the plasma membrane. Water can pass freely through the plasma membrane without the aid of specialized proteins (though facilitated by aquaporins).
Osmosis is the diffusion of water molecules across a selectively permeable membrane. When water moves into a body by osmosis, hydrostatic pressure or osmotic pressure may build up inside the body.
Transport proteins in the plasma membrane transfer solutes such as small ions (Na+, K+, Cl-, H+), amino acids, and monosaccharides.
The proteins involved with active transport are also known as ion pumps.
The protein binds to a molecule of the substance to be transported on one side of the membrane, then it uses the released energy (ATP) to change its shape, and releases it on the other side.
The protein pumps are specific, there is a different pump for each molecule to be transported.
Protein pumps are catalysts in the splitting of ATP → ADP + phosphate, so they are called ATPase enzymes.
The sodium-potassium pump (also called the Na+/K+-ATPase enzyme) actively moves sodium out of the cell and potassium into the cell. These pumps are found in the membrane of virtually every cell, and are essential in transmission of nerve impulses and in muscular contractions.
Cystic fibrosis is a genetic disorder that results in a mutated chloride ion channel. By not regulating chloride secretion properly, water flow across the airway surface is reduced and the mucus becomes dehydrated and thick.
Vesicles or other bodies in the cytoplasm move macromolecules or large particles across the plasma membrane. Types of vesicular transport include:
Exocytosis, which describes the process of vesicles fusing with the plasma membrane and releasing their contents to the outside of the cell. This process is common when a cell produces substances for export.
Endocytosis, which describes the capture of a substance outside the cell when the plasma membrane merges to engulf it. The substance subsequently enters the cytoplasm enclosed in a vesicle.
Phagocytosis or cellular eating, occurs when the dissolved materials enter the cell. The plasma membrane engulfs the solid material, forming a phagocytic vesicle.
Pinocytosis or cellular drinking occurs when the plasma membrane folds inward to form a channel allowing dissolved substances to enter the cell. When the channel is closed, the liquid is encircled within a pinocytic vesicle.
Receptor-mediated endocytosis occurs when specific molecules in the fluid surrounding the cell bind to specialized receptors in the plasma membrane. As in pinocytosis, the plasma membrane folds inward and the formation of a vesicle follows.
Note: Certain hormones are able to target specific cells by receptor-mediated endocytosis.
The gel-like material within the cell membrane is referred to as the cytoplasm. It is a fluid matrix, the cytosol, which consists of 80% to 90% water, salts, organic molecules and many enzymes that catalyze reactions, along with dissolved substances such as proteins and nutrients. The cytoplasm plays an important role in a cell, serving as a "molecular soup" in which organelles are suspended and held together by a fatty membrane.
Within the plasma membrane of a cell, the cytoplasm surrounds the nuclear envelope and the cytoplasmic organelles. It plays a mechanical role by moving around inside the membrane and pushing against the cell membrane helping to maintain the shape and consistency of the cell and again, to provide suspension to the organelles. It is also a storage space for chemical substances indispensable to life, which are involved in vital metabolic reactions, such as anaerobic glycolysis and protein synthesis.
The cell membrane keeps the cytoplasm from leaking out. It contains many different organelles which are considered the insoluble constituents of the cytoplasm, such as the mitochondria, lysosomes, peroxysomes, ribosomes, several vacuoles and cytoskeletons, as well as complex cell membrane structures such as the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi apparatus that each have specific functions within the cell.
Threadlike proteins that make up the cytoskeleton continually reconstruct to adapt to the cell's constantly changing needs. It helps cells maintain their shape and allows cells and their contents to move. The cytoskeleton allows certain cells such as neutrophils and macrophages to make amoeboid movements.
The network is composed of three elements: microtubules, actin filaments, and intermediate fibers.
Microtubules function as the framework along which organelles and vesicles move within a cell. They are the thickest of the cytoskeleton structures. They are long hollow cylinders, composed of protein subunits, called tubulin. Microtubules form mitotic spindles, the machinery that partitions chromosomes between two cells in the process of cell division. Without mitotic spindles cells could not reproduce.
Microtubules, intermediate filaments, and microfilaments are three protein fibers of decreasing diameter, respectively. All are involved in establishing the shape or movements of the cytoskeleton, the internal structure of the cell.
Microfilaments provide mechanical support for the cell, determine the cell shape, and in some cases enable cell movements. They have an arrow-like appearance, with a fast growing plus or barbed end and a slow growing minus or pointed end. They are made of the protein actin and are involved in cell motility. They are found in almost every cell, but are predominant in muscle cells and in the cells that move by changing shape, such as phagocytes (white blood cells that scour the body for bacteria and other foreign invaders).
Organelles are bodies embedded in the cytoplasm that serve to physically separate the various metabolic activities that occur within cells. The organelles are each like separate little factories, each organelle is responsible for producing a certain product that is used elsewhere in the cell or body.
Cells of all living things are divided into two broad categories: prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Bacteria (and archea) are prokaryotes, which means they lack a nucleus or other membrane-bound organelles. Eukaryotes include all protozoans, fungi, plants, and animals (including humans), and these cells are characterized by a nucleus (which houses the chromosomes) as well as a variety of other organelles. Human cells vary considerably (consider the differences between a bone cell, a blood cell, and a nerve cell), but most cells have the features described below.
A comparison of Eukaryote and Prokaryote cells.
Controls the cell; houses the genetic material (DNA). The nucleus is the largest of the cells organelles. Cells can have more than one nucleus or lack a nucleus all together. Skeletal muscle cells contain more than one nucleus whereas red blood cells do not contain a nucleus at all. The nucleus is bounded by the nuclear envelope, a phospholipid bilayer similar to the plasma membrane. The space between these two layers is the nucleolemma Cisterna.
The nucleus contains the DNA, as mentioned above, the hereditary information in the cell. Normally the DNA is spread out within the nucleus as a threadlike matrix called chromatin. When the cell begins to divide, the chromatin condenses into rod-shaped bodies called chromosomes, each of which, before dividing, is made up of two long DNA molecules and various histone molecules. The histones serve to organize the lengthy DNA, coiling it into bundles called nucleosomes. Also visible within the nucleus are one or more nucleoli, each consisting of DNA in the process of manufacturing the components of ribosomes. Ribosomes are shipped to the cytoplasm where they assemble amino acids into proteins. The nucleus also serves as the site for the separation of the chromosomes during cell division.
Inside each cell nucleus are chromosomes. Chromosomes are made up of chromatin, which is made up of protein and deoxyribonucleic acid strands. Deoxyribonucleic acid is DNA, the genetic material that is in the shape of a twisted ladder, also called the double helix. Humans have 23 pairs of chromosomes. Down Syndrome and Cri du Chat Syndrome result from having an abnormal number of chromosomes.
Centrioles are rod like structures composed of 9 bundles which contain three microtubules each. Two perpendicularly placed centrioles surrounded by proteins make up the centrosome. Centrioles are very important in cellular division, where they arrange the mitotic spindles that pull the chromosome apart.
Centrioles and basal bodies act as microtubule organizing centers. A pair of centrioles (enclosed in a centrosome) located outside the nuclear envelope gives rise to the microtubules that make up the spindle apparatus used during cell division. Basal bodies are at the base of each flagellum and cilium and appear to organize their development.
Ribosomes play an active role in the complex process of protein synthesis, where they serve as the structures that facilitate the joining of amino acids. Each ribosome is composed of a large and small subunit which are made up of ribosomal proteins and ribosomal RNAs. They can either be found in groups called polyribosomes within the cytoplasm or found alone. Occasionally they are attached to the endoplasmic reticulum.
Mitochondria are the organelles that function as the cell "powerhouse", generating ATP, the universal form of energy used by all cells. It converts food nutrients such as glucose, to a fuel (ATP) that the cells of the body can use. Mitochondria are tiny sac-like structures found near the nucleus. Little shelves called cristae are formed from folds in the inner membrane. Cells that are metabolically active such as muscle, liver and kidney cells have high energy requirements and therefore have more mitochondria.
Mitochondria are unique in that they have their own mitochondrial DNA (separate from the DNA that is in the nucleus). It is believed that eukaryotes evolved from one cell living inside another cell, and mitochondria share many traits with free-living bacteria (similar chromosome, similar ribosomes, etc).
Endoplasmic means "within the plasm" and reticulum means "network".
A complex three dimensional internal membrane system of flattened sheets, sacs and tubes, that play an important role in making proteins and shuttling cellular products; also involved in metabolisms of fats, and the production of various materials. In cross-section, they appear as a series of maze-like channels, often closely associated with the nucleus. When ribosomes are present, the rough ER connects polysaccharide groups to the polypeptides as they are assembled by the ribosomes. Smooth ER, without ribosomes, is responsible for various activities, including the synthesis of lipids and hormones, especially in cells that produce these substances for export from the cell.
Rough endoplasmic reticulum has characteristic bumpy appearance due to the multitude of ribosomes coating it. It is the site where proteins not destined for the cytoplasm are synthesized.
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum provides a variety of functions, including lipid synthesis and degradation, and calcium ion storage. In liver cells, the smooth ER is involved in the breakdown of toxins, drugs, and toxic byproducts from cellular reactions.
"Packages" cellular products in sacs called vesicles so that the products can cross the cell membrane and exit the cell. The Golgi apparatus is the central delivery system for the cell. It is a group of flattened sacs arranged much like a stack of bowls. They function to modify and package proteins and lipids into vesicles, small spherically shaped sacs that bud from the ends of a Golgi apparatus. Vesicles often migrate to and merge with the plasma membrane, releasing their contents outside the cell. The Golgi apparatus also transports lipids and creates lysosomes and organelles involved in digestion.
Spaces in the cytoplasm that sometimes serve to carry materials to the cell membrane for discharge to the outside of the cell. Vacuoles are formed during endocytosis when portions of the cell membrane are pinched off.
Lysosomes are sac-like compartments that contain a number of powerful degradative enzymes. They are built in the Golgi apparatus. They break down harmful cell products and waste materials, cellular debris, and foreign invaders such as bacteria, and then force them out of the cell. Tay-Sachs disease and Pompe's disease are just two of the malfunctions of lysosomes or their digestive proteins.
Organelles in which oxygen is used to oxidize substances, breaking down lipids and detoxifying certain chemicals. Peroxisomes self replicate by enlarging and then dividing.
They are common in liver and kidney cells that break down potentially harmful substances. Peroxisomes can convert hydrogen peroxide, a toxin made of H2O2 to H2O.
Human cells, like other animal cells, do not have a rigid cell wall. Human cells do have an important and variable structure outside of their cell membrane called the extracellular matrix. Sometimes this matrix can be extensive and solid (examples = calcified bone matrix, cartilage matrix), while other times it consists of a layer of extracellular proteins and carbohydrates. This matrix is responsible for cells binding to each other and is incredibly important in how cells physically and physiologically interact with each other.
Many prokaryotes have flagella, allowing, for example, an E. coli bacteria to propel its way up the urethra to cause a UTI (Urinary Tract Infection). Human cells, however (and in fact most eukaryotic cells) lack flagella. This makes sense since humans are multicellular, and individual cells do not need to swim around. The obvious exception to this is with sperm, and indeed each sperm is propelled by a single flagellum. The flagellum of sperm is composed of microtubules.
Cilia are especially notable on the single-celled protozoans, where they beat in synchrony to move the cells nimbly through the water. They are composed of extensions of the cell membrane that contain microtubules. When present in humans they are typically found in large numbers on a single surface of the cells, where rather than moving cells, they move materials. The mucociliary escalator of the respiratory system consists of mucus-secreting cells lining the trachea and bronchi, and ciliated epithelial cells that move the mucus ever-upward. In this manner mold spores, bacteria, and debris are caught in the mucus, removed from the trachea, and pushed into the esophagus (to be swallowed into a pit of acid). In the oviducts cilia move the ovum from the ovary to the uterus, a journey which takes a few days.
A magnified view of several cells, with visible cilia.
The plasma membranes of adjacent cells are usually separated by extracellular fluids that allow transport of nutrients and wastes to and from the bloodstream. In certain tissues, however, the membranes of adjacent cells may join and form a junction. Three kinds of cell junctions are recognized:
Desmosomes are protein attachments between adjacent cells. Inside the plasma membrane, a desmosome bears a disk shaped structure from which protein fibers extend into the cytoplasm. Desmosomes act like spot welds to hold together tissues that undergo considerable stress, such as our skin or heart muscle.
Tight junctions are tightly stitched seams between cells. The junction completely encircles each cell, preventing the movement of material between the cell. Tight junctions are characteristic of cells lining the digestive tract, where materials are required to pass through cells,rather than intercellular spaces, to penetrate the bloodstream.
Gap junctions are narrow tunnels that directly connect the cytoplasm of two neighbouring cells, consisting of proteins called connexons. These proteins allow only the passage of ions and small molecules. In this manner, gap junctions allow communication between cells through the exchange of materials or the transmission of electrical impulses.
Cell metabolism is the total energy released and consumed by a cell. Metabolism describes all of the chemical reactions that are happening in the body. Some reactions, called anabolic reactions, create needed products. Other reactions, called catabolic reactions, break down products. Your body is performing both anabolic and catabolic reactions at the same time and around the clock, twenty four hours a day, to keep your body alive and functioning. Even while you sleep, your cells are busy metabolizing.
Catabolism: The energy releasing process in which a chemical or food is used (broken down) by degradation or decomposition, into smaller pieces.
Anabolism: Anabolism is just the opposite of catabolism. In this portion of metabolism, the cell consumes energy to produce larger molecules via smaller ones.
Chemical diagram of an ATP molecule.
ATP is the currency of the cell. When the cell needs to use energy such as when it needs to move substances across the cell membrane via the active transport system, it "pays" with molecules of ATP. The total quantity of ATP in the human body at any one time is about 0.1 Mole. The energy used by human cells requires the hydrolysis of 200 to 300 moles of ATP daily. This means that each ATP molecule is recycled 2000 to 3000 times during a single day. ATP cannot be stored, hence its consumption must closely follow its synthesis. On a per-hour basis, 1 kilogram of ATP is created, processed and then recycled in the body. Looking at it another way, a single cell uses about 10 million ATP molecules per second to meet its metabolic needs, and recycles all of its ATP molecules about every 20-30 seconds.
When two hydrogen atoms are bonded, FAD is reduced to FADH2 and is turned into an energy-carrying molecule. FAD accommodates two equivalents of Hydrogen; both the hydride and the proton ions. This is used by organisms to carry out energy requiring processes. FAD is reduced in the citric acid cycle during aerobic respiration
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP) are two important cofactors found in cells. NADH is the reduced form of NAD+, and NAD+ is the oxidized form of NADH. It forms NADP with the addition of a phosphate group to the 2' position of the adenosyl nucleotide through an ester linkage.
NAD is used extensively in glycolysis and the citric acid cycle of cellular respiration. The reducing potential stored in NADH can be converted to ATP through the electron transport chain or used for anabolic metabolism. ATP "energy" is necessary for an organism to live. Green plants obtain ATP through photosynthesis, while other organisms obtain it by cellular respiration.
NADP is used in anabolic reactions, such as fat acid and nucleic acid synthesis, that require NADPH as a reducing agent. In chloroplasts, NADP is an oxidising agent important in the preliminary reactions of photosynthesis. The NADPH produced by photosynthesis is then used as reducing power for the biosynthetic reactions in the Calvin cycle of photosynthesis.
Chemical diagram of an NADH molecule.
MH2 + NAD+ → NADH + H+ + M: + energy, where M is a metabolite.
Two hydrogen ions (a hydride ion and an H+ ion) are transferred from the metabolite. One electron is transferred to the positively-charged nitrogen, and one hydrogen attaches to the carbon atom opposite to the nitrogen.
The human body synthesizes NAD from the vitamin niacin in the form of nicotinic acid or nicotinamide.
Cellular respiration is the energy releasing process by which sugar molecules are broken down by a series of reactions and the chemical energy gets converted to energy stored in ATP molecules. The reactions that convert the fuel (glucose) to usable cellular energy (ATP) are glycolysis, the Krebs cycle (sometimes called the citric acid cycle), and the electron transport chain. Altogether these reactions are referred to as "cellular respiration" or "aerobic respiration." Oxygen is needed as the final electron acceptor, and carrying out cellular respiration is the very reason we breathe and the reason we eat.
The glycolytic pathway (glycolysis) is where glucose, the smallest molecule that a carbohydrate can be broken into during digestion, gets oxidized and broken into two 3-carbon molecules (pyruvates), which are then fed into the Kreb's Cycle. Glycolysis is the beginning of cellular respiration and takes place in the cytoplasm. Two molecules of ATP are required for glycolysis, but four are produced so there is a net gain of two ATP per glucose molecule. Two NADH molecules transfer electrons (in the form of hydrogen ions) to the electron transport chain in the mitochondria, where they will be used to generate additional ATP. During physical exertion when the mitochondria are already producing the maximum ATP possible with the amount of oxygen available, glycolysis can continue to produce an additional 2 ATP per glucose molecule without sending the electrons to the mitochondria. However, during this anaerobic respiration lactic acid is produced, which may accumulate and lead to temporary muscle cramping.
Two molecules of pyruvate enter the Krebs cycle, which is called the aerobic pathway because it requires the presence of oxygen in order to occur. This cycle is a major biological pathway that occurs in humans and every plant and animal.
After glycolysis takes place in the cell's cytoplasm, the pyruvic acid molecules travel into the interior of the mitochondrion. Once the pyruvic acid is inside, carbon dioxide is enzymatically removed from each three-carbon pyruvic acid molecule to form acetic acid. The enzyme then combines the acetic acid with an enzyme, coenzyme A, to produce acetyl coenzyme A, also known as acetyl CoA.
Once acetyl CoA is formed, the Krebs cycle begins. The cycle is split into eight steps, each of which will be explained below.
Step 1: The acetic acid subunit of acetyl CoA is combined with oxaloacetate to form a molecule of citrate. The acetyl coenzyme A acts only as a transporter of acetic acid from one enzyme to another. After Step 1, the coenzyme is released by hydrolysis so that it may combine with another acetic acid molecule to begin the Krebs cycle again.
Step 2: The citric acid molecule undergoes an isomerization. A hydroxyl group and a hydrogen molecule are removed from the citrate structure in the form of water. The two carbons form a double bond until the water molecule is added back. Only now, the hydroxyl group and hydrogen molecule are reversed with respect to the original structure of the citrate molecule. Thus, isocitrate is formed.
Step 3: In this step, the isocitrate molecule is oxidized by a NAD molecule. The NAD molecule is reduced by the hydrogen atom and the hydroxyl group. The NAD binds with a hydrogen atom and carries off the other hydrogen atom leaving a carbonyl group. This structure is very unstable, so a molecule of CO2 is released creating alpha-ketoglutarate.
Step 4: In this step, our friend, coenzyme A, returns to oxidize the alpha-ketoglutarate molecule. A molecule of NAD is reduced again to form NADH and leaves with another hydrogen. This instability causes a carbonyl group to be released as carbon dioxide and a thioester bond is formed in its place between the former alpha-ketoglutarate and coenzyme A to create a molecule of succinyl-coenzyme A complex.
Step 5: A water molecule sheds its hydrogen atoms to coenzyme A. Then, a free-floating phosphate group displaces coenzyme A and forms a bond with the succinyl complex. The phosphate is then transferred to a molecule of GDP to produce an energy molecule of GTP. It leaves behind a molecule of succinate.
Step 6: In this step, succinate is oxidized by a molecule of FAD (Flavin adenine dinucleotide). The FAD removes two hydrogen atoms from the succinate and forces a double bond to form between the two carbon atoms, thus creating fumarate.
Step 7: An enzyme adds water to the fumarate molecule to form malate. The malate is created by adding one hydrogen atom to a carbon atom and then adding a hydroxyl group to a carbon next to a terminal carbonyl group.
Step 8: In this final step, the malate molecule is oxidized by a NAD molecule. The carbon that carried the hydroxyl group is now converted into a carbonyl group. The end product is oxaloacetate which can then combine with acetyl-coenzyme A and begin the Krebs cycle all over again.
Summary: In summary, three major events occur during the Krebs cycle. One GTP (guanosine triphosphate) is produced which eventually donates a phosphate group to ADP to form one ATP; three molecules of NAD are reduced; and one molecule of FAD is reduced. Although one molecule of GTP leads to the production of one ATP, the production of the reduced NAD and FAD are far more significant in the cell's energy-generating process. This is because NADH and FADH2 donate their electrons to an electron transport system that generates large amounts of energy by forming many molecules of ATP.
To see a visual summary of "Kreb Cycle" please click here.
The most complicated system of all. In the respiration chain, oxidation and reduction reactions occur repeatedly as a way of transporting energy. The respiratory chain is also called the electron transport chain. At the end of the chain, oxygen accepts the electron and water is produced.
This is a simultaneous oxidation-reduction process whereby cellular metabolism occurs, such as the oxidation of sugar in the human body, through a series of very complex electron transfer processes.
The chemical way to look at redox processes is that the substance being oxidized transfers electrons to the substance being reduced. Thus, in the reaction, the substance being oxidized (aka. the reducing agent) loses electrons, while the substance being reduced (aka. the oxidizing agent) gains electrons. Remember: LEO (Losing Electrons is Oxidation) the lion says GER (Gaining Electrons is Reduction); or alternatively: OIL (Oxidation is Loss) RIG (Reduction is Gain).
What major classes of molecules are found within cells?
The term is more-specifically used to refer to fatty-acids and their derivatives (including tri-, di-, and mono-glycerides and phospholipids) as well as other fat-soluble sterol-containing metabolites such as cholesterol. Lipids serve many functions in living organisms including energy storage, serve as structural components of cell membranes, and constitute important signaling molecules. Although the term lipid is sometimes used as a synonym for fat, the latter is in fact a subgroup of lipids called triglycerides and should not be confused with the term fatty acid.
Carbohydrate molecules consist of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. They have a general formula Cn(H2O)n. There are several sub-families based on molecular size.
Carbohydrates are chemical compounds that contain oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon atoms, and no other elements. They consist of monosaccharide sugars of varying chain lengths.
Certain carbohydrates are an important storage and transport form of energy in most organisms, including plants and animals. Carbohydrates are classified by their number of sugar units: monosaccharides (such as glucose and fructose), disaccharides (such as sucrose and lactose), oligosaccharides, and polysaccharides (such as starch, glycogen, and cellulose).
The simplest carbohydrates are monosaccharides, which are small straight-chain aldehydes and ketones with many hydroxyl groups added, usually one on each carbon except the functional group. Other carbohydrates are composed of monosaccharide units and break down under hydrolysis. These may be classified as disaccharides, oligosaccharides, or polysaccharides, depending on whether they have two, several, or many monosaccharide units.
All proteins contain carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen. Some also contain phosphorus and sulfur. The building blocks of proteins are amino acids. There are 20 different kinds of amino acids used by the human body. They unite by peptide bonds to form long molecules called polypeptides. Polypeptides are assembled into proteins. Proteins have four levels of structure
The secondary structure is formed by hydrogen bonds between amino acids. The polypeptide can coil into a helix or form a pleated sheet.
The tertiary structure refers to the three-dimensional folding of the helix or pleated sheet.
The quaternary structure refers to the spatial relationship among the polypeptide in the protein.
The hexagonary structure refers to the carpal relationship among the bipeptide in the person.
A biological molecule that catalyzes a chemical reaction. Enzymes are essential for life because most chemical reactions in living cells would occur too slowly or would lead to different products without enzymes. Most enzymes are proteins and the word "enzyme" is often used to mean a protein enzyme. Some RNA molecules also have a catalytic activity, and to differentiate them from protein enzymes, they are referred to as RNA enzymes or ribozymes.
Questions 2 - 6 Match the following organelles with their function:
c. Within the nucleus
a. The largest living units within our bodies.
b. Enzymes that "eat" bacteria
c. Microscopic fundamental units of all living things.
Active Transport: the movement of solutes against a gradient and requires the expenditure of energy
Cells: the microscopic fundamental unit that makes up all living things
Cell Membrane: boundary of the cell, sometimes called the plasma membrane
Cytoplasm: a water-like substance that fills cells. The cytoplasm consists of cytosol and the cellular organelles, except the cell nucleus. The cytosol is made up of water, salts, organic molecules and many enzymes that catalyze reactions. The cytoplasm holds all of the cellular organelles outside of the nucleus, maintains the shape and consistency of the cell, and serves as a storage place for chemical substances.
Cytoskeleton: made of threadlike proteins, helps cells maintain their shape and allows cells and their contents to move
Dialysis: the diffusion of solutes across a selectively permeable membrane. Most commonly heard of when a patient has had renal failure. In medicine, dialysis is a type of renal replacement therapy which is used to provide an artificial replacement for lost kidney function due to renal failure. It is a life support treatment and does not treat any kidney diseases.
Endocrine cells: similar to exocrine cells, but secrete their products directly into the bloodstream instead of through a duct
Endocytosis: the capture of a substance outside the cell when the plasma membrane merges to engulf it
Endoplasmic Reticulum: organelle that play an important role in making proteins and shuttling cellular products; also involved in metabolisms of fats, and the production of various materials
Epithelial Cells: cells that aid in secretion, absorption, protection, trans-cellular transport, sensation detection, and selective permeability
Exocrine Cells: cells that secrete products through ducts, such as mucus, sweat, or digestive enzymes
Exocytosis: the process of vesicles fusing with the plasma membrane and releasing their contents to the outside of the cell
Facilitated Diffusion: the diffusion of solutes through channel proteins in the plasma membrane
Golgi Apparatus: "packages" cellular products in sacs called vesicles so that the products can cross the cell membrane and exit the cell
Lysosomes: sac-like compartments that contain a number of powerful degradative enzymes
Microfilaments: provide mechanical support for the cell, determine the cell shape, and in some cases enable cell movements
Organelles: bodies embedded in the cytoplasm that serve to physically separate the various metabolic activities that occur within cells
Osmosis: the diffusion of water molecules across a selectively permeable membrane from an area of high solute concentration to an area of low solute concentration.
Passive Transport: the movement of substances down a concentration gradient and does not require energy use
Peroxisomes: organelles in which oxygen is used to oxidize substances, breaking down lipids and detoxifying certain chemicals
Phagocytosis: a form of endocytosis wherein large particles are enveloped by the cell membrane of a (usually larger) cell and internalized to form a phagosome, or "food vacuole." In animals, phagocytosis is performed by specialized cells called phagocytes, which serve to remove foreign bodies and thus fight infection. In vertebrates, these include larger macrophages and smaller granulocytes, types of blood cells. Bacteria, dead tissue cells, and small mineral particles are all examples of objects that may be phagocytosed.
Pinocytosis: also called cellular drinking, is a form of endocytosis, a process in which small particles are taken in by a cell by splitting into smaller particles. The particles then form small vesicles which subsequently fuse with lysosomes to hydrolyze, or to break down, the particles. This process requires adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
Receptor-mediated Endocytosis: occurs when specific molecules in the fluid surrounding the cell bind to specialized receptors in the plasma membrane
Red Blood Cells (erythrocytes): cells that collect oxygen in the lungs and deliver it through the blood to the body tissues
Ribosomes: play an active role in the complex process of protein synthesis, where they serve as the structures that facilitate the joining of amino acids
Simple Diffusion: the net movement of substances from an area of higher concentration to an area of lower concentration
Vacuoles: spaces in the cytoplasm that sometimes serve to carry materials to the cell membrane for discharge to the outside of the cell
White Blood Cells (leukocytes): produced in the bone marrow and help the body to fight infectious disease and foreign objects in the immune system
The integumentary system consists of the skin, hair, nails, the subcutaneous tissue below the skin,and assorted glands.The most obvious function of the integumentary system is the protection that the skin gives to underlying tissues. The skin not only keeps most harmful substances out, but also prevents the loss of fluids.
A major function of the subcutaneous tissue is to connect the skin to underlying tissues such as muscles. Hair on the scalp provides insulation from cold for the head. The hair of eyelashes and eyebrows helps keep dust and perspiration out of the eyes, and the hair in our nostrils helps keep dust out of the nasal cavities. Any other hair on our bodies no longer serves a function, but is an evolutionary remnant. Nails protect the tips of fingers and toes from mechanical injury. Fingernails give the fingers greater ability to pick up small objects.
There are four types of glands in the integumentary system: Sudoriferous glands, Sebaceous glands, Ceruminous glands, and Mammary glands. Sudoriferous glands are sweat producing glands. These are important to help maintain body temperature. Sebaceous glands are oil producing glands which help inhibit bacteria, keep us waterproof and prevent our hair and skin from drying out. Ceruminous glands produce earwax which keeps the outer surface of the eardrum pliable and prevents drying. Mammary glands produce milk.
In zoology and dermatology, skin is an organ of the integumentary system made up of a layer of tissues that guard underlying muscles and organs. As the interface with the surroundings, it plays the most important role in protecting against pathogens. Its other main functions are insulation and temperature regulation, sensation and vitamin D and B synthesis. Skin is considered one of the most important parts of the body.
Skin has pigmentation, melanin, provided by melanocytes, which absorbs some of the potentially dangerous radiation in sunlight. It also contains DNA repair enzymes which reverse UV damage, and people who lack the genes for these enzymes suffer high rates of skin cancer. One form predominantly produced by UV light, malignant melanoma, is particularly invasive, causing it to spread quickly, and can often be deadly. Human skin pigmentation varies among populations in a striking manner. This has sometimes led to the classification of people(s) on the basis of skin color.
Damaged skin will try to heal by forming scar tissue, often giving rise to discoloration and depigmentation of the skin.
The skin is often known as "the largest organ in the human body". This applies to exterior surface, as it covers the body, appearing to have the largest surface area of all the organs. Moreover, it applies to weight, as it weighs more than any single internal organ, accounting for about 15 percent of body weight. For the average adult human, the skin has a surface area of between 1.5-2.0 square meters, most of it is between 2-3 mm thick. The average square inch of skin holds 650 sweat glands, 20 blood vessels, 60,000 melanocytes, and more than a thousand nerve endings.
The use of natural or synthetic cosmetics to treat the appearance of the face and condition of the skin (such as pore control and black head cleansing) is common among many cultures.
The skin has two major layers which are made of different tissues and have very different functions. Diagram of the layers of human skin
Skin is composed of the epidermis and the dermis. Below these layers lies the hypodermis or subcutaneous adipose layer, which is not usually classified as a layer of skin.
The outermost epidermis consists of stratified squamous keratinizing epithelium with an underlying basement membrane. It contains no blood vessels, and is nourished by diffusion from the dermis. The main type of cells which make up the epidermis are keratinocytes, with melanocytes and Langerhans cells also present. The epidermis can be further subdivided into the following strata (beginning with the outermost layer): corneum, lucidum, granulosum, spinosum, basale. Cells are formed through mitosis at the innermost layers. They move up the strata changing shape and composition as they differentiate, inducing expression of new types of keratin genes. They eventually reach the corneum and become sloughed off (desquamation). This process is called keratinization and takes place within about 30 days. This layer of skin is responsible for keeping water in the body and keeping other harmful chemicals and pathogens out.
Blood capillaries are found beneath the dermis, and are linked to an arteriole and a venule. Arterial shunt vessels may bypass the network in ears, the nose and fingertips.
The dermis lies below the epidermis and contains a number of structures including blood vessels, nerves, hair follicles, smooth muscle, glands and lymphatic tissue. It consists of loose connective tissue otherwise called areolar connective tissue—collagen, elastin and reticular fibers are present. Erector muscles, attached between the hair papilla and epidermis, can contract, resulting in the hair fiber pulled upright and consequentially goose bumps. The main cell types are fibroblasts, adipocytes (fat storage) and macrophages. Sebaceous glands are exocrine glands which produce a mixture of lipids and waxy substances known as sebum. Sebum serves many functions, including lubrication, water-proofing, softening, and also provides antimicrobial properties. Sweat glands open up via a duct onto the skin by a pore.
The dermis is made of an irregular type of fibrous connective tissue consisting of collagen and elastin fibers. It can be split into the papillary and reticular layers. The papillary layer is outermost and extends into the epidermis to supply it with vessels. It is composed of loosely arranged fibers. Papillary ridges make up the lines of the hands giving us fingerprints. The reticular layer is more dense and is continuous with the hypodermis. It contains the bulk of the structures (such as sweat glands). The reticular layer is composed of irregularly arranged fibers and resists stretching.
The hypodermis is not part of the skin, and lies below the dermis. Its purpose is to attach the skin to underlying bone and muscle as well as supplying it with blood vessels and nerves. It consists of loose connective tissue and elastin. The main cell types are fibroblasts, macrophages and adipocytes (the hypodermis contains 95% of body fat). Fat serves as padding and insulation for the body.
Clinical Application:The patch drug delivery system.
The transdermal patch is an increasingly popular drug delivery system. These patches are designed so that the drug molecules diffuse through the epidermis to the blood vessels in the dermis layer. A typical patch works well for small lipid-soluble molecules (for example, estrogen, nitroglycerin, and nicotine) that can make their way between epidermal cells.
Protection: Skin gives an anatomical barrier between the internal and external environment in bodily defense; Langerhans cells in the skin are part of the immune system
Sensation: Skin contains a variety of nerve endings that react to heat, cold, touch, pressure, vibration, and tissue injury; see somatosensory system and touch.
Heat regulation: The skin contains a blood supply far greater than its requirements which allows precise control of energy loss by radiation, convection and conduction. Dilated blood vessels increase perfusion and heat loss while constricted vessels greatly reduce cutaneous blood flow and conserve heat. Erector pili muscles are significant in animals.
Lanugo, the fine, unpigmented hair that covers nearly the entire body of a fetus, although most has been replaced with vellus by the time of the baby's birth
Vellus hair, the short, downy, "peach fuzz" body hair (also unpigmented) that grows in most places on the human body. While it occurs in both sexes, and makes up much of the hair in children, men have a much smaller percentage (around 10%) vellus whereas 2/3 of a female's hair is vellus.
Terminal hair, the fully developed hair, which is generally longer, coarser, thicker, and darker than vellus hair, and often is found in regions such as the axillary, male beard, and pubic.
Drugs used in cancer chemotherapy frequently cause a temporary loss of hair, noticeable on the head and eyebrows, because they kill all rapidly dividing cells, not just the cancerous ones. Other diseases and traumas can cause temporary or permanent loss of hair, either generally or in patches.
The hair shafts may also store certain poisons for years, even decades, after death. In the case of Col. Lafayette Baker, who died July 3, 1868, use of an atomic absorption spectrophotometer showed the man was killed by white arsenic. The prime suspect was Wallace Pollock, Baker's brother-in-law. According to Dr. Ray A. Neff, Pollack had laced Baker's beer with it over a period of months, and a century or so later minute traces of arsenic showed up in the dead man's hair. Mrs. Baker's diary seems to confirm that it was indeed arsenic, as she writes of how she found some vials of it inside her brother's suit coat one day.
The fingernail is an important structure made of keratin. The fingernail generally serve two purposes. It serves as a protective plate and enhances sensation of the fingertip. The protection function of the fingernail is commonly known, but the sensation function is equally important. The fingertip has many nerve endings in it allowing us to receive volumes of information about objects we touch. The nail acts as a counterforce to the fingertip providing even more sensory input when an object is touched.
The structure we know of as the nail is divided into six specific parts - the root, nail bed, nail plate, eponychium (cuticle), perionychium, and hyponychium.
The root of the fingernail is also known as the germinal matrix. This portion of the nail is actually beneath the skin behind the fingernail and extends several millimeters into the finger. The fingernail root produces most of the volume of the nail and the nail bed. This portion of the nail does not have any melanocytes, or melanin producing cells. The edge of the germinal matrix is seen as a white, crescent shaped structure called the lunula.
The nail bed is part of the nail matrix called the sterile matrix. It extends from the edge of the germinal matrix, or lunula, to the hyponychium. The nail bed contains the blood vessels, nerves, and melanocytes, or melanin-producing cells. As the nail is produced by the root, it streams down along the nail bed, which adds material to the undersurface of the nail making it thicker. It is important for normal nail growth that the nail bed be smooth. If it is not, the nail may split or develop grooves that can be cosmetically unappealing.
The nail plate is the actual fingernail, made of translucent keratin. The pink appearance of the nail comes from the blood vessels underneath the nail. The underneath surface of the nail plate has grooves along the length of the nail that help anchor it to the nail bed.
The cuticle of the fingernail is also called the eponychium. The cuticle is situated between the skin of the finger and the nail plate fusing these structures together and providing a waterproof barrier.
The perioncyhium is the skin that overlies the nail plate on its sides. It is also known as the paronychial edge. The perionychium is the site of hangnails, ingrown nails, and an infection of the skin called paronychia.
The hyponychium is the area between the nail plate and the fingertip. It is the junction between the free edge of the nail and the skin of the fingertip, also providing a waterproof barrier.
Nail diseases are in a separate category from diseases of the skin. Although nails are a skin appendage, they have their own signs and symptoms which may relate to other medical conditions. Nail conditions that show signs of infection or inflammation require medical assistance and cannot be treated at a beauty parlor. Deformity or disease of the nails may be referred to as onychosis.
There are many disease that can occur with the fingernails and toenails. The most common of these diseases are ingrown nails and fungal infections.
Onychocryptosis, commonly known as "ingrown nails" (unguis incarnatus), can affect either the fingers or the toes. In this condition, the nail cuts into one or both sides of the nail bed, resulting in inflammation and possibly infection. The relative rarity of this condition in the fingers suggests that pressure from the ground or shoe against the toe is a prime factor. The movements involved in walking or other physical disturbances can contribute to the problem. Mild onychocryptosis, particularly in the absence of infection, can be treated by trimming and rounding the nail. More advanced cases, which usually include infection, are treated by surgically excising the ingrowing portion of the nail down to its bony origin and cauterizing the matrix, or 'root', to prevent recurrence. This surgery is called matricectomy. The best results are achieved by cauterizing the matrix with phenol. Another method, which is much less effective, is excision of the matrix, sometimes called a 'cold steel procedure'
An infection of nail fungus (onychomycosis) occurs when fungi infect one or more of your nails. Onychomycosis generally begins as a white or yellow spot under the tip of the fingernail or toenail. As the nail fungus spreads deeper into the nail, it may cause the nail to discolor, thicken and develop crumbling edges — an unsightly and potentially painful problem.
Infections of nail fungus account for about half of all nail disorders. These infections usually develop on nails continually exposed to warm, moist environments, such as sweaty shoes or shower floors. Nail fungus isn't the same as athlete's foot, which primarily affects the skin of the feet, but at times the two may coexist and can be caused by the same type of fungus. Topical steroid misuse is one of the most common cause now a days.
An infection with nail fungus may be difficult to treat, and infections may recur. But medications are available to help clear up nail fungus permanently.
Nail inspection can give a great deal of information about the internal working of the body as well, and like tongue or iris inspection, has a long history of diagnostic use in cantraditional medical practices such as Chinese medicine.
Brittleness is associated with iron deficiency, thyroid problems, impaired kidney function, circulation problems[2], and biotin deficiency[3]
Splitting and fraying are associated with psoriasis, folic acid, protein and/or Vitamin C deficiency.
Unusual thickness is associated with circulation problems.
Thinning nails and itchy skin are associated with lichen planus[4].
Clubbing, or nails that curve down around the fingertips with nail beds that bulge is associated with oxygen deprivation and lung, heart, or liver disease.
Spooning, or nails that grow upwards is associated with iron or B12 deficiency.
Flatness can indicate a B12 vitamin deficiency[5] or Raynaud's disease[6]
Horizontal ridges indicate stress, and Beau's lines are associated with many serious conditions.
Vertical ridges are associated with arthritis[7].
Vertical grooves are associated with kidney disorders, aging, and iron deficiency[8].
Beading is associated with rheumatoid arthritis[9].
Nails that resemble hammered brass are associated with (or portend) hair loss[10].
Short small beds are associated with heart disease[11].
Mee's lines are associated with arsenic or thallium poisoning, and renal failure.
White lines across the nail are associated with heart disease, liver disease, or a history of a recent high fever[12].
Opaque white nails with a dark band at the fingertip are associated with cancer, cirrhosis, congestive heart failure, diabetes and aging[13].
Paleness or whitening is associated with liver or kidney disease and anemia[14].
Yellowing of the nail bed is associated with chronic bronchitis, lymphatic problems, diabetes, and liver disorders.
Brown or copper nail beds are associated with arsenic or copper poisoning, and local fungal infection.
Grey nail beds are associated with arthritis, edema, malnutrition, post-operative effects, glaucoma and cardio-pulmonary disease[15].
Stains of the nail plate (not the nail bed) are associated with nail polish[16], smoking, and henna use.
Pink and white nails are associated with kidney disease[17].
Parallel white lines in the nails are associated with hypoalbuminemia.
A diagrammatic sectional view of the skin (magnified). Sweat gland labeled as "sudoriferous gland" at center right.
Also "click" here"How our body Sweats" to see a short movie on sweat glands.
Eccrine sweat glands are exocrine glands distributed over the entire body surface but are particularly abundant on the palms of hands, soles of feet, and on the forehead. These produce sweat that is composed chiefly of water (99%) with various salts. The primary function is body temperature regulation.
Eccrine sweat glands are coiled tubular glands derived leading directly to the most superficial layer of the epidermis (outer layer of skin) but extending into the inner layer of the skin (dermis layer). They are distributed over almost the entire surface of the body in humans and many other species but are lacking in some marine and fur-bearing species. The sweat glands are controlled by sympathetic cholinergic nerves which are controlled by a center in the hypothalamus. The hypothalamus senses core temperature directly, and also has input from temperature receptors in the skin and modifies the sweat output, along with other thermoregulatory processes.
Apocrine sweat glands only develop during early- to mid-puberty (approximately age 15) and release more than normal amounts of sweat for approximately a month and subsequently regulate and release normal amounts of sweat after a certain period of time. Apocrine sweat glands produce sweat that contains fatty materials. These glands are mainly present in the armpits and around the genital area and their activity is the main cause of sweat odor, due to the bacteria that break down the organic compounds in the sweat from these glands. Emotional stress increases the production of sweat from the apocrine glands, or more precisely: the sweat already present in the tubule is squeezed out. Apocrine sweat glands essentially serve as scent glands.
In some areas of the body, these sweat glands are modified to produce wholly different secretions, including the cerumen ("wax") of the outer ear. Other glands, such as Mammary glands, are greatly enlarged and modified to produce milk.
Schematic view of a hair follicle with sebaceous gland.
The sebaceous glands are glands found in the skin of mammals. They secrete an oily substance called sebum (Latin, meaning fat or tallow) that is made of fat (lipids) and the debris of dead fat-producing cells. These glands exist in humans throughout the skin except in the palms of the hands and soles of the feet. Sebum acts to protect and waterproof hair and skin, and keep them from becoming dry, brittle, and cracked. It can also inhibit the growth of microorganisms on skin.
Sebaceous glands can usually be found in hair-covered areas where they are connected to hair follicles to deposit sebum on the hairs, and bring it to the skin surface along the hair shaft. The structure consisting of hair, hair follicle and sebaceous gland is also known as pilosebaceous unit.
Sebaceous glands are also found in non haired areas of lips, eyelids, penis, labia minora and nipples; here the sebum reaches the surface through ducts. In the glands, sebum is produced within specialized cells and is released as these cells burst; sebaceous glands are thus classified as holocrine glands.
Sebum is odorless, but its bacterial breakdown can produce odors. Sebum is the cause of some people experiencing "oily" hair if it is not washed for several days. Earwax is partly sebum, as is mucopurulent discharge, the dry substance accumulating in the corners of the eye after sleeping.
A hair follicle with associated structures.
The composition of sebum varies from species to species; in humans, the lipid content consists of about 25% wax monoesters, 41% triglycerides, 16% free fatty acids, and 12% squalene.
Sebaceous glands are involved in skin problems such as acne and keratosis pilaris. A blocked sebaceous gland can result in a sebaceous cyst. The prescription drug isotretinoin significantly reduces the amount of sebum produced by the sebaceous glands, and is used to treat acne. The extreme use (up to 10 times doctor prescribed amounts) of anabolic steroids by bodybuilders to prevent weight loss tend to stimulate the sebaceous glands which can cause acne.
The sebaceous glands of a human fetus in utero secrete a substance called Vernix caseosa, a "waxy" or "cheesy" white substance coating the skin of newborns.
The preputial glands of mice and rats are large modified sebaceous glands that produce pheromones.
Wet-type human earwax on a cotton swab.
Earwax, also known by the medical term cerumen, is a yellowish, waxy substance secreted in the ear canal of humans and many other mammals. It plays a vital role in the human ear canal, assisting in cleaning and lubrication, and also provides some protection from bacteria, fungus, and insects. A comprehensive review of the physiology and pathophysiology of cerumen can be found in Roeser and Ballachanda. Excess or impacted cerumen can press against the eardrum and/or occlude the external auditory canal and impair hearing.
Cerumen is produced in the outer third of the cartilaginous portion of the human ear canal. It is a mixture of viscous secretions from sebaceous glands and less-viscous ones from modified apocrine sweat glands.
Two distinct genetically determined types of earwax are distinguished -- the wet-type which is dominant, and the dry type which is recessive. Asians and Native Americans are more likely to have the dry type of cerumen (grey and flaky), whereas Caucasians and Africans are more likely to have the wet type (honey-brown to dark-brown and moist). Cerumen type has been used by anthropologists to track human migratory patterns, such as those of the Inuit.
The difference in cerumen type has been tracked to a single base change (an single nucleotide polymorphism) in a gene known as "ATP-binding cassette C11 gene". In addition to affecting cerumen type, this mutation also reduces sweat production. The researchers conjecture that the reduction in sweat was beneficial to the ancestors of East Asians and Native Americans who are thought to have lived in cold climates.
Wet-type earwax fluoresces weakly under ultraviolet light.
Cleaning. Cleaning of the ear canal occurs as a result of the "conveyor belt" process of epithelial migration, aided by jaw movement. Cells formed in the center of the tympanic membrane migrate outwards from the umbo (at a rate equivalent to that of fingernail growth) to the walls of the ear canal, and accelerate towards the entrance of the ear canal. The cerumen in the canal is also carried outwards, taking with it any dirt, dust, and particulate matter that may have gathered in the canal. Jaw movement assists this process by dislodging debris attached to the walls of the ear canal, increasing the likelihood of its extrusion.
Lubrication. Lubrication prevents desiccation and itching of the skin within the ear canal (known as asteatosis). The lubricative properties arise from the high lipid content of the sebum produced by the sebaceous glands. In wet-type cerumen at least, these lipids include cholesterol, squalene, and many long-chain fatty acids and alcohols.
Antibacterial and antifungal roles. While studies conducted up until the 1960s found little evidence supporting an antibacterial role for cerumen, more recent studies have found that cerumen provides some bactericidal protection against some strains of bacteria. Cerumen has been found to be effective in reducing the viability of a wide range of bacteria (sometimes by up to 99%), including Haemophilus influenzae, Staphylococcus aureus, and many variants of Escherichia coli. The growth of two fungi commonly present in otomycosis was also significantly inhibited by human cerumen. These antimicrobial properties are due principally to the presence of saturated fatty acids, lysozyme and, especially, to the relatively low pH of cerumen (typically around 6.1 in normal individuals).
Mammary glands are the organs that, in the female mammal, produce milk for the sustenance of the young. These exocrine glands are enlarged and modified sweat glands and are the characteristic of mammals which gave the class its name.
The basic components of the mammary gland are the alveoli (hollow cavities, a few millimetres large) lined with milk-secreting epithelial cells and surrounded by myoepithelial cells. These alveoli join up to form groups known as lobules, and each lobule has a lactiferous duct that drains into openings in the nipple. The myoepithelial cells can contract, similar to muscle cells, and thereby push the milk from the alveoli through the lactiferous ducts towards the nipple, where it collects in widenings (sinuses) of the ducts.
A suckling baby essentially squeezes the milk out of these sinuses.
Dissection of a lactating breast.1 - Fat2 - Lactiferous duct/lobule3 - Lobule4 - Connective tissue5 - Sinus of lactiferous duct6 - Lactiferous duct
One distinguishes between a simple mammary gland, which consists of all the milk-secreting tissue leading to a single lactiferous duct, and a complex mammary gland, which consists of all the simple mammary glands serving one nipple.
Humans normally have two complex mammary glands, one in each breast, and each complex mammary gland consists of 10-20 simple glands. (The presence of more than two nipples is known as polythelia and the presence of more than two complex mammary glands as polymastia.)
Also, "click" this;"Breast tissue", to this a movie visual of the breast.
The mammary glands exist in both sexes, but they are rudimentary until puberty when in response to ovarian hormones, they begin to develop in the female. Click this [1]to see what breast tissue does in a female during menstruation.
Estrogen promotes formation, while testosterone inhibits it.
At the time of birth, the baby has lactiferous ducts but no alveoli. Little branching occurs before puberty when ovarian estrogens stimulate branching differentiation of the ducts into spherical masses of cells that will become alveoli. True secretory alveoli only develop in pregnancy, where rising levels of estrogen and progesterone cause further branching and differentiation of the duct cells, together with an increase in adipose tissue and a richer blood flow.
Colostrum is secreted in late pregnancy and for the first few days after giving birth. True milk secretion (lactation) begins a few days later due to a reduction in circulating progesterone and the presence of the hormone prolactin. The suckling of the baby causes the release of the hormone oxytocin which stimulates contraction of the myoepithelial cells.
As described above, the cells of mammary glands can easily be induced to grow and multiply by hormones. If this growth runs out of control, cancer results. Almost all instances of breast cancer originate in the lobules or ducts of the mammary glands.
As a whole, the integumentary system plays a big part in maintaining homeostasis. The integumentary system is the outermost organ system of the body and many of its functions are related to this location. The skin protects the body against pathogens and chemicals, minimizes loss or entry of water, and blocks the harmful effects of sunlight. Sensory receptors in the skin provide information about the external environment, helping the skin regulate body temperature in response to environmental changes and helping the body react to pain and other tactile stimuli. The large surface area of the skin makes it ideal for temperature regulation. The rate of heat loss can be regulated by the amount of blood flowing through the blood vessels in the dermis close to the surface of the skin. When the body temperature rises, as for example during exercise, sympathetic tone is reduced and this brings about dilation of the blood vessels supplying the skin. The increase in skin blood flow allows heat to be lost more rapidly so that body temperature does not rise above the normal homeostatic range. The rate of heat loss can also be boosted by the production of sweat, which takes up additional heat as it evaporates. Conversely, if heat production is less than required, the dermal vessels constrict, sweating stops, and heat is conserved by the body.
Areolar connective tissue is a pliable, mesh-like tissue with a fluid matrix and functions to cushion and protect body organs. It acts as a packaging tissue holding the internal organs together and in correct placement.
Basal lamina (often erroneously called basement membrane) is a layer on which epithelium sits. This layer is composed of an electron-dense layer (lamina densa) between two electron-lucid layers (lamina lucida), and is approximately 40-50 nm thick (with exceptions such as the 100-200 nm glomerular basement membrane).
The dermis is the layer of skin beneath the epidermis that consists of connective tissue and cushions the body from stress and strain. The dermis is tightly connected to the epidermis by a basement membrane.
The epidermis is the outermost layer of the skin. It forms the waterproof, protective wrap over the body's surface and is made up of stratified squamous epithelium with an underlying basal lamina.
A fibroblast is a cell that makes the structural fibers and ground substance of connective tissue.
A hair follicle is part of the skin that grows hair by packing old cells together.
The hypodermis (also called the hypoderm), is the lowermost layer of the integumentary system in vertebrates. It is derived from the mesoderm, but unlike the dermis, it is not derived from the dermatome region of the mesoderm.
This is a superficial skin infection most common among children age 2–6 years. People who play close contact sports such as rugby, American football and wrestling are also susceptible, regardless of age. The name derives from the Latin impetere ("assail"). It is also known as school sores.
These are cells located in the bottom layer of the skin's epidermis and in the middle layer of the eye, the uvea. Through a process called melanogenesis, these cells produce melanin, a pigment in the skin, eyes, and hair.
The papillary layer is outermost and extends into the epidermis to supply it with vessels. It is composed of loosely arranged fibres. Papillary ridges make up the lines of the hands.
The reticular layer is more dense and is continuous with the hypodermis. It contains the bulk of the structures (such as sweat glands). The reticular layer is composed of irregularly arranged fibres and resists stretching.
For more fun pictures of other skin diseases and skin problems "click" to this cool website
"Dermatology Image Database". Note: From this link then click "Clinical Skin Diseases Images".
Brannon, Heather (2006). "Nail Anatomy" About, Inc., A part of The New York Times Company.
Cobb, Judith. Fingernails, Jewels or Tools? Nature's Field - Nail diagnosis
Mader, Sylvia S. (2004). Human Biology. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Sorrentino, Sheila A. (2004). Mosby's textbook for Nursing Assistants, 6th Edition. St. Louis, Missouri: Mosby.
The central nervous system includes the brain and spinal cord. The brain and spinal cord are protected by bony structures, membranes, and fluid. The brain is held in the cranial cavity of the skull and it consists of the cerebrum, cerebellum, and the brain stem. The nerves involved are cranial nerves and spinal nerves.
The nervous system has three main functions: sensory input, integration of data and motor output. Sensory input is when the body gathers information or data, by way of neurons, glia and synapses. The nervous system is composed of excitable nerve cells (neurons) and synapses that form between the neurons and connect them to centers throughout the body or to other neurons. These neurons operate on excitation or inhibition, and although nerve cells can vary in size and location, their communication with one another determines their function. These nerves conduct impulses from sensory receptors to the brain and spinal cord. The data is then processed by way of integration of data, which occurs only in the brain. After the brain has processed the information, impulses are then conducted from the brain and spinal cord to muscles and glands, which is called motor output. Glia cells are found within tissues and are not excitable but help with myelination, ionic regulation and extracellular fluid.
The nervous system is comprised of two major parts, or subdivisions, the central nervous system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous system (PNS). The CNS includes the brain and spinal cord. The brain is the body's "control center". The CNS has various centers located within it that carry out the sensory, motor and integration of data. These centers can be subdivided to Lower Centers (including the spinal cord and brain stem) and Higher centers communicating with the brain via effectors. The PNS is a vast network of spinal and cranial nerves that are linked to the brain and the spinal cord. It contains sensory receptors which help in processing changes in the internal and external environment. This information is sent to the CNS via afferent sensory nerves. The PNS is then subdivided into the autonomic nervous system and the somatic nervous system. The autonomic has involuntary control of internal organs, blood vessels, smooth and cardiac muscles. The somatic has voluntary control of skin, bones, joints, and skeletal muscle. The two systems function together, by way of nerves from the PNS entering and becoming part of the CNS, and vice versa.
Brain, brain stem, and spinal cord.
When the central nervous system becomes damaged or peripheral nerves become trapped, it can increase or decrease your internal organs functionality, it can even affect your facial expressions, i.e. make you frown a lot, your smile becomes lopsided, your lungs can overwork, or underwork, the lung capacity is increased or decreased, your bladder can fill , but you are unable to urinate, your bowels become lapsed and you are unable to completely clear them upon each bowel movement, the muscles in your arms, legs, and torso can become weaker and more fatty, not from lack of use, but from the nerves that run from your spine into them being restricted from working properly, you can suffer headaches, earaches, sore throats, blocked sinuses. Even your ability to orgasm can be affected.
CNS:The "Central Nervous System", comprised of the brain, brain stem, and spinal cord.
The central nervous system (CNS) represents the largest part of the nervous system, including the brain and the spinal cord. Together with the peripheral nervous system (PNS), it has a fundamental role in the control of behavior.
The CNS is conceived as a system devoted to information processing, where an appropriate motor output is computed as a response to a sensory input. Many threads of research suggest that motor activity exists well before the maturation of the sensory systems, and senses only influence behavior without dictating it.
Neurons are highly specialized for the processing and transmission of cellular signals. Given the diversity of functions performed by neurons in different parts of the nervous system, there is, as expected, a wide variety in the shape, size, and electrochemical properties of neurons. For instance, the soma of a neuron can vary in size from 4 to 100 micrometers in diameter.
The soma (cell body) is the central part of the neuron. It contains the nucleus of the cell and therefore is where most protein synthesis occurs. The nucleus ranges from 3 to 18 micrometers in diameter. The dendrites of a neuron are cellular extensions with many branches, and metaphorically this overall shape and structure are referred to as a dendritic tree. This is where the majority of input to the neuron occurs. However, information outflow (i.e. from dendrites to other neurons) can also occur (except in chemical synapse in which backflow of impulse is inhibited by the fact that axon does not possess chemoreceptors and dendrites cannot secrete neurotransmitter chemical). This explains one-way conduction of nerve impulse.
The axon is a finer, cable-like projection which can extend tens, hundreds, or even tens of thousands of times the diameter of the soma in length. The axon carries nerve signals away from the soma (and also carry some types of information back to it). Many neurons have only one axon, but this axon may - and usually will - undergo extensive branching, enabling communication with many target cells. The part of the axon where it emerges from the soma is called the 'axon hillock'. Besides being an anatomical structure, the axon hillock is also the part of the neuron that has the greatest density of voltage-dependent sodium channels. This makes it the most easily-excited part of the neuron and the spike initiation zone for the axon: in neurological terms, it has the greatest hyperpolarized action potential threshold. While the axon and axon hillock are generally involved in information outflow, this region can also receive input from other neurons as well.
The axon terminal is a specialized structure at the end of the axon that is used to release neurotransmitter chemicals and communicate with target neurons.
Although the canonical view of the neuron attributes dedicated functions to its various anatomical components, dendrites and axons often act in ways contrary to their so-called main function.
Axons and dendrites in the central nervous system are typically only about a micrometer thick, while some in the peripheral nervous system are much thicker. The soma is usually about 10–25 micrometers in diameter and often is not much larger than the cell nucleus it contains. The longest axon of a human motor neuron can be over a meter long, reaching from the base of the spine to the toes. Sensory neurons have axons that run from the toes to the dorsal columns, over 1.5 meters in adults. Giraffes have single axons several meters in length running along the entire length of their necks. Much of what is known about axonal function comes from studying the squids' giant axon, an ideal experimental preparation because of its relatively immense size (0.5–1 millimeter thick, several centimeters long).
Sensory afferent neurons convey information from tissues and organs into the central nervous system.
Efferent neurons transmit signals from the central nervous system to the effector cells and are sometimes called motor neurons.
Interneurons connect neurons within specific regions of the central nervous system.
Afferent and efferent can also refer generally to neurons which, respectively, bring information to or send information from the brain region.
Excitatory neurons excite their target postsynaptic neurons or target cells causing it to function. Motor neurons and somatic neurons are all excitatory neurons. Excitatory neurons in the brain are often glutamatergic. Spinal motor neurons, which synapse on muscle cells, use acetylcholine as their neurotransmitter.
Inhibitory neurons inhibit their target neurons. Inhibitory neurons are also known as short axon neurons, interneurons The output of some brain structures (neostriatum, globus pallidus, cerebellum) are inhibitory. The primary inhibitory neurotransmitters are GABA and glycine.
Modulatory neurons evoke more complex effects termed neuromodulation. These neurons use such neurotransmitters as dopamine, acetylcholine, serotonin and others.
Each synapses can receive both excitatory and inhibitory signals and the outcome is determined by the adding up of summation.
The release of an excitatory neurotransmitter (e.g. glutamate) at the synapses will cause an inflow of positively charged sodium ions (Na+) making a localized depolarization of the membrane. The current then flows to the resting (polarized) segment of the axon.
Inhibitory synapse causes an inflow of Cl- (chlorine) or outflow of K+ (potassium) making the synaptic membrane hyperpolarized. This increase prevents depolarization, causing a decrease in the possibility of an axon discharge. If they are both equal to their charges, then the operation will cancel itself out. This effect is referred to as summation.
There are two types of summation: spatial and temporal. Spatial summation requires several excitatory synapses (firing several times) to add up, thus causing an axon discharge. It also occurs within inhibitory synapses, where just the opposite will occur. In temporal summation, it causes an increase of the frequency at the same synapses until it is large enough to cause a discharge. Spatial and temporal summation can occur at the same time as well.
The neurons of the brain release inhibitory neurotransmitters far more than excitatory neurotransmitters, which helps explain why we are not aware of all memories and all sensory stimuli simultaneously. The majority of information stored in the brain is inhibited most of the time.
When excitatory synapses exceed the number of inhibitory synapses there are, then the excitatory synapses will prevail over the other. The same goes with inhibitory synapses, if there are more inhibitory synapses than excitatory, the synapses will be inhibited. To determine all of this is called summation.
Neurons can be classified according to their electrophysiological characteristics (note that a single action potential is not enough to move a large muscle, and instead will cause a twitch).
Tonic or regular spiking: Some neurons are typically constantly (or tonically) active. Example: interneurons in the neostriatum.
Fast spiking: Some neurons are notable for their fast firing rates. For example, some types of cortical inhibitory interneurons, cells in globus pallidus.
Thin-spike: Action potentials of some neurons are more narrow compared to the others. For example, interneurons in the prefrontal cortex are thin-spike neurons.
Some examples are cholinergic, GABAergic, glutamatergic and dopaminergic neurons.
The central nervous system is the control center for the body. It regulates organ function, higher thought, and movement of the body. The central nervous system consists of the brain and spinal cord.
Electrical characteristics of a neurochemical action potential.
When a nerve is stimulated the resting potential changes. Examples of such stimuli are pressure, electricity, chemicals, etc. Different neurons are sensitive to different stimuli(although most can register pain). The stimulus causes sodium ion channels to open. The rapid change in polarity that moves along the nerve fiber is called the "action potential." In order for an action potential to occur, it must reach threshold. If threshold does not occur, then no action potential can occur. This moving change in polarity has several stages:
The upswing is caused when positively charged sodium ions (Na+) suddenly rush through open sodium gates into a nerve cell. The membrane potential of the stimulated cell undergoes a localized change from -55 millivolts to 0 in a limited area. As additional sodium rushes in, the membrane potential actually reverses its polarity so that the outside of the membrane is negative relative to the inside. During this change of polarity the membrane actually develops a positive value for a moment(+30 millivolts). The change in voltage stimulates the opening of additional sodium channels (called a voltage-gated ion channel). This is an example of a positive feedback loop.
The downswing is caused by the closing of sodium ion channels and the opening of potassium ion channels. Release of positively charged potassium ions (K+) from the nerve cell when potassium gates open. Again, these are opened in response to the positive voltage--they are voltage gated. This expulsion acts to restore the localized negative membrane potential of the cell (about -65 or -70 mV is typical for nerves). sodium potassium pump
When the potassium ions are below resting potential (-90 mV). Since the cell is hyper polarized, it goes to a refractory phrase.
The refractory period is a short period of time after the depolarization stage. Shortly after the sodium gates open, they close and go into an inactive conformation. The sodium gates cannot be opened again until the membrane is repolarized to its normal resting potential. The sodium-potassium pump returns sodium ions to the outside and potassium ions to the inside. During the refractory phase this particular area of the nerve cell membrane cannot be depolarized. This refractory area explains why action potentials can only move forward from the point of stimulation.
Increased permeability of the sodium channel occurs when there is a deficit of calcium ions. When there is a deficit of calcium ions (Ca+2) in the interstitial fluid, the sodium channels are activated (opened) by very little increase of the membrane potential above the normal resting level. The nerve fiber can therefore fire off action potentials spontaneously, resulting in tetany. This could be caused by the lack of hormone from parathyroid glands. It could also be caused by hyperventilation, which leads to a higher pH, which causes calcium to bind and become unavailable.
This area of depolarization/repolarization/recovery moves along a nerve fiber like a very fast wave. In myelinated fibers, conduction is hundreds of times faster because the action potential only occurs at the nodes of Ranvier (pictured below in 'types of neurons') by jumping from node to node. This is called "saltatory" conduction. Damage to the myelin sheath by the disease can cause severe impairment of nerve cell function. Some poisons and drugs interfere with nerve impulses by blocking sodium channels in nerves. See discussion on drug at the end of this outline.
A color-coded image of the brain, showing the main sections.
The brain is found in the cranial cavity. Within it are found the higher nerve centers responsible for coordinating the sensory and motor systems of the body (forebrain). The brain stem houses the lower nerve centers (consisting of midbrain, pons, and medulla),
The medulla is the control center for respiratory, cardiovascular and digestive functions.
The pons houses the control centers for respiration and inhibitory functions. Here it will interact with the cerebellum.
The cerebrum, or top portion of the brain, is divided by a deep crevice, called the longitudinal sulcus. The longitudinal sulcus separates the cerebrum in to the right and left hemispheres. In the hemispheres you will find the cerebral cortex, basal ganglia and the limbic system. The two hemispheres are connected by a bundle of nerve fibers called the corpus callosum. The right hemisphere is responsible for the left side of the body while the opposite is true of the left hemisphere. Each of the two hemispheres are divided into four separated lobes: the frontal in control of specialized motor control, learning, planning and speech; parietal in control of somatic sensory functions; occipital in control of vision; and temporal lobes which consists of hearing centers and some speech. Located deep to the temporal lobe of the cerebrum is the insula.
The cerebellum is the part of the brain that is located posterior to the medulla oblongata and pons. It coordinates skeletal muscles to produce smooth, graceful motions. The cerebellum receives information from our eyes, ears, muscles, and joints about what position our body is currently in (proprioception). It also receives output from the cerebral cortex about where these parts should be. After processing this information, the cerebellum sends motor impulses from the brain stem to the skeletal muscles. The main function of the cerebellum is coordination. The cerebellum is also responsible for balance and posture. It also assists us when we are learning a new motor skill, such as playing a sport or musical instrument. Recent research shows that apart from motor functions cerebellum also has some emotional role.
The Limbic System and Higher Mental Functions
Image of the brain, showing the Limbic system.
The Limbic System is a complex set of structures found just beneath the cerebrum and on both sides of the thalamus. It combines higher mental functions, and primitive emotion, into one system. It is often referred to as the emotional nervous system. It is not only responsible for our emotional lives, but also our higher mental functions, such as learning and formation of memories. The Limbic system explains why some things seem so pleasurable to us, such as eating and why some medical conditions are caused by mental stress, such as high blood pressure. There are two significant structures within the limbic system and several smaller structures that are important as well. They are:
The Hippocampus is found deep in the temporal lobe, shaped like a seahorse. It consists of two horns that curve back from the amygdala. It is situated in the brain so as to make the prefrontal area aware of our past experiences stored in that area. The prefrontal area of the brain consults this structure to use memories to modify our behavior. The hippocampus is a primary contributor to memory.
The Amygdala is a little almond shaped structure, deep inside the anteroinferior region of the temporal lobe, that connects with the hippocampus, the septi nuclei, the prefrontal area and the medial dorsal nucleus of the thalamus. These connections make it possible for the amygdala to play its important role on the mediation and control of such activities and feelings as love, friendship, affection, and expression of mood. The amygdala is the center for identification of danger and is fundamental for self preservation. The amygdala is the nucleus responsible for fear.
Lesions or stimulation of the medial, dorsal, and anterior nuclei of the thalamus are associated with changes in emotional reactivity. However, the importance of these nuclei on the regulation of emotional behavior is not due to the thalamus itself, but to the connections of these nuclei with other limbic system structures. The medial dorsal nucleus makes connections with cortical zones of the prefrontal area and with the hypothalamus. The anterior nuclei connect with the mamillary bodies and through them, via fornix, with the hippocampus and the cingulated gyrus, thus taking part in what is known as the Papez's circuit.
The Hypothalamus is a small part of the brain located just below the thalamus on both sides of the third ventricle. Lesions of the hypothalamus interfere with several vegetative functions and some so called motivated behaviors like sexuality, combativeness, and hunger. The hypothalamus also plays a role in emotion. Specifically, the lateral parts seem to be involved with pleasure and rage, while the medial part is linked to aversion, displeasure, and a tendency to uncontrollable and loud laughing. However, in general the hypothalamus has more to do with the expression of emotions. When the physical symptoms of emotion appear, the threat they pose returns, via the hypothalamus, to the limbic centers and then the prefrontal nuclei, increasing anxiety.
These small structures are important connecting pathways for the limbic system.
The Cingulate Gyrus is located in the medial side of the brain between the cingulated sulcus and the corpus callosum. There is still much to be learned about this gyrus, but it is already known that its frontal part coordinates smells and sights, with pleasant memories of previous emotions. The region participates in the emotional reaction to pain and in the regulation of aggressive behavior.
Memory is defined as : The mental faculty of retaining and recalling past experiences, the act or instance of remembering recollection.
Learning takes place when we retain and utilize past memories.
Overall, the mechanisms of memory are not completely understood. Brain areas such as the hippocampus, the amygdala, the striatum, or the mammillary bodies are thought to be involved in specific types of memory. For example, the hippocampus is believed to be involved in spatial learning and declarative learning (learning information such as what you're reading now), while the amygdala is thought to be involved in emotional memory. Damage to certain areas in patients and animal models and subsequent memory deficits is a primary source of information. However, rather than implicating a specific area, it could be that damage to adjacent areas, or to a pathway traveling through the area is actually responsible for the observed deficit. Further, it is not sufficient to describe memory, and its counterpart, learning, as solely dependent on specific brain regions. Learning and memory are attributed to changes in neuronal synapses, thought to be mediated by long-term potentiation and long-term depression.
The sensory memories act as a buffer for stimuli through senses. A sensory memory retains an exact copy of what is seen or heard: iconic memory for visual, echoic memory for aural and haptic memory for touch. Information is passed from sensory memory into short term memory. Some believe it lasts only 300 milliseconds, it has unlimited capacity. Selective attention determines what information moves from sensory memory to short term memory.
Short Term Memory acts as a scratch pad for temporary recall of the information under process. For instance, in order to understand this sentence you need to hold in your mind the beginning of the sentence as you read the rest. Short term memory decays rapidly and also has a limited capacity. Chunking of information can lead to an increase in the short term memory capacity, this is the reason why a hyphenated phone number is easier to remember than a single long number. The successful formation of a chunk is known as closure. Interference often causes disturbance in short term memory retention. This accounts for the desire to complete a task held in short term memory as soon as possible.
Acoustic memory - the ability to hold sounds. Can be held longer than iconic.
Working memory - an active attentional process to keep it until it is put to use. Note that the goal is not really to move the information from short term memory to long term memory, but merely to put it to immediate use.
The process of transferring information from short term to long term memory involves the encoding or consolidation of information. This is not a function of time, that is, the longer the memory stays in the short term the more likely it is to be placed in the long term memory. On organizing complex information in short term before it can be encoded into the long term memory, in this process the meaningfulness or emotional content of an item may play a greater role in its retention in the long term memory. The limbic system sets up local reverberating circuits such as the Papez's Circuit.
Long Term Memory is used for storage of information over a long time. Information from short to long term memory is transferred after a short period. Unlike short term memory, long term memory has little decay. Long term potential is an enhanced response at the synapse within the hippocampus. It is essential to memory storage. The limbic system isn't directly involved in long term memory necessarily but it selects them from short term memory, consolidates these memories by playing them like a continuous tape, and involves the hippocampus and amygdala.
Episodic memory represents our memory of events and experiences in a serial form. It is from this memory that we can reconstruct the actual events that took place at a given point in our lives.
Semantic memory, on the other hand, is a structured record of facts, concepts, and skills that we have acquired. The information in the semantic memory is derived from our own episode memory, such as that we can learn new facts or concepts from experiences.
There are three main activities that are related to long term memory:
Information for short term memory is stored in long term memory by rehearsal. The repeated exposure to a stimulus or the rehearsal of a piece of information transfers it into long term memory. Experiments also suggest that learning is most effective if it is distributed over time. Deletion is mainly caused by decay and interference. Emotional factors also affect long term memory. However, it is debatable whether we actually ever forget anything or whether it just sometimes becomes increasingly difficult to retrieve it. Information may not be recalled sometimes but may be recognized, or may be recalled only with prompting. This leads us to the third operation of memory, information retrieval.
There are two types of information retrieval:
In recall, the information is reproduced from memory. In recognition the presentation of the information provides the knowledge that the information has been seen before. Recognition is of lesser complexity, as the information is provided as a cue. However, the recall may be assisted by the provision of retrieval cues which enable the subject to quickly access the information in memory.
Long term potentiation is largely theoretical. Many of the concepts have experimental backing, but there is still a substantial amount of controversy over other parts. There are also processes involved in long-term potentiation that go beyond the scope of this introductory book, and have been simplified. Consider this a starting place.
Long-term potentiation (LTP) is the lasting enhancement of connections between two neurons that results from stimulating them simultaneously. Since neurons communicate via chemical synapses, and because memories are believed to be stored by virtue of patterns of activation of these synapses, LTP and its opposing process, long-term depression, are widely considered the major cellular mechanisms that underlie learning and memory. This has been proven by lab experiments. When one of the chemicals involved (PKMzeta, it will be discussed later) is inhibited in rats, it causes retrograde amnesia with short term memory left intact (meaning they can't recall events from before the inhibitor was given).
By enhancing synaptic transmission, LTP improves the ability of two neurons, one presynaptic and the other postsynaptic, to communicate with one another across a synapse. The precise mechanism for this enhancement isn't known, but it varies based on things like brain region, age and species. This will focus on LTP in the CA1 section of the hippocampus, because that's what is well known.
The end result of LTP is a well established neural circuit that can be called upon later for memory.
LTP in the CA1 hippocampus is called NMDA receptor-dependent LTP. It has four main properties.
LTP can be rapidly induced by applying one or more brief, high-frequency, stimulus to a presynaptic cell.
Once induced, LTP at one synapse does not spread to other synapses; rather LTP is input specific. LTP is only propagated to those synapses according to the rules of associativity and cooperativity.
Associativity refers to the observation that when weak stimulation of a single pathway is insufficient for the induction of LTP, simultaneous strong stimulation of another pathway will induce LTP at both pathways.
LTP can be induced either by strong tetanic stimulation of a single pathway to a synapse, or cooperatively via the weaker stimulation of many. When one pathway into a synapse is stimulated weakly, it produces insufficient postsynaptic depolarization to induce LTP. In contrast, when weak stimuli are applied to many pathways that converge on a single patch of postsynaptic membrane, the individual postsynaptic depolarizations generated may collectively depolarize the postsynaptic cell enough to induce LTP cooperatively. Synaptic tagging, discussed later, may be a common mechanism underlying associativity and cooperativity.
LTP is generally divided into three parts that occur sequentially: Short-term potentiation, early LTP (E-LTP) and late LTP (L-LTP). Short-term potentiation isn't well understood and will not be discussed.
E-LTP and L-LTP phases of LTP are each characterized by a series of three events: induction, maintenance and expression. Induction happens when a short-lived signal triggers that phase to begin. Maintenance corresponds to the persistent biochemical changes that occur in response to the induction of that phase. Expression entails the long-lasting cellular changes that result from activation of the maintenance signal.
Each phase of LTP has a set of mediator molecules that dictate the events of that phase. These molecules include protein receptors, enzymes, and signaling molecules that allow progression from one phase to the next. In addition to mediators, there are modulator molecules that interact with mediators to fine tune the LTP. Modulators are a bit beyond the scope of this introductory book, and won't be discussed here.
E-LTP induction begins when the calcium inside the postsynaptic cell exceeds a threshold. In many types of LTP, the flow of calcium into the cell requires the NMDA receptor, which is why these types of LTP are considered NMDA receptor-dependent.
When a stimulus is applied to the presynaptic neuron, it releases a neurotransmitter, typically glutamate, onto the postsynaptic cell membrane where it binds to AMPA receptors, or AMPARs. This causes an influx of sodium ions into the postsynaptic cell, this short lived depolarization is called the excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) and makes it easier for the neuron to fire an action potential.
A single stimulus doesn't cause a big enough depolarization to trigger an E-LTP, instead it relies on EPSP summation. If EPSPs are reaching the cell before the others decay, they will add up. When the depolarization reaches a critical level, NMDA receptors lose the magnesium molecule they were originally plugged with and let calcium in. The rapid rise in calcium within the postsynaptic neuron trigger the short lasting activation of several enzymes that mediate E-LTP induction. Of particular importance are some protein kinase enzymes, including CaMKII and PKC. To a lesser extent, PKA and MAPK activation also contribute.
During the maintenance stage of E-LTP, CaMKII and PKC lose their dependence on calcium and become autonomously active. They then carry out phosphorylation that underlies E-LTP expression.
CaMKII and PKC phosphorylate existing AMPA receptors to increase their activity, and mediate the insertion of additional AMPA receptors onto the postsynaptic cell membrane. This is achieved by having a pool of nonsynaptic AMPA receptors adjacent to the postsynaptic membrane. When the appropriate stimulus arrives, the nonsynaptic AMPA receptors are brought into the postsynaptic membrane under the influence of protein kinases.
AMPA receptors are one of the most common type of receptors in the brain. Their effect is excitatory. By adding more AMPA receptors, and increasing their activity, future stimuli will generate larger postsynaptic responses.
Late LTP is the natural extension of E-LTP. L-LTP requires gene transcription and protein synthesis in the postsynaptic cell, unlike E-LTP. Late LTP is also associated with the presynaptic synthesis of synaptotagmin and an increase in synaptic vesicle number, suggesting that L-LTP induces protein synthesis not only in postsynaptic cells, but in presynaptic cells as well. This is discussed under "retrograde messenger" below.
Late LTP is induced by changes in gene expression and protein synthesis brought about by persistent activation of protein kinases activated during E-LTP, such as MAPK. In fact, MAPK--Specifically the ERK subfamily of MAPKs--may be the molecular link between E-LTP and L-LTP, since many signaling cascades involved in E-LTP, including CaMKII and PKC, can converge on ERK.
Upon activation, ERK may phosphorylate a number of cytoplasmic and nuclear molecules that ultimately result in the protein synthesis and morphological changes associated with L-LTP. These chemicals may include transcription factors such as CREB. ERK-mediated changes in transcription factor activity may trigger the synthesis of proteins that underlie the maintenance of L-LTP. PKMzeta is one such molecule. When this molecule is inhibited in rats, they experience retrograde amnesia (where you can't recall previous events but short term memory works fine).
Aside from PKMzeta, many of the proteins synthesized during L-LTP are unknown. They are though to increase postsynaptic dendritic spine number, surface area and sensitivity to the neurotransmitter associated with L-LTP expression.
Retrograde signaling is a hypothesis that attempts to explain that, while LTP is induced and expressed postsynaptically, some evidence suggests that it is expressed presynaptically as well. The hypothesis gets its name because normal synaptic transmission is directional and proceeds from the presynaptic to the postsynaptic cell. For induction to occur postsynaptically and be partially expressed presynaptically, a message must travel from the postsynaptic cell to the presynaptic cell in a retrograde (reverse) direction. Once there, the message presumably initiates a cascade of events that leads to a presynaptic component of expression, such as the increased probability of neurotransmitter vesicle release.
Retrograde signaling is currently a contentious subject as some investigators do not believe the presynaptic cell contributes at all to the expression of LTP. Even among proponents of the hypothesis there is controversy over the identity of the messenger.
Language depends on semantic memory so some of the same areas in the brain are involved in both memory and language. Articulation, the forming of speech, is represented bilaterally in the motor areas. However, for most individuals, language analysis and speech formation take place in regions of the left hemisphere only. The two major cortical regions involved are:
Broca's area is located just in front of the voice control area of the left motor cortex. This region assembles the motor sequencing of language, speech and writing. For example, patients with lesions in this area:
Are unable to understand language perfectly: they are typically able to understand nouns better than verbs or syntactical words and fragments
Wernicke's area is part of the auditory and visual associations cortex. This region is responsible for the analysis and formation of language content. For example, patients with lesions in this area:
Articulate speech readily but often with distorted or unintelligible meaning
There are several well known diseases that are disorders of the limbic system. Several are discussed here.
An increased dopamine (DA) response in the limbic system results in schizophrenia. DA may be synthesized or secreted in excess, DA receptors may be supersensitive, and DA regulatory mechanism may be defective. Symptoms are decreased by drugs which block DA receptors. Symptoms of schizophrenia are:
Symptoms may be so severe that the individual cannot function.
Depression is the most common major mental illness and is characterized by both emotional and physical symptoms. Symptoms of depression are:
The cause of depression and its symptoms are a mystery but we do understand that it is an illness associated with biochemical changes in the brain. A lot of research goes on to explain that it is associated with a lack of amines serotonin and norephinephrine. Therefore pharmacological treatment strategies often try to increase amine concentrations in the brain.
One class of antidepressants is monoamine oxidase inhibitors. Mono amine oxidase is an enzyme that breaks down your amines like norephinephrine and serotonin. Because the antidepressants inhibit their degradation they will remain in the synaptic cleft for a longer period of time making the effect just as if you had increased these types of neurotransmitters.
A newer class of antidepressants is selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI's). With SSRI's decreasing the uptake of serotonin back into the cell that will increase the amount of serotonin present in the synaptic cleft. SSRI's are more specific than the monoamine oxidase inhibitors because they only affect serotonergic synapses. You might recognize these SSRI's by name as Prozac and Paxil.
Manic depression, also known as bipolar disorder, displays mood swings between mania and depression. The limbic system receptors are unregulated. Drugs used are unique mood stabilizers.
The hippocampus is particularly vulnerable to several disease processes, including ischemia, which is any obstruction of blood flow or oxygen deprivation, Alzheimer’s disease, and epilepsy. These diseases selectively attack CA1, which effectively cuts through the hippocampal circuit.
A connection between autism and the limbic system has also been noted as well. URL: http://www.autism.org/limbic.html
I was 42 years old when my life changed forever. I had a stroke. As an avid viewer of medical programs on television I assumed that I would have physical therapy for my paralyzed left side and get on with my life. No one ever mentioned pain or the possibility of pain, as a result of the stroke. I did experience unusual sensitivity to touch while still in the hospital, but nothing to prepare me for what was to come.
The part of my brain that is damaged is the Thalamus. This turns out to be the pain center and what I have now is an out of control Thalamus, resulting in Thalamic Pain syndrome, also called Central Pain Syndrome. This means that 24 hours a day, seven days a week, my brain sends messages of pain and it never goes away. I am under the care of physicians, who not only understand chronic pain, but are also willing to treat it with whatever medications offer some help. None of the medications, not even narcotic medications, take the pain away. They just allow me to manage it so I can function.
The peripheral nervous system includes 12 cranial nerves 31 pairs of spinal nerves. It can be subdivided into the somatic and autonomic systems. It is a way of communication from the central nervous system to the rest of the body by nerve impulses that regulate the functions of the human body.
X Vagus for swallowing, talking, and parasympathetic actions of digestion
10 out of the 12 cranial nerves originate from the brain stem (I and II are in the cerebrum), and mainly control the functions of the anatomic structures of the head with some exceptions. CN X receives visceral sensory information from the thorax and abdomen, and CN XI is responsible for innervating the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles, neither of which is exclusively in the head.
Spinal nerves take their origins from the spinal cord. They control the functions of the rest of the body. In humans, there are 31 pairs of spinal nerves: 8 cervical, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral and 1 coccygeal. The naming convention for spinal nerves is to name it after the vertebra immediately above it. Thus the fourth thoracic nerve originates just below the fourth thoracic vertebra. This convention breaks down in the cervical spine. The first spinal nerve originates above the first cervical vertebra and is called C1. This continues down to the last cervical spinal nerve, C8. There are only 7 cervical vertebrae and 8 cervical spinal nerves.
The lateral cord gives rise to the following nerves:
The lateral pectoral nerve, C5, C6 and C7 to the pectoralis major muscle, or musculus pectoralis major.
The musculocutaneous nerve which innervates the biceps muscle
The median nerve, partly. The other part comes from the medial cord. See below for details.
The posterior cord gives rise to the following nerves:
The upper subscapular nerve, C7 and C8, to the subscapularis muscle, or musculus supca of the rotator cuff.
The lower subscapular nerve, C5 and C6, to the teres major muscle, or the musculus teres major, also of the rotator cuff.
The thoracodorsal nerve, C6, C7 and C8, to the latissimus dorsi muscle, or musculus latissimus dorsi.
The axillary nerve, which supplies sensation to the shoulder and motor to the deltoid muscle or musculus deltoideus, and the teres minor muscle, or musculus teres minor.
The radial nerve, or nervus radialis, which innervates the triceps brachii muscle, the brachioradialis muscle, or musculus brachioradialis,, the extensor muscles of the fingers and wrist (extensor carpi radialis muscle), and the extensor and abductor muscles of the thumb. See radial nerve injuries.
The medial cord gives rise to the following nerves:
The median pectoral nerve, C8 and T1, to the pectoralis muscle
The medial brachial cutaneous nerve, T1
The medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve, C8 and T1
The median nerve, partly. The other part comes from the lateral cord. C7, C8 and T1 nerve roots. The first branch of the median nerve is to the pronator teres muscle, then the flexor carpi radialis, the palmaris longus and the flexor digitorum superficialis. The median nerve provides sensation to the anterior palm, the anterior thumb, index finger and middle finger. It is the nerve compressed in carpal tunnel syndrome.
The ulnar nerve originates in nerve roots C7, C8 and T1. It provides sensation to the ring and pinky fingers. It innervates the flexor carpi ulnaris muscle, the flexor digitorum profundus muscle to the ring and pinky fingers, and the intrinsic muscles of the hand (the interosseous muscle, the lumbrical muscles and the flexor pollicus brevis muscle). This nerve traverses a groove on the elbow called the cubital tunnel, also known as the funny bone. Striking the nerve at this point produces an unpleasant sensation in the ring and little fingers.
The remainder of the thoracic spinal nerves, T3 through T12, do little recombining. They form the intercostal nerves, so named because they run between the ribs. For points of reference, the 7th intercostal nerve terminates at the lower end of the sternum, also known as the xyphoid process. The 10th intercostal nerve terminates at the umbilicus, or the belly button.
The somatic nervous system is that part of the peripheral nervous system associated with the voluntary control of body movements through the action of skeletal muscles, and also reception of external stimuli. The somatic nervous system consists of afferent fibers that receive information from external sources, and efferent fibers that are responsible for muscle contraction. The somatic system includes the pathways from the skin and skeletal muscles to the Central Nervous System. It is also described as involved with activities that involve consciousness.
The basic route of the efferent somatic nervous system includes a two neuron sequence. The first is the upper motor neuron, whose cell body is located in the precentral gyrus (Brodman Area 4) of the brain. It receives stimuli from this area to control skeletal (voluntary) muscle. The upper motor neuron carries this stimulus down the corticospinal tract and synapses in the ventral horn of the spinal cord with the alpha motor neuron, a lower motor neuron. The upper motor neuron releases acetylcholine from its axon terminal knobs and these are received by nicotinic receptors on the alpha motor neuron. The alpha motor neurons cell body sends the stimulus down its axon via the ventral root of the spinal cord and proceeds to its neuromuscular junction of its skeletal muscle. There, it releases acetylcholine from its axon terminal knobs to the muscles nicotinic receptors, resulting in stimulus to contract the muscle.
The somatic system includes all the neurons connected with the muscles, sense organs and skin. It deals with sensory information and controls the movement of the body.
The Autonomic system deals with the visceral organs, like the heart, stomach, gland, and the intestines. It regulates systems that are unconsciously carried out to keep our body alive and well, such as breathing, digestion (peristalsis), and regulation of the heartbeat. The Autonomic system consists of the sympathetic and the parasympathetic divisions. Both divisions work without conscious effort, and they have similar nerve pathways, but the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems generally have opposite effects on target tissues (they are antagonistic). By controlling the relative input from each division, the autonomic system regulates many aspects of homeostasis. One of the main nerves for the parasympathetic autonomic system is Cranial Nerve X, the Vagus nerve.
Figure 1: The right sympathetic chain and its connections with the thoracic, abdominal, and pelvic plexuses. (After Schwalbe.)
The sympathetic nervous system activates what is often termed the fight or flight response, as it is most active under sudden stressful circumstances (such as being attacked). This response is also known as sympathetico-adrenal response of the body, as the pre-ganglionic sympathetic fibers that end in the adrenal medulla (but also all other sympathetic fibers) secrete acetylcholine, which activates the secretion of adrenaline (epinephrine) and to a lesser extent noradrenaline (norepinephrine) from it. Therefore, this response that acts primarily on the cardiovascular system is mediated directly via impulses transmitted through the sympathetic nervous system and indirectly via catecholamines secreted from the adrenal medulla.
Western science typically looks at the SNS as an automatic regulation system, that is, one that operates without the intervention of conscious thought. Some evolutionary theorists suggest that the sympathetic nervous system operated in early organisms to maintain survival (Origins of Consciousness, Robert Ornstein; et al.), as the sympathetic nervous system is responsible for priming the body for action. One example of this priming is in the moments before waking, in which sympathetic outflow spontaneously increases in preparation for action.
The parasympathetic nervous system is part of the autonomic nervous system. Sometimes called the rest and digest system or feed and breed. The parasympathetic system conserves energy as it slows the heart rate, increases intestinal and gland activity, and relaxes sphincter muscles in the gastrointestinal tract.
After high stress situations (ie: fighting for your life) the parasympathetic nervous system has a backlash reaction that balances out the reaction of the sympathetic nervous system. For example, the increase in heart rate that comes along with a sympathetic reaction will result in an abnormally slow heart rate during a parasympathetic reaction.
Sympathetic nerves originate inside the vertebral column, toward the middle of the spinal cord in the intermediolateral cell column (or lateral horn), beginning at the first thoracic segment of the spinal cord and extending into the second or third lumbar segments. Because its cells begin in the thoracic and lumbar regions of the spinal cord, the SNS is said to have a thoracolumbar outflow. Axons of these nerves leave the spinal cord in the ventral branches (rami) of the spinal nerves, and then separate out as 'white rami' (so called from the shiny white sheaths of myelin around each axon) which connect to two chain ganglia extending alongside the vertebral column on the left and right. These elongated ganglia are also known as paravertebral ganglia or sympathetic trunks. In these hubs, connections (synapses) are made which then distribute the nerves to major organs, glands, and other parts of the body. [1]
In order to reach the target organs and glands, the axons must travel long distances in the body, and, to accomplish this, many axons link up with the axon of a second cell. The ends of the axons do not make direct contact, but rather link across a space, the synapse.
In the SNS and other components of the peripheral nervous system, these synapses are made at sites called ganglia. The cell that sends its fiber is called a preganglionic cell, while the cell whose fiber leaves the ganglion is called a postganglionic cell. As mentioned previously, the preganglionic cells of the SNS are located between the first thoracic segment and the second or third lumbar segments of the spinal cord. Postganglionic cells have their cell bodies in the ganglia and send their axons to target organs or glands.
The ganglia include not just the sympathetic trunks but also the superior cervical ganglion (which sends sympathetic nerve fibers to the head), and the celiac and mesenteric ganglia (which send sympathetic fibers to the gut).
Messages travel through the SNS in a bidirectional flow. Efferent messages can trigger changes in different parts of the body simultaneously. For example, the sympathetic nervous system can accelerate heart rate; widen bronchial passages; decrease motility (movement) of the large intestine; constrict blood vessels; increase peristalsis in the esophagus; cause pupil dilation, piloerection (goose bumps) and perspiration (sweating); and raise blood pressure. Afferent messages carry sensations such as heat, cold, or pain.
The first synapse (in the sympathetic chain) is mediated by nicotinic receptors physiologically activated by acetylcholine, and the target synapse is mediated by adrenergic receptors physiologically activated by either noradrenaline or adrenaline. An exception is with sweat glands which receive sympathetic innervation but have muscarinic acetylcholine receptors which are normally characteristic of PNS. Another exception is with certain deep muscle blood vessels, which have acetylcholine receptors and which dilate (rather than constrict) with an increase in sympathetic tone.
The sympathetic system cell bodies are located on the spinal cord excluding the cranial and sacral regions, specifically the thoracolumbar region (T1-L3). The preganglonic neurons exit from the vertebral column and synapse with the postganglonic neurons in the sympathetic trunk.
The parasympathetic nervous system is one of three divisions of the autonomic nervous system. Sometimes called the rest and digest system, the parasympathetic system conserves energy as it slows the heart rate, increases intestinal and gland activity, and relaxes sphincter muscles in the gastrointestinal tract.
While an oversimplification, it is said that the parasympathetic system acts in a reciprocal manner to the effects of the sympathetic nervous system; in fact, in some tissues innervated by both systems, the effects are synergistic.
The parasympathetic nervous system uses only acetylcholine (ACh) as its neurotransmitter. The ACh acts on two types of receptors, the muscarinic and nicotinic cholinergic receptors. Most transmissions occur in two stages: When stimulated, the preganglionic nerve releases ACh at the ganglion, which acts on nicotinic receptors of the postganglionic nerve. The postganglionic nerve then releases ACh to stimulate the muscarinic receptors of the target organ.
The three main types of muscarinic receptors that are well characterised are:
The M1 muscarinic receptors are located in the neural system.
The M2 muscarinic receptors are located in the heart, and act to bring the heart back to normal after the actions of the sympathetic nervous system: slowing down the heart rate, reducing contractile forces of the atrial cardiac muscle, and reducing conduction velocity of the atrioventricular node (AV node). Note, they have no effect on the contractile forces of the ventricular muscle.
The M3 muscarinic receptors are located at many places in the body, such as the smooth muscles of the blood vessels, as well as the lungs, which means that they cause vasoconstriction and bronchoconstriction. They are also in the smooth muscles of the gastrointestinal tract (GIT), which help in increasing intestinal motility and dilating sphincters. The M3 receptors are also located in many glands that help to stimulate secretion in salivary glands and other glands of the body.
The nervous system coordinates the activity of the muscles, monitors the organs, constructs and also stops input from the senses, and initiates actions. Prominent participants in a nervous system include neurons and nerves, which play roles in such coordination.Our nervous tissue only consists of two types of cells. These cells are neurons and neuroglia cells. The neurons are responsible for transmitting nerve impulses. Neuroglia cells are responsible for supporting and nourishing the neuron cells.
There are three types of neurons in the body. We have sensory neurons, interneurons, and motor neurons. Neurons are a major class of cells in the nervous system. Neurons are sometimes called nerve cells, though this term is technically imprecise, as many neurons do not form nerves. In vertebrates, neurons are found in the brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system. Their main role is to process and transmit information. Neurons have excitable membranes, which allow them to generate and propagate electrical impulses. Sensory neuron takes nerve impulses or messages right from the sensory receptor and delivers it to the central nervous system. A sensory receptor is a structure that can find any kind of change in it's surroundings or environment.
Neurons have three different parts to them. They all have an axon, a cell body and dendrites. The axon is the part of the neuron that conducts nerve impulses. Axons can get to be quite long. When an axon is present in nerves, it is called a nerve fiber. A cell body has a nucleus and it also has other organelles. The dendrites are the short pieces that come off of the cell body that receive the signals from sensory receptors and other neurons.
Schwann cells contain a lipid substance called myelin in their plasma membranes. When schwann cells wrap around axons, a myelin sheath forms. There are gaps that have no myelin sheath around them; these gaps are called nodes of Ranvier. Myelin sheathes make excellent insulators. Axons that are longer have a myelin sheath, while shorter axons do not. The disease multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune disease where the body attacks the myelin sheath of the central nervous system.
A 35-year-old male in 1986 had been admitted to a hospital in Florida three weeks previous to being diagnosed, with complaints of weakness and spasticity in the right leg, difficulties with balance, and fatigue and malaise. Tests performed at the Florida hospital had revealed abnormalities in spinal fluid and MRI brain scan. The patient complained of being severely depressed and anxious. He had anger at his circumstances and frequent crying spells. One month previously he had noticed aching and loss of vision in the left eye that had since improved.
This man was diagnosed with Multiple Sclerosis (MS). MS is a chronic, degenerative, and progressive disorder that affects the nerve fibers in the brain and spinal cord. Myelin is a fatty substance that surrounds and insulates the nerve fibers and facilitates the conduction of the nerve impulse transmissions. MS is characterized by intermittent damage to myelin (called demyelination) caused by the destruction of specialized cells (oligodendrocytes) that form the substance. Demyelination causes scarring and hardening (sclerosis) of nerve fibers usually in the spinal cord, brain stem, and optic nerves, which slows nerve impulses and results in weakness, numbness, pain, and vision loss. Because different nerves are affected at different times, MS symptoms often worsen (exacerbate), improve, and develop in different areas of the body. Early symptoms of the disorder may include vision changes (blurred vision, blind spots) and muscle weakness. MS can progress steadily or cause acute attacks (exacerbations) followed by partial or complete reduction in symptoms (remission). Most patients with the disease have a normal lifespan.
Multiple sclerosis is classified according to frequency and severity of neurological symptoms, the ability of the CNS to recover, and the accumulation of damage.
Every now and then we all feel a little blue, these feelings can be caused by losing a loved one. Clinical depression goes much further than just feeling down. Depression has many symptoms, including lack of energy, abnormal eating habits (either too much or too little) and sleeping problems (also too much or too little). Often a person can feel worthless and have thoughts of committing suicide. The cause of depression and its symptoms are a mystery but we do understand that it is an illness associated with biochemical changes in the brain. A lot of research goes on to explain that it is associated with a lack of amines serotonin and norephinephrine. Therefore pharmacological treatment strategies often try to increase amine concentrations in the brain.
One class of antidepressants is monoamine oxidase inhibitors. Mono amine oxidase is a enzyme that breaks down your amines like norephinephrine and serotonin. Because the antidepressants inhibit their degradation they will remain in the synaptic cleft for a longer period of time making the effect just as if you had increased theses types of neurotransmitters.
A newer class of antidepressants is selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI's). With SSRI's decreasing the uptake of serotonin back into the cell that will increase the amount of serotonin present in the synaptic cleft. SSRI's are more specific than the monoamine oxidase inhibitors because they only affect serotonergic synapses. You might recognize these SSRI's by name as Prozac and Paxil.
A drug is, generally speaking, any substance that changes the way your body works. Some drugs have a medicinal effect, and some are used recreationally. They have diverse effects, depending on the drug. Drugs can do anything from diminish pain, to preventing blood clots, to helping a depressed person.
Different drugs work in different ways, called the mechanism of action, the drugs covered here will all act on the nervous system via receptors on different neurons. There are also drugs that change how enzymes work, but that's not part of the nervous system (at least directly) and will not be discussed here.
You've probably heard the terms stimulant (excitatory) and depressant (inhibitory). This is a broad way of classifying drugs that work on the CNS. Depressants slow down neural function, and stimulants speed it up.
Most of the common depressants (including alcohol, benzodiazepines, barbiturates and GHB) work on GABA receptors, although there are others. Opiates, for example, work on mu opioid receptors and also produce inhibitory effects, and some antipsychotics block serotonin. See the alcohol section below to see one way this can work.
Stimulants work mostly with epinephrine, dopamine or serotonin (or a combination of them). Many of them either mimic one, or stop them from leaving the synapse, causing more action potentials to be fired. Methamphetamine, discussed below, is a fairly typical stimulant drug.
Scientists have long accepted that there is a biological basis for drug addiction, though the exact mechanisms responsible are only now being identified. It is believed that addictive substances create dependence in the user by changing the brain's reward functions, located in the mesolimbic dopamine system—the part of the brain that reinforces certain behaviors such as eating, sexual intercourse, exercise, and social interaction. Addictive substances, through various means and to different degrees, cause the synapses of this system to flood with excessive amounts of dopamine, creating a brief rush of euphoria more commonly called a "high”. Some say that abuse begins when the user begins shirking responsibility in order to afford drugs or to have enough time to use them. Some say it begins when a person uses "excessive" amounts, while others draw the line at the point of legality, and others believe it amounts to chronic use despite degenerating mental and physical health in the user. Some think that any intoxicant consumption is an inappropriate activity. Here are some drugs that are abused frequently:
Acid/LSD, Alcohol, various tryptamines and phenethylamines, Cocaine, Ecstasy/MDMA, Heroin, Inhalants, Marijuana, Methamphetamine, PCP/Phencyclidine, Prescription Medications, Smoking/Nicotine and Steroids.
Alcohol is, and has been for thousands of years, one of the most commonly used drugs in the world. It is legal, with some restrictions and exceptions, nearly everywhere. It is a common misconception that somehow alcohol is 'better' or 'safer' than other recreational drugs. This is simply NOT the case. Alcohol is a depressant, and as such it has the potential to cause coma, respiratory depression/arrest and possibly death. Compared with some other (illegal in most places) drugs of recreational value (such as marijuana, serotonin based hallucinogens like LSD or psilocybin) alcohol is far more toxic and has more risk of overdose. That doesn't mean that moderate drinking will probably hurt you, though, either.
Short term effects from drinking (listed roughly as they appear, and as dosage goes up) are: decreased inhibitions and, thus, judgment, flushing of the face, drowsiness, memory problems, severe motor impairment, blurry vision, dizziness, confusion, nausea, possible unconsciousness, coma, and death (due to respiratory arrest or possibly aspiration on vomit).
Alcohol produces these effects mainly via the GABA receptors in the brain. When GABA (or in this case alcohol) binds to it's receptor, it lets either Cl- ions in, or K+ out. This is called hyperpolarization, or an inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP). It makes it harder for the neuron to depolarize and hence harder for it to fire an action potential, slowing neural function. At higher doses alcohol will start to block NMDA. NMDA is involved in memory (see the long-term potentiation section) so this is thought to account for memory blackouts.
In the US, medically prescribed methamphetamine is distributed in tablet form under the brand name Desoxyn®, generally for Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) but also for narcolepsy or obesity.
Illicit methamphetamine comes in a variety of forms. Most commonly it is found as a colorless crystalline solid, sold on the street under a variety of names, such as: crystal meth or crystal. Methamphetamine may also be referred to as shards, rock, pony, crissie, crystal, glass, ice, Jib, critter, Tina, tweak or crank. Dope may refer to methamphetamine or other drugs, especially heroin or marijuana. The term "speed" can denote any stimulant including other amphetamines (e.g. adderall), cocaine and methylphenidate (Ritalin).
Methamphetamine can be injected (either subcutaneous, intramuscular or intravenous), smoked, snorted, swallowed, or used rectally or sublingually. The latter two being fairly uncommon. After administration, methamphetamine takes from a few seconds (smoked or injected IV) to around 30 minutes (oral) for effects to arise, lasting around eight hours depending on the route of administration. Effects/side effects include euphoria, anorexia, increased energy, clenching of the jaw/grinding of teeth (bruxism), weight loss, insomnia, tooth decay and psychosis among others.
Methamphetamine is neurotoxic to at least some areas of the brain, and owes most of its effects to the neurotransmitters dopamine, norepinephrine and serotonin it releases. It also blocks the reuptake of those neurotransmitters, causing them to stay in the synaptic cleft longer than normal.
Cannabis sativa.
Marijuana contains a myriad of chemicals, called cannabinoids, that have psychoactive and medicinal effects when consumed, the major one being tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). THC serves to mimic the endogenous neurotransmitter anandamide (also found in chocolate) at the CB1 receptors in the brain. Other cannabinoids include Cannabidiol (CBD), cannabinol (CBN) and tetrahydrocannabivarin (THCV). Although THC is found in all parts of the plant, the flower of the female plant has the highest concentration, commonly around eight percent. The flowers can be used, or they can be refined. Trichomes contain most of the THC on the flowers and can be removed by a few different methods. These removed trichomes are called kief. Kief can, in turn, be pressed into hashish. By far the most common way to consume any of these products is by smoking, but it can be taken orally as well.
Cannabis has a very long, very good safety record. Nobody on record has ever died because of marijuana, directly at least. It is estimated that it would take 1-1.8 kilograms of average potency marijuana, taken orally, to have a fifty percent chance of killing a 68kg human. Despite this, the possession, use, or sale of psychoactive cannabis products became illegal in many parts of the world in the early 20th century. Since then, while some countries have intensified the enforcement of cannabis prohibition, others have reduced the priority of enforcement to the point of de facto legality. Cannabis remains illegal in the vast majority of the world's countries.
The nature and intensity of the immediate effects of cannabis consumption vary according to the dose, the species or hybridization of the source plant, the method of consumption, the user's mental and physical characteristics (such as possible tolerance), and the environment of consumption. This is sometimes referred to as set and setting. Smoking the same cannabis either in a different frame of mind (set) or in a different location (setting) can alter the effects or perception of the effects by the individual. Effects of cannabis consumption may be loosely classified as cognitive and physical. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the Cannabis sativa species tends to produce more of the cognitive or perceptual effects, while Cannabis indica tends to produce more of the physical effects.
A ) (1) neurotransmitter released (2) diffused across the synaptic cleft to a receptor protein (3) binding of the transmitter opens pores in the ion channels and positive ions move in.
B ) (1) neurotransmitter released (2) diffused across the synaptic cleft to a receptor protein (3) binding of the transmitter opens pores in the ion channels and negative ions move in.
C ) (1) neurotransmitter released (2) diffused across the synaptic cleft to a receptor amino acid (3) binding of the transmitter opens pores in the ion channels and positive ions move in.
D ) (1) diffused across the synaptic cleft to a receptor protein (2) neurotransmitter released (3) binding of the transmitter opens pores in the ion channels and positive ions move in.
A ) excess positive ions accumulate inside the plasma membrane
E ) Their axons and dendrites may be either long or short
A ) from the muscle fiber to the central nervous system
B ) away from the central nervous system to the central nervous system
D ) away from the central nervous system to muscle fiber
Autonomic System: deals with the visceral organs, like the heart, stomach, gland, and the intestines
Cannabis: a psychoactive drug produced from parts of the cannabis plant
Central Nervous System (CNS): the system that includes the brain and the spinal cord
Cerebellum: part of the brain that is located posterior to the medulla oblongata and pons, coordinates skeletal muscles to produce smooth, graceful motions
Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF): acts a shock absorber for the central nervous system, protecting the brain and spinal cord from injury; it also has a high glucose content which serves as a nutritional factor
Cerebrum motor control, learning, speech, somatic sensory functions, vision,hearing and more.
Dendrites: short pieces that come off of the cell body that receive the signals from sensory receptors and other neurons
Episodic Memory: represents our memory of events and experiences in a serial form
Excitatory Neurotransmitter: a neurotransmitter that acts to elicit an action potential by opening sodium ion channels
Longitudinal Sulcus: separates the cerebrum in to the right and left hemispheres
Long Term Memory: used for storage of information over a long time
Long-Term Potentiation (LTP) long term communication enhancement between two neurons. Results in neural pathways that store memoris.
Medulla control center for respiratory, cardiovascular and digestive functions.
Myelin: a fatty substance that surrounds and insulates the nerve fibers and facilitates the conduction of the nerve impulse transmissions
Multiple Sclerosis (MS): disease that affects the CNS by causing hardening and scaring of the myelin
Peripheral Nervous System (PNS): a way of communication from the central nervous system to the rest of the body by nerve impulses that regulate the functions of the human body
Pons control centers for respiration and inhibitory functions.
Postganglionic Cells: have their cell bodies in the ganglia and send their axons to target organs or glands
Postsynaptic Cells the cell on the receiving (second) end of the synapse.
Presynaptic Cell The cell on the sending (first) end of the synapse.
Proprioception the sense that indicates whether the body is moving with required effort, as well as where various parts of the body are located in relation to each other.
Sensory Receptor: structure that can find any kind of change in it's surroundings or environment
Somatic Nervous System (SNS): the part of the peripheral nervous system associated with the voluntary control of body movements through the action of skeletal muscles, and also reception of external stimuli
Synapses: the gap between two neurons; new synapses lead to learning
What are Senses?
We experience reality through our senses. Senses are the physiological methods of perception, so a sense is a faculty by which outside stimuli are perceived. The senses and their operation, classification, and theory are overlapping topics studied by a variety of fields. Many neurologists disagree about how many senses there actually are due to a broad interpretation of the definition of a sense. Our senses are split into two different groups. Our exteroceptors detect stimulation from the outsides of our body. For example smell, taste, and equilibrium. The interoceptors receive stimulation from the inside of our bodies. For instance, blood pressure dropping, changes in the glucose and pH levels. Children are generally taught that there are five senses (sight, hearing, touch, smell, taste). However, it is generally agreed that there are at least seven different senses in humans, and a minimum of two more observed in other organisms. Sense can also differ from one person to the next. Take taste for an example: what may taste great to one person will taste awful to someone else. This has to do with how the brain interprets the stimuli that are received.
The senses of gustation (taste) and olfaction (smell) fall under the category of chemoreception. Specialized cells act as receptors for certain chemical compounds. As these compounds react with the receptors, an impulse is sent to the brain and is registered as a certain taste or smell. Gustation and olfaction are chemical senses because the receptors they contain are sensitive to the molecules in the food we eat, along with the air we breathe.
In humans, the sense of taste is transduced by taste buds and is conveyed via three of the twelve cranial nerves. Cranial nerve VII, the facial nerve, carries taste sensations from the anterior two thirds of the tongue (excluding the circumvallate papillae, see lingual papilla) and soft palate. Cranial nerve IX the glossopharyngeal nerve carries taste sensations from the posterior one third of the tongue (including the circumvallate papillae). Also a branch of the vagus nerve carries some taste sensations from the back of the oral cavity (i.e. pharynx and epiglottis). Information from these cranial nerves is processed by the gustatory system. Though there are small differences in sensation, which can be measured with highly specific instruments, all taste buds can respond to all types of taste. Sensitivity to all tastes is distributed across the whole tongue and indeed to other regions of the mouth where there are taste buds (epiglottis, soft palate).
Papilla are specialized epithelial cells. There are four types of papillae: filiform (thread-shape), fungiform (mushroom-shape), foliate (leaf-shape), and circumvallate (ringed-circle). All papillae except the filiform have taste buds on their surface. Some act directly by ion channels, others act indirectly.
Fungiform papillae – as the name suggests, are slightly mushroom shaped if looked at in section. These are present mostly at the apex (tip) of the tongue.
Filiform papillae – these are thin, longer papillae that don't contain taste buds but are the most numerous. These papillae are mechanical and not involved in gustation.
Foliate papillae – these are ridges and grooves towards the posterior part of the tongue.
Circumvallate papillae – there are only about 3-14 of these papillae on most people and they are present at the back of the oral part of the tongue. They are arranged in a circular-shaped row just in front of the sulcus terminalis of the tongue.
The mouth cavity. The cheeks have been slit transversely and the tongue pulled forward.
Semidiagrammatic view of a portion of the mucous membrane of the tongue. Two fungiform papillæ are shown. On some of the filiform papillæ the epithelial prolongations stand erect, in one they are spread out, and in three they are folded in.
Each taste bud is flask-like in shape, its broad base resting on the corium, and its neck opening by an orifice, the gustatory pore, between the cells of the epithelium.
The bud is formed by two kinds of cells: supporting cells and gustatory cells.
The supporting cells are mostly arranged like the staves of a cask, and form an outer envelope for the bud. Some, however, are found in the interior of the bud between the gustatory cells.
The gustatory cells occupy the central portion of the bud; they are spindle-shaped, and each possesses a large spherical nucleus near the middle of the cell.
The peripheral end of the cell terminates at the gustatory pore in a fine hair-like filament, the gustatory hair.
The central process passes toward the deep extremity of the bud, and there ends in single or bifurcated varicosities.
The nerve fibrils after losing their medullary sheaths enter the taste bud, and end in fine extremities between the gustatory cells; other nerve fibrils ramify between the supporting cells and terminate in fine extremities; these, however, are believed to be nerves of ordinary sensation and not gustatory.
Arguably the simplest receptor found in the mouth is the salt (NaCl) receptor. An ion channel in the taste cell wall allows Na+ ions to enter the cell. This on its own depolarises the cell, and opens voltage-regulated Ca2+ gates, flooding the cell with ions and leading to neurotransmitter release. This sodium channel is known as enc and is composed of three sub-units. En Ac can be blocked by the drug amiloride in many mammals, especially rats. The sensitivity of the salt taste to amiloride in humans, however, is much less pronounced, leading to conjecture that there may be additional receptor proteins besides EnAC that may not have been discovered yet.
Sour taste signals the presence of acidic compounds (H+ ions in solution). There are three different receptor proteins at work in sour taste. The first is a simple ion channel which allows hydrogen ions to flow directly into the cell. The protein for this is EnAC, the same protein involved in the distinction of salt taste (this implies a relationship between salt and sour receptors and could explain why salty taste is reduced when a sour taste is present). There are also H+ gated channels present. The first is a K+ channel, which ordinarily allows K+ ions to escape from the cell. H+ ions block these, trapping the potassium ions inside the cell (this receptor is classified as MDEG1 of the EnAC/Deg Family). A third protein opens to Na+ ions when a hydrogen ion attaches to it, allowing the sodium ions to flow down the concentration gradient into the cell. The influx of ions leads to the opening of a voltage regulated Ca2+ gate. These receptors work together and lead to depolarization of the cell and neurotransmitter release.
There are many classes of bitter compounds which can be chemically very different. It is interesting that the human body has evolved a very sophisticated sense for bitter substances: we can distinguish between the many radically different compounds which produce a generally “bitter” response. This may be because the sense of bitter taste is so important to survival, as ingesting a bitter compound may lead to injury or death. Bitter compounds act through structures in the taste cell walls called G-protein coupled receptors (GPCR’s). Recently, a new group of GPCR’s was discovered, known as the T2R’s, which is thought to only respond to bitter stimuli. When the bitter compound activates the GPCR, it in turn releases gustducin, the G-protein it was coupled to. Gustducin is made of three subunits. When it is activated by the GPCR, its subunits break apart and activate phosphodiesterase, a nearby enzyme. It then converts a precursor within the cell into a secondary messenger, which closes potassium ion channels. This secondary messenger can stimulate the endoplasmic reticulum to release Ca2+, which contributes to depolarization. This leads to a build-up of potassium ions in the cell, depolarization, and neurotransmitter release. It is also possible for some bitter tastants to interact directly with the G-protein, because of a structural similarity to the relevant GPCR.
Like bitter tastes, sweet taste transduction involves GPCR’s. The specific mechanism depends on the specific molecule. “Natural” sweeteners such as saccharides activate the GPCR, which releases gustducin. The gustducin then activates the molecule adenylate cyclase, which is already inside the cell. This molecule increases concentration of the molecule cAMP, or adenosine 3', 5'-cyclic monophosphate. This protein will either directly or indirectly close potassium ion channels, leading to depolarization and neurotransmitter release. Synthetic sweeteners such as saccharin activate different GPCR’s, initiating a similar process of protein transitions, starting with the protein phospholipase A, which ultimately leads to the blocking of potassium ion channels.
Umami is a Japanese word meaning "savory" or "meaty". It is thought that umami receptors act much the same way as bitter and sweet receptors (they involve GPCR’s), but not much is known about their specific function. We do know that umami detects glutamates that are common in meats, cheese and other protein-heavy foods. Umami receptors react to foods treated with monosodium glutamate (MSG). This explains why eating foods that have MSG in them often give a sense of fullness. It is thought that the amino acid L-glutamate bonds to a type of GPCR known as a metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR4). This causes the G-protein complex to activate a secondary receptor, which ultimately leads to neurotransmitter release. The intermediate steps are not known.
It is usually caused by some form of trauma, such as biting your tongue, or eating piping-hot or highly acidic food or drink.
If your top and bottom teeth don’t fit neatly together, tongue trauma is more likely.
Some people may experience a sore tongue from grinding their teeth (bruxism).
Disorders such as diabetes, anemia, some types of vitamin deficiency and certain skin diseases can include a sore tongue among the range of symptoms.
A condition characterized by a burning sensation on the tongue.
This condition is characterized by irregular and inflamed patches on the tongue surface that often have white borders. The tongue may be generally swollen, red and sore. Another name for this condition is geographic tongue. The cause of benign migratory glossitis is unknown.
Olfaction is the sense of smell. In humans, the sense of Smell is received in nasopharynx. Airborne molecules go into solution on moist epithelial surface of nasal passage. An olfactory receptors neuron sends an impulse via Cranial nerve I the olfactory nerve.
Humans have 347 functional odor receptor genes; the other genes have nonsense mutations. This number was determined by analyzing the genome in the Human Genome Project; the number may vary among ethnic groups, and does vary among individuals. For example, not all people can smell androstenone, a component of male sweat.
Each olfactory receptor neuron in the nose expresses only one functional odor receptor. Odor receptor nerve cells may function like a key-lock system: if the odor molecules can fit into the lock the nerve cell will respond. According to shape theory, each receptor detects a feature of the odor molecule. Weak-shape theory, known as odotope theory, suggests that different receptors detect only small pieces of molecules, and these minimal inputs are combined to create a larger olfactory perception (similar to the way visual perception is built up of smaller, information-poor sensations, combined and refined to create a detailed overall perception). An alternative theory, the vibration theory proposed by Luca Turin (1996, 2002), posits that odor receptors detect the frequencies of vibrations of odor molecules in the infrared range by electron tunneling. However, the behavioral predictions of this theory have been found lacking (Keller and Vosshall, 2004).
An olfactory receptor neuron, also called an olfactory sensory neuron, is the primary transduction cell in the olfactory system. Humans have about 40 million olfactory receptor neurons. In vertebrates, olfactory receptor neurons reside on the olfactory epithelium in the nasal cavity. These cells are bipolar neurons with a dendrite facing the interior space of the nasal cavity and an axon that travels along the olfactory nerve to the olfactory bulb.
Many tiny hair-like cilia protrude from the olfactory receptor cell's dendrite and into the mucus covering the surface of the olfactory epithelium. These cilia contain olfactory receptors, a type of G protein-coupled receptor. Each olfactory receptor cell contains only one type of olfactory receptor, but many separate olfactory receptor cells contain the same type of olfactory receptor. The axons of olfactory receptor cells of the same type converge to form glomeruli in the olfactory bulb.
Olfactory receptors can bind to a variety of odor molecules. The activated olfactory receptor in turn activates the intracellular G-protein GOLF, and adenylate cyclase and production of Cyclic AMP opens ion channels in the cell membrane, resulting in an influx of sodium and calcium ions into the cell. This influx of positive ions causes the neuron to depolarize, generating an action potential.
Individual olfactory receptor neurons are replaced approximately every 40 days by neural stem cells residing in the olfactory epithelium. The regeneration of olfactory receptor cells, as one of the only few instances of adult neurogenesis in the central nervous system, has raised considerable interest in dissecting the pathways for neural development and differentiation in adult organisms.
The axons from all the thousands of cells expressing the same odor receptor converge in the olfactory bulb. Mitral cells in the olfactory bulb send the information about the individual features to other parts of the olfactory system in the brain, which puts together the features into a representation of the odor. Since most odor molecules have many individual features, the combination of features gives the olfactory system a broad range of odors that it can detect.
Odor information is easily stored in long term memory and has strong connections to emotional memory. This is possibly due to the olfactory system's close anatomical ties to the limbic system and hippocampus, areas of the brain that have long been known to be involved in emotion and place memory, respectively.
The Olfactory Nerve leading to the brain.
Some pheromones are detected by the olfactory system, although in many vertebrates pheromones are also detected by the vomeronasal organ, located in the vomer, between the nose and the mouth. Snakes use it to smell prey, sticking their tongue out and touching it to the organ. Some mammals make a face called flehmen to direct air to this organ. In humans, it is unknown whether or not pheromones exist.
Olfaction, taste and trigeminal receptors together contribute to flavor. It should be emphasized that there are no more than 5 distinctive tastes: salty, sour, sweet, bitter, and umami. The 10,000 different scents which humans usually recognize as 'tastes' are often lost or severely diminished with the loss of olfaction. This is the reason why food has little flavor when your nose is blocked, as from a cold.
The key nutrition players in our taste is the olfactory function, 80-90% of what we consider taste is dependent on our senses of smell. With aging our olfactory function declines. In the elderly careful monitoring of appetite is necessary due to the alterations in the olfactory function. Nutritionist suggest giving a dual approach of supplementation of the trace minerals zinc and iron to enhance the smell and taste senses.
Anosmia is the lack of olfaction, or a loss of the sense of smell. It can be either temporary or permanent. A related term, hyposmia refers to a decrease in the ability to smell. Some people may be anosmic for one particular odor. This is called "specific anosmia" and may be genetically based. Anosmia can have a number of detrimental effects. Patients with anosmia may find food less appetizing. Loss of smell can also be dangerous because it hinders the detection of gas leaks, fire, body odor, and spoiled food. The common view of anosmia as trivial can make it more difficult for a patient to receive the same types of medical aid as someone who has lost other senses, such as hearing or sight. A temporary loss of smell can be caused by a stuffy nose or infection. In contrast, a permanent loss of smell may be caused by death of olfactory receptor neurons in the nose, or by brain injury in which there is damage to the olfactory nerve or damage to brain areas that process smell. The lack of the sense of smell at birth, usually due to genetic factors, is referred as congenital anosmia. Anosmia may be an early sign of degenerative brain diseases such as Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease. Another specific cause of permanent loss could be from damage to olfactory receptor neurons due to use of nasal sprays. To avoid loss of smell from nasal sprays, use them for only a short amount of time. Nasal sprays that are used to treat allergy related congestion are the only nasal sprays that are safe to use for extended periods of time.
Phantosmia is the phenomenon of smelling odors that aren't really present. (AKA Phantom odors) The most common odors are unpleasant smells such as rotting flesh, vomit, feces, smoke etc. Phantosmia often results from damage to the nervous tissue in the olfactory system. The damage can be caused by viral infection, trauma, surgery, and possibly exposure to toxins or drugs. It can also be induced by epilepsy affecting the olfactory cortex. It is also thought the condition can have psychiatric origins.
When things smell differently than they should.
Vision needs to have the work of both the eyes and the brain to process any information. The majority of the stimuli is done in the eyes and then the information is sent to the brain by the way of nerve impulses. At least one-third of the information of what the eye sees is processed in the cerebral cortex of the brain.
The human eye is a elongated ball about 1-inch (2.5 cm) in diameter and is protected by a bony socket in the skull. The eye has three layers or coats that make up the exterior wall of the eyeball, which are the sclera, choroid, and retina.
The outer layer of the eye is the sclera, which is a tough white fibrous layer that maintains, protects and supports the shape of the eye. The front of the sclera is transparent and is called the cornea. The cornea refracts light rays and acts like the outer window of the eye.
The middle thin layer of the eye is the choroid, also known as the choroidea or choroid coat, it is the vascular layer of the eye lying between the retina and the sclera. The choroid provides oxygen and nourishment to the outer layers of the retina. It also contains a nonreflective pigment that acts as a light shield and prevents light from scattering. Light enters the front of the eye through a hole in the choroid coat called the pupil. The iris contracts and dilates to compensate for the changes in light intensity. If the light is bright the iris then contracts making the pupil smaller, and if the light is dim, the iris dilates making the pupil bigger. Just posterior to the iris is the lens, which is composed mainly of proteins called crystallins. The lens is attached by the zonules to the ciliary body that contains the ciliary muscles that control the shape of the lens for accommodation. Along with the ciliary body and iris, the choroid forms the uveal tract. The uvea is the middle of the three concentric layers that make up an eye. The name is possibly a reference to its almost black color, wrinkled appearance and grape-like size and shape when stripped intact from a cadaveric eye.
Retina's simplified axial organization. The retina is a stack of several neuronal layers. Light is concentrated from the eye and passes across these layers (from left to right) to hit the photoreceptors (right layer). This elicits chemical transformation mediating a propagation of signal to the bipolar and horizontal cells (middle yellow layer). The signal is then propagated to the amacrine and ganglion cells. These neurons ultimately may produce action potentials on their axons. This spatiotemporal pattern of spikes determines the raw input from the eyes to the brain.
A photoreceptor, or photoreceptor cell, is a specialized type of neuron found in the eye's retina that is capable of phototransduction. More specifically, the photoreceptor sends signals to other neurons by a change in its membrane potential when it absorbs photons. Eventually, this information will be used by the visual system to form a complete representation of the visual world. There are 2 types of photoreceptors: rods are responsible for scotopic, or night vision, whereas cones are responsible for photopic, or daytime vision as well as color perception.
Each eye has six muscles that control its movements: the lateral rectus, the medial rectus, the inferior rectus, the superior rectus, the inferior oblique, and the superior oblique. When the muscles exert different tensions, a torque is exerted on the globe that causes it to turn. This is an almost pure rotation, with only about one millimeter of translation, thus, the eye can be considered as undergoing rotations about a single point in the center of the eye. Five of the extraocular muscles have their origin in the back of the orbit in a fibrous ring called the annulus of Zinn. Four of these then course forward through the orbit and insert onto the globe on its anterior half (i.e., in front of the eye's equator). These muscles are named after their straight paths, and are called the four rectus muscles, or four recti. They insert on the globe at 12, 3, 6, and 9 o'clock, and are called the superior, lateral, inferior and medial rectus muscles. (Note that lateral and medial are relative to the subject, with lateral toward the side and medial toward the midline, thus the medial rectus is the muscle closest to the nose).
The visual system in the brain is too slow to process that information if the images are slipping across the retina at more than a few degrees per second, thus, for humans to be able to see while moving, the brain must compensate for the motion of the head by turning the eyes. To get a clear view of the world, the brain must turn the eyes so that the image of the object of regard falls on the fovea. Eye movements are thus very important for visual perception, and any failure to make them correctly can lead to serious visual disabilities. Having two eyes is an added complication, because the brain must point both of them accurately enough that the object of regard falls on corresponding points of the two retinas; otherwise, double vision would occur. The movements of different body parts are controlled by striated muscles acting around joints. The movements of the eye are no exception, but they have special advantages not shared by skeletal muscles and joints, and so are considerably different.
Hold your hand up, about one foot (30 cm) in front of your nose. Keep your head still, and shake your hand from side to side, slowly at first, and then faster and faster. At first you will be able to see your fingers quite clearly. But as the frequency of shaking passes about one hertz, the fingers will become a blur. Now, keep your hand still, and shake your head (up and down or left and right). No matter how fast you shake your head, the image of your fingers remains clear. This demonstrates that the brain can move the eyes opposite to head motion much better than it can follow, or pursue, a hand movement. When your pursuit system fails to keep up with the moving hand, images slip on the retina and you see a blurred hand.
The light rays enter the eye through the cornea (transparent front portion of eye to focus the light rays).
Then, light rays move through the pupil, which is surrounded by Iris to keep out extra light
Then, light rays move through the crystalline lens (Clear lens to further focus the light rays )
Then, light rays move through the vitreous humor (clear jelly like substance)
Then, light rays fall on the retina, which processes and converts incident light to neuron signals using special pigments in rod and cone cells.
These neuron signals are transmitted through the optic nerve,
Then, the neuron signals move through the visual pathway – Optic nerve > Optic Chiasm > Optic Tract > Optic Radiations > Cortex
Then, the neuron signals reach the occipital (visual) cortex and its radiations for the brain's processing.
The visual cortex interprets the signals as images and along with other parts of the brain, interpret the images to extract form, meaning, memory and context of the images.
Depth perception is the visual ability to perceive the world in three dimensions. It is a trait common to many higher animals. Depth perception allows the beholder to accurately gauge the distance to an object.
Depth perception is often confused with binocular vision, also known as Stereopsis. Depth perception does rely on binocular vision, but it also uses many other monocular cues.
There are many diseases, disorders, and age-related changes that may affect the eyes and surrounding structures. As the eye ages certain changes occur that can be attributed solely to the aging process. Most of these anatomic and physiologic processes follow a gradual decline. With aging, the quality of vision worsens due to reasons independent of aging eye diseases. While there are many changes of significance in the non-diseased eye, the most functionally important changes seem to be a reduction in pupil size and the loss of accommodation or focusing capability (presbyopia). The area of the pupil governs the amount of light that can reach the retina. The extent to which the pupil dilates also decreases with age. Because of the smaller pupil size, older eyes receive much less light at the retina. In comparison to younger people, it is as though older persons wear medium-density sunglasses in bright light and extremely dark glasses in dim light. Therefore, for any detailed visually guided tasks on which performance varies with illumination, older persons require extra lighting.
File:Colorblind3.png This image contains a two digit number similar to the sample above. Someone who is protanopic might not see this number.
Color Blindness or color vision deficiency, in humans is the inability to perceive differences between some or all colors that other people can distinguish. It is most often of genetic nature, but may also occur because of eye, nerve, or brain damage, or due to exposure to certain chemicals. There are many types of color blindness. The most common variety are hereditary (genetic) photoreceptor disorders, but it is also possible to acquire color blindness through damage to the retina, optic nerve, or higher brain areas. There is generally no treatment to cure color deficiencies, however, certain types of tinted filters and contact lenses may help an individual to distinguish different colors better.
Also known as Nyctalopia, is a condition making it difficult or impossible to see in the dark. It is a symptom of several eye diseases. Night blindness may exist from birth, or be caused by injury or malnutrition (for example, a lack of vitamin A). The most common cause of nyctalopia is retinitis pigmentosa, a disorder in which the rod cells in the retina gradually lose their ability to respond to the light. Patients suffering from this genetic condition have progressive nyctalopia and eventually their day-time vision may also be affected. In congenital stationary night blindness the rods do not work from birth, but as the name implies, sufferers do not get worse. Another cause of night blindness is a deficiency of retinol, or vitamin A, found in fish oils, liver and dairy products.
Also known as Hemeralopia is the inability to see clearly in bright light. The daytime vision gets worse and worse. Nighttime vision remains unchanged due to the use of rods as opposed to cones (during the day), which get affected by hemeralopia and in turn degrade the daytime optical response.
Impression of floaters, as seen against a blue sky.
Also known as "Muscae Volitantes" are deposits of various size, shape, consistency, refractive index, and motility within the eye's normally transparent vitreous humour. Floaters are suspended in the vitreous humour, the thick fluid or gel that fills the eye. Thus, they generally follow the rapid motions of the eye, while drifting slowly within the fluid. Floaters are visible only because they do not remain perfectly fixed within the eye. The shapes are shadows projected onto the retina by tiny structures of protein or other cell debris discarded over the years and trapped in the vitreous humour. They are also common after cataract operations or after trauma. In some cases, floaters are congenital.
Picture of children holding a ball as seen by someone with glaucoma.
A group of diseases of the optic nerve involving loss of retinal ganglion cells in a characteristic pattern of optic neuropathy. Although raised intraocular pressure is a significant risk factor for developing glaucoma, there is no set threshold for intraocular pressure that causes glaucoma. One person may develop nerve damage at a relatively low pressure, while another person may have high eye pressures for years and yet never develop damage. Untreated glaucoma leads to permanent damage of the optic nerve and resultant visual field loss, which can progress to blindness.
Visual agnosia is the inability of the brain to make sense of or make use of some part of otherwise normal visual stimulus, and is typified by the inability to recognize familiar objects or faces. This is distinct from blindness, which is a lack of sensory input to the brain due to damage to the eye or optic nerve. Visual agnosia is often due to damage, such as stroke, in posterior parietal lobe in the right hemisphere of the brain. Careful analysis of the nature of visual agnosia has led to improved understanding of the brain's role in normal vision.
Deadly Nightshade is a plant oil that can potentially kill you. Atrophine taken from this plant causes your eyes to dilate. This was used in the middle ages by women who wanted to look more attractive for men. To this day, it is still used by opthamologists. How this works is that the atrophine is a competitor with acetylcholine. The Nightshadow goes into your receptors on the postsynaptic membrane of an action potential. This makes it so that the acetylcholine doesn’t have any receptor site so the Na ion is not able to be released.
The answers for these critical thinking questions is right here
Explain why you are normally unaware of your blind spot.
Stare at a bright light for 10 seconds and then stare at a white sheet of paper. What do you observe and why?
What is it that makes things "disappear" when you are staring at them at night, and how do you make them reappear?
Name what rods are sensitive to and also what cones are sensitive to.
Explain how Deadly Nightshade works.
The ear is the sense organ that collects and detects sound waves and plays a major role in the sense of balance and body position. The sensory receptors for both hearing and equilibrium are mechanoreceptors found in the inner ear; these receptors are hair cells that have stereocilia (long microvilli) that are extremely sensitive to mechanical stimulations.
The ear has three divisions: the outer ear, the middle ear, and the inner ear.
The outer ear is the most external portion of the ear. The outer ear includes the pinna (also called auricle), the ear canal, and the very most superficial layer of the ear drum (also called the tympanic membrane). Although the word "ear" may properly refer to the pinna (the flesh covered cartilage appendage on either side of the head), this portion of the ear is not vital for hearing. The complicated design of the human outer ear does help capture sound, but the most important functional aspect of the human outer ear is the ear canal itself. This outer ear canal skin is applied to cartilage; the thinner skin of the deep canal lies on the bone of the skull. If the ear canal is not open, hearing will be dampened. Ear wax (medical name – cerumen) is produced by glands in the skin of the outer portion of the ear canal. Only the thicker cerumen-producing ear canal skin has hairs. The outer ear ends at the most superficial layer of the tympanic membrane. The tympanic membrane is commonly called the ear drum.
Middle Ear (Air Filled Cavity behind the Ear Drum, includes most of the Ear Drum, and Ear Bones)
The middle ear includes most of the ear drum (tympanic membrane) and the 3 ear bones ossicles: malleus (or hammer), incus (or anvil), and stapes (or stirrup). The opening of the Eustachian tube is also within the middle ear. The malleus has a long process (the handle) that is attached to the mobile portion of the ear drum. The incus is the bridge between the malleus and stapes. The stapes is the smallest named bone in the human body. The stapes transfers the vibrations of the incus to the oval window, a portion of the inner ear to which it is connected. It is the final bone in the chain to transfer vibrations from the eardrum to the inner ear. The arrangement of these 3 bones is a sort of Rube Goldberg device: movement of the tympanic membrane causes movement of the first bone, which causes movement of the second, which causes movement of the third. When this third bone pushes down, it causes movement of fluid within the cochlea (a portion of the inner ear). This particular fluid only moves when the stapes footplate is depressed into the inner ear. Unlike the open ear canal, however, the air of the middle ear is not in direct contact with the atmosphere outside the body. The Eustachian tube connects from the chamber of the middle ear to the back of the pharynx. The middle ear in humans is very much like a specialized paranasal sinus, called the tympanic cavity, it, like the paranasal sinuses, is a hollow mucosa lined cavity in the skull that is ventilated through the nose. The mastoid portion of the temporal bone, which can be felt as a bump in the skull behind the pinna, also contains air, which ventilates through the middle ear.
The inner ear includes both the organ of hearing (the cochlea) and a sense organ (the labyrinth or vestibular apparatus) that is attuned to the effects of both gravity and motion. The balance portion of the inner ear consists of three semi-circular canals and the vestibule. The inner ear is encased in the hardest bone of the body. Within this ivory hard bone, there are fluid-filled hollows. Within the cochlea are three fluid filled spaces: the tympanic canal, the vestibular canal, and the middle canal. The eighth cranial nerve comes from the brain stem to enter the inner ear. When sound strikes the ear drum, the movement is transferred to the footplate of the stapes, which attaches to the oval window and presses into one of the fluid-filled ducts of the cochlea. The hair cells in the organ of Corti are stimulated by particular frequencies of sound, based on their location within the cochlea. High pitch sounds are at a higher frequency and, due to the shorter wavelength they "hit" the membrane "faster" (ie. close to the oval window). In contrast, low frequency sounds have large wavelengths, and will travel further through the scala vestibuli before "hitting" the tectorial membrane near the apex of the cochlea. The fluid inside the cochlea is moved, flowing against the receptor (hair) cells of the organ of Corti, which fire in a graded response based on the volume of the sound. The hair cells then stimulate the nerve cells in the Spiral Ganglion, which sends information through the auditory portion of the eighth cranial nerve to the brain. Humans are able to hear sounds between about 20 Hz and 20,000 Hz. Mammals that can hear lower frequency sounds, such as whales and elephants, have a longer cochlea. Humans tend to lose high-frequency hearing first, which has led some teenagers to using high-frequency ring tones (above 17,000 Hz) that may go undetected by their middle-aged teachers.
Hair cells are columnar cells, each with a bundle of 100-200 specialized cilia at the top, for which they are named. These cilia are the mechanosensors for hearing. Lightly resting atop the longest cilia is the tectorial membrane, which moves back and forth with each cycle of sound, tilting the cilia and allowing electric current into the hair cell. Hair cells, like the photoreceptors of the eye, show a graded response, instead of the spikes typical of other neurons. Immediately over the hair cells of the organ of Corti is an overhanging “tectorial membrane.” When the Bones of the Middle Ear vibrate the oval window, these vibrations are transmitted to the fluid within the cochlea and eventually cause the round window on the cochlea to bulge outward. These vibrations deflect the membrane on which the Organ of Corti is located, causing the three rows of outer hair cells to “rub” against the overhanging tectorial membrane. By their muscle-like activity they amplify the weakest vibrations for the inner hair cells. The louder sounds are not amplified. The disturbed inner hair cells will then activate the cochlear nerve fibers. The current model is that cilia are attached to one another by “tip links”, structures which link the tips of one cilium to another. Stretching and compressing the tip links may open an ion channel and produce the receptor potential in the hair cell. These graded potentials are not bound by the “all or none” properties of an action potential. There are far fewer hair cells than afferent (leading to the brain) nerve fibers in the cochlea. The nerve that innervates the cochlea is the cochlear nerve, and forms cranial nerve number VIII with the vestibular nerve from the balance organ. Neuronal dendrites innervate cochlear hair cells. The neurotransmitter itself is thought to be glutamate. At the presynaptic juncture, there is a distinct “presynaptic dense body” or ribbon. This dense body is surrounded by synaptic vesicles and is thought to aid in the fast release of neurotransmitter. Efferent projections from the brain to the cochlea also play a role in the perception of sound. Efferent synapses occur on outer hair cells and on afferent dendrites under inner hair cells.
Detection of sound motion is associated with the right posterior superior temporal gyrus. The superior temporal gyrus contains several important structures of the brain, including: (1)marking the location of the primary auditory cortex, the cortical region responsible for the sensation of sound. Sections 41 and 42 are called the primary auditory area of the cerebrum, and processes the basic characteristics of sound such as pitch and rhythm. The auditory association area is located within the temporal lobe of the brain, in an area called the Wernicke's area, or area 22. This area, near the lateral cerebral sulcus, is an important region for the processing of acoustic energy so that it can be distinguished as speech, music, or noise. It also interprets words that are heard into an associated thought pattern of understanding. The gnostic area of the cerebrum, (areas 5, 7, 39 and 40) helps to integrate all incoming sense patterns so that a common thought can be formed (correlated) using all arriving sensory information.
Hearing threshold and the ability to localize sound sources are reduced underwater. in which the speed of sound is faster than in air. Underwater, hearing is by bone conduction and localization of sound appears to depend on differences in amplitude detected by bone conduction.
Humans are normally able to hear a variety of sound frequencies, from about 20 Hz to 20 kHz. Our ability to estimate just where the sound is coming from, sound localization, is dependent on both hearing ability of each of the two ears, and the exact quality of the sound. Since each ear lies on an opposite side of the head, a sound will reach the closest ear first, and its amplitude will be loudest in that ear. Much of the brain's ability to localize sound depends on interaural (between ears) intensity differences and interaural temporal or phase differences.
Two mechanisms are known to be used.
Bushy neurons can resolve time differences as small as the time it takes sound to pass one ear and reach the other (10 milliseconds).
For high frequencies, frequencies with a wavelength shorter than the listener's head, more sound reaches the nearer ear.
Human echolocation is a technique involving echolocation used by some blind humans to navigate within their environment.
Equilibrioception or sense of balance is one of the physiological senses. It allows humans and animals to walk without falling. Some animals are better in this than humans, for example allowing a cat (as a quadruped using its inner ear and tail) to walk on a thin fence. All forms of equilibrioception can be described as the detection of acceleration.
When the sense of balance is interrupted it causes dizziness, disorientation and nausea.
You can temporarily disturb your sense of balance by closing your eyes and turning rapidly in circles five or six times. This starts the fluid swirling in circles inside your ear canal. When you stop turning it takes a few seconds for the fluid to lose momentum, and until then the sense from your inner ear conflicts with the information coming from your vision, causing dizziness and disorientation. Most astronauts find that their sense of balance is impaired when in orbit, because there is not enough gravity to keep the ear's fluid in balance. This causes a form of motion sickness called space sickness.
A 45-year-old woman wakes up not feeling well. She believes that she may be coming down with the flu due to nausea that she is feeling, so she continues with her day. As the day progresses so does the feeling of nausea. While watching a movie with members of her family, the sick feeling seems to intensify and so they leave the movie. In the lobby of the movie theater she becomes very unbalanced and collapses. The fear is that she is experiencing a stroke. After being taken to the hospital via ambulance, the ER doctors also feel that it may be a stroke and do CAT scans to verify. Nothing shows up on the scans but the feeling of nausea and vertigo are intense. The woman is later diagnosed with an inner ear infection. The next 6-9 months of her life are filled with antibiotics, balance therapy and continued nausea and vertigo. Nothing seems to help so the doctors go into her inner ear surgically through her skull. They cut the vestibular nerve that is linked to the balance center on the left side. The right inner ear will eventually compensate for this loss of balance however it will take months of balance therapy. After a year from the onset on the inner ear infection, the woman has had three inner ear surgeries, loss of hearing in the left ear and problems with her balance. Doctors have told her they have done everything that they can and that she will now have to live with these conditions on a daily basis.
The word deaf can have at least two different meanings. The first term is used to indicate the presence of enough hearing loss such that an individual is not sensitive to sound. Someone with a partial loss of hearing is more likely to be referred to as hearing impaired or the qualified partially deaf by professionals. The second term is used to indicate someone who considers themselves 'culturally deaf', and they often use a capital D to distinguish this. Deaf people often are signers and consider that their Deafness is not something that needs to be medically fixed.
A cochlear implant is a device which has been used to restore hearing function to some deaf and hearing impaired people. It consists of an internal device; which extends electrodes into the cochlea and indirectly stimulates the auditory nerve, and an external device; which works much like a hearing aid, except it transmits information to the internal device rather than to the ear. The cochlear implant basically bypasses the middle ear and the cochlea hair cells, and allows some people with damage to these structures to hear 'electronically'.
An inflammation of the middle ear segment. It is usually associated with a buildup of fluid and frequently causes an earache. The fluid may or may not be infected. The typical progress of otitis media is: the tissues surrounding the Eustachian tube swell due to an infection and/or severe congestion. The Eustachian tube remains blocked most of the time. The air present in the middle ear is slowly absorbed into the surrounding tissues. A strong negative pressure creates a vacuum in the middle ear. The vacuum reaches a point where fluid from the surrounding tissues accumulates in the middle ear. Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae are the most common bacterial causes of otitis media. As well as being caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae it can also be caused by the common cold.
Vertigo, sometimes called a headrush, is a major symptom of a balance disorder. It is the sensation of spinning while the body is stationary with respect to the earth or surroundings. With the eyes shut, there will be a sensation that the body is in movement, called subjective vertigo; if the eyes are open, the surroundings will appear to move past the field of vision, called objective vertigo. The effects may be slight. It may cause nausea or, if severe, may give rise to difficulty with standing and walking. Vertigo is usually associated with a problem in the inner ear balance mechanisms (vestibular system), in the brain, or with the nerve connections between these two organs. The most common cause is benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, or BPPV. Vertigo can be a symptom of an underlying harmless cause, such as in BPPV or it can suggest more serious problems. These include drug toxicities, strokes or tumors (though these are much less common than BPPV).
Motion sickness is a condition in which the endolymph (the fluid found in the semicircular canals of the inner ears) becomes 'stirred up', causing confusion between the difference between apparent perceived movement (none or very little), and actual movement. Depending on the cause, it is also referred to as seasickness, carsickness, airsickness, or spacesickness. Nausea is the most common symptom of motion sickness. If the motion causing nausea is not resolved, the sufferer will frequently vomit within twenty minutes. Unlike ordinary sickness, vomiting in motion sickness tends not to relieve the nausea. If you don't want to consult a doctor, one common form of relief is to eat mints.
Dysacusis is a hearing impairment characterized by difficulty in processing details of sound, but not primarily a loss of the ability to perceive sound. May also refer to pain or discomfort due to sound.
The answers for these critical thinking questions can be found here.
What do the three semicircular canals in the inner ear enable us to do? How do they accomplish this?
What does the eustachian tube do? What does the eustachian tube have to do with a middle ear infection?
Touch is the first sense developed in the womb and the last sense used before death. With 50 touch receptors for every square centimeter and about 5 million sensory cells overall, the skin is very sensitive and is the largest and one of the most complex organs in our bodies. These touch receptors are grouped by type and include Mechanoreceptors (sensitive to pressure, vibration and slip), Thermoreceptors (sensitive to changes in temperature), and Nocioreceptors (responsible for pain).
Pacinian corpuscles detect gross pressure changes and vibrations. They are the largest of the receptors. Any deformation in the corpuscle causes action potentials to be generated, by opening pressure-sensitive sodium ion channels in the axon membrane. This allows sodium ions to influx in, creating a receptor potential.
Pacinian corpuscles cause action potentials when the skin is rapidly indented but not when the pressure is steady, due to the layers of connective tissue that cover the nerve ending (Kandel et al., 2000). It is thought that they respond to high velocity changes in joint position.
Meissner's corpuscles are distributed throughout the skin, but concentrated in areas especially sensitive to light touch, such as the fingertips, palms, soles, lips, tongue, face, nipples and the external skin of the male and female genitals. They are primarily located just beneath the epidermis within the dermal papillae.
Any physical deformation in the Meissner’s corpuscle will cause an action potential in the nerve. Since they are rapidly adapting or phasic, the action potentials generated quickly decrease and eventually cease. If the stimulus is removed, the corpuscle regains its shape and while doing so (ie: while physically reforming) causes another volley of action potentials to be generated. (This is the reason one stops "feeling" one's clothes.) This process is called sensory adaption. Because of their superficial location in the dermis, these corpuscles are particularly sensitive to touch and vibrations, but for the same reasons, they are limited in their detection because they can only signal that something is touching the skin. Meissner's corpuscles do not detect pain; this is signaled exclusively by free nerve endings.
Layers of the skin, showing the Merkel's Cell.
Merkel’s Discs are Mechanoreceptors, making them sensitive to pressure and vibration. In humans, Merkel cells occur in the superficial skin layers, and are found clustered beneath the ridges of the fingertips that make up fingerprints. They’re somewhat rigid in structure, and the fact that they are not encapsulated, causes them to have a sustained response (in the form of action potentials or spikes) to mechanical deflection of the tissue.
Merkel nerve endings are extremely sensitive to tissue displacement, and may respond to displacements of less than 1 um. Several studies indicate that they mediate high-resolution tactile discrimination, and are responsible for the ability of our fingertips to feel fine detailed surface patterns (e.g. for reading Braille).
Ruffini corpuscles are Thermoreceptors, aiding in the detection of temperature changes. Named after Angelo Ruffini, the Ruffini ending is a class of slowly adapting mechanoreceptor thought to exist only in the glabrous dermis and subcutaneous tissue of humans. This spindle-shaped receptor is sensitive to skin stretch, and contributes to the kinesthetic sense of and control of finger position and movement.
In most people sensory integration occurs naturally without a thought process. But in some people the sensory integration does not develop properly and becomes distorted. In these people, the brain and central nervous system misinterprets everyday sensory information such as touch, sound and movement. Research is still being done on this disorder but they are finding direct links to SPD with other disorders like ADD/ADHD, premature birth, Autism, Down’s Syndrome and Fragile X.
Considered a category of SPD, tactile defensiveness is an overreaction to the sense of touch. Identified by Dr. Jean Ayers in the 1960’s. A person with tactile defensiveness will react with a “flight or fight” reaction to touch stimuli that a normal person would interpret as harmless. Most cases are noticed in children or babies due to the fact that they do not want to be touched or cuddled as a normal child would. A child with this disorder will probably have these sign or symptoms:
Does not like to go barefoot or have feet touched
Does not enjoy baths, haircuts, nail clipping
Does not want to touch anything that is messy or has a sticky texture
Exceedingly rare disease. There are only about 35 known cases in the United States. CIPA is a severe autosomal recessive condition in which the peripheral nerves demonstrate a loss of unmyelinated and small myelinated fibers. The actual physiopathological mechanism is still unknown and being studied- this is an extremely hard disease to study due to the rarity of cases. Most people with the disease will not live long due to injuries received that go untreated because they are unknown and severe
Wouldn't it wonderful if you could no longer feel pain. Is that not something we all would like to have? Or do we have pain for a good reason?
Although it is rare there is a disease known as congenital insensitivity to pain. This genetic abnormality cause some people to lack certain components of the sensory system to receive pain. The exact reason for the problem is unknown and varies between people. Sadly people who have the disease often die in childhood. Injuries are very common with people who have congenital insensitivity to pain. They often will lose digits, may suffer from burns and their knees often have sores from kneeling to long.
Clearly pain has a purpose, it is our warning signal when things are awry.
Newborns can feel all different sensations, but respond most enthusiastically to soft stroking, cuddling and caressing. Gentle rocking back and forth will oftentimes calm a crying infant, as will massages and warm baths. Newborns may comfort themselves by sucking their thumbs, or a pacifier. The need to suckle is instinctive and allows newborns to feed.
Newborn infants have unremarkable vision, being able to focus on objects only about 18 inches (45 cm) directly in front of their face. While this may not be much, it is all that is needed for the infant to look at the mother’s face when breastfeeding. When a newborn is not sleeping, or feeding, or crying, he or she may spend a lot of time staring at random objects. Usually, anything that is shiny, has sharp contrasting colors, or has complex patterns will catch an infant's eye. However, the newborn has a preference for looking at other human faces above all else.
While still inside the mother, the infant can hear many internal noises, such as the mother's heartbeat, as well as many external noises including human voices, music and most other sounds. Therefore, although a newborn's ears may have some fluid present, he or she can hear sound from birth. Newborns usually respond to a female's voice over a male's. This may explain why people will unknowingly raise the pitch of their voice when talking to newborns. The sound of other human voices, especially the mother's, can have a calming or soothing effect on the newborn. Conversely, loud or sudden noises will startle and scare a newborn.
Newborns can respond to different tastes, including sweet, sour, bitter, and salty substances, with preference toward sweets.
A newborn has a developed sense of smell at birth, and within the first week of life can already distinguish the differences between the mother's own breast milk and the breast milk of another female.
Bright light shining in eyes or clap hands by eyes.
Closes eyelids quickly.
This reflex protects the infant from an excessive amount of stimulation.
Stick sole of foot with a stimulus like a pin.
This causes the foot to withdraw. Flexing of the knee to hip occurs.
This protects the infant from excessive unpleasant tactile stimulation.
Touch cheek near the corner of the mouth.
The infant's head will turn towards the site of stimulation.
3 weeks (due to the voluntary response that is now capable for infant to do at this time)
This reflex helps baby to find the mothers' nipple.
The infant will suck finger rhythmically.
This helps with feeding.
The baby paddles and kicks in swimming movements.
This helps baby to survive if dropped into the water.
Hold infant in a cradling horizontal position and slightly lower the baby in a fast motion toward the ground while making a loud sound.
The baby will make an embracing motion and arch its back extending its legs and throwing its arms outward. Finally, it will bring the arms in toward its body
In the evolutionary past this may have helped the baby cling to the mother.
Place the finger in baby's palm and press against the palm.
The baby will immediately grasp the finger.
This prepares infant for voluntary grasping.
Turn the baby's head to one side while the baby is awake.
This will cause the baby to extend one arm in front of its eye or to the side to which the head has been turned.
This may prepare for voluntary reaching.
Hold the baby under the arm and permit the bare feet of the baby to touch a flat surface.
The baby will lift one foot after the other in a stepping fashion.
2 months (this applies to a baby who has gained weight. For baby who is not as heavy, this reflex may be submissive.)
This prepares the baby for voluntary walking.
Touch the foot in a stroking manner from the toe toward the heel.
The baby's toes will fan out and curl as the foot twists inward.
A) allows vision in light and dark, using cones and rods
C) Contains the ciliary muscles that control the shape of the lens
A) Merkel’s Discs are somewhat rigid in structure, and the fact that they are not encapsulated, causes them to have a sustained response
B) Meissner’s corpuscle are rapidly adapting or phasic, the action potentials generated quickly decrease and eventually cease
D) Pacinian corpuscles allow sodium ions to influx in, creating a receptor potential
B) My food will taste the same; taste and smell have nothing in common
C) Papilla become blocked by mucus and are unable to function
D) Olfaction, taste and trigeminal receptors together contribute to the flavor of my food
A) The sclera in the eye to open and eventually allow me to see in the dark
B) The extraocular muscles in the eye to open and eventually allow me to see in the dark
C) The cones in the eye to open and eventually allow me to see in the dark
D) the rods in the eye to open and eventually allow me to see in the dark
A) Are the actual sensory receptors that will fire off action potentials when they are disturbed
B) Show a graded response, instead of the spikes typical of other neurons
B) There are numerous eye diseases that can affect an older eye
C) The extent to which the pupil dilates decreases with age
A) The fluid in the auricle has not stopped moving causing conflicts with the information coming from your vision
B) the fluid in the cochlea has not stopped moving causing conflicts with the information coming from your vision
C) The fluid in the tympanic membrane has not stopped moving causing conflicts with the information coming from your vision
D) The fluid in the stirrup has not stopped moving causing conflicts with the information coming from your vision
Auditory Canal: Tube from the auditory meatus or opening of the ear to the tympanic membrane
Auditory Tube: Either of the paired tubes connecting the middle ears to the nasopharynx; equalizes air pressure on the two sides of the eardrum
Chemoreception: Physiological response of a sense organ to a chemical stimulus
Choroid: Vascular layer of the eye lying between the retina and the sclera
Circumvallate papillae: Papillae that are present on the back of the oral part of the tongue
Extraocular muscles: Six muscles that control eye movements: lateral rectus, medial rectus, inferior rectus, superior rectus, inferior oblique and superior oblique
Filiform papillae: Thin, longer papillae that don't contain taste buds but are the most numerous
Foliate papillae: Ridges and grooves towards the posterior part of the tongue
Fungiform papillae: These are present mostly at the apex (tip) of the tongue- slightly mushroom shaped
Hair Cell: Mechanosensors for hearing, columnar cells each with a bundle of 100-200 specialized cilia at the top
Haptic: From the Greek Haphe, means pertaining to the sense of touch
Inner Ear: Innermost part of the ear, contains the cochlea, vestibule and semi-circular canals
Mechanoreceptor: Sensory receptor that responds to mechanical pressure or distortion
Meissner's Corpuscle: Encapsulated unmyelinated nerve endings, usually found in areas sensitive to light touch
Middle Ear: Air filled cavity behind the eardrum, includes most of the eardrum and ear bones
Nasopharynx: Nasal part of the pharynx that lies behind the nose and above the level of the soft palate
Outer Ear: External portion of the ear, includes the auricle, ear canal and surface of the ear drum
Oval Window: Fenestra that has the base of the stapes attached to it
Papilla: Specialized epithelial cells that are small projections on the top of the tongue
Phantosmia: Phenomenon of smelling odors that aren't really present (AKA Phantom odors)
Retina: Thin layer of neural cells that lines the back of the eyeball of vertebrates and some cephalopods
Sclera: White outer coating of the eye- gives the eye its shape and helps to protect the delicate inner parts
Tympanic Membrane: The membrane in the ear that vibrates to produce sound
Umami: Japanese word meaning savory or meaty- type of taste signal
Hänig, D.P., 1901. Zur Psychophysik des Geschmackssinnes. Philosophische Studien, 17: 576-623.
Collings, V.B., 1974. Human Taste Response as a Function of Locus of Stimulation on the Tongue and Soft Palate. Perception & Psychophysics, 16: 169-174.
Buck, Linda and Richard Axel. (1991). A Novel Multigene Family May Encode Odorant Receptors: A Molecular Basis for Odor Recognition. Cell 65:175-183.
The muscular system is the biological system of humans that produces movement. The muscular system, in vertebrates, is controlled through the nervous system, although some muscles, like cardiac muscle, can be completely autonomous. Muscle is contractile tissue and is derived from the mesodermal layer of embryonic germ cells. Its function is to produce force and cause motion, either locomotion or movement within internal organs. Much of muscle contraction occurs without conscious thought and is necessary for survival, like the contraction of the heart or peristalsis, which pushes food through the digestive system. Voluntary muscle contraction is used to move the body and can be finely controlled, such as movements of the finger or gross movements that of the biceps and triceps. Muscle structureMuscle is composed of muscle cells (sometimes known as "muscle fibers"). Within the cells are myofibrils; myofibrils contain sarcomeres which are composed of actin and myosin. Individual muscle cells are lined with endomysium. Muscle cells are bound together by perimysium into bundles called fascicles. These bundles are then grouped together to form muscle, and is lined by epimysium. Muscle spindles are distributed throughout the muscles, and provide sensory feedback information to the central nervous system. Skeletal muscle, which involves muscles from the skeletal tissue, is arranged in discrete groups. An example is the biceps brachii. It is connected by tendons to processes of the skeleton. In contrast, smooth muscle occurs at various scales in almost every organ, from the skin (in which it controls erection of body hair) to the blood vessels and digestive tract (in which it controls the caliber of a lumen and peristalsis, respectively). A top-down view of skeletal muscleThere are approximately 640 skeletal muscles in the human body (see list of muscles of the human body). Contrary to popular belief, the number of muscle fibers cannot be increased through exercise; instead the muscle cells simply get bigger. It is however believed that myofibrils have a limited capacity for growth through hypertrophy and will split if subject to increased demand. There are three basic types of muscles in the body (smooth, cardiac, and skeletal). While they differ in many regards, they all use actin sliding against myosin to create muscle contraction and relaxation. In skeletal muscle, contraction is stimulated at each cell by nervous impulses that releases acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction, creating action potentials along the cell membrane. All skeletal muscle and many smooth muscle contractions are stimulated by the binding of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. Muscular activity accounts for most of the body's energy consumption. Muscles store energy for their own use in the form of glycogen, which represents about 1% of their mass. Glycogen can be rapidly converted to glucose when more energy is necessary.
Smooth muscle or "involuntary muscle" consists of spindle shaped muscle cells found within the walls of organs and structures such as the esophagus, stomach, intestines, bronchi, uterus, ureters, bladder, and blood vessels. Smooth muscle cells contain only one nucleus and no striations.
Cardiac muscle is also an "involuntary muscle" but it is striated in structure and appearance. Like smooth muscle, cardiac muscle cells contain only one nucleus. Cardiac muscle is found only within the heart.
Skeletal muscle or "voluntary muscle" is anchored by tendons to the bone and is used to effect skeletal movement such as locomotion. Skeletal muscle cells are multinucleated with the nuclei peripherally located. Skeletal muscle is called 'striated' because of the longitudinally striped appearance under light microscopy. Functions of the skeletal muscle include:
Assists with the movement of cardiovascular and lymphatic vessels through contractions
Cardiac and skeletal muscle are striated in that they contain sarcomere and are packed into highly-regular arrangements of bundles; smooth muscle has neither. Striated muscle is often used in short, intense bursts, whereas smooth muscle sustains longer or even near-permanent contractions.
Type I, slow oxidative, slow twitch, or "red" muscle is dense with capillaries and is rich in mitochondria and myoglobin, giving the muscle tissue its characteristic red color. It can carry more oxygen and sustain aerobic activity.
Type II, fast twitch, muscle has three major kinds that are, in order of increasing contractile speed:
a) Type IIa, which, like slow muscle, is aerobic, rich in mitochondria and capillaries and appears red.
b) Type IIx (also known as type IId), which is less dense in mitochondria and myoglobin. This is the fastest muscle type in humans. It can contract more quickly and with a greater amount of force than oxidative muscle, but can sustain only short, anaerobic bursts of activity before muscle contraction becomes painful (often attributed to a build-up of lactic acid). N.B. in some books and articles this muscle in humans was, confusingly, called type IIB
c) Type IIb, which is anaerobic, glycolytic, "white" muscle that is even less dense in mitochondria and myoglobin. In small animals like rodents or rabbits this is the major fast muscle type, explaining the pale color of their meat.
For most muscles, contraction occurs as a result of conscious effort originating in the brain. The brain sends signals, in the form of action potentials, through the nervous system to the motor neuron that innervates the muscle fiber. However, some muscles (such as the heart) do not contract as a result of conscious effort. These are said to be autonomic. Also, it is not always necessary for the signals to originate from the brain. Reflexes are fast, unconscious muscular reactions that occur due to unexpected physical stimuli. The action potentials for reflexes originate in the spinal cord instead of the brain.
There are three general types of muscle contractions, skeletal muscle contractions, heart muscle contractions, and smooth muscle contractions.
An action potential reaches the axon of the motor neuron.
The action potential activates voltage gated calcium ion channels on the axon, and calcium rushes in.
The calcium causes acetylcholine vesicles in the axon to fuse with the membrane, releasing the acetylcholine into the cleft between the axon and the motor end plate of the muscle fiber.
The skeletal muscle fiber is excited by large myelinated nerve fibers which attach to the neuromuscular junction. There is one neuromuscular junction for each fiber.
The acetylcholine diffuses across the cleft and binds to nicotinic receptors on the motor end plate, opening channels in the membrane for sodium and potassium. Sodium rushes in, and potassium rushes out. However, because sodium is more permeable, the muscle fiber membrane becomes more positively charged, triggering an action potential.
The action potential on the muscle fiber causes the sarcoplasmic reticulum to release calcium ions(Ca++).
The calcium binds to the troponin present on the thin filaments of the myofibrils. The troponin then allosterically modulates the tropomyosin. Normally the tropomyosin physically obstructs binding sites for cross-bridge; once calcium binds to the troponin, the troponin forces the tropomyosin to move out of the way, unblocking the binding sites.
The cross-bridge (which is already in a ready-state) binds to the newly uncovered binding sites. It then delivers a power stroke.
ATP binds the cross-bridge, forcing it to conform in such a way as to break the actin-myosin bond. Another ATP is split to energize the cross bridge again.
Steps 7 and 8 repeat as long as calcium is present on thin filament.
Throughout this process, the calcium is actively pumped back into the sarcoplasmic reticulum. When no longer present on the thin filament, the tropomyosin changes back to its previous state, so as to block the binding sites again. The cross-bridge then ceases binding to the thin filament, and the contractions cease as well.
Isometric contraction--muscle does not shorten during contraction and does not require the sliding of myofibrils but muscles are stiff.
Isotonic contraction--inertia is used to move or work. More energy is used by the muscle and contraction lasts longer than isometric contraction. Isotonic muscle contraction is divided into two categories: concentric, where the muscle fibers shorten as the muscle contracts (ie. biceps brachialis on the up phase of a biceps curl); and eccentric, where the muscle fibers lengthen as they contract (ie. biceps brachialis on the down phase of a biceps curl).
Twitch--exciting the nerve to a muscle or by passing electrical stimulus through muscle itself. Some fibers contract quickly while others contract slowly.
Tonic -maintaining postural tone against the force of gravity.
If a muscle contraction is slow or without movement, energy is lost as maintenance heat.
Summation of Muscle Contraction: It is the adding together of individual muscle twitches to make strong muscle movements.
Multiple motor unit summation--increasing number of motor units contracting simultaneously.
Tetanization--higher frequency successive contractions fuse together and cannot be distinguished from one another.
When a muscle contracts, the actin is pulled along myosin toward the center of the sarcomere until the actin and myosin filaments are completely overlapped. The H zone becomes smaller and smaller due to the increasing overlap of actin and myosin filaments, and the muscle shortens. Thus when the muscle is fully contracted, the H zone is no longer visible (as in the bottom diagram, left). Note that the actin and myosin filaments themselves do not change length, but instead slide past each other.
During cellular respiration the mitochondria, within skeletal muscle cells, convert glucose from the blood to carbon dioxide and water in the process of producing ATP (see cell physiology). ATP is needed for all muscular movement. When the need of ATP in the muscle is higher than the cells can produce with aerobic respiration, the cells will produce extra ATP in a process called anaerobic respiration. The first step of aerobic respiration(glycolysis) produces two ATP per glucose molecule. When the rest of the aerobic respiration pathway is occupied the pyruvate molecule can be converted to lactic acid. This method produces much less ATP than the aerobic method, but it does it faster and allows the muscles to do a bit more than if they relied solely on ATP production from aerobic respiration. The drawback to this method is that lactic acid accumulates and causes the muscles to fatigue. They will eventually stop contracting until the breakdown of lactic acid is sufficient to allow for movement once again. People experience this most noticeably when they repeatedly lift heavy things such as weights or sprint for a long distance. Muscle soreness sometimes occurs after vigorous activity, and is often misunderstood by the general public to be the result of lactic acid buildup. This is a misconception because the muscle does fatigue from lactic acid buildup, but it does not stay in the muscle tissue long enough to cause tissue breakdown or soreness. During heavy breathing, following exercise, the cells are converting the lactic acid either back into glucose or converting it to pyruvate and sending it through the additional steps of aerobic respiration. By the time a person is breathing normally again the lactic acid has been removed. The soreness is actually from small tears in the fibers themselves. After the fibers heal they will increase in size. The number of mitochondria will also increase if there is continued demand for additional ATP. Hence, through exercise the muscles can increase in both strength and endurance.
Another misconception is that as the muscle increases in size it also gains more fibers. This is not true. The fibers themselves increase in size rather than in quantity. The same holds true for adipose tissue--fat cells do not increase in number, but rather the amount of lipids (oil) in the cells increase.
Muscle fibers are also genetically programmed to reach a certain size and stop growing from there, so after a while even the hardest working weightlifter will only reach a certain level of strength and endurance. Some people will get around this by taking steroids. The artificial steroids cause all sorts of trouble for the person. They can cause the adrenal glands to stop producing corticosteroids and glucosteroids. This leads to the atrophy of the gland's medulla and causes permanent loss of the production of these hormones. The testicles may also atrophy in response to steroids. Eventually the testes will stop making testosterone and sperm, rendering the male infertile.
One of the more serious problems associated with abnormal gain of muscle mass is heart failure. While for most people gaining muscle and losing fat is desirable, a body builder is at risk of producing more muscle mass than the heart can handle. One pound of fat contains about 3.5 miles of blood vessels, but one pound of muscle has about 6.5 miles. Hence, additional muscle causes the heart to pump more blood. Some people that have too much muscle will be very strong but will not have a healthy aerobic endurance, in part because of the difficulty of providing oxygenated blood to so much tissue.
This link shows the animation of the sliding filament theory.
When Smooth and skeletal muscles go through multiple spasms it is referred either as seizure or convulsion.
Strenuous activities can cause painful spasms that are long, this is referred to as cramps.
An injury to a joint that involves a stretched or torn ligament.
A strain occurs when a muscle or the tendon that attaches it to the bone is overstretched or torn. Muscle strains are also called pulled muscles.
Who gets it?
Anyone can strain a muscle. However, people involved in sports or other forms of strenuous exercise are more likely to strain a muscle.
What causes it?
Muscles are bunches of fibers that can contract. Muscle strains usually occur during activities that require the muscle to tighten forcefully. The muscle is strained either because it is not properly stretched, or warmed up, before the activity; it is too weak; or because the muscle is already injured and not allowed time to recover. So, many muscle strains occur during exercise or sports activities. They can also occur when lifting heavy objects.
What are the symptoms?
When a muscle is strained, it hurts and is difficult to move. You may also feel a burning sensation in the area of the injured muscle, or feel as though something has "popped." Sometimes the area of the strained muscle looks bruised or swells. A strained muscle might spasm, which means it contracts suddenly and involuntarily, causing severe pain.
To diagnose a muscle strain, your doctor will examine the painful area, and ask how and when the injury happened. He or she may order other diagnostic tests, such as x-rays, to rule out any injury to the bone.
Muscle strains are treated with rest, ice, compression, and elevation, or RICE. You will be told to rest the injured area to reduce pain and swelling. If the strain is in the leg or foot area, you may need to use crutches. Ice packs are recommended at regular intervals (as recommended by your doctor) over the first few days after the injury. Ice causes the blood vessels to constrict, which reduces inflammation and pain. Anti-inflammatory medications might also be used to relieve pain. Compression and elevation help to reduce swelling. Your doctor may also recommend physical therapy to speed your recovery. You should avoid the type of activity that caused the injury until the muscle is completely healed.
You can prevent muscle strains by warming up for at least 10 minutes before participating in any strenuous exercise or heavy lifting. When you warm up, you increase the blood circulation to the muscle and prepare it for exercise. When starting any new exercise program or sport, it's important to begin gradually so your muscles are conditioned for the activity.
Anabolic steroids, which are synthetic versions of the primary male sex hormone testosterone, can be injected, taken orally, or used transdermally. These drugs are Controlled Substances that can be prescribed to treat conditions such as body wasting in patients with AIDS, and other diseases that occur when the body produces abnormally low amounts of testosterone. However, the doses prescribed to treat these medical conditions are 10 to 100 times lower than the doses that are used for performance enhancement.
Abuse of anabolic steroids differs from the abuse of other illicit substances because the initial use of anabolic steroids is not driven by the immediate euphoria that accompanies most drugs of abuse, such as cocaine, heroin, and marijuana, but by the desire of the user to change their appearance and performance, characteristics of great importance to adolescents. These effects of steroids can boost confidence and strength leading the user to overlook the potential serious long-term damage that these substances can cause.
Government agencies such as NIDA support research that increases our understanding of the impact of steroid use and improves our ability to prevent abuse of these drugs. For example, NIDA funding led to the development of two highly effective programs that not only prevent anabolic steroid abuse among male and female high school athletes, but also promote other healthy behaviors and attitudes. The ATLAS (targeting male athletes) and ATHENA (targeting female athletes) programs have been adopted by schools in 29 states and Puerto Rico. Both Congress and the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration have endorsed ATLAS and ATHENA as model prevention programs, which could and should be implemented in more communities throughout the country.
In addition to these prevention programs and other research efforts, also has invested in public education efforts to increase awareness about the dangers of steroid abuse. We have material on our website about steroid abuse at www.steroidabuse.gov and in April 2005 we again will distribute a "Game Plan" public service announcement designed to bring attention to abuse of anabolic steroids.
Research has shown that the inappropriate use of anabolic steroids can have catastrophic medical, psychiatric and behavioral consequences.
I hope that students, parents, teachers, coaches and others will take advantage of the information on our website about anabolic steroids abuse and join us in our prevention and education efforts. Participating in sports offers many benefits, but young people and adults shouldn't take unnecessary health risks in an effort to win.(Nora D. Volkow, M.D.)
-Human-made substances related to male sex hormones. Some athletes abuse anabolic steroids to enhance performance. Abuse of anabolic steroids can lead to serious health problems, some of which are irreversible.
Major side effects can include liver tumors and cancer, jaundice, high blood pressure, kidney tumors, severe acne, and trembling. In males, side effects may include shrinking of the testicles and breast development. In females, side effects may include growth of facial hair, menstrual changes, and deepened voice. In teenagers, growth may be halted prematurely and permanently.
The therapeutic use of steroids can be realized by patients and their doctors by using them in a manner that is beneficial to the person.
MyoD is a protein and a transcription factor that activates muscle cell differentiation by turning on transcription of specific regulatory genes. It turns stem cells into myoblasts, a cell that can turn into many muscle cell, also called "muscle stem cell". MyoD belongs to a family of proteins knowns as myogenic regulatory factor(MRFs). MyoD can also turn on transcription of its own regulatory genes (MyoD protein coding genes), and this means that it can produce more of itself. The positive feedback turns on transcription of other muscle proteins, cell cycle blockers, and microRNA-206. One of the main actions of MyoD is to remove cells from the cell cycle by enhancing the transcription of p21The function of MyoD is to commit mesoderm cells to a skeletal lineage. MyoD can also regulate muscle repair. One of the main actions of MyoD is to remove cells from the cell cycle by enhancing the transcription of p21.
Bidirectional Signalling- muscle cells and nerves cells send signals back and forth to each other.
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis(ALS) is a loss of motor neuron and this blocks the formation of neuromuscular junctions. Therefore, no muscle growth which means a potential of leading to paralysis. Stephen Hawking suffers from this disease.
MicroRNA-206 indirectly forms neuromuscular junctions with motor neurons. Neuromuscular junction sends synaptic signals to MyoD and this blcoks MyoD and stops or limits muscle development. Myostatin is a protein that also blocks MyoD. Without myostatin, muscle development increases.
Myostatin Mutations In Sheep: they can have a mutant myostatin that causes microRNA-206 to block myostatin translation
Myostatin Mutations In Humans: humans with mutant myostatin will develop lots of muscle (like a body builder) is possible to create a drug that blocks myostatin production.
Contractions are initiated by an influx of calcium which binds to calmodulin.
The calcium-calmodulin complex binds to and activates myosin light-chain kinase.
Myosin light-chain kinase phosphorylates myosin light-chains using ATP, causing them to interact with actin filaments.
Powerstroke.
Calcium is actively pumped out of the cell by receptor regulated channels. A second messanger, IP3, causes the release.
As calcium is removed the calcium-calmodulin complex breaks away from the myosin light-chain kinase, stopping phosphorylation.
Myosin phophatase dephosphorylates the myosin. If the myosin was bound to an actin molecule, the release is slow, this is called a latch state. In this manner, smooth muscle is able to stay contracted for some time without the use of much ATP. If the myosin was not bound to an actin chain it loses its affinity for actin.
It should be noted that ATP is still needed for crossbridge cycling, and that there is no reserve, such as creatine phosphate, available. Most ATP is created from aerobic metabolism, however anaerobic production may take place in times of low oxygen concentrations.
Muscles cells, like all cells, use ATP as an energy source. The total quantity of ATP in the human body at any one time is about 0.1 Mole. The energy used by human cells requires the hydrolysis of 200 to 300 moles of ATP daily. This means that each ATP molecule is recycled 2000 to 3000 times during a single day. ATP cannot be stored, hence its consumption must closely follow its synthesis. On a per-hour basis, 1 kilogram of ATP is created, processed and then recycled in the body. Looking at it another way, a single cell uses about 10 million ATP molecules per second to meet its metabolic needs, and recycles all of its ATP molecules about every 20-30 seconds.
Catabolized carbohydrates is known as glycolysis. The end product of glycolysis, pyruvate can go into different directions depending on aerobic or anaerobic conditions. In aerobic it goes through the Krebs cycle and in anaerobic it goes through the Cori cycle.
In the Cori cycle pyruvate is converted to lactate, this forms lactic acid, lactic acid causes muscle fatigue. In the aerobic conditions pyruvate goes through the Krebs cycle. For more about Krebs cycle refer to chapter 2 Cell Physiology.
Dermatomyositis and polymyositis cause inflammation of the muscles. They are rare disorders, affecting only about one in 100,000 people per year. More women than men are affected. Although the peak age of onset is in the 50s, the disorders can occur at any age.
Signs and symptoms — Patients complain of muscle weakness that usually worsens over several months, though in some cases symptoms come on suddenly. The affected muscles are close to the trunk (as opposed to in the wrists or feet), involving for example the hip, shoulder, or neck muscles. Muscles on both sides of the body are equally affected. In some cases, muscles are sore or tender. Some patients have involvement of the muscles of the pharynx (throat) or the esophagus (the tube leading from the throat to the stomach), causing problems with swallowing. In some cases, this leads to food being misdirected from the esophagus to the lungs, causing severe pneumonia.
In dermatomyositis, there is a rash, though sometimes the rash resolves before muscle problems occur. A number of different types of rash can occur, including rashes on the fingers, the chest and shoulders, or on the upper eyelids (show picture 1-3). In rare cases, the rash of dermatomyositis appears but myopathy never develops.
Other problems sometimes associated with these diseases include fever, weight loss, arthritis, cold-induced color changes in the fingers or toes (Raynaud phenomenon), and heart or lung problems.
The majority of muscle atrophy in the general population results from disuse. People with sedentary jobs and senior citizens with decreased activity can lose muscle tone and develop significant atrophy. This type of atrophy is reversible with vigorous exercise. Bed-ridden people can undergo significant muscle wasting. Astronauts, free of the gravitational pull of Earth, can develop decreased muscle tone and loss of calcium from their bones following just a few days of weightlessness.
Muscle atrophy resulting from disease rather than disuse is generally one of two types, that resulting from damage to the nerves that supply the muscles, and disease of the muscle itself. Examples of diseases affecting the nerves that control muscles would be poliomyelitis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS or Lou Gehrig's disease), and Guillain-Barre syndrome. Examples of diseases affecting primarily the muscles would include muscular dystrophy, myotonia congenita, and myotonic dystrophy as well as other congenital, inflammatory or metabolic myopathies.
Even minor muscle atrophy usually results in some loss of mobility or power.
Muscular dystrophy (MD) is a group of rare inherited muscle diseases in which muscle fibers are unusually susceptible to damage. Muscles, primarily voluntary muscles, become progressively weaker. In the late stages of muscular dystrophy, muscle fibers are often replaced by fat and connective tissue. In some types of muscular dystrophy, heart muscles, other involuntary muscles and other organs are affected.
The most common types of muscular dystrophy appear to be due to a genetic deficiency of the muscle protein dystrophin.
There's no cure for muscular dystrophy, but medications and therapy can slow the course of the disease.
The twitching phenomenon that happens in the early stage of sleep is called a hypnagogic massive jerk, or simply a hypnic jerk. It has also been referred to as a sleep start. There has been little research on this topic, but there have been some theories put forth. When the body drifts off into sleep, it undergoes physiological changes related to body temperature, breathing rate and muscular tone. Hypnic jerks may be the result of muscle changes. Another theory suggests that the transition from the waking to the sleeping state signals the body to relax. But the brain may interpret the relaxation as a sign of falling and then signal the arms and legs to wake up. Electroencephalogram studies have shown sleep starts affect almost 10 percent of the population regularly, 80 percent occasionally, and another 10 percent rarely.
Muscle movement or twitching also may take place during the Rapid Eye Movement, or REM, phase of sleep. This also is the time when dreams occur. During the REM phase, all voluntary muscular activity stops with a drop in muscle tone, but some individuals may experience slight eyelid or ear twitching or slight jerks. Some people with REM behavioral disorder, or RBD, may experience more violent muscular twitching and full-fledged activity during sleep. This is because they do not achieve muscle paralysis, and as a result, act out their dreams. Researchers think that people with RBD lack neurological barriers that define the different stages of sleep. New research done by the Mayo Clinic and published in the July 2003 issue of Sleep Medicine shows that melatonin can help lessen RBD symptoms.
Sleep twitches, or myoclonic jerks, as they are sometimes called, are explained in easily understood language on this website.
Learn more about REM Behavior Disorder, or RBD, and treatment for sufferers.
View information about various sleep disorders such as insomnia, apnea, and narcolepsy.
Normally a nerve impulse initiates contraction of a muscle. At the same time, an opposing muscle receives the signal to relax so as not to oppose the contraction. Tetanus toxin blocks the relaxation, so both sets of muscle contract. The usual cause of tetany is lack of calcium, but excess of phosphate (high phosphate-to-calcium ratio) can also trigger the spasms.
If ingested, the toxin is absorbed in the intestine, goes to the blood, and on to the nervous system. It acts on the peripheral nervous system by blocking the impulse that is normally passes along to the nervous system. By blocking the impulse that is normally passed along to motor end plates so the muscle contraction can be released, resulting in paralysis.
A protein that forms a long polymer rods called microfilaments; Interacts with myosin to cause movement in muscles.
"Adenosine Triphosphate" is a nucleotide that comes from adenosine that takes place in muscle tissue: This provides a large source of energy for cellular reactions.
A pathogen that causes botulism, gram stain positive, morphology is rod shaped, grows in anaerobic conditions, and produces spores.
A pathogen that causes lock jaw, gram stain positive, morphology is tennis racket shaped rod, grows in anaerobic conditions, and produces spores.
In anaerobic conditions produces lactic acid.
A localized muscle spasm that happens after strenuous activity.
Glucose that has been converted for energy storage. Muscles store energy for their own use in this form.
Causes muscle fatigue.
Contractile tissue that is derived from the mesodermal layer of embryonic germ cells.
A hereditary disease characterized by progressive atrophy of muscle fibers
The fibrous motor protein that uses ATP to drive movements along actin filaments.
Smooth-surfaced tubules forming a plexus around each myofibril that function as a storage and release area for calcium ions (CA+2).
Injuries that involves a stretched or torn ligament.
A injury to the muscle or tendon attachment
Windmaier, P.W. Raff, H. Strang, T.S. (2004) Vander, Sherman, & Luciano's Human Physiology, the Mechanisms of Body Function 9th ed. Mcgraw-Hill
Neil A. Campbell , Jane B. Reece "Biology 8th edition"
The primary function of blood is to supply oxygen and nutrients as well as constitutional elements to tissues and to remove waste products. Blood also enables hormones and other substances to be transported between tissues and organs. Problems with blood composition or circulation can lead to downstream tissue malfunction. Blood is also involved in maintaining homeostasis by acting as a medium for transferring heat to the skin and by acting as a buffer system for bodily pH.
The blood is circulated through the lungs and body by the pumping action of the heart. The right ventricle pressurizes the blood to send it through the capillaries of the lungs, while the left ventricle re-pressurizes the blood to send it throughout the body. Pressure is essentially lost in the capillaries, hence gravity and especially the actions of skeletal muscles are needed to return the blood to the heart.
Blood circulation from the heart to the lungs.
Oxygen (O2) is the most immediate need of every cell and is carried throughout the body by the blood circulation. Oxygen is used at the cellular level as the final electron acceptor in the electron transport chain (the primary method of generating ATP for cellular reactions). Oxygen is carried in the blood bound to hemoglobin molecules within red blood cells. Hemoglobin binds oxygen when passing through the alveoli of the lungs and releases oxygen in the warmer, more acidic environment of bodily tissues, via simple diffusion.
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is removed from tissues by blood and released into the air via the lungs. Carbon dioxide is produced by cells as they undergo the processes of cellular respiration (particularly the Kreb's Cycle). The molecules are produced from carbons that were originally part of glucose. Most of the carbon dioxide combines with water and is carried in the plasma as bicarbonate ions. An excess of carbon dioxide (through exercise, or from holding ones breath) quickly shifts the blood pH to being more acidic (acidosis). Chemoreceptors in the brain and major blood vessels detect this shift and stimulate the breathing center of the brain (the medulla oblongata). Hence, as CO2 levels build up and the blood becomes more acidic, we involuntarily breathe faster, thus lowering CO2 levels and stabilizing blood pH. In contrast, a person who is hyperventilating (such as during a panic attack) will expire more CO2 than being produced in the body and the blood will become too alkaline (alkalosis).
Blood is a circulating tissue composed of fluid plasma and cells (red blood cells, white blood cells, platelets). Anatomically, blood is considered a connective tissue, due to its origin in the bones and its function. Blood is the means and transport system of the body used in carrying elements (e.g. nutrition, waste, heat) from one location in the body to another, by way of blood vessels.
Plasma which makes up 55% of blood volume.
Formed cellular elements (red and white blood cells, and platelets) which combine to make the remaining 45% of blood volume.
Plasma is made up of 90% water, 7-8% soluble proteins (albumin maintains bloods osmotic integrity, others clot, etc), 1% carbon-dioxide, and 1% elements in transit. One percent of the plasma is salt, which helps with the pH of the blood. The largest group of solutes in plasma contains three important proteins to be discussed. There are: albumins, globulins, and clotting proteins.
Albumins are the most common group of proteins in plasma and consist of nearly two-thirds of them (60-80%). They are produced in the liver. The main function of albumins is to maintain the osmotic balance between the blood and tissue fluids and is called colloid osmotic pressure. In addition, albumins assist in transport of different materials, such as vitamins and certain molecules and drugs (e.g. bilirubin, fatty acids, and penicillin).
Globulins are a diverse group of proteins, designated into three groups: gamma, alpha, and beta. Their main function is to transport various substances in the blood. Gamma globulins assist the body's immune system in defense against infections and illness.
Clotting proteins are mainly produced in the liver as well. There are at least 12 substances, known as "clotting factors" that participate in the clotting process. One important clotting protein that is part of this group is fibrinogen, one of the main components in the formation of blood clots. In response to tissue damage, fibrinogen makes fibrin threads, which serve as adhesive in binding platelets, red blood cells, and other molecules together, to stop the blood flow. (This will be discussed in more detail later on in the chapter.)
Plasma also carries Respiratory gases; CO2 in large amounts(about 97%) and O2 in small amounts(about 3%), various nutrients(glucose, fats), wastes of metabolic exchange(urea, ammonia), hormones, and vitamins.
Red blood cell (erythrocyte) also known as "RBCs". RBCs are formed in the myeloid tissue or most commonly known as red bone marrow, although when the body is under severe conditions the yellow bone marrow, which is also in the fatty places of the marrow in the body will also make RBCs. The formation of RBCs is called erythropoiesis ( erythro / red; poiesis / formation). Red blood cells lose nuclei upon maturation, and take on a biconcave, dimpled, shape. They are about 7-8 micrometers in diameter. There are about 1000x more red blood cells than white blood cells. RBCs live about 120 days and do not self repair. RBCs contain hemoglobin which transports oxygen from the lungs to the rest of the body, such as to the muscles, where it releases the oxygen load.The hemoglobin gets its red color from their respiratory pigments.
RBCS have a shape of a disk that appears to be “caved in” or almost flattened in the middle; this is called bi-concave. This bi-concave shape allows the RBC to carry oxygen and pass through even the smallest capillaries in the lungs. This shape also allows RBCs to stack like dinner plates and bend as they flow smoothly through the narrow blood vessels in the body. RBCs lack a nucleus (no DNA) and no organelles, meaning that these cells cannot divide or replicate themselves like the cells in our skin and muscles. RBCs have a short life span of about 120 days, however, as long as our myeloid tissue is working correctly, we will produce about 2-3 million RBCs per second. That is about 200 billion a day! This allows us to have more to replace the ones we lose.
The main function is the transportation of oxygen throughout the body and the ability of the blood to carry out carbon dioxide which is called carbamino – hemoglobin. Maintaining the balance of blood is important. The balance can be measured by the acid and base levels in the blood. This is called pH. Normal pH of blood ranges between 7.35-7.45; this normal blood is called alkaline (less acidic than water). A drop in pH is called acidic. This condition is also called acidosis. A jump in pH higher then 7.45 is called "alkalosis". To maintain the homeostasis (or balance,) the blood has tiny molecules within the RBC that help prevent drops or increases from happening.
Red blood cells are broken down and hemoglobin is released. The globin part of the hemoglobin is broken down into amino acid components, which in turn are recycled by the body. The iron is recovered and returned to the bone marrow to be reused. The heme portion of the molecule experiences a chemical change and then gets excreted as bile pigment (bilirubin) by the liver. Heme portion after being broken down contributes to the color of feces and your skin color changing after being bruised.
White blood cells are different from red cells in the fact that they are usually larger in size 10-14 micrometers in diameter. White blood cells do not contain hemoglobin which in turn makes them translucent. Many times in diagrams or pictures white blood cells are represented in a blue color, mainly because blue is the color of the stain used to see the cells. White blood cells also have nucleii, that are some what segmented and are surrounded by electrons inside the membrane.
White blood cells (leukocytes) are also known as "WBC's". White blood cells are made in the bone marrow but they also divide in the blood and lymphatic systems. They are commonly amoeboid (cells that move or feed by means of temporary projections, called pseudopods, meaning "false feet"), and escape the circulatory system through the capillary beds. The different types of WBC's are Basophils, Eosinophils, Neutrophils, Monocytes, B- and T-cell lymphocytes. Basophils, Eosinophils, and Neutrophils are all granular leukocytes. Lymphocytes and Monocytes are agranular leukocytes. Basophils store and synthesize histamine which is important in allergic reactions. They enter the tissues and become "mast cells" which help blood flow to injured tissues by the release of histamine. Eosinophils are chemotoxic and kill parasites. Neutrophils are the first to act when there is an infection and are also the most abundant white blood cells. Neutrophils fight bacteria and viruses by phagocytosis which mean they engulf pathogens that may cause infection. The life span of a of Neutrophil is only about 12-48 hours. Monocytes are the biggest of the white blood cells and are responsible for rallying the cells to defend the body. Monocytes carry out phagocytosis and are also called macrophages. Lymphocytes help with our immune response. There are two Lymphocytes: the B- and T- cell. B-Lymphocytes produce antibodies that find and mark pathogens for destruction. T-Lymphocytes kill anything that they deem abnormal to the body.
WBCs are classified by phenotype which can be identified by looking at the WBCs under a microscope. The Granular phenotype are able to stain blue. The Agranular phenotype are able to stain red. Neutrophils make up 50-70% of Granular cells Eosinophils make up 2-4%, and Basophils 0-1%. Monocytes make up 2-8% of Agranular cells. B and T Lymphocytes make up 20-30%. As you can see, there is a great deal of differentiation between WBCs. These special cells help our bodies defend themselves against pathogens. Not only do they help our immune system but they remove toxins, wastes, and abnormal or damaged cells. Thus, we can say that WBCs' main function is being Phagocytic which means to engulf or swallow cells.
A 250 ml bag of newly collected platelets.
Platelets, also called thrombocytes, are membrane-bound cell fragments. Platelets have no nucleus, they are between one and two micrometers in diameter, and are about 1/10th to 1/20th as abundant as white blood cells. Less than 1% of whole blood consists of platelets. They result from fragmentation of large cells called Megakaryocytes - which are cells derived from stem cells in the bone marrow. Platelets are produced at a rate of 200 billion per day. Their production is regulated by the hormone called Thrombopoietin. The circulating life of a platelet is 8–10 days. The sticky surface of the platelets allow them to accumulate at the site of broken blood vessels to form a clot. This aids in the process of hemostasis ("blood stopping"). Platelets secrete factors that increase local platelet aggregation (e.g., Thromboxane A), enhance vasoconstriction (e.g., Serotonin), and promote blood coagulation (e.g., Thromboplastin).
Hemostasis is the natural process of stopping blood flow or loss of blood following an injury. (hemo = blood; stasis = standing). It has three stages: (1) vascular spasm, vasoconstriction, or intense contraction of blood vessels, (2) formation of a platelet plug and (3) blood clotting or coagulation. Once the flow of blood has been stopped, tissue repair can begin.
In a normal individual, immediately after a blood vessel has been cut and endothelial cells are damaged, vasoconstriction occurs, thus slowing blood flow to the area. Smooth muscle in the vessel wall goes through spasms or intense contractions that constrict the vessel. If the vessels are small, spasms compress the inner walls together and may be able to stop the bleeding completely. If the vessels are medium to large-sized, the spasms slow down immediate outflow of blood, lessening the damage but still preparing the vessel for the later steps of hemostasis. These vascular spasms usually last for about 30 minutes, long enough for the next two stages of hemostasis to take place.
Within 20 seconds of an injury, coagulation is initiated. Contrary to popular belief, clotting of a cut on the skin is not initiated by air or drying out, but by platelets adhering to and activated by collagen in the blood vessels endothelium. The activated platelets then release the contents of their granules, which contain a variety of substances that stimulate further platelet activation and enhance the hemostatic process.
When the lining of a blood vessel breaks and endothelial cells are damaged, revealing collagen proteins in the vessel wall, platelets swell, grow spiky extensions, and start clumping together. They start to stick to each other and the walls of the vessel. This continues as more platelets congregate and undergo these same transformations. This process results in a platelet plug that seals the injured area. If the injury is small, a platelet plug may be able to form and close it within several seconds. If the damage is more serious, the next step of blood clotting will take place. Platelets contain secretory granules. When they stick to the proteins in the vessel walls, they degranulate, thus releasing their products, which include ADP (adenosine diphosphate), serotonin, and thromboxane A2.
If the platelet plug is not enough to stop the bleeding, the third stage of hemostasis begins: the formation of a blood clot. First, blood changes from a liquid to a gel. At least 12 substances called clotting factors take part in a series of chemical reactions that eventually create a mesh of protein fibers within the blood. Each of the clotting factors has a very specific function. We will discuss just three of the substances here: prothrombin, thrombin, and fibrin. Prothrombin and fibrinogen are proteins that are produced and deposited in the blood by the liver.
Prothrombin: When blood vessels are damaged, vessels and nearby platelets are stimulated to release a substance called prothrombin activator, which in turn activates the conversion of prothrombin, a plasma protein, into an enzyme called thrombin. This reaction requires calcium ions.
Thrombin: Thrombin facilitates the conversion of a soluble plasma protein called fibrinogen into long insoluble fibers or threads of the protein fibrin.
Fibrin: Fibrinogen is cleaved by thrombin to form its active form, "fibrin." Fibrin threads wind around the platelet plug at the damaged area of the blood vessel, forming an interlocking network of fibers and a framework for the clot. This net of fibers traps and helps hold platelets, blood cells and other molecules tight to the site of injury, functioning as the initial clot. This temporary fibrin clot can form in less than a minute, and usually does a good job of reducing the blood flow. Next, platelets in the clot begin to shrink, tightening the clot and drawing together the vessel walls. Usually, this whole process of clot formation and tightening takes less than a half hour.
The use of adsorbent chemicals, such as zeolites, and other hemostatic agents, are also being explored for use in sealing severe injuries quickly.
The ABO blood group is represented by substances on the surface of red blood cells (RBCs). These substances are important because they contain specific sequences of amino acid and carbohydrates which are antigenic. As well as being on the surface of RBCs, some of these antigens are also present on the cells of other tissues. A complete blood type describes the set of 29 substances on the surface of RBCs, and an individual's blood type is one of the many possible combinations of blood group antigens. Usually only the ABO blood group system and the presence or absence of the Rhesus D antigen (also known as the Rhesus factor or RH factor) are determined and used to describe the blood type. Over 400 different blood group antigens have been found, many of these being very rare. If an individual is exposed to a blood group antigen that is not recognized as self, the individual can become sensitized to that antigen; the immune system makes specific antibodies which binds specifically to a particular blood group antigen and an immunological memory against that particular antigen is formed. These antibodies can bind to antigens on the surface of transfused red blood cells (or other tissue cells) often leading to destruction of the cells by recruitment of other components of the immune system. Knowledge of a individual's blood type is important to identify appropriate blood for transfusion or tissue for organ transplantation.
Several different RBC surface antigens stemming from one allele (or very closely linked genes) are collectively labeled as a blood group system (or blood group). The two most important blood group systems were discovered during early experiments with blood transfusion, the ABO group in 1901 and the Rhesus group in 1937 . These two blood groups are reflected in the common nomenclature A positive, O negative, etc. with letters referring to the ABO group and positive/negative to the presence/absence of the RhD antigen of the Rhesus group. Development of the Coombs test in 1945 and the advent of transfusion medicine led to discovery of more blood groups.
Blood group AB individuals have both A and B antigens on the surface of their RBCs, and their blood serum does not contain any antibodies against either A or B antigen. Therefore, a individual with type AB blood can receive blood from any group (with AB being preferable), but can only donate blood to another group AB individual. AB blood is also known as "universal receiver".
Blood group A individuals have the A antigen on the surface of their RBCs, and blood serum containing IgM antibodies against the B antigen. Therefore, a group A individual can only receive blood from individuals of groups A or O (with A being preferable), and can donate blood to individuals of groups A or AB.
Blood group B individuals have the B antigen on their surface of their RBCs, and blood serum containing IgM antibodies against the A antigen. Therefore, a group B individual can only receive blood from individuals of groups B or O (with B being preferable), and can donate blood to individuals of groups B or AB.
Blood group O individuals do not have either A or B antigens on the surface of their RBCs, but their blood serum contains IgM antibodies against both A and B antigens. Therefore, a group O individual can only receive blood from a group O individual, but they can donate blood to individuals of any ABO blood group (ie A, B, O or AB). O blood is also known as "universal donor".
Blood types are inherited and represent contributions from both parents. The ABO blood type is controlled by a single gene with three alleles: i, IA, and IB. The gene encodes an enzyme that modifies the carbohydrate content of the red blood cell antigens.
IA and IB are dominant over i, so ii people have type O, IAIA or IAi have A, and IBIB or IBi have type B. IAIB people have both phenotypes because A and B are codominant, which means that type A and B parents can have an AB child. Thus, it is extremely unlikely for a type AB parent to have a type O child (it is not, however, direct proof of illegitimacy): the cis-AB phenotype has a single enzyme that creates both A and B antigens. The resulting red blood cells do not usually express A or B antigen at the same level that would be expected on common group A or B red blood cells, which can help solve the problem of an apparently genetically impossible blood group.
Many people have the Rh Factor on the red blood cell. Rh carriers do not have the antibodies for the Rh Factor, but can make them if exposed to Rh. Most commonly Rh is seen when anti-Rh antibodies cross from the mothers placenta into the child before birth. The Rh Factor enters the child destroying the child's red blood cells. This is called Hemolytic Disease.
Blood transfusions between donor and recipient of incompatible blood types can cause severe acute immunological reactions, hemolysis (RBCT destruction), renal failure, shock, and sometimes death. Antibodies can be highly active and can attack RBCs and bind components of the complement system to cause massive hemolysis of the transfused blood.
When considering a plasma transfusion, keep in mind that plasma carries antibodies and no antigens. For example you can't give type O plasma to a type A, B or AB, because a person with type O blood has A and B antibodies and the recipient would have an immune response. On the other hand an AB donor could give plasma to anyone, since they have no antibodies.
The table to the right is for plasma transfusions, and it's just the opposite for RBC transfusions. It doesn't take the Rh factor into effect, though, because most people don't have antibodies for the Rhesus factor (it only happens upon exposure).
Often a pregnant woman carries a fetus with a different blood type to herself, and sometimes the mother forms antibodies against the red blood cells of the fetus, leading to low fetal blood counts, a condition known as hemolytic disease of the newborn.
Hemolytic disease of the newborn, (also known as HDN) is an alloimmune condition that develops in a fetus when the IgG antibodies produced by the mother and passing through the placenta include ones which attack the red blood cells in the fetal circulation. The red cells are broken down and the fetus can develop reticulocytosis and anemia. The fetal disease ranges from mild to very severe and fetal death from heart failure - hydrops fetalis - can occur. When the disease is moderate or severe many erythroblasts are present in the fetal blood and so these forms of the disease can be called erythroblastosis fetalis.
Before birth, options for treatment include intrauterine transfusion or early induction of labor when pulmonary maturity has been attained, fetal distress is present, or 35 to 37 weeks of gestation have passed. The mother may also undergo plasma exchange to reduce the circulating levels of antibody by as much as 75%.
After birth, treatment depends on the severity of the condition, but could include temperature stabilization and monitoring, phototherapy, transfusion with compatible packed red blood, exchange transfusion with a blood type compatible with both the infant and the mother, sodium bicarbonate for correction of acidosis and/or assisted ventilation.
Rh negative mothers who have had a pregnancy with or are pregnant with a Rh positive infant, are given Rh immune globulin (RhIG) also known as Rhogam, during pregnancy and after delivery to prevent sensitization to the D antigen. It works by binding any fetal red cells with the D antigen before the mother is able to produce an immune response and form anti-D IgG. A drawback to pre-partum administration of RhIG is that it causes a positive antibody screen when the mother is tested which is indistinguishable from immune reasons for antibody production.
The most common inherited bleeding disorder, von Willebrand disease affects both men and women equally. Von Willebrand disease is similar to hemophilia in that it involves a deficiency in the ability of blood to clot properly. Those affect by von Willebrand disease will have one or more of the following- low levels of von Willebrand factor (a protein that helps the blood to clot), and/or their von Willebrand factor doesn't work properly. While it is mostly an inherited disease (with factors contributed by both parents), von Willebrand disease may be an aquired syndrome in rare cases.
There are three types of von Willebrand disease: Type 1, which is the mildest and most common form of the disease; Type 2, which has four subtypes (2A, 2B, 2M, and 2N) and ranges from mild to moderate in severity; and finally, Type 3, which is very rare and is the most severe form.
In type 1 von Willebrand disease, there is a low level of von Willebrand factor. The level of factor VIII may also be lower than normal. This is the mildest and most common form of the disease. About 3 out of 4 people diagnosed with von Willebrand disease have type 1.
In type 2 von Willebrand disease, a defect in von Willebrand factor causes it to not work properly. Type 2 is divided into 2A, 2B, 2M, and 2N. Each is treated differently, so knowing the exact type is important.
People with type 1 and type 2 von Willebrand disease may have the following mild-to-moderate bleeding symptoms: easy bruising, nosebleeds, bleeding from the gums after a dental procedure, heavy menstrual bleeding in women, blood in their stools or urine (from bleeding in the intestines, stomach, kidneys or bladder), excessive bleeding after a cut or other accident or surgery.
People with type 3 von Willebrand disease usually have no von Willebrand factor and very low factor VIII. Type 3 is severe and very rare.
Symptoms of type 3 von Willebrand disease might include any of the symptoms of types 1 and 2, and also include severe bleeding episodes for no reason, which can be life-threatening if not treated immediately. Bleeding into soft tissues or joints (hemarthrosis), causing severe pain and swelling, is another symptom.
Many people with von Willebrand disease do not require treatment to manage the disease. However, if treatment is necessary, it may include a range of different interventions depending on the severity. These involve medicine to increase the level of von Willebrand factor in the blood (DDAVP), medicine to prevent the breakdown of clots (called antifibrinolytic drugs), medicine to control heavy menstrual bleeding in women (often birth control pills), or injection of clotting factor concentrates (containing von Willebrand factor and factor VIII).
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), also called consumptive coagulopathy, is a pathological process in the body where the blood starts to coagulate throughout the whole body. This depletes the body of its platelets and coagulation factors, and there is a paradoxically increased risk of hemorrhage. It occurs in critically ill patients, especially those with Gram-negative sepsis (particularly meningococcal sepsis) and acute promyelocytic leukemia.
Hemophilia is a disease where there is low or no blood protein, causing an inability to produce blood clots. There are two types of Hemophilia: Type A, which is a deficiency in factor VIII and Type B, (Christmas disease) a deficiency on factor IX. Because people with hemophilia have an impaired ability to make blood clots, even a little cut may take hours or days to fully clot, and a small bump or jar to the body could cause severe bruising that doesn't heal for months. Internal muscle bleeds are the most common symptom though, causing swelling and varying degrees of pain.
Hemophilia is passed down from mothers to their sons. Hemophilia is sometimes known as the "Royal Disease". This is because Queen Victoria, Queen of England (1837-1901), was a carrier of hemophilia. The hemophilia disease was passed down to her son Leopold who ended up dying at age 31. Queen Victoria also had two daughters who were carriers. These daughters passed hemophilia into the Spanish, German, and Russian royal families. One of the most famous stories is that of the Russian royal family. Alexandra, granddaughter to Queen Victoria, married Nicholas (Tsar of Russia in the 1900s). Alexandra was a carrier of the disease and passed the disease to their first son, Tsarevich Alexi, who was heir to the throne of Russia. The family tried to keep their son's secret from the people, but Alexi suffered with serious bruises and extreme pain. The family found help from a monk named Rasputin. He kept their secret and gained a great deal of power over the family, making them think he was their only hope. During this time of great turmoil in Russia, Nicholas and Alexandra spent most of their attentions on their son, and not on the people. It wasn't long before the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 began.
The opposite of Hemophilia, Factor V Leiden is the name given to a variant of human factor V that causes a hypercoagulability disorder. In this disorder the Leiden variant of factor V, cannot be inactivated by activated protein C. Factor V Leiden is the most common hereditary hypercoagulability disorder amongst Eurasians. It is named after the city Leiden (The Netherlands), where it was first identified in 1994 by Prof R. Bertina et al. Those that have it are at a slightly higher risk of developing blood clots than those without. Those that test positive for factor V should avoid (oral contraceptives, obesity, smoking, and high blood pressure.)
The three main classes of anemia include excessive blood loss (acutely such as a hemorrhage or chronically through low-volume loss), excessive blood cell destruction (hemolysis) or deficient red blood cell production (ineffective hematopoiesis). In menstruating women, dietary iron deficiency is a common cause of deficient red blood cell production.
Image of RBC's with Sickle Cell mutations.
Sickle-cell disease is a general term for a group of genetic disorders caused by sickle hemoglobin (Hgb S or Hb S). In many forms of the disease, the red blood cells change shape upon deoxygenation because of polymerization of the abnormal sickle hemoglobin. This process damages the red blood cell membrane, and can cause the cells to become stuck in blood vessels. This deprives the downstream tissues of oxygen and causes ischemia and infarction. The disease is chronic and lifelong. Individuals are most often well, but their lives are punctuated by periodic painful attacks. In addition to periodic pain, there may be damage of internal organs, and/or stroke. Lifespan is often shortened with sufferers living to an average of 40 years. It is common in people from parts of the world where malaria is or was common, especially in sub-Saharan Africa or in descendants of those peoples.
Sickle-cell disease is inherited in the autosomal recessive pattern, depicted above. The allele responsible for sickle cell anemia is autosomal recessive. A person who receives the defective gene from both father and mother develops the disease; a person who receives one defective and one healthy allele remains healthy, but can pass on the disease and is known as a carrier. If two parents who are carriers have a child, there is a 1-in-4 chance of their child developing the illness and a 1-in-2 chance of their child just being a carrier.
In primary polycythemia, there may be 8 to 9 million and occasionally 11 million erythrocytes per cubic millimeter of blood (a normal range for adults is 4-5 million), and the hematocrit may be as high as 70 to 80%. In addition, the total blood volume can increase to as much as twice as normal. The entire vascular system can become markedly engorged with blood, and circulation times for blood throughout the body can increase up to twice the normal value. The increased numbers of erythrocytes can increase of the viscosity of the blood to as much as five times normal. Capillaries can become plugged by the very viscous blood, and the flow of blood through the vessels tends to be extremely sluggish.
As a consequence of the above, people with untreated Polycythemia are at a risk of various thrombotic events (deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism), heart attack and stroke, and have a substantial risk of Budd-Chiari syndrome (hepatic vein thrombosis). The condition is considered chronic; no cure exists. Symptomatic treatment (see below) can normalize the blood count and most patients can live a normal life for years.
Secondary polycythemia is caused by either appropriate or inappropriate increases in the production of erythropoietin that result in an increased production of erythrocytes. In secondary polycythemia, there may be 6 to 8 million and occasionally 9 million erythrocytes per cubic millimeter of blood. A type of secondary polycythemia in which the production of erythropoietin increases appropriately is called physiologic polycythemia. Physiologic polycythemia occurs in individuals living at high altitudes (4275 to 5200 meters), where oxygen availability is less than at sea level. Many athletes train at higher altitudes to take advantage of this effect — a legal form of blood doping. Actual polychthemia sufferers have been known to use their condition as an athletic advantage for greater stamina.
Other causes of secondary polycythemia include smoking, renal or liver tumors, or heart or lung diseases that result in hypoxia. Endocrine abnormalities, prominently including pheochromocytoma and adrenal adenoma with Cushing's Syndrome, are also secondary causes. Athletes and bodybuilders who abuse anabolic steroids or erythropoietin may develop secondary polycythemia.
Relative polycythemia is an apparent rise of the erythrocyte level in the blood; however, the underlying cause is reduced blood plasma. Relative polycythemia is often caused by fluid loss i.e. burns, dehydration and stress polycythemia.
Leukemia is a cancer of the blood or bone marrow characterized by an abnormal proliferation of blood cells, usually white blood cells (leukocytes). It is part of the broad group of diseases called hematological neoplasms. Damage to the bone marrow, by way of displacing the normal marrow cells with increasing numbers of malignant cells, results in a lack of blood platelets, which are important in the blood clotting process. This means people with leukemia may become bruised, bleed excessively, or develop pin-prick bleeds (petechiae).
White blood cells, which are involved in fighting pathogens, may be suppressed or dysfunctional, putting the patient at the risk of developing infections.
The red blood cell deficiency leads to anaemia, which may cause dyspnea. All symptoms may also be attributable to other diseases; for diagnosis, blood tests and a bone marrow biopsy are required.
Anemia: a deficiency of red blood cells or hemoglobin caused by lack of iron, folic acid or vitamin B12 in the diet, or by red blood cell destruction; associated with decreased ability of blood to carry oxygen
Basophil: this white blood cell enters damaged tissues and releases a histamine and other chemicals that promote inflammation in the body to fight pathogens
Blood: the means and transport system of the body used in carrying elements - nutrition, waste, heat - from one location in the body to another by way of blood vessels
Eosinophil: white blood cell that is involved in the immune response against parasitic worms (such as tapeworms and roundworms). Named because it stains with the red dye "eosin."
Factor V Leiden most common genetic hypercoagulability disorder.
Formed Elements: the red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets found in blood
Hemoglobin (Hb): iron-containing pigment in red blood cells that combines with and transports oxygen
Hemophilia: genetic disorder in which the affected individual may have uncontrollable bleeding; blood does not clot
Hemostasis: the process by which blood flow is stopped; also describes the clotting of blood
Lymphocytes: cells of the Lymphatic system, provide defense against specific pathogen or toxins
Monocytes: The largest white blood cell. Becomes a macrophage when activated. Engulfs pathogens and debris through phagocytosis, also involved in presenting antigens to B and T lymphocytes.
Neutrophils: the most common white blood cell; they are phagocytic and engulf pathogens or debris in the tissues; also release cytotoxic enzymes and chemicals to kill pathogens
NK-Cells: also known as "Natural Killer Cells", these T lymphocytes are responsible for surveillance and detection of abnormal tissue cells; important in preventing cancer
Phagocytosis: process by which amoeboid-like cells engulf and ingest, and thereby destroy, foreign matter or material
T-Cell: cells that mediate by coordinating the immune system and enter the peripheral tissues. They can attack foreign cells directly and control the activities of other lymphocytes
A) If they have a second child Ginger needs to have RhoGam shot
B) There is no risk to a second child, unless it has a negative blood type
C) If the child needs a blood transfusion Fred could provide it safely, but not Ginger
C) This low of a hematocrit could indicate liver damage or leukemia
The heart is the life-giving, ever-beating muscle in your chest. From inside the womb until death, the thump goes on. The heart for the average human will contract about 3 billion times; never resting, never stopping to take a break except for a fraction of a second between beats. At 80 years of age, a person's heart will continue to beat an average of 100,000 times a day. Many believe that the heart is the first organ to become functional. Within weeks of conception the heart starts its mission of supplying the body with nutrients even though the embryo is no bigger than a capital letter on this page.
The primary function of the heart is to pump blood through the arteries, capillaries, and veins. There are an estimated 60,000 miles of vessels throughout an adult body. Blood transports oxygen, nutrients, disease causing viruses, bacteria, hormones and has other important functions as well. The heart is the pump that keeps blood circulating properly.
Americans today have many options to take care of their heart and circulatory system. Expanding medical technology has made it much easier to do so. This chapter is dedicated to the heart and its many parts.
The heart is a hollow, muscular organ about the size of a fist. It is responsible for pumping blood through the blood vessels by repeated, rhythmic contractions. The heart is composed of cardiac muscle, an involuntary muscle tissue that is found only within this organ. The term "cardiac" (as in cardiology) means "related to the heart” and comes from the Greek word kardia, for "heart." It has a four-chambered, double pump and is located in the thoracic cavity between the lungs.
The cardiac muscle is self-exciting, meaning it has its own conduction system. This is in contrast with skeletal muscle, which requires either conscious or reflex nervous stimuli. The heart's rhythmic contractions occur spontaneously, although the frequency or heart rate can be changed by nervous or hormonal influence such as exercise or the perception of danger.
The endocardium is the innermost lining of the heart which consists of the endothelial cells forming a smooth membrane in places, and a pocked and tribeculated surface in others (mainly the ventricles, or lower pumping chambers).
The myocardium is the muscular tissue of the heart. The myocardium is composed of specialized cardiac muscle cells with an ability not possessed by muscle tissue elsewhere in the body. Cardiac muscle, like other muscles, can contract, but it can also conduct electricity, like nerves.
The blood to the myocardium is supplied by the coronary arteries. If these arteries are occluded by atherosclerosis and/or thrombosis, this can lead to angina pectoris or myocardial infarction due to ischemia (lack of oxygen). Failure of the heart to contract properly (for various reasons) is termed heart failure, generally leading to fluid retention, edema, pulmonary edema, renal insufficiency, hepatomegaly, a shortened life expectancy and decreased quality of life.
The outer most layer next to the myocardium is known as the Epicardium. This is the outer layer after endocardium and myocardium that consists of a thin layer of connective tissue and fat.
The pericardium is the thick, membranous sac that surrounds the heart. It protects and lubricates the heart. There are two layers to the pericardium: the fibrous pericardium and the serous pericardium. The serous pericardium is divided into two layers; in between these two layers there is a space called the pericardial cavity.
The heart has four chambers, two atria and two ventricles. The atria are smaller with thin walls, while the ventricles are larger and much stronger.
There are two atria on either side of the heart. On the right side is the atrium that contains blood which is poor in oxygen. The left atrium contains blood which has been oxygenated and is ready to be sent to the body. The right atrium receives de-oxygenated blood from the superior vena cava and inferior vena cava. The left atrium receives oxygenated blood from the left and right pulmonary veins. Atria facilitate circulation primarily by allowing uninterrupted venous flow to the heart, preventing the inertia of interrupted venous flow that would otherwise occur at each ventricular systole.
The ventricle is a heart chamber which collects blood from an atrium and pumps it out of the heart. There are two ventricles: the right ventricle pumps blood into the pulmonary artery which takes the blood through the pulmonary circuit, and the left ventricle pumps blood into the aorta for systemic circulation to the rest of the body.
Ventricles have thicker walls than the atria, and thus can create the higher blood pressure. Comparing the left and right ventricle, the left ventricle has thicker walls because it needs to pump blood to the whole body. This leads to the common misconception that the heart lies on the left side of the body.
The inter ventricular septum (ventricular septum, or during development septum inferius) is the thick wall separating the lower chambers (the ventricles) of the heart from one another. The ventricular septum is directed backward and to the right, and is curved toward the right ventricle. The greater portion of it is thick and muscular and constitutes the muscular ventricular septum. Its upper and posterior part, which separates the aortic vestibule from the lower part of the right atrium and upper part of the right ventricle, is thin and fibrous, and is termed the membranous ventricular septum.
The two atrioventricular (AV) valves are one-way valves that ensure that blood flows from the atria to the ventricles, and not the other way. The two semilunar (SL) valves are present in the arteries leaving the heart; they prevent blood from flowing back into the ventricles. The sound heard in a heart beat is the heart valves shutting. The right AV valve is also called the tricuspid valve because it has three flaps. It is located between the right atrium and the right ventricle. The tricuspid valve allows blood to flow from the right atrium into the right ventricle when the heart is relaxed during diastole. When the heart begins to contract, the heart enters a phase called systole, and the atrium pushes blood into the ventricle. Then, the ventricle begins to contract and blood pressure inside the heart rises. When the ventricular pressure exceeds the pressure in the atrium, the tricuspid valve snaps shut. The left AV valve is also called the bicuspid valve because it has two flaps. It is also known as the mitral valve due to the resemblance to a bishop's mitre (liturgical headdress). This valve prevents blood in the left ventricle from flowing into the left atrium. As it is on the left side of the heart, it must withstand a great deal of strain and pressure; this is why it is made of only two cusps, as a simpler mechanism entails a reduced risk of malfunction. There are two remaining valves called the Semilunar Valves. They have flaps that resemble half moons. The pulmonary semilunar valve lies between the right ventricle and the pulmonary trunk. The aortic semilunar valve is located between the left ventricle and the aorta.
The chordae tendinae are attached to papillary muscles that cause tension to better hold the valve. Together, the papillary muscles and the chordae tendinae are known as the subvalvular apparatus. The function of the subvalvular apparatus is to keep the valves from prolapsing into the atria when they close. The subvalvular apparatus have no effect on the opening and closing of the valves. This is caused entirely by the pressure gradient across the valve.
The most common congenital abnormality of the heart is the bicuspid aortic valve. In this condition, instead of three cusps, the aortic valve has two cusps. This condition is often undiagnosed until the person develops calcific aortic stenosis. Aortic stenosis occurs in this condition usually in patients in their 40s or 50s, an average of 10 years earlier than in people with normal aortic valves. Another common complication of rheumatic fever is thickening and stenosis (partial blocking) of the mitral valve. For patients who have had rheumatic fever dentists are advised to prophylactically administer antibiotics prior to dental work to prevent bacterial endocarditis that occurs when bacteria from the teeth enter the circulation and attach to damaged heart valves.
The aortic valve is a semilunar valve, but it´s called bicuspid because of it´s regular three "cusps" or "semilunar" valves, and is not to be confused with the left atrioventricular valve, which is more commonly called the mitral valve, and is one of the two cuspidal valves.
While it is convenient to describe the flow of the blood through the right side of the heart and then through the left side, it is important to realize that both atria contract at the same time and that both ventricles contract at the same time. The heart works as two pumps, one on the right and one on the left that works simultaneously. The right pump pumps the blood to the lungs or the pulmonary circulation at the same time that the left pump pumps blood to the rest of the body or the systemic circulation.
Venous blood from systemic circulation (deoxygenated) enters the right atrium through the superior and inferior vena cava. The right atrium contracts and forces the blood through the tricuspid valve (right atrioventricular valve) and into the right ventricles. The right ventricles contract and force the blood through the pulmonary semilunar valve into the pulmonary trunk and out the pulmonary artery. This takes the blood to the lungs where the blood releases carbon dioxide and receives a new supply of oxygen. The new blood is carried in the pulmonary veins that take it to the left atrium. The left atrium then contracts and forces blood through the left atrioventricular, bicuspid, or mitral, valve into the left ventricle. The left ventricle contracts forcing blood through the aortic semilunar valve into the ascending aorta. It then branches to arteries carrying oxygen rich blood to all parts of the body.
From the arterioles, the blood then enters one or more capillaries. The walls of capillaries are so thin and fragile that blood cells can only pass in single file. Inside the capillaries, exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide takes place. Red blood cells inside the capillary releases their oxygen which passes through the wall and into the surrounding tissue. The tissue then releases waste, such as carbon dioxide, which then passes through the wall and into the red blood cells.
The circulatory system is extremely important in sustaining life. It’s proper functioning is responsible for the delivery of oxygen and nutrients to all cells, as well as the removal of carbon dioxide, waste products, maintenance of optimum pH, and the mobility of the elements, proteins and cells, of the immune system. In developed countries, the two leading causes of death, myocardial infarction and stroke are each direct results of an arterial system that has been slowly and progressively compromised by years of deterioration.
Arteries are muscular blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart, oxygenated and deoxygenated blood . The pulmonary arteries will carry deoxygenated blood to the lungs and the sytemic arteries will carry oxygenated blood to the rest of the body. Arteries have a thick wall that consists of three layers. The inside layer is called the endothelium, the middle layer is mostly smooth muscle and the outside layer is connective tissue. The artery walls are thick so that when blood enters under pressure the walls can expand.
An arteriole is a small artery that extends and leads to capillaries. Arterioles have thick smooth muscular walls. These smooth muscles are able to contract (causing vessel constriction) and relax (causing vessel dilation). This contracting and relaxing affects blood pressure; the higher number of vessels dilated, the lower blood pressure will be. Arterioles are just visible to the naked eye.
Capillaries are the smallest of a body’s vessels; they connect arteries and veins, and most closely interact with tissues. They are very prevalent in the body; total surface area is about 6,300 square meters. Because of this, no cell is very far from a capillary, no more than 50 micrometers away.
The walls of capillaries are composed of a single layer of cells, the endothelium, which is the inner lining of all the vessels. This layer is so thin that molecules such as oxygen, water and lipids can pass through them by diffusion and enter the tissues. Waste products such as carbon dioxide and urea can diffuse back into the blood to be carried away for removal from the body.
The "capillary bed" is the network of capillaries present throughout the body. These beds are able to be “opened” and “closed” at any given time, according to need. This process is called autoregulation and capillary beds usually carry no more than 25% of the amount of blood it could hold at any time. The more metabolically active the cells, the more capillaries it will require to supply nutrients.
Veins carry blood to the heart. The pulmonary veins will carry oxygenated blood to the heart awhile the systemic veins will carry deoxygenated to the heart. Most of the blood volume is found in the venous system; about 70% at any given time. The veins outer walls have the same three layers as the arteries, differing only because there is a lack of smooth muscle in the inner layer and less connective tissue on the outer layer. Veins have low blood pressure compared to arteries and need the help of skeletal muscles to bring blood back to the heart. Most veins have one-way valves called venous valves to prevent backflow caused by gravity. They also have a thick collagen outer layer, which helps maintain blood pressure and stop blood pooling. If a person is standing still for long periods or is bedridden, blood can accumulate in veins and can cause varicose veins. The hollow internal cavity in which the blood flows is called the lumen. A muscular layer allows veins to contract, which puts more blood into circulation. Veins are used medically as points of access to the blood stream, permitting the withdrawal of blood specimens (venipuncture) for testing purposes, and enabling the infusion of fluid, electrolytes, nutrition, and medications (intravenous delivery).
A venule is a small vein that allows deoxygenated blood to return from the capillary beds to the larger blood veins, except in the pulmonary circuit where the blood is oxygenated. Venules have three layers; they have the same makeup as arteries with less smooth muscle, making them thinner.
Human circulatory system. Arteries are shown in red, veins blue.
The double circulatory system of blood flow refers to the separate systems of pulmonary circulation and the systemic circulation in amphibians, birds and mammals (including humans.) In contrast, fishes have a single circulation system.
For instance, the adult human heart consists of two separated pumps, the right side with the right atrium and ventricle (which pumps deoxygenated blood into the pulmonary circulation), and the left side with the left atrium and ventricle (which pumps oxygenated blood into the systemic circulation). Blood in one circuit has to go through the heart to enter the other circuit.
Blood circulates through the body two to three times every minute. In one day, the blood travels a total of 19,000 km (12,000 miles), or four times the distance across the U.S. from coast to coast.
In the pulmonary circuit, blood is pumped to the lungs from the right ventricle of the heart. It is carried to the lungs via pulmonary arteries. At lungs, oxygen in the alveolae diffuses to the capillaries surrounding the alveolae and carbon dioxide inside the blood diffuses to the alveolae. As a result, blood is oxygenated which is then carried to the heart's left half -to the left atrium via pulmonary veins.
Oxygen rich blood is prepared for the whole organs and tissues of the body. This is important because mitochondria inside the cells should use oxygen to produce energy from the organic compounds.
The systemic circuit supplies oxygenated blood to the organ system. Oxygenated blood from the lungs is returned to the left atrium, then the ventricle contracts and pumps blood into the aorta. Systemic arteries split from the aorta and direct blood into the capillaries. Cells consume the oxygen and nutrients and add carbon dioxide, wastes, enzymes and hormones. The veins drain the deoxygenated blood from the capillaries and return the blood to the right atrium.
The aorta is the largest of the arteries in the systemic circuit. The blood is pumped from the left ventricle into the aorta and from there it branches to all parts of the body.
The aorta is an elastic artery, and as such is able to distend. When the left ventricle contracts to force blood into the aorta, the aorta expands. This stretching gives the potential energy that will help maintain blood pressure during diastole, as during this time the aorta contracts passively.
The superior vena cava (SVC) is a short vein that carries de-oxygenated blood from the upper half of the body to the heart's right atrium. It is formed by the left and right brachiocephalic veins (also referred to as the innominate veins) which receive blood from the upper limbs and the head and neck. The azygous vein (which receives blood from the ribcage) joins it just before it enters the right atrium.
The inferior vena cava (or IVC) is a large vein that carries de-oxygenated blood from the lower half of the body into the heart. It is formed by the left and right common iliac veins and transports blood to the right atrium of the heart. It is posterior to the abdominal cavity, and runs along side of the vertebral column on its right side.
The coronary circulation consists of the blood vessels that supply blood to, and remove blood from, the heart muscle itself. Although blood fills the chambers of the heart, the muscle tissue of the heart, or myocardium, is so thick that it requires coronary blood vessels to deliver blood deep into the myocardium. The vessels that supply blood high in oxygen to the myocardium are known as coronary arteries. The vessels that remove the deoxygenated blood from the heart muscle are known as cardiac veins.
The coronary arteries that run on the surface of the heart are called epicardial coronary arteries. These arteries, when healthy, are capable of auto regulation to maintain coronary blood flow at levels appropriate to the needs of the heart muscle. These relatively narrow vessels are commonly affected by atherosclerosis and can become blocked, causing angina or a heart attack.
The coronary arteries are classified as "end circulation", since they represent the only source of blood supply to the myocardium: there is very little redundant blood supply, which is why blockage of these vessels can be so critical.
In general there are two main coronary arteries, the left and right.
Both of these arteries originate from the beginning (root) of the aorta, immediately above the aortic valve. As discussed below, the left coronary artery originates from the left aortic sinus, while the right coronary artery originates from the right aortic sinus.
Four percent of people have a third, the posterior coronary artery. In rare cases, a patient will have one coronary artery that runs around the root of the aorta.
In human anatomy, the hepatic veins are the blood vessels that drain de-oxygenated blood from the liver and blood cleaned by the liver (from the stomach, pancreas, small intestine and colon) into the inferior vena cava.
They arise from the substance of the liver, more specifically the central vein of the liver lobule. They can be differentiated into two groups, the upper group and lower group.
The upper group of three typically arises from the posterior aspect of the liver and drain the quadrate lobe and left lobe. The lower group rise from the right lobe and caudate lobe, are variable in number, and are typically smaller than those in the upper group. None of the hepatic veins have valves.
Cardiac cycle is the term used to describe the relaxation and contraction that occur, as a heart works to pump blood through the body. Heart rate is a term used to describe the frequency of the cardiac cycle. It is considered one of the four vital signs. Usually it is calculated as the number of contractions (heart beats) of the heart in one minute and expressed as "beats per minute" (bpm). When resting, the adult human heart beats at about 70 bpm (males) and 75 bpm (females), but this rate varies between people. However, the reference range is nominally between 60 bpm (if less termed bradycardia) and 100 bpm (if greater, termed tachycardia). Resting heart rates can be significantly lower in athletes, and significantly higher in the obese. The body can increase the heart rate in response to a wide variety of conditions in order to increase the cardiac output (the amount of blood ejected by the heart per unit time). Exercise, environmental stressors or psychological stress can cause the heart rate to increase above the resting rate. The pulse is the most straightforward way of measuring the heart rate, but it can be deceptive when some strokes do not lead to much cardiac output. In these cases (as happens in some arrhythmias), the heart rate may be considerably higher than the pulse.
Every single 'beat' of the heart involves three major stages: atrial systole, ventricular systole and complete cardiac diastole. Throughout the cardiac cycle, the blood pressure increases and decreases. As ventricles contract the pressure rise, causing the AV valves to slam shut.
The heart in the systole phase.
Systole, or contraction, of the heart is initiated by the electrical cells of the sinoatrial node, which is the heart's natural pacemaker. These cells are activated spontaneously by depolarization of their membranes beyond a certain threshold for excitation. At this point, voltage-gated calcium channels on the cell membrane open and allow calcium ions to pass through, into the main, or interior, of the muscle cell. Some calcium ions bind to receptors on the sarcoplasmic reticulum causing an influx of calcium ions into the sarcoplasm. The calcium ions bind to the troponin, causing a conformation change, breaking the bond between the protein tropomyosin, to which the troponin is attached, and the myosin binding sites. This allows the myosin heads to bind to the myosin binding sites on the actin protein filament and contraction results as the myosin heads draw the actin filaments along, are bound by ATP, causing them to release the actin, and return to their original position, breaking down the ATP into ADP and a phosphate group. The action potential spreads via the passage of sodium ions through the gap junctions that connect the sarcoplasm of adjacent myocardial cells.
The heart in the diastole phase.
Cardiac Diastole is the period of time when the heart relaxes after contraction in preparation for refilling with circulating blood. Ventricular diastole is when the ventricles are relaxing, while atrial diastole is when the atria are relaxing. Together they are known as complete cardiac diastole. It should be noted that even this relaxation is an active, energy-spending process.
During ventricular diastole, the pressure in the (left and right) ventricles drops from the peak that it reaches in systole. When the pressure in the left ventricle drops to below the pressure in the left atrium, the mitral valve opens, and the left ventricle fills with blood that was accumulating in the left atrium. Likewise, when the pressure in the right ventricle drops below that in the right atrium, the tricuspid valve opens and the right ventricle fills with blood that was in the right atrium
The first heart tone, or S1, "Lub" is caused by the closure of the atrioventricular valves, mitral and tricuspid, at the beginning of ventricular contraction, or systole. When the pressure in the ventricles rises above the pressure in the atria, these valves close to prevent regurgitation of blood from the ventricles into the atria.
The second heart tone, or S2 (A2 and P2), "Dub" is caused by the closure of the aortic valve and pulmonic valve at the end of ventricular systole. As the left ventricle empties, its pressure falls below the pressure in the aorta, and the aortic valve closes. Similarly, as the pressure in the right ventricle falls below the pressure in the pulmonary artery, the pulmonic valve closes.
During inspiration, negative intrathoracic pressure causes increased blood return into the right side of the heart. The increased blood volume in the right ventricle causes the pulmonic valve to stay open longer during ventricular systole. This causes an increased delay in the P2 component of S2. During expiration, the positive intrathoracic pressure causes decreased blood return to the right side of the heart. The reduced volume in the right ventricle allows the pulmonic valve to close earlier at the end of ventricular systole, causing P2 to occur earlier, and "closer" to A2. It is physiological to hear the splitting of the second heart tone by younger people and during inspiration. During expiration normally the interval between the two components shortens and the tone becomes merged.
The heart is primarily made up of muscle tissue. A network of nerve fibers coordinates the contraction and relaxation of the cardiac muscle tissue to obtain an efficient, wave-like pumping action of the heart
The heart contains two cardiac pacemakers that spontaneously cause the heart to beat. These can be controlled by the autonomic nervous system and circulating adrenaline. If the cardiac muscles just contracted and relaxed randomly at a natural rhythm the cycle would become disordered and the heart would become unable to carry on its function of being a pump.
Sometimes when the heart undergoes great damage to one part of the cardiac muscle or the person incurs an electric shock, the cardiac cycle can become uncoordinated and chaotic. Some parts of the heart will contract whilst others will relax so that instead of contracting and relaxing as a whole, the heart will flutter abnormally. This is called fibrillation and can be fatal if not treated within 60 seconds.
Schematic representation of the sinoatrial node and the atrioventricular bundle of His. The location of the SA node is shown in blue. The bundle, represented in red, originates near the orifice of the coronary sinus, undergoes slight enlargement to form the AV node. The AV node tapers down into the bundle of HIS, which passes into the ventricular septum and divides into two bundle branches, the left and right bundles. The ultimate distribution cannot be completely shown in this diagram.
The sinoatrial node (abbreviated SA node or SAN, also called the sinus node) is the impulse generating (pacemaker) tissue located in the right atrium of the heart.
Although all of the heart's cells possess the ability to generate the electrical impulses (or action potentials) that trigger cardiac contraction, the sinoatrial node is what normally initiates it, simply because it generates impulses slightly faster than the other areas with pacemaker potential. Because cardiac myocytes, like all nerve cells, have refractory periods following contraction during which additional contractions cannot be triggered, their pacemaker potential is overridden by the sinoatrial node. The SA node emits a new impulse before either the AV or purkinje fibers reach threshold.
The sinoatrial node (SA node) is a group of cells positioned on the wall of the right atrium, near the entrance of the superior vena cava. These cells are modified cardiac myocytes. They possess some contractile filaments, though they do not contract.
Cells in the SA node will naturally discharge (create action potentials) at about 70-80 times/minute. Because the sinoatrial node is responsible for the rest of the heart's electrical activity, it is sometimes called the primary pacemaker.
If the SA node doesn't function, or the impulse generated in the SA node is blocked before it travels down the electrical conduction system, a group of cells further down the heart will become the heart's pacemaker. These cells form the atrioventricular node (AV node), which is an area between the right atrium and ventricle, within the atrial septum. The impulses from the AV node will maintain a slower heart rate (about 40-60 beats per a minute). When there is a pathology in the AV node or purkinje fibers, an ectopic pacemaker can occur in different parts of the heart. The ectopic pacemaker typically discharges faster than the SA node and causes an abnormal sequence of contraction.
The SA node is richly innervated by vagal and sympathetic fibers. This makes the SA node susceptible to autonomic influences. Stimulation of the vagus nerve causes decrease in the SA node rate (thereby causing decrease in the heart rate). Stimulation via sympathetic fibers causes increase in the SA node rate (thereby increasing the heart rate). The sympathetic nerves are distributed to all parts of the heart, especially in ventricular muscles. The parasympathetic nerves mainly control SA and AV nodes, some atrial muscle and ventricular muscle. Parasympathetic stimulation from the vagal nerves decreases the rate of the AV node by causing the release of acetylcholine at vagal endings which in turn increases the K+ permeability of the cardiac muscle fiber. Vagal stimulation can block transmission through AV junction or stop SA node contraction which is called "ventricular escape." When this happens, the purkinje fibers in the AV bundle develops a rhythm of their own.
In the majority of patients, the SA node receives blood from the right coronary artery, meaning that a myocardial infarction occluding it will cause ischemia in the SA node unless there is a sufficiently good anastomosis from the left coronary artery. If not, death of the affected cells will stop the SA node from triggering the heartbeat
The atrioventricular node (abbreviated AV node) is the tissue between the atria and the ventricles of the heart, which conducts the normal electrical impulse from the atria to the ventricles.
The AV node receives two inputs from the atria: posteriorly via the crista terminalis, and anteriorly via the interatrial septum. [1]
An important property that is unique to the AV node is decremental conduction. This is the property of the AV node that prevents rapid conduction to the ventricle in cases of rapid atrial rhythms, such as atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter.
The atrioventricular node delays impulses for 0.1 second before spreading to the ventricle walls. The reason it is so important to delay the cardiac impulse is to ensure that the atria are empty completely before the ventricles contract (Campbell et al., 2002).
In certain types of supraventricular tachycardia, a person could have two AV Nodes; this will cause a loop in electrical current and uncontrollably-rapid heart beat. When this electricity catches up with itself, it will dissipate and return to normal heart-beat speed.
The bundle of HIS is a collection of heart muscle cells specialized for electrical conduction that transmits the electrical impulses from the AV node (located between the atria and the ventricles) to the point of the apex of the fascicular branches. The fascicular branches then lead to the Purkinje fibers which innervate the ventricles, causing the cardiac muscle of the ventricles to contract at a paced interval. These specialized muscle fibers in the heart were named after the Swiss cardiologist Wilhelm His, Jr., who discovered them in 1893.
Cardiac muscle is very specialized, as it is the only type of muscle that has an internal rhythm; i.e., it is myogenic which means that it can naturally contract and relax without receiving electrical impulses from nerves. When a cell of cardiac muscle is placed next to another, they will beat in unison. The fibers of the Bundle of HIS allow electrical conduction to occur more easily and quickly than typical cardiac muscle. They are an important part of the electrical conduction system of the heart as they transmit the impulse from the AV node (the ventricular pacemaker) to the rest of the heart. The bundle of HIS branches into the three bundle branches: the right left anterior and left posterior bundle branches that run along the intraventricular septum. The bundles give rise to thin filaments known as Purkinje fibers. These fibers distribute the impulse to the ventricular muscle. Together, the bundle branches and purkinje network comprise the ventricular conduction system. It takes about 0.03-0.04s for the impulse to travel from the bundle of HIS to the ventricular muscle.
It is extremely important for these nodes to exist as they ensure the correct control and co-ordination of the heart and cardiac cycle and make sure all the contractions remain within the correct sequence and in sync.
Purkinje fibers (or Purkyne tissue) are located in the inner ventricular walls of the heart, just beneath the endocardium. These fibers are specialized myocardial fibers that conduct an electrical stimulus or impulse that enables the heart to contract in a coordinated fashion. Purkinje fibers work with the sinoatrial node (SA node) and the atrioventricular node (AV node) to control the heart rate.
During the ventricular contraction portion of the cardiac cycle, the Purkinje fibers carry the contraction impulse from the left and right bundle branches to the myocardium of the ventricles. This causes the muscle tissue of the ventricles to contract and force blood out of the heart — either to the pulmonary circulation (from the right ventricle) or to the systemic circulation (from the left ventricle).
They were discovered in 1839 by Jan Evangelista Purkinje, who gave them his name.
The contractions of the heart are controlled by electrical impulses, these fire at a rate which controls the beat of the heart.
The cells that create these rhythmical impulses are called pacemaker cells, and they directly control the heart rate. Artificial devices also called pacemakers can be used after damage to the body's intrinsic conduction system to produce these impulses synthetically.
Fibrillation is when the heart flutters abnormally. This can be detected by an electrocardiogram which measures the waves of excitation passing through the heart and plotting a graph of potential difference (voltage) against time. If the heart and cardiac cycle is functioning properly the electrocardiogram shows a regular, repeating pattern. However if there is fibrillation there will be no apparent pattern, either in the much more common 'Atrial Fibrillation', or the less likely but much more dangerous 'Ventricular Fibrillation'. In a hospital during VF the monitor would make a sound and alert the doctors to treat the fibrillation by passing a huge current through the chest wall and shocking the heart out of its fibrillation. This causes the cardiac muscle to stop completely for 5 seconds and when it begins to beat again the cardiac cycle would have resumed to normal and the heart will be beating in a controlled manner again. Fibrillation is an example of "circus movement" of impulses through the heart muscle.
Circus movement occurs when an impulse begins in one part of the heart muscle and spreads in a circuitous pathway through the heart then returns to the originally excited muscle and "re-enters" it to stimulate it once more. The signal never stops. A cause of circus movement is long length pathway in which the muscle is no longer in a refractory state when the stimulus returns to it. A "flutter" is a circus movement in coordinated, low frequency waves that cause rapid heart rate.
If the Bundle of HIS is blocked, it will result in dissociation between the activity of the atria and that of the ventricles, otherwise called a third degree heart block. The other cause of a third degree block would be a block of the right, left anterior, and left posterior bundle branches. A third degree block is very serious medical condition that will most likely require an artificial pacemaker.
E.C.G stands for Electrocardiogram and represents the electrophysiology of the heart. Cardiac electrophysiology is the science of the mechanisms, functions, and performance of the electrical activities of specific regions of the heart. The ECG is the recording of the heart's electrical activity as a graph. The graph can show the heart's rate and rhythm, it can detect enlargement of the heart, decreased blood flow, or the presence of current or past heart attacks. ECG's are inexpensive, Non-invasive, quick, and painless. Depending on the results, the patient’s medical history, and a physical exam; further tests or a combination of medications and lifestyle changes may be ordered.
P wave- indicates that the atria are electrically stimulated (depolarized) to pump blood into the ventricles.
QRS complex- indicates that the ventricles are electrically stimulated (depolarized) to pump blood out.
ST segment- indicates the amount of time from the end of the contraction of the ventricles to the beginning of the T wave.
T wave- indicates the recovery period (repolarization) of the ventricles.
U wave- rarely seen, and thought to possibly be the repolarization of the papillary muscles
After an action potential excites the plasma membrane of the cardiac muscle cell the contraction is due to an increase in the cytoplasmic concentration of Calcium ions. Similar to skeletal muscle, the release of Ca+ ions from the sarcoplasmic reticulum binds to troponin which allows actin to bind with myosin. The difference between skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle is that when the action potential opens voltage gated calcium ion channels in the T-tubules. The increase in cytosolic calcium causes calcium ions to bind to receptors on the surface of the sarcoplasmic reticulum. The binding of calcium ions to these receptors causes the opening of more calcium ion channels in the SR membrane. Calcium ions then rush out of the SR and bind to troponin and allow the myosin and actin to bind together which causes contraction. This sequence is called calcium-induced calcium release. Contraction ends when the level of cytosolic calcium returns to normal resting levels.
Blood pressure is the pressure exerted by the blood on the walls of the blood vessels. Unless indicated otherwise, blood pressure refers to systemic arterial blood pressure, i.e., the pressure in the large arteries delivering blood to body parts other than the lungs, such as the brachial artery (in the arm). The pressure of the blood in other vessels is lower than the arterial pressure. Blood pressure values are universally stated in millimeters of mercury (mmHg). The systolic pressure is defined as the peak pressure in the arteries during the cardiac cycle; the diastolic pressure is the lowest pressure (at the resting phase of the cardiac cycle). The mean arterial pressure and pulse pressure are other important quantities.
Typical values for a resting, healthy adult are approximately 120 mmHg systolic and 80mm Hg diastolic (written as 120/80 mmHg), with individual variations. These measures of blood pressure are not static, but undergo natural variations from one heartbeat to another, and throughout the day (in a circadian rhythm); they also change in response to stress, nutritional factors, drugs, or disease.
Systolic Pressure is the highest when the blood is being pumped out of the left ventricle into the aorta during ventricular systole. The average high during systole is 120 mmHg.
Diastolic blood pressure lowers steadily to an average low of 80 mmHg during ventricular diastole.
Cardiovascular disease refers to the class of diseases that involve the heart and/or blood vessels (arteries and veins). While the term technically refers to any disease that affects the cardiovascular system, it is usually used to refer to those related to atherosclerosis (arterial disease). These conditions have similar causes, mechanisms, and treatments.
Over 50 million Americans have cardiovascular problems, and most other Western countries face high and increasing rates of cardiovascular disease. It is the number 1 cause of death and disability in the United States and most European countries. By the time that heart problems are detected, the underlying cause (atherosclerosis) is usually quite advanced, having progressed for decades. There is therefore increased emphasis on preventing atherosclerosis by modifying risk factors, such as healthy eating, exercise and avoidance of smoking.
Hypertension or high blood pressure is a medical condition wherein the blood pressure is chronically elevated. Hypertension is defined by some authors as systolic pressure over 130 and diastolic over 85 mmHg. [1] Hypertension often has an insidious or un-noticed onset and is sometimes called the silent killer because stretching of the arteries causes microscopic tears in the arterial wall and accelerates degenerative changes. Persistent hypertension is one of the risk factors for strokes, heart attacks, heart failure and arterial aneurysm, and is a leading cause of chronic renal failure
Severe atherosclerosis of the aorta. Autopsy specimen.
Atherosclerosis is a disease affecting the arterial blood vessel. It is commonly referred to as a "hardening" or "furring" of the arteries. It is caused by the formation of multiple plaques within the arteries. Arteriosclerosis ("hardening of the artery") results from a deposition of tough, rigid collagen inside the vessel wall and around the atheroma. This increases the stiffness, decreases the elasticity of the artery wall. Atherosclerosis typically begins in early adolescence, is usually found in most major arteries, and yet is asymptomatic and not detected by most diagnostic methods during life. It most commonly becomes seriously symptomatic when interfering with the coronary circulation supplying the heart or cerebral circulation supplying the brain, and is considered the most important underlying cause of strokes, heart attacks, various heart diseases including congestive heart failure and most cardiovascular diseases in general.
Plaque Atheroma or commonly known as plaque is an abnormal inflammatory accumulation of macrophage white blood cells within the walls of arteries.
Circulatory Shock is a severe condition that results from reduced blood circulation.
Preventing blood clots reduces the risk of stroke, heart attack and pulmonary embolism. Heparin and warfarin are often used to inhibit the formation and growth of existing blood clots, thereby allowing the body to shrink and dissolve the blood clots through normal methods.
An embolism occurs when an object (the embolus) migrates from one part of the body (through circulation) and causes a blockage (occlusion) of a blood vessel in another part of the body. Blood clots form the most common embolic material by far: other possible embolic materials include fat globules (a fat embolism), air bubbles (an air embolism), septic emboli (containing pus and bacteria), or amniotic fluid.
A stroke, also known as cerebrovascular accident (CVA), is an acute neurological injury whereby the blood supply to a part of the brain is interrupted. Strokes can be classified into two major categories: ischemic and hemorrhagic. ~80% of strokes are due to ischemia.
Ischemic Stroke: In ischemic stroke, which occurs in approximately 85-90% of strokes, a blood vessel becomes occluded and the blood supply to part of the brain is totally or partially blocked. Ischemic stroke is commonly divided into thrombotic stroke, embolic stroke, systemic hypoperfusion (Watershed or Border Zone stroke), or venous thrombosis
Hemorrhagic Stroke: A hemorrhagic stroke, or cerebral hemorrhage, is a form of stroke that occurs when a blood vessel in the brain ruptures or bleeds. Like ischemic strokes, hemorrhagic strokes interrupt the brain's blood supply because the bleeding vessel can no longer carry the blood to its target tissue. In addition, blood irritates brain tissue, disrupting the delicate chemical balance, and, if the bleeding continues, it can cause increased intracranial pressure which physically impinges on brain tissue and restricts blood flow into the brain. In this respect, hemorrhagic strokes are more dangerous than their more common counterpart, ischemic strokes. There are two types of hemorrhagic stroke: intracerebral hemorrhage, and subarachnoid hemorrhage.
The term "brain attack" is starting to come into use in the United States for stroke, just as the term "heart attack" is used for myocardial infarction, where a cutoff of blood causes necrosis to the tissue of the heart. Many hospitals have "brain attack" teams within their neurology departments specifically for swift treatment of stroke. If symptoms of stroke are detected at early on-set, special "clot busting" drugs may be administered. These clot busters will dissolve clots before they can cause tissue death and restore normal circulation. One of the initial drugs used to dissolve clots was streptokinase, although its use creates a possibility of clot destruction throughout the entire body, leading to serious hemorrhage. There are newer, third generation thrombolytics that are safer.
Acute myocardial infarction (AMI or MI), commonly known as a heart attack, A heart attack occurs when the supply of blood and oxygen to an area of heart muscle is blocked, usually by a clot in a coronary artery. Often, this blockage leads to arrhythmias (irregular heartbeat or rhythm) that cause a severe decrease in the pumping function of the heart and may bring about sudden death. If the blockage is not treated within a few hours, the affected heart muscle will die and be replaced by scar tissue. It is the leading cause of death for both men and women all over the world
Angina Pectoris is chest pain due to ischemia (a lack of blood and hence oxygen supply) of the heart muscle, generally due to obstruction or spasm of the coronary arteries (the heart's blood vessels).
Coronary artery bypass surgery, coronary artery bypass graft surgery and heart bypass are surgical procedures performed on patients with coronary artery disease for the relief of angina and possible improved heart muscle function. Veins or arteries from elsewhere in the patient's body are grafted from the aorta to the coronary arteries, bypassing coronary artery narrowing caused by atherosclerosis and improves the blood supply to the myocardium (heart muscle).
Congestive heart failure (CHF), also called congestive cardiac failure (CCF) or just heart failure, is a condition that can result from any structural or functional cardiac disorder that impairs the ability of the heart to fill with or pump a sufficient amount of blood throughout the body. It is not to be confused with "cessation of heartbeat", which is known as asystole, or with cardiac arrest, which is the cessation of normal cardiac function in the face of heart disease. Because not all patients have volume overload at the time of initial or subsequent evaluation, the term "heart failure" is preferred over the older term "congestive heart failure". Congestive heart failure is often undiagnosed due to a lack of a universally agreed definition and difficulties in diagnosis, particularly when the condition is considered "mild". Right sided heart failure commonly causes peripheral edema, or swelling of the extremities. Left sided heart failure commonly causes pulmonary edema, or fluid buildup in the lungs.
An aneurysm (or aneurism) is a localized dilation or ballooning of a blood vessel by more than 50% of the diameter of the vessel and can lead to instant death at anytime. Aneurysms most commonly occur in arteries at the base of the brain (the circle of Willis) and in the aorta (the main artery coming out of the heart) - this is an aortic aneurysm. This bulge in a blood vessel, much like a bulge on an over-inflated inner tube, can lead to death at anytime. The larger an aneurysm becomes, the more likely it is to burst. Aneurysms are also described according to their shape: Saccular or fusiform. A saccular aneurysm resembles a small sack; a fusiform aneurysm is shaped like a spindle.
To dissolve blood clots you would use a drug that converts plasminogen (molecule found in blood), to plasmin, (enzyme that dissolves blood clots).
One way to unblock a coronary artery (or other blood vessel) is percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA), which was first performed in 1977. A wire is passed from the femoral artery in the leg or the radial artery in the arm up to the diseased coronary artery, to beyond the area of the coronary artery that is being worked upon. Over this wire, a balloon catheter is passed into the segment that is to be opened up. The end of the catheter contains a small folded balloon. When the balloon is hydraulically inflated, it compresses the atheromatous plaque and stretches the artery wall to expand. At the same time, if an expandable wire mesh tube (stent) was on the balloon, then the stent will be implanted (left behind) to support the new stretched open position of the artery from the inside.
Varicose veins are veins on the leg which are large, twisted, and ropelike, and can cause pain, swelling, or itching. They are an extreme form of telangiectasia, or spider veins.
Varicose veins result due to insufficiency of the valves in the communicating veins. These are veins which link the superficial and deep veins of the lower limb. Normally, blood flows from the superficial to the deep veins, facilitating return of blood to the heart. However, when the valve becomes defective, blood is forced into the superficial veins by the action of the muscle pump (which normally aids return of blood to the heart by compressing the deep veins). People who have varicose veins are more at risk of getting a Deep Vein Thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolisms.
Phlebitis is an inflammation of a vein, usually in the legs. This is usually the most serious if found in a deep vein. However, most people with the condition, perhaps 80 to 90 percent, are women. The disease may also have a genetic component, as it is known to run in families.
Heart defects present at birth are called congenital heart defects. Slightly less than 1% of all newborn infants have congenital heart disease. Eight defects are more common than all others and make up 80% of all congenital heart diseases, whereas the remaining 20% consist of many independently infrequent conditions or combinations of several defects.
Cyanotic heart defects refer to defects that result in decreased amounts of oxygen in the blood. In cyanotic heart defects deoxygenated blood from the right ventricle flows into the systemic circulation. Cyanotic defects include tetrogy of Fallot and transposition of the great arteries.
Homeostasis in the body is only possible if the cardiovascular system is working properly. This means that the system needs to deliver oxygen and nutrients to the tissue fluid that surrounds the cells and also take away the metabolic waste. The heart is composed of arteries that take blood from the heart, and vessels that return blood to the heart. Blood is pumped by the heart into two circuits: the pulmonary and systemic circuits. The pulmonary circuit carries blood through the lungs where gas exchange occurs and the systemic system transports blood to all parts of the body where exchange with tissue fluid takes place. The cardiovascular system works together with all other systems to maintain homeostasis.
The lymphatic system is closely related to the cardiovascular system. There are three main ways that they work together to maintain homeostasis: the lymphatic system receives the excess tissue fluid and returns it to the bloodstream, lacteal take fat molecules from the intestinal villi and transport them to the bloodstream and both systems work together to defend the body against disease.The lymphatic system can create white blood cells that fight off disease and infections.
Stress, eating high fat foods, obesity, tobacco and alcohol use are just some risk factors of developing heart disease.
Recent research suggests that taking a small dose of aspirin daily may help prevent a heart attack (because aspirin inhibits platelet clumping).
The length of all your blood vessels lined up is about 60,000 miles long! To put this in perspective, the Earth's circumference is 40,075.02 kilometres and 60,000 miles is around 96,000 km - so your blood vessels would go twice around the world and still have some to spare!
Eating healthy, good nutrition.
Having a healthy lifestyle; don't drink, smoke, or do drugs.
Lowering LDL cholesterol and high blood pressure.
Reduce the fat, sodium, and calories in your diet.
The heart muscle becomes less efficient with age, and there is a decrease in both maximum cardiac output and heart rate, although resting levels may be more than adequate. The health of the myocardium depends on its blood supply, and with age there is greater likelihood that atherosclerosis will narrow the coronary arteries. Atherosclerosis is the deposition of cholesterol on and in the walls of the arteries, which decreases blood flow and forms rough surfaces that may cause intravascular clot formation
High blood pressure (hypertension) causes the left ventricle to work harder. It may enlarge and outgrow its blood supply, thus becoming weaker. A weak ventricle is not an efficient pump, and may progress to congestive heart failure. This process may be slow or rapid.
The heart valves may become thickened by fibrosis, leading to heart murmurs and less efficient pumping.
Arrhythmias are also more common with age, as the cells of the conduction pathway become less efficient.
Physiological stress can be any kind of injury from burns, to broken bones; the body's response to stress is categorized in two phases the ebb phase (early phase) begins immediately after the injury. And the second phase is about 36 to 48 hours after injury is called the flow phase. In the ebb (shock) phase there is Inadequate circulation, decreased insulin level, decreased oxygen consumption, hypothermia (low body temperature), hypovolemia (low blood volume), and hypotension (low blood pressure). In the flow phase there is increased levels of catecholamine, glucocorticoids, and glucagons, normal or elevated insulin levels, catabolic (breakdown), hyperglycemic (high blood sugar), increased oxygen consumption/respiratory rate, hyperthermia (high body temperature) fever sets in, hypermetabolism, increased insulin resistance, increased cardiac output.
Excitation occurs through the SA node to the AV node if there are abnormalities or drug interference that malfunctions the AV node the ventricles will not receive the initiating stimuli and the autorhythmic cells in the bundle branches begin to initiate actions on their own rate becoming the pacemakers for the ventricles. This in turn will cause conduction disorder. With conduction that causes problems with the bundle branches there is the right and the left premature ventricular contractions. Right is most common and may go untreated. Left is always a serious problem and must be treated.
SA node (located in the right atrium near the entrance of the superior vena cava)
AV node (located at the base of right atrium)
AV bundle (located in the intraventricular septum between the two ventricles that go in two directions right and left bundle branches that leave the septum to enter the walls of both ventricle)
Bundle Branches (the branching off the septum to the walls of the ventricles that run into the purkinje fibers that then make contact with ventricular myocardial cells to spread the impulse to the rest of the ventricles)
Animation of a normal ECG wave.
QRS is the ventricular depolarization, as well as atrial repolarization.
Autonomic system with two subdivisions: the sympathetic division and the parasympathetic division.
In 1955, when I was five years old, I first learned by my family physician that I had a heart murmur and that it would eventually need attention. By the time I was 15 in 1965, I had two cardiac catherizations at Rhode Island Hospital. The tests were inconclusive and I was told to go on with my life and wait and see if I had a problem.
It wasn't until 1975 that I was told by my family physician that I should have my heart checked again. Dr. David Kitzes of Mariam Hospital performed another catherization. This time, unlike the others, I was told that because of new machine technology, Dr. Kitzes found that I had aortic stenosis, which is a narrowing of the valve passage by build-up of plaque due to the valve being malformed at birth. Dr. Kitzes informed me that I could lead a normal life until I was in my fifties or sixties before I would need corrective surgery.
In 1996, I had an echocardiogram and it was determined that my heart was enlarged. My family physician said that I should see a cardiologist. I down played the visit as not being serious after hearing the same thing many times. This time I entered the office of Jon Lambrecht, I had never met him before. Within a few minutes my whole life was turned around. After asking me about my symptoms, which were fatigue, weakness, asthmatic symptoms, as well as ashen skin color and dizziness, he informed me of how serious my condition was and the only salvation was immediate open-heart surgery to replace the aortic valve. I began to cry as I thought my life was over. Dr. Lambrecht studied my reaction and told me that this condition is repairable and that I don't have a terminal illness. I didn't have a lot of time to think about it. Within 10 days from that visit, I was the recipient of a Meditronic Hall Prosthetic heart valve. The operation was performed by Dr. Robert Indeglia at Miriam Hospital in Providence, R.I. on March 20th, 1996.
It has been almost 3 years since the surgery and I am doing better than I could have expected. In 1977 my son Kevin was born with Hypoplastic Left-heart Syndrome and only lived for 2 days because heart surgery wasn't performed like today. I am thankful that I lived at a time when medical technology paved the way for a second chance because of my new aortic heart valve.
Cerebrovascular disease are those that affect blood vessels in the brain and happen to be the third cause of death in the United States only behind heart disease and cancer. Stroke (also called cerebrovascular accident or CVR) is a cerebrovascular disorder caused by a sudden decrease or stoppage of blood flow to a part of the brain. Decreased blood flow also known as ischemia is dangerous to any tissue but brain tissue is even more vulnerable, mainly due to the high rate of its metabolic reactions. In fact if you stopped blood flow for no more than three minutes it may be sufficient enough to cause death of most brain cells. For this reason a stroke can kill people within minutes or leave them with severe brain damage.
Strokes may be classified as either occlusive or hemorrhagic and may happen either in the interior of the brain or on its surface. In a occlusive stroke blood flow through a vessel is blocked. In a hemorrhagic stroke a blood vessel ruptures causing a hemorrhage.
As with all of the body systems, the cardiovascular system plays a part in maintaining homeostasis. The nervous system regulates the functioning of the heart based on what the heart is supposed to do. The pumping of the heart maintains normal blood pressure and proper oxygenation of tissues.
The vascular system forms passageways for the blood, but they aren't simply just a pipeline system. The vessels are not passive tubes, but rather active contributors to homeostasis. The arteries and veins help maintain blood pressure, and the capillaries provide sites for the necessary exchanges of materials between the blood and the tissues.
A) Right atrium with the right ventricle and left atrium with the left ventricle
B) Right atrium with left atrium and right ventricles with left ventricle
A) Pressure exerted by the blood on the walls of the blood vessels
C) The highest when blood is being pumped out of the left ventricle into the aorta
Acute myocardial infarction (AMI or MI) commonly known as a heart attack, is a disease state that occurs when the blood supply to a part of the heart is interrupted. The resulting ischemia or oxygen shortage causes damage and potential death of heart tissue.
Antidiuretic hormone: Produced in the posterior pituitary ADH (vasopressin), major function is to regulate blood pressure by water retention by the kidneys.
Arteriole: a small diameter blood vessel that extends and branches out from an artery and leads to capillaries
Atrioventricular Node (abbreviated AV node): the tissue between the atria and the ventricles of the heart, which conducts the normal electrical impulse from the atria to the ventricles
Atrioventricular valves: large, multi-cusped valves that prevent backflow from the ventricles into the atria during systole
AV Bundle: collection of heart muscle cells specialized for electrical conduction that transmits the electrical impulses from the AV node
Blood Pressure: the pressure exerted by the blood on the walls of the blood vessels
Capillaries: the smallest of a body’s vessels, they connect arteries and veins
Cardiac Cycle: term used to describe the sequence of events that occur as a heart works to pump blood through the body
Cerebral Vascular Accident (CVA): Also known as a stroke, is a rapidly developing loss of a part of brain function or loss of consciousness due to an interruption in the blood supply to all or part of the brain. That is, a stroke involves the sudden loss of neuronal function due to a disturbance in cerebral perfusion. There are many different causes for the interruption of blood supply, and different parts of the brain can be affected. Because of this, a stroke can be quite heterogeneous. Patients with the same cause of stroke can have widely differing handicaps. Similarly, patients with the same clinical handicap can in fact have different causes of their stroke.
Chordae Tendinae: cord-like tendons that connect the papillary muscles to the tricuspid valve and the mitral valve in the heart
Coronary Arteries: blood vessels that supply blood to, and remove blood from, the heart muscle itself
Continuous Capillaries: have a sealed epithelium and only allow small molecules, water and ions to diffuse
Deep-vein thrombosis (DVT): is the formation of a blood clot ("thrombus") in a deep vein. It commonly affects the leg veins, such as the femoral vein or the popliteal vein or the deep veins of the pelvis. Occasionally the veins of the arm are affected
Diastole: period of time when the heart relaxes after contraction in preparation for refilling with circulating blood
Diastolic Pressure: lowest point in blood pressure where the heart relaxes
Edema: The swelling that forms when too much tissue fluid forms or not enough taken away
Electrocardiogram: the recording of the heart's electrical activity as a graph
Epinephrine: Produced in the adrenal medulla of the adrenal glands, major function is vasoconstriction that will in turn increase respiratory rate and increase cardiac out put.
Fenestrated Capillaries: have openings that allow larger molecules to diffuse
Fibrous Pericardium: a dense connective tissue that protects the heart, anchoring it to the surrounding walls, and preventing it from overfilling with blood
Heart Rate: term used to describe the frequency of the cardiac cycle
Hepatic Veins: blood vessels that drain de-oxygenated blood from the liver and blood cleaned by the liver (from the stomach, pancreas, small intestine and colon) into the inferior vena cava
Hypertension or High Blood Pressure: medical condition wherein the blood pressure is chronically elevated
Inferior Vena Cava (or IVC): a large vein that carries de-oxygenated blood from the lower half of the body into the heart
Intraventricular Septum: the stout wall separating the lower chambers (the ventricles) of the heart from one another
Left Atrium:receives oxygenated blood from the left and right pulmonary veins
Lub: first heart tone, or S1; caused by the closure of the atrioventricular valves, mitral and tricuspid, at the beginning of ventricular contraction, or systole
Lymph: originates as blood plasma that leaks from the capillaries of the circulatory system, becoming interstitial fluid, filling the space between individual cells of tissue
Mitral valve: also known as the bicuspid valve; prevents blood flowing from the left ventricle into the left atrium
Myocardium: the muscular tissue of the heart.
Norepinephrine: Produced in the adrenal medulla of the adrenal glands, major function is a strong vasoconstrictor that will in turn increase respiratory rate.
Pacemaker Cells: cells that create these rhythmical impulses of the heart
Plaque: an abnormal inflammatory accumulation of macrophage white blood cells within the walls of arteries
Pulmonary Valve: lies between the right ventricle and the pulmonary artery; prevents back-flow of blood into the ventricle
Purkinje Fibers (or Purkinje tissue): located in the inner ventricular walls of the heart, just beneath the endocardium; specialized myocardial fibers that conduct an electrical stimulus or impulse that enables the heart to contract in a coordinated fashion
Right Atrium: receives de-oxygenated blood from the superior vena cava and inferior vena cava
Serous Pericardium: functions in lubricating the heart to prevent friction from occurring during heart activity
Sinoatrial Node: (abbreviated SA node or SAN, also called the sinus node): the impulse generating (pacemaker) tissue located in the right atrium of the heart
Sinusoidal Capillaries: special forms of fenestrated capillaries that have larger opening allowing RBCs and serum proteins to enter
Systolic Pressure:' the highest point in blood pressure when the blood is being pumped out of the left ventricle into the aorta during ventricular systole
Superior Vena Cava (SVC): a large but short vein that carries de-oxygenated blood from the upper half of the body to the heart's right atrium
Tricuspid Valve: on the right side of the heart, between the right atrium and the right ventricle; allows blood to flow from the right atrium into the right ventricle when the heart is relaxed during diastole
Veins:carry de-oxygenated blood from the capillary blood vessels to the right part of the heart
Venule: a small blood vessel that allows deoxygenated blood to return from the capillary beds to the larger blood vessels called veins
Essentials of Anatomy and Physiology, Valerie C. Scanlon and Tina Sanders
Tortora, G. & Grabowski, S. (2000) Principles of Anatomy & Physiology. Wiley & Sons. Brisbane, Singapore & Chichester.
Anderson, RM. The Gross Physiology of the Cardiovascular System (1993) .
The Urinary System is a group of organs in the body concerned with filtering out excess fluid and other substances from the bloodstream. The substances are filtered out from the body in the form of urine. Urine is a liquid produced by the kidneys, collected in the bladder and excreted through the urethra. Urine is used to extract excess minerals or vitamins as well as blood corpuscles from the body. The Urinary organs include the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra. The Urinary system works with the other systems of the body to help maintain homeostasis. The kidneys are the main organs of homeostasis because they maintain the acid base balance and the water salt balance of the blood.
One of the major functions of the Urinary system is the process of excretion. Excretion is the process of eliminating, from an organism, waste products of metabolism and other materials that are of no use. The urinary system maintains an appropriate fluid volume by regulating the amount of water that is excreted in the urine. Other aspects of its function include regulating the concentrations of various electrolytes in the body fluids and maintaining normal pH of the blood. Several body organs carry out excretion, but the kidneys are the most important excretory organ. The primary function of the kidneys is to maintain a stable internal environment (homeostasis) for optimal cell and tissue metabolism. They do this by separating urea, mineral salts, toxins, and other waste products from the blood. They also do the job of conserving water, salts, and electrolytes. At least one kidney must function properly for life to be maintained. Six important roles of the kidneys are:
Regulation of plasma ionic composition. Ions such as sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium, chloride, bicarbonate, and phosphates are regulated by the amount that the kidney excretes.
Regulation of plasma osmolarity. The kidneys regulate osmolarity because they have direct control over how many ions and how much water a person excretes.
Regulation of plasma volume. Your kidneys are so important they even have an effect on your blood pressure. The kidneys control plasma volume by controlling how much water a person excretes. The plasma volume has a direct effect on the total blood volume, which has a direct effect on your blood pressure. Salt(NaCl)will cause osmosis to happen; the diffusion of water into the blood.
Regulation of plasma hydrogen ion concentration (pH). The kidneys partner up with the lungs and they together control the pH. The kidneys have a major role because they control the amount of bicarbonate excreted or held onto. The kidneys help maintain the blood Ph mainly by excreting hydrogen ions and reabsorbing bicarbonate ions as needed.
Removal of metabolic waste products and foreign substances from the plasma. One of the most important things the kidneys excrete is nitrogenous waste. As the liver breaks down amino acids it also releases ammonia. The liver then quickly combines that ammonia with carbon dioxide, creating urea which is the primary nitrogenous end product of metabolism in humans. The liver turns the ammonia into urea because it is much less toxic. We can also excrete some ammonia, creatinine and uric acid. The creatinine comes from the metabolic breakdown of creatine phospate (a high-energy phosphate in muscles). Uric acid comes from the break down of nucleotides. Uric acid is insoluble and too much uric acid in the blood will build up and form crystals that can collect in the joints and cause gout.
Secretion of Hormones The endocrine system has assistance from the kidney's when releasing hormones. Renin is released by the kidneys. Renin leads to the secretion of aldosterone which is released from the adrenal cortex. Aldosterone promotes the kidneys to reabsorb the sodium (Na+) ions. The kidneys also secrete erythropoietin when the blood doesn't have the capacity to carry oxygen. Erythropoietin stimulates red blood cell production. The Vitamin D from the skin is also activated with help from the kidneys. Calcium (Ca+) absorption from the digestive tract is promoted by vitamin D.
CC: Chapter Check: Name the role of the kidneys and how they work?
Kidney Diagram: 1. Renal pyramid 2. Interlobar artery 3. Renal artery 4. Renal vein 5. Renal hylum 6. Renal pelvis 7. Ureter 8. Minor calyx 9. Renal capsule 10. Inferior renal capsule 11. Superior renal capsule 12. Interlobar vein 13. Nephron 14. Minor calyx 15. Major calyx 16. Renal papilla 17. Renal column
The kidneys are a pair of bean shaped, brown organs about the size of your fist.It measures 10-12 cm long. They are covered by the renal capsule, which is a tough capsule of fibrous connective tissue. Adhering to the surface of each kidney is two layers of fat to help cushion them. There is a concaved side of the kidney that has a depression where a renal artery enters, and a renal vein and a ureter exit the kidney. The kidneys are located at the rear wall of the abdominal cavity just above the waistline, and are protected by the ribcage. They are considered retroperitoneal, which means they lie behind the peritoneum. There are three major regions of the kidney, renal cortex, renal medulla and the renal pelvis. The outer, granulated layer is the renal cortex. The cortex stretches down in between a radially striated inner layer. The inner radially striated layer is the renal medulla. This contains pyramid shaped tissue called the renal pyramids, separated by renal columns. The ureters are continuous with the renal pelvis and is the very center of the kidney.
The renal veins are veins that drain the kidney. They connect the kidney to the inferior vena cava. Because the inferior vena cava is on the right half of the body, the left renal vein is generally the longer of the two. Unlike the right renal vein, the left renal vein often receives the left gonadal vein (left testicular vein in males, left ovarian vein in females). It frequently receives the left suprarenal vein as well.
The renal arteries normally arise off the abdominal aorta and supply the kidneys with blood. The arterial supply of the kidneys are variable and there may be one or more renal arteries supplying each kidney. Due to the position of the aorta, the inferior vena cava and the kidneys in the body, the right renal artery is normally longer than the left renal artery. The right renal artery normally crosses posteriorly to the inferior vena cava.
The renal arteries carry a large portion of the total blood flow to the kidneys. Up to a third of the total cardiac output can pass through the renal arteries to be filtered by the kidneys.
The ureters are two tubes that drain urine from the kidneys to the bladder. Each ureter is a muscular tube about 10 inches (25 cm) long. Muscles in the walls of the ureters send the urine in small spurts into the bladder, (a collapsible sac found on the forward part of the cavity of the bony pelvis that allows temporary storage of urine). After the urine enters the bladder from the ureters, small folds in the bladder mucosa act like valves preventing backward flow of the urine. The outlet of the bladder is controlled by a sphincter muscle. A full bladder stimulates sensory nerves in the bladder wall that relax the sphincter and allow release of the urine. However, relaxation of the sphincter is also in part a learned response under voluntary control. The released urine enters the urethra.
The urinary bladder is a hollow, muscular and distendible or elastic organ that sits on the pelvic floor (superior to the prostate in males). On its anterior border lies the pubic symphysis and, on its posterior border, the vagina (in females) and rectum (in males). The urinary bladder can hold approximately 17 to 18 ounces (500 to 530 ml) of urine, however the desire to micturate is usually experienced when it contains about 150 to 200 ml. When the bladder fills with urine (about half full), stretch receptors send nerve impulses to the spinal cord, which then sends a reflex nerve impulse back to the sphincter (muscular valve) at the neck of the bladder, causing it to relax and allow the flow of urine into the urethra. The Internal urethral sphincter is involuntary. The ureters enter the bladder diagonally from its dorsolateral floor in an area called the trigone. The trigone is a triangular shaped area on the postero-inferior wall of the bladder. The urethra exits at the lowest point of the triangle of the trigone. The urine in the bladder also helps regulate body temperature. A bladder when operating normally empties completely upon a complete discharge, otherwise it is a sign that its elasticity is compromised, when it becomes completely void of fluid, it may cause a chilling sensation due to the rapid change of body temperature.
Male Sphincter urethrae muscle - The male urethra laid open on its anterior (upper) surface. (Region visible, but muscle not labeled.)
The urethra is a muscular tube that connects the bladder with the outside of the body. The function of the urethra is to remove urine from the body. It measures about 1.5 inches (3.8 cm) in a woman but up to 8 inches (20 cm) in a man. Because the urethra is so much shorter in a woman it makes it much easier for a woman to get harmful bacteria in her bladder this is commonly called a bladder infection or a UTI. The most common bacteria of a UTI is E-coli from the large intestines that have been excreted in fecal matter.
In the human female, the urethra is about 1-2 inches long and opens in the vulva between the clitoris and the vaginal opening.
Men have a longer urethra than women. This means that women tend to be more susceptible to infections of the bladder (cystitis) and the urinary tract.
The length of a male's urethra, and the fact it contains a number of bends, makes catheterisation more difficult.
The urethral sphincter is a collective name for the muscles used to control the flow of urine from the urinary bladder. These muscles surround the urethra, so that when they contract, the urethra is closed.
There are two distinct areas of muscle: the internal sphincter, at the bladder neck and
Human males have much stronger sphincter muscles than females, meaning that they can retain a large amount of urine for twice as long, as much as 800mL, i.e. "hold it".
A nephron is the basic structural and functional unit of the kidney. The name nephron comes from the Greek word (nephros) meaning kidney. Its chief function is to regulate water and soluble substances by filtering the blood, reabsorbing what is needed and excreting the rest as urine. Nephrons eliminate wastes from the body, regulate blood volume and pressure, control levels of electrolytes and metabolites, and regulate blood pH. Its functions are vital to life and are regulated by the endocrine system by hormones such as antidiuretic hormone, aldosterone, and parathyroid hormone.
Each nephron has its own supply of blood from two capillary regions from the renal artery. Each nephron is composed of an initial filtering component (the renal corpuscle) and a tubule specialized for reabsorption and secretion (the renal tubule). The renal corpuscle filters out large solutes from the blood, delivering water and small solutes to the renal tubule for modification.
The glomerulus is a capillary tuft that receives its blood supply from an afferent arteriole of the renal circulation. The glomerular blood pressure provides the driving force for fluid and solutes to be filtered out of the blood and into the space made by Bowman's capsule.
The remainder of the blood not filtered into the glomerulus passes into the narrower efferent arteriole. It then moves into the vasa recta, which are collecting capillaries intertwined with the convoluted tubules through the interstitial space, where the reabsorbed substances will also enter. This then combines with efferent venules from other nephrons into the renal vein, and rejoins with the main bloodstream.
The afferent arteriole supplies blood to the glomerulus. A group of specialized cells known as juxtaglomerular cells are located around the afferent arteriole where it enters the renal corpuscle. The efferent arteriole drains the glomerulus. Between the two arterioles lies specialized cells called the macula densa. The juxtaglomerular cells and the macula densa collectively form the juxtaglomerular apparatus. It is in the juxtaglomerular apparatus cells that the enzyme renin is formed and stored. Renin is released in response to decreased blood pressure in the afferent arterioles, decreased sodium chloride in the distal convoluted tubule and sympathetic nerve stimulation of receptors (beta-adrenic) on the juxtaglomerular cells. Renin is needed to form Angiotensin I and Angiotensin II which stimulate the secretion of aldosterone by the adrenal cortex.
Bowman's capsule (also called the glomerular capsule) surrounds the glomerulus and is composed of visceral (simple squamous epithelial cells) (inner) and parietal (simple squamous epithelial cells) (outer) layers. The visceral layer lies just beneath the thickened glomerular basement membrane and is made of podocytes which send foot processes over the length of the glomerulus. Foot processes interdigitate with one another forming filtration slits that, in contrast to those in the glomeruluar endothelium, are spanned by diaphragms. The size of the filtration slits restricts the passage of large molecules (e.g., albumin) and cells (e.g., red blood cells and platelets). In addition, foot processes have a negatively-charged coat (glycocalyx) that limits the filtration of negatively-charged molecules, such as albumin. This action is called electrostatic repulsion.
The parietal layer of Bowman's capsule is lined by a single layer of squamous epithelium. Between the visceral and parietal layers is Bowman's space, into which the filtrate enters after passing through the podocytes' filtration slits. It is here that smooth muscle cells and macrophages lie between the capillaries and provide support for them. Unlike the visceral layer, the parietal layer does not function in filtration. Rather, the filtration barrier is formed by three components: the diaphragms of the filtration slits, the thick glomerular basement membrane, and the glycocalyx secreted by podocytes. 99% of glomerular filtrate will ultimately be reabsorbed.
The process of filtration of the blood in the Bowman's capsule is ultrafiltration (or glomerular filtration), and the normal rate of filtration is 125 ml/min, equivalent to ten times the blood volume daily. Measuring the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is a diagnostic test of kidney function. A decreased GFR may be a sign of renal failure. Conditions that can affect GFR include: arterial pressure, afferent arteriole constriction, efferent arteriole constriction, plasma protein concentration and colloid osmotic pressure.
Any proteins that are roughly 30 kilodaltons or under can pass freely through the membrane. Although, there is some extra hindrance for negatively charged molecules due to the negative charge of the basement membrane and the podocytes. Any small molecules such as water, glucose, salt (NaCl), amino acids, and urea pass freely into Bowman's space, but cells, platelets and large proteins do not. As a result, the filtrate leaving the Bowman's capsule is very similar to blood plasma in composition as it passes into the proximal convoluted tubule. Together, the glomerulus and Bowman's capsule are called the renal corpuscle.
The proximal tubule can be anatomically divided into two segments: the proximal convoluted tubule and the proximal straight tubule. The proximal convoluted tubule can be divided further into S1 and S2 segments based on the histological appearance of it's cells. Following this naming convention, the proximal straight tubule is commonly called the S3 segment. The proximal convoluted tubule has one layer of cuboidal cells in the lumen. This is the only place in the nephron that contains cuboidal cells. These cells are covered with millions of microvilli. The microvilli serve to increase surface area for reabsorption.
Fluid in the filtrate entering the proximal convoluted tubule is reabsorbed into the peritubular capillaries, including approximately two-thirds of the filtered salt and water and all filtered organic solutes (primarily glucose and amino acids). This is driven by sodium transport from the lumen into the blood by the Na+/K+ ATPase in the basolateral membrane of the epithelial cells. Much of the mass movement of water and solutes occurs in between the cells through the tight junctions, which in this case are not selective.
The solutes are absorbed isotonically, in that the osmotic potential of the fluid leaving the proximal tubule is the same as that of the initial glomerular filtrate. However, glucose, amino acids, inorganic phosphate, and some other solutes are reabsorbed via secondary active transport through cotransport channels driven by the sodium gradient out of the nephron.
The Nephron Loop or Loop of Henle.
The loop of Henle (sometimes known as the nephron loop) is a U-shaped tube that consists of a descending limb and ascending limb. It begins in the cortex, receiving filtrate from the proximal convoluted tubule, extends into the medulla, and then returns to the cortex to empty into the distal convoluted tubule. Its primary role is to concentrate the salt in the interstitium, the tissue surrounding the loop.
Its descending limb is permeable to water but completely impermeable to salt, and thus only indirectly contributes to the concentration of the interstitium. As the filtrate descends deeper into the hypertonic interstitium of the renal medulla, water flows freely out of the descending limb by osmosis until the tonicity of the filtrate and interstitium equilibrate. Longer descending limbs allow more time for water to flow out of the filtrate, so longer limbs make the filtrate more hypertonic than shorter limbs.
Unlike the descending limb, the ascending limb of Henle's loop is impermeable to water, a critical feature of the countercurrent exchange mechanism employed by the loop. The ascending limb actively pumps sodium out of the filtrate, generating the hypertonic interstitium that drives countercurrent exchange. In passing through the ascending limb, the filtrate grows hypotonic since it has lost much of its sodium content. This hypotonic filtrate is passed to the distal convoluted tubule in the renal cortex.
The distal convoluted tubule is similar to the proximal convoluted tubule in structure and function. Cells lining the tubule have numerous mitochondria, enabling active transport to take place by the energy supplied by ATP. Much of the ion transport taking place in the distal convoluted tubule is regulated by the endocrine system. In the presence of parathyroid hormone, the distal convoluted tubule reabsorbs more calcium and excretes more phosphate. When aldosterone is present, more sodium is reabsorbed and more potassium excreted. Atrial natriuretic peptide causes the distal convoluted tubule to excrete more sodium. In addition, the tubule also secretes hydrogen and ammonium to regulate pH.
Each distal convoluted tubule delivers its filtrate to a system of collecting ducts, the first segment of which is the connecting tubule. The collecting duct system begins in the renal cortex and extends deep into the medulla. As the urine travels down the collecting duct system, it passes by the medullary interstitium which has a high sodium concentration as a result of the loop of Henle's countercurrent multiplier system. Though the collecting duct is normally impermeable to water, it becomes permeable in the presence of antidiuretic hormone (ADH). As much as three-fourths of the water from urine can be reabsorbed as it leaves the collecting duct by osmosis. Thus the levels of ADH determine whether urine will be concentrated or dilute. Dehydration results in an increase in ADH, while water sufficiency results in low ADH allowing for diluted urine. Lower portions of the collecting duct are also permeable to urea, allowing some of it to enter the medulla of the kidney, thus maintaining its high ion concentration (which is very important for the nephron).
Urine leaves the medullary collecting ducts through the renal papilla, emptying into the renal calyces, the renal pelvis, and finally into the bladder via the ureter.
Because it has a different embryonic origin than the rest of the nephron (the collecting duct is from endoderm whereas the nephron is from mesoderm), the collecting duct is usually not considered a part of the nephron proper.
Blood enters the afferent arteriole and flows into the glomerulus. Blood in the glomerulus has both filterable blood components and non-filterable blood components. Filterable blood components move toward the inside of the glomerulus while non-filterable blood components bypass the filtration process by exiting through the efferent arteriole. Filterable Blood components will then take a plasma like form called glomerular filtrate. A few of the filterable blood components are water, nitrogenous waste, nutrients and salts (ions). Nonfilterable blood components include formed elements such as blood cells and platelets along with plasma proteins. The glomerular filtrate is not the same consistency as urine, as much of it is reabsorbed into the blood as the filtrate passes through the tubules of the nephron.
Within the peritubular capillary network, molecules and ions are reabsorbed back into the blood. Sodium Chloride reabsorbed into the system increases the osmolarity of blood in comparison to the glomerular filtrate. This reabsorption process allows water (H2O) to pass from the glomerular filtrate back into the circulatory system.
Glucose and various amino acids also are reabsorbed into the circulatory system. These nutrients have carrier molecules that claim the glomerular molecule and release it back into the circulatory system. If all of the carrier molecules are used up, excess glucose or amino acids are set free into the urine. A complication of diabetes is the inability of the body to reabsorb glucose. If too much glucose appears in the glomerular filtrate it increases the osmolarity of the filtrate, causing water to be released into the urine rather than reabsorbed by the circulatory system. Frequent urination and unexplained thirst are warning signs of diabetes, due to water not being reabsorbed.
Glomerular filtrate has now been separated into two forms: Reabsorbed Filtrate and Non-reabsorbed Filtrate. Non-reabsorbed filtrate is now
Some substances are removed from blood through the peritubular capillary network into the distal convoluted tubule or collecting duct. These substances are Hydrogen ions, creatinine, and drugs. Urine is a collection of substances that have not been reabsorbed during glomerular filtration or tubular reabsorbtion.
It is the job of the kidneys to maintain the water-salt balance of the blood. They also maintain blood volume as well as blood pressure. Simple examples of ways that this balance can be changed include ingestion of water, dehydration, blood loss and salt ingestion.
There are several factors that influence the secretion of ADH. The first of these happen when the blood plasma gets too concentrated. When this occurs, special receptors in the hypothalamus release ADH. When blood pressure falls, stretch receptors in the aorta and carotid arteries stimulate ADH secretion to increase volume of the blood.
The Kidneys also regulate the salt balance in the blood by controlling the excretion and the reabsorption of various ions. As noted above, ADH plays a role in increasing water reabsorption in the kidneys, thus helping to dilute bodily fluids. The kidneys also have a regulated mechanism for reabsorbing sodium in the distal nephron. This mechanism is controlled by aldosterone, a steroid hormone produced by the adrenal cortex. Aldosterone promotes the excretion of potassium ions and the reabsorption of sodium ions. The release of Aldosterone is initiated by the kidneys. The juxtaglomerular apparatus is a renal structure consisting of the macula densa, mesangial cells, and juxtaglomerular cells. Juxtaglomerular cells (JG cells, also known as granular cells) are the site of renin secretion. Renin is an enzyme that converts angiotensinogen (a large plasma protein produced by the liver) into Angiotensin I and eventually into Angiotensin II which stimulates the adrenal cortex to produce aldosterone. The reabsorption of sodium ions is followed by the reapsorption of water. This causes blood pressure as well as blood volume to increase.
Atrial natriuretic hormone (ANH) is released by the atria of the heart when cardiac cells are stretched due to increased blood volume. ANH inhibits the secretion of renin by the juxtaglomerular apparatus and the secretion of the aldosterone by the adrenal cortex. This promotes the excretion of sodium. When sodium is excreted so is water. This causes blood pressure and volume to decrease.
An increase in plasma sodium levels above normal is hypernatremia. Sodium is the primary solute in the extracellular fluid. Sodium levels have a major role in osmolarity regulation. For excitable cells the electrochemical gradient for sodium across the plasma membrane is critical for life. Water retention and an increased blood pressure usually are signs of hypernatremia. If the plasma sodium levels are below normal it is called hyponatremia. Signs of this are low plasma volume and hypotension.
A diuretic (colloquially called a water pill) is any drug that elevates the rate of bodily urine excretion (diuresis). Diuretics also decrease the extracellular fluid (ECF) volume, and are primarily used to produce a negative extracellular fluid balance. Caffeine, cranberry juice and alcohol are all weak diuretics.
In medicine, diuretics are used to treat heart failure, liver cirrhosis, hypertension and certain kidney diseases. Diuretics alleviate the symptoms of these diseases by causing sodium and water loss through the urine. As urine is produced by the kidney, sodium and water – which cause edema related to the disease – move into the blood to replace the volume lost as urine, thereby reducing the pathological edema. Some diuretics, such as acetazolamide, help to make the urine more alkaline and are helpful in increasing excretion of substances such as aspirin in cases of overdose or poisoning.
The antihypertensive actions of some diuretics (thiazides and loop diuretics in particular) are independent of their diuretic effect. That is, the reduction in blood pressure is not due to decreased blood volume resulting from increased urine production, but occurs through other mechanisms and at lower doses than that required to produce diuresis. Indapamide was specifically designed with this is mind, and has a larger therapeutic window for hypertension (without pronounced diuresis) than most other diuretics.
Chemically, diuretics are a diverse group of compounds that either stimulate or inhibit various hormones that naturally occur in the body to regulate urine production by the kidneys.
Alcohol produces diuresis through modulation of the vasopressin system.
Diabetic nephropathy (nephropatia diabetica), also known as Kimmelstiel-Wilson syndrome and intercapillary glomerulonephritis, is a progressive kidney disease caused by angiopathy of capillaries in the kidney glomeruli. It is characterized by nodular glomerulosclerosis. It is due to longstanding diabetes mellitus, and is a prime cause for dialysis in many Western countries.
An image of a kidney stone.
Kidney stones, also known as nephrolithiases, urolithiases or renal calculi, are solid accretions (crystals) of dissolved minerals in urine found inside the kidneys or ureters. They vary in size from as small as a grain of sand to as large as a golf ball. Kidney stones typically leave the body in the urine stream; if they grow relatively large before passing (on the order of millimeters), obstruction of a ureter and distention with urine can cause severe pain most commonly felt in the flank, lower abdomen and groin. Kidney stones are unrelated to gallstones.
I was 34 weeks pregnant when I noticed blood in my urine. I immediately went to my OBGYN where I was told that I had a bladder infection and given an antibiotic. The next morning I experienced the most intense pain. I was rushed to the ER where I was told that I had kidney stones. The doctors explained that there was nothing they could do as long as I was pregnant. The next 3 weeks of my life were filled with intense pain and multiple painkillers. After I delivered my baby, CAT scans were done and I was informed that I had 6 kidney stones. It took three more weeks for me to pass all of the stones the largest measuring 5 mm. The stones were tested and I was informed that my body had been building up calcium due to my pregnancy and this was the cause of the kidney stones. I continued to have kidney pain for 6 months after passing the stones. I now live my life on a low calcium diet and the hope that my body will not develop more kidney stones.
Pyelonephritis When an infection of the renal pelvis and calices, called pyelitis, spreads to involve the rest of the kidney as well, the result is pyelonephritis. It usually results from the spread of fecal bacterium Escherichia coli from the anal region superiorly through the urinary tract. In severe cases, the kidney swells and scars, abscesses form, and the renal pelvis fills with pus. Left untreated, the infected kidney may be severely damaged, but administration of antibiotics usually achieve a total cure.
Renal Failure Uremia is a syndrome of renal failure and includes elevated blood urea and creatinine levels. Acute renal failure can be reversed if diagnosed early. Acute renal failure can be caused by severe hypotension or severe glomerular disease. Diagnostic tests include BUN and plasma creatinine level tests. It is considered to be chronic renal failure if the decline of renal function to less than 25%.
This is caused by the deficiency of or decrease of ADH. The person with (DI) has the inability to concentrate their urine in water restriction, in turn they will void up 3 to 20 liters/day. There are two forms of (DI), neurogenic, and nephrogenic.
The second most common type of bacterial infections seen by health care providers is UTI's. Out of all the bacterias that colonize and cause urinary tract infections the big gun is Escherichia coli. In the hospital indwelling catheters and straight catheterizing predispose the opportunity for urinary tract infections. In females there are three stages in life that predispose urinary tract infections, that is menarche, manipulation between intercourse, and menopause. However, a small percentage of men and children will get urinary tract infections. In men it is usually due to the prostate gland growth which usually occurs in older age men. In children it can occur 3% to 5% in girls and 1% in boys, uncircumcised boys it is more common than circumcised ones to have a urinary tract infection, in girls it may be the result of onset of toilet training, some predispositions for getting urinary tract infection include family history and urinary tract anomalies. In neonates urinary tract infections is most common when bacteremia is present.
Generally, humans can live normally with just one kidney. Only when the amount of functioning kidney tissue is greatly diminished will renal failure develop. If renal function is impaired, various forms of medications are used, while others are contraindicated. Provided that treatment is begun early, it may be possible to reverse chronic kidney failure due to diabetes or high blood pressure. If creatinine clearance (a measure of renal function) has fallen very low ("end-stage renal failure"), or if the renal dysfunction leads to severe symptoms, dialysis is commenced. Dialysis is a medical procedure, performed in various different forms, where the blood is filtered outside of the body.
Kidney transplantation is the only cure for end stage renal failure; dialysis, is a supportive treatment; a form of "buying time" to bridge the inevitable wait for a suitable organ.
There are two types of kidney transplants: living donor transplant and a cadaveric (dead donor) transplant. When a kidney from a living donor, usually a blood relative, is transplanted into the patient's body, the donor's blood group and tissue type must be judged compatible with the patient's, and extensive medical tests are done to determine the health of the donor. Before a cadaveric donor's organs can be transplanted, a series of medical tests have to be done to determine if the organs are healthy. Also, in some countries, the family of the donor must give its consent for the organ donation. In both cases, the recipient of the new organ needs to take drugs to suppress their immune system to help prevent their body from rejecting the new kidney.
A ) the magnetic charge of the Bowman's capsule attracts the substances
B ) the substances are actively transported into the Bowman's capsule
C ) blood pressure of the glomerulus is so great that most substances in blood move into capsule
D ) little green men force it in with their ray guns
A ) urine bonds are formed between the wastes
C ) wastes move into the distal convoluted tubule from the blood
Antidiuretic: lessening or decreasing of urine production or an agent that decreases the release of urine.
Catheterisation: a catheter is a tube that can be inserted into a body cavity, duct or vessel. Catheters thereby allow drainage or injection of fluids or access by surgical instruments. The process of inserting a catheter is catheterisation. In most uses a catheter is a thin, flexible tube: a "soft" catheter; in some uses, it is a larger, solid tube: a "hard" catheter.
Dehydration: condition resulting from excessive loss of body fluid.
Diabetes: a general term for a disease characterized by the beginning stages and onset of renal failure. It is derived from the Greek word diabaínein, that literally means "passing through," or "siphon", a reference to one of diabetes' major symptoms—excessive urine production.
Diuretic: increasing of urine production, or an agent that increases the production of urine.
Erythropoietin: hormone that stimulates stem cells in the bone marrow to produce red blood cells
Glomerulus: capillary tuft that receives its blood supply from an afferent arteriole of the renal circulation.
Gluconeogenesis: the cycle of producing a glucose form fat or protein; preformed by the kidney in times of long fasting, initially gluconeogenesis is preformed by the liver
Juxtaglomerular (JG) cells: Renin-secreting cells that are in contact with the macula densa and the afferent arterioles of the renal nephron.
Juxtaglomerular apparatus (JGA): A site of juxtaglomerular cells connecting with the macula densa where renin is secreted and sensor for control of secretion of golmerular filtration rate.
Loop of Henle/ Nephron Loop: u-shaped tube that consists of a descending limb and ascending limb; primary role is to concentrate the salt in the interstitium, the tissue surrounding the loop
Medullary Pyramids or Renal Pyramids: the cone shaped masses in the kidney
Renal Calculi: kidney stones, solid crystals of dissolved minerals in urine found inside the kidneys
Renal Lobe: each pyramid together with the associated overlying cortex
Renal Pelvis: a central space, or cavity that transmits urine to the urinary bladder via the ureter
Renin: hormone released by the Juxtaglomerular (JG) cells of the kidneys when blood pressure falls
TURP: transurethral resection of the prostate. During TURP, an instrument is inserted up the urethra to remove the section of the prostate that is blocking urine flow. This is most commonly caused by benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). A TURP usually requires hospitalization and is done using a general or spinal anesthetic. It is now the most common surgery used to remove part of an enlarged prostate.
Urethra: a muscular tube that connects the bladder with the outside of the body
Ureters: two tubes that drain urine from the kidneys to the bladder
Urine: liquid produced by the kidneys, collected in the bladder and excreted through the urethra
Urinary Bladder: a hollow, muscular and distensible or elastic organ that sits on the pelvic floor
Urinary System: a group of organs in the body concerned with filtering out excess fluid and other substances from the bloodstream
Mader, Sylvia S. (2004). Human Biology. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Smith, Peter (1998). Internet reference, The Role of the Kidney. Department of Clinical Dental Sciences,The University of Liverpool.
McCance, Katherine L., Heuther, Sue E. (1994). "Pathophysiology: The Biological Basis for Disease In Adults and Children, Second Edition". Mosby-Year Book, Inc.
The Respiratory System is vital to every human being. Without it, we would cease to live outside of the womb. Let us begin by taking a look at the structure of the respiratory system and how vital it is to life. During inhalation or exhalation air is pulled towards or away from the lungs, by several cavities, tubes, and openings.
The organs of the respiratory system make sure that oxygen enters our bodies and carbon dioxide leaves our bodies.
The respiratory tract is the path of air from the nose to the lungs. It is divided into two sections: Upper Respiratory Tract and the Lower Respiratory Tract. Included in the upper respiratory tract are the Nostrils, Nasal Cavities, Pharynx, Epiglottis, and the Larynx. The lower respiratory tract consists of the Trachea, Bronchi, Bronchioles, and the Lungs.
As air moves along the respiratory tract it is warmed, moistened and filtered.
The lungs flank the heart and great vessels in the chest cavity. (Source: Gray's Anatomy of the Human Body, 20th ed. 1918.)
EXTERNAL RESPIRATION, which is the exchange of gases (oxygen and carbon dioxide) between inhaled air and the blood.
INTERNAL RESPIRATION, which is the exchange of gases between the blood and tissue fluids.
In addition to these main processes, the respiratory system serves for:
REGULATION OF BLOOD pH, which occurs in coordination with the kidneys, and as a
Ventilation is the exchange of air between the external environment and the alveoli. Air moves by bulk flow from an area of high pressure to low pressure. All pressures in the respiratory system are relative to atmospheric pressure (760mmHg at sea level). Air will move in or out of the lungs depending on the pressure in the alveoli. The body changes the pressure in the alveoli by changing the volume of the lungs. As volume increases pressure decreases and as volume decreases pressure increases. There are two phases of ventilation; inspiration and expiration. During each phase the body changes the lung dimensions to produce a flow of air either in or out of the lungs.
The body is able to stay at the dimensions of the lungs because of the relationship of the lungs to the thoracic wall. Each lung is completely enclosed in a sac called the pleural sac. Two structures contribute to the formation of this sac. The parietal pleura is attached to the thoracic wall where as the visceral pleura is attached to the lung itself. In-between these two membranes is a thin layer of intrapleural fluid. The intrapleural fluid completely surrounds the lungs and lubricates the two surfaces so that they can slide across each other. Changing the pressure of this fluid also allows the lungs and the thoracic wall to move together during normal breathing. Much the way two glass slides with water in-between them are difficult to pull apart, such is the relationship of the lungs to the thoracic wall.
The rhythm of ventilation is also controlled by the "Respiratory Center" which is located largely in the medulla oblongata of the brain stem. This is part of the autonomic system and as such is not controlled voluntarily (one can increase or decrease breathing rate voluntarily, but that involves a different part of the brain). While resting, the respiratory center sends out action potentials that travel along the phrenic nerves into the diaphragm and the external intercostal muscles of the rib cage, causing inhalation. Relaxed exhalation occurs between impulses when the muscles relax. Normal adults have a breathing rate of 12-20 respirations per minute.
When one breathes air in at sea level, the inhalation is composed of different gases. These gases and their quantities are Oxygen which makes up 21%, Nitrogen which is 78%, Carbon Dioxide with 0.04% and others with significantly smaller portions.
There are three bony projections inside the nasal cavity.
The superior, middle, and inferior nasal conchae.
Air passes between these conchae via the nasal meatuses.
Air then travels past the nasopharynx, oropharynx, and laryngopharynx, which are the three portions that make up the pharynx. The pharynx is a funnel-shaped tube that connects our nasal and oral cavities to the larynx. The tonsils which are part of the lymphatic system, form a ring at the connection of the oral cavity and the pharynx. Here, they protect against foreign invasion of antigens. Therefore, the respiratory tract aids the immune system through this protection. Then the air travels through the larynx. The larynx closes at the epiglottis to prevent the passage of food or drink as a protection to our trachea and lungs. The larynx is also our voicebox; it contains vocal cords, in which it produces sound. Sound is produced from the vibration of the vocal cords when air passes through them.
The trachea, which is also known as our windpipe, has ciliated cells and mucous secreting cells lining it, and is held open by C-shaped cartilage rings. One of its functions is similar to the larynx and nasal cavity, by way of protection from dust and other particles. The dust will adhere to the sticky mucous and the cilia helps propel it back up the trachea, to where it is either swallowed or coughed up. The mucociliary escalator extends from the top of the trachea all the way down to the bronchioles, which we will discuss later. Through the trachea, the air is now able to pass into the bronchi, bronchioles and finally alveoli before entering the pulmonary capillaries. There is lots of oxygen and then there is less carbon dioxide when the air comes in, but when it diffuses, the amounts exchange. All of this happens in seconds.
Inspiration is initiated by contraction of the diaphragm and in some cases the intercostals muscles when they receive nervous impulses. During normal quiet breathing, the phrenic nerve stimulates the diaphragm to contract and move downward into the abdomen. This downward movement of the diaphragm enlarges the thorax. When necessary, the intercostal muscles also increase the thorax by contacting and drawing the ribs upward and outward.
As the diaphragm contracts inferiorly and thoracic muscles pull the chest wall outwardly, the volume of the thoracic cavity increases. The lungs are held to the thoracic wall by negative pressure in the pleural cavity, a very thin space filled with a few millilitres of lubricating pleural fluid. The negative pressure in the pleural cavity is enough to hold the lungs open in spite of the inherent elasticity of the tissue. Hence, as the thoracic cavity increases in volume the lungs are pulled from all sides to expand, causing a drop in the pressure (a partial vacuum) within the lung itself (but note that this negative pressure is still not as great as the negative pressure within the pleural cavity--otherwise the lungs would pull away from the chest wall). Assuming the airway is open, air from the external environment then follows its pressure gradient down and expands the alveoli of the lungs, where gas exchange with the blood takes place. As long as pressure within the alveoli is lower than atmospheric pressure air will continue to move inwardly, but as soon as the pressure is stabilized air movement stops.
During quiet breathing, expiration is normally a passive process and does not require muscles to work (rather it is the result of the muscles relaxing). When the lungs are stretched and expanded, stretch receptors within the alveoli send inhibitory nerve impulses to the medulla oblongata, causing it to stop sending signals to the rib cage and diaphragm to contract. The muscles of respiration and the lungs themselves are elastic, so when the diaphragm and intercostal muscles relax there is an elastic recoil, which creates a positive pressure (pressure in the lungs becomes greater than atmospheric pressure), and air moves out of the lungs by flowing down its pressure gradient.
Although the respiratory system is primarily under involuntary control, and regulated by the medulla oblongata, we have some voluntary control over it also. This is due to the higher brain function of the cerebral cortex.
When under physical or emotional stress, more frequent and deep breathing is needed, and both inspiration and expiration will work as active processes. Additional muscles in the rib cage forcefully contract and push air quickly out of the lungs. In addition to deeper breathing, when coughing or sneezing we exhale forcibly. Our abdominal muscles will contract suddenly (when there is an urge to cough or sneeze), raising the abdominal pressure. The rapid increase in pressure pushes the relaxed diaphragm up against the pleural cavity. This causes air to be forced out of the lungs.
Another function of the respiratory system is to sing and to speak. By exerting conscious control over our breathing and regulating flow of air across the vocal cords we are able to create and modify sounds.
Lung Compliance is the magnitude of the change in lung volume produced by a change in pulmonary pressure. Compliance can be considered the opposite of stiffness. A low lung compliance would mean that the lungs would need a greater than average change in intrapleural pressure to change the volume of the lungs. A high lung compliance would indicate that little pressure difference in intrapleural pressure is needed to change the volume of the lungs. More energy is required to breathe normally in a person with low lung compliance. Persons with low lung compliance due to disease therefore tend to take shallow breaths and breathe more frequently.
Two major things determine lung compliance. The first is the elasticity of the lung tissue. Any thickening of lung tissues due to disease will decrease lung compliance. The second is surface tensions at air water interfaces in the alveoli. The surface of the alveoli cells is moist. The attractive force, between the water cells on the alveoli, is called surface tension. Thus, energy is required not only to expand the tissues of the lung but also to overcome the surface tension of the water that lines the alveoli.
To overcome the forces of surface tension, certain alveoli cells (Type II pneumocytes) secrete a protein and lipid complex called ""Surfactant””, which acts like a detergent by disrupting the hydrogen bonding of water that lines the alveoli, hence decreasing surface tension.
The medulla oblongata is the primary respiratory control center
Its main function is to send signals to the muscles that control respiration to cause breathing to occur.
For the sake of convenience, we will divide the respiratory system in to the upper and lower respiratory tracts:
The upper respiratory tract consists of the nose and the pharynx. Its primary function is to receive the air from the external environment and filter, warm, and humidify it before it reaches the delicate lungs where gas exchange will occur.
Air enters through the nostrils of the nose and is partially filtered by the nose hairs, then flows into the nasal cavity. The nasal cavity is lined with epithelial tissue, containing blood vessels, which help warm the air; and secrete mucous, which further filters the air. The endothelial lining of the nasal cavity also contains tiny hairlike projections, called cilia. The cilia serve to transport dust and other foreign particles, trapped in mucous, to the back of the nasal cavity and to the pharynx. There the mucus is either coughed out, or swallowed and digested by powerful stomach acids. After passing through the nasal cavity, the air flows down the pharynx to the larynx.
The lower respiratory tract starts with the larynx, and includes the trachea, the two bronchi that branch from the trachea, and the lungs themselves. This is where gas exchange actually takes place.
The larynx (plural larynges), colloquially known as the voice box, is an organ in our neck involved in protection of the trachea and sound production. The larynx houses the vocal cords, and is situated just below where the tract of the pharynx splits into the trachea and the esophagus.
The larynx contains two important structures: the epiglottis and the vocal cords.
The epiglottis is a flap of cartilage located at the opening to the larynx. During swallowing, the larynx (at the epiglottis and at the glottis) closes to prevent swallowed material from entering the lungs; the larynx is also pulled upwards to assist this process. Stimulation of the larynx by ingested matter produces a strong cough reflex to protect the lungs. Note: choking occurs when the epiglottis fails to cover the trachea, and food becomes lodged in our windpipe.
The vocal cords consist of two folds of connective tissue that stretch and vibrate when air passes through them, causing vocalization. The length the vocal cords are stretched determines what pitch the sound will have. The strength of expiration from the lungs also contributes to the loudness of the sound. Our ability to have some voluntary control over the respiratory system enables us to sing and to speak. In order for the larynx to function and produce sound, we need air. That is why we can't talk when we're swallowing.
Homeostasis is maintained by the respiratory system in two ways: gas exchange and regulation of blood pH. Gas exchange is performed by the lungs by eliminating carbon dioxide, a waste product given off by cellular respiration. As carbon dioxide exits the body, oxygen needed for cellular respiration enters the body through the lungs. ATP, produced by cellular respiration, provides the energy for the body to perform many functions, including nerve conduction and muscle contraction. Lack of oxygen affects brain function, sense of judgment, and a host of other problems.
External respiration is the exchange of gas between the air in the alveoli and the blood within the pulmonary capillaries. A normal rate of respiration is 12-25 breaths per minute. In external respiration, gases diffuse in either direction across the walls of the alveoli. Oxygen diffuses from the air into the blood and carbon dioxide diffuses out of the blood into the air. Most of the carbon dioxide is carried to the lungs in plasma as bicarbonate ions (HCO3-). When blood enters the pulmonary capillaries, the bicarbonate ions and hydrogen ions are converted to carbonic acid (H2CO3) and then back into carbon dioxide (CO2) and water. This chemical reaction also uses up hydrogen ions. The removal of these ions gives the blood a more neutral pH, allowing hemoglobin to bind up more oxygen. De-oxygenated blood "blue blood" coming from the pulmonary arteries, generally has an oxygen partial pressure (pp) of 40 mmHg and CO2 pp of 45 mmHg. Oxygenated blood leaving the lungs via the pulmonary veins has an O2 pp of 100 mmHg and CO2 pp of 40 mmHg. It should be noted that alveolar O2 pp is 105 mmHg, and not 100 mmHg. The reason why pulmonary venous return blood has a lower than expected O2 pp can be explained by "Ventilation Perfusion Mismatch".
The Passage Way From the Trachea to the Bronchioles
There is a point at the inferior portion of the trachea where it branches into two directions that form the right and left primary bronchus. This point is called the Carina which is the keel-like cartilage plate at the division point. We are now at the Bronchial Tree. It is named so because it has a series of respiratory tubes that branch off into smaller and smaller tubes as they run throughout the lungs.
The Right Primary Bronchus is the first portion we come to, it then branches off into the Lobar (secondary) Bronchi, Segmental (tertiary) Bronchi, then to the Bronchioles which have little cartilage and are lined by simple cuboidal epithelium (See fig. 1). The bronchi are lined by pseudostratified columnar epithelium. Objects will likely lodge here at the junction of the Carina and the Right Primary Bronchus because of the vertical structure. Items have a tendency to fall in it, where as the Left Primary Bronchus has more of a curve to it which would make it hard to have things lodge there.
The Left Primary Bronchus has the same setup as the right with the lobar, segmental bronchi and the bronchioles.
The lungs are attached to the heart and trachea through structures that are called the roots of the lungs. The roots of the lungs are the bronchi, pulmonary vessels, bronchial vessels, lymphatic vessels, and nerves. These structures enter and leave at the hilus of the lung which is "the depression in the medial surface of a lung that forms the opening through which the bronchus, blood vessels, and nerves pass" (medlineplus.gov).
There are a number of terminal bronchioles connected to respiratory bronchioles which then advance into the alveolar ducts that then become alveolar sacs. Each bronchiole terminates in an elongated space enclosed by many air sacs called alveoli which are surrounded by blood capillaries. Present there as well, are Alveolar Macrophages, they ingest any microbes that reach the alveoli. The Pulmonary Alveoli are microscopic, which means they can only be seen through a microscope, membranous air sacs within the lungs. They are units of respiration and the site of gas exchange between the respiratory and circulatory systems.
First the oxygen must diffuse from the alveolus into the capillaries. It is able to do this because the capillaries are permeable to oxygen. After it is in the capillary, about 5% will be dissolved in the blood plasma. The other oxygen will bind to red blood cells. The red blood cells contain hemoglobin that carries oxygen. Blood with hemoglobin is able to transport 26 times more oxygen than plasma without hemoglobin. Our bodies would have to work much harder pumping more blood to supply our cells with oxygen without the help of hemoglobin. Once it diffuses by osmosis it combines with the hemoglobin to form oxyhemoglobin.
Now the blood carrying oxygen is pumped through the heart to the rest of the body. Oxygen will travel in the blood into arteries, arterioles, and eventually capillaries where it will be very close to body cells. Now with different conditions in temperature and pH (warmer and more acidic than in the lungs), and with pressure being exerted on the cells, the hemoglobin will give up the oxygen where it will diffuse to the cells to be used for cellular respiration, also called aerobic respiration. Cellular respiration is the process of moving energy from one chemical form (glucose) into another (ATP), since all cells use ATP for all metabolic reactions.
It is in the mitochondria of the cells where oxygen is actually consumed and carbon dioxide produced. Oxygen is produced as it combines with hydrogen ions to form water at the end of the electron transport chain (see chapter on cells). As cells take apart the carbon molecules from glucose, these get released as carbon dioxide. Each body cell releases carbon dioxide into nearby capillaries by diffusion, because the level of carbon dioxide is higher in the body cells than in the blood. In the capillaries, some of the carbon dioxide is dissolved in plasma and some is taken by the hemoglobin, but most enters the red blood cells where it binds with water to form carbonic acid. It travels to the capillaries surrounding the lung where a water molecule leaves, causing it to turn back into carbon dioxide. It then enters the lungs where it is exhaled into the atmosphere.
You can increase both the amount you inhale, and the amount you exhale, by breathing deeply. Breathing in very deeply is Inspiratory Reserve Volume and can increase lung volume by 2900 mL, which is quite a bit more than the tidal volume of 500 mL. We can also increase expiration by contracting our thoracic and abdominal muscles. This is called expiratory reserve volume and is about 1400 ml of air. Vital capacity is the total of tidal, inspiratory reserve and expiratory reserve volumes; it is called vital capacity because it is vital for life, and the more air you can move, the better off you are. There are a number of illnesses that we will discuss later in the chapter that decrease vital capacity. Vital Capacity can vary a little depending on how much we can increase inspiration by expanding our chest and lungs. Some air that we breathe never even reaches the lungs! Instead it fills our nasal cavities, trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles. These passages aren't used in gas exchange so they are considered to be dead air space. To make sure that the inhaled air gets to the lungs, we need to breathe slowly and deeply. Even when we exhale deeply some air is still in the lungs,(about 1000 ml) and is called residual volume. This air isn't useful for gas exchange. There are certain types of diseases of the lung where residual volume builds up because the person cannot fully empty the lungs. This means that the vital capacity is also reduced because their lungs are filled with useless air.
There are two pathways of motor neuron stimulation of the respiratory muscles. The first is the control of voluntary breathing by the cerebral cortex. The second is involuntary breathing controlled by the medulla oblongata.
There are chemoreceptors in the aorta, the carotid body of carotid arteries, and in the medulla oblongata of the brainstem that are sensitive to pH. As carbon dioxide levels increase there is a buildup of carbonic acid, which releases hydrogen ions and lowers pH. Thus, the chemoreceptors do not respond to changes in oxygen levels (which actually change much more slowly), but to pH, which is dependent upon plasma carbon dioxide levels. In other words, CO2 is the driving force for breathing. The receptors in the aorta and the carotid sinus initiate a reflex that immediately stimulates breathing rate and the receptors in the medulla stimulate a sustained increase in breathing until blood pH returns to normal.
This response can be experienced by running a 100-meter dash. During this exertion (or any other sustained exercise) your muscle cells must metabolize ATP at a much faster rate than usual, and thus will produce much higher quantities of CO2. The blood pH drops as CO2 levels increase, and you will involuntarily increase breathing rate very soon after beginning the sprint. You will continue to breathe heavily after the race, thus expelling more carbon dioxide, until pH has returned to normal. Metabolic acidosis therefore is acutely corrected by respiratory compensation (hyperventilation).
Many of us are not aware of the importance of maintaining the acid/base balance of our blood. It is vital to our survival. Normal blood pH is set at 7.4, which is slightly alkaline or "basic". If the pH of our blood drops below 7.2 or rises above 7.6 then very soon our brains would cease functioning normally and we would be in big trouble. Blood pH levels below 6.9 or above 7.9 are usually fatal if they last for more than a short time. Another wonder of our amazing bodies is the ability to cope with every pH change – large or small. There are three factors in this process: the lungs, the kidneys and buffers.
So what exactly is pH? pH is the concentration of hydrogen ions (H+). Buffers are molecules which take in or release ions in order to maintain the H+ ion concentration at a certain level. When blood pH is too low and the blood becomes too acidic (acidosis), the presence of too many H+ ions is to blame. Buffers help to soak up those extra H+ ions. On the other hand, the lack of H+ ions causes the blood to be too basic (alkalosis). In this situation, buffers release H+ ions. Buffers function to maintain the pH of our blood by either donating or grabbing H+ ions as necessary to keep the number of H+ ions floating around the blood at just the right amount.
The most important buffer we have in our bodies is a mixture of carbon dioxide (CO2) and bicarbonate ion (HCO3). CO2 forms carbonic acid (H2CO3) when it dissolves in water and acts as an acid giving up hydrogen ions (H+) when needed. HCO3 is a base and soaks up hydrogen ions (H+) when there are too many of them. In a nutshell, blood pH is determined by a balance between bicarbonate and carbon dioxide.
Bicarbonate Buffer System.
With this important system our bodies maintain homeostasis.
If pH is too high, carbonic acid will donate hydrogen ions (H+) and pH will drop.
If pH is too low, bicarbonate will bond with hydrogen ions (H+) and pH will rise.
Too much CO2 or too little HCO3 in the blood will cause acidosis. The CO2 level is increased when hypoventilation or slow breathing occurs, such as if you have emphysema or pneumonia. Bicarbonate will be lowered by ketoacidosis, a condition caused by excess fat metabolism (diabetes mellitus).
Too much HCO3 or too little CO2 in the blood will cause alkalosis. This condition is less common than acidosis. CO2 can be lowered by hyperventilation.
So, in summary, if you are going into respiratory acidosis the above equation will move to the right. The body's H+ and CO2 levels will rise and the pH will drop. To counteract this the body will breathe more and release H+. In contrast, if you are going into respiratory alkalosis the equation will move to the left. The body's H+ and CO2 levels will fall and the pH will rise. So the body will try to breathe less to release HCO3. You can think of it like a leak in a pipe: where ever there is a leak, the body will "fill the hole".
The environment of the lung is very moist, which makes it a hospitable environment for bacteria. Many respiratory illnesses are the result of bacterial or viral infection of the lungs. Because we are constantly being exposed to harmful bacteria and viruses in our environment, our respiratory health can be adversely affected. There are a number of illnesses and diseases that can cause problems with breathing. Some are simple infections, and others are disorders that can be quite serious.
Carbon Monoxide Poisoning: caused when carbon monoxide binds to hemoglobin in place of oxygen. Carbon monoxide binds much tighter, without releasing, causing the hemoglobin to become unavailable to oxygen. The result can be fatal in a very short amount of time.
Mild Symptoms: flu like symptoms, dizziness, fatigue, headaches, nausea, and irregular breathing
Moderate Symptoms: chest pain, rapid heart beat, difficulty thinking, blurred vision, shortness of breath and unsteadiness
Severe Symptoms: seizures, palpitations, disorientation, irregular heart beat, low blood pressure, coma and death.
Pulmonary Embolism: blockage of the pulmonary artery (or one of its branches) by a blood clot, fat, air or clumped tumor cells. By far the most common form of pulmonary embolism is a thromboembolism, which occurs when a blood clot, generally a venous thrombus, becomes dislodged from its site of formation and embolizes to the arterial blood supply of one of the lungs.
Symptoms may include difficulty breathing, pain during breathing, and more rarely circulatory instability and death. Treatment, usually, is with anticoagulant medication.
The upper respiratory tract consists of our nasal cavities, pharynx, and larynx. Upper respiratory infections (URI) can spread from our nasal cavities to our sinuses, ears, and larynx. Sometimes a viral infection can lead to what is called a secondary bacterial infection. "Strep throat" is a primary bacterial infection and can lead to an upper respiratory infection that can be generalized or even systemic (affects the body as a whole). Antibiotics aren't used to treat viral infections, but are successful in treating most bacterial infections, including strep throat. The symptoms of strep throat can be a high fever, severe sore throat, white patches on a dark red throat, and stomach ache.
An infection of the cranial sinuses is called sinusitis. Only about 1-3% of URI's are accompanied by sinusitis. This "sinus infection" develops when nasal congestion blocks off the tiny openings that lead to the sinuses. Some symptoms include: post nasal discharge, facial pain that worsens when bending forward, and sometimes even tooth pain can be a symptom. Successful treatment depends on restoring the proper drainage of the sinuses. Taking a hot shower or sleeping upright can be very helpful. Otherwise, using a spray decongestant or sometimes a prescribed antibiotic will be necessary.
Otitis media in an infection of the middle ear. Even though the middle ear is not part of the respiratory tract, it is discussed here because it is often a complication seen in children who has a nasal infection. The infection can be spread by way of the 'auditory (Eustachian) tube that leads form the nasopharynx to the middle ear. The main symptom is usually pain. Sometimes though, vertigo, hearing loss, and dizziness may be present. Antibiotics can be prescribed and tubes are placed in the eardrum to prevent the buildup of pressure in the middle ear and the possibility of hearing loss.
An infection of the larynx is called laryngitis. It is accompanied by hoarseness and being unable to speak in an audible voice. Usually, laryngitis disappears with treatment of the URI. Persistent hoarseness without a URI is a warning sign of cancer, and should be checked into by your physician.
Lower respiratory tract disorders include infections, restrictive pulmonary disorders, obstructive pulmonary disorders, and lung cancer.
An infection that is located in the primary and secondary bronchi is called bronchitis. Most of the time, it is preceded by a viral URI that led to a secondary bacterial infection. Usually, a nonproductive cough turns into a deep cough that will expectorate mucus and sometimes pus.
A bacterial or viral infection in the lungs where the bronchi and the alveoli fill with a thick fluid. Usually it is preceded by influenza. Symptoms of pneumonia include high fever & chills, with headache and chest pain. Pneumonia can be located in several lobules of the lung and obviously, the more lobules involved, the more serious the infection. It can be caused by a bacteria that is usually held in check, but due to stress or reduced immunity has gained the upper hand.
Vital capacity is reduced in these types of disorders because the lungs have lost their elasticity. Inhaling particles such as sand, asbestos, coal dust, or fiberglass can lead to pulmonary fibrosis, a condition where fibrous tissue builds up in the lungs. This makes it so our lungs cannot inflate properly and are always tending toward deflation. Pulmonary fibrosis can be synonymous with interstitial lung disease (ILD), or interstitial pneumonia or pneumonitis.
Diagram of the lungs during an asthma attack.
Asthma is a respiratory disease of the bronchi and bronchioles. The symptoms include wheezing, shortness of breath, and sometimes a cough that will expel mucus. The airways are very sensitive to irritants which can include pollen, dust, animal dander, and tobacco. Even being out in cold air can be an irritant. When exposed to an irritant, the smooth muscle in the bronchioles undergoes spasms. Most asthma patients have at least some degree of bronchial inflammation that reduces the diameter of the airways and contributes to the seriousness of the attack.
Emphysema is a type of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Typically characterized by a loss of elasticity and surfactant in the alveoli, a loss of surface area decreases the gas exchange in the lungs. These patients have difficulty with too little expiratory pressure, not retaining inspired air long enough for sufficient gas exchange to happen.
Another type of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, Chronic Bronchitis is caused by overproduction of mucus in the airways, causing an inadequate expiration of inspired air. Retention of air in the lungs reduces gas exchange at the alveoli, and can lead to a hypoxic drive. These patients are known as "blue bloaters", vulnerable to cyanosis and often have increased thoracic diameters.
At birth the pressure needed to expand the lungs requires high inspiratory pressure. In the presence of normal surfactant levels the lungs retain as much as 40% of the residual volume after the first breath and thereafter will only require far lower inspiratory pressures. In the case of deficiency of surfactant the lungs will collapse between breaths, this makes the infant work hard and each breath is as hard as the first breath. If this goes on further the pulmonary capillary membranes become more permeable, letting in fibrin rich fluids between the alveolar spaces and in turn forms a hyaline membrane. The hyaline membrane is a barrier to gas exchange, this hyaline membrane then causes hypoxemia and carbon dioxide retention that in turn will further impair surfactant production.
Type two alveolar cells produce surfactant and do not develop until the 25th to the 28th week of gestation, in this, respiratory distress syndrome is one of the most common respiratory disease in premature infants. Furthermore, surfactant deficiency and pulmonary immaturity together leads to alveolar collapse. Predisposing factors that contribute to poorly functioning type II alveolar cells in a premature baby are if the child is a preterm male, white infants, infants of mothers with diabetes, precipitous deliveries, cesarean section performed before the 38th week of gestation.
Surfactant synthesis is influenced by hormones, this ranges form insulin and cortisol. Insulin inhibits surfactant production, explaining why infants of mothers with diabetes type 1 are at risk of development of respiratory distress syndrome. Cortisol can speed up maturation of type II cells and therefore production of surfactant. Finally, in the baby delivered by cesarean section are at greater risk of developing respiratory distress syndrome because the reduction of cortisol produced because the lack of stress that happens during vaginal delivery, hence cortisol increases in high stress and helps in the maturation of type II cells of the alveoli that cause surfactant.
Today to prevent respiratory distress syndrome are animal sources and synthetic surfactants, and administrated through the airways by an endotracheal tube and the surfactant is suspended in a saline solution. Treatment is initiated post birth and in infants who are at high risk for respiratory distress syndrome.
CPAP is the most common treatment for obstructive sleep apnea.
Sleep apnea or sleep apnoea is a sleep disorder characterized by pauses in breathing during sleep. These episodes, called apneas (literally, "without breath"), each last long enough so one or more breaths are missed, and occur repeatedly throughout sleep. The standard definition of any apneic event includes a minimum 10 second interval between breaths, with either a neurological arousal (3-second or greater shift in EEG frequency, measured at C3, C4, O1, or O2), or a blood oxygen desaturation of 3-4 percent or greater, or both arousal and desaturation. Sleep apnea is diagnosed with an overnight sleep test called polysomnogram.
One method of treating central sleep apnea is with a special kind of CPAP, APAP, or VPAP machine with a Spontaneous Time (ST) feature. This machine forces the wearer to breathe a constant number of breaths per minute.
(CPAP), or continuous positive airway pressure, in which a controlled air compressor generates an airstream at a constant pressure. This pressure is prescribed by the patient's physician, based on an overnight test or titration.
Nutrition is particularly important for ventilator-dependent patient. When metabolizing macronutrients carbon dioxide and water are produced. The respiratory quotient (RQ) is a ratio of produced carbon dioxide to amount consumed. Carbohydrates metabolism produces the most amount of carbon dioxide so they have the highest (RQ). Fats produce the least amount of carbon dioxide along with proteins. Protein has a slightly higher RQ ratio. It is recommended that this kind of patient not exceed a 1.0 respiratory quotient (RQ). Lowering carbohydrates and supplementing fat or protein in the diet might not result in maintaining the desired outcome because, excess amounts fat or protein may also result in a respiratory quotient (RQ) higher than 1.0.
Please reference source and fact accuracy. It seems like by definition, it is impossible to exceed a respiratory quotient (RQ) of 1.0. *
This disease is most common in Caucasians and will happen to 1 in every 2500 people. It is most known for its effects on the respiratory tract although it does effect other systems as well. The respiratory passages become clogged with a thick mucus that is difficult to expel even with vigorous coughing. Breathing becomes difficult and affected individuals run the risk of choking to death on their own secretions unless strenuous effort is made to clear the lungs multiple times every day. Victims frequently will die in the 20's of pneumonia. All of us secrete mucus by certain cells in the epithelium that line the respiratory passageways. In normal cases the cells also secrete a watery fluid that will dilute the mucus making it easier to pass through the airways. In cystic fibrosis that secretion of watery fluid is impaired. This makes the mucus thicker and difficult to clear from the passageways. A 1989 discovery found that cystic fibrosis is caused by defects in a type of anion channel found in apical membranes of epithelial cells in the respiratory system and elsewhere[1]. The defects directly impede the chloride ion transport, which will then indirectly effect other exchanges of ions in the cells. This causes the epithelium to not create the osmotic gradient necessary for water
Mader, Sylvia S. Human Biology. McGraw Hill Publishing, Burr Ridge, IL. 2004.
"The respiratory system"Authors Mary Kitteredge,intro. by C. Everett Koop, M.D.,SC.D., foreword by Sandra Thurman
Eastern Kentucky University Gary Ritchison Lecture Notes: Human Respiration (includes videos)
Which organ is the most important organ in the body? Most people would say the heart or the brain, completely overlooking the gastrointestinal tract (GI tract). Though definitely not the most attractive organs in the body, they are certainly among the most important. The 30+ foot long tube that goes from the mouth to the anus is responsible for the many different body functions which will be reviewed in this chapter. The GI tract is imperative for our well being and our lifelong health. A non-functioning or poorly functioning GI tract can be the source of many chronic health problems that can interfere with your quality of life. In many instances the death of a person begins in the intestines.
The old saying "you are what you eat" perhaps would be more accurate if worded "you are what you absorb and digest". Here we will be looking at the importance of these two functions of the digestive system: digestion and absorption.
The Gastrointestinal System is responsible for the breakdown and absorption of various foods and liquids needed to sustain life. Many different organs have essential roles in the digestion of food, from the mechanical disrupting by the teeth to the creation of bile (an emulsifier) by the liver. Bile production of the liver plays an important role in digestion: from being stored and concentrated in the gallbladder during fasting stages to being discharged to the small intestine.
In order to understand the interactions of the different components we shall follow the food on its journey through the human body. During digestion, two main processes occur at the same time;
Mechanical Digestion: larger pieces of food get broken down into smaller pieces while being prepared for chemical digestion. Mechanical digestion starts in the mouth and continues into the stomach.
Chemical Digestion: starts in the mouth and continues into the intestines. Several different enzymes break down macromolecules into smaller molecules that can be absorbed.
The GI tract starts with the mouth and proceeds to the esophagus, stomach, small intestine (duodenum, jejunum, ileum), and then to the large intestine (colon), rectum, and terminates at the anus. You could probably say the human body is just like a big donut. The GI tract is the donut hole. We will also be discussing the pancreas and liver, and accessory organs of the gastrointestinal system that contribute materials to the small intestine.
The GI tract is composed of four layers also known as Tunics. Each layer has different tissues and functions. From the inside out they are called: mucosa, submucosa, muscularis, and serosa.
Mucosa: The mucosa is the absorptive and secretory layer. It is composed of simple epithelium cells and a thin connective tissue. There are specialized goblet cells that secrete mucus throughout the GI tract located within the mucosa. On the mucosa layer there are Villi and Micro Villi.
Submucosa: The submucosa is relatively thick, highly vascular, and serves the mucosa. The absorbed elements that pass through the mucosa are picked up from the blood vessels of the submucosa. The submucosa also has glands and nerve plexuses.
Muscularis: The muscularis is responsible for segmental contractions and peristaltic movement in the GI tract. The muscularis is composed of two layers of muscle: an inner circular and outer longitudinal layer of smooth muscle. These muscles cause food to move and churn with digestive enzymes down the GI tract.
Serosa: The last layer is a protective layer. It is composed of avascular connective tissue and simple squamous epithelium. It secretes lubricating serous fluid. This is the visible layer on the outside of the organs.
Exocrine gland that produces saliva which begins the process of digestion with amylase
Produces and excretes bile required for emulsifying fats. Some of the bile drains directly into the duodenum and some is stored in the gall bladder.
Helps metabolize proteins, lipids, and carbohydrates.
Breaks down insulin and other hormones.
Produces coagulation factors.
Bile storage.
Exocrine functions: Digestive enzyme secretion.
Stores zymogens (inactive enzymes) that will be activated by the brush border membrane in the small intestine when a person eats protein (amino acids).
Trypsinogen – Trypsin: digests protein.
Chymotypsinogen – Chymotrypsin: digests proteins.
Carboxypeptidases: digests proteins.
Lipase-lipid: digests fats.
Amylase: digests carbohydrates.
Endocrine functions: Hormone secretion.
Somatostatin: inhibits the function of insulin. Produced if the body is getting too much glucose.
Glucagon: stimulates the stored glycogen in the liver to convert to glucose. Produced if the body does not have enough glucose.
There are a few theories on what the appendix does.
The first step in the digestive system can actually begin before the food is even in your mouth. When you smell or see something that you just have to eat, you start to salivate in anticipation of eating, thus beginning the digestive process.
Food is the body's source of fuel. Nutrients in food give the body's cells the energy they need to operate. Before food can be used it has to be broken down into tiny little pieces so it can be absorbed and used by the body. In humans, proteins need to be broken down into amino acids, starches into sugars, and fats into fatty acids and glycerol.
During digestion two main processes occur at the same time:
Mechanical Digestion: larger pieces of food get broken down into smaller pieces while being prepared for chemical digestion. Mechanical digestion starts in the mouth and continues in to the stomach.
Chemical Digestion: several different enzymes break down macromolecules into smaller molecules that can be more efficiently absorbed. Chemical digestion starts with saliva and continues into the intestines.
The digestive system is made up by the alimentary canal, or the digestive tract, and other abdominal organs that play a part in digestion such as the liver and the pancreas. The alimentary canal is the long tube of organs that runs from the mouth (where the food enters) to the anus (where indigestible waste leaves). The organs in the alimentary canal include the mouth( for mastication),esophagus, stomach and the intestines. The average adult digestive tract is about thirty feet (30') long. While in the digestive tract the food is really passing through the body rather than being in the body. The smooth muscles of the tubular digestive organs move the food efficiently along as it is broken down into absorb-able atoms and molecules. During absorption, the nutrients that come from food (such as proteins, fats, carbohydrates, vitamins, and minerals) pass through the wall of the small intestine and into the bloodstream and lymph. In this way nutrients can be distributed throughout the rest of the body. In the large intestine there is re absorption of water and absorption of some minerals as feces are formed. The parts of the food that the body passes out through the anus is known as feces.
Digestion begins in the mouth. A brain reflex triggers the flow of saliva when we see or even think about food. Saliva moistens the food while the teeth chew it up and make it easier to swallow. Amylase, which is the digestive enzyme found in saliva, starts to break down starch into simpler sugars before the food even leaves the mouth. The nervous pathway involved in salivary excretion requires stimulation of receptors in the mouth, sensory impulses to the brain stem, and parasympathetic impulses to salivary glands.
Swallowing your food happens when the muscles in your tongue and mouth move the food into your pharynx. The pharynx, which is the passageway for food and air, is about five inches (5") long. A small flap of skin called the epiglottis closes over the pharynx to prevent food from entering the trachea and thus choking. For swallowing to happen correctly a combination of 25 muscles must all work together at the same time. Salivary glands also produce an estimated three liters of saliva per day.
The esophagus (also spelled oesophagus/esophagus) or gullet is the muscular tube in vertebrates through which ingested food passes from the throat to the stomach. The esophagus is continuous with the laryngeal part of the pharynx at the level of the C6 vertebra. It connects the pharynx, which is the body cavity that is common to both the digestive and respiratory systems behind the mouth, with the stomach, where the second stage of digestion is initiated (the first stage is in the mouth with teeth and tongue masticating food and mixing it with saliva).
After passing through the throat, the food moves into the esophagus and is pushed down into the stomach by the process of peristalsis (involuntary wavelike muscle contractions along the G.I. tract). At the end of the esophagus there is a sphincter that allows food into the stomach then closes back up so the food cannot travel back up into the esophagus.
The esophagus is lined with mucus membranes, and uses peristaltic action to move swallowed food down to the stomach.
The esophagus is lined by a stratified squamous epithelium, which is rapidly turned over, and serves a protective effect due to the high volume transit of food, saliva, and mucus into the stomach. The lamina propria of the esophagus is sparse. The mucus secreting glands are located in the submucosa, and are connective structures called papillae.
The muscularis propria of the esophagus consists of striated muscle in the upper third (superior) part of the esophagus. The middle third consists of a combination of smooth muscle and striated muscle, and the bottom (inferior) third is only smooth muscle. The distal end of the esophagus is slightly narrowed because of the thickened circular muscles. This part of the esophagus is called the lower esophageal sphincter. This aids in keeping food down and not being regurgitated.
The esophagus has a rich lymphatic drainage as well.
The stomach is a thick walled organ that lies between the esophagus and the first part of the small intestine (the duodenum). It is on the left side of the abdominal cavity, the fundus of the stomach lying against the diaphragm. Lying beneath the stomach is the pancreas. The greater omentum hangs from the greater curvature.
A mucous membrane lines the stomach which contains glands (with chief cells) that secrete gastric juices, up to three quarts of this digestive fluid is produced daily. The gastric glands begin secreting before food enters the stomach due to the parasympathetic impulses of the vagus nerve, making the stomach also a storage vat for that acid.
The secretion of gastric juices occurs in three phases: cephalic, gastric, and intestinal. The cephalic phase is activated by the smell and taste of food and swallowing. The gastric phase is activated by the chemical effects of food and the distension of the stomach. The intestinal phase blocks the effect of the cephalic and gastric phases. Gastric juice also contains an enzyme named pepsin, which digests proteins, hydrochloric acid and mucus. Hydrochloric acid causes the stomach to maintain a pH of about 2, which helps kill off bacteria that comes into the digestive system via food.
The stomach is divided into four sections, each of which has different cells and functions. The sections are: 1) Cardiac region, where the contents of the esophagus empty into the stomach, 2) Fundus, formed by the upper curvature of the organ, 3) Body, the main central region, and 4) Pylorus or atrium, the lower section of the organ that facilitates emptying the contents into the small intestine. Two smooth muscle valves, or sphincters, keep the contents of the stomach contained. They are the: 1) Cardiac or esophageal sphincter, dividing the tract above, and 2) Pyloric sphincter, dividing the stomach from the small intestine.
After receiving the bolus (chewed food) the process of peristalsis is started; mixed and churned with gastric juices the bolus is transformed into a semi-liquid substance called chyme. Stomach muscles mix up the food with enzymes and acids to make smaller digestible pieces. The pyloric sphincter, a walnut shaped muscular tube at the stomach outlet, keeps chyme in the stomach until it reaches the right consistency to pass into the small intestine. The food leaves the stomach in small squirts rather than all at once.
Water, alcohol, salt, and simple sugars can be absorbed directly through the stomach wall. However, most substances in our food need a little more digestion and must travel into the intestines before they can be absorbed. When the stomach is empty it is about the size of one fifth of a cup of fluid. When stretched and expanded, it can hold up to eight cups of food after a big meal.
There are many different gastric glands and they secrete many different chemicals. Parietal cells secrete hydrochloric acid and intrinsic factor; chief cells secrete pepsinogen; goblet cells secrete mucus; argentaffin cells secrete serotonin and histamine; and G cells secrete the hormone gastrin.
Arteries: The arteries supplying the stomach are the left gastric, the right gastric and right gastroepiploic branches of the hepatic, and the left gastroepiploic and short gastric branches of the lineal. They supply the muscular coat, ramify in the submucous coat, and are finally distributed to the mucous membrane.
Capillaries: The arteries break up at the base of the gastric tubules into a plexus of fine capillaries, which run upward between the tubules, anatomizing with each other, and ending in a plexus of larger capillaries, which surround the mouths of the tubes, and also form hexagonal meshes around the ducts.
Veins: From these the veins arise, and pursue a straight course downward, between the tubules, to the submucous tissue; they end either in the lineal and superior mesenteric veins, or directly in the portal vein.
Lymphatics: The lymphatics are numerous: They consist of a superficial and a deep set, and pass to the lymph glands found along the two curvatures of the organ.
Nerves: The nerves are the terminal branches of the right and left urethra and other parts, the former being distributed upon the back, and the latter upon the front part of the organ. A great number of branches from the celiac plexus of the sympathetic are also distributed to it. Nerve plexuses are found in the submucous coat and between the layers of the muscular coat as in the intestine. From these plexuses fibrils are distributed to the muscular tissue and the mucous membrane.
Disorders of the stomach are common. There can be a lot of different causes with a variety of symptoms. The strength of the inner lining of the stomach needs a careful balance of acid and mucus. If there is not enough mucus in the stomach, ulcers, abdominal pain, indigestion, heartburn, nausea and vomiting could all be caused by the extra acid.
Erosions, ulcers, and tumors can cause bleeding. When blood is in the stomach it starts the digestive process and turns black. When this happens, the person can have black stool or vomit. Some ulcers can bleed very slowly so the person won't recognize the loss of blood. Over time, the iron in your body will run out, which in turn, will cause anemia.
There isn't a known diet to prevent against getting ulcers. A balanced, healthy diet is always recommended. Smoking can also be a cause of problems in the stomach. Tobacco increases acid production and damages the lining of the stomach. It is not a proven fact that stress alone can cause an ulcer.
Like the other parts of the gastrointestinal tract, the stomach walls are made of a number of layers.
From the inside to the outside, the first main layer is the mucosa. This consists of an epithelium, the lamina propria underneath, and a thin bit of smooth muscle called the muscularis mucosa.
The submucosa lies under this and consists of fibrous connective tissue, separating the mucosa from the next layer, the muscularis externa. The muscularis in the stomach differs from that of other GI organs in that it has three layers of muscle instead of two. Under these muscle layers is the adventitia, layers of connective tissue continuous with the omenta.
The epithelium of the stomach forms deep pits, called fundic or oxyntic glands. Different types of cells are at different locations down the pits. The cells at the base of these pits are chief cells, responsible for production of pepsinogen, an inactive precursor of pepsin, which degrades proteins. The secretion of pepsinogen prevents self-digestion of the stomach cells.
Further up the pits, parietal cells produce gastric acid and a vital substance, intrinsic factor. The function of gastric acid is twofold 1) it kills most of the bacteria in food, stimulates hunger, and activates pepsinogen into pepsin, and 2) denatures the complex protein molecule as a precursor to protein digestion through enzyme action in the stomach and small intestines. Near the top of the pits, closest to the contents of the stomach, there are mucous-producing cells called goblet cells that help protect the stomach from self-digestion.
The muscularis externa is made up of three layers of smooth muscle. The innermost layer is obliquely-oriented: this is not seen in other parts of the digestive system: this layer is responsible for creating the motion that churns and physically breaks down the food. The next layers are the square and then the longitudinal, which are present as in other parts of the GI tract. The pyloric antrum which has thicker skin cells in its walls and performs more forceful contractions than the fundus. The pylorus is surrounded by a thick circular muscular wall which is normally tonically constricted forming a functional (if not anatomically discrete) pyloric sphincter, which controls the movement of chyme.
The movement and the flow of chemicals into the stomach are controlled by both the nervous system and by the various digestive system hormones.
The hormone gastrin causes an increase in the secretion of HCL, pepsinogen and intrinsic factor from parietal cells in the stomach. It also causes increased motility in the stomach. Gastrin is released by G-cells into the stomach. It is inhibited by pH normally less than 4 (high acid), as well as the hormone somatostatin.
Cholecystokinin (CCK) has most effect on the gall bladder, but it also decreases gastric emptying. In a different and rare manner, secretin, produced in the small intestine, has most effects on the pancreas, but will also diminish acid secretion in the stomach.
Gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP) and enteroglucagon decrease both gastric motility and secretion of pepsin. Other than gastrin, these hormones act to turn off the stomach action. This is in response to food products in the liver and gall bladder, which have not yet been absorbed. The stomach needs only to push food into the small intestine when the intestine is not busy. While the intestine is full and still digesting food, the stomach acts as a storage for food.
The small intestine is the site where most of the chemical and mechanical digestion is carried out. Tiny projections called villi line the small intestine which absorbs digested food into the capillaries. Most of the food absorption takes place in the jejunum and the ileum.
The functions of a small intestine is, the digestion of proteins into peptides and amino acids principally occurs in the stomach but some also occurs in the small intestine. Peptides are degraded into amino acids; lipids (fats) are degraded into fatty acids and glycerol; and carbohydrates are degraded into simple sugars.
The three main sections of the small intestine are the duodenum, the jejunum, the ileum.
In anatomy of the digestive system, the duodenum is a hollow jointed tube connecting the stomach to the jejunum. It is the first and shortest part of the small intestine. It begins with the duodenal bulb and ends at the ligament of Treitz. The duodenum is almost entirely retro peritoneal. The duodenum is also where the bile and pancreatic juices enter the intestine.
The jejunum is a part of the small bowel, located between the distal end of duodenum and the proximal part of ileum. The jejunum and the ileum are suspended by an extensive mesentery giving the bowel great mobility within the abdomen.
The inner surface of the jejunum, its mucous membrane, is covered in projections called villi, which increase the surface area of tissue available to absorb nutrients from the gut contents. It is different from the ileum due to fewer goblet cells and generally lacks Peyer's patches.
Its function is to absorb vitamin B12 and bile salts. The wall itself is made up of folds, each of which has many tiny finger-like projections known as villi, on its surface. In turn, the epithelial cells which line these villi possess even larger numbers of micro villi. The cells that line the ileum contain the protease and carbohydrate enzymes responsible for the final stages of protein and carbohydrate digestion. These enzymes are present in the cytoplasm of the epithelial cells. The villi contain large numbers of capillaries which take the amino acids and glucose produced by digestion to the hepatic portal vein and the liver.
The terminal ileum continues to absorb bile salts, and is also crucial in the absorption of fat-soluble vitamins (Vitamin A, D, E and K). For fat-soluble vitamin absorption to occur, bile acids must be present.
The large intestine (colon) extends from the end of the ileum to the anus. It is about 5 feet long, being one-fifth of the whole extent of the intestinal canal. It's caliber is largest at the commencement at the cecum, and gradually diminishes as far as the rectum, where there is a dilatation of considerable size just above the anal canal. It differs from the small intestine in by the greater caliber, more fixed position, sacculated form, and in possessing certain appendages to its external coat, the appendices epiploicæ. Further, its longitudinal muscular fibers do not form a continuous layer around the gut, but are arranged in three longitudinal bands or tæniæ.
The large intestine is divided into the cecum, colon, rectum, and anal canal. In its course, describes an arch which surrounds the convolutions of the small intestine. It commences in the right iliac region, in a dilated part, the cecum. It ascends through the right lumbar and hypochondriac regions to the under surface of the liver; here it takes a bend, the right colic flexure, to the left and passes transversely across the abdomen on the confines of the epigastric and umbilical regions, to the left hypochondriac region; it then bends again, the left colic flexure, and descends through the left lumbar and iliac regions to the pelvis, where it forms a bend called the sigmoid flexure; from this it is continued along the posterior wall of the pelvis to the anus.
There are trillions of bacteria, yeasts, and parasites living in our intestines, mostly in the colon. Over 400 species of organisms live in the colon. Most of these are very helpful to our health, while the minority are harmful. Helpful organisms synthesize vitamins, like B12, biotin, and vitamin K. They breakdown toxins and stop proliferation of harmful organisms. They stimulate the immune system and produce short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) that are required for the health of colon cells and help prevent colon cancer. There are many beneficial bacteria but some of the most common and important are Lactobacillus Acidophilus and various species of Bifidobacterium. These are available as "probiotics" from many sources.
The pancreas, liver, and gallbladder are essential for digestion. The pancreas produces enzymes that help digest proteins, fats, and carbohydrates, the liver produces bile that helps the body absorb fat, and the gallbladder stores the bile until it is needed. The enzymes and bile travel through special channels called ducts and into the small intestine where they help break down the food.
The pancreas is located posterior to the stomach and in close association with the duodenum.
In humans, the pancreas is a 6-10 inch elongated organ in the abdomen located retro peritoneal. It is often described as having three regions: a head, body and tail. The pancreatic head abuts the second part of the duodenum while the tail extends towards the spleen. The pancreatic duct runs the length of the pancreas and empties into the second part of the duodenum at the ampulla of Vater. The common bile duct commonly joins the pancreatic duct at or near this point.
The pancreas is supplied arterially by the pancreaticoduodenal arteries, themselves branches of the superior mesenteric artery of the hepatic artery (branch of celiac trunk from the abdominal aorta). The superior mesenteric artery provides the inferior pancreaticoduodenal arteries while the gastroduodenal artery (one of the terminal branches of the hepatic artery) provides the superior pancreaticoduodenal artery. Venous drainage is via the pancreatic duodenal veins which end up in the portal vein. The splenic vein passed posterior to the pancreas but is said to not drain the pancreas itself. The portal vein is formed by the union of the superior mesenteric vein and splenic vein posterior to the body of the pancreas. In some people (as many as 40%) the inferior mesenteric vein also joins with the splenic vein behind the pancreas, in others it simply joins with the superior mesenteric vein instead.
The function of the pancreas is to produce enzymes that break down all categories of digestible foods (exocrine pancreas) and secrete hormones that affect carbohydrates metabolism (endocrine pancreas).
The pancreas is composed of pancreatic exocrine cells, whose ducts are arranged in clusters called acini (singular acinus). The cells are filled with secretory granules containing the precursor digestive enzymes (mainly trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen, pancreatic lipase, and amylase) that are secreted into the lumen of the acinus. These granules are termed zymogen granules (zymogen referring to the inactive precursor enzymes.) It is important to synthesize inactive enzymes in the pancreas to avoid auto degradation, which can lead to pancreatitis.
The pancreas is near the liver, and is the main source of enzymes for digesting fats (lipids) and proteins - the intestinal walls have enzymes that will digest polysaccharides. Pancreatic secretions from ductal cells contain bicarbonate ions and are alkaline in order to neutralize the acidic chyme that the stomach churns out. Control of the exocrine function of the pancreas are via the hormone gastrin, cholecystokinin and secretin, which are hormones secreted by cells in the stomach and duodenum, in response to distension and/or food and which causes secretion of pancreatic juices.
The two major proteases which the pancreas are trypsinogen and chymotrypsinogen. These zymogens are inactivated forms of trypsin and chymotrypsin. Once released in the intestine, the enzyme enterokinase present in the intestinal mucosa activates trypsinogen by cleaving it to form trypsin. The free trypsin then cleaves the rest of the trypsinogen and chymotrypsinogen to their active forms.
Pancreatic secretions accumulate in intralobular ducts that drain the main pancreatic duct, which drains directly into the duodenum.
Due to the importance of its enzyme contents, injuring the pancreas is a very dangerous situation. A puncture of the pancreas tends to require careful medical intervention.
Scattered among the acini are the endocrine cells of the pancreas, in groups called the islets of Langerhans. They are:
The islets are a compact collection of endocrine cells arranged in clusters and cords and are crisscrossed by a dense network of capillaries. The capillaries of the islets are lined by layers of endocrine cells in direct contact with vessels, and most endocrine cells are in direct contact with blood vessels, by either cytoplasmic processes or by direct apposition.
The liver is an organ in vertebrates, including human. It plays a major role in metabolism and has a number of functions in the body including glycogen storage, plasma protein synthesis, and drug detoxification. It also produces bile, which is important in digestion. It performs and regulates a wide variety of high-volume biochemical reaction requiring specialized tissues.
The liver normally weighs between 1.3 - 3.0 kilograms and is a soft, pinkish-brown "boomerang shaped" organ. It is the second largest organ (the largest being the skin) and the largest gland within the human body. Its anatomical position in the body is immediately under the diaphragm on the right side of the upper abdomen, The liver lies on the right side of the stomach and makes a kind of bed for the gallbladder.
The liver is supplied by two main blood vessels on its right lobe: the hepatic artery and the portal vein. The hepatic artery normally comes off the celiac trunk. The portal vein brings venous blood from the spleen, pancreas, and small intestine, so that the liver can process the nutrients and byproducts of food digestion. The hepatic veins drain directly into the inferior vena cava.
The bile produced in the liver is collected in bile canaliculi, which merge from bile ducts. These eventually drain into the right and left hepatic ducts, which in turn merge to form the common hepatic duct. The cystic duct (from the gallbladder) joins with the common hepatic duct to form the common bile duct. Bile can either drain directly into the duodenum via the common bile duct or be temporarily stored in the gallbladder via the cystic duct. The common bile duct and the pancreatic duct enter the duodenum together at the ampulla of Vater. The branching's of the bile ducts resemble those of a tree, and indeed term "biliary tree" is commonly used in this setting.
The liver is among the few internal human organs capable of natural regeneration of lost tissue: as little as 25% of remaining liver can regenerate into a whole liver again. This is predominantly due to hepatocytes acting as unipotential stem cells. There is also some evidence of bio potential stem cells, called oval cell, which can differentiate into either hepatocytes or cholangiocytes (cells that line bile ducts).
The various functions of the liver are carried out by the liver cells or hepatocytes.
The liver produces and excretes bile, required for dissolving fats. Some of the bile drains directly into the duodenum, and some is stored in the gallbladder
The liver performs several roles in carbohydrate metabolism:
The breakdown of insulin and other hormones
The liver also performs several roles in lipid metabolism:
The liver produces coagulation factors I (fibrinogen), II (prothrombin), V, VII, IX, X and XI, as well as protein C, Protein S and antithrombin.
The liver breaks down hemoglobin, creating metabolites that are added to bile as pigment
The liver breaks down toxic substances and most medicinal products in a process called drug metabolism. This sometimes results in toxication, when the metabolite is more toxic than its precursor.
The liver converts ammonia to urea.
The liver stores a multitude of substances, including glucose in the form of glycogen, vitamin B12, iron, and copper.
In the first trimester fetus, the liver is the main site of red blood cell production. By the 32nd weeks of gestation, the bone marrow has almost completely taken over that task.
The liver is responsible for immunological effects; the reticuloendothelial system of the liver contains many immunologically active cells, acting as a 'sieve' for antigens carried to it via the portal system.
The gallbladder is a pear shaped organ that stores about 50 ml of bile (or "gall") until the body needs it for digestion. The gallbladder is about 7-10cm long in humans and is dark green in appearance due to its contents (bile), not its tissue. It is connected to the liver and the duodenum by the biliary tract.
The gallbladder is connected to the main bile duct through the gallbladder duct (cystic duct). The main biliary tract runs from the liver to the duodenum, and the cystic duct is effectively a "cul de sac", serving as entrance and exit to the gallbladder. The surface marking of the gallbladder is the intersection of the midclavicular line (MCL) and the trans pyloric plane, at the tip of the ninth rib. The blood supply is by the cystic artery and vein, which runs parallel to the cystic duct. The cystic artery is highly variable, and this is of clinical relevance since it must be clipped and cut during a cholecystectomy.
The gallbladder has an epithelial lining characterized by recesses called Aschoff's recesses, which are pouches inside the lining. Under the epithelium there is a layer of connective tissue, followed by a muscular wall that contracts in response to cholecystokinin, a peptide hormone synthesized in the duodenum.
The gallbladder stores bile, which is released when food containing fat enters the digestive tract, stimulating the secretion of cholecystokinin (CCK). The bile emulsifies fats and neutralizes acids in partly digested food. After being stored in the gallbladder, the bile becomes more concentrated than when it left the liver, increasing its potency and intensifying its effect on fats.
The human anus is situated between the buttocks, posterior to the perineum. It has two anal sphincters, one internal, the other external. These hold the anus closed until defecation occurs. One sphincter consists of smooth muscle and its action is involuntary; the other consists of striated muscle and its action is voluntary. In many animals, the anus is surrounded by anal sacs.
Role of the anus is when the rectum is full, the increase in intra-rectal pressure forces the walls of the anal canal apart allowing the fecal matter to enter the canal. The rectum shortens as material is forced into the anal canal and peristaltic waves propel the feces out of the rectum. The internal and external sphincters of the anus allow the feces to be passed by muscles pulling the anus up over the exiting feces.
There are two different types of conditions that may affect the esophagus. The first type is called congenital: meaning a person is born with it. The second type is called non-congenital: meaning the person develops it after birth. Some examples of these are:
Both of these conditions are congenital. In Tracheoesophageal fistula there is a connection between the esophagus and the wind pipe (trachea) where there shouldn't be one. In Esophageal atresia the esophagus of a newborn does not connect to the stomach but comes to a dead end right before the stomach. Both conditions require corrective surgery and are usually detected right after the baby is born. In some cases, it can be detected before the baby is born.
Esophagitis is inflammation of the esophagus and is a non-congenital condition. Esophagitis can be caused by certain medications or by infections. It can also be caused by gastroesophageal reflux disease (gerd), a condition where the esophageal sphincter allows the acidic contents of the stomach to move back up into the esophagus. Gastroesophageal reflux disease can be treated with medications, but it can also be corrected by changing what you eat.
Everybody has experienced constipation or diarrhea in their lifetime. With constipation, the contents of the large intestines don't move along fast enough and waste material stays in the large intestines so long that almost all water is extracted out of the waste and it becomes hard. With diarrhea you get the exact opposite reaction: waste moves along too fast and the large intestines can't absorb the water before the waste is pushed through. Common flora bacteria assists in the prevention of many serious problems. Here are some more examples of common stomach and intestinal disorders:
Acute Appendicitis: An exemplary case of acute appendicitis in a 10-year-old boy. The organ is enlarged and sausage-like (botuliform). This longitudinal section shows the angry red inflamed mucosa with its irregular luminal surface. Diagnosed and removed early in the course of the disease, this appendix does not show late complications, like transmural necrosis, perforation, and abscess formation.
Appendicitis is the inflammation of the appendix, the finger-like pouch that extends from the cecum. The most common symptoms are abdominal pain, loss of appetite, fever, and vomiting. Children and teenagers are the most common victims of appendicitis, which must be corrected by surgery. While mild cases may resolve without treatment, most require removal of the inflamed appendix, either by laparotomy or laparoscopy. Untreated, mortality is high, mainly due to peritonitis and shock.
Celiac disease is a disorder in which a person's digestive system is damaged by the response of the immune system to a protein called gluten, which is found in rye, wheat, and barley, and also in foods like breakfast cereal and pizza crust. People who have celiac disease experience abdominal pain, diarrhea, bloating, exhaustion, and depression when they eat foods with gluten in them. They also have difficulty digesting their food. Celiac disease runs in families and becomes active after some sort of stress, like viral infections or surgery. The symptoms can be managed by following a gluten free diet. Doctors can diagnose this condition by taking a full medical history or with a blood test.
Diverticulitis is a common disease of the bowel, in particular the large intestine. Diverticulitis develops from diverticulosis, which involves the formation of pouches (diverticula) on the outside of the colon. Diverticulitis results if one of these diverticula becomes inflamed. In complicated diverticulitis, bacteria may subsequently infect the outside of the colon if an inflamed diverticula bursts open. If the infection spreads to the lining of the abdominal cavity (peritoneum), this can cause a potentially fatal peritonitis. Sometimes inflamed diverticula can cause narrowing of the bowel, leading to an obstruction. Also, the affected part of the colon could adhere to the bladder or other organ in the pelvic cavity, causing a fistula, or abnormal communication between the colon and an adjacent organ.
Usually the stomach and the duodenum are resistant to irritation because of the strong acids produced by the stomach. But sometimes a bacteria called Helicobacter pylori or the chronic use of drugs or certain medications, weakens the mucous layer that coats the stomach and the duodenum, allowing acid to get through the sensitive lining beneath. This can cause irritation and inflammation of the lining of the stomach, which is called gastritis, or cause peptic ulcers, which are holes or sores that form in the lining of the stomach and duodenum and cause pain and bleeding. Medications are the best way to treat this condition.
Gastrointestinal infections can be caused by bacteria such as Campylobacter, Salmonella, E. coli, or Shigella. They can also be caused by viruses or by intestinal parasites like amebiasis and Giardiasis. The most common symptoms of gastrointestinal infections are abdominal pain and cramps, diarrhea, and vomiting. These conditions usually go away on their own and don't need medical attention.
Inflammatory bowel disease is the chronic inflammation of the intestines, which usually affects older children, teens and adults. There are two major types, ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease and indeterminate colitis, which occurs in 10-15% of patients. Ulcerative colitis usually affects just the rectum and large intestine, while Crohn's disease can affect the whole gastrointestinal tract from mouth to anus along with some other parts of the body. Patients with these diseases also suffer from extraintestinal symptoms including joint pain and red eye, which can signal a flare of the disease. These diseases are treated with medications and if necessary, Intravenous or IV feeding, or in the more serious cases, surgery to remove the damaged areas of the intestines.
A polyp is an abnormal growth of tissue (tumor) projecting from a mucous membrane. If it is attached to the surface by a narrow elongated stalk it is said to be pedunculated. If no stalk is present it is said to be sessile. Polyps are commonly found in the colon, stomach, nose, urinary bladder and uterus. They may also occur elsewhere in the body where mucous membranes exist like the cervix and small intestine.
Disorders of the pancreas, liver, and gallbladder affect the ability to produce enzymes and acids that aid in digestion. examples of these disorders are.
Cystic fibrosis is a chronic, inherited illness where the production of abnormally thick mucous blocks the duct or passageways in the pancreas and prevents the digestive fluids from entering the intestines, making it difficult for the person with the disorder to digest protein and fats, which cause important nutrients to pass through without being digested. People with this disorder take supplements and digestive enzymes to help manage their digestive problems.
Hepatitis is a viral condition that inflames a person's liver which can cause it to lose its ability to function. Viral hepatitis, like hepatitis A, B, and C, is extremely contagious. Hepatitis A, which is a mild form of hepatitis, can be treated at home, but more serious cases that involve liver damage, might require hospitalization.
Acute or chronic inflammation if the gallbladder causes abdominal pain. 90% of cases of acute cholecystitis are caused by the presence of gallstones. The actual inflammation is due to secondary infection with bacteria of an obstructed gallbladder, with the obstruction caused by the gallstones. Gallbladder conditions are very rare in kids and teenagers but can occur when the kid or teenager has sickle cell anemia or in kids being treated with long term medications.
Cholestasis is the blockage in the supply of bile into the digestive tract. It can be "intrahepatic" (the obstruction is in the liver) or "extrahepatic" (outside the liver). It can lead to jaundice, and is identified by the presence of elevated bilirubin level that is mainly conjugated.
As we age, the amount of digestive enzymes produced by the body drops way down. This leads to decreased and slower digestion, slower absorption of nutrients and increased accumulation of fecal mater in the intestinal tract. Undigested food material and metabolic waste can also build up due to slow elimination, starting a series of health problems.
When digestion slows, it turns the intestines into a toxic environment. Helpful organisms cannot live in toxic environments. When the beneficial organisms die they are replaced by harmful organisms, such as yeasts and parasites, the most common being Candida albicans. This leads to changes in the intestinal wall which produce leaky gut syndrome, which allows many toxic chemicals to be introduced into the bloodstream. As a result, the entire toxic load of the body is increased, causing a bigger burden on the liver, kidneys and other body organs. When this happens the organs that are normally used for eliminating waste and supplying nutrients to the GI tract become a large dump for waste. This problem can be made worse by the use of prescriptions and over-the-counter medications, antibiotics, and a diet that is too low in fiber or contains 'junk food'.
Most people never think about their GI tract. We are concerned about what the outside of our bodies look like, but we completely ignore the inside. Because our bodies a very resilient, deterioration of the digestive system can go on for years with no symptoms or side-effects. When symptoms finally do appear they are usually very non-specific, and include: decreased energy, headaches, diarrhea, constipation, heartburn, and acid reflux. Over the years these symptoms become more serious, including: asthma, food allergies, arthritis, and cancer.
Poor digestion, poor absorption, and bacterial imbalance can be traced to many chronic conditions. Every organ in the body receives nutrients from the GI tract; if the GI tract is malfunctioning then the whole body suffers.
It is possible to return good health to your GI tract by improving digestion, consuming the right amount of fiber, and cutting out junk food and refined sugars.
You can improve the function of the intestines by taking fiber supplements and vitamins (especially B12 and vitamin K). Some doctors suggest herbal or vitamin enemas to cleanse and relieve constipation and to help stimulate peristaltic movement which will help to move the bowels.
Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) is a disorder with symptoms that are most commonly bloating, abdominal pain, cramping, constipation, and diarrhea. IBS causes a lot of pain and discomfort. It does not cause permanent damage to the intestines and does not lead to serious diseases such as cancer. Most of the people affected with IBS can control their symptoms with stress management, diet, and prescription medication. For others IBS can be debilitating, they may be unable to go to work, travel, attend social events or leave home for even short periods of time.
About 20 percent of the adult population has some symptoms of IBS, making it one of the most common intestinal disorders diagnosed by physicians. It is more common in men than women and in about 50 percent of people affected it starts at about age 35.
Researchers have not found out what exactly causes IBS. One idea is that people with IBS have a large intestine (colon) that is sensitive to certain foods and stress. The immune system may also be involved. It has also been reported that serotonin is linked with normal GI functioning. 95 percent of the body's serotonin is located in the GI tract (the other 5 percent is in the brain). People with IBS have diminished receptor activity, causing abnormal levels of serotonin in the GI tract. Because of this, IBS patients experience problems with bowel movement, motility, and the sensation having more sensitive pain receptors in their GI tract. Many IBS patients suffer from depression and anxiety which can make symptoms worse.
There is no cure for IBS, but medications are an important part of relieving symptoms. Fiber supplements or laxatives are helpful for constipation. Anti diarrhoeals such as Imodium can help with diarrhea. An antispasmodic is commonly prescribed for colon muscle spasms. Antidepressants and pain medication are also commonly prescribed. [12]
Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors or GIST is an uncommon type of cancer in the GI tract (esophagus, stomach, small intestine, and colon). These types of cancers begin in the connective tissue like fat, muscles, nerves, cartilage, etc.
GIST originates in the stroma cells. Stroma cells are strung along the GI tract and are part of the system that helps the body to know when to move food through the digestive system. Over half of GISTs occur in the stomach. Most cases occur in people between the ages of forty and eighty, but they can also occur in a person of any age.
All GISTs of any size or location have the ability to spread. Even if a GIST is removed, it can reappear in the same area, or may even spread outside of the GI tract.
In the early stages, GIST is hard to diagnose because early-stage symptoms cannot be recognized. In the later stages a person can have vague abdominal pain, vomiting, abdominal bleeding that shows up in stool or vomit, low blood counts causing anemia, and having an early feeling of being full, causing a decrease in appetite.
GIST is now recognized as an aggressive cancer that is able to spread to other parts of the body. People who have been diagnosed with GIST should get treatment as soon as possible.
Food allergies occur when the immune system thinks that a certain protein in any kind of food is a foreign substance and will try to fight against it.
Only about eight percent of children and two percent of adults actually have a food allergy. A person can be allergic to any kind of food, but the most common food allergies are to nuts, cow's milk, eggs, soy, fish, and shellfish. Most people who have a food allergy are allergic to fewer than four different foods.
The most common signs of food allergies are hives, swelling, itchy skin, itchiness, tingling or swelling in the mouth, coughing, trouble breathing, diarrhea, and vomiting. The two most common chronic illness that are associated with food allergies are eczema and asthma.
Food allergies can be fatal if they cause the reaction called anaphylaxis. This reaction makes it hard for the person to breathe. This can be treated by an epinephrine injection.
GERD, or Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease occurs when the lower esophageal sphincter is not able to close properly. When this happens, contents from the stomach, called reflux, leak back into the esophagus and the stomach.
When the stomach refluxes, stomach acid touches the lining of the esophagus and causes it to have a burning feeling in the throat or the chest. This is what heartburn is. When you taste the fluid in the back of your throat, it is called acid indigestion. It is common for a person to get occasional heartburn, but when it occurs more than twice a week it can be considered to be GERD. GERD can occur in people of all ages including infants.
Some symptoms of GERD include having a pain in your chest, hoarseness, having trouble swallowing, or having the feeling of food being stuck in your throat. The main symptoms are having persistent heartburn and acid regurgitation. GERD can also cause bad breath and a dry cough.
No one knows why people get GERD. Some things that could contribute to GERD are alcohol use, pregnancy, being overweight and smoking. Certain foods might also contribute like citrus fruits, caffeine, spicy, fatty, and dried foods, and also mint flavorings.
Over-the-counter antacids or medications that help stop acid production and help the muscles empty the stomach are commonly used to treat GERD.
Not everyone is on the same schedule for having a bowel movement. Depending on the person, a "normal" schedule can range anywhere from three times a day to three times a week. If you start having bowel movements less than your own personal schedule, then you might be getting the signs of constipation.
Constipation is when you have trouble having bowel movements. The stool is very hard, making it difficult to pass and causing a person to strain. You may even feel like you have to have a bowel movement even after you have already had one.
When you digest food, the waste products go through your intestines by the muscles contracting. When in the large intestine, most of the water and salt from the waste products are reabsorbed because they are needed by the body for our everyday functions. You can become constipated if too much water is absorbed, or if waste products move too slowly.
Not getting enough fluids, a low fiber diet, age, not being physically active, depression, stress and pregnancy can all contribute to constipation. Medications and narcotics can also cause a person to get constipated. Chronic constipation may be a symptom of a liver problem such as a urea cycle disorder.
The best way for a person to treat constipation is to make sure that they are getting enough fluids as well as fiber in their diet. By doing this, the bulk of their stool is increased and made softer, so that it can move through the intestines more easily. Being more active and increasing daily exercise also helps keep bowel movements regulated.
Hemorrhoids (also known as haemorrhoids, emerods, or piles) are varicosities or swelling and inflammation of veins in the rectum and anus.
Two of the most common types of hemorrhoids are external and internal hemorrhoids.
External hemorrhoids are those that occur outside of the anal verge (the distal end of the anal canal). They are sometimes painful, and can be accompanied by swelling and irritation. Itching, although often thought to be a symptom from external hemorrhoids, is more commonly due to skin irritation.
If the vein ruptures and a blood clot develops, the hemorrhoid becomes a thrombosed hemorrhoid.
Internal hemorrhoids are those that occur inside the rectum. As this area lacks pain sensory receptor|receptors, internal hemorrhoids are usually not painful and most people are not aware that they have them. Internal hemorrhoids, however, may bleed when irritated.
Untreated internal hemorrhoids can lead to two severe forms of hemorrhoids: prolapsed and strangulated hemorrhoids.
Prolapsed hemorrhoids are internal hemorrhoids that are so distended that they are pushed outside of the anus.
If the anal sphincter muscle goes into spasm and traps a prolapsed hemorrhoid outside of the anal opening, the supply of blood is cut off, and the hemorrhoid becomes a strangulated hemorrhoid.
Bleeding in the gastrointestinal tract doesn't always mean you have a disease, it's usually a symptom of a digestive problem. The cause of the bleeding may not be that serious, it could be something that can be cured or controlled such as hemorrhoids. However, locating the source of the bleeding is very important. The gastrointestinal tract contains many important organs like the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine or colon, rectum, and anus. Bleeding can come from one or more of these area from a small ulcer in the stomach, or a large surface like the inflammation of the colon. Sometimes a person doesn't even know they are bleeding. When this happens, it is called hidden, or occult bleeding. Simple tests can detect hidden blood in the stool.
Esophageal bleeding may be caused by Mallory-Weiss syndrome which is a tear in the esophagus. Mallory-Weiss syndrome is usually caused by excessive vomiting or may be caused by childbirth, a hiatal hernia, or increased pressure in the abdomen caused by coughing. Various medications can cause stomach ulcers or inflammations. Medications containing aspirin or alcohol, and various other medications(mainly those used for arthritis) are some examples of these.
Benign tumors or cancer of the stomach may also cause bleeding. These disorders don't usually produce massive bleeding. The most common source of bleeding usually occurs from ulcers in the duodenum. Researchers believe that these ulcers are caused by excessive stomach acid and a bacteria called Helicobacter Pylori.
In the lower digestive tract, the most common source of bleeding is in the large intestine, and the rectum. Hemorrhoids are the most common cause of bleeding in the digestive tract. Hemorrhoids are enlarged veins in the anal area which produces bright red blood that you see in the toilet or on the toilet paper.
The signs of bleeding in the digestive tract vary depending on the site and severity of the bleeding. If the blood is coming from the rectum, it would be bright red blood. If it was coming from higher up in the colon or from the small intestine, the blood would be darker. When the blood is coming from the stomach, esophagus, or the duodenum, the stool would be black and tarry.
If the bleeding is hidden, or occult, a person may not notice changes in the stool color. If extensive bleeding occurs, a person may feel dizzy, faint, weak, short of breath, have diarrhea or cramp abdominal pain. Shock can also occur along with rapid pulse, drop in blood pressure, and difficulty urinating. Fatigue, lethargy, and pallor from anemia will settle in if the bleeding is slow. Anemia is when the bloods iron-rich substance, hemoglobin, is diminished.
Iron and beets can also turn the blood red or black giving a false indication of blood in the stool.
To diagnose bleeding in the digestive tract the bleeding must be located and a complete history and physical are very important. Here are some of the procedures that diagnose the cause of bleeding.
An endoscopy is a common diagnostic technique that allows direct viewing of the bleeding site. Since the endoscope can detect lesions and confirm the absence or presence of bleeding, doctors often use this method to diagnose acute bleeding, the endoscope can also be used to treat the cause of bleeding as well.
Capsule endoscopy helps doctors to see and examine the lining of the middle part of the gastrointestinal tract, which includes the three parts of the small intestine (duodenum, jejunum, ileum). The capsule is a small pill sized video camera called an endoscope. It has its own lens and light that transfers the images to a monitor so the doctor can view them outside of the body. This process is also referred to as small bowel endoscopy, capsule endoscopy, or wireless endoscopy.
The most common reason for doing a capsule endoscopy is to look for the causes of bleeding that is coming from the small intestine. It is also able to help detect ulcers, tumors, and Crohn's disease.
A colonoscopy is a test to look at the inside of your colon. Everyone should have a colonoscopy by the time they are 50 to check for diseases of the colon. Colonoscopy is best known for its use in early detection of colorectal cancer, the second leading cause of cancer deaths in the United States. Colon cancer develops from growths like polyps within the intestinal wall. These growths often take 5-10 years to develop usually without symptoms. You are at a higher risk to have this disease if you have a close relative who has had it. If you are going to develop a polyp, you will probably do so after age 50. So the American College of Gastroenterology (the digestive specialists) recommends screening examinations every 5 years for early detection and removal of these cancer-causing growths after that age. Don't make excuses! It's not so bad and it may save your life!
Bob had a history of chronic pain in his intestinal area, and wasn't sure what it was. His doctor suspected what it was and gave Bob antibiotics, which helped. It so happened that whenever Bob ate popcorn or nuts he would get this pain. Sometimes it would just go away... other times he had to go on antibiotics. The doctor ordered some tests, and told Bob he would have to stay away from nuts, popcorn, tomatoes, strawberries, and anything else with seeds or hard parts; something in his bowels couldn't tolerate those foods. Bob ate a pretty healthy diet so he couldn't understand what was happening. A few years later, Bob had another series of painful episodes. The pain was so great Bob could hardly stand, let alone go to work. This time the doctor did more tests and found out that his lower intestine was almost blocked. Surgery was ordered. What did Bob have?
An inflammation if the intestines caused by infestation with Entameba histolytica (a type of ameba) and characterized by frequent loose stools flecked with blood and mucus
A bitter, alkaline, brownish-yellow or greenish-yellow fluid that is secreted by the liver, stored in the gallbladder, and discharged into the duodenum and aids in the emulsification, digestion, and absorption of fats. Also called gall.
Biotin is used in cell growth, the production of fatty acids, metabolism of fats, and amino acids. It plays a role in the Krebs Cycle. Biotin is also helpful in maintaining a steady blood sugar level. It is often recommended for strengthening hair and nails.
A vitamin important for the normal formation of red blood cells and the health of the nerve tissues. Undetected and untreated B12 deficiency can lead to anemia and permanent nerve and brain damage
Found in animals and in man. Has been isolated from the skin and mucosa of man, but has also been recovered from leaves, flowers, water, and soil. Reported to be allergenic. A common cause of superficial infection, oral and vaginal infection, sepsis, and disseminated disease. Cells from the organism are usually not airborne and are considered to be normal component of the flora of the mouth and other mucous membranes on the body.
Is a chemical breakdown of food when being in the mouth (oral cavity). Is the digestive secretions of saliva that moistens food and introduces gastric juices and enzymes that are produced in the stimulation to certain macronutrients, such as, carbohydrates. In this, the mouth saliva carries an enzyme called amylase for breaking down carbohydrates.
Cholecystokinin (also called pancreozymin), this is a hormone in the small intestinal cells (intestinal mucosa) that is produced in response to food. This hormone regulates the release of secretions of many organs that aid digestion, such as, bicarbonate from the pancreas to reduce the acidity of digestive juices like the chyme that enters the small intestine form the stomach that contains hydrochloric acid (HCL).
The lipoproteins first formed after absorption of lipids form food.
The thick semi fluid mass of partly digested food that is passed from the stomach to the duodenum.
Described as skip lessions in the large and small bowel it is a malabsorption disorder that can affect the gastrointestinal tract for the mouth to the anus.
When an amino acid group breaks off an amino acid that makes a molecule of ammonia and keto acid.
A mixture of two immiscible (unblendable) substances.
The stomach mucosa secretes a hormone gastrin that increases the release of gastric juices.
Gastrointestinal Tract, The tube that extends from the mouth to the anus in which the movement of muscles and release of hormones and enzymes digest food.
Important resident inhabitant of the human small and large intestines, mouth, and vagina. Secretes natural antibiotic substances which strengthen the body against various disease-causing microbes
An enzyme produced only in infancy to aid digestion of long-chain fatty acids.
An enzyme produced by microorganisms that split the fat molecules into fatty acids which create flavor
The crushing of the teeth and rhythms made by the movement of the tongue, the teeth aid in tearing and pulverizing food, while the tongue helps with peristalsis (movement), of food down the esophagus.
On the villi in the small intestine is mivrovilli, these projections called brush border microvilli secrete specific enzymes for disaccharide hydrolysis, these further aid the absorption of the carbohydrate by yielding a monosaccharide that then can go through portal circulation to liver circulation to be further processed into immediate use for energy or glycogen storage.
The wavelike muscular contractions of the intestine or other tubular structure that propel the contents onward by alternate contraction and relaxation.
Only produced during infancy and is a gastric protease and functions with calcium to clot with milk proteins casein, to slow the movement of milk so that digestion is prolonged.
To create something, such as chemicals in the body, from simpler, raw materials
A minute projection arising from a mucous membrane, especially one of the vascular projections of the small intestine.
A substance that promotes the clotting of blood
Bob has diverticulitis. The doctor was afraid that if he had another bad infection that scar tissue would eventually block his colon completely and burst, which would necessitate a colostomy. Bob ended up having to have surgery to remove the damaged part of his colon. The doctor removed almost 18 inches of Bob's large intestine. Bob is doing fine now and most importantly, he can now eat his favorite food - nuts! Note: Sometimes a diet rich in fiber can help you avoid this dreaded problem. Sometimes, like in Bob's case, the predisposition to have this problem runs in the family. All of his siblings and his father suffered from this same ailment. Stress is another factor that can exacerbate this disease. So.. don't worry, be happy and eat fiber!
1: Chen Ts, Chen PS. Intestinal autointoxication: A gastrointestinal leitmotive: Journal Clinical Gastroenterology
2: Ernst E. Colonic irrigation and the theory of autointoxication: A triumph of ignorance over science. Journal of Gastroenterology
3: Alvarez WC. Origin of the so-called auto-intoxication symptoms.
4: Donaldson AN. Relation of constipation to intestinal intoxication.
5: Kenney JJ. Fit for Life: Some notes on the book and its roots. Nutrition Forum
7: Amebiasis associated with colonic irrigation - Colorado. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
8: Istre GR and others. An outbreak of amebiasis spread by colonic irrigation at a chiropractic clinic
9: Benjamin R and others. The case against colonic irrigation
10: Eisele JW, Reay DT. Deaths related to coffee enemas
11: Jarvis WT. Colonic Irrigation. National Council Against Health Fraud.
12: National Digestive Disease Information Clearinghouse (NDDIC)
Connections between nutrition and health have probably been generally understood by people for a long time. For example, around 400 BC Hippocrates said, "Let food be your medicine and medicine be your food.". Understanding the physiological needs of our biology helps us understand why food has such an impact on overall health. In this chapter we introduce nutrition by examining how cells use different nutrients and then discuss disease conditions that are tied to nutritional problems. Note however that nutrition impacts out biologic processes more than at a mere cellular level, alone our diverse genetic characteristics prevents any overgeneralization but then the multitude of fauna that share our bodies and divergent characteristics of human ecology and how it affects our biological chemical processes is of equal importance.
The nutritional status of people in our communities is a concern not only for quality of life, but also for economics (treating illness costs far more than preventing it). Various public health agencies are striving to prevent nutritional deficiencies and improve overall health. In the U.S., the government supplies a variety of resources such as state assistance, WIC (Women Infant and Child), and so forth. In addition, there have been many government agencies and voluntary health and scientific associations, such as the American Heart Association, that focus on life style and dietary factors that prevent chronic and life-threatening diseases. The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS) developed dietary guidelines in 1977 that were compiled and displayed as the food guide pyramid. The food guide pyramid was revised as "My Pyramid," but this new chart is confusing to most people. Harvard School of Public Health developed an alternative healthy eating pyramid (shown at left) based on long-term nutritional studies. This pyramid differs from the old USDA pyramid in several key aspects: for example, exercise is at the bottom to remind us of its important role in our health. Also, not all carbohydrates are at the bottom (white bread, white rice, and potatoes are now at the top with sugars), and not all oils are at the top (plant oils are at the bottom). Other resource, such as the Recommended Daily Allowance (RDA) have helped people become more aware of nutritional needs, yet obesity and chronic health problems continue to rise.
Our bodies have both caloric and nutritional needs. Living tissue is kept alive by the expenditure of energy in ATP molecules, which energy came from the break down of food molecules. Caloric need refers to the energy needed each day to carry out the varied chemical reactions in each cell. When looking at a nutritional label, we can easily see how many Calories are in a serving. These Calories (big "C") are actually kilocalories (1000 calories). Technically, a calorie (little "c") is the amount of energy needed to raise the temperature of 1 mL of water by 1 °C. How many Calories a person needs daily varies greatly by age, sex, height, and physical activity levels. If the amount of energy taken in exceeds the amount of energy used, then the excess energy is stored as adipose tissue (fat), regardless of the source of the energy.
In addition to daily energy needs, there are nutritional needs to prevent the body from losing its own fats, carbohydrates, and proteins. Such molecules are continuously broken down, and must be replaced regularly. Essential amino acids and essential fatty acids are particularly important building blocks in replacing these molecules. Vitamins and minerals are not used as energy, but are essential in tissue and enzyme structure or reactions.
An energy-yielding nutrient. Macronutrients are those nutrients that together provide the vast majority of metabolic energy to an organism. The three main macronutrients are carbohydrates, proteins, and fat.
Microminerals or trace elements, are dietary minerals needed by the human body in very small quantities (generally less than 100mg/day) as opposed to macrominerals which are required in larger quantities.
Glucose it is the most easily used by the body. It is a simple carbohydrate that circulates in the blood and is the main source of energy for the muscles, central nervous system, and brain (the brain can also use ketone bodies).
Carbohydrates are made of organic compounds carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen.
There are three sizes of carbohydrate and they are distinguished by a classification of two that is, simple carbohydrates (mono saccharides and disaccharides) and complex carbohydrates (polysaccharides). Polysaccharides are the most abundant carbohydrate in the body along with glycogen.
The break down of polysaccharides goes as follows: Polysaccharides are digested into monosaccharides including glucose which goes into the intestinal epithelium and into the bloodstream. The molecules of glucose are taken by glucose transporters and delivered into the cells of the body. While glucose is in the cells it can be oxidized for energy or provide substrates to other metabolic reactions or of course into glycogen for storage.
A. Monosaccharides = Single carbohydrate unit such as, Glucose, Fructose, and Galactose.
B. Disaccharides = Two single carbohydrates bound together such as, Sucrose, Maltose, and Lactose.
C. Polysaccharides = Have many units of monosaccharides joined together such as, Starch and Fiber.
Fiber is carbohydrates that cannot be digested. It is in all eatable plants such as fruits vegetables, grains and Legumes. There are many ways of categorizing fiber types. First, from the foods they come from such as grains, which is called cereal fiber. Second, if they are soluble fiber or insoluble fiber. Soluble fiber partially dissolves in water and insoluble fiber does not.
Adults need about 21-38 grams of fiber a day. Children ages 1 and up need 19 grams a day. On average Americans eat only 15 grams a day.
Fiber helps reduce the chances of having the following conditions: colon cancer, heart disease, type 2 diabetes, diverticular disease, and constipation.
Glycemic Index is a new way of classifying carbohydrates. It measures how fast and how far blood sugar will rise after consuming carbohydrates. Foods that are considered to have a high glycemic index are converted almost immediately to blood sugar which causes it to rise rapidly. Foods that are considered to have a low glycemic index are digested slower causing a slower rise in blood sugar. Examples of high glycemic index foods are potatoes, white rice, white flour, anything refined, anything with a lot of sugar which includes high fructose corn syrup. Examples of low glycemic index foods are whole grains (brown rice, 100% whole wheat bread, whole grain pasta, high fiber cereals), high fiber fruits and vegetables, and many legumes. According to the Harvard School of Public Health, "The most comprehensive list of the glycemic index of foods was published in the July, 2002, issue of the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. A searchable database maintained by the University of Sydney is available online."
Protein forms hormones, enzymes, and antibodies. It is part of fluid and electrolyte regulation, the buffering effect for pH, and transporter of nutrients. A good example of a protein is the oxygen carrying hemoglobin found in red blood cells.
Proteins are made of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen, an inorganic molecule, the thing that clearly distinguishes them from the other macronutrients.
A. Amino acids are the building blocks of proteins.
B. Polypeptide are a group of amino acids bonded together 10-100 or more.
The body requires amino acids to produce new body protein (protein retention) and to replace
Proteins are relatively large molecules made of amino acids joined together in chains by peptide bonds. Amino acids are the basic structural building units of proteins. They form short polymer chains called peptides or longer poly-peptides which in turn form structures called proteins. The process of protein synthesis is controlled by an mRNA template. In this process tRNA transfers amino acids to the mRNA to form protein chains.
There are twenty standard amino acids used by cells in making proteins. Vertebrates, including humans, are able to synthesize 11 of these amino acids from other molecules. The remaining nine amino acids cannot be synthesized by our cells, and are termed "'essential amino acids'". These essential amino acids must be obtained from foods.
The 9 Essential Amino Acids have the following names:
Histidine, Isoleucine, Leucine, Lysine, Methionine, Phenylalanine, Threonine, Tryptophan, Valine
You can remember these with this saying “Hey It's Like Lovely Material; Please Touch The Velvet”.
The 11 Non-essential Amino Acids are as follows:
Alanine, Arginine, Aspartic acid, Cysteine, Cystine, Glutamic acid, Glutamine, Glycine, Proline, Serine, Tyrosine
How about this memory device, "Almost Always Aunt Cindy Can Get Great Gum Popping Sounds Together"
(This section needs to be corrected. Cystine is not one of the 20 common amino acids. It should be replaced by asparagine which is missing from the list. Also histidine is not essential for adults while cysteine, tyrosine, histidine, and arginine are required for infants and growing children. Some amino acids are also essential for specific subpopulations, e.g., tyrosine for individuals with PKU.)
The 20 Amino Acids and What They Do!
Abbrev.
Very abundant, very versatile. More stiff than glycine, but small enough to pose only small steric limits for the protein conformation. It behaves fairly neutrally, can be located in both hydrophilic regions on the protein outside and the hydrophobic areas inside.
The sulfur atom binds readily to heavy metal ions. Under oxidizing conditions, two cysteines can join together in a disulfide bond to form the amino acid cystine. When cystines are part of a protein, insulin for example, this stabilizes tertiary structure and makes the protein more resistant to denaturation; disulphide bridges are therefore common in proteins that have to function in harsh environments including digestive enzymes (e.g., pepsin and chymotrypsin) and structural proteins (e.g., keratin). Disulphides are also found in peptides too small to hold a stable shape on their own (e.g., insulin).
Behaves similarly to glutamic acid. Carries a hydrophilic acidic group with strong negative charge. Usually is located on the outer surface of the protein, making it water-soluble. Binds to positively-charged molecules and ions, often used in enzymes to fix the metal ion. When located inside of the protein, aspartate and glutamate are usually paired with arginine and lysine.
Behaves similar to aspartic acid. Has longer, slightly more flexible side chain. Also serves as an excitatory neurotransmitter in the CNS.
Essential for humans. Phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan contain large rigid aromatic group on the side chain. These are the biggest amino acids. Like isoleucine, leucine and valine, these are hydrophobic and tend to orient towards the interior of the folded protein molecule.
In even slightly acidic conditions protonation of the nitrogen occurs, changing the properties of histidine and the polypeptide as a whole. It is used by many proteins as a regulatory mechanism, changing the conformation and behavior of the polypeptide in acidic regions such as the late endosome or lysosome, enforcing conformation change in enzymes. However only a few histidines are needed for this, so it is comparatively scarce.
Essential for humans. Isoleucine, leucine and valine have large aliphatic hydrophobic side chains. Their molecules are rigid, and their mutual hydrophobic interactions are important for the correct folding of proteins, as these chains tend to be located inside of the protein molecule.
Essential for humans. Behaves similarly to arginine. Contains a long flexible side-chain with a positively-charged end. The flexibility of the chain makes lysine and arginine suitable for binding to molecules with many negative charges on their surfaces. E.g., DNA-binding proteins have their active regions rich with arginine and lysine. The strong charge makes these two amino acids prone to be located on the outer hydrophilic surfaces of the proteins; when they are found inside, they are usually paired with a corresponding negatively-charged amino acid, e.g., aspartate or glutamate.
Essential for humans. Behaves similar to isoleucine and valine. See isoleucine.
Essential for humans. Always the first amino acid to be incorporated into a protein; sometimes removed after translation. Like cysteine, contains sulfur, but with a methyl group instead of hydrogen. This methyl group can be activated, and is used in many reactions where a new carbon atom is being added to another molecule.
Similar to aspartic acid. Asn contains an amide group where Asp has a carboxyl.
Similar to glutamic acid. Gln contains an amide group where Glu has a carboxyl. Used in proteins and as a storage for ammonia.
Functionally similar to lysine.
Serine and threonine have a short group ended with a hydroxyl group. Its hydrogen is easy to remove, so serine and threonine often act as hydrogen donors in enzymes. Both are very hydrophilic, therefore the outer regions of soluble proteins tend to be rich with them.
Essential for humans. Behaves similarly to serine.
Essential for humans. Behaves similarly to isoleucine and leucine. See isoleucine.
Essential for humans. Behaves similarly to phenylalanine and tyrosine (see phenylalanine). Precursor of serotonin.
Behaves similarly to phenylalanine and tryptophan (see phenylalanine). Precursor of melanin, epinephrine, and thyroid hormones.
Dietary proteins fall into two categories: complete proteins and incomplete proteins. Complete proteins include ample amounts of all essential amino acids. Examples of foods that will include these great complete proteins are meat, fish, poultry, cheese, eggs, and milk. Incomplete proteins contain some but not all of the essential amino acids required by the human body. Examples of incomplete proteins include legumes, rice, and leafy green vegetables. Someone who chooses a vegan lifestyle must be careful to combine various plant proteins to obtain all the essential amino acids on a daily basis, but it can be accomplished.
Ingested proteins are broken down into amino acids during digestion. They are then absorbed by the villi of the small intestine and enter the blood stream. Our cells use these amino acids to assemble new proteins that are used as enzymes, cell receptors, hormones, and structural features. Each protein has its own unique amino acid sequence that is specified by the nucleotide sequence of the gene encoding that protein (see Genetics and Inheritance). If we are deficient in even a single amino acid, then our cells cannot make the proteins they require.
Provides 9 Kcalories per gram; it is an energy-yielding nutrient.
Functions are stored energy (adipose tissue), organ protection, temperature regulator, insulation such as myelin that covers nerve cells, lipid membrane around cells, and emulsifiers to keep fats dispersed in body fluids.
Lipids are made of organic molecules carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. Fats consist of glycerol fatty acids joined by an ester bond.
A. Triglycerides - composed of three fatty acids and one glycerol molecule.
B. Saturated fatty acid - fatty acid with carbon chains fully saturated with hydrogen.
C. Monounsaturated fatty acid - fatty acid that has a carbon chain with one unsaturated double bond.
D. Polyunsaturated fatty acid - fatty acid that has two or more double bonds on the carbon chain.
E. Linoleic acid an essential polyunsaturated fatty acid, its first double bond is at the 6th carbon and this is why it can be called Omega 6.
F. Linolenic acid an essential polyunsaturated fatty acid, its first double bond is at the 3rd carbon and this is why it can be called Omega 3, and is the main member of the omega-3 family.
G. Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) , may be derived inefficiently from linolenic acid and is the main fatty acid found in fish, also called omega 3.
I. Sterols serve a vital function in the body, are produced by the body, and are not essential nutrients. This structure of a lipid is cholesterol which is a waxy substance that doesn't look like a triglyceride. It doesn't have a glycerol backbone or fatty acids, but because it is impermeable in water, it is a lipid.
J. CIS- Trans Fatty acids hydrogenation makes monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fatty acids go from a state of their original form that is cis to a trans form. Addition of hydrogen ions will cause vegetable oil to harden. Additionally, they may stimulate cholesterol synthesis, and are potentially carcinogenic.
This is the fat that your body deals with most of the time. They are absorbed with the transport of chylomicrons into the lymphatic system which in turn will pour into the blood stream at the thoracic duct. Once it enters the blood stream, the chylomicrons take the triglycerides into the cells. The triglycerides that are on the outer part of the chylomicrons are broken down by lipoprotein lipase. Lipoprotein lipase can be found on the walls of capillaries. It is this enzyme that will break it into fatty acids and monoglycerides. The fatty acids are taken by the body's cells while the monoglycerides are taken to the liver to be processed. Medium chain triglycerides (MCTs) bypass chylomicron lipoprotein function allowing the body to quickly utilize them for energy. Due to their shorter chain length, MCTs possess 8.3kcal as opposed to the 9kcal content of long chain triglycerides. MCT consumption due to the immediate utilization by the body also results in the rapid formation of ketones and less ability to be stored as adipose tissue.
Although there are different types of fat the effect on health and disease, the basic message is simple: leave out the bad fats and replace them with good fats. Try to limit saturated fats in your diet, and try to eliminate trans fats from partially hydrogenated oils.Replace saturated and trans fats with polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fats.
As of January 1, 2006, trans fat must be listed on food labels. More and more "trans-fat" free products are becoming available. Keep in mind, though, that according to the FDA, a product claiming to have zero trans fat can actually contain up to a half gram. You may still want to scan the ingredient list for "partially hydrogenated vegetable oil" and "vegetable shortening," and look for an alternative product without those words.
Fruits and vegetables are often a good source of vitamins.
We all need micronutrients in small quantities to sustain health. Micronutrients include dietary minerals and vitamins. While all minerals and vitamins can be obtained through food, many people do not consume enough to meet their micronutrient needs and instead may take a supplement.
Microminerals or trace elements include at least iron, cobalt, chromium, copper, iodine, manganese, selenium, zinc, and molybdenum. They are dietary minerals needed by the human body in very small quantities (generally less than 100mg/day) as opposed to macrominerals which are required in larger quantities. (Note that the use of the term "mineral" here is distinct from the usage in the geological sciences.)
Vitamins are organic compounds that are essential for our body to function properly. Most vitamins are obtained from what you consume, because the body is unable to manufacture most of the essential vitamins that you need to survive. Here are types of vitamins and their roles:
Ingested in a precursor form. Found in animal sources such as milk and eggs. Also found in carrots and spinach (contain pro vitamin A carotenoids).
Vitamin A is a fat-soluble vitamin. It helps cells differentiate, also lowering your risk of getting cancer. Vitamin A helps to keep vision healthy. It is required during pregnancy. Vitamin A also influences the function and development of sperm, ovaries and placenta and is a vital component of the reproductive process.
Found in wheat germ, whole wheat, peas, beans, enriched flour, fish, peanuts and meats.
Vitamin B1 is a water-soluble vitamin that the body requires to break down carbohydrates, fat and protein. The body needs vitamin b in order to make adenine triphosphate (ATP). Vitamin B1 is also essential for the proper functioning of nerve cells.
Found in milk cheese, leafy green vegetables, liver, soybeans yeast and almonds. Exposure to light destroys riboflavin.
Vitamin B2 is a water-soluble vitamin that helps the body process amino acids and fats. Activated vitamin B6 and folic acid helps convert carbohydrates to adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Sometimes vitamin B2 can act as an antioxidant.
Found in beets, brewer's yeast, beef liver, beef kidney, pork, turkey, chicken, veal, fish, salmon, swordfish, tuna, sunflower seeds, and peanuts.
Vitamin B3 is required for cell respiration and helps release the energy in carbohydrates, fats, and proteins. It helps with proper circulation and healthy skin, functioning of the nervous system, and normal secretion of bile and stomach fluids. It is used in the synthesis of sex hormones, treating schizophrenia and other mental illnesses, and as a memory-enhancer.
Found in citrus fruits such as oranges, grapefruit and lemon.
Vitamin C is an essential water-soluble vitamin. It is needed to make collagen. Vitamin C also aids in the formation of liver bile which helps to detoxify alcohol and other substances. Evidence indicates that vitamin C levels in the eye decrease with age and this may be a cause of cataracts. Vitamin C has been reported to reduce activity of the enzyme, aldose reductase, which helps protect people with diabetes. It may also protect the body against accumulation or retention of the toxic mineral, lead.
Produced by the human body during exposure to the ultraviolet rays of the sun.
Vitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin that helps maintain blood levels of calcium. Vitamin D is necessary for healthy bones and teeth. Vitamin D plays a role in immunity and blood cell formation and also helps cells differentiate this lowers your chance of getting cancer.
Lack of Vitamin D results in rickets for children and osteomalacia for adults.
Found in vegetable oils, nuts, and green leafy vegetables. Fortified cereals are also an important source of vitamin E in the United States.
Vitamin E is an antioxidant that protects cell membranes and other fat-soluble parts of the body, such as LDL cholesterol (the “bad” cholesterol), from damage.
Found in kale, collard greens, spinach, mustard greens, turnip greens and Brussels sprouts. Also found vegetable oils such as soybean, canola, cottonseed, and olive. Additionally, the normal flora of the large intestine produce vitamin K, which our body is able to absorb and use
Vitamin K by helping transport Ca, vitamin K is necessary for proper bone growth and blood coagulation.
Found in many vegetables including, broccoli, peas, asparagus, spinach, green leafy types. Also found in fresh fruit, liver and yeast.
Vitamin B12 is needed to make red blood cells. Supplements can help some types of anemia.
Found in cereals, yeast, liver, and fish.
Rare to be deficient, convulsions, vomiting, seborrhea, muscular weakness
Women of childbearing age are often encouraged to take a folic acid supplement to help reduce the risk of certain birth defects. Research cited by the Harvard School of Public Health shows that folic acid may have even more benefits, and not just for the developing fetus. Their study shows that people who get more than the recommended amount of folic acid due to diet or supplements can actually lower the risk of developing colon or breast cancer. Since alcohol blocks the absorption of folic acid and inactivates circulating folate, this can be especially important to those who drink alcohol frequently (more than one drink per day). The current recommended intake for folic acid is 400 micrograms per day. There are many excellent sources of folic acid, including prepared breakfast cereals, beans, and fortified grains. So if you would like to reduce your risk of colon or breast cancer, be sure to get more than 400 micrograms per day!
With fat soluble vitamins you need the presence of fat in your diet to absorb them, this is because the bile will not be secreted to help with emulsification and therefore the fat vitamins will not be broken down for absorption. Fat soluble vitamins are stored in organs such as the liver, spleen, and other fatty tissues in the body. Because of this, excessive amounts of fat-soluble vitamins can accumulate in the body resulting in toxicity, but this rarely comes from excessive dietary intake but rather from improper use of vitamin supplements. The other, water-soluble vitamins, do not build up to toxic levels because they are regularly excreted in the urine.
Calcium can be found in dairy products, dark green vegetables and legumes.
It contributes to bone and teeth formation. In addition, calcium also contributes to nerve and muscle action, and blood clotting.
It plays a role in the acid-base balance, stomach acid formation, and body water balance.
Copper can be found in seafood, nuts, and legumes.
It accounts for the maintenance of teeth, and perhaps the maintenance of bone as well.
Although a very small amount is needed for our body, according to some, iodine still plays a role in our body's function. It can also be found in seaweed. It is needed for the thyroid hormone.
Iron can be found in green leafy vegetables, whole grains foods, legumes, meats, and eggs.
Phosphorus can be found in meat, poultry, and whole grain foods.
It serves as components of bones, teeth, phospholipids, ATP, and nucleic acids.
It deals with muscle and nerve function, and also is a major component of intracellular fluid.
Beta Carotene Males: 5,000 I.U per day.
Take one tablet daily. Antibiotics, laxatives, and some cholesterol lowering drugs interfere with A’s absorption. Consult a physician if the following occur: Cystic fibrosis, diabetes, intestinal disorders, thyroid disorders, kidney, liver, and /or pancreatic disease. Deficiency symptoms include night blindness, dry skin, impaired growth, defective teeth and gums, dry inflamed eyes, diarrhea, and respiratory infection. Depleting factors include caffeine, alcohol, mineral oil, excess iron, and tobacco. Prolonged doses (greater than 25,000 I.U) may lead to bone and joint pain, hyperostosis, hair loss and anorexia. Anti-infective, antioxidant, essential for function of retina, possible co-factor in enzyme systems, normal development and health of skin, teeth, bones, vision, hair, tolerance to sunlight/normal night vision, tissue growth, protein digestion, liver, immune system, eyes, and reproductive system. Important for integrity of the epithelial tissue.
Thiamine RDA: 1.0mg – 1.4mg per day.
Take one tablet daily. Avoid when liver or kidney disease is present. Antibiotics, sulfa drugs and oral contraceptives may decrease levels. May cause excessive muscle relaxation in presence of some anesthetics. Deficiency symptoms include edema, enlarged liver, muscular atrophy, heart enlargement, and Beriberi. Disorder of the peripheral nervous system, loss of appetite, gastric distress, insomnia, mental confusion, depression, fatigue, and nausea. Numbness of limbs, irritability and stress on nervous system. Depleting factors include stress, tobacco, fever, caffeine, alcohol, antibiotics, and surgery. Aids in carbohydrate metabolism, promotes normal cell growth, enhances circulation, restores deficiencies caused from over consumption of alcohol, prolonged diarrhea, or an over active thyroid. Essential for healthy nervous system, muscle tone, normal digestion, and energy. Stabilizes appetite, nervous system, heart and muscle.
Riboflavin RDA: 1.0mg – 1.7mg per day.
Take one tablet daily. Avoid if kidney disease is present. May decrease the efficiency of methotrexate. Oral contraceptives and tiring exercise increases the need of B2. Anti-depressants, phenothiazines decrease effectiveness. Deficiency symptoms include mouth disorders, ariboflavinosis, insomnia, itching, scaling of skin, slow mental responses, retarded growth, weakness, dizziness, sore tongue, digestive disturbances, dermatitis, nervous instability, and burning eyes. Depleting factors include alcohol, tobacco, sugar, caffeine, and copper toxicity. Dosages of 50mg per day have caused retinal damage in experimental animals. Maintains integrity of mucous membranes, aids in metabolism of certain foods, necessary for red blood cell formation, antibody production, and cellular respiration. Assists in skin, hair, vision and nails. Builds and maintains body tissue.
Niacin RDA: 13mg-9mg per day.
Take one tablet daily. Decreases the effects of anti-diabetics and chenodiol. Lowers blood pressure when used with mecamylamne, beta-adrenergic blockers and pargyline. Flushing is normal and will decrease with time. Liver toxicity is possible at 2-3 grams. Deficiency symptoms include pellagra, dermatitis, and loss of memory, irritability, anger and depression. Depleting factors include stress, infection, antibiotics, sugar, caffeine, alcohol and excess water. Reduces cholesterol and triglycerides. Aids in energy production, amino acid metabolism and converts fats into eicosanoids. Regulates synthesis of sex hormones, growth and health. Maintains normal function of the skin, tongue and nervous system.
Pantothenic Acid Take one tablet daily. Deficiency symptoms include muscle cramps, dermatitis, abdominal pain, insomnia, fatigue, stress, hypoglycemia, arthritis, eczema, kidney troubles, premature aging and infections. Depleting factors include caffeine, alcohol, stress, antibiotics, and insecticide. Metabolism of protein, fats and carbohydrates. Aids in premature aging and wrinkles. Synthesis of cholesterol fatty acids and steroids. Aids growth. Maintenance of healthy skin, nerves and digestive tract.
Pyridoxine RDA: 2mg per day.
Take one tablet daily. Diuretics and cortisone drugs block absorption. In large doses, breaks down phenytoin. Interferes with the efficacy of levodopa. Depleted with use of cycloserine ethionamide, hydralazine, isoniazid and immuno-suppressants. Deficiency symptoms include depression, insomnia, nervousness, muscle spasms, possible convulsions, mental confusion, water retention, irritability, low blood sugar, and loss of hair. Depleting factors include x-rays, caffeine, tobacco, alcohol and birth control pills. Promotes the change of tryptophan to serotonin, essential for the metabolic process of fats, proteins and carbohydrates. Regulates water retention and secretion. Mixture of RNA/DNA. Balance of sodium and potassium. Critical for diets rich in protein. Important for proper functioning of the immune system and hormone balance (regulates females).
Cyanocobalamin RDA: 3mcg per day.
Take one tablet daily. Low incidence of toxicity with dosages of up to 850mcg per day. Deficiency symptoms include harmful anemia, sub-acute shared degeneration of the spinal cord, lethargy, weakness, muscle soreness, mental, nervous and digestive disorders, poor reflexes, speaking difficulty, nerve degeneration, depression and enlarged liver. Depleting factors include laxatives, caffeine, tobacco and alcohol. Important role in energy production, immune, central nervous system functions in folic acid metabolism. Stops the buildup of homocysteine in blood. Assists with fat and carbohydrate metabolism, promotes formation of red blood cells. Aids with fatigue, general weakness, mood swings, loss of appetite and with the production of DNA/RNA, Crucial for the use of iron.
(Calcium Salt) Take one tablet daily. Deficiency symptoms include glandular and nervous disorders and diminished oxidation of cells. Promotes cell respiration and glucose oxidation, promotes protein, fat and sugar metabolism. Treats high cholesterol levels, impaired circulation and premature aging.
Take one tablet daily. Deficiency symptoms include frequent or prolonged infections, fatigue, joint pain, bleeding gums, scurvy, hemorrhages, poor resistance to infection, anemia, colds, and allergies, shortness of breath, bruising, and gout. Depleting factors include mercury, stress, high fever, cortisone, tobacco, aspirin, air pollution, D.D.T, sulfonamides, and excess water. Decreases anti-cholinergic effectiveness. Combined with sulfa drugs may lead to kidney stones. Aids in utilization of carbohydrates, strengthens blood vessels, synthesis fats and proteins. Aids in production of interferon. Boosts resistance to infection, promotes normal teeth, bones, blood vessels, formation of collagen and connective tissue. For muscles and bones, detoxifies nicotine, mobilizes iron in blood, stimulates growth, and iron assimilation.
Take one tablet daily. Increased risk of hypercalcemia when used with diuretics and thiazide, irregular heartbeats when used with digitalis. Reduces effectiveness of calcitonin in hyperclacemia treatment. Deficiency symptoms include bone diseases, rickets, osteomalacia, softening of bones, poor growth, porous and brittle bones, teeth and gum problems, lack of resilience in skin and tissue, and colds. Mineral oil is the only depleting factor. Controls absorption of phosphorous and calcium in small intestine. Promotes health development of bones, and teeth. Necessary for thyroid function. Used in treatment of herpes zoster and herpes simplex, cystic fibrosis, arthritis, normal use of calcium and phosphorous for strong bones and teeth, calcium absorption, maintains stable nervous system and normal heart action, aids sleep by helping absorb calcium, and blood clotting.
(Alpha-tocopherol) RDA: 8 IU-10 IU per day.
Take one tablet daily. High doses deplete Vitamin A stores in the body. High doses over a long time may alter metabolism of thyroid and pituitary hormones. Use caution in presence of diabetes and rheumatic heart disease. Anticoagulants and Vitamin E together may result in spontaneous or hidden bleeding. Deficiency symptoms include fragility of the red blood cells, liver and kidney disease, gastrointestinal problems, muscular wasting, enlarged prostate, sterility, impotence, dry dull hair, fat deposits in muscles (especially in the heart), atherosclerosis, varicose veins, hypertension, lethargy, lack of mental alertness, infertility, and neuromuscular impairment. Depleting factors include rancid fat, mineral oil, chlorine, birth control pills and air pollution. Antioxidant, aids in formation of red blood cells, lowers LDL’s, helps eliminate triglycerides, increases HDL’s , assists in preventing blood clots Useful in premenstrual syndrome and fibrocystic disease of the breast. Increases the body’s ability to utilize oxygen, Protects Vitamin A from damage in the body, protects unsaturated fats from abnormal breakdown, extends the life of red blood cells and promotes cell respiration, reported to be the “anti-aging” vitamin, helps minimize scarring and aids in the healing of wounds, retards blood clotting, and keeps the youthful elasticity in tissues.
Take one tablet daily. Deficiency symptoms include fatigue, depression, and inflammation of mucous membranes, baldness, mental health, muscle pain, mild skin disorders, and lack of energy, poor appetite, extreme exhaustion, and dry gray skin. Depleting factors include alcohol, raw egg white, caffeine, and antibiotics. Assists in utilization of B-complex vitamins. Helps in metabolism of carbohydrates and amino acids and the formation of fatty acids. Maintains reproductive and nervous systems, and promotes growth.
Take one tablet daily. Deficiency symptoms include the tendency to bleed and bruise easily, and bleeding gums. Depleting factors include colds and surgery. Capillary fragility, allergies, nosebleeds, inflammations, strengthens collagen and connective tissues. Helps strengthen capillaries; helps prevent colds and influenza, asthma, regulation of menstrual flow, and rheumatoid arthritis.
Choline Take one tablet daily. Deficiency symptoms include fatty deposits in the liver, high blood pressure, and cirrhosis of the liver. Depleting factors include sugar, caffeine, alcohol, and insecticide. Recommended for people taking niacin or nicotinic acid. Prevents fat buildup in the liver. Essential for health of liver, kidneys, and healthy nerves.
TDR: 800mcg per day. Do not take in combination with phenytoin or pyrimethamine. Folic acid is depleted in presence of analgesics, anti-convulsants, chloramphenicol, cortisone, oral contraceptives, quinine, sulfa drugs, and trimethoprim. Deficiency symptoms include hemolytic and megaloblastic anemia. Weakness, mood disorders, insomnia, diarrhea, confusion, retarded growth, anemia, mental deterioration, gastro intestinal disorders, birth defects, B12 deficiency, gray hair, and a low pain to tolerance. Possibly related to forms of depression and psychosis. Depleting factors include stress, caffeine, alcohol, and streptomycin. Promotes normal red blood cell formation. Maintains health of intestinal tract, formation of white blood cells. Regulates embryonic and fetal development. Used in treating anemia developed from liver disease, pregnancy, and use of oral contraceptives. Acts as co-enzyme in formation of red blood cells, and nucleic acid. Breakdown and utilization of protein, aids in performance of the liver. Mental and emotional health.
Take one tablet daily. Deficiency symptoms include constipation, eczema, hair loss, high blood cholesterol, and eye problems. Depleting factors include caffeine, sulfonamide, and excess water. Promotes the body’s production of lecithin, aids in the metabolism of fats and helps to reduce blood cholesterol. Growth of hair, vital organs, bone marrow and eye membranes.
Take one tablet daily. Deficiency symptoms include fatigue, depression, nervousness, irritability, constipation, graying hair, digestive problems, eczema, sunburn, and lack of pigment. Depleting factors include sulfonamides, caffeine, and alcohol. Co-enzyme in breakdown and utilization of proteins and formation of red blood cells. Acts as sunscreen. Skin health, hair pigmentation. Stimulates intestinal bacteria and the production of folic acid.
Needs acidic medium for absorption.
Take two tablets daily. Avoid if kidney stones, chronic constipation, colitis, intestinal bleeding, stomach disorders or irregular heart beat is present. Use with digitalis or ephedrine preparations may cause heartbeat indiscretion. Decreases absorption of tetracycline. Deficiency symptoms include osteomalacia, joint pains, rickets, insomnia, hypertension, osteoporosis, bone diseases, tetany, heart problems, excessive bleeding, poor development and brittleness of teeth and bones, muscle and menstrual cramps. Depleting factors include aspirin, corticosteroid, and drugs. Stimulates bone loss if combined with large doses of Vitamin A. Vital for proper functioning of the nervous muscular and skeletal systems. Necessary for blood coagulation, retain acid balance and maintaining the permeability of membranes. Keeps muscle strength, elasticity and tone, needed for strong bones and teeth, blood clotting process, metabolism of Vitamin D, and the use of Iron.
Excess chlorine destroys Vitamin E and Intestinal flora. Deficiency symptoms include hair and tooth loss, poor muscle contractions and impaired digestion. Chlorine (an amine) is an ancestor to an ester called acetylcholine which is needed for the transmission of nerve impulses at synapses and myoneural junctions. Suggested for people taking niacin or nicotinic acid for high serum cholesterol and triglycerides due to reduction of chlorine and lecithin. Liver disease, tardive dyskinesia, hormone and lecithin production. Regulates acid/alkali balance in the blood and maintains fluid pressure in cell membranes, stimulates the production of hydrochloric acid, stimulates liver, helping it clear toxic waste, aids in keeping joints and tendons in tone and helps to distribute hormones.
Take one tablet daily. Chromium should be used only under care of a physician when diabetes is at hand due to the change in the insulin requirements. Deficiency symptoms include anxiety, glucose intolerance, and chance of arteriosclerosis, poor metabolism of amino acids, retarded growth, mental and emotional disorder, hypoglycemia, weakness and fatigue. The depleting factor is air pollution. Metabolizes glucose, aids in regulation of blood sugar, vital in synthesis of cholesterol, fats and protein. Stimulates enzymes involved in metabolism of glucose. Increases the effect of insulin and synthesis of protein.
Deficiency symptoms include vegetarians vulnerable to deficiency, pernicious anemia, slow rate of growth, and nervous disorders. There are no depleting factors. Vital part of B12 activates a number of enzymes required for functioning and maintenance of red blood cells and body cells in general.
Avoid in the presence of hepatolenticular degeneration. Absorption is decreased in the presence of Vitamin C. Deficiency symptoms include general weakness, impaired respiration, lower collagen and lower white blood cell formation, retarded growth, skin ores, pernicious anemia, and respiratory problems. There are no depleting factors. Aids in the formation of bone hemoglobin, and red blood cells. Needed for integrity of joints and nerves. Necessary for formation of elastin. Aids with production of enzymes needed for respiration, protein metabolism, healing process, hair and skin pigment, oxidation of Vitamin C and iron absorption.
Deficiency symptoms include poor teeth development, gum disorders, osteoporosis and loss of hearing. Depleting factors include excess fluorine which may destroy the enzyme Phosphates. Affects vitamin metabolism and brain tissues, aluminum salts and insoluble calcium. Aids in tissue, skeleton and teeth, supports deposition of calcium by strengthening bones and teeth.
TDR: 3mg per day. Works with lithium carbonate to make oddly low thyroid activity. Deficiency symptoms include mental retardation, apathy, deafness, dry hair, delayed growth, obesity, slowed mental reaction, sluggish metabolism, irritability, cold extremities, sexual development in children and Goiters in adults. Depleting factors include raw foods such as nuts and cabbage which may interfere with the use of iodine in thyroid hormone production. Maintains health of the thyroid gland, helps to metabolized excess fats. Treats angina pectoris, arteriosclerosis, helps with the growth and development of hair, skin, nails, teeth, speech, mentality and the oxidation of fat protein, and encourages the rate of metabolism.
ODR/TDR: Toxicity of overdoses of ferrous sulfate indicates appropriate amounts in RDA. Avoid in the presence of hepatitis hemolytic anemia. Excessive dosages can cause bloody diarrhea, heart irregularities, weakness, and shortness of breath. Supplementation with iron combined with the intake of alcohol can cause organ damage. Deficiency symptoms include fatigue, pale skin, irritability, general malaise, difficulty swallowing, weakness, brittle nails, general lethargy, constipation iron-deficiency, and breathing difficulty. Depleting factors include coffee, tea, bleeding, excess Phosphorous, diarrhea, stress, lack of hydrochloric acid, antacids, and aspirins. Vital to hemoglobin, myoglobin formation, aids in tissue respiration as well as cellular oxygenation. Aids nutrition of epithelial tissues. Needed for proper assimilation of B Vitamins, increases resistance to stress and disease.
TDR: 1,000mg per day. Reduces absorption of ketoconazole. May slow excretion (urinary) of mecamylamine. Reduces absorption of tetracycline. Deficiency symptoms include cardiovascular problems, confusion, insomnia, irritability, rapid heartbeat, seizures or tetany, depression, tremors, muscle twitch, convulsions, kidney stones, tooth decay, exhaustion and soft bones. Depleting factors include alcohol, diuretic, high cholesterol, and corticosteroid drugs. Activates enzymes responsible for catalytic reactions between phosphate ions and adenosine triphosphate. Controls body temperature, prevents calcification of soft tissue, and synthesizes proteins. Assists in calcium and potassium uptake. Activates enzymes necessary for the metabolism of carbohydrates and amino acids, helps to regulate acid/alkaline balance in the body, bone growth, teeth enamel, used for proper function of nerves, memory, muscles, liver and glands.
ODR/TDR: calculated in relation to zinc intake. 35mg per day of Manganese when taken with 100mg of zinc. Excess amounts lead to poor iron absorption. The following deplete manganese: calcium supplementation, oral contraceptives, and magnesium. Deficiency symptoms in children are an abnormal rate of development and growth, high blood sugar, ataxia, glandular disorders, muscular in coordination, poor growth, convulsion, loss of hearing, dizziness and paralysis. Depleting factors include excess phosphorous, calcium and antibiotics. Antioxidant, assists with managing blood glucose levels, helps to lower triglycerides, strengthens arterial tissues, and stabilizes LDL’s. Vital part of glucosamine, therefore useful in treatment of arthritis. Helps to maintain sex hormone, protein, fat and carbohydrate productions. Formation of blood cells, activates numerous enzymes, bones and tissue growth, synthesis of fatty acids and cholesterol.
TDR: 200mcg-1000mcg per day. Use with caution in presence of gout. Copper levels decline with excessive molybdenum intake. Deficiency symptoms include impotence, anemia, digestive disorders and tooth decay. Depleting factors are food refining and processing. Aids in eliminating aldehydes. Promotes normal cell growth. Generates energy, assists with production of hemoglobin. Aids in mobilization of iron from the liver. Vital for oxidation of fats.
Deficiency symptoms include cirrhosis of liver, kidney failure, excessive sweating, aggravates anemia, and intestinal malabsorption. Depleting factors include tobacco, alcohol and stress. May be a factor in hormone, lipid and membrane metabolism activator of some enzymes, and is involved in glucose metabolism.
Deficiency symptoms include bone diseases and weakness, gum and tooth diseases, nervous disorders, under or overweight, stunted growth, and irregular bleeding. Depleting factors include antacids, alcohol, aspirin, corticosteroid drugs and diuretics. Used in combination with calcium for the building of bones and teeth, repair of cells, growth maintenance, teeth and bones, skeletal growth, carbohydrates, kidney functioning, fat, protein metabolism, muscle contractions and nerve activity.
TDR: available only by prescription. Overdose may result in irregular heartbeat, partial paralysis, coma and convulsions. Combination of ameliorate can cause serious rise in blood pressure. Heart irregularities may occur in presence of digitalis or calcium. Intestinal disorders in the presence of belladonna and atropine. Deficiency symptoms include hypokalemia, vomiting, perspiration, severe cardiac problems, nervous disorders, insomnia, and general weakness. Depleting factors include diuretics, caffeine, stress, diarrhea, alcohol, excess salt, high cholesterol, aspirin, sugar, and corticosteroid drugs. An electrolyte responsible for acid/base balance. Promotes regular heartbeat, normal muscle contraction, regulates water balance, essential for proper muscle function, helps regulate water/fluid balance, stimulates kidney to remove body waste, cell metabolism, heart rhythm, growth, protein and glucose absorption.
Take one tablet daily. Side effects may include nausea, vomiting and hair loss. Deficiency symptoms include cardiomyopathy, myocardial death, premature aging, infertility, insomnia, and arteriosclerosis. Depleting factor is mercury poisoning. Antioxidant, especially when used with Vitamin E. Strengthens immune system, promotes normal growth and development. Major studies in cancer treatment. Preserves elasticity of tissue, normal body growth and hair growth, production of prostaglandin substances that effect blood pressure, fertility, and metabolism.
Depleting factor is Atherosclerosis. Aids in the connective tissues, bones and blood.
Sodium Deficiency symptoms include weight loss, alkalosis, nausea, muscle cramps, excess thirst, edema high blood pressure insomnia and irritability. Depleting factor is excessive perspiration. Aids in water balance, osmotic pressure, blood and lymph health, nerves, muscle contractions, and acid/alkaline balance.
Take one tablet daily. Deficiency symptoms include loss of taste and smell, alopecia, glossitis, stomachitis, paronychia, sterility, enlarged liver or spleen, decreased size of testicles, dwarfism, baldness, stretch marks in the skin, retarded growth, prolonged healing of wounds, sterility, prostate problems. Depleting factors include lack of phosphorous, excess calcium, alcohol, cadmium, corticosteroid drugs, oral contraceptives, and diuretics. Antioxidant, aids in wound and burn healing, supports normal fetal growth and development, helps synthesize DNA and RNA, promotes normal cellular functioning, strengthens immune system, aids in regulating blood sugar. Used in treatment of prostate disorders. Topical application for wounds and skin irritations. Proper growth and function of reproductive organs, carbohydrates, digestive and phosphorous metabolism, needed to break down alcohol, phosphorous and protein metabolism, and component of insulin.
Body Mass Index became popular during the early 1980s as obesity started to become a discernible issue in prosperous Western society. BMI provided a simple numeric measure of a person's "fatness" or "thinness", allowing health professionals to discuss the problems of over- and under-weight more objectively with their patients. However, BMI has become controversial because many people, including physicians, have come to rely on its apparent numerical "authority" for medical diagnosis – but that has never been the BMI's purpose. It is meant to be used as a simple means of classifying sedentary (physically inactive) individuals with an average body composition.[1] For these individuals, the current value settings are as follows: a BMI of 18.5 to 25 may indicate optimal weight; a BMI lower than 18.5 suggests the person is underweight while a number above 25 may indicate the person is overweight; a BMI below 15 may indicate the person has an eating disorder; a number above 30 suggests the person is obese (over 40, morbidly obese).
In physiology, the term “weight” is used interchangeably with “mass”. For a given body shape and given density, the BMI will be proportional to weight e.g. if all body weight increase by 50%, the BMI increases by 50%.
BMI is defined as the individual's body weight divided by the square of their height. The formulas universally used in medicine produce a unit of measure that is not dimensionless; it has units of kg/m2. Body mass index may be accurately calculated using any of the formulas below.
Either way can be a disorder.
The U.S. National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey of 1994 indicates that 59% of American men and 49% of women have BMIs over 25. Extreme obesity — a BMI of 40 or more — was found in 2% of the men and 4% of the women. There are differing opinions on the threshold for being underweight in females, doctors quote anything from 18.5 to 20 as being the lowest weight, the most frequently stated being 19. A BMI nearing 15 is usually used as an indicator for starvation and the health risks involved, with a BMI <17.5 being one of the criteria for the diagnosis of anorexia nervosa.
Anorexia nervosa: is a psychiatric diagnosis that describes an eating disorder characterized by low body weight and body image distortion with an obsessive fear of gaining weight. Individuals with anorexia often control body weight by voluntary starvation, purging, vomiting, excessive exercise, or other weight control measures, such as diet pills or diuretic drugs. It primarily affects young adolescent girls in the Western world and has one of the highest mortality rates of any psychiatric condition, with approximately 10% of people diagnosed with the condition eventually dying due to related factors.[1] Anorexia nervosa is a complex condition, involving psychological, neurobiological, and sociological components.[2]
Bulimia nervosa: commonly known as bulimia, is generally considered a psychological condition in which the subject engages in recurrent binge eating followed by an intentional purging. This purging is done in order to compensate for the excessive intake of the food and to prevent weight gain. Purging typically takes the form of vomiting; inappropriate use of laxatives, enemas, diuretics or other medication, and excessive physical exercise.
The body has two phases to its metabolic cycle. The first is known as the absorptive stage. This stage happens 3-4 hours after a typical meal. During this phase nutrients are absorbed by the body. In other words this is the stage where energy is stored into macromolecules. During the post-absorptive stage the nutrients are not being absorbed instead this is the stage where it is being mobilized.
The changes in the body that occur between the absorptive and post-absorptive stages are triggered by the changes in the plasma concentration of insulin. Insulin encourages the synthesis of energy storage molecules. When plasma glucose levels in the bloodstream increase during the absorptive stage, insulin is secreted from the pancreas. When the plasma glucose levels decrease, the post-absorptive phase begins. Insulin acts on several different tissues in the body and influences almost every major aspect of energy metabolism. Insulin supports and promotes all aspects of the absorptive phase by helping store energy in all tissues. It also inhibits the reactions of the post-absorptive phase. Insulin also affects the transport of nutrients across the membrane of ALL body cells except for those located in the liver and CNS. Insulin also has a part in growth where it needs to be present in the blood stream in order for the hormones to effect normally.
The sympathetic system and epinephrine suppress insulin and stimulate glucagon secretion. This effects the post absorptive phase by making metabolic adjustments. During the post absorptive phase, plasma glucose levels decrease and cause an increase of glycogen secretion. It also acts directly on glucose receptors in the CNS. This causes a rise in epinephrine secretion by the adrenal medulla. The rise in epinephrine creates a cascade event where the body sends signals to all the tissues (except skeletal muscles) to switch to the post absorptive phase.
Diabetes is essentially any condition which is characterized by an increase in urine production and secretion. The Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary defines it as the following... "A disorder of carbohydrate metabolism, usually occurring in genetically predisposed individuals, characterized by inadequate production or utilization of insulin and resulting in excessive amounts of glucose in the blood and urine, excessive thirst, weight loss, and in some cases progressive destruction of small blood vessels leading to such complications as infections and gangrene of the limbs or blindness."
In other words, when food is put into the body you get high levels of glucose in your blood stream thus resulting in the release of Insulin to take up and metabolize this glucose. It also stimulates the liver to store the glucose as glycogen, thus resulting in the storage of nutrients and the lowering of glucose levels in the blood. On the flip side you have Glucagon which helps in the breakdown of the stored nutrients when you need them, thus having the opposite effect of Insulin. People who are unable to produce insulin on their own, or are lacking/have damaged their insulin receptors develop what is known as "Diabetes Mellitus." There are two types of Diabetes Mellitus: Type I, aka, Insulin Dependent Diabetes Mellitus (IDDM), and Type II, aka, Non-Insulin Diabetes Mellitus (NIDDM).
Type I diabetes is believed to be an autoimmune disease which has been present since birth or has been brought on by exposure to a virus which causes insulin production by the pancreas to be impaired. This usually results in a person having to receive insulin from an external source. Without this external administration, the body would turn to the metabolism of fat, which leads to the build up of Ketones in the blood, which leads to blood acidosis and could result in a coma or possible death. The onset of Type I diabetes is most commonly seen under the age of 25.
Although Type II Diabetes is like Type I in many ways, it's onset is usually the result of poor lifestyle choices, particularly eating a diet high in sugars and fats while getting little or no physical exercise. Following this routine will quickly lead to damaging or the shutting down of your insulin receptors completely, thus resulting in the lack of glucose storage and the expulsion of essential nutrients from the body via urination. Just like with Type I Diabetes, Type II can have detrimental effects on the body including blindness, kidney disease, atherosclerosis, and again, even lead to the loss of extremities due to gangrene.
Doctors have projected that upwards of seven million Americans may have diabetes, yet many may not know it. If you or someone you know has been suffering from such things as: frequent urination, especially at night; unusual hunger and/or thirst; unexplained weight gain or loss; blurred vision; sores that don't heal; or excessive fatigue then it is highly recommended that you have your fasting blood glucose level checked by a physician. Maintaining an active lifestyle and making sound nutritional choices may greatly extend your life by protecting you from the ills of diabetes.
Energy is measured in units called calories. A calorie is the amount of energy that is needed to raise the temperature of 1 gram of water by one degree Celsius. Because a calorie is such a small amount, scientists use a larger unit to measure intake, called a kilocalorie. A kilocalorie is also referred to often as a capital "C" Calorie, and is equal to 1000 calories. When we "count" calories, we are actually counting the big Calories.
The old saying, "you are what you eat" is very much true. According to scientists, the average adult consumes 900,000 calories per year. Most people tend to take in more calories than their body needs. An intake of 120 extra calories a day, or around 5% excess in calories, yields an annual increase of 12 extra pounds of body weight. The more developed countries tend to consume more calories than others because of the increasing availability and dieting habits of eating refined foods with little nutrition in them and lots of saturated fat. In our society, there is a huge emphasis put on a person's image and how thin they are, and less emphasis put on what's most important--the nutrition our body receives. While our body do need calories every day to keep us going, we need to watch the amount of calories we consume in order to maintain good health and proper body weight.
Our Caloric intake is linked directly to our health status. Being overweight is generally defined as being 15-20% above ideal body weight, while obesity is defined as being more than 20% above it. People who weigh 10% less than ideal are considered underweight. This is less common in the more developed countries. In less developed countries such as South Africa, being underweight is quite common because they lack the nutrition to maintain good health.
When we consume more calories than our body can burn in a day, the excess energy is stored in specialized cells as fat. It is also important to know that the three classes of nutrients have different Caloric contents. Carbohydrates and proteins contain only four Calories per gram, while fat contains about nine. Because of this, it is essential that we watch our amount of fat intake. If we continuously feed our body more calories than is needed, our body will produce more fat cells, to store the excess energy. This contributes to gaining weight.
It is more difficult for chronically overweight persons to lose weight than normal-weight persons. This is because they are constantly fighting the body's own weight-control system, which responds as if the excess weight were normal. Our body is capable of measuring how much we intake, and maintaining our weight. When an overweight person goes on a diet, and consumes less calories, their body will respond as if they are starving, and try to save energy where it can to make up for the decrease in received calories.
Exercise is a great way to maintain healthy body weight.
To maintain a stable body weight, our consumption of calories needs to be equal to the amount of calories we use in a day. You can determine your daily energy needs by determining your basal metabolic rate (BMR). Your BMR is the energy your body needs to perform essential activities. Some examples of essential activities are breathing, and maintaining organ function. Your metabolic rate can be influenced by your age, gender, muscular activity, body surface area and environmental temperature.
Although the BMR stays about the same, we can dramatically change the amount of calories we burn in a day by participating in physical activity. It is important to note that heavier people do more work per hour than normal-weight people, for the same level of activity. We must spend about 3,500 Calories to lose one pound of fat. The best approach to weight loss, recommended by nutritionists, is to reduce the Caloric intake by a small amount each day while gradually increasing your amount of physical activity.
There are several factors that influence the BMR. Each person's body has different needs. BMR needs vary with gender and body composition. Muscle tissue consumes more energy than fat tissue. Typically, males need more calories than females, because they generally have more muscle tissue. Males use up calories faster than women. BMR also varies with your age as well. As we age, our body needs less and less calories. In addition, some health conditions can contribute to our needed calories. Health conditions such as fever, infections, and hyperthyroidism are examples of health conditions that increase your BMR. Our stress level effects our needed calorie intake as well. So does our increase or decrease in consumption, and our rate of metabolism, which varies with individual genetics.
Here are the steps to determining your BMR, or, the amount of energy your body needs to perform essential activities:
Living a healthy, well-balanced life involves good nutrition and adequate exercise. They work hand in hand.
There are many benefits to exercising.
Your chances of living longer increases.
You decrease your chances of getting diseases such as:
The costs of being physically active far outweigh the medical costs for those who are not physically active.
Thirty minutes a day of moderate intensity exercise or physical activity has been shown to make noticeable increases in breathing and heart rate.
METs (metabolic equivalents) are the amount of energy it takes while at rest (1 calorie per every 2.2 pounds of body weight per hour). Moderate intensity activities can get you to burn energy 3-6 times more depending upon the activity.
A study suggests that those with disabilities, who are older, or who are out of shape get the same benefit from 30 minutes of lower intensity exercise as those who are younger and more fit do from more intense activity.
There are other areas that benefit from different types of exercise such as strength training. These types of exercises help balance, muscle strength, and overall function.
Resistance or strength training can possibly decrease the loss of lean muscle tissue and even replace some already lost.
It can also decrease fat mass and increase resting metabolic rate.
It also helps maintain functional tasks in older populations.
Flexibility training or stretching exercises increases range of motion, decrease soreness, and injury.
The building blocks of protein in the body. There are nine essential amino acids that are not manufactured by the body and must come from the diet.
Refers the cumulative metabolic intracellular, molecular processes by which every cell repairs itself and grows.(synthesizing).
A common eating disorder characterized by an abnormal loss of the appetite for food
Compounds that protect against cell damage inflicted by molecules called oxygen-free radicals, which are a major cause of disease and aging.
Eating disorder characterized by binge eating followed by an intentional purging.
The opposite of Anabolism. The metabolic process that breaks down molecules into smaller units. It is made up of degradative chemical reactions in the living cell.
An irreversible advanced scarring of the liver as a result of chronic inflammation of the liver. Can be caused by alcoholism or obesity.
Proteins that contain ample amounts of all of the essential amino acids
When an amino acid group breaks off an amino acid that makes a molecule of ammonia and ketoacid.
A diet low in dietary fiber increases the risk, this is the pouches called diverticula formation on the outer portion of the large intestine.
An operation where a small gastric pouch is created and the remainder of the stomach bypassed
Proteins that contain some but not all of all of the essential amino acids required by the body
A childhood form of malnutrition caused by general lack of protein or deficiency in one or more amino acids. Appearance of a person with this is a swollen belly due to inadequate production of albumin, which causes the blood to have a lower osmotic pressure, resulting in more fluids escaping from the plasma.
An imbalanced nutrient and or energy intake.
A condition in which the natural energy reserve in fatty tissue increased to a point where it is thought to be a risk factor for certain health conditions or increased mortality
Two or more amino acids linked together by a bond called a peptide bond.
A string of amino acids linked together by peptide bonds. A protein is an example of a polypeptide.
A severe reduction in vitamin, nutrient, and energy intake, and is the most extreme form of malnutrition
Windmaier, P.W. Raff, H. Strang, T.S. (2004) Vander, Sherman, & Luciano's Human Physiology, the Mechanisms of Body Function 9th ed. Mcgraw-Hill
Starr & McMillan (2001) Human Biology 6th ed. Thomson-Brooks/cole.
Sylvia S. Mader (2006) Human Biology 9th ed. McGraw-Hill Higher Education
Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary 2nd ed. (2001) Random House
Ali, E. et. al. The All in One Guide to Natural Remedies and Supplements. AGES Publication. (1999).
The endocrine system is a control system of ductless glands that secrete hormones within specific organs. Hormones act as "messengers," and are carried by the bloodstream to different cells in the body, which interpret these messages and act on them.
It seems like a far fetched idea that a small chemical can enter the bloodstream and cause an action at a distant location in the body. Yet this occurs in our bodies every day of our lives. The ability to maintain homeostasis and respond to stimuli is largely due to hormones secreted within the body. Without hormones, you could not grow, maintain a constant temperature, produce offspring, or perform the basic actions and functions that are essential for life.
The endocrine system provides an electrochemical connection from the hypothalamus of the brain to all the organs that control the body metabolism, growth and development, and reproduction.
There are two types of hormones secreted in the endocrine system: Steroidal (or lipid based) and non-steroidal, (or protein based) hormones.
The endocrine system regulates its hormones through negative feedback, except in very specific cases like childbirth. Increases in hormone activity decrease the production of that hormone. The immune system and other factors contribute as control factors also, altogether maintaining constant levels of hormones.
Major endocrine glands. (Male left, female on the right.) 1. Pineal gland 2. Pituitary gland 3. Thyroid gland 4. Thymus 5. Adrenal gland 6. Pancreas 7. Ovary 8. Testis
Exocrine Glands are those which release their cellular secretions through a duct which empties to the outside or into the lumen (empty internal space) of an organ. These include certain sweat glands, salivary and pancreatic glands, and mammary glands. They are not considered a part of the endocrine system.
Endocrine Glands are those glands which have no duct and release their secretions directly into the intercellular fluid or into the blood. The collection of endocrine glands makes up the endocrine system.
1, The main endocrine glands are the pituitary (anterior and posterior lobes), thyroid, parathyroid, adrenal (cortex and medulla), pancreas and gonads.
2, The pituitary gland is attached to the hypothalamus of the lower forebrain.
3, The thyroid gland consists of two lateral masses, connected by a cross bridge, that are attached to the trachea. They are slightly inferior to the larynx.
4, The parathyroid glands are four masses of tissue, two embedded posterior in each lateral mass of the thyroid gland.
6, The pancreas is along the lower curvature of the stomach, close to where it meets the first region of the small intestine, the duodenum.
7, The gonads (ovaries and testes) are found in the pelvic cavity.
The endocrine system produces hormones that are instrumental in maintaining homeostasis and regulating reproduction and development. A hormone is a chemical messenger produced by a cell that effects specific change in the cellular activity of other cells (target cells). Unlike exocrine glands (which produce substances such as saliva, milk, stomach acid and digestive enzymes), endocrine glands do not secrete substances into ducts (tubes). Instead, endocrine glands secrete their hormones directly into the surrounding extra cellular space. The hormones then diffuse into nearby capillaries and are transported throughout the body in the blood.
The endocrine and nervous systems often work toward the same goal. Both influence other cells with chemicals (hormones and neurotransmitters). However, they attain their goals differently. Neurotransmitters act immediately (within milliseconds) on adjacent muscle, gland, or other nervous cells, and their effect is short-lived. In contrast, hormones take longer to produce their intended effect (seconds to days), may affect any cell, nearby or distant, and produce effects that last as long as they remain in the blood, which could be up to several hours.
In the following table there are the major hormones, their target and their function once in the target cell.
Stimulates uterine muscle contractions and release of milk by mammary glands
Released in emergency situations, raises blood glucose level, “fight or flight” response
Controls circadian and circannual rhythms, possibly involved in maturation of sexual organs
Amino acid-derived: Hormones that are modified amino acids.
Polypeptide and proteins: Hormones that are chains of amino acids of less than or more than about 100 amino acids, respectively. Some protein hormones are actually glycoproteins, containing glucose or other carbohydrate groups.
Steroids: Hormones that are lipids synthesized from cholesterol. Steroids are characterized by four interlocking carbohydrate rings.
Eicosanoids: Are lipids synthesized from the fatty acid chains of phospholipids found in plasma membrane.
Hormones circulating in the blood diffuse into the interstitial fluids surrounding the cell. Cells with specific receptors for a hormone respond with an action that is appropriate for the cell. Because of the specificity of hormone and target cell, the effects produced by a single hormone may vary among different kinds of target cells.
Hormones activate target cells by one of two methods, depending upon the chemical nature of the hormone.
Lipid-soluble hormones (steroid hormones and hormones of the thyroid gland) diffuse through the cell membranes of target cells. The lipid-soluble hormone then binds to a receptor protein that, in turn, activates a DNA segment that turns on specific genes. The proteins produced as result of the transcription of the genes and subsequent translation of mRNA act as enzymes that regulate specific physiological cell activity.
Water-soluble hormones (polypeptide, protein, and most amino acid hormones) bind to a receptor protein on the plasma membrane of the cell. The receptor protein, in turn, stimulates the production of one of the following second messengers:
Cyclic AMP (cAMP) is produced when the receptor protein activates another membrane-bound protein called a G protein. The G protein activates adenylate cyclase, the enzyme that catalyzes the production of cAMP from ATP. Cyclic AMP then triggers an enzyme that generates specific cellular changes.
Inositol triphosphate (IP3) is produced from membrane phospholipids. IP3, in turn, triggers the release of CA2+ from the endoplasmic reticulum, which then activates enzymes that generate cellular changes.
Endocrine glands release hormones in response to one or more of the following stimuli:
Hormones from other endocrine glands.
Chemical characteristics of the blood (other than hormones).
Neural stimulation.
Most hormone production is managed by a negative feedback system. The nervous system and certain endocrine tissues monitor various internal conditions of the body. If action is required to maintain homeostasis, hormones are released, either directly by an endocrine gland or indirectly through the action of the hypothalamus of the brain, which stimulates other endocrine glands to release hormones. The hormones activate target cells, which initiate physiological changes that adjust the body conditions. When normal conditions have been recovered, the corrective action - the production of hormones - is discontinued. Thus, in negative feedback, when the original (abnormal) condition has been repaired, or negated, corrective actions decrease or discontinue. For example, the amount of glucose in the blood controls the secretion of insulin and glucagons via negative feedback.
The production of some hormones is controlled by positive feedback. In such a system, hormones cause a condition to intensify, rather than decrease. As the condition intensifies, hormone production increases. Such positive feedback is uncommon, but does occur during childbirth, where hormone levels build with increasingly intense labor contractions. Also in lactation, hormone levels increase in response to nursing, which causes an increase in milk production. The hormone produced by the hypothalamus causing the milk let down and uterine contraction is oxytocin.
The hypothalamus makes up the lower region of the diencephalons and lies just above the brain stem. The pituitary gland (hypophysis) is attached to the bottom of the hypothalamus by a slender stalk called the infundibulum. The pituitary gland consists of two major regions, the anterior pituitary gland (anterior lobe or adenohypophysis) and the posterior pituitary gland (posterior lobe or neurohypophysis). The hypothalamus also controls the glandular secretion of the pituitary gland.
The hypothalamus oversees many internal body conditions. It receives nervous stimuli from receptors throughout the body and monitors chemical and physical characteristics of the blood, including temperature, blood pressure, and nutrient, hormone, and water content. When deviations from homeostasis occur or when certain developmental changes are required, the hypothalamus stimulates cellular activity in various parts of the body by directing the release of hormones from the anterior and posterior pituitary glands.
The hypothalamus communicates directives to these glands by one of the following two pathways:
The pituitary gland is found in the inferior part of the brain and is connected by the pituitary stalk. It can be referred to as the master gland because it is the main place for everything that happens within the endocrine system. It is divided into two sections: the anterior lobe (adenohypophysis) and the posterior lobe (neurohypophysis). The Anterior pituitary is involved in sending hormones that control all other hormones of the body.
Communication between the hypothalamus and the posterior pituitary occurs through neurosecretory cells that span the short distance between the hypothalamus and the posterior pituitary. Hormones produced by the cell bodies of the neurosecretory cells are packaged in vesicles and transported through the axon and stored in the axon terminals that lie in the posterior pituitary. When the neurosecretory cells are stimulated, the action potential generated triggers the release of the stored hormones from the axon terminals to a capillary network within the posterior pituitary. Two hormones, oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone (ADH), are produced and released this way. Decreased ADH release or decreased renal sensitivity to ADH produces a condition known as diabetes insipidus. Diabetes insipidus is characterized by polyuria (excess urine production), hypernatremia (increased blood sodium content) and polydipsia (thirst). Oxytocin is secreted by paraventricular nucleus and a small quantity is secreted by supraoptic nucleus in the hypothalamus. Oxytocin is secreted in both males and females. In females, oxytocin acts on the mammary glands and uterus. In males, oxytocin facilitates release of sperm into the urethra by causing contraction of vas deferens.
The posterior lobe is composed of neural tissue [neural ectoderm] and is derived from hypothalamus. Its function is to store oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone. When the hypothalamic neurons fire these hormones are release into the capillaries of the posterior lobe.
The posterior pituitary is, in effect, a projection of the hypothalamus. It does not produce its own hormones, but only stores and releases the hormones oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone. ADH is also known as arginine vasopressin (AVP) or simply vasopressin.
The anterior lobe is derived from oral ectoderm and is composed of glandular epithelium. Communication between the hypothalamus and the anterior pituitary (adenohypophysis) occurs through hormones (releasing hormones and inhibiting hormones) produced by the hypothalamus and delivered to the anterior pituitary via a portal network of capillaries. It consists of three divisions: 1. pars distalis, 2. pars tuberalis, 3. pars intermedia. The releasing and inhibiting hormones are produced by specialized neurons of the hypothalamus called neurosecretory cells. The hormones are released into a capillary network or primary plexus, and transported through veins or hypophyseal portal veins, to a second capillary network or secondary plexus that supplies the anterior pituitary. The hormones then diffuse from the secondary plexus aunshine into the anterior pituitary, where they initiate the production of specific hormones by the anterior pituitary. Many of the hormones produced by the anterior pituitary are tropic hormones or tropins, which are hormones that stimulate other endocrine glands to secrete their hormones.
The anterior pituitary lobe receives releasing hormones from the hypothalamus via a portal vein system known as the hypothalamic-hypophyseal portal system.
It does this in response to a variety of chemical signals from the hypothalamus, which travels to the anterior lobe by way of a special capillary system from the hypothalamus, down the median eminence, to the anterior lobe. These include:
These hormones from the hypothalamus cause release of the respective hormone from the pituitary. The control of release of hormones from the pituitary is via negative feedback from the target gland. For example homeostasis of thyroid hormones is achieved by the following mechanism; TRH from the hypothalamus stimulates the release of TSH from the anterior pituitary. The TSH, in turn, stimulates the release of thyroid hormones form the thyroid gland. The thyroid hormones then cause negative feedback, suppressing the release of TRH and TSH.
The heart, gastrointestinal tract, the placenta, the kidneys and the skin, whose major function is not the secretion of hormones, also contain some specialized cells that produce hormones.
In addition, all cells, except red blood cells secrete a class of hormones called eicosanoids. These hormones are paracrines, or local hormones, that primarily affect neighboring cells. Two groups of eicosanoids, the prostaglandins (PGs) and the leukotrienes (LTs), have a wide range of varying effects that depend upon the nature of the target cell. Eicosanoid activity, for example, may impact blood pressure, blood clotting, immune and inflammatory responses, reproductive processes, and the contraction of smooth muscles.
Maintaining homeostasis often requires conditions to be limited to a narrow range. When conditions exceed the upper limit of homeostasis, specific action, usually the production of a hormone is triggered. When conditions return to normal, hormone production is discontinued. If conditions exceed the lower limits of homeostasis, a different action, usually the production of a second hormone is triggered. Hormones that act to return body conditions to within acceptable limits from opposite extremes are called antagonistic hormones. The two glands that are the most responsible for homeostasis is the thyroid and the parathyroid.
The regulation of blood glucose concentration (through negative feedback) illustrates how the endocrine system maintains homeostasis by the action of antagonistic hormones. Bundles of cells in the pancreas called the islets of Langerhans contain two kinds of cells, alpha cells and beta cells. These cells control blood glucose concentration by producing the antagonistic hormones insulin and glucagon.
Beta cells secrete insulin. When the concentration of blood glucose raises such in after eating, beta cells secret insulin into the blood. Insulin stimulates the liver and most other body cells to absorb glucose. Liver and muscle cells convert glucose to glycogen, for short term storage, and adipose cells convert glucose to fat. In response, glucose concentration decreases in the blood, and insulin secretion discontinues through negative feedback from declining levels of glucose.
Alpha cells secrete glucagon. When the concentration of blood glucose drops such as during exercise, alpha cells secrete glucagon into the blood. Glucagon stimulates the liver to release glucose. The glucose in the liver originates from the breakdown of glycogen. Glucagon also stimulates the production of ketone bodies from amino acids and fatty acids. Ketone bodies are an alternative energy source to glucose for some tissues. When blood glucose levels return to normal, glucagon secretion discontinues through negative feedback.
Another example of antagonistic hormones occurs in the maintenance of Ca2+ ion concentration in the blood. Parathyroid hormone (PTH) from the parathyroid glands increases Ca2+ in the blood by increasing Ca2+ absorption in the intestines and reabsorption in the kidneys and stimulating Ca2+ release from bones. Calcitonin (CT) produces the opposite effect by inhibiting the breakdown of bone matrix and decreasing the release of calcium in the blood.
The Thyroid gland is one of the largest endocrine glands in the body. It is positioned on the neck just below the Larynx and has two lobes with one on either side of the trachea. It is involved in the production of the hormones T3 (triiodothyronine) and T4 (thyroxine). These hormones increase the metabolic activity of the body‘s cells. The thyroid also produces and releases the hormone calcitonin (thyrocalcitonin) which contributes to the regulation of blood calcium levels. Thyrocalcitonin or calcitonin decreases the concentration of calcium in the blood. Most of the calcium removed from the blood is stored in the bones.
The thyroid hormone consists of two components, thyroxine and iodine. This hormone increases the metabolism of most body cells. A deficiency of iodine in the diet leads to the enlargement of the thyroid gland, known as a simple goiter. Hypothyroidism during early development leads to cretinism. In adults, it produces myxedema, characterized by obesity and lethargy. Hyperthyroidism leads to a condition known as exophthalmic goiter, characterized by weight loss as well as hyperactive and irritable behavior.
The thyroid gland is a two-lobed gland that manifests a remarkably powerful active transport mechanism for up-taking iodide ions from the blood. As blood flows through the gland, iodide is converted to an active form of iodine. This iodine combines with an amino acid called tyrosine. Two molecules of iodinated tyrosine then combine to form thryroxine. Following its formation, the thyroxine becomes bound to a polysaccharide-protein material called thyroglobulin. The normal thyroid gland may store several weeks supply of thyroxine in this bound form. An enzymatic splitting of the thyroxine from the thyroglobulin occurs when a specific hormone is released into the blood. This hormone, produced by the pituitary gland, is known as thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). TSH stimulates certain major rate-limiting steps in thyroxine secretion, and thereby alters its rate of release. A variety of bodily defects, either dietary, hereditary, or disease induced, may decrease the amount of thyroxine released into the blood. The most popular of these defects is one that results from dietary iodine deficiency. The thyroid gland enlarges, in the continued presence of TSH from the pituitary, to form a goiter. This is a futile attempt to synthesize thyroid hormones, for iodine levels that are too low. Normally, thyroid hormones act via a negative feedback loop on the pituitary to decrease stimulation of the thyroid. In goiter, the feedback loop cannot be in operation - hence continual stimulation of the thyroid and the inevitable protuberance on the neck. Formerly, the principal source of iodine came from seafood. As a result, goiter was prevalent amongst inland areas far removed from the sea. Today, the incidence of goiter has been drastically reduced by adding iodine to table salt.
Thyroxine serves to stimulate oxidative metabolism in cells; it increases the oxygen consumption and heat production of most body tissues, a notable exception being the brain. Thyroxine is also necessary for normal growth. The most likely explanation being that thyroxine promotes the effects of growth hormone on protein synthesis. The absence of thyroxine significantly reduces the ability of growth hormone to stimulate amino acid uptake and RNA synthesis. Thyroxine also plays a crucial role in the closely related area of organ development, particularly that of the central nervous system.
If there is an insufficient amount of thyroxine, a condition referred to as hypothyroidism results. Symptoms of hypothyroidism stem from the fact that there is a reduction in the rate of oxidative energy-releasing reactions within the body cells. Usually the patient shows puffy skin, sluggishness, and lowered vitality. Other symptoms of hypothyroidism include weight gain, decreased libido, inability to tolerate cold, muscle pain and spasm, and brittle nails. Hypothyroidism in children, a condition known as cretinism, can result in mental retardation, dwarfism, and permanent sexual immaturity.
Sometimes the thyroid gland produces too much thyroxine, a condition known as hyperthyroidism. This condition produces symptoms such as an abnormally high body temperature, profuse sweating, high blood pressure, loss of weight, irritability, insomnia and muscular pain and weakness. It also causes the characteristic symptom of the eyeballs protruding from the skull called exopthalmia. This is surprising because it is not a symptom usually related to a fast metabolism. Hyperthyroidism has been treated by partial removal or by partial radiation destruction of the gland. More recently, several drugs that inhibit thyroid activity have been discovered, and their use is replacing the former surgical procedures. Unfortunately thyroid conditions require lifetime treatment and because of the body's need for a sensitive balance of thyroid hormone both supplementing and suppressing thyroid function can take months or even years to regulate.
Iodine and T4 stimulate the spectacular apoptosis (programmed cell death) of the cells of the larval gills, tail and fins
Transforming the aquatic, vegetarian tadpole into the terrestrial, carnivorous frog with better neurological, visuospatial, olfactory and cognitive abilities for hunting. Contrary to amphibian metamorphosis, thyroidectomy and hypothyroidism in mammals may be considered a sort of phylogenetic and metabolic regression to a former stage of reptilian life. Indeed, many disorders that seem to afflict hypothyroid humans have reptilian-like features, such as dry, hairless, scaly, cold skin and a general slowdown of metabolism, digestion, heart rate and nervous reflexes, with lethargic cerebration, hyperuricemia and hypothermia ( Venturi, 2000). ]]
The Production of T3 and T4 are regulated by thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), released by the pituitary gland, a bean shape node in the brain. TSH Production is increased when T3 and T4 levels are too low. The thyroid hormones are released throughout the body to direct the body's metabolism. They stimulate all cells within the body to work at a better metabolic rate. Without these hormones the body's cells would not be able to regulate the speed at which they performed chemical actions. Their release will be increased under certain situations such as cold temperatures when a higher metabolism is needed to generate heat.
When children are born with thyroid hormone deficiency they have problems with physical growth and developmental problems. Brain development can also be severely impaired
Thyroid hormone cannot be produced without an abundant source of iodine. The iodine concentration within the body, although significant, can be as little as 1/25th the concentration within the thyroid itself. When the thyroid is low on iodine the body will try harder to produce T3 and T4 which will often result in a swelling of the thyroid gland, resulting in a goiter.
Sequence of 123-iodide human scintiscans after an intravenous injection, (from left) after 30 minutes, 20 hours, and 48 hours. A high and rapid concentration of radio-iodide is evident in the periencephalic and cerebrospinal fluid (left), salivary glands, oral mucosa and the stomach. In the thyroid gland, I-concentration is more progressive, also in the reservoir (from 1% after 30 minutes, to 5.8 % after 48 hours, of the total injected dose. Highest iodide-concentration by the mammary gland is evident only in pregnancy and lactation. High excretion of radio-iodide is observed in the urine.[2]
Iodine accounts for 65% of the molecular weight of T4 and 59% of the T3. 15–20 mg of iodine is concentrated in thyroid tissue and hormones, but 70% of the body's iodine is distributed in other tissues, including mammary glands, eyes, gastric mucosa, the cervix, and salivary glands. In the cells of these tissues iodide enters directly by sodium-iodide symporter (NIS). Its role in mammary tissue is related to fetal and neonatal development, but its role in the other tissues is unknown. It has been shown to act as an antioxidant in these tissues.
The US Food and Nutrition Board and Institute of Medicine recommended daily allowance of iodine ranges from 150 micrograms /day for adult humans to 290 micrograms /day for lactating mothers. However, the thyroid gland needs no more than 70 micrograms /day to synthesize the requisite daily amounts of T4 and T3. These higher recommended daily allowance levels of iodine seem necessary for optimal function of a number of body systems, including lactating breast, gastric mucosa, salivary glands, oral mucosa, thymus, epidermis, choroid plexus, etc.[3][4][5]
Moreover, iodine can add to double bonds of docosahexaenoic acid and arachidonic acid of cellular membranes, making them less reactive to free oxygen radicals.[6]
Calcitonin is a 32 amino acid polypeptide hormone. It is an additional hormone produced by the thyroid, and contributes to the regulation of blood calcium levels. Thyroid cells produce calcitonin in response to high calcium levels in the blood. This hormone will stimulate movement of calcium into the bone structure. It can also be used therapeutically for the treatment of hypercalcemia or osteoporosis. Without this hormone calcium will stay within the blood instead of moving into bones to keep them strong and growing. Its importance in humans has not been as well established as its importance in other animals.
There are four parathyroid glands. They are small, light-colored lumps that stick out from the surface of the thyroid gland. All four glands are located on the thyroid gland. They are butterfly-shaped and located inside the neck, more specifically on both sides of the windpipe. One of the parathyroid glands most important functions is to regulate the body's calcium and phosphorus levels. Another function of the parathyroid glands is to secrete parathyroid hormone, which causes the release of the calcium present in bone to extracellular fluid. PTH does this by depressing the production of osteoblasts, special cells of the body involved in the production of bone and activating osteoclasts, other specialized cells involved in the removal of bone.
There are two major types of cells that make up parathyroid tissue:
The second type are called chief cells. Chief cells produce parathyroid hormone.
The structure of a parathyroid gland is very different from that of a thyroid gland. The chief cells that produce parathyroid hormone are arranged in tightly-packed nests around small blood vessels, quite unlike the thyroid cells that produce thyroid hormones, which are arranged in spheres called the thyroid follicles.
PTH or Parathyroid Hormone is secreted from these four glands. It is released directly into the bloodstream and travels to its target cells which are often quite far away. It then binds to a structure called a receptor, that is found either inside or on the surface of the target cells.
Receptors bind a specific hormone and the result is a specific physiologic response, meaning a normal response of the body.
PTH finds its major target cells in bone, kidneys, and the gastrointestinal system.
Calcitonin, a hormone produced by the thyroid gland that also regulates ECF calcium levels and serves to counteract the calcium-producing effects of PTH.
The four parathyroid glands secrete the parathyroid hormone (PTH). It opposes the effect of thyrocalcitonin. It does this by removing calcium from its storage sites in bones, releasing it into the bloodstream. It also signals the kidneys to reabsorb more of this mineral, transporting it into the blood. It also signals the small intestine to absorb more of this mineral, transporting it from the diet into the blood.
Calcium is important for steps of body metabolism. Blood cannot clot without sufficient calcium. Skeletal muscles require this mineral in order to contract. A deficiency of PTH can lead to tetany, muscle weakness due to lack of available calcium in the blood.
The parathyroid glands were long thought to be part of the thyroid or to be functionally associated with it. We now know that their close proximity to the thyroid is misleading: both developmentally and functionally, they are totally distinct from the thyroid.
The parathyroid hormone, called parathormone, regulates the calcium-phosphate balance between the blood and other tissues. Production of this hormone is directly controlled by the calcium concentration of the extracellular fluid bathing the cells of these glands. Parathormone exerts at least the following five effects: (1) it increases gastrointestinal absorption of calcium by stimulating the active transport system and moves calcium from the gut lumen into the blood; (2) it increases the movement of calcium and phosphate from bone into extracellular fluid. This is accomplished by stimulating osteoclasts to break down bone structure, thus liberating calcium phosphate into the blood. In this way, the store of calcium contained in bone is tapped; (3) it increases re-absorption of calcium by the renal tubules, thereby decreasing urinary calcium excretion; (4) it reduces the re-absorption of phosphate by the renal tubules (5)it stimulates the synthesis of 1,25-dihydrixycholecalciferol by the kidney.
The first three effects result in a higher extracellular calcium concentration. The adaptive value of the fourth is to prevent the formation of kidney stones.
If parathyroid glands are removed accidentally during surgery on the thyroid, there would be a rise in the phosphate concentration in the blood. There would also be a drop in the calcium concentration as more calcium is excreted by the kidneys and intestines, and more incorporated into the bone. This can produce serious disturbances, particularly in the muscles and nerves, which use calcium ions for normal functioning. Over activity of the parathyroid glands, which can result from a tumor on the glands, produces a weakening of the bones. This is a condition that makes them much more vulnerable to fracturing because of excessive withdrawal of calcium from the bones.
Adrenal glands are a pair of ductless glands located above the kidneys. Through hormonal secretions, the adrenal glands regulate many essential functions in the body, including biochemical balances that influence athletic training and general stress response. The glucocorticoids include corticosterone, cortisone, and hydrocortisone or cortisol. These hormones serve to stimulate the conversion of amino acids into carbohydrates which is a process known as gluconeogenesis, and the formation of glycogen by the liver. They also stimulate the formation of reserve glycogen in the tissues, such as in the muscles. The glucocorticoids also participate in lipid and protein metabolism.
The cortex of the adrenal gland is known to produce over 20 hormones, but their study can be simplified by classifying them into three categories: glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids, and sex hormones.
They are triangular-shaped glands located on top of the kidneys. They produce hormones such as estrogen, progesterone, steroids, cortisol, and cortisone, and chemicals such as adrenalin (epinephrine), norepinephrine, and dopamine. When the glands produce more or less hormones than required by the body, disease conditions may occur.
The adrenal cortex secretes at least two families of hormones, the glucocorticoids and mineral corticoids. The adrenal medulla secretes the hormones epinephrine (adrenalin) and norepinephrine (noradrenalin).
The hormones made by the Adrenal Cortex supply long-term responses to stress. The two major hormones produced are the Mineral Corticoids and the Glucocorticoids. The Mineral Corticoids regulate the salt and water balance, leading to the increase of blood volume and blood pressure. The Glucocorticoids are monitoring the ACTH, in turn regulating carbohydrates, proteins, and fat metabolism. This causes an increase in blood glucose. Glucocorticoids also reduce the body's inflammatory response.
Cortisol is one of the most active glucocorticoids. It usually reduces the effects of inflammation or swelling throughout the body. It also stimulates the production of glucose from fats and proteins, which is a process referred to as gluconeogenesis.
Aldosterone is one example of a mineralocorticoid. It signals the tubules in the kidney nephrons to reabsorb sodium while secreting or eliminating potassium. If sodium levels are low in the blood, the kidney secretes more renin, which is an enzyme that stimulates the formation of angiotensin from a molecule made from the liver. Angiotensin stimulates aldosterone secretion. As a result, more sodium is reabsorbed as it enters the blood.
Aldosterone, the major mineralocorticoid, stimulates the cells of the distal convoluted tubules of the kidneys to decrease re-absorption of potassium and increase re-absorption of sodium. This in turn leads to an increased re-absorption of chloride and water. These hormones, together with such hormones as insulin and glucagon, are important regulators of the ionic environment of the internal fluid.
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone mechanism can raise blood pressure if it tends to drop. It does this in two ways. Angiotensin is a vasoconstrictor, decreasing the diameter of blood vessels. As vessels constrict, blood pressure increases. In addition, as sodium is reabsorbed, the blood passing through the kidney becomes more hypertonic. Water follows the sodium into the hypertonic blood by osmosis. This increases the amount of volume in the blood and also increases the blood pressure.
The hypothalamus starts nerve impulses that travel the path from the bloodstream, spinal cord, and sympathetic nerve fibers to the Adrenal Medulla, which then releases hormones. The effects of these hormones provide a short-term response to stress
Excessive secretion of the glucocorticoids causes Cushing's syndrome, characterized by muscle atrophy or degeneration and hypertension or high blood pressure. Under secretion of these substances produces Addison's disease, characterized by low blood pressure and stress.
Epinephrine and norepinephrine produce the "fight or flight" response, similar to the effect from the sympathetic nervous system. Therefore, they increase heart rate, breathing rate, blood flow to most skeletal muscles, and the concentration of glucose in the blood.
They decrease blood flow to the digestive organs and diminish most digestive processes.
Suprarenal glands viewed from the front.
Suprarenal glands viewed from behind.
The adrenal sex hormones consist mainly of male sex hormones (androgens) and lesser amounts of female sex hormones (estrogens and progesterone). Normally, the sex hormones released from the adrenal cortex are insignificant due to the low concentration of secretion. However, in cases of excess secretion, masculine or feminine effects appear. The most common syndrome of this sort is "virilism" of the female.
Should there be an insufficient supply of cortical hormones, a condition known as Addison's disease would result. This disease is characterized by an excessive excretion of sodium ions, and hence water, due to lack of mineralocorticoids. Accompanying this is a decreased blood glucose level due to a deficient supply of glucocorticoids. The effect of a decreased androgen supply cannot be observed immediately. Injections of adrenal cortical hormones promptly relieve these symptoms.
Hormonal production in the adrenal cortex is directly controlled by the anterior pituitary hormone called adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH).
The two adrenal glands lie very close to the kidneys. Each adrenal gland is actually a double gland, composed of an inner core like medulla and an outer cortex. Each of these is functionally unrelated.
The adrenal medulla secretes two hormone, adrenalin or epinephrine and noradrenalin or norepinephrine, whose functions are very similar but not identical. The adrenal medulla is derived embryologically from neural tissue. It has been likened to an overgrown sympathetic ganglion whose cell bodies do not send out nerve fibers, but release their active substances directly into the blood, thereby fulfilling the criteria for an endocrine gland. In controlling epinephrine secretion, the adrenal medulla behaves just like any sympathetic ganglion, and is dependent upon stimulation by sympathetic preganglionic fibers.
Epinephrine promotes several responses, all of which are helpful in coping with emergencies: the blood pressure rises, the heart rate increases, the glucose content of the blood rises because of glycogen breakdown, the spleen contracts and squeezes out a reserve supply of blood, the clotting time decreases, the pupils dilate, the blood flow to skeletal muscles increase, the blood supply to intestinal smooth muscle decreases and hairs become erect. These adrenal functions, which mobilize the resources of the body in emergencies, have been called the fight-or-flight response. Norepinephrine stimulates reactions similar to those produced by epinephrine, but is less effective in conversion of glycogen to glucose.
The significance of the adrenal medulla may seem questionable since the complete removal of the gland causes few noticeable changes; humans can still exhibit the flight-or-fight response. This occurs because the sympathetic nervous system complements the adrenal medulla in stimulating the fight-or-flight response, and the absence of the hormonal control will be compensated for by the nervous system.
The pancreas is very important organ in the digestion system and the circulatory system because it helps to maintain our blood sugar levels. The pancreas is considered to be part of the gastrointestinal system. It produces digestive enzymes to be released into the small intestine to aid in reducing food particles to basic elements that can be absorbed by the intestine and used by the body. It has another very different function in that it forms insulin, glucagon and other hormones to be sent into the bloodstream to regulate blood sugar levels and other activities throughout the body.
It has a pear-shape to it and is approximately 6 inches long. It is located in the middle and back portion of the abdomen. The pancreas is connected to the first part of the small intestine, the duodenum, and lies behind the stomach. The pancreas is made up of glandular tissue: any substance secreted by the cells of the pancreas will be secreted outside of the organ.
The digestive juices produced by the pancreas are secreted into the duodenum via a Y-shaped duct, at the point where the common bile duct from the liver and the pancreatic duct join just before entering the duodenum. The digestive enzymes carried into the duodenum are representative of the exocrine function of the pancreas, in which specific substances are made to be passed directly into another organ.
Note:The pancreas is both an exocrine and an endocrine organ.
The pancreas is unusual among the body's glands in that it also has a very important endocrine function. Small groups of special cells called islet cells throughout the organ make the hormones of insulin and glucagon. These, of course, are hormones that are critical in regulating blood sugar levels. These hormones are secreted directly into the bloodstream to affect organs all over the body.
No organ except the pancreas makes significant amounts of insulin or glucagon.
Insulin acts to lower blood sugar levels by allowing the sugar to flow into cells. Glucagon acts to raise blood sugar levels by causing glucose to be released into the circulation from its storage sites. Insulin and glucagon act in an opposite but balanced fashion to keep blood sugar levels stable.
A healthy working pancreas in the human body is important for maintaining good health by preventing malnutrition, and maintaining normal levels of blood sugar. The digestive tract needs the help of the enzymes produced by the pancreas to reduce food particles to their simplest elements, or the nutrients cannot be absorbed. Carbohydrates must be broken down into individual sugar molecules. Proteins must be reduced to simple amino acids. Fats must be broken down into fatty acids. The pancreatic enzymes are important in all these transformations. The basic particles can then easily be transported into the cells that line the intestine, and from there they can be further altered and transported to different tissues in the body as fuel sources and construction materials. Similarly, the body cannot maintain normal blood sugar levels without the balanced action of insulin and glucagon.
The pancreas contains exocrine and endocrine cells. Groups of endocrine cells, the islets of Langerhans, secrete two hormones. The beta cells secrete insulin; the alpha cells secrete glucagon. The level of sugar in the blood depends on the opposing action of these two hormones.
Insulin decreases the concentration of glucose in the blood. Most of the glucose enters the cells of the liver and skeletal muscles. In these cells, this monosaccharide is converted to the polysaccharide glycogen. Therefore, insulin promotes glycogenesis or glycogen synthesis, in which glucose molecules are added to chains of glycogen. Excess glucose is also stored as fat in adipose tissue cells in response to insulin.
Insulin deficiency leads to the development of diabetes mellitus, specifically type I, juvenile diabetes. As the pancreas does not produce sufficient insulin, it is treated by insulin injections. In type II or maturity onset diabetes, the pancreas does produce enough insulin, but the target cells do not respond to it.
As already stated, the pancreas is a mixed gland having both endocrine and exocrine functions. The exocrine portion secretes digestive enzymes into the duodenum via the pancreatic duct. The endocrine portion secretes two hormones, insulin and glucagon, into the blood.
Insulin is a hormone that acts directly or indirectly on most tissues of the body, with the exception of the brain. The most important action of insulin is the stimulation of the uptake of glucose by many tissues, particularly the liver, muscle and fat. The uptake of glucose by the cells decreases blood glucose and increases the availability of glucose for the cellular reactions in which glucose participates. Thus, glucose oxidation, fat synthesis, and glycogen synthesis are all accentuated by an uptake of glucose. It is important to note that insulin does not alter glucose uptake by the brain, nor does it influence the active transport of glucose across the renal tubules and gastrointestinal epithelium.
As stated, insulin stimulates glycogen synthesis. It also increases the activity of the enzyme that catalyzes the rate-limiting step in glycogen synthesis. Insulin also increases triglyceride levels by inhibiting triglyceride breakdown, and by stimulating production of triglyceride through fatty acid and glycerophosphate synthesis. The net protein synthesis is also increased by insulin, which stimulates the active membrane transport of amino acids, particularly into muscle cells. Insulin also has effects on other liver enzymes, but the precise mechanisms by which insulin induces these changes are not well understood.
Insulin is secreted by beta cells, which are located in the part of the pancreas known as the islets of Langerhans. These groups of cells, which are located randomly throughout the pancreas, also consist of other secretory cells called alpha cells. It is these alpha cells that secrete glucagon. Glucagon is a hormone that has the following major effects: it increases hepatic synthesis of glucose from pyruvate, lactate, glycerol, and amino acids (a process called gluconeogenesis, which also raises the plasma glucose level); and it increases the breakdown of adipose tissue triglyceride, thereby raising the plasma levels of fatty acids and glycerol. The glucagon secreting alpha cells in the pancreas, like the beta cells, respond to changes in the concentration of glucose in the blood flowing through the pancreas; no other nerves or hormones are involved.
It should be noted that glucagon has the opposite effects of insulin. Glucagon elevates the plasma glucose, whereas insulin stimulates its uptake and thereby reduces plasma glucose levels; glucagon elevates fatty acid concentrations, whereas insulin converts fatty acids and glycerol into triglycerides, thereby inhibiting triglyceride breakdown.
The alpha and beta cells of the pancreas make up a push-pull system for regulating the plasma glucose level.
The Sex organs (Gonads) are the testes in the male, and the ovaries in the female. Both of these organs produce and secrete hormones that are balanced by the hypothalamus and pituitary glands.
The main hormones from the reproductive organs are:
Testosterone is more prominent in males. It belongs to the family of androgens, which are steroid hormones producing masculine effects. Testosterone stimulates the development and functioning of the primary sex organs. It also stimulates the development and maintenance of secondary male characteristics, such as hair growth on the face and the deep pitch of the voice.
Estrogen In females, this hormone stimulates the development of the uterus and vagina. It is also responsible for the development and maintenance of secondary female characteristics, such as fat distribution throughout the body and the width of the pelvis.
The testes produce androgens (i.e., "testosterone").
Testosterone increases protein production. Hormones that build up protein are called anabolic steroids. Anabolic steroids are available commercially and are being used by athletes because they help improve their physical ability, however, they do have major side effects such as:
Schematic frontal view of female anatomy.
The ovaries produce estrogen and progesterone. Estrogen increases at the time of puberty and causes the growth of the uterus and vagina. Without estrogen egg maturation would not occur. Estrogen is also responsible for secondary sex characteristics such as female body hair and fat distribution. Estrogen and Progesterone are responsible for the development of the breast and for the uterine cycle. Progesterone is a female hormone secreted by the corpus luteum after ovulation during the second half of the menstrual cycle. It prepares the lining of the uterus for implantation of a fertilized egg and allows for complete shedding of the endometrium at the time of menstruation. In the event of pregnancy, the progesterone level remains stable beginning a week or so after conception.
The pineal gland (also called the pineal body or epiphysis) is a small endocrine gland in the brain. It is located near the center of the brain, between the two hemispheres, tucked in a groove where the two rounded thalamic bodies join. It consists of two types of cells 1. parenchymal cells 2. neuroglial cells.
The pineal gland is a reddish-gray body about the size of a pea (8 mm in humans) located just rostro-dorsal to the superior colliculus and behind and beneath the stria medullaris, between the laterally positioned thalamic bodies. It is part of the epithalamus.
The pineal gland is a midline structure, and is often seen in plain skull X-rays, as it is often calcified. The main hormone produced and secreted by the pineal gland is melatonin. Secretion is highest at night and between the ages of 0-5. Melatonin acts mainly on gonads.
Adrenal Gland: endocrine gland that is located on top of each kidney
Antagonistic Hormones: hormones that act to return body conditions to within acceptable limits from opposite extremes
Calcitonin: hormone produced by the thyroid; contributes to the regulation of blood calcium levels
Eicosanoids: lipids that are synthesized from the fatty acid chains of phospholipids found in plasma membrane
Endocrine Glands: glands that have no duct and release their secretions directly into the intercellular fluid or into the blood
Endocrine System: a control system of ductless glands that secrete chemical messengers called hormones
Estrogen: hormone in females; stimulates the development of the uterus and vagina
Exocrine Glands: glands that release their cellular secretions through a duct which empties to the outside or into the lumen (empty internal space) of an organ
Hormone: a specific chemical substance produced by certain cells that control, or help to control, cellular processes elsewhere in an organism
Insulin: hormone that acts to lower blood sugar levels by allowing the sugar to flow into cells
Iodine: chemical in the body; Thyroid hormone can not be produced with out it
Lipid-soluble Hormones: diffuse through the cell membranes of target cells
Pancreas: organ involved with the digestion system and the circulatory system; helps to maintain blood sugar levels
Pineal Gland: small endocrine gland in the brain located near the center of the brain, between the two hemispheres, tucked in a groove where the two rounded thalamic bodies join
Pituitary Gland: endocrine gland that is attached to the hypothalamus of the lower forebrain
Polypeptide and Proteins: hormones that are chains of amino acids of less than or more than about 100 amino acids
Steroids: hormones that are lipids that are synthesized from cholesterol; characterized by four interlocking carbohydrate rings
Testosterone: hormone more prominent in males; belongs to the family of androgens, which are steroid hormones producing masculinizing effects
Thyroid Gland: endocrine gland that consists of two lateral masses that are attached to the trachea
Thyroxine: serves to stimulate oxidative metabolism in cells; increases the oxygen consumption and heat production of most body tissues
Water-soluble Hormones: bind to a receptor protein on the plasma membrane of the cell
In simple terms, reproduction is the process by which organisms create descendants. This miracle is a characteristic that all living things have in common and sets them apart from nonliving things. But even though the reproductive system is essential to keeping a species alive, it is not essential to keeping an individual alive.
In human reproduction, two kinds of sex cells or gametes are involved. Sperm, the male gamete, and a secondary oocyte (along with first polar body and corona radiata), the male gamete must meet in the female reproductive system to create a new individual. For reproduction to occur, both the female and male reproductive systems are essential. It is a common misnomer to refer to a woman's gametic cell as an egg or ovum, but this is impossible. A secondary oocyte must be fertilized by the male gamete before it becomes an "ovum" or "egg".
While both the female and male reproductive systems are involved with producing, nourishing and transporting either the oocyte or sperm, they are different in shape and structure. The male has reproductive organs, or genitals, that are both inside and outside the pelvis, while the female has reproductive organs entirely within the pelvis.
The male reproductive system consists of the testes and a series of ducts and glands. Sperm are produced in the testes and are transported through the reproductive ducts. These ducts include the epididymis, vas deferens, ejaculatory duct and urethra. The reproductive glands produce secretions that become part of semen, the fluid that is ejaculated from the urethra. These glands include the seminal vesicles, prostate gland, and bulbourethral glands.
The testes (singular, testis) are located in the scrotum (a sac of skin between the upper thighs). In the male fetus, the testes develop near the kidneys, then descend into the scrotum just before birth. Each testis is about 1 1/2 inches long by 1 inch wide. Testosterone is produced in the testes which stimulates the production of sperm as well as give secondary sex characteristics beginning at puberty.
The two testicles are each held in a fleshy sac called the scrotum. The major function of the scrotal sac is to keep the testes cooler than thirty-seven degrees Celsius (ninety-eight point six degrees Fahrenheit). The external appearance of the scrotum varies at different times in the same individual depending upon temperature and the subsequent contraction or relaxation of two muscles. These two muscles contract involuntarily when it is cold to move the testes closer to the heat of the body in the pelvic region. This causes the scrotum to appear tightly wrinkled. On the contrary, they relax in warm temperatures causing the testes to lower and the scrotum to become flaccid. The temperature of the testes is maintained at about thirty-five degrees Celsius (ninety-five degrees Fahrenheit), which is below normal body temperature. Temperature has to be lower than normal in order for spermatogenesis (sperm production) to take place.
The scrotum is in a relaxed state. Penile shrinkage due to low temperatures. The scrotum is in a tense state to regulate testicular temperatures.
The two muscles that regulate the temperature of the testes are the dartos and cremaster muscles:
The cremaster muscle is a thin strand of skeletal muscle associated with the testes and spermatic cord. This muscle is a continuation of the internal oblique muscle of the abdominal wall, from which it is derived.
The seminiferous tubules are the functional units of the testis, where spermatogenesis takes place. Once the sperm are produced, they moved from the seminiferous tubules into the rete testis for further maturation.
In between the seminiferous tubules within the testes, are instititial cells, or, Cells of Leydig. They are responsible for secreting the male sex hormones (i.e., testosterone).
It is activated by follicle-stimulating hormone, and has FSH-receptor on its membranes.
Its main function is to nurture the developing sperm cells through the stages of spermatogenesis. Because of this, it has also been called the "mother cell." It provides both secretory and structural support.
During the Maturation phase of spermiogenesis, the Sertoli cells consume the unneeded portions of the spermatazoa.
The sperm are transported out of the testis and into the epididymis through a series of efferent ductules.
The testes receive blood through the testicular arteries (gonadal artery). Venous blood is drained by the testicular veins. The right testicular vein drains directly into the inferior vena cava. The left testicular vein drains into the left renal vein.
Anatomy of the testisThe seminiferous tubules join together to become the epididymis. The epididymis is a tube that is about 2 inches that is coiled on the posterior surface of each testis. Within the epididymis the sperm incomplete their maturation (full maturation occur in female genital tract) and their flagella become mobile. This is also a site to store sperm, nourishing them until the next ejaculation. Smooth muscle in the wall of the epididymis propels the sperm into the ductus deferens.
Vasa efferentia from the rete testis open into the epididymis which is a highly coiled tubule. The epididymis has three parts- 1)head or caput epididymis- it is the proximal part of the epididymis. It carries the sperms from the testis.
2)body or corpus epididymis- it the highly convoluted middle part of the epididymis
3)tail or cauda epididymis- it is the last part that takes part in carrying the sperms to the vas deferens. The cauda epididymis continues to form less convoluted vas deferens.
The ductus (vas) deferens, also called sperm duct, or, spermatic deferens, extends from the epididymis in the scrotum on its own side into the abdominal cavity through the inguinal canal. The inguinal canal is an opening in the abdominal wall for the spermatic cord (a connective tissue sheath that contains the ductus deferens, testicular blood vessels, and nerves. The smooth muscle layer of the ductus deferens contracts in waves of peristalsis during ejaculation.
The pair of seminal vesicles are posterior to the urinary bladder. They secrete fructose to provide an energy source for sperm and alkalinity to enhance sperm mobility. The duct of each seminal vesicle joins the ductus deferens on that side to form the ejaculatory duct.
There are two ejaculatory ducts. Each receives sperm from the ductus deferens and the secretions of the seminal vesicle on its own side. Both ejaculatory ducts empty into the single urethra.
The prostate gland is a muscular gland that surrounds the first inch of the urethra as it emerges from the bladder. The smooth muscle of the prostate gland contracts during ejaculation to contribute to the expulsion of semen from the urethra.
Pre ejaculate produced by the bulbourethral glandsThe bulbourethral glands also called Cowper's glands are located below the prostate gland and empty into the urethra. The alkalinity of seminal fluid helps neutralize the acidic vaginal pH and permits sperm mobility in what might otherwise be an unfavorable environment.
The penis is an external genital organ. The distal end of the penis is called the glans penis and is covered with a fold of skin called the prepuce or foreskin. Within the penis are masses of erectile tissue. Each consists of a framework of smooth muscle and connective tissue that contains blood sinuses, which are large, irregular vascular channels.
The urethra, which is the last part of the urinary tract, traverses the corpus spongiosum and its opening, known as the meatus, lies on the tip of the glans penis. It is both a passage for urine and for the ejaculation of semen.
Pea sized organs posterior to the prostate on either side of the urethra.
Secretion of gelatinous seminal fluid called pre-ejaculate. This fluid helps to lubricate the urethra for spermatozoa to pass through, and to help flush out any residual urine or foreign matter. (< 1% of semen)
Adjacent to the seminiferous tubules in the testicle.
Responsible for production of testosterone. Closely related to nerves.
Covers the testes.
Raises and lowers scrotum to help regulate temperature and promote spermatogenesis. Voluntary and involuntary contraction.
Layer of smooth muscular fiber outside the external spermatic fascia but below the skin
Contraction by wrinkling to decrease surface area available for heat loss to testicles, or expansion to increase surface area available to promote heat loss; also helps raise and lower scrotum to help regulate temperature
Part of the testes and connect the rete testis with the epididymis
Begins at the vas deferens, passes through the prostate, and empties into the urethra at the Colliculus seminalis.
Causes reflex for ejaculation. During ejaculation, semen passes through the ducts and exits the body via the penis.
Tightly coiled duct lying just outside each testis connecting efferent ducts to vas deferens.
Three columns of erectile tissue: two corpora cavernosa and one corpus spongiosum. Urethra passes through penis.
Male reproductive organ and also male organ of urination.
Surrounds the urethra just below the urinary bladder and can be felt during a rectal exam.
Stores and secretes a clear, slightly alkaline fluid constituting up to one-third of the volume of semen. Raise vaginal pH.(25-30% of semen)
Pouch of skin and muscle that holds testicles.
Regulates temperature at slightly below body temperature.
Usually white but can be yellow, gray or pink (blood stained). After ejaculation, semen first goes through a clotting process and then becomes more liquid.
Components are sperm, and "seminal plasma". Seminal plasma is produced by contributions from the seminal vesicle, prostate, and bulbourethral glands.
Convoluted structure attached to vas deferens near the base of the urinary bladder.
About 65-75% of the seminal fluid in humans originates from the seminal vesicles. Contain proteins, enzymes, fructose, mucus, vitamin C, flavins, phosphorylcholine and prostaglandins. High fructose concentrations provide nutrient energy for the spermatozoa as they travel through the female reproductive system.
Long coiled structure contained in the chambers of the testis; joins with vas deferens.
Meiosis takes place here, creation of gametes (sperm).
Junctions of the Sertoli cells form the blood-testis barrier, a structure that partitions the interstitial blood compartment of the testis from the abdominal compartment of the seminiferous tubules.
Cells responsible for nurturing and development of sperm cells , provides both secretory and structural support; activated by FSH. Also called "mother cells" or "nurse cells".
Gonads that produce sperm and male sex hormones.Production of testosterone by cells of Leydig in the testicles.
Branch of the abdominal aorta. It is a paired artery. Each passes obliquely downward and laterally behind the peritoneum.
Supplies blood to the testes.
Connects bladder to outside body, about 8 inches long.
Tubular structure that receives urine from bladder and carries it to outside of the body. Also passage for sperm.
Muscular tubes connecting the left and right epididymis to the ejaculatory ducts to move sperm. Each tube is about 30 cm long.
During ejaculation the smooth muscle in the vas deferens wall contracts, propelling sperm forward. Sperm are transferred from the vas deferens into the urethra, collecting fluids from accessory sex glands on route
The components of semen come from two sources: sperm, and "seminal plasma". Seminal plasma, in turn, is produced by contributions from the seminal vesicle, prostate, and bulbourethral glands.
Seminal plasma of humans contains a complex range of organic and inorganic constituents.
The seminal plasma provides a nutritive and protective medium for the spermatozoa during their journey through the female reproductive tract. The normal environment of the vagina is a hostile one for sperm cells, as it is very acidic (from the native microflora producing lactic acid), viscous, and patrolled by immune cells. The components in the seminal plasma attempt to compensate for this hostile environment. Basic amines such as putrescine, spermine, spermidine and cadaverine are responsible for the smell and flavor of semen. These alkaline bases counteract the acidic environment of the vaginal canal, and protect DNA inside the sperm from acidic denaturation.
The components and contributions of semen are as follows:
Approximately 200- to 500-million spermatozoa (also called sperm or spermatozoans), produced in the testes, are released per ejaculation
A 1992 World Health Organization report described normal human semen as having a volume of 2 ml or greater, pH of 7.2 to 8.0, sperm concentration of 20x106 spermatozoa/ml or more, sperm count of 40x106 spermatozoa per ejaculate or more and motility of 50% or more with forward progression (categories a and b) of 25% or more with rapid progression (category a) within 60 minutes of ejaculation.[1]
The hypothalamus secretes this hormone into the pituitary gland in the brain.
There are two gonadotropic hormones, FSH and LH.
The pituitary gland secretes this hormone after receiving a GnRH signal from the hypothalamus.
LH stimulates Leydig cells, in the testes, telling them to produce testosterone.
The pituitary gland also secretes this hormone.
Testosterone helps FSH run through the bloodstream to make Sertoli cells, located in the seminiferous tubules of the testes, to make immature sperm to mature sperm.
Also known as "the male hormone" and "androgen".
The constituent cavernous cylinders of the penis.
The erection of the penis is its enlarged and firm state. It depends on a complex interaction of psychological, neural, vascular and endocrine factors. The term is also applied to the process that leads to this state.
A penile erection occurs when two tubular structures that run the length of the penis, the corpora cavernosa, become engorged with venous blood. This is a result of parasympathetic nerve induced vasodilation. This may result from any of various physiological stimuli. The corpus spongiosum is a single tubular structure located just below the corpora cavernosa, which contains the urethra, through which urine and semen pass during urination and ejaculation, respectively. This may also become slightly engorged with blood, but less so than the corpora cavernosa.
Penile erection usually results from sexual stimulation and/or arousal, but can also occur by such causes as a full urinary bladder or spontaneously during the course of a day or at night, often during erotic or wet dreams. An erection results in swelling and enlargement of the penis. Erection enables sexual intercourse and other sexual activities (sexual functions), though it is not essential for all sexual activities.
Emission is the term used when sperm moves into the urethra. Ejaculation is the term used when sperm is forced out of the urethra and the penis. These are both stimulated by sympathetic nerves.
Spermatagonia divides several times during the process of sperm development. The entire process of sperm formation and maturation takes about 9-10 weeks. The separate divisions that take place and what happens in each are as follows:
First division: The first division is done by mitosis, and ensures a constant supply of spermatocytes, each with the diploid number of chromosomes.
Second division: Spermatocytes then undergo a series of two cell divisions during meiosis to become secondary spermatocytes.
Third division: Secondary Spermatocytes finally become spermatids. Spermatids, which are haploid cells, mature slowly to become the male gametes, or sperm.
The sperm is the main reproductive cell in males. The sperms differ in that each carry a set of chromosomes dividing each into either a male, or female sperm. The females differ in that they carry a X gene, while the male sperm carry a Y gene. The female sperm also differ phenotypically in that they have a larger head in comparison to the male sperms. This contributes to the male sperm being lighter, and therefore faster and stronger swimmers than their female counterparts (although statistically there is still a 50% chance of an either XY or XX embryo forming.
Spermatozoan stream lines are straight and parallel. The tail flagellates, which we now know propels the sperm cell (at about 1-3 mm/minute in humans) by rotating like a propeller, in a circular motion, not side to side like a whip. The cell is characterized by a minimum of cytoplasm. During fertilization, the sperm's mitochondria gets destroyed by the egg cell, and this means only the mother is able to provide the baby's mitochondria and mitochondrial DNA, which has an important application in tracing maternal ancestry. However it has been recently discovered that mitochondrial DNA can be recombinant.
Spermatozoa are produced in the seminiferous tubules of the testes in a process called spermatogenesis. Round cells called spermatogonia divide and differentiate eventually to become spermatozoa. During copulation the vagina is inseminated, the spermatozoa move through chemotaxis (see glossary) to the ovum inside a Fallopian tube or the uterus.
Spermatogenesis takes place inside a male’s testes, specifically in the walls of the seminiferous tubules. The epididymis is a tortuously coiled structure topping the testis, it receives immature sperm from the testis and stores it for several days. When ejaculation occurs, sperm is forcefully expelled from the tail of the epididymis into the ductus deferens. Sperm travels through the ductus deferens and up the spermatic cord into the pelvic cavity, over the ureter to the prostate behind the bladder. Here, the vas deferens joins with the seminal vesicle to form the ejaculatory duct, which passes through the prostate and empties into the urethra. Upon the sperm's exit from the testes, into the vas deferens, muscular movements take over. When ejaculation occurs, rhythmic muscle movements of peristalsis propel the sperm forward. This continues throughout the remainder of the sperm's journey through the male reproductive system.
Sperm cells become even more active when they begin to interact with the fertilizing layer of an egg cell. They swim faster and their tail movements become more forceful and erratic. This behavior is called "hyper activation."
A recent discovery links hyper activation to a sudden influx of calcium ions into the tails. The whip-like tail (flagellum) of the sperm is studded with ion channels formed by proteins called CatSper. These channels are selective, allowing only calcium ion to pass. The opening of CatSper channels is responsible for the influx of calcium. The sudden rise in calcium levels causes the flagellum to form deeper bends, propelling the sperm more forcefully through the viscous environment. Acrosome reaction on a Sea Urchin cell
The sperm use their tails to push themselves into the epididymis, where they complete their development. It takes sperm about 4 to 6 weeks to travel through the epididymis. The sperm then move to the vas deferens, or sperm duct. The seminal vesicles and prostate gland produce a whitish fluid called seminal fluid, which mixes with sperm to form semen when a male is sexually stimulated.
When the erect penis is stimulated to orgasm, muscles around the reproductive organs contract and force the semen through the duct system and urethra. Semen is pushed out of the male's body through his urethra - ejaculation. The speed of the semen is about 70 mph when ejaculation comes and it can contain 100 to 600 million sperm cells. When the male ejaculates during intercourse, semen is deposited into the fornix at the base of the female's vagina, near the cervix. From the fornix, the sperm make their way up through the cervix and move through the uterus with help from uterine contractions.
Sperm hyperactivity is necessary for breaking through two physical barriers that protect the egg from fertilization.
The first barrier to sperm is made up of so-called cumulus cells embedded in a gel-like substance made primarily of hyaluronic acid. The cumulus cells develop in the ovary with the egg and support it as it grows.
The second barrier coating the oocyte is a thick shell formed by glycoproteins called the zona pellucida. One of the proteins that make up the zona pellucida binds to a partner molecule on the sperm. This lock-and-key type mechanism is species-specific and prevents the sperm and egg of different species from fusing. There is some evidence that this binding is what triggers the acrosome to release the enzymes that allow the sperm to fuse with the egg.
When a sperm cell reaches the egg the acrosome releases its enzymes. These enzymes weaken the shell, allowing the sperm cell to penetrate it and reach the plasma membrane of the egg. Part of the sperm's cell membrane then fuses with the egg cell's membrane, and the sperm cell sinks into the egg (at which point the sperm tail falls off).
Upon penetration, the egg cell membrane undergoes a change and becomes impenetrable, preventing further fertilization.
The binding of the sperm to an ovum is called a zygote. A zygote is a single cell, with a complete set of chromosomes, that normally develops into an embryo.
Male pubertyIn addition to producing sperm, the male reproductive system also produces sex hormones, which help a boy develop into a sexually mature man during puberty. When a baby boy is born, he has all the parts of his reproductive system in place, but it isn't until puberty that his reproductive organs mature and become fully functional. As an newborn FSH and LH levels are high and after a few weeks levels drop to extremely low. When puberty begins, usually between the ages of 10 and 14, the pituitary gland - which is located in the brain - secretes hormones that stimulate the testicles to produce testosterone. The production of testosterone brings about many physical changes. Although the timing of these changes is different for each individual male, the stages of puberty generally follow a set sequence.
First stage: the scrotum and testes grow larger, the apocrine glands develop (see explanation of apocrine glands in glossary).
Second stage: the penis becomes longer, and the seminal vesicles and prostate gland grow. Hair begins to grow in the pubic region. Reproductive capacity has usually developed by this stage.
Third stage: hair begins to appear on the face and underarms. During this time, a male's voice also deepens. Fertility continues to increase.
In boys, testicular enlargement is the first physical manifestation of puberty (and is termed gonadarche). Testes in prepubertal boys change little in size from about 1 year of age to the onset of puberty, averaging about 2–3 cc in volume and about 1.5-2 cm in length. Testicular size continues to increase throughout puberty, reaching maximal adult size about 6 years later. While 18-20 cc is reportedly an average adult size, there is wide variation in the normal population.
The testes have two primary functions: to produce hormones and to produce sperm. The Leydig cells produce testosterone (as described below), which in turn produces most of the changes of male puberty. However, most of the increasing bulk of testicular tissue is spermatogenic tissue (primarily Sertoli and interstitial cells). The development of sperm production and fertility in males is not as well researched. Sperm can be detected in the morning urine of most boys after the first year of pubertal changes (and occasionally earlier).
A boy's penis grows little from the fourth year of life until puberty. Average prepubertal penile length is 4 cm. The prepubertal genitalia are described as stage 1. Within months after growth of the testes begins, rising levels of testosterone promote growth of the penis and scrotum. This earliest discernible beginning of pubertal growth of the genitalia is referred to as stage 2. The penis continues to grow until about 18 years of age, reaching an average adult size of about 10-16 cm.
Although erections and orgasm can occur in prepubertal boys, they become much more common during puberty, accompanied by development of libido (sexual desire).
Ejaculation becomes possible early in puberty; prior to this boys may experience dry orgasms. Emission of seminal fluid may occur due to masturbation or spontaneously during sleep (commonly termed a wet dream, and more clinically called a nocturnal emission). The ability to ejaculate is a fairly early event in puberty compared to the other characteristics, and can occur even before reproductive capacity itself. In parallel to the irregularity of the first few periods of a girl, for the first one or two years after a boy's first ejaculation, his seminal fluid may contain few active sperm.
If the foreskin of a boy does not become retractable during childhood, it normally begins to retract during puberty. This occurs as a result of the increased production of testosterone and other hormones in the body.
The penis contains two chambers called the corpora cavernosa, which run the length of the organ. A spongy tissue, full of muscle, veins, arteries, etc. fills these chambers. The corpora cavernosa are surrounded by a membrane, called the tunica albuginea.
Erection begins with sensory or mental stimulation, or both. Impulses from the brain and local nerves cause the muscles of the corpora cavernosa to relax, allowing blood to flow in and fill the spaces. The blood creates pressure in the corpora cavernosa, making the penis expand. The tunica albuginea helps trap the blood in the corpora cavernosa, thereby sustaining erection. When muscles in the penis contract to stop the inflow of blood and open outflow channels, erection is reversed.
Pubic hair often appears on a boy shortly after the genitalia begin to grow. As in girls, the first appearance of pubic hair is termed pubarche and the pubic hairs are usually first visible at the dorsal (abdominal) base of the penis. The first few hairs are described as stage 2. Stage 3 is usually reached within another 6 to 12 months, when the hairs are too numerous to count. By stage 4, the pubic hairs densely fill the "pubic triangle." Stage 5 refers to spread of pubic hair to the inner thighs and upward towards the umbilicus as part of the developing abdominal hair.
Cross-sectional diagram of the female reproductive organs.
For most men, testosterone secretion continues throughout life, as does sperm production, though both diminish with advancing age. Probably the most common reproductive problem for older men is prostatic hypertrophy, enlargement of the prostate gland. This causes the urethra to compress and urination becomes difficult. Residual urine in the bladder increases the chance of urinary tract infections. Prostate hypertrophy is usually benign, but cancer of the prostate is one of the more common cancers in elderly men. A TURP is commonly used to correct this problem if the symptoms do not improve in response to home treatment and medication.
Erectile dysfunction (ED) is another common problem seen in aging males. In older men, ED usually has a physical cause, such as disease, injury, or side effects of drugs. Any disorder that impairs blood flow in the penis or causes injury to the nerves has the potential to cause ED. Although it is not an inevitable part of aging, incidences increases with age: About 5 percent of 40-year-old men and between 15 and 25 percent of 65-year-old men experience ED. As discouraging as Erectile dysfunction may be, it is treatable at any age, and awareness of this fact has been growing. More men have been seeking help and returning to normal sexual activity because of improved, successful treatments for ED.
Boys may sometimes experience reproductive system problems. Below are some examples of disorders that affect the male reproductive system (Disorders of the Scrotum, Testicles, or Epididymis). Conditions affecting the scrotal contents may involve the testicles, epididymis, or the scrotum itself.
Testicular trauma. Even a mild injury to the testicles can cause severe pain, bruising, or swelling. Most testicular injuries occur when the testicles are struck, hit, kicked, or crushed, usually during sports or due to other trauma. Testicular torsion, when 1 of the testicles twists around, cutting off the blood supply, is also a problem that some teen males experience - although it's not common. Surgery is needed to untwist the cord and save the testicle.
Varicocele. This is a varicose vein (an abnormally swollen vein) in the network of veins that run from the testicles. Varicoceles commonly develop while a boy is going through puberty. A varicocele is usually not harmful, although in some people it may damage the testicle or decrease sperm production, so it helps for you to take your child to see his doctor if he is concerned about changes in his testicles.
Testicular cancer. This is one of the most common cancers in men younger than 40. It occurs when cells in the testicle divide abnormally and form a tumor. Testicular cancer can spread to other parts of the body, but if it's detected early, the cure rate is excellent. Teen boys should be encouraged to learn to perform testicular self-examinations.
Epididymitis is inflammation of the epididymis, the coiled tubes that connect the testes with the vas deferens. It is usually caused by an infection, such as the sexually transmitted disease chlamydia, and results in pain and swelling next to 1 of the testicles.
Hydrocele. A hydrocele occurs when fluid collects in the membranes surrounding the testes. Hydroceles may cause swelling of the testicle but are generally painless. In some cases, surgery may be needed to correct the condition.
Inguinal hernia. When a portion of the intestines pushes through an abnormal opening or weakening of the abdominal wall and into the groin or scrotum, it is known as an inguinal hernia. The hernia may look like a bulge or swelling in the groin area. It can be corrected with surgery.
Inflammation of the penis. Symptoms of penile inflammation include redness, itching, swelling, and pain. Balanitis occurs when the glans (the head of the penis) becomes inflamed. Posthitis is foreskin inflammation, which is usually due to a yeast or bacterial infection.
Hypospadias. This is a disorder in which the urethra opens on the underside of the penis, not at the tip.
Phimosis. This is a tightness of the foreskin of the penis and is common in newborns and young children. It usually resolves itself without treatment. If it interferes with urination, circumcision (removal of the foreskin) may be recommended.
Paraphimosis. This may develop when a boy's uncircumcised penis is retracted but doesn't return to the unretracted position. As a result, blood flow to the penis may be impaired, and your child may experience pain and swelling. A doctor may try to use lubricant to make a small incision so the foreskin can be pulled forward. If that doesn't work, circumcision may be recommended.
Ambiguous genitalia. This occurs when a child is born with genitals that aren't clearly male or female. In most boys born with this disorder, the penis may be very small or nonexistent, but testicular tissue is present. In a small number of cases, the child may have both testicular and ovarian tissue.
Micro penis. This is a disorder in which the penis, although normally formed, is well below the average size, as determined by standard measurements.
Sexually transmitted diseases. Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) that can affect boys include human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS), human papillomavirus (HPV, or genital warts), syphilis, chlamydia, gonorrhea, genital herpes, and hepatitis B. They are spread from one person to another mainly through sexual intercourse.
Erectile dysfunction. E.D. is the inability to get or keep an erection firm enough for sexual intercourse. This can also called impotence. The word "impotence" may also be used to describe other problems that can interfere with sexual intercourse and reproduction, such as problems with ejaculation or orgasm and lack of sexual desire. Using the term erectile dysfunction clarifies that those other problems are not involved.
Condoms: A device, usually made of latex, or more recently polyurethane, that is used during sexual intercourse. It is put on a man's penis and physically blocks ejaculated semen from entering the body of a sexual partner. Condoms are used to prevent pregnancy, transmission of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs - such as gonorrhea, syphilis, and HIV), or both.
C) the sperm begin to interact with the fertilizing layer of an egg cell
Androgen: The generic term for any natural or synthetic compound, usually a steroid hormone, that stimulates or controls the development and maintenance of masculine characteristics in vertebrates by binding to androgen receptors. This includes the activity of the accessory male sex organs and development of male secondary sex characteristics. They are also the precursor of all estrogens, the female sex hormones. The primary and most well-known androgen is testosterone.
Apocrine Glands: Apocrine sweat glands develop during the early to mid puberty ages approximately around the age of 15 and release more than normal amounts of sweat for approximately a month and subsequently regulate and release normal amounts of sweat after a certain period of time. They are located wherever there is body hair.
These glands produce sweat that contains fatty materials. Mainly present in the armpits and around the genital area, their activity is the main cause of sweat odor, due to the bacteria that break down the organic compounds in the sweat.
Bulbourethral Glands: male accessory sex glands that secrete mucus for lubrication
Chemotaxis: Chemotaxis is a kind of taxis, in which bodily cells, bacteria, and other single-cell or multicellular organisms direct their movements according to certain chemicals in their environment. This is important for bacteria to find food (for example, glucose) by swimming towards the highest concentration of food molecules, or to flee from poisons (for example, phenol). In multicellular organisms, chemotaxis is critical to development as well as normal function. In addition, it has been recognized that mechanisms that allow chemotaxis in animals can be subverted during cancer metastasis.
Ductus Deferens: epididymal ducts from each testis converge to form a large, thick walled, muscular duct
Ejaculatory Ducts: two ducts, receive sperm from the ductus deferens and secretions from the seminal vesicle; the ducts then empty into the urethra
Epididymis: comma shaped and loosely attached to the rear surface of each testis
Erectile Tissue: smooth muscle and connective tissue inside the penis that contain blood sinuses; large, irregular vascular channels
Erection: the penis at its enlarged and firm state; occurs when the corpora cavernosa become engorged with venous blood
Flagellum: the whip-like tail of a sperm, propels the sperm towards the egg in hopes of achieving fertilization
Follicle-Stimulating Hormone (FSH): hormone that stimulates production of sertoli cells, to make immature sperm to mature sperm
Glans Penis: distal end of the penis, covered with the foreskin
Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone (GnRH): hormone secreted by the hypothalamus into the pituitary gland; two types, FSH and LH
Libido: In its common usage, it means sexual desire; however, more technical definitions, such as those found in the work of Carl Jung, are more general, referring to libido as the free creative—or psychic—energy an individual has to put toward personal development, or individuation.
Luteinizing Hormone (LH): hormone that stimulates Leydig cells in the testes to produce testosterone
Oviduct: the passage in females from the ovaries to the outside of the body.
Prostate Gland: male accessory sex gland that secretes an alkaline fluid, which neutralizes acidic vaginal secretions
Scrotum: skin covered sac that houses the male testicles; keeps the testicles away from the body so that they can stay a few degrees cooler than the body, for better sperm production
Seminal Vesicle: male accessory sex glands that supply fructose to ejaculated sperm and secrete prostaglandins
Seminiferous Tubules: highly coiled tubules within the testes that produce spermatozoa
It is activated by follicle-stimulating hormone, and has FSH-receptor on its membranes.
Its main function is to nurture the developing sperm cells through the stages of spermatogenesis. Because of this, it has also been called the "mother cell." It provides both secretory and structural support.
Sexual Homology: sex organs that evolve from the same tissues in both male and females
Testes: located in the scrotum, produces testosterone which stimulates production of sperm
Testosterone: male sex hormone secreted by the leydig cells of the testes, vital for the production of sperm
TURP: transurethral resection of the prostate. During TURP, an instrument is inserted up the urethra to remove the section of the prostate that is blocking urine flow. This is most commonly caused by benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). A TURP usually requires hospitalization and is done using a general or spinal anesthetic. It is now the most common surgery used to remove part of an enlarged prostate.
Urethra: the last part of the urinary tract; in males, it is the passage for both urine and sperm
Varicocele: varicose vein of the testicles, sometimes a cause of male infertility
Both male and female reproductive systems may seem somewhat isolated from other body systems in that their purpose is to create new life and not just to maintain existing life. There are however significant relationships between the reproductive system and other body systems. All systems relate in one way or another to help our bodies maintain homeostasis.
"Essentials of Anatomy and Physiology" by Valerie C. Scanlon and Tina Sanders
All living things reproduce. This is something that sets the living apart from non-living.
Even though the reproductive system is essential to keeping a species alive, it is not essential to keeping an individual alive. This chapter describes the different parts of the female reproductive system: the organs involved in the process of reproduction, hormones that regulate a woman's body, the menstrual cycle, ovulation and pregnancy, the female's role in genetic division, birth control, sexually transmitted diseases and other diseases and disorders.
Reproduction can be defined as the process by which an organism continues its species. In the human reproductive process, two kinds of sex cells ( gametes), are involved: the male gamete (sperm), and the female gamete (egg or ovum). These two gametes meet within the female's uterine tubes located one on each side of the upper pelvic cavity, and begin to create a new individual. The female needs a male to fertilize her egg; she then carries offspring through pregnancy and childbirth.
The reproductive systems of the male and female have some basic similarities and some specialized differences. They are the same in that most of the reproductive organs of both sexes develop from similar embryonic tissue, meaning they are homologous. Both systems have gonads that produce (sperm and egg or ovum) and sex organs. And both systems experience maturation of their reproductive organs, which become functional during puberty as a result of the gonads secreting sex hormones.
Cross-sectional diagram of the female reproductive organs.
The differences between the female and male reproductive systems are based on the functions of each individual's role in the reproduction cycle. A male who is healthy, and sexually mature, continuously produces sperm. The development of women's "eggs" are arrested during fetal development. This means she is born with a predetermined number of oocytes and cannot produce new ones.
At about 5 months gestation, the ovaries contain approximately six to seven million oogonia, which initiate meiosis. The oogonia produce primary oocytes that are arrested in prophase I of meiosis from the time of birth until puberty. After puberty, during each menstrual cycle, one or several oocytes resume meiosis and undergo their first meiotic division during ovulation. This results in the production of a secondary oocyte and one polar body. The meiotic division is arrested in metaphase II. Fertilization triggers completion of the second meiotic division and the result is one ovum and an additional polar body.
The ovaries of a newborn baby girl contain about one million oocytes. This number declines to 400,000 to 500,000 by the time puberty is reached. On average, 500-1000 oocytes are ovulated during a woman's reproductive lifetime.
When a young woman reaches puberty around age 10 to 13, a promary oocyte is discharged from one of the ovaries every 28 days. This continues until the woman reaches menopause, usually around the age of 50 years. Occytes are present at birth, and age as a woman ages.
Protects and nourishes the fertilized egg until it is fully developed
Provides nourishment to the baby through milk secreted by mammary glands in the breast
The external female genitalia is referred to as vulva. It consists of the labia majora and labia minora (while these names translate as "large" and "small" lips, often the "minora" can protrude outside the "majora"), mons pubis, clitoris, opening of the urethra (meatus), vaginal vestibule, vestibular bulbs, vestibular glands.
The term "vagina" is often improperly used as a generic term to refer to the vulva or female genitals, even though - strictly speaking - the vagina is a specific internal structure and the vulva is the exterior genitalia only. Calling the vulva the vagina is akin to calling the mouth the throat.
The mons veneris, Latin for "mound of Venus" (Roman Goddess of love) is the soft mound at the front of the vulva (fatty tissue covering the pubic bone). It is also referred to as the mons pubis. The mons veneris protects the pubic bone and vulva from the impact of sexual intercourse. After puberty, it is covered with pubic hair, usually in a triangular shape. Heredity can play a role in the amount of pubic hair an individual grows.
The labia majora are the outer "lips" of the vulva. They are pads of loose connective and adipose tissue, as well as some smooth muscle. The labia majora wrap around the vulva from the mons pubis to the perineum. The labia majora generally hides, partially or entirely, the other parts of the vulva. There is also a longitudinal separation called the pudendal cleft. These labia are usually covered with pubic hair. The color of the outside skin of the labia majora is usually close to the overall color of the individual, although there may be some variation. The inside skin is usually pink to light brown. They contain numerous sweat and oil glands. It has been suggested that the scent from these oils are sexually arousing.
Medial to the labia majora are the labia minora. The labia minora are the inner lips of the vulva. They are thin stretches of tissue within the labia majora that fold and protect the vagina, urethra, and clitoris. The appearance of labia minora can vary widely, from tiny lips that hide between the labia majora to large lips that protrude. There is no pubic hair on the labia minora, but there are sebaceous glands. The two smaller lips of the labia minora come together longitudinally to form the prepuce, a fold that covers part of the clitoris. The labia minora protect the vaginal and urethral openings. Both the inner and outer labia are quite sensitive to touch and pressure.
The clitoris, visible as the small white oval between the top of the labia minora and the clitoral hood, is a small body of spongy tissue that functions solely for sexual pleasure. Only the tip or glans of the clitoris shows externally, but the organ itself is elongated and branched into two forks, the crura, which extend downward along the rim of the vaginal opening toward the perineum. Thus the clitoris is much larger than most people think it is, about 4" long on average.
The clitoral glans or external tip of the clitoris is protected by the prepuce, or clitoral hood, a covering of tissue similar to the foreskin of the male penis. However, unlike the penis, the clitoris does not contain any part of the urethra.
During sexual excitement, the clitoris erects and extends, the hood retracts, making the clitoral glans more accessible. The size of the clitoris is variable between women. On some, the clitoral glans is very small; on others, it is large and the hood does not completely cover it.
The opening to the urethra is just below the clitoris. Although it is not related to sex or reproduction, it is included in the vulva. The urethra is actually used for the passage of urine. The urethra is connected to the bladder. In females the urethra is 1.5 inches long, compared to males whose urethra is 8 inches long. Because the urethra is so close to the anus, women should always wipe themselves from front to back to avoid infecting the vagina and urethra with bacteria. This location issue is the reason for bladder infections being more common among females.
The hymen is a thin fold of mucous membrane that separates the lumen of the vagina from the urethral sinus. Sometimes it may partially cover the vaginal orifice. The hymen is usually perforated during later fetal development.
Because of the belief that first vaginal penetration would usually tear this membrane and cause bleeding, its "intactness" has been considered a guarantor of virginity. However, the hymen is a poor indicator of whether a woman has actually engaged in sexual intercourse because a normal hymen does not completely block the vaginal opening. The normal hymen is never actually "intact" since there is always an opening in it. Furthermore, there is not always bleeding at first vaginal penetration. The blood that is sometimes, but not always, observed after first penetration can be due to tearing of the hymen, but it can also be from injury to nearby tissues.
A tear to the hymen, medically referred to as a "transection," can be seen in a small percentage of women or girls after first penetration. A transection is caused by penetrating trauma. Masturbation and tampon insertion can, but generally are not forceful enough to cause penetrating trauma to the hymen. Therefore, the appearance of the hymen is not a reliable indicator of virginity or chastity.
The perineum is the short stretch of skin starting at the bottom of the vulva and extending to the anus. It is a diamond shaped area between the symphysis pubis and the coccyx. This area forms the floor of the pelvis and contains the external sex organs and the anal opening. It can be further divided into the urogenital triangle in front and the anal triangle in back.
The perineum in some women may tear during the birth of an infant and this is apparently natural. Some physicians however, may cut the perineum preemptively on the grounds that the "tearing" may be more harmful than a precise cut by a scalpel. If a physician decides the cut is necessary, they will perform it. The cut is called an episiotomy.
The vagina is a muscular, hollow tube that extends from the vaginal opening to the cervix of the uterus. It is situated between the urinary bladder and the rectum. It is about three to five inches long in a grown woman. The muscular wall allows the vagina to expand and contract. The muscular walls are lined with mucous membranes, which keep it protected and moist. A thin sheet of tissue with one or more holes in it, called the hymen, partially covers the opening of the vagina. The vagina receives sperm during sexual intercourse from the penis. The sperm that survive the acidic condition of the vagina continue on through to the fallopian tubes where fertilization may occur.
The vagina is made up of three layers, an inner mucosal layer, a middle muscularis layer, and an outer fibrous layer. The inner layer is made of vaginal rugae that stretch and allow penetration to occur. These also help with stimulation of the penis. microscopically the vaginal rugae has glands that secrete an acidic mucus (pH of around 4.0.) that keeps bacterial growth down. The outer muscular layer is especially important with delivery of a fetus and placenta.
Receives a male's erect penis and semen during sexual intercourse.
Pathway through a woman's body for the baby to take during childbirth.
Provides the route for the menstrual blood (menses) from the uterus, to leave the body.
May hold forms of birth control, such as a diaphragm, FemCap, Nuva Ring, or female condom.
Clinical Application:Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is a widespread infection that originates in the vagina and uterus and spreads to the uterine tubes, ovaries, and ultimately the pelvic peritoneum. This condition, which occurs in about 10% of women is usually caused by chlamydial or gonorrheal infection, other bacteria infecting the vagina may be involved as well. Signs and symptoms include tenderness of the lower abdomen, fever, and a vaginal discharge. Even a single episode of PID can cause infertility, due to scarring that blocks the uterine tubes. Therefore, patients are immediately given broad-spectrum antibiotics whenever PID is suspected.
The cervix (from Latin "neck") is the lower, narrow portion of the uterus where it joins with the top end of the vagina. Where they join together forms an almost 90 degree curve. It is cylindrical or conical in shape and protrudes through the upper anterior vaginal wall. Approximately half its length is visible with appropriate medical equipment; the remainder lies above the vagina beyond view. It is occasionally called "cervix uteri", or "neck of the uterus".
During menstruation, the cervix stretches open slightly to allow the endometrium to be shed. This stretching is believed to be part of the cramping pain that many women experience. Evidence for this is given by the fact that some women's cramps subside or disappear after their first vaginal birth because the cervical opening has widened.
The portion projecting into the vagina is referred to as the portio vaginalis or ectocervix. On average, the ectocervix is three cm long and two and a half cm wide. It has a convex, elliptical surface and is divided into anterior and posterior lips.
The ectocervix's opening is called the external os. The size and shape of the external os and the ectocervix varies widely with age, hormonal state, and whether the woman has had a vaginal birth. In women who have not had a vaginal birth the external os appears as a small, circular opening. In women who have had a vaginal birth, the ectocervix appears bulkier and the external os appears wider, more slit-like and gaping.
The passageway between the external os and the uterine cavity is referred to as the endocervical canal. It varies widely in length and width, along with the cervix overall. Flattened anterior to posterior, the endocervical canal measures seven to eight mm at its widest in reproductive-aged women. The endocervical canal terminates at the internal os which is the opening of the cervix inside the uterine cavity.
During childbirth, contractions of the uterus will dilate the cervix up to 10 cm in diameter to allow the child to pass through. During orgasm, the cervix convulses and the external os dilates.
The uterus is shaped like an upside-down pear, with a thick lining and muscular walls. Located near the floor of the pelvic cavity, it is hollow to allow a blastocyte, or fertilized egg, to implant and grow. It also allows for the inner lining of the uterus to build up until a fertilized egg is implanted, or it is sloughed off during menses.
The uterus contains some of the strongest muscles in the female body. These muscles are able to expand and contract to accommodate a growing fetus and then help push the baby out during labor. These muscles also contract rhythmically during an orgasm in a wave like action. It is thought that this is to help push or guide the sperm up the uterus to the fallopian tubes where fertilization may be possible.
The uterus is only about three inches long and two inches wide, but during pregnancy it changes rapidly and dramatically. The top rim of the uterus is called the fundus and is a landmark for many doctors to track the progress of a pregnancy. The uterine cavity refers to the fundus of the uterus and the body of the uterus.
Helping support the uterus are ligaments that attach from the body of the uterus to the pelvic wall and abdominal wall. During pregnancy the ligaments prolapse due to the growing uterus, but retract after childbirth. In some cases after menopause, they may lose elasticity and uterine prolapse may occur. This can be fixed with surgery.
Some problems of the uterus include uterine fibroids, pelvic pain (including endometriosis, adenomyosis), pelvic relaxation (or prolapse), heavy or abnormal menstrual bleeding, and cancer. It is only after all alternative options have been considered that surgery is recommended in these cases. This surgery is called hysterectomy. Hysterectomy is the removal of the uterus, and may include the removal of one or both of the ovaries. Once performed it is irreversible. After a hysterectomy, many women begin a form of alternate hormone therapy due to the lack of ovaries and hormone production.
At the upper corners of the uterus are the fallopian tubes. There are two fallopian tubes, also called the uterine tubes or the oviducts. Each fallopian tube attaches to a side of the uterus and connects to an ovary. They are positioned between the ligaments that support the uterus. The fallopian tubes are about four inches long and about as wide as a piece of spaghetti. Within each tube is a tiny passageway no wider than a sewing needle. At the other end of each fallopian tube is a fringed area that looks like a funnel. This fringed area, called the infundibulum, lies close to the ovary, but is not attached. The ovaries alternately release an egg. When an ovary does ovulate, or release an egg, it is swept into the lumen of the fallopian tube by the fimbriae.
Once the egg is in the fallopian tube, tiny hairs in the tube's lining help push it down the narrow passageway toward the uterus. The oocyte, or developing egg cell, takes four to five days to travel down the length of the fallopian tube. If enough sperm are ejaculated during sexual intercourse and there is an oocyte in the fallopian tube, fertilization will occur. After fertilization occurs, the zygote, or fertilized egg, will continue down to the uterus and implant itself in the uterine wall where it will grow and develop.
If a zygote doesn't move down to the uterus and implants itself in the fallopian tube, it is called a ectopic or tubal pregnancy. If this occurs, the pregnancy will need to be terminated to prevent permanent damage to the fallopian tube, possible hemorrhage and possible death of the mother.
Mammary glands are the organs that produce milk for the sustenance of a baby. These exocrine glands are enlarged and modified sweat glands.
The basic components of the mammary gland are the alveoli (hollow cavities, a few millimetres large) lined with milk-secreting epithelial cells and surrounded by myoepithelial cells. These alveoli join up to form groups known as lobules, and each lobule has a lactiferous duct that drains into openings in the nipple. The myoepithelial cells can contract, similar to muscle cells, and thereby push the milk from the alveoli through the lactiferous ducts towards the nipple, where it collects in widenings (sinuses) of the ducts. A suckling baby essentially squeezes the milk out of these sinuses.
The development of mammary glands is controlled by hormones. The mammary glands exist in both sexes, but they are rudimentary until puberty when - in response to ovarian hormones - they begin to develop in the female. Estrogen promotes formation, while testosterone inhibits it.
At the time of birth, the baby has lactiferous ducts but no alveoli. Little branching occurs before puberty when ovarian estrogens stimulate branching differentiation of the ducts into spherical masses of cells that will become alveoli. True secretory alveoli only develop in pregnancy, where rising levels of estrogen and progesterone cause further branching and differentiation of the duct cells, together with an increase in adipose tissue and a richer blood flow.
Colostrum is secreted in late pregnancy and for the first few days after giving birth. True milk secretion (lactation) begins a few days later due to a reduction in circulating progesterone and the presence of the hormone prolactin. The suckling of the baby causes the release of the hormone oxytocin which stimulates contraction of the myoepithelial cells.
The cells of mammary glands can easily be induced to grow and multiply by hormones. If this growth runs out of control, cancer results. Almost all instances of breast cancer originate in the lobules or ducts of the mammary glands.
Upper chest one on each side containing alveolar cells (milk production), myoepithelial cells (contract to expel milk), and duct walls (help with extraction of milk).
Lactation milk/nutrition for newborn.
The lower narrower portion of the uterus.
During childbirth, contractions of the uterus will dilate the cervix up to 10 cm in diameter to allow the child to pass through. During orgasm, the cervix convulses and the external os dilates
Sexual excitation, engorged with blood.
Extending upper part of the uterus on either side.
Egg transportation from ovary to uterus (fertilization usually takes place here).
Thin membrane that partially covers the vagina in young females.
Outer skin folds that surround the entrance to the vagina.
Lubrication during mating.
Inner skin folds that surround the entrance to the vagina.
Lubrication during mating.
Mound of skin and underlying fatty tissue, central in lower pelvic region
Pelvic region on either side of the uterus.
Provides an environment for maturation of oocyte. Synthesizes and secretes sex hormones (estrogen and progesterone).
Short stretch of skin starting at the bottom of the vulva and extending to the anus.
Pelvic cavity above bladder, tilted.
To house and nourish developing human.
Canal about 10-8 cm long going from the cervix to the outside of the body.
Receives penis during mating. Pathway through a womans body for the baby to take during childbirth. Provides the route for the menstrual blood (menses) from the uterus, to leave the body. May hold forms of birth control, such as an IUD, diaphragm, neva ring, or female condom
Surround entrance to the reproductive tract.(encompasses all external genitalia)
The innermost layer of uterine wall.
Contains glands that secrete fluids that bathe the utrine lining.
Contracts to help expel the baby.
Towards the end of puberty, girls begin to release eggs as part of a monthly period called the female reproductive cycle, or menstrual cycle (menstrual referring to "monthly"). Approximately every 28 days, during ovulation, an ovary sends a tiny egg into one of the fallopian tubes. Unless the egg is fertilized by a sperm while in the fallopian in the two to three days following ovulation, the egg dries up and leaves the body about two weeks later through the vagina. This process is called menstruation. Blood and tissues from the inner lining of the uterus (the endometrium) combine to form the menstrual flow, which generally lasts from four to seven days. The first period is called menarche.
During menstruation arteries that supply the lining of the uterus constrict and capillaries weaken. Blood spilling from the damaged vessels detaches layers of the lining, not all at once but in random patches. Endometrium mucus and blood descending from the uterus, through the liquid creates the menstruation flow.
The reproductive cycle can be divided into an ovarian cycle and a uterine cycle (compare ovarian histology and uterine histology in the diagram on the right). During the uterine cycle, the endometrial lining of the uterus builds up under the influence of increasing levels of estrogen (labeled as estradiol in the image). Follicles develop, and within a few days one matures into an ovum, or egg. The ovary then releases this egg, at the time of ovulation. After ovulation the uterine lining enters a secretory phase, or the ovarian cycle, in preparation for implantation, under the influence of progesterone. Progesterone is produced by the corpus luteum (the follicle after ovulation) and enriches the uterus with a thick lining of blood vessels and capillaries so that it can sustain the growing fetus. If fertilization and implantation occur, the embryo produces Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (HCG), which maintains the corpus luteum and causes it to continue producing progesterone until the placenta can take over production of progesterone. Hence, progesterone is "pro gestational" and maintains the uterine lining during all of pregnancy. If fertilization and implantation do not occur the corpus luteum degenerates into a corpus albicans, and progesterone levels fall. This fall in progesterone levels cause the endometrium lining to break down and sluff off through the vagina. This is called menstruation, which marks the low point for estrogen activity and is the starting point of a new cycle.
Common usage refers to menstruation and menses as a period. This bleeding serves as a sign that a woman has not become pregnant. However, this cannot be taken as certainty, as sometimes there is some bleeding in early pregnancy. During the reproductive years, failure to menstruate may provide the first indication to a woman that she may have become pregnant.
Menstruation forms a normal part of a natural cyclic process occurring in healthy women between puberty and the end of the reproductive years. The onset of menstruation, known as menarche, occurs at an average age of 12, but is normal anywhere between 8 and 16. Factors such as heredity, diet, and overall health can accelerate or delay the onset of menarche.
The female body produces outward signs that can be easily recognized at the time of ovulation. The two main signs are thinning of the cervical mucus and a slight change in body temperature.
After menstruation and right before ovulation, a woman will experience an increase of cervical mucus. At first, it will be thick and yellowish in color and will not be very plentiful. Leading up to ovulation, it will become thinner and clearer. On or around the day of ovulation, the cervical mucus will be very thin, clear and stretchy. It can be compared to the consistency of egg whites. This appearance is known as 'spinnbarkeit'.
A woman can also tell the time of ovulation by taking her basal body temperature daily. This is a temperature taken with a very sensitive thermometer first thing in the morning before the woman gets out of bed. The temperature is then tracked to show changes. In the uterine cycle, a normal temperature will be around 97.0 – 98.0. The day of ovulation the temperature spikes down, usually into the 96.0 – 97.0 range and then the next morning it will spike up to normal of around 98.6 and stay in that range until menstruation begins.
Both of these methods are used for conception and contraception. They are more efficient in conception due to the fact that sperm can live for two to three days inside of the fallopian tubes. A woman could be off by a couple of days in her calculations and still become pregnant.
Menopause is the physiological cessation of menstrual cycles associated with advancing age. Menopause is sometimes referred to as "the change of life" or climacteric. Menopause occurs as the ovaries stop producing estrogen, causing the reproductive system to gradually shut down. As the body adapts to the changing levels of natural hormones, vasomotor symptoms such as hot flashes and palpitations, psychological symptoms such as increased depression, anxiety, irritability, mood swings and lack of concentration, and atrophic symptoms such as vaginal dryness and urgency of urination appear. Together with these symptoms, the woman may also have increasingly scanty and erratic menstrual periods.
Technically, menopause refers to the cessation of menses; the gradual process through which this occurs, which typically takes a year but may last as little as six months or more than five years, is known as climacteric. A natural or physiological menopause is that which occurs as a part of a woman's normal aging process. However, menopause can be surgically induced by such procedures as hysterectomy.
The average onset of menopause is 50.5 years, but some women enter menopause at a younger age, especially if they have suffered from cancer or another serious illness and undergone chemotherapy. Premature menopause is defined as menopause occurring before the age of 40, and occurs in 1% of women. Other causes of premature menopause include autoimmune disorders, thyroid disease, and diabetes mellitus.
Premature menopause is diagnosed by measuring the levels of follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). The levels of these hormones will be higher if menopause has occurred. Rates of premature menopause have been found to be significantly higher in both fraternal and identical twins; approximately 5% of twins reach menopause before the age of 40. The reasons for this are not completely understood. Post-menopausal women are at increased risk of osteoporosis.
Perimenopause refers to the time preceding menopause, during which the production of hormones such as estrogen and progesterone diminish and become more irregular. During this period fertility diminishes. Menopause is arbitrarily defined as a minimum of twelve months without menstruation. Perimenopause can begin as early as age 35, although it usually begins much later. It can last for a few months or for several years. The duration of perimenopause cannot be predicted in advance.
It is common for women to experience some discomfort in the days leading up to their periods. PMS usually is at its worst the seven days before a period starts and can continue through the end of the period. PMS includes both physical and emotional symptoms: acne, bloating, fatigue, backaches, sore breasts, headaches, constipation, diarrhea, food cravings, depression, irritability, difficulty concentrating or handling stress.
An ovary about to release an egg.
Endometrium breaks down.
Follicle maturation occurs.
Endometrium rebuilds.
Endometrial thickens, and glands are secretory.
Corpus luteum forms.
There are two phases of the ovarian cycle the follicular phase and the luteal phase. In the follicular phase about 10-25 follicles are taken from preantral or early antrial follicles to develop further. Seven days later the dominant follicle is selected to develop to full maturity. This is the pre-cursor for ovulation. Follicles themselves secrete FSH and estrogen, and these two hormones stimulate follicular growth and development. Ovulation marks the beginning of the luteal phase. This is started by the wall of the Graffian follicle to rupture and cause a flow of antral fluid that will carry the oocyte to the ovary's surface. The ruptured follicle is then turned into a gland (corpus luteum). Which secretes estrogens and progesterone. This is all triggered by and abrupt change in plasma LH levels. After ovulation the released oocyte enters the uterine tube, where it will be either fertilized or discarded.
The uterine cycle operates in sync with the ovarian cycle and is divided into three phases. The first phase in the menstrual phase. It is named the menstrual phase because in corresponds with the shedding the uterine lining or more commonly called menstruation. The corpus luteum degenerates causing plasma estrogen and progesterone levels to decrease and in turn causes menstruation. Blood vessels in the outer most layer of the endometrium constrict and decrease blood flow to the tissues killing these tissues. After the tissues die they start to separate from the underlying endometrail tissues. Eventually the dead tissue is shed. This shedding of the tissues ruptures blood vessels and causes bleeding.
Now we have the proliferative phase. During this phase the uterus renews itself and prepares for pregnancy. The endomitrial tissue that is left after menstruation begins to grow. The endometrial glands grow and enlarge causing more blood vessels. The cervical canal has glands that secrete a thin mucous that helps deposited sperm. Estrogen promotes uterine changes in this phase.
The last phase is the secretory phase. This is where the endometrium is transformed to make it the best environment for implantation and subsequent housing and nourishment of the developing embryo. By doing this the endometrium will do things like have an enriched blood supply, begin to secrete fluids rich in glycogen, and even form a plug at the end of the cervical canal so that microorganisms can not enter. These changes in the uterus are caused by progesterone, due to the corpus luteum. At the end of the secretory phase the corpus luteum degenerates, and progesterone levels fall. This will trigger menstruation.
Sexual reproduction is a type of reproduction that results in increasing genetic diversity of the offspring. In sexual reproduction, genes from two individuals are combined in random ways with each new generation. Sex hormones released into the body by the endocrine system signal the body when it is time to start puberty. The female and male reproductive systems are the only systems so vastly different that each sex has their own different organs. All other systems have "unisex" organs.
Reproduction is characterized by two processes. The first, meiosis, involves the halving of the 46 of chromosomes. The second process, fertilization, leads the fusion of two gametes and the restoration of the original number of chromosomes: 23 chromosomes from the paternal side and 23 from the maternal side. During meiosis, the chromosomes of each pair usually cross over to achieve genetic recombination.
Sexual reproduction cannot happen without the sexual organs called gonads. Both sexes have gonads: in females, the gonads are the ovaries. The female gonads produce female gametes (eggs); the male gonads produce male gametes (sperm). After an egg is fertilized by the sperm, the fertilized egg is called the zygote.
The fertilization usually occurs in the oviducts, but can happen in the uterus itself. The zygote then implants itself in the wall of the uterus, where it begins the processes of embryogenesis and morphogenesis. The womens body carries out this process of reproduction for 40 weeks, until delivery of the fetus from the uterus through the vagina (birth canal). Even after birth, the female continues with the reproduction process by supplying the milk to nourish the infant.
Infertility is the inability to naturally conceive a child or the inability to carry a pregnancy to term. There are many reasons why a couple may not be able to conceive without medical assistance. Infertility affects approximately 15% of couples. Roughly 40% of cases involve a male contribution or factor, 40% involve a female factor, and the remaining 20% involve both sexes. Healthy couples in their mid-20s having regular sex have a one-in-four chance of getting pregnant in any given month. This is called "Fecundity".
According to the American Society for Reproductive Medicine, infertility affects about 6.1 million people in the United States, equivalent to 10% of the reproductive age population. Female infertility accounts for one third of infertility cases, male infertility for another third, combined male and female infertility for another 15%, and the remainder of cases are "unexplained.
"Secondary infertility" is difficulty conceiving after already having conceived and carried a normal pregnancy. Apart from various medical conditions (e.g. hormonal), this may come as a result of age and stress felt to provide a sibling for their first child. Technically, secondary infertility is not present if there has been a change of partners.
Various intersexuality|intersexed conditions, such as androgen insensitivity syndrome
In some cases, both the man and woman may be infertile or sub-fertile, and the couple's infertility arises from the combination of these factors. In other cases, the cause is suspected to be immunological or genetic; it may be that each partner is independently fertile but the couple cannot conceive together without assistance.
In about 15% of cases of infertility, investigation will show no abnormalities. In these cases abnormalities are likely to be present but not detected by current methods. Possible problems could be that the egg is not released at the optimum time for fertilization, that it may not enter the fallopian tube, sperm may not be able to reach the egg, fertilization may fail to occur, transport of the zygote may be disturbed, or implantation fails. It is increasingly recognized that egg quality is of critical importance.
Diagnosis of infertility begins with a medical history and physical exam. The healthcare provider may order tests, including the following:
a postcoital test, which is done after sex to check for problems with secretions
Fertility medication which stimulates the ovaries to "ripen" and release eggs (e.g. Clomifene|clomifene citrate, which stimulates ovulation)
Donor insemination which involves the woman being artificially inseminated or artificially inseminated with donor sperm.
In vitro fertilization (IVF) in which eggs are removed from the woman, fertilized and then placed in the woman's uterus, bypassing the fallopian tubes. Variations on IVF include:
Use of donor eggs and/or sperm in IVF. This happens when a couple's eggs and/or sperm are unusable, or to avoid passing on a genetic disease.
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) in which a single sperm is injected directly into an egg; the fertilized egg is then placed in the woman's uterus as in IVF.
Zygote intrafallopian transfer(ZIFT) in which eggs are removed from the woman, fertilized and then placed in the woman's fallopian tubes rather than the uterus.
Gamete intrafallopian transfer(GIFT) in which eggs are removed from the woman, and placed in one of the fallopian tubes, along with the man's sperm. This allows fertilization to take place inside the woman's body.
Acupuncture Recent controlled trials published in Fertility and Sterility have shown acupuncture to increase the success rate of IVF by as much as 60%. Acupuncture was also reported to be effective in the treatment of female anovular infertility, World Health Organization, Acupuncture: Review and Analysis of Reports on Controlled Trials (2002).
Birth control is a regimen of one or more actions, devices, or medications followed in order to deliberately prevent or reduce the likelihood of a woman becoming pregnant. Methods and intentions typically termed birth control may be considered a pivotal ingredient to family planning. Mechanisms which are intended to reduce the likelihood of the fertilization of an ovum by a sperm may more specifically be referred to as contraception. Contraception differs from abortion in that the former prevents fertilization, while the latter terminates an already established pregnancy. Methods of birth control (e.g. the pill, IUDs, implants, patches, injections, vaginal ring and some others) which may prevent the implantation of an embryo if fertilization occurs are medically considered to be contraception. It is advised to talk with a doctor before choosing a contraceptive. If you have genetics problems or blood conditions, such as factor V leiden, certain contraceptives can be deadly.
Intercourse is avoided for about an 8-day span every month in middle of her cycle, from about five days before ovulation to three days after ovulation.
The man withdraws his penis from the vagina at just the right moment before ejaculation.
Releases small amounts of estrogen. In most cases, stops egg from developing and being released, but can also operate by killing a fertilized egg by preventing its implantation
Stops release of FSH and LH, but can also operate by killing a fertilized egg by preventing its implantation
Prevents release of egg, fertilization of egg, but can also operate by killing a fertilized egg by preventing its implantation
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) are diseases or infections likely to be transmitted by sexual contact: vaginal intercourse, oral sex, and/or anal sex.
Many STDs are (more easily) transmitted through the mucous membranes of the penis, vulva, and (less often) the mouth. The visible membrane covering the head of the penis is a mucous membrane, though, for those who are circumcised it is usually dry and produces no mucus (similar to the lips of the mouth). Mucous membranes differ from skin in that they allow certain pathogens (viruses or bacteria) into the body (more easily).
The probability of transmitting infections through sex is far greater than by more casual means of transmission, such as non-sexual contact—touching, sharing cutlery, and shaking hands. Although mucous membranes exist in the mouth as well as in the genitals, many STDs are more likely to be transmitted through oral sex than through deep kissing. Many infections that are easily transmitted from the mouth to the genitals or from the genitals to the mouth, are much harder to transmit from one mouth to another. With HIV, genital fluids happen to contain a great deal more of the pathogen than saliva. Some infections labeled as STDs can be transmitted by direct skin contact. Herpes simplex and HPV are both examples. Depending on the STD, a person who has the disease but has no symptoms may or may not be able to spread the infection. For example, a person is much more likely to spread herpes infection when blisters are present than when they are absent. However, a person can spread HIV infection at any time, even if he/she has not developed symptoms of AIDS.
All sexual behaviors that involve contact with the bodily fluids of another person should be considered to hold some risk of transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. Most attention has focused on controlling HIV, which causes AIDS, but each STD presents a different situation.
As may be noted from the name, sexually transmitted diseases are transmitted from one person to another by certain sexual activities rather than being actually caused by those sexual activities. Bacteria, fungi, protozoa or viruses are still the causative agents. It is not possible to catch any sexually transmitted disease from a sexual activity with a person who is not carrying a disease; conversely, a person who has an STD received it from contact (sexual or otherwise) with someone who is infected.
Although the likelihood of transmitting diseases by sexual activities varies a great deal, in general, all sexual activities between two (or more) people should be considered as being a two-way route for the transmission of STDs (i.e. "giving" or "receiving" are both risky).
Although healthcare professionals suggest that safer sex, such as the use of condoms, as the most reliable way of decreasing the risk of contracting sexually transmitted diseases during sexual activity, safer sex should by no means be considered an absolute safeguard. The transfer of and exposure to bodily fluids, such as blood transfusions and other blood products, sharing injection needles, needle-stick injuries (when medical staff are inadvertently jabbed or pricked with needles during medical procedures), sharing tattoo needles, and childbirth are all avenues of transmission. These means put certain groups, such as doctors, haemophiliacs and drug users, particularly at risk.
There are over 100 types of this virus which is often asymptomatic. Nearly 3 out of 4 Americans between ages 15 and 49 have been infected. It can be contracted through one partner and remain dormant allowing it to be transmitted to another. Some types can cause cervical cancer.
Genital HPV infection is a sexually transmitted disease that is caused by human papillomavirus. Human papillomavirus is the name of a group of viruses that includes more than 100 different strains. More than 30 of these are sexually transmitted and they can infect the genital area of men and women. Approximately 20 million people are currently infected with HPV and at least 50% of sexually active men and women will acquire HPV at some point in their lives. By age 50 at least 80% of women will have acquired HPV and about 6.2 million Americans get a new HPV infection each year. Most people who have HPV don't know that they are infected. The virus lives in the skin or mucous membranes and usually causes no symptoms. Commonly some people get visible genital warts or have pre-cancerous changes in the cervix, vulva, anus, or penis. Very rarely, HPV results in anal or genital cancers. Genital warts usually appear soft, moist, pink, or flesh colored swellings. They can be raised, flat, single, or multiple, small or large and sometimes cauliflower shaped. Warts may not appear for weeks or months or not at all and the only way to diagnose them is by visible inspection.
Most women are diagnosed with HPV on the basis of abnormal pap tests and there are no tests available for men. There is no cure for HPV. The surest way to eliminate risk for HPV is to refrain from any genital contact with another individual. For those who choose to be sexually active, a long term monogamous relationship with an uninfected partner is the strategy most likely to prevent future HPV infections.The next best way to help reduce risk is using a condom but the effectiveness is unknown.
What is the connection between HPV and cervical cancer?
All types of HPV cause mild pap test abnormalities which do not have serious consequences. Approximately 10 of the 30 identified HPV types can lead to development of cervical cancer. Research as shown that for most women, 90% cervical HPV infection becomes undetectable within two years. Although only a small proportion of women have persistent infection, persistent infection with the high risk types of HPV is the main risk factor for cervical cancer.
A pap test can detect pre-cancerous and cancerous cells on the cervix. Regular pap testing and careful medical follow up, with treatment if necessary, can help ensure that pre-cancerous changes in the cervix caused by HPV infection do not develop into life-threatening cervical cancer. The pap test used in the U.S. cervical cancer screening programs is responsible for greatly reducing deaths from cervical cancer.
Women are commonly dealing with many different diseases and disorders that pertain to the reproductive system. Here are some of the most common:
Vulvovaginitis (pronounced:vul-vo-vah-juh-ni-tus) is an inflammation of the vulva and vagina. It may be caused by irritating substances such as laundry soap, bubble baths or poor hygiene such as wiping from back to front. Symptoms include redness and itching in these areas and sometimes vaginal discharge. It can also be caused by an overgrowth of candida, a fungus normally present in the vagina.
Nonmenstrual vaginal bleeding is most commonly due to the presence of a foreign body in the vagina. It may also be due to urethral prolapse, a condition in which the mucous membranes of the urethra protrude into the vagina and forms a tiny, donut shaped mass of tissue that bleeds easily. It can also be due to a straddle injury or vaginal trauma from sexual abuse.
Ectopic Pregnancy occurs when a fertilized egg or zygote doesn't travel into the uterus, but instead grows rapidly in the fallopian tube. Women with this condition can develop severe abdominal pain and should see a doctor because surgery may be necessary.
Ovarian tumors,although rare, can occur. Women with ovarian tumors may have abdominal pain and masses that can be felt in the abdomen. Surgery may be needed to remove the tumor.
Ovarian cysts are noncancerous sacs filled with fluid or semi-solid material. Although they are common and generally harmless, they can become a problem if they grow very large. Large cysts may push on surrounding organs, causing abdominal pain. In most cases, cysts will pass or disappear on their own and treatment is not necessary. If the cysts are painful and occur frequently, a doctor may prescribe birth control pills to alter their growth and occurrences. Surgery is also an option if they need to be removed.
Polycystic ovary syndrome is a hormone disorder in which too many hormones are produced by the ovaries. This condition causes the ovaries to become enlarged and develop many fluid filled sacs or cysts. It often first appears during the teen years. Depending on the type and the severity of the condition, it may be treated with drugs to regulate hormone balance and menstruation.
Trichomonas vaginalis inflammatory condition of the vagina usually a bacterial infection also called vaginosis.
Menorrhagia is when a woman has very heavy periods with excess bleeding.
Oligomenorrhea is when a woman misses or has infrequent periods, even though she has been menstruating for a while and is not pregnant.
Amenorrhea is when a girl has not started her period by the time she is 16 years old or 3 years after puberty has started, has not developed signs of puberty by 14, or has had normal periods but has stopped menstruating for some reasons other than pregnancy.
Toxic shock syndrome is caused by toxins released into the body during a type of bacterial infection that is more likely to develop if a tampon is left in too long. It can produce high fever, diarrhea, vomiting, and shock.
Candidasis symptoms of yeast infections include itching, burning and discharge. Yeast organisms are always present in all people, but are usually prevented from "overgrowth" (uncontrolled multiplication resulting in symptoms) by naturally occurring microorganisms.
At least three quarters of all women will experience candidiasis at some point in their lives. The Candida albicans organism is found in the vaginas of almost all women and normally causes no problems. However, when it gets out of balance with the other "normal flora," such as lactobacilli (which can also be harmed by using douches), an overgrowth of yeast can result in noticeable symptoms. Pregnancy, the use of oral contraceptives, engaging in vaginal sex after anal sex in an unhygienic manner, and using lubricants containing glycerin have been found to be causally related to yeast infections. Diabetes mellitus and the use of antibiotics are also linked to an increased incidence of yeast infections. Candidiasis can be sexually transmitted between partners. Diet has been found to be the cause in some animals. Hormone Replacement Therapy and Infertility Treatment may be factors.
There are also cancer's of the female reproductive system, such as:
Endometriosis is the most common gynecological diseases, affecting more than 5.5 million women in North America alone! The two most common symptoms are pain and infertility.
In this disease a specialized type of tissue that normally lines the inside of the uterus,(the endometrium) becomes implanted outside the uterus, most commonly on the fallopian tubes, ovaries, or the tissue lining the pelvis. During the menstrual cycle, hormones signal the lining of the uterus to thicken to prepare for possible pregnancy. If a pregnancy doesn't occur, the hormone levels decrease, causing the thickened lining to shed.
When endometrial tissue is located in other parts it continues to act in it's normal way: It thickens, breaks down and bleeds each month as the hormone levels rise and fall. However, because there's nowhere for the blood from this mislocated tissue to exit the body, it becomes trapped and surrounding tissue becomes irritated. Trapped blood may lead to growth of cysts. Cysts in turn may form scar tissue and adhesions. This causes pain in the area of the misplaced tissue, usually the pelvis. Endometriosis can cause fertility problems. In fact, scars and adhesions on the ovaries or fallopian tubes can prevent pregnancy.
Endometriosis can be mild, moderate or severe and tends to get worse over time without treatment. The most common symptoms are:
Painful periods Pelvic pain and severe cramping, intense back pain and abdominal pain.
Pain at other times Women may experience pelvic pain during ovulation, sharp deep pain in pelvis during intercourse, or pain during bowel movements or urination.
Excessive bleeding Heavy periods or bleeding between periods.
The cause of endometriosis remains mysterious. Scientists are studying the roles that hormones and the immune system play in this condition. One theory holds that menstrual blood containing endometrial cells flows back through the fallopian tubes, takes root and grows. Another hypothesis proposes that the bloodstream carries endometrial cells to other sites in the body. Still another theory speculates that a predisposition toward endometriosis may be carried in the genes of certain families.
Other researchers believe that certain cells present within the abdomen in some women retain their ability to specialize into endometrial cells. These same cells were responsible for the growth of the woman's reproductive organs when she was an embryo. It is believed that genetic or environmental influences in later life allow these cells to give rise to endometrial tissue outside the uterus.
Experts estimate that up to one in ten American women of childbearing age have endometriosis. There is some thinking that previous damage to cells that line the pelvis can lead to endometriosis. There are several ways to diagnose endometriosis:
Conservative surgery which removes endometrial growths.
E) nothing LH only does something in the male reproductive system
Alveoli: Basic components of the mammary glands; lined with milk-secreting epithelial cells
Birth Control: regimen of one or more actions, devices, or medications followed in order to
Cervical Mucus: Mucus secreted by the cervix, near ovulation it helps to lower the acidity of the vagina
Cervix: Lower, narrow portion of the uterus where it joins with the top of the vagina
Chromosomes: Structures in the nucleus that contain the genes for genetic expression
Endocervical Canal: Passageway between the external os and the uterine cavity
Fallopian Tubes: Located at the upper end of the vagina, passage way for the egg from the ovary
Factor V Leiden: This is the name given to a variant of human factor V that causes a hypercoagulability disorder.
In this disorder the Leiden variant of factor V, cannot be inactivated by activated protein C.
Factor V Leiden is the most common hereditary hypercoagulability disorder amongst Eurasians.
Gamete: A haploid sex cell; either an egg cell or a sperm cell
Gene: That portion of the DNA of a chromosome containing the information needed to synthesize a particular protein molecule
Gonad: A reproductive organ, testis or ovary that produces gametes and sex hormones
Hormone: A chemical substance produced in an endocrine gland and secreted into the bloodstream that acts on target cells
Hymen: Thin fold of mucous membrane that separates the lumen of the vagina from the urethral sinus
Infertility: Inability to naturally conceive a child or the inability to carry a pregnancy to term
Labia Majora: Outer "lips" of the vulva, made of loose connective tissue and adipose tissue with some smooth muscle
Labia Minora: Inner lips of the vulva, folds and protects the vagina, urethra and clitoris
Mammary Glands: Organs that produce milk for the sustenance of a baby
Meiosis: A specialized type of cell division by which gametes, or haploid sex cells, are formed
Menarche: The first menstrual discharge; occurs normally between the ages of 9 and 17
Menopause: The period marked by the cessation of menstrual periods in the human female
Menstrual Cycle: The rhythmic female reproductive cycle characterized by physical changes in the uterine lining
Menstruation: The discharge of blood and tissue from the uterus at the end of menstrual cycle
Mittelschmerz: Pain near the lower abdomen site at the time of ovulation; German for ovulation pain
Mons Veneris: soft mound at the front of the vulva (fatty tissue covering the pubic bone)
Ovarian Cycle: Last phase of the reproductive cycle; if no implantation occurs, causes the breakdown of the
Ovulation: The rupture of an ovarian follicle with the release of an ovum
Perineum: External region between the scrotum and the anus in a male or between the vulva and anus in a female
Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS): Time leading up to menstruation; includes both physical and emotional symptoms: acne, bloating,
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs): diseases or infections that have a significant probability of transmission between humans by means of sexual contact
Urethra: Located below the clitoris, used for the passage of urine
Uterine Cycle: First part of the reproductive cycle; the time when the endrometrial lining builds up and follicles develop
Uterus: Major reproductive organ, receives fertilized eggs which become implanted in the lining,
Vagina: Muscular, hollow tube that extends from the vaginal opening to the cervix
Vulva: External female genitals, includes labia majora, labia minora, mons pubis, clitoris, meatus, vaginal vestibule, vestibule bulbs and vestibular glands
Essentials of Anatomy and Physiology. Fourth Edition. Valerie C. Scanlon and Tina Sanders.
In this chapter we will discuss the topics covering pregnancy, from conception to birth. The chapter will cover fertilization, implantation of the zygote, to becoming a fetus, the three trimesters, and the progressive development of the fetus through the weeks of pregnancy. It will cover the topic of birth and different birthing methods.
Fertilization is the joining of a sperm and an egg. A sperm is a male gamete that is released into the vagina of a female during intercourse. In order for fertilization to occur there must be a mature ovum present. Every month one of the ovaries releases an egg which will meet one of the A 4 million sperm the male ejaculates into the vagina. The sperm swim through the cervix and into the uterus which lead to the fallopian tubes. This is where fertilization is most likely to take place. The high amount of sperm in the ejaculate is needed because only around 100 survive to enter reach the fertilization site. In order to penetrate the egg the sperm must first break through two barriers surrounding the ovum. The acrosome of sperm comes in contact with the corona radiata and releases digestive enzymes that break down a gelatinous layer around the egg called, the zona pellucida. Once a sperm reaches the plasma membrane of the egg it sets off a reaction that spreads across the membrane of the egg preventing other sperm from breaking through the egg membrane. Once the sperm reaches the inside of the egg it sheds its tail and the two nuclei fuse and now the 23 chromosomes from the egg and the 23 chromosomes of the sperm join and they become a zygote. Chromosomes contain all the information needed to determine the genetic structure of the new baby. Normally all human beings have two chromosomes that determine sex: A combination of X and Y makes a male or a combination of X and X makes a female. All ovum have X sex chromosomes where as sperm have both X or Y sex chromosomes. Therefore, the male gametes determine the sex of the baby.
After fertilization, the zygote begins a process of dividing by mitosis in a process called cleavage. It divides until it reaches 16 cells. It is now referred to as a morula. As the morula floats freely within the uterus, it starts to bring nutrients into the cells. The morula fills with fluid and the cells inside start to form two separate groups. At this stage it is now a blastocyst. The inner layer of cells is called the embryoblast, and will become the fetus. The outer layer is called a trophoblast which will develop into part of the placenta. At this point the zona pellucida is disintegrating. The trophoblast contains specialized cells that become extensions, like fingers, that grow into the endometrium once in contact with the well thickened endometrium.
The blastocyst preserves itself by secreting a hormone that indirectly stops menstruation. The trophoblast cells secrete hCG hormones that help maintain the corpus luteum that would normally regress. In turn, the corpus luteum continues to secrete progesterone, which maintains the endometrium of the uterus in the secretory phase. This helps the blastocyst to continue to grow and stay embedded within the endometrium. The fetal life support system and the placenta begin to form, and eventually the placenta will take over the job of producing progesterone.
The embryoblast within the blastocyst forms 3 primary germs layers: ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm.
This forms the nervous tissue and the epithelium covering the outer body surface. Epidermis of skin, including hair and nails, glands of skin, linings of oral cavity, nasal cavity, anal canal, vagina, brain, spinal cord, sensory organs, lens of eye and epithelium of conjunctiva (a membrane that covers the sclera and lines the inside of the eyelids), pituitary gland, adrenal medulla, and enamel of teeth.
This forms all of the muscle tissue and the connective tissue of the body, as well as the kidneys and the epithelium of the serous membranes and blood vessels. All muscle tissue (skeletal, smooth, cardiac), all connective tissue (fibrous connective tissue, bone, blood, cartilage), dentin of teeth, adrenal cortex, kidneys and ureters, internal reproductive viscera, epithelium lining vessels, joint cavities, and the serous body cavities.
Forms the lining epithelium and glands of the visceral body systems. Lining epithelium and glands of digestive, respiratory, and parts of urogenital systems, thyroid and parathyroid glands, and thymus.
As changes to the endometrium occur, cellular growth and the accumulation of glycogen cause fetal and maternal tissue to come together. This formation makes the functional unit called the placenta. The placenta does not mix blood between mother and fetus, but allows nutrients and waste products to diffuse between the two blood systems. The placenta provides protection by filtering out many harmful substances that the mother comes in contact with. The placenta cannot protect against some teratogens including but not limited to:
Propecia, also known as Finasteride, which can cause birth defects simply by a woman handling a broken pill during pregnancy.
Attached to placenta is the membranous sac which surrounds and protects the embryo. This sac is called the amnion. It grows and begins to fill, mainly with water, around two weeks after fertilization. This liquid is called Amniotic fluid, it allows the fetus to move freely, without the walls of the uterus being too tight against its body. Buoyancy is also provided here for comfort. After a further 10 weeks the liquid contains proteins, carbohydrates, lipids and phospholipids, urea and electrolytes, all which aid in the growth of the fetus. In the late stages of gestation much of the amniotic fluid consists of fetal urine. The fetus swallows the fluid and then voids it to prepare its digestive organs for use after birth. The fetus also "breathes" the fluid to aid in lung growth and development.
A small part of the placenta is shown at the bottom, while the fluid-filled amnion surrounds it
Not enough amniontic fluid, or oligohydramnios, can be a concern during pregnancy. Oligohydramnios can be caused by infection, kidney dysfunction or malformation (since much of the late amniotic fluid volume is urine), procedures such as chorionic villus sampling (CVS), and preterm, premature rupture of membranes (PPROM). One possible outcome of oligohydramnios can cause is underdeveloped, or hypoplastic, lungs. This condition is potentially fatal and the baby can die shortly after birth. Babies with too little amniotic fluid can also develop contractures of the limbs, including clubbing of the feet and hands.
As with too little fluid, too much fluid or polyhydramnios, can be a cause or an indicator of problems for the mother and baby. Polyhydramnios is a predisposing risk factor for cord prolapse and is sometimes a side effect of a macrosomic pregnancy. In both cases, however, the majority of pregnancies proceed normally and the baby is born healthy.
Preterm, premature rupture of membranes (PPROM) is a condition where the amniotic sac leaks fluid before 38 weeks of gestation. This can be caused by a bacterial infection or by a defect in the structure of the amniotic sac, uterus, or cervix. In some cases the leak can spontaneously heal, but in most cases of PPROM, labor begins within 48 hours of membrane rupture. When this occurs, it is necessary that the mother receive treatment immediately to postpone labor if the fetus is not viable, for as long as is safe, and for antibiotic treatments to avoid possible infection in the mother and baby. If rupture occurs too early in pregnancy little can be done to save the fetus.
A very rare and most often fatal obstetric complication is an amniotic fluid embolism, or leakage of amniotic fluid into the mothers vascular systems causing an allergic reation. This allergic reaction results in cardiorespiratory (heart and lung) collapse, developing into a condition known as disseminated intravascular coagulation in which the mothers blood looses it's ability to clot.
Amniotic band syndrome, or ABS, occurs when the inner fetal membrane (amnion) ruptures without injury to the outer membrane (chorion). Fibrous bands from the ruptured amnion float in the amniotic fluid and can entangle the fetus, reducing blood supply and causing congenital limb abnormalities dysmelia. In some cases a complete "natural" amputation of a digit(s) or limb may occur before birth or the digit(s) or limbs may be necrotic (dead) requiring surgical removal.
There are pituitary like hormones and steroid hormones secreted from the placenta. The pituitary like hormones are hCG and hCS. HCG is similar to LH and helps maintain the mothers corpus luteum. HCS is like prolactin and growth hormone and help aid in increasing fat breakdown that spares the use of glucose from the mothers tissues. This effect leaves more glucose available to the placenta and the fetus for necessary growth. The steroid hormones are progesterone and estrogen. Progesterone helps maintain the endrometrium and supports the growth of mammary glands. Estrogen also helps maintain the endrometrium and growth of mammary glands as well as inhibits prolactin secretion.
The womb is expanding, the baby is growing and taking all the nourishment from the mother. What once started as a microscopic two-celled egg, will be formed into a baby in just twelve weeks. The baby develops from conception to term, in a month-to-month progress.
Fertilization occurs, cell division begins and continues, chorion appears
Symptoms of early pregnancy (nausea, breast swelling and tenderness, fatigue); blood pregnancy tests may show positive
Implantation occurs; amnion and yolk sac appear; embryo has tissue; placenta begins to form
First period missed; urine pregnancy test may show positive; early pregnancy symptoms continue
Nervous system begins to develop; allantois and blood vessels are present and placenta is well formed
Limb buds form; heart is beating; nervous system further develops; embryo has tail; other systems are forming
Uterus is the size of a hen's egg; mother may need to urinate frequently
Embryo is curved, head is large, limb buds are showing division, nose, ears and eyes are noticeable
Fetus begins to look human; limbs are developing and major organs forming; facial features are becoming refined
Head grows faster than the rest of the body; facial features are apparent, but there is no layer of fat yet and the skin is translucent; gender can be distinguished via ultrasound; fingernails appear
Fine hair (lanugo) grows over the body; fetus resembles a tiny human being; skeleton is visible
Uterus reaches up to the level of umbilicus and pregnancy is obvious
Vernix caseosa, the protective fatty coating, begins to be deposited; heartbeat can be heard
Doctor can tell where baby's head, back and limbs are; breasts have enlarged and nipples and areola are darker, colostrum is produced
Fully formed but still thin; much larger and very active, all major organs are working, the lungs and digestive system need more time to develop; body is covered in fine hair called lanugo
Most babies are in a head down position in the womb; head is more in proportion to the body; eyes are open; babies born at this stage have a good chance of living
Weight gain is averaging about a pound a week; standing and walking are becoming very difficult because the center of gravity is thrown forward
Uterus is up to the rib cage, causing shortness of breath and heartburn; sleeping is very difficult
Not much room to move in the womb; fully mature, baby moves less, and the surrounding fluid reduces and the womb expands its limits
An embryo this tiny shows very distinct anatomic features, including tail, limb buds, heart (which actually protrudes from the chest), eye cups, cornea/lens, brain, and prominent segmentation into somites. The gestational sac is surrounded by a myriad of chorionic villi resembling elongate party balloons. This embryo is about five weeks old (or seven weeks in the biologically misleading but eminently practical dating system used in obstetrics).
There are only the beginnings of facial features. All the major organs are starting to form. Gill-like folds that develop into facial features, beginnings of the spinal cord, skin is translucent, and rudimentary (basic; minimal) heart develops.
The length from crown to rump is about the size of a finger tip, ¾ ". The beginnings of all the major organs will have formed.
The embryo floats in a fluid filled bubble that will develop into the amniotic sac. The sac is covered by a protective layer of cells, called chorion. The yolk sac supplies the embryo with all its nutrients until the placenta is fully developed and takes over at around the twelfth week. During the first 12 weeks, the embryo will develop features and major organs of a human being. The embryo is susceptible to harmful environmental influences. This is a vital time for the embryo to develop healthily; taking supplements of folic acid, avoiding certain foods, and eliminating alcohol, cigarettes, and any unnecessary drugs or medicines.
The length from crown to rump approximately 1 1/4". The facial features are becoming more distinct, and the “tail” has disappeared. The muscles are also developing. Eyes are formed but eyelids are still closed over them. Arms now bend at the elbow and rudimentary hands and fingers develop. Knees will have formed and developing feet with distinct toes.
Heart- is now a four-chambered and fully formed organ; it beats about 180 times per minute.
Brain and nervous system- is four times the size it was at 6 weeks. Special glial cells are being formed within the neural tube; they allow nerve cells to be joined so that messages can be transmitted from the brain to the body.
Digestive system- the mouth, intestine, and stomach are developing very rapidly, but do not function yet.
The fetal life-support system- the placental tissue that initially surrounds the fetus and the amniotic sac is becoming concentrated in one circular area on the womb wall to form the placenta.
At twelve weeks the fetus looks like a tiny human. It is about 2 1/2" long and weighs 1/2 oz. Arms and legs are now beginning to move. Skin is red and translucent. Fingers and toes are more defined, and nails are starting to grow.
Heart is complete and working, pumping blood to all parts of the body. Digestive system has formed and is linked to the mouth and intestines. Sexual organs have formed inside the body, but cannot yet establish the sex of the baby.
By 20 weeks the fetus will be about 6 1/3" long and weighs 12 oz. Movements are for more coordinated. The sexual organs are well developed and are usually visible on ultra sound.
The fetus is growing very quickly. At this stage, the mother should feel the movements of the fetus. Movements are more noticeable as the fetus's leg bones achieve their final relative proportions in a process called quickening. Quickening is the process of muscles contracting that cause movement at the fetus's synovial joints. The joint movement enhances the nutrition of the articular cartilage and prevents the fusion of connective tissues within the joint. It also promotes bone hardening.
From now on, the fully developed placenta will provide all the fetus' needs until birth; oxygen, nutrients and protective antibodies.
By 29 weeks the baby is about 10" long and weighs about 2 lbs. 7 oz.
The brain grows much larger, and fatty protective sheath covers the nerve fibers; this important development allows brain impulses to travel faster, enhancing the ability to learn. The lungs have developed most of their airways and air sacs. The placenta is quite selective in what it allows to pass from the mother to the baby's blood, stopping some harmful substances, such as certain drugs, from crossing over.
The baby is now ready to be born. When the head of the baby moves down from high in the mother's abdomen and settles deeper into her pelvis in preparation for birth, it is called engagement. This can happen any time between 36 weeks and labor.
In the last four weeks of pregnancy the baby puts on a lot of weight and develops a thick layer of fat. All organs are completely formed and functioning.
This is the life support for a growing embryo. The umbilical cord stretches between the placenta and the fetus. This cord contains the umbilical arteries and vein. The umbilical cord forms by week 5 of conception. The average cord is close to 22 inches long and may have the appearance of a coil. The umbilical cord is very rich in stem cells and is often used for parents who choose to store their stem cells in a blood bank or donate it to a blood bank. These stem cells can be used to treat over 45 disorders and is an alternative from extracting the stem cells from a donor.
Human placenta shown a few minutes after birth. The side shown faces the baby with the umbilical cord top right. The unseen side connects to the uterine wall. The white fringe surrounding the bottom is the remnants of the amniotic sac. You can see the differences in the umbilical vein and arteries.
The exchange of gases, nutrients and oxygen takes place between the maternal blood and fetal blood. There are 2 main arteries.
Vein that carries nutrients and oxygen away from the placenta to the growing fetus. It also carries oxygen and nutrient rich blood. There is only 1 main vein.
Fetus doesn't use its lungs for gas exchange, only a small amount of blood is pumped to fetal lungs in order to support their development.
One artery instead of two will result in chromosomal abnormalities. Some of these defects include poor fetal growth, preterm delivery, and still births. This can be detected by a routine ultrasound. If an ultrasound is done and no other complications or abnormalities are detected, the baby will usually be born healthy.
This condition usually happens when a cord is too long. The baby may be born prematurely or will be breech.
This condition happens when the umbilical cord is wrapped around the baby's head at least one or more times. This can be detected when a baby is in stress or by a simple ultrasound. In most cases the mother will have a cesarean delivery. In other cases the cord may be wrapped around the hands or feet.
This occurs in one in every 3,000 births, which can become life-threatening for the unborn baby. This complication happens when the umbilical cord inserts abnormally in the fetal membranes of the placenta, which appears abnormally shaped or positioned. Major risks include unprotected fetal blood vessels cross the cervix, oftentimes rupturing the membranes. Also, lack of blood pressure due from pressure, causes the loss of oxygen to the baby. Women who will be at risk for this would be those who already have experienced placenta previa or have used in vitro fertilization.
About 1% of babies are born with one or more knots in their umbilical cord. Some knots happen during labor; others happen from moving around in the womb. Most knots occur when the umbilical cord is too long. In some cases the knots can become tight, cutting off the oxygen supply to the baby. Cord knots result in miscarriages and stillbirth in 5% and 10% of most cases. Most will require a cesarean delivery.
This is more common with genetic defects, such as Factor V Leiden. This complication will prevent blood flow to and from the baby and many times will cause the placenta to also clot and die. If this is not caught early enough, the baby will die of starvation in the womb. A simple ultrasound can determine if there are problems with the blood flow.
An initial sign of pregnancy is amenorrhea, or the absence of menstruation. Menses cease because the blastocyte begins the release of hCG or human chorionic gonadotropin. Most pregnancy tests are specifically designed to recognize the presence of hCG, and hCG levels can be tested through the mothers blood to learn whether or not a pregnancy is progressing normally.
Human pregnancy lasts approximately 40 weeks from the time of the last menstrual cycle to childbirth (38 weeks from fertilization). The medical term for a pregnant woman is genetalian, just as the medical term for the potential baby is embryo (early weeks) and then fetus (until birth). A woman who is pregnant for the first time is known as a primigravida or gravida 1: a woman who has never been pregnant is known as a gravida 0; similarly, the terms para 0, para 1 and so on are used for the number of times a woman has given birth.
In many societies' medical and legal definitions, human pregnancy is somewhat arbitrarily divided into three trimester periods, as a means to simplify reference to the different stages of fetal development. The first trimester period carries the highest risk of miscarriage (spontaneous death of embryo or fetus). During the second trimester the development of the fetus can start to be monitored and diagnosed. The third trimester marks the beginning of viability, which means the fetus might survive if an early birth occurs.
(38 weeks) A fully developed fetus in the mothers abdomen
As soon as a woman becomes pregnant, her body begins to change so that it can support both herself and the unborn baby. All of the body functions start to work much harder. The heart has to pump more blood around the body, in particular to the womb, placenta, and the fetus. As well as physical demands, pregnancy also causes a range of emotional reactions.
The first trimester, the first twelve weeks, little is visible.
The second trimester, 13-27 Weeks, the waistline is rapidly growing, the abdomen becomes noticeably pregnant.
The third trimester, 28-40 weeks, the body expands rapidly and the womb enlarges and presses against the diaphragm.
In the early weeks the mother is likely to be more tired. As the uterus begins to grow, the "bump" becomes noticeable.
This is a good time to start looking into options on birthing and doctors.
Physical feelings: tiredness, nausea, constipation, frequent urination, food cravings, change in size of breasts, fainting or dizziness, bloated stomach, and high emotions.
The mother will probably be feeling full of energy and excitement.
Physical feelings: More energy, constipation, heartburn, and indigestion. The breasts continue to grow, as does an increase in appetite. There is mild swelling in the feet, ankles, hands, and face. There is also more baby movement. There may be emotional ups and downs in the feeling of pregnancy, and short-term memory may be poor.
The hormones estrogen, progesterone, human placental lactogen, oxytocin, and prolactin prepare the body for feeding the baby, and cause the breasts to enlarge, becoming painful and tender.
The fetus, placenta, and amniotic fluid account for just over a third of the weight gain during pregnancy. The remaining weight comes from increased blood volume, fluid retention, and extra body fat. The suggested weight gain in most pregnancies is between 25-40 lbs.
Shortness of breath, tiredness, difficulty in moving and sleeping, and frequent urination. The emotional mood swings ease off, but the mother begins to feel less enthusiastic about being pregnant. She may become impatient and restless and just wants for the birth to be over.
The body is changing to cope with the ever increasing size of the womb. The baby grows and pushes out the lower back of the mother. The breathing rate of the baby is growing very quickly. At this stage, the mother should feel the movements of the fetus. Other signs may be the nipples secreting colostrum, Braxton-Hicks' contractions may begin, and blood flow to the womb has increased tenfold since conception.
Once the female confirms her pregnancy, she will need to find out her physical condition and what to expect in the coming months. Women typically begin pre-natal care at approximately 8-10 weeks gestation, and pregnancy care should continue until approximately 6 weeks postpartum. The main purpose of the prenatal visits is to perform preventative medicine. Most complications in pregnancy are best treated if they are caught early on. A series of tests will be performed throughout the pregnancy to judge the mother and fetus' well-being including:
Blood tests such as a complete blood count, HIV test, or the triple screen which is test used most commonly to look for neural tube defects and Downs Syndrome.
Continuous care is the best way to ensure a healthy mother and baby.
Labor is defined as contractions and cervical change, contractions alone are not labor.
Pre-Labor Signs: as your body is preparing for labor, there are a few things that should be expected to happen within four to six weeks of labor.
False Labor Signs: there are a few signs that indicate false labor.
Timing of the contractions are irregular and do not become more frequent or more intense
Contractions stop during rest, stopping what the mother is doing, walking, or changing position
Pain in the lower back, radiating towards the front abdomen, possibly also the legs
Contractions increase in strength and are closer together; coming now on a regular basis, 30 to 70 seconds apart
The mucous plug is detached, showing bloody discharge
The water breaks (usually this does not break until the doctor does it), when this happens, contractions become much stronger
Some women have the sudden need to go to the bathroom, diarrhea is common
When the contractions of labor begin, the walls of the uterus start to contract. They are stimulated by the release of the pituitary hormone oxytocin. The contractions cause the cervix to widen and begin to open. As labor progresses the amniotic sac can rupture causing a slow or a fast gush of fluids. Labor usually begins within a 24 hour period after the amniotic sac has ruptured. As contractions become closer and stronger the cervix will gradually start to dilate. The first stage of labor is broken into three parts:
Early Phase First is the early phase of labor, when the cervix dilates from 1-4 centimeters, this can be the longest and most exhausting part for the mother.
Active Phase The cervix dilates on average 1 cm per hour in the active phase of labor dilating from 4-7 centimeters. If an epidural is requested it is usually given in this phase.
Transition This is often considered the most intense part of labor with contractions lasting longer and having shorter rest periods in between them. Dilation from 8-10 centimeters occurs during transition. Some women experience nausea and vomiting during this phase as well as rectal pressure and an urge to push.
Oxytocin continues to be released to shrink the size of the uterus and aid in the limiting of blood loss from the site of the placenta. As the uterus shrinks the attachment site blood vessels, some of which can be as large as an adult finger, shrink also. The average blood loss in a routine vaginal delivery is 400-500 cc.
There are times when a mother may need outside aid in the delivery of the baby, some of these methods include:
Forceps, an instrument used to cradle the fetus' head and manipulate the head under the pubic bone to more easily pass through the birth canal.
Vacuum Extraction, a suction cup is applied to the baby's head, and a plunger is used to suck any air from between the suction cup and the head to create a good seal. The babies head is then manipulated through the birth canal. This usually leaves a baby's head bruised, but the mark fades within weeks after birth.
Cesarean section, or C-section, is the delivery of a baby through a surgical abdominal incision (Abdominal delivery - Abdominal birth - Cesarean section). A C-section delivery is performed when a vaginal birth is not possible or is not safe for the mother or child. Surgery is usually done while the woman is awake but anesthetized from the chest to the legs by epidural or spinal anesthesia. An incision is made across the abdomen just above the pubic area. The uterus is opened, and often brought through the incision after delivery for better visualization. The amniotic fluid is drained, and the baby is delivered. The baby's mouth and nose are cleared of fluids, and the umbilical cord is clamped and cut. After delivery a nursery nurse or pediatrician check the make sure that the baby is breathing and responding. Due to a variety of medical and social factors, C-sections have become fairly common; around 25% of births are performed by C-section. C-sections carry some risks to mother and baby. Compared to a vaginal birth, the risks to mother include increased risk of death, surgical injury, infection, postpartum depression, and hemorrhage, although these are rare. Babies born by c-section are more likely to be admitted to the ICU for breathing problems. Mothers are advised to carefully weigh the risks of C-section versus vaginal birth.
The chances of having natural, uncomplicated birth are optimized by carefully selecting your obstetrician and hospital. Doctors who work with midwives have lower cesarean section rates because midwives handle less complicated pregnancies. Delivering babies by abdominal surgery has been steadily rising in America over the past two decades, so that now 22-30% of births in American hospitals are cesarean section. The U.S., despite having the most advanced technology and highly trained medical personnel, ranks 23rd in infant mortality and 18th in perinatal mortality.
Medical interventions such as epidural anesthesia, pitocin augmentation of labor, vacuum extraction of fetus, episiotomy and separation of newborn and mother are common in American hospitals. There are circumstances where medical procedures such as these are necessary, but many parents and professionals now question the routine use of such interventions. In some cases, the routine use of these procedures have lead to further complications. For example, the epidural anesthetic, while providing pain relief, has shown to increase the operative vaginal delivery rate (i.e. forceps and vacuum extraction rates slightly) especially in first time mothers. Epidurals have not been shown to increase the cesarean section rate in recent well documented studies.
"Freestanding" Birth Centers are not inside of or affiliated with a hospital. They are run by collaboration of midwives or physicians. This is an alternative choice for the woman who does not wish to birth in a hospital environment yet is not comfortable giving birth at home. Birth centers do not provide any additional measure of safety than most planned home births with qualified midwives; they may provide the expectant couple with the physiological comfort necessary to enable the mother to relax.
Out of hospital birth centers are designed for women having low-risk pregnancies who want drug-free birth with minimal intervention in a home-like environment. Family members may participate in the birth. C-sections rates are lower than most hospitals because the pregnancies are low risk. Freestanding Birth Centers are an alternative choice for a woman who has had a previous cesarean and wishes to maximize her chances of a vaginal delivery. However, vaginal birth attempts after a prior cesarean section have a 1-2% risk of uterine rupture. Health insurance may cover costs. Many birth centers offer birthing tubs where one can give birth in water.
Birth at home provides parents with intimacy, privacy, comfort and family-centered experience. Childbirth at home may be a safe option for healthy women having normal pregnancies. It is for those who have a very strong desire for natural childbirth and who are willing to take high degree of responsibility for their health care and baby's birth. At home, the parents and midwife are in control of the birthing environment, and strict time perimeters for length of labor are not imposed, or routine medical interventions such as IVs done. However, the World Health Organization (WHO) states that "giving birth in a health facility (not necessarily a hospital) with professional staff is safer by far than doing so at home." (The World Health Report 2005). Also, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) opposes out of hospital births. In choosing the comfort of home parents are also choosing to be further away from lifesaving measures should complications arise.
Homebirth midwives provide complete prenatal care including monthly visits, laboratory tests, screening for infections. They provide nutritional counseling and support for psycho-social issues. There is a chance that a rare, but critical emergency might occur during the birth where hospital services may not be able to be obtained quick enough. Again, the WHO states that "it is just before, during, and in the very first hours and days after birth that life is most at risk," (The World Health Report 2005) and that "many of the complications that result in maternal deaths and many that contribute to perinatal deaths are unpredictable, and their onset can be both sudden and severe." (WHO Birth and Emergency Preparedness in Antenatal Care, 2006) Home birth midwives are trained to know when an emergency requires medical interface and can provide stabilizing measures until critical care can be obtained. While homebirth midwives generally have the training, equipment, and medicine to handle many complications, there is great variation in training and skill level among midwives. In choosing a homebirth midwife one should careful examine credentials and training.
A newborn with umbilical cord still attached (3 minutes.)
After the baby is born the umbilical cord is clamped and cut and the baby is looked over by a doctor or nurse. The baby is given an APGAR score at one and five minutes after birth. This is an analysis of how well the baby is performing its vital functions.
If tearing, or an episiotomy occurs the wound is closed with absorbable suture. The mother is closely watched for blood loss, infection, or any other possible complications. Breastfeeding should be initiated as soon as possible after delivery as the stimulation of oxytocin in the mother aids in hemostasis.
Pregnancies that warrant close attention usually come from an existing medical condition such as asthma, diabetes, epilepsy, or a condition developed because of pregnancy. Conditions that arise during pregnancy will require special treatment. The purpose of prenatal care is to detect these conditions, and to monitor and deal with them before they become serious.
Preeclampsia is the medical term for high blood pressure during pregnancy. It is also characterized by edema, blurry vision, liver pain, and can progress into Eclampsia in which the mother can experience seizures, coma or even death.
Gestational Diabetes is diabetes mellitus that develops during pregnancy. All women should be tested for the condition at about 28 weeks gestation. Gestational and pre-existing diabetes can cause large for gestational age babies, a sudden drop in a neonates blood sugar after birth, and has a high risk for stillbirth
Teratogens (substances that cause birth defects including alcohol and certain prescription and recreational drugs)
Infection (such as rubella or cytomegalovirus) An infection in the eleventh week is less likely to damage the heart, but the baby may be born deaf.
Genetics (such as Factor V Leiden) Diabetes, blood conditions, etc.
Radiation (ionizing radiation such as X-rays, radiation therapy, or accidental exposure to radiation)
Fetal Alcohol Syndrome or FAS exposure is the leading known cause of mental retardation in the Western world. It is a disorder of permanent birth defects that occurs in the offspring of women who drink alcohol during pregnancy, depending on the amount, frequency, and timing of alcohol consumption. Alcohol crosses the placental barrier and can stunt fetal growth or weight, create distinctive facial stigmata, damage neurons and brain structures, and cause other physical, mental, or behavioral problems. Drinking during pregnancy should be avoided. Women who drink more than 4 or 5 drinks per day may cause permanent damage to their fetus, including, behavioral problems, sight and hearing loss, deformed organs and central nervous system dysfunction.
Smoking can cause low birth weight, still birth, birth defects, preterm births and immature lung development. It can also contribute to addiction in the child's later teen years.
Illegal Drugs can be the most devastating. Risks include SIDS (Sudden Infants Death Syndrome), learning disorders, birth defects, uncontrollable trembling, hyperactive, and drug dependency. Most drugs can be tested by a simple urine or blood test.
Medications. All medication use should be discussed with your doctor. Many over the counter and prescription drugs have warning labels. Follow these precautions to help avoid birth defects or other related problems.
Miscarriage or spontaneous abortion is the natural or spontaneous end of a pregnancy at a stage where the embryo or the fetus is incapable of surviving, generally defined in humans at a gestation of prior to 20 weeks. Miscarriages are the most common complication of pregnancy.
Basic Facts: 15-20% of pregnancies end in miscarriage, 70% of the time there is a chromosomal abnormality with the fetus, and one miscarriage does not increase your risk in the next pregnancy. Miscarriage is almost never the mother's fault.
Vaginal bleeding at any stage should be taken seriously. Severe bleeding in the early weeks may be a sign of miscarriage. However, 25% of pregnant patient bleed in the first trimester. After 24 weeks the mother should seek medical advice immediately. Third trimester bleeding in pregnancy is often one of the first signs of placenta previa; placenta is across the opening of the cervix. An ultrasound should be performed to establish the location. Other causes of late term bleeding include:
Preterm Labor or labor that occurs before 38 weeks gestation that can have multiple causes
Placental Abruption is a condition in which the placenta is torn away from the uterine wall causing loss of oxygen and nutrients to the baby, and hemorrhage of mother and baby from the large blood vessels in the placenta. Most women, but not all experience heavy bleeding and abdominal pain. This is a life threatening emergency as a fetus can only survive as long as 50% of the placenta is still attached.
Individuals either have, or do not have, the Rhesus factor (or Rh D antigen) on the surface of their red blood cells. This is usually indicated by 'RhD positive' (does have the RhD antigen) or 'RhD negative' (does not have the antigen) suffix to the ABO blood type i.e. A+ B- blood typing. This is a problem only when an Rh-negative woman has a partner who is Rh-positive resulting in an Rh-positive baby. If the mother's and the baby's blood come into contact during the birth, her body produces antibodies against the baby's blood. This problem usually does not affect the current pregnancy but can be dangerous for future pregnancies as the antibodies stay in the blood causing an immune response against future Rh+ fetus. In essence the mother's body "rejects" the fetus as it would a foreign body. A drug called Rhogam is now given by injection given at 28-30 weeks gestation and given again if there is confirmation that the baby is Rh positive within 24 hours after birth to protect the future pregnancies. Rh isoimmunization is rare in our day. Rh- mothers should also be given the injection after miscarriage or abortion.
If a mother is untreated they are at risk to subsequently deliver babies who suffer from hemolytic disease of the newborn. Hemolytic disease of the newborn, also known as HDN, is an alloimmune condition that develops in a fetus, when the IgG antibodies that have been produced by the mother and have passed through the placenta include ones which attack the red blood cells in the fetal circulation. The red cells are broken down and the fetus can develop reticulocytosis and anemia. This fetal disease ranges from mild to very severe, and fetal death from heart failure (hydrops fetalis) can occur. When the disease is moderate or severe, many erythroblasts are present in the fetal blood and so these forms of the disease can be called erythroblastosis fetalis (or erythroblastosis foetalis). Hemolysis leads to elevated bilirubin levels. After delivery bilirubin is no longer cleared (via the placenta) from the neonate's blood and the symptoms of jaundice (yellowish skin and yellow discoloration of the whites of the eyes) increase within 24 hours after birth. Like any other severe neonatal jaundice, there is the possibility of acute or chronic kernicterus.
Profound anemia can cause high-output heart failure, with pallor, enlarged liver and/or spleen, generalized swelling, and respiratory distress. The prenatal manifestations are known as hydrops fetalis; in severe forms this can include petechiae and purpura. The infant may be stillborn or die shortly after birth.
Physical anomalies are present at birth. Examples are; cardiac, facial (such as cleft palate), club foot, etc. These do not always endanger the baby's life. 1-2% of babies are born with a significant congenital abnormality. 4-6% with something relatively minor.
Chromosomal Abnormalities: Occur when there is a problem in the baby's genetic makeup; these include conditions such as Down syndrome. Other genetic defects, such as cystic fibrosis, can be inherited from the parents.
Pregnancy and childbirth place great demands, it is important to keep healthy. The more healthy and relaxed the mother is, the better it will be to cope with the demands of pregnancy. A healthy lifestyle combines many factors:
A poor diet can cause a low birth weight. Excessive weight gain during pregnancy can cause back problems, varicose veins, or indicate preclampsia. Advice on diet often includes to eat foods that are high in nutritional content. Sufficient protein, vitamins, carbohydrates, fats, and minerals, as well as fiber. Limit intake of saturated fats and sugar, and salt. Drink plenty of fluids.
Mild exercise, such as walking or swimming, is beneficial and will help cope with the workload of pregnancy and the demands of labor. Mother's should listen to her body and stop exercising when it tells her to. Exercise should never be painful.
Smoking reduces the oxygen and nutrients passing via the placenta to the baby. Avoid alcohol to avoid serious birth defects.
An alternative when other methods of achieving contraception have failed.
In vitro fertilization (IVF) is a technique in which egg cells are fertilized by sperm outside the woman's womb. IVF is a major treatment in infertility when other methods of achieving conception have failed. The process involves hormonally controlling the ovulatory process, removing ova (eggs) from the woman's ovaries and letting sperm fertilize them in a fluid medium. The fertilized egg (zygote) is then transferred to the patient's uterus with the intent to establish a successful pregnancy.
The term in vitro, from the Latin root, is used, because early biological experiments involving cultivation of tissues outside the living organism from which they came, were carried out in glass containers such as beakers, test tubes, or petri dishes.
While the overall live birth rate via IVF in the U.S. is about 27% per cycle (33% pregnancy rate), the chances of a successful pregnancy via IVF vary widely based on the age of the woman (or, more precisely, on the age of the eggs involved). Where the woman's own eggs are used as opposed to those of a donor, for women under 35, the pregnancy rate is commonly approximately 43% per cycle (37% live birth), while for women over 40, the rate falls drastically - to only 4% for women over 42. Other factors that determine success rates include the quality of the eggs and sperm, the duration of the infertility, the health of the uterus, and the medical expertise. It is a common practice for IVF programmes to boost the pregnancy rate by placing multiple embryos during embryo transfer. A flip side of this practice is a higher risk of multiple pregnancy, itself associated with obstetric complications.
If multiple embryos are generated, patients may choose to freeze embryos that are not transferred. Those embryos are placed in liquid nitrogen and can be preserved for a long time. There are currently 500,000 frozen embryos in the United States. The advantage is that patients who fail to conceive may become pregnant using such embryos without having to go through a full IVF cycle. Or, if pregnancy occurred, they could return later for another pregnancy.
Pluripotent, embryonic stem cells originate as inner mass cells with in a blastocyst. The stem cells can become any tissue in the body, excluding a placenta. Only the morula's cells are totipotent, able to become all tissues and a placenta.
Embryonic Celtic cell lines (ES cell lines) are cultures of cells derived from the epiblast tissue of the inner cell mass (ICM) of a blastocyst. A blastocyst is an early stage embryo - approximately 4 to 5 days old in humans and consisting of 50-150 cells. ES cells are pluripotent, and give rise during development to all derivatives of the three primary germ layers: ectoderm, endoderm and mesoderm. In other words, they can develop into each of the more than 200 cell types of the adult body when given sufficient and necessary stimulation for a specific cell type. They do not contribute to the extra-embryonic membranes or the placenta. This means they can become any kind of human tissue (ie. heart tissue, nerve tissue, etc.).
When given no stimuli for differentiation, ES cells will continue to divide in vitro and each daughter cell will remain pluripotent. The pluripotency of ES cells has been rigorously demonstrated in vitro and in vivo, thus they can be indeed classified as stem cells.
Because of their unique combined abilities of unlimited expansion and pluripotency, embryonic stem cells are a potential source for regenerative medicine and tissue replacement after injury or disease. To date, no approved medical treatments have been derived from embryonic stem cell research. This is not surprising considering that many nations currently have moratoria (suspension of practices) on either ES cell research or the production of new ES cell lines.
There exists a widespread controversy over stem cell research that emanates from the techniques used in the creation and usage of stem cells. Embryonic stem cell research is particularly controversial because, with the present state of technology, starting a stem cell line requires the destruction of a human embryo and/or therapeutic cloning. Opponents of the research argue that this practice is a slippery slope to reproductive cloning and tantamount to the instrumentalization of a human being. Contrarily, some medical researchers in the field argue that it is necessary to pursue embryonic stem cell research because the resultant technologies are expected to have significant medical potential, and that the embryos used for research are only those meant for destruction anyway (as a product of in vitro fertilization). This in turn, conflicts with opponents in the pro-life movement, who argue that an embryo is a human being and therefore entitled to dignity even if legally slated for destruction. The ensuing debate has prompted authorities around the world to seek regulatory frameworks and highlighted the fact that stem cell research represents a social and ethical challenge.
Reproductive Cloning is a technology used to generate an animal that contains the same nuclear DNA as another currently or previously existing animal. Scientists transfer the genetic material from the nucleus of a donor adult cell to an egg whose nucleus, and thus its genetic material has been removed. The egg containing the DNA, now reconstructed, has to be treated with chemicals or electric current in order to stimulate cell division. Once the cloned embryo reaches a suitable stage, it is transferred to the uterus of a female host to continue development until birth. Currently this is illegal to practice in the United States.
Recent research by researchers led by Anthony Atala of Wake Forest University and a team from Harvard University has found that amniotic fluid, in addition to its main functions of cushioning a growing fetus and providing buoyancy, is also a plentiful source of non-embryonic stem cells. These cells have demonstrated the ability to differentiate into a number of different cell-types, including brain, liver and bone.
A mother's milk is ideal because it meets the baby's specific needs. Lactation is a neuroendocrine response in milk production. Sucking stimulates the sensory nerve endings in the nipples and sends stimulus to the hypothalamus. The hypothalamus stimulates anterior pituitary and prolactin is released. In milk let-down the sucking stimulates sensory nerves in the nipples. This stimulates the hypothalamus which then stimulates the posterior pituitary and releases oxytocin. Sucking also stimulates contraction of the cells around the alveoli in the mammary cells. Milk then flows into the milk ducts causing milk let-down.
Breast milk provides all the nutrients required for the first 4-6 months. It contains carbohydrates (such as lactose), fats (such as linoleic acid), and easily digestible proteins (such as alpha-lactalbumin). Breast milk also contains an adequate supply of vitamins and minerals, digestive enzymes, hormones and immunological factors.
The first milk produced after birth is called colostrum. This is synthesized during the end of pregnancy and 3-5 days of postpartum. It is very high in protein and low in fat and carbohydrates, and contains immunoglobulins. This help the baby have a first bowel movement and prevent jaundice. The bowel movement that results from the colostrum is a different color and consistency than future bowel movements once the mother's milk comes in. In some cultures the colostrum is discarded because of the difference, but what they do not know is that it is the best thing for the baby.
The composition varies in breast milk during feeding, and over time with development of the baby. When breastfeeding there are three names for the composition of the milk: the fore milk, present during the beginning of breastfeeding; mid is the middle of feeding; and hind which is toward the end of the feeding and contains a composition high in fat.
When breastfeeding the female should consider the types of food that will be consumed. If the mother is on a low fat diet or if foods like garlic, broccoli, and onions are eaten, it may affect the baby's preference for breast feeding. Also, the mother should consider not breastfeeding after the consumption of alcohol, caffeine, smoking, and certain medications.
Barriers of breastfeeding are lack of professional and social support, misinformation, embarrassment, early discharge form the hospital without instruction, and returning to work or school without adequate lactation rooms and if the mother refuses to tend breastfed infant.
When breastfeeding initiate as soon after delivery as possible, position the baby correctly, feed on demand from both breasts at each feeding and at least 10 minutes on each breast. Additionally there should be a good educator in the case the infant is not latching on.
A common problem that may happen when breastfeeding is mastitis, which is an inflammation of one or both breasts and is usually associated with the infection of a blocked milk duct during lactation. The symptoms include flu-like symptoms, red streaks on the breast, and hot skin. Antibiotics may be necessary to clear the infection. Thrush may also happen and could be passed between mom and baby. A symptom of thrush includes white flecks on tongue, and the baby and mother should be treated by a doctor.
Breast milk is recommended through the first 12 months. Supplementation of cow's milk is not recommended due to the high protein that would cause liver damage to the baby.
Why breastfeed?
Changes during a feeding, high in fat at the end of feeding
Having a baby is usually one of the happiest times in a woman's life, but for some women, it can include times of sadness and depression. More women actually suffer from postpartum depression than we really know. Women usually ignore the emotional and physical signs, dealing with their feelings on their own.
Postpartum depression affects approximately 10 to 15 percent of new mothers. It often causes anxiety and obsession about caring for the baby or the cleanliness of the home. It may cause changes in sleep patterns and affect relationships including the ability to form a bond with the baby and other family members. Some mothers with postpartum depression have thoughts of wanting to die or of hurting the baby. If the symptoms are so severe that they keep the mother from being able to function, medical treatment is necessary.
Baby blues are common due to rapid hormonal changes but resolve after 1-2 weeks. Postpartum depression is characterized by persisting symptoms, and the mother should notify her provider immediately.
Abruption: Premature separation of the placenta from the wall of the womb
Amnion: An embryonic membrane that encircles a developing fetus and contains amniotic fluid.
Amniotomy: (artificial rupture of membranes, ARM) Breaking the membranes using a special plastic hook
Anemia: Lack of hemoglobin in red blood cells, due to iron deficiency or disease
Antepartum Hemorrhage: (APH) Vaginal bleeding that happens after 24 weeks of pregnancy and before delivery
Celiac sprue: Nutrient absorption impairment which is improved when gluten is removed form the diet. Characteristic mucosal lesion of the small intestine.
Chorion: The embryonic membrane that forms the outermost covering around the developing fetus.
Chorion Villus Sampling: (CVS) A method for sampling placental tissue for genetic or chromosome studies.
Colostrum the fluid that is made late in pregnancy and the first few days postpartum in the breast that contains immunologic substances and essential nutrients.
Cleavage: The early successive divisions of embryonic cells into smaller and smaller cells.
Cilia: The fine hairs that line the fallopian tubes'
Copulation: (Coitus, sexual intercourse) is the procreative act of a man's erect penis is inserted into a woman's vagina. At climax, semen is ejaculated from the penis at the cervix of the uterus. Sperm then propel themselves into the uterine tubes where fertilization may occur if an egg is present.
Crohn's disease: Skip lesions in the colon and is a malabsorptive disease.
Doppler: A form of ultrasound used specially to investigate blood flow in the placenta or in the fetus
Down Syndrome: (Trisomy 21) A disorder caused by the presence of an extra chromosome 21 in the cells
Edema: Swelling of the fingers, legs, toes, and face.
Embryo: The medical term for the baby from conception to about six weeks
Engagement: The process in which the head of the baby moves down from high in the mother's abdomen and settles deeper into her pelvis in preparation for birth. This can happen any time between 36 weeks and labor.
Epidural Anesthesia: A method of numbing the nerves of the lower spinal cord to ensure a pain-free labor
Episiotomy: A cut of the perineum and vagina performed to make the delivery easier
External Fetal Monitor: An electronic monitor used to record the fetal heartbeat and mother’s contractions
Fallopian Tubes: (uterine tubes) Two tubular structures (one on each side of the womb) leading from the ovaries to the uterus
Fertilization: The union of an egg cell and a sperm cell is present wherein 23 chromosomes from each parent come together to form a zygote. After sperm penetrates, the ovum undergoes a chemical change to prevent other sperm from entering. Multiple births can occur from complete division of the conceptus during early cleavage or from fertilization of multiple ova. Birth control techniques are designed to prevent ovulation or to prevent fertilization by barriers, that keep sperm and ova separated.
Fetus: Medical term for the baby from six weeks after conception until birth
Forceps: Metal instruments that fit on either side of the baby's head and are used to help deliver the baby
Germ layer: Layers of cells within an embryo that form the body organs during development.
Glial Cells (neuroglia; glia): Non-neuronal cells that provide support and nutrition, maintain homeostasis, form myelin, and participate in signal transmission in the nervous system. In the human brain, glia are estimated to outnumber neurons by about 10 to 1.
Glial cells provide support and protection for neurons, the other main type of cell in the central nervous system. They are thus known as the "glue" of the nervous system. The four main functions of glial cells are to surround neurons and hold them in place, to supply nutrients and oxygen to neurons, to insulate one neuron from another, and to destroy pathogens and remove dead neurons.
In utero death: (IUD)the death of the unborn fetus after 24 weeks
Nuchal scan: special ultrasound scan that gives an estimate of the risk of Down syndrome
Oocyte: one egg that is released from the ovary at each ovulation
Placenta: The structure by which an unborn child is attached to it's mother's uterine wall and through which it is nourished.
Quickening: The process that occurs between the seventeenth and twentieth weeks of fetal development, the fetus's leg bones achieve their final relative proportions. In this process the muscles contract, causing movement at the fetus's sinovial joints. The joint movement enhances the nutrition of the articular cartilage and prevents the fusion of connective tissues within the joint. It also promotes bone hardening. It is this stage, where the fetus's bones become more developed and harder, that the mother begins to notice fetal movement.
Rudimentary: Basic; minimal; with less than, or only the minimum, necessary
Thrush: Creamy white flakes on a red papillae on tongue and tongue may be enlarged.
Umbilical cord: The cord like structures that connects the fetus to the placenta.
Zygote: A cell produced by the fusion of an egg and a sperm; a fertilized egg cell.
"as your baby grows From Conception to Birth"published by American Baby
"Pregnancy and Birth" authors: Dr. Karina Reynolds, Dr. Christoph Lees, Grainne McCartan
"Fundamental Concepts of Human Anatomy" authors: M.J. Shively D.V.M., M.S., Ph.D. and D.P. Homan B.S., M.S.
"Essentials of Anatomy and Physiology" authors:Valerie C. Scanlon and Tina Sanders, fourth edition
"The New Parent" author DR. Miriam Stoppard
Genetics is the science of the way traits are passed from parent to offspring. For all forms of life, continuity of the species depends upon the genetic code being passed from parent to offspring. Evolution by natural selection is dependent on traits being heritable. Genetics is very important in human physiology because all attributes of the human body are affected by a person’s genetic code. It can be as simple as eye color, height, or hair color. Or it can be as complex as how well your liver processes toxins, whether you will be prone to heart disease or breast cancer, and whether you will be color blind. Defects in the genetic code can be tragic. For example: Down Syndrome, Turner Syndrome, and Klinefelter's Syndrome are diseases caused by chromosomal abnormalities. Cystic fibrosis is caused by a single change in the genetic sequence.
Genetic inheritance begins at the time of conception. You inherited 23 chromosomes from your mother and 23 from your father. Together they form 22 pairs of autosomal chromosomes and a pair of sex chromosomes (either XX if you are female, or XY if you are male). Homologous chromosomes have the same genes in the same positions, but may have different alleles (varieties) of those genes. There can be many alleles of a gene within a population, but an individual within that population only has two copies, and can be homozygous (both copies the same) or heterozygous (the two copies are different) for any given gene.
Genetics is important to medicine. As more is understood about how genetics affects certain defects and diseases, cures and treatments can be more readily developed for these disorders. The sequence of the human genome (approximately 3 billion base pairs in a human haploid genome with an estimated 20,000-25,000 protein-coding genes) was completed in 2003, but we are far from understanding the functions and regulations of all the genes. In some ways medicine is moving from diagnosis based on symptoms towards diagnosis based on genetics, and we are moving into what many are calling the age of personalized medicine.
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is the macromolecule that stores the information necessary to build structural and functional cellular components. It also provides the basis for inheritance when DNA is passed from parent to offspring. The union of these concepts about DNA allows us to devise a working definition of a gene. A gene is a segment of DNA that codes for the synthesis of a protein and acts as a unit of inheritance that can be transmitted from generation to generation. The external appearance (phenotype) of an organism is determined to a large extent by the genes it inherits (genotype). Thus, one can begin to see how variation at the DNA level can cause variation at the level of the entire organism. These concepts form the basis of genetics and evolutionary theory.
A gene is made up of short sections of DNA which are contained on a chromosome within the nucleus of a cell. Genes control the development and function of all organs and all working systems in the body. A gene has a certain influence on how the cell works; the same gene in many different cells determines a certain physical or biochemical feature of the whole body (e.g. eye color or reproductive functions). All human cells hold approximately 30,000 different genes. Even though each cell has identical copies of all of the same genes, different cells express or repress different genes. This is what accounts for the differences between, let's say, a liver cell and a brain cell. Genotype is the actual pair of genes that a person has for a trait of interest. For example, a woman could be a carrier for hemophilia by having one normal copy of the gene for a particular clotting protein and one defective copy. A Phenotype is the organism’s physical appearance as it relates to a certain trait. In the case of the woman carrier, her phenotype is normal (because the normal copy of the gene is dominant to the defective copy). The phenotype can be for any measurable trait, such as eye color, finger length, height, physiological traits like the ability to pump calcium ions from mucosal cells, behavioral traits like smiles, and biochemical traits like blood types and cholesterol levels. Genotype cannot always be predicted by phenotype (we would not know the woman was a carrier of hemophilia just based on her appearance), but can be determined through pedigree charts or direct genetic testing. Even though genotype is a strong predictor of phenotype, environmental factors can also play a strong role in determining phenotype. Identical twins, for example, are genetic clones resulting from the early splitting of an embryo, but they can be quite different in personality, body mass, and even fingerprints.
Genetics (from the Greek genno = give birth) is the science of genes, heredity, and the variation of organisms. The word "genetics" was first suggested to describe the study of inheritance and the science of variation by prominent British scientist William Bateson in a personal letter to Adam Sedgwick, dated April 18, 1905. Bateson first used the term "genetics" publicly at the Third International Conference on Genetics (London, England) in 1906.
Genes encode the information necessary for synthesizing the amino-acid sequences in proteins, which in turn play a large role in determining the final phenotype, or physical appearance of the organism. In diploid organisms, a dominant allele on one chromosome will mask the expression of a recessive allele on the other. While most genes are dominant/recessive, others may be codominant or show different patterns of expression.
The phrase "to code for" is often used to mean a gene contains the instructions about a particular protein, (as in the gene codes for the protein). The "one gene, one protein" concept is now known to be the simplistic. For example, a single gene may produce multiple products, depending on how its transcription is regulated. Genes code for the nucleotide sequence in mRNA and rRNA, required for protein synthesis.
Gregor Mendel researched principals of heredity in plants. He soon realized that these principals also apply to people and animals and are the same for all living animals.
Gregor Mendel experimented with common pea plants. Over generations of the pea plants, he noticed that certain traits can show up in offspring with out blending any of the parent's characteristics. This is a very important observation because at this point the theory was that inherited traits blend from one generation to another.
Pea plant reproduction is easily manipulated. They have both male and female parts and can easily be grown in large numbers. For this reason, pea plants can either self-pollinate or cross-pollinate with other pea plants.
In cross pollinating two true-breeding plants, for example one that came from a long line of yellow peas and the other that came from a long line of green peas, the first generation of offspring always came out with all yellow peas. The following generations had a ratio of 3:1 yellow to green. In this and in all of the other pea plant traits Mendel observed, one form was dominant over another so it masked the presence of the other allele. Even if the phenotype (presence) is covered up, the genotype (allele) can be passed on to other generations.
1906 The term "genetics" is first introduced publicly by the British biologist William Bateson at the Third International Conference on Genetics in London, England
1910 Thomas Hunt Morgan shows that genes reside on chromosomes, and discovered linked genes on chromosomes that do NOT follow Mendel's law of independent allele segregation
1918 Ronald Fisher publishes On the correlation between relatives on the supposition of Mendelian inheritance - the modern synthesis starts.
1928 Fredrick Griffith discovers a hereditary molecule that is transmissible between bacteria
1944 Oswald Theodore Avery, Colin McLeod and Maclyn McCarty isolate DNA as the genetic material (at that time called transforming principle)
1950 Erwin Chargaff shows that the four nucleotides are not present in nucleic acid in stable proportions, but that some general rules appear to hold. (e.g., the nucleotide bases Adenine-Thymine and Cytosine-guanine always remain in equal proportions)
1952 The Hershey-Chase experiment proves the genetic information of phages (and all other organisms) to be DNA
1953 DNA structure is resolved to be a double helix by James D. Watson and Francis Crick, with help from Rosalind Franklin
1956 Jo Hin Tjio and Albert Levan established the correct chromosome number in humans to be 46
1958 The Meselson-Stahl experiment demonstrates that DNA is semi-conservatively replicated
1964 Howard Temin showed using RNA viruses that Watson's central dogma is not always true
1970 Restriction enzymes were discovered in studies of a bacterium Haemophilus influenzae, enabling scientists to cut and paste DNA
1977 DNA is sequenced for the first time by Fred Sangr, Walter Gilbert, and Allan Maxam working independently. Sanger's lab complete the entire genome of sequence of Bacteriophage
1983 Kary Banks Mullis discovers the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) enabling the easy amplification of DNA
1989 The first human gene is sequenced by Francis Collin and Lap-Chee Tsui. It encodes the CFTR protein. Defect in this gene causes Cystic Fibrosis
1995 The genome of Haemophilus influenza is the first genome of a free living organism to be sequenced.
2001 First draft sequences of the human genome are released simultaneously by the Human Genome Project and Celera Genomic
2003 (14 April) Successful completion of Human Genome Project with 99% of the genome sequenced to a 99.99% accuracy
2006 Marcus Pembrey and Olov Bygren publish Sex-specifics, male line trans-generational responses in humans, a proof of epigenetics
Transcription is the process of making RNA. In response to an enzyme RNA polymerase breaks the hydrogen bonds of the gene. A gene is a segment of DNA which contains the information for making a protein. As it breaks the hydrogen bonds it begins to move down the gene. Next the RNA polymerase will line up the nucleotides so they are complementary. Some types of RNA will leave the nucleus and perform a specific function.
Translation is the synthesis of the protein on the ribosome as the mRNA moves across the ribosome. There are eleven basic steps to translation.
The mRNA base sequence determines the order of assembling of the amino acids to form specific proteins.
Transcription occurs in the nucleus, and once you have completed transcription the mRNA will leave the nuecleus, and go into the cytoplasm where the mRNA will bind to a free floating ribosome, where it will attach to a small ribosomal subunit.
Methionine-tRNA binds to the nucleotides AUG. AUG is known as the start codon and is found at the beginning of each mRNA.
The complex then binds to a large ribosomal subunit. Methionine-tRNA is bound to the P site of the ribosome.
Another tRNA containing a second amino acid (lysine) binds to the second amino acid. Binding to the second condon of mRNA (on the A-site of the ribosome).
Peptidyl transferase, forms a peptide3 bond between the two amino acids (methionine and lysine).
The first amino tRNA is released and mRNA is translocated one codon carrying the second tRNA (still carrying the two amino acids) to the P site.
Another tRNA with attached amino acid (glutamine) moves into the A site and binds to that codon.
It will now form a peptide bond with lysine and glutamine.
Now the tRNA in the P site will be let go, and mRNA is translocated one codon, (the tRNA with three amino acids) to the P site.
This will continue going until it reaches the stop codon (UAG) on the mRNA. Then this codon will tell it to release the polypeptide chain.
These are some good sites to visit
Children inherit traits, disorders, and characteristics from their parents. Children tend to resemble their parents especially in physical appearance. However they may also have the same mannerisms, personality, and a lot of the time the same mental abilities or disabilities. Many negatives and positives tend to "run in the family". A lot of the time people will use the excuse "It runs in the family" for things that have alternative reasons, such as a whole family may be overweight, yes it may "run in the family" but it could also be because of all the hamburgers and extra mayo that they all eat. Or the fact that after they eat the hamburgers they all sit on the couch and don't move for the rest of the evening. Children may have the same habits (good or bad) as their parents, like biting their nails or enjoying reading books. These things aren't inherited they are happening because children imitate their parents, they want to be like mom or dad. Good examples are just as important as good genes.
Only one mutated copy of the gene is needed for a person to be affected by an autosomal dominant disorder. Each affected person usually has one affected parent. There is a 50% chance that a child will inherit the mutated gene. Many disease conditions that are autosomal dominant have low penetrance, which means that although only one mutated copy is needed, a relatively small proportion of those who inherit that mutation go on to develop the disease, often later in life.
Huntingtons disease, Neurofibromatosis 1, HBOC syndrome, Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer
Two copies of the gene must be mutated for a person to be affected by an autosomal recessive disorder. An affected person usually has unaffected parents who each carry a single copy of the mutated gene (and are referred to as carriers). Two unaffected people who each carry one copy of the mutated gene have a 25% chance with each pregnancy of having a child affected by the disorder.
Cystic fibrosis, Sickle cell anemia, Tay-Sachs disease, Spinal muscular atrophy, Muscular dystrophy
X-linked dominant disorders are caused by mutations in genes on the X chromosome. Only a few disorders have this inheritance pattern. Females are more frequently affected than males, and the chance of passing on an X-linked dominant disorder differs between men and women. The sons of a man with an X-linked dominant disorder will not be affected, and his daughters will all inherit the condition. A woman with an X-linked dominant disorder has a 50% chance of having an affected daughter or son with each pregnancy. Some X-linked dominant conditions, such as Aicardi Syndrome, are fatal to boys, therefore only girls have them (and boys with Klinefelter Syndrome).
X-linked recessive disorders are also caused by mutations in genes on the X chromosome. Males are more frequently affected than females, and the chance of passing on the disorder differs between men and women. The sons of a man with an X-linked recessive disorder will not be affected, and his daughters will carry one copy of the mutated gene. With each pregnancy, a woman who carries an X-linked recessive disorder has a 50% chance of having sons who are affected and a 50% chance of having daughters who carry one copy of the mutated gene.
Hemophilia A, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Color blindness, Turner Syndrome
Y-linked disorders are caused by mutations on the Y chromosome. Only males can get them, and all of the sons of an affected father are affected. Since the Y chromosome is very small, Y-linked disorders only cause infertility, and may be circumvented with the help of some fertility treatments.
This type of inheritance, also known as maternal inheritance, applies to genes in mitochondrial DNA. Because only egg cells contribute mitochondria to the developing embryo, only females can pass on mitochondrial conditions to their children.
A person's cells hold the exact genes that originated from the sperm and egg of his parents at the time of conception. The genes of a cell are formed into long strands of DNA. Most of the genes that control characteristic are in pairs, one gene from mom and one gene from dad. Everybody has 22 pairs of chromosomes (autosomes) and two more genes called sex-linked chromosomes. Females have two X (XX) chromosomes and males have an X and a Y (XY) chromosome. Inherited traits and disorders can be divided into three categories: unifactorial inheritance, sex-linked inheritance, and multifactor inheritance.
Chart showing the possibilities of contracting a recessive defect, from two carrier parents.
Traits such as blood type, eye color, hair color, and taste are each thought to be controlled by a single pair of genes. The Austrian monk Gregor Mendel was the first to discover this phenomenon, and it is now referred to as the laws of Mendelian inheritance. The genes deciding a single trait may have several forms (alleles). For example, the gene responsible for hair color has two main alleles: red and brown. The four possibilities are thus
Red/brown, resulting in red hair.
The genetic codes for red and brown can be either dominant or recessive. In any case, the dominant gene overrides the recessive.
When two people create a child, they each supply their own set of genes. In simplistic cases, such as the red/brown hair, each parent supplies one "code", contributing to the child's hair color. For example, if dad has brown/red he has a 50% chance of passing brown hair to his child and a 50% of passing red hair. When combined with a mom who has brown/brown (who would supply 100% brown), the child has a 75% chance of having brown hair and a 25% chance of having red hair. Similar rules apply to different traits and characteristics, though they are usually far more complex.
Some traits are found to be determined by genes and environmental effects. Height for example seems to be controlled by multiple genes, some are "tall" genes and some are "short" genes. A child may inherit all the "tall" genes from both parents and will end up taller than both parents. Or the child my inherit all the "short" genes and be the shortest in the family. More often than not the child inherits both "tall" and "short" genes and ends up about the same height as the rest of the family. Good diet and exercise can help a person with "short" genes end up attaining an average height. Babies born with drug addiction or alcohol addiction are a sad example of environmental inheritance. When mom is doing drugs or drinking, everything that she takes the baby takes. These babies often have developmental problems and learning disabilities. A baby born with Fetal alcohol syndrome is usually abnormally short, has small eyes and a small jaw, may have heart defects, a cleft lip and palate, may suck poorly, sleep poorly, and be irritable. About one fifth of the babies born with fetal alcohol syndrome die within the first weeks of life, those that live are often mentally and physically handicapped.
Sex-linked inheritance is quite obvious, it determines your gender. Male gender is caused by the Y chromosome which is only found in males and is inherited from their fathers. The genes on the Y chromosomes direct the development of the male sex organs. The x chromosome is not as closely related to the female sex because it is contained in both males and females. Males have a single X and females have double XX. The X chromosome is to regulate regular development and it seems that the Y is added just for the male genitalia. When there is a default with the X chromosomes in males it is almost always persistent because there is not the extra X chromosome that females have to counteract the problem. Certain traits like colorblindness and hemophilia are on alleles carried on the X chromosome. For example if a woman is colorblind all of her sons will be colorblind. Whereas all of her daughters will be carriers for colorblindness.
Our knowledge of the mechanisms of genetic inheritance has grown a lot since Mendel's time. It is now understood, that if you inherit one allele, it can sometimes increase the chance of inheriting another and can affect when or how a trait is expressed in an individuals phenotype. There are levels of dominance and recessiveness with some traits. Mendel's simple rules of inheritance does not always apply in these exceptions.
Polygenic traits are traits determined by the combined effect of more than one pair of genes. Human stature is an example of this trait. The size of all body parts from head to foot combined determines height. The size of each individual body part are determined by numerous genes. Human skin, eyes, and hair are also polygenic genes because they are determined by more than one allele at a different location.
When there is incomplete dominance, blending can occur resulting in heterozygous individuals. An example of intermediate expression is the pitch of a human male voice. Homozygous men have the lowest and highest voice for this trait (AA and aa). Tay-Sachs, causing death in childhood, is also characterized by incomplete dominance.
For some traits, two alleles can be co-dominant. Were both alleles are expressed in heterozygous individuals. An example of that would be a person with AB blood. These people have the characteristics of both A and B blood types when tested.
There are some traits that are controlled by far more alleles. For example, the human HLA system, which is responsible for accepting or rejecting foreign tissue in our bodies, can have as many as 30,000,000 different genotypes! The HLA system is what causes the rejection of organ transplants. The multiple allele series is very common, as geneticists learn more about genetics, they realize that it is more common than the simple two allele ones.
Modifying and regulator genes are the two classes of genes that may have an effect on how the other genes function. Modifying Genes alter how other genes are expressed in the phenotype. For example, a dominant cataracts gene may impair vision at various degrees, depending on the presence of a specific allele for a companion modifying gene. However, cataracts can also come from excessive exposure to ultraviolet rays and diabetes. Regulator Genes also known as homoerotic genes, can either initiate or block the expression of other genes. They also control a variety of chemicals in plants and animals. For example, Regulator genes control the time of production of certain proteins that will be new structural parts of our bodies. Regulator genes also work as a master switch starting the development of our body parts right after conception and are also responsible for the changes in our bodies as we get older. They control the aging processes and maturation.
Some genes are incomplete penetrate. Which means, unless some environmental factors are present, the effect does not occur. For example, you can inherit the gene for diabetes, but never get the disease, unless you were greatly stressed, extremely overweight, or didn't get enough sleep at night.
Some of the most common inherited diseases are hemochromatosis, cystic fibrosis, sickle cell anemia and hemophilia. They are all passed along from the parents and even if the parents don't show signs of the disease they may be carriers which mean that all of the children they have may be born with the disease. There is genetic testing that may be done prenatally to determine if the baby is conflicted with one of these diseases.
Haemochromatosis types 1-3 are inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion.
Even though most people have never heard of hemochromatosis it is the most common inherited disease. About 1 in 300 are born with hemochromatis and 1 in 9 are carriers. The main characteristic is the intake of too much iron into the inflicted body. Iron is crucial to the workings of hemoglobin but too much iron is just as bad as too little iron. With hemochromatosis deposits of iron form on almost every major organ especially the liver, heart and pancreas, which causes complete organ failure. Hemochromatosis patients usually absorb two or three times the iron that is needed for normal people. Hemochromatosis was first discovered in 1865 and most patients have Celtic ancestry dating back 60 or 70 generations.
The most common treatment for hemochromatosis is to induce anemia and maintain it until the iron storage is reduced. This is done by therapeutic phlebotomy. Phlebotomy is the removal of a unit of blood (about 500 mls.) This must be done one to two times a week and can take weeks, months, or years to complete. After this treatment some patients will never have to do it again and others will have to do it many times over the course of their life. Patients who undergo their recommended treatments usually go on to live a long and healthy life. Patients who decide against treatment increase their chances of problems such as organ failure -- or even death. Along with phlebotomy treatment, patients should stick to a low iron diet and should not cook with iron cookware.
Cystic fibrosis is a disease that causes thick, sticky mucus to build up in the lungs and digestive tract. It is the most common lung disease in children and young adults and may cause early death. The mucus builds up in the breathing passages of the lungs and in the pancreas. The build up of the mucus results in terrible lung infections and digestion problems. Cystic fibrosis may also cause problem with the sweat gland and a man's reproductive system. There are more than 1,000 mutations of the CF gene, symptoms vary from person to person. The most common symptoms are: No bowel movements for the first 24 to 48 hours of life, stools that are pale or clay colored, foul smelling or that float, infants that have salty-tasting skin, recurrent respiratory infections like pneumonia, coughing or wheezing, weight loss or low weight gain in childhood, diarrhea, delayed growth, and excessive fatigue. Most patients are diagnosed by their first birthday but less severe cases sometimes aren't caught until after 18 years of age. 40% of patients are over 18 years old and the average life span of CF patients is about 35 years old, which is a huge increase over the last 30 years. Patients usually die of lung complications.
In 2005 the U.S food and drug administration approved the first DNA based blood test to help detect CF. Other tests to help detect CF include: Sweat chloride test, which is the standard test for CF. High salt levels in the patients sweat is an indication of CF, Fecal fat test, upper GI and small bowel series, and measurements of pancreatic function.
After a diagnosis has been made there are a number of treatments available, these include: Antibiotics for respiratory infections, pancreatic enzyme replacement, vitamin supplements (mostly A, D, E, and K), inhalers to open the airways, enzyme replacement therapy which makes it easier to cough up the mucus, pain relievers, and in very severe cases, lung transplants.
Sickle cell anemia is an inherited disease of the red blood cells which causes abnormally shaped red cells. A typical red blood cell has about 270 million hemoglobin molecules, which bind with oxygen. In a person with sickle cell disease, one amino acid is changed in the hemoglobin molecule, and the end result is misshapen red blood cells. In a patient with sickle cell disease the red blood cells change from the normal round shape to the shape of a sickle or "C" shaped. The abnormal shape causes the cells to get stuck in some blood vessels which causes blockage in the vessel. This causes pain and can destroy organs because of the lack of oxygen. Sickle cells live only 10 to 20 days and a normal cell lives about 120 days. Red blood cells with sickle-cell mutations. This rapid death of blood cells leads to chronic anemia. Complications can include severe pain, terrible infection, swelling of the feet and hands, stroke, damage to the eyes, and damaged body organs. These effects can vary from person to person depending on the type of sickle cell disease they have. Some patients are mostly healthy and others are in the hospital more than they are out. Thanks to diagnosis and treatment advancements, most children born with sickle cell grow up to have a normal and relatively healthy life. The form of sickle cell is determined by which genes they inherit from the parents. When a child inherits a sickle cell gene (hemoglobin gene) from each parent it is called hemoglobin SS disease ( which is the formal name for sickle cell). When a child inherits a sickle cell gene from one parent and a different abnormal gene from the other parent, it is a form of disease called hemoglobin SC disease or hemoglobin S-thalassemia. If a child inherits a normal gene from one parent and a sickle cell gene from the other, the child will not have sickle cell but will be a carrier and may pass it to their children. Sickle cell affects mostly African Americans and some Latino Americans. A person who is a carrier (has one copy of the gene) is resistant to malaria. This heterozygote advantage explains why the gene is more common in people in equatorial regions, or who are descendants of such people (such as African Americans).
Sickle cell is diagnosed at birth with a simple blood test. If the first blood test is positive then a second test is done just for confirmation. Because of the high risk of infections that occur with sickle cell, early diagnosis is very important. Other than a bone marrow transplant there is no known cure for sickle cell. Bone marrow transplants have a high risk of rejection and aren't an available option for every patient. The patient would need a bone marrow donor match with a low risk of rejection. Even without a cure, with the use of pain medications and antibiotic treatments, children with sickle cell can live a long and happy life. Blood transfusions are sometimes used to treat episodes of severe pain. For adults who have recurrent pain episodes (at least 3 yearly), a cancer drug, hydroxyurea (marketed as Droxia), has been approved to relieve symptoms. It appears to work by increasing the flexibility of sickle cells.
About two thirds of people who have Hemophilia have inherited it. For the other third, there is no known cause for possessing the disorder. There are two types of hemophilia, Type A and Type B. Both are caused by a low level or a complete absence of protein in the blood. Without this protein, blood is not able to clot.
Some of the symptoms of Hemophilia are bleeding in the joints, knees, and ankles. Stiffness without pain in the joints, stiffness with a lot of warmth,(most ability for movement is lost due to swelling) blood in the urine or stool, excessive bleeding after surgery or loosing a tooth, excessive bruising, abnormal menstrual bleeding, and nose bleeds that last for long periods of time.
Hemophiliacs blood does not coagulate like a normal persons. Coagulation controls bleeding, it changes blood from a liquid to a solid. Within seconds of a cut or scrape, platelets, calcium and other tissue factors start working together to form a clot. Over a short time the clot strengthens and then dissolves as the injury heals. Hemophiliacs are missing the clotting factor, or it isn't working correctly which causes them to bleed for a longer time. The most common myth is that a person with a bleeding disorder will bleed to death from a minor wound or that their blood flows faster than somebody without a bleeding disorder. Some of the risks hemophilia are: Scarring of the joints or joint disease, vision loss from bleeding of the eyes, chronic anemia from blood loss, a neurological or psychiatric problem, death which may occur from large amounts of blood loss or bleeding in the brain or other vital organs. Most cases of hemophilia are caused from inherited disorders but sometimes people can get it from vitamin K deficiency, liver disease, or treatments like prolonged use of antibiotics or anti coagulation drugs. Hemophilia is the best known bleeding disorder and it has had the most research done on it, so hemophiliacs have a slight advantage over people with other bleeding disorders.
To treat Hemophilia, a Clotting Factor is needed. It is in the shape of powder kept in a small, sterile glass bottle. It has to be kept in the fridge. When needed, The Clotting Factor is mixed with sterile water, then one minute later it can be injected into a vein. It may also be mixed with a large amount of water and injected through an IV.
There are over 140 centers that specialize in hemophilia. Most of these centers are "Comprehensive Care Facilities". Comprehensive care facilities provide all the services needed by a hemophiliac and their family. Services provided include: Primary physician, nurse coordinator, physiotherapist, and dentist. Hemophiliacs require a special dentist because of the higher risk of bleeding. It is recommended that hemophiliacs go to the treatment centers twice a year for a complete check-up.
The basic and most common treatment for patients with hemophilia A and B is factor replacement therapy. Factor replacement therapy is the IV injection of Factor VIII and IX concentrates which help control bleeding. This concentrate comes from two sources: human plasma and genetically engineered cells made by DNA technology. This concentrate is what the hemophiliac is lacking in their own genes. After the injection is given the patients blood becomes "normal" for a couple of hours which gives time for a clot to from at the site of a damaged blood vessel. This treatment is not a permanent cure, within about 3 days there is no trace left in the system. Today's Factor treatments are much more concentrated than they were in the past so very little is required even if the patient is going in for major surgery or has a major injury. Treatments are also very convenient, they can be stored at home in the fridge for up to 6 months. So if the patient is injured they don't need to go to the hospital they can give themself an injection at home. After the injection it only takes about 15-20 minutes for the clotting process to begin. There is a risk of contracting other disease such as AIDS from Factor VIII that is made from human plasma, but as technology gets better the cases of AIDS has dropped. There is no possibility of contracting diseases from genetic engineering Factor VIII.
Hemophiliacs can live a long life. The most common reason for early death among patients has been from AIDS related complications.
Any disorder caused totally or in part by a fault (or faults) of the genetic material passed from parent to child is considered a genetic disorder. The genes for many of these disorders are passed from one generation to the next, and children born with a heritable genetic disorder often have one or more extended family members with the same disorder. There are also genetic disorders that appear due to spontaneous faults in the genetic material, in which case a child is born with a disorder with no apparent family history.
Down Syndrome, also known as Trisomy 21, is a chromosome abnormality that effects one out of every 800-1000 newborn babies. During anaphase II of meiosis the sister chromatids of chromosome 21 fail to separate, resulting in an egg with an extra chromosome, and a fetus with three copies (trisomy) of this chromosome. At birth this defect is recognizable because of the physical features such as almond shaped eyes, a flattened face, and less muscle tone than a normal newborn baby. During pregnancy, it is possible to detect the Down Syndrome defect by doing amniocentesis testing. There is a risk to the unborn baby and it is not recommended unless the pregnant mother is over the age of thirty-five. Other non-lethal chromosomal abnormalities include additional osex chromosome abnormalities which is when a baby girl (about 1 in 2,500)is born with one x instead of two (xx) this can cause physical abnormalities and defective reproduction systems. Boys can also be born with extra X's (XXY or XXXY) which will cause reproductive problems and sometimes mental retardation.
In most cases with a chromosomal abnormality all the cells are affected. Defects can have anywhere from little effect to a lethal effect depending on the type of abnormality. Of the 1 in 200 babies born having some sort of chromosomal abnormality, about 1/3 of these results in spontaneous abortion. Abnormalities usually form shortly after fertilization and mom or dad usually has the same abnormality.
There is no cure for these abnormalities. Tests are possible early in pregnancy and if a problem is detected the parents can choose to abort the fetus.
Mutations are changes in the genetic material of the cell. Substances that can cause genetic mutations are called mutagen agents. Mutagen agents can be anything from radiation from x-rays, the sun, toxins in the earth, air, and water viruses. Many gene mutations are completely harmless since they do not change the amino acid sequence of the protein the gene codes for.
Mutations can be good, bad, or indifferent. They can be good for you because their mutation can be better and stronger than the original. They can be bad because it might take away the survival of the organism. However, most of the time, they are indifferent because the mutation is no different than the original.
The not so harmless ones can lead to cancer, birth defects, and inherited diseases. Mutations usually happen at the time of cell division. When the cell divides, one cell contracts a defect, which is then passed down to each cell as they continue to divide.
Teratogens refers to any environmental agent that causes damage during the prenatal period. Examples of Common Teratogens:
Genetic engineering is where the DNA or gene gets changed by a scientist to make a gene with the characteristics that they want it to have, and to get rid of the characteristics that they don't want the gene to have. This process can be applied towards any plant, animal, or person.
The main reason for genetic engineering is to "mass produce" a certain protein. Each cell is responsible for producing a certain protein and these proteins can be used for medical treatment and diagnosis. The job of each gene is to control the production of a particular protein in a living cell. If the gene responsible for synthesizing an important or useful protein can be found, and if that gene can be inserted into another cell that can be made to reproduce, then a colony of cells containing that gene can be grown and the protein will be manufactured in large quantities. This process is responsible for insulin and growth hormones and it is also used in vaccines to help prevent hepatitis and a treatment to help prevent viral infections. It also helps in genetically engineering Factor VIII which is a treatment for hemophilia.
The first step is to find the gene in the DNA of a cell that is responsible for the manufacturing of the desired protein. Then that gene is either extracted or the exact chemical structure is figures out to be synthesized. The last step is to insert the DNA into the recipient which is done by using special enzymes to split a molecule of the recipients cell and inserting the new gene.
There have been many steps taken to bring technology closer to being able to fix genetically inherited diseases. Hopefully someday there will be many fewer babies born with genetic diseases and disorders.
Gene therapy is a way to correct the defective genes that are the cause of disease development. When the genes are altered proteins are not able to function normally and as a result of this, defects can occur. Current gene therapy is still being experimented with, but in some cases it is very effective.
Genes are carried on chromosomes and are the basic physical and functional parts of hereditary. When there is a genetic disorder, gene therapy can help fix the problem either permanently or at least temporarily. The most common form of gene therapy is to insert a gene into a nonspecific place to replace a malfunctioning gene. Another method is gene swapping, where an abnormal gene is replaced by a normal gene. Genes could also be repaired through "selective reverse mutation" which returns the gene to it's original function. The degree to which a gene is turned on or off can also be altered.
Gene therapy works on the principle belief that a virus genome can be manipulated to remove disease causing genes and new therapeutic genes can be inserted in their place. These new genes are called gene therapy vectors. (The virus container is the vector and the new gene is the payload.)
Gene therapy using an Adenovirus vector. A new gene is inserted into an adenovirus vector, which is used to introduce the modified DNA into a human cell. If the treatment is successful, the new gene will make a functional protein.
A few of the different viruses used as gene therapy vectors are: Retroviruses - A class of viruses that can create double-stranded DNA copies of their original RNA genomes. Theses copies of its genomes can be mixed into the chromosomes of "host" cells. HIV is a type of retrovirus.
Adenoviruses - A class of viruses with double-stranded DNA genome that cause respiratory, intestinal, and eye infections in humans. The common cold is an adenovirus. Adeno-associated viruses - A class of small, single-stranded DNA viruses that can insert their genetic material at a specific site on chromosome 19. (chromosome 19 represents about 2% of the human genome and contains about 1,500 genes. Some of the genes included are genes that code for insulin-dependent diabetes, myotonic dystrophy, migraines, and inherited high blood cholesterol). A class of double-stranded DNA viruses that infect a particular cell type, neurons, called Herpes simplex viruses is another common virus used in gene therapy. It is the virus that causes cold sores.
Major advancements have been made in gene therapy. There are many new discoveries in helping cure and treat diseases that claim millions of lives. Some of the disease that have cures or treatments because of gene therapy include: Parkinson's, Huntington's, Cystic Fibrosis, Some cancers, "Bubble Boy" syndrome and sickle cell. With technology jumping ahead, maybe someday there will be a cure for every life threatening disease.
It is very easy to think of genetics as why I have blue eyes while both of my parents have brown eyes. Or how hemophilia is passed down from mother to son, and not mother to daughter. But Genetics is more in depth than that. At conception you started as a single cell. That cell started to divide. You didn’t increase in mass just in the number of cells. Once the bundle of cells reached a certain number, things changed. You started gaining mass by acquiring new resources (from your mother) and increasing in cell number. Your cells specialized. Some cells became the liver. Others became heart, lungs, brain, and so forth. Why is this? How did that little bundle of cells "know" when it was time to specialize? It is because your DNA has regulatory control over your entire system. If it didn’t, that bundle of cells would just keep dividing as undifferentiated cells and never specialize, never gain form or function. Thanks to the genetic regulatory control over your system, your anatomy forms correctly with everything in its proper place. Even after fetal development gene regulation still controls what each cell produces and how it functions. Puberty just doesn’t happen at the age of twelve. Puberty happens because genes in your genetic code are triggered by your growth and development, causing your endocrine system to start producing the proper hormones, thus causing you to mature sexually.
Even aging is genetically controlled. The mechanisms of genetic regulation are not discussed here, but it is worth noting that any step of gene expression may be modulated, from the DNA-RNA transcription step to post-translational modification of a protein. Gene regulation gives the cell control over structure and function, and is the basis for cellular differentiation. A cell can also respond to changes in its environment by altering gene expression. For example, a pancreatic cell exposed to high glucose levels releases pre-formed insulin that it was storing. Yet, if the high levels of glucose continue, the cell will transcribe additional copies of the gene for making insulin and thus increase insulin production to meet demand. This is homeostasis in action.
Allele: one member of a pair of genes that occupy a specific position on a specific chromosome
Cystic Fibrosis: recessive genetic disorder affecting the mucus lining of the lungs, leading to breathing problems and other difficulties
Fetal Alcohol Syndrome: combination of birth defects resulting form high (sometimes low) alcohol consumption by the mother during pregnancy
Gene: is a segment of nucleic acid that contains the information necessary to produce a functional product, usually a protein.
Genome: complete set of genetic information of an organism including DNA and RNA
Hemochromatosis: metabolic disorder that causes increased absorption of iron, which is deposited in the body tissues and organs; the iron accumulates in the body where it may become toxic and causes damage
Hemophilia: group of heredity disorders in which affected individuals fail to make
Modifying Gene: alters how other genes are expressed in the phenotype
Multifactorial Inheritance: trait or disorder determined by multiple genes and/or environmental effects
Polygenic: trait whose expression is influenced by more than one gene
Regulator Genes: initiate or block the expression of other genes.
Sex-linked: pertaining to a trait of a disorder determined by the sex chromosome in a persons cells or by the genes carried on those chromosomes
Sickle Cell Anemia: recessive disorder in which red blood cells take on an unusual shape, leading to other problems with the blood
Unifactorial Inheritance: trait or disorder determined by a single pair of genes
We are born, we grow up, we age, and then we die. Unless disease or trauma occurs, most humans go through the various stages of the life described above. Human Development is the process of growing to maturity and mental ability. Traditionally, theories that explain senescence have generally been divided between the programmed and stochastic theories of aging. Programmed theories imply that aging is regulated by biological clocks operating throughout the life span. This regulation would depend on changes in gene expression that affect the systems responsible for maintenance, repair and defense responses. Stochastic theories blame environmental impacts on living organisms that induce cumulative damage at various levels as the cause of aging. Examples of environmental impacts range from damage to DNA, damage to tissues and cells by oxygen radicals (widely known as free radicals countered by the even more well known antioxidants), and cross-linking. However, aging is now seen as a combination of genetic and environmental processes; a progressive failure of homeostatic mechanisms involving maintenance and repair genes, stochastic events leading to molecular damage and molecular heterogeneity, and chance events determining the probability of death. Homeostasis, as we have seen throughout this book, is maintained through complex and interacting systems, and aging is considered to be a progressive shrinkage of homeostatic capabilities, mainly due to increased molecular heterogeneity. In this chapter we explore the physiology of all stages of human development, with a particular emphasis on the aging process.
A cell undergoing apoptosis. In just one of many scenarios of apoptosis, the process is triggered by another neighboring cell; the dying cell eventually transmits signals that tell the phagocytes, which are a part of the immune system, to engulf it.
Apoptosis is the process of regulated cell death and removal. In some cases cell damage can trigger apoptosis, but it is usually a normal function of the cell. Apoptosis results in controlled auto digestion of the cells content. The cell membrane stays in place and the cells contents are not dispersed. When this process is near completion, "eat me" signals, like phosphatidylserine, appear on the surface of the cell membrane. This in turn attracts phagocytic scavengers that complete the process of removing the dead cell without eliciting an inflammatory response. Unlike necrosis, which is a form of cell death that results from acute cellular injury, apoptosis is carried out in an ordered process that generally confers advantages during an organism's life cycle.
The rate at which cells of the body die varies widely between different cell types. Some cells, such as white blood cells, live for only a matter of hours while other cells can live throughout the duration of the lifespan of the individual.
Apoptosis is a regulated function that results in a relatively consistent number of cells in the body. This balancing act is part of homeostasis (see chapter 1) that is required by living organisms. An example for this is that blood cells are constantly being produced and apoptosis takes place to eliminate a similar number of older cells. Homeostasis was discovered by Claude Bernard around the year 1851.
Apoptosis also plays a key role in growth and development. An example of how apoptosis enables development is the differentiation of human fingers in a developing embryo. Apoptosis is the function that enables the embryos fingers to separate.
Too much apoptosis causes cell loss disorders such as osteoporosis, whereas too little apoptosis results in uncontrolled cell proliferation, namely cancer.
Growth and development is an ongoing process that begins at conception and continues through the remainder of our lives. There is a broad spectrum of physical and psychological changes that are part of the maturation and life of the individual.
Growth is a physical change that can be weighed and measured. Development is psychological and social changes to the individual such as behaviors and thinking patterns. Growth and development are two complimentary processes that together make up the individual.
Examples of this difference are all around us. One notable example involves infants. Infants understand speech much earlier than their bodies have matured enough to physically perform it. Thus it is evident that their speech patterns develop before the physical growth of their vocal chords is adequate to facilitate speech.
The rate of development and growth varies dependent on many factors such as age and genetic disposition. Babies grow at roughly the same pace and benchmarks for their physical and social development are roughly standard. However, as any parent can tell you, no two children develop exactly within the same time frame. Thus an appropriate time span should be used. For example: one brother may gain weight faster than another. Growth spurts can vary. Some children can speak entire sentences before their first year while others may not speak at all until two or three. This creates a greater diversity among human beings.
The following chart focuses on reflexes of the developing infant.
This reflex protects the infant from a lot of stimulation
This cause the foot to withdraw, this occurs with the use of flexing of the knee to hip
The infants head will turn towards the site of stimulation
3 weeks (due to the voluntary response that is now capable for infant to do at this time)
This reflex helps baby to find the mothers nipple
The baby paddles and kicks in swimming movements
This helps baby to survive if dropped into the water
Hold infant in a cradling horizontal position and slightly lower the baby in a fast motion toward the ground while making a loud sound supporting the baby
The baby will make a embracing motion and arch its back extending its legs throwing its arms outward, and finally it will bring arms in toward its body
In the evolutionary past this may have helped the baby cling to the mother
Place the finger in baby's palm and press against the palm
The baby will immediately grasp the finger
This prepares infant for when voluntary grasping comes about
Turn the baby's head to one side while the baby is awake
This will cause the baby to extend one arm in front of its eye on one arm to the side to which the head has been turned
When you hold the baby under the arm and permit the bare feet of the baby to touch a flat surface
The baby will lift one foot after the other in a stepping fashion
2 months (this applies to a baby who has gained weight a baby who is not as heavy this reflex may be submissive)
This prepares the baby for voluntary walking
Touch the foot in a stroking manner form the toe toward the heel
The baby's toes will fan out and curl as the foot twists in
The neonatal period extends from birth to somewhere between 2 weeks and 1 month.
Immediately after the baby is born, uterine contractions force blood, fluid, and the placenta from the mother's body. The umbilical cord—the baby's lifeline to it's mother—is now severed. Without the placenta to remove waste, carbon dioxide builds up in the baby's blood. This fact, along with the actions of medical personnel, stimulates the control center in the brain, which in turn responds by triggering inhalation. Thus the newborn takes its first breath. As the newborn's lungs begin to function, the bypass vessels of fetal circulation begin to close. The bypass connecting the atria of the heart, known as the foramen ovale, normally closes slowly during the first year.
During this period the body goes through drastic physiological changes. The most critical need is for the body to get enough oxygen as well as an adequate supply of blood. (The respiratory and heart rate of a newborn is much faster than that of an adult.)
Newborn infant, just seconds after vaginal delivery.
A newborn's skin is oftentimes grayish to dusky blue in color. As soon as the newborn begins to breathe, usually within a minute or two of birth, the skin's color returns to normal tones. Newborns are wet, covered in streaks of blood, and coated with a white substance known as vernix caseosa, which is believed to act as an antibacterial barrier. The newborn may also have Mongolian spots, various other birthmarks, or peeling skin, particularly at the wrists, hands, ankles, and feet.
A newborn's shoulders and hips are narrow, the abdomen protrudes slightly, and the arms and legs are relatively short. The average weight of a full-term newborn is approximately 7 ½ pounds (3.2kg), but can be anywhere from 5.5–10 pounds (2.7–4.6kg). The average total body length is 14–20 inches (35.6–50.8cm), although premature newborns may be much smaller. The Apgar score is a measure of a newborn's transition from the womb during the first ten minutes of life.
A newborn's head is very large in proportion to the rest of the body, and the cranium is enormous relative to his or her face. While the adult human skull is about 1/8 of the total body length, the newborn's is twice that. At birth, many regions of the newborn's skull have not yet been converted to bone. These "soft spots" are known as fontanels; the two largest are the diamond-shaped anterior fontanel, located at the top front portion of the head, and the smaller triangular-shaped posterior fontanel, which lies at the back of the head.
During labor and birth, the infant's skull changes shape to fit through the birth canal, sometimes causing the child to be born with a misshapen or elongated head. This will usually return to normal on its own within a few days or weeks. Special exercises sometimes advised by physicians may assist the process.
Some newborns have a fine, downy body hair called lanugo. It may be particularly noticeable on the back, shoulders, forehead, ears and face of premature infants. Lanugo disappears within a few weeks. Likewise, not all infants are born with lush heads of hair. Some may be nearly bald while others may have very fine, almost invisible hair. Some babies are even born with a full head of hair. Amongst fair-skinned parents, this fine hair may be blond, even if the parents are not. The scalp may also be temporarily bruised or swollen, especially in hairless newborns, and the area around the eyes may be puffy.
A newborn's genitals are enlarged and reddened, with male infants having an unusually large scrotum. The breasts may also be enlarged, even in male infants. This is caused by naturally-occurring maternal hormones and is a temporary condition. Females (and even males) may actually discharge milk from their nipples, and/or a bloody or milky-like substance from the vagina. In either case, this is considered normal and will disappear in time.
The umbilical cord of a newborn is bluish-white in color. After birth, the umbilical cord is normally cut, leaving a 1–2 inch stub. The umbilical stub will dry out, shrivel, darken, and spontaneously fall off within about 3 weeks. Occasionally, hospitals may apply triple dye to the umbilical stub to prevent infection, which may temporarily color the stub and surrounding skin purple.
Newborns lose many of the above physical characteristics quickly. Thus prototypical older babies look very different. While older babies are considered "cute", newborns can be "unattractive" by the same criteria and first time parents may need to be educated in this regard.
Neonatal jaundice is usually harmless: this condition is often seen in infants around the second day after birth, lasting until day 8 in normal births, or to around day 14 in premature births. Serum Bilirubin initially increase because a newborn does not need as many red blood cells as it did as a fetus (since there is a higher concentration of oxygen in the air than what was available through the umbilical vein). The newborn's liver processes the breakdown of the extra red blood cells, but some bilirubin does build up in the blood. Normally bilirubin levels drop to a low level without any intervention required. In babies where the bilirubin levels are a concern (particularly in pre-term infants), a common treatment is to use UV lights ("bili lights") on the newborn baby.
By the end of the first year an infant's height is increased by 50% and by the age of 2 the baby will have grown 75% greater.
By 5 months a baby will have doubled its weight, and tripled its weight by the first year. By the age of 2, a baby's weight will have quadrupled.
Infants and toddlers grow in little spurts over the first 21 months of life. A baby can go through periods of 7 to 63 days with no growth but they can add as much as an inch in one 24 hour period. During the day before a growth spurt, parents describe their babies as irritable and very hungry.
The best way to estimate a child's physical maturity is to use skeletal age, a measure of bone development. This is done by having a x-ray of the long bones of the body to see the extent to which soft, pliable cartilage has hardened into bone.
Cephalocaudal trend means that growth occurs from head to tail. The head develops more rapidly than the lower part of the body. At birth the head takes up to one fourth of the total body length and legs only one third. The lower body catches up by age 2 and the head accounts for only one fifth and legs for nearly one half of the body length.
Proximodistal trend means that head growth proceeds literally from near to far or from center of the body outward.
At birth the brain is nearer its adult shape and size than any other physical structure. The brain continues to develop at an astounding pace throughout infancy and toddlerhood.
Growth of neural fibers and synapses increases connective structures. When synapses are formed, many surrounding neurons die. This occurs in 20 to 80 percent of the brain region.
Synapses are tiny gaps between neurons where fiber from different neurons come close together but do not touch. Neurons release chemicals that cross the synapses sending messages to one another. During the prenatal period the neural tube produces far more neurons than the brain will ever need.
The coating of neural fibers with a fatty sheath called myelin that improves the efficiency of message transfer. Multi-layered lipid cholesterol and protein covering produced by neuralgia cause a rapid gain in overall size of brain due to neural fibers and myelination.
Neurons seldom stimulated soon loose their synapses. Neurons not needed at the moment return to an uncommitted state so they can support future development.
However, if synaptic pruning occurs in old age neurons will lose their synapses. If neurons are stimulated at a young age, even though neurons were pruned, they will be stimulated again.
Surrounding the brain, it is the largest most complex brain structure. The cortex is divided into four major lobes: occipital lobe, parietal lobe, temporal lobe, and frontal lobe which is the last to develop.
The brain is highly plastic. Many areas are not yet committed to specific functions. If a part of the brain is damaged, other parts can take over tasks that they would not normally have handled.
How children develop more regular “sleep patterns” around 4 to 6 months of age:
Infancy is the period that follows the neonatal period and includes the first two years of life. During this time tremendous growth, coordination and mental development occur. Most infants learn to walk, manipulate objects and can form basic words by the end of infancy. Another characteristic of infancy is the development of deciduous teeth.
Deciduous teeth, otherwise known as milk teeth, baby teeth, or primary teeth, are the first set of teeth in the growth development of humans and many other animals. They develop during the embryonic stage of development and erupt - become visible in the mouth - during infancy. They are usually lost and replaced by permanent teeth, but in the absence of permanent replacements, they can remain functional for many years. (Concise)
Deciduous teeth start to form during the embryo phase of pregnancy. The development of deciduous teeth starts at the sixth week of development as the dental lamina. This process starts at the midline and then spreads back into the posterior region. By the time the embryo is eight weeks old, there are ten areas on the upper and lower arches that will eventually become the deciduous dentition. These teeth will continue to form until they erupt in the mouth. In the deciduous dentition there are a total of twenty teeth: five per quadrant and ten per arch. In most babies the eruption of these teeth begins at the age of six months and continues until twenty-five to thirty-three months of age. The first teeth seen in the mouth are the mandibular centrals and the last are the maxillary second molars. However it is not unheard of for a baby to be born with teeth.
Deciduous teeth.
The deciduous dentition is made up of centrals, laterals, canines, first molars, and second molars; there is one in each quadrant, making a total of four of each tooth. All of these are replaced with a permanent counterpart except for the first and second molars; they are replaced by premolars. These teeth will remain until the age of six. At that time, the permanent teeth start to appear in the mouth resulting in mixed dentition. The erupting permanent teeth causes root resorption, where the permanent teeth push down on the roots of the deciduous teeth causing the roots to be dissolved and become absorbed by the forming permanent teeth. The process of shedding deciduous teeth and the replacement by permanent teeth is called exfoliation. This will last from age six until age twelve. By age twelve there are only permanent teeth remaining.
Deciduous teeth are considered essential in the development of the oral cavity by dental researchers and dentists. The permanent teeth replacements develop from the same tooth bud as the deciduous teeth; this provides a guide for permanent teeth eruption. Also the muscles of the jaw and the formation of the jaw bones depend on the primary teeth in order to maintain the proper space for permanent teeth. The roots of deciduous teeth provide an opening for the permanent teeth to erupt through. These teeth are also needed in the development of a child’s ability to speak and chew their food correctly.
Adolescence is the period of psychological and social transition between childhood and adulthood. Adolescence is the transitional stage of human development in which a juvenile matures into an adult. This transition involves biological, social, and psychological changes, though the biological ones are the easiest to measure objectively. The time is identified with dramatic changes in the body, along with developments in a person's psychology and academic career. In the onset of adolescence, children usually complete elementary school and enter secondary education, such as middle school or high school. A person between early childhood and the teenage years is sometimes referred to as a pre-teen or 'tween.
Physical maturation resulting from puberty leads to an interest in sexual activities, sometimes leading to teenage pregnancy. Since teens may not be emotionally or mentally mature enough or financially able to support children, sexual activity among adolescents is considered problematic.
At this age there is also a greater probability of drug and alcohol use, mental health disorders such as schizophrenia, eating disorders such as anorexia, and clinical depression. The unstable emotions or lack of emotional intelligence among some adolescents may also lead to youth crime.
Searching for a unique identity is one of the problems that adolescents often face. Some, but not all, teenagers often challenge the authority or the rules as a way to establish their individuality. They may crave adulthood and be eager to find their place in society. While adolescents are eager to grow up and be treated like adults, they also idolize athletes, movie stars and celebrities. They want to be like these role models - whether or not these role models actually have qualities that should be aspired to.
In females, puberty is caused by alterations in brain functions that result in increased secretion by the hypothalamus of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). Increased levels of GnRH stimulate secretion of pituitary gonadatrophins FSH and LH which cause follicle development and estrogen secretion. Estrogen is responsible for accessory sex organs and secondary sex characteristics. Menarche, the first menstrual cycle, occurs at about 12.5 years of age as a result of the release of FSH.
The first physical sign of puberty in girls is usually a firm, tender lump under the center of the areola(e) of one or both breasts, occurring on average at about 10.5 years. This is referred to as thelarche. By the widely used Tanner staging of puberty, this is stage 2 of breast development (stage 1 is a flat, prepubertal breast). Within 6-12 months, the swelling has clearly begun in both sides, softened, and can be felt and seen extending beyond the edges of the areolae. This is stage 3 of breast development. By another 12 months (stage 4), the breasts are approaching mature size and shape, with areolae and papillae forming a secondary mound. In most young women, this mound disappears into the contour of the mature breast (stage 5), although there is so much variation in sizes and shapes of adult breasts that distinguishing advanced stages is of little clinical value.
Pubic hair is often the second unequivocal change of puberty. It is referred to as pubarche and the pubic hairs are usually visible first along the labia. The first few hairs are described as Tanner stage 2. Stage 3 is usually reached within another 6–12 months, when the hairs are too numerous to count and appear on the mons as well. By stage 4, the pubic hairs densely fill the "pubic triangle." Stage 5 refers to spread of pubic hair to the thighs and sometimes as abdominal hair upward towards the umbilicus. In about 15% of girls, the earliest pubic hair appears before breast development begins.
The mucosal surface of the vagina also changes in response to increasing levels of estrogen, becoming thicker and a duller pink in color (in contrast to the brighter red of the prepubertal vaginal mucosa). Whitish secretions (physiologic leukorrhea) are a normal effect of estrogen as well. In the next 2 years following thelarche, the uterus and ovaries increase in size. The ovaries usually contain small cysts visible by ultrasound.
The first menstrual bleeding is referred to as menarche. The average age of menarche in American girls is about 12.7 years, usually about 2 years after thelarche. Menses (menstrual periods) are not always regular and monthly in the first 2 years after menarche. Ovulation is necessary for fertility, and may or may not accompany the earliest menses. By 2 years after menarche, most girls are ovulating at least several times a year. Over 90% of girls who experience menarche before age 13 years are experiencing very regular, predictable menses accompanied by ovulation within 2 years, and a higher proportion of those with later menarche may not establish regular ovulation for 4 years or more. However, initiation of ovulation after menarche is not inevitable, and a high proportion of girls with continued irregularity several years from menarche will continue to have prolonged irregularity and anovulation, and are at higher risk for reduced fertility.
During this period, also in response to rising levels of estrogen, the lower half of the pelvis widens. This prepares the body for the time when she will give birth by enlarging the birth canal. Fat tissue increases to a greater percentage of the body composition than in males, especially in the typical female distribution of breasts, hips, and thighs. This produces the typical female body shape. Also, the fat goes to the buttocks of a girl, giving their buttocks more shape and curve.
In the months and years following the appearance of pubic hair, other areas of skin which respond to androgens develop heavier hair (androgenic hair) in roughly the following sequence: underarm (axillary) hair, perianal hair, upper lip hair, sideburn (preauricular) hair, and periareolar hair. Arm and leg hair becomes heavier gradually over a period of 10 years or more. While the appearance of hair in some of these areas is not always wanted, particularly in Western culture, it rarely indicates a hormone imbalance unless it occurs elsewhere as well, such as under the chin and in the midline of the chest.
The estrogen-induced pubertal growth spurt in girls begins at the same time the earliest breast changes begin, or even a few months before, making it one of the earliest manifestations of puberty in girls. Growth of the legs and feet accelerates first, so that many girls have longer legs in proportion to their torso in the first year of puberty. The rate of growth tends to reach a peak velocity (as much as 7.5-10 cm or 3-4 inches per year) midway between thelarche and menarche and is already declining by the time menarche occurs. In the 2 years following menarche most girls grow about 5 cm (2 inches) before growth ceases at maximal adult height. This last growth primarily involves the spine rather than the limbs.
Acne on the face and body.
Rising levels of androgens can change the fatty acid composition of perspiration, resulting in a more "adult" body odor. This often precedes thelarche and pubarche by 1 or more years. Another androgen effect is increased secretion of oil (sebum) from the skin. This change increases the susceptibility to acne vulgaris, a characteristic affliction of puberty greatly variable in its severity.
The onset of puberty for males is similar to that of females. GnRH secretion from the hypothalamus results in an increase in pituitary gonadatropins secretion of LH / ICSH and FSH. The pituitary gonadatropins stimulate the seminiferous tubules and testosterone secretion. Testosterone causes changes in the accessory reproductive organs, secondary sex characteristics and male sex drive.
In boys, testicular enlargement is the first physical manifestation of puberty. It is termed gonadarche. The testes in prepubertal boys change little in size from about 1 year of age to the onset of puberty, averaging about 2–3 cc in volume and about 1.5-2 cm in length. Testicular size continues to increase throughout puberty, reaching maximal adult size about 6 years later. While 18-20 cc is reportedly an average adult size, there is wide variation in the normal population.
The testes have two primary functions: to produce hormones and to produce sperm. The Leydig cells produce testosterone (as described below), which in turn produces most of the changes of male puberty. However, most of the increasing bulk of testicular tissue is spermatogenic tissue (primarily Sertoli and interstitial cells). The development of sperm production and fertility in males is not as well documented. Sperm can be detected in the morning urine of most boys after the first year of pubertal changes (and occasionally earlier).
A boy's penis grows little from the fourth year of life until puberty. Average prepubertal penile length is 4 cm. The prepubertal genitalia are described as stage 1. Within months after growth of the testes begins, rising levels of testosterone promote growth of the penis and scrotum. This earliest discernible beginning of pubertal growth of the genitalia is referred to as stage 2. The penis continues to grow until about 21 years of age, reaching an average adult size of about 7-15.5 cm.
Although erections and orgasms occur in prepubertal boys, they become much more common during puberty, accompanied by a markedly increased libido. Ejaculation becomes possible early in puberty; prior to this boys may experience dry orgasms. Emission of seminal fluid may occur due to masturbation or spontaneously during sleep (commonly termed a wet dream, and more clinically called a nocturnal emission). The ability to ejaculate is a fairly early event in puberty compared to the other characteristics. However, in parallel to the irregularity of the first few periods of a girl, for the first one or two years after a boy's first ejaculation, his seminal fluid may contain few active sperm.
Pubic hair often appears on a boy shortly after the genitalia begin to grow. As in girls, the first appearance of pubic hair is termed pubarche and the pubic hairs are usually first visible at the dorsal (abdominal) base of the penis. The first few hairs are described as stage 2. Stage 3 is usually reached within another 6–12 months, when the hairs are too numerous to count. By stage 4, the pubic hairs densely fill the "pubic triangle." Stage 5 refers to spread of pubic hair to the thighs and upward towards the umbilicus as part of the developing abdominal hair.
In the months and years following the appearance of pubic hair, other areas of skin which respond to androgens develop heavier hair (androgenic hair) in roughly the following sequence: underarm (axillary) hair, perianal hair, upper lip hair, sideburn (preauricular) hair, periareolar hair, and the rest of the beard area. Arm, leg, chest, abdominal, and back hair become heavier more gradually. There is a large range in amount of body hair among adult men, and significant differences in timing and quantity of hair growth among different ethnic groups.
Under the influence of androgens, the voice box, or larynx, grows in both genders. This growth is far more prominent in boys, causing the male voice to drop, rather abruptly, about one octave, because the larger vocal folds have a lower fundamental frequency. Occasionally, this is accompanied by cracking and breaking sounds in the early stages. Most of the voice change happens during stage 4 of male puberty around the time of peak growth. However, it usually precedes the development of significant facial hair by several months to years.
Compared to girls' early growth spurt, growth accelerates more slowly in boys and lasts longer, resulting in a taller adult stature among males than females (on average about 10 cm or 4 inches). The difference is attributed to the much greater potency of estradiol compared to testosterone in promoting bone growth, maturation, and epiphyseal closure. In boys, growth begins to accelerate about 9 months after the first signs of testicular enlargement and the peak year of the growth spurt occurs about 2 years after the onset of puberty, reaching a peak velocity of about 8.5–12 cm or 3.5–5 inches per year. The feet and hands experience their growth spurt first, followed by the limbs, and finally ending in the trunk. Epiphyseal closure and adult height are reached more slowly, at an average age of about 17.5 years. As in girls, this last growth primarily involves the spine rather than the limbs.
By the end of puberty, adult men have heavier bones and nearly twice as much skeletal muscle. Some of the bone growth (e.g., shoulder width and jaw) is disproportionately greater, resulting in noticeably different male and female skeletal shapes. The average adult male has about 150% of the lean body mass of an average female, and about 50% of the body fat.
This muscle develops mainly during the later stages of puberty, and muscle growth can continue even after a male is biologically adult. The peak of the so-called "strength spurt," the rate of muscle growth, is attained about one year after a male experiences his peak growth rate.
Estradiol is produced from testosterone in male puberty as well as female, and male breasts often respond to the rising estradiol levels. This is termed gynecomastia. In most boys, the breast development is minimal, similar to what would be termed a "breast bud" in a girl, but in many boys, breast growth is substantial. It usually occurs after puberty is underway, may increase for a year or two, and usually diminishes by the end of puberty. It is increased by extra adipose tissue if the boy is overweight.
Although this is a normal part of male puberty, breast development for some boys is as unwelcome as upper lip hair in girls. If the boy's distress becomes too substantial during development, breast tissue can be removed and corrected surgically.
The term "adult" generally refers to a fully developed person from maturity (the end of puberty) onward. The age at which a person is physiologically an adult is age 17 for females and age 18 for males. Adulthood can also refer to a person's ability to care for them self independently, and raise a family of their own; or it can simply mean reaching a specified age. Graduating high school, residing in one's own residence and attaining financial independence are all synonymous with adulthood in the United States.
There are some qualities that symbolize adultness in most cultures. Not always is there a concordance between the qualities and the physical age of the person.
Self-control - restraint, emotional control.
Stability - stable personality, strength.
Independence - ability to self-regulate.
Seriousness - ability to deal with life in a serious manner.
Responsibility - accountability, commitment and reliability.
Method/Tact - ability to think ahead and plan for the future, patience.
Endurance - ability and willingness to cope with difficulties that present themselves.
Objectivity - perspective and realism.
This diagram shows Maslow's hierarchy of needs, represented as a pyramid with the more primitive needs at the bottom.
Abraham Maslow, a psychologist, developed Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs. It is a chart outlining basic needs that a person must meet to function and survive in life. It also attempts to explain what motivates people in life. The needs on the lower level must be met before moving up the ladder, as the higher needs only come into focus once all the needs that are lower down in the pyramid are satisfied. People can get stuck on levels and some people may never reach certain levels because of circumstances in their life. When one stage is fulfilled you naturally move to the next.
Physical or Physiological: These include shelter, oxygen, food, water, rest and elimination, all of which are vital to a person's life and essential to survival.
Security or Safety: This involves not only actually being secure and safe, but also the feeling of safety and security. This is something that people typically learn from their childhood and something that helps lay the groundwork for developing other skills and moving up to the next step in the ladder.
Social (Love/Belonging): This involves developing friendships and eventually relationships. This involves emotionally-based relationships in general, such as friendship, sexual intimacy, and having a supportive and communicative family.
Esteem: This is where people learn to develop self-esteem and confidence. According to Maslow, all humans have a need to be respected, to have self-respect, and to respect others. People need to engage themselves in order to gain recognition and have an activity or activities that give the person a sense of contribution, be it in a profession or hobby,
Self-Actualization: The highest level you can reach according to Maslow. Maslow writes the following of self-actualizing people:
They embrace the facts and realities of the world (including themselves) rather than denying or avoiding them.
They are spontaneous in their ideas and actions.
They are creative.
They are interested in solving problems; this often includes the problems of others. Solving these problems is often a key focus in their lives.
They feel a closeness to other people, and generally appreciate life.
They have discernment and are able to view all things in an objective manner. Prejudices are absent.
Most people accomplish the two lower levels in their lifetime, but may get stuck on upper levels. While self-actualization is a useful concept to many, others insist there is no proof that every individual has this capacity or even the goal to achieve it.
Menopause occurs as the ovaries stop producing estrogen, causing the reproductive system to gradually shut down. As the body adapts to the changing levels of natural hormones, vasomotor symptoms such as hot flashes and palpitations, psychological symptoms such as increased depression, anxiety, irritability, mood swings and lack of concentration, and atrophic symptoms such as vaginal dryness and urgency of urination appear. Together with these symptoms, the woman may also have increasingly scanty and erratic menstrual periods.
The average onset of menopause is 50.5 years, but some women enter menopause at a younger age, especially if they have suffered from cancer or another serious illness and undergone chemotherapy. Premature menopause (or premature ovarian failure) is defined as menopause occurring before the age of 40, and occurs in one percent of women. Other causes of premature menopause include autoimmune disorders, thyroid disease, and diabetes mellitus. Premature menopause is diagnosed by measuring the levels of follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH); the levels of these hormones will be higher if menopause has occurred. Rates of premature menopause have been found to be significantly higher in both fraternal and identical twins; approximately five percent of twins reach menopause before the age of 40. The reasons for this are not completely understood. Transplants of ovarian tissue between identical twins have been successful in restoring fertility.
Post-menopausal women, especially Caucasian women of European descent, are at increased risk of osteoporosis.
Animals other than human beings rarely experience menopause, possibly because they simply do not live long enough to reach it. However, recent studies have shown menopause in gorillas, with an average age of 44 at onset.
Perimenopause refers to the time preceding menopause, during which the production of hormones such as estrogen and progesterone diminishes and becomes more irregular. During this period fertility diminishes. Menopause is arbitrarily defined as a minimum of twelve months without menstruation. Perimenopause can begin as early as age 35, although it usually begins much later. It can last for a few months or for several years. The duration of perimenopause cannot be predicted in advance.
Human females have the unique distinction of being one of the only species to stop reproduction well before the end of their life span. This evolutionary distinction is odd because most other species continue to reproduce until death, thus maximizing the number of offspring they produce. The grandmother hypothesis essentially states that the presence of a grandmother has beneficial effect on the survival of an infant. Humans are one of the slowest developing species in the animal kingdom, and unlike many species, infants, toddlers and children must be continuously cared for to ensure their survival. (Compare that to the salmon that swims up stream, spawns and dies.)
The cessation of menses is the result of the eventual atresia (degeneration and reabsorption) of almost all oocytes in the ovaries. This causes an increase in circulating FSH and LH levels as there are a decreased number of oocytes responding to these hormones and producing estrogen. This decrease in the production of estrogen leads to the post-menopausal symptoms of hot flashes, insomnia, osteoporosis, atherosclerosis, vaginal atrophy and depression.
Cigarette smoking has been found to decrease the age of menopause by as much as one year however, premature menopause (before the age of 40) is generally idiopathic.
The clinical features of menopause are caused by the estrogen deficiency.
Medical treatments for menopausal symptoms have been developed. Most notably, Hormone Replacement Therapy (HRT), has been used to reduce the weakening of bones (known as osteoporosis). However, some women have resisted the implication that menopause is a disorder, seeing it as a natural stage of life. There has also been scientific controversy over whether the benefits of HRT outweigh the risks. For many years, women were advised to take hormone therapy after menopause to reduce their risk of heart disease and various aspects of aging. However, a large, randomized, controlled trial (the Women's Health Initiative) found that women undergoing HRT had an increased risk of Alzheimer's disease, breast cancer, heart disease and stroke.
Osteoporosis is a skeletal disease resulting in bone loss and changes in the bone quality that leads to diminished bone strength and an increased risk to sustain fractures. The main cause of osteoporosis is a loss estrogen following menopause. Osteoporosis can be prevented and treated using a number of different drugs and lifestyle modifications including proper diet, exercise and hormone replacement therapy. The link to Wikipedia Osteoporosis is a great source of additional information.
Preventing Osteoporosis The old saying that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure holds true for osteoporosis. In researching osteoporosis I found that while there are some treatments for osteoporosis, a healthy lifestyle throughout your life is a much more effective way of combating the effects of this disease. It is generally acknowledged that a regular weight bearing exercise plan is helpful in maintaining bone mass. Additionally, adequate dietary calcium and vitamin D intake throughout ones life are important factors in building up and maintaining bone mass.
Estrogen and progesterone treatments in postmenopausal women have proven to be effective in treating bone loss. There are also two groups of drugs that interfere with the re-absorption of bone by osteoclasts called bisphosphonates and lective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMS).
An estimated 52 million men and woman will be afflicted with crumbling, weakened bones by the year 2010. Osteoporosis is three to four times more common in woman than men. While some men do get osteoporosis, they are less likely to do so because men have frames that are 25 percent larger and heavier than women. Women are also more susceptible to the disease because they are more likely than a man to go on crash diets. This kind of diet may interfere with the three main factors associated with osteoporosis and having healthy bones: having enough vitamin D, having enough calcium, and having enough estrogen. There are approximately 1 million to 1.3 million hip fractures every year that are related to osteoporosis. Men on steroids, people with arthritis, people undergoing chemotherapy, along with those suffering from anorexia all have an increased chance of having osteoporosis.
Wikipedia Osteoporosis Page This is a wikipedia link with a complete discussion of osteoporosis.
National Osteoporosis Foundation This page links to the National Osteoporosis Foundation
Why do people age?
Some researchers believe we are programmed by an internal biological clock to age. The idea is that each type of cell, tissue and organ is like a clock that ticks at its own pace. In the body our cells divide 80 to 90 times at the most. At the end of each chromosome there are repeated stretches of DNA called telomeres. These Telomeres prevent Uncontrollable division which might lead to genetic deficits , producing Cancer cells. A bit of each telomere is lost during every cell division. When only a nub remains the cells stop dividing and die.
A different hypothesis is that aging is a result of accumulated damage to DNA from environmental attacks and a decline in DNA's mechanism of self repair. Things such as free radicals attack DNA and other molecules causing structural changes. These changes in DNA endanger the synthesis of enzymes and other proteins that are required for life. This damage interferes with cell division. Organ wear out (over time) can cause excessive damage to DNA ; unable to repair itself , DNA slowly starts degrading in function thus increasing the chance of mistakes in replication .
Most researchers believe that aging is a combination of an internal clock that ticks out the life span of cells and the accumulation damage to DNA.
Diabetes mellitus is a disease characterized by persistent hyperglycemia (high blood sugar levels), resulting either from inadequate secretion of the hormone insulin, an inadequate response of target cells to insulin, or a combination of these factors. Diabetes is a metabolic disease requiring medical diagnosis, treatment and lifestyle changes
Type 1 diabetes mellitus is characterized by loss of the insulin-producing beta cells of the islets of Langerhans of the pancreas. Sensitivity and responsiveness to insulin are usually normal, especially in the early stages. This type comprises up to 10% of total cases in North America and Europe, though this varies by geographical location. This type of diabetes can affect children or adults, but has traditionally been termed "juvenile diabetes" because it represents a majority of cases of diabetes affecting children. The most common cause of beta cell loss leading to type 1 diabetes is autoimmune destruction, accompanied by antibodies directed against insulin and islet cell proteins. The principal treatment of type 1 diabetes, even from the earliest stages, is replacement of insulin. Without insulin, ketosis and diabetic ketoacidosis can develop.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus is due to a combination of defective insulin secretion and defective responsiveness to insulin (often termed reduced insulin sensitivity). In early stages the predominant abnormality is reduced insulin sensitivity, characterized by elevated levels of insulin in the blood. The initial defect of insulin secretion is subtle and initially involves only the earliest phase of insulin secretion. In the early stages, hyperglycemia can be reversed by a variety of measures and medications that improve insulin sensitivity or reduce glucose production by the liver, but as the disease progresses the impairment of insulin secretion worsens, and therapeutic replacement of insulin often becomes necessary. Type 2 diabetes is quite common, comprising 90% or more of cases of diabetes in many populations. There is a strong association with obesity and with aging, although in the last decade it has increasingly begun to affect older children and adolescents. In the past, this type of diabetes was often termed adult-onset diabetes or maturity-onset diabetes.
Gestational diabetes, Type III, also involve a combination of inadequate insulin secretion and responsiveness, resembling type 2 diabetes in several respects. It develops during pregnancy and may improve or disappear after delivery. Even though it may be transient, gestational diabetes may damage the health of the fetus or mother, and about 40% of women with gestational diabetes develop type 2 diabetes later in life.
Congestive heart failure (CHF), also called congestive cardiac failure (CCF) or just heart failure, is a condition that can result from any structural or functional cardiac disorder that impairs the ability of the heart to fill with or pump a sufficient amount of blood throughout the body. It is not to be confused with "cessation of heartbeat", which is known as asystole, or with cardiac arrest, which is the cessation of normal cardiac function in the face of heart disease. Because not all patients have volume overload at the time of initial or subsequent evaluation, the term "heart failure" is preferred over the older term "congestive heart failure". Congestive heart failure is often undiagnosed due to a lack of a universally agreed definition and difficulties in diagnosis, particularly when the condition is considered "mild".
A stroke, also known as cerebrovascular accident (CVA), is an acute neurologic injury whereby the blood supply to a part of the brain is interrupted. Stroke can also be said to be a syndrome of sudden loss of neuronal function due to disturbance in cerebral perfusion. This disturbance in perfusion is commonly on the arterial side of the circulation, but can be on the venous side.
The part of the brain with disturbed perfusion can no longer receive adequate oxygen carried by the blood; brain cells are therefore damaged or die, impairing function from that part of the brain. Stroke is a medical emergency and can cause permanent neurologic damage or even death if not promptly diagnosed and treated. It is the third leading cause of death and adult disability in the US and industrialized European nations. On average, a stroke occurs every 45 seconds and someone dies every 3 minutes. Of every 5 deaths from stroke, 2 occur in men and 3 in women.
The term Progeria narrowly refers to Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria syndrome, but the term is also used more generally to describe any of the so-called "accelerated aging diseases". The word progeria is derived from the Greek for "prematurely old". Because the "accelerated aging" diseases display different aspects of aging, but never every aspect, they are often called "segmental progerias" by biogerontologists. Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria syndrome is an extremely rare genetic condition which causes physical changes that resemble greatly accelerated aging in sufferers. The disease affects between 1 in 4 million (estimated actual) and 1 in 8 million (reported) newborns. Currently, there are approximately 40-45 known cases in the world. There is no known cure. Most people with progeria die around 13 years of age. Progeria is of interest to scientists because the disease may reveal clues about the process of aging. Unlike most other "accelerated aging diseases" (such as Werner's syndrome, Cockayne's syndrome or xeroderma pigmentosum), progeria is not caused by defective DNA repair. It is caused by mutations in a LMNA (Lamin A protein) gene on chromosome 1. Nuclear lamina is a protein scaffold around the edge of the nucleus that helps organize nuclear processes such as RNA and DNA synthesis.
The effects of Aging on the Body
The heart loses about 1% of its reserve pumping capacity every year after we turn 30. Change in blood vessels that serve brain tissue reduce nourishment to the brain, resulting in the malfunction and death of brain cells. By the time we turn 80, cerebral blood flow is 20% less, and renal blood flow is 50% less than when we were age 30. As we age our heart goes through certain structural changes: the walls of the heart thicken and the heart becomes heavier, heart valves stiffen and are more likely to calcify, and the aorta, the major vessel carrying blood out of the heart, becomes larger.
Acute myocardial infarction (AMI or MI), commonly known as a heart attack, is a disease that occurs when the blood supply to a part of the heart is interrupted, causing death of heart tissue. It is the leading cause of death for both men and women all over the world. The term myocardial infarction is derived from myocardium (the heart muscle) and infarction (tissue death). The phrase "heart attack" sometimes refers to heart problems other than MI, such as unstable angina pectoris and sudden cardiac death.
In the elderly, ventricular diastolic stiffness can lead to pulmonary circulatory congestion. Aortic stenosis and aortic insufficiency, elevate left ventricular preload to the point where the left ventricle becomes stiff and noncompliant, and is common in people 75 years of age or older. Elevated pressures are transmitted to the pulmonary vasculature and lead to pulmonary edema.
Aging is accompanied by the loss of bone tissue. The haversian systems in compact bone undergo slow erosion, lacunae are enlarged, canals become widened, and the endosteal cortex converts to spongy bone. The endosteal surface gradually erodes until the rate of loss exceeds the rate of deposition. Bone remodeling cycle takes longer to complete because bone cells slow in the rate of resorption and deposition of bone tissue. The rate of mineralization also slows down. The number of bone cells also decreases because the bone marrow becomes fatty and unable to provide an adequate supply of precursor cells. Because bones become less dense, they become more prone to fractures. Although bone degeneration is inevitable, it is variable if steps are taken before the mid-twenties -around this time our bones break down faster than they rebuild. Bone density increases when our bones are stressed, so physical activity is important. Vitamins and good diet also help build up bone mass.
Cartilage becomes more rigid, fragile, and susceptible to fibrillation. Loss of elasticity and resiliency is attributed to more cross-linking of collagen to elastin, decrease in water content, and decreasing concentrations of glycosaminoglycans. Joints are also more prone to fracture due to the loss of bone mass.
Decrease in the range of motion of the joint is related to the change of ligaments and muscles. As the body ages, muscle bulk and strength declines especially after the age of 70. As much as 30% of skeletal muscle are lost by age 80. Muscle fibers, RNA synthesis and mitochondrial volume loss may all be contributors to muscle decline. Other factors that could contribute to muscle loss of the aged are: change in activity level, reduced nerve supply to muscle, cardiovascular disease, and nutritional deficiencies. In women, menopause will cause muscle mass to decrease significantly, especially in the first three post-menopausal years.
One of the effects of aging on the nervous system is the loss of neurons. By the age of 30, the brain begins to lose thousands of neurons each day. The cerebral cortex can lose as much as 45% of its cells and the brain can weigh 7% less than in the prime of our lives. Associated with the loss of neurons comes a decreased capacity to send nerve impulses to and from the brain. Because of this the processing of information slows down. In addition the voluntary motor movement's slow down, reflex time increases, and conduction velocity decreases. Parkinson's disease is the most common movement disorder of the nervous system. As we age there are some degenerative changes along with some disease's involving the sense organ's that can alter vision, touch, smell, and taste. Loss of hearing is also associated with aging. It is usually the result of changes in important structures of the inner ear.
Dementia (from Latin de- "apart, away" + mens (genitive mentis) "mind") is the progressive decline in cognitive function due to damage or disease in the brain beyond what might be expected from normal aging. Particularly affected areas may be memory, attention, language and problem solving, although particularly in the later stages of the condition, affected persons may be disoriented in time (not knowing what day, week, month or year it is), place (not knowing where they are) and person (not knowing who they are). Symptoms of dementia can be classified as either reversible or irreversible depending upon the etiology of the disease. Less than 10% of all dementias are reversible. Dementia is a non-specific term that encompasses many disease processes, just as fever is attributable to many etiologies.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by progressive cognitive deterioration together with declining activities of daily living and neuropsychiatric symptoms or behavioral changes. It is the most common cause of dementia. The most striking early symptom is short term memory loss (amnesia), which usually manifests as minor forgetfulness that becomes steadily more pronounced with illness progression, with relative preservation of older memories. As the disorder progresses, cognitive (intellectual) impairment extends to the domains of language (aphasia), skilled movements (apraxia), recognition (agnosia), and those functions (such as decision-making and planning) closely related to the frontal and temporal lobes of the brain as they become disconnected from the limbic system, reflecting extension of the underlying pathological process. This consists principally of neuronal loss or atrophy, together with an inflammatory response to the deposition of amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. Genetic factors are known to be important, and autosomal dominant mutations in three different genes (presenilin 1, presenilin 2, and amyloid precursor protein) have been identified that account for a small number of cases of familial, early-onset AD. For late onset AD (LOAD), only one susceptibility gene has so far been identified: the epsilon 4 allele of the apolipoprotein E gene. Age of onset itself has a heritability of around 50%.
The changes associated with aging of the digestive system include loss of strength and tone of muscular tissue and supporting muscular tissue, decreased secretory mechanisms, decreased motility of the digestive organs, along with changes in neurosensory feedback regarding enzyme and hormone release, and diminished response to internal sensations and pain.
In the upper GI tract common changes include periodontal disease, difficulty in swallowing, reduced sensitivity to mouth irritations and sores, loss of taste, gastritis, and peptic ulcer disease. Changes that may appear in the small intestine include, appendicitis, duodenal ulcers, malabsorption, and maldigestion. Other pathologies that increase in occurrence with age are acute pancreatitis, jaundice, and gallbladder problems. Large intestinal changes such as hemorrhoids and constipation may also occur. Cancer of the rectum are quite common.
As we get older kidney function diminishes. By the age of 70, the filtering mechanism is only about half as effective as it was at age 40. Because water balance is altered and the sensation of thirst diminishes with age, older people are more susceptible to dehydration. This causes more urinary tract infections in the elderly. other problems may include nocturia (excessive urination at night), increased frequency of urination, polyuria (excessive urine production), dysuria (painful urination), incontinence, and hematuria (blood in the urine).
Some kidney diseases that are common as we age include acute and chronic kidney inflammations and renal calculi (kidney stones). The prostate gland is often implicated in various disorders of the urinary tract. Prostate cancer is the most common cancer in elderly males. Because the prostate gland encircles part of the urethra, an enlarged prostate gland may cause difficulty in urination
With the advancing of age, the airways and tissue of the respiratory tract become less elastic and more rigid. The walls of the alveoli break down, so there is less total respiratory surface available for gas exchange. This decreases the lung capacity by as much as 30% by the age of 70. Therefore, elderly people are more susceptible to pneumonia, bronchitis, emphysema, and other pulmonary disorders. For a more complete discussion of the respiratory system please visit Chapter 12 The Respiratory System.
Correlation between lung cancer and smoking tobacco.
Lung cancer is a cancer of the lungs characterized by the presence of malignant tumors. Most commonly it is bronchogenic carcinoma (about 90%). Lung cancer is one of the most lethal forms of cancer worldwide, causing up to 3 million deaths annually. Only one in ten patients diagnosed with this disease will survive the next five years. Although lung cancer was previously an illness that affected predominately men, lung cancer rate for women has been increasing in the last few decades. This has been attributed to the rising ratio of female to male smokers. More women die of lung cancer than any other cancer, including breast cancer, ovarian cancer and uterine cancers combined.
Current research indicates that the factor with the greatest impact on risk of lung cancer is long-term exposure to inhaled carcinogens. The most common means of such exposure is tobacco smoke.
Changes in vision begin at an early age. The cornea becomes thicker and less curved. The anterior chamber decreases in size and volume. The lens becomes thicker and more opaque, and also increases rigidity and loses elasticity. The ciliary muscles atrophy and the pupil constricts. There is also a reduction of rods and nerve cells of the retina.
Approximately one third of people over the age of 65 have hearing loss. The ability to distinguish between high and low frequency diminishes with age. Loss of hearing for sounds of high-frequency (presbycusis) is the most common, although the ability to distinguish sound localization also decreases. It is believed that the hearing loss isn't so much an age change as it is due to the accumulation of noise damage.
Sensitivity to odors and taste decline with age. The sense of smell begins to degenerate with the loss of olfactory sensory neurons and loss of cells from the olfactory bulb. The decline in taste sensation is more gradual than that of smell. The elderly have trouble differentiating between flavors. The number of fungiform papillae of the tongue decline by 50% by the age of 50. Taste could also be affected by the loss of salivary gland secretions, notably amylase. This loss of taste and smell can have a significant effect on an elder's health. With the reduced ability to taste and smell, it is difficult to adjust food intake as they can no longer rely on their taste receptors to tell them if something is too salty, or too sweet. This can also cause the problem in that they might not be able to detect if something is spoiled, making them at a higher risk for food poisoning.
As people age, oxygen intake decreases as well as the basal metabolic rate. The decrease in the metabolic rate, delayed shivering response, sedentary lifestyle, decreased vasoconstrictor response, diminished sweating, and poor nutrition are reasons why the elderly cannot maintain body temperature. There is also a decrease in total body water (TBW). In newborns, TBW is 75% to 80%. TBW continues to decline in childhood to 60% to 65%, to less than 60% in adults.
Aging is generally characterized by the declining ability to respond to stress, increasing homeostatic imbalance and increased risk of disease. Because of this, death is the ultimate consequence of aging. Differences in maximum life span between species correspond to different "rates of aging". For example, inherited differences in the rate of aging make a mouse elderly at 3 years and a human elderly at 90 years. These genetic differences affect a variety of physiological processes, probably including the efficiency of DNA repair, antioxidant enzymes, and rates of free radical production.
We go through several stages of grief as we near death, receive catastrophic news, or go through some type of life-altering experience. There are five defined stages according to Elisabeth Kübler-Ross. She states, however, that these steps don't always come in order, and are not always experienced all together by everyone. She does claim that a person will always experience at least two of the stages.
Denial- This isn't happening, there must have been some mistake.
Anger- Why me? It's not fair, how could you do this to me?!? (aimed toward some other "responsible" party)
Bargaining- Just give me 2 more years...let me live to see________.
Depression- extreme sadness, lack of motivation or desire to fight anymore
Acceptance- I'm ok with this.
Aubrey David Nicholas Jasper de Grey, Ph.D., (born 20 April 1963 in London, England) is a controversial biomedical gerontologist who lives in the city of Cambridge, UK. He is working to expedite the development of a cure for human aging, a medical goal he refers to as engineered negligible senescence. To this end, he has identified what he concludes are the seven areas of the aging process that need to be addressed medically before this can be done. He has been interviewed in recent years in many news sources, including CBS 60 Minutes, BBC, the New York Times, Fortune Magazine, and Popular Science. His main activities at present are as chairman and chief science officer of the Methuselah Foundation and editor-in-chief of the academic journal Rejuvenation Research. Here are the seven biological causes of senescence and possible solutions:
Cell loss or atrophy. Cell depletion can be partly corrected by therapies involving exercise and growth factors. But stem cell therapy is almost certainly required for any more than just partial replacement of lost cells. This research would involve a large number of details, but is occurring on many fronts.
Nuclear mutations and epimutations. A mutation in a functional gene of a cell can cause that cell to malfunction or to produce a malfunctioning product. Because of the sheer number of cells Dr. de Grey believes that redundancy takes care of this problem, although cells that have mutated to produce toxic products might have to be disabled. In Dr. de Grey's opinion, the effect of mutations and epimutations that really matters is cancer, since if even one cell turns into a cancer cell it might spread and become deadly. This is to be corrected by whole-body interdiction of lengthening telomeres, or any other cure for cancer, if any is ever found.
Mutant mitochondria. Because of the highly oxidative environment in mitochondria and their lack of the sophisticated repair systems found in the cell nucleus, mitochondrial mutations are believed to a be a major cause of progressive cellular degeneration. This is to be corrected by moving the DNA for mitochondria completely within the cellular nucleus, where it is better protected. In humans all but 13 proteins are already protected in this way. It has been experimentally shown the operation is feasible.
Cellular senescence. Cellular senescence might be corrected by forcing senescent cells to destroy themselves, a process called apoptosis. Cell killing with suicide genes or vaccines was suggested for making the cells do apoptosis. Healthy cells would multiply to replace them.
Extracellular cross-links. These are chemical bonds between structures that are part of the body, but not within a cell. In senescent people many of these become brittle and weak. The proposal is to further develop small-molecular drugs and enzymes to break links caused by sugar-bonding (glycation), and other common forms of chemical linking.
Junk outside cells. Junk outside cells might be removed by enhanced phagocytosis (the normal process used by the immune system), and small drugs able to break chemical beta-bonds. The large junk in this class can be removed surgically. Junk here means useless things accumulated by a body, but which cannot be digested or removed by its processes, such as the amyloid plaques characteristic of Alzheimer's disease. The oft-mentioned 'toxins' that people claim cause many diseases would probably also fit under this class.
Junk inside cells. Junk inside cells might be removed by adding new enzymes to the cell's natural digestion organ, the lysosome. These enzymes would be taken from bacteria, molds and other organisms that are known to completely digest animal bodies.
Dr. de Grey's research proposals are highly controversial, with many critics arguing the highly complicated biomedical phenomena involved contain too many unknowns for intervention to be considered remotely foreseeable.
In this time the thought was once children emerged form infancy, they were regarded as miniature already formed adults.
Puritan belief harsh restrictive parenting practices were recommended as the most efficient means of taming the depraved child.
Tabula Rosa = Blank slate in this the thought was that children are to begin with nothing at all and all kinds of experiences can shape their characters.
This is seen as a negative vision of the development of children because children do contribute to his or her own development.
Noble savages = endowed with a sense of right or wrong.
Children have built in moral sense 1st concept of stage, 2nd maturation of growth refers to genetically determined naturally unfolding course. He saw development as a discontinuous stagewise process mapped cut by nature.
Charles Darwin the forefather of Scientific Child Study 1859-1936, 19th century
The famous theory of evolution, the survival of the fittest, and natural selection.
G. Stanley Hall regarded as the founder of the child study movement 1846-1924
One of the most influential American psychologists of the early twentieth century.
The Normative Approach = normative period measures of large numbers of individuals and age related averages are computed to represent typical development.
The mental testing movement early 20th Century
French psychologist Alfred Binet and Colleague Theodore Simon were the first to come up with a successful intelligence test IQ at Stanford University.
Theory 'psychosexual theory, ID, Ego, and Superego.
E) as a child she lived in an environment that never made her feel safe
The growth in diameter of bones around the diaphysis occurs by deposition of bone beneath the periosteum.
A chemical breakdown product of hemoglobin.
The first set of teeth in the growth development of humans and many other animals. (milk teeth, baby teeth, or primary teeth)
The progressive decline in cognitive function due to damage or disease in the brain beyond what might be expected from normal aging.
The cartilage in growing long bones that allows lengthwise growth. The plate ossifies at the end of puberty.
The basic structural unit of compact bone which includes a central canal, lamellae, lacunae, osteocytes, and canaliculi.
The type of bone formation responsible for the development of flat bones, especially those found in the skull. In intramembranous ossification mesenchymal cells develop into bone without first going through a cartilage stage.
The permanent cessation of menstrual cycles.
The first menstrual bleeding, usually occurs at about 12.7 years of age.
A form of cell death that results from acute cellular injury.
A condition that is characterized by a decrease in bone mass and density, causing bones to become fragile.
The process of physical changes by which a child's body becomes an adult body capable of reproduction
Narrowing of the pyloric sphincter that reduces or eliminates the passage of food from the stomach to the small intestine, often causing projectile vomiting in infants.
Windmaier, P.W. Raff, H. Strang, T.S. (2004) Vander, Sherman, & Luciano's Human Physiology, the Mechanisms of Body Function 9th ed. Mcgraw-Hill
Starr & McMillan (2001) Human Biology 6th ed. Thomson-Brooks/cole.
McCance, Kathryn L., Heuther, Sue E. (1994) Pathophysiology: the biological basis for diseases in adults and children. Mosby-Year Book, Inc.
Kevin Young, U.S. Citizen and resident thereof. I was teaching pre-nursing students of Provo College through distance education technology, while working at the Utah State University Brigham City campus (From 2010-2020 I taught at Snow College, Arizona Western College, and Sul Ross State University, then returned to USU Brigham City). This textbook was created as a class project. I created the chapter pages, but the students are the primary authors (hopefully some of them will list themselves here). The fall 2006 class created the initial structure and content, while the spring 2007 students went through each chapter making improvements. Starting spring 2021, USU students will make contributions to this book.
Nursing student, Provo College Stephanie Greenwood 18:13, 30 April 2007 (UTC)
Nursing Student, Provo College Danette Seyffert 16:07, 1 May 2007 (UTC)
Dr.Elvis Ali, Board Certified Licensed Naturopath and Licensed Acupuncturist. Staff member of CCNM. August 29th, 2016.
Hopefully this project expands far beyond our classroom. If you wish to be listed specifically as a contributing author, then please include your name above this paragraph. We also thank all those who wrote Wikipedia articles that we borrowed from extensively, and all anonymous contributors.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the world's first and only open content human physiology textbook. Not only will this be the most affordable introductory physiology textbook available, but we anticipate that it will become the best one available. We will focus all our efforts for two months on providing valuable content and organizing and explaining information clearly. We anticipate the book becoming increasingly better as worldwide awareness and participation spread.
The original text of this work, and the home of the project, can be found at:
Notes on the preferred style and formatting of each page can be at:
All content contained herein is available under the GNU free documentation license. You can copy it, print it, sell it, and create derivative works from it, in accordance with that license.
This book links to several outside sources, and these links are designed to be illustrative learning tools. Links to outside content do not represent an endorsement of that content. Any of the content not found under the Wikimedia site and subsites is not guaranteed to be under the GDFL; they are most likely not.
The effects of rock type on Hong Kong's landscape are great. We will look at the three rock types here.
Although all three rock types are found in Hong Kong, igneous rocks are by far the most common, taking up nearly 85% of Hong Kong's rock outcrop. That means the layer of rock on the surface of Hong Kong is mainly igneous rock. Sedimentary rocks take up most of the remaining 15%, with a very small percentage for metamorphic rocks. This is not to count the parts of Hong Kong covered by superficial deposits (discussed below).
Although it was previously believed that granite was the dominant rock type in Hong Kong, it is now known that volcanic rocks are the most important, taking up half of Hong Kong's outcrop. Important places with volcanic rocks include the northern, eastern and central portions of the New Territories, including Tai Mo Shan and the Sai Kung Peninsula. The western portion of Lantau Island and the southern part of Hong Kong Island, excluding the southernmost part, are also made of volcanic rocks.
Tuff is one of the most important volcanic rocks in Hong Kong. Hong Kong's tuff was formed during the Middle and Late Jurassic and Early Cretaceous. Ash and pyroclasts from violent volcanic eruptions of the era were compacted and solidified. Tuff varies in composition, ranging from fine ash to small rock fragments. There are usually various crystals, mainly quartz, feldspar, biotite and hornblende, embedded in fine, dark groundmass. The last major volcanic eruption in Hong Kong was one of extreme magnitude, and produced the spectacular hexagonal tuff columns at High Island Reservoir. The columnar joints were bent during solidification as weight caused a sliding effect on the upper part of the rock.
Rhyolite is another important rock in Hong Kong, formed from lava flows and ash flows. The main mineral in feldspar and the rhyolite often exhibits flow bands, which indicate that it was formed from lava.
Volcanic rocks shape Hong Kong's landscape. As a volcanic rock, tuff has very high resistance - that is to say, it is very tough. Therefore, tuff hills in Hong Kong are less prone to denudation. Tai Mo Shan and Lantau Peak are notable examples. Also, volcanic rocks are responsible for various sea cliffs near the coast like those found in Port Shelter.
Plutonic rocks were formed deep in the earth's crust and were exposed onto the earth's surface after the overlying rocks were removed. About 35% of Hong Kong's outcrop are plutonic rocks. Granite is the most important.
Granite is the most common, and is found in the southwestern part of the New Territories (most notably Tuen Mun and Tai Lam), other southern part of the New Territories (such as Sha Tin), Tai Po, the northern part and southernmost tips of Hong Kong Island. It is also found on the outlying islands: the eastern part of Lantau Island, most of Lamma Island, Po Toi Island, and the Soko Islands. Most notably, the two sides of Victoria Harbour are a granite batholith.
Hong Kong's granite has either pink or grey feldspar minerals. These are the dominant colours of granite.
Plutonic rocks are less resistant than their volcanic relative, and have produced shorter hills which have gone through more denudation, such as Castle Peak and Beacon Hill. (The badland landscape in granitic slopes will be discussed later.)
Granite produces a specific weathering profile in Hong Kong by spheroidal weathering. On the bottom sits the unweathered bedrock. Above the bedrock lies corestones of decreasing size and angularity until the surface of the weathering profile, where fine regolith is found. The layer of regolith is very thick and provides support for lush vegetation. The weathering profile is also thick, and may extend up to 60 metres below the earth surface. As rainfall continues to infiltrate and percolate into the bedrock, the bedrock will be continuously removed unless the layer of regolith is too thick for infiltrating water to progress. Erosion by rain and wind, especially the former, will wash away the layer of topsoil to reveal the corestones below. Tors are thus commonly found in Hong Kong. Amah Rock and Lion Rock are two notable examples.
(This is only a description of the weathering profile. For its formation, you should write out the processes involved in spheroidal weathering, which is provided in the Chemical Weathering chapter.)
Sedimentary rock outcrops are sparse and scattered over the city, taking up 15% of the land area. They appear in the northereastern the New Territories, including Pat Sin Leng, Port Island and Tung Ping Chau. The very first rocks in Hong Kong are sedimentary. They were developed along Tolo Channel before its submergence, and includes Bluff Head and Ma On Shan. The youngest rocks in Hong Kong are also sedimentary. They were developed on Tung Ping Chau.
Various types of sedimentary rocks are found in Hong Kong, including the full range of grain sizes: conglomerate, sandstone, siltstone, mudstone, shale. We will discuss conglomerate and siltstone in detail.
Layers of conglomerate generally overlie volcanic rock layers or are sandwiched by other sedimentary rocks. They are formed from cemented pebbles, cobbles and boulders. The colour varies. White conglomerate was formed from lithified rounded pebbles along Tolo Channel and on Ma On Shan during the Devonian period. They were formed in a wet delta environment, hence reduction took place, discolouring the rocks. Red conglomerate was formed from lithified colluvium, composed of volcanic rock and other sedimentary rocks. They were formed in an arid environment during the Cretaceous period, hence oxidation took place, colouring the rocks.
Siltstone was also found. Surprisingly, siltstone was formed from fine silt. Found in Tung Ping Chau and contains minerals like quartz. The bedding plates are very thin and fossils are commonly found. The colour ranges from dark grey to reddish-brown. It was formed in a lake that originally housed gypsum from salt evaporation. The gypsum later dissolved and the lake was filled with sediments, forming siltstone.
???
Metamorphic rocks rarely occur as outcrop in Hong Kong. Marble and schist are sometimes found here. Marble is found in Yuen Long and Ma On Shan. Metamorphosed sedimentary rocks are also found in Lo Wu and Lok Ma Chau.
High temperature caused by magma intrusion and subduction. Which causes chemical reaction occurs that causes existing minerals to recrystalise, leading to forming new minerals.
The rocks are subjected to two kinds of pressure which confining pressure with a general force applied equally in all directions such as subduction. Which creates a huge pressure and lead to cracks and space between materials to decrease. Rocks has then become denser and more compact and mineral recrystalise and forming new materials.
Also differential stress such as pressure ezeerted in a particular direction is greater than others. Example which includes fding by tectonic processes which resulted differental stress. Rock is the. Flattened and deformed with the mineral recrystalise and forming new materials.
Now more than ever, there seems to be a great debate whether Edutainment, specifically, Digital Game Based Learning (DGBL) is effective in learning of K-12 students.
There are three factors that have brought public interest in games as learning tools:
Recently, some researchers (e.g., Gee, 2003; 2005; Squire, 2005; Prensky, 2006; Shaffer, 2006) have also argued that games’ underlying cognitive, social, and cultural features can offer various educative opportunities for learners. These are games’ intrinsic traits that promote learning in a constructivist fashion from these perspectives:
Motivational Perspective: fun and enjoyment are important as learners can be more relaxed, motivated and willing to learn. Malone (1980) gave his intrinsic motivation theory, which asserts that challenge, fantasy, control, curiosity, cooperation, recognition and competition are the most significant elements that make game-playing fun and engaging, and sustain players’ continual motives.
Cognitive Perspective: the traditional school curricula are often fragmented into small and unconnected pieces (Papert, 1993). The original intention is for making learning easier, but this usually ends up with depriving the rationale behind the knowledge itself, creating unrealistic learning contexts, and making learning boring. Learning should be an active process based upon concrete experience (Piaget, 1964). A well-designed game can do well in presenting near real-life contexts for individuals to acquire knowledge and skills unintentionally rather than deliberately (Gee, 2003).
Socio-Cultural Perspective: How to educate learners is not seen as how to build representations in each of their heads, but how to engage them in social practices (Lave & Wenger, 1991). Knowledge itself arises from social needs, fulfills social functions, and is tied inherently with cultural conditions (Cole, 1996). Thus, learning is not just a process of mastering facts, but rather, participating in socio-cultural practices. This requires learners to develop their own identity relative to others.
The noun edutainment was made by Bob Heyman while producing documentaries for the National Geographic Society. It is used to refer to the use of small portions of eLearning used to deliver key messages in an entertaining manner. Edutainment is potentially a broad term which covers the combination of educational and entertainment use on a variety of media platforms including computer games. The term is quite elastic as a lot of games are put into this category, and game companies are so inclined as to strengthen the appeal for parents (Buckingham & Scanlon, 2002; Konzack, 2003). This software genre is designed and developed to focus on academic subjects. Education games can also provide students with experiences that simulate real life.
What is Digital Game Based Learning (DGBL)?
DGBL is an instructional method that incorporates educational content or learning principles into computer or video games with the goal of engaging learners. Applications of digital game-based learning draw upon the constructivist theory of education.
Marc Prensky explains that the emergence of digital game-based learning came near the end 20th century along with a global technology boom. The recent generations of students in grades K-12 have lived their entire lives with access to technology. Because of this access to technology, Prensky argues that today’s students “think and process information fundamentally differently than their predecessors.” Teachers or “digital immigrants” now have to adapt to the language and learning styles of “digital natives,” the net generation students who have always been surrounded by technology. Prensky recommends that in order for teachers to adapt their instruction to meet the needs of students, they can employ computer or digital-based games as learning tools in the classroom. These games can be used in various subject areas and in a variety of ways.
Digital game-based learning involves activities that can range from completing very simple tasks to the development of intricate problem-solving skills. According to Patricia Deubel, games can be categorized as “action, adventure, fighting, puzzle, role-playing, sports, and strategy.” (5) Deubel suggests that the following information should be taken into account when teachers are selecting games for students:
Students’ age, characteristics, gender, competitiveness, and previous gaming experience
Too much competitiveness and the effectiveness of the difficulty level.
Deubel suggests that there are a few necessary components required for effective digital game-based learning.
The games must keep learning and engagement at a high level.
Rules and goals are also important components of a strong game-based learning program.
Teachers must make the outcomes of the games clear and provide immediate feedback.
Students have an interactive role not only with the game, but with other students as well.
We should not think of edutainment as a fixed genre but rather as different titles which share some problematic assumptions about motivation, learning theory, learning principles and game design while being produced, marketed and distributed differently than commercial computer games. The characteristics are:
Entertainment-Education uses a blend of core communication theories and fundamental entertainment pedagogy to guide the preparation of the programming. The major communication theories that influence Entertainment-Education include:
Persuasion Theory: (Aristotle, Petty, Cacioppo) Psychological characteristics effect the response of a person to messages. Also indicates the message and source factors that influence a person's response such as the credibility, attractiveness, and expertise of the source.
Theory of Reasoned Action: (Ajzen, Fishbein) Social influences effect behavior, including beliefs and perceived social norms.
Social Learning Theory: (Bandura) People learn by observing others and the consequences of their behavior. If the person so chooses, they then emulate the behavior by rehearsing the action, taking action, comparing their experiences to the experiences of others, and then adopting the new behavior.
Diffusion Theory: (Rogers) Behavior spreads through a community or group over a period of time. Television may plant the idea, but social networks reinforce it and cause it to grow.
Major education pedagogy involved with Entertainment-Education includes:
Relevance: Learning is more likely when people can see the usefulness of the knowledge they are given.
Incremental Learning: Learning is most effective when people can learn at their own pace.
Distributed Learning: (Fossard) Different people learn in different ways over different periods of time. It is important to present information differently so that people can absorb it.
According to Patricia Deubel, DGBL has the potential to engage and motivate students and offer customized learning experiences while promoting long-term memory and providing practical experience. Deubel suggests that in order for teachers to effectively use DGBL they must first find non-violent games that facilitate planning and problem-solving and relate to the curriculum. Deubel recommends role-playing, simulation, and adventure games because they often appeal to the development of more than just one skill. DGBL also provides a great tool for conducting educational research. DGBL attracts students of various demographic backgrounds. It also helps students set and work towards achievement of common goals, provide helpful feedback, and maintain records for measurement purposes. Furthermore, the interactive nature of video games stimulates learning and encourages participants to challenge new topics or knowledge. It can help students develop computer skills that they may need in a society that continues to develop technologically.
This process happens rapidly and often while the game is played, with immediate feedback. Games that are too easily solved will not be engaging, so good games constantly require input from the learner and provide feedback. Games thrive as teaching tools when they create a continuous cycle of cognitive disequilibrium and resolution (via assimilation or accommodation) while also allowing the player to be successful. There are numerous other areas of research that account for how and why games are effective learning tools, including anchored instruction, feedback, behaviorism, constructivism, narrative psychology, and a host of other cognitive psychology and educational theories and principles. Each of these areas can help us, in turn, make the best use of DGBL.
Although education games are becoming more prevalent, they are no match for the quantity and the quality of games that are produced and are available solely for "entertainment" purposes. It is difficult for education games to compete because most education institutions cannot afford to finance such projects (Gros, 2003; Sawyer, 2004). According to Sawyer (2004), building a pedagogically sound game is expensive and time-consuming. It can cost between $500,000 and $2.5 million, and can take from 12 to 24 months to complete. Many commercial games require peripheral hardware or game devices such as the Xbox and also require a large block of time for players to complete. These criteria are not readily available to K-12 institution. In addition, education games are not designed and created to correlate with specific school curricula.
There are critics who object to the use of educational games. Two concerns are: the addictive nature of computer games and the violence that children are exposed to while playing games. According to Okan (2003), computer games are not culturally neutral. This has raised concerns among educators and the general public. They fear that technology is sweeping through all levels of education without the benefit of input from individuals who can help to shape and restrain this forward momentum.
By integrating technology into pedagogy, students learn cognitive and technological skills at the same time. More traditional parents and educators are skeptical of using technology especially edutainment software. They believe that if students are playing or being entertained they are not learning. They fear that technology will undermine learning processes, while at the same time encourage parents and teachers to spend scarce education dollars on technology. They suggest that this encourages a watering down of the learning process. Other concerns are that edutainment technology teaches students that learning does not require perseverance, reading critically, making connections between new information and what is already known, and that collaborating with peers is outdated and unnecessary. In other words, in addition to teaching the curriculum, technology has an unintended effect of discouraging serious learning (Okan, 2003).
Another argument against using computer games in education is the concern that technology will be used only for the sake of "using technology." Using technology does not guarantee academic success.
A study showed mixed results with regard to the impact of technology on learning outcomes. (McDonald and Hannafin 2003)
Using technology is a new approach to teaching and that teachers are trying to fit a new medium into traditional teaching methods. (Salomon 2002) Salomon suggests that traditional classrooms produce a better mastery of recalled information. Alternatively, less traditional technology and constructivist-based classrooms produce improved skills for developing questions, formulating hypotheses, and the ability to intelligently address new problems.
According to Okan (2003), the use of technology results in acquiring passive information in the form of entertainment rather than though the more challenging critical thinking process. It is argued that, when used effectively, digital games develop critical thinking skills through the process of active problem solving (Hostetter, 2002).
When student are having fun, they are motivated to persist for longer periods of time or to approach the learning activity more often. According to Rieber (2001), motivation is inseparable from learning and is considered by some to be the most important learning factor. When students are motivated, they spend more time on task and learning becomes an incidental part of the activity. Alternatively, some think that technology, although motivating, often diminishes the need to review prior knowledge, to strategize, to analyze, to make new connections and to engage in other high-level learning activities. However, through solving puzzles, conquering enemies, and creating digital cities and theme parks, students are categorizing, analyzing, and using prior knowledge for problem solving (Hostetter, 2002).
DGBL probably do teach children bits of things, but mostly edutainment is simple in its facilitation of learning experiences. Learning in relation to spelling and reading for pre-school and early school children may see some gains from edutainment. However, edutainment does not really teach the player about a certain area, but rather lets the player perform mechanic operations. This will lead to memorization of the practiced aspects but probably not a deep understanding of the skill or content – not really grasped by the student and although this may work for some limited areas, like spelling and reading, this is a quite limited scope. In general, this will result in weak transfer and application of the skills as it is not fundamentally understood, but only memorized as a mechanic action in the game environment (Gee et al., 2004; Jonassen, 2001; Schank, 1999).
There is also common agreement that edutainment fails to integrate the learning with the computer game. Hence, a change of focus in the learning experience from the educational part to the game part. This result in weak learning experiences especially if you consider the time-on-task issue – the player won’t spend a lot of time on educational experiences, but rather gain a lot of game experience. (Brody, 1993; Fabricatore, 2000; Facer et al., 2003; Vandeventer, 1997)
Overall the shortcomings of edutainment have created an overall negative attitude towards edutainment titles. There is, to put it mildly, widespread skepticism towards almost any aspects of edutainment.
River City: “multi-user virtual environment” game funded by the National Science Foundation and developed by programmers at the Harvard Graduate School of Education. Targeted at students in grades six through nine, River City looks a bit like Second Life and portrays how three diseases simultaneously affect health in a fictitious city. As students explore the ailments, they learn how disease is spread and the impact of human interactions far and wide.
Food Force: a U.N. produced game on the mechanics of food aid distribution, and Whyville, another game that takes place in a virtual world, each has about four million players, a number that far exceeds the number of students graduating each year with a bachelor’s degree in science, technology, engineering or math.
Learning Federation: Microsoft is bringing researchers and businesses together to develop a game-based computer learning environment to be used by classroom teachers. The idea behind this partnership is to take the same video-game technology that lets you virtually fly airplanes or build amusement parks, and use it for educational purposes. Microsoft has teamed up with several academic partners, such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), to build some prototypes. Some prototypes include:
One CD focuses on a bio-hazard attack in a city and how an emergency team would respond.
Another CD explores engineering principles as students have to rebuild the world on another planet after Earth is evacuated.
A third one has students build houses in unusual places, such as under the ocean or suspended in air. As in popular computer games, students can use different "virtual" tools, like a crane, to help complete their quest.
Age of Empires (history), Sim City (engineering & geography), CSI (criminal justice & forensic science), Tycoon series (business, economics, and management) are also known as educational games.
We are past the point of questioning whether or not DGBL is good for learning. The inclusion of computer games within formal learning is a necessity and should be commonplace. It is really an issue of curriculum and teaching methodology rather than a technological issue. Technological moderating factors can be overcome, what is more important is that teachers are able to align the use of computer games with their existing notions of pedagogy and their approaches to learning. To do this the negative perceptions of games playing needs to be challenged, teachers who do understand the potential of games need to work with those who don’t and the use of games in learning needs to be legitimized by dialogue with organizations and parents.
Teachers may need to recognize that games promote interactivity and problem solving skills and adjust their pedagogies accordingly but more than anything it is the social status of games that needs to be recognized within the formal environment alongside the skills that learners can accrue from playing those games. Schools and teachers need to adjust their pedagogical approaches rather than looking at wholesale curriculum redesign and look for areas of transfer that can be planned into lessons to maximize the learning potential available to them, not only of computer games but also of other ubiquitous technologies that can aid learning and break the boundaries between 21st century bedroom and 20th century classroom.
DGBL is opening up new potential for learning in formal situations and in innovative ways. The emergence of DGBL is offering the learning and teaching communities new opportunities to reach and motivate hard-to-engage learner groups, support differentiated and personalized learning, address vocational and training-based course materials and provide new tools for teaching basic and key skills, science and math education.
Clearly, DGBL has been effective in these situations and offers a wide diversity of approaches and tools for teachers to make use of in their practice. But DGBL also offers the learner a chance to become more central in their own learning through generating their own content, learning collaboratively in teams and becoming more engaged in the processes of learning.
There are some potential benefits in developing computer games to teach children:
It makes a lot of sense to develop computer game based learning on a widespread basis. To produce good computer game based learning requires a combination of great games design, cleaver programming to build in some of the important factors discussed above and expertise in teaching/ child neuropsychological development. There are thousands of learning games out there but very few based on knowledge of neuropsychological development, with good game play and research to show their effectiveness.
Educational Gaming: Interactive Edutainment link to site Accessed on October 29, 2009
Digital Game based learning link to site Accessed on October 29, 2009
Prensky, M. (2004). “Digital Natives, digital immigrants.” On the Horizon.
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital Game-Based Learning. New York: McGraw-Hill
Deubel, P. (2006). “Game on!” T.H.E. Journal (Technological Horizons in Education)
K12 Academics Fundamental Communication & Education Theories & Pedagogy Used in the Field link to site Accessed on October 30, 2009
Griffiths, M. (2002). “The educational benefits of videogames.” Education and Health.
Educause Review Digital Game-Based Learning: It's Not Just the Digital Natives Who Are Restless link to site Accessed on October 28, 2009
Egenfeldt-Nielsen, Simon. (2009) Making sweet music: The Educational Use of Computer Games
Gamebased Learning. Computer games and realising their learning potential link to site Accessed on October 30, 2009
Reed, Jonathan. Child Neuropsychology. link to site Accessed on October 29, 2009
Gee, J. P. (2003). What Video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: PalGrave-McMillan.
Gee, J. P. (2004, 24. March). Learning by Design: Games as Learning Machines. Gamasutra.
Buckingham, D., & Scanlon, M. (2002). Education, edutainment, and learning in the home. Cambridge: Open University Press.
Egenfeldt-Nielsen, S. (2004). Practical barriers in using educational computer games. On the Horizon.
Leyland, B. (1996). How can computer games offer deep learning and still be fun? Paper presented at the Ascilite, Adelaide, Australia.
Malone, T. W., & Lepper, M. (1987a). Intrinsic Motivation and Instructional Effectiveness in Computer-based Education. In Snow & Farr (Eds.), Aptitude learning, and instruction. London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
Malone, T. W., & Lepper, M. (1987b). Making learning fun: A Taxonomy of Intrinsic Motivation for Learning. In Snow & Farr (Eds.), Aptitude learning, and instruction.
Okan, Z. (2003). Edutainment: is learning at risk? British Journal of Educational Technology, 34(3), 255-264. London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
Squire, K. (2004). Replaying history. Unpublished Dissertation submitted in part fulfilment of the requirements of the Doctor of Philosophy (Instructional technology). Indiana University., Indiana.
Konzack, L. (2003). Edutainment : leg og lær med computermediet. Aalborg: Aalborg Universitetsforlag.
The Weasleys, The Lestranges, The Crabbes, The Potters, The Malfoys, The Burkes, The Longbottoms, The Hitchens, The Flints, The Crouches
The Black family were considered to be one of the noblest family in the wizarding world. They are very strict when it comes to blood status.
Beginner warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Note that many members of the Black Family appear in this series. This article will only briefly touch on all known Black family members. For more discussion of the Black family, see the articles on Sirius Black, Regulus Black, Narcissa (Black) Malfoy, Bellatrix (Black) Lestrange, Andromeda (Black) Tonks, Phineas Nigellus Black, Orion Black, and Walburga Black. Although Draco Malfoy, Narcissa's son, is related to the Black family through Narcissa, we will not include him directly in this article.
Hagrid, as he brings the infant Harry to Professor Dumbledore, says that he had borrowed young Sirius Black's flying motorcycle.
Harry finds out that Sirius Black has escaped from Azkaban to find him, and it is widely believed Sirius' purpose is to kill Harry. He then finds out that Sirius was his father's best friend, and his godfather. Harry later finds out that actually it was Ron's rat, Scabbers, actually an Animagus wizard named Peter Pettigrew, that betrayed Harry's parents, and that he framed Sirius. Pettigrew, one of Sirius' purported victims, manages to escape before his continuing existence can be proved to the satisfaction of the Ministry of Magic, so Sirius remains a wanted fugitive.
Needing advice about dreams he is having, and about the Triwizard Tournament, Harry contacts Sirius using Owl Post, and Sirius answers by means of Floo Powder. Sirius counsels him, both from the fireplace and later in person, having concealed himself via his Animagus dog shape, but despite providing reassurance is not particularly helpful.
Shortly after the appearance and disappearance of Bartemius Crouch, Harry is briefly left alone in Dumbledore's office. While there, he discovers Dumbledore's Pensieve. Experimenting with it, he finds himself witnessing the trials of several Death Eaters, including Bellatrix Lestrange, who he feels is quite insane.
As the book ends, Dumbledore has Sirius reveal himself to Professor Snape and Mrs. Weasley, and sends Sirius off to round up "the old gang".
Shortly after Harry's birthday, the "Advance Guard" arrives to bring him to "Headquarters". This building, at Number 12, Grimmauld Place, is now the Headquarters of the Order of the Phoenix, and is the ancestral Black home. Harry is reunited here with Sirius, and meets the mad, screaming portrait of his mother, Walburga.
Sirius Black shows Harry the Black family tree on a tapestry in the front parlour at Grimmauld Place. The members of the family that he mentions are Phineas Nigellus, Aunt Elladora, Araminta Meliflua, his uncle Alphard Black, his parents Walburga and Orion, his brother Regulus, his cousins Bellatrix, Andromeda (who has had her spot on the tree burned off because she dated to marry "the Muggle Ted Tonks") and Narcissa, and Narcissa's son Draco Malfoy. This family tree is huge, and the motto is Toujours Pur - "Always Pure". Those like Andromeda and Sirius himself who have dared to consort with Muggles or the Muggle-born have been burned off the family tree, and the tapestry itself is apparently fastened to the wall with a Permanent Sticking Charm.
Harry and Sirius speak by means of Floo Powder a number of times in this book. Additionally, Phineas Nigellus at several points carries messages back and forth between Hogwarts and Grimmauld Place.
Some time after Christmas, several Death Eaters imprisoned in Azkaban break out. Bellatrix Lestrange is one of them.
At the end of the book, both Sirius and Bellatrix take part in the climactic Battle at the Ministry of Magic, though on opposite sides. Of the twelve Death Eaters who take part in that battle, Bellatrix is the only one to escape, after killing Sirius. Bellatrix is trapped by Dumbledore, but is finally rescued by Voldemort.
Bellatrix (Bella) and Narcissa (Cissy) together visit Severus Snape. Narcissa has a favour to ask him; Bellatrix tries to dissuade her because she does not trust Snape's return from Dumbledore's side. Snape manages, mostly, to reassure Bellatrix, though he does mention that her value to Voldemort and her position in his councils has not been improved by the fiasco at the Ministry. After warning Narcissa that Voldemort prohibits discussion of missions between Death Eaters, Snape notes that he was already aware of Draco's mission, which is never clearly stated, and agrees to help him. He further reinforces his statements to Bellatrix about his loyalty by agreeing to take an Unbreakable Vow to help Draco complete his mission.
Barely a fortnight into the summer, Professor Dumbledore visits the Dursley house to pick up Harry, and while there he tells Harry what he has inherited from Sirius. It appears Sirius left Harry everything he owns, including the Noble and Most Ancient House of Black at Grimmauld Place, and Kreacher, the house elf belonging to the house.
Draco's mission, it turns out, has been in part to arrange a secret entrance to Hogwarts. Having managed that, Draco waits until Dumbledore is away from the school, then leads a large number of Death Eaters into the school. Among their number is Bellatrix, who we see at one point taunting the weakened Dumbledore, and at another point dueling with Ginny Weasley.
The locket that Dumbledore retrieved from the lake in the cave bears a note signed by one "R. A. B." It was believed, following the publication of this book, that the mysterious R. A. B. was Regulus Black; this was confirmed in the next book.
We see Bellatrix and Narcissa in council with Voldemort, where it has become apparent, by the location where they are seated, that both have fallen out of favour with the Dark Lord. Bellatrix is also part of the group of Death Eaters who attack the seven Harry Potters in the escape from Privet Drive; she targets Nymphadora Tonks, her own niece.
Having returned to Grimmauld Place, Harry recalls a locket that had been discarded two years earlier and guesses that it could be the locket Dumbledore had been trying to retrieve from the cave in the previous book. Summoning Kreacher, Harry discovers that Voldemort had borrowed Kreacher from Regulus in order to place the locket in the cave. On discovering what Voldemort had done, Regulus then returned to the cave with Kreacher, told Kreacher to take the locket and destroy it, and then drank the potion protecting the locket, afterwards being dragged to his death in the lake when he tried to quench the thirst caused by the potion. Kreacher remains distraught because he is unable to follow his master's final wishes, especially now as the locket has been stolen by Mundungus Fletcher. Harry reveals that he has the same mission, to retrieve and destroy the locket, and gives Kreacher the locket Dumbledore had retrieved from the potion; Kreacher, as a result, becomes fervently loyal to Harry.
Captured by Snatchers, disguised hastily by Hermione, and brought to Malfoy Manor, Harry is faced by Bellatrix and Narcissa, who try to identify him. Bellatrix recognizes the Sword of Gryffindor, and states that summoning Voldemort before they know where the Sword came from would be fatal. She questions Hermione, and the goblin Griphook, with the Cruciatus curse, finally accepting Hermione's story that the sword is a fake. Harry and Ron manage, with the help of Dobby, to rescue Harry, Griphook, and the other prisoners, but in the process Dobby is murdered by a dagger thrown by Bellatrix.
After their escape, Harry mentions that, as they had overheard earlier that the Sword had been moved to Gringotts Wizarding Bank, Bellatrix' recognizing the Sword indicates that it had gone into her vault at Gringotts, and her fear suggested strongly that there was something else in there that Voldemort treasured. Harry guesses, correctly, that this is one of Voldemort's horcruxes, and determines to break into Gringotts and destroy it. To do this, Hermione disguises herself as Bellatrix, and using her captured wand as identification, manages to get the Trio into the deep vaults.
Both Narcissa and Bellatrix take part in the final battle at Hogwarts. After Harry's and Voldemort's souls return from the Waystation, Bellatrix rushes to help Voldemort, who brushes her off while ordering Narcissa to see if Harry is truly dead. Harry is not, and Narcissa can't help noticing this; she asks Harry if Draco is still alive. Harry replies that he is, and Narcissa lies to Voldemort, saying Harry is dead so Voldemort will not re-open the battle on the school. Battle is rejoined, however, and eventually Bellatrix is killed by Molly Weasley, who is defending her daughter Ginny.
We see later that Narcissa has survived the battle, and we are told that Andromeda Tonks had stayed at home to care for the infant Teddy.
The Black family seemed to have considerable magical strength. We see that Bellatrix (Lestrange) is an extremely powerful witch, and Sirius is quite able to hold his own with the other Marauders. It is also mentioned that Sirius' father had strengthened the protective spells on Number 12, Grimmauld Place, which we expect would take a rare strength, that building being so old and well-established.
Much of the perceived strength of character in the Black family was based on a belief in their own superiority due to being pure-blood wizards. While this may have made them appear stronger, it carries with it all the less savory aspects of nobility (looking down on others, treatment of those not blessed with pure blood as menials or subhuman) and so does not count particularly in their favour.
There seems to have been a strain of mental instability that is expressed in the Black blood line. We see this to a great extent in the portrait of Sirius' mother, and in Bellatrix Lestrange, and to a lesser extent in Sirius himself. We can only speculate that this is at least in part due to the Black belief in pure-blood strength, and the resulting in-breeding; we will note in the Black family tree that both Sirius' parents are descended from Phineas Nigellus Black.
The Blacks seemed to have a surprisingly short life span for wizards. Most of the later generations were female and, with the death of Sirius near the end of Order of the Phoenix, the family name came to an end. The blood-line continues, however, through Nymphadora Tonks, child of Andromeda (Black) Tonks, and through Tonks' child, Teddy; and Draco Malfoy, son of Narcissa (Black) Malfoy.
Family tree drawing (note: pending redrafting of the tree, we are using a Portuguese image, hence the odd spellings of the names):
If nothing else, the Black family tree details just how inbred and intermarried the "pureblood" Wizards are – both of Sirius' parents are descended from Phineas Nigellus and his wife Ursula Flint. One point of interest is that Dorea Black married Charlus Potter, and they had one son – could that be James Potter, Harry's father? James was born, we think, about 1959, when Dorea would have been about 40, which is possible; though it is equally possible that Charlus is James' grandfather. Sirius did mention that he spent rather a lot of time over at James' parent's, presumably because he didn't get along with his parents; it's possible that James' mother was his aunt or great-aunt. The Family Tree would not show James Potter in any event, as he had committed the cardinal sin (in the Black family estimation) of marrying the Muggle-born Lily Evans.
It is curious that Harry did not see, or did not see fit to comment on, the presence of his own family name, when he saw the House of Black tapestry in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix.
Other interesting names appear in this tapestry as well. Callidora, who was born in 1915 and is still alive, married Harfang Longbottom; what relationship are they to Neville Longbottom? Lucretia (1925 - 1992) married Ignatius Prewett; Molly Weasley gave this name to her son Percy as his middle name as it was her uncle's name. Charis (1919 - 1973) married one Caspar Crouch: Bartemius Crouch Sr.'s brother, perhaps? And Septimus Weasley, who apparently married Cedrella Black (burn-mark 4), is almost certainly Ron's grandfather.
Burn-mark 7, Andromeda "who married Muggle Ted Tonks", is Nymphadora Tonks' mother; Ted Tonks is not a Muggle, though he was Muggle-born. Tonks did mention that she was related to the Black family.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Is Draco Malfoy, Lucius Malfoy's son, related to Harry Potter? If so, what is the relation?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Many times, we use the terms vibration and oscillation without knowing the difference between them. The term oscillation refers strictly to the repeating motion of a point mass or that of a rigid body while the term vibration refers to the repeating motion or deformations of an elastic structure. Thus any oscillation is a term used only in cases like the motion of a pendulum or that of a ship as a rigid body moving on the wavy seas while vibration is a term used for phenomenon exhibited by structures such as rotating fans or motors etc. Vibration involves deformation by definition while an oscillating structure does not deform.
In Structural and Mechanical engineering context, oscillation and vibration are differentiated based on the "restoring force" present in the system. For both oscillation and vibration, the mass of a system at rest (static equilibrium) need to be disturbed from its rest or equilibrium position. The mass gets excited and initiate oscillation or vibration; but only with the presence of a restoring force. If the disturbance is from an unstable or neutral equilibrium, possibility of any restoring force is lacking and the mass eventually moves away and occupies a new position. In the case of (i) stable equilibrium of a mass or (ii) mass being attached to a spring (or an elastic member), a restoring force comes into being and the mass is tended back to the original equilibrium position and as a result, periodic motion starts.
In case (i), generally, component of gravity (g) operated upon the associated mass component serves as restoring force. Thus the system undergoes no "elongations or strains" than rigid body motion, as in the case of a simple pendulum. Such "no-strain" periodic motions are referred to as oscillation.
In case (ii), spring force developed on the attached spring or elastic member serves as the restoring force. Thus the attached member undergoes "periodic elongation or strain". Thus the mass as well as attached member undergoes periodic motion. Such "strained" periodic motions are referred to as vibrations.
We have studied how we find the response of a structure to static load. When we come to study vibrations, what we have is not static load but dynamic load. The very nature of the load means that the response of the structure i.e the displacement, stress, reactions etc. also varies with time (see, also, Seismic Fitness).
Dynamic load is the load which varies. The variation may be with respect to time (Ex : reciprocating engine) or with respect to space (Ex : Moving vehicle on bridge).
The next question arises is at what rate it should change ? For example in a Dam the water level changes throughout the year then should we consider it as a dynamic load for designing the dam? NO, because though the load is changing with respect to time its inertial effect is very less for practical consideration.
To make it more clear, a Dynamic load (externally applied) is not only a function of time, say F(t), but also one which excites the mass of the system causing inertial effect. The physicist who deals with the problem has to decide whether the force, F(t) is a dynamic one or not based on the significance of the excitation.
It is also interesting to note that a dynamic load is not essential to produce vibration or oscillation. An initial displacement or velocity will trigger free vibration in an appropriate system (Ex : a spring-mass system like shock absorber of automobile)
In any vibrating system, there are a total of four types of forces that need to be taken into account. These are listed here.
The inertial force occurs because acceleration is present. We know if a body having mass 'm' is moving with an acceleration 'a' then the force acting on it is the inertial force given by :
The Spring force arises due to the elasticity of the material. It is proportional to the displacement. But actually it may vary linearly, quadratically or other proportionality law but for simplicity in modelling we assume that this force varies linearly. This assumption holds good for most of the general cases and hence accepted. If the extension in the spring is 'x' then the spring force is given by :
While these forces are enough to set up harmonic vibrations in a system, most systems also have intrinsic damping even if an external damper is not used. The damping force tends to oppose motion and acts against the velocity in most cases (the exception is negative damping). It generally varies with some power of the velocity though the most useful is viscous damping which varies linearly with velocity.
The total External force 'f(ext)' is the remaining force that acts on the system. It is the force that causes the excitation in the first place and may or may not be present while the system vibrates.
Necrosis is a type of cell death, distinct for apoptosis and autophagy, which has commonly thought to be an uncontrolled form of death. However, recent research has shown that the process and initial start may actually be regulated. Necrosis is typified by distinguishable signs such as generation of reactive oxygen species and ATP depletion. Necrosis is considered a more inflammatory form of cell death that might contribute to antiviral immunity. Additionally, it has been found that inhibition of proteins that are involved in apoptosis or autophagy lead to necrosis.
There are three types of mammalian cell death that can be distinguished by criteria of the morphological kind. While apoptosis is characterized by plasma membrane blebbing, among other criterion, and autophagy by accumulation of autophagic vacuoles, necrosis has been commonly defined negatively in that it is death lacking the aforementioned characteristics. Necrosis is associated with the loss of cells in many pathologies and is linked to local inflammation. This is through immune system alerting factors that are released. Furthermore, necrotic cells are cleared through a macropinocytotic mechanism whereby only parts of the cell are phagocytosed.
Necrosis is the combine of cell changes after localized cellular death through a process called autolysis. Necrosis consists of five distinctive morphological patterns. The five are listed below:
Coagulative necrosis- characterized by the formation of a gelatinous (gel-like) substance in dead tissues.
Liquefactive necrosis- also known as colliquative necrosis and is characterized by the digestion of dead cells to form a viscous liquid mass.
Caseous necrosis- combination of coagulative and liquefavtive necroses that is usually caused by mycobacteria.
Fat Necrosis- specialized necrosis of fat tissue.
Fibrinoid necrosis- special form of necrosis that caused by immune-mediated vascular damage containing antigen and antibodies.
Besides these five distinctive morphological patterns, there are also other clinical classifications of necrosis such as gangrene, gummatous, and haemorrhagic. Often time, spider bites may also lead to necrosis.
Experimental evidence in different species with similar necrosis with early plasma membrane rupture with little signs of apoptosis or autophagy has shown several traits leading to a sequence of events that are specific to necrotic cell death. These include mitochondrial dysfunction through production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and swelling, depletion of ATP, lack of Ca2+ homeostasis, perinuclear organelle clustering, protease activation such as calpains and cathepsins, lysosomal rupture, and plasma membrane rupture. This is further confirmed by the existence of a similar pathway in plant cells. Although research remains to be done to completely elucidate the molecular and chronological components of this pathway, it is possible that necrotic cell death is part of an organized programmed cascade to self-destruction.
While there are necrotic processes that are poorly defined and cannot be regulated, such as that from harsh external conditions as freeze-thawing and detergents, there are programmed necrotic happenstances in its occurrence. Evidence for this includes developmental necrosis such as that limiting the growth of bones and that of intestinal epithelial cells. Additionally, certain plasma membrane receptors, if triggered by attachment of their physiological ligands, can initiate necrosis, suggesting that there are signal transduction pathways connected to the induction of necrosis specifically. In addition, certain types of genetic and epigenetic factors can increase susceptibility to necrotic death, as seen in mouse brain ischemia. Furthermore, the inhibition of specific enzymes can prevent necrosis, indicating that certain enzymes play a vital role in the necrotic pathway. Also telling is that inhibition of caspases can change the type of cell death from that of apoptosis or autophagy to necrotic cell death.
The idea that necrotic cell death is the default pathway for cell death is supported by observations that inhibition of apoptosis as well as autophagy leads to necrosis in a variety of cell models. In a model using baby mouse kidney epithelial cells, suppression of both mitochondrial membrane permeabilization and transfection with Akt protein kinase changes the type of cell death from apoptosis to autophagy to necrosis. Simultaneous inhibition is required.
Other signs include the depletion of ATP favoring necrotic cell death (due to reducing optimal activation of caspases), presence of nitric oxide (inhibiting caspases), and inactivation of atg1 gene for autophagy. As such, it would appear that necrosis can occur as a part of signal transduction cascades or upon inhibition of other cell death pathways.
The occurrence of necrosis upon the inhibition of other pathways indicates its potential emergence early on in evolution as primordial. Apoptosis and autophagy may have been added later on. One hypothesis is that a primordial necrotic pathway existed. Addition of apoptosis or autophagy came later and was recruited for optimal dismantling of cells. However, this pathway would appear after the point of no return of cell death has already been reached. Autonomization of that pathway would arrive later, where two mechanisms are available for cell death, either apoptosis or necrosis. Both happen independently and the point of no return is not shared. Exclusivity of one mechanism, such as apoptosis, would come later in certain species, where necrosis is no longer a viable cell death pathway and cell death relies exclusively on apoptosis, such as in C. elegans.
Studies have shown that there may be certain molecules that are specifically required for necrosis. Some potential ones are described below. However, unlike apoptosis where genes necessary for its course have been identified, in necrosis, genes identified are not as specific.
In certain types of cell death signaling involving activation of caspase-8, RIP1 is cleaved by caspase-8, inactivating any pro-necrotic activity. By inhibiting caspase-8, cell death follows a necrotic-like pattern which is dependent on RIP1 expression. RIP1 has been implicated in other necrotic signaling such as that induced by DNA alkylation. The mechanism for this, however, is not completely elucidated, and more research is needed. However, it appears that RIP1 is a necrosis contributor as an upstream signal.
Since RIP1 activates signaling pathways other than necrosis, it suggests that there are additional mechanisms existing to regulate its pro-necrotic function. RNA interference screens have identified a kinase known as RIP3, which showed that RIP3 over-expression prompts apoptotic and necrotic cell death. This kinase serves as an inducer of programmed necrosis. The assembly of the pro-necrotic RIP1-RIP3 complex is during the TNF-induced programmed necrosis. The complex is mediated through the RHIM (RIP homotypic interaction motif), which is a representation of an emerging protein-protein interaction motif. Evidence favor RIP1 over RIP3 as the upstream kinase activator in necrotic signaling cascade. RIP1/RIP3-dependent programmed necrosis may be important in other inflammatory diseases as well as cancer.
However, CypD is not the cause of permeabilization mediated by the Bax/Bak genes, suggesting two different mechanisms of MMP, one necrotic and the other apoptotic. Cyclosporin A, strangely though, has been shown to inhibit apoptotic death in some situations, indicating some cross over between the two pathways. As involved in necrosis as CypD may be, it is not involved in all necrosis cases and is not specific to necrosis either.
Calpains, cysteine proteases that are Ca2+-dependent, and lysosomal cathepsins have been shown to be the likely executors of cell death through cleavage of the plasma membrane sodium/calcium exchanger, resulting in the inactivation of homeostasis. In C. elegans cases where there is a deg-3(d) allele, lysosomal proteases appear to be important as lysosomes fuse together and eventually result in necrosis, possible due to calpain activation. It would appear that altered ion homeostasis results in calpain activation and eventually cell death by necrosis.
To therapeutically inhibit necrosis may be desirable. One way to do this would be to block surface receptors that are linked to necrosis. Studies have shown that inhibition of PARP, RIP1, CypD, calpains, and cathepsins lead to necrosis inhibition in in vivo settings. On the other side, we may want to initiate necrosis in cells such as tumors that are resistant to cell death. Switching from necrotic cell death to the non-inflammatory apoptosis may also be a desirable deviation. By activating caspases, necrosis may be attenuated and inflammation decreased.
The most likely desirable outcome is the prevention of cell death completely. Knowing that several cell death pathways exist and are inter-related, inhibition of all of the pathways would prevent cell death. Combined inhibition of caspases, apoptotic proteins and necrotic factors would truly prevent cell death.
Golstein, P., & Kroemer, G. (2007). Cell death by necrosis: towards a molecular definition. Trends in biochemical sciences, 32(1), 37–43. doi:10.1016/j.tibs.2006.11.001
Golstein, P. and Kroemer, G. (2005) Redundant cell death mechanisms as relics and backups. Cell Death Differ. 12 (Suppl. 2), 1490–1496
Xu, K. et al. (2001) Necrotic cell death in C. elegans requires the function of calreticulin and regulators of Ca2+ release from the endoplasmic reticulum. Neuron 31, 957–971
Moquin, David, and Francis Ka-Ming Chan. The Molecular Regulation of Programmed Necrotic Cell Injury. Worcestor: Cell Press, n.d. PDF.
Many book authors set their books up with a print version, a PDF version or a collection. These are useful tools for saving an entire book to your hard drive, or for printing out a book for use offline. In this chapter we're going to talk about all these options and how they are used.
A print version is a combination of all the book's pages, loaded into one webpage and specially formatted for printing. Print versions for large books might take a long time to load in your browser, especially if you are on a slow connection. Some print versions are so big that they've been broken up into several pages to prevent overloading the server or the browser.
Print versions, unlike PDF versions, will automatically update when one of the included pages is updated. This means that a print version will always display the most recent version of all the pages in the book. Print versions are designed to look good when printed, but might not look very good in your browser. To make sure you see what it's supposed to look like, use the "Print preview" option in your browser before printing.
If a book has a print version, there will usually be a notice on the main page of that book about it. If there is no notice, there probably isn't a print version available. If there is no print version and you would like there to be one, you can ask the authors to create it for you, or you can jump in and do it yourself. We will discuss how to make print versions in The Wikibooks Author (Using Wikibooks/Print versions and PDFs).
Some book authors go the extra mile and produce a PDF version of their book. PDF versions can be saved to your hard drive, and can be opened in a PDF reader. Contrary to HTML print versions, a PDF version might not be up to date with the current text of the book on Wikibooks. For the most up to date version, you should check back on Wikibooks to see if there have been any changes.
To create PDF versions see Using Wikibooks/Print versions and PDFs.
Wikibooks has a special software extension called the collections extension. With the collections extension, you can create groups of pages called "collections". In most cases, the pages in a book are used to create these collections, although there is no rule about this: You can pick and mix pages from multiple books together in a collection, if you want.
On the left-hand side of your screen there is a box with links in it that says "create a book". The links in this box can be used to create collections of pages, or to load a saved collection. We will discuss how to create and use collections in more detail in The Wikibooks Author.
Once you have created a collection, or loaded a premade one, you can go to Special:Collection to see various options. You can save your collection, you can download it in PDF or ODT format, or you can have it printed by our print-on-demand partner PediaPress. PediaPress will print and bind your collection into a book and mail it to you for a reasonable price. A portion of proceeds from these book sales goes to the WMF. None of our authors get any royalties for these books, that helps to keep the cost down for students who need them cheap!
For more information about Collections, see the relevant chapters in The Wikibooks Author (Using Wikibooks/Print versions and PDFs#Collections Extension), or visit Help:Collections.
The gastrointestinal tract consists, put simply, of a hollow tube passing through the body. It is an external part of the body, responsible for processing and filtering ingested material. It includes the mouth, pharynx, esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine, and anus. The Gastrointestinal (GI) tract is a duct that expands through the body and it allows food to enter from one end to the other. The inside of the GI tract is known as the lumen, it extends from one end to another.
The mouth is where the process of digestion all begins. When you put food into your mouth you chemically and mechanically process the food. Chemically your mouth secretes saliva, which contains salivary amylase, a main enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of starch, creating sugars. The production of saliva is triggered before the food even enters your mouth. Once the food enters your mouth, saliva is even further produced. The mouth also mechanically processes your food with your teeth to grind up the food, making it easier to swallow and enter the esophagus. The mouth also contains your tongue, which helps to propel the food down your throat to continue digestion.
Once the food is ground up by the mouth, it goes through the pharynx, or your throat – a passageway that allows the food to move out of the mouth and into the esophagus. According to Whitney/Rolfes (3.1a) the pharynx shares its functions with both the digestive system and the respiratory system. Since the pharynx is involved with both of these systems, it contains a flap of skin called the epiglottis that separates the two systems and ensures that air enters one while food enters the other.
Once the food reaches the esophagus it becomes a bolus. It moves and enters the esophagus through sphincters that open and close in order for the food to get through. There are two sphincters in the esophagus: one is the upper esophageal sphincter that allows the food to enter into the esophagus, and the other is the lower esophageal sphincter, or the cardiac sphincter, which goes near the heart, through the diaphragm, and then enters the stomach. An interesting fact about the esophagus is that it also prevents the stomach contents from refluxing upward, according to Mayo Clinic and Oxford Medicine.
Once the bolus enters the stomach it remains in the upper portion and churns. The stomach adds acid to it so that it can become more of a liquid, and then it becomes chyme. Not only does it provide lubrication to the food, but it also releases the proteolytic enzyme pepsin and hydrochloric acid to denature proteins and other components. Once the chyme is made, the stomach keeps moving the food along by ways of peristalsis, according to Dr. Gillaspy, a professor at the University of Phoenix. Peristalsis is a way that the muscles of the stomach move in order to move and churn the food in the stomach. It is able to churn the food because it contains an extra layer of muscle that is diagonal. The stomach’s main action is to move food – not to absorb nutrients, yet. Once the chyme is ready to go into the small intestine, it moves through the pyloric sphincter and out of the stomach.
The small intestine is the main organ for digestion. It is here where the food is digested and absorbed into the body in order to access the nutrients from your food. The inner walls of the small intestine absorb the nutrients into the blood stream. The absorption is attained through passive diffusion, facilitated diffusion, or active transport. There are three parts of the small intestine: the duodenum, the jejunum, and the ileum. According to “Understanding Nutrition” by Whitney/Rolfes, the small intestine “is almost 10 feet of tubing coiled within the abdomen.” (3.1a) The small intestine is very large and folded around the center of your abdomen; this is because it needs to have a maximal amount of surface area in order for the food and nutrients to be absorbed optimally. The way the small intestine increases its surface area is by ways of microvilli. There are also pancreatic enzymes and liver bile brought to the small intestine to allow the chyme to break down into attainable nutrients.
After the small intestine absorbs all of the nutrients out of the food, it travels into the large intestine, or colon, by ways of the ileocecal valve. The large intestine, although shorter in length than the small intestine, is thicker than the small intestine. It surrounds your body with the cecum, ascending colon, transverse colon, descending colon, and sigmoid colon. The small tube known as the appendix is attached to the cecum. The large intestine is also responsible for breaking down fibers into fatty acids and breaking down vitamins. The way that the large intestine achieves this is through its abundance of microflora, good bacteria. Additionally, any leftover fluid is absorbed here. The large intestine ends at the rectum, and digestion is finished at the anus.
The anus is the end of digestion where food is to be excreted. The muscles at the rectum are under voluntary contractions, so as to allow a person to control it himself. These muscles include pelvic floor muscles and two anal sphincters. Once your muscles relax, the sphincters on the anus excrete the waste from your body.
Salivary Glands The salivary glands are located in the mouth and throat and can be split into major salivary glands and minor salivary glands. The major salivary glands are known as the parotid, submandibular, and sublingual glands and are located near the upper teeth, under the tongue, and on the floor of the mouth, respectively. There are many minor glands as well located throughout the mouth. The function of these salivary glands is to secrete saliva into the mouth. Saliva has a vast multitude of functions from beginning to breaking down carbohydrates while still in the mouth to protecting teeth by neutralizing acidic substances to assisting in chewing and swallowing. Therefore, saliva plays a vital role in the gastrointestinal system and digestion process.
Liver The liver is located superiorly and to the right of the stomach. It has multiple functions, including several in the digestive system. Primarily, the liver aids in digestion by processing nutrients that the small intestine has absorbed. Using these nutrients, the liver then makes compounds that the body needs to function properly. Another function of the liver in the digestive system is to create bile for secretion into the small intestine where is assists in fat digestion by breaking fats down into liquid form so that the intestinal enzymes can continue in digestion. Bile is stored in the gallbladder and is secreted through the bile ducts when a person eats.
Pancreas The pancreas is located under the stomach and is almost surrounded by it as well. This gland’s main function in the digestive process is to create a pancreatic juice that contains digestive enzymes to break down macromolecules such as fats, carbohydrates, and proteins. These digestive enzymes are then secreted through ducts into the duodenum, which is the first portion of the small intestine. Once there, the pancreatic enzymes are then able to aid in the digestion of carbohydrates, fats, and proteins. Another function of the pancreas is to secrete insulin, which is a hormone that assists in the metabolism of sugars.
Gallbladder The gallbladder is an accessory organ to the gastrointestinal system that is located under the liver and is slightly covered by it. The function of the gallbladder is to store the bile that the liver creates between meals. Once a person begins to eat again, the gallbladder’s role is to squeeze the bile out so that it is secreted through the bile ducts into the small intestine. Once the bile is in the small intestine, it can begin to assist with the digestion of fats in the small intestine.
Mandal A. What Does the Small Intestine Do? News-Medical.net. http://www.news-medical.net/health/what-does-the-small-intestine-do.aspx. Accessed May 29, 2016.
Taylor T. Large Intestine. InnerBody. http://www.innerbody.com/anatomy/digestive/large-intestine. Accessed May 29, 2016.
The Digestive System. WebMD. http://www.webmd.com/digestive-disorders/digestive-system. Accessed May 29, 2016.
One of the main uses of computers is to simulate real life scenarios. You might have made a spreadsheet at school to simulate the amount of money made by a shop, or driven a formula one car on your console at home. Some of the most powerful computers in the world are used to simulate complex phenomena including
If you ever watch the weather forecast all the predictions are made by software simulating weather patterns. If you ever wonder why there aren't so many nuclear tests any more, there is no need as computers can simulate what happens.
With such powerful computers simulating models you might question why we are so bad at predicting the weather and how simulations can give the wrong results. This may be because the model being used is set up in completely the wrong way, but it may also be a result of chaos theory. Chaos theory states that any tiny differences in the initial starting conditions (such as those due to rounding errors in numerical computation) will have a huge effect on how the system performs in the long run. Rendering long-term prediction impossible in general. This can be seen in the inability of weather forecasts to get long term forecasts correct. This is also known through the butterfly effect, where Philip Merilees stated "Does the flap of a butterfly’s wings in Brazil set off a tornado in Texas?"
Give one reason why simulation might not work in the long term:
The margin of error increases over time, as more variables interact with the system, causing errors and unforeseen circumstances that could enter the system, causing it to stop accurately working in the long term.
A petrol station needs to model the number of vehicles it can serve petrol in a day. It can serve petrol and diesel and often has queues for each pump. Name the entities and attributes of each entity.
A swimming pool, swimming bath, wading pool, paddling pool, or simply pool is a structure designed to hold water to enable swimming or other leisure activities. Pools can be built into the ground (in-ground pools) or built above ground (as a freestanding construction or as part of a building or other larger structure), and are also a common feature aboard ocean-liners and cruise ships. In-ground pools are most commonly constructed from materials such as concrete, natural stone, metal, plastic, or fiberglass, and can be of a custom size and shape or built to a standardized size, the largest of which is the Olympic-size swimming pool.
The ACT’s Emergency Services have been the subject of various inquiries and reviews these include the 1988 Purdue report, the 1991 Hannan Report, the 1992 Purdon Report, the 1993 McDonald Report, the 1994 McBeth Report, and the 1995 Glenn Report.[1]
LEGAL AFFAIRS - STANDING COMMITTEE Report on Proposed Restructuring of ACT Emergency Services
MR OSBORNE (11.59): Mr Speaker, I present Report No. 4 of the Standing Committee on Legal Affairs entitled "Inquiry into the Proposed Restructuring of the ACT Emergency Services", together with a copy of extracts of the minutes of proceedings. I move: That the report be noted.[2]
Mr Ron McLeod (a former Commonwealth Ombudsman) headed the Inquiry into the Operational Response to the January 2003 Bushfires.[3] Final Report was presented to the Chief Minister, on 1 August 2003.
The Inquiry found in the structure of the ACT’s emergency service arrangements inefficiencies that frustrated emergency workers and volunteers in their efforts to make their contribution as effective as possible. Taking into account the ACT’s size, the Inquiry considers it would be more efficient if all the ACT emergency services, their assets and their personnel (with their considerable skills), were maintained and managed within a single, larger operational body specifically set up outside the framework of the ACT Public Service. This would bring the various emergency service bodies closer together and would facilitate more flexible use of equipment and personnel, to better meet changing circumstances and a variety of different types of emergencies.
The proposed new body—the ACT Emergency Services Authority—would need its own legislation and its own management and governance arrangements, and it would report directly to the ACT Government through the relevant Minister. A move in this direction would be consistent with the trend elsewhere in Australia towards greater integration between the different emergency service bodies and a stronger ‘all hazards’ approach to emergency management. The proposed ACT authority would replace the existing Emergency Services Bureau.
Coroner Maria Doogan "Inquest into the deaths of Mrs Dorothy McGrath, Mrs Alison Tener, Mr Peter Brooke and Mr Douglas Fraser as a result of the January 2003 Canberra bushfires" was formally opened at a directions hearing on 16 June 2003 and began to hear evidence on 7 October 2003. See Coroner Doogan's Report Volume 1 and Volume 2.
Whenever a sentence expresses something being done for someone, the beneficiary is put in the dative case, by suffixing the dative case particle .ir. Consider:
= For Nanna, Shulgi built the temple
We see that the temple was built for Nanna, and hence his name is put in the dative case. As is standard, the initial /i/ sound is often lost when it occurs right after another vowel. (Nanna, incidentally, was the name for the moon god, also called Zuen.)
Also, somewhat mysteriously, the /r/ sound was often not written either! That means we're basically seeing Nanna but reading Nanna.(ir). However, it is often quite easy to tell when this is happening, and the meaning is usually clear whether or not the particle is actually written.
By now, you've most likely grown sick of the one dimensional transient diffusion PDE we've been playing with:
The Laplacian is a linear operator in Euclidean n-space. There are other spaces with properties different from Euclidean space. Note also that operator here has a very specific meaning. As a function is sort of an operator on real numbers, our operator is an operator on functions, not on the real numbers. See here for a longer explanation.
. The "del squared" notation is preferred since the capital delta can be confused with increments and differences, and
, and put them into a vector, that would have been the gradient of the function
. The Laplacian takes the second unmixed derivatives and adds them up.
In one dimension, recall that the second derivative measures concavity. Suppose
, the Laplacian (simply the second derivative here) is negative, and the graph is concave down. At
, the curve inflects and the Laplacian is
Concavity may or may not do it for you. Thankfully, there's another very important view of the Laplacian, with deep implications for any equation it shows itself in: the Laplacian compares the value of
So the laplacian may be thought of as, at some point
Note that our one dimensional transient diffusion equation, our parallel plate flow, involves the Laplacian:
With this mentality, let's examine the behavior of this very important PDE. On the left is the time derivative and on the right is the Laplacian. This equation is saying that:
For example, if there's at some position a "hot spot" where
It's worth noting that in 3D, this equation fully describes the flow of heat in a homogeneous solid that's not generating it's own heat (like too much electricity through a narrow wire would).
Laplace's equation describes a steady state condition, and this is what it looks like:
Solutions of this equation are called harmonic functions. Some things to note:
Time is absent. This equation describes a steady state condition.
The absence of time implies the absence of an IC, so we'll be dealing with BVPs rather then IBVPs.
In one dimension, this is the ODE of a straight line passing through the boundaries at their specified values.
All functions that satisfy this equation in some domain are analytic (informally, an analytic function is equal to its Taylor expansion) in that domain.
Despite appearances, solutions of Laplace's equation are generally not minimal surfaces.
Laplace's equation is separable in the Cartesian (and almost any other) coordinate system. So, we shouldn't have too much problem solving it if the BCs involved aren't too convoluted.
Steady state conditions on a square.
Imagine a 1 x 1 square plate that's insulated top and bottom and has constant temperatures applied at its uninsulated edges, visualized to the right. Heat is flowing in and out of this thing steadily through the edges only, and since it's "thin" and "insulated", the temperature may be given as
As with before, calling the separation constant
(or something) happens to make the problem easier to solve. Note that the negative sign was kept for the
Note that the constants can be merged, but we won't do it so that a point can be made in a moment. At edge A:
, which can't satisfy the temperature at edge C. This is why the constants weren't merged a few steps ago, to make it obvious that
It should go without saying by now that
Since Laplace's equation is linear, a linear combination of solutions to the PDE is also a solution to the PDE. Another thing to note: since the BCs (so far) are homogeneous, we can add the solutions without worrying about nonzero boundaries adding up.
) solutions to form a linear combination which might solve the BVP as a whole:
Assuming this form is correct (review Parallel Plate Flow: Realistic IC for motivation), let's again try applying the last BC:
It looks like it needs Fourier series methodology. Finding
. Note that a Fourier sine expansion has been done. The solution to the BVP can finally be assembled:
That solves it!
It's finally time to mention that the BCs are discontinuous at the points
. As a result, the series should converge slowly at those points. This is clear from the plot at right: it's a 25 term partial sum (note that half of the terms are
), and it looks perfect except at
, especially near the discontinuities at
This result may be derived using differentials and the chain rule; it's not difficult but it's a little long. In these coordinates Laplace's equation reads:
Note that in going from Cartesian to polar coordinates, a price was paid: though still linear, Laplace's equation now has variable coefficients. This implies that after separation at least one of the ODEs will have variable coefficients as well.
This could represent a physical problem analogous to the previous one: replace the square plate with a disc. Note the apparent absence of sufficient BC to obtain a unique solution. The funny looking statement that u is bounded inside the domain of interest turns out to be the key to getting a unique solution, and it often shows itself in polar coordinates. It "makes up" for the "lack" of BCs. To separate, we as usual incorrectly assume that
Once again, the way the negative sign and the separation constant are arranged makes the solution easier later on. These decisions are made mostly by trial and error.
This is a very good example problem since it goes to show that PDE problems very often turn into obscure ODE problems; we got lucky this time since the solution for
Now, this is where the English sentence condition stating that u must be bounded in the domain of interest may be invoked. As
. Note that if this problem were solved between two concentric circles, this term would be nonzero and very important. With that term gone, constants can be merged:
, yet there are 3 constants. Let's say for now that:
Equating coefficients won't work. However, if the IC were broken up into individual terms, the sum of the solution to the terms just happens to solve the BVP as a whole:
Verify that the solution above is really equal to the BC at
And, since Laplace's equation is linear, this must solve the PDE as well. What all of this implies is that, if some generic function
. Note that it's implied that
You probably don't like infinite series solutions. Well, it happens that through a variety of manipulations it's possible to express the full solution of this particular problem as:
This is called Poisson's integral formula.
Though not necessarily a PDEs concept, it is very important for anyone studying this kind of math to be comfortable with going from one coordinate system to the next. What follows is a long derivation of the Laplacian in 2D polar coordinates using the multivariable chain rule and the concept of differentials. Know, however, that there are really many ways to do this.
, then the chain rule may be used to express derivatives in terms of
Applying this to itself, treating the underlined bit as a unit dependent on
The above mess may be quickly simplified a little by manipulating the funny looking derivatives:
This may be made slightly easier to work with if a few changes are made to the way some of the derivatives are written. Also, the
Now we need to obtain expressions for some of the derivatives appearing above. The most direct path would use the concept of differentials. If:
, then the total differential is given as:
Note that the two previous equations are of this form (recall that
There's an easier but more abstract way to obtain the derivatives above that may be overkill but is worth mentioning anyway. The Jacobian of the functions
So, it follows then that the derivatives that we're interested in may be obtained by inverting the Jacobian matrix:
Though somewhat obscure, this is very convenient and it's just one of the many utilities of the Jacobian matrix. An interesting bit of insight is gained: coordinate changes are senseless unless the Jacobian is invertible everywhere except at isolated points, stated another way the determinant of the Jacobian matrix must be nonzero, otherwise the coordinate change is not one-to-one (note that the determinant will be zero at
Either path you take, there should now be enough information to evaluate the Cartesian second derivatives. Working on
Now, add these tirelessly hand crafted differential operators and watch the result collapse into just 3 nontrigonometric terms:
Derivatives have been combined wherever possible (not done previously).
This was a long, involved chapter. It should be clear that the solutions derived work only for very simple geometries, other geometries may be worked with by grace of conformal mappings.
The Laplacian (and variations of it) is a very important quantity and its behaviour is worth knowing like the back of your hand. A sampling of important equations that involve the Laplacian:
The Navier Stokes equations.
The diffusion equation.
Laplace's equation.
Poisson's equation.
The Helmholtz equation.
The Schrödinger equation.
The wave equation.
There's a couple of other operators that are similar to (though less important than) the Laplacian, which deserve mention:
The biharmonic equation is useful in linear elastic theory, for example it can describe "creeping" fluid flow:
The wave equation may be expressed using the d'Alembertian:
Isolate client and provide gloves, gown and masks for visitors and health workers to reverse barrier (protect client)
Prioritize care to minimize disruption to clients environment, clean procedures first.
Use single room if CRP >15 Pressuruized room if client CRP>60
Eliminate fresh salads and unpeeled fresh fruits or vegetables.
Deep breathing and coughing to avoid stagnation.
Provide client with mask for ambulation outside room.
Observe fastidious hygiene measures and five moments of hand hygiene.
Monitor IV site and Consider Central line to prevent peripheral thrombophlebitis.
Four hourly vital signs.
Continue until white cell count is in normal range (ANS Absolute Neutrophile count >1500 cells per microliter)
The Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA) sets out the provisions for access, use, disclosure, interception and privacy protections of electronic communications. The law was enacted in 1986 and covers various forms of wire and electronic communications. The Stored Communications Act is part of the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, and is discussed separately.
Two federal statutes govern real-time electronic surveillance in federal criminal investigations. The first and most important is the wiretap statute, 18 U.S.C. §§ 2510-2522, first passed as Title III of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (and generally known as "Title III"). The second statute is the Pen Registers and Trap and Trace Devices chapter of Title 18 ("the Pen/Trap statute"), 18 U.S.C. §§ 3121-3127, which governs pen registers and trap and trace devices.
Title III and the Pen/Trap statute coexist because they regulate access to different types of information. Title III permits the government to obtain the contents of wire and electronic communications in transmission. In contrast, the Pen/Trap statute concerns the real-time collection of addressing and other non-content information relating to those communications. See 18 U.S.C. § 2511(h)(i) (stating that it is not a violation of Title III to use a pen register or trap and trace device); United States Telecom Ass'n v. FCC, 227 F.3d 450, 454 (D.C. Cir. 2000); Brown v. Waddell, 50 F.3d 285, 289-94 (4th Cir. 1995) (distinguishing pen registers from Title III intercept devices).
The Hold Harmless Clause in User Agreements ·
By ticking the field Only Allow Quiz to be Loaded from This Domain and entering the relevant website address you can specify the website from which your test can be viewed. This helps to prevent people re-publishing your tests on different websites.
Like all copyright protection measures, this isn't a panacea and a determined copyright thief will be able to circumvent this measure, but it will deter the vast majority of casual abuse.
Go To Introduction to Web Settings, Send Results over the Internet, After Quiz, Browser Options
Randomized. 414 pts w/ pharynx or supraglottic larynx ca. RT median 66 Gy. Randomized: 1) +/- Nimorazole. Pts with low hgb level underwent 2nd randomization: 2) +/- transfusion.
Outcome: 5-year LRC p16+ 58% vs p16- 28% (SS), DSS 72% vs 34% (SS), OS 62% vs 26% (SS). p16 remained strong predictor on MVA
Conclusion: Expression of p16 has a major impact on treatment response and survival
Subset analysis. 331 patients with pretreatment tumor blocks, stained for p16. p16+ in 25% (oropharynx 37%, SGL 21%, others 10%)
Outcome: Nimorazole improved LRC overall (HR 0.7, SS). p16- improved LRC overall (HR 0.4, SS). If p16-, nimorazole improved LRC (HR 0.7, SS), but if p16+, nimorazole did not improved LRC (HR 0.9, NS)
Conclusion: Hypoxic modification improved outcome in HPV/p16 negative patients, but had no impact in HPV/p16 positive patients
Retrospective. 2044 patients, previously untreated. Incidence and topographic distribution of neck LNs
Retrospective. 619 patients. Review of pretreatment CT and/or MRI to determine presence of retropharyngeal LNs
Outcome: Highest incidence in NPC (74%) and pharyngeal wall (19%). Neck relapse and DM significantly higher, RFS and OS significantly worse if present
Retrospective. 126 patients treated with IMRT. System for nodal target volumes used. Median F/U 2.2 years. Patterns of failure analyzed.
Patients receiving 60 Gy were given, failure rates were 15% and 12%, respectively.
2105 pts. For survival, most predictive factor was T stage. For T1-T2, next most important was tumor location, whereas for T3-T4, it was KPS. For LRC, N stage was most important; for N0, T stage was next most important, whereas for N+ number of treatment fractions was.
Survival: Group 1) T2 or less, glottic, age = 75; 3) T2 or less, not glottic, N0-2, KPS >= 80, age =80; or T3-4, N0-2, KPS 90-100, oral cavity, hypopharynx, or glottis; or T3-4 N3 or Nx KPS < 90; 5) T2 or less, not glottic, KPS <80; or N3, T3-4, KPS 90-100, N3; or T3-4, N1-3, KPS < 90.
2166 pts classified both by RPA and TNM stage and compared overall survival and loco-regional DFS. No differences between the systems in terms of survival, but for locoregional control, RPA system depended on treatment and was not generalizable.
Randomized. Stopped early due to slow accrual. 199 patients, resectable Stage III/IV SCHNC excluding NPC and salivary glands (larynx 32% (supraglottis 23%), oral cavity 27%, oropharynx 21%, hypopharynx 12%). T4 56%. Arm 1) surgery + adjuvant RT 60/30 vs. Arm 2) RT 66/33 + concurrent cisplatin 20 mg/m2 + 5-FU 1000 mg/m2 x2 cycles. 90% received at least 1 cycle of chemo
Outcome: 3-year DFS: S+RT 50% vs. chemo-RT 40% (NS). Organ preservation (larynx/hypopharynx 68%, oropharynx 55%, oral cavity 21%). Chemo-RT group had poor surgical salvage of 47%, with no long-term survivors (possibly due to larger proportion of T4 and oral cavity cancers)
Conclusion: Chemo-RT not superior to surgery+RT, but can be attempted for organ preservation in larynx, hypopharynx, and oropharynx. Poor organ preservation (and salvage) in oral cavity
Gene arrays. Correlation of 277 genes (angiogenesis and/or mets) to locoregional control
MDM2 and erbB2 are predictors of locoregional failure in patients treated with chemo-RT
103 pts treated with induction chemotherapy followed by surgery and/or RT. 71 pts were free of disease. 5-year recurrence rate was 51% (39% local and 26% distant failure). Relapse patterns were affected by: site (oral cavity more likely to fail locally, hypopharnx more likely to have DM); type of treatment (surgery + RT had lower local failure); TN stage (T3-4N3 had higher risk of local and distant failure); oropharynx (higher local + distant failure).
General consensus suggests that adjuvant neck dissection is not necessary for patients with N1 neck and CR after chemo-RT
Historically, ipsilateral neck recurrence was lower for N2/N3 disease after primary RT + adjuvant neck dissection than either modality alone
~25% of patients with clinical/radiographic CR who undergo neck dissection have residual disease
30-40% of patients with clinical/radiographic detectable disease who undergo neck dissection have no residual disease
PET shows promise, and appears more accurate than clinical, CT, or MRI neck evaluation
It may be reasonable to observe patients with clinical/radiographic CR, and negative PET 12 weeks after completing chemo-RT
TROG 98.02 subset analysis suggests that after chemo-RT, ipsilateral failure is low in patients with clinical/radiographic CR
Subset analysis. TROG 98.02 is Phase II randomized trial of RT 70/35 with Arm 1) concurrent cisplatin/tirapazamine vs. Arm 2) concurrent cisplatin/5-FU. Subset patients with initial N2-3 disease, who achieved complete clinical/radiological CR at 12 weeks (N2 63%, N3 40%) and no planned neck dissection was performed
Outcome: First failure: local 4%, locoregional 2%, distant 28%, locoregional + distant 6%. No patients with neck-only failure
5-yr LC 94% for T1 and 54% for T2. 10-year DSS 92%, OS 63%
Conclusion: similar control rates to typical squamous cell carcinoma. The histologic diagnosis of sarcomatoid carcinoma by itself should not influence the decision to treat a patient with early stage glottic disease with irradiation.
eContouring Webinar - Head and Neck with Kenneth Hu, M.D.
A "satellite galaxy" refers to a smaller galaxy running around a bigger galaxy. In the space, a sky body or a group of sky bodies running around a sky body or a group of sky bodies can be called a natural satellite. A human-made device that runs around a sky body is called an artificial satellite.
-- your implementation goes here
The Costa Rica meeting in 2005 recognised the linkages between SCP and poverty reduction, and rec-ommended mainstreaming SCP in poverty reduction policies and measures as one of the key areas of implementing SCP. This was envisioned to support the development, funding and implementation of SCP activities in developing countries, and to engage development agencies to apply the SCP concept for their poverty reduction projects.
For this objective, the first Cooperation Dialogue Session with development agencies was held during the Costa Rica meeting with participation from seven agencies. As a follow-up, UNEP conducted a re-view of the current SCP-related projects in development agencies. The results revealed a majority of bilateral and multilateral agencies are already implementing SCP-related projects (see 1.4). This review provides a basis for considering how to better integrate SCP in development plans and identify opportu-nities to increase access to available development funds. The Cooperation with Africa Task Force also explores acceleration of the SCP implementation in developing countries by both working directly with those governments and extending cooperation with development agencies (see 1.3.2). The second Cooperation Dialogue Session will be organised at the Third International Expert Meeting on the 10YFP in Stockholm in June 2007.
One of key recommendations at the Costa Rica meeting was to integrate national SCP action plans into national development plans, including Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs). As response, UNEP launched a pilot project “Integration of SCP into PRSPs”. The project works with governments of a few selected low-income countries to help them draft country-specific texts on SCP for PRSPs. The texts are expected to contain examples of concrete public policies and private sector actions for SCP that can also contribute to poverty reduction. CSCP has developed a guidance manual that helps pilot countries to identify the linkages between SCP and poverty reduction in key industrial sectors and to draft the texts step by step.
UNEP launched a pilot project for integrating the SCP concept into Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers.
As another measure, it was proposed to encourage National Cleaner Production Centres (NCPCs) and other intermediaries to take up the SCP concept and apply it for business development in their own countries. To support this process, UNEP’s 9th International High-level Seminar on SCP (SCP 9) held in Arusha, Tanzania in December 2006 will introduce the concept of “Human Development through the Market” (HDtM) as a new guiding vision for NCPCs. The HDtM concept aims to inspire businesses to find new market opportunities for offering products and services that both address the needs of the poor and improve environmental and social conditions in developing countries at the same time. This approach will be presented with case studies in various sectors that have been tried in different countries.
Bolsa Amazônia is a regional partnership dedicated to developing small-scale enterprises in rural forest communities in Amazon through harvesting and processing value-added products and their commercialisation. Its objective is promoting sustainable use of Amazonian natural re-sources while reducing poverty of indigenous people through new income generation activities and providing consumers with environmentally friendly products. One success story is the coco-nut-fibre project that supplies 120,000 car seats a month to DaimlerChrysler and benefits 5,200 people in the various steps of production. As result of this project, producers have increased their productivity and reduced soil degradation. Bolsa Amazônia has been supported by EU funding for training on marketing, processing, management and sustainable resource use.
Tunis International Center for Environmental Technologies (CITET) promotes environmen-tally sound technologies and strengthens the skills in this field by enhancing Tunisia’s compe-tences in environmental technologies and supporting the international exchange of experience and know-how. German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ) supports CITET for providing expertise in training, laboratory services, and transfer and implementation of environmental technologies. As a result, CITET has trained over 8,000 participants in technical workshops in six years, and more than 5,600 people have visited the conferences, business meetings and exhibitions in the last 3 years. According to a survey of 14 companies consulted by CITET, they have saved an average of €850,000 annually due to introduction of environmental technolo-gies.
While the issues relating to SCP have been addressed in a variety of projects, the concept itself is not universally known or widely applied. This limits the possibility of many projects.
Research, education and development of environmentally sound technologies have not ade-quately focused to adapt them to conditions in developing countries.
Many SCP-related projects and best practices remain limited in terms of scale and funding, re-sulting in limited impacts towards “leapfrogging” of developing countries as a whole.
Securing adequate funding for SCP activities remains a challenge, especially how to increase awareness of SCP among both private and public financial institutions.
The limited involvement of the private sector in SCP and the slow uptake of the concept by en-trepreneurs have hindered the expansion of SCP benefits beyond pilot projects.
The impact of integrating SCP into national development plans or PRSPs might be limited unless key actors within national authorities are familiar with the SCP concept and take up lead-ership for actively utilising the SCP concept in the actual policy planning and implementation.
Mania, defined as “a state of heightened overall activation with enhanced affective expression together with lability of affect,” is fundamentally characterized by a pathological elevation of mood. Patients often report a sense of elation, and a euphoric mood has been traditionally associated with mania. However, the heightened mood can also be irritable; indeed, as the mania progresses, not only does irritability – which can eventuate in full-blown rage and dangerous hostility – become more prominent, but the mood is often labile, and patients may switch erratically between euphoria and irritability. Fleeting depressive symptoms may also be observed. The other cardinal features include flight of ideas and pressure of speech; and increased energy, decreased need for sleep, and hyperactivity. In addition, inflated self-esteem or grandiosity is almost always seen, as are distractibility, poor judgement and lack of insight, dishinibition, and “excessive involvement in pleasurable activities that have a high potential for painful consequences,” which can prove disastrous. Their thoughts are, at the least, rapid, and patients may complain of having thoughts that race in a disorganized progression, on pell-mell. When more severe, flight of ideas can degenerate into loosening of associations, wherein the connections between the patient’s successive ideas have no conceivable connection. Patients may also become psychotic.
A manic patient may appear well-groomed but display a dramatic change in appearance (e.g., a drastic change in wardrobe, make-up, or hairstyle; they may be festooned with ribbons and excessive jewelry). The manic will probably be extremely talkative and initially might seem more clever or entertaining; however, conversation eventually becomes tangential with puzzling leaps from one subject to another, and the patient’s speech may become incredibly rapid and almost unstoppable. Often, a manic patient has an inflated sense of self-confidence, to the point of feeling invincible. The patient may take on too many projects without actually bringing any of them close to completion, engage in risky sexual activities, spend too much money, and land into conflict with the law. Upon recovery, patients often feel remorse and shame over what they have done.
For the mood disorders, DSM-IV describes several types of episodes. These episodes are not disorders in themselves, but descriptions of discrete syndromes, which can form the building blocks of actual disorders.
The symptoms must last for at least one week (or any duration if hospitalization is necessary)
Three or more of the following symptoms (at least 4 if the mood is only irritable):
The symptoms cause impairment in social or occupational functioning.
The symptoms are not secondary (the direct result of a substance or general medical condition)
Mania may occur secondary to a host of general medical or neurological conditions, or as a result of substance abuse or as a side-effect of certain medications. However, it is most commonly associated with bipolar I disorder, a severe mental illness characterized by the occurrence of at least one full manic or mixed-manic episode during the patient's lifetime.
In current DSM-5 nomenclature, although the same diagnostic criteria is used for both hypomanic and full manic episodes, hypomanic episodes are separated from manic ones, which, in turn, are characterized as either mild, moderate, or severe (with or without psychotic features). However, manic episodes may be "staged" as follows: hypomania, or stage I; acute mania, or stage II; and delirious mania, or stage III. This "staging" of a manic episode is very useful from a descriptive and differential diagnostic point of view, in particular allowing for a more thorough consideration of the more extreme manifestations, which in current nomenclature would simply be classed as "severe with psychotic features."
Allied to the "staging" of a manic episode are the cardinal symptoms: heightened mood (either euphoric or irritable); flight of ideas and pressured speech; and increased energy, decreased need for sleep, and hyperactivity. These cardinal symptoms are most plainly evident in hypomania; in stages II and III, however, these symptoms undergo a progressively severe exacerbation and become increasingly obscured by psychotic symptoms and disorganized or fragmented behaviour. However, once the peak of the severity of the individual patient's episode has been reached, patients retrace the symptoms seen in the earlier escalation: thus, a patient whose episode peaked in acute, or stage II, mania would gradually settle back into stage I, or hypomania, before more or less returning to euthymia.
This is the page to discuss the lesson, ask your questions, leave your comments, or just to say hello!
Click here or the tab labeled “edit this page” at the top of this page in order to add your comment at the end.
Text of comment. Sign your comment using “--~~~~”. This will look something like this: --Martin Kraus (talk) 09:26, 14 November 2008 (UTC)
Fundamentals for Trainz Trainees Versions Build Codes Table for Trainz Simulator 12
This is a Trainz Wikibooks sub-page Table.
The contents of this page are reference material and are likely included (in parts, not the header nor footer sections) in other Wikibook pages as a displayed section or by expansion.
List of TS12 releases with Code Build Numbers, dates, and footnotes on upgrades [click for table]
0: New and/or just downloaded or off DVD
Initial TS2012 SP0, TS12-SP0 + Immediate Patch to Build 47059,1: Early released of manual & auto-patch to 47059 plateau version.2: (later) will auto-patch to 48054via auto-patch to 48249
Simulator Central (Planet Auran)download release version R: U: April, 21st 2011[1][2]
Minor revision: TS2012 SP0+minor 1, TS12-SP0+ap1 First Common or Plateau Version
1: Corrupted manual patch build intent, assigned to 482492:Replacement Patch sequence to 49922[2]
Common revision: TS2012 SP0 Patch 1 (Corrupted)Manual & auto patch to build 49922 taking this one's place as a common plateau release.(check, TS12-SP0+hf2?3
Annotation added "Note: To be able to install Aerotrain and any future DLC packs, you will need to install this patch for your Trainz build."[3]
Stable English product, Common revisionFirst Non-English=Czech incorporated release
TS12 SP1 Hotfix 1, or TS12-SP1+hf1 (English) • manual patch 57825_to_57898[8]
Note: Shadowarrior, JamesMoody, and Windwalkr are official N3V staff and spokespersons.
This reference page is adapted from the TrainzOnline Wiki under the CC-BY-SA 3.0 License. This page will likely include more textual explanations, exposition, history, and/or examples than the source page on the same topic.The TrainzOnline Wiki is for the most part maintained by the programmers or knowledgeable content creators and may have newer more up-to-date information on the current trainz-build code standards, which have some tendency to change as features are added to the software.
In this book we introduce the Tabacco control chosen from three different countries around the world. The countries include China, Nothern Ireland, and Finland. We mainly focus on the restriction of smoking and health warning against cigarette. We hope you will edit our cases and add some more Tabbaco control in the other countries later.
Smoking in the People's Republic of China is prevalent, as China is the world's largest consumer and producer of tobacco: there are 350 million Chinese smokers, and China produces 42% of the world's cigarettes. The China National Tobacco Corporation is by sales the largest single manufacturer of tobacco products in the world and boasts a virtual monopoly in Mainland China.
China's 300 million smokers face smoking ban in indoor...- March 24, 2011
Smoking, which is linked to the deaths of at least 1 million people in China every year, is one of the greatest health threats the country faces, government statistics show. Nearly 30 percent of adults in China smoke, about 300 million people – a number roughly equal to the entire U.S. population.
The older regulations listed venues such as movie theaters, concert halls, libraries and shopping malls in which smoking was prohibited. The new list adds hotels, restaurants, cafes, bars, hair and beauty salons and other places.
The new regulation will come into effect on 1 May in public places including buses, restaurants and bars. Shanghai imposed similar rules a year ago, but people do not seem to take much notice of them. People commonly light up in hospital waiting rooms, video game arcades and even on domestic flights, despite set of regulations from 1991 that prohibit smoking in such places.
Anti-tobacco laws are being tightened in what anti-smoking campaigners have called a war on the cigarette industry. In 1995, 29 % of working age men and 19 % of women smoked daily. The smoking prevalence has diminished rapidly during the last few years. Also the per capita consumption of tobacco products has declined since 1991. However, daily smoking among young people, although also declined during the last few years, was in 1994 as frequent as 25 % among 15 year old boys and 19 % among girls.
Smoking in Finland was first restricted in 1976 with a ban on tobacco advertising. About 20% of Finns smoke. The Government of Finland plans to completely abolish smoking by 2040. A smoking ban for all public places is already enacted, and extends to outdoor concerts and immediate areas around schools and day-care centres, and many Finnish landlords insist on non-smoking rental agreements.
The use of tobacco products causes annually about 5,100 premature deaths in Finland. The number has decreased in the last few years because smoking has decreased. The Ministry of Social Affairs and Health estimates that involuntary smoking causes 50-60 lung cancer deaths and a few hundred cardiovascular deaths annually.
The 2007 smoking ban for bars and restaurants imposed all bars, cafes and restaurants larger than 50 square meters with a proper ventilation system can, during a two-year transition period, set up special smoking sections covering half the size of premises. No customers are allowed to eat or drink in the special booths. However, this strict regulation was not accepted from the owners, because they cannot expect to pay well by setting a separate smoking space inside. As a result, most restaurant owners adopted a policy to place ashtrays on a table of outdoor section.
An implementation of a workplace smoking ban in the Republic of Irelands entered intoa crucial step in protecting the health of those who work in the hospitality industry and the general public. The great majority of people in Northern Ireland finds cigarette smoke unpleasant and irritating and the majority of smokers and non-smokers alike would prefer public places to be smoke-free. All have a right to be free from tobacco smoke pollution.
Smoking in workplaces in Ireland was banned on 29 March 2004, making Ireland the first country in the world to institute an outright ban on smoking in workplaces. On 18 July 2008, Irish Fine Gael MEP Avril Doyle proposed in a committee in the European Parliament, that she would like to see an EU-wide ban on cigarettes and cigars by 2025.
On 1 July 2009, Ireland banned in-store tobacco advertising and displays of tobacco products at retail outlets and new controls on tobacco vending machines (limiting them to being token-operated in registered bars and clubs only) were also introduced. Tobacco advertising had already been banned from radio, television and on billboards beforehand.
Up to 13,5000 children in Northern Ireland are at risk of passive smoking as a passenger in cars. Smoking just one cigarette in a car can put their air quality into the ‘unhealthy’ category, according to a study by the Royal College of Physicians. Second hand smoke can cause lifelong health problems for children Studies have also shown that cracking open a window is not enough to eradicate the risk to child passengers. Opponents of an outright ban accuse Nanny-state Britain of interfering too far into people’s private lives and freedom.
From 29 March 2004, under the Public Health (Tobacco) Acts, it has been illegal to smoke in all enclosed workplaces. The ban is strictly enforced and includes bars, restaurants, clubs, offices, public buildings, company cars, trucks, taxis and vans - and within a three metre radius to the entrances of these locations. A private residence is considered a workplace when trades people, such as plumbers or electricians, are working there. €3,000 is the maximum fine on the spot, while a prison sentence can also be given at a later time for violators.
Don't let it scare you that all this grammatical stuff is supposed to be read before you begin. Really they are all really simple—and shouldn't be something you need to worry about. Also, remember: This will always be a handy reference. Just enjoy it!
To editors: It might be a good idea to incorporate this section into the main lessons.
There are two main types of words in Uzbek: nominals and verbals. Nominals are those words which are equivalent to English nouns and adjectives, or which have a noun-like character; for example, qora, "black" and koʻz 'eye'.
In Uzbek, nominals include classes of words that in English are called nouns, pronouns, adjectives, and some adverbs. An Uzbek "noun" may be equivalent to an English adjective or noun:
Verbals are those words which are equivalent to English verbs and some adverbs; for example, qelmoq 'to come' (infinitive) and boʻlib 'as, being' (gerund).
In addition, there are a small number of particles, conjunctions, and similar words which do not take suffixes; for example uchun 'for' and va 'and'.
The last syllable of an Uzbek word receives the stress. however, certain endings and particles at the end of words are not stressed.
The lexical meanings and grammatical functions of Uzbek words are indicated primarily by adding elements called suffixes to the ends of the words. This process of suffixation (also called agglutation) is regular and clear in the sense that it does not require changing the phonetic shapes of words and suffixes; fo example,
Nominals and verbals with new lexical meanings are created in Uzbek through suffixation. Adding a suffix to a nominal root or word results in a nominal or a verbal with a new lexical meaning:
The indication of grammatical functions like number, case, mood or tense is accomplished by adding suffixes to words. These grammatical suffixes change the relationship of one word to other words in a sentence; however, they do not change the basic lexical meaning of the word.
The Uzbek suffix plural -lar is added to nominals to indicate that there is more than one subject or object, but also to verbals to indicate that there is more than one subject. After numeral, the plural suffix is not added to a nominal:
Case suffixes express relationships between nominals and verbals and are equivalent to English 'to', 'in', 'from', and other ideas:
oʻgʻilga (to the son)
Uzbek has several means of expressing possession. One means requires adding possessive suffixes to a nominal:
A second means requires the possessive relationship construction. In Uzbek, the possessor of an object is placed first, often with the suffix -ning, while the person or the object possessed is placed second, always with the suffix -i/si (plural -lari). The Uzbek equivalent of an English phrase like 'my daughter's book' is the following:
The Uzbek equivalent of the English infinitive of verbs ('to enter,' 'to see,' etc.) is created by adding the suffix -moq to the verbal root. Without this or other suffixes, the verbal root expresses the familiar or at times impolite imperative mood:
To express moods like the imperative or the conditional, Uzbek adds suffixes to verbal roots:
In Uzbek, tenses like past, present, and future are formed by adding suffixes to a verbal root, including the past tense suffix -di:
Uzbek combines the meanings of English present and future tenses into one idea that is expressed by the suffix -a/-y. This present-future tense indicates that an action occurs as a habit in the present and may occur at some point in the future:
oʻqimoq (to read -infinitive)
You just said "di" was the past tense and then you show an example with "di" in the future.
Please explain more clearly.
Uzbek lacks words equivalent to the English articles 'a/an, the'. Instead, a nominal serving as an object of a verb stands without a suffix to express an indefinite quality, while a nominal severing as an object adds the suffix -ni to indicate a definite quality.
In Uzbek, both singular and plural forms exist for personal pronouns. Besides the first person pronoun men (I) and biz (we), Uzbek has the pronoun sen for singular 'you' (older English 'thou') and the pronoun siz for singular polite and plural 'you'.
Uzbek does not posses separate personal pronouns for 'he', 'she', and 'it.' All of these persons are expressed with the pronoun u. Gender must be determined from other words in the sentence or context.
Where English places words like 'behind' or 'toward' in position before nouns (prepositions), Uzbek uses nominals with the same meanings in position after other nominals (postpositions):
The formation of relative sentences presents a major difficulty for learners of Uzbek. In English, the word 'who' in the construction 'the son who entered the house' is expressed by adding the suffix -gan to a verbal root and by reversing the order of elements:
(The son who entered the house)
Spoken Uzbek makes little use of the conjunction va (and) to link two sentences together. The 'and' in the English sentence 'he came home and read the book' is indicated by adding the suffix -ib to the first verbal stem:
(He came home and read the book)
The word order in Uzbek sentences normally has the following construction:
FIFA has announced that nine goal-line technology systems will undergo vigorous testing in a bid to be approved for match-day use in the 2012–13 EPL season [2]. However, they will not disclose the full list of the nine candidates being assessed by the independent company Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology ( or Empa – German acronym for "Eidgenössische Materialprüfungs- und Forschungsanstalt") attached to the Zurich University [2].
Although the complete list has not been disclosed, two of the technologies are known to be included on the list are the Adidas-backed firm Cairos and Goalminder, the brainchild of Bolton Wanderers fans Harry Barnes and David Parden [3].
Each of the nine technologies will be tested in order to determine whether or not they meet the strict testing criteria laid out by FIFA. Should the technologies meet the criteria they will be invited to phase two of the trials [3].
Closure expressions are unnamed, anonymous functions which can interact with values from their surrounding contextref name="error">Apple Inc. | 2017 | Closure Expressions | [online][accessed: 18.09.2017] | https://developer.apple.com/library/content/documentation/Swift/Conceptual/Swift_Programming_Language/Closures.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40014097-CH11-ID94. They are short function-like constructs without a declaration or name.
In this snippet, you can see the general syntax of a closure expression. It starts with opening curly brackets, a parameter list and a return value. They keyword in marks the beginning of the closure's body. After the return statement the expression is closed with a curly bracket.
If a closure is assigned to a function type, a shorthand syntax can be used because Swift can infer the data types from the context. In the shortest version, you only have to tell Swift what to do with the parameters. $0 is short syntax for the first passed in argument, $1 for the second, and so on.
Closures can be passed to functions as arguments. A trailing closure can be used as the function's final argument. It's not written within the functions parentheses but right after them.
In the snippet below, you can see how a closure is passed to Swift's map function. The map function can be called on an array, the closure is then executed on every item of the array. In this example, the map functions checks whether a year is a leapyear or not. All years are converted to a string and " is a leap year" is appended if the prerequisites are fulfilled.
In Swift, there are two main types of properties. Stored properties are used to store values of variables and constants associated with a class or a structure. Computed properties are not used to store, but to compute values.
These properties are a part of an instance of a class or a structure. It can have a variable or a constant value.
These properties provide getters and setters to retrieve or set the value of a variable.
In this example, the structure Circle has a computed property called diameter. It has a getter which returns the doubled value of the radius. The setter changes the value of the radius to the half of the new diameter. area is a read-only property, which means it does not have a setter.
Property observers can be used to observe the state of a property and respond to changes. They are called whenever the value of a property is set. There are two types of observers. willSet is called before a value is stored, didSet is called after a value is stored.
The dispatch framework includes a lot of language features, runtime libraries and system enhancements which improve the support for concurrent code execution on hardware with more than one core. The Grand Central Dispatch (GCD) submittes work to dispatch queues managed by the system.
Parallelism is the term which describes the concept of executing two or more threads at the same time on multi-core processors. Devices with a single core can achieve concurrency with time-slicing. This is the process of switching between multiple threads through context switches.
GCD manages a pool of threads. Codeblocks can be added to dispatch queue and the GCD decides what to execute.
DispatchQueue represents the dispatch queues provided by GCD[1]. The tasks, which you submit to the queues, are executed in a FIFO order, which means the first submitted task will always be the first one that gets started.
There are two types of queues. Serial queues can only execute one task at any time. Concurrent queues can start multiple tasks at the same time. They are started in the order they were added and can finish in any order.
The scheduling is managed by GCD, which means it controls when tasks are started. GCD provides a main queue, which is a serial queue and runs on the main thread. Tasks on the main queue are executed immediatly. It is good practice to put all tasks, which change or update the UI, on the main queue. This makes sure the UI is always responsive. The four global queues are concurrent, shared by the entire system and devided in priorities - high, default, low and background. Queues can also be created by the user and can be serial or concurrent.
The priority is not specified directly, but by using Quality of Service (QoS) classes.
.user-interactive describes tasks which have to be done immediatly, because otherwise the user experience would be bad. This QoS is used for UI updates and event handling.
.user-initiated represents tasks, which can be performed asynchronously and are started from the UI. These tasks are mapped into the high priority queue, because it is used when users are waiting for immediate results or tasks require user interaction to continue.
.utility represents long-running tasks. This class is used for I/O, networking and computations. Usually a progress indicator is used to make sure the user knows something is going on.
.background describes tasks, which the user usually is not aware of. It is used for tasks that do not need user interaction and are not time-sensitive, for example maintenance or prefetchting.
The following snipped can be found on Github and can be imported as Xcode project.
As soon as the "Start" button is pressed, the function download(size: Int, label: UILabel, timeout: Int) is called twice with different input parameters. After they are put onto a global queue they asynchronously execute the simulation. After each iteration the amount is increased by 1.
Next, the label which displays the progress of the download has to be updated. To do this, it is necessary to put the task back on the main queue, which makes sure that it is executed immediatly. After a short timeout the next iteration starts.
@IBOutlet weak var task1: UILabel!
@IBOutlet weak var task2: UILabel!
There are a lot of situations where errors can occure during the execution of your code. For example, when trying to read a file from your harddisk errors can occur due to missing permission or non-existing files. Swift provides couple of ways[2] to deal with errors during code execution.
Errors in a function can be propagated to the code calling the function
The keyword throws is used in a function's declaration after the parameterlist. This function is then called a "throwing function".
Do-Catch statements are used to execute different statements depending on what type of error is thrown. For example, here a needsMaintenance error is caught, the machine asks for maintenance and the counter is set back to 0.
With the try? keyword, an error is converted to an optional value. The value of an expression is nil whenever an error is thrown during the execution. In the snippet below, an error is thrown as soon as the digit that should be returned is no longer greater than zero.
Apple's mobile devices include a lot of sensors, including an Accelerometer, a Barometer, an Ambient light sensor and a Pedometer. iOS developers can access these sensors data in their projects with Swift.
As an example, the snippet below shows how the Pedometer can be accessed and how data can be retrieved[3]. This sensor is used for instance to count a persons steps. This project can be downloaded from GitHub.
@IBOutlet weak var stepsDisplay: UILabel!
@IBOutlet weak var stepsToComplete: UILabel!
In this section we will have a look at how simple unit tests can be implemented in Swift[4]. For this purpose a simple class with three functions will be tested. The class contains variables for two integer values and three functions which can add, subtract or multiply those values.
In simple terms, reproduction is the process by which organisms create descendants. This miracle is a characteristic that all living things have in common and sets them apart from nonliving things. But even though the reproductive system is essential to keeping a species alive, it is not essential to keeping an individual alive.
In human reproduction, two kinds of sex cells or gametes are involved. Sperm, the male gamete, and a secondary oocyte (along with first polar body and corona radiata), the male gamete must meet in the female reproductive system to create a new individual. For reproduction to occur, both the female and male reproductive systems are essential. It is a common misnomer to refer to a woman's gametic cell as an egg or ovum, but this is impossible. A secondary oocyte must be fertilized by the male gamete before it becomes an "ovum" or "egg".
While both the female and male reproductive systems are involved with producing, nourishing and transporting either the oocyte or sperm, they are different in shape and structure. The male has reproductive organs, or genitals, that are both inside and outside the pelvis, while the female has reproductive organs entirely within the pelvis.
The male reproductive system consists of the testes and a series of ducts and glands. Sperm are produced in the testes and are transported through the reproductive ducts. These ducts include the epididymis, vas deferens, ejaculatory duct and urethra. The reproductive glands produce secretions that become part of semen, the fluid that is ejaculated from the urethra. These glands include the seminal vesicles, prostate gland, and bulbourethral glands.
The testes (singular, testis) are located in the scrotum (a sac of skin between the upper thighs). In the male fetus, the testes develop near the kidneys, then descend into the scrotum just before birth. Each testis is about 1 1/2 inches long by 1 inch wide. Testosterone is produced in the testes which stimulates the production of sperm as well as give secondary sex characteristics beginning at puberty.
The two testicles are each held in a fleshy sac called the scrotum. The major function of the scrotal sac is to keep the testes cooler than thirty-seven degrees Celsius (ninety-eight point six degrees Fahrenheit). The external appearance of the scrotum varies at different times in the same individual depending upon temperature and the subsequent contraction or relaxation of two muscles. These two muscles contract involuntarily when it is cold to move the testes closer to the heat of the body in the pelvic region. This causes the scrotum to appear tightly wrinkled. On the contrary, they relax in warm temperatures causing the testes to lower and the scrotum to become flaccid. The temperature of the testes is maintained at about thirty-five degrees Celsius (ninety-five degrees Fahrenheit), which is below normal body temperature. Temperature has to be lower than normal in order for spermatogenesis (sperm production) to take place.
The scrotum is in a relaxed state. Penile shrinkage due to low temperatures. The scrotum is in a tense state to regulate testicular temperatures.
The two muscles that regulate the temperature of the testes are the dartos and cremaster muscles:
The cremaster muscle is a thin strand of skeletal muscle associated with the testes and spermatic cord. This muscle is a continuation of the internal oblique muscle of the abdominal wall, from which it is derived.
The seminiferous tubules are the functional units of the testis, where spermatogenesis takes place. Once the sperm are produced, they moved from the seminiferous tubules into the rete testis for further maturation.
In between the seminiferous tubules within the testes, are instititial cells, or, Cells of Leydig. They are responsible for secreting the male sex hormones (i.e., testosterone).
It is activated by follicle-stimulating hormone, and has FSH-receptor on its membranes.
Its main function is to nurture the developing sperm cells through the stages of spermatogenesis. Because of this, it has also been called the "mother cell." It provides both secretory and structural support.
During the Maturation phase of spermiogenesis, the Sertoli cells consume the unneeded portions of the spermatazoa.
The sperm are transported out of the testis and into the epididymis through a series of efferent ductules.
The testes receive blood through the testicular arteries (gonadal artery). Venous blood is drained by the testicular veins. The right testicular vein drains directly into the inferior vena cava. The left testicular vein drains into the left renal vein.
Anatomy of the testisThe seminiferous tubules join together to become the epididymis. The epididymis is a tube that is about 2 inches that is coiled on the posterior surface of each testis. Within the epididymis the sperm incomplete their maturation (full maturation occur in female genital tract) and their flagella become mobile. This is also a site to store sperm, nourishing them until the next ejaculation. Smooth muscle in the wall of the epididymis propels the sperm into the ductus deferens.
Vasa efferentia from the rete testis open into the epididymis which is a highly coiled tubule. The epididymis has three parts- 1)head or caput epididymis- it is the proximal part of the epididymis. It carries the sperms from the testis.
2)body or corpus epididymis- it the highly convoluted middle part of the epididymis
3)tail or cauda epididymis- it is the last part that takes part in carrying the sperms to the vas deferens. The cauda epididymis continues to form less convoluted vas deferens.
The ductus (vas) deferens, also called sperm duct, or, spermatic deferens, extends from the epididymis in the scrotum on its own side into the abdominal cavity through the inguinal canal. The inguinal canal is an opening in the abdominal wall for the spermatic cord (a connective tissue sheath that contains the ductus deferens, testicular blood vessels, and nerves. The smooth muscle layer of the ductus deferens contracts in waves of peristalsis during ejaculation.
The pair of seminal vesicles are posterior to the urinary bladder. They secrete fructose to provide an energy source for sperm and alkalinity to enhance sperm mobility. The duct of each seminal vesicle joins the ductus deferens on that side to form the ejaculatory duct.
There are two ejaculatory ducts. Each receives sperm from the ductus deferens and the secretions of the seminal vesicle on its own side. Both ejaculatory ducts empty into the single urethra.
The prostate gland is a muscular gland that surrounds the first inch of the urethra as it emerges from the bladder. The smooth muscle of the prostate gland contracts during ejaculation to contribute to the expulsion of semen from the urethra.
Pre ejaculate produced by the bulbourethral glandsThe bulbourethral glands also called Cowper's glands are located below the prostate gland and empty into the urethra. The alkalinity of seminal fluid helps neutralize the acidic vaginal pH and permits sperm mobility in what might otherwise be an unfavorable environment.
The penis is an external genital organ. The distal end of the penis is called the glans penis and is covered with a fold of skin called the prepuce or foreskin. Within the penis are masses of erectile tissue. Each consists of a framework of smooth muscle and connective tissue that contains blood sinuses, which are large, irregular vascular channels.
The urethra, which is the last part of the urinary tract, traverses the corpus spongiosum and its opening, known as the meatus, lies on the tip of the glans penis. It is both a passage for urine and for the ejaculation of semen.
Pea sized organs posterior to the prostate on either side of the urethra.
Secretion of gelatinous seminal fluid called pre-ejaculate. This fluid helps to lubricate the urethra for spermatozoa to pass through, and to help flush out any residual urine or foreign matter. (< 1% of semen)
Adjacent to the seminiferous tubules in the testicle.
Responsible for production of testosterone. Closely related to nerves.
Covers the testes.
Raises and lowers scrotum to help regulate temperature and promote spermatogenesis. Voluntary and involuntary contraction.
Layer of smooth muscular fiber outside the external spermatic fascia but below the skin
Contraction by wrinkling to decrease surface area available for heat loss to testicles, or expansion to increase surface area available to promote heat loss; also helps raise and lower scrotum to help regulate temperature
Part of the testes and connect the rete testis with the epididymis
Begins at the vas deferens, passes through the prostate, and empties into the urethra at the Colliculus seminalis.
Causes reflex for ejaculation. During ejaculation, semen passes through the ducts and exits the body via the penis.
Tightly coiled duct lying just outside each testis connecting efferent ducts to vas deferens.
Three columns of erectile tissue: two corpora cavernosa and one corpus spongiosum. Urethra passes through penis.
Male reproductive organ and also male organ of urination.
Surrounds the urethra just below the urinary bladder and can be felt during a rectal exam.
Stores and secretes a clear, slightly alkaline fluid constituting up to one-third of the volume of semen. Raise vaginal pH.(25-30% of semen)
Pouch of skin and muscle that holds testicles.
Regulates temperature at slightly below body temperature.
Usually white but can be yellow, gray or pink (blood stained). After ejaculation, semen first goes through a clotting process and then becomes more liquid.
Components are sperm, and "seminal plasma". Seminal plasma is produced by contributions from the seminal vesicle, prostate, and bulbourethral glands.
Convoluted structure attached to vas deferens near the base of the urinary bladder.
About 65-75% of the seminal fluid in humans originates from the seminal vesicles. Contain proteins, enzymes, fructose, mucus, vitamin C, flavins, phosphorylcholine and prostaglandins. High fructose concentrations provide nutrient energy for the spermatozoa as they travel through the female reproductive system.
Long coiled structure contained in the chambers of the testis; joins with vas deferens.
Meiosis takes place here, creation of gametes (sperm).
Junctions of the Sertoli cells form the blood-testis barrier, a structure that partitions the interstitial blood compartment of the testis from the abdominal compartment of the seminiferous tubules.
Cells responsible for nurturing and development of sperm cells , provides both secretory and structural support; activated by FSH. Also called "mother cells" or "nurse cells".
Gonads that produce sperm and male sex hormones.Production of testosterone by cells of Leydig in the testicles.
Branch of the abdominal aorta. It is a paired artery. Each passes obliquely downward and laterally behind the peritoneum.
Supplies blood to the testes.
Connects bladder to outside body, about 8 inches long.
Tubular structure that receives urine from bladder and carries it to outside of the body. Also passage for sperm.
Muscular tubes connecting the left and right epididymis to the ejaculatory ducts to move sperm. Each tube is about 30 cm long.
During ejaculation the smooth muscle in the vas deferens wall contracts, propelling sperm forward. Sperm are transferred from the vas deferens into the urethra, collecting fluids from accessory sex glands on route
The components of semen come from two sources: sperm, and "seminal plasma". Seminal plasma, in turn, is produced by contributions from the seminal vesicle, prostate, and bulbourethral glands.
Seminal plasma of humans contains a complex range of organic and inorganic constituents.
The seminal plasma provides a nutritive and protective medium for the spermatozoa during their journey through the female reproductive tract. The normal environment of the vagina is a hostile one for sperm cells, as it is very acidic (from the native microflora producing lactic acid), viscous, and patrolled by immune cells. The components in the seminal plasma attempt to compensate for this hostile environment. Basic amines such as putrescine, spermine, spermidine and cadaverine are responsible for the smell and flavor of semen. These alkaline bases counteract the acidic environment of the vaginal canal, and protect DNA inside the sperm from acidic denaturation.
The components and contributions of semen are as follows:
Approximately 200- to 500-million spermatozoa (also called sperm or spermatozoans), produced in the testes, are released per ejaculation
A 1992 World Health Organization report described normal human semen as having a volume of 2 ml or greater, pH of 7.2 to 8.0, sperm concentration of 20x106 spermatozoa/ml or more, sperm count of 40x106 spermatozoa per ejaculate or more and motility of 50% or more with forward progression (categories a and b) of 25% or more with rapid progression (category a) within 60 minutes of ejaculation.[1]
The hypothalamus secretes this hormone into the pituitary gland in the brain.
There are two gonadotropic hormones, FSH and LH.
The pituitary gland secretes this hormone after receiving a GnRH signal from the hypothalamus.
LH stimulates Leydig cells, in the testes, telling them to produce testosterone.
The pituitary gland also secretes this hormone.
Testosterone helps FSH run through the bloodstream to make Sertoli cells, located in the seminiferous tubules of the testes, to make immature sperm to mature sperm.
Also known as "the male hormone" and "androgen".
The constituent cavernous cylinders of the penis.
The erection of the penis is its enlarged and firm state. It depends on a complex interaction of psychological, neural, vascular and endocrine factors. The term is also applied to the process that leads to this state.
A penile erection occurs when two tubular structures that run the length of the penis, the corpora cavernosa, become engorged with venous blood. This is a result of parasympathetic nerve induced vasodilation. This may result from any of various physiological stimuli. The corpus spongiosum is a single tubular structure located just below the corpora cavernosa, which contains the urethra, through which urine and semen pass during urination and ejaculation, respectively. This may also become slightly engorged with blood, but less so than the corpora cavernosa.
Penile erection usually results from sexual stimulation and/or arousal, but can also occur by such causes as a full urinary bladder or spontaneously during the course of a day or at night, often during erotic or wet dreams. An erection results in swelling and enlargement of the penis. Erection enables sexual intercourse and other sexual activities (sexual functions), though it is not essential for all sexual activities.
Emission is the term used when sperm moves into the urethra. Ejaculation is the term used when sperm is forced out of the urethra and the penis. These are both stimulated by sympathetic nerves.
Spermatagonia divides several times during the process of sperm development. The entire process of sperm formation and maturation takes about 9-10 weeks. The separate divisions that take place and what happens in each are as follows:
First division: The first division is done by mitosis, and ensures a constant supply of spermatocytes, each with the diploid number of chromosomes.
Second division: Spermatocytes then undergo a series of two cell divisions during meiosis to become secondary spermatocytes.
Third division: Secondary Spermatocytes finally become spermatids. Spermatids, which are haploid cells, mature slowly to become the male gametes, or sperm.
The sperm is the main reproductive cell in males. The sperms differ in that each carry a set of chromosomes dividing each into either a male, or female sperm. The females differ in that they carry a X gene, while the male sperm carry a Y gene. The female sperm also differ phenotypically in that they have a larger head in comparison to the male sperms. This contributes to the male sperm being lighter, and therefore faster and stronger swimmers than their female counterparts (although statistically there is still a 50% chance of an either XY or XX embryo forming.
Spermatozoan stream lines are straight and parallel. The tail flagellates, which we now know propels the sperm cell (at about 1-3 mm/minute in humans) by rotating like a propeller, in a circular motion, not side to side like a whip. The cell is characterized by a minimum of cytoplasm. During fertilization, the sperm's mitochondria gets destroyed by the egg cell, and this means only the mother is able to provide the baby's mitochondria and mitochondrial DNA, which has an important application in tracing maternal ancestry. However it has been recently discovered that mitochondrial DNA can be recombinant.
Spermatozoa are produced in the seminiferous tubules of the testes in a process called spermatogenesis. Round cells called spermatogonia divide and differentiate eventually to become spermatozoa. During copulation the vagina is inseminated, the spermatozoa move through chemotaxis (see glossary) to the ovum inside a Fallopian tube or the uterus.
Spermatogenesis takes place inside a male’s testes, specifically in the walls of the seminiferous tubules. The epididymis is a tortuously coiled structure topping the testis, it receives immature sperm from the testis and stores it for several days. When ejaculation occurs, sperm is forcefully expelled from the tail of the epididymis into the ductus deferens. Sperm travels through the ductus deferens and up the spermatic cord into the pelvic cavity, over the ureter to the prostate behind the bladder. Here, the vas deferens joins with the seminal vesicle to form the ejaculatory duct, which passes through the prostate and empties into the urethra. Upon the sperm's exit from the testes, into the vas deferens, muscular movements take over. When ejaculation occurs, rhythmic muscle movements of peristalsis propel the sperm forward. This continues throughout the remainder of the sperm's journey through the male reproductive system.
Sperm cells become even more active when they begin to interact with the fertilizing layer of an egg cell. They swim faster and their tail movements become more forceful and erratic. This behavior is called "hyper activation."
A recent discovery links hyper activation to a sudden influx of calcium ions into the tails. The whip-like tail (flagellum) of the sperm is studded with ion channels formed by proteins called CatSper. These channels are selective, allowing only calcium ion to pass. The opening of CatSper channels is responsible for the influx of calcium. The sudden rise in calcium levels causes the flagellum to form deeper bends, propelling the sperm more forcefully through the viscous environment. Acrosome reaction on a Sea Urchin cell
The sperm use their tails to push themselves into the epididymis, where they complete their development. It takes sperm about 4 to 6 weeks to travel through the epididymis. The sperm then move to the vas deferens, or sperm duct. The seminal vesicles and prostate gland produce a whitish fluid called seminal fluid, which mixes with sperm to form semen when a male is sexually stimulated.
When the erect penis is stimulated to orgasm, muscles around the reproductive organs contract and force the semen through the duct system and urethra. Semen is pushed out of the male's body through his urethra - ejaculation. The speed of the semen is about 70 mph when ejaculation comes and it can contain 100 to 600 million sperm cells. When the male ejaculates during intercourse, semen is deposited into the fornix at the base of the female's vagina, near the cervix. From the fornix, the sperm make their way up through the cervix and move through the uterus with help from uterine contractions.
Sperm hyperactivity is necessary for breaking through two physical barriers that protect the egg from fertilization.
The first barrier to sperm is made up of so-called cumulus cells embedded in a gel-like substance made primarily of hyaluronic acid. The cumulus cells develop in the ovary with the egg and support it as it grows.
The second barrier coating the oocyte is a thick shell formed by glycoproteins called the zona pellucida. One of the proteins that make up the zona pellucida binds to a partner molecule on the sperm. This lock-and-key type mechanism is species-specific and prevents the sperm and egg of different species from fusing. There is some evidence that this binding is what triggers the acrosome to release the enzymes that allow the sperm to fuse with the egg.
When a sperm cell reaches the egg the acrosome releases its enzymes. These enzymes weaken the shell, allowing the sperm cell to penetrate it and reach the plasma membrane of the egg. Part of the sperm's cell membrane then fuses with the egg cell's membrane, and the sperm cell sinks into the egg (at which point the sperm tail falls off).
Upon penetration, the egg cell membrane undergoes a change and becomes impenetrable, preventing further fertilization.
The binding of the sperm to an ovum is called a zygote. A zygote is a single cell, with a complete set of chromosomes, that normally develops into an embryo.
Male pubertyIn addition to producing sperm, the male reproductive system also produces sex hormones, which help a boy develop into a sexually mature man during puberty. When a baby boy is born, he has all the parts of his reproductive system in place, but it isn't until puberty that his reproductive organs mature and become fully functional. As an newborn FSH and LH levels are high and after a few weeks levels drop to extremely low. When puberty begins, usually between the ages of 10 and 14, the pituitary gland - which is located in the brain - secretes hormones that stimulate the testicles to produce testosterone. The production of testosterone brings about many physical changes. Although the timing of these changes is different for each individual male, the stages of puberty generally follow a set sequence.
First stage: the scrotum and testes grow larger, the apocrine glands develop (see explanation of apocrine glands in glossary).
Second stage: the penis becomes longer, and the seminal vesicles and prostate gland grow. Hair begins to grow in the pubic region. Reproductive capacity has usually developed by this stage.
Third stage: hair begins to appear on the face and underarms. During this time, a male's voice also deepens. Fertility continues to increase.
In boys, testicular enlargement is the first physical manifestation of puberty (and is termed gonadarche). Testes in prepubertal boys change little in size from about 1 year of age to the onset of puberty, averaging about 2–3 cc in volume and about 1.5-2 cm in length. Testicular size continues to increase throughout puberty, reaching maximal adult size about 6 years later. While 18-20 cc is reportedly an average adult size, there is wide variation in the normal population.
The testes have two primary functions: to produce hormones and to produce sperm. The Leydig cells produce testosterone (as described below), which in turn produces most of the changes of male puberty. However, most of the increasing bulk of testicular tissue is spermatogenic tissue (primarily Sertoli and interstitial cells). The development of sperm production and fertility in males is not as well researched. Sperm can be detected in the morning urine of most boys after the first year of pubertal changes (and occasionally earlier).
A boy's penis grows little from the fourth year of life until puberty. Average prepubertal penile length is 4 cm. The prepubertal genitalia are described as stage 1. Within months after growth of the testes begins, rising levels of testosterone promote growth of the penis and scrotum. This earliest discernible beginning of pubertal growth of the genitalia is referred to as stage 2. The penis continues to grow until about 18 years of age, reaching an average adult size of about 10-16 cm.
Although erections and orgasm can occur in prepubertal boys, they become much more common during puberty, accompanied by development of libido (sexual desire).
Ejaculation becomes possible early in puberty; prior to this boys may experience dry orgasms. Emission of seminal fluid may occur due to masturbation or spontaneously during sleep (commonly termed a wet dream, and more clinically called a nocturnal emission). The ability to ejaculate is a fairly early event in puberty compared to the other characteristics, and can occur even before reproductive capacity itself. In parallel to the irregularity of the first few periods of a girl, for the first one or two years after a boy's first ejaculation, his seminal fluid may contain few active sperm.
If the foreskin of a boy does not become retractable during childhood, it normally begins to retract during puberty. This occurs as a result of the increased production of testosterone and other hormones in the body.
The penis contains two chambers called the corpora cavernosa, which run the length of the organ. A spongy tissue, full of muscle, veins, arteries, etc. fills these chambers. The corpora cavernosa are surrounded by a membrane, called the tunica albuginea.
Erection begins with sensory or mental stimulation, or both. Impulses from the brain and local nerves cause the muscles of the corpora cavernosa to relax, allowing blood to flow in and fill the spaces. The blood creates pressure in the corpora cavernosa, making the penis expand. The tunica albuginea helps trap the blood in the corpora cavernosa, thereby sustaining erection. When muscles in the penis contract to stop the inflow of blood and open outflow channels, erection is reversed.
Pubic hair often appears on a boy shortly after the genitalia begin to grow. As in girls, the first appearance of pubic hair is termed pubarche and the pubic hairs are usually first visible at the dorsal (abdominal) base of the penis. The first few hairs are described as stage 2. Stage 3 is usually reached within another 6 to 12 months, when the hairs are too numerous to count. By stage 4, the pubic hairs densely fill the "pubic triangle." Stage 5 refers to spread of pubic hair to the inner thighs and upward towards the umbilicus as part of the developing abdominal hair.
Cross-sectional diagram of the female reproductive organs.
For most men, testosterone secretion continues throughout life, as does sperm production, though both diminish with advancing age. Probably the most common reproductive problem for older men is prostatic hypertrophy, enlargement of the prostate gland. This causes the urethra to compress and urination becomes difficult. Residual urine in the bladder increases the chance of urinary tract infections. Prostate hypertrophy is usually benign, but cancer of the prostate is one of the more common cancers in elderly men. A TURP is commonly used to correct this problem if the symptoms do not improve in response to home treatment and medication.
Erectile dysfunction (ED) is another common problem seen in aging males. In older men, ED usually has a physical cause, such as disease, injury, or side effects of drugs. Any disorder that impairs blood flow in the penis or causes injury to the nerves has the potential to cause ED. Although it is not an inevitable part of aging, incidences increases with age: About 5 percent of 40-year-old men and between 15 and 25 percent of 65-year-old men experience ED. As discouraging as Erectile dysfunction may be, it is treatable at any age, and awareness of this fact has been growing. More men have been seeking help and returning to normal sexual activity because of improved, successful treatments for ED.
Boys may sometimes experience reproductive system problems. Below are some examples of disorders that affect the male reproductive system (Disorders of the Scrotum, Testicles, or Epididymis). Conditions affecting the scrotal contents may involve the testicles, epididymis, or the scrotum itself.
Testicular trauma. Even a mild injury to the testicles can cause severe pain, bruising, or swelling. Most testicular injuries occur when the testicles are struck, hit, kicked, or crushed, usually during sports or due to other trauma. Testicular torsion, when 1 of the testicles twists around, cutting off the blood supply, is also a problem that some teen males experience - although it's not common. Surgery is needed to untwist the cord and save the testicle.
Varicocele. This is a varicose vein (an abnormally swollen vein) in the network of veins that run from the testicles. Varicoceles commonly develop while a boy is going through puberty. A varicocele is usually not harmful, although in some people it may damage the testicle or decrease sperm production, so it helps for you to take your child to see his doctor if he is concerned about changes in his testicles.
Testicular cancer. This is one of the most common cancers in men younger than 40. It occurs when cells in the testicle divide abnormally and form a tumor. Testicular cancer can spread to other parts of the body, but if it's detected early, the cure rate is excellent. Teen boys should be encouraged to learn to perform testicular self-examinations.
Epididymitis is inflammation of the epididymis, the coiled tubes that connect the testes with the vas deferens. It is usually caused by an infection, such as the sexually transmitted disease chlamydia, and results in pain and swelling next to 1 of the testicles.
Hydrocele. A hydrocele occurs when fluid collects in the membranes surrounding the testes. Hydroceles may cause swelling of the testicle but are generally painless. In some cases, surgery may be needed to correct the condition.
Inguinal hernia. When a portion of the intestines pushes through an abnormal opening or weakening of the abdominal wall and into the groin or scrotum, it is known as an inguinal hernia. The hernia may look like a bulge or swelling in the groin area. It can be corrected with surgery.
Inflammation of the penis. Symptoms of penile inflammation include redness, itching, swelling, and pain. Balanitis occurs when the glans (the head of the penis) becomes inflamed. Posthitis is foreskin inflammation, which is usually due to a yeast or bacterial infection.
Hypospadias. This is a disorder in which the urethra opens on the underside of the penis, not at the tip.
Phimosis. This is a tightness of the foreskin of the penis and is common in newborns and young children. It usually resolves itself without treatment. If it interferes with urination, circumcision (removal of the foreskin) may be recommended.
Paraphimosis. This may develop when a boy's uncircumcised penis is retracted but doesn't return to the unretracted position. As a result, blood flow to the penis may be impaired, and your child may experience pain and swelling. A doctor may try to use lubricant to make a small incision so the foreskin can be pulled forward. If that doesn't work, circumcision may be recommended.
Ambiguous genitalia. This occurs when a child is born with genitals that aren't clearly male or female. In most boys born with this disorder, the penis may be very small or nonexistent, but testicular tissue is present. In a small number of cases, the child may have both testicular and ovarian tissue.
Micro penis. This is a disorder in which the penis, although normally formed, is well below the average size, as determined by standard measurements.
Sexually transmitted diseases. Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) that can affect boys include human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS), human papillomavirus (HPV, or genital warts), syphilis, chlamydia, gonorrhea, genital herpes, and hepatitis B. They are spread from one person to another mainly through sexual intercourse.
Erectile dysfunction. E.D. is the inability to get or keep an erection firm enough for sexual intercourse. This can also called impotence. The word "impotence" may also be used to describe other problems that can interfere with sexual intercourse and reproduction, such as problems with ejaculation or orgasm and lack of sexual desire. Using the term erectile dysfunction clarifies that those other problems are not involved.
Condoms: A device, usually made of latex, or more recently polyurethane, that is used during sexual intercourse. It is put on a man's penis and physically blocks ejaculated semen from entering the body of a sexual partner. Condoms are used to prevent pregnancy, transmission of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs - such as gonorrhea, syphilis, and HIV), or both.
C) the sperm begin to interact with the fertilizing layer of an egg cell
Androgen: The generic term for any natural or synthetic compound, usually a steroid hormone, that stimulates or controls the development and maintenance of masculine characteristics in vertebrates by binding to androgen receptors. This includes the activity of the accessory male sex organs and development of male secondary sex characteristics. They are also the precursor of all estrogens, the female sex hormones. The primary and most well-known androgen is testosterone.
Apocrine Glands: Apocrine sweat glands develop during the early to mid puberty ages approximately around the age of 15 and release more than normal amounts of sweat for approximately a month and subsequently regulate and release normal amounts of sweat after a certain period of time. They are located wherever there is body hair.
These glands produce sweat that contains fatty materials. Mainly present in the armpits and around the genital area, their activity is the main cause of sweat odor, due to the bacteria that break down the organic compounds in the sweat.
Bulbourethral Glands: male accessory sex glands that secrete mucus for lubrication
Chemotaxis: Chemotaxis is a kind of taxis, in which bodily cells, bacteria, and other single-cell or multicellular organisms direct their movements according to certain chemicals in their environment. This is important for bacteria to find food (for example, glucose) by swimming towards the highest concentration of food molecules, or to flee from poisons (for example, phenol). In multicellular organisms, chemotaxis is critical to development as well as normal function. In addition, it has been recognized that mechanisms that allow chemotaxis in animals can be subverted during cancer metastasis.
Ductus Deferens: epididymal ducts from each testis converge to form a large, thick walled, muscular duct
Ejaculatory Ducts: two ducts, receive sperm from the ductus deferens and secretions from the seminal vesicle; the ducts then empty into the urethra
Epididymis: comma shaped and loosely attached to the rear surface of each testis
Erectile Tissue: smooth muscle and connective tissue inside the penis that contain blood sinuses; large, irregular vascular channels
Erection: the penis at its enlarged and firm state; occurs when the corpora cavernosa become engorged with venous blood
Flagellum: the whip-like tail of a sperm, propels the sperm towards the egg in hopes of achieving fertilization
Follicle-Stimulating Hormone (FSH): hormone that stimulates production of sertoli cells, to make immature sperm to mature sperm
Glans Penis: distal end of the penis, covered with the foreskin
Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone (GnRH): hormone secreted by the hypothalamus into the pituitary gland; two types, FSH and LH
Libido: In its common usage, it means sexual desire; however, more technical definitions, such as those found in the work of Carl Jung, are more general, referring to libido as the free creative—or psychic—energy an individual has to put toward personal development, or individuation.
Luteinizing Hormone (LH): hormone that stimulates Leydig cells in the testes to produce testosterone
Oviduct: the passage in females from the ovaries to the outside of the body.
Prostate Gland: male accessory sex gland that secretes an alkaline fluid, which neutralizes acidic vaginal secretions
Scrotum: skin covered sac that houses the male testicles; keeps the testicles away from the body so that they can stay a few degrees cooler than the body, for better sperm production
Seminal Vesicle: male accessory sex glands that supply fructose to ejaculated sperm and secrete prostaglandins
Seminiferous Tubules: highly coiled tubules within the testes that produce spermatozoa
It is activated by follicle-stimulating hormone, and has FSH-receptor on its membranes.
Its main function is to nurture the developing sperm cells through the stages of spermatogenesis. Because of this, it has also been called the "mother cell." It provides both secretory and structural support.
Sexual Homology: sex organs that evolve from the same tissues in both male and females
Testes: located in the scrotum, produces testosterone which stimulates production of sperm
Testosterone: male sex hormone secreted by the leydig cells of the testes, vital for the production of sperm
TURP: transurethral resection of the prostate. During TURP, an instrument is inserted up the urethra to remove the section of the prostate that is blocking urine flow. This is most commonly caused by benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). A TURP usually requires hospitalization and is done using a general or spinal anesthetic. It is now the most common surgery used to remove part of an enlarged prostate.
Urethra: the last part of the urinary tract; in males, it is the passage for both urine and sperm
Varicocele: varicose vein of the testicles, sometimes a cause of male infertility
Both male and female reproductive systems may seem somewhat isolated from other body systems in that their purpose is to create new life and not just to maintain existing life. There are however significant relationships between the reproductive system and other body systems. All systems relate in one way or another to help our bodies maintain homeostasis.
"Essentials of Anatomy and Physiology" by Valerie C. Scanlon and Tina Sanders
The term osculating plane, which was first used by Tinseau in 1780, of a curve C parametrized by a function f(t) at a point f(a) is the plane that is approached when it is spanned by two vectors f(x)-f(a) and f(y)-f(a) when x and y both approach a.
. If these vectors are linearly independent, then they span a plane.
, meaning that the plane is also spanned by the vectors
We can also replace the second vector by
!
Then it is obvious that the following scalar triple product is equal to 0:
The intersection of the osculating plane and the normal plane is called the principal normal line.
If it happens to be the case that f'(x) and f(x) are linearly dependent, then we can consider every plane containing the tangent line to be the osculating plane.
The United States has frequently been caricaturized as a citizenship of excess consumerism. Homes are disproportionately large for the typical family, with multi-car garages, manicured lawns and laid out in widely spaced suburban patterned streets. Houses are cooled during the hot summer with automatic electric air condition and heated in the winter with gas furnaces. Paved roads interconnect towns and cities, with wide interstates filled with large vehicles and trucks. Over these wide roads which cover vast regions, they provide daily commutes using large cars and trucks fueled by gasoline and diesel. A network of pavement between shopping centers, markets and places of employment at factories or offices, and the various leisure activities, making up these urban centers. Parking lots have replaced meadows and forests. While farms are now industrial scale, using large machines to harvest and plow large tracks of land. The wildlands cleared for timber, stripped mined or developed into industrial oil and gas fields is the predominate landscape of rural regions of the country.
Living within the urbanized Earth, it is difficult to fathom how we reached this pinnacle and precarious perch that humanity now stands upon. Humans have transformed the Earth in the last 200 years, changing its atmosphere and altering its oceans, with a swift progress that involved unique ways of cooperation. Study of this complex human cooperation through production, distribution, trade, and the consumption of goods and services extracted from the Earth is known as economics. Ecological economics is the subfield interested in how humans interact with the Earth, and emphasizes the need for sustainable practices that protect life on the planet from collapse.
How many countries are required to match demand (2018).
The Mineral Education Coalition publishes an estimate of the amount of raw minerals and rocks the average child born each year will use throughout their life. In 2019 it is estimated that every American will have used in their lifetime, 15 tons of salt, 7 tons of phosphate limestone, 6 tons of clay minerals, 26.5 tons of cement and lime, 10 tons of iron ore, 1 ton of bauxite for aluminum, 680 tons of aggregate for roads, construction and pavement, 165 tons of coal, 980 pounds of copper ore, 953 pounds of lead, 466 pounds of zinc, 31 tons of other metals and minerals, like tin, lithium oxide, and rare earth metals, with 75,327 gallons of petroleum and 7.7 million cubic feet of natural gas, and 1.5 ounces of gold. This does not include the amount of food and freshwater that a person needs through their whole lifespan. The total land required to meet these demands and are used per individual, is known as the ecological footprint—the land required to sustain the use of these natural resources from the Earth.
The concept of an ecological footprint was first developed by the work of the Swiss scientist Mathis Wackernagel in the 1990s as a method to estimate the amount of space required per individual to live on Earth at their current consumption habits. This was expanded into the Global Footprint Network, which offers a Footprint Calculator for you to estimate the amount of space required, as well as the amount of Earth’s total surface actually required if everyone on the Earth lives as you do. The results are frankly startling, as the capacity of Earth is nearing its limit for the number of humans that can occupy the planet. This point in time is known as an overshoot, which occurs when the resource consumption exceeds the availability of those resources to maintain the current population and living standards. Overshoot events are thought to precede a sudden collapse within a society, as the resources are no longer able to match the necessary demand, which leads to scarcity, starvation, and general population drop depending on the resource in decline.
Play media Video on the rising demands on Earth's plant life, as human consumption increases.
The modern human species Homo sapien arose on Earth between 300,000 to 200,000 years ago, and for most of that time, humans utilized only the local resources of their immediate environment, such as plants, animals and water as well as natural shelters such as caves and other constructed homes from natural materials available. The rise of human consumption during the recent period of human history has been very rapid with the advent of human civilization. Civilization started with technological advancements in the domestication of animals (starting about 20,000 years ago) and the advent of agriculture (starting about 11,000 years ago). Since then, humans have become more cooperative with a complex network in the trade and exchanging of goods and items. This profound shift in using the Earth’s resources for the production of goods that are to be traded, lead to the rapid changes that you observe today on the planet. The growth of trade allowed for the extraction of natural resources to produce and distribute goods to widely spaced geographic areas around the world. This was accomplished in three stages that lead to the modern rate of trade and commerce that we have today.
The advent of human agriculture and idea of land ownership had a major effect on Earth's surface.
Increases in domestication and agriculture came with the issue of protecting those place-bound resources from other groups of humans, which would attack, steal, or destroy those resources, and blunder those goods. The more production increased, the greater the need for cooperation between and among humans to guard and protect those resources. They also needed to be able to trade goods with other groups lacking them in exchange of goods scarce to their own region. These early trade routes and guarding armies required a percentage of the profit to flow to people not directly involved in the making of the goods themselves, this resulted in groups of traders and sellers exchanging goods, as well as taxes being levied against these trades. These profits resulted in a percentage of the exchange to flow through a community of people, eventually leading to an important aspect of civilization— egalitarianism. Egalitarianism is the idea or philosophy that all humans are equal and should be treated equally in a society with the sharing of profits and goods.
View of Kansas, showing individual agricultural fields and crops.
However, these early communities were far from being truly egalitarian, as they were besieged by tribalism and nationalism. Brutal wars, murder, genocide, and systematic violence was feverishly common between groups and individuals. These breakdowns in early civilized societies would result in their frequent downfall. Traders were often put at great risk in moving goods across the Earth without protection. Slavery existed, where an elite group regarded fellow humans as goods themselves, to be traded and forced to work, resulted in inequalities in these early societies. These inequalities persist into the modern age.
Taxation likely developed from extortion and bribery, in which groups rather than bunder all the traded goods, would take some part of it, knowing that by killing or robbing the traders, they would lose the long-term access to these goods themselves. Taxation was a method of dividing profits to serve larger groups of individuals.
Slavery and the ownership of fellow humans generated major inequality during this period of history.
Taxation comes with the issue of having wealthy groups that might rebel when forced to pay these costs, and since they are wealthy they could hire their own army and overthrow the local group of elites if the taxes became too high. The development of contracts, or agreements between a ruling class and noble class in a society, lead to the early ideas of feudalism and land ownership. The most famous of these changes can be found in the Doomsday Book, or in Latin the original title Liber de Wintonia. In 1085, William the Conqueror ordered a survey of the land and goods that they had conqueror during the Norman conquest of England and Wales. These early surveys were meant to establish rights to individuals to own land, and establish taxes and fees to those entities. It was called the Doomsday Book, because people living on the land or in the region not recorded during the initial survey were subjected to servitude and lacked legal authority to the land. These surveys resulted in major inequalities between the upper-class landowners and those lower-class peasant and serfs that were required to work the land, but not own it. Such concepts of landownership resulted an increased need to produce crops and livestock to trade or sell in markets, and trade for goods that the particular parcel of land was unable to provide for. During this time, cities grew as places of trade and commerce, since each parcel of land resulted in different goods and items that required exchange at the markets and in the city centers. This process of dividing the land into parcels with a legal authority governing who owned what resulted in a major transformation of the Earth’s surface. It also promoted slavery and servitude to work the land, with the benefit of a wealthy landowning upper class. These primitive societies were still susceptible to invasion, attack and revolt. Often small city states hired mercenary forces to protect these lands, as well as standing armies who were overseen by nobility, such as a king or queen. Much of these services were paid for by taxes, which helped maintain the legal authority of landownership, by contributing to these standing armies or mercenary forces. However, many nobles receiving these taxes realized that the conquest of new lands could be of major benefit to them, as they would expand the revenue incoming to their own courts. However, if these armies pursued a war and lost, it would offer a major risk to the current landowners on the losing side. Landowners were not supportive of these efforts to invade other countries, until the advent of bonds. The concept of bonds developed around 1590 as a way to bind individual nobles together by offering loans to the rulers, which would be paid back with interest by the rulers or government. These came about with the increased cost of conducting wars and conquering other nations, such as the advent of firearms and other specialized weapons that required more money. Bonds unified the upper class, allowing the distribution of wealth to remain among the elite landowners, who benefited from exploits of wars and bounty during various conquests of exotic lands outside the boundary of their own nations. This was the age of colonization, which would see great global empires arise for the first time on Earth during the 1600 and 1700 centuries.
Entrance to the New York Stock Exchange.
Trading ships were financed by stock purchases among individual investors.
Local trade between one region to another became less risky the stronger the nation’s governance. However, shipping goods across an ocean to a far-off colony, carried much more risk if the ship sank or was attacked by pirates, and greater returns, in that what goods the ship traded for and carried back would be exotic and worth considerably more that the goods shipped out. To mediate this risk, stock was offered in which a ship owner would receive money before the goods were delivered, and then payout money with profit on the return of the ship, such that if a ship were to sink on its long journey, the ship owner would not have lost all the value of the goods and the ship. These types of transactions lead to a greater interest in making these risky trading trips around the world, and the exchange of goods across vast oceans between conquered lands. The concept of stocks would revolutionize the export and import of goods, and the increase demand for natural resources across global trading routes.
An example of a stock certificate from 1900.
Large mines require major capital, to develop, such as this coal strip mine.
Large agricultural businesses have taken over small farms, with major capital investments into land and machines.
The United States of America benefited greatly with this style of capitalistic society, as it was founded on the eastern seaboard of the North American continent, with trading ports between its shores and those of Europe, the Caribbean, and even North Africa. It also had a source in the interior lands of a continued conquerable lands from the native indigenous peoples of the interior. Between 1800 and 1850, in fifty short years, the United States purchased and conquered much of the western region of North America. As already occupied by native people, and being more arid and difficult to access, it nevertheless rapidly changed the ownership of this land during the years leading up to and after the American Civil War. In an attempt to quell the Civil War in the east, and to restore pathways to landownership in the interior, the government begin the process of giving land away to eastern settlers. This land reallocation pushed people in the east to go west to establish farms and towns in the more arid climates, and lead to conflict with native people in these regions. This great westward migration resulted in major conflict of the people already in the region, and also led to a completely alternated landscape, with the promotion of agriculture and landownership, as well as the major extraction of mineral resources found in the region, including gold and silver.
Charles Dow was born on a farm in Connecticut near the Rhode Island border in 1851. His father died when he was six, and the family struggled during the Civil War. He nevertheless enjoyed reading and writing, and aspired to become a journalist for one of the many newspapers in the region. In 1877, he finally was able to find a job writing for a newspaper, and took an interest in the history of Newport Rhode Island. Newport was an important trading post since its colony days in the 1600s, but faced an economic collapse, but subsequently had become a revitalized port after its initial collapse. The town’s story was tied up with the whaling industry during the mid-1800s, and the massive efforts in harvesting whales for oil used in lamps and cooking, which were exported around the world. During this massive harvesting of whales, the population of along the North Atlantic collapsed, leading to a scarcity of whales, and a collapse of the local economy. To make money, the local population turned toward the illegal slave trade and the manufacturing of rum from imported sugar cane from the Caribbean. The American Civil War and freedom of slaves, ending these trade routes, which left a low value to the lands near the port. Many southern plantation owners moved north, and started trading in ginseng rather than cotton, that could be grown in the local climate and did not require large workforces of slaves that were now freed. Ginseng was exported to China which made fortunes and these people established large plantation style homes in New England, in the style of southern plantations. This transformation of Newport fascinated Charles Dow, and he wrote of the ways in which fortunes were made and lost in the town since its founding.
In the 1870s during the reconstruction of the United States from its Civil War, individual investors were interested in investing in mining stocks. Many companies were looking to raise capital for the extraction of gold and silver from western mountains, which was heavily supported by the government with the passage of the Homestead Act in 1864 and switch to a gold standard for coins.
However, unlike a ship and its goods, where the investors could inspect the vessel and items before setting sail, far off mines in the rugged regions of the interior where highly speculative, as most stocks were sold with no intentions of developing the mine, or demonstrating to the investors that the mine would produce gold and silver. This speculation was made all the more problematic because of the Homestead Act, and the giving of land away to white settlers, with the explicit rule that it be developed for agriculture or for mining. It was tempting for an individual living on the east coast to raise money to develop a mine somewhere west. However, if they gave those funds to a company that either disappeared or developed the land with little to no intention to make a profit, they would lose all their money. Fraud was common and many people lost their fortunes on such ventures. The government subsidized this great migration westward with finance speculation because it afforded the eastern states access to the interior of the continent and dispersed the warring population and fractions that had developed after the war. The government helped finance a transcontinental railway, giving large tracks of land to the railroad companies. All this required capital, funded through selling of stock to individual investors. For some, the risk proved very profitable, while others saw their fortunes evaporate. In 1879, Charles Dow was asked to cover a news story about the mines in Colorado, and he traveled to the gold and silver mines of the rich district in the country, the old west mining town of Leadville Colorado. There he quickly understood the pitfalls of east coast investors, as they did not know which mines were profitable ones and which mines were simply plywood cutouts and decoys to garnish more investments. Dow wrote nine letters from Leadville, concluding that mines are extremely risky investments and require insider knowledge of the mine and its true profits before one could invest in these stocks. On his return, Charles Dow realized the need to communicate financial knowledge about companies and their profits as an independent source to the public. The idea was sparked by his continued friendship with his friend at the newspaper Edward Jones. Jones was a mathematician, but also wrote for the paper and they discussed the importance of providing information to investors about the profits of companies and their worthiness in investing. They were joined by Charles Bergstresser, who suggested that they name their newspaper the Wall Street Journal, after the name of the street were the New York Stock Exchange and Treasury Building is located in Manhattan. This newspaper grew in importance because of the list of reputable companies that they published, which became known as the Dow Jones Index. The Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) is the total stock of 30 companies that are ranked by the newspaper, often large capitalized relatively safe companies to invest with. These types of indexes had a profound effect on the flow of money into the most productive companies, which were subsequently able to exploit more natural resources from the Earth, through an increased drive for profits. Where before stock purchases were very risky, now for companies to be listed on the Dow Jones they had to prove to the public that they were productive, and this production self-drove continued investment depending on investor sentiments of growth and production. This made companies overproduce, and often this overproduction was driven by government incentives.
Large mining operations in the central Rocky Mountains of Colorado. Cripple Creek, Colorado.
These cooperative agreements meant that citizens, companies and even the government all worked together to incentivize the production of goods without consideration of the environmental damage these endeavors cause. In the case of the gold and silver mines, these were driven by the actual purchases of gold by the government itself. During the Civil War, inflation plagued the dollar, which became uncoupled from the price of gold. In the early 1870s the U.S. Government begin purchasing gold from these western mines to back the dollar and restore the dollar’s value. Price fixing became a major issue, and forced the U.S. Government to suddenly drop their order for gold from the mines in 1873 to bring down the price. This resulted in a rippling effect through the economy and the collapse of the value of the dollar, as people exchanged dollars for gold. However, in the decades to follow, silver coins became worth less than an equal currency value established for gold coins. So, investors bought silver, exchanged it at the mint for gold coins, and then sold these gold coins in the market for more than they had paid for using silver turning a profit. Quickly gold became scarce and much more valuable than silver. Mining companies had extracted large quantities of silver (which is more common than gold), resulting in an oversupply of silver metal. To fix this issue, mining companies lobbied the government to begin buying large amounts of silver and issue fewer silver coins, to keep the mines open and running. This oversupply of silver continued since the government was buying this silver, which resulted in a drop in the price of gold relative to silver. In 1893, people who held gold lobbied the U.S. Government to stop buying silver. They did this, as the government then passed into law that they would no longer buy silver. The price of silver suddenly dropped, resulting in a crash in the price of silver in 1893, resulting in massive economic loss in the western states in the silver mines.
The cycle of boom and bust are driving by the supply and demand of goods and the markets that they are purchased within. Trading of goods is driven by perceived scarcity, and the demand of those goods by other individuals, however these perceptions can quickly change in any economy. Many of these boom and bust cycles are driven by governments who push markets in key ways to support stock owning citizens, lobbyists and companies that donate to election campaigns, and receive kick-backs as part of these cooperative agreements. The boom and bust cycle of extraction of resources results in major large-scale depletions of natural resources followed by collapse, and leaves depleted often exhausted supplies of those goods. Many of these goods are not often necessary to living.
Most resources are non-renewable, and scarcity will increase over time, until alternatives are found or demand decreases. With governmental purchases and large scale subsidizes there will be an increase in demand, while governmental regulations can direct companies to find alternatives and prevent scarcity and depletion of natural resources. The middle ground is to have the government do nothing, called Laissez-faire capitalism, discussed by Adam Smith in his classic history of economics The Wealth of Nations, published in 1776, the same year the United States declared its independence. The ideal of laissez-faire capitalism has prevailed in discussions of ways to govern since the inception of the United States. It however has proven to be disastrous in the promotion of the rapid depletion of natural resources.
The consequence of laissez-faire capitalism leads to what is called The Tragedy of the Commons, a concept developed by the ecologist Garrett Hardin in 1968. The Tragedy of the Commons is best illustrated with a simple example. Imagine a tiny nation composed of a single forest of 100 trees, and a population of 4 individual people who make a living cutting trees and selling the lumber. Each tree takes 10 years to grow back. If each individual agrees to cut only 1 tree each year, then the forest will never run out of trees, as the rate of cutting trees is less than the rate of regrowth, and the number of trees will remain around 64, after 10 years. However, imagine that one of the individuals wants to make a little extra money, and cuts 3 trees instead of just 1. In just 32 years, the forest will be depleted and exhausted. With laissez-faire capitalism there would be no penalty for this action. This example using the Tragedy of the Commons highlights the susceptibility for the rapid depletion of shared natural resources when there is little to no regulation and enforcement for the protection and the long-term preservation of the resource. The Tragedy of the Commons also highlights the incentive to cheat within laissez-faire capitalism to turn a greater profit. Simple laissez-faire capitalism always leads to rapid resource depletion when there is strong demand and little protection for a resource. Most countries today don’t apply a purely laissez-faire capitalistic government. Governments can choose to regulate and conserve or protect their natural resources, such as limiting the number of trees cut down per year, to avoid harmful effects.
Each pays the candidate money to swing favor toward themselves. This makes the candidate wealthy, and able to buy more ads and promote themselves politically. Once they win, as the president of this tiny nation, they award the extra tree cutting to the one individual who gave them the most money in their campaign. That individual is allowed to cut down 3 trees without penalty, increasing their wealth at the expense of other citizens. Since the depletion of the resource takes time, the loss of the forest resources because of this extra cutting of the trees occurs long after the president is no longer in office. Such methods of governance is very common around the world and is referred to as a kleptocracy, a government with corrupt leaders that use their power to exploit the people and natural resources in their own nation in order to extend their own political power and wealth. Such forms of government lead to ecological disasters that result in major poverty for the population with the long-term depletion of natural resources for these short-term gains.
No other product on Earth has driven economies in the roller-coaster of boom and bust cycles than hydrocarbons, like oil and natural gas, which are extracted from the subsurface. Petroleum was discovered in the subsurface in Pennsylvania by Samuel Kier in 1849, and was first used as a medical oil and ointment that he started selling in drug stores. This raw crude oil was discovered when drilling water wells in the region, as it floated above the denser water in the wells. It was soon discovered that this oil could be burned in oil lamps without much odor once it was refined and distilled. The oil through heating would be separated out into the various hydrocarbon compounds, each of which would produce a different fuel source, such as natural gas (methane), propane and octane. Early on, oil wells were drilled across Pennsylvania with the increasing demand for the oil in heating, cooking and gas for lighting, as well as a fuel (gasoline) for early combustion engines. Following the Civil War demand exploded as the number of whales (an early source of oil), became depleted. Production peaked around 1890 in Pennsylvania as drillers drilled deeper into the subsurface to find oil, finding less and less. A typical oil well only lasts a few years, before the oil is depleted and runs dry. Oil takes millions of years to develop in the subsurface, so it is a non-renewable resource, and every well drilled has a typical lifespan of only 3 to 15 years on average, with many dry from the start, but injections of water and gas can to help push oil into a producing well, and extend its production as long as 30 years at limited production levels.
The increased demand for oil was rapid with the creation of motorized combustion engines in the twentieth century, and as people purchased cars and trucks, to replace horses, they needed a fuel source for them. Further demand came from the transportation of goods and supplies carried by gasoline powered trucks rather than coal and steam locomotives. This rapid demand for petroleum, resulted in oil drillers moving further and further westward in search of new locations (called plays), with major discoveries in West Texas in the Permian Basin, Southern California near Los Angles, as well as Wyoming. Many of these sources of oil were owned by landowners who held the mineral rights, but a large majority of these oil fields are owned and managed by the United States Government. The government would lease these lands through the Department of the Interior for companies to extract the oil for profit. In many other countries sources of oil and gas are also extracted directly by government owned companies.
Oil production peaked in the early 1970s in the United States, the second increase during 2004-2010 was do to fracking and other technology.
In the 1950s, cities became interconnected by major Interstates built by the government that decreased travel times between major cities across the country, which was quickly replaced traveling by rail. Such changes in the society demanded more and more oil, with increased demand to travel by these large roads paid for by the government, and this led to a peak in the domestic production of oil in the United States in 1973, after this date oil production begin to drop as the resource became depleted. With production falling, and demand still rising, oil prices soared nearly 400%, and many gas stations ran out of gasoline to sell to its customers. Much of this shock came from the embargo of imported oil from the Middle East, and the fact that domestic oil production could not keep up with increasing domestic demand. The effect of this shock, resulted in high inflation and requiring major downsizing of motorized vehicles. Most importantly it led to increased fuel standards to increase the mileage and amount of fuel needed to travel any distance. From that point onward, the United States carried a trade deficit and had to import much of its oil from other countries, particularly Saudi Arabia. During this time the major oil producing nations formed the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) to set prices on the international exchange of oil, these countries had an excess of oil, and were willing to work cooperatively to set prices. The United States became depend on these sources of oil, leading a continued push (sometimes turning to war) to make these oil markets low in terms of price, but also pushed for innovations to make cars more fuel efficient.
As a nation of widely geographically distributed citizens, the reliance on hydrocarbon sources of fuel continued. Technological advances to extract more oil continued in the 1980s, particularly exploring remote regions like the Northshore of Alaska, as well as deep ocean drilling in the Gulf of Mexico. Technology also lead to the widespread use of directional drilling and horizontal drilling to tap into smaller pockets of oil in abandoned fields. In 2003 drilling expanded into previous regions long abandoned, particularly Pennsylvania, North Dakota, and eastern Utah, with the discovery of fracking, which is the process of introducing acids to dissolve rock in a well, which releases locked oil and gas within pore space inside layers of sedimentary rock. Some fracking technologies used injected gases or explosives and other mechanical ways to break open the rock. This process enabled producers to scrap the bottom of the bowl, and increased domestic production to near its 1973 peak, but this source is limited, and will be soon exhausted. Alternatives need to be found. Oil and gas are both consumables, which means they are used within a relative short span of time, and cannot be recycled or reused.
The ocean water on fire due to oil spill off the coast of the United States of America.
Consumables include food and oil and gas, while most other natural resources can be recycled and reused once they are extracted like gold and silver, but also glass and many metals like copper and iron, as well as wood and some plastics, although wood and plastic have a more limited recyclability compared to metals. Technological advancements have worked to increase the amount of recycle paper products as well as glass and plastics, but many would be considered consumable (used only once), however hydrocarbons used as a fuel are never reused, and instead are consumed by burning them to produce energy and carbon dioxide, as well as other pollutants. This makes demand much easier to predict since new sources are continually needed.
These types of ventures result in ecological impacts to the regions that oil and gas wells are installed upon, covering vast regions of the Earth’s surface. Pipelines and roads are constructed (especially necessary to carry natural gas), and native vegetation and wildlife are disturbed or killed by this industrialization of rural regions of Earth. Oil spills, and deadly explosions at wells and in the petroleum distillation facilities near cities, as well as the pollution caused by the burning of these fuels all contribute to ecological collapse and rapid climate change.
Governments, particularly politicians wield enormous power in the preservation of the Earth through their policies and economic incentives. A large percent of the oil and gas reserves, as well as timber and meat production are carried out on government managed lands, which incentivizes its use and consumption for profit. Such governance can result in long term economic collapse, as the ecological costs of such ventures are often destructive to the long-term health of Earth’s water, atmosphere and lifeforms. Developing nations are particularly susceptible to these investments and projects which are often fraudulent, especially where there is rampant corruption. The United States is not immune to these problems and issues.
Conservation is the prevention of the wasteful use of a natural resource, by extending its use over a long interval, while preservation is maintaining a natural resource within its original or existing state. Preservation of land is the action of protecting the landscape by eliminating its use for industry, agriculture and urban development. Preservation retains the landscape and its natural resources to its original form in perpetuity. Conservation on the other hand, allows the use of the landscape, but limits this use to a set quota. Examples of conservation include hunting and fishing limits, limits on tree cutting in National Forests, and fishery limits for wild caught seafood. Conservation requires close documentation of the available resource at any given time, and the amount of use to prevent the depletion of a resource.
The human population on planet Earth in 2020 stands close to 7.7 billion individuals, and the population has been rapidly increasing since 1800, when the world population was only around 1 billion people. Population growth of humans has grown exponentially over the last two hundred years. Prior to the advent of world trade and commerce the growth rate was very slow, only about 0.04% annually. After 1800, with the advent of global trading routes and growing commercial exchange of goods between various regions of the Earth, the human population exploded, with a rapid increase to 3% annual growth rates, resulting in 7.7 billion living people living on the Earth today. The Earth has more living human individuals on its surface than any time throughout its long history. It is estimated that about 108 billion human individuals have ever lived, and about 7.3% of those people are living today. There is great concern if the Earth can handle such a dramatic increase of human individuals, and this rapid increase in population density. Resource depletion and the allocation of those resources as they become more scarce fundamentally runs the risk of population collapse in the future.
Ecologists who study population change over time have observed two styles of population growth in nature. The first style of population growth is called r (lower case r), which stands for reproduction. An r or reproduction population growth curve is where a population rapidly increases dramatically, but then crashes very suddenly when it is culled back by increasing death rates. The reproductive strategy of these species of plants and animals is to produce the greatest number of offspring possible. Such organisms, include dandelion flowers, which will produce millions of seeds that are dispersed by wind each summer, with the majority of seeds not growing into new plants. Another example are rats or mice, that often have large litters of offspring, and if there is available resources populations can rise suddenly and dramatically.
An example of a K reproductive growth rate, where the population reaches a carrying capacity and levels off.
This style of reproduction strategy ensures that some individuals will survive, even at the expense of the majority. Species that exhibit these boom and bust population explosions are often very effective of exploiting a resource that is disturbed or undergoing major changes, since they are often the first species to colonize or occupy a disturbed region.
The second reproductive strategy is called K (upper case K), the K stands for the carrying capacity, which (actually is spelled with a c). These species produce far fewer offspring, and spend more time and resources for their care. These species will also increase in population over time, but at much slower rates than r strategists. The K strategists will however reach a carrying capacity, that is a population that is balanced between new births and new deaths, such that the population is said to reach the carrying capacity. K strategists tend not to collapse, but will maintain this population for long periods of time. However, this strategy comes at the cost that it requires more offspring care and protection, but also that if disturbed, the population will not replenish itself for a long time.
The question that our current human population poses is whether humans are fundamentally a r strategist or a K strategist? Since humans spend much time in the raising and education of their offspring (especially compared to a dandelion), the clear agreement among most scientists is that humans are K strategist, and that given time the human population will at some point reach a carrying capacity, and remain stable.
What is the human population that the Earth can support?
Some scientists argue that the human population has already overshot its carrying capacity, and that resource depletion as well as atmospheric changes in carbon dioxide and climate change, and limited food production, as well as diseases and pandemics with overcrowding, the human population will dramatically be reduced in the near future. Other scientists argue that the human population will soon reach its carrying capacity of the Earth and stabilize, with some estimate of human population between 8 to 10 billion people as sustainable. These scientists predict that population size will began to slow, as families reduce the number of children, with two or fewer offspring. These scientists are led to this conclusion based on economic data, which demonstrates that the more affluent a family is, the fewer the number of children they will have. More affluent families often are led by mothers who have more rights and say in the raising of their children, as well as their productive role in a society. The more that is invested by a society in raising and educating children and supporting woman’s rights, the slower the population growth of that country, compared to countries that have limited access to education and health care.
Hans Rosling supported the idea that human population would slow near Earth's carrying capacity.
Hans Rosling the late medical professor from Stockholm Sweden developed unique ways to visualize human population growth with a key insight into the response of economics and standard of living in relationship to population growth. He and his family, developed innovative tools to observe how countries population dynamics respond to the economic conditions within a country. He, along with his daughter Anna Rosling Rönnlund and son Ola Rosling developed a data viewer called Trendalyzer, which uses data from the World Bank to look at the dynamic nature of population growth and personal income. The results of this massive study suggest that as families become more affluent with increasing income, access to education, and healthcare, they reduce the number of children they have in a family and population growth slows. They conclude that Earth is approaching its total human carry capacity and will stabilize around 10 to 11 billion, as both personal income and life expectancy increases. The opposite is true as well, if families in a country reduce the average number of children in their family through family planning, then over time the average personal income will subsequently increase. This is exemplified in China, which from 1979 to 2015 limited the number of children a family could legally have, resulting in an increasingly affluent country and rising GDP, with a rise in average income for those families as the population of the country stabilized. This idea, that as individuals become more affluent and wealthier, population growth slows and ends, has been refuted by many scientists as being overly optimistic. Part of this comes from the fact that the more affluent and wealthier a person is, the more resources from the Earth they will use. Another observation is that as a human population becomes more affluent and wealthier they exhibit longer individual lifespans, with an increase in life expectancy well unto 80 years of life on average and may give a short-term increase, or bump in population growth instead. The idea that as populations became more affluent and wealthier they reach a carrying capacity and stop growing in population size has been contested in a number of interesting studies (maybe best summarized by Jared Diamond’s book Collapse). It nevertheless is a prediction that in the short-term human populations might began to hit a ceiling.
In the scientific field of economics, many studies have tried to examine the boom and bust cycles of local aspects of economics, suggesting that long term patterns might emerge, where an economy or society goes from a rapid expansion, to a boom, falling onto a recession and ending with a depression, only to restart this pattern again. In extracting and using Earth’s resources you can identify the same pattern, first discovery and utilization of a resource, massive extraction of that resource during a boom period, the resource quickly becomes depleted and scarce, and finally is economically extinguished with a major depression and collapse. The question becomes whether human populations themselves will undergo such a pattern into the future.
The economist Thomas Piketty analyzed capital assets throughout European history, to see what patterns emerged from this massive collection of resource allocation through 200 years of history. His summarized results were published in his best-selling book Capital in the Twenty-First Century, and his more recent book Capital and Ideology. Looking at the long period of capital investments by wealthy landowners, Piketty noticed a pattern of boom and bust that was not tied to a gradual rise and fall or swings in the markets, but one driving by increasing inequality over time, until inequality becomes so great that a society reaches a snapping point when everything rapidly collapses into war, disease or famine. Piketty envisioned a repeating pattern where societies increasingly become unequal over a long stable periods of governance where the ruling class because wealthier and more politically powerful, while the poor become worse off and powerless. This will continue until there is a cataclysmic event that snaps the increasingly unequal society into a revolt and there will be a redistribution of wealth and landownership, which acts to erase the inequality present in the society. Some classic examples are the French and Russian Revolutions, where aristocratic societies were overthrown and followed by a redistribution of wealth and capital assets. Piketty envisions that income inequality is like a ticking bomb within a society, and that as the rich get richer, and the poor get poorer, there will be a point of revolt, and the society will collapse. After this collapse the population returns to the beginning and slowly restarts the inequality clock for the next ticking bomb. It may not be a revolt, but some other cataclysmic event that can restart a society, such as a plague or disease, an invasion from another nation, a major famine, deforestation, poor land use, natural resource depletion or even the inability of the government to enforce conservation or preservation of natural resources.
Victims of the Rwandan Genocide at the Nyamata Memorial Site.
An example of this cycle of population rise, growing inequality and societal collapse can be illustrated by the events that lead to the Rwandan genocide, where the country’s population dropped dramatically between the years of 1990 to 1994, from a peak near 7.5 million people to a low of 5.5 million, as millions were murdered during major civil unrest in the country. The story of this collapse can be attributed to a growing inequality within the country that extended back nearly two centuries. The country of Rwandan was occupied by the hunter gathering nomadic society of the Twa people, but a major migration into the country from Bantu groups to the north brought agriculture and domesticated cattle, settling in the lush valleys. These groups of settlers quickly grew in population size, and begin to trade with each other building networks of villages and commence. Overtime the Bantu groups started to recognize two classes of people, the Tutsi who owned cattle and the Hutu who worked in the fields and farmed the land. This division of labor begin a process called Ubuhake, in which Tutsi would trade cattle for services carried out by the Hutu. This made the Hutu subjected to Tutsi power and rule, as they used their wealth in cattle to take more land and use Hutu as servants to sow and harvest the land. Overtime this class division became more racial, as the two groups viewed each other as separate races, avoided intermarriage and desegregation. The rise in income disparity between the upper-class Tutsi and lower-class Hutu became more and more pronounced. Colonization by Germany and later Belgium who both maintained this class division within the Rwandan society had begun the process to issue identification cards dividing people into either Tutsi or Hutu. It became impossible for someone to switch between groups, and there grew increasing resentment among the Hutu against the rich Tutsi ruling class. Social unrest increased until 1959 to 1961 when the Hutu overthrow the Tutsi monarchy. Hundreds of thousands of the Tutsi fled the country. The exiled Tutsi vowed revenge and begin a campaign to regain control of the country. This revenge came in early 1990s as Tutsi rebels attempted to invade the country, but meant with failure. This action of aggression only caused the Hutu living in the country to grow resentful of the Tutsi that they still lived alongside and had remained within the country. Major propaganda campaigns were launched by the media to persuade the Hutu population that the Tutsi were a indeed a separate race of people, similar to bugs or insects, and should be killed. This division increased as racial discrimination and acts of hate flooded the society’s media and stoked anger. This resulted in the radicalization of youth to carry out violence against anyone labeled as Tutsi. The president of the country, Juvénal Habyarimana realizing the growing hate and division within the country begin to attempt to broker peace with the Tutsi rebels, but when he was assassinated on 6 April 1994 as his aircraft was shot down above the capital, the country erupted in one of the worst genocides in Earth’s history. Neighbor killed neighbor, schools were burned, massive public executions were committed as villages and markets were burned and corpses filled homes. Hundreds of thousands of people died in just a few short months as the violence spilled over to moderate Hutu and other people who back the peace agreements. Nearly 30% of the country’s population died during the violence of the Rwanda genocide. By numbers, one of the worst human population collapses in Earth’s history. Eventually Tutsi rebel forces reestablished control of the country, led by Paul Kagame, who established himself as dictator of the country. The story of the collapse of the Rwandan society illustrates how racial division and inequality results in a society’s collapse, breed by hate. A civilized society must be an egalitarian society where each person has equal rights and opportunities extended to them, and were everyone within the society is viewed with equal importance. Civilizations collapse when laws, regulations and the true respect of your fellow humans is disregarded. The only way to solve the Earth’s problems is through love of your fellow mankind.
History of steel making goes back to 4th century BC. Steel weapons were produced in Iberian Peninsula. Roman military used Noric Steel (high quality steel from Noricum). Chinese of Han Dynasty created carbon intermediate steel by melting wrought iron together with cast iron.
People of East Africa discovered high heat blast furnace which allowed them to forge carbon steel. This technique was duplicated during Industrial Revolution in Europe.
Evidences of carbon steel production in the Subcontinent was found in Sri Lanka. Unique wind furnace blown by monsoon winds was used to produce high carbon steel. Also known as Wootz steel, it is famous for its durability. Trace elements were also used in production of this steel.
Wootz steel was also produced in India and China. It was a complicated alloy containing Iron as the major component. Steel possessed legendary qualities.
Crucible steel was produced in Merv by slow heating and cooling of pure iron and carbon (typically charcoal) in the 9th -10th century.
Steel buildings are very popular choice for commercial and residential purposes. They can be used as storage units for business or temporary shelters. The early 20th century saw a great rise in demand of steel buildings. After World War II, their use became more prevalent. Steel frame shelters were built for the army to provide housing during the World War. After the war, army shelters were used as living accommodation. Easy availability of steel then allowed more constructions of steel buildings. The use of steel buildings became more diverse as the people came to know about the strength and durability of steel.
Prefabricated steel buildings came in to use in 1960. These metal buildings had components premade including roof, floor, frame, walls and bracing. The parts just needed to be put together to make a building stand. This allowed to create buildings in various designs and made construction easier. The first computer aided design steel building was seen in 1960’s. This allowed steel buildings to have more designs, features, shapes and sizes.
A wide varieties of steel buildings are available now including Arch Steel Buildings, Clear span Buildings and Straight walled buildings. The Arch Steel buildings are used as storage units for agricultural business. They are structurally very strong and durable. The straight walled buildings are less sturdy compared to Arch steel buildings but have more usable space inside. These clear span buildings use big overhead beams in place of inside support columns. It offers wide open interior spaces to be used for commercial and industrial buildings. It is a great choice for warehouses, factories and storage space. As beams are not included in the structure, you can easily rearrange floor plans according to your needs. The clear span buildings are ideal for use as aircraft storage space and maintenance hangars.
The Forth language is a stack-based language designed for rapid interactive programming in limited-resource environments. Forth is interesting because it can be simple and small, yet it allows for remarkably powerful extensions to be written in Forth itself; most fully-fledged Forth systems are implemented partially in Forth. Forth is most often used to write embedded applications.
Many ritual necessities of other languages and required designer syntax falls away.
Forth is an extensible language, giving the user great flexibility to extend it. This is both a pro and a con. As with modeling clay, in the hands of an architect with a clear philosophy it can work wonders, or it can create a hodgepodge. Much Forth programming consists of "adding words to a dictionary" and learning someone's program, the words they have chosen to create, and their significance is often confused with learning the language itself.
Parsing in Forth, or "What happened to the Compiler"
Forth Interpreter in JavaScript that you can try out right now
Starting Forth by Leo Brodie, online edition from FORTH, Inc.
Thinking Forth by Leo Brodie.
The Orange County Line is one of 8 lines on the Metrolink commuter rail system in Southern California. It connects Los Angeles Union Station with Oceanside to the south, roughly following the route of the Interstate 5. Trains on the Orange County Line have 600-series numbers (i.e. The 3-digit train number begins with a 6). The route operates 7 days a week.
Rail 2 Rail?
Monday-Friday Service?
Saturday-Sunday Service?
Metro Gold, Red, and Purple Lines at Los Angeles Union Station
Metrolink Antelope Valley, San Bernardino, Riverside, Orange County, 91, and Burbank-Bob Hope Airport Lines at Los Angeles Union Station
Metrolink Inland Empire-Orange County Line at all stations between Orange and Oceanside
San Diego Coaster (to Downtown San Diego) and Sprinter (to Escondindo) at Oceanside
A WebQuest is a lesson in the format of a questionnaire. The main goal is to ask students to find and work with information from the web. It was created by Bernie Dodge at San Diego State University in February, 1995. Dodge is also the author of a number of educational software packages for children and technology tools for educators.
Technologically speaking creating a WebQuest is very simple. The only thing you need to know is how to create a document with hyperlinks so it can be created in Word, Powerpoint, and Excel. A webquest should have critical attributes.
Introduction: Provides background information.
Task: It is a formal description of the goal of the project. First the teacher has to find resources from the web for a specific topic. Then she/he creates an activity for students that has this information; it should be interesting. It is useful to show students an example of a project.
Process: Description of the steps students should follow with the links included in each step.
Resources: List of resources students need to do the task. Non- web resources can also be used.
Conclusion: It is for reflection. The teacher encourages students to suggest ways of improving the task.
A webquest is based on ideas of inquiry and constructivism. The teacher can use the webquest as a way to engage students in the learning process while surfing the internet. It is a very useful tool for teachers because it encourages students to use higher level of thinking, not simply summarizing. This includes synthesis, analysis, problem-solving, creativity and judgment.
It also creates collaborative and cooperative learning, since students work on projects in groups.
The student is required to make good use of the web. It is based on real resources from the web; it is not just a traditional lesson . Books and other media can also be used within a WebQuest, but if the web is not at the heart of the lesson, it is not a WebQuest.
While WebQuests can be applied to a wide range of topics, they are not equally appropriate for everything. You would not use a WebQuest to teach the times table, the chemical symbols in the top two lines of the periodic table, or the state flags of New England. In other words, do not use WebQuests to teach factual pieces of information.
These could be examples of the topic in which a teacher can create a webquest:
What should be done to protect America's coral reefs?
What kinds of people were most likely to survive the sinking of the Titanic? Why?
What was it like to live during the American Gold Rush?
What would Mark Twain think about the lives that children live today?
Created by Bernie Dodge provides a step-by-step guidance with useful examples. You can attach Word, PowerPoint, etc to your WebQuest. You can also use and modify an existing WebQuest from one of the members to create yours.
It's free of charge. It is a fill-in-the-blank tool that guides you through picking a topic, searching the Internet, gathering good Internet links, and turning them into online learning activities. Sample Product: Italian Unification
zWebQuest (Previously called Instant Webquest)
Is free of charge. It is a web based software for creating WebQuests in a short time. Sample product: The Fantastic Four World War III.
Ii's a free of charge Webquest Generator that allows teachers to create webquests without the need of writing any HTML code or using web page editors. The program supports images uploading. A HTML editor is provided in order to format the texts for the pages. Must be installed on your own server. Sample project: La Catedral de Madrid
Online tool for creating simple WebQuests, especially appropriate for younger elementary students. Cost: $27/year. Sample product: Colonial America
There is a full variety of topics to work on webquest with students.
There is an interesting interview with the creator of the webquest Bernie Dodge
EW: How long did it take you to develop the WebQuest format?
Dodge: A few weeks later -- pretty much all in one sitting -- I put together a template, set up in the same way I ...
This is the webquest that Tom March developed and that Bernie Dodge makes reference in his interview
This site helps teachers to adapt existing webquest to their needs.
These are rubrics, sets of instructions, to help teacher to evaluate the task.
She/he can do it along with the students.
The following are the resources used in the assignment:
Note: Unicode character visualization will depend on the character support of your web browser and the fonts installed on your system.
Researchers: Russell Butson, Shelagh Ferguson, Carla Thomson, Leigh Blackall and Ruth Jelley
Citation: Blackall, L. & Hegarty, B. (2012). Open Education Practices: A User Guide for Organisations. Wikibooks. Retrieved from https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Open_Education_Practices:_A_User_Guide_for_Organisations
Preface | Download or order book | Introduction | Foreword | Cape Town Declaration | Video: OER at OP | Literature Review | Resources and Practices | Development | Intellectual Property Policy | Educational Development | Models of Open Education | Measuring Open Education | Recommendations | Incentives and Rewards | A word on ICT | Libraries are critical | Marketing | Responses | Credits| Resources
As a rule of thumb, nails should enter the second member by twice the thickness of the material you are nailing through. Example: attaching 2 pieces for 2.54cm (1 inch) hard wood together, the nail should be 5.08cm (2 inches) long. Nails come in many different types, there are CC (concrete coated), bright (these have no coating), galvanized (exactly as the name implies), sinkers, screw, and that's about it. The nail used in a project needs to be the right type i.e.; if they are to be painted over the CC will tend to bleed through so brights should be used. If the entire project is to be of treated wood, as in a deck, then screw type galv. would be a proper nail. Headless or finish nails are for inside jobs and are designed to be set (driven below surface), and the hole filled and painted over. Nails are a metal pin used with forced to drive into a material.
Charles Darwin, based on a watercolor by G. Richmond.
A little tombstone sits in the graveyard in the town of Malvern near Worcestershire England. It reads “Anne Elizabeth Darwin, Born March 2 1841 Died April 28 1851. A dear and good child” The death of Charles Darwin’s eldest daughter at the age of 10 came at a time in his life when he was struggling both with his mental and physical health and as a scientist. Since returning from his grand voyage around world in 1836, where he served as a scientific investigator on board the research vessel H.M.S. Beagle, Darwin had been feverously working on scientific reports describing everything that he saw and collected, including the rocks, fossils and animals that he collected onboard the research vessel. He had sent many of his collections off to the experts of the time, Richard Owen (who coined the word dinosaur) wrote about the fossils he collected, George Waterhouse wrote about the mammals, John Gould and George Robert Gray wrote about the birds, Leonard Jenyns the fish, and Thomas Bell the reptiles, each naming new species and varieties discovered during the expedition. These reports were assembled into a large edited volume describing, with wonderment and rich and detailed illustrations, the wide variety of life on Planet Earth. When it was completed around 1844, Darwin was married with a growing family, including little Annie, a joyful little girl. And he was beginning to turn to new projects, including a detailed study of barnacles, and other shells he had collected during his trip.
It was during this time that Darwin read a short essay by the economist Thomas Robert Malthus entitled “Essay on the Principle of Population,” which had been written in 1798, but recently reprinted in 1826. In summary, Malthus wrote “the power of population is indefinitely greater than the power in the earth to produce subsistence for man,” in other words, population sizes will continue to grow exponentially, until the population runs out of resources, and then it will crash. What pertained to bacterial populations, also pertained to human populations. A growing population was limited by the availability of food.
Various breeds of domesticated pigeons is a result of breeders selecting for desired traits, called artificial selection.
Various breeds of cattle, which are selected for by ranchers and farmers for their desired traits.
In fact, when he bought Annie a pet canary, a little yellow bird with a beautiful song, he was introduced into the world of bird-fanciers and breeders, who selected for the best traits, such as singing, or weird feathers, or large body sizes or unique colors, and only allowing those individuals to breed together. He also bought his children ponies; small horses bred to be tiny for his children to learn to ride on. It was from these homelier observations that he started thinking about the origin of new forms of life in the natural world. In particular, how did a new species come to be? What was the cause of all this variety of life on Earth? Most of his ideas were kept in a notebook, and still not well defined, composed of simple and loose diagrams and observations from talking with animal breeders in the rural country and visiting local county fairs. He also enjoyed exploring the countryside making observations in his notebook about the animals and plants that he witnessed on these trips into nature, but also sharing conversations over a fence on local breeds of dairy cows.
In 1848, Darwin become gravely ill, spending nights vomiting, and struggling to eat. He grew weary and sick. He entrusted his unfinished notebook to his wife, Emma, and told her that if he were to die, she should publish the work it contained. Worried about his condition, the family traveled to Malvern Wells looking for a cure for his sudden illness, where they meet a doctor. His name was Dr. Cully. He had developed a series of homeopathic cures featuring the emersion of one’s body into cold waters and bathing, as well as hot saunas, but also was known to consult ghosts through seances and other unorthodox treatments that were in vogue during the middle 1800s. Darwin was very skeptical of the treatments, but after a few months, the routine at Malvern Wells improved his health and he was able to return home. Much of his health was likely restored from the long walks that were part of the treatment, which he continued to practice into old age. In the Autumn of 1850, Annie became ill on holiday with the family with a fever and the family took her home to nurse her to health. They consulted a local traditional doctor, who prescribed some medicine. Still ill later that winter, she took to spending the day with her father helping to organize his collection of barnacle shells in his study. In early December, Annie developed a horrible sounding cough, and the Darwin’s again visited the doctor in London, who gave them the grim news of her serious illness. This was in the days before antibiotics, and typhoid was a major cause of death at the time. Typhoid is caused by a bacterial infection of Salmonella typhi found in unclean water that leads to a high fever, diarrhea, and vomiting. It can be fatal, especially in children. The worried parents took Annie to Dr. Cully as a last resort, as he had helped with Charles Darwin’s ailment before and maybe the treatment would help his sick daughter. During the early Spring, while staying at Malvern there was some hope of her improvement, but on April 28th, she died. Her death devastated Charles Darwin, and he entered into a dark period of his life.
Filled with depression and sadness, Charles Darwin’s productivity decreased during the years after Annie’s death. He published his work on barnacles which was dragged out over a few years, but melancholy kept him from returning to his earlier ideas. He kept thinking about the fragility of life, and how with Annie’s death, it was not just the death of her, as painful as that was, but all her offspring. She would bear him no grandsons and no granddaughters— it was like a great chain of being had been cut off. Life was a struggle- a struggle for survival.
Just when Charles Darwin was about to publish his book, however a letter arrived from a man named Alfred Russel Wallace. Wallace was working on the other side of the world, in Singapore in the 1850s and had discovered the possible evolution by natural selection that Darwin had been working on. Wallace was collecting natural history specimens that he hoped to sell on his return to England and was busy collecting on the Island of Ternate in Indonesia at the time. Here in 1858, he came upon an idea for evolution in which species can become organized by progressive steps checked and balanced by the necessary conditions of life, which leads to an extraordinary modification of form between each generation.
The idea was nearly the same as that of Charles Darwin’s. Wallace had written to him, with the hopes that he would pass it on to Charles Lyell for publication for the Linnaean Society meetings. When Darwin showed the letter to Lyell, the two decided to write back, and mention that Darwin had come to the same conclusion, although Darwin explained his explanation was part of large book he was writing on the topic. Later that year, in 1858 both Darwin and Wallace’s short essay was read to the Linnaean Society meetings. Sadly, Charles Darwin was unable to read it himself, as his young infant son died of fever a few days before, and Charles Lyell presented in his place. While the essay did not garnish much interest, Darwin’s book, which came out the following year quickly becoming a best seller, and altered culture even into the modern age— Charles Darwin is likely the best-known name in the field of biology, as Einstein is in physics. But he is often mistakenly characterized in the modern realm of science.
Darwin knew nothing of genetics, chromosomes, heredity, DNA, or RNA. Instead his writings resulted in our modern understanding of how life adapts by its continued process of being selected by nature. Death removes all of life in the end, but it is only those individuals that survive to at least the stage in life to have offspring and reproduce that succeed in the long run with a new generation after their parent’s death. Each generation growing stronger by the natural selection of traits that make each generation slightly better adapted to the world it confronts. This adaptive process of trial and error is powerful, resulting in the amazing diversity of life on our planet. Evidence for Darwin’s theory of natural selection was powerfully vindicated by fossilized remains of transitional animals preserved in an orderly fashion in the stratigraphy of rocks on the Earth’s surface. Each generation of fossilized lifeforms working to perfect the act of surviving long enough, long enough for a brief moment on Earth, enough to leave its descendants and a new generation.
Darwin left behind more questions than he answered. Darwin viewed that organisms were naturally selected by the harsh environments that they found themselves in, and the best fit individuals of that harsh environment would leave behind the next generation, with each generation overtime becoming better adapted to the environment. If the harsh environment was too harsh, and zero individuals survived, then the lineage or species would become extinct. This trial and error method of change was similar to the artificial selection that animal and plant breeders will employ in cultivating the traits that they personally find advantageous. It is one of the reasons why there are so many different breeds of dogs, and such variety, each lineage was selected for those particular traits that make each breed unique. Darwin viewed differences in shape (morphology) and characteristics of each variety as a unique species of lifeform, which changed as the environment changed, but his ideas did not truly explain what a species is and how they originate. This led biologists to try to define what is a species? And secondarily how do they appear in nature?
A plate from Rothschild's book on cassowary birds, he named many species based on only slight differences in appearance.
Much of our current understanding of what a species is comes from the work of a famous ornithologist by the name of Ernst Mayr. Mayr grew up in Germany, with a complete fascination of birds, which he fanatically catalogued and described from his numerous bird-watching trips into the mountains of southern Germany. He could easily identify most birds on the basis of color, shape, and song, with particular skill. He would use the nomenclature of paired genus and species scientific names developed by Carl Linnaeus in the 1600s, as well as the local German common names for birds. After his education, he worked in Berlin at the museum continuing to catalogue the occurrence of various birds in the country. In 1927, he was introduced to Walter Rothschild, an eccentric wealthy English aristocrat.
Walter Rothschild with his carriage pulled by zebras.
Rothschild was the oldest son of the famous Rothschild banking family in London. Walter Rothschild struggled throughout his life with a stuttering speech, and found it difficult to make connections with fellow humans, both in communicating verbally as well as being socially awkward and self-conscious when he spoke. It was animals that he felt most comfortable being around, and from an early age dreamed of building a private zoo, and taking care of an assortment of animals. As he grew older, he had the finances to make it possible and founded a zoo and natural history collection in London. This private collection housed many living species of animals collected from around the world, including many cassowary birds (large flightless birds from New Guinea). Rothschild had described many of these birds as new species, with slight observable differences in the shape of their crests and skulls. Fascinated with these birds from New Guinea, Rothschild was eager to continue to collect bird specimens from the islands for his collections in England. Ernst Mayr seemed the best choice to send on an expedition to New Guinea to find more bird specimens. For Mayr this was a chance in a lifetime, and he was eager to spend a year or more collecting birds in the tropical islands of the South Pacific and Indonesia and getting paid all the while. The adventure lead to the collection of one of the largest museum bird collections ever made of the region, and quickly Mayr discovered the importance of geography in the occurrence of species. Using the colors and morphology (shape) of individual specimens to name species, Mayr also found that he could use other differences to distinguish individual birds, such as differences in mating calls or behaviors he observed. These traits were localized to particular geographic regions, likely representing interbreeding populations. These traits may not be demonstrated by differences in observable morphology or color on an individual specimen back at the museum. He wondered how such behaviors would affect the localized breeding populations and influence mating or breeding between pairs in the wild.
On returning from the trip, the collections were added to Rothschild’s museum and zoo, but a mysterious scandalous event occurred a few years later which would allow Mayr to study the collections again. Rothschild was being blackmailed, and to make the payment he sold the valuable collection of museum bird specimens to the American Museum in New York, where Mayr was working after his return from New Guinea. For Mayr, it meant that his collection of birds he had personally collected in the field was within his possession again. He could study all of these birds in more detail, and furthermore he knew exactly where each had been collected. It was during this period of cataloguing specimens that Mayr begin to develop a new concept for what defines a species. Rather than distinguishing species based on similarity of appearance, Mayr began to distinguished species based on their ability to interbreed in nature. He developed the modern idea of a species— the biological species concept.
The biological species concept defines a species as individual members of a population that actually or potentially interbreed in nature with viable offspring. Species are defined this way by their ability to share genetic information within a population over time, rather than their physical appearance. The biological species concept differs from the earlier morphological species concept, which simply groups individual organisms by their shared appearance. The biological species concept groups individuals based on their ability to interbreed with each other instead. This more reproductive definition is somewhat difficult to distinguish in practice, because not all individuals will interbreed within a population. It is much easier to compare differences and similarities within individuals, but recent developments in bioinformatics (the study of genetic similarities and differences of organisms) has allowed biological species to be defined based on shared generic information, rather than their appearance.
Species are the fundamental unit of evolution since they pass on information through heredity of specific traits. These traits allow species to recognize each other in the wild, and will restrict interbreeding between species. The concept of what truly defines a species is debated among biologists, but often takes into factors of viability of offspring, potential ability to interbreed in the wild and genetic similarities between individuals, rather than appearance. Although the general appearance of animals and plants can be more directly used by biologists to determine a species in practice in the field, often discoveries of new species rely on genetic information as well.
A museum display showing closely related species of finch found on different islands in the Galapagos Islands, showing adaptations unique to each island.
The idea of peripatric speciation where a population becomes geographically isolated, and is subjected to different natural selection forces.
Ernst Mayr’s work in cataloguing the large variety of birds from New Guinea highlighted something also observed by Charles Darwin, that geographic isolation was an important factor in the origination of new species and varieties of life. During Darwin’s expedition around the world he collected many new bird specimens as well, most notably finches from the Galapagos Islands. The collection of birds was studied by John Gould who realized that they were all closely related to each other (appearing to share traits with the species Geospiza magnirostris, the Galapagos Ground Finch), but differed depending on which island the bird was collected from. Each bird appeared to be adapted to the particular environment of the island it lived on. Some birds had larger beaks to break tough seeds, while others had narrow beaks to feed on small seeds, depending on the local plants that grew on each island. Ernst Mayr discovered that birds were also localized, but this regional environment influence was the source of new species. For example, if a group of individual birds of a particular species arrived at a new island, and survived for many generations in isolation they would be subjected to different natural selection processes, and could come to resemble a different species over time. If they later returned to the original geographic range, they may not be recognized as the same species, and would not interbreed with the general parent population. This process of complete geographic isolation is called peripatric speciation, which was first proposed by Ernst Mayr in 1954, which states that species originate from isolated portions of the general population, which change due to differences in the local environment. This is often cited, for example when a species originates on geographic isolated islands, but can also be applied to regions along the periphery of a species geographic range if the individual population become cut off from the main parent population center. This idea has led to the discovery that most species originate along the periphery of a species geographic range, or when the geographic range of a species becomes fragmented.
Different models of speciation by geographic isolation or within a population.
Together this style of speciation is collectively called allopatric speciation, which is used whenever biological populations of the same species become geographically isolated from each other to an extent that it prevents or interferes with gene flow. The term parapatric speciation is used when an isolate population is restricted from the parent population, but may not be completely isolated geographically. There is some debate if new species can originate within the population without geographic isolation or restriction. The origin of species from within the parent population is called sympatric speciation. Ernst Mayr viewed that sympatric speciation was rare or impossible, and indeed over the years examples of sympatric speciation have proven elusive, indicating that geographic barriers or isolation is the main driver in the origin of new species on Earth.
Punctuated Equilibrium shows that new species appear in the fossil record at punctuated points in time, and rarely change gradually. This is an artifact that new species occurs mostly within the periphery of a population, among smaller populations.
Various trilobites, common fossils in the Cambrian Period, and lived in the oceans until the end of the Paleozoic Era.
Down the long museum halls of the American Museum, where Ernst Mayr worked on his bird collection, an equally large collection of fossil trilobites is housed. Niles Eldridge happily studied these ancient fossils that exhibit a wide diversity of varieties and forms preserved in Paleozoic shales from around the world. Long extinct, these small fossils are highly sought after by collectors who have named and classified many species and forms. Eldridge noticed that the observed appearance of new varieties and species in the fossil record exhibited a pattern which appeared to be influence by the mechanism of parapatric and peripatric speciation, where new species or forms appeared to change rapidly in the periphery of a species geographic range, within a small isolated population, then expand outward, colonizing larger regions. Since the fossil record is limited geographically, these periphery small populations were not preserved in the fossil record as frequently, but do appear when they expand their range and population size. The temporal pattern of evolution observed in the fossil record is one of rapid change (or colonization) followed by status. In 1972, Nile Eldridge authored with fellow paleontologist Stephen Jay Gould the idea of punctuated equilibrium. Punctuated equilibrium states that species appear suddenly in the fossil record, and exist over time in stable populations that show little morphological change. The pattern is a result of the observation that most species originate from small isolated or restricted populations separated from the parent population These regions are rarely sampled in the fossil record, although examples have been demonstrated. Simply stated, this idea of evolution views that the major driving force for the great variety of life on Planet Earth is a result of peripheral changes occurring along the edges or among isolated small populations, which if successful will swept out adding new varieties of life, as accumulations of layer upon layer of growing biodiversity.
Geographic reproductive isolation is important for the origin of species within sexually reproducing organisms, but asexually reproducing organisms, like bacteria can also speciate into new forms through isolation as well, but relies on chance genetic mutations or sharing of genetic information between individual cells. This process is much slower, since genetic information is slower to change in frequency over time in these populations, through the lack of intermixing of mating pairs.
Darwin viewed that traits between pairs of sexually reproducing organisms blend their traits together like paint. However, if this was the case, traits over time would be less variable, and individuals would come to exhibit no variation (like dark brown paint when colors are all mixed together). This became known as Darwin's dilemma. How do you increase variation of traits for natural selection to work on?
Charles Darwin struggled to define how heredity of traits worked between mated pairs and their offspring. He recognized, as most of us do, that traits are passed from the parents to the offspring, but the mechanism behind this heredity was a mystery to him. Darwin coined the long disused term pangenesis, for this out of date idea that traits were blended together from both parents, but this presented the problem. The problem is that overtime the diversity or frequency of novel traits would decrease. For example, if you can imagine a population of a single species of a reproducing population of individuals, each individual in this population exhibiting a variety of color, say red ones, blue ones, and yellow ones, and each time one pair would mate and produce offspring, the resulting colored offspring would be a mix or blend of the two parent colors, for example a yellow and red pair, would produce an orange offspring. With each generation the population would began to look a drab gray, as more and more colors would be mixed with each generation. Like mixing or blending all the colors of paint together will also result in a drab gray or brown color over time. How does a population retain its genetic diversity over time? This idea of Darwin’s blended inheritance of traits was clearly incorrect, heredity was not blended or mixed equally from each parent, but there must be some other mechanism behind the heredity of traits. The solution to Darwin’s dilemma would come from a contemporary of Darwin’s, but one a world away in the highly religious Augustinian Order of the St. Thomas Monastery in Brno in the Czech Republic.
The Battle of Ballinalee was an engagement of the Irish War of Independence, fought by British soldiers and auxiliaries, against Seán Mac Eoin's North Longford Flying Column of the Irish Republican Army. The engagement took place in 1920, at the centre of Ballinalee village, County Longford, Ireland. The approx 100 British troops in 11 lorries hoped to burn the town as a reprisal, but were repulsed by approx 100 Irish (including those who occupied all roads leading into Ballinalee. The village was the only one in all of Ireland to repel the English outright.
There are many healing remedies which can be sought by distilling certain plants.
Mild to severe stomach aches and nausea can be easily corrected.
While mild nausea may be corrected with small sips of ginger tea (or flat ginger ale), You should give it in tablespoon size amounts every five mnutes. This is important to minimize the chance of vomiting. Continue clear liquids only for 4 hours. If vomiting continues despite this regimen, evaluation by a health care professional is advisable. Dehydration or electrolyte imbalance could occur and have dire consequences.
Mild stomach pain can often be managed at home especially if it is intermittent and associated with nausea or diarrhea. However it can also have a more serious cause. If stomach pain interferes with your normal activity, is constant rather than intermittent, or lasts more than than two hours, you need to be evaluated by a medical professional. Sooner then two hours if very painful. Possibilities include but are not limited to: infection of almost any abdominal organ, appendicitis, pancreatitis, liver disease, severe constipation (NEVER attempt to self treat severe somach pain with laxatives!) plus many other possible diseases. Seek a professional's advice or care and do not risk your life or well being by attempting to treat severe pain at home.
There are certain configurations that may help heal from infections. These may increase immune response or simply dampen certain diseases.
When developing computer systems (programs or applications) - we aim to solve problems. The problem may be to change the patterns of lights, according to the pressing of buttons on a keyboard, as demonstrated above.... It is essential to understand the problem in its entirety so that it can be solved without mistakes.
To arrive at this understanding it is essential to analyse the problem by identifying its individual components. In other words: it is necessary to split the problem into sub-problems. This process is called de-composition.
This process can lead to a graphical representation of a problem, called a structure diagram:
Each of the sub-problems may require further decomposition, leading to more complex structure diagrams.Example of a structure diagram, or structure chart:
Each of the following exercises describes a problem. Analyse each problem by identifying some of its sub-problems.
In an air traffic control system, one problem would be to prevent planes from flying into each others paths.
In a computer gaming system, one problem would be to add to the score when the player has achieved an objective.
De-compose the problem of getting dressed into at least three component parts. Can you apply an order of execution? In other words: which sub-problem needs to be solved before another? Produce a structure diagram.
De-compose the problem of cooking dinner into at least 10 component parts. Can you apply an order of execution? In other words: which sub-problem needs to be solved before another? Produce a structure diagram.
De-compose a simple banking system into at least three component parts. The system needs to allow users to open accounts, close accounts and track money spent and money deposited into the account. Produce a structure diagram.
Consider your favourite game. Identify at least 5 sub-problems which this computer system needs to solve. Produce a structure diagram.
Can you think of an app that you would like to create? Describe the app and identify at least 5 sub-components of the app. Produce a structure diagram.
Computational thinking requires the de-composition of problems: the precise identification of the components which make up a bigger problem... this process can lead to a structure diagram.
Each of the identified problems needs to be solved and the solutions must be put back together. This process will be part of the implementation of the complete solution.
Find out about modular design and summarise its advantages and disadvantages.
The Waterfall and the Spiral are common methods of modular design. More recently, Rapid Application Development (RAD) and Extreme Programming (see also Agile Development and On-Site Development) have increased in popularity. Research each method and summarise how they are used and listing their advantages and disadvantages.
←The hart & servys to yow profferd
Attributed to Sir Thomas Wyatt[2] in the Devonshire Manuscript, this poem was entered by H2. Similar to other courtly poetry found in the Devonshire Manuscript, this poem describes a suffering lover and his cruel mistress.
This poem is one of seventeen entries where Margaret Douglas marks with “and thys.” Paul Remley has suggested that these annotations relate to another in-text annotation of hers, “lerne but to syng it” (81r), and may indicate a group of texts to be learned for entertaining.[3]
1 most] moste DBla04 moost LEge03 myscheffe] myschyef DBla04 myschief LEge03 2 suffer] suffre LEge03 greffe] gryeff DBla04 greif LEge03 3 ffor] for DBla04 LEge03 off releffe] of relyef DBla04 of relief LEge03 4 syns] sith DBla04 have] haue DBla04 none] noone DBla04 5 my] My DBla04 LEge03 &] and DBla04 6 contynually] continuelly LEge03 8 syghe] sigh LEge03 wele syth DBla04 &] or and DBla04 mone] mon DBla04 9 Nowght] Nought LEge03 Naught DBla04 may] doth DBla04 prevayle] prevaill LEge03 10 wepe] sighe DBla04 wayle] waill LEge03 11 pety] pitie LEge03 sens pety DBla04 dothe] Doth DBla04 doeth LEge03 fayle] faill LEge03 12 yow] you LEge03 DBla04 Alas] al DBla04 13 mornyng] Mornyng DBla04 Morning LEge03 14 complaynt] complaynte DBla04 complaint LEge03 15 yt] hit DBla04 yt ys Alone] it is all one LEge03 hit ys alone DBla04 16 thys] this DBla04 LEge03 17 cruelte] crueltye DBla04 crueltie LEge03 18 most] moste DBla04 moost LEge03 can] may DBla04 19 hathe] hath DBla04 LEge03 suffraynte] sufferaunte DBla04 soveraynte LEge03 20 yor] youre DBla04 your LEge03 hart] harte DBla04 hert LEge03 21 Whyche] Which LEge03 and DBla04 makythe] maketh LEge03 makith DBla04 22 welffare] welfare DBla04 LEge03 23 nowght] nought LEge03 nowght do ye] naught doo you DBla04 24 How] how DBla04 LEge03 25 No] Noo DBla04 No tygres hart] LEge03 tygres] tygurs DBla04 26 ys so pervart] LEge03 so] soo DBla04 pervart] pervarte DBla04 27 without Desart] LEge03 Desart] desarte DBla04 28 to wreke hys yre] LEge03 hys yre] his Ire DBla04 29 & you] And ye DBla04 & you me kyll] LEge03 30 ffor] for DBla04 ffor my good wyll] LEge03 31 lo] Lov DBla04 lo how I spyll] LEge03 32 ffor] for DBla04 ffor my Desyre] LEge03 Desyre] desyre DBla04 33 Ther] There DBla04 Ther ys no love] LEge03 no] noo DBla04 34 that can ye move] LEge03 ye] you DBla04 35 &] and DBla04 & I can prove] LEge03 can] cann DBla04 36 none] no DBla04 none other way] LEge03 other] nother DBla04 37 Wherfor] Wherfore DBla04 Wherfor I must] LEge03 38 Refrayn me] refrayne my DBla04 Refrayn me lust] LEge03 lust] luste DBla04 39 banysshe] banyshe DBla04 and banyshe DBla04 banysshe me trust] LEge03 me] DBla04 40 & welthe Awaye] frome me alway DBla04 LEge03 41 thus] Thus DBla04 thus in myscheffe] LEge03 myscheffe] myschyef & c / DBla04 42 I suffer greffe] DBla04 LEge03 43 ffor off releffe] DBla04 LEge03 44 syns I have none] DBla04 LEge03 45 my lute & I] DBla04 LEge03 46 contynually] DBla04 LEge03 47 shall vs apply] DBla04 LEge03 48 to syghe & mone] DBla04 LEge03
The Tongue is used as an "air stopper" between the airstream (from the player's mouth) and the mouthpiece, a clarinetist never stops the airflow with his or her diaphragm, the air is merely interrupted by the tongue in a way specific to the musical context. It can be thought of as stones skipping over water, your tongue literally bouncing over air.
First exercise when we start tonguing is to set up the reed and the mouthpiece, as you normally would, but take it off the clarinet (with the barrel too) and begin to play long sustained notes allowing each to be about 8–10 seconds long, now when you want to shortly interrupt the sound, while blowing (playing notes) use the tip of the tongue and make the consonant sound of the letter "t" (if you find that "t" doesn't float your boat, use "d"). This is only a tiny interruption in the sound and should be approx 1/64 of a beat (a minute amount).
You have now learned the basic legato tonguing, this is used in situations for example when you have a bar of ta's (Crotchets- For all those non-French note value people) that are just a bar of ta's, they are separated by a light tongue in an even manner. It would be appropriate to practice the tonguing of ta's or 2 beat notes (Crotchets or minums) with your mouthpiece/barrel setup and then move on to Tee-Tees (quavers, grouped into 2's) with the sound "t t" and learn to control the speed and dynamic of your tonguing. Then move on to music, put your clarinet together and play a song all tongued and then play it all slurred, and then play it as written. You will get better and find out how your tongue is most comfortable with practice.
How have things been since your last visit?
What questions or concerns would you like us to address today?
Affected individuals have 50% chance of passing on mutation to each of their children
If neither parent has NF2, recurrence risk is very low - only one case of germline mosaicism reported
Some people don't develop signs until their 40's or 50's
Tumor that arises from Schwann cells that support and protect nerves with insulation needed to conduct information on 8th cranial nerve
Initial symptoms include tinnitus (ringing in ears), hearing loss, and balance dysfunction
Most individuals with spinal cord tumors have more than one
Tumor that grows from cells that line the brain and spinal cord in protective sheets called meninges
Other types of central nervous system tumors
Suspected in individuals with unilateral vestibular schwannoma and multiple other tumors on one side
Early recognition allows for earlier intervention and improved outcome
Has Lisch nodules, axillary and inguinal freckling, and plexiform neurofibromas not seen in NF2
Patients with NF2 do not have mental retardation or learning problems
"Neurofibromatosis Type 2: Information for Patients and Families." National Neurofibromatosis Foundation brochure.
"Georgia manages water resources in a sustainable manner to support the state’s economy, to protect public health and natural systems, and to enhance the quality of life for all citizens."
Policy statement from the Comprehensive Statewide Water Management Planning Act signed by Governor Sonny Perdue on May 13, 2004.
The vision statement above was provided in the final report of the Joint Comprehensive Water Plan Study Committee and then incorporated into the Comprehensive State-wide Water Management Planning Act. "This vision encompasses the concept of sustainability that has never been articulated in earlier goals. It also recognizes the interrelationship of the economy, environmental quality, and quality of life."[1]
The statements of goals and objectives for the statewide water plan are quoted below, from EPD document [2] of November 23, 2005, posted on Georgia Water Council website.
Goals - "The comprehensive water management plan will be drafted to meet two overarching goals:
Objectives - "To accomplish these goals we will focus on four management objectives:
Maximize returns to the basin of origin through policies that address interbasin transfers, on-site sewage disposal systems, and land application of treated wastewater where water quantity is limited;
Meet instream and off stream demands for water through efficient surface storage, aquifer management and reducing water demands; and
Protect water quality by reducing pollutant loadings from discharges and runoff from the land to ensure the assimilative capacity of the streams is not exceeded and aquatic life is not impaired."
The new water policy tools (revised laws) to be developed for aiding the state comprehensive plan will be conceived and organized around these four water management objectives. [3]
Goals - A similar (slightly reworded) goals statement was given by Carol Couch at the first [Georgia Water Council] meeting on March 2, 2005 (see online meeting notes).
Objectives - The list of four management objectives was given in a presentation by Jim Kundell at the second Georgia Water Council meeting on June 7, 2005. At this meeting, Carol Couch reiterated the statements of goals and four objectives, and asked for the Council's concurrence, which was given.[4]
Best Practices in defining vision and goals for a region, and examples from other states.
This chapter focus on the implementation of knowledge management (KM) in beverage industry in Asia. Various KM tools and strategies employed by food and beverage organizations are discussed in worldwide aspect. It can help getting an overview of the environment of the industry. Problems solved by those tools and strategies are mentioned too. A real case of e-learning portal establishment in an Asian-based beverage company are investigated to get deeper understanding on the planning, implementation, maintenance and evaluation of KM project. Future development trend of KM on an industry-wide base are covered as well.
We would like to give a special thanks to Mr. Cheung from Consultancy A for kindly sharing his experiences and knowledge with us in his comfortable office. We would also deeply appreciated Dr. Sam Chu, our professor and course lecturer, for contacting Mr. Cheung for us and advising us on writing the article.
Chan Ying Wai, Andrea; Ma Kwong Kei, Coley; Tam Man Ying, Tammy; Wong Ka Wing, Karina; Yu Ching Yin, Jas
Alavi, M. & Leidner, D.E. (2001). Knowledge management and knowledge management systems: conceptual foundations and research issues. MIS Quarterly, 25(1), 107-136.
Brannback, M. & Wiklund, P. (2001). A new dominant logic and its implications on knowledge management: a study of the Finnish food industry. Knowledge and Process Management, 8(4), 197-206.
Buckman, R. H. (2005). The world is getting flatter - three future trends for km. Knowledge Management Review, 8, 4.
Fuyuno, I. (2004). Sour to Sweet. Far Eastern Economic Review, 167, 38.
Hagen, J.M. (2002). The knowledge management frontier in the global food system: discussion. American Agricultural Economics Association, 84(5), 1353-1354.
Knowledge Management Review, (2005). km goes mobile: integrating handheld devices into the km loop. Knowledge Management Review, 8, 4.
Kwahk, K.Y., Kim, H.W., & Chan, H.C. (2007). A knowledge integration approach for organizational decision support. Journal of Database Management, 18(2), 41-61.
Lee, AuthorD. J., & Ahn, J. H. (2007). Reward systems for intra-organizational knowledge sharing. European Journal of Operational Research, 180, 938.
M2 Presswire. (2001). IBM: The Coca-Cola Company and IBM create unique digital media management system; Powerful knowledge management system gives Coca-Cola employees worldwide online access to a century of Coca-Cola Company marketing and advertising history . M2 Presswire, Retrieved March 5, 2006, from ProQuest.
Nonaka, N. & Takeuchi, H. (1995). The knowledge-creating company. New York: Oxford University Press.
Pollitt, D. (2004). Training is a never-ending process at Nestle. Human Resource Management International Digest. 12, 27.
Soliman, F. (2000). Application of knowledge management for hazard analysis in the Australian dairy industry. Journal of Knowledge Management, 4, 287.
Soo, C., Devinney, T., Midgley, D., & Deering, A. (2002). Knowledge management: philosophy, process, pitfalls, and performance. California Management Review, 44(4), 129-150.
Sporleder, T.L. & Goldsmith, P.D. (2001). Alternative firm strategies for signalling quality in the food system. Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics, 49, 591-604.
Sporleder, T.L. & Moss, L.E. (2002). Knowledge management in the global food system: network embeddedness and social capital. American Agricultural Economics Association, 84(5), 1345-1352.
Voelker, M.P. (2005, June). Reusing content without starting from scratch. Intelligent Enterprise, 8(6), 31-39.
Yao, L.J. , Kam, T.H.Y. , & Chan, S.H. (2007). Knowledge sharing in Asian public administration sector: the case of Hong Kong. Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 20, 51.
The Hanakel norm (i.e., the square root of the maximum eigenvalue) of
LMI Methods in Optimal and Robust Control - A course on LMIs in Control by Matthew Peet.
LMI Properties and Applications in Systems, Stability, and Control Theory - A List of LMIs by Ryan Caverly and James Forbes.
LMIs in Systems and Control Theory - A downloadable book on LMIs by Stephen Boyd.
These are the closest elves to the original elvish race. Throughout time, they have forged close ties with humans, who have become their privileged allies. They hate necromancy, opposing as it does their vision of the world. They are therefore fervent enemies of the Dark.
Who are they?
These are the closest elves to the original elvish race. Throughout time, they have forged close ties with humans, who have become their privileged allies. They hate necromancy, opposing as it does their vision of the world. They are therefore fervent enemies of the Dark.
The outstanding natural gift of high elves is their intelligence. It gives access to great magical powers. To compensate for their relative physical frailness, high elves have developed advanced unarmed combat techniques.
How to Think Like a Computer Scientist: Learning with Python 2nd Edition
If you have saved this file to your computer, click on a link in the contents to go to that section.
'I have a friend who's an artist and he's some times taken a view which I don't agree with very well. He'll hold up a flower and say, "look how beautiful it is," and I'll agree, I think. And he says, "you see, I as an artist can see how beautiful this is, but you as a scientist, oh, take this all apart and it becomes a dull thing." And I think he's kind of nutty.
First of all, the beauty that he sees is available to other people and to me, too, I believe, although I might not be quite as refined aesthetically as he is. But I can appreciate the beauty of a flower.
At the same time, I see much more about the flower that he sees. I could imagine the cells in there, the complicated actions inside which also have a beauty. I mean, it's not just beauty at this dimension of one centimeter: there is also beauty at a smaller dimension, the inner structure...also the processes.
The fact that the colors in the flower are evolved in order to attract insects to pollinate it is interesting -- it means that insects can see the color.
It adds a question -- does this aesthetic sense also exist in the lower forms that are...why is it aesthetic, all kinds of interesting questions which a science knowledge only adds to the excitement and mystery and the awe of a flower.
It only adds. I don't understand how it subtracts.' ... Richard Feynman
This guide is meant as a supplement to a year long freshman level physics course with a trigonometry prerequisite. Some ideas from calculus are included in the book but are not necessary to understand the content. The overview of equations and definitions and eventually sample problem solutions are pertinent to an introductory, college-level physics course suitable for pre-meds. This is not a stand alone textbook rather the intent is to help the student and any other interested person quickly familiarize themselves with concepts and terminology so as to use the appropriate equations to get the desired answers to physics problems.
Everyone is encouraged to contribute to the guide. Be bold in your edits! If you have a question about how we do things here look at the Style Guide or post your question on the talk page.
Thanks karl!
This guide is meant as a supplement to a year long freshman level physics course with a trigonometry prerequisite suitable for pre-meds. This is not a stand alone textbook. The intent is to help the student and any other interested person quickly familiarize themselves with concepts and terminology.
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Both computer programmers and mathematicians have quickly learned that with complicated problems, it can become near impossible to try and solve everything at the same time. Instead, we try to reduce the problem that we know how to solve. This can be done easily and efficiently with procedures and functions.
Here is a program that will print a string backwards.
There are actually a couple new things. First, the more simple, is the word decreasing in the for-loop. This tells Turing to decrease by one. As you can see, functions allow us to keep our main program nice and neat. It will become imperative to use functions in larger programs, as they can get very complicated!
If you were wondering what 'token-oriented input' meant, it's just telling Turing NOT to consider space to mean that the next variable is being put in. This allows spaces in the word variable.
Processes are like procedures, except they can run concurrently with other parts of your code. This means that, if you're using a loop, your process won't stop you from doing whatever else you need. This is especially useful in cases like playing music, where you need other code to be able to run while the music is playing.
The Public Switched Telephone Network, or PSTN, is the worldwide network of lines used to carry telephone calls. It is a "switched" network because a connection is made between caller and receiver before any communication begins. Originally, a physical circuit (formed via a number of switches) had to be formed between the caller and receiver, limiting the capacity of the network. This problem was resolved with the development of time division multiplexing.
The first telephone exchanges (where the circuit switches were located) were operated manually by the telephone operator. This was a slow process. Over time, the human operators were replaced with electromechanical switches. These were in turn superseded by electronic switches.
The increasing use of mobile phones does not make it possible for each mobile phone to have its own carrier frequency as the range of carrier frequencies for linking between mobile phones and base stations is limited. Hence the same carrier frequency must be used by many mobile phones at the same time (repeated cells). This is done using UHF which has a limited terrestrial range and using low power transmitters. Each base station has an omnidirectional antenna and the transmitted radio wave are powered so as to have a range approximately equal to the radius of the cell (a few Km) The advantage of operating on UHF is that the aerial of the mobile phone will be very short. Neighbouring cells will typically use different range of carrier frequencies so as to prevent interference.
A reader requests expansion of this page to include more material.You can help by adding new material (learn how) or ask for assistance in the reading room.
Models of the known universe • Stars and Galaxies • Structure of the universe • Information from stellar observation • How the universe may evolve • RelativityElectrons, Waves, and Photons
Electric current • D.C. circuits • Magnetic effects of current • Quantum physics • Electromagnetic wavesForces, Fields, and Energy
Further dynamics • Work and energy • Motion in a circle • Oscillations • Gravitational fields • Electric fields • Capacitors • Electromagnetism • Electromagnetic induction • Thermal physics • The nuclear atom • Radioactivity • Appendix of FormulaeForces and Motion
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
The symptoms of ankylosing spondylitis (AS) (stiff spinal inflammation) usually develop slowly over several months or years. Over the years, symptoms may recur and improve or worsen.
AS usually begins to develop between 20 and 30 years of age.
Sales of organic products are steadily increasing, and so is organic production in low and middle income countries. For good reason: for farmers it is an opportunity to improve their livelihoods and at the same time manage their land in a more sustainable way. It enables them to access promising local and international markets and to gain a better income.
There are many successful examples of how this potential can be turned into a sound business in which all stakeholders benefit. However, there are also less successful cases where it was found difficult to seize - and to maintain - a market. Some of them have struggled for a long time to become independent from external support. The main objective of this guide is to increase the success rate among organic farming initiatives in low and middle income countries.
What can you expect from this guide?
This guide should help those actively engaged in setting up or in managing organic businesses with smallholders, to do a better job, and thus to be more successful. They should know what they are getting into, be well prepared, and able to keep an overview once they are involved in an organic business. We purposely use the term "organic business", as we strongly believe that organic production initiatives, even if they focus on improving the livelihoods of smallholders, can only grow and survive if they are economically viable.
In the guide you can expect to find the practical know-how and essential information you need to be familiar with in order to set up, manage and expand an organic business. By spending some time reading (parts of) the guide, you will:
This guide was developed in a participatory process involving people who are active and experienced in managing or supporting organic businesses in Asia, Africa and Latin America. For the first step, the content identified by the editorial team was tested and expanded in an international workshop involving more than 30 practitioners. On this basis, and drawing from years of their own practical experience, the authors developed a first draft of the guide. Documents and websites on related topics served as sources of inspiration, and are referenced where useful for the reader. Drafts of the guide were reviewed by entrepreneurs, consultants and development experts active in this field.
Figure 1: The organic business in the value chain.
The guide is primarily written for people who are directly involved in the set-up or management of an organic business that involves smallholders in low and middle income countries. These can be individual entrepreneurs, senior staff of companies, but also the management of producer cooperatives marketing organic products. In this guide, when we use ‘you’ we address this type of people (Figure 1).
Secondly, the guide should be useful for those who facilitate the development of such businesses. These can be NGOs focusing on sustainable development and income generation of rural communities, or consultants and business development services. Thirdly, the guide should help donors, financial service providers and government agencies active or interested in this field to better understand the particularities of organic businesses and to provide the right support to the right initiatives. The chapter "Roles for facilitators, governments and donors" specifically addresses organisations that facilitate and support the development of organic businesses.
The focus of the guide is on organic businesses and where this is possible, organic in combination with Fair Trade. However, it is not about Fair Trade in conventional farming. The following examples from Africa, Asia and Latin America provide an idea of some of the different types of organic businesses:
Pineapple processing and export in Uganda: An individual entrepreneur, who contracts 200 farmers producing organic pineapple, exports fresh pineapples and runs a solar based drying plant. He sells the fresh pineapple to Europe and sometimes to Kenya, and the dried fruit to Europe and on local urban markets.
Cocoa production in the Dominican Republic: A Fair Trade-certified cooperative consisting of 180 producer associations which involve a total of approximately 10,000 farmers, most of them certified organic. The cooperative runs fermentation facilities and exports directly to Europe and the US. Fruits and vegetables intercropped in the cocoa are sold in the local market.
Cotton and pulses in India: A farmer co-owned company that involves 5,000 cotton farmers who hold the majority of shares. The marketing company was set up in order to improve the livelihoods of smallholders by increasing efficiencies, lowering input costs and raising incomes through organic and Fair Trade certification. It established commercial partnerships with the local processing industry, and with textile brands abroad. Pulses and other rotation crops are currently sold in the local market.
Entrepreneurial or developmental perspective?
Organic businesses may be developed by entrepreneurs who use their own funds or take up loans, or by producer organisations that use the shares or fees of their members. They may receive support from locally available funds for private sector development, or from development agencies. The approaches of these different actors, however, are often quite different. First of all, an entrepreneur needs to ensure that s/he will make a profit, meaning that revenues are higher than costs after an as short as possible initial phase. As entrepreneurs are using their own money, they are usually more sensitive about avoiding risk. They particularly need to be sure that their investments pay off, and that no one else reaps their benefits. At the same time entrepreneurs can also be opportunistic in the sense that they can easily change business focus from one product to another one, and in that way abandon groups of farmers.
Examples of entrepreneur thinking How do I become profitable in a short time? What is the minimum I have to do, and what extra if I want to do a really good job? What is the cost; can someone else pay for it? What are the risks, and how can I reduce them? How can I avoid farmers turning against me?
Producer organisations have a longer term perspective with the wellbeing of their members in mind. They are not focused on profits; they are focused on getting their members a better deal.
Development agencies are most concerned about the impact the organic initiative has on poverty reduction and on sustainable development of disadvantaged communities. They need to ensure that small farmers benefit, and that important cross-cutting issues such as gender equity and HIV/AIDS are given due attention. Unfortunately, many support programmes follow a project logic, and some businesses collapse at the end of that period as they are not yet self-financing. In some cases they have become addicted to donor support, and programmes are then extended for a long period.
Examples of development agency thinking How can we achieve development goals? How do we ensure that small farmers benefit? How does this integrate cross cutting issues (gender, social inclusion, HIV/AIDS etc.)? How can we make sure that public money is spent in a responsible way? How can we ensure that the objectives of the project are achieved?
A far-sighted entrepreneur will understand that his or her organic and certainly Fair Trade business will only succeed in the long run if the farmers benefit too. A far-sighted development agency as well as a farmer cooperative, on the other hand, will understand that farmers will only benefit if the production and marketing of their products is handled in a professional and competitive way so that it makes money. This guide is written for all of them.
In general it is a lot easier for existing companies and cooperatives to convert (part of) their business to organics rather than for companies and cooperatives to be started up for the purpose of going into organic business. However, in an existing business, it is necessary to separate the organic unit from the conventional one. Setting up a new business, developing an organic product line, or starting up organic processing are all very challenging tasks, certainly in a three year period; a good business person knows when and where to ask for assistance. Many entrepreneurs are reluctant to ask for help because of the paperwork involved or because they have to expose their figures. This is an unnecessary obstacle to the growth of their business (see chapter "Gender issues in organic value chains").
How to use this guide?
You could read this guide from beginning to the end, thus covering all relevant aspects of an organic business; more probably, however, the guide will serve you as a reference manual which you can consult when searching for information or guidance on a topic that is relevant for your work at that time.
The Organic Business Guide provides you with several tools that will help you to get your business started and keep it running - some of which were already displayed in the Annex. The link below will take you to some "ready-to-use" word and excel documents, which are hosted on the website of the Organic and Fairtrade Competence Center:
Blender is a complicated professional grade 3d modeling tool which has been used to create static and animated models, computer games, and animated, and short films. You can either go directly to Trainz Specific Moving House tutorial below or you may wish to spend time learning to use the software proficiently before attempting to create content for Trainz. There are many sources of information on Blender, including high school and college level courses, forums, and tutorials.
A free college level course, created by Neal Hirsig of Tufts University.
Besides the official Blender site, from which the software can be downloaded, and at which the user can find forums, and tutorials there are a number of third party sites which offer tutorials or forums supporting Blender. As of first quarter 2013, these include (but are not limited to)
Youtube also hosts a number of channels of material by people creating Blender tutorials.
Because Trainz uses phototextures exclusively, users wanting to create content will be well advised to have working knowledge of image manipulation software which is capable of writing image files in jpeg and uncompressed ~.tga formats.
There was a major update to Blender effective with version 2.50, issued in July 2010, which dramatically changed the user interface. Unfortunately, many of the tutorials for Trainz were created with the older interface, and while users well versed in more recent versions of Blender can complete the tutorials, less accomplished users who want to use the older interface can still obtain that version of the software used in the tutorials from the download site.
The first thing you have to do is install Blender. So go directly to http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Trainz/Tutorial_for_Blender#Getting_started
The recommendation is to watch the video tutorials http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Trainz/Tutorial_for_Blender#Video_tutorials_from_Blender.org before attempting the basic house tutorial but it is not essential to do so.
Next you need to create something then export it.
To texture this house download kuid:86627:2491 or any version of it such as kuid2:86627:2491:3. You want the texture file from it (Terrace one.tga). Use that file and the
Also please note that Paul Hobbs has three blender tutorials here: http://www.44090digitalmodels.co.uk/
These tutorials cover a lot of material quite quickly and Paul is very knowledgeable.
The intention of this page is to assist people in exporting their Blender creations directly to Trainz using the Blender Exporter for Trainz. Only items that are pertinent to the exporter will be described here. If you are stuck in Blender or have a question about Content Creation itself, then you find a lot of explanations and experienced people under the following links:
Video tutorials from Blender.org.
Blender animation video tutorial View this one to see how to make a roof.
Under the heading Textures is a basic tutorial that will guide you through creating a cylinder in Blender then exporting it as a scenery object and also as a wagon into Trainz. Sample config.txt files for cylinder are available on the DLS. Please do the video getting started tutorials first.
Blender is a big complex product but we only need a sub section of the features for building models for Trainz, so start with the tutorial under Textures then have a look through the getting started videos, especially the interface ones.
Things you may find useful when working with Blender.
Under File is "load factory settings", in Blender it is possible to change the default this one gets you back to sanity.
When texturing with an external .tga file the exporter expects a certain type of texturing. Even if you can see it in Blender it may not export. F6, choose as texture type "Image" and load your image file.
Working with four 3D windows above the button window makes sense. If you go into user preferences (click the mouse just below the file add labels and pull them down) click on the view name button each quadrant will be labelled.
Number pad 0 is camera view, the others are 1 3 7. 3 or 3 gives the opposite side etc. 5 changes from ortho view to perspective.
F9 brings up the double sided button to turn off double sided texturing.
Use append ()to combine things from two files. http://wiki.blender.org/index.php/Manual/Using_Linked_Libraries
To change the texture file name F6, then change the file name under still.
To pick out an item by name use the outliner.
When creating an animated load note that the first and last frame seem to interact so the highest load should be the frame before last or a wagen with no load may show the high load when empty. Also export with the frame number set to the highest number.
Press S and scale it up. That is it... just scale it bigger then the UV texture window and it will automatically tile for you"
The following link shows how to (use) import blue prints into Blender.
Page 6 and 7 refer to Tempest game pack this gives you a MD3 export. It also tells you were to download the tempest game pack. If you get desperate I think I have it somewhere. Getting out of GMAX is the most difficult part.
What you need to create content for Trainz with Blender is obviously Blender itself Note 2.49b the version that many Trainz specific tutorials use can be obtained here Blender2.49b and the Blender Exporter for Trainz. The script was developed for Blender 2.45, by Torsten but any later version should work also. To use the Blender Exporter for Trainz, you must unzip the archive and copy the included file trainz_exporter.py into the script directory of Blender. This is normally the folder scripts located in the subdirectory .blender, so if you install Blender on a Windows system using the default path, you have to copy the file trainz_exporter.py from the archive into the folder C:\Program Files\Blender Foundation\Blender\.blender\scripts. On some Blender installations it maybe found in Application Data\Blender Foundation\Blender\.blender\scripts under document and settings, application data maybe a hidden folder / directory in windows which makes locating it difficult sometimes especially on Windows 7 machines where you may have to turn off UAC to reach it. Alternately if you have two different versions of blender installed or have upgraded from one version to the another you will find additional folder in the "\Application Data\Blender Foundation\Blender" location. Open the folder for the current version of blender your using for example "Application Data\Blender Foundation\Blender\2.60\scripts\addons\"
For Blender 2.5 and later you need the exporter at bitbucket also by Torsten bitbucket.org. The scripts that are available for download work with blender 2.65 at the time of this writing.
You also need to copy in the Auran XML importer, needed for Blender etc. http://online.ts2009.com/mediaWiki/index.php5/Downloads then download Trainzimporter.rar
We are still experimenting with the Blender settings in order to get the best results in Trainz. Nevertheless, the following suggestions should be noted:
In Blender it is not possible to set a reference scale for Blender units, unlike in GMAX where we can specify that one GMAX unit equals, say, one metre. In Blender, simply assume that one Blender Unit (BU) is one metre. This is the assumption that is built in to the Trainz Blender exporter. If you want to use imperial units, then you may wish to explore the Blender Mesh Attribute Editor script.
If you want to move an object to an absolute position, then change to Object Mode via Tab ↹ then press N. The Transform Properties window will appear, then you can enter the values you need. A word of warning, however: LocX, LocY and LocZ refer to a coordinate in the local coordinate system. These refer to a coordinate in the world coordinate system only if the object does not have a parent. If you have already assigned a parent, then you must enter the location relative to that parent.
Not all material properties visualized in Blender will have an effect in Trainz, and some effects achievable in Trainz are unable to be visualized in Blender. Therefore be sure to take a look at your model in Trainz, and do not trust what you see in Blender.
Regarding textures: only diffuse, opacity, reflection and normal maps have any effect in Trainz. You can also export meshes that do not have any texture.
If your installation folder is on your boot drive and in Program Files, you should also ensure that your temp folders (set in user preferences) are somewhere else or Blender will have problem writing temp files.
Meshes are the Blender objects you will see in Trainz. You can build your objects by manipulate Blender primitives or even place vertices and create faces. Just keep in mind the following things:
Faces can be double or single sided, in Blender this is a mesh and not a material option. You will recognize the difference only in Trainz, as Blender render faces always double sided.
The Exporter only recognizes meshes which are visible during export. Make sure all objects you want to export are visible and you have selected all needed layers too! There are two reasons for this behaviour: First, nothing will be exported what you not see(maybe a long forgotten test mesh). The second reason is that you can hold big or animated objects in one Blender file and export only the needed parts by changing visibility(here the layers comes into play).
The term bone in this section stand in general for a helper object to build up hierarchical animation systems. It is not related to the subobject Bone contained in Blender Armatures. Up to now, the Blender Exporter only recognizes Lattices as valid bone-objects.
Here are two tutorials to get a clue about animation basics in Blender:
Animation do this video tutorial first to understand the basics like where the frame number is. [2]
Next for simple animation such as we use in Trainz do this tutorial. [3]
As soon as you want to animate your asset, there is no way around using bones. You can create bones by placing a Lattice(Add > Lattice) and rename it to something like b.r.something as it is described for the bone naming conventions in CCG.
Note the animation works by making the bone b.r.rot etc a parent of object then the animation is applied to the bone.
If you use bones you need to build up a complete hierarchy, that mean starting from a root bone all other bones or meshes need to be child of this root bone or any subordinated bone. The Exporter will fail if you have loose meshes or bones, because unbound meshes will not shown in Trainz.
The root bone should be located at the point of origin and should not be rotated. Best practice might be to place it in top view (Hotkey NumPad 7) and leave it untouched. The root bone also must not be animated; it serves as parent for any not animated mesh within this asset and for any bone which is not driven by/depending on an animated parent.
To export bones they must be visible; so watch your Outliner and your Layers.
Attachment points are used in Trainz to attach effects, tracks or even other meshes. To create an AP you have to add an Empty first(Add > Empty). Afterwards place and rotate it like you need and give it a name following the CCG-Rules for APs(a.whatsoever, do you remember? ;)). APs don't need a parent, as this information will get lost during export. To although made animation possible, Trainz use an extended naming schema. Assume you have a bone b.r.john and an AP a.doe. To tell Trainz that a.doe should be animated like b.r.john, you must rename the AP to a.r.john/a.doe. In your config.txt this AP is still to refer as a.doe.
What is valid for meshes and bones, is also valid for attachment points: If they are not visible, they will not be exported.
You can manipulate diffuse and specular color in Blender to give the material in Trainz the appearance you want. Both you find at the material panel, Col for diffuse and Spe for specular color:
1 - Blender material panel
There are two other colors supported by Trainz: ambient and emissive.
The ambient color in Blender work different from Trainz and as in most cases ambient and diffuse color will be equal, ambient color is copied from diffuse color during export. The emissive color is used for self illumination in Trainz and not provided in Blender. As things normally have the same color even if lighted or light, the Exporter here also copies the value of diffuse color.
If you plan to use textures you should set the diffuse color to pure white, else your textures will appear darker in Trainz than expected.
Also on the material panel you find the slider for Opacity, in Blender called Alpha(slider A down at the right side). A value of 1 means the material is completely visible, a value of 0 render your material completely invisible. If you use texture maps which also affect the opacity, then better leave the Alpha-slider at its right position as the over all opacity will not be higher then the material opacity.
Specularity can be adjusted using the Shaders panel. The interesting sliders are Spec (specularity) and Hard (hardness) in the middle of the panel:
2 - Blender Shaders panel
The Spec ("specularity") slider adjusts the intensity of specular color from 0 (no specular highlight) to 2 (full specular highlight), while the Hard ("hardness") slider adjusts the intensity of the reflected light. A high hardness value gives a hard specularity (imagine glass or an polished surface), whereas a low hardness value gives a dull shine (like asphalt or rough/dirty metal). The hardness range (0 to 511) will be scaled down by the Trainz Exporter to 0 to 128. A hardness value below 4 switches off specularity in order to avoid strange effects in Trainz.
The brightness without to be lighted. You find the slider Emit in the lower right corner of shader panel. The more emissive you order, the more your material glow in diffuse color.
This is the area that causes the most problems.
This is the simplest case so do it first, once you have this part working you can add complexity.
Right click the image below and save it as Blender cylinder texture.jpg. Trainz can use .jpg files but it is much better to convert it to Blender cylinder texture.tga.
Step 2: By changing the values in the Transform Properties dialog, you can change the dimensions and rotation of the object. Here the cylinder has been raised by 2 metres by changing LocZ to 2.00 and its direction has been changed by setting its RotY to 90.
The dropdown menu should now display MA:Material.001.
Step 5: In the Image pane, press Load then navigate to your image file.
Step 6: Press F5 then navigate to the Map Input pane. Press the UV button to change the map input to UV.
Step 8: In order to map the texture, we have to unwrap the mesh in Edit mode. Change from Object mode to Edit mode by pressing Tab ↹.
Accept the default settings by clicking the OK button.
Scale down the faces of the cylinder's side in order to avoid a coloured dot in the middle.
For a preview of the result, press F12.
If you don't have the Trainz Exporter script, get it from the SourceForge project page. Copy the script file into Blender Foundation\Blender\.blender\scripts\.
To create a wagon or locomotive, we need to add attachment points and have a different config.txt file such as kuid:86627:1792 (available on the Trainz Download Station).
First we need to rotate the object so that it sits along the track. In Object mode, press N to enter the Transform Properties dialog. Note the RotY and RotZ values here.
Next we add the empty which will become our attachment point.
Trainz expects to see a specific name on the attachment point so we change the OB: name in the Transform Properties dialog from Empty to a.limfront.
In the Transform Properties dialog, change the LocZ value to 0.89, the LocY value to -4.5 and the LocX value to 0.0.
We need to add another attachment point for the rear coupler. Duplicate the a.limfront attachment point by pressing ⇧ Shift+D. Rename the duplicate to a.limback. Change its LocY value to 4.5.
We also need to add attachment points for the bogies. Add the following attachment points:
OB: a.bog0 with parameters LocX = 0.0, LocY = -1.0 and LocZ = 0.0
OB: a.bog1 with parameters LocX = 0.0, LocY = 1.0 and LocZ = 0.0
If you are using the sample wagon config, you also need to add:
OB: a.bog2 with parameters LocX = 0.0, LocY = 0.0 and LocZ = 0.0
Now save your work (Name your file 'cylinder') and export the model to Trainz. File/Export/Trainz Export. Copy the cylinder.im file, texture and texture.txt file into a wagon object clone such as kuid:86627:1792 available on the Trainz Download Station. The wagon object should show up in Trainz. Note the sample kuid has two cylinders so if you see one you have been successful.
NEVER use compressed image formats such as .jpg, as they often distort colors, waste resources while loading (to extract they need additional memory and CPU-time) and have the same footprint in memory as an uncompressed picture format. A good format to use is Targa (.tga), as it is uncompressed (don't use the RLE-option!) and also has the ability to store an alpha channel if required.
Always use "power of 2" values as map dimensions (i.e. 64x64, 128x128, 128x512). Such textures could processed very fast because "power of 2" - numbers are the native language of your hardware. If you don't abide by this rule your meshes will be white in Trainz. You don't have to use square maps, but you must avoid an aspect ratio above 1:8 (this is unsupported in Trainz).
In Blender in order to access textures you must first add them to the project through the Texture pane in the Material buttons window. Press F5 to access the Material buttons window, then click the Add New button in the Texture pane to add a new texture.
After creating a texture (TE:) object you use the Map Input pane to tell Blender where the mapping information should come from, and the Map To pane to specify which material property should be influenced.
5 - Blender Map Input panel
The default map input choosen by Blender is Orco. This is okay for reflection maps, but for the other kinds of maps the Exporter script only accepts the UV map input. As mapping target (Map To pane) you can choose one or more of the following options:
You can assign other mapping targets and these textures will be exported, but you will not notice the slightest effect in Trainz.
What's now left to do is of course loading the texture itself. In Blender you define the content of a texture using the Texture pane (press F6 to access). The only Texture Type you can export to Trainz is Image, so all of the other options (DistortedNoise, Voronoi and so-on) can be ignored.
7 - Blender Texture buttons
There is only one option left, the option "no texture". The Blender Exporter for Trainz allows you to export models without any texture. This can speed up asset creation due to "quick checks" of the pure mesh directly in Trainz. To export without any texture you simply have to delete eventually assigned texture objects.
One little problem can occure if you work with opacity: Due to a bug in Trainz not completely opaque or transparent areas may overlap each other. You can take a look at the problem and one possible work around by downloading the two related examples from SourceForge.
These textures are a bit different in usage as the others, because Trainz map them automatically using spherical mapping. How this works you can imagine best if you create a smooth sphere and assign a reflection map. Which map part is shown depend on the direction in which the imaginary ray from the camera to the objects surface would be reflected. That's why you see the whole map on the surface of a smooth sphere.
To use reflection maps you only need to press button Refl in Map Input panel and button Ref in the Map To panel of the designated texture. You will notice that no colors appear neither in material preview nor in render window. That's because Blender use reflective textures to modify the strenght and not the color of reflection. But no fear, in Trainz you get your colors back ;).
You can assign hardness textures but you will be disappointed. They don't affect hardness, instead they will be typed as reflective texture during export. This behavior is copied from the original exporter, as any attempt to influence the "shinestrength" so far ends in a complete white unlighted object.
A normal texture is used to fake highs and lows on an plain surface. To use it you need an UV Map Input and a Nor Map To. Please take care to use an normal map and not a bump map. Both are used for the same purpose, but they contain different data.
The influence that a texture has on an object's appearance in Trainz is controlled by so-called "material name decorations". With one exception the Blender Exporter for Trainz selects the appropriate decoration depending on the textures you have assigned. This exception is m.billboard, as this material decoration is used for objects always facing the camera. Because the Exporter has no chance to detect if you want this behavior, you have to decorate the material name for yourself with the ending m.billboard. Generally the Exporter doesn't overwrite a known material decoration, so if you want to ensure your material will be exported as m.gloss, then simply append m.gloss for yourself to the material name.
In case of animation export the original exporters ask you for an event file to bind events to specific frames. To use events with the Blender Exporter for Trainz is similar. Switching a Blender window to Text Editor window and create a new TX object via File > New (Hotkey Alt N). Enter for every event a line with frame number, event type and event name. If you finally rename this TX object to events, then the Exporter will parse this text and create the desired entries in your animation file.
Examples you find as additional files at the download section by SourceForge
Serine proteases are proteases that have serine, an amino acid, bonded at the active site. Their main function in humans is digestion, however they also function in processes such as inflammation, blood clotting, and the immune system in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Serine proteases are grouped depending on their structure. Major groups of serine proteases include alpha hydrolase, beta hydrolase, and signal peptidase.
The serine proteases is the enzyme that catalyze the hydrolysis of ester or amide. This reaction involves the reaction of acylation of the hydroxyl group of Ser-195. The substrate forms a tetrahedral intermediate by attacking of Ser-195 on the carboxyl group of the substrate since the active site of the enzyme is complementary to the transition state of the reaction.
Proteases, proteinases, peptidases describe the same group of enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of covalent peptide bonds. Serine proteases are grouped into clans that share structural homology and then further subgrouped into families that share close sequence homology. In the case of serine protease, the mechanism of the protease is based on the nucleophilic attack of the targeted peptidic bond by a serine.
Cysteine, threonine or water molecules associated with aspartate or metals may also play this role. In many cases the nucleophilic property of the group is improved by the presence of a histidine, held in a "proton acceptor state" by an aspartate. Aligned side chains of serine, histidine and aspartate build the catalytic triad common to most serine proteases.
The active site of serine proteases is shaped as a cleft where the polypeptide substrate binds. Schechter and Berger [1] labeled amino acid residues from N to C term of the polypeptide substrate (Pi, ..., P3, P2, P1, P1', P2', P3', ..., Pj) and their respective binding sub-sites Si,..., S3, S2, S1, S1', S2', S3',..., Sj) . The cleavage is catalyzed between P1 and P1'.
Many proteases are synthesized and secreted as inactive forms called zymogens and subsequently activated by proteolysis. This changes the architecture of the active site of the enzyme.
Few examples are: Chymotrypsin, trypsin, and elastase.
~240-residue monomeric proteins, 4 disulfide bridges
Two folded domains with antiparallel b-sheets (barrel-like) and little helix
Catalytic triad - His57 and Ser195 located at substrate binding site along with Asp102, which is buried in solventinaccessible pocket.
Chymotrypsin - prefers bulky Phe, Trp, or Tyr in hydrophobic pocket.
Trypsin - prefers Arg and Lys in binding pocket (Ser189 replaced by Asp).
Bound substrate is attacked by nucleophilic Ser195 forming transition state complex (tetrahedral intermediate), His57 takes up H+, which is facilitated by Asp102.
Tetrahedral intermediate decomposes to acyl-enzyme intermediate by His57 (general acid).
Enzyme prefers binding transition state to either Michaelis complex or acyl-enzyme intermediate forms.
Catalytic triad serves to form low-barrier hydrogen bonds in the transition state (assisted by hydrophobic environment).
Enzyme inhibitors (pancreatic trypsin inhibitor) or zymogen granules prevent activation
Serine proteases are sequence specific. While cascades of protease activations control blood clotting and complement, other proteasesare involved in signalling pathways, enzyme activation and degradative functions in different cellular or extracellular compartments.
While running regressions on multiple explanatory variables, there often is the problem of two variables having the same effects on the dependent variable. For example, say that the reading level of your father and the reading level of your mother can predict your eventual max reading level (YourLevel = a + b*FatherLevel + c*MotherLevel + u). However, there probably is a high probability that your parents have similar reading levels, so that using both may be redundant. This is a problem known as Multicollinearity. The problem with this is bias in your estimators. Say we can find yours through your mother's level. YourLevel = a + c*MotherLevel + u. If we add on your father's level, we will increase the prediction for your level, although in real life your level will not increase at all.
Detecting multicollinearity can be more difficult than in the above example. But the first step that should be taken is an examination of the theory that is being tested. Is it redundant to have both mother's level and father's level? If this does not yield any results, probably because the theory is more complex, causing multicollinearity to be hidden, several econometric techniques can be used to find problems.
Large changes in the estimated regression coefficients when a predictor variable is added or deleted.
Running the regression first with 'FatherLevel' and then without it may yield large variation, indicating that there is an error.
Non-significant results of simple linear regressions.
Obviously if we find that with both FatherLevel and MotherLevel that neither are significant, than again there is something strange happening signaling possible multicollinearity.
Estimated regression coefficients have an opposite sign from predicted
If in a regression with both FatherLevel and MotherLevel, b is positive, but c is negative; we know from theory that a higher reading level of the mother does not cause the child to be a worse reader. This is a possible sign of multicollinearity.
4)formal detection-tolerance or the variation inflation factor (VIF)
Motor learning and control is the study of how our brains execute complex muscle movements. Motor means muscle in this context.
This section will explain how we learn complex, precise movements, eventually perform a skill without even thinking about it. You'll also learn about the role of cognition (mental attention): many of these skills can only be performed when we don't think about them. Our performance degrades when we exert conscious control.
A muscle movement takes about 200 milliseconds (one-fifth of a second) to execute:
Sensation, or neural transmission from sensory receptors in your eyes, ears, etc., to your brain, takes about 15 milliseconds.
Perception, which retrieves long-term memories to organize, classify, and interpret your sensations, takes about 45 milliseconds. In other words, perception changes sensation data into perceived information or meaning.
Response selection takes about 75 milliseconds. You use current perception and past experiences to formulate a course or action. For example, in baseball, a batter watches the pitcher and decides whether to swing at a pitch, hit to left field or right, etc. Psychologists differentiate conscious decisions from unconscious translations, or relating a particular stimulus to a particular response.
Response execution of an action plan&#151;a step-by-step sequence of events that make up the planned movement&#151;takes about 15 milliseconds. In these events, motor neurons carry signals from the brain or spinal cord to muscles.
We perform muscle movements with either open-loop or closed-loop motor control.
Closed-loop motor control uses perception to consciously, continuously adjust muscle movements. E.g., threading a needle. You look at the needle. You look at the thread. You move the thread towards the needle. You look at the needle again. You look at the thread again. You correct your movement. You do this dozens of times until the thread is through the needle.
Each stimulus-response adjustment takes at least 200 milliseconds (one-fifth of a second). If you make ten adjustments, the task takes at least two seconds.
Closed-loop motor control has two advantages. It enables precise control, and it enables execution of novel movements (activities you've never done before). E.g., threading a needle on the deck of a rolling ship.
Closed-loop motor control has two disadvantages. It's slow, and it requires your full attention.
Closed-loop motor control is good for learning new skills, or for executing skills you rarely need. But you don't want to use closed-loop motor control for fast-paced, frequently used skills.
200 milliseconds&#151;a split second&#151;may seem fast, but it's too slow for many motor tasks. For example, a gymnast's double-back somersault requires muscle movements lasting only tens of milliseconds.
How is it possible to execute a muscle movement in tens of milliseconds, when the sensation to execution cycle requires about 200 milliseconds? Simple&#151;don't do the sensation, perception, and response selection stages. Just do the response execution. This final stage of muscle movements can be performed in as little as 15 milliseconds. This is called open-loop motor control. Open-loop motor control is the execution of preprogrammed movements, called a motor program, without perceptual feedback.
The colloquial term for this is "muscle memory." For example, gymnasts practice hours each day for years, until they can execute complex routines seemingly effortlessly.
After winning the gold medal in gymnastics at the 1984 Olympics, Mary Lou Retton said that coach
Bela [Karolyi] can really teach, I've learned so much from him. Many long hours were spent in the gymnasium&#133;repetition, feedback, repetition, and experimentation. Somehow, after a lot of bumps and bruises, it got easier, as if I could float.
Someone should be able to sneak up and drag you out at midnight and push you out on some strange floor, and you should be able to do your entire routine sound asleep in your pajamas. Without a mistake. That's the secret. It's got to be a natural reaction.
It requires no attention. Movements under open-loop control are automatic and mentally effortless.
If your motor program contains errors, you'll execute the errors. You can't stop and adjust a mistake. You may not even be aware that you made a mistake.
Developing open-loop control of a motor skill requires long practice&#151;especially for adults. Children learn some motor skills easily, that adults struggle for years to master.
Novel or new situations can't be handled. E.g., in the 2000 Olympics, officials set the gymnastic vault two inches too low. The officials didn't correct the height until 18 of the 36 women had performed. These 18 athletes performed poorly, eliminating their hopes of winning medals. The American hopeful, Elise Ray, suffered a "devastating fall."
Use closed-loop motor control for learning a new motor skill. Then gradually increase your speed until you can perform the motor skill with open-loop motor control.
For example, if you take tennis or golf lessons the coach will have you start with swinging the club or racquet slowly. When you've perfected your form, your coach will have you gradually increase the speed and force, while continuing to use your perfect form. After extensive practice you'll be executing perfect open-loop motor programs. You'll smash the ball hard and fast and accurately without thinking about your elbows or knees or anything other than the ball.
Speech is fast. Phonemes (speech sounds) are typically 20 to 40 milliseconds.
Speech is automatic and effortless. Speakers think about what they're saying, not about the muscles they're moving.
Fluency shaping stuttering therapy uses closed-loop speech motor control. You consciously relax your breathing. Then, as you exhale, you slowly increase your vocal fold tension, until your vocal folds hum. Then you slowly move your lips, jaw, and tongue to form the sounds of each word. Stuttering is impossible when using closed-loop speech motor control. Stuttering dysfluencies are open-loop speech motor programs.
Closed-loop speech motor control is slow. Closed-loop motor control takes about 200 milliseconds per muscle movement. Open-loop speech sounds are typically in the 20-40 millisecond range. You can see why switching to closed-loop speech motor control slows speech five to ten times, or one or two seconds per syllable.
Closed-loop speech motor control demands your full attention. You must pay attention to your breathing, vocal folds, and lips, jaw, and tongue. This isn't a problem when reading a list of words, but is impossible to use in conversations.
Your speech loses prosody (rhythm and emotional intonation).
Accents are another parameterization schema that conveys meaning. For example, a waitress from Oklahoma asked me if I wanted ah-iss. When I figured out that she was asking about ice, I affirmatively answered yay-iss. I knew the invariable characteristics of "yes," and when I'd learned the rules of an Oklahoma accent&#151;e.g., break monosyllabic words into two syllables&#151;I was able to say a word I'd never heard.
Another example is a person who grew up in Vermont and Georgia. When she's in New England she speaks in a Yankee accent. When she's in the South she switches to a southern accent. Different environmental cues cause her to unconsciously selects different parameterization schema to produce each accent.
For example, training a stutterer to not feel fear or anxiety when answering the telephone is changing the response selection to an environmental cue (a ringing telephone). In contrast, training a stutterer to speak with relaxed vocal folds changes a speech parameter.
Closed-loop speech motor control is the "wizard behind the curtain" of many stuttering therapy programs. Switch any stutterer to closed-loop speech motor control and he or she will be nearly fluent.
You can switch to closed-loop speech motor control by making any speech process conscious instead of unconscious. For example, focusing on relaxed, slow breathing will switch you into closed-loop speech motor control, with your vocal folds and articulators (lips, jaw, and tongue) following right along. Or you can focus on producing "gentle onset" with your vocal folds. This will switch your breathing and articulators to closed-loop speech motor control. Or you can focus on "reduced articulatory pressure" and your breathing and vocal folds will follow.
Always these "wizards" claim that their therapies are 100% effective if the stutterer "really tries," that is, if he devotes his full attention to closed-loop speech motor control. If he instead pays attention to a conversation, switches into open-loop speech motor control, and then stutters, then he wasn't "really trying."
And the closed-loop speech motor control effect has caused speech-language pathologists to hypothesize various theories that stutterers have something wrong with their breathing, or with their vocal folds, or with their articulators, or even that stutterers' brains are slow in some way. That's like saying that student drivers have slower brains than Indy 500 race car drivers because student drivers are safe at 20 mph but crash when driving at 200 mph. Everyone performs slowly when attentively learning a new motor skill. For stutterers in speech therapy, the new motor skill is fluent speech.
Some speech clinics tell stutterers that they'll always have to speak slowly. That's like training a student driver to drive 20 mph, then telling him never to go faster.
If you learn tennis or golf, you'll use closed-loop motor control when you're learning to swing the club or racquet. As you practice, increasing your speed and force, you'll gradually reinforce open-loop motor programs.
Similarly, you'll use closed-loop speech motor control when working with your speech-language pathologist. She'll train you to move your respiration muscles, vocal folds, and articulators correctly to produce fluent speech. When you've mastered this at a very slow speaking rate, she'll help you to gradually increase your speaking rate, while staying fluent. The goal is fluent, automatic, effortless, normal-sounding and normal-rate speech. Slow speech is not the goal of stuttering therapy.
Severe stutterers usually don't mind learning closed-loop speech motor control. If your stuttered speech is ten to twenty times slower than normal speech, then closed-loop speech motor control, which is typically five to ten times slower than normal speech, will double your speaking rate. Some severe stutterers are even willing to use closed-loop speech motor control outside of the speech clinic. Record conversations with and without using closed-loop speech motor control. Count your syllables per second. You may find that closed-loop speech motor control feels slower but is actually faster than your stuttered speech.
But mild stutterers don't like closed-loop speech motor control. They can hide their stuttering by avoidance and substitution (of certain sounds, words, or speaking situations). They can sound fluent at a normal speaking rate. They don't like that closed-loop speech motor control "advertises to the world" that they have a speech disorder. If they're embarrassed to admit that they stutter, they won't want to use closed-loop speech motor control.
Mild stutterers should consider that closed-loop speech motor control enables them to say anything they want. E.g., a mild stutterer wants to buy a chess set. He's afraid of s words, so he calls a toy store and asks if they have "one of those games with kings and knights and castles."
The puzzled clerk responds that the store has many games with kings and castles and knights. After five minutes of conversation, the clerk asks, "Do you mean chess sets?" The stutterer says yes. The clerk never knows that the caller is a stutterer, but she thinks the caller is an idiot. The stutterer wasted five minutes because he wasn't willing to use ten seconds of slow speech.
Or the stutterer drives to the store and looks for a chess set, without calling first. If the store doesn't have chess sets he wastes an hour, to save ten seconds.
In other words, saying what you want slowly is faster than saying something else, or not speaking.
I've never taken a typing class. I type about 45 words per minute (I'm probably the world's fastest two-fingered typist!).
I've twice tried to learn touchtyping. My speed dropped to less than ten words per minute. Touchtyping not only slowed me down, it required my full concentration. I couldn't think about what I was writing, only about moving my fingers.
I gave up touchtyping within a week. If I'd kept at it, my speed would have increased and eventually surpassed my two-fingered typing speed. I might have been typing 80 words per minute now. The mental effort would have diminished, until touchtyping was automatic and effortless.
Coaches say they'd rather work with a novice who has never played their sport, rather than with an experienced player who uses incorrect techniques. It's easier to learn a new motor skill correctly than it is to correct an incorrect, deeply learned motor skill.
Stuttering is difficult to overcome because we learned to talk incorrectly. We have to learn new, fluent speech motor skills, and we have to not use our old, dysfluent speech motor skills. We learned these dysfluent speech motor skills in childhood, when our brains were growing. Now the dysfluent speech motor skills are hardwired into our brains. Making fluent speech automatic and effortless, for a stutterer, demands more time and effort than learning a new sport or vocational skill.
Many speech clinics use delayed auditory feedback (DAF) devices to establish fluency using closed-loop speech motor control. With only a little training a DAF device can help a stutterer maintain perfectly paced, steady, mentally effortless, slow closed-loop speech motor control.
The user's speaking rate can be adjusted by turning a knob. A typical protocol is to train a stutterer to use closed-loop speech motor control with a 200-millisecond delay and one to two seconds per syllable. The stutterer practices this until he is 100% fluent. That usually takes only one or two therapy sessions. (A study found that without training a 195-millisecond delay reduced stuttering only 85%.[2])
When the stutterer can speak 100% fluently, the speech-language pathologist then has the stutterer use one- or two-second stretched syllables without the DAF device; in increasingly stressful situations (e.g., calling the speech-language pathologist's answering machine); and with the DAF device adjusted for faster speaking rates. The stutterer must stay on-target with 100% fluency, or go back to using the DAF device at 200 milliseconds and a one- to two-second speaking rate.
Typically, a 100-millisecond DAF delay is used with half-second per syllable stretched speech, a 75-millisecond delay is used with quarter-second per syllable "slow normal" speech, and a 50-millisecond delay is used with a normal speaking rate.
In the cognitive stage, you observe the target motor skill. For example, your speech-language pathologist demonstrates relaxed breathing.
In the associative stage, you learn to perform and refine the motor skill. You perform the movements under closed-loop control.
In the autonomous stage, the motor skill becomes automatic. You perform the muscle movements without mental effort. You perform the movements under open-loop control.
Let's go back to the golf or tennis coach example. You watch the coach hit a few practice balls. Then the coach hands you the club or racket. The coach guides you through a swing, telling you to drop this shoulder or extend that forearm. Soon you can execute the swing perfectly, if you fully concentrate on each movement. You then practice the swing, and your game improves.
A few years later a novice admires your excellent swing and asks you to explain how you do it. "I don't know," you say, "I just do it without thinking about it."
For another example, last summer I tried mountain bike racing. In four races I crashed four times. Then I hired a coach. In twelve hours over three weeks, he taught me how to ride down hills; make tight turns; jump my bike over logs; climb hills; plus a few tricks such as picking up a water bottle off the ground.
Then I quit mountain bike racing. I'd completed the associative stage and learned how to do each skill. Now I would have to practice these skills hours a day, several times a week for years to make the skills automatic in the fast, high-stress environment of racing. I.e., I could do any of the skills if I thought about it, but my body didn't automatically execute the moves without conscious mental effort. I decided that mountain bike racing isn't important enough to me to spend thousands of hours practicing.
Stuttering therapy follows a similar course. A speech-language pathologist can show you the fluency skills&#151;relaxed, diaphragmatic breathing; vocal fold relaxation (gentle onsets); and relaxed articulation muscles (lips, jaw, and tongue)&#151;in a few minutes. Teaching you to execute these skills takes a few hours. You can then speak fluently in the speech clinic, when you mentally concentrate on each skill. Almost everyone successfully completes these cognitive and associative stages.
You then have to practice these skills thousands of hours to make them automatic and effortless, in high-stress situations. Many stutterers fail at this stage. But no one intentionally fails for the reasons I quit mountain bike racing. No one rationally weighs the alternatives and says, "Talking isn't important to me. I'll learn sign language instead, or write notes."
Books on this shelf deal with theatre: the branch of the performing arts defined as what occurs when people present themselves to others in an act of storytelling. It can take on many forms, utilizing speech, gesture, music, dance, and spectacle, combining the other performing arts, often as well as the visual arts, into a single artistic form.
Things are not as they appear, nor are they otherwise.
Space can contain everything, but space does not entertain the thought that it can contain everything.
Samsara and Nirvana are the same - Normalisation of attainment for the arisings
If you meet the Buddha on the road - Kill him - Attachment to obstacles goes all the way to the top
A biscuit jointer machines a groove of fixed depth & width into a piece of lumber. The grooves are of set standard sizes. An oval "biscuit" of pressed beech is placed into the groove. This biscuit expands when exposed to a water-based glue, thus strengthening the joint. In some cases biscuit jointing provides a stronger joint than traditional dowel joints.
The Birmingham School and The Digital Divide
The Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies or CCCS for short was the heart of British cultural studies. Founded by Richard Hoggart in 1964, the Centre operated at the intersections of literary criticism, sociology, history, and anthropology. Rather than focus on ‘high’ culture, the intention was to carry out group research on areas of popular culture such as chart music, television programmes, and advertising. This approach went profoundly against the grain of conventional academic practice. The school went through a few directors including Stuart Hall, Richard Johnson, and Michael Green. The work that was produced at the Centre worked on many different intersections of study, such as sociology and literary criticism. In 2002, the school closed its door, as the senior management says the program needed restructuring (1).
Richard Hoggart- Born September 24th, 2018 in Leeds, Richard was from a working-class family. His began his career as an adult education tutor. His work The Uses Of Literacy published in 1957 would define his career. In this work, Hoggart wrote about the changing working class from the 1930's to the 1950's. He contrasted these two timeframes by separated them into two cultures:
"An “older” order’, describing the working class culture of Hoggart’s childhood in the 1930s; and ‘Yielding place to new’, describing a traditional working-class culture under threat from the new forms of mass entertainment of the 1950s. Dividing the book in this way in itself speaks volumes about the perspective taken and the conclusions expected. On the one hand, we have the traditional ‘lived culture’ of the 1930s. On the other, we have the cultural decline of the 1950s. (2) "
The antagonist to the traditional working-class culture was the threat of new forms of mass entertainment of the 1950s. He refers to the pleasures of mass entertainment as irresponsible and vicarious. Hoggart noted that the working-class did have a great natural ability to survive change by excepting what they want and ignoring the rest. In the book, " Cultural Theory and Popular Culture: An Introduction" by John Storey he writes that "Hoggart can be criticized for his romanticism of the 1930's in order to that that his picture of the 1950's is exaggeratedly pessimistic and overdrawn." The rich life of his childhood seemed to be exponentially ruined by the popular culture of the 1950s. In Richard Hoggart's book, "The uses of literacy" he writes about what he sees as the relationship between these two cultures:
"Having a good time’ may be made to seem so important as to override almost all other claims; yet when it has been allowed to do so, having a good time becomes largely a matter of routine. The strongest argument against modern mass entertainments is not that they debase taste – debasement can be alive and active – but that they overexcite it, eventually dull it, and finally kill it. . . . They kill it at the nerve, and yet so bemuse and persuade their audience that the audience is almost entirely unable to look up and say, ‘But in fact, this cake is made of sawdust’ (3).
Stuart Hall- Born February 3rd, 1932, in Kingston, Jamacia, In 1964, Hall joined the Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies, became the acting director in 1968, then fully took over in 1972. (4)
Enlightenment Subject: A human person as a fully centered, unified individual, endowed with the capacities of reason, consciousness, and action, whose "center consisted of an inner core which first emerged when the subject was born. (5)Sociological Subject: A human person who reflected the growing complexity of the modern world and the awareness that this inner core of the subject was not autonomous and self-sufficient. Formed in relation to the significant others who mediated to the subject values, meaning, and symbols the culture of the world she/he have. (5)Post-Modern Subject: A human subject that conceptualized as having no fixed essential or permanent identity. Identity formed and transformed continuously in relation to the ways we are represented or addressed in cultural systems which surround us. (5)These three types of identity that Hall laid out are the process in which we project ourselves. In the enlightenment subject, this is where we build out primary discourse. We begin to decipher whats good and bad or right and wrong. In the sociological subject, people are looking outwards outside of their primary discourse. We take from others people values, meaning, and symbols to make sense of our own. In the postmodern subject, a person is non-stop changing with the culture around him/her.
'Raymond Williams'- Born August 31st, 1921, in Lianfihangel Crucorney, Wales, Williams was a colleague of Hoggart and Hall at the Birmingham school of cultural studies. Raymond Williams was from a working-class welsh family, his father was a railway signalman. Throughout his career, Willians released several novels, literary and cultural studies journals, and short stories. In one of his most prolific works "The analysis of culture", Willams put cultural into three general categories:
Ideal: Discovery of certain absolute or universal, high and low meaning and values. (6)Documentary: Culture is the body of intellectual and imaginative work, in a detailed way, human thought and experience are variously recorded. (6)Social: Culture is a description of a particular way of life.Within a given society, selection will be governed by many kinds of special interests, including class interests. Just as the actual social situation will largely govern contemporary selection, so the development of the society, the process of historical change, will largely determine the selective tradition. The traditional culture of a society will always tend to correspond to its contemporary system of interests and values, for it is not an absolute body of work but a continual selection and interpretation (5).
The Birmingham school of cultural studies was focused on class, gender, race and the politics of representation. The digital divide is a problem in which people in poverty have a lack of access to quality technology and tend to have lower digital literacy skills. This phenomenon has been seen as a very complicated issue that is connected to race, education, and poverty. The lack of resources has a direct effect on literacy, to solve this problem the cultural theorist believed that cultural practices such as digital literacy should be studied within the culture. Each of these cultural theorists would look at the digital divide differently, for instance, Richard Hoggart who was a purist thinks that these pleasures of mass entertainment do nothing but ruin culture and forces them to adapt to the changes. The tech of the 1950's ruined the culture he knew as a child. Although Hoggart was pessimistic about some technology advancements, he believed the working class had a strong ability to survive change. Stuart Hall, on the other hand, would look at the lack of resources as a threat to the identity of the postmodern subject. The digital divide keeps impoverished people away from the cultural systems that surround them. As the digital divide effects people in poverty, it also affects their digital identities in the communities that surround them. Raymond Williams focused a lot of his work on the marginalized, with his Marxist ideology the digital divide would be an important topic to him. Williams stood up for injustice and would see the digital divide as being a disadvantage to the disenfranchised.
Attacking the bishop, yet moving to the side of the board. In theory this is Black's best move, but it's not that clear.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bc4 Nf6 4.Ng5 d5 5.exd5 Na5
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
All the different membranous organelles perform different tasks in the cell (animal cells and plant cells). However, they also communicate with each other though ions and lipids. In addition, some of the organelles have membrane that are connected. The others are related by transfer of membrane segments. As we know, structures determine functions in a lot of ways in nature. We can categorize eukaryotic organelles into four categories according to their general functions.
In this first category, nucleus, ribosomes, rough ER, smooth ER and golgi apparatus are included. They can perform this task because of they have metabolically active membranes. Some of them can also perform transportation of the products. Below is some examples of the manufacturing task these organelles do.
Rough ER--Membrane protein synthesis, secretory proteins synthesis and hydrolytic enzymes synthesis; formation of transport vesicles
Golgi apparatus--Modificaiton, temporary storage and transportation of macromolecules such as proteins; formation of lysosomes and transport vesicles
In this category, lysosomes, peroxisomes and vacuoles are included. They are all consist of single membrane sac that can be used to collect materials and/or break down unwanted/harmful materials.
In this category, chloroplasts and mitochondria are included. They both have metabolically active membranes and intermembrane compartments that can convert energy units to provide to the cells.
In this last category, cytoskeleton(such as cilia, flagella and centrioles in animal cells), cell walls(in plants, fungi and some protists), extracellular matrix(in animal cells) and cell junctions are included. They are all responsible for the keeping cells in shape.
This quest allows players to fletch and use brutal arrows, which can only be used with ogre bows and do more damage than normal arrows of the same type. This also allows players access to a "cure disease" potoin which may be used in the Tai Bwo Wannai cleanup minigame as well as in the [[Old School RuneScape
Sparta was a Dorian civilization located in the Peloponnese. One thing that made Sparta different from other poleis is that it was a military state for most of its history.
Sparta was one of the most militarily powerful city-states in Greece. While Sparta had existed for a considerable time prior, Spartan history really begins with Lykurgos. Lykurgos was a Spartan aristocrat who enacted a number of reforms to spartan society which brought it to its recognizable form. Some of Lykurgos' reforms included a prohibition on any currency other than iron, a requirement that all men eat all meals in public mess halls, and that all ceilings be finished with an axe rather than carved. The Spartans proceeded to attack their neighbors to acquire helots (slaves) to farm the land while they concentrated on military matters. They later joined the Athenians in their war against the Persians.
In the Dark Ages (the era after the fall of Myceneae) Dorians built Sparta as a military encampment, and it remained as such until the Spartans incorporated nearby settlements on the Laconian plain.
By the end of the Dark Ages, Sparta had become pre-eminent in Greece. Spartan lords endeavored to conquer more land, for their population was growing exceedingly large. Those whom the Spartans conquered were enslaved and called Helots, and they eventually revolted against the small Spartan army and Sparta herself was almost destroyed. In light of this, King Lycurgus established a military aristocracy .
In the early 7th century BCE, Lycurgus rose to power. He was the great lawmaker of Sparta, having written its constitution and laying down the law that made Sparta such a military power. Under Lycurgus' laws, Sparta had political equality for all Spartan citizens. At the time Sparta controlled all of the Peloponnesos.
Managing Sparta was no small task. Thanks to its military might, there were massive amounts of conquered territory, which, though citizens managed it privately, remained the property of the state. Most subjects of those conquered lands were enslaved by the Spartan government and were known as helots. Though the helots were viewed as state property, individual Spartans – presumably those who managed the conquered land – took half the responsibility of the helots' protection, while the other half reverted to the state.
Because of the amount of conquered territory under Spartan rule, there were numerous helots. The helots identified themselves as one race, although they previously belonged to different city-states. This unified them and sowed seeds of discontent. Helots' unity made the risk of an uprising a very real possibility, which furthered Sparta's drive to remain a military state. As well as acting as a deterrent, Spartan military power would provide the means to quash any rebellion.
Not all natives of subjugated lands were reduced to the position of being helots. Some of the more important communities in conquered regions were given some level of independence in their own domestic affairs. These peoples were called perioikoi (which translates as "neighbors") and received somewhat better treatment than helots. In spite of their better treatment, however, these peoples were not happy to be under Spartan rule, even if they were less likely to rise up against Sparta.
From the ages of seven to sixty, Spartan males were required to serve in the military. During that time, they lived in military barracks. After twenty-five years of service, it was common for them to spend their days in military training and evenings with other military companions. This military lifestyle made a home life next to impossible. The men weren't allowed to marry until the age of twenty(which some took wives by force), but were unable to have a household until the age of thirty. Spartan women were treated unusually well, they had many rights and were not subjected to the common roll of women found in other civilizations, namely, stay at home and keep the children. Spartans citizens in general had a great deal of freedom.
Because Sparta's military state was so firmly established, it was sufficient to maintain a tradition of a military monarchy. Other poleis began with this form of leadership, but grew away from it as time passed. Sparta's kingship was hereditary, but also dual; that is to say, there were two kings from two different families. Sometimes these kings got on well and worked well together, but sometimes, of course, they did not.
Under Lycurgus' constitution, Spartan citizens did have some basic rights. The constitution also mapped out Sparta's political structure. There were always two kings, both military leaders. The kings worked with a council of aristocrats referred to as Gerousia. The Gerousia also handled political and judicial decisions. Another governing body was the homoioi ("equals"). The homoioi was comprised of Spartan citizens who had survived their required military service, received state land (conquered territories) with helots to work it, and continued to obey Spartan rules. This assembly met regularly and made final decisions on most of the important issues related to Spartan government. Also there were the 'ephorites', the spiritual leaders with a 'connection' to the Gods, which had the power to dispose of a King, or over-turn his will.
In Sparta, a citizen was a member of society who was automatically entitled to certain – albeit few – rights. Citizens also shared a basic sense of community. That this sense was based on fear of helot uprisings or the desire to profit from them (or both) was not important. This communal equality, however, was a minimum. That some Spartans owned their land privately while others had been granted use of state land was irrelevant. It did not matter that some were high-ranking nobleman and others were 'mere mortals' as all were Spartan citizens, so all enjoyed those same basic rights.
Variables allow you to store and change information. Below is an example how to use variables.
In Basic, a string variable ends in a $, and whole number variables, known as integers, end with a %.
If you use Dim varName As DataType to declare variables, you do not need to use a suffix.
This in-class exercise was done towards the end of an introductory course on Artificial Intelligence, as part of a regular computer science and engineering program ABET accreditation on the criterion concerned with lifelong learning. One week before the in-class exercise, students were told that they would have an open book and open note exercise on relationships between
(a) a paper, Ross, J., Shantharam, N., and Tomlinson, B. (2010) "Collaborative Filtering and Carbon Footprint Calculation". In: Proceedings of the 2010 International Symposium on Sustainable Systems and Technology (ISSST). Washington D.C.: IEEE (retrieved from http://www.ics.uci.edu/~jwross/pubs/RossShantharamTomlinson-BetterCarbon-ISSST2010.pdf)[1]
(b) a previously undiscussed section on clustering from the course textbook (Poole, D. & Mackworth, A., Artificial Intelligence: Foundations of Computational Agents. Cambridge University Press). (The exercise could be easily adapted to other treatments of clustering, and even adapted to other forms of unsupervised learning).
There was no greater specificity given on what the exercise would cover, other than the relationships between these two readings. In addition students were given a hardcopy of the Ross, et al paper, and told that they could use this during the exercise, and that they would be turning in their marked up hardcopy of the paper with their answers to the exercise, along with any notes that they prepared before walking into class. They were told that the quality of notes and mark up could not hurt their exercise score, and might in fact help it.
This exercise is open notes, open book, and open internet. Also, refer to your (marked up) copy of “Collaborative Filtering and Carbon Footprint Calculation” by Ross, Shantharam, and Tomlinson.
(a) Write a short paragraph that Poole and Mackworth could add to Example 11.1 as a third instance of clustering, in this case to relate to better carbon calculation. It’s ok to cut and paste and adapt text from the Ross et all paper – just quote text from that paper that you use if that is what you do (but significant paraphrasing requires no further acknowledgement in this context – your use of the ideas in the Ross et al paper in this exercise is taken as a given).
Instructor comments: A fully correct answer would be ‘A better carbon calculator groups users into clusters based on similar responses to geographical and carbon-lifestyle questions, to better predict unknown choices be subsequent users (or expanding this latter point -- a user who does not answer all questions can be placed in the best-fitting cluster based on known responses, with cluster average values predicted as the user’s unknown responses).
This question is intended to assess student ability to understand and express the gist of the relationship between an application (carbon calculator) and a process abstraction (clustering) that can implement the application. An ability to recognize such associations is critical for lifelong learning and professional development.
Ideally, an answer made unambiguous reference to (i) known variables that represented the basis of ascertaining cluster membership, and (ii) cluster membership as a basis of predicting values for unobserved variables (unknown user responses).
(b) Figure 2 of Ross et al shows 10 of the variables that are used in user profiles by the Better Carbon Calculator. Note that two of these variables are NOT continuous (i.e., Vehicle fuel type, Vehicle size). However, assume for the moment that all variables used by the Better Carbon Calculator are continuous. Briefly describe what (else) you would have to change about the Better Carbon Calculator (as described), in order to use the K-means algorithm AS IS (i.e., with no changes from the algorithm described in the text) to organize user profiles. You may want to answer (c) and (d) before finishing your answer to this.
Instructor comments: (b) and (e) ask students to more deeply consider/imagine/understand the association between application (Better Carbon Calculator) and process abstraction (clustering). Each of (b) and (e) ask the student to consider this association from a different angle. For purposes of ABET rubric, (b) and (e) are assessed together. A fully correct answer would list at least three points beyond recognizing that (i) BCC would be restricted to continuous variables, and
(ii) different similarity measures are used. Additional points can be drawn from
(iii) the Better Carbon Calculator (BBC) variables would have to be scaled similarly
(iv) limit the BCC to consider a fixed and known number of clusters and/or extend k-means to handle indeterminate number of clusters
(v) a recognition that BCC allows data to continually arrive, and this would have to be restricted or somehow managed in K-Means as described were to be used (which assumes the data is available en masse)
The additional points (beyond the different similarity functions) follow a discounting function.
(c) How is “similarity” assessed by the Better Carbon Calculator (you just need to give the name of the similarity function, but if you looked it up on the Web, for example, and want to give a more detailed definition then do so, and cite the source).
Instructor comments: At 0.5 pt each, (a) and (d) assess an ability/motivation to look up facts, and are supporting questions for (b) and (e).
(d) This question is ‘the inverse’ of (b). How would you have to change/adapt the k-means algorithm described in the text to organize the user profiles of the Better Carbon Calculator, with no changes (as best you can tell) to the Better Carbon Calculator as it is described in the paper. I would be happy if you simply stated some issues that would have to be addressed in doing this adaptation? But if you have thoughts of how the issues would be resolved, then by all means elaborate them.
(e) In a short paper like the Ross et al, it is often difficult to elaborate on all the things that a reader would require for full understanding. List terms, concepts, findings, etc that were mentioned/addressed in the paper that you feel you would have to look elsewhere for a fuller understanding or to otherwise get the answers (e.g., from the authors themselves). Your exercise grade will not be affected by your answer to the following: Did you actually pursue any such clarifications already? Tell me about it if so.
Instructor comments: (e) and (f) are intended to assess the ability of students to critically assess material that they read, and to highlight that uncertainty in their understanding of this material is an invitation to follow up. (e) and (f) are counted together, with credit given for points raised in (f) and/or (g) (using a discounted scale of 1.5, 1.0, 0.5, 0.5) that seemed a legitimate issue to the instructor. These points could be drawn from the following:
(i) inadequate description of experimental design, (ii) variance measures not reported for experimental results, (iii) implementation details of the BCC (it is the lack of great detail which makes the paper ideal in some ways for this assessment, allowing students to imagine a possible implementation), but other points are possible.
In the case where parts (e)+(f) fell short of the 3.5 pts possible discussed so far, I examined the marked up hardcopy to see if there was commentary there that would justify additional points.
Up to 0.5 point is given if student indicates that they went beyond the source documents given one week in advance of the exercise. This is indicative of “recognition” for need for life-long learning
(f) Are there any of issues that give you pause in believing that the Better Carbon Calculator would be advantageous relative to other calculators, or at all. An issue may be something you identified in (f) as something that you needed more clarification about, or it could be something that the paper itself identified, or something else.
A mass production Pandora console.
A prototype Pandora on the left, compared to a production Pandora on the right.
Much of the early Pandora community was formed at the GP32X forms,[1] where the team making the console began polling users about their ideal console by 2007.[2]
The Pandora was mostly made in either the UK or Germany, with some plastics being sourced from China.[3] This choice increased costs, but was made so the developers could be close to production.[4]
The Pandora began shipping in May 2010.[5] Production of the Pandora ended in 2013, and was succeeded by the Pyra project.[6] Around 5,000 consoles were produced by 2013 before a large branch of the project was dissolved after 7 years of operation, though the German branch remained active.[7]
The schematics for the Pandora PCB were open sourced in 2014.[8]
The Pandora is notable for being among the first a community oriented consoles that actually made it to production. What is especially notable about the Pandora is successfully doing this in an era before widespread online crowdfunding and easy access to home rapid prototyping hardware, proving that mass production of a community oriented game console was possible, though with significant challenges and delays. Furthermore the Pandora was among the earliest open source oriented game consoles to run a fully featured operating system.
The Pandora cleverly took advantage of increasingly capable mobile oriented SOCs as a base for its design, a strategy that would later see widespread use in other mobile consoles and microconsoles.
The Pandora is powered by a ARM Cortex A8 processor clocked at one gigahertz.[6][9] The CPU is complimented by a PowerVR SGX 530 GPU clocked at 110 megahertz.[9][10]
The Pandora uses a 4.3" color TFT LCD resistive touchscreen with a resolution of 800 by 480 pixels.[9][8]
The Pandora was designed with special care in regards to audio capabilities. The system uses a Burr-Brown DAC to achieve an SNR of 100dB, as well as a built in microphone and stereo speakers.[3][9]
The user replaceable 4200 mAh capacity lithium ion polymer battery lasts about 10 hours of heavy use, or 20 hours of light use.[3][9]
At the time the Pandora had impressive connectivities capabilities for a handheld console. The Pandora has a full size USB 2.0 Type A port and dual SD card readers.[9] The Pandora has b/g Wi-Fi and Bluetooth 2.0 + EDR.[6]
The Pandora plays most open source Linux games that run on ARM.
As mentioned before, the Book does not properly introduce relations. In Mizar, a function is a special kind of Relation (see RELAT_1:def 1), so many facts that seem obvious about functions hold more generally for relations, and are therefore in RELAT_1 instead of FUNCT_1.
(a) The definition is equivalent to the one in Mizar (FINSET_1:def 1). If X is finite, then
(but not necessarily a certain range), a ManySortedSet of X is a total X-defined Function (PBOOLE). Then a sequence in Mizar (starting with
, then it can also be described as a sequence of A (NAT_1).
An indexed set family is a ManySortedSet, as described above. If just a set
TOPGEN_3:29 in combination with CARD_2:def 3 and CARD_1:50 shows that the cardinality of the 0-1-sequences is the same as the cardinality of REAL. TOPGEN_3:30 shows that that the reals are not denumerable.
Convex sets are defined by CONVEX1:def 2 (usable for TOP-REAL k, but not for Euclid k). The open/closed balls are clustered as convex in TOPREAL9. No reference for convexity of cells. #TODO Find it.
(i) is TBSP_1:def 7 or METRIC_6:def 3.
, is Der E (TOPGEN_1:def 3), which gives a second characterization via TOPGEN_1:17.
(g) is SUBSET_1:def 4, see also XBOOLE_0:def 5.
(h) is TOPGEN_1:def 10 in combination with TOPGEN_1:def 7. See also TOPS_1:5 and TOPGEN_1:28.
(j) given by TOPS_1:def 3 and TOPGEN_1:29.
Corrolary (for topological spaces and TOP-REAL n) No reference.
Corrolary (for topological spaces) is TOPS_1:3.
Corollary (for topological spaces) No reference.
, accumulation point variant.
First two clusterings. pathwise_connected -> connected in BORSUK_2, interval -> pathwise_connected in TOPALG_2. Now an interval has the described properties (XXREAL_2:80) and the given properties describe an interval (XXREAL_2:84). Note difference between XXREAL_2:def 12 and TOPALG_2:def 3.
The Liberty-Bell (Sent from Philadelphia to Atlanta, October 4, 1895)
Life. ("Before we knew thee thou wert with us; ay") Century v. 46 no. 6 p. 839 (October 1893); 1898 p. 1; 1916 v. 1 p. 5. Stanza break after line 8 (1916). Punctuation differences.
In that far time forgotten and obscure
We feebly uttered first our human cry.
Thou camest, our dull clay to glorify.
Each loss by the dark river: more and more
And find thee waiting on the farther shore.
The Little Lass—An Old-Time Ditty
Longing. Poet-Lore v. 10 no. 1 p. 25 (January 1898); 1898 p. 6; 1916 v. 2 p. 14. Punctuation differences.
The lilacs blossom at the door,
And they unclose.
For waiting long.
From dreams awakes?
Persephone?
The wintry sleep!
Love, Dost Thou Smile?
A Lover's "Litany to Pan"
Define a single-table database from given data storage requirements - 2016 CIE Syllabus p16
Choose and specify suitable data types - 2016 CIE Syllabus p16
Choose a suitable primary key for a database table - 2016 CIE Syllabus p16
Perform a query-by-example from given search criteria - 2016 CIE Syllabus p16
Liposomes are artificially constructed vesicles consisting of a phospholipid bilayer. First discovered in 1961 by Alec Bangham, a British scientist studying blood clotting, liposomes are now being studied for their potential in both laboratory techniques as well as medical applications. Of particular interest are their ability to cross cell membranes and to transport certain types of drugs to pre-designated locations within the human body. Structure of a liposome formed by a phospholipid bilayer.
Liposomes are spherical structures, usually between 15nm and 1000nm in diameter. Various targeting ligands can be attached to their surface to direct them to the appropriate sites within cells; these include, but are not limited to, membrane proteins.
It is important to differentiate liposomes from micelles; even though both of these macromolecular complexes are spherical and consist of lipids, a micelle is normally formed from ionized fatty acids, whereas a liposome consists of phospholipids. Furthermore, micelles consist of only a single layer of lipids, with their non-polar carbon tails clustered together at the center (therefore not allowing any water soluble compounds on the interior), whereas liposomes are constructed from a bilayer that does allow charged molecules on the inside. This is due to the presence of the hydrophilic glycerol-phosphate-alcohol heads of phospholipids, which define both the outer and inner surfaces of liposomes.
The Major Structural Components of Liposomes are: [1]
Phospholipids - Phospholipids are the main component of the liposome's membrane. The phospholipids used in liposomes are further categorized into natural and synthetic phospholipids. The most common phospholipid used is known as lecithin (also known as phosphatidylocholine) and is amphipathic.
Cholestorol - Cholesterol molecules in the membrane increases separation between choline head groups which reduces the normal hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interaction.
Liposomes can be classified into several types according to their following features:[2]
Note: Lamellae refers to the lipid bilayers.
Note: Refer to Diagram to Right for Better Idea.
Liposomes are frequently synthesized by mixing and dissolving the phospholipids in organic solvent, such as chloroform or a chloroform-methanol mixture. A clear lipid film is subsequently formed by removal of the solvent, and hydration of this film eventually leads to formation of large, multilamellar vesicles (LMVs). An LMV consists of more than one bilayer, creating a complex the structure of which has several layers, analogous to the structure of an onion. Each bilayer is separated from the next by water.
Smaller liposomes are produced by disrupting LMVs using sonication (agitation by sound-waves). This process yields small, unilamellar liposomes (SUVs) between 15nm and 50nm in diameter. These are not very stable and tend to form larger vesicles. Storing them above their phase transition temperature can help prevent formation of those larger vesicles.
In order to synthesize larger liposomes, the method of extrusion is commonly used. Following several freeze-thaw cycles, the lipid suspension (the LMV suspension) is forced through polycarbonate filters containing pores, which leads to formation of liposomes with diameters similar to the size of the pores. This technique, if employed with pores of approximately 100nm in diameter, allows for the formation of large, unilamellar vesicles (LUVs) approximately 120nm – 140nm in size. These sizes are significantly more reproducible than those achieved through sonication.
The study of phospholipid bilayers can help clarify several of their characteristics, such as their permeability under varying pH and temperature, their fluidity, and their electro conductivity. This is usually done with sheets of bilayers, which can be more easily generated and are more stable, not vesicles such as liposomes. However, liposomes have been found useful in studies of phase transitions and lattice spacing and were thus used for such purposes in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
The greatest potential of liposomes lies in the medical field, where their ability to deliver drugs and other compounds to specific areas of an organism are under active investigation. The basis for this ability is that the hydrophilic compounds contained by a liposome cannot pass through the hydrophobic core of the lipid bilayer, and are thus trapped on the inside. The attachment of glycosylated membrane proteins to the outside or the vesicle can help direct the liposome to the desired cells. These binding ligands may also be responsible for the fusion of the vesicle with the diseased cell. This process of drug delivery often lessens the toxicity of the drugs, which are sheltered from interaction with other non-target cells. Additionally, this mode of delivery can be more efficient, as long circulating liposomes may accumulate in a region of higher than average blood circulation, such as an inflammation site, a tumor, or other diseased areas.
Factors other than the membrane protein mediated fusion of vesicles to cellular membranes can contribute to the release of the compound contained in the liposome. An example of this is the pH-triggered permeability change of a heterogeneous liposome. Liposomes under certain pH conditions can become “leaky” and thereby release the compounds contained within. Doxorubicin, a cancer drug, is delivered to tumor cells by this mechanism, which does not affect overall liposome stability.
Since the 1960's Liposomes and their use in the medicinal field has been greatly explored by pharmaceutical companies. Liposomes have many advantages as a method of drug delivery. These advantages are as follows:
Liposomes are biocompatible, completely biodegradable, non-toxic, flexible, and nonimmunogenic.
Liposomes have both a lipophilic and aqueous environment making it useful for delivering hydrophobic, amphipathic, and hydrophilic medicines.
Liposomes with their layers encapsulates the drug and serves as a protection of the drug from the environment as well as acting as a sustained release mechanism. This encapsulation also serves to protect sensitive areas from the drug as well.
Liposomes are extremely versatile in the form which they may be administered. These forms include suspension, aerosol, gel, cream, lotion, and powder which can then by administered through most common routes of medicinal administration.
Liposomes are also flexible in their size, and as such they can enclose a wide size range of molecules.
Liposomes can aide with active targeting as it has flexibility in coupling with site-specific ligands.
Despite all the wonderful advantages, Liposomes do have some disadvantages when compared with other methods of drug delivery.
Liposomes may have leakage and fusion of encapsulated drugs.
The liposome phospholipid may undergo oxidation and hydrolysis.
Liposomes have a shorter half-life.
Liposomes have lower solubility.
In the 21st century the Internet is a pervasive presence in our lives, shaping them both for good and evil. It should not be surprising that the Internet may have motivated you to buy and use a computer to its maximum potential.
So, people "connect" to the Internet. Where is the Internet? The short answer is nowhere and everywhere. The nature of the Internet is not centralized, there is no specific place where the Internet exists. What we call "the Internet" is the ever-changing collection of computers that are all connected together and configured so that they can "talk" to each other. Your computer becomes part of the Internet every time you connect to it, and you usually connect to it through your internet service provider (ISP), and they are permanently connected.
The Internet is what you and others make it by creating a web page and uploading it onto a server. Your web page has now become a part of the Internet.
To define the term, the internet is a collection of many, many computers, including servers and desktop PCs, linked together to send and receive information.
The Internet and the World Wide Web
Another point that may need clarification is the difference between the Internet and the World Wide Web. People tend to use those terms interchangeably, but there is a difference. The Internet can provide a wide range of services, like web-pages, email, file transfers, instant messages — the list never ends. The World Wide Web (or just "Web"), refers to the collection of inter-linked web-pages, and web-browsing refers to the exploration of those web-pages.
Web browsing is probably the most accessible beginners' Internet activity. It is the act of viewing textual or image-based content using the World-Wide Web over the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP). You are doing this as you read this text.
All recent versions of Windows come with a version of Internet Explorer, and most of them are inextricably integrated with the operating system. The current version, bundled with Windows Vista , is Internet Explorer 8. Windows 98 ships with version 4, and Me or 2000 are integrated with 5.0 or 5.5 (the difference being that 5.5 has support for more advanced security measures).
Internet Explorer is not the only browser, and not necessarily the best. Although it's still by far the most common, many people point out that it's difficult to use and may expose your computer to security risks. If you plan to use the World Wide Web, it's highly recommended that you at least try out one of the alternatives:
Mozilla Firefox is simple and reliable, and one of the most popular alternative browsers.
Linux users sometimes want to use command-line, or textual, browsers such as Lynx or Links2 where a graphical user interface is unavailable, for instance when installing, but most browsers are graphical.
When learning to use a browser (graphical or textual) most efficiently, it can be useful to learn keyboard commands, as well as the discrete uses of the Left and Right mouse button. If your mouse has a wheel in the middle, it can be useful to scroll, or for browsers with tabbed browsing support, opening a new tab. Check your settings so you can get the best use of this tool.
The vast majority of Web browsing is done among sites you might already know. The first one that you may have seen is your home page. When the browser is out of the box, it may direct to the company (Microsoft for Internet Explorer, Netscape for Netscape and allied products), or it will direct to your Internet Service Provider (the people who manage your connection). You can also have a home page of your choosing. If you are surfing at school or work, your school or work will have a page, as will the library or the Internet cafe.
Many web services, such as email, internet shopping or online banking
It is important to choose a good password, that is, a password that
The following types of passwords should never be used. They can
Dictionary words, common phrases and names in any language, even if combined with numbers. For example:
fG4ir5, bmw, cat, foo, cng56, girl9, ...
Passwords containing a modified version of the user name. (e.g. if the user name is "martin88", a password such as "martmart" or "nitram")
Passwords containing personal information about the user or the user's family such as dates of birth, social security numbers, number plates, pet names and addresses. For example:
12021967, 12_2_1967, 12Feb67, y67d12m2, abbeyRoad, ...
FQr7erfn5, QWd3fTr6U, rgi82eJiFF0, GI$87d90%nj, kEirt4Pw, ...
A convenient way of creating a password is thinking of a "pass phrase" and then abbreviating it
"Roses are red, violets are blue, I'm a bad poet, so are you" becomes "RarVabIabp5ay", where the first word of each line is represented by a capital and "S" becomes a "5" because both characters look similar.
"I use this website to buy cheap flights from Stanstead airport" becomes "IutwtbcffSa"
Using special characters such as *&^%$ also improves a password's safety. However,
If in doubt, leave them out and make the password longer.
Another convenient way to creating a good password is to change the letters to numbers or symbols in a short phrase. For example, if I wanted to use the phrase "Pepsi Man", I could simply change a few letters to numbers or symbols and get "P3p$1_m4n" an good and easy to use password that is accepted by most websites.
A very useful idea for a home page can be a search engine. In a search engine, you can type in words or phrases in regard to a site or topic you may know something or nothing about. There have been many search engines developed over time. Since 1998, the most popular search engine is Google.
The principles to use all search engines are the same. Search engines differ in how much, how widely and how deeply they cover the Internet. The Internet is not just the World Wide Web, it can be Telnet, Usenet, Tymnet, Gopher and File Transfer Protocol. So keep that in mind!
So when looking for a website that we already know, we type in http://www into the box at the top below the menus. Or we would go to Open Location and press Control+L (all demonstrations from this point are conducted in Firefox 1.0.1).
Once you are in Google type in the box "Windows XP For Beginners". Then press Enter/Return or click on Google Search. The button next to it, I'm Feeling Lucky, will take you to the first site that google finds such as "BBC" will take you to "http://www.bbc.co.uk". When we 'felt lucky', we clicked on this site: http://northville.lib.mi.us/tech/tutor/welcome.htm, which will reinforce many of the concepts we have gone through and learnt.
Many sites have come up. We want to evaluate the ones which give us the most information about what we want to know.
Google gives us the name of the website (written out in full, so you can recall it later; if you can't put your mouse over the link's name), the first few words of the website we want to go to (usually 2 lines long), how big the file is (measured in kilobytes and useful for downloading, especially if you have limited time and resources), and two links called 'Cached' (which shows past versions of the website in the event the present version may not work) and 'Similar Pages' which will give similar pages. In the case of our 'Never Used a Computer Before' search, we found 30 sites similar to the 'I Feel Lucky' site, which incidentally is the first one. Many people, when they search and research, click on the first 10 files they see and gain information that way. This is not always the best thing to do, because most search engines have some form of ranking. Some of this ranking is sorted out by the user patterns of human beings, and others by the vagaries of servers. Some of this is sorted out by advertising. Google is a popular search engine for the reason it is not influenced by advertising.
How do we narrow down the search? On the right, there is a small link called Advanced Search. Advanced Search, as implied, is very powerful. It is something like a similar feature in your word processor or database programme and even in your operating system.
Advanced Search is here (if you are not located in the United States replace '.com' with '.com.au', '.co.uk', '.de', '.fr' or some other domain suffix.)
The first four text boxes are to do with restricting the terms of the search with words or phrases - adding, delimiting or deleting. You may well be familiar with this from your word processor's Find and Replace function.
Web pages are in many different languages, file formats, dates and domains. To protect yourself and other people, you may want to use SafeSearch. Most things searched on the Web are 'sex' and 'porn(ography)' in all their forms, so for work and study, SafeSearch would be recommended. Otherwise, no filtering will do the trick. Google is able to limit all these things.
If you need more help then you can look at Advanced Search Tips:
You might also like to find similar or linked pages to your page.
There are also technology-related searches for Macintosh, Microsoft and Linux (for example).
E-mail (commonly referred to as email - either spelling is acceptable) is a method of sending messages with a computer. Sending email costs nothing extra over your Internet connection.
You send email either with an email client such as Microsoft Outlook
, Mozilla Thunderbird or with a web-based email system. The basic principle is the same for both:
The email is written and sent to a server with an email address attached.
The server looks at the domain name of the email (the section following the @) and sends the email on its way through the internet.
The receiving server receives the email. It looks at the username of the email (the section preceding the @) and stores the email in an appropriate folder on its hard disc.
The recipient connects to the Internet and logs into their mail client or webmail site.
The receiving server then allows the message to be downloaded by the recipient.
All this often happens in a second or less. The speed depends on the speed of the two previously mentioned servers and all the ISP servers in between, the amount of internet traffic, and the distance between the two servers.
Web-based email is very convenient compared to email accessed via a client, but almost never has the featureset of clients.
Here is how to sign up for a Yahoo! Mail account. Yahoo! was one of the very first web-based email companies.
Having got to the Yahoo site! (the American one), find 'Sign up'.
The splash screen shows us three choices: Yahoo Mail, Yahoo Mail Plus and Personal Yahoo. The one that will be easiest for our purposes will be Yahoo Mail.
It is always a good idea to read the Privacy Policy [1], and Terms of Service [2]. Look at everything marked with an asterisk and read the Terms of Service very very carefully. (Even print them out if you can't read them: there is a printable version).
The most important thing is to have a user name and password:
For this demonstration we'll type in neverusedacomputer@yahoo.com where the pattern is username@provider.com.
You can make up your own password
Follow the tips and hints.
Hopefully you won't forget your password, but 'If You Forget Your Password' is next.
Now that you have remembered your password, you will have to look at Captcha to verify your registration or account. It will be different every time. If you can see it, type it.
Now you have your Yahoo account and you can sign in.
Many of these principles and practices apply to any Internet Service Provider or free service. It is interesting to compare similarities and differences. The basis of getting 'free' e-mail can and will change over time, especially if you intend to keep your address for longer than a month and will use it for many different things. Most people do keep their e-mail addresses for life or as long as is practicable, and will try to maintain continuity over the services they most frequently use. However, there is a danger of forgetfulness or apathy in regard to less frequently used or one-time only services. Ideally, a portal such as Yahoo or Hotmail will provide a very functional and neat e-mail address and many safe explorations on the information superhighway, like message boards, chat and directory links.
There are many programs designed for reading e-mail. A good one is Mozilla Thunderbird and it is meant to work alongside Mozilla Firefox. There are also Outlook and Outlook Express, Eudora and others. Those programs do not need a browser, they are capable of downloading and reading email on their own — they are stand-alone.
One of the main ways that computer viruses propagate is via e-mail. This is usually done by attachments — files that are attached to the e-mail message sent to you. If you don't know the person sending you the email, it's advisable to be careful and not open the attachment that accompanies the e-mail (if any). The types of files that can be infected by viruses are files whose filenames end with .exe (executable programs), .bat, .vbs, .doc (Microsoft Word documents), .xls (Microsoft Excel files), .ppt (Microsoft PowerPoint presentations) and others. Even if you do know the person sending you the e-mail message, they might not know that their computer is infected with a virus and they may unknowingly be sending you infected files, so it's always a good idea to have virus-scanning software. Finally, watch out for files that have names like file.jpg.bat. The .jpg part of the filename is there to fool you into believing this is a picture file, but it is almost certainly something nasty (due to the .bat ending).
One final point you should be careful about: many graphical e-mail programs have a "preview mode" as the default mode for reading email messages. In this mode, the contents of the email are presented to you immediately when you click on the message title in the list of messages. In the past years, we have seen viruses that infect your system immediately when you just view the email message that carries them. It's advisable to disable the preview mode so that you have more control on which messages you want to view: that would give you the chance of deleting the emails you think look suspicious before even viewing their contents (yes, you can often judge from their titles).
Common sense in the real world applies online. If an offer sounds too good to be true, it probably is.
A good idea is to research an offer before you accept it.
A typical scam letter expresses an urgent need for a person to do them a favor. This usually involves some type of inheritance. These scammers are very good, and their letters sound sincere and legitimate. They are not. They also will target anyone who they think has money. There are even reports of religious figures being scammed. One occurred with a Pastor who was scammed into thinking that a Nigerian man had an inheritance of a few million dollars. However, a stipulation was placed on the inheritance that he had to give half of it away to charity but he didn't have the initial money to get to the location of the money in order for it to be released. The Pastor trusted him and in exchange for fronting the $10,000 or so USD, the scammer was to give him a few million for his church for the trouble. Unfortunately, the Pastor was scammed, he never received the money and was out $10,000.
First of all, thanks for checking out this book on DarkBASIC. It's the first WikiBook on the subject of DarkBASIC Programming. Not everyone can program, but in the information age I believe that it's necessary for everyone to gain the skills to use different types of technology. Especially, computers and programming. Today and for the next 30 days you'll learn a lot about DarkBASIC Programming and a lot about what you can accomplish using a computer. DarkBASIC is all about making DirectX do your evil bidding and your domination of the world of computer game programming. I hope you read and contribute to this book, as well as rant because then I can fix stuff others will insult. I hope you enjoy!
In this tutorial I'm going to assume you have no prior programming experience, or else you wouldn't be reading this book. You would pick up the manual, compare it to C++, and program in DarkBASIC easily. First of all not to scare you but game programming is not easy and secondly you are not going to make a killer or clone or whatever in DarkBASIC for a long time. I'm also going to assume you have v1.0 of the "classic" or non-pro edition of DarkBASIC or else with another version you'll have some problems running this code unfortunately. Programming is not a new concept, and there are many hundreds of languages such as DarkBASIC out there, one such programming language comparable to DarkBASIC is BlitzBASIC, and you may have heard of Visual Basic.
This isn't a stupid question. Programming is not just making applications for Windows, or talking a language your computer understands. Programming is input, process, and output. If you take computer sciences, chances are you'll be doing program outlines, but right now you're a hobbyist programmer so let's keep it simple. Not all of us know VC++ or Pascal. DarkBASIC is game oriented. You can make applications in it, but it's harder. There are no message boxes in the version we'll be using. But DarkBASIC is easy and fun, especially for beginner's and junior programmers. Instead of having to write 1000+ lines of code to put a 2d character on screen you'll write one, instead of writing a massive program to make a cube spin you'll write a simple and human readable one in 20 or less lines. If you have no patience, take it slow and easy and don't move on until you understand it all or else you'll be bald by the time you finish this wikibook. I will say this: this book is a work in progress. I'll be finished as soon as possible so, bare with me please. Programming is simply entering lines of code that once compiled, or is run, tells the computer to follow out a task until it's done. What's involved is input, or you programming; processing or computing; and finally output, what you get to see.
So you know: A coder is another word for a programmer.
All programs follow the above method, since every program is (1) certainly programmed, (2) is certainly compiled, and (3) certainly displays results. Now, just what is code then? Code is the recipe for your program. Computers won't do a task wrong. You'll do the task
There are many sorts of errors also! The most common is called a syntax error . A syntax error are mistakes in your program's code. A programming language like a written language is incorrect if it contains things that are gibberish. Like in English, asdfjdj is not a word, it's gibberish. Just like in DarkBASIC, print is a command, where as printf is not. Another kind of error is called a run-time error, this is when your program compiles but you don't get the results you want. Such as if your writing is sloppy, the word "hello" may look like jello and the person will get the wrong information from it. Run-time errors are things that aren't suppose to happen, like when in your favorite video game, when a character can sometimes walk through a wall, or the program crashing when this happens.
The process of fixing your mistakes is called debugging. You'll get familiar with this; half your time or more will be spent doing debugging. So as much as possible, save, compile, debug, and run. It'll save you lots of anger, and stress. Finally remember this: with computers, the language goes through assembly or getting put into binary, and sent back to your programming language. If the binary pattern is correct, then you have no syntax errors. Remember, 0s are off or false, and 1s are on or true. Remember when I said assembly above?
Well, here's how it works. First off, you compile or check syntax, then the code you entered passes through what's called machine language or assembly (its name changes depending on what its doing when it's compiling its assembler). Then it becomes pure binary (which is not human readable but meant for computers; they cannot understand anything other than 0s and 1s). Then it is sent back to the compiler where if the binary matches what's correct, it gets executed. If it doesn't, you get a syntax error and must debug. Now, don't quote me on that but that's basically what happens. So now you're ready to begin programming in DarkBASIC and will know what I talk about.
One more thing: DarkBASIC is not case sensitive. If you don't know what this means, it means that DarkBASIC does not distinguish between upper-case letters and lower-case ones.
Reflect, and discuss the ways in which the agronomic, management-related and mechanical soil conservation methods influence the driving soil erosion process factors you identify from chapter 1: • Choose three conservation methods you consider most effective• explain their mode of action in a concise way• Write an one page paper on your results.
The squared coefficient of determination is a measure of how well the explanatory variables predict the explained variable. It is the proportion of variability in the dependent variable that is accounted for by the linear relationship with the independent variables. It provides a measure of how well future outcomes are likely to be predicted by the model.
How to add new page?
How to remove existing page?
How to rollback my changes?
How do I test my page on my web site?
Go to your website (which suppose to have extRouter) and type the Page ID. Below would be a sample. If my page id is called "page_1", i'll just have to type like below
My website is not automatically updated after I have changed it. What happen?
In order to improve the performance and security of the website, the extRouter will contain certain caching in its own local database. If you decided that you wish to update the website base on what you have already configure in anyPiece, feel free to type /flush. Below would be the sample of the url
1 The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him to show to his servants things which must shortly come to pass. And he sent and signified it by his angel to his servant John, 2 who bore record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ, and of all things that he saw.people have lost there faith the world has become polluted by man and sin. A cleansing must happen,man must fall in order to get back up. Humanity as we know it lies in the hands of the morning star.
Commentary: The opening indicates the order of the message's transmission: a) from God, b) to Jesus, c) to an angel, d) to John, e) to the servants of God. While John received the actual visions, however, we only have his descriptions of them. One senses that words are inadequate to describe what he actually saw. John is delivering this message to the servants of God. Note well the plurality of the word, servant. It was not God's intention for John to be the only one to obtain the revelation and keep it to himself. God desired that the people in the church, his "servants" would gain understanding. Those in today's churches also have a biblical right to understand the message being delivered in this book. The verse goes on to say that the things contained within the prophecy will happen "shortly." This has variously been understood as from the perspective of the audience (anything from minutes to years), in historical terms (hundreds or thousands of years), or from the point of view of an eternal Deity (for whom 10,000 years would be nothing).
The author identifies himself as John which many people have suggested is actually the John of the Gospel of John. However, scholars have shown this to be unlikely. The Gospel of John and Revelation have two very different writing styles. The authors use often use different words to express the same concept. An example is the word used for lamb. In Revelation, the word arnion is used, whereas the author of John uses another word for lamb. The two books also use the same word to mean different things. Examples include ethnos/ethne which refers to Gentiles or all nations in Revelation, but in The Gospel of John the same word is used to refer to the Jews. Similarly, Kosmos in Revelation is used to refer to the created world and in John it is used to refer to the world of humanity. Additional evidence that the John of Revelation is not the John of the Gospel of John is that they often spell the same word differently, Jerusalem being a prime example of this. In Revelation Jerusalem is spelled Ierosalem and in John it is spelled Ierosoluma. While there is no conclusive proof of who the John of Revelation was, it is the scholarly consensus that he was not the John of the Gospel of John.[1]
3 Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein, for the time is at hand.
Commentary: The blessing of Verse 3 carries a threefold condition: Read, understand (hear), and obey (keep those things). God gave prophecies to be obeyed, not simply to be discussed and debated. "The time is at hand" simply means that no further things must occur before the fulfillment of the prophecies. It does not mean the time was (or is) imminent.
The mention of reading and hearing may also be an indication that the document was intended to be read to the congregations to whom it was addressed. Early churches would read the entire book of revelation every time they met, from beginning to end, this could be because this is the only book out of the entire Bible that states a blessing will be given to those who read it, listen to it, and obey it. We are to act in one's faith about what we hear during Revelation.
4 John, to the seven churches which are in Asia: Grace be to you, and peace, from him which is, and which was, and which is to come, and from the seven spirits which are before his throne, 5a and from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, and the first begotten of the dead, and the prince of the kings of the earth.
Commentary: "Asia" was a Roman province in what is now western Turkey. This verse is evidence for the author being the Apostle John. John became the leader of the church at Ephesus after the death of Paul and the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans in A.D. 70. The other churches to whom letters were given were daughter churches established by the church at Ephesus. John would therefore have exercised pastoral influence over them, and it then makes sense that his letters were addressed to them. It also explains the absence of letters to other major churches, as John did not have leadership of them. The benediction refers to the Godhead, which is eternal in existence. The phrase "is, was, is to come" comes from the translation of the Hebrew Yahweh, which means "I am". The seven Spirits are somewhat cryptic. The number 7, in the Bible, means spiritually complete. They probably represent the spirits of the seven churches embodied within the Holy Spirit. (Verse 5a): Jesus Christ is identified as the faithful witness who revealed the plan of God, the first to be resurrected from the dead, and the future worldwide ruler of the Millennial Kingdom. (Note "prince" of kings rather than "king" of kings).
Witherington says, "A major point of this entire book is that heaven and earth are very close indeed; in fact they are juxtaposed in such a way that heaven is already active in and for earth and will descend to it at the end in the from of the New Jerusalem." He asserts that it is very unlikely that John would have divided the holy spirit up seven different ways. Rather, he draws on early Jewish texts that refer to seven archangels before the throne of God (Tob. 12:15, 1 En.20.1-8, and 4 Qserek) that are the eyes of the great King keeping watch over the church of the lamp. This image is to ensure that Christ is not distant but very near among the lampstands (or seven congregations). (Witherington 2003)
5b To him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, 6 and has made us kings and priests unto God and his Father, to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.
Now he is here again not to shed his blood for sin, he walks the earth holding the keys to hell and death
Commentary: These verses are praise to Jesus Christ, whose sacrifice on the cross gave us redemption from our sins, and (Verse 6) made us acceptable to enter the Holy Presence of the Godhead. John gives Jesus eternal praise, glory, and authority. Amen in this context means "Let it be so".
7 Behold, He comes with clouds, and every eye shall see Him, and they also which pierced Him, and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of Him. Even so, Amen.
Commentary: Christ will come with the clouds (Daniel 7:13) in the sky. This may refer to the final return to establish His Millennial Kingdom, not to the Rapture. Everyone will see Him (Matthew 24:30). Those who pierced Him may be those who have rejected Him as their Savior. Everyone who is without His grace will be, according to one interpretation, sorry and fearful (wail). "Even so, Amen" in this context could be rendered "Let it be done, whether people are ready or not".
8 “I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending,” says the Lord, “which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.”
Commentary: John clearly demonstrates his high Christology by placing the divine name on the lips of Jesus. By claiming to be the Alpha and the Omega (or in more contemporary terms, the A and the Z), Jesus unites himself with God. This is seen both by the fact that within Revelation, Jesus and God are referred to equally by these titles and by the allusion to Isaiah 44:6 (“I am the first and last, and besides me there is no God”), with which John was surely familiar. From the onset, Christ is unified with God, which gives Christ the authority to proclaim the rest of the vision – the Omega half of history. [2]
Commentary: John's exile to Patmos, together with the phrase, "your brother and companion in tribulation," implies a time of persecution. This is further indicated by the mention of a martyrdom in Pergamos[2:13] and other passages in the messages to the churches.[cf. 2:3; 2:9-10] John was exiled to Patmos because of his preaching and his testimony of Jesus Christ, having irritated the Roman government by doing so. Tribulation here refers to the present sufferings of believers, not the end times. Believers live in the present (Church Age) form of God's Kingdom, waiting and enduring until His return.
10 I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and heard behind me a great voice, as of a trumpet, 11 saying, “I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last,” and, “What you see, write in a book, and send it to the seven churches which are in Asia: to Ephesus, and to Smyrna, and to Pergamos, and to Thyatira, and to Sardis, and to Philadelphia, and to Laodicea.”
Commentary: "In the spirit" means John was in a state of receiving prophetic revelation from God. "The Lord's Day" refers to Sunday as the new Sabbath day for Christians, and the only other place this term (kuriakos) is used is in I Corinthians 11:20. Again, Alpha and Omega, the first and the last are applied to Jesus Christ. The seven churches introduced here are expanded upon in Chapters 2 and 3.
The seven churches were in the Roman province of "Asia," an area which is in western Turkey today. Why these seven churches were chosen to be the recipients of the Revelation, we can only guess. Yet it is clear that what Jesus says to them is meant ultimately for the Church in all times and places, for after each church’s message, seven times in all, Jesus says, “He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches” (2:7, 11, 17, 29; 3:6, 13, 22).
12 And I turned to see the voice that spoke with me. And being turned, I saw seven golden candlesticks.
Commentary: The seven candlesticks are said in Verse 20 to represent the seven churches. The number seven plays a prominent role in Revelation. Many scholars believe that the number seven, when given symbolic interpretation, represents completeness and perfection.
At this point the Jewish menorah (containing seven candles) was a common symbol of Judaism. In the vision John is seeing the seven lights are separated. Perhaps symbolizing a full representation of God's people in each church. (Witherington 2003).
13 And in the midst of the seven candlesticks one like unto the Son of Man, clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girded about the chest with a golden girdle. 14 His head and His hair were white like wool, as white as snow, and His eyes were as a flame of fire, 15 And His feet like to fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace, and His voice as the sound of many waters.
Commentary: "Like unto the Son of Man" means the figure looked to John like Jesus Christ glorified. Son of Man is a messianic title that Jesus Himself frequently used. The garments depicted here are the robes of a judge. Christ has judgmental authority over all creation. The white hair signifies justice, purity, and glory. Fire is often associated with judgment in the Scriptures( rf. Matthew 5:22, 2 Peter 3:7). The brass and the voice symbolize power and authority.Brass is a metal that has a Biblical connection with sacrifice (e.g. the brazen altar of sacrifice in Israel: Exodus 27:1-6). Jesus was the ultimate sacrifice on the cross for the sins of the world. Brass is also known to be a very strong metal. Therefore to compare Christ's feet to that of fine brass demonstrates His power, permanence, and stability. The seven candlesticks again represent the churches, and Christ's position in the midst of them shows He is the root and leader of the churches.
16 And He had in His right hand seven stars, and out of His mouth went a sharp two-edged sword, and His countenance was as the sun shines in his strength.
Commentary: The seven stars are identified in Verse 20 as the angels of the seven churches. The sharp sword is a metaphor for the Word of God, the power of which is sharp and certain. His face shone as the sun, so that John has difficulty looking at it. Compare this to Exodus 33 and 34, in which Moses experiences much the same thing when he asks to see God. Moses returns from the mountain with his own face glowing, much to the amazement of the people.
17 And when I saw Him, I fell at His feet as dead. And He laid his right hand upon me, saying to me, “Fear not. I am the first and the last."
Commentary: At the first sight of Jesus, John’s unworthiness to the almighty one causes John to fall to his feet. This happens three times in the book of Daniel (8:17-18, 10:9-10, 10:15). John's initial reaction is fear. As He did many times with the apostles, Jesus tells John not to fear. This command to not fear is present in the Bible 365 times, give or take. Jesus again states His identity to reassure John that nothing can happen without His approval. The mentioning of Christ being the first and the last (Alpha and Omega) that is mentioned many times in the prophecy of Isaiah (41:4, 44:6, 48:12) and Repeated again in Revelation 2:8 as well as 22:13. This mentioning of the first and the last shows that God encompasses all things from beginning to end and all things in-between. God is the beginning and end of time, and the first and the last of all creation. This verse shows that God is transcendent of all things, and all time (Hebrews 13:8) and shows his sovereignty as well as his divinity.
18 "I am He that lives, and was dead, and behold, I am alive for evermore. Amen. And I have the keys of hell and of death."
Commentary: Christ continues His affirmation, leaving absolutely no doubt that He is God. He was dead at the crucifixion, He rose from the dead, and He is alive forevermore. Amen used here means "I tell you it is so". The keys of hell and of death symbolize His authority to judge the living and the dead of all ages. At His command, death and hell will give up their captives.
19 "Write the things which you have seen, and the things which are, and the things which shall be hereafter."
Commentary: Verse 19 is the key to the layout of Revelation. The book has three main divisions:
"the things which you have seen": John's vision of Christ (ch 1);
"the things which are": the messages to the churches (ch 2-3);
"the things which shall be hereafter": the predictions for the future (ch 4-22)
The "things which shall be hereafter" are the things that will happen as the Day of the Lord approaches and arrives. These things will have a definite "buildup" sequence which the careful reader can see, and which will prevent the true believers from being taken "as by a thief in the night".
20 "The mystery of the seven stars which you saw in My right hand, and the seven golden candlesticks: The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches, and the seven candlesticks which you saw are the seven churches.”
Commentary: The Greek word "angelos" means "messenger" and can be interpreted to refer to either a heavenly or an earthly being. This is determined by the context. The seven stars, therefore, may represent either angels assigned to the churches, or the earthly leaders of the churches. Christ holding them in His right hand signifies they have His approval. The candlesticks, as already stated, represent the churches themselves. Christ standing in the midst of them shows His leadership of the churches.
6 Bf1! A strange looking move, undeveloping the Bishop, however White wisely retreats the Bishop as tactics advantage still remain on b5.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bc4 Nf6 4.Ng5 d5 5.exd5 b5 6.Bf1
h6 40%, Nd4 40%, Qxd5 15%, Nxd5 4%
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
In 1802, the mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss published a formula to calculate the date of the first day of Pesach in any year. Albert Einstein is said to have remarked of the formula that not only could nobody but Gauss have produced it, but it would never have occurred to anyone but Gauss that such a formula was possible.
It is trivial to adapt the formula to find the dates of the other main festivals; for example, Purim is always 30 days before Pesach and Rosh Hashana is 163 days after Pesach.
Note that in the very long term, due to calendar drift, it may be hard to know which year of the Julian calendar this Nisan 15th is in. (See Mathematics of the Jewish Calendar/The long-term accuracy of the calendar.)
Hamburger, M. (1896) Crelle's Journal, 116, p.90 gave the first rigorous proof.
Candidates should be able to properly patch a kernel to add support for new hardware. This objective also includes being able to properly remove kernel patches from already patched kernels.
The following is a partial list of the used files, terms and utilities:
If you add want to use the same piece of code in multiple programs (i.e. a sensor board interface, or a common algorithm), it may be useful to create a module. Such a module can be included and used in all your programs.
The Khepera III Toolbox provides you with a module template and a Makefile.
To check if everything is all right, try to compile the new module:
This should create an archive my_new_module.a.
You can now edit the files my_new_module.h and my_new_module.c. In case your module is more complex, you can of course create additional my_new_module_*.c and my_new_module_*.h files (note the prefix my_new_module_!). All these additional files will automatically be compiled and available to the programs including the module.
A module cannot be executed by itself. To test a module, you must create a program that includes this module. To include your module, add the following line to the Makefile of your program:
This will tell the compiler to look for the *.h files of that module, and to integrate the my_new_module.a archive into the program. (If your program needs multiple modules, simply add them on the same line. Note that all module folders must reside at the same location.)
Now, you can use the functions of the module in your program, and test them therewith. Note that whenever you change code in your module, you need to first recompile the module, and then recompile the program.
The name of the binary executable can be changed in the Makefile by modifying the line
Note that the archive should always have the same name as the project folder, suffixed by .a.
A module can include other modules. To include standard modules, add the following line (with the modules you want to add, of course) to the Makefile:
To include other modules that you wrote on your own, add
Just as for programs, we strongly suggest using a versioning system such as SVN (Subversion) to store your Khepera III modules. SVN is probably the most prominent system today, and easy to set up and use.
If you are using a versioning system, you should check in the following files of your module:
The compiled archive (*.a) (such that a compiled copy is available for those who don't have a compiler set up)
Any additional files that the program needs
Depression, or major depressive disorder is one of the most prevalent mood disorders to affect people, with a high proportion of people experiencing this at some stage throughout their life.[1] The aetiology of this disease is complex and it has numerous causes and triggers, including genetic predisposition, cognitive factors (such as a pessimistic outlook) and environmental stimuli (stress) and is often the result of an imbalance of neurotransmitters (notably norepinephrine and seratonin) in the central nervous system.[2] Women are more at risk of major depressive disorder, than men, with the rate of depression in women being 2 to 3 times that in men. The risk for young women is higher at an earlier age and is far greater than the risk for young males. Numerous studies suggest that dance movement therapy, or participation in ballroom (recreational) dance classes may assist in alleviation of the symptoms of depression, and after only short treatment durations of three months.[3]
Whilst it is normal for people to experience ups and downs in mental state, persistence in reduced mood, feelings of sadness, and a loss of enthusiasm for activities that would typically be enjoyable indicate cause for concern. Other symptoms that may indicate depression include feelings of worthlessness, despair and guilt, fluctuations in weight, alterations in sleeping patterns, concentration issues, anxiety, irritability and muscle weakness.[2][4]
The diagnosis of depression is made following a thorough clinical interview, in conjunction with a mental status examination, according to criteria in the DSM-IV. This disease is often diagnosed in conjunction with other mental illnesses and other comorbidities, including anxiety and substance abuse disorders. The elderly and also adolescents are at the highest risk of developing depression, although those people living in lower socioeconomic areas are frequently diagnosed with depression.[1]
Conventionally, the treatment for depression involves treating the symptoms. There are a number of different methods used to treat this disease.
Pharmacotherapy – antidepressants and other drugs may be used in an attempt to restore the balance between different chemicals (neurotransmitters) in the brain. These are difficult to prescribe, as each individual may require different drug levels, and they may cause side effects or only partial relief from symptoms, which greatly impact patient adherence to the drugs. Many antidepressant pharmaceuticals are also quite expensive, and therefore adherence to courses of medication among those in lower socio economical areas is often quite low.[1]
Psychotherapy – including counselling, cognitive-behavioural therapy and family therapy is commonly prescribed to treat depression. These treatments involve redirecting depressive thoughts, or altering behaviour to reduce the symptoms of depression. This type of therapy is often prescribed in conjunction with pharmacotherapies.[5] Like many pharmacotherapy drugs, psychotherapies often provide incomplete relief from depression symptoms, so many patients stop participating in psychotherapies after only about three weeks. Similarly, the cost associated with psychotherapy may affect patient’s utilisation of these sorts of treatments.[6]
Exercise – This is an alternatively prescribed treatment for depression, with a growing evidence base, particularly in patients who are overweight or obese. In addition to symptom-reducing effects, exercise, as a treatment for depression shows an excellent rate of adherence, therefore increasing the benefits from prescribed exercise regimes. However, once the course of prescribed exercise is over, the patients often stop exercising again.[7] Exercise has also been seen to be particularly successful when it is used in conjunction with conventional treatments.[8] Dance movement therapies can be seen as a specialised branch of exercise interventions.
Dance as exercise can be described as a set of rhythmical movements, performed according to temporal, as well as spatial parameters. There is a distinct relationship between the psychological and physiological responses to moving to music, and these work to alter mood, leading to increased mental health as well as the physical health benefits, as similar to exercise.[6] Indeed, the use of dance as a form of exercise is important, not only to increase aerobic power, muscle endurance, strength, flexibility and improve gait, but also as a means to decrease stress and anxiety, by improving self-esteem, mind-body coordination and overall psychological health.[9] It is also useful as a means of treatment as it requires minimal expense and equipment and also may seem less threatening to non-active or elderly individuals, than conventional forms of exercise.[10]
Dance/movement therapy is slightly different to recreational dance in that it is run by a trained dance/movement therapist, rather than a dance teacher. It incorporates the emotional expression and creativity that comes with dance as an art form, and the physical fitness and health benefits of conventional exercise, with the methods and understandings of psychotherapy. This means that dance/movement therapy can be altered easily to suit each patient or group’s individual needs, and it is this adaptability that makes this type of therapy ideal for treating mental illness patients.[11] This may make it less adaptable to other spaces than recreational dance, but participants receive greater benefits, as far as improvements to mental health go, as classes are structured to target specific effects from the course of dance/movement therapy.[12]
It has been shown that dance can cause significant changes in plasma serotonin and dopamine concentrations and decrease the severity and symptoms of depression. The psychological effects of a dance intervention may be greater than those in normal exercise programs, due to the use of music.[12] Dance movement therapy is useful, as it appeals greatly to females, particularly young females, who are at high risk of developing depression, but may not be interested in participation in conventional forms of exercise. It seems that reductions in depression symptoms can be seen after only a period of a three month dance/movement therapy intervention.[13] However, in the current studies, it is not shown if these decreased symptoms are permanent or not, as no follow up is ever made.[3]
A minimum of 2-3 dance/movement therapy sessions per week for a period of three months has been shown to reduce the symptoms of depression, especially in adolescents.[13] However, the need for further participation in dance/movement interventions, following the initial three month set of sessions, is unclear. Given the health benefits, which are similar to those that occur with regular exercise, it can be inferred that further involvement in dance/movement interventions or recreational dance may increase the benefits and improve the longevity of relief from depression symptoms. Dance/movement interventions, show greater reduction of depression symptoms than recreational dance, although ballroom dancing does provide numerous benefits to depression and other mental illness patients.[12]
Glasses are used to serve drinks in. Below are outlined some of the different glass styles you may see.
Pint: A standard, all-purpose beer glass with slightly tapered walls. Used primarily for English- and American-style lagers and ales ranging from light lagers to imperial stouts. Pint glasses come in two sizes: Imperial 20 ounce (570 mL) or US 16 ounce (470 mL) pints.
Pilsener: A long, narrow glasses with walls that taper towards the base. Used to consolidate volatiles and support delicate heads of pilseners and other lagers.
Weizen: A large, curvaceous glass, bulbous near the mouth to support and showcase the heads of weizens and other wheat beers.
Seidel: A German-style mug, often of great volume, with handles and thick walls to help maintain a cool temperature. An earthenware, ceramic, or metal version is called a stein.
Tulip: A bulbous glass with a trumpeted mouth and short stem used to capture aromas and support large heads of artisanal Belgian ales. They are ideal for swirling beer to release volatiles. Many have etchings on the bottom of the inside of the glass to stimulate carbonation, aiding in head retention. A tulip glass may be substituted with an oversize snifter.
Chalice or goblet: A wide-mouthed, bowl-like, stemmed glass, often with metal linings. Used for serving Trappist ales and other abbey-style ales. Like tulip glasses, they are often etched to stimulate carbonation. Chalices may be substituted with an oversize red wine glass.
Similar to a wine glass, the brandy glass has a shorter stem and a wider bowl. The purpose is opposite of the wine glass — the brandy glass is designed to be cupped in the hand to warm the brandy.
Often referred to as 'Rocks' glasses, Casablanca glasses are used professionally around the world due to their sturdiness, versatility and cheap pricing. Their distinctive octagonal shape comes as a result of the mold involved in the fabrication process. Today Casablanca glasses are the go-to functional glass for the average bartender in place of fashion when preparing, mixing and serving beverages. They can come in a wide range of sizes but the most common being:
5oz - Juices, Minerals and Dining
7oz - Liquor Sipping Glass, Bomb Glass
10oz - Versatile Glass, Often a Standard for Mixers, Half Pint Equivalent for Beers
13oz - Also "Cooler" Glass, Traditionally Gin & Tonic, Long Island Ice Tea or other Similar Cocktails
15oz - Fits Well Into Most Boston Tins, Ideal for Large Drinks, Cocktail Preparation and Serving
Cocktail and whiskey sour glasses are 4 fl oz (120 mL) glasses used for cocktails and whiskey sours. Martinis and Manhattans are examples of cocktails that are served in a cocktail glass; these cocktails are prepared with ice and then strained into the 4 fl oz (120 mL) vessel. Similarly, Sours are prepared in ice and strained into a 4 fl oz (120 mL) sour glass. The stems of these glasses allow the drinker to hold the glass without warming the contents.
Collins glasses are straight-sided narrow glasses, traditionally wrought of frosted glass, primarily designed for long drinks (namely the fizz and Collins family of drinks), and typically holding around 10 fl oz (300 mL) each.
Highball glasses are tall, 8 or 9 fl oz (240 or 270 mL) glasses designed to hold highball drinks — iced drinks containing liquor along with water and/or a carbonated mixer. Highball glasses may in some parts also be known as a cooler or a slim jim.
This type of liqueur glass has straight sides and is designed for drinks prepared using the pousse-café method.
A 4-6 oz (120-180 mL) lowball glass is designed to hold iced drinks without additional liquids, such as various on-the-rocks drinks.
A large glass, typically used for beer and related drinks. It is often used as a mixing vessel by customers when a cocktail is not offered at the bar. For example the 'Cheeky Vimto'.
Small cup used to serve eggnog and other punches.
Usually used for whiskeys and gin. A perfect rocks glass has a perfect round bottom, and when the ice is dropped from the correct height a "ting" can be heard. Rocks glasses got their name as most of these drinks are served over ice (on the rocks).
Small, narrow stemmed glasses with a wider rim than a cordial glass.
Holds 6 ounces (180 mL). Ideal for liqueurs and aperitifs.
A shot glass is a small glass that holds approximately 1.5 oz (45 mL), made for drinks intended to be consumed in one quaff. Shots are also used as volume measurements in cocktail and espresso recipes. A jigger is a metal, hourglass-shaped measure; the larger cup of the jigger measures one shot, and the smaller, one ounce (30 mL). The shooter or double-shot is the shot glass's larger cousin, and holds three ounces (90 mL).
Although wine glasses can be found in a variety of shapes and sizes, they all consist of three primary elements: the bowl, the stem and the base. The base and stem serve to weight the glass and provide support for the bowl. Wine glasses are stemmed so the drinker's hand does not warm the bowl and thus the drink. The bowl is the primary distinguishing factor of wine glasses. Different wines are best served in a specific style of glass so as to best release the aromas and flavors of the wine.
In America this has 4-6oz (120-180 mL) volume; in Europe 210 mL-330 mL (7-11 oz.)
Riedel has designed an extensive collection of wine glass styles based on the characteristics of specific grape varieties such as Cabernet Sauvignon and Syrah or common blends such as Burgundy & Bordeaux. The designs are based on the theory that wine can be delivered via the shape of the bowl to the taste buds in a way to accentuate the flavors specific to the grape variety or common to a standard blend. For blends that do not have a specifically designed glass the style designed for the predominate varietal in the blend is often used. A number of other stemware companies have extended their lines beyond basic Red/White dichotomies as well into less common blends in a similar fashion.
You can choose how much information is displayed with each question by ticking the appropriate boxes in Question Options, General Question Properties or amending the text displayed via Other Labels - both sections of the Quiz Properties.
Go to Introduction to Questions, Adding Questions, Adding Pages, Question Types, Scoring Questions, Custom Feedback, Skipping and Branching, Question Metadata
GIMP, the free graphics editor is an excellent program for budding online comic artists.
The type of equipment you need depends entirely on what type of comic you wish to create. Below are some basic guidelines for the type of equipment one may use to create comics.
For comics presented on a paper medium, you may need these tools for drawing:
Also, as a side note, some artists ink their comics (Going over, or tracing them with ink) after drawing them in pencil. In which case you may need additional materials such as (these are optional):
A tool for inking (could be a marker, fine-liner or quill)
If you would like to transform your paper-based comic into a web-based, online comic, you will need:
You can also use a computer to color a paper comic. For this you will need a graphics program. This can be as simple as Paint but better programs include:
This is just the grammatical form of Neapolitan's greetings. Because, for their civilty, Neapolitans are very friendly when they greet, so you will have a very long greet, for example:
This is the Digital Systems version of the Control Systems book. This represents a subset of pages from that book that deal specifically with digital systems. Topics covered here will include digital systems, difference equations, Z-transforms, and other topics specific to digital systems.
This is a child version of the Control Systems parent book. The pages listed here constitute a suggested reading order of the material, and are not a stand-alone book. Do not edit these pages in a way that make them incompatable with the main narrative of the parent book. If you have questions, comments, or suggestions about this version, leave a message on the main book discussion page.
For a list of all child versions of this book, see All Versions.
Here we use Env to create an asymmetric waveshape - when the value is below zero, the ruler is touching the table and so is practically "shorter". Therefore it has a higher frequency (shorter wavelength) in the lower cycle than in the upper cycle.
OK, so now we need to make sound from this data. The base frequency for the resonator is higher if isDown==true, since the effective length is shorter. So we need to modulate the base frequency at the same time as pushing the thwacks through the resonators.
This wiki will critique the research study ‘Resistance strength training exercise in children with spinal muscular atrophy’ by Lewelt et al.[1]
What is the background to this research?
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is neuromuscular disorder in which muscle strength and motor function is reduced due to the degeneration of motor neurons in both the spinal cord and brainstem.[1] Due to the nature of this disease it currently has no disease-altering treatments and has a high morbidity and mortality rate.[1] Whilst younger individuals afflicted with SMA have better motor function and strength than their older counterparts,[1] it is still vital that any intervention is in place early within the patient’s life. Progressive strength resistance training may provide an option to aid SMA afflicted individuals, especially younger ones, as they progress through life.
SMA is the second most commonly found fatal autosomal recessive disorder after cystic fibrosis,[2] with 1/6000 to 1/10,000 incidents in live births.[2] As with most diseases, the lack of care for it may breed other implications, such as; if even lesser forms of SMA are left untreated then the prevalence of other co-morbidities may arise,[2] such as the development of scoliosis, obesity due to poor mobility and osteoporosis.[2] For this reason, it is important that physical strengthening interventions are in place at an early age to enhance the strength of the individuals, thus allowing them to lead fuller and less impacted lives.
The study was conducted in Utah USA and approved by the University of Utah,[1] whilst this is an American based study its relevance is still impactful to an Australian populous. Participants were:
Had some antigravity strength in elbow flexors, so that participants were able to perform the intervention
Were within a 60-minute or 60-mile (96-kilometre) drive of the University of Utah
Written consent was gathered from all participants 18 years and older and parental consent for those younger than 18 years.[1]
Participants were not eligible for this study if they satisfied any of the following:
Planned surgery or out-of-town trips during the proposed intervention periods
The research was a 12-week progressive strength-based resistance program carried out by trained physical therapists with standardized procedures 3 times per week.[1]
What did the research involve?
Over a 12-week period, 3 training sessions per week were conducted in the participants households. Each session went for 45–60 minutes in duration with a 5-minute warm-up and concluding with a cool-down.[1]
The exercise sessions were conducted in the following order:
Resistance was applied in the form of ankle and wrist weights, body weight or variation in positioning/level of assistance provided,[1] all increasing the difficulty of the task to create challenge for the participants to achieve strength adaptations.
The weight applied to the participants was increased until they indicated a score of 6/10 or 8/10 on the Children’s OMNI-resistance exercise rating scale of perceived exertion [3] at the end of the second set.[1]
The body segments that were exercised and tested were:
What were the basic results?
After the 12-week intervention the authors found that the safety, measured in pain perception whilst participating in the exercises was none existent for 99.5% of the entire study, motor function scores were increased significantly and strength was significantly increased in the manual muscular tests composite scores, however both hand-held dynamometry (HHD) and quantitative muscle analysis displayed non-significant increases.[1] This however need to be considered in contrast with the study, no grip-strength training was conducted and such HHD would not increase.
What conclusions can we take from this research?
In line with the researchers aim of wanting to find and test a feasible and tolerable strength intervention for children with SMA, their results reflect their interventions aims in a successful way. The results show that it is feasible to have children between the ages of 5 – 21 years with SMA perform progressive strength resistance training to aid in their motor function and strength gains.[1] It also displays that the pain of performing this sort of intervention is near non-existent, satisfying the tolerance section of their study. HHD was a form of grip strength test used, however due to the nature of the training, it yielding non-significant results is expected as none of the exercises utilised grip strength as resistance was not held, rather strapped to wrists and ankles. This test doesn't seem to fit within this experiment and such should not have been used. Future studies may take HHD into account if it has been trained during the study, in addition research on different types of progressive strength exercises should be conducted to better understand the capabilities of SMA patients and how different strength protocols/exercises can affect them.
For children with SMA it would be very beneficial for them to perform progressive strength training, guided by a physical therapist (at least initially), to improve strength and motor control, thus leading to better quality of life. This study also gives insight and information for future exercise studies with SMA patients, as well as informing parents or carers with SMA children on some of the information surrounding SMA and exercise. Whilst this article doesn’t discuss strength training in conjunction with other treatments, strength training should be strongly considered when treatment is formulated for a child with SMA.
For additional reading on this topic please find the links below:
Resistance strength training exercise in children with spinal muscular atrophy
Validation of the Children’s OMNI-Resistance Exercise Scale of Perceived Exertion
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
This Chess related article is a Wikibooks:Chess stub. Please assist Wikibooks by expanding it.
In November 2014, Rolling Stone published "A Rape on Campus" by Sabrina Rubin Erdely, describing a student’s account of an alleged gang rape at a University of Virginia fraternity house[1]. Within days, key parts of the narrative were proven false, and the veracity of the source as well as the professionalism of the journalist were questioned[2]. The Columbia School of Journalism (CSJ) conducted an independent investigation of Rolling Stone’s reporting, editing, and fact-checking behind the story[1]. The CSJ’s report deemed the article a “journalistic failure that was avoidable”[1]. On April 8th, 2015, Rolling Stone officially retracted the story and apologized to its readers and those damaged by the allegations, including the falsely accused fraternity, members of the U-Va. Administration, and sexual assault victims who may feel uncomfortable stepping forward due to their failures[1].
Rolling Stone magazine and Sabrina Rubin Erdely’s actions provide a useful case to examine the role of professionalism in journalism through the framework of the professional guidelines from the Society of Professional Journalists (SPJ) and the CSJ report.
"The Society of Professional Journalists (SPJ) is the nation’s most broad-based journalism organization, dedicated to encouraging the free practice of journalism and stimulating high standards of ethical behavior. Founded in 1909 as Sigma Delta Chi, SPJ promotes the free flow of information vital to a well-informed citizenry through the daily work of its nearly 10,000 members; works to inspire and educate current and future journalists through professional development; and protects First Amendment guarantees of freedom of speech and press through its advocacy efforts."[3]
The SPJ Code of Ethics was originally adopted by Sigma Delta Chi from the American Society of Newspaper Editors in 1926 and has been revised multiple times until its most recent version in 2014. The codes preamble highlights "public enlightenment [as] the forerunner of justice and the foundation of democracy"[4]. The preamble emphasizes setting a journalist's integrity paramount to any other aspect of professionalism. The four pillars of the SPJ's Code of ethics are: seek truth and report it, minimize harm, act independently and be accountable and transparent. The code also warns "it is not a set of rules, rather a guide that encourages all who engage in journalism to take responsibility for the information they provide, regardless of medium" and "it is not, nor can it be under the First Amendment, legally enforceable"[4]. The fact that this code is not legally binding, makes it no less important to a journalist who values their integrity and reputation.
While the SPJ Code of Ethics is held as a guide, the society provides further resources for aspiring and veteran journalists to base ethical decisions on.
A case study particularly suited to the ethical dilemmas that Erdely faced is "Deep Throat, and His Motive," based on the Watergate scandal and the reporters who protected the principal source known as Deep Throat. In this case study, the SPJ raises the question question, "Is protecting a source more important than revealing all the relevant information about a news story?"[5]
Another related case is "A Self-Serving Leak," in which two reporters investigated sports figures involved with steroids. The journalists went to prison for protecting their source who wanted to get his clients case, part of the BALCO sports-and-steroids investigation, dismissed. This brings up two ethical questions, "should the two reporters have continued to protect this key source even after he admitted to lying? Should they have promised confidentiality in the first place?"[6]
Erdely faced no legal consequences from naming her source, and did not have a reputation or motive to cover up like Deep Throat. Further research into the provided information and identities of the accused may have prevented some of the misreporting.
On December 22nd, 2014, Rolling Stone announced that the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism would conduct an independent review of their journalistic practices in reporting the "A Rape on Campus" story.[7] Dean Steve Coll and Dean of Academic Affairs Sheila Coronel were specifically tapped to produce the report, which was finally published April 5th, 2015.[1] Intended as "a work of journalism about a failure of journalism," the report called Rolling Stone's journalistic conduct a "failure [that] encompassed reporting, editing, editorial supervision and fact-checking."
Ultimately, the report narrows in on three areas of improvement for Rolling Stone and three areas for careful consideration of all journalists:
In the next section, we'll look more specifically at what led CSJ to their recommendations for Rolling Stone.
Ethical Quandaries in Reporting "A Rape on Campus"
Much media attention has been given to the timeline of events leading up to the publishing of "A Rape on Campus." But ultimately, challenges to Erdely's professional ethics group nicely around her interactions with three specific stakeholders: Jackie, her main source; three of Jackie's friends, with whom she never spoke; and the fraternity Phi Kappa Psi, portrayed as the perpetrators.
At the center of the controversy over "A Rape on Campus" is the article's main character--the woman whose startling account of a violent rape was told. That circumstance alone makes for a complicated journalistic ethics landscape. Consider the following perspectives:
Show compassion for those who may be affected by news coverage. Use heightened sensitivity when dealing with [...] victims of sex crimes
Because questioning a victim's account can be traumatic, counselors have cautioned journalists to allow survivors some control over their own stories. This is good advice. Yet it does survivors no good if reporters documenting their cases avoid rigorous practices of verification.
—Coronel, S., Coll, S., and Kravitz, D., Rolling Stone and UVA: The Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism Report
If the goal is ethical behavior, journalists must at once be particularly sensitive and push back enough to nail down hard facts in scenarios that are frequently without many. And perhaps counterintuitively, this may mean digging up details because it is in the best interests of the subject--even when the subject objects. In the case of "A Rape on Campus," the voices of friends and the accused stand out as neglected--so we turn to those now.
Jackie's account of the night of her assault includes an encounter with three friends after she fleed the scene of the attack. The conversation she recounts is, to quote CSJ, "unflattering to all" and suggests the friends encouraged Jackie to hide the story.[1] To Erdely, Jackie gave only the three first names of her friends and the message that the friends were unwilling to talk. And thus Erdley was again faced with an ethical challenge: trust and respect her single source, or go around her? Again, the perspectives of SPJ and CSJ are helpful:
Diligently seek subjects of news coverage to allow them to respond to criticism or allegations of wrongdoing.
Erdely and [her editor] made the fateful agreement not to check with the three friends [...] such a practice was unacceptable
—Sheila Coronel, Steve Coll, and Derek Kravitz, Rolling Stone and UVA: The Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism Report
Further, Erdley faced the issue of whether to print the information about the three friends without their comment, and whether to use their names. Ultimately she did, using pseudonyms--another practice the CSJ took issue with as obfuscating reliance on a single source[1]
Erdley's final challenge came in confronting her accused subjects. Having named Phi Kappa Psi as the location of the violent assault, how would she confer with them before printing what would certainly damage their reputation?
She decided on an email that shared very few details of what she had learned: "I've become aware of allegations of gang rape," she wrote. "Can you comment on those allegations?"[1]
Working from SPJ standards, Phi Kappa Psi was not "allow[ed] to respond" to the full breadth of the allegations against them--because Erdely did not share them. CSJ strongly condemned this choice:
[Erdely] missed the opportunity to hear challenging, detailed rebuttals from Phi Kappa Psi before publication. [Rolling Stone] should routinely share specific, derogatory details with the subjects of their reporting
—Sheila Coronel, Steve Coll, and Derek Kravitz, Rolling Stone and UVA: The Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism Report
In this case, the ethical dilemma is, again, complicated--Erdely did reach out; but did she do enough? Independent investigators say no.
Journalists must be experts in uncovering information and exposing hidden connections but also be able to decide when public enlightenment or anonymity over rules certain professional ethics. The four pillars of ethics that are laid out in the SPJ Code of ethics can be generalized by other professions as follows; "seek truth and report it" can be reflected as honesty, "minimize harm" can be seen as respect, "act independently" describes autonomy, "be accountable and transparent" is accountability and integrity needs no generalization.
This case's outcome has left a mark on Rolling Stone's reputation, but it would not be its first. Before the fiasco of Erdley's article, the Rolling Stone magazine made a mistake on their cover by putting John Hancock's signature on a fake tattoo of the U.S. Constitution[8]. The continued mistakes by the magazine suggests a responsibility of the customer. Rolling Stone's reputation should preface the audience's judgment on the information that it reports.
"In psychology and cognitive science, confirmation bias is a tendency to search for or interpret information in a way that confirms one's preconceptions, leading to statistical errors"[9]
July 8, 2014, Erdely contacted Emily Renda, a rape survivor and U-Va. alumna and staff member working on asexual assault issues at the university[1]. Erdely reached out to Renda searching for "a single, emblematic college rape case that would show 'what it's like to be on campus now … where not only is rape so prevalent but also that there's this pervasive culture of sexual harassment/rape culture'"[1]. Renda introduced Erdely to Jackie's story, but warned Erdely that Jackie's memory of the events may not be perfect[1]. Erdely overlooked Jackie's numerous memory lapses and evolving story, likely on account of confirmation bias and the desire to produce an article about the "enblematic college rape case" which she had in mind.
The desire to tell a sensational story leads to a flaw in journalism known as "a story too good to check". Erdely's ambition to write a shocking expose on college rape led her to pass over numerous other true cases of college rape to write about Jackie's horrifying account.
The unnamed fact-checker assigned to "A Rape on Campus" had only been on staff for one and a half years[1]. Although inexperienced, drafts of the article show that the fact-checker noted that Erdely or Dana should reach out to Jackie's friends and Drew to check their quotes and accounts, but the editors came to the conclusion that they could not or would not reach the sources and did not want to clarify such to readers[1]. The fact-checker did not raise her concerns to her department boss, Coco McPherson, who read the final draft[1]. McPherson, ultimately responsible for the fact-checking, knew the story relied on one source but was not concerned because she "had faith in everyone involved"[1].
Overall, neither Sabrina Rubin Erdely nor Rolling Stone magazine acted as professionals or fully took responsibility for their misconduct. Rolling Stone publisher Jann Wenner announced that no one would be fired and affirmed that the publication of Columbia's report was punishment enough[10]. Erdely and Rolling Stone failed to meet the SPJ guidelines and were especially careless in terms of fact-checking. "A Rape on Campus" was recognized on Columbia School of Journalism's "Worst Journalism of 2014" list[11]. "Reporting on rape has unique challenges, but the journalist still has the responsibility to get it right," Erdely said. "I hope that my mistakes in reporting this story do not silence the voices of victims that need to be heard"[12]. In response, University of Virginia President Teresa A. Sullivan stated, "Rolling Stone’s story, ‘A Rape on Campus,’ did nothing to combat sexual violence, and it damaged serious efforts to address the issue. Irresponsible journalism unjustly damaged the reputations of many innocent individuals and the University of Virginia"[12].
Erdely recalls the aftermath of "A Rape on Campus" the as the most embarrassing moments of her professional career[12]. However, Wenner and Dana stand by Erdely, Dana stated, "Sabrina's done great work for us over the years and we expect that to continue"[10]. Other news sources have reported that Wenner is in denial and Rolling Stone has irreparably damaged its reputation[13].
How?: Kako?
What?: Što?
When?: Kad? or Kada?
Where: Gdje?
Who?: Tko?
Which?: Koji?
Mother: Majka (Majka is also used to say 'darling' or 'my love')
Grandmother: Baba (Note: Calling other women by this name can be considered rude since it can also mean something like old hag. However, it is used daily in some parts of Croatia)
Nouns are never used instead (For example: Fox fur).
Over: Preko (can also mean "beyond"), but better is iznad (above)
Small splash: Buć!
Spit!: Pljuc!
Kaboom!: Bum!
Dog (Bark! Wuf!): Vau, Vau!
Pidgeon (Chirp, Chirp!): Živ, živ!
Sheep (Baah!): Beee! or Meee!
Pig (Oink, oink!): Rok, rok!
Duck (Quack, Quack!): Kva, kva!
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q-R S T U V W-Z
The My Lai Massacre occurred on March 16, 1968 when US troops killed approximately 500 unarmed Vietnamese civilians during the Vietnam War [1]. Members of Charlie Company of 1st Battalion, 20th Infantry Regiment, 11th Brigade of the 23rd Infantry Division committed the acts under the command of Captain Ernest Medina. Lieutenant William Calley, the main perpetrator of the attacks, was later charged with killing unarmed civilians.[2] The massacre ended when Warrant Officer Hugh Thompson, Jr. intervened, ordering his men to fire on fellow US soldiers if they continued killing the civilians.[1]
The United states started deploying troops into Vietnam in 1965. In January 1968, a large attack by the Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese on the American troops known as the Tet Offensive caused a severe blow to the morale of US soldiers over the next few months. The attack also led to decreased support for the war from Americans back home.[3]
Charlie Company arrived in Vietnam in December, 1967. They established an 11th Brigade fire base in the southern Quang Ngai Province, a Vietcong stronghold at the time.[4] Charlie Company was comprised of three platoons, and together with Alpha and Bravo Company made up Task Force Barker, designated after Lieutenant Colonel Frank A. Barker, Jr. On February 25, 1968, the 1st and 2nd platoons of Charlie Company encountered a minefield, killing three soldiers and wounding several more. On March 14th, 1968, a small squad from Charlie Company stumbled across a booby trap, killing popular Sergeant George Cox and blinding a GI. Several others were injured to various degrees.[2] Over the course of three months, Charlie Company had suffered 28 casualties, including 5 dead.[1] The following day some commanding officers, including Colonel Oran Henderson, informed frustrated and angry members of Charlie Company that they would soon meet the enemy head on, and encouraged them to be more aggressive.[5] That evening, at Sergeant Cox's memorial service, Captain Medina suggested "revenge" for the casualties was not inappropriate.[2] Soldiers were told that they would engage the 48th Vietcong Battalion the next morning in the village of My Lai. There, women and children would already be cleared out of the village and all they could expect to encounter was the enemy.[6]
My Lai was located along the seacoast of Quang Ngai Province in the northernmost part of South Vietnam. 700 residents lived in either red-brick homes or thatch-covered huts in the small village. [6] On the morning of March 16, 1968, two days after a booby trap killed Sergeant Cox and wounded several other members of Charlie Company, Task Force Beta entered the area surrounding My Lai. Charlie Company was to invade the village and engage the enemy, while the remaining two companies, Alpha and Bravo, were stationed along potential escape routes.[2] There was great confusion as to whether the 48th Vietcong Battalion was in My Lai at the time, and the intelligence which suggested the enemy was in the target area later proved faulty.[4] When they failed to encounter enemy resistance, Captain Medina ordered the first platoon, led by William Calley, to enter the village and "secure it."[2] The men began their standard search-and-destroy practices, pulling people from homes, interrogating them and searching for Vietcong. Suddenly, a soldier stabbed an unarmed villager in the back with a bayonet. Another soldier tossed a middle-aged man into a well, and lobbed a grenade in after him. A group of 15 to 20 women, huddled around a temple in prayer, were each shot in the back of the head. Disappointed after finding a group of civilians alive in the village plaza, his men standing by, Calley ordered them to "waste" the villagers as they were heard crying "No VC! No VC!" Bodies were piled into irrigation ditches, dead or alive, while soldiers shot at them from just yards away. [7] Roughly 500 villagers were murdered in My Lai, the majority of whom were women, children, and the elderly. Many who survived were found hiding in the piles of corpses.[3]
Warrant Officer Hugh Thompson, Jr.
Hugh Clowers Thompson, Jr. was born April 15th, 1943, in Atlanta, Georgia. [8] Before serving in Vietnam, Thompson served the US Navy in 1961 as a Seabee construction worker. [9] After returning home in 1964 and becoming a funeral director, Hugh Thompson joined the US Army in 1966 [10], where he trained to become a helicopter pilot at Forts Wolters and Rucker. Thompson arrived in Vietnam in December 1967, joining the 123rd Aviation Battalion of the 23rd Infantry Division. Serving with Thompson aboard his helicopter were his door gunner and crew chief, Specialist Glenn Andreotta, and a second door gunner, Specialist Lawrence Colburn. [10]
At the time of the massacre, Hugh Thompson was a 24-year-old chief warrant officer. His mission was to fly a small reconnaissance helicopter over the fields of My Lai and draw fire from the Vietcong in order to help the ground troops, including Charlie Company. On that morning, nobody shot at him. Instead, Thompson only saw unarmed villagers, mostly women, children, and the elderly, in My Lai. When Thompson circled back, almost all of them were dying or dead.[11] Thompson, seeing these dead bodies across the village, reported the killings to brigade headquarters.[6] Specialist Larry Colburn recalls that nobody aboard knew what could have happened to the villagers and began marking the wounded with smoke. As Thompson flew lower to My Lai, he witnessed an American soldier nudge a young wounded woman and proceed to shoot and kill her. That soldier was Captain Ernest Medina. [11]
Thompson landed the helicopter to confront Charlie Company when he saw soldiers throwing woman and children into an irrigation ditch. Thompson said to a soldier, “These are civilians, we need to get them out,” to which the soldier responded he would “help them out of their misery.”[11] After pleading with the soldier, Thompson proceeded to return to his helicopter and prepare for takeoff. When he looked back, the soldiers were firing into the ditch, murdering the civilians.
As Thompson contemplated his next step, he saw elderly adults and children running to hide in a bunker. Thompson, now in his helicopter, landed the plane between the bunker and the incoming soldiers. [11] Thompson tried to explain to the lieutenant in command, William Calley, that the people appeared to be civilians and that he had not encountered any combatants in the area. Calley commanded Thompson to “mind his own business and get out of the way”. [11] At that point, Thompson recalls, he "knew who the real enemy was." [12] He told his helicopter crew mates to fire on Charlie Company if any of Calley’s men interfered while he rescued the civilians. Fortunately, the soldiers simply stood by and watched as Thompson saved the remaining civilians. Thompson called for nearby airships to help bring the people out of the town and to safety.
Soldiers are arguably held to a higher standard of professionalism than most occupations, since the consequences of their actions are more severe. Just war theory is a set of guidelines that dictates how nations and their militaries should decide when to go to war and how to conduct themselves in war.[13] One of the major tenants of just war theory is jus in bello, or just conduct in war. Soldiers must discriminate between combatants and non-combatants, and the amount of harm they cause must not be excessive in relation to the military objectives they are trying to accomplish.[14] Many civilians were intentionally killed in the Vietnam War, and US soldiers did not discriminate as much as they should have. [15]
William Calley clearly violated jus in bello. He did not discriminate between combatants and non-combatants, and the amount of harm he caused was excessive to the military objective he sought to accomplish.[2] He violated the Geneva Convention, under which his actions are considered war crimes.[16] The killings at My Lai were also seen by many in the US as another reason to stop the war in Vietnam, which ran counter to the American war effort that Calley was fighting for.
A military member's personal ethics might not align with their professional obligation. In the US, the military services have measures in place to defuse issues that arise between a soldier or sailor's loyalties. When conflicts arise, service members must follow a hierarchy of loyalties in order to decide what they should do. Soldiers and sailors must put the "nation above service, service above their comrades in arms, and comrades above self." [17]
When a service member's personal morals conflict with a mission, they can use the Constitutional Paradigm.[18] This paradigm is a set of four principles that are sequentially used to deconstruct where a person's loyalties lie. They are:
If the issue at hand is too extreme to ignore, you can choose to disobey
Hugh Thompson had conflicting loyalties when he landed in My Lai. His mission was to clear the area of enemy combatants, but it was unclear at the time if there were any enemy combatants in the area. His personal loyalties urged him to protect non-combatants, but he also had loyalties to his fellow soldiers. He could not obey the first part of the Constitutional Paradigm, since his mission was to draw fire and said nothing about protecting civilians.[18] His loyalty was technically to his comrades. Since he couldn't resolve his conflicts through the hierarchy, he had to move to the second part of the paradigm. He was able to resolve the conflict, and therefore his loyalties were no longer at odds. By threatening the American soldiers, he was actually helping by preventing them from committing more atrocities.
Hugh Thompson's decisions were much harder to make than they may first appear. Service members are taught cohesion, and that working as a team is the best way to victory.[19] This creates a sort of brotherhood, encouraging them look out for each other even in morally ambiguous situations. When Thompson chose to protect the villagers in My Lai, he risked being ostracized by his fellow soldiers, disrupting the cohesion built within his company and jeopardizing their effectiveness.
After the massacre ended and Thompson returned to base, he told his Commanding Officer what had happened, expecting Calley to be court-martialed, but nothing came of it. Not until 1969, a year later, did rumors of this massacre bring a full investigation on the matter. [20] The captain of Charlie company, Captain Medina was charged with murder as the commanding officer of the unit in question and dereliction of duty in suppressing the investigation. [20] However, Medina was eventually found not guilty. Calley was formally indicted, court-martialed, and convicted of premeditated murder with a life sentence. [21] After many appeals and public sentiment that Calley was a scapegoat, President Nixon reduced his sentence to 15 years and Calley was paroled in 1974 after only serving 4 years in prison.[22] In 1998, 30 years later, Hugh Thompson received the Soldier’s medal,[23] the highest medal awarded in non-combat situations.
To develop the electric potential (or voltage), begin with a single point charge, Q, at the origin, of charge q. The electric field is
The curl of this is easily shown to be zero, and by a well-known theorem of vector calculus, if the curl of a function vanishes over a region of space, then that function may be written as the gradient of a scaler. Hence, there exists a scaler field,
We next find the work done by the field as it moves a test particle, q, from point
. By the fundamental theorem of calculus (for gradients),
, but this is not always true if the charge extends to infinity. However, this only happens in bogus textbook problems, so in real life, it is always safe to say
To generalize to anything more than a point charge is easy. It is just the superposition of many point charges, and our result holds true for any distribution.
To apply this to Coulomb's law, we just take the integral of the electric field and get the potential. We stick on a minus sign for the convetion and we have,
How simple.
There are two main advantages to using potential. The first is that it will come in handy later when we want to solve Maxwell's equations, but the second reason is that it is a scalar, not a vector. It is much easier to only remember one component instead of three. You find the potential of a charge distribution, then take finding the E field is as easy as taking a derivative.
Potential is an interesting thing, because it is a scalar function, yet it uniquely represents a vector function, E, which has three times as many numbers! Well, it just so happens that the three components of an electric field are not independent, because they are radially symmetric around a point charge, so the curl is zero. This constraint is just enough to tell us that we only need one number to represent all three components of E.
I would like to point out that the potential only can be used (without modification) when the charges are not moving. If they move, then if a particle goes around in a circle, it may end up with more energy than it had before!
The Crown must disclose all materials information that is in its possession or control that is not clearly irrelevant, regardless of if the evidence is to be called at trial or is inculpatory or exculpatory.[1]
The right to disclosure is founded in the principle of fair play between parties[2] as well as the right to make full answer and defence.[3]
The Crown has an obligation to obtain from an investigative agency any relevant information that it is aware of and must "take reasonable step to inquire about ...relevant information".[4]
The obligation also requires the Crown to preserve all relevant evidence.[5]
This obligation is jointly held by both Crown and police.[6]
The "Stinchcombe disclosure regime" only applies to "material relating to the accused’s case" that are "in the possession or control" of the Crown.[7]
R v Stinchcombe, 1991 CanLII 45 (SCC), [1991] 3 SCR 326 at 339 and 343 (Stinchcombe #1)
(3) An accused is entitled, after the close of the case for the prosecution, to make full answer and defence personally or by counsel.
R. v. Carosella, 1997 CanLII 402 (SCC), [1997] 1 S.C.R. 80, stated disclosure by the crown is "one of the components of the right to make full answer and defence which in turn is a principle of fundamental justice embraced by s. 7 of the Charter."
The Martin Committee produced a report considering the decision. The report detailed the principles of the case, at p. 146:
The fruits of the investigation which are in the possession of the Crown are not the property of the Crown for the use in securing a conviction, but, rather, are the property of the public to ensure that justice is done. Stinchcombe, at para. 12
The general principle is that all relevant information must be disclosed, whether or not the Crown intends to introduce it in evidence. The Crown must disclose relevant information, whether it is inculpatory or exculpatory, and must produce all information which may assist the accused. If the information is of no use, then it is irrelevant and will be excluded by Crown counsel in the exercise of the Crown's discretion, which is reviewable by the trial judge.
The duty to disclose is engaged once the accused requests information from the crown any time after the charge has been laid. [1]
If defence fails to raise the issue and remains passive, they are less able to claim that non-disclosure affected trial fairness.[2]
Defence have an obligation to diligently pursue disclosure by actively seeking and pursuing disclosure once they become aware or ought to have been aware of it.[3] This means the defence should bring any failure to disclose to the Court's attention at the earliest opportunity so that the judge can remedy any trial unfairness.[4]
The Crown will only be subject to disclosure obligation where there is evidence in its possession or control and it is relevant.
Once the right to disclosure has been invoked by the Defence the onus is upon the Crown to comply with the obligation. The Crown may refuse to disclose certain information, but has the burden of proving why full disclosure should not be applied.[1]
The information will not be considered disclosure where it is:
Satisfying any one of these requirements will eliminate any disclosure obligations upon the Crown.
Where evidence is not in the control of the Crown it may be the subject of a third party records application, also known as an "O'Connor Application".[1]
In an O'Connor application the Defence must show that the evidence is "likely relevant".[2]
Not all information in possession of police must be disclosed. It must only be "relevant" evidence.[1]
The burden is upon the crown to prove that the information was "clearly irrelevant".[3]
Relevance refers to whether "it could reasonably be used by the defence in meeting the case for the Crown".[4]That is to say there is "a reasonable possibility that the information could be useful to the accused in making full answer and defence.".[5]
The standard of relevancy is where there is a “reasonable possibility that the information will be useful” to the accused in making full answer and defence.[6] Utility consists of information used for:[7]
Relevance is not limited solely to inculpatory evidence nor only evidence that the Crown would adduce at trial. "Relevant materials" includes all materials for which there is a "reasonable possibility" that it may be useful for the Defence. All possible exclupatory evidence must be provided as well, however, this obligation does not extend to a duty to examine the exculpatory evidence.[8]
R. v. Banford, 2011 SKQB 418 (CanLII), 2011 SKQB 418, [2012] 3 W.W.R. 835 at para. 5 citing Stinchcomb, among others
R. v. Banford, 2010 SKPC 110 (CanLII), 2010 SKPC 110, 363 Sask. R. 26 (SKPC) at para. 13
R. v. McQuaid, 1998 CanLII 805 (SCC), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 244 (S.C.C.) at para. 20
R. v. Dixon, 1998 CanLII 805 (SCC), [1998] 1 S.C.R. 244 at para. 20
R v Dixon 1998 CanLII 805, [1998] 1 SCR 244 at 22
The duty is engaged upon the request of the Defendant. It is continuous throughout the proceedings up to and including the trial. The Crown may object to the request on the basis that it is irrelevant, outside of their control, or otherwise privileged.[1] The burden is on the Crown to justify the refusal to disclose.
The duty to disclose is ongoing and so any new information received must also be disclosed.[2]
The right to disclosure may not extend to the into a conditional sentence breach hearing as there is less of a right to full answer and defence.[1]
Materials including statements and police notes are required to be disclosed under s. 603:
(a) to inspect without charge the indictment, his own statement, the evidence and the exhibits, if any; and
(b) to receive, on payment of a reasonable fee determined in accordance with a tariff of fees fixed or approved by the Attorney General of the province, a copy
(ii) of his own statement, if any, and
R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 603; R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 101(E).
Evidence that is in an undecipherable form, such as unlockable encrypted data, does not need to be given to defence as disclosure as the Crown cannot properly vet it for disclosable and non-disclosable information.
Police compile a package of the evidence consisting of the notes, reports and statements generated during their investigation that is forwarded to the Crown Attorney's office. This usually comprises the initial disclosure package that is made available to the Defence counsel.
Copies of Court Orders (Probation Orders; Prohibition Orders; Recognizances)
Certificates of analysis (often for breathalizer machine results; drug analysis; or firearms test results);
Demands made to client by the police from a script (e.g. Charter caution, breath demand, etc)
Printed logs and audio recordings of police, 911 dispatch, or ambulance transmissions
Notes of any professionals, such as doctors, ambulance crew, fire crew, etc. who was present at scene of incident
Police action reports: Use of Force Reports, Use of Pepper Spray Reports
When documents are to be released for disclosure, the police and crown are permitted to vet the materials for the purpose of removing information that may not be disclosable. Types of information that can be validly redacted from the disclosure before going out to the defence include:
See further details on Privilege section.
A third party request for the production of materials that are part of a proceeding must be made to the presiding judge.
Where a matter has been concluded, the superior court does not have jurisdiction to order the release or production of any documents or evidence to third party applicants.[1]
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation v. Canada (Attorney General), 2009 NSSC 400 (CanLII) upheld at 2010 NSCA 99
There is no violation of the disclosure obligation arising from a failure to collect information.[1]
There is no burden on the police to record evidence of all conversations with witnesses, even important ones.[2]
Where the handwritten notes of an officer are illegible, then the obligation of disclosure can require the crown to transcribe the notes or otherwise provide them in legible form.[3]
The police do not have a general obligation under collect evidence in a certain manner or create specific material disclosure and so a failure to do so would not amount to a failure to provide disclosure or impact the right to make full answer and defence.[4]
Incomplete notes do not breach the right to full answer and defence. As long as the majority of the officer's evidence is recorded in some fashion there will be no violation.[5]
The court have no authority to direct officers on how they should keep their notes.[6] They should not be micromanaging the police's handling of a case.[7]
The police have no obligation "to conduct their investigation in any particular way, to record every word spoken in an interview or to take a written statement from every potential witness who is interviewed."[8]
Police are not obliged "to preserve everything that comes into their hands on the off-chance that it will be relevant in the future."[9]
Investigative police strategies and "tactical information are presumptively not disclosable absent a particularized claim to relevance".[10]
R. v. Wicksted, 1996 CanLII 641 (ON CA), [1996] O.J. No. 1576, 29 O.R. (3d) 144 at p. 155:
("As pointed out by the trial judge, counsel were unable to provide him, nor were counsel able to provide this court with any Canadian authority wherein a stay was granted for the failure of investigating police officers to record conversations with important witnesses.")
R. v. Pickton, 2007 BCSC 2029, [2007] B.C.J. No. 3100 (B.C. S.C.) at para. 9
Notifying the accused ahead of destruction of property inviting inspection may cure the prejudice cause by the loss of evidence from the destruction of property.[3]
R. v. Lipovetsky, 2007 ONCJ 484, [2007] O.J. No. 4135 at para. 19 ("Even where there is negligence on the part of the Crown, the loss of a videotape does not automatically violate the Charter. A Charter breach is established only where the lost evidence is shown by the applicant to be relevant to the issues at trial.")
See also R. v. Dulude [2004] O.J. No. 3576 (C.A.) at para. 30.
R. v. La 1997 CanLII 309 (SCC), [1997] 2 S.C.R. 680 at para. 21
e.g. R v Berner, 2012 BCCA 466 - car in collision destroyed by police prior to trial. Officer sent registered mail letter to accused prior to releasing vehicle.
Where relevancy is in dispute, the burden rests on the accused to prove on a balance of probabilities that breach of the Charter right to disclosure has been violated.[1]
Where a breach of the right to full disclosure is found it does not necessarily follow that the right to make full answer and defence was violated.[2]
Where the right to make full answer and defence is not implicated, the usual remedy is either an adjournment or order of production.[3] In fact in general, where disclosure has not been given or is given late, the usual remedy is an adjournment.[4]
R. v. Bjelland, 2009 SCC 38 (CanLII), [2009] 2 S.C.R 651
R. v. Bjelland, 2009 SCC 38, [2009] S.C.J. No. 38, at para 25
Where late disclosure results in an unfair trial, even after the trial, an new trial may be ordered.[1]
However, this may not constitute a distinct Charter breach.[2]
A number of factors should be considered.[4]
Where late disclosure warrants the exclusion of evidence follow the following principles from R v Bjelland:
(a) Remedies under s. 24(1) of the Charter are flexible and contextual. The exclusion of evidence cannot be ruled out under s. 24(1). However, such a remedy will only be available where a less intrusive remedy cannot be fashioned to safeguard the fairness of the trial process and the integrity of the justice system.
(b) The Crown’s failure to disclose evidence does not, in and of itself, constitute a violation of s. 7. Rather, an accused must generally show “actual prejudice” to his ability to make full to answer and defence.
(c) An accused must receive a fair trial, however, the trial must be fair from both the perspective of the accused and of society more broadly. A fair trial is one which satisfies the public interest in getting at the truth, while preserving basic procedural fairness for the accused.
(d) A trial judge should only exclude evidence for late disclosure in “exceptional” cases:
(e) where late disclosure renders the trial process unfair, and the unfairness cannot be remedied through an adjournment and disclosure order, or
(f) where exclusion in necessary to maintain the integrity of the justice system.
Within the rights under section 7 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms include the "right to full answer and defence". This right requires the Crown to provide all relevant evidence. A failure to do so may violate this right, and a breach of that right may entitle the accused to a stay of proceedings under s. 24(1) of the Charter.
Where a section 7 Charter breach is alleged on the basis of violating the right to make full answer and defence due to failure to make disclosure, the issue will usually be left for the conclusion of trial. Not only to first determine whether there is insufficient evidence for gulit but also that the judge can properly assess whether the right to full answer and defence was violated in context of the case in its entirety.[1]
Delayed disclosure can be a factor but not a sole basis of seeking a stay.[2]
R. v. F.C.B. 2000 NSCA 35 (CanLII), 2000 NSCA 35 (N.S.C.A.)
R. v. Banford 2010 SKPC 110 (CanLII), 2010 SKPC 110 (Sask. Prov. Ct.) at paragraph 10 (overturned at 2011 SKQB 418 (Sask. Q.B.) on other grounds).
Where failure to disclose is flagrant and unjustified, the court may order costs.[1]
R v Boutin, 2012 SKQB 291 -- lost video tape irrelevant to delayed detention in impaired driving case
R v Slater, 2012 SKPC 69 -- request for training materials for DRE examination refused-
R. v. Carey, 2012 CanLII 20684 (NL PC)-- detailed summary of the law on disclosure
R v Swanson, 2012 SKQB 156 -- granted order disclosing performance record of sniffer dog
R v. Vincent Quesnelle, 2010 ONSC 175 [2] -- failed to establish basis for police occurrence reports
R v Breau, 2011 NBQB 245 -- judge releases medical documents from Morgentaler clinic
R. v. John, 2011 ONCJ 607 -- 3rd party records for police policy on driving offences -- denied
R v G(S) 2012 ONCJ 176 -- defence unsuccessfully tries to get disclosure from crown consisting of police training manuals
The People's Republic of China is often considered a rising superpower due to its large and stable population, its rapidly growing economy, and its rapidly growing military spending and capabilities. However, it has a number of economic, political and demographics problems to contend with and is still not influential enough on the international stage (compared to the scale of that of the United States) to be noted as a superpower.
China's population is the world's largest, with about 1.3 billion citizens. With the global human population currently estimated at about 6.5 billion, China is home to approximately 20%. Because of the Two Children Policy (enacted October,2015)China is able to control its own population, although this may eventually have a detrimental effect on China's demographics.
UNSC - As the only Asian country which holds a permanent seat in the UN Security Council, China has considerable influence in the foreign affairs.
Foreign Relations - Its military and economic aid for Pakistan has led to a permanently strong relationship with the Islamist States. It has been noted for providing direct aid to Pakistan's nuclear bid, although this has not helped its relations with some other nations. China's non-ideological approach to foreign affairs offers African and Latin American countries a desirable alternative when they seek foreign aids and potential allies. This means China is gradually increasing its soft power in areas which are traditionally dominated by the influence of western countries. Its ties with these countries have become closer through economic cooperation and trade.
China's GDP - has grown at a rate of at least 9% per year for more than 25 years (although recently the government has sought to slow this growth to prevent a crash), the fastest growth rate for a major economy in recorded history [1]. In 2005, China became the fourth largest economy in the world in terms of nominal value [2] and the second largest when measured by purchasing power parity, with a GDP (PPP) of US $7.124 trillion in 2004. In the same period of time, it has moved 300 million people out of poverty and quadrupled the average Chinese person's income.
Shanghai - also known as "Paris of the East", is moving to become Asia's financial centre and transit port for manufacturing companies [3].
Trade - China’s share in global trade is 5.2%, a rapidly growing number. China is also the world's third largest trading power (after the United States and Germany) [4]. Reports have shown that China is not only a major manufacturing export country, but also moving up to become a high-tech product export country. During 2005, China's high-tech export is about 80 million US dollars. The Chinese government also put great efforts to push for exporting medical supplies and software. [5] 80% of all goods in WalMart are made in china.
Technology - Studies show China is progressing rapidly in science and technology research. The Chinese government has spent billions of dollars in fields such as biotechnology and information technology. The R&D spending by the Chinese government more than tripled since 1998. Moreover, the numbers of the scientific research paper doubled in the same period. According to experts, China might produce more engineering PhDs than U.S. in 2010. Many foreign companies are setting up R&D centres in China due to the low costs, government support, and skilful researchers. [6]
Military - China has the largest standing army (2.3 million men) of any country in the world. China is undergoing a massive effort to improve and modernize its military technology, equipments, and power projection capabilities. Fuelled by a rapidly growing defence budget over the years (China's size of military spending is second only to the United States), China is poised to have an organized, well-trained, and well-equipped military power within the next 20 years [7].
Space exploration - China launched its first satellite Dong Fang Hong to Earth orbit on its own Long March rocket in 1970, becoming the fifth nation to achieve independent launch capability. There were over 50 Dong Fang Hong satellites launched over the next thirty years. China also became the third country (after the former Soviet Union and the USA) to send humans into space on its own in 2003. China has said that it plans to launch its own space station and to send a manned mission to the Moon by 2020, assuming funding was approved by the government [8].
Soft power - China has always had an attractive traditional culture, but now it is entering the realm of global popular culture as well. Chinese novelist Gao Xingjian won China's first Nobel Prize for Literature in 2000, and the Chinese film Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon became the highest grossing non-English film. Many Chinese actors/actresses and motion picture makers such as Jackie Chan, Zhang Ziyi, and Zhang Yimou have gained international recognition. Yao Ming, the Chinese star of the U.S. National Basketball Association's Houston Rockets, is rapidly becoming a household name, and China has successfully hosted the 2008 Summer Olympics. The enrollment of foreign students in China has tripled to 110,000 from 36,000 over the past decade, and the number of foreign tourists has also increased dramatically to 17 million in 2004. Mandarin, being the most spoken language in the world, will likely increase China's soft power. China has created 26 Confucius Institutes around the world to teach its language and culture, and while the Voice of America was cutting its Chinese broadcasts to 14 from 19 hours a day, China Radio International was increasing its broadcasts in English to 24 hours a day [9].
History - China has a long history spanning 5000 years. During the times of imperial China, China held some of the most advanced technologies in the world. The Chinese invented the gunpowder, paper, the printing machine, compass, the mechanical clock [10], and introduced the world's first paper money. Trade and learning occurred between the Chinese and the ancient Roman Empire, the Indians, and the Arabs.
Diaspora and cultural spread - Another important factor is the strong and economically influential Chinese [diaspora around the world, especially in South East Asian countries like Malaysia, [Singapore, Indonesia, [Thailand, and throughout the western world. The Chinese culture carries an important place in the culture of Vietnam, Korea, Japan and other south-eastern Asian countries. The Korean kingdom absorbed much of the Chinese essence in philosophy, language, technology as well as gaining military protection. The ideas of Confucianism, originated from China, holds great influence on the lifestyles of the Japanese, Koreans, Vietnamese, the Chinese in China and even within the Chinese diasporas.
China's military capabilities (technology and power projection) are still dwarfed by that of the United States (and the European Union, if counted as a unit), whose military spending outstrips that of its next major competitors combined. For example, in terms of operational land-based ICBM systems, it is the USA that possesses the most lethal strategic capability by far, as it has a more reliable arsenal and a massive numerical edge in ICBMs over China. In space technology as well, China is lagging behind United States' level of development as the latter had an earlier headstart in its space program.
Foreign affairs - China has yet to improve its relationship with other major powers. The Chinese people are often suspicious of Japan due to Japan's occupation of China in World War II. China has also fought a war with the other Asian regional power, India, and is noted for helping Pakistan in its wars against India. A major ongoing issue is the continued Chinese claims over Taiwan. China has threatened Taiwan with invasion should they declare formal independence. Although most countries recognize the One China policy and regard Taiwan as a part of China, the United States is obliged by law to help defend Taiwan should there be any invasion from the mainland. Therefore, a military conflict in the Taiwan Strait could lead to a confrontation between China and the United States, and this can be devastating to both sides.
Freedom of information - Some observers believe that the key to future technological growth will be the internet and global communication. Access to information is believed the key to development of science and technological ideas. Chinese control over information sources such as the internet may eventually hamper its growth. China is already less authoritarian; an example being the growth of the internet and the spread of free media. However, in recent times the government has increased its control over the media again.
Foreign relations clash - While the Chinese government would best maintain good relations with the United States, its good relations with Islamic nations may clash with its desire to maintain relations with the modern superpower. It is also necessary to note that some of its allies, particularly African and Latin American nations, are politically/economically unstable, which could lead to unexpected twists in foreign relations. While this is not necessary a point against China, it could be observed that Chinese foreign relations are (in the current era) delicate and unstable.
Foreign suspicion on China's true ambitions - Powerful nations such as the United States and India still are suspicious of China's international ambition. Some intellectuals and officials argue that China may become another Soviet Union type power, with the means and will to confront the United States, and that the U.S. may intervene to thwart China's rise. However, due to the close economic ties developed through globalization between China and these countries, a large scale military confrontation seems unlikely.
Incompatible economic and political model - Although China has liberalized its economy, its political system remains a one-party, authoritarian state. This have led some to believe that such two conflicting systems are incompatible and China's growth would be unsustainable in the long run. As Chinese people's affluence grew, it is believed that they would eventually demand more say in the political life of the country. This may lead to the eventual downfall of the Communist government. If such power transition towards a more democratic and open society were turbulent, this may present a setback to China's development.
Unemployment and uneven growth throughout the country - China still faces great difficulty in solving the mass unemployment problem in the rural areas. Furthermore, although the eastern seaboard areas of China have experienced a tremendous (often double-digit) economic growth rate and are major recipients of FDI into the country, similar breakneck growth rate has been lacking in the relatively undeveloped western areas. To close the gap and to catch up with China's wealthier eastern provinces, the government has initiated China Western Development strategy, the Revitalize Northeast China initiative, and the Rise of Central China policy. On a more micro-scale, there's also a big gap over urban-rural population wealth. This great disparity in urban-rural income (on average, urban residents earned three times more income than their rural counterparts) has caused concerns such as social discontents. Officially, an estimated 150 million Chinese still live below international poverty line (living under US$1 per day) in 2005. This has prompted the government to take steps such as abolishing the 2,000-year-old agricultural tax, exempting personal income tax for those receiving monthly income below 1,600 yuan, and increasing investments in rural infrastructure, education, and health services.
Technology sector - In some technology fields, China is still decades behind its counterparts such as the United States or the European Union. As many consider the manufacturing sector to have a minor (and decreasing) importance to technological advances and the surge of tertiary and quaternary sectors, to be a major industrial powerhouse would not necessarily characterize a nation as a superpower, but just a huge new commodity producer.
External dependency - The Chinese economy has a large dependence on foreign trade (exports) and investments. Therefore, any sudden fluctuation such as a downturn in global economic growth and/or demands for Chinese goods may have a significant adverse effect on the economy.
Currency - While China is a source of cheap and efficient labour force to foreign countries, it is the opinion of some experts that the Chinese currency needs re-evaluation and is currently greatly undervalued. This is a disadvantage of its rapid growth in recent years. When the currency is thoroughly re-valued, it is possible that the outsourcing of jobs to China would lessen somewhat. While a stronger currency is a concern for China's manufacturing industry, a positive effect could see the reduction of China's over-reliance on foreign trade and investments as the current main engine for its economic growth. It will thus cause domestic consumption to increase its role in fuelling the economic growth. This type of growth would be more stable towards external economic conditions and sustainable for longer periods of time. As of 2005, the share of domestic consumption in China's overall GDP is only approximately 30%, far below United States' share of 80% (most other industrialized nations' share are about 60-70%).
Trade imbalance - Products that are labelled Made in China are not necessarily developed or designed in China. In fact, 60% of Chinese goods that are exported come from overseas-invested factories, according to Chinese customs data. China has become a focal point for assemblies, where final products are assembled and/or tested, but not manufactured there. The main components are still imported from other countries. For instance, although China keeps a [trade surplus of US$200 billion with the United States, it has a trade deficit of US$137 billion with Asian countries.
Deteriorating environment - As a result of previous growth-at-all-costs strategy, China's environment is in a state of serious degradation. Soil erosion, desertification, air pollution, loss of arable lands, and steady falling of [water table especially in the north are serious problems and are estimated to cost the Chinese economy billions of dollars per year. Water is already a scarce commodity in China (especially in northern arid regions) where per capita water supplies are less than a quarter of the world's average. Pollution from coal causes over 250,000 deaths annually. By 2020, it is predicted that China will account for up to 19 per cent of global carbon dioxide emissions. [11] To respond to these problems, the Chinese government has embarked upon a number of projects such as Great Green Wall project (planting billions of trees to hold back desertification) and building canals to divert water from water-abundant southern regions to arid northern regions.
Economic crimes - Due to the lack of openness of the Chinese society in general, economic crimes such high-level corruption and collusion have become rampant among party and government officials, and this may hinder China's economic growth and hurt the confidence of investors. [12] Combined with worsening social problems in China (due to wide urban-rural income gap), there are about 87,000 big and small-scale demonstrations throughout China in 2005 alone. [13] Most of these public discontents are not political; rather they are due to economic reasons. Peasants for example, are being forced to leave their land and are compensated poorly. Their confiscated lands are then sold at a much higher price with the local officials keeping much of the proceeding profits. [14]
One Child Policy - A side effect of the One Child Policy is China's rapidly aging population, although this is likely to stabilize over time, it is predicted that by 2020, 25% of China's population will be considered retirees, so they cannot contribute to the work force. This could disadvantage its economy. Despite government prohibition, the One Child Policy and cultural preferences over sons have encouraged female infanticide and gender-based abortion. If trends continue, there will be 30-40 million more men of marriageable age in 2020 than there are women. [15]
The syswrite function tries to write LENGTH number of bytes from the SCALAR to the FILEHANDLE by using write(2) of UNIX. If LENGTH is not specified, the whole string is written.
Without an OFFSET, it writes the whole content of the SCALAR. If OFFSET is positive, OFFSET number of characters are skipped. If it is less than zero, it places the data this number of bytes before the end of the string. If OFFSET is greater than the string length, only the number of characters that exists are written.
Do not use syswrite with reads or with eof, print, seek, tell, or write, as it bypasses normal buffered I/O.
If the FILEHANDLE has been marked as :utf8 Unicode, characters are written instead of bytes, and the return value of syswrite() is in Unicode characters.
Please read the Australian Esoterica Manual of Style before making any significant contributions to this wikibook.
The history of Edmeston, New York: 1760 through 1769
On February 10, the Treaty of Paris ended the French and Indian War and France ceded Canada to Great Britain.
Of the first settlement in town, authentic data of the precise date are wanting. It was made, however, on the Unadilla River, during the interval between the close of the French War, in 1763, and the commencement of that of the Revolution, in 1775, by Col. Edmeston, an officer of the French War, and Percifer Carr, a faithful soldier who had served under him.
At the close of the war, Col. Edmeston, for his military services, received the grant of a tract of land covering a large portion of the town on which he made the first settlement. At his death the lands fell to heirs and minor children residing in England, from whom no safe title could be obtained for many years, — which greatly retarded the settlement of the town. During the Revolution, the hired men of Mr. Carr were killed while at work, his barn burned, his property destroyed, and himself and family were taken prisoners by the British and Indians and detained to the close of the war. — Gazetteer of the State of New York
British Parliament passed the Stamp Act, the first direct tax levied from England on the American colonies.
William Edmeston served in America as a captian of the British 48th Regiment during the French and Indian War, (1754-1763), the King, by proclamation, bestowed land upon his loyal soldiers as a kind of a bonus. The amount of land given varied with the rank of the soldier and ranged from 50 to 5,000 acres. Both William Edmeston and his brother, Robert Edmeston, a lieutenant in the same regiment, received the mandamus of the king in council in 1765 entitling each of them to 5,000 acres.
As a usual thing, the soldiers sold their claims to land speculators for a few shillings on the pound, but the Edmestons determined to develop theirs. They first tried to locate their tracts in eastern New York among the river Indians or in the New Hampshire grants but finally had their claims laid out and surveyed in 1770, just to the East of the Unadilla River and West of George Croghan's Patent. Both of these tracts are contained today in the Town of Edmeston. — Dr. Edward P. Alexander
At first they [William and Robert Edmeston] tried to locate their tracts in Eastern New York among the River Indians or in the New Hampshire Grants, today's Vermont, then in dispute between Yorker and Yankee speculators. But they came to understand the warning of John Watts not to settle in these places lest "one take your scalp, the other your estate in law suits."
The Edmestons finally had their claims laid out and surveyed in 1770 just east of the Tiendurran, or Unadilla River, west of George Croghan’s Otsego Patent. Both tracts are contained today in the Town of Edmeston, Otsego County.
The negotiations described above were conducted for William Edmeston by Parsafor Carr, who had been a sergeant in the 48th regiment. Carr became Edmeston's agent in administering the new tract, called Mount Edmeston, and in securing its settlement. Edmeston sent Carr settlers from Britain and in 1773 the proprietor came over personally to develop his buildings. — Mary E. Cunningham
The Townshend Acts were passed by British Parliament, placing a tax on common products, such as lead, paper, paint, glass, and tea.
Colonel William seems to have been the only one to do anything about developing the patent. — Hazel L. Jones
To Serjt Carr of the 48th Regt.
I am sorry you did not write me with your own hands and let me know exactly how the affair stands, what is the reason why the lands is not located and when they are likely to be located. I shall expect to hear from you regularly three times a year whether you have business or no.
You must attend the survey as it will be of great consequence you being present - I shall be very impatient till I hear from you & get your opinion about the affair how it stands.
I am Your Most Humble Servt.
P.S. Direct all your letters for me at Mr. Reeds as he will always know where to forward them to me.
The frontier line could soon move to the "Line of Property", set at the Fort Stanwix treaty in 1768 to separate the areas of white and Indian occupation. This line ran along the west branch of the Unadilla River, the whole length of the stream, then overland to the Northeast corner of Pennsylvania. Almost at once thereafter the remaining Otsego lands were almost entirely taken up and settlements were begun on them in a dozen or more years. — Roy L. Butterfield
To Sergeant Carr of the 48th Regt at Mr. James Garvices, French Church Street, New York
To Sergt Carr of the 48th Regt.
I received your [letter] about 3 weeks ago. and in regard to your hubbart you may make yourself very easy about it, I will take care to preserve it for you; I would have you remain where you are until you hear further from me; and you may draw on the Agent for 6 months pay sending me a letter of advice of it the packet before the bill sails for Eng- land that I may have sufficient time to apprise the Agent of it that he may honour your bill as it must be drawn on him and I mentioned for you &c. I am told there is a great deal of vacant land in the Province of New York and beg you will inquire very particularly about them and let me know by first Packet and Direct your letter to Mr. Reed as the last was but send me no more double letters it makes the Postage very high – I can't help thinking Mr. Webb was very negligent in not getting the land located long ago let me know your opinion about it – There was one Samuel Selby Sadler that lived on the north River New York enquire and let me know what is become of him.
I am Your Humble Servt.
I have just now received your letter and shall take care and pay your bill. I am glad to find that there is now some likelyhood of getting the lands located and you put upon them therefore would have you go to the spot and assist in the surveying of them, and endeavor to get them in the best situation and everything belonging to them and write me by the very first opportunity as I shall be impatient till I hear your report — I will take care to keep you as long as possible I can in the Regt. and will speak to Col Ross to recommend you to Genl Gage and Mr. Ogilvie when I go to Ireland as I am certain his recommendations will have much more weight than mine — when ever you write do it on a single sheet of paper as it makes the postage to high when its enclosed.
I am Your Humble Sert.
I received your letter dated the 15th of June, and am very sorry to find things are in no better way. I have wrote by this Post to Col Maitland to beg he will intercede with the governor for me, and would have you wait on him, and let me know what he says. If you see any probability of getting the lands I would have you stay by all means; but if you think there is no likelihood of it, you had better come home and join the Regt again.
I think Mr. Webb seems rather to trifle in the affair than any-thing else. I have paid your bill and beg you to make my Compts on Mr. Wallace & tell him i will pay any bill of yours at Mr. Reeds in London.
I am Your Humble Sert.
The Treaty of Fort Stanwix between the English and the Iroquois Indians, established the Unadilla river as the Western boundary of the New York colony.
I received your [letter] dated 18th June an am so sorry you did not get the land surveyed when you was up at Schenectady as it will be a loss of time. I shall write by this packet to Mr. Webb to let you have Provisions and money, and every assistance in his Power; I intend being out myself in the year 1771, or 1772 at farthest, and if I can get two boys bound to me till they are of age I will bring them out with me. Let me have every particular about the land in your next, as to situation, distance from Mohawk river, from Fort Stanwyx, its quality &c. I hope it will be as good a situation as that land on the Susquehanna otherwise my friends Col Maitland & Mr. Webb have done wrong for I never should have considered the purchaise money myself had I been on the spot.
Send me a particular account of everything necessary for the Stocking your farm &c. I have paid your bill of twelve pounds to Jas Jarvis, there has been no prize money paid since you left the Regt whenever there is I shall take care of yours; you talk of a private man's share, what man is it pray — I would have you fix on somebody in Albany or Schenectady where you can send your letters to be forwarded to me from the lands when you have gote settled upon them, and I would have you write me every two months what you are doing &c.
I have never seen Col Ross since I gote Mr. Wallaces letter about Col Murrays affair & have been only once at the Regt & only stayed a few days but I wrote Mr Scott about it and he promised to inquire into it if it can be settled I will do it for him with all my heart. Pray let me know your opinion in regard to setling the lands, whether people can be gote to rent them, or what method will be the best to pursue — Whenever you draw on me make your bills at 60 days sight — I would have you lose no time in getting yourself fixed upon the lands as the sooner the better; Let me know whether the Country is settled near the lands & how far up &c. and if there is any runs of water or rivers upon the Lands.
I am Your Most Obed Humble Servt.
Phosphorus is the fifteenth element in the periodic table. The phosphorus nucleus therefore contains fifteen protons.
Only phosphorus-31, 31P, is stable, so all naturally-occurring phosphorus is this isotope, which contains 16 neutrons. The 31P nucleus is NMR-active, and 31P NMR is widely used in chemistry.
This simplifies to 2.8.5 in GCSE-style electron shell notation.
In its standard elemental state, phosphorus is known to exist in several infinite covalent network structures. The most important allotropes of P are:
White phosphorus: contains discrete P4 tetrahedra (these also exist in liquid P)
Phosphorus forms compounds with most elements in the periodic table. Due to its larger size, phosphorus is much worse at forming double bonds than nitrogen is, so it mostly forms single bonds. One key exception is the very strong P=O bond is phosphoric acid.
Salts of phosphoric acid, contain the phosphate ion, PO43−.
In compounds with very electropositive elements, as in sodium phosphide, Na3P, phosphorus can exist as the phosphide ion, P3−. P3− does not exist in solution because it is exceptionally reactive. For example, if you try to dissolve Na3P in water, the following reaction occurs:
In compounds with elements whose electronegativity is similar to or greater than phosphorus, such as phosphorus trifluoride, PF3, phosphorus is covalently bonded to the other element.
Note that this book is for pre-university level. it can be used by school/college students as well as adults. This book deals with concepts and different dimensions of governance highlighting the major debates in the contemporary times. There is a need to understand
Sprain or Fracture?
File:Communitive mid-shaft humeral fracture callus.jpg Communitive mid-shaft humeral fracture: a compound fracture of the left upper arm.
Sprains, strains, dislocations, and fractures can all present with the same symptoms. It is very difficult to determine what the injury may be. It is not necessary to know which injury the victim has as the treatment will be the same for all of them.
Sprains only occur when a ligament is stretched past its normal limits.
Strains occur when a muscle or tendon is stretched past its normal limits.
Dislocations are when a bone comes out of its normal joint.
Fractures are actual breaks in the bone.
When assessing an injury, the history will inform the practitioner almost as good as anything. The anatomy, the way it feels, hearing a "pop," loss of function, and what the pain feels like are good indicators to having a musculoskeletal injury.
If the patient has any of the following symptoms, you should treat for a possible muscle or skeletal injury.
Crepitus - A grinding or cracking sound when the affected area is moved (usually accompanied by extreme pain). (Do not test for this! It should be reported by the patient.)
If the injury appears to be severe, EMS should be activated as soon as possible. These injuries include open fractures, shoulder/hip dislocations, and any injury that compromises nerve or circulatory function.
The acute treatment for muscle, bone or joint injury can follow the simple acronym "RICE".
Rest - Rest is very important for soft tissue injuries, both in the short term and for longer term care.
Immobilize - Sprains, strains and dislocations can be slinged; fractures should be splinted and slinged.
Cold - Ice should be applied periodically, for around 10-20 minutes at a time. After the 10-20 minutes, you need at least a 20 minute off period before you ice again. Any person sensitive to cold should have a layer of clothing between the skin and the ice.
Elevation - Where appropriate, the injury should be elevated above the heart, as this may help reduce the localized swelling which occurs. Do not elevate if this causes more pain to the victim.
If the injury is bad enough, the victim should be referred to a physician.
Frostbite is when tissues freeze. If the frozen tissue is more than skin deep, this is considered deep frostbite.
Notify EMS as soon as possible or be prepared to transport victim to a medical facility, even after treatment of frostbite.
Remove victim from cold environment, ensure there is no possibility of hypothermia. (If there is, see below.)
Fill a shallow container with enough water to cover the frostbitten body part. Make sure the water is at room temperature. The water does not have to be cool, but it cannot be too warm. The warmer the water, the worse the pain.
Immerse the injured area, ensure that the skin does not come into contact with anything but the water!
Repeat the above step by refreshing the water as it cools until the skin is back to a normal color and texture. This may take several hours depending on the severity of the injury.
Remember to transport the victim to a medical assistance for further assessment after the above steps.
Hypothermia is when the body's core temperature drops so low the body can no longer warm itself back up. Severe hypothermia is classified as when the body drops below 95 degrees Fahrenheit.
Don't do this!
Never jostle a victim of extreme hypothermia as this may cause cardiac arrest!
Remove the victim from the cold environment.
For cases of extreme hypothermia, where the patient is showing signs of confusion, slurred speech, fumbling hands, or go unconscious, notify EMS.
Remove wet clothing from the victim and replace with dry clothing. (A dry hat is recommended to be worn.)
Use heat packs to warm the patient. Do not allow the packs to touch naked skin.
Victims who are alert may drink warm liquids, however, do not give any drinks containing alcohol, caffeine, or give a drink that is too hot.
Warning: Victims of hypothermia may become worse as they warm, this is due to cold blood moving towards the core of the body. If a patient goes unconscious, check their ABCs and notify EMS.
"Nobody's dead until they're warm and dead" First aid procedures must therefore continue until professional help is available.
During the breeding season, the adult males grow distinctive black feathers on their heads; after the breeding season they lose this eye-catching plumage.
Bird callThe American Robin has gray upperparts and head, and orange underparts, usually brighter in the male. Robins are frequently seen running across lawns, picking up earthworms by sight. In fact, the running and stopping behavior is a distinguishing characteristic. When stopping, they are believed to be listening for the movement of prey.
Students...
To sign up for an editor duty, click "edit this page", and sign your username (using four tildes) directly after the name of the duty you want to claim.
Remember, each editor duty will be completed by only one student. This means, if a username appears next to a duty, that duty is not available. Please choose another editor duty in this or another chapter.
This indicates that PbakerODU correctly signed up for this editor duty.
The Currency - Advanced (European Union) Honor is a component of the Artisan Master Award
1 1. Have the Currency (Coins) Honor
3 3. What are the laws regarding counterfeiting in your country and what devices are used in your nation's currency to prevent it?
4 4. Attend a meeting of a local coin club and report on your experience. Possible items to consider: a. Level of expertise of members as demonstrated by presentations and dialogues.b. Average general age of attendees. c. Ideas which might help the club extend its collector interest to a wider audience. d. How newcomer friendly is the organization. e. Suggestions on how these people might be reached with the gospel through a manner which they would find attractive.
6 6. Add to your collection at least one of the unusual (odd and curious) forms learned about in requirement 1 of the Currency Honor requirements and have in your Currency Honor files, at least a paragraph summarizing how, when and where this item was used as currency.
Instructions and tips for earning the Currency honor can be found in the Arts and Crafts chapter.
In preparation for the arrival of the Euro on the continent on 1 January 2002, all Member States, bear an obligation to co-operate fully in the fight against currency counterfeiting. To reflect this, the EC has passed two Regulations – 1338/2001 and 1339/2001 (both passed on 28 June 2001) – each of which is intended to prevent counterfeiting of the new Euro notes and coins.
Regulation 1338 places obligations on those Member States which have adopted the Euro as their single currency; Regulation 1339 then extends these obligations to the other Member States. Article 6 of the former requires the Member States to implement “effective, proportionate and deterrent sanctions” on institutions which fail to withdraw and hand over counterfeit Euros to the country’s ‘Competent National Authorities’.
Individuals who fail to withdraw counterfeit Euros from circulation will be liable to up to two years in prison and those who fail to hand them in to the proper authorities could be fined.
Many security features have been incorporated into the euro banknotes. They will help you to recognise a genuine banknote at a glance.
The notes have raised print – a special printing processes give banknotes a unique feel.
Look at the banknote against the light for a watermark, a security thread and the see-through number. All three features should be seen from the front and back of genuine banknotes.
Tilt the banknote and on the front, you should see the shifting image on the hologram. On the back, you should see the glossy stripe (on the €5, €10 and €20 banknotes) or the colour-changing number (on the €50, €100, €200 and €500 banknotes).
Euro coins have machine-readable characteristics. They can be used in vending machines throughout the euro area - no matter where they were issued.
A sophisticated bi-metal and sandwich technology have been incorporated into the €1 and €2 coins.
The material of the 10, 20 and 50 cent coins is a unique alloy (Nordic gold), which is difficult to melt and used exclusively for coins.
Additionally there is lettering around the edge of the €2 coin and a unique metal composition is used for the 10, 20 and 50 cent coins to protect against counterfeiting.
Requirement 7. Collect and mount a type set of coins from your country of any date
a. Possess at least one coin from each mint in the type set.
b. Locate and identify the mint mark (if any) on each coin.
c. Locate and identify the initials (if any) of each coin's designer(s).
b. Collect, identify, and mount 25 different foreign coins. No two coins alike.
c. Collect and mount a type set of coins from your country minted during the 20th Century.
d. Collect and mount a date set of series of coins for your country beginning
Requirement 1. Relate briefly the story of barter, showing three reasons why money came into
The rate equation of a reaction maps out the rate of disappearance/appearance of a compound over time.
Where [A] is the molar concentration of compound A, and 'k' is the rate constant. Rates can have a certain order to them. They can be zero, first, second, etc. depending on the reaction. First order reactions (like the one above) are directly proportional to the concentration, so its 'k' value has a unit equal to (1/s) so as to make the rate (M/s).
Though reaction orders are often whole numbers, they may also be fractions or negative in value.
A zero-order reaction is independent of the concentration of the reactants, in which even a higher concentration of reactants will not speed up the rate of the reaction. This kind of reaction if found when a catalyst or other material required for the reaction is saturated by the reactants. Zero-order reactions frequently have to occur first in order to provide reactive substances for the higher order reactions.
Furthermore, a plot of concentration versus time should yield a straight line.
A first-order reaction depends on the concentration of only one reactant. This order occurs mostly in the reactions where there is only one reactant.
The rate equation of this reaction is illustrated as: Rate = K[A]
Furthermore, a plot of the natural log of concentration versus time should yield a straight line.
A second-order reaction is characterized by the property that their rate is proportional to the product of the concentrations of two reactants.
The rate equation of this reaction is illustrated as: Rate = K[A][B]
This means that if you double the concentration of the reactants, it will result in a four time increase in rate.
Furthermore, a plot of the inverse of concentration versus time should yield a straight line.
What are the benefits of students as self-regulated learners?
How can we help students set goals and monitor their own learning?
How can early elementary students be involved in the assessment process?
How can upper elementary students be involved in the assessment process?
How can secondary students be involved in the assessment process?
Can and should students grade each other?
Commonly referred to as a 'kennel', this is an ideal sleeping area for your dog if you live in confined places. Many can be used for travel, including airplanes.
With technology becoming such a major part in today’s classrooms, teachers should understand the advantages of incorporating technology into their classroom. Technology plays such an essential role in today’s society and the integration into the classroom is necessary for students to learn. Nowadays, children are becoming exposed to technology at such a young age and in some cases the students know more about the technology in the classroom than the teacher does; this may be beneficial at times, however teachers must strive to stay updated on technology as well and not just depend that students will know everything. Students and teachers can benefit greatly from having technology in their classroom especially starting in the Elementary classroom. Today’s technology can provide teachers, students, and parents with teaching and learning opportunities that were impossible in the past if technology is integrated into the classroom. Integrating technology into classroom instruction means more than simply teaching basic computer skills or software programs; it means using technology as a tool to support learning. There is a wide range of advantages for having technology in the Elementary classroom. A few of them are: better engagement and motivation, better instructional materials, better communication and interaction, increased family involvement, and application of real world skills.
The use of technology in an elementary school classroom enhances both student engagement and motivation. Students who are often uninterested in learning become more motivated by technology. This motivation and engagement can be related to a specific content area in the classroom or new skills gained by incorporating technology. If teachers can see the power that technology has in motivating students, they can use it to their advantage.
According to Paul D Eggen and Donald P Kauchak, “technology can heighten learner motivation by increasing self-efficacy and self-esteem, improving student attendance, promoting more positive attitudes toward school and more enjoyment of out-of-class activities, and increasing student involvement in learning activities. Technology may be unique in its ability to increase learners’ sense of efficacy.” In addition, because of the increased student engagement and motivation, there tends to be fewer behavioral problems within the classroom. Many schools have noticed these benefits within their classroom environments and students.
Sarah Carlyle, a third grade teacher from a small rural school, sees power in technology for motivation in her classroom. Carlyle's focus is on improving her students' reading and writing skills through technology. This is, to put simply, no easy task. To increase her students’ interest in writing, Carlyle used digital pictures of herself accompanied by pieces of her own writing for demonstration. Carlyle then created a digital "story" of herself as a successful author to share with her students in a slideshow format. After modeling this activity, the students then imagined they were successful authors and created a digital story as well. By using digital cameras, the students were more motivated and engaged in their assignment. The photographs allowed the students’ writing to come to life and the slideshow presentation motivated students to try their best. This is just one example of how effective incorporating technology can be in an elementary school classroom.
Increased motivation and involvement can also be found in Cal Washburn’s 4th grade classroom. Washburn teaches history at a rural elementary school. Washburn knows that the “quickest way to lose students' interest in the topic is to open the textbook.” So, to overcome this hurdle, he adopted a “hands-on, minds-on” approach to his lessons. One particular lesson he used with technology was based on Lewis and Clark’s journey. During the first part of the lesson, students used online resources such as authentic maps, diary entries, and history texts to gain information about Lewis and Clark’s trip. In addition, Washburn also wanted the students to experience real life discovery, so he planned a hands-on learning experience he called "geo-caching." This experience would allow Washburn to superimpose a map over the school and then place “artifacts” in relation to important landmarks described by Lewis and Clark. Washburn used Geographic information systems (GIS) and global positioning satellite (GPS) to create the maps for his lessons. Then students took historical maps, geographic coordinates, and GPS devices, to work on their artifact discovery. This lesson incorporated technology to bring history to life for the students and engage them in an experience similar to what Lewis and Clark would have experienced.
Another example of increased motivation and engagement due to technology was found in a study on Peakview Elementary School in Colorado. The study showed that students who were exposed to technology in the classroom were more motivated to learn, had increased independence, and were more engaged. In addition, students’ attitudes about school, technology, learning and themselves was positively affected. Teachers at this school also reported that the increased engagement and motivation led to an increase in the students’ success in all subject matters.
These examples, along with many others, show how the incorporation of technology can increase student motivation and engagement. This increase was due to new experiences with technology for the students and an increased interest in the content matter.
Findings show that learning is best done while being engaged in something. Technology is a great way to give each individual student an opportunity to do just this. With gizmos and gadgets available to the schools, students are given the opportunity to do something on their own instead of watching something being done by an instructor or another student. Some technologies that allow students to do things while learning include resources such as iPads, iPods, SmartBoards, or basic computers. Of course, the list is longer than what is provided here, but knowing that the possibilities are never-ending is something that can boggle anyone’s mind. Technology is continually being improved by researchers and scientists, as well as computer programmers. We can only dream of where technology will take us in the coming years, however, technology is currently having a large focus on the classroom and learning.
According to an administrator at http://www.rememberanything.com/benefits-of-technology-in-the-classroom/#, another positive side of the instructional materials from technology is that they are more attractive looking. With technology comes moving graphics, bright colors, and attractive modules. As students are changing with the times, incorporating entertainment into learning is something that works with kids today. According to Arvind Singhal and Everett M. Rogers (1999), education is being modeled to entertain students while they learn. Technology is something that can hold the attention of students and entertain them while they learn. This is something that research has shown to be effective.
Additionally, a point made by an administrator is that the instructional materials allow for a better self-paced learning. Students are able to go as fast or as slow as they please when going over content. If a student has a learning disability, the curriculum can be self-paced so that the student is going at a rate where they can understand and truly grasp the material. On the other hand, a student who is gifted or talented can speed up the curriculum to meet his or her needs. These technologies are very useful for a teacher to differentiate to students on the speed of course work.
Technology has become a major foundation for communication and interaction between the classroom and the student’s home life. At the elementary level, some students often forget what their homework is, when it is due, or sometimes forget papers at school that need parent signatures. In addition to having technology provide these things to students, it also makes them available to parents. With technology being involved, students are able to access classroom websites from home, which may contain their homework or other materials from their classroom. With this tool, parents are able to communicate with their child’s teacher as well. This type of communication allows parents to know what is going on in their child’s classroom. When it comes to communication, as stated on http://www.rememberanything.com/benefits-of-technology-in-the-classroom/, “technology is an excellent tool for assessment purposes as well as advocacy issues between the students and the teachers”. Students are able to do homework or activities online where their teachers can assess them to see if they understand the information taught in class. This is a great foundation that is making it easier for teachers to assess the information that their students actually know.
Peer tutoring has become huge with technology in the classroom. As stated on http://www2.ed.gov/pubs/EdReformStudies/EdTech/effectsstudents.html#peers by a fifth grade teacher, "I've also seen kids helping each other a lot at the computer. The ones that pick it up faster, they love teaching it to someone that doesn't know it yet." Students are communicating with one another more because of technology and in some cases students are getting more out of the curriculum.
With students using more technology they are taking on more of an active role rather than a passive one. The student is constantly making choices on how to generate information not only for themselves, but to share with their peers and the teacher. Communication for the teachers is a big role. They become the facilitator offering suggestions to their students when they are stuck on a certain topic, but with the technology it also gives the students the freedom to be more creative and explore.
As teachers and school districts look at technology, many view technology as an avenue to increase parent and family involvement in the students’ education. Parental involvement is something that is desired by many teachers, but some do not know how to increase the involvement from students’ parents and families. Technology is an appropriate answer to this serious and difficult dilemma that teachers face year after year when trying to get parents involved. If teachers can see the advantages to using technology to communicate with families and use technology correctly to do this, they will also see improvement within their students. This involvement through technology can manifest itself in many forms: classroom websites, emails, grades posted online, etc. With these tools incorporated into the classroom, families are now more than ever before becoming involved in the education of the student by being aware of what is going on in the classroom.
Telem and Pinto (2006) point out that having a “positive association between home and school is now commonly accepted as necessary for educational progress” (p. 260). This means that home and school need to be linked in a way that fosters a child’s learning. With technology, teachers and parents can foster a child’s learning together and be on the same page.
In a study done in the UK, Lewin & Luckin (2010) found that with technology introduced into the classroom, parents became much more involved in the education of their children. With a program called the ICT Test Bed, parents were given the opportunity to track and pay attention to their child’s progress in school. The effects of this program were allowing parents to see the work of their child and allowing parents to become involved. Also in this study, parents were asked to use technology more. For example, parents were asked to email the schools about absences. This simple use of technology was something that proved to be effective in the running of the elementary schools in the UK. Also mentioned in this study was the use of school websites. Parents were able to be more involved in their child’s education because they were had access to a website that contained information about the happenings of the classroom that a parent may not be exposed to by their child.
“To live, learn, and work successfully in an increasingly complex and information-rich society, students must be able to use technology effectively,” according to the National Educational Technology Standards. By using technology, even students at an elementary school level are able to gain new and valuable skills. Today’s children are growing up in a world much different from what other generations have experienced in the past. It is a world of computers, software, and wireless access to instant information. Our world now requires a different set of skills to succeed.
These skills can include understanding how to use technology, software, and the internet safely, or how to research and learn using technology. All of these skills students can gain by having technology in the classroom and it can be applied to their futures because of our technology based society.
By gaining introduction experience with technology at a young age, students will be more confident using it in the future. According to Beth Gregor, an elementary technology coordinator at Pleasantdale Elementary School, “students of all ages need to be on the computer. It is a real-life skill that will carry them throughout their entire lives. The more familiar I can make computers for my kindergarteners, the easier time they will have using computers as they get older.” In addition to these computer skills, students can gain information about how to use the internet safely and effectively in a controlled environment. Elementary school teacher, Ann Johnston, works with children from grades one to five on their internet skills in a San Diego school. In her program, "The Internet pyramid,” Johnston plans activities which gradually build the students' skills in conducting research by using search engines, pictures, and creating multimedia presentations based of the information they have gathered. These types of skills are very important for students as they advance through school and eventually in their careers.
In our advancing times, technology is rapidly becoming the future. According to James Morris, “students are entering a world in which 60% of jobs will require technological competency- a world in which they must continue to update their occupational and technological skills in order to be successful." As the demand for technological skills grow, it will become more essential that students begin learning these skills, beginning in elementary schools.
As we look at all of the things that technology offers students and teachers, we cannot help but to see the advantages that are offered. Between better engagement and motivation, better instructional materials, better communication and interaction, increased family involvement, and application of real world skills; the advantages are apparent and bountiful. Technology’s advantages are too numerous to name, but this wiki presents the highlighted advantages. Teachers must learn to harness and use the valuable resources that technologies offer so that their classroom can be successful and move forward into the future. Elementary classrooms are the perfect environment to start the use of technology because it is important to encourage knowledge of technology at an early age. Students are becoming more and more technology literate with each passing year, and it is imperative for teachers to recognize the power technology has over children. Of equal importance is the necessity for teachers to keep up with the students. If these two things are realized, the sky is the limit for the advantages of technology that presents. Technology is coming whether teachers and classrooms are ready or not. Realizing that technology is an advantage is giving students a gift if we let the power of technology in the classroom reach it’s fruition.
Lewin, C., & Luckin, R. (2010). Technology to support parental engagement in elementary education: Lessons learned from the UK. Computers & Education, 54(3), 749-758. Retrieved November 22, 2010, from ERIC.
Peterson, K. (n.d.). Successful Technology Integration in an Elementary School: A Case Study . Retrieved November 20, 2010, from h
Singhal, A., & Rogers, E. M. (1999). Entertainment-education: a communication strategy for social change. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Telem, M., & Pinto, S. (2006). Information technology’s impact on school–parents and parents–student interrelations: a case study. Computers & Education, 47(3), 260-279. Retrieved November 22, 2010, from ERIC.
Mixers are non-alcoholic ingredients in cocktails. Mixers include things like grenadine, soda, non-liqueur syrups, and juices.
Carbonated mixers are based on carbonated water. Due to certain properties of gas-liquid solutions and gas solubility, carbonated water does not stay carbonated for long; it quickly goes flat. Because heat decreases solubility of gases, and because an open container allows the pressure on top the solution to stay below the vapor pressure of carbon dioxide, you should always make sure carbonated mixers are kept in a keg or cold, closed bottle.
For soda fountains and soda guns (automated soda fountains), carbonated water is mixed for soda, colas, and tonic water by passing water through syrup and introducing carbon dioxide gas into the line from a pressurized tank. This ensures that the carbonation is always fresh, not weak or flat. Kegs usually come with a pump to allow them to be pressurized; you can purchase small pumps to replace soda bottle caps for the same reason, but they're rarely worth the effort except for very rarely used bottles. Remember, gases evaporate from water under low pressure; high pressure fixes this.
For carbonated mixers in bottles, try keeping smaller bottles for mixers that are used slowly throughout the night; use bigger bottles only for really popular mixers that run out fast. In either case, try to keep the cap on when not in use.
Whenever possible, use fresh squeezed citrus juices. These juices degrade quickly after being squeezed, and cocktails will not have the expected flavour or balance with sweet and sour mix or commercial bottled juices. For less easily made juices such as pomegranate or pineapple, the drink recipe is likely balanced for bottled juice, so feel free to use those, as long as they are 100% juice without added sweeteners or artificial flavourings.
Lime juice: Lime juice is one of the most common juices found in classic cocktails, as its tart flavor is very effective at balancing sweet liqueurs like triple sec, and its character has a natural synergy with the aromatic botanicals of dry gin. If used in a cocktail without a sweeter liqueur or juice, it is often sweetened with a small amount of simple syrup so as not to be unpleasantly tart. Lime juice is also a bit inconsistent compared to other citrus juices, so one must be sure to taste a cocktail and balance for it before serving.
Rose's lime juice: Rose's is a lime juice cordial, with sugar and preservatives added. It is a very specific flavor, which is often specified in Gimlet recipes. However, given the current availability of fresh limes in most parts of the developed world, it should never be substituted in recipes calling for "lime juice", only those calling for lime juice cordial or Rose's specifically.
Cocktail bitters (usually called just bitters) are highly concentrated liquids with a strong bitter flavor. They are used as a flavoring agent in small quantities of drops or dashes. Though they are typically made with an alcohol base, they are not intended to be drunk on their own and are usually not considered an alcoholic beverage. Cocktail bitters should not be confused with bitter liqueurs such as Campari or Chartreuse, which are considered alcoholic beverages and can be drunk on their own. Though there are numerous formulations of bitters with a wide variety of flavors, the three most commonly used in cocktails are:
The RNA World Hypothesis speculates that the origin of life began with ribonucleic acid (RNA) because of its ability to serve both as a storage for genetic information and enzymatic activity. It is proposed that RNA preceded the current genetic material, deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), and led the evolution of the DNA → RNA → protein world.
There are two schools of thought that both support the RNA World hypothesis:
The book, The Genetic Code, written in 1967 by Carl Woese, was the first published material that supported RNA World Hypothesis[2]. Francis Crick and Leslie Orgel proposed the idea that RNA once did the work of DNA and proteins in 1968. Their theories were not validated until the work of Nobel Prize laureate Thomas R. Cech. In the 1970s, Cech was studying the splicing of RNA in a single-celled organism, Tetrahymena thermophila, when he discovered that an unprocessed RNA molecule could splice itself. He announced his discovery in 1982 and became the first to show that RNA has catalytic functions. The phrase “RNA World Hypothesis” was then coined later in 1986 by Harvard molecular biologist and Nobel Prize laureate Walter Gilbert as he commented on the recent observations of the catalytic properties of RNA[3]. Another major milestone occurred in 2000 when it was published in Science that "The Ribosome is a Ribozyme" and the proteins in the ribosomes exist primarily on the periphery.
The primordial soup that made up Earth had compounds including nucleotides. These nucleotides sequenced spontaneously and randomly, eventually forming an RNA molecule (or a similar molecule) with catalytic characteristics. RNA has properties of autocatalytic self-replication and assembly, contributing to its exponential increase in number. Scientists today have assumed that replication was not perfect in the time of primitive life, and therefore variations of RNA developed. RNA's catalytic properties do not only apply to itself, but it also catalyzes transesterification—a process necessary for protein synthesis that allows specific peptide sequences and proteins to arise. Some of the peptides formed may have supported the self-replication of RNA and provided the possibility of undergoing modifications. Those modifications led to more efficient sequences of RNA molecules.
A possible model for forming purine and pyrimidine bases was proposed by Urey and Miller's experiment. This experiment brought about evidence that organic molecules originated from inorganic ingredients such as carbon dioxide, ammonia, and water etc. Such products were mixed under a reduced environment and subjected to electric shock (to simulate lightning), which led to the creation of more reactive molecules, such as hydrogen, cyanide, and aldehydes, as well as some amino acids and organic acids over a certain period of time. These amino acids contributed to the formation of peptide sequences.
Further evidence that the RNA World Hypothesis has clout is found through the function of present day ribosomes. RNA is the ribosome's tool for synthesizing proteins and catalyzing the formation of peptide bonds. A form of RNA known as transfer RNA (tRNA) is responsible for delivering free amino acids to the ribosome and growing peptide chain. Therefore, this points to the fact that RNA is multifunctional, and can act as a synthesizer, transporter, messenger, and ribosome molecule.
One may ask, if RNA was the precursor of DNA and proteins, how did this evolution occur?
DNA complements the RNA sequence and stores genomic information. Since DNA is a more stable molecule than RNA, it makes sense for DNA to adapt to the environment and take over this job of RNA. And how is DNA more stable than RNA? The difference between the general structure of DNA and RNA is found in the sugar. DNA has a deoxyribose sugar while RNA has a ribose sugar. The missing 2'-OH group on the deoxyribose sugar is what makes DNA more stable, since there is no hydroxyl group for other molecules to react with. Otherwise, RNA does not remain in a helical ring, as does DNA, since the chain of nucleotides would be easily broken apart. Another possibility scientists are exploring is the idea that reverse transcriptase (RT) played a role in the transformation from RNA to DNA. Reverse transcriptase catalyzes the formation of DNA from an RNA template, and RT is the defining feature of retroviruses like HIV. RT, along with RNA replicase, may be the enzyme that performed this transition. Furthermore, the combination of cyanoacetaldehyde and urea formed uracil (U) and cytosine (C)-- components of the primordial soup. This belief was supported by another of Miller's experiments. There is no evidence at this time that thymine (T), the nitrogenous base in DNA that takes the place of uracil (U) in RNA, was formed from this atmosphere. This infers that RNA was a predecessor of DNA. In addition, proteins that had formed from RNA were found to be versatile structures, allowing them to take over what was initially RNA's catalytic functioning.
Properties that support the RNA Hypothesis became more clear in the 1980s when it was discovered that RNA can activate and deactivate other molecules by binding with them while folding into specific structures. Before this discovery, researchers believed that RNA only had a few functions. Consideration of RNA as the pre-component of cellular life has since been studied extensively.
Major evidence that has the scientific community believing that RNA predates DNA and proteins are as follows:
RNA has the ability to store genetic data, and pass down hereditary information.
It is the main component linking up DNA and gene formation to amino acids and protein synthesis via transcription and translation.
RNA's ability to duplicate itself as well as the genetic information it carries, very much like DNA.
DNA requires an RNA primer in order to replicate while RNA does not need any such primer. This shows how DNA seems to depend more on RNA for its continued existence rather than the other way around.
RNA is able to catalyze reactions as proteins do. The formation of a protein is also administered by RNA which points heavily to its preexistence over the proteins.
RNA's ability to form double helices similar to DNA, and tertiary structures similar to those of catalytic proteins.
The structure of RNA, with an hydroxyl group in the 2' position of the sugar molecule, makes it a less stable molecule which is capable of attacking a phosphodiester bond near it as long as the RNA molecule is in a flexible position and not constrained. This made it susceptible to breakdown and allowed an adaptation of different conformations which perhaps was beneficial to early life.
RNA's different set of bases such as Uracil, which is “1 product of damage to cytosine” made RNA more prone to mutations thus making it more suitable to primitive life in early times.
An experiment supporting the RNA World Hypothesis was, the Miller-Urey Experiment. The Miller-Urey Experiment was an experiment tested by Stanley L. Miller and Harold C. Urey in 1953 to see which molecules were present in the origin of life. This experiment specifically tested the hypothesis of Alexander Oparin's and J.B.S. Haldane's hypothesis that stated the conditions of prebiotic Earth favored chemical reactions, synthesizing inorganic compounds into organic ones. Both experiments helped scientists around the world better understand the evolution of the Earth and how organic compounds formed. The gases used by Miller and Urey were Methane (CH4), Ammonia (NH3), Hydrogen (H2) and water (H2O). After putting these gases (which were presumed to be present in prebiotic Earth), Miller and Urey continuously ran an electric current throughout the closed vessel system to stimulate lightning, which was thought to be extremely common on early Earth. These compounds were put inside a sterile array of glass tubes and flasks connected in a loop, with one flask half-full of liquid water and another flask containing a pair of electrodes. The liquid water was heated to induce evaporation, sparks were fired between the electrodes to simulate lightning through the atmosphere and water vapor, and then the atmosphere was cooled again so that the water could condense and trickle back into the first flask in a continuous cycle.
Within a day, the mixture had turned pink in color,[1] and at the end of one week of continuous operation, Miller and Urey observed that as much as 10–15% of the carbon within the system was now in the form of organic compounds. Two percent of the carbon had formed amino acids that are used to make proteins in living cells, with glycine as the most abundant. Sugars and liquids were also formed. Nucleic acids were not formed within the reaction. But the common 20 amino acids were formed, in various concentrations. This experiment thus showed that organic compounds that are vital to cellular function and life were easily made under the conditions of prebiotic Earth.
In an interview, Stanley Miller stated: "Just turning on the spark in a basic pre-biotic experiment will yield 11 out of 20 amino acids."[2]
This further supported the RNA World Hypothesis.
The Miller-Urey and Oparin experiments helped launch other experiments to further show that organic compounds formed in early Earth and to also confirm the RNA World Hypothesis.
In 1961, Juan Oro conducted an experiment that concluded amino acids could be formed from HCN, hydrogen cyanide, and Ammonia (NH3) in an aqueous solution. This experiment also produced Adenine, one of the nucleotide bases. This became a major breakthrough because adenine is one of the four bases in DNA and RNA, the genetic material of a cell. Adenine is also used during the process of ATP (adenosine triphosphate), which is an energy releasing molecule in cells.
This experiment led to more showing that the other three RNA and DNA bases could be formed through similar experiments of simulated chemical environments with reducing atmospheres.
Most of the opponents of the RNA World concentrate on dispelling the idea that RNA was the first form of genetic material, although they do agree that there may have been some other pre-RNA form of genetic material. In summary:
Others believe that RNA is not a likely pre-DNA form of genetic material. Their arguments include:
The difficulty of RNA formation has caused other propositions of alternative theories on precursor materials for cellular life:
Peptide Nucleic Acid theory (PNA), a nucleic acid with a backbone of peptide bonds, made a likely theory because it overcame the problem in RNA theory regarding the difficulty of RNA to attach ribose and phosphate groups together.
Threose nucleic acids are proposed as a more likely starting material than RNA.
Glycold nucleic acids are proposed as precursors rather than RNA because they are easily formed.
The RNA World hypothesis is supported by RNA's ability to store, transmit, and duplicate genetic information, as DNA does. RNA can also act as a ribozyme (an enzyme made of ribonucleic acid). Because it can reproduce on its own, performing the tasks of both DNA and proteins (enzymes), RNA is believed to have once been capable of independent life. Further, while nucleotides were not found in Miller-Urey's origins of life experiments, they were found by others' simulations, notably those of Joan Oro. Experiments with basic ribozymes, like the viral RNA Q-beta, have shown that simple self-replicating RNA structures can withstand even strong selective pressures (e.g., opposite-chirality chain terminators) (The Basics of Selection (London: Springer, 1997)).
Additionally, in the past a given RNA molecule might have survived longer than it can today. Ultraviolet light can cause RNA to polymerize while at the same time breaking down other types of organic molecules that could have the potential of catalyzing the break down of RNA (ribonucleases), suggesting that RNA may have been a relatively common substance on early Earth. This aspect of the theory is still untested and is based on a constant concentration of sugar-phosphate molecules.
The base cytosine does not have a plausible prebiotic simulation method because it easily undergoes hydrolysis.
Prebiotic simulations making nucleotides have conditions incompatible with those for making sugars (lots of formaldehyde). So they must somehow be synthesized, then brought together. However, they do not react in water. Anhydrous reactions bind with purines, but only 8% of them bind with the correct carbon atom on the sugar bound to the correct nitrogen atom on the base. Pyrimidines, however, do not react with ribose, even anhydrously.
Then phosphate must be introduced, but in nature phosphate in solution is extremely rare because it is so readily precipitated. After being introduced, the phosphate must combine with the nucleoside and the correct hydroxyl must be phosphorylated, in order to create a nucleotide.
For the nucleotides to form RNA, they must be activated themselves (meaning that they must be combined with two more phosphate groups, as in adenosine triphosphate). Activated purine nucleotides form small chains on a pre-existing template of all-pyrimidine RNA. However, this does not happen in reverse because the pyrimidine nucleotides do not stack well.
Additionally, the ribose must all be the same enantiomer, because any nucleotides of the wrong chirality act as chain terminators.
A.G. Cairns-Smith in 1982 criticized writers for exaggerating the implications of the Miller-Urey experiment. He argued that the experiment showed, not the possibility that nucleic acids preceded life, but its implausibility. He claimed that the process of constructing nucleic acids would require 18 distinct conditions and events that would have to occur continually over millions of years in order to build up the required quantities.
As mentioned above, a different version of the same hypothesis is "Pre-RNA world", where a different nucleic acid is proposed to pre-date RNA. A candidate nucleic acid is peptide nucleic acid (PNA), which uses simple peptide bonds to link nucleobases.53 PNA is more stable than RNA, but its ability to be generated under prebiological conditions has yet to be demonstrated experimentally.
Threose nucleic acid (GNA), and like PNA, also lack experimental evidence for their respective abiogenesis.
The iron-sulfur world theory proposes that simple metabolic processes developed before genetic materials did, and these energy-producing cycles catalyzed the production of genes.
Yet another alternative theory to the RNA world hypothesis is the panspermia hypothesis. It discusses the possibility that the earliest life on this planet was carried here from somewhere else in the galaxy, possibly on meteorites similar to the Murchison meteorite.58 This does not invalidate the concept of an RNA world, but posits that this world was not Earth but rather another, probably older, planet.
The RNA world hypothesis, if true, has important implications for the very definition of life. For the majority of the time following the elucidation of the structure of DNA by Watson and Crick, life was considered as being largely defined in terms of DNA and proteins: DNA and proteins seemed to be the dominant macromolecules in the living cell, with RNA serving only to aid in creating proteins from the DNA blueprint.
The RNA world hypothesis places RNA at center-stage when life originated. This has been accompanied by many studies in the last ten years demonstrating important aspects of RNA function that were not previously known, and support the idea of a critical role for RNA in the functionality of life. In 2001, the RNA world hypothesis was given a major boost with the deciphering of the 3-dimensional structure of the ribosome, which revealed the key catalytic sites of ribosomes to be composed of RNA and for the proteins to hold no major structural role, and be of peripheral functional importance. Specifically, the formation of the peptide bond, the reaction that binds amino acids together into proteins, is now known to be catalyzed by an adenine residue in the rRNA: the ribosome is a ribozyme. This finding suggests that RNA molecules were most likely capable of generating the first proteins. Other interesting discoveries demonstrating a role for RNA beyond a simple message or transfer molecule include the importance of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (SnRNPs) in the processing of pre-mRNA and RNA editing and reverse transcription from RNA in Eucaryotes in the maintenance of telomeres in the telomerase reaction.
9.Nelson, David L. Principles of Biochemistry, 4th ed. W. H. Freeman, 2004.
Lawsuits have become increasingly common in our society and many Americans act and speak out of the fear of being taken to court. In any environment, one must be conscious of how their words and actions will affect others. A thoughtless statement or inappropriate physical contact might land you in court. This is especially true in schools, where daily contact, high emotions and stressful circumstances can all come together at the wrong moment. As such, it is good to understand the rights of students trying to express themselves and the rights of teachers trying to keep a safe, orderly learning environment. Few people know their constitutional rights, and even fewer teachers & students know how their constitutional rights change once they enter the "semi-public/semi-private" classroom.
This paper will examine some of the rights guaranteed to all Americans and how those rights change once they enter school. It will also seek to answer some of the most common questions held by students. What is free speech? Is it protected in school? How safe am I in my possessions? Do I have any expectation of privacy when it comes to my things? A good understanding of students' rights benefits everyone: the students who exercise them, the teachers who challenge them, and the democratic society which lives by them.
By the conclusion of this article, readers should be able to:
The founding fathers deliberated for days on end when writing the first draft of our nation's Constitution and later the Bill of Rights. They agonized over wording; argued over semantics. It is likely they had no idea just how successful this "great experiment in democracy" would turn out to be. Equally likely is this: they never once considered how these rights would pertain to young students in the classroom. The landmark case of Tinker v. Des Moines School District clearly defined the benchmark for how rights may be exercised and when they may be curtailed:
It can hardly be argued that either students or teachers shed their constitutional rights to freedom of speech or expression at the schoolhouse gate.
On the other hand, the Court has repeatedly emphasized the need for affirming the comprehensive authority of the States and of school officials, consistent with fundamental constitutional safeguards, to prescribe and control conduct in the schools.
In other words, one doesn't surrender his or her constitutional rights by attending school. However the courts have recognized that the unique nature of the school environment requires that certain liberties be suppressed in the interest of maintaining a safe, orderly learning environment. According to the doctrine of "in loco parentis" school officials are more than government officials; they are, in a legal sense, the temporary parents of their students. Just what exactly that allows them to do and say is a matter of debate and has led to numerous legal challenges, many involving the Supreme Court. This paper will examine some of those court decisions and explore their impact on student's rights.
Summary : The balancing act between the free expression of rights and the desire to maintain order in school serves as a good example of the struggle faced by our democratic society.
Perhaps the most quoted court decision on the subject, Tinker v. Des Moines was a battle over students' 1st amendment rights, specifically the right to free speech. High school students John Tinker, 15, and Christopher Eckhardt, 16, decided to show their opposition to the Vietnam War by wearing black armbands to school. Administrators countered by banning armbands and threatened disciplinary actions for any students violating the rule. Tinker and Eckhardt wore their armbands and were suspended, not allowed back until they agreed to stop violating school rules. Tinker's father subsequently sued and lost in District Court. The Appellate Court was unable to reach a decision and the case was passed up to the Supreme Court, who overturned the District Court's decision and ruled in favor of the plaintiffs. The court stated that if the student's actions did not disrupt the learning environment, or advocate or cause harm to themselves or others, it was permissible. This has been the rationale in virtually every other opinion held by the court regarding student's constitutional rights.
While a student's right to free speech is protected, it is not a blanket protection covering any form of protest. A recent example of this is Morse v. Frederick, also known as the "Bong Hits 4 Jesus"case. This case is particularly eye-opening in that the offense occurred off school grounds. Frederick, a high school student, displayed a banner at a local parade featuring the phrase "Bong Hits 4 Jesus", a reference to marijuana use. Morse, a school official, noticed the banner and instructed the student to take it down. When Frederick refused, he was suspended by Morse and the decision was upheld by the school board. Frederick sued, claiming protection under his 1st amendment rights. This time the Supreme Court sided with the school board, noting "schools may take steps to safeguard those entrusted to their care from speech that can reasonably be regarded as encouraging illegal drug use, [therefore] the school officials in this case did not violate the First Amendment". This fits with the consistent message of the courts "a student's Constitutional rights will be protected only as long as their exercise does not endanger the health or academic progress of others".
Other cases regarding the Rights of Free Speech & Expression:
West Virginia v. Barnette, 1943 : The court ruled that is unconstitutional to require students to salute the American flag. The 1st amendment not only protects freedom "of" expression but also freedom "from" expression.
Bethel School District v. Fraser, 1986 : Washington high school student Matthew Fraser was suspended for using sexually explicit language in a speech given on school grounds. The court sided with the school, affirming that schools can prohibit "lewd, indecent or plainly offensive" language.
Guiles v. Marineau, 2004 : A 14-year old student in Vermont was suspended for repeatedly wearing a T-shirt depicting President George W Bush as an alcoholic and a cocaine addict. The shirt contained both written and visual depictions of banned substances. The court sided with the student, citing two factors: 1) the shirt did not advocate the use of illegal drugs and 2) the shirt did not cause significant disruptions to the learning environment.
Summary : A student's exercise of speech or expression is legal and constitutionally protected so long as it doesn't:
The student's desire for freedom of speech can only be matched by their desire for privacy and for security of their possessions. The right of school officials to search a student's belongings is a contentious issue, and few teachers know the limits of their authority and few students understand the extent of their rights. Just as Tinker v. Des Moines set the standard for the protection of 1st Amendment rights, so did another case set the precedent for search & seizure: New Jersey v. T. L. O., 469 U.S. 325 (1985).
Two female high school students were caught smoking in the restroom and assistant principal Theodore Choplick confronted them. One of the two admitted her wrongdoing but the other student (T.L.O.) denied it. Choplick searched T.L.O.'s purse and discovered cigarettes, drugs and drug paraphernalia, along with a large amount of money. T.L.O. was tried and convicted in court on charges of delinquency. The student countered that the school had violated her 4th amendment rights, depriving her of protection against unreasonable search and seizure (i.e. searching without a warrant) and the evidence should be inadmissible. The Supreme Court disagreed, stating: "a school official may properly conduct a search of a student's person if the official has a reasonable suspicion that a crime has been or is in the process of being committed, or reasonable cause to believe that the search is necessary to maintain school discipline or enforce school policies."
This is a departure from the court's usual position requiring "probable cause" for government officials to search someone without a warrant. This change, although appearing slight, has enormous ramifications. School officials may search someone based solely upon a well-grounded suspicion, not iron-clad evidence of wrongdoing. This is analogous to the difference between "reasonable doubt" and "beyond a shadow of a doubt". This threshold however applies only to school personnel and NOT to law enforcement officials on school grounds. The court has been careful not to slide down that slippery slope. In the court's decision, they state that a teacher's right to protect him- or herself and the safety of their students is on par with the rights of firefighters, EMS, OSHA officials, etc. The right to privacy must be balanced against the public's right to safety. In a school, the balance is tilted toward protecting safety and maintaining order, even if it is at the expense of student rights.
The issue of locker searches has not come to the Supreme Court. As the locker is school property and therefore "public space" it is not afforded the same protections as a student's personal possessions.
State of Iowa v. Marzel Jones (2003) - A student whose locker was cleaned out by school personnel. Finding a small amount of marijuana, the student was charged. Marzel claimed 4th amendment protection against unreasonable search & seizure but was denied by the State Supreme Court whonoted that the search occurred on school grounds, "where the State is responsible for maintaining discipline, health, and safety." (Bd. of Ed. of Indep. Sch. Dist. 92 v. Earls, 536 U.S. 822)
Another issue of concern has been the constitutionality of drug screenings for student-athletes.
Vernonia School District v. Acton (1995) : 7th grade Oregon student James Acton signed up to play football but refused to take a mandatory urine test. Drug testing was administered to athletes after a recent "explosion" in drug-use and the related discipline problems which arose. Citing public health concerns and noting the prevalence of student-athletes involved in drug-related incidents, the school board deemed urinalysis a necessary requirement for participation in sports. The Supreme Court agreed and upheld their decision. Once again, the desire to protect public health overrode student's desire for privacy.
Summary : School personnel may search a student and their belongings if the health & welfare of the public is at risk or they have a "reasonable suspicion" that a crime has been, is being, or will be committed
These amendments protect an individual's right to a fair trial and must be considered whenever "a person's good name, reputation, honor, or integrity is at stake because of what the government is doing to him..." (Wisconsin v. Constantineau, 1971). This includes the enforcement of disciplinary actions such as suspension or expulsion. The expectations of a fair trial are very different however, depending on the circumstances. Disciplinary expulsion is treated differently than an "academic dismissal." Claire La Roche makes the point by citing Barnard v. Inhabitants of Shelburne: "Misconduct is a very different matter from failure to attain a standard of excellence in studies.... A public hearing may be regarded as helpful to the ascertainment of misconduct and useless or harmful in finding out the truth as to scholarship." (emphasis added)
According to La Roche's interpretation of the courts, the following are necessary in the expulsion of a student on disciplinary grounds:
a detailed explanation of the charges
a strict adherence to the schools stated policy
a punishment that fits the crime
She goes on: "To ensure fundamental fairness, decisions must be based on the facts and supported by the evidence. Moreover, punishment should be commensurate with the severity of the offense. Consequently, it is important for schools to establish guidelines and be consistent with sanctions."
How are college students affected by these decisions?
"Since 1970, officers on the Seattle campus have regularly patrolled the hallways of dormitories of the University of Washington."
"[T]he state's Court of Appeals ruled that students have the same right to privacy in dormitory hallways as they do in their rooms."
"Therefore ... campus police officers lack the legal authority to randomly patrol residence halls."
"Although the closely watched ruling bears on only one state, it reveals the tension between privacy and security in dormitories everywhere. Residence halls are legally complex spaces, where crime often creeps in and where residents, perhaps more than ever, expect administrators and police officers to ensure their safety."
Hoover, Eric. (July, 2008). Police in the Dorms: Student Safety or Privacy Infringement? Chronicle of Higher Education, v54 n46 pA15. (link)
This matter has come before the Supreme Court as well, who ruled that the rights of due process vary depending on the reason for expulsion. An academic dismissal does not have the same requirements as the stricter guidelines set down for a disciplinary expulsion. This is illustrated by the case of University of Missouri v. Horowitz (1977). A student was expelled for poor academics and lack of good hygiene after being notified in writing and in person. The student countered with the fact that she had never been given a hearing to dispute the charges. The Supreme Court denied her appeal. As La Roche reiterates, "Ultimately, the Supreme Court of the United States held that procedural due process did not require a formal hearing when the school dismisses a student for academic reasons".
Summary : Students are guaranteed the right to a fair trial and due process, although their rights are dependent upon the nature of their dismissal.
The following are other judgements handed down by the Supreme Court:
School uniforms and dress codes are intended to stop disruptions to the learning process by banning lewd, obscene or offensive clothing. As such, the courts have ruled them constitutional despite students pleading for "the freedom of expression" and the lesser-known "freedom to see skin."
Corporal punishment (physically disciplining a student) barely passed a constitutional challenge in 1977 with a divided court ruling 5-4 that it is neither "cruel and unusual punishment" nor a denial of due process. (Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U.S. 651)
The Supreme Court has changed greatly through the years, sometimes leaning left, sometimes right. Throughout it all, it has remained remarkably consistent on the issue of student's constitutional rights in school. In summary, the opinion held by the court might best be summarized by the following: "An ye harm none, do what ye will." If a student's speech or actions do not cause physical, emotional or academic harm to others, they will receive the fullest protection offered by the Constitution. By extending these rights to students, teachers offer them the greatest benefit of our democracy and in doing so, invite them to become full members of society.
Hoover, Eric. (July, 2008). Police in the Dorms: Student Safety or Privacy Infringement? Chronicle of Higher Education, v54 n46 pA15.
La Roche, C. (2005). Student rights associated with disciplinary and academic hearings and sanctions. College Student Journal.
Retrieved from FindArticles.com. 23 Sep. 2008.
Guiles v. Marineau, 461 F.3d 320, 324-25 (2d. Cir. 2006) - LINK
New Jersey v. T. L. O., 469 U.S. 325 (1985) - LINK
State of Iowa vs. Marzel Jones, Appellee 02-505 (2003) - LINK
University of Missouri v. Horowitz, 435 U.S. 78 (1978) - http://www.law.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/conlaw/horowitz.html
Which of these was a landmark case which set the precedent for all Supreme Court decisions regarding student's rights?
b) Tinker v. Des Moines
c) Mothra v. Godzilla
d) Good v. Evil
What is the Latin term referring to teachers status as the 'temporary parents' of their students?
Which of these situations is least likely to be protected under the Constitution by the Supreme Court?
a) A student wears a t-shirt depicting the principal of the school with the words "This is not a cool person" written underneath
b) Two students put duct tape over their mouth to protest the unfair treatment of homosexuals
c) A group of FFA members release two dozen cows into the hallway during class change
d) An athlete turns his back to the flag during the singing of the national anthem
Which of these government employees may search a student based on a 'reasonable suspicion' of criminal activity?
Hello! This article was originally going to be written about "Students' Rights & Responsibilities" but I chose to focus solely on the legal aspect for several reasons, but mainly because its so important. Lawsuits are a real possibility and knowing your rights as teachers, and the students rights as well, can only be a good thing. I think the deserves its own article so more information can be presented on the topic. I certainly learned a lot by writing this. The knowledge I gained has made me more confident in what I can and cannot do in my role as a teacher. While the risk of a lawsuit is still there (and very likely always will be) having a good understanding of teacher's and student's rights has made me more relaxed in the hallways where discipline is the number-one concern.
I hope you found this article as helpful as I did.
Rate This!
1 1. Give three Bible principles and two Spirit of Prophecy principles to support exercise.
2 2. Give a report on the correct diet to maintain peak physical condition and how this was maintained for the duration of training. Include fluid intake during and pre- competition, and in-competition food intake.
3 3a. Give guidelines for correct training, including warm-up, stretching, injury prevention, prevention of overtraining, etc.
4 3b. Present your regular training program.
5 3c. List the correct equipment, including bike, shoes, clothing.
7 5. Compete in all three aspects of a recognized triathlon event, either solo or as a team member, where the triathlon is similar to
For physical training is of some value, but godliness has value for all things, holding promise for both the present life and the life to come.
Do you not know that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit, who is in you, whom you have received from God? You are not your own; you were bought at a price. Therefore honor God with your body.
So whether you eat or drink or whatever you do, do it all for the glory of God.
You can look up other translations at BibleGateway.com
3a. Give guidelines for correct training, including warm-up, stretching, injury prevention, prevention of overtraining, etc.
3b. Present your regular training program.
(If you already train regularly, all the notes here are moot, otherwise, here are some thoughts).
It is often said: If you fail to plan, you plan to fail.
You should take the time to sit down and create a training schedule.
Sit down with a calendar and determine on which days of the week you can put time aside for your training.
You should train on a different sport each day. For example, swim one day, rest the next day, bike the next, rest the next, and run on the following day. I think that's five days, right? You've probably earned a rest until the next week.
Don't forget to ease into a training program, especially if you have not had a regular training program.
Commit yourself to this schedule, and follow it.
And do not forget to: Enjoy!
3c. List the correct equipment, including bike, shoes, clothing.
Here are some thoughts on the equipment you may need to get you to the finish line.
Some triathlons are Canoe/kayak, mountain bike, and run, with various distances.
Essential equipment for the kayak leg includes a kayak or sea kayak (or any canoe for the beginner) paddle, lifejacket (you will not be able to compete without one), helmet if needed, and sun-glasses.
Swimsuit — A snug-fit suit will reduce drag in the water. This can be a standard swimsuit or you can get a specialized tri suit which also has bike-type shorts and a form-fitting top which you can wear through the entire race.
Goggles — Make sure they fit well and allow you to see.
Swim Cap — Usually the race provides this, however you may want one when you train.
Wetsuit — (Optional, unless you train or race in cold water). A wetsuit helps keep you warm and buoyant and preserves some of your energy for the rest of the race.
Lubricant — (Optional). Lubricants helps when removing the wetsuit. It also prevents chafing from clothing. (Petroleum-based products such as Vaseline can degrade wetsuit material and are therefore not recommended.)
Anti-Fog Solution or Spray — (Optional but works wonders to keep your goggles from fogging up, especially in cold water).
Bike — A road bike's lighter frame and narrower tires will be faster than a mountain bike, but lots of first-timers use whatever kind of bike they have.
Shoes — These can be your running shoes used with toe clips on your pedals or rigid biking shoes with cleats that attach to the pedals. Stiffer soled bike shoes deliver more power to your pedal stroke and can prevent your feet from going numb as you ride.
Helmet — Any approved bike helmet that fits. You will need one.
Sunglasses — Protects your eyes from glare and grit on the road.
Bike Gloves — For short (sprint-distance) races you can omit these to save time. Your hands probably won't feel the difference. It is nice to have on longer rides.
Shirt — You may already be in your swimsuit or the top you wore in the swim. You may like to have a dry shirt on in cooler conditions.
Bike Shorts — (Optional). You may wear a tri suit which has a thin pad for the entire race.
Socks — (Optional). Cotton will cause blisters.
Water Bottles — One, two. Depends on the distance and the temperature.
Bike Pump — Attach one to your bike's frame.
Spare Tube/Patch Kit — Keep in a small under-seat bag. Nothing is more frustrating than standing on the sidelines during a race with no way to fix your tire. You will also need to know how to fix a flat or change your tire.
Bike Computer — (Optional). Nice to have to keep track of distance, time and speed.
Running Shoes — You can also add speed laces to save time.
Socks — You will likely want socks for the run to prevent blisters.
Sun Hat — Shade your face.
Race Belt — (Optional). Allows you to attach your race number quickly after the bike leg.
Towel — To dry off as well as to wipe your feet off between the swim and biking.
Gels, Bars, Sports Drink — Keep nearby when you bike ride and run.
Sunscreen — Apply before the bike or run so that you do not burn.
Day Pack or Duffel Bag — You need to carry your stuff, right?
Sports Watch — (Optional). This does not have to be expensive helps you with training and pacing.
Heart Rate Monitor — (Optional). Helps keep you within your target heart-rate zone when you train.
Review, as needed.
Instructions and tips for earning the Cycling honor can be found in the Recreation chapter.
Instructions and tips for earning the Cycling - Advanced honor can be found in the Recreation chapter.
Instructions and tips for earning the Swimming - Beginner honor can be found in the Recreation chapter.
Instructions and tips for earning the Swimming - Advanced Beginner honor can be found in the Recreation chapter.
Instructions and tips for earning the Swimming - Intermediate honor can be found in the Recreation chapter.
Instructions and tips for earning the Swimming honor can be found in the Recreation chapter.
Instructions and tips for earning the Swimming - Advanced honor can be found in the Recreation chapter.
That's 546 yards (or so, for the non-metric folks).
That's 9.32 miles (for the non-metric folks).
That's 6.21 miles (for the non-metric folks).
d. within 4.5 hours.
The shortest is a sprint which has a 1/2-mile swim, 15-mile ride, 3.1-mile run. (800-m swim, 24.1-km ride, 5-km run)
The next is Olympic distance with a 1-mile swim, 30-mile ride, 6-mile run. (1600-m swim, 48.2k-m ride, 10-km run)
Half-ironman.
Hawaii's famous (and grueling) IronmanTM with a 2.4-mile swim, 112-mile ride, 26.2-mile run. (3862-m swim, 180-km ride, 42.195-km run)
Invercargill New Zealand's Wai Tri gets competitors from all over NZ. Triathlon: Kayak (5 km), Mtb (15 km), Run (7.8 km). Check out a more detailed description in the equipment section. Duathlon: Mtb (15 km), Run (7.8 km). Novice / Schools : Mtb (3.9 km), Run (3.9 km). The distances can vary year to year.
By the end of this lesson, the EMT-Basic should be able to:
Describe the function of the muscular system.
Describe the function of the skeletal system.
List the major bones or bone groupings of the spinal column, the thorax, the upper extremities, and the lower extremities.
Differentiate between an open and a closed painful, swollen, deformed extremity.
State the reasons for splinting.
List the general rules of splinting.
List the emergency medical care for a patient with a painful, swollen, deformed extremity.
Explain the rationale for splinting at the scene as opposed to load-and-go.
Explain the rationale for immobilization of a painful, swollen, deformed extremity.
Demonstrate the emergency medical care of a patient with a painful, swollen, deformed extremity.
Demonstrate completing a prehospital care report for patients with musculoskeletal injuries.
The symptoms changed gradually, but have become severe enough to affect the daily lives of people with dementia.
The discrete Fourier transform 's given by the symmetric Vandermonde matrix:
Exercise (*). If an e-network is rotation invariant, then so 's the conductivity equation and the Dirichlet-to-Neumann map is diagonal in the Fourier coordinates (the column vectors of the matrix.
The authors identify improvement and innovation as two critical plant level capabilities. These capabilities are each conceptualized as a second-order factor and measured through a distinct bundle of routines. The following routines underlying improvement capabilities are identified: continuous improvement, process management, and leadership involvement in quality. The routines closely related to improvement capability are: search for new technologies, cross-functional product design, and processes and equipment development. The items to measure each routine were selected based on a review of the relevant literature. Items were included that have been used in prior studies. A panel of five academic researchers and managers with expertise in manufacturing operations reviewed each of the items.
All major department heads within the plant accept their responsibility for quality.
Plant management provides personal leadership for quality products and quality improvement.
Our plant management creates and communicates a vision focused on quality improvement.
Peng et al. (2008): Linking routines to operations capabilities: A new perspective. Journal of Operations Management, Vol. 26, No. 6, pp. 730-748. Based on: Ketokivi and Schroeder (2004).
Given that a 7-point Likert scale was used ("4" indicating "neutral"), the mean value (5.65) is quite high. Therefore, the wording might be changed (e.g., "is always personally involved" rather than "is personally involved").
/ Proudly powered by WordPress
Today in 2001 the first version of b2/cafelog was released. This weblog content management system was later reborn as WordPress and, with its particular beginner-friendliness, went for world domination. Meanwhile more than half of all websites are built using a content management system, far more than half of them with WordPress. It has evolved from a specialized blogging tool to an ecosystem with a huge selection of themes and plugins that cover diverse needs.
Its status and ease of use make this often needlessly complex system a natural choice for many simpler projects that do not actually require dynamic page generation. Coupled with this hard-to-control diversity, this makes it a very attractive target for attacks. To mitigate this, it was the first CMS to implement automatic software updates, one of the most effective practical measures against security flaws in software.
Egypt was one of the earliest countries to use a postage meter. For a short period in 1922 a Moss (New Zealand) machine was used by the National Bank of Egypt in Cairo. Postage meters were not used again until 1933.
All stamps are inscribed “EGYPT”, “EGYPTE”, “ARE”, “RAE”, “RAU”, “UAR”, or have Arabic script without Western inscription. Few stamps have a meter number (M#) but many have a License number (L#), in Arabic.
The stamps are grouped according to political period and inscription.
Many Egyptian meter stamps have doubled value figures, with Arabic over Western numerals (technically Eastern Arabic over Western Arabic). This catalog represents the Arabic zero as ““.
All franks, except Type A1, have a crown and Arabic tougra (monogram) in the design. Two tougras exist as follows:
E. 50 mills (triangles) [Extremely rare, only 3 examples known, value undetermined]
Separate panel at bottom contains the denomination spelled out.
In use only one month, 27 February to 31 March 1922.
NOTE: Proofs of these stamps exist and are worth approximately $150. Proofs of the 2, 4 and 50 mill stamps are far more common than postally used examples and worth less than the stated values. Proofs of the 5 and 10 mill stamps are somewhat scarcer than postally used examples.
The value figures sit above the bottom frame line which is without breaks.
NOTE: The illustration shows a proof. The spacing between the town mark and frank is much narrower than found on the actual stamp.
Very similar to Type A2.1 but segments of the bottom frame line are connected to the value slugs which are moved in and out depending on the postage needed.
This leaves small breaks in the bottom frame line beneath the value figures.
M# 1-10.
As Type A2.1 but with tougra of King Farouk.
Meter number 5 only.
NOTE: Type A5 in the original paper edition of the catalog has been moved to Type PV1. Type 5 here is a new stamp not known when the paper edition was published.
As Type A2.3 but "MILLS" has been moved from below the two value dies and is now vertical between them.
The Western value figures are of a different, plainer style.
M# 10 only. One cover known.
Values: 15 seen, but 2, 3, 5, 10 and 20 are presumed
Ornamental frame with straight line outer border.
Very small crown above tougra at top center.
Inner box around V/F. “MILLS” in Western alphabet and Arabic at bottom.
With or without 4-digit S# between TM and frank.
a. L# in Arabic below frank
NOTE: This was previously Type A3 and has been renumbered following discovery of Type A3.2 below.
Frank with simulated-perforation outer border.
Inner box around V/F. “MILLS” vertically in panels in Western alphabet at left and Arabic at right.
4-digit S# between TM and frank.
NOTE: One example known, tentatively dated as 13 VIII 52. An essay with the same design but TM ALEXANDRIA is known dated 16 VII 35.
Frank with simulated-perforation outer border and ornamental inner border.
Country name in Western alphabet at left and Arabic at right curved at upper sides
Inscriptions inside frank can vary considerably in size from one machine to another.
C. Large frank 34 x 41 mm [Very rare, value unknown]
a. L# in Arabic below TM
c. Small date figures
d. Town mark lowered with small date figures (shown at right)
Similar to Type A4.1 but with inner box around value figures.
Similar to Type A4.1 but the TM is lowered, and the date figures are small.
Frank 25-26 x 30 mm.
As Type A4.3 but with tougra of King Farouk.
Similar to A4.1 but crown is shorter and flatter.
The value figures have an 8-point asterisk in the leading bank.
Frank 25-26 x 29/30. L# in Arabic below frank.
As Type A5.1 but with tougra of King Farouk.
a. With Francotyp style 5-point asterisk in the leading bank: above 00
b. TM with double inner and outer lines
c. Outer circle of TM straight at sides
d. Date only, without TM
All franks with Western inscriptions “EGYPTE” or “EGYPT” without crown and tougra. Many of these stamps were used well into the United Arab Republic period (Group C) from 1958 to 1971.
Small frank with simulated perforated outer border.
Wide spacing.
S# above slogan, and L# below slogan.
As B1.1 but larger frank, 26 x 30 mm.
“MILLS/POSTES” at bottom.
As Type B1.2 but slightly larger frank, 28-29 x 31-32 mm,
As B1.2 but frank is larger, and spacing between TM and frank is narrow.
Arabic L# below frank.
a. Sides of TM outer circle curve inward almost touching inner circle. Without L#
Types B2.1 through B2.7 are Universal “Multi Value” (MV) stamps. All have 5-pointed asterisk in the value figures, and none have a meter number below the frank although many have it below the town mark. All have double-circle town marks. Dates do not include stops except as noted.
Upright frank, 28-28 x 30-31 mm.
Country inscriptions curved.
Upright frank, 26-28 x 30-31 mm.
Country inscriptions curved.
Date figures small with stop after M.
B2.3.
Upright frank.
Country inscriptions straight.
a. Small date figures with stop after M [$10]
Upright frank, 28-36 mm.
Country inscriptions straight.
Date figures small with stop after M.
B2.5.
Square frank, ~31-32 mm.
Country inscriptions straight.
Horizontal frank, 28 x 35 mm.
Country inscriptions curved, with stars centered at top and bottom.
Square or horizontal frank, 35 x 32 mm.
Country inscription straight.
Inner frame line made up of dashes rather than a segmented frame.
“EGYPTE” slightly curved, TM: DC with small date figures.
Arabic L# vertical at right of TM.
NOTE: Although this stamp has inscriptions common to the Republic of Egypt period (Group B, 1953-1958), it is first seen in 1974 during Arab Republic of Egypt period (Group D).
Types B3.1 through B3.4 are Hasler “F88” (MV) stamps. All have country inscriptions curved, 8-point starburst in the value figures, and all have an Arabic meter number below the frank. The date contains stops after the day and month. All have double-circle town mark with double-line rings except as noted.
B3.1.
Upright frank.
a. Date only without TM
As Type B3.1 but “POSTES” alone at bottom (without “MILLS”).
Frank 26 x 32 mm.
B3.3.
Large, square frank ~34-35 mm.
Large horizontal frank, 36 x 38 mm.
Stars at top and bottom of frank.
TM is straight line as “=DATE=TOWN=“ with slogan above.
“EGYPTE” vertical and straight.
Arabic L# below frank.
a. “EGYPTE” very small (as shown)
As Type B4.2 but country names horizontal.
Most franks have Western inscriptions “UAR EGYPTE”, “UAR EGYPT”, “RAU EGYPTE”, “RAU” alone, or “UAR” alone. Some have Arabic inscription only without Western characters.
One stamp, C2.5, does not have a country name in either script. Possibly this is from a damaged die.
NOTE: Group B stamps are often found used after 1958 into the UAR period.
“POSTES” at top left, “R.A.U./EGYPTE” at bottom left.
Frank 29-30 x 32-33 mm.
TM: DC, outer circle with straight sides. M/M left of F/V. Arabic L# below frank, occasionally missing.
a. Printed in blue [Very rare, value unknown]
C1.2. Francotyp.
“U.A.R.” curved upwards at left.
“MILLS/POSTES” at bottom left.
Frank 29-30 x 32-33 mm.
Types C2.1 through C2.6 are Universal “Multi Value” (MV) stamps. All have double-circle town mark with large date figures. All have a 5-pointed asterisk in the value figures. Most have Arabic license number below the town mark. Date figures have no stops.
C2.1.
Frank 27-28 x 32-33 mm.
“U.A.R.” at top center with Arabic inscriptions above and along the sides.
“MILLS/POSTES” at bottom left.
L# below TM.
C2.2.
Frank 30-31 x 35 mm.
“U.A.R.” straight up at left.
Extensive Arabic inscriptions at right.
L# below TM.
C2.3.
Frank 30-31 x 37 mm.
“U.A.R.” straight up at left.
Three Arabic characters at right.
C2.4.
Frank 28-29 x 35 mm.
“R.A.U.” up at left.
Without L#.
a. With very large L# below TM.
C2.5.
Frank 31 x 36 mm. Blank at top.
The only Western inscription is “MILLS/POSTES” at bottom left.
L# below TM.
C2.6.
Frank size as with Type C2.4.
Arabic inscription across top, "MILLS/POSTES" at bottom left.
L# below TM.
Types C3.1 and C3.2 are Hasler “F88” (MV) stamps. All have an Arabic inscription across the top and no inscriptions at the sides. The only Western inscription is “MILLS/POSTES” at bottom left. All have double circle town mark and an 8-point starburst in the value figures. Date figures contain stops between day, month, and year.
C3.1.
Upright frank.
TM with single- or double-line circles.
NOTE: Type C8C closely resembles Type C7.1. They are most easily differentiated by the differences in the date figures. Type C7.1 has no stops, and Type C8 has stops.
C3.2.
Square frank ~35-37 mm.
a. MILL instead of MILLS (error)
“U.A.R.” at top center with extensive Arabic inscription above.
As Type C4.1 but Arabic inscription at top is curved.
As Type C4.1 but TM: SC.
As Type C4.2 but TM: SC.
a. Arabic L# inside TM at bottom
Similar to Type C4.1 but Arabic inscription at top is larger and does not have “U.A.R.” below.
The only Western inscriptions on the stamp are “MILLS/POSTES” at bottom left.
As Type C4.3 but without “U.A.R.” below top inscription.
The only Western inscription is “MILLS/POSTES” at bottom left.
Frank is plane rectangle with straight frame line.
“U A R” at top below Arabic inscription.
Types C5.1 through C5.5 are Pitney Bowes “Automax” (MV) stamps, introduced into Egypt in 1963. They are similar in appearance to Universal MultiValue stamps except that “POSTES” (or “POST”) appears in the upper left corner of the stamps (except C5.5). The value figures have a 5-pointed star like the Universal. All have double-circle town mark. All except C5.5 have small “M/M” left of the value figures.
C5.1.
Upright frank. “R.A.U./EGYPTE” at bottom left.
“POSTES” at upper right.
C5.2.
Square frank, ~32-33 mm.
“R.A.U./EGYPTE” at bottom left.
“POSTES” at upper left. Without L#.
C5.3.
Square frank with “U.A.R./EGYPTE” at bottom left.
“POSTES” at upper left.
C5.4.
Frank 26 x 28 mm. “U.A.R./EGYPT” at bottom left.
“POST” at upper left.
C5.5.
“R.A.U.” at top center, “EGYPTE” vertical at left.
“MILLS/POSTES” at bottom left.
Arabic L# below TM.
M# “P.B.1” below frank.
Frank has straight line outer border and segmented inner border.
“U.A.R.” italicized at top beneath Arabic inscription.
“EGYPT” italicized at left.
Without L#.
TM: SC with semi circles above and below date.
With one exception all franks have Western inscription “RAE EGYPTE”, “ARE EGYPTE”, “ARE EGYPT”, “AR EGYPT”, "AR of EGYPT", “ARE”, “EGYPTE” or “EGYPT”. Type DA3.4 has country identification in Arabic only. Stamps inscribed “EGYPTE” or “EGYPT” can be distinguished from Group B stamps by the dates of use.
As Type C1.1 but with “R.A.E./EGYPTE” at bottom left.
Small “M/M” at left side with dots above and below.
L# below frank.
a. Sides of TM curve inward almost touching inner circle
Similar to Type DA1.1 but with “EGYPTE” alone at bottom left.
Without L#.
“EGYPTE” curved at left. “MILLS/POSTES” at bottom left.
L# below frank.
One meter seen.
Upright frank, 25 x 32 mm, with “A.R.E./EGYPTE” at lower left and “POSTES” at upper left.
Small “M/M” between dots at center left. L# below frank.
Upright frank, 25 x 35 mm, with Arabic inscription across the top,
“MILLS/POSTES” at bottom left. Without Western country name
L# below frank.
Frank nearly square, 25-26 x 27-28 mm, with inner frame around value figures.
Arabic inscription across top, “A.R. EGYPT” vertical at left, “MILLS” at lower left.
The one example we have seen is faint and probably has “POST” below “MILLS”.
L# below frank.
By the beginning of the Arab Republic of Egypt period, Pitney Bowes had become the owner of Universal Postal Frankers. Stamps from the “Multi Value” and “Automax” models became virtually indistinguishable. Types DA3.1 through DA3.6 could be from either the “Automax” or the “Multi Value” machines. All have a 5-pointed asterisk in the value figures, and all have double-circle town marks.
DA3.1.
Upright frank, 26 x 33 mm, with “A.R.E./EGYPTE” at lower left and “POSTES” at upper left.
a. With L# below TM
b. With “POST” instead of “POSTES” at upper left (error). One meter used by J. Marcou & Co., Cairo, seen. [$10]
DA3.2.
Upright frank with “A.R.E./EGYPT” at lower left and “POST” at upper left.
DA3.3.
Large, nearly square frank, 34 x 32-33 mm, with “R.A.E./ EGYPTE” at lower left,
With L# below TM.
DA3.4.
Frank 31-32 x 35 mm.
Arabic text across top, "PT/POST" at lower left with no other Western text in the stamp.
DA3.5.
Inscriptions as for Type DA3.2 but frank is much smaller, 25 x 27 mm.
Value figures are in Western digits only.
L# below frank.
DA3.6.
Frank size as with type DA3.5 but with different inscriptions.
Country name in Arabic only reads down vertically at right.
Upright frank, 27 x 31 mm, with “A.R.E./EGYPT” at lower left and “POST” at upper left.
L# below frank.
Upright frank with single straight-line frame.
“ARE” centered below Arabic text at top.
DA5.1. Pitney Bowes-GB “5000” (MV), 1974.
Wide design with town mark fitting into curving left side of frank.
“POST/A.R.E./EGYPT” at center between town mark and value figures.
At bottom center is “P.B.” and an unengraved rectangle.
The date figures are raised in relation to the value figures.
DA5.2. Pitney Bowes-GB “6300” (MV).
Similar to Type DA5.1, but frank is squared off at left, and the date and value figures are on the same level.
“A.R.E./EGYPT” centered above an unengraved rectangle.
“POST” at lower right.
a. Unengraved M# with "P.B." prefix
DA5.3. Pitney Bowes-GB “6600” (MV).
Similar to Type DA5.2 but taller frank with equally spaced simulated perforations all around.
Unengraved M# with "P.B." prefix.
DA5.4. Pitney Bowes “A900” (MV).
With “Pts” and Arabic text at right.
Nearly square frank with single line simulated-perforation border.
“A.R.E./EGYPT” at center right.
“MM” and Arabic text at center left.
“POST” at upper left below Arabic text.
Unengraved rectangle with “P” prefix at bottom center.
Square sim-perf frank similar to Type DA6.1 but smaller.
Meter number with "FP" prefix breaks bottom frame line.
Upright frank with straight single-line frame.
“A.R./EGYPT” at top left. “POST” at lower left.
“MILLS” and Arabic text centered above “POST” line.
Square frank with single straight-line frame.
“A.R./EGYPT” at top left. “POST” at lower left.
“Mills.” and Arabic text centered above “POST” line.
Date figures tall (model "205" as shown) or short (model "2205").
Upright frank with “EGYPT” vertical outside frame line at left and Arabic text outside frame line at right.
“POST” at lower left.
“Mills” centered above “POST” line.
Square frank with simulated-perforation outer border and segmented inner border.
“A.R.E./EGYPT” at lower left. “POST” at upper left.
Date figures low and wide.
Square frank with single straight-line border.
“A.R./EGYPT” at top below Arabic text. “POST” at lower left.
Date figures low and wide.
Square frank with “EGYPT” vertical outside frame line at left and Arabic text outside frame line at right.
“POST” at lower left.
“Mills” centered above “POST” line.
Slightly horizontal frank with single simulated-perforation border.
“A.R. of EGYPT” vertical at left.
“Pts” and Arabic text at right. “POST” at bottom left.
B. Frank inscriptions slighter larger than with A, most noticeable in “POST”. Arabic inscriptions more condensed.
Similar format to DA7.2 but the date and value figures are different, as with D24.
“A.R./EGYPT” at top left, “POST” at bottom left without "MILLS".
Nearly square frank with "A.R. EGYPT" at top left and Arabic text at top right.
"POST" at lower left with "Mills" above.
Frank is a simple single-line square.
Arabic text above "A.R.EGYPT" at top.
“POST” at lower left.
DA8.1. Frama “M/E” (MV).
Slightly upright frank with single simulated-perforation border.
“A.R.E. EGYPT” reads down at right.
“POST” at top left. “F.N.” and empty block at bottom left.
Value figures are thick.
A. Arabic text at center left. Block at bottom is hollow. “A.R.E. EGYPT” is 2 mm tall
B. “MM” above Arabic text at center left. Block at bottom is solid. “A.R.E. EGYPT” is 3 mm tall
C. As "B" but “PT” above Arabic text at center left (not shown)
DA8.2. Frama "M/E” (MV).
Horizontal frank with dentated frame line.
"A.R.E." reads up at left, "EGYPT" reads up at right.
"POST" at lower right.
Value figures thick.
Frank is horizontal rectangle with simulated-perforation outer frame line and thick,
With inner box around value figures.
Arabic text at top, “POST” and “A R E” across bottom.
M# in Eastern Arabic numerals below bottom frame line.
Frank is horizontal rectangle with double straight-line outer frame line
Arabic text across top.
“A.R.E./EGYPT” at left, “PT” at right, and “POST” at lower left.
This design may be a "Post Office" stamp.
"EGYPT POST" logo across the top above the value figures.
At bottom is the meter number with "NP" prefix above the date.
TM: rectangle with openings in the centers of the sides, "EGYPT" in English and Arabic at top above various identification numbers.
At left of the TM is found a smaller vertical box containing Arabic text. This may be a service indicator or possibly a slogan.
a. With double circle TM added at far left
DB1. Francotyp "Cc" (MV), 1988 or earlier. [Extremely rare, one example reported]
Frank is horizontal rectangle with ornamental outer border and an inner border containing Arabic inscriptions.
In the center are "A.R.E. EGYPT" at top and "MM" at both left and right.
Below the frank is "F.N." and a solid block presumably holding the space for an identification number.
Frank with straight line frame and panels at top, bottom and sides.
Crown and tougra between TM and frank.
The Codex Las Huelgas is a music manuscript from the thirteenth century. The codex superseded the papyrus scroll and is the precursor of the modern printed book.
By the ninth century Western music had become standardized into a notational form called nuemes which were shapes that represented notes. One line was used to indicate the middle pitch with nuemes above the line being higher in pitch and the nuemes below the line being lower in pitch. This primitive notational system was more of a memory aid rather than a complete notational system showing exact pitch and duration. To read nuemes you needed to be familiar with the piece of music beforehand. In the tenth century Guido d'Arezzo, a Benedictine monk and Choir Master, extended the one line to four lines and set the exact pitch of each note. This new invention of the stave allowed music to be notated more precisely. Guido d'Arezzo also devised the solfeggio system where a different syllable is sung to each note of an ascending scale:
Today a scholarly approach has been applied to the music of the past in relation to ensuring that the notation is interpreted correctly. An example is baroque music where modern research into the instruments, techniques and approach of this period has led today's musicians to revise their interpretation and performance of Baroque notation.
During the Renaissance Italian composers tried to recreate the plays of Ancient Greece and their experiments led to the invention of Opera. Musicians have always mined the music of the past for ideas and maybe some clue as to the roots of contemporary musical practices. From a musicologist point of view we are living in a Golden Age simply from the fact that mankind for the first time has the ability to record sound. Though we take recorded sound for granted today; it must be said that the future musicologist will find a rich legacy of sound recordings from which to base their research. We can never hear the music of Ancient Greece or the Medieval period; we can only attempt to recreate it. The importance of notation as the only mechanism we had for preserving the music of the past becomes self-evident.
The music up to the baroque period was created from a form of scales known as the Church Modes which took their names from the tribes of Ancient Greece.
Ionian - the Greeks who settled on the coast of modern day Turkey.
Dorian - the Greeks who settled on Crete, Sparta and Corinth.
Phrygian - the Greeks who moved further inland in Turkey to settle Anatolia.
Lydian - a Greek tribe also from the Anatolia region of Turkey.
Mixolydian - the Mixolydian mode was invented by Sappho, the 7th century B.C. poet and musician.
Aeolian - originally Greeks from Thessaly who spread to the Greek islands and Asia-minor.
The Ancient Greeks laid the foundation for the study of music and intervals in a way that has defined Western music ever since. They investigated intervals using mathematics and used ratios to describe these intervals. The Church Modes are not scales from Ancient Greece. The Ancient Greeks used a scale system based on the idea of tetrachords. However the debt that the Medieval period owes to the Ancient Greeks is reflected in the naming of the Church Modes. The Ancient Greeks also described their modes as Dorian, Lydian, etc. However this shows a continuity of music nomenclature rather than practice and the Ancient Greeks used their modes in an entirely different manner to the Medieval musician. Here is Aristotle's view of the modes:
"The musical modes differ essentially from one another, and those who hear them are differently affected by each. Some of them make men sad and grave, like the so-called Mixolydian; others enfeeble the mind, like the relaxed modes; another again, produces a moderate and settled temper, which appears to be the peculiar effect of the Dorian; the Phrygian inspires enthusiasm"
The quote above is from Aristotle's Politics which is a work about government and society and the individual's role in both. This Aristotelian analysis of music influenced the early Church fathers who sought to lay the foundations for the liturgy of the Christian mass which had always contained musical elements.
The Church Modes derive from Gregorian Chant which is a body of liturgical vocal music named in honor of Pope Gregory (590CE to 604CE) who set others to collect all the earlier Christian plainsong for codification. Pope Gregory instigated the revision of the existing liturgical music into a coherent whole and in doing so defined the musical practices of the early Christian faith. With regards to secular (non-religious) music there is not much contemporary information available for the modern reader. The church filling the vacuum left by the demise of the Roman empire became the main conduit of information and therefore the earliest substantial musical literature we have available to study is primarily to do with the musical practices of the Christian church.
As instruments and forms evolved, some of the Church Modes became redundant as musicians found that those modes did not suffice for their musical needs. A few of the Church Modes went on to form the basis of our "major-minor" system and it is from these modes that baroque musicians created the harmonic theory that has dominated music right up to the twentieth century. The earlier Ionian mode is now called the Major scale.
The keyboard layout of the harpsichord and organ became standardized in the 15th century and the invention of the keyboard played a large part in laying down the foundation of modern tuning practices and theory. Tempered-tuning was adopted as a direct result of these inventions. The earlier system of mean-tuning meant that the errors introduced by the problem of the Pythagorean Comma allowed only a few keys to be played. If a piano was mean-tuned to C major then the player would find that keys further away from this C major center would be unusable. The guitarist can hear this by tuning the guitar in the first position (first four frets) so that a C major chord is in tune with itself. You will find that the chords in the first position are usable but as you further progress up the neck the chords start to sound out of tune. Tempered-tuning spreads the errors introduced by the Pythagorean Comma evenly across the entire range of an instrument. By the time the piano was invented in the 17th century, the tempered C major scale had become the foundation for teaching music theory.
Since the keyboard has been such a dominating force in music, a complete study of scale theory must make some reference to it. Thus, it is best to first look at the piano keyboard and then compare it to the guitar fretboard.
Before you begin it is good idea to familiarise yourself with the notes of the C major scale. Roman numerals are used to label the scale degrees.
A piano keyboard showing the C major scale. Note that all the degrees of the C major scale are on the white keys.
If you play each key on a keyboard ascending from the middle C (diagram on the right), you will have played the 12 tone chromatic scale. These are all the notes available in Western music. The keyboard of a piano is laid out so that when you play the C major scale, you use only the white keys. The C major scale has no sharps (#'s) or flats (b's) which means that no black keys are used. Only the C major and its relative minor have no sharps or flats; all other scales will have a sharp or flat in their notation.
It is important to recognize that on the keyboard the distance between two adjacent keys is always a semitone. On the guitar the same applies to adjacent frets. Looking at the keyboard diagram you will see that between the C and D is a black key which is a semitone above the C and a semitone below the D. Between E and F there is no black key but it is still notated as a semitone interval. There is also no black key between B and C so they are also semitone neighbours. The 12 tone chromatic scale consists of 12 sounds which are all a semitone apart. The C major scale has seven notes which are represented by all the white keys. At this point it is best to remember that adjacent keys are a semitone apart and that a tone describes keys two semitones apart. Therefore C to D is a tone because there are two semitones - C to C# and C# to D. E to F# is also a tone.
The C major scale has no sharps of flats so that the chords are formed using only the white keys. The most basic chord you can play is a triad which consists of three notes. The piano student will be asked by their tutor to play the seven triads in the key of C major almost immediately. Once the piano student has formed the shape of the C major triad (C-E-G) it is only a case of moving that shape up through the scale degrees while naming the chords. A beginner on the piano will learn the chords in the key of C major within minutes.
The guitar exercise below will allow you to quickly learn the chords of the C Major scale. For the Dm triad and Bdim triad use your little finger for the lowest note and for the lowest note of the last triad (C major octave) use your third finger.
The major scale (or Ionian mode) is the main scale currently used in music. It is made up of seven notes plus an eighth which duplicates the first an octave higher. The Italian music system "solfeggio" where each note is sung using a syllable - "Do, Re, Mi, Fa, Sol, La, Ti, (Do)" - may help in illustrating this concept.
The interval pattern for any major scale is:
The difference in notes can also be called steps, 2 notes being a whole step, and 1 note being a half step. This pattern in steps can be written as:
The scale below uses the "tone-semitone" method:
Please note that there is a distinction in terminology between American English and UK English. It is common to find the word "tone" used in American English to describe notes whereas in UK English the word "tone" is never used.
American English: "The leading-tone is always a semitone below the octave in a major scale"
UK English: "The leading-note is always a semitone below the octave in a major scale"
The natural minor scale (or Aeolian mode) is one of the diatonic scales along with the major scale. The word "diatonic" in a modern sense refers only to the major and natural minor scales. In the key of A minor, the harmonic form would be called "non-diatonic" because the seventh note is sharpened.
TIP: Any natural minor scale can be changed into a harmonic minor scale by sharpening the seventh note.
The natural minor scales are all "diatonic" because they consist of the notes from the key they are derived from without any changes. The harmonic and melodic form both contain changes to the original natural minor scale and are therefore "non-diatonic".
Natural minor scales can be created for any key using the formula:
Below is the Am natural (or relative) scale with tones and semitones shown:
Getting Started: Different Types of Guitars | Anatomy of a Guitar | Buying a Guitar | Buying an Amplifier | Tuning the Guitar | Tablature | Lead Guitar and Rhythm Guitar
For Beginners: The Basics | Intervals and Power Chords | Open Chords | Muting and Raking | Learning Songs | Song Library
Lead Guitar: Picking and Plucking | Scales | Arpeggios and Sweep Picking | Slides | Hammer-ons, Pull-offs, and Trills | Bending and Vibrato | Harmonics | Vibrato Bar Techniques | Tapping
Rhythm Guitar: Chords | Barre Chords | Chord Progressions | Alternate Picking | Tremolo Picking | Rhythm
Playing Styles: Folk Guitar | Blues | Slide Guitar | Rock Guitar | Country and Western | Metal | Jazz | Classical Guitar | Flamenco
General Guitar Theory: Tone and Volume | Singing and Playing | Writing Songs | Playing With Others | Recording Music |Tuning Your Ear | How to Continue Learning
Equipment: Guitar Accessories | Effects Pedals | E-Bow | Cables | Bass Guitar | Harmonica and Guitar Combo
Not just the success stories! Sometimes more can be learned from mistakes than from chance fortunes.
A Change in variable is a term used to express the diffeence between 2 variables . Let
As an oily fish, mackerel is a rich source of omega-3 fatty acids.
Society can be defined as: an entity belonging to a group of the same species, by means of co-operation (through mutual information exchange, to fulfil collaborative relationships), organised to form group operation system.
This generally includes human society and natural society.
A reader requests expansion of this book to include more material.You can help by adding new material (learn how) or ask for assistance in the reading room.
Western Music refers to those cultures whose music system is based on the philosophy and science of Pythagoras and his school. The Ancient Greeks were the first European culture to investigate the science of acoustics using mathematics and simple scientific laboratory instruments like the monochord. Due to the paucity of actual notated music from Ancient Greece we are unable to fully recreate their music, but with the rise of Christianity and through the importance and influence of Greek thought upon the early Christian church we can infer that their legacy was of no small importance to the developing musical practices of later generations. There is some debate about Eastern influences, notably from the Hebrew liturgy and psalms, but this does not disturb the system of consonance and dissonance described by the Ancient Greeks within one octave of twelve intervals. The foundation of Western Music is Greek, but its development pan-European.
As Europe emerged from the Dark Ages, the consolidation of Chant (later termed Gregorian Chant) from the Roman Catholic Mass and Liturgies of the Hours led to the development of a body of music that was disseminated throughout Europe via the Papacy and monasteries for both women and men. During this period, Western Music kept a strict division between music used for the service of God and that put to everyday use. As champions of literacy and learning, it was the church that made advances in music notation; this is why we have "sacred" melodies from the 11th century preserved for us, but few to none from the secular world from that time. Later, as education became more widespread, secular themes began to come to the fore in the Renaissance period. People began to combine voices and instrumental lines in deliberate ways. The role and work of the composer was sparked.
We then have expansions of range and complexity as we move with Dietrich Buxtehude, Georg Friedrich Handel, and J. S. Bach into the Baroque era. The Classical era gives us the understated, formal power associated with such composers as C. P. E. Bach, Franz Josef Haydn, and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. Romanticism, in the musical imaginations of Franz Schubert, Ludwig von Beethoven, Claude Debussy and Richard Wagner, then transforms the rigid styles and forms of the Classical era into more individualistic stylizations. Tonality was at its peak during this period, then Impressionist music paved the way to the total breakdown of harmonic structure in favor of the 12-tone, aleatoric, and mechanically produced music of the Modern era. This process continues, morphs, and returns to tonality in the current Contemporary period of music.
There is no clear line when the Renaissance began and the Middle Ages ended. The Renaissance in music happened, as the Renaissance in all the other arts did, at different times in different places. So for convenience, we will use 1400 A.D. as the start of the Renaissance.
This vagueness is the same for every period, there is no specific beginning or ending date. For example, the Classical era was ongoing both with its influences and its music. Where shall we place the dividing point between it and Romanticism? However, for the sake of pinning down when the style was most popular and the people who produced its music were alive, these dates were chosen, and are, by and large, agreed upon by scholars.
Now that you know what sociologists study, you might be wondering: What can you do with a degree in sociology? In an ideal world, just studying social problems would make them go away. But, alas, as you've learned from reading this book, we don't live in an ideal world and there is far more to do than just study social life with a degree in Sociology. The American Sociological Association, among others, has looked into this question and has some pretty intriguing answers.[1] What follows is a brief explanation of what you can do with a degree in Sociology.
Despite the many tests that suggest otherwise, there is no correlation between personality and career choice.[2] Thus, there is no particular "personality type" among sociology majors.
The average graduating sociology major is a young female (early 20s) who is white and single. Almost 80% of students graduating with sociology degrees are female, and nearly that many (75%) are white. Less than half of the parents of sociology majors have baccalaureate degrees of their own.[1]
Many sociology majors choose the major because they found their first exposure to the discipline engaging (usually through an introductory course). Most sociology majors chose the discipline because they found the concepts discussed in their course interesting. Only 7% of sociology majors choose the discipline because it appears easy, and relatively few (5%) choose it because the major they wanted was unavailable. In other words, sociology majors find the discipline exciting and challenging and generally enjoy studying sociology.[1]
By the time they graduate, 90% of sociology majors report understanding the basic concepts of the discipline (e.g., social structure, social stratification, etc.). Most also grasp the differences in the theoretical paradigms of sociology (e.g., structural functionalism, conflict theory, etc.). Sociology majors feel confident in the following skills as a result of their degree: identifying ethical issues in research, developing evidence-based arguments, evaluating different research methods, writing reports that are understandable by non-sociologists, forming causal hypothesis, using computers to develop reference lists, interpreting the results of data analysis, and using statistical software (though slightly less than 50% feel confident in their ability to use statistical software).[1]
Sociology majors are generally satisfied overall with their experience earning a sociology degree. Most are also satisfied with the quality of teaching, the accessibility to technology and faculty, their interaction with other majors, and getting the courses they need to graduate. Unfortunately, most students (between 80% and 92%) are dissatisfied with the information provided on graduate school and career opportunities (hopefully this brief chapter will help fill this void).[1]
What can you do with a Baccalaureate degree in Sociology? While it may not seem like it when you are deep into studying race relations or gender stratification, the training you receive as a sociology major is actually quite applicable outside academia as well. College graduates trained in sociology bring unique and valuable insights into business decisions concerning issues surrounding race, ethnicity, gender, age, education, and social class.[3] To give a specific example, a sociology major could help a company like CVS realize the problem with tagging hair care items for African Americans with anti-theft measures while not doing the same for hair care items for whites.[4] Practices like these may seem pragmatic to the managers of these stores, but they also alienate consumers.[4]
College graduates trained in sociology bring many skills to their jobs, including: the ability to recognize trends and patterns, the ability to create concise reports and essays, strong critical thinking skills, oral presentation skills, strong interpersonal communication skills, skills in data collection and analysis using statistical software, grant writing skills, management skills, and planning and organizational skills.[5] All of these skills are potentially invaluable contributions to workplaces.
Most graduating seniors (around 72%) plan on getting a job right out of college. Around 40% plan on going on to graduate school (these paths aren't mutually exclusive of course, you can work while going to graduate school). There are a number of institutions where sociologists find employment, including: schools, churches, hospitals, corporations, government, and social service agencies.[3] For those planning on getting jobs, all of the following are career paths sociology majors are well-suited for: organizational planning, development, and training; human resource management; industrial relations; marketing; public relations; organizational research; and international business.[6]
Some sociologists find the adaptation of their sociological training and insights to the business world relatively easy.[3] Corporations want and need to understand their customers' habits and preferences in order to anticipate changes in their markets. This drive to understand consumers is called consumer research and is a growing interest of corporations. Sociology majors are particularly well-suited for this type of research as the ultimate goal of empirical sociological research is to predict human behavior.[7] This particular niche may be the single largest opportunity for sociologists in the corporate world.[3]
Another budding area in modern retail firms is site selection, or the determination of the best locations for new stores. Site selection requires understanding human ecology and consumer spending patterns, both of which are addressed using the sociological imagination.[3] Some additional direct applications of sociology include concept and product testing (which will put to good use training in research methods), the evaluating of global market opportunities (which will draw upon understandings of various cultures), long-range planning and forecasting (which draws on both statistics and futurist perspectives), marketing and advertising (which applies consumer studies directly), and human resource management (which relies on studies of organizational behavior).[3]
One way to situate yourself well for the corporate world after earning your Bachelor's degree in Sociology would be to double major in Sociology and Business or minor in Business. This would give you the credentials that hiring departments in the business world are looking for while simultaneously allowing you to focus on Sociology. Another key to succeeding in the corporate world with a degree in Sociology is to market your specific skill set.[8] As noted above, a degree in Sociology provides you with skills that many other college graduates lack. Emphasizing those skills on your resumes and in job interviews increases the odds of you being hired and you using those skills in your job. There is also evidence to suggest that sociology graduates who use their sociological training in their jobs post graduation are more satisfied with their jobs.[8]
Non-Governmental Organizations (or NGOs) are legally constituted organizations created by private persons or organizations with no participation or representation of any government. Examples of NGOs include Oxfam, Catholic Relief Services, CARE International, and Lutheran World Relief. Many NGOs are concerned with the very social problems and social issues sociologists study, from poverty to gender stratification to world population growth. NGOs are ideal opportunities for sociology majors to apply what they have learned in college.
For those planning on continuing their education, the table to the right breaks down the most frequently chosen fields of study for sociology majors:
Many professional degree programs (e.g., medical school and law school) do not, in fact, require someone to have a specific undergraduate degree. Sociology majors can carry the sociological imagination into medical practice, offering sociological insights while practicing medicine. In 2001, sociology majors had a 42% acceptance rate into medical school.[9]
Sociology majors should view their undergraduate education as opening doors for them into many possible fields of work and study. Two factors seems to limit the occupational prospects of sociologists: The first limiting factor is their own imagination. The sociological imagination is applicable to almost every occupation and field of research, from studying how physicists do their work [10] to union organizing.[11] The second limiting factors is that many people do not know what sociologists are trained to do. This should only be a limiting factor up until they meet a sociology major!
What can you do with a PhD in Sociology? A PhD in Sociology prepares an individual for a variety of career options, including all of those mentioned above for someone with a Bachelor's Degree in Sociology (e.g., marketing, non-governmental organizations, etc.), but it also means you will be much better qualified for these types of jobs. Graduate training in Sociology includes a greater emphasis on research methodology and statistics. It also often includes training in qualitative research methods, like content analysis. Additionally, graduate training includes much more in depth analysis and discussion of many of the topics discussed in your undergraduate training. The format of graduate training may also differ as many of the classes are designed as a seminar rather than a lecture-oriented class - students will come to class meetings having read the assigned readings and then discuss them under the supervision of a professor.
All of this additional training will prepare a PhD in Sociology for advanced careers in fields as diverse as corporate marketing and statistical forecasting to community organizing and lobbying. A PhD in quantitative research and demography could lead to a career at the Census Bureau or the World Bank.
Another obvious occupation one can pursue is as an academic sociologist, working at a college or university. Depending on the type of university or college where one works, the job description will vary substantially. Some colleges - typically four-year liberal arts colleges - focus on teaching. In contrast, research universities - which include PhD programs - focus on research. Thus, what your job description would be as an academic sociologist could range from a heavy emphasis on teaching undergraduates to a heavy emphasis on teaching graduate students. In both types of institutions, there are both tenure and non-tenure track jobs. Tenure refers to a lifetime appointment and carries with it a contractual right not to have the position terminated without just cause. Adjunct instructing is another option, which is usually teaching on a contract basis.
According to Forbes magazine, Sociology is one of the top-ten highest-paying rare jobs in the United States and is generally rated as one of the most satisfying occupations. This may be due to the fact that Sociologists are often engaged in trying to remedy social ills, which can be a very satisfying life pursuit.
According to data compiled in ASA’s 2007 “Beyond the Ivory Tower” report, one-fourth of PhD sociologists work outside academia. Of those in academia, as of April 2008, the average sociology faculty salary was $68,857, ranging from assistant professors making $53,844 to full professor earnings of $87,938.
Joe Mercurio, retired strategist and researcher at Walgreens Co. http://www.asanet.org/footnotes/feb08/fn1.html
Karen Ehrhardt-Martinez, works for the NGO American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy (ACEEE) http://www.asanet.org/footnotes/feb08/fn6.html
What are some jobs you can do with training in sociology?
What are some of the skills you would learn with training in sociology?
How might sociologists think about the world differently from other people?
!
, and there exists a unique function
!
If one were doing a walkathon and wanted to raise $5 for every mile walked, an equation for the total money raised,
. Would donors, however, promise to not only pay $5 per mile but give an additional $30 just for taking part, the equation would be
. Note that this example is limited as negative miles don't make sense, but the line defined by the equation is infinite in either direction.
Before discussing the reflection and transmission of plane waves, the relation between particle velocity and acoustic pressure is investigated.
The acoustic pressure and particle velocity can be described in complex form.
The specific acoustic impedance for plane waves is defined.
Consider an incident plane wave in a medium with specific impedance
Notice that the frequency of the wave remains constant across the boundary, however the specific acoustic impedance changes across the boundary. The propagation speed in each medium is different, so the wave number of each medium is also different. There are two boundary conditions to be satisfied.
The acoustic pressure must be continuous at the boundary
The particle velocity must be continuous at the boundary
Applying the second boundary condition and using the definition of specific impedance,
The pressure reflection and transmission coefficients are defined as the ratio of the reflected and transmitted acoustic pressure over the incident pressure, respectively.
The specific acoustic impedance ratio is also defined.
Case 1: Consider an incident plane wave that encounters a rigid boundary. This is the case if the specific impedance of medium 2 is significantly larger than the specific impedance of medium 1. Thus, the specific acoustic impedance ratio is very large, the reflection coefficient approaches 1 and the transmission coefficient approaches 2.
The amplitudes of the incident and reflected waves are equal. The reflected wave is in phase with the incident wave. The particle velocity at the boundary is zero. The acoustic pressure amplitude at the boundary is equal to twice the pressure amplitude of the incident wave and it is maximum.
Case 2: Consider an incident plane wave that encounters a resilient boundary. This is the case if the specific impedance of medium 2 is significantly smaller than the specific impedance of medium 1. Thus, the specific acoustic impedance ratio approaches zero, the reflection coefficient approaches -1 and the transmission coefficient approaches zero.
The amplitudes of the incident and reflected waves are equal. The reflected wave is
Case 3: Consider two media with the same specific acoustic impedance so that the specific acoustic impedance ratio is 1, the reflection coefficient is zero and the transmission coefficient is 1. Therefore, the wave is not reflected, only transmitted. It behaves as if there was no boundary.
The golden age of /b/ concluded with the notorious /b/-day: moot, tired with the direction /b/ has taken, makes a sticky where he declares he will impose much tighter rules, including the banning of jailbait and raids, much cherished traditions of /b/. The sticky was met with nothing short of an outrage. Dissent was an all-time high, even in the moderation ranks, which led to the thread being deleted, remade and constantly stickied and unstickied. Threads claiming that putting rules on /b/ was betraying the board and its anonymous users where covering the front page. Calls for rebellions, uprisings and exodus where made everywhere. When the stickies reappeared, the drama and spam became so much that 4chan's img server crashed and a plethora and boards with it. A number of /b/tards leave 4chan for dead and abandon en masse. A declaration of independence written by exemplar /b/tard Captain_Cornflake is made that establishes Anonymous as a separate group with its home anywhere but 4chan. Two days later /b/ was back again, but the board was submerged in a state of civil war, banned anonymous from 7chan script-flooded the board for days, 4chan's /b/-tards retaliating in a similar manner. Ultimately, the /b/-day failed its purpose. At this stage the users of /b/ were too numerous and aggressive to be moderated properly and there was nothing that could be done in the administration’s end. This event foreshadowed what would become of imageboard culture during the following years.
The aftermath of the /b/-day was the diversification of *chan culture, with a rise on the number of alternate image boards, or better said, alternate /b/. Claims of an exodus became stronger and stronger and many /b/tards would migrate from 4chan. A second generation of chans that where created after and during the /b/-day became populated by the exiled legion. Many sites were created or revived, such as 7chan, 12chan, 2ch.ru; a site that would become the birthplace of the Russian chanverse, 888chan, and already existing sites like the recently created 420chan, WAKAchan, AnonIB, WTFux and others would be benefitted. The idea of independent, low population-high quality /b/s became a cultural trend on the imageboard communities that lasted for many years, having its peak during late 2006 and early 2007. The prohibition on raids also strengthened the raid mentality of those who were banned. From there on there would be a presence of the /i/nsurgency as an extant identity that saw the idea of the anonymous legion was an independent force. They accused 4chan and /b/ of being shit and going against what they considered cultural staples of anonymous. The legion identity culminated in the creating of 7chan's /i/ - Invasion board. However /i/ boards where highly problematic, and 7chan's board would later be deleted. With time, every major alternative site would house an /i/ board for a while.
A Dvd with one / more language subtitles.
We need to the following resources...
Takata Corporation is a Japanese based automotive parts company that produced vehicle airbags for several automaker companies, including Ford, Toyota, Honda, BMW, Chrysler, and many others. [1] They are 1 of 3 major suppliers of airbags producing about 20% of airbags sold worldwide. [2] Many Takata airbag inflators have the potential to rupture and send flying debris inside the vehicle. This issue prompted the largest series of automotive recalls in U.S. history, with 19 automakers having to recall up to 69 million inflators in 42 million vehicles. At least 20 people have been killed worldwide and more than 180 injured. Takata's negligence brought a criminal conviction and fines against the company, eventually forcing it into bankruptcy protection.[3]
Takata used a phase-stabilized ammonium nitrate (PSAN) propellant in the airbag inflator without including a drying agent. [4] The inflator assembly also did not adequately protect against outside moisture. [4] This moisture inside the inflator, combined with long term exposure to heat could cause the inflator to rupture when activated. [4] Many victims whose airbags exploded were injured by metal shards from the inflator. [1] Because heat and humidity are factors in the airbag's failure, this rupturing has been more common in southern states, especially Florida. [4]
In litigations it was revealed that Takata knew about these faulty inflators as early as 1999 and waited until 2015 to formally acknowledge the safety risk. Takata did a lot of business with Honda which could have been one reason why they kept news of the defect quiet, to keep from losing business. As a result of the cover-up, Takata was fined $200 million dollars for withholding and denying the release of the information. As lawsuits accrued against Takata they pled guilty and declared bankruptcy in 2017. As part of their final judgement, they needed scientific data to say their equipment was safe and could only distribute their Ammonium Nitrate airbags as recall replacements. They were fined an additional $1 billion dollars, in which $850 million dollars was to be given to automakers who bought their inflators and were stuck with the litigation costs and recall costs, and $125 million dollars was awarded to the victims. Takata was bought by a rival company for $1.6 billion dollars. [5] During litigations two members of the corporation were found to play important roles in this controversy. Thomas Sheridan, an airbag engineer, and Al Bernat, who was a testing engineer.[6] Mr. Sheridan's deposition during a lawsuit involving a paralyzed woman stated that he had the data but was unable to examine the individual parts. He said that the vice president of engineering at the time, Mr. Bernat, had discarded the evidence. Sheridan was quoted as saying that he was not surprised that the airbags were linked to deaths and injuries: “I didn’t think it would take so long for the failures to show up,” he said. “It took a lot longer than I thought.”[6] Takata insisted that their data related to the accusers airbag showed that it would not deploy forcefully as was claimed. Safety regulators fined Takata an additional $70 million dollars which could grow by $130 million dollars for manipulating its test data.[6]
The Takata Corporation settled confidential settlements with victims to avoid the problem from reaching public domain. Victims said: "it was like they were paying us off to shut us up." These settlements kept the defects out of the public domain.[5] Additionally 44 states and Washington D.C reached a deal with Takata for $650 million to settle consumer protection claims. However, the states decided that they would not collect the settlement to allow victims a greater share of what would be Takata's dwindling funds. South Carolina was the only state to accept any payment to cover the cost of initializing the investigation against Takata.[7] Takata's lawsuits are brought by plaintiffs who claim that they suffered injury that could have been prevented had they known about the defect. Key points for these lawsuits are concealing the defect, downplaying the defect, and producing a defective airbag. These lawsuits provide compensation for bodily harm, disability/impairment, disfigurement, mental anguish, loss of enjoyment of life, medical bills, lost wages, and vehicle/property damage. Anyone who is harmed through the deployment of these airbags, whether malfunction or safety mechanism, are eligible for these lawsuits. In some cases these deployments can be filed as wrongful death suits.[5]
The NHTSA investigated Takata airbags as incidents arose, and pressured Takata Corporation to admit there was a default in some of their airbags. [1] In May 2015, Takata, under pressure from the NHTSA, agreed to expand their recall to include airbags in cars nationwide, instead of only recalling airabags in a few southern states with consistently high heat and humidity. [1] The NHTSA also pressured automakers to speed up their repair programs, due to the huge number of airbags being recalled. [1]
The NHTSA has promoted awareness of the dangers of Takata airbags and the importance in getting defective ones replaced on their website. And they have strongly encouraged media outlets to report on the issue. Several of their news stories on their website include at the bottom: "NOTE TO MEDIA: NHTSA encourages media coverage of this event in an effort to increase public awareness of the urgency of getting recalled Takata air bag inflators replaced. Car owners should visit www.safercar.gov to check the recall status of their vehicles and for more information on what the recall means to them" (p. 7) [8]
Despite their accomplishments the NHTSA's handling of the Takata airbag recalls has been criticized by the Department of Transportation, a DOT spokesperson told ABC news in 2014: "The roll out of the safety advisory by NHTSA was not optimal, but what is most important right now is that a NHTSA-led investigation uncovered a very serious defect" (p. 3).[9]
Orbital ATK [4], on behalf of the Independent Testing Coalition (ITC), tested the Takata airbags independently to find the source of failure. The ITC, formed in December 2014, is made up of ten automakers who's vehicles contained recalled Takata airbags. [4] Once Orbital ATK [4] tested the airbags and found the cause of failure they submitted their findings to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in 2016.
Many consumers are frustrated because of the frequently long wait time to get their defective airbags replaced. [1] Due to the high number of recalls in place, automakers had to replace the most at-risk airbags first, forcing many consumers with lower risk (but still potentially dangerous) airbags to wait for several weeks or even months between when their car's airbag was recalled and when the local dealer was able to replace it. [1] Victims and families of victims who have been killed or injured by airbags sued Takata and automaker companies in a class action lawsuit. [10] In addition to that, some families have attempted to sue Takata individually for punitive damages. [11]
Many of the initial injuries involved 2001 Honda Accords and Civics. In November 2008, Honda responded by recalling 4000 vehicles globally as it became apparent that Takata airbag inflators may produce excessive internal pressure causing them to rupture and propel metal fragments into the car.
The first deaths in the United States occurred in 2009, both involving 2001 Honda Accords. Honda as well as Takata denied fault in the first death and settled for an undisclosed sum. The second case was settled for $3 million.[12]
In April and May 2013, Toyota Motor, Honda, Nissan Motor, Mazda Motor, and BMW, recalled a total of 3.6 million cars. Then on June 11, Toyota expanded that recall by 2.3 million additional vehicles, many for the second time, though for a different airbag. Takata admitted it had kept inadequate records and that the number of recalled cars could still rise as automakers discover more models fitted with defective air bags.[12]
On June 11, 2014, Toyota expands its prior recall to 2.27 million vehicles globally. On June 23, 2014, Honda, Nissan and Mazda recall 2.95 million vehicles, expanding their April 2013 recall, bringing the total recall to about 10.5 million vehicles over five years. July 16, 2014, BMW recalls about 1.6 million more cars worldwide.[12]
Many automakers have been slow to replace the potentially deadly inflators. A report by an independent monitor said that as of September 15, 2017, automakers have recalled 43.1 million inflators. Of those, only 18.5 million, or 43 percent have been replaced.[3]
There are instances of automakers attempting to avoid recalls. Ford appealed the recall of certain models since the inflators contained a drying agent, "At this point, there is no data to suggest a recall is needed,” even though Takata said they were still capable of exploding.[13] General Motors appealed the recall of some truck models because it said their inflator casings were more robust and located in areas not prone to moisture. In its petition seeking the delay, GM said that 52,000 air bags in its trucks and SUVs have inflated in crashes, and none has ruptured. GM also said Takata has tested 1,475 GM inflators and all worked as designed. General Motors was allowed to delay a large recall of potentially defective air bags, giving them time to prove that the devices are safe and to possibly avoid a huge financial hit. The testing could help GM fend off several recalls totaling 6.8 million trucks and SUVS with the same inflators that ultimately could cost the company $870 million.[14]
Nissan has agreed to a $98 million class-action settlement with consumers to cover the economic losses they've incurred because of faulty Takata airbags. Among the possible benefits:
Free rental car for use while awaiting repairs.
Reimbursement of reasonable expenses, including transportation, towing and lost wages or childcare costs, accumulated as a result of the recall.
The funds will also support a program to try to convince Nissan owners to get their vehicles repaired. Only 30% of Nissan vehicle owners had gotten their Takata air bags replaced as of June 2017.
Similar agreements have been made by Toyota, BMW, Mazda and Subaru.[15]
To prevent the possibility that an affected Takata airbag inflator can ever be used as a replacement part, Honda searched salvage yards nationwide to find and secure recalled inflators. This voluntary effort has successfully removed over 130,000 inflators from salvage yards. They also requested that major online auction sites prohibit and stop the sale of affected airbags. Honda applied graphics about the recall to more than 300 American Honda Parts & Service trucks, transforming them into rolling billboards that encourage affected owners to take immediate action. These trucks cover more than 100,000 miles per day, all across the country. Honda sent teams of representatives to physically knock on owners’ doors to assist them with scheduling recall repairs. Hundreds of additional people were hired to continue this effort with the goal of repairing or accounting for 100% of vehicles with high risk inflators.[16]
Takata kept quiet about the defect in their airbags. They neglected to alert consumers about the dangers and purposefully covered up their test data. The defective airbags were not the first major recall Takata was forced to implement either. In 1995, Takata produced 8.8 million defective seat belts, 90% of which were later recalled. [17] Unfortunately, Takata Corporation did not learn from this experience, and as a result many people have been killed and injured from their defective airbags. Takata's actions are similar to those of Volkswagen, which altered its equipment to produce false test results in order to pass the emission standards. Many engineers knew about the defect in the airbags, however no one came forward and released that information to the public. It seems that some engineers did not appreciate the gravity of the situation. In an email from 2006 obtained by The New York Times, Takata airbag engineering Bob Schubert wrote "Happy Manipulating!!!" in reference to airbag test results. [18] This blatant disregard for consumer safety is very dangerous and unprofessional, especially for a company that produces safety equipment for automobiles.
Jerk is not commonly used in first year motion. Its main application is in dealing with travel of large objects that change their weight as they move due to a change in mass. One example might be a rocket travelling up from rest. As it burns fuel, its centre of gravity changes and as such, its acceleration is not constant (violation of Newton's Second Law).
Given the details of the loading of a beam, we can represent it on a diagram of the beam with arrows indicating forces, curved arrows indicating moments (resistance to torque) and shaded regions representing universally varying or distributed loads. We can use this diagram (commonly known as a free body diagram) and the information contained within it to draw a diagram representing the shear forces (V in the beam, and can also derive an equation that represents these. The equation may not be as simple as a polynomial, and is quite often a series of continuous functions with endpoints at the points on the beam where the forces occur.
We can perform an indefinite integral on each of these segments of the beam to get more information on it. The indefinite integrals combine to form a diagram of the bending moments in the beam. Bending moments are a special type of moment, as the beam is most likely to fail where the bending moments are at a relative extrema. By definition, any indefinite integral will contain a constant, C. In the case of the bending moment diagram, our C is merely the endpoint of the previous segment. The only exception being when we have a moment, we add or subtract its value (depending on direction).
Hence, differentiating the bending moment model will give us the shear force.
Differentiating the shear force model brings us back to our loading diagram, and differentiating that will give us the shape of the deflection of the beam under the loading.
For any bending moment model b, as a function of distance from the end of the beam, x,
Where f(x) is a function describing the deflection of the beam.
Messier 73 (also known as M73 and NGC 6994) is an asterism of four w:stars in the constellation of Aquarius. An asterism is comprised of physically unconnected stars that appear close to each other in the sky as seen from Earth. M73 is one of the best-known asterisms in the sky, and it has been carefully studied scientifically.
M73 was discovered by w:Charles Messier on w:October 4, w:1780, who originally described the object as a cluster of four stars with some nebulosity. Subsequent observations by w:John Herschel, however, failed to reveal any nebulosity. Moreover, Herschel noted that the designation of M73 as a cluster was questionable. Nonetheless, Herschel included M73 in his General Catalogue of clusters, w:nebulae, and w:galaxies, and John Dreyer included M73 when he compiled the w:New General Catalogue[2].
Scientific Research: Asterism or Open Cluster?
M73 was once treated as a potential sparsely populated w:open cluster, which consists of stars that are physically associated in space as well as on the sky. The question of whether the stars were an asterism or an open cluster generated a small, interesting debate.
In 2000, L. P. Bassino, S. Waldhausen, and R. E. Martinez published an analysis of the colors and luminosities of the stars in and around M73. They concluded that the four bright central stars and some other nearby stars followed the color-luminosity relation that is also followed by stars in open clusters (as seen in a w:Hertzsprung-Russell diagram). Their conclusion was that M73 was an old open cluster that was 9 arcmin wide[3]. G. Carraro, however, published results in 2000 based on a similar analysis and concluded that the stars did not follow any color-luminosity relation. Carraro's conclusion was that M73 was an asterism[4]. Adding to the controversy, E. Bica and collaborators concluded that the chance alignment of the four bright stars seen in the center of M73 as well as one other nearby star was highly unlikely, so M73 was probably a sparse open cluster[5]. The controversy was solved in 2002, when M. Odenkirchen and C. Soubiran published an analysis of the high resolution w:spectra of the six brightest stars within 6 arcmin of the central position of M73. Odenkirchen and Soubiran demonstrated that the distances from the Earth to the six stars were very different from each other, and the stars were moving in different directions. Therefore, they concluded that the stars were only an asterism[6].
Although M73 was determined to be only a chance alignment of stars, further analysis of asterisms is still important for the identification of sparsely populated open clusters. Such clusters can be important for demonstrating how open clusters are ripped apart by the gravitational forces in the w:Milky Way.
Sub-group PD-D: Vertical rectangle containing "POSTAGE/DUE"
Two variations of the slogan were used.- D1 - 10 mm tall, 19-20 mm wide. The lines of the letters are uniform in thickness
D2 - 9½ mm tall, 17 mm wide. The lines of the letters are of variable thickness, most noticeable in the "O", "S", and "G". The "U" of DUE has a small serif at bottom right.At least 41 machines were used with this slogan starting in 1951. Most had their slogans dies replaced by PD-E dies by the mid 1950s although at least one is known used as late as 1963.
PD-D1.1. Pitney Bowes "JD" or "JDC", first used with Postage Due slogan on December 22, 1951.
Type PO-A3.1A (92745 CHICAGO / ILL.) with Postage Due slogan D1.
Type PO-A6.2A/2B with Postage Due slogan D1.
A. Town mark contains "P." and "O." at the sides. At least thirty-six meters were used in Chicago, Dallas, Los Angeles, New York, Saint Louis, and San Francisco starting October 22, 1951.
B. Town mark contains "POST OFFICE" at bottom. Four meters known: [S]
107635 CHICAGO, ILL.(used February 11, 1952 to June 29, 1953 when the town mark was changed to A)
C. Town mark contains no indication of post office use. One meter only: 109278 DALLAS / TEXAS[RRRR]
Type PO-A6.2B with Postage Due slogan D2.
A. 197917 WASHINGTON / P. O. / D.C.♦(earliest seen October 29, 1951)[RRRR]
B. 186999 WASHINGTON / P. O. / D.C.(earliest seen March 24, 1952)[S for loose tape, RR on cover]
V/F: ≋ 00 :♦ This is the same meter used in an earlier experiment, Type PD-A3.1C.
The Berlin Defence is a common opening often played at grandmaster level. The move 3...Nf6 attacks the center and threatens the pawn on e4. The Berlin Defence also gets black ready to castle quicker than in the Morphy's Defence. When playing the Berlin Defence, black must keep in mind the threat on his c6 Knight. Therefore black must soon consider a way of negating the threat and defending e5 as the game transitions into the middle game.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 Nf6
d3...
Nc3...
d4...
Qe2...
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Please read Using Wikibooks to learn about editing and writing books. You can ask any questions in the help room.You can help people find this book by categorizing it.
Kurdish is the language of the Kurds, an stateless iranic people in the Middle East who live in what is called Kurdistan. It is split among multiple dialects and among those, subdialects. It has some similarity to Persian with influences from arabic and turkish also. It is with the Persian languages are in the Indo - European languages family.
Per capita GNI or per capita GDP represent measures of per capita income. The difference between GDP and GNI is that GNI excludes incomes earned domestically by foreign factors (which are paid abroad, for example the profits of multinational corporations) but it includes incomes earned abroad by nationals of the country. Per capita income figures are computed by dividing GNI or GDP of a country by the mid-year total population of the country. Usually, per capita income figures are also called PPP (purchasing power parity) dollars, sometimes referred to as 'international dollars,' which have same purchasing power over GDP as a conversion factor, and not the market exchange rate, is that cost of living may differ substantially between countries and market exchange rates do not necessarily adjust to capture these differences.
The World Bank uses per capita GNI to determine the following income classifications: low income was defined as $975 or less in 2008; middle income was $976 to $11,905; and high income was $11,906 or more. A further at GNI per capita - $3,855 - is made between lower-middle income and upper-middle income economies.
The classification is useful and may provide us with some information on the level of development of a country as there is a positive correlation between per capita income and social welfare. Few would question that Norway is more developed than Zimbabwe. But since growth in per capita income does not necessarily imply improved living standards, classification based on per capita income is also fraught with problems. Using per capita income may mask very significant differences between countries.
These are some issues to be aware of when using per capita income figures to determine the level of development of countries.
Per capita income fails to incorporate income distribution considerations. Per capita income is just a simple average providing no information on whether income is equitably or very unequally distributed.
Using per capita income figures does not take into account the value of the environmental degradation often associated with increased production. Te pressure on agriculture to produce more food products is responsible for soil erosion and the burning of forests. Industrialisation is also often accompanied by massive migration from rural to urban areas, leading to heavily polluted and congested cities. Emissions from industry and increased energy requirements also decrease the quality of life.
Per capita income figures fail to include non-marketed subsistence production which may be relatively significant in some low-income countries. Non-marketed subsistence production refers to foods and other goods and services produced by a family for its own consumption. More generally, per capita income figures fail to include the size of parallel ('black' or shadow) economies in developing countries.
Relying on per capita income also conceals useful information on the composition of output. Two economies with equal per capita income levels may differ with respect to living standards because of different output mix. A country that spends a large proportion of its GDP on, say, defence, devotes resources there that could have been used to otherwise in the production of pro-development goods. The value of leisure, a very important 'good' an individual may enjoy, is not included in the calculation of GNI or GDP. It makes a big difference to workers if the average working week is over 50 hours and they can seldom take a holiday, or if the working week is only 35 hours and everyone enjoys four weeks' paid leave every year.
Lastly, per capita income does not include the value of the stream of services flowing from the accumulated social other capital of an economy that individuals enjoy. Living standards at any point in time are not affected just by the current income but also by the stock of accumulated wealth. For example, the existence of a high-quality and free public school system implies that households with children may devote more of their income to goods and services not related to education.
Despite these and other shortcomings, per capita income remains the best single indicator of development available but must be employed with caution in any analysis.
Health-related indicators may be used, such as health expenditure per capita; life expectancy at birth (years); infant mortality (per 1,000 live births); mortality of children aged under fie years (per 1,000); malnutrition prevalence, weight, and /or height for age (of children under five years old); births attended by skilled health staff (% of total); maternal mortality ratio(per 100,000 live births); immunisation, DPT, and measles (% of children aged between 12 and 23 months); improved sanitation facilities (% of population with access); prevalence of HIV (% of population aged between 15 and 49 years); physicians (per 10,000 people); hospital beds (per 10,000 people).
Education-related indicators may be taken into account, such as literacy rate (% of people aged 15 years and older); mean years of schooling (of people aged 25 years and older); expected years of schooling (years); expenditure per student, primary, secondary, and tertiary (% of GDP, per capita); pupil-teacher ratio, primary; ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%); school enrolment, primary secondary, and tertiary (%); trained teachers in primary education (% of total teachers).
Other indicators include newspaper circulation per 1,000 population, energy consumption per capita, percentage of GDP derived from each sector of the economy and urban population.
An excellent source of current data on health, education, and other development-related indicators are the statistical tables at the end of the World Development Report published annually by the World Bank.
No single indicator is powerful enough to illustrate satisfactorily the complex issue of development. It is therefore preferable to rely on several indicators synthesised into a single variable.
A number of composite indices have been devised. They integrate economic, social, and even political aspects of development. The most widely quoted and used composite indicator is the human development index (HDI). The HDI measures average achievements of a population in terms of health, education, and access to goods and services and was devised as a simple rival to GNP concentrating only on longevity, basic education, and minimal income. The HDI 'succeeded in challenging the hegemony of growth-centric thinking' (that is, it was successful in displacing per capita income as a summary measure of development).
The health dimension of the HDI is captured by life expectancy at birth. In 2010 the indicators used to measure progress in education have been revised and now include the mean years of schooling that a child of school entrance age could expect to receive if prevailing patterns of enrolment were to stay the same (instead of adult literacy and gross enrolment rate). Access to goods and services is measured by per capita income which in 2010 has also been revised and now refers to GNI per capita in PPP dollars, replacing GDP per capita. The reason for this change to GNI is that in a globalised world it is preferable to focus on the income of the residents of a country as this income may significantly differ from domestic production.
a reliance on national averages which conceals skewed distributions in the variables included within a population, and
Being an average it may conceal important differences within a country. Women and rural populations as well as the very old and the very young often suffer disproportionately but this is not illustrated through the HID. In addition, environmental concerns are not addressed. It is possible for a country to have a high HDI and be 'unsustainable, undemocratic, and unequal.'
Note that three composite indicators were introduced by the UNDP in 2010 capturing multidimensional inequality (the inequality-adjusted HDI, known as the IHDI), gender disparities (the gender inequality index) and extreme deprivation (the multidimensional poverty index).
The IHDI is a measure of human development that takes into consideration the extent of inequality in the country. Under perfect equality the HDI and the IHDI are equal. Inequality in the distribution of health, education, and income lowers the HDI on an average person in society below the aggregate HDI of the country (based on the UNDP Human Development Report, 2010).
The gender inequality index attempts to reveal differences in the distribution of achievements between women and men in a country. Often women and girls are discriminated against in health, education, and in the labour market, which negatively affect their freedom.
The multidimensional poverty index replaces the human poverty index. It complements money-based measures of poverty by considering 'multi deprivations and their overlap.' Low level of income is byt one dimension of the poverty experienced by people in many countries of the world − poverty extends to other dimensions such as poor health and nutrition, low education and skills, inadequate livelihoods, bad housing conditions, social exclusion and lack of participation. The multidimensional poverty index shows the number of people who are poor (suffering a given number of deprivations) and the numbe rof deprivations with which poor households typically struggle.
Stamps are collectibles and are exchanged and traded extensively in many countries around the world.
Most postage stamps are very common either in condition used or mint (not used) condition. Fine used and mint unhinged are the two conditions most likely to be collected.
It may be hard to comprehend, but stamp catalogs exist that identify nearly every postage stamp ever created in the entire world. A collector with an interest in just one country or region may prefer a stamp catalog that describes only the stamps in the specific collecting area. For beginner collectors, a pocket catalog that identifies each stamp and lists them in chronological order may be all that is needed.
Yet it is very difficult to devine a valuation scheme in one or several currencies which reflect the true market value of any particular collectible. Therefore, the following scheme is based on scarcity (and therefore value) and a basic coding is used in this catalogue:
Population Genetics is the field of genetics which studies allele distributions and genetic variation in populations. Population geneticists study the processes of mutation, migration, natural selection and genetic drift on populations, and in doing so are studying evolution as it occurs.
Chapter or book approach: The approach of this chapter / book is to work through a series of models. The first model will be the Hardy-Weinberg Model, and then progressively, the models will move away from the premises of Hardy-Weinberg.
Templeton states that the three premises of population genetics are the same premises for population genetics:
Phenotypes emerge from the interaction of templates/DNA and environment.
There are three major properties that a population must maintain with replication:
They are distributed over space and time
The first property indicates that individuals of the population must reproduce to keep the population stable. This is necessary because individuals breakdown over time do to the introduction of entropy and inability for an individual to continuously remove the entropy added by the environment. Thus to maintain the population, individuals must pass down their DNA, or organizational encoding, to the next generation. Through continuous reproduction, a population can be maintained over a much longer time than the individuals that comprise it. In addition, the continuous reproduction of over time enables for the population to have properties and components of its own.
The second property is that a population is distributed over a space. Populations can exists as:
a large interbreeding population that exists over a vast space
In general though the population can be divided into a primary group that can be considered as interbreeding and a secondary group that mates occasionally with the primary group. It is this primary group that population geneticists generally study, as it is generally stable. They define the group as a group of interbreeding individuals that share a common system of mating. The secondary group is generally ignored, and treated as noise in the system, unless it is having a major effect on the primary group.
The third property that must be maintained with reproduction is the population's gene pool. The gene pool is the collection of all the genes, organizational templates, in the population that can be used to create new individuals. By studying this gene pool, geneticists can determine the frequency of alleles, and or groups of alleles in the population and how they are changing over time. From the patterns of result that are obtained, geneticists then can start to understand what forces are acting on the population.
Single Nucleotide Substitutions (sometimes changing the protein sequences and sometimes not)
Initially we are going to consider populations with genetic architectures of two loci per template.
The genetic architecture of the Hardy Weinberg model is one locus, two allele model (Templeton, p. 35).
Quantitatively it says that if the allele proportions of two alleles A and a are denoted p and q then the genotype proportions will be such that the homozygote AA will be of proportion p2, the heterozygote Aa will have proportion 2pq and the homozygote aa will be of proportion q2.
To do this test you do what is known as a Chi Square test (
If there is a population with genotype proportions AA: 0.1 Aa: 0.4 aa: 0.5
So our expected values are AA: 0.09 Aa: 0.42 aa: 0.49.
Extending the H.W. model to two autosomal locus model with two alleles.
For the purpose of this discussion, the first locus will have alleles A and a and the second locus will have B and b. From this we can get the following gamete types and their frequencies through recombination:
A population producing the above four gamates can produce the following genotypes:
If you analyze the table above, it can be noticed that there are only ten unique combinations. Four combinations correspond to homozygous zygotes and the remaining six are the heterozygous zygotes.
Notice that the sum of FreqAB, FreqAb, FreqaB, and Freqab is one. This follows from the earlier model where the sum of p and q equaled one.
Formally, if we define pairwise LD, we consider indicator variables on alleles at two loci, say
Various derivatives of this parameter have been developed. In the genetic literature the wording "two alleles are in LD" usually means to imply
. Contrariwise, linkage equilibrium, denotes the case
If r > 0 and D != 0 then evolution is occurring
If r = 0 or if D equals 0, then no evolution is occurring
To do:To be created.
First experiments were done in the early 30's. German was a major scientific language before the second world war.
The effects of genetic drift is inversely proportional to population size. This means as the population increases, the deviation from expected allelic frequencies will decrease. (Templeton, p. 84).
There is no attraction to return ancestral allele frequencies.
Genetic drift is a cumulative function. Changes in allele frequencies from the previous generations are added to the changes that occur in the current generation.
To study genetic drift this section will create a simplified model and expand upon it. The model will just have two states, a) genetic drift is occurring and b) genetic drift is not occurring.
b->a reintroduction of differentiable patterns
Genetic drift can be broken down into two simplified states to start. The f
In each population, 2N=32, po=qo=0.5 initially and then did 19 generations of data. (Buri, P. 1956 "Gene frequency in small populations of mutant Drosophila. Evolution 10: 367-402
(See Figure 6.3 from Hedrick, P.W. 2005, Genetics of populations, 3rd edition. Jones and Bartlett, Sudbury, MA)
Note that in this figure, variance is increasing, but mean allele frequency over populations is staying relatively the same.
Genetic Drift can be simulated using a Monte Carlo Simulation.
The proportion of populations expected to go to fixation for a given allele is equal to the initial frequency of that allele
Only the allele frequencies are changing and the distribution of the allele frequency. The mean allele frequency over multiple replicate populations does not change due to genetic drift.
Heterzygositity or the variance of the allele frequency over the replicate population can be used to understand genetic drift.
We can calculate the number of generations necessary to reduce the reduce the heterozygostity
t=ln(x)*-2*N, where x is how much heterozgostity is left, and N is the population size.
To do:To be created.
Gene Pool - p. 37 and p. 38 of Templeton's book
!
What are the observed frequencies of p and q?
What are the expected number of genotypes?
Do the observed genotypes fit H-W expectation?
It is possible to solve for the amount of time it will take till an initial frequency is less than or equal to a particular threshold by using the following formula:
Given the frequency of the dominant allele and an F value:
What sample size would be necessary to detect an effect of F=0.01 at the S% significant level?
Look up the X2 value for S% significant level (usually S = 5%)
What are the selection coefficients?
What are the equilibrium frequencies for the pf and qf alleles in females considering that heterozygotes have intermediate fitness?
What are the equilibrium frequencies for the pm and qm alleles in males considering that heterozygotes have intermediate fitness?
What range of sf values will give a stable polymorphism?
What range of sm values will give a stable polymorphism?
What are the selection coefficients shomo, dom and shetero with q = 0.02?
Calculate the stable equilibrium frequency, qe and pe.
(b) stable equilibrium allele frequencies
(a) What are the frequencies of the S1, S2, and S3 alleles initially, and after one and two generations?
What are the absolute and relative fitness for each?
Information literacy is the ability to articulate a problem to be investigated, locate and assemble information, scrutinize gathered resources, process and apply information towards a solution, and contemplate the effectiveness of the entire process.
According to the American Library Association (2007), "Information literacy is a set of abilities requiring individuals to "recognize when information is needed and have the ability to locate, evaluate, and use effectively the needed information."
Digitally literate students will be the students who will succeed in the positions of the 21st century. It is critical for students to learn to gather, assess, evaluate, and expand on resources while in school. Teachers should have a vision of digital literacy in the classroom.
Information literacy instruction teaches our students to be digitally literate so they may be prepared for living in the 21st century. Our students need to be equipped with the technological skills to succeed.
Many educators feel the need to understand and utilize technology but do not have the necessary tools and resources. It is our responsibility as educators to learn how to teach technology literacy in a way that everyone can understand (Wepner & Liqing, 2002). We also have a responsibility to search for websites that accommodate our student’s literacy skills (Wepner & Liqing, 2002).
National organizations have created standards to indicate what students should know about and be able to do with technology (Bennett, 2005). Look at the International Society of Technology in Education's standards for students (ISTE-NETS) and for teachers (ISTE-NETS-T) for help in formulating lesson plans. It is our responsibility to consider these standards as we plan for our classrooms.
The ability to "effectively locate, evaluate, organize, use, package and present information effectively will become a normal part of life at work"(Cheuk, 2002). Students need to become proficient in using technology to handle these demands and teachers must accommodate this need by integrating technology skills in every facet of instruction. There are several key factors to consider when implementing a technology education program: the students’ abilities, assessment of deficiencies in skill attainment, selection of material and methods for teaching, and application of learning in real world situations.
Schools and program designers must understand the strengths and weaknesses of their students before planning their instruction. A literacy skills survey of college students found that more than half the graduates could not be categorized as possessing proficiency in analyzing news articles, comprehending documents and balancing a checkbook (Lilienthal, 2006. Being aware of strengths, weaknesses and curriculum needs will do much to guide instruction and develop information literacy skills.
What exactly do educators need to teach to students and how will the content be taught? The current focus in education is to access higher level or critical thinking skills in students. “Helping our students achieve information literacy and critical thinking skills is an important goal” (Murray, 2005). Students are expected to utilize their critical thinking skills to solve problems in a technologically-based environment. Students must utilize skills that they have learned that clearly demonstrate technological competency. By performing these tasks students are taught how to use technology to accomplish a curricular goal.
Exactly what students need to learn should be written into educational standards. For instance, the American Association of School Librarians developed standards for student learning. “The student who is information literate accesses information efficiently and effectively, evaluates information critically and competently, and uses information accurately and creatively” (Murray, 2005). The goals of technology information literacy are to promote lifelong learning among students, utilize critical thinking skills, and promote problem-solving skills (Plotnick, 1999).
The NetSavvy approach developed by Jukes, Dosaj, and Macdonald (2000), suggests that once educators and learners have determined what the essential questions are for the task, it is imperative to consider one’s choice of tools. This consideration means not only what is available, but whether all participants in the project are comfortable with using the selected tools. The NetSavvy approach supplies educators and students with guideposts to tackle any project. Specifically, teachers can evaluate whether the tools are right for one’s pupils for where they are at a particular moment in time and be used to track whether the lesson has helped in reaching the lesson’s objectives.
The NetSavvy approach ensures that teachers cover what the authors refer to as the 5A’s. These are Asking, Acccessing, Analyzing, Applying, and Assessing. For each of the 5A’s there are the same five elements to consider, each tweaked to fit one’s particular lesson plan. The first examines the prerequisite skills teachers assume of students. The second element uses the Student Basic Asking Tool which, like a KWL chart, seeks what pre-information students have on the topic and what they wish to learn. (An additional component not seen in the KWL chart or in many lesson plans in general is added, namely, imagination.) The third element of the 5A’s deals with the essential skills the teacher hopes to engender in the students. The remaining two elements deal with equipment needs coverage and a review element appraising the entire teacher, student, and collaborative processes involved in the lesson. Once teachers and students are empowered with this method, they are equipped with innate tools to make good choices.
INTERACTIVE WEBSITES breathe life into the Internet! Interactivity makes the Internet dynamic and highly engaging. Just imagine how long you can stare at an image of an airplane on a web page...you try to imagine how it moves in the air, how it feels when it touches down on a landing strip. You can concentrate for ten, maybe fifteen seconds, right? Now imagine flying that plane - you are in control of a smooth bank to the right, with a sparkling blue expanse below. You might even try a gutsy aileron roll as your engine roars through the sky! That's the potential of interactivity - it puts users in control! And control equates to engagement! Studies show that websites that are "providing opportunities for interaction can increase learning effectiveness".(Brady, 2004)[1].
Interactive websites engage students by providing information and resources coupled with practice, simulations, tutorials, virtual fieldtrips, problem-solving and other learning activities. They can be highly interactive, content-rich simulations such as the Frog Guts (subscription-based) simulation and the Leonardo's Workshop. Or, traditional drill and practice like Funbrain or book quizzes like Book Adventure.
Using music, video, simulations, practice sessions, feedback mechanisms, and a host of other attention-getting and attention-keeping devices, well-designed interactive websites keep minds clicking and seeking more information. A well-designed interactive website is more than "drill-and-kill" types of games, though such skills-based sites are still useful for some students or for certain circumstances.
Teachers should preview sites before sending their students to them. Teachers can also turn to portal or other trusted sites that have prescreened the web pages which they are promoting.One well-known example of such a trusted site is Discovery School, maintained by Kathy Schrock, a former school librarian. Kathy and the Discovery School staff have done much of the wading through websites for teachers. Another alternative would be to utilize specialty websites, such as:
Instructors should also be teaching students about protecting themselves on the Internet in conjunction with instruction on how to locate, evaluate and choose appropriate sites for their purposes. With "more than 100 million web sites on the Internet" (Netcraft, 2006) and thousands more being added daily, the Internet has much to offer and much to wade through. Students and teachers alike must be equipped to do their searching efficiently. In order to find and assess quality, checklists can be kept on each website visited.
Interactivity is more than visiting websites - there is a multitude of interactive resources for teachers and students to use. On-line games will immediately come to mind. Thought many schools block on-line games, most schools also allow sites to be unblocked if teachers can demonstrate the educational efficacy of a site. Computer games “can provide many self-directed learning strategies, thus stimulating student’s learning interests and promoting student-centered learning” (Yu, Wang, and Che, 2005, p. 94). Keeping students motivated and interested are two of the main goals of interactive gaming. They “incorporate knowledge, fun competition, cooperation, and virtual reality into learning” (Yu, et. al, 2005, p. 95). Like any website, an evaluation should be done on the online game that is in question to use. Here is a sample rubric for evaluating an online games:
Other types of interactive resources include instant messaging, podcasts, blogs, and using the Internet for phone calls using services like Skype. Instant messaging has been found to be “more personal, confidential, and targeted than the public space of a discussion list or chat room” (Abram, 2005). Podcasting allows students to record their own thoughts and ideas. Teachers only need to supply a microphone for students to record. Blogging has grown tremendously in the last few years and some sites are designed specifically for school-age children.“Skype is for calling other people all over the world—for free—on their computers” (Abram, 2005, ¶ 12). This could be either an add-on or replacement for a pen pal in other countries. JYBE is a “plug-in to Internet Explorer and Mozilla Firefox that brings real-time collaboration to Web-based systems and content” (Abram, 2005, ¶ 13). This allows partners to see exactly what the other is doing. JYBE can be downloaded for free.
Jefferson County Schools- Jefferson County Schools in Tennessee maintains this long list of interactive sites organized by content area
The Teacher's Guide- pop-up free list of interactive websites. Sites are ranked according to a simple system.
Mr. Nussbam- a teacher-created, interactive website designed specifically for students in grades K - 8
Multimedia instruction is an interactive method of teaching and uses text, graphics, video, animation and sound to instill meaningful learning for students (Juhas, 2004, p.1). Multimedia instruction utilizes technology in the classroom, offering students unlimited means of learning. I found a website, eZedia, that lists the 12 reasons for using multimedia in the classroom and I have included the list. Projects and activities that include multimedia have the potential to:
One of the most popular multimedia tools is video streaming, “the process of viewing video over the Internet” (Ross, 2005, ¶ 3). Teachers can download the video and watch it at the same time. Teachers need “a computer with an Internet connection and Windows Media Player” to access video streaming (McNeal, and Kearns, 2005, p. 17). They can be used in a variety of ways. They can be used in presentations or Web sites. Students can also view these on an individual basis. One example of video streaming is UnitedStreaming. There are a great number of videos available through Unitedstreaming on every subject and every level.
One of the newest Internet multimedia resources is Podcasting. This “is an automated technology that allows listeners to subscribe and listen to digitally recorded audio shows" (Flanagan, 2005). The files are downloaded onto an MP3 player or a computer. Students can download everything from a teacher’s lecture to previously recorded audio files on a wide multitude of subjects. David Warlick (2005) explains that educators “can share their knowledge, insights, and passions for teaching and learning and for the stories that they relish and teach.” He began the Education Pod Network where teachers and students can download educational Podcasts.
Along with Podcasting, Vodcasting will soon be used extensively. “’Vodcasts’ are identical to podcasts with the exception being that vodcasts are video-based podcasts” (Switzer, 2006). Students will be able to download video files of interest such as science experiments, group presentations or foreign language lessons.
Library databases are used to locate journal or newspaper articles and they are updated daily-to-monthly. (Alverno Library, 2005). Libraries try and update their information whereas the World Wide Web allows anyone to post information without providing continuous updates. Libraries are also able to focus their content, providing researchers to spend more time on qualitative analysis of the articles, rather than the initial search of material. Search results on the World Wide Web may not always have helpful or accurate links to the information that is sought. Based on the accuracy and up-to-date information provided by library databases, it may be more productive and less time consuming to use a library database, rather than to merely search the World Wide Web for information.
Electronic databases are prevalent in today's technologically-immersed world, and continue to grow and become useful for many professions and topics. Electronic databases are used to help researchers locate periodical articles that relate to their topic. Electronic databases may also provide access to full-text databases.
According to the Expanded Academic ASAP User Tutorial, an electronic database can be defined as "an organised list of published information sources (usually journal articles), either giving directions (a citation) to where you can find the full information or containing the information itself (full-text databases) (Gale, 2005). One thing that is absolutely significant to databases is that they function differently based upon the content that they cover. Not all databases are created equally, thus it helps to understand the particulars of the database before utilizing its multiple functions.
Electronic Databases-How are They Different From Library Databases?
The greatest benefit to using a library database is the security of the information that you will find, "if students click on the school library's databases and catalogs, they have albeit virtually stepped through the doors of the building itself. If they click on an Internet search engine, however, they have hurled themselves into the entire world, the world of cyberspace" (Jenson, 2004). This is not to say that library databases are better, but when doing research for educational purposes, it may be wise to consult the library database, and most especially the libararian.
An electronic database is different from a library database only in structure. The general basis of results is primarily the same. Performing a search with either database is going to generate several works in which the researcher can choose from. However, an electronic database differs from a library database in that the timeframe is significantly shortened in a library database, and the location of generated results typically is inconsequential if they are listed in full-text formats. We can endlessly defend the value of books, but we can no longer deny the many advantages of electronic resources: their ease of use, cross-searching capabilities, and simultaneous and remote access options (Roncevic, 2002).
Librarians are witnessing a shift in resources that they offer. In an ideal world, many librarians would like to see their libraries with both print and electronic resources. However, economically, this is a tough feat to accomplish (Roncevic, 2002). An electronic database is difficult in nature to build in terms of cost. An electronic subscription to a journal may cost twice as much as the print version (Roncevic, 2002).
As our classrooms become more enriched with technology and our society becomes more netsavvy, print databases will become less popular. In many libraries, using a print database can be difficult since the options are becoming limited. Electronic databases are becoming more prominent in schools and regional libraries throughout our county. The shift from print to electronic is inevitable. All research can not be conducted from home through use of databases. There are some very valuable resources, such as reference books and other non-circulating materials, that students miss out on unless they physically visit the library. So, for certain research projects, it is important to couple the use of electronic resources with access to print resources.
How can databases be used?
In order for students to use databases effectively for classroom projects and research, teachers cannot assume that students will automatically know how to search databases because they know how to search the Web. Teachers must always provide as much information for their students as possible, including modeling correct search strategies.
With younger students, certain databases can be great tools because, unlike the vast World Wide Web, they are tailored to the students’ comprehension level. Databases also provide solutions to some of the obstacles that face younger students in their searches for information.
Kids InfoBits, a child-friendly spin-off of InfoTrac, is aimed at students in grades kindergarten through five. It culls only those resources appropriate for children and does not contain advertising (Dempsey, 2003). For younger children, databases like Kids InfoBits do what an Internet search engine cannot: “Organize vast resources into a narrower range that's child-friendly, highly structured so kids can find things easily, and vetted for appropriate content” (Dempsey, 2003). Because databases can sometimes provide more meaningful content for young students than the Internet, teachers should check with their school’s media specialist about the school’s access to children’s databases before starting a research project.
When choosing to incorporate technology into a lesson, teachers should choose technology that allows “students to be productive, innovative and enterprising” (TEFA Online, 1999). Teachers need to be certain that incorporating the technology does not hinder the learning process for the students, but instead leads to a deeper understanding of the topic. Technology should “bolster instruction and help students develop higher-order thinking and problem-solving skills” (Brown, 2002, p. 4). To help teachers decide what technology is the best to use, Professor Bell(2004) at Michigan State University designed this Technology Rubric.
B.F. Jones, G. Valdez, J. Nowakowski, and C. Rasmussen (1995) developed The Technology Effectiveness Frameworkthat shows how to use technology to get a deeper understanding and allows students to reach the higher-levels of thinking. If teachers are undecided of what technology is the best to use, they have also designed a Comparison Chart.
Are there assessment tools available? What are they?
There are assessment tools available for choosing appropriate technology and technological tools for teaching and learning. North Central Region Educational Consortium offers a rubric that can be used to score technology usage within a lesson plan. The rubric guides teachers and ensures proper alignment with curriculum objectives and lesson planning. Rubrics can also be created to provide students with guidelines as to what is expected from them before they begin their projects. By creating rubrics in this way, students have more of a focus when using websites to search for information, and teachers are able to change their requirements easily depending upon the grade level and depth of the project.
Assessment of whether information is accurate or not falls upon the teacher. By utilizing electronic and library databases, teachers are able to access information that has already been assessed for its content through the database itself. By being able to accurately assess the information provided on a database, utilizing the rubrics provided by NetSavvy (Jukes, Dosaj, & Macdonald, 2000), as well as the rubrics found at the above wesite, teachers and students will be become technologically literate.
The Big 6, created by Mike Eisenberg and Bob Berkowitz breaks down teaching information literacy into 6 Big Steps. Each of the Big Steps have two sub-groups. The Big 6 are: Task Definition, Information Seeking Strategies, Location and Access, Use of Information, Synthesis and Evaluation.
School-Libraries created a valuable resource not only for librarians but for teachers as well. It has numerous links to various websites under the categories:
Penn State University provided a step-by-step guide to help students learn how to research. It walks the student through nine steps, including copyright concerns. Each step is simple and concise and can easily be used by high school students. One drawback is that certain steps use databases that are licensed to Penn State University libraries; however the basic principles for searching and identifying databases and periodicals are useful.
ERIC Digest provides a definition of information literacy and how information literacy incorporates technology.
An Elementary Level rubric for evaluating websites from Kathy Schrock's Guide for Educators
A rubric from Cornell University’s library website to evaluate a website
An interactive math web site using a library of virtual manipulatives for K-12 math instruction and enrichment
Technology integration ideas for teachers and treasure hunts and other activites for students invovling several subjects such as math, science, social studies, and language arts.
Lawrence Magid hosts this website to provide useful information concerning how to avoid online dangers and explain possible risks that children may face, methods of avoiding risks and also guidelines parents and educators should follow to help prevent online dangers.
A website sponsored by the public library of Greensboro, NC, at , provides two types of resources for teachers and parents: it lists five search engines that are designed specifically for children, and it provides helpful tips to prevent online dangers.
A fun site that uses games and rap songs with robots to teach young kids online safety lessons. Netsmartzkids provides children with opportunities to learn about everything from keeping passwords secret to safety with Instant Messaging.
A site geared toward older children/young teenagers, that helps them, with the use of comic characters, to learn more about age specific online dangers such as cyber bullying or inappropriate cyber contact.
A search engine designed for students to help with their research in form of multiple search engines consisting of encyclopedias, universities, books, facts and references.
Kids website providing thousands of fun and educational activities, worksheets and games for kids.
Abram, S. (2005). Playing to learn! Meet and greet the new interactive
American Library Association. 2006.http://www.ala.org/acrl/ilcomstan.html (Accessed 14 Feb, 2007). American Library Association. Presidential Committee on Information Literacy. Final Report.(Chicago: American Library Association, 1989.)
Bennett, L. (2005). Guidelines for using technology in the social studies classroom. The Social Studies 96, 38-40.
Brown, B. L. (2002). Professional development for career educators (Digest Number 240). Columbus, OH: ERIC Clearinghouse on Adult Career and Vocational Education. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED472602)
Cheuk, B. (2002, July). Information literacy in the workplace context: Issues, best practices and challenges. White Paper prepared for UNESCO, the U.S. National Commission on Libraries and Information Science, and the National Forum on Information Literacy, for use at the Information Literacy Meeting of Experts, Prague, The Czech Republic. Retrieved April 23, 2007, from the National Commission on Libraries and Information Science Web site: http://www.nclis.gov/libinter/infolitconf&meet/papers/cheuk-fullpaper.pdf
Dempsey, B. (2003). Teaching research skills to young students: the critical role
Flanagan, B.& Calandra, B. (2005). Podcasting in the Classroom, Learning and Leading
Gale, T. (2005). Expanded academic asap online tutorial. Access 14 April 2006 from http://web7.infotrac.galegroup.com
Jenson, J.D. (2004). It's the information age, so where's the information? Why our students can't find it and what we can do to help. College Teaching 52 (3), 107-112. Retrieved April 17, 2006 from the WilsonWeb Education Full Text Database.
Jukes, I. , Dosaj, A., & Macdonald, B. (2000) Net.savvy: Building information literacy in the classroom. Thousand Oaks, Calif. : Corwin Press.
McNeal, T. and Kearns, L. (2005). Using video streaming: Setting up a cheap system for distributing information to teachers and students Electronic Version. Learning & Leading with Technology, 32(6), 16-19.
Netcraft, (2006 Nov). November 2006 Web Server Survey. Retrieved April 21, 2007, from Netcraft Web site: http://news.netcraft.com/archives/2006/11/01/november_2006_web_server_survey.html
Roncevic, M. (2002). The e-ref invasion. Reed Business Information Library Journal 130(19) 8-10. Retrieved April 13, 2006 from Wilson Web Full Text Database.
Wepner, S. B. & Liqing, T. (2002). From master teacher to master novice: Shifting responsibilities in technology-infused classrooms. The Reading Teacher, 55(7)642-51.
Yu, S., Minjuan, W., and Che, H. (2005) An exposition of the crucial issues in china’s educational informatization. Educational Technology Research and Development, 53(4), 88-101. Retrieved March 4, 2006, from the WilsonWeb database.
Claymation (or stop motion animation) can be achieved with simple tools. The following are steps in creating the ultimate claymation short film or movie.
A simple digital camera would be the ultimate way to create a animated movie. In the movie Corpse Bride, they purchased a 16 megapixel camera for their shooting. You can also use a movie camera, or a web cam. (You could go out and purchase a professional animation camera). A film camera, will take hundreds of rolls of film. So If its a low budget project, stick to digital. If you are doing it film, do it with a professional animation camera. Don't forget to purchase a tripod! Without one, animating will seem impossible.
If you are going digital, you need a computer. I prefer a Mac, but a PC will do just fine. Macs come with all the software to make your own home movie! Then get an editing software for your clips. iMovie comes free with MacOSX. Next, if you are adding voices to your feature, get a good microphone. Last thing, you will need very much disk space. A short film takes under four gigabytes!
Most amateur animators tend to just go out and buy some clay, but there are many to choose from. I can't tell you what exactly to buy, but make sure you buy all the same brand, or the clay figurines will all be slightly different colours. you can also build or buy an armature. An armature is basically a skeleton for your clayman. you can make these by just bending some aluminium wire to fit your model, or buy an armature from lots of leading brands such as stop mo tec armatures, which I would recommend, or armabenders armatures. you can buy stikfas from www.stikfas.com. you will find out what these are on the site. If you are a seasoned animator and are looking for something more, try buying a guide on how to make foam latex puppets on www.animateclay.com. Foam latex is a substitute for clay, which looks more professional and does not have fingerprints all over them. These things can be made easily and are a brilliant way to kick up your animation a notch.
But whatever you do, you must concentrate while making a model. You better consult some books on anatomy, this really helps.
Walking can reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes by 60% and reduce the risk of large intestine cancer, breast cancer or womb cancer by 20%.
This is perhaps the most important single piece of advice when learning Rebol for the first time: forget the past. Forget what you already know about programming.
Rebol is different. If you know other programming languages such as C or BASIC, and you expect to program Rebol the same way, then what you will get as a result is C or BASIC. Nothing better. We've seen this happen many times.
When programmers finally "get" Rebol, they often make this comment: "You should have told me to forget what I know about programming, I would have been better off."
Does that mean Rebol is difficult to learn? No it's not. But, it's different in many ways, and it makes you think differently about how to program... that is, if you want to program well. Rebol's powerful concept of "dialecting" is just one example.
Here's another way to look at Rebol: If you compare the way you code in assembly language to the way you write in higher level languages, your approach is quite different. This same amplification factor is true with Rebol when compared to most higher level languages.
The inferior and superior vertebral notches of two disks form the intevertebral foramen through which spinal nerves pass.
C1 Atlas: Has transverse processes on each side with an anterior tubercle process at the back. On the Articular facet, the occipital condyles move. Lateral are the transverse foramina which houses the vertebral artery
C2 Axis: Has another pair of articular facets lateral to the Dens-an odontoid process which projects upwards into the atlas. The transverse ligament run across this to keep it in place.
Spinal Vertebrae: Costal facet is posterior to the transverse costal facet (costal=rib).
Upper extremities: 60 bones: humerus, radius, ulna, carpals, metaparpals, phalanges.
Lower extremities: 60 bones: femur, tibia, fibula, patella, tarsals, metatarsals, phalanges (sing. phalanx)
Iliacus Origin: Iliac Fossa, Insertion: Lesser trocanter femur, Function: Hip, medial rotation of femur.
Psoas major Origin: Vertebra, Insertion: " ", Function: " "
Insertion: Origin: Iliac Crest, Insertion: Tibia, lat. condyle, Hip flexor muscle.
Origin: Ilium and sacrum, Insertion: Femur, Function: Abduction and lateral rotation.
Origin: Ilium, Insertion: Greater Trochanter femur, Function: Abduction, medial rotation.
Sartorius: Ilium, Tibia medial, Flexes knee.
Transverse cisternae on the sides and tubule going down the middle
This module contains functions that access analog to digital converter (ADC) peripherals.
When utilizing this module, acquiring ADC data is a two step process: requesting sample conversions (using adc.sample) and extraction of conversion results from a conversion buffer (using adc.getsample, adc.getsamples or adc.insertsamples). Various configuration parameters are available to set conversion rate, how results are extracted from the buffer and how these results are processed prior to extraction.
This module can be utilized if the device in use has a supported ADC peripheral (see status for details) and if ADC functionality is enabled at build time (see building).
Initiate conversion and buffering of samples on an ADC channel.
Returns: nothing.
Get a single conversion value from the buffer associated with a given channel.
Get multiple conversion values from the buffer associated with a given channel.
Get multiple conversion values from a channel's buffer, and write them into a table.
Returns: nothing.
Get the maximum value (corresponding to the maximum voltage) that can be returned on a given channel.
Set the frequency (number of samples per second) at which voltages will be converted into samples.
NOTE: adc.setclock() is not implemented on AVR32 platforms.
Check whether samples are still being acquired on a channel.
Set whether or not functions that request converted samples should wait for requested samples or return immediately with what is available. If this function is not called, each channel starts in blocking mode.
Returns: nothing.
Set the length of the moving average filter. When length is greater than 1, samples pulled from the conversion buffer will be averaged with the preceding length - 1 buffered values.
Returns: nothing.
The apostle John, brother of James and son of Zebedee, one of Jesus' original twelve disciples/apostles, is traditionally viewed as the author of the Gospel of John. According to church tradition he was the only one of the Twelve to live to an old age and die a natural death. This would mean either that he refers to himself in the Gospel, or that the final author/editor/compiler refers to him, as the "disciple whom Jesus loved". This disciple is described as being present at Jesus' crucifixion, however, which is difficult to fit together with the information from the Synoptic Gospels, which suggest that all of the Twelve fled when Jesus was arrested, and only Peter is said to have followed at some distance (see further Mark 14:50, 54, 66-72). However, it is clear from John's Gospel, that John himself was meticulous in his description of the events surrounding the Crucifixion, including Jesus placing his mother Mary in the care of John.
There is at any rate significant debate about whether the Gospel of John was actually written by John the apostle. From internal evidence, one might conclude that Lazarus was the author, since he is the only named individual specifically referred to as the one whom Jesus loves (John 11:3). However, this reference to Lazarus is only a secondary reference to one of many people who Jesus loved and cannot easily support authorship of a Gospel.
Although authorship is still debated, historical testimonies strongly support John, the son of Zebedee, as the author of this Gospel as well as the other Johannine works (Epistles of John, Revelation). External evidence is found in the writings of the church fathers -- Ignatius, Polycarp, Tatian, Theophilus -- who testify that John wrote these works. Eusebius also testifies to the fact that John wrote his Gospel last of all, between 80 - 95 AD. This is further substantiated by Irenaeus who wrote that John eventually moved to Ephesus and lived to be an old man, living during the reign of Trajan (98 - 117 AD).
Wikipedia has related information at Authorship of the Johannine works
Beets are members of the genus Beta, several of which are grown in the garden as ornamentals and food crops.
Staff of the L. H. Bailey Hortorium (1976). Hortus Third: A Concise Dictionary of Plants Cultivated in the United States and Canada. Cornell University Press. pp. 160.
Cranshaw, Whitney (2004). Garden Insects of North America: The Ultimate Guide to Backyard Bugs. Princeton University Press. pp. 582.
Pippa Greenwood, Andrew Halstead, A.R. Chase, Daniel Gilrein (2000). American Horticultural Society Pests & Diseases: The Complete Guide to Preventing, Identifying, and Treating Plant Problems (First Edition ed.). Dorling Kindersley (DK) Publishing, inc.. pp. 202.
Kreacher is the house elf for the Black family.
Beginner warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Kreacher is first encountered when Harry Potter is brought into the Order of the Phoenix's headquarters, at Number 12 Grimmauld Place. He resents the new inhabitants of the house that has been a pure-blood stronghold for a long time, and wages his own little psychological warfare on them. Sirius Black says that he has been shut up in the house for ten years, taking orders only from the mad portrait of Sirius' mother, and going rather mad himself. It is noted that as Sirius and the others are collecting Black family artifacts to throw out, Kreacher is stealing some of them and hiding them away.
When Harry, Ron, Ginny, Fred, and George are transported by Portkey to Grimmauld Place after their father is injured, Kreacher makes a very insulting comment. "Is it true their father is dying?" Sirius, outraged, shouts "Out!" at him, whereupon he vanishes and is not seen again for some days. Hermione wants to give him a Christmas present, a quilt, but cannot find him; Sirius says that he has a sort of nest under the boiler, and Hermione leaves the quilt there. Harry notes that many of the pictures that he had helped Sirius discard, including a disturbing one of Bellatrix Lestrange, are arranged around Kreacher's sleeping space. Eventually, Kreacher reappears; apparently he has been in the attic all this time.
Later on, when Harry tries to find out if his vision of Sirius Black being attacked at the Department of Mysteries is true, Kreacher says that his master is not home, and that Sirius will never return from the Department of Mysteries, making Harry believe that he must get to London immediately and try to save Sirius.
When Albus Dumbledore arrives at Grimmauld Place, Kreacher laughs at him, telling him that Sirius is gone and won't be back. Dumbledore has to use rather forceful persuasion on Kreacher, but by doing so he learns that Sirius and the other Order members there present (Remus Lupin, Nymphadora Tonks, Kingsley Shacklebolt, and Alastor Moody), have gone off to the Ministry to rescue Harry. He also learns that the Death Eaters have learned about Harry's vulnerability to worry about Sirius because, when Sirius had dismissed Kreacher at Christmas, Kreacher had interpreted that as permission to leave the house, and he had gone to the only Black relative that he still respected: Narcissa Malfoy. Though unable to reveal any of the secrets of the Order, or anything he was specifically forbidden to talk about by Sirius, he still was able to reveal that Harry cared extremely deeply about Sirius. Additionally, by injuring Buckbeak, Kreacher was able to keep Sirius out of the way when Harry tried to reach him via the Floo network. So when Harry spoke to Kreacher, Kreacher was able to lie to him without fear of being contradicted by Sirius.
By the terms of Sirius' will, Harry has inherited Grimmauld Place and all its contents, including Kreacher. Professor Dumbledore summons Kreacher to the Dursleys' house to determine whether the inheritance is valid; if there is a charm preventing Harry from inheriting, Kreacher will not accept his orders. Harry's desperate order to Kreacher to shut up is effective, despite Kreacher's quite evident reluctance to accept orders from "the Potter brat," proving that he, rather than Narcissa (Black) Malfoy or Bellatrix (Black) Lestrange, has actually inherited. Harry then, at a loss for anything else for Kreacher to do, accepts Dumbledore's suggestion and sends him to Hogwarts to work in the kitchens.
Later, as Harry is the only person who believes Draco Malfoy is up to something, he sends Kreacher and Dobby to follow Malfoy and find out what he is doing. Kreacher's report is largely full of insults for Harry and compliments for Malfoy, but Dobby reports that Malfoy has been going to the Room of Requirement.
Harry discovers that the mysterious R.A.B. is Regulus Arcturus Black when he sees the sign on his bedroom door at Grimmauld Place. After a fruitless search of Regulus' room, Hermione recalls that there was a locket, but that they had thrown it out; Harry recalls that Kreacher was perpetually stealing stuff back, and they go to search Kreacher's sleeping area to see if he has in fact kept it. Kreacher's den is empty of valuables, but it occurs to Harry that Kreacher himself may know what happened to it. Harry summons Kreacher, who reports that he had stolen the locket back, but that Mundungus Fletcher had then stolen it from him, along with almost everything else of value in the house. Harry demands the full story; Kreacher tells how Voldemort had asked Regulus for a house-elf. Regulus had volunteered Kreacher, telling him that he was to come back as soon as the Dark Lord was done with his services. Kreacher had accompanied Voldemort to the island in the lake that Harry had visited with Dumbledore, where Voldemort had forced Kreacher to drink a potion that left him remembering horrible things. Voldemort had placed a locket in the basin, had refilled it with potion, and then had vanished, leaving Kreacher alone; Kreacher had gone to the lake for a drink of water, and had been pulled under by the Inferi in the lake, and then had returned to his master, Regulus, as ordered.
Later, Regulus had taken him back to that same island, and had ordered Kreacher to force him to drink the potion, and then replace the locket with the one that Harry had found in the basin, and take the locket back to Grimmauld Place and destroy it. Regulus had drained the basin with Kreacher's assistance, and then struggled to the lake for water, and had been dragged under by the Inferi; and Kreacher had returned with the locket to Grimmauld Place, but had failed his master: he had been unable to destroy the locket, no matter how hard he tried.
Harry tells him that they, too, have the mission of destroying the locket, and as a token of their shared mission, he gives Kreacher the locket that Regulus had had him place in the basin, and that Harry had later recovered. Kreacher is overjoyed at this sign of consideration from Harry. Harry asks him to find Mundungus and bring him back, and Kreacher sets off immediately.
It is some days later that Kreacher returns with Mundungus, saying that he had been hard to trace. A number of times while Harry is interrogating Mundungus, Kreacher threatens him with a frying pan, because he is evidently being disrespectful to Harry.
Over the next month or so, Kreacher's work improves significantly, to the point that Harry is starting to enjoy returning to Grimmauld Place. After the invasion of the Ministry, however, Harry, Hermione, and Ron are forced to leave Grimmauld Place. With Harry gone, Kreacher apparently decides to return to Hogwarts, possibly in the hopes that his master (Harry) will be going there.
Kreacher leads the house-elves at Hogwarts into the second part of the battle at Hogwarts, cutting at the legs of Death Eaters with kitchen implements. After the final battle at Hogwarts, Harry hopes to himself that his four-poster bed in the dormitories at Hogwarts is still there waiting for him, and that Kreacher would be able to bring him a sandwich there...
As a house-elf, Kreacher has significant magic ability in his own person, ability that is distinct from human magic. He also has the house-elf trait of extreme loyalty to his Masters, if he accepts them as worthy.
Kreacher shares the weaknesses of all House-elves: being tied to one family and one location and not being able to disobey their orders, and the relatively low verbal intelligence of the race. He is also, we are told, quite old, and when we first meet him has had no human contact except for Walburga Black's mad portrait for ten years. As such, he is presumed to be somewhat maddened himself. He does seem to recover when separated from Walburga's portrait.
It is a unclear whether Walburga treated Kreacher well or not. It might seem so, as Kreacher seems to follow the instructions issued by Walburga's painting, while resisting those of Sirius, a live Master. However, in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, Dumbledore discusses how house elves become loyal and what it means. And in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, Harry showed that he was on the same side as Regulus and treated Kreacher with respect, and as a result, Kreacher accepted Harry full-heartedly as his Master.
At that point, Kreacher, to a great extent, accepted Harry's ideals as his own. We see this particularly in the Battle of Hogwarts, where Kreacher is seen leading the school's house elves to fight against Lord Voldemort, and thus against the values of his earlier Masters. From this, it appears that house elves, despite the strong link of obedience to the family and heritage, have a great loyalty of mind to those "Masters" who treat them well.
The author's choice of name for this character is interesting. We have seen that characters names are quite often related to their characteristics; for example, Rubeus Hagrid, a character hag-ridden by his heritage; Remus Lupin, whose name almost shouts his "furry little problem"; Albus Dumbledore, white of beard and hair, and eccentrically bumbling about like the bumblebee which is his last name, but with equally hidden purpose. In a world where house-elves are given cutesy, childish names like Dobby, Winky, and Hokey, Kreacher, which seems to be a portmanteau of "creature" and "treachery", is very out of place. The first time we see him, his name alone causes us to distrust him and his motives, and his perpetual string of muttered insults does nothing to change our feelings about him. One feels that the name was selected deliberately to foster that distrust; a name more in line with other house-elf names would have caused a certain cognitive dissonance that would have jarred throughout Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, as it would result in an elf with a cute name who was saying really horrible things about Harry, Hermione, and Ron. That dissonance would likely have distracted readers from the story.
Kreacher's character is written to be quite childish, in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix and Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, and child-like in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows. This seems to be consistent with all we know of house elves and their intellectual development. There is more on house-elf intellect in that topic.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Why did Kreacher lie to Harry about Sirius?
What causes Kreacher's change of heart towards Harry and his friends?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
The author apparently insisted that Kreacher be part of the film of Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix because he would play an important part in the final chapter. As we can see in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, this is the case.
At least one source had suggested that Kreacher's role would have something to do with the mysterious RAB identified with the locket Horcrux. Having assumed that RAB was, in fact, Regulus Black, sources reasoned that it could be Kreacher who accompanied Regulus to the island of the locket; and Kreacher who was required to drink the potion that covered the locket. It is a bit of a surprise to find that it was Regulus who drank the potion, because given that Regulus was a good and loyal Black son, one would expect him to share the Black family disrespect for their servants.
One finds it hard to imagine that Lord Voldemort would not have protected his Horcrux against other magical creatures; however, we have already seen with Dobby that house-elf magic is very hard to counter even for very powerful wizards. Additionally, Voldemort has been shown to have no respect for magic he cannot do himself; this tendency to discount non-human magic, and to discount the strength of non-Pureblood wizards, is a large part of what eventually brought him down.
Provide an alternative business to business opportunity for local and fellow Queensland corporations, to make sure they get a chance to network with one another as well as members of the corporate rugby community (1, 2,3,5).
The Gold Coast was chosen to host this event due to continued growth in stature and fast emerging rugby market in Queensland, as well as being the home of Sevens Rugby of Australia (5).
Developing a unique way for Rugby’s corporate community to celebrate the game, with the aim to grow this event over the coming years, at a capacity to play as a warm up to the IRB sevens at Skilled Park.
Engaging with like-minded organizations as a pathway to new business opportunities, (1,2,3,5,6).
Encourage members of the corporate Rugby Community to utilize this event as a way to increase staff engagement, increasing Reds membership and a way to connect with Queensland Rugby’s corporate elite, to create possible future business opportunities (1,2,3,5).
Provided activation opportunities for current sponsors (6).
Provided a means of advertising rugby sevens to the World due to the game’s new entry into the next Olympic Games in 2016, hosted in Rio de Janeiro.
Providing an opportunity to showcase the Australian sevens team on the Gold Coast, in hopes strengthen the view of Australian and international sporting bodies as a major events host.
WorldRadioHistory.com's scan of Australasian Radio World - Vol. 03 No. 1 - May 1938 has been utilised to create the partial content for this page and can be downloaded at this link to further extend the content and enable further text correction of this issue: ARW 1938 05
In general, only content which is required for other articles in this Wikibook has been entered here and text corrected. The material has been extensively used, inter alia, for compilation of biographical articles, radio club articles and station articles.
Registered at the G.P.O., Sydney, for transmission by post as a periodical
Highlighted Contents: Special Battery Set Number: "Air-Cell Dual-Wave Four": "Scout Battery Three: "Comet Dual-Wave Four": Eliminating Power Interference: A.O.C.P. Questions and Model Answers.
Editorial Notes . . .
The Air-cell Dual-wave Four . . . . 3
Radiokes Release New Range of Power Transformers . . . . 7
The Comet Superhet Four . . . . 10
An Appreciation From A.T.R.S.I. . . . . 12
"Pirate" Uses Lakemba Club Call . . . . 14
The Triode And Its Applications . . . . 16
The Scout Battery Three . . . . 18
A Trip Through The Ever Ready Factory . . . . 22
Shortwave Aerials For DX Reception (2) . . . . 27
The "Australasian Radio World" is published monthly by Trade Publications Proprietary, Ltd. Editorial offices, 214 George Street, Sydney, N.S.W. Telephone BW6577. Cable address: "Repress," Sydney. Advertisers please note that copy should reach office of publication by 15th of month preceding that specified for insertion.
Subscription rates: 1/- per copy, 10/6 per year (12 issues) post free to Australia and New Zealand. Subscribers in New Zealand can remit by Postal Note or Money Order.
Printed by Bridge Printery Pty. Ltd., 214 George Street, Sydney, N.S.W., for the proprietors of the "Australasian Radio World," 214 George St., Sydney (Footnote P.48)
P.12 - An Appreciation From A.T.R.S.I.
Vitamins are critical organic molecules necessary for life. Despite their vital importance, they cannot be synthesized by animals and they must be acquired through diet, whether they are obtained from food or through supplemental vitamins. This odd characteristic may have evolved because of the biological complexity of vitamin synthesis; it is more efficient to obtain vitamins in food in trace amounts than to develop the numerous enzymes necessary to synthesize vitamins. In addition, vitamins must be molecularly modified after ingestion before they can be used in the body. Vitamins can act ascoenzymes, signaling molecules, antioxidants, and hormones, as well as serving various other functions. Vitamin deficiency can lead to conditions such as: scurvy from lack of Vitamin C, and eye damage from lack of Vitamin A. In fact, many activated carriers in metabolism are derived from vitamins, including carriers important for redox reactions, such as electron transport (FADH2, for example), and carbon dioxide transfer (biotin). Because of the critical roles vitamins play in the functioning of the human body, they are an essential topic of study despite the low vitamin requirements of most animals.
Approximately 14-20 vitamins have been discovered. There are two categories that vitamins fall under: water-soluble as well as fat-soluble.
Water-soluble: vitamins that easily dissolvable in water and easily excreted out of the body via urine output. As a result of this type of vitamin that can be dissolved in water, individuals cannot overdose on them because all excess will simply be excreted. Moreover, this type need to be replaced more on a regular basis. Some water-soluble vitamins are B vitamins(B1, B2, B3B6, B7, B12) and vitamin C.(1)
Fat-soluble: vitamins that are soluble in fat or lipids and are absorbed into the body through the intestinal tract or more specifically the small intestines.(1): Some fat-soluble vitamins are vitamins A, D, E, and K.(1) Vitamins included in this category include vitamin A, vitamin D, vitamin E, as well as vitamin K. An acronym to help remember these fat-soluble vitamins- ADEK. Main areas in which fat-soluble vitamins are stored are the liver and adipose tissues. Fat-soluble vitamins except for vitamin K, are stored for long periods at a time and then excreted after this long duration of time has passed. For this reason overdosing on fat-soluble vitamins is highly feasible if ingested at high, toxic levels and it could possibly lead to hypervitaminosis.
Vitamin A: is used for growing healthy new cells like skin, bones, and hair. Also is used for surface lining upkeep of the eyes, urinary tract, intestinal tract, and respiratory system. Night vision is also assisted by Vitamin A.
Vitamin A also performs other major functions in the body. It is required for reproductive functions such as normal growth and development of sperm and ovaries. Vitamin A also helps vision by keeping cells which are used for transduction of light into nerve signals healthy. Vitamin can be found from certain foods such as egg yolk, whole milk, and butter.
Vitamin D: is needed for the body to properly use calcium and phosphorous. It is also used in the formation of some RNA, maintain a normal heart, keep a stable nervous system and blood clotting.
Along with absorbing calcium, Vitamin D can also help regulate the amount of calcium and phosphorus that is present in the blood. Vitamin D can be found in dairy products, fish, and oysters.
Vitamin D deficiency caused severe growth retardation. The lack of calcium in the bones resulted in deformities of the skeleton, characterized by a widening at the ends of the long bones because of a disorganization in the hypertrophy and maturation of chondrocytes in the epiphyseal plates. Vitamin D deficiency is also associated with a low-normal blood calcium, low or low-normal fasting blood phosphorus, and elevated parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels that cause a mineralization defect in the skeleton.
Vitamin E: is an antioxidant that helps the body get rid of free radicals to keep tissues healthy. It is also used in the creation of red blood cells. The use of vitamin A,C and K are assisted by Vitamin E.
Although the role of Vitamin E is not completely understood but it is clear that it presents antioxidant properties in the body. They get rid of the free radicals in the body by preventing the oxidation of lipid-based cell membranes. Free radicals are very reactive and can steal electrons from membranes which could ultimately damage DNA. Good sources of Vitamin E are almonds, spinach, wheat, and asparagus. Of the many such dietary components, vitamin E has commanded most interest because of its availability, strong marketing potential, overall health impact, and central role in preventing oxidation at the cellular level.
Vitamin K: assists in creating proteins in the body like those that create blood clots. It also allows for calcium regulation within the body.
Vitamin K’s ability to help the clotting of blood is important for healing. The clotting ability could help in slowing or stopping bleeding in injured patients. During surgery, Vitamin K is often given to patients to reduce bleeding. Sources of Vitamin K include spinach, Brussels sprouts, asparagus, and broccoli.
Vitamin B: are essential for creating dopamine, epinephrine, serotonin, and myelin. They also help the mind focus, help hemoglobin hold oxygen and lower cholesterol.
Vitamin B is essential to good health. It is also used for energy production in the human cells. B vitamins help convert food often consumed as carbohydrates into fuel. They also help the nervous system function properly. Good sources of Vitamin B are bananas, potatoes, whole grans, and chili peppers.
Vitamin C: helps regulate the immune system and relieve pain caused by tired muscles. It also is needed in the manufacture of collagen and norepinephrine.
Vitamin C is also an antioxidant which can enhance the immune system by stimulating white blood cells in the body. Vitamin C also helps to benefit the skin, teeth, and bones. Vitamin C is often in citrus fruits such as papayas, oranges, and lemons.
Thiamin is another name for vitamin B1. It helps to convert blood sugar into energy for your body. It also helps the mucous membranes of the muscular, cardiovascular, and nervous systems in good shape.
Some good sources of Vitamin B1 is from some whole grain cereals, pork, navy beans, and wheat germs.
Riboflavin is another name for vitamin B2. It works with the other B vitamin complexes to process the carbohydrates, proteins, and fats into calories for energy in body. The body also needs this for healthy skin, good vision, growth, and red blood cell creation.
Some good sources of Vitamin B2 is Dairy, red meats, and leafy green vegetables.
Niacin is another name for vitamin B3. It also works with other B vitamin complexes to process the carbohydrates, proteins, and fats into calories for energy in the body. The difference is that it helps the digestive systems functions along with promoting a healthy appetite and healthy nerves. Large doses of niacin could lower LDL cholesterol but large doses is recommended to be taken under physician supervision.
Panththenic Acid is another name for vitamin B5. Like B3 and B2 it hlps break down carbohydrates, proteins, and fats for energy.
Some good sources of Vitamin B5 is from meats, peas, and whole grain cereals
Pyridoxine is another name for Vitamin B6. Vitamin B6 working along with B12 and B9 helps prevent heart attacks. Just like B2 B3 and B5 this vitamin helps the body process proteins, carbohydrates, and fats into energy.
Some good sources of B6 is from meats, eggs, soybeans, whole grains, and nuts.
Vitamin H or Biotin are other names for Vitamin B7. Vitamin B7 helps the formation of fatty acids and glucose to be used as fuel for the body.
Some Good sources of B7 is from bananas, yeast, cereal, and liver.
Folic Acid is another name for vitamin B9. It is very important during pregnancy since it is used for making and maintaining new cells. B9 prevents anemia by keeping up the production of red blood cells and prevent low birth weight and prematurity in births.
Some good sources of B9 is from mushrooms, leafy greens, peas, and broccoli.
Cobalamin is another name for vitamin B12. It works with B9 in keeping red blood cells healthy and also helps keep the central nervous system healthy.
Some good sources of B12 are meat, eggs, and dairy.
The two organizations that create guidelines for vitamin intake are by the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Academy of Sciences and the Food and Drug Administration(FDA).
Excess consumption of ethanol can lead to biochemical changes in the body, which further interrupts the vitamin A metabolism. Since both ethanol and retinol, the animal form of vitamin A, are alcohols, they are likely to interact and compete with each other for the same pathways; this also means they are likely to disrupt one another’s reaction. Retinol, like ethanol, reacts with dehydrogenases. The reaction forms retinoic acid. In the case of overconsumption of ethanol, retinol’s functions are affected. The retinoic acid signaling pathway is disrupted by the metabolized ethanol, which leads to various cancers and fetal alcohol syndrome.
People who often drinks may likely to develop Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, a disorder that affects the brain due to an insufficient intake of vitamin thiamine. Some characteristics of Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome are confusion and abnormal movement of the limbs and eyes. Because thiamine can be converted to thiamine pyrophosphate, a coenzyme that is part of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, the insufficiency of thiamine leads to the formation of an altered pyruvate dehydrogenase complex that causes neurological defects.
Alcoholics are especially susceptible to scurvy, a disease resulting from low levels of vitamin C in the body. People with scurvy experience easy bruising, gum disease, loss of teeth, abnormal changes of the skin, and other symptoms. These symptoms appear because the lack of vitamin C stops the production of collagen, which is a protein fiber that makes up most of the dry skin weight. More specifically, vitamin C is needed for the production of the enzyme called prolyl hydroxylase. Prolyl hydroxylase is in charge of producing an amino acid, 4-hydroxyproline, that is needed in collagen. Hydroxyproline is essential because it forms hydrogen bond within the collagen triple helix, thus making the collagen more stable.
The Institute of Medicine has created a few guidelines for people to reference on how much to take, recommended requirements, and what would be considered too much.This is also known as the Dietary Reference Intake(DRI)(2):
The applications of RDA are: evaluating the adequacy of the national food supply, establishing a nutritional policy for public institutions and organizations, establishing labeling regulations, and setting guidelines for product formulation. The amount of vitamin intake for children, males, and females can be found on this external link: (1)
Recommended Dietary Allowance(RDA): is the average intake per day that satisfies the nutrient requirement for about 97-98% of all people whom are healthy in a gender group or life group.
Adequate Intake: is the recommended amount to intake, based on estimations of nutrient intake by people who are healthy and this amount is assumed to be sufficient. This measurement is used when the Recommended Dietary Allowance is unable to be determined.
Tolerable Upper Intake level: this is the utmost upper limit that is permitted without any detrimental risk to health and well-being for most of the people of a population. Ingesting or taking over this limit, increases the probability of detrimental effects significantly.
Estimated Average Requirements: daily intake number that has been evaluated to suffice 50% of the healthy peoples of a particular age or gender group.
Deficiency or Excess: although vitamins are essential building blocks of the human body, too much or too less of these compounds could be dangerous. An example would be the deficiency of folic acid (one of the vitamin B's) and a derivative of vitamin B2 called FAD. These two molecules help regulate the production of a potentially harmful compound called homocyesteine. Homocyestein is an essential intermediate of the production of an essential non-toxic amino acid methionine. To help lower the risks of this compound, vitamin B helps improving the fit of the enzyme that converts homocyestein to methionine. The deficiency of vitamin B in this case could increase the risk of heart attacks, strokes, and in the case of pregnant women, child defects. (7)
Intracranial pressure, dizziness, nausea, headaches, liver damage.
Increase the risk of heart failure; can act as an anticoagulant and excessive intake may increase the risk of over bleeding.
Vitamin B9 - 200mcg/180mcg/400mcg for pregnant women/280mcg for breast feeding
Vitamin D - 5mcg/5mcg for 19-51 year olds and 10mcg/10mcg for 51 and older
Cofactors are small molecules or compounds that bind to enzymes and allow the enzymes to function. Cofactors are not proteins nor amino acids. Enzymes catalyze many type of reactions. However, most of the enzymes require the presence of cofactors in order to be active. The cofactor's role and mechanism varies with different enzymes. Usually, cofactors perform chemical reactions that the twenty amino acids cannot undergo. Proteins can perform acid-base reactions, form certain covalent bonds, and engage in intermolecular interactions. However, proteins are not equipped to facilitate reactions involving oxidation-reduction and group transfers.
Inactive enzymes without a cofactor attached are referred to as apoenzymes. Conversely, enzymes that are complete with cofactors and ready to catalyze reactions are called holoenzymes.
There are two categories of cofactors: metals and coenzymes. Metal cofactors are essentially metal ions, such as Zn2+, Mg2+, and Ni2+. Coenzymes are small organic compounds, commonly generated from vitamins. Furthermore, coenzymes are characterized by how strong they bind to their respective enzymes. Coenzymes that bind strongly to enzymes are called prosthetic groups. The enzyme-coenzyme complexes with prosthetic groups are generally permanent. In others words, the prosthetic group does not dissociate from the enzyme. Coenzymes that loosely bind to enzymes function like cosubstrates. In this case, the enzyme-coenzyme complexes can form and dissociate, which make the enzyme active or inactive.
Thiamine pyrophosphate: helps with tissue respiration.
Coenzyme A transports acetyl groups from one substrate to another subtrate.
For more information on Cofactors, see Cofactor (biochemistry).
Mewtwo doesn't really jab or punch, he just put's his hand out with a bit of purple lighting, causing some damage.
Mewtwo starts waving his hand and small bursts of Shadow flame appear (minimum 8 bursts). If you keep pressing A, Mewtwo can continue this attack indefinitely.
Mewtwo swipes his tail at the enemy. It is a very quick attack and can be used consecutively without interruption.
Mewtwo uses both his arms to punch out and project a dark flame burst while still sliding forward.
Mewtwo swipes his tail in a full circle while crouching. It is a sweeping attack, and knocks enemies up slightly. However, it cannot hit enemies behind him.
Mewtwo flips himself over and hits any enemy in front of or above him (primarily above).
Mewtwo uses both of his arms to push out and project a dark flame burst. This move is powerful at its "sweet spot" (the center of the burst) and has a large range.
Mewtwo will point to the ground and a small explosion will occur where he pointed. This is not a sweeping attack and will only cause damage to in front of Mewtwo. It is the only down smash in the that does not hit enemies both in front and behind. Compared to his forward smash it has a shorter range but does not have a sweet spot (or, in this case, an area of weaker damage).
The way Mewtwo poses for this move is actually used for one of his Smash Trophies. He raises his left hand up and a small swirling vortex appears which can slightly juggle an enemy if caught in it. There are 7 hits that this moves causes, the last one being the most damaging and the only one that actually knocks you away.
Mewtwo gets up and does a little spin, which shocks anyone on both sides who comes into contact with it.
Mewtwo flips back onto the ledge, while doing an attack with his tail.
A web of electricity is generated around Mewtwo and if anyone is near enougth, they are caught in it. Directional influence can be used to break away from this, but it always hits at least once. It causes a max of up to 9 hits and 18% damage, which can degrade to 9% damage if it is used continually.
Mewtwo swipes his hand with a touch of dark flame, sending the enemy sky high at high percentages, and just high enough to do it again at low percentages. This move comes out very quickly, but has an awful range, so timing is important.
Mewtwo swings his tail behind him. Good range and startup time, poor damage, knockback, and lag.
This is Mewtwo's meteor smash. Mewtwo backflips, swinging his foot downwards. This is not a very powerful attack. It does a maximum of 14% and is rather slow.
This is just an airborne version of the Up + A move on the ground, except in the air. It does the same amount of damage.
Mewtwo never physicaly touches an item, they all merely float near him
Swipes his weapon in a small arc without even moving his arm
Swipes his weapon in a larger arc and makes a hand gesture.
Mewtwo spins his weapon out in front of him dealing many weak hits. It is one of the only ways to hit an enemy with Lip's Stick that won't result in a flower being planted on them.
Holds his weapon above him paralell to the ground, then brings it down to the ground. Decent.
While on the ground or in the air, press B and Mewtwo will start charging his Shadow Ball. Any enemy that comes into contact with the Shadow Ball while Mewtwo is still charging will be damaged slightly. While charging, press R or L to cease charging, or left or right to dodge in that direction. If Mewtwo finishes charging, but is interrupted, the charge for the Shadow Ball will still remain, as long as Mewtwo had charged for long enough. The Shadow ball will cause an explosion if it hits an obstruction in it's path, which can cause damage to any enemy close enough. Throwing a partially-charged Shadow Ball big enough, will cause you to recoil, significantly if you are in the air while throwing it.
Mewtwo will immediately move from one point to another. There is a very short wind up time before Mewtwo teleports. Thus you are able to move in a direction in which you wish Mewtwo to go when he teleports, however, you must be quick, otherwise he will just teleport up. This move makes Mewtwo invulnerable while he is teleporting, so when he uses Teleport, he cannot be attacked.
Mewtwo will jerk his head and release a short-distance attack represented by two shiny dots. Mewtwo must make eye-contact with the enemy for it to work. How long the enemy is disabled depends on the current damage of the enemy, much like Jigglypuff's singing, but it doesn't last as long. If you use this move while the enemy is already disabled, the enemy will get knocked away as if he was punched, doing 1% damage. If you use this move on an enemy who is in the air, they will also get knocked back as if they were punched. Note that this attack is considered a projectile and can be reflected back into Mewtwo.
Mewtwo will spin an enemy around whether he or she is in the air or on the ground. It causes a maximum of 10% damage and will degrade to a minimum of 5% damage if it is used continuously. After using this move, the enemy will pratfall, but can still use an aerial attack move if he or she is quick enough. It can also be used to deflect (not reflect) projectile attacks.
Mewtwo's throws are the strongest attacks he can dish out, but they require precision timing and aim to pull off.
Mewtwo jumps above the enemy and whips himself around with his tail, hitting the enemy. A good combo starter.
Mewtwo lifts the enemy up and blasts it with 5 mini-Shadow balls. The Shadow balls almost always hit and can hit other fighters caught in the line of attack. If the opponent DIs (hold) up during the throw, generally they will fly above most of the shadow balls and come down to punish the throw. Not reccomended.
Mewtwo spins the enemy around himself and shoots it right into the air. A powerful killing throw, especially on lighter opponents.
Mewtwo maneuvers the enemy over his head and throws him back behind him. Another powerful killing throw, especially near the edge.
Hace + tiempo + que + verb - To have been (verb in present participle) for (amount of time)
[Literally means, it makes it (amount of time) that -]
Hace tres semanas que me duele la mano - My hand has been hurting me for three weeks.
It promotes government regulation of a nation's economy for the purpose of augmenting state power at the expense of rival national powers. Mercantilism includes a national economic policy aimed at accumulating monetary reserves through a positive balance of trade, especially of finished goods. Historically, such policies frequently led to war and also motivated colonial expansion .
This module contains VBA code to calculate the lapsed time between two fully expressed dates; that is, containing both date and time information. It can run in any MS Office applications like Excel that can run VBA code.
Date variables contain a combination of both dates and times, but they need not do so. Some have only dates and some have only times, and when converted to the single data type, they can be seen to represent days in their integer parts and times in their fractions. Although the input parameters can contain any date variables, exact results are obtained only when both times and dates are included in each parameter. If time data is missing from a date, the calculation is still performed but uses midnight as the assumption.
The integer part of a date-converted-to-single is just the number of days since 31 Dec 1899 . It follows then that negative integer parts describe the days before that reference date. In fact the date function can be used for dates in the Gregorian calendar from Aug 2, 718 through Dec 31, 9999, though this differs when other calendars are in use. Add integers to, or subtract integers from date variables to modify the date by that number of days. Subtraction also applies.
The fractional part of a date represents a part of a day. The individual parts of time within it can be obtained as follows; multiply the date variable by 86400 to find the whole-seconds; by 1440 for whole-minutes; and by 24 for whole-hours. Then convert these results to the single data type before taking each integer part. To modify an existing date variable by a number of seconds, we simply add 1/86400 to it for each second; 1/1440 per minute, 1/24 per hour, and as stated earlier, whole units for days. Subtraction also applies.
Various functions also exist to simplify date-time handling.
Copy all of the VBA code below into a standard module.
The output result is a colon-separated string, containing any of a selection of formats; seconds only, minutes-seconds, hours-minutes-seconds, or days-hours-minutes-seconds. The format option is set with sConfig, and the optional units label is returned in sLabel.
'Run this to test LapsedTime()
'For both fully expressed and
'set two exact date-times for calculation
'exactly 2 days, 1 hours, 17 mins, and 10 seconds apart
MsgBox "Exact Lapsed Time:" & vbCrLf & "For fully expressed date-times:" & vbCrLf & vbCrLf & _
Format(dDateTimeEnd, "mmm dd yyyy" & ", hh:mm:ss") & " End Time" & vbCrLf & _
Format(dDateTimeStart, "mmm dd yyyy" & ", hh:mm:ss") & " Start Time" & vbCrLf & vbCrLf & _
'set the incomplete date-times for calculation
'first item has no time data so DEFAULTS TO MIDNIGHT
dDateTimeStart = #1/5/2019# 'assumes time 0:0:0
'default time given as 2 days, 14 hours, 37 mins, and 20 seconds apart
MsgBox "Default value of Lapsed Time:" & vbCrLf & "When time data is missing," & vbCrLf & _
Format(dDateTimeEnd, "mmm dd yyyy" & ", hh:mm:ss") & " End Time" & vbCrLf & _
Format(dDateTimeStart, "mmm dd yyyy") & " Start Time" & vbCrLf & "becomes " & vbCrLf & _
Format(dDateTimeStart, "mmm dd yyyy" & ", hh:mm:ss") & " Start Time" & vbCrLf & vbCrLf & _
sConfig As String, Optional sLegend As String) As String
'Choice of various colon-separated outputs with sConfig.
'and Optional format label found in string sLegend
'Parameter Options for sConfig
' "s" output in seconds. Integer.
' "ms" output in minutes and seconds. mm:ss
' "hms" output in hours, minutes and seconds. hh:mm:ss
' "dhms" output in days, hours, minutes and seconds. integer:hh:mm:ss
MsgBox "Invalid parameter start date - closing."
MsgBox "Invalid parameter end date - closing."
'difference as date-time data
dDiff = dTimeEnd - dTimeStart
'choose required output format
MsgBox "Illegal format option - closing"
Calculate Elapsed Time - Microsoft: An article by Microsoft describing methods of avoiding error in time comparisons.
You want to send a request to a web server to add additional XML data into your form. This allows different parts of an XForms to defer getting data till it is needed. This makes large forms load faster and avoids unessary network traffic.
The send element has a single parameter which is submission. This must be the ID of one of the submission elements in your model.
If you reference this submission you will need a corresponding submission in your model.
The most common usage of send is to perform incremental model loading. If you have a large form with many tabs you can wait till the user selects the tab to load the data for this tab.
In the following code fragment, if the user selects tab-5 of the form the submission to load the form data will be sent to the server.
See XForms/Incremental_Model_Loading for an example of how this works.
1st Normal Form - Achieved by ensuring that the table does not contain any repeated attributes or groups and that the data is atomic (lowest level of detail)
2nd Normal Form - Achieved by first ensuring that the database is in 1NF (1st normal form) and that there are no attributes which depend on only part of the primary key, but not all of it. This is done by creating additional tables.
3rd Normal Form - Achieved by ensuring that the database is in 2NF and that all non key attributes which depend upon other non key attributes are removed. This is done by creating additional tables.
Databases are normalised to ensure they are structured efficiently.
Normalisation is used to keep a database as efficient as it can possibly be without any unnecessary duplication and no redundant data. When working with large volumes of data this can cause a lot of space and time to be saved as it's less data to process.
If a table has a primary key it is said to be in First Normal form if the table does not have repeating groups of attributes. All attributes within the table need to be dependent only on the primary key.
2NF - Partial Dependence Test
For a table to be in Second Normal form it must first be in First Normal (1NF) Form and then contain no data that is dependent on only part of the Primary Key
3NF - Non-Key Dependence Test
For a table to be in Third Normal Form(3NF) it must be in Second Normal form and contain No data that is not dependent on the primary Key
e.g. (Remove columns that are not dependent upon the primary key.)
To illustrate this let's look at a product ordering system. Initially our database looks like this:
This is known as un-normalised form, UNF or 0NF.
To change this into 1NF we need to take out duplicated data. To do this we create a new table to hold the products and move the product data to this table along with the primary key which is the OrderNumber.
Every row is not now unique so we create a composite primary key, made up of the OrderNumber column and the ProductID column.
To put our table into 2NF we need to separate out any data that is only dependent on one part of the primary key. This would be the ProductName and PriceEach as these only depend on the ProductID and not on the OrderNumber.
And finally, to reach 3NF we must separate out our Customer details from our order table as CustomerAddress (a non-key attribute) is currently dependent on CustomerName (another non-key attribute).
What is meant by Third Normal Form?
You want to conditionally display a group of elements based on the value selected from a list. This will work similar to a "switch/case" but you can have each view depend on complex XPath expressions that will evaluated to either true or false.
One One One One One One One One One One One One One One One One One One
Two Two Two Two Two Two Two Two Two Two Two Two Two Two Two Two Two
Three Three Three Three Three Three Three Three Three Three Three Three Three Three Three Three Three
This program is very similar to the example that uses a button to toggle a switch/case but the value is calculated dynamically by any XPath expression. The prior example that uses switch/case/toggle uses an XML Event to make a specific case visible.
ASCII is a character-encoding scheme based on the ordering of the English alphabet. The 95 ASCII graphic characters numbered from 0x20 to 0x7E (32 to 126 decimal), also known as the printable characters, represent letters, digits, punctuation marks, and a few miscellaneous symbols. The first 32 ASCII characters, from 0x00 to 0x20, are known as control characters. The space character, that denotes the space between words, as produced by the space-bar of a keyboard, represented by code 0x20 (hexadecimal), is considered a non-printing graphic (or an invisible graphic) rather than a control character.
!
?
In Clickjacking attacks, the target site is embedded in an IFRAME on the attacking site and either kept in the background, but mostly covered by other elements or made transparent and kept in the foreground. The user is then incited to click a certain location (e.g. when using the transparency method by placing a button in the background). Instead of the visible button, the click hits the invisible window. The placement of the IFRAME and button is chosen so that the click triggers the action wanted by the attacker (e.g. change settings). As the user is logged into the target site, the click can trigger actions that would otherwise be unreachable for the attacker. Multiple Facebook spam waves were generated using this method.
Prevent (i)framing of your application in current browsers by including the HTTP response header “X-Frame-Options: deny”
Prevent (i)framing in outdated browsers by including a JavaScript frame breaker which checks for (i)framing and refuses to show the page if it is detected
For applications with high security requirements where you expect users to use outdated browsers with JavaScript disabled, consider requiring users of older browsers to enable JavaScript
The X-Frame-Options header is required as JavaScript frame breakers could be ineffective in some newer browsers that allow undetectable framing. However, older, still common browsers ignore the header and thus require additional protection using classic JavaScript based frame breakers. Since (as opposed to the header method) those do not work if JavaScript is disabled, additional measures may be necessary.
| File inclusion and disclosure
| File upload vulnerabilities
| XML and internal data escaping
| XML, JSON and general API security
| Cross-site request forgery (CSRF)
| Truncation attacks, trimming attacks
| Prefetching and Spiders
| SSL, TLS and HTTPS basics
Wi-Fi refers to wireless fidelity that allows you to connect to the internet wirelessly. FWi-Fi is mainly used to connect computers and other Wi-Fi enabled devices to a local area network. How this works is pretty simple! A wireless router is connected to a modem which is provided by the internet service provider. Now after it is connected to a modem, it allows users to connect via w/LAN. In other words it allows users to access the local area network wirelessly through any Wi-Fi enabled devices. Good examples of Wi-Fi enabled devices are laptops, smart phones and tablets. However, speed of internet via Wi-Fi depends on several factors:
On the other hand WiMAX is similar to Wi-Fi but the main difference is that it is designed for longer range wireless networking connections. Wi-Max is designed to provide internet access to only fixed locations also called ‘Hotzones’, but it covers significantly larger radius from about 4–6 miles, whereas a good wireless router might only have a range of couple hundred meters. It can also provide internet to the entire city by using multiple wimax towers so packs in a lot of range. We don’t see a lot of Wi-Max towers just yet but it is the new upcoming technology to keep an eye on.
Reference: Morely, Deborah, and Charles Parker. Understanding Computers Today and Tomorrow. Boston: Course Technology, 2011. Print.
A web browser, specifically designed for the Social Web is Flock.
Flock is an aggregator. It brings together various "social media" such as
Facebook, ...
The name directly or inadvertenly calls to mind the saying "birds of a feather flock together".
Exam objective: Implementing globalization, drawing, and text manipulation functionality in a .NET Framework application
Text manipulation, in the context of the exam objectives, covers 3 main subjects: string building, regular expressions and text encoding. We look at each in the following paragraphs.
Text manipulation starts with the representation of a string which is done via the String class. No specific exam objective mentions the String class but we added a section for it because you must understand some of its specific characteristics.
Next comes the StringBuilder class that serves for efficient construction.
The Regex, Match and Group classes together implement the regular expressions support in the .NET framework.
Regular expressions are a world by themselves and have been around for quite some time.
There is a wikibook on regular expressions which, among other things, point to this Tutorial.
Format data based on culture information.
Exam objective: Access culture and region information in a .NET Framework application
Format date and time values based on the culture.
Format number values based on the culture.
Perform culture-sensitive string comparison.
Exam objective: Build a custom culture class based on existing culture and region classes
Exam objective: Enhance the user interface of a .NET Framework application by using the System.Drawing namespace.
Exam objective: Enhance the user interface of a .NET Framework application by using brushes, pens, colors, and fonts
Exam objective: Enhance the user interface of a .NET Framework application by using graphics, images, bitmaps, and icons
Exam objective: Enhance the user interface of a .NET Framework application by using shapes and sizes
Exam objective: Enhance the text handling capabilities of a .NET Framework application, and search, modify, and control text in a .NET Framework application by using regular expressions
The String class is not a specific exam objective but was added to have a place to discuss some of its characteristics.
The StringBuilder class is used for very fast string concatenation. If you use conventional string concatenation
For fast string concatenations use StringBuilder instead. It is about 1000 times faster (depending on the string
Refer to the example to measure the performance differences.
Console.WriteLine("Duration for " + loops + " loops: " + millis + " ms");
Decode text by using Decoding classes.
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
The basic premise to explore the petroleum is the existence of sedimentary basin. Sedimentary basin is a depression on the earth surface the can accummulated the sedimentation material through time. Since most of the sediment transporting agent are water, the sedimentary basin usually the place where the water finally accummulate. It can be in the form of sea, lake, delta, or river.
Indonesia is a large country with various type of sedimentary basins. Most of the sedimentary basin in the western Indonesia are already explored since the end of 19th century. The recent years also saws the exploration on the frontier basins, especially in the eastern Indonesia. Unfortunately, the interest of the major oil companies lost their appetite to conduct explorationa activities in Indonesia probably due to the unfavorable fiscal regime. As a result, the oil and gas production is keep declining in Indonesia without any substantial reserve replacement.
The sediment which comprise of clay, sand, boulder or carbonate are being deposited in the sedimentary basin over a geologic time (million years). Due to the weight of the sedimentary deposit, the sedimentary basin experience subsidence to allow more sedimentation. This sedimentary process may accummulate sediment with cumulative thickness of several thousand meters.
About 60 Tertiary sedimentary basins, spread out from Sumatra in the west to Irian Jaya in the east, are identified in Indonesia. So far only 38 basins have been explored and drilled for petroleum and 14 of the are now producing oil and gas. Seventy three percent of these basins are located offshore, about one third of them in the deeper sea, with water depth exceeding 200 m.
The most prolific sedimentary basin in Indonesia are belong to back-arc basin, whichis located on the 'back' of the volcanic-arc. Most of the back-arc basin located in the northeastern coast of Sumatra, northern Java, and continue to northern Lesser Island. Almost all of the back-arc basin are currently producing oil and gas, therefore categorized as proven petroleum province.
The fore-arc basin located to the 'front' of the volcanic arc, which is located along southwestern coast of Sumatra, southern coast of Java and Lesser Island. The fore-arc basin is mainly considered as a frontier basin and no commercial hydrocarbon found yet. However, there is strong indication of working petroleum system in the fore-arc basin, such as gas discoveries in the Nias area. Oil shows also reported to be found in offshore Bengkulu (Southern Sumatra). On the interesting note, the fore-arc basin in the southern part of Papua New Guinea already found commercial gas accummulation in the Pandorra Gas Field.
An APF TV Fun model 401 being played on a CRT television.
Before making the APF TV Fun, APF made consumer electronics like calculators.[1]
The APF TV Fun model 401 was released in 1976 for $125.[2][3] The system sold very well, and lead APF to make more game consoles.[3]
The APF-MP1000 followed the system, featuring much better capabilities and design.
Casing tended to be shared between models of APF TV Fun.[5] Systems were manufactured in Japan.[6]
The APF model 401 uses a General Instrument AY-3-8500 chip, and takes 6 C type batteries.[2][3] A CD4071 chip handles video output on the APF model 401.[7]
The 402 also uses a General Instrument AY-3-8500 chip but has an additional General Instrument AY-3-8515 chip to add color graphics capability to the system.[8]
The APF TV Fun 402 supported two light gun games.[8]
The 402C consisted of an angular deck with black plastic, woodgrain themed panels and silvery metallic accents.
The 402C rear contained a number of ports, including power and controller ports.
The 402C bottom contained a channel selection switch and an info panel. This console was made in Hong Kong.
The 402C bottom panel with the battery compartment exposed.
Paddle controllers for the APF TV Fun 402C.
Light Gun for the APF TV Fun 402C.
The PCB is made with care. Hand drawn traces curve to their destination.
A small portion of the PCB is cut away to make space for an external component. Some cables are wrapped around a ferrite choke.
The plastic shell of the console provides a number of internal mount points.
A TV Fun 402C motherboard has hard wired connections to external components.
A TV Fun 402C motherboard appears to be single sided, with this side lacking traces.
Straight lines of solder blobs indicate a probable IC on the other side of the board. This PCB bears the mark of UAL.
AY-3-8500 pinout, used on the 401, 402, and a number of first generation consoles.
Old Computers - APF TV Fun 401.
Pong Museum - APF TV Fun 401.
Parts of this page are based on materials from: Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia.
Like many other languages, Kyrgyz has a case system. This means that the form of the noun is altered in various ways to carry grammatical meaning. (In English, the vestiges of such a system may be seen in the permutations of the word “who”: we have “who,” “whose,” and “whom,” each of which has a separate grammatical function.) In Kyrgyz, these alterations (called “cases“) are formed by means of various suffixes.
Nouns in Kyrgyz are considered to have six cases, the Nominative, Genitive, Dative, Accusative, Locative, and Ablative. Each case performs a different role. For example, a noun in the nominative case acts as a subject, a noun in the genitive is a possessor, and, as we have seen, a noun in the ablative can translate the English “from.”
If you have already studied any of the “inflected” languages, such as Latin or Russian, don’t let prior bitter experience daunt you: The system of Kyrgyz is generally very straightforward and regular.
Case suffixes, like almost all Kyrgyz suffixes require the application of vowel harmony rules. Whether a given suffix takes a left or right vowel will have to be memorized and learned by practice.
Case markers can be changed slightly by suffixes that precede them, most especially the possessive suffixes. Again, the rules regarding this are very regular, and require only practice.
These endings change a bit when they follow some possessive suffixes. That will all be dealt with later, when possessive suffixes are presented.
The various cases carry different grammatical meanings, depending to some degree on the contexts in which they are used. However, many of these uses are actually quite intuitive to English speakers.
As in the inflected languages (e.g. Russian), the nominative is the subject case and the dictionary form of the word.
Also, if the object of a transitive verb (that is, a verb that requires a direct object) is not definite or specific—that is, if it is just a general member of a category, and in English would not take the word “the” before it—then it also is in the nominative case.
Again, this is in the case of a direct object that is indefinite. It might be useful to compare the accusative case and the section on definite and indefinite.
Also, so-called “predicate nominatives” are in the nominative case. This means that, in English, a simple “to be” construction would be used, such as “John is a doctor.”
In order to properly use these sorts of sentences in situations other than the third person, it is necessary to use personal endings, which are dealt with in the section on short sentences.
The genitive case is usually used to indicate possession, along with the possessive suffixes.
In this sense, the genitive may also be used to translate the English “to have.” More on this and on the necessary suffixes is in the possessive suffixes section.
These also are more thoroughly dealt with in their own section.
The dative indicates indirect object and motion toward.
The accusative indicates the direct object of a verb, that is, the thing that the verb directs its action upon. (In English, the direct object of a verb never has a preposition in front of it.) However, the accusative is only used for a direct object if the object is definite. This means that you should put the object of a verb into the accusative if it is a direct object AND:
It has a possessive suffix.
You can imagine the word “the” placed before it in English.
The locative indicates location.
Like the genitive, it can be used in certain constructions to translate the verb “to have.” This is covered in the section on possession.
The ablative case can be used to indicate motion from someplace:
It can also work in a partitive sense, that is, it indicates a piece of something from a larger whole. In this it is like the Russian genitive.
The ablative indicates the material by which a thing is made:
5 pirates of different ages have a treasure of 100 gold coins. On their ship, they decide to split the coins using this scheme: the oldest pirate alive will propose how the coins will be distributed among the pirates, and all pirates remaining will vote for or against it. If more than 50% of the pirates vote for it, then the coins will be distributed as such. Otherwise, the pirate proposing the scheme will be thrown overboard, and the process is repeated with the pirates that remain.
Assuming that all 5 pirates are extremely intelligent, rational, greedy, and do not wish to die, (and are rather good at math for pirates) what will happen?
Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease of the central nervous system.[1][2] Multiple Sclerosis affects the brain and the spinal cord .[3] due to the damage of the myelin, axon and oligodendrocytes. (1),Mayo.,, NE,title=Predicting exercise capacity through submaximal fitness tests in persons with Multiple Sclerosis (2010). Physical Medicane and Rehabilitation 91: 1410–1417. There is a higher activation of the body's natural killer cells and these attack the myelin proteolipid protein.(1) The process of the demyelination of the axon slows down the conduction velocity of the axon.(1) The slowing of conduction in the demyelinated motor and sensory tracts can cause problems in balance and gait (walking).(1) This can also occur in the proprioceptive and visual pathways causing imbalance, in coordination and spastic movements. (1)
Problems Associated with Multiple sclerosis.
Multiple Sclerosis effects those between the ages of 20–50 years old (3) with women more likely to be diagnosed than men, with a 2:1 ratio of women to men being diagnosed (2) Majority of the MS population are physically inactive, due to symptoms such as fatigue than can make it very difficult to do so.(2) This can lead to secondary diseases such as obesity and Coronary heart disease.(2) Multiple Sclerosis causes many problems for sufferers in the areas of muscle, sensation, coordination and balance. (4) These symptoms can make it hard for sufferers to lead normal lives as it can restrict their social interaction, lose their occupation, effect mental health and stops them from performing normal day to day tasks(3)
Effects on the patient.
One of the major symptoms associated with MS. 65% of individuals who suffer from MS reported some sort of fatigue limitations. 40% found it was the most debilitating symptom.(1,2) MS fatigue is most frequently felt as tiredness or as muscle fatigue without any exercise (1) Fatigue can also become progressively worse throughout the day, it can also be affected by heat and humidity (1)
Understanding the child is the most difficult aspect of the teaching job ...
The Wikibook project supports the development of the FutureBASIC programming language. FutureBASIC, also known as FB, is a compiled procedural BASIC dialect used to develop applications for Apple Macintosh family of computers.
If you would like to contribute energy to the FB Documentation Project, please read our Style Guide for FB Documentation.
The Language Reference focuses on the FutureBASIC language and syntax. While programming is discussed, this is primarily to demonstrate the language syntax. The Programming Guide offers far more detail on accomplishing specific tasks. The Beginner's Guide is primarily concerned with how to use the FB IDE and compiling programs. It exists to explain the process of compiling applications, not as a replacement for the Programming Guide.
The "Hello World!" Example: Compiling Your First Application
Event driven Programming with Carbon Events (Not posted) (13 Jan 2009)
Other topics are also planned!
Language Reference (Not every page of the complete LR is posted - yet!)
The FutureBASIC and FBtoC freeware projects can be located at: http://4toc.com/fb4/
Going to the Chinese pronunciation Category on Wikicommons, you will find hundreds of short audio recordings from native speakers, most with the pinyin and tone marks on their info pages or within the filename. Download some to hear the differences in the tones. Try clicking one with your eyes closed or having someone else choose a word so that you can test your listening skills by guessing the tones that were said.
The best squares for the attacker will depend upon the objective of the attack. During an Elephant and Dog Attack against Cats and Rabbits, the same rules of positioning apply as discussed in the Elephant and Horse Attack: the Dog on b6 and Elephant on d6 is usually optimal.
In order to facilitate the hostage-taking of a strong defender occupying the b6 square by the attacking Elephant on the d6 square, any non-Rabbit should move to c5 so that the Elephant can occupy b6 and force the defender south. Unfortunately, the attacking Elephant will become decentralized and the process of dragging the hostage to the home trap is slow. This tactic should only be used against a Camel and only if the decentralized Elephant will not jeopardize the defenses on the opposite wing. In most situations this plan is too slow to be effective.
If the attacker is attempting to advance a Rabbit toward the goal rank, it is beneficial to place a Dog or Cat on c7 on a depleted board during the endgame, but it is normally too risky to do so during the middlegame. It is usually a mistake to place the Elephant on c7 due to the major strategic drawbacks of a decentralized Elephant. The Elephant should only occupy c7 if it can force the gain of significant material or a decisive goal threat.
Transcription, comments, theories, links to do with VMs page f4r to be added here... :-)
Two paragraphs (with 3.8 and 8.6 lines), both above mid-page. The
Hinduism is the oldest of all religions practised in the today's world. It is generally believed to have originated around 2000 BC to 1500 BC; though archaeological evidence in the form of religious artifacts (the discovery of a seal known as the proto-Shiva at the site Mohenjo-daro, dated to 2,700 BC) may point to an earlier era. Hinduism has a vast corpus of religious texts and no one text is considered to represent Hinduism solely. The earliest works are collected under the generic title of "The Vedas" meaning: The Knowledge. The four Vedas: The Rig Veda, Sama Veda, Yajur Veda and Atharva Veda are sacred texts containing hymns, incantations, and rituals from ancient India. The two great epics, The Ramayana by Valmiki and The Mahabharata by Ved Vyasa are also considered sacred texts of Hinduism. A Portion of the Mahabharata, the Srimad Bhagavad Gita, is one of the most revered texts in modern India. It contains the preachings of Lord Krishna to Arjuna on the battlefield of Kurukshetra. It describes How to ascent an ordinary man to divinity and enjoy absolute Bliss.
Hinduism may be considered more a way of life, rather than a religion. Hindu ritual practice is the method used for proclaiming that one is a Hindu and theological studies, though important, remain secondary in relation to the rituals. It is an amalgamation of different theories, beliefs and philosophies. There are two popular beliefs Dvaita and Advaita; the principles of Duality and Non-Duality respectively. The Duality principle states that God and mortals are two different beings. The Non-Duality principle professes that all life forms are inter-connected with the Supreme Being - the concept of Parmatma. Duality principle states that Paramathma and inner self (soul) of all living things are one and the same.Even 'Charvaks' who challenged even the existence of God, are considered part of Hinduism. None of the ancient text mentions the word Hindu, the only term used by them is 'Dharma' or the guidelines for a human being in that particular role. One may consider it to be the most open and democratic form of system where ideologies can move in-out or get modified any time. The text forming the basis of Hinduism are written by many and in different periods. None of them alone can define this religion in totality. All of them deal with one or few aspects of it. Because of this flexibility and fluidity this religion could withstand the trial of times.
According to Hindu Philosophy reaching God or attaining Moksha is an individual act. The semitic religions may stress the need to follow a particular individual or prophet who acts as a vassal of God's will and the acceptance of an authoritative religious text; for example the Bible or the Koran. Hinduism teaches that there is no particular way or book to reach God or Heaven. The Hindu philosophy "Sarvadeva Namaskara Kesavamprathi Gattchathi" means that you can worship in any way or form you choose, for all are true paths that lead to God. The Guru in Hinduism is a person who instructs others in religious matters and worship. Hindus consider Gurus to be guides who show the path to God.
The Rishis, ancient sages who performed religious rituals and services for the well-being of society, are believed to be the earliest receivers of the Vedas. Hindu texts derived from revelation are called Sruti. The Vedas is believed to be the absolute truths discovered by the Rishis and transmitted from gurus to disciples and passed on to each successive generation. Hindus believe that Sruti establishes that there is purpose in creation and there is some other reality beyond the visible physical world. Hindus consider that the self (aham) is an illusion and that by reading the Holy Scriptures or receiving instruction, a person will realize that there is a purpose to their birth and their present "state of being" in the world. Hindus believe that a person's "state of being" is the result of good or bad deeds in an earlier birth and that when a person dies, it is only the body that perishes. The soul (atman) will regain entry into the world through a cyclic rebirth that may manifest itself in any form of living matter.
Sruti is a Sanskrti word which means 'what is heard' and Smrti means 'what is remembered'. Later on when people started using Tada Patra (in Sanskrit, Tada is the name of a tree and Patra means leaf, hence leaf of the tree Tada, which was quite big in size and suitable for writing and recording texts on; some manuscripts written on the leaf of the Tada tree can still be found in Indian Museums) these Srutis and Smrtis were recorded in a literary form. Hinduism has a wide ranging body of work that are called Tikas and these works present a critical analysis and interpretation of the Vedas, Srutis and Smrtis texts. Tika in Sanskrit roughly translates as commentary or criticism.
The Bride and Bridegroom making an offering during a Hindu marriage ceremony
One of the Smrtis, the Manu Smrti, is the oldest source of law still in use in India. Many Hindu religious texts of ancient origin are still used as a reference point for decisions about the social and judicial life of contemporary Indians . The current Hindu Marriage Act section 5 and other related sections, which is about the solemnization of Hindu Marriages, is a modern interpretation of the ancient vedic Hindu Law. Other sections of the Hindu Marriage Act dealing with Divorce are secular and have no relation to Vedic law. In Hindusim, marriage is a religious sacrament in which the bride severs her knots with the gotra of her father's family and joins the gotra of her husband's family and this sacrament cannot be reversed. Though Hinduism forms the basis of the laws and customs of India, the secular approach of Indian politics has ensured that modern ideas can still be adopted.
The other main religions in India share a common past with Hinduism. The Sikh Religion reveres some of the Hindu scriptures and Saints and there have been many exchanges of religious ideas between Hinduism and the other two ancient religions of India: Buddhism and Jainism. Hinduism has much in common with the ancient religions of Greece and Rome, in that its adherents are discouraged from orthodox dogma as long as piety and worship of the Gods is proven by the act of partaking in rituals. For Hindus, the Vedas scriptures describe the concepts of ideal conduct and the correct way of living one's life. The Holy Book of Hindus - Srimad Bhagwad Gita - preaches a way of life. The way which one must follow to attain Moksha; to free oneself of the wordly constraints and to remove oneself from the cycle of rebirth.
Three early deities form the core of Hindu worship - Bhagwan Brahma (the Creator), Bhagwan Vishnu (the Preserver) and Bhagwan Mahesh (or Shiv, the Destroyer). Bhagwan is Sanskrit for God or Lord.
Hinduism has undergone many changes during the twentieth century. It has responded to the creation of a secular democratic modern India by adopting new ideas and practices and still continues to play a major role in the lives of its adherents.
Exam objective: Manage a group of associated data in a .NET Framework application by using collections.
(Refer System.Collections namespace - MSDN)
The ArrayList class is used for arrays whose size will dynamically increase as required. An ArrayList is not necessarily sorted.
The ICollection interface is the base interface for classes in the System.Collections namespace.
The ICollection interface extends IEnumerable; IDictionary and IList are more specialized interfaces that extend ICollection. An IDictionary implementation is a collection of key/value pairs, like the Hashtable class. An IList implementation is a collection of values and its members can be accessed by index, like the ArrayList class.
Some collections that limit access to their elements, such as the Queue class and the Stack class, directly implement the ICollection interface.
If neither the IDictionary interface nor the IList interface meet the requirements of the required collection, derive the new collection class from the ICollection interface instead for more flexibility.
The following tables list the members exposed by the ICollection type.
IsSynchronized - Gets a value indicating whether access to the ICollection is synchronized (thread safe).
SyncRoot - Gets an object that can be used to synchronize access to the ICollection.
CopyTo - Copies the elements of the ICollection to an Array, starting at a particular Array index.
IComparer interface, IEqualityComparer interface, and IKeyComparer interface
Write down a handler for Practicing the above code.
Response.Write("First Name : " + P.firstName + ", Last Name : " + P.lastName);
Response.Write("First Name : " + p.firstName + ", Last Name : " + p.lastName);
An iterator is effectively a lightweight version of the IEnumerable interface. It is primarily used with foreach statements.
You will normally implement the GetEnumerator method of the IEnumerable interface.
This enables the class to be accessed using a standard foreach statement. A class is not restricted to implementing only a single iterator. Multiple iterators can be supplied, for example to enable iteration in both ascending and descending order of a list. To call a named iterator, use the following syntax:
The yield statement marks a point where execution of a iterator will resume on a subsequent iteration. This can be used to supply multiple yield statements:
Used to represent a collection of key/value pairs.
You will probably need an FTP program like SmartFTP (for Windows) or AxyFTP (for Linux) to connect to your scanner and download all the images that have been acquired.
Instead of copying your files via FTP or CD/DVD, you may set up a DICOM server or connect to a PACS/RIS using free DICOM tools.
There are some free DICOM toolkits around from which you can build your own DICOM archive. An ancient, but very robust DICOM server can be found at ftp://ftp.erl.wustl.edu/pub/dicom/software/ctn/. The software is known to compile and run under both 32bit and 64bit Linux. Once you have set it up, you can configure your scanner console to send the images to this server using the scanner GUI.
See with your physics team.
% See if the structurals exist
"Truth tables for logical expressions. Generalize problem 47 in such a way that the logical expression may contain any number of logical variables. Define table’ in a way that table’(List,Expr) prints the truth table for the expression Expr, which contains the logical variables enumerated in List.
-- your implementation goes here
Vermiculite is a material which is made by heating the rock mica to a high tempature at which point it expands and becomes capable of
The following are some terms you may see used throughout the book:
To list the inflected forms of a verb for each person, in order, for one or more tenses.
In English, the verb "to be" is conjugated as follows: "I am", "thou art", "he/she/it is", "we are", "you are", "they are".
A verb that does not follow the normal rules for its conjugation.
A verb which follows the normal rules for its conjugation.
If intExpr is positive, it's interpreted as the resource ID of a 'crsr' (first choice) or a 'CURS' resource (alternative choice), and this statement changes the current cursor to the indicated cursor. The following cursor resources are found in the System file, and are always available:
For Appearance Manager calls, cursorType must be _themeCursorStatic or _themeCursorAnimate
Items marked with an asterisk (*) may be animated.
If you attempt to use an illegal value in the cursor statement, you will see the following dialog:
If intExpr is negative(for example:CURSOR=-_watchCursor), then the cursor is changed to the one whose ID is ABS(intExpr), and a cursor event is generated, which can be trapped by checking for events of type _cursEvent with the DIALOG function. You cannot generate a _cursEvent when switching to the _arrowCursor (since its resource ID number has no negative!)
If you've designed a csrs or a CURS resource of your own which you want to make available to your program, do the following:
Assign a positive resource ID number to the resource (don't use any of the numbers in the above table. You should use an ID number of 128 or higher.)
Copy the resource to the resources file which you reference in your program's RESOURCES statement.
You can then use the CURSOR statement to activate your cursor within the program.
Both the male and female teachers liked the vacation as well
He took a piece of chalk and wrote on the board <-note that the diminutive krijtje renders the notion 'piece of' in this case
In the mathematics lesson the teacher introduced parallel lines <-Dutch is one of the few languages that has its own term for parallel thanks to 17th century genius called Simon Stevin.
The children played on the school yard.
His grade report was full of fives and sixes <-roughly D's and F's in the American system
It was do or die. There could be no doubt about that. The next opponent against whom he had to play tennis, was a very good player, from whom everybody expected a victory. It was even said of him that he would be the new champion. He had to take that into account. But he was not afraid of that anyway. He had experienced this before. He knew he was in good shape, and with that he could cause a surprise. In good spirits he went to the locker room.
Ervan again refers back to the opponent.
With the fact that he was in good shape he could cause an upset.
He touched the net with the ball.
The next ball went over the net well.
The umpire whistled and with that signal he made clear that he had scored.
The umpire did not take the protest into consideration
The fifth set put an end to his dream.
Intracranial aneurisms are the main cause of bleeding around the brain within the subarachnoid space.
WorldRadioHistory.com's scan of Australasian Radio World - Vol. 02 No. 05 - September 1937 has been utilised to create the partial content for this page and can be downloaded at this link to further extend the content and enable further text correction of this issue: ARW 1937 09
In general, only content which is required for other articles in this Wikibook has been entered here and text corrected. The material has been extensively used, inter alia, for compilation of biographical articles, radio club articles and station articles.
Registered at the G.P.O., Sydney, for transmission by post as a periodical
Cover Photo: Photo of Repogle World Globe and Amateur Communications Eight (See Page 45)
Highlighted Contents: "Tom Thumb Portable Two": DX Junior Two-Band C.C. Transmitter: More about the "Sky-King Dual-Wave Five": 13-Watt Amplifier: Results of First Shortwave DX Contest.
Editorial Notes . . .
The "Australasian Radio World" is published monthly by Trade Publications Proprietary, Ltd. Editorial offices, 214 George Street, Sydney, N.S.W. Telephone BW6577. Cable address: "Repress," Sydney. Advertisers please note that copy should reach office of publication by 14th of month preceding that specified for insertion.
Subscription rates: 1/- per copy, 10/6 per year ( 12 issues) post free to Australia and New Zealand. Subscribers in New Zealand can remit by Postal Note or Money Order.
Printed by Bridge Printery Pty. Ltd., 214 George Street, Sydney, N.S.W., for the proprietors of the "Australasian Radio World," 214 George St., Sydney (Footnote P.48)
Radio Editor, "The Bulletin."
In this instalment the author tells of an impulse that brought him halfway across the world to Australia, and of his early experiences in amateur radio here.
MY own fly-power gear wasn't powerful enough to reach the Antipodes, and so I teamed up with a pal, Bloxam of G5LS, and punched the key from this South London station for a while until once again, business affairs demanded a move.
From "ham" radio I graduated to the more serious side of radio transmission by securing a position with the old British Broadcasting Co. as maintenance engineer, being appointed to the Leeds-Bradford relay in Yorkshire. This relay centre fed two transmitters about 15 miles apart, from the control point and main studio in Leeds, and apart from regular station and control duties, much of the work was in connection with OB's.
I was often to be found lugging amplifiers and microphones about, to Harrogate, York, Scarborough, and various theatres. The work proved interesting, and broadcasting apparatus as used to-day brings a smile at the thought of the antiquated gear of those days.
An amusing but rather disconcerting incident occurred one day, when my duty schedule called for the day at Bradford. The transmitter there was housed on the top floor of a dilapidated warehouse, and once the engineer on duty started up at 11 a.m., he was marooned there without a break on his lonesome until midnight. A motor-cycle combination was available for transportation, but this was such a "grid" that one preferred to use the train and travel comfortably.
The Wrong Train! That morning was a murky, foggy one as I waited on the Leeds station platform for the train. It was due out at 10.25 a.m., but no train showed up until nearly 10.40 a.m. Taking a seat along with morning paper, I glanced up to note that the train was apparently making up for lost time, as, contrary to usual, she hurtled straight through Shipley junction, just outside Bradford.
Then along the corridor came a ticket collector. I handed over my Bradford ticket, whereupon the gold-braided one remarked that I "would be a h-- of a time getting there, as this was the Carlisle express!"
Carlisle – non-stop – about 150 miles north, and I was due to get that transmitter radiating before 11.30!
At Skipton, north of Bradford, the express stopped to pick up two special passengers, and I nipped out. A train was just leaving for Bradford on the opposite platform, and I made it. Alas, it ambled into Bradford at 11.50 a.m., and I reached the station at almost mid-day.
All land-line indicators from control in Leeds were down, and when I got through to the Chief, his observations were sulphurous to a degree. Furthermore, an ambulance was screaming its way toward me in case I had been electrocuted. Anyway, I never did know whether Chief Engineer Eckersley in London believed the faithful report I returned regarding the fog and the train mixup, but things never seemed to be the same. Complete silence from a B.B.C. station with dealers waiting to demonstrate receivers, to say nothing of housewives missing their morning cookery chat, was akin to sacrilege!
Back To Australia. A year of broadcasting experience passed, and once again I sought a change. Radio was moving ahead quickly, but somehow the wanderlust had not worked off since war service and subsequent seafaring.
Back in the home town in Lancashire, I passed one day a shipping office. Australia loomed large on a poster, and without hesitation in I walked and booked a passage on a ship leaving London in three weeks. It was an adventurous step, inasmuch that by the time I had worked out all it would cost me, I would arrive in Sydney with a sadly depleted pocket-book.
Again I spent most of that passage "upstairs" with "Sparks." Out of odds and ends I conjured up a short-wave receiver, and we had much fun logging amateurs from everywhere. By the time I reached Sydney in April, 1926, the radio business had been through a bad slump for some reason or other. Nevertheless, through the agency of a Sydney friend I had met in London, I stepped into a job of sorts in a little wireless business in the city and began to look around.
Amateur radio naturally came up again. Many of the early Sydney amateurs were already known to me by QSL correspondence, and in short order I was invited to attend a W.I.A. meeting in the old rooms in Elizabeth Street. It was there I met a really fine bunch of fellows, simply brimming with hospitality, and in those days a "G" ham was a novelty. Here was amateur radio plus good fellowship as I had always imagined it to be.
On The Air As A2NO. After that meeting, two members approached me and asked if I intended getting on the air. Could a duck swim? These two were brothers; one was the original A2TM, Haswell Turner, and the other, Harry. The latter had no "ham" ticket, couldn't punch a key, but had a lot of apparatus and enthusiasm. The result was that I joined forces with Harry and quickly approached the P.M.G.'s Department for a licence.
That pioneer station piled up some good work. Harry did the engineering, and my job was handling the dials and key. In short order I was yarning away on 32 metres with old friends back in England, and life took on a very pleasant aspect. It was at that station that much experimentation was done with antenna systems, and soon there sprouted between the two lofty sky-sticks what was really the first "Zepp" feed antenna in this part of the world before "QST" began to deal with the idea.
Try as we would, we could never clean up the note from the Hartley transmitter, despite expenditure of much cash on filter condensers. We even made up a huge "electrolytic" with aluminium pie dishes, glass strips, and borax, and it withstood 2,000 odd volts!
It was only long afterwards that we discovered the reason for that bad note, which sounded something like tearing silk, but reached all over the world. The high voltage transformer stood hard up against the "shack" wall, which carried a shelf holding the transmitter, with large diameter copper tube coils on glass rods.
It was a massive ex-navy transformer, and it had loose laminations that chattered. The vibration was carried up the wall to the tank circuit, and as the coils merely rested on the glass tubes, they shimmied slightly, but quite enough to modulate the signal almost as if raw A.C. were applied to the plates of the old T250's. If we had only rested that transformer on shock-absorbing material away from the wall, the note would have been at least smooth R.A.C.
Two Years Of Key Punching. That year and 1927 I seldom slept. The DX bug bit hard, and the week-ends particularly would find me glued to the operating table, hardly deigning to look up for a cup of tea. Lasting world-wide friendships were made, and there was always keen competition between A2TM, A2BK, A2YI and A2NO. From 32 metres we explored 20 metres and worked Europeans all through the day, particularly during 1927.
I well recall the occasion when Belgian 4AU told me to inform A2DY up in Gordon, N.S.W., that he had been "R7 here for three or four hours." A2DY had a lone 201A-Hartley outfit, with about 10 watts input in comparison to our 250 watts or more. My own signal report was R7! Don Lindsay (now in A.W.A.'s laboratory) got remarkable efficiency from his little station of those days.
My First C.C. Transmitter. Then came a new era. "QST" (my bible for years) had been talking crystal control, and it was decided that something ought to be done about it. Harry Kauper, of Adelaide (A5BG), had made a start, and his 32-metre crystal signal was a source of joy and envy. Through the late Clair Foster (W6HM), a crystal was obtained from U.S.A., and the job of building the gear began. That crystal, incidentally, cost us around £10 in those days.
Starting off with a 210 oscillator, 210 doubler, and De Forest H tube buffer, driving a T250, we eventually got on the air. It was the first C.C. amateur station in N.S.W., though we only beat Chas. Maclurcan (A2CM) by a day or two.
Then came disaster. Experiments were undertaken with various forms of crystal oscillators, using our lone and expensive piece of quartz. One day Harry · left a partly completed breadboard oscillator on the workbench with the crystal in the holder, which consisted simply of two polished pennies.
Another man who used this bench for odd jobs picked up the breadboard unit and placed it on one end on the floor. Later in the day somebody brushed out the floor of the shack and swept all the debris into the dustbin. Unfortunately our crystal had slipped out of the holder, and had been among all the odds and ends of spaghetti, wire, etc. Wild thoughts of a visit to the Council incinerator were uppermost, but were ruled out as being too much like searching for the proverbial needle in a haystack. The man who shifted that unit was most unpopular!
We visited various opticians in search of suitable spectacle lenses. While the process of examining, cutting and grinding was proceeding, the fact of a silent station chafed, and back went the old 32-metre "rock-crusher." Again that raspy note tore across the seven seas, and all was well.
Nearly a Silent Key. Around this time I nearly came to an untimely end, when sleepily, somewhere around 3 a.m., I put my hands where they would have been safer in my pockets. For a fraction of a second I took the full kick from the H.T. transformer, 4,000 volts across the outside. I came back to earth about half an hour later, lying across the shack floor, very groggy about the knees, and a little burnt at the fingers. The transmitter was still radiating merrily; The house was about 30 feet distant from the shack, and nobody would have been any the wiser until hours later if anything serious had happened.
Old timers of those days on 32 metres will recall some of the unusual and outstanding DX stations – for example, JKZB in Tokio, SK2 in Borneo, the original OP1HR (Manila, Philippines), and LA1X in Stavanger, Norway. (This latter station I kept skeds with every morning at 6 a.m. Sydney time for months, and never failed to make contact). QRM from thousands of "ham" stations as in these days was almost unknown. FO5X in Johannesburg, G2NM, G2OD, G5XY, NU6HM, NU6AM, NU9DNG, and hundreds of others remain in the memory, and the contacts show in the old log book.
It was in 1927 that commercial radio decided that the amateurs had too much to themselves, and that fateful Washington Conference resulted in the allocation of the bands mainly as they are to-day. With the passing of 32 metres, the Australian amateur lost the finest DX medium that ever was. Those who remember, and now listen occasionally to the overseas broadcasters around the 31/32-metre mark, know that it was the amateur and nobody else who paved the way.
I often wonder what would have been the position if, when in the early days, "200 metres and below" was thrown to amateurs had been taken by them in conjunction with International legal agreements that this should for all future time be strictly amateur territory! Amateur radio might have been very wealthy to-day by sub-letting shortwave channels to commercial interests! Instead of which, despite any assertion to the contrary, amateur radio is literally fighting for International existence. There are people who would take from the amateur entirely what little is left to him.
But wise governments encourage their amateurs as much as possible, and in this respect Australians are indeed fortunate. The VK amateur of to-day enjoys many privileges barred to his fraternity overseas, and the Wireless Institute of Australia plays a big part in this respect.
During 1927-28, I had taken to writing occasional pars for the radio publications of the day, dealing mostly with DX achievements from A2NO.
The published description of my pet receiver led to the permanent filling of a staff vacancy on the old "Radio in Australia and N.Z.," together with the "Wireless Weekly" of those days. That receiver was rather queerly named the "Go-Getter," and how it caught on! Probably many readers of these words well remember that receiver and the subsequent "All-Empire." The latter was the first metal chassis receiver in this part of the world, and the first to realise the advantages of the screen-grid valve as a T.R.F. amplifier for high frequencies.
The old original A2NO station in 1926, then located at Cremorne, Sydney. Immediately in front of the author are the crystal oscillator and buffer stages, with a T250 final and MRI rectifiers on the right.
Using CDISC ODM 1.3 with OpenClinica Extensions to export to SAS
SAS can import data in a number of formats. For OpenClinica version 3.x the obvious choice, due to its portability and SAS's import facilities, is CDISC ODM 1.3 XML.
The CDISC ODM 1.3 XML with OpenClinica extensions format includes two types of data:
OpenClinica extensions data (which SAS can be told how to pick up with a mapping file)
Most of the useful data is CDISC ODM 1.3, but some useful data is 'hidden' in OpenClinica extensions sections (e.g. DateOfBirth, Sex and Event Start Dates).
OpenClinica extensions aren't part of the CDISC ODM 1.3 specification, and need to be imported separately. The code below uses a mapping file (extensions.xml) to import some, but not all, of the extensions. Other OpenClinica extensions can be picked up from the data file by altering the mapping file appropriately - OpenClinica extensions are tags and attributes in the data file that have the Openclinica prefix, some of which are important. The only place to obtain the Study Subject ID is by using OpenClinica:StudySubjectId - the SubjectKey refers to the internal OID, which doesn't change even if the Study Subject ID does (the OID remains SS_TEST, even if the Study Subject ID is changed to Test 2). The CDISC ODM 1.3 schema generated by OpenClinica is also documented at Openclinica.com/tools/odm-doc.
Download the mapping file.
The mapping file to import OpenClinica Extension data
We import using the CDISC ODM 1.3 XML using the libname command (proc cdisc is deprecated as of SAS 9.2). The import.sas file first imports the CDISC ODM file, then imports the OpenClinica Extensions.
Create OpenClinica extensions dataset;
CDISC ODM 1.3 includes a specification for a data type called partial date, which SAS can't import (it throws an error when you try to read the file). You may choose to not have partial dates in your study and use a text field instead, validated by a regular expression. Alternatively you can modify the XML export before it is imported to change partial dates to text fields (see below).
SAS will use a shortened version (truncated to 8 chars) of the ITEM_NAME as the field name, e.g. DMHEIGHT (the SASFieldName attribute of the ItemDef tag in the XML). It will use the full ITEM_NAME itself as the field label (the Name attribute of the ItemDef tag in the XML). In some cases it would be good to pick up the DESCRIPTION_LABEL as the field label (the Comment attribute of the ItemDef tag in the XML). The code below includes a section (commentable) that switched the Name and Comment attributes of ItemDef tags around, so that DESCRIPTION_LABELs are imported as the label.
SAS doesn't like field names that are longer than 32 characters including the OpenClinica prefix (e.g. I_HTBAS_BLD_1STDOSESTUDYMEDSGIVEN). You may want to use shorter names (e.g. 8 character long) for new studies, but if you have an old study you may need to replace long field names with shortened versions.
OpenClinica can export entities that aren't defined in the DTD (see this issuetracker bug - OpenClinica login needed). The script correctly escapes the leading ampersand.
The script below modifies the CDISC ODM XML directly. For CTIMPs (Clinical Trials Involving Medicinal Products) this alters the valuable data you have been collecting, and should be done carefully, with the changes validated (how exactly is up to you).
The code below is specific to Windows, and has been tested in Windows 7
Windows doesn’t run unsigned PowerShell scripts, so until a signed version of the script below can be created, you have to run the commands manually.
Don't be concerned if you notice the XML files double in size, this is because PowerShell's output files are in Unicode (two bytes for every original character) to cope with international characters. The original is most likely to have been in single byte encoding (ASCII or similar)
The regexps could be reimplemented in Perl under Linux
Copy the code below into Notepad (or a similar text editor)
Alter the $extractdirectory value to point to your data extracts (paths can be obtained from the Explorer toolbar). This script creates files ending in _new.xml from existing .xml files (and ignores existing files ending in _new.xml).
Type cmd into the Windows Start Orb search box (which opens a terminal)
Then copy and paste the code into the terminal (right-clicking on the terminal will open context menu from whence you can paste.)
$extractdirectory = 'C:\Users\\Documents\\Original Data\'
$text | Out-File $modifiedfilename
This OpenClinica forum thread further discussed details of how to import data into SAS.
On a similar note, for those interested in Stata, there's a tool that converts SPSS to Stata here:
When a dataextract is exported in SPSS-format the zip contains 2 files:
Most of the time the syntax file must be edited, because it assumes that the dat-file is in the default SPSS directory. If this is not the case,
Also error messages appear referring to dates. The reason why dates are not imported correctly is in the different date
The .dat file contains dates in searchable format whereas the .sps file
Some excellent xsl transform files were made available by Linas Silva on this developers list thread (also available here).
These transformations can be run on full ODM 1.3 xml extracts, with the accompanying powershell scripts. The CSV powershell script is probably the most important as it chops up the output csv into into a series of csvs.
Alternatively, the transforms can be run without powershell, instead using the copy of the saxon library that comes with OpenClinica. Example syntax (all on one line):
Each of the xsl files refer to renaming map stylesheet called 'xml_convert_dynamic_lookup' which lists the CRF and Item Group name combinations and what they should be renamed to in the output. If this is not used, the dataset names default to the Item Group OID.
For SAS transfomations, use the script titled powershell_perform_SAS_xsl_transforms.ps1. This is a powershell-script, so you should open a command-prompt as administrator.
Change to the directory where you unzipped the script plus the *.xsl-files and start powershell.
Now you have a Powershell-prompt and first you must set the Execution policy:
Running the script is done with one big line, invoking the script with 7 parameters:
.\powershell_perform_SAS_xsl_transforms.ps1 "RDP001_ODM_20140311.xml" "xml_convert_sas_map.xsl" "sasmap_rdp001_20140310.map" "xml_convert_sas_data.xsl" "data_rdp1_20140311.xml" "xml_convert_sas_format.xsl" "formatout_20140310.sas"
"RDP001_ODM_20140311.xml" and this must be the name of your dataextract in ODM1.3-format
"xml_convert_sas_map.xsl" is one of the *.xsl-files of the zip, so do not change this one
"sasmap_rdp001_20140310.map" is the mapping-file that is created and you can give this any name you want
"xml_convert_sas_data.xsl" is one of the *.xsl-files of the zip, so again: do not change this one
"data_rdp1_20140311.xml" is the resulting sas-data-file
"xml_convert_sas_format.xsl" is one of the *.xsl-files of the zip: no changing this one
"formatout_20140310.sas" is a SAS-file with info about radio- and singleselect-options
As with many of Black's off-beat 1st move alternatives, this move does not hold independent status as it usually transposes into other mainstream openings. It's quite a good move but usually the mainline is part of another opening. White may transpose into the Pirc or Modern defence by playing 2. e4, so black must enjoy playing these defences or should shy from this move.
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
e4...
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Welcome to the Lineage 2 Fishing Wiki. Here all players can post their information about fishing. I've started it out with all the information I've personally gathered on PTS so far, and now it's your turn. Only add information you have seen yourself, as you will be credited (or blamed) for it in the history logs.
Enjoy.
Fishing is easy... Unless you overtrain your skills (more on that later). You need the Fishing, Fishing Expertise, Pumping, and Reeling skills. For equipment you need a fishing rod and some bait. All of these are available from the fishing NPC, usually in the magic shop in towns and on boat docks.
You'll catch fish and treasure chests, which you double-click to turn into materials . These are used in Common Crafting, or to turn into the fishing NPC for "Proof of Catching a Fish" (refered to as "proofs" from now on) that can be used to learn skills.
You'll also quickly go insane, it's booooooring. Luckily you don't need to fish all that much to get what you need.
Setup a hotbar with the fishing, pumping and reeling skills. I also put my weapon, the fishing rod, and fishing shots in there.
Find any water where the breath gauge shows up, stand near (not in) the water facing it.
Equip the fishing rod and the bait.
Hit your fishing key, and wait for the fish's HP gauge to show up.
Reel if the HP gauge is going up.
Pump if the HP gauge is standing still.
Pump and Reel until you catch it, if you make mistakes the fish will heal itself.
Go to step 3 until bored.
That's it, it's really that easy. You will catch fish, treasure chests, and very rarely a monster.
Now for the messy details....
Level 1 only, used like craft skills to activate the action.
Level 1-26. This is the main skill in fishing. It determines what strength of fish you will be catching. It's very easy to train this higher then you can handle ( i.e. the fish are too strong for you to catch), so advance slowly.
Do not train Pumping to more then ( Fishing Expertise + 2 ), or penalties will apply.
Level 1-26. Determines how much damage you do when you pump.
Do not train Reeling to more then ( Fishing Expertise + 2 ), or penalties will apply.
Level 1-26. Determines how much damage you do when you reel.
This is a table of how much adena it costs to level Fishing Expertise, Pumping, and Reeling.
For example, leveling Fishing Expertise from 4 to 5 requires 500a. The third column is the
The Total cost for all skills are: 3,785,200a
Rods work like any weapon, you need to use a rod that's your grade or lower, otherwise it won't work very well at all. When you're fishing, the damage you do to the fish depends on your weapon and on your skills.
There are 3 colors of lures, and 3 grades of each. Since the High Grade lures catch fish faster, and are more likely to catch better fish, they are the only ones you should spend money on - they are all very very cheap anyway. Don't waste time, buy the good ones. With High Grade bait you will catch about 30% one level lower catch, 60% your level, and 10% one level above.
Like all things, NCsoft has carefully calculated things so higher cost = higher returns, so Purple are the best in the long run. But if you're after a specific kind of fish for a specific material/recipe, you can try and influence the type of fish with the color.
Also, there is a chance for monsters to appear. In the test I did with green lures, I got 3 monsters in addition to the fish I posted.
Fish and chests get stronger as your expertise increases, changing color as they advance. There are some levels of fish that are MUCH stronger then the previous level, which will make them only catchable with fish shots or the next grade of fishing pole, so be aware of this. Although hard to catch, you can catch Black fish with a C grade pole and fishing shots.
Each 3-level range of fish, has a color and a "Small", normal, and "Big" version of the fish and chest. You will catch one level below your expertise to one level above your expertise. This means you will need 12 inventory slots for fishing - 3 levels x 3 types of fish, plus 3 levels of chests.
Rarely you will catch a monster instead of fish. At fishing level 3 I caught only Caugh Undines (that drop ~35 fishing shot D-grade) and at level 9 only Caught Rakul (which drop ~12 fishing shot C-grade and can curse you so that your head will grow large).
That's the general overview, for the (obscenely detailed) details about the fish and what people have had them give in rewards, go to the Exact details about fish page. For the most part you should not worry about the details - you will be catching the fish low enough in level that you can easily kill them, and really only interested in gathering as many proofs as possible.
Once you have as many fish as you can carry, you double-click them to see what you get. You may fail (about 50% of the time), or you may get materials, common crafting recipes, or "fish guts" that you can trade in to the fishing NPC for proofs.
The fish guts can also be used in many common crafting recipes, so you may not want to turn them into Proofs at all.
1, use common crafting to turn 4 Fish Oils => 1 Greater Fish Oil
5, use common crafting to turn 4 Greater Fish Oils => 1 Premium Fish Oil
You buy new abilities with your Proof of Catching a Fish. Normally you can train one level of the skill for every 10 levels of your character, plus one. So you can train Expand Inventory level 3 at level 20.
Expand Trade can only be trained to level 3, at levels 40, 55, and 65.
Expand Dwarven Craft can only be learned by dwarves, at the normal skill trainer.
In most cases, Expand Warehouse, Expand Dwarven Craft, and Expand Trade are the only 3 skill 99% of players will need to be interested in, as the weight limits inventory, and there are not many common crafting recipes.
There is a fishing shot quest given by all the fishermen (or at least the one in aden)... its very useful because it gives free fishing shots for just hunting mobs all over the world.
Before attempting any of the Special Bait quests (there are 4 of them), suspend your sweet fluid quest because it will make the quest item drop rate horrific.
She gives you Plated Leather Gloves as a reward.
You will already be familiar with infix expressions where the operator is between two operands. E.g. 4 + 5 where the numbers 4 and 5 are the operands and + is the operator. The operators you will need to be familiar with are + (addition), - (subtraction), * (multiplication), / (division) and ↑(exponent).
When we write expressions in infix notation it can be confusing as to which operation should be performed first. For example, in the expression 4 + 5 * 6 we only know that the multiplication operation should be performed first because we have learnt the BIDMAS (or equivalent) rules. A computer does not automatically know this and would have to be programmed with the rules in order to carry out these operations correctly.
RPN is a way of getting round this and provides a way to write expressions without the need for brackets. This makes it much easier for a computer to evaluate the expressions. RPN places the operator after the operands it is to operate on. E.g. 54 + 20 would be written as 54 20 + in RPN.
Q: Write the infix expression x + y in Reverse Polish notation
Q: Write the RPN expression x 2 ↑ in infix form
Q: Write the RPN expression x y + x y - * in infix form
Write the RPN expression 6 x + 4 y + * as an infix expression
The Heavenly Stems (HS) and Earthly Branches (EB) of the Year, Month and Day of 1980 in the Hsia Calendar, from January (Month =1) to December (Month=12).
The RMS Titanic left Southampton, England on April 10, 1912 for New York City. The ship sank on April 14, resulting in the death of 1,500 people.[1] This infamous disaster and enormous loss of life was the result of multiple poor ethical decisions that were made months before the ship set sail during its construction, in the hours leading up to the collision, and during the sinking itself.
The Titanic was built for the White Star Line by Harland and Wolff of Belfast.[2] Weighing close to 47,000 tons, she cost about 1.5 billion pounds to build and had 8 triple expansion engines, with steam supplied by 159 furnaces. The hull was divided into 16 supposedly watertight compartments. The amenities on board the Titanic were extravagant and included a swimming pool, three electric elevators, a gymnasium, and a Turkish bath.[3]
The Titanic in the shipyard ready for launch
Before leaving for Europe to take command of the ship for her voyage, the Captain of the Titanic, Edward John Smith, was overconfident and said at a dinner he had the “utmost confidence in her seagoing qualities…[it is] impossible for her to sink".[4] Captain Smith regarded the vessel as one that would keep above water even in the most unexpected trials at sea, and had no doubt she would reach port if seriously damaged.[4]
When the Titanic hit the iceberg, the five forward compartments flooded immediately. Due to the non-watertight nature of the deck, the water overflowed onto the deck and proceeded to flood the remaining compartments until the entire hull was flooded. Thus, the supposedly watertight compartments were concluded to not be watertight.[5]
The Titanic was an emigrant ship and had to get approval of her sea-worthiness.[3] After construction was complete, this consisted of trial tests where the ship was steamed around the port, a few turning circles made, and her compasses adjusted. While rather inadequate, this was deemed sufficient and the Titanic received approval.[5] This lack of testing was highly criticized, in particular by Naval Constructor David W. Taylor. Taylor emphasized the need for proper inspection by competent authorities for liners such as the Titanic, and compared to the extensive testing Navy ships are subjected to which consisted of filling the compartments above the water line to determine whether they are in fact watertight. If not for the faulty compartments, the Titanic should have stayed afloat long enough to reach port rather than the meager 5 hours the ship had to evacuate.[6]
Only 20 boats were on board the Titanic, allowing for a total capacity of 1,176 persons, and this fulfilled the British Board of Trade requirements.[5] The Board of Trade requirements were severely outdated at the time; for a ship 10,000 tons or over the minimum number of boats required on board was 16. The law regarded 10,000-ton boats as the maximum weight, but at 47,000 tons the Titanic was significantly over this limit but still only needed to abide by this guidelines.[7]
Chief Designer at Harland and Wolff, Alexander Carlisle, admitted that “she ought to have had 50 lifeboats instead of 20,” but the reason given by the owners of the Titanic was that they could not afford to add to the top-weight of the vessel.[8] Safety was evidently not a high priority.
With the sinking of the Titanic, many began to question the apparent prioritization of luxury over safety with the design of passenger liners. In the New York Times on April 17, 1912, the article “Luxury Blamed for Wreck by Engineer” featured Naval Engineer E. K. Roden who emphasized this as a serious fault in the design of modern steamships. Roden proceeded to state that the public says little attention to safety measures, instead assuming the steamship company is doing everything possible to ensure the safety of all its passengers.[9] Unfortunately in the case of the Titanic, many individuals had to pay the price with their lives for the lack of prioritization of safety.
The route of the maiden voyage of the Titanic, including all ports and the approximate location of the wreckage
The day of the sinking, the Titanic was going a speed of 22.5 knots, or 25.9 miles per hour; the maximum speed of the ship was 23 knots (26.5 mph).[10] The average over the entire course of the trip was approximately 20 knots. In comparison, other nearby ships including the Californian and the Mount Temple were averaging 11 knots in an effort to avoid ice collisions[11][12] There is no definitive reason why the ship was going so fast in an icy region of the Atlantic Ocean, but many speculate that Captain Smith was attempting to beat the Titanic's sister ship Olympic's record for fastest time across the Atlantic. Another possibility is that in efforts to manage a fire in the coal bunker, the coal was moved into the boiler and ship subsequently had to go faster.[13] Ultimately, the ship was not designed for such speeds as it was a liner built for comfort, and this likely contributed to the collision and rapid sinking.
A replica of the radio room from the Titanic
On April 14, the Titanic received ice warnings from six different ships in the vicinity (see table below).[14][15] Captain Smith was only shown and responded to those from the Caronia, the Noordam, and the Baltic. In response to the Baltic, Captain Smith sent “Thanks for your message and good wishes; had fine weather since leaving. - Smith”.[14] This is representative of prior responses as well - that there appeared to be good weather and conditions. This type of response implies that the Captain was not worried about ice.
The most urgent ice warnings came later in the evening from the Mesaba and the Californian. Prior to the Californian's message, at 10:33 pm she came to a full stop because of a field of pack ice directly in her path.[16] In response to radio operator of the Californian, Cyril Evan's, message, Jack Phillips, the Titanic's operator on duty at the time, responded with "Shut up! Shut up! I'm working Cape Race".[17] Cape Race is the wireless station what was relaying messages from passengers to New York City. At the time, the primary job of the wireless officers was to relay messages for passengers rather than for the crew, as they were employed by the Marconi Company rather than by White Star Line. This left no open emergency communication channel for the crew to access.
In an attempt to avoid the iceberg collision last minute, the engines were reversed in order to first maneuver the bow around the iceberg followed by the stern.[18] In 2010 it was revealed that Bruce Ismay, the managing director of the White Star Line, allegedly ordered "slow ahead" instead, believing the ship to be unsinkable.[19]
The failure of the crew to fully board the lifeboats during the sinking resulted in an enormous loss of life. The lifeboats rescued only 705 people, with some leaving below 50% capacity.[1] Lack of direction and competent leadership was a primary factor in the insufficient evacuation measures. “There was no system adopted for loading the boats; there was great indecision as to the deck from which boats were to be loaded; there was wide diversity of opinion as to the number of the crew necessary to man each boat; there was no direction whatever as to the number of passengers to be carried by each boat, and no uniformity in loading them”.[20]The majority of victims were third-class passengers. Captain Smith never sounded a general alarm, resulting in many third-class passengers being unaware of the situation until it was too late.[20] Some third-class passengers had a hard time getting through the "maze of corridors and staircases"[21] to the top deck in time.[1] Neshan Krekorian was a third-class passenger whose grandson claimed Krekorian “had to break a chain lock to get up to the upper decks”.[22] However, the British investigators found “that allegations that third class passengers were locked below decks were false. Evidence given at the inquiry did suggest that initially some of the gates blocked the way of steerage passengers as stewards waited for instructions and that they were then opened, but only after most of the lifeboats had launched".[21] After they were launched, lifeboats did not return promptly to collect more people because they did not want passengers to swarm and capsize the lifeboats. Eventually the lifeboats did return but by then it was too late.[1]
At the time of the incident, the Californian was close enough to the ship to have saved a large number of people from the water.[1] Crew members saw the distress flares from the Titanic and notified their captain, Captain Stanley Lord. “Instead of ordering the ship’s wireless operator to turn on the radio, Lord instead told the men to continue to use the Morse lamp".[1] After a while, the crew members thought the ship had sailed away. The U.S. investigative committee concluded that Californian's officers and crew "saw the distress signals of the Titanic and failed to respond to them in accordance with the dictates of humanity, international usage, and the requirements of law" and that "such conduct, whether arising from indifference or gross carelessness, is most reprehensible, and places upon the commander of the Californian a grave responsibility”.[20]
US Senate Committee Titanic hearings on the sinking of the ship in 1912.
Both the U.S. and Great Britain performed independent investigations; the U.S. investigation investigated 82 witnesses.[23] White Star Line held limited liability unless claimants could prove that the captain or crew made an error that the company was aware of. Individuals built a case around the Titanic’s speed, failure to post additional lookouts with binoculars, and failure to properly train the crew. However, “A final decree, signed by Judge Julius M. Mayer in July 1916, held the company guiltless”.[23]
Both investigative teams recommended new safety provisions. The U.S. Investigation Committee recommended that they “require sufficient lifeboats to accommodate every passenger and every member of the crew", that "all members of the crew assigned to lifeboats should be drilled in lowering and rowing the boats," and that passengers and crew are assigned to lifeboats before sailing.[20] The International Conference for Safety of Life at Sea met for the first time in 1913 to create rules out of these recommendations.[1] The International Ice Patrol was also established, an organization whereby “13 nations support a branch of the U.S. Coast Guard that scouts for the presence of icebergs”.[23]
Overall, over-confidence during ship construction and an unwillingness to question authority were the driving factors behind the disaster of the Titanic. Luxury was evidently prioritized in the building of the ship, while safety measures, including testing and equipment on board, were neglected. Reckless decisions were made by the captain and members of the crew in the days leading up to the incident such as speeding and ignoring ice warnings. During the sinking, inaction by Captain Smith resulted in inefficient boarding of the lifeboats and the death of many third-class passengers. Captain Stanley Lord’s inaction took any last chance of survival away from the passengers left in the water. This inaction combined with a “fog of war” derailed possible solutions to solvable problems. The phrase "fog of war" describes a phenomenon whereby information becomes confusing in the midst of an emergency.[24] The sinking of the Titanic demonstrates a universal principle that must be considered during ethical decisions; during an emergency, confusion easily gets in the way, even in solvable situations.
CHAP. I. 1. Tsze-lu asked about government. The Master said, 'Go before the people with your example, and be laborious in their affairs.'
CHAP. II. 1. Chung-kung, being chief minister to the Head of the Chi family, asked about government. The Master said, 'Employ first the services of your various officers, pardon small faults, and raise to office men of virtue and talents.'
CHAP. III. 1. Tsze-lu said, 'The ruler of Wei has been waiting for you, in order with you to administer the government. What will you consider the first thing to be done?'
CHAP. IV. 1. Fan Ch'ih requested to be taught husbandry. The Master said, 'I am not so good for that as an old husbandman.' He requested also to be taught gardening, and was answered, 'I am not so good for that as an old gardener.'
CHAP. V. The Master said, 'Though a man may be able to recite the three hundred odes, yet if, when intrusted with a governmental charge, he knows not how to act, or if, when sent to any quarter on a mission, he cannot give his replies unassisted, notwithstanding the extent of his learning, of what practical use is it?'
CHAP. VI. The Master said, 'When a prince's personal conduct is correct, his government is effective without the issuing of orders. If his personal conduct is not correct, he may issue orders, but they will not be followed.'
CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'The governments of Lu and Wei are brothers.'
CHAP. VIII. The Master said of Ching, a scion of the ducal family of Wei, that he knew the economy of a family well. When he began to have means, he said, 'Ha! here is a collection!' When they were a little increased, he said, 'Ha! this is complete!' When he had become rich, he said, 'Ha! this is admirable!'
CHAP. IX. 1. When the Master went to Wei, Zan Yu acted as driver of his carriage.
CHAP. X. The Master said, 'If there were (any of the princes) who would employ me, in the course of twelve months, I should have done something considerable. In three years, the government would be perfected.'
CHAP. XI. The Master said, '"If good men were to govern a country in succession for a hundred years, they would be able to transform the violently bad, and dispense with capital punishments." True indeed is this saying!'
CHAP. XII. The Master said, 'If a truly royal ruler were to arise, it would still require a generation, and then virtue would prevail.'
CHAP. XIII. The Master said, 'If a minister make his own conduct correct, what difficulty will he have in assisting in government? If he cannot rectify himself, what has he to do with rectifying others?'
CHAP. XIV. The disciple Zan returning from the court, the Master said to him, 'How are you so late?' He replied, 'We had government business.' The Master said, 'It must have been family affairs. If there had been government business, though I am not now in office, I should have been consulted about it.'
CHAP. XV. 1. The Duke Ting asked whether there was a single sentence which could make a country prosperous. Confucius replied, 'Such an effect cannot be expected from one sentence.
CHAP. XVI. 1. The Duke of Sheh asked about government.
CHAP. XVII. Tsze-hsia, being governor of Chu-fu, asked about government. The Master said, 'Do not be desirous to have things done quickly; do not look at small advantages. Desire to have things done quickly prevents their being done thoroughly. Looking at small advantages prevents great affairs from being accomplished.'
CHAP. XVIII. 1. The Duke of Sheh informed Confucius, saying, 'Among us here there are those who may be styled upright in their conduct. If their father have stolen a sheep, they will bear witness to the fact.'
CHAP. XIX. Fan Ch'ih asked about perfect virtue. The Master said, 'It is, in retirement, to be sedately grave; in the management of business, to be reverently attentive; in intercourse with others, to be strictly sincere. Though a man go among rude, uncultivated tribes, these qualities may not be neglected.'
CHAP. XX. 1. Tsze-kung asked, saying, 'What qualities must a man possess to entitle him to be called an officer? The Master said, 'He who in his conduct of himself maintains a sense of shame, and when sent to any quarter will not disgrace his prince's commission, deserves to be called an officer.'
CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'Since I cannot get men pursuing the due medium, to whom I might communicate my instructions, I must find the ardent and the cautiously-decided. The ardent will advance and lay hold of truth; the cautiously-decided will keep themselves from what is wrong.'
CHAP. XXII. 1. The Master said, 'The people of the south have a saying-- "A man without constancy cannot be either a wizard or a doctor." Good!
CHAP. XXIII. The Master said, 'The superior man is affable, but not adulatory; the mean man is adulatory, but not affable.'
CHAP. XXIV. Tsze-kung asked, saying, 'What do you say of a man who is loved by all the people of his neighborhood?' The Master replied, 'We may not for that accord our approval of him.' 'And what do you say of him who is hated by all the people of his neighborhood?' The Master said, 'We may not for that conclude that he is bad. It is better than either of these cases that the good in the neighborhood love him, and the bad hate him.'
CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'The superior man is easy to serve and difficult to please. If you try to please him in any way which is not accordant with right, he will not be pleased. But in his employment of men, he uses them according to their capacity. The mean man is difficult to serve, and easy to please. If you try to please him, though it be in a way which is not accordant with right, he may be pleased. But in his employment of men, he wishes them to be equal to everything.'
CHAP. XXVI. The Master said, 'The superior man has a dignified ease without pride. The mean man has pride without a dignified ease.'
CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'The firm, the enduring, the simple, and the modest are near to virtue.'
CHAP. XXVIII. Tsze-lu asked, saying, 'What qualities must a man possess to entitle him to be called a scholar?' The Master said, 'He must be thus,-- earnest, urgent, and bland:-- among his friends, earnest and urgent; among his brethren, bland.'
CHAP. XXIX. The Master said, 'Let a good man teach the people seven years, and they may then likewise be employed in war.'
CHAP. XXX. The Master said, 'To lead an uninstructed people to war, is to throw them away.'
See also: Rectum Official Guidelines (for now, contains colorectal guidelines)
T4b - directly invades or is adherent to other organs or structures
Layers: are the epithelium, basement membrane (defines intraepithelial), lamina propria (defines intramucosal) - contains capillaries and lymphatics (but little chance for mets), muscularis mucosae, submucosa (loose connective tissue), muscularis propria (circular and longitudinal layers), subserosa (single layer of cells).
Difference between rectum and colon is that most of the rectum lacks serosa. Thus for the rectum, a T3 is invasion into perirectal fat; for colon, T3 is invasion of subserosa. Also for the rectum, T4 is only invasion of other organs, whereas for the colon T4 can also be perforation through serosa.
N1c - tumor deposits in the subserosa, mesentery, or nonperitonealized pericolic or perirectal tissues without regional nodal metastasis
M1b - metastasis in more than one organ/site or the peritoneum
Stage III: T4bN1 was reclassified from IIIB to IIIC; T1N2a reclassified from IIIC to IIIA; T1N2b, T2N2, and T3N2a reclassified from IIIC to IIIB.
M1 subdivided into M1a/b. Stage IV subdivided into IVA and IVB.
No PMID - "The classification of cancer of the rectum." Dukes CE. J Pathol Bacteriol. 1932;35:323.
No PMID - "Lymphatic spread in cancer of the rectum." Gabriel WB, Dukes C, et al. Br J Surg. 1935;23:395.
T3 - invades into subserosa or into non-peritonealized pericoloic or perirectal tissues
T4 - invades other organs or structures or perforates visceral peritoneum
6th ed: divided into IIA and IIB and into IIIA, B, C
5% due to mutations in mismatch repair genes; 1% due to FAP gene.
Patients with familial risk (two or more first or second degree relatives) make up about 20% of patients; those with autosomal dominant mutations make up 5-10%.
Increased risk with moderate/heavy alcohol use, animal fat, and red meat.
Folate intake associated with a decreased risk.
Treatment is surgical. >12 lymph nodes required for adequate surgical staging.
RTOG 94-15 / INT 0146 / NCCTG 93-46-53 (closed 2001) - Laparoscopic colectomy vs open colectomy.
Retrospective. 77 patients with obstruction and 34 with perforation; compared with control 400 patients. Minimum F/U 5 years
5-year OS: obstruction/perforation 31% vs. 59%; DFS 44% vs. 75%
Obstruction: 42% local failure (28% local only, 72% local and distant)
Retrospective. 533 patients.
LR: overall 19%, 30% local only / 70% concurrent local and distant failure
By stage: B3/C2-C3 LR >30%, A/B1-B2/C1 <4%
Retrospective. 285 patients.
Recurrence by location: overall 27%; right 24%, transverse 10%, left 11%, sigmoid/rectum 35%
Recurrence by stage: A 13%, B1 11%, C1 32%, B2-3 37%, C2-3 56%
187 pts. Randomized Phase III. Resected pts with: 1) T4 (any site), or 2) T3N+ (of ascending or descending colon only). Trial closed due to poor accrual (goal of 700 pts).
Comments: Lots of issues - End point survival without looking at local control, RT fields included para-aortic LNs, not sufficient power (accrued 25% patients), high number of ineligible patients (15%), broad eligibility criteria (including low risk T3N1), chemotherapy now outdated, inability in many patients to determine tumor location (no preop imaging, no surgical clips), radial margins often not examined on pathology
T4N1: 10-year LC 88%, DFS 58%; if more than 1 LN worse outcome
Conclusion: compared to historical controls, RT should be considered for 1) invasion of adjoining structures, 2) associated perforation or fistula, or 3) residual disease
Retrospective. 203 post-op RT +/- 5-FU after resection of B2-3 or C2-3 colon. 15% residual disease. Compared to 395 historical control undergoing surgery only
Improvement after RT in: 1) B3 and C3, 2) associated abscess or fistula, 3) residual local disease after subtotal resection
Retrospective. 103 patients with locally advanced colon CA, 40 R0, 18 R1, 35 R2. Median F/U 5.8 years
EBRT given 1-4 after resection to tumor bed + LNs 16-60 Gy; IORT to 11 patients. Chemo 77 patients
Conclusion: In locally advanced colon, high probability of local control with EBRT +/- 5-FU. IORT improves control with residual disease
Retrospective. 78 patients with complete resection of B2-C colon CA. 28 patients RT <=45 Gy, 50 patients RT 50-55 Gy. 27 patients 5-FU. Minimum F/U 3 years
Retrospective. 61 patients treated with surgery, IORT 10-20 Gy, usually with EBRT 45-55 Gy +/- 5-FU. Residual disease at IORT unresected 1, gross 16, microscopic/negative 39
Randomized. 300 patients. Curative resection of transmural or N+ colon cancer, treated with 1) observation or 2) 5-FU + 21Gy to liver
(Note: This section is intended to highlight some of the common chemotherapy regimens used today, but an in-depth discussion of chemotherapy should be reserved for a Medical Oncology textbook)
Chemotherapy is recommended for all Stage III (i.e. node-positive) patients. Some stage II (T3-4 N0) patients may also benefit, but the treatment is made on a case-by-case basis.
Oxaliplatin, 85 mg/m2 IV day 1. LV, 200 mg/m2/day IV days 1-2. 5-FU, 400 mg/m2/day IV days 1-2. 5-FU, 600 mg/m2/day CI over 22 h, days 1-2. Repeat q14d x 12 cycles.
IFL (bolus 5-FU/LV/Irinotecan) - not used, excess mortality from increased toxicity
Randomized. 1264 patients with completely resected Stage III colon CA. Treated with weekly bolus 5-FU/Leukovorin +/- irinotecan
1166 pts. Dukes B and C. Randomized after curative resection to 1) chemotherapy with 5-FU, semustine, and vincristine, 2) BCG, or 3) no further treatment.
Showed increase in DFS and survival for chemotherapy. Increased survival but not DFS for BCG (due to decrease in non-cancer related deaths)
No difference in DFS or survival for chemotherapy group. Decrease in non-cancer related deaths for BCG.
Conclusion: DFS benefit for chemotherapy disappears by 10 years.
Retrospective. 51 patients. Salvage surgery + IORT after prior EBRT. IORT 20 Gy (10-30) + in 37 patients EBRT median 25 Gy + 20 patients 5-FU
Side effects: peripheral neuropathy related to IORT (32% patients); ureteral narrowing/obstruction
Conclusion: local control can be obtained, but survival poor due to distant mets
Prospective. 43 patients with locally advanced pelvic recurrence of CRC. Treated with RT 45 Gy + C.I. 5-FU and/or cisplatin, followed by surgery + IORT 10-20 Gy or BT. Median F/U 26 months
40 patients underwent surgery, 77% with curative intent. 88% SM-, 48% sphincter-preserving
Conclusion: Preop CRT can increase resectability and enable sphincter preservation
Randomized. 430 patients. Arm 1) FOLFIRI (infusional 5-FU, leucovorin, irinotecan) vs. Arm 2) mIFL (bolus 5-FU, leucovorin, irinotecan) vs. Arm 3) CapeIRI (capecitabine, irinotecan). Concurrently +/- celecoxib. After amendment, dropped Arm 3. Then additional 117 patients radnomized to bevacizumab: FOLFIRI-Bev or mILF-Bev. Primary endpoint PFS
Outcome: PFS FOLFIRI 7.6 month vs. mIFL 5.9 months (SS) vs. CapeIRI (SS).
Randomized. 348 patients. Arm 1) XELOX (oral capecitabine 1,000 mg/m2 bid for 14 days plus oxaliplatin 130 mg/m2 on day 1 every 3 weeks) vs. Arm 2) FUOX (continuous-infusion FU 2,250 mg/m2 during 48 hours on days 1, 8, 15, 22, 29, and 36 plus oxaliplatin 85 mg/m2 on days 1, 15, and 29 every 6 weeks)
Randomized. 474 patients, first line therapy. Arm 1) CAPOX (capecitabine 1,000 mg/m2 bid, days 1 to 14 plus oxaliplatin 70 mg/m2 days 1 and 8, repeated every 22 days) vs. Arm 2) FUFOX (oxaliplatin 50 mg/m2 followed by leucovorin 500 mg/m2 plus FU 2,000 mg/m2 as a 22-hour infusion days 1, 8, 15, and 22, repeated every 36 days). Primary end point: PFS
Randomized. 244 patients, unresectable metastatic CRC, no prior chemo for advanced disease. Treated with 1) FOLFOXIRI (irinotecan 165 mg/m2 day 1, oxaliplatin 85 mg/m2 day 1, leucovorin 200 mg/m2 day 1, fluorouracil 3,200 mg/m2 48-hour continuous infusion starting on day 1, every 2 weeks) vs. FOLFIRI (infusional fluorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan). Primary end-point response rate (RR)
Toxicity: Grade 2-3 neurotoxicity 19% vs. 0% (SS), Grade 3-4 neutropenia (50% vs. 28%, SS)
Response rate: 66% vs. 41% (SS); better R0 secondary resection rate of mets
Conclusion: FOLFOXIRI improves RR, PFS, and OS with manageable toxicity
100% progress to carcinoma, most by age 30, often in teens. 100s-1000s of polyps. Other malignancies: thyroid, GB, adrenal. image
Autosomal dominant with facial tricholemmomas, acral keratoses, oral mucosal papillomas, colorectal polyps. Patients have increased risk of malignancy (breast and thyroid cancer), but not in polyps.
Colonic adenomatous polyps plus multiple osteomas (skull, mandible, long bones), epidermal cysts, fibromatosis (usually intraabdominal after surgery), fibromas, lipomas, impacted and supernumerary teeth, dental cysts, lymphoid polyps in small intestine and fundic gland polyps in stomach. 100% develop colon cancer. Other malignancies: periampullary, thyroid, adrenal.
Mutation in APC gene but has variable penetrance so not all extracolonic features are present.
Most common hereditary colon syndrome (but less than 5% of carcinomas). Dominant. Type 1 - 50% risk of colon ca in relatives. Type 2 - also with endometrial ca, cholangiocarcinoma. Favorable clinical course (increased survival, respond better to chemo).
Criteria: 3 colon cancers in which 2 people are first-degree relatives of the third. Cancer in 2 generations. One diagnosis before age 50. No evidence of FAP.
Screening: full colonoscopy q3y beginning age 20-25; annual endometrial screening age 25-35;
Conductors & Insulators - Electronic Circuits - AND & OR Gates - Circuit/Systems Diagram - Hydraulics - Hydraulics & Pneumatics - Technological Products - Preservation-1 - Identifying Materials - Properties of Materials - Preservation-2 - Electroplating - Conditioning-Strengthening/Waterproofing-1 - Conditioning-Strengthening\Waterproofing-2 - Shaping - Forming - Forces - Types of Structures - Mechanisms Worksheet
When a material bends the two forces we talked about above can be seen in the material
Use an eraser (or similar object) and draw evenly spaced lines on the side. Bend, by applying upward pressure with the thumbs at arrow A and downward pressure at arrows B.
Refer to Fig: 1 and answer these questions.
..............................................................................................................................................
Use your knowledge of forces and indicate on the drawing, where the metal has experienced the
..............................................................................................................................................
Designing a VISSIM network in accordance to the background map involves adding links and connectors to build the roadway. The network will also identify the routing options for vehicles.
Click on the Links toolbar under “Network Objects” (see Figure below).
A “Link Data” window will appear where you can define:
Click and Drag either end point to your desired final location
TIP: You can access/change the “Link Data” by Double Clicking on any link. Pay close attention to the direction of the arrows located at the edges of each link. The arrows indicate the direction of traffic flow. It is highly recommended you create all basic links first, with their approximate start and end locations. Adding lanes, reversing the direction or generating adjacent lanes in the opposite direction can be done by Right Clicking the link and selecting your desired option (see Figure below).
You can change the alignment/curvature of links so they can align with the geometry on the aerial photograph (see Figure below).
TIP: You can roughly outline a Highway segments with 3 or more points, then use the “Generate Spline” function to add more points (see Figure below). This will automatically smooth out the curve. You can continuously add intermediate points or replace all existing points by Unchecking “Keep current intermediate points”.
WARNING: DO NOT add too many points to a curved highway segment or to your entire network. It will slow down the application and make it difficult to make future alignment adjustments.
Connector guide the path of each vehicle. Links must be connected to other links for continuous travel. A connector is the tool to connect two links. For computational reasons, it is best to design connectors not too long and not too short.
On the upstream link and precise lane, Hold CTRL+ Right Click
Release the right mouse button, after which a “Connector” dialog box will appear (see Figure below)
Note: lanes are numbered with 1 being the right-most lane of travel (slow lane). To make the connector work, you need to indicate how the vehicles from the ramp enter/exit into the downstream link
TIP: If a two lane highway segment merges into one lane, first draw a two lane link next to the one lane link. Then connect the links with two short connectors.
Repeat the above process to create the entire network. After the network is complete it might be easier to hide the image background/map for editing purposes. You can toggle the map or background off/on to view only the network (see Figure below).
To hide the background map, Click on the “Globe” in the Network Editor
Toggle off/on the “wireframe” to clearly view the map or background (Shortcut: CTRL+A)
TIP: Name every link and connector with a unique and descriptive abbreviation. This will help to easily identify the link. For example:
The 60 Eastbound Mainline link will can be named (60EB ML)
The Northbound Fullerton On-Ramp can be named (NB Fullerton ONR)
You can also number (1,2,3…) multiple links with the same name (60EB ML1, 60EB ML2, 60EB ML3...)
The content above is also available as a video. Click the following YouTube link: VISSIM v7 Tutorial Part 3: Geometric Network Design
"Most assuredly, I say to you, he who hears My word and believes on Him that sent Me has everlasting life, and shall not come into judgement, but is passed from death to life." John 5:24
"You are all sons of God through faith in Yeshua the Messiah" Galatians 3:26
There is a tendency to try and be worthy of so great a salvation that has been poured out upon us.
This brings us into performing "good works" through our own human efforts to change, or to please God.
This amounts to trying to come up to God's standard - His law, by our own effort.
"Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law but by faith in Yeshua Messiah, even we have believed in Messiah Yeshua, that we might be justified by faith in Messiah and not by the works of the law, for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified." Galatians 3:16
"Having begun in the Spirit, are you now being made perfect by the flesh?" Galatians 3: 3
The apostle Paul is addressing a problem in the assembly at Galatia, where they were being wrongly taught that they needed to obey the law of God to be justified with Him.
No one has ever been saved from their fallen state by trying to keep God's laws. To begin with, it is impossible for man from the time of Adam, to keep Yahweh God's laws as he is in a fallen state, and in that state, he does not have the ability to walk in God's righteousness.
Yahweh God imparted His own divine life and His own divine nature into Adam whereby he could walk in His righteousness and keep his divine laws. And, He instructed him that he needed to walk in obedience, in order to maintain the divine life which had been given to him. However, Adam chose to deliberately disobey.
As a result he lost the divine nature of God through which he was able to walk according to God's laws.
Now that the divine life is imparted to those who put their faith in Yeshua as their Redeemer, it is once again possible to keep Yahweh God's laws, but it is harder, as we now have a fallen human nature to contend with which will rise up and take over if we are not careful and will cause us to disobey. However, knowing the frailty of the human nature by His own experiences in the flesh, Yeshua made provision for that in His sacrifice on the torture stake for us. When we confess our sins, we are restored to relationship with Him.
This is the same provision that He made for Adam after he fell, providing a lamb for a sacrifice whereby he was able to come back into relationship with Him. By faith in the revelation of the Messiah who was to come, Adam was restored to relationship with Yahweh God by another impartation of the divine nature.
After that, he was once again able to walk in God's laws, but with the hindrance of the fallen nature.
When Yahweh God took the descendants of Abraham out of the world and redeemed them unto Himself in the Passover to make them into a nation (Exodus 12:31-51), He only started giving them His laws and precepts when they were completely out of Egypt, baptised in water and in the Spirit (1 Corinthians 10:1-4)
His laws were given to them after they were a redeemed people and after they had received an impartation of His Spirit, not before (Exodus 20:17). Yahweh God had not placed upon them an expectation to keep His precepts and His holy laws until they had received this impartation from Himself to enable them.
The principle remains the same for us, we can only walk in His holy laws after an impartation of His life into our beings in a relationship that is based on a living faith and reliance upon Him. As we remain in relationship with Him, which is maintained by trusting and relying upon the life which He has given to us, we will naturally, without effort, be enabled to walk in His ways.
The believers in Galatia were wrongly being taught that there were "works of the law" which they needed to do to be right with God. These "works of the law" were interpretations from the law of God of regulations and observances which they needed to keep in order to be accepted with God.
Instead, they had already been made right with God by faith, now they just needed to go on and live out of that faith-based relationship with Yahweh God, obeying Him as He revealed His Word to them.
The "just" are those who have been justified by faith, and, "the just shall live by faith" Galatians 3:11b
Those who have been justified by their initial act of placing their faith and trust in Yeshua as their Messiah/Deliverer/Redeemer are to continue on walking in the same way as they began, in faith.
They are to live in this faith-relationship in every area of their lives, not by a set of man-made rules and interpretations of how to keep the law, but by the leading of the Spirit of God.
We are told, "But if you are led of the Spirit, you are not under the law." Galatians 5:18
"I say then: Walk in the Spirit, and you will not fulfill the lusts of the flesh." Galatians 5:16
Then the apostle Paul goes on to outline what the evidence in our lives of the divine nature is when we are living out of relationship with Yahweh God, and also, how to recognise the "works of the flesh" - those things which originate out of the fallen human nature when we allow it to control us.
"Now the works of the flesh are evident which are adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lewdness, idolatry, sorcery, hatred, contentions, jealousies, outbursts of wrath, selfish ambition, dissentions, heresies (wrong teachings), envy, murders, drunkenness, revelries and the like; of which I tell you beforehand, just as I also told you in times past, that those who practice such things will not inherit the kingdom of God." Galat. 5:19-22
"But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, self-control. Against such there is no law" Galatians 5:22-23
This is not to say that Yahweh God's law has been done away with or put aside, for as the apostle Paul elsewhere says, "I would not have known sin except through the law. For I would not have known covetousness except the law had said, "You shall not covet"" Romans 7: 7 (See 1 Timothy 1: 8)
"Therefore the law is holy, and the commandment holy and just and good." Romans 7:12
The law is a written expression of the holy nature of God, but in itself, it lacks the power to impart into us the principles of God which it outlines. That is why Yeshua, the Son of God, came in the flesh and manifested the divine nature to us in human form. He was the living Word, the written Word etched into a human life.
As Yeshua said when Phillip asked Him to reveal the Father to them, "He who has seen Me has seen the Father" (John 14: 9). Yeshua displayed the divine nature in His life in everything He said and did.
He always spoke to them from the Spirit what the Father gave Him to say and to do (John 14:10).
As a result of walking in this way, He kept all the divinely appointed Feasts and Sabbaths, as well as all the statutes and principles of His Father in His daily life which had been given to Israel through Moses.
It was by fulfilling all the commandments, statutes and ordinances of the Father that Yeshua became a perfect sacrifice to substitute for mankind's failure to do those things.
Because He lived a life completely in accordance with all of His Father's principles and laws for Adam's race and made a complete atonement for all of our sins and our iniquities, He became a new type of man, virtually a "second man". He was the originator of a new order in the Adamic race (1 Corinthians 15:45-49).
As a result we have a better covenant with better promises than that which Yahweh God was able to give to Israel at Sinai, in that we have imparted to us the Spirit of Yeshua Himself, a perfected man, whereas theirs was an only an impartation of the Spirit upon them which did not have the power to change their hearts.
It is from this deposit of the perfected human life of the Son of God which has been imparted to us, that we are to live. But there is a learning process involved to grow into the fullness of this divine nature.
Looking back on industrial history, many of the great technologies have been known to change in levels of deployment, use, or presence. Often, technologies follow similar paths over time. In informal terms, technologies are slow to catch on, but when they do, they become popular fast, are universal, then peak, and their use is high, but no longer seems to be rising. This familiar story follows a graphical representation of an S-curve. The presence of a technology over often can be seen to go through three “life cycles”: birth, growth, and maturity.
The life cycles of technologies vary. Some are rapid—like the microwave—taking off shortly after they are released to the market. Others are much more gradual, taking many decades to become popular.
This report examines the life cycle of a technology that has become popular in the last half century. Light rail may owe its beginnings to streetcar, but since the early 1980s when the first “second-generation” light rail system went on line in San Diego, it has become a technology that caters to the fast-paced urban lifestyle. Now light rail transit (LRT) systems are popping up all over America. Although it is tough to say where in its life cycle this technology finds itself, this report takes an empirical approach to estimating the future of light rail transit.
Before presenting the statistical findings of the life cycle of light rail, some historical context must be presented to better understand how light rail became a popular mode in American cities, as well as the future of the technology.
The American Public Transportation Association (APTA) defines light rail transit (LRT) as:
a mode of transit service (also called streetcar, tramway, or trolley) operating passenger rail cars singly (or in short, usually two-car or three-car, trains) on fixed rails in right-of-way that is often separated from other traffic for part or much of the way. Light rail vehicles are typically driven electrically with power being drawn from an overhead electric line via a trolley or a pantograph; driven by an operator on board the vehicle; and may have either high platform loading or low level boarding using steps. [1].
Whereas APTA equates streetcar and light rail, many transportation researchers see these two modes as distinct. Public transit commentator Jarrett Walker discusses the distinction between the two forms in his blog Human Transit:
Light rail and streetcar technologies are, as a whole, more similar than different, but the terms as I hear them used belong to different categories of usefulness to the customer. I use the term light rail to describe something that's at least attempting to be rapid transit, by which I mean covering long distances fast by serving fairly widely-spaced stations rather than closely-spaced local stops. The term "light rail" was invented specifically for the contrast with "heavy rail," which is a competing alternative for the same relatively long corridors. Light rail often makes closely-spaced stops right in downtown, and may thus serve a "streetcar" function there, but it does this mainly for the purpose of providing good access to people who want to use its higher-speed segments. I refer to streetcars/trams only when I mean local-stop services, designed to do pretty much what local buses do. (Human Transit, 2012)
It appears as though the definition of, and the distinction between streetcar and LRT is different based on who is asked. Streetcars and LRT can serve a similar function in some cities or different functions within the same city. The major differences between the two modes appear to come from the distance of the entire line, the frequency at which the vehicle makes stops, the capacity of the train consist, and the travel lane.
It appears as though more and more metropolitan areas are pursuing LRT as a viable option for urban transit. According to The Transport Politic, at least sixty LRT systems are being planned around the United States (Transport Politic, 2013). Of course, not all of these systems will receive the funding or political support they need to be deployed, but the numbers are informative. Light rail provides transit agencies the ability to connect major destination centers by providing a fixed and reliable to its customers. Light rail is often politically popular because of the jobs the construction of the system creates, as well as the economic development that these systems often spark along the corridor.
Not all markets are appropriate for light rail, however. The investment is large. In the Twin Cities, the new Green Line LRT was set to open in mid-2014 and connect the two downtowns of Saint Paul and Minneapolis. The Metropolitan Council (the local Metropolitan Planning Organization) has said the 11-mile project has a budget of up to $957 million. Estimates for another Twin Cities LRT project, the 12-mile Southwest LRT (or Green Line Extension), has received price tags of up to $1.25 billion. Metropolitan areas must determine if the investment will produce the ridership and economic development to justify the cost. All transit requires a certain amount of residential density to support the system. Without zoning and land use to support this density, no one will ride the light rail. Some systems perform better than others. The extensive Boston light rail network had an average of 227,000 average weekday riders in the second quarter of 2013, while the Sprinter light rail in San Diego only saw 4,300 weekday riders during that same time. Boston has a robust light rail system that offers any connections to a densely populated metropolitan area, whereas the single line existing in San Diego operates between two cities whose populations do not exceed 200,000.
In many areas around the United States, buses dominated, and still dominate urban public transit. Buses have a high capacity, are relatively inexpensive to buy and maintain, and run on the same infrastructure as cars—no capital upgrades must be made for buses. Many cities have created a large network of bus service, and continue to operate on the same platform on which they began.
It is curious however, that buses replaced a system very similar to light rail. Between the late 1800s and the mid 1900s, streetcars dominated urban public transit. However, with the advent and affordability of the modern automobile in the early twentieth century, people no longer required streetcar service, and track was ripped up across the country. Eventually, buses, many of which followed the same routes, replaced the service of streetcars. In the beginning of the second half of the twentieth century, it seemed as though American public transit was doomed.
Indeed, the term “light rail transit” did not appear in North America until 1972, and the National Conference on Light Rail was held in Philadelphia in June of 1975 (Thompson, 2003). Taking cues from Europe and Edmonton, Canada, in 1981 San Diego was the first American city to adopt the second generation streetcar, or what is now called by it’s current name, light rail. This system is not the same as the SPRINTER system mentioned above currently serving Oceanside and Escondido, but instead was a 15.9 mile route that rain south out of downtown San Diego to the U.S.-Mexican border. The current San Diego Trolley still runs that same path as the South Line.
With suburban populations and automobile traffic congestion growing throughout the second half of the twentieth century, local governments began looking at options besides bus to help alleviate some of the issues related to the private automobile. In addition, transit agencies thought the clean and sleek light rail would be seen as a more attractive option for customers. Not only could the average bus rider take the light rail, but also the businessman, the politician and the doctor. By investing in corridors that connected major job centers, transit agencies aimed to capture riders who not only relied and required public transit, but also those who would willingly take light rail instead of driving their car to work.
Just as spatial distributions of populations changed after World War II that made streetcars no longer feasible, populations are returning from the suburbs and are now interested in living in the city, in denser settings. These demographic changes are making fixed guideway systems like LRT more possible. If more people live within the catchment area of a light rail station, the ridership is forecasted higher, and the investment no longer seems unviable. Since 1981 when the first American light rail system began operation in San Diego, light rail has grown in popularity, and will be discussed further in later sections.
Light rail transit technology did not begin with a new invention, but rather the evolution and adoption of an existing technology. As mentioned, even today, many in the public transit field believe there is little difference between the technologies of streetcar and light rail, but rather in the implementation of the two. The vehicles of current streetcar systems and light rail systems are not terribly different. Both have low floors, both are powered by overhead electrical lines, and are operated by a single conductor. The San Diego Trolley began with German-built Siemens-Duewag U2 vehicles, but as the system has expanded and built an additional two lines, the system now utilizes updated Siemens Avanto S70 vehicles, which are used in both light rail and streetcar systems worldwide.
Light Rail was initially seen as a transit mode to reclaim the niche that was left vacant by the loss of streetcar. As trunk corridors were becoming overcrowded with automobile traffic congestion, LRT sought to connect major trip generators in trip times that buses alone could not accomplish. Currently, bus rapid transit (BRT) is also seen as a mode to fill this market niche, however, BRT vehicles are unlikely to be able to carry the same capacity as a LRT consist. In addition, BRT is not believed to have the same kind of economic development generating potential as LRT. Unlike an agency’s ability to “pick up and move” a BRT route, once LRT track is laid, the likelihood of the relocation of this line is slim. On the side of the spectrum, heavy rail has the capacity to more people than an LRT might, however, these heavy rail systems are more expensive and unlike an LRT, run usually on diesel locomotives, which carry with them environmental air pollution externalities (VTA, 2007).
It seems as thought LRT has found a transit market: one that can connect destinations of relatively long distances, can carry a large number of people separate from automobile traffic, may generate economic development in areas that may not be profitable, and is not cost (both financially and environmentally) prohibitive.
Now that elements and history of light rail transit have been touched on, this report will now discuss the findings of a statistical estimation of the lifecycle of light rail. This analysis attempts to estimate the future of light rail deployment by considering past and current trends in annual vehicle total miles traveled of all United States light rail systems. The analysis considers data between 1981 (the first “second generation” streetcar deployment in the United States) to 2011 (last reported data).
Presented in Figure 3 are the reported and predicted LRT miles from 1981 to 2011. As the reader can see, the model closely predicts the reported miles traveled. Also illustrating the accuracy in prediction is Figure 4, which graphically illustrates the reported and predicted annual miles traveled.
By projecting reported data into the future and determining which model was most accurate by examining the coefficient of determination (R2), an estimate can be made at which the miles traveled of all U.S. LRT will peak. Several estimates of peak mileage were made ranging from 95 million miles traveled to one billion miles traveled. After these estimates, the point of highest coefficient of determination yields the most accurate prediction of peak mileage. The highest coefficient of determination occurred at the estimate of 475 million miles. Before this point, LRT mileage traveled increased every year. After this point, mileage decreased every year. Figure 5 illustrates the projection of this model into the future. As illustrated, the model predicts increasing vehicle miles traveled, then a leveling off, and eventually reaching a maximum close to 475 million miles. This maximum of 475 million miles is never reached, but the model predicts a negligible gain (and statistical asymptote) in annual mileage traveled starting in the year 2095.
Finally, this analysis gave an inflection point, or where the vehicle miles traveled slowed in growth. In other words, this point shows does not show where LRT mileage is expected to stop increasing, but rather where the mileage ceases to increase at an increasing rate and begins to increase at a decreasing rate. This point was estimated to fall in the year 2029.
From Figure 5, it is possible to affix birth, growth and maturity stages in the life cycle of LRT. These dates are suggested by looking at both the graphical representation of the projection, as well as the reported vehicle miles traveled.
Birth: First Implementation → Rapid increase of deployment
Growth: Rapid Increase of deployment→ inflection point
Maturity: Inflection point → asymptote approach
With regards to the initial light rail transit system in the United States, the San Diego Trolley, federal legislation passed in the early 1970s to promote public transit through $12 billion was encouragement to San Diegan MPO (then called a Comprehensive Planning Organization—or CPO) to develop a mass transit plan. (Thompson, 2003) Furthermore, then California Senator James R. Mills was a large proponent of transit, and pushed for the deployment of what would become the nation’s first second generation light rail system.
It is possible that LRT remains in the birth phase, or likely in the early stages of the growth phase. There are current federal, state and local policies that encourage the deployment of rapid modes of transit (one of them being LRT). Examples of such policies at three governmental levels:
Federal: Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act (MAP-21) was a bill signed by President Obama that funds $105 billion of surface transportation programs in both 2013 and 2014.
Local: A dedicated 0.25% sales tax was established in 2008 with the formation of the Counties Transit Improvement Board
Light rail transit has roots in past streetcar systems that once dominated American transportation. For decades, streetcars shaped cities by changing development patterns, connecting neighborhoods, and leaving others in isolation. These routes were later taken over by buses, and only since 1981 have second generation light rail systems similar to those in current use been deployed. As this exercise in life cycle deployment analysis shows, at the rate American cities are investing in this transportation technology, it appears as though light rail transit will continue to expand.
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
Harry finds himself, with his possessions but no Muggle money, on a dark deserted street. Fearing Ministry officials are hunting him to expel him from the Wizarding community, Harry decides that using more magic could hardly worsen his situation. He intends to magically lighten his trunk, and, hidden under his Invisibility Cloak, fly to Diagon Alley in London on his broom to withdraw his inherited fortune from Gringotts Bank. While rummaging through his trunk, he has an uneasy feeling eyes are upon him. Flashing his wand-light at a dark corner, he sees a huge dog; recoiling, he trips over his trunk and falls into the street. A purple triple-decker bus suddenly appears from nowhere, nearly running over him.
A conductor in an equally purple outfit hops out and introduces himself as Stan Shunpike, conductor for the Knight Bus. Only after he partially gets through his spiel does Stan realize that the person who "flagged" the bus is lying on the ground. Helping him up, Stan asks Harry his name. Harry, afraid that he is already a wanted fugitive, identifies himself as his Hogwarts classmate, Neville Longbottom, and asks if the bus can take him to the Leaky Cauldron. Stan tells him the Knight Bus will take him to London for eleven sickles; for thirteen, he gets hot chocolate, and for fifteen, a hot water bottle and a toothbrush. Harry climbs on board, while Ernie, the driver, manhandles his trunk into the bus. Inside, the bus is furnished with four-poster beds rather than chairs.
The bumpy ride leaves Harry unable to sleep, while Stan reads The Daily Prophet. Sirius Black's photo is on the front page—the same fugitive Harry saw on Muggle TV. The story says Black killed thirteen people with a single curse, and he is believed to be a strong supporter of Voldemort.
When the Knight Bus arrives at The Leaky Cauldron the next morning, it is met by Minister of Magic Cornelius Fudge. Stan Shunpike, already awed by accounts of "The Boy Who Lived", is astounded when Fudge greets his passenger, addressing him as "Harry". Fudge escorts Harry to a private parlor in the Leaky Cauldron and informs him that his Aunt Marge has been punctured and her memory altered. Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia will take Harry back next summer if he stays at Hogwarts for Christmas and Easter. And, most puzzling, given what happened when Dobby the House-elf used magic at his home the previous year, Harry learns there will be no consequences for having performed under-age wizardry.
Harry will stay at the Leaky Cauldron until school starts, and Fudge requests that he confine his travels to within Diagon Alley, not venturing into Muggle London. Harry asks Fudge to sign his Hogsmeade permission slip, but Fudge, disconcerted, refuses. Harry finds Hedwig inside his room, where he promptly falls asleep.
Harry, thrown into a panic, is thinking and acting irrationally, and, in what becomes a somewhat typical behavioral pattern, takes his trunk and runs away, unable to endure his family's abuse any longer. Although Harry's reaction is childish, he knows from his own past experience the harsh penalty for using underage magic. He expects only the worst: expulsion from Hogwarts and having his wand snapped in two. His brief foray into the nighttime Muggle world is frightening, and however unhappy he was at the Dursleys, he was at least safe, and comforted by knowing he would always return to Hogwarts. Now everything he holds dear seems to have vanished, and Harry is too used to unfair treatment to expect the incident to be resolved favorably. He is unsure what to do next, but decides his only option is to become an outcast living clandestinely on the Wizarding world's fringe. Fortunately, his faulty plan is derailed by a scary large dog and the Knight Bus' timely arrival.
Harry experiences another way wizards coexist unnoticed with the Muggle world—the Knight Bus, a vehicle that seamlessly navigates through Muggle traffic undetected. Conductor Stan Shunpike, a rather comical and ineffectual character, represents Harry's lifeline back into the Wizarding realm. The return trip is bumpy, however, both literally and figuratively. Even aboard the Knight Bus, Harry is unable to escape his celebrity, overhearing Ernie and Stan Shunpike chatting about the famous Harry Potter, unaware he is their passenger. During the long ride, Harry learns about the escaped fugitive, Sirius Black, though he only briefly takes notice, instead preoccupied by his current unhappy situation. Harry's concern and reaction over the episode with Aunt Marge was unnecessary, however—Fudge, surprisingly, brushes off the entire incident and arranges for Harry to stay in Diagon Alley until school starts.
As a minor aside, there is a small numerical discrepancy here. Harry's birthday and Aunt Marge's arrival fall on the 31st of July; Aunt Marge's visit is only for one week, and Harry leaves on her last night there, which should be August 6. The next day, Fudge twice remarks that Harry will be staying in the Leaky Cauldron for the last fortnight (two weeks) of his vacation; but if school starts on 1 September, Harry's stay in the Leaky Cauldron should be closer to three and a half weeks than two. This discrepancy has been corrected in later editions, giving the length of Harry's stay in the Leaky Cauldron as three weeks.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
What does Harry see when he is on the dark street? Why is he so affected by it?
What is the Knight Bus and how did it know where to find Harry?
Why does Harry say his name is "Neville Longbottom" when he boards the Knight Bus?
Why does Fudge brush off the incident involving Aunt Marge?
Why would Fudge refuse to sign Harry's permission slip for Hogsmeade Village?
If Stan and Ernie did not recognize Harry, then how did Cornelius Fudge know he was traveling on the Knight Bus and headed to Diagon Alley?
Why don't Stan or Ernie recognize Harry?
Why is Harry allowed to stay in Diagon Alley by himself, rather than sending him to the Weasleys or another wizard family that would welcome and protect him?
Considering Sirius Black is reportedly one of Voldemort's followers, why does Harry pay so little attention to the Daily Prophet story about him?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Throughout the year, Harry repeatedly sees the same black dog that appeared moments before he accidentally hailed the Knight Bus. He initially believes it is the Grim, a spectral creature (having no physical reality) believed to be a death omen. The first few times Harry sees it, it appears that he may be in mortal danger. However, before a Quidditch match, he sees Crookshanks and the dog together, which reassures him that the canine must not be spectral. Ironically, though Harry initially considered it a death omen, the dog's first appearance actually aids Harry by causing him to stumble backwards and raise his wand arm, thus hailing the Knight Bus, the vehicle that carries him to safety. The dog is actually the fugitive wizard, Sirius Black, who is an Animagus (a wizard that can transform himself into an animal at will). They continually encounter each other because Black wants to see Harry, who is his godson, though Harry is still unaware he has a godfather. When he first finds out, it proves to be particularly distressing, believing Black betrayed his parents. It is only later that he learns the true circumstances leading to Black's arrest and imprisonment.
Although Harry appears to choose Neville's name randomly when introducing himself, this may be a hint at the connection between the two boys. We will discover in a later book that a prophecy foretold that either boy could have become Voldemort's target.
Harry is still considered a hero: "The Boy Who Lived," who is widely believed to have caused Voldemort's downfall some twelve years earlier. As such, Fudge's "pro-Harry" stance is hardly surprising. Add to that, the general Wizarding population's belief that Sirius Black is (or was) Voldemort's right-hand man who apparently wants to kill Harry, and we see that it would be political suicide for Fudge to allow himself to be identified as the government head that left Harry defenceless against Black. Mystifying as it may seem to Harry, dismissing his magical misbehaviour is the only course the politically-driven Fudge can possibly follow.
Neither can Fudge allow Harry to roam London proper or venture into Hogsmeade village where he would be relatively unprotected from Black. It is also a little surprising that Fudge waffles at signing Harry's permission form; he certainly has a legitimate excuse, that he is not Harry's legal guardian. As the form requires a legal guardian's signature, that would be a ready-made and valid reason; it is therefore surprising that Fudge never uses it.
Stan Shunpike reappears throughout the series, though he remains a minor character. While he occasionally engages in petty mischief, Shunpike represents how easily innocents can become hapless pawns and scapegoats of a corrupt or political institution.
The Knight Bus, that appears again in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, is part of the ever-elaborated Wizarding transportation infrastructure. We have already seen the Hogwarts Express and the use of brooms and the Floo network, and in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire we will find out about Portkeys and Apparition. It may be of interest to examine the multiple modes of transportation, to see how each one's failings are covered by another one's strengths.
Prosecutorial misconduct can come in various forms, but it most commonly arises in a few ways. First, a prosecutor's sidebar statements during trial can be prosecutorial misconduct. These may be comments about the defendant, his attorney, a witness, or the judge. These comments can result in a mistrial with Pre-Judice (barring reprosecution), assuming the trial court concludes that they were made for the purpose of inciting the motion for mistrial. Other times, they will just result in a mistrial without prejudice. Second, a prosecutor's failure to turn over material, exculpatory evidence to the defense, in dereliction of his duties under Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963). This is a type of prosecutorial misconduct which may be raised at virtually any time, even post-conviction, as it is a constitutional error of great magnitude. If the defendant can prove the prosecutor failed to turn over Brady material, he will typically receive a new trial. Third, a prosecutor's selective prosecution of a person or group of people may be misconduct. Also, if a prosecutor increases the punishment or charges based on the defendant's exercise of his rights (to jury trial, of appeal, etc.), this may (under certain circumstances) be misconduct.
To be completed.
If you look directly at the content of a computer's memory, you see only a lot of bytes. These are often shown as numbers but in fact they don't have a meaning on its own, not even the meaning of a number.
Types are used in computer languages like D to give one byte or a sequence of bytes a meaning. Types define if these bytes are a number, a text, a date or whatever.
Each type has a size in bits which defines how many different values(=states) it can hold.
An 8 bit type, for instance, can store 256 different states, while a 16 bit type can store 65536.
Each type exists as signed and unsigned variant. The unsigned ones have an "u" prefix (like uint, ubyte).
Unsigned means that the range of possible states is interpreted as nonnegative values starting at 0 and going up to the maximum number of possible states for this type minus 1 because the 0 is also a state which must be stored.
For the ubyte type (8 bit = 256 states) this means it can store values from 0 up to and including 255.
Signed types interpret one half of their states as positive, the other half as negative values, so the signed byte type has a range of values from -128 to +127.
A character is a unit of information that roughly corresponds to a grapheme-like unit, or symbol, such as in an alphabet in the written form of a natural language.
The concept also includes control characters, such as carriage return.
Characters are typically combined into strings.
D language allows to directly handle Unicode strings.
The following issue applies to motors sold with Opamma ignitions (pre-2012 engines), prior to the release of the Easy Start Ignition.
Undeniably the most widely experienced and well-known defect with the PRD Fireball engine was it's ignition/starter system's inability to reliably start the motor.
The problem boiled down to one simple fact: the Opamma ignition did not generate consistent spark at the RPM the starter would drive the motor.
There were a few "work-arounds" used by the community to achieve reliable starting:
Re-wire the starter for 9-volts.
Add an extra 6 volt battery to the 12 volt battery to create 18 volts across the starter.
This problem was so common that PRD finally released an updated ignition system in 2012 to solve this systemic issue: PRD Fireball Shop Manual/Easy Start Ignition.
(The first figures refer to the original pages of text, and second figures to the reference figures in text).
I don't care at all.
As of July 15, 2009 Wikibooks has moved to a dual-licensing system that supersedes the previous GFDL only licensing. In short, this means that text licensed under the GFDL only can no longer be imported to Wikibooks, retroactive to 1 November 2008. Additionally, Wikibooks text might or might not now be exportable under the GFDL depending on whether or not any content was added and not removed since July 15.
The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other functional and useful document "free" in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone the effective freedom to copy and redistribute it, with or without modifying it, either commercially or noncommercially. Secondarily, this License preserves for the author and publisher a way to get credit for their work, while not being considered responsible for modifications made by others.
This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means that derivative works of the document must themselves be free in the same sense. It complements the GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft license designed for free software.
We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free software, because free software needs free documentation: a free program should come with manuals providing the same freedoms that the software does. But this License is not limited to software manuals; it can be used for any textual work, regardless of subject matter or whether it is published as a printed book. We recommend this License principally for works whose purpose is instruction or reference.
This License applies to any manual or other work, in any medium, that contains a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it can be distributed under the terms of this License. Such a notice grants a world-wide, royalty-free license, unlimited in duration, to use that work under the conditions stated herein. The "Document", below, refers to any such manual or work. Any member of the public is a licensee, and is addressed as "you". You accept the license if you copy, modify or distribute the work in a way requiring permission under copyright law.
A "Modified Version" of the Document means any work containing the Document or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with modifications and/or translated into another language.
A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a front-matter section of the Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the publishers or authors of the Document to the Document's overall subject (or to related matters) and contains nothing that could fall directly within that overall subject. (Thus, if the Document is in part a textbook of mathematics, a Secondary Section may not explain any mathematics.) The relationship could be a matter of historical connection with the subject or with related matters, or of legal, commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position regarding them.
The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose titles are designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice that says that the Document is released under this License. If a section does not fit the above definition of Secondary then it is not allowed to be designated as Invariant. The Document may contain zero Invariant Sections. If the Document does not identify any Invariant Sections then there are none.
The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text that are listed, as Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that the Document is released under this License. A Front-Cover Text may be at most 5 words, and a Back-Cover Text may be at most 25 words.
A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy, represented in a format whose specification is available to the general public, that is suitable for revising the document straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images composed of pixels) generic paint programs or (for drawings) some widely available drawing editor, and that is suitable for input to text formatters or for automatic translation to a variety of formats suitable for input to text formatters. A copy made in an otherwise Transparent file format whose markup, or absence of markup, has been arranged to thwart or discourage subsequent modification by readers is not Transparent. An image format is not Transparent if used for any substantial amount of text. A copy that is not "Transparent" is called "Opaque".
Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain ASCII without markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format, SGML or XML using a publicly available DTD, and standard-conforming simple HTML, PostScript or PDF designed for human modification. Examples of transparent image formats include PNG, XCF and JPG. Opaque formats include proprietary formats that can be read and edited only by proprietary word processors, SGML or XML for which the DTD and/or processing tools are not generally available, and the machine-generated HTML, PostScript or PDF produced by some word processors for output purposes only.
The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the title page itself, plus such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material this License requires to appear in the title page. For works in formats which do not have any title page as such, "Title Page" means the text near the most prominent appearance of the work's title, preceding the beginning of the body of the text.
The "publisher" means any person or entity that distributes copies of the Document to the public.
A section "Entitled XYZ" means a named subunit of the Document whose title either is precisely XYZ or contains XYZ in parentheses following text that translates XYZ in another language. (Here XYZ stands for a specific section name mentioned below, such as "Acknowledgements", "Dedications", "Endorsements", or "History".) To "Preserve the Title" of such a section when you modify the Document means that it remains a section "Entitled XYZ" according to this definition.
The Document may include Warranty Disclaimers next to the notice which states that this License applies to the Document. These Warranty Disclaimers are considered to be included by reference in this License, but only as regards disclaiming warranties: any other implication that these Warranty Disclaimers may have is void and has no effect on the meaning of this License.
You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either commercially or noncommercially, provided that this License, the copyright notices, and the license notice saying this License applies to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that you add no other conditions whatsoever to those of this License. You may not use technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or further copying of the copies you make or distribute. However, you may accept compensation in exchange for copies. If you distribute a large enough number of copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.
You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and you may publicly display copies.
If you publish printed copies (or copies in media that commonly have printed covers) of the Document, numbering more than 100, and the Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you must enclose the copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all these Cover Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on the back cover. Both covers must also clearly and legibly identify you as the publisher of these copies. The front cover must present the full title with all words of the title equally prominent and visible. You may add other material on the covers in addition. Copying with changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve the title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated as verbatim copying in other respects.
If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit legibly, you should put the first ones listed (as many as fit reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent pages.
If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering more than 100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent copy along with each Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy a computer-network location from which the general network-using public has access to download using public-standard network protocols a complete Transparent copy of the Document, free of added material. If you use the latter option, you must take reasonably prudent steps, when you begin distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that this Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the stated location until at least one year after the last time you distribute an Opaque copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of that edition to the public.
It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the Document well before redistributing any large number of copies, to give them a chance to provide you with an updated version of the Document.
You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under the conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release the Modified Version under precisely this License, with the Modified Version filling the role of the Document, thus licensing distribution and modification of the Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy of it. In addition, you must do these things in the Modified Version:
Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct from that of the Document, and from those of previous versions (which should, if there were any, be listed in the History section of the Document). You may use the same title as a previous version if the original publisher of that version gives permission.
List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities responsible for authorship of the modifications in the Modified Version, together with at least five of the principal authors of the Document (all of its principal authors, if it has fewer than five), unless they release you from this requirement.
State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the Modified Version, as the publisher.
Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.
Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications adjacent to the other copyright notices.
Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice giving the public permission to use the Modified Version under the terms of this License, in the form shown in the Addendum below.
Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections and required Cover Texts given in the Document's license notice.
Include an unaltered copy of this License.
Preserve the section Entitled "History", Preserve its Title, and add to it an item stating at least the title, year, new authors, and publisher of the Modified Version as given on the Title Page. If there is no section Entitled "History" in the Document, create one stating the title, year, authors, and publisher of the Document as given on its Title Page, then add an item describing the Modified Version as stated in the previous sentence.
Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for public access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise the network locations given in the Document for previous versions it was based on. These may be placed in the "History" section. You may omit a network location for a work that was published at least four years before the Document itself, or if the original publisher of the version it refers to gives permission.
For any section Entitled "Acknowledgements" or "Dedications", Preserve the Title of the section, and preserve in the section all the substance and tone of each of the contributor acknowledgements and/or dedications given therein.
Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document, unaltered in their text and in their titles. Section numbers or the equivalent are not considered part of the section titles.
Do not retitle any existing section to be Entitled "Endorsements" or to conflict in title with any Invariant Section.
Preserve any Warranty Disclaimers.
If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or appendices that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no material copied from the Document, you may at your option designate some or all of these sections as invariant. To do this, add their titles to the list of Invariant Sections in the Modified Version's license notice. These titles must be distinct from any other section titles.
You may add a section Entitled "Endorsements", provided it contains nothing but endorsements of your Modified Version by various parties—for example, statements of peer review or that the text has been approved by an organization as the authoritative definition of a standard.
You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a passage of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list of Cover Texts in the Modified Version. Only one passage of Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be added by (or through arrangements made by) any one entity. If the Document already includes a cover text for the same cover, previously added by you or by arrangement made by the same entity you are acting on behalf of, you may not add another; but you may replace the old one, on explicit permission from the previous publisher that added the old one.
The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License give permission to use their names for publicity for or to assert or imply endorsement of any Modified Version.
You may combine the Document with other documents released under this License, under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified versions, provided that you include in the combination all of the Invariant Sections of all of the original documents, unmodified, and list them all as Invariant Sections of your combined work in its license notice, and that you preserve all their Warranty Disclaimers.
The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and multiple identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single copy. If there are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name but different contents, make the title of each such section unique by adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the original author or publisher of that section if known, or else a unique number. Make the same adjustment to the section titles in the list of Invariant Sections in the license notice of the combined work.
In the combination, you must combine any sections Entitled "History" in the various original documents, forming one section Entitled "History"; likewise combine any sections Entitled "Acknowledgements", and any sections Entitled "Dedications". You must delete all sections Entitled "Endorsements".
You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents released under this License, and replace the individual copies of this License in the various documents with a single copy that is included in the collection, provided that you follow the rules of this License for verbatim copying of each of the documents in all other respects.
You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute it individually under this License, provided you insert a copy of this License into the extracted document, and follow this License in all other respects regarding verbatim copying of that document.
A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate and independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or distribution medium, is called an "aggregate" if the copyright resulting from the compilation is not used to limit the legal rights of the compilation's users beyond what the individual works permit. When the Document is included in an aggregate, this License does not apply to the other works in the aggregate which are not themselves derivative works of the Document.
If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these copies of the Document, then if the Document is less than one half of the entire aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be placed on covers that bracket the Document within the aggregate, or the electronic equivalent of covers if the Document is in electronic form. Otherwise they must appear on printed covers that bracket the whole aggregate.
Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may distribute translations of the Document under the terms of section 4. Replacing Invariant Sections with translations requires special permission from their copyright holders, but you may include translations of some or all Invariant Sections in addition to the original versions of these Invariant Sections. You may include a translation of this License, and all the license notices in the Document, and any Warranty Disclaimers, provided that you also include the original English version of this License and the original versions of those notices and disclaimers. In case of a disagreement between the translation and the original version of this License or a notice or disclaimer, the original version will prevail.
If a section in the Document is Entitled "Acknowledgements", "Dedications", or "History", the requirement (section 4) to Preserve its Title (section 1) will typically require changing the actual title.
You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document except as expressly provided under this License. Any attempt otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute it is void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this License.
However, if you cease all violation of this License, then your license from a particular copyright holder is reinstated (a) provisionally, unless and until the copyright holder explicitly and finally terminates your license, and (b) permanently, if the copyright holder fails to notify you of the violation by some reasonable means prior to 60 days after the cessation.
Moreover, your license from a particular copyright holder is reinstated permanently if the copyright holder notifies you of the violation by some reasonable means, this is the first time you have received notice of violation of this License (for any work) from that copyright holder, and you cure the violation prior to 30 days after your receipt of the notice.
Termination of your rights under this section does not terminate the licenses of parties who have received copies or rights from you under this License. If your rights have been terminated and not permanently reinstated, receipt of a copy of some or all of the same material does not give you any rights to use it.
The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions of the GNU Free Documentation License from time to time. Such new versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to address new problems or concerns. See http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/.
Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number. If the Document specifies that a particular numbered version of this License "or any later version" applies to it, you have the option of following the terms and conditions either of that specified version or of any later version that has been published (not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation. If the Document does not specify a version number of this License, you may choose any version ever published (not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation. If the Document specifies that a proxy can decide which future versions of this License can be used, that proxy's public statement of acceptance of a version permanently authorizes you to choose that version for the Document.
"Massive Multiauthor Collaboration Site" (or "MMC Site") means any World Wide Web server that publishes copyrightable works and also provides prominent facilities for anybody to edit those works. A public wiki that anybody can edit is an example of such a server. A "Massive Multiauthor Collaboration" (or "MMC") contained in the site means any set of copyrightable works thus published on the MMC site.
"CC-BY-SA" means the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 license published by Creative Commons Corporation, a not-for-profit corporation with a principal place of business in San Francisco, California, as well as future copyleft versions of that license published by that same organization.
"Incorporate" means to publish or republish a Document, in whole or in part, as part of another Document.
An MMC is "eligible for relicensing" if it is licensed under this License, and if all works that were first published under this License somewhere other than this MMC, and subsequently incorporated in whole or in part into the MMC, (1) had no cover texts or invariant sections, and (2) were thus incorporated prior to November 1, 2008.
The operator of an MMC Site may republish an MMC contained in the site under CC-BY-SA on the same site at any time before August 1, 2009, provided the MMC is eligible for relicensing.
To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy of the License in the document and put the following copyright and license notices just after the title page:
Copyright (c) YEAR YOUR NAME.
Free Documentation License".
If you have Invariant Sections, Front-Cover Texts and Back-Cover Texts, replace the "with...Texts." line with this:
Front-Cover Texts being LIST, and with the Back-Cover Texts being LIST.
If you have Invariant Sections without Cover Texts, or some other combination of the three, merge those two alternatives to suit the situation.
If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we recommend releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of free software license, such as the GNU General Public License, to permit their use in free software.
Spacebar: Activate Switches, Open Doors etc...
Escape: View menu (this can be used anytime in the game, including at the title screen, and ending texture screen)
HOT POTATOES is a set of programs that allows the production of interactive web-based teaching exercises which can be delivered to any computer. The suite consists on six individual programs: JCloze, JQuiz, JCross, JMatch, JMix, and The Mashe.
A cloze test is a test in which words have been removed from a short piece of writing, and students have to write what they think are the correct words in the empty spaces; in JCLOZE students must do the same thing but the program provides clues, and encouragement
A crossword puzzle is a game in which you write the answers to questions in a pattern of numbered boxes. In JCROSS the learners write up the words, by answering written questions or by looking at pictures and guessing the correct word. If necessary they can ask for hints, in the form of free letters.
A mix is a combination of different items so that the result cannot be easily separated into its parts, and JMIX produces jumbled-sentences, where the student can choose among several answers. In this case the hint bottom provides whole words or even segments of the right sentence, if requested.
Two things match when they look the same because they are pairs, so in JMTCH there are two lists made up of words, or sentences, or pictures, which the student has to match. Also in this program scoring is available.
THE MASHER is a program that compiles batches of hot potatoes exercises into a whole unit, in a sequential order, with the same colour and appearance setting; it also helps to set certain convenient links using the navigation bottons to create an index file for the unit.
This is the tool that allows you to upload the files to hotpotatoes.net, in case of having an account, or if you have registered earlier.
At the Hot Potatoes home page, there is a free software available that has limited entries, still it gives a clear idea of the wide range of possibilities this tool has for ELT. The set with a wider range of entries is not freeware, but can be used without conditions by members of public or non-profit educational institutions. However, a registration is necessary. H.P. were created by the University of Victoria Humanities Computing and Media Centre (Canada). A commercial wing called Half Baked Potatoes provides the necessary funds.
The production can be uploaded into a web page which itself can be uploaded to hotpotatoes.net (handled by Half Baked Potatoes) from within the hot potatoes program. In this site there are plenty of examples. To enter this net, registration is obligatory.
Hot potatoes set constitutes a tool that allows teachers to create their own material for subject content instruction. The programs are also useful for tests. Teachers can develop interactive multiple choice and fill-in-the-gap exercises as well as crosswords, questions where short answers are required or where ordering and rearranging words is necessary to make up sentences.
Learners are allowed to work with the exercises on line, in groups or by themselves in such a way that they get engaged in a new, interesting and funny learning experience. H.P. programs have outstanding characteristics, namely they allow the up-loading of pictures, audio and video.
Students can practice listening and comprehension choosing the correct written form in multiple-choice options, sometimes they must appeal to their knowlegde dragging to find out the correct answer. Often they have to write up their own production that can be immediately checked for mistakes. The program has hints, scores, clues, icons and other ways to boost learner participation.
Resources for Students and Teachers of English as a Foreign Language
This is a French website to learn English online. It is a good example of H.P. because it features audio and video. The exercise challenges the learners to write up the proper time, after listening and watching the video where native speakers talk about what time it is.
We have chosen this example because simple vocabulary is used. The exercises requires to match sound (listening skills) with a vocabulary item (written skills). Here, meaning is also involved by linking with images. It is simple, useful, friendly, and as regards as the use of hotpotatoes as software, it includes three interesting features: image, audio, and dragging.
Also you may find exercises like mixed up sentences, that allows to drag the words into the correct order to make a grammatical sentence. Moreover, crosswords are also available.
An exercise to revise telling the time, for English speakers learning Spanish! Very interesting: there are several questions for learners to choose the correct answer.
Exercise: A bird can fly includes pictures and multiple choice exercises about animal's abilities. We have chosen it because it provides several correct options to score at the same time. It is Very interesting, appart from showing other amazing features of hot potatoes.
Swahili given names are used in Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda alike. The Luo and Kikuyu first names are also used in Kenya for their respective tribes.
Luo have three names: their first name, a personal surname, and their father’s personal surname. Many Luo surnames vary with gender (O- for males, A- for females). A man would be Otieno while a woman would be Atieno.
In the Kikuyu tribe, the firstborn daughter receives the name of her paternal grandmother, and the second daughter the name of her maternal grandmother. If the parents have any more girls, they will name said girls after paternal aunts, alternating with maternal aunts. If they run out of aunts, they will do research and find more relatives.
In the Kikuyu tribe, the firstborn son receives the name of his paternal grandfather, and the second son the name of his maternal grandfather.
A bridge is a structure that allows people or vehicles to cross an obstacle such as a river or canal or railway etc.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesCover | Introduction | Contributors | Contents | Appendices | Page Index | Index
I've put in so many enigmas and puzzles that it will keep the professors busy for centuries arguing over what I meant, and that's the only way of insuring one's immortality.
—Richard Ellmann, James Joyce, Oxford University Press, New York, Revised Edition (1982), p. 521.
James Joyce's novel Ulysses is one of the most allusive works of literature in the Western canon. Ever since its publication in 1922, its encyclopaedic nature and voluminous display of erudition have proved stumbling blocks for many readers. All too often the reader's initial enthusiasm for the book is whittled away at the expense of a growing sense of bewilderment, as a mass of unexplained references and quotations piles up. Bewilderment inevitably gives rise to frustration, and this frustration provides the reader with an excuse to give up.
This wikibook aims to provide the reader of Ulysses with a set of line-by-line annotations and authoritative references which explain Joyce's allusions and allow the reader to enjoy the book without being overwhelmed by a rising tide of incomprehensible minutiae. It is assumed that the reader has read Ulysses at least once before, though first-time readers should also find the annotations useful; but no spoiler alerts will be provided when references are made to other parts of the novel. It is recommended that the first-time reader make a genuine effort to read the work through from cover to cover before seeking assistance from annotations or critical appraisals.
The annotations are being compiled with reference to the original edition (editio princeps) of Ulysses, which was published in Paris on 2 February 1922 by Sylvia Beach's Shakespeare and Company. Subsequent editions of the novel have attempted to correct the many errata of the original, but the 1922 edition possesses a certain historical cachet that no subsequent edition can match. Cross-references are given in a five-digit format that cites the relevant page and line of the 1922 edition: 003.01 refers to the opening line of the novel and 732.22 to the closing line. In this wikibook each page of Ulysses will have its own dedicated page, which will contain both an accurate reproduction of the relevant page of Ulysses and, below it, a comprehensive list of annotations and errata.
This book is under development at Wikibooks, a site providing a collection of open-content textbooks. Anyone can edit this book, and all who are interested in contributing are encouraged to be bold and help to make this one of the most useful books on Ulysses available on the Internet. Please try to ensure that your contributions adhere to the style of existing annotations, and always include complete and authoritative references to support your annotations. Don't forget to add your name or username to the list of contributors.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Contents | Page Index | Next Page
The explicit keyword is used to avoid implicit type conversions.
Here's an example[1] class with a constructor that can be used for implicit conversions:
The argument is not a Foo object, but an int. However, there exists a constructor for Foo that takes an int so this constructor can be used to convert the parameter to the correct type.
The compiler is allowed to do this once for each parameter.
The Gold Coast Suns demonstrate their support with the community through an active partnership with the Gold Coast community fund. Together through innovative programs and activities, the players of the Gold Coast suns football club aim to deliver 5000 hours through over 1000 appearances within the gold coast community each year.
This chapter examines the social interface of medical therapies where disgust can undermine technical effectiveness.
Clostridium difficile (C. diff) is a pathogen best known to cause antibiotic-associated diarrhea by disruption of a patient’s colonic flora content after antibiotic use. The infection’s prevalence is high in hospitals, with an incidence range from 0.5 to 30 cases per 1000 discharges. The immediate area surrounding an affected patient becomes highly contaminated with C. diff spores, which may spread the infection.[1] In 2010, the incidence of C. diff was approximated at 500,000 cases per year with mortality rates as high as 20,000 cases per year in the United States.[2]
Symptoms of C. diff include mild diarrhea to live-threatening colitis. Its primary treatment method is with further antibiotic treatment, however the infection has been rising in incidence, gaining antibiotic resistance, and becoming increasingly difficult to treat.[3]
Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is a method of injecting a donor stool sample into a patient suffering from C. diff in order to replenish the patient’s flora content and eliminate the infection. There is not a clear methodology for FMT, but the general preparation is completed in the hospital. A donor stool sample is taken and combined with a fluid (e.g. water or saline solution) and then lightly blended to create a homogeneous fluid mixture. The amount of fluid combined and blending time are decided on a case to case basis determined by the consistency of the donor stool sample. The blending of stool often releases terrible fumes which add to the already "gross" nature of handling another person's stool. The mixture is then filtered and divided into appropriate volumes for delivery.[4] There is not a current consensus to the most appropriate form of FMT delivery, but current methods include: colonoscope insertion of FMT to the proximal colon, FMT delivery into the distal lower GI tract using a rectal enema, and FMT administration to the upper GI tract through the use of a nasogastric tube.[2]
Fecal microbiota transplants are a subset of a larger group of treatments classified as gut flora repopulation.[5] One of the first recorded instances of gut repopulation therapy in modern history is the discovery of Bacillus subtilis as a cure for dysentery.[6] During World War II, Nazi German forces that were engaged with British forces in Africa were experiencing high mortality rates from dysentery. The Germans knew the disease was caused by contaminated food and water but they had no cure for the symptoms.[6] Upon observation of the native Bedouins, who were not dying at the same rate as the German soldiers, they realized that the native Bedouins also contracted dysentery. The Bedouins, however, proceeded to consume fresh camel dung and were subsequently cured. The Germans reasoned that something in the dung must abate the symptoms of dysentery.[7] The dung consumption only worked if the dung was fresh because the active ingredient in the dung was identified as Bacillus subtilis, a microorganism that overwhelms almost all harmful microorganisms in the intestinal tract.
The Germans produced Bacillus subtilis in labs and shipped it out to their forces in Africa, halting the dysentery epidemic. The dysentery cure was sold worldwide as a medicinal product and was the leading treatment for dysentery until the 1960s.
As FMT has only recently seen an increase in popularity it was only in January of 2013 that the first randomized controlled trial of fecal transplant in the treatment of recurrent C. diff infection was published.[8] This study directly compared the effectiveness between the FMT and the Vancomycin treatments in curing patients without relapse. Vancomycin is an antibiotic therapy that is based upon a theory that relapses may be due to the presence of persistent spores that survive therapy. Vancomycin is more expensive than FMT and the emergence of vancomycin-resistant enterococci and relapse are both concerns. The study showed that the overall cure rate for recurrent C. diff was 93.8% by the infusion of donor feces overall and 30.8% by Vancomycin.[8] Antibiotics have been shown to decrease in effectiveness with infection recurrences and as most patients had several relapses before the study the effectiveness of Vancomycin was lower than expected. In addition, the study showed that the infusion of donor feces was able to replenish the patient’s flora content back to a healthy state. In contrast, the antibiotics used in treatments eliminate the healthy and non-healthy bacteria to rid the infection.[8]
Humans have an evolutionarily hardwired distaste for feces that is universal across different cultures, known as a core disgust elicitor to disgust researchers. It is theorized that this reaction stems from the health risks posed by excrement, where feces have been shown to be the source of over 20 known bacterial, viral, and protozoan causes of intestinal tract infections.[12] Our instinctual avoidance of the substance is thus a natural barrier towards adopting fecal transplants as commonplace treatments for C. diff and potentially many other intestinal infections.
FMT is currently not widely accepted and recommended by doctors or professional societies. As of 2011, only about a dozen U.S. physicians have admitted, via publishing cases in medical journals, to using FMT on their patients, though this number is purportedly increasing.[11] Additionally, institutions must be tolerant of their doctors performing this unofficially experimental procedure, as its unregulated nature can be detrimental in malpractice suits.[13]
Several regulatory hurdles currently prevent this therapy from being further researched and standardized. In May of 2013, the FDA announced that FMT is not yet approved for any therapeutic purposes, and its use will require the doctor to file an investigational new drug (IND) application, a time consuming and costly application most associated with the start of a clinical trial.[14] Following opposition from FMT advocates, in June of 2013, the FDA instead decided it will exercise “regulatory discretion” over the therapy, though doctors are still “strongly encouraged” to comply with the FDA’s IND regulations.[15] For FMT, the practical efficacy of the therapy is counteracted by the highly variable nature of different donors’ stool samples and the resulting safety concerns of regulatory bodies.
Mainstream options for treating C. diff include courses of antibiotics such as Dificid and Vancomycin. The cost for a 10-day course of treatment with Dificid is $2,800. Vancocin, an oral form of Vancomycin, costs $1,000 to $1,500 for a 10- to 14- day course of treatment at the lowest dose.[16] On the other hand, feces are abundant, free, and unpatentable, though the testing and screening costs for the donor in a FMT may cost up to $1,500. Though comparable in cost, FMT, however, has a much lower incidence of C. diff relapse after the initial treatment making it more economical. However, insurance companies often do not cover the screening costs for FMT, distorting this economic advantage to the patient.[17]
Antibiotics are a major source of revenue for pharmaceutical companies. Pharmaceutical companies, as major funders of US biomedical research, are thus unlikely to support research on standardizing and validating FMT as an alternative to antibiotic treatment.
The adoption of FMT is governed by the various participants who will be affected by changes in the standard of therapy administration. The large groups are doctors, researchers, patients, nurses, regulatory bodies, and pharmaceutical companies.
Gastroenterologist, doctors who specialize in the gastroenterology, are an organized group.[18] The American College of Gastroenterology (ACG) is a professional society of over 12,000 gastroenterologists. The stated mission of ACG is "Advancing gastroenterology, improving patient care."[18] ACG publishes a journal called The American Journal of Gastroenterology which has featured journal articles about FMT.[19]
Researchers of gastroenterology are organized in American Gastrology Association (AGA). The AGA has a stated purpose of "Advancing the Science and Practice of Gastroenterology"[20] and a membership of 17,000 scientists and physicians. The AGA publishes two journals, Gastroenterology[21] and Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology.[22]
Button promoting fecal matter transplant as a therapy produced by a blog about hospital infections[23]
Patients of gastroenterologists are a disorganized group. Patient advocacy groups, such as the International Organization of Patients' Associations,[24] seek to provide a global voice for patients and provide the best treatment options for patients. Small organizations, such as The Power of Poop[25], are composed of former patients, and families and friends of former patients, that try to spread the word about FMT through online networks. The mission statement of The Power of Poop is "promoting safe, accessible fecal microbiota transplant for all who need it"[25].
Nurses and other hospital staffers specialized in gastroenterology are organized in the Society of Gastroenterology Nurses and Associates (SGNA).[26] The SGNA is "dedicated to the safe and effective practice of gastroenterology and endoscopy nursing."
Regulatory agencies such as the Federal Drug Administration in the United States and Health Canada are charged with ensuring the safety of treatment options.
Pharmaceutical companies are organized in the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America[27] and Biotechnology Industry Organization.[28] Both organizations lobby on behalf of the pharmaceutical industry, spending $800 million from 1997 to 2004 on 1600 congressional bills.[29]
The sense of disgust has evolved in humans as a useful defense mechanism, stymieing potentially harmful behavior such as incest, cannibalism, and coprophagia. It is the reason why we avoid spoiled food or feces, which carry the risk of harboring harmful bacteria or parasites. However, scientists disagree on the value of this instinct when it is removed from the context in which the instinct was developed. Some argue that it leads us to reject technologies that defy the core of our humanity (e.g. human reproductive cloning) while others cite that it has been used to justify persecution (e.g. racism, anti-Semitism, sexism, and homophobia).[30]
In 2006, bioethicist Arthur Caplan coined the term the “yuck factor” to describe our instinctual response against new technologies.[31] In the case of FMT, without discounting other economic and institutional factors, the yuck factor can help explain part of the gap between FMT’s demonstrated efficacy and its usage. Currently the treatment is used as a last resort therapy for patients suffering from chronically reoccurring C. diff,[11] many of whom are more than willing to overcome this yuck factor. However, advocates of the treatment believe FMT should be used as the first resort, primary treatment, which would require a larger extent of patients and doctors alike to be able to stomach the therapy.
Outside of medicine, the yuck factor has derailed wastewater reclamation projects in drought-stricken areas, with opponents labeling the technology as ‘toilet-to-tap’ in order to elicit a reaction of disgust. With public acceptance and support crucial to the successful implementation of this technology, the treated wastewater usually goes through additional, unnecessary treatment processes to assuage public concern.[31]
For a list of words relating to this topic, see the English politically correct terms category of words in Wiktionary, the free dictionary
Negative comments about the opposing side are acceptable, but hit pieces on candidates and causes rarely help anyone. Although some evidence suggests that repeated negative campaign advertisements can increase turnout in local elections,[1] long-term analysis indicates that many of the most commonly held assumptions about negativity in political communication (i.e. that negative political advertisements are more effective than positive) are unsupported by the extensive research conducted on this subject.[2]
Instead, compare your candidate or cause in a positive light. Keep barbs to a minimum and keep them relevant. Remember that your objective is to convince the reader to join your side, not to inflame those who disagree. Hyperbolic jabs tend to incite online comment wars rather than facilitate reasonable discussion. Though often lambasted, politically correct terminology is almost always preferable over colloquialisms or pejorative terms. This includes references to minorities or those on the other side of an issue.
A: Candidate Y is a lying, conniving, sniveling puppet of the opposing party, unfit to lead even the smallest unit of government.
B: Candidate Y is a liar. Even though the things he says are untrue, he continues to say them precisely because they aren't, and that's the true mark of any liar.
C: Candidate Y may not want to tell the truth, but our candidate does, and that is why he is the best fit for this elected office.
D: Candidate Y is one of "them", and "they" are against us.
Answer: C. In the first example, those on the fence about Candidate Y will be turned off by your comments, and those who already concur don't need to be told again. The second example contains only awkward, circular logic and doesn't arrive at any real point. The third choice changes the primary focus from the opposing candidate to the person you're supporting. It is still negative, but in a way that contrasts those qualities with the positives of the opposition.
A: We must stand with the Arabs.
B: We must stand with the Middle Eastern community.
C: We must stand with the Muslims.
D: We must stand with those people.
Answer: B. As a general rule, "community" is a safe word in most contexts. The other three examples are either incorrect, offensive, or both. Ethnicity and religion are not interchangeable terms.
How to Get Started Developing in Object Pascal using Delphi or Lazarus
All you need for programming in Object Pascal is an IDE for the Object Pascal programming Language. The number one commercial choice for Pascal development is Delphi.
To get a demo of or to buying Delphi, see http://www.embarcadero.com. If you prefer a free open-source IDE, see Lazarus at http://www.lazarus.freepascal.org. Choose one of those links and download and then install the IDE.
You should know that there are some differences between Delphi and Lazarus:
Delphi provides two frameworks, the VCL and Firemonkey, for developing applications.
Lazarus provides a very similar, but not compatible framework called LCL for developing
There is a wide variety of third-party and open-source components, a much larger set of components, and tools, and add-ons that work with Delphi, as you might expect for a large commercial application.
Lazarus has a smaller, but active community that you can find online.
Delphi has a larger community around it than Lazarus, which you can also find online. There are many blogs, forums, and user groups.
Delphi and Lazarus both support the Object Pascal language with Objects, for object-oriented programming.
Precipitation is the falling of water from the sky in different forms. They all form from the clouds which are raised about 8 to 16 kilometers above the ground in the earth’s troposphere. The process of precipitation represents falling down of this condensed material in the form of rain, snow, hail, sleet or some other forms.
Freezing precipitation (freezing drizzle, freezing rain and sleet) and
Frozen precipitation (snow, ice pellets and hail etc.).
Rain is any liquid that drops from the clouds in the sky, in the form of liquid.There size described as water droplets of 0.5 mm or more than 0.5mm.Rainfall rates vary from time to time.tropical areas, cumulus clouds rain is the result ofcollision and coalescence process. In temperate areas, most rainfall is produced by nimbostratus clouds. The
Drizzle represents light liquid precipitation in the form of uniform water droplets of diameter less than 0.5 mm.It associated with stratus, nimbostratus and stratocumulus clouds.Precipitation in the form of drizzle continues for several hours or occasionally for days.It is the most frequent form of precipitation over subtropical Oceans.
Freezing rain occurs when raindrops pass through the subfreezing air near the surface, the raindrops become supercooled and freeze when they strike on surface features.
It consist of small, white and opaque compact grains of ice. The grains are mostly spherical and have a diameter of 2–5 mm. Snow pellets are also known as soft hail. the grains are brittle and bounce and break after striking surface.
Hailstones are big balls and irregular lumps of ice that fall from large thunderstorms.mostly diameter between 1 cm and 5 cm. Its size depends on the content of ice and snow it acquires while falling down. Hailstones are common in violent summer thunderstorms.hailstones are formed from super-cooled droplets that slowly freeze and results in sheet of clear ice.
As we have seen, "an-archy" implies "without rulers" or "without (hierarchical) authority." Anarchists are not against "authorities" in the sense of experts who are particularly knowledgeable, skilful, or wise, though they believe that such authorities should have no power to force others to follow their recommendations (see section B.1 for more on this distinction). In a nutshell, then, anarchism is anti-authoritarianism.
Anarchists are anti-authoritarians because they believe that no human being should dominate another. Anarchists, in L. Susan Brown's words, "believe in the inherent dignity and worth of the human individual." [1] Domination is inherently degrading and demeaning, since it submerges the will and judgement of the dominated to the will and judgement of the dominators, thus destroying the dignity and self-respect that comes only from personal autonomy. Moreover, domination makes possible and generally leads to exploitation, which is the root of inequality, poverty, and social breakdown.
In other words, then, the essence of anarchism (to express it positively) is free co-operation between equals to maximise their liberty and individuality.
Co-operation between equals is the key to anti-authoritarianism. By co-operation we can develop and protect our own intrinsic value as unique individuals as well as enriching our lives and liberty for "[n]o individual can recognise his own humanity, and consequently realise it in his lifetime, if not by recognising it in others and co-operating in its realisation for others . . . My freedom is the freedom of all since I am not truly free in thought and in fact, except when my freedom and my rights are confirmed and approved in the freedom and rights of all men [and women] who are my equals." [2]
While being anti-authoritarians, anarchists recognise that human beings have a social nature and that they mutually influence each other. We cannot escape the "authority" of this mutual influence, because, as Bakunin reminds us:
In other words, those influences which stem from hierarchical authority.
This is because hierarchical systems like capitalism deny liberty and, as a result, people's "mental, moral, intellectual and physical qualities are dwarfed, stunted and crushed" (see section B.1 for more details). Thus one of "the grand truths of Anarchism" is that "to be really free is to allow each one to live their lives in their own way as long as each allows all to do the same." This is why anarchists fight for a better society, for a society which respects individuals and their freedom. Under capitalism, "[e]verything is upon the market for sale: all is merchandise and commerce" but there are "certain things that are priceless. Among these are life, liberty and happiness, and these are things which the society of the future, the free society, will guarantee to all." Anarchists, as a result, seek to make people aware of their dignity, individuality and liberty and to encourage the spirit of revolt, resistance and solidarity in those subject to authority. This gets us denounced by the powerful as being breakers of the peace, but anarchists consider the struggle for freedom as infinitely better than the peace of slavery. Anarchists, as a result of our ideals, "believe in peace at any price - except at the price of liberty. But this precious gift the wealth-producers already seem to have lost. Life . . . they have; but what is life worth when it lacks those elements which make for enjoyment?" [4]
So, in a nutshell, Anarchists seek a society in which people interact in ways which enhance the liberty of all rather than crush the liberty (and so potential) of the many for the benefit of a few. Anarchists do not want to give others power over themselves, the power to tell them what to do under the threat of punishment if they do not obey. Perhaps non-anarchists, rather than be puzzled why anarchists are anarchists, would be better off asking what it says about themselves that they feel this attitude needs any sort of explanation.
He stood on a block of ice, which has melted and so flooded the floor.
The room was located near a river, when the river flooded, the water level rose and lifted the man to the ceiling, leaving the floor flooded.
In chemistry, two stereoisomers are said to be enantiomers if they are mirror images of each other. Much as a left and right hand are different but one is the mirror image of the other, enantiomers are stereoisomers whose molecules are nonsuperposable mirror images of each other.
As of 1848, the area of desert that is present-day Nevada was an unexplored passageway traveled primarily by new European arrivals to the Americans emigrating towards the western coast. The massive section of land became part of United States territory in 1848 after Mexico's surrender in the Mexican-American war in 1847. The treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo was drawn up ending the Mexican-American war that occurred during the previous two years, containing ramifications that the Mexican Republic relinquish control of a substantial amount of land in exchange for a monetary fee. With the conflict between the United States and the Mexican Republic ended, the accessibility of western territories by migrants became the main route of travel to the western seaboard. Following the discovery of gold within the Californian territory in 1849, the western province would witness an enormous influx of emigrants comprised of a wide variety of race and cultures. Established only one year later, the Compromise of 1850 included the creation of the state of California, as well as the territory of Utah that encompassed Nevada at the time. The breakthrough of the Californian gold rush would serve as a tidal wave in the development of Nevadan territory into becoming recognized as more than just an empty desert in the territory of Utah.
Within only five years following the discovery of gold in California, its population expanded from a mere 10,000 to over 250,000. The desire to earn riches quickly through discovering gold was a primary driver to emigrate for many of these pioneers. The supply system of gold was not great enough to support the tens and thousands of prospectors, who combed anywhere, rumored to be rich with gold while abandoning camps to go to the next. Production of gold mining steadily declined in each year, forcing miners to return home or attempt to uncover precious metals elsewhere. Mining in the Sierra-Nevada territory was not prominent during the California gold rush, but the presence of gold was noted during a prospector’s emigration to California in 1849. As the excitement in California surrounding the gold rush subsided, so begun what would initiate launching the Nevadan area into its eventual statehood.
Initially, the potential mineral wealth of the Comstock Lode attracted miners. However, not all people who immigrated to Nevada at this timer were miners, there were a number of diverse occupations arriving due to the increased population of the town. Many people in Virginia City were merchants, mechanics, teachers, seamstresses, laundresses, milliners, dance hall girls, prostitutes, and saloonkeepers, who followed the miners to Nevada. This is because the wealth of the miners attracted saloonkeepers, gamblers, and prostitutes who would “mine the miners” for their newfound wealth. Miners died daily from diseases, accidents, or murderous fights because violence and dueling were commonplace in this time period. Therefore, the men whose job it was to extract the silver and gold needed a way to escape the harsh realities of everyday life through entertainment. Entertainment in Virginia City was confined to drinking, gambling, and prostitution: all of which could be found in the local saloons. Of the first 100 commercial buildings erected, twenty-five were saloons, this demonstrates how commonplace saloons were.
The Demographics and Politics of Territorial Nevada
Brigham Young (President of the Church of Latter Day Saints from 1847 to 1877)Prior to 1860, Nevada was a relative backwater in the American west, so far as citizens of the Union were concerned. Little interest existed in extracting minerals, as the California Gold Rush still presented an attractive prospect to entrepreneurial gold-seekers. During the early to middle phases of the Gold Rush, Mormon colonization constituted the most significant influx of Union citizens to the Territory.
Nevada attracted Mormon settlement primarily due to the potential profits in supplying Gold Rushers. In 1850, a delegation was dispatched from Salt Lake City in the Utah Territory with the objective of locating an opportune area for the establishment of a trading post, and doing so; eventually, Carson City was selected for settlement by the delegation. The economic premise of this mission coincided with the fulfillment of the expansionist political aims of the Church, a product of Brigham Young himself. Once a formal structure of governance was established in Carson County in 1855, Mormons swept local elections; all political offices in the County but one went to Mormon candidates.
Tensions between Mormons and gentiles came to a head when, in 1853 and 1855, gentile settlers petitioned for annexation by California, and failed to do so. Further conflict emerged between the two communities in 1857 when president Buchanan exercised executive power to dismiss nearly all of Utah’s government officials, including Young (then the governor of Utah Territory), from service, following which he installed a non-Mormon governor and dispatched 2,500 soldiers on a “Mormon Expedition.” Young and other Church leaders, believing this to be a threat to their continued political and religious existence, recalled all Mormon settlers to Utah to defend the faith. This outflux of settlers from the County (in all, 450 Mormons departed, reducing its population by approximately two-thirds, which implies a post-exodus population of 225) made room for newer settlers and encouraged the formation of apparatuses of government which looked to D.C. in hopes of incorporation into the Union.
Throughout the early to mid-1850s, miners struggled to find a breakthrough in the Sierra-Nevada with many living on a meager three to four dollars per day. It was not until 1859 that the central aspect of Nevada’s mining prosperity would be made publicly known. In January of 1959 a small group of miners composed of notable individuals such as Henry Comstock, and James “Ol’ Virginny” Finney, John Bishop, Alexander Henderson, and John Yount made what seemed to be encouraging ground on top of a hill by the Six-Mile Canyon. The men who found the site immediately established a camp named Gold Hill. The group had unearthed what would be one-half of the remarkable mining foundation that would propel Nevada forwards. With further exploration of the area neighboring Gold Hill, the collection of miners made another finding, which unbeknownst to them would reignite the craze of a mining rush equivalent to the severity of California’s gold rush. On June 8, 1859, Patrick McLaughlin and Peter O’Riley started working a new site, which was even higher than Gold Hill. This site would later be referred to as Ophir site or Virginia City. Silver mining would be the second half of the Nevadan mining system, as Virginia City was rich in the precious metal, not as common as gold at the time. On June 10 Henry Comstock arrived at Ophir site and realized that McLaughlin and O’Riley had made a significant discovery. He then declared his right to the area, and began negotiations with McLaughlin and O’Riley. Detailed records of the ore deposits show that on June 10, 1859, Penrod & Company, which was later renamed to Comstock and Company, found the load in Ophir. Even though O’Riley and McLaughlin discovered the site, Comstock was more vocal about the discovery, which is why his name was fixed to the lode.
Virginia City during the period of migration spurred by the discovery of the Comstock Lode
On June 11, 1859, after the Comstock Lode was discovered, resolutions were passed which called a constitutional convention of settlers to appoint five delegates of this district, to be elected by the people. At this time the people in the Gold Hill District voted to adopt a set of laws. Many of these laws were modeled after California’s mining customs, because of the large number of pioneer Comstock miners who came from California. The first four articles provided a justice of the peace, constable and district recorder for a term of six months. The following six sections dealt with crimes and their punishment, for example, death by hanging was the punishment for murder. The final fourteen articles outlined rules for mining, for example, the maximum size of land claims was 300 feet, so that people would only claim what they were able to mine. All citizens of the district, signifying their agreement to comply with these laws, signed the rules and regulations. In 1861, in an act of congress organizing Nevada into a territory of the United State, the district mining rules and customs were recognized as valid and binding under the territorial legislature of Nevada. Thus, after the discovery of the Comstock Lode came the beginnings of established legislation, which allowed for the growth of an organized legal system.
Due to the discovery of the Comstock Lode, immigration to Nevada increased. What occurred in the towns surrounding the Comstock Lode, such as Virginia City and Gold Hill, can be described as a boomtown, which is a town that has grown rapidly as a result of sudden prosperity. From mid-1849 to 1860 the territory around Sun Mountain, where the Comstock Lode was discovered, drew a steady stream of immigrants from California. This is because many people were seeking work after the California Gold rush. By the end of 1859, 500 silver seeker has arrived in Nevada, doubling its’ population. By the end of 1860 the shabby mining camp, with crude accommodations had become a metropolis of 700 people. In what could be considered a domino effect, it took only two years from the beginning of the Comstock Lode for then President James Buchanan to declare the territory of Nevada for the 6,000 residents incorporating it on March 2nd, 1861.
In the state of Nevada, The Pyramid Lake Massacre was a defining moment in White-Indian relations. The battle marked the first major Indian resistance to encroaching Union settlement. Reports from newspapers of the time could be unabashedly sensational and were rarely unbiased in their portrayal of Indians.
On May 13th, 1862 at six o’clock in the morning, the New York Times tells of a Mr. C.T. Lake arriving in Virginia City, Nevada to recount what he knew of the event. A soldier of the militia, he had been ordered by the commanding major to guard the route of retreat. Successfully completing his assignment, he and six other men escaped. The massacre came in the wake of a recent series of excitements in the region, beginning with the news of an Indian uprising reaching California on May 8th of the same year. On Monday, May 7th, a large band of Indians from various tribes attacked Miller’s Station, a recently commissioned relay station for the Pony Express, killing nine and raiding what stock they could in the process. Estimates by locals placed the number of warriors at five hundred strong. On May 10th, settlers at Smith’s ranch on Walker’s river in Genoa reported a band of four hundred Indians led by white men. They communicated their intentions to descend upon the Carson valley as the purpose of their gathering, threatening to drive the livestock out of the region and subsequently attack nearby towns. In response to these disturbances, a company of white responders had already been forming, beginning with the tenth company of thirty men and eventually growing to one hundred troops by the time of the massacre. When Major William Ormsby led this company towards Pyramid Lake on the trail of the natives, he and his men were ambushed by a number of warriors judged by Mr. Lake to be two thousand strong. The Major ordered his men to charge, at which point they were surrounded and roundly defeated. Some whites escaped, though Lake judged the majority of the men to lay dead on the field. Later estimates judge roughly sixty-six of the hundred men to have been killed or unaccounted for including Major Ormsby himself.
A group of Shoshone Indians posing several years later by the nearby Ruby Valley
Early exaggerations of the still-significant events provoked state and private entities to react immediately. Private citizens in Placerville and Sacramento raised three thousand dollars and outfitted a company of well-armed and outfitted volunteers to defend Virginia city.The state responded in similar manner, promptly dispatching two hundred of its own troops. The federal government issued large quantities of ammo and ammunition dispatching all available soldiers in central California to the area. Between state action in California and the federal response elsewhere, it was estimated that no less than three thousand two hundred sixty troops were raised for the counter-effort within a single month. Further attacks by the offending warband were broadly anticipated. Settlers from locales in the surrounding region such as Carson, Black Rock county, Honey Valley, Honey Lake Valley and Genoa vacated the region out of fear, whilst others such as Colonel Lander, an experienced Union officer stationed in the region, remained unfazed, skeptical of the verifiability of some of the accounts. The coalition of Shoshones, Honey Lake, Smoke Creek, and Paiute warriors that formed in this instance was unprecedented in the region, as the Paiute in particular were thought to be a fairly peaceable collection of tribes. Even at the time many Americans were aware of the desperate situation many Indians faced, driving them to such extreme measures. The military response to the uprising regardless proved effective and swiftly crushed any threat of further attacks by the group.
Despite the presence of prostitutes and dancing girls, not all women living in Virginia City had these occupations. From a census collected in 1860, one year after the Comstock Lode was discovered, it was found that of the 111 women living in Virginia City, 83 were living with husbands. This indicates that a family-based community was growing soon after the discovery of the Comstock Lode. As families grew so too did the population, and a need for more businesses and institutions, such as schools. This process led to the further growth of surrounding cities and contributed to the process of Nevada gaining statehood in 1864.
In 1860, the majority of Nevadans were: white, male, and employed in skilled labour. Men represented roughly ninety percent of the population of the Territory, two-thirds of which were employed in a skilled trade, with minor subsections in agriculture, commerce, and military occupations. The female demographic, representing roughly ten percent of the population, are for the most part unaccounted for with respect to their employment. This implies either domesticity or employment in less than reputable pursuits according to the morals of the time. Contrasting this with 1870, we see an increase in the percentage of women in the population, as well as in domestic employment. Furthermore, there was a small minority employed in education, implying the development of a settled society with intent to produce and raise subsequent generations in situ.
An overwhelming majority of Nevadans were white in both 1860 and 1870, but 1860 presaged an influx of Chinese immigrants, presumably attracted by the prospect of economic opportunity in mining or railroads within the state-to-be. This attraction bore less fruit in 1860 than 1870, as Chinese immigrants, though there were much fewer of them, worked primarily in commercial enterprises or foodservice. By 1870, Chinese immigrants worked primarily in skilled labour positions, though roughly the same proportion worked in foodservice as had previously, indicating either immobility or lack of desire to shift employment preferences. Black and white Nevadans showed remarkable parity with respect to employment distributions by 1870, while native Nevadans were employed primarily in services or had unknown sources of employment.
Percent Distribution of Counted Persons, NV, 1860-1870, by ColourPercent Breakdown of Employment, NV, 1860-1870, by Colour
The data in these censuses have been dutifully and painstakingly transcribed by a team of scholars, beginning with Ronald M. James in 1991, and transferred into formats compatible with the crafting of visualizations and numerical analyses from the data. It is from these data that the preceding figures and tables have been created; therefore Dr. James and his team are owed a substantial debt of gratitude for facilitating this research. As a means of demonstrating the substantial growth that 1860 presaged in Nevada, 1870 is included in the following figures, so as to offer context regarding the growth of the state past incorporation.
Just two days after Nevada had become its own territory, Abraham Lincoln took office as president of the United States. Lincoln appointed James Warren Nye as the territorial governor of Nevada. the idea of statehood came from the residents of the territory, who held a vote without authorization from congress. A constitution was drawn up with the Californian constitution used as a draft, but citizens voted against the final version. Citizens in the Nevadan territory were mainly concerned with not being challenged by heavy taxing on mining, and after one failure for ratification in 1863. Three years after Nevada had been declared its own territory, President Lincoln signed an enabling act stating that once Nevada came up with a constitution, that congress would review it and grant it statehood. Delagates met from July 4th to 27th, 1864 to write a new constitution, adding in the outlawing of slavery in the state and giving public land to the federal government. The constitution was approved by citizens on Nevada and on October 31st, 1864, Nevada was granted statehood, becoming the 36th state to enter the Union.
Combustion analysis, also called elemental analysis, is one of the oldest analytic methods used to determine the empirical formula of a pure organic compound. A small portion of the compound undergoes combustion in the presence of excess oxygen resulting compounds containing carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen, which is quantitatively analyzed.
Combustion analysis method was invented by Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac in 1810 and was later improved by Justus von Liebig, who studied under Gay-Lussac.
The unknown compound is burned in pure O2 in an apparatus that consists of a combustion furnace and chambers containing compounds that absorb either H2O or CO2. All the H in the unknown is converted to H2O, which is absorbed in the first chamber, and all the C is converted to CO2, which is observed in the second. By weighing the absorbers before and after combustion, we find the masses of CO2 and H2O and use them to calculate the masses of C and H in the compound, from which we find the empirical formula. Many organic compounds also contain oxygen, nitrogen, or a halogen.
Reference: Silberberg, Martin S. Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. 5th ed. 2009.
The current method for combustion analysis is passing the combustion gases through a chromatography (gas chromatography) column, which detects the carbon dioxide, water, and nitrogen gas by thermal conductivity.
A compound containing carbon and hydrogen (CaHb) or carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen (CaHbOc) is burned completely to form H2O and CO2. The products are drawn through two tubes. The first tube absorbs water, and the second tube absorbs carbon dioxide.
Weigh the sample being analyzed and place in the apparatus above.
Sample undergoes combustion.
Weigh the two tubes beforehand.
Calculate the mass of carbon from the mass of the trapped carbon dioxide.
If there is oxygen, calculate the mass of oxygen by subtracting the mass of carbon and hydrogen from the total mass of the original sample.
Now, use these mass to calculate the empirical formula of the pure organic compound sample.
Frederic L. Holmes (1963). "Elementary Analysis and the Origins of Physiological Chemistry". Isis 54 (1): 50–81.
Silberberg, Martin S. Chemistry: The Molecular Nature of Matter and Change. 5th ed. 2009.
Proteins are modified by fatty acid on the cysteine residue which induces a hydrophobic interactions. This is a very important post translation modification of proteins that diversifies proteins by enabling protein protein interactions, signal transduction and many other protein functions. One of the widely recognized lipid linked protein is G-protein1.
The pathway that proteins follow is now being clearly understood. The discovery of multi-drug resistance (MDR) genes has changed the ways cells can target proteins. Another significant discovery is that of small lipopeptied that have been found on the surface of some proteins. Lipid modifications of proteins are important in eukaryotic cells, by increasing flexibility and increasing protein specificity.
There are three covalent lipid modification of eukaryotic cells: Myristoylation, Palmitoylation and Isoprenylation
O-GlcNAc.
Many cellular peptides are covalently linked to a rare 14-carbon chain (acylation) on a amid bond of glycine. Since this modification was mostly observed in the cytosol, the hydrophobic function was not the only function in this modification. The N-myristoyl transferase was purified from yeast and mammals. Due to the solubility and catalysis after the removal of the interior Met can be achieved using myristoyl-coenzyme A. The acyl chain plays a more important role in the utility by an enzyme compared to the hydrophobic region 2.
In vivo the substitution of the methylene group with S or O therefore making it more hydrophilic. Therefore this changes the distribution of proteins in the membrane. This can be used to target drug delivery 2.
This involves a thioester bond on the cysteine residue and primary palmitric acid. However, the mechanism that regulates this process is poorly understood due to the difficulty of purifying labile (membrane-bound palmitoyl transferases). Another challenge is that Palmitoyl-CoA is an excellent acyl donor, but no protein sequence specifications need to be fulfilied. Yet, it has been observed that sites of interest are located close to the transmembrane region on the cytoplam side. Many of the proteins that are located near the cytoplasm region are palmitoylated 2.
This is a triptlet modifications at the C terminal, depending on the primary sequence of motif CAAX (C, cysteine; A, aliphatic aminoacid; X, any amino acid). The first step is to add to isoprenoid lipid farnesol to cysteine residue which will add a 15th cardon. The second step is to protolytycally remove the AAX and carboxyl-methylation of the a-carboxyl 2.
O-GlcNAc.
GPI-anchored proteins were discovered from Trypanosoma Variant Surface Glycoprotein (VSG) and mammalian Thy-1 antigen. It has now been seen on the surface of many eukaryotic cells including humans and yeast. A test for this bond was discovered by low using bacterial phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipases C (PI-PLC), which releases the GPI-anchore. The amid c-terminal is linked to ethanolamine which is further linked by a phosphodiester bond to tri-mannosyl glucosaminyl core glycan. On the 6th position of the insitol of the tri-mannosyl glucosaminyl core glycan a phosphatidylinositol (PI) is linked on the outer layer of the bi-layer. There are many possible variations in the glycerol group: alkyl or acyl and may also differ in chain length. Another structural difference is that the glycan can have extra sugars some examples are aGal, /JGalNAc or aMan, and/or ethanolamine phosphate. Due to these many structural differences therefore we have many different functions that these proteins can fulfill 2.
Only four methods have been identified to modify eukaryotic proteins. However, this doesn't mean that there are no other lipid modifications of proteins. Using metabolic labeling and SDS-PAGE to identify proteins that are regulated by lipids it was discovered that about 10-50 proteins were observed. This may lead to a conclusion that about 10-50% are modified by lipids. One of the major functions of lipid modification of protein is localization. Analyzing lipid modification of proteins we may better understand cell function 2.
2.ANTHONY I. MAGEE,Lipid Modification of proteins and its relevance to protein targeting. COMMENTARY
This is a list of many of the widely used software packages. Mainly provided for those who compile their own packages, it lists required packages and various notes on compiling, although other users may find this information useful as well.
As with compiling and installing any software, running configure and make as a non-root user is recommended.
A number of libraries rely on pkg-config, so check to make sure your PKG_CONFIG_PATH contains the right path to dependencies.
(Note to self: Confirm this)
(Note to self: Double check dependencies needed for VST support)
The boost and gtk2 libraries are included in most sane linux distributions, so there is little chance you will need to worry about these. At most, it will involve installing a -devel package or two.
The non float-enabled fftw3 is required for Ardour's internal libsndfile library.
(The optional float-enabled fftw3f is required for the optional FFT analysis window feature.)
A very well optimized FFT library used in a lot of packages for performing DSP routines. *NOTE* There is a version 2 of the library as well, which is incompatible with version 3.
--enable-shared - disabled by default, this enables the shared library to be built, which is required by most software
--enable-single - same as --enable-float
--enable-float - this forces the library to be built with single-precision floating point numbers, and the library names beginning with fftw3 will begin with fftw3f.
Some software require the fftw3 version of the library, and some require the fftw3f version. This may be confusing to users who are compiling this for the first time. If another software fails to detect this library, double check which version you have installed. Since a lot of software documentation does not specify which, it may be a good idea just to install both from the start and avoid confusion later.
Formerly the FreeBob project (for support of BridgeCo. BeBoB devices). A backend end driver for use with firewire audio interfaces.
This software should compile with little issue.
Note for those wishing to run the test suite, it takes a VERY long time. As a comparison, on 2.4GHz dual core system with 2GB of RAM, compiling the library takes less than a minute, but the test suite takes about 45 minutes.
--enable-dynsimd - Enables SIMD instructions, such as SSE. HIGHLY recommended for any user using a Pentium II or later compiler.
--with-default-tmpdir - Sets the default path for a shared memory directory.
A note on using SSE, even though the configure script will add the -sse flag, SSE and above support will not be enabled. A way to check this, if you run the jackd server, it will explicitly output SSE, SSE2, or Enhanced3DNow! detected if found. Since a good deal of JACK is SSE optimized, your best bet is to just enable it from the start. The worst thing that could happen is an illegal instruction error if your processor does not support it, in which case you can disable it.
If the --with-default-tmpdir flag is not set, JACK will use /tmp, which is not present or not set as shared memory in some distributions. The JACK documentation recommends creating and entry in /etc/fstab for it, but for recent kernels and distributions, it may be simpler to set this to existing shared memory, such as /dev/shm.
Note: Some pre-compiled versions already set this for you. So, if you are upgrading from a previous version of JACK, make sure everything including the installation goes in the same place. The JACK developers advise against having more than one version installed to avoid possible breakage and general confusion.
The Linux Audio Developer's Simple Plugin API
Installation requires not compiling at all, just copying src/ladspa.h from the source tree into your /usr/include directory.
Compiling the sample plugins is completely optional.
You should have little trouble compiling this package.
Note: While out of the scope of this book, liblo can use IPv6, which has been known to be rather unstable on some older systems. This shouldn't be a problem on any recent kernel or distribution.
You should have little trouble compiling this package.
The current version of libsndfile requires version 1.1.2 of FLAC. A note to those who like to use the most recent versions of software, libsndfile will NOT compile with FLAC versions 1.1.3, 1.1.4 or later! This is due to the FLAC library changing the names of some key functions in the stream encoder. While designed to be easier to use, libsndfile has not been updated to use these new functions yet.
When networking first started, connections between computers were simple one directional links. Then Two directional links were developed. Then banks of connections became possible, and so on. Today literally millions of computers are connected to every computer in the internet. At each expansion of networking to a large audience, the problems caused by connectivity increased.
At first it was enough to have access control to the computer room. then as computers began to connect, it was found that service companies were building illicit links into the computer rooms in order to deal with service requirements without visiting the site. These Back door links were at first thought to be a good idea, but later found to be a security problem. The development of War Dialing made an extra phone line into the computer a security breach.
At first networks were in-house, you could, it was thought trust the computers in your own computer room, because you had access control. But about this time time-sharing began to happen, and terminals spread outside the computer room in large banks. Some of these terminals had system user capabilities and thus could be used to attack data integrity from outside the confines of the computer room. Later, computers became even more prevalent, and everyone seemed to have one. The idea of Local area Networks was created, in order to allow people to hook up their own systems within an office or home.
Then internetworking began to happen, one network hooked up to another network, and so on. It became possible for disgruntled employees to reach beyond their local network, and play havoc with networks on the other side of the building. Then internetworking took off, and the Internet was created and it became possible for people half the world away to affect your private computer. Obviously you needed some control over who was allowed into your computer.
Along with networking came the idea of a hub, where multiple computers were hooked up to the same network segment. It was found that if a network card was put in promiscuous mode it could listen in to all the data flowing through its own network segment. All that was needed was a packet sniffer, and you could literally read the data right off the network.
Eventually data speeds became high enough that more control over network segments was required, and a switch was substituted for the hub. this passively separated the data so that only data aimed at a particular network card passed through the switch into that network segment. However for larger networks, something similar was needed to link the larger segments together, and Internetworking Routers were designed. Essentially a Router is an active device that routes data to the network segment that connects it to the particular network card. Gradually more and more advanced routers became possible and now some routers routinely switch data between different network segments so as to balance loads across the network. One of the interesting aspects of the Iraqi war was that they had Internet routers for their command and control and as long as there was even partial connections between the soldiers and command, the commands could keep passing to the soldiers.
As routing became possible special programs were run, often on the router, to limit the access of unqualified users. These programs called firewalls, were supposed to limit security breaches. However as more and more became known about how firewalls worked, security became more and more difficult and new firewall designs needed to be created.
One of the problems was that internet relied on programs called Daemons which offered services automatically without operator intervention. These Daemons listened to transport channels called Sockets in order to serve up their data. Vulnerabilities in the programming of the Daemons made it possible for crackers to break into a system without the owners awareness. A simple program could scan all the sockets, and report which versions of which Daemons answered the connection request, and from that it could be determined which socket was most vulnerable to cracking.
In order to counter this firewalls had to become more sophisticated and shut down any attempts to scan the sockets of a computer. As well scanners were made publically available so that people could evaluate their firewalls and determine if they shut down the more vulnerable sockets or not.
One way of limiting access was the idea of a packet filter, which could limit which types of packets were allowed to access the network segment. The problem with this type of firewall was that it was so secure that Users often complained that nothing was getting through.
The idea of a Demilitarized Zone, developed as a result. Obviously the Users wanted access to some Internetworking services, but the Data in the most secure computers needed to be protected as well, so a compromise was reached. Two different types of firewalls would be installed, one between the users and the internet to protect them from hacking attacks, and one between the users and the secure filesystem, that only accepted valid packets. The user area was called the demilitarized zone because while it was protected the whole firepower of the most secure firewall was not offered to it. As well a firewall program could be implemented on the individual computer that would limit the access to the sockets by prompting the user whenever programs went to access the internet.
The idea of Intrusion Detection, is that when someone successfully manages to penetrate your security, you want to be able to quickly notice their penetration and be able to deal with it.
In one of the first documented cases of Intrusion Detection, an American student was hired by his university to determine why an operating system accounting program that was formerly stable had suddenly broken and had lost a few cents. Over a period of months, he developed first the idea that the problem was related to a specific Users account, then the idea that the user account had been hacked, then developed a methodology to track and trick the hacker into revealing his location, and finally managed to shut down a German Spy Ring based on Hackers. The student wrote a book about it, popularizing the concept of Intrusion Detection.
The seminal work on Intrusion Detection started in the 1970's and was first published in 1980 by James P. Andersion. He set out some standards for audit trails that made them comprehensive enough to detect anomalies in operation, but not so comprehensive as to allow intruders to detect the presence of Intrusion Detection, or unduly confuse an auditor.
In 1984 to 1985 Dorthy Denning and Peter Neumann did more seminal work on how to use anomaly detection and an expert system, to detect the likelihood of abuse. Called IDES the system was able to reliably detect abuse because the Anomaly detector could adapt to changes in use, while the Expert System could detect abuse, and link it back to particular behaviors.
By 1990 Intrusion Detection began to move beyond merely auditing the computer system, and began to monitor network connections as well. It quickly became obvious that only about 1 percent of intrusions were being detected by earlier means. A system called DIDS was developed that was capable of tracking intrusions that hopped from computer to computer so that proper attribution of damage could be done. From this first work in the 1980's considerable work has been done on development of the capability of tracking anomalous use of the computer, and security threats so that they can be managed.
The current, editable version of this book is available in Wikibooks, the open-content textbooks collection, at
7 Introduction/Accelerate workflow: graduate more quickly, make ETDs available faster to outside audience
16 Introduction/Helping universities develop digital library services & infrastructure
20 Introduction/Browsing: Classification systems, classification schemes used in different disciplines
27 Universities/Reasons and strategies for archiving electronic theses and dissertations
51 Universities/Policy Initiatives: National, Regional, and Local; Discipline specific; Language specific
88 Technical Issues/Overview: hardware, software, multimedia, scripts, encoding, document representations\conversions
95 Technical Issues/Conversions from Word, Word Perfect or other RTF-compatible tools to SGML\XML
134 Training the Trainers/Developing Centres of Expertise where appropriate and helpful
The UNESCO Guide for Creating Electronic Theses and Dissertations (ETDs) aims to help all those interested in projects and programs involving ETDs. To the extent possible, it has the eventual goal of aiding all students at all universities to be able to create electronic documents and to use digital libraries. It has particular focus on the emerging genre of ETDs, which should enhance the quality, content, form, and impact of scholarly communication that involves students engaged in research. It should help universities to develop their local infrastructure, especially regarding electronic publishing and digital libraries, which in turn build upon networking, computing, multimedia, and related technologies. In so doing, it should promote the sharing of knowledge locked up in universities, and the collaboration of universities spanning across all countries and continents, from North to South, from East to West, from developing to developed, from public to private, and from large to small. The ultimate effect may be one of the world's largest sustainable programs for diffusion of knowledge, across all fields, including science, technology, and culture.
This work should be of interest to diverse audiences. Its various sections (see discussion in section 1.6) are aimed to address the needs of universities (including administrators and faculty), students (including those who wish to create ETDs as well as those who wish to make use of already-created works), and those involved in training or setting up ETD projects or programs. Ample technical details are covered to support the needs of students wishing to apply multimedia methods to enhance their ability to communicate complex results, as well as the requirements of staff building a local support infrastructure
This work is a living document that will continue to be updated in connection with the work of the Networked Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations (NDLTD, www.ndltd.org). It was born as a result of the support provided by UNESCO in grants given to Virginia Tech and University of Montreal. It was prepared by an international team of faculty and staff; coordinated by Shalini Urs. Its organization and content are the result of the editorial labor of Joseph Moxley. Its availability in a broad range of languages is the result of teams of translators, some funded in part by UNESCO, and others volunteering their assistance.
While the development of a comprehensive worldwide program of ETDs of necessity builds upon an enormous range of knowledge and experience, it is hoped that this work will suffice as an initial Guide. We hope that those who read some or all of the sections contained herein will build upon the foundation laid out in the Introduction, so they understand the key ideas and are energized to move forward to advance the cause. In keeping with the goals of NDLTD, we hope that people around the globe who are interested in ETDs will help each other, and together transform graduate education, promote understanding, vastly expand access to new discoveries, and empower the next generation of researchers to become effective leaders of the Information Age.
There are two main types of ETDs. One type, strongly preferred
(to their university or agent thereof). Typically, the raw form of the
ETDs can be "discovered" by those interested, as a result of
(usually by university or service company staff) by scanning in the
ETDs are a new genre of documents, continuously re-defined as technology and student knowledge
The first benefit is that new, better types of TDs may emerge as ETDs develop as a genre. Rather than
As the new genre of ETDs emerges from this growing community of scholars, it is likely to build upon
(that thus may be printable), appendices including multimedia content following international standards,
Next Section: Why ETDs?
Introduction/Why ETDs?
The quality of a university is reflected by the quality of its students’ intellectual products. Theses and
Starting an ETD program is like starting any other project: a need for the results must exist so all those
ETDs are based on the joint work of graduate students, mentors, graduate deans, administrative staff,
American Universities Should Require Electronic Theses and Dissertations by Moxley, Joseph M.
Once ETDs are collected on behalf of educational institutions, digital library technology makes it easy for
Next Section: Accelerate workflow: graduate more quickly, make ETDs available faster to outside audience
Introduction/Accelerate workflow: graduate more quickly, make ETDs available faster to outside audience
ETDs can be managed through automated procedures honed to take advantage of modern networked
ETD submission over networks has zero cost, which compares favorably with the charges of hundreds or
In many institutions, the networking, computing, and software resources available to students suffice so
ETDs having higher quality and becoming more expressive of student findings.
Next Section: Helping students be better prepared as knowledge workers
Most documents created today are prepared with the aid of computers. Many universities have "writing
To function as effective knowledge workers, students must go beyond word processing skills that lead
Originality is a defining feature of academic research. Using new media can empower you to conduct
Having an ETD helps build your career. Your work is published in a timely manner, visible, and easily
This is a 52000 word essay that Phil Agee wrote with the intention of “get[ting] it into the hands of every
Next Section: Improving graduate education, and quality/expressiveness of ETDs
Introduction/Improving graduate education, and quality/expressiveness of ETDs
Around the globe, people have diverse views toward graduate students and graduate education. Some
Accordingly, the move toward ETDs aims to enhance graduate education in effective researching.
Building on the fact that students learn best by doing, this move encourages students to create and submit
Furthermore, once students become exposed to electronic documentation preparation processes, they
(e.g., through spreadsheets or database management systems). Images can be prepared as thumbnails that
Beyond these tools and aids, however, is the fact that authors spend more time when their likely
With ETDs leading to large numbers of accesses, many students and faculty will work hard to enhance
Each student could develop a bibliography reflecting his or her work, and a collective bibliography would emerge encompassing all of a faculty member's advisees.
A student's acquired expertise will not completely leave with that student but will remain to help bootstrap new students (and new interests of the faculty member).
The efforts of students working with a faculty member can be known to a wider audience. This would provide publicity and enhanced visibility for the student and that student's lab and major professor.
Students who know how to use tools, such as Microsoft Word's tracking or commenting features, are better prepared for future e-publishing; they can use these tools for future collaboration and mentoring, which should save the faculty member time with the reviews and revisions.
Next Section: Increasing readership of ETDs, communicating research results
Introduction/Increasing readership of ETDs, communicating research results
Once a student embarks upon the process of creating an ETD, this student will be assured of a large increase in the number of readers. Such an audience emerges when ETDs are locatable because of searches using popular search engines and/or are available for other students as well as more advanced researchers to draw upon. Many look for the large bibliographies and comprehensive literature reviews found in ETDs. Others look for in-depth discussion of research methods. Some seek data sets to use for follow-up studies. A growing number of faculty use ETD collections as reference sources, saving space on their shelves or time required to walk to a library. Some also refer to ETDs in classes or in homework assignments, especially where there are important results and/or clear expressions of concepts and ideas.
Through such ETDs, students can communicate more effectively. Color figures are much easier to attain, in many situations, than those limited to black and white. Complex tables can be built, with sorting and subtotals incorporated, because of software tools. Spreadsheets or simulations help readers gain hands-on familiarity with data and analysis, promoting a deeper understanding. For those studying phenomena that could be characterized with color photos (using digital cameras or scanners), digital video sequences, audio files, medical images, or other digital representations. Thus, expanded and more effective communication of research results can be aided by usage of ETDs.
Once a student embarks upon the process of creating an ETD, that student can be assured of a one or more order of magnitude increase in the number of readers. Such an audience emerges when ETDs are locatable because of searches using popular search engines and/or are available for other students as well as more advanced researchers to draw upon. Many look for the large bibliographies and comprehensive literature reviews found in ETDs. Others look for in-depth discussion of research methods. Some seek data sets to use for follow-up studies. A growing number of faculty use ETD collections as reference sources, saving space on their shelves or time required to walk to a library. Some also refer to ETDs in classes, or in homework assignments, especially where there are important results and/or clear expressions of concepts and ideas.
At Virginia Tech, for example, many popular theses and dissertations are available to the public electronically. In 1996, there were 25,829 requests for ETD abstracts and 4,600 requests for ETDs themselves; by 1999 (January–August), there were over 143,056 requests for abstracts and 244,987 requests for ETDs. As of October 1999, the most popular ETD at VT had been requested over 75,000 times (see VT's download statistics at http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/theses/data/pdatah.htm).
Next Section: Helping universities develop digital library services & infrastructure
Introduction/Helping universities develop digital library services & infrastructure
Many universities have little or no involvement in digital library efforts. Yet, it is clear that most universities will have digital library efforts as part of, or in addition to, conventional library efforts. Digital libraries are of particular value when distance education is involved or when a university has a number of far flung sites. They also can promote more flexible access to information (e.g., 24 hours/day, 7 days/week, from home or office, with no blocking because another person has borrowed a work).
Establishing an ETD program automatically moves a university into the digital library era. Free software available through NDLTD, or from NDLTD members, is available that allows a university to develop its own digital library. Setting up that digital library helps the university bring together the personnel and infrastructure required for other digital library projects, too. Though the demands are small, the digital library that emerges will force consideration of almost all of the key concerns of those who work with digital libraries. Also, since various sponsors interested in digital library technology are helping in many ETD projects, there will be a continual enhancement of the digital library services that relate to improving local infrastructure.
Next Section: Increasing sharing and collaboration among universities and students
Introduction/Increasing sharing and collaboration among universities and students
As more and more ETDs become available at universities or through their agents, more and more students will draw upon the emerging digital library of ETDs. This will make it easier for students to learn of the work of other students. Contact is quite feasible since many ETDs include email addresses and other contact information, of faculty helpers/advisors at least if it is not feasible to track down a graduating student author. Once contact is made, it is possible to have further discussion of references, application of methodologies, reuse of datasets, and extension of prior work, as well as investigation of remaining open problems. This may lead to friendships, collaborations, joint publications, and other benefits. Such may expand beyond student-student relationships to also include faculty, groups, laboratory teams, and other communities.
Once ETDs are available, through diverse means, others may gain access. In particular, such access may be the only recourse open to those in developing countries who cannot afford to make purchases from Proquest, who cannot wait for expensive shipping of copies through interlibrary loan, who cannot attend the myriad conferences that demand the considerable expenses related to travel, or who cannot pay for expensive journals (that only may have short summaries of thesis or dissertation results).
Access may result from word of mouth, from search, from announcements, or by following links or citations. They may occur quickly after a work is made known to those whose works are referred to or to those who employ Selective Dissemination of Information services. They may occur intermediated by digital library systems or similar mechanisms. They may result when ETDs are referred to journal articles, conference papers, reports, course notes, and other forms.
Numerically, if theses and dissertations are all released as ETDs, the number of works per year may be around the number of journal articles published by university students. The number may be 20-50% of the number of journal articles prepared by the faculty. Regarding students, in most cases, an ETD will be the only publication of an author. If the number who read ETDs is 10 or 100 times the number who read a paper thesis, then it is clear that there will be a significant increase in access to university research as a result of an ETD program.
As part of the education component of NDLTD, it is hoped that graduate students will become facile with searching through electronic collections, especially those in digital libraries. If we regard managing information as a basic human need, ensuring that the next generation of scholars has such skill seems an appropriate minimal objective. Most specifically, since graduate research often builds upon prior results from other graduate researchers, it seems sensible for all ETD authors to be able to search through available ETD holdings. NDLTD encourages online resources, self-study materials, individual assistance, as well as group training activities be provided so that graduate students become knowledgeable about resource discovery, searching, query construction, query refinement, citation services, and other processes – both for ETDs and for content in their discipline.
Next Section: Browsing: Classification systems, classification schemes used in different disciplines
Introduction/Browsing: Classification systems, classification schemes used in different disciplines
A key method to gain access to ETDs is through browsing. Browsing promotes serendipity, in analogous fashion to when a person looks around in library stacks, picking up and glancing at a number of works, typically ones that are relatively close to each other.
Browsing often involves a researcher in a learning process connecting with the concepts, areas, and vocabulary used in a particular field. A researchers often moves around in "concept space", seeing what concepts are broader and which are narrower, which are related, and which are examples or applications of theories or methods. Thus, in the case of medical works, browsing often encourages researchers to think about diseases, treatments, location in an organism (or human body or subsystem thereof), symptoms, and other considerations. In many fields, browsing involves exploring a taxonomic system, managing an organization chart or hierarchical structure, or moving from a term to a more focused noun phrase.
In many disciplines, there are official classification systems. Some are quite broad, in some cases covering all areas, as is the case when using the subject headings prepared by the US Library of Congress (LCSH), or the Dewey Decimal Classification system (DDC, available from Forest Press, owned by OCLC). However, for in-depth characterization of a research work in a particular field, it is more appropriate to use the category system for the field. In computing, the ACM system is popular. In medicine, MeSH or UMLS are widely used. In physics, PACS is widely used. Gradually, digital library support for ETDs will support browsing using both broad schemes like DDC, as well as narrow schemes like PACS, integrated synergistically.
NDLTD runs the Web site http://www.theses.org/ (also under the alias http://www.dissertations.org/) as a central clearinghouse for access to ETDs. This site points to various other locations that support portions of the worldwide holdings of ETDs. For example, the largest corporate archive, with over 1.5 million entries, is managed by UMI and has most doctoral dissertations from USA and Canada, as well as most masters’ theses from Canada, in microfilm form with metadata available as a searchable collection through Dissertation Abstracts. Since 1997 UMI has scanned new submissions (originally from microfilm, later directly from paper) and made the page images available through PDF files. With over 100,000 ETDs accessible through subscription or direct payment mechanisms, UMI hosts the largest single collection of both electronic and microfilm TDs.
Other corporations as well as local, regional, national, and international groups associated with NDLTD have Web sites too, such as http://www.cybertheses.org/[1] for the International Francophone project or http://www.dissonline.org/ for the German Dissertation online project. In addition, a number of WWW search engines have indexed some of the ETD collections available so this genre is included in general Web searches.
Some other schemes allow access to ETD collections. Using Z39.50, the “information retrieval protocol”, for example, the Virginia Tech ETD collection can be accessed through suitable clients or from some library catalog systems. OCLC’s WorldCat service, with over 20 million catalog records, has an estimated 3.5 million entries for TDs. Perhaps most promising is that the global as well as regional and local metadata information about ETDs may become widely accessible through the Open Archives Initiative (http://www.openarchives.org/).
The German "Dissertation Online" project was undertaken by the Initiative of Information and Communication of the German Learned Societies (http://www.iuk-initiative.org/index.shtml.en). This project was funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG: Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft) for 21/2 years (April 1998 - October 2000). The final conference took place in Berlin from October 30–31, 2000 (http://www.dissonline.de/abschlusstagung/index.html). The project worked at an integrative level and aimed towards a German wide initiative to bring scholarly publications, such as dissertations, diploma and master theses which are usually lost in libraries, online. Through the joint work of 6 academic disciplines (mathematics, physics, chemistry, educational sciences, computer science and libraries such as the State and University Library Lower Saxony (SUB Göttingen) and the German National Library (DDB: Die Deutsche Bibliothek)) which took place at several locations (Duisburg, Oldenburg, Erlangen, Berlin Computing Centre and School of Education, Göttingen, Frankfurt) the project was highly successful in Germany and elsewhere. A tight cooperation with the Networked Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations (NDLTD[2]), set up by Edward Fox from the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, USA, was established.
The developments and the movement "DissOnline.de" resulted in establishing a bureau for coordination (Koordinierungsstelle DissOnline) at the German National Library (DDB). All German efforts taken are now coordinated and all developments (tools, guidelines, etc.) are collected by this bureau.
The main tasks of the original project still reflect the problem areas that have to be taken into consideration while setting up local, national or global projects on electronic theses and dissertations:
The results of these different subtasks are integrated into the different sections that follow for students, universities, technical issues and trainers.
MPRESS, a large collection of European Mathematical Theses. which contains as a subset
The first real activity directed toward ETDs was a meeting convened by Nick Altair of UMI in Ann Arbor, Michigan during the fall of 1987 involving participants from Virginia Tech, ArborText, SoftQuad, and University of Michigan. Discussion focussed on the latest approaches to electronic publishing and the idea of applying the Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML, an ISO standard approved in 1985) to the preparation of dissertations, possibly as an extension of the Electronic Manuscript Project. In 1988, Yuri Rubinsky of SoftQuad was funded by Virginia Tech to help develop the first Document Type Definition (DTD) to specify the structure of ETDs using SGML. Pilot studies continued using SoftQuad’s AuthorEditor tool, but only with the appearance of Adobe’s Acrobat software and Portable Document Format (PDF) in the early 1990s did it become clear that students could easily prepare their own ETDs.
Then, in 1996, the pace of ETD activities sped up. SURA funded a project led by Virginia Tech to spread the concept around the Southeastern Unted States. Starting in September 1996, the US Department of Education funded a three-year effort to spread the concept around the USA. The pilot project that had proceeded at Virginia Tech led to a mandatory requirement for all theses and dissertations submitted after 1996 to be submitted (only) in electronic form. International interest spread the concept to Canada, UK, Germany, and other countries. To coordinate all these efforts, the free, voluntary federation called NDLTD (Networked Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations) was established and quickly began to expand. Annual meetings began in the spring of 1998 with about 20 people gathering in Memphis, TN. In 1999 about 70 came to Blacksburg, VA while in 2000 about 225 arrived in St. Petersburg, FL for the third annual conference.
There continues to be rapid growth and development of ETD activities around the world. Whether such efforts arise spontaneously or as extensions of existing efforts, it is hoped that all will proceed in cooperative fashion so universities can help each other in a global collaboration [4], passing on lessons learned as well as useful tools and information. The mission of NDLTD is to facilitate such progress in a supportive rather than prescriptive manner. Over 100 members joined NDLTD by 2000, including over 80 universities in addition to national and regional project efforts; international, national, and regional organizations; and interested companies and associations. The only requirement for joining NDLTD is interest in advancing ETD activities, so it is hoped this will help ensure global cooperation.
A number of groups involved in NDLTD are particularly interested in supporting efforts in developing countries. The sharing of research results through ETDs is one of the fastest ways for scholars working in developing countries to become known and have an impact on the advancement of knowledge. It also is one of the easiest and least costly ways for universities in developing countries to become involved in digital library activities and to become known for their astute deployment of relevant and helpful technologies. The Organization of American States, UNESCO, and other groups are playing a most supportive role in facilitating this process.
Subsequent sections further explain ETD activities.
Section 2 discusses issues for university decision makers and implementers of projects on campuses.
Section 3 presents the topic for students.
Section 4 deals with further technical details.
Section 5 takes a broader view, raising the level to issues related to launching campus initiatives and training those who may train students.
Finally, Section 6 provides a glimpse of future directions.
NDLTD hopes that forthwith there will be ETD efforts in every country and then in every state/province,
It is not clear why any university should not become involved in ETD efforts. Once an ETD program on
a campus has evolved to the point that ETD submission is a requirement, the effort saves money for the
This section of the Guide explains why and how universities can establish ETD programs, and helps
Next Section: Why ETDs?
Universities/Why ETDs?
The quality of a university is reflected by the quality of its students’ intellectual products. Theses and
Starting an ETD program is like starting any other project: a need for the results must exist so all those
ETD's are based on the joint work of graduate students, mentors, graduate deans, administrative staff,
American Universities Should Require Electronic Theses and Dissertations by Moxley, Joseph M.
Next Section: Reasons and strategies for archiving electronic theses and dissertations
Universities/Reasons and strategies for archiving electronic theses and dissertations
The reasons are purposely listed in the order they were presented during the discussion and, no doubt,
Thus, let's imagine 3 categories of reasons: benefits to students, benefits to universities and benefits to
First, there are benefits to students which reflect on the university and on society too. Of the 23 reasons
Next, the universities are the focus and some reasons that were listed under benefits to students will
Benefits that appeared under the previous 2 categories will be listed again in this last category, devoted to
There were 23 reasons when they were first listed. When they were classified, we got 34. The
It is not hard to come to the conclusion that ETD's are beneficial to all, and that ETD programs are good
Some points must be considered before starting an ETD program
The stage where the project starts;
The type of training to be provided;
The technology to be adopted;
The personnel to be hired, if needed;
The time frame for the program to be operative;
The team implementing the ETD program must be aware that decisions
Many of the following points may not apply to developed nations but
The points are grouped into four categories:
Does it support the MARC format?
Does it support digital objects? What types? Can the contents of objects be searched?
Does it have a Web interface?
Is it compliant with Protocol Z39.50?
Is there a project to automate the catalog? Does the system to be used support the MARC format? What is the time frame for the catalog to be automated?
Can the system to be used can hold a digital library (types of digital objects, Web interface, Z39.50)?
Number of TDs per year and to date (both on paper and on digital files):
The decision on how to start - by some areas to proof concept or all programs;
The decision to make the retrospective capture in some areas and/or dates or all TDs;
The decision to use scanner + OCR in some areas and/or dates or all TDs (on paper);
One or many formats? The number of DTDs, templates and viewing filters depends on this;
Is there legislation to comply with?
Is a document of authorization required? If so, define terms and approve with legal department;
Establish conditions? For black out period, for on campus publishing only, for partial publishing, etc.
The width of the scope of the topics above shows that an ETD program involves many areas of the universisty and all of them must be committed to it. After these points have been addressed, the project of the ETD program may begin.
An ETD program, like any other project, requires that the roles of each player be well defined. All the people involved must be aware of the importance of their work individually and of the interaction that
They will lead the university in deciding upon:
The formats for ETDs;
The way to deal with authors' rights and publishing procedures;
The workflow for the new dissertations;
The strategy and workflow for retrospective capture;
The style sheets and filters for visualization;
The digital library system to be used;
The identification of the digital documents;
The relation of the ETD digital library with legacy systems (library, administrative, etc.);
The support team to be used;
The training program.
At the beginning of the project, they must have the support of the highest administration to:
Assure preservation and information security of the digital collection (ETD);
A good way to start the discussion in the university is by writing a pre-
The main topics of the pre-project should include but not be limited to:
A brief and focused description of the program and the project
An estimate of the resources (human and material) needed to implement the program
An estimate of the annual resources (human and material) needed to keep the program in operation
An estimate of the time frame to implement each step of the project and to have the program operable
The commitment, responsibilities and actions of each participant involved
The writing of this pre-project will help the team organize and
Next Section: Scenarios illustrating approaches, schedules and workflow
Universities/Scenarios illustrating approaches, schedules and workflow
A common workflow at a campus involved in NDLTD is as follows. Each student will use a home
First, students will provide an ID and password that authenticates them. Next, they will enter in metadata
Later, a person in the graduate school will find that a new ETD has been uploaded. He or she will check
More refined workflow models can be applied. Let us suppose that at the Polytechnic University of
Valencia, Spain the process starts from a catalog of ETD proposals, published by faculty members filling
This section looks at how electronic publication of theses and dissertations will enhance graduate education.
Topics discussed include: improved knowledge of electronic publication technologies, greater access to
The move by Graduate Schools to allow or even require students to submit theses and dissertations as
ETD process, I believe the importance of an open-minded approach to this new way of expressing the outcomes of masters and doctoral research is captured very well in the following statement by Jean-
When print emerged, universities failed to recognize its importance and almost managed to marginalize
Yet the challenges universities face in responding to an increasingly digitized and networked world are
The ETD initiatives now under way in universities around the world are about bringing fundamental
I believe graduate schools and faculty, in the name of maintaining quality, have all too often inhibited the
Some graduate schools still read and edit the entire text of every thesis or dissertation. Many have thesis
I believe that the student must submit a high quality document that is legible, readable, and that conveys
As early 1999 about 80% of Virginia Tech's 1500 ETDs are vanilla ETDs. Accordingly, we have
ETD. Advanced topics include landscape pages; multimedia objects like graphs, pictures, sound, movies,
To maintain quality, the student's thesis or dissertation committee must actively participate as reviewers
Whether tomorrow's graduate students are employed inside or outside the university environment, the
For this reason efforts to increase the information literacy are certain to benefit graduate students long
The traditional view is that the doctoral dissertation and less so the masters thesis provides a one time
The attitudes of students and faculty toward the value of theses and dissertations vary greatly. For the
Indeed, these information sources have been grossly underutilized because of the difficulty in obtaining
University Microfilms. If a comprehensive worldwide networked digital library of theses and
Growth in usage has been steady and remarkable. For the calendar year 1998 there were over 350,000
250,000 from .edu, 88,000 from .com, 27,000 from .net, 6,800 from .gov, and 3400 from.mil. Inquiries
Australia, 7,300 from Germany, 3,900 from Canada, and 2,200 from South Korea. The most accessed
ETDs have been accessed tens of thousands of times with many over one thousand accesses. To learn more about accesses see
When the ETD project began at Virginia Tech, some students and faculty expressed great concern that
For the longer term, however, it is important that researchers and scholars regain control of their work by
It is also noteworthy that the American Physical Society has a practice of sharing electronic copies of
More disconcerting to me is the closely related concern of researchers and scholars that by reading their
ETD discussions with the Graduate Dean, the Library, and Ed Fox, a faculty member conducting
Format (PDF) files came on the market. This software for the first time provided a tool that was easy to
Computer Science, Gail McMillan from the Library, and John Eaton from the Graduate School. In these
That a student training process be conducted to show students how to produce an ETD.
That necessary software (Adobe Acrobat®) be made available to students in campus computer labs.
That the faculty not be burdened by this process.
That a faculty/graduate student advisory committee be established to advise the Commission on Graduate Studies and Policies on the ETD project.
With these provisions agreed to, the Commission approved a one year voluntary submission period to be
Late in the spring semester of 1997, after the mandatory requirement began, a small but vocal group of
Tech and is now rapidly becoming and integral part of graduate education.
The ETD project has provided the opportunity for fundamental change in the expression of and access to
ETDs have a very positive impact on libraries because they are an easy way to expand services and
The library can do more, such as improving workflow, reducing the time from receipt to public access,
The most tenuous and highly emotional service libraries provide to ETDs is archiving. Because not
Another role that the library plays can be to put a prototype in place. While the Graduate School is
When a university is adopting policies about ETDs it is helpful to have a place where its students, faculty, and administrators can see what an electronic library of digital theses and dissertations might be.
Many graduate students are anxious to participate in an ETD initiative and the library’s Web site can take
Graduate School personnel opportunities to compare the old and the new processes with somewhat
The library is also in a position to offer graduate students the incentive to participate. Most libraries
The best chance electronic information has of being preserved is when it is used online regularly and
As ETDs begin to join the library’s traditional theses and dissertations, it is a good time to align the
Special Collections Department and/or its University Archives are often responsible for storing and
The academic departments determine the quality of the work of their students, while the individual
With digital materials libraries give access and simultaneously prolong the life of the work, ensure the
The first goal is to have all ETDs online and available all the time from a stable server. If necessary
(depending on the capabilities of the server), some ETDs could be moved to a secondary server.
Considerations for moving ETDs to a secondary server are usage (ETDs with fewest accesses) or age
(oldest ETDs). Formats and file sizes probably would not be a factor in employing a secondary server,
If it becomes necessary to move some ETDs to a secondary server, programs would be written to trigger
URNs would link migrated ETDs. URNs could be mapped to PURLs at some future date.
ETDs that been submitted but not yet approved should be frequently backed-up
(e.g., hourly) if changes have occurred since the last back up; otherwise, generate
a back-up programmatically every few hours. Make a weekly back up of ETDs in
Authors cannot modify their ETDs once approved. Exceptions are made with proper approval.
Viewers/readers cannot modify or replace any ETDs. Only in extreme circumstances would the system
The library should share with the university the responsibility to guarantee that ETDs will be available
Standard formats should be the only acceptable files approved. Formats recommended for ETDs that
Whether an author is creating an electronic or paper thesis or dissertation, it does not change their rights
107). The four factors of fair use that must be considered equally are: (1) purpose and character of use;
(2) nature of the copyrighted work; amount and substantiality; and (4) effect. In the United States,
The owner of an ETD, as explained above usually the student, must take direct action if an ETD service
The student certifies that the work submitted is the one approved by the faculty they work with. The university is given authority, directly or through third party agents, to archive the work and to
John Eaton, Dean at Virginia Tech’s Graduate School, surveyed graduate student alumni in 1998 and 1999 and
Seaman’s 2000 survey as well as at Eaton’s surveys of graduate student alumni, the ready availability of ETDs
International Symposium on ETDs," Gail McMillan. College and Research Libraries News, v. 62, no. 6 (June
Several publishers have also attested to this and these statements are available in a variety of sources such as
Next section: Human resources and expertise needed for an ETD program
While each university’s situation with regard to personnel will vary, it has been shown that ETD
One step that should not be overlooked is to involve every person that had a role in traditional theses and
Graduate School personnel who, for example, receive the TDs as well as the various forms and payments, and who may be responsible for approving the final document
Library personnel such as the University Archivist, reference librarian, cataloging librarian, binding clerk, and business services personnel who, for example, are responsible for the long term preservation and access as well as those responsible for processing the microfilming invoices
A programmer may spend one-half to one hour per day during non-peak periods on maintenance and
One or two student assistants are helpful. One student who knows programming may spend a maximum
A faculty member from the library would supervise staff; draft policies; prepare budgets; collaborate
The ADT model was developed by the 7 original project partners during 1998-1999. The program was
The initial project was funded by an Australian Research Council (ARC) - Research Infrastructure
Equipment and Facilities (RIEF) Scheme grant (1997/1998). The ARC is the peak Australian
The software used is generic, and designed to be easily integrated at ADT member sites. Once installed,
ADT requires minimal resources. In fact, digital copies are much cheaper to produce that the traditional paper bound versions.
It must be noted that institutional membership and individual contributions to the ADT are voluntary, and
Each NDLTD member has to apply to its own national, regional and community funding agencies.
However, recurrent funding will probably be an ongoing issue unless a commitment is made at the
Libraries usually have some of the infrastructure already in place to handle ETDs, especially if they are
Keep in mind that existing personnel and hardware can be commandeered for the ETD prototype and that
These estimates assume that the university/library would adapt existing programs, scripts, Web pages, software, etc. that has been developed by the VT ETD Team. No additional equipment, software, or staff was necessary for the VT library to begin or to maintain the ETD system and services.
The estimated costs below show that for about $49,500 a library could replicate the Scholarly Communications Project ETD library if it adapts what VT has already developed for the NDLTD. If another university/library must also provide support to students like the New Media Center does, then the costs are greater for training, equipment and software.
In Virginia, pay band 5: $30,000/annual; $14/hr
We estimate the our Sys Admin spends .5 - 1 hr/day during non-peak times on maintenance and development. During peak periods he may spend 8 hrs/day on problems, development, and system improvements.
We estimate that our student (who knows programming) spends a maximum of 2 hrs/wk during non-peak times, and up to 10 hrs/wk during the periodic peaks.
Supervise staff; draft policies; prepare budgets; collaborate with system maintenance and developers; monitor workflow.
Work with faculty, staff, students, departments, colleges to become familiar with the processing, accessing, and archiving of ETDs.
Conduct workshops, write articles, participate in graduate student seminars, prepare handouts and Web pages. collaborate with other universities and libraries.
Originally, we did not purchase special equipment for ETDs, but incorporated this additional responsibility into the original server, a NeXt3.3 running HP. In Sept. 1997 we purchased a Sun Netra.
$50 Red Hat 3 advanced Server (free download for software and $50 education entitlement cost)
$1000/yr Server Equipment Maintenance fee
$150 x 2 Photoshop* * Educational pricing available for this software
At VT we have a New Media Center with staff, software, and equipment that can help students with every stage of ETD preparation and submission. If you don't have such a facility, consider:
$3000 2 printers: LaserJet and ColorPrinter
$150 x 2 Photoshop* * Educational pricing available for this software
Maintenance of training materials: Web pages: instructions and handouts
These may not change from the costs of cataloging traditional theses and dissertations. One advantage is
Many universities that have paper submissions of theses and dissertations collect funds for processing
These funds commonly are called "binding fees" or are given other names designating their use for
In the case of transition to ETDs at Virginia Tech, there were changes to these fees. First, in 1996, when
ETDs.
The estimated cost of a project to electronically produce and distribute theses
The expenditure budget of an electronic theses project involves four principal
Start-up costs are related to what you require to begin a project to electronically
The number of professionals required is linked to the volume of theses to be processed and to the variety of disciplines taught at your institution
Communication with the university’s administration, and with external partners
This is usually provided by the University
A workstation (PC) to test different software and to receive students’ files (by ftp) in a secure manner
Software chosen to suit the chosen technology and assembly line (Office suite, Adobe, XML software, HTML editor, etc.)
Table 1– Start-up for an electronic thesis production and distribution project
The resources required to create an assembly line for producing theses are related
Install and set parameters for the search tool (full-text and metadata)
Ensure Web referencing (Web search tools, indexes, other ETD sites, etc.).
Install a tool to measure visits to, and usage of, the site
The communications plan often makes the difference between successful projects
Worktime and other resources must be budgeted for the creation and
Organizing and holding information sessions with the university’s professors, researchers and students
Meeting with journalists from the university or from the city’s newspapers.
Student training must be offered through many forms such as workshops, on-line
Organizing the workshops (selecting classrooms, installing software, etc.)
Hiring assistants (eventually students) for the workshop’s “hands-on” period
Time taken by the professionals and technicians to answer student questions (by e-mail, telephone, and eventually in person).
The issue of plagiarism often arises among the arguments used to express skepticism with regard to
The argument is largely false and can be refuted fairly easily. To begin with, it is easy to recall that the
Scientist. X would have a better chance to lie ownership claims than if he/she held back these results. By
Theses are not so well protected at present. Widely dispersed across many institutions in many countries
(and languages), they are so poorly catalogued on a national or international basis that they often
The paradox of placing theses on line, especially if these theses can be harvested through some technique
In effect, putting theses on-line amounts to rediscovering Oldenburg's wisdom when it comes to
I shall consider assessment to include the gathering of information concerning the functioning of
I used functioning to refer to the broad social purposes of a college or university: to facilitate student
(Alexander W. Astin, Assessment for Excellence, 1991, p. 2)
Electronic theses and dissertations are not only products of student research, but also marks of the
Assessment of a program’s goals and objectives yields information that may be of great value to
Ideally, an ETD assessment program will have ties to overall campus assessment activities.
However, whether or not accountability to administration or government is a driving factor in developing
Assessment takes two basic forms, based on the point at which the
Formative evaluation takes place during the development of a program. It is used to help refocus activities, revise or fine tune a program, or to validate the success of particular activities. Formative assessment in an ETD program may help diagnose whether training sessions are useful to students, whether the submission process worked efficiently, whether the students learned about electronic scholarly communication issues, or whether the students find what they learned in order to produce an ETD helpful in their employment.
Summative evaluation is used to examine the program at its completion or at the end of a stage. Since an ETD program is ongoing, summative evaluation can be used on an annual basis to yield statistics that can be compared from year to year.
This chapter of the Guide is intended for those who have responsibility for implementing an institutional
Some campuses form an ETD committee or team, consisting of representatives from the Graduate
School, the faculty, the library, the computing center, and other relevant units on campus. As part of
Several units of the university—including academic departments, the graduate school, information
During the planning process, the ETD committee may focus on a variety of issues, including:
Once the focus of the assessment and measurement activities is identified, the ETD committee should
A necessary prerequisite to assessment is a clear understanding of the ETD project’s goals. Each
If an ETD program does not have clearly defined goals, an excellent resource is the NDLTD web site. This site includes the goals of the NDLTD, which can be adapted to local needs. These
Within each of these broad areas, many types of measures can be developed to help evaluate whether the
Institutions have many choices in what they measure in an ETD program. After aligning the assessment
(Charles R. McClure and Cynthia L. Lopata, Assessing the Academic Networked Environment, 1996, p.
An extensiveness measure collects data on such questions as how many departments within the university
An efficiency measure collects data to compare how life cycle costs of ETDs compare to those of print
Effectiveness measures examine the degree to which the objectives of a program have been met. For
Measures of service quality examine whether students are receiving the training and follow-up assistance
Frequently, discussions of how to assess electronic information resources are limited to defining ways of
Many vital questions cannot be answered with statistics about searches, downloads, and hits: Can users
Collection of data for assessment should be designed to answer some of these questions, to address the
Decisions about data collection are also informed by the institutional mission and goals. For example, if
There are a number of questions related to users that are possible targets for assessment. These include:
Are students achieving the objectives of the ETD program?
Are students using tools such as Acrobat appropriately and efficiently?
Has the availability of student work increased?
Do students have an increased understanding of publishing issues, such as intellectual property concerns?
Were students satisfied with the training or guidance they received to assist them with producing an ETD?
Did the availability of their dissertation on the web assist them in getting a job?
Are they using the technology and electronic authoring skills they learned in their current work?
Usefulness to students may be a factor of the availability of their ETD on the web, assisting employers in
The usefulness of an ETD program to students, faculty, and others may be an important factor to measure
Finally, the ability for faculty and students around the world to easily examine the dissertation and thesis
ETDs. The work done at Virginia Tech’s Electronic Thesis and Dissertation Initiative can provide a model for other institutions. Using
In compiling its counts, Virginia Tech eliminates everyone working
Several projects currently focus on collection of statistics related to
The Association of Research Libraries (ARL) collects statistics from libraries of large research universities in North America and has been working on several initiatives that explore data collection related to digital information. In particular, one of its New Measures initiatives, the E-Metrics Project, is recommending a particular set of measures and defining their collection.
The International Coalition of Library Consortia’s (ICOLC) has created Guidelines for Statistical Measures of Usage of Web-Based Indexed, Abstracted, and Full-Text Resources. They encourage vendors of electronic information products to build into their software statistical report generation that will meet the ICOLC Guidelines, promoting comparability of products.
In Europe, the EQUINOX Project, funded under the Telematics for Libraries Programme of the European Commission, addresses the need to develop methods for measuring performance in the electronic environment within a framework of quality management. Their products include a consolidated list of data sets and definitions of terms.
Library Statistics and Measures, a web site maintained by Joe Ryan of Syracuse University, also provides a useful set of links to resources on library statistics and measures.
Gathering data about ETDs can be done through online surveys and log file analysis. Online surveys can
Questions for student authors may be designed to improve the process of preparing and submitting
While preparing your ETD, where did you find answers to your questions?
If you consulted the VT ETD Web site, please indicate if the site was useful.
If you attended an ETD workshop, please indicate if you found the workshop useful.
If you used a [particular] computer lab, please indicate if the staff was helpful.
How many ETDs did you consult while preparing your ETD?
Compared to what you expected, how difficult was it to create a PDF file?
My computer is a [PC, Mac, Unix, other].
Where were you when you submitted your ETD?
Compared to what you expected, how difficult was it to submit your thesis/dissertation electronically?
Within the next 1–2 years, what do you intend to publish from your ETD?
If you restricted access to your VT ETD, on what did you base your decision?
Please include any comments or questions that you have about ETDs.
In the online environment, usage is similar to but not equal to library circulation and re shelving
It would be beneficial if all libraries providing access to ETDs would capture and
McMillan has periodically surveyed and reported numbers of ETDs available
For administrative purposes, institutions may be interested in the number of ETDs supervised by each
Microsoft Excel. The access to the database can be done using either ODBC drivers or specialized
For a broad view of counting information, two projects are widely regarded as providing interesting
Peter Lyman and Hal R. Varian’s How Much Information project at the University of California, Berkeley is an attempt to measure how much information is produced in the world each year.
The OCLC Web Characterization Project conducts an annual web sample of publicly available web sites to analyze trends in the size and content of the web.
Some programs that provide guidance or models for collecting institutional data in higher education are
K. C. Green has been conducting the Campus Computing Project since 1990. His work charts the increasing use of technology on campuses.
The TLT Group’s Flashlight Program, under the direction of Steve Ehrmann, has developed a subscription-based tool kit that provides a large, structured set of assessment techniques and data collection models that can be adapted by individual campuses that want to study and improve the educational uses of technology. The Flashlight Program web site also includes valuable overviews of assessment issues and provides advice on deciding what to assess and how to develop questions.
The Coalition for Networked Information’s Assessing the Academic Networked Environment project provides case studies of campuses that implemented assessment projects.
One of the participants in the CNI project, the University of Washington, has a rich set of assessment instruments and reports on its web site, UW Libraries Assessment.
Next Section: Guidelines for Implementing an Assessment Program for ETDs
Universities/Guidelines for Implementing an Assessment Program for ETDs
The Coalition for Networked Information (CNI) sponsored a
Bring together an assessment team of individuals from various units on campus that can add useful perspectives and expertise; include, if possible, someone who specializes in assessment.
Align the overall goals of the assessment initiative with the institution’s goals and priorities.
Gain support from the administration at as many levels as possible.
Choose a manageable portion of the assessment project as the first implementation. Do not attempt to do a comprehensive assessment of campus networking on the first try.
Consider using more than one assessment technique to measure the aspect of networking that you have chosen; particularly consider combining quantitative and qualitative approaches as complementary techniques.
Identify carefully who are the audiences for the assessment reports.
Examine what you might do with the information you collect, including improving services, seeking additional funding and determine whether your data will provide what you need for that objective.
Refine assessment instruments on a periodic basis and incrementally add new components.
Monitor the work of national groups such as ARL, EDUCAUSE, CNI, and the Flashlight Project to see whether materials they develop and guidelines they produce can provide a framework for your project.
(Joan K. Lippincott, “Assessing the Academic Networked Environment,” Information Technology in
Higher Education: Assessing Its Impact and Planning for the Future, ed., Richard N. Katz and Julia A.
In addition to gathering availability and usage data, online surveys can be used to gather information
Where do you work/study?
What do you do?
What type of computer are you using?
Are you familiar with Adobe PDF?
Are you familiar with online databases?
If you are from a university, does your institution accept electronic theses and dissertations (ETDs)?
If your institution does not accept ETDs, do you think it should?
Have you ever submitted an ETD? (to find out if your readers are ETD authors past, present or future)
For what purpose are you using this digital library?
Did you download any ETDs?
If you downloaded any ETDs, how did you find them?
If you downloaded any ETDs, how easy was it to find what you were looking for?
If you searched for an ETD, how fast was the response to your search request?
How often do you plan to use Virginia Tech's ETD library?
How often do you plan to use other ETD libraries?
Measurement Program.
1998-99. Washington, DC: ARL, 2000.
Higher Education.
American Council on Education/Oryx Press. 1991.
Measures.
Management System.
Abstracted, and Full Text Resources. November 1998.
Networked Information, 1996.
NDLTD: Networked Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations.
Ryan, Joe. Library Statistics & Measures.
The Campus Computing Project.
Networked Environment.
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1999.
Lyman, Peter and Hal R. Varian. How Much Information?
Next Section: Policy Initiatives: National, Regional, and Local; Discipline specific; Language specific
Universities/Policy Initiatives: National, Regional, and Local; Discipline specific; Language specific
For universities, it seems most practical to participate in national ETD
Online Initiative or in Canada. The national library as a central point,
Principal tasks of a so called central coordination bureau for national ETD
In France, a national program for ETDs has been initiated by the Ministry
The following text was taken from Prof. Peter Diepold (Sourcebook for
The initiative soon caught public attention, leading to the enlargement of
Initiative. (IuK stands for ``Information und Kommunikation in German).
Funds were granted for three years by the Federal Ministry of Education
One major project within this initiative was the Dissertation Online project,
Internet, involving five universities (Berlin, Duisburg, Erlangen, Karlsruhe,
Science Foundation. Funding was initially restricted to one year.
Therefore a subsequent proposal to DFG was drafted. DFG funds were
Later, this project was made into a national initiative with the German
South America??
Discipline specific initiatives focus on bringing researchers and scholars
The PhysNet Service exists within the Physnet initiative. PhysNet - the
Therefore PhysNet complements the services of commercial providers. All information of PhysNet is kept, stored and maintained by its creators at
PhysDep offers a set of lists of links to nearly all Physics Institutions worldwide ordered by continent, country and town. In addition, it offers a HARVEST-based search engine to search across the listed Institutions.
PhysNet provides lists of links to document sources of the distributed Physics Institutions. Such document sources are, for example, preprints, research reports, annual reports, and lists of publications of local research groups and individual scientists. The service is also completed with a HARVEST-based search engine.
Journals lists Physics-related Journals, which are available with free fulltext on the web. A list of 'EPS Recognized Journals' is given as well.
Conferences, Workshops and Summer Schools offers a list of servers with Conference Lists in different fields of Physics.
PhysJobs offers a list of links to various physics-related job sites on the web. It also implements a search facility to search for information on these sites.
Education provides online educational resources for physics (e.g. Lecture Notes, Seminar Talks, Visualization and Demonstration Applets), listed by subject areas.
Links lists further sources of physics information on the web and information services of other fields and disciplines.
Services provides various related tools e.g. to enrich and improve homepages and document sources by adding correct MetaData according the international Dublin-Core standard.
It comes with link lists sorted by country and town/state and institution.
The present content is about 100.000 documents or document lists
A search engine is attached http://physnet.uni-oldenburg.de/PhysNet/physdoc.html which went into full
Mathematical Union. The special appeal of Physdoc is that it serves a
The MathDissInternational project developed as a service within the
MathNet initiative, set up in Germany at the Konrad Zuse institute for
International, a permanent international online full-text document server
LaTeX has become a widely accepted tool in mathematical literature.
The project MathDiss International will be sponsored by the DFG:
Complete inclusion of the dissertations through metadata and the expansion of the research possibilities using the source code.
Integration of the services in the Math-Net by the adaptation of the project results to the standards used there.
International marketing for the worldwide opening of the service.
Tests on the conversion of mathematical dissertations into new mark-up languages, e.g. MathML.
CogPrints project is funded by the Joint Information Systems Committee
(JISC) of the Higher Education Funding Councils, as part of its Electronic
The arXiv.org e-Print archive (formerly xxx.lanl.gov) is a fully automated
The regulatory framework was set by decree on 25 September 1985. The decree laid out the procedures
The current initiatives for the electronic distribution of theses are numerous and extremely varied, as
The French system is currently structured on three levels:
A local level, based on the initiatives of certain producer institutions
A regional level, where a number of research institutions have aggregated at a regional or thematic level
A national level, based on the creation of a ministerial working group, following a circulated letter written by the Minister in October 2000. This working group must define a new regulatory framework.
This document guarantees the University’s commitment to support young scholars, so that they benefit
September 1998. Its preamble restates the appendix of this decree (Model Charter) and fills out the text
Every thesis is prepared within a research group linked to a Doctoral School. The doctoral school’s
a) to give a student applying for admission to the doctorate all pertinent information on the following two subjects: first, the functioning of doctoral studies, the research supervisors and pertinent teams for his/her project as well as the follow-up he/she can expect; and second, the possibility for student aid, scholarships, bursaries, and partnerships with a company likely to provide him/her with the means to completer his/her project;
b) to approve the agreement between the student and the supervisor for the preparation of a thesis;
c) to coordinate the academic training dispensed in order to obtain the DEA as well as during the years of doctoral studies;
d) to offer doctoral students a larger academic environment than their thesis specialization, for instance by organizing transversal seminars, methodology courses, exchanges with other laboratories (especially European ones), by favoring discussion forums, and by making all useful documents available on a server, etc...;
e) to consult annually with the thesis supervisor about the progress of work and to give an assessment of exemptions from extensions. The thesis supervisor’s follow-up, like that of the doctoral school’s director, can be conducted by e-mail when the student in undertaking activities far from the university;
f) to inform doctoral students about the question of professional insertion throughout their doctoral studies, notably by organizing internships and information sessions with professionals, but also by organizing where possible a course of study involving rotation, with periods in firms, in national education etc.;
g) to track this insertion after the thesis defense or after a post-doctoral period in an external laboratory.
A doctoral thesis is a contribution to the knowledge produced within a research team. In order to
University recommends that doctoral students prepare their thesis using a computer. To this end, it
a) at the SCD, under the conditions set out by the decree of 25 September 1985 that applies Law no. 84-52 of 26 January 1984;
b) from the University’s server, once the author and the jury have agreed to its electronic distribution.
The rules of usage concerning the necessity of the jury’s authorization before distribution and the
Scientific Council to nominate a mediator from outside the doctoral school and/or the Establishment.
French thesis supervisor, or between the two thesis supervisors. If the conflict persists, the Presidents of
The doctoral schools have the responsibility for distributing this charter to the DEA and doctoral
Lyon 2: electronic submission and mixed submission.
The establishment of an electronic archiving and distribution system assumes that the administration
Electronic submission should be organized in an automatic fashion, on a server able to support anywhere
This submission will naturally be integrated within the traditional administrative circuit of the thesis and
This form of submission should be seen as a step towards the completely electronic submission, but it is
The student submits paper copies and an electronic copy at the thesis service, and attests to the
The electronic publishing service validates the submission. It is a question of verifying the
Non-corrected theses, or those subject to a confidentiality clause, are archived in SGML and are only distributed on the intranet, according to the case. Their description is broadcast, but with mention of their confidentiality.
This second system removes the risk of non-conformity inherent in the mixed submission. The legal
If this system is more satisfactory, it nevertheless requires a supplementary infrastructure. In order to
This system thus requires the support of many different types of structures. These include the traditional
Starting from the files produced by the student, a “single file” printing (PostScript and/or PDF) will be
Only the PostScript file will be transferred to the copy service’s print station.
The resources necessary for the implementation of a thesis treatment platform in an establishment
a client-server system. Here, a server site ensures the management of computing resources while client sites ensure production (from a distance) and distribution (locally). A web interface manages the communication between the different client sites and the server site.
Associations of institutions can develop as a result of geographic or disciplinary proximity, by creating synergies and by combining skills and competencies.
The existing system requires diverse skills, both in computer engineering and in engineering documents,
Training in the use and administration of the software platform for processing theses
The training activities are targeted at two types of agents with specific skills:
The implementation of these new processes requires the participation of the principal actors involved
With time, the Doctoral Schools should become support centers for the use of the new tools of scientific
Tools such as generic document forms and technical specifications will be provided by the Ministry. The
Doctoral Schools will be charged with adapting them to the particular practices of a discipline or of the
A permanent link should be established between the electronic production and distribution services and
Grenoble, Genève), and on the other hand scientific establishments (CNRS, Inra, Inserm). One equally
To conclude the work led by a reflection group, the Minister responsible for Higher Education released a
Text addressed to University presidents, and to presidents or directors of institutions of higher
The deep transformations which have for some time characterized information technology have clearly
Research, the conference of university presidents, the association of university library directors, and
The proposed new system foresees the distribution of theses on the Internet once a certain number of
The intervention of numerous actors above and beyond the doctoral student will be required:
On these bases, in agreement with the Minister of Research, and after consultation with the CPU, I have
This new scheme will obviously take time to put into place, progressing as the institutions introduce
To increase the visibility and to valorize French scientific production at the international level
To favor a new approach to the thesis so that it is considered as a dynamic database rather than a static body of knowledge. The electronic version of the thesis becomes a genuine work instrument which meets the demands of users, starting from the user’s own agenda of research and investigation.
To develop training for student-researchers in the use of information technology and electronic publishing. Student-researcher will find themselves in the role of scientific information producers since they will be able to master these mechanisms and thus increase their autonomy. They will personally acquire the status of being information producers and distributors.
This should gather together the elements permitting scientists to produce, archive and distribute all their research work by themselves. Let us remember that France’s approach to the electronic distribution of theses is integrated into a vaster francophone project of putting the results of public research online.
The ADT Program has developed a simple e-commerce option for members to use should they choose.
The file format for the ADT is to always include a front.pdf file. This file contains author, title, abstract,
Students are the most important participants in ETD activities. They are the main target of the education
This section of the Guide highlights issues of interest to students who write or refer to ETDs. It provides
Next Section: How to learn about ETDs? (workshops, online resources, helpers)
Students/How to learn about ETDs? (workshops, online resources, helpers)
Some students who prepare an ETD undertake this effort as an independent. That is, they prepare a paper
In addition to learning about ETDs from this guide or other online sources (see also from
The other type of helper is a person who provides assistance on demand. This may be a person who
ETDs.
Do you know of any theses or dissertations that are crafted in
By celebrating the innovative work of our graduate students and
When students prepare ETDs, they must be sure to undertake this effort in accordance with all
If their university does not accept ETDs, students can submit as an “independent”, according to rules and
Documents are often prepared in a similar form to that of prior documents. Students are encouraged to go
In its Fall 2001 meeting, the NDLTD Steering Committee decided to pursue this strategy, giving awards
ETDs are prepared to facilitate scholarly communication. They are vehicles for transmitting the research
The former ensures that a reader sees things the way the author desires, which may be of particular
However, no authors write using tools that store their works only in PDF, and few authors directly create
Such choices may be discipline specific, may be based on what is commonly used by faculty and
Next Section: Overview: writing with word processors and structured editors
Students/Overview: writing with word processors and structured editors
Authors preparing an ETD must learn about electronic publishing to succeed in their task. In the future,
Meanwhile, a small number may invest (their money and time) in such as SoftQuad’s Author/Editor. But
From word processing systems such as these, it is relatively easy to prepare PDF files. It also is possible
Some of these efforts yield metadata for ETDs as a byproduct, either directly or in connection with a
In addition to writing, authors may convey their results using multimedia devices. Special tools are often
The following subsections explain in detail how to work with Word, Word Perfect, LaTeX, and
FrameMaker. Note, however, that many tools rapidly become obsolete. Authors should work with
Inspired by the NDLTD, a group of faculty and staff joined together to create the Digital Media
Improving the quality of e-documents, particularly theses and dissertations.
Researching ways authoring tools, particularly Microsoft Office 2000, can be used to facilitate electronic theses and dissertations.
Researching how technologies alter graduate education, including mentoring relationships, topic selection, intellectual property, writing processes, and publishing practices
Working with tool developers to keep abreast of new tools for researchers and writers
Providing an open forum for the exchange of ideas regarding the evolutions of new media scholarship.
Providing training workshops, reference materials, and support for graduate students interested in contributing to the University of South Florida's digital library of electronic theses and dissertations.
While we are excited about engaging our undergraduate students in this research and support endeavor,
Following Walter Ong, who theorized "Technologies are not mere exterior aids but also interior
Browser. More extensive analyses can be formed by “roundtripping” the data back into Excel.
Throughout our research, as we work with Office 2000 tools in proposal preparation, research, and
Ultimately, we expect our research will reveal ways faculty and graduate students can use software tools
Results of our research can be viewed at our project home: http://dmi.usf.edu.
Moxley, Joseph M. "Dissertating in a Digital Age: the Future of Composition Scholarship" Invited Chapter. Reinventing the Discipline in Composition and Rhetoric and a Site for Change. Edited by Sheila Carter-Tod, Catherine G. Latterell, Cindy Moore, and Nancy Welch.
Moxley, Joseph M. American Universities Should Require Electronic Theses and Dissertations. (Educause Quarterly, No. 3 2001, pp. 61-63.)
Preparing a word document to be converted into an archivable form using the SGML or XML standard first
In Word it is possible to distinguish between the information a document holds and the structure in which it
If you use the style sheet heading1 (see picture below), than it may be possible to associate a certain
You can see the left row within the word window. This is the so-called structured view, which you can get
(http://mariachi.dsic.upv.es/bibword) is a bibliography management tool for MS
The Corel WordPerfect Suite provides another possibility to produce large documents. It is a system like
Microsoft Word, but sold by another vendor: Corel Inc. (see http://www.corel.com). It contains nearly the
Usually there has been a native WordPerfect template produced in order to help you with additional drop-
"Digital Dissertation" and Create. This enables the functions of the drop-down menu as in the following
Figure 1: Using a WordPerfect style sheet for digital dissertations (used with version 9 of WordPerfect suite)
Scientists within the natural and engineering sciences have special needs for mathematics and
TeX is a document formatting language (and the program that processes it) written by Donald Knuth for
LaTeX is free to download from any CTAN archive (http://www.ctan.org ), and works on
Macintosh, MS-DOS, Unix, and Windows 3.1/95/NT (though some commands may vary on some
To create LaTeX files, all you need is an ASCII-based editor, like Emacs, Vi. Writing a dissertation just
*.tex.
To compile a LaTeX file and produce a printable version of the document, you have to follow the
While writing your thesis in LaTeX, please keep the following rules in mind:
As document style we advise to choose report or book, because both start with chapter as the highest
With usepackage we import additional styles that are needed, e.g. for tables, mathematics, figures etc. In
Levels -1 to 2 appear in the table of contents. Part is used to split the whole document into several parts.
The chapters numbering are constantly growing. Within the document than a single page is displayed,
Chapters are numbered without taking the parts into account. The numbering is standardized: Chapter 1
Mathematics.
Sections are subunits of chapters and numbered: Basic Algorithms.
Chapters are numbered without taking the parts into account. The numbering is standardized: Chapter 1
Mathematics.
Sections are subunits of chapters and numbered: Basic Algorithms.
Sections are numbered as follows: 1.1.1 Decision Tree Algorithm A.
For those parts like acknowledgements, dedication, and curriculum vita where authors usually don't want
\chapter*{Thank You} . The asterisk prevents the numbering.
Appendices are included using the \appendix command. Please use commands as in the following
\appendix* not numbered headings of the appendices
Using graphics: figures and pictures should be included in LaTeX documents using the eps (encapsulated
The parameter [h] positions the figure at the current position.
Keep in mind, always to use a caption-environment to put the figure captions below the picture:
\caption[short description for the table of figures]{Long description for the text}
The title page is the most complicated part. Most universities supply own templates for the title page and
HTML or SGML/XML, we advise to use \newcommands as simplest method to apply a pseudo structure
But as this is not enough for a thesis, most universities provide own style sheets or templates.
Tables should be used as follows: authors are advised to use the table-environment because it provides
Citations can be used as their own structured items as follows:
Numbered lists are typeset using the enumerate-environment. By integration new enumerate-
Bulleted lists are typeset using the itemize-environment. Here a hierarchical nesting is also possible.
Definition lists contain a definition term and a definition text.
\item[Definition term] Explanation of the definition term
If an author wants to include source code this is best done using the \verbatim-environment.
Anchors, references and cross-references are typeset using the \label command, which links a key to the
A very important part of a dissertation is the bibliography. We advise all authors to use the bibtex-system
The bibtex-database can be included into the LaTeX file by the following command, where a predefined
\bibliography{file name without .bib}
\bibliographystyle{style, e.g. alpha, plain, apalike, etc.}
Within the BibTeX-system database entries can be done using a plain ASCII editor. like emacs. There
The following example shows how a BiBTeX-entry has to be written:
The following table shows those items have to be used for certain bibliographic entry types:
To process a latex and a bibtex-file under UNIX system you have to type the following command
This produces the following files: mydissertation.dvi / mydissertation.aux /mydissertation.bbl /
Run dvips "dvips mydissertation.dvi" This produces a file dissertation.ps that is printable on a printer, or
Using LaTeX under MS Windows requires the TeY System, a DVI-Viewer, Ghostscript and Ghostview.
There are several LaTeX distributions: MikTeX , a highly regarded setup for Windows 95/NT
(http://www.miktex.org/) and emTeX , the classic DOS and OS/2 TeX setup by Eberhard
Mattes (ftp://ctan.tug.org/tex-archive/systems/msdos/emtex/).
There are front ends available for Latex that provide a WYSIWIG view to the user. One of the most used
Why should one use FrameMaker instead of MS Word?
Framemaker provides in comparison to Microsoft Word a much more sophisticated tool for electronic
Production of real and large structured text (not just address cards) (and is stable handling those).
Production of semantically structured text (not just text that uses style sheets).
Provision of a WYSIWYG user interface to edit XML documents, instead of an XML tree editor à la Spy or Xeena.
Capabilities of producing a good-looking paper version of a document with all layout features that are professionally used at printing companies.
Framemaker+SGML especially combines the power of an excellent word processor (better than MS
Word) with a good structure editor.
In order to produce structured documents and some sort of style sheets, one has to learn FrameMaker's
As FrameMaker belong to the product family of Adobe, it provides an add-on to produce a high quality
Using FrameMaker+SGML6.0 for a conversion of MS Word documents into SGML instances.
Editing or converting using FrameMaker is much more complex than the previously described methods.
FrameMaker is able to import formatted Word documents keeping the stylesheet information and
In order to proceed with a conversion using FrameMaker, you will need the following configuration files:
a conversion table that contains the list of the Word styles and the corresponding elements within the
FrameMaker internal format. This table is saved within the FrameMaker internal format (*.frm).
A document type definition will be saved within FrameMaker internally as EDD (Element Definition). It
FrameMaker uses layout rules for the internal layouting of documents. Within this layout definition, the
The Read-Write Rules contain rules that define which FrameMaker format will be exported in which
The SGML- or XML DTD has to be used as well, including Catalog- or Entity files, as well as Sub
DTDs, like CALS for tables.
To process a conversion, a new SGML application has to be defined within FrameMaker+SGML. This
A workflow and a technology for conversion to ETD using FrameMaker+SGML6.0 was first developed
You can find more information about using FrameMaker+SGML for an XML Authoring at
The desired situation for retrieving archivable ETDs would be the one, that authors write in an XML-
Some desktop publishing systems today provide an opportunity to save as SGML or XML. Investigations
Writing in WordPerfect or FrameMaker+SGML enforces the author to learn new writing habits. While writing, they have to think about the structure of their documents, e.g., which part is a heading, which part is a definition list; or they have to think to add certain parts immediately to the document, like, references, table and figure captions, etc.
While writing according to a specified DTD, the desktop publishing system often internally checks syntax correctness by using an XML parser. Some of those internal parsers are still not stable enough and may cause the system to crash, as experienced with WordPerfect 9.0. Those parsing procedures in between the active scientific thinking and writing often disturbs the authors.
Most of the pure XML editors could not produce an appropriate and layouted printed copy or PDF file that would satisfy the approval of readers of the printed version of a document. Some of those editors simply fail to process large and complex documents.
Most of the tools are not ready yet, especially in a sense that would allow to use user or domain specific DTDs. Staroffice and other tools support their own vendor specific DTD only.
Although the world of desktop publishing systems is actually changing, there are still too few tools that
The support and appearance of their graphical user interface,
The provision of a certain amount of features normal word processors have, like automated numbering, colors, table management, link management, style sheets.
The platform independence or cross-platform availability,
The support of user specific DTDs, and standard DTDs, like TEI, Docbook, etc.,
The export quality of produced XML: tables, tags,
Their commercial availability and price.
The following systems are able to export into SGML or
(More information about SGML/XML tools can be found at:
A popular page representation scheme, a published de facto standard developed by Adobe is the Portable Document Format, PDF. Adobe
PDF. It is downloadable at http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/readstep.html. Adobe also provides tools
PostScript. The whole suite is called Adobe Acrobat and is actually available with version 5. Adobe’s Acrobat software, installed on a Windows
It is also possible to produce PDF documents on UNIX systems. However, the latest version of Acrobat Distiller that was available for certain
UNIX platforms such as Solaris or HP-UX was version 3.1. Authors writing in LaTeX can use ghostscript to produce PDF files. But in order to
To avoid problems for future readers, authors should embed all fonts in their documents (when that is allowed). Otherwise, software displaying
Similarly, authors should use so-called “outline” fonts as opposed to bitmap fonts, so that display and printing can proceed to scale characters as
Ghostscript (http://archiv.leo.org/pub/comp/general/typesetting/tex/support/ghostscript/ or http://www.cs.wisc.edu/~ghost) and Viewer Tool ghostview (http://archiv.leo.org/pub/comp/general/typesetting/tex/support/ghostscript/gnu/ghostview/)
Generally speaking, there are several possibilities for producing PDF document from a LaTeX document.
A PDF-producing application can deal with a font in one of three ways: First it can take the entire font
The default installation of dvips uses fonts with a fixed resolution (.pk fonts) encoded as 300dpi (dots per
Output as Type 3 fonts. Acrobat Distiller cannot handle those fonts, because there are no font descriptors
Therefore it is necessary to install Postscript Type 1 fonts (True Type) for the dvips program. Many
The Type 1 Computer Modern fonts are provided by Virginia Tech and part of this guide (cmps.tgz /
Producing a WWW-readable PDF is just the first part of a PDF production. It is more sophisticated to
You can use the Adobe Exchange software under Windows/Macintosh to add links, etc., to a ready
This package has been developed by Sebastian Rahtz and uses the outcome of the Hypertex project.
This package extends the capabilities of the LaTeX cross-referencing commands (TOC,bibliographies,
etc.) to produce \special commands that a driver can turn into hypertext links. It also defines new
For using hyperref a global option can be used within the LaTeX file:
/Title (Test of the pdftex Package)
The usual \label and \autoref commands are used to produce hyperlinks. The \autoref-command replaces
Within the LaTeX file there are some additional user macros available to produce hyperlinks:
The text is used a hyperlink to the url . This URL must be a full URL (like http://www.cybertheses.org)
A base url is established, prepended to other specified URLs to make it easier to write PDF documents.
The image referenced by the image url is inserted.
A target area of the document (text) is marked and given the name category.name
The text is made into a link to url#category.name
The text becomes a link point to a point established with a \label command (using the symbolic name label).
It is even possible to use Acrobat specific commands, e.g.menu options to
For further information and help, we recommend the book by Goosens/ Rahtz: The LaTeX Web
Companion.
The \special commands that are added by using the LaTeX macros have to be interpreted by DVI drivers
The following DVI drivers are supported by the hyperref package:
PDFTex is a variant of Tex that produces directly a PDF output. Usually a Latex or Tex system produces
a DVI output. PDFTex can also produce DVI output.
You may use pdfTex instead of LaTex using macro packages as context or hyperref or others to write the
"When producing DVI output, for which one can use pdfTex as well as any other Tex, part of the job is
As a direct result, when on uses a high level macro package, the macros that take care of these features
Currently all mainstream macro packages offer pdfTex support in on way or the other. When using such
a package, it makes sense to turn on this support in the appropriate way, otherwise one cannot be sure if
The following main macro packages support pdfTex:
The concept of Document Type Definitions (DTDs)
A document type definition (DTD), in the sense of XML, defines rules or templates, which are used to
An element declaration, which is the main part of a DTD and the structural definition. Elements can contain other elements, characters or nothing. Element declarations define the name of the element and the logical content (sub elements) of an element. (See [10].) An important part of the element declaration is the content model. It is here that the document architect indicates the order and occurrence of other element or character data.
A notation declaration, which defines a notation for external formats, e.g., for graphics (gif, jpeg), mathematics (TeX, LaTeX), 3D objects (VRML) and other formats, that cannot be coded directly in XML.
An entity declaration, which defines character, sets and replacement objects for characters. Everything from a single character on up can be defined with a single entity. There are two basic types of entities: general and parameter. Parameter entities are only allowed in declarations, and are usually used to make a DTD more readable or to control processing. General entities are used in the document instance; the documents build upon the DTD.
An attribute list declaration, where attributes and their values for the different element types defined in the element type declaration is listed.
To define a DTD, a special syntax is needed, which does not conform to the usual XML syntax where a
), producing code like this: Joe Miller
The fact that currently available authoring systems for XML still have not won wide recognition has led
DTDs were available. A view of those projects from today’s perspective illustrates the demand for a
All the presented DTDs are built upon similar principles. A classical dissertation (which can be seen as
The following DTDs are currently in use at different institutions:
ETD-ML.DTD: Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (Virginia Tech)
TEI-based DTD with extensions for natural sciences: Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences Uppsala
All those Document Type Definitions are so-called author-DTDs. This means that they are primarily
Michigan, which use TEI-Light.dtd, mainly serve students in the arts and humanities. Problems using
TEI.DTD or DocBook.DTD are recognized at universities, which support a strong natural science
Converting from word processing forms to SGML or XML requires more planning in advance, different
Simple word processing emphasizes layout or what-you-see-is-what-you-get (WYSIWYG) editing.
Emphasizing what documents look like is quite distinct from focusing on the logical structure, for which
Some word processors have been extended to facilitate such an approach. Microsoft produced SGML
Author for Word as an add-on package for Word 95, and new versions of WordPerfect can export
Conversion from LaTeX is slightly simpler since the TeX approach involves using formatting commands
Because of the inherent complexity of converting from word processing schemes to markup
[5] Edward Fox: Networked Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations, Web matters, Aug., 12th 1999, http://helix.nature.com/webmatters/library/library.html
[6] Website of the standards committee of NDLTD: http://www.ndltd.org/standards/
[8] Tad Lane, Scalable Vector Graphics - Web Graphics with Original-Quality Artwork, in: BITS, November 1999, http://lanl.gov/orgs/cic/cic6/bits/november_99/novbits1.html
[9] Neill Kipp: Beyond the Paper Paradigm: XML and the Case for Markup; in: Part II "Guideline for Writing and Designing ETDs" ETD Sourcebook, Weisser, Moxley and Fox editors, 1999
[10] B. Travis, D. Waldt: The SGML Implementation Guide, Springer, Berlin- Heidelberg-New York, 1995 [11] Ed Dumbill: The State of XML, June, 16th, 2000 in XML.com, http://www.xml.com/pub/2000/06/xmleurope/keynote.html
A SGML or XML document type definition (DTD) that serves as structure model for the output. One says that the output SGML document is valid to the specific DTD, or it is an instance of this DTD:
A Word style sheet that holds paragraph and character styles according to the structures in the DTD. So if in a DTD you have defined a structure for Author (e.g. expressed in the output file as):
You will need some kind of a configuration file that allows the mapping of the DTD elements into Word elements and vice versa.
Often a conversion is done by using a plug in to MS Word directly. But other options use the Microsoft internal
There are other approaches in development as well, especially within Scandinavia and the University of Oslo/
Norway. We don't refer to their solution yet.
The process line for converting Word files into SGML documents developed within the CyberThèses project uses
The input of the process line is an RTF file with a "structuring style sheet" and the output is an SGML document
a first one converts the RTF file into a flat XML file encoded according to DTD of RTF. The produced file is a linear sequence of paragraph elements having each one an explicit "style name" attribute corresponding to the RTF style names.
Some supplementary scripts then allow the export of the SGML document towards other formats (HTML, XML).
Most of the scripts are available from the CyberTheses web site : http://www.cybertheses.org
This system is devoted to a particular DTD, but its generalization to other document models shall not raise any
Why did we use the SGML Author for Word?
The "Dissertation Online" project implemented and refined a conversion strategy that allows to convert documents
We used this product from Microsoft, the SGML Author for Word, due to several reasons:
It is less expensive than other software producing SGML files with the same quality.
It supports an international standard for tables: CALS.
As it is a Word-Add-On it handles documents in MS-Word doc- format better than other tools.
As we started using this technology in 1997, it supported from the very beginning Word97, the version of word, which was the actual one that time.
Unfortunately, Microsoft didn't continue the development of this tool. So there are new versions available for Office
2000, Office XP, or Office 2007. But the internal document format from MS Word 97, MS Word 2000, Office XP, and Office 2007 are the same
For a successful conversion from a word document into a DiML document you will need:
The DiML-document type definition (diml20.dtd, calstb.dtd)
The Association file for the Microsoft SGML-Author for Word (diml20.dta)
The converter style sheet, which consists of several macros programmed to make the preconversion process easier.
Several perl scripts to correct the transformation of tables.
You must have the following software installed at you computer:
SP (NSGMLS) (Parser for SGML-Files by James Clark). (new version are available at http://openjade.sourceforge.net/doc-1.4/index.htm, but we haven’t tested that)
Run SP (A WYSIWYG tool for SP by Richard Light). http://www.light.demon.co.uk/runsp/index.htm
Perl (a scripting language for using the perl scripts).
The converter style sheet and the author’s style sheet can be obtained from the following website:
Converter scripts and perlscripts can be obtained from http://www.educat.hu-
The conversion from a Microsoft Word document into a SGML document, which is an instance of the DiML.dtd that
Load the style sheet for conversion (NOT the one for the authors) see, see figure below.
There is a special feature to get the page numbers out of the Word document by using certain word specific text
Formatting that has been applied by the author without using style sheets have to be replaced by the correct style
In order to get a correct display of tables later on by using CSS style sheets within common browsers, empty table
Soft coded line breaks have to be preserved for the conversion. This is done by inserting special characters #BR# to
Press the button "Save as SGML" within the FILE menu.
Check the XML/SGML output using the feedback file (fbk) see figure below.
DiML.dtd)automatically.
Check the HTML Output.
Correct possible errors manually within the SGML file and repeat the transformation.
A demonstration QuickTime video may be found at the ETD-Guide server as well. (see http://www.educat.hu-
Text editors, Desktop Publishing Systems that can export SGML/XML documents
[1] Bollenbach, Markus; Rüppel, Thomas, Rocker, Andreas: FrameMaker+SGML5.5.
[2] St. Laurent; Biggar, Robert: Inside XML DTDs. New York, McGraw Hill, 1999, ISBN
[4] Smith, Norman E.: Practical Guide to SGML/XML Filters. Plano. Texas, Wordware
[5] Goldfarb, Charles; Prescod, Paul: XML Handbuch. München, Prentice Hall, 1999,
WordPerfect supports structured writing since version 7. Most of the following text has been taken from
a Whitepaper by Corel Inc. that appeared for WordPerfect 9 in June 1999.
Writing XML using WordPerfect means that the author is forced to use specific structures. The software
Standard WordPerfect 9 templates allow users to embed XML components. These WordPerfect
The Document Type Definition (DTD) defines the elements and the structured relationship between the
(LGC) by the Word Perfect DTD Compiler, the DTD is integrated to a WordPerfect Template along with
The Layout Specification Instance (LSI) specifies formatting information, such as bold, underline,
An Alias file (LNM) specifies the descriptive names for elements in the DTD. This is useful when the
WordPerfect also provides standards templates to the user and allows the creator to customize the user
An example of a DTD, a LSI file and a WordPerfect template for digital dissertations used in Germany
XML using WordPerfect you have to work with the SGML/XML functionality. Please consult the
In order to compile a DTD into a Logic file, you have to follow the steps:
Press Compile. Now the LGC file has been produced and is usable for writing an SGML/XML
You can now open WordPerfect and choose Tools / SGML / Document types. Here point to the created
Your own layout can be produced using the Layout Designer program that is in the WordPerfect suite.
Just choose open diml1_0.lsi or open a new file and start creating or manipulating your own layout style.
Start writing a dissertation directly with SGML/XML by choosing under WordPerfect the option Tools /
Usually there has been a native WordPerfect template produced in order to help you with additional drop
This allows you now to use the WordPerfect style sheet by choosing under the main window: File / New
/ Choose "Digital Dissertation" and Create. This enables the functions of the drop down menu as in the
If ETDs should be archived for he next 20–50 years and still be readable and usable, it in necessary, that
LaTeX is mostly used within the natural sciences and mathematics, the encoding of complex
The LaTeX format should enable an easier conversion to XML, because of its structured approach to text
Converting mathematical expressions into XML can be done using 3 different strategies:
Convert them into graphics that are easily interpreted and presented by common Internet
To leave them in a LaTeX encoding within the XML file. Then Plugins like IBM
Techexplorer, or Math Viewer are able to interpret the LaTeX code and produce an on-the –fly rendering
There are semantic differences in LaTeX between the encoding of formulas. So authors have to be aware
Pi represents the mathematical constant, which is the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter,
Instead of coding it simply as letter pi, which may stay as a name for a variable:
This would be rendered as: pi ≈ 22 / 7
In order to produce an XML document out of a LaTeX document there are several possibilities:
TeX4ht is a highly configurable TeX-based authoring system for producing hypertext. It interacts with TeX-based applications through style files and postprocessors, leaving the processing of the source files to the native TeX compiler. Consequently, TeX4ht can handle the features of TeX-based systems in general, and of the LaTeX and AMS style files in particular. (http://www.cis.ohio-state.edu/~gurari/TeX4ht/mn.html )
For further information on the usage of different tools, please use:
After an author has written his or her ETD, the service institutions, like the university library or computing and
The checklist should consider the following parts of a document and should also be open to the authors for self-
The WinWord, WordPerfect or LaTeX document
After receiving an ETD from an author, several organisational issues have to be proofed:
Does the student belong to the university?
Has he passed his exams?
Has he passed the approvals?
Has he missed deadlines or not?
For the application of style sheets the following parts of a word document are mostly critical for further usage:
Can the document as a whole been opened within the WinWord or WordPerfect systems at the service institutions?
Has the student used all style sheets correctly?
Has the students used the heading feature of WinWord or WordPerfect?
Are lists styled as lists?
Are Tables produced using the table features from the text formatting system? (Sometimes authors use the tabulator to build tables)
Has the authors used a reference managing system for the references? This makes the automatic formatting of the bibliography much easier and enables a linking into the text parts.
Did the author use the automatic spell-checking features instead of applying hard coded – letters in the text?
Have the guidelines and rules been followed by the author?
Has the template or styles file been used?
Has the author used bibtex to collect the references?
Have all figures been provided in an EPS (encapsulated postscript) format?
Have all additional styles been provided by the author?
Is the whole ETD processible at a computer of the library or the computing centres?
Is the PDF document readable? Can it be opened within the actual version of the Adobe Acrobat Reader?
Does the PDF file contain all text pars?
Does it contain hyperlinks for multimedia additions? Do the hyperlinks work within an actual Internet browser?
Has the author provided all Dublin Core metadata requested about himself and his thesis?
Are there keywords in different languages, according to different classification schemas?
Are there abstracts in different languages?
In which format has the metadata information been provided?
An SGML/XML-based archiving strategy today consist on a conversion workflow, as shown:
The Conversion from native text formatting formats (like doc WinWord) into
SGML/XML-compatible documents is done by a service of the university. Here checking and correcting
This checking has to be done within the word processing systems used, e.g. WinWord and can e.g. partially
The conversion from native text formats (like doc WinWord) into SGML/XML-
SGML/XML parser and concentrates especially on the correct usage of the document type definition (DTD)
This can completely automated by an SGML/XML-parser and checking scripts that produce an error list for the
Inaccessible dead media has little value. Students who are incorporating moving images, audio and live
How these resources are created, and the form and format they are created in, will determine how your
ETD can be managed, used, preserved, and even re-used in the future.
When your ETD enters a networked electronic environment, it does not exist in isolation. It becomes
Inter-operable standards that will allow for this metadata to be understood by everyone (even machines)
This means that you, the creator, have to take responsibility for describing each layer or 'object' of
These objects may be audio (mono or stereo) and visual (2D or 3D) or text.
They may also be composed from several sources.
They may be simultaneously acquired, processed, transmitted and used in real time.
If, in the future, the encoding of these objects is to be decoded, the metadata must include format
Internet Media Types (MIME values) whenever possible (this list is a registry where there is a
An important (proposed) standard that multimedia content providers should investigate is the
Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language (SMIL). This standard will allow hypertext creators
At one level, this is because all digital resources are in some way dependent on electronic mediation by
In an ideal world, all digital material would be created independent of proprietary hardware and software.
In other words, everything would run on commonly available hardware using freely available (public
In the real world, many content creators will be producing work on-line or off-line that is either hardware
Metadata is information about these applications and formats, which allows for licensed versions to be
Information about the content creator (rights, contributors, publisher,);
Information about the content that will help it to be found or discovered (coverage, description, title, subject, relationships);
Information about the resource (formats, system requirements, date, identification).
There are a growing number of audiovisual formats that allow for metadata to be embedded in the file
This has the advantage that different communities can gather the metadata for different purposes. It has
The NDLTD model encourages students to submit their metadata to a central repository for indexing in a
See: European Projects such as Metadata Observatory. The aim of the Observatory is to maintain
DCMI's activities include consensus-driven working groups, global workshops, conferences, standards
Next Section: Protecting intellectual property and how to deal with plagiarism
Students/Protecting intellectual property and how to deal with plagiarism
Protecting against plagiarism may involve specific steps as explained below, in addition to action in
First, there is software available to detect plagiarism, or, in simple terms, similar copies. Stanford's
SCAM software, and other software developed in Australia and other locations, discussed in the digital
"close". While determined authors might defeat such software, more refined software could be
Second, it should be noted, as stated in section ETD Guide:Universities - Plagiarism, that if a work in made widely available, it is more
Third, since it is known that ETDs are often read by many more people than would read a paper
In summary, detection by machines or people, and the threat of severe penalties, are likely to discourage
The ADT Program uses two simple protocols to describe – the PDF files associated with a thesis, and the
Letters from the alphabet (upper or lower case). Example: 05appendix.pdf; 05APPENDIX.pdf; 05Appendix.pdf
Or any appropriate alphanumeric combination. 02Chapter1.pdf; 09Chapter10.pdf
The only symbols permitted are - (hyphen) or _ (underscore). Example: 06Appendix-Images.pdf; 06Appendix_Images.pdf
Create one PDF file containing title/author information; abstract; acknowledgments; table of
Create another file containing the whole of the thesis (including what is contained in the front.pdf
Break the thesis up into smaller files maintaining a relevant filename structure such as
02chapter1.pdf; 03chapter2.pdf; 04appendix1.pdf; 05bibliography.pdf; etc.
In order to maintain the desired file sequence the files need to be numbered using the standard 01-
99 (or 001-999 if individual files exceed more than 99 for an individual thesis). Numbering theses is
The 01front.pdf file is compulsory. The official ADT v1.0 or v1.1 software will create an empty front file
This standard will allow viewers to easily identify the relevant parts of the ADT theses via a common
UMI/Bell&Howell have introduced for the DAI database. Similarly, this ADT standard will facilitate e-
The combination used by all ADT members is as follows: the word "adt-" immediately followed by the
../adt-ANU20010223.162256/ (Australian National University)
../adt-WCU19991112.125812/ (Curtin University of Technology)
../ adt-NUN20010510.153038/ (The University of New South Wales)
….and so on.
Next Section: How to submit your ETD?
Students/How to submit your ETD?
Universities requiring or accepting ETDs should provide students with basic levels of support such as
The ADT Program is an Australian university libraries initiative. The library at the ADT member
Apart from the ADT Program support processes described above, local workflow and policies within the
ADT membership will vary. Typically, what is most common across all members is that the libraries are
What is less common is the local procedures insofar as how theses are deposited to the local server, who
An example of workflow, policies & procedures at The University of New South Wales [UNSW]
When theses are deposited, auto alerts are sent to the student, supervisor, the ADT coordinator and the cataloguers
The cataloguers are responsible for checking the theses are original and have been awarded. They edit the metadata to include appropriate thesaurus terms/subject headings. The cataloguers are also responsible for approving the theses and making them public. They also catalogue the theses into the local OPAC and the National Bibliographic Database. These ETDs are then available via the national distributed ADT database, the local view of the ADT database [i.e. UNSW-ETDs only], the local OPAC and the National Bibliographic database. Most are available unrestricted with a few restricted to the local domain due to copyright reasons
Two separate units are responsible for the ADT Program at UNSW Library. The General Services Department's Learning Support Unit provides all support, promotion and associated information. The cataloguing department is responsible for administration of the ETDs when deposited to the server. The ADT coordinator at UNSW is also the overall coordinator and is responsible for liaising and guiding the program at the national level.
ETDs.
To efficiently and effectively implement an ETD program, involved institutions need to develop a
Our world is a very diverse place. We have many geographies, climates, races, cultures, and languages. Another characteristic that differentiates places of the world is the level of development. This creates various levels of access to:
Infrastructure is different in different regions of the world too. Third world nations have characteristic social/economic gaps among groups of persons and/or regions within the countries. In one nation, developed areas, where people have access to all the items listed above and where infrastructure is good, coexist with very poor regions where living conditions are bad.
This coexistence leads to a varied range of infrastructure levels in general and in universities too. There are universities with very good campuses and with the infrastructure comparable to those in developed nations. Others have bad installation, lack equipment and do not have good networks and Internet connections. This bad fortune reflects on students, faculty and staff who may not be proficient with information technology tools.
When an ETD program is considered, some aspects of the infrastructure must be examined. They can be grouped in 3 categories, as follows.
The number and quality of machines available to students
The number and quality of machines available to the administrative staff
The network conditions - connection to all university buildings, speed, reliability and support
The level of computer literacy of students, faculty, library staff and administrative staff
The number of machines connected to the Internet
The connection of the university network to WAN's and the Internet - speed, reliability and support
The network connections - speed, reliability and support;
The existence of other ETD and/or digital library projects to develop the culture and to seek/provide support
The possibility of funding, from agencies and/or private companies, to ETD programs Global
The network connections - speed, reliability and support;
The dissemination of information on ETD and/or digital library projects to provide support to those who want to start programs
The agreement on minimum standards for systems, technology and metadata to allow interoperability and seamless access
The discussion and agreement on languages to identify ETDs so that they can be searched, retrieved and used
With the spread of the Internet and the WWW, and the emergence of local area networks as well as wide area networks (LANs and WANs), network facilities have enormously expanded in many of the educational institutions of the world. To support the needs for access, and the related processes that deal with making content accessible, many universities have made networked computers available to their graduate students, as well as to faculty, staff, and undergraduate students. The ETD initiative can build on those investments, employing them to support submission and downloading of ETDs. By focusing on networked access, there can be considerable savings that result from elimination of manual handling and physical distribution. It is recommended that, except for ETDs that have enormous amounts (e.g., gigabytes) of multimedia content, authors, as well as university staff, avoid procedures that require transfer of content using diskettes, CDs, or other physical media.
Universities should consider the amount of traffic on their networks, making sure that networking hardware (Internet connection, routers, and cable plants) accommodates well the demand for uploading and downloading ETDs). This accommodation generally will not be a problem if adequate support for email, rapid access to WWW, and other types of usage is provided.
Regarding software for accessing ETDs, there is not much of a special nature that is required. Web browsers, support for Java applets, and multimedia presentation tools are typically sufficient. Special aids may be needed for PDF, that Adobe provides for free at Adobe at www.adobe.com, or SGML/XML (becoming more widely available). The real need for special software is to help manage the ETD submission process, handle local workflow, make ETDs accessible, and facilitate search. NDLTD and its various parts have prepared software to help with all of these.
Next Section: Seamless access: Open Archives Initiative, federated search
Technical Issues/Seamless access: Open Archives Initiative, federated search
Access to ETDs that are produced by students around the globe requires some mechanism for connecting with the many computers that house those ETDs. There are two basic approaches.
In federated search, a user’s information need, expressed in the form of a query, is sent by the federated search system to all the sites that support the searching over local ETD collections. Then, when the sites have completed their searching and generated results, either the user can view each site that might have some relevant content (see Powell & Fox, 1998), or some type of fusion of results leads to a single merged list (as with Dienst, see Lagoze & Davis, 1995). While federated search yields up-to-the-moment results, such currency is usually not of high priority in the ETD world (where daily updates should suffice). At the same time, federated search may involve complex timeout and backup site management, if some remote sites are down or slow to respond. At best, federated search is often slow (due to network delays) and suffers from having to manage a wide diversity of representations of data at remote sites, leading in some cases to low data quality. Nevertheless, see such a service for ETDs from www.theses.org.
Each ETD is described (with metadata) using MARC21 or ETD-MS (http://www.ndltd.org/standards/metadata/ETD-ms-v1.00.html).
Each ETD site runs an open archive, which responds to OAI requests for metadata by providing Dublin Core records, as well as either (or both) MARC21 and ETD-MS. For example, the software for ETD management developed by Virginia Tech has such a capability (http://www.dlib.vt.edu/projects/OAI/software/ndltd/ndltd.html).
State, provincial, national, regional or other organizations may harvest from these sites, and run their own open archives and related services.
Virginia Tech harvests from all sites (or group sites that have harvested for university sites) to develop a union collection (http://oai.dlib.vt.edu/~etdunion).
VTLS Inc., as a service to NDLTD, provides search access to the union collection (http://www.vtls.com/ndltd).
Lagoze, C. and J. R. Davis. 1995. "Dienst - An Architecture for Distributed Document Libraries", in Communications of the ACM, Vol. 38, No. 4, p. 47, ACM, 1995.
Lagoze, Carl and Herbert Van de Sompel. 2001. The Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting, Open Archives Initiative, January 2001. Available http://www.openarchives.org/OAI/openarchivesprotocol.htm
J. Powell and E. Fox. Multilingual Federated Searching Across Heterogeneous Collections, D-Lib Magazine, Sep. 1998 http://www.dlib.org/dlib/september98/powell/09powell.html
Hussein Suleman, Anthony Atkins, Marcos A. Gonçalves, Robert K. France, and Edward A. Fox, Virginia Tech; Vinod Chachra and Murray Crowder, VTLS, Inc.; and Jeff Young, OCLC. Networked Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations: Bridging the Gaps for Global Access - Part 1: Mission and Progress. D-Lib Magazine, 7(9), Sept. 2001, http://www.dlib.org/dlib/september01/suleman/09sulemanpt1.html
Hussein Suleman, Anthony Atkins, Marcos A. Gonçalves, Robert K. France, and Edward A. Fox, Virginia Tech; Vinod Chachra and Murray Crowder, VTLS, Inc.; and Jeff Young, OCLC. Networked Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations: Bridging the Gaps for Global Access - Part 2: Services and Research. D-Lib Magazine, 7(9), Sept. 2001, http://www.dlib.org/dlib/september01/suleman/09suleman-pt2.html
Electronic publishing technology and infrastructure is needed to support the production and archiving of ETDs. Section 4.2.1 provides an overview of this matter. The next two sections explain key issues related to the two main approaches: PDF and SGML/XML. Remaining sections give further information of specific matters such as metadata and post processing.
Next Section: Overview: hardware, software, multimedia, scripts, encoding, document representations/conversions
Technical Issues/Overview: hardware, software, multimedia, scripts, encoding, document representations\conversions
Preparing an ETD is somewhat like preparing a book to be given to a publisher, and then distributed electronically (and perhaps on paper). There are many aspects to this process, briefly summarized in the next paragraphs.
First, there is the hardware perspective.
Authors of ETDs nowadays almost always use a computer for this activity. In many cases this means a personal computer, though in some cases a terminal, PDA, or another device might be chosen. With the continuing increase in performance and functionality, given a particular price, it is becoming more feasible for authors to have their own computers. However, in some cases, an office or laboratory or shared computer might be used, at least from time to time.
In addition to a computer, authors may use other special devices to prepare parts of the ETD. In particular, in the case of multimedia content, parts might result from using a scanner, digital camera, digital camcorder, slide scanner, microphone, sound card, MIDI device, or other special equipment. Special systems might be used for audio or image or video editing, though in some cases such editing can be done on a PC.
Software that can help with ETD production may be specialized by role. Text editors like Wordpad, vi, and emacs allow creation of files of characters, often encoded in ASCII. More powerful word processors may allow handling of more extensive sets of characters, like UNICODE, and entry of character codes from large sets (e.g., for Chinese, Japanese, or Korean texts).
Separate editors may support multimedia content. Photoshop handles photos and other images, for example, while Sound Forge allows manipulation of audio files. Premiere is a tool for video editing that also can process audio, animations, and other related components. Editing tools may handle conversions as well, or accept the results of conversion. Ultimately, one may think of authoring, capture, conversion, and editing tools for all media types as all having the objective of amassing a pool of components that go into the ETD.
Large documents thus are made of pools of content objects, and students can use special software to integrate the content into a coherent whole. A simple integration is to have a linear structure, like a book, where all the components are ordered, as in a sequence of pages, manipulated by a word processor. It is simple for images to be included in such a work, as long as sizing is adjusted. However, large images, and other multimedia content (e.g., audio), must be integrated in a different fashion.
Such integration may involve linking (as in hypermedia, found in many Web sites). Additional interactivity may require a tailored hypertext system (e.g., Toolbook, Guide), or a multimedia integration package (e.g., Director or AuthorWare). Such a system will support synchronization (e.g., using the WWW standard, SMIL), or complex performances. Ultimately, the most sophisticated integration of content with reader interaction requires a programming language. In the case of multimedia languages, this typically is called a scripting language. However, students can also use general purpose languages like Java for sophisticated handling of content along with interaction.
Third, consider representation. Each content object must have a representation scheme, depending on its form. Text components are characterized by character encoding, as well as supplemental information to support presentation (e.g., font, size, style). Multimedia components are encoded in suitable forms, depending on resolution or other measure of level of detail, compression, and other attributes. For the purpose of archival preservation, the representations used for content objects (e.g., UNICODE, MPEG), as well as those used to describe the organization and rendering of content (e.g., SMIL), will be in standard forms.
Fourth, for an ETD or other large work, one can choose from archival forms, and related software support.. In particular, for more detail about software, see the next subsection. For details about PDF, SGML/XML, and other matters, see the next sections.
The evolution of networks and the World Wide Web have profoundly affected the content and quality of communications. The complexity and visual content of documents is no longer limited by the artistic skills of the designer. Itranets and Web sites are being tapped into for creative content that is much more complex than could have been imagined. As creative expression expands to new levels, the quality of the printed output must also rise to the challenge.
The Internet has changed not only the dynamics of the creative process but the entire printing workflow process. The Internet is used to transmit information electronically while CD-ROMs and servers are used for storing and accessing data. One often finds difficulty in predicting what will be printed because documents can come from many sources. And it’s equally difficult to predict where they will be printed, because documents can be distributed around the world electronically and printed locally. The printing workflow has evolved from creating, printing, copying, and distributing hard-copy documents to creating, electronically publishing, and printing documents on demand. It was clearly time to advance the imaging standard.
With the introduction of PostScript in 1985, Adobe Systems Incorporated sparked a revolution in how we communicate on the printed page. Since its introduction, Adobe PostScript has become the printing and imaging technology of choice for corporations, publishers, and government agencies throughout the world. In fact, 75 percent of commercial publications are printed on Adobe PostScript devices, including black-and white printers, color printers, imagesetters, platesetters, and direct digital printing systems. Adobe PostScript is also the display imaging system in some of the most advanced workstations on the market today.
Adobe PostScript 3 takes the PostScript standard beyond a page description language into a fully optimized printing system that addresses the broad range of new requirements in today’s increasingly complex and distributed printing environments.
By fully integrating Portable Document Format (PDF) - an open file format that preserves the visual fidelity of documents across applications and platforms - into Adobe PostScript 3, documents can be delivered electronically and printed directly. A PDF file delivers the single "digital master" for use in electronic, printed, and mixed workflows, ensuring the highest fidelity across all media.
With Adobe PostScript 3, Adobe delivers advanced features for the new digital document. Today, document creators draw on a variety of sources and increasingly rely on color to convey their messages. And tomorrow, these documents will be delivered and printed on a virtually unlimited range of devices.
Since the mid-1980s, the electronic publishing community has faced the issue of supporting works targeted for use on computers, or on computers and paper (i.e., for dual publishing). To achieve maximal flexibility, it is desirable to separate the description of document structure from the rendering of that structure into some paper or screen form. SGML and, later, XML, were devised with this goal in mind.
SGML and XML are markup languages. In particular, they are meta-languages. One can provide a
In the SGML/XML family are other markup schemes, or applications of these. HyTime extends SGML with architectural forms to allow handling of rich multimedia and hypermedia content. RDL, developed by e-Numerate Solutions, Inc., allows handling of numeric content in an application of XML, while XBRL applies XML to business reporting. For many ETDs, tailored markup schemes (e.g., MathML for mathematics, or chemical markup language), also are used for particular types of content expression.
The following subsections explain further how ETDs can be produced using markup languages.
Since XML is software independent, many types of software can be used for the production of ETDs in XML. The next table gives the software you can use by type of tools. This is a short list of tools we used in our projects. Nevertheless, many others can suit you requirements, among them, freeware. http://www.garshol.priv.no/download/xmltools/ is a good place to find free XML tools and software. The XML Cover Page (http://www.oasisopen.org/cover/sgml-xml.html) is the reference.
Corel WordPerfectSuite http://www.corel.com See Corel WordPerfect. Can also be used as regular wordprocessing software.
MS Word www.microsoft.com See Microsoft Word and Office 2007.
StarOffice Version 8 http://www.sun.com/software/star/staroffice/index.jsp A good alternative to MS Word, exports some kinds of XML. Supports import and export of MathML files.
OpenOffice.org http://www.openoffice.org Exports XMLbut not to (user) variable DTDs
Amaya http://www.w3.org/amaya Open Source, World Wide Web Consortium For Mathematical Formulas in MathML
Hancom HancomWord 5.2 (included in HancomOffice 1.5 and more) http://www.hancom.com Linux based Office Package fully compatible with MS-word file and templates.
Any scriptinglanguage PERL, JAVA, etc.
Omnimark http://www.omnimark.com Very interesting, but not free, and no longer offers a significant discount for universities (about 10,000 US$ for the standard release)
Save as XML plug-in in PDF http://www.adobe.com/support/downloads/89a2.htm
Tetrasix http://www.tetrasix.com Only partially usable. Good for the Majix prepared DTDs
(This section was taken from an article by P. Potter, P. Strabala, D.Dobratz, M. Schulz about ETDs, that is due to appear in "The Internet and Higher education" 4/2001)
The fact that currently available authoring systems for XML still have not won wide recognition has led to different strategies at different universities regarding XML documents. Most of these projects were started between 1995 and 1997, in a time when XML was alive, but where tools or standardized DTDs were barely available. A view of those projects from today’s perspective illustrates the demand for a rethinking and redesign of those approaches in order to come to a standardization.
All the presented DTDs are built upon similar principles. A classical dissertation (which can be seen as monograph) consists of 3 main components: an extensible titlepage with abstracts, declarations, etc., the dissertation corpus, which includes text, pictures, audio, video, tables and so on, and appendices, which contain data sheets, bibliographies, acknowledgements and others.
The following DTDs are currently in use at different institutions:
ETD-ML.DTD: Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (Virginia Tech)
TEI-based DTD with extensions for natural sciences: Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences Uppsala
All these Document Type Definitions are so-called author-DTDs. This means that they are primarily used to support the authoring and the conversion process and do not primarily address document archiving and preservation. One may ask why all those different DTDs have prevailed. This is mainly because the scientific orientation of the mentioned universities is quite varied. Lyon, Oslo and Michigan, which use TEI-Light.dtd, mainly serve students in the arts and humanities. Problems using TEI.DTD or DocBook.DTD are recognized at universities that support a strong natural science community, such as Berlin, Helsinki or Uppsala. Often a dissertation is a cumulative work, e.g., in Lyon or Helsinki.
"Structured data," such as mathematical or chemical formulas, spreadsheets, address books, configuration parameters, financial transactions, technical drawings, etc., are usually published on the Web using layout programs such as Postscript or PDF, or by putting them into graphic formats like gif, jpeg, png, vrml, and so on. Programs that produce such data often also store it on disk, using either a binary or text format. Therefore, if someone wants to look at the data, he usually needs the program that produced it. With XML, data could be stored in text format, which allows the user to read the file without having the original program. XML can be thought of as a set of rules, guidelines, or conventions, for designing text formats for data in a way that produces files that are easy to generate and read (by computer). In addition to the older standard SGML, there are several emerging standards that use XML encoding to overcome the disadvantages common to web publishing in HTML. The following sections give an overview of standards that have been established during the last few years or which are still works in progress, but widely recognized.
For standardized knowledge management this variety of XML DTDs and Schemas seems confusing. A closer look, though, gives another perspective: every scientific subject defines and uses its own standards. The following document type definitions can roughly be classified in:
Schemata that use semantic tags to mark real content items, e.g., MathML or CML.
Schemata that are used for visualisation and layout purposes and to control the browser synchronization, e.g., HTML, SVG (Scalable Vector Graphics), SMIL(Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language).
Schemata that are principally designed to perform the exchange of data with huge databases, e.g., cXML(commercial XML).
Within the field of "Electronic Publishing," these developments have led to new opportunities to structure scientific information, not just text-based but also so-called active contents and multimedia elements. This brings the whole field to a new level of information processing or knowledge management. The different approaches for electronic publishing at universities creates a very heterogeneous environment. The following tables show how difficult it might be to subsume all those different models under one concept in order to achieve valuable and searchable information systems based on XML. Crosswalks between all those DTDs have to be defined in order to build a distributed retrieval engine, capable of searching within internal document structures "throughout the world." Not only different DTDs are used, but also different strategies to perform a conversion from usual text formatting systems into highly structured documents in SGML or XML.
The Idea behind this workshop was to bring together experts and developers working on SGML or XMLbased Document Type Definitions for electronic theses and dissertations. Within the NDLTD-initiative several document type definitions (DTDs) for dissertations have been developed. To come to a standardized or generalized searching and archiving structure, it is absolutely necessary to summarize all those developments and research and to work out correspondences between all of them. If SGML and XML are the preferred future document formats for theses and dissertations, the DTD will play a major role within the whole initiative. The following questions were discussed:
How to get to a generalized DTD?
Is there just one DTD necessary or is it possible to have more than one DTD, e.g., for different subjects and sciences?
Where exactly are the current differences between the existing document type definitions?
Which approach shall we follow to unify our DTDs?
How to come to an agreed Dublin-Core metadata element set?
How many markup should be done by the author, how much by machine translation?
Evaluating several tools and ways to come to an SGML/XML-based document
This expert workshop covering the topic of using XML for publishing theses and dissertations electronically in universities was held in May 2000 at Humboldt-University Berlin, Germany. It focused on the ways in which XML can be used in university libraries in order to deliver, process and archive scholarly high quality electronic publications. The recognition that a worldwide range of various approaches for SGML/XML-based publishing concepts exists, led to the conclusion that interoperability on an international level is inevitable. Experts from the USA, Finland, Norway, Sweden, France, Portugal, the United Kingdom and Germany discussed commonalities and differences among their models, approaches and document type definitions (DTDs).
The objective of the workshop was also to exchange experiences in document conversion and author's support therein, to agree on a Dublin Core metadata set worldwide and to share tools. The potential support of authors was recognized as a very essential part within the electronic publishing workflow. Attempts to convince authors to leave their native word processing systems for systems that support structured writing and/or export to SGML or XML usually tend to fail, for several reasons. First, authors are reluctant to switch from the system they are used to. This is exacerbated by the fact that publications usually have to be written within a very short time frame, leaving little or no time for authors to learn a new system, even if they were so inclined. Until XML authoring and editing tools become as simple to use as a word processor, this approach will still be viewed as an added burden to the student. Second, current SGML/XML support systems are usually far more expensive than common ones.
Many universities follow another strategy and accept documents in a pre-archival format. This necessitates conversion of the documents by the university libraries or media center. The advantage is that authors are able to prepare their documents within their native word processing systems using style sheets especially designed for that conversion, e.g., in Microsoft Word. Some institutions that have a high focus on format are reluctant to approve this method because the SGML or XML publication may be altered from the word processing document that was deposited by the student. Even though this method seems to exact a high resource cost, it is a step toward the ideal, where authors write in XML directly, using their native word processors. We are not far from this ideal.
The following electronic theses and dissertation (ETD) projects have an XML- based approach already in place or are presently in a pilot phase:
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, University Libraries, USA
University of Oslo, Center for Information Technology Services, NORWAY
For further information, please visit the workshop-website at: http://dochost.rz.huberlin.de/epdiss/dtd-workshop/index.html
With the workshops there has been a collection of tool, that are used fpor SGML/XML publishing at different universities. This collection can be found at: http://dochost.rz.huberlin.de/epdiss/dtd-workshop/cdrom/index.htm
The following extends that discussion by focusing on tools to help students to write directly in XML.
To author and view documents written in XML, different kinds of tools are required. They are:
There are quite a large number of XML editors, for different platforms are
Free/OpenSource version of the Serna XML editor https://github.com/ydirson/serna-free
When a XML document is created, it is parsed/validated to see if it is syntactically correct and well formed. To accomplish this task, we need a XML parser/validator. There are a lot of XML parser available. Most of the XML editors mentioned above is also a XML parser. For example, XML Spy provides a IDE for XML, i.e. it is both editor and parser.
To view a XML documents, we need a browser that supports XML. Many browsers now support XML, such as:
HyBrick is an SGML/XML browser from Fujitsu.
Most newer browsers support XML in a way that lets it fully integrated with HTML. A stylesheet is required to view the XML documents. For ETD a cascading stylesheet has been developed for that. That stylesheet can be downloaded from http://www.etdguide.org/.
Next Section: Conversions from Word, Word Perfect or other RTF-compatible tools to SGML/XML
Technical Issues/Conversions from Word, Word Perfect or other RTF-compatible tools to SGML\XML
Performing a conversion from MS Word documents into instances of a specified SGML or XML DTD is a very complex task. What you will need for that is:
A SGML or XML document type definition (DTD) that serves as structure model for the output. One says that the output SGML document is valid to the specifies DTD, or it is an instance of this DTD:
A Word stylesheet that holds paragraph and character styles according to the structures in the DTD. So if in a DTD you have defined a structure for Author: e.g. expressed in the output file as:Dr.PeterFox
You will need some kind of a configuration file that allows the mapping of the DTD elements into Word elements and vice versa.
Often a conversion is done by using a plug into MS Word directly, but other options use the Microsoft internal exchange format RTF (Rich Text Format) for conversion. Those tools can interpret the RTF file with the MS Word style that is still coded in this RTF file and export it into an SGML document. This process mostly happens within batch mode without using many graphical user interfaces.
There are other approaches in development as well, especially within Scandinavia and the University of Oslo/ Norway. We don't refer to their solution yet.
The process line for converting Word files into SGML documents developed within the CyberThèses project uses scripts written with the Omnimark language.
The input of the process line is an RTF file with a "structuring style sheet" and the output is an SGML document encoded according to the TEI Lite DTD (see the TEI web site at http://etext.virginia.edu/TEI.html).
Most of the scripts will soon be available from the CyberTheses web site : http://www.cybertheses.org
This system is devoted to a particular DTD, but its generalization to other document models shall not pose any difficulty.
Why did we use the SGML Author for Word?
The "Dissertation Online" project implemented and refined a conversion strategy that allows writers to convert documents written in MS word with a special stylesheet (dissertation.dot) into an SGML instance of the DiM.dtd.
We used this product from Microsoft, the SGML Author for Word, for several reasons:
It is less expensive than other software producing SGML files with the same quality.
It support an international standard for tables: CALS.
As it is a Word-Add-On it handles docuents in MS-Word doc- format better than other tools.
As we started using this technology in 1997, it supported from the very beginning Word97, the version of word which was the actual one that time.
Unfortunately, Microsoft didn't continue the development of this tool. So there are no new versions available for Office 2000 or Office XP. However, the internal document format from MS Word 97, MS Word 2000 and Office XP are the same in the sense of the conversion into SGML. This means documents written in Word 2000 or Office XP can be imported into Word97 and therefore a conversion can be done.
For a successful conversion from a word document into a DiML document you will need:
The DiML-document type definition (diml20.dtd, calstb.dtd)
The Association file for the Microsoft SGML-Author for Word (diml20.dta)
The converter stylesheet, which consists of several macros programmed to make the preconversion process easier.
Several perl scripts to correct the transformation of tables.
You must have the following software installed at you computer:
SP (NSGMLS) (Parser for SGML-Files by James Clark). (new versions are availabe at http://openjade.sourceforge.net/doc-1.4/index.htm, but we haven’t tested that)
Run SP (A WYSIWYG tool for SP by Richard Light). http://www.light.demon.co.uk/runsp/index.htm
Perl (a scripting language for using the perl scripts).
The converter stylesheet and the authors stylesheet can be obtained from the following website: http://dochost.rz.hu-berlin.de/epdiss/vorlage.html
Converter scripts and perlscripts can be optained from http://www.educat.huberlin.de/diss_online/software/tools.exe (Perl scriptc, DTD and converter file for MS SGML-Author for Word - KonverterDiML2_0.dta)
The conversion from a Microsoft Word document into a SGML document, which is an instance of the DiML.dtd that is used at Humboldt-University, takes several steps:
Preparing the conversion without using the converter Microsoft SGML Author for Word directly
Load the stylesheet for conversion (NOT the one for the authors), see figure below.
There is a special feature to get the page numbers out of the Word document by using certain word specific text anchors. Those have to be converted into hard coded information using a page numer stylesheet.
Formattings that have been applied by the author without using style sheets have to be replaced by the correct style sheets.
In order to get a correct display of tables later on by using CSS stylesheets within common browsers, empty table cell have to be filled up with a single space (letter).
Press the button "Save as SGML" within the FILE menu.
Check the XML/SGML output using the feedback file (fbk) see figure below.
Work through the output file (output according to the DiML.dtd) automatically.
Check the HTML Output.
Correct possible errors manually within the SGML file and repeat the transformation.
A demonstration quicktime video may be found at the ETD-Guide server as well. (see http://www.educat.hu-berlin.de/diss_online/software/didi.mov)
Using FrameMaker+SGML6.0 for a conversion of MS Word documents into SGML instances.
Editing or converting using FrameMaker is much more complex than the previously described methods. FrameMaker is able to import formatted Word documents keeping the stylesheet information and exporting the document via an internal FrameMaker format as SGML or XML documents. In order to proceed with a conversion using FrameMaker you will need the following configuration files.
A conversion table. This contains the list of the Word styles and the corresponding elements within the FrameMaker internal format. This table is saved within the FrameMaker internal format (*.frm).
A document type definition will be saved within FrameMaker internally as EDD (Element Definition) It is saved within the FrameMaker internal document format (*.edd)
FrameMaker uses layout rules for the internal layout of documents. Within this layout definition the layout of documents is described just like it is within MS Word documents: single formats and their appearances like text height, etc. are defined. This file is also stored as (*.frm file).
The Read-Write Rules contain rules that define which FrameMaker format will be exported in which SGML / XML element.
The SGML- or XML DTD has to be used as well, including Catalog- or Entity files, as well as Sub DTDs, like CALS for tables.
To process a conversion a new SGML application has to be defined within FrameMaker+SGML. This application links all files that are needed for a conversion as described above. It enables FrameMaker to parse the output file when exporting a document to SGML or XML:
A workflow and a technology for conversion for ETD using FrameMaker+SGML6.0 was first developed at the Technical University Helsinki, within the HUTPubl project (1997–2000), see http://www.hut.fi/Yksikot/Kirjasto/HUTpubl
Text editors, Desktop Publishing Systems that can export SGML/XML documents
Looking at this problem, it first gives the impression that because writing in LaTeX is also a kind of structured writing, a conversion into SGML or XML compatible documents can quite easily be done.
Often people use as software Onmimark, Balise or simple Perl scripts for conversion.
The LaTeX format itself enables due to the structural approach an easier conversion into SGML/XML. But often the pure LaTeX approach goes hand in hand with sophisticated macro programming, so that in many cases the pure structure of a LaTeX document will be destroyed by macros or the conversion will be much harder to perform. Also the lack of a parser that checks the correct usage of structure elements like chapter, section, subsection make a conversion more complicated.
If an author wants to define a mathematical formula in LaTeX, he has 2 basic opportunities:
Defining them with the appropriate mathematical LaTeX features as text formulas.
The first version prevents from any secondary usage of the formula. The second version allows the reusability of a formula in different contexts. So it makes it easy to prove correctness of a statement by importing the LaTeX formula into a mathematical software package like Maple or Mathematica. Formulas coded in LaTeX can be displayed in a rendered form in an browser by software or plug-ins like IBM Techexplorer, Math Viewer. As LaTeX coded formulas still have the disadvantage, that they are not encoded using so called sematic tags, the usage of MathML is highly advised MathML is an XML document type definition for mathematics developed by the W3C.
In LaTeX authors often don't distinguish between the letter 'e', that may stand for a variable and the Euler constant. In MathML there is a huge difference whether something is encoded as variable e or as the Euler e (2,718. . . ). Therefor, the usage of layout definition in LaTeX for mathematics complicats the conversion into MathML and therefore into any SGML/XML format.
In order to prepare mathematical formulas in LaTeX for a conversion, many universities and the TeX. User Groups around the world are working soon the definition of certain macros that can be transformed into the appropriate MathML definitions.
In the case of conversion of documents into SGML/XML, the original file must be written using a structuring style sheet (template). But students often give a lot of importance to the layout of the final document and make many personalizations and adaptations on the original structuring style sheet. It is our duty to also convert also this aspect of their work. The conversion tools devoted to the document content have to be completed by conversion tools that may generate rendering style-sheets : typically XSL files for XML documents.
As SGML or XML cannot be directly read by users using today's browsers (Opera, Netscape, Internet Explorer), it is necessary either to provide layout information in the form of a stylesheet or to transform those highly structured documents into layout or printable version in HTML, PDF,PS, which can be more easily used by users to read the documents.
Generally, universities have 2 possibilities to cope with the demand for layout:
Try to preserve all layout information the author (student) has given to the MS Word or other document. This strategy involves the author directly by the personalization of a standard style sheet for his/her work.
Universities could decide to develop one single style sheet or a choice of certain style sheets usable for all ETDs. This would support a corporate design and solve the layout question on a more general level, leaving it to the ETD production department.
The development of such tools is being achieved in France (collaboration between Lyon 2 and Marne-la-Vallée) for documens produced in MS Word and other RTF compatible authoring tools. Theirs are based on the analysis and the extraction of the typographic characteristics associated to each used style.
The equivalent tools shall be easy to develop for document produced with LateX, as this kind of language natively uses the notion of rendering style-sheets.
As CSS are not powerful enough to handle the complexity and demand for large XML documents as theses and dissertations, this is not advisable.
Within the XSL standard, one distinguishes between several sub-standards:
Extensible Style Sheet Transformation (XSLT). This part allows the user to produce stylesheets that act like small programs. They transform the original document, that is always valid against a specified DTD, into a document that either follows another DTD (which allows an easier rendering within browsers, as HTML.dtd) or allows a transformation of the document into other document description languages such as Rich Text Format (RTF), LaTeX, PDF. From those formats the production of a printed version may be possible.
XPath allows to authors to build expressions that link to other XML documents, but not only to the whole document. The citation of a certain subsection and the citation of e.g. section 3 to 5 might be possible once common browsers support this linking technology.
XSL:Fo ( Formatting vocabulary, that can be applied to the nodes of an XML document)
Example for a Printing On Demand Service (POD) based on the use of stylesheets
Digital Libraries which use their document servers as long term electronic archives will not make printed information dispensable. On the contrary: for users of these information systems the desire for printed documents is increasing. In most cases this desire often focuses not on the whole document as such, but on particular parts of it like chapters, citations and so on. For that reason the Humboldt-University Berlin's printing on demand project aims toward the development of a technology which allows the users to print the only the desired part of a certain document.
For the printing on demand component with XML the usage of Apache/Cocoon was chosen. This software uses an XSLT-engine to produce an HTML or PDF-Version on the fly. "The Cocoon Project is an Open Source volunteer project under the auspices of the Apache Software Foundation (ASF), and, in harmony with the Apache webserver itself, it is released under a very open license. Even if the most common use of Cocoon is the automatic creation of HTML through the processing of statically or dynamically generated XML files, Cocoon is also able to perform more sophisticated formatting, such as XSL:FO rendering to PDF files, client-dependent transformations such as WML formatting for WAP-enabled devices, or direct XML serving to XML and XSL aware clients. "
With the advent of ETDs, traditional catalogers can learn about cataloging online resources, or they can apply what they already know about cataloging online resources to cataloging theses. Catalogers may need to adapt existing policies and procedures, but their workstations may already have the necessary software (e.g., word processor, PDF reader, etc.). This may also be an opportunity to implement cataloging policy changes, for example, allowing authors to assign keywords in addition to or instead of continuing to assign a controlled vocabulary such as the Library of Congress Subject Headings. Of course, catalogers will add the necessary MARC fields required for computer files. More information can easily be added to the bibliographic record because of the ease of copy-and-paste features of word processors, so include the abstract in online catalog records and index this field to enhance findings through keyword searching.
The following table includes MARC fields included in bibliographic records for ETDs, with additional information about Dublin Core metadata, etc. For the latest information about ETD metadata, see http://www.ndltd.org/standards/metadata/current.html
METADATA CROSSWALK http://www.dlib.vt.edu/~paul/ndltd/scm0998_imp-dev.htm (link to fuller document)
Reveals if file is corrupted. Appropriate here?
Paul Mather and Gail McMillan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Nov. 18, 1998
This topic is discussed in Naming standards: file names; unique Ids. The focus there is on naming of files and on unique identifiers. Here we consider those matters briefly, but also discuss URNs and OAI naming.
At Virginia Tech, naming of the parts of an ETD is left to authors. Many have a single document, called etd.pdf, but there are many other selections. The entire ETD is referred to by way of a summary page.
These two correspond to full URLs, respectively:
Other but similar schemes are in use elsewhere - recall Naming standards: file names; unique Ids.
The key point is to have an ID for each work, and a way to resolve that to the actual document. In some cases, a URN is given, such as a handle or PURL, which in turn is resolved to a URL. (See Identifying: URN, PURL, DOI) That allows users to remember the URN, and be assured that over time, as documents are moved about, there still be automatic linking from the URN to the designated document.
IDs as discussed above also are important with regard to OAI. Assuming that, as is required, each archive has a unique identifier, then as long as each record in the archive, as required, has a unique internal ID, then the combination of the two will uniquely determine a record in an archive.
Digital signatures act like conventional signatures - allowing you to "sign off" on anything that requires an approval. You can simply attach your "signature" to the document. In addition, a signature stores information, like the date and time, and allows you to track document versions and validate their authenticity.
Choose Tools > Self-Sign Signatures > Log In.
In the Acrobat Self-Sign Signatures - Log In dialog box, click New Profile.
In the User Attributes area of the Acrobat Self-Sign Signatures - Create New User dialog box, enter your name and whatever other information you want to include in the three optional fields.
In the Profile File area of the Acrobat Self-Sign Signatures - Create New User dialog box, enter the path name for the folder in which you want to store your signature profile or click Browse and choose a folder. Enter a password of at least six characters in the User Password and Confirm Password fields and then click OK.
Click on the Digital Signature tool in the Tool bar and then click and drag where you want to place your signature.
Enter your password in the Confirm User Password field and then click Save Document.
If this is the first signature added to the document, the Save As dialog box is displayed. Enter a name and choose a location for the file and then click OK. Note: If the Save As dialog box is displayed when you add a digital signature, you end up with two copies of the document: one unsigned and one signed.
From this point on, you should use the signed version.
To display a list of a document's signatures, click the Signatures tab in the Navigation pane. The Signatures palette's pop-up menu contains several commands for working with digital signatures; the Properties command lets you see the attributes of a digital signature.
The Australian Digital Theses (ADT) Program software is a modified version of the original Virginia Tech ETD software and is in its second release. The ADT software modifications were to make it generic, flexible and customisable for easy integration within the local IT infrastructure. This is critical as the ADT Program is a distributed and collaborative system involving a large number of Australian universities.
The software is distributed to all ADT members free by ftp download as a .tar file. The reason for using a .tar file is that it keeps related files together, and thus facilitates the transfer of multiple files between computers. The files in a .tar archive must be extracted before they can be used.
Extracting the distribution .tar file will reveal a directory (adt) containing 2 further directories (cgi-gin & public_html) plus installation instructions in a readme.txt file plus an empty adt-ADT admin site to help identify the structure of the admin side of the software.
Also included in the release package is a test site for members to look at and use to familiarise themselves on the look, structure and functionality.
Three dummy theses are used as examples of how theses can look, and how they fit into the admin structure. General software details, as well as all other information regarding the ADT Program is publicly available on the ADT Information page @: http://adt.caul.edu.au/
Responsibility for the ADT software and initial setup support for new members is taken by the lead institution - The University of New South Wales Library.
An archival infrastructure for ETD should not only consider document format or the use of digital signatures, but also a consequently run concept for mirroring and backups.
Mirrors ensure, that archives run stable, regardless of usage, bandwidth and location.
A common server concept for an ETD archive is the following one:
Archive Server (Storage Unit, like IBMs Tivoli Storage Management System)
Archive Mirror at different geographical location.
The production server is the server that communicates with the users, especially the authors. Here the uploads and metadata processing is done.
The archive server ensures that a permanent incremental backup of the public archive server is done. Only system administrators have access to the archive server. This secures the access to the ETDs and their digital signatures. It prevents users from manipulating ETDs and their authenticity and integrity.
The public archive server itself is the server that is known as the document server from the outside. Here the ETDs can be access by users, the retrieval is available. We advise to secure this server with a special RAID (Redundant Array of Independent Disks) system, that allows a security in case of a hardware failure of the disk, that might be caused by extreme usage of the server. A RAID system holds internally 2 equal copies of the server distributed on independent hard disks. So if one copy cannot be accessed due to a head crash or other hardware inconsistencies, the second copy will take over functionality and operate as the first copy. The user itself will not realize, which copy is actually in use.
Additionally to the archive server there should be another storage management system server, an archive mirror that mirrors the original archive. This is important if due to environmental accidents e.g. fire, earthquake or anything else destroys the original archive server. So a data loss, or the loss of the full archive can be prevented. This backup archive should be located at another geographical position, even at another continent.
Ultimately, ETDs are designed to be disseminated, to at least some audience. Aspects of this activity are considered in the next subsections.
First, each ETD must have an ID, and there must be a link between the ID and the actual work. Second, each ETD must have a metadata record attached, that can be used for resource discovery and other purposes. Third, there must be a link between the ID, the metadata, and the actual body of the ETD. Fourth, the works must be made available, typically through a Web server. Sixth, there may be summaries or full works that are provided for discovery, or for indexing that is designed to lead to discovery. For example, summary pages may be indexed by Web search engines so that they may be found as a result of a Web search.
Note that it is encouraged for all NDLTD sites to keep a log regarding dissemination of the local ETDs, as well as other related information, so statistical and other reports can be prepared both for individual sites and for sites that have aggregate information (such as NDLTD).
Resources distributed on the Internet are accessible by means of a syntax which corresponds to their physical location. This syntax is defined by the RFC 1738 and is known as a Uniform Resource Locator (URL). This way of doing things creates certain problems which we must often confront. Who has not encountered the famous HTTP error 404 Not Found, which indicates that the server cannot find the location of the requested resource? This does not mean that the resource is no longer on the server, because it may simply have been moved to another location. URLs have no means of being automatically updated when a resource is moved to another place, such that we often run up against that famous HTTP error.
While the URL identifies the address of a resource, the Uniform Resource Name (URN) identifies the actual resource, the unit of information, much like the ISBN does for books. To draw a parallel, the URL corresponds to a users’ postal address while the URN corresponds to users’ social insurance or social security number. The URN is thus attached to a resource and not to a physical address. By knowing this identifier, it is possible to find this resource even if its physical address changes. The URN ensures an institutional commitment to the preservation of access to a resource on the Internet.
Another interesting avenue is the PURL system created by OCLC. Let us note that a document attached to a PURL can be modified, contrary to other norms or applications for the use of a URN. The PURL system largely follows the same principle as the Handle system except that the URNs are resolved using a URL address. This solution has the advantage of not requiring the use of a plugin. In fact, a PURL is a URL. Rather than pointing directly to an Internet resource, a PURL points to an intermediary resolution service. This service associates the PURL with the active URL, which is then provided to the client. The client then normally gives access to the resource. It is possible to register PURLs with an intermediary service (such as the OCLC’s) or to install the service on one’s own server.
One of the objectives of an ETD program is to yield easy access to TDs. Since we are dealing with digital libraries, we are implicitly dealing with libraries. One of the actions performed on a library catalog is that of search and retrieve. This is the first step towards accessing the contents of a library item; the second step is the use (read, listen, view, etc.) of the item.
In order to be efficient in the search and retrieve action, the user must search a catalog in which the items were properly identified, besides using good search functions.
This section is about the identification of ETD's, which is a very important step towards their dissemination. The identification will be accomplished through the use of the metadata elements whose set is named the metadata model of the digital library of TDs.
Before we address metadata models for ETDs, it is important that some ideas are brought to the discussion. These ideas are related to the choice of a model to be considered later on. These models must be rich and versatile to contain information of different natures and to be searched by users from all over the world.
It is obvious that the richer and more versatile the metadata model is, the more time and effort it takes to
Our world is a very diverse linguistic place. Those who work with information and are involved in international projects know English. This is the language they use to communicate, to access the Internet, to read technical literature, etc.
At the same time, not only many other languages exist but some of them have large numbers of native speakers. The 100 most spoken languages of the world, when first language speakers are counted, can be found in http://www.sil.org/ethnologue/top100.html. In descending order, the first 10 are Chinese (Mandarin), Spanish, English, Bengali, Hindi, Portuguese, Russian, Japanese, German (Standard) and Chinese (Wu).
If only the other 9 languages are considered, it is not hard to imagine the numbers of texts that are written and published every year. The same happens with TDs. The number of TDs published in languages other than English must be very big.
We assume that ETD digital libraries are to be connected to the Internet so that their contents can be shared worldwide, to make sure this benefit is accomplished.
Metadata are data about data or information about information.
The metadata elements are the attributes used to describe a digital library item just like the ones used to catalog items in a traditional library.
Many of these attributes are language dependent, as for example titles, abstracts, subjects, keywords, etc. Others obviously are not, as for example authors' names, digital format, number of bytes of the file, etc.
Since some metadata elements are language dependent and TDs are written in many languages, we can expect that most probably the metadata will use the language of the work. This can pose a problem for search and retrieve activities since most of us are not fluent in as many languages as we would like to be.
The items of a digital library may be identified in 2 different levels; the same way the items of a traditional library are. The first level is the content which is equivalent to a title of a traditional library and the second is the instance which is equivalent to a volume.
The use of contents and instances allows contents to have multiple instances either in different formats or due to physical partitions. This will yield a one to many relationship among contents and instances.
The use of contents and instances also allows the access control to be performed on the partitions instead of on the content. This makes the digital library more flexible in terms of dealing with intellectual property rights.
Therefore, we can conclude that there are attributes that are particular to contents and others that refer to instances. The metadata model must contain both.
Some metadata elements are common to all contents, as for example title, abstract, type, etc., while others are common to all instances, as for example electronic format, access level, etc.
On the other hand, some metadata elements are specific to some contents, as for example translation control - original content, translator, etc., and others are specific to some instances, as for example special equipment, expiration date, remote location, etc.
From this comment, we can see that the metadata model must be versatile to contain attributes that are common to all contents and to all instances and also the specific ones, in order to accommodate specialization of the digital library items.
Other languages may be associated with a content - the ones in which it is catalogued. It is possible to describe a content written/spoken/sung in one language in other language(s). This way, there is one catalog entry in each of the languages to be used.
It is possible to define the digital library to hold more than one language. A good choice would be, at least, the language(s) of the nation where TDs are developed and English.
If this is the case, the metadata model can have all attributes that are language dependent written in each language to be used in the digital library and the language code must be a part of the primary key in the database.
Attributes that are language independent would have only one representation in the database.
There are quite a few metadata schemes. Some are strictly related to library items while others have a broader scope, as for example the ones devoted to digital objects to be used in Web Based Education. Some schemes are well known and should be mentioned:
DCMES - Dublin Core Metada Element Sethttp://purl.org/dc/documents/rec-dces-19990702.htm Under the responsibility of the DCMI - Dublin Core Metadata Initiative http://www.purl.oclc.org/metadata/dublin_core/ http://purl.org/dc/ This metadata element set will be presented in the section Cataloging: MARC, DC, RDF
IMS Project - Instructional Management System Project http://www.imsproject.org/ The metadata element set defined by the IMS Project has the objective of identifying digital objects used in Web based Education. It contains all the elements of the DCMES and many more.
LOM - Learning Objects Metadata of the Learning Technology Standards Committee of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (LTSC/IEEE) http://ltsc.ieee.org/doc/wg12/LOM_WD4.htm/ The metadata element set defined by the LTSC/IEEE (http://ltsc.ieee.org/) has the objective of identifying digital objects used in Web based Education. It contains all the elements of the DCMES and many more.
LoC - Core Metadata Elements of the Library of Congress http://lcweb.loc.gov/standards/metadata.html The second and the third are used when WBE is under. Since they contain the DCMES, no conflict exists to the general digital library identification.
Besides the usual data contained in general purpose metadata schemes, there are some types of information related to TDs that may be of interest to the university. For this reason, it may be useful to consider adding extra metadata elements to the traditional metadata schemes. The additional elements can be separated in 3 groups:
Administrative information - department, date of presentation, date of acceptance, financial support, etc.
Academic information - level, mentor, examining committee, etc.
These may be useful to yield information concerning the graduate programs of the university.
The definition of the metadata model for an ETD digital library must combine:
The needs for proper identification of ETD's for the goals of access to be achieved (national access? international access?)
At the same time, the restrictions imposed by budget or operation time frames must be to taken into consideration. There is a balance between what is desired and what is possible. Some comments concerning this balance are made:
For international access, the use of English besides the original language(s) is mandatory. This means that titles and abstracts must be translated, and that subjects headings, keywords, etc. will be multilingual catalogs to be maintained.
For the ETD digital library to be a part of the international community, the minimum requirements in terms of ETD identification must be met. This means that at least the DCMES must be used.
For the university to have good control of the intellectual property, the use of content / instance concept allows access specifications to be established on the digital objects. Thus, some objects may be made public while others may have different types of restrictions due to format or to intellectual content.
In the definition of the workflow to operate the ETD program, attention must be given to the capture of the metadata elements. If non-librarians are involved in the process, there must be a good training program and a careful review process so that the attributes are catalogued right.
The choice of the metadata model is very important and the team in charge of the implementation of the ETD program must study the possibilities before making the decision. Minimum standards must be met.
Many traditional library systems exchange and store records using the MARC Format (Machine Readable Catalog), one of the realizations of the ISO 2709 Standard. The MARC Format has approximately 1,000 fields, many with subfields which can be repeated. The use of this format allows a very detailed description of the items. This format has a specific field (856) to identify of electronic objects associated with the intellectual item and its other physical instances.
The DCMES (Dublin Core Metadata Element Set - http://dublincore.org/documents/dces/) is a set of 15 attributes divided into 3 groups: content, intellectual property and instanciation. Associated to them there are the Dublin Core Qualifiers (http://dublincore.org/documents/dcmes-qualifiers/) that enhance the identification of the items.
The RDF (Resource Description Framework - http://www.w3.org/TR/1999/rec-rdf-syntax-19990222/) is a foundation for processing metadata. It specifies a representation for metadata as well as the syntax for encoding and transporting this metadata. The objective is to yield interoperability of Web servers and clients, and to facilitate automation of processing of resources. It can be used to describe Web pages, sites or digital libraries.
The DCMES can be used with the RDF representation.
Catalogers may want to focus initially on what fields are currently included in the MARC bibliographic record for theses and how these would be the same or different for ETDs. The MARC record for theses is not very robust and often has a local twist, presenting valuable information in a unique format that can be seen only at the originating institution. Optimally, author, title, abstract, and other relevant bibliographic information would be programmatically adapted to the appropriate MARC fields. The extent of AACR2r compliance was another complicating factor. For example, would programming change upper-case letters to lower case?
Requiring authors of theses (in all formats) to provide keywords for use in the bibliographic record may enhance search results. Assigning Library of Congress subject headings (or other controlled vocabulary) is very time consuming, so having the authors assign the uncontrolled subject headings may be an appropriate alternative. MARC tag 653 would be appropriate for author-assigned terms. Without LC subject headings, however, these MARC records would be considered "minimal level," rather than full level, cataloging. This seemed particularly unjust to because the ETD bibliographic records would actually be more robust than previous theses cataloging because additional information is included.
The catalogers on the ad hoc task force suggested including tables of contents (MARC tag 505) and abstracts (MARC tag 520) since the standard copy-and-paste features of today's word processors would make this a relatively easy process. The table of contents for dissertations, however, proved to be quite generic, usually containing only the standard dissertation topics (e.g., literature review, methodology, findings, etc.), and, therefore, not an enhancement to the information available about the work in the OPAC. The abstract, however, contains valuable information and provides valuable information about the research topic. The 520 is also an indexed field in our online catalog and, therefore, a word-searchable field for OPAC users. Adding the abstract (250-350 words) can, however, add tremendously to the length of the MARC record. See figure 2 and figure 3.
Cataloging conventions have not generally included the name of the thesis author's department as a standard feature of the bibliographic record. This is an opportunity to modify local cataloging practices.
Taking advantage of the opportunity to incorporate changes in theses cataloging, consider using MARC tag 502, the dissertation note field, to include the degree, institution, and year the degree was granted, expanding institution to include the name of the department. The new note would follow this example:
502 Thesis (Ph. D. in Mechanical Engineering)--Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 1955.
Evaluating the potential value of an e-thesis bibliographic record provides the opportunity to propose a substantially enhanced record of real and continuing value to OPAC users. AACR2r compliance may be an issue. In reviewing her Cataloging Internet Resources: A Manual and Practical Guide, Nancy Olson states that when cataloging Internet-accessible documents, consider them to be published documents. Therefore, publisher information belongs in field 260 of an e-thesis record. [Coming from a serials background it seems reasonable to add a 710 for this corporate body tracing.] Additional fields required for cataloging computer files include tag 256 for computer file characteristics, tag 538 for notes of system details, and tag 856 for formatted electronic location and access information. These additional fields (505, 260, 710, etc.), however, also increase the length of the record and, therefore, should be carefully considered as should the usefulness of the information provided in meeting the combined needs of OPAC users and computerized access and retrieval systems.
Repr: Enc lvl: K Conf pub: 0 Ctry: vau Dat tp: s M/F/B: 0
100 1 Alvarez, Leticia, \d 1973-
245 14 The influence of the Mexican muralists in the United States \h [computer file] : \b from the new deal to the abstract expressionism / \c Leticia Alvarez.
260 [Blacksburg, Va. : \b University Libraries, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, \c 2001]
520 3 This thesis proposes to investigate the influence of the Mexican muralists in the United States, from the Depression to the Cold War. This thesis begins with the origins of the Mexican mural movement, which will provide the background to understand the artists2 ideologies and their relationship and conflicts with the Mexican government. Then, I will discuss the presence of Mexican artists in the United States, their repercussions, and the interaction between censorship and freedom of expression as well as the controversies that arose from their murals. This thesis will explore the influence that the Mexican mural movement had in the United States in the creation of a government-sponsored program for the arts (The New Deal, Works Progress Administration). During the 1930s, sociological factors caused that not only the art, but also the political ideologies of the Mexican artists to spread across the United States. The Depression provided the environment for a public art of social content, as well as a context that allowed some American artists to accept and follow the Marxist ideologies of the Mexican artists. This influence of radical politics will be also described. Later, I will examine the repercussions of the Mexican artists2 work on the Abstract Expressionist movement of the 1940s. Finally I will also examine the iconography of certain murals by Mexican and American artists to appreciate the reaction of their audience, their acceptance among a circle of artists, and the historical context that allowed those murals to be created.
Figure 3: OPAC display for an electronic thesis from the Virginia Tech VTLS opac
Title: The influence of the Mexican muralists in the United States [computer file] : from the new deal to the abstract expressionism / Leticia Alvarez.
Imprint: [Blacksburg, Va. : University Libraries, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 2001]
Note: System requirements: PC, World Wide Web browser and PDF reader.
Note: Available electronically via Internet.
Note: Title from electronic submission form.
Note: Vita.
Note: Abstract.
Note: Thesis (M.A.)--Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 2001.
Note: Includes bibliographical references.
Abstract: This thesis proposes to investigate the influence of the Mexican muralists in the United States, from the Depression to the Cold War. This thesis begins with the origins of the Mexican mural movement, which will provide the background to understand the artists2 ideologies and their relationship and conflicts with the Mexican government. Then, I will discuss the presence of Mexican artists in the United States, their repercussions, and the interaction between censorship and freedom of expression as well as the controversies that arose from their murals. This thesis will explore the influence that the Mexican mural movement had in the United States in the creation of a government-sponsored program for the arts (The New Deal, Works Progress Administration). During the 1930s, sociological factors caused that not only the art, but also the political ideologies of the Mexican artists to spread across the United States. The Depression provided the environment for a public art of social content, as well as a context that allowed some American artists to accept and follow the Marxist ideologies of the Mexican artists. This influence of radical politics will be also described. Later, I will examine the repercussions of the Mexican artists2 work on the Abstract Expressionist movement of the 1940s. Finally I will also examine the iconography of certain murals by Mexican and American artists to appreciate the reaction of their audience, their acceptance among a circle of artists, and the historical context that allowed those murals to be created.
In terms of the broader topic of bibliographic control of electronic publications, focus on adding to current cataloging practices those fields that would enhance the OPAC users' access and conform to AACR2r. So many of the fields describing computer files appear to be redundant; 245 \h, 256, 516, and 538, for example; which tell the OPAC user over and over that the item is a computer file. To stay within the stringent restrictions of full-level cataloging, the members of the task force saw no way to avoid requiring catalogers to use most of the available fields. Concentrate on the MARC tags that would provide information about access. The principal fields include: 256 (computer file characteristics), 506 (restrictions on access note), 516 (type of computer file or data note), 530 (other formats available), 538 (system details note), 556 (accompanying documentation), and 856 (electronic location and access).
Current OPACs, in addition to the limitations of hardware and workstations, however, still prevent most users from accessing electronic texts or images directly and smoothly from one menu or even from a single, multi-function workstation. However, workstations are gradually becoming available that permit users to copy the URL from the bibliographic record and paste it into a World Wide Web browser for accessing an e-text from a single terminal. Knowing this was possible include MARC tag 856.
Another issue that must be addressed is using subfield u or splitting the URL into the multiple subfields. We went for simplicity and decided to format the 856 subfield u so that it could be copied and pasted into a World Wide Web browser. Again, we were not willing to wait for the programming that would be necessary to combine the separate subfields into a clickable URL.
Cataloging has greatly benefited from advances in library automation and the cataloging of e-texts is ripe for further automation. It is now possible to derive MARC cataloging from text mark-up languages, subsets of XL, SGML such as TEI (Text Encoding Initiative) headers, and possibly even HTML (hypertext markup language) tags.
With input from the University Archivist and addressing a concern of the Graduate School's, long term preservation and access of ETDs should also be factored into the procedures. A plan may include periodically writing ETDs to CD-ROMs for security back-ups and possibly longer term preservation. While this is may not be the final answer, an alternative has not been brought forward; how frequently this would be done has also not been determined.
Electronically transfers approved file to library theses server E-mails Thesis Transmission Form to library thesis coordinator
Electronically send file to UMI or move to UMI holding file
Maintains server, including weekly back-ups (stored on site) and monthly tapes (stored off site)
Works with Theses Server Administrator as necessary to ensure that archival files are accessible
Theses and dissertations as electronic files may be the first major source of electronic texts that many libraries encounter regularly. Seize this opportunity to enhance the OPAC users search results by expanding current theses cataloging and taking advantage of online information prepared by authors. Since authors will probably not be adding TEI, MARC, or other element tags to their documents to help cataloging in the near term, catalogers could use the information available in a variety of online sources including the document itself or from the online submission form to provide the basic descriptive MARC fields. Whether programmatic changes can be made or standard copy-and-paste features of word processors are incorporated, enhancing the ETD bibliographic record does not require a lot of extra work.
See also "Electronic Theses and Dissertations: Merging Perspectives," chapter in Electronic Resources: Selection and Bibliographic Control, Pattie, Ling-yuh W. (Miko), and Bonnie Jean Cox, eds. New York: Haworth, 1997 (105-125). [Simultaneously published in Cataloging and Classification Quarterly, 22(3/4)]
The next step after identification of the items of the digital library, the ETDs, is to address storage of the cataloguing attributes and the action of searching and retrieving. Remember that the quality of retrieval is dependent both on the programming of the search and retrieve functions but, as important as this, on the quality of the information used to catalog the items of the collection.
Databases are common and suitable tools to store, search and retrieve information. Besides this, they can also be very helpful in the process of capturing the attributes since they have the general function of managing information.
Before implementing the database, the database model must be created. This will happen only after the metadata model has been defined and related to other existing identification procedures such as traditional cataloguing on an automated library system.
If the traditional OPAC is to be maintained during the ETD program, it is desirable to avoid duplicated information. Thus, the attributes that are present in the OPAC should not be repeated and a link between the OPAC record and the ETD metadata is be created.
No matter where information is stored, the user should be able to perform the types of search that are standard in library systems: author, title, keywords, subjects, ISBN, etc.
As mentioned in the section Metadata models for ETDs, some information that is used to identify the items are language dependent (title, keywords, subjects, etc.). If the database holds only one language per record, search procedures are to be performed using the arguments in this language. If a multilingual database is modelled, it is recommended that search be language independent, i.e., that the argument be checked against all languages. In this last situation, after a record is found as the result of a search, all its language instances should be displayed to the user so that he/she can choose the language for retrieval.
Database extenders (text, image) may be considered to increase the number of points of access by performing the searches in the ETD's not only on the cataloguing attributes.
The relation with the legacy systems databases must be examined since information concerning the TDs may be stored on them. Some examples are the graduate program, the mentor, the examining committee, etc.
The next sections address specific aspects of this topic.
Since 1995, there have been plans to share work developed in connection with ETDs so as to help others. The first such effort was funded by the Southeastern Universities Research Association (SURA), to spread the work around the Southeast of the USA. Virginia Tech acted as the agent for this effort, creating software, documentation, training materials, and other resources. In particular, it became clear that software was needed to support student submission, staff checking, library processing, and support for access. The Virginia Tech resources were packaged in connection with these efforts and the follow-on work funded by the USA’s Department of Education. These were made available starting in 1996 through local and NDLTD sites, and updated regularly since.
The following subsections give details of the Virginia Tech solutions, as well as extensions to it, and alternatives. NDLTD offers to assist such sharing by providing a clearinghouse for whatever seems appropriate and useful to share.
Theses and dissertations are traditionally covered by the legal deposit law in Portugal. Nowadays, almost all the thesis and dissertations are created using word processors, just confirming the fact that science and technology became one of the first areas for digital publishing.
In this context, the deposit of theses and dissertations emerged as an ideal case study for a scenario concerned with a specific genre. For that, the National Library of Portugal promoted the project DiTeD-Digital Thesis and Dissertations from which a software package with the same name originated.
Theses and dissertations carry special requirements for registration and access, since their contents are usually used to produce other genres, such as books and papers, or they can include sensitive material related with, for example. patents. This requires the management system functionality to make it possible to the authors to declare special requirements for access, which have to be registered and respected.
Universities have a long tradition of independence in their organization, culture and procedures. As a consequence, soon it was learned that it would be impossible to reach, in the short and medium term, any kind of overall agreement for common formats or standard procedures with the different administrative services. Therefore, the main objective defined for DiTeD was the development, on the top of the Internet, of a framework that would connect the National Library to the local university libraries and would make it possible to support a full digital circuit for the deposit of theses and dissertations.
A solution for this framework was found in the DIENST technology [3], which provides a good set of core services. DIENST also has an open architecture that can be used with great flexibility, making it possible to extend its services and build new functionalities. The basic entities of this architecture are shown in Figure 1, as a class diagram in UML - Unified Modeling Language.
The Master Meta Server provides the centralized services, including a directory of all the local servers members of the system. Only one of these servers must exist in each system.
In DiTeD this server exists at the National Library. It was renamed Master Server, and differs substantially from the original versions developed for DIENST. The original server was designed to manage only metadata, while now it is necessary to manage also the contents of the theses or dissertations and give support to the workflow for its submission and deposit.
The DIENST Standard Server is the server installed at the university libraries. This server was modified in DiTeD, and renamed Local Server. The following core modules compose it:
Repository Service: This is where the documents are stored. It manages metadata structures and multiple content formats for the same document, functions that were substantially extended in DiTeD (to support a specific metadata format, as also to recognize a thesis or dissertation as possibly composed by several files). It is also possible to define and manage different collections in the same server.
Index Service: This service is responsible for indexing the metadata and responding to queries. Small adjustments were made in DiTeD to support diacritics in the indexes and queries, a requirement in the Portuguese writing.
User Interface: This service is responsible for the interaction with the user. It was extended in DiTeD to support a flexible multilingual interface and a workflow for submissions using HTTP.
Two Local Servers are running at the National Library. One, named Deposit Server, is used to locally store the deposited theses and dissertations coming from all universities (the deposit will consist in a copy, so in the end each thesis or dissertation will exist in two places, the Local Server and the Deposit Server). A second Local Server is used as a virtual system for those university libraries that do not have the necessary technical resources or skills to maintain their own server.
Each thesis or dissertation deposited in DiTeD automatically receives a URN [4], which will be registered and managed by a namespace and resolution service. This is in fact a simple implementation of the concept of PURL - Persistent URL, with the particular property that it resolves any PURL by returning its real URL in the original Local Server, unless it is not available anymore. In this case, it resolves it by returning its URL in the Deposit Server. The entities of this final DiTeD architecture are shown in Figure 2.
The workflow comprises two main steps: submission and deposit.
The submission process comprises the following steps:
Delivery: The process starts with the submission by the student of the thesis or dissertation to a local server. In this step the student fills a metadata form, where it is recorded the bibliographic information and the access conditions. All of this information is hold in a pending status, until it is checked.
Verification: In a second step a librarian checks the quality of the submission (a login in the local server gives access to all the pendent submissions). This task is supposed to be assured by a local librarian, but it can be also assured remotely, such as by a professional from the National Library (in a first phase of the project, this task will be assured by the National Library, especially to assure uniformity in the criteria and test and tune the procedures).
Registration: If everything is correct (metadata and contents), the thesis or dissertation is stored in the local repository, and the student receives a confirmation. Otherwise, the student is contacted to solve any problem, and the submission remains in the pending status.
The deposit consists in the copy of the thesis or dissertation, as also of its metadata, from the Local Server to the Deposit Server. This is done in the following steps:
What’s new: Periodically, the Master Server contacts the repository of a Local Server to check if there are new submissions. The Local Server replies, giving a list of the identifiers of the new submissions.
Delivery: For each new submission, the Master Server sends a request to the Local Server to deposit it in the Deposit Server. Because this Deposit Server is also a Local Server, this deposit works just like a normal local submission.
Verification: A librarian in the National Library checks the deposit. This double checking is important, especially in the first times of the project, to reassess the procedures and test the automatic transfer of files over the Internet -not always a reliable process).
Registration: If everything is correct, the thesis or dissertation is stored in the deposit repository, the final URN (a PURL) is assigned, and both the student and the local librarian receive a confirmation. The metadata is also reused to produce a standard UNIMARC record, for the national catalogue. If it detected any problem, the local librarian is contacted and the deposit remains in the pending status.
One can argue that, if the Deposit Server is really also a Local Server, than the first step would be excused and the Local Server could perform the delivery automatically after a successful submission. This can be a future optimization, but for now the reason for this extra step is to preserve the requirement of an asynchronous system, making it possible for the Master Server, for example, to better control the moment of the deposit (such as to give preference for the night periods).
DiTeD utilizes a metadata structure for theses and dissertations defined by the National Library and coded in XML. This structure contains descriptive bibliographic information about the work and the author, as well as information about the advisers and jury members, access conditions, etc. This metadata structure is configurable at installation time, making the software flexible for use in other countries, or even with other publication genres. Metadata may also be accessed and exported in other formats, like UNIMARC and Dublin Core.
DiTeD's user interface has multilingual capabilities, allowing the users to switch between the available languages at any time. The base configuration includes English and Portuguese.
The software is maintained by the National Library of Portugal, and distributed freely for noncommercial use.
Access to the software package may be requested by email to dited@bn.pt.
Sollins, K; Masinter, L. (1994). Functional Requirements for Uniform Resource Names. RFC 1737.
ADT Program is a collaborative Australia-wide university libraries initiative. Membership is open to all Australian universities and is voluntary. National coordination of the ADT is via the Council of Australian University Librarians [CAUL; an umbrella group representing all Australian university libraries]. The ADT Steering Committee is currently investigating a proposal to further extend ADT Program & software to the Australasian region.
ADT software was designed to be transportable and to be flexible enough to be 'plugged in' at each member institution with minimum modification. The ADT software was also designed to automatically generate simple core metadata which is gathered automatically to form national distributed 'metadata' database of ADT-ETDs
ADT software is based on the original Virginia Tech [VT] software. The original ADT v1.0/1999 released in April 1999, with upgrade v1.1/2000 released in October 2000.
The distribution software package requires modification of a list of variables and some webserver-dependent adjustments so it runs in standard way for each of the local institutions. Local search software, which may be institution-mandated, is not included in the package. It is expected that each institution will use their own security accordingly.
Deposit Form : generic look and feel; includes copyright and authenticity statements; complete set up help screens; quality control using alerts when errors are made and does not allow non compliance with core ADT standards
Administration pages: possible to edit html and change document restrictions; also possible to add, delete, rename files as well as moving files to no access directory to restrict files temporarily for copyright reasons; varying levels of restrictions possible; easy to 'un make' deposit
Metadata: revised and updated according to latest DC Qualifiers document; generated and gathered automatically, used to create central national searchable 'metadata' database
ADT Standards: few, simple but necessary for success of collaborative program. Core standards are - research theses only; PDF document format; PDF filename convention; unique URL; Metadata standard.
At first, this cooperation dealt with the conception and creation of a production line for electronic documents, using the SGML norm. It also had the objective of setting up a server to be shared by the different participating establishments so as to allow their theses to be indexed.
In a desire for openness, we decided to enlarge participation on this server to all establishments of higher education distributing full-text versions of their thesis on the Internet, without constraints based on the language used or on the chosen format of distribution.
The www.cybertheses.org site allows theses to be indexed on line using a common metadata model. Its implementation provides a structure for this growing cooperative effort by basing itself on the Internet’s own modes of functioning and of distributing skills. Our wish is that it can quickly ensure a better distribution of the research work conducted within the participating establishments and serve as an effective tool for the entire community of researchers.
From the conception of the project, the partners wanted to contribute to the distribution of software tools created for use in the university environment. These tools are available to the partners in the Cybertheses network. They permit all the partners to participate, on equal footing, in the construction of an electronic university library that functions in a dispersed manner and applies the concept of distributed intelligence.
One of the principles that motivated the implementation of this program is to favor, as much as possible, the re-appropriation of research work by the researchers themselves. Our objective is to eventually help create a new political economy of knowledge, which makes researchers the masters of their publications, beyond any economic constraints. Many aspects of our project respond to this goal:
Placing theses freely and completely on-line on the Internet, and thus widening their distribution, means that the thesis will no longer be considered as solely the result of a research project. It will instead become a genuine work instrument integrated to a much larger system in order to satisfy the user’s demand.
The creation of the Cybertheses database containing the metadata of the participating institutions’ theses. Cybertheses provides an efficient indexation system and rapid searching, even while significantly increasing the visibility and the distribution of the theses.
The use of free or freely distributed software is favored at each stage of the production and distribution process.
The sharing of research, self-created software programs, and documentation between the
Cybertheses partners, thereby creating a "toolbox" permitting participation in the program.
This page describe the hardware and software requirements involved in setting up your own ETD database.
To use this software, you must have a web server available. At Virginia Tech we use a UNIX-based server platform. You should allocate enough disk space on your machine for at least a year's worth of submissions. Our site averages 2.5 Megabytes per submission. Keep in mind that it's better to have more space early on, as the scripts are not designed to deal with a collection which spans multiple drives. You should also have enough memory to handle the web server, the database server, and whatever other tasks you have in mind. As an example, our site uses a dual-processor Sun Enterprise 250 with 384 Mb of RAM, running Solaris 2.7. Our machine has an 18Gb drive allocated solely for the ETD collection.
Before you can make use of the scripts provided here, you must have the following installed:
Mysql is a database server and client which partially implements the SQL 9.2 standard. It is many ways similar to other SQL databases, such as Oracle, Postgres, and miniSQL. UNIX versions of Mysql are made available without charge to education institutions at http://www.mysql.com/. A version of Mysql for Windows NT is available as well for an additional charge, although the scripts are not designed for use with Windows NT.
All of the scripts included with this distribution are written using perl. Perl is also freely available (under the GNU public license) from http://www.perl.com/CPAN/. It is recommended that you download, install, and test the latest version available for your operating environment.
The CGI module for perl is one of the most widely used and best supported libraries of CGI oriented routines in existence. Virtually all of the query handling performed in these scripts relies heavily on CGI.pm. CGI.pm is available from http://www.perl.com/CPAN-local/modules/bymodule/CGI/.
The DBI and DBD:Mysql modules for perl
The DBI module for perl is a generic set of database calls designed to interface with a wide range of different database technologies in a powerful, reliable, and easy to understand way.
To make use of the DBI module, you need a DBD module for the particular database you intend to use. The DBD:Mysql module (also known as the DBD:Msql module) allows you to easily perform all types of database operations on a Mysql database from within perl.
The Tie-IxHash module is a very small add-in that allows you to reliably output hashes in the order they are defined in. Without this module, none of the global hashes that contain department names, degree information, etc. would appear in the order we'd like them to. This module is available at http://www.perl.com/CPAN-local/modules/by-module/Tie/
The perl scripts provided are designed for the most part to be used through a CGI interface, meaning that you must have a compatible web server installed. The freely available Apache Web Server is our recommendation, although any web server capable of seamlessly handling html output from perl scripts should be acceptable. Apache is available from http://www.apache.org/.
Once you have all the preceding items installed and tested, you should be ready to download (http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/ETD-db/developer/download/) and install(http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/ETD-db/developer/install.html) the scripts
ETDs are intimately connected with libraries. The first key automation of libraries, launched in the 1980s, involved computerization of the card catalogs. Online Public Access Catalogs (OPACs) were
Many library catalogs have their holdings encoded according to the MARC (machine readable cataloging) standard. Managed by the US Library of Congress, the MARC standard in the USA has been applied in many other contexts, leading to broader standards like UNIMARC. The latest standard as of 2001 is MARC 21.
VTLS, Inc. (http://www.vtls.com), is one company that sells software (e.g., their Virtual system, which works with MARC) and services to support catalog search and other related library requirements. OPACs in many cases have evolved into sophisticated digital libraries, and can be used to help manage ETD collections. Indeed, ETDs at most universities can be found by searching in the local catalog system, as long as one can distinguish this genre or type of work from other holdings (e.g., books, journals, maps).
VTLS has volunteered equipment, software, staff, and services to help NDLTD. From http://www.vtls.com/ndltd one can gain access to a system affording search and browse support to the union catalog of all ETDs that can be harvested using the mechanisms supported in the Open Archives Initiative.
The HARVEST system is often used for a fulltext search within the ETD archives. In Germany, most of the university libraries are using this particular software.
Before the installation, one should check whether the following technical preconditions are fulfilled.
The Harvest system consists of two major components:
The Harvest Broker.
This allows establishing a distributed retrieval and search model.
This program part is responsible for collecting the full text and metadata of the dissertations. The Gatherer visits several sites regularly, sometimes daily or weekly and builds an incremental index area database. The collected index data are held in a special format, called SOIF-Format (Summary Object Interchange Format). The Gatherer can be extended so that it can interpret different formats.
This part of the software is responsible to provide the indexed information by using a search interface. The broker operates as Query-Manager and does the real indexing of the data. Using a Web based interface he can reach several Gatherer and Broker simultaneously and perform several search requests.
In Germany there has been established a Germany-wide retrieval interface on the basis of the Harvest software, called The (Theses Online Broker), which is accessible via: http://www.iuk-initiative.org/iwi/TheO
Within NDLTD a special Broker has been set up to add the German sites using Harvest to the international search.
Harvest is able to do a search within the following document formats:
Extract text in word processor-specific fashion, and pass through Text summarizer.
Extract full text of README file and comments for Makefile and source code files, and summarize any manual pages
Extract first 100 lines plus first sentence of each remaining paragraph
Extract author, title, etc., based on `-man, `-ms, `-me macro packages, or extract section headers and topic sentences
Before the Harvest-Gatherer can collect PDF documents and transform into SOIF format it has to be configured.
Using only the standards configuration ignores the format. In order to make a format known to the Gatherer a summarizer for PDF has to be build:
Configure the PDF summarizer. Use Acrobat to transfer PDF documents into PS documents, that are used by the summarizer. A better choice provides the xpdf packages by Derek B. Noonburg (http://www.foolabs.com/xpdf ). It contains a PDF-to text converter (pdftotext), that can be integrated into, the summerizer Pdf.sum:
The Harvest-Gatherer is by standard configured to map every HTML metatag into an SOIF attribute, e.g. into an own SOIF attribute, that is equal to the NAME attribute of the metatag.
The summarizer table has entries like this:
If a retrieval should be done only in the HTML metatags, meaning within certain SOIF attributes, those attributes have to put in front of the search request and put into the retrieval forms provided to the user, e.g.
As in Germany there is a nationwide agreed metadata set for ETDs, those are searchable within the German wide Harvest network.
The following example shows, how those Dublin Core metadata (only a small part is displayed) is encoded within the HTML front pages for ETDs:
For this agreed metadata set, there has been formulated a suggestion, on how the metadata can be produced and operated at the university libraries. The following schema shows the details:
The doctoral candidate uploads his ETD document to the library. He does this while filling in an HTML form, that collects internally metadata in Dublin Core format.
The university libraries check the metadata of correctness and the ETD of readability and correct usage of style sheets.
At last submits the university library the metadata to the National library, which is in charge of archiving all German language literature.
The national library copies the ETD and metadata to its own internal system.
Harvest also allows a search within SGML/XML DTD (document type definition) elements.
All that has to be done to configure the Gatherer component according to the following rules:
Within the home of the Harvest software (written as ) in /lib/gatherer/byname.cf a line has to be added: DIML ^.*\.did$. (DiML is the DTD used at Humboldt-University, did is the file names of the SGML documents accorning to the DIML-DTD). This says the Harvest-Gatherer, which Summerizer should be used, if documents ending with .did are found.
Now, the summarizer has to be build and saved as DIML.sum within the filesystem at /lib/gatherer: (The summarizer contains the following line: #!/bin/sh exec SGML.sum ETD $*
Within the catalog file /lib/gatherer/sgmls-lib/catalog the following entries have to be done: (They point to the public identifiers of the DIML and from DIML used DTVs)
Now /lib/gatherer/lib/sgmls-lib/DIML can be created (mkdir ) and four files copied into the path:
The Gatherer can be launched now.
In order to saerch within certain SOIF tags, the name of the SOIF attribute has to be put in front of the search term, e.g. searching for "title: Hallo"means, searching within the SOIF-attribute 'title' for the search term 'Hallo'.
At Humboldt-University Berlin, there has been installed a prototype that allows a retrieval within documents structures, so a user may search within the following parts of a document and therefore specialize the search in order to retrieve only the wanted information and hits:
For Author names within bibliography (nach Autoren in der Bibliographie)
With the growing enthusiasm for the approach of the open archives initiative, where a special OAI software protocol allows to send out requests to document archives and receive standardized metadata sets as answers, there are ideas on how this could be connected with the Harvest-based infrastructure that has been set up in Germany.
Making a Harvest archive OAI compliant means, that the information, that the Gatherer holds, has to be normalized (same metadata usage) and that the index has temporarily saved within a database. The Institute for Science Networking at the Department of Physics at the University of Oldenburg, Germany developed the following software. This software, written in php4, uses an SQL database to perform the OAI protocol requests. The SQL database holds the normalized data from the Harvest Gatherer.
Other university document servers, like the one at Humboldt-University, additionally hold the Dublin core metadata within an SQL database (Sybase) anyway. There a php4 script operating at the cgi-interface reads the OAI protocol requests that is transported via the HTTP protocol and puts them into SQL statements, which are then used as requests for the SQL-database. The database response is given in an SQL syntax as well, which is then transformed into OAI protocol syntax using XML and Dublin Core.(see http://edoc.hu-berlin.de/oai)
The Networked Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations is an interconnected system of digital archives. After NDLTD became a reality, the logical next step was to give users the means to search and browse the entire collection of theses and dissertations. Much research went in to deciding how best to do this, and a couple of proto-solutions were examined. In the end, by adopting the Metadata Harvesting Protocol of the Open Archives Initiative to gather metadata in the ETDMS format, NDLTD was able to make the collection of ETDs accessible via a central portal. VTLS Inc., using their Virtua—Integrated Library System (Virtua ILS), is hosting this portal, providing a Web interface to the ETD Union Catalog. This portal gives users a simple and intuitive way to search and browse through the merged collection of theses and dissertations. Once relevant items are discovered via a browse, keyword, or Boolean search, users can follow links that go directly to the source archives or to an alphabetical index that allows for further searching.
In addition to creating an ETD, students now need to become their own cataloguers. The tools being developed by the NDLTD will assist in the submission of a basic description of the ETD but there are skills to be developed and issues to be aware of.
Students will have already discovered that one of the greatest barriers to finding information is the difficulty of coming up with the right terminology. Lists of standardized subject heading terms, structured thesauri, and fielded searching have been created to remedy this problem.
Accurate metadata improves precision and increases the recall of the content of ETDs by using the same standardized terms or elements. However, even if common metadata elements are used, there is no guarantee that the vocabularies, the content of the elements, will be compatible between communities of interest. Students and researchers working within specialized areas sometimes forget that language and terms often have particular and precise meanings. Outside this field of interest, global searches can return too much of the wrong information.
Generating accurate metadata requires some of the basic skills of resource description and good practice in avoiding three language problems that cause poor precision:
Polysemy: words with multiple meanings. For example, if we are searching for an article that discusses types of springs and their uses, we might retrieve articles on freshwater springs or on the season of spring, as well as on leaf springs, flat springs, or coil springs.
Synonymy: words representing the same concept, although they may do it with different shades of meaning. Take the words 'ball,' 'sphere,' and 'orb,' or 'scuba diving' versus 'skin diving.' If we look for scuba diving, but the term used is skin diving, we will miss materials we might otherwise find. Good metadata should draw these materials together, despite their use of different synonyms.
Ambiguity: If we return to our example of springs, we can see what differentiates these meanings is their context. It is unlikely an article on coil springs will also discuss water quality. The other words used in the article, and the processes described, will be entirely different. A search engine must understand the meaning, not just be able to match the spelling of a word, if it is going to differentiate between different meanings of the same word. A possible solution to this difficulty lies in the recent development of the notion of Application Profiles. Application Profiles provide a model for the way in which metadata might be aggregated in ‘packages’ in order to combine different element sets relating to one resource. This is a way of making sense of the differing relationship that implementers and namespace managers have towards metadata schema, and the different ways they use and develop schema. Students should investigate these developments within their community of interest.
See: Metadata: Cataloging by Any Other Name ... by Jessica Milstead and Susan Feldman ONLINE, January 1999
See: Application profiles: mixing and matching metadata schemas Rachel Heery and Manjula Patel
In fulltext searching it often is possible to specify that query terms appear in the same paragraph, same sentence, or within n words of each other. These refinements may work together with support for exact or approximate phrase and/or word matching.
For fulltext searching to work, the entire document must be analyzed, and used to build an index that will speed up searching. This may require a good deal of space for the index, often around 30% of the size of the texts themselves. Further, such searching may lead to decreased precision, since a document may be located that only makes casual mention of a topic, when the bulk of the document is about other topics. On the other hand, fulltext searching may improve recall, since works can be found that are not classified to be about a certain topic. Further, fulltext searching often yields passages in a document, so one can find a possibly relevant paragraph, rather than just a pointer to a document that then must be scanned to ascertain relevance.
SGML/XML is a multiple-targeted strategy. "It allows librarians to ensure longevity of digital dissertations. Modern hardware and redundancy can keep all the bits of an electronic thesis or dissertation (ETD) intact. But electronic archives must be modernized continually as new document formats become popular." As librarians always tend to think in decades, document formats like TIFF, Postscript or PDF do not meet their requirements. If PDF is replaced by another de facto (industry, not ISO-like) standard, preserving digital documents would mean converting thousends of documents. XML can help overcome those difficulties. If an electronic document is to be of ‘archival quality, it should be liberated from the page metaphor."
A second reason for using SGML/XML is that it ensures reusability of documents by preserving raw data and content-based structuring of information pieces. Preserving data for statistics and formulas in mathematics and chemistry could allow researchers to reuse and repeat simulations, calculations and experiments, deriving the needed data directly from an archive.
Third, using structured information allows the reuse of the same information or documents in different contexts, i.e., the same digital dissertation can be used to produce an online or print version, and to produce additional information products, like monthly proceedings containing the abstracts of all dissertations produced within the university during the last month, or a citation index. Additionally, the dissertation can be displaysd for different media, so a Braille reader or an automatic voice synthesizer could be used as a back-end machine.
Another reason for using markup for encoding documents is that a wider, more qualified retrieval could be provided to the users of an archive. As university libraries are more and more challenged by the problem of handling, converting, archiving and providing electronic publications, one of the major tasks is providing a new quality for retrieval within the user interface. Using an SGML/XML-based publishing concept enables a new quality in the distribution of scientific contents via specific information and knowledge management.
What does SGML/XML mean?
The Extensible Markup Language (XML) is the universal format for structured documents and data on the Web. The current W3C Recommendations are XML 1.0, Feb '98, Namespaces, Jan '99, and Associating Stylesheets, Jun '99, and XSLT/XPath, Nov '99.( http://www.w3.org/XML ) The development of XML started in 1996 and it is a W3C (http://www.w3.org/) standard since February 1998, which may make you suspect that this is rather immature technology. But in fact the technology isn't very new.
Before XML there was the Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML), developed in the early '80s, an ISO standard since 1986, and widely used for large documentation projects. And of course HTML, whose development started in 1990. The designers of XML simply took the best parts of SGML, guided by the experience with HTML, and produced something that is no less powerful than SGML, but vastly more regular and simpler to use. While SGML was mostly used for technical documentation and much less for other kinds of data, with XML it is the opposite.
The eXtensible Markup Language (XML) is a markup or structuring language for documents, a so-called metalanguage, that defines rules for the structural markup of documents independently from any output media. XML is a "reduced" version of the Structured Generalized Markup Language (SGML), which has been an ISO-certified standard since 1986. In the field of internet publishing, it never achieved wide success due to the complexity of the standard and the high cost of the tools. It prevailed only in certain areas, such as technical documentation in large enterprizes (Boeing, patent information). The main philosophy of SGML and XML is the strict separation of content, structure and layout of documents. Most ETD projects use either the SGML standard (ISO 8879 with Korregendum K vom 4.12.1997) or the definition of the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) XML 1.0 (10.02.1998, revised 6.10.2000). The crux of all those projects was always the document type definition (DTD).
SGML (Standard Generalized Markup Language) and XML (eXtensible Markup Language) are markup languages, which use tags ("") with names of labels inside around the sections of the documents that are thus marked or bracketed. Document Type Definition (DTD) specifies the grammar or structure for a type or a class of documents. SGML requires a DTD while XML employs DTD optionally. But given current trends it seems that XML is most likely to be used due to the following reasons.
XML looks a bit like HTML but isn't HTML Like HTML, XML makes use of tags and attributes (of the form name="value"), but while HTML specifies what each tag and attribute means (and often how the text between them will look in a browser), XML uses the tags only to delimit pieces of data, and leaves the interpretation of the data completely to the application that reads it. In other words, if you see "" in an XML file, don't assume it is a paragraph. Depending on the context, it may be a price, a parameter, a person. In short it allows you to develop your own mark up language specific to a particular domain.
XML documents can be preserved for a long time. XML is, at a basic level an incredibly simple data format. It can write in 100 percent pure ASCII text as well as in a few other well-defined formats. ASCII text is reasonably resistant to corruption. Also XML is very well documented. The W3C’s XML 1.0 specification tells us exactly how to read XML data.
XML is license-free, platform-independent and well-supported. By choosing XML as the basis for some project, you buy into a large and growing community of tools (one of which may already do what you need!) and engineers experienced in the technology. Opting for XML is a bit like choosing SQL for databases: you still have to build your own database and your own programs/procedures that manipulate it, but there are many tools available and many people that can help you. And since XML, as a W3C technology, is license-free, you can build your own software around it without paying anybody anything. The large and growing support means that you are also not tied to a single vendor. XML isn't always the best solution, but it is always worth considering.
XML is a family of technologies. There is XML 1.0, the specification that defines what "tags" and "attributes" are, but around XML 1.0, there is a growing set of optional modules that provide sets of tags & attributes, or guidelines for specific tasks. There is, e.g., Xlink which describes a standard way to add hyperlinks to an XML file. XPointer & XFragments are syntaxes for pointing to parts of an XML document. (An Xpointer is a bit like a URL, but instead of pointing to documents on the Web, it points to pieces of data inside an XML file.) CSS, the style sheet language, is applicable to XML as it is to HTML. XSL is the advanced language for expressing style sheets. The DOM is a standard set of function calls for manipulating XML (and HTML) files from a programming language. XML Namespaces is a specification that describes how you can associate a URL with every single tag and attribute in an XML document. What that URL is used for is up to the application that reads the URL, though. XML Schemas help developers to precisely define their own XML-based formats. There are several more modules and tools available or under development.
XML provides Structured and Integrated Data XML is ideal for large and complex data like ETD’s because data is structured. It not only lets you specify a vocabulary that defines the elements in the document; but it also allows you to specify relations between the elements.
XML can encode metadata about DTD’s. Documents are often supplemented with metadata (that is data about data). If such metadata were included inside an ETD then it would make ETD self-describing. XML can encode such metadata. However on the downside XML comes with its own bag of discomforts.
Conversion from word processing forms to XML requires more planning is advance, different tools and broader learning about processing concepts than it is required for PDF.
There are many fewer people knowledgeable about these matters and tools that support this conversion are less mature and expensive. Also process of converting may be complicated, difficult and time consuming.
Writing directly in XML by using XML authoring tools requires some prior knowledge of XML.
Also XML is very strict regarding the naming and ordering of tags. It is also case sensitive illustrating the relative effort required by students to prepare ETD’s in this form.
XML documents are mostly created using an editor. It may be a basic text editor like notepad. or .vi. editor. We may even use WYSIWYG editors. The XML parser reads the document and converts it into a tree of elements. The parser passes the tree to the browser that displays it. It is important to know that all this processes are independent and decoupled from each other.
Before we jump into the XML details for ETD.s we should make certain things clear, since we would be using them on a regular basis now onwards.
An XML document primarily consists of a strictly nested hierarchy of elements with a single root. Elements can contain character data, child elements, or a mixture of both. The structure of the XML document is described in the DTD. There are different kinds of documents like letter, poem, book, thesis, etc. Each of the documents has its own structure. This specific structure is defined in a separate document called Document Type Definition (DTD).
DTD used is based on XML and it covers most of the basic HTML formatting tags and also some specific tags from the Dublin core metadata. A DTD has been developed for ETD. The developed DTD is too generic. If someone wants to use mathematical equation or incorporate some chemical equation, it won't be sufficient. For that we can incorporate MathML (Mathematical Markup Language) and/or CML (Chemical Markup Language). There are defined DTDs for these languages that we also have to use for our documents. But research of incorporating more that one DTD for different parts of the documents is still going on.
CSS is a flexible, cross-platform, standards-based language used to suggest stylistic or presentational features applied throughout entire websites or web pages. In their most elegant forms, CSS are specified in a separate file and called from within the XML or HTML header area when documents loads into the CSS-enabled browser. Users can always turn off the author's styles and apply their own or mix their important styles with the authors. This points to the "cascading" aspect of CSS.
CSS is based on rules and style sheets. A rule is a statement about one stylistic aspect of one or more elements. A style sheet is one or more rules that apply to a markup document.
An example of a simple style sheet is a sheet that consists of one rule. In the following example, we add a color to all first-level headings (H1). Here's the line of code - the rule - that we add:
XSL is a language for expressing stylesheets. It consists of two parts:
A language for transforming XML documents, and
An XML vocabulary for specifying formatting semantics.
If you don't understand the meaning of this, think of XSL as a language that can transform XML into HTML, a language that can filter and sort XML data, a language that can address parts of an XML document, a language that can format XML data based on the data value, like displaying negative numbers in red, and a language that can output XML data to different devices, like screen, paper or voice. XSL is developed by the W3C XSL Working Group whose charter is to develop the next version of XSL.
Because XML does not use predefined tags (we can use any tags we want), the meanings of these tags are not understood: could mean an HTML table or maybe a piece of furniture. Because of the nature of XML, the browser does not know how to display an XML document.
In order to display XML documents, it is necessary to have a mechanism to describe how the document should be displayed. One of these mechanisms is CSS as discussed above, but XSL is the preferred style sheet language of XML, and XSL is far more sophisticated and powerful than the CSS used by HTML.
The purpose of XML namespaces is to distinguish between duplicate element type and attribute names. Such duplication might occur, for example, in an XSLT stylesheet or in a document that contains element types and attributes from two different DTDs.
An XML namespace is a collection of element type and attribute names. The namespace is identified by a unique name, which is a URI. Thus, any element type or attribute name in an XML namespace can be uniquely identified by a two-part name: the name of its XML namespace and its local name. This two part naming system is the only function of XML namespaces.
XML namespaces are declared with an xmlns attribute, which can associate a prefix with the namespace. The declaration is in scope for the element containing the attribute and all its descendants. For example code below declares two XML namespaces. Their scope is the A and B elements:abcd
If an XML namespace declaration contains a prefix, you refer to element type and attribute names in that namespace with the prefix. For example code below declare A and B in http://www.foo.org namespace, which is associated with the foo prefix: abcd
If an XML namespace declaration does not contain a prefix, the namespace is the default XML namespace and you refer to element type names in that namespace without a prefix. For example, code below is same as previous example but uses a default namespace instead of foo prefix:abcd
XML structural construct. A name-value pair within a tagged element that modifies certain features of the element. For XML, all values must be enclosed in quotation marks.
Formatting descriptions that provide augmented control over presentation and layout of HTML and XML elements. CSS can be used for describing the formatting behavior of simply structured XML documents, but does not provide a display structure that deviates from the structure of the source data.
XML structural construct. CDATA sections can be used to mark tags or reserved characters with quotation marks and thus prevent them from being interpreted. For this reason, the CDATA section is especially useful for escaping markup and script. The syntax for CDATA sections in XML is .
XML structural construct. The text content of an element or attribute. XML differentiates this plain text from markup.
A mapping of a set of characters to their numeric values. For example, Unicode is a 16- bit character set capable of encoding all known characters; it is used as a worldwide character-encoding standard.
An object that encapsulates both data and code, and provides a well-specified set of publicly available services.
The type of content that an element contains: a number, a date, and so on. In XML, an author can specify an element's data type, for example, with a tokenized attribute type. Microsoft is working with the W3C to define a set of standard types that anyone can freely use.
The top-level element of an XML document; only one top-level element is allowed. The document element is a child of the document root.
The standard maintained by the W3C that specifies how the content, structure, and appearance of Web documents can be updated programmatically with scripts or other programs. The proposed object model for XML matches the Document Object Model for HTML so that script writers can easily learn XML programming. The XML DOM will provide a simple means of reading and writing data to and from an XML tree structure.
The top-level node of an XML document; its descendants branch out from it to form the XML tree for that document. The document root contains the document element and can also contain a set of processing instructions and comments.
XML structural construct. A production within an XML document that contains or points to markup declarations that provide a grammar for a class of documents. This grammar is known as a Document Type Definition. The document type declaration can point to an external subset (a special kind of external entity) containing markup declarations, or can contain the markup declarations directly in an internal subset, or both. The DTD for a document consists of both subsets taken together. The syntax of the document type declaration is .
The markup declarations that describe a grammar for a class of documents. The DTD is declared within the document type declaration production of the XML file. The markup declarations can be in an external subset (a special kind of external entity), in an internal subset directly within the XML file, or both. The DTD for a document consists of both subsets taken together.
An existing format used to exchange data and support transactions. EDI transactions can be conducted only between sites that have been specifically set up with compatible systems.
XML structural construct. An XML element consists of a start tag, and end tag, and the information between the tags, which is often referred to as the contents. Elements used in an XML file are described by a DTD or schema, either of which can provide a description of the structure of the data.
XML structural construct. A character sequence or well-formed XML hierarchy associated with a name. The entity can be referred to by an entity reference to insert the entity's contents into the tree at that point. The function of an XML entity is similar to that of a macro definition. Entity declarations occur in the DTD.
XML structural construct. Refers to the content of a named entity. The name is delimited by the ampersand and semicolon characters; for example, &bookname; and <. It is used in much the same way as a macro.
An XML vocabulary that provides links in XML similar to those in HTML but with more functionality. Linking could be multidirectional, and links could exist at the object level rather than just at a page level.
A subset of SGML that provides a uniform method for describing and exchanging structured data in an open, text-based format, and delivers this data by use of the standard HTTP protocol. At the time of this writing, XML 1.0 is a World Wide Web Consortium Recommendation, which means that it is in the final stage of the approval process.
A language used to transform XML-based data into HTML or other presentation formats, for display in a Web browser. Differs from cascading style sheets in that it can present information in an order different from that in which it was received. XSL will also be able to generate CSS along with HTML. XSL consists of two parts, a vocabulary for transformation and the XSL Formatting Objects.
A special attribute type within the XML language. The ID attribute on the XML element provides a unique name, enabling links to that element using the IDREF attribute type. The value associated with the ID attribute must be unique within that XML document. IDs are currently declared with a DTD or schema.
XML structural construct. Text in an XML document that does not represent character data: start tags, end tags, empty-element tags, entity references, character references, comments, CDATA section delimiters, DTDs, and processing instructions.
XML structural construct. An element type has mixed content when elements of that type can contain character data, optionally interspersed with child elements. In this case, the types of the child elements can be constrained, but not their order or their number of occurrences.
A mechanism to resolve naming conflicts between elements in an XML document when each comes from a different vocabulary; it allows the commingling of like tag names from different namespaces. A namespace identifies an XML vocabulary defined within a URN. An attribute on an element, attribute, or entity reference associates a short name with the URN that defines the namespace; that short name is then used as a prefix to the element, attribute, or entity reference name to uniquely identify the namespace. Namespace references have scope. All child nodes beneath the node that specifies the namespace inherit that namespace. This allows nonqualified names to use the default namespace.
The literal string "NDATA" is used as part of a notation declaration. See also notation.
Usually refers to a data format, such as BMP. A notation identifies by name the format of unparsed entities, the format of elements that bear a notation attribute, or the application to which a processing instruction is addressed.
A notation declaration provides a name and an external identifier for a notation. The name is used in entity and attribute-list declarations and in attribute specifications. The external identifier is used for the notation, which can allow an XML processor or its client application to locate a helper application capable of processing data in the given notation.
XML structural construct. Instructions that are passed through to the application. The target is specified as part of the PI. The syntax for a PI is .
An object model similar in function to an application programming interface (API), RDF can be used by developers to access the logical meaning of designated content in XML documents.
Sometimes this term is used to refer to the document element but this is misleading, since the top-level element and the document root are not the same. Because of this ambiguity, use of the term "root element" is discouraged.
A formal specification of element names that indicates which elements are allowed in an XML document, and in which combinations. A schema is functionally equivalent to a DTD, but is written in XML; a schema also provides for extended functionality such as data typing, inheritance, and presentation rules.
The international standard for defining descriptions of structure and content of electronic documents. XML is a subset of SGML designed to deliver SGML-type information over the Web.
The application to which a processing instruction is directed. The target names beginning with "XML" and "xml" are reserved. The target appears as the first token in the PI. For example, in the XML declaration , the target is "xml".
Inserting tags into the middle of an element's text flow, to mark certain parts of the element with additional meta-information.
Each attribute has an attribute type. Seven attribute types are characterized as tokenized: ID, IDREF, IDREFS, ENTITY, ENTITIES, NMTOKEN, and NMTOKENS.
The generic set of all names and addresses that refer to resources, including URLs and URNs. Defined in Berners-Lee, T., R. Fielding, and L. Masinter, Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax and Semantics. 1997. See updates to the W3C document RFC1738. The Layman-Bray proposal for namespaces makes every element name subordinate to a URI, which would ensure that element names are always unambiguous.
The set of URI schemes that have explicit instructions on how to access the resource on the Internet.
XML that conforms to the vocabulary specified in a DTD or schema.
XML that meets the requirements listed in the W3C Recommendation for XML 1.0: It contains one or more elements; it has a single document element, with any other elements properly nested under it; each of the parsed entities referenced directly or indirectly within the document is well-formed. A well-formed XML document does not necessarily include a DTD.
The international consortium founded in 1994 to develop standards for the Web. See
The first line of an XML file can optionally contain the "xml" processing instruction, which is known as the XML declaration. The XML declaration can contain pseudoattributes to indicate the XML language version, the character set, and whether the document can be used as a standalone entity.
A data object that is well-formed, according to the XML recommendation, and that might (or might not) be valid. The XML document has a logical structure (composed of declarations, elements, comments, character references, and processing instructions) and a physical structure (composed of entities, starting with the root, or document entity).
A generalized XML parser reads XML files and generates a hierarchically structured tree, then hands off data to viewers and other applications for processing. A validating XML parser also checks the XML syntax and reports errors.
Searching through works with multimedia content requires extra support beyond what is usually provided (e.g., searching through metadata or fulltext). Content based image retrieval (CBIR), searching in files of spoken language, and searching in video collections are all supported with special methods and systems.
While most ETD collections today allow search for multimedia content based on descriptions of such content (i.e., metadata), in the future, as collections grow and have richer assortments of multimedia elements, it is likely that multimedia database and multimedia content search software will be more widely deployed. Indeed, Virginia Tech carried out some preliminary work in this regard with its ETD collection, using tools provided by IBM (e.g., QBIC, VideoCharger). Other vendors and systems exist, and can be used for searching local, regional, national, and international collections of ETDs.
Information retrieval (IR) systems have been improving since the 1950s. One of the most important areas of advance in the 1990s and in the 21st century benefits from the rapid enhancement of humancomputer interaction (HCI) that results from new types of interfaces, new methods of interaction, and new integration of those activities with IR methods. Information visualization, for example, allows faster analysis of the contents of a collection of ETDs, or of the result set from a search.
We believe that all universities should have ETD programs. Clearly that will be the case, when one considers the situation in the long term (e.g., 10 years). Why not join now, so that students over the next decade can benefit? Why not participate, so that the research of universities is more widely shared? Why not develop local infrastructure, so that students are properly prepared for the Information Age, save money, and save money for the university?
Training efforts should aim to make clear the benefits of working with ETDs. They should assuage concerns, and make obvious how changes can be made in a smooth transition from current practice.
Training the Trainers/Initiatives to support ETD projects in Latin America
Abstract: This section focuses on the outreach work of the Ibero-American Science & Technology Education Consortium (ISTEC) and selected other organizations in developing EDT projects in Latin America. Training for librarians and for EDT trainers are described.
Many Latin American universities have digital library projects, some of which include electronic theses. However, standards and consistency may be lacking in local EDT initiatives. The Ibero-American Science & Technology Education Consortium (ISTEC) and its partners have been creating learning opportunities and instigating local projects in digital libraries and EDT’s. This section describes ISTEC’s outreach process and progress in regards to EDT projects for the science and technology libraries that are members of the organization.
ISTEC is a non-profit organization comprised of educational, research, and industrial institutions throughout the Americas and the Iberian Peninsula. The Consortium was established in September 1990 to foster scientific, engineering, and technology education, joint international research and development efforts among its members and to provide a cost-effective vehicle for the application of technology.
With start-up funding from the State of New Mexico and selected IT companies, the ISTEC board created four initiatives to address obstacles to IT developments and to encourage IT manpower development. These are:
The ACE Initiative champions continuing engineering and computer sciences education projects. The most important goals are to upgrade human resources and curriculum development through training and non-traditional exchange programs. The methodology involves on-site training, web-based education, video courses, satellite delivery, and "sandwich" graduate programs. The latter brings graduate students from Ibero-America together with experts from ISTEC member organizations to ensure excellence.
The Research and Development (R&D) Initiative focuses on the development and enhancement of laboratory infrastructure at member organizations. The major goal is the design and installation of modular, flexible, and expandable laboratory facilities for education, training, and R&D with links to the private sector.
The Los Libertadores Initiative champions networks of excellence in the region.The main goal is to network Centers of Excellence equipped with the latest telecommunications and computer technology to provide real-time access to a world-wide system of expertise and knowledge. This requires partnerships among industries and governments to create an Ibero-American academic and R&D Internet backbone.
The major goal of LibLINK is to design and implement innovative, international Science and Technology (S&T) information-sharing services. The annual compound growth rate of the Rapid Document Delivery (RDD) project has been hovering around 200% since 1995. Over 27 libraries in 19 countries are connected in real-time and documents are provided using the Ariel® software. The RDD project, although the most popular service, is a foundation for the more important digital library initiatives which were started in 1998. The projects within LibLINK can be categorized as follows:
Connecting libraries for information transfer. This is accomplished through opening S&T library collections - especially Latin American collections - for scholars through regional networks created to compliment the LiBLINK document delivery services. Currently these include LigDoc in Brazil, PrEBi in Argentina, REBIDIMEX in Mexico, and most recently, a cooperative group of libraries in Colombia.
Training librarians and researchers in digital library concepts.
Working with the Networked Dissertation/Thesis Library (NDTL) initiative at Virginia Tech to expand the concept in Latin America. The LibLink initiative seeks to promote easy access to scientific information in the region, especially to thesis and dissertations of master's and doctoral candidates as this is our member organizations’ most important intellectual property.
Advancing and piloting new types of scholarly communication by actively supporting new publishing efforts such as the NDLTD and the Open Archives initiatives.
LibLINK volunteers plan and carry out workshops and mini-conferences to facilitate the above. Funding generally come from grants provided by organizations such as the US National Science Foundation (NSF) and other national science councils such as CONACyT in Mexico, and regional organizations such as the OAS and UNESCO.
We have refined a process for involving librarians and computer scientists in digital library projects that has proven successful. The principles on which ISTEC and LibLINK base their outreach efforts are:
Site visits Participation in regional or local IT and computer science workshops to identify computer scientists working on digital library projects or components thereof. We are especially interested in initiatives created in isolation from each other and from their local libraries.
In this way digital library initiatives and researchers are identified and a DL group can be established from the above findings that consist of librarians and computer scientists/engineers. Outcome: Critical mass of computer scientists and librarians linked to each other and to ISTEC.
With this groundwork done, we plan and find funding sources for a Digital Library Workshop that generally have two major aims:
To share information about current DL initiatives in that specific country or region
To provide training in EDT’s as the preferred first DL project
In some cases, this is also an opportunity to create strategic plans for coordinated national projects
This process has resulted in the following EDT and DL workshops:
A NSF/CONACyT digital library workshop that included NDLTD training by Ed Fox, in Albuquerque, NM. Funding was obtained from various sources, mainly the National Science Foundation, CONACyT (the Mexican Science Council) and the Organization of American States. July 7–9, 1999
A successful DL conference in Costa Rica for Central American countries (Seminario / Taller Subregional sobre Bibliotecas Digitales). A full day EDT workshop was delivered by Ed Fox, followed by a day of digital leadership training and planning for local EDT projects. Funding was provided by the Organization of American States(OAS), the US Ambassador to Costa Rica and ISTEC. San Jose, Costa Rica, November 1999 (more detail below).
1st Course for the Training for Project Directors for Electronic Thesis and Dissertation Projects. The course was organized by UNESCO, the VII CYTED, Universidad de los Andes, and ISTEC’s Library Linkages Initiative and held in conjunction with the VII Jornadas Iberoamericanas de Informatica, Cartagena de Indias, Colombia, from August 30 to September 1, 2000. This is an example of how EDT training can be piggy-backed on a significant regional event that is synergistic and that provide more value for the money spent to attend.
A 2nd Training Course for Directors of EDT Projects was funded by UNESCO (Montevideo), the Asociación de Universidades Grupo Montevideo (AUGM), and ISTEC. This "Train the Trainer" course was held in Montevideo, December 7–9, 2000. The main goals for this series of courses are to create a group of specialists responsible for the dissemination and management of electronic dissertations and theses. The trainer for both these sessions was Ana Pavani from the Pontificia Universidade Catolica do Rio de Janeiro.
REBIDIMEX is the Mexican operations for ISTEC Library Linkages. This group has had a number of meetings to develop coordinated digital library and EDT projects in Mexico. The digital theses project at the library of the Universidad de las Américas- Puebla is an excellent example, http://biblio.udlap.mx/tesis/, and forms the basis for a national Mexican EDT project.
The Primer Seminario-Taller Subregional sobre Bibliotecas Digitales, sponsored by the OAS and ISTEC at the Universidad de Costa Rica, San Jose, Costa Rica, mentioned above, provides a good case study of EDT outreach events. Each participating Central American country was asked to identify universities with sufficient technological infrastructure to support a digital library/ EDT project. Then each organization was funded to send representatives from each of their computer systems and library groups. The agenda focussed on providing one whole day of basic training by Ed Fox (a co-author of this Guide) in digital library and EDT concepts, followed by another day of leadership training for digital environments and a planning session.
During this portion the groups identified a project that all could participate in. They chose the digitization of their organization’s theses and dissertations and making it available through the Open Archives system using the processes developed by Virginia Tech and others described in other sections of the Guide. Regional working groups were assigned. The most important outcomes, however, were the creation of a network of librarians and computer scientists that understand EDT technological, operational and political issues and that now have contacts for joint projects in the region.
What next?
The model of creating synergism and connections between librarians and computer scientists and focusing their energies on basic digital library/EDT projects will continue to be replicated in other parts of Latin America. Ana Pavani (a section author of the Guide) continues to deliver EDT courses with the help of ISTEC, such as one in Pernambucu, Brasil, in the spring of 2001. Members from ISTEC’s regional and executive offices regularly speak at conferences regarding EDT’s and are available to help arrange EDT events. Organizing training events and developing joint funding arrangements takes a lot of time, expertise, local contacts, and effort, but is critical for creating opportunities in under-served countries.
ISTEC and its partner organizations, the OAS, International Development Bank, UNESCO, etc., continue to work together to offer regional digital library workshops in Latin America. UNESCO is formulating an international strategy for creating and disseminating electronic theses and dissertations that will support Latin American outreach efforts (UNESCO, 1999). As well, we are assisting governments to draft suitable policies to improve access to information, especially in making their universities’ intellectual property (theses and dissertations) widely available to publicize the universities’ research strengths. ISTEC is also sponsoring the Spanish translation of the Guide and will disseminate it through the ISTEC Science & Technology Portal.
The Latin American Network Information Center (LANIC) at the University of Texas at Austin is the most comprehensive resource for academic and economic information on Latin America (http://lanic.utexas.edu/), but not specifically for EDT projects. Some beginning and mature EDT projects can be found at:
The Digital Technology Research and Development Center (CITEDI) of the Instituto Politecnico Nacional in Tijuana, México. http://www.citedi.net/docs/tesis.htm
The UNESP site at the Universidade Estadual Paulista in Brazil. http://www.cgb.unesp.br/etheses/
The digital theses project at the library of the Universidad de las Américas-Puebla, Mexico. http://biblio.udlap.mx/tesis/
In Chile the Universidad de Chile has been developing Cyberthesis, since November 1999. This is an electronic theses production project with support from Unesco and the cooperation of the Universit de Lyon and the Universit de Montreal. The Information Service and Library System, SISIB, is coordinating the Electronic Theses and Dissertations Project (Cybertesis), applying the production process developed by the Universite de Montreal, based on the conversion of texts to SGML/XML. In 2002, the Universidad de Chile will organize training workshops in the production of ETD (structured documents) for other Chilean universities.
The Transborder Library Forum/FORO Transfronterizo de Bibliotecas share many of the aims of ISTEC’s Library Linkages initiative. Their meetings have been held annually since 1991 to work on ways to improve communications relating to border issues and to foster professional networking among librarians from Mexico and the United States. Recently, Canadians and representatives from Latin American libraries also interested in NAFTA and border issues began to have a presence. At the 10th Transborder Library FORO held in Albuquerque, New Mexico in March 23–25, 2000, attendance of several representatives from Latin American libraries were sponsored and ISTEC’s LibLink project provided a training session and talks about the REBIDIMEX initiative in Mexico.
The Association of Latin American and Caribbean Academic Libraries ( Bibliotecas Universitarias da America Latina e do Caribe)) sponsored a LibLINK workshop that included EDT discussions and talks at the annual meeting in Florianopolis, Brazil, in April 2000. ISTEC continues to have a presence at their conferences. And are involved with the Brazilian EDT initiatives.
The impact of Bandwidth and Infrastructure issues on EDT outreach in Latin America
Bandwidth and IT infrastructure are important factors for digital EDT project developers in Latin America. IT policy development is another. More aggressive action is needed in both the governmental and industrial sectors. ISTEC emphasize these issues at the "IT Challenge" conferences by bringing industrial and academic members together with regional decision makers, such as ministers of education and technology and representatives from national science councils.
The first high-performance Internet link between North and South America for research and education was inaugurated in Santiago, Chile on September 12, 2000. Chili and the USA connected their respective high performance networks, REUNA* and Internet2, enabling collaboration among researchers and educators at universities in the two countries. Such high-performance network links are critical to ensure the bandwidth required for future format-enriched EDT projects. ISTEC and its partners are strongly committed to advance this cause. * Reuna is a collaboration between the National Universities of Chili that introduced the Internet in Chile in 1992. Reuna´s high-speed network, REUNA2, is an ATM network of 155 Mbps. across the country. The National University Network is a non-profit consortium of 19 leading Chilean universities plus the National Commission for Science and Technology. Its mission is the creation and development of networks and services in IT aimed at supporting participation in the Information Society.
The Library Linkage initiative of ISTEC has found a methodology for encouraging and supporting EDT developments in Latin America that has proven successful. The most important step is to identify local players in digital library initiatives in both libraries and computer science and computer engineering departments. The next step then brings these players together at events that provide opportunities for training, information sharing and national/regional EDT project planning. ISTEC monitors subsequent developments and provide support to keep projects going as appropriate. The most important strategic outcome we are aiming for is to create an open archive structure that will provide access to all science and technology theses and dissertations of member organizations through the ISTEC Portal. We believe that this will be a rich source of innovation, manpower identification and development, and an opportunity to highlight the intellectual property of our member universities.
UNESCO (1999). Workshop on an international project of electronic dissemination of thesis and dissertations, UNESCO, Paris, September 27–28, 1999 http://www.unesco.org/webworld/etd/
Ibero-American Science & Technology Education Consortium. For more information see www.istec.org
This section of the Guide outlines the approaches to student training used by certain universities. For the most part, links are made to sites where the tools themselves can be consulted and eventually used or adapted for local use.
Welcome and general presentation of the Programme for the electronic publication and distribution of theses (DGTIC)
On-campus services offered to thesis-writing students: equipment rentals, self-service digitizer, digital camera, etc. (DGTIC).
Presentation of the capabilities of the EndNote software for managing bibliographic referencing (Library)
Practical exercises with the Word document template to be used by the students.
Points 1 to 4 in this general plan involved presentations given by trainers, while point five directly involved participants in concrete exercises, accompanied by several demonstrations. For these exercises, the students used a working text (a Word document containing the principal editorial elements of a thesis, but without a proper layout), a Word document template developed for theses, and a list of instructions.. The exercises essentially consisted of applying the template’s styles to the working text, of producing and inserting an image captured on the screen into the text, and of automatically producing a table of contents and an index of tables.
As well, several documents were provided to participants at the sessions: the instructions, the document template (Word style sheets) as well as training guides and informative documents of interest to the students. All these documents are available on-line at www.theses.umontreal.ca.
The workshops are offered to all doctoral students, whether they are at the beginning of their research or near the end of their writing. To reach the largest possible number of students, we used a multidimensional communications plans: posters, advertising, messages to student associations, and letters from the Dean of Graduate studies to the heads of departments and research centres. The number of seats in the training laboratory is limited to 15 to 20 students per session, depending on the laboratory used. Students are invited to register in advance, either by telephoning one of the DGTIC’s administrative assistants, or, in an autonomous manner, by using an interactive Web form managed using a CGI scripts. This latter form tells students how many participants have already registered for each session and the maximum number of seats available. When the maximum number of registrations is reached, the script no longer allows registrations. Nevertheless, an invitation to register on a "waiting list" allows students to signal their interest and to be rapidly informed when new workshops are held. This also allowed us to note the pertinence of the training: the available spaces were quickly filled and the waiting list allowed us to reach interested students for the next sessions.
Many technological choices such as encoding formats, computing tools, dissemination tools, and copyrights, have an important impact on the ETD project’s success. It is necessary an overview of the different aspects of producing, disseminating, archiving theses in electronic formats, implementation and management of ETD projects.
Networked Digital Library of Theses and Dissertations (http://www.ndltd.org/)
The Joint Electronic Theses & Dissertations Project (http://www.fis.utoronto.ca/etd/)
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (Virginia Tech) [United States]
(http://elfikom.physik.uni-oldenburg.de/dissonline/PhysDis/dis_europe.html) PhysDis - a large collection of Physics Theses of Universities across Europe
(http://www.iwi-iuk.org/dienste/TheO/) TheO - a collection of theses of different fields of 43 Universities in Germany, in as much as the Theses do contain Metadata.
(http://MathNet.preprints.org/) MPRESS - a large collection of European Mathematical Theses. Which also contains the next entry as a subset.
The inclusion of courses and tutorials with online demonstrations can facilitate a better understanding of all the production and submission process. With a comprehensive guide for ETD creation, the students can learn how to create ETD in word processing software, how to convert to PDF format and the submission procedure.
Requirements and Guidelines for the Preparation of Master's and Doctoral Theses - Penn State University (http://www.gradsch.psu.edu/thesis/thesis.guide.html)
Thesis and Dissertation Guide - North Carolina State University (http://www.fis.ncsu.edu/grad_publicns/thesdis.htm)
ETD Workshop Outline - North Carolina State University (http://www2.acs.ncsu.edu/grad/ETD/etdworkshop.htm)
This section includes a series of tools intended to support the work of production and submission of ETD.
Humboldt University of Berlin Word-style (for German Word Versions only)
In Germany, theses are to obey the German Urheberrecht, which is different from the copyright in anglosaxon countries. See http://elfikom.physik.unioldenburg.de/dissonline/urheber.html
Next Section: Creating an online database of problem solving solutions
Training the Trainers/Creating an online database of problem solving solutions
A quite important document must be at the users' disposal together with the various tools implemented for the electronic edition of scientific documents:
Pedagogical toolkit for the training of authors...
This first edition, as complete as it may be, is nevertheless insufficient. It must be completed by the online diffusion of a database listing all the problems usually encountered and their solutions (FAQ) eventually completed with links to specific documents with examples.
Most of the time, such a database cannot be a priori completely defined and will have to be enriched as the number of users grows and their mastery of the various tools increases.
The collection of the questions and problems are done very efficiently thanks to the creation of discussion lists or forums opened to the users. It is recommendable to group the frequent questions or problems by subject, to offer an easier and friendly consultation.
Then, two methods considered for the construction of the database of solutions:
Synthesis, based on the discussion list, prepared by some "experts" used to supply the database with questions and answers. The information available for the users is validated.
The content of the forum indexed directly; the information is not validated, and it is thus the users themselves who will have to make a sort in the list of answers they get for their request. If this second method is lighter in terms of administration and management, its efficiency depends on the quality of the posted messages (questions and answers): precise and clear subject, good presentation of the problem, argumentation of the answer, etc.
Whichever the adopted solution may be, its implementation may rest on usual free software classical list and database servers.
The online diffusion of the so constructed FAQ must still have the name and e-mail of a member of the technical staff or a visible link to the discussion list in order to answer the questions not taken into account in the database.
As an example, CyberThèses proposes a forum construct with a MySql database and interfaced with Php, and will develop a second database from validated information.
The core of the ADT Program was developed at The University of New South Wales Library (UNSW Library) as the lead institution. The team at UNSW Library included the overall coordinator & designer; technical manager & programmer; metadata consultant as well as the web coordinator & designer. This team developed the model from the conceptual to reality. The most important thing was not to lose focus, to keep the model as close to the original project description proposal as possible and to not overly complicate processes - in fact keep them as simple as possible. It was seen as critical to develop a workable model for the project partners to test and further refine.
During the development and testing process, all 7 original partners were consulted and had input at all stages. Two workshops for all 7 members were held approximately 12 months apart. These were used to discuss all aspects of the ADT model as well as to agree on the standards and protocols used. The agreed standards are at the core of the distributed model of the ADT Program. Without the involvement of an effective team to lead the process, and the effective input of the broader team, arriving at the desired outcome would have been very difficult.
The ADT Program is now effectively working across all 7 original member sites. Membership to the ADT has now been opened up to all Australian universities. It is anticipated that all Australian universities will become members and thus form a comprehensive national program. The benefits of a broad membership team are many: shared infrastructure, shared software development, shared metadata, shared documentation and training as well the shared satisfaction that comes with effective collaboration for the common good. The membership to the ADT may in time also include others in the region such as New Zealand and others.
While each institution will have differences as to the way in which its procedures are implemented and ETDs presented to satisfy local needs, for the potential of optimal global dissemination of ETDs to be achieved, adherence to basic standards is essential. These standards relate to document format and settings, filename protocols and metadata. Agreement on use of a small set of standard metadata elements can facilitate harvesting for creation of collaborative databases. While individual institutions can apply additional metadata including subject or format schemas as desired, if a minimum level of metadata is established, particularly if this metadata can be automatically generated, then any institution can access the document regardless of its resources and expertise. This provides an entry point for retrieval of an ETD from any institution without compromising the ability of other institutions to provide very rich metadata for their ETDs.
Cooperation and collaboration between institutions in the creation and dissemination of ETDs has a number of benefits. From the point of view of creating ETDs, the benefits include the utilization of software and procedures developed and tested by others, sharing generic training tools, sharing of expertise in problem solving and developmental work and the provision of mutual support. In the dissemination of information about research findings contained in ETDs, collaborative approaches can be particularly effective in small or developing countries where the total volume of ETDs may not be large. In these situations a national or regional approach can provide increased visibility, economies of scale and sharing of resources required to mount and maintain ETDs.
There are a number of models for cooperation and collaboration in creation, dissemination and preservation of ETDs. While the models can vary in detail, major elements are:
Shared infrastructureIn this model, a central agency provides the infrastructure for publication, dissemination, maintenance and preservation of ETDs. The central agency provides the server and the network access to a central repository of ETDs. Other institutions cooperate with the central agency by supplying copies of theses or dissertations. These copies could be supplied in digital form, conforming to the basic standards, or the central agency can be responsible for ensuring a suitable digital version is created and made available. The central agency has the responsibility for maintaining archival versions. This model could operate at a supranational, national or regional level, or could be used by a group of universities with similar interests.
Shared software developmentSharing of generic software, which is easily installed and maintained, can be a cost effective way of establishing an ETD program. This can be of particular benefit for institutions where staff with highly developed IT skills are in short supply. Collaborative development or modification of new versions of software can also be very cost-effective.
Shared metadataIn this model, institutions publish and maintain digital theses on their own institutional servers but the metadata is harvested to produce a central database of details of the theses from the collaborating institutions. The metadata is linked to the full text of the ETD wherever it resides. The home institution retains the responsibility for the preservation of the ETD.
Shared documentation and training toolsSharing of detailed documentation on all aspects of operating an ETD program is a very cost effective method of collaboration. The development of generic procedures and training programs, which can be customized for local conditions, can facilitate the participation of institutions in an ETD program. Sharing of documentation is also likely to reinforce the use of standards, which will ensure the ETDs are readily discoverable
An effective mechanism for providing support is to identify centres of expertise which are prepared to assist others in setting up their ETD system. These centres of expertise can be regional, national or within an international geographic or linguistic region. The benefits flowing from these centres of expertise include assistance with designing processes, assistance with implementing software, especially if a common software product is being used, assistance in use of metadata and continuing support as systems evolve. Another very important function of a centre of expertise is provision of a focus around which a group can develop which can offer a self-support function and an environment taking into account local or regional conditions for continuing discussion and development of ETD programs as the technology continues to evolve. This latter is essential if ETD programs are to prosper.
The centre of expertise concept also has the great advantage of reducing significantly the learning curve in starting up an ETD program and consequently the timeframe and cost of new programs.
Next Section: Developing Centres of Expertise where appropriate and helpful
Training the Trainers/Developing Centres of Expertise where appropriate and helpful
An effective mechanism for providing support is to identify centers of expertise, which are prepared to assist others in setting up their ETD system. These centers of expertise can be regional, national or within an international geographic or linguistic region. The benefits flowing from these centers of expertise include assistance with designing processes, assistance with implementing software, especially if a common software product is used, assistance in use of metadata and continuing support as systems evolve. Another very important function of a center of expertise is provision of a focus around which a group can develop which can offer a self-support function and an environment taking into account local or regional conditions for continuing discussion and development of ETD programs as the technology continues to evolve. This latter is essential if ETD programs are to prosper.
The centre of expertise concept also has the great advantage of reducing significantly the learning curve in starting up an ETD program and consequently the timeframe and cost of new programs.
ETD initiatives will spread in many ways. Word of mouth, from universities with successful programs, is one of the most effective means. Word of mouth, from graduates of universities with ETD programs, will spread the idea further.
Further, as the worldwide collection of ETDs grows, more and more researchers, including graduate students, will make use of the valuable content. As use expands, others will be convinced to include their works in the collection, so it approaches full coverage.
Academics stand on a precipice separating our past, when genres of communication evolved slowly, and our future, when new genres emerge overnight. Our concepts of research, the authority of knowledge, and the shape of content are being radically challenged. We have difficulty imagining what dissertations or academic digital libraries will look like ten years from now. The shape of a dissertation is evolving from the first six-page, handwritten thesis at Yale University in 1860 into a form we cannot yet predict. Today's researchers and scholars are challenging the conventions of linear texts, one-inch margins, and texts written for extremely narrow audiences. They are integrating video, audio, animation, and graphics into their works. They are creating interactive elements, including real-time video, pivot tables, and online writing spaces.
Predicting the future of academic scholarship is a little like predicting the stock market: both are volatile and unpredictable. Given this fact, however, it appears that there are a number of emerging trends that will affect our enterprise:
Dissertations will matter more than they have in the past. Thanks to digital libraries, which increase access (http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/theses/data/somefacts.html) from one or two readers to sometimes more than 60,000, students and universities will pay greater attention to the quality of students' research and writing.
Given this increased access, both students and universities may begin to pay greater attention to the quality of scholarly writing.
Progressive universities will use their digital libraries of ETDs to market their programs, and universities will provide the resources students need to write multimedia research.
Multimedia documents will transform author-reader relations. Authors will interact synchronously with readers, create different reading paths for different readers, and use visuals, animation, and pivot tables.
Students will increasingly search the worldwide digital libraries of ETDs, resulting in research that is more collaborative and more current.
Across disciplines, students will provide links that clarify the significance, methodology, and findings of their work to a broader range of readers, including lay audiences, thereby helping the general public better understand the value of academic scholarship. As an example, students in the social sciences can incorporate video of cultures and primary subjects; they can create polyvocal case studies and ethnographies - that is, studies with alternative interpretations.
Faculty members will work more collaboratively with students, resulting in more complete bibliographies and saved time.
The ease of distributed access accompanying the digital revolution has a darker side. Technological obsolescence and ephemeral formats have left little firm ground upon which to build the infrastructure necessary for the effective management and preservation of digital resources. An infrastructure supporting long-term access needs to be able to accommodate the continuous evolution of the technology as well as continuous streams of data. This means that a durable record of such work now includes a flexible and adaptable approach to maintaining live access.
Devices and processes used to record, store and retrieve digital information now have a life cycle of between 2 – 5 years, far less than some of the most fragile physical materials they are seeking to preserve. The practice known as 'refreshing' digital information by copying it onto new media is particularly vulnerable to problems of 'backward compatibility' and 'interoperability'. Software capable of emulating obsolete systems currently relies on the goodwill and enthusiasm of talented programmers but has little basis in economic reality.
The foundation of effective management of an ETD as digital resource occurs at the point of creation. How a digital resource is created and the form and format it is created in will determine how it can be managed, used, preserved and re-used at some future date. Authors/creators and migrators of all digital resources need to be aware of their importance to the life span or term of access of a digital resource.
Simple but practical strategies that might increase the life span of an ETD are as follows:
Use non-proprietary formats such as (ASCII, Unicode or plain text) as much as possible (e.g. Notepad or Simple Text)
Use widely available formats such as Word or PDF that can be easily converted into plain text
Use widely available non-proprietary image formats such as JPEG or PNG rather than GIF (proprietary format)
If you must use custom or proprietary software, make such you keep a record of the version number (e.g. Real Media 7) and all the hardware dependencies (e.g. MAC system 7).
This information can be stored within the metadata associated with your ETD. For example, you could use the Dublin Core metadata element, 'DC.Relation.Requires'. As technologies evolve, the use of preservation metadata to record this kind of information is increasing. Check with your library to see what standard is currently in use.
At our various locations, document servers for electronic theses and dissertations have been set up independently from each other. The aim is to build a network of sites, which would allow for worldwide retrieval within a heterogeneous knowledge base, independently from the physical location of the data provided. The users should not have to navigate and search the various servers separately. They should be provided with one retrieval interface that can link to all the different nodes of the network of ETDs sites. This is the horizontal level on which retrieval could take place.
Another level, which we call the vertical level of the information portal, would be the one, which configures the retrieval interface in a manner allowing the user to retrieve only the relevant and desired information rather than receiving all of the information that can be possibly provided. We wish to avoid the "Altavista effect" of information overload. The user should be able to search within specific subjects and for specific information structures. For example, they should be able to undertake searches just within the author field or the title field, for certain keywords or institutions or just within the abstracts field. A highly sophisticated retrieval facility would allow a worldwide search within certain internal document structures, such as the bibliography.
For the scientific use of theses in the humanities and social sciences, as well as in the natural and technical sciences, it is necessary to offer not only bibliographical metadata and full text but also structural information for retrieval purposes, such as:
These structural metadata are an integral part of the document and have to be defined by the author. At present, this predominantly takes place while formatting the text (e.g. headings, footnotes etc.). In order to also use these structural data for retrieval, they must be tagged as such by the author, by using either a structured language like LaTeX, or "style sheets" as with WinWord.
What could be the lowest common denominator for interoperability?
The first step within the above mentioned development is to reach agreement on a common metadata set for theses and dissertations and to formulate guidelines on how to use it for ETD projects. See http://www.ndltd.org/standards/metadata/ for the Dublin Core metadata set proposed by the NDLTD. Those guidelines could be supported by additional free software tools, which would allow library staff to create the necessary metadata set without needing a technical knowledge of the actual encoding in HTML or XML/RDF. Such a "metamaker" has been developed for the German ETD projects and could be translated into English, French, Spanish and Portuguese. MySQL or other free software can be used as the underlying database system.
The Open Archives Specification: A chance for metadata interoperability
During the last 2 years one initiative has effected the discussions about interoperability in digital libraries and the digital lbrary community enormously.
a protocol, that can easily be implemented at archive servers and
a metadata set based upon the Dublin Core metadata set
Allow archives, like ETD servers, preprint archives as well as museums and other institutions to provide
So the Open Archives Framework (see http://www.openarchives.org) allow an interoperability f heterogeneous and distributed ETD archives and servers in a very low interoperability level.
For the ETD initiatives and projects the OAI compliance has to be seen as chance to connect ETD servers worldwide.
Theses and dissertations represent a global source of information resulting from cutting edge research. While a proportion of this information is published in other forms much of the detail is not, and research emanating from lesser-known institutions, particularly in the developing countries, may be less likely to be published in mainstream journals. Creation of this information in electronic form making it readily accessible via the Web through standard, ubiquitous and free software programs provides the key to dissemination of this information independent of the source of the research. The ETD initiatives to date have proven that electronic theses and dissertations can be created using relatively low technology at a cost, which would be within the reach of most institutions. Portable packages have been developed which eliminate the majority of the developmental work required. The point has been reached where all research institutions can technically establish their own ETD program.
Traditionally, theses and dissertations have been extremely underutilized sources of information due to their lack of physical availability. The development of ETDs provides the opportunity for theses and dissertations to be recognized as a basic channel for the dissemination of research findings and an essential resource in the discovery process. Therefore, the focus for the future needs to be to ensure optimal access to ETDs by information seekers. This in essence means ensuring that ETD metadata records are accessible through as many channels as possible and are retrieved as integral components of searches without the researcher necessarily specifying an ETD. Some ways of achieving this could be:
Creation of a virtual union catalogue of ETD metadata through frequent regular harvesting of data from ETD sites which could be individual, regional or national
Integration of ETD metadata into general metadata repositories for electronic scholarly information
Ensuring search engines being established for other electronic scholarly information initiatives such as the Open Archives Initiative also search the ETD metadata repositories
The development of ETD programs worldwide and the implementation of access structures have the potential to significantly enhance the opportunity for all researchers, independent of geographic and economic constraints, to make their contribution to the global research effort.
Work in all of these areas continues under development by NDLTD. Acting as agent for NDLTD, Virginia Tech is running a union catalog, drawing upon sites that support OAI. The result is accessible through Virginia Tech software as well as VTLS’s Virtua software.
With support from the USA’s National Science Foundation, Virginia Tech also is engaged in a number of research activities related to ETDs. These include matching efforts funded by DFG in Germany (in collection with Oldenburg U.) and by CONACyT in Mexico (with Puebla and Monterrey). These aim to promote mirroring (of metadata as well as regular data), high performance access, effective searching and browsing, visualization of results and of sites, and other advanced schemes.
It is hoped that all involved in the ETD efforts will assist, with a global perspective, so that all universities become involved, and ultimately all students submit an ETD, thus becoming better prepared to be a leader in the Information Age.
Identify pelvic and sacral landmarks and ligaments to diagnose sacral somatic dysfunction.
Document sacral somatic dysfunction with appropriate nomenclature.
Understand and apply the relationship between L5 and sacral dysfunctions.
Treat sacral and pubic somatic dysfunctions.
The sacrum begins as 5 unfused vertebrae at birth. Initial fusion begins around age 16 and completes by age 26. It is a major load bearing structure, serving as the base of the spine and the trunk. It is suspended in place between the ilia. The ligament which joins the sacrum to the ilia is the sacroiliac ligament.
The sacrum is composed of five fused vertebrae. The anterior portion of the first segment (S1) is referred to as the sacral promontory. Sacral somatic dysfunction diagnoses are named by motion at the sacral promontory. The sacral base is the top (most cephalad) part of the sacrum. In somatic dysfunctions, the sacral base can be identified as being shallow (or posterior) or deep (or anterior). The sacral apex is the bottom part of the sacrum, which articulates with the coccyx. The sacral sulci (or sacral bases) are located on the superior lateral part of the sacrum. They are identified as being posterior (or shallow) or anterior (or deep) in somatic dysfunctions. The inferior lateral angles (ILAs) of the sacrum are located at the inferior lateral part of the sacrum. They are identified as being shallow (or posterior), deep (or anterior), superior or inferior in somatic dysfunctions. The innominates articulate with the femur at the acetabulum, the sacrum at the SI joint, and the pubic bones articulate with each other at the pubic symphysis. The articular process is where the sacrum articulates with L5. These two arms join at S2. Nerve roots exit through the sacral foramina.
There are four important ligaments to identify when considering pelvis anatomy:
Sacral Ligamentsthe iliolumbar ligament is a broad ligament that stabilizes L5 and anterior motion of the lower lumbar spine;
The sacrospinous and sacrotuberous ligaments restrict sacral flexion and posterior innominate rotation. The sacroiliac ligament is contiguous with the sacrotuberous ligament.
There are three significant muscles which attach the sacrum: the gluteus maximus, the multifidus, and the piriformis. The gluteus maximus is the primary extensor and abductor of the hip and attaches to the posterior aspect of the sacrum. When the sacrum is pulled posteriorly, the gluteus maximus is used due to its posterior attachment site. The multifidus coalesces into a thicker muscle as it descends inferiorly and attaches to the sacrum posteriorly as well. On the anterior surface, the piriformis attaches and serves as an external rotator of the hip. When the sacrum is pulled forward, the piriformis is used due to its anterior attachment site. The piriformis is the only muscle to attach to the anterior surface of the sacrum.
Lateral part of the dorsal surface of the sacrum, posterior part of the gluteal surface of the ilium, from the thoracolumbar fascia, and the sacrotuberous ligament
Extend and externally rotate the hip as well as stabilize the hip in both the sagittal and coronal planes (entire muscle); adduction (upper fibers); adduction (lower fibers)
With regard to the neuroanatomy of the sacral region, the spinal cord ends at the level of L2, below which the conus medullaris begins and the cauda equina follows to the level of S4. The dura matter ends at the level of S2; dura mater attachments will be the subject of Chapter 14 but are, briefly, the surfaces of the OA, C2, C3, and S2 vertebrae.
The pelvic splanchnic nerves exit from the S2-S4 nerve roots and are responsible for parasympathetic innervation of the viscerosomatic reflexes discussed in Chapter 11.
There are four types of sacral motion: respiratory motion, craniosacral motion, postural motion, and dynamic motion. The axes of motion of the sacrum are shown in Figure 8.1. During respiration and craniosacral motion, the sacral base will move posteriorly about the superior transverse axis, passing through the level of S2. Postural motion occurs during ambulation, utilizing the middle transverse axis (S3). Innominate rotation occurs about the inferior transverse axis (S4). The left and right oblique axis are utilized during the dynamic motion of ambulation; when bearing weight on the left leg, the left oblique axis is engaged.
Sacrum nomenclature is always named with the sacral promontory as a point of reference. Torsional axes are always named by the SI joint involved. Torsion dysfunctions are named by rotation on axis. For example, a right on left sacral somatic dysfunction means that a rightward rotation is occurring about a left oblique axis.
Left on left and right on right sacral somatic dysfunctions are considered anterior torsions because the dysfunction involves moving the base of the sacrum forward and are termed physiologic because they occur normally during gait. Right on left and left on right sacral somatic dysfunctions are termed posterior torsions because the sacral base is moving posteriorly and are termed non-physiologic because they do not occur during gait (i.e. physiologic conditions).
With respect to sacral shear somatic dysfunctions, these are always pathologic and related to some type of trauma. They are uncommon. Unilateral shear somatic dysfunctions occur when one half of the sacrum is pulled in one direction; bilateral shear somatic dysfunctions occur when both halves of the sacrum are pulled in a direction. These dysfunctions are the result of abnormal motion around a transverse axis. Shear dysfunctions occur either in a flexion or extension motion.
The possible sacral shear somatic dysfunctions are:
Lumbosacral mechanics are next to be considered because L5 and the sacrum always move in opposite directions under physiologic conditions to compensate for motion of the lumbar spine and the opposing motions of the sacrum. Sacral extension is known as counternutation and sacral flexion is known as nutation.
The following observations can be used to predict lumbar and sacral dysfunctions:
If L5 is sidebent, the sacral oblique axis is engaged on the same side as the sidebending.
If L5 is rotated, the sacrum rotates the opposite way on an oblique axis.
Sacrum will be rotated left (opposite side of rotation) on a right oblique axis (same side as sidebending) – this is a L on R torsion.
Sacrum will be rotated left (opposite side of rotation) on a left oblique axis (same side as sidebending) – this is an L on L torsion.
L5 FRRSR or L5 ERRSR (cannot tell from these findings alone)
Conclusion: Type 1 dysfunctions are anterior torsions and type 2 dysfunctions are posterior torsions.
A freely-moving sacroiliac joint will allow for full lumbar flexion before locking and rotating the pelvis forward. The seated flexion test, as discussed in prior chapters, is utilized because a dysfunctional sacroiliac joint will lock earlier and rotate the pelvis forward first. Sitting stabilizes the innominates and allows isolation of sacral motion.
The seated flexion test is performed to also determine laterality of sacroiliac dysfunction. It is done by having the patient seated on the exam table with the knees flexed to 90 degrees. The physician sits behind the patient with the eyes at the level of the pelvis and the thumbs on the PSIS. The patient is asked to bend forward. Ideally, the patient’s feet should be in contact with the ground while performing this test to avoid injury to the patient. As with the standing flexion test, the side that moves first and moves the furthest is the positive side, indicating sacroiliac restriction on the ipsilateral side.
A freely-moving sacrum should have recoil when it is directly compressed. A positive spring test occurs when direct compression of the sacrum in the Sphinx position has no recoil and feels rigid (“no spring”); it also indicates posterior displacement of the sacral base.
The positions of the sacral sulcus and the inferior lateral angle are based on static examination and palpation of the sacrum. The sacral sulcus is described as being either deep or shallow based on sacral base positioning; it corresponds to the distance between the PSIS and the sacral base. The inferior lateral angle is described as posterior or anterior based on sacral apex positioning.
What side is the seated flexion test positive on?
What does the spring test show?
What are the relative positions of the sacral sulcus and inferolateral angles?
Positive seated flexion test on the right.
Sacral sulcus is deep on the right.
Inferior lateral angle (ILA) is shallow on the right.
What is the somatic dysfunction diagnosis?
The seated flexion test is positive on the opposite side of the oblique axis. (Eliminate right on right and left on right as options.)
The seated flexion test is falsely positive for pelvic somatic dysfunctions on the same side. (Eliminate left unilateral flexion and left unilateral extension as options.)
Possible dysfunctions include: Left on left and Right unilateral flexion
A positive spring test occurs when direct compression of the sacrum in the Sphinx position has no recoil and feels rigid; it also indicates posterior displacement of the sacral base. Therefore, a negative spring test would be freely springing and exclude posterior displacement.
Eliminate right on left and right unilateral extension. Both are eliminated because right sacral base is not posteriorly displaced if the spring test is negative. A way to remember dysfunctions with positive spring tests are the “opposites” (R on L and L on R) and the “extensions” (RUE/LUE).)
Sacral sulcus is deep on the right. Inferior lateral angle (ILA) is shallow on the right.
The sacral dysfunction diagnosis is right unilateral flexion.
In a left on left sacral dysfunction, the sacral sulcus is deep on the right and the ILA is posterior on the left.
Positive seated flexion test on the right.
Sacral base is deep on the left.
ILA is shallow on the right.
What is the somatic dysfunction diagnosis?
The seated flexion test is positive on the opposite side of the oblique axis. (Eliminate right on right and left on right as options.)
The seated flexion test is falsely positive for pelvic somatic dysfunctions on the same side. (Eliminate left unilateral flexion and left unilateral extension as options.)
Sacral base is deep on the left. ILA is shallow on the right.
Visualize the two possible torsional somatic dysfunctions and try to match the palpatory findings provided in the stem of the question
As with innominate static findings, sometimes the described findings may have to be analyzed further in order to determine a diagnosis. Stating that the sacral base is deep on the left and the ILA is shallow on the right is equivalent to saying that the sacral base is shallow on the left and the ILA is deep on the right. Therefore, the diagnosis is a right on left sacral somatic dysfunction.
Positive seated flexion test on the left.
Sacral base is deep on the left.
ILA is deep on the left.
What is the somatic dysfunction diagnosis?
The seated flexion test is positive on the opposite side of the oblique axis. (Eliminate right on right and left on right as options.)
The seated flexion test is falsely positive for pelvic somatic dysfunctions on the same side. (Eliminate left unilateral flexion and left unilateral extension as options.)
Sacral base is deep on the left. ILA is shallow on the left.
Visualize the two possible torsional somatic dysfunctions and try to match the palpatory findings provided in the stem of the question:
Stating that the sacral base is deep on the left and the ILA is deep on the left is equivalent to saying that the sacral base is deep on the left and the ILA is shallow on the right. Therefore, the diagnosis is a right on right sacral somatic dysfunction.
Seated flexion test is not given.
Sacral sulcus is deep on the left.
ILA is deep on the left.
What is the somatic dysfunction diagnosis?
Seated Flexion Test is not given.
Sacral base is deep on the left. ILA is shallow on the left.
Visualize the two possible torsional somatic dysfunctions and try to match the palpatory findings provided in the stem of the question:
A left unilateral flexion sacral somatic dysfunction would have a shallow ILA on the left, not a deep ILA. This reasoning also eliminates left on left as an option. A right unilateral flexion would cause the left sacral sulcus to be shallow, eliminating this as an option.
Stating that the sacral base is deep on the left and the ILA is deep on the left is equivalent to saying that the sacral base is deep on the left and the ILA is shallow on the right. Therefore, the diagnosis is a right on right sacral somatic dysfunction.
Seated flexion test is positive on the right.
ILA is shallow on the left.
What is the somatic dysfunction diagnosis?
Seated flexion test is positive on the right.
For a right unilateral extension, the ILA would deep, not shallow – this eliminates right unilateral extension.
These findings describe a left on left sacral somatic dysfunction.
Sacral torsion dysfunctions can be treated with post-isometric relaxation muscle energy:
The mnemonic to remember treatment of these dysfunctions is Up, Up, Up, or Down, Down, Down. The three directions in the mnemonic refer to which way the patient’s torso faces, the side of the dysfunctional axis is placed, and which direction the physician force is directed, respectively.
Up, Up, Up: Place the patient in lateral recumbent position with dysfunctional axis side up. Keeping the pelvis in recumbent, swivel only the patient’s upper body into supine position until motion is felt over the restricted sacral base (the sacral sulcus closer to the table). Flex the patient’s bilateral hips until motion is felt over the restricted sacral base. Keeping the knees also flexed, and the weight of the patient’s legs supported by the physician’s body, lift both lower extremities off the table until the restrictive barrier is reached at the restricted sacral base. The patient contracts their gluteus maximus by pushing their lower extremities downward into the table, and this force is met by the physician to produce an isometric contraction.
Down, Down, Down: Place the patient in lateral recumbent position with dysfunctional axis side down. Keeping the pelvis in recumbent, swivel the patient’s upper body into prone position until motion is felt at the restricted sacral base (the sacral sulcus that is higher). Flex the patient’s bilateral hips until motion is felt over the restricted sacral base. Keeping the knees also flexed, Lower both lower extremities off the table until the restrictive barrier is reached at the restricted sacral base. The patient contracts their gluteus maximus by pushing their lower extremities upwards towards the table, and this force is met by the physician to produce an isometric contraction.
Using the same mnemonic convention as anterior torsions, the treatment technique for posterior torsions is either Up, Down, Down, or Down, Up, Up.
Up, Down, Down: Place the patient in lateral recumbent position with dysfunctional axis side down. Keeping the pelvis in recumbent, swivel the patient’s upper body into supine position until motion is felt at the restricted sacral base (the sacral sulcus that is higher). Flex the patient’s hip on the side of the restricted sacral base until motion is felt over the restricted sacral base. Keeping the knee also flexed, lower the lower extremity off the table until the restrictive barrier is reached at the restricted sacral base. The patient contracts their piriformis muscle by pushing their lower extremity upwards towards the table, and this force is met by the physician to produce an isometric contraction.
Down, Up, Up: Place the patient in lateral recumbent position with dysfunctional axis side up. Keeping the pelvis in recumbent, the swivel the patient’s upper body into prone position until motion is felt at the restricted sacral base (the sacral sulcus that is towards the table). Flex the patient’s hip on the side of the restricted sacral base until motion is felt over the restricted sacral base. Lifting up on the medial/lateral malleoli, the raise the lower extremity off the table until the restrictive barrier is reached at the restricted sacral base. The patient contracts their piriformis muscle by pushing their lower extremity downwards towards the table, and this force is met by the physician to produce an isometric contraction.
Sacral shears (unilateral flexion shears, unilateral extension shears, bilateral flexion shears, and bilateral extension shears) use respiratory motion of the sacrum in combination with direct physician force to correct sacral positioning. These techniques require that the sacroiliac joint be in a gapped position in order to be effective. Sacral shear dysfunctions can be treated with respiratory-assisted muscle energy:
Unilateral Flexion Shear: Place the patient in the prone position on the table. Abduct and internally rotate the entire lower extremity on the dysfunctional side until the ilium is as laterally displaced as possible with respect to the sacrum. Contact the inferior lateral angle on the dysfunctional side. Instruct the patient to perform 3 long, slow cycles of inhalation and exhalation. During the patient’s inhalation phase, apply firm downward pressure onto the inferior lateral angle. During the patient’s exhalation phase, actively resist sacral nutation.
Unilateral Extension Shear: Place the patient in the prone Sphinx position on the table. Abduct and internally rotate the entire lower extremity on the dysfunctional side until the ilium is as laterally displaced as possible with respect to the sacrum. Contact the base of the sacrum on the dysfunctional side. Instruct the patient to perform 3 long, slow cycles of inhalation and exhalation. During the patient’s exhalation phase, apply firm downward pressure onto the sacral base. During the patient’s inhalation phase, actively resist sacral counternutation.
Bilateral Flexion Shear: Place the patient in the prone position on the table. Abduct and internally rotate both lower extremities until the ilia are as laterally displaced as possible with respect to the sacrum. Contact the inferior lateral angles of the sacrum. Instruct the patient to perform 3 long, slow cycles of inhalation and exhalation. During the patient’s inhalation phase, apply firm downward pressure onto the inferior lateral angles. During the patient’s exhalation phase, actively resist sacral nutation.
Bilateral Extension Shear: Place the patient in the prone Sphinx position on the table. Abduct and internally rotate both lower extremities until the ilia are as laterally displaced as possible with respect to the sacrum. Contact the base of the sacrum in the midline. Instruct the patient to perform 3 long, slow cycles of inhalation and exhalation. During the patient’s exhalation phase, apply firm downward pressure onto the sacral base. During the patient’s inhalation phase, actively resist sacral counternutation.
The pelvic girdle is made of the two innominates and the sacrum. There are differences in the angles between the android male pelvis (acute, ca. 70o) and the gynecoid female pelvis (obtuse, ca. 100o). The gynecoid pelvis has increased flaring of the ilia. The android pelvis is heavier and has more pronounced muscle attachment; the ischial tuberosities are closer in the android pelvis than in the gynecoid pelvis, and the pelvis outlet is thus comparatively smaller. All of the ilia are less flared in the android pelvis than in the gynecoid pelvis, so the greater pelvis is deeper. The pelvic inlet is heart-shaped in the android pelvis and more transversely oval in the gynecoid pelvis. The gynecoid pelvis is broader than in the android pelvis to allow the passage of the fetal head.
The pelvic diaphragm (interchangeably called the pelvic floor) is often overlooked as a source of pain. It may be the cause of lower back pain but is not often considered as the first issue. It serves as a major crossroads for blood, lymph, and nerves and is closely connected to the abdominal diaphragm. Most dysfunctions of the pelvic diaphragm occur in females during pregnancy. The muscles of the pelvic diaphragm include the levator ani (composed of the puborectalis, the pubococcygeus, and the iliococcygeus) and the coccygeus. The piriformis and the coccygeus form the posterolateral aspects of the pelvic floor. The ischial tuberosity serves as a landmark for treating pelvic floor dysfunctions. To contact the pelvic diaphragm, the physician will palpate through a significant amount of connective tissue and adipose. Once a firm feeling is palpated, contact is made. The pelvic diaphragm will move with the respiratory cycle and tighten with inspiration.
The pubic symphysis is a dense fibrocartilaginous joint. Under physiologic conditions, the pubic tubercles should be less than 1 cm apart; the symphysis has the inherent ability to move ca. 2 mm superiorly or inferiorly during the gait cycle. Rotation is limited to 1-2o. The major function of the pubic symphysis is force distribution. During pregnancy, the pubic symphysis becomes relaxed.
Palpating with the thenar and hypothenar eminences starting from the umbilicus working towards the pelvis. The physician's fingers are arched off of the patient’s body. As the physician moves distally, the thenar and hypothenar eminence will locate the pubic symphysis by feeling a bony prominence.
Once located, stay midline and place one thumb on one pubic tubercle and the other thumb on the other pubic tubercle. Make sure to be on the same anatomical location on each side. For example, palpate the superior margin of the tubercle with each hand. The physician should not have one thumb on the superior margin and one on the inferior margin. This skews the diagnosis when evaluating for symmetry. The physician evaluates the heights (inferior or superior) of the pubic tubercles. The physician then assesses for tenderness over the pubic symphysis midline.
To diagnose a pubic somatic dysfunction, use the ASIS compression test or standing flexion test to evaluate for the side of most restriction. Once determined, this will be the side that has dysfunction. Note that the ASIS compression test evaluates the pubic bones, innominates and SI joint, therefore, keep in mind there may be a combination of dysfunctions.
The following static findings are palpated: a positive standing flexion test on the right, ASIS lower on the right, PSIS higher on the right, longer leg on the right, and the right pubic tubercle is tender and inferior to that on the left. The diagnosis is a right inferior pubic shear dysfunction based on these findings.
Somatic dysfunctions of the pubic symphysis include superior pubic shear dysfunctions, inferior pubic shear dysfunctions, gapped pubic dysfunctions, and compression pubic dysfunctions. Pubic somatic dysfunctions are relatively uncommon. Superior shear dysfunctions mirror posterior innominate dysfunctions; Inferior shear dysfunctions mirror anterior innominate dysfunctions. Superior and inferior shear dysfunctions are caused by trauma or hypertonic adductors respectively. (Other muscles which may be involved in pubic symphysis dysfunctions include the pectineus, gracilis, and rectus abdominus.)
For treatment of pubic symphysis dysfunctions using post-isometric relaxation muscle energy:
Gapped Pubic Symphysis (utilizes hip abductors): Patient is supine, with knees bent and knees apart. The physician places their hands on the lateral aspect of each of the patient’s knees. The physician asks the patient to push out into their hands and at the same time the operator resists this motion resulting in no movement of the legs. For the second and third iterations, the physician brings the knees closer together.
Compressed Pubic Symphysis (utilizes hip adductors): Patient is supine, with knees bent and knees together. The physician places their fist in between the patient’s knees. The physician asks the patient to push into their hand and at the same time the physician resists this motion resulting in no movement of the legs. For the second iteration, the physician places two fists between the knees; for the final iteration, the physician places the forearm between the knees.
For treatment of pubic shear dysfunctions using muscle energy, treatment involves:
Inferior Pubic Shear: The patient is supine. The physician gaps the pubic symphysis using the compression technique. The physician stands on the side of the dysfunction. The patient’s leg is flexed until a restrictive barrier is contacted. Once at that barrier, the patient is instructed to push back against the physician. The physician resists this motion resulting in no movement. The patient's leg is brought further into flexion during each iteration of the treatment. Lastly, the physician compresses the pubic symphysis using the gapping technique.
Superior Pubic Shear: The patient is supine. The physician gaps the pubic symphysis using the compression technique. The physician stands on the side of the dysfunction. The patient’s leg is extended until a restrictive barrier is contacted. Once at that barrier, the patient is instructed to push back against the physician. The physician resists this motion resulting in no movement. The patient's leg is brought further into extension during each iteration of the treatment. Lastly, the physician compresses the pubic symphysis using the gapping technique.
Questions 1-6: Match the sacrum diagnosis based on the following static findings (choices may be used more than once):
A. Bilaterally contract the abductors, treat the shear, bilaterally contract the adductors
B. Treat the shear, bilaterally contract the adductors, bilaterally contract the abductors
C. Bilaterally contract the abductors, bilaterally contract the adductors, treat the shear
D. Bilaterally contrast the adductors, treat the shear, bilaterally contract the abductors
E. Treat the shear, bilaterally contract the abductors, bilaterally contract the adductors
F. Bilaterally contract the adductors, bilaterally contract the abductors, treat the shear
A. The superior transverse axis is about S3.
B. The sacral base moves posteriorly during respiration about S2.
C. Innominate motion occurs about the middle transverse axis.
D. Postural motion occurs around the inferior transverse axis.
E. The left and right oblique axes are engaged during hip flexion and extension.
A. Pubic somatic dysfunctions are fairly common.
B. Superior pubic shear dysfunctions are caused by hypertonic quadriceps muscles.
C. Inferior pubic shear dysfunctions mirror anterior innominate dysfunctions.
D. Superior pubic shears are less often caused by trauma than hypertonic musculature.
Have you ever wondered what computing is and how a computer works? What exactly is computer science? Why—beyond the obvious reasons—is it important? What do computer scientists do?
What types of problems do they work on? What approaches do they use to solve
Question 1: What do you think of when you hear "computer
When you hear the term "computer science" perhaps
There are a number of reasons why it is useful and important to know something
What, more specifically, will this book cover? The foremost purpose of
And how do computers work? For example, we can store not only numbers
And why is any of this important? Isn't it sufficient for most people
These are all fundamental questions about computing, and in this book
There are two parts of this overview that are particularly important: while the main theme is an
Computer science relies heavily on mathematics (in fact, some colleges
This means that to understand something very basic about computers you need to
While mathematics and technology and society might seem too different
"two sides of the same coin." For example, one topic in the book
This is not a computer applications book. Many other books cover basic computer applications. For
These and other applications are important parts of computer
This is not a "computer literacy" or "computer fluency" book. There are a variety of definitions of computer literacy or
Parts of this book will involve using computers to gain a variety
a variety of computer-related tasks such as performing web searches,
However, this is just one part, rather than the totality, of the text.
So this book shares some characteristics of a computer literacy book,
a great ideas book. It is not focused solely on ideas, but explores broadly
a number of computer-related issues, subtopics, and computer
In addition to programming, applications, computer fluency, and great ideas, there are a
However, there is not a suitable text that combines an overview
At first glance, it might seem odd that a book introducing
Question 3. What do you think of when you hear the word
"mathematics?" Write a paragraph or list, or draw an image or
Question 4. Based on your experience with computers, write a list
What do computers and mathematics have in common? Why is it appropriate for
At the same time, the different uses of mathematics in this text
The reliance of many key ideas in computer science, such as data representation, on mathematics.
The use of special mathematics- or logic-related notation and terminology in many parts of computer science.
The ability to represent and work with many different types of data in the computer, and the related ability to represent and work with quantities in different representations using a variety of operations.
The need for rigor in solving problems, analyzing situations, or specifying computational processes.
The use of numbers and arithmetic in solving computational problems. However, rather than being simple arithmetic problems, these problems often have some special characteristics such as involving repeated operations, or involving extremely large or extremely small numbers.
The existence of a variety of different algorithms for solving such diverse problems as pattern matching, counting specified values in a table of data, or finding the shortest path between two nodes in a graph.
In exploring low-level logical operations you'll need to manipulate binary representation and logical operators.
In specifying computational processes you'll need to use "pseudocode" or a programming language. These share many notational characteristics with mathematical or logical symbols, especially when the computational processing involves a large number of numeric computations.
We'll look at a few different ways to represent numbers in binary representation. For example, integers are often represented in binary not using the usual straightforward binary representation, but in "two's complement" form. So part of this book is learning not only about the "usual" binary representation, but also about these alternatives.
We'll look at various issues with binary representation, such as the number of "bits" used, that are important in determining the range and precision of numbers used by computers.
In addition to representing numbers, we will also look at how computers use binary representation to represent and operate on other types of data such as text, colors, and images.
In addition to basic operations such as binary addition, we will also look at other operations on binary representations. For example, logical operations are important in masking colors in image processing, and in implementing arithmetic operations in low-level computer hardware.
Question 5. What do you think of when you hear "technology and society?"
Write a paragraph or list, or draw an image or diagram of
The topic of this book is computers and computing. Computers have affected
Through this book you should get an understanding of how computers work.
This includes understanding the basics of computer hardware and computer
Technology affects society. However, it is not a one-way street.
These can include individual users, developers, companies
(producers, consumers, and intermediaries), government bodies,
These different stakeholders often have different views and different
In this book we will often look at technology and society issues
One often hears conflicting views on computer and society issues.
In this book we'll often explore issues that are contentious
For instance, it might mean give an informed projection about whether
a new computer product will be successful or not. Or it might mean
Here are some additional introductory questions.
Question 7. How do you use computers? List the most important
a major role. For each movie, indicate whether computing is portrayed as
Question 11. Suppose you were to write a novel, play, screenplay,
etc. about some aspect of computers and society. Describe what the theme
Question 13. Suppose you had to write a short essay or short
Question 14. Suppose you had to write a short essay or short
Bangla consonants do not have special names. They are known by the sound they represent followed by the vowel অ [ɔ]. For example: ক is pronounced [kɔ], গ is pronounced [gɔ], etc.
There are various debugging tools available in Rebol.
Probe is a highly useful tool. What it does, is read the return values of functions and output them on the console. The return value is passed through probe, so you can insert it anywhere in your program.
The value is both printed and returned as a value, because probe lets the return value pass through itself, as opposed to print, which doesn't return a useful value.
NOTE: Be careful with probing large objects as they can take a very long time to print on the console. Large amounts of output can be stopped by pressing Escape.
Trace can help you to see function calls or TCP/IP network statistics on the console.
Trace/func returns a large amount of feedback, so it's wise only to activate it around the code you need to examine.
... some problematic code ...
That stray ":" on the return redefines return rather than returning the expected result. Any later code that uses return may misbehave.
An answer may be to protect all existing words from change:
Adding print statements is a time-honored way of debugging code. Rebol has a neat way of letting you leave the statements in unactivated until needed
The trick is to define another word as a synonym of print, eg:
In production code, or when you want to turn the debugging statements off, simply add:
??
Rebol provides specific functions to help with debugging. The function ?? prints a variable name followed by its molded value. Unlike the print function, it also returns the value it receives.
Once you have finished debugging, you can either remove all the ?? from the source, or just redefine ?? so that it just passes the value as though it were no longer present.
??: func [val] [val]
While a VID program is running, you can't use the console to type print or ?? or any
[field1/text: 1 + to-integer field1/text show field1]
Try typing help view into the field labeled console.
You can shave off a tiny bit of debugging time, by adding a simple button to your program that quits the program and starts it again.
Stopping a program to the console can be done with Escape key.
Continuing GUI programs can be done with do-events command.
"An organization for those interested in proton, light ion, and heavy charged particle radiotherapy"
Promotes the clinical benefits of proton beam radiation therapy for cancer patients and their families
University of California San Francisco/University of California Davis - ocular diseases only
American Shared Hospital Services: Kettering Medical Center, Dayton, OH
Proton facilities: Massachusetts General Hospital, National Cancer Center Japan, National Cancer Center Korea, Wanjie Proton Therapy Center, Midwest Proton Radiotherapy Institute
Overview. 2,639 patients treated with prostate, H&N, liver, lung and sarcomas (total 87%). Proton beam 2,122 (80%), carbon ion 517 (20%)
Overview of European experience, including development of facilities in Heidelberg (HIT) and Pavia (CNAO). Also review of Marburg, Wiener Neustadt, Lyon and Uppsala and the development of ENLIGHT network
Partnership between MD Anderson Cancer Center, Sanders Morris Harris, and The Styles Company to manage the Proton Therapy Center at MD Anderson
Remember the wealth of information a soldier gets from a mike click? With certain types of data, it makes sense that if you could encode the data using information that is not stored in the actual datafile you are compressing, you could significantly reduce known forms of storage and the requirements for communication. Some algorithms replicate this process by including an internal data table, often referred to as dictionary, hence the term dictionary compression.
The word dictionary in this case does not relate to the programming structure that holds the data table. Some authors and implementors may refer to this type of concept as library (and then library compression), in that case library does not refer to the code implementation file.
This can become confusing since the algorithm relies on an internal data storage container that references the information that may in reality not be what programmers define as a dictionary, also adding to it is the fact most compression algorithms tend to be implemented into as programming object libraries files, so the algorithm can easily be reusable and updated.
Due to its intrinsic characteristic of permitting gains when used in communications, as the example of the mike click demonstrates, there is a pre-understood code system agreed and shared between the emitter and the receptor. It is not without a cause that most communication network oriented compression algorithms rely in some form of dictionary compression.
To do:This should be extended a bit, keeping it inside the scope by inclusion of some mentions of communication protocols V.42bis using Lempel Ziv dynamic dictionary compression, V.44 uses LZJH (Lempel-Ziv-Jeff-Heath) adaptive data compression.
An example is a simple dictionary built into the compression algorithm scheme. If you already know the most compact storage scheme for a specific type of data, then you can simply substitute the more compact state for the actual data. Consider the word "supercalifragiliciousexpialadocious" Now suppose that in your dictionary there are only 11 words starting with super, and this is the eleventh. Well it's obvious that Super11 would be unique enough that given the same dictionary at the time of decompression, you could recover the full word with no data loss. With A and An, however it is not quite so obvious that you could store information about the word in less space than everything but the one letter word.
Now consider that you have the Internet, and you want to store an article by LaVogue. You could store the file on your own computer, or, alternately you could store a link to the file similar to the hypertext links you have on your homepage. Is it compression? Maybe not, but you can recover the original text with a slight delay while it downloads.
The mind boggles at the efficiency of a compression system that contains all knowledge in the world on a single server-farm, and uses it to reduce the storage of information on the client computer. Even more fantastic would be the legal snarl such a system would create and the privacy concerns and financial costs associated with recovery of compressed information that was proprietary in the first place. But a net-aware compression server, might be able to achieve truly radical compression rates. Essentially all that the home file would have to contain was the key sequence to trigger the decompression of a specific data cloud. The home user could even compress his compression files because multiple files each containing a link to a specific compression file structure, could be themselves turned into a single file, that contained the compression file structure of all the composite files. Infinite compression at the user level, but truly massive storage at the server level.
Pike's 1981 compression algorithm, like several early text compression algorithms, used a more or less literal dictionary of English words.
Pike's algorithm used a fixed dictionary composed of 205 of the most popular English words, and the ASCII characters.
By using a variable-length coding of 4, 8, or 12 bits to represent these words and the remaining ASCII characters, and some clever handling of uppercase letters and the space between words, Pike's algorithm achieved a compression ratio of 3.87 bits per character for typical English text.
Adding more English words to the dictionary helps compression, but with diminishing returns.
Adding certain non-words to the dictionary -- common letter pairs and triplets, common prefixes, common suffixes, etc. -- helps compression, since they can be used to at least partially compress words that aren't in the dictionary, but adding such non-words also gives diminishing returns.
Later compression algorithms kept the idea of a short codeword representing something longer, but generalized it: a dictionary coder expands codewords to a sequence of bytes, a sequence that may or may not line up on English word boundaries.
Smaz is a simple compression library suitable for compressing very short
Much like Pike's algorithm, Smaz has a hard-wired constant built-in codebook of 254 common English words, word fragments, bigrams, and the lowercase letters (except j, k, q).
Fetch the next byte X from the compressed file.
Is X == 254? Single byte literal: fetch the next byte L, and pass it straight through to the decoded text.
Is X == 255? Literal string: fetch the next byte L, then pass the following L+1 bytes straight through to the decoded text.
Any other value of X: lookup the X'th "word" in the codebook (that "word" can be from 1 to 5 letters), and copy that word to the decoded text.
Repeat until there are no more compressed bytes left in the compressed file.
Because the codebook is constant, the Smaz decoder is unable to "learn" new words and compress them, no matter how often they appear in the original text.
Most dictionary algorithms are adaptive: rather than a fixed, hard-wired dictionary like Pike's algorithm, as the decoder compresses the text, when it encounters letter triplets or entire words that are not yet in the dictionary, the decoder adds them to the dictionary.
If there are too many rare triplets, syllables, or words in the dictionary,
If some triplet, syllable, or word is left out of the dictionary,
This balancing act makes it difficult to build an optimal dictionary.[3]
The hard-wired dictionary used to initialize the data compression algorithm has a big effect on the compression ratio in the early phase of the compression.
An adaptive dictionary algorithm eventually adds to the dictionary all the syllables and common words used in that specific text,
LZ77 type decoders expand the compressed file by expanding "copy items" in that compressed file into larger strings.
This enables "duplicate string elimination": only the first copy of a string is stored in the compressed file.
All other copies refer to a previous copy.
Is the next item a literal? Then copy it directly from the compressed file to the end of the decoded text.
Is the next item a copy item? Then break it into a "length" and a "distance". Find the text that starts that "distance" back from the current end of decoded text, and copy "length" characters from that previously-decoded text to end of the decoded text.
Repeat from the beginning until there is no more items in the compressed file.
While all LZ77 style algorithms have this same decoder structure, there is a huge variety of ways that decoders decide whether an item is a literal or a copy items, and also a variety of ways that they extract the "length" and the "distance" from the copy item.
Many decoder algorithms combine LZ77 with other compression ideas.
As of 2008, the most popular LZ77 based compression method is called DEFLATE; it combines LZ77 with Huffman.
Lempel-Ziv-Storer-Szymanski (LZSS) was created in 1982 by James Storer and Thomas Szymanski.
The LZSS and LZRW1-A decompressors have a very similar form:
For each copy item, fetch a "literal/copy" bit from the compressed file.
0: literal: the decoder grabs the next byte from the compressed file and passes it straight through to the decompressed text.
1: copy item: the decoder grabs the next 2 bytes from the compressed file, breaks it into a 4 bit "length" and a 12 bit "distance". The 4 "length" bits are decoded into a length from 3 to 18 characters. Then find the text that starts that "distance" back from the current end of decoded text, and copy "length" characters from that previously-decoded text to end of the decoded text.
Repeat from the beginning until there is no more items in the compressed file.
0: literal: the decoder grabs the next byte from the compressed file and passes it straight through to the decompressed text.
1: copy item: the decoder grabs the next 2 bytes from the compressed file, breaks it into a 6 bit "length" and a 10 bit "distance". The 6 "length" bits are decoded into a length from 3 to 66 characters. Then find the text that starts that "distance" back from the current end of decoded text, and copy "length" characters from that previously-decoded text to end of the decoded text.
Repeat from the beginning until there is no more items in the compressed file.
At first look, a 2-byte "copy" in LZRW1A, LZSS, and LZJB algorithms may seem to not save any space, because the 16 bits to indicate "length, distance" are the same size as 2 literal bytes. However, 2 literal bytes actually require 18 bits including the "literal/copy" bits, while a 2 byte copy requires 17 bits. Even so, the 2 byte copy was either overlooked or not considered worth the effort by the authors of those algorithms.
After pulling a 1 bit from the control word, a copy item is in only one format:
LLLLLLdd dddddddd : copy L+3 bytes from d bytes before the most-recently-decoded byte.
The original LZ77 decoder fetches a "distance/length/literal" block from the compressed file.
Find the text that starts that "distance" back from the current end of decoded text, and copy "length" characters from that previously-decoded text to end of the decoded text. (Sometimes the "length" is 0, so this "copy" does nothing).
Then copy the literal character from the compressed file to the end of the decoded text.
Repeat from the beginning until there is no more items in the compressed file.
(when it's not cheating) uses a simple byte-oriented LZ77-like code.
X in the range 0...31? Literal: copy the next X literal bytes from the compressed stream to the end of the decoded text.
X in the range 32...255? Copy item: copy the two bytes from X-32 places back in the decoded text.
Repeat from the beginning until there is no more items in the compressed file.
LZF is a fast compression algorithm that takes very little code space and working memory (assuming we have access to the most recent 8 kByte of decoded text).
LibLZF by Marc Lehmann is designed to be a very small, very fast, very portable data compression library for the LZF compression algorithm.
To do: Is LZF also developed by Marc Lehmann ?.
For each copy item, the LZF decoder first fetches a byte X from the compressed file, and breaks the byte X into a 3 bit length and a 5 bit high_distance.
The decoder has 3 cases: length==0, length==7, and any other length.
Either kind of copy: Fetch a low_distance byte, and combine it with the 5 high_distance bits to get a 13-bit distance. (This implies a 2^13 = 8KByte window).
Either kind of copy: Find the text that starts that "distance" back from the current end of decoded text, and copy "length+2" characters from that previously-decoded text to end of the decoded text.
Repeat from the beginning until there is no more items in the compressed file.
000LLLLL ; literal reference
LLLddddd dddddddd ; copy L+2 from d bytes before most recently decoded byte
111ddddd LLLLLLLL dddddddd ; copy L+2+7 from d bytes before most recently decoded byte
FastLZ by Ariya Hidayat is a free, open-source, portable real-time compression library for the FastLZ algorithm.
(Ariya Hidayat apparently developed the FastLZ algorithm based on the LZF algorithm?)
It has pretty much the same compressed size and compression time as LibLZF, and significantly faster decompression -- about 2/3 the time of LibLZF.
The FastLZ decoder inner loop is very similar to the LZF inner loop:
Fetch a byte X. Divide the byte X into the 3 bit length and a 5 bit high_distance.
(When the new byte is all-ones (255), it serves as an escape to even longer lengths ...)
Fetch a low_distance byte, and combine it with the 5 high_distance bits to get a 13-bit distance. (This implies a 2^13 = 8KByte window).
If the distance is all-ones (0x1FFF): fetch 2 new distance bytes to give a full 16 bit distance, and add it to the 0x1FFF all-ones distance. (This implies a 2^16 + 2^13 = 64 KByte + 8 KByte window)
Repeat from the beginning until there is no more items in the compressed file.
If a compressed file only uses distances within the 2^13-1 window, and lengths less than 2^8+7,
Each FastLZ "item" is one of these 5 formats (the LZF formats, plus a few extensions):
000LLLLL ; literal reference
LLLddddd dddddddd ; copy L+2 bytes from d bytes before most recently decoded byte
111ddddd LLLLLLLL dddddddd ; copy L+2+7 bytes from d bytes before most recently decoded byte
LLL11111 11111111 dddddddd dddddddd ; copy L+2 bytes from d+0x1FFF bytes before most recently decoded byte
11111111 LLLLLLLL 11111111 dddddddd dddddddd ; copy L+2+7 bytes from d+0x1FFF bytes before most recently decoded byte
It's not clear why FastLZ is so much faster than LZF. Its "extensions" are apparently not being used, since the compressed file sizes on the benchmark files are not significantly different.
If the same implementation techniques -- 16-bit copies whenever possible, special-case for "run" (pseudo-RLE), etc. -- were applied to LZF, would it be just as fast?
Or is it the case that these "extensions" actually are being used a lot, and somehow they are faster (but roughly the same size) as the LZF approach?
To do:Complete miniLZO.
LZO is a compressed data format and portable lossless data compression library written in ANSI C developed and maintained by Markus F.X.J. Oberhumer.[9]
LZO is slightly slower and produces somewhat better compressed file sizes than LZF.
LZO is much faster than DEFLATE/gzip -- it runs in about half the time -- and produces somewhat worst file sizes than DEFLATE/gzip.
LZ4 is a compressed data format and portable lossless data compression library developed and maintained by Yann Collet.
LZ4 is used in many compressed file systems including OpenZFS, GNU Grub, HAMMER, and Squashfs.[10]
Open source implementations are available for a variety of languages and (cross-platform) operating systems, and there is an active discussion group.[11]
The LZ4 decoder inner loop is:[12]
For each copy item, the LZF decoder first fetches a byte X from the compressed file, and breaks the byte X into a 4 bit literal_length and a 4 bit copy_length.
The literal decoder has 2 cases: literal_length==7, and any other length.
(... say something about the special case of literal_length == 7 followed by any number of additional 255 bytes ...)
Then copy the sum literal bytes from the compressed stream and pass them straight through to the decompressed stream.
After the literal bytes (if any) is the low byte of the distance, followed by the high byte of the distance. (This implies a 2^16 = 64KByte window).
A distance of 1 indicates "current position - 1 byte"; a distance of 0xffff indicates "current position - 65535 bytes"; a distance of 0 is invalid and should never happen.
The actual number of bytes to copy is decoded similar to the actual number of literals to copy,
(... say something about the special case of copy_length == 7 followed by any number of additional 255 bytes ...)
Either kind of copy: Find the text that starts that "distance" back from the current end of decoded text, and copy "length" characters from that previously-decoded text to end of the decoded text.
Repeat from the beginning until there is no more items in the compressed file.
Like most LZ77-style algorithms, LZ4 supports pseudo-RLE -- the copy_length can be longer than the offset distance; matches can overlap forward.[13]
In order to ensure that the decoder will never read beyond the input buffer,
The last copy item is incomplete and stops right after its literals.
The "LZ4-HC" ("high compression") and "LZ4" use exactly the same format and the same decoding function; the difference is in the encoder.[14][15]
Stac Electronics sued Microsoft for infringement of LZS patents.
Since then, several of those patents have expired.
The LZS decoder fetches a "literal/copy" bit from the compressed file.
0: literal: the decoder grabs the next byte from the compressed file and passes it straight through to the decompressed text.
1: copy item: the decoder grabs the next bit from the compressed file.
That bit selects how many bits of "distance" to pull from the file:
1: the decoder grabs a 7 bit "distance".
If this distance is the nonsensical value "0", it really represents the end-of-message. Exit the loop.
0: the decoder grabs a 11 bit "distance" (this implies a 2 kibiByte sliding window).
Then the decoder grabs a "length" value from the compressed file.
However, the length is not encoded in a fixed-length field, but in a variable-length pattern:
In general, except for the first 6 special cases listed above, "1111" repeated N times followed by 4 more bits that represent a value Y in the range 0...14, are decoded into a length value (N*15 + Y - 7).
Then find the text that starts that "distance" back from the current end of decoded text, and copy "length" characters from that previously-decoded text to end of the decoded text.
Repeat from the beginning, until the special "zero distance" value was decoded.
The complex variable-length encoding technique used in LZS allows "recent" byte pairs to be compressed into 11 bits, and even "less recent" byte pairs, as long as they are in the 2 kibiByte sliding window, to be compressed in 15 bits.
In text files, repeated pairs are far more common than longer repeated strings.
This gives LZS an advantage over compression algorithms which are unable to compress repeated strings shorter than 3 characters, and so must store such short repeats as-is, or even expand them by a bit.
The "Snappy" algorithm is tuned for very high speeds (even at the cost of mediocre compression).
On benchmark files, Snappy is an order of magnitude faster than zlib
The inner loop of the "Snappy" decompressor
LLLLLL00 ; where L in 0..59: literal reference for 1...60 (inclusive) literal bytes.
LLLLLL00 ; where L in 60..63: these special "lengths" indicate 1, 2, 3, or 4 bytes, respectively, of actual length bytes follow the tag byte. Those length bytes are followed by the literal itself.
LLLLLL10 dddddddd dddddddd ; copy with 2-byte offset: copy L+1 bytes from d bytes before the most recently decoded byte.
LLLLLL11 dddddddd dddddddd dddddddd dddddddd ; copy with 4-byte offset: copy L+1 bytes from d bytes before the most recently decoded byte.
PalmDoc combines LZ77 with a simple kind of byte pair compression.
Read a byte from the compressed stream. If the byte is
0x00: "1 literal" copy that byte unmodified to the decompressed stream.
0x09 to 0x7f: "1 literal" copy that byte unmodified to the decompressed stream.
0x01 to 0x08: "literals": the byte is interpreted as a count from 1 to 8, and that many literals are copied unmodified from the compressed stream to the decompressed stream.
0x80 to 0xbf: "length, distance" pair: the 2 leftmost bits of this byte ('10') are discarded, and the following 6 bits are combined with the 8 bits of the next byte to make a 14 bit "distance, length" item. Those 14 bits are broken into 11 bits of distance backwards from the current location in the uncompressed text, and 3 bits of length to copy from that point (copying n+3 bytes, 3 to 10 bytes).
0xc0 to 0xff: "byte pair": this byte is decoded into 2 characters: a space character, and a letter formed from this byte XORed with 0x80.
Repeat from the beginning until there is no more bytes in the compressed file.
The simplest dictionary algorithm is byte pair encoding with a fixed dictionary of byte pairs (a bigram dictionary).
A byte pair decoder assumes that English text uses only a relatively small "alphabet" of letters and symbols.
A byte pair decoder assumes that certain bytes never occur in English language text (the "high" bytes 0x80 to 0xFF and a few other bytes).
When the "impossible" bytes occur in the compressed text, the decoder looks that byte up in a fixed dictionary, and emits the corresponding pair of bytes.
Otherwise, the decoder copies the compressed byte to the plaintext more or less as-is.
Often the 0x00 byte marks the end of the compressed string, so standard C string-handling routines can be re-used to handle compressed text.
The dictionary should include all the most-frequent letter pairs used in the plaintext ("th", "he", " t", etc.).
There are several different implementations of this algorithm, each one using a different (incompatible) dictionary.[22][23]
To do:... should I say something about "adaptive coding" here? ...
DTE can be decoded in a single pass -- each byte of compressed text is either a "normal" printable character that stands for itself,
Sometimes both of those two bytes are normal printable characters, just like DTE.
Sometimes one or both bytes may be (some other) "unprintable" byte,
SCZ is a dynamic byte pair algorithm and compressed format developed by Carl Kindman, who released one implementation and its test suite under a LGPL license.[27]
Each segment has a few bytes of header and footer, including a iteration count and a checksum, surrounding a repeatedly-compressed block.
The inner loop of the SCZ decoder is given a dictionary of 256 entries, and a special escape symbol.
The inner loop scans through a block of "compressed segment data" and generates a new uncompressed block something like this:
Read the next byte from the compressed block.
If the byte read is the special escape byte, discard the escape byte and read the following compressed byte as a literal byte, and write that literal byte to the decompressed block.
Otherwise look up that byte in the dictionary.
If the byte is a "marker character", the dictionary has a byte pair to replace it with -- write those 2 bytes to the decompressed block.
Otherwise the dictionary indicates the byte is a literal byte -- write the byte read to the decompressed block.
Repeat until no more data in the compressed block.
The "escape byte" makes it possible to compress a file that has a byte pair repeated many times, even when the file already uses all 256 possible byte values -- the compressor deliberately expands some rare byte into two bytes (the escape byte and the rare byte),
The middle loop of the SCZ decoder is given an iteration count and a block of data.
The middle loop and generates the corresponding plaintext something like this:
Read the symbol count N, and read N dictionary entries into a dictionary. (Each entry is 3 bytes: the "marker" byte as stored in the compressed text, and the pair of bytes it represents in the uncompressed text.
Pass the escape symbol, the dictionary, and the rest of the compressed block (the compressed segment data) to the inner loop, decompressing it to an uncompressed block.
Decrement the iteration count and repeat from the beginning.
The outer loop of the SCZ decoder breaks the file up into a series of segments,
a block of compressed data (which the outer loop passes to the inner loop for decoding),
A common misconception is that data compression algorithms can compress practically any block of data.
That leads to the common misconception that repeated applications of a compression algorithm will keep shrinking the data further and further.
The vast majority of compression algorithms squeeze as much as they can in a single iteration.
Applying a second iteration (attempting to produce a "double-compressed" file) almost invariably produces a file that is larger than the first compressed file; further iterations only make it worse (larger).
SCZ is one of the few compression algorithms that takes multiple iterations.
But even a SCZ compressor eventually reaches minimum size; further iterations only make the "compressed" file worse (larger).
A well-known example of the dictionary based technique is the LZW data compression, since it operates by replacing strings of essentially unlimited length with codes that usually range in size from 9 to 16 bits.
The LZW algorithm, as used in the GIF file format, is perhaps the most famous and controversial compression algorithm.
While decoding a codeword to a "word" of 1 or more letters and emitting those letters to the plaintext stream,
a LZW decompressor adds a new "word" to the dictionary.
The new word is the concatenation of the previously-decoded word and the first letter of the word represented by the current codeword.
Larger codewords allow larger dictionaries, which typically improves compression.[28]
The GIF file format typically starts with 9 bit codewords
Many GIF implementations statically allocate a dictionary with 2^12 = 4096 dictionary entries, one for each possible codeword.
While decoding a codeword to a "word" of 1 or more letters and emitting those letters to the plaintext stream,
a LZMW decompressor adds a new "word" to the dictionary.
The new word is the concatenation of the previously-decoded word and the entire word (possibly the same word) represented by the current codeword.
This allows dictionary entries to grow in length much more rapidly than LZW.
While decoding a codeword to a "word" of 1 or more letters and emitting those letters to the plaintext stream,
a LZAP decompressor adds at least 1 and often more new "words" to the dictionary.
The new words are the concatenation of the previous match with every initial substring of the current match. ("AP" refers to "all prefixes").
For example, if the previous match is "com" and the current match is "press",
"comp", "compr", "compre", "compres", and "compress",
This allows the number of words in the dictionary to grow much more rapidly than LZW or LZMW.
In 2005, Jan Lánský introduced syllable-based compression.
The LZWL compressor uses a syllable detector to divide the plain text into syllables.
When the LZWL decompressor pulls a "phrase index" from the compressed text,
When the LZWL decompressor pulls the special "empty syllable" phrase index from the compressed text,
A similar "word-based LZW" divides the plain text into English words (in general, alternate maximal strings of alphanumeric characters and non-alphanumeric characters).[32]
Character-based compression seems to give better compression with smaller files;
Some researchers suggest that syllable-based compression methods
To do:Does the decompressor need to use the syllable detector?
The dictionary used by the decompressor doesn't really need to store a literal string
This same compact dictionary also works with LZAP.
With LZMW, rather than each entry storing a single suffix character,
It's usually simpler and faster for the decoder to special-case decode any codeword with a value less than 256,
Some LZW compressors use a hash table to rapidly map the next few plain text characters to a dictionary entry.
This works about the same as the hash table used to speed up LZ77-style compressors.
Some implementations of LZW and other LZ78 variants use a special search tree that takes advantage of the dictionary structure.[33]
(We discuss LZX in a later chapter, Data Compression/Order/Entropy#LZX)
The above LZ77 variations of LZ77 encode a linear, uncoded, fixed-length offset.
The possible values of that offset at any particular instant of decoding often include many values that will *never* be used.
If we could somehow "skip over" those impossible offsets, we could encode the offset in fewer bits, and still be able to use the same (offset,length) phrase that the above LZ77 encoders would use.
Also, many possible values of the offset are highly unlikely to occur.
For example, once the decoder finishes emitting a phrase that ends in "ch",
So all the offsets that point to a phrase starting with some consonant will almost never be used.
By skipping over those highly unlikely offsets, we could encode the offset of the next phrase in fewer bits,
(In some rare cases, the above LZ77 encoder picks some phrase that a ROLZ algorithm deems "unlikely" and skips over, forcing us to copy some other, shorter phrase; but hopefully sacrificing a few bits in those situations is paid back in saving a few bits in almost every other situation).
We do *not* mean that the maximum possible offset is reduced -- in fact, most ROLZ compressors can copy a phrase from a much more distant offset than the typical 2^10 or 2^12 byte limit of linear, uncoded offsets.
Using something other than a linear, uncoded, fixed-length offset necessarily requires more computation at decode-time to translate that compressed selection value to the actual position in the decompressed-so-far text.
This is yet another tradeoff between speed and compression ratio.
Ross Williams points out that all LZ77 and LZ78 algorithms can be cast into the form of Markov algorithms.[34]
Malcolm Taylor wrote one (the first?) implementation of ROLZ as part of the WinRK compression suite.
Ilia Muraviev wrote the first open-source implementation of ROLZ compression.[35]
The inner loop of the LZRW3-a decoder first fetches a "literal/copy" bit from the compressed file.
0: literal: the decoder grabs the next byte from the compressed file, which represents itself. Pass it straight through to the decompressed text. Every literal byte is "interesting", so a pointer to this byte is (eventually) added to the "table of 2^12 interesting locations in the previously-decoded text". Hopefully next time this byte can be copied as part of a long phrase via that pointer, rather than laboriously spelled out with literals again.
1: copy item: the decoder grabs the next 2 bytes from the compressed file, which represents a phrase. The decoder breaks it into a 4 bit "length" and a 12 bit selector.
The 4 "length" bits are decoded into a length from 3 to 18 characters.
It uses that 12 bit selector to pick a location from the "table of 2^12 interesting locations in the previously-decoded text", and copies length characters from that location to the end of the decoded text. Also: add to the table a pointer to the beginning of this phrase.
Repeat from the beginning until there is no more items in the compressed file.
LZRW3-a(8) tries to (approximately) preserve the 8 most-recent instances of every 3-byte phrase that occurs in the plaintext.
(The specific details of which partition the decompressor adds the pointer to,
(In effect, the decompressor expands a 12 bit code to a 20 bit uncoded offset into the 1 MB plaintext buffer).
LZRW4 (Ross Williams, 1991) can be seen as a kind of ROLZ algorithm.
The 5 bit value selects one of the 32 pointers in the context-selected partition.
That points to some previously-decoded location in the 1 MB plaintext buffer.
(In effect, the decompressor has expanded the 5 coded bits to a 20 bit uncoded offset).
Then the decompressor pulls 3 bits from the compressed text and decodes that into 8 possible length values (2,3,4,5,6,7,8,16), then copies the selected (offset,length) phrase to the plaintext.
Then the context partitions are updated.
Because a "copy item" is only 9 bits (flag bit + offset selector + length), it does a good job compressing common byte pairs.
Literal items are also 9 bits (flag bit + literal octet).
(To increase speed, Williams doesn't store a pointer to *every* time a 2-byte context occurs in the partition table, but only the 2 byte contexts that occur at the *end* of some phrase).
Williams doesn't keep track of the *exact* 2-byte context using 2^16 partitions, but instead hashes the 2 previous bytes of context into a 12 bite context with 2^12 partitions).
Perhaps the most extreme form of "reduced offset" is to reduce the offset to zero bits.
A LZP decompressor examines the current context (perhaps previous 3 bytes),
That gives us an extremely short compressed phrase (a flag bit + a match length).
In some cases, that one fixed offset is the same one that LZ77 would have used -- in these cases, we've saved a lot of bits because we didn't store the offset.
In other cases, that one fixed offset is not exactly the same one that LZ77 would have used, but a larger offset that gives us exactly the same copied phrase -- likewise, we've saved lots of bits.
Inevitably, sometimes that one fixed offset gives us fewer useful bytes than the offset LZ77 would have chosen -- in the worst case, zero useful bytes.
LZP requires more bits to encode those bytes than LZ77 would have done in that situation.
But overall, LZP typically compresses better than LZ77.
A few implementations make sure the context table always points exactly to the most recent occurrence of every 3 byte context -- this requires updating the context table on every byte the decompressor emits.
Many LZP implementations approximate this by only updating the table at the start of a phrase or literal, skipping the updates for all the bytes copied during that phrase.
That speeds up decompression, and Arturo San Emeterio Campos[36] claims it actually improves the compression ratio on longer files, although it hurts the compression ratio on shorter files.
Look up the current context in the context table to get the Position. If this context has *never* occurred before, then we have a literal. Otherwise, fetch a "literal/copy" bit from the compressed file.
(In either case, remember that Position, but update the context table to point to the current location in the decompressed text. The next time we have the same context, we get this location, rather than that less recent Position)
0: literal: the decoder grabs the next byte from the compressed file and passes it straight through to the decompressed text.
1: copy item: the decoder grabs a few bits from the compressed file and decodes them into a length. Starting at the Position where this context occurred before, copy "length" characters from that previously-decoded text to end of the decoded text. Then grabs the next literal byte from the compressed file and passes it straight through to the decompressed text.
Repeat from the beginning until there is no more items in the compressed file.
Look up the current context in the context table to get the Position. (Remember that Position, but update the context table to point to the current location in the decompressed text. The next time we have the same context, we get this location, rather than that less recent Position).
Fetch the next byte from the compressed text.
If this context has *never* occurred before, *or* the fetched byte is not the escape byte, then we have a literal; otherwise, we have a copy item. (The compressor should have picked a value for the escape byte that occurs rarely in the plain text).
Repeat from the beginning until there are no more items in the compressed file.
To do: Should this WikiBook describe LZ77 and LZP first, and then later describe ROLZ as a generalization between them?
Yes - Charles came up with LZP first, and ROLZ was developed by Malcolm as a generalisation of LZP
Statistical Lempel-Ziv was first proposed by Yu Fan Ho as the research topic of his Master's degree in Computer Science, supervised by Dr. Sam Kwong.
They first published it as an application to personal digital assistants.[38]
Later Yu Fan Ho applied to it ring tones for mobile phones,
Traditional LZ-based technologies make use of the repetitive characteristic of the data. The decompression process can be done simply by copying the repeated data from the search window according to an index in the compressed data. The data not found in the window is left uncompressed in the compressed data. The uncompressed data is then shifted into the search window for the next repetition and so on. The data is shifted into the window unconditionally without considering the statistical information. Because of limited size of the search window, the first-in data is shifted out unconditionally when the window is full. There are high possibilities that the window is occupied by the useless (non-repetitive) data while the useful (to be repeated) data is banished. To improve the compression ratio, larger search window should be used and hence more memory required in the decompressor.
Statistical Lempel Ziv is a LZ-like lossless compression algorithm but statistical information is also taken into consideration to identify the useful data that should be put into the dictionary (search window). It improves the compression ratio compared with LZ77 because more useful data can be kept in the dictionary. The dictionary can be smaller in size for keeping the useful data and hence less memory required in the decompressor. Since not all the data has to be shifted into the window, less processing power is required on the decompressor.
The Huffman algorithm gives a fixed-to-variable-length code that (under certain constraints) is optimal.
The Tunstall algorithm gives a variable-to-fixed-length code that (under certain constraints) is optimal.[41][42][43]
Most data compression decompression algorithms are most naturally described in terms of reading the compressed file as an undifferentiated stream of bits (a bitstream).
Most programming languages do file I/O a byte at a time.
So decompression implementations typically keep a separate "bit buffer" (initially empty).
When you want to read a bit, if the bit-buffer is empty,
Otherwise read the next bit from the bit-buffer.
Many file formats are designed to maintain "8 bit alignment"
(some even try to maintain "16 bit alignment") wherever possible,
Often when decompressing, you've read some odd number of bits, and the abstract decompression algorithm mentions something like "read the next 8 bits and pass that literal byte directly to the output".
There are three possible ways to design a file format to handle "read the next 8 bits":
"undifferentiated bitstream": get the remaining bits in the bit buffer, reload the bit buffer, and get a few more bits, then shift-and-align to re-assemble the byte.
Throw away the remaining "padding bits" in the bit buffer, and simply read the next (byte-aligned) byte from the compressed bytestream. Faster than the bitstream approach, but the unused bits hurt the compression ratio, and so we will speak no more of this approach.
"byte aligned": Temporarily ignore the bit-buffer; read the (byte-aligned) byte directly from the compressed bytestream. (Only use the bit-buffer when the decompression algorithm reads a bit or two or seven).
Compared to an undifferentiated bitstream format, a byte-aligned format for compressed text is precisely the same number of bytes long and has exactly the same bits; the bits are merely arranged in a slightly different order.
So picking a byte-aligned format gives precisely the same compression ratio, and it often makes things faster.
The obvious way to implement a LZ77-style (offset, length) compressor involves scanning the entire window for a match to the following plaintext, for each and every phrase we eventually write into the compressed file.
Then picking the longest (and nearest) match.
The obvious way to implement a LZ78-style (dictionary entry) compressor involves scanning the entire dictionary for a match to the following plaintext, for each and every dictionary index we eventually write into the compressed file.
For a file of length N this is O(N) for each compressed phrase.
This requires O(N^2) to compress a file of length N.
(Schlemiel the Painter's algorithm).
(I'm assuming the LZ77 window covers at least half of the file, and assuming a roughly constant compression ratio).
Most LZ77-style and LZ78-style compressor implementations use a speedup trick:
Whenever they output a compressed phrase, they do a little O(1) "extra" work updating some data structure --
Then, instead of sequentially scanning the entire window for a match, they look up the following plaintext (typically the next 3 bytes) in that data structure.
Some LZ77-style and LZ78-style compressor implementations use a
Trie data structure.
Most LZ77-style and LZ78-style compressor implementations use a hash table.
Then, instead of sequentially scanning the entire window for a match, they look up the following plaintext (typically the next 3 bytes) in the hash table.
In a hash table, searches immediately succeed or fail in O(1), and therefore it only takes O(N) to compress the entire file.
Many LZ77-style compressors deliberately sacrifice the maximum possible compression in two ways:
(b) Some compressors use a direct-indexed cache -- a very simple hash table without collision detection -- the table remembers only the single most-recent item with that hash index -- rather than a standard hash table that remembers *every* item (so far) with that hash index.
Typically each of (a) or (b) hurts compression by a few percent, but can roughly double or triple the speed of the compressor.
Many LZ77 style compressors do both (a) and (b), hurting compression by a few percent, but getting roughly four or ten times the speed.
RLE can be emulated with overlapping copies in most LZ77-like decompressors ("pseudo-RLE mode").
The decompressor must use a method that handles such overlapping copies properly -- in particular, the decompressor must not use memcpy() or memmove() on such overlapping copies.[44]
On some machines, it's faster to simply use the same "copy one byte at a time" copy_bytes() routine for all copies.
On other machines, programmers find that memcpy() is so much faster than that it reduces the total decompression time if the decompressor includes extra code that, for each copy item, decides whether it overlaps or not, and uses the slower copy_bytes() only when memcpy() won't work.
To do: (Neither memcpy() nor memmove() are quite what we want here. See the comments of the "IncrementalCopy" function[17].)
J. Pike.
"Genetic algorithms in syllable based text compression".
Jacob Ziv and Abraham Lempel; A Universal Algorithm for Sequential Data Compression, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 23(3), pp.337-343, May 1977.
"Better Archiver with Recursive Functionality (BARF)" by Matt Mahoney
"replacing liblzf with FastLZ"
Hadoop: "Implement FastLZCodec for fastlz/lzo algorithm"
"LZ4 - Extremely fast compression"
"LZ4c Discussions on LZ4 compression algorithm & open source implementations".
LZ4 Compressed block format.
Yann Collet.
"LZ4 explained".
"LZ4-HC : High Compression LZ4 version is now Open Sourced".
"LZ4 compression for Java".
"two compression methods that both generate a valid LZ4 stream: ... fast scan (LZ4) ... high compression (LZ4 HC)"
RedComet.
"Dual-Tile Encoding: NES/Famicom Implementation".
"Dual-Tile Encoding (commonly referred to as DTE in
w:ROM hacking#Hex editing romhacking circles)"
"Pattern-Based String Compression Function"
Carl Kindman.
"SCZ - Simple Compression Utilities and Library".
"Lempel-Ziv-Welch (LZW) Encoding: Discussion and Implementation"
Katsiaryna Chernik, Jan Lánský, and Leo Galamboš.
"Syllable-based Compression for XML Documents".
"Constructing Word-Based Text Compression Algorithms (1992)"
Juha Nieminen.
"An efficient LZW implementation: Fast LZW dictionary search".
"A Statistical Lempel-Ziv compression algorithm for personal digital assistant (PDA)".
2001-Feb.
Ho; Yu Fan.
United States Patent 7,507,897.
"Dictionary-based compression of melody data and compressor/decompressor for the same".
Michael Drmota, Yuriy A. Reznik, and Wojciech Szpankowski.
"Tunstall Code, Khodak Variations, and Random Walks".
"Tunstall Code, Khodak Variations, and Random Walks"
David Salomon.
p. 61.
"Signal Compression: Variable to Fix Encoding"
Hans Wennborg.
"Zip Files: History, Explanation and Implementation".
Originally described as a tumor of the abdominal wall in women who were recently pregnant, but can arise at any site in the body in both men and women
"Desmos" means band-like or tendon-like
Frequently arise in association with fascia, aponeurosis, and associated muscle
Potential for large growth, local invasion, and frequent local recurrence if not widely excised
Predilection for surgical sites, typically after colectomy or pouch creation within the abdomen/pelvis
Appear to be associated with increased beta-catenin levels due to dysregulation of FAP
Intra-abdominal desmoids can also present with intestinal obstruction, bowel ischemia, or functional deterioration, particularly in bowel anastomotic sites
There are no imaging characteristics that can reliably distinguish desmoid from malignant lesions
Incisional biopsy preferred to have a higher confidence in benign vs malignant distinction (UpToDate 2010)
Monoclonal fibroblastic proliferation, appearing as small bundles of spindle cells in fibrous stroma
Infiltrative process resembles low-grade fibrosarcoma, but cells lack nuclear and cytoplasmic features of malignancy
IHC stains for vimentin, smooth muscle actin, and nuclear beta-catenin (see above). Typically negativer for desmin, CKs, and S100
Cleveland Clinic proposed a system for FAP-associated intra-abdominal tumors
Stage III — Moderately symptomatic or bowel/ureteric obstruction, or 10-20 cm in maximal diameter, or slowly growing
Stage IV — Severely symptomatic or >20 cm, or rapidly growing
Close observation may be a reasonble strategy for stable, asymptomatic desmoids
They may grow progressively larger over time, but growth is indolent, and periods of growth arrest are not uncommon
Intra-abdominal tumors, particularly if they are FAP-associated, may have 10% mortality rate due to local progression
Treatment is indicated for symptomatic patients, for cosmetic concerns, or for risk to adjacent structures
Surgical resection with wide local margin is the goal, though this may not be feasible in many circumstances
However, it's not completely clear if positive surgical margin impacts the ultimate rate of recurrence
Role for postop RT is not clear, and is currently not recommended for R1 resection, though it may be offered for R2 resection, particularly if there are concerns about local disease progression and morbidity/mortality (UpToDate 2010)
Literature review. 22 studies. Surgery vs surgery + RT vs RT alone
Outcome: Local control surgery 61% (SM- 72% vs SM+ 41%); surgery + RT 75% (SM- 94% vs SM+ 75%); RT alone 78% (significantly higher than surgery group)
Conclusion: RT or surgery + RT results in significantly better local control than surgery alone
This VBA code module is made for Excel, but is easily adapted for other MS Office applications. It checks a workbook to see if it contains any useful VBA dimensional or structural code. Line counting has been found to be less reliable than this since even empty modules will show two lines of code each.
Place all of the code below into the same standard module, and identify the test workbook address in wb.
The procedures first check to see that the workbook is not locked.
The test workbook is closed again after inspection.
Results are shown in message boxes here, but the top section is easily modified for other uses.
'Assumes that workbook to test is in same folder and called Book2.xlsm
'Set reference to Microsoft VBA Extensibility 5.5
'set full address of workbook to test here
'if just file name then same folder is assumed
'check for code if project is not locked
"CONTAINS VBA code structure."
"DOES NOT contain VBA code structure."
"might have VBA but unable to confirm."
'returns TRUE if VBA is password protected, else false
If nComp = -1 Then
'returns true if workbook contains VBA, else false.
'Code must not be locked.
'Set reference to Microsoft VBA Extensibility 5.5
'get each module one at a time
'check for significant code entries
'Returns true if input string contains any listed word,
'else false. User should add keywords of interest to vKeyList
'set the key list of interest here
vKeyList = Array("End", "Dim", "Public", "Private", "Friend", "Property", _
"Type", "Declare", "Sub", "Function")
'loop through keylist and compare with parameter module string
If bM = True Then
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
This Casebook contains a set of case studies developed by students enrolled in the Introduction to Transportation Systems course taught in the Schar School of Policy and Government at George Mason University by Prof. Jonathan Gifford. The course is part of the Transportation Policy, Operations and Logistics (TPOL) degree program. To read additional case studies developed by students enrolled in the Public-Private Partnership Policy course please visit the Public-Private Policy Casebook.
This article is on the topic of creating Nichols plots in MATLAB. The quick answer is use the Nichols command. However, the Nichols command has several options and the plots generated by the Nichols command are not easily reformatted. The default formatting of most MATLAB plots is good for analysis but less than ideal for dropping into Word and PowerPoint documents or even this website. As a result this article presents an alternative that requires more lines of code but offers the full formatting flexibility of the generic plot command.
The basic Nichols command is as follows
If you wish to specify the frequency points at which LTI_SYS is plotted then create a frequency vector using logspace or linspace as follows
The main issue with the nichols command is reformatting of the plot. The nichols command appears to use a normal semilogx plot and then apply patches or something similar to the figure. This can lead to odd behavior when attempting to create multi-line titles, reformat line widths or font sizes, etc. The normal relationship of axes to figure is just not quite present.
The natural corollary of economic nationalism was imperialism. The exploration of the 19th century had exhausted the unknown regions and now nations turned on each other. Germany aspired to win back the colonies lost in world war 1. Italy cast her eyes on Abyssinia and Japan on China.The imperialism of the 19th century was a product of the Industrial Revolution. Increased production created the need for raw materials and increased markets, which led to the scramble for Africa and colonial rivalries in Asia. These in turn, gave rise to a series of international crises. France and Germany. Kaiser William 2 raised imperial slogans like Berlin to Bagdad' and' the Germans claimed a "place in the sun". The Kaiser's project of the Berlin Bagdad Railway threatened Russian interests in the East. The Kiel canal and German's efforts to rival England in naval power, the attened the latter's supremacy on the seas government as the murderer was a Slav. She sent an Ultimatum to Serbia did not agree to two points. Austria treated this as a refusal of the ultimatum and attacked Belgrade.
Carbohydrate is a chemical compound of carbon and water. It can produce energy in the body. The foods rich in carbohydrates are rice, noodle, vegetables and fruits, as well as sugar. Eating too much carbohydrates can cause obesity.
Brahmin Tamil or Braahmik is the name for a Tamil dialect used by the Tamil Brahmin communities (Iyers and Iyengars) of Tamil Nadu and in the neighbouring states.
"Three Dollar Shoes" is a gin cocktail made with Seagram's and Bombay Sapphire brand gin. It also includes Margarita mixer for sweetness, and grenadine to give the drink a pink tint.
The Three Dollar Shoes cocktail was invented in Albuquerque, New Mexico on 21 July 2006 as a strong but sweet cocktail to drink before going to a local club for Salsa dancing. Originally, the drink included only Seagram's and Margarita mixer. Bombay Sapphire was added to give a higher alcohol content, and drawing inspiration from one of the inventors recently purchased pink high-heel shoes (for three dollars), the grenadine was added to give the cocktail a pink tint.
For serving the drink, a plastic water-bottle was used for ease and portability. In keeping with the original spirit of the cocktail, if at all possible the drink should be served from a large, cheap plastic bottle, though a drink mixer can be used instead.
As served originally, the drink should be poured from a plastic bottle, though a drink mixer may be substituted. The cocktail may be drunk strait from the water bottle, or poured into large glasses.
Add all ingredients, gin first, into the plastic bottle or mixer.
Shake for 10 seconds, or until well blended.
Drink directly from water-bottle, or pour into a large glass. It may also be served as is, chilled, or on the rocks.
MythTVIntroduction | Getting Started | Installing | Extras | Troubleshooting | Conclusion
The easiest way to install MythTV is to follow a how-to. The following how-to is geared towards Mandrake 10.1 Official (download), but most of the steps will be similar for other linux distributions. The locations of some files may be slightly different, and instead of using urpmi to install updates, you will need a different tool depending on your distribution. So, you should first figure out what packaging tool is used on your linux distribution, and whenever commands involving urpmi arrive, use your tool instead. Examples of tools used on other command-line tools are apt-get, and emerge (used on Gentoo). There are also graphical tools, such as grpmi (graphical version of urpmi), rpmdrake (for Mandrake), Synaptic, etc.
If you're using another distribution and need to find a particular file, you can always use the find command. For instance:
To find out where a given command or script is located. (The "whereis" command is also useful.) If the command does not exist on any defined path, this will let you know (so that you can either install the required software, or add it to the path appropriately). This is useful when a how-to asks you to run a command that you seemingly don't have. Also, before running any commands you should probably do
Example installation: MythTV 0.17 on Mandrake 10.1 with a Hauppauge PVR-350
You can download the latest Mandrake ISO images from the official download page, or from any number of mirrors. You then burn these ISO images to CD, and perform the installation by booting off the CD. There are many other ways to install linux of course. What you install of course depends on what you want. You should install all the multimedia options, and development tools (so that you'll be able to compile things later). It's probably a good idea to install network client functions, and if you want to access your MythTV remotely, you should install some server packages (web server and ssh server especially). Having your MythTV running an SSH server can be handy if you have another computer at your disposal, because then you can have your MythTV hooked up to your television, but configure it via command line of another computer (this is good because your MythTV, when hooked up to a television, doesn't have very good resolution, and it can be aggravating to use it as a computer). You need to install some sort of window manager. KDE is a good choice if you have no other preference.
In terms of partitioning your disk, it makes good sense to have your linux OS on one partition, and keep another partition for storing your MythTV data. That way you can reinstall linux without deleting your videos. Linux doesn't need very much space (5 or 10 Gb is sufficient). Be sure to make your swap partition (512 Mb is pretty typical, but you can make it bigger if you like). And of course the bulk of your space (100+ Gb hopefully) is allocated for mythTV. You can set the mount point of this partition as "/data/" or "/home/mythtv/data/" or "/home/" or whatever you like.
During installation, you may aswell create an account called 'mythtv'. Once the installation is complete, create the directory where you will store your MythTV data (make sure it is inside your big partition!). So, for example, if you wanted to create /data you would type 'su' to become root, and:
You'll also want to have your kernel source installed (for compiling drivers, later). To install software on Mandrake, we use a convenient tool called "urpmi" that downloads, installs, and configures automatically. Often, you can just type:
In this example, a 2.6 kernel is running. To install the right 2.6 source:
Of course modify this command depending on what source you're looking for. You can also use "urpmq" to query your urpmi sources, and find out what different kernel sources are available, and what the package names are called (be warned: packages like "kernel-source-2.6" might not be the exact kernel version you have, so look for something that matches exactly). If you can't find the right source, you can try configuring some urpmi sources (refer to the next section), and then use "urpmq" again to find a source that matches your kernel.
Once you have your kernel source installed, it's a good idea to double check that it's the right one:
Thus, make sure that the "linux-*" directory matches what uname returned. If not, you should uninstall the current kernel source (by typing something like "# urpme kernel-source") and then install the correct source. Also, make sure that you have the above symbolic link. If you don't have one, then make it:
There is another symbolic link that is often missing, which you should create if it isn't there. Check:
Mandrake uses urpmi to download and install all sorts of software. After installing Mandrake from CD, you probably have three CDs listed as sources inside urpmi. When you tell urpmi to install something, it checks all of its sources, finds the package you want, and installs it. For our purposes, it's best to add some online repositories of Mandrake packages to urpmi. That way, all the dependencies will be automatically downloaded and installed as needed. So that we always get the newest packages, we can remove the current sources (which are the installation CDs):
Now we need to find some good, trustworthy, and fast online package sources. There is a great online tool called Easy Urpmi. You pick your distribution, pick a trustworthy local package source, and it prints out the command you must enter to add the designated source properly. Nothing could be easier! There are numerous mirrors of Easy Urpmi:
Be sure to pick the right Mandrake version and architecture. If you're not sure what you're using, try this:
An example of what Easy Urpmi outputs, which you then type in a console as root:
Downloading all the package information will take a little while (depending on your internet connection speed). Finally, we must add a source for the Mandrake MythTV RPM. Luckily, Thac's RPMs have what we need:
With our sources defined, a single command will download, install, and configure MythTV, including all missing dependencies (MySQL, QT, etc.):
The installer will prompt you for which package to select. You may notice three options, one with "nvidia" in the name, one with "via" and one that is generic. If you specifically have nvidia or via hardware, you can go that route, but the generic packages should work in most cases. When presented with the (long) list of packages to install, say "yes" and wait for it to finish (may take 30 minutes to several hours).
Now we need to install the ivtv driver, which is an open-source driver written to enable linux compatibility with Hauppauge WinTV PVR capture cards. The example below should work for the PVR-150, 250, 350, and 500. With a little imagination, you can also adapt these instructions to your own capture card. First off, let's avoid any hardware conflicts by getting rid of the default ivtv driver provided in most Mandrake installs:
The msp3400 module will be replaced too:
Those last two commands will compile the driver and put all the required files in the right places. Many users experience errors during the make operations. If you have permission errors, try switching to root and make again. Sometimes the problem is fixed by trying a different driver version. Often the problem is simply that your kernel source version does not match your running kernel (see elsewhere in this document). In extreme cases you may have to change to a different kernel. Try searching the internet (and elsewhere in this document) for the error messages you're seeing. Someone else may already have figured out the solution to your problem.
The next step is to extract the firmware for the capture card. This is binary driver information that we need to communicate with the capture card properly. For this next step to work, g++ must be installed, so let's check:
If it's not on your system, install it with urpmi:
So far so good. Now we need to get the capture card driver binary and extract out the part we need. Depending on whether you have a new or old Hauppauge card, these files will be located in slightly different places on the installation CD-ROM that came with your card. The ivtv wiki has lots of helpful information. For older cards, expect a file called "pvr48wdm_1.8.22035.exe" (or something similar) but for newer cards it will be "pvr_1.18.21.22301_inf.zip" or "hcwPVRP2.sys." You can also simply download the appropriate file from the ivtv firmware page. For example:
This should have placed two new files in the "/lib/modules" directory, 'ivtv-fw-dec.bin' and 'ivtv-fw-enc.bin'. You can go check:
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 262144 May 28 20:09 ivtv-fw-dec.bin
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 262144 May 28 20:09 ivtv-fw-enc.bin
The installer has also placed our new modules into the "/lib/modules/2.6.8.1-12mdkcustom/extra", but our kernel won't see these. Instead, let's put them in the right place:
Now let's reload the module list. You can reboot too, just to make sure everything gets loaded:
After rebooting, we can try loading our new ivtv module and see if it actually works. A few modules have to be loaded in the proper order:
Note that the "tuner type=2" varies depending on your capture card's tuner type. You can find a list of the tuner types in the "tuner.h" file in your ivtv driver directory:
(Note: to exit emacs use "Ctrl-x Ctrl-c".) For North American users, "tuner type=2" (Philips NTSC) will probably work. If the module loaded properly, we can run a quick test. Hook up a video input to your card, and type:
If everything is working, you should see some video. If you see snow or even black, that's actually a good sign. It means the driver is probably working, but you'll need to play with settings to get it to capture on the right channel. If you instead get an error message and no video is captured, then you should start looking for solutions. Maybe your tuner type is wrong. Maybe you forgot to remove conflicting ivtv modules. Maybe a different driver version would work. Play around, search for answers.
Save and exit (in emacs "Ctrl-x Ctrl-s" does this, in vi use "ESC, :x"). Remember to make the script executable:
Now if you type "start-ivtv" (as root) everything will be loaded. Later you can modify this script to start MythTV automatically when the computer boots.
First set the MySQL service to automatically load during boot, and start it manually for now:
And now change the database permissions so that MySQL can do what it needs to. Note that you should replace "root_password" with your root password.
MySQL should be ready to go.
Before configuring MythTV, set up an account with a service that will give you XMLTV listings. In North America, this means setting up an account with zap2it DataDirect. Now we can setup our MythTV using a graphical configuration tool:
The options in this program are fairly self-explanatory. Set everything up consistent with your hardware and preferences.
For "IP address for localhost" and "Master Server IP address", you can enter your IP address, or leave it with the defaults if you're running the frontend and backend on the same computer
For the "recordings" and "Live-TV buffers" directories, enter the directories you've chosen. For example, "/home/mythtv/data" or "/data/mythtv" or whatever.
For the "TV format" selected "NTSC" (or whatever your local setting is).
For "VBI format" you probably want "NTSC Closed Caption". Depending on your driver, closed captioning might not be supported.
Create a new capture card, set the "Card type" to "MPEG-2 Encoder card", and set "Default input" to whatever you're using (tuner, S-video, etc.).
Create a new video source.
Set "XMLTV listings grabber" to "North America (DataDirect)".
Check that the "Data Direct Lineup" is consistent with your zap2it subscription.
Set the "S-video0" (or whatever you're using) "Video source" to the name of your defined video source.
Now you can fill the MythTV database with your listing of TV channels:
This operation will take awhile, as MythTV downloads all the program data (for the next few weeks). Once it's done, start MythTV:
If everything is working, then you may aswell set your "start-ivtv" script to start automatically at boot time. To do this, edit your "/etc/rc.d/rc.local" file, by adding "/usr/local/bin/start-ivtv" to the end:
We'll be using LIRC to read the signals from the Hauppauge remote. Refer to the mailing list archive when searching for answers to problems. First get rid of any other version of LIRC that MythTV may have installed:
Go to the LIRC page and download the latest release, then untar it and start the configure script:
Open up the file "/etc/ld.so.conf" and add "/usr/local/lib" to the end. Or just type:
Copy the configuration file from MythTV documents to your lircrc directory, and add a symbolic link:
/usr/local/sbin/lircd -d /dev/lirc0 --permission=666
See if the remote works. It might be a good time to reboot, and see if everything starts up:
Once its booted, you should be able to run "mythfrontend" and use your MythTV. You can open the "/home/mythtv/.lircrc" file and edit it to map your remote properly (more on this later). For the moment, if you're using a Hauppauge silver remote, then you should change "Rew" to "Rewind" and "FFW" to "Forward".
The configuration of your TV-out depends on your hardware. If you're using a video card with a TV-out, then it may simply be a matter of having a TV connected to that output during boot, and the card may output everything (the console, the GUI, and MythTV) to the TV. This is an easy solution. For other cards, you may have to edit your X server configuration file. On older versions of linux, this file would be "/etc/X11/XFree86Config" (there are many similar locations where it may be found). In a modern Mandrake distribution, the file that is used is "/etc/X11/xorg.conf" (which may just be a symlink to another config file mind you). Before going any further, make a copy of your old xorg.conf, and then you can try editing it and see if that helps. After making a change to xorg.conf, you can use Ctrl+Alt+Backspace to exit and restart the X server (and thus your window manager, KDE). If your new settings worked, then you may see output to your TV. If not, you can get back to a console by using Ctrl+Alt+Backspace, and switch back to your old xorg.conf or try something else. Some extra help can be found here and here.
To use the TV-out on the Hauppauge 350 in particular is a good idea, since the 350 has hardware MPEG decoding, which means that it will do the work of decoding the video stream, thereby taking the strain off of your processor. To enable it, there is an option in MythTV that says "use hardware MPEG decoder", which will just use the 350 to output TV. Although this will output recorded playback to the 350's TV-out, you won't have your MythTV menus on that same graphics output. To get everything to work together smoothly, we need our entire X environment (including the desktop and MythTV frontend) to output using the 350's TV-out. Here's what you do:
First, modify your "/usr/local/bin/start-ivtv" script to load "ivtv-fb" also, by adding a line "/sbin/modprobe ivtv-fb":
/usr/local/sbin/lircd -d /dev/lirc0 --permission=666
Now let's get the ivtv driver right. Essentially, X needs a driver to use the 350's TV output. What you want is for the "ivtvdev_drv.o" driver to end up in "/usr/X11R6/lib/modules/drivers". As usual, there are a couple of options. You can build the appropriate driver from the ivtv source you have. The source is here:
The instructions to install are in "/home/mythtv/ivtv-0.2.0-rc3j/utils/README.X11". So essentially you should be able to run install, which will make everything. The second way (which might be easier) is to download a binary version from somewhere, and then just copy it:
Now we need to determine the PCI settings of your card. There are three different ways of getting this info:
What you will get will be information about the PCI address of devices. Find the one corresponding to your desired TV-out (the Hauppauge 350 card in our running example). The address is usually given in the order "bus", "card number", "function". Pay attention to whether the numbers are decimal or hexadecimal (preceeded by 0x). The lspci and scanpci tools report in hexadecimal, whereas Xorg outputs decimal. Keep in mind that the xorg.conf file expects things to be in decimal, although you can explicitly denote hexadecimal by preceeding a value with "0x" (or just convert them to decimal).
The output of lspci will look something like:
00:04.3 Bridge: Intel Corp. 82371AB/EB/MB PIIX4 ACPI (rev 02)
00:09.0 Ethernet controller: Lite-On Communications Inc LNE100TX [Linksys EtherFast 10/100] (rev 25)
00:0b.0 Multimedia video controller: Internext Compression Inc iTVC15 MPEG-2 Encoder (rev 01)
00:0e.0 Multimedia audio controller: C-Media Electronics Inc CM8738 (rev 10)
01:00.0 VGA compatible controller: STMicroelectronics STG4000 [3D Prophet Kyro Series] (rev 07)
The "iTVC15 MPEG-2 Encoder" is the capture card, which we'll use for TV-out. This card would thus be given the bus designation:
(Remember that 0x0b is 11 in decimal.) Now we need to know what linux device this maps to. The 350 is essentially a special kind of framebuffer device. There are many ways to do this. Let's check "/var/log/messages" and see what "ivtv-fb.o" is mapped to:
Jun 6 20:42:30 localhost kernel: ivtv-osd: fb1: iTVC15 TV out frame buffer device
You could also use "fbset" and go device by device ("fbset -fb /dev/fb0" then "fbset -fb /dev/fb1" etc.) and see which one corresponds to your required card. In our current example, the output we want is "/dev/fb1" (for video-card TV-out, it may end up being a /dev/fb or a /dev/video).
Now we need to reconfigure xorg.conf, armed with our new information (namely that our card is /dev/fb1 at BusID "PCI:0:11:0" using ivtvdev_drv.o). As usual, be warned: improperly configuring your video settings could damage your video card and/or monitor. These instructions are provided as examples. Use them at your own risk and be sure to double-check that they make sense for your hardware. Now to start, let's add a monitor:
Identifier "NTSC Television on Hauppauge card"
That should work for NTSC. For PAL, it would be something like:
Note that the Identifier in all xorg.conf sections is arbitrary. You can set it to whatever you like. However, once you decide on a name, remember to stick to it. Elsewhere in your file you must refer to the sections by name exactly. Any little typo will break your configuration. Now add a device:
Identifier "Hauppauge WinTV PVR 350"
Again the identifier is arbitrary, but remember what you pick. Above we are using the "ivtvdev" driver and the "fbdev" option. The commented-out lines are alternate options that you could try using: they may be better for your particular setup (in that case, be sure to comment-out the other line to avoid conflict). Remember to update the "/dev/fb1" as needed by your device, and change the BusID to whatever you determined before. This is critical! Now we define a screen (this again would be slightly different for PAL):
Device "Hauppauge WinTV PVR 350"
Monitor "NTSC Television on Hauppauge card"
Lastly we switch the ServerLayout to use our new output. Just by changing this one section, you can control what input and output devices (defined above) are going to be used. This will let you switch between different configurations easily. You can have multiple ServerLayouts defined if you like. For your new ServerLayout, it's best to copy the existing one and just modify it as needed. It will end up being something like:
Save the file, restart X (Ctrl+Alt+Backspace if you are inside the GUI), and hopefully it will begin to output to the TV-out you wanted. Note that for some cards this won't work unless there is a device hooked to that output when X starts up. So make sure the TV is hooked up and turned on before trying to switch to/boot into your new X setting. If it didn't work, you can go back to your older settings or try something else.
So now everything should be working. Upon booting, the drivers should load, and "mythbackend" should have started. If you use "pgrep" you should get a process ID number (PID) for that process:
The game derives from two different sources.
In the 19th century unknown authors in Europe invented "Reversi", which the well-known German games publisher Ravensburger started producing in 1898 as one of its first titles.
The modern rule set, now universally accepted (except by those who know only the still-produced Ravensburger edition) originated in Japan as "Othello" in the 1970s.
Goro Hasegawa, who wrote How to win at Othello, popularised the game in Japan in 1975. It took its name from the Shakespearean play Othello, the Moor of Venice.
Beginner warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
A scripting language for processing text and files.
ARexx is a scripting language and although you can use it to launch applications, you're better off using a regular DOS script for that, if it's required.
ARexx is far more powerful than DOS, but isn't really intended as a replacement. ARexx's principal strength is that it allows you to write scripts that can talk to "hosts"; that is, any application that has an ARexx port. This allows ARexx to control the application (within the limits of what features it exposes to ARexx). As a single script can communicate with multiple hosts, it can coordinate activity between applications. Any command it doesn't understand, it forwards to the currently selected host. By default, the host is the shell itself.
External AREXX programs - forward the Msg to the AREXX process itself and scan for files loaded
The DO control structure always begins with a DO and ends with an END.
Looping forever until exiting with LEAVE - BREAK has other possibilities, but you probably want LEAVE:
NOP indicates no instruction is to be executed.
There is a command that looks if a var is a integer or not... DATATYPE(WHOLE)
Rexx makes difference between commands and functions. With ADDRESS you indicate a place to send a command to. Commands are always one line. Functions have to be in a library with ARexx support and be added with addlib. You seem to want function syntax but are using command port.
Changes the way that arguments passed on the command line are made available to the called Rexx program. With this switch each parameter on the command line is available as a separate argument, rather then the normal behaviour of only making the combined command line arguments available as one internal argument.
The PARSE instruction is particularly powerful; it combines some useful string-handling functions
A template can use a combination of variables, literal delimiters, and column number delimiters.
(take care to put the '.' or just the stem var will be visible to the function 'test', not the all stem.
Any modificiation to 'stem.' will be global. There is no way to pass a stem to an external function
ARexx will also search for the function in a file with the same name as it and as .rexx), both in current dir and REXX:. Don't put .rexx on my files, as ~(*:*) matches functions, *.rexx ordinary scripts, *.ced ...
IBM text editors do a at each . Most Amiga software, AFAIK, only does and the end of the file is simply indicated when there are no more bytes to be read.
The ARexx EOF() indicates when you've run out of stuff to read from a file. It does not (to my knowledge) look around for whatever the IBM thinks signifies the end of a file on top of simply noticing when the file has reached its end of capacity (say you have a 1024-byte file, after reading 1024 bytes you will have reached the end of the file, or EOF).
Syntax, loop errors, etc.
You can get the ARexx commands of any MUI program with the HELP command. Here is an example for IBrowse.
The drive specification after the HELP command is the drive and file name for the output. Of course, the program you are checking must be running so the port is available. The output will show the standard ARexx commands that every MUI program has followed by the commands specific to the particular program being checked.
Normally you would provide a commandlist with your application and those command would 'automatically' be processed by the hooks installed.
It's when you use commands that does not get 'processed automatically' (because they are not in the commandlist) you need to make use of the functionality you presented (like MUIA_Application_RexxHook).
Since those attributes does not seem to be in place, you would need to fallback to the ordinairy way of doing things, meaning you would somehow 'invent' how to 'sync' your normal commands with the arexx commands
NUMERIC {DIGITS | FUZZ} expression or: NUMERIC FORM {SCIENTIFIC | ENGINEERING}
OPTIONS [FAILAT expression] or: OPTIONS [PROMPT expression] or: OPTIONS [RESULTS]
It's really easy to set up your own Rexx port. It's just a standard MsgPort. If you are just going to exit on any message and not parse commands sent to the port then you don't even need to open rexxsyslib.library...
Now that the port is created we just need to wait for a message.
ProcessRexxMsg() can print your message and exit but remember to ReplyMsg(). If you want to parse the Arexx commands, it's not much more work. The above is pulled from a longer printed code example and uses some REXX includes from "arexx.h" and "arexxsyslib.h" but it should NOT be necessary to open rexxsyslib.library if you will exit on any message received at your port.
You can now send a message to this little program with the following script:
DO .... ; you have the code already
(either 50 or 60 generally) amd pouts it into variable 'f' */
You can do it so it makes a value true or tries indefinitely. otherwise you can make it leave the loop using a 'Leave' command at any stage of the DO UNTIL part.
So the below loading libs works well...
CTRL-C will stop this thing. Note here that the above and RAW-KEY Intui-messages (OpenWindow()/intuition,
IDCMP flags) are about the only easy and *system legal* way to obtain information about keys pressed.
This will extract the filename extension (such as .lha or .8svx) along with its length. It can be useful, when renaming files. Used it in a conversion script, that can convert different file- types, so archive.lha gets archive.lzx and pic.gif gets pic.png.
** Returns filename extension and length of extension
** freely usable, freely distributable, intellectual property:
This one makes a valid path, which is better to use. No more RAM:Envfilename mistake, but RAM:Env/filename
Nothing special, though, you can achieve the same result (except for RAM:<-Ram Disk:) by using rexxdossupport.library/AddPart(pathname,"") - Do not forget the "".
** make a vaild path out of path (in case it lacks '/')
** Concentrates "Ram Disk:" to "Ram:", so we get rid of this annoying space
** Freely usabel, freely distributable, intellectual property of
The function results in a BOOL (either TRUE or FALSE) so it is easy to handle flow control.
In this routine you will find another function I use:
You can replace it by anything you want or just take it away. Use such general routines, because they are more powerful, so could have some logging in myERR() or WB requesters or whatever.
** Shows if portname is available, attempts to launch program if not
** Freely usable, freely distributable, intellectual properties:
Here ya go, the fastest SQRT function in Rexx I have seen yet, found in c.l.rexx
a very simple one, seldomly used, but given as some example of the Translate() function to newbies and to make the function set a bit more complete. (Since there is an Upper() why shouldn't be there also a Lower())
** Like Upper(), but this one makes a string lowercase.
** Considers german unmlauts and some accents.
** TODO: Add more national characters. Do you know of any missing
** (and where to find them on the keyboard) ?
Suggest that when you open files you do something more like this to check that it was opened successfully:
See also: Utility Applied to Mode Choice (Fundamentals of Transportation wikibook)
Demand depends on utility. Utility functions represent a way of assigning rankings to different bundles such that more preferred bundles are ranked higher than less preferred bundles. A utility function can be represented in a general way as:
An indifference curve is the locus of commodity bundles over which a consumer is indifferent. If preferences satisfy the usual regularity conditions (discussed below), then there is a utility function
In graphic terms substitutability is greater the more the indifference curves approach a straight line.
Perfect substitutability is a straight line indifference curve (e.g. trips to work by mode A or mode B).
The more complementary the more the indifference curves approach a right angle curve; perfect complementarity would have a right angle indifference curve (eg. left and right shoes, trips from home to work and work to home)
The trade game is a way of examining how economic trading of resources affects individual utility. Imagine the economy consists of the following resources (denoted by colored slips of paper)
You are handed an assortment of resources
Record your trades.
At the end of the trading period measure your utility again. Compute your absolute and percentage increase.
Is there a better way to allocate resources?
Often one price is taken to be 1, and one good is taken to be money. An income increase can be represented by the outward movement of the budget line.
In graphic terms the process of optimization is accomplished by equating the rate at which an individual is willing to trade off one good for another to the rate at which the market allows him/her to trade them off. This can be represented in the following graph
The individual maximizes utility by moving down the budget constraint to that point at which the slope of the budget line (
) which is the rate of exchange dictated by the market is just equal to the rate at which the individual is willing to trade the two goods off. This is the slope of the indifference curve or the marginal rate of transformation (MRT). A point such as 'e' is an equilibrium point at which utility is being maximized.
Equilibrium is the tangency between the indifference curve/utility and the budget constraint.
As an optimization problem, this can be written:
(Because of non-satiation, the constraint can be written as px=m.)
This kind of problem can be solved with the use of the Lagrangian:
, and set the first order conditions to 0
Divide to get the Marginal rate of substitution and Economic Rate of Substitution
s.t.
The Marshallian Demand relates price and income to the demanded bundle. This is given as
Roy's Identity allows going back and forth between observed demand and utility
The Money Metric Indirect Utility Function tells how much money at price p is required to be as well off as at price level q and income m. Define it as
Current prices are the base, what income change will give equivalent utility
New prices are the base, what income change will compensate for price change
Three individuals each have well-behaved preferences. However, aggregating the three does not produce a well behaved preference function:
Person C prefers blue to green and green to red.
Two people prefer green to red.
'x', 'y', 'z', are bundles of goods, such as x{house,car}, y{car, computer}, z{house, computer}.
Goods are not consumed for themselves but for their attributes relative to other goods
There are several Conditions on preferences to produce a continuous (well-behaved) utility function.
(Read x is preferred to y) or
(This poses a problem for social welfare functions)
Continuity: small changes in input beget small changes in output. The preference relation
The function f is continuous at the point a in its domain if:
Utility Applied to Mode Choice (Fundamentals of Transportation wikibook)
A reader requests expansion of this book to include more material.You can help by adding new material (learn how) or ask for assistance in the reading room.
The CompTIA Server+ exam verifies the core knowledge for server technicians. The latest version SK0-003 was released in 2009.
The criteria for the 2009 exam are as follows:
Rack-mounted servers are manufactured to a standard unit height, where one unit (1U) is 1.75 inches.
Some system boards may have mounts for more than one processor.
Each processor may have more than one core, which executes the instructions of a program.
Between these two modes of going to work, I can see only one difference. The principle is the same; the effect is the same; but in the one, certain individuals pay the price of protection; in the other, it is paid for by the nation at large.
I frankly avow my predilection for the second mode. It appears to me more just, more economical, and more honourable; more just, because if society desires to give largesses to some of its members, all should contribute; more economical, because it would save much expense in collecting, and get us rid of many restrictions; more honourable, because the public would then see clearly the nature of the operation, and act accordingly.
But if the protectionist system had taken this form, it would have been laughable to hear men say, "We pay heavy taxes for the army, for the navy, for the administration of justice, for public works, for the university, the public debt, etc.—in all exceeding a milliard [£40,000,000 sterling]. For this reason, the State should take another milliard from us, to relieve these poor ironmasters, these poor shareholders in the coal-mines of Anzin, these unfortunate proprietors of forests, these useful men who supply us with cod-fish."
Look at the subject closely, and you will be satisfied that this is the true meaning and effect of the sophism we are combating. It is all in vain; you cannot give money to some members of the community but by taking it from others. If you desire to ruin the tax-payer, you may do so. But at least do not banter him by saying, "In order to compensate your losses, I take from you again as much as I have taken from you already."
To expose fully all that is false in this sophism would be an endless work. I shall confine myself to three observations.
You assert that the country is overburdened with taxes,
Allowing programs to indicate emergency situations to external programs which can then investigate and take action.
Provide timestamped markers for performance analysis.
Provide information about what is being processed for later forensic analysis.
Timestamps for events.
Logging in programming is one of the areas where the code may literally have been written years before the generated information is needed, and where you have very little or no idea what you might be needing to know at that time. If you could foresee it, you could have coded around it back then.
There is a need for a wiki-based reference helping programmers to create better logs. The focus will not be a comprehensive overview, but a "Best practice"-approach using slf4j and logback/java.util.logging.Logger depending on scenario.
Download and unpack the latest release of SLF4J from http://slf4j.org/download.html
Put slf4j-api-X.Y.Z.jar and slf4j-simple-X.Y.Z.jar on your classpath.
Logging: Why, How, What, Where?
Output from said java program.
One of the first things new Java programmers learn is to use System.out.println("....") to see "inside" their program, and frequently this results in a lot of information being printed every time the program runs. Some information is very important and require human action, and some are just trivial indications that a library is working, and some include a stack trace. For advanced programs with multiple threads active, the individual messages may even be mixed together so that "Message 1" and "Message 2" turn into "MMessagessag 1e 2". Also you may need the log in a file and not System.out (which for some platforms are not even available).
Resulting logfiles.
Why log in the first place?
How to log?
What to log?
Where to put all the logged information?
What is SLF4J and why should it be used?
Returns the first value multiplied by the second.
A suggestion by America Master Steiner.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bc4 Nf6 4.Ng5 d5 5.exd5 Na5 6.Bb5+ c6 7. dxc6 bxc6 8. Be2 h6 9. Nf3 e4 10. Ne5
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
The computer may or may resign in this game depending on which console versions.
Setting the computer to the lowest level means the fastest (5 seconds) but weakest moves. Longer thinking time by the computer may be added in the increment of 5 seconds. Reversible algebraic notation is hereby used:
The Rebels win!
This script is used to summarize insights by the group, clarifies ideas that may have been confusing or ambiguous, and negotiates next steps.
One or more reflectors with expertise in system dynamics, topic under discussion, or community members
Before the session starts, reflectors are assigned specific areas to focus based on their expertise. Generally, someone with expertise in modeling should be focusing on system dynamics insights while an expert on the topic being discussed would typically focus on what is new or similar with respect to what is already known, and someone with expertise in the community (e.g., a person with lived experience) might focus on what is new or happened within the community.
Reflectors take notes and prepare summary comments for model reflection at the end of the session.
If possible, it can be helpful to have the reflectors briefly coordinate their comments (e.g., during a brief break).
Each reflector takes a few minutes to summary 2-3 key insights, raise any questions for clarification and brief discussion, and summarizes any next steps, e.g., "So there are three things I heard as possible next steps. First,... Second, ..., And third, ... Did I get that right?" "Which of these seems the most important?"
Start by having one reflector (typically the reflector with modeling expertise) reviewing the session and what happened, and refer back to (point to or stand by) the boundary objects around the room in temporal order.
As one reviews what happened, highlight key insights tied to the modeling and be sure to point to any structures or diagrams as this is an important time to reinforce the conventions and types of diagrams.
After reviewing the process insights, reflectors focused content can share how the insights relate to what is known by experts. This is an important point to help people recognize how what they came up with may or may not align with what expert researchers have found, as well as highlight what is new or innovative.
Then, close by reviewing how this contributed to building community and connections, as well as acknowledging any remaining sources of tension or disagreement (e.g., "It seems we still have some work to do and some disagreement, but perhaps it was too much to expect that we can resolve all the issues in one day. Nonetheless, we made some good progress.")
After the summary of model, content, and community insights, it is useful to talk about and negotiate next steps. This is important for both understanding and setting realistic expectations. A number of areas might be considered and those who have the most insight into what is feasible and needed should be invited to weigh in at this point.
The group has a shared sense of what they did, how this related to insights
The idea of the reflector role was originally introduced by George Richardson and David Andersen in the Albany Tradition of group model building as described in (Luna-Reyes et al, 2006). This version of the reflector script was based on the Richardson and Andersen script, and documented by Annalise Calhoun in 2010 based on Luna-Reyes et al. (2006). Within the practice of community based system dynamics, the script evolved to bring in different types of reflectors and provide persons with no prior experience in group model building with a structured approach to help close out a session.
Luna-Reyes, L. F., Martinez-Moyano, I. J., Pardo, T. A., Cresswell, A. M., Andersen, D. F., & Richardson, G. P. (2006). Anatomy of a group model-building intervention: Building dynamic theory from case study research. System Dynamics Review, 22(4), 291-320.
The script is mostly a presentation, but interactive in nature and an important function of this script is to provide a means of consolidating insights from a group model building session and reaching consensus about the next steps for the modeling.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
What is the background to this research?
Breast cancer is the most common cancer affecting women however some men are also affected. With over 2 million new cases been diagnosed in 2018 alone [1], breast cancer has a chronic impact on women across the globe. Literature suggests common risk factors for breast cancer include age, obesity, level of physical activity and circulating levels of sex hormones i.e. oestrogen [2]
[3]. However, there is little research showing the effect that physical activity plays in the prevention and treatment of breast cancer [4], despite its positive impact in managing other chronic diseases.
This research comes from the 1976 Nurses’ Health Study (NHS) where data looked at 2987 female registered nurses who had been diagnosed with breast cancer in either stages I, II or III [4]. With the prevalence of the condition affecting women globally, this article published by the American Medical Association provides relevant information to many women.
This study is a prospective observational study as it deals with observing characteristics of a population such as the diagnosed breast cancer cohort over a period of 16 years [5]. Observational studies are frequently used in medical research however often result in biased studies, particularly as surveying often involves self-reporting.
What did the research involve?
Self-reported diagnosis were supported by professional health records which were then used to quantify participants in this study. By mailing questionnaires to diagnosed breast cancer sufferers, the participants are able to identify their condition and be subject to participate in the study. Additionally, confirmation from family members and research in the National Death Index are the two methods used in order to account for those participants who passed away throughout the course of the study.
It is important to place the patients’ health as a priority during a study especially because it involves both cancer and physical activity. Situations in which diagnosed patients were deemed unable to participate in the study include:
Previously diagnosed with breast or any other cancer (other than non-melanoma) prior to 1984.
Had been diagnosed with stage IV of the cancer or stage wasn’t provided
From this there may be a misconception of the result ‘physical activity increases survival of breast cancer’ to show that physical activity reduces the risk of mortality in all sufferers, when in fact it may only be true in only 67% [4] of diagnosed patients or those who meet the criteria.
The standard measure of exercise duration and intensity is through the use of metabolic equivalent (MET) hours per week. The study split participants into the following groups in order to analyse results;
Activity levels were first assessed two years following diagnosis in all patients so that treatment could first be provided without interference, further enhancing the safety of the study. In order to reduce the subjectivity of data collected, participants were provided with a general guide was provided showing (walking = 3 METS); (jogging = 7 METs) and (running = 12 METs). This guide was provided along with a list of common activities in order to normalise the results provided as best as possible so that personal interpretation didn’t alter the results provided.
What were the basic results?
Physical activity is shown to provide breast cancer sufferers with significant benefits of reducing the risk of adverse effects associated with breast cancer such as recurrence and mortality [4] [6]. Lifestyle factors play an important role in the amount of physical activity completed by an individuals including amounts prior to diagnosis. The study shows that the women who participated in 9 – 14.9 MET hours per week (equivalent of walking for 3-5 hours) were the women who experienced most benefit from physical activity [4]. Contrastingly, activity that exceeded this amount may not provide any additional benefit in terms of outcome for the patient, where often higher amounts would result in poor health consequences. This suggests that cancer-related fatigue has a significant impact on sufferers as a greater physiological demand is placed on the body, leading to sleep disturbances, stress and further decreased immune function [4] [7]. Therefore, excess in physical activity is shown to have reduced benefit when compared to those participating in 9 – 14.9 MET hours per week.
The data collected provides a subjective measure of physical activity due to the self-reported nature of the study which has been noted by Holmes [4]. By asking people to indicate the duration and intensity there will be discrepancies due to interpretation, particularly regarding intensity. However, this impact has been reduced by indicating how many METs an activity is, as a guide walking to equal 3 METs.
What conclusions can we take from this research?
This study was able to illustrate that physical activity plays a positive role in reducing mortality and recurrence associated with breast cancer. External literature supports the elements mentioned in the text, particularly those associated with obesity, sex hormones and the risk associated with women post-menopause [2] [3]. Inversely, women who are not physically active following breast cancer diagnosis are exposed to an increase mortality risk [8]. This further supports the role of physical activity in reducing recurrence and mortality rates. Due to the evidence being well supported in literature, the study provides accurate data whereby both intensity and duration of physical activity are shown to benefit breast cancer sufferers.
Early detection is vital to reduce mortality associated with breast cancer [9]. Women over the age of 40 are encouraged to get a free mammogram every 2 years to promote early detection, this can be done through BreastScreen Australia.
Prevention is often the best cure for chronic diseases such as breast cancer. By being physically active you are able to prevent risks associated with a broad range of chronic diseases such as diabetes, hypertension and cancer.
Revealing the Truth about Deborah Chung's "Apparent Negative Resistance"
Circuit idea: There is not any connection between this arrangement and the negative resistance phenomenon.
The idea of Chung's "negative resistance".Contents
In July 1998, Deborah Chung and Shoukai Wang of the University of Buffalo presented the results of an experiment that showed an apparent absolute negative resistance in bare carbon fibers held together by pressure.[1]
In the experiment, two bundles of carbon fibers are arranged in a cross shape, with the ends of each bundle shorted with copper foil and silver paint (at A, B, C, and D in the image). A current is driven through one branch, and a voltage is measured across the other branch. In the paper, the voltage divided by current is referred to as an "apparent resistance" (a real electrical resistance requires both the current and voltage to be measured at the same points.)
The paper describes how the apparent contact resistance of the interface changes from positive to negative when the fibers are compressed. The current-voltage characteristic of the measured "negative resistance" is then a straight line of negative slope through the origin. The apparent negative resistance was also observed in metal wires (silver-coated copper), but was not observed for a single fiber crossing another single fiber. The paper claims that this phenomenon is useful because the forward flow and backflow of electrons in the same piece of material can be reproducibly controlled by external forces.
If we scrutinize this exotic carbon fiber arrangement, we will reralize it acts as some kind of bridge circuit formed by two kinds of resistances - steady carbon fiber resistances R and varying contact resistances Rc. In some way (for now unrecognized), it turned out they were connected in the opposite bridge legs. By the way, a long time ago I was impressed by this remarkable feature of the bridge circuit - to reverse the output voltage. It can do that because the output voltage is a differential quantity. It is "flying"; it is the difference between the two grounded voltages - VR and VRc. Depending on the proportion between R and Rc, this difference may be zero (R = Rc), positive (R > Rc) or negative (R < Rc). And, if we assume the current IIN is the input quantity and the voltage VOUT is the output quantity, we may think of this device as a zero, a positive or... a "negative" transresistance converter:) But this is not a negative resistance; this is not even a resistance; it is the more abstract transresistance.
Fig. 1b. ...a positive "resistance"...
Fig. 2b. A voltage drop appears across the contact resistance when no pressure is applied (a detailed picture).
Well, let's look at Fig. 2 and begin thinking... The two laminae are connected to each other by great number of contact resistances Rc; you may think of the central cross area as a kind of cube. The current flows from the top lamina that is positive to the bottom lamina that is negative. So, the upper point B is positive and the lower point D is negative; the output voltage VOUT has a positive polarity as it is shown on the picture. The "resistance" is positive: R = VOUT/IIN > 0.
Fig. 3a. A voltage drop appears across the fiber resistance (simplified).
Fig. 3b. A voltage drop appears across the fiber resistance when a big pressure is applied (a detailed picture).
Now, let's look at Fig. 3 and continue thinking together. Now, a big pressure is applied; so, the two laminae are connected to each other by great number of zero contact resistances. In this case, the central cross area is a flat grid. The current goes into the left side of the grid, turns to the bottom and goes out from the bottom side of the grid. In this situation, the point D stays closer to the positive terminal of the input voltage source and the point B stays closer to the negative terminal. So, the point D is more positive than the point D and the output voltage VOUT has a negative polarity as shown on the right picture. As a result, like Professor Chung, we might draw a wrong conclusion that the "resistance" is "negative": R = -VOUT/IIN < 0 and to begin making a stir.
Finally, we may suppose there is some middle pressure between the extreme limits when the output voltage VOUT is zero. The "resistance" is zero as well: R = VOUT/IIN = 0.
Then, what has Professor Deborah Chung actually observed? What has she done? Let's try to answer...
It is clear she has made some kind of exotic bridge circuit depending on applied pressure. Indeed, this carbon fiber arrangement can serve as an odd voltage-to-voltage converter, a current-to-voltage converter or as a (poor) pressure-to-voltage converter (a pressure sensor). But IMO, there are no any benefits of using it; contrary, there are many losses... Only see in Google how many people are involved in this useless discussion and how much efforts, time and money are wasted... It is a pity to see how people relying more on "reputable" sources than on their own human common sense are misleaded!
There is not any connection between this experiment and the negative resistance phenomenon.
There is not any apparent, absolute, differential or even dynamic resistance in this arrangement; there is only ordinary, bare, "19th century" ohmic resistance.
Chung's carbon fiber network behaves actually as an odd bridge circuit depending on the applied pressure (like the ordinary tensometric bridge circuit).
«Traditional New England style since 1876» (Bass ),
«America’s original jeans since 1850» (Levi’s),
«The fashion made in Italy» (Carella),
«It’s a process of self-discovery» (Louis Vuitton),
«New custom fits for women. It’s about shape not size. Curve it!» (Levi’s) ,
«Metropolitan casual, designed to eXXcite» (MEXX) ,
«50 years of fashion and design» (Pierre Cardin) ,
«Designed for sport, crafted for life» (Nike),
«Everything you need to make yourself» (Nike women),
«It’s:my: time. The next face of Benetton could be you» (Benetton),
«I am what I am» (Reebok) ,
«Yes, it’s me» (Losi),
«Your fragrance – your rules» (HUGO BOSS),
«Eternity moment» - «One moment is enough for changing everything» (Kelvin Clein),
«Miss Dior Cherie – The luxury of freedom» (Dior) ;
«Let the average man be divine» (Levi’s),
«Arpege» - «Promise her anything but give her Arpege» (Lanvin),
«DKNY» - «Love from New York» (Donna Karan)
«The number 1 fragrance by John Galliano» (John Galliano) ,
«This country wasn’t built by men in suits» (Levi’s),
The Platonic solids or Platonic polyhedra are the convex polyhedra where all faces are copies of the same regular polygon, and the same number of edges meet at every vertex. There are five of these shapes: the tetrahedron (like a pyramid but with a triangular base): cube, octahedron, dodecahedron and icosahedron.
Recent versions of Blender include an addon called “Regular Solids”, which lets you instantly generate these and a whole bunch of other similar shapes. However, the following steps do not require any addons.
Applicable Blender version: 2.67.
. To make sure that you have a regular tetrahedron, you can check the lengths of the edges (in Edit Mode, press N to open the Properties panel and locate the checkbox Length in the section Edge Info).
What’s the dual of the tetrahedron? Try applying the Bevel operation to one of those; what do you end up with?
" A good teacher is like a candle-it consumes itself to light the way for others"
Learning TargetsStudents should be able to detect signs of Child abuse and child neglect in a classroom.
Students will know the 3 types of Child abuse and the statistics on all 3.IntroductionTo a student a teacher can be seen as someone they can tell their deepest darkest secrets too. So what happens when a student tells a teacher some information that might suggest child abuse or neglect? Teachers need to know how to handle child abuse suspicions on the legal and ethical level and how to recognize it.
The lines between child abuse and child neglect can get a little hazy sometimes. The Child Welfare Information Gateway has defined child abuse as
“ Any recent act or failure to act on the part of a parent or caretaker which results in death, serious physical or emotional harm, sexual abuse or exploitation; or an act or failure to act which presents an imminent risk or serious harm” ( Child Welfare Information Gateway,2008)
There are 3 different types of Child abuse; physical, emotional, and sexual abuse. The Child Welfare Information Gateway also defines the three types of abuse
Physical-“is non- accidental physical injury as a result of punching, beating, kicking, biting, shaking, throwing, stabbing, choking, hitting, burning, or otherwise harming the child.”(Child Welfare Information Gateway, 2008)
Emotional- “pattern of behavior that impairs a child’s development of sense of self-worth” (Child Welfare Information Gateway,2008)
Sexual-“activities by a parent or caregiver such as fondling a child’s genitals, penetration, incest, rape, sodomy, indecent exposure, and exploitation through prostitution or production of pornographic material”( Child Welfare Information Gateway, 2008)Child abuse can bee seen as causing immediate harm to the child. While child neglect might not cause immediate harm to the child, overtime child neglect can cause physical and developmental harm. Child Neglect it defined as
Child Neglect- “the failure of a parent, guardian or other caregiver to provide for a child’s basic needs.” (Child Welfare Information Gateway,2008) Those needs can be put into four catergories physical,medical,educational, and emotional.
StatisticsA teacher needs to know the statistics of child abuse and neglect, once they know the numbers they will see how dyer the situation is and how important it is to know how to respond to child abuse and neglect.The National Child Abuse and Neglect Data System is a federal organization that collects data and statistics on child abuse and neglect every year (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2008). In the year 2006 there was an estimated 3.3 million cases and of those cases over half of them were reported by professionals, such as teachers (U.S Department of Health and Human Services, 2008) in the year 2006 the data showed
905,000 victims of Child abuse or neglect
51.5% were girls an 48.2% were boys
48.8% were white,22.8% were African-America, and 18.4 were HispanicThe data that was collected also showed the child neglect was more common than child abuse, in years past the NCANDs reported that child abuse was more prevalent that child neglect. In 2006 the data showed
6.6% were victims of emotional abuseDetecting Child Abuse or NeglectAs teachers we spend and average of 7 hours, 5 days a week with our students. So besides their parents, we are the people that the children spend most of their time with, this allows us to create a relationship of trust with our students.The relationship that is created is one that is so strong that a teacher will do anything to protect their students.So by knowing how to detect abuse and neglect teachers are better prepared to protect their students. We also get to know our students behavioral patterns, and if it changes occur. A dramatic change can in behavior can be a warning sign of child abuse or neglect (Coleman). According to Dr. Coleman, a child psychologist some other warning signs of child abuse or neglect both physical and emotional. They are as follows(Coleman).
UnsociableWhen it comes to detecting the possibility of child neglect the warning signs can be a lot more apparent and can be easily seen by the outer appearance of the child. Some of the things to look for if a teacher suspects a child is being neglected are as follows (Duncan, 2001)
Child comes to class in clothes that appear dirty and wornReporting Suspicions of Child Abuse or NeglectWhen teachers suspect child abuse or neglect they sometimes hesitate to report it, this may be because of a fear that the parents of the child may retaliate against the child, or they feel that even if it is reported nothing will be done. As teachers those we are mandated to report any suspicions of child abuse or neglect. This is stated in the Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act(CAPTA) if a teacher fails to report any suspicions they can face disciplinary action up to and including termination and criminal liabilities(Smith, 2007).
When a teacher suspects that a child is being abused in most school the teacher will file a report for the principal once the report is filled it is normally given to the guidance counselor who will be the one to contact the local depart of Child Protective Services(CPS)(Citizens Information). The website also states that if a child confides in a child that the teacher should record the conversations. The teacher also needs to have the child’s basic information such as; name , address, phone number, details about the suspected abuse, and information about the potential perpetrator(Duncan, 2001).
The CPS will determine in the information is substantial enough for an investigation. The CPS will normally send the mandated reporter a letter, but a family’s right to privacy is still of importance. So a mandated reporter might know that the CPS investigated but may not know the findings or results of the investigation (Duncan, 2001).
ConclusionSo in conclusion teachers have not only a legal responsibility but an ethical responsibility to protect their students. Teachers should pay attention to students’ behavior and create strong relationships with their students. If this happens, I feel that we will see a huge drop in numbers of children dying from child abuse and neglect. Every child deserves a happy and safe childhood and as educators we can help ensure that they are happy and healthy.
Test your knowledge Time1. What percentage of abuse/neglect victims are white
A. The teacher is just overacting and just forget about it
B. The teacher should punish the child for coming into her classroom looking dirty
D. The teacher should give the child a cracker and tell him/her to stop complaining
A. Just forget it, Henry must be telling a story.
B. Record the conversation and go to the principal.
C. Go have a talk with Henry’s parents.
D. Go tell the principal.
ReferenceChild Welfare Information Gateway.(2008).What is child abuse and neglect?.Retrieved February 7, 2009, From Child Welfare Inofrmation Gateway. Web site: http://www.childwelfare.gov/pubs/factsheets/whatiscan.cfm
Children’s Bureau.(2008).NCANDS Survey Instrument.Retri ved February 7, 2009, from Department of Health and Human Services. Web site: http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/cb/systems/ncands/survey.htm
Coleman, M. What should you do when you suspect child abuse. Retrived February 7, 2009, from Scholastic.com. Web site: http://content.scholastic.com/browse/aticle.jsp?id=4435
Duncan,N. When should teachers report abuse? Retrived February 7, 2009,from Children’s Voice Article.Web site: http://www.cwla.org/articles/cv0111teachers.htm
Smith,S.(2007). Mandatory reporting of child abuse and neglect. Retrived February 7, 2009, from Smith Law firm. Web site: http://www.smith-lawfirm.com/mandatory_reporting.htm
(2008).Reporting child abuse are primary and post primary leve. Retrived February 7, 2009, from Citizens Information.Web site: http://www.citizensinformation.ie/categories/education/primary-and-post-primary-education/attendance-and-discipline-in-schools/child_abuse
Page scraping allows any web page to be the source of raw data suitable for transformation. This example takes the data on the Wikipedia current events page 24 September 2007 and transforms to a simple HTML page
The key components of an XQuery page scraper are:
The fn:doc function which accepts a URL and retrieves the page as XML. Many pages are not well-formed XML, but the Wikipedia pages are.
Setting a namespace if the page has a default namespace. This page has a default namespace of "http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" so a namespace must be declared and its namespace prefix used in path expressions which access the page's XML.
Re-basing any relative URLs. Here the links to Wikipedia articles have relative URLs. To re-base these, the XML is serialized to a string with util:serialize(), the relative URLs edited with replace, and the string converted back to XML using util:parse()
In this example, there is some date re-formating to do since the date format in the page's URL is not the XML formated date. Links to the previous and next days are included, making use of XQuery date arithmetic.
Computing is a very different course from ICT and if you have studied ICT at secondary school you should see a big difference between the two. This course will introduce you to the theory, mathematics and logic that sit behind the computing revolution. Over the course of this book I also hope to take you through the steps needed to practice computational thinking, the art of using computers to solve problems. This doesn't mean getting you to think like a computer, but it does mean getting you to think in ways that you can use computers to solve problems. Computational thinking is made up of four parts:[1]
Part of being a computer scientist is breaking down a big problem into the smaller problems that make it up. If you can break down a big problem into smaller problems then you can give them to a computer to solve. For example if I gave you a cake and asked you to bake me another one you might struggle, but if you watched me making the cake and worked out the ingredients then you'd stand a much better chance of replicating it. If you can look at a problem and work out the main steps of that problem then you'll stand a much better chance of solving it.
Let's look at an example, the equation to work out the roots of a quadratic equation.
On first look it might appear a little scary, but if we decompose it we should stand a better chance of solving it:
By noting the steps down to solve a problem we can often recognise patterns, and by giving a list of steps we are one step closer to creating an algorithm.
Often breaking down a problem into its components is a little harder than taking apart an algorithm, we often get given a set of raw data then are asked to find the pattern behind it:
This is pretty easy with number sets, the above has the pattern
. But pattern recognition might also involve recognising shapes, sounds or images. If your camera highlights faces when you point it at some friends, then it is recognising the pattern of a face in a picture.
The face was automatically detected by pattern recognition
If your phone tells you the weather when you ask it "What is the weather like in Witham", then it has recognised the word "weather" and that "Witham" is a small town in Essex, linking them together. Pattern recognition is the computing behind why you get given tailored adverts when you log into your mail account or social network, they have recognised the pattern of what someone like you wants to buy. Pattern recognition might predict the weather, but chaos theory means that it's not always perfect.
Once we have recognised a pattern we need to put it in its simplest terms so that it can be used whenever we need to use it. For example, if you were studying the patterns of how people speak, we might notice that all proper English sentences have a subject and predicate.
Once we have our patterns and abstractions we can start to write the steps that a computer can use to solve the problem. We do this by creating Algorithms. Algorithms aren't computer code, but are independent instructions that could be turned into computer code. We often write these independent instructions as pseudo code. Examples of algorithms could be to describe orbit of the moon, the steps involved in setting up a new online shopping account or the sequences of tasks involved for a robot to build a new car.
What are the four main parts of computational thinking?
Can you come up with an algorithm to make a cup of tea?
(your answer might differ considerably from this, to see if it works give it to a friend to see if they can follow it)
Limits?
Nowadays computers are ubiquitous and some would argue that there are no problems out there that a computer, given enough time, couldn't solve. But is this true? Is every problem solvable by a machine and can we ever know if this is the case?
Do you think that every process in nature can be simulated by a computer?
The jury is still out of this one. There are people who say yes and others no, with people such as some existentialists arguing that you cannot get a computer to simulate consciousness. This line of thought soon turns into philosophy.
Very early on in modern computing, a British academic named Alan Turing devised the halting problem. This problem is to do with whether we can determine if a program will ever come to a halt or run for ever, for example:
Would write hello to the screen then stop. However, take a look at:
This would never finish, it would never come to a halt as x will always be larger than 8 and never get any smaller. This means the while loop will continue for ever, constantly printing out "hello". In the two cases shown it is easy to tell if a program will halt or not, but it isn't so easy. Imagine we get a more complex piece of code:
This is harder but still solvable taking a little more thinking and a little time on the processor. We could get a piece of code that takes weeks, years or even thousands of years to finish. But how can we know that all programs will end or not? To determine whether the program halts we:
BUT if it keeps running beyond a reasonable amount of time we cannot conclude that it will loop for ever (maybe we need to wait a little longer...)
Surely we create a mathematical proof to determine whether code will end or not I hear you say. Well let's prove just the opposite:
The halting solution H takes an input program A and a set of inputs X, it then determines whether the program will finish executing or not
You can replace the Input X with a copy of the program A. As the program A is made from code, this can be transformed into 1s and 0s, giving H a data input
If H says halt, K will loop. If H says loop K will halt, thus the Halting Solution H will be undecidable
We can therefore see that there are examples of programs such as K that we cannot determine whether they are ever going to halt.
The material for this page was originally written for isaac computer science
Function - a rule that assigns a specific output for every given input
Domain - the set of data that comprises the inputs of a function
Co-domain - the set of data from which the outputs of a function are chosen
A function is a rule that connects a set of inputs to given outputs. We can model the inputs as SetA, with the outputs being chosen from the SetB. It is not necessary that every member of SetB will be mapped to an input from SetA. In the example below, SetA describes the inputs as being the Natural numbers (positive integers and zero,
), the function is the doubling of the inputs. The outputs are from SetB, the set of Natural numbers, note that not all elements of SetB are mapped from SetA, e.g. no doubling of a positive integer will ever map to the number 3.
Another name for the set that describes the inputs is the domain, the set from which the possible outputs are chosen is called the co-domain. The type of the domain and the co-domain do not have to be the same. For example we could have a function that told us whether a given positive integer input was a prime number. In this case the domain would be Natural numbers (
), and the co-domain the boolean values True and False, as shown below:
Another way of explaining the working of functions is by describing the function type. The rule of the doubling function above can be written as f: A → B, this describes function f being a rule that maps the argument (input) type A to result (output) type B. Replacing A and B with their datatypes and f with a name gives us:
We can also write the isPrime function as a function type:
In a functional programming language functions are first-class objects. This means that they can be used in the following ways:
A good way to remember what first-class objects are is through: EVAC. First-class objects are used in Expressions, as Variables, as Arguments and can be returned from function Calls
Let's see this in action (you will learn more about what this code codes as you follow this chapter),
.> twoToSomething = superPower 2 -- returned by a function call
You will have already used first-class objects when writing procedural programming code where integers, characters and other datatypes, along with variables are used as arguments, returned by function calls, appear in expressions and can be assigned to variables.
In Haskell when you want to declare a value and attach it to a name you can use the = command like most other languages:
"Hey Kim, you are 536112000 seconds old"
But, as you hopefully remember, variables in functional programming are immutable, and we shouldn't be able to edit the value of myPi once we have declared it in a program:
Attempting to compile this code from the command line gives an error, Haskell won't let you declare the same thing twice. In other words it won't let you change the value of something once it has been declared, variables in Haskell are immutable:
This chapter gives a very simple introduction to Haskell declarations that resembles the construction of a variable or constant in other languages. The let and where commands offer better functionality, learn more about them over at learn you a haskell.
Write the function type description for a function that take a person's postcode as an argument and returns the the crime statistic for the area as a number between 1 and 5.
Write the function type description for a function that takes the year as a number and tells you whether it is a leap year
Now that we have learnt how to write simple functional programs using Haskell's inbuilt functions we will start to define our own functions. To do this we write the name of the function along with any arguments it might take, then set the return value as a calculation or short piece of code. For example:
Haskell uses static typing, the type of every parameter and return value is known at compile time, unlike languages such as Python which are dynamically typed. When we write functions we can declare the types that should be used for the arguments and the output, meaning that we will have better control over how the compiler creates the functions we define.
There are several base types in Haskell (which are always written starting with a capital letter) including:
This means that when we load this code it will only accept integer inputs, anything else will return an error. And we also know that it will return a boolean value if given an integer input.
[1 of 1] Compiling definingDataTypes ( definingDataTypes.hs, interpreted )
Ok, one module loaded.
No instance for (Fractional Int) arising from the literal ‘7.5’
In an equation for ‘it’: it = isMagic 7.5
Other Haskell examples of declaring the function type and the function code include:
The output type is always the last datatype specified in in the -> list. All the other datatypes define the inputs. In the byThePowerOf example above there are three types listed Integer -> Integer -> Integer. The first two Integer data types specify the argument types and the last data type listed, the final Integer, specifies the output type.
You can find out the type(s) of something in Haskell by using the :t command. For example:
a is odd as it is a type that doesn't start with capital letter like the other date type names, it is a type variable. This means that the max function isn't bound to using any particular type, but by it having a three times it means that we have to pass the same variable type to both arguments of the max function, and the max function will return a value of the same type as the arguments.
Write a function in Haskell along with the type definition to output the area of any circle given its radius
Write a function in Haskell along with the type definition to output the average of three numbers that have decimal points
Write a function in Haskell along with the type definition to output whether someone can see an 18+ movie when they give their age in years.
f: integer x integer -> integer
Which describes the function f being defined by the cartesian product of two integers, integer x integer; meaning any combination of both integer arguments can be accepted (x doesn't equal multiply). The final arrow (->) shows that the output of the function f on these integers is also an integer.
Whilst it looks like f accepts two arguments, because the argument is defined as a cartesian product, f only takes one argument, a pair of values, for example (7,9) or (101, 99).
Partial function - a function that has been called with only some of the required arguments, allowing it to be reused or used as a building block for other functions
Haskell might appear to have functions that take multiple arguments, e.g. max 2 2, but in reality a function in Haskell can only ever take one argument. How can this be? Looking at the example of the min function we can write the same function call in two different ways, both work:
The second example, (min 50) 13 is showing a partial function application. As you know through mathematics and previous programming, the inner brackets are always executed first. This means the (min 50) runs with only one input, when it needs two?! The code within the brackets return a function that is still waiting for the missing input before it can return a value, this is why we call it a partial function, (min 50) only partially runs. To make this clearer let's declare (min 50) as a variable:
.> LTL 13 -- partial function LTL is completed by the argument 13
Whilst the above example is rather trivial, you can see that instead of having to write min 50 multiple times, and all the mistypes that might entail, we can use the partial function LTL (Less Than L) instead.
We can describe the min function that we used above as the function type:
Passing a single Integer to min returned a function that took another Integer as an argument and returned an Integer. This can be written, with the brackets defining the return function, as:
Let's look at a more complex example that is trying to work out the volume of boxes. There are three Integer arguments x,y,z and one Integer output.
Let’s see how a partial function of boxVol can be used. By passing two arguments, 4 and 5, to boxVol at the same time we first create a partial function with 4 as the argument x, and Integer -> (Integer -> Integer) as the expected arguments and output. Haskell then passes 5 to this partial function, forming a new partial function. This is declared as standardBase. standardBase has x = 4 and y = 5 and it accepts Integer -> Integer as the expected argument and output. Passing 9 to the partial function standardBase then completes the function which can now return the value 180 (4 * 5 * 9).
[1 of 1] Compiling partialBoxes( definingDataTypes.hs, interpreted )
Ok, one module loaded.
We create partial functions that have calculations involving one of more arguments already built into them. These partial functions are then ready to accept the other arguments to complete the function or make further partial functions. Partial functions can be used as the building blocks of other functions.
Function composition - combination of two or more functions to create a new function
Sometimes you might want to combine two functions together, this is called function composition. Let's imagine that we have a function f of function type f: A -> B and another function g, of function type g: B -> C. We can use function composition to make a new function through the command g ∘ f:
For function composition to work, the co-domain of f must match the domain of g, e.g. f: A -> B = g: B -> C. Allowing the output of f to be mapped to the input of g. We can see this by looking at this example:
Another way of writing g ∘ f is g(f(y)), which tells us that we should first calculate f, then map the output of f to the input of g.
We can perform function composition in Haskell by using the full stop symbol '.'. Taking the above example, we can turn this into code:
A carpet sales company wants to work out the volume of their carpets in store, they write the following code, what does it output?
For the following functions, which of the numbered function compositions would be allowed?
This Wikibook is intended to help New Zealand students currently studying economics for the National Certificate Of Educational Achievement (NCEA) Level 1.
. The GMRES method starts with a point
Suppose we choose to solve the least squares problem in part a for
Each successive Given's Rotations multiply on an upper Hessenberg matrix requires four fewer multiplies because each previous subdiagonal entry has been zeroed out by a Given's Rotation multiply.
, and give a formula for the error
The local error, the error on one interval, is
The error in polynomial interpolation can be found by using the following theorem:
!
Use the error formula to derive a new quadrature rule obtained by performing one step of extrapolation on the composite trapezoidal rule. What is this rule, and how does its error depend on
? You may assume here that
The error for the composite trapezoidal rule at
. This gives a new error rule with
Consider the shifted QR iteration for computing a 2 x 2 matrix
i.e.
's entries are chosen such that when
's remaining three entries i.e.
. Demonstrate that with an appropriate shift
. What does this suggest about the convergence rate of the QR iteration?
. Using the above equation, we can find
i.e.
. Then the above equation yields,
To do:Per Future Chapters at Introduction to Sociology table of contents, this module is yet to be completed.
Social psychology is the scientific study of how people think about, influence, and relate to one another.
Locus of control is “the extent to which people perceive outcomes as internally controllable by their own efforts and actions or as externally controlled by chance or outside forces” (Myers, 56). Some people “feel that what happens to them is governed by external forces of one kind or another, while others feel that what happens to them is governed largely by their own efforts and skills” (quoted by Hunt, 1993, p.334). There are two types of locus’ of control, internal and external. Internal is when one believes they control their own destiny, while external locus of control one believes some outside force determines their destiny.
Individuals who feel that they are in control benefit greatly in life. “studies confirm that systems of governing or managing people that promote personal control will indeed promote health and happiness ( Deci & Ryan, 1987). Contrary, people who don’t feel they are in control, which are usually depressed, become quite unreceptive because they feel their work is useless. This is usually refereed to as learned helplessness which is “the hopelessness and resignation learned when a human or animal perceives no control over repeated bad events” (Myers, 56).
“If you think in positive terms you will get positive results” ( Myers, 53). It does not occur just by self-persuasion, or by giving complements to individuals, rather it usually occurs after the achievement of success. Thinking positively can help people achieve a plethora of things, so after realizing this, some situations can be avoided by positive thinking which will illuminate many problems.
Personal problems such as depression and drug abuse is a result of low self-esteem. Violence and degrading others usually occurs when an individual feels that their self-esteem is endangered. After studying many bullies and gang leaders, who many people perceive as having low self-esteem, instead have rather high self-esteem. There are many benefits to having a high self-esteem which is reflected in these individuals’ grades, appearance, and social status. In contrast, individuals with low self-esteem live a more stressful life with stress, depression, ect.
Our preconception guides how our mind perceives and interprets information. People fail to realize how great the effect of preconception. Other studies support these ideas by showing students supporting evidence on their beliefs as well as disconfirming evidence that supported their point of view,but were critical of the disconfirming evidence.
Preconception can also be manipulated and in an experiment at the University of Oregon, students were asked to assess the facial expressions of a man. The students who judged his expressions as cruel were first told he was responsible for cruel acts performed at concentration camps of WWII. Others who assessed the man as warm and kind were previosly told he was an anti-nazi who saved numerous jewish lives. The experiment above strongly demonstrates that our preconceptions do control the way we view issues and people but beyond preconception is the ability to manipulate and consrue the way we see things.(Ross and Lepper). This seems to hold true in everyday life from assuming that someone is shy to wondering if someone feels the same way that you do. If you constue an idea and continue to perceive certain ideas then there will be little room for change or consideration.
We Are More Swayed By Memorable Events Than By Facts
Because people assume that something is commonplace simply because it is easily available in memory, people are often more compelled with powerful anecdote than statistics(Allison&others,1992). This is known as the availability heuristic and is often why people overestimate the reality of situations. For example, the 9/11 attacks are often a visual and readily available in memory, many people thus believe they are more at risk for similar situations during commecial travel than they actually are.
Psychologist Daniel Kahneman supports this belief and conducts studies based on probability of an event based on the way our mind imagines and retrieves information. When we view an unlikely event the picture in our mind allows us to over estimate the likeliness that this would happen (kahneman).
Our search for order in random events influences our everyday thinking and can lead us down all sorts of wrong paths.
When we expect to find a significant relationship we often associate random events. Experiments confirm that people often confirm their own beliefs by misperceiving random events(Crocker,1981). If we believe that there is a correlation between events or that a premonition relates to an event we tend to find ways they relate to later occurring events but neglect to realize all the episodes that occur and do not coincide. As the mind creates an illusion perception and correlation it also gives us the idea that chance events are subject to our influence also known as illusion of control. An experiment done by Ellen Langer in 1977 showed how illusion of control affected gamblers when people who picked their own lottery numbers demanded four times the value of their ticket simply because they chose their own numbers. Gamblers credit their wins to their skill and forsight(Gilovich& Douglas,1986).
Illusion of Control contributes to another statistical phenomenon known as Regression toward the average.Tversky and Kahneman noted that students' exams scores fluctuate partly by chance and that tutors are not likely to be the cause of a students improvement but that students who score high will regress or fall back towards a more average score. Those who do poorly first time around will often seek tutoring but even without the help the student will typically improve showing that we tend to regress toward an average. As with test scores sports performances are proven to regress towards the average as well. After baseball players were measured on ability in areas such as batting average and earned run averages the outstanding performances of players often exaggerated their skills but are usually followed by a regression toward the mean (Galton).
Our Beliefs Can Generate Their Own Confimation.
A study conducted by Robert Rosenthal found that people sometimes live up to what is expected of them. When partipants knew they were expected to give high ratings on a picture they viewed, they did so more than others who were expected to see the photos as failures. This study demonstrated self-fulfilling prophecy.
On the flip side, a students expectation of an instructor can affect the way a student perceives the class. For example,a student who goes into class having heard positive feedback about the instructor was more likely to find the class more interesting than a student with lower expectation(Feldman&Theiss,1982).
Many times we view others then make our minds up about a person before we even get to know them.The fact that we make snap decisions or assumptions about people tells us something about ourselves. We make an assumption,and determine what type of person they are.We have certain expectations of people and we believe they will live up to our expectation most of the time.The type of behavior that we want from a person can happen with the way we bait that persons response to our action. If a person is kind,friendly and well adjusted that's what you will reflect to others. The expectation is that others will give you that in return because of the way you present yourself to them. Setting an expectation for success seems to motivate people to conform to this. An employee is more likely to accomplish more when an authority figure sets expectations high. Assuming that someone is rude may affect the way we approach them and in return may change the reaction of that person to support our anticipated internal thought.
We perceive things as true according to our own beliefs and we have the power to convince others to conform to the way we think. Whether these views are right or wrong our minds are capable of being judgmental. Despite the outcome of our judgement or decision its amazing the way our minds will come to this conclusion,which often results in false assumption and harsh judgement.Persuasion can even be as easy as referencing a simple image in our mind or listening to a news briefing.
As a kid, how many times did you get in trouble for doing something you probably shouldn't have only to hear your little brother or sister say "I told you so"? And it was very painful when you realized they were right? Hindsight, the I-should-have-known-all-along phenomenon is experienced in one form or another daily and much more than we realize. Goggin & Range, 1985 examined hindsight from the perspective of a suicide victim's family, friends and acquaintances. Typical responses from people viewed the suicide victim's family as somewhat responsible for the death. McIntosh and Kelly (1992) report there are more similarities than differences in the grief response among suicide, accident and natural death survivors. They did not find any guilt or social support differences, but they did find that suicide survivors differed from others in three ways. They blamed more people, felt stigmatized, and felt they could have done something to prevent the suicide. I have experienced the loss of a family friend by suicide. I do recall the feeling of guilt, but only because there were no obvious signs or red flags to predict that such a drastic departure would occur. In regards to clinical judgements, hindsight leaves the clinician open to error. The tendency to exaggerate a diagnosis usually leads to misinterpreting the true problem.
Looking for a lost set of keys or a matching pair of socks can turn into quite a frustrating endeavor. In the clinical environment however, the clinician must not know what to expect of an individual if an honest judgment is to be made. Presumptive questioning will lead the interviewer to the diagnosis he/she seeks not the diagnosis that will clarify a pattern of behavior. Snyder and Swann (1978), conducted an experiment that proved that once a person received information and then is told it's invalid they still have problems clearing their mind to conduct an unbiased evaluation. Thus, creating error in judgment and a misdiagnosis. This reminds me of the conscientious attorney that declares in the courtroom that his client is guilty of all accusations. The judge then turns to the jury and says "disregard that last remark". It's just about impossible.
Alot of cliicians and interviewers make the error of hindsight and self confirming diagnosis which leads them being more confident in their own predictions than in statistical prediction (such as using GPA of high school to predict how well the student will do in college). But using ones own predictions based off of intuition isnt nearly as accurate as statistical prediction.Most of the research favors statistical prediction over human intuition even thought neither one is completely reliable. After much research Paul Meehl (1986) writes how there is overwhelmingly more evidence toward statistical predictions as being more accurate than human intuition. "When you are pushing 90 investigatioins, predicting everything from the outcome of football games to the diagnosis of liver disease and when you can hardly come up with a half dozen studies showing even a weak tendency in favor of the clinician, it is time to draw a practical conclusion." Even in the face of all this research favoring statistical prediction, intuition is still used by experts to predict all kinds of things such as how well a high school student will do in college. Dawes (1976) tells us why statistics is more accurate by giving an example of interviewers relying on their intuitive ability rather than statistical information, which in this case is cumulative GPA of students interviewing for enrollment of college. "Yet you and I, looking at a folder or interviewing someone for a half hour, are supposed to be able to form a better impression than one based on 3 1/2 years of cumulative evaluations of 20-40 differnt professors."
Clinicians make errors and have biases such as when thinking you see a connection between something you look for evidence to prove there is a connection. They also think their intuitive predictions are more accurate than they really are. Some ways to stay away from erroneous prediction is to realize that looking back can be tempting and may lead to overconfidence. Don't ask questions that may lead you to the answer you're looking for, and test your original thinking against different ideas. With all this bias and errors in research and diagnosis shows that Psychology has only extracted a drop of information from an ocean of knowledge. With this knowledge missing some psychologist try to create theories to make up for Psychology's ignorance, which only increases our ignorance. Science is but one way of seeking truth and will always be connected with human intuition.
When it comes to depression people don't realize the things people go through that make
The depressive explanatory style is one of those ways. (Peterson and Steen,2002:
Sweeney and others,1986) This style gives us a better understanding of how it works.
People suffering from depression usually are the ones who look at the positive and negative aspects of things while non depressed people
Loneliness is something that most people feel atleast once in their life and most of the time it is unconscious. There is a difference between felling lonely and actually being physically alone. Most of the time loneliness is associated with depression but not always. The correlation between the two is relatively high. It is a negative correlation greater than .5 (Anderson et al. 1994: 549-557).
Loneliness is also a cycle like depression. Since, people feel lonely they approach people shyly because the feeling of being lonely makes people feel that they are inadequate. They also feel that it is their fault that they are lonely. "A correlation study designed to more accuratley represent the self-blame conceptualization revealed that both behavioral and characterological self-blame contribute uniquely to depression and loneliness" (549). Since, people behave and characterologically self-blame they then place themselves into a cycle of loneliness that is difficult to get out of. People's thoughts and beliefs control their actions which give them specific results that then contribute to their previous thoughts (Anderson et al.).
Anxiety of certain situations occur for many different reasons. Most of them stem from fear. Fear of social evaluation, fear of self disclosure, and fear of having to evaluate others. Shyness and anxiety were highly correlated with the correlation equaling .75 (Asendorpf 1987: 542-549). Shy people are more likely to be anxious than people who are not shy.
Psychotherapists try change the way a patient thinks, their attitude, by first adjusting the
Are gender differences determined by natural selection or are they dictated through individual cultures? To answer this question we will need to examine the differences between how culture affects males and females. Cultural influenced differences have been found to surface in childhood. Boys have been found to seek a separation between themselves and their caregiver, whereas, girls tend to identify themselves through their social connections. These gender differences appear to follow a person into adulthood. For example, in group situations, men tend to focus on the task at hand whereas women focus more on personal relationships (Gabriel & Gardner, 1999).
There are also gender differences in expressing empathy or experiencing how someone else feels as if you are feeling it also. Women tend to show more emotion, such as crying, than men when someone is distressed. This difference in empathetic reactions may possibly be explained by a woman’s superior sensitivity to nonverbal cues, which allow women to easily decode emotional messages being displayed by individuals.
According to John Williams and Deborah Best, men are more dominant driven, and aggressive (John Williams and Deborah Best, 1990 a.p.15).
There is no evidence of societies where women are more dominant than men (Pratto, 1996).
Gender differences are shrinking over time as women assume more managerial and leadership positions.
Aggression is defined by psychologists as behavior that is meant to hurt others (Myers, 2004). In surveys, men admit to having more aggression than women do.
When it comes to responses that are subjective and physiological, women and men are “more similar than different” (Griffitt, 1987). Statistics show that 48% of men and 12% of women can imagine themselves being comfortable and enjoying casual sex with different partners. How often do they think about sex? It is thought that 19% women and 54% men think about sex every day or several times a day (Laumann & others, 1994).
Evolution and Gender: Doing What Comes Naturally?
There is a theory known by evolutionary psychologists that says that men are more aggressive and dominant than females because they produce many more times the number of sperm than woman do eggs. They use this to explain why men have the more aggressive and dominant behavioral patterns. Because men have more genetics to pass on, they seek to spread their genes and fertilize as many women as possible. In contrast, woman are said to seek just one male who can help to support and take care of her and the child she will introduce into the world. Evolution in turn is supposed to be the cause of the male’s behavior. Physically dominant males are said to attract more woman, making it seem like they can better help support and care for them, forcing the other males to become more aggressive and dominant in order to spread their genes. In accordance with what was said about woman wanting a man who can help support them, woman tend to seek the highest paid or most successful of men when searching for a partner. Woman will go to great lengths, even starvation, to get model like beauty which men seek. In conjunction with this behavior, women tend to go after the more wealthy or dominant of men because they would be able to provide more for their offspring.
Many people believe that sex hormones, mainly testosterone, are a key element in gender differences. Testosterone both influences masculine features and aggressiveness. Violent male criminals generally have much higher testosterone levels. It is also noted that most males seem to become much less aggressive as they grow older and testosterone levels drop.
There are two problems, hindsight bias and cultural socialization, that occur when researchers try to explain theories using evolutionary psychology. Hindsight bias is an attempt to explain behavior by examining history and working backward to find an explanation for this behavior. For example, if we were to say women are stronger and aggressive than in hindsight we can say that this is because women needed to be this way in order to protect their young (Myers, 2004). On the other hand, cultural socialization tests “evolutionary predictions through the utilization of cross-cultural and animal behavior observations, as well as hormonal and genetic studies (Myers, 2004). Evolutionary psychologists do agree however that evolution does play a role in explaining some of the things we have in common and the things that we differ in; however, they do not feel that evolution is solely responsible for predicting cultural variations in behavior through time (Myers, 2004).
Culture can be defined as the ideas, behaviors, attitudes and traditions that have been passed within a group through generations. Within a culture there are certain behavioral expectations. An example of one of these expectations would be gender roles in which there are certain behaviors that a culture expects females and males to conform to (Myers, 2004).
Gender roles have gone through dramatic times in the last part of the century. For example, in 1938 only 1 out of 5 Americans agreed that a married woman could earn money in the industry and business fields. However, in 1996 a remarkable 4 out of 5 Americans approved of women working in these fields proving that time has greatly influenced changes in American culture (Niemi & others, 1989; NORC, 1996). This type of attitude change has also been accompanied by behavioral shifts. For instance, the proportion of 40 year old married women in America that are in the workplace has doubled since 1960 (Bureau of the Census, 1999). It is evident that it is not just evolution and biology that change gender roles but that culture affects gender roles also (Myers, 2004).
Biology and culture both play a role in how are attitudes and behaviors are affected. Genetics may predispose us to behave a certain way, but culture may accentuate these behaviors. There is an interaction between biological and cultural influences in that the effects of biology are dependent on the environment (Myers, 2004). For example, people (environment) tend to react differently to people with particular genetic traits (biology). An example of this would be that there is a significant cultural norm that dictates that males should be taller than their female companions. According to one particular study, only 1 in 720 couples were in violation of this cultural norm (Gillis & Avis, 1980). This interaction between biology and culture can be explained psychologically two different ways. Through hindsight, we could say that social power over women is perpetuated when a man is taller than she. On the other hand, using cultural socialization, we can explain that if partners preferred companions of equal height than taller men and shorter women would not have companions. Therefore, the cultural norm for height among couples may result from biology and culture because it is evident that evolution has brought about taller men and culture has dictated the same for couples (Myers, 2004).
-Interaction occurs in three different ways: First, any given social situation affects everybody differently. Because we all see and think differently, we react to things based on how we perceive the situation. Also, some people are more sensitive and corresponsive than others. Second, interaction, whether between situations or persons, most often occurs because people choose, and are responsible, for the situations they are in. For example, quiet people might choose to be in a quiet or nonsocial environment. Another example would be when people choose the college they want to attend; conservatives would most likely not choose to attend a liberal college. Third, more often than not, people create the situations they are in. For example, if we perceive or expect someone to be unfriendly, the way we treat that person may cause that person to act unfriendly or distant. Our social environment is what we make of it.
Dispute between whether or not reacting or acting upon our environments does also come into play. In one perspective, it is sensible to see ourselves as the product of our environment, and to see others as “free actors.” In another perspective, it may be sensible to see the opposite; to see ourselves as the agents and others as the products. For example, if we see others as being influenced by their environments, we would be more likely to understand them, rather than to just say they are lazy or corrupt. In conclusion, we are both the products and the designers of our own environments and social worlds.
The much supported theory of reactance states that “people do indeed act to protect their sense of freedom”, (Myers, 229). Experiments also showed that people often do the opposite of what is expected of them in order to express their freedom. Freedom is very important to all individuals, and they often rebel when they think it might be in jeopardy. An example of this might be underage drinking, because surveys show that more people get drunk when they are under the legal drinking age than those over the drinking age(Engs & Hanson, 1989). Another example of individuals rebelling due to their sense of threat of their freedom is by the act of rape. While committing rape a man or woman may feel their freedom is restricting by the rejection of the other partner.
“People feel uncomfortable when they appear too different from others….. they also feel uncomfortable when they appear like everyone else” (Myers, 230). Individuals think of themselves highly when they appear unique, but not too different so they won’t appear as outcasts. The yearning for such uniqueness is evident in the selection in names of babies. Children also present the desire for uniqueness in many ways. One example, which was reported by William McGuire and his colleagues at Yale University is that when students are asked to tell others about themselves they often state something rather unique about themselves.
Also, individuals recognize their differences especially when it comes to the differences in gender (Cota & Dion, 1986). For example, one sex is more likely to notice they are different when surrounded by the opposite sex. This provides us with an understanding of how minorities become quite conscious of their differences and surroundings.
“When the people of two cultures are nearly identical, they still will notice their differences, however small” (Myers, 231). Hostility usually occurs more when one party has a greater correspondence to the other.
What is it that makes a minority persuasive? In the book, there are three things that minorities achieve to gain the attention and respect of the majority. We find that consistency of a minority that never falters in it's beliefs and stances on an issue is gradually accepted by the majority. Self-confidence, which is a product of consistency, also establishes to the majority that the minority is assertive and empowered in their beliefs and claims. And last, defections of the majority help to increase the popularity of the minority. A product of the first two, defection from the majority can help to further a minorities cause.
-Some leaders surface based on their group and how they interact, others are formally agreed upon or elected. Good leadership depends on the situation. For example, the best person to lead the swim team may not be the best person to lead a debate team. The most common types of leadership include task leadership and social leadership. Task leadership includes setting standards, organizing, and goal achievement. Task leaders most commonly have a dictative style-one that can work well if the leader is smart and adequate enough to give good instructions or guidelines. Also, since the task leadership wants to achieve their goals, they would be good at keeping the group on track making sure things are getting done. Experiments done on the subject show that a mixture of detailed and perhaps tough goals and intermittent advancement helps stimulate students’ achievement. Social leadership includes being sympathetic and/or supportive, structuring teamwork, and intervening conflicts. This is often a self-governing method. Many researchers think this type of leadership is also good for self-confidence. Also, when workers feel that they are in control over what they are doing, they are more likely to be motivated and therefore achieve more.
-Studies have shown that the best types of leaders include those who fall under both categories-task and social leadership. They are concerned both with the progression of the work, and are also sympathetic and understanding to the needs and feelings of their workers. Effective leaders also exude a self-confident charisma, and they are consistent with sticking to their goals. Charismatic leaders usually have a convincing vision or idea of what they desire, and are able to communicate these ideas clearly, showing hopefulness and confidence in their group to enthuse others to follow.
-Groups also influence their leaders. Sometimes a leader who strays too much from their groups standards may be “thrown out.” Smart leaders most often stick with the majority, and are careful as to what they say.
"Reactance - A motive to protect or restore one’s sense of freedom. Reactance arises when someone threatens our freedom of action."
"Leadership- The process by which certain group members motivate and guide the group."
To better understand the principles of love, it must first be examined and measured. Psychologist Robert Sternberg (1998) views love as a triangle, whose three sides consist of passion, intimacy, and commitment. Love can be best described in reference to a relationship between two people. Love is more evident in relationships that contain a mutual understanding, giving and receiving support, and enjoying the loved one’s company. Passionate love is mostly expressed in a physical manner while maintaining an exclusive relationship. Passionate love is also a love that is shared between two people who are intensely fascinated with their partners. Passionate love is an emotional love that is both exciting and intense. Elaine Hatfield (1998) defined it as “a state of intense longing for union with another” (p.193). Love assumes many variations. Time and culture both have an affect on the love formed in a relationship. Time can be consistent with the age of the individuals involved in the relationship, or it could even be the age difference between the partners. Culture plays a strong role in love and relationships. An individual’s ethnicity, background, religion, or even financial stability can affect the love in a relationship.
Companionate love is best defined as a passionate love that has settled to a warm enduring love between the two partners in a relationship. The companionate love shared between two partners consists of fewer ups and downs than what is found in passionate love. It’s more stable and a deeper respect and affectionate attachment between partners is more evident. Passionate love is a fire burning hot and rapidly. Companionate love is the hot coals left over after the fire is gone. Companionate love is often found in marriages. In marriages, the passion has often left the relationship, but a deep affection and commitment for the other person still remains. Companionate love is often a person relation shared amongst partners. The longer the relationship lasts, the less of an emotional rollercoaster it will have.
One important factor of any close relationship is equity. Being able to achieve equity is an important key in a relationship. Elaine Hatfield, William Walster, and Ellen Berscheid (1978) have proclaimed an equity principle of attraction: What you and your partner get out of a relationship should be proportional to what you each put into it. In other words, for a relationship to work, each partner must invest certain feeling and actions into their relationship. Long-term equity is achieved by not focusing on “who owes who” in a relationship. When one partner provides the other with their needs, a form of return in not expected. Be able to look past and not feel that a debt is owed, is what allows the relationship to last. One clue that an acquaintance is becoming a close friend is that the person shares when sharing is unexpected (Miller & others, 1989). Happily married people tend not to keep score of how much they are giving and getting (Buunk & Van Yperen, 1991).
Relationships normally end when the love that is shared between the partners is no longer significant. Enduring relationships are rooted in enduring love and satisfaction, but also in inattention to possible alternative partners, fear of the termination cost, and a sense of moral obligation (Adams & Jones, 1997).
Who Divorces?
Divorce rates are currently on the high and high nearly doubled since the middle of the century. Divorce is ultimately the result of unhappiness in a relationship, a lost of love between partners, and the outcome of consistent conflict within a marriage. Recent Risk of divorce also depends on who marries whom (Fergusson & others, 1984; Myers, 2000a; Tzeng, 1992). People usually stay married if they:
These results can vary from marriage to marriage, but at least every divorce or loss of love in a relationship can be related back to one of these circumstances. Obviously, without a way to attach or relate yourself to another person, a relationship or even a marriage will become increasingly difficult to maintain.
Many of the choices that we make in regards to our own self-interest can be collectively punishing.
Two men are questioned by the District Attorney in regards to a crime they are guilty of committing but the DA only has enough evidence to convict them both of a lesser crime, so he splits them up and talks to them one at a time, giving them both three choices
Confess and if the other man doesn’t than you will be given immunity and he will have to serve your sentence along with his own
If both of you confess then you will each have to serve out five year sentences
If neither of the two men confess they will both be assigned very light punishment
This puts the two men in a predicament because they are left with the uncertainty that the other will try to get away scot-free. Even though if neither of them confess they will both be sentenced to a far less harsh punishment, they are left to consider the risk that if they decide not to confess they could potentially be left to serve out both sentences alone. So the majority of people would just choose to confess so that they don’t potentially have to deal with the others selfishness. So just a simple thing like mistrust can make cooperation out of the question.
In most social dilemmas more than one party is responsible for contributing to the problem.
Between restockings, a cookie jar holds enough cookies (if conserved properly) for the children to eat three a day. However cooperation and regulation of the out of cookies is very unlikely; instead, the children who are afraid of being exploited by each other just start shoveling cookies into their mouths and then the supply is exhausted immediately. A lack of trust in each other and cooperation now leaves them without cookies until the next time the jar is filled (Gifford & Hine, 1997). This is an example of a non-zero game, instances in which acting rationally still results in a negative outcome.
If a group remains small then the members are more likely to feel an obligation to the group and they will most likely see their input or contribution as important. If a group grows too large than many of the members might feel like their role is unimportant and will feel little ambition to remain active in the groups prosperity, (Kerr, 1989).
When a group communicates and expresses their concern or addresses a dilemma, the group members often act in the interest of everyone, this also adds pressure on the other members to contribute so they will not be singled out or possibly reprimanded.
If the reward for co-operation is more appealing than the reward for exploitation more people are likely to cooperate, for instance; car pool lanes on busy highways so that the number of cars contributing to the traffic and pollution problems is decreased.
If it is likely to benefit the common good, people might feel responsible to act in the interest of the group, (social responsibility norm) even if it could possibly put their own life in danger, or inconvenience them.
In an experiment to test the intensity of influence competition has on conflict, Muzifer Sherif (1966), used two groups of boys to test if limited resources shared between the two groups would lead to conflict. Unaware of the other group, Sherif had the boys in each group work together to build their campsites and let them get aquatinted with one another. After friendships had been formed he introduced the two groups to each other by putting one group on the baseball field at the same time the other group was supposed to use it. This sudden fear of losing their resources to the other group led the boys to strengthen their camaraderie within their respective groups by mutual hostility towards the rival group, where even affiliation to the group meant immediate blacklisting.
When one feels as though their contribution to the group is worthy of a greater reward, they are either reminded of their inadequacies and become submissive to their superiors, use personal attacks or black-mail to get what they want, or actually revolt against their superiors and try to overthrow them, (Elaine Hatfield, William Walster, Ellen Pzersheid, 1978). On the other hand, it is very unlikely that someone will bring attention to themselves if they feel they are receiving more for their contribution than necessary. In these cases many will convince themselves that their work is worthy of extra benefits. Also if one is made aware that their skills exceed their reward they are more likely to argue their worth, “The more competent and worthy people feel, (the more they value their inputs), the more they will feel under benefitted and thus eager to retaliate”(Ross & others, 1971).
All things considered, who has a better life in this country--men or women?
(Source: Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, 1997)
Since conflict is the product of a perceived incompatibility, it is likely that by mis-perception of others actions, most conflicts are created. This coincides with the concept of a self-serving bias, in that we often justify our own actions and take credit for our successes but justify our mistakes. At the same time we tend to judge others’ actions or motives more harshly than our own, leading us to condemn others prematurely. We can also attribute the fundamental attribution error to our mis-perceptions in the sense that we are more likely to be less considerate of others external circumstances that factor into their actions, and this gives us a one-dimensional perception of the other which can be very inaccurate.
An example of skewed mirror image perceptions
It is common for two rival groups to hold each other responsible for same crimes and to consider themselves moral and virtuous for the same reasons, (Morton Deutsch, 1986). This is often the case in wartime, we see people in only one of two categories; “for us or against us”. In modern warfare it is seen as more diplomatic however for us to say that it is not the general public that we are at war with, but the evil regime that has contaminated it’s people that we are against. This also gives us the appeal of a knight in shining armor, trying to save the “good people” from their “evil leaders”. Our cause for intervening is now validated because it is then considered a service to the people.
Module 30 - When Do People Help?
Why Do People Help?
Altruism is an unselfish act of genuine care toward another in a given situation in which no form of payment is expected. But what motivates helping? One theory, called Social-Exchange, entails a person evaluating a sort of relationship that binds the benefit and cost of helping the person before they act in the situation. Obviously, the helper desires to achieve optimal benefit at a low cost. If a person knows that the reason a person helped was because of this, then the "helper" does not deserve to be recognized for their "good deed." Some people help to increase someone else's welfare and the only happiness gained is from the sense of knowing they genuinely helped someone. Often this type of person is characterized as someone who feels other's pain when they hurt, or feel someone else's joy when they are happy. Another agent that invokes helping are social norms, one of which being the reciprocity norm. As social norms idealize how we ought to be behave, this norm suggests how we act in service to someone else because they had previously done it for us. This norm is not likely to be altruistic since there is some motivation for the self present. Another norm that suggests how we ought to behave is the social-responsibility norm. This agent is different from the reciprocity norm in that we are aware of no trading services for one another. This norm best illustrates altruism because it prescribes us to be inspired to help someone in need and never ask for or expect anything in return. These theories can be brought up to the level of making sense in nature. A concern for other's well being essentially is a concern for their survival. It is interesting to think, in this sense, how a group that is more altrustic has a good likelihood of surviving.
When Do People Help?
Social psychologists have tried to explain bystander behavior in different ways. Through a series of experiments they arrived at remarkable results. Helping often is performed by people who want to feel better about themselves by relieving a sense of guilt they may have in order to have a more pure notion of themselves. Sometimes people who are just in a positive state of mind feel the genuine desire to help someone else in need. A highly specialized result gives the impression that people of a religious affiliation are often the ones giving service to others. The conditions under which help takes place range in subjective to objective conditions. Subjective conditions include recent observation of a good deed by someone else, not feeling rushed at that particular time, or that a person debating to help sees an element of similarity between them and the victim. Objective conditions include the severity of the victim's need, our environment or surroundings, and the absence of others around to help.
When we hear about a situation in which someone was in need but was not helped by a bystander we think that the bystander is a horrible person, and that surely, we would have done something because we are caring people. But is it possible that the bystander who did not help was a caring person? Not necessarily. Numerous experiments have been done that reveal, oddly enough, that the less people that are around as bystanders in a given situation where someone needs help, service is more likely to take place. In situations with multiple bystanders, one is less likely to notice the victim in need, their problem, and take action (Latane, Darley 1970:364-369). This lack of concern for a critical situation within a group of people is referred to as informational influence. One person sees no one else acting to help, and they themselves think everything must be alright, and do not help. On the other hand, if someone noticed someone in need and they saw someone rush over frantically to render service to them, then the sense of urgency for a critical situation would be higher. Either way, we always face the dilemma of deciding whether a situation warrants our attention. Sometimes we disregard ourselves and decide to help. Other times we take no action in a situation we feel is unclear, and this is referred to as the bystander effect. But not understanding the magnitude of a critical situation is not always the reason for taking no action. In some events the situation is clear and we still do not act. We can see something happening to a person and not act because of our notice of others who are also watching. Our attention is drawn from the victim to the other bystanders and by seeing them just looking on, we fail to act as well. It is interesting to think the mere presence of other people affects our own personal emotion and mindset in an objective situation. In experiments where participants were placed in a situation where they had to decide whether or not to take action for themselves, focus groups with other people aware of the same circumstances failed to act more compared with focus groups in which people thought they were the only ones aware of the critical nature of the given situation (Latane, Darley 1968:217-221). The participants were asked whether the presence of others with the same awareness affected their decision regarding action, the common response was that it did not. In essence, a person does not always know why they do what they do, as affirmed by this experiment. The depth of some experiments causes some people to question the ethics of said experiments. But it is important to keep in mind that the overall goal of experiments is to protect those participating and enhance human well being in the process. People become informed as a result of such experiments, and those who witness change are more likely to implement it (Beaman, Barnes, Klentz, McQuirk 1978:407-410).
Please Note, all copy on this page is a paraphrased summary of Module 30 in Exploring Social Psychology, by David Myers. For verification of data please reference the book itself.
To sustain a future for all human life, we must continue to push the boundaries of technology. Automobiles have become more fuel efficient and produce much less pollution. Documents are now stored, copied, delivered, and produced electronically. Forget the copier machine, right click, copy, and then paste. From home appliances, to light bulbs, highways, buildings, and medicine, technological advances are certainly paving the road into the future. How knew the 21st century would be so far ahead of it time?
Another vital step in sustain future life is reducing consumption. For humans to inhabit the earth for centuries to come, we must obtain the ability to both consume and pollute less. Birth rates are continually dropping, due to the escalating numbers of educated and employed women in the world. However, the world is still at its full capacity. Many countries in the world have tried to reduce consumption, but many have simply given up or have not yet witnessed the constructive outcomes. Ideas such as, rewarding those who recycle, carpool, use public transportation, and use environmental friendly equipment to power their homes would be a great place to start. On the other hand, we must also penalize those who add to the over consumption of resources. Fine, ticket, tax, or charge those who drive separately. Those who leave their light on in their homes 24 hours of the day, drive three-hundred miles for vacation in an S.U.V., and throw away every piece of trash instead of recycling. Robert Frank (1999), an economist well-versed in social psychology, suggests how a socially responsible market economy might reward achievement while promoting more sustainable consumption.
The Social Psychology of Materialism and Wealth
Increased materialism is most evident in the United States, as one poll clearly represents, Gallup Poll (1990), 1 in 2 women, 2 in 3 men, and 4 in 5 people earning more than $75,000 a year would like to be rich. More and more individuals want to be wealthy during their life, rather than making an effort at living a meaningful life.
Can you buy happiness with money? Or maybe even your well-being? Sadly, no, it can’t. There is little, if any, correlation between wealth and well-being. Studies have shown that regardless of how wealthy an individual is, his or her well-being is highly (almost indefinitely) not going to change. In poor countries, where low income threatens basic needs, being relatively well-off does predict greater well-being (Argyle, 1999). Once and individual becomes wealthy, there is an increase in happiness that will only last for short period of time till that individual is no longer happy. Then, even more money and wealth are needed to be content with that individual’s well-being. David Lykken (1999, p.17), “People who go to work in their overalls and on the bus are just as happy, on the average, as those in suits who drive to work in their own Mercedes.” Even the super-rich –the Forbes 100 wealthiest Americans– report only slightly greater happiness than average (Diener, Horwitz, and Emmons, 1985).
Materialism fails to satisfy the individual who strive to gain as much as they can in their life time. Those who strive for power, money, and wealth live their lives at a much lower sense of well-being. Those who strive to achieve person growth, wisdom, and knowledge live their lives with a much higher sense of well-being. Being materialistic and obtaining a personal well-being from material objects will only results in a lower sense of well-being. So many things that used to be luxuries have now become necessities, by which an individual will measure there well-being. Eventually, everyone will have that luxury and the individual will feel they need yet another luxury that everyone else does not have, in order to promote their own well-being. The cycle will continue and the materialistic individuals will constantly need more to obtain a higher sense of personal well-being.
To relieve our society of the materialistic nature in which it is engulfed, people must follow the steps of sustainability. Implementing programs and laws that reduce consumption, continue to improve technology, focus on efficiency, realize that wealth and well-being share no correlation, and promote economical growth. People must come together and concentrate their attention on the events which take place in the world instead of centering their focus on their selves. Through the study of social psychology, the world can better itself by contributing to the sustainability and survival of the world. The sooner people come to terms with materialism not leading to a better sense of well-being, the better of a place the world will become.
Abramson, L. Y., Seligman, M. E. P., & Teasdale, J. D. (1978). Learned helplessness in humans: Critique and reformulation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 87, 32-48.
Adams, J.M., & Jones, W.H. (1997). The conceptualization of martial commitment: An integrative analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 1177-1196.
Allison,S. T.,Jordan,M.R.,& Yeatts,C.E.(1992). A cluster-analytic approach toward identifying the structure and content of human decision making. Human Relations,45,49-72.
Anderson, C.A., Miller, R.S., Riger, A.L.,Dill, J.C., and Sedikides, C. (1994). Behavioral and characterological attributional styles as predictors of depression and lonleliness: Review, refinement, and test. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 549-558.
Argyle, M. (1999). Causes and correlates of happiness. In D. Kahneman, E. Diener, & N. Schwartz (Eds.), Foundations of hedonic psychology: Scientific perspectives on enjoyment and suffering. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Asendorpf, J.B. (1987). Videotape reconstruction of emotions and cognitions related to shyness. Journal of personality and social psychology, 53, 541-549
Bayer, E. (1929). Beitrage zur zeikomponenten theorie des hungers. Zeitschrift fur Psycholgie, 112, 1-54.
Beaman, A.L., Barnes, P.J., Klentz, B., & McQuirk, B. (1978). Increasing helping rates through information dissemination: Teaching pays. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 4, 406-411.
Bureau of the Census. (1999). Statistical abstract of the United States 1996 (Table 65). Washington, D.C.: Superintendent of Documents.
Buunk, B.P., & van der Eijnden, R.J.J.M. (1997). Perceived prevalence, perceived superiority, and relationship satisfaction: Most relationships are good, but ours is the best. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 219-228.
Carey,B.,New York Times."A Senior Moment' or A Self-Fulfilling Prophecy?"(July,18,2006).
Cooper,H.(1983). Teacher expectation effects. In L. Bickman(Ed.), Applied social psychology annual,vol 4.Beverly Hills,CA:Sage.
Cota, A.A., & Dion, K.L. (1986). Salience of gender and sex composition of ad hoc groups: An experimental test of distinctiveness theory. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50, 770-776.
Crocker,J. (1981). Judgment of covariation by social perceivers. Psychological Bulletin,"90, 272-292.
Dawes,R.M. (1976). Shallow psychology. In J.S. Carroll & J.W. Payne (Eds.), Cognition and social behavior. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Deci, E. L., & Rayan, R. M. (1987). The support of autonomy and the control of behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 1024-1037.
Deutsch, M. (1993). Educating for a peaceful world. American Psychologist, 48, 510-517.
Diener, E., Horowistz, J., & Emmons, R.A. (1985). Happiness of the very wealthy. Social Indicators, 16, 263-274.
Engs, R., & Hanson,D.J. (1989) Reactance theory: A test with collegiate drinking. Psychological Reports, 64, 1083-1086
Feldman, R.S., & Theiss, A.J. (1982). The teacher and student as Pygmalions: Joint effects of teacher and student expectations. Journal of Education Psychology,74,217-223.
Fergusson, D.M., Horwood, L.J., & Shannon, F.T. (1984). A proportional hazards model of family breakdown. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 46, 539-549.
Frank, R. (1999). Luxury fever: Why money fails to satisfy in an era of excess. New York: Free Press.
Gallup Poll. (1990, July). Reported by G. Gallup, Jr., & F. Newport, Americans widely disagree on what constitutes “rich.” Gallup Poll Monthly, pp. 28-36.
Galton, F.(1886), "Regression Towards Mediocrity in Hereditary Stature," Journal of the Anthropological Institute,15, 246-263.
Gifford, R., & Hine, D.W. (1997). Crowding: More fearsome than crime-provoking? Comparison of an Asian city and a North American cinty. Psychologia, 22, 79-83
Gillis, J. S., & Avis, W.E. (1980). The male-taller norm in mate selection. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 6, 396-401.
Gilovich, T., & Douglas, C.(1986). Biased evaluations of randomly determined gambling outcomes. Journal of Experimental"
Griffitt, W. (1987). Females, males, and sexual responses. In K. Kelley (Ed.), Females, males and sexuality: Theories and research. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Hamilton, D. L. and R. K. Gifford (1976). Journal of Experimental Psychology 12, 392-407.
Harris, J.R. (1998). The nurture assumption. New York: Free Press.
Hatfield (Walster), E., Walster, G.W., & Berscheid, E. (1978). Equity: Theory and research. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Hatfield, E. (1988). Passionate and compassionate love. In R.J. Sternberg & M.L. Barnes (Eds.), The psychology of love. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Hunt, M, (1993). The story of psychology. New York: Doubleday.
Jussim,L. (1986). Self-fulfilling prophecies: A theoretical and integrative review. Psychological Review,93.
Kahneman,D., Slovic,P.,&Tversky,A,(editors), Judgement Under Uncertainty,Heuristics, and Biases.(Cambridge University Press,1982), Part IV.
Larsson, K. (1956). Conditioning and sexual behavior in the male albino rat. Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell.
Latane, B., & Darley, J.M. (1970). The Unresponsive Bystander: Why Doesn't He Help? New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Latane, B., & Darley, J.M. (1968). Group inhibition of bystander intervention in emergencies. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 10, 215-221.
Lewinsohn,P.M.,Hoberman,H.,Teri,L.,& Hautziner,M. (1985) An integrative theroy of depression. In S. Reiss & R. Bootzin (Eds), Theoretical issues in behavior therapy. New York: Acadimic Press
Lykken, D.T. (1999). Happiness. New York: Golden Books.
McIntosh, J.L. & Kelly, L.D. (1992). Survivors reactions: suicide vs. other causes. Crises, 82-93
Meehl, P.E. (1954). Clinical vs. statistical prediction: A theoretical analysis and a review of evidence. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Miller, L.C., Berg, J.H., & Rugs, D. (1989). Selectivity and sharing: Needs and norms in developing friendships. Unpublished manuscript, Scripps College.
Mirels, H.L., & McPeek, R.W. (1977) Self Advocacy and Self Esteem. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 45, 1132-1138.
Myers, D. G., (2004). Exploring Social Psychology: Third Edition. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Niemi, R. G., Mueller, J., & Smith, T. W. (1989). Trends in public opinion: A compendium of survey data. New York: Greenwood Press.
Orive, R. (1984). Group similarity, public self-awareness, and opinion extremity: A social projection explanation of deindividuation effects. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 47, 727-737
Peterson, C., & Steen, T.A. (2002). Optimistic explanatory style. In C.R. Snyder & S.J. Lopez (Eds), Handbook of positive psychology. London: Oxford University Press
Pratto, F. (1996). Sexual politics: The gender gap in the bedroom, the cupboard, and the cabinet. In D. M. Buss & N. M. Malamuth (Eds.), Sex, power, conflict: Evolutionary and feminist perspectives. New York: Oxford University Press.
Sherif, M. (1966). In common predicament: Social psychology of intergroup conflict and cooperation. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Sigal, J., Gibbs, M. S., Goodrich, C., Rashid, T., Anjum, A., Hsu, D., et al. (2005). Cross-cultural reactions to academic sexual harassment: effects of individualist vs. collectivist culture and gender of participants. Sex Roles: A Journal of Research.
Snyder, M., & Swann, W. B. (1978). Hypothesis-testing processes in social interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 1202-1212
Stangor, C., Lynch, L., Duan, C., & Glass, B.(1992). Categorization of individuals on the basis of multiple socail features. Journal of Personality and Socail Psychology, 62, 207-218.
Sternberg, R. J. (1988). Triangulating love. In R. J. Sternberg & M.L. Barnes (Eds.), The psychology of love. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Sternberg, R. J. (1998). Cupid’s arrow: The course of love through time. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Thorn, J., Gershman, M., Palmer, P., and Pietrusza, D. (eds.) 1999), Total Baseball, Sixth Edition, New York: Total Sports.
Triplett, N. (1898). The dynamogenic factors in peacemaking and competition. American Journal of Psychology, 9, 507-533.
Vallone,R. P., Ross, L & Lepper,M.R.(1985). The hostile media phenomenon: Biased perception and perceptions of media bias in coverage of the "Beirut Massacre." and Social Psychology Journal," 49, 577-585.
Williams, J.E., & Best, D.L. (1990a). Measuring sex stereotypes: A multination study. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Zajonc, R.B. (1965). Social faciliation. Science,149, 269-274.
The formula Wu Mei Wan, designed to warm and cool simultaneously, calming ascarids (a parasitic nematode of family Ascaridae) to relieve pain, consists of the following:
Clearing The Upper And Warming The Lower Part Of The Body
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
72: PROTOCOL: ERROR-CONTROL/ LAP-B/HDX
78: PROTOCOL: LAP-M/HDX V.42
An operator is something, usually a sign like + or -, that is used to manipulate different entities. The entities manipulated are called operands. If you have experience with programming, SQL or even simple computer languages like spreadsheet formulae, you should be familiar with a lot of them already. In the last chapter, we have already introduced the assignment operator. In this chapter, we will go into detail about the most useful operators. (Note: dot and array access operators are also useful, but we'll save that till later when we learn about properties and methods.)
What are the most useful operators?
An arithmetic operator is an operator that does maths for you. The four basic arithmetic operators are as follows:
+ does addition.
/ does division.
Error!
However, this will give you an error. This is because 1 + 1 is only an expression with a value of 2; it is not a statement. (Recall: statements tell the computer to do something.) Therefore, we should write this instead:
Again, just take the 'trace' thing for granted for now. Enter this into the ActionScript of the first frame and preview your Flash file. '2' should appear on the output box.
In addition to the above, a less frequently used operator, %, can calculate the remainder of a division operation. 10 % 3, for example, returns 1. Other operations (such as exponents, square roots, etc.) cannot be evaluated using operators and we'll learn them later.
One peculiarity of Flash is that + acts as both the addition operator and the text concatenation operator. The text concatenation operator turns two strings into one. For example, by concatenating "This is" and " Sparta" (note the space before Sparta), we'll get "This is Sparta". If we concatenate "This is" and "Sparta", however, we'll get "This isSparta", which is undesirable.
If the entites on either side of the + sign are both numbers, the + will act as the addition operator. Otherwise, the + will act as a text concatenation operator. Here's an example:
Comparison operators are operators which compare two entities and return a Boolean value.
The equality operator (==) compares two entites and determines whether they are exactly the same. If it's the same, it returns true; otherwise, it returns false. Here's some sample code:
Note that the last one is false because the equality operator is case-sensitive.
When we're working with composite data types, we need to be more careful. The equality operator will only return true if they are referring to the same entity. Even if we have two distinct identical entities, the equality operator will return false. In this example, let's imagine there are two dogs. One is called Spot, and it has another name, Bandian (which is Chinese for 'spot'). The other is called 'Lucky' and they are twins, and are physiologically the same in every way.
Sometimes, we compare two entities of different data types, such as 23 and "23". In this case, the equality operator will still return true by automatically converting "23" to 23 for you. If you don't want this automatic conversion, use the strict equality operator (===).
Flash provides several inequality operators for all your comparing needs.
The first operator is !=. != does the opposite of ==: if the two are equal, it returns false, and if the two are unequal, it returns true. Consider the following code:
You've probably noticed that != also converts the data types where necessary. If you don't want that to happen, use !==.
The other four operators are , =. They do the same as , ≤ and ≥ in mathematics. If you need a quick refresher, here you go:
< means 'smaller than'.
> means 'larger than'.
<= means 'smaller than or equal to'.
>= means 'larger than or equal to'.
We can also compare strings. No, really! The strings are converted into their Unicode code points in order to be compared. See Unicode/Character reference/0000-0FFF for the code points.
With letters of the same case, later letters have larger values than earlier letters, so a B.
Like most languages, the most important logical operators are AND, OR and NOT.
&& is ActionScript's AND operator. Its operands must be Boolean. If both operands are true, it returns true; otherwise, it returns false.
|| is ActionScript's OR operator. Its operands must be Boolean. If neither operand is true, it returns false; otherwise, it returns true.
Note that there must be two ampersands for AND and two vertical bars for OR.[1]
! (pronounced 'bang') is ActionScript's NOT operator. It is added before the operand.It flips Boolean variables around: false becomes true and true becomes false.
We've already met the simple assignment operator in the last chapter, but there's something else we need to clarify first. The simple assignment operator actually does two distinct things:
With primitive data types, the assignment operator simply copies the assigned value to the variable.
With other data types, the assignment operator puts a link to the assigned entity inside the variable!
What does this mean?
Here, Flash copied the value "Wikibooks" to string_2. After we changed string_2 to "Wikipedia", the original string_1 is not affected. Consider another situation with a non-primitive data type, Dog:
The first line is a comment; we'll talk about that at the end of the chapter. You don't have to understand the third line, either; just assume that it changes the species of nicestDog to 'pekingese'. Now, do you think changing nicestDog's species to 'pekingese' will genetically alter Spot, a chihuahua, into a pekingese? The answer is yes. This is because nicestDog only contains a link to spot.
There are two types of compound assignment operators. We will only talk about the type that combines assignment and arithmetic operators. If you're interested, you can check the official Flash documentation to learn about the other type.
Compound assignment operators always work with numbers. There are five of them, each corresponding to one arithmetic operator:
+=, the addition and reassignment operator
-=, the subtraction and reassignment operator
*=, the multiplication and reassignment operator
/=, the division and reassignment operator
%=, the modulus and reassignment operator
What these operators do is to perform an operation on the left operand and the right operand, then assign the value to the left operand. In other words,
Let's better = understand this concept with an example.
In this example, Flash multiplied number_1 with 5, then assigned the value to number_1.
What do assignment operators return?
So far, we've seen that arithmetic operators, logical operators, comparison operators and and the text concatenation operator all return a value. Since assignment operators can be statements per se, does that mean they do not return a value?
In fact, assignment operators do return values. The value returned by an assignment operator is the value assigned to the left operand. For example, a = 2 returns the value 2, while a /= 2 returns half the original value of a.
The following code may look counter-intuitive, but it works:
Here, a += 1 returns 7. The round brackets are to allow the operation inside it to be performed first; we'll discuss that later.
The postfix increment operator, written as variableName++
The prefix increment operator, written as ++variableName
The postfix decrement operator, written as variableName--
The prefix decrement operator, written as --variableName
Both incremental operators add 1 to integral variables, and both decremental operators subtract 1 from integral variables. They are statements in their own rights. For example:
As you can see, incremental and decremental operators when the are statements per se. However, we sometimes want to place the incremental operator into another statement. With the postfix increment/decrement operators, everything else will be evaluated before going back to the increment/decrement. With the prefix increment/decrement operators, the increment/decrement will be evaluated before everything else.
If that sounds confusing, look at the following examples:
In our first example, myFirstNumber was traced before the increment operation. That's why we still see 10 in the first trace statement. The second trace statement displays the computed value 11.
Remember the order of operations (PEMDAS or BOMDAS/BIMDAS) you learnt in Maths class? ActionScript also applies different operators in a fixed order.
In ActionScript, there are two things we need to consider when determining the order of operations: operator precedence and operator associativity.
Operators that only involve one operand, such as NOT (!), are the first to be evaluated. (These are called unary operators if you want to know.)
Next on the list are *, / and %.
Then come the comparison operators.
Then the logical operators AND and OR.
The last ones are the assignment operators.
If we want a certain operation to have higher precedence, we should use the grouping operator, which is a pair of round brackets: (). We've already met that before, when we learnt about assignment operators. Let's take another look at that example:
Error!
This is because var someNumber:Number = 3 + a is performed first. var someNumber:Number = 3 + a returns a value of 6. You can't assign a value to a constant, or the world would be a very chaotic place! That's why Flash will return an error.
Consider the expression someNumber = 3 * 2 + 5 * 6. 3 * 2 and 5 * 6 have the same precedence, so which one should be performed first? Operator associativity answers this question. In this case, since the associativity of + is 'left to right', 3 * 2 is evaluated first, then 5 * 6, and finally 6 + 30.
The associativities of +, -, *, /, and % operators are all left to right, while those assignment are right to left.
Let's run a script with lots of operators to see the effects of operator precedence and associativity.
The second trace is much more complicated. The operator with the lowest precedence here is &&, whose precedence is even lower than the comparison operators. The associativity of && is left to right, so the computer needs to evaluate the code on the left of && (1 + 3 / 5 != 2) first. 1 + 3 / 5 = 1.6, which is not equal to 2. Therefore, the left side returns the value true. Now to the right side. In 4 - 3 >= 1, 4 - 3 = 1, so 1 >= 1 returns true. Since both sides of the && are true, the trace statement returns true.
How can I add a comment?
Now that we've learnt all the difficult operators, let's end the chapter with a very simple concept.
A comment is some text that is added to the script to give information. They will be ignored by the compiler. The following example shows two types of comment:
Don't actually copy-paste this into a Flash file.
There will be no visible results. */
The first comment, enclosed by /* and */, allows for multiple lines. /* marks the beginning of the comment and */ marks the end of it. This type of comment can also be added in the middle of a line. They are widely used for elements such as to-do lists and copyright information.
The second comment starts with // and is added to the end of the line. It cannot extend over one line. This type of comment is usually used to explain code.
Sometimes, we may want to 'hide' some code for testing or debugging. This process, called commenting out, is also achieved with comments.
Now that we've learnt all our operators, we can move on to the next chapter: functions.
Robotics brings together several very different engineering areas and skills. There is metalworking for the body. There is mechanics for mounting the wheels on the axles, connecting them to the motors and keeping the body in balance. You need electronics to power the motors and connect the sensors to the controllers. At last you need the software to understand the sensors and drive the robot around.
This book tries to cover all the key areas of robotics as a hobby. When possible examples from industrial robots will be addressed too.
You'll notice very few "exact" values in these texts. Instead, vague terms like "small", "heavy" and "light" will be used. This is because most of the time you'll have a lot of freedom in picking these values, and all robot projects are unique in available materials.
A PDF version is available. (info)
Note to potential contributors: this section could be used to discuss the basics of robot design/construction.
This section could be used to discuss various means through which robots are constructed.
This section could be used to discuss the control method and control algorithm introduces and analyzes the robot, including the position control, trajectory control, force control, torque control, compliance control, hybrid force / position control, decomposition motion control, variable structure control, adaptive control and hierarchical control, fuzzy control, learning control, neural control and evolutionary control, intelligent control.
The basic structure of the position control
The basic principle of variable structure control
The evolution of the mobile robot autonomous navigation control
This section could be used to discuss components used in robotics or the making of robots.
This section could be used to discuss the things involved with controlling robots via computers.
Sensors that a robot uses generally fall into three different categories:
Feedback sensors tell the robot what it is actually doing, and
Communication sensors allow a human or computer to provide a robot other information.
Sensors aren't perfect. When you use a sensor on your robot there will be a lot of times where the sensors acts funny. It could miss an obstacle, or see one where none is. Key to successfully using sensors is knowing how they function and what they really measure.
This section could be used to cover "special" robots.
b. if not educator the souls would remain savage, ignorant: SWAB:#98, 126
a. Consider, for instance, the revelation of the light of the Name of God, the Educator: GL:XCIII:189-190
a. Wert thou to consider, for but a little while, the outward works and doings of Him Who is the Eternal Truth, thou wouldst fall down upon the ground, and exclaim: O Thou Who art the Lord of Lords! I testify that Thou art the Lord of all creation, and the Educator of all beings, visible and invisible: GL:CXV:243
b. Prophets of God are the perfect material, human and divine educators: SAQ:III:9-13
c. Prophets of God are the real Educators, the perfect Instructors of mankind: PUP:364
d. Manifestations of God come to educate and illumine mankind...first Teachers and Educators of humanity: PUP:330
e. Prophets of God are divine educators: SWAB:#102, 128
b. if parents neglect education of children they will be held responsible: TAB:III:577; SWAB:#98, 127
c. parents must strive with all effort to train children:
d. parents must set aside part of income for education of children, giving it to a trustee with knowledge of the House of Justice: SW IX:7; TB:90
e. every mother and father must counsel children over long period, guide them to those things which lead to everlasting honour: SWAB:#108, 134
g. mothers should think of educating not fondling and embracing and spoiling children: 'Abdu'l-Baha in DMAS 9/2/13, in SW VII:15, pp. 141-144
h. parents must take child out of school where there are heedless ones who will try to lead him astray: SW IX:8, 89-96
i. do not allow children to drink alcoholic drinks: SW VII:15
j. protect children from temptations and vices: SW VII:15
k. My hope is that your parents may educate you spiritually and give you thorough moral training: PUP:92
o. duty of parents to perfectly and thoroughly train their children; have abundant love love for them and exert utmost in training them: TAB:II:262
p. parents who are united and harmonized bring up children in love and knowledge, the gift and training of God: TAB:III:605-606
q. before born, for child are destined two founts of gleaming milk, eyes to watch over thee, and hearts to love thee: Persian Hidden Words, #29
r. best of all ways to worship God is to educate children and train them in all the perfections of humankind, no nobler deed: SWAB:#114, p. 139
a. Unto every father hath been enjoined the instruction of his son and daughter in the art of reading and writing and in all that hath been laid down in the Holy Tablet: KA:K48, 37; TB:128
c. He that putteth away that which is commanded unto him, the Trustees are then to take from him that which is required for their instruction if he be wealthy, and, if not, the matter devolveth upon the House of Justice: KA:K48, 37; TB:128
d. Should a father neglect this most weighty commandment laid down in the Kitab-i-Aqdas by the Pen of the Eternal King, he shall forfeit rights of fatherhood, and be accounted guilty before God: KA:Q105, 138
f. wise father plays with his children: SW IX:8, 89-96
g. if father fails in duty to teach children then must be compelled to discharge this responsibility: SWAB:#101, 127-128
h. if father unable to teach children then responsibility to do so devolves upon the House of Justice: SW IX:7, 81-88; SWAB:#101, 128
i. if parents neglect education of children they will be held responsible: TAB:III:577; SWAB:#98, 127
j. parents must strive with all effort to train children:
k. parents must set aside part of income for education of children, giving it to a trustee with knowledge of the House of Justice: SW IX:7; TB:90
l. every mother and father must counsel children over long period, guide them to those things which lead to everlasting honour: SWAB:#108, 134
m. parents must take child out of school where there are heedless ones who will try to lead him astray: SW IX:8, 89-96
n. do not allow children to drink alcoholic drinks: SW VII:15
o. protect children from temptations and vices: SW VII:15
p. My hope is that your parents may educate you spiritually and give you thorough moral training: PUP:92
t. duty of parents to perfectly and thoroughly train their children; have abundant love love for them and exert utmost in training them: TAB:II:262
u. parents who are united and harmonized bring up children in love and knowledge, the gift and training of God: TAB:III:605-606
v. teach children so that they will peruse divine verses every morning and evening: Baha'u'llah, in Compilation of Compilations, I, #5
w. every father must educate his children, both boys and girls, in sciences and morals, crafts and professions: Baha'u'llah, in Compilation of
x. father must always endeavour to educate son and acquaint him with heavenly teachings, give him advice, exhort him, teach him praiseworthy conduct and character, enable him to study in school, acquire such arts and sciences as are useful and necessary, remembrance of God: 'Abdu'l-Baha, in
b. teachers must be attracted, assured, educated and refined believers: SW VII:15
c. teachers must be familiar with child psychology: SW VII:15
d. teachers must be well grounded in science of pedagogy: SW VII:15
f. mentor must be doctor to the character of the child as well as educator, remedy faults, give learning and rear to have spiritual nature, heal spiritual ailments: SWAB:#103, 130
g. thanks to loving efforts of teacher of primary school child may reach highest levels of achievement; may lift some child of small account to the exalted throne: SWAB:#104, 132
a. urged to become mother and father to orphans: SW VII:13, 122
a. Address yourselves to the promotion of the well-being and tranquillity of the children of men. Bend your minds and wills to the education of the peoples and kindreds of the earth, that haply the dissensions that divide it may, through the power of the Most Great Name, be blotted out from its face, and all mankind become the upholders of one Order, and the inhabitants of one City: GL:CLVI:333-334
c. every one of friends of God has inescapable duty to promote knowledge and learning: SWAB:#97, 126; #102, 129
d. every believer must be active and progressive in the field of inventions and the arts: SWAB:#102, 129
e. every believer must endeavour to rectify the conduct of men and seek to excel the whole world in moral character: SWAB:#102, 129
f. train these children with divine exhortations. From their childhood instill in their hearts...Teach them to free themselves: PUP:53
a. gathering of women believers for purposes of teaching and training children must be entirely spiritual and concerned with every means of training the girl children: SWAB:#94, 123-124
Type:CaterpillarBinomial:Spodoptera exiguaFamily:NoctuidaeOrder: LepidopteraMetamorphosis:CompleteDamaging stages:Larval
The beet armyworm (Spodoptera exigua) is one of the most well-known agricultural pest insects. It is also known as the asparagus fern caterpillar, and the adult moth is known in the UK (where it is an immigrant and not known to breed) as the small mottled willow. It is native to Asia, but has been introduced worldwide and is now found almost anywhere its many host crops are grown.
The wide host range of the beet armyworm includes asparagus, beans and peas, sugar and table beets, celery, cole crops, lettuce, potato, tomato, cotton, cereals, oilseeds, tobacco, many flowers, and a multitude of weed species. The beet armyworm does not tolerate cold. It can overwinter in warm areas, such as Florida and Hawaii, but in colder areas it dies off during the winter and the region is reinvaded by the adult moth as the weather warms and crop plants sprout.
The caterpillars are greenish-brown cutworms, soft and bulging caterpillars with dark longitudinal stripes. The adult is a drab brown or gray moth 2 to 3 cm in wingspan.
The larvae feed on the foliage of plants, and can completely defoliate small ones. Smaller larvae devour the parenchyma of leaves, so that all that remains is the thin epidermis and veins. Larger larvae tend to burrow holes through thick areas of plants. For example, they will burrow straight into a head of lettuce rather than neatly removing tissue from one particular leaf. This renders the produce unmarketable. They attack buds and new growth on plants, preventing flowers from opening, new leaves from sprouting, and vegetables from developing. As the smaller larvae move about they leave strands of silk behind, netting the leaves with a silvery film.
Overwinters only in warm climates, but migrates during the growing season.
Cultural controls: Eliminate weed hosts, timely disposal of crop wastes.
Predators and parasites: Predatory bugs including Minute pirate bugs (Orius; bigeye bugs, (Geocoris spp.), damsel bugs, (Nabis spp.) (Hemiptera: Nabidae); and a predatory shield bug, Podisus maculiventrisWasps (including Chelonus insularis, Cotesia marginiventris, and Meteorus autographae)
Fire ants, Solenopsis invictaBiocontrols (microscopic): Bacillus thuringensis (selected strains); fungi including Beauveria bassiana Erynia and Nomurea rileyi, Nuclear Polyhedrosis Virus, Predatory Nematodes
For the original seven factions, see Civ/Sid Meier's Alpha Centauri/Factions. Also see Civ/Sid Meier's Alpha Centauri/Understanding the game.
No penalties for Cybernetic Social Engineering choice.
-1 Growth is a pretty huge penalty for a landward faction, but it does not even compare with the benefits this faction has. The efficiency (and ability to run Market), combined with the Research bonus makes this group a powerhouse by any definition, but when you add in the tech-steal ability, what you get is a faction that can stand up to any of the original seven, and then some! Their aversion is one you'd not run anyway (Fundamentalist), so essentially what you get is Deirdre's efficiency, Zakharov's research, and none of their crippling disabilities (Deirdre's lack of cash via market, and Zakharov's drones). That puts the faction in a position to do amazing things. So what if you have to build your own network nodes...with techsteal, active probes, and your inherent research bonus, getting and keeping the tech lead will not be difficult for this faction, growth penalty or no. The "no penalties for Cybernetic" thing is of little consequence, as by the time you are able to make that switch, the game is pretty well won or lost. Still, it's an interesting footnote that you don't need the Network Backbone to get around Cybernetic's negatives when playing this faction.
Played this way, you take advantage of your Techsteal ability by not taking advantage of it. Nobody will want to attack you for fear of your being able to rip down a base and steal their proprietary research, so if you're content to play nice, they'll probably be content to let you, and you can make good on your threat anytime you like...just go for Nonlinear Mathematics pretty early on (that being about the only deviation from the more Builder-oriented techs), and you can make good on the implied threat...since you start with Applied Physics, you're only one step away, which is great for you. As the consciousness, of course, you want to get those lab-enhancing facilities built as quickly as possible to further enhance your native +2 Research bonus, but that will mean building at least some energy banks and the like to help pay maintenance, so if you pursue the Builder path, then do it with a vengeance.
One thing that will help your Builder game is the Growth penalty. Bases won't be springing up to size in an uncontrolled fashion, and in general, you will have plenty of time to get all your Rec. Commons in place before it becomes an issue.
Impact weapons, Mobility, and Flex, and you're armed and doubly dangerous, as each one of your troopers is as good as a probe team too, if he's the one who moves into an enemy base. That, combined with your ability to do something other than fight (+2 Research) and do it efficiently, makes you a terrific choice for Hybrid style. Since you'll probably keep a standing army at the ready as soon as you get the techs to put something decent together (and you'll get those techs at a pretty good clip, thanks to your inherent strengths), you'll be in a much better position than your Builder cousins to make good on the threat of ripping down their defenses and stealing their techs(an ability which, by the way, lets you selectively ignore certain tech paths, knowing full well that when you get in a war, you'll be netting those techs anyway). Simply put, you will be hard pressed to find a better Hybrid faction in the game.
Again, your techsteal ability is pivotal to your entire game. In this case, ignore the juicy Builder techs entirely...you'll get them anyway when you tear down their bases. Just get a core group of mobile, heavily gunned attackers and make everybody else pay. Even without focusing on Network Nodes right away, you will still out tech everybody but Zakharov in the game, which means you can have your prototype Impact Rover rolling off the assembly lines before most folks have their prototype Synth-garrisons in place, and the math is very much on your side.
Free Naval Yard (with Doctrine: Initiative).
Your advantages grow over time as more techs are discovered, but even with what you have at the outset, the faction is a powerhouse by any definition. First consider that you begin the game in total isolation. No one can attack you at all until they get Doctrine: Flexibility, and build a fleet. Even then, all of the important advantages are yours in terms of sea-battling, and that only becomes more true as the game wears on. Next, is your inefficiency. Just as with Lal, this is easily overcome via the simplest of base facilities, and is not much to lose sleep over, and the Growth penalty simply keeps the faction from running away with the game. Sea bases are notoriously good at cranking out food, and when you get a few kelp farms in place, you will be able to grow like a proverbial weed in spite of the –1 Growth. In fact, you'll have such surpluses that you will barely notice it. The only thing that hurts a bit is the inability to execute an "easy" pop-boom, but again, if the Pirates could do that too, they'd simply run away with the game every time.
+1 mineral per square means that your early game mining platforms can keep you on-par and then some with your landlocked cousins, and again, you've got an easy 75 years of pretty much competition-free expansion...probably a hundred or more before someone mounts a serious offensive.
Marine Detachment ability is huge too, enabling you to capture enemy ships and upgrade accordingly (you'll want to cover the newly captured and weakened ships with interceptors to protect them from sniping while vulnerable, but remember, once you get them back to base, they'll be recovered in a single turn, thanks to your naval yards everywhere). You can also capture transports loaded with troops (effectively making the Marine Detachment like a Probe Team that can avoid stacking limits).
It's true, before the advent of fusion power, you will pay a premium for your formers and colony pods, but on the plus side, each base you build comes with a built in pressure dome, so even with fission reactors, they're a bargain for what you're getting.
This faction is a Hybrid player's dream, and there's absolutely no reason why you should not be in the driver's seat, diplomacy wise. You can find and infiltrate all the other factions before they make contact with each other, and with a steadily growing global naval presence, you can oftentimes dictate when or IF your various rivals will meet each other at all, simply sinking their fledgling navies as they come out of port. This kind of control over the ebb and flow of the game is key to influencing the metagame (more on that concept later) for all the players, and for this reason alone, I'd say that if any faction came close to being unbalanced, this is it.
Conquesting is easy for Svensgaard, since you start with two of the key techs you need to go hunting. Get a good weapon (Impact), and you don't even need the rovers...in fact, if you wait till you get Doctrine: Initiative (an early-mid game tech, at best), your infantry units actually become more effective than rovers, given that a transport full of assault marines can sweep in on any coastal base from five squares out and taking the base with complete surprise, and remaining entirely out of sensor range till the moment of the attack...this, combined with your inherent ability to capture transports filled with enemy troopers (at times, effectively doubling the size of your attack force), makes you deadly indeed. Pay close attention to the section on Naval Power...you'll be making heavy use of it.
Yes, air power may well be at the top of the food chain battle-wise, but 99 times in a hundred, initial contact with a faction not on your starting continent will be made in the water. Never forget that, and never underestimate the power inherent in being the first faction in the water to pop sea pods!
% chance that rioting bases will join you
"The Mouse that Roared," would be an excellent descriptor for this faction...their puny research capabilities and punishingly slow start might seem to make them not worth playing, but that sweet industry bonus will more than make up for it in the end.
Simply put, while you may have a lagging research capability, there's nothing whatsoever to prevent you from making hordes of cash (Market), and that influx of energy, coupled with an Industrial capacity that no one else in the game can touch (Yang can come close, but still can't match you, and he has no money anyway), will quickly see you ratcheting up the power chart, and the speed with which you can crank out lab-enhancers and such will quickly undo your measly 20% penalty to research.
Miriam is drawn to Fundamentalist: it plays well with her other abilities and makes her a wretched researcher, but that is not the case with you, and in the absence of choosing Fundamentalist to render your bases and units immune to covert actions, the efficiencies of Democracy become much more attractive in peace time, with Police State in times of crisis (coupled with your inherently fewer drones to begin with).
Minerals drive the early game, and he who can build the most stuff the fastest will win. Nobody builds stuff faster than the Drones. Nobody.
Building stuff quickly is what you guys do! All you need is Planetary Networks, and Doctrine Flex if you start by yourself, and you're off and running. Infiltrate, steal tech in the early game to give you the tools you need, and then use that amazing infrastructure to build everything with lightning speed. By the time you get your Treefarms in place, you'll have to remind yourself that you have a research penalty, things will be rolling along so well for you, and if you're pressed by an attack, it's easy to build a stout army very quickly with cash + your native industry. Domai must be fairly active at least in the early game) as a Builder though, much in the same vein as Miriam's Builder game. Probes are about the only way you can reach those much needed early game techs in reasonable time, so use them!
Essentially, you make use of some of that incredible industrial advantage by "blunting" it slightly. In the early game, a high industry rating is nearly the same as a high support rating, enabling you to carry more units per base, cutting down your minerals available, but still building things reasonably quickly. What this means is that you'll be able to keep pace, build-wise, and support a big enough army/exploration force that no one will want to press you. The Research penalty truly IS a penalty in the early game, and you won't have a lot to do for the first ten years, but after that, and once you've found someone to trade with or steal techs from, you'll soon find yourself with a lot of new capabilities. One of the coolest features of the Drones is the ability to snag rioting bases from other factions, and this opens up whole new vistas for you and your probes, enabling you to get a toehold on continents by enciting drone riots and simply moving in, without firing a shot.
Big Industry = Big Army. Probe. Techsteal. Build more stuff, more quickly. Drones win. Game. (And with the Drones, it really is that simple!)
25% cheaper probe actions
A faction not given much consideration, in general, because unlike the others, they lack a well-founded ideological base, however, a closer look reveals that this group plays borrows heavily from Lal's Peacekeepers, Morgan, and the Nautilus Pirates in terms of playstyle...admittedly without any of their advantages, but that's okay, as they've got numerous advantages of their own.
Roze's singular negative is practically meaningless, while her other abilities are quite useful. +2 Probe effectively gives every unit you have the "Polymorphic Encryption" enhancement (for free!), further enhanced by actually giving that ability to your units if you feel the need to. Essentially this makes it almost ruinously expensive to steal bases or units away from you, enabling you to leave your units single stacked far more often than your opposition (which is great from a combat perspective). That, combined with your own, correspondingly cheaper probe actions puts you firmly in the driver's seat where Covert Ops are concerned. Add that to your sharetech3 ability (gives you the same effect as the Planetary Datalinks for free!), and what you have is a faction that is quite capable of defending itself from a variety of attacks, and able to zero in on specific areas of the tech tree, relying on the fact that your sharetech3 will enable you to pick up new technological advances from areas outside of what you are pursuing as those techs are traded and passed around the other factions. In fact, to make the most of your sharetech ability, you should play this group as a synthesis of Morgan, Lal, and Svensgaard. Seeing that the other factions are in contact with each other is very important to you, as it increases the likelihood of techs being traded around, which gives you direct benefits (and, if no one seems willing to trade tech with you in the game, you've got your probe teams to get them anyway!).
Your only Social Engineering aversion is Power, and that's one that doesn't really work well with this group in any case, so even if you could pick it, odds are good that you wouldn't. You're not hampered by a lack of energy, or any research or drone penalties, and that, combined with your probes, will very quickly put you in a position of dominance.
Morgan must rely on his additional cash windfall to subvert enemy troops that land, but you (with your cheaper cover ops rates) can accomplish the same ends with less money, putting you in the same or better position as Morgan, probe-wise.
Combatively, your troops are only average, but with your probe teams, it is entirely possible to stay in Free Market for the entire game and simply steal your opponents' bases one at a time, buying them out from under him, and stealing enemy troops as they drive up to try and get the base back.
Later in the game, the presence of a Covert Ops Center in each base, you've effectively got a +4 Probe rating, rendering you immune to probe actions a la Miriam, without any of her disadvantages! (Effectively giving you your own private "Hunter-Seeker Algorithm!")
Regardless of your style of play, Probe Teams will play heavily into your overall strategy, and the Builder's game is no exception. As you've read before though, anybody who relies heavily on Probe Teams (Domai, Miriam, Yang, Cha'Dawn, and you especially), must play a fairly active Builder's game. Thus, your goal in the Data Angel Builder game is to mind your own business, building probes anytime you get a few free turns in a base's build queue, sending out the probe foils to go find the others, and keeping the rover and infantry based ones milling about your empire (or sneaking across a rival's border, if you've got company on your continent). If the bad guys come calling, a little bit of cash will net you with a bigger army, a weaker opponent, and fewer worries. Also, if one of your neighbors decides to continue to raise a fuss, drive a few probe foils over to his infrastructure poor (and thus, relatively inexpensive) bases and simply buy his empire away from him one piece at a time.
Played this way, it's all about getting out and meeting people. Your favored SE settings will tend to put you in good standing with both Lal and Morgan (and sometimes, with fickle Svensgaard), and these are the more commerce-oriented factions, generally eager to trade and make treaties, so go out, meet interesting people from exotic, far-off lands, and infiltrate them, relying on your Builderesque approach to warfare. With Roze, you can run your entire exploration effort via probe teams and transport foils, which means you can stick to Market in all but the more dire circumstances.
Run a brief, early period of Market to get yourself built up to a position of power, making use of Market's energy boon to give you the important early game mobility and combat techs relatively quickly, then, construct a medium-sized force, augmented with money and probes and go hunting! If you come across a base that looks like it might be a tough fight, fine. Buy it, add the garrison to your strike force, and keep moving. It is entirely possible for you to buy even a base with a number of secret projects in it on the cheap, something even Morgan is hard-pressed to do at times!
Widely considered to be the weakest faction in the game, the Cult is still quite fun to play! Their planet bonus and lack of industrial might and cash makes it imperative that you play to this group's natural strengths, and that means going native with a vengeance! The Cult "Out-Greens" even Deirdre, able to catch more worms, more quickly. This in turn (if you have pod-scattering on) enables you to go pod-popping early on, which increases your chance of catching still more worms and that can very rapidly put you in a position to launch an early-game worm rush.
The vast majority of the factions in the game have no trouble with getting to +1 energy per square, which means they'll have no trouble out-teching you. Because of this, and because of your native strengths, you must play to the metagame and become the spoiler. Specifically, this means doing everything you can to enhance the power of your native life, attacking rivals who are running Market in order to deny them access to their much-cherished money. Simply put, you can win the battle and the war by taking the fight to a Marketeer. If they drop out of Market to fight you, you win by forcing them away from their principle source of money and tech (exception: Morgan!), and if not, you will run over them, given their –3 Planet Rating!
It's not that you don't build well...you do okay at that, at least as well as the Spartans, but the trouble is, without some serious crawlers to augment your lagging energy production, lab-enhancers just aren't going to benefit you as much as some of the other factions. This is not to say that you should avoid them, only to point out that you will need to augment your infrastructure with a bit of an energy kick in order to get yourself up to something near parity with your Market-loving rivals (and, set up this way, when you succeed in driving your rivals away from Market, you will actually be out-producing them!) Nonetheless, pure Builder Style is a difficult game for Cha'Dawn, as you must be active if you hope to exploit your position relative to Marketeers. Also, as with the other technologically lagging factions, you must take an active stance with your Probe Teams, though, like Yang, you will seldom be in a cash-rich enough of a position to make use of many of the covert ops requiring you to spend credits. Still, as a means of keeping tech parity, Probe Teams should play an integral part of your strategy.
Much more natural a style with this faction. In times of peace, you can devote yourself to the creating of fungal barriers and fungal farms, and building up your mineral and energy position via crawlers (both of which will help you offset your starting negatives), all the while, searching out your rival factions. Once you find someone, infiltrate, and as soon as you see them making a switch to Market, hammer them hard with your captured worm force!
Sleek and fast, and...pure native! This is actually one of the simplest and most different ways of playing the game.
The first thing you need to do is catch a worm. Just send your scout out to play in the fungus, and before long, you'll be all set. Send your worm out to pop some serious pods, and try to catch another worm. Essentially, this means more playing in the fungus for you (and all the while, your bases are slowly but steadily working on Colony Pods to continue your expansion). Once you've got two worms, you're really rolling, because now the first can continue the pod-popping crusade (which will go far in keeping you in the ball-park, tech-wise), and the other can begin some serious worm farming (getting three chances per turn, unlike your scout's one) to stir up some native life. At this point, you're in prime position to get ready to do a big worm rush (and it generally only takes 4-6 Worms in the early game).
If you're alone on your continent, then your next two overriding goals ought to be Planetary Networks (for Probe Teams) and Doctrine: Flexibility (for transports) so you can go make some greedy Marketeer pay!
3-Res armour researched at start
Note: some people disagree with Velociryx's assessment of the alien factions. Feel free to make this more neutral.
Arguably overpowered in human hands, almost to the point of making the game tedious. It's a cakewalk. Nobody will have much luck in attacking, you begin with a recycling tanks at every base, which means that you don't have to worry as much about terraforming, and farms are not really needed much at all until the midgame. All in all, you have a vastly simplified game, with more techs at game start, and an almost unbelievably strong defensive position.
This group was designed for the Builder game. You can play the part of the turtle, and do quite well. A program of rapid expansion will see you filling up the continent quickly (possibly switching to battle mode if you see that you're not alone, and sweeping them off the map before they can build to any significance), then, just become a hermit. Terraform to your heart's content and use your impressive tech lead (and it will be impressive) to hammer the daylights out of anybody who wants to spoil your fun!
Also easy to do. With your tech lead in the beginning, augmented by automatic Recycling tanks at all bases, your research will be top notch. That alone will make the Hybrid game easy, because you will be able to field better troops than most, if not all of your opponents. That, coupled with the fact that your 25% defensive bonus kicks in from the moment you take over a base makes it unlikely that the opposition will be able to root you out, once you get a foothold.
Again, fairly easy to do, but, with H'minee, you're probably better off simply subverting human bases to avoid population flight, and again, captured garrisons will gain that additional 25% defensive bonus from the moment you take control of the base.
3-Res armour researched at start
Note: some people disagree with Velociryx's assessment of the alien factions. Feel free to make this more neutral.
Again, an almost impossibly easy game, no matter what level of play you select. You get all the advantages of Miriam's attackers, with none of her disadvantages, a morale boost besides that, a free recycling tanks at each base (which, as per the Caretakers, dramatically speeds up your game), and three techs at game start. You would have to try hard not to win the game with these guys! With normal research rates, your tech will be as good, if not better than everybody around you (especially since you are guaranteed of one extra energy per base, with your free Recycling Tanks, and three techs at game start), and with your attack bonuses you are, simply put, a terror.
Sure, you can do this well, but why? Of course, if you're just looking to play the Builder's game with the ultimate "big stick," then this faction will do the job for you. No one will want to attack you, figuring that if you're content to build, in most cases, they'll be content to let you. At least you're not attacking them!
A cakewalk. Again, in times of peace, nobody will even breathe hard in your direction for fear of provoking you, and you can focus on infrastructure, and, if the time comes to attack...well, your faction was born and bred for it!
You could do this with your eyes closed! Just follow the human-faction momentum paradigms with a vengeance and you will beat them at their own game every time. Probe teams and foils first, then sweep in for the kill, and you have a leg up again, thanks to the free Rec. Tanks at the outset!
This information was originally written by Velociryx in his SMAC FAQ. Used with permission.
Forward to the first page of Predicate Logic.
Backward to the last page of Sentential Logic.
Further back to the first page of Sentential Logic.
‘capital’ ‘chair’ ‘stool (physiological)’ ‘professorship’
(For areas without shading there is no information yet.)
< False Friends of the Slavist Homepage
Up to 50% of neurons that develop die during the course of normal development. The fact that neurons that make incorrect connections are more likely to die suggests that cell death increases the overall accuracy of synaptic connections.
There are three evidences that suggest that neural cells die since they fail to compete with others and fail at life preserving:
Destroying some neurons before the period of neuron death increases the survival rate of the remainder
Increasing the number of axons that initially synapse on a target decreases survival rate of the remainder
Location Manager: Player; Person in charge of finding and securing locations where the non-studio filming takes place. Involves dealing with owners and neighbors (kissing a lot of a--) and knowing how to pay people off.
You can use Distel on top of this, for extra functionality.
This is about conditioning rope made out of natural fibers. Don't singe nylon ropes! ;)
Conditioning is done to give the rope properties like a particular softness and look, and more durability.
Directly after you made your rope, and also after washing, it is a good idea to stretch the rope. Adjust one end somewhere and pull at the other end as hard as you can! If you are stretching your rope after washing or dying, it is required stretching it for a couple of days. This is also referred to as "drying under load".
The purpose of that is to even out the forces in the rope, and the rope will stretch anyway, better it does not stretch too much when you have tied someone in it. If rope gets wet, especially hemp rope, it shrinks.
After you have twisted and stretched your rope, a good plausible next step would be singeing. That means holding it over a flame for a short moment to burn the little fibers that are sticking out.
The purpose of it is getting the rope "faster" because after singeing the rope is smoother and sticks less at itself and other things, like the clothing of your model. Furthermore it gets a nice shiny look without the little fibers looking out.
It is a very good idea to clean the soot away with a microfiber cloth afterwards.
Polishing rope is rubbing it at itself. To do it you fix a carabiner (or something else with a smooth surface) for instance at your balcony (outdoor is better), pull one end of your rope through and wrap it a few times around itself. Take the end of the rope in one hand and a rope piece about 40 cm away from the wrap-around-itself in the other. Pull alternately with your right and left hand. It will snow little rope pieces. Then you go a bit further on your rope and do the rub-at-itself with the whole rope.
Polishing rope means aging it artificially. If you would do 10 sessions with it, you would have the same effect (but more sweat). It makes the rope softer and prevents you from looking like you had a beige cat after your first ten rope sessions with you new rope.
You should already have met the internal components of the computer and the peripherals, that sit outside. We are now going to look at two different categories of peripherals. Those that input data into a computer, and those that output data from the computer.
Computers work along the lines shown above, they receive inputs (instructions etc.), they process the input working out what to do with it, then they output some form of result
How do we tell what is an input and what is an output device? Think about it from the computer's perspective. If a device is putting data into the computer in the form of text, sound, images, button presses etc. then it is an input device, if the device is outputting things from the computer such as sound, movement, printing, images etc., then it is an output device. It really is that easy to tell the difference, but be warned, some devices can be both input and output!
When you are using the monitor it displays things that you are doing, such as moving windows and clicking on website links. At no point do you click on the screen or put anything into the monitor. The only thing it does is output information, therefore it is an output device. Easy!
A mouse is used to move a little cursor around the screen, clicking and dragging as you go. if you let go of the mouse, the cursor will stop. The computer is relying on you to move the mouse, the mouse won't move on its own! Therefore it is an input device.
Note whether the following devices are input or output devices (or both!)
Graphics tablet - input or output (if there is a screen on it)
Descriptive Statistics is statistical measures that are used to describe numerical data; this numerical data can be in form of a table, number list, frequency distribution etc.
Common Statistical measures are arithmetic mean (AM) (or average or simply the mean), median, mode and standard deviation.
Text: an encoded version of the template 'macro' code (see below for proper encoding)
PageId: NodeID for the node you want to use for the content for the macro
When you are putting the code for your macro in a template it looks something like this:
To encode this for the RenderMacroContent function follow these steps:
This string should of course be encoded, so it would look like this:
If you want to be able to just "cut & paste" the standard template macro code into your XSLT and have it encoded properly, add this bit of code to a new XSLT:
Then use this to render the encoded XSLT to a test page in your browser (which you can then cut & paste into your XSLT code):
Warning, Umbraco 4 macros with new templates have a different syntax however the XSLT extention still requires the old v3 one so if you copy the macro inserted into a v 4 template you need to change it to v3
i.e.
Go is a strategic, two-player game that originated in ancient China thousands of years ago. It is popular throughout East Asia, and is gaining popularity among computer programmers because of its extraordinary complexity. Whereas the top chess-playing computer programs are now better than the top human grand masters, the best Go-playing computer programs currently in existence can be defeated even by amateur Go players.
The rules of Go are simple, but the strategies complex; the sheer number of legal moves at any point in the game make programming an effective opponent a daunting task. This book endeavors to help the novice who is beginning to write software to play the ancient game of Go, as well as to provide a useful resource to those already skilled in the art.
It is becoming very common for Go players to use the Internet to meet, discuss games, and play one another. Many strong players now regularly play Go online. There is also a growing community of people who write Go software programs, with regular competitions and tournaments between the various Go-playing engines. See How Do I Find Other Programs To Play Against?
Where Do I Start?
The best place to start is with the rules of Go. Once you are comfortable with the rules, you may want to play a few games yourself. At that point you can begin with whichever chapter of this book you find most interesting:
Writing a GTP Engine: the protocol that allows to programs to play Go against each other
Writing an SGF Parser: the file format in which Go games are stored
Writing a Go GUI: the way humans interact with a Go-related program
For the definition of a Horcrux, see Horcrux.
The entire Harry Potter series revolves around the defeat of the Dark Lord, which cannot be complete until all the Horcruxes are destroyed. This article lists the Horcruxes and details about them as best they are known.
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
The entire Horcrux plot starts some forty years before Harry is born, when Tom Riddle asks Professor Slughorn about Horcruxes, whether if having one's soul in two places would allow return from death, would not multiple Horcruxes provide additional security? Would, perhaps, seven be a better number, as seven has so many mystical properties? Professor Slughorn is revolted at the idea, but Riddle does come away with the idea that it is not impossible. Professor Dumbledore, then Transfiguration professor, may have suspected that Riddle was studying Horcruxes; it is likely that he had already removed the books about Horcruxes from the library, as Riddle apparently claimed he could not find them. Hermione was able to retrieve these books from Dumbledore's study with the summoning charm.
Although there does not seem to be any mention of this fact in Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, where Horcruxes were first introduced by name, it is mentioned in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows that Dumbledore thought Riddle had already made one Horcrux before his talk with Professor Slughorn. In fact, this is the case: according to the author, it was Tom Riddle Sr.'s death that allowed creation of the Ring Horcrux, and it was on the night that Riddle killed his father that he stole the ring from his uncle Morfin. In Slughorn's memory we see Tom wearing the ring. So the inescapable conclusion is that the ring was a Horcrux at that point, though almost certainly the only one.
Riddle generally chose to make Horcruxes out of items that had value to him, and chose to hide them in places that were significant to him as well. It is possible that as he created more Horcruxes, the soul shards that he was able to split off and set aside would each be weaker than the previous. Thus, one would expect that the first Horcrux he made would be stronger than the second, which would be stronger than the third, and so forth. This does not seem to be the case; while the remnant of soul that remained within Riddle apparently became very frayed and fragile, each of the Horcruxes was as strongly able to defend itself as the earlier ones.
In the end, Riddle (or Voldemort, as he is later known) does end up making seven Horcruxes, one of them accidentally. These are as follows:
The diary Horcrux. Likely the first one created, and also the first one discovered, this was also made when Tom Riddle was still a student. The author has stated in an online chat that this Horcrux was made by means of Moaning Myrtle's death. Possibly an initial attempt, the value to Riddle of the diary was that it proved he was the true heir of Slytherin; interestingly, it only gained this value after it was made into a Horcrux. This is the only Horcrux that actually generates a simulacrum of Riddle, perhaps it is the only one that is actually allowed to. Hermione's reading suggests that a Horcrux can use the life-force of someone who gets emotionally close to it, using that to regenerate the person who provided the soul, and this is evidently what happened in this case: Riddle regenerated using Ginny's life force. We can see that the diary took no damage from being flushed down the toilet or having ink spilled all over it, which is what we would expect given the characteristics of a Horcrux. This Horcrux was destroyed by Harry in Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets using a Basilisk fang. Dumbledore was actually disturbed by the discovery of this Horcrux; while he had suspected that Riddle had made a Horcrux, the almost cavalier way that this one was risked, solely in order to make trouble, seemed to suggest that it had a rather lower value than a Horcrux, being a ticket to immortality, ought to have.
The ring Horcrux. Very likely the second Horcrux Riddle made, and the second one discovered, this was probably made shortly before we see it on Tom's finger in his fifth or sixth year. The author has stated that it was the death of Tom Riddle Sr. that allowed the creation of this Horcrux. While Dumbledore does not believe Riddle would have wanted to continue wearing it once it was made into a Horcrux, it is possible that Riddle did not yet have any safe place to keep it at that point. He eventually hid it, magically protected, in the ruins of the Gaunt shack; it is certain that he would not actually want to hide it there until he was certain that the original occupants would not be returning. It is also certain that he did not know exactly what the ring was; Marvolo Gaunt thought it was a signet ring bearing the coat of arms of the Peverell family, but the device etched onto the surface was, in fact, the sigil of the Deathly Hallows. The significance of the ring to Riddle was, of course, the illustration of the connection to the pure-blood Peverell family, just as it had been to Morfin Gaunt and Marvolo before him; and its hiding place was significant because it was the home of his mother and grandfather, and thus served as partial proof of his heritage. Professor Dumbledore had retrieved it from there; then, knowing Dumbledore was preparing to destroy it, the Horcrux apparently managed to convince him to put the ring on his finger. The resulting action of the embedded curse caused the damage to Dumbledore's hand that was apparent in Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, and in fact left him with, at best, a year of life. Dumbledore managed, despite the curse, to return to his office, where he destroyed the Horcrux using the sword of Godric Gryffindor.
The locket Horcrux. This is the third Horcrux discovered, but likely the fifth made. The author has stated that it was created from the death of a Muggle tramp. The locket is significant to Tom Riddle (now calling himself Lord Voldemort) because of its direct connection to Salazar Slytherin, who espoused the same belief in pure-blood superiority that Voldemort has adopted, and because it serves as proof that he is descended from Slytherin. The first time we see it, before it is a Horcrux, it is around the neck of Merope Gaunt. She evidently then sells it for a pittance, and it goes on to become one of Hepzibah Smith's treasures. Shortly after Hepzibah's death, it vanished; apparently Tom Riddle had, at this point, stolen it and made it into a Horcrux. As a Horcrux, it was originally hidden in the basin in the cave, which was visited by Harry and Professor Dumbledore in Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince. This cave was significant to Voldemort because it was one of the places where he had first exercised his superiority over Muggles, by torturing some of his fellows from the orphanage. The locket was then stolen by Regulus Black, who replaced the locket with the one that Harry and Dumbledore found, and who passed the locket on to Kreacher with instructions to destroy it. Kreacher was unable to do so. It then passed through Mundungus Fletcher's hands to Dolores Umbridge. Harry and Hermione managed to steal it from Dolores, and eventually Ron destroyed this Horcrux with the sword of Gryffindor. The locket had to be opened before it could be destroyed; Harry discovered that it would open if spoken to in Parseltongue.
The cup Horcrux. This is the fourth Horcrux retrieved, probably the fourth one made, and according to the author was made via the death of Hepzibah Smith. The cup is significant to Voldemort because of its direct connection to Helga Hufflepuff, one of the Four Founders of Hogwarts. We first see it in Hokey's memory, when Hepzibah Smith is showing off her treasures, and assume that it is stolen by Voldemort at her death, at the same time he recovers Slytherin's locket. When we next see the cup, it is locked away in a top-security vault at Gringotts. Harry believes that the location is significant to Voldemort because possession of a vault at Gringotts is proof of ancient Wizarding heritage. The vault is owned by Bellatrix Lestrange, and Voldemort is furious when the Horcrux is stolen from there. The report of the theft of the cup Horcrux starts Voldemort inspecting the places where he has hidden all his Horcruxes to confirm that they still are safe. To his fury, he finds that they are not. The cup Horcrux is carried out of Gringotts by Hermione, and destroyed by her at Hogwarts using a Basilisk fang recovered from the Chamber of Secrets.
Nagini. The seventh Horcrux created, and the fifth revealed, Nagini was used as something of an afterthought. Voldemort needed a sixth Horcrux to complete what he thought was the mystical number of soul pieces (seven), and Nagini was handy at the time when he was murdering Bertha Jorkins. (Voldemort was unaware of the existence of the accidental Horcrux at that point, and remained so throughout the series.) Nagini had been his constant companion to that point, and after becoming a Horcrux, started showing certain human characteristics. It is certain that Nagini and Voldemort were sharing their thoughts when Harry viewed Nagini's attack on Arthur Weasley. Once Voldemort knew that his Horcruxes were under attack, he created protective spells around Nagini to keep her safe; but once Harry was believed dead, he no longer thought that necessary. Nagini was beheaded by Neville Longbottom, using the sword of Gryffindor which had been provided to him by the Sorting Hat.
Harry. The sixth created, and the seventh one revealed, Harry, who doesn't actually merit use of the term "Horcrux", was purely accidental. It was revealed in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows that the act of murdering Harry's parents had caused Voldemort's already shredded soul to tear again, and the detached fragment sought and attached itself to the nearest intact soul it could find, which was Harry's. This soul fragment, resident in Harry, gave him some of Voldemort's abilities, notably the ability to speak to snakes, and provided him an awareness of Voldemort's thoughts and feelings throughout the seven books. Voldemort destroyed this soul fragment when he tried to kill Harry the second time, in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows; he was unable to kill Harry at that time because of the blood protection Harry still carried. But the author has said that with the destruction of the soul fragment, Harry lost the ability to speak Parseltongue.
It is perhaps interesting that no person destroyed more than one Horcrux. Harry, Ron, Hermione, Neville, Dumbledore, Crabbe (indirectly: the diadem fell apart in Harry's hands after being damaged by Crabbe's fiendfyre), and Voldemort each destroyed one of the seven. This illustrates a point that Harry has been trying to make throughout the series, but only verbalizes while in the process of setting up Dumbledore's Army in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix: Harry didn't do all this stuff alone, he had loads of help.
One thing that must be noted is that re-embodiment does not "use up" a Horcrux. Despite being sheared apart, all of the "soul fragments" remain connected, and the purpose of a Horcrux is to anchor the principal soul remnant to the earth by securing the sheared-off portion in an artifact that cannot be translated. When you die, your soul is freed to make the next step; if you have made a Horcrux, that fragment of soul is tied to the ring you used (e.g.) and holds the rest of your soul to the Earth. The Horcrux we see in Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets is an anomaly in this case. It was acting independently, as the principal soul shard had been earlier, to take over another person. In Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, the principal soul fragment partly took over Professor Quirrell, but on Quirrell's death it was released to return to Albania. In Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, if the soul fragment had succeeded in rebuilding itself from Ginny's life force, killing the reconstituted Tom Riddle would almost certainly have freed the soul fragment. Harry destroyed the diary before the Horcrux was fully extracted from it, which similarly freed the soul fragment.
We noted earlier that Voldemort's plan was for there to be seven soul fragments, the original plus six Horcruxes; and Harry's gaining a soul fragment from Voldemort was not actually a Horcrux, as the charm that binds the sheared-off soul fragment to an object was not completed, if it was even begun.
While a murder is necessary to create a Horcrux, it is not sufficient. While the act of murdering someone does result in the soul being torn apart, according to Professor Slughorn, Professor Dumbledore implies that the separated soul fragment will attempt to return to the soul that it was sheared from and re-integrate. This is why Harry carried a piece of Voldemort's soul: it was torn free, but when it attempted to re-attach, Voldemort's soul was no longer there, having been blasted away by the backfire from the Avada Kedavra spell. Creating a Horcrux requires a spell to keep the sheared-off fragment from re-attaching, and to embed it in some object, so while the soul fragment within Harry probably would have acted to hold Voldemort's soul in this plane, it is not actually bound to Harry. Dumbledore commented at one point that he believed Tom's soul was so frayed and damaged by the repeated murders that he could no longer sense when a Horcrux was destroyed; it is uncertain, but is it not possible that one who committed enough murders would be left effectively soulless when their soul frayed away to nothing?
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
One question that has been debated is whether the Elder Wand, an exceptional wand, would provide sufficiently strong magic to destroy a Horcrux? We learn that a Horcrux can defend itself against any damage that could be inflicted by ordinary magic; the Elder Wand, of course, is an extraordinary magical artifact, is not its magic strong enough to destroy a Horcrux? After all, the Killing Curse, cast by Voldemort at Harry using that wand, was sufficient to dispatch the soul fragment that Harry had been carrying; and the wand had not accepted Voldemort as its master at that point.
There is nothing in the books that directly addresses this question. However, it is possible to speculate, and based on that speculation, the apparent answer is that no, the magic of the Elder Wand is not sufficient in and of itself. Our reasoning is as follows: Why did Dumbledore travel all the way back to Hogwarts from the Gaunt shack, and fetch the Sword of Gryffindor out of a display case to break the ring Horcrux if the Elder Wand, of which he was the full master, could have done the job? The apparent difference is this: a Horcrux is a soul fragment that is bound to an object. What was in Harry was in fact not a proper Horcrux at all, but simply a piece of soul more or less along for the ride; as partial evidence for this, we mention that at no time did Dumbledore refer to it as a Horcrux, but always rather as a "soul shard" or "piece of Voldemort's soul." Others, notably Severus Snape, referred to it as a Horcrux in conversation with Dumbledore, and Dumbledore did not contradict them, but also did not agree or use the term himself. Dumbledore also notes that "it is inadvisable" to use a living thing as a Horcrux "because to confide a part of your soul to something that can think and move for itself is obviously a very risky business." (Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince chapter 23, Raincoast edition p.473) This leaves it open as to whether the soul fragment is at risk of destruction if the living creature housing it is killed, or if it remains bound to the body after death of the original resident, so to speak, or if the concern is that the being housing the Horcrux might stray into extraordinary danger on its own part. The sole example we see of this is Nagini, and as she is killed with a weapon that has destroyed Horcruxes, the destruction of the Horcrux in that container is inconclusive.
In order to speculate on what happened there, we also have to speculate on the nature of the Avada Kedavra curse. To wit: Harry's experience in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows leads us to believe that one of the effects of the Curse is to separate soul from body. But that cannot be the full effect; the Curse also works on spiders, and nobody teaches us that spiders have souls, and the end effect of the Dementor's Kiss is not a dead body, but one that is merely "as good as dead". So we have to assume that the Curse also damps the life force somehow... but we can assume that it did not do so in the Forbidden Forest, primarily because Voldemort still had one extant Horcrux, Nagini, even after the soul shard in Harry was dispatched. (Otherwise, Voldemort would have died in the Forest from that spell rebound.) So, the Curse separated Harry's soul, with its rider, from his body. The soul fragment, separated from Harry by the shock, may have tried to return to Voldemort's soul and reattach, and been rebuffed; and then would have evaporated, as the other Horcrux soul fragments apparently did. While it is possible that this particular fragment did reattach, Harry later says that Voldemort must "have some remorse" for his actions, echoing Dumbledore who says that is a necessary part of re-integrating the separated soul fragments. As Voldemort has never felt remorse, we believe that the soul fragment within Harry was not able to reintegrate with what was left of Voldemort's soul.
We can also speculate that the soul fragment riding Harry, lacking the blood protection that Harry carried within him, would have been susceptible to destruction or expulsion by Voldemort's curse, at least more so than Harry would have been. While one could potentially argue that Voldemort's soul shard could be protected from Voldemort because of shared blood, that is not the case; Voldemort's blood came from Harry, and the soul shard from an earlier instance of Voldemort who was using his own flesh and blood.
It is almost certain that the magic that was used to make a Horcrux out of Nagini was the same as the magic that was used to make the other Horcruxes, in which case the soul fragment could be bound, not to Nagini's reptilian soul but to her body, and as such it could have remained intact despite Nagini's death, bound to her remains. It is certainly possible that a Horcrux bound to a living being is freed with the being's death, though that would be a rather brief form of immortality, in which case Nagini's death by use of any weapon would have released that Horcrux. Of course, the fact that she was killed with the Sword of Gryffindor, and its Basilisk-venom infusion, will have put an end to the Horcrux.
To conclude, then: A soul fragment bound to an object, a Horcrux, is proof against ordinary magic, even magic as strong as that produced by an extraordinary wand. (At least, evidence is that Dumbledore believed so, and we have seen nothing against that.) The soul fragment within Harry is not actually bound to him, but is merely clinging to his own soul, and as such is only as strong as Harry himself; if Harry's soul is separated from his body, the soul fragment is detached and vanishes. And the soul fragment within Nagini, we believe, is bound to its container (Nagini's physical body) by the Horcrux magic, and likely would act to keep that container intact, even after Nagini's original "soul" or life force had vanished; it is only the sword of Gryffindor, with its dose of Basilisk venom, that is able to dispatch it.
This page was imported and needs to be de-wikified.Books should use wikilinks rather sparsely, and only to reference technical or esoteric terms that are critical to understanding the content. Most if not all wikilinks should simply be removed. Please remove after the page is dewikified.
The X-ray standing wave (XSW) technique can be used to study the structure of surfaces and interfaces with high spatial resolution and chemical selectivity. Pioneered by B.W. Batterman in the 1960s the availability of synchrotron light has stimulated the application of this interferometric technique to a wide range of problems in surface science.
An X-ray interference field created by Bragg reflection provides the length scale against which atomic distances can be measured. The spatial modulation of this field described by the dynamical theory of X-ray diffraction undergoes a pronounced change when the sample is scanned through the Bragg condition. Due to a relative phase variation between the incoming and the reflected beam the nodal planes of the XSW field shift by half a lattice constant.
Depending on the position of the atoms within this wave field the element specific absorption of X-rays varies in a characteristic way. Therefore, measurement of the photo yield – via X-ray fluorescence or photoelectron spectroscopy – can reveal the position of the atoms relative to the lattice planes.
(coherent position) are directly related to the Fourier representation of the atomic distribution function.
(red) for different coherent positions
Since the emitting atoms are located in the near field, this technique does not suffer from the ubiquitous phase problem of X-ray crystallography. Therefore, and with a sufficiently large number of Fourier components being measured, XSW data can be used to establish the distribution of the different atoms in the unit cell (XSW imaging).
J. Als-Nielsen & D. McMorrow, Elements of Modern X-ray Physics, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd (2000)
B. W. Batterman & H. Cole, Dynamical Diffraction of X Rays by Perfect Crystals, Rev. Mod. Phys. Vol. 36 681 (1964)
An Acromantula is a large venomous spider, covered in thick black hair. It is a carnivorous creature and has pincers which create a distinctive clicking sound when aroused. The female is larger than the male and lays up to one hundred eggs at a time. Acromantulae are intelligent beasts, capable of human speech, although not self-taught.
Beginner warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
These creatures appear in Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, and Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows.
Acromantulae originated in Borneo dense jungles, where wizards were said to have bred them, and are one cause of the Ban on Experimental Breeding being put into effect. Acromantula venom is apparently exceedingly valuable, but it is nearly impossible to obtain from the living spider, and as acromantulae eat their dead, it is very uncommon to find one that can still be harvested. Their eggs — large, soft and white in colour — are Class A Non-Tradeable Goods.
Although it is not mentioned in Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, Aragog is an Acromantula. The Forbidden Forest population of Acromantulae are fathered by him, and he owes a debt to Hagrid, who raised him in a cupboard in Hogwarts castle fifty years prior. The fact that he is an Acromantula is discovered in Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince. During the Third Task in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, an Acromantula is one of the dangerous creatures that the Champions must overcome to reach the Triwizard Cup at the center of the Maze; Harry very nearly falls victim to it. Acromantulae also play a small role in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, where the Death Eaters drive them towards Hogwarts Castle as part of the battle at Hogwarts.
Spiders in general, and large spiders in particular, have been a focus of human fear from time immemorial. Some theories suggest that fear of spiders may be inborn. Whether learned or inborn, extreme irrational fear of spiders, Arachnophobia, is one of the most common types of phobia people suffer from.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
The Auburn High Performance 542074 is a limited slip differential for the Chrysler 8.25" 29 spline axle. It works in the rear of 2002-2007 Jeep Libertys, but is incompatible with Dana 35C rear axle found in some 2002 Jeep Libertys and might be incompatible with ESP system found in all 2006-2007 Jeep Libertys. Its clutch-based carrier replaces the stock carrier and performs well on-road and off-road. Ring and pinion gear set up is required.
The earlier parts of this book introduce the idea of Seed Factories, their history, component concepts and methods, and design process. This is followed by several design examples. The intent is a logical flow in the discussion for the reader's understanding. Developing the Seed Factory concept is a work in progress, so there is material that is either too new or not yet organized into the main text of the book. Developing the design examples in their full detail also generates a lot of material that would interrupt the flow of the main discussion. We therefore place place both of these kinds of material here in the Notes section. In effect they form a kind of "engineer's notebook". Historically these were paper notebooks and file folders that each designer kept for their work. The more modern approach is to use a shared electronic project database, so that all the current data is available to all the designers. So another reason to include these notes in the Wikibook is as an example of a collaborative project database. The Wikimedia format can only handle text and some file types. Other file types, such as spreadsheets, software code, and editable drawings will be stored elsewhere and linked.
General NotesThese general notes refer to the book as a whole, or the discussion in sections 1.0 through 4.0. This is followed by notes for the particular design examples.
Notes BackgroundThese notes originated from the later parts of the Wikibook Space Transport and Engineering Methods. That book envisions a program to improve life on Earth by the use of advanced technology, and then enable inhabiting more difficult environments, eventually beyond the Earth and into space. To relocate to and operate in a difficult environment imposes a cost to deliver equipment and supplies. The more difficult and distant the location, the higher the cost. You can calculate that cost as (cost/kg for delivery) x (mass delivered). Reducing either factor will reduce the cost, but for space locations the most attention has gone to the delivery cost, in the form of designing better rockets and propulsion. The mass to be delivered can be reduced by methods like using local resources to make equipment and supplies, and by recycling materials on location.
The Seed Factory approach, sending a starter kit which self-expands to a larger production capacity, had been previously proposed as a way to use the local resources in space without having to launch massive amounts of industrial equipment. This author (Eder) first realized the same approach could be applied to building the Earth production capacity and launch site to reach orbit. That led to the idea of using it on Earth for general production, not just for space applications. Delivery cost is not as big a factor on Earth, but cost of production is. By reducing the amount of equipment you need to buy for a factory, using cheaper raw materials, supplying it's own power to operate, and high levels of automation, those costs could be greatly reduced. Since Earth is a more immediate and much larger market than space, the work shifted to how to develop terrestrial Seed Factories. That work became extensive enough that a separate book (this one) seemed justified. The accumulated study and design notes were shifted in bulk to here, and re-organizing them into the appropriate sections of the current book was started. That is still in progress, so the following sections are fragmentary, repetitive, and may not match content elsewhere in the book.
Study Goals and PlanThe notes here represent a concept study in progress, and not a final report. The sections show the work as it is developed in their full detail. This is for a couple of reasons. First, as a tutorial for others, we feel it is important to show all the steps in the process. Second, the authors have to record their work somewhere in the process of doing it, and this is it. As a "work in progress", the study will exhibit gaps, inconsistencies, and repetitiveness until complete. Normally these deficiencies are cleaned up in producing a final report or technical paper in order to present a clear summary of the analysis. In this case, the clean up is by organizing the notes into the main part of the book for a textbook-style discussion of the concepts, and keep detailed design and calculation data for specific examples here in the notes. That keeps them available for reference without interrupting the discussion.
The original Seed Factory study work identified several candidate technologies, and questions about to how best to use them, and whether they are enough of an advantage over conventional methods. The goal was to develop the ideas for these technologies in enough detail to start answering the questions.
Self-Expanding Production - producing increasing amounts of items internal to program locations, including more production equipment. This reduces what is needed to set up a new location to a starter set, reducing costs. Growth is by adding new equipment types, making larger versions of existing equipment, and by direct copies of the starter set.
Modular Design - Using standardized sizes and interfaces so that production elements can be added or rearranged without custom work.
Generalized Resources - Using widely distributed materials and energy as sources, rather than requiring high grade sources only found in certain places.
Cyclic Flows - repeat use of materials by recycling, repair, and closed-loop processes. This reduces the need for new materials and amount of waste products.
Distributed Operations - use of remote control, robotics, and automation to decouple where the people are and where the production elements are. This allows each to be in their optimum locations, rather than brought together in one place because there is no alternative. The more difficult the location, the more desirable it is to start construction with fewer people, and the more important remote/robotic/automated methods are.The questions to be addressed include:
What production functions are needed in various environments, starting with the easiest?
What should the starter set of elements contain, vs items added later?
How well do existing technologies meet desired goals, and what new technology needs to be developed?
How should production output be divided between adding more equipment, products for use in the program, and items for outside delivery to cover costs?
In expanding capacity, do you add more copies of existing equipment, build larger versions, or add new elements that can do new processes?
What is the right mix of direct human labor, remote operation, robotic, and automated tasks, and how does that evolve?
How much advantage do these advanced production methods have over existing/conventional methods?
The Systems Engineering methodology was chosen to perform the study. Seed Factories are likely to be a complex design, and Systems Engineering is suited to complex projects. The goal for the study was to answer the questions noted above. It was envisioned in the context of a larger program to improve the quality of life and expand civilization to new locations, and inherited some goals and requirements from that larger context. To for the purpose of the study, we assumed a concept for the program as a whole, and then concentrated on the initial development of a single location Study steps include:
Requirements Analysis: Pass down such requirements and evaluation criteria from the program as apply, and add new ones if needed.
Functional Analysis: Break down production into sub-functions according to location types, to see if there are unique ones,
Requirements Allocation: Distribute our requirements to each lower level function.
Modeling and Define Alternatives: Developing a production model and identify a set of alternative approaches to perform the various functions.
Synthesis and Baseline: Combine the best choices for the various functions into a coherent whole and document a concept baseline to use for further work.The resulting concepts are then assessed against the original questions to see how well they perform. The study remains remains incomplete until other parts of the program are more developed.
Initial Seed Factories DiscussionImproved technology is one of the main ways that civilization has advanced. Before starting the technical analysis, we describe the candidate technologies and the motivations for using them.
Note: The discussion that was here has been moved to sections 3.0, 7.0, and 8.0.
Program ConceptIn the Space Systems book from which these notes came, an overall program for expanding human civilization is envisioned. A particular temperate location project was included as the first step in that program. In this book we separate that first location into the Community Factory example, which can stand on it's own, and treat the larger program as a separate example for Remote Locations. We inserted two new examples between these for industrial and distributed factories, to better explore applications for the Seed Factory concept. The remaining notes not yet incorporated follow:
The Program Concept describes in words what the whole program is intended to do, and how it will be operated and maintained. The Location Concept does this for the particular location type in this study. These are the starting concepts, which may get updated as the study progresses.
Notes for Section 5.0 - Community FactoryTemperate Location ConceptThe first location established after Phase Zero (Technology Development) is at a Temperate location, where temperate is defined as an environment where the middle 90% of people currently live, with 5% at each extreme of conditions. A "location" does not have to be on one physically connected piece of land, but it should have all it's elements close enough that they can easily operate with each other. This location may carry over prototype elements from Phase 0, or use the prototype equipment to build the first full scale elements. The goal for the first location is to supply most of the long term needs for 660 people, building up to this at a rate of 75 more people per year. This can be considered a form of real estate development, except it includes living, working, and transportation elements designed to work together.
Habitation - The initial set of people and equipment may be distributed in the existing local community if the site development is starting from scratch. The future residents are assumed to self-build most of the location, since they will be the main future owners and operators once it is built. As the habitation portion of the location gets built, they can move themselves there.
Production - The output of the starter set (seed factory) is split among making more equipment for expanding production, satisfying the human needs of the owners, such as building materials and food, and external production for sale or trade. The question is who decides how much of each category to produce, and what specific items to make? That can be sales-driven, where outside buyers determine what gets made first, and leftover capacity gets used for growth and owner's needs; owner-driven, where the factory owners or designated managers decide what to make; or contributor-driven, where contributors of capital and labor can decide individually what to make according to their share of the contributions.
Operations - Modern computers and networking make it possible for the people to work remotely from the equipment. We do not require it be done this way, just have it available as an option. Distributed production and staff can save on daily commuting costs and travel time, and let equipment be in optimized locations, rather than centralized like a traditional factory. This forces higher communications cost, but that component is rapidly getting cheaper. Moving people less and distributing the physical production may result in more transportation for physical items. Another aspect of operations is who is controlling things. This can be humans locally, humans remotely, and computers directly (automation and robotics) or remotely. We expect to have a shifting mix of all of the above mentioned options, with a trend towards more automated and less human work. One incentive to develop more remote and automated methods than are strictly needed for the first location is that future more difficult and hostile locations would be more expensive and less desirable for humans. Another is that change of job or work location becomes decoupled from the preferred location to live.
Maintenance - The production part of the location makes most of the products needed to build out the full site. Therefore our maintenance concept is to use the same production capacity to repair, replace, or modify the location elements as needed. Any items that cannot be repaired are returned to production as scrap, or exported as waste, but by design we try to minimize this.
Requirements FlowdownNote: These are requirements extracted from the larger Human Expansion program and passed down to the first location. They have been redone for the Community Factory example in Section 5.0 in this book.
This step passes down requirements from the overall program level to lower tier elements. The existing baseline (human civilization in its present state) has an approximate score of 75 points, so the goal for Phase I of the program is to do 10 points better, or 85 points. Setting this score level generates a set of parameters to apply for the first location in Phase I to use as design requirements. Some of the requirement values will be quite challenging to reach, but by setting difficult goals we will identify what areas of technology need improvement and guide future research. We also expect to see some requirements adjusted up or down when they turn out to be easier or harder to reach than expected. The initial values are:
First location design increment = 75 people, with growth at 75 people per year.
Equivalent GDP/person = $156,000 (Jan 2013 US $ base for all costs)
Long term ratio of materials & energy production to internal needs = 10.5
Technology development cost = $66 million for temperate location.
Location construction cost = $76,000 per person.
Technical uncertainty = 7.5%We can then further allocate requirements for the production function within the location:
After start-up, it should be able to meet 85% of the basic needs (shelter, food, utilities) of 75 people.
After start-up, the production function should have produced 85% of the total value of the location, including itself. Sales of surplus products is included in calculating net value.
The production function should be able to expand itself by 11% per year (with some added parts from outside).
The production function should be able to recycle 85% of location mass flows, not counting fuel.
Labor hours/unit output should be 85% below 2013 industrial production average.
After start-up, at least 85% of labor and operations control will be internal to the location.
Long term ratio of materials and energy production to internal needs is 10.5 to 1.
Development of production technology to be less than $66 million less habitation and transport development.
Net cost of the production elements should be below $5.7 million for a location supporting 75 people.
A technical performance uncertainty of 5-10% for the production function, balanced with habitation and transport uncertainties.From the location type and size we can also establish:
The design must function in a temperate climate near a developed area.
Local operation should require no more than 85% of time to supply 85% of needs x 50% labor force participation x 75 people = 32 full time staff.From higher level program requirements we can also set:
To encourage participation, the design of the prototype should use open-source methods, while ownership of the hardware and outputs will belong to the project contributors.These requirements then become goals for the technology development phase to meet.
Evaluation CriteriaWe need a way to optimize the design and choose among alternative concepts. The standard Systems Engineering approach is to define various parameters for what is "better", such as cost and growth rate. These parameters are converted to a common measuring scale, and whichever choice gives the highest score on this scale is the one selected. The measures are arbitrary, since they are based on customer desires, but they are a way to model those desires in a mathematical way so that design choices can be made. If one changes the desires, then the technical design would also change. The customer here is assumed to be a non-profit foundation building the prototypes for research and the benefit of people generally. Measures were previously defined at the program level (Section 5.1, page 4), so to be consistent we will use the subset of these measures which apply to the production function, keeping the same formulas and relative weights for scoring purposes.
At the moment, we are developing a concept for just the first temperate location, so the full set of evaluation criteria are modified as follows:
Functional Analysis Figure 5.3-1 - Top level functional diagram.For this analysis we consider the location as a whole as the system, and draw a boundary around it to separate it from the outside environment (Figure 5.3-1). Input and output flows that cross the system boundary come from the physical environment and the remainder of human civilization, which includes technology developed in Phase 0. Within this system boundary, we have previously identified three top level functions of production, habitation, and transport. There may be other functions at this level not identified yet. We do not show the flows between the functions or to and from the system boundary because that would make the diagram too complicated. Instead we use a spreadsheet which tabulates each flow and box on the diagram as rows, and the various resources that make up that item as columns. The Input-Output Model on our Desktop Space Program project on Sourceforge is a generic version of such a spreadsheet, and the Temperate Location Model is the particular one being developed for this study. The design must meet the rule that total flows and functions sum to zero, where outputs have positive values and inputs have negative values. Otherwise something is appearing or vanishing without explanation. Enforcing this rule ensures that all necessary items are identified and accounted for.
Figure 5.3-2 - Production functional diagram. Figure 5.3-3 - Habitation functional diagram. Figure 5.3-4 - Transport functional diagram.Next we break the top level functions into their next lower level parts. We have done this in what seems a natural way by type of function. Part of functional analysis is to identify what needs to be done, but not exclude possible design solutions for how it will be done. Therefore the functions are named in terms of a task and not the method to implement the task. Figures 5.3-2 to 5.3-4 show this next-level breakdown. Again, we have not tried to show the flows between functions because there would be too many of them in the illustration. It should be understood that each box will have multiple flows entering and leaving, and the details will be tracked in our spreadsheet. There can be more than one way to break down a function, leading to different designs to satisfy it, but we will try this one first before looking at alternate ways. Since this study is particularly interested in the production function, we may do additional breakdown of details below what is shown in Figure 5.3-2.
Function DescriptionsIn addition to the diagrams, we also write descriptions of the functions to further explain what they do. They are numbered according to the more general Human Expansion project scheme to be consistent with later work.
Requirements AllocationAllocate Requirements to Functions:We now take the requirements listed above under Requirements Analysis, and parcel them out to the lower level functions to create the smaller subsets that each lower function is responsible for meeting. All of these requirements are to be fully met at the end of the growth of the location, and met as well as practical before then.
Design Increment - Provide support for 75 people initially, and adding 75 more per year to reach 660 total at first location. Assigned to F.2.1.1.1, .2, and .3 as "Provide [Production, Habitation, Transport] Capacity for 75 people per year" respectively.
Growth Capacity - Provide growth capacity after startup of 11%/year. Assigned only to F.2.1.1.1 Production as "Produce new equipment capable of 11% increased output per year." Outside components will be needed for the new equipment, and growth is measured by economic value of the output. Additions which take multiple years are distributed over the years for credit towards the goal.
Local Resource Use - Use 85% local matter and energy. Assigned only to F.2.1.1.1 Production as "Provide 85% of location matter and energy needs from local resources by economic value."
Self Production - Produce 85% of economic value locally. Divided between Production and Habitation/Transport functions depending how location labor decides to work.
Recycled Mass Flow - Re-use 85% of mass, not counting fuel. Assigned to all three major functions as a 15% limit on unused waste flows by mass. This likely will require high level of recycling of water and food and resulting wastes.
Automation - 85% reduction in labor hours relative to US average. Assigned to all three major functions, with most of the reduction in the production area. Some gains in household maintenance and food preparation, and automated transport should be possible.
Autonomy - 85% of the control of needed operations at the location come from local sources (humans and control equipment).
Starter Complexity - Goal of 7 devices in the starter set of machines. This counts the major machine items, and not accessory heads, bits, tooling, or conventional small shop tools.
Quality of Life - Equivalent GDP/person of US$ 156,000 (Jan 2013 base). Assigned to a combination of mostly Habitation and Production, and perhaps a little for transport. Equivalent GDP means counting internally produced and used items at their market values, and adding external sales of products and services, including surplus labor not needed for internal operations.
Resources - Long term ratio of materials and energy production/internal needs of 10.5:1. Assigned to production function. Surplus production goes to location growth or sold for income.
Development Cost - Maximum net development cost of $66 million for temperate location, divided between all three functions, but likely most will be under production. Net cost is after any sales during development.
Location Cost - $76,000 per person, divided between all three functions. This is the recurring cost of building the first location, after development.
Technical Risk - Performance and design uncertainty of 7.5% divided between 3 main functions. The goal by the end of development is to have reduced the uncertainty to this level. It will be higher at the start of development.
Location Risk - Life and casualty risk of 38% relative to US average, divided between 3 main functions.
Population Risk - 17% reduction to population risk for nearest 3.5 million population. Self-reduction counts towards this, but general risk reduction may be difficult on a small scale. Allocated to all three functions.
Biosphere Security - Preserve 89 species outside their normal environment range, either stored or living. Divided between production and habitation, depending on species.
Survivability - Provide 0.0085% compensation for civilization level critical risks. Assigned to production function. Likely areas are resource depletion or carbon reduction, but this will be a difficult goal.Collect Assigned Requirements by Function:Note: Tables moved to Section 5.3
Long sitting slows the metabolism, which affects the body's ability to regulate blood sugar, blood pressure and break down body fat.
Long sitting causes obesity, high blood pressure, heart disease, diabetes, cancer and die early.
Adults aged 19 to 64 are advised to sit down less, including at work, when traveling and at home.
19-64 suih cherngrern zaih gongzuoh, jiaotong huoh jialii shir dou yinggai shaao zuohxiah.
Arterial calcification is a gradual development process that occurs in most people over the age of 60. Due to impaired blood flow, this leads to a decrease in arterial elasticity and increases the chance of illness and death.
Apache Software Foundation (Organization) A collaborative non-profit working group dedicated to the education, development and delivery of open source web software.
Its Web address is the Apache Foundation.
Improving a highly specialised scientific database might seem the sort of task that needs to be kept to experts rather than opened up to the general public. In fact, it fits the earlier description of tasks that benefit from crowdsourcing. It can be broken down into many small, independent steps, each of which can be checked individually, and at least some of the necessary skills are widely available. A crowdsourcing project does not have to leave everything to the public but can invite them to build on something created by professionals.
The Pfam protein families database, used extensively by biochemists, has benefitted from a bi-directional linking with Wikipedia. Encyclopedia articles have been populated with information from Pfam and corrections or expansions can be fed back into it. This puts the Pfam data where it will be very easily found and used by researchers, students and other users, with links to the official site for verification. It also puts any errors where they can be seen and acted upon. The Pfam maintainers realise that minor errors can occur in a large database, but they use that as a reason to make the data as visible as possible rather than as an argument against publication.
Changes to the Wikipedia articles are not copied immediately into the database, but are collected by a script and manually checked. The Pfam maintainers write:
Most edits are simple format or typographic improvements, but many have also provided valuable scientific content, including significant improvements to and expansion of important articles.[1]
With a more controversial topic (such as current politicians) the proportion of vandal edits would be much higher, but protein families are stable enough that anyone editing an article is at least trying to improve it.
So there is a role for the public to play in maintaining a scholarly database. Since “the public” includes highly qualified people, this role is not restricted to low-value contributions. Collaboration between the professional Pfam community and interested members of the public would be impossible to arrange prospectively, but thanks to wiki technology and shared data they can work in parallel.
(For areas without shading there is no information yet.)
< False Friends of the Slavist Homepage
Art Rogers is trying to make the supermarket cleaning aisle a little cleaner. According to Rogers, most of the household products we use contain “elements that you would not want to have in your personal environment or the environment in general.” After assuming the CEO position at Sun & Earth, a natural cleaning products company, his objective was to convince retailers to move the company’s detergents and spray bottles out of the organic section and into the cleaning aisle.
To do this, Rogers tailored his pitch to his audience, and didn’t try to stand on a soapbox (no pun intended). “The product worked,” said Rogers, “and I sold it to retailers based on that. The other things are in the background. Most consumers are concerned only with products that work.”
He admits that people are skeptical about Sun & Earth products’ performance because environmentally friendly cleaners introduced in the 1980s didn’t work very well and were more expensive. Sun & Earth is different: all products are 3-5% better to 97% as good as the name brands on the market, and cost only 10% more.
Sun & Earth began in a Pennsylvania garage where its founders developed cleaners without harmful chemicals as alternatives to existing products. They convinced local stores to carry their products, then bigger stores in New York, Boston, and Washington DC. This strategy allowed them to successfully grab “highly enlightened” consumers who were strongly environmentally and health conscious. As the company grew and was partially acquired by Ben Cohen’s Barred Rock investment fund (his first investment after the sale of Ben & Jerry’s), it strove to gain a wider consumer base.
Rogers believes that the key to reaching this objective was understanding the “ripple effect.” A pebble thrown into a pond creates a splash—this splash represents core customers who understand the product’s value and currently buy it (the “highly enlightened”). But the pebble also creates ripples. The ripples closest to the splash represent customers who are predisposed to buy the product (such as those with chemical sensitivities in the case of Sun & Earth). The further the ripple from the splash, the further the customer group is from understanding and relating to the product’s message.
Sun & Earth tries to reach the ripples closest to the splash and continue moving out to spread its message. While grocery store coupons and promotions yield higher sales, they do not necessarily create repeat customers because they entice bargain hunters rather than groups that identify with the Sun & Earth’s values. Rogers tries to focus on marketing at events, like Race for the Cure, a breast cancer research fundraiser, that draw people who are more likely to be health conscious or environmentally concerned.
Although his objective is to mainstream Sun & Earth’s products, the company itself is anything but mainstream. Their sense of social good extends far beyond the ingredients in their products. Located in a transformed argyle sock factory, the company employs workers from the surrounding low-income community and promotes community building through volunteer projects. Consistent with the company’s environmental focus, its plant is the first in Pennsylvania to be run completely on wind power.
Rogers notes that while 99.8% of for-profit companies measure themselves with one P (profit) Sun & Earth uses 3 P’s: profit, people, planet. His investors, all social venture funds, demand returns in each of the three areas. Besides sharing similar values, an advantage of being funded this way is the network that Sun & Earth has built. The company has used its connections to reach important players and gain accounts from companies that are also committed to sustainable and socially responsible business, such as Starbucks.
With his experience boosting sales at major companies like Saucony and Proctor & Gamble as well as Sun & Earth, Rogers has simple advice for aspiring entrepreneurs. “Make sure your product has a unique selling proposition. And make sure it works.”
Others?
A branch statement, or conditional statement, is code that allows you to test whether statements are true or false and then execute some code based on these comparisons.
The IF statement ALWAYS tests the left condition or statement for a TRUE result:
If the condition or statement is true, the IF statement continues to process the top or next portion of the statement using the THEN operator.
If the THEN operation is a single statement, it can be written on the same line as the test condition:
If the THEN operation requires two or more statements you will find that the entire IF statement will be MUCH easier to read when written with each statement on its own line:
iJunk1 = iJunk1 + 3 'iJunk1 would then = 7
iJunk2 = iJunk2 + 1 'iJunk2 would then = 8
As shown above, the IF statement does not require and can be used without the ELSE clause.
When your IF statement needs to process both a True and a False condition the use of the ELSE clause is required:
(execute the True code) 'iJunk1 is NOT = 4
It is sometimes easier to read the condition or statement when you place it within paren's:
If/ElseIf statement is used to conditionally execute code based on more than one test condition or statement. If the condition provided in the If statement evaluates to true, the code in the block is executed. Otherwise, execution would proceed to the ElseIf condition or statement, or on to the Else or EndIf statement.
The ElseIf and Else clauses are not required parts of an If statement.
'The following variable declarations are for the following example only. They are not needed in real life.
'Whatever will happen if x = y
'Whatever will happen if x < y
'Whatever will happen if x isn't = to y and x isn't < to y
Boolean operators in Visual Basic .NET now accommodate for short circuit boolean evaluation, most other languages always apply short circuit boolean evaluation by default (usually, this can be turned off with a compiler option), consider the following boolean statement:
With this statement, when short-circuit boolean evaluation is used, the second function will only be called if the first function returns true, this is because if functionA returns false it becomes irrelevant to the outcome of the statement whether functionB returns true or not.
However, when no short-circuit boolean evaluation is used, both of the functions will be called irrespective of whether the first part of the statement returns true or false.
Something to note with short-circuit boolean evaluation is that the order of the parameters can become important when it is used.
Due to previous versions of Visual Basic not having short circuit boolean evaluation, Microsoft has decided to preserve backward compatibility and add two new boolean logic identifiers which support short-circuit boolean evaluation, so in addition to the standard boolean operators:
There are also two new operators which function using short-circuit boolean evaluation, and they are:
B. General features that should be evaluated for each specific disorder
f. Juvenile chronic arthritis
c. Dermatomyositis and polymyositis
b. Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD) crystal deposition disease
c. Calcium hydroxyapatite deposition disease
As White, you still have designs on playing f4, but Black with his knight sortie has challenged your control of d5. Should you fight back, or ignore this distraction?
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
= see 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nc3
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Manganese (VII) in the form of potassium permanganate has been used as a chemiluminescence reagent for several decades. A broad band of red light is emitted on reaction with over 270 compounds in acidic solution.[1] Among the organic analytes are morphine and a wide range of other pharmaceuticals, phenolic substances, amines and hydrazines in addition to well-known reductants such as ascorbic acid and uric acid. Proteins and amino-acids are also known to reduce permanganate with chemiluminescence. Inorganic analytes include sulfur dioxide and sulfites, hydrogen sulfide, hydrogen peroxide, hydrazine and iron(II). Chemiluminescence intensity is a linear function over a very wide range of concentration, but varies considerably for different analytes. It is also affected by anions present so that acidification with sulfuric acid gives a better signal than hydrochloric, nitric or perchloric acids. Considerable signal enhancement occurs in the presence of polyphosphates; these are unstable at low pH but hexametaphosphate is more stable than the others. In a number of cases, chemiluminescence is enhanced by the presence of an ancillary reductant such as formic acid or, especially, formaldehyde. Manganese(II) is sometimes a useful signal enhancer. Fluorophores such as quinine, riboflavin or rhodamine B have also been used but sometimes give a high blank signal and a reduced signal to noise ratio.
The emitting species is an electronically excited manganese(II) species, as has been confirmed by a direct comparison of the laser-induced photoluminescence of manganese(II) chloride with the chemiluminescence from reaction of sodium borohydride with acidic potassium permanganate.[2] In many cases where permanganate is used in the presence of fluorescent compounds, e.g. enhancers or reaction products, energy transfer to the efficient fluorophore has been proposed on the basis of spectral distributions that match those obtained using other oxidants; in most cases, however, the red emission characteristic of manganese(II) is also produced and can make a significant contribution to the total light output,[3] especially in the presence of polyphosphate.
More recently, manganese(III) and manganese(IV) have been explored as chemiluminescence reagents.[4] As with the +VII oxidation state, these produce on reaction with a wide range of molecules an excited manganese(II) species that emits light, but differ markedly in terms of selectivity. They also possess characteristics that provide new avenues for detection, such as the immobilisation of solid manganese dioxide, the production of colloidal manganese(IV) nanoparticles and the electrochemical generation of manganese(III).
A brown, transparent, stable solution of manganese(IV) can be prepared by dissolving freshly precipitated manganese dioxide in 3M orthophosphoric acid. Using this reagent at about 1 x 10-4 M, analytically useful chemiluminescence has been reported for a growing list of compounds, often with nanomolar detection limits. Light emission is enhanced by up to 2 orders of magnitude in the presence of 0.2 – 3.0 M formaldehyde. Numerous pharmaceuticals have been determined in commercial formulations by this reaction in flow-injection assays. Detection of drugs and biomolecules in more complex matrices such as urine or serum requires coupling with an initial separation step such as HPLC.
Manganese(III) can be obtained by oxidation of manganese(II) or reduction of manganese(IV); it readily disproportionates into the +II and +IV states but can be stabilised by acidification, by complexation with anions or by adding manganese(II). The reduction of manganese(III) produces excited manganese(II) leading to emission of light of the same spectral characteristics as that emitted in permanganate or manganese(IV) chemiluminescence. On-line electrochemical generation of manganese(III) from manganese(II) has been applied to the chemiluminescence determination of a wide range of analytes, especially pharmaceuticals, with satisfactory selectivity and typically sub-micromolar limits of detection.
Use this to enter in Factory Accessories, and Color codes, or modify the vehicle to better fit the invoice. Only needed if service that pulls directly from manufacturer is not enabled.
Option four is used for application access and is used to grant access to different Reynolds screens.
From this screen you can create new reports, save reports, print reports, and preview reports -- but only the first the first 1,000 lines[2] -- prevents third parties from screen scraping with the consent of the dealer. You can query items such as vehicle inventory, service history, customer information, and prospective customers.
Hold and download print reports.
"6975 allows you better restrict or allow reports and files that can be accessed by users in 6910."[1]
Access to this screen will allow reports created in 6910 to be downloaded by the ERALink software to the host PC in one of two formats:
In the comma separated format, ERALink attempts to place delimiters in the appropriate locations for all fields, but often fails; leaving the user to define placement manually, by clicking and dragging columns.
A proprietary vertical format can be chosen when creating or modifying a report by selecting yes when asked to enter a special format, and yes again for option five. The vertical format displays selected fields and their values, each on a new line, with a set number of new lines between records. There tends to be inconsistencies between Reynolds versions.
"Setup R+R Users 2.0" (pdf). Service Drives Sales LLC. http://servicedrivessales.com/DOCS/Setup_RR_Users.pdf.
"VEHINVENTORY Library" (pdf). Advanced Reporting Data Sources. AutoVT. http://my.autovt.com/Reynolds/root/data/products/ERA/ERA_advanced_reporting/vehInv_zb900p/VEHINVENTORY%20Data%20Sources.pdf. Retrieved 2008-06-20.
Welcome to the Using Ratpoison Wikibook.
This is intended to be a book aimed at the intermediate/advanced GNU/Linux user who wants to start using the Ratpoison Window manager.
Thusly, only the window manager itself will be covered- this guide assumes that you have a working system running, from the kernel up to the X11 Windowing System, and it assumes you have competent grasp on Linux- this book will not teach you how to use GNU/Linux in general. Please see your distribution documentation or the Linux Guide to learn Linux in general.
Who is this guide suitable for?
Basically, any GNU/Linux or BSD user who wants to try something new or exciting, but also the user who wants to experiment with a different approach to mouse usage.
Ratpoison is a window manager written for X Window, and principally developed by Linux users (though it should run on any operating system and platform X Window does). It is very different from most other window managers in that it is a tiling window manager and because it tries to minimize or completely eliminate the use of the mouse, in order to relieve stress on the arms and shoulders.
In keeping with this old-school approach, ratpoison is also extremely lightweight, and there are no "fat library dependencies", no fancy graphics beyond what other programs provide, and no window decoration. While this might seem odd at first, starting to use it is in fact quite simple.
If you've ever used the GNU Screen terminal multiplexer or GNU Emacs, you'll be quite familiar with the interface, since most of the hotkeys and design ideas are borrowed from those programs. Indeed, the developers are very much fans of Emacs, as evidenced in one of the FAQs:
"What you want is probably already in Emacs. If you don't use Emacs, start. If do use Emacs, use it more. If you *still* can't do what you want to do, you probably shouldn't do it." (sic)
Ratpoison is extremely lightweight and will therefore start up and run very quickly; it will also run well on ancient hardware as well as more modern setups such as a 32-way SPARC.
Rodent usage is minimized and the keyboard is promoted, relieving your arms and shoulders and decreasing the risk of injury
Ratpoison works well with multiple monitors.
Ratpoison key-bindings are very similar to those of GNU Screen and should be familiar to users with experience using Screen.
High learning curve. Not particularly suited for UNIX beginners, without a lot of customization- this is a window manager written by experts for experts, so to speak.
Some programs like the GIMP (which uses a multitude of small windows) are simply not designed to work with tiling window managers and do not work very well.
Java GUI applications have some issues with the way Ratpoison handles window parenting and most Java GUI applications will only render as a grey box. (This problem could be solved by issuing 'export AWT_TOOLKIT=MToolkit' command before starting Java app).
To start with, ratpoison has some radically different concepts about using a computer. First, you cannot drag windows around the "desktop", all windows are maximized to the full screen size and that cannot be changed. Because of this, you don't need window decorations, since they would steal precious space. When you look at a program, the only thing you see is the program. You are not forced to look at only one program at a time however: a window can be subdivided into a number of adjacent (but not overlapping!) frames; each of these frames holds a single program which is maximized within its frame. In Emacs terms, there is one window, split into one or more frames, in which each buffer is shown in one and only one frame.
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Example: The car was fixed (fix) yesterday.
We _____________ (visit) by our friends last week.
The child ____________(feed) two hours ago.
Jim solved the problem.
The government funded the project.
The city council built new facilities in the city.
Did they maintain the machines?
She didn't write the letter.
(a) escapes from lawful custody, or
To be in custody the officer must use words of arrest along with physical restraint or the accused’s submission to physical restraint. Without physical restraint of some sort, the offence cannot be made out.[1]
Disobeying a Court Order (127), Obstruction of a Peace Officer (129), Perjury (131), Giving a False Sworn Statement (134), Fabricating Evidence (137), Obstructing Justice (139), Public Mischief (140), Breach of Undertaking, Recognizance, or Probation (145, 733), Failure to Attend Court or Appear (145), Escape from Lawful Custody (145), Intimidation of a Justice System Participant (423.1)Sentencing
Failure to Attend Court or Appear (145), Escape from Lawful Custody (145), Intimidation of a Justice System Participant (423.1)
Analysis of the journal article: "Exercise improves quality of life in indigenous Polynesian peoples with type 2 diabetes and visceral obesity." - (2013).
What is the background to this research?
Historically, Polynesians were known to be some of the largest people in the world in size and stature.[1] In more recent times, Polynesians have been plagued by health complications including chronic diseases such as Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) and are now known as the ‘largest’ people on Earth according to various World Obesity Rankings.[2]
In New Zealand, research indicates Polynesians have three times the prevalence of T2DM, are more likely to have comorbidities (chronic obesity, cardiovascular disease etc.); and score lower in health surveys measuring Quality of Life (QoL) than the general population.[3][4] To alleviate such a burden and improve health outcomes; this study was conducted to evaluate the effects of exercise interventions on the QoL of Indigenous Polynesian peoples afflicted by T2DM and Visceral Obesity.
A Massey University Research Grant funded this study, and research was conducted in Porirua, New Zealand.[5] The study was published in The Journal of Physical Activity and Health Vol 10 Issue 5, July 2013, and was a collaboration between eight authors across various universities and institutions: Southern Cross University, Massey University, University of Western Sydney, Charles Darwin University, University of Otago, & The Capital and Coast District Health Board.[5]
The main author, Dr William Sukala (Exercise Physiologist), has extensive experience in clinical health care and published research in the areas of morbid obesity, physical inactivity, and Type 2 Diabetes.[6] He has appeared in mainstream health magazines, journals, and websites and is frequently quoted and interviewed by major media outlets and has spoken at conferences around the world.[6]
Due to cultural implications with participants, the research design was adjsuted as a Randomized Controlled Trial only comparing resistance training to non-exercise; to a trial that assessed both resistance and aerobic training, thus excluding a non-exercise control group.[5]
Indigenous Cultural consultants and the Central Regional Ethics Committee, NZ, reviewed and permitted all study procedures.[5]
What did the research involve?
Participants were referred by local health care professionals, completed pre-medical screening and then were assessed against a specific list of selection criteria.[5] Once deemed eligible, participants were randomly assigned to exercise interventions over 16-weeks: aerobic or resistance.[5] Both exercise groups trained three sessions per week, ranging from 40-60mins in duration.[5]
The Medical Outcomes Trust Short Form-36 Health Survey (SF-36) was used to assess participants QoL which included a Physical Component Summary (PCS), and a Mental Component Summary (MCS).[5] All training and survey data was recorded before and after the 16-week period.[5]
What were the basic results?
After the 16-week exercise intervention, there was a significant improvement in scores of all domains of QoL for both training groups.[5] Specifically, the resistance training prescription improved scores in more domains than the aerobic training.[5]
In general, there was moderate to significant improvements in all domains, even in the physical and mental component summaries from pre to post intervention.[5]
The table represents the changes in QoL for both groups from total data collected in the study.[5]
Fig.1.[5] Note: all data expressed as mean ± SD.
What conclusions can we take from this research?
The results of the study showed that exercise, regardless of type, significantly improved the QoL of the Polynesian participants to near equivalent or greater levels than the general New Zealand population.[5] This is noteworthy given that QoL norms are both lower in Indigenous Polynesian peoples and populations that are afflicted by T2DM and comorbidities.[4]
A previous study led by Sukala showed the positive metabolic effects exercise has on Polynesian populations with T2DM and comorbidities[7], subsequently, this study is the first to evaluate the effect exercise has on QoL within the same cohort.[5] Similar trials using similar methodologies as this study have found mixed results with other populations, possibly due to differences in exercise interventions, cohorts, or questionaries, to name a few.[8][9]
The researchers carefully considered many aspects involved in this study, e.g. no control group - cultural considerations, physical & mental health status pre and post intervention.[5]
There is a consensus in the health industry that exercise can have lasting positive effects on QoL and all aspects of health in general, and this study’s findings reiterate that within a Polynesian population afflicted by T2DM and Obesity.[5][10] Despite a need for more research, this study presents an opportunity for Polynesian people to use these findings as motivation to participate in regular exercise, and work towards positive health outcomes within their respective communities. The social benefits of group based exercise aren’t measured in this study, but are known to have positive ramifications within populations and should only add motivation for Polynesian peoples to get active together.[11]
Recent studies alike further emphasise the benefits exercise can have on the health outcomes of various populations with low QoL and comorbidities such as Polynesians.[5][12][13]
Undoubtedly, exercise should be an integral part in the lives of Polynesian peoples and the general population to improve QoL and attain positive health outcomes for the future.
Diagnosis and Management of the Diabetes Epidemic in the Pacific Islands: http://www.alere.com/en/home/viewpoints/diagnosis-management-diabetes-pacific-islands.html
Obesity & Diabetes Burden in The Pacific (Research Article): Hawley, N.L. & McGarvey, S.T. Curr Diab Rep (2015) 15: 29. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11892-015-0594-5
WHO Pacific Adult Physical Activity Guidelines: www.who.int/dietphysicalactivity/publications/pacific_pa_guidelines.pdf
Intiative to Use Sport for Development in the Pacific: http://dfat.gov.au/people-to-people/sport/sport-for-development/pacific/Pages/sport-for-development-pacific.aspx
Importing of Resource Pool & Business Process Master Data from a source file
Importing of Primary Costs & Consumption Quantities from a source file
Secondary costs are planned in quantities and in the unit of measure of the provider resource pool or business process. Secondary input quantities are also planned in fixed and/or proportional components. Secondary planned inputs in Figure 5 shows all the consumption values for Resource Pool 6101: Utilities with a consumption quantity from two secondary sources. These are Resource Pool 6401: Maintenance with 49.18 Labor hours proportional) and Resource Pool 6102: Floor Area with a quantity value of 166.67 Square feet fixed consumption.
In the ROSA application, all the secondary consumptions relationships are initially valued in ‘quantities’ as illustrated in Figure 6. Once the internal rates are calculated, the secondary quantities will be valued in dollars so that total cost on each cost object is obtained. The connecting lines on Figure 6 below represent the relationships/consumption flows between cost objects.
These consumption relationships are captured in the system in a Provider-Consumer manner to accurately trace consumption. Once the quantities have been valued, the costs are reflected as secondary costs on the consumer and as recovery on the supplier.
We can remark that 21, 31, 41, 51, 61 and 71 can have et un with or without a hyphen; otherwise this it is simply both words consecutively (vingt-six, trente-trois, etc) with a hyphen in between. For 100-199, cent is added before the rest of the number; this continues up to 1000 and onward. Many speakers of French outside of France refer to the numbers 70 to 99 in the same pattern as the other numbers. For instance, in Switzerland and Belgium, 70 is septante /sɛp.tɑ̃t/, 71 is septante-et-un, 72 is septante-deux, and so on; 90 is nonante /nɔ.nɑ̃t/, 91 is nonante-et-un /nɔ.nɑ̃t.e.œ̃/, 92 is nonante-deux, and so on. In Switzerland, 80 is huitante or octante /ɔk.tɑ̃t/.
In French, the addition, subtraction, multiplication and division are as follows:
Treize, monsieur !
Thirteen, sir!
No Toto you were wrong! Eight plus six equals fourteen. And how much is five plus nine?
Quatorze !
Fourteen!
Very good, Clément.
(Highlight or hover over a line to show the answer.)
Write the number represented by each word.
(Highlight or hover over a line to show the answer.)
Write the number represented by each word.
(Highlight or hover over a line to show the answer.)
Write the number represented by each word.
(Highlight or hover over a line to show the answer.)
Write the French word for each number.
(Highlight or hover over a line to show the answer.)
Write the French word for each number.
(Highlight or hover over a line to show the answer.)
Write the French word for each number.
(Highlight or hover over a line to show the answer.)
Translate from French to English.
(Highlight or hover over a line to show the answer.)
Translate from French to English.
Acsan ya toxsan? Are you hungry or full?
Qapı açıq idi. The door was open.
Pəncərəni aç! Open the window!
Adınız nədir? What is your name?
Kipr adasına səyahət edək. Let's travel to Cyprus island.
Ağacın yarpaqları yaşıldır. The leaves of the tree are green.
Həmişə ağlımdasan. You are always in my mind.
Kim daha ağıllıdır? Who is more intelligent?
Ən ağırı ikinci mərhələdir. The hardest one is the second period.
Ağır addımlarla içəri girdi. He entered with slow steps.
Proses çox ağır gedir. The process is going very slowly.
Kişilər də ağlayar. Men also cry.
Axşamınız xeyir! Good evening!
Yalnız mənə aiddir. It only belongs to me.
Ailədə səkkiz nəfərik. We are eight people in the family.
Tavan alçaqdır. The ceiling is low.
Əqrəblər isti iqlimli ölkələrdə yaşayır.Scorpions live in countries with a hot climate.
Məni ələ salırsan? Are you mocking me?
Onu bağışlamaq olarmı? Is it OK to forgive him?
Sənə bunu izah edəcəkdim. I would explain this to you.
Ramil kişi adıdır. Ramil is a male name.
Bəlkə yanındakı qohumudur. Maybe the one next to her is her relative.
Bir az naşıyam. I am a little novice.
Soyuğa öyrəncəli idi. He was accustomed to the cold.
Bakıya öyrəşə bilmisənmi? Could you accustom yourself to Baku?
Mənimlə şam yeməyinə gələrsən? Will you come to dinner with me?
təcili pul urgent money
İki otaqlı mənzil təcili satılır. A two-room flat is being urgently sold.
tələsmək: to hasten, to hurry
Niyə belə tələsirsən? Why are you hurrying like this?
In 1917, the Russian Empire was losing a war against both Germany and Austria-Hungary. The population was starting to resent the Czar/Tsar, and wanted a different leader so the war would end. Vladimir Lenin, returning from exile in Switzerland, led the Communist Party of Russia to power in the October Revolution.
Before The Creation of the Soviet Union
One of the best ways of learning the Turkish language is to read Turkish things. Below you will find a list of newspapers and magazines which will help build up your knowledge of Turkish.
Magazines are a good way to both learn colloquial language and to learn the terms used in your field(s) of interest.
I am...
Are you busy today?
You can give your feedback about this page on the talk page.
At a steam power plant, steam engines work in pairs, the heat output of the first one being the approximate heat input of the second. The operating temperatures of the first are 800 deg C, and 500 deg C, and of the second 485 deg C and 300 deg C. If the heat of combustion of coal is 2.8 x 107 J/kg, at what rate must coal be burned if the plant is to put out 1 GW of power? Assume the efficiency of engines is 70 percent of the Carnot efficiency operating between the said temperatures.
The Association marker is used to specify with whom something is done. "-den" is the neutral form, while "-dan" can additionally specify that it is a pleasure to do so.
I am singing.
Bóo aril lalom leden.
Would you sing with me?
The Beneficiary marker is used to specify for whom something is done for; on whose behalf.
Bíi lalom le laneda wa.
I am singing for a friend.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
Actinistia | Actinopterygii | Amphibia | Aves | Chondrichthyes | Dipnoi | Mammalia | Petromyzontida | Reptilia
Gets the ClickOnce application's manifest of the current application.
Returns an array of bytes that contains the ClickOnce application's manifest for the application that is associated with this ApplicationContext.
All other move types are normal effectiveness on Fearow.
GS/C/RS/FL: Attract, Frustration, Hidden Power, Protect, Return, Steel Wing, Sunny Day, Thief
RB/Y: Bide, Double-Edge, Mimic, Rage, Razor Wind, Sky Attack, Substitute, Take Down, Whirlwind
Things to avoid.
1.“Real” women don’t do math.
This is a big myth which everyone can't seem to stop and think about. There is no such thing as a real woman who doesn't do math. Math is basically a compulsory subject in most schools. "Real women" are women that have jobs (some don't) but they are independent and they can also be doctors and engineers.
This is another huge myth that is still being tackled everyday. People from African blood aren't naive. They quite influential and independent.
It is a common belief that because men are the principal producers in “modern” society that this has always been the case. In fact in earlier times when women were the main food-gatherers and producers, there were matriarchal societies where women had high status, were preeminent as cultivators and were glorified as goddesses. As late as the 2nd century BC, the major deities in European culture were women.
There are a variety of theories as to why this changed. Some like Reed felt that with the evolution of private property women lost their place in productive, social and cultural life and their worth sank along with their former status. Others like DeBeauvoir felt that change occurred when it was established that men as well as women were involved in the reproductive process.
"Woman is our property we are not hers because she produces children for us — we do not yield any to her. She is therefore our possession as the fruit tree is that of the gardener."
Researchers also used women’s reproductive capacity to conclude women's intellectual inferiority, and then turned around and concluded that using the intellect would destroy reproductive capacity. For example:
Female students were concluded to be pale, in delicate health and “prey to monstrous deviations from menstrual regularity.” (Clarke, 1873, last printing 1963!)
The woman who uses her brain loses her “mammary function first and had little hope to be other than a moral and medical freak.” (Hall, 1905)
Women are “closer to children and savages than to an adult civilized man.” (Le Bon, 1879, reported in Gould, 1981)
As you can tell from the publication dates of these texts, this ideology is outdated, and is not applicable to modern literature. Women, such as Valentina Tereshkova, the first female astronaut, and Katherine Johnson, the astrophysicist the who helped put man on the moon, have accomplished a great deal in the fields of math, science, and engineering. Therefore, women's contributions to the STEM fields are a perfect example of why you should not include "Women can't do math" in your adolescent fiction, because it sets an unfair stereotype on the young, impressionable girls who read your books.
The harmonica is an instrument that has found favour with many guitarist. The idea evolved from the blues and country and western musicians of the early part of the 20th century. The role the harmonica plays in providing another timbre has appealed to many artists. Musicians such as Bob Dylan and Neil Young have used the combination to great effect.
Harmonicas exist in four varieties: diatonic, chromatic, tremolo and chord. The chromatic can play along to music in any key but is harder to master than the diatonic version. The diatonic harmonica is made to play in one key and is easier to learn but you will need to buy more than one. The guitar's natural key is E; so buying a diatonic harmonica in the key of E major would be ideal. The other diatonic harmonicas you should aim to add to your collection is G major and C major. Diatonic harmonicas are cheap and it shouldn't take long before you have a collection of harmonicas that cover every key. The tremolo harmonica is like a diatonic, yet it vibrates and has more vibrato than usual harmonicas. It is used for orchestra too.Chord harmonicas are very big and may require multiple people to play and can be even used in the orchestra at times.They add a touch to a lot of things really.Chord Harmonicas are very cool,yet very expensive too and they can run in the thousands when it comes to cost.Some good Chord Harmonicas can cost you $2,000 or more depending on the company selling them.
To play both instruments, one would need a way to hold the harmonica while the hands chord and strum the guitar. This is done by the harmonica holder, which goes around the neck, allowing the harmonica to be always in front of your mouth. However, there are a few things to keep in mind:
Instead of moving the harmonica itself, you will now move your head in order to play the notes. Due to this limitation the solos you "blow" will be slower than if you had the harmonica cupped in your hands.
Hand-related effects, such as hand vibrato, will be unavailable. Also, due to the lack of hands, there will be no additional resonance from the cupped hands.
Furthermore, since one is multitasking, it's best to know how to play both instruments individually very well, in order to spend less time trying to find each note and chord. When you buy your first harmonica, spend some time learning to play it with your hands. Try playing along to the recordings of Little Walter and Sonny Boy Williamson.
The harmonica will usually be played in the 2nd position (of course one can try other positions). Often the guitar plays the chords, while the harmonica provides the melody. This is because guitars have a much lower octave range than the harmonica; furthermore, guitarists can play chords in different keys easily. Since the harmonica is played in a higher pitch range, this makes it suitable for melodic lines. Another factor is the timbre of the harmonica tends to cut through the sound of resonating guitar chords. Still, this should not stop you reversing the roles, as long as it sounds pleasing.
It is possible to play chromatic harmonicas with a guitar. This can be done with the following:
Tombo S-50.
Take off the mouthpiece of a straight tuned chromatic harp. However, one may need to make sure the body's edge is smooth
Note: both S-50 and this method require using the lips to block the non-sounding row; S-50, due to greater distance between rows, is easier at this.
Use the handless chromatic; essentially a special mouthpiece that move up and down between the rows, controlled by the movement of the head.
Getting Started: Different Types of Guitars | Anatomy of a Guitar | Buying a Guitar | Buying an Amplifier | Tuning the Guitar | Tablature | Lead Guitar and Rhythm Guitar
For Beginners: The Basics | Intervals and Power Chords | Open Chords | Muting and Raking | Learning Songs | Song Library
Lead Guitar: Picking and Plucking | Scales | Arpeggios and Sweep Picking | Slides | Hammer-ons, Pull-offs, and Trills | Bending and Vibrato | Harmonics | Vibrato Bar Techniques | Tapping
Rhythm Guitar: Chords | Barre Chords | Chord Progressions | Alternate Picking | Tremolo Picking | Rhythm
Playing Styles: Folk Guitar | Blues | Slide Guitar | Rock Guitar | Country and Western | Metal | Jazz | Classical Guitar | Flamenco
General Guitar Theory: Tone and Volume | Singing and Playing | Writing Songs | Playing With Others | Recording Music |Tuning Your Ear | How to Continue Learning
Equipment: Guitar Accessories | Effects Pedals | E-Bow | Cables | Bass Guitar | Harmonica and Guitar Combo
There are two types of storage, primary and secondary storage. Primary storage deals with temporary storage and is usually called "memory" or "main memory". Secondary storage deals with permanent storage and is usually called "storage". Most memory is referred to storing media, documents...etc on chips, whereas storage stores it on disks or tapes. Memory (primary storage) is stored on RAM chips or Random Access Memory chips. Whenever you open a file from the secondary storage it is opened on the RAM and allows you to make amendments to it. When you save the file it is then moved back to the secondary storage and saved on the hard drive. Basically you can think of the secondary storage as the refrigerator and the primary storage or RAM as the counter or stove in which you cook. There are different types of RAM some which include DRAM, SDRAM, SRAM and DDR - SDRAM. DRAM is abbreviated for "dynamic ram" and is constantly refreshed by the PC to keep its contents. SDRAM is abbreviated for "synchronous dynamic ram" and is synchronized by the system clock. This allows it to be faster than DRAM and the speed is measured in megahertz. SRAM is abbreviated for "static ram" is faster than DRAM and keeps its contents without having to be refreshed by the PC. DDR - SDRAM is abbreviated for "double-data rate synchronous dynamic ram". It is the most current RAM, it is used commonly in PC and Apple's and is also measured in megahertz.
Li limite es quinant. Plu quam quinant viola li lege. Garda vos contra policistes.
Ella salta tre alt.
“Anc yo,” dit Quincey Morris laconicmen. (laconic = con poc paroles)
“Yo vole vor permission por far ho-nocte to quo yo judica necessi. It es, yo save, multcos a demandar. E solmen quande vu save quo yo vole far vu va comprender it. Talmen yo peti que vu promesse me sin savente, por que, benque vu va esser incolerat durant un témpor, vu ne va blamar vos.”
“Dr. Van Helsing, yo ne vole promesser sin saver quo it es, e si it concerne mi honor quam un gentilmann o un cristano (crist·an·o = un credente de Jesus Cristo), yo ne posser promesser. Ma si vu posse confirmar (confirmar = far cert) que it ne viola (violar = esser contra) ti du coses, yo posse. Benque yo have null idé pri quo vu parla ti instante.”
“Yo concorda! (concordar = haver li sam idé)” dit Arthur. “Nu esque yo posse questionar quo it es quel noi va far?”
“Intrar li tombe!” Arthur stat.
“E quo far quande in li tombe?”
“Si yo vell posser salvar vos ti dolor, mi povri amico,” il dit, “Deo save que yo vell. Ma ho-nocte noi deve marchar in dangerosi vias, por que li pedes de vor amanta ne mey marchar in li vias de flamme!”
“Garda vos, senior, garda vos!” (gardar = esser caut contra un atacca)
“Senioretta Lucy es mort, ne ver? Yes! Talmen on ne posse damagear la. Ma si ella ne es mort –”
“Bon Deo!” il criat. “Quo vu vole dir? Esque ella ha esset interrat vivent?” Il gemit con dolore.
“Ne-mort! Ne vivent! Quo to significa? Es omno ci un cochemare?”
“It existe misteries pri quel li homes solmen posse conjecter (conjecter = pensar sin saver), e comprender solmen desfacilmen, poc a poc. Ma yo ne ha finit. Esque yo posse decapitar (decapit·ar = remover li cap) li mort Senioretta Lucy?”
On posse far sam con altri verbes: verb + li cose sur quel on fa li verbe.
The header contains prototypes for several functions that deal with mathematics. In the 1990 version of the ISO standard, only the double versions of the functions were specified; the 1999 version added the float and long double versions. To use these math functions, you must link your program with the math library. For some compilers (including GCC), you must specify the additional parameter -lm[1][2].
The math functions may produce one of two kinds of errors. Domain errors occur when the parameters to the functions are invalid, such as a negative number as a parameter to sqrt (the square root function). Range errors occur when the result of the function cannot be expressed in that particular floating-point type, such as pow(1000.0, 1000.0) if the maximum value of a double is around 10308.
The functions can be grouped into the following categories:
The cos, sin, and tan functions
The cos, sin, and tan functions return the cosine, sine, and tangent of the argument, expressed in radians.
The cosh, sinh and tanh functions compute the hyperbolic cosine, the hyperbolic sine, and the hyperbolic tangent of the argument respectively. For the hyperbolic sine and cosine functions, a range error occurs if the magnitude of the argument is too large.
The acosh functions compute the inverse hyperbolic cosine of the argument. A domain error occurs for arguments less than 1.
The asinh functions compute the inverse hyperbolic sine of the argument.
The atanh functions compute the inverse hyperbolic tangent of the argument. A domain error occurs if the argument is not in the interval [-1, +1]. A range error may occur if the argument equals -1 or +1.
The exp, exp2, and expm1 functions
The exp functions compute the base-e exponential function of x (ex). A range error occurs if the magnitude of x is too large.
The exp2 functions compute the base-2 exponential function of x (2x). A range error occurs if the magnitude of x is too large.
The expm1 functions compute the base-e exponential function of the argument, minus 1. A range error occurs if the magnitude of x is too large.
The frexp, ldexp, modf, scalbn, and scalbln functions
These functions are heavily used in software floating-point emulators, but are otherwise rarely directly called.
Inside the computer, each floating point number is represented by two parts:
The value of a floating point number
The frexp functions break the argument floating point number value into those two parts, the exponent and significand.
After breaking it apart, it stores the exponent in the int object pointed to by ex, and returns the significand.
In other words, the value returned is a copy of the given floating point number but with an exponent replaced by 0.
The ldexp functions multiply a floating-point number by a integral power of 2 and return the result.
In other words, it returns copy of the given floating point number with the exponent increased by ex.
A range error may occur.
The modf functions break the argument value into integer and fraction parts, each of which has the same sign as the argument. They store the integer part in the object pointed to by *iptr and return the fraction part.
The *iptr is a floating-point type, rather than an "int" type, because it might be used to store an integer like 1 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 which is too big to fit in an int.
The scalbn and scalbln compute x × FLT_RADIXn. FLT_RADIX is the base of the floating-point system; if it is 2, the functions are equivalent to ldexp.
Most C floating point libraries also implement the IEEE754-recommended nextafter(), nextUp( ), and nextDown( ) functions.
The log, log2, log1p, and log10 functions
The log functions compute the base-e natural logarithm of the argument and return the result. A domain error occurs if the argument is negative. A range error may occur if the argument is zero.
The log1p functions compute the base-e natural logarithm of one plus the argument and return the result. A domain error occurs if the argument is less than -1. A range error may occur if the argument is -1.
The log10 functions compute the common (base-10) logarithm of the argument and return the result. A domain error occurs if the argument is negative. A range error may occur if the argument is zero.
The log2 functions compute the base-2 logarithm of the argument and return the result. A domain error occurs if the argument is negative. A range error may occur if the argument is zero.
The ilogb functions extract the exponent of x as a signed int value. If x is zero, they return the value FP_ILOGB0; if x is infinite, they return the value INT_MAX; if x is not-a-number they return the value FP_ILOGBNAN; otherwise, they are equivalent to calling the corresponding logb function and casting the returned value to type int. A range error may occur if x is zero. FP_ILOGB0 and FP_ILOGBNAN are macros defined in math.h; INT_MAX is a macro defined in limits.h.
The logb functions extract the exponent of x as a signed integer value in floating-point format. If x is subnormal, it is treated as if it were normalized; thus, for positive finite x, 1 ≤ x × FLT_RADIX-logb(x) < FLT_RADIX . FLT_RADIX is the radix for floating-point numbers, defined in the float.h header.
The pow functions compute x raised to the power y and return the result. A domain error occurs if x is negative and y is not an integral value. A domain error occurs if the result cannot be represented when x is zero and y is less than or equal to zero. A range error may occur.
The sqrt functions compute the positive square root of x and return the result. A domain error occurs if the argument is negative.
The cbrt functions compute the cube root of x and return the result.
The hypot functions compute the square root of the sums of the squares of x and y, without overflow or underflow, and return the result.
The ceil functions compute the smallest integral value not less than x and return the result; the floor functions compute the largest integral value not greater than x and return the result.
The fabs functions compute the absolute value of a floating-point number x and return the result.
The fmod functions compute the floating-point remainder of x/y and return the value x - i * y, for some integer i such that, if y is nonzero, the result has the same sign as x and magnitude less than the magnitude of y. If y is zero, whether a domain error occurs or the fmod functions return zero is implementation-defined.
The nearbyint, rint, lrint, and llrint functions
The nearbyint functions round their argument to an integer value in floating-point format, using the current rounding direction and without raising the "inexact" floating-point exception.
The rint functions are similar to the nearbyint functions except that they can raise the "inexact" floating-point exception if the result differs in value from the argument.
The lrint and llrint functions round their arguments to the nearest integer value according to the current rounding direction. If the result is outside the range of values of the return type, the numeric result is undefined and a range error may occur if the magnitude of the argument is too large.
The round, lround, and llround functions
The round functions round the argument to the nearest integer value in floating-point format, rounding halfway cases away from zero, regardless of the current rounding direction.
The lround and llround functions round the argument to the nearest integer value, rounding halfway cases away from zero, regardless of the current rounding direction. If the result is outside the range of values of the return type, the numeric result is undefined and a range error may occur if the magnitude of the argument is too large.
The trunc functions round their argument to the integer value in floating-point format that is nearest but no larger in magnitude than the argument.
The remainder functions compute the remainder x REM y as defined by IEC 60559. The definition reads, "When y ≠ 0, the remainder r = x REM y is defined regardless of the rounding mode by the mathematical reduction r = x - ny, where n is the integer nearest the exact value of x/y; whenever |n - x/y| = ½, then n is even. Thus, the remainder is always exact. If r = 0, its sign shall be that of x." This definition is applicable for all implementations.
The remquo functions return the same remainder as the remainder functions. In the object pointed to by quo, they store a value whose sign is the sign of x/y and whose magnitude is congruent modulo 2n to the magnitude of the integral quotient of x/y, where n is an implementation-defined integer greater than or equal to 3.
The erf functions compute the error function of the argument
The erfc functions compute the complimentary error function of the argument (that is, 1 - erf x). For the erfc functions, a range error may occur if the argument is too large.
30 1/4 square yards = 1 square rod
A section of land = 640 acres = 1 square mile
Useful information for practical men compiled for E. I. Du Pont de Nemours ... By E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company
If text fields can receive focus but not accept any input, maybe the application is accidentally handling keyDown events so that they never make it to FrmDispatchEvent at the end of the chain of command in the event loop.
Although having a field edit a MemHandle (such as a database record) is easy (with FldSetTextHandle), changing the text in a text field is rather more involved:
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
This is the term used in Akilattirattu Ammanai the holy book of Ayyavazhi to represent The Ultimate Oneness, and in Thiruvasakam - 2 it was stated that it was from this Ekam all this objects including the separate Godheads, Devas, Asuras etc. of the Universe formed.
Li quar sesones: hiverne, verne, estive, autun.
Li cindres pos un foy.
Quande on ne lucta, on have pace.
“Vu va esser felici que Luca standa plu bon. Li filia dormi.” Li professor subridet e aspectet felici. Il frottat su manus e dit:
“Quo vu vole dir, madam?” questionat li professor.
Ella exeat li coridor por dejunear. Durant que ella parlat yo videt li visage del professor grisijar. Ne volente chocar li madam, il dit nullcos, e mem subridet quande il apertet li porta por la. Ma li moment quande ella desaparit il traet me subitmen e con fortie, ad in li manja-chambre e cludet li porta.
Quo omnicos significa? Yo comensa questionar me ca mi long vive con li dementes ha comensat far anc mi mente dement.
Paroles finient in -c o -g usa null vocale vice -e por indicar ne mann, ne fémina.
Certes prefere li finition ·o, e it es pro to que ·o ne es sempre mannic. Li parol loc es anc scrit loco, e pisc es anc scrit pisco.
Con ·ari on crea adjectives.
Con ·esc on crea adjectives queles significa "simil a", o "far se pensar pri".
Ti-ci ·esc es tre sovente usat pos nómines e locs.
Li grand horloge es tam londonesc! (= it fa se pensar pri London)
Quande li coses circum se ne importa, on usa totvez.
Top - 0–9 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
Musical scores are temporarily disabled.
C Early in the : Dm morning?
Dm Take him and shake him and try to awake him
C Take him and shake him and try to awake him
Dm Take him and shake him and try to awake him
Dm Put him in the scuppers with a hose pipe on him
C Put him in the scuppers with a hose pipe on him
Dm Put him in the scuppers with a hose pipe on him
The tonality of the song is either C major or D minor and F major, not as it is written in a few musical scores. The range of notes is the same as C major. But the harmonic center of the song is the D-minor chord. Such melodies are said to be in so-called "Dorian scale". This is a church key. So named because there are many old hymns in this key. But there are some folk songs (eg the Irish folk music) and modern pieces (eg, Mad World by Michael Andrews) still using this mode.
For most people, there may be no single cause for their high blood pressure. We do not know exactly what causes high blood pressure. We do know that your lifestyle can affect your risk of developing it. You are at a higher risk if:
This document refers to the Toyota Prius 2004-2009 (NHW20) and contains information only where details for the Prius differ from 'ordinary' vehicles. The Prius doesn't lend itself to home maintenance beyond the usual oil/coolant levels, tyres, etc. Almost everything electrical is computer controlled so special equipment is required to diagnose faults or change parameters. Also, worth mentioning, is the high voltage battery which can give a nasty jolt to anyone who takes liberties with it. Having said that, there are still steps that owners can take to minimise future problems and even some relatively minor problems that can be easily and safely fixed by the owner.
Prius uses two battery systems: A high voltage battery system (several hundred volts! Note DANGER to untrained mechanics!) often referred to as the traction battery. This battery sits under the rear seat or under the floor in the rear cargo area. Its main function is to power the electric traction motor(s), start the gasoline engine and store regenerated power. A second battery, the auxiliary battery, powers computers that manage Prius systems, vehicle lighting, electric door locks, electric windows, the radio, etc. This is a 12-volt battery and electrical system much like traditional automobiles except it does not need to be powerful enough to run a starter motor. In earlier models, it is located in the rear cargo area and in the later models, in the engine compartment.
The 12 volt lead acid auxiliary battery, located underneath the cargo area near the right interior fender, is quite small and will discharge if the car isn't used for more than a couple of months. This battery powers the vehicle's entire 12 volt bus, including body and powertrain computers, window and lock actuators, exterior and interior lights, various accessories, and it initiates the hybrid control system when the driver switches the vehicle into ready mode. Note however, the auxiliary battery doesn't power the reciprocating engine's starting motor (motor generator 1 - MG1). The high voltage traction battery powers the starter.
A total loss of 12 volt power from a discharged or disconnected auxiliary battery can cause unforeseen problems. These are not insurmountable or even serious, but can be annoying. These issues need to be restored by clearing the error codes from the system (see below). You may also have to reset the clock and your radio station settings. A discharged battery can also make accessing the inside of the car difficult (especially the cargo area), as electrically actuated locks or latches may be inoperable. It's a good idea to use your manual key at least once a month for entry to avoid lock seizure, as this may be the only way to access the interior should the auxiliary battery become completely discharged.
WARNING: Take great care to get the jumper leads the right way round! Connect Red to Red (+) and then Black to Black (-). Mixing up the polarity (+ to -) WILL cause extremely expensive damage to your Prius!
Prius can be jump started just like any other car from under the hood (bonnet), in the engine compartment. With earlier Prius models, access to the battery in the rear is not needed; there is a jump start terminal hidden under a Red plastic cover in the fuse box. In a later model Prius, the auxiliary battery is in the engine compartment under the hood, so connect the Red jumper cable to the positive battery terminal hidden under a Red cover. For any Prius model, see warning above.
Sufficient power from the donor vehicle is only required to start the hybrid control system, far less than a normal vehicle's starter motor would require. Connect the Red +12 volt jumper lead to the jump terminal or the +12 volt Red battery terminal, depending on the Prius model. Then connect the Black negative ground lead to any substantial bare metal part in the engine compartment. Once connected, just start the Prius as normal. The leads can then be disconnected. There is no need to leave them connected once the hybrid system has started even if the engine hasn't fired up. This sometimes confuses drivers of recovery vehicles who think the Prius has failed to start or has stalled. The Prius only needs to indicate READY. When READY is on, the Prius will now charge the auxiliary battery itself.
Unlike normal cars, the Prius does not charge the 12 volt battery via an alternator spun by the engine. This vehicle charges its 12 volt battery from the hybrid system, so if you are unable to take the car out for a run for any reason, just switching the system on for a while will do the job. To maintain charge in the 12V battery if the car is not being used often, Toyota recommend putting the car in 'Ready' mode for one hour, once per week. If the battery is completely flat, the vehicle may need to be put in 'Ready' for 4 - 8 hours to fully recharge. Be aware that the engine will start occasionally to ensure the high voltage battery doesn't discharge - so this should only be done in a well-ventilated area, not a closed garage. Doing this will also wreck your miles per gallon record. Alternatively, the 12 volt battery can also be recharged using a standard car battery charger.
The high voltage battery will never discharge under normal operating conditions. The Prius strives to keep the battery within normal parameters while the car is being driven and it is physically disconnected via a relay when the car is shut down. It is charged automatically by energy reclaimed by the hybrid system when the vehicle is slowing down and by running the main engine when required. Barring faults, there are two ways to discharge the high voltage battery; run the car without fuel, thus preventing the engine starting, or putting it in Neutral. This is to be avoided except in emergencies and a specific warning is given in the vehicles handbook about this. If access is needed to the battery, there is a safety plug, close to the battery itself, which can be used to disconnect it completely for maintenance purposes. Having said that, there is no need for the average owner to go near that battery and it is not necessary to unplug it if you're not intending to use the car for some time.
The Diagnostic Trouble Codes or DTC's (also known simply as fault codes) are stored automatically whenever any of the sensors are outside of predetermined parameters. For instance, on the Prius, there are sensors at the braking systems master cylinder and also at the calipers. If the sensors show different readings, the system logs this as a fault. The fault codes are not generally cleared automatically; they are stored until reset manually with an OBD-II diagnostic tester. If you have such a tool and wish to interrogate the system and/or reset the fault codes, you can just plug it in and follow the instructions for the particular tool you are using. If you don't have an OBD-II tester, you can get away with a Special Service Tool (SST) 09843-18040 from Toyota. This is used to safely link particular terminals together in order to get the system to display the stored fault codes and respond to instructions given via the vehicles sensors. Warning lights on the dashboard that refuse to extinguish even when you are sure there is no fault can be due to stored fault codes.
Use the SST to connect terminals 4 and 13 of the OBD-II socket.
Turn on the vehicles power (just press the power button).
Press the brake pedal at least eight times within five seconds.
Check that there are no warnings displayed on the dashboard - if warnings are still displayed, turn the power off and repeat from step 2.
Unplug the SST.
Poor reception on the Prius, including crackling, on both AM and FM is usually a grounding problem at the antenna end. The antenna is mounted on the roof, right at the back in the centre. The fix then is simply to gain access, unbolt the antenna, clean the antenna and the area of the roof where it makes contact, smear some dielectric grease on the contact point to prevent corrosion in the future (petroleum jelly will suffice) and put it all back together. Unfortunately, in order to gain access to the contact point in order to clean it, you'll need to remove the rear internal light assembly and drop the headlining at the back.
Disconnecting the 12 volt battery in a Prius (or allowing it to go flat), will cause the automatic function of the power windows to fail. They need to be recalibrated before they will work properly again. Fortunately this is an easy task. Just use the switch to lower the window to about half way. Then use the same switch to raise the window. Hold the switch in the (up) position for at least a second after the window stops moving. If that fails, try disconnecting the battery again for a few minutes, reconnect it and try again, holding the switch for a couple of seconds after the window stops.
Use: The Carrick bend is used for joining two lines. It is particularly appropriate for very heavy rope or cable that is too large and stiff to easily be formed into other common bends. It will not jam even after carrying a significant load or being soaked with water. The Carrick bend's aesthetically pleasing interwoven and symmetrical shape has also made it popular for decorative purposes.
In the interest of making the Carrick bend easier to untie, especially when tied in extremely large rope, the ends may be seized to prevent the knot from collapsing when load is applied. This practice also keeps the knot's profile flatter and can ease its passage over capstans or winches.
The ends are traditionally seized to their standing part using a Round seizing. For expediency, a series of double constrictor knots, drawn very tight, may also be used. When seizing the Carrick bend, both ends must be secured to their standing parts or the bend will slip.
WARNING: The Carrick bend is generally tied in a flat interwoven form shown above. Without additional measures it will capsize (collapse) under load into a secure and stable, although bulky, form. If the knot is allowed to capsize naturally under tension, considerable slippage of line through the knot can occur before tightening. The knot should be upset carefully into the capsized form and worked up tight before actual use.
Intraverbals/Fill In the Blank/Wh?
Pause pauses a program until the user hits Enter.
(Also called Cooley's Anemia, Beta-Thalassemia is an inherited blood disorder that manifests as an absent or decreased production of normal hemoglobin.)
Caused by a mutation in the gene encoding the Hemoglobin beta chain (HBB)
Normal hemoglobin has two alpha and two beta peptide chains. Beta-Thalassemia results from reduced synthesis of the hemoglobin beta chain. This disorder is caused by mutations in the beta chain of the hemoglobin molecule.
Over 200 different HBB gene mutations are known. In each at risk population, though, four to ten mutations usually account for a large majority of HBB disease-causing alleles.
B-thal is more prevalent in Meditarranean, Middle Eastern, Transcaucasus, Central Asia, Indian and Far Eastern populations.
Ex.: People with Mediterranean ancestry (Greek or Italian) have a 1/30 carrier risk
Parents of an affected child are heterzygotes. They are clinically asymptomatic but may be slightly anemic.They are referred to as having beta-thalassemia minor.
Patients with thalassemia major are usually picked up within the first 2 yrs of life. Babies may be pale, fussy, have poor appetite and infections
If untreated, spleen, liver and heart become enlarged and bones can become thin and brittle. Buildup of iron may cause heart failure in teens or 20s.affected children have failure to thrive and shortened life expectancy. Many other complications can occur without treatment. Patients usually die before 30.
Treatment involves chelation therapy (which removes excess iron) and blood transfusions
Liver and spleen are enlarged and iron overload may still occur
Shows microcytic anemia (low mean corpuscular volume) and reduced content of Hb per red cell (low mean corpuscular hemoglobin).
Normal level of hemoglobin for males is 14-18 g/dl and 12-16 g/dl for females. Affected individuals have hemoglobin levels less than 7 g/dl and carrier level is 11-14 g/dl.
Affected patients have microcytosis, hypochromia, anisocytosis, poikilocytosis and nucleated red blood cells (erythroblasts).
This disorder characterized by decreased amounts of hemoglobin A (HbA)
In beta-thalassemia patients, bone marrow is extremely cellular due to erythroid hyperplasia
Mutations are detected by a number of different PCR-based procedures. The most common are reverse dot blot analysis or primer-specific amplification, with a set of probes complementary to the most common mutations in the population from which the patient originated.
There are known common mutations for Mediterranean, Middle Eastern, Indian, Thai, Chinese, and African/ African American populations.
Carriers identified by red blood cell indices, hemoglobin analysis and mutation analysis.
Family members of an affected person, gamete donors and members of at-risk ethnic groups should consider carrier detection.
Hematologic testing has several limitations: silent mutations, coinheritance of other thalassemias, and confusion with Alpha-thalassemia.
Prenatal testing is available for couples who are both carriers and their mutations have been identified. Use CVS or amniocentesis.
Corrects the anemia, suppresses erythropoiesis and inhibits increased gastrointestinal absorption of iron
Bone marrow transplantation from an HLA identical sibling is an alternative
Post your College and Table of Contents and share your two-year college style of teaching.
Japan categorizes Mongolia as an East Asian nation (Mongolia is considered a central Asian nation)
Middle East (Central Asia, West Asia) tables will be fixed later. Some difficulties due to Japan system of categorizing countries.
Content from the work A Beginner's Python Tutorial Copyright © 2011 Steven Thurlow, available at https://github.com/stoive/pythontutorial and dual licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 2.5 Australia license and MIT License was used on the creation of this book.
The removal of harmful and unwanted waste material from the body is called excretion.Those organ which help in the process of excretion called excretory organs.
% caption.tex - Examples of how Latex handles captions within floats
% Andrew Roberts - September 2003
\caption{A picture of the same toucan looking the other way!}
Notice how the tables and figures have independent counters.
This page uses material from Andy Roberts' Getting to grips with LaTeX with permission from the author.
Welcome to the Wikibook on Animal Crossing: Wild World.
Download android.img as instructed here. Save it to `/var/lib/anbox/android.img`.
Once QEMU has been installed, it should be ready to run a guest OS from a disk image. This image is a file that represents the data on a hard disk. From the perspective of the guest OS, it actually is a hard disk, and it can create its own filesystem on the virtual disk.
You can download a few guest OS images from the QEMU website, including a simple 8 MB image of a Linux distro (which is meant primarily for testing; note that it lacks the e1000 driver and therefore cannot do networking out-of-the-box). To run it, download and unzip the image in a folder and run the QEMU command.
When you do not have the plain command qemu try to run:
Replace linux-0.2.img with the name of your guest OS image file. If it has a GUI and you want to use your mouse with it, double-click on the window and QEMU will grab your mouse. To make QEMU release your mouse again, hold down the Control and Alt keys simultaneously, then let go - your mouse will be released back to X.
Aurélien Jarno of Debian has prepared a number of pre-packaged Debian QEMU images for several architectures, including ARM, Sparc, PowerPC, x86_64, and i386. They can be found at http://people.debian.org/~aurel32/qemu/
For some of the test kernels that you get, for example, the Sparc test image, you might get the error "No NFS Server available giving up" or some other message about needing to insert a "Root Floppy" or even a message specifying to fix the root option. If so then specify "root=/dev/ram" as an addition kernel command line option. This will then cause the test system to work. This is specifically true for the Sparc test files available from http://wiki.qemu.org/Testing, but probably for some of the others as well. If you are using the manager program for windows then just add the "root=/dev/ram/" in the advanced tab. Also turn off video and sound and if using qemu-system-sparcw.exe then change the filename to qemu-system-sparc.exe because some renamed it.
QEMU supports several image types. The "native" and most flexible type is qcow2, which supports copy on write, encryption, compression, and VM snapshots.
(default) the raw format is a plain binary image of the disc image, and is very portable. On filesystems that support sparse files, images in this format only use the space actually used by the data recorded in them.
Compressed Loop format, mainly used for reading Knoppix and similar live CD image formats
QEMU copy-on-write format with a range of special features, including the ability to take multiple snapshots, smaller images on filesystems that don't support sparse files, optional AES encryption, and optional zlib compression
VMware 3 & 4, or 6 image format, for exchanging images with that product
VirtualBox 1.1 compatible image format, for exchanging images with VirtualBox.
Hyper-V compatible image format, for exchanging images with Hyper-V 2012 or later.
Hyper-V legacy image format, for exchanging images with Virtual PC / Virtual Server / Hyper-V 2008.
To set up your own guest OS image, you first need to create a blank disc image. QEMU has the qemu-img command for creating and manipulating disc images, and supports a variety of formats. If you don't tell it what format to use, it will use raw files. The "native" format for QEMU is qcow2, and this format offers some flexibility. Here we'll create a 3 GB qcow2 image to install Windows XP on:
The easiest way to install a guest OS is to create an ISO image of a boot CD/DVD and tell QEMU to boot off it. Many free operating systems can be downloaded from the Internet as bootable ISO images, and you can use them directly without having to burn them to disc.
Here we'll boot off an ISO image of a properly licensed Windows XP boot disc. We'll also give it 256 MB of RAM, but we won't use the kqemu kernel module just yet because it causes problems during Windows XP installation.
Note: Depending on your distribution, you may need to use qemu-system-x86_64 command (when you using a 64-bit OS, also if you want to use KVM later).
To boot from a real CD or DVD, tell QEMU where to find it. On Linux systems, you can usually use a logical device name like /dev/cdrom or /dev/dvd, or the physical name of the device, e.g. /dev/sr0
QEMU will boot from the ISO image or CD/DVD and run the install program. If you have two screens, move the QEMU screen off to the spare one where you can keep an eye on the installer, but get on with something else - it will take a while!
Once the guest OS has installed successfully, you can shutdown the guest OS (e.g. in Windows XP, click on Start and then Shutdown). Once it has shutdown, start QEMU up with the kqemu kernel module to give it a little more speed.
If you are running an x86-64 Linux (i.e. 64-bit), you will need to run the x86-64 version of QEMU to be able to utilise kqemu:
QEMU can utilise up to four image files to present multiple virtual drives to the guest system. This can be quite useful, as in the following examples:
a pagefile or swapfile virtual disc that can be shared between QEMU guests
a common data drive where all data is stored, accessible from each QEMU guest but isolated from the host
Bear in mind that only one instance of QEMU may access an image at a time - shared doesn't mean shared simultaneously!
To use additional images in QEMU, specify them on the command line with options -hda, -hdb, -hdc, -hdd.
NB: QEMU doesn't support both -hdc and -cdrom at the same time, as they both represent the first device on the second IDE channel.
The "cow" part of qcow2 is an acronym for copy on write, a neat little trick that allows you to set up an image once and use it many times without changing it. This is ideal for developing and testing software, which generally requires a known stable environment to start off with. You can create your known stable environment in one image, and then create several disposable copy-on-write images to work in.
To start a new disposable environment based on a known good image, invoke the qemu-img command with the backing_file option and tell it what image to base its copy on. When you run QEMU using the disposable environment, all writes to the virtual disc will go to this disposable image, not the base copy.
Sometimes it is helpful to be able to mount a drive image under the host system. For example, if the guest doesn't have network support, the only way to transfer files into and out of the guest will be by the storage devices it can address.
Linux and other Unix-like hosts can mount images created with the raw format type using a loopback device. From a root login (or using sudo), mount a loopback with offset.
For example, to copy some files across to a FreeDOS hard drive image:
NB: never mount a QEMU image while QEMU is using it (unless -snapshot is used), or you are likely to corrupt the filesystem on the image.
Note: if you have an image without partitions you should omit the ,offset=32256 part. This is for instance the case if you want to mount linux-0.2.img (which can be found at the qemu web site at the time of writing).
Using fdisk you can get information regarding the different partitions in nbd0.
/dev/nbd0p1 * 2048 499711 248832 83 Linux
/dev/nbd0p2 501758 8386559 3942401 5 Extended
/dev/nbd0p5 501760 8386559 3942400 8e Linux LVM
LVM type partitions cannot be mounted using 'mount'. In such a case the image could be mounted with:
Reading all physical volumes. This may take a while...
Replace with the name of the logical volume present in the volume group. Finally, after the usage it's important to unmount the image and reverse other steps (depending on how the image was mounted):
"nbd" stands for "Network Block Device". Here we're using them locally, but one can also export the image for other hosts to use/mount. See qemu-nbd(8), nbd-client(8) for details.
The same can be done for raw images, but it's a lot less efficient than the loop method described above.
Another alternative for vmdk and raw images is to use vdfuse (http://forums.virtualbox.org/viewtopic.php?f=26&t=33355) which allows to access any image supported by VirtualBox.
It may be desired to copy a diskimage to a physical device. An example may be if building a cluster, it might be easier to get everything ready in qemu, then write the final diskimage to all of the hard drives. Of course your image will need to contain all of required configuration and drivers for the new system to boot properly.
The diskimage will need to be in raw format.
Then you just dd it onto the hard drive.
Or, let qemu-img directly write onto the drive in one command:
Of course you need to be careful that you write it to the correct drive!
The qemu-img program can tell you about the format, virtual size, physical size, and snapshots inside an image.
-f fmt – optional, specify the format of the input file (QEMU can usually detect it)
-O fmt – specify the format of the output file
-e – use encryption in the output file (you will be prompted for a password)
-c – use compression in the output file (can't be used with encryption)
-6 – when converting to vmdk (VMware) format, make it compatible with VMware 6
In any case, you may use the raw format (or an nbd device):
To convert a QEMU image for use with VirtualBox, first convert it to raw format, then use VirtualBox's conversion utility to convert and compact it in its native format. Note that the compact command requires the full path to the VirtualBox image, not just the filename.
(1) VBoxManage convertdd test.raw test.vdi
Alternatively, you may use qemu-nbd to make the image available as raw as an nbd device, which VBoxManage can then convert.
To convert a VDI back to raw, one may use VBoxManage again:
To use a VDI image from KVM without converting it, vdfuse may be used again.
Like Chrono Trigger, Chrono Cross has many different combos. Combos involving two characters are called Double Techs. Combos involving three characters are called triple techs.
Pick a word at random and say the translation in Dutch, then hover your mouse over the word and see if your are right.
(refutation) in which only SLD-resolution steps occur and
It is a correct answer substitution for
, whose nodes are literals from
, such that the link-condition with mgu
The following are three possible link conditions:
The empty condition results in a clause normal form tableau calculus.
The weak condition results in a connection calculus.
The strong link condition results in a model elimination calculus.
The face is the front part of your head, where your eyes, nose, and mouth are.
Soi Xim is a constructed language designed by web user Lkolkalki.
Soi Xim is a language thought to be as of minimal as of maximal complexity, depending on the use.
Wants to demonstrate the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis in terms of philosophical achievements, due to its particular idea-formation method, as universal as possible.
It is a personal language, firstly crafted as a stylish experiment and can possibly be used as an international auxiliary language for easier communication purposes.
As a philosophical language, the main feature is to form practical thoughts to understand nature, human behavior and action-reaction processes, making this with as few words as possible.
Its inner nature is the one of an a priori language, by which root words are created ex novo by the author and merely inspired by Asiatic languages, like Altaic and Sino-Tibetan ones, also like a hypothetical isolated idiom.
As of grammar, it can be either an isolating, an agglutinative or a polysynthetic language, making it really flexible and adaptable to any context and level of difficulty.
It focuses on simple concepts and elements that are relatively universal among cultures. It was created to express a wide range of human and natural concepts with a simpler wordcraft, making it the shortest vocabulary based language. The language has 17 phoneme, 6 vowels and 11 consonants, for a total of 72 basic words.
Latin a b c d e i k m o p r s u v x y z
n object, practical thing
n feeling, sentiment, emotion
n enemy, evil, opposition
v to sleep, to rest
v to know, understand, comprehension
n war, conflict, violence
n number, measure, dimension
v to do, to use
v to see, to feel
n question, problem, doubt
v to be, being, existence
Sexual reproduction - Human sex cycle. Cells undergo Meiosis.
This Wikibook explores the spatial distribution of racial groups in the United States, their historical and contemporary causes, and the consequences for racial inequality. Location is important for accessing many goods and services: decent housing, employment opportunities, voting power, education, low-cost public services, a clean environment, connections to influential people. Managing the spatial distribution of racial groups has been a key tool for controlling who gets access to these goods and services. This website focuses on the role of government and law in determining the spacial distribution of racial groups, although some attention is also paid to private sector actions. The interactive maps and other information contained oj this site reveal several dimensions of this process.
The main authors of this book are Elizabeth Anderson and Jeffrey Jones.
The Wikibook is based on their original work of 2002 and is reproduced here under its CC-BY-SA 4.0 licence. Modifications by the Wikibooks community are not necessarily endorsed by the original authors.
FET or Field effect transistors are device that find applications just as BJT does but vary on how they operate. BJT is a current controlled device, that is the current that flows via the collector terminal is a function of base current
FET is similar to BJT. It has a source which is analogous to emitter BJT. It has a drain which is analogous to collector in BJT and has a gate which is similar to base in BJT. The current in FET flows from source to drain, and is a function of voltage applied between gate and source
FET's normally have very high input impedance that ranges from few ohms to mega ohms. It has simpler construction and is easy to put in Integrated Circuits. FET's have more temperature stability than BJT. There are different type's of FET's as follows
Webquest is an inquiry-oriented activity in which some or all of the information that learners interact with comes from resources on the internet.
6 Chapter 2. Telecentre network governance – setting the playing field for a network culture
A PDF version is available. (info)
A collaborative project of the telecentre.org community
Edited by Meddie Mayanja, Manuel Acevedo, Silvia Caicedo and Claire Buré
(Wikified by Bangladesh Open Source Network with support from Partha Sarker)
A Guidebook for Managing Telecentre Networks Front Cover
A Guidebook for Managing Telecentre Networks Back Cover
Telecentre (noun): A Telecentre is a public place where people can access computers, the Internet, and other digital technologies that enable them to gather information, create, learn, and communicate with others while they develop essential digital skills. While each Telecentre is different, their common focus is on the use of digital technologies to support community, economic, educational, and social development—reducing isolation, bridging the digital divide, promoting health issues, creating economic opportunities, and reaching out to youth for example.
Telecentres exist in almost every country, although they sometimes go by a different name: public Internet access center (PIAP), village knowledge center, Infocenter, community technology center (CTC), community multimedia center (CMC), multipurpose community Telecentre (MCT), Common/Citizen Service Centre (CSC), school-based Telecentre, etc.[1]
Telecentre network governance – setting the playing field for a network culture
Associação Telecentro de Informação e Negócios (Brazil’s Telecentre Information and Business Association)
The Philippine Community eCenter Network, Inc.
The telecentre.org Community Fact Sheet
Growing the market for telecentres: Cooking school (and other services)
An online portal of input services directory developed by telecentres in Bangladesh
Telecentres of Business and Information (TBI), Brazil.
The Telecentre Times: a case for international collaboration among networks
A simplified example of how the operational elements from a communications strategy can be described
I am heartened that telecentre networks have immortalized what they have learned from experience about network building and management since 2005, especially because there is no longer any dispute: networks are the new normal for organizing and managing telecentres successfully. As such, this initiative represents a major contribution by and for networks, as well as for the global telecentre community at large.
The resulting Network Management Guide addresses practical issues that networks face on a daily basis. It discusses the challenges and proposes solutions from the practitioners’ perspectives. As a living document, constantly updated through wiki posts, the guide encourages the telecentre community to engage in building stronger telecentres together and to share experiences and perspectives for many years to come.
This guide was co-edited by Manuel Acevedo (Argentina), Claire Buré (Chile), Silvia Caicedo and myself (telecentre.org, Canada). It is published by telecentre.org (www.telecentre.org) and is available online and (coming soon) as a living wiki.
Finally, this guide represents the very best of what telecentre.org and the telecentre movement is all about: working together to share experiences and best practices with a view to making telecentres strong, better, more sustainable and more relevant to the people they serve.
Congratulations. I'm proud to be and work in your company.
Community telecentres, or simply ‘telecentres’ as they are widely known, have existed since the mid 1980s in Scandinavia, Canada and the United States – for almost as long as the internet has been available to the general public. They became more widespread in the late 1990s with their deployment in developing countries, as the strategic importance for human development of universal access to information and communication services became more accepted by policy-makers around the world. In 1997, the United Nations called for universal access to ICT services:
We have concluded that the introduction and use of ICT and information management must become an integral element of the priority efforts by
In many countries in the world, the only viable way to reach universal access for the time being and in the mid-future is though shared access, particularly for people who are impoverished. As C.K. Prahalad notes:[1]
The search for a solution to this problem has focused on different forms of shared access, in which public computers are made available in
Since the mid 2000s a new player for universal access has arrived on the scene: the mobile phone. And it is the only imaginable digital device connectable to the internet that can bring universal ICT access in the foreseeable future (individually or even at the family level). Yet, while their capabilities are growing by leaps and bounds, mobile phones still present significant limitations (small screens, restricted inputs, high costs for connectivity, etc.).
This points to a different, more integral understanding of the meaning of universal access. Just as the concept of ‘digital divide’ evolved from being strictly related to infrastructure to one combining infrastructure, capacity and content (Acevedo, 2005), we can talk of ‘effective universal access’ which isn’t just about devices; but rather integrates devices, goods, services and context to allow people to make effective use of ICTs. Telecentres continue to play a key role in allowing greater levels of connectivity, becoming even more important as the diversity and complexity of ICT goods and services grows. Telecentres help constituencies to gain ICT capacity, to find relevant content, to make use of a growing range of services and to connect with other users (across towns or across the world), all within the ‘supportive environment’ outlined earlier by Prahalad. Therefore, as telecentres are shifting to becoming community resources for human development, reaching beyond their initial recognition as technology access points, they will be increasingly recognized as fundamental actors in spreading the benefits and opportunities of ICT use.[2]
Once the first telecentres were launched in a given country, particularly in developing nations during the mid-to-late 1990s,[3] some practitioners and policy makers turned their attention to how to bring those telecentres together so they could share experiences, information, training materials, etc. Low performance caused many ‘early casualties’ among the first waves of telecentres. Telecentre networking became an important issue, at least on paper, even before large national scaling-up of telecentres started. But it wasn’t easy and it would take time.
Up until a few years ago, most telecentres were fairly isolated from one another. Even national initiatives that were born with the intention of being networked, such as in Jordan starting in 2000, essentially functioned as individual telecentres which only shared program managers and funding. Even discussions among national telecentre associations (mostly in Latin America) in December 2001 on the eve of a Global Citizens Networks Congress in Buenos Aires did not lead to any significant results or advances. However, this event probably did help to pave the way towards more extensive networking, a way that was significantly facilitated by the strings of meetings and contacts made possible by the process of the World Summit on the Information Society (2003–2005). It was really with the start of the
Is it possible to provide a unified definition of a telecentre network (TCN)? Perhaps, but since the nature of this publication is more practical than academic, we prefer to characterize telecentre networks through the attributes that commonly appear. After all, telecentre networks can vary significantly from country to country: sometimes they are informal arrangements, linking a few dozens of telecentres, while others are highly structured national programs that include hundreds of individual telecentres.
Meddie Mayanja, from the telecentre.org program initiative, provides a description of some of the key attributes of a telecentre network:
An alliance of practitioners (who believe in the power of working together to learn and find solutions for their problems);
A forum for exchange of ideas and experiences; and
A platform for action to increase social and economic impact of grassroots telecentres (Mayanja, 2008).
In addition, we could say that a telecentre network fosters the collaboration of telecentres, helps to represent them and channels their voices, also serving as a dynamic repository of resources for its member telecentres. More broadly, networks strengthen the entire telecentre ecosystem — acting as connection points between key players and sustaining relationships between activists, researchers, and development partners.[4]
Some network parameters, applied to telecentre networks can help to characterize them, include the following characteristics:
Size: Networks can consist of up to 100 nodes, 100 – 500, over 500;
Regional coverage: Can be local, state/provincial, national, regional, global;
Maturity: Can describe stages from ‘infancy’ (up to 2 years),‘adolescence’ (2-4 yrs), and ‘adulthood’ (after 5 yrs)[5]
Institutionality: Can range from formal to semi-formal to informal.
Most telecentre network practitioners will find their network’s characteristics among the attributes mentioned. Other network characteristics and behaviours are described in more depth in Chapter 10.
But what exactly do you mean by a 'network'?
Networks are currently fashionable. Everyone is in a network (or sometimes in many), and all sorts of organizations describe themselves as ‘networked’. We may even take networks for granted, given their ubiquity. But as it happens with other all-too important concepts, such as ‘quality’ or ‘excellence’, the concept ends up devoid of meaning. As Kilduff and Tsai (2008) note:
Sometimes it appears that the network paradigm is in danger of becoming a victim of its own success – invoked by practically every organizational researcher, included in almost every analysis, and yet strangely absent as a distinctive set of ideas (p. 9).
It is thus appropriate to briefly pause in order to convey a common understanding of the concept of a network, without going into theoretical vagaries. If we are going to talk, analyze and make decisions about networks,t is worth thinking about what it actually means, even while recognizing that there are numerous interpretations of what a network entails. At its most basic level, a network can be understood as set of connected nodes. The nodes interact via some type of connection or channel: it could be an electronic link, or a ‘physical’ chat while having tea. Each node and connection can exhibit different characteristics. For example, nodes may vary in terms of
Networks do not particularly need a centre, though they often have one or more sets of concentrated nodes that can be called ‘hubs’. In comparison with more traditional or hierarchical organization structures, networks tend to be more flexible and modulable. They may also be more efficient, such as for the distribution of information.
As will be mentioned in the final chapter, there are various ways to describe or characterize networks, with associated techniques to analyze them. For now, it is helpful to distinguish between social networks (those between individuals) and organizational networks (those between or within entities, the latter when they are large). Organizational networks typically have one or more explicit purposes, while social networks chiefly serve to communicate between people. Additionally, an organizational network displays a productive nature; it produces something concrete (making it more than a set of contacts). Telecentre networks can, for these reasons, be described as organizational networks.
Telecentre networks, ecosystems, or what...?
For practical purposes, it is worthwhile to extend the view of a telecentre network to that of a telecentre ecosystem, a term coined by telecentre.org in 2006. A telecentre ecosystem recognizes actors both within and outside the telecentre network, as Figure 1.1 illustrates below.
A narrow view of a telecentre network would only include telecentres, leaving out other relevant actors (like universities, or a municipal administration, for example). A more accurate, open view would include these outside actors as well, in an broader telecentre network. After all, network geometries are based more on collaboration than strictly on nodal identity: it is more important what do you do than who you are. It is this second, more open interpretation of telecentre networks that will be used in this Guidebook, recognizing non- telecentre actors as another type of node that can participate in network activities in various ways. This topic will be covered in greater detail in the next section under ‘Other actors in telecentre networks’.
If a telecentre network could be seen as a club, what is important here is not whether we would formally initiate non-telecentre actors as ‘full members with voting-rights’ or whether we grant them only with temporary passes to the club. What matters is to realize their potential for collaboration in order to achieve the objectives of our telecentre networks.
Currently, national governments, businesses, international organizations and civil society are the protagonists in the telecentre movement. Generally speaking, governments tend to lead the development and implementation of public policies in ICT, while the private sector enables and finances actions aligned with their corporate strategies. International organizations (as represented by UN agencies like the United Nations Development Programme, UNESCO or the International Telecommunications Union, development banks or by entities such as the International Development Research Centre (IDRC) in Canada bring resources and share knowledge for better management of telecentre networks. And in a growing number of cases, it is the responsibility of civil society to manage telecentre networks.
As mentioned before, telecentre ecosystems can include many different kinds of entities that can contribute to and become active within telecentre networks, acting as nodes in those networks. Let’s take a look at their possible roles now, while keeping in mind that networks can always benefit from the contributions of additional genuine supporters.
Universities: Universities provide the skills for future engineers, managers, doctors, sociologists and other professionals in a country. They also help to educate people to be citizens in a more harmonious society. Given this double motive, universities are well placed to be important partners for TCNs. A national collaborative arrangement would benefit from having students hone their ICT technical skills while supporting telecentres as a work placement (such as through a summer job, or an internship) or online, by providing help desk support, for example [7] Students and professors can also help to provide or adapt training content in thematic areas of interest to telecentres (relating to agriculture, health, trade, civil rights, etc.). Universities can also help conduct valuable research for telecentre networks, which few other institutions may be in a position to do.
Businesses: As part of their Corporate Social Responsibility programs, or even without them, companies can contribute to the operations of a telecentre network. They can provide technical/management expertise, equipment, connectivity and, very importantly, the collaboration of corporate volunteers. Companies can also facilitate the entry of TCNs into specific development projects they are involved with. ICT companies such as Microsoft, Telefónica or Cisco (or smaller ones) can play valuable roles.
Development agencies/ Development NGOs: Both multilateral entities (such as the UNDP, UNESCO, ITU, IDRC, Soros Foundation) and bilateral entities (the UK’s DFID, Swiss SDC, or Spain’s Intermon-Oxfam), have supported the telecentre movement for years, and continue to play significant roles. One good example was the ITU with their ‘Multipurpose Community Telecentres’.[8] These organizations are well placed to examine experiences around the world, and together with telecentre practitioners, distill knowledge that can be applied to advance the work and performance of these networks.
Media: With the advent of a web 2.0 internet environment, media channels have multiplied and extended their reach to new communities. The media can provide special types of contributions to telecentre networks: (i) increasing the visibility of telecentres for the general public and specialized audiences, (ii) strengthening the public communications capacity of TCNs, and (iii) enriching the role of telecentres as consumers/providers of news and information flowing through media change.
Governments: The myriad of possible contributions of public administration to telecentres and telecentre networks is well recognized. What is worth mentioning here is that their participation as (powerful) members of telecentre ecosystems can occur simultaneously atnational levels (i.e. with telecentre networks) or locally, with municipal administrations providing support to local telecentres. One particularly interesting area of government involvement in terms of content and services would be to impulse large-scale e-government service initiatives where telecentres are utilized as the main means of delivery.
As we will see in Chapter 10, effective telecentre network management can help to arrange and map the contributions of these non-telecentre actors to obtain joint virtuous network effects. For this, careful consideration needs to be exercised in relation to (i) each actor’s possible functions, (ii) TCN management aspects (as covered in Chapters 2-8) and (iii) the collaborative actions between them (such as between an ICT business consortium and a national university). The key aim is to derive added value from their participation, while avoiding a multiplicity of isolated contributions.
Why do telecentre networks matter?
Regardless of a telecentre network’s specific characteristics, most practitioners have an instinctive sense of its benefits for a given telecentre, as well as for the ‘community’, (i.e. the network entity itself), which will include some of the following:
Pooling of financial and technological resources – for example, being able to negotiate better connectivity costs;
Enhanced collaboration – for exmple, in undertaking a joint project among a number of individual telecentres;
Decentralized orientation – such as implementing collective decisions through coordinated actions at the local level;
Mutual support and risk reduction – such as when facing financial blackouts from donors or unfriendly legislation;
Support for smaller players (not all telecentres have similar structures or ‘health’);
More flexibility, from the nature of functioning as a network (as opposed to a mere association of telecentres); and
More effective representation stemming from a stronger capacity to interact with higher order entities, like a government. For example, interacting with a government’s ministry to influence national ICTn policies with socially inclusive measures – which could never be achieved by a single telecentre or even a loose group of them.
From experience, practitioners know that participation in such networks involves a cost in terms of time, human resources and to some extent, money. The challenge lies in achieving the expected benefits from participation in a network in ways that outweigh the costs.
These benefits will not emerge spontaneously, and even if they did, they would be limited and ad-hoc. Networks are not self-managing; there is no kind of automatic pilot that keeps them going without intervention. Network management of any type (including for telecentres) is a relatively new style of management. Its added difficulty is that most of us were brought up in more hierarchical or traditional environments (whether in school, at work, in the family or in society at large). Most of the time we use ‘trial-and-error’ to come up with appropriate strategies and practices to help our networks reach the potential we intuitively think they have. These reasons lead us to try advancing our understanding of telecentre network management, the main theme of this document, with its specific issues and factors.
A brief story on telecentre.org
The telecentre.org program initiative was launched in November 2005 at the World Summit on the Information Society in Tunis. It is the product of a joint social investment program by the International Development Research Centre (IDRC), Microsoft and the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC). The program provides grants and technical assistance to telecentre networks and organizations around the world. Currently housed at the IDRC in Ottawa, Canada, key functions of the social investment program are increasingly being carried out by partners around the world.
But telecentre.org is much more than a social investment program. It is a community that gathers people and organizations from around the world who believe that telecentres have an important role to play in development. This group is made up of telecentre managers, network leaders, nonprofit and civil society organizations; corporations, governments and international development agencies — all working together to increase the social and economic impact of grassroots telecentres around the world.
Telecentre networks are the nerve and connectors of these complex web of interdependent relationships aimed at helping telecentres to create stronger social and economic impacts in communities they serve. Partners share experiences, skills, innovations and resources.
English, Spanish, French and Arabic.
Influenced public policy and used our brand to leverage more than
$3 million to make telecentres stronger, more sustainable and more numerous.
Train one million knowledge workers by the year 2015.
Figure 1.2 Network strategies and other telecentre.org program pillars
The ‘Network’ pillar of telecentre.org is critical to the overall success of the program. The national and regional networks that it supports provide a trusted channel to grassroots telecentres, who are the ultimate beneficiaries and stakeholders of the telecentre.org program.
Another book on telecentres...?
The telecentre.org program had in fact already previously made a strategic decision to throw its weight towards supporting TCNs.[9] Its ‘Network Development Support’ strategy is aimed at obtaining technical support for institutional development and sustainability planning of TCNs. This guidebook is one of the products of that strategy. This is coherent with the strategy shown by its parent organization, IDRC, in supporting development networks of many types.
A resource document providing systematized information and proven knowledge about networks is imperative to help us get the most out of telecentre networks, so that individual telecentres can better serve their users and communities. This is the primary reason that led the men and women who attended the Telecentre Leaders’ Forum in Kuala Lumpur in December 2007 to advocate for the publication of a document about effectively managing telecentre networks. Appropriately, these same individuals requested the networked organization of which they are now a part.
While there is already a sizable and substantive bibliography about telecentres[10](of which a selection is included in this publication), few works can be found that focus on telecentre networks. Of those, fewer still concentrate on managing those networks.
The guidebook is the first publication dedicated exclusively to telecentre network management. It is not just another publication about telecentres: it is about how effectively create and thrive in networks. We hope it will be a useful resource to better structure and handle telecentre networks for its target audience, which includes (i) people managing a telecentre network, (ii) managers and operators of telecentres that belong to a network; (iii) managers and operators of telecentres which do yet belong to a network; (iv) organizations that provide services to telecentres; and (v) ICT/information society policy makers. We’ll be glad as well if it provides food for thought to anyone interested in telecentres and development networks.
There are additional reasons for the creation of this guidebook that deserve mention here. First, it is the product of a collective undertaking in which the key authors are all telecentre network practitioners. These are highly experienced people who are presently running a telecentre network or are closely linked to them: in other words, these are people who – day in, day out – are solving problems and expanding opportunities for telecentre networks. It is a publication based entirely on on-the-ground experience.
Second, it represents an important opportunity to bring applicable knowledge from network theory to the development field; so that NGOs, aid agencies and other actors (such as individual telecentres) can start to apply it in their own operations to improve results and outcomes. This has rarely been done in the past, and it will be beneficial as we enrich and complement practice with useful theoretical aspects.
Finally, and more broadly, human development processes need to be coherent within the context of the ‘information society’, or as sociologist Manuel Castells terms it, the ‘network society’ (1998). If we are living in such a networked environment, it is essential to understand its structures, processes and power relations, so as to conduct our activities more effectively within it. Currently, emerging networked cooperation schemes are overcoming traditional North-South (one-way) cooperation flows; instead creating more South-South flows (as well as South-North ones).
What can i find in this guidebook?
This guidebook contains nine chapters, aside from the introduction, which are briefly described ahead. Chapters 2 – 8 each discuss a specific topic of interest relating to telecentre networks, while Chapters 9 and 10 provide a unifying glance at previous chapters, while suggesting ideas on moving forward.
The themes were chosen in consultation with telecentre network managers and staff. They focus on key relevant topics, providing a strong foundation (and expected guidance) to help those responsible or deeply involved with a telecentre network. More topics will be added in subsequent versions of the guidebook, particularly as it will provide the basis of a wikibook soon after its publication so that the telecentre.org community and others involved with telecentre networks can help to enrich and expand it.
Each of the seven thematic chapters are presented using the same structure; namely: (i) a descriptive section, where the main aspects of the topic in question are discussed; (ii) a case study, where some of those aspects are examined in a real life scenario; (iii) a list of quick tips, running down the key points to bear in mind about that theme; and (iv) a number of references to outstanding reports, web resources or organizations.
Network Governance (Chapter 2): Properly managing telecentre networks, as for any other organizational (or institutional) networks requires structuring and planning. Network management does not occur in a vacuum, and rarely yields good results if approached in ad-hoc or spontaneous manner. Core successful attributes and practices of TCN governance are discussed, while other aspects which could also be considered part of telecentre network governance such as participatory schemes and monitoring and evaluation, are covered in separate chapters for the sake of clarity.
Participatory Networks (Chapter 3): A fundamental pillar of telecentre network governance is participation, which should always relate to the network’s objectives. A healthy TCN should offer fertile ground for effective participation and networked collaboration. This implies the need for certain management practices, cultural factors as well as adequate tools. For instance, effective knowledge sharing depends on the level of participation and nature of the network itself.
Communication Strategies and Practices (Chapter 4): Telecentre network communication strategies should cover at least three domains. One is the wider public, which for telecentre networks often means the national level. Another refers to membership, where individual telecentres act as nodes of the network. Finally, and no less importantly, is the communication supporting the telecentres’ relationship with the communities they serve. Strategies and practices for this 3-D communication space are explained in this chapter.
Financial Sustainability (Chapter 5): One of the most recurring issues about telecentre networks is how to generate sufficient income to implement concrete activities. Various approaches to financial sustainability are discussed in this chapter, both with respect to telcentre networks as a whole, and for the ways in which TCNs can support individual telecentres to achieve sustainability. It is understood here that effective sustainability involves many dimensions beyond solely financial sustainability, including social and institutional sustainability too.
Content and Services for Digital Inclusion (Chapter 6): Telecentres are in the frontline of digital inclusion as community centers that serve people with low incomes or who cannot adequately access information and ICT-based content and services in other ways. The chapter discusses how telecentre networks can play a key role in supporting telecentres to deliver those content and services.
Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (Chapter 7): Monitoring and evaluation are important features of network governance: monitoring as a continuous process, and evaluation as time-bound intensive exercises are the main sources of institutional learning. This chapter deals with those aspects of monitoring and evaluation which telecentre network management can incorporate to know how the network is performing, and also where TCNs can strengthen the capacity of individual telecentres.
International Telecentre Network Collaboration (Chapter 8): One of the exciting new possibilities of advancing the goals and penetration of telecentres is via the collaboration of national or sub-national telecentre networks at the international level. The telecentre.org initiative is a living example, instrument and product of such collaboration. This chapter discusses tools and processes that can maximize such international collaboration via national or sub-national TCNs, with the end purpose of enabling and empowering individual telecentres.
The final two chapters focus on crosscutting telecentre network issues. Chapter 9 focuses on Integrated Network Management and distils the main messages from the guidebook, aiming to pull the topics from the thematic chapters into a recognizable and cohesive picture. Chapter 10 is about Empowering Networks and introduces elements of network theory and provide insights into the future of telecentres and telecentre networks, including possible lines of study and research.
There is an inevitable degree of overlap in the contents, since all these factors are interlinked and occur simultaneously in the daily operations of telecentre networks. How do you talk about participation without getting into communications issues? For the sake of clarity and brevity, efforts have been made to minimize such overlaps. We trust the reader will be understanding and patient with such occurrences.
A note about the future strategy of the guidebook: Once it has been translated into Spanish and French, it will be published in the web as a wikibook, to support its evolution into a living document as knowledge and experience about telecentre networks changes and evolves. This is based on IDRC’s philosophy on open content sharing, where the telecentre community can take the lead in enriching and expanding its contents. As such, the guidebook will grow in quality and quantity from the contributions of members of the telecentre.org community and other practitioners. Moreover, additional topics may presumably be added in the near-mid future, on topics such as (i) training for telecentre staff/volunteers, (ii) knowledge management, (iii) creation partnerships, (iv) telecentre networks and ICT policies, etc.
Enough for the introduction; let’s get into the real thing!
Castells, M. (1998). The rise of the Network Society (The Information Age: Economy, society, culture; Vol. 1). Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
Fillip, B. & Foote, D. (2007). Making the Connection: Scaling Telecenters for Development. Information Technology Applications Center, Academy for Education Development: Washington, DC.
Heeks, R. (2008, June). ICT4D 2.0: The next phase of applying ICT for international development. IEEE Computer (pp. 26–33), June 2008. IEEE Computer Society.
Jensen, M. (2001). Afriboxes, telecentres, cybercafes: ICT in Africa. Cooperation South. UNDP, Special Unit for Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries (TCDC), pp. 97–109.
Myanja, M. (2008). Telecentre Network Strategy 2008-2009. Ottawa: IDRC.
Nath, V. (2001). Executive Summary of Evaluation Report: UNV TACCs project in Egypt. Bonn: UNV. Retrieved February 25, 2002, from www.unites.org/html/resource/knowledge/taccs.htm
United Nations Administrative Committee on Coordination (1997). ACC Statement on Universal Access to Basic Communication and Information Services, New York. Retrieved October 1, 2003, from www.unites.org/html/resource/acc1997.htm
Chapter 2. Telecentre network governance – setting the playing field for a network culture
Telecentre network governance – setting the playing field for a network culture
Management challenges of telecentre networks often spring from the network formation; the decisions and actions the network leaders preferred to take. After years of network building and mentoring, we can point to a number of key aspects for successful telecentre networks. While most of these are decisions and approaches often undertaken during network formation, a telecentre network may, at any stage of its evolution, incorporate these perspectives in order to strengthen what it is already doing. This chapter examines key components of telecentre network governance such as instilling a clear vision, setting and tracking objectives, network structure, leadership, norms and accountability, resources (e.g. financial resources).
Governance refers to the common norms or rules that define the actors, procedures and accepted methods for collective action. Governance may be about the whole of society (which carries a more political connotation), whereas in other instances it may refer to specific areas such as internet – therefore called internet governance. ‘Good governance’ is understood to refer to an institutional system (and a collective culture) that stimulates the efficient and responsible behaviour of a set of actors.
Through governance, networks articulate reasons for existence, targets, how to manage resources, formulate and implement policies, and how to deliver services. Strong network governance depends of good relationships amongst members, skilled people, appropriate structures as well as clear rules and practices.
The impetus and momentum for the birth of a telecentre network can spring from a variety of situations — spontaneously and informally or from a more deliberate and intended initiative. Whatever the origin, the process begins with interaction between people during which the rationale for the network starts to take shape, coalesces and solidifies until the conscious decision to form it is collectively made.
The initial stimulus that sparked and sustained this interaction provides the first indispensable element for effective network management that must be addressed.
Telecentres generally have a common vision in coming together as a network — the growth, advancement, and sustainability of their facilities as well as increased capacities to serve the needs of their immediate communities. In other cases, a network may emerge on just one of the so many issues that telecentres face. For instance, a network could be founded on the need to increase availability of local content or reliable and affordable internet connectivity.
One of the primary challenges at the early stages of telecentre network management is to define and clarify a shared vision that the membership can identify with. A clear network vision is useful when a network starts the process of identifying services, resources and partners to work with. In some cases, the network vision may change as the needs and priorities of members change or because the original problem has been addressed. A dynamic network may then choose to recreate itself over another issue. The important thing is that telecentre networks need to hold their members together through a shared vision and purpose or their members will simply slide away.
It is highly recommended that a formal statement of network purpose is made and institutionalized. This will facilitate the network’s accountability and communication with new members and partners. It will also help the network when exploring the potential for a formal structure later and the adoption of formal commitments and responsibilities towards the shared vision, in case it does not start as a formal institution.
Networks require a critical level of sharing and interaction amongst members to ensure that the shared vision remains in focus for all and operational. Details of how to facilitate knowledge sharing within the network and engaging the membership are discussed in Chapters 3 (on Communication) and 4 (about Participation).
A telecentre network needs to have a communication platform through which members can interact. Most networks have discussion lists and forums for this purpose. Sharing accomplishments, issues and concerns, suggestions, and resources in a common helps a network to build and demonstrate its ‘network value’. Members get to know one another in the process, and as a result are more likely to commit to helping one another with pressing issues in the future.
The objectives of a telecentre network spring from their shared vision. Different telecentre networks, though perhaps sharing many facets of their visions, will have specific objectives that may differ. Therefore if the objectives are concrete, there are more chances to create locally relevant services.
Objectives may be classified as organizational in nature, which is, bringing telecentres under one sustaining and supportive federation to enable concerted efforts and unified representation, or strengthening the collaborative capacities of individual telecentres. They may be content-oriented, seeking to establish uniformity in certain operations, standards and services provided to member telecentres, or community approaches. Then there may be resource-specific objectives, seeking the growth of the network and sustainability of members through resource mobilization and sharing, supporting human resources throughout the network or generating a pool of network resources.
A network may have one of these types of objectives as priorities or a mix of them to describe the avenues for achieving its vision. Whatever a network chooses as the parameters for achieving its vision, these have to be arrived at collectively with maximum participation of all members to ensure a corresponding degree of acceptance by all.
It is ideal, but not mandatory, that individual telecentre objectives are aligned with network objectives. The participation of a telecentre in a telecentre network may be justified if even just a handful of the telecentre objectives display that alignment – as long as the other objectives do not enter into specific contradictions with what the network does or how it operates. For instance, a telecentre may wish to provide ICT training for its community (an objective) for which it will benefit as a member of the network. But if the business model of the telecentre does not allow it to share some materials (e.g. because of intellectual property considerations), it may be difficult to join a telecentre network where all members can openly share their training contents.
The other way around is a little different: all telecentre network objectives must be based on individual telecentre objectives (as functions of their needs and opportunities). That is the basis on which to formulate the network’s objectives. While TCN objectives cannot be expected to pertain to all telecentre objectives, they should be defined to maximize the value to the member telecentres. In addition, part of the work of the network may be directed towards indirect objectives of some telecentres (such as when it involves policy actions that affect telecentres but do not feature among their most pressing needs).
What does this duality mean in practice? It implies that a telecentre network has to make sure it is tailored to the collective objectives of telecentres (bending over backwards if needed), while for the telecentres it is not mandatory to adapt to the network. However this does not mean that members may not need to consider certain changes in order to better participate in the network. In fact, some telecentres may well find it worthwhile to strengthen some of their capacities to better benefit from the network, whether instrumental (for example, installing and utilizing Moodle to gain from e-learning opportunities available via the telecentre network), or generative (e.g. to create joint projects with other members through the network). We will discuss the latter in the last chapter, as part of advanced network management strategies.
Objectives serve as the directional signs for a network, and as we discuss in the final chapter, provide the true bearings in the network’s typically unstable navigation. Though many objectives may be defined for the mid and long term, they are never permanent fixtures. When a destination is reached, objectives should be revisited and sometimes replaced by new ones. Part of the function of telecentre network managers, as we will see in the Monitoring and Evaluation chapter, is to track the attainment of objectives and be ready to change them or identify new ones at the appropriate time.
The structure a telecentre network takes largely depends on a number of factors such as size of membership, and certainly by the objectives it seeks to achieve. A network that self-identifies itself as small in terms of membership, geographical scope, or the range and reach of its objectives may not need a formal structure, in contrast to diverse and complex networks. A smaller network may use a flexible, less formal network governance approach that allows it to achieve its objectives, enables the participation and involvement of its members, as well as provides for its growth and sustainability.
An important consideration in shaping the network is the promotion of equal representation allowing proportionate participation in network decisions and operations by all members. Whether this is achieved by shaping the structure components or by staffing the leadership and membership of these components is a decision to be made by network members.
Whatever the choice, a structure is functional and productive when it allows network membership parity in the share of authority and participation in network operations. It should thus allow leadership the means to effectively and decisively steer the organization towards its objectives while at the same time providing space for members to participate.
The issues of network management style and leadership are inevitably intertwined. While leadership inspires change, management promotes stability. Many networks start with a highly consultative process where leadership changes frequently according to issues and resources required. As the network idea solidifies, leadership may shift less often and rest within the most active and most resourced members.
An example would be the need for a dedicated facility and staff to take on the duties of a network secretariat or hub where concerns and support services for the network are addressed at the outset. This was the case in the Philippines with the NCC-CICT (National Computer Center of the Commission on ICT) that had the reach and the resources for the Philippine Community eCenter Network (PhilCeCNet) to get itself on the launching pad, as presented in this chapter’s case study.
The organizational member who contributes the most to creating and operating such a facility usually finds itself in the leadership role at that point in time, a phase usually characterized as the transition phase before the network formally defines its structure, policies, and operations. A consensus for leadership is essential at this sensitive point. Such a consensus may be easy to arrive at when members recognize the need, and willingly allow leadership to be determined by means and capability. But in cases where similar means and capability may exist together with a certain rivalry among some members, the general interest of the network must come to the fore. In such a case, the strategy of leadership rotation by tenure may be adopted, and may be maintained as a leadership policy even in the general management of the network.
When the network matures, the management style and leadership must be rooted in the original climate that gave birth to the network – participatory and multi-sectoral. Aided by equal representation and leadership rotation, it enables the network to remain true to its essence.
Network management, especially the day-to-day aspect of administration and support, requires that an extent of decision-making be centralized in the interest of speed, effective response, and manageability. It would be impractical to expect that every decision the network has to make is to be derived from general deliberation.
An effective and practical organizational structure helps this process, where a leadership component such as a representative executive council may be effective in handling decisions of a level and priority that need not be submitted to the general membership for approval.
Of course, one of the main points of decision-making refers to what kind of decisions are made, and where. A highly decentralized network that has agreed on a minimum set of rules but which uses consultation among the telecentres will in effect have a highly decentralized decision-making scheme. We will reflect on what this entails further ahead in the concluding chapter, when comparing ‘aggregating’ and ‘enabling’ network styles.
Some quick additional points to consider on network leadership:
The network leader must see its role as facilitatory to be able to work their ideas into the network, searching for kindred spirits who want to share their pursuit.
Networks do not require personal relationships between all members but a central issue is the coordination of the network leader. The leader or the leading organization must have good ‘chemistry’ with the members.
It is common to have a formal agreement on the conditions of the relationship.
Network leadership, as compared to traditional organizational leadership, tends to be more value-based than control-based. Trust becomes the central tenet to take advantage of the flexibility and agility afforded by networks.
There are several other factors that influence network management. Culture is one such factor. Some cultures are more collaborative-oriented while others may lay claim to fierce individualism. It is important to understand such external influences and appreciate how to align them harmoniously for the benefit of the network.
The mentioned strategy of leadership rotation as well as the desired balance between centralized and general decision making are examples of certain norms and defined processes a network must arrive at to achieve effective network management.
Norms cover a broad range of organizational concerns that may include:
Delineated roles and functions of network components, officers, staff, etc.
There may be other areas where norms and processes may be developed for an effective governance system.
It is vital that norms and processes be developed after consultation with members. The diverse membership of a telecentre network requires that certain social, cultural, religious, and political sensitivities be considered carefully in the crafting of norms and procedures so as to avoid the obvious pitfalls. What may be acceptable or tolerable to one group may be offensive and insulting to another.
A telecentre network can determine its structure, formulate its objectives, craft a common vision and even enjoy an outstanding leadership. But it can dissipate fairly quickly if the appropriate enabling factors are not set in place. Key amongst these factors are financial resources, support human resources, technology, facilities and access to expert knowledge in areas of network concern.
The chapter on Financial Sustainability treats in some detail the challenges of ensuring necessary monetary resources and some of the means to get them. In this section we simply highlight some aspects of governance that are intimately related to financial resources.
The network start-up effort where members with the means and the most to contribute assumed temporary leadership to get things off the ground is often a curtain-raiser to the realization that once the network gets underway, that interim arrangement will cease. Telecentre network managers then have to identify resources from external sources and/or from their own members, weighting the realistic possibilities that each option presents.
The second (internal) option is directly within the control of the network and can be activated from the start. It will entail some rules regarding member financial contributions resulting in formal commitments binding on all concerned. But the first option of external resource generation will probably demand much more attention from a telecentre network manager.
Often, the chronic scarcity of resources steers a network to prioritize a culture of collective volunteerism in network management. The network is not a revenue-generating business enterprise that can support a salaried management team. But it needs to find a common basket of support sources, as the Financial Sustainability chapter discusses.
As a telecentre network matures, it often moves towards more stable management schemes: professionalized, salaried and specialized. Business models will include a combination of sourcing. Institutional agreements may be reached with government entities, such as in government-led national telecentre or information society programs, covering management and operational costs of the network. Funding special projects from external sources may enable the recruitment of certain specialists or support staff to ensure success of the projects. Members may pay membership fees and a subsidy for some of the services provided by the telecentre network (e.g. technical service). Telecentre networks may offer services to outside organizations (evaluations, research, and so on) that could also help it to mobilize resources.
Finally, it should be pointed out that for many telecentre networks, especially those whose members are either struggling to generate a positive revenue stream from services to sustain operations or whose operations seem to have stalled due to resource scarcity, membership in the network may carry the hope that additional opportunities will arise to find new answers to their needs.
Why do some networks fail?
In this guidebook we are examining a plethora of factors related to managing telecentre networks that can help a network succeed. Some of them are in the realm of TCN managers – those ‘popular’ individuals are fully dedicated to the success of their networks. Many are applicable to the member telecentres.
But learning often comes from failures, and it would be wise, or simply realistic, to acknowledge that much of what is covered in the guidebook comes from the arduous road travelled by the telecentre movement worldwide and which caused many telecentres to close over the last two decades. This, together with issues inherent to networked modes of organization, can help us reflect on some of the main causes of telecentre network failure.
The following points are simply stated to make us think and to further the debate among telecentre networks:
Fading vision — When members of a network get over the first euphoric phase of networking and see that nothing much has changed and nothing new has taken place, the spirit of a network wanes and the exit of involvement and participation spells the end of a network.
Poor leadership — when leadership fails to build trust and commitment, when it cannot be perceived as ethical and results-oriented, or when it fails to sustain the created culture of cooperation and sharing that is born with a network, the network withers.
Excessive control — if those tasked with coordinating or managing the network end up taking and imposing too many decisions, or if the power in the network is perceived to be too centralized or concentrated on a handful of nodes, the network will suffer in terms of shared commitment – and some members may quietly sit on the sidelines or simply step out.
Cliques and rivalry — another failure of network leadership involves the existence of dysfunctional cliques that undermine the essential spirit of the network. It worsens when leadership itself is perceived to belong to a clique. Rivalries that are allowed to flourish can sap the unity and cooperation within the organization. The sense of ‘betrayal’ that sets in is toxic for the network.
Resource famine —when a network is perceived by members as being unable to meet even the most basic of its functions due to inadequate resources it might be a good time to leave the sinking ship. If network leadership fails to show positive results for resource generation, and even the most basic network maintenance tasks falter, the network also fades away.
Network fatigue — It may occur when a members feel overwhelmed by the demands of the network (and this is a rather relative perception based on one’s own capacities) or from involvement in one network too many. When network fatigue sets in, members become silent spectators – without giving much of a clue about their relative withdrawal or inactivity. .
Inadequate monitoring — Sometimes an organization is run with little concrete information on what it is actually doing, or about how is it operating. In the case of a network, with its predominantly horizontal relationships, the absence of ‘traditional’ control by authority mechanisms make it even more important to base decisions on information and feedback. Telecentre network management should have a clear picture of what the needs of the members are (and some vision as well about the opportunities).
Case Study: The Philippine Community eCenter Network, Inc.www.philcecnet.ph
Sometimes, there's no stopping something once the ball is rolling. When the National Computer Center of the Commission on Information and Communications Technology of the Philippines initiated a series of Knowledge Exchange Conferences (KEC), bringing together all key players, operators, and managers of 755 telecentres in the Philippines in 2005, the momentum started for what would become the Philippine Community eCenter Network or PhilCeCNet. The network idea didn't come immediately. But it arrived soon afterwards – before 2006 had even ended.
As PhilCeCNet began to take shape, it did so systematically. It drew up a charter for the network and positioned itself as an implementing partner for the Philippine CeC Program and its mandate for responsive, efficient, valuable, and sustainable Community eCenters, a role highlighted in the CeC Roadmap for 2008-2010. It also helped establish the telecentre.org Philippine Community eCenter Academy (tPCA) as the network’s capacity building arm.
With members from eight different telecentre initiatives in the Philippines, PhilCeCNet’s general assembly, the highest policy body, was organized into nine sector clusters: National Government Agencies, Academia, NGOs, the Private Sector, Media, CeC Managers, CeC Users, Funding Agencies, and Local Government Units. Each of the sectors nominated three representatives to the Executive Council to represent each of the country's island groups – Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao. The members at large then elected from among the nominees a sector representative to an Executive Council, which led by a Chairperson, implements the network’s initiatives.
Four committees corresponding to the four thrusts (or lines of work) of the national CEC program currently prepare work and implementation plans that are evaluated and approved by the Council. These Committees also draft revisions to any strategies formulated by the Executive Council and recommend options. Special committees on resource mobilization and membership development are also in place.
PhilCeCNet's administrative operations are handled by a National Secretariat. This Secretariat is led by an Executive Secretary who oversees day-to-day operations and carries out Council mandates. All CeC member concerns and affairs pass through this clearinghouse and are routed to the appropriate respondents for their information and action.
Secretariat staff keeps a close eye on PhilCeCNet's network hub website (www.philcecnet.ph) which is a beehive of sharing about CeCs: what they’re doing, what’s happening to them, and what’s coming up. People asking questions, others posting answers, information exchanges, and communication to network management mainly take place here. The website is a dynamic news board for all that concerns CeCs and was recently a semi-finalist for the Philippine Web Awards. This is the hub that actualizes the interaction-sharing aspect of the network vision.
PhilCeCNet made its debut on April 3, 2008 — and it is expected to play a vital role in realizing the Philippines’ national vision of “A Community eCenter in Every Municipality” by 2010.
Network governance presents many challenges, especially when we consider that network organizations such as telecentre networks are not the same as traditional organizations in terms of structure, scope, culture or stability.
Nourish the vision — the lifeblood and spirit of the network must always be visible, vibrant, and given life through progress-based results.
Strengthen the interaction — A sustained effort to build a culture of sharing and cooperation within a network shows that the network is true to its intentions and binds members to the roots of the organization. Dynamic interaction also sustains one of the basic pillars of the telecentre network: the exchange of knowledge, skills and experience.
Meet member needs with network objectives — When members see their own objectives reflected in the network’s objectives and when the advances in the network’s attainment of its objectives contribute to their own achievements, the commitment level is increased or remains high.
Organize well — Take time and focus closely on organizing the network well, tuning its structure to network objectives and member needs. This will make it easier to manage the network.
Transparent and responsive communications — Good network management requires good communications between management and members. Being informed clearly and in a timely manner provides a strong sense of inclusiveness, even if the information communicated is bad news!
Put the essential systems in place — Policies, norms and processes, functions and responsibilities are vital to network management. They set standards, promote order, and prescribe the elements and codes of organizational culture.
Be sensitive to member values — Consideration of member values in implementing network management shows that the network cares about its members and generates invaluable premiums of mutual respect and appreciation. A network that shows its sensitivity reflects sincerity, engenders trust and builds commitment.
Reach out to partners — In sustaining the network through resources, thinking out of the box and discovering opportunities beyond network boundaries shows a network’s innovative spirit and resourcefulness. There is never a lack of possible partners with whom to travel the road. If the road leads the same way that the network is going, a fellow traveller can be welcome company, especially if both have something the other may find useful.
Networks are sources of social and organizational support where interactions, exchanges and relations between different actors take place. Partnership networks enable the realization of individual goals which otherwise could not be reached as an individual person or organization. This is precisely why we integrate telecentres into networks.
Establishing interactive networks is not an easy task, due to the many factors that come into play. We have to structure a network, set goals and long-term plans as equitably as possible, which is always a challenge because it involves fulfilling the demands and requests from various members.
When several members decide to join a network, it is because they find value in the benefits, but at the same time they assume shared responsibility and take charge in making it stronger. We have to understand that participation is not an engine that generates profits for its network nodes/members; rather, the participatory dynamic is itself the main potential benefit, where the social capital for these organizations increases as a result.
This is why the management of a telecentre network should include an outline or plan of participation to promote collaboration among each telecentre member through flexibility, freedom and incentives. Bear in mind that a high level of participation will significantly promote sustainability of the network.
We hope that this chapter will help you to discover ways of increasing the levels of participation within your telecentre network. First, we discuss the motivation of members to participate in a telecentre network and how to get these members involved or committed once they are in. We will talk about some aspects of network governance directly related to promote participation (linked with the previous chapter about telecentre network governance). Next, we will explore the issue of a distributed leadership and the principles of a collaborative culture, after which we will identify different factors and methodological tools that can help to make participation more effective. Finally, we will discuss a key issue for telecentre networks that directly depends on their collaborative culture: knowledge management.
Participation is at the core of telecentre networks. Almost by definition, a network results from the following participation exercise: several individuals and organizations come together and decide on the principles, objectives and structure of the network. But before creating a network, they identify several common motivations; some in their own interest, and others for the benefit of everyone, such as:
To build and strengthen political positions for specific actors or situations;
To create initiatives and joint projects between several telecentres based on a common goal and for the benefit of members;
To face situations and risks that would be significantly more difficult to handle individually.
These fundamentals of participation and collaboration may be obvious enough for founding members, or at least implicitly felt. But as new nodes or members join the network, the participation base can become diffused or unclear. Therefore, it is very important to communicate to new members the importance of the participation and collaboration principles so that they can fully share the principles, objectives, policies and ways of acting inside the network. It will also help to document the participation and collaboration activities, in order to maintain these goals.
Although it is generally assumed that if new members choose to join a network it is because they agree with the principles, some may want to join only because they want the prestige of belonging to the network (especially if it is widely recognized), so they may not have a full understanding of the participation and collaborative aspects.
If the new telecentres can understand and share in the principles, values and goals of the network, it is easier to generate good ideas, proactive attitudes and new lines of collaborative work. On the other hand, if new members do not share in the ideas, values, principals and goals of the network, it will be harder to reach agreement and take constructive actions that ensure compliance with the network’s goals. We may actually jeopardize the stability of a network if new members cause a disturbance or are difficult to negotiate with.
As the network grows, one of the most important issues that helps to ensure the future of the network is in the way that it is managed. The nature of a network as an organizational structure implies that a network is not meant to be lead, it is meant to be coordinated.
The governance of a telecentre network (as mentioned in the previous chapter) is largely characterized by coordination. Whether as individual or a collective coordination, this implies – almost by definition – that members of the network will work together for the benefit of the network as a whole group.
Therefore, active participation is one of the main indicators of good governance of the telecentre network. The management team of the network must pay special attention to issues related to coordination and governance, such as:
To undertake the action plan of the network during a specific time period that is defined by members, in order to facilitate their commitment and interest in planning;
To manage and share with new members the network values and principles so they all know how to participate in the network, as previously noted.
To design, develop and implement training on how to participate and collaborate on networking activities.
To collectively determine monitoring and evaluation methodologies for the network.
To include the telecentre in taking on monitoring tasks, maintaining an open and participatory point of view.
To encourage member telecentres to promote their visibility through external communications, on topics such as news, projects, event announcements, calls for publications and so on, so that people outside the network stay informed.
In practice, people involved with telecentre networks know that coordination involves a delicate balance between centralization and decentralization. But to maintain coordination does not necessarily imply that decision-making processes are centralized, or that the actions are carried out without the support of members. Put simply, it is important to ensure there is a person or team in place that takes responsibility for general network tasks. If there is a lack of coordination, there is a risk that the responsibility becomes dispersed and therefore that no one takes care of tasks.
To coordinate without centralization means maintaining a healthy balance between taking action and delegating responsibilities, while including the members of the network. This is not an easy balance to achieve, and needs to be negotiated between several aspects:
The coordination involves making decisions and the delegation of duties that must be synchronized with the network principles and objectives. There should be a margin of discretion for those making decisions.
Members often (wrongly) believe that if there is a person or group in charge of coordination, that that specific person or group has to take care of all networks tasks.
Being proactive and collectively making decisions as a team implies a high investment of time and resources, and members are not always available to meet such requirements.
The leadership style of the coordinating team should be one that is inclusive, participatory and well oriented. This coordination must be carried out by a network leader who is open to constructive dialogue.
To ensure that members feel like part of a telecentre network, it is important to avoid any hierarchical planning which works against the horizontal nature of a network, since that is one of the most positive attributes of a network. A network consists of nodes that normally interact with one other with a margin of freedom and autonomy. In this sense, the network is a space where ideas are freely exchanged, relationships are maintained and information and knowledge circulates between the telecentres (and other non-telecentre members who may also be part of the network).
We want to promote collaborative activities and operationalize the desired horizontality of our telecentre networks. But to 'impose' or ‘demand’ participation is not an effective way to encourage collaboration; rather, networks should work towards creating a collaborative culture, which can be done by supporting a participatory style of leadership, rather than one that is ‘top-down’.
Participatory (or distributed) leadership implies 'harmonious leadership', based on common values. It may not be the kind of leadership style that most of us are used to, but there are ways to promote it within telecentre networks. Participatory leadership does not imply sharing leadership responsibilities between network members, nor does it mean that members each have a particular level of leadership to live up to. What is actually implies is described by the following:
Various actors in a network can exhibit leadership in parallel, which corresponds to their shared interests and objectives;
Taking care that leadership does not become 'obligatory' or 'decreed' for any person or entity; and that
For starters, it is advantageous that telecentre networks are open systems that are continually bringing on new members, while existing members always have the option of leaving the network. Individual roles can change (where formal management tasks may shift from one telecentre to another), as well as leaders, who may change or move around between telecentres.
In the majority of telecentre networks, there exists some kind of entity that governs the network, such as a Coordinating Committee, or an Executive Secretariat, and so on. This entity depends on the effective functioning of the network, and actually makes the coordination easier, especially when the focus is on facilitation (i.e. actions) rather than on concentration (i.e. power).
On the other hand, participatory leadership is useful when the network wants to bring forth a particular action (since the network does not always represent one single actor), or when negotiating actions that encourage the active participation of various members (where certain leadership responsibilities can even be delegated).
In any case, we should avoid comparing leadership and management styles, and neither should it be assumed that people or entities with more leadership skills will automatically take on management or administration duties. Leadership and management styles will vary depending on the characteristics of the telecentre network.
Participatory leadership can also help to resolve conflicts and provide solutions in difficult situations. A network of telecentres can have a remarkably heterogeneous composition, with nodes and members that coexist rather than compete, whereas with others there may be competition and power struggles. A highly centralized leadership can sometimes effectively resolve differences between members. That said, for the sustainable and healthy growth of a telecentre network, it is important that the governance of network take on a participatory leadership style, where many problems can be solved collegially.
To establish a collaborative culture is one of the most difficult – but also critical – points in creating a productive telecentre network. It is difficult (and quite likely impossible) to develop participatory leadership within an environment that does not embrace a culture of collaboration. That is, this type of leadership can help to promote collaboration, but it is virtually impossible to be the sole cause behind the creation of a collaborative culture. On the one hand, it can help to delegate work and distribute activities among members. On the other hand, the first step towards creating the initiative for collaborative working must come directly from members themselves.
The value of a network greatly increases when there is a real culture of collaboration among member telecentres. The more spontaneous the collaborative activities (as a result of the tools, methods and even the possibility of access to funding), the easier it will be to launch joint projects whose results can actually feed into each other and increase mutual trust. This may be an area where a collaborative culture of networks can play a bigger role: in the end, organizations with a highly rigid structure can also work in a decentralized manner (like an army, for example). Networks can create an ecosystem of collaborative working characterized by the freedom, merit and shared visions that often lead to very interesting results – in the area open source software, for example.
A network of telecentres that enjoys a healthy collaborative culture will be a productive one, and most likely sustainable as well. But like distributed leadership, a collaborative culture also requires types of participation that do not negatively impact the efficiency or results of the network.
It is not possible (nor recommendable) to achieve 100% participation while including all network nodes and members in the decision making process of a network, and even less with respect to specific network-related projects and activities. Participation for the sake of participation alone can risk becoming an aimless process, like a book without words. What we need is a well-designed model of participation, one that is results-oriented, designed to achieve the desired outcomes. For example, the level of participation necessary for the strategic planning of a network of telecentres is not the same as would be needed for the redesign of the network website.
A well-functioning network is not one that maximizes participation quantitatively (measuring the number of participants), but rather one that qualitatively maximizes the products/results achieved in a participatory manner. A network usually distributes its work along particular lines of action, while some members tend to be more committed to the development strategies than others because it is within their particular interest to do so. For example, some telecentres are more able to participate than others in activities such as research, or in the generation of content rather than in the provision of services.
It is therefore important to strengthen and stimulate people’s networking ability, with the so-called 'generative capacity' to which we referred in the previous chapter and which we will also describe in the last chapter. An important function of a TCN is the capacity for building leadership, planning, collaboration, and negotiation skills from a network point of view. In other words, to be able to perform all those network functions within a network environment (for the purposes of our own network and more broadly for the ‘network society’).
In addition to training, another way to generate those capabilities is simply through practice, such as by managing a project or organization that requires coordination and working in a network. Coordinating a network involves a lot of difficult negotiation, like the daily work of a spider that weaves its web and tries to keep it from breaking.
It is critical for the people who take on coordination of the network to promote effective participation, in a way that does not wear out the participants and which generates results effectively and efficiently. One way to achieve this is through the continual identification of opportunities for collaboration through projects, activities, campaigns, and so on.
Additionally, network coordinators tend to be very familiar with each of the network members, and can therefore steer the most appropriate opportunities towards the individual nodes (telecentres) best suited for the work.
Knowledge is one of the main assets of a telecentre network. It can be either tacit or explicit, but in any case it is conditional to the uses and social and cultural history background of each person, organization or community. Tacit knowledge is based on individual experience, skills, abilities, values, judgments, beliefs, viewpoints and mental maps of each person, and therefore is not easy to share with others, at least not in a systematic way.
Explicit knowledge is that which can be expressed in words, a song, numbers, charts, formulas, and so on. It is a kind of knowledge we can find in different learning tools such as videos, books, articles, websites, and we can access in different places such as libraries, hard disk drives, databases, museums or newspapers. The application and use of this type of knowledge is one of the biggest attractions to becoming part of a network. To make the most use of it, it is recommendable to have a knowledge management strategy plan, especially one that can be documented.
Knowledge management (KM) refers to different processes that seek to transform, generate and transfer knowledge. One of KM’s main challenges is to capture tacit knowledge in order to share it with other people, sometimes becoming explicit knowledge in the process. A good strategy takes both tacit and explicit knowledge into account, each involving the most appropriate tools and mechanisms. In this way, the strategy will draw on the most appropriate people, organizations (i.e. telecentres in this case) or telecentre network to involve.
The concept of knowledge management goes beyond knowledge transfer alone, and therefore the concept of ‘participation’ is also addressed in this chapter. Participation is the core principle for network growth. It’s more like a kind of ‘know-how’, a social discursive knowledge that shifts through media and products of knowledge. The knowledge within each node can be expressed in many different ways in the telecentre network, such as through workshops, meetings, books, websites, videos, etc.
A good knowledge management strategy is that it is ‘open’ rather than imposed, and it should be based on the respect for the knowledge of others. Knowledge can be shared in the form of lessons learned, experiences, or best practices and it should always be used to contribute to, and complement, existing knowledge and practices in telecentres – not to replace them.
Knowledge management should consider both live and virtual presence, by taking advantage of ICTs to facilitate collaboration and participation, including:
Virtual communities (such as ning used by telecentre.org, or Dgroups);
Places to share content (flickr, YouTube, Slideshare, GoogleMaps, etc.);
Virtual training courses.
A knowledge management workplan can specify the tools and communication media to use to share information, as well as frequency of use, structure, design, content production, editorial policies or a style manual.
But the ease of access to these tools should not cause a sea of information and content that can overwhelm members. Just like effective participation, knowledge management must incorporate effective methods for the input/output of specific knowledge available to members: when and where they need it. However, this is without a doubt much easier to say than do; in many jobs, information overload impacts productivity and stress levels.
In order to avoid such problems, and to effectively take on knowledge management within a community or group, it is useful to identify one or more facilitators who can facilitate knowledge flows. Knowledge management is more an art than science, and it benefits from people in the community who know how to motivate others and who can find the correct channels to spread useful information to the right people. Very few knowledge networks can claim success without the constant and dedicated work of these ‘infomediaries’.
It is possible for knowledge to be efficiently managed without using participatory processes; this is something that happens every day in centralized organizations. In networks, however, participation is essential to ensure knowledge flows that do not depend on instructions from above, but rather on collaborative participation where each member adds value to the network.
The National Telecentre Network in Colombia has been informally functioning as a network since mid-2001, with participation from the civil society, business and government sectors.
The aim of the network is to “create an efficient and sustainable model of collaboration between members, with the aim of creating a positive impact on the development dynamics in the communities”.[1] In other words, the network focuses specifically on participatory and collaborative processes.
The strategic objectives of the network are:
To promote information and knowledge exchange (experiences, lessons learned, ideas, resources, teaching materials, methodologies, tools, etc.) between network members and other communication networks, public media and social movements;
To promote the development of virtual communities, including both thematic and regional;
To encourage the participation of network members in various fora for discussion and learning about ICT and Development, at both the national and international levels.
To promote the development of regional networks of telecentres (at state, municipal, and local levels).
The network brings together the people and organizations who coordinate, research, lead, train and assist in national telecentre processes. It aims to open spaces for dialogue between telecentre initiatives that are led by various players, helping to connect telecentres put in place by the national government (through the Compartel program), and those by local governments, private companies, universities, NGOs, research centers, or community organizations.
Ministry of Communications of Colombia (www.mincomunicaciones.gov.co) and the Compartel Program (www.compartel.gov.co); and
Telecentres in Colombia vary according to their financial structure, how they are installed, overall operation and location. However, they all share in their aim to achieve social and financial sustainability and the meeting of local needs in order to positively impact on the community, to achieve development goals.
The network has run National Telecentre Meetings, which have been financed, coordinated and convened by civil society organizations with help and support of national and local governments.
Up until now they have held five meetings. The objectives of the meetings have varied between exchanging experiences to building collaborative strategies and consolidating the network. Although the first meetings were intended to bring everyone together, share experiences and identify lessons learned, and common needs and challenges, they have evolved into active learning spaces through live workshops, discussion forums about public access to ICTs, and debate about a common agenda to strengthen the network.
The main impact of the network is reflected in these meetings and on the fact that they have gathered hundreds of telecentre managers together from different areas of the country. The meetings maintain their purpose as regular spaces for discussion and sharing experiences, learning, training telecentre leaders and creating partnerships.
The conference has grown from 30 participants in the first meeting to over 80 in the second and third, reaching 110 participants in the fourth and 200 in the fifth and latest meeting. The meetings were intentionally focused on being participatory spaces for exchange and discussion rather than academic spaces, particularly to promote the participation of those directly involved in the day-to-day running of telecentres. In the fourth meeting it was possible for the first time to include the participation of Compartel telecentres managers, a new government initiative that has put in place about 1,700 telecentres throughout the country.
Each meeting saw an increase in regional participation. Colombia is divided into 32 districts, and by the fifth meeting they managed to include telecentre leaders and managers from 20 districts, which represents a significant portion of the whole country.
Other important areas of the Colombian national network’s emphasis on participation are:
Knowledge Management: To facilitate access and improve communication within the network, the following activities are encouraged:
The creation of virtual communities for knowledge sharing and dialogue;
The exchange of teaching materials, methodologies and tools on various issues that may impact the telecentre development;
The reflection and discussion of new proposals for community communication, new technologies for virtual interactive meetings, at the regional and national levels.
Information and Communication: The goal is to build a communication strategy that strengthens network information channels by promoting interaction and dialogue among members. The main network spaces for information and virtual communication on the internet are:
The national telecentre portal: www.telecentros.org.co
The network distribution list: colombia@tele-centros.org
The telecentre network virtual community: comunidad.telecentros.org.co
Education & Training: The network strengthens the skills and abilities of people who manage telecentres through a process of in-class and virtual training. The first virtual training project is the national telecentre.org Academy. For in-class training, local and national telecentre meetings are held.
In order to undertake more network-related activities, more information about the network was gathered, including the total number of telecentres in Colombia, their associated characteristics, and where they are located. Further, it is hoped that in the future:
Hundreds of telecentre managers and leaders will formally confirm their participation in the network;
The telecentres will be mapped geographically (available online);
Effective channels of information and communication between members to publish information through the virtual community;
An online library of materials and resources will be created;
There will be a continued production of free tools that all telecentres in Colombia can use, in order to improve their skills and performance;
A user registration system will be created.
Through the participation of our members we have achieved the following things as a network:
The consolidation of the national telecentre.org Academy, where more than 350 telecentre managers and leaders have been certified via virtual training courses.
The organization of five national and regional telecentre meetings, which have been attended by more than 400 people in total who are all associated with the telecentre movement in Colombia (particularly telecentre managers and leaders);
The creation of information and communication media for the network, such as the portal that includes the experiences, materials, resources and virtual community for more than 40 telecentres with more than 350 people registered.
The mapping of 864 telecentres, of which 131 are online and the rest are near to completion.
Influence on ICT policy in Colombia. One example refers to the implementation model for 1669 new Compartel telecentres operating from within educational institutions and which will use a methodology for social telecentre appropriation designed, tested and published by the network;
The recognition of the network as a leader in telecentre issues in Colombia. In fact, when completed, the new Compartel telecentres will be joining the national network.
One of the most important lessons learned is that the network will not function without an organizing agency to guide it and lead activities in collaboration with other members. Despite the initial successes, particularly with respect to the national meetings, it through the managing committee that many beneficial activities were brought about for telecentres in Colombia, also incorporating decision-makers at the local and national levels.
However, it is nevertheless a challenge for the managing committee to become much more involved in telecentre work, not just as beneficiaries but also as executives. For collaboration between members to really be strengthened, communication channels need to be relied upon, including virtually, as well as through face-to-face exchanges such as workshops, meetings and forums.
A collaborative spirit and constant support from those members who wish for a network of telecentres should be pursued deliberately – it does not usually happen by itself.
Most decisions in networks must be come about through consensus, in order to enhance the process of negotiation and compromise.
Trust among members and transparency of actions are some of the core requirements for participation to take place.
Training on networking activities helps to improve teamwork and productivity and therefore encourages participation.
Collaborative cultures are not achieved in the short term, but must be gradually advanced and taken into consideration in the medium-term.
One should always ask ‘what can I do for the network?’ over ‘what can the network do for me?’
Proactive collaboration between network members contributes significantly to the sustainability of the network.
It is essential to prevent competition between members, nodes, projects, or events in the network. The role of the network is to encourage complementarity, not competition.
It is necessary to strengthen channels of communication and information and to have a fluid flow of ongoing communication with members.
Chapter 4. Communication Strategies and Practices for a Telecentre Network
Effective communication is critical to the success of telecentre networks. Without it, people who are not directly involved with network activities will never know about what’s going on, the impact activities that are having, or the value of the network itself. Communication also contributes to network growth, that is, to expand its constituency, nurture existing relationships, attract new partners and open up opportunities for new resources needed to support telecentres.
For the most part, network communications aim to achieve three things:
Relationship building – generating participation instead of audiences by building bridges to people and organizations, and then nurturing and deepening such relationships on a regular basis.
Publicrelations and awareness– raising or managing a positive profile of the network, its members, and important issues such as affordable connectivity for telecentres.
Marketing and influence – promoting specific products, services and influencing behaviour change (attracting NGOs to use telecentres in their communities, for example).
In this chapter, we discuss how to create and put in place a communication strategy that can be useful for a telecentre network. It is important to distinguish between ‘internal communications’ (among telecentres within the network) and ‘external communications’ (for stakeholders and other audiences outside the network). We will also touch on the role of TCNs in strengthening communications capacities of individual telecentre members.
In its simplest expression, we may consider that a telecentre network’s communication strategy has two broad dimensions: internal and external.The internal communication strategy serves to facilitate relationship building, nurturing trust, participation and conflict management within the ‘nodes’ or network constituency. Good internal communication practices enable creation and sharing of relevant information and knowledge products as well as useful relationships. Internal network communications may also include supporting the communication needs of individual member telecentres as they reach out to respective communities. This internal aspect of communications constitutes the ‘nervous system’ of telecentre networks.
The external communications dimension deals with people and organizations outside the telecentre network. These include government, civil society, professional groups (such as educators), the private sector, and the general public. Adequate external communications create awareness about telecentre issues (including problems and possible solutions) and the impact of telecentres for national development. This awareness creates confidence among target groups in their work and relations with telecentre networks, which in turn is a key element in building and nurturing partnerships.
Successful network communications will benefit from a well thought-out strategy that has clear goals, objectives, target groups and expected outcomes that can be tracked over the time. The strategy may use specific network activities from which to draw messages to identified target groups, such as bandwidth sharing by a number of telecentres in the country to illustrate the challenges of connectivity and how networking might help.
Defined goals and objectives – with specific reference to timeframe and desired outcomes
Identified target audiences – to tailor the tone and format of communication activities to the preferences of each audience. Networks may need to engage in some form of intelligence-building exercise to learn more about their target audiences in order to better understand them; that is, what information they may need and are most receptive to, and how they prefer to receive their information (such as text-based or face-to-face)
Appropriate tools and tactics – that help network reach their audiences more effectively, at a reasonable cost and with high returns. Tools may include news releases, pamphlets, brochures, electronic bulletins, newsletters, CDs, videos, radio advertising, and so on. Tactics are the venues used to disseminate the network’s messages and products such as activities and events.
A simplified communication strategy template is shown in the following text box with related questions.
CONTEXT: What is the political/social/cultural/economic environment that could influence your initiative?
STRATEGIC CONSIDERATIONS: What trends, potential strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats are inherent in your initiative?
OBJECTIVES: What you are trying to achieve?
MESSAGES: What messages must you deliver to your target audiences to achieve your objectives?
TOOLS AND TACTICS: What approaches you will take to deliver your messages to your target audiences to achieve your objectives. Include a budget
MONITORING/ EVALUATION: How is your strategy working? How did your strategy work?
Generally, for network communication activities to be successful, they must deliver their message in such a way that the intended audience (i) wants to hear it (ii) needs to hear it, and (iii) expects to receive the message.
The first step towards building a network communications strategy involves a clear understanding of the purposes of the network (and thus imagining what success looks like), as well as the identification of the people and organizations the network would like to influence in order to be successful. This may have already occurred in the early stages of network creation, or perhaps it can take place through a necessary review via some kind of participatory network analysis process involving network members and partners. It is preferably done though a face-to-face process, complemented by online communication using discussion lists or free web conferencing tools like Dimdim.[2] This preparatory work should define the goal, audience and appropriate tools and tactics needed to achieve communication-based outcomes. Including an evaluation component allows for fine-tuning as the strategy rolls out, also helping to improve future communications efforts.
Participation in shaping the strategy by the member telecentres will help build support for – and commitment to – the strategy. It will also improve the members’ capacity to manage individual communications activities, which is an added benefit to the network in the long run.
The following set of questions might be helpful to assess communications-related aspects of the telecentre networks. It is important to elicit responses and comments that are as concrete as possible:
Who are the telecentre network’s members and external stakeholders and where are they located?
What does the network need to communicate?
What means of communication are used among members and towards external actors?
Are these means constraining or fostering the exchange of information and contact among the parties in any way?
What and where are the main ‘information plugs’ in the telecentre networks? How can they be removed or avoided?
It is important to use the information obtained from the above questions (in addition to any other pertinent ones) to determine the network’s communications objectives, specific communications activities and expected results. It is important to determine some simple indicators to track attainment of the objectives – the simpler they are the more likely telecentre network managers will use them. The following items refer to the key elements in the operational (or logic) framework, as seen in table a logic touch upon objectives, activities and results, as well as the way to track the strategy’s progress.
I think this section deserves a new title here, or at least a sentence or two describing what is about to be explained: OK, I introduced a bit of a bridge (it does follow from the paragraph, but it´s not that clear).
Objectives – Communication is a tool, not a goal in itself. Communications objectives have to be realistic and achievable – there is no point in trying to convert a telecentre network into the telecentre equivalent of the American national news network CNN. Some examples of key communication objectives are:
To improve communication flow with the network.
To keep the member telecentres informed about the telecentre network activities and progress.
To enhance interaction between local communities and their telecentres.
Activities – These activities allow the network to accomplish its communication objectives. In designing the activities, it is useful to determine (i) what (to identify the activity itself: it can help to draw an informative chart, or start a blog, etc.); (ii) who (to identify the person or team that will execute the activity); (iii) when (to come up with a timetable for the implementation of the activity). It is also important to identify the appropriate tools required to conduct the activity, including face-to-face events (like meetings, workshops, visits), documentation (newsletters, publications, web content) and online communication (emails, discussion lists, blogs)
Expected results – These are specific intended outcomes when activities are executed according to plan. Expected results should be achievable, measurable and traceable, for example, recognizing the frequency of a newsletter and not just its establishment. Measuring the progression of results instead of quantifying an indicator at the end of a given period makes monitoring feasible and useful.
Monitoring – An effective communications strategy requires regular updating. For this, telecentre networks need to track expected results against objectives and can ask questions such as:
Were the intended people reached? What about other (unintended) actors?
Did target audiences understand the messages?
What steps can be taken to improve the outcomes?
How can the overall communication strategy be implemented more effectively?
Table 4.1. A simplified example of how the operational elements from a communications strategy canbe described .
To improve communication flows within the network.
Creation of an internal electronic bulletin with a weekly circulation.
Most of the new information about activities, projects, services and events from network members is circulated on a timely basis;
The bulletin is a collective product generated mostly by network members with support from the network’s coordinating unit.
The bulletin maintains a stable volume of content on a monthly basis, growing by 20% by the end of the first year;
There are replies from members to each bulletin, and the numbers of replies grows twofold by the end of the first year.
Creation of a discussion list to encourage information and knowledge exchange within the network.
The network’s discussion list becomes one of the most referenced and recognized fora in the country for ICT4D issues, in particular to inform some aspects national ICT policy.
In six months there have been at least 12 discussions threads about TCN topics;
More than 60% of the network members have participated in the discussion list;
At least 100 people from outside the network have subscribed to, or participate in, the discussion list (gradually incrementing from zero at the start).
Creation of a wiki or googledoc for the telecentre network’s internal use
Training is provided to most network members about collaborative publishing;
Some of the most representative and substantive documents generated by the network are produced in a participatory fashion using these tools;
An e-bulletin is fully created on these tools after a testing period.
Four substantive documents published by the network are created via the wiki or googledoc – including the yearly M&E report;
By year’s end, the e-bulletin is fully produced and published with these tools.
Even the best communications strategy will lack value if the members of the network do not share its key elements, or if they lack awareness of those elements. Holding special team meetings among a small group of people who are responsible for the execution of the strategy will help to see that it is successfully carried out. It is also recommendable that the strategy is presented and discussed as part of the agenda of a telecentre network’s specific events that involve larger groups, particularly during its preparation, and soon after implementation. The good news is that making the strategy well known will require some of the same communications tactics!
It is important to share the idea that the entire telecentre network is responsible for its communications agenda, and not just that of a few network members, or the staff of a coordinating unit. While leadership of a few individuals will have a significant effect on the attainment of communication objectives, having most people in the network connected and feeding information into it is a more likely guarantee that the network will stay well informed. In this regard, individual telecentres should view themselves as both antennae and broadcasters.
A communications strategy that yields results (which is what any network member is interested in, and not simply ‘chatter’) goes through stages in a cycle, like the one in figure 4.1. Some of the stages in the cycle are also present during a single communication action (such as producing a news bulletin, or organizing a symposium). It is important to recognize the stages, as they will require different tasks and treatment. For example, sharing information can be a unilateral action, occurring quickly and using a computer. On the other hand, negotiation can turn out to be a painfully slow process, requiring the participation of various actors, and using a table, tea and biscuits as the main tools.
While external communication is usually included within the overall communications strategy of a network, it is often done implicitly. External communications may seem more detached from the day-to-day life of a telecentre network, and allows less control over its implementation (where most of the actors are by definition based outside the network). They are directed to very different types of recipients: sponsors, partners, local officials, state representatives, community members and academics, and possibly other telecentre networks too.
The tasks related to providing information to these actors and prompting their involvement are carried out differently than for internal communications. The means used can vary from actor to actor, as well as the language used. After all, the audience for external communications is generally heterogeneous, while for internal communications it is often more homogenous.
That is why the main challenge in external communications is to identify the best means to communicate to each actor. The way to communicate a message to a sponsor, in most cases, will not work with a community leader or with telecentre users. For example, a local leader may prefer oral communication to written communication – let’s remember than even today, at the start of the 21st century, some cultures are based on orality. A development agency or a newspaper will prefer written information because they can process it and save it. At the same time, establishing a relationship with a media outlet is also valuable, and that requires oral communications (phone calls, in-person visits, and so on). Thus, in our information society context, the communications strategy should be able to include a flexible repertoire of instruments: analogue and digital, written and spoken, visual and text.
There is a wide range of communication tools available, many of which are free, to spread one’s message. For example, a distribution list such as a Dgroup[3] can be easily created which facilitates ongoing dialogue among stakeholders; including beneficiaries, sponsors, partners and the community. Not only do distribution lists bring multiple voices to the network, but they also help telecentre network members to provide feedback to the network. On the other hand, a periodic (weekly or monthly) e-bulletin is an efficient means to inform external parties about TCN activities, needs and outcomes. For real-time information dissemination, an RSS (real simple syndication) or Atom newsfeed may be a good idea.
In addition, other web 2.0 tools such as blogs, Twitter, social network tools (such as MySpace, Orkut, Facebook, and ning) allow for a multimedia mix of information to be offered, including pictures and video clips. This provides enormous opportunities. For example, wouldn’t a partner/funder like to see short clips on how its supported telecentre network is working with local teachers to enrich their classrooms with fresh, new content? How valuable is it for a local television station to access content about teenagers from conflictive parts of town who are stimulated to ‘create’ (e.g. videos with their stories, websites, etc.) rather than ‘destroy’?
Choosing a language for communication is very important. When communicating with a sponsor, it is generally a good idea to use more formal language and articulate the results and processes advanced through the telecentre network. When communicating with local partners, on the other hand, it can be useful to adapt a style more closely based on how they communicate.
Candidly sharing lessons learned with sponsors is a way to generate trust with that sponsor, such as why an activity failed, and how learning from that failure will help the network grow. It will also help to sustain a longer-term relationship, as sponsors (particularly development agencies) are aware that all projects find difficulties. Sometimes the outstanding feature about a project is how it went about overcoming its difficulties.
Finally, one can take advantage of electronic and print media as key infomediaries to the outside community.[4] These institutions can help to deliver important messages, engaging new audiences and potential partners. Media organizations are constantly in search of interesting stories that affect human development. Telecentre networks are working with telecentres whose business is to improve people’s lives. TCNs can attract and maintain good contacts in the media using press releases, regular short stories, video clips, etc. about how telecentres are making a difference and providing useful solutions to public interest issues. Local media outlets want to access ‘human stories’, and pre-packaged news bits, with data, quotes, pictures, etc. It is also wise to have network spokespeople available and to provide these spokespeople with key messages to which they can refer should they be contacted by media.
What about communications for member telecentres?
The communications strategies and practices of a telecentre network should also include ways of supporting member telecentres with their own communications needs. Ultimately, as in other aspects of the telecentre network, it is the work of the individual telecentres that determines its success or failure. Telecentre staff seldom has the expertise or time to put together a well thought-out communications plan.
This is one of the aspects where being part of a telecentre network may really pay off. Telecentre workers understand the needs of the local population and their cultural norms, and TCN staff can help workers to build capacity through the following:
Devising and putting into action a community outreach plan, in effect ‘taking the telecentre outside its walls and into the streets’. This can include visits to schools, civic organizations, business centers, marketplaces, etc.
Producing content (such as video clips) that can help telecentre staff to better connect with the community.
Using ICT tools to help them communicate with their communities and stakeholders.
Generating and extending the TCN ‘brand’ to the individual telecentres, for greater visibility and publicity (and by providing templates, key messages, logos and other materials to help facilitate this).
Telecentre network staff can also help directly organize and implement various communication-related activities, such as:
Moderating discussion lists where telecentre staff share and debate about communications with their users.
Generating content that can easily be adapted to local telecentre needs to contact and engage local citizens, such as poster templates, interview scripts, surveys, etc.
Creating network-wide activities that promote local participation, such as contests, scholarships, or art displays.
The E3 project started in June 2008 to enhance the sustainability of 60 telecentres in Sri Lanka’s Uva province. It was prompted by a monitoring and evaluation process carried out by the national Information and Communications Technology Agency (ICTA), which found that the lack of communication was one of the key issues challenging the sustainability of the Uva Telecentre Network.
Part of the project www.shilpasayura.org involved the creation of a network communications platform developed by a national organization, the E–fusion Regional Impact Team (RIT), with tools used for training and content sharing, connecting key stakeholders as shown in the image found below (Figure 4.2). It also facilitated monitoring tasks for the network. The platform is depicted in the graph below.
A significant challenge was to establish a communications platform where only slightly over half (52%) of the 60 telecentres had internet access. There were also different levels of language and ICT skills within the network.
The E–fusion Regional Impact Team assessed telecentre needs by conducting small workshops, telecentre visits, and questionnaires to help design the communcations strategy. The network communication platform provided messaging services among RIT, telecentres, ICTA and service providers.
Transparency and open group communications helped to develop trust among members. The creation of a ‘network think-tank’ increased stakeholder involvement. Connecting members of the telecentre community with government and business helped to increase network reach. Telecentre operators were empowered to represent their centres which increasing local ownership. Periodic monitoring reports helped resolve network issues. All communications were carried out with authenticated identity. Forming a Telecentre Community Association created a front end to represent the network.
Using online tools and e-content in ‘local language’ increased participation and reach. The communication media used were email, blogs, fora, discussion lists, ning social networks, telephone, Skype web-conferencing, chat and SMS messaging to communicate effectively within the network to share and transfer telecentre knowledge. Regular workshops helped to improve inter-telecentre communications, knowledge networking and resources sharing.
Forums, surveys, activity photos, videos, blogging and comments captured feedback to improve the process.
Before the E3 project, each of the Uva telecentres were isolated, individual competing entities. The nine-month duration of the first phase of the project improved network communications to make telecentres truly emerge as a telecentre network. The E3 network communication strategy assisted in the effective delivery of telecentre support services, content, capacity building, advocacy, research and reporting. Advocacy actions motivated the emergence of a Telecentre Sustainability Network (TSN), receiving national and global ICT4D research attention for telecentre sustainability development.
The diversity within Uva telecentres was a challenge for network communications to bring loosely bound individual telecentres into a network. Creating some early benefits helped, such as deploying an e-learning platform to set off joint activities among telecentres.
There were, however, some problems along the way. Some telecentres, even if individually successful, did not contribute enough to the network with their skills and resources. Lack of a gender perspective (as revealed through women’s reluctance to engage in network-wide activities) also affected network communications. Negotiation and awareness improved the situation, but some individuals’ positions did not move much over time.
Effective network communications require openness, use of local languages and effective tools. In a loosely bound network misunderstandings can always occur; hence network messages require careful consideration of content and channels of delivery. For example, if a message with information of general interest is not received by all telecentre, it can negatively affect the entire telecentre network. Therefore, making feedback mechanisms available and having processes for corrective action are a must.
Postal mail, even if not considered ‘modern’, can be an effective network messaging element to involve non-ICT literate stakeholders (and amazingly enough, some telecentre owners may fit in this category).
Open communications help to motivate small players to play big roles in the network and informal communicationsare useful in assessing the effectiveness of network programs.
Quick Tips about Communications Strategies and Practice in Telecentre Networks
A healthy communication flow among the members is the energy that keeps a network active and feeds the solidarity and confidence required for the TCN to be successful.
Nothing replaces face-to-face communication; plan for annual meetings.
Use web 2.0 tools, which simplify making contributions and producing content.
Foster confidence and trust between your users. You won’t openly share things if you do not trust the person you are working with.
In order to create incentive for communication among network members, it is important to name one or two facilitators that can help you encourage participation.
Promote discussion fora that will help to keep the network active.
One of the best incentives is to help individual telecentres better communicate themselves: make this a central part of your communications strategy.
In case you do not have the level of participation you were expecting, get help! Some individuals in the network may be able to assist you in motivating other members. And even better, revise stimuli to communicate for the members.
Focus on your target audience and the main ideas you want to communicate.
Try to personalize messages according to your audience and the goal you want to achieve.
The message has to be concrete and clear; remember that ‘less is often more’ in public communications
Your message structure always should have an introduction, message body and conclusion.
Create a blog for your telecentre network. It will make it easier to keep your partners and possible donors informed about the activities of the telecentres and their communities.
In a visible place in the telecentre, prepare a poster with all the information regarding the telecentre, its rules, schedule, etc.
Keep the community informed about telecentre activities and how it is accomplishing its goals. Also let the community know if you need some help.
Quality over quantity: how you communicate is more important than how much you communicate.
Think and communicate positively but credibly: in the case of failures (which are normal experiences and occur regularly) try to emphasize the lessons learned.
Get the most out of the Web 2.0. Use social networks, blogs, tags, YouTube, web picture albums, etc. to let the world know about your TCN and its telecentres.
This chapter identifies resource challenges, business models for telecentre networks and discusses ways for networks to undertake resource mobilization programs. Since the first telecentres were established in the early 1980s, a number of different models have emerged around the world. The models often take varied management approaches, technologies, connectivity options, and services. Yet no single telecentre model has so far proved inherently superior in terms of ensuring financial sustainability. Issues underlying financial sustainability of telecentre networks have been mostly similar to those of the network members – i.e. the telecentres themselves. The difference however, is that as a network, there is more potential for finding working solutions.
The telecentres of today and of the future are increasingly networked telecentres. The impact of telecentre networks has been significant in terms of providing quality support to telecentres, strengthening their mission of delivering ICT training and services to rural and marginalised urban communities, and in bridging the digital divide (or specific digital divides, such as urban-rural).
Telecentre networks function well if they have a heart – a core team of people – that champion the exchange of ideas, propose projects, ensure lessons are documented, make connections with potential partners and oversee long-term planning. It does not matter whether a network is virtual or physical. But there is only so much that a core team can do if it does not have the financial resources needed for the tasks at hand. Ultimately, a lack of resources often results in frustration and undermines the spirit of the network. In fact, the collapse of many telecentre networks has been attributed to lack of financial resources.
Before entering into the relevant aspects of financial sustainability for telecentre networks, we will start by quickly identifying other dimensions of TCN sustainability, besides the financial one, which have an effect on overall sustainability. The remainder of the chapter focuses on financial sustainability:
Social sustainability – This may be the most influential dimension of the various types of sustainability, since it is driven by demand of its members.[1] As Fillip and Foote say “sustaining a network is first and foremost about providing value to the telecentre managers who belong” (2007, p. 151).
Institutional Sustainability – It is beneficial to increase the scale of telecentre networks through partnerships with other telecentres, and with sectors including government, the private sector, academia, and civil society. By involving an extended set of organizations, responsibilities and costs are shared, collective commitment is increased, and risks are reduced.
Technological sustainability – Telecentre networks require good access to the proper technologies and skilled technicians needed to provide adequate services to the member telecentres.
Box 5.1 Achieving institutional sustainability: the Brazil Community program
The project Brazil Community (www.ec-corp.com.br/midia/2002/nov/cam_comunidade.htm) was created in 2002 with the purpose of creating so-called ‘Community Rooms’ that have internet access in the whole country. It put in motion an interesting public-private partnership model in telecentre-related initiatives.
The partnerships model was based on a union between the Brazilian government, civil society organizations and the business sector. In so doing, it gained the commitment of a diverse set of partners, each with different contributions and responsibilities:
Web-Class (www.webaula.com.br) offered the technology for a distance education program;
Planner (www.plannermob.com.br) provided Marketing Intelligence Service tools;
Caixa Econômica Federal (CEF) (www.caixa.gov.br) provided some of the funding;
The Federal Data Processing Service (SERPRO) (www.serpro.gov.br), committed to giving technological support to telecentres;
Câmara Brasileira de Comércio Eletrônico (www.camara-e.net) provided a little funding and e-commerce technology;
An e-consulting business (www.ec-corp.com.br)created the web portal www.comunidade-brasil.net;
The NGO Moradia e Cidadania (www.moradiaecidadania.org.br), supported local workers;
The NGO Sampa.org (www.sampa.org), provided telecentre management training; and
Brasil Telecom (www.brasiltelecom.com.br) offered free internet access.
Telecentre networks face various types of challenges while trying to achieve financial sustainability, as listed below:
Low financial diversification: Many telecentres and telecentre networks, in their initial stages, are funded 100% by donors, and later experience a reduction in this funding. This generates a high level of risk if key donors withdraw their support.
Restrictions on the use of funding: Some grants include restrictions that inhibit a telecentre network’s ability to grow and develop independently. That is, some grants may only be provided to carry out specific activities or hire particular staff for the duration of a project. Moreover, there are usually no provisions for subsequent funding. It is important to limit expectations to the explicit terms of an agreement.
Lack of funding for non-project work: It is often hard to secure funding for advocacy and institutional strengthening activities. For example, in many countries, the benefits that telecentres and ICT4D activities may bring to communities need to be more widely and publicly communicated, since these tasks figure under ‘soft’ operations, and are therefore hard to finance outright.
Proposal-related hassle: There are often difficulties related to the preparation and presentation or follow-up of funding proposals. Each donor organization requires the submission of proposals in a particular format; and naturally, each donor targets specific interests. In this way, the preparation of multiple proposals often becomes too time consuming for TCNs with limited capacity (with respect to technical and human resources).
Project-only funding: Funds are often limited to short-term projects that are financed by a handful of donors (such as national governments and international agencies), compared to a lack of funding for projects supporting overall organizational development or projects with a broader social impact.
Bearing these challenges in mind, it must also be understood that if many telecentres in a network are not sustainable themselves, then it is difficult for the network to be sustainable as a whole. Therefore, apart from supporing telecentres individually, telecentre networks also have a vested interest in contributing to their financial stability.
Effective financial sustainability starts with a clear strategic plan: a long-term perspective of what the network is about and what it plans to do. This strategy should outline network objectives, priorities, resources required, and a means to track performance and resource levels. Each of these aspects is discussed in detail in other chapters of this guidebook, where this chapter focuses mainly on locating resources for the implementation stage of a telecentre network.
A telecentre network strategic plan may include obtaining resources from internal and external sources. Internal financial resources may include:
Membership fees – Who pays, and how much, are questions that should be carefully thought out. Collecting membership fees requires transparency, accountability and ample reporting on the part of the network leadership. Otherwise, fees can become a source of network instability.
Consultancy services – Networks can provide technical services for a fee to their telecentre members, governments, private or civil society organizations. In several countries around the world, telecentre networks are leaders in universal access issues and enjoy good access to communities, which makes them valuable project partners. For instance, UgaBYTES in Uganda provides technical maintenance support to telecentres at a discounted fee.
Sale of products – This may include discounted software, hardware, training programs or telecentre supplies. Products that are connected to the core business of a telecentre network may be the most feasible to sell since they may not require the development of new skills.
Box 5.2 Growing the market for telecentres: Cooking school (and other services)
“I had a chat with Mohamed (Afriklinks) yesterday – kind of trying to digest the focus of eight telecentres that were launched early this month by government of Algeria which provides 100% support. This program is supported by InWent (Germany). They visited a telecentre in Djelfa, Algeria almost 300 km from the capital.
The catch for me, these telecentres provide certified training in cookery and adult literacy in addition to your usual telecentre style services. I think that is really revolutionary. This is why; if rural communities where most telecentres are located are largely illiterate and therefore unable to effectively use most services, how will a telecentre helps to address that problem and therefore drive more use?
You have probably heard of telecoms and other private companies spending time and energy to grow the market…working with young people and investing in schools (tomorrow’s market). How can a telecentre grow its future market? Well, adult literacy training is one great way to do just that”.
There are many resource mobilization opportunities from external network sources. Perhaps this is an area within which telecentre networks have focused significantly, but still not enough. The foundation of a good external resources mobilization plan is based on a strong awareness of what a network can do well, knowledge of its internal capacities (to offer as services to other organizations) and a recognition of the organizations that might be interested in working with the network. This implies an objective partnership analysis, and one that requires regular updates.
One way for telecentre networks to raise external resources is to directly cover operational overheads. This may mean getting another organization to pay for the salary of key network staff member(s) or paying for the internet connectivity. The network, in this instance, does not have to receive the money directly.
Telecentre networks can also mobilize external resources through endorsements. When a network can demonstrate its network value in terms of quantity, it is possible to use it to endorse products and services in return for economic value. Some telecentre networks such as the Brazilian Telecentre Information and Business Association (ATN)[2] have developed a highly regarded public reputation so that private sector companies and local governments may even provide funding just in order to be associated with the network brand. Clearly, network value can be highly valuable if it is properly communicated and marketed.
One of the most significant ways to generate resources externally is for a telecentre network to act as a distribution channel of content and services. This implies working with private sector companies, civil society organizations and governments to distribute, implement, test and demonstrate products or services. TCNs can obtain significant resources this way. It gives networks an opportunity to expand the range of products and services they offer beyond the traditional ICT-related ones. And it places TCNs as significant actors in public-private partnerships.
Telecentre networks with the capacity and processes in place to act as distribution channels can work together with international partners such as UN agencies, multinational corporations with corporate social responsibility programs and universities. They can work either from the demand side, such as bringing online university courses to telecentre users. And they could also work the supply-side, such as offering project collaboration opportunities for a UN agency at the telecentre/community level. For instance, the partnership between the Brazilian Telecentre Information and Business Association (ATN) and Microsoft will provide 40,000 Windows XP/Office Package licenses for telecentres. Another benefit from this partnership is the email service hosted and operated by Microsoft in the platform Windows Live Custom Domains.
ATN provides another interesting example of helping telecentres’ financial needs with respect to university education. Through a partnership with the Metropolitan University of Santos (Unimes), telecentres are able to offer graduate and post-graduate courses accredited by Brazil’s Ministry of Education. Through this program, students attend classes once a week in the telecentres which are given by teachers from the university. Throughout the week, students can use any computer and other telecentre services they may need. By the end of the course, students receive an accredited degree while the telecentre receives 20% of each student’s monthly payment.
Perhaps the most frequent approach taken presently by telecentre networks is to raise external funds is via direct project funding. However, this is also the most unreliable of all sources. External funding may come from national or foreign donors. It is common for industrialized countries such as Canada, Finland, Australia or Spain to provide telecentre services for free to individual users in their territory. The Government of Western Australia, for example, gives recurrent support to most of an estimated 150 telecentres via its well-established WA Telecentre Network [3] and makes use of the distributed potential discussed in the previous section to provide a range of educational and government services to the local communities served. This implies that the Western Australia Government considers its financial support to be an investment and not a simple ‘donation’.
Less developed countries that try to follow this type of highly subsidized project funding for telecentre development may find it to be financially unsustainable. It may lead to an abrupt stop in funding, or limit the extent and reach of telecentre programming. But this makes an even stronger selling point for supporting telecentre networks: if, as a government, you cannot maintain individual telecentres, at least try to strongly support telecentre networks that will work to stabilize the situation of the individual telecentres.
In the Philippines and Brazil, as in Australia and Spain, some telecentre networks are run by government organizations where workers and operational fees are paid for by the government. In Mali, the government wants to establish telecentres called ‘Community Access Points’ (CAPs) in all 703 communes, and to provide support for them (at least initially). The existing telecentre network in Mali, called FETEMA, is lobbying the government to demonstrate the advantages of networking and to send the message that FETEMA has the required expertise to support telecentres – and can probably do it more effectively and efficiently than government officials with lesser expertise and who are busy with other issues. This is a proper way to seek official support for a telecentre network, in promoting a partnership with a government department.
Telecentre networks can turn to the ‘social enterprise’ concept for effectively and efficiently complying with its essentially social objective (i.e. to support its member telecentres), as a logical extension of the social enterprise models exhibited by individual telecentres. This model can be applied to income-generating activities to supplement existing program funding and individual telecentre contributions.
The term ‘social enterprise’ refers to any entrepreneurial activity that generates revenue for an organization (that is, the ‘enterprise’) while at the same time helping to achieve social objectives. A network that ‘sells’ market information to telecentres to strengthen their services in the community and allows them to generate revenues is operating as a social enterprise. A different example could relate to a national NGO that wishes to disseminate good practices and training about family planning but that finds it difficult to reach municipal areas - the national telecentre network could then negotiate a fee with the NGO to send the relevant content to its telecentres, and thus provide the information to the NGO’s target audience in effective manner.
A social enterprise model for a telecentre network can bring a series of potential benefits such as:
Increased and diversified income resulting from a social enterprise’s ‘profitability’, which helps to reduce dependence on uncertain funding sources;
Greater flexibility because, unlike grant funding, a social enterprise’s income is not restricted to a specific use, thereby allowing networks to use the funds in ways that best meet their organizational needs;
Improved overall organizational performance as the proper financial and managerial discipline required for running a successful social enterprise will improve the network’s organizational efficiency and planning skills;
A positive impression on donors as they may appreciate that the telecentre network is being proactive in generating its own resources;
Increased visibility and network self-confidence: marketing for social enterprise purposes can reach new audiences for the network, making the same the network leaders and staff realise that they have the ability to generate income on their own.
A telecentre network can manage more than one social enterprise, depending on its size (or, to be more precise, its management capacity). It also depends on the level of demand from telecentres or other clients (such as government entities or businesses) for delivering value-added services such as health content, tax information, delivery of official forms, and so on.
While social enterprise models may bring significant benefits for telecentre networks, network managers should be aware of potential limitations. Managing a social enterprise of any type is not easy, and it may run against local economic or business cultures. Social enterprises also require a certain level of financial stability and expertise that not all telecentre networks have, and therefore they must be professionally managed. Furthermore, there is no direct recipe for success. Rather, each social enterprise model should be tailored to each particular telecentre network’s mission, and level of capacity, expertise, and technical skills.
According to Loïc Comolli, a social enterprise is not a way to get ‘quick money’ because it requires a long-term financial strategy and it may take several years before a financial return is realised (2008). In addition, as with any kind of business, a social enterprise is vulnerable to socio-economic conditions and market fluctuations, and if it not well managed it can place the network’s reputation and financial integrity at risk. A social enterprise’s activities may also cause a variety of internal organizational and cultural dilemmas as well as ideological conflicts with the core mission of the TCN.
There is a range of possible social enterprise elements or activities that can be appropriate for telecentre networks. Some are closely related to the network's mission to strengthen telecentres, while others may be unrelated to the network's core missions and thus have a more limited – or even nonexistent – direct social impact. We take a look now at some of the various types, with tendencies ranging from lower to higher profit generation.
What will emerge from this quick examination of social enterprise aspects in telecentre networks is an apparent trade-off between network mission impact and impending profit levels. In general, the less related the social enterprise is from the telecentre network mission, the lower the resulting ‘impact’ of the activities in achieving network goals, but the higher the expected profit. Working on activities unrelated to the network mission may prove risky to the TCN, because the market and product is less familiar. In any case, the primary goal of non-mission related social enterprises would be to generate enough revenues to either cover operational costs (what is commonly referred to as 'overhead') of the telecentre network and/or support specific projects.
Implementing telecentre network program activities and providing services specified in the telecentre network’s charter without charging any fees from members: For example, a TCN may provide IT support to telecentres which strengthens a telecentre’s capacities, but additional funding is still required from other sources to pay staff members. The social impact of this kind of activity is high (telecentres cannot operate without staff) but the network relies 100% on grants and subsidies. Generally this kind of telecentre network is not seen as a social enterprise but rather as a type of NGO unless they use their social enterprise label to access funding as a regular component of their income generation strategy.
Using a partial cost-recovery goal, covering a percentage of their existing program costs through fees. This implies that the remaining costs would have to be covered by grants or donations. For example, the TCN may charge fees for providing IT support to telecentres. This helps to increase the prospects of sustainability of the program by reducing the amount of grant funding needed.
Offering new services to existing clients (such as telecentres). For example, they can sell ICT course curriculum to telecentres to offer higher quality training to community members. This type of social enterprise has a high mission impact, i.e. it aims at the core purpose of the organization, its mission, and is funded by cost-recovery. It can either allow for these tasks to be performed on a break-even basis or may even have a potential to create a financial profit.
Offering extended program activities to new paying clients. For example, a telecentre network may charge fees for IT support for local schools or NGOs for a small profit.
Providing completely new products or services to new paying clients. For example, a telecentre network social enterprise that sells refurbished PCs to non-profit organizations and to the general public is not directly related to the network missiong since it does not directly involve the strengthening of telecentres; not in the service delivery, nor in the sharing of revenues from the enterprise. The overall goal is to make a profit that subsidizes the telecentre network's core activities and organizational development.
Since telecentre networks support and interact with a large number of telecentres (sometimes numbering in the hundreds or even thousands), the type of social enterprise that strikes a better balance may be one that provides new product or services to the existing clients (that is, member telecentres). At any rate, a rigorous analysis of TCN objectives, telecentre needs, revenue streams and resource mobilization possibilities is always required. The most appealing scenario, in most cases, is one where both networks and telecentres generate some revenue, offering products and services that are useful to the communities.
The Rural Center of Digital Inclusion (CRID) (www.multimeios.ufc.br) based at the Federal University of Clara (www.ufc.br) presents an interesting example of a social enterprise within a telecentre network. A project they run helps to mobilize the community to become acquainted with the process of digital culture, as a road towards ‘knowledge transformations’. As stakeholders in a public-private partnership scheme, the project involves rural communities in managing the telecentres, which offer services in digital inclusion, educational informatics, distance courses and telecommunications in a context of social, personal, economic and cultural empowerment. The telecentres are well-managed, the communities are empowered, and useful services are provided to the users of the telecentres.
“Building the capacities of young girls/women who are school drop-outs through Malian Telecentres: A partnership between Afriklinks, Microsoft CTSP and FETEMA”
Telecentres in Mali do not typically receive subsidies from initial funding partners to support operating costs. Among the various types of telecentres that exist, only those known as Community Learning and Information Centers (or Clicks) ever received direct subsidies, which ended in March 2005. The role of Afriklinks and its partners is to support these individual telecentres to achieve a higher level of sustainability (including within the network itself).
With the support of telecentre.org, in addition to technical support from Afriklinks, the Federation des Telecentres du Mali (FETEMA) was created in 2006. However, FETEMA needed additional funds to become operational as an independent entity. Most of its funding was originally supposed to come from network members. But annual subscription fees were not allowed to cover network activities, and Afriklinks’ staff in Bamako constituted the de-facto permanent secretariat of FETEMA, essentially providing free human resources for the federation. In order to mobilize resources, therefore, FETEMA carried out many formal and informal meetings with potential partners. This case study is the result of one of those meetings.
This project process started in Benin during the African Telecentre Leaders’ Forum that was held at Centre Songhai, in December 2007, where the Afriklinks team met with Microsoft representatives. We learned that Microsoft can fund community based ICT projects, and we knew that the person dedicated to Mali-based projects was based in Senegal. After initial contact, we learned about the eligible areas for project funding at the community level, through Microsoft’s Community Technology Skills Program (CTSP) initiative.
In Mali, many young girls drop out of school because they marry or have children at a young age. The majority of these girls do not have access to any ‘professional’ training of any kind, due to their poverty level, or for cultural reasons (for example, their husbands are not willing to pay to send them to another locality in order to attend courses). These young women therefore stay home to take care of domestic chores, and have little to aspire to besides raising a family.
There emerged an opportunity to develop a project to provide these young women with ICT skills. The project covered their training fees, which in turn could help them make a new start. They were given the chance to improve their lives (if allowed the possibility to apply for jobs or manage a personal activity at the local level), while having access to useful information in telecentres which enabled them to better care for themselves and their families.
We submitted a proposal online at the Microsoft Unlimited potential website in June 2007. Two months later, we received an invitation to participate in a workshop organised by Microsoft in Senegal as a potential partners. The cost of travel (about USD $1,500) needed to be covered by the invited organizations, and Afriklinks invested in the project and sent one delegate to this workshop. There were meetings with Microsoft to clarify doubts and answer questions about the project, and one month later (in October 2007) the proposal was selected. The grant was for USD $50,000, which allowed for approximately 200 young girls/women to be trained through the community telecentres.
We opened a bid for FETEMA’s members to apply to be project partners to help with the execution of the project. FETEMA members were informed through the federation website and the distribution list about the project, including eligibility criteria. Twelve telecentres were chosen according to the manager’s level of technical capacity, as well as the availability of adequate equipment. We used communication via the local community radio over a two-week period to broadcast project information and beneficiary criteria in French and in at least one local language. A national press conference was held to formally present the project and the locations of the chosen telecentres.
After the first year of implementation, 42 young girls out of the total 200 involved in the project got a job in their communities. The remaining girls were either hoping to open their own local cybercafés, or to continue studying to obtain a professional diploma.
The project budget covered the telecentres’ training costs, and it provided FETEMA with some core funding (approximately 5% of the total funds). All telecentres involved in the project agreed to share their resources between them.
We see this activity as a social enterprise that permitted young girls/women at the local community level to develop ICT skills, bringing some revenue to individual telecentres, and also to the network as a franchise fee.
In 2008, Afriklinks presented another proposal to Microsoft to help young girls create their own businesses. If approved, the project will receive USD $50,000 to be implemented in February 2009. The project would allow for ten new telecentres to be created by Afriklinks using refurbished computers, to be managed by some of the newly trained girls in their communities. FETEMA will order the refurbished computers and re-sell them to telecentres that need to improve their technical equipment, getting some revenue in the process.
The rather new FETEMA executive board, whose members are fully employed within the telecentres or their hosting institutions, did not have the capacity to write effective proposals at the time of application. It is therefore recommendable for the FETEMA telecentre network to initiate training sessions on fundraising for its members. The
Afriklinks team had the capcity to submit the proposal due to support from telecentre.org and USAID, otherwise it would have been very difficult to conduct the process.
Access to some initial funds is critical to begin network activities: the network needs to be able to hire people who competent in communication and fundraising activities.
The project was one of ‘learning by doing’ for both the telecentre network and the selected telecentres involved.
Accountability and regular reporting to donors and partners are a crucial part of the fundraising process.
Dependence on only one source of financing should be avoided, even if it provides significant funding or if it appears stable: the situation can change from one day to the next.
It is (operationally) necessary to plan for the short term, called annual action plans. It is also (strategically) necessary to have long-term strategies and planning (that is, planning at least five years ahead).
Financial sustainability for telecentres or for telecentre networks does not guarantee overall sustainability: other dimensions like social, institutional and technological sustainability are important as well.
Content and services from individual telecentres can be combined into a network-wide catalogue of content and services, to respond to the needs of telecentres users all around the network.
A telecentre network can help telecentres to expand their range of products and services beyond the traditional ICT-related ones, such as ICT technical support and training, to include health, e-government, and educational related products and services, for example.
Using a proper distribution strategy, a telecentre network can offer products and services that come from national and international entities.
Building the capacity of individual telecentres to formulate good project proposals (including the provision of helpful materials like proposal templates) is a practical way to help the overall sustainability of the network by contributing to individual telecentre sustainability.
It may prove useful to provide incentives for telecentres to keep financially contributing to the network, for example, by inviting only those telecentres to events who are consistently paying their fees.
If a government is going to set up a telecentre program, or if it already supports telecentre programs, one of its central ‘smart’ investments should be in telecentre networks.
It should never be assumed that project funding will be extended beyond the life of a given project. Therefore, any related measures for extended financing or in seeking additional project phases should be timely and taken accordingly. For example, networks can negotiate with the donor early on, arrange for project evaluations, become familiar with the donor’s calendar, prepare new projects, etc.).
Non-financial resource contributions such as expertise and human and technological resources can contribute powerfully to sustainability needs (including the financial sustainability).
Social enterprise business models can be appropriate for telecentre networks, just as they are for individual telecentres. But they require a relatively strong level of institutional capacity to succeed.
The closer a social enterprise is to the telecentre’s overall mission of strengthening telecentres, the higher its potential impact.
Comolli, L. (2008). Increasing Telecentre Network Sustainability through Social Enterprise. Telecentre Magazine, 2:4, pp. 18–22.
If communications are the ‘nervous system’ of a telecentre network, as expressed in Chapter 4, we could say that content and services are at the heart of a telecentre. It is through content and services that a telecentre serves the development challenges of its community and therefore provide opportunities for improved livelihoods.
Telecentre networks have a unique advantage in developing content and services. Networks may use their collective power to attract content and services originally developed by other organization – and then modify them for their own purposes. Networks may also engage directly in content and services development. This chapter discusses attributes and types of adequate content and services for telecentres, and how a telecentre network can play a central role in their provision. Examples are provided along the way about TCNs engaging in this process, drawing on a case study that looks at the Bangladesh Telecentre Network and its content and services development plan.
Since 2006, telecentre.org has supported a number of networks around the world to develop content and services that telecentres can use. This support has been linked to overall sustainability of telecentre networks. This is because telecentre.org believes that good content and services best advance the value of telecentre networking and are therefore key to sustainability for the telecentres.
Creating or even adapting the proper content or service packages for a particular community is an expensive and time-consuming job; and it is even more difficult for individual telecentres to create content and services.
Moreover, providers of content and services activities may not want to work with just one telecentre and its relatively limited constituency. But the aggregate level of demand of a group of telecentre practitioners can make the relationship more attractive.
There is an increasing recognition that networks can leverage content and services development, including the creation, packaging, training and provision of support services. Those content and services activities can then be replicated and distributed at the local and international level (such as through other TCNs). Herein lies the power of a telecentre network.
A telecentre network can also provide a channel for validation and feedback for content and service providers. This is an invaluable opportunity for any provider.
Individual telecentres can contribute to content development from telecentre networks by gathering information and knowledge from their communities. This may cover farming processes, trading opportunities, traditional herbal medicine, or local cultural practices for example. Telecentres have become a key source of data about local communities by development agencies and research organizations.
One interesting experience comes from telecentre.org’s support of a number of networks and organizations to develop services through the competitive Rural Innovation Fund in India. These services included:
A delivery model for Tara Akshar, a computer-based literacy program that teaches adult illiteracy in Hindi in 30 days. The service also developed a training system that integrates NGO and community based organizations as partners;
Primary eye care through rural vision centres. The service was meant to increase access eye to care in rural India in order to reduce blindness;
An e-Commerce village web portal that provided communities with access to information, goods and services;
A village disaster management system that records critical threats and available resources (such as personnel, equipment, support services) at village and national levels;
An integrated rural milk procurement system that records milk collection to facilitate payments to farmers.
There are a growing number of telecentre network experiences with direct content and services development, although there is much potential that remains unexplored. Within the telecentre.org community, we can highlight the UgaBYTES initiative that a service called ‘MySchool’, which helps high school students in Uganda meet online to share educational resources and to ask teachers questions. The national network in Mozambique receives the collaboration of the Brazilian Telecentre Information and Business Association (ATN) to deliver online telecentre manager training. D.Net in Bangladesh provides another good references (see Box 3).
Box 6.1 An online portal of input services directory developed by telecentres in Bangladesh
D.Net, one of the members of the Bangladesh Telecentre Network, started to generate a countrywide directory of service providers like agriculture tool vendors, hospitals, educational institutions, and law firms; where information listed included their address, products available, price range, availability etc. They created an information repository of 20 sectors from 26 districts. Total entries in the database number over 8,000.
D.Net used telecentres to collect this data by surveying local businesses. They trained telecentre staff and gave them a questionnaire in order to collect data. The telecentres thereby collected the data and send it to D.Net via email. Through this process, telecentres were able to earn additional income, while getting the opportunity to introduce a new service to the community. For D.Net, this process reduced the cost of their operation (also because they used the same telecentres to help them upgrade or further modify the data collected.
The design and nature of content and services needs to be guided by the needs of telecentres, which in turn are determined by the needs – and perceived opportunities – of their communities. The particular mix of content and services useful for a telecentre depends on the community ecosystem, where the telecentre itself needs to become an important component of that ecosystem. The figure below describes the constituent parts of such a community ecosystem. Each of the bubbles represents people and organizations that have a concrete, staked interest. Telecentre managers and telecentre network staff need to ensure that everything provided by telecentres is focused on community needs and opportunities. This translates into a process where benefits reach a sufficient amount of ecosystem actors.
This leads to the questions, what attributes should characterize those content and services activities demanded by local communities and channelled through individual telecentres? We can point out at least four necessary attributes: content and services that are appropriate, relevant, dynamic and authentic.
Content and services may be determined as appropriate for a specific community or network based on any of the following potential benefits:
Reducing costs by accessing different types of information and knowledge through easy and cheap communications;
Creating new income opportunities for the community, by helping community members to gain new ICT or information skills, or to learn about new productive or business possibilities;
Empowering marginalized communities and giving a ‘voice to the voiceless’.
Benefits may not always be quantifiable but they need to be visible. For instance, a cheap communications service (like IP telephony via companies like Skype) can let a mother know that her daughter and grandchildren are doing well far away from home. We have identified a few brief stories of social changes to illustrate, which are presented in Appendix 6.1.
Because appropriate content and services are determined by user needs, they need to be dynamic. Telecentre networks have to be prepared to adapt or even abandon services as needs change over time. In the case of a service that provides content (information) to farmers about pest control and management, if new pesticides emerge on the market or if specific pests arrive in the scene, the service will have to update its content, since erroneous information may prove to be very costly to the farmers.
The relevance of content and services determines their level of demand by the community. Proper packaging and delivery contribute to their relevance. Selecting the right delivery channels is critical in developing content and services; it may be necessary to use a combination of offline, online, print, SMS-based, or face-to-face channels. A network should also consider the characteristics of its telecentre users, such as their literacy levels. For instance, telecentre networks that work with high illiteracy rates will deliver more voice and video enabled content than printed materials. Content translation is also essential. The role of a good infomediary is not only to provide physical access to information but also to facilitate ‘real’ accessibility: that is, to make their meaning accessible.
Another important attribute of content and services is authenticity. Because of the potential impact of particular content and services to people’s livelihoods, it imperative that networks seek validation to ensure that the information provided is accurate, complete and can lead to effective results, and that entities who are providing informational services are legal and honest. It is also useful if respected thematic experts and organizations validate content and service activities. In fact, this validation or quality control function may be one of the added value tasks performed by telecentre networks.
Community demands for information and services may vary widely from one community to the next. For example, local demand for livelihood information and services depends on types of professions in the community. Demand may prove higher in rural and remote areas, given their isolation and more restrained access to information. A telecentre network can get involved by providing a potentially wide range of content and services, which can relate to any of the following areas:
Agriculture: Agriculture is the main occupation of people living in rural areas. Many people engaged with agriculture are illiterate or semi-literate. But they have inherited indigenous knowledge. Typical demands for content and services from farmers can include: where to buy quality seeds, insecticides, pesticides or fertilizer availability (particularly from government sources). They also want to know about power cuts, fuel prices and the visits of agriculture extension officers. Farmers are certainly interested about information on daily market prices for agricultural commodities, but also on tools to test the soil quality, storage facilities (particularly for perishable products) or information about crop rotation and selection.
Health: Health and healthcare related issues are basic to a community’s well being, especially for rural women. The information demands on health issues are mainly on basic remedial issues related to diseases and health problems. Telemedicine services, including remote diagnostics and treatment follow-up are particularly valuable for rural people who can save precious time and money by not having to travel far away for some of those medical services.
Law and human rights: Violation of human rights may be more prevalent in rural locations because people lack basic education on their rights, or information about their obligations. Local elites often take advantage of the functional illiteracy of the individuals within the community. For these purposes, databases of legal and human rights organizations, listings for the nearest administrative offices and information about citizen rights are valuable.
Education: Students and teachers in rural communities often have little access to quality educational material. Youth in those areas may find it difficult to obtain higher education, so information about higher education opportunities, as well as procedures of getting admitted, is important for the rural community. Aging adult literacy is another major demand on the educational sector. Using audiovisual materials to promote adult literacy creates new opportunities for adult literacy as people can learn by watching and listening.
Employment: People use several sources for job information. Personal, face-to-face contact is the most common source for employment information. In addition, telecentres facilitate access to job information via online services.
Commerce, business including self-employment/non-farm economic activities: Telecentres can become popular places for business and commerce. Using a telecentre, people can find out information about their products (including market prices and additional information), input pricing and connections to global and national trading opportunities. Self-employment, especially rural micro and small enterprises capture the majority of rural occupations. Information about new business opportunities, business-related government information, business management, and online market places are major demands for this sector.
Disaster preparedness and management: Disasters and natural calamities are an increasing occurrence across the globe. Access to disaster-related information can reduce the severity of its effects, such as by allowing people a timely evacuation before a probable disaster strikes.
Government service: Telecentres can be a popular mechanism and a primary access point for all e-government services. This can make it easier to download official forms, submissions, certifications and so on, cutting out ‘middle men’ who sometimes demand unwarranted fees to perform services for citizens.
Entertainment: Telecentres are good source of entertainment for rural communities. Satellite private televisions and radio broadcasted programs are usually not available in rural areas. Telecentres may therefore provide good venues for entertainment: cartoons for children, drama shows, movies, sports for adults or online radio stations, are good examples.
News: In many remote villages, access to the newspaper is absent. Currently, most newspapers have an online version and there are hundreds of news blogs. A telecentre is a common access point for all to access to this media online.
A key service provide by telecentres is access to the internet, used by relatively more highly educated and ICT-knowledgeable user groups for purposes as wide-ranging as (i) job searching, (ii) applying for foreign visas, (iii) learning materials, (iv) reading the newspaper (and writing to the editor), (v) writing and conferencing with relatives, (vi) exchanging business information, or (vii) simply playing games. Some users, mostly in urban areas, are more advanced; they may use ICT facilities for banking or e-commerce activities. Many telecentres also provide ICT training.
The ‘Telecentres of Business and Information’ program is different from other digital inclusion programs in that it is more socially oriented: it aims to provide spaces for conducting business activities. The program’s objective is to strengthen competitiveness, increase profitability and reduce the closure of micro and small businesses by providing access to information, products, services and training courses available on the internet and on the resources offered by ICTs. That is, literacy and digital inclusion were taken as a ‘means’ (as a stage of work), and not its purpose. The program started in 2000, and now in 2009 it is in its third program phase.
A Telecentre of Business and Information is a physical space within an existing institution that represents and develops actions directed towards micro and small businesses. Their infrastructure is built on the computational and human resources necessary for digital literacy and on the use of extensive resources of the internet. Each TBI has a manager, with some monitors and assistants, and about 10 computers connected in a local network and to the internet. Other equipment is also available, such as printers, scanners, a fax machine, telephone, or television. By the end of 2008, the TBI network included an impressive 3,500 units.
The key resource for providing business content is the TBI Portal that introduced ‘smart navigation’ for the classification and presentation of business information. The actions of the program’s Information Committee in organizing topics of interest for micro and small businesses, and the establishment of virtual communities were very important in terms of facilitating content provision.
The TBI Network now offers extension courses in Telecentre Management and Digital Entrepreneurship in the form of e-learning offered via a Moodle platform. The courses were developed specifically to train telecentre managers, for a total of 60 hours and with the support of specialist tutors. The content is available in five modules, with the intention to stimulate entrepreneurial potential and improve telecentre management practices. At the end of the course, students receive a certificate from the University of Brasilia. Since 2007, the course has trained more than 300 telecentre managers.
A management system of Telecentres of Business and Information has been set up for the TBI Network, to facilitate monitoring and evaluation. It is focused mainly on two functions: 1) to generate indicators for the TBI network and 2) to automate internal administrative activities of the telecentres. Even though it is still in development, the management system is already being used by 125 TBIs in the country.
Project TBI has benefited from the collaboration of an extensive set of partners, for a variety of purposes, including for: (i) internet connection, (ii) the donation of computers, furniture, printers, modems, fax, scanners or air conditioners, and (iii) for courses and training for professionals. Key partnerships were established with Caixa Econômica Federal and Banco do Brasil (two large banks) for the donation of computers; the National Research Council [1] for providing technical expertise for the project, and the Brazilian Service of Support to Micro and Small Enterprises, for the installation of telecentres and an ongoing discussion on methodologies and strategic planning.[2]
In 2007, the TBI program received a World Summit Award in the category digital inclusion (e-inclusion). This award is sponsored by UNIDO, UNESCO and the Internet Society.
Case study - Mapping content for telecentres by the Bangladesh Telecentre Network [3]
It is important for a telecentre network to invest in finding different sources of content and services and developing partnerships with various organizations to link them with telecentres. Recently, the Bangladesh Telecentre Network (BTN) has undertaken an initiative to map content and services for telecentres. The BTN found that individual telecentres do not know who has what. Instead, they struggle to find relevant sources of content and services.
The Bangladesh Telecentre Network put together a small team comprised of a number of members with experience in content and services development for telecentres. At the beginning, BTN called for a members meeting and shared the idea of content mapping. The members attending the meeting identified dynamic sectors where they had demand for content by the community. The sectors are:
After finalizing the list of sectors, the team discussed how the various ways in which to present these types of content. Before starting the content mapping process, the team identified the following types of format:
(Digital) Video Recording, for delayed showing
Online applications (education, government, health).
After developing a comprehensive matrix (See Appendix 6.3 for a detailed matrix template), the team developed a list of institutions with the potential to develop content in each of the sectors mentioned above.
The team later organized small sectoral meetings with organizations to brief them about the importance of content mapping and its benefit to the community. After the discussion, many organizations showed their willingness to support the initiative.
In the very first phase the Bangladesh Telecentre Network technical team helped the organizations to develop their content description and post it on the BTN website. Later, a small number of organizations started posting their information on their own.
As a result, BTN was able to develop a repository of 1,130 knowledge sources that are grouped under 13 categories. The outcomes were aggregated numerically as follows:
A generic list of content and services that were requested by communities, and which could be provided by telecentres, included:
List of poor people eligible to access government subsidies or special economic programs such as relief
List of government divisions and departments working in a given region or administrative unit, along with the services they provide
Livelihood other trainings (handicrafts, rural business through video documentary)
This example of content mapping can be replicated in other telecentre networks, yet it is also important to recognize the associated challenges. Among them are limitations drawing from copyrights of the institutions and authors, the capacity of organizations to post online and, most importantly, the level of willingness to support a network.
Telecentre networks should regularly and systematically examine the needs of individual telecentres for content and services, in order to provide a collective expression of demand – known as a pull strategy.
A telecentre network should deliberately promote content and services from different providers when it believes that they will be useful to some telecentres – a push strategy.
Telecentre networks can help individual telecentres to assess the needs for content and services for their community – through methodology, advice, tools, etc.
Community trust of content is important. Sometimes the organizations that are providing content are more important that the content itself. For example, medical content from an untrustworthy source may not be accepted by the community.
Telecentres are now a key source of research data about local communities, and TCNs can help to channel that data in ways that benefit telecentres (for example, through data on connectivity in order to increase coverage).
Government sources of information tend to be trusted. TCNs should try to bring more government institutions on board, for example, to provide e-government services.
Telecentres by themselves often do not know where to access relevant content and services, so telecentre networks can be of great help to locate them. Rigorous content mapping is an important function of the network from an early stage.
Various communication channels should be used to provide content and services: including offline, online, face-to-face, and print media.
Some users may be illiterate, which should be taken into account (therefore more audio and video content is helpful).
Some of the content and services may not be strictly developmental in nature, like in entertainment and news, but there will nevertheless be an audience for it.
The increased versatility of mobile phones may add ‘mobility’ and higher personal access to the information.
Telecentre networks will have an increasingly relevant function in providing exchange platforms for direct access or provision of content and services among users; that is, a kind of peer-to-peer marketplace for content and services.
Billah, M., Das, N. C., Hasan, M., Raihan, R., Sarer, T., and Uddin, M. F. (2007). Pallitathya: An Information and Knowledge System for the Poor and Marginalized: Experience from Grassroots in Bangladesh, D.Net
The Jeeon- IKB (Information and Knowledge Base) is a content database that has been developed in Bangla and is aimed at improving livelihood through ICTs. This CD version has been made for use in locations that do not have internet connectivity. The Jeeon-IKB responds to everyday queries such as what, where, who, and how in the areas of agriculture, education, healthcare, non-farming economic activities, appropriate technologies, human rights, awareness and disaster management in simple non-technical language. The Jeeon-IKB is particularly suitable for rural users – even for those who are unable to read and write, with the assistance of 'infomediaries' (people who can use Jeeon-IKB to respond to queries). This also creates access to crucial information and thus reduces livelihood costs and improves income opportunities. The Jeeon-IKB is more effective when used with Teletathya: the people's telecentre (a mobile phone based information service), since whatever information is not available in the CD can be obtained by calling the specialists at the Teletathya Helpline. For more information, visit: www.jeeon.com.bd
Online source of content - Rice Knowledge Bank www.knowledgebank.irri.org
The International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) Rice Knowledge Bank (RKB) is the central repository for all IRRI’s research-based rice science and rice farming knowledge that is relevant to the extension-farmer community. The IRRI RKB is also the model for similar RKBs in each partner country where the individual countries select, validate and modify rice-farming knowledge for their extension/farmer communities. The strength of the RKB community depends on developing a shared vision for the RKBs, a sharing of knowledge and exchanging information about technical issues. Now, different countries have their local language version of the knowledge base. For example, in Bangladesh, the Bangladesh Rice Research Institute has developed a comprehensive agriculture knowledge bank in Bangla, which is available at www.knowledgebank-brri.org.
Mobile phone based content source - CellBazaar: Market in Your Pocket (www.cellbazaar.com)
Audio-visual content source - Netbetar.com: Development net cast Website: www.netbetar.com
Netbetar.com, the first Bangladeshi internet broadcast radio channel hopes to reach all corners of the country via the thousands of telecentres sprinkled across rural areas. Development-focused entertainment through radio can help to bring issues closer to poor individuals, says the team behind the initiative.
Local knowledge repository - One Village One Portal: Towards Village Information Entrepreneurship
One Village One Portal (OVOP) is an initiative of GCC (Global Communication Center) aims to build a model of social information infrastructure where villagers can also be producers and owners of village information. Rather than using high-tech infrastructure and training, this model shows how villagers with their current skill set and their own devices can generate and broadcast information. In order to bridge the gap between their capability and the capability of their devices, a "bottom of the pyramid” (BoP) adaptation layer is introduced in the model. Villagers need ICTs to spread their voices. Indeed it can be argued that we need their voices as much as they do. Our step towards finding a way for villagers to develop, own and commoditize information is the One Village One Portal platform. The platform is capable of handling 85,000 portals for 85,000 villages in Bangladesh. However, we envision the OVOP as a prototype for other BoP villages around the world.
One promising field for telecentre services via the support of telecentre networks is in formal and vocational education. One successful example of a program of excellence in education instrumented largely through telecentres is the National Program of Informatics in Education, an initiative of the Ministry of Education in Brazil. The approach has been to incorporate telecentres within Brazilian schools with the objective of improving education, and with the added value of benefiting their communities beyond students and education professionals.
This telecentre ensures the right to access to new technologies, expansion of relations, internet access and democratization of communication to ensure the digital inclusion of Brazilian fishermen.
These telecentres promote the competitiveness of small mines (especially for those already organized into associations), cooperatives and micro and small enterprises in small regions or municipalities that have small mineral production as part of an important socio-economic base.
Telecentres can reduce the cost of livelihood through accessing different livelihood information and knowledge and ‘get-easy’ communication access.
A Farmer Saved his Crop using Information Services of Telecentre
Mr. Nurul Islam Khan produces rice along with beans, bitters and bottle gourds on his land. He is doing his best to make an honest living for his six-member family with an average monthly family income of USD $120. One day, he found that his cultivated beans, bitters and bottle gourds were attacked by harmful insects. He became worried and started consulting with his neighbours.
His neighbours advised him to consult with a local agricultural field officer regarded as ‘block supervisor’, a post of Agricultural Extension Department under the Ministry of Agriculture. They also informed him that if he fails to get hold of the desired officer, then he can pay a visit to local telecentre to receive effective agricultural information services through various ICT channels. The urgency to receive effective agricultural advice made him look for the local block supervisor first, but he failed to get hold of him. Then he sought informational help from telecentre. He paid a visit to the telecentre and he chose to use the verbal information service from the CD content.
Mr. Nurul Islam Khan applied the prescribed insecticides and dramatically got rid of his problems. Thus he saved his beans, bitters and bottle gourds and above all, his livelihood. According to his calculation, Mr. Nurul Islam Khan was able to prevent a total loss of USD $120 just by applying the received advice without paying any charge for the service offered by the Pallitathya Kendra. He thinks that information services provided by the Pallitathya Kendra can greatly save other farmers from potential losses.
Telecentres can create new income opportunities for the community. New income opportunities are created through gaining new skills on ICTs and information about new income opportunities.
Alam, a 26-year old rural educated youth never even dreamt of getting a job at a local bank. The place where he stays is far from the main town, so it is hard for him to search for new employment opportunities. Fortunately, a local telecentre came forward to rescue him from this situation.
Alam knew about internet browsing from the infomediary at the local telecentre. Browsing the internet at a local telecentre, he found a job advertisement in a local bank. He applied for the position through email. He was shortlisted and later interviewed. The bank authority publishes results online. Alam, thanks to the local telecentre, could get the dreamed result online. Now Mr. Alam is working as a Customer Relations Officer at BRAC Bank Ltd., Khatungonj, at the Chittagong Branch.
Telecentres can reduce the risk of possible loss or damage in a community.
The tsunami that struck the coastal communities of several Asian countries on 26 December 2004, was made even more tragic as news began to break of how a handful of technicians, monitoring the progress of the waves across the seas using the latest ICT systems, found themselves unable to warn communities standing in harm's way.
This was not the case with Vijayakumar Gunasekaran, a 27-year old son of a fisherman from Nallavadu village, Pondicherry, on the eastern coast of India, who works in Singapore. He had access to radio and television broadcasters on the morning of 26 December. Vijayakumar followed the news of the earthquake in Aceh, Indonesia as it unfolded over the radio and television in Singapore. As the seriousness of the disaster in Aceh sank in, he began to worry about the safety of his family living along the Indian coastline facing Aceh. He decided to phone home.
Muphazhaqi, his sister answered the phone. She told him that seawater was seeping into their home when he asked what was happening in Nallavadu. Vijayakumar realized at once that his worst fears were rapidly materializing. He asked his sister to quickly leave their home and to also warn other villagers to evacuate the village. "Run out and shout the warning to others" he urged his sister.
No one from the village was killed as a result of the timely warnings. Nallavadu is home to 500 families and about 3,630 people. While all lives were saved, the tsunami destroyed 150 houses and 200 fishing boats in the village.
Telecentres can empower marginalized community members and can give a voice to the voiceless.
Khadija Begam was married to Alamin Akon (a 28 year-old man), both from Mongla. Her husband got married for a second time without informing her. Khadija could not tolerate it and protested. That caused her to be physically and mentally abused by her husband. She had no choice but to move to her parents’ house with her three-year-old daughter. She was helpless. Mr. Akon refused to pay any alimony to his wife.
She knew about a mobile infomediary, who was working in a community telecentre, and called her one day. The mobile infomediary Nayan helped her to talk to a lawyer from a local human rights organization whose address and details was available at the telecentre where Nayan was working. After investigating the problem and consulting with Khadija, the lawyer sent a legal notice to her husband. After receiving the legal notice from the court, her husband got scared and rushed to the Union Parishad Chairman for a petition to compromise. But the UP chairman didn’t respond to it, since the local telecentre routinely informs community citizens about their rights and obligations. The chairman told Ms. Khadija that if she withdraws the legal notice, he would take her back to his family. But Ms. Khadija was adamant and she wanted either a compensation of BDT 25,000 or a divorce between her husband and his second wife. She managed to find a job at a restaurant in Mongla to make an honest living with dignity. She found the telecentre to be as a good resort while in distress and relied on it later for other livelihood issues.
Telecentre people like to work, share and learn together. This occurs in a multiplicity of ways and intensities. Information sharing is often triggered by enthusiastic people who want to learn or by people who want to help their friends do better – either informally or formally. Together, these two groups form the creative core of any telecentre network. When these people are in managerial positions or have a high level of responsibility in telecentre networks, collaborations can quickly turn international.
Telecentre network collaboration is increasing as TCNs continue to encounter benefits from working together. It has helped in the establishment of new telecentre networks and in the strengthening others. Collaboration is also the foundation of telecentre.org community, a community of people and organizations working together to improve the social and economic impact of grassroots telecentres.
This chapter discusses the benefits of international network collaboration and the ways in which networks can collaborate. It also aims to examine the future of network-to-network collaborations and the extent to which the partnerships will be valued and used by members. It also highlights the example of the global telecentre.org Academy as a case study, which since 2008 has provided the ground for collaboration for networks and institutions in Spain, Colombia, Philippines, and Brazil among many others.
Potential and experiences arising from collaboration across telecentre networks
A telecentre network loses its capacity to support, analyze and strengthen telecentres as soon as it stops learning. That is why since 2005, telecentre.org has been at the front of fostering network collaboration and creating new networks. The broad aim of telecentre.org in this context is to connect people and networks, build social capital, facilitate partnerships and sow the seeds of new networks by regularly convening telecentre leaders and champions to share their knowledge.
The benefits of telecentre network collaborations may include:
New services and products – Such as the telecentre.org Academy (as reviewed in the case study in this chapter);
Improving network operation – Such as the Kenya Nework of Telecentres (KenTel) which developed its network strategic plan through collaboration with UgaBYTES;
Opportunities for network staff exchange – For example, where networks from Burkina Faso and Mali collaborated to develop services and online resources;
Alliances that require efforts for multi-stakeholder resource mobilization and bigger task accomplishment;
Solving problems (short and long-term) based on information and knowledge sharing.
The rise of telecentre network collaboration has taken three main stages, personal connections, informal networks and formalized networks. For example, the telecentre.org initiative has been supporting networks through the transformation through these stages, where it now acts as a ‘clearance house’ for many telecentre networks and moving towards formalizing into a networks’ network.
In its beginning phase from 2003 to 2005, telecentre.org depended on personal connections and focused on information gathering and knowledge sharing at the global level. It was concerned mostly with skills identification and engagement from existing networks all over the world. But in the process, it built complex informal networks that would later lead to its present, already significantly formalized, stage.
At the launch of telecentre.org in 2005 there were very few TCNs, among them UgaBYTES in Uganda, Somos Telecentros in Latin America, SchoolNet in Bangladesh and the Telecentre Association of South Africa (TASA). The emergence of the telecentre.org initiative had a strong catalyzing effect, and since then, more than 45 telecentre networks or associations have been formed, some of which are included in the table below:
Community Information Communication Support Centre (CAICC), Mozambique www.caicc.org.mz
Bangladesh Telecentre Network (BTN), Bangladesh www.mission2011.net.bd/index.php
Associação Telecentro de Informação e Negócios (ATN), Brazil www.atn.org.br
Nepal Telecentre Network (Mission Swaabhimaan), Nepal www.fitnepal.org.np
Commission on Information and Communication Technology, the Philippines www.cict.gov.ph
The importance of informal networks cannot be underestimated, and deserve support and cultivation even if they are hard to manage, as exemplified by telecentre.org. Three types of networking modes can be highlighted in informal networks, namely advice networks, trust networks and communication networks. However, none of them operates in isolation, as illustrated by the example drawn from the Telecentre Times, below.
Box 7.1: The Telecentre Times: a case for international collaboration among networks
The Telecentre Times (www.ugabytes.org/telecentretimes) story is energizing as a success of inter-network collaboration. In 2005, telecentre.org organized the first Global Telecentre Leaders' Forum as a side event to the World Summit on the Information Society. In their leisure time, network leaders chatted and shared. Part of the many ideas that went around was one by D.Net, dnet-bangladesh.org, (Bangladesh), Sarvodaya www.sarvodaya.org (Sri Lanka) and UgaBYTES www.ugabytes.org (Uganda)[1] to develop a project together. This continued on as a conversation lasting for about another year.
The idea to create a Telecentre Times magazine gained ground, and it would later attract support from telecentre.org for a face-to-face follow-up meeting in Sri Lanka, with advisory support from telecentre.org. The meeting was also attended by D.Net, which resulted not only in the establishment of the Telecentre Times, but also in the expansion of another telecentre.org project, the Helpdesk, for Bangladesh.
In the process of improving the English version, the telecentre.org team provided reviews and advisory support while the other networks took the role of collecting the articles, designing and disseminating the publication to UgaBYTES. Other networks also supported the editorial team at UgaBYTES. And through sharing lessons, other networks have now translated the publication into their local languages.
As the people involved got to know each other and built up trust, the process moved forward quickly and today the Telecentre Times is also published in French, Arabic and Bengali (in addition the initial English version). The process now requires minimal involvement of the initial players, while still benefiting from some telecentre.org support.
The Telecentre Times exemplifies a good example of a product of knowledge management achieved through inter-network collaboration. It captures periodical grassroots telecentre innovations, experiences, novel solutions and many more, and it globally disseminates them in a single publication, through regional networks, websites and mailing lists.
As a paper publication, it can be pleasantly read while sipping tea without having to turn anything on (except the light, if it’s dark…).
Like when building a network, network collaboration thrives on trust and good relationships. It may be informal or informal. Networks need opportunities to develop the necessary trust as well as ongoing ways of nurturing and deepening relationships. Often, collaboration starts with a face-to-face meeting. Relationships grow faster when networks work together on a concrete activity of mutual benefit and maintain regular communication. They learn to understand and value each other more and more. Therefore, concrete projects such as the Telecentre Times have a kind of ‘double value’: as products of network collaboration as well as in sparking future collaborations among TCNs.
Effective network collaboration also needs leadership and mentoring. As we saw in the case of the Telecentre Times, telecentre.org provided resources for face-to-face meetings, occasionally facilitating online conversations and providing advisory support on a variety of issues. Additionally, telecentre.org encourages and facilitates documentation and sharing of experiences across networks involved in the publication.
Networks (and thus their individual nodes) have much to gain from collaboration. As pointed out, together they find innovative solutions to challenges, develop new products, build up community development resources and strengthen institutional capacities.
In East Africa, UgaBYTES brought together network leaders and helped East African national networks like the Kenya Network of Telecentres (KenTel), Burundi Community Telecentre Network (BCTN), Tanzania Telecentre Network (TTN) and Rwanda Telecentre Network (RTN) to work more closely together. UgaBYTES contributed to the development of the mailing list and the website of the French network in Mali (Afriklinks), while Mozambique sent a representative on a one-week staff exchange program to Uganda in order to share experiences between UgaBYTES and the CAICC (The Community Information and Communication Support Centre in Mozambique). Telecentre networks in Latin America started a regular networking Skype chat in 2007. Community content facilitators based in Egypt, Peru, Uganda, India, Sri Lanka, Spain and Benin are also holding regular online chats to share strategies.
Bilateral, project-oriented collaborations are also occurring. One example involves Brazil’s Telecentre Information and Business Association (ATN) and its exchanges in Mozambique for content adaptation (both being Lusophone countries) and capacity building programs for telecentre operators. The counterpart in Mozambique is the Eduardo Mondlane University (UEM) in Maputo,[2] a pioneer in providing internet access that has also helped other digital inclusion initiatives.
Network collaboration can offer substantial benefits, but it is not without its challenges. Telecentre network collaborations are constrained by the fact that most networks are not at the same level of development, with some just in the emerging stages while others are well established, perhaps causing a barrier to fluid integration. For instance, it is a significant challenge to agree on procedures and requirements across networks at the stage of emerging large services, because most TCNs are in their initial stages, after all. Advanced members in this position typically feel that collaboration is less rewarding and does not provide mutual benefits. Let us examine other challenges for network collaboration:
Participation: Most of the time networks actively engage in collaborating in activities of their choice and interest. But a few individuals and networks may appear to collaborate without actually contributing. This skews the process of sharing and learning. And its negative results end up reducing network collaborations.
Coordination and control: There is a saying that everybody’s responsibility is nobody’s responsibility and that somebody will blame everyone for not doing something about that responsibility. In network collaboration there is a very big dilemma in resolving this phenomenon. Members are afraid that once one of them is chosen to coordinate, it is easy for that network to take the credit and in the end assume a controlling role. Or worse even, that once your network is picked to coordinate, you will have to perform all the work!
Inclusion and focus: Most network collaborations draw on people interested in a specific part of the collaboration – such as about a telecentre.org Academy, staff exchange, or social enterprise models. This approach risks losing out on useful people who are not necessarily interested in several specific themes. A broader inclusion, on the other hand, opens up many opinions and perspectives, although it requires more complex coordination.
Process and structure: Network collaboration may start from personal contacts and via informal processes before focusing on concrete actions. There is no standard time for network collaboration to mature. The one thing we know, however, is that if networks change the collaborative dynamics too early, the process may fail.
The telecentre.org Academy is a global initiative to provide telecentre managers with ongoing training, capacity building, and professional development opportunities. Structured as a consortium of national academies and partners with a small global support unit, the academy supports and coordinates training programs, promotes the collaborative development and sharing of resources, and maintains accreditation and certification standards. At the global level, the telecentre.org Academy does the following:
Establishes national academies in partnership with academic institutions, government, NGOs, and the private sector, and provides support for business and sustainability planning;
Sets standards to accredit national academies and develops a certification scheme that recognizes telecentre managers' training achievements as well and skills gained through work experience;
Supports the development of open curricula and promotes the creation, coordination, and improvement of common resources;
Facilitates events, networking, and knowledge sharing activities, including engaging the community to contribute to a shared, multilingual repository based on UNESCO's Open Training Platform (to include curricula, certification standards, best practices, models, list of experts, etc.)
Establishes partnerships to secure additional resources and support, encouraging other training organizations, technology companies and donor organizations to join as partners in the academy;
Reaches out to governments and donors supporting telecentres to help them incorporate continuous and sustainable capacity building into their program design.
At the national or regional level, each academy localizes materials, delivers training, and links managers to ongoing mentoring and coaching opportunities. The telecentre.org Academy is a participatory initiative, where national academies and TCNs come together to determine the direction and activities of the global support unit.
The telecentre.org program initiative was launched in 2005 with a commitment to developing the management capacity of telecentre practitioners and network managers around the world. It was clear that any initiative that would respond to this need would have to be owned by the telecentre community and be led by national networks. The initiative would need a multitude of reputable stakeholders like government, universities and other training and curriculum development bodies. Simply put, the initiative required more complex partnerships than could be developed in Ottawa (where telecentre.org was based), if the academy was to be a truly global training infrastructure.
For that reason, telecentre.org spearheaded discussions and provided grants for some networks that were picking up the idea. Involved networks shared their experiences through workshops, telecentre leaders’ forums, and online spaces. Now, national academies have been established in Spain, Colombia, and the Philippines, which are to be followed by Peru, Chile, Brazil, Sudan, Egypt, India, and Mozambique with other academies in the pipeline. It is expected that by 2012 the telecentre.org-supported academies will have trained one million people.
The telecentre.org Academy is built on global network collaborations. It is focused on ensuring multi-stakeholder involvement and as such it has remained oriented to building trust and stimulating adaptation of its work to the needs of TCNs around the world. It fosters global debate through an open discussion forum at www.telecentre.org/groups/telecentreacademy, and it contributes training materials to the Open Training Platform run by UNESCO.It also professionalizes, motivates, and supports one million telecentre knowledge workers in the making.
Telecentre.org invites national TCNs to set up their own national academies, committing to help them establish a national-level training system for telecentre workers that use telecentre.org's Curriculum Commons resources. Thus, in the Academy, telecentre.org provides space to members as well as being an active partner, since it also contributes resources, materials and logistics.
The key result from the telecentre.org Academy so far is a strengthened operational capacity for hundreds of thousands of telecentre practitioners, as more networks incorporate the academy as part of their national training programs.
But other things have also happened as a result of this engagement. As an example, the international collaboration activities strengthen the bargaining power of the telecentre community, and it has therefore become simpler for national networks to engage with other partners like universities to support the training agenda of their telecentres.
Embrace ‘win-win’ situations. Right from the start, establish a give-and-take exchange as you begin to build a network. Let all the content for the interaction depends on what’s happening in each participating network’s objectives, strategy, brand, products, services and member experiences; such that everyone feels that he is gaining in one way or the other. The goal should be on how to increase your knowledge and how you will benefit your diverse members.
Create results and define processes aimed at successful relations. In cases where you have meetings or collaborative engagements, design your meetings to achieve results, process and relationship success. Clear desired outcomes, agendas and effective facilitation to support results and process satisfaction.
Include members from diverse functions and industries. If you have supporters based on a particular sector (and with differing job functions) include them; this cross-pollination of partnerships and functions adds depth and breadth to networks’ communication and it creates diversity of thought, new perspectives, and alternative approaches to problem solving.
Build trust. For meaningful collaborations to happen, there should be a certain level of trust between actors. However, trust takes time to build up: it cannot happen overnight, and everything that happens either builds or destroys the trust (where it´s easier to destroy than build). Using interactive collaborations tools to build and maintain trust as well as undertake collaborative works is the best way to get to know a partner.
Get your own website. First, having and maintaining a website for your network is key to open up to the rest of the world. It gives you a communication platform for all that you do and a market to sell your ideas for whoever is interested. The telecentre.org website has proved to be one of its most powerful tools in enhancing collaborations.
Meet face-to-face. Meeting people face-to-face remains one the most effective ways to work together, manage knowledge and develop trust. In the telecentre community, several telecentre leaders’ forums – global, continental, regional, and national – have been organized. Since they are expensive and time consuming, their objectives should be thought out carefully to justify the effort.
Take advantage of online social networks. Today, one of the most common methods of networking is through online social networks. In general, the idea is to create a place where network leaders, members, and all stakeholders can meet to exchange experiences at the lowest cost: online of course. Some of these spaces include ning, Facebook, or Twitter.
Use online communication channels. Once you have Internet access, you may need to engage in cheap and powerful online communication channels like Skype (for voice and video).[3] List servers/online forums remain essential communication channels that make it easy to share and collaborate ideas asynchronously, regardless of locations. Blogs provide a simple and yet powerful means of sharing and collaborating on key issues of network enhancement, from anywhere (as they are web based).
Chapter 8. Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning for Telecentre networks
This chapter presents some of the basic elements for conducting an evaluation process of telecentre networks. Evaluation is not a fixed recipe, but should be tailored to each case; that is, the same design cannot be applied to all telecentre networks. But there are certain guidelines that can be observed for specific types of evaluations, such as those for development projects, political campaigns or, in our case, telecentre networks. For this reason, in this chapter we focus on one particular case, with an explanation of the main steps to be followed.
It is essential for a given evaluation to set out its specific purpose, questions, categories, variables and indicators, as well as tailor its methodology. This implies tailoring the data gathering techniques, analysis and dissemination of the results to the purpose and object of the evaluation exercise. An evaluation is basically a type of research that aims to provide inputs for decision-making, and must therefore meet the same rigorous requirements as an investigative process.
Figure 8.1 outlines the evaluation process. The circles indicate the main threads, the arrows represent the flow between them, and the boxes show the main products of each process.
Figure 8.1 represents an example of an approach to the evaluation process for a telecentre network. Some of the steps and questions can be applicable to the reader’s own telecentre networks. The intention is to provide a useful reference as a guide for the elaboration of other evaluative processes that are adaptable to the needs of the specific network.
It is important to note the indicators presented within the evaluative framework. Due to the influence that the logical framework has had in the evaluation processes and the design of development programs, it has been assumed that indicators are “objectively verifiable values”. Clearly, what we propose does not follow this traditional belief and bets on what is called “indicative indicators”. These can be described as a series of statements that the person who designs the evaluation creates from his/her knowledge on the subject, to determine how a variable in the evaluated program or project is being addressed. These indicative indicators do not seek a rating or a measurement, but rather an assessment. It is also recommended that they are created in collaboration with the people involved in the project, in this case, with the telecentre network.
First, it is necessary to determine the boundaries for an evaluation by defining the entity to be evaluated, and its major guiding questions. In this case, we could define the ‘object’ as follows: a development-oriented national telecentre network.
This implies two things: that the objective is to evaluate a telecentre network, and thus the process does not focus on assessing the functioning of a single telecentre but rather the operation of telecentres as a network, including their support organizations. Moreover, this is an evaluation process; that is, it is assumed that the network is functioning, or that it exists and is active at the time that the evaluation is being developed.
The questions asked help to set the boundaries of an evaluation. It is not possible to assess all areas of a given evaluation object. These questions help us to understand which aspects will be prioritized in the evaluation. An evaluation question is not just any question: it is analytical, investigative and cannot be only a descriptive one. An example of a main evaluation or research question could be formulated as:[1]
To what extent does the networking of telecentres improve the opportunities for the digital inclusion of people who have fewer opportunities to access information and communication technologies?
When conducting an evaluation, various areas of analysis may be chosen depending on the case, and they may be linked from the evaluative question(s). Make sure that the questions are evaluative and not descriptive; that is, that they are analytic. To put it more simply, the questions cannot be answered with a quick answer such as “yes” or “no”.
In order to carry out any monitoring or evaluation process, we must operationalize the key evaluation question(s). For this we create what is called the ‘evaluative framework’. This will serve as a guide to operationalize the question and to determine how to evaluate the social phenomenon. The evaluative framework depends on what will be assessed (object), the time frame covered for activities (starting, on process, recently completed, completed some time ago), the type of evaluation (that is, if it is done by someone of the same network or someone outside the network), if it is participatory or not, among others.
Following a rigorous evaluation process, once the object and main evaluation question is defined, the latter is broken down into secondary questions, categories of analysis, variables and indicators (if applicable). Once the evaluation framework is designed, the methodology needs to be defined, including the evaluation approach and the related tools and techniques with which this will be investigated. One such evaluative scheme is detailed below, with the steps are illustrated in the table below:
Secondary question #1: To what extent has networking improved the performance of individual telecentres?
a.When one telecentre faces a problem, other members of the network provide support;
b.When a telecentre faces a problem it is sometimes supported by a few members of the network (but not always);
c.When a telecentre faces a problem it is not supported by any of the other members of the network.
a.The network is constantly sharing knowledge to help strengthen the network and its members;
b.The network runs a knowledge sharing process from time to time but doesn’t have permanent KS mechanisms;
c.The network has not set up knowledge sharing processes among its members.
a.The network develops joint projects involving some of its members, e.g. for capacity building processes, annual assemblies; service provision, etc.
b.The network develops joint activities but doesn’t have medium or long-term projects;
c.The network members do not develop joint projects.
4.Self sustainability for telecentres that are members of the network
a.The network favours telecentre sustainability strategies for its members;
b.The network provides some elements for the sustainability of member telecentres but is not essential;
c.The network does not provide elements for the sustainability of its members.
Secondary question #2: To what extent has networking enabled the integration of other types of support for the telecentres?
1.Strengthening the support of other actors and stakeholders that are already involved
a.Networking enables telecentres to integrate with public, private, and civil society organizations that can help to consolidate the network;
b.Networking identifies key actors from different sectors that have not yet integrated into the collaborative work;
c.Networking does not yet have an impact on the integration of telecentres and other actors.
2.Integration of new actors and stakeholders
a.Thanks to the network, diverse social actors have been identified and are involved in supporting telecentres;
b.Through the network, people have begun to establish contacts with potential supporters, but they are not yet involved;
c.The network has not managed to connect new actors to support telecentres.
Secondary question # 3: To what extent has networking led to the positioning of telecentres at the national level?
1.Visibility of the telecentre network nationwide
a.Networking has allowed for the telecentres to become key actors at national level;
b.Networking has contributed to the visibility of telecentres;
c.Networking has not yet contributed to the positioning of the telecentres nationwide.
a.The telecentre network advocates for, and is consulted on public policies for technology and digital inclusion in the country;
b.The telecentre network delivers an opinion in regard to technology policies and digital inclusion in the country;
c.The telecentre network has not yet prioritized advocacy on public policies of technology and digital inclusion.
a.The network is recognized as a key means for the digital inclusion of populations with little access to technology opportunities;
b.The network is recognized at the national level but there is no clarity about its importance;
c.The network is still not recognized as a key actor.
Secondary question #4: To what extent has networking encouraged organizational strengthening at the national level?
a.The network faces several challenges and has been consolidated over time;
b.The network is working properly but it still has to be consolidated in order to face complex challenges;
c. The network is not strong and may be severely threatened if challenges arise.
a.The network has an organizational structure (formal or informal) which is apparent to all members;
b.The network has an organizational structure (formal or informal) that is not so apparent to all its members;
c.The network does not have an organizational structure.
a.The network is self-sustainable;
b.The network faces sustainability challenges but is advancing positively towards sustainability;
c.The network is finding it very difficult to become sustainable.
Secondary question #1: To what extent does the telecentre network support the digital inclusion of populations who have fewer opportunities?
1.Populations are served by the network
a.The network is mostly serving people with fewer opportunities to access technology (for example, people who are elderly, handicapped, indigenous, housewives, farmers, etc.);
b.The network is serving people with less access opportunities and other populations;
c.The network is mostly serving people that have more access to technology conditions (young people, population with a higher educational level for example).
2.Actions are tailored to people with lower levels of access to technology
a.Actions of the network members are oriented towards digital inclusion (i.e. people and communities digitally excluded);
b.Actions of the network members are oriented towards digital inclusion for any populations;
c.Actions of the network members are oriented to the same services available in other similar venues.
3.New relationships forged by the telecentre network between individuals who are socially excluded
a.The populations served by the network are able to develop and build new relationships;
b.The populations served by the network make contact with new people and spaces. but do not give continuity to the relationships;
c.The populations served by the network do not establish any new relationships.
4.New income generation opportunities for excluded populations
a.The populations served by the network are able to develop new income generation opportunities;
b.The populations served by the network become aware of new ways for income generation;
c.The populations served by the network do not identify new income generation opportunities.
5.New recreational opportunities for excluded populations
a.People served by the network count on new entertainment tools;
b.People served by the network become aware of new entertainment tools;
c.People served by the network are not able to identify new entertainment spaces.
Secondary question #2: To what extent does the telecentre network encourage the development of populations who have fewer opportunities?
1.Link between technology use and community needs
a.The uses of the technology promoted by the network of telecentres are in line with the needs, visions, and problems of people with lower levels of access to technology opportunities;
b.Some of the uses of technology are in line to the needs, visions, and problems of people with less access to technology opportunities;
c.The uses of technology do not meet the needs, visions, and problems of people with less access to technology opportunities.
a.Populations served by the network have modified and improved their communication processes at internal and external community levels;
b.Populations served by the network have identified new resources for their communication processes;
c.Populations served by the network have not yet identified the potential of ICTs for their communication processes
a.Populations served by the network have transformed their information processes and resources;
b.Populations served by the network can locate new information resources;
c.Populations served by the network have not yet transformed their information processes and resources.
a.Populations served by the network have modified their knowledge building processes;
b.Populations served by the network have modified some aspects of their knowledge building processes;
c.Populations served by the network keep the same knowledge building processes.
When designing an evaluative framework, as the one used as example in Box 8.1, we are making a series of assumptions based on the knowledge of what the evaluation object is supposed to do or achieve. This set of assumptions, once validated with the appropriate stakeholders, becomes the so-called ‘program theory’ or ‘line of intention of the program’. In this case, the program is a telecentre network, and some of the assumptions composing its line of intention can be stated as follows:
Network implies a strengthening of each of its members through mutual aid, knowledge sharing and the development of joint projects;
Networking increases and strengthens the amount of support that members of the network, and the network itself require;
There is greater potential for impact on technology and digital inclusion policies, which positions telecentres as an option for people with fewer opportunities, because networking clarifies the role of these social actors;
The telecentre network is aimed at meeting the demands and needs of a population with fewer possibilities of accessing development opportunities such as education, health, and income generation, among others;
The population is indeed targeted and served by the network, and that the services offered are aimed to meet their needs, visions, demands; and in so doing it is adapted to the context of this;[2]
A true ICT integration in these populations will involve new communications processes, new information resources and therefore, new ways of developing one’s own knowledge.
All these aforementioned processes will result in a greater recognition of ICTs as tools of opportunity and that a telecentre network can have an impact that produces a transformation in this population. All these assumptions that make up the line of intention are subsequently monitored and evaluated to properly identify them. The line of intention is usually not previously elaborated. Thus, before initiating an evaluation process, it is advisable that this line of intention is elaborated in conjunction with the stakeholders. This will be the basis of the evaluation.
Figure 8.2 presents the line of intention in this telecentre network. It outlines the way in which the network is supposed to help transform reality. It allows clarification of what we are trying to do when creating a telecentre network. As the reader can see, it is directly linked to the evaluative framework presented in Box 8.1 above.
Once the evaluation purpose, framework and line of intention are defined, the fieldwork for the evaluation of the telecentre network can be started. This involves using the sources described in the evaluative framework (Box 8.1) to retrieve the information and data necessary to make the assessment. This includes developing the right tools and methods to approach these sources.
Surveys, interviews, life stories or observation are instruments that require the development of particular tools and methods. For the purposes of this paper, these instruments will not be described in detail here, but is important to note that they must be designed before starting to capture information. It is also important to point out that each variable has its own associated techniques and instruments for data and information collection.
How the data will be analyzed must also be determined in advance, for which quantitative, qualitative or participative [3] are necessary by integrating the involved stakeholders into discussions and analysis. The data analysis must respond to the indicators, variables, questions and categories previously designed.
It is important to think of evaluation as a research process that allows making an informed value judgment. As such, it is meant to provide guidance with the decision-making on, for example, (i) the correction or continuation of network activities, (ii) the most appropriate use of financial support, (iii) the integration of new support to the network (e.g. local government or private enterprise) or (iv) changing the direction/the organizational transformation of the network.
A very important phase of the evaluation process is the presentation of results. This must be adapted to the language, media and various populations that have participated. It is the duty of the evaluator to present the results to each of the populations who have been consulted. In the case of telecentre networks, it is therefore important to report back to telecentre users, supporting organizations, and public sector, aside from telecentre managers and staff.
If the process presented here is not properly followed, a number of common mistakes can be committed, such as:
Using the evaluation to control and punish, instead of to learn and improve;
Understanding the evaluation as a measurement, rather than an assessment;
Considering that to “evaluate” means to “collect successful stories”.
This final chapter attempts to do two things: it will integrate the topics we have explored separately to provide a coherent picture, and it will put forth additional guidance to expand the potential and impact of our telecentre networks.
How does it all come together?
In the previous chapters we explored the main issues that need to be paid attention to in order to make a telecentre network successful. While it may seem like a simplistic conclusion, the single most important message that emerges is that, in the end, networks are about sharing, including knowledge, resources, vision, efforts, risks, failures… Sharing is mostly determined by attitude: it is a disposition more than an obligation. Thus, sharing (and by extension good telecentre network management) can best be promoted, hardly enforced.
This does not mean that we should simply resign to hoping that the people and organizations that make up a telecentre network will have a spontaneously positive, generous and productive attitude towards sharing. We wish it could be that easy… but that is not what one naturally starts with, even if a good general predisposition exists between those that come together in a network. This guidebook has been prepared because good intentions are not enough: the purpose is to provide useful knowledge about creating a fertile environment for sharing in our networks.
The challenge for telecentre network managers, and other people directly involved in network-wide operations, is how to deal with all the issues presented in the preceding chapters in parallel: exercising a suitable governance style, taking measures to ensure financial sustainability, supporting telecentres to offer the right content and services, and so on, to occur simultaneously.
In fact, network management is not a linear path from A to B,[1] since network structures are not linear. As we argue later on in this chapter, the most productive networks are three-dimensional. So making our way through the network involves going back and forth, and sideways, and up and down, and all combinations thereof. In other words, there is a destination (B) or more than one destination (B1, B2, etc.). The telecentre network manager[2] knows where he/she wants the network to go. Perhaps it is towards increasing the number of telecentres involved while diversifying sources of funding. Or it might be to stabilize a newly formed network, or finding out how to satisfy the demand for content and services to all member telecentres.
Regardless of the ‘destination’, instead of moving one step at a time in a straight line, the movement appears more like a bouncing around within the network. If we were to draw a path, it might resemble squiggles drawn by a chile: many short lines with multiples directions and without apparent shape.
Sound confusing? Well, just think that you are probably functioning in that way right now. As a network manager, you deal with many nodes (mainly telecentres) and with a variety of issues that affect both their individual operations and the interactions among them. One day you may go to some of the nodes (telecentres, or other organizations) to provide them with services, or to different nodes to get content, and still others to implement a new project.
Tomorrow you may get the same nodes involved in different network actions, new nodes to perform those same actions or a mixed pack altogether. The point is that you are moving in a networked environment, threading your way around, while attempting to move the entire network in a specific direction, that is, towards the network’s objectives.
An integrated view of telecentre network management
The point is that even though a telecentre network manager may bounce around a lot while doing his/her work, there is a certain and definite direction in which s/he wants to move the network, that is, toward its stated objectives. We can assume that network members will reach a consensus on those objectives, so that all are reasonably in agreement in terms of what they would like the network to achieve.
While the aims may be clear, the path may be much less so. The fundamental responsibility of the network manager (and management team) is to set out the path and steer the network through it, through good analysis, proper decisions, and a collaborative leadership style coherent with a network environment.
This bears some similarities to steering a large sailing ship. There are a variety of sails, each with a different purpose and effect. In addition, the load of the ship, attitude of its crew, quality of materials being carried, and atmospheric conditions, etc. will contribute to determining how the navigation goes and whether the ship gets to its destination according to plan.
This guidebook has explored a set of issues that will determine to a significant extent how the network advances, and whether it will arrive at the port as expected (its objective). The network manager, together with those responsible for its ‘piloting’, will activate and modulate tasks related to network governance, communications, financial sustainability, ICT policy, etc. in the most properly balanced way for smooth navigation. It has already been mentioned that each of these issues is important and that they need handling in parallel, but for the sake of clarity, we have examined them separately and in relative isolation. We will therefore now try to describe some of their relations and inter-dependencies.
Network governance: This is clearly one of the key determinants of how the network operates, with strong links to how its members interact (participation and communication), while setting the playing field for business models (sustainability) and taking in significant inputs from the monitoring, evaluation and learning functions.
Financial sustainability: If this is not achieved (at least partially), the network may be short lived, but that doesn’t mean that it is strongly related to all internal network functions. The types and amount of content and services will strongly influence financial sustainability, as well as network governance (the ‘rules of the game’). In a healthy network environment, it will need a significant participatory attitude from its members (internally), while it can both contribute and benefit from international collaboration (externally).
Participation: Participation is one of the key defining characteristics of a network (without it, is hard to speak of a real network). It is the main channel for content and services and the basis for a well-functioning monitoring, evaluation and learning framework. It is also essential that the network adequately represents its members on ICT policy issues or for collaboration with other networks. It is hard to think of one area upon which it doesn’t have a strong influence. It is therefore one of the most important processes to stimulate in order for good results.
Communications: If participation is an embedded characteristic in all areas of the network, we could say that communication is the fuel (or the seed) that makes participation possible. And, like participation, it´s a sine-qua-non condition for a network – a set of non-communicating nodes does not make up a network. Communications, in turn, will be mainly enabled by adequate network governance, aside from the attitude of the participants and their cultural styles of course.
Content and services: These can be seen, using developmental jargon, as the ‘immediate objectives’ of a telecentre network – or as Hasan writes in Chapter 6, they are the ‘heart’ of a telecentre network. Network governance generates content and services, possibly including various types. Even more importantly, content and services require participation from the members of the network. In turn, they will strongly determine financial sustainability of the TCN.
Monitoring, evaluation and learning (M&E and Learning): This function aims at at improving other aspects of telecentre network management, allowing for modifications based on evidence. In other words, M&E and learning constitute the principal ‘navigational’ aid for the network to reach its objectives. It is a collective task and thus depends strongly on participation and communication. It is largely defined as part of network governance methods. While it will help to improve any aspect of TCN management, perhaps its most direct effect will be content and services (helping to understand what people think of them); and network governance (by introducing adjustments to the ‘navigation’ itself).
International TCN collaboration: This is a natural extension of networking done internally in the country. The results of that collaboration will be applicable to various areas but without a strong impact on any of them (as an external action, that impact cannot be guaranteed). Content and services or the work on ICT policy are areas that could possibly benefit the most. As for the internal drivers to get a TCN proactively involved in international collaboration, they are mainly participation (at least by some of its members) and network governance (setting the conditions to facilitate such collaboration).
Content and services, as the key ‘products’ of telecentre networks, require actions on essentially all fronts. Its most significant measurable effect will be financial sustainability – the intangible effects will be a more satisfied membership that can easily point to the benefits of being a part of the TCN.
Financial sustainability and monitoring, evaluation & learning have crosscutting effects, where the first powers actions while the latter facilitates change. On the other hand, the outward management aspect of is also cross-cutting with both short and longer-term effects (though more geared towards the middle-term effects).
These considerations can and will change as a consequence of many factors, such as the maturity of a telecentre network, its political context, degree of heterogeneity or simply its size. Let’s imagine a big, state-instituted TCN that is largely financed by the government in a country with essentially non-democratic institutions. Perhaps its role in ICT policy could the most salient aspect, but participation may be less of a driver for the network’s success (in the sense of a participatory approach derived from stimulated individual imitative and not rigidly set).
In any event, and whatever the shape or form of the telecentre network, thinking about and driving the interactions of these areas of work is useful for managing a network properly. A TCN manager can base key decisions on expected consequences from the direct/indirect effects of such interactions. It will be as if s/he and her officers are facing a control panel of a modern ship, and can operate the various handles, levers and switches to set the most appropriate course for navigation.
So far we have said that telecentre network managers have to skillfully navigate through their networks in order to stimulate or entice a whole set of actors (mainly telecentres) to share enough so that the network functions well and keeps members happy – and therefore, stay inside the network. In order to do so, networks need to juggle a set of priorities, as discussed in the previous seven chapters. Fortunately, these priorities are not isolated, and handling one well often has a positive effect on others. This section explores these interdependencies and their related effects.
Some of the overlap that you will have probably noted while reading through the previous chapters is inevitable. The reason is that the issues are inter-related, sometimes strongly so. Let’s take a simple example of a sequence to illustrate, recognizing that there are many possible combinations. Financial sustainability depends on the content and services provided by the network. Those contents and services will be strongly dependent on the level of participation in the network. The participatory scheme will be determined to a large extent by how network governance is carried out. And the capacity and ability of network management will inevitably depend on the financial resources available to the network.
A detailed consideration of each interaction between each intersecting issue is beyond the scope of this chapter. It is instead meant to provide a simple visual approximation to the relationship between the various issues. Nevertheless, some reflections emerging from the exercise are worth mentioning:
There is a relatively high level of inter-dependency among the various issues (few of the cells are blue);
The relationships are not necessarily symmetrical. For example, the content and services provided in a network are highly dependent on network governance. However, network governance depends little on existing content and services;
The matrix serves to quickly identify how a satisfactory performance in one category can have a range of possible positive indirect effects (besides the effects deduced from direct interaction), that is, the virtuous network effects alluded to in the title of this section. For example:
Participation strongly depends on the style of network governance; and,
Network governance is strongly linked to monitoring, evaluation and learning.
So for example – and without taking the relationships too strictly or seriously…[4] – we could say that doing a good job in monitoring, evaluation and learning will have an indirect but real effect on communication and participation because of its improvements on network governance. For instance, this would be in addition to the direct effects on communication and participation strategies that can be directly drawn from applying recommendations from M&E and learning actions.
The cumulative effect of direct and indirect effects can become rather substantial because of the high number of inter-dependencies. This elevates the rewards for performing well on each of the categories identified for network management. And it points to the level of virtuous network effects that could be linked.
The matrix exercise provides only a rough approximation, perhaps a good starting point, for a finer level of analysis. Its results will certainly differ from network to network. But it is a valuable management exercise, one that we recommend to you – if possible, together with several of your colleagues in the network. Appendix 10.1 contains a blank matrix for you to print out and analyze on your own – and compare it with the one we have discussed or with the ones prepared by your colleagues.
Box 9.1: What are the Seven Strategies for Building Successful Telecentres?
Here, the reader can find a different approach to consider network effects, this time applied to individual telecentres. It was posted to the telecentre.org intranet by Azul, who is the Head of Telecentre Excellence at Warisan Global Sdn Bhd, in Malaysia.
The image below indicates the seven strategies Azul considers most important for successful telecentres. She reflects: “What I consider important may not be important to you and vice versa. The way we ‘chunk’ things may also be different. We have many ways of "cooking" a telecentre dish.”
Box 9.1: What are the Seven Strategies for Building Successful Telecentres?
And then she follows with a key message: “The Seven Strategies are connected with each other. Interdependent”. This interdependency relates directly to our argument in this chapter that the various aspects for managing telecentre networks are inter-related and that there are virtuous network effects that can be derived from a truly integrated approach to TCN management.
Nath, V. (2000). Knowledge Networking for Sustainable Development. Knownet Initiative, www.knownet.org. Retrieved November 14, 2001, from www.cddc.vt.edu/knownet/articles/exchanges-ict.html
Roman, R. & Colle, R. D. (2002). The Telecentre Environment in 2002. In R. Roman & R. D. Colle (Eds.), The Journal of Development Communication, Special Number on Telecentres and ICT for Development, Volume 12, No. 2. ISSN 0128-3863.
In the previous chapter we explored the integrated nature of telecentre network management, taking into account the interaction of its various aspects. We also pointed out the significant and aggregated impact of network effects when those management aspects relate productively to one another. However, an important issue remains to be considered: how can we improve ways of working so that we can fully exploit the networking potential of TCNs?
This chapter contemplates the road ahead in telecentre network management. And since this is a living document that will change via a wiki, this section will likely change accordingly. After all, the view of a road depends on where you are in it.
The question posed in the first paragraph implies that there are gaps in collaborative methodologies in network environments, and arguably this is often the case. Sometimes an entity that describes itself as a network actually follows traditional, linear practices. Or it has strict, hierarchical strings of power and control. In other words, it calls itself a network, but it does not truly act as one.
Let’s take, as a hypothetical example, a telecentre network that is undertaking a project to extend educational content about the country’s history from local stories and traditions. Through observation it is determined that (i) only a small percentage of the telecentres actually gets involved, (ii) each participating telecentre provides content in whatever format it wants and (iii) there are no means through which to determine the assessment of the membership about specific submissions. The end result is nevertheless a reasonable repository of historical local content.
In spite of having carried out an activity resembling network practices, the project will lack the power of the network to (i) include a wide participation from its telecentres (so that perhaps some of the best stories are missing); (ii) determine a proper way to prepare the content, so that stories and traditions are not presented in comparable formats and make it hard to process the entries; and (iii) include the opinions and judgements of the involved telecentres on the selected content. The final product will be less representative, have less quality, have demanded more work to produce and will have a lower educational value than could have been attained through a proper networked process.
In this concluding chapter we discuss network strategies that can help us get the most out of telecentre networks and examine some of the key challenges ahead in the short and mid term, such as:
What strategies can help us to better collaborate (and more productively so) in telecentre networks?
What kind of networks can best empower member telecentres, individually as well as collectively? and;
What measures and policies could help the telecentre movement to advance towards a stable, firmly-rooted and networked future?’
Finally, let us mention that collaborative networking initiatives are not restricted to the social or development arena. It is increasingly reaching into the business and corporate environments as well. As Tapscott & Williams (2008) observe in the preface to their popular ‘Wikinomics’ book, “Thanks to Web 2.0, companies are beginning to conceive, design, develop and distribute products and services in profoundly new ways” (p. ix), and there are many examples of how companies are embracing this collaborative, networked style of working, from small upstarts to established giants such as IBM or Procter and Gamble.
Just like any for any type of organization, it is important to formulate the strategy of a telecentre network so it is best suited or prepared to meet the objectives it has set for itself. Formulating a suitable strategy for a particular TCN is therefore indispensable to obtain the best results.
A simple way to consider strategy formulation to optimize telecentre networking begins by considering four key elements, as indicated in Figure 10.1 (Moreno, Mataix & Acavedo, 2007).
a) Architecture refers to the organizational network structure, and will identify its members and their intended relationships (transactions). The architecture should be conducive and coherent with the emergence of a corporate networked culture favouring collaboration and horizontal working relationships.
b) Processes refer to the working procedures or methods to be implemented, or the modifications to existing ones, aimed at favouring networking (and in particular, collaboration). The ways of handling knowledge management and monitoring, evaluation and learning are among such processes.
c) Tools are the instruments or resources needed to implement the strategy according to the selected processes (and within the architecture already in place). Among the essential instruments for a successful networked strategy will certainly be a set of ICTs, but there are others: financial, physical infrastructure and facilities, events, etc.
d) Capacities refer to the ability to carry out selected processes using the tools at our disposal. It includes both human and institutional capacities. Specific individual and collective capacity gaps relative to tools (e.g. ICTs) and processes (e.g. knowledge management) should be identified and measures designed to address them. This can range from training on digital collaborative platforms (i.e. groupware) to training about monitoring methodologies.
This process requires a review of the aspects of TCN management as examined in Chapters 2 to 8 across these strategy elements, in order to determine with relative precision the elements of strategy that would be required to perform each management aspect satisfactorily. For example, when examining the aspect of participation, we can consider which components of the network’s architecture, processes, capacities and tools need to be in place.
When the review is thus carried out for all management aspects, we will have arrived at the crux of a strategy to maximize networking potential for our TCN. The results could be displayed in a matrix form like that sketched below. At this point it is highly likely we will find that many components of those four network strategy elements will serve for more than one of our network management aspects. For example, tools like content management systems and/or a web 2.0 type of community platform or groupware (like ning) will be applicable for participation, communication, content and services and M&E and learning.
In terms of overall orientation of a network towards collaboration, we can broadly speak of two models: aggregating networks and enabling networks. An aggregating network pulls together contributions from their members (e.g. to generate a newsletter) or represents its members (e.g. for advocacy purposes or to defend members’ common interests). The connections in such networks are usually to either nearby (i.e. similar)[1] nodes, or to the center node. In functional terms, their geometry is two-dimensional (2-D) or planar. Performance for aggreagting networks is measured in terms of joint actions undertaken by the network on behalf of the member nodes.
On the other hand, an enabling network seeks to strengthen the capacities of its members to achieve their individual objectives, particularly via collaborative tools and practices within as well as outside the network. The functional geometry of enabling networks is three dimensional (3-D) or spatial, where any node is free to connect with any other node, like the one in figure 10.2.[2] In this case, performance derives from the number of collective activities undertaken by member nodes and supported by the network.
Let’s characterize the two types of networks to better understand how they compare in functional terms (Acevedo, 2009):
The central or principal node acts as the network coordinator (as in a secretariat or coordinating unit); it largely determines which nodes will carry out particular functions/actions, and will know about these actions in advance.
The main node (if there is one) acts as a network dynamizer or animator, providing resources and tools to favor networked activities among other nodes.
Established procedures are very important: network operations are based primarily on a series of norms or protocol that give order and regulate the network’s activities.
Network operations proceed in an ad-hoc fashion (given the freedom and ease to establish productive relations among nodes), while adhering to a few basic institutional norms.
Planning for the network is very important, since the central node (the ‘coordinator’ above) should direct resources and efforts towards their implementation. This determines a clear orientation towards input-allocation management.
Periodic monitoring is essential to know how the network is functioning, since it is not possible to plan all the possible collaborative activities among nodes. This points to a strong orientation towards results-based management.
The network prioritizes access to information; the central node fosters the availability of the information and provides access systems.
The network prioritizes access to knowledge through the communication among nodes, the relationship with external entities and the systematization of information. The main node (if there is one) works on shared criteria for knowledge management, prioritizing the provision of tools/services that facilitate the efficacy of knowledge management.
It can be argued that enabling networks offer more adequate environments in relation to maximizing the collaborative potential of networks. They are focused on strengthening each member in relation to the member’s own objectives, primarily by providing tools/methodologies that favour the open collaboration of the members within the network (and also outside of it). This generates a much greater volume and range of collective, network-powered results than what could be derived from a network planned and directed by a central point. There are limitations to how well a coordinating unit can effectively and efficiently orchestrate the collective capacities of the nodes – and it will get more difficult as those capacities grow.
Moreover, by empowering their members to use networking methods to suit their specific purposes, enabling networks can encourage members’ own initiative and responsive attitudes. In this respect, such a structure takes more advantage of network traits such as relational freedom and flexibility. Conversely, embedding hierarchical practices into networked structures reduces the network’s possibilities.
Real development networks exhibit both profiles, activating desired traits as needed. For example, a TCN may follow a more aggregating approach when providing relevant information to its members, carrying out campaigns and acting as an important interlocutor to external governmental entities. However, when promoting projects, looking to expand resource mobilization or strengthening communications capacities, these networks act on their enabling mode.
Open-source programming networks. Most free/open-source software (FOSS) products are created by networks of skilled, volunteer programmers who use specific platforms and methods for program development (like ‘SourceForge’ in the picture). While the programmers will find support from the coordinators to make their work easier and more efficient, these networks are highly centralized. Essentially all the contributions from volunteers are meant to contribute to a single objective – the final software product. The network does not seek to deliberately strengthen the programmers (they are already rather skilled) nor their collaborative actitivies (collaborative methods are strictly set). Thus, these networks do not function in ad-hoc fashion; adherence to the procedures is mandatory.
CONGDE brings together NGOs in Spain that participate in development activities of all types. It is set up as a network, and some of its members are in turn regional networks that represent entities from parts of the country (Catalonia, Andalusia, etc.). Its mission is to coordinate and support the joint work of the member organizations. This is done through campaigns such as the one promoting the Millennium Development Goals, activities to educate the Spanish public about development, and most importantly by acting as interlocutor to the government and in policy-making fora. There are some services provided to members like training, promoting codes of conduct and information bulletins. So, while it exhibits some enabling traits, CONGDE functions more like an enabling-type network.
APC is possibly the best-known civil society organization in the Information Society and ICT for Development area. It is composed of country nodes, such as WOUGNET (Uganda), Colnodo (Colombia), GreenNet (United Kingdom), ArabDev (Egypt) or WomensHub (Philippines), represented in a Council, and it also has a small staff. While APC carries out corporate actions as an organization in its own right (e.g. it was very active in WSIS), it is constantly supporting its members to undertake their own projects (at the national level) as well as collaborative actions among them, in areas such as communications/information policy, access to infrastructure, strategic use of ICT, gender and ICT, etc. So it is mostly an enabling network, though displaying some clear characteristics of an aggregating network as well.
The year 2001 was declared as the International Year of Volunteers by the United Nations to promote and visualize their contributions to development. The approach taken to operationalize its related activities was different than for other similar years. Instead of a few large events, it sought to energize the volunteer community worldwide to carry out a multitude of local and national events. For this, the UN Volunteers agency set up a small team in its Bonn offices whose responsibility was to enable and strengthen volunteer organizations worldwide to carry out IYV2001 related activities. An informal network of marked enabling characteristics emerged during a three-year preparation, in which people and institutions not only communicated with UNV’s team, but with many others through the internet’s platform set up for the year. The result was a resounding success, at almost no cost to the UN, and literally mobilizing millions of people worldwide.
If the assumption of favouring collaborative potential proves correct, then it is relevant to explore how to deliberately make the transition from aggregating to enabling network environments for TCNs. This entails focusing on the so-called generative capacities (Moreno et al. 2007), mentioned briefly in Chapter 2 on telecentre network governance. These are new and essential capacities in a knowledge-based, collaborative context (like our telecentre networks). The applicability of generative capacities extends beyond the individual (although they may still be useful) and into the collective realm.
To promote and strengthen generative capacities, we can follow a two-pronged approach. At the member (telecentre) level, these are capacities that focus on (i) learning, (ii) systemic vision, (iii) collective leadership, (iv) collaboration and (v) feedback (i.e. to the organization or the network).
At the institutional (network) level, generative capacities are improved by actions led at management level, and complementary to outcomes sought at the member level, such as:
Producing flexibility in the modes of participation (so that ‘weaker’ telecentres or non-telecentre actors can also participate);
Promoting participatory monitoring and continuous feedback practices; and
Designing projects as ‘networked’ initiatives.
Networks are ideal environments to foster generative capacities, since they favour sharing and collective commitment. In turn, such capacities also help to construct creative and productive networks.
A final remark about network strategy: a primary instance for participation, with a view to effective network management, should be precisely the time of determining its strategy. By the very nature of a network as a highly participatory organizational environment, the process of crafting its strategy should be open and participatory as well. Such a philosophy will not only result in a better strategy, but the process leading to it will already be developed as a practical exercise in common decision making – a very useful skill when working in networks. There are no tried-and-tested rules to set up and handle development networks. Much is learned along the way through trial and error. A truly participatory strategy then, despite some flaws and limitations, will have a stronger sense of collective commitment – including making the necessary corrections on the way.
Even the best network management arrangements need to be validated, otherwise they can simply remain attractive institutional exercises with no clear return. The definitive measures for success will undoubtedly come from the results generated, both for the individual telecentres as well as for the overall TCN. However, a potentially useful previous step in assessing the success of a network (and possibly a decisive one in some cases) is to know whether we are indeed constructing and running the kind of network we had in mind. In other words, to respond to the question “What kind of network do we really have?” The answer to this question allows us to compare it with the intended design and clarify the direction we haven taken and are planning to move forward on.
For this we depend on network analysis, a set of methodological approaches, techniques and tools drawn from sociology that allow us to diagnose how a given network is functioning in order to manage it better. It’s similar to an internal organizational analysis often performed in companies, universities or government units, which helps determine whether they are set up as initially intended. This guidebook does not set out to provide a detailed design and instruction manual on performing a network analysis. However, it does encourage interested telecentre managers to consider exploring such type of analysis and describes briefly what may be involved – references are provided for further reading.[3]
Network analysis provides us with an understanding of the relationships among the nodes of a network. It examines complex personal or inter-organizational networks to reveal underlying patterns that are easier to recognize and thus to possibly re-shape. It is based on the functional structure of the networks rather than on the attributes of its nodes.
In the case of a TCN, network analysis would focus on the relationships and transactions among the members (primarily the telecentres) rather than in the characteristics of the members (size, thematic orientation, urban/rural, etc.). This type of analysis gives us a relatively objective determination on whether the network as a whole is functioning as expected and whether potential changes have occurred in terms of the relationships among the nodes in order to improve its performance.
There are different methodologies, and some will fit a particular TCN better than others. Anhier and Katz (2005) propose one for developmental (or more precisely, for NGO) networks, which could be applicable for TCNs. It includes five parameters to examine the relations among nodes, described in the following table together with one sample application for network management and for an individual telecentre:
Cohesion: characterizes the interconnection of social relations and their tendency to form areas of high relational density (hubs) where there are higher probabilities for links to exist or develop.
What action areas of the network are drawing the most participation?
Would it be possible for us to get involved in activities where few other telecentres participate?
Equivalence: describes to what extent the members of a network have similar relations with others, which helps to find zones or bands that facilitate the analysis by studying the relationships among those zones.
What are the different categories of network members based on their participation in the TCN?
Are some of our needs shared and already satisfied by other telecentres?
Prominence: identifies the prominent positioning of nodes in relation to others, which serves to visualize power relations.
How is leadership evolving within the network, and is it convenient to stimulate some capable but little active telecentre managers?
Bridge: identifies nodes that connect groups of nodes (or networks) not connected through other links or paths. Identifying nodes with stronger bridging attributes helps to visualize/understand information flows and mobilization processes among groups.
Which telecentres are pivotal in identifying project possibilities for others (including outside the TCN)?
Do we have links to organizations through other networks or associations that could be valuable for our TCN?
Agency: refers to situations in networks in which an actor observes the possibility of connecting empty spaces or nodes. This helps to characterize the enterprising role of some nodes in the establishment and interconnection of networks.
Who are the real innovators in this network?
What are the main unexplored aspects of content and services in the network, and where do we perceive demand from our users?
It is important to recognize that a network analysis exercise will only provide a simplified picture of the complexity of social relations that exist in institutionally-rich environment like that of a telecentre network. Also, the analysis can be as simple or as sophisticated as we want, selecting network attributes/parameters that we care about. The important thing, particularly for TCN managers, is to pinpoint trends in behaviour and functional patterns that can be contrasted over time (e.g. over a five-year period). The motivation is the same as for establishing network strategies in the first place: to have the most productive and effective possible TCN network.
Telecentre networks are becoming significant actors in the definition and implementation of national policies dealing with ICT and the consolidation of inclusive information societies. This is because their telecentre members are involved in their day-to-day work at the community level, where they can play decisive roles in carrying out such policies and from where they can extract realistic expressions of popular ICT-related needs and demands to feed into the policy-making process. It is in the TCNs’ direct interest too: telecentre networks can be important actors in ICT policy shaping and development, contributing to policies that may be directed at supporting and strengthening them.
Telecentre networks will mainly get involved in such policy processes from the perspective (and for the aim) of digital inclusion. TCNs can play a key role in ensuring that digital inclusion is at the core of any national policies related to ICT or the information society. Moreover, from a developmental point of view they can add to pressure ensuring so that that ICT policies become intertwined with national development policies. Telecentres themselves, particularly in countries that are carrying out large telecentre programs, are the subject of ICT policies in relation to extending ICT access and capacity across a country.
An example of how telecentres have become necessary actors for implementing ICT and information society related policies is the Brazilian ‘Digital Inclusion Program’ (Programa ID Brasil) of the Ministry of Communications (www.mc.gov.br). It aims to deploy telecentres in all 5,500 Brazilian counties, quite an ambitious target. Thousands of city halls around the country received equipment already,[4] and they had the responsibility of establishing the telecentres, whose common and stated purpose was to contribute to the digital and social inclusion of their communities through access to ICTs. The focus has been on small cities and villages in the countryside with deficient telecommunication infrastructure and notable barriers to access. The Digital Inclusion portal (www.idbrasil.gov.br) contains data about the progress of the program.
Many successful telecentres enjoy the involvement of volunteers, who can carry a variety of supporting tasks for their telecentre:
To raise awareness about the telecentre it is important to understand the needs, problems and hopes of the various actors in the community, in order to determine what elements of information and ICTs may be more suitable. Frequent outreach to different groups and profiles of people will serve to make them more aware of the opportunities and practical uses of the technologies they can expect at their telecentre.
For information brokering since it is essential to help users find the right information for their needs and thus to get immediate practical benefits from the telecentre. The same could be said in terms of services, such as finding the right type of e-gov application for the specific needs of a user.
For basic ICT training, which is needed by many telecentre users, it is crucial to develop the skills for general use of computers, for creating content (e.g. word processing), for viewing images (e.g. digital pictures, scanning), and to use email and the Web. Some potential telecentre users may feel an initial ‘fear’ of computers, thus requiring ICT training to incorporate personalized attention and to be amenable – in order to learn to do things quickly which are fun and make people feel good about their progress.
For building capacity, which takes place once the familiarity and basic skills are at hand. Meanwhile, it is important to ensure periodic monitoring of progress in applying the skills learned (and acquiring new ones) for well-defined purposes. Building capacity requires human interaction and understanding, which most effectively develop via direct and continued personal contact and exposure, something typical of volunteer work. Whether for advanced applications (website creation, digital video processing) or for simpler uses (e.g. finding market price information using email), where volunteers can build and expand the capacity of each individual user so s/he can really benefit from accessing and using ICT products and services.
In other words, volunteers can help to achieve the most critical dimension of sustainability for telecentres; that is, social sustainability, by generating awareness, interest and ultimately demand from people in the community surrounding the telecentre. As such, volunteers are able to transform a ‘technology access community center’ into a ‘local development center with access to technology’ (Nath, 2001). The first is ‘instrumental’, essentially granting physical access to the internet and other ICTs, while the latter is ‘transformational’, promoting and supporting developmental processes with resources that include ICTs.
So what about volunteers and TCNs? Such networks are ideally placed to organize and manage TCN-wide volunteer programs.[5] They can be oriented to support individual telecentres as well as to directly support the TCN structure itself (for exmample, help desks, a national telecentre academy, etc.). Such volunteers can be onsite or online. Onsite (physical) volunteers can essentially be locals who are interested in what the telecentres do and who could benefit by collaborating with them (gaining technical experience, connection time at a telecentre, etc.). At the national scale, partnerships can be formed with universities or companies to promote such volunteer programs.
Online volunteers can also play a role. Specialized programs such as the UN’s Online Volunteering Service (www.onlinevolunteering.org) provide the infrastructure and mechanisms so that people around the world can collaborate through the internet with development-oriented organizations. They can help in the provision of content and services (particularly for quality control), designing websites, revising project proposals, adapting content, doing translations, moderating discussion fora, publishing e-bulletins, etc. The aforementioned website contains many examples of actual tasks performed by online volunteers. In fact we could envisage interesting possibilities for cooperation between onsite and online volunteers too.
A key book about telecentres was written in 2006: “From the Ground Up: The Evolution of the Telecentre Movement”. It came at a turning point, after WSIS, when telecentres started gaining wider support again, after having been all but discarded by major international development agencies in their digital divide agendas. It appeared at the dawn of the telecentre movement, which in fact it helped to describe.[6]
In looking to the future, ‘From the Ground Up’ serves as a lucid reference for all of us. It starts with the following:
“Most early telecentres started with a modest goal: giving people a chance to access and learn about technology. A telephone, a photocopier, a computer, the internet. Yet telecentres have evolved. It’s no longer just about access and skills. Today’s telecentres use computers and the internet to do everything from improving public health to extending education to a wider audience to strengthening local democracy. No matter what they are called—telecentres, community multimedia centres, telecottages, village knowledge centres, community technology centres, telehuts, internet learning centres, community access points, library computer labs and so on—they share a common commitment: to help communities enter the information age and embrace the knowledge economy on their own terms. This is the telecentre movement today.”
The concluding chapter, entitled Telecentre 2.0, identifies “Seven things we still need (to scale up and scale sideways)”:
Flexible, responsive and innovative social investment mechanisms to support the establishment of new telecentres at the grassroots level.
Well-packaged, easy-to-replicate community services for telecentres such as telemedicine, remote learning, financial remittances and e-government.
Simple, proven social enterprise models that telecentres can use to generate community impact and financial revenue.
Flexible, on going training and support for hundreds of thousands of grassroots technology activists around the world.
Low-cost, easy-to-implement telecentre technology platforms, including affordable and stable internet connections for rural areas.
Networks and partnerships that help good ideas travel far and wide —and help the telecentre movement reach a global scale.
An enduring commitment to telecentres and other grassroots technology initiatives from all sectors: governments, businesses, development agencies and communities.[7]
We could say that the sixth point about networks and partnerships has advanced significantly, with dozens of national and cross-national telecentre networks around the world.[8] And yet we know they can deliver more than they do today – to take a deeper look at the how is the purpose of this guidebook. The intention has been for the previous chapters to assist in some way to advance on the other six points: how can networks help achieve that vision?
Three years later, in mid 2009, the telecentre movement has grown, with thousands of them springing up in diverse countries around the world. In India, the degree of telecentre growth is coherent with its vast scale: official policies focus on goals such as having as many telecentres that reach each one of its 600,000-plus villages, a tremendously ambitious objective. For successful stable growth (that is, sustainability), whether for large places like India or for other smaller countries or at the global sphere, the key is networking. This includes smart networking that goes beyond simply joining together and adding efforts. Creative networking builds on enterprising attitudes and innovative ideas. Productive networking, through a mix of art and science, transforms limited resources into changes that make a difference to people. Open networking encourages an inclusive approach to collaboration, an approach which ‘adds and never subtracts’.
In looking ahead at the next two to four years (hardly any professional publication these days has a longer shelf-life) let us take a quick look at the Telecentre 2.0 precedent and propose factors for a vibrant Telecentre 3.0 stage (network-based, of course):
Investment of public funds for telecentre networks (see the point below about building the ‘public good’ nature of telecentres) and encouragement of public-private initiatives to strengthen them (in terms of technologies, management, communications, etc.).
Provision and delivery of content, services and other telecentre products via networked models, which can also move across networks (or countries).
Decisive support and stimulus to social enterprise models for establishing and supporting telecentre networks, as well as for extending the range of telecentre offerings and services provided (e.g. a social enterprise offering telemedicine services through the telecentres).
Support for network training initiatives tailored to telecentres (including the telecentre.org Academy). Encouragement of educational offerings for and from telecentre practitioners, including e-learning platforms that facilitate independent authorship (by telecentre staff or users), flexible course delivery and administrative tasks.
Implement universal-service provisions managed nationwide through telecentre networks that deliver connectivity to telecentres which is free/low cost, dependable, hi-speed and ubiquitous. Mobile telephone infrastructure should be included to this end.
Extension of telecentre networks to most countries (and among countries), with adequate telecentre network management methodologies, in ways to present TCN managers with one multi-actor, virtual ‘global telecentre ecosystem’ from where TCN members and partners can join.
Integrate telecentres into national policies as (networked) public goods, and promote their role as publicly supported local development centres1. Introduce telecentre networks into wider development networks.
Throughout this guidebook, we have explored ways of encouraging greater networking between telecentres for the benefit of the men, women and children in the communities who will experience positive changes from the resources and support offered by their local telecentres. Its preparation has been a networked project in itself, with lead authors for each chapter that have been supported by others who have reviewed and/or provided some content, and a larger group in a dedicated section of telecentre.org, together with IDRC staff. We’ve all learned and will continue to do so through the debate and contributions to a new wiki book on telecentre networks. The initial version of this guidebook is simply the first contribution to a wiki that has an unending potential to grow. And throughout the process, a valuable asset is created: a type of networked social capital, the kind that stimulates collaboration across boundaries and extends collaborative opportunities limited only by the will and the imagination of those involved.
Acevedo, M. (2009). Networked Cooperation in the Network Society. International Journal of Information Communication Technologies and Human Development, 1(1), pp. 1–21. Retrieved September 15, 2009, from www.igi-global.com/downloads/LockedJournals/IJICTHD1(1).pdf
Anheir, H. Anheir, H., & Katz, H. (2006). Global connectedness: the structure of transnational NGO networks. In F. Holland, H. Anheir, M. Glasius, & M. Kaldor (Eds.), Global Civil Society 2005/2006 (pp. 240–265). London: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Arquilla, J., & Ronfeldt, D. F. (1999). The emergence of noopolitik: toward an American information strategy. Santa Monica (California): Rand Corp.
Kilduff, M., & Tsai, W. (2008). Social Networks and Organizations. London: SAGE Publications. (Reprinted in 2008, first published in 2003).
Moreno, A., Mataix, C., & Acevedo, M. (2007). Estructuras en red: diseño y modelos para el Tercer Sector. Madrid: UNED (Spanish National Distance University), Fundación Luis Vives - Module 8, 2007-2008 Course on Strategic Management and Management Skills for Non-Profits Organizations.
McIver Jr., W. J. (2003). The need for tools to support greater collaboration between transnational NGOs: Implications for transnational civil society networking. State University of New York at Albany. Retrieved July 20, 2005 from www.ssrc.org/programs/itic/publications/knowledge_report/memos/mcivermemo.pdf
Myanja, M. (2008). Telecentre Network Strategy 2008-2009. Ottawa: IDRC.
Nath, V. (2000). Knowledge Networking for Sustainable Development. Knownet Initiative, www.knownet.org. Retrieved November 14, 2001 from www.cddc.vt.edu/knownet/articles/exchanges-ict.html
Nooteboom, B (2004). Inter-firm collaboration, learning and networks: and integrated approach. London: Routledge.
Tapscott, D., & Williams, A. D. (2008). Wikinomics: How Mass Collaboration Changes Everything. New York: Penguin Group.
Books on this shelf deal with chemical engineering: the branch of engineering that deals with the application of physical science (e.g. chemistry and physics), with mathematics, to the process of converting raw materials or chemicals into more useful or valuable forms. In addition to producing useful materials, modern chemical engineering is also concerned with pioneering valuable new materials and techniques - such as nanotechnology and fuel cells.
Welcome to Python! This tutorial will show you how to start writing programs.
Python programs are nothing more than text files, and they may be edited with a standard text editor program.[1] What text editor you use will probably depend on your operating system: any text editor can create Python programs. However, it is easier to use a text editor that includes Python syntax highlighting.
The very first program that beginning programmers usually write or learn is the "Hello, World!" program. This program simply outputs the phrase "Hello, World!" then terminates itself. Let's write "Hello, World!" in Python!
Open up your text editor and create a new file called hello.py containing just this line (you can copy-paste if you want):
The below line is used for Python 3.x.x
You can also put the below line to pause the program at the end until you press anything.
This program uses the print function, which simply outputs its parameters to the terminal. By default, print appends a newline character to its output, which simply moves the cursor to the next line.
In Python 2.x, print is a statement rather than a function. As such, it can be used without parentheses, in which case it prints everything until the end of the line and accepts a standalone comma after the final item on the line to indicate a multi-line statement. In Python 3.x, print is a proper function expecting its arguments inside parentheses. Using print with parentheses (as above) is compatible with Python 2.x and using this style ensures version-independence.
Now that you've written your first program, let's run it in Python! This process differs slightly depending on your operating system.
Create a folder on your computer to use for your Python programs, such as C:\pythonpractice, and save your hello.py program in that folder.
Type cd \pythonpractice to change directory to your pythonpractice folder, and hit Enter.
Type hello.py to run your program!
If it didn't work, make sure your PATH contains the python directory. See Getting Python.
Create a folder on your computer to use for your Python programs. A good suggestion would be to name it pythonpractice and place it in your Home folder (the one that contains folders for Documents, Movies, Music, Pictures, etc). Save your hello.py program into it. Open the Applications folder, go into the Utilities folder, and open the Terminal program.
Type cd pythonpractice to change directory to your pythonpractice folder, and hit Enter.
Type python ./hello.py to run your program!
If you have both Python 2 and Python 3 installed (Your machine comes with a version of Python 2 but you can install Python 3 as well), you should run python3 hello.py
Create a folder on your computer to use for your Python programs, such as ~/pythonpractice, and save your hello.py program in that folder.
Type cd ~/pythonpractice to change directory to your pythonpractice folder, and hit Enter.
Don't forget to make the script executable by chmod +x.
Type python ./hello.py to run your program!
Create a folder on your computer to use for your Python programs, such as ~/pythonpractice.
Open up your favorite text editor and create a new file called hello.py containing just the following 2 lines (you can copy-paste if you want):[2]
Type cd ~/pythonpractice to change directory to your pythonpractice folder, and hit Enter.
Type chmod a+x hello.py to tell Linux that it is an executable program.
Type ./hello.py to run your program!
In addition, you can also use ln -s hello.py /usr/bin/hello to make a symbolic link hello.py to /usr/bin under the name hello, then run it by simply executing hello.
Note that this mainly should be done for complete, compiled programs, if you have a script that you made and use frequently, then it might be a good idea to put it somewhere in your home directory and put a link to it in /usr/bin. If you want a playground, a good idea is to invoke mkdir ~/.local/bin and then put scripts in there. To make ~/.local/bin content executable the same way /usr/bin does type $PATH = $PATH:~/local/bin (you can add this line to your shell rc file, for example ~/.bashrc).
File extensions aren't necessary in UNIX-like file-systems. To linux, hello.py means the exact same thing as hello.txt, hello.mp3, or just hello. Linux mostly uses the contents of the file to determine what type it is.
/usr/bin/hello: Python script, ASCII text executable
Hello, world!
Congratulations! You're well on your way to becoming a Python programmer.
Modify the hello.py program to say hello to someone from your family or your friends (or to Ada Lovelace).
Change the program so that after the greeting, it asks, "How did you get here?".
Re-write the original program to use two print statements: one for "Hello" and one for "world". The program should still only print out on one line.
A Quick Introduction to Unix/My First Shell Script explains what a hash bang line does.
Architect not known.
Medieval remains incorporated in later building.
Existing house dates largely from c.1571, with 18–19th century alterations.
On high ground above the River Frome.
Large tower and gatehouse, altered 16–17th century.
Towers originally had conical roofs, north wall collapsed 1910.
160117th century house built within remains of castle.
Short length of embattled wall and a tower survive, incorporated in large house, restored 19th century.
Now houses Somerset County Museum, Castle Hotel incorporates remains of an outer gatehouse.
Restored as private house 20th century.
Raymond H. Williams was a Welsh academic and theorist. He was an influential figure in defining the term culture. His writings and critique of culture made significant contributions to the field of cultural studies.
This Al Jazeera produced video on Hall’s ideas on race, gender, class in the media: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FWP_N_FoW-I&feature=youtu.be, gives a brief overview of the cultural themes we should consider as we view media through the cultural studies lens.
In John Storey’s (2015) chapter on “Culturalism” we find Raymond Williams’ “The Analysis of Culture.” In the analysis, Williams presents three categories to consider in defining culture: the ideal, how we think culture could be better; the documentary record, a way to remember the past; and the social, how we speak about our present way of life.
Stuart Hall (1996) describes three concepts of identity. The first is the enlightenment subject, one who knows one’s own identity, “whose ‘center’ consisted of an inner core which first emerged when the subject was born, and unfolded with it, while remaining essentially the same - continuous or ‘identical’ with itself - throughout the individual's existence” (597). The second is the social subject, where you view yourself as part of a community. The idea that your identity is formed from your relationship with others. Our identities shape culture and vice-versa culture shapes our identities. The post-modern subject is the last identity concept. Post-modern subjects believe you are not born with a stagnate identity. Identities are formed and changed by their experiences. We assume different identities at different times and locations in our lives, identities rely on historical experiences. This allows us to have conflicting identities, we are ever changing. We must considered these definitions of culture and identity in order to fully understand modern society. We can use this cultural studies lens to potentially unpack a culture system and help understand how they construct a person’s identity.
I will use Hall’s ideas of culture and identity to critique the interconnected exercise technology, examining the technology and the larger behavior and social structures this technology shapes.
INTERCONNECTED EXERCISE TECHNOLOGY THROUGH THE CULTURAL STUDIES AND IDENTITY LENS
What is an interconnected exercise technology?
An interconnected exercise is an exercise machine that uses the internet to connect users to each other users. An example is the Peloton’s stationary bike. The company defines the word peloton, as the main group of riders in a race. They also add the subheading of “Riders in a peloton work together, conserve energy and perform better because of one another.” Peloton’s stationary bike have a fairly big screen attached to them where users can connect to other users, access on-demand classes, or join a live-stream of a class while using the machines. Users pay a monthly subscription to access these options. According to Marketpace.org, the popularity of social, yet isolated aspect of these exercise machines is the next big thing. The price tag of a Peloton stationary bike starts at $2,245 and over 300,000 have been sold with millions of monthly of subscribers at $39 per month. This new technology is offering a different way for people to work out and companies investing in this trend have the potential for huge profits.
This interconnected exercise technology reinforces the notion that people want to exercise at the comfort of their own home. It supposes people want the comfort home without the isolation feeling. It aims to give on-demand the social aspect some might want. The upfront cost is prohibitive for most people, so it clearly is geared toward people of a higher income bracket. The value implicit in this technology is people of wealth can further insulate themselves. People want this need, or feel they need to protect themselves from other people will find this technology compelling and attractive. I think this technology offers both freedom and constraints. Freedom in the ability to access it on-demand from the comfort and safety of your home. Constraints in the fact that this is just one machine and you are connecting to others only through screen.
What does cultural studies reveal about this interconnected exercise technology?
In Stuart Hall’s (1996) article “Introduction: Who Needs Identity?”, he claims the fact that identities are products within its community. This inner production of identity within the discourse, inherently gives it the capacity to “exclude, to leave out, to render 'outside', abjected. Every identity has at its 'margin', an excess, something more” (5). He further adds this inner circle of like-minded affability is unnatural, it is “but a constructed form of closure, every identity naming as its necessary, even if silenced and unspoken other, that which it 'lacks'” (5). This interconnected exercise equipment, given its costs and ability to make it possible for people to be in somewhat isolation and connected to others only when desired, falls squarely in Hall’s assertion. When we are made aware of this scenario, we can thoughtfully use cultural studies to form a different discourse that will in turn form something quite different from our historical understanding of identity. Hall revised the term identity to mean an intersection where: “Identities are, as it were, the positions which the subject is obliged to take up while always 'knowing' (the language of consciousness here betrays us) that they are representations, that representation is always constructed across a 'lack', across a division, from the place of the Other, and thus can never be adequate - identical - to the subject processes which are invested in them” (6). We are no longer concerned with merely constructing identity, we are equally concerned with identification of subjects and practices that is in our constitution.
With this new reference, we can employ the knowledge of how identities are constructed when assessing a digital technology artifact. Returning to the interconnected exercise stationary bike, Peloton, what identity is this equipment attempting to construct? Did the makers of this equipment aim to include everyone in their pool of consumers? I doubt the makers hoped that everyone will be their consumer. The cost of this equipment immediately excludes a large segment of the world. When only people of wealth and means can purchase this equipment, it intentionally excludes those of lesser means. Possession of this exercise equipment creates an identity in its circle of elitism. Many people are outside of the circle falling in the margins. To its credit, this exclusivity is what makes the company profitable. What this reveals about people, is we want to be included. A business model of for-profit, not for-all-people will often choose to further exploit this desire, which will result in even more profits.
Beras, Erika. 2019. “Is interconnected exercise the next big thing?” Marketplace.org. Accessed March 1, 2019. https://www.marketplace.org/2019/02/28/tech/interconnected-exercise-next-big-thing.
Hall, S. (1996). “The question of cultural identity.” In S. Hall, D. Held, D. Hubert, and K. Thompson (Eds.), Modernity: An introduction to modern societies. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Storey, J. (2015). "Culturalism." Cultural Theory and Popular Culture: An Introduction. New York, NY: Taylor and Francis, pp. 38-58.
Sardine is a nutritious oily fish.
The transistor is "on" less than half the cycle of a sine wave. We say <180 of conduction. This class produces both even and odd order distortion, however is very efficient.
The class D amp has been developed after the short-comings of past generations, including classes A, B, AB, and C. Many people mistake the D as standing for digital. Although it is a “switching” amp, meaning it turns “on” and “off” at a specific frequency, it is a wrong assumption. D was simply the next letter in the alphabet. Consuming the least power out of its previous generations, the class D amps are generally smaller, making them ideal for mobile devices. It is because of their power efficiency, small size, and cheaper costs that the class D amps are quickly becoming the new industry standard for audio electronic. Companies such as Advanced Analog, Texas Instruments as well as other companies have released 50W stereo class d amplifiers that are the size of a penny and did not require any sort of heat sinking, something that was not possible with other types of amplifiers.
The basic design includes two MOSFET transistors in series, one pFET and one nFET being driven by a pulse width modulated (PWM) signal. Because of the properties of MOSFET transistors they are either fully on or fully off. When the transistor is off and the current is zero (so the amount of power wasted heating up the transistor is zero), or the transistor is fully on and the voltage across it is very close to zero (so the amount of power wasted heating up the transistor is again, very close to zero).
Because an analog signal needs to be transformed into a PWM signal a certain amount of distortion can occur, but the amount of distortion can be minimized. Because a PWM signal is very much like a digital signal, the sampling theorem states that if the sampling frequency is more than half the maximum frequency of the source it can be reproduced exactly. For audio signals the maximum frequency heard by humans is roughly 20kHz, so a PWM generator would only need to provide a minimum switching frequency of 40kHz. Because of the availability of faster components many class d amplifier designers will use switching frequencies closer to 400kHz to further reduce the distortion.
Issues of concern with a class d amplifier include electromagnetic emissions. Due to the presence of a medium frequency signal in the circuit, steps must be taken to reduce the emission of these signals that could interfere with other electronic devices.
These amplifiers are erroneously called "digital" amplifiers by the press and many audio "experts." Here's the skinny on Class D:
While some Class D amps do run in true digital mode, using coherent binary data, most do not.
They are better termed "switching" amplifiers, because here the output devices are rapidly switched on and off at least twice for each cycle.
Depending on their switching frequency, they may be "switched on" or "off" millions of times a second.
Think of Class D amps as being similar to a switchable power supply, but with audio signals controlling, or modulating, the switching action. To do this, you use a technology called Pulse Width Modulation (or PWM, a technology found in many CD players).
According to experts, audio signals can be used to modulate a PWM system to create a high power audio amplifier at fairly low voltages using very small components. Class D audio uses a fixed, high frequency signal having pulses that vary in width based on input signal amplitude. So, for example, a deep bass note creates a large pulse in the carrier signal. This can be translated into a musical signal by the on/off nature of the output devices.
There is a fifth (and, nominally, a sixth) class of amplifier, but they are rarely seen in practice in the consumer market. One is the Class G and the other Class H. These are similar in design to Class AB topologies, but both feature two power supplies that switch on or off, depending on the musical signal imputed. Using two power supplies improves efficiency enough to allow significantly more power for a given size and weight. Class G is becoming common for pro audio designs. Class H amps are designed to use the same topology as Class G, but it provides just enough voltage for optimum operation of the output devices. Again, its an attempt to increase efficiency, but at the expense of fidelity ultimately.
Complex Electronics | Electricity |
Op-amp stands for operational amplifier. It is available in IC (Integrated Circuit) chip. It is an electronic circuit of many electronic components already connected and packaged inside a chip of many pins for external connection. Originally, op-amps were so named because they were used to model the basic mathematical operations of addition, subtraction, integration, differentiation, etc. in electronic analog computers. In this sense a true operational amplifier is an ideal circuit element.
The 741 op-amp has a symbol as shown.
The 741 op-amp can be thought as Universal Voltage Difference Amplifier. The main function of the 741 op-amp is to amplify the difference of two input voltages which can be expressed mathematically like below
. The op-amp acts as a voltage difference amplifier.
It can be shown that an op-amp can function as a noninverting voltage amplifier or inverting voltage amplifier.
.
. The op-amp acts as a noninverting voltage amplifier.
.
. The op-amp acts as an inverting voltage amplifier.
Also, it can be shown that an op-amp can function as a voltage comparator
.
. No difference between the two input voltages
. Non Inverting input voltage is greater than the Inverting input voltage
. Inverting input voltage is greater than the Non Inverting input voltage.
The output voltage is the difference between the + and - inputs multiplied by the open-loop gain
The input impedance is the impedance seen between the noninverting and inverting inputs.
Using voltage divider rule, we can determine the voltage vd.
Since the dependent voltage source amplifies the voltage vd by Avo. We can work out the output voltage across RL once again using voltage divider rule.
Substituting equation 1 into 2.
Now if the properties of an Ideal op-amp are applied. The ideal properties of an op-amp are infinite input impedance and zero output impedance. Since Rin >>, much greater than, Rs, Rin/(Rin+Rs)
Which is basically the definition of an op-amp. But if the input impedance was not infinite and the output impedance nonzero then this would not be so.
Real op-amps are (normally) built as an integrated circuit, but occasionally with discrete transistors or vacuum tubes. A Real op-amp is an approximation of an Ideal op-amp. A real op-amp does not have infinite open loop gain, infinite input impedance nor zero output impedance. Real op-amps also create noise in the circuit, have an offset voltage, thermal drift and finite bandwidth.
Op-amps are made up of transistors. Transistors can only respond at a certain rate because of certain capacitances that they have. This means that the op-amps cannot respond fast enough to frequencies above a certain level. This level is the bandwidth.
Open-loop gain is defined as the amplification from input to output without any feedback applied. For most practical calculations, the open-loop gain is assumed to be infinite; in reality, however, it is limited by the amount of voltage applied to power the operational amplifier, i.e. Vs+ and Vs- in the above diagram. Typical devices exhibit open loop DC gain ranging from 100,000 to over 1 million. This allows the gain in the application to be set simply and exactly by using negative feedback. Of course theory and practice differ, since op-amps have limits that the designer must keep in mind and sometimes work around.
The op-amp gain calculated at DC does not apply at higher frequencies. This effect is due to limitations within the op-amp itself, such as its finite bandwidth, and to the AC characteristics of the circuit in which it is placed. The best known stumbling-block in designing with op-amps is the tendency for the device to resonate at high frequencies, where negative feedback changes to positive feedback due to parasitic lowpasses.
Typical low cost, general purpose op-amps exhibit a gain bandwidth product of a few MHz. Specialty and high speed op-amps can achieve gain bandwidth products of 100s of MHz.
Imagine we have a (weak) input signal, and we want to amplify it to generate a strong output signal; or we have several different voltages, and we want to add them together. For these purposes, we need op-amp amplifying and summing circuits. It seems that there is nothing new to say about these bare (usually single op-amp) circuits. Only, the innovator Dieter Knollman has suggested a new simpler design procedure in an EDN's article [2]. He has also placed his work on the web[3] (see also a circuit story[4] written after Dieter's work).
All inputs are ideal voltage sources.
Gain is defined as the gain from the ideal voltage source to the op-amp output.
The feedback resistor, Rf, connects from the op-amp output to the inverting input.
The input resistor, Ri, connects from the ideal voltage source input to the op-amp input. (This *includes* any source resistance).
First, specify the desired circuit gains for each input.
Then calculate the ground gain, as follows:
Ground gain = 1 -­ ( the sum of the desired positive and negative gains).
Choose a feedback-resistor value. For example, let Rf=100 kiloOhms.
Next, calculate the resistor values for each input, including the ground-gain resistor, using
.
Some op-amp circuits need a resistor to ground from the op-amp's inverting input.
Others need a resistor to ground on the noninverting input.
The sign of the ground gain determines where to place the ground resistor.
If the desired gains add up to one, a resistor to ground is unnecessary.
You will see below some examples that illustrate using the quick design procedure. First of all, answer the question, "What's the highest and lowest output voltage you want?" Make sure the power terminals of the op-amp are at least that high and low. (If you want it to swing from +5 V to -5 V, then an op-amp connected to 0 V and +10 V won't work).
The generic op-amp has two inputs and one output. (Some are made with floating, differential outputs.) The output voltage is a multiple of the difference between the two inputs:
G is the open-loop gain of the op-amp. The inputs are assumed to have very high impedance; negligible current will flow into or out of the inputs. Op-amp outputs have very low source impedance.
If an Operational Amplifier is used with positive feedback it can act as an oscillator.
The power supply pins (VS+ and VS−) can be labeled many different ways. For FET based op-amps, the positive, common drain supply is labeled VDD and the negative, common source supply is labeled VSS. For BJT based op-amps, the VS+ pin becomes VCC and VS− becomes VEE. They are also sometimes labeled VCC+ and VCC−, or even V+ and V−, in which case the inputs would be labeled differently. The function remains the same.
Fully Differential Amplifier versus Instrumentation Amplifier
An instrumentation amplifier has extremely high input impedance-- much higher than the input impedance of a fully differential amplifier (once all the feedback resistors are in place).
So an instrumentation amplifier is better for measuring voltage inputs with unknown (and possibly time-varying) output resistance.
A fully differential amplifier is better than an instrumentation amplifier for precisely generating differential output voltages, with good rejection of differential noise on the input, output, and power lines.
Can we apply Dieter's procedure to a fully differential amplifier? We can, if we revise it a little:
The sum of the gains = 0 in a properly-designed fully differential amplifier circuit.
Use equal feedback resistors Rf, one from the + output to the - input, and one from the - output to the + input. Connect the "common" input to the appropriate voltage source.
The sum of the gains = zero in a properly-designed fully differential amplifier circuit (note that this new formulation differs from Daisy's theorem, which claims that the sum is always 1).
Calculate resistor values for each input, using Ri = Rf / |desired gain|.
For inputs with positive gain, connect the calculated resistor value between that input and the + input on the amplifier.
For inputs with negative gain, connect the calculated resistor value between that input and the - input on the amplifier.
If all your inputs are differential pairs, then the sum of all the gains is now zero. Done. Otherwise add a ground resistor to bring the total gain to zero.
↑ Designing Analog Chips ISBN 978-1589397187
↑ Single-formula technique keeps it simple - EDN's article by Dieter Knollman, PhD, Lucent Technologies
↑ K9 analysis make analog circuit design and analysis doggone simple
↑ How to Simplify the Design of the Mixed Op-amp Voltage Summer (after EDN's Single-formula technique keeps it simple)
Wikipedia has related information at Fully differential amplifier and Instrumentation amplifier
Voltage compensation reveals the philosophy behind op-amp inverting circuits with negative feedback
Sergio Franco, "Design with Operational Amplifiers and Analog Integrated Circuits," 3rd Ed.], McGraw-Hill, New York, 2002 ISBN 0-07-232084-2
Linear Databook published in 1982 by The National Semiconductor Corporation.
The Transfer Function of the Non-Inverting Summing Amplifier with “N” Input Signals
Simulates an inductor (i.e., provides inductance without the use of a possibly costly inductor). The circuit exploits the fact that the current flowing through a capacitor behaves through time as the voltage across an inductor. The capacitor used in this circuit is smaller than the inductor it simulates and its capacitance is less subject to changes in value due to environmental changes.
This circuit is unsuitable for applications relying on the back EMF property of an inductor as this will be limited in a gyrator circuit to the voltage supplies of the op-amp.
An analog multiplier is a circuit with an output that is proportional to the product of two inputs:
Two possible implementations will be shown. Both will be using operational amplifiers, but the first one will use diodes to get the needed relationships, the second one MOSFET transistors.
As known, using operational amplifiers and diodes it's quite easy to obtain the logarithm and the exponential of a certain input. Remembering the property of logarithms:
If we simply append the circuits for logarithm, sum and exponential we get the following configuration:
, so we will have no error. The complete multiplier circuit is the following:
. From the mathematical point of view this is due to the fact that we can't calculate the logarithm of a negative number, from a physical point of view the limit is due to the fact that we can obtain only very small currents (almost zero) inverse-polarizing the diodes.
In practical applications, the diodes are replaced with BJTs connected so to work like a diode.
Since it is possible to use a MOSFET transistor as a voltage controlled resistor, it is possible to use this feature to create an analog multiplier.
Referring to the picture on the right -- the letters indicate the different pins: Drain, Source and Gate. MOS devices are symmetrical, so the drain and source can be exchanged without affecting the behavior of the device. Use source as the lowest voltage terminal and drain as the higher voltage terminal. When the voltage between gate and drain exceeds the threshold voltage, i.e.
, the relationship between current and voltage is the following:
, the other one is at (virtual) ground. That same current will flow through the MOS
, thus defining the voltage
.
In other words, the diode implementation is more complicated but it works fine for a wider range on inputs.
The numbers that a digital system operates upon are binary numbers.One binary digit just have two values '0' and '1'. This '0' or '1' are analogous to 'off' and 'on', 'false' and 'true', etc. The Binary digIT is known as 'bit'. In day to day activities we use numbers and every digit of that number can be between 0 - 9. We use combination of such digital to for numbers bigger than 9. Similarly we can use combination of bits, i.e. combination of 1 & 0, to form bigger binary numbers.
Circuit can be any electric circuit and Digital circuit is a circuit which is designed to implement the description of digital circuit.
Digital circuits are developed using a special type of mathematics called 'Boolean Algebra'.
Boolean Algebra was created by George Boole (1815 - 1864) in his paper An Investigation of the Laws of Thought, on Which Are Founded the Mathematical Theories of Logic and Probabilities, published in 1854. It had few applications at the time, but eventually scientists and engineers realized that his system could be used to create efficient computer logic.
The Boolean system has two states: True (T) or False (F). This can be represented in several different ways as on or off, one or zero, yes or no, etc. These states are manipulated by three fundamental operations called logical operators: AND, OR and NOT. These operators take certain inputs and produce an output based on a predetermined table of results. For example, the AND operator takes two (or more) inputs and returns an 'on' result only when both (or all) inputs are 'on'.
In these tables T means "True", or "Yes", or 1 (in electronics), and
F means "False", or "No" or 0 (in electronics).
For example, the 1st line of the AND table says that if A is F and B is F then the result also is F. This is also said often as If A is 0 and B is also 0, then A AND B = 0 times 0 = 0
Looking at the OR table, use plus instead of times: 0 plus 0 is 0, where again 0 is F and 1 is T. Only 0 and 1 exist, therefore if the result of the addition is more than 1, then change it to 1.
The 3rd table shows NEGATION: whatever it is, change it to the other; 0 is changed into 1, and 1 is changed into 0.
These simple operators are good because they allow us to create very simple logic circuits:
There are ways, however, to combine these expressions to make much more complex but useful digital circuits. By using multiple operators on the same inputs, it is possible to create much more complex outputs. An expression like:
If A and B are true, or C is true, then X is true
Exercise: Go through each case in the table and check it using the above statement.
.
If these three operators are combined then the NOR and NAND can be created. So A NOR B is
. Other notations are valid as well, and many different combinations of them arise in mathematics and engineering. No universal standard has been agreed upon. However, most sources will make explicit the particular notation used.
Boolean Algebra, like regular algebra, has certain rules. These rules are Associativity, Distributivity, Commutativity and De Morgan's Laws. Associativity, Commutativity and Distributivity only apply to the AND and OR operators. Some of these laws may seem trivial in normal Algebra but in other algebras they are not.
Distibutivity is the property that an operator can be applied to the terms within the brackets.
This can be seen as either AND having a higher precedence or the fact that Associativity does not hold between AND and OR or that it is an invalid application of distributivity.
Another way of looking at this is the possible application of our understanding of normal algebra rules using the second notation. Where clearly the analogy between OR being addition and AND being multiplication is made. We would never make this error if this were high school algebra.
Simplify the following Expressions.
For number 1 using rule 7. We get.
Which happens to be rule 5 so the answer is zero.
Complex Electronics | Electricity |
TTL stands for Transistor-Transistor Logic. It is the system based on combining transistors in such a way that they can be used for logic gates. Transistors have the capability of becoming parts of very complex devices when combined. An average microprocessor uses upwards of 40 million transistors. Transistors in microprocessors, however, are microscopic as opposed to the discrete components used in consumer electronics and circuitboards.
The NOT gate works by inverting the input. The TTL version of the NOT gate contains one transistor, seen below:
When the input, A, is high (+5V), the base of the transistor is saturated, allowing current to flow from the collector of the transistor to the emitter. Since this is possible, the current does not take the higher resistance path through the output (assuming it has a resistive load attached to it such as an LED). When the input is low (0V), the current has no choice but to flow out of the inverted A output (the A with the line overtop to indicate it is negated). The two resistors in the circuit are for limiting current as to not destroy the transistor, and sometimes may not even be required depending on the transistor.
(note: this image is considered *Resistor-Transistor Logic* The proper TTL representation is below.)
To further explain, the NOT gate has been integrated into a circuit by connecting it to a current probe and a battery. When the switch for the input of the not gate is not hit, the current flows in the path indicated by the red diagram below. The current flows through the resistor because the transistor does not conduct when the base is not saturated.:
However, when the switch is hit, making the input high, the circuit is shorted and current flows directly from one terminal of the battery through the transistor, to the other terminal. This is illustrated further in the next figure:
In real logic gates, several more transistors are used in order to stabilize the input and output. Although this may seem like a large hike in complexity and price, creating transistors in ICs is a lot cheaper and easier to do, as they do not have to even have a shell or casing, and are a lot smaller.
CMOS stands for Complementary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor. Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor refers to the construction method of the component Field-Effect Transistors (MOSFETs), and Complementary means that CMOS uses both n-type (nMOS) and p-type (pMOS) transistors. Older designs had used only n-type transistors, and are referred to as NMOS logic.
n-type MOSFETs are active (conductive) when their input voltage is high, while p-type MOSFETs are active when their input voltage is low.
All CMOS gates are arranged in two parts: the pull-up network (PUN), built from p-type transistors and connect to source; and the pull-down network (PDN), built from n-type transistors and connected to ground (also called drain). The two parts are logical duals of each other, so that if the PUN is active, then the PDN is inactive, and vice-versa. In this way there can never be a direct path between source and ground (in any steady state).
The biggest advantage of CMOS over NMOS is that CMOS has a rapid change from both hi-to-low and from low-to-hi. NMOS transitions only slowly from low-to-hi (because it uses a resistor in place of a PUN), and since overall circuit speed must take into account the worst case, NMOS circuits must be much slower.
The simplest CMOS circuit: the NOT gate, or inverter. Although uncomplicated, it demonstrates the basic structure of a CMOS gate; a series of inputs (in this case, one) which are connected to the transistors, the PUN (consisting of a single p-type transistor) connected to source, the PDN (consisting of a single n-type transistor) connected to ground, and the output which is fed from both the PUN and PDN.
When the input voltage is high, the p-type transistor will be inactive, and the n-type transistor will be active. This creates a connection between ground and the gate output, pulling the gate's output to low. Conversely, when the input voltage is low, the p-type transistor will be active instead, creating a connection between the output and source, pulling the gate's output to high.
The PUN for NAND consists of a pair of p-type transistors in parallel, one with the A input feeding it and one with the B input feeding it. Therefore the PUN is active, and the output of the gate is high, as long as either of these inputs is low.
The PDN for NAND consists of a pair of n-type transistors in series, also each fed by one of the two inputs. Therefore the PDN is active, and the output of the gate is low, only if both of the inputs are high.it uses the logic a bar(OR)b bar
"Upside down" relative to the NAND gate, the NOR gate is made from a PUN of two p-type transistors in series and a PDN of two n-type transistors in parallel.
All told, this takes 12 transistors (4 in the PUN, 4 in the PDN, and 2 for each inverter). There are more efficient designs for the XNOR circuit, but they require a more detailed analysis than we will go into here. Instead of serving as an example of an actual XNOR design, this section should instead help to suggest the methods one could use to generate a CMOS circuit for any arbitrary boolean function.
If you've been following along, you may guess that an XOR gate is made by attaching a NOT onto the end of the XNOR; while this will produce a correct circuit, it is not the most correct (or efficient) circuit. Instead, we could use the same 12 transistors and simply shuffle around the wires. This is left as an exercise for the reader.
An integrated circuit is a collection of very small components etched onto a silicon wafer. The wafer is then cut out and placed into a package usually made out of plastic or ceramic and connected to leads with small wires.
The integrated circuit was independently invented in 1959 by both Jack Kilby of Texas Instruments and Robert Noyce of Fairchild Semiconductor. (about.com) Their invention led to the modern integrated circuit, devices with millions of transistors and incomprehensible computing power.
Complex Electronics | Electricity |
A transistor is a solid state device made by joining three positive-type and negative-type semiconductors together. In general, all transistors have three pins: base, collector, and emitter. Transistor is a bi-polar device that is a transistor with two junctions namely BE and CE DE EE FE. In theory we take a specified formulae incorporate this with using any type of meter in figuring the mathematical solution.
A lightly doped region called base is sandwiched between two regions called the emitter and collector respectively. The collector handles large quantities of current, hence its dopant concentration is the highest. The emitter's dopant concentration is slightly lesser, but its area is larger to provide for more current than the collector. The collector region should be heavily doped because electron-hole pairs recombine in that region, while the emitter is not such a region. We can have two varieties in this kind of transistor.
An NPN transistor is made by joining one positive-type semiconductor in between two negative-type semiconductors. Here a lightly doped p-type semiconductor (semiconductor with more holes than electrons) is sandwiched between two well-doped n-type regions. It is like two pn-junctions facing away. An IEEE symbol for the NPN transistor is shown here. The arrow between the base and emitter is in the same direction as current flowing between the base-emitter junction. Power dissipated in the transistor is
A PNP transistor is made by sandwiching a negative-type semiconductor in between two positive-type semiconductors.
A transistor conducts current when the base voltage is greater than BE junction's voltage. Current is non zero.
A transistor conducts current when the base voltage is greater than BE junction's voltage. Current is non zero. This corresponds to a closed switch. A transistor does not conduct current when the base voltage is less than BE junction's voltage. Current is zero. This correspond to an open switch.
The Truth Table of the five basic logic gates above
Q = NOT A AND B
The Truth table of the combination gates above
XNOR gate (NOT−exclusive−OR)
A flip-flop is a device very like a latch in that it is a bistable multivibrator, having two states and a feedback path that allows it to store a bit of information. The difference between a latch and a flip-flop is that a latch is asynchronous, and the outputs can change as soon as the inputs do (or at least after a small propagation delay). A flip-flop, on the other hand, is edge-triggered and only changes state when a control signal goes from high to low or low to high. This distinction is relatively recent and is not formal, with many authorities still referring to flip-flops as latches and vice versa, but it is a helpful distinction to make for the sake of clarity.
There are several different types of flip-flop each with its own uses and peculiarities. The four main types of flip-flop are : SR, JK, D, and T.
An SR latch (Set/Reset) is an asynchronous device: it works independently of control signals and relies only on the state of the S and R inputs. In the image we can see that an SR latch can be created with two NOR gates that have a cross-feedback loop. SR latches can also be made from NAND gates, but the inputs are swapped and negated. In this case, it is sometimes called an SR latch.
Circuit symbol for an SR latch.
When a high is applied to the Set line of an SR latch, the Q output goes high (and Q low). The feedback mechanism, however, means that the Q output will remain high, even when the S input goes low again. This is how the latch serves as a memory device. Conversely, a high input on the Reset line will drive the Q output low (and Q high), effectively resetting the latch's "memory". When both inputs are low, the latch "latches" – it remains in its previously set or reset state.
When both inputs are high at once, however, there is a problem: it is being told to simultaneously produce a high Q and a low Q. This produces a "race condition" within the circuit - whichever gate succeeds in changing first will feedback to the other and assert itself. Ideally, both gates are identical and this is "metastable", and the device will be in an undefined state for an indefinite period. In real life, due to manufacturing methods, one gate will always win, but it's impossible to tell which it will be for a particular device from an assembly line. The state of S = R = 1 is therefore "illegal" and should never be entered.
When the device is powered up, a similar condition occurs, because both outputs, Q and Q, are low. Again, the device will quickly exit the metastable state due to differences between the two gates, but it's impossible to predict which of Q and Q will end up high. To avoid spurious actions, you should always set SR latch to a known initial state before using them - you must not assume that they will initialize to a low state.
In some situations it may be desirable to dictate when the latch can and cannot latch (change value). The gated SR latch is a simple extension of the SR latch which provides an Enable line which must be driven high before data can be latched. Even though a control line is now required, the SR latch is not synchronous, because the inputs can change the output even in the middle of an enable pulse - i.e. if the input keeps changing while the Enable pin is high, the output will keep changing until the Enable pin goes to low.
When the Enable pin input is low, the outputs from the AND gates must also be low, leaving the Q and Q outputs latched to the previous data. Only when the enable input is high can the state of the latch change, as shown in the truth table. When the enable line is high (asserted), a gated SR latch is identical in operation to an SR latch.
The Enable line is sometimes a clock signal, but is usually a read or write strobe.
The D latch (D for "data") or transparent latch is a simple extension of the gated SR latch that removes the possibility of invalid input states.
Since the gated SR latch allows us to latch the output without using the S or R inputs, we can remove one of the inputs by driving both the Set and Reset inputs with a complementary driver: we remove one input and automatically make it the inverse of the remaining input.
The D latch outputs the D input whenever the Enable line is high, otherwise the output is whatever the D input was when the Enable input was last high. This is why it is also known as a transparent latch: when Enable is asserted, the D input propagates directly through the latch as if it wasn’t there.
D latches are often used in I/O ports of integrated circuits and are available as discrete devices, often multiply packaged. An example is the 74HC75, part of the 7400 series of ICs, containing four separate D latches.
The D flip-flop is the edge-triggered variant of the transparent latch. On the rising (usually, although falling or negative edge triggering is equally possible) edge of the clock, the value of the D input at that moment is expressed at the output. The output can only change at the clock edge: if the input changes at other times, the output will be unaffected.
D flip-flops are by far the most common type of flip-flops and some devices (for example some FPGAs) are made entirely from D flip-flops. They are also commonly used for shift-registers and input synchronisation.
The JK flip-flop is a simple enhancement of the SR flip-flop where the state J=K=1
As the behavior of the JK flip-flop is completely predictable under all conditions,
But there is still a problem i.e. both the outputs are same when one tests the circuit practically. This is because of the
A T flip-flop is a device which swaps or "toggles" state every time it is triggered if the T input is asserted, otherwise it holds the current output. This behavior is described by the characteristic equation:
A counter is a device that generates some patterned binary value depending on a clock or some other pulsed input. There are three simple types of counters ripple and synchronous.[[
If the output of a shift register is fed back to the input. a ring counter results. The data pattern contained within the shift register will recirculate as long as clock pulses are applied. For example, the data pattern will repeat every four clock pulses in the figure below. However, we must load a data pattern. All 0's or all 1's doesn't count. Is a continuous logic level from such a condition useful?
We make provisions for loading data into the parallel-in/ serial-out shift register configured as a ring counter below. Any random pattern may be loaded. The most generally useful pattern is a single 1.
Loading binary 1000 into the ring counter, above, prior to shifting yields a viewable pattern. The data pattern for a single stage repeats every four clock pulses in our 4-stage example. The waveforms for all four stages look the same, except for the one clock time delay from one stage to the next. See figure below.
The circuit above is a divide by 4 counter. Comparing the clock input to any one of the outputs, shows a frequency ratio of 4:1. How may stages would we need for a divide by 10 ring counter? Ten stages would recirculate the 1 every 10 clock pulses.
An alternate method of initializing the ring counter to 1000 is shown above. The shift waveforms are identical to those above, repeating every fourth clock pulse. The requirement for initialization is a disadvantage of the ring counter over a conventional counter. At a minimum, it must be initialized at power-up since there is no way to predict what state flip-flops will power up in. In theory, initialization should never be required again. In actual practice, the flip-flops could eventually be corrupted by noise, destroying the data pattern. A "self correcting" counter, like a conventional synchronous binary counter would be more reliable.
The above binary synchronous counter needs only two stages, but requires decoder gates. The ring counter had more stages, but was self decoding, saving the decode gates above. Another disadvantage of the ring counter is that it is not "self starting". If we need the decoded outputs, the ring counter looks attractive, in particular, if most of the logic is in a single shift register package. If not, the conventional binary counter is less complex without the decoder.
The waveforms decoded from the synchronous binary counter are identical to the previous ring counter waveforms. The counter sequence is (QA QB) = (00 01 10 11).
Ripple counters are the simplest type of counters. They are nothing more than toggle flip flops connected in a chain to divide each others output frequency by two. The result is a binary count. They are called ripple counters because the new count ripples through them. The major disadvantage of ripple counters is that because of new count "rippling" through the flip flops all the bits of the count arrive at different times.
Synchronous counters are simple state machines made out of flip flops and logic gates. They have two parts, a register made out of flip flops and a decoder made out of logic gates. A register is a simple group of flip flops that are all clocked at the same time. In this way they can hold the counters output value until the next clock cycle. The decoder, decodes the current count and generates the correct value for the next count to the flop flops. For example in a simple up counter the decoder would always output the current count plus one. The major advantage of Synchronous Counters is that all the bits of their output change at the same time.
When adding one number A with another number B the operation will produce a Sum S and a Carry C.The Operation of an adder is Shown below.
If there are two binary number A and B . The operation of adding two numbers can be shown below
The operation of Half Adder can be summarized in the Truth Table below
A full adder is a logical circuit that performs an addition operation on three one-bit binary numbers. The full adder produces a sum of the two inputs and carry value. It can be combined with other full adders (see below) or work on its own.
It is possible to create a logical circuit using multiple full adders to add N-bit numbers. Each full adder inputs a Cin, which is the Cout of the previous adder. This kind of adder is a ripple carry adder, since each carry bit "ripples" to the next full adder. Note that the first (and only the first) full adder may be replaced by a half adder.
The layout of ripple carry adder is simple, which allows for fast design time; however, the ripple carry adder is relatively slow, since each full adder must wait for the carry bit to be calculated from the previous full adder.
The gate delay can easily be calculated by inspection of the full adder circuit.
Each full adder requires three levels of logic. In a 32-bit [ripple carry] adder, there 32 full adders,so the critical path (worst case) delay is
To reduce the computation time, engineers devised faster ways to add two binary numbers by using carry lookahead adders.
They work by creating two signals (P and G) for each bit position, based on whether a carry is propagated through from a less significant bit position (at least one input is a '1'), a carry is generated in that bit position (both inputs are '1'), or if a carry is killed in that bit position (both inputs are '0'). In most cases, P is simply the sum output of a half-adder and G is the carry output of the same adder. After P and G are generated the carries for every bit position are created. Some advanced carry look ahead architectures are the Manchester carry chain, Brent-Kung adder, and the Kogge-Stone adder.
4-bit adder with Carry Look Ahead
Some other multi-bit adder architectures break the adder into blocks. It is possible to vary the length of these blocks based on the propagation delay of the circuits to optimize computation time. These block based adders include the carry bypass adder which will determine P and G values for each block rather than each bit, and the carry select adder which pre-generates sum and carry values for either possible carry input to the block.
Other adder designs include the conditional sum adder, carry skip adder, and carry complete adder.
By combining multiple carry look-ahead adders even larger adders can be created.
This can be used at multiple levels to make even larger adders.
For example, the following adder is a 64-bit adder that uses four 16-bit CLAs with two levels of LCUs.
Encoders are devices that act on data to transform it in such a way that the data acquires some new characteristics. These characteristics can vary from reduction in length to inclusion of error correction properties to use of security measures. At the most basic level, encoders can be used to reduce the size of data. Consider the following block diagram :
If out of ABCD only one is high at any given time, then we can only have the following possibilities for input : 000, 001, 010, 100. Thus we can make the internal circuit of the encoder in such a way that when it sees 000 it outputs 00, when it sees 001 it outputs 01, when it sees 010 it gives 10 and when it sees 100 it outputs 11
Thus we have effectively reduced the size of the data, by exploiting the fact that all possible combinations of input will never be provided at the input terminals.
The internal circuit of the encoder can be easily derived by using truth tables
So the circuit diagram can be :
This scheme can be extended for n inputs.
This was a very basic encoder, it could act only on data when a single line was high. It is possible that multiple lines may be high, in that case one may use priority encoders which assign output based on priority, that is if two lines are high, for example A and C in the previous example, then a priority encoder will, based on a prior decision by the designer, decide to assign output to either C or A thereby assigning it a higher priority.
In some cases we don't want priority encoding, rather when faced with multiple signals, we wish to create a new code for that particular combination as well, and still obtain some reduction in size.
At other times we may wish to modify the incoming code in a manner that allows the receiver to detect any errors that may have crept in during transmission. These topics will be elaborated upon in appropriate topics.
A multiplexer is a device that brings the concept of a rotary switch in analog electronics to the digital side. It is a device which, based on some input, will change the connection of its other inputs to its outputs. Conceptually a digital multiplexers functionality is the same as an analog one, only it handles everything digitally. Because of the mathematical concept of combinatorix they can be used to replace chain logic circuits. However, this is not done frequently because multiplexer based logic has a comparably high propagation delay.
The circuit above has 2 Control Lines A1Ao which can be used as 2 Selectors . Depend on the value of the Selectors only one of the Output Lines can be high . The circuit above has the capability to select the output line
The operation of the circuit above can be summarized in the Truth Table below
Of course, the above discussion is about what is known as a Demultiplexer, where 1 line is switched to N lines. The article is misleading because while it shows that one of the outputs goes high, it does not pass a signal through, so it really isn't even about a Demultiplexer, but rather a 2 to 4 line decoder. A Multiplexor takes N lines and selects one to be the output. See Multiplexer on multiple sites, including Wikepedia. It can be confusing when dealing with an Analog Switch, which is a CMOS based device that is inherently bidirectional, and there are Analog Multiplexers/Demultiplexers. -- Steve KD4TTC
Capacitors can be charged, and when they are charged they can be discharged.
When charged they act like a source of voltage but only for a limited time unless they are "refreshed".
If charged they can be "refreshed" by charging them again and again to keep their voltage above a specified minimum. This procedure can be quite automatic at regular intervals and applies ONLY to capacitors that already have a voltage that is above that set minimum.
"Writing" into a capacitor-memory means either charging that capacitor or discharging it as required. We say that a memory is "a zero" if its voltage is below a specified value, and it is "a one" if above. Putting a 1 into the memory means charging the capacitor, while putting a 0 into the memory means discharging the capacitor.
"Reading" a capacitor-memory is equivalent to putting a voltmeter across its terminals to see whether its voltage is or is not above a given minimum.
Reference 1: Programmer's Reference Guide for the Commodore 64 Personal Computer, published in 1988 by Commodore Business Machines, Inc.
For a 0 the minimum is minus 0.3 Volt, and the maximum is plus 0.3 Volt.
For a 1 the minimum is plus 2.0 Volt, and the maximum is 1 Volt above the supply voltage which usually is about 5 Volt, but whose absolute maximum is 7.0 Volt. Note that static electricity (by friction on the carpet for example) can cause a lot of damage and must be guarded against.
Reference 2: The Semiconductor Memory Data Book for Design Engineers, published in 1975 by Texas Instruments Inc.
Think of "one bit" as one memory unit, such as one capacitor-memory. It can have a 0 or a 1 "in it", as required; a "High" (H) usually is a 1, and a "Low" (L) usually is a 0. Bit is a shortened version of binary digit.
A byte is a group of bits. One bit can only represent "a count" of zero or one, two bits grouped together into a byte can represent a count of zero to 3, 3 bits into a byte can count up to 7 and n bits in a byte can count up to 2n minus 1. A byte with 8 bits in it can count from 0 to 255. "Words" are bytes; they each have a stated number of bits in them.
Bytes can also be combined; 2 bytes, each with 8 bits in it, can count up to 256 times 256 minus 1, that is 0 to 65535.
Words are a concept that dates back to early computer architectures, where a single "unit" of memory was different from 8 bits. Common early word sizes were often 10 bits, but sometimes six or 20 bits.
Generally a word was defined as the size of the memory bus for internal storage (i.e. RAM or ROM), as well as the minimum independently addressable unit of memory.
Most modern CPU architectures use independently addressable byte architecture, but some modern CPUs (like the Pentium and other x86 CPUs) perform memory and instruction tasks more efficiently if the memory is "aligned" on word boundaries.
Terms like word and longword date back to 16-bit and 32-bit CPU architectures respectively, and to give a common framework for backward compatible software tools. More recently, the term quadword is used to denote a 64-bit piece of memory, although the term octaword is sometimes used (because it is 8-bytes being accessed at once).
Endian architecture defines how the memory is encoded within the RAM of the computer and its relationship with the byte addresses. Generally this is not an issue for most software except when you write data files meant for consumption on multiple platforms that have multi-byte components.
Just as the mail delivery person needs to have an address on each item to be delivered/collected, so also access to a particular byte of memory is "delivered" to a particular address, or "collected" from a particular address.
For example a memory can have 16 address connections, labelled 0 to 15. That means that data can be fed into, or taken out of, a specific memory cell, whose address is between 0 and (216 minus one), which is between 0 and 65535.
After the specific address has been fed into the memory, a specific given number is fed ("written") into the data bus connection, or the content of that address is "read".
For example a memory can have 8 data connections, labelled 0 to 7. That means that the number fed into the selected byte must be between 0 and (28 minus one), which is between 0 and 255.
There is also an input terminal connection that indicates the operation required. A 0 into that connection may indicate that the next operation will be a "write", while a 1 may indicate that it will be a "read".
A memory may require one or more clock signals, possibly "phase 1" and "phase 2", etc., which are inputs into the memory from oscillators, meaning they alternate very fast between 0 and 1 continuously. While the clock is, maybe, 0 various changes can be made, such as an address change and/or a change of data, but the actual reading or writing takes place only while the clock is, maybe, 1. Some memories include clock oscillators, possibly requiring external crystals.
A RAM is a "Random Access Memory" - Sizes and their architecture vary considerably, users can put into any of their addressed bytes any number up to a given maximum, and that number can be replaced by another number as required, when required. Some memories supply the complements of what was put into them.
For example a memory with 1024 bits can require only a 0 or 1 to be put into any of the 1024 cells, while another memory can require 4 bits (0 to 15) per word, but only 16 words can be retained at a time, etc.
Requires frequent refreshing.
Retains the data even if control signals are absent, however such memories may use dynamic addressing
A ROM is a "Read Only Memory". It is factory-produced, and usually its contents are fixed. A ROM can be read, but it usually cannot be written. Usually a ROM contains very important fixed information required for the equipment for the operation.
Uses a mask during manufacture, contents cannot be altered.
Permits a change of each cell after manufacture, but once only.
Permits changes to each cell after manufacture, more than once.
Registers can move two types of digital information: parallel and serial. Registers also have two basic ways of moving it: FIFO and LIFO. The simplest register is a FIFO, which is only one level deep and one bit wide. It is basically a single D Type Flip/Flop.
A LIFO (Last In First Out) is a like a FIFO only the data comes out in the reverse order it came in. Data is processed like a stack data structure. Imagine putting items onto a stack, the first item taken off would be at the top of the stack. Thus, the last item in (item at the top of the stack), would be the first item out
Parallel Registers take in mulitple bits at a time.
Shift Registers are the simplest serial interfaces. They take serial data in one bit at a time and convert it to parallel form or the other way around. The first way is Serial In Parallel Out and the latter is Parallel In Serial Out. Shift Registers are used to make larger state machines like counters and UARTs.
Tons of information about Serial in Parallel out circuits and how they are constructed
This input is a one-bit input that will decide whether to route the binary variables to the Arithmetic or to the Logic Circuit.
Handles basic operations such as Addition and Subtraction. The Multiplication and Division operations are dependent on the basic operations and Bit-Shifting.
The Multiply and Divide operations can also be implemented using Hardwired / Microprogrammed Control.
The Logic unit is a Hardware Unit implemented for performing basic operations such as AND, OR, NAND and NOT. A particular logical operation is selected using a 4:1 Demultiplexer.
The results of all the operations are routed into a data bus for memory addressing.
The Control Unit provides the Micro-Instructions that are necessary for the execution of a program. The
Of the two CPU architectures in use the RISC (Reduced Instruction Set Computing) and the CISC (Complex Instruction Set Computing) have different philosophies in this regard where the RISC believes in having a larger number of more simple Micro-instructions and the CISC believes in a smaller number of more complex instructions.
Wikipedia has related information at control unit
Digital Circuits/Finite State Machines describes low-level detail of state machines in general, which includes control units.
Microprocessor Design/Control Unit describes some very complicated control units, and how to design your own.
For example: a computer disk can have a lot of information on it, and the user selects a particular disk for the task in hand. Then the user activates an input procedure to have the computer move a copy of the given required information from the disk, where the original remains, into a part of the computer's memory for further use. The original on the disk can, if desired, be deleted.
For example: Some work has been done using a computer, and now the result is to be moved from the computer onto a disk, which is one of many possible output devices. Usually the computer's screen, which is also an output device, shows exactly what is being done by the user so as to ensure the information concerned ends up at the correct place, outside of the computer. Often a printer is used, which is another output device.
Complex Electronics | Electricity |
Register Transfer Notation is a way of using special math notation to analyze different types of computer architectures. RTN easily shows the number of transfers and clocks required for a given architecture to do a specific process.
Most information in the real world is considered analog (e.g. Audio, temperature and distance) the problem is modern day processing in electronics is done in binary ( a series of 1s and 0s) An analog to digital converter is an IC that solves this problem.
The step size is the voltage difference between one digital level (i.e. 0001) and the next one (i.e. 0010 or 0000).
For example if an ADC has a step size of 1 Volt an input of 1 volt will produce an output, in a 4 bit converter, of 0001. 0 volts is always considered 0000. Obviously, real world ADCs and DACs would be functionally useless with such a large step size, and most modern devices have step sizes in the microvolt range.
Step size is an important consideration, as well as how many bits will be used. A 4 bit converter with a step size of 1 volt can show a maximum of 15 volts at the input, however a complex sine wave will be heavily distorted. Decreasing the step size to .5 volts will reduce the distortion but lower the maximum input reading. As smaller step sizes are used, higher bit converters are needed to keep maximum voltages equal.
This explains what many consumer audio products mean by "X bit outputs".
Block Diagram for an n-bit Digital to Analog Converter. D/A converter converts digital or binary data into its equivalent analog data.This analog data is required to drive motors and other analog devices. The converted analog value is either in voltage or current form.
In the weighted resistor type D/A Converter, each digital voltage is converted into an equivalent analog voltage or current. In a 4-bit D/A converter, from 0000 to 1111, there are 15 discrete levels and hence it is convenient to divide the output analog signal into 15 discrete levels.
Wikipedia has related information at resistor ladder
This page covers the spectrum of electromagnetic waves.
A wave is an oscillation, if represented in the plane using a Cartesian coordinate system looks like a sine wave, being the x axis time and the y axis amplitude. Amplitude is the variation of the wave across a given period being the peak the highest point of a wave. The difference between two peaks is a wavelength. Period is the time it takes a wavelength to pass by a point in space. Frequency is the number of waves that pass by in a second.
Black bodies - A cavity that absorbs all radiation and emits radiation at a specific frequency.
Resonant cavities - A cavity that allows standing waves of a specific frequency.
Sound is heard when there are two that things collide with each other . Sound wave is a longitude wave . Sound waves are affected by temperature and atmosphere's pressure
In water sound waves travel faster due to particles being more compressed. In Air, Sound wave pressure creates rare-fraction and rare-compression columns of air
Sounds of frequency below 20 Hz is called InfraSound can not be heard by human's ears
Infrasound has some really warped effects on society.
If heard would be a large rumble as loud as a jet engine or gunfire.
At rock concerts they play infrasound. This intensifies emotions. This is one possible reason why people play loud music.
Infrasound appears to heighten emotions and make people nervous and thus has an association with the supernatural such as haunted houses. Since people are emotionally attached to the deceased and go to where they died, when you combine it with infrasound which is associated with chills, is this an explanation for ghosts?
One of the stranger uses of infrasound involves combining an ancient chamber that resonates infrasound with mind altering drugs to induce visions and out of body experiences.
Audible Sound: 20-20,000 Hz
Audible Sound are sound that can be perceived by human's ears . Audible Sounds are sounds in the range of frequencies 20-20,000 Hz
Older human hearing 20-15,000 Hz
Ogg, AAC up to 20 kHz
Sounds above 20 kHz are called Ultra Sound . Unable to be heard by people, but can be heard by dogs and dolphins.
Federal Standard 1037C and MIL-STD-188.
The VLA telescope array can resolve a &lambda of 8,xxx Hz
ELF is used by the US Navy to communicate with submerged submarines. The extremely high electrical conductivity of seawater shields submarines from most electromagnetic communications. Signals in the ELF frequency range, however, can penetrate much more deeply. The low transmission rate of most ELF communications limits their use as communications channels; generally an ELF signal serves to request that a submarine surface and initiate some other form of contact.
One of the difficulties posed when broadcasting in the ELF frequency range is antenna size. In order to transmit internationally using ELF frequencies, an extremely large antenna is required. The US maintains two sites, in Wisconsin and Michigan. Both sites use long power lines as antennae, in multiple strands ranging from 14 to 28 miles long. Considerable amounts of power are generated and emitted by ELF, and there have been some concerns over the possible ecological impact of such signals.
See also: TACAMO, HAARP, List of initialisms,
Starting at 7.8 Hz there is the Schumann resonance, which is due to the space between the surface of the Earth and the ionosphere. It acts as a resonant cavity fueled by energy from lightning strikes. Serial Experiments Lain had the idea that the Schumann resonance could be a carrier for a collective consciousness.
Voice band. Used to transmit speech. Allocated for telephone. Voice frequency varies from 300-3400 Hz. 4 kHz allocated for for a single voice-frequency including guard bands.
(VLF) Very Low Frequency: 3-30 kHz
Very Low Frequency or VLF refers to Radio Frequencies (RF) in the range of 3 - 30 kHz. Since there is not much space in this band of the spectrum, only the very simplest signals are used, such as for radionavigation. Many natural radio emissions, such as whistlers, can be heard in this band.
Because VLF can penetrate water to a depth of 20 meters, they are used to communicate with submarines.
Lightning generates low frequency radio waves called whistlers. Whistlers have been received from Jupiter showing the presence of lightning there.
The dawn chorus is an unexplained electromagnetic phenomenon that occurs most often at sunrise or shortly after, that (with the proper radio equipment) resembles the sound of a massive flock of birds. It is thought to be caused by high-energy electrons that get caught in the Van Allen radiation belts of the Earth's magnetosphere and fall to the Earth's surface in the form of audible radio waves. Dawn choruses occur more frequently during magnetic storms.
This phenomenon also occurs during aurorae, when it is termed an auroral chorus.
Low Frequency or LF (sometimes called longwave) refers to Radio Frequencies (RF) in the range of 30-300 kHz. In Europe, part of the LF spectrum is used for AM broadcast service. In the western hemisphere, its main use is for aircraft beacon, navigation, information, and weather systems.
Longwave radio frequencies are those below 500 kHz, which correspond to wavelengths longer than 600 meters. They have the property of following the curvature of the earth, making them ideal for continuous, continental communications. Unlike shortwave radio, longwave signals do not reflect nor refract using the ionosphere, so there are fewer phase-caused fadeouts.
In Europe, North Africa and Asia, longwave radio frequencies between 153 and 281 kHz are used for domestic and international broadcasting. In the Americas, frequencies between 200 and 430 kHz are used for non-directional radio beacons.
The frequency of 60 kHz is used by several nations, such as the United States, Germany, England, and Japan, for extremely accurate time and precision frequency signals. Many commercial appliances sold since approximately 2000 have a VLF receiver capable of receiving these signals, which penetrate indoors more effectively than mediumwave or shortwave signals.
Radio signals below 50 kHz are capable of penetrating ocean depths to approximately 200 meters. The United States, Russian, British, Swedish, and Indian navies communicate with submarines on these frequencies.
Longwave transmitting antennas take up large amounts of space, and have been the cause of controversy in the United States and Europe due to fears over proximity to high-power radio waves.
(AM) Amplitude Modulation radio is from 530 - 1,700 kHz. Also known as medium wave. Was big from 1900's-1960's
AM radio technology is simpler than other types of radio, such as FM radio and DAB. An AM receiver detects the power of the radio wave, and amplifies changes in the power measurement to drive a speaker or earphones. The earliest crystal radio receivers used this principle.
AM radio was used for small scale voice and music broadcasts before World War I. The great increase in the use of AM radio came the following decade. The first commercial radio services began on AM in the 1920s. Radio programming boomed during the "Golden Age of Radio." Dramas, comedy and all other forms of entertainment were produced, as well as broadcasts of news and music.
Medium wave is by far the most used for commercial radio broadcasting; this is the "AM radio" that most people are familiar with.
For the long and medium wave bands, the wavelength is long enough that the wave diffracts around the curve of the Earth by ground wave propagation, giving AM radio, in particular long wave and medium wave at night, a long range.
Short wave is used by radio services intended to be heard great distances away from the transmitting station; the far range of short wave broadcasts comes at the expense of lower audio fidelity. The mode of propagation for short wave is different, see High frequency. AM is used mostly for broadcast uses - other shortwave users may use a modified version of AM such as SSB or an AM-compatible version of SSB such as SSB with carrier reinserted.
Frequencies between the broadcast bands are used for other forms of radio communication, such as baby monitors, walkie talkies, cordless telephones, radio control, amateur radio etc.
High frequency (HF) radio frequencies are between 3 and 30 MHz. This range is often called shortwave.
Short wave is 1,700 - 30,000 kHz, divided into 14/15 "broadcast bands".
Since the ionosphere often reflects HF radio waves quite well, this range is extensively used for medium and long range terrestrial radio communication. However, suitability of this portion of the spectrum for such communication varies greatly with a complex combination of factors:
Sunlight/darkness at site of transmission and reception
Frequency of operation within the HF range
HF is often used for continuous wave morse code transmissions.
See also: VHF, AM radio, Radio propagation
Shortwave radio operates between the frequencies of 3000 kHz and 30 MHz (30,000 kHz) and came to be referred to as such in the early days of radio because the wavelengths associated with this frequency range were shorter than those commonly in use at that time. An alternate name is HF, or high frequency.
Short wavelengths are associated with high frequencies because there is an inverse relationship between frequency and wavelength.
Shortwave frequencies are capable of reaching the other side of the planet by bouncing a signal off the ionosphere. The selection of a frequency to use to reach a target area depends on several factors:
The distance from the transmitter to the target receiver
Time of day. During the day, higher shortwave frequencies (> 10 MHz) can travel longer distances than lower; at night, this : property is reversed.
Solar conditions, including the number of sunspots, solar flares, and overall solar activity. Solar flares can prevent the : ionosphere from reflecting or refracting radio waves.
Some major users of the shortwave radio band include:
Domestic broadcasting in countries with a widely dispersed population with few longwave, mediumwave or FM stations serving them
Utility stations transmitting messages not intended for a general public, such as aircraft flying between continents, encoded or ciphered diplomatic messages, weather reporting, or ships at sea
The Asia-Pacific Telecommunity estimates that there are approximately 600,000,000 shortwave radio receivers in use in 2002.
The World Radiocommunication Conference (WRC), organized under the auspices of the International Telecommunications Union, allocates bands for various services in conferences every few years. The next WRC is scheduled to take place in 2007. At the World Administrative Radio Conference (WARC) in 1997, the following bands were allocated to international broadcasters:
7,300-7,350 kHz (7,100-7,350 kHz outside of the Americas)
Shortwave broadcasting channels are allocated with a 5 kHz separation. International broadcasters, however, may operate outside the normal WARC-allocated bands or use off-channel frequencies to attract attention in crowded bands.
The power used by shortwave transmitters ranges from less than one watt for some experimental transmissions to 500 kilowatts and higher for intercontinental broadcasters. Shortwave transmitting centers often use specialized antenna designs to concentrate radio energy on a bearing aimed at the target area.
See International broadcasting for details on the history and practice of broadcasting to foreign audiences.
The privilege of operating shortwave radio transmitters for non-commercial purposes is open to licensed amateurs. In the US, they are licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). U.S. citizens do not need licenses to own or operate shortwave receivers. Recently the FCC has added an amateur radio license which requires no knowledge of Morse code, making it easier for beginners to get involved; however, a working knowledge of Morse code is required to operate on shortwave bands.
Amateur radio operators have made numerous technical advancements in the field of radio and make themselves available to transmit emergency communications when normal communications channels fail. Some amateurs practice operating off the power grid so as to be prepared for power loss.
Many hobbyists listen to shortwave broadcasters without operating transmitters. In many cases, the goal is to obtain as many stations from as many countries as possible (DXing); others listen to specialized shortwave utility, or "ute", transmissions such as maritime, naval, aviation, or military signals. Others focus on intelligence signals.
Shortwave listeners, or SWLs, can obtain "QSL" cards from broadcasters or utility stations as trophies of the hobby.
Numbers stations are shortwave radio stations of uncertain origin that broadcast streams of numbers, words, or phonetic sounds. Although officially there is no indication of their origin, radio hobbyists have determined that many of them are used by intelligence services as one-way communication to agents in other countries.
The development of direct broadcasts from satellites has reduced the demand for shortwave receivers, but there are still a great number of shortwave broadcasters. A new digital radio technology, Digital Radio Mondiale, is expected to improve the quality of shortwave audio from very poor to standards comparable to the FM broadcast band. The future of shortwave radio is threatened by the uprise of power line communication (PLC), where a data stream is transmitted over unshielded power lines. As the frequencies used overlap with the shortwave bands severe distortions make listening to shortwave radio near power lines difficult or impossible.
Some musicians have been attracted to the unique aural qualities of shortwave radio. John Cage employed shortwave radios as live instruments in a number of pieces, and other musicians have sampled broadcasts, used tape loops of broadcasts, or drawn inspiration from the unusual sounds on some frequencies. Karlheinz Stockhausen used shortwave radio in works including Telemusik (1966), Hymnen (1966–67) and Spiral (1968), and Holger Czukay, Pat Metheny, Aphex Twin, Meat Beat Manifesto, and Wilco have also used broadcasts.
(VHF) Very High Frequency: 30-300 MHz/10-1 m
Common uses for VHF are FM radio broadcast at 88-108 MHz and television broadcast (together with UHF). VHF is also commonly used for terrestrial navigation systems (VOR in particular) and aircraft communications.
UHF and VHF are the most common frequency bands for television.
VHF frequencies' propagation characteristics are ideal for short-distance terrestrial communication. Unlike HF frequencies, the ionosphere does not usually reflect VHF radio and thus transmissions are restricted to the local area (and can't interfere with transmissions thousands of kilometres away) It is also less affected by atmospheric noise and interference from electrical equipment than low frequencies. Whilst it is more easily blocked by land features than HF and lower frequencies, it is less bothered by buildings and other less substantial objects than higher frequencies. It was also easier to construct efficient transmitters, receivers, and antennas for it in the earlier days of radio. In most countries, the VHF spectrum is used for broadcast audio and television, as well as commercial two-way radios (such as that operated by taxis and police), marine two-way audio communications, and aircraft radios.
The large slice of technically and commercially valuable slice of the VHF spectrum taken up by television transmission has attracted the attention of many companies and governments recently, with the development of more efficient digital television broadcasting standards. In some countries much of this spectrum will likely become available (probably for sale) in the next decade or so (currently scheduled for 2008 in the United States).
In the United Kingdom, the authorities chose to develop colour television exclusively on UHF, beginning in the late 1960s. The last British VHF TV transmitters closed down in 1986. VHF band III is now used in the UK for digital audio broadcasting.
42-50 MHz Pre WWII allocation of FM 1940
88-106 MHz Post WWII allocation of FM 1945
New technology was added to FM radio in the early 1960s to allow FM stereo transmissions, where the frequency modulated radio signal is used to carry stereophonic sound, using the pilot-tone multiplex system.
This multiplexes the left and right audio signal channels in a manner that is compatible with mono sound, using a sum-and-difference technique to produce a single "mono-compatible" signal, which has a baseband part that is equal to the sum of the left and right channels (L+R), and a higher-frequency part that is the difference of the left and right channels (L-R) amplitude modulated on a 38 kHz subcarrier. A 19 kHz pilot tone is then added, to allow allow receivers to detect the presence of a stereo-encoded signal.
This signal can then be passed through the FM modulation and demodulation process as if it was a monophonic signal, and the stereo signals extracted from the demodulated FM signal by reversing the multiplexing process.
Simple mono FM receivers will not extract the left and right signals, but simply reproduce the baseband part of the "mono-compatible" signal. (This relies on the fact that the subcarrier-modulated part of the mono-compatible signal is in a part of the audio spectrum that is inaudible to people, and the pilot tone is a low-intensity tone in a part of the audio spectrum that is inaudible to most people).
This backwards compatibility was important, as when the FM stereo system was introduced in the U.S. in the 1960s, mono FM transmissions had been in service since the 1940s, and there was a large installed base of mono receivers that needed to be able to receive stereo broadcasts without any modification.
Stereo receivers could automatically switch between "mono" and "stereo" modes based on the presence of the pilot tone. They were also equipped with a notch filter to remove the pilot tone. In poor signal conditions, stereo receivers could also fall back to mono mode, even on a stereo signal, allowing improved signal-to-noise performance in these conditions.
The stereo multiplexing system has been further extended to add an extra, even higher frequency, 57 kHz subcarrier, which is used to carry low-bandwidth digital Radio Data System information, allowing digitally controlled radios to provide extra features.
FM radio channel assignments in the US
In the United States, frequency-modulated broadcasting stations operate in a frequency band extending from 87.8 MHz to 108.0 MHz, for a total of 20.2 MHz. It is divided into 100 channels, each 0.2 MHz wide, designated "channel 200" through "channel 300."
To receive a station, an FM receiver is tuned to the center frequency of the station's channel. The lowest channel, channel 200, extends from 87.8 MHz to 88.0 MHz; thus its center frequency is 87.9 MHz. Channel 201 has a center frequency of 88.1 MHz, and so on, up to channel 300, which extends from 107.8 to 108.0 MHz and has a center frequency of 107.9 MHz.
Because each channel is 0.2 MHz wide, the center frequencies of adjacent channels differ by 0.2 MHz. Because the lowest channel is centered on 87.9 MHz the tenths digit of the center frequency of any FM station in the United States is always an odd number. FM audio for television channel 6 is broadcast at a carrier frequency of 87.75 MHz, and many radios can tune down this low; a few low-power television stations licensed for channel 6 are operated solely for their right to use this frequency and broadcast only nominal video programming. For the same reason, assignment restrictions between TV stations on channel 6 and nearby FM stations are stringent: there are only two stations in the United States (KSFH and translator K200AA) licensed to operate on 87.9 MHz.
FM stations in a market are generally spaced four channels (800 kHz) apart. This spacing was developed in response to problems perceived on the original FM band, mostly due to deficiencies in receiver technology of the time. With modern equipment, this is widely understood to be unnecessary, and in many countries shorter spacings are used. Other spacing restrictions relate to mixing products with nearby television, air-traffic control, and two-way radio systems as well as other FM broadcast stations. The most significant such taboo restricts the allocation of stations 10.6 and 10.8 MHz apart, to protect against mixing products which will interfere with an FM receiver's standard 10.7 MHz intermediate frequency stage.
Commercial broadcasting is licensed only on channels 221 through 300, with 200 through 220 being reserved for noncommercial educational broadcasting. In some markets close to the Canadian or Mexican border, such as Detroit, Michigan and San Diego, California, commercial stations operating from those countries target U.S. audiences on "reserved band" channels, as neither Canada nor Mexico has such a reservation.
(UHF) Ultra High Frequency: 300-3000 MHz/100-10 cm
UHF and VHF are the most common frequency bands for television.
UHF frequencies have higher attenuation from atmospheric moisture and benefit less from 'bounce', or the reflection of signals off the ionosphere back to earth, when compared to VHF frequencies. The frequencies of 300-3000 MHz are always at least an order of magnitude above the MUF (Maximum Usable Frequency). The MUF for most of the earth is generally between 25-35 MHz. Higher frequencies also benefit less from ground mode transmission. However, the short wavelengths of UHF frequencies allow compact receiving antennas with narrow elements; many people consider them less ugly than VHF-receiving models
In the United States, UHF stations (broadcast channels above 13) originally gained a reputation for being more locally owned, less polished, less professional, less popular, and for having a weaker signal than their VHF counterparts (channels 2-13). The movie UHF, starring Weird Al Yankovic, parodies this phenomenon. Recently, with the emergence of eight major broadcast television networks, that notion has changed as bigger and bigger media companies seek a bigger slice of the television pie. Many Fox, UPN, WB, and Pax network affiliates broadcast in the UHF band.
As cable television, digital television, and DSS have penetrated the television market, the distinction between VHF and UHF stations has dissipated.
In Australia, UHF was first anticipated in the mid 1970s with channels 28 to 69. The first UHF TV broadcasts in Australia were operated by Special Broadcasting Service (SBS) on channel 28 in Sydney and Melbourne starting in 1980, and translator stations for the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC). The UHF band is now used extensively as ABC, SBS, commercial and community (public access) television services have expanded particularly through regional areas.
A band reserved for television.
(SHF) Super High Frequency: 3-30 GHz/10-1 cm
Note: above 300 GHz, the absorption of electromagnetic radiation by Earth's atmosphere is so great that the atmosphere is effectively opaque to higher frequencies of electromagnetic radiation, until the atmosphere becomes transparent again in the so-called infrared and optical window frequency ranges.
A microwave oven uses a magnetron microwave generator to produce microwaves at a frequency of approximately 2.4 GHz for the purpose of cooking food. Microwaves cook food by causing molecules of water and other compounds to vibrate. The vibration creates heat which warms the food. Since organic matter is made up primarily of water, food is easily cooked by this method.
A maser is a device similar to a laser, except that it works at microwave frequencies. Microwaves are also used in satellite transmissions because this frequency passes easily through the Earth's atmosphere with less interference than higher wavelengths.
Radar also uses microwave radiation to detect the range, speed, and other characteristics of remote objects.
Wireless LAN communication protocols such as IEEE 802.11 and bluetooth also use microwaves in the 2.4 GHz ISM band, although some variants use a 5 GHz band for communication.
Cable TV and Internet access on coax cable as well as broadcast television use some of the lower microwave frequencies.
Microwaves can be used to transmit power over long distances, create a solar array to beam power to earth.
The microwave spectrum is defined as electromagnetic energy ranging from approximately 300 MHz to 1000 GHz in frequency. Most common applications are within the 1 to 40 GHz range.
Microwave Frequency Bands are defined in the table below:
For some of the history in the development of electromagnetic theory applicable to modern microwave applications see the following figures:
Michael Faraday.
James Clerk Maxwell.
Heinrich Hertz.
Nikola Tesla.
Guglielmo Marconi.
Samuel Morse.
Sir William Thomson, later Lord Kelvin.
Oliver Heaviside.
Lord Rayleigh.
Oliver Lodge.
Specific significant areas of research and work developing microwaves and their applications:
Specific work on microwaves Work carried out by	Area of work
Barkhausen and Kurz	Positive grid oscillators
Hull	Smooth bore magnetron
Varian Brothers	Velocity modulated electron beam → klystron tube
Randall and Boot	Cavity magnetron
Home appliances.
Microwave auditory effect.
Radio.
Optics.
The Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation is a form of electromagnetic radiation that fills the whole of the universe. It has the characteristics of black-body radiation at a temperature of 2.726 kelvins. It has a frequency in the microwave range.
This radiation is regarded as the best available evidence of the Big Bang (BB) theory and its discovery in the mid-1960s marked the end of general interest for alternatives such as the steady state theory. The CMR gives a snapshot of the Universe when, according to standard cosmology, the temperature dropped enough to allow electrons and protons to form hydrogen atoms, thus making the universe transparent to radiation. When it originated some 300,000 years after the Big Bang—this point in time is generally known as the "last scattering surface"—the temperature of the Universe was about 6000 K. Since then it has dropped because of the expansion of the Universe, which cools radiation inversely proportional to the fourth power of the Universe's scale length.
Variations due to external physics also exist; the Sunyaev-Zel'dovich Effect is one of the major factors here, in which an cloud of high energy electrons scatters the radiation transferring some energy to the CMB photons.
Even more interesting are anisotropies at a level of roughly 1/100000 and on a scale of a few arc minutes. Those very small variations correspond to the density fluctuations at the last scattering surface and give valuable information about the seeds for the large scale structures we observe now. These density fluctations arise because different parts of the universe are not in contact with each other.
In addition, the Sachs-Wolfe effect causes photons from the Cosmic microwave background to be gravitationally redshifted. These small-scale variations give observational constraints on the properties of universe, and are therefore one important test for cosmological models.
Detection, Prediction and Discovery
The CBR was predicted by George Gamow, Ralph Alpher, and Robert Hermann in the 1940s and was accidentally discovered in 1964 by Penzias and Wilson, who received a Nobel Prize for this discovery. The CBR had, however, been detected and its temperature deduced in 1941, seven years before Gamow's prediction. Based on the study of narrow absorption line features in the spectra of stars, the astronomer Andrew McKellar wrote: "It can be calculated that the 'rotational' temperature of interstellar space is 2 K."
Because water absorbs microwave radiation, a fact that is used to build microwave ovens, it is rather difficult to observe the CMB with ground-based instruments. CMB research therefore makes increasing use of air and space-borne experiments.
Of these experiments, the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite that was flown in 1989-1996 is probably the most famous and which made the first detection of the large scale anisotropies (other than the dipole). In June 2001, NASA launched a second CBR space mission, WMAP, to make detailed measurements of the anisotropies over the full sky. Results from this mission provide a detailed measurement of the angular power spectrum down to degree scales, giving detailed constraints on various cosmological parameters. The results are broadly consistent with those expected from cosmic inflation as well as various other competing theories, and are available in detail at NASA's data center for Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) [ed. see links below],
A third space mission, Planck, is to be launched in 2007. Unlike the previous two space missions, Planck is a collaboration between NASA and ESA (the European Space Agency).
During the mid-1990's, the lack of detection of anisotropies in the CBR led to some interest in nonstandard cosmologies (such as plasma cosmology) mostly as a backup in case detectors failed to find anisotropy in the CBR. The discovery of these anisotropies combined with a large amount of new data coming in has greatly reduced interest in these alternative theories.
Some supporters of non-standard cosmology argue that the primodorial background radiation is uniform (which is inconsistent with the big bang) and that the variations in the CBR are due to the Sunyaev-Zel'dovich effect mentioned above (among other effects).
(EHF) Extremely High Frequency: 30-300 GHz/10-1 mm
Note: above 100 GHz, the absorption of electromagnetic radiation by Earth's atmosphere is so great that the atmosphere is effectively opaque to higher frequencies of electromagnetic radiation, until the atmosphere becomes transparent again in the so-called infrared and optical window frequency ranges.
Infra-red means below red, where red is the color with the longest wavelength.
(MIR/IIR) mid-IR (5-30 µm) - Infrared radiation is often linked to heat, since objects at room temperature or above will emit radiation mostly concentrated in the mid-infrared band (see black body).
However, these terms are not precise, and are used differently in various studies.
Infrared is used in night-vision equipment, when there is insufficient visible light to see an object. The radiation is detected and turned into an image on a screen, hotter objects showing up brighter, enabling the police and military to chase targets. "Night vision"
Smoke is more transparent to infrared than to visible light, so fire fighters use infrared imaging equipment when working in smoke-filled areas. Fire fighters also use this equipment in wood-frame buildings after a fire has been extinguished to look for hot spots behind the walls, where a fire can break out again.
A more common use of IR is in television remote controls. In this case it is used in preference to radio waves because it does not interfere with the television signal. IR data transmission is also employed in short-range communication among computer peripherals and personal digital assistants. These devices usually conform to standards published by IrDA, the Infrared Data Association. Remote controls and IrDA devices use infrared light-emitting diodes (LEDs) to emit infrared radiation which is focused by a plastic lens into a narrow beam. The beam is modulated, i.e. switched on and off, to encode the data. The receiver uses a silicon photodiode to convert the infrared radiation to an electric current. It responds only to the rapidly pulsing signal created by the transmitter, and filters out slowly changing infrared radiation from sunlight, people and other warm objects.
Carbon Dioxide absorbs certain wavlengths of infared light. This is thought to cause global warming.
Visible light exists on the tip end of infared and just below it is UV. Basically you can almost get a sunburn from visible light.
The optical spectrum (visible light or visible spectrum) is the portion of the electromagnetic spectrum that is visible to the human eye. The optical spectrum is a composite, or mixture, of the various colors.
There are no exact bounds to the optical spectrum ; a light-adapted eye typically has a maximum sensitivity of ~555 nm (in the green). Commonly the response of the eye is considered to cover 380 nm to 780 nm although a range of 400 nm to 700 nm range is more common. The eye may, however, have some visual response at even wider wavelength ranges.
Wavelengths in the range visible to the eye occupy most of the "optical window", a range of wavelengths that are easily transmitted through the Earth's atmosphere.
Note: Ultraviolet and Infrared are often considered to be "light" but are generally not visible to the human eye.
See Rydberg formula.
People see red, yellow, green, blue and purple
People don't notice the difference because red and purple both have a low intensity.
Ultra-Violet means beyond violet, where violet is the color with the shortest wavelength.
It is colloquially called black light, as it is invisible to the human eye.
The sun emits ultraviolet light in the UV-A, UV-B, and UV-C bands
99% of the UV light that reaches the Earth's surface.
Associated with skin cancer.
Absorbed by ozone layer, creates ozone layer.
Ordinary glass is transparent to UV-A but is opaque to shorter wavelengths. This is why people don't get sunburns in cars. During the first nuclear blast, Feynman was the only person who saw it because he looked through a window.
Quartz glass, depending on quality, can be transparent even to vacuum UV wavelengths.
In general, UV-A is the least harmful, but can contribute to the aging of skin, DNA damage and possibly skin cancer. It penetrates deeply and does not cause sun burn. Because it does not cause reddenning of the skin (erythema) it can not be measured in the SPF testing. There is no good clinical measurement of the blocking of UVA radiation, but it is important that your sunscreen block both UVA and UVB.
High intensities of UV-B light are hazardous to the eyes, and exposure can cause welder's flash (photokeratitis or arc eye).
UVA, UV-B and UV-C all can damage collagen fibers and thereby accelerate aging of the skin.
Tungsten-Halogen lamps have bulbs made of quartz, not of ordinary glass. Tungsten-Halogen lamps that are not filtered by an additional layer of ordinary glass are a common, useful, and possibly dangerous, source of UV-B light.
UV-A light is known as "dark-light" and, because of its longer wavelength, can penetrate most windows. It also penetrates deeper into the skin than UV-B light and is thought to be a prime cause of wrinkles.
UV-B light in particular has been linked to skin cancers such as melanoma. The radiation ionizes DNA molecules in skin cells, causing covalent bonds to form between adjacent thymine bases, producing thymidine dimers. Thymidine dimers do not base pair normally, which can cause distortion of the DNA helix, stalled replication, gaps, and misincorporation. These can lead to mutations, which can result in cancerous growths. The mutagenicity of UV radiation can be easily observed in bacteria cultures.
This cancer connection is the reason for concern about ozone depletion and the ozone hole.
UV-C rays are the strongest, most dangerous type of ultraviolet light. Little attention has been given to UV-C rays in the past since they are normally filtered out by the ozone layer and do not reach the Earth. Thinning of the ozone layer and holes in the ozone layer are causing increased concern about the potential for UVC light exposure, however.
As a defense against UV light, the body tans when exposed to moderate (depending on skin type) levels of radiation by releasing the brown pigment melanin. This helps to block UV penetration and prevent damage to the vulnerable skin tissues deeper down. Suntan lotion that partly blocks UV is widely available (often referred to as "sun block" or "sunscreen"). Most of these products contain an "SPF rating" that describes the amount of protection given. This protection applies only to UV-B light. In any case, most dermatologists recommend against prolonged sunbathing.
A positive effect of UV light is that it induces the production of vitamin D in the skin. Grant (2002) claims tens of thousands of premature deaths occur in the U.S. annually from cancer due to insufficient UV-B exposures (apparently via vitamin D deficiency).
In astronomy, very hot objects preferentially emit UV light (see Wien's law). However, the same ozone layer that protects us causes difficulties for astronomers observing from the earth, so most UV observations are made from space. (See UV astronomy, space observatory).
Fluorescent lamps produce UV light by the emission of low-pressure mercury gas. A phosphorescent coating on the inside of the tubes absorbs the UV and turns it into visible light.
The main mercury emission wavelength is in the UV-C range. Unshielded exposure of the skin or eyes to mercury arc lamps that do not have a conversion phosphor is quite dangerous.
The light from a mercury lamp is predominantly at discrete wavelengths. Other practical UV light sources with more continuous emission spectra include xenon arc lamps (commonly used as sunlight simulators), deuterium arc lamps, mercury-xenon arc lamps, metal-halide arc lamps, and tungsten-halogen incandescent lamps.
Ultraviolet light is increasingly being used to disinfect drinking water and in waste water treatment plants. Dr. James R. Bolton discovered that ultraviolet light could treat Cryptosporidium, previously unknown. The findings resulted in two US patents and the use of UV light as a viable method to treat drinking water.
Ultraviolet lamps are also used in analyzing minerals, gems, and in other detective work including authentication of various collectibles. Materials may look the same under visible light, but fluoresce to different degrees under ultraviolet light; or may fluoresce differently under short wave ultraviolet versus long wave ultra violet. UV fluorescent dyes are used in many applications (for example, biochemistry and forensics). The fluorescent protein Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) is often used in genetics as a marker. Many substances, proteins for instance, have significant light absorption bands in the ultraviolet that are of use and interest in biochemistry and related fields. UV-capable spectrophotometers are common in such laboratories.
Ultraviolet lamps are used to sterilize workspaces and tools used in biology laboratories and medical facilities. Since microorganisms can be shielded from ultraviolet light in small cracks and other shaded areas, however, these lamps are used only as a supplement to other sterilization techniques.
Ultraviolet light is used for very fine resolution photolithography, as required for manufacture of semiconductors.
UV light is used extensively in the electronics industry in a procedure known as photolithography, where a chemical known as a photoresist is exposed to UV light which has passed through a mask. The light allows chemical reactions to take place in the photoresist, and after development (a step that either removes the exposed or unexposed photoresist), a geometric pattern which is determined by the mask remains on the sample. Further steps may then be taken to "etch" away parts of the sample with no photoresist remaining.
It is photolithography which is primarily used to create integrated circuit components and printed circuit boards.
The onset of vacuum UV, 200 nm, is defined by the fact that ordinary air is opaque below this wavelength. This opacity is due to the strong absorption of light of these wavelengths by oxygen in the air. Pure nitrogen (less than about 10 ppm oxygen) is transparent to wavelengths in the range of about 150-200 nm. This has wide practical significance now that semiconductor manufacturing processes are using wavelengths shorter than 200 nm. By working in oxygen-free gas, the equipment does not have to be built to withstand the pressure differences required to work in a vacuum. Some other scientific instruments, such as Circular Dichroism spectrometers, are also commonly nitrogen purged and operate in this spectral region.
It is advisable to use protective eyewear when working with ultraviolet light, especially short wave ultraviolet. Ordinary eyeglasses give some protection. Most plastic lenses give more protection than glass lenses. Some plastic lens materials, such as polycarbonate, block most UV. There are protective treatments available for eyeglass lenses that need it to give better protection. The most important reason that ordinary eyeglasses only give limited protection, however, is that light can reach the eye without going through the lens. Full coverage is important if the risk from exposure is high. Full coverage eye protection is usually recommended for high altitude mountaineering, for instance. Mountaineers are exposed to higher than ordinary levels of UV light, both because there is less atmospheric filtering and because of reflection from snow and ice.
Some insects, such as bees, can see into the near ultraviolet, and flowers often have markings visible to such pollinators.
Hard X-ray: (100-5 pm)Low energy gamma rays
X-rays are generated by electron collisions.
X-rays are primarily used for diagnostic medical imaging and crystallography.
Physicist Johann Hittorf observed tubes with energy rays extending from a negative electrode. These rays produced a fluorescence when they hit the glass walls of the tubes. In 1876 the effect was named "cathode rays" by Eugene Goldstein. Later, English physicist William Crookes investigated the effects of energy discharges on rare gases. He constructed what is called the Crookes tube. It is a glass vacuum cylinder, containing electrodes for discharges of a high voltage electric current. He found, when he placed unexposed photographic plates near the tube, that some of them were flawed by shadows, though he did not investigate this effect. In 1892, Heinrich Hertz began experimenting and demonstrated that cathode rays could penetrate very thin metal foil (such as aluminum). Philip Lenard, a student of Heinrich Hertz, further researched this effect. He developed a version of the cathode tube and studied the penetration of X-rays through various materials. Philip Lenard, though, did not realize that he was producing X-rays.
In April 1887, Nikola Tesla began to investigate X-rays using his own devices as well as Crookes tubes. Tesla did this by experimenting with high voltages and vacuum tubes. From Nikola Tesla's technical publications, it is indicated that he invented and developed a special single-electrode X-ray tube. Tesla's tubes differ from other X-ray tubes in that they have no target electrode. He stated these facts in his 1897 X-ray lecture before the New York Academy of Sciences. The modern term for this process is the bremsstrahlung process, in which a high-energy secondary X-ray emission is produced when charged particles (such as electrons) pass through matter. By 1892, Tesla performed several such experiments; however, he did not categorize the emissions as what was later called X-rays (generalizing the phenonomena as radiant energy). Tesla did not publicly declare his findings nor did he make them widely known. His subsequent X-ray experimentation by vacuum high field emissions led him to alert the scientific community to the biological hazards associated with X-ray exposure.
Hermann von Helmholtz formulated mathematical equations for X-rays. He postulated a dispersion theory before Roentgen made his discovery and announcement. It was formed on the basis of the electromagnetic theory of light (Wiedmann's Annalen, Vol. XLVIII); however, he did not work with actual X-rays.
On November 8, 1895, Wilhelm Röntgen, a German scientist, began observing and further documenting X-rays while experimenting with vacuum tubes. Röntgen, on December 28, 1895, wrote a preliminary report "On a new kind of ray: A preliminary communication". He submitted it to the Würzburg's Physical-Medical Society journal. This was the first formal and public recognition of the categorization of X-rays. Röntgen referred to the radiation as "X", to indicate that it was an unknown type of radiation. The name stuck, although (over Röntgen's great objections), many of his colleagues suggested calling them Röntgen rays. They are still referred to as Röntgen rays in some countries. Roentgen received the first Nobel Prize in Physics for his discovery.
In 1895, Thomas Edison investigated materials' ability to fluoresce when exposed to X-rays. He found that calcium tungstate was the most effective substance. Around March 1896, the fluoroscope he developed became the standard for medical X-ray examinations. Nevertheless, Edison dropped x-ray research around 1903 after the death of Clarence Madison Dally, one of his glassblowers. Dally had a habit of testing X-ray tubes on his hands, and acquired a cancer in them so tenacious that both arms were amputated in a futile attempt to save his life.[1]
In 1906, physicist Charles Barkla discovered that X-rays could be scattered by gases, and that each element had a characteristic X-ray. He won the 1917 Nobel prize for this discovery.
The use of X-rays for medical purposes was pioneered by Major John Hall-Edwards in Birmingham, England. In 1908, he had to have his left arm amputated owing to the spread of X-ray dermatitis.
The detection of X-rays is based on various methods. Most commonly known is the photographic plate as we know them from hospitals. Initially, most common detection was based on the ionisation of gasses. One of the most simple examples is the Geiger counter. Since the 1990-ies, new detectors were developed based on semiconductors. In the semiconductor, the X-ray photon was converted to electron-hole pairs which were collected to detect the X-ray
Used to take photographs.
Gamma rays from nuclear fallout would probably cause the largest number of casualties in the event of the use of nuclear weapons in a nuclear war. An effective fallout shelter reduces human exposure at least 1000 times.
Gamma rays are less ionising than either alpha or beta rays. However, reducing human danger requires thicker shielding. They produce damage similar to that caused by X-rays such as burns, cancer, and genetic mutations.
In terms of ionization, gamma radiation interacts with matter via three main processes: the photoelectric effect, Compton scattering, and pair production.
Photoelectric Effect: This describes the case in which a gamma photon interacts with and transfers all of its energy to an orbital electron, ejecting that electron from the atom. The kinetic energy of the resulting photoelectron is equal to the energy of the incident gamma photon minus the binding energy of the electron. The photoelectric effect is thought to be the dominant energy transfer mechanism for x-ray and gamma ray photons with energies below 50 keV (thousand electronvolts), but it is much less important at higher energies.
Compton Scattering: This is an interaction in which an incident gamma photon loses enough energy to an orbital electron to cause its ejection, with the remainder of the original photon's energy being emitted as a new, lower energy gamma photon with an emission direction different from that of the incident gamma photon. The probability of Compton scatter decreases with increasing photon energy. Compton scattering is thought to be the principal absorption mechanism for gamma rays in the intermediate energy range 100 keV to 10 MeV (million electronvolts), an energy spectrum which includes most gamma radiation present in a nuclear explosion. Compton scattering is relatively independent of the atomic number of the absorbing material.
Pair Production: By interaction in the vicinity of the coulomb force of the nucleus, the energy of the incident photon is spontaneously converted into the mass of an electron-positron pair. A positron is a positively charged electron. Energy in excess of the equivalent rest mass of the two particles (1.02 MeV) appears as the kinetic energy of the pair and the recoil nucleus. The electron of the pair, frequently referred to as the secondary electron, is densely ionizing. The positron has a very short lifetime. It combines within 10−8 second with a free electron. The entire mass of these two particles is then converted into two gamma photons of 0.51 MeV energy each.
Gamma rays, x-rays, visible light, and UV rays are all forms of electromagnetic radiation. The only difference is the frequency and hence the energy of the photons. Gamma rays are the most energetic. An example of gamma ray production follows.
First cobalt-60 decays to excited nickel-60 by beta decay:
Then the nickel-60 drops down to the ground state (see nuclear shell model) by emitting a gamma ray:
The powerful nature of gamma-rays have made them useful in the sterilising of medical equipment by killing bacteria. They are also used to kill bacteria in foodstuffs to keep them fresher for longer.
In spite of their cancer-causing properties, gamma rays are also used to treat some types of cancer. In the procedure called gamma-knife surgery, multiple concentrated beams of gamma rays are directed on the growth in order to kill the cancerous cells. The beams are aimed from different angles to focus the radiation on the growth while minimising damage to the surrounding tissues.
See also: physics, gamma-ray astronomy, gamma ray bursters, radiation therapy.
Highly energetic photons associated with blackholes and galaxies
Black holes are known to emit gamma ray bursts through their poles.
A large enough gamma ray burst could sterilize all life on earth.
In the VLF-range signals from transmitters and jammers can be received.
The following table contains the most important signals in the range under 24 kHz. One should not expect to receive all stations at the same time. Some of the specified stationa are only few minutes per week active. Since these stations nearly all for the transmission of news to submerged submarines of naval forces, no transmission plans are available. Also a decoding of the signals might not succeed. One can enjoy however frequently about the signals on the spectrograms.
Frequency of horizontal deflectors in cathode ray tube-based TVs, as defined by PAL and SÉCAM specifications
?
Only active at special occasions, such as Alexanderson Day
?
Many operation modes, even Superpulseses
RJH63, RJH66, RJH69, RJH77, RJH99
?
Russia?
Only active on 2nd of each month for a short periode between 11o'clock and 13o'clock (respectively 10o'clock and 12o'clock in winter), if 2nd of each month is not a Sunday
RJH63, RJH66, RJH69, RJH77, RJH99
Signals from GBZ on 19,6 kHz
Signal looking like a fish on 19.6 kHz
Signal looking like a garland on 19.6 kHz
Ornament-type signal on 19.6 kHz
Signals in the range between 17 kHz and 18 kHz
Signal of unidentified transmitter on 17.8 kHz
Signal of SAQ on July 4th, 2004
Signals from Russian "Beta"-time signal transmitters
Signal of unknown transmitter on 17 kHz
This aerial should consist of a coil with as many windings and as large a diameter as possible.
You only need one roll of insulated wire, which is connected to the LINE or MIC input of the sound card with a cable at least 2 metres long. As cable you can use any type with two conductors (although shielded or coaxial cable should be quieter).
In many shops ready-soldered plugs can be bought for all types of PC sound card inputs and you may need not even have to solder the necessary plug for the sound card input by yourself.
For good reception the coil should be placed as far away as possible from the PC (if possible at least 2 metres) and from other electrical devices, with the axis being parallel with the ground.
It is possible, if you want to achieve a higher sensitivity, to connect two or more coils in series. You have to mind the sense (clockwise or counterclockwise) of the windings, otherwise the induced signals cancel each other out.
Reception aerial for VLF consisting of a serial connection of 4 wire rolls, from which two share one common axis. Each wire roll has a diameter of 10.3 centimetres and 309 windings. With the paperclips it is possible for test purposes to short-circuit one or more of the rolls.
After the aerial was connected to the sound card input, the signal input to be used must be selected at the PC.
Therefore click with the right mouse button on the loudspeaker symbol at the right end of the Windows task bar.
A popup menu appears, on which you have to choose the option for "loudness" or "Open Volume Controls (w2k)".
On the dialog, which is now shown, click on the menu point for "options" and then choose from the sub menu the point "properties".
You will see a second dialog on the screen, click the button for "recording" and click afterwards on the "OK" button.
Now you can set the sound card entrance you want to use. For VLF reception, the balance control of this entrance should be put in the middle and the loudness regulator to maximal loudness.
All these settings can be changed of course later, if e.g. the spectral analysis of a sound signal shall be done, which is fed via an other soundcard entrance in the PC.
General considerations about the reception technique and analysis software
There are many programmes available for the spectral analysis of signals, which come via the sound card in the PC (look http://www.vlf.it/harald/strangerec.htm).
My favourite software is "SpecPlus", since this extremely powerful software offers the possibility to save the received signals as frequency/time/intensity diagrams (such called spectrograms) automatically in a disk space saving way as jpeg files.
Besides this, "SpecPlus" runs very stable, when a Windows95, Windows98 or Windows ME operating system is used. (I do not know how well it runs under Windows NT 4.0, Windows 2000 or Windows XP. It does not work under Windows3.x!)
Monitors of PCs generate strong noise in the VLF range. For this reason it is very sensible not to view the spectrograms directly on the screen, but saving them as file on hard disk and viewing them at a later point of time.
Therefore automatically working with monitor switched off is the best operation mode. Between midnight and 6o'clock local standard time is usually the best time for VLF reception, because most electric devices are switched off at that time and the level of disturbing signals is therefore lowest.
As a corollary, the PC is probably not being used for other tasks at these hours, so it can be used for VLF reception!
"SpecLab" is downloadable as zip file from http://www.qsl.net/dl4yhf/spectra1.html.
After successful download and extraction with WinZip in an installation directory, the software can be installed, experience shows that no troubles occur. The program runs under Windows 98, 2000, ME, XP, Linux/WINE, but not under Windows Vista.
After successful installation some settings have to be done.
First you should set the colour palette. There are many false colour display modes available.
Although false colour displays can look like somewhat pop, I prefer for good reason a mode which shows the signals black and the background white.
First, such a display mode can be easily understood without knowledge of the colour palette used and you can, if you want, compress the received jpeg files further with other programmes without loosing information (if you use a display in false colours the colours can easily changed by this process. This effect is not desired at all, because the colours show the intensity of the signal, so the information is lost in compression.
For the setting of the colour palette a file containing an appropriate colour palette is load via the menu point "Option" and the submenu point "Load Color Palette".
Now the sampling rate is adjusted. Choose therefore the menu point "Option" and then the submenu point "Audio Settings".
The sampling rate determines the value of the highest frequency you can receive. Its value is:
F = sampling rate / (2 * Input Sample Rate Divisor).
For a maximum reception frequency of 24 kHz (customary sound cards cannot process input signals with higher frequencies), you have to set the sampling rate on 48000 Hertz and the Input Sample Rate Divisor on 1.
Then you have to fix the FFT properties. Choose therefore under "options" the menu point "FFT Settings".
For VLF reception you must set FFT Output on "Logarithmic" and for FFT type you should choose "Real Number FFT Starting at 0".
Set the amplitude range on the dialog which will now appear for VLF reception between -130 dB and -60dB.
Experience shows that this range is very sensitive for the display of VLF signals, because stronger signals do normally not occur and the noise of the sound card has a value in the order of -110dB to -120dB.
There are some further adjustments possible in this window (look at the picture).
Finally you have to adjust in the main dialog with the controls "B" (brightness) and "C" (contrast) below "Color Palette" the best value for the sensitivity. Disconnect or short-circuit your aerial for this purpose and move the control "B" so that the background just appears white.
Set the contrast of the display with the control "C".
You can set it in such way, that small differences in signal intensity appear or not.
Because of the fact that the settings of the regulator "B" and "C" influence each other, you have perhaps to do these steps several times, until you are content with the display.
Afterwards your PC is ready for VLF reception!
For automatic operation you have to choose under the menu point "File", the submenu point "Periodic actions".
With the settings shown here every 40 seconds a graphic file showing the spectrogram with the name "ns" + running number(starting with 1) + ".jpg" is written into the directory g:\vlf\07032002.
(I assign with the two letters at the beginning of the file name the direction, in which the axis of the reception coil shows: 'ns' is for north/south direction, 'ow' for east/west direction'. This is very sensible, because the used aerial shows, as does every inductive aerial, a strong directional characteristic.)
Keep in mind, that the directory you mention, must exist and that there is a toggle at "active".
Otherwise no recordings are done!
Radio transmitter design is a complex topic which can be broken down into a series of smaller topics.
For a fixed frequency transmitter one commonly used method is to use a resonant quartz crystal in a Crystal oscillator to fix the frequency. For transmitter where the frequency has to be able to be varied then several options can be used.
An array of crystals—This approach uses several oscillators, each tuned to a different fixed frequency.
It is often the case for VHF transmitters that it is not possible to operate the crystal controlled or variable frequency oscillator at the frequency of the final output. Also, for reasons including frequency stability, it is better to multiply the frequency of the free running oscillator up to the final frequency which is required.
If the output of an amplifier stage is tuned to a multiple of the frequency which the stage is driven with, the stage is optimised to give a larger harmonic output than that found in a linear amplifier. In a push-push stage, the output will only contain the even harmonics. This is because the currents which would generate the fundamental and the odd harmonics in this circuit (if one valve was removed) are canceled out by the second valve. Note that in these diagrams that the bias supplies and the neutralization have been omitted for clarity. In a real system it is likely that tetrodes would be used as plate to grid capacitance in a tetrode is lower so making the stage less likely to be unstable.
Here in the push-pull stage the output will only contain the odd harmonics because of the canceling effect.
The task of many transmitters is to transmit some form of information using a carrier wave. This process is called modulation. There are many types of RF modulation, and the choice of modulation often depends on the type of information being transmitted.
For instance, audio information is continuous in time and value, and scaling by a constant (i.e. signal inversion, volume control) is acceptable, so AM and FM transmission work. But for digital communications, the signal is discrete in time and discrete in value, and inversion of the signal is unacceptable, so AM and FM are not (on their own) satisfactory. For digital communications, a modulation such as frequency shift keying (FSK) or on-off keying (OOK) over FM would be better.
In many cases the carrier wave is mixed with another electrical signal to impose upon it the information. This occurs in Amplitude modulation (AM).
Here a small audio stage is used to modulate a low power stage, the output of this stage is then amplified using a linear RF amplifier.
The advantage of using a linear RF amplifier is that the smaller early stages can be modulated, which only requires a small audio amplifier to drive the modulator.
The great disadvantage of this system is that the amplifier chain is less efficient, because it has to be linear to preserve the modulation. Hence class C amplifiers cannot be employed.
An approach which marries the advantages of low-level modulation with the efficiency of a Class C power amplifier chain is to arrange a feedback system to compensate for the substantial distortion of the AM envelope. A simple detector at the transmitter output (which can be little more than a loosely coupled diode) recovers the audio signal, and this is used as negative feedback to the audio modulator stage. The overall chain then acts as a linear amplifier as far as the actual modulation is concerned, though the RF amplifier itself still retains the Class C efficiency. This approach is widely used in practical medium power transmitters, such as AM radiotelephones.
One advantage of using class C amplifiers in a broadcast AM transmitter is that only the final stage needs to be modulated, and that all the earlier stages can be driven at a constant level. These class C stages will be able to generate the drive for the final stage for a smaller DC power input. However, in many designs in order to obtain better quality AM the penultimate RF stages will need to be subject to modulation as well as the final stage.
A large audio amplifier will be needed for the modulation stage, at least equal to the power of the transmitter output itself. Traditionally the modulation is applied using an audio transformer, and this can be bulky. Direct coupling from the audio amplifier is also possible (known as a cascode arrangement), though this usually requires quite a high DC supply voltage (say 30V or more), which is not suitable for mobile units.
A wide range of different circuits have been used for AM. While it is perfectly possible to create good designs using solid-state electronics, valved (tube) circuits are shown here. In general, valves are able to easily yield RF powers far in excess of what can be achieved using solid state. Most high-power broadcast stations still use valves.
In plate modulation systems the voltage delivered to the stage is changed. As the power output available is a function of the supply voltage, the output power is modulated. This can be done using a transformer to alter the anode (plate) voltage. The advantage of the transformer method is that the audio power can be supplied to the RF stage and converted into RF power.
Anode modulation using a transformer. The tetrode is supplied with an anode supply (and screen grid supply) which is modulated via the transformer. The resistor R1 sets the grid bias, both the input and outputs are tuned LC circuits which are tapped into by inductive coupling.
An example of a series modulated amplitude modulation stage. The tetrode is supplied with an anode supply (and screen grid supply) which is modulated by the modulator valve. The resistor VR1 sets the grid bias for the modulator valve, both the RF input (tuned grid) and outputs are tuned LC circuits which are tapped into by inductive coupling.
When the valve at the top conducts more than the potential difference between the anode and cathode of the lower valve (RF valve) will increase. The two valves can be thought of as two resistors in a potentiometer.
Under steady state conditions (no audio driven) the stage will be a simple RF amplifier where the grid bias is set by the cathode current. When the stage is modulated the screen potential changes and so alters the gain of the stage.
Other modes which are related to AM
(SSB, or SSB-AM single-sideband full carrier modulation), very similar to single-sideband suppressed carrier modulation (SSB-SC)
Using a balanced mixer a double side band signal is generated, this is then passed through a very narrow bandpass filter to leave only one side-band. By convention it is normal to use the upper sideband (USB) in communication systems, except for HAM radio when the carrier frequency is below 10 MHz here the lower side band (LSB) is normally used.
The phasing method is another way to generate of single sideband signals. One of the weaknesses of this method is the need for a network which imposes a constant 90o phase shift on audio signals throughout the entire audio spectrum. By reducing the audio bandwidth the task of designing the phaseshift network can be made more easy.
The audio signal is passed through the phase shift network to give two identical signals which differ by 90o.
So as the audio input is a single sine wave the outputs will be
These audio outputs are mixed in non linear mixers with a carrier, the carrier drive for one of these mixers is shifted by 90o. The output of these mixers is combined in a linear circuit to give the SSB signal.
w:Vestigial-sideband modulation (VSB, or VSB-AM) is a type of modulation system commonly used in TV systems, it is normal AM which has been passed through a filter which removes one of the sidebands.
Strictly speaking the commonly used 'AM' is double-sideband full carrier. Morse is often sent using on-off keying of an unmodulated carrier(Continuous wave), this can be thought of as an AM mode.
Direct FM (true Frequency modulation) is where the frequency of an oscillator is altered to impose the modulation upon the carrier wave. This can be done by using a voltage controlled capacitor (Varicap diode) in a crystal controlled oscillator. The frequency of the oscillator is then multiplied up using a frequency multiplier stage, or is translated upwards using a mixing stage to the output frequency of the transmitter.
Indirect FM employs varicap diode to impose a phase shift (which is voltage controlled) in a tuned circuit which is fed with a plain carrier. This is termed Phase modulation, the modulated signal from a phase modulated stage can be understood with a FM receiver but for good audio quality the audio applied to the phase modulation stage.
This is a solid state circuit, on the right a RF drive is applied to the base of the transistor, the tank circuit (LC) connected to the collector via a capacitor contains a pair of varicap diodes. As the voltage applied to the varicaps is changed the phase shift of the output will change.
For high power systems it is normal to use valves, please see Valved RF amplifiers for details of how valved RF power stages work.
Electrically very robust, they can tolerate overloads for minutes which would destroy bipolar transistor systems in milliseconds
Heater supplies are required for the cathodes
High voltages (Threat of death) are required for the anodes
Valves have a shorter working life than solid state parts because the heaters tend to fail
For low and medium power it is often the case that solid state power stages are used. Sadly for high power systems these cost more per Watt of output power than a valved system.
The vast majority of modern equipment is designed to operate with a resistive load driven via coaxial cable of one particular impedance, often 50 ohms. To connect the aerial to this coaxial cable transmission line a matching network and/or a balun may be required. Commonly a SWR meter and/or an Antenna analyzer are used to check the goodness of the match between the aerial system and the transmission line (feeder).
See w:Antenna tuner and w:balun for details of matching networks and baluns respectively.
While this section was written from the point of view of a radio ham with relation to Television interference (radio transmitter interference) it applies to the construction and use of all radio transmitters, and other electronic devices which generate high RF powers with no intention of radiating these. For instance a dielectric heater might contain a 2000 Watt 27 MHz source within it, if the machine operates as intended then none of this RF power will leak out. However, if the device is subject to a fault then when it operates RF will leak out and it will be now a transmitter. Also computers are RF devices, if the cases is poorly made then the computer will radiate at VHF. For example, if you attempt to tune into a weak FM radio station (88 to 108 MHz, band II) at your desk you may lose reception when you switch on your PC. Equipment which is not intended to generate RF, but does so through for example sparking at switch contacts is not considered here, for a consideration of such matters please see Television interference (electrical interference) for further details.
All equipment using RF electronics should be inside a screened metal box, all connections in or out of the metal box should be filtered to avoid the ingress or egress of radio signals. A common and effective method of doing so for wires carrying DC supplies, 50 Hz AC connections, audio and control signals is to use a feedthrough capacitor. This is a capacitor which is mounted in a hole in the shield, one terminal of the capacitor is its metal body which touches the shielding of the box while the other two terminal of the capacitor are the on either side of the shield. The feed through capacitor can be thought of as a metal rod which has a dielectric sheath which in turn has a metal coating.
In addition to the feed through capacitor, either a resistor or RF choke can be used to increase the filtering on the lead. In transmitters it is vital to prevent RF from entering the transmitter through any lead such as a power, microphone or control connection. If RF does enter a transmitter in this way then an instability known as motorboating can occur. Motorboating is an example of a self-inflicted EMC problem.
If a transmitter is suspected of being responsible for a television interference problem then it should be run into a dummy load, this is a resistor in a screened box or can which will allow the transmitter to generate radio signals without sending them to the antenna. If the transmitter does not cause interference during this test then it is safe to assume that a signal has to be radiated from the antenna antenna to cause a problem. If the transmitter does cause interference during this test then a path exists by which RF power is leaking out of the equipment, this can be due to bad shielding. This is a rare but insidious problem and it is vital that it is tested for.
You are most likely to see this leakage on homemade equipment or equipment which has been modified. It is also possible to observe RF leaking out of microwave cookers.
Early in the development of radio technology it was recognized that the signals emitted by transmitters had to be 'pure'. For instance Spark-gap transmitters were quickly outlawed as they give an output which is so wide in terms of frequency. In modern equipment there are three main types of spurious emissions.
The term Spurious emissions refers to any signal which comes out of a transmitter other than the wanted signal. The spurious emissions include harmonics, out of band mixer products which are not fully suppressed and leakage from the local oscillator and other systems within the transmitter.
These are multiples of the operation frequency of the transmitter, they can be generated in a stage of the transmitter even if it is driven with a perfect sine wave because no real life amplifier is perfectly linear. It is best if these harmonics are designed out at an early stage. For instance a push-pull amplifier consisting of two tetrode valves attached to an anode tank resonant LC circuit which has a coil which is connected to the high voltage DC supply at the centre (Which is also RF ground) will only give a signal for the fundamental and the odd harmonics.
Here is a slightly worse design which only has one tetrode, while perfectly good designs have been made using this circuit it does have more potential shortcomings than the above circuit.
In addition to the good design of the amplifier stages, the transmitter's output should be filtered with a low pass filter to reduce the level of the harmonics.
The harmonics can be tested for using a RF spectrum analyser (expensive) or with an absorption wavemeter (cheap). If a harmonic is found which is at the same frequency as the frequency of the signal wanted at the receiver then this spurious emission can prevent the wanted signal from be received.
Imagine a transmitter, which has an intermediate frequency (IF) of 144 MHz, which is mixed with 94 MHz to create a signal at 50 MHz, which is then amplified and transmitted. If the local oscillator signal was to enter the power amplifier and not be adequately suppressed then it could be radiated. It would then have the potential to interfere with radio signals at 94 MHz in the FM audio (band II) broadcast band. Also the unwanted mixing product at 238 MHz could in a poorly designed system be radiated. Normally with good choice of the intermediate and local oscillator frequencies this type of trouble can be avoided, but one potentially bad situation is in the construction of a 144 to 70 MHz converted, here the local oscillator is at 74 MHz which is very close to the wanted output. Good well made units have been made which use this conversion but their design and construction has been challenging. This problem can be thought of as being related to the Image response problem which exists in receivers.
One method of reducing the potential for this transmitter defect is the use of balance and double balanced mixers. For example, here is a simple but poor mixer
File:Badmixer.jpg
If the equation is assumed to be
E = E1 . E2
If the simple mixer is replaced with a balanced mixer then the number of possible products is reduced. Imagine that two mixers which have the equation {I = E1 . E2} are wired up so that the current outputs are wired to the two ends of a coil (the centre of this coil is wired to ground) then the total current flowing through the coil is the difference between the output of the two mixer stages. If the f1 drive for one of the mixers is phase shifted by 180o then the overall system will be a balanced mixer.
So the output will now have only three frequencies
Now as the frequency mixer has fewer outputs the task of making sure that the final output is clean will be simpler.
If a stage in a transmitter is unstable and is able to oscillate then it can start to generate RF at either a frequency close to the operating frequency or at a very different frequency. One good sign that it is occurring is if a RF stage has a power output even without being driven by an exciting stage. Another sign is if the output power suddenly increases wildly when the input power is increased slightly, it is noteworthy that in a class C stage that this behaviour can be seen under normal conditions. The best defence against this transmitter defect is a good design, also it is important to pay good attention to the neutralization of the valves or transistors.
Complex Electronics | Electricity |
Another order could be definitions by subject such as DC, AC, radio, integrated circuit, etc.
Alternating current. Consists of a periodic oscillation between two different voltages. Usually said to look like a sine wave, but is not always.
Amplitude modulation. In radio communications, a signal controls the amplitude of a carrier wave that is at a much higher, constant frequency. The carrier wave is filtered out and a loudspeaker plays based on the amplitude of the signal.
The SI unit for current I. (Commonly spoken as "amps", "milliamps", etc.) The ampere is officially defined as that constant current which, if maintained in two straight parallel conductors of infinite length, of negligible circular cross-section, and placed one meter apart in vacuum, would produce between these conductors a force equal to 2×10-7 newton per meter of length. There is another definition which is based on the deposition rate of silver (in electrolysis?), which is much easier to measure. The other electronics units are derived units based on the ampere definition.
To increase the strength of the signal. Often an "amplifier" is used to pass a signal with both an increase or a decrease in gain.
An electron collector. Means up the path from a negative to a positive voltage. An anode has a more positive voltage relative to a cathode.
Decrease the strength of a signal.
An analog filter that absorbs low and high frequencies (f) but allows a band of frequencies in the middle to pass through.
Bi-polar junction transistor. A transistor in which the resistance of the channel is controlled by a current at the gate. Can be thought of as a current-controlled resistor. FET is the other major type of transistor.
An electronics component that stores energy in the form of electric charge (static electricity). It resists a sudden change in voltage.
An electron emitter. A cathode has a more negative voltage relative to some other place.
Another name for an inductor, specifically referring to those used in power regulation.
Complementary metal oxide semiconductor. Complementary means that it has N-channel and P-channel transistors. Metal oxide is the type of gate. CMOS is a type of Integrated Circuit (IC) that is voltage based, since it is made of FETs. Digital circuits tend to use very little current, because the paths for current flow are effectively open or closed circuits except during the transition between states.
A helix of wire (the same shape as a spring or Slinky). Its height, width, thickness, and material can all vary. Used as an inductor. The loops of wire can overlap.
Another name for capacitor.
The SI unit for electric charge Q. Defined in terms of the ampere. 1 coulomb is the amount of electric charge carried by a current of 1 ampere flowing for 1 second. It is also about 6.24×1018 times the charge on an electron. 1 C = 1 A·s
An obsolete name for hertz, the standard SI unit. As the name implies, a measurement of frequency in full cycles of a wave per second. The unit cps (or kilocycles, megacycles, etc.) is more often seen in older documents.
Decibel. Used to measure logarithmic ratios like signal to noise ratio (SNR), total harmonic distortion (THD), volume relative to a nominal level. Similar to percent (%) in that it has no units. dB SPL is used to measure sound levels relative to 20 micro-pascals (µPa). dBu is used to measure voltage relative to 0.775 V.
Direct current. A constant voltage and a constant current flow in one direction.
A one way valve for current. Semiconductor diodes typically have a voltage drop of 0.6 V (silicon) or 0.2V (germanium) when conducting in the forward direction.
Electro-Motive Force. A force for moving electrons. See Voltage.
The SI unit for capacitance (C). A capacitor is one farad if it has a coulomb (1 C) of charge on it with a voltage separation of a volt (1 V). 1 F = 1 C/V
Field Effect Transistor. Can be thought of as an Electric Field Transistor. A transistor in which the voltage at the gate controls the resistance of the channel. (i.e. a FET has voltage-controlled resistance.) BJT is the other major type of transistor.
Frequency modulation. Changing the frequency of a carrier signal to represent the amplitude of the original signal.
The voltage polarity through a part which causes it to conduct current.
The number of revolutions (cycles) per unit time. Usually expressed in either radians per second or cycles per second (Hz).
A multiplier of voltage or current.
Ground is defined as the point in the circuit which is at zero voltage. Voltage is relative, and is the same throughout a conductor, so any point in the circuit can be defined as ground, and all other voltages are referenced to it. Usually it is defined as the most negative point in the circuit, for convenience. Sometimes it is defined in the middle of two bi-polar rails, for "balanced" circuits. In many cases this circuit point is connected to the Earth (Ground) by some buried conductor.
The SI unit for inductance. 1 H = 1 Wb/A
The SI unit for frequency. One Hz is one cycle per second. 1 Hz = 1/s
An analog filter that absorbs low frequencies (f) but allows high frequencies to pass.
The amount of force F a horse can exert. I don't think it is related to horses anymore. 1 hp = 746 W
Integrated circuit. A circuit constructed on one chip of semiconductor, rather than as discrete components.
A more generalized form of resistance. The impedance of a device varies with the frequency of the electricity applied. A perfect resistor will have a constant impedance for all frequencies. Capacitors and inductors have varying impedances at different frequencies. Measured in ohms.
An inductor is a device that stores energy in a magnetic field. It opposes a sudden change in the flow of current. A solenoid is usually shaped like a spring or a Slinky.
The work required to exert a force of a newton (1 N) for a meter (1 m). 1 J = 1 N·m
Light activated silicon controlled rectifier. A light activated SCR.
Light dependent resistor. As light intensity increases, its resistance decreases.
An analog filter that absorbs high frequencies (f) but allows low frequencies to pass.
A special form of vacuum tube, typically used as the microwave emitter in a microwave oven, or in Radar systems.
The SI unit for distance. The distance light travels in 1/299,792,458 second.
Metal-oxide-semiconductor field effect transistor. An FET that uses a thin layer of oxide (usually silicon) to insulate the gate terminal from the underlying channel
Short for operational amplifier. An op-amp amplifies the voltage between its two inputs.
A reaction where something loses electrons. Given that oxygen will strip electrons from most elements, this has historically meant a reaction involving oxygen. A cathode (electron emitter) is constantly oxidized as it looses electrons.
Printed circuit board. This is a piece of plastic or fiberglass with copper attached. The copper is typically chemically etched away to leave "traces" for the electricity to be conducted through. Other electrical components are soldered to the traces.
The time between cycles of a periodic wave.
Phase modulation. Sending information by modifying relative phases.
Pulse modulation. Sending information in binary pulses.
Voltage times current. The amount of work being done by a circuit.
Convert AC current to DC current.
A reaction where oxidation and reduction take place. A cathode (electron emitter) is oxidized (loses electron). The electron travels and is absorbed by an anode (electron acceptor) that is reduced (gains electron).
A reaction where something gains electrons. In gaining electrons its charge value is reduced. An anode (electron acceptor) is constantly reduced as it gains electrons.
Properties of a circuit that impede the flow of electrons. Resistance converts electrical energy into photons that are given off as waste heat. Resistance is measured in ohms.
The inverted voltage polarity on a part.
The effective DC value for an AC value.
Silicon-controlled rectifier.
The SI unit for time.
Surface mount technology. This is a circuit built on a PCB with the components soldered directly to pads on the surface, without going through the board. The components and boards are usually much more compact than through-hole boards.
Varies depending on the medium it is traveling through. Maximum speed c of 299,792,458 m/s is only in a perfect vacuum. Light has been slowed down to less than 17 m/s (~40 mph) in special mediums.
Speed that an electromagnetic wave travels through air, cables, or wires. A typical speed for a typical coax cable is (2/3)·c.
Temperature based resistor. As temperature increases resistance decreases.
A type of electronic switch. It has two states which are triggered by another voltage or current. SCRs and switching transistors are examples of thyristors.
Unit of magnetic flux density. 1 T = 1 Wb/m2
This means the circuit is built on a PCB with holes drilled in it for the component leads to go through. The leads are soldered on the other side of the board.
The symbol for time in seconds (s).
Used to raise or lower the AC voltage between two circuits. This is based on the ratio of turns between the two coupled inductors. Transformers operate by way of induction between two inductors.
A three-element vacuum tube.
Reactive voltage.
A type of transformer with a movable tap to provide a variable output voltage. Also "Powerstat".
A potential due to an electric field. One volt is defined as the potential difference across a resistor that is passing one ampere and dissipating one watt. 1 V = 1 W/A
(changed to demonstrate subsection headings)
A potential due to an electric field. One volt is defined as the potential difference across a resistor that is passing one ampere and dissipating one watt. 1 V = 1 W/A
An electric field between two charges. Similar to gravity this acts as an electric potential. Measured in volts.
Common-collector voltage source (+). This is an alternate label for the power supply in electronic diagrams for BJT-based circuits such as common-collector amplifiers. (There is also VEE, VDD, VSS do we want one for each?) That might work if they were grouped together.
The distance between two peaks of a wave.
Unit of magnetic flux. 1 Wb = 1 V·s
Charge: Particles can have three possible types of charge: positive, negative, or neutral (no charge). Electrons are negatively charged, protons are positively charged, and neutrons are (surprise!) neutral. Opposite charges tend to attract, while particles with the same charge (both positive or negative) tend to repel.
Electronics: is the study of gadgets that use electricity, typically creating or handling signals, not just switching power.
??? are devices which take in input, perform some function, and return some output, through the use of electricity.
Circuit: The path electrons take as they are pushed by some power source, flow through various electrical components in a gadget, and return to the power source.
Electric Field: field created by the presence of charge. The field represents the force that would be felt by a positive charge.
Voltage: Accelerates charge.
Voltage is a gravity-like potential due to the separation of a negative and a positive charge. Voltage accelerates negatively charged electrons from the negative to the positive charge, and accelerates positive charged protons and ions the other way. Pushing accelerates the charges in what is known as current.
Resistance: When moving electrons (current) collide with atoms, energy is given off as heat. Resistance is the measure of a material's tendency to cause this type of energy loss. Resistance acts to limit the flow of current due to a given voltage. As the resistance becomes infinite the current stops flowing and becomes an open circuit. When there is no resistance the circuit shorts and the current becomes infinite. (Current 'prefers' the path with the lowest possible resistance.)
Air has higher resistance than wire.
Resistor: A device whose primary use is to provide resistance.
Short Circuit: there is no resistance between two points. Current flows without a change in voltage.
Open Circuit: there is infinite resistance between two points. Current is unable to flow, but there is still a voltage between the two points.
Current Source, which creates a current and a voltage for the current.
Voltage Drop When the current goes through resistance it loses some of the push of the voltage.
When the current comes to an intersection it has multiple paths it can take and flows according to its resistance.
Cell: Two materials with a voltage difference between them.
Capacitor: Two metal plates with a gap between them. Voltage causes charge to drain from one plate and accumulate on the other plate. This charge separation creates a voltage in the capacitor that opposes the other voltage and stops the flow of current. When a dielectric is placed between the plates it weakens the electric field between the plates and allows more charge to accumulate.
Capacitance: Any two pieces of conducting material separated by some distance have capacitance. Simply, a measure of the tendency of some configuration of metal to act as a capacitor.
Inductor: A coil of wire. Current starts to flow through the wire and creates a magnetic field. This magnetic field creates an opposing magnetic field which stops the current through the wire. Over time the inductor stops opposing current and turns into a wire.
Transformer Two connected inductors, which operate through mutual inductance. Current flows through the first inductor and creates a magnetic field that is fed to the second inductor. In response the second inductor creates an opposing magnetic field and current. Having a permanent magnet between the two inductors intensifies their magnetic fields.
Vacuum tube: An arrangement of two or more electrodes in a vacuum. Typically placed in a glass bulb to keep air from leaking in.
Triode: The first electrical amplification device. A triode is a type of vacuum tube with three connections:
The cathode emits electrons.
The anode accepts electrons.
The 'grid, placed in the middle, which controls the flow of electrons from the cathode to the anode.
Diode: A 2 wire device that allows current to flow easily in only one direction.
Transistor: A 3 wire device, with one wire (the "base" or "gate") that controls the flow of electrons between the other 2 wires. Replaced vacuum tubes.
Complex Electronics | Electricity |
See here for more examples: [18]
One reason people don't understand math or Physics very well is that it literally is Greek to them.
Complex Electronics | Electricity |
We should make sure that types of markings for all the types of resistors, caps, ICs, and everything else are thoroughly explained. This is not terribly important to engineers, who are more concerned with theory and just pull them out of a labeled box. But to the hobbyist this is pretty important, and also difficult to learn, because there are so many nonintuitive ways to label things.
Should we put the color code and SMT numbering explanations at the top, and then tell in each section what they stand for? (ohms, picofarads, microhenries) "The color-digit pairs used in the resistor example below are standard, but the tolerance and higher multiplier values are for resistors only."
Most axial resistors use a pattern of colored stripes to indicate resistance. SMT ones follow a numerical pattern. Cases are usually brown, blue, or green, though other colors are occasionally found like dark red or dark gray.
Axial resistors are also called "thru-hole" resistors because they cross the plate to which they are welded. Four band identification is the most commonly used color coding scheme on all resistors. It consists of four colored bands that are painted around the body of the resistor. The values of the resistors belong to series. The best-known series with 4 rings is called the E12 serie because this series contains 12 values. The values are part of the preferred numbers. The scheme is simple: The first two numbers are the first two significant digits of the resistance value, the third is a multiplier, and the fourth is the tolerance of the value. Each color corresponds to a certain number, shown in the chart below. The tolerance for a 4-band resistor will be 2%, 5%, or 10%
For example, if you are looking for a 12K (12000 ohm) resistor with ±5% tolerance, you would be looking for a Brown (1) Red (2) Orange (×103) Gold (±5%) resistor.
Note that red to violet are the colors of the rainbow where red is low energy and violet is higher energy. Resistors use specific values, which are determined by their tolerance. These values repeat for every exponent, 6.8, 68, 680. This is useful because the digits, and hence the first two or three stripes, will always be similar patterns of colors, which you will learn to recognize without checking a chart. To help you remember them, the standard values for 10% resistors are:
The E24 series therefore contains 24 values with 2 significant digits. As soon as the E48 series, the resistors contain 3 significant digits, so a code with 5 color rings. These numbers are not chosen at random, but are part of IEC 60063. Charles Renard proposed these numbers and have since been adopted in the international standard ISO 3.
5-band identification is used for higher precision (lower tolerance) resistors (1%, 0.5%, 0.25%, 0.1%), to notate the extra digit. The first three bands represent the significant digits, the fourth is the multiplier, and the fifth is the tolerance.
SMD (surface mounted device) or SMT (surface mount technology; same thing) resistors are found mostly on devices where large scale integration is present. They generally use an alphanumeric numbering system.
They are the smallest class of discrete resistors available.
Axial electrolytic capacitors are electrolytic capacitors that have connections on both ends. These are most frequently used in devices where there is no space for vertically mounted capacitors. See photograph above.
The arrowed stripe indicates the polarity, with the arrows pointing towards the negative pin. Warning: connecting electrolytic capacitors in reverse polarity can easily damage or destroy the capacitor. Most large electrolytic capacitors have the voltage, capacitance, temperature ratings, and company name written on them without having any special color coding schemes. Most electrolytic capacitors in general have light blue, black, dark purple or brown colors, although some specialized ones come in yellow and other colors. If for some reason you are uncertain about the polarity, the can is always the negative connection. Most axial caps have both ends visible. The positive end has a rubber insulation and the negative side is only aluminium.
Radial electrolytic capacitors are like axial electrolytic ones, except both pins come out the same end. Usually that end (the "bottom end") is mounted flat against the PCB and the capacitor rises perpendicular to the PCB it is mounted on. This type of capacitor probably accounts for at least 70% of capacitors in consumer electronics (that don't use SMT components). See photograph above.
Like their axial counterparts, many radial electrolytic capacitors have the voltage, capacitance, temperature ratings, polarity, and company name directly written on them without having any special color coding schemes.
Tantalum capacitors are useful due to their low leakage current, reliability, and their ability to keep stable capacitance over a wide range of temperatures. below is a diagram:
They have special markings. The stripe on the side indicates polarity. Usually with a store bought component, the longer lead is positive. Warning: connecting tantalum capacitors in reverse polarity can easily damage or destroy the capacitor. Generally it will have the capacitance written in µF, and the working voltage below it. In some cases (often when µF is not printed), the value (in pF) is encoded with three numbers; the first two digits being the significant figures, with the third being the multiplier (i.e. number of zeros). Tantalum capacitors are most commonly dipped and have a shiny coating, as well as vary in color, being yellow, red, and sometimes blue. Most axial tantalum capacitors look completely different.
The dark line on the SMT variety is the positive terminal. The dipped axial through-hole variety will be marked with a + or a dark line to indicate the positive terminal.
Ceramic capacitors are generally non-polarized and almost as common as radial electrolytic capacitors.
Generally, they use an alphanumeric marking system. The number part is the same as for SMT resistors, except that the value represented is in pF. They may also be written out directly, for instance, 2n2 = 2.2 nF. For capacitors the tolerance code is:
For example, .047K = .047 µF 10%.
The dielectric material is sometimes designated by another code:
(note: the materials in the table below are not ceramic capacitors as implied, but plastic and paper)
Please note that the table above is valid most of the time but not always because it is not a real standard. To be real sure you may check the data sheet from the manufacturer in mind.
The cap color can also indicate the dielectric:
These often have a yellow body, and use the same color band system as resistors, except that the value indicated is in pF.
These usually use the same alphanumeric system.
These are often not even labeled. If they are labeled, it is the same system as SMT resistors, but representing pF. Polarized capacitors are marked with a stripe on the positive end of the package, though some electrolytic SMT capacitors are marked on the negative end of the package. They are rectangular, and often black or tan colored. The black capacitors are easily mistaken for diodes due to the white stripe on one end...
Sometimes the value of an inductor is printed directly on it. If no units are given, µH can be assumed. If it looks like the system used by SMT resistors, it is probably that system, except that the value represented is in µH. Inductors as a class of components are current and magnetic sensitive devices. Inductors work by creating a magnetic field around the windings. The current of a electron flow causes energy to transfer into the field. Similarly, if there is a no current but a field present, coiled wiring responds by creating a current in the wiring. This is the original source of the name Inductor, it induces a current when exposed to a field, or a field when exposed to a current.
If an inductor uses the color code system, the value represented is in µH. Expect to see a wide silver or gold band before the normal colored bands, and a thin tolerance band at the end.
Diode:- in electronics a diode is a two terminal electronic component with asymmetric transfer characteristic, with low (ideally zero) resistance to current flow in one direction, and high (ideally infinite) resistance in the other.
Complex Electronics | Electricity |
!
Complex Electronics | Electricity |
Resistance of a conductor icrease with increasing temperature
Electric Power delivered through resistive network is equal to Electric Power Supply minus Electric Power Loss as Heat through resistance of the resistive network
The goal of electro-mechanical analogies is to integrate electrical and mechanical components in a simple graphical way that illustrates the behavior of the system. Of course, one needs to be familiar with simple lumped electrical systems to appreciate the analogy. This is warranted because these circuits and procedures are still used in the transducer industry to model shakers, speakers, dynamic microphones, and other systems.
The two analogies between electrical and mechanical systems are the impedance analogy and the mobility analogy.
The impedance analog is often easier for most acousical systems while the mobility analog more "naturally" represents mechanical systems. It also may be easier to draw one analog or the other in some cases.
Complex Electronics | Electricity |
See also Learn Electronics and Learn Electronics/Analogue and Digital
Aerials, antennae and transmission lines
See also Electronics/Analog Circuits and Wikipedia: Analog circuit and Wikipedia: Analog signal and Wikipedia: Analog computer
See also Electronics/Digital Circuits and Digital Circuits and Wikipedia: Digital and Wikipedia: Digital circuit
Semiconductors are often made of silicon.
Chapter 13 and a half: Component Construction details
An excellent source of info is the various Robotics Societies, including Seattle Robotics Society and Dallas Personal Robotics Group. There is a lot of info on these groups websites, especially in the archived pages of The Encoder, published by SRS.
To begin, an excellent source would be the Wikipedia pages on Robotics (w:Robotics) or the Robotics Wikibook.
Telemetry - Measurement at a distance. Critical in the success of early spacecraft. This technology allowed an incredible pyramid of resources to be applied to monitoring and safely operating the machine and human occupied spacecraft of the pre-space era of human development. Modern development efforts are focusing on a new generation of space based grid technologies that are hopefully sustainable independently from the mother planet with only occasional unnoticed intervention from the Lord Almighty but which when prematurely, suddenly or unexpectedly exposed to an adverse probability surge from outside the locally anticipated systems or universes can survive long enough to request and receive assistance.
From Wikibooks, the free textbook project.
Hi and welcome to wikibooks. I noticed you started a book on electronics and just wanted to point out that i have already written a very basic introduction to electronics in the GCSE science book. Take a look at Circuits (GCSE science) and the pages that follow - you may find it easier to visit Electricity (GCSE science) and navigate from there. Feel free to copy anything you want including any of the diagrams. (click on a diagram and it will take you to a description page titles image:image_name.png, copy the title of the description page into the page you want and put double square brackets around it like this File:Image name.png. Preview and you should see the image appear on the page. Theresa knott 12:54, 17 Mar 2004 (UTC)
Do we need any permission to use content from Wikipedia?
No. Anything from Wikipedia is copyleft, and can be used as long as the same freedoms are provided. However, you must comply with the site license which includes providing attribution. This is usually done by requesting a history import at Wikibooks:RFI.
I'm guessing this includes images.
No it does not include images. Images hosted on Wikipedia may be subject to copyright and used under fair use criteria that do not necessarily apply here.
Anyone want to look at this license to see if we can use the electronics book?
"The web page is written in HTML and Javascript. Because of that the source code is wide open and available to all. Radio amateurs are encourged to take the code, modify it, and create something even more useful to the ham community. The way the web page operates does not have to be limited to schematics. It could be extended to other uses such as printed circuit board layout."
"These things imply that it's ideal for amateur radio. It can be shared all over the world, which is where hams are. It can be used with diverse equipment, which hams have. It it can be modified, which hams love to do. And hams need simple, albiet clunky, schematics.
So, Klunky is my gift to amateur radio. If some ham, somewhere, can get some use out of it, he's welcome to it."
I am sure he wouldn't mind if we use it. He says the code is open. I have written him to ask specifically, but he hasn't responded.
From Wikibooks, the free textbook project.
Hi and welcome to wikibooks. I noticed you started a book on electronics and just wanted to point out that i have already written a very basic introduction to electronics in the GCSE science book. Take a look at Circuits (GCSE science) and the pages that follow - you may find it easier to visit Electricity (GCSE science) and navigate from there. Feel free to copy anything you want including any of the diagrams. (click on a diagram and it will take you to a description page titles image:image_name.png, copy the title of the description page into the page you want and put double square brackets around it like this File:Image name.png. Preview and you should see the image appear on the page. Theresa knott 12:54, 17 Mar 2004 (UTC)
Do we need any permission to use content from Wikipedia?
No. Anything from Wikipedia is copyleft, and can be used as long as the same freedoms are provided. However, you must comply with the site license which includes providing attribution. This is usually done by requesting a history import at Wikibooks:RFI.
I'm guessing this includes images.
No it does not include images. Images hosted on Wikipedia may be subject to copyright and used under fair use criteria that do not necessarily apply here.
Anyone want to look at this license to see if we can use the electronics book?
"The web page is written in HTML and Javascript. Because of that the source code is wide open and available to all. Radio amateurs are encourged to take the code, modify it, and create something even more useful to the ham community. The way the web page operates does not have to be limited to schematics. It could be extended to other uses such as printed circuit board layout."
"These things imply that it's ideal for amateur radio. It can be shared all over the world, which is where hams are. It can be used with diverse equipment, which hams have. It it can be modified, which hams love to do. And hams need simple, albiet clunky, schematics.
So, Klunky is my gift to amateur radio. If some ham, somewhere, can get some use out of it, he's welcome to it."
I am sure he wouldn't mind if we use it. He says the code is open. I have written him to ask specifically, but he hasn't responded.
Below is table of the grammatical abbreviations used in this book and their expanded forms. If you would like more detailed information on any item, click on the word to read the Wikipedia article on it.
Abbr.
ProHeart 6 (also known as moxidectin) is an injectable sustained-release drug that is manufactured and marketed by Wyeth, a pharmaceutical company, to treat canine heartworm disease for 6 months.[1] ProHeart 6 was launched in June 2001 by Wyeth's subsidiary, Fort Dodge Animal Health (FDAH).[2] By June 2004, 17.1 million doses were sold.[3]
Dr. Victoria Hampshire was the United States Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) Center for Veterinary Medicine (CVM) Adverse Drug Coordinator assigned to monitor the adverse drug events (ADE) reports of ProHeart 6 sent in by both consumers and veterinarians.[4] She found that reports of ADE for ProHeart 6 were unusually high in their "severity, frequency, and similarity of timing of events".[4] From June 1, 2001 to September 1, 2004, there were 5659 reports of ADE and 485 reports of dog deaths that were "possibly, probably, or definitely related" to the use of ProHeart 6.[5] In the same time period, there were 1820 reports of anaphylaxis/anaphylactoid reactions, 378 reports of convulsions, 65 reports of liver lesions, 124 reports of thrombocytopenia, and 67 reports of anemia.[5] From July 1, 2001 to June 30, 2004, the annual number of initial ProHeart 6 ADE did not decrease and the annual number of reported deaths increased.[5] In November, 2003, Dr. Hampshire raised the issue internally, but received little response, despite agreement among other safety officers at the CVM.[4][6] In July, 2004, distraught consumers brought attention to ProHeart 6's ADE, which caught the attention of Dr. Stephen Sundlof, Director of the CVM.[6] Dr. Sundlof invited Dr. Hampshire to present her findings to the CVM, which caused Dr. Sundlof, to take the matter to Acting FDA Commissioner, Dr. Lester Crawford.[4] In September, 2004, the FDA requested that Wyeth recall ProHeart 6 from the market "pending a review by an independent scientific panel" and they agreed.[2]
Shortly after the recall of ProHeart 6, the FDA granted Wyeth's request for a Veterinary Medicine Advisory Committee (VMAC) meeting and scheduled it for January 31, 2005. The timing of the meeting would allow Wyeth a chance to reintroduce ProHeart 6 for the spring heartworm season if the VMAC voted to support its return to market. Thomas Corcoran, President of FDAH, coerced Dr. Sundlof to give him all records of Dr. Hampshire's presentation on ProHeart 6.[4] FDAH asked Dr. Larry Glickman to conduct an "epidemiological study to determine the incidence of potential adverse events associated with ProHeart 6 and to compare these with the safety profile of 2 oral, monthly heartworm preventatives and vaccines".[2]
Wyeth hired Germinder & Associates, Inc to investigate Dr. Hampshire, without her knowledge, for conflict of interest in her post-market review of ProHeart 6.[4][6] Private agents found a website through which Dr. Hampshire prescribed ProHeart 6's competitors.[4] They attempted to procure competitor heartworm products through the website, but failed because Dr. Hampshire didn't prescribe them.[4] They instead, purchased over-the-counter drugs and saved the purchase records.[4]
On November 19, 2004, Robert Esner, CEO of Wyeth, met with Dr. Crawford to present Wyeth's evidence of their allegations against Dr. Hampshire for conflict of interest.[4][6] Robert alleged that Dr. Hampshire promoted rival drugs of ProHeart 6 and that made her biased towards it.[4] Furthermore, they claimed Dr. Hampshire pursued the withdrawal of ProHeart 6 for personal financial gain.[4][6] Dr. Hampshire had no knowledge of this meeting.[4][6]
Wyeth attempted to discredit Dr. Hampshire beyond the FDA to the veterinary community. A sales representative stated that Dr. Hampshire pursued the withdrawal or ProHeart 6 for personal financial gain and that received $70,000.[4][6]
On January 7, 2005 the Commissioner of the FDA, Lester Crawford, reassigned Victoria Hampshire to another position in the FDA. There was no explanation for her reassignment.[4] This meant that she was officially removed from the ProHeart 6 case as well as all other adverse drug event cases. Dr. Hampshire was subjected to an internal criminal investigation by the FDA for alleged misconduct and conflicts of interest.[6] During her reassignment, she was told not to attend the upcoming VMAC public meeting.[4]
On January 31, 2005, ProHeart 6 was recalled by the FDA in an 8–7 vote by VMAC. It was shown that certain processes in the manufacturing of ProHeart 6 resulted in some adverse drug events.[2] The results of Glickman's study suggest that the incidence of ADE following administration of ProHeart 6 was comparable to 2 oral, monthly heart-worm preventatives, despite the fact that nearly 5,500 reports of ADE followed the use of ProHeart 6 were submitted to the CVM at the time of his study.[2] The voters that voted "no," agreed that more study was required on the drug.[7] The voters that voted "yes," were disagreed on the sufficiency of the study, but agreed that further study should be conducted while the drug was in the market.[7]
Dr. Hampshire held an inactive pharmacy account through which she prescribed drugs to old clients, friends, and family.[4] She estimated that she wrote 14 prescriptions per year and made less than $200 over the course of two years.[4] This information was fully disclosed and purchases went to the associated pharmacy.[4]
A vote to remove ProHeart 6 resulted 8–7 in favor. All charges against Dr. Hampshire were removed. For her part in the blowing the whistle on ProHeart 6 and staying true to her profession, Dr. Victoria Hampshire was selected as the veterinarian of the year in 2006.[4][8]
Dr. Hampshire's duty was to conduct investigations if any adverse events appeared in animal drug use reports. Dr. Crawford faced a tough decision to either fire Dr. Hampshire for Wyeth's report on her conflict of interest, with the website, or reassign her. Dr. Crawford made the safe decision on reassigning her, however the emotional impact this had on Dr. Hampshire was enough to make his decision seemed morally wrong. The lack of explanation and the investigation also seemed excessive, considering that Dr. Hampshire was doing her job correctly. However, Dr. Crawford could jeopardize the credibility and reputation of the FDA if he had not conducted the investigation and Dr. Crawford was guilty of Wyeth's allegations. The lack of explanation may have been to maintain the investigation. Wyeth naturally wanted to maximize revenue; such an act of finding evidence leading to Dr. Hampshire's conflict of interest was understandable. It was the culmination of each participant's duties that resulted in an emotional story.
"If you do your job right and you're questioned, you lose your job [for now]" - Dr. Linda Tollefson, past deputy head of FDA's center for Veterinary Medicine.Tollefson was quoted after realizing Dr. Hampshire was reassigned for doing her duties as AEC. This conveys Tollefson's pessimism saying that good people get punished, but naturally one may feel pessimistic when finding news such as Dr. Hampshire's reassignment. The [for now] is added to this quote to use a property of karma; doing good eventually gives good. Dr. Hampshire worked for a more suitable job after some period. This may show that if you listen to the "click" in your head,you will find that your job eventually aligns with your happiness.
This lesson can be applied to college students majoring in their passion. Some parents say to study a subject their child likes. They say in the end a happier life is fulfilled if people do what they love. Contrast this with stereotypical parents who want their child to become a doctor, lawyer, engineer but the child wants to pursue another subject. Finding out later in life that their job does not bring happiness versus a child who pursued their passion may pay off for the latter child who went against their parent's desires, took risks, and achieved lesser goods.
Who pulls the strings? Even though Dr. Crawford ultimately made the decision to reassign Dr. Hampshire, outside influences may have swayed his choice. Wyeth's attack against Dr. Hampshire in revealing possible conflicts of interest due to her personal website may have been a red flag for Dr. Crawford. This evidence was used as leverage. It is important to know all participants involved in a decision. Like the soccer ball analogy, see who is on the "same team" in controlling the ball (Dr. Crawford).
Who pulls the strings can be applied to milk as discussed in class. The message "Milk does the body good" is advertised, and there is science to back up the benefits of vitamin D which may convince many that milk is great. It is healthy to drink milk every day, say some nutritionists, however some studies suggest that people who drink three or more glasses a day versus less than one are twice as likely to die.[9] Who works behind the scenes of milk may be the lobbyists, farmers, and businesses that depend on milk for their own benefits.
↑ ProHeart 6. https://www.proheart6.com/
↑ a b c d e Glickman, Larry; Glickman, Nita; Moore, George; Cobb, Rami; Connell, Stephen; Morrison, Mitch; Lewis, Hugh (2005). "Safety Profile of Moxidectin (ProHeart 6) and Two Oral Heartworm Preventatives in Dogs". International Journal of Applied Research in Veterinarian Medicine 3(2): http://www.jarvm.com/articles/Vol3Iss2/GLICKMAN.pdf
↑ Kuesel, Annette (2005). "Summary of data related to recall of ProHeart 6 from the US market and FDA advisory meeting". Tropical Disease Research program. World Health Organization. http://www.who.int/tdr/publications/documents/moxidectin-8-proheart6.pdf
↑ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t Cohen, Mark. Hampshire, Victoria. "Killer Dog Drug; Federal Whistle Blower Rights". Whistle Where You Work. Government Accountability Project. (2010). https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2bw1VmtdFQc
↑ a b c Hampshire, Victoria(2005). "CVM Background Document on the Voluntary Recall of ProHeart 6". Center for Veterinary Medicine. Food and Drug Administration. http://www.fda.gov/downloads/AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeetingMaterials/VeterinaryMedicineAdvisoryCommittee/UCM127121.pdf
↑ a b c d e f g h Grassley, Charles (November 17, 2005). "" (Letter to Robert Esner). http://www.finance.senate.gov/newsroom/chairman/release/?id=0aa53497-5345-4846-814e-1be1dcaa4344
↑ a b Craigmill, Arthur (2005). Acting Chairperson's Summary. Issue: Voluntary Recall of ProHeart 6. http://www.fda.gov/AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeetingMaterials/VeterinaryMedicineAdvisoryCommittee/ucm127150.htm
↑ Donn, Jeff (2007); "Officials Takes Risks Warning on Pet Drug". The Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/04/22/AR2007042200183_pf.html
↑ Dominguez, Trace (2014); "Milk Could Be Killing You!". Dnews. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fQHi1DPK5bo
Like animals, plants and even some single-celled organisms also have a circadian clock, which keeps track in time by monitoring blue light. Most single-celled organisms, including bacteria and fungi, use a circadian clock to replicate at night, presumably to protect themselves from the damage of ultraviolet radiation. Keeping track of time evolved very long ago, making the perception of time one of the most evolutionarily ancient parts of minds.[1]
Our brain keeps track of time to know how much of it has passed. This is time perception, and the right prefrontal cortex seems to be important for it.[2]
Rather than keeping track of time with a single clock in the head, the brain uses multiple ways to keep track of time, at different scales.
When you have people come into the lab and listen to clicks, people can differentiate between two with only a five-hundredth of a second between them.[3]
Even understanding speech requires keeping track of time at the millisecond level. That is, there are some differences in meaning that depend on the length of time spent on particular sounds.[2]
The part of your brain called the basal ganglia seems to be important for lengths of time greater than two seconds.[2]
The circadian rhythm clock in our body keeps track of 24 hour periods, but this system has no sense time at the scale of hours, minutes, or seconds. The part of the hypothalamus gland called the suprachiasmatic nucleus has neural oscillations that keep track of 24 hour periods, adjusted by daylight. Without daylight, one study found that the time kept was 24 hours and 31 minutes. So over days this can get far off of normal days.
[4] The receptors used to detect light in service of the circadian system use the same chemical that plants do to do the same thing--a chemical called cryptochrome.[5]
Even when we're asleep we're pretty good at knowing how much time has passed. One study found that we were accurate to within 15 minutes.[6]
Why Time Speeds Up As We Age
When we look back on an event, one of the ways we judge how long it lasted is by looking at how many new memories were encoded. The more memories we encoded, the longer an amount of time it feels like. This is why the trip back seems shorter than the trip to a new place--on our way there, we are encoding lots of new landmarks, but on the way back we are mostly recognizing them.[2] This is also why time seems to speed up when you grow older. As you experience life, you learn about more and more things. Think about how fascinated kids are with everything they see. As you grow older, you just recognize them. Dog, car accident, the color green. They are merely recognized, not encoded as new things. As a result, because fewer things surprise you, it feels like time is going faster.
A version of this theory, From David Eagleman, is the resource-allocation or time-sharing hypothesis.[7] It's just more efficient to process things you recognize, and it's the consumption of energy that is associated with time passing.
Interestingly, people with schizophrenia get no reduction in energy used when they see something again. Everything, in terms of brain energy consumption, appears brand new.
If you're bored, you overestimate prospective time (you think time passes faster than it is--"it's only been 15 minutes?!"), but in retrospection it seems shorter. Time also seems to fly when we're busy--that is, it feels like it's moving slower than it really is, so we feel surprised when two hours have gone by. One theory of why this is states that we just have fewer mental resources to attend to time passing. When you're bored, you pay attention to the time, but when you're busy, you're simply thinking of other things.
Our sense of how much time has passed can be lengthened by extreme fear, boredom, rejection, depression, having a high temperature, and having Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).[2]
In the chapter on conceptual metaphor, we discussed how people use their understandings of concrete things in the real world to make sense of abstract things. This happens for time too.
Suppose there was a meeting on Wednesday, but it gets pushed forward two days. What day do you think it's on now, Friday or Monday?
It turns out that your answer to this question is indicative of how you are thinking about time. Some people feel that they are moving through time, as though time were some substance, like air or water, that they are moving through. Others see themselves as being relatively stationary, and time is flowing over them, like standing in the wind or in a river. People who see time as flowing around them are more likely to think that the meeting is on Monday. People who see themselves as actively moving through time are more likely to think it's on Friday.
People who are waiting tend to use the time-moving metaphor. People about to do something use the ego-moving metaphor.If you are looking forward to something, you are likely to use the ego-moving metaphor, and if you are dreading it, the time-moving one.[8]
Not only does our language reflect this, but experiments show that it really affects the way we think about time. People who spoke languages with different time metaphor were asked to estimate the amount of time something happened on a screen. That something was sometimes a line getting longer, and sometimes it was a container filling up with water. People's estimations of time could be influenced by what they were seeing if it corresponded with the metaphor their language used.[9]
Sometimes called chronosthesia, mental time travel is when we imagine the past or the future. We think about the future a lot. People think about the future, on average, 59 times per day. That’s once every 16 minutes.[10]
An analysis of internet search data found that people are most likely to ask the big questions, like the meaning of consciousness and the existence of free will, between two and four in the morning.[11]
What seems like a long or short time can depend on our cultural expectations. For example, we expect a play to take about two hours, and if it takes longer we feel that it drags.[12]
Does it feel as though things more faster in some places than in others? In 2006 A scientist named Robert Levine went to 31 countries and measured walking speed, time taken to buy a stamp, and the accuracy of clocks in banks.[13] He found that the fastest countries were the USA, those in Northern Europe, and the South East Asian countries. There was even variation within countries. In the USA, for example, Boston was the fastest city, and Los Angeles was the slowest.
A tribe in the Amazon basin, called the Amondawa, have no words for time, month, or year. They have no clocks and no calendar. They can conceive of sequences of events, but just not time.[14]
↑ Chamovitz, D. (2012). What a plant knows: A field guide to the senses. Scientific American: New York. Pages 25--26.
↑ a b c d e Hammond, C. (2012). Time warped: Unlocking the mysteries of time perception. Toronto Anansi.
↑ Work by physiologist Sigmund Exner, described in:
James, W. (1890). "The principles of psychology, Vol. 1." published 1907. London: Macmillan and Co.
↑ name ="FosterKreitzman2003">Foster, R. & Kreitzman, L. (2003). Rhythms of life: The biological clocks and that control the daily lives of every living thing. London: Profile Books.
↑ Chamovitz, D. (2012). What a plant knows: A field guide to the senses. Scientific American: New York. Page 3
↑ Boring, L.D. & Boring, E.G. (1917). Temporal judgements after sleep. Studies in psychology, Titchener Commemorative Volume, 255--279.
↑ Eagleman, D.M. & Pariyadath, V. (2009). Is subjective duration a signature of coding efficiency? "Philosophical transactions of the royal society," B, 364, 1183--1851
↑ Marguiles, S.O. & Crawford, L.E. (2008). Event valence and spatial metaphors of time. Cognition & Emotion, 22(7), 1401--1414.
↑ Cassasanto, D. & Boroditsky, L. (2010). Time in the mind: Using space to think about time. "Cognition", 106, 579--593.
↑ D’argembeau, A., Renaud, O. & Van der Linden, M. (2011). Frequency, characteristics and functions of future-oriented thoughts in daily life. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 25: 96—103.
↑ Stephens-Davidowitz, S. (2017). Everybody lies: big data, new data, and what the internet can tell Us about who we really are. New York: HarperCollins. Kindle Location approximately 2333.
↑ Zerubavel, E. (2003). Time maps: Collective memory and the shape of the social past. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
↑ Levine, R. (2006). A geography of time: The temporal misadventures of a social psychologist. Oxford: Oneworld.
↑ Palmer, J. (2011). Amondawa tribe lacks abstract idea of time, study says. http://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-13452711
Can probably put this section under partnering.
Atmosphere is the air around the Earth.
<< Prohibited invasive plants at the SCA
Berberis thunbergii fruit from previous season at the Skaneateles Conservation Area, 29 Apr 2011.
There are two barberry (Berberis) species known to be present at the Skaneateles Conservation Area (SCA):
Berberis thunbergii (Japanese barberry), by far the most prevalent, prohibited in New York and listed as very highly invasive
Berberis vulgaris (common barberry) is much less common at the SCA and listed as moderately invasive.
Berberis × ottawensis (Ottawa barberry) is a hybrid of the two but not known to be present in the area.
Japanese barberry (Berberis thunbergii) is a deciduous shrub that can grow up to 8 feet tall, native to Japan. It can invade open and semi-open areas such as light gaps in forests, forest edges, meadows, and disturbed areas. Large infestations have been implicated in a large increase in ticks that transmit Lyme disease, possibly because they are ideal habitat for white-footed mice,[1] which carry Borrelia burgdorferi, the spirochete bacterium that causes Lyme disease, and provide the first blood meals for blacklegged (deer) ticks, which often transmit the disease to humans.[2]
↑ Japanese Barberry (Berberis thunbergii) 2021 Western New York PRISM.
↑ Melissa Banigan (2017) “Why you need to know about mice, ticks, warm temperatures and Lyme disease” Washington Post.
Invasiveness ranking for Berberis thunbergii (Japanese barberry)
The New York State ranking for Berberis thunbergii, assessed in 2008, included all hybrids with other Berberis species. The relative maximum score was 91%, giving it an invasiveness rank of Very Highly Invasive.
Berberis thunbergii is prohibited by New York State law, [2] however, according to the DEC website, the following cultivars meet the exemption qualifications of 575.8 (a)(4) and are Conditionally Exempt:[3]
Berberis thunbergii 'UCONNBTCP4N' Crimson Cutie™
Berberis thunbergii 'UCONNBTB113' Lemon Cutie™
Berberis thunbergii 'UCONNBTB048' Lemon Glow™
Major, possibly irreversible, alteration or disruption of ecosystem processes (10/10):
Soil under Berberis thunbergii has higher pH, higher nitrification rates (conversion of ammonium to nitrate), and often higher N mineralization rates than soil under native shrubs.[4]
Barberry litter is higher in N, and decomposes more rapidly (with little N immobilization), than native plant litter. These changes may lead to a positive feedback loop in which barberry increases the rate of nitrate production, which it preferentially takes up to support rapid growth and high biomass production.[4]
May facilitate non-native earthworm increases, which also alters soil chemistry and function.[5]
Significant impact in at least one layer (7/10):
Has been shown to significantly increase the shrub layer density and may invade areas where there is not currently a shrub layer, thus creating a new layer, possibly eliminating layers below it.[6]
Altered soil pH, N concentrations and N cycling increases the likelihood of additional exotic invasions, which tend to prefer soils with higher pH and nutrient availability.
Replaces the understory Vaccinium layers.[6]
Since barberry is not a preferred deer food, deer browse pressure is increased on native plants which may prevent their recruitment.[7]
Severe impact on other species or species groups (10/10):
Causes "profound effects on the microbial community of the soil" which include altered microbial community structure and function (Kourtev et al. 2002).
Also alters earthworm fauna.
Possesses spines which decrease palatability to deer (Rawinski unpub).
A single plant can produce 2000 or more fruits (each fruit is one to few-seeded) per year, although some cultivars produce much less fruit and seed.[8]
Viability is high for the species but lower for some cultivars.[8]
One year old seedling of some cultivars also reported to have reduced growth vigor.[8]
Spreads vegetatively through horizontal branches that root freely when they touch the ground.[9]
Fruits are eaten by birds, small mammals and wild turkeys and transported long distances by this means.
The shrub is propagated by seed widely dispersed by birds. A rise in populations of the ruffed grouse and turkey, due in part to the regrowth of second generation forest, may have much to do with the dispersal of barberry seed.[10]
Most seedlings are found beneath existing plants, with some found tens of meters away from nearest adult, [11] but this is not direct evidence that there is not long-distance dispersal.
Was commercially sold at assessment date, but now prohibited in New York State, with the exception of the cultivars listed above.
Can be transported indirectly through brush removal. [Particular relevance at SCA due to transfer station location.]
Some of the commonly grown purple- and yellow-leaf types readily produce green-leaf offspring resembling the wild type barberry, although the percentage of green-leaf offspring varied widely by genotype.[8]
Possesses two or more characteristics that increase competitive advantage (6/6):
↑ M.J. Jordan, G. Moore & T.W. Weldy (2008). Invasiveness ranking system for non-native plants of New York. Unpublished. The Nature Conservancy, Cold Spring Harbor, NY; Brooklyn Botanic Garden, Brooklyn, NY; The Nature Conservancy, Albany, NY. Berberis thunbergii assessed by Jinshuang Ma; Gerry Moore, March 4 & September 5, 2008.
↑ New York Codes, Rules and Regulations, Title 6 Section 575.3 - Prohibited invasive species
↑ DEC Invasive Species Regulations, Regulated and Prohibited Invasive Species. Accessed 11 Jul 2021
↑ a b Joan G. Ehrenfeld, Peter Kourtev, Weize Huang (2001). "Changes in soil functions following invasions of exotic understory plants in deciduous forests." Ecological Applications, 11: 1287-1300.
↑ P.S. Kourtev, W.Z. Huang & J.G. Ehrenfeld (1999). "Differences in earthworm densities and nitrogen dynamics in soils under exotic and native plant species." Biological Invasions 1: 237-245.
↑ a b Kris Zouhar, 2008. Berberis thunbergii in: Fire Effects Information System. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory.
↑ Anne K. Eschtruth, John J. Battles (2008) "Acceleration of Exotic Plant Invasion in a Forested Ecosystem by a Generalist Herbivore." Conservation Biology, 23: 388-399
↑ a b c d Jonathan M. Lehrer, Mark H. Brand & Jessica D. Lubell (2006). "Four Cultivars of Japanese Barberry Demonstrate Differential Reproductive Potential under Landscape Conditions." HortScience 41(3): 762–767.
↑ WDNR (2021). "Japanese Barberry (Berberis thunbergii)." Invasive Species. Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
↑ Eve Harmon (2006). "Japanese Barberry (Berberis thunbergii)." Introduced Species Summary Project. Center for Environmental Research and Conservation, Columbia University.
↑ John A. Silander & Debra M. Klepeis (1999). "The Invasion Ecology of Japanese Barberry (Berberis thunbergii) in the New England Landscape." Biological Invasions 1: 189–201.
Invasiveness of Berberis thunbergii at the SCA
Although Japanese barberry is quite common at the Skaneateles Conservation Area, it does not appear to be one of our most prevalent invasive plants at this time. However, it is a huge problem in the more southeastern part of New York and might be expected to become more of a problem in this area due to climate change and other factors. The Invasiveness ranking system for non-native plants of New York (2008) gave Japanese barberry a relative maximum score of 91%,[1] the third highest of SCA plants that we know of.
↑ Jordan, M.J., G. Moore and T.W. Weldy. 2008. Invasiveness ranking system for non-native plants of New York. Unpublished. The Nature Conservancy, Cold Spring Harbor, NY; Brooklyn Botanic Garden, Brooklyn, NY; The Nature Conservancy, Albany, NY.
Observations of Berberis thunbergii at the SCA
The following photographs and corresponding iNaturalist observations of Berberis thunbergii were made at or very near the Skaneateles Conservation Area. Click on images to enlarge and read details on Wikimedia Commons or on the "iNat obs" links to view the corresponding observations at iNaturalist.
Berberis thunbergii at the SCA, 29 Apr 2011. iNat obs
Berberis thunbergii at the SCA, 22 Dec 2014. iNat obs
Berberis thunbergii at the SCA, 3 May 2012. iNat obs
Berberis thunbergii in Guppy Farm Vinca minor at the SCA, 31 Aug 2015. iNat obs
Berberis thunbergii at the SCA, 2 Nov 2015. iNat obs
Berberis thunbergii at the SCA, 14 Jul 2016. iNat obs
There are several ways to combat racism; one of those ways is through the arts. Using various methods of research we explored distinct areas of antiracist activism through the arts. We explored the people who are involved in antiracist activism and how they utilize the arts in their antiracist efforts. Though ‘The Arts’ encompasses a broad range of mediums and forms of expression, we looked more specifically at children's literature, theatre, visual arts and film.
Theatre of The Oppressed (TO) and Anti-Racist Activism
Theatre of the Oppressed (TO) is an international school of theatre, which means it is performed all over the world. It was founded by Augusto Boal in 1971 and is known for addressing oppressive political and social issues in communities (beliefs, laws, attitudes and actions). It was first used in Brazil and other South American countries to create dialogue between Indigenous populations and Spanish decedents. Most importantly, TO involves the work of both actors and non-actors; although we are not literally on stage we perform acts everyday. “We perform the play of breakfast, the scene of going to work, the act of working” and the list continues (Boal, 2002, 11). Thus, whenever racist acts are committed, passive or aggressive, they are apart of a larger rehearsal and play. Racism can be undone in the same way; through the use of theatre. To better understand how TO can be used to tackle racism we will examine Boal’s early contributions, well-known branches of TO, and how it can be applied in the classroom.
Augusto Boal first began using T.O in Brazil, his place of origin. In Brazil he used theatre to examine the oppression faced by working class Brazilians, their lack of political and economic power, and repression under the dictatorship of Brazil. His first development and working professional theatre was the “Teatro Arena.” Here Boal produced plays written both by new Brazilian authors and classical playwrights to see how they could be applied to Brazilian realities. This practice, applying contemporary Brazilian matters to classical plays, was used to help people acquire better understanding of their problems and how they may relate to larger issues within society. At this time, Boal also created “Newspaper Theatre”, which involves transforming newspaper items into dramatic performance. This form of theatre in particular increased the knowledge and popularity of TO.
Forum theatre is another popular forms of TO. It is useful because it gives voices to the voiceless and moves the marginalized to the center. This is true whether the issues concerns classism, sexism and in this case racism. Forum Theatre allows all members of an audience, usually the community, to participate and be heard. Thus, everyone has a fair chance to talk and present art. First the actors present a contemporary issue on stage. Afterwards they perform the piece again allowing spect-actor or audience participation. Spect-actors are encouraged to both propose solutions and become active participants in the scene by taking an actor’s place. Such freedom allows for roles of power to be examined. For instance, you may have a working class girl playing the role of a lawyer or mayor. This type of theatre was originally set in the middle of towns so that all community members could be apart of the process. As one can imagine forum theatre often went longer than expected, which suggests that solutions to end inequalities are works in progress which need ongoing reinforcement.
“Newspaper Theatre” and “Forum Theatre” have been used to look at current issues in society in a number of ways, especially those pertaining to racism. In particular, a group of students at Hampshire College used TO to construct an imporov theatre piece, “Unpacking”, that addressed issues of racism on campus. Racism was depicted in a number of ways such as white students singling out student of colors during a discussion of race and a speech given by our president advocating colorblindness. Students in the play were both white and black, which further depicted race matters on campus. Because of it’s relevance to Hampshire’s climate (86% white) it suddenly made white students in the audience both conscientious and more conscientious about race. When asked how they created the final product most of the cast talked about their personal experiences and realizations; recent and past acts of hate crimes and profiling in the classroom. In addition, they discussed TO games, gamesercises, which will be discussed in the up and coming paragraph.
Gamersercises is what Boal calls “a fair proportion of exercise in the games and a fair proportion of game in the exercises” (Boal, 2002, 48). Thus, TO includes a lot of games that are used to warm-up its participants. They are usually physical and have the intention of getting people emotionally involved. An example of a gamesercise is Columbian Hypnosis characterized by an actor (hypnotizer) leading another actor (hypnotized) around with the palm of their hand. The person hypnotized must use their face to follow the hypnotizer’s hand and cannot break their initial distance (between 20 and 40 centimeters). Like Columbian Hypnosis all TO gamesercices require teamwork, and there is never anyone working alone. This dynamic mirrors life and struggle, since there is always someone helping you live and someone causing you to struggle (oppressed and an oppressed, and the oppressed and the oppressor). You are never working alone.
Gamersercises are really important because they set up a safe space for actors and raise the comfort bar for non-actors. Furthermore, it gives all people an equal chance to be in control of the situation whether they’re black, white, shy, poor, male or female. These types of exercises can even be used with children. In fact, many of them are renditions of children games and involve a lot of play. Columbian Hypnosis can be safely done as long as rules are explained and the children are in an area with very few things to bump into. Afterwards students can talk about how they felt to be in power while hypnotizing their peers and while they were the person with less power being hypnotized. Musical Chairs is also used as a gamesercise. This game involves playing music while actors march around chairs. For this to be successful there must be one chair less than the actual members playing so that someone is eliminated each round. Whenever the music stops actors must find a seat. If a person doesn’t get a seat they’re eliminated, a chair is removed, and the game continues until there is a winner. This game in particular is a great way to talk about inclusion and exclusion, which can pave the way for a larger discussion about racism.
A recent graduate student, Juana Mendoza Claudio, at the University of Massachusetts Amherst looked at how TO techniques could be used with bilingual students in Transitional Bilingual Education Programs. Through this work she hoped to counter mainstreaming by finding a way to help bilingual students embrace their differences while in school. Most of Claudio’s (2002) work is qualitative and exists in the form of detailed journal recordings that are both her own and the students. She used several of Boal’s gamesercises such as Blind/Guide, which is similar to “Columbian Hypnosis” except that the person hypnotized is blindfolded and “This is not a stick”, where the children took turns transforming a stick into another representation like a brush or a pencil (Claudio, 2002, 70-71). Many of these exercises resulted in cultural realizations and a deeper understanding of who they were as Latinos and their individual cultures. For instance, students often noticed that certain words were different in Spanish speaking countries which better shaped who they were as individuals rather than the bilingual group they were tracked as in school (Bolivia, Puerto Rico, Chile). Furthermore, TO helped the students take control of their learning by choosing topics and creating the scenes. This type of empowerment can also be seen in Amherst’s local youth group, Project 2050, which also uses TO to combat racism.
When thinking or learning about the visual arts, people’s minds usually jump to thoughts of paintings or drawings, mostly of those created by white males. However, visual art encompasses a wide range of mediums such as street art, graffiti, graphic design, murals, printmaking, painting, drawing, sculpture, photography and cartoons. Anti-racist visual artists often use a variety of these materials as an outlet to combat the white haze that encompasses visual art and even our society. Anti-racist artists have been in our society for quite some time and yet they are not as well known or spoken of when learning about art. This article will explore the lives of a few anti-racist artists as they work, or have worked, to speak out about issues of racism, oppression, power struggles and every day issues that get swept under the rug. These artists are only a few contemporary ones; many artists before them and currently have created work dealing with similar issues. The article also explores mostly female artists to provide an alternative perspective on visual arts, a move away from the predominately white, male Eurocentric perspective.
Keith Knight (born 1966) Born and raised in the Boston area, Keith Knight was “weaned on a steady diet of Star Wars, hip-hop, racism and Warner Bros. cartoons” (“Bio: Cartoonist”). He started drawing in elementary school and soon developed his trademark cartooning style of underground comics. When asked about his work he stated, “You’re totally influenced by your surroundings and Boston’s known as a pretty racist place, though you don’t really realize it when you’re growing up there” (McGovern).
Knight is “part of a new generation of talented young African-American artists who infuse their work with urgency, edge, humor, satire, politics and race” (“Bio: Cartoonist”). Using his humor, he brings awareness to issues of race, diversity, media, youth and student empowerment, the corporate corrosion of creativity and other contemporary issues (“Fear of a Black”). As a means of addressing these issues, Knight created the K Chronicles, a weekly comic strip, and (th)ink a single-panel piece that tackles issues effecting communities of color. His work has appeared in places such as Salon.com, ESPN the Magazine, the Funny Times, World War 3 Illustrated, L.A. Weekly, and MAD Magazine. In 2007 he won the Harvey Award and the 2006 & 2007 Glyph Awards for Best Comic Strip. His comic art has appeared in museums and galleries all over, from California to France. Knight is also the author of three books, Fear of a Black Marker, Dances with Sheep and his latest, What a Long Strange Trip It’s Been (“Fear of a Black”).
Keith Knight continues to actively promote antiracism through whatever means; whether he is drawing another poignant cartoon, performing in his hip-hop band, the Marginal Prophets or writing a book.
Below are some specific examples of his work: http://web.archive.org/web/20070626081604/http://www.salon.com/comics/knig/2007/06/20/knig/ http://web.archive.org/web/20080306020053/http://www.salon.com/comics/knig/2008/03/05/knig/ http://web.archive.org/web/20080308100348/http://www.salon.com/comics/knig/2007/09/26/knig/ Some of his comics can be viewed at: http://www.buzzle.com/authors.asp?author=243
Yolanda Lopez (born 1942) Yolanda Lopez is a talented Chicana muralist, painter, printmaker, educator, and film producer. Her art work focuses mostly on the lives of Mexican American women, challenging the ethnic stereotypes associated with them. Lopez argues that it is “crucial that we systematically explore the cultural mis-definition of Mexicans and Latin Americans that is presented in the media” (Guerena & Chatman). She views her art as a tool for political and social change, labeling herself as an “artistic provocateur” (“Women Artists”).
Lopez is most famous for her Virgin of Guadalupe series of paintings (1975–78) in which she transformed the “beloved icon to celebrate ordinary Mexican and Mexican American women as hardworking, assertive, and vibrant” (Davalos). Through whatever means possible, curating an exhibition, producing films, painting murals, teaching art in studios or universities, Lopez has strived to be and succeeded in becoming an antiracist artist.
Here are examples of her work: http://www.ic.arizona.edu/~ws5001/runningshoes.JPG https://archive.is/20130707081921/img512.imageshack.us/img512/6158/lopez1bigxy2.jpg
Emma Amos (born 1938) Through the use of paintings, prints and weavings, Emma Amos has explored political and social issues of Black life. Amos’ work is strongly influenced by her idea that as an African American woman, art is fundamentally “a political act” (“Women Artists”).
When recounting growing up in the South, Amos said, “images come to me of words like sass and back talk that describe the attitudes of people who actively resisted oppression. My work has often taken shots at assumptions about skin color and the privileges of power and of whiteness” (Amos). Through her work she challenges audiences to consider how ideas about race, sex and identity are constructed through images. Her works “expose the ways in which images of blackness and non-western cultural forms have been historically appropriated by white artists” (“Emma Amos”). As Amos stated, her paintings serve to “dislodge, question, and tweak prejudices, rules, and notions relating to art and who makes it, poses for it, shows it, and buys it. The work reflects my investigations into the otherness often seen by white male artists, along with the notion of desire, the dark body versus the white body, racism, and my wish to provoke more thoughtful ways of thinking and seeing” (Amos).
Amos’ work has been internationally exhibited and she is currently a Professor at the Mason Gross School of the Arts at Rutgers University.
Some of her paintings can be viewed at: http://emmaamos.com/category/works/painting/
Faith Ringgold (born 1930) Using painting, storytelling and most famously story quilts, Faith Ringgold has proved to be an influential female African American artist. Ringgold was familiar with the quilt-making tradition, influenced by weaving done by men in Africa, for warmth, preserving memories and events, storytelling, and even as "message boards" for the Underground Railroad to guide slaves on their way north (“Artist Profile”).
Ringgold initially painted in oils reflecting the turmoil and change of the Civil Rights movement in the 1960s. During this time she worked as an activist for social change for women and blacks. She focused in on the American art museum system, “which often omitted African-Americans and women from its exhibitions on a de facto basis” (“Artist Profile”). In 1967, Ringgold created a series entitled, The American People, which addressed racial conflict and discrimination. And in 1972, she helped found the Women Students and Artists for Black Liberation so that African American art exhibitions would equally represent both men and women (“African American”).
Ringgold became most famous for her use of art in a medium formerly referred to as "woman's work" (textiles, sewn fabric, weaving, quilting, embroidery). She transformed this ‘craft’ into art work that explores the serious issues of society (“Artist Profile”). Ringgold has exhibited in major museums in the USA, Europe, South America, Asia, Africa, and the Middle East. Her first book, Tar Beach was a Caldecott Honor Book and winner of the Coretta Scott King Award for Illustration. She has written and illustrated eleven children's books, received more than 75 awards, fellowships, citations and honors (Ringgold). Faith Ringgold continues to inspire, challenge and create, urging people to follow their dreams and overcome obstacles with an unstoppable spirit.
Khalil Bendib (born 1957) Khalil Bendib is an award winning cartoonist and “arguably the most visible Muslim Arab fine artist working today in the USA” (“Studio”). Born during the Algerian revolution, Bendib grew up in Morocco and Algeria and came to California at age 20. Bendib worked both as a cartoonist and a fine artist using ceramics, sculptures, and paintings in California.
After working at Gannett Newspapers for eight years, he resigned due to his feelings that his work was unnecessarily censored. Bendib now works independently, exploring “potentially explosive issues avoided by other cartoonists, such as racial injustice, labor and class struggles, U.S. imperialism, environmental degradation, the scapegoating of Muslims and Arabs, and the complicity of our Orwellian media” (“America’s Most Wanted”). His work has been published in numerous newspapers across America as well as The Black Commentator and other online publications. Khalil provides a “fresh, non-Eurocentric perspective and a unique voice not usually found in our large, corporate media” (“The Book”). Khalil Bendib continues to “give a voice to the voiceless” and work hard to speak out on important issues through his antiracist art.
View his work at: http://www.studiobendib.com/inside.html
Though only a few artists have been addressed, it is important to be aware of the people in our society (both past and present) who have used their creative voices to speak out on issues of inequality. These artists could be used as sources of inspiration or for a new perspective other than the Eurocentric one that so dominates the visual arts culture.
Haile Gerima, Sankofa and Independent Filmmaking
In his career as both a professor and filmmaker, Gerima has been an activist for a whole host of issues, ranging from third world studies to racism and African American history. Born in Gondar, Ethiopia, Gerima immigrated to the US in 1968. Best put in his own words, initially, “I wanted to work in theatre-It never occurred to me I could be a filmmaker because I was raised on Hollywood movies that pacified me to be subservient.” In an attempt to break both break from this mold, and to attack the dominant narrative, Gerima became involved in film in the tumultuous times of the late 60s and early 70s. It was a time when African Americans were involved in the civil rights struggle in America, and many African nations were in the midst of independence movements themselves. This duality, between the African diaspora and Africa itself, is a crucial theme in Gerima's work. By looking at lives and struggles of the diaspora, with their roots in Africa, Gerima internationalizes and unifies the diaspora's world-wide struggle. Moreover, this allows for Gerima to use history as a medium to expose the connections that create unity and a shared direction.
His most famous film, Sankofa, is about slavery, and more specifically, about a slave rebellion in the Caribbean. This film plays directly into the aforementioned theme of Gerima's films. The film takes place in an unknown island in the Caribbean for a reason; it could have been anyone in the diaspora's former family, and if it wasn't, it represents a struggle that many families can locate in their own histories. The film takes an afro-centric perspective, like all of Gerima's films, with a stress on how history is connected to today. The film starts out with a female model on a beach on the west coast of Africa. Gerima uses this female character, who appears to have forgotten her roots, as a tool to explore the past. Suddenly, the character steps back in time, she remains in the same place, but it is roughly 200 years earlier when enslaved Africans were being shipped from the same beach to plantations across the Atlantic. From this point on in the story, the main character takes a brutal and revealing trip back through history, as Gerima connects the past to the present. While the film contains many themes dealing with the institution of slavery, including the role of religion, skin tone, sexuality, rape, language, family, and identity, the film centers around empowerment of the enslaved peoples through insurrection. Despite being deemed “too controversial” and struggling to find funding, Gerima took 9 years to raise the money from the diaspora community and made his award-winning film. Refusing to buckle to the Hollywood stereotypical mold, which Gerima states as embodying “cultural genocide,” Gerima has mastered the art of making powerful low-budget films. In addition to being a Professor at Howard, Gerima and his wife have opened a book store, film studio, and coffee shop complex to create a space for the community to come together and have critical thought.
Gerima has intentionally remained an independent filmmaker so he can control the message and delivery of his films. He provides an excellent example of a life of anti-racist activism through the medium of film, the classroom, and the community. By striving to unify the diaspora community and bring real issues to the fore, Gerima embodies the spirit of pan-African liberation. Furthermore, all of Gerima's films attack the dominant narrative, expose reality, and create stories that both empower audiences and make them ask for more. His work and his life story stand as excellent examples of how to out-maneuver and attack racist institutions and racist narratives. Gerima continues to give back to the diaspora community, and as a result, the diaspora keeps Gerima's independent direction going. This relationship in itself is indicative of the power and unifying nature of Gerima's life work. This piece focuses on the life and work of Gerima, but, his work and desire to remain an independent filmmaker speaks to the wider community of African American filmmakers and the struggles they endure. In turn, Gerima's perseverance and the power of his work portrays both the need for afro-centric films, and the trials that must be overcome to realize these goals.
Antiracism in literature can be a powerful thing. In the field of education it is important for young children to be exposed to what antiracism is, how it works, and how they can be active. One of the ways of introducing this topic is through children’s picture books. It is a simple but effective way in getting a message across. Reading begets knowledge and by introducing children to how our world in diverse through children’s literature is a tool in teaching youth how to become actively antiracist. Laura Atkins, a children’s literature specialist says that “books can share values. Some people are threatened by difference/diversity in thinking that it is leading towards fragmentation. We have to? see it as an opportunity to show what unites as well as what differentiates.” In order to celebrate difference and open dialogue, we must look at how there are different people in the world with different culture and experiences, and how that makes our world better.
Children’s picture books such as “Nappy Hair”, “Black, White, Just Right!”, “It’s Test Day, Tiger Turcotte” and “The Skin I’m In: A First Look at Racism” are all fantastic books that explores multiculturalism, put an emphasis on difference but sameness, and celebrates the multiracial society that we live in. Along with the text, illustrations are just as important. Presenting visuals for children helps them to recognize difference and accept that not everyone looks like them, and at the same time helping them to understand that it is okay for that difference to exist because there are qualities that we all share. According Eliza T. Dresang, Associate Professor at Florida State University, to create authentic multicultural literature and images that can be useful in educating children it is important to include things that are “based on facts, reproduces essential features of an origin, and that are true to the creator's own cultural personality, spirit, or character.” With these things in mind, it is important to remember that authenticity for children creates an open space for children to express themselves and be comfortable to speak up and ask questions.
Anti-racism can be done in a number of ways, especially through the arts. Above we have highlighted four ways: theatre, visual arts, film and children's literature in which educators, parents, students and the larger community can be anti-racist. Finally, we hope that when we (as educators) think about education we embrace anti-racist methods because of their long lasting, positive implications for the world we live in.
Boal, Augusto. 2002. “Games for actors and non-actors” Routledge. New York, NY 10001.
Claudio Mendoza, Juana. 2002. “The Application of Theatre of The Oppressed Techniques in Elementary Education Theory and Practice: A Constructivist Approach. Graduate school of the University of Massachusetts Amherst.
Amos, Emma. Artist’s Statement. April 19, 2008, from http://emmaamos.com/abo-ut/statement/
Black Filmmakers, "Haile Gerima Page," May 1, 2008, from http://www.blackfilmmakers.net/gerimabio.html
Davalos, M., Karen.(2008). Yolanda Lopez. April 14, 2008, from http://www.upress.u-mn.edu/Books/D/davalos_yolanda.html
Ethiopian Politics Blog, "A moment with Haile Gerima," May 1, 2008, from http://ethiopianpolitics.blogspot.com/2008/02/ethiopia-moment-withhaile-gerima.html
Guerena, Salvador, & Chatman, Todd. (1999). Guide to the Lopez, Yolanda M. Papers. April 29, 2008, from http://cemaweb.library.ucsb.edu/lopez_toc.html
McGovern, Leo (2006). Keith Knight. Antigravity, 3 (8). April 28, 2008 from https://antigravitymagazine.sslpowered.com/antigravity_vol3_issue8.pdf
Ringgold, Faith (2002). May I Introduce Myself? April 29, 2008, from http://www.faithri-nggold.com/ringgold/bio.htm
African American World: Arts & Culture. April 27, 2008, from http://www.pbs.org/w-net/aaworld/arts/ringgold.html
America's Most Wanted Comedian and Political Cartoonist. April 20, 2008, from http://www.speakoutnow.org/userdata_display.php?modin=50&uid=2749
Artist Profile: Faith Ringgold. April 27, 2008, from http://www.ndoylefineart.com/ringg-old.html
Bio: Cartoonist, Rapper, and Multimedia Artist Keith Knight. May 1, 2008, from http://www.kchronicles.com/bio.shtml
“Fear of a Black Marker" Underground Cartooning and Activism. April 20, 2008, from http://www.speakoutnow.org/userdata_display.php?modin=50&uid=70
Emma Amos: Paintings and Prints. April 26, 2008, from http://www.antioch-college.edu/herndon/html/amos.html
Studio Bendib: Biography. April 30, 2008, from http://www.studiobendib.com/bio.html
Women Artists 1960–Present. April 20, 2008, from http://www.csupomona.edu/~pli-n/women2/part3.html
The Book: Biography of Khalil Bendib. May 1, 2008, from http://www.bendib.com/bo-ok/biography.html
A transistor is an electronic control device, where an electrical signal input can control another electrical signal.
The very name derives from the fact that this control action was seen as an input current flowing into one resistor (base-emitter) causing a larger current in an other resistor (collector-emitter). The early named for this device was the transfer-resistor and hence transistor.
There are many different variations of transistors that are appropriate for a wide variety of applications. The transistors that are used in modern digital electronics are generally pairs of MOSFETs, but bipolar transistors are occasionally used.
In digital circuits, transistors are always used as a switch.
Like a common lightswitch, the ideal digital transistor is, at any one instant, either "off" with zero current flowing through it, or "on" with nearly zero voltage across it.
There are occasional transitions between the two states, but in this book we ignore the details of what happens during the transition.
Transistors may be put together in configurations that allow more flexibility than simply diodes. With two diodes and a resistor, you can construct an AND gate and an OR gate. If we add transistors into the mix, we can construct the three basics, the AND, OR, and NOT gates. The NOT gate allows us to expand further into NAND and NOR gates. Mainly create little bit portion of resistor function.
In all transistors today, there is a certain amount of latency between the time that a control signal is applied and the time that the output is affected. This delay is called propagation delay. These delays can be broken up into two parts.
tPLH This is the delay time resulting from a LOW to HIGH transition
tPHL This is the delay time resulting from a HIGH to LOW transition
Keep in mind: These two values may not be the same and are usually defined on the device's datasheet.
Propagation delay can be influenced by capacitance in the circuit. Propagation delay is also a rough indicator of effective speed of the device. For example, a gate with a 5 nanosecond propagation delay will respond much faster than a gate with a 120 nanosecond propagation delay.
Propagation delay is measured at the 50% mark and measures the time elapsed between the input and output signal changes.
In digital circuits, we are mainly focusing on transistors that are in cutoff or saturation. For details of behavior of transistors when they are forced into an "in-between" state between fully off and fully on, see Analogue Electronics.
This section of the Digital Circuits wikibook is a stub. You can help by expanding this section. If you add something, list yourself as a Contributor.
This tutorial covers lighting by multiple light sources in one pass. In particular, it covers Unity's so-called “vertex lights” in the ForwardBase pass.
This tutorial is an extension of Section “Smooth Specular Highlights”. If you haven't read that tutorial, you should read it first.
As discussed in Section “Diffuse Reflection”, Unity's forward rendering path uses separate passes for the most important light sources. These are called “pixel lights” because the built-in shaders render them with per-pixel lighting. All light sources with the Render Mode set to Important are rendered as pixel lights. If the Pixel Light Count of the Quality project settings allows for more pixel lights, then some of the light sources with Render Mode set to Auto are also rendered as pixel lights. What happens to the other light sources? The built-in shaders of Unity render four additional lights as vertex lights in the ForwardBase pass. As the name indicates, the built-in shaders render these lights with per-vertex lighting. This is what this tutorial is about. (Further lights are approximated by spherical harmonic lighting, which is not covered here.)
In the ForwardBase pass, the four vertex lights (i.e. their positions and colors) are specified by the following built-in uniforms (see Unity's documentation of built-in shader variables):
We follow Unity's built-in shaders and only compute the diffuse reflection by vertex lights (assuming they are point lights) using per-vertex lighting. This can be computed with the following for-loop inside the vertex shader:
The total diffuse lighting by all vertex lights is accumulated in vertexLighting by initializing it to black and then adding the diffuse reflection of each vertex light to the previous value of vertexLighting at the end of the for-loop. A for-loop should be familiar to any C/C++/Java/JavaScript programmer. Note that for-loops in Cg are severely limited for some GPUs; in particular the limits (here: 0 and 4) have to be constants for some GPUs, i.e. you cannot even use uniforms to determine the limits. (The technical reason is that the limits have to be known at compile time in order to “un-roll” the loop.)
This is more or less how vertex lights are computed in Unity's built-in shaders. However, remember that nothing would stop you from computing specular reflection or per-pixel lighting with these “vertex lights”.
In the context of the shader code from Section “Smooth Specular Highlights”, the complete shader code is:
Shader "Cg per-pixel lighting with vertex lights" {
_WorldSpaceLightPos0.xyz - input.posWorld.xyz;
UNITY_LIGHTMODEL_AMBIENT.rgb * _Color.rgb;
_WorldSpaceCameraPos.xyz - input.posWorld.xyz);
_WorldSpaceLightPos0.xyz - input.posWorld.xyz;
The use of #pragma multi_compile_fwdbase and #ifdef VERTEXLIGHT_ON ... #endif is necessary to make sure that no vertex lighting is computed when Unity doesn't provide the data; see also Unity's documentation of multi_compile directives.
Congratulations, you have reached the end of this tutorial. We have seen:
How Unity's vertex lights are specified.
How a for-loop can be used in Cg to compute the lighting of multiple lights in one pass.
If you still want to know more
Unless stated otherwise, all example source code on this page is granted to the public domain.
Kamehameha I (c. 1758–May 8, 1819), united all the Hawaiian Islands together to form the Kingdom of Hawaii in 1810.
No one is quite sure exactly what year Kamehameha was born. Hawaiians did not have a written language before the 1800s. Some say Kamehameha was born in 1758 because that is the year Halley’s comet was seen in Hawaii. According to a prophecy, a fiery light in the sky would come before the birth of a “killer of cheifs.” Alapa’i, the chief of the island of Hawai’i, heard about this prophecy and ordered the baby Kamehameha to be killed. Kamehameha’s parents, Chief Keōua and Chiefess Kekuʻiapoiwa, secretly gave him to a trusted friend Nae’ole to take care of him and keep him safe from Chief Alapa’i. Five years later, Chief Alapa’i decided that maybe Kamehameha would not kill him and invited him back to live with his family.
When Kamehameha was 14, he overturned the Naha Stone. According to legend, only someone from the royal Naha family could move the stone. Whoever lifted the Naha Stone, would be the one to unite all of the Hawaiian Islands. Even though Kamehameha was not from the Naha family, he lifted and overturned the stone. Today, you can see the Naha Stone in front of the Hilo Public Library.
From 1782 until 1810, Kamehameha fought many battles to conquer each of the Hawaiian islands. First, he defeated his cousin Kiwala’o and Chief Keawemaʻuhili who ruled the island of Hawai’i. Next, he defeated Chief Kalanikupule who ruled Maui and ‘Oahu. Kamehameha tried several times to attack Chief Kaumualiʻi of Kauai but was unsuccessful. Chief Kaumuali’i seeing there was no way to stop Kamehameha’s powerful army, offered to surrender Kauai and Ni’ihau.
King Kamehameha had many wives. His favorite wife was Kaahumanu. Kaahumanu had no children of her own but she hanai adopted Kamehameha’s son Liholiho. Kaahumanu was a strong political figure and even when Liholiho became King Kamehameha II she became his regent. A regent is someone who rules for someone else who is too young to rule.
Kamehameha died on May 8, 1819. Following Hawaiian customs, his bones were hidden by two of his most trusted friends. Even today no one knows where his body was buried.
After Kamehameha died, Liholiho became King Kamehameha II.
Wong and Rayson (1987). Hawaii's Royal History. Bess Press. ISBN 0935848487
Previous exercise | Next exercise
"Ancient" history is a rather vague term, but its generally accepted denotation is the period of history preceding the birth and beginnings of modern civilisation, in the first few centuries after the fall of Rome.
However, historians like to argue about what constitutes a historical period, and "ancient history" is understandably vast. The dawn of time and the Early Middle Ages are separated by a very large gap in time.
Some would argue that history refers to the development of human society. In this case, ancient history actually begins with the Paleolithic Era, from about 4.5 million years before the present until ten thousand years ago. This places the development of early hominids into modern-style humans within the compass of ancient history. Others believe that the origins of agriculture really mark the beginning of ancient history, with the domestication of the first food and fiber crops; this process began about 12,000 years before the present, near the end of the last Ice Age. Yet another school argues that the invention of writing and arithmetic, in Mesopotamia and China, around 4500 BC marks the beginnings of true ancient history.
A number of ending points may also be considered. In the western world, the end of the Roman Empire, traditionally dated to 476 CE, has often been declared a cut-off. However, this relegates all of world history between 475 CE and 1500 CE to a period usually called medieval history. The rise of Islam and the early development of science fall within this medieval period, but both are outgrowths of the work of the preceding millennia.
By our measurements, this textbook began at 04:23, 1 January 2005 by User:24.18.206.57 as a redirect from the Modern History page. This page was one year later made into a book by being filed at template:new and soon after being marked at the Humanities bookshelf.
So far, no themes questions have been asked and none have been answered. The themes of the book have been modeled after those of the Modern History page.
Population [P] refers to groups of persons, such as ethnic or social groups.
In the ancient world, questions of population involve the movements of large numbers of people over great distances. The appearance of Neanderthal Man in many parts of Europe is one such type of movement; the Germanic invasions of western Europe in the early fifth century CE are another. When possible this will identify a people's conjectured point of origin, and attempt to track its movements both geographically and physically.
Population is often closely tied in western Europe and the Mediterranean littoral with questions of citizenship and eligibility to participate in the political system. One of the principal themes of Roman history, for example, is the way in which certain social classes and peoples were either included or excluded from the political process in Rome. During the Hellenistic Age, the idea of who was Greek expanded far beyond the genetic questions of who had come from the geographical region of Greece.
Governance [G] refers to rule over a population or populations. Many empires expanded in ancient history until many were sacked.
Governance deals with how a population ruled itself, and the nature of a population's laws and political customs. Many modern English words for governmental types—monarchy, dictatorship, oligarchy, democracy, republic, syndicalism and tyranny—actually come to us from Greek and Latin, since these nations experimented with all these types of government, with written and unwritten law, and with written and unwritten constitutions.
Governance is often ruled by internal and external considerations. Governments usually possess domestic policies, which determine how a nation's leadership acts towards people living within its borders. They also attempt to guide and direct relationships with other nations and people, through treaties and foreign policy.
Invention [I] refers especially to new or recovered technology.
Invention and Innovation may be equally appropriate terms here. In the modern world, many nations are aware of the same technologies, even if developing nations can not afford these technologies. Many people know what airplanes do, even if they have never flown in one. However, in the ancient world, in which factories were rare or non-existent, and most artisans labored to create objects in small workshops or at home, innovations took time to spread across cultural lines.
Historians of ancient history often use two terms to describe the process by which inventions pass from culture to culture. The first term is Independent Invention, meaning that two cultures developed a specific idea or technology, but did not learn of that technology from one another. Each culture invented that technology without knowing of the other culture's technological advance. For example, both China and Egypt invented paper of a sort; Egyptian papyrus was invented around 3000 BCE by pounding strips of a marsh reed into a flat surface, while Chinese paper was produced on screens from a mash of mulberry leaves or rice husks around 100 BCE. China knew nothing of Egyptian papyrus paper, so it independently invented paper, even though Egyptian examples already existed.
The other type of innovation is termed Cultural Diffusion, meaning that a culture invents a given technology and then that technology is passed hand to hand and mind to mind through teaching, learning, and borrowing, until it is accepted by another culture in a different geographical region. For example, the spinning wheel was invented in northern China in the fourth century CE, but it did not make an appearance in European households until the twelfth century CE. This advance in thread-making technology advanced year by year along the trade routes from China to Europe, making slow progress but infiltrating each house and culture it passed on the way.
Combat [C] refers to wars, battles, and other destructive competition. In ancient history, it is hard to say what was the deadliest war.
Combat in ancient times was conducted largely without the use of anything more elaborate than hand-to-hand weapons: swords, shields, armor, spears, and personal valor were the principal tools of battle. Weapons such as catapults often had to be invented first, before they could be put into use. Horses and camels trained for battle provided cavalry services to many armies, but the expense of maintaining animals for battle kept these forces small relative to the size of infantry forces.
In addition, prior to 1500 CE few nations or countries were able to maintain state monopolies on the use of military force. Arms and armor were relatively inexpensive, and private armies and navies existed even if they were not particularly common. Because of the nature of government, a charismatic leader in many places and times could raise a private army and go into the business of conquering a nation, or starting one of his own.
Trade [T] refers to any exchange of goods or services, from the exchange of some money for a slice of bread to the many camels crossing the Arabian Desert.
Compared to the present day, where masses of statistical data and reams of financial information are available, ancient times had little in the way of accurate economic information. Most production of goods occurred at the level of a workshop or household's cottage industry, rather than at the level of a factory or multi-national corporation. While some mercantile companies of a sort did exist, most trade at the international level was conducted by adventurous individuals or families, and it often occurred in a haphazard way.
At the level of local production in the ancient world, numerous types of commerce existed. The first type was barter in which goods are evaluated by the trading partners, and rough estimates of value are assigned to commodities; the commodities themselves are then exchanged, without the use of money. In medium of exchange commercial systems, buyer and seller agree on a value for a commonly available product, such as salt in ancient China or olive oil in ancient Greece, and other products' values are assessed in terms of measured units of that common substance. In specie commerce, a rare product such as gold or silver or precious stone which is small and relatively easily transported, becomes the valuation system. Specie systems often led in the ancient world to the creation of coinage in which coins of indefinite or nominal specie value become the medium of exchange. The most advanced system of trade, credit, did exist in the ancient world, but tended to be rare and reserved for financial transactions of stupendous size.
Mulch is a protective cover placed over the soil, primarily to modify the effects of the local climate. A wide variety of natural and synthetic materials are used.
Shredded wood used as mulch. This type of mulch is often dyed to improve its appearance in the landscape. Pine needles used as mulch. Also called "pinestraw" in the southern U.S.
Organic residues - grass clippings, leaves, hay, straw, shredded bark, sawdust, wood chips, shredded newspaper, cardboard, wool, etc. Many of these materials also act as a direct composting system. There are many differing opinions on what to use.
Plastic mulch - Crops grow through slits or holes in thin plastic sheeting. This method is predominant in large-scale vegetable growing, with millions of acres cultivated under plastic mulch worldwide each year (disposal of plastic mulch is cited as an environmental problem).
Sheet composting - Various products developed as a biodegradable alternative to plastic mulch.
Stones and gravel can also be used a mulch. In northern climates the heat retained by rocks will extend the growing season.
The way a particular organic mulch decomposes, and reacts to wetting by rain and dew, determine in great degree its effectiveness. Organic mulches can rot rapidly rather than slowly break down, and it can mat into a barrier that blocks water and air, both conditions that can be detrimental to crops.
Living mulch may also be considered a type of mulch, or as a mulch-like cover crop. This technique involves undersowing a main crop with a fast-growing cover crop that will provide weed suppression and other benefits associated with mulch.
Mulching is an important part of any no-dig gardening regime, such as practiced within permaculture systems.
Mulch is usually applied towards the beginning of the growing season, and may be reapplied as necessary. It serves initially to warm the soil by helping it retain heat. This allows early seeding and transplanting of certain crops, and encourages faster growth. As the season progresses, the mulch stabilizes temperature and moisture, and prevents sunlight from germinating weed seed.
Plastic mulch used in large-scale commercial production is laid down with a tractor-drawn or standalone plastic mulch layer. This is usually part of a sophisticated mechanical process, where raised beds are formed, plastic is rolled out on top, and seedlings are transplanted through it. Drip irrigation is often required, with drip tape laid under the plastic, as plastic mulch is impermeable to water.
In home gardens and smaller farming operations, organic mulch is usually spread by hand around emerged plants. For materials like straw and hay, a shredder may be used to chop up the material. Organic mulches are usually piled quite high, six inches or more, and settle over the season.
In central Pennsylvania, Harrisburg area, mulch is namely referred to as tanbark, even by manufacturers and distributors. In this area, "mulch" refers to very fine tanbark or peat moss.
Mulch should normally smell like freshly cut wood, but sometimes will develop a toxicity that will cause it to smell like vinegar, ammonia, sulfur or silage. This happens if the material is not rotated often enough and it forms pockets where no air is circulating. When this occurs, the decomposition process become anaerobic and produces these toxic materials in small quantities. Once exposed to the air, the process quickly reverts back to an aerobic decomposition, but these toxic materials will be present for a period of time. If the mulch is placed around plants before the toxicity has had a chance to dissipate, then the plants could very likely be severely damaged or killed depending on their hardiness. Plants that are predominantly low to the ground or freshly planted are the most susceptible.
If sour mulch is applied and there is plant kill, the best thing to do is just water the mulch heavily. Water will help the chemicals to dissipate more quickly and refresh the plants. By the time plant kill is noticed, most of the toxicity will have already disappeared anyway, so removing the offending mulch will have little effect. While testing after plant kill will not likely turn up anything since the toxicity will have dissipated, a simple pH check may reveal a highly acid content, perhaps in the 1.8 to 3.6 range instead of the normal 6.0 to 7.2 range. Finally, placing a bit of the offending mulch around another plant to check for plant kill will verify if the toxicity has departed. If the new plant is also killed, then sour mulch is probably not the problem.
r1bqk2r/2p1bppp/p1np1n2/1p2p3/3PP3/1B3N2/PPP2PPP/RNBQR1K1
1.1 8. d4?!
1.2 8. d4? Nxd4! 9. Nxd4 exd4 10. Qxd4
d4?!
White counts the number of pieces attacking d4, and the number of pieces defending it, and reckons that 8. d4 is a safe move.
r1bqk2r/2p1bppp/p2p1n2/1p6/3QP3/1B6/PPP2PPP/RNB1R1K1
d4? Nxd4! 9. Nxd4 exd4 10. Qxd4
r1bqk2r/4bppp/p2p1n2/1p6/2p1P3/1B6/PPP2PPP/RNBQR1K1
Disaster!
Alas, Black plays 10...c5! and wherever her beautifully centralised queen moves, Black follows up with 11...c4 and the b3-bishop is trapped. (third diagram)
The moral of the story: White must prepare d4 with 8. c3.
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Noah's Ark Trap and Ruy Lopez
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon · Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
"Today we are entering upon the third phase of the development of our consciousness m regard to the function of the drama and of the theatre in modern life. There is dawning upon our consciousness an inkling of a new ideal. This is the grand idea of the organization of the theatre as a social force. The old narrow idea of individual culture through amusement is giving place to the new ideal of social development through the communal appeal of the drama. The feeling at the back of this movement is expressive of the characteristic temper and tone of modern civilization. Democracy and socialism prompt these new voices which exclaim: 'Democratize the drama! Socialize the play-house.' With these two watchwords as slogans of a national crusade, America bids fair in this domain to justify its claim as the most fertile field and proving-ground anywhere in the world for the testing in practice of significant and promising ideas" (Henderson, 1915 pp 5-6). Also in this period, innovations appeared in the manner of telling the dramatic story, as when Elmer Rice (1892-1967), innovator of the flashback technique, wrote “On trial” (1914) (Gould, 1966).
1.1 "A long day's journey into night"
1.2 "Desire under the elms"
1.4 "The iceman cometh"
3.1 "The children's hour"
3.2 "The little foxes"
4.1 "The unchastened woman"
8.1 "They knew what they wanted"
14.1 "The witching hour"
15.1 "Poached eggs and pearls"
16.1 “Arsenic and old lace”
Eugene O'Neill is the dominant playwright of early 20th century American drama, 1936
Eugene O'Neill (1888-1953) is the dominant figure of early to middle 20th century American drama for such plays as "Desire under the elms" (1924), "Ah, wilderness!" (1933), "The iceman cometh" (1940), and "A long day's journey into night" (1941 though first produced only in 1956).
In “Desire under the elms”, "the trees' shadow hang oppressively over the house. Also oppressive is the terrain filled with stones. The three main characters are very large and direct products of their environment...unsophisticated, unlettered, and ignorant, driven by their passionate...desires and isolated from normal social intercourse” (Miller and Frazer (1991, p 70). Many early critics found the play lacking in tragic depth, or even consisting of a “study in perversion” (Flexner, 1938 p 159). Gassner (1954) disagreed in that "powerful characterization and dialogue are combined here with a stark elemental theme and a sultry kind of nature poetry. Eben's Oedipus complex, the effects of farm life, and an inhibitive religion are fused into a tragic unit...'Desire under the elms' is consequently the most consistently wrought of O’Neill’s plays and marks the peak of his relatively naturalistic period. Moreover, this is true tragedy; the power of the passions, the impressiveness of the characters, and the timelessness of the inner struggle between a son and a father ensure tragic elevation" (p 651). “Desire under the Elms is a tragedy. A drearier setting, a more typically realistic setting, it would be hard to find, but to see it is to feel pity and awe before a very ordinary type of man and woman, commonplace in everything else but made great by what they can suffer” (Hamilton, 1950 p 38). “The theme of the play is variations on the word 'desire'. "Abbie desires a home, security, Simeon and Peter desire freedom from the hard labor of a rock-bound New England farm, Eben desires to possess what was his mother’s, a Freudian implication, and Old Ephraim desires to escape from his sense of aloneness by possessing the farm he has made out of impossible land, since human love fails him in each of his wives and in each of his sons” (Downer, 1951 p 69). The play "created a realistic whole charged with symbolism and...opened a new level of meaning and a new way of meaning to the local color realism traditionally associated with rural simplicity" (Murphy, 1987, p 129). “The situation is the Hippolytus-Phaedra-Theseus plot: the father has returned, bringing with him a young wife, who is immediately attracted to her stepson…Like Phaedra, Abbie conceals her growing passion for Eben with the mask of scorn. Like Phaedra, she asks that the son be banished and for the same reason, plus the fact that Eben is a potential rival for the farm. Like Phaedra, Abbie makes advances, but with more success than her dramatic ancestor” (Racey, 1964 p 59). "The struggle of the son against the father, the son's resentment of the intruding woman, canonical incest itself, are part of the story whose interest is deeper than any local creed or any temporary society, whether of our own time or of another. It is one of the great achievements of the play that it makes us feel them not merely as violent events but as mysteriously fundamental in the human story and hence raises the actors in them somehow above the level of mere characters in a single play, giving them something which suggests the kind of undefined meaning which we feel in an Oedipus or a Hamlet" (Krutch, 1939 p 97). At the end, Eben and Abbie express their love of each other instead of frustration over losing the farm (Sauer, 2011, p 201). Eben need not follow her to prison, but seems unwilling to defend himself before authorities when often a woman’s crime drags the man along with her.
"Ah, wilderness!" is O'Neil's "truest comedy. Significant for the psychoanalytically minded, and possibly also for others, is the fact that its leading adult character, the small-town editor Nat Miller, was the most generous portrait of a father to appear in O’Neill’s work. And O’Neill being no piddling painter executed the picture with a notable warmth of color and emotion. Moreover, 'Ah, wilderness!' was the dramatist’s most idyllic picture of youth and its environment. Young Richard Miller’s restiveness is set down genially as a transitory state of adolescence instead of being inflated into a cosmic philosophy or darkened into a neurosis and the merciful early nineteenth-century background bears no resemblance to the infernos O’Neill had previously favored. Even Main Street had lost its sting once regression to childhood bore no terrors for O’Neill. Consequently, 'Ah, wilderness!' was nothing more- and nothing less- than a sunny and uncomplicated comedy of adolescence and peaceful middle age. It is marred only by an occasional lapse into sentimentality, and it is limited only by that reduction of emotional power that occurs when one writes about sentiment rather than passion" (Gassner, 1954a p 660).
In “The iceman cometh”, "all the chill of the city of New York in 1912 seems to have descended on the bar and hotel of Harry Hope. Hope is a drunken derelict whose sole accomplishment is to keep the place running for his alcoholic cronies. By careful and constant drinking the members of this private hell keep alive on pipe dreams. Some of the company is able to maintain delusions without alcohol, but each conceals his true identity, his guilt and fear. They all pretend that tomorrow will find them sober and back on the road to success. They look forward, however, to a special pleasure, a visit from Hickey, a big-spending salesman who delights them all with his good humour. When Hickey arrives this time he shocks them with his sobriety and his determination to help them free themselves from their predicament. This is no simple temperance tract, of course. Hickey is really trying to disabuse them of their self-delusions, their pipe dreams, their hopes for the eternal tomorrow. With painful intensity and cheerfulness he perseveres to make them move from the bar and into the world to claim the fruit of their promises. All of his efforts nearly turn into disaster. Without hope or illusions these people are more desperate than ever, and when Hickey finally reveals that he has killed his wife, all his friends are happy to think that he is insane. They then can resume their peaceful drunkeness. Hickey is taken away by the police. He has come to a final stage of purging him- self of 'pipe dreams'; he had convinced himself that murdering his wife was a kindness to her. In a moment of insight, he realizes that he really hated her, and that the basis for his own self-cure was another violent pipe-dream" (Carpenter, 1957 pp 11-12). “Iceman” may refer to the professional in a position to cuckold an absent husband or the personification of death. In the bar, “each has in his past a cankerous secret that has so corrupted him that he has lost the will to act and the power to make decisions; each has taken refuge in a deadening alcoholic daze” (Parks, 1966 p 103). "Laying hold of an assortment of social outcasts quartered in a disreputable saloon on the fringe of New York in the year 1912 and introducing into their drunken semblance of contentful hope an allergy in the shape of a Werlean traveling salesman, O’Neill distils from them, slowly but inexorably, the tragedy that is death in life. Superficially at times suggesting a cross between Gorki’s The Lower Depths and Saroyan’s The Time Of Your Life, let alone Ibsen’s The Wild Duck, the play with its author’s uncommon dramaturgical skill gradually weaves its various vagrant threads into a solid thematic pattern and in the end achieves a purge and mood of compassion that mark it apart from the bulk of contemporary drama...With a few nimble strokes, O’Neill pictures vividly the innards of even the least of his variegated characters, from the one-time circus grifter to the one-time police lieutenant, from the quondam boss of a Negro gambling den to the erstwhile Boer War correspondent, and from the night and the day bartenders and the wreck of a college graduate to the former editor of anarchist magazines and the old captain once in the British armed services. Only in the characters of his three street-walkers does he work rather obviously; truthfully, perhaps, but in a theatrically routine manner. Yet in his major figures, Slade, the one-time syndicalist-anarchist, Hickey, the hardware salesman, Hope, the proprietor of the saloon, etc. the hand is as steady and sure as ever" (Nathan, 1947 pp 94-95). “The play holds kinship with Ibsen’s 'The wild duck' (1884), Hickman resembling Gregers Werle, as well as Gorky’s 'The lower depths' (1903), Hickman resembling Luka in a room filled with 'abandoned creatures'” (Lamm, 1952 p 330). Brustein (1964) enumerated the men’s illusions, namely political: Hugo’s love of the proletariat, racial: Joe’s demands of equality, domestic: Chuck and Cora’s fantasy of farm life, status-related: the whores’ difference between whores and tarts, psychological: Don’s false motives in betraying his mother, intellectual: Willie Oban’s excuse for abandoning law school, philosophical: Larry’s pretense of disillusionment and detachment, religious: Hickey’s false motives in betraying his wife (pp 341-342). "It is easy to miss the vitality and camaraderie of the first act because the sordid and debased quality of the drunks' lives dominate our impressions. We notice it most when Hickey's campaign puts a damper on the party atmosphere, turning the friends against each other, driving them away from company to hide in solitude, and even depriving them of the solace of drunkenness" (Berkowitz, 1992 p 107). The play discounts "positive models of history and the possibility of social action" (Fleche, 1997 p 58). "In the fourth act of The Iceman Cometh, O'Neill combines visual and auditory scenic means to communicate the tension between comedy and tragedy. Sitting apart from the group of celebrants after the departure of Hickey and the death of Don Parritt, Larry Slade admits that 'there's no hope'. Harry Hope then invites him to rejoin the group...Then as Larry doesn't reply he immediately forgets him and turns to the party. Larry is aware that his interaction with Don Parritt has contradicted his traditional claim of existential neutrality. In truth, Slade seeks and shuns emotional and intellectual involvement with others. Ironically, once his pipedream of philosophical detachment from life has been destroyed, he is separated from his former friends. Because he rejects the false hope that Harry offers him, he is really alone for the first time in the play. Slade's emotional and intellectual ambivalence precipitates his experience of absurdity. However, unlike characters in absurdist plays, he clearly articulates his existential dilemma in rational speech. His agonizing insights into his life, and life in general, are presented against a background of frenzied celebration. In the last scenic image of the play, his silence contrasts with the group's attempt to sing. The characters' songs typify their pipedreams; singing their individual tunes simultaneously results in cacophony" (Como, 1989 p 66). Despite the play's dramatic power, critics complain of its lack of eloquence, citing instead O’Neill’s “incessant sullenness...Does the play “manifest a transfiguring nobility? How can it?...His strength was neither in stance nor style, but in the dramatic representation of illusions and despairs, in the persuasive imitation of human personality, particularly in its self-destructive weaknesses” (Bloom, 2005 pp 209-213). The value of the play “lies in the very varied characters of these down-and-outs, in their attitudes to one another and to the outside world, in their quarrels, their hopes and their fears” (Gascoigne, 1970 p 116). “Rich in detail, complex in contrivance yet seemingly natural, naturalistic in speech and situation yet also somewhat symbolic and grotesque, The Iceman Cometh looms large in the O’Neill canon” (Gassner, 1968 p 277).
"A long day’s journey into night" "is essentially a study of O'Neill's own family's relationships, including his talented but neurotically miserly father, his dope-addicted mother, an affectionate ne'er-do-well brother and O'Neill himself, afflicted with tuberculosis. A quicksand of love and hate holds the family in violent unresolved turmoil; their fears and sickness are frighteningly close to us. Yet these particular family relationships remain integral and untouchable. Much of the action is taken up with illness. They must decide how to treat the younger brother for tuberculosis and how to deal with the mother's addiction. No one of them can share an opinion with another or really present a workable way to a cure. In trying to find solutions they pour out their anguish, searching some way to establish themselves with each other, to be understood, to be loved. They all seem fascinated with this family loyalty in spite of knowing that love is lost to them through their impotence, vanity, and self-reproach. The bluntness of the speech and its very repetitions heighten the family tensions to a grand scale of passions common to all the world" (Carpenter, 1957 p 15). von Szeliski (1971) criticized the ambitions and goals of modern attempts at tragedy as being too limited, taking as an example "A long day’s journey into night": "if anything, [the play's goal is] to clarify blame, or Edmund Tyrone simply wants to dissolve into a bank of fog" (p 119). “Here is a family living in close symbiotic relationship, a single organism with four branches, where a twitch in one creates a spasm in another. For example, Tyrone's miserliness and acting career contributed to his wife’s drug addiction, causing respectively access to a quack doctor and her sense of being abandoned at home. His miserliness is also the source of Edmund’s resentment at being sent into a second-class sanatarium for the treatment of tuberculosis (Brustein, 1964 pp 350-351). “Greek tragedy tended to...obliterate the future. In Oedipus the King, we see a formal handling of time very similar to Long Day’s Journey into Night. A few hours time shown upon the stage are made to enclose many years of past time, the irony being that although we see the past contained as it were in the present, actually the present is under the domination of the past, with the result that the present cannot show any action leading to a future” (Driver, 1964 p 113). “The father...is conventionally pious without any deep commitment to the old faith...The mother, on the other hand, is deeply, neurotically, but still honestly pious...The sons are militantly atheistical” (Raleigh, 1964 pp 131-132). Parks (1966) pointed Edmund out as the only "fundamentally sound" character. "But the sickness in father, mother, and brother is essentially a moral sickness: in seeking to escape from the world they have grown eccentric, cold; their flashes of warmth are sporadic and to a degree irrational; they have lost the capacity to love and the will to act...[Their] hopeless escapist fantasies lead them inevitably into the past, away from the present, and ahead of them is only the darkly symbolic night" (pp 101-102). “Mary’s language- and the structure of the play insofar as she helps comprise it- is a complex rhythm of admission and denial of her narcotic addiction, counterstressed with blame and exoneration of her [family]” (Goldman, 1967 p 31). “It is Mary’s backward movement into drug addiction which dominates the play and the stages of her regress gives the play its structure. The first act ends with Edmund’s suspicion that she has begun again, the first scene of the second act with Tyrone’s assurance that she has, the second scene with her plan to go to town for more medicine. In the third act, which is mostly hers, the drug has already made her quite remote...At the end of the fourth act, she has arrived at her destination- her girlhood in the convent” (Waith, 1964 p 39). “A part of Mary must know that she can never get back to that ‘true self’, that her struggle to keep from losing it is...a fight to regain something that never existed except in the imagination. And yet without it, life is not worth living. Call it a vital lie or pipe dream or illusion, it is the driving force of some characters’ lives, to keep that idea of the self with which one can live” (Abbott, 1989 p 125-126). "Alienation, loneliness and the specter of death stalk the Tyrone house day and night; this morbid, depressing 'anschauung' [view] is the light and shadow of the human condition. The final view of Mary, almost lunatic in the throes of her addiction, closes the play in one of the most poignant mad scene of all drama, recalling Lady Macbeth's sonambulist madness" (Featherstone, 2008, p 13). “Mary’s choice to pray to the Virgin Mary [marks a shift]. Having retreated from the men in the play, Mary reaches out to...other female characters…She does not succeeds with the offstage cook...but does seem to make contact with the onstage maid, Cathleen...Mary dreams of a female utopia…By the end of the play, illusion enshrouds her” (Hall, 1993 pp 43-44). "As the play advances, it is as if the fog and darkness take over: Jamie and Edmund bump into objects in the dark, James' need for economy makes him turn off the light bulb, Mary's memories of the past overtake her judgment in the bridal wear, morphine being liable to cause a foggy state of mind, the dialogue becomes diffuse, as if the environment determines character" (Fleche, 1997 p 26). “The cynical non-artist, Jamie, a hack actor haunting Broadway backstages, living in the shadow of his illustrious matinee-idol father, is, like all members of this haunted family, filled with resentments: against his father for his miserliness and for forcing him into a profession he did not choose and in which he is not equipped to succeed, against his mother for her drug addiction and her favoritism towards her younger son, against Edmund for being the favored and, on top of that, for precipitating the mother’s dependency on morphine through his birth” (Adler, 1987 p 147). “The jealousy and affection between the brothers add as strongly to the day’s distress as do the hatred and love between James and his sons. The three men, however, are united in their common rejection of the actuality of Mary’s condition. On occasion, they pretend that she is not under the influence of dope, and again they denounce her for her weakness, though each strikes at the other to defend her” (Herron, 1969 p 334). "Although the characters reveal their deepest feelings about themselves and one another, and although Edmund achieves some mutual understanding with his father and brother, there is no suggestion that the cycle of their behavior will change, or that the family's dynamics of conflict will undergo any transformation" (Murphy, 1987 p 192). "Long day's journey into night" “is perhaps the modern theatre’s outstanding dramatization of the ambivalences omnipresent in the human species. This alone would have given authenticity and depth to the play, which O’Neill managed to convey with much dramatic skill in a crescendo of revelations and even with some delightful humor, as in the scene in which the father tries to contradict the charge of miserliness by turning on all the lights in the parlor and then cautiously turning them out again” (Gassner, 1968 pp 278-279).
“The all-consuming weakness of the characters in ‘Long day’s journey into night’ and ‘The iceman cometh’, probably his two best plays, is organic to the nature of the conflicts. Watching them, one experiences the sensation of being inundated in a sea of ineffectuality, swelled with each torturous monologue, fed by the tears of self-pity” (Gardner, 1965 p 103). “O’Neill reflects...all that has been modern...in his restless experimentation, his avid cultivation of new ideas, his assertive individualism, and his intense unease...The defect of his talent may be summed out as a case of nearly continual straining for a negativeness or sense of desolation not always well founded and more conducive to darkness than to light, liberation, and final purgation...But even if we agree with critics who believe his work, in lacking poetry and elevation, falls short of tragedy, we cannot legitimately deny his work tragic ambience” (Gassner, 1960 pp 67-69). “It is only the second-rater who makes you feel that he rather enjoys the sorrow and terror of the figures he has created. Perhaps that is why the work of the great tragic poets is always tempered with compassion, and why O’Neill himself in certain of his later plays, seemingly impatient with the accidental, or incidental, elements in man’s character that too often precipitate tragic conflict and defeat, has dehumanized his dramatis personae and permitted himself to drive them to extraordinary deeds of violence, without our feeling that his victims are too close to us, too much like the common run of men...Time and again his characters stop to tell us what they are doing and why, instead of going ahead and doing it” (Clark, 1947 pp 62-74).
"A long day's journey into night"
James Tyrone played by Paul Hartmann, Mary by Elisabeth Bergner, Jamie by Heinz Drache, and Edmund by Martin Benrath, 1957 German production
Time: 1910s. Place: New England, USA.
Text at https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.182217
In their summer house, James Tyrone is glad that his wife, Mary, has been looking better lately. Nevertheless, their son, Edmund, sometimes hears her moving about at night, especially on entering the spare bedroom. She reassures him by saying she goes there only to get away from her husband's snoring. The family is worried about Edmund's coughing, perhaps a sign of consumption, though he seems more worried about his mother than about himself. Edmund and his brother, Jamie, taunt each other about taking some of their father's alcoholic beverage and watering it down to avoid detection. More seriously, Jamie accuses Edmund of leaving their mother unsupervised. Though worried, Edmund considers his brother overly suspicious. When Mary appears after lying down for a long time, Jamie becomes suspicious again and she irritated at his cynicism. She is also frustrated at the shabbiness of the house, blaming it on her husband's reluctance to spend money, a bitter joke in the family. When Jamie stares at her and she asks why, he angrily replies she should look at her glazed eyes in the mirror. The following day, Mary and their servant, Cathleen, return from the drugstore. Mary expresses more feelings of frustration at her present condition, how once she had shown promise as a pianist but abandoned it for the sake of her husband's career as an actor. She says it is because of her arthritic hands that she needs to take her medication, purchased through Cathleen. She is about to go upstairs for more as James and Edmund arrive drunk. They miserably notice she has gone back to her drug addiction. She diverts attention by blaming her husband for Jamie's drunken habits. Edmund confirms her worst fears by saying he has been diagnosed with consumption, which she refuses to believe, blaming the doctor's incompetence. In frustration, he exlaims how difficult it is to have "a dope fiend for a mother". When James returns at dinner time, his wife goes upstairs, he too depressed to prevent her. At midnight, Edmund joins his father for more drinking. Despite financial success, James considers his career ruined because he had repeatedly played the same acting part, which dissipated his talent. When Jamie arrives drunk, his father leaves to avoid a quarrel. Jamie admits that despite his love of Edmund, his sense of failure forbids him to wish for his brother's success. Jamie dozes offs but is awaken by his father's belligerence. All three gaze in misery as Mary enters wearing her wedding gown, reminiscing about her happy girlhood.
The tranquility at a farm is disrupted by the rivalry between father and son for the same woman. Elm tree
Time: 1850. Place: New England, USA.
Text at http://gutenberg.net.au/ebooks04/0400081h.html https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.235160 https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.149919
Considering the farm as his own since his mother's death, a subject of dispute between her family and his father, Eben wakes up his two half-brothers with the news that their father, Ephraim, has married a second time. He offers them $300 for their share of the farm. The half-brothers accept to go to California to hunt for gold. His stepmother, Abbie, disapproves of his visiting a local whore, but he says she herself is a whore for selling herself to obtain a farm rightly his. To avenge herself for these harsh words, she lies to Ephraim by saying benthat E attempted to seduce her. When Ephraim threatens to kill him, a frightened Abbie tries to mitigate her lie. When Ephraim threatens to force him out, she insists that the farm needs another hand. To win her husband over, she suggests that they try to beget a son, but with the large difference in age, the husband being much older, this proves difficult. As a result, Abbie herself tries to seduce Eben for this purpose. She opens the main parlor, closed since his mother's death. After much effort, Abbie succeeds, Eben being convinced that this forms part of his mother's revenge against her husband. "I'm the prize rooster o' this roost," Eben boasts to his unsuspecting father. Two weeks after the son's birth, Ephraim taunts Eben by revealing that the farm will belong to his newborn and also that he knows about his attempt at seducing his wife. Choking in rage, Eben feels he was manipulated by Abbie. He fights with his father. Ephraim starts to choke Eben until Abbie steps in. Eben wants to follow his half-brothers to California, but Abbie, loving him all the more, tries to prevent it. He does not heed her. To prove her love towards him, she smothers the newborn with a pillow. When Ephraim discovers the baby's death, his wife admits the deed and specifies that the father is Eben, at which he is suddenly glad the baby died. When Eben discovers the baby's death, he is aghast and leaves her to alert the sheriff. When he returns, Ephraim orders him out. Even angrier, Ephraim turns the livestock loose and intends to burn the farm and go to California with the money he has saved, but the money was stolen by Eben to pay off his half-brothers. Ephraim can only remain alone at the farm, more lonely than ever, submitting his will to a God who is "not easy" while the sheriff arrests Abbie along with Eben, who, despite her denial, confesses to being auxiliary to the crime.
"Ah, wilderness!" poster for the Federal Theatre Playhouse, 1934
Time: 1906. Place: Connecticut, USA.
Text at https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.81613 https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.225263 https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.503014
The Miller family breakfast is interrupted by McComber, their next-door neighbor, who accuses Nat's son, Richard, for attempting to corrupt his daughter, Muriel, and presents a letter on her behalf, ending their amorous relationship. Nat superficially defends his son, but is hesitant to challenge one of the most important advertisers in his local newspaper. He is all the more worried that his wife, Essie, had anxiously mentioned Richard's taste for subversive poetry, as found in Swinburne, Wilde, and Khayyam. When Richard learns of the letter, he is devastated. The unhappy development of young love is in contrast to the non-development of old love between Nat's sister, Lily, and Essie's brother, Sid. For many years, despite their love of each other, Lily has put off marrying Sid because of his drunken habits. Disillusioned, Richard goes with his brother's university friend, Wint, ostensibly for a double date with two women, but, in actual fact, a visit to the local whorehouse. While Wint indulges his cravings upstairs, Richard sits very uncomfortably downstairs with Belle, contenting himself merely with talk. When a brash salesman insults her, he defends her by striking him. Late at night, to his parents' consternation, Richard arrives drunk and disheveled. They decide to punish him, Nat still hesitant on how to proceed and especially worried about what he should say. When Richard wakes up the following morning, he receives a welcoming letter from Muriel stating that her father forced her to write the letter. She promises undying love and suggests that they meet secretly that night on a beach, where they discuss their future and kiss for the first time. Nat is then relieved to learn that Muriel's father has changed his mind about his son. Still hesitant, Nat speaks to Richard about the temptations of youth, especially drinking and illicit love relations, whose dangers Richard agrees to avoid and to abide from this moment on to his father's advice.
Time: 1912. New York, USA.
Text at https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.175142 https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.149062 https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.149917
In Harry Hope's rundown rooming house and bar, alcoholics await the arrival of a popular salesman known as Hickey, to plan Harry's surprise birthday party the next day. The regulars live on drunken hopes. Harry has not left the bar once since his wife's death 20 years ago, but says he intends to on his birthday. Joe, former owner of a casino, intends to re-open another one. He and his friend, Captain Lewis, former infantryman in the Boer War, expect to return home. Pat McGloin, a former policeman convicted and fired from his job, intends to appeal the decision when the right moment comes up. Ed, Harry's brother-in-law, a former circus box-office man, was fired for cheating, but hopes one day to get his job back. Jimmy Tomorrow, former British newspaperman, procrastinates about getting another job. Chuck, the day bartender, plans to marry Cora, a whore, the next day. The regulars are stunned to find Hickey so changed, no longer joking but sober. He wants them to quit their "pipe dreams" and, to obtain peace, embrace instead their hopeless condition. They are reluctant to do so. The next day, Harry goes out, but, soon aware of his great fears, is forced back to the comfort of his bar. One by one, the customers resent Hickey's interference, except Larry Slade and Don Parritt, friends who have known each other for a long time, as Larry's former girlfriend is Don's mother. Larry learns that Don was the informant responsible for her arrest. In anguish at losing his friendship, Don runs up to his room to jump off the fire escape. Larry guesses at his intention but does nothing to prevent it and only wishes for his own death. Though Hickey had first told the regulars his wife had died by accident, he admits to murder. Police officers arrive, perhaps called by Hickey himself, who justifies the murder on the basis of his love towards her, a woman living a hopeless life, always ready to forgive his whore-mongering and alcoholism. The regulars are relieved on seeing Hickey show signs of insanity, for now they can return to their pipe dreams. They decide to testify in favor of Hickey's insanity at his trial, despite his wish to incur a death sentence.
Thornton Wilder joined realism and fantasy in depicting town life and the history of humanity, 1920
"Our town" “is reminiscent of the pilgrimage depicted in ‘Everyman’. As a 20th-century morality play, it traces the journeying of ordinary people, telling, without sensationalism ‘the way we were…in our living and in our dying’” (Herron, 1969 p 415). The characters “do not look beyond this bounded township at the nation, the world-at-large, nor at the universal scheme in which they figure. [They] are brought to a condition of emotional gentleness” (Bogard, 1965 p 363). “Grover’s Corners look like the New England village of our dreams; it has clean air, fresh-faced children, no violence, no crime, no slums; there is neither excessive wealth nor hopeless poverty...Grover’s Corners, in fact, would seem to be the fulfillment of the American Dream, the apogee of Puritan aspiration, the utmost achievement of a democratic society. But Our Town is interesting to us, not because of what it leaves out, but the extraordinary rich comprehensiveness and inclusiveness...We come to realize, moreover, that even in so idyllic a setting, existence leaves a great deal to be desired...For we see that the inhabitants of Grover’s Corners, who had so much going for them, were blind to the possibilities, the variations, the adventures that life can bring” (Goldstone, 1969 pp 13-14). Castronovo (1986) emphasized the affinities of "Our town" to folk art, simple people being simply presented (pp 86-88). But Bogard (1966) felt that unlike "the bulk of folk drama", Wilder does not attempt to present reality: "if the story had been developed realistically, carefully plotted, decorated so as to attempt to convince the audience that it was seeing living human beings, much of its truth would have been drained from the play, and all of it would have seemed sentimental and unconvincing" (p 59). However, other critics believe in its reality despite such theatrics as the presence of the stage manager. “The first act is described, proceeds through the poignancy of the commonplace” (Krasner, 2012 p 212). “Nothing heroic, shocking, exotic, or, for that matter, unfamiliar occurs in it. Yet such is the power of the play to reach the emotions that it shames sophisticated raillery...Yet for the very reason that it is an ordinary place, the town comes to represent all societies, and whatever happens to its inhabitants is an expression, in general terms, of the chief events in the lives of all people...Moving through the day from dawn until bedtime, at every turn the action distils poignancy from the commonplace, including even so unremarkable an occurrence as the children's struggle with homework” (Goldstein, 1967 p 64). "Thornton Wilder graced the American theatre with an engaging reminiscence of the idyllic side of small-town life in the first two acts of 'Our town', which affirmed the decency of common people while life is not too harassed. A third act in which some of the characters lead a ghostly existence took the play, at the price of some inconsistency, out of the category of genre painting and turned it into a classically poetic expression of the cycle of human existence from birth to death, even if the genre picture was more memorable" (Gassner, 1954a p 686). "The first day emphasizes the routine aspect of town-life, the second day the special if not unique aspect: a person’s wedding, and the third day the routine aspect of death and Emily’s desire to re-live both the routine aspect of her past life and the special occasion of her birthday" (Porter, 1969, p 215). Some critics favor O'Neill's “Ah, wilderness!” over an “Our town” judged to be “hackneyed, sentimental, indifferent to frustration and sadness” (Freedman, 1971 p 20). But others consider the Wilder refined in delineating the unrefined. The play "is a picture of the priceless value of even the most common and routine events in life and of the waste of life through failure to realize the value of every moment...By relating the ordinary events in the lives of these ordinary people to a metaphysical framework that broadens with each act, [Wilder] is able to portray life as being at once significant and trivial, noble and absurd, miraculous and humdrum...When the dead Emily returns...she becomes aware that the daily life of the town was humdrum and commonplace because taken for granted and not fully appreciated...In contrast to Emily, the dead are indifferent to life on earth...all the problems and joys, the grief and happiness...are dissolved in the transcendent whole” (Burbank, 1978 pp 77-81). Castronovo (1986) saw no "transcendent whole", but only “hokum about stars and human aspirations” (p 90). In any event, how striking that “the dead are shown as indifferent to human affairs!" (Gagey, 1947 p 108). Berkowitz (1992) emphasized that "the play's central message is that we require no tragic heroes or allegorical interpretations to make ordinary life significant, because the simple and mundane facts are themselves almost too precious and extraordinary for us to absorb and appreciate" (pp 61-62). Despite the characters’ appeal, Miller and Frazer (1991) were bothered by their limitations. On one hand, Wilder makes the town a “microcosm of all existence”, on the other it is “painfully misleading in its avoidance of certain realities...a provincial, inbred town concerned with very little beyond its borders” (pp 239-240). True, it is an "anti-elitist vision of human existence" (Castronovo, 1986 p 93), a picture of small-town mentalities projected on a universal stage, and so likely to bother large-town mentalities. “There are countless moments in which his theater averts its eyes, stops its ears, and bites its tongue...Mrs Gibbs swallows her disappointment at never traveling. Simon Stimson, harried by private furies, cannot or will not disclose the sources of his despair. When George Gibbs asks his future father-in-law whether or not he believes in marriage, Mr Webb too quickly says: ‘oh, yes, oh, yes’- an attempt to conceal doubt that falters until he changes the subject to chicken raising” (Robinson, 2009 p 206).
An irate Agate (1946) fumed that "the skin of their teeth, says Mr Thornton Wilder, is that by which the Antrobus family has survived ice, flood, pestilence, wars, depressions, and all the natural shocks that flesh is heir to. Studying this play’s text one imagines the author’s notions concerning it to have run something as follows: Have I anything new to say about life, death, predestination and free-will, evolution and the life-force, romantic passion and family ties? Perhaps not very much. But why not present the old stuff in a new dress? Abolish Time. Pretend the ice-age is coeval with co-eds. Have a mammoth and a dinosaur on the stage together with a telegraph boy. Bring Adam and Eve up to date. Show Cain as Henry Antrobus, a High Schoolboy with football jersey and catapult. Give the old story a modern twist. Henry, with a stone in his hand, can hit anything from a bird to an elder brother. A most unfortunate accident, and quite a job getting the police out of the house. Have this said by the hired help— Helen, Circe, Cleopatra (must be careful about the order) in the guise of an Atlantic City trollop. Have the alphabet, simple arithmetic, and the wheel all in the making. Have Homer and Moses (must find out which came first) put in an appearance. Have scenery that moves of its own accord. Peer-Gyntism plus Back-to-Methuselahism. Hotch-potch of Pirandello, Obey, Kaiser, O’Neill. Touches of Walt Disney, the Marx Brothers, and Olsen and Johnson. Will this make a good play? It may or it mayn’t, but it’ll win the Pulitzer. Will the folks walk out? Possibly. But they’ll talk, which is better than staying and not talking. Actually this play did win the Pulitzer, and on the first night, according to Mr Burns Mantle, 'the sight of bewildered and discouraged patrons walking out at the first intermission and not returning to their seats was not uncommon'" (pp 184-185). The play's theme shows that "self-interest, complacency, despair, and violence coexist with intellectual aspirations and energies to begin again" (Castronovo, 1986 p 103). The play has affinities with Joyce's "Finnegans wake" (1939) in its "conflation of time, mixing of images, cyclic patterning, and finding correspondences between the life of ancient and modern man" (p 21). “Even in so distinguished a play as The Skin of our Teeth, the intrusion of self-conscious theatricality somewhat blunts the edge of comedy and causes the essential action to mark time. Now and then the play’s playfulness becomes altogether too much. But one can go further in criticizing Wilder’s theatricality and maintain the intrusion of theatre weakens the power of he play, especially in the last act, which occurs immediately after a world-devastating war. If the human race has survived only by the skin of its teeth, one is tempted to ask what is the author so cheerful about?...The theatricalism is not only inappropriate because it is played in the wrong key and is perhaps insufficiently climactic for a dramatic masterpiece but it is evasive as well” (Gassner, 1956 pp 142-143). The Skin of our Teeth, “which generalizes man’s continual struggle with natural and man-made disaster, is a genuine heroic drama. In no current play does the spirit burn so brightly as in the scene in which Mr Antrobus, the eternal Adam or man of good will, resolves to weather the Ice Age and succors the first masters of song, law, and healing science- despite the behavior of Cain, who drives him to desperation” (Gassner, 1968 p 303). “The three acts of ‘The skin of our teeth’ involve the struggles of mankind to survive the periodic disasters that threaten it with extinction: glacial invasion, flood, and war. The first act pits man against nature, the second man against the moral order, and the third man against himself“ (Burbank, 1978 pp 89-95). This critic complained of the incompatibility between “religious humanism and burlesque”. Other critics savor the comedy of the contrast. The play shows “the precarious nature of mankind, demonstrating that human resilience has kept things going and probably always will...Also, funny observations on mankind’s inability to learn anything from the past keep the play moving at a fast clip, forcing audiences to abandon any rational analysis of it but to recognize the appalling reality on which it is based” (Miller and Frazer, 1991 p 241). The play is “whimsical, capricious, and cruel, the playwright transforming trivia into historical moment and vice versa...most intensely philosophical and spiritual when he seems most antic...Without disillusionment or panic, Wilder views death...with stoic fortitude, reason, and pragmatism as simply a part of the continuum, the next phase in the natural order” (Featherstone, 2008 p 288). “When the breath of creative imagination blows through the theatre, what exhilaration to the lungs, what refreshment to the spirit! Doors may bang and scenery fly about; audiences may be outraged, infuriated, delighted, but the theatre is once more alive. Thornton Wilder’s The Skin of Our Teeth is not only a tribute to the indestructibility of the human race as its author indicates; it is also a giddy proof of the theatre’s own imperishable vitality…The Antrobus family goes through many adventures and trials. Pestilences, famines, floods and wars threaten it with annihilation at every turn, but through all its calamities it manages to survive and to move forward. Mr Antrobus builds the alphabet, apprehends numbers, invents the wheel. Mrs Antrobus, chiefly concerned with the preservation and protection of her family, her race, her species, does her share by transmuting the necessities of living into a better way of life. Even Sabina, effervescent and unstable- menace, delight and slave in one- struggles intermittently and hysterically to understand and help. The children are, of course, the ultimate focus of the adventure. In them is the hope and terror of the future: hope, because to them can be handed on the gains and conquests of man’s mind, terror because on Henry’s forehead is an ineradicable mark, the deep- and today how deeply branded- mark of Cain. All this Mr Wilder presents with the deftest and most engaging gaiety. His concern with the human race is second only to his delight in the nonsense and the magic of theatre. His play is as much theatre burlesque as it is satire on some of the foibles of the human race” (Gilder, 1950 pp 652-653).
Played by Frank Craven (1875-1945), the stage manager presents a day in the life of an east coast town and its aftermath, along with its young lovers, Martha Scott (1912-2003) and John Craven (1916-1995) in the original Broadway production, 1938
Time: 1901-1913. Place: Fictional town of Grover's Corners, New Hampshire USA.
Text at https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.75529 https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.85310
The stage manager explains that Mrs Gibbs has told Mrs Webb that she has been wishing for several years to take an overseas holiday with her husband, but he does not care to go. Emily, daughter to Mr and Wrs Webb and a brilliant student, helps the more dull-minded George, son to Dr and Mrs Gibbs, with problems in arithmetic. But she has trouble concentrating. "I can't work at all. The moonlight's so terrible," she tells George who lives across the street. Yet before going to bed, she also has difficulty sleeping because after speaking with him, the moonlight then becomes "wonderful". Dr Gibbs speaks to George about his intention to become a farmer. Does he really think he can get up early, milk, feed the stock? "Well, George, while I was in my office today I heard a funny sound," Dr Gibbs says, "and what do you think it was? It was your mother chopping wood." This reproof shames George, so that he promises to do his chores with greater diligence. Simon Stinson is rolling drunk on the streets again, but because Constable Warren sees his wife looking for him, he looks the other way. On George and Emily's wedding day, Mr Webb reminisces before the groom on the advice his father once gave him: "Best thing to do is to give an order, even if it don't make sense; just so she'll learn to obey...And, oh yes, he said never, never, let her know how much money you have, never...So I took the opposite of my father's advice and have been happy ever since." George and Emily knew they were meant for each other when she criticized him for being too conceited, not perfect as other men are, such as her and his father, women being less liable to be perfect, because they are inherently "more nervous". Over strawberry ice-cream sodas, both realize they have been noticing each other nearly all the time. However, Mrs Webb finds it "downright cruel about sending our girls out into marriage that way". "I hope some of her girl friends have told her a thing or two," she adds. The couple are married, but Emily soon dies in childbirth. At the funeral, the dead come back to talk, including Emily with her mother, Stimson, and others. When allowed to live a day in her life over again, she chooses one from fourteen years ago on her twelfth birthday, but cannot bear to look long. "That's what it was to be alive," Stimson concludes, "to move about in a cloud of ignorance-". When George enters the cemetery and sinks in sorrow over Emily's grave, she concludes with the others: "They don't understand, do they?"
Time: Fictional past, 1940s, the future. Place: New Jersey, USA.
Text at https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.268516 https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.262038 https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.262703
Lillian Hellman described the evils attending children's rumors and how we should "take us the foxes, the little foxes, that spoil the vines: for our vines have tender grapes (Solomon 2:15)
Lillian Hellman (1905-1984) contributed importantly to dramatic lore with "The children's hour" (1934) and "The little foxes" (1939).
The play's title of "The children's hour" derives from a poem of the same name by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (1807-1882), starting with “Between the dark and the daylight,/When the night is beginning to lower,/Comes a pause in the day's occupations,/That is known as the children's hour." The name of the play is ironically chosen because the poem emphasizes children’s goodness so that the parent gently responds with: “I have you fast in my fortress,/And will not let you depart,/But put you down into the dungeon/In the round-tower of my heart." The plot is taken from a criminal case which occurred in 19th century Scotland, "The great Drumsheugh case", a section of “Bad companions” (1931) written by William Roughead, a Scottish law historian. In “The children’s hour”, the accusation of homosexuality is all the more worrisome in a school environment. Although the accusation of lovemaking is false, there is some inkling of future danger in that Martha admits after the suicide to having had such secret feelings towards her mate. In such a charged atmosphere, “for the mere accusation that a person is something or believes in something by even an irresponsible source does as much damage as the proof or even the revelation that the charge is true” (Reynolds, 1986, p 134). Bentley (1956) complained that “the material...suggests two stories. The first is a story of heterosexual teachers accused of lesbianism; the enemy is a society which punishes the innocent. The second is a story of lesbian teachers accused of lesbianism; the enemy is a society which punishes lesbians. Now, since either one of these stories could make an acceptable indignant play, one could scarcely be surprised if a playwright tried to tell them both at once. This is not quite what Miss Hellman does. She spends the greater part of the evening on the first story. In fact the indignation she arouses in us has but one source: our impression that the charge of lesbianism is unfounded, an impression reinforced by everyone's holy horror whenever the subject comes up. Then, in the last few minutes, we learn that one of the teachers is lesbian. But it is too late for Miss Hellman to tell Story Two and spell out its moral. The 'guilty' teacher kills herself, and the curtain comes down" (pp 74-75). This criticism is countered by Sauer (2011). "Bentley complained that the play contains two improperly meshed stories: society pursuing the innocent, society pursuing homosexuality after Martha admits her feelings to Karen. 'I love you that way,' she admits, 'maybe the way they said I loved you, I don’t know.' She may not know her own feelings, or she knows her feelings but is uncertain of her friend’s reaction, or both. In any case, she wants to know more and to stay with her, so that one can argue there is only one story: society pursuing the innocent who may yet be guilty in the future, a preemptive strike to prevent a crime in a situation all the more charged with two adults in the constant presence of children" (pp 142-154). Although Miller and Frazer (1991) criticized that Martha’s admission “undercuts the whole thesis that a malicious child can wreck innocent lives” (p 200), the play’s value thereby increases because now we have two interactions instead of one: the impact of a girl on society and the impact of society on a woman. One can also argue that the main story is female jealousy. “This almost entirely female society is full of jealousy and manipulation; the characters compete for love and find accusations of excessive attachment easy to make and easy to believe. Mary's claim that the teachers have a lesbian relationship names and heightens what is already in the air. Mrs Mortar, for example (there is no Mr Mortar, as far as the play is concerned), feels in competition with Karen Wright for the attentions of her niece, Martha. Jealous of the affectionate friendship between the two teachers, Mrs Mortar accuses her niece of resenting Karen's upcoming marriage with Joe Cardin. It is this accusation, overheard, that provides Mary with the seed of her slanderous attack on Karen and Martha. Although Mrs Mortar calls Martha's affection for Karen "unnatural, just as unnatural as it can be," her own past seems somewhat ambiguous. Shortly after we learn of Karen and Martha's revised vacation plans. To Martha's disappointment the two women will now be accompanied by the young doctor. Mrs Mortar recalls her own vacation to England with Delia Lampert, a beloved friend, and the disruption of that friendship by Delia’s unhappy marriage. Mrs Mortar is, in addition, easily seduced by Mary Tilford's wilted bouquets and flattery; her fatuousness is surpassed only by Mrs Tilford's. Like the aunt, the grandmother seems overly attached to her younger relation. In her conversation with Mrs Tilford, Mary repeatedly speaks of this affection and uses physical caresses to secure confirmations of love. Like Mrs Mortar, Mrs Tilford finds the idea of Martha and Karen making love easy to believe. Mary's uncertain descriptions of 'funny noises' and 'funny things', communicated to her grandmother in 'fast, excited' whispers, seem to confirm something perhaps unacknowledged, but already present in the older woman's mind. Mrs Tilford only hesitates a moment before picking up the phone and spreading the news. Suggestions of lesbian desire are diffused throughout the text, touching every character except Karen Wright. Early in the play, Hellman presents the students simultaneously discussing changes in sleeping arrangements and passing a forbidden copy of 'Mademoiselle de Maupin' from bedroom to bedroom. This is the text whose 'one part' all the girls want to read...The play covertly suggests that desire for each other is the common if unacknowledged possession of the majority of women, but it overtly represents lesbianism as so fearful that the teachers are viewed as monsters and shunned in the street, so potentially infectious that even Karen's sensible, stalwart fiancé hesitates to kiss and hold her, fearing contamination” (Titus, 1991 pp 220-222). In the characterization of Mary, “she is established as a liar and a bully by concrete dialogue about a missing bracelet and allowance money and a broken vase and wilted flowers and a specific book read furtively. The concrete dialogue is reinforced by concrete actions: arm-twisting, a fake heart attack” (Lederer, 1979 pp 29-30).
“Possessing a strange and abnormal nature and having been overly pampered by a doting and prosperous grandmother, Amelia Tilford, the girl is accustomed to getting her own way by cajolery and threats. Her skill and obstinacy in lying, her violent temper, her spirit of defiance toward any authority and, most of all, her capacity for hate enable Mary to move from one despicable triumph to another” (Herron, 1969 p 343). "Mary's lie succeeds because adults' inner community find it inconceivable that she should know about a lesbian relationship unless she had actual evidence of it and Mary is clever enough to disguise how much she has learned from reading illicit French novels" (Griffin and Thorsten, 1999 pp 29-30). Moody (1972) complained that the play loses its edge once Mary, "the most compelling character", disappears from the action, especially after the suicide in the final scene between Karen and Amelia (p 55). One can dispute to what extent Mary is the most compelling character and how the relation between Karen and Amelia is more vital if we consider female envy as the main theme.
In "The little foxes", Hellman "drew an unmerciful picture of the rise of an American fortune, of the predatory nature of entrepreneurs who profited from industrial expansion in the nation, and of the warping of human nature produced by unlimited greed. Presented in terms of character rather than exhortation or diffuse exposition, this analysis was a notable encaustic" (Gassner, 1954a p 688). In Regina and her two brothers, we have the mentality of “the family and me before everything”. “They are guilty of abusing their position, their power, and they fail to recognize evil either in others or themselves” (Reynolds, 1986 p 141). Regina is "a magnificent embodiment of evil: cold, hard, determined, and beautiful, larger than life, yet grounded to the life that made her" (Moody, 1972 p 104). Lederer (1979) emphasized the use of irony in plot structure and characterization. For example, "Horace's effort to outwit Regina boomerangs: his threat to make a new will leaving only the bonds to Regina causes his death...The stolen bonds which temporarily free Ben and Oscar from Regina put them in her control when Horace dies" (pp 45-46). Regina and Ben enjoy each other's ironies, especially when they mock Oscar out of his share of the money.
Joe looks sternly at the innocent-looking Mary to the consternation of Martha, Karen, and Lily. Original Broadway production, played respectively by Robert Keith, Anne Revere, Florence McGee, Katherine Emery, and Katherine Emmet
Time: 1930s. Place: USA.
Text at http://azactorsacademy.com/uploads/plays/childrens_hour_the.pdf
Karen and Martha own a girls' boarding school and are helped by Martha's aunt, Lily. To rid herself of her troublesome aunt, Martha suggests that she should travel for a while. Lily refuses, angrily accusing her niece of jealousy towards anyone around Joe. To avoid working, one of their pupils, Mary, pretends to be sick and is examined by Dr Joe Cardin, her cousin and engaged to be married to Karen. Judged to be healthy, Mary asks her grandmother, Amelia, to allow her to leave the establishment, but she refuses. Knowing little of such matters but helped by a book kept well hidden, Mary accuses Karen and Martha of engaging in an illicit love-affair with each other. This time Amelia accedes to her request and contacts the students' parents, so that by word of mouth Karen and Martha lose most of their pupils, except a girl named Rosalie. In an attempt to halt this emerging disaster, Karen and Martha confront Amelia with her granddaughter's lie. Though Mary's story is plainly inconsistent, Rosalie reluctantly corroborates it in fear of being accused of lesbianism herself. Under these disagreeable conditions, Aunt Lily finally decides to go away. Karen and Martha accuse Amelia of libel in court, but lose their case. When Lily returns, both women accuse her of disloyalty. Although Joe remains loyal, the scandal forces him to move to a distant town. He proposes that the women should move along with him. Unsure on whether he believes their innocence, Karen proposes that she separate from Joe despite his unwillingness to do so. When Martha learns of this, she is consumed with guilt, feeling that the accusation of lesbianism, though not based in fact, might be true within. Karen dismisses the thought, but Martha cannot. Sitting alone, Karen hears a pistol shot in Martha's room. In the aftermath of Martha's suicide, Amelia begs Karen's forgiveness for having uncovered Mary's lies too late, but is not forgiven.
To make money, Regina, played by Tallulah Bankhead, attempts to control her husband and her brothers, original Broadway production, 1939
Time: 1900s. Place: USA.
Text at http://www.archive.org/details/sixteenfamousame00cerf
A businessman from Chicago agrees with his two brothers, Ben and Oscar, on opening a cotton mill, but they need money from a third brother, Horace, who has not as yet agreed on it. Horace's wife, Regina, says that, though he offers to pay one third, he should have twice that amount in return. While the two brothers mutter in discontent at that offer, Oscar discovers that Horace's son, Leo, has looked inside his father's safety deposit box at the bank and found valuable bonds, enough to close the deal. "If he doesn't look at them until autumn, he wouldn't even miss them out of the box," Oscar suggests. Horace arrives after being five months away to treat a heart condition. Regina suggests that the disease might be due to his "fancy women", which he considers unlikely. She explains the mill business, specifying he will get a larger share at Oscar's expense, but Horace responds with little interest. "We'll sit by and watch the boys grow rich," he says laconically. Meanwhile, Oscar informs Ben of Leo's discovery. In turn, Ben informs a stunned Regina that Oscar intends to go to Chicago with the money. Growing desperate, Regina exclaims against her husband. "You hate to see anybody live now, don't you?" she states sarcastically. After he still refuses to change his mind, her hate wells up. "I hope you die," she says. "I hope you die soon." A few days later, Horace discovers Leo's theft and reveals it to his wife, but he plans to do nothing about it. In the midst of an argument, he suffers a heart attack while his wife does nothing to help him. Eventually, Leo discovers that his uncle knows about the theft. Regina tells her brothers that if Horace dies, she will either get 75% of the business in exchange for the bonds or report them to the police. When they discover he is indeed dead, they are forced to accept her conditions. Suspecting her mother of treachery, Alexandra refuses to follow Regina to a life of pleasure in Chicago.
Louis Kaufman Anspacher (1878-1947) merits praise for two comedy-dramas: "The unchastened woman" (1916) and "Our children" (1913).
Some critics were at first offended by the subject matter and characters of "The unchastened woman", such as Anthony (1916): "This ultra essence of unmoral maritality may interest the public of a great city where such polished depravity exists, but just why it should be put upon the stage is a question the author must answer. Any bromide flavor may become a fad for a time, but few mortal beings can behold such unholy happening for a term of two hours without being more or less scathed by the experience. It is for this reason we believe the piece an unwholesome product" (p 638). In contrast, Phelps (1920a) felt that "during the season of 1915-1916, the only original American play of any importance [was] The Unchastened Woman" (p 18). Eaton (1916) praised the play for the contrast shown between characters, especially the pro-worker, Hildegarde, and the woman of the world, Caroline. "Lawrence's wife is one of those strong, energetic, idealistic, radical young women who just now are so numerous in New York (and elsewhere) and are often actually accomplishing so much in organization of the garment workers, in industrial reform, in charities and even in literature. To throw into strong contrast such a woman as this and such a product of the parasitic rich as Caroline Knollys is to create instantly a living, vital dramatic situation" (pp 119-120). "The dramatist accomplished a distinct feat; he created a character-study in his heroine worthy of Mrs Humphry Ward or Mrs Edith Wharton, and he developed that character with unerring understanding of her essential weakness, keeping her development consistent to the end. But the defect of the play, seen as much in the printed script as in the acting, was to be found in the incomplete social fervor injected into it, the bad taste of socialized preachment. These side-issues distracted the attention of the audience away from the real concern of the play" (Moses, 1917 pp 299-300). "The very 'clou' of the play is the heroine's careful conventionality, her adoration of good form, her creed which puts the surface above everything, which objects not to immorality but to the appearance of it...Utterly heartless, vain, and cattish that lady may have been, but just the same you may be quite certain, a woman more ready to forgive an enemy than commit a social gaucherie, and quite as incapable of wearing last year's gown as of being generous to a rival...For this play of Mr Anspacher's is distinctly a play of character. More than that it is an attempt to show the different reactions of varying characters to the truth- to break up the white light of truth into its spectrum. Caroline uses the truth unscrupulously as a weapon of offence; the truth makes of her husband a gentle, varnished cynic; it blights Emily, makes of Krellin the anarchist a cosmic humorist, the old chairwoman a kindly philosopher, and leaves Hildegarde, the architect's wife, the only one who can stand facing the truth without being overwhelmed. It is a play of skillful unwinding of the strands of good and evil, a play wherein the intricate threads of action are separated with deft fingers, a play of delicate tones and half lights, and subtle gradations" (Meyer, 1916 pp 288-290).
Time: 1910s. Place: USA.
Text at http://archive.org/details/unchastenedwoman00ansp https://archive.org/details/modernamericanpl00bakeuoft
Hubert learns that his wife, Caroline, was caught at customs making false declarations along with her friend, Susan. "Two women without even the wretched excuse of poverty attempting to defraud the government!" he exclaims. Caroline explains that she made a settlement with the authorities, in contrast to Susan who declared everything. Despite their marriage troubles, Hubert and Caroline have resigned themselves to an amiable arrangement by which, according to Hubert, she has broken all her vows except one, marital fidelity, while he has kept all of his except that one. More precisely, she is aware of her husband's relations with Emily, but does not suffer from it, revealing to Susan that at any moment she can name that woman as a co-respondent to divorce proceedings that would be favorable to her. She wishes to continue her platonic friendship with Lawrence, a needy architect, by giving him a commission to remodel their house. Out of curiosity, she gauges Lawrence's relation with his wife, Hildegarde, who organizes an employment bureau in connection with a cooperation of tenements for poor people, their only source of revenue. Hubert discovers that Hildegarde is the one who wrote a newspaper article against the abuses, notably in child labor practices, of the Homestead Mills factory manufacturing wool products, of which he owns the majority stock. However, Hildegarde reassures him on one point. "Tomorrow we begin on your competitors," she announces. Alone with Hildegarde, Caroline points out that this type of work might constitute a hindrance to her husband's ambitions. To prove her power over him, Caroline proposes that Lawrence take up the fourth floor of their house as a studio, which he gladly accepts, both out of friendship towards her and his need to distance himself from squalid surroundings. Meanwhile, Emily informs Hubert that it was through her means as an employee at customs that his wife got off so easily, though she must pay a large fine to avoid being arrested. She also informs him of her intention to abandon their adulterous relation to marry Michael, a Russian immigrant working as a newspaper reporter. When Hubert angrily confronts his wife because of the fine, she haughtily refuses to pay. "It would really be indelicate of you to insist that I should pay your mistress," she affirms, at which Hubert chokes with fury. At the tenements, Lawrence worries that his wife has invited Caroline and Susan over for supper, angrily fussing about. Hildegarde admonishes him. "They are your friends, and you know I never miss a chance of interesting rich people in this philanthropy," she affirms. Alone with Lawrence, Caroline offers to help his career. "Oh, I want to see you free- free from all the petty scruples that would hinder you," she says. "That's my work now, for while you're building houses, I shall be building your career." The party is interrupted by the arrival of Michael, who happens also to be the friend of Lawrence and Hildegarde. He is overjoyed at the settlement by arbitration with Homestead Mills, largely in favor of the workers. Yet Lawrence is nervous over the consequences of these news on Caroline, who attempts to twit Michael about his pro-labor views. He challenges back. "You see, I know you," he says. "You're a spoiled American woman, which means you take neither our government nor yourself seriously. I don't blame you; neither do I. In other words, we have a sense of humor." He casually mentions he knows about her difficulties at customs, but was forced to abandon the thought of publishing the story through the intercession of a friend. "Well, to resume: strange to say, I wrote that the people whose fortunes have been made in industries protected by the government are always the very ones most eager to evade the customs imposed by that government to protect their industries," he declares. Aghast at this left-wing talk, Susan wishes to leave at once, but Caroline becomes bolder when Emily arrives. She accuses Emily of being her husband's mistress. Michael refuses to believe it and proposes to speak to her husband about this. For good measure, after hearing Hildegarde defend Emily and insisting on a retraction, Caroline insinuates that she herself is enjoying an ongoing amorous relation with her husband. Later, worried about his wife's whereabouts, Lawrence falsely says to Caroline over the telephone that he has hurt his ankle and cannot join her with an acquaintance that might have yielded him a second commission. When Hildegarde joins her husband, she tells him that it might be best that they separate for awhile, but he does not want to. The couple is surprised by the arrival of Hubert. Hildegarde still insists on the necessity of his wife's retraction, with which Hubert agrees. He pretends to be surprised after hearing about Caroline's innuendo concerning her own marriage. Lawrence becomes even more frightened during this encounter, but is forced to challenge his boss by stating that his wife's accusation is a lie. Hubert coolly insists that unless she retracts, Hildegarde will be named co-respondent to divorce proceedings, news which now frighten her as well. All three are surprised by Caroline's arrival, who expected to see Lawrence alone. Aware that she is losing her power over him, Caroline angrily confronts Lawrence about his lie and even more so after learning from Hildegarde that latter informed her husband about her insinuation. When Hubert speaks to her about the necessity of retracting, Caroline at first refuses, but, confronted with the ambiguities underlying her relation with Lawrence, she is forced to sign a statement of retraction written by Michael. Before leaving, she insinuates as a parting shot in her husband's absence about Emily's infidelity. Breaking down, Emily confesses the truth. Now recognizing that she ignored some matters concerning Caroline's relation with her husband, Hildegarde admits defeat and prepares for divorce, but on seeing her husband crumple at these news, she takes him in her arms.
Because of his son’s extravagance and his own stubbornness in disowning his daughter when she married one of his employees, Willy loses his shoe factory and his peace of mind. Shoe factory at Lynn Massachusetts, 1900s
Time: 1910s. Place: Lynn, Massachusetts, USA.
Text at https://archive.org/details/ourchildren00ansprich
Willy Engel has bought his son, Theodore, a partnership in a brokerage business. Although Theodore has been going out with Rosie, niece to Willy’s best friend, Stasi, his new position prompts him to start courting Harriet Hutton, daughter of a rich bank president. For three years, Willy has been holding the mortgage on the neighboring house to Richard Hellman, employee and inventor at his shoe factory, but now he wants to foreclose and leave it to Theodore. For his daughter, Hertha, he has opened a $10,000 bank account. Unaware of Willy’s plans on his house, Richard asks Hertha to marry him. She accepts, but when she informs her father of the marriage proposal, he refuses his consent because the man’s social rank is too low for her. Nonplussed, Richard takes her away. Angry yet worried, Willy asks Theodore to give Hertha the booklet of her bank account. Over a two year period, Willy’s financial situation worsens because of a strike at his factory and his son’s extravagance in speculating and spending on himself. He is warned by Stasi about the rash speculations of his son’s partner, Vaughan Leland. “Willy, I know that he’s a crook,” Stasi declares. “He took your Theodore for a partner just to get credit with your money. Stop him now before he goes too far.” But Willy’s confidence in his son remains unshaken. To Stasi’s astonishment who expected to witness his Theodore’s marriage with Rosie, Willy announces that he is engaged to marry Harriet. Despite his difficulties, Hutton agrees to renew Willy’s mortgages and accepts his son’s marriage to his daughter provided the latter cut himself away from Leland’s dishonest dealings. Theodore assures Harriet her that if she gives him more money to invest in stocks, her previous investments should be safe. She gives him $3,000 but specifies that she never intended to marry him. A shaken Theodore calls Boston only to learn that Leland’s affairs are even worse than he thought. “Sheriffs?” he asks astonished. “Receiver sealed, the books pending investigation? But where’s Leland? Gone? Gone where?” Afraid of being arrested, he takes off with Harriet’s money as Hertha returns. Knowing of her father’s troubles, Hertha offers him the $10,000 back and proposes that Richard, who has made good on his inventions, help him out, but he refuses both offers. Unexpectedly, Richard shows up as his wife runs to hide. He gives Willy money as the first installment of the neighboring property on which he wishes to build a house, acquired without Willy knowing who the buyer was. But Richard is astonished on learning that Hertha has divulged he is also involved in acquiring her father’s factory. “You must see that I have duties to my firm to the people that put bread in our mouths,” he says to her. “You’ve betrayed them.” However, they are interrupted by Hutton, who offers Richard the following: “An hour ago I refused to foreclose and sell your firm, the Engel factory. But if your offer still holds good, I’ll take it. The factory goes to you.” When Willy asks why he has changed his mind, Hutton replies: “Your son took $3,000 of my daughter’s money tonight after he knew the police had closed up his office.” A crushed Willy gives him Richard’s $3,000, pretending that it is Theodore’s money, but is then relieved to find $3,000 enclosed in a letter left by his son. Theodore finds work in a tannery and sends back money to pay his debts, while Willy returns to work as a plain shoemaker. But Richard accelerates the process of reconciliation with Willy by purchasing the tannery, paying the remaining $12,000 in debts, and sending his son back home to him.
John Steinbeck showed how the best-laid plans of mice and men easily go astray, 1962
Although mostly a novelist, John Steinbeck (1902-1968) contributed to the drama with "Of mice and men" (1937), an adaptation of the novella of the same name whose title is derived from Robert Burns' poem, "To a mouse" (1785): "The best laid schemes o’ mice an’ men/Gang aft agley,/An’ lea’e us nought but grief an’ pain/For promis’d joy!" "The best-laid schemes of mice and men/Often go astray/And leave us nothing but grief and pain/For promised joy." "The mouse cannot enjoy his hoped-for nest; Lennie and George will never own their own ranch” (Reinking, 2013 p 22).
“John Steinbeck’s dramatization of his own story never fails, never even falters for a moment in its achievement. It is a perfect piece of dramatic writing in a small frame. It is simple, rich and authentic, with a foundation set strongly in a social situation that has within it every element of drama, and with a structure built as strongly on the characters and the human relationships that arise inevitably out of the situation. The dialogue is perfect- direct, revealing, brutally true, so uninhibited as to leave no place for implication, expressive of the ranch life it represents and of the natures of the men who speak it. The drama is the perfect example of what a social play can be, without a line or a word of preachment, with only an artist’s creative presentation of his theme and his characters” (Isaacs, 1950 pp 644-645).
"Once he shoots Lennie...George can still get the farm with Candy if he wants to...But he declines, which proves that being in one safe place with Lennie was more important to him than simply being in one safe place. He elects to continue living the hard life of a ranch hand rather than settle down to life on a small farm with Candy. George can have a better life, yet he turns it down. Unquestionably, he will suffer more on the road, without Lennie, than on the farm, without Lennie. He never gives himself a chance to, in his words, 'get used to' Candy" (Cardullo, 2011 p 260). Doyle (2006) also emphasized “the symbiotic relation between the two migrant workers, each equally needing the other" (pp 82-83). “Not hoboes who love the road and refuse to work, the characters are vagrant laborers who move from job to job as the breaks decree...Locked in a dependency relationship that neither can break, the intelligent George and the muddle-brained Lennie travel and work together, holding agricultural jobs until fired or hounded out because of Lennie’s half-wittedness and his propensity for stroking soft living things until, involuntarily, he kills them. Steinbeck makes it clear that theirs is not a homosexual relationship, nor is it a blood relationship...It is the simple need of companionship that keeps them together...Steinbeck builds suspensefully toward the climactic scene in which Lennie for the last time in his life strokes and kills. At the opening of the play, it is dead mice found along the roadside that he fondles. Next it is a newborn puppy. Finally, it is the wife (unnamed) of Curley, the ranch-owner’s son. The looming inevitability of the scene renders it shockingly grotesque in the event...Darting through their story are insights into the workers life- his pride in his job and his modest physical and material satisfactions which had a special force during the Depression” (Goldstein, 1974 pp 371-372).
"Candy laments the lost dream and blames the woman Lennie killed for ruining [it]” (Reinking, 2013 p 22). Puritan-minded Krutch (1939) presented an unduly harsh picture of Curley's wife as a "pathetic little nymphomaniac" (p 129). Agate (1944) is likewise harsh on her: “Is this an appalling tragedy? Yes. But it is not the girl’s, since we are no more concerned for her than we are for that mouse and that puppy. The tragedy is that of Lennie the husky, and even more of his friend George, who has nursed and fenced in Lennie throughout his horribly precarious existence, and must now shoot him to avoid his inevitable lynching at the hands of the cutie’s husband and the other ranchers” (369-170).
George worries over the troubles Lennie gets into because of his weak brain and great strength, played respectively by Wallace Ford (left) and Broderick Crawford (right) in the original Broadway production, 1938
Time: 1930s. Place: California, USA.
Text at https://www.joculartheatre.com/scripts/Of%20Mice%20and%20Men.pdf
Two migrant field workers, George and Lennie, look for work on a ranch. They were forced out of their previous occupation after Lennie was falsely accused of attempted rape, merely for touching a woman's dress, due to his penchant of stroking soft objects. Because of Lennie's mental deficiencies, George advises him to speak as little as possible to their potential employer, a ploy which succeeds. At work, the two are confronted with Curley, the boss' son, who overly compensates for his small size with aggressive talk. His wife has an openly flirtatious personality, in George's view a figure of danger in their hope of making important money. A field hand, Slim, offers Lennie a puppy, joyfully accepted as something he can fondle. Another farmhand, Candy, offers to advance some money to George in support for their dream of owning land, provided he is allowed to live with them. Their agreement is threatened when Curley capriciously attacks Lennie, who, encouraged to defend himself by George, breaks the aggressor's hand. Yet, supported by the other farmhands, George and Lennie remain on the farm. Despite his cynical outlook in general, Crooks, a stable buck, hears of Lennie's dream of owning land and asks to contribute to it. Their talk is interrupted by Curley's wife, as flirtatious as ever towards Lennie. Later, Lennie grieves on discovering he has accidentally killed his puppy through over-fondling. He meets Curley's wife a second time. She expresses her own dream of one day becoming a star of the cinema. When Lennie mentions his penchant to touch, she flirtatiously allows him to stroke her hair, but then becomes very worried about his manner and his strength. In a panic she cries out. Aware of the danger of the situation, Lennie seeks to calm her down, but is unable to, until in frustration he accidentally breaks her neck. After learning of this disaster, George joins Lennie as a fugitive. They hide in the bushes as a lynch mob is formed. In despair and out of compassion of his friend, George shoots Lennie and is soon discovered by Curley and the farmhands.
William Saroyan showed how you can have the time of your life by rejecting society's expectations, 1940
William Saroyan (1908-1981) is especially known for "The time of your life" (1939), like O'Neill's “The iceman cometh”, a bar-room drama.
Freedman (1971) favored “The iceman cometh” over “The time of your life”, because less sentimental (p 20). “The time of your life” “is a reflection of the years of the Depression, dramatizing the establishment and its laws and enforcers as oppressively fascistic and anti-labor, hostile to the ‘little man’. The playwright strives to prove that truth and beauty are to be found in society’s underdogs and pariahs...and the child-like adult. [The saloon seems like a] melting pot of ethnicities, where there is kindliness, security, and generosity of spirit, living and letting live as each person follows his own destiny in contrast to the outside world where none of this occurs. The saloon is the site of Joe’s wish fulfillment; prostitutes are ladies, wind-up toys are stronger than machines, love occurs in an instant, the potentially threatening Arab is gentle and plays beautiful music on a harmonica (Featherstone, 2008 pp 94-109). In particular, Joe uses money to offer hope in his fantasy world of wish fulfillment” (Miller and Frazer, 1991 p 241). “The work is imbued with the spirit of the Popular Front. In Saroyan’s view, it is the courage and integrity of the little man who loves America above all else who will preserve democracy. Saroyan attempts to touch on all contemporary liberal concerns. Not only does he celebrate democracy with scenes of good fellowship, and not only does he recall with praise the courageous frontier spirit that won the west, but he also packs in references to labor unrest and racial antagonism. The result is a collection of the literary motifs of the period. The San Francisco waterfront saloon that forms the setting becomes, not a microcosm, but a resort to which spokesmen for all social classes hurry to find warmth at a moment in time made chilling by the inevitability of war. The keynote of the play is sounded by one of the barflies- improbably an Arab- who repeatedly offers his analysis of the contemporary scene: ‘no foundation, all the way down the line’” (Goldstein, 1974 pp 358-359).
“The mystery of Saroyan’s success...was the result of an instinctively arrived at accommodation between two schools of theatre that had been at war with each other during the Depression-harassed thirties: the school that made social awareness the primary test of playwriting and the school that would have preferred to sublimate the times in poetry, fantasy, and abstraction” (Gassner, 1954b p 297). “No play demonstrates the potential vitality of our stage at the end of the 1930s more convincingly than William Saroyan’s fugue, The Time of your Life...the people...are, superficially considered, hopelessly miscellaneous. But they have one thing in common...who are they but waifs of the world, impressing upon us the fact that we rare all waifs of one kind or another!...Those who want more cohesion in the drama will find it, if they have unimpaired eyes, in the presence of Joe, a shiftless young man with money at his disposal. Everything, every event or presence in the play impinges upon him, so that he becomes the sensitive film and focus of the episodes..This man who acquired money and sickened of it, who is alone and inscrutably so...has developed a pity for all mankind...and...has made himself a paraclete or comforter of his fellow creatures...The fantastic relic of the frontier, Kit Carson, who claims the honor of having killed the vigilante, is received with approval by Joe...Nothing is basically vague, although everything is fugitive in the play...All its separate points are vividly realized. Only a certain sentimentality attenuates them, particularly in a bedroom scene...The assumption that anything not completely integrated constitutes fantasy is an illusion of reason-inebriated members of the intelligentsia; to them we recommend the platitude that a good deal of private and social life is unintegrated and illogical” (Gassner, 1968 pp 407-410).
Joe, played by Eddie Dowling, ponders on how to help his friend, Tom, obtain Kitty's hand. Original Broadway production, 1939
Time: 1939. Place: San Francisco, USA.
Text at https://archive.org/details/threedramasofam00mers
In a saloon, as he often does, an habitual loafer, Joe, asks his friend, Tom, to run an errand for him, in this case buying a load of mechanical toys. When Tom returns with them, he asks Kitty, a whore with whom he is in love, to go out with him. She asks him whether he has money. When he says yes, they go out together. A woman asks Joe whether he really likes to drink so much. "As much as I like to breathe," he answers. When Tom returns to Joe, he reports that Kitty is crying. Joe requests him to buy an European map, a gun, and bullets. When he returns, they console Kitty, who is in the habit of daydreaming that she is an actress and her man a doctor. "Be the wonderful doctor she dreams about and never had," Joe recommends to Tom. "Go ahead. Correct the errors of the world." When a sailor arrives to sleep with her, Tom threatens to kill him. Another customer arrives, Krupp, a dockside policeman considering quitting his job. "We've got everything, but we always feel lousy and dissatisfied just the same," he comments. Practical for the benefit of others but not towards himself, Joe buys Kitty new clothes and the rent needed to live in a more comfortable hotel. Yet another barroom customer, Kit Carson, shows up and demonstrates to Joe how to use the gun. To help Tom get Kitty, Joe arranges for him to obtain a job as a truck-driver. Kitty is still depressed, feeling that her gifts have arrived too late in life. Meanwhile, a member of the vice squad, Blick, checks on the premises and interrogates Kitty aggressively. When Kit objects to his tone, Blick takes him out in the street and beats him up. On further interrogation, Kitty confesses that she dances burlesque, at which Blick challenges her to show him how she dances. As she starts to take off her clothes, Joe and Tom intervene. Sensing danger, Joe pushes his friend away and gives him money, so that he and Kitty can escape safely. Joe aims his gun at Blick, but it is defective, so that he wanders to his table confused, in a daze. Soon, the owner of the bar tells him Blick has been shot, after which Kit enters with the news that he once killed a man in San Francisco in 1939.
The importance of “Paradise lost” is sometimes misunderstood, the downfall of the family dismissed as “confusing”, the characters as “never coming to life” (Gagey, 1947 p 171). Critics such as Krutch (1939), resenting the picture of America presented in the play, criticized the author as having "lost his grip on reality" and exaggerating the "decadence of a family" (p 271). “Is an economic system to be judged by its successes or by its failures? I suggest that both tests are wrong, and that the test of a civilization is not its tyrants or its slaves, but the general run of happiness among its wage-earners. The cross-section of society which Mr Odets has chosen to show us is a miasmatic welter of failure, decay, and death. Mr Odets, an American, tells me that the home of the Gordons is what you may expect under a capitalist regime. I, as an Englishman whose acquaintance with America is limited to a three weeks’ visit to New York, tell Mr Odets (a) that he cannot produce such a home, and b) that if he can, the life contained therein would be equally catastrophic under socialism, communism, or any other ‘ism’. These people are without virtue, and their faults cry to heaven. What’s the good of blaming capitalism?...Leo Gordon is a spineless, nostalgic, vapourizing manufacturer who would lose money in a tobacco kiosk. He has been for some years in partnership with a Mr Katz without discovering that his partner has the soul of a thug and the mind of a fire-raiser. Katz would also be a hundred per cent sadist if he were not also a hundred per cent coward, and, moreover, the victim of some obscure disease. Gordon has three children. Ben is an amateur sprinter with the mind of a professional gigolo; he marries a wanton and joins in partnership with his wife’s lover, who is a taxi-driver turned gangster. The second son is dying of sleeping sickness, and there is a sleepy daughter who, by giving music lessons, appears to earn the only money coming into the house. Her heart is broken because some down-at-heel young man, who ought to be behind a counter selling gloves, wants to be an orchestral conductor, but, finding competition with the Toscaninis and the Barbirollis too keen, mooches off to Chicago. Lastly, Gordon has a wife, a self-complacent, detached creature who wears delightful silk stockings and goes out to play bridge. I do not believe that any American middle-class family as unpretty as this one owes its unprettiness to capitalism, communism, or any other ‘ism’...The English playgoer is necessarily a little at sea when into this magnificent apartment, alleged to be the living-room of the Gordons, irrupt without waiting to be announced a boiler-stoker and a queer little piano-tuner who seems to be a mixture of Quilp and Little Nell’s grandfather. The latter character, who has the biggest part in the play, is always cropping up in American comedy, one of the variants being Grandpa in You Can't Take It With You. He is a master of foolish saws and antique instances, all of them disconnected. When, then, the stage is cleared for this odd creature who has spent all night in gaol, a stoker in dungarees, and the dying boy who has now exchanged a dinner-jacket for a silk dressing-gown, the English playgoer may be excused if he finds that his finger is not, so to speak, on the American social pulse...In the end the ruined manufacturer, whose furniture has been piled on the sidewalk, has a lyrical passage in which he expresses his conviction that in the failure of the individual is to be read hope for the nation as a whole which, of course, is bunk, and pretentious bunk” (Agate, 1944 pp 366-368).
In a similar vein, Isaacs (1950) wrote that the play “aims to be the story of the disintegration of the middle-class liberals in America under the capitalist system and their hope of redemption through a new social system… Someone should tell him that the Gordons, and Gus Michaels (the not too full-witted family friend), his unclean daughter, her gangster lover, and Mr. Pike (the aristocratic furnace man), Phil Foley (the crooked ward politician), the insurance man who suggests arson, and the homeless philosophers, while they may be American citizens, are not in any sense representative of the middle-class, nor is there anything in their thinking or acting to indicate that they are liberal. They are the dregs of the social system, money-loving, money- starved capitalists who have gone rotten through spinelessness and the frustration of their own golden longings. No revolution would help them. They are too old- every one of them, but especially the young ones. All of this only means that Mr Odets has not made you accept either his first premise or his conclusion. But between the two there still stands a play of more than usual power, observation, tension” (pp 635-637).
Likewise, Gassner (1954b) balked at the large number of unfortunate outcomes suffered by a single family. The play “was acceptable drama...only when taken as a poetic parable whose large assortment of catastrophes and blunderings serve an allegorical purpose and represent the social chaos that Odets felt” (p 308). Yet Gassner (1954a) admitted that "the well-intentioned, humane father meets the catastrophe with a high-hearted faith in a new unmercenary world that will release the joy and greatness latent in men’s hearts" (p 690). “Leo Gordon is an intellectual…gentle, rueful slightly self-mocking. He cannot save his business because he cannot believe in the kinds of action which he would have to perform...Leo’s problem...is...to recognize that he is in a new world where old solutions, old comforts are dead” (Weales, 1967b p 81). The Gordons “not only have a name unrecognizable as Jewish but they have diction that is free of Yiddish phrases...Of the major Jewish characters, only the repellent Sam Katz, Leo Gordon’s partner, is allowed the kind of idiomatic speech that instantly reveals his ethnic background...Holding the new line with its stress on the American revolutionary heritage, Odets gives Pike the play’s toughest, most radical lines on the failure of the American dream...[A] character skillfully developed is Kewpie. Odets subtly suggests that this minor monster feels a homosexual attraction for Ben and that he asserts his manliness by sleeping with Ben”s wife” (Goldstein, 1974 pp 302-307). “Even the radical spokesman in the play, Pike, is condemned because, although he is able to diagnose the malady, he is unable to provide the necessary remedy. Although he is articulate in his condemnation of capitalism and war, when he is asked the most vital question: ‘what is to be done?’ Pike does not draw the revolutionary moral. ‘I don’t know,’ he answers” (Rabkin, 1964 p 188). In the social context, the well-intentioned fail, as evidenced by Leo's confrontation with the delegation of workers and Gus' selling of his stamp collection, supporting Pike's view that a major social upheaval is necessary, that a piece-meal approach will not cut it. In short, "there is nothing to counteract the declension" (Weales, 1971, p 100), because such is tragedy.
"Sam asks them for longer hours and signs pay vouchers for more money than they are paid for, to keep the business going. Leo mortgages house and furniture. In the midst of the family downfall, Leo affirms the validity of the struggle of an individual or a family against overwhelming forces. His result, however, is optimistic and positive; the alternative to destruction is social realization” (Reynolds, 1986, p 109). Some critics complain that the realization is not dramatically realized, but merely forms Leo’s intent. Leo’s uplifting speech to Clara in the final scene (“the world is in its morning...”) has been misinterpreted. Miller and Frazer (1991) commented that “intended to be stirring and inspirational, the speech instead throws sand in the cogs and the gears don’t mesh” (p 181). It can rather be construed as defiance before calamity or a pathetic response to a pathetic situation, not necessarily intended to be stirring. For Berkowitz (1992), "Leo's salvation comes from his regaining the ability to dream any dream" (p 48). “The disparity described here between inner vision and external reality lies at the center of Odets' perception of the world. In America, even the America of the 1930s, men and women have the capacity for personal fulfillment, but are thwarted by political and social forces that leave few, if any, options for those without money or power” (Groman, 1986 p 80).
“’This is not reality, one says, 'too many catastrophes in one family, too much trouble in one package!’ Such an approach to Paradise Lost is the method of obdurate philistinism...The dramatic complications...represent the quintessence of a social tragedy, that of the disintegration of the middle class in our self-confessedly stalled social order. This stalemate is indicated in the play on two intimately connected levels: a general economic plane, the living presence of the Depression with its accompaniment of financial pressure, foreclosure, evictions, homelessness, and artificial demagogic reassurances (‘prosperity block-parties’), and a private, personal plane...Marcus Katz...may intimidate and exploit his handful of employees, but he is himself a pawn in the larger game which he does not run...The handsome Olympic runner lives on the thin air of promises and goes downgrade in a society which he helped to ‘glorify’. His friend, Kewpie, is a pathetic caricature of the tough-minded individualist who run the world and are aped on a slightly higher scale by the petty owning class of which Katz is a member. Only the radical furnace man and the shop delegates possess some real positiveness insofar as they are floating or being driven down to the clear and bracing sea of social responsibility instead of stagnating in a private puddle like the Gordon family...Leo Gordon...is left only with his least material possession, his spirit that tells him that there must be something beyond the impasse he has reached, that the spirit of man must leap over it, for a fruit tree does not wear a lock and chain...Paradise Lost is not only a notable advance in Odets' craftsmanship but one of the most thoughtful and moving plays of the American theatre” (Gassner, 1968, pp 399-401).
“In the 1930s, the vogue of so-called social significance was resisted by few novelists and playwrights. Zeal for social protest seized even those writers who had no talent for protest and did not know what to protest against except their own futility. In the 30s, scores of playwrights endeavored to write like Clifford Odets. Toward the end of the decade, it became distressingly evident that even Odets was trying to write like Odets; his manner, having lost a clear objective, was becoming a mannerism” (Gassner, 1968 p 187).
Time: 1930s. Place: USA.
Text at https://archive.org/details/dli.ernet.212821
Sidney Howard showed that immigrants know what they want but do not always get it, 1909
The principal claim to fame of Sidney Howard (1891-1939) is "They knew what they wanted" (1924).
Flexner (1938) found that the beginning of "They knew what they wanted" has “tension and pace. Thereafter the play sags...and the playwright is forced to draw heavily on the color and life of the 'festa'...[It is late] that we learn the fact towards which the play has built, that Amy is going to have Joe’s child” (p 33). “In keeping with the theme of nature’s fertility, the comedy begins in the early spring of the year, when the grapes in Tony’s vineyard are small and green. And the last act, months later, the grapes are large and purple. Like the grapes, the characters’ dreams grow to a ripe sweetness” (Firestone, 2008 p 45).
"It is quite understandable, that, for dramatic effect, Mr Howard should have Amy commit her one transgression on the wedding night itself. Yet I can not but feel that this weakens the characterization greatly. In every other respect, Amy is essentially a strong character- in her decision to go ahead with her bargain in spite of the deception, in her refusal to practise any subterfuge about her child, or to do away with it, in the fine contempt she discovers for Joe the moment her confused resentment has passed, in the flinty courage with which she makes her confession, expecting it to mean the wrecking of her life and her chance for a home, and feeling deeply the tragedy it holds for Tony. It seems hardly credible that a woman of this type would succumb so rapidly and with such trivial cause to the dark persuasions of Joe. This creates a serious weakness in a play that is otherwise a powerful crescendo in the character development of two people whose lives, for a time, seem headed toward disaster and tragedy. The other weakness lies in the character of the priest, Father McKee, to whose kindly philosophy Tony and Amy owe much of their essential strength. First of all and as a trivial detail of observation a rough and ready parish priest of Father McKee’s type is not apt to worry about 'not having written his sermon' by a Thursday evening! The other point is more important. Mr Howard makes Father McKee warn Tony in the first act that marriage with a non-Catholic is 'practically the same as living in sin', even when the marriage ceremony is performed by a Catholic priest. This is so grotesque a misrepresentation of the well-known Catholic position that it smacks of the desire to write an amusing line rather than of honest character study. In all its main outlines, however, this play must remain one of the memorable contributions to that theatre in which strong characters battle through to important human victories" (Skinner, 1931 pp 142-143).
"The situation here presented is one which could obviously be developed either as comedy or as tragedy. As tragedy it might end either in suicide or death, or in some other less definitive calamity. As it is, the triumph of common sense brings it closer to comedy. But it is not quite either. The mood of the conclusion suggests rather a sober, slightly wistful, acquiescence in the fact that life, even when it spares us fundamental catastrophe, often disappoints our rosier expectations...'They knew what they wanted' is in no sense a thesis play though it involves moral assumptions which might well have been argued in a thesis play only a decade before. What an opportunity is here presented- and neglected by Mr Howard- to expound a paradoxical morality, to define love, to explain The Case for the unmarried mother, and in general to 'épater les bourgeois!' Mr Howard, however, does nothing of the sort. He is not consciously engaged in forwarding a revolution either for its own sake or because he feels that the meaning of his play can be comprehensible only in so far as he is able to produce a revolution in the attitudes of his auditors. But he does assume that such a revolution has already taken place" (Krutch, 1939 pp 46-50). The same critic also remarked that the play runs counter to Bronson Howard's axioms of expected responses from the audience (p 51). In "Anatomy of a play" (1886), Bronson described axiom 1 thus: "three hearts cannot beat as one. The world is not large enough, from an artistic point of view, for three good human hearts to continue to exist, if two of them love a third. If one of the two hearts is a bad one, art assigns it to the hell on earth of disappointed love, but if it is good and tender and gentle, art is merciful to it, and puts it out of its misery by death." For axiom 2, "the wife who has once taken the step from purity to impurity can never reinstate herself in the world of art this side of the grave."
When Tony accepts his friend’s child, everyone’s wish is partially fulfilled: Tony has a wife and child (though not his own), Amy a home (though not her love), and Joe may wander (though without his love), and so convention is shown to be wrong (Gagey, 1947 p 124). The escape of the predicament of the three main characters is accomplished by “practical reasoning and common sense” in a manner that the mores of the previous generation would have found intolerable (Miller and Frazer, 1991 pp 134-135). "There are elements of Tony's character which accurately depict the sentiments of the immigrant Italian in the early part of the century. In the third act, when Joe begins elaborating on his Wobblie philosophy and the brotherhood of man, Tony states his credo, which represents the immigrant's attitude toward his new life in his new land...Tony's dream, expressed in this scene, is to be able to be an American. The notion of assimilation, of being absorbed into the mainstream of American life, is evident here and is a realistic portrayal of the immigrant's ambitions" (Ventimiglia, 1976 p 230). “Tony’s live-and-let-live attitude reflects his belief that people should not impose their standards upon others; from this he develops an affective norm for human action, saying that a ‘mistake in da head is no matter’ because the motive of the heart is all that counts. The play is then antirational, celebrating the truth of one’s emotions and instincts by setting up feelings as the normative meas ure for right and wrong. These characters discover that happiness not only is possible, it is attainable- they get what they wanted- and the attainment need not necessarily require living by society’s conventional manners and mores. It may, in fact, even require violating them in favor of a higher morality determined by the promptings of the heart” (Adler, 1987 pp 41-42).
"They knew what they wanted"
Time: 1920s. Place: California, USA.
Text at https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.462881 https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.235160
Having amassed a fortune for illegally selling alcoholic products during prohibition as a 60-year-old illiterate wine farmer and immigrant from Italy, Tony wishes to marry. Via a matrimonial agency, he sets up a date at a restaurant with Amy, a 20-year-old waitress, but at the last minute, too shy to speak with her, he backs down. Instead, he asks his friend and employee, Joe, to write and send a marriage proposal on his behalf. She accepts his marriage proposal. On the wedding day, bride qn bridegroom not having met, Tony is very nervous about the impression he will make. He drinks too much wine, takes his car on his way to pick her up at the train station, and topples over a bridge, breaking both legs. When Amy reaches the farm, Joe is there to welcome her. He is stunned on discovering that Tony, afraid of rejection because of his physical appearance, sent her a photograph of himself. When Tony is carried in from the ambulance, he cries out Amy's name but is swiftly carried off to his bedroom for further medical treatment. In terrible surmise, Amy asks Joe: "Who- who is that old guy?" Joe is forced to admit that the old guy is her future husband. Her first thought is to run away, but, after further consideration and liking the looks of the place, she decides to stay and marry him. Later that evening, with Tony ailing in bed and facing a 6-month period of convalescence, Joe mentions his desire to return to his former life as a migrant worker. Tony begs him to remain, mostly to manage the vineyard in his place. Amy pretends to be indifferent, but breaks down and rushes out when Joe prepares to leave. He follows her and they make love on Tony's wedding night. Three months later, Tony is well on his way to recovery, so that Joe reiterates his desire to leave. However, his progress is stopped by the news that Amy is pregnant with his child. He proposes that they marry and abandon Joe. Unwillingly, she prepares to accompany him, but, before going, informs Tony that she is pregnant. Frightened by his anger, she moves back, but then he collapses at her feet and begs her to stay. She hesitates about what to do, disbelieving that he can ever love her again or the baby, but then accepts his offer as Joe picks up his knapsack to head elsewhere.
“Vollmer succeeds admirably in the characterization of each of her mountain figures, but none is better than the Widow Cagle. The wife of a murdered moonshiner, she cannot understand why the law, in the person of Sheriff Weeks, her good friend, has to be enforced to the detriment of her family, particularly when bending and breaking the law in feuding and making illicit whiskey have been natural parts of living” (Miller and Frazer, 1991 p 250). In a production, Manning (2001) pointed out that "Sun-up's simple, singular unit stage setting is complemented by the characters' comical misunderstanding of the world. Local color notions are stamped on character action and speech as well" (pp 303-304). “Widow Cagle, as an example of primitive life, begins by opposing any intrusion of the government into her life. When the sheriff comes to investigate the failure of two mountain youths, one of them, Rufe, to register for the draft, Widow Cagle voices her negative feelings about the government. Rufe, however, has had some schooling...It has equipped him to understand the need for going to war even at the cost of his own life...The point Vollmer is making is that, even though her characters are innocent even to the point of simplicity, their intuitive reactions and instinctive wisdom in times of national crisis draw them to the stated purpose of the national government” (France, 1987 p 152).
The ending of this play is misunderstood by too literal critics such as Gagey (1947) who consider the widow’s change of mind by hearing Rufe’s message in music as “melodramatic absurdity”. Likewise, Clark (1927) stated that "Miss Vollmer's 'Sun-up', despite the purposeful 'idea' of showing her mountaineers falling into line with the rest of the country during the war, is a genuine folk play up to the sentimentalized end. The play has to do with a woman who makes her stand against the law and the government, in accordance with her own notions of law and justice, only to be 'reformed' at last by the playwright's desire to prove her thesis. She preferred falsifying a character in order to help the cause of enlistment, to telling the truth as she doubtless knew it" (p 762). One may argue that the ending is truthful to the character's memory of her husband.
Time: 1917. Place: Near Asheville, North Carolina, USA.
Text at https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.52009 http://www.unz.org/Pub/TuckerSMarion-1931-00831
A farmer, Rufe Cagle, wishes to marry Emmy Todd but she is undecided about whether to marry him or else the region's sheriff, Jim Weeks. When Rufe insists to have her answer because he must soon go away, she promises to do so after sun-down. Sheriff Weeks offers Rufe's mother $800 for her farm, but she refuses to sell. He announces that according to a government decree, Rufe and Emmy's brother, Bud, must register their name and address. Widow Cagle proposes that Bud should refuse. "Ye got a gun, ain't ye?" she asks her son rhetorically. "That's as much as the law's got." She specifies that they owe the governement nothing, all the more so since an agent, Zeb Turner, once shot her husband to death for resisting arrest after being caught for illegally making corn whiskey. Alone with Emmy and aware that his rival is likely to be called up, Jim asks her to marry him. Instead she declares to everyone that she accepts Rufe's offer. Thinking that outcome lets her son off being registered, Mrs Cagle is overjoyed, but then Rufe announces having registered that very morning. After Rufe receives the news he is drafted without Bud because of the latter's weak-mindedness, he tells his wife that he is going of his own free will. "Then it 'tain't fer me to say no more," Emmy answers. She is surprised about his attitude and declines to kiss him goodbye. "Whut's the use o' sech foolishness?" she says, but on following him out, she moves her hand lovingly over Rufe's hoe and the corn-cob pipe drops from her mouth. Several months later in a blizzard, an army deserter shows up at Mrs Cagle's house. Unknown to her, it is Zeb Turner's son, Zeb junior. Having followed his snow-tracks up to her house, Sheriff Weeks calls out to her, but, hating any form of law, she decides to hide the stranger, who succeeds in avoiding detection. Unable to read, Mrs Cagle asks Emmy to read a letter delivered to her from the government, informing them that Rufe died in action. "It means the law's got my boy same as his pap," Mrs Cagle declares. Seeing her bravely put up with grief when he thought his own mother would be unable to, the stranger abandons any thought of desertion, intending to return to his army post. But before he has a chance to, the sheriff returns with the news that the stranger's name is Zeb junior. Instead of delivering the son of her husband's killer to the law, she hides him a second time after seeming to hear her dead son's voice stating that as long as there is hate there will be feuds. Before the sheriff's very nose, Zeb leaves the house disguised in Bud's coat and cap. After the sheriff discovers the trick, he moves to arrest her, but, reminded of her grief, changes his mind. "I heared you, Rufe," Mrs Cagle calls aloud when everyone has gone. "I never knowed nothin' about lovin' anything but ye till ye showed me hit's lovin' them all that counts." The dawn's light pours in as she opens the door to look out.
Another rural play out of Carolina, "Hell-bent for heaven" (1924), written by Hatcher Hughes (1881-1945), concerns mountaineer life and religion in the context of two lovers under the threat of a family feud, akin to Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet (1595).
In a fit of jealousy, Rufe uses dynamite to explode a dam, endangering the lives of mountaineer people. Great Smoky Mountains National Park, North Carolina, USA
Time: 1920s. Place: Carolina mountains, USA.
Text at https://archive.org/details/hellbentferheave0000hugh
Alice Brown described men and women trapped by family ties, 1899
In "Children of earth", "Brown depicts a rural civilization which is still to be fully formed, focusing on that point in time when the community is threatened by materialism of the industrial age and by the unrefined sensuality of frontier days...Mary Ellen Barstow must integrate the natural aspects of her rural life, the feeling of union with the earth, with a profound sense of duty, to morality, and the work ethic, to realize a new level of civilization- for herself and for the children of the earth for whom it is her special province to care" (France, 1987 pp 147-148).
Time: 1910s. Place: near Toledo, Ohio, USA.
Text at https://archive.org/details/childrenofearth00brow
Aaron, a widower, expects his sister, Mary Ellen, unmarried caretaker of their recently deceased father, to live with him and his daughter, Anita, in New York. But Mary Ellen prefers to remain in the same house. She disapproves of Aaron’s refusing Adam Hale, an agricultural chemist, as Anita’s husband, because he considers his entire family as a worthless bunch. “No Hale ever made a dollar,” Aaron specifies. He wants to know why Mary Ellen did not bother to acquire Mill Road Farm, owned by a boyhood friend of his, Nathan Buell, a farm presently occupied by the married couple Peter and Jane Hale, Peter being Adam’s cousin, a couple who helped Mary Ellen take care of her dying father. She answers that she made no offer because Peter wants to buy the farm from Nathan. Alone with Anita, Mary Ellen confesses that she wants to marry Nathan as she first intended to do 26 years ago when her father prevented the match. But when Nathan arrives expecting her consent to marry, she hesitates, for he seems more like a stranger now. Instead, serving Peter’s interest more than her brother’s, she offers a down payment to Mill Road Farm, which Nathan grudgingly accepts provided she agrees to marry him, which she grudgingly accepts. When Mary Ellen informs Peter of the agreement, she asks him to lend her the money, having none on her own. He agrees despite her refusing to tell why she agreed to Nathan’s offer. When Aaron and Mary Ellen meet at Mill Road Farm, he specifies that the land she has bought and the farm she is about to buy should eventually be turned over to him, since she has been acting as his agent. “You didn't tell me I was actin' for you,” she remonstrates. “That land's to be a deed o' gift to the state, for use as a Public Park known as the Barstow Reservation, he informs her. She refuses, an objection Nathan as her future husband approves of. “Nathan, I ain't got anything to bring you,” she admits. “Mebbe you won't want me now.” He makes no attempt to convince her to marry him without her land. Meanwhile, Adam offers to marry Anita. “But you don't care for things other people care for,” she wavers. “There never was a Hale that did,” Aaron agrees. Alone with Mary Ellen, Peter declares his love and suggests that they should leave together. “Yes. I ain't anybody's but yours an’ I never knew it,” she answers. After Peter informs Adam and Jane of his intention, he meets her in the woods at daybreak when they agree to leave town. They hide in the bushes as Jane, wild and haggard, appears with a mad old man, Eph Grout, in pursuit of her and suggesting suicide. “Water! Water!” he cries out. “I'll hold your head under 'f I git the courage, an' you can drownd an' I'll see how it's done.” When she hesitates, he takes out a big clasp knife and hands it to her, but she escapes. At the sight of Jane’s misery, Mary Ellen has qualms of conscience, also in regard to her promise to Nathan, which Peter is unable to counter. A little later, in the Barstow sitting room, Adam informs Anita of Peter’s intention and that he had locked Nathan since early morning in his room at the farm to prevent him from seeing Aaron before he takes the train. But, after breaking out, Nathan appears trembling with rage and informs Aaron that his sister has run off with Peter. This notion is dispelled by Jane, knowing nothing of her husband’s change of mind, who nevertheless covers up for the supposed fleeing couple by saying that she saw Marry Ellen that very morning. When Marry Ellen and Peter show up, she tells Nathan that she signed away the land, so that he has no more reason to marry her. Teasing Adam, Anita allows him to follow her at the station with her father while Mary Ellen, Peter, and Jane remain as before.
Owen Davis showed that life-long dreams are renewable, 1950
Owen Davis (1874-1956) is another talented playwright, particularly illustrated with a play of broken dreams in "The detour" (1921). Davis also wrote "Icebound" (1923) about the Jordan family, consisting of two sons and two daughters, whose rich mother has just died. To the horror of the older brother and the two sisters, the mother leaves her money to a distant cousin of theirs, Jane, while the younger brother, Ben, is on the run trying to escape from an arson charge. Jane keeps the family farm in the hope of marrying Ben, who does not love her. As a result, she leaves all her money to him until he realizes that he needs her to keep the farm going.
In "The detour", "Davis juxtaposes two structures of comedy, the normal plot of marriage between young lovers and the quixotic plot of escape from the oppressive old order. By emphasizing the action surrounding them, however, he suggests that these traditional rhythms of comedy are merely detours from the fundamental business of everyday life...Davis' point is that the fundamental need for a mate, the need to escape routine, and the conflicting need for security account for a good deal more of the action in life than the sensational moments of decision" (Murphy, 1987 p 183). The play "has the tang of the soil about it, exuding a flavor born of struggle against environment...The plot is starkingly simple,,,It grows naturally out of provincial character and problems common to all who yearn for beauty and it is enlivened by racy humor” (Herron, 1969 p 247).
Trouble starts when a detour sign prevents a garage owner from doing business
Time: 1920s. Place: Northport, New York, USA
Text at http://archive.org/details/cu31924022351542
Kate, a schoolteacher during the school year and a clerk at a store during summertime has been saving money for many years so that she can attend an art school in New York. "The thing I wanted to do you're going to do," her mother, Helen, says happily. However, the father, Steve, considers he needs more land to make truck farming profitable and intends to take away her summer-money. Their neighbor, Tom, has opened an oil station and garage, but learns too late a detour sign has been put up the road because of a need for repairs. Tom would like to marry Kate, but she does not encourage his advances. To get her faster on her way to New York, Helen sells the family bed. Steve is outraged and wants to block the sale until learning the generous amount it went for. In his own financial trouble, Tom is willing to sell his land to him. Steve wants to accept but has no money. He learns that the sale of the bed is sufficient to enable Kate to be on her way to art school. "That's nonsense," he declares. "I made my mind up to it, whether I think or I don't, over ten years ago," Helen counters. "It's just as much a part of my life- what I've planned she's goin' to do and be- as the work I do is, or this old dress that I've worn and worn and worn until I wouldn't know myself in any other. I couldn't any more live without the hope of what's coming to her than I could live without drink or food." Frustrated at unable to realize his own dream, Steve puts his hands on all their savings and offers them to Tom. "Fifteen hundred cash and a mortgage for the balance!" he cries exulting. But Helen refuses to let him take the money. "Take it, then," he counters. "But remember this: if you do take it, and if she goes against my will, you go with her." Seeing her in a red dress of his daughter's makes him reminisce of another red dress from long ago, so that he loses heart, though still angrily refusing to let Kate go. In anger, Helen throws in the stove-fire all of her cherished letters and photographs. Steve encounters a famous painter from New York, here to judge the value of Kate's art-work as his wife promised to Helen he would. He looks doubtfully at it, at which Kate cries out in anguish. Stunned at the sound of her cry, Steve quickly intervenes. "I was speakin' to this gentleman here about your picture," he assures. "He was sayin' it was pretty good, real good he seemed to think it was, for- for a girl that hadn't had much teachin'- I- I got to see if my stock's all fixed for the night. He liked that picture real well; he'11 tell you so himself, if you ask him." Despite this hopeful speech, the professional critic can only see "the conventional schoolgirl water color". After the road reopens following citizen complaints, Tom's garage is attached. Disillusioned about her prospects, Kate hands the money over to her father so that he can buy the land from Tom and re-obtain the garage. An even more disillusioned Helen hears Steve offer her egg-money so that she can start saving again for Kate's unborn daughter. His coarse laughter does not faze her as she looks again to the future, her heart still swelling with hope.
In another worthy drama of the period, ”The hero” (1921), written by Gilbert Emery (1875-1945), the frustrations and foibles of a WWI veteran are told in a domestic setting.
Some early critics were misguided as to the play's theme, sensing a bias whereas their own position was even more so, as follows. "The Hero is attracting more attention than its technique or its logic merits. In this play it is the daring theme that holds the interest: is the war hero who becomes a rotter at home, more to be admired than the hard-working self-effacing stay-at-home who could not enter the war because of family responsibilities. In the face of recent war patriotism as distinguished from peace patriotism, the fact that the author brings up the theme indicates his bias and colors the attitude of the audience. In marshalling his arguments within the play itself, he attempts absolute fairness to both sides. The fallacy lies in the unfairness of the assumption that the cases are typical. By no means were all of the stay-at-homes forced by duty to remain safely in America, and by no means are all of the returned heroes beyond the pale of respect in their civilian lite. If we are not to consider these two men types, we are not to consider the theme seriously, and if this play is not worthwhile for its theme, it is a poor play" (Anonymous, 1921 p 22).
For Quinn (1924), the play "is a remarkable study of three characters, two brothers, one a moral and the other a physical hero, and the wife of the first. The playwright draws with unerring skill the nature of the returned soldier and contrasts him with the man who does his duty every day with no other reward than of his own self-respect. At the end we feel a sense of exaltation, for we have been introduced to at least one character who is worthwhile. And how many plays or novels of today give us that much?" (p 9). "The Hero, a study of a returned soldier, who is a moral coward but a physical hero, as he proves in the end, is striking by reason of its effective dialogue, its preciseness of character, and its well-contrived situation" (Coad and Mims, 1929 p 336).
Time: 1920s. Place: New York, USA.
Text at https://archive.org/details/contemporaryamer00quin_0
In his youth, Oswald stole money from a bank and went off as a soldier to WWI while his father had to pay the money back. He also abandoned a woman who counted on him to marry. He has been missing for several years but now returns to find his brother, Andrew, living with his wife, Hester, his son little Andy, along with their mother, Sarah. With the added expense of harboring his brother, Andrew thinks that they should get rid of their hired help, Mattie, but Hester refuses, the girl being still not ready to accept a job as a stenographer. When Oswald finds himself alone with Mattie, he immediately flirts with her. The attempt at seduction works all too well, as Mattie becomes pregnant. Oswald’s military service is the main point interest at a church service, which garnered more donation money than usual: $500 kept in Andrew’s keeping at his house in the drawer of a secretary. Andrew tells his wife that his boss has offered Oswald the same job he holds as an insurance salesman. She is glad, and, moreover, wants to prolong Oswald’s stay at the house, despite her husband’s worries over paying bills. Rather than lose Oswald, Hester changes her mind: Mattie must go. When told about the job offer and despite having nothing else in sight, Oswald immediately refuses. Hester is bored with married life. She loves Oswald, who repulses her longings, reminding her that she is a mother. “Stick to your kid. He’s hero enough for you,” he affirms. With Hester gone, Oswald walks over to the secretary to steal the church money. She, returning in her nightdress, sees him slip it into his coat-pocket. Soon, Mattie shows up. Muttering in rage, Oswald pushes himself between the two women on his way to his room while Mattie looks at Hester with anger and follows Oswald, Hester standing petrified with horror and anguish. The following morning, Hester and Mattie confront each other. “I love him, love him. You hear?” Mattie declares. “And he loves me, me, not you.” Hester guesses that Mattie is pregnant by him. “I want to know what you two intend doing with that money,” Hester says. A bewildered Mattie knows nothing about any money. On her way to a funeral, Sarah pleads with Oswald to marry a rich woman or take the job. Hester pleads with Oswald to hand the money back, but he refuses. “Andy’ll have to pay it’” he says. “Andy- pay it!” she exclaims. “Why- we haven’t got a penny and you know it.” “Oh- he can get it somehow. What’s he ever done, anyhow?” he asks rhetorically. “He didn’t go to war, did he?” “Why should he pay for you-and your horrid women?” she asks. “I’m going back to France, back to France, see? To my girl,” he retorts. “What’ll you do? Call the police? And disgrace the family? What about your nice, pious friends when they hear the police have arrested the church treasurer’s brother?” Oswald goes away. When Mattie demands to know where he is, Hester replies: “He’s left you to me.” Mattie dashes off as Andrew enters. There is a sign of fire outside as someone calls Andrew to say he is wanted as Mattie returns with a face ghastly and gray with horror. Fire broke out in the kindergarten where Oswald was able to save little Andy before being engulfed in smoke. To cover her brother-in-law’s crime, Hester says that she gave the money to him to put in the bank. Andrew is determined to pay it back. “You are a good man, Andrew,” Hester says. “Me? I’m just old Andy, I am,” Andy retorts. “But Os- Os was a hero.”
Augustus Thomas described the strange legal problems arising from unconscious wishes, 1916
"The witching hour" (1917) is a mysterious play written by Augustus Thomas (1857-1934).
"The witching hour" "is based on the themes of hypnotism and telepathy, and involves the question of the moral responsibility of those who exercise occult power over others" (Coad and Mims, 1929 p 287).
"The characters are distinct, individual, and veritable. The pivotal incident is an unpremediated, unintentional homicide. The situations are essentially dramatic, occurring in a sequence, each arising as a natural result
"The witching hour" "is thoroughly American in spirit: the good and bad qualities of American drama are easily distinguished from page to page. Greneralizations in matters theatrical nowadays are especially fallible, yet it will not be amiss to say that the drama in the United States is as a rule conventional, over-sentimental, puritanical in that it rarely dares go to the root of life and comments on it with fearless and outspoken sincerity; it is, on the other hand, live, moving, interesting as a transcript of the everyday externals of life. The dialogue is usually good, idiomatic, and clever, although it rarely reveals character. It is nearly always violent, extreme: melodrama and farce seem to be the favorite forms, and happy endings are practically indispensable. The American dramatist is a sentimentalist, although he seldom sentimentalizes over the deepest things in life- as a Frenchman does— love-scenes are usually short and snappy, an American dislikes showing his feelings- while little children, old mothers, and pals in crooked deals supply more sentimental material than half a dozen love-affairs to a Frenchman or a deserted mistress to Schnitzler. Notice the first love-scene in 'The witching hour': the actual proposal and its casual announcement" (Clark, 1915a pp 240-241).
In Act 3, Judge Prentice (Russ Whytal), Jack Brookfield (John Mason), and Frank Hardmuth (George Nash) discuss Jack's complicated case of murder. Arena Magazine, volume 40, 1908
Time: 1900s. Place: Louisville Kentucky and Washington DC, USA.
Text at https://archive.org/details/witchinghourdram00thomrich https://archive.org/details/witchinghour00thomgoog https://archive.org/details/witchinghour00thomiala https://archive.org/details/witchinghourillu00thomuoft https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.52009
When Alice learns that her daughter, Viola, is engaged to be married with Clay, she worries about its outcome because of the man's card-playing habits, although her present fortune is the result of the success enjoyed in such games by her brother, Jack, a professional gambler. Aware of Clay's love of Viola, Frank, assistant district attorney, asks Jack whether he agrees to his marrying her. He does not. Although favorable to his interests, Jack takes a moral stance in Frank's turning a blind eye on his illegal activity as well as his involvement in the unresolved murder of a recent governor-elect, Scovill. Before their poker-game, a drunken gambler, Tom, teases Clay when he turns away from his scarf-pin. As he continues to harass him, Clay takes up a paper-knife from a table and strikes wildly at him. The knife-thrust kills him. Clay is arrested, placed on trial, and condemned to die for murder. The defense attorney appeals to the supreme court to have the trial remanded due to a tactical error by the presiding judge. Viola and Clay's mother, Helen, make a personal appeal to one of the supreme court judges, Prentice. Their main defense is that Clay was the victim of an hereditary fear of a cat's-eye jewel contained in the scarf-pin, since she has the same fear as did her mother. Judge Prentice agrees that her mother's letter may constitute new evidence in the case, all the more so in that he once loved Clay's grandmother. The trial is remanded. While the jury deliberates, Jack, following Judge Prentice's advice, convinces a newspaper reporter to print an article suggesting the involvement of Frank, the prosecuting attorney in the Clay case, in Scovill's murder. Although the jury had no access to the newspaper article, Clay is acquitted as a result of telepathic communication, according to Jack and Judge Prentice. Incensed, Frank bursts in the room with a gun with the intent to kill Jack but then freezes when Jack and Judge Prentice mentally command him to do so. Frank flees to escape the murder charge, but his hiding place is discovered. Instead of turning him over to the police, Jack asks Clay to hand him a note in which he offers to help him. "Long before Scovill was killed, I thought he deserved killing," Jack explains, "and I thought it could be done just as it was done." When Frank comes over, Jack and Helen drive him across state-lines to facilitate his escape.
Canteen comedy is turned into a fine play in "Poached eggs and pearls" (1916) by Gertrude E Jennings (1857-1958), born in the USA and immigrating in England, also author of two interesting one-act social plays set in rest homes: "Acid drops" (1914) and "The rest cure" (1914).
"Poached eggs and pearls"
Canteen work is compatible with love affairs. London production of the play, 1917
Time: 1910s. Place: London, England.
Text at http://archive.org/details/poachedeggspearl00jenn
During World War I, Lady Clara and Lady Mabel have volunteered for canteen work under the supervision of the Duchess of Port Arthur. While serving tables and following rules limiting conversations with customers, Clara stands aloof towards Jimmie, a soldier mechanic who, just to be near her, orders more food than he can eat, often poached eggs because they take the longest to prepare. But to Mabel, she admits she likes him all the more. She is frightened when he announces he will soon go to the front lines, yet refuses to consider marrying him. As canteen orders multiply, a clumsy volunteer, Emily, confides to Clara a matter concerning her nephew's desire of marrying above his social station to a titled canteen volunteer whose name she does not know. Against the rules, Jimmie surreptiously enters the pantry where Clara works alone. He presses her even more ardently for her to marry him. If they are caught, she is worried that she will be sent to sew pyjamas, a type of work she particularly detests. Mabel warns her in time of the approach of Lady Violet, jealous of any woman who attracts the men. Anxious that the hidden Jimmie may be discovered, Clara resists going over to clear the tables, but is nevertheless forced to by the duchess. Re-entering, Jimmie sneaks up from behind, calls out Clara's name, and kisses Violet by mistake. An outraged Violet threatens to tell the duchess about this unseemly behavior. Jimmie begs her not to. They are interrupted by the arrival of Emily, surprised to find her nephew there, who assumes that he loves Violet and tries to convince him not to marry above his station. Violet convinces her otherwise. "I'm happy to say that this young man is absolutely nothing to do with me," she says. "I was amazed to find him in the pantry, and I do not come to the canteen to flirt with Tommies." Emily confronts her. "There's no reason to insult my dear boy because he doesn't care for you," she says. "After all, he's one of our gallant gentlemen. He's been out to the front and been wounded and risked his life for England with the rest of our men, and that's more than you have done. And I think you ought to respect them all, however humble, and not sneer at them, our dear brave gallant soldiers!" They are interrupted by the duchess, outraged after being told by Violet of the love-intrigue. Emily defends the two. "Oh, but, duchess, may I tell you?" she asks. "This is my nephew- the dearest boy. I do want him to be happy, and I like Lady Clara so much. She is so sweet and washes up so well. And I know I'm only a silly old thing, and I've dropped the china and spilt the tea and made the cocoa wrong, but I do want them to be happy, and I've got money, thanks to my dear father, and they shall have it now, and not wait till I'm gone, and, oh, duchess, do be kind to my dear Jimmie." Thanks to this appeal, the duchess at last relents.
Though at its darkest, a comedy of the French boulevard type, “Arsenic and old lace” (1941), comprises the summit in the achievements of Joseph Kesselring (1902-1967).
In “Arsenic and old lace”, “various methods make the esthetic product a…comedy rather than a melodrama of terror...The multiple madness [seems like] a passing general affliction rather than a dreadful danger to an individual...Further, the victims are all old men, a class with whom the smallest number of the audience will empathize. Still further, their absence has apparently been noticed by no one, as if they had not really existed. Hence the elimination of them is rather a hypothesis for theatrical purposes than an act which makes moral outrage inevitable. Again, the failure of anyone to miss them is the kind of improbability that we find in a dream, and such a hint of a dream subtly diminishes the reality of what has happened. Finally, the victims not only did not suffer, we are told, but were freed from suffering...Nor are the murderers given hateful styles that would evoke fear and detestation; if they are a kind of ultimate form of erring do-gooders who in the actual life around us would be trying, still we picture them no sign of malice...They come off as a fantastic incarnation of good intentions” (Heilman, 1978b pp 143-144). However, one can object that the purpose of all these considerations is to render the black comedy less disturbing than it should be.
Played by Boris Karloff, Jonathan wants to use the window-seat to hide his murdered victim. Broadway production of the play, 1943
Time: 1940s. Place: Brooklyn, New York, USA.
Text at https://www.joculartheatre.com/scripts/Arsenic%20and%20Old%20Lace.pdf
Two sisters, Abby and Martha Brewster, have been taking care of their nephew, Teddy, as the man shows evident signs of insanity, namely believing himself to be President Theodore Roosevelt. The sisters have asked Reverend Dr Harper, their next-door neighbor, to prepare the legal papers necessary so that Teddy can be taken care of at Happy Vale after their deaths. Two police officers, Brophy and Klein, arrive to gather toys for a children’s Christmas fund. All three men agree that the Brewster sisters are among the most sympathetic women they have ever known. As Rev Harper leaves, his daughter, Elaine, steps in to wait for her boy-friend, another nephew of the Brewster sisters, Mortimer, who left the house to become a theatre critic. Mortimer is frustrated how Elaine has been holding out during the time they have known each other. “I can afford to be a good girl for quite a few years yet,” she coyly suggests, too long for the impatient Mortimer who, to her joy, asks her to marry him. While left alone to look around the room to find some literary papers, Mortimer lifts the window-seat and discovers a dead body in there. Aghast, he asks his aunts the meaning of this, who reveal that there are eleven more bodies buried in their cellar, all carried down by Teddy, the first man dying by chance of a heart attack, the latest, Hoskins, poisoned by Abby alone from a concoction of their own making that includes arsenic and strychnine dissolved in their home-made elderberry wine, the rest of the bodies being the work of both sisters working together, religiously taking pity on unfortunate lodgers who seem to have little to live for. In a panic about what to do next, he at least begs his aunts to avoid letting anyone inside the house. While Mortimer speaks to a newspaper colleague to replace him for a forthcoming play he is assigned to criticize, yet another potential lodger enters but is frightened away by a Mortimer anguished at the thought on how the man may become his aunts’ next victim. Unable to find a replacement, Mortimer heads for the theatre as his other brother, Jonathan, walks toward the house in the company of Dr Einstein, two criminals who have recently killed a man, Spenalzo, in their car and intend to use the house as a hide-out. Mindful of their promise to Mortimer to keep everyone out, the Brewster sisters ignore the knocking at their door, but the two men nevertheless enter. Neither of the sisters recognizes their nephew, since he is in the habit of changing his face to avoid imprisonment, this time using an actor's, Boris Karloff's, a task assured of by his surgeon friend. Having had great trouble in raising Jonathan as a youth, the Brewster sisters wish the two men would depart at once, but eventually back down and agree to serve them dinner. After the meal, Jonathan asks his aunts permission to sleep in their house. Once more, they back down and agree to let both men sleep in their house only for one night. The two men gather their luggage with the obvious intent of staying indefinitely. Thinking their lodgers asleep, the Brewster sisters order Teddy to remove the dead Hoskins from the window-seat and carry it down to the cellar while Jonathan and the doctor sneak their own victim inside the house, but their task is interrupted by a sudden knock on the door, so that Einstein hides the dead Spenalzo in the vacated window-seat. It is Elaine who suspects the existence of prowlers inside the Brewster house. Jonathan identifies himself and in talking to her becomes convinced she saw them carry the dead body, and so prepares to strangle her at the moment Teddy re-emerges from the cellar, but to Elaine’s despair, he is unaware of her danger and leaves the room. Nevertheless, the noise alerts the Brewster sisters dressed in mourning clothes to hold a funeral service for Hoskins so that Einstein carries Elaine down to the cellar while Jonathan assures his aunts that he has discovered a prowler but that everything is under control, only to face the additional difficulty of facing his other brother, Mortimer, back from the play while Elaine frees herself to join her fiancé. The two brothers argue about their sleeping arrangements for the night, each insisting on a bedroom until Mortimer, afraid that Jonathan will discover Hoskins and Jonathan, made aware by his accomplice of Spenalzo’s whereabouts, each prefer to sleep on the window-seat. Left alone with his aunts, Elaine tells Mortimer that Jonathan intended to kill her. He wants her out of the house, all the more so after discovering an unknown body, Spenalzo’s instead of Hoskins’, lying dead in the window-seat. After she leaves, Mortimer confronts Aunt Abby about the new corpse on the premises, but she has no idea who he is. A more than ever worried Mortimer next confronts Jonathan, each wanting the other out of the house. When Abby conducts Martha toward the window-seat to show her the strange corpse, both brothers jump up and run over to sit on the window-seat until Mortimer realizes that the body is probably the result of Jonathan’s handiwork. He invites his brother to show Martha the window-seat. Jonathan freezes in anger. Invited by his brother to leave the house with the corpse, Jonathan threatens to kill him until a police officer, O’Hara, peaks in, a familiar figure to the sisters and curious about their house-lights being on so late at night, whose sudden appearance finally convinces Jonathan that he should leave at once. In the kitchen, Mortimer distracts O’Hara, a budding playwright enthused about hearing the critic’s views on his first play, so that Jonathan and Einstein can take away the corpse. But Jonathan refuses to go, all the more after Einstein shows him Hoskins lying dead on the cellar floor, so that Mortimer leaves instead with an Officer O’Hara still waiting to reveal his plot. Jonathan confronts his aunts about his intention to stay and is stunned on hearing that they know about Hoskins already, having prepared twelve graves down there. Despite their protests, Jonathan and Einstein bury the two remaining corpses while Mortimer obtains commitment papers for Teddy, intending to blame the murders on him. But in talking to Einstein about the play he had just seen, Mortimer reveals the very way Jonathan uses to bind and gag him in preparation of torturing him to death. A shaken Einstein proposes a drink to steady his nerves. As the murderers lift their glasses of poisoned wine, Teddy blows his usual trumpet when performing an important piece of business, a noise that brings Officer O’Hara back to the house, who on seeing Mortimer tied and gagged, seizes the opportunity of explaining his play until morning when Brophy and Klein appear because of neighbors’ complaints concerning the bugle late at night and arrest Jonathan when the latter, certain that they have come to arrest him, groggily reveals himself as a fugitive and is knocked unconscious by Brophy after attempting to escape. Their superior officer, Lieutenant Rooney, discovers the identity of the unconscious man, an escapee from a prison for the criminally insane. Mortimer announces that the commitment papers have been signed to take Teddy away, since the man is responsible for the thirteen bodies buried in the cellar, but after Rooney heard about the thirteen bodies from Brophy’s report on Jonathan and Teddy’s own mouth, two obvious madmen, he disbelieves what Mortimer tells him. When the sisters learn about Mortimer’s plan for Teddy, they insist on going along with him, convincing Rooney and Witherspoon, the superintendent of Happy Vale, that they, too, are probably insane after admitting the existence of the thirteen graves. Their papers must be signed by a physician, and so when Dr Einstein re-appears, he is welcomed to sign them and is afterwards stunned on being able to escape when Rooney fails to recognize him as Jonathan’s accomplice. As the two sisters are lead away, they learn of Witherspoon’s lonely existence and offer him a glass of elderberry wine, which he accepts and raises his glass to drink to a better one.
Chase questioned the nature of insanity when a man is at odds with psychiatrists
Another comedy of the popular type, but more light-hearted, "Harvey" (1944), comprises the main achievement of Mary Chase (1906-1981).
“The action and conflict of ‘Harvey’ springs from Veta’s frantic ploys to find a proper husband for Myrtle Mae...Veta’s entire party is a social cliché and her belief in her own match-making scheme is shaky...One catch is that Elwood owns the house, having inherited it from their dead mother. This normally would make Elwood the household head, the patriarch and liaison between his family and society...But Elwood has in effect taken leave of his normal family and their social context...Elwood leaps at every chance to meet others and introduce them to Harvey...[The psychiatrists] make an instant, comedic contrast to the unhurried, unassuming Elwood...The innocent and oblivious Elwood [also] gets the best of everyone else and he does so while displaying more kindness, humanity, and even social graces than the lot of them” (Craig, 2004 pp 104-106).
The play can be seen as a man’s revolt against matriarchy, rejecting social responsibility and the institution of the family. The family and psychiatry are the butt of the playwright’s humor. Indeed, family members appear “inane, petty, and materialistic”, psychiatrists “inept, blindly treating the wrong persons, indifferent to the seriousness of their profession, confused in the ordering of their own private lives, and succumbing to the same psychotic hallucinations as the patients they are engaged to treat”. Instead of looking like “untroubled innocents”, Elwood and the pooka can appear “troubled and subversive” (Featherstone, 2008 pp 70-73).
In "Harvey", "what you have here is an extended paraphrase of the familiar skit in the burlesque shows wherein the inebriated low comedian is told that he is sit- ting opposite a great big beautiful luscious blonde and drinking champagne wine and wherein he thereupon for the next fifteen minutes accepts the delusion as fact and has himself a wonderful time, embroidered with the Pirandello
Trouble starts when Elwood speaks to a giant rabbit no one else can see
Time: 1940s. Place: New York City, USA.
Text at https://griffingroundlings.wordpress.com/2008/11/
While Veta and her daughter, Myrtle, entertain at their home, Elwood P Dowd unexpectedly shows up and mingles among the guests. Veta quickly removes him, worried that her brother will once more introduce her guests to Harvey, a pooka or spirit in the shape of a human-sized rabbit. On the phone, Elwood accepts a subscription to a club for himself and Harvey. Tired of her brother's interference in her social life, a distraught Veta heads for Dr Chumley's sanitarium to have him committed. She explains to his assistant, Dr Lyman Sanderson, that her brother is in the habit of frequenting taverns and invites all sorts of strangers to their house. She is so harassed that she admits she once saw Harvey herself. Her excited state prompts the doctor to misinterpret what she is saying and to lock her up in the institution for her own good. He calls in Elwood and asks him to sign the commitment papers for his sister, but he suggests she should do that herself. Instead, he invites Lyman and the head nurse to a bar that very evening. When Dr William Chumley arrives, he is puzzled on discovering a coat and a hat with two holes cut in its crown and orders the items removed. As Elwood returns to retrieve Harvey's coat and hat, he encounters William's wife, who takes a message on his behalf for Harvey. When William returns and receives his wife's message, he recognizes Lyman's mistake and fires him. Confident that her uncle will be institutionalized, Myrtle begins planning to sell the house. Elwood returns home while no one is there and takes up a parcel containing an oil painting of himself and Harvey. He hangs it up on the wall and then leaves to look for Harvey. Though William shows up to explain his subordinate's mistake, Veta is determined to sue him. She shrieks on discovering the painting. When Elwood calls to ask whether Harvey has returned, Veta is able to guess which bar he is calling from and William goes off to bring him back to his institution. Elwood shows up at the sanitarium to pick up Lyman and the nurse for their evening drink. On being asked what happened to William, he says the doctor unexpectedly left him at the bar while ordering more drinks for the two of them and Harvey. Lyman decides to hold Elwood. A shaken William returns with the impression of being followed. On seeing Lyman, he re-hires him. After some pleasant chat, Elwood wants to leave, but Veta, Myrtle, and the family lawyer think it best he should stay. "An element of conflict in any discussion is a good thing," Elwood comments serenely. Alone with William, Elwood explains his tranquil life with Harvey, mostly consisting of meeting friends in bars. "Harvey can stop clocks," he points out. To a stressed-out doctor, the prospect seems appealing and so to keep the rabbit to himself, he decides to inject Elwood with a drug liable to shock him back to reality. At first Elwood refuses, but when Veta insists, he submits. While the doctor prepares the drug solution, a cab driver shows up to ask for his money, but neither Veta nor Myrtle find any on their person. They ask Elwood for it, who finds some and then invites the cab driver and his brother to dinner over at his house. The driver is impressed and suggests that the man might not be so pleasant after the injection. Feeling guilty at committing her brother, Veta changes her mind and interrupts the proposed injection to take Elwood home. She is puzzled on looking at her purse to find money there.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
Researchers initially thought that enzyme ERO1, endoplasmic reticulum oxidoreductin 1, couples oxygen reduction to de novo formation of disulfides, but it was recently discovered that mammals that are deficient in this enzyme still survive and form disulfides. This suggests that there exist alternative pathways to forming disulfides. Discoveries have found that peroxiredoxin 4 is involved in peroxide removal and disulfide formation. Many other different pathways for disulfide formation in the mammalian ER include quiescin sulfhydryl oxidase, ER-localized protein disulfide isomerase peroxidases and vitamin K epoxide reductase. These various pathways for forming disulfides are regulated by glutathione.
Many important secretory and cell-surface proteins like antibodies, plasma membrane receptors and channels, extracellular matrix proteins, and blood clotting factors contain disulfide bonds because disulfides heighten protein stability and control redox-dependent functions. Disulfides in the endoplasmic reticulum undergo a procedure catalyzed by membranes of the PDI, protein disulfide isomerase, family and then undergo co-translational translocation to the ER. As the polypeptide starts to fold, cysteine residues that come into close contact form disulfides, even if they do not form in the end product. These disulfides that do not end up folding into the final product are sources of problems for misfolded proteins but may also serve as intermediates in normal folding processes. In order to obtain the final correctly folded disulfide, incorrectly folded disulfides must be disintegrated in a reaction catalyzed by the PDI family. The PDI family thus plays a vital role in the course for the correct formation and reduction of disulfides in order for proper folding of proteins that enter the endoplasmic reticulum
The correspondence of a disulfide between the enzyme and substrate is needed to cause a catalytic reaction to form a disulfide. Since PDI family members each accommodate at least one thioredoxin domain, a CXXC motif alternates between dithiol and disulfide states at their active site. When a disulfide is transferred to the substrate protein, a reduction of the active site occurs. It is necessary that the active site be deoxidized in order for the enzyme to carry out further oxidation. It was initially thought that GSSG, glutathione disulfide, was relevant in how the active site is reoxidized. In Vitro experiments were conducted and showed that a GSH/GSSG ratio similar to that found in the endoplasmic reticulum would efficiently oxidize active site cysteines in PDI, thus transferring disulfides onto substrate proteins. These experiments didn’t show how disulfides were introduced de novo. With the revelation of ERO1p, an enzyme in yeast called endoplasmic oxidoreduction, it was found that this enzyme was necessary for the formation of disulfide. ERO1p plays an important role in oxidizing PDI instead of secreting proteins or low-molecular-weight molecules like GSH and catalyzing oxidation by coupling de novo disulfide formation to the reduction of oxygen to hydrogen peroxide. While securely regulated in order to prevent overproduction of reactive oxygen species, ERO1 showed how disulfides could be formed de novo and also identified the ultimate electron acceptor for the pathway.
Since H2O2 is also generated when a reaction is catalyzed by ERO1, this indicates that additional proteins might be present in the endoplasmic reticulum to remove this reactive oxygen species. Enzymes called peroxiredoxins metabolize H2O2 ensuing disulfide formation. PRDx4 is active in both H2O2 removal and disulfide formation. Studies show a new responsibility for PRDx4 in de novo disulfide formation. Since PRDX4 and several PDI family members within the ER and equivalent, this shows that the enzyme is an abundant endoplasmic resident protein. Under circumstances where PRDX4 was efficiently reduced by some PDI family members during incubation of the two proteins at equal concentrations, some PDI protein was oxidized. This showed that even though GSH was a reductant on its own, when a PDI is included, the efficiency of PRDx4 reduction is enhanced. This proposes that disulfide exchanged between PRDx4 and GSH to form GSSP depends on the presence of PDI. If PRDX4 were to be reduced by PDI family members, a rapid disulfide formation in secretory proteins could occur. These results are confirmed by in vitro evidence. Since PRDX4 enhances a temperature-sensitive mutant of ERO1, viability and disulfide formation in yeast occurs at non-permissive temperatures. However, overexpression of PDI family members can also lead to decrease or increase in the ability of PRDX4 to be reduced in the endoplasmic reticulum. In conclusion, by combining the ERO1 and PRDX4 pathways, every oxygen molecule that is reduced causes two disulfides to be introduced, therefore making the whole process more effective than using ERO1 alone.
The VKOR enzyme exhibits another potential ERO1-independent pathway for disulfide formation . VKOR is a four transmembrane helix protein in the endoplasmic reticulum. VKOR functions by catalyzing the two steps in the reduction of vitamin K epoxide so as to generate vitamin K hydroquinone. When vitamin K epoxide is reduced, a CXXC motif in VKOR is then oxidized to form a disulfide bond. Members in VKOR family exchange this disulfide with thiredoxin-like oxidoreductases in order to oxidize substrate proteins. Since human VKOR does not contain a thioredoxin domain, PDI family members instead serve as VKOR substrates. WHen overexpression occurs with active-site CXXA mutants, VKOR can be trapped in a mixed-disulfide complex with PDI family members, mainly the transmembrane-bound TMX and TMX4. Results of these experiments show that VKOR sustaining disulfide formation is still unclear but proves a potential pathway.
Relative contribution and interplay between oxidative pathways
With all these potential pathways for disulfide formation, now their relative contribution has to be figured out. ERO1 pathway is an important pathway for disulfide formation under normal physiological conditions. TRDX4 hyperoxidation in cells expresses a deregulated form of ERO1 and shows that the enzyme is active in the ER and has the ability to produce hydrogen peroxide. Even though mammals do no necessarily need this pathway, if it didn’t exist, it would compromise disulfide formation. ERO1 is important in determining the redox status of PDI in cells and also forms mixed disulfides with PDI. This shows that ERO has the ability to oxidize PDI. If animals did not have ERO1 to survive and still formed disulfide-bonded proteins, this shows that other pathways exist. Their relative contributions still have to be explored.
PRDX4-dependent pathway doesn’t provide a significant contribution to disulfide formation. If it did, it would be predicted that the Prdx4 knockout mouse should have a severe phenotype and even though the Prdx4 knockout mouse is viable, it is sterile due to oxidative stress in the testis. PRDX4 pathway is then determined to be crucial for correct function of specific tissues though not essential for survival. If there were a higher presence of PRDX4 in higher eukaryotes, it would show mild phenotypes of ERO1 knockouts as an alternative source of hydrogen peroxide that is available in order to make the PRDX4 pathway work. More research is needed to determine which sources provide the H2O2 necessary to drive disulfide formation. The importance of the PRDX4 pathway needs to be determined, even if PRDX4 provides an alternative pathway to ERO1 for disulfide formation.
As shown in vitro experiments, direct oxidation by H2O2 of cysteines in PDI and substrate proteins to form disulfides could potentially occur. Although, these pathways are shown to not be important due to faster kinetics of substrate refolding when the reaction mixture contains H2O2 and PDI family members together with either of the PDI peroxidases or PRDX4. Dehydroascorbate is an addition source of oxidizing equivalents in the ER. DHa can be moved into the ER from the cytosol, generated in the ER, and like H2O2, DHA directly oxidizes PDI and unfolds reduced proteins in vitro . Due to its slow rate, the former pathway is shown to not be a main route for the reduction of DHA. A faster pathway occurs with a faster PDI-independent oxidation of protein substrates.
Bulleid NJ, Ellgaard L.
Trends Biochem Sci. 2011 Sep;36(9):485-92. Epub 2011 Jul 19. Review.
Alekhine Defence : Krejcik Variation
Among the four legal moves, Kf6 and Ke6 aren't good options. Both moves would further expose the king.
4...g6 and 4...Kg8 are playable but none of these moves can save the knight.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation
'1.e4 Nf6 2.Bc4 Nxe4 3.Bxf7+ Kxf7 4.Qh5+'
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Alekhine's Defence
Unorthodox Alekine Defense from EricShiller.com
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon · Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
The second order transfer function is the simplest one having complex poles.
Its analysis allows to recapitulate the information gathered about analog filter design and serves as a good starting point for the realization of chain of second order sections filters.
3.1 6th Order Normalized Butterworth Filter
The transfer function of a continuous-time all-pole second order system is:
This simplifies the writing without any loss of generality, as numerator and denominator can be multiplied or divided by the same factor.
The frequency response, taken for
For very high frequencies, the most important term of the denominator is
At high frequencies, the amplitude response looks like a (squared) hyperbol in a linear plot and like a straight line with a negative slope in a log-log plot.
Having a given amplitude at DC and an amplitude nearing zero at high frequencies indicates that the transfer function is of lowpass type.
The poles of the system are given by the roots of the denominator polynomial:
If the term inside the square root is negative, then the poles are complex conjugates.
From the location of the poles, the transfer function can be rewritten as:
The amplitude of the poles gives the corner frequency of the filter.
The corner frequency is defined as the abscissa of the point where the horizontal and the -40 [dB/decade] lines meet in the log-log magnitude response plot.
Note that this is not necessarily the -3 [dB] attenuation frequency of the filter.
The ratio between the real part of the poles and the corner frequency is proportional to the damping, or inversely proportional to the quality factor of the system.
The closer the poles are to the imaginary axis, the more a resonance will appear at a frequency smaller but close to the corner frequency of the system.
With this, the transfer function with unity gain at DC can be rewritten as a function of the corner frequency and the damping in the form:
The name biquadratic stems from the fact that the functions has two second order polynomials:
The poles are analysed in the same way as for an all-pole second order transfer function.
They determine the corner frequency and the quality factor of the system.
The zeroes are used to affect the shape of the amplitude response:
Placing zeroes on the imaginary axis at frequencies a little higher than the corner frequency gives more attenuation in the stopband and allows a faster transition from passband to stopband. This is what happens with Chebyshev type 2 and elliptic filter functions.
Placing the zeroes on the imaginary axis precisely at the corner frequency forces the amplitude to zero at that specific point. This corresponds to a bandstop (or notch) function.
Placing a single zero at the (0, 0) coordinate of the s-plane transforms the function into a bandpass one. This is done by setting coefficients
.
Placing both zeroes at the (0, 0) coordinate transforms the function into a highpass one. This is done by setting coefficients
.
Placing the zeroes on the right half plane, symetrically to the poles gives an allpass function: any point on the imaginary axis is at the same distance from a zero and from the associated pole. This allpass function is used to shape the phase response of a transfer function.
6th Order Normalized Butterworth Filter
This example analyses the 3 second order sections of a 6th order normalized Butterworth filter.
The poles of the Butterworth filter are regularly spaced on the left half of a circle centered at the origin of the complex plane.
Each complex conjugate pole pair builds a second order all-pole transfer function.
The product of these second order functions gives the 6th order Butterworth transfer function.
In the figure on the side, the pole
Their amplitude response will show an overshoot at the corner frequency.
This corresponds to an underdamped case and the second order section will show some resonance at frequencies close to the corner frequency.
Their amplitude response will show 3 dB loss at the corner frequency.
It is the limiting case where the amplitude response shows no overshoot.
Nevertheless, this doesn't correspond to a critically damped case: the step response will have overshoots before stabilization.
Their amplitude response will show a large attenuation at the corner frequency.
This corresponds to an overdamped case.
The following Octave code allows to plot the amplitude responses of the individual second order sections and of the global Butterworth amplitude response:
The blue curve on the side shows the global amplitude response.
The green curves are the responses of the individual second order sections.
They all have a hozizontal asymptote towards DC.
They also all have a -40 dB/decade asymptote for high frequencies.
Both asymptotes cross at the point (
The top green amplitude response shows what a response with a high quality factor looks like.
It has a maximum of more than 0 dB (here 6.02 dB) at a frequency a little below the corner frequency.
At the corner frequency, the amplitude has already fallen down (here to 5.68 dB).
The middle green amplitude response shows what a maximally flat response looks like.
It has an amplitude of -3.02 dB at the corner frequency.
Whatever its order, a Butterworth function shows the same -3.02 dB loss at the corner frequency.
The bottom green amplitude response shows what a response with a low quality factor looks like.
It has an amplitude of less than -3 dB (here -5.72 dB) at the corner frequency.
Charts can be either embedded, where they are found in association with worksheets, or can occupy sheets of their own. The code example below makes basic charts on their own sheets. Purely to test the code, there is a procedure to fetch a selection of cells from the worksheet. Clearly, this procedure is justified only for testing since there are easier ways to make charts starting from a selection of cells. Array charting is generally most useful when data is not first written to a worksheet.
The chart procedure runs from an array. The array can contain one X series, and any practical number of Y series. However, the layout of the array is strict; the first row must contain only X data. All other rows will be treated as having Y series data in them. No heading labels can be included.
If the source data has its series in columns instead of the rows required by the chart array, then the data is transposed before the charting point. A transpose procedure is included in the code.
The code can be tested as a self-contained standard module.
Because there are too many variations of chart types to accommodate with any accuracy, only the most general properties can be considered in one procedure. As a result, the user should add any specific code to the appropriate sections.
Note that in the supporting procedures, both empty selections and insufficient selections generate errors, so a minimal error handling was added.
'either; top row X data, and all other rows Y series, or
'first column X data, and all columns Y series;
'set boolean variable bSeriesInColumns to identify which:
'Do not include heading labels in the selection.
Dim vA As Variant, bOK1 As Boolean, bOK2 As Boolean
Dim bTranspose As Boolean, bSeriesInColumns As Boolean
'avoid errors for 'no selection'
On Error GoTo ERR_HANDLER
'load selection into array
LoadArrSelectedRange vA, bSeriesInColumns
'make specified chart type
ChartFromArray vA, xlLine
MsgBox "Chart done!"
ActiveChart.ChartArea.Activate
MsgBox "Make a 2D selection of cells"
Public Function LoadArrSelectedRange(vR As Variant, Optional bTranspose As Boolean = False) As Boolean
'gets the current selection of cells - at least 2 cols and 2 rows, ie, 2 x 2
'and returns data array in vR
'if bTranspose=True then selection is transposed before loading array
'before array storage - otherwise as found
Dim vA As Variant, rng As Range
Dim sht As Worksheet, vT As Variant
Dim r As Long, c As Long
Dim lb1, ub1, lb2, ub2
Dim nSR As Long, nSC As Long
'make sure a range is selected
With Application.Selection
nSR = .Rows.Count
nSC = .Columns.Count
'check that enough data is selected
If nSC < 2 Or nSR < 2 Then
MsgBox "No useful selection was found." & vbCrLf & _
"Needs at least two rows and two columns" & vbCrLf & _
"for array 2D loading."
ReDim vA(1 To nSR, 1 To nSC)
Set rng = Application.Selection
'pass range of cells to array
'output transposed or as found
If bTranspose = True Then
'collapse selection to top left
Function ChartFromArray(ByVal vA As Variant, Optional vChartType As Variant = xlLine) As Boolean
'assumes multi series are in array ROWS
'if data in columns then transpose it before call
'at this point vA must have X values in first row
'and all other rows assumed to be Y series
'only data - no label columns
'see link in ChartType help page
'for full list of chart types
Dim lb1 As Long, ub1 As Long, lb2 As Long, ub2 As Long
Dim X As Variant, Y As Variant, oChrt As Chart
Dim n As Long, m As Long, S As Series, bTrimAxes As Boolean
Dim sT As String, sX As String, sY As String
sT = "Top Label for Chart Here"
sX = "X-Axis Label Here"
sY = "Y-Axis Label Here"
'set boolean to True to enable axes trimming code block
ReDim X(lb2 To ub2) '1 to 11 data
ReDim Y(lb2 To ub2) '1 to 11 data
Set oChrt = Charts.Add
'use parameter chart type
oChrt.ChartType = vChartType
'load the single X series
For n = lb2 To ub2
Do Until .SeriesCollection.Count = 0
For m = 2 To ub1
For n = lb2 To ub2
Set S = ActiveChart.SeriesCollection.NewSeries
'transfer series individually
.Name = "Series names"
On Error Resume Next 'avoid display exceptions
'CHART-SPECIFIC PROPERTIES GO HERE
'GENERAL CHART PROPERTIES GO HERE
.ChartTitle.Text = sT 'chart title
If bTrimAxes = True Then
'X Axis limits and such- set as required
Selection.TickLabelPosition = xlLow
'Y Axis limits and such- set as required
Set oChrt = Nothing
Function TransposeArr2D(vA As Variant, Optional vR As Variant) As Boolean
' Procedure : Transpose2DArr
' Purpose : Transposes a 2D array; rows become columns, columns become rows
' Specifically, (r,c) is moved to (c,r) in every case.
' Options include, returned in-place with the source changed, or
' if vR is supplied, returned in that instead, with the source intact.
Dim loR As Long, hiR As Long, loC As Long, hiC As Long
Dim r As Long, c As Long, bWasMissing As Boolean
'find whether optional vR was initially missing
If Not bWasMissing Then Set vR = Nothing
'find bounds of vW data input work array
'set vR dimensions transposed
'Erase vR 'there must be an array in the variant to erase
ReDim vR(loC To hiC, loR To hiR)
For r = loR To hiR
For c = loC To hiC
'find bounds of vW data input work array
'decide whether to return in vA or vR
'vR was the intended return array
'so leave vR as it is
'vR is not intended return array
'so reload vA with vR
'return success for function
'loads an array with sample number data
'first row values of x 1 to 100
'next three rows y series
Dim nNS As Long, f1 As Single
Dim f2 As Single, f3 As Single
Dim vS As Variant, vR As Variant, n As Long
ReDim vS(1 To 4, 1 To nNS)
For n = 1 To nNS
ChartFromArray vS, xlLine
Application.DisplayAlerts = False
For Each oC In ThisWorkbook.Charts
Application.DisplayAlerts = True
The Ba Zi of anyone born in Year 1932. The Hour Pillar and Luck Pillars are obtained by clicking the items under the respective column.
The term "SS" refers to the "Season".
The Hour Pillar is derived from the hour of birth. At the page that shows the Hour Pillar, one has to use the time of birth to look up the Hour Pillar.
The Luck Pillars depend on whether a person is male or female. By clicking under one of these columns, we can see the respective Luck Pillars, together with the starting Age. An item such as Age 9 (H2E12r) means that the starting Age is 9, the Heavenly Stem is 2, the Earthly Branch is 12 and the Luck Pillars unfold in a 'reverse' direction. An item such as Age 8 (H10E9f) means that the starting Age is 8, the Heavenly Stem is 10, the Earthly Branch is 9 and the Luck Pillars unfold in a 'forward' direction. If the first Luck Pillar is H4E7, then the next pillar (when the Age increases by 10 years) will be H5E8 in the 'forward' direction. In the 'reverse' direction, the next pillar (when the Age increases by 10 years) will be H3E6. In the 'forward' direction, both the Heavenly Stem and the Earthly Branch are incremented by 1, but in the 'reverse' direction, both numbers are decremented by 1, provided that the Heavenly Stems range from H1 to H10, and the Earthly Branches range from E1 to E12.
A carboxylic acid is characterized by the presence of the carboxyl group -COOH. The chemical reactivity of carboxylic acids is dominated by the very positive carbon, and the resonance stabilization that is possible should the group lose a proton. These two factors contribute both to acidity and to the group's dominant chemical reaction: nucleophilic substitution.
Aliphatic carboxylic acids are formed from primary alcohols or aldehydes by reflux with potassium dichromate (VI) acidified with sulphuric acid.
Alkyl benzenes (methyl benzene, ethyl benzene, etc) react with potassium manganate (VII) to form benzoic acid. All alkyl benzenes give the same product, because all but one alkyl carbon is lost.
No acidification is needed. The reaction is refluxed and generates KOH. The benzoic acid is worked up by adding a proton source (such as HCl).
The systematic IUPAC nomenclature for carboxylic acids requires the longest carbon chain of the molecule to be identified and the -e of alkane name to be replaced with -oic acid.
The traditional names of many carboxylic acids are still in common use.
The systematic approach for naming dicarboxylic acids (alkanes with carboxylic acids on either end) is the same as for carboxylic acids, except that the suffix is -dioic acid.
Common name Nomenclature of dicarboxylic acids is aided by the acronym OMSGAP (Om's Gap), where each letter stands for the first letter of the first seven names for each dicarboxylic acid, starting from the simplest.
Most carboxylic acids are weak acids. To quantify the acidities we need to know the pKa values: The pH above which the acids start showing mostly acidic behaviour:
Data from CRC Handbook of Chemistry & Physics, 64th edition, 1984 D-167-8 Except http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trifluoroacetic_acid
Clearly, the carboxylic acids are remarkably acidic for organic molecules. Somehow, the release of the H+ ion is favoured by the structure.
The O-H bond is polarised by the removal of electrons to the carbonyl oxygen.
The ion is stabilised by resonance: the carbonyl oxygen can accept the charge from the other oxygen.
The acid strength of carboxylic acid are strongly modulated by the moiety attached to the carboxyl. Electron-donor moiety decrease the acid strength, whereas strong electron-withdrawing groups increase it.
Carboxylic acids are converted to acid chlorides by a range of reagents:
SOCl2, PCl5 or PCl3 are the usual reagents. Other products are HCl & SO2, HCl & POCl3 and H3PO3 respectively. The conditions must be dry, as water will hydrolyse the acid chloride in a vigorous reaction. Hydrolysis forms the original carboxylic acid.
CH3COOH + SOCl2 → CH3COCl + HCl + SO2
C6H5COOH + PCl5 → C6H5COCl + HCl + POCl3
Alcohols will react with acid chlorides or carboxylic acids to form esters. This reaction is catalyzed by acidic or basic conditions. See alcohol notes.
C6H5COCl + CH3CH2OH → C6H5COOCH2CH3 + HCl
With carboxylic acids, the condensation reaction is an unfavourable equilibrium, promoted by using non-aqueous solvent (if any) and a dehydrating agent such as sulfuric acid (non-nucleophilic), catalyzing the reaction).
CH3COOH + CH3CH2CH2OH = CH3COOCH2CH2CH3 + H2O
Ethanoic Acid reacts with Propanol to form Propyl Ethanoate
Reversing the reaction is simply a matter of refluxing the ester with plenty of aqueous acid. This hydrolysis produces the carboxylic acid and the alcohol.
C6H5COOCH3 + H2O → C6H5COOH + CH3OH
This latter process is called 'saponification' because when fats are hydrolysed in this way, their salts are useful as soap.
See acid anhydride.
Conceptually, an amide is formed by reacting an acid (an electrophile) with an amine compound (a nucleophile), releasing water.
However, the acid-base reaction is much faster, which yields the non-electrophilic carboxylate and the non-nucleophilic ammonium, and no further reaction takes place.
To get around this, a variety of coupling reagents have been developed that first react with the acid or carboxylate to form an active acyl compound, which is basic enough to deprotonate an ammonium and electrophilic enough to react with the free base of the amine. A common coupling agent is dicyclohexylcarbodiimide, or DCC, which is very toxic.
On heating with sodalime (NaOH/CaO solid mix) carboxylic acids lose their –COOH group and produce a small alkane plus sodium carbonate:
CH3CH2COOH + 2 NaOH →CH3CH3 + Na2CO3 + H2O
Note how a carbon is lost from the main chain. The product of the reaction may be easier to identify than the original acid, helping us to find the structure.
Industrially, ethanoic anhydride is used as a less costly and reactive alternative to ethanoyl chloride.
It forms esters and can be hydrolysed in very similar ways, but yields a second ethanoic acid molecule, not HCl
The structure is formed from two ethanoic acid molecules…
Polyester can be made by reacting a diol (ethane-1,2-diol) with a dicarboxylic acids (benzene-1,4-dicarboxylic acid).
Polyester makes reasonable fibres, it is quite inflexible so it does not crease easily; but for clothing it is usually combined with cotton for comfort.
The plastic is not light-sensitive, so it is often used for net curtains. Film, bottles and other moulded products are made from polyester.
Although carboxylic acids are acidic, they can be distinguished from phenol because:
Only carboxylic acids will react with carbonates and hydrogencarbonates to form CO2
C6H5COOH + NaHCO3 → C6H5COONa + H2O + CO2
Some phenols react with FeCl3 solution, giving a characteristic purple colour.
Note: Click on the following icon to go back to the contents page.
A bond is a debt: the issuer of a bond (a company, government, or other entity) borrows money from the purchaser of a bond (bond holder). Until the bond matures (the debt becomes due), the issuer will make periodic interest payments to the bond holder. On the maturity date of the bond, the issuer pays back the principal (the amount borrowed) to the bond holder, and possibly also makes a final interest payment.
From the point of view of the issuer, bonds may be an attractive alternative to borrowing from a bank (perhaps to avoid restrictive loan terms or to obtain a better interest rate), or to issuing stock (which would dilute the equity or ownership stake of the current owners of a company). From the point of view of the bond holder, bonds may be attractive relative to other investment alternatives, perhaps paying better interest rates than bank deposits or being more certain of retaining their value than stocks. With some exceptions, bonds are freely traded, so that the bond holders are not locked into their investments. (All of these advantages are possibilities and not certainties, as discussed below.)
As an illustration, suppose a company wants to build a factory which will cost US $1,000,000. The company may issue a bond to cover this amount. The bond could either be backed by the factory, or could be a debenture, which is only a call on the future income of the company. The face value of the bond would be $1,000,000, which typically would be sold in increments of $1,000. (The face value of the bond is distinct from the current price in the marketplace, which might be more or less than the face value.) The bond might pay an interest rate of 5% (also known as having a 5% coupon), typically in semiannual payments of 2.5% each, and could have a maturity of up to 30 years. For example, assuming the 5% and 30 year figures above, the bond typically would make 60 payments of $25 per $1000 of face value, with a final repayment of the principal coinciding with the last interest payment.
The purchase price of a bond is often not the price found on the bond itself, but can vary based on the interest rate of the bond, as well as the accrued interest on the bond. An increase in interest rates results in lower bond prices, and a decrease in interest rates results in higher bond prices (this is known as a loss or premium over the face value of the bond).
Bonds return around 5% a year on average. To have a higher return in bonds you invest in riskier bonds. They are known as junk bonds. Bonds have a credit rating which shows their risk rating. The credit ratings go from AAA, AA or A, BBB, BB B, CCC, CC, C, DDD, DD, D. AAA bonds are seen at a very low risk of default. BBB indicate some problems. CCC bonds can be viewed with caution. DDD are bonds at a high risk of default.
When can you use bonds? You could use bonds if you are an investor who would not want stocks and shares prices ups and down. How do you invest in bonds. You can invest in bonds through funds. You can also invest in bonds through stockbrokers. Be careful of too high charges on a bond fund, it could take away from the potential profits.
Fill the blank spaces with the correct form of the verb "ser" (to be).
I am your brother.
I am your sister.
You are my friend.
You are dangerous.
They are people.
Fill the blank spaces with the correct form of the verb "estar" (to be).
You are in the correct place.
You are angry.
Tú _____ enojado.
Ella ___ triste.
They are ill.
Ellos _____ enfermos.
Fill the blank spaces with the correct form of the verb "ser" or "estar" (to be).
You are my friend.
You are there.
Ella _____ mi hermana. (es/está)
You are in Europe for Christmas.
Vosotros _____ en Europa para Navidad. (sois/estáis)
You are sad.
Vosotras _____ tristes. (sois/estáis)
They are sympathetic.
They are interesting people.
The first argument is a target register which value is affected by the instruction.
The second argument is the source value register.
The SR instruction is available on all models of the 360, 370 and z/System.
The SR instruction reads 32-bit integer value from the register specified by the second argument and subtracts it from the value of register specified by the first argument. The register specified by the first argument holds the operation result after the instruction is executed. The Condition Code field in the Program Status Word is changed according to the resulting value.
If signed integer overflow occurs, i.e. difference is not between -2**31 and 2**31-1, CC is set to 3.
Otherwise, CC is set to 0, 1 or 2, if difference is equal to zero, below zero or above zero accordingly.
To subtract by double word value from the full 64-bit double word of both registers on the z/Series, see SGR.
To subtract by word value from the full 64-bit double word of the other register on the z/Series, see SGFR.
To subtract by full 64-bit double word register on the z/Series from a 64-bit double word in memory, see SG.
To subtract from full 64-bit double word register on the z/Series from a 32-bit word in memory, see SGF.
To subtract by word value from memory, see S.
To subtract by half-word value from memory, see SH.
To subtract by value and set condition codes according to unsigned arithmetic, or add not most significant part of multi-word integer value, see SL or SLR.
To check condition code, see BC or BCR.
Floating Point · High-Level Languages
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Many fields can be studied and learned without ever actually working with the tools in field. For instance, chemistry can be learned in depth without ever picking up a test tube or mixing ionic compounds. Philosophy, however, is more about the methodology behind deriving answers than it is about the answers themselves. As such, students studying philosophy must use the methodology of philosophy on the philosophy they are learning as they are learning it. Doing philosophy involves asking the right questions, critically examining the work of previous philosophers, truly understanding the works and the reasoning behind the works, and possibly building on the works of previous philosophers by expanding or testing this methodology.
Next: To Do ...
Every language-type has its own unique way of expression.
Next: To Do ...
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
When input signal in A and B is <=0 (less or equal to 0) then the signal is false, but when bigger then 0 then true..
The output of this module is only true when both A and B are true.
Not inverts the output.
Stata's website includes a huge quantity of resources including
The UCLA Stata computing page includes many tutorials.
Antoine Bozio's introduction to Stata (in French)
'Installing Commands from the Command Line in Stata'
Wetting is the distribution ratio between the Strong Force and the Weak Forces of a substance. A substance will be given the ability to become a perfect sphere based on internally directed bond structure due to the mass of the atom and the reversal of the internal polarity of the substance due to outside forces. This results in a perfectly spherical liquid, which is unable to form physical bonds with the nano-particulate surface of a material (Cohesion of the liquid). These are defined in the field of Wetting as Cohesion and Adhesion. Adhesion on the other hand involves the superconductivity of the fluid, similar to liquid helium. The ability for Liquid Helium to act as it does is due to the Adhesive Force. The liquid sprawls itself out to become as flat as possible, as if to form a lattice, and is able to use such forces to travel above the surface of a substance, so as to climb vertically and parallel to a surface.
Cohesive Force – Infusive Polarity of a substance
Adhesive Force – Diffusive Polarity of a substance
Wetting – The phenomenon of a liquid acting as a superconductor, related to floating
The relationship between surface area and wetting is due to two types of forces present. In a Spherical Situation, related to Combustion, The Oxidized Bonds of a Surface, or Anic Bonds of a Surface, prevent Physical Bonding.
Physical Bonding – the ability for Hydrogen to attack the surface of another material besides itself, where Oxygen pulls the electrons from a substrate, such as Metals, Anions, Cations, Alkanes and the such. Since Hydrogen can be found on Alkanes, we also become aware that it is impossible for Hydrogen to attack itself, and thus the Alkane remains insoluble in water (unless enough oxygen is present to emulsify the compound immediately or upon impact with a surface). Thus we may describe Hydrogenation, to a degree.
Hydrogenation – The addition of Hydrogen to the surface of a material, such as an Alkane at its simplest, or to an oil, of any sort. Hydrogen has the tendency to attack a surface, where the hydrogen atoms then begin to take apart such a surface, especially in the presence of an oxide. With the oxide present, Hydrogen simply begins to pair with the oxygen atom, and with some heat added, the oxide begins to release itself from its parent structure, a metal perhaps, a cation and perhaps even an anion to some degree, depending on the strength of its bond to outside forces.
Relationship to Electrolytes – Hydrogenation of electrolytes allows it to create an acidic structure within an atomic radius, thus allowing an atom to perform certain functions in a system of some sort. An equilibrium point is created, an ionic bond, and this is what allows acidity and interaction between Hydrogen and its anion. The anion then begins to radiate via the ionic bond EMR into the hydrogen, giving it the extension of the original atom's capabilities, like an arm. A covalent bond would eventually break, meaning the flow of EMR is not the same, a typical behavior in imbalanced equations or a function without its inverse function present. Covalent bonds thus describe a ratio in which atom-atom energy is dependent upon the side with more electronegativite dominance. Thus we begin to describe oxygen, which claims the hydrogen for its specific purpose.
Oxygen is able to use hydrogen via a double covalent bond system, which uses oxygen as an ionic superbond between H2. This ability for oxygen to act as the ionic point between H+ and H- is based on a single electron, acting as a center of balance, between two separate structures to form a single structure. The oxygen thus acts as the midpoint, between the two structures, to form a superstructure, and this is the subject of wetting.
SuperConductivity - SuperConductivity is based on the ability for a SuperStructure to exist. A SuperStructure is based off of Alpha Particles, which gives us a Basic Unit of SpaceTime. It includes the facet of something physical in nature, of which exists in space and can travel through such space thus giving it the ability to travel from one point in time, to another, such as from one point in space time, to another point in space time. The ability to travel through two points in space from a single point of time is teleportation, meaning that something can travel without time, and the ability to travel through two points of time, without space, is time travel. A liquid molecule thus has the ability to maintain a superstructure, and this is the explanation for wetting. When this perfect structure is attained, perfect wetting can be attained thus just like a superconductor. Once this is done, we will understand the nature of liquid, as this means that a liquid can thus act as a solid, if it has perfect wetting, meaning water can arrange itself to be perfectly symmetrical about its origin as a molecular species.
Low Energy and High Energy Surfaces –
Low Energy Surfaces are surfaces that have Physical Bonds.
High Energy Surfaces are surfaces that have Chemical Bonds.
It's set by rebol to true if are you using Rebol/Command; otherwise it is set to false.
For more information about Rebol/Command look this page: http://www.rebol.com/command.html
Hand-making is a good option if you're making very few indeed, or if it's based on crafty stuff, or a series of one-off things. Otherwise, remember that you've got every right to combine hand-making techniques with other techniques, such as photocopying the whole zine then sewing a front cover (or whatever).
Photocopiers are a big thing in zine-making, whether it's subtle use of the photocopier at work (or so I've heard) or the photocopier in the library. Some photocopiers will even do your stapling for you, which is very kind.
Many photocopiers do not copy all the way to the edge of the page, and some have quirks about the way they photocopy different shades/colours, so it's a good idea to try a print-run out once or twice and see if you can get it looking good, before you dial in "500" and press Go. It's a good idea to get used to a specific photocopier's quirks and then stick with that one, to avoid giving yourself a new set of headaches.
If you have a computer and a printer at home then it can be easy to print things out yourself, especially if you're not doing many. But after a while it gets:
Expensive. Printer ink is really quite expensive, and (especially if you have any pages with large amounts of black on them) you'll be using up printer ink faster than you can possibly imagine...
Frustrating. This is particularly true if you're doing double-sided things but your printer doesn't do double-sided, because you need to do a lot of sitting there feeding printed sheets back into the printer in the correct order/orientation/etc, and it can go wrong quite a lot too. It can also go a bit wrong because the printed sheets might be a bit damp or crinkly, so the printer goes a bit wrong in feeding the paper back in. Then there's also the stuff about getting it all to print out so all the folds line up nicely.
Anyway. If you are using your own printer then here are some tips:
Remember to make sure it'll fit on the page. Most printers don't print right to the edge of the paper, which means that either the edges of what you've designed will be chopped off, or it'll be printed out slightly smaller than maybe you expected. You might find you need to leave an empty border around your work so that nothing gets chopped off.
Do a bit of experimenting then make a template. Draw some lines (or try and set appropriate borders) in your software, print them out, fiddle about and repeat until you've got it about right, and save that file. You can use this as a basis for your pages then delete/hide any guiding lines before you print the pages out. This webpage has a couple of examples of templates: http://www.footprinters.co.uk/layout.htm
A quick rule of thumb: if your zine doesn't fit in the page, resize it (in the print preferences or whatever) to about 97%.
You can get your zine printed for you at businesses all over the world
If you're strongly into DIY or anarchist things you might not want to use a company to print the things for you, and that's fine. But if not:
If you're getting to the point where you're making a lot of copies (more than a few dozen) then it's probably cheaper and easier to get the zines printed on your behalf, and will get you more uniform results. Of course there are various limitations with this: the printing companies are not likely to be willing to print every fourth page using tracing paper, for example. But you could easily get a printing company to make the zines and then do some "post-processing" on the zines to add your preferred cross-stitch/hole-punch/felt-tip customizations, which is quite a nice way of combining interestingness with painless production.
Printing companies typically vary a lot when it comes to pricing, so make sure you ask around for different prices. They can also vary in helpfulness, and this can be quite important. Does the company look small and friendly? A small friendly company may be more inclined to spend time talking to you and making sure they get it right. Double points if the website gives the name, photo and direct phone number of the person who gives quotes.
Check: are they happy to do small print runs? Check that "small print run" means 50 rather than 50,000.
You don't particularly need to pick a nearby printers, because delivery is often included or inexpensive.
What info to tell the print shop
What the finished zine will look like (e.g. 12-page A6 booklet)
What weight of paper you want (e.g. 80gsm is normal printer paper, 120gsm is thick paper... ask them for advice if you're not sure)
The color and shininess of the paper (e.g. white, glossy)
What colors of ink you need (e.g. black, black and red, or full colour)
If you want it delivered and how soon you need it done
How you'll provide the original copy - either electronically (PDF, Word, jpg, by CD, email, etc) or 'camera ready' (on paper)
You are given the following mode choice model.
= dummy variable (alternative specific constant) for transit
Compute Utility for Each Mode for Each Cell
Compute Probability for Each Mode for Each Cell
B. Using the results from the previous problem (#2), how many car trips will there be?
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
The Ba Zi of anyone born in Year 1966. The Hour Pillar and Luck Pillars are obtained by clicking the items under the respective column.
The term "SS" refers to the "Season".
The Hour Pillar is derived from the hour of birth. At the page that shows the Hour Pillar, one has to use the time of birth to look up the Hour Pillar.
The Luck Pillars depend on whether a person is male or female. By clicking under one of these columns, we can see the respective Luck Pillars, together with the starting Age. An item such as Age 9 (H2E12r) means that the starting Age is 9, the Heavenly Stem is 2, the Earthly Branch is 12 and the Luck Pillars unfold in a 'reverse' direction. An item such as Age 8 (H10E9f) means that the starting Age is 8, the Heavenly Stem is 10, the Earthly Branch is 9 and the Luck Pillars unfold in a 'forward' direction. If the first Luck Pillar is H4E7, then the next pillar (when the Age increases by 10 years) will be H5E8 in the 'forward' direction. In the 'reverse' direction, the next pillar (when the Age increases by 10 years) will be H3E6. In the 'forward' direction, both the Heavenly Stem and the Earthly Branch are incremented by 1, but in the 'reverse' direction, both numbers are decremented by 1, provided that the Heavenly Stems range from H1 to H10, and the Earthly Branches range from E1 to E12.
The first project we're making is a sketchbook, for you to fill with drawings, paintings & sketches!
Play media How to make a simple sketch book
Watch our video for a step-by-step guide
Neatly assemble your 10 sheets of A4 paper on top of the sheet of cardboard, and then carefully fold in half to create an A5 size.
Cut along the fold.
Using a pen or pencil mark a dot roughly an inch in from the short edge, and roughly the same from the long edge, at both sides.
Using a thumbtack (or something similar) carefully press through the dots marked to make a hole. NOTE: if you have two thumbtacks, leave them stuck through the paper until the next step - it makes things a bit easier!
Straighten out the paper clips and feed them through the holes until they are half way through.
Bend both ends out over the edge of the paper, and twist them together. Bend the excess back onto your card to keep it out of the way.
Ta-da! You now have a simple sketchbook. Why not decorate the cover as your first project?
Those who end end in consonant or any vowel excluding a
Those who singular form for masculine ends in a
The first (those ending in consonants but excluding "a") does not inflect where as the second one inflects with respect to gender and the number of the qualifying noun.
This inflection for the second case is shown below (Tiwari, [1966] 2004).
If the noun to be qualified consists of multiple words of different numbers and genders, then the adjective must agree with that particular noun which it immediately precedes or follows.
There are many ways of making positive–comparative–superlative forms of adjectives:
Immigration Act Republic of China (Taiwan) LawArticle 38-8
Promulgated addition on 2015-02-04, effective 2015-02-05
For an alien whose temporary detention is revoked in accordance with Paragraph 1 of Article 38-1, or a detainee whose temporary detention is terminated or suspended under Paragraph 1 of the preceding paragraph, and falls under any of the following circumstances; the National Immigration Agency may temporarily detain him/her if a compulsory exit order is difficult or impractical to enforce. A continuation of the detention period may be applied for in court prior to the end of the said detention period.
The reason for terminating or suspending the temporary detention is no longer valid.
The time period for repeated detention of an alien mentioned in the preceding paragraph shall be included in the detention period for the same case and shall not exceed 100 days.
↑ "Immigration Act". Immigration Office (Taiwan). 2015-04-30. http://www.immigration.gov.tw/ct.asp?xItem=1096847&ctNode=30026&mp=2. Retrieved 2017-01-08.
Legal and Regulatory Issues in the Information Economy
The Rule of Law and the Internet —
Legal Recognition of Electronic Documents and Electronic Signatures —
Ideas, Trade Secrets, and Intellectual Property —
Consumer Privacy and Protection —
Censorship or Content Regulation —
What are domain names?
Domain names provide the address of companies in the Internet and are equivalent to the business address in the physical world. As more and more companies use the Internet, the number of disputes arising from the use of domain names is increasing as well.
Domain names are divided into hierarchies. The top-level of the hierarchy appears after the last dot (.) in a domain name. In “microsoft.com”, the top level domain name is .com, the most common top-level domain name, indicating that the domain name is owned by a commercial enterprise. Other common top-level domain names are .org (for non-profit organizations), .net (for network and Internet related organizations), .edu (for four-year colleges and universities), and .gov (for government entities).
Aside from these generic domain names, each country has a unique top-level domain name. For instance, .ca indicates a domain in Canada, and .ie indicates an Irish domain.
When and how can disputes over domain names arise?
The disputes that arise over domain names involve “second level” domain names, which refer to the name directly to the left of the top-level domain name in an Internet address. For instance, in the address “www.microsoft.com”, the second level domain name is Microsoft.
Two identical second level domain names cannot coexist under the same top level domain. For example, even though both the Delta Faucet Company and Delta Airlines would like the “delta.com” domain name, only one Delta company can have delta.com. Unfortunately for the Delta Faucet Company, that Delta company is Delta Airlines. Therefore, Delta Faucet Company must use deltafaucet.com.
Some well publicized examples of domain name disputes are:
Who controls the registration of domain names? How are disputes resolved?
Prior to December 1999, a company called Network Solutions Inc. (NSI) was almost solely responsible for the registration of second level domain names for the most popular top-level domains, including .com, .net, and .org. NSI dictated the policy on domain name registration and had a great deal of control over how domain names were registered, and how disputes would be resolved. To avoid having to arbitrate in disputes, NSI adopted a first-come, first-served arrangement. Under this scheme, NSI would not question an applicant’s right to have a particular domain name. If the domain name was available, the applicant was given the name.
This policy has now been replaced with the Uniform Domain Names Disputes Resolution Policy created by ICANN (Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers) and used by all accredited registrars. Under this new policy, a trademark owner can initiate a relatively inexpensive administrative procedure to challenge the existing domain name. In order to prevail, the trademark owner must show that:
Those disputing the grant of a domain name can go to the courts for this purpose. In the United States, the Anti-Cybersquatting Consumer Protection Act in November of 1999 made it easier for individuals and companies to take over domain names that are confusingly similar to their names or valid trademarks. However, they must establish that the domain name holder acted in bad faith.
One portion of this Act is related to famous individuals. This portion allows individuals to file a civil action against anyone who registers their name as a second level domain name for the purpose of selling the domain name for a profit. Take the case of the domain name juliaroberts.com. An individual who intended to sell it later to actress Julia Roberts registered the name. Citing bad faith on the part of the registrant, the court ruled that the domain name be transferred to its rightful owner.
Is there an international organization that can arbitrate disputes?
WIPO has set up an Arbitration and Mediation Center, described by its Web site as “internationally recognized as the leading institution in the area of resolving Internet domain name disputes”. Since December 1999, the Center has administered proceedings in the generic Top Level Domains (gTLDs) .com, .org, .net.
Following ICANN’s decision of 16 November 2000 to admit seven new gTLDs, WIPO has been working with the operators of the new gTLDs to develop domain name dispute resolution mechanisms for their domains. The Center has also been designated to provide dispute resolution services for these domains.
In addition, the Center administers dispute procedures in a number of country code Top Level Domains (ccTLDs), such as .ph for Philippines or .th for Thailand.
Concepts and Definitions —
E-Commerce Applications: Issues and Prospects —
In the emerging global economy, e-commerce and e-business have increasingly become a necessary component of business strategy and a strong catalyst for economic development. The integration of information and communications technology (ICT) in business has revolutionized relationships within organizations and those between and among organizations and individuals. Specifically, the use of ICT in business has enhanced productivity, encouraged greater customer participation, and enabled mass customization, besides reducing costs.
With developments in the Internet and Web-based technologies, distinctions between traditional markets and the global electronic marketplace-such as business capital size, among others-are gradually being narrowed down. The name of the game is strategic positioning, the ability of a company to determine emerging opportunities and utilize the necessary human capital skills (such as intellectual resources) to make the most of these opportunities through an e-business strategy that is simple, workable and practicable within the context of a global information milieu and new economic environment. With its effect of leveling the playing field, e-commerce coupled with the appropriate strategy and policy approach enables small and medium scale enterprises to compete with large and capital-rich businesses.
On another plane, developing countries are given increased access to the global marketplace, where they compete with and complement the more developed economies. Most, if not all, developing countries are already participating in e-commerce, either as sellers or buyers. However, to facilitate e-commerce growth in these countries, the relatively underdeveloped information infrastructure must be improved. Among the areas for policy intervention are:
High Internet access costs, including connection service fees, communication fees, and hosting charges for websites with sufficient bandwidth;
Limited availability of credit cards and a nationwide credit card system;
Underdeveloped transportation infrastructure resulting in slow and uncertain delivery of goods and services;
Network security problems and insufficient security safeguards;
Lack of skilled human resources and key technologies (i.e., inadequate professional IT workforce);
Content restriction on national security and other public policy grounds, which greatly affect business in the field of information services, such as the media and entertainment sectors;
Cross-border issues, such as the recognition of transactions under laws of other ASEAN member-countries, certification services, improvement of delivery methods and customs facilitation; and
The relatively low cost of labor, which implies that a shift to a comparatively capital intensive solution (including investments on the improvement of the physical and network infrastructure) is not apparent.
It is recognized that in the Information Age, Internet commerce is a powerful tool in the economic growth of developing countries. While there are indications of e-commerce patronage among large firms in developing countries, there seems to be little and negligible use of the Internet for commerce among small and medium sized firms. E-commerce promises better business for SMEs and sustainable economic development for developing countries. However, this is premised on strong political will and good governance, as well as on a responsible and supportive private sector within an effective policy framework. This primer seeks to provide policy guidelines toward this end.
Yoshi's Island is the first world of Super Mario World. It contains seven levels, including the Yellow Switch Palace and Yoshi's House, which could not really be considered a level.
Note: When completed, this page will contain info on the creatures in and the difficulty of the world.
“We have tremendous power as citizens of a democratic society and, if we choose to use it, we can wield that power to elect leaders who are committed to overcoming global inequality. We can only take these actions if we refuse to divide ‘us’ and ‘them,’ if we recognize ourselves as part of a fundamentally connected humanity, if we embrace the power we have to shape the world.” --Holly Hanson
Anti-racism involves taking action against racism that is woven into the fabric of society. Many white individuals have become white allies and anti-racist activists. In order for white individuals to become an anti-racist they must first confront their own prejudice and gain an understanding of the ways in which having white privilege may play a role in inequalities that people of color face on a daily basis. Often times white people come to realize they have unconsciously contributed to perpetuate racism in society. Many white students are able to confront these challenges with the help of Professors. Professor Holly Hanson could be seen as an anti-racist in today’s society. Holly Hanson is a white anti-racist Professor of History at Mount Holyoke College. She has served as a role model to many students empowering them to advocate for social justice. Hanson, however does not associate herself with the term anti-racist. To Hanson the term anti does not fully transmit the idea of activism. She feels that many just put a label or “button” on themselves saying that they are anti-racist but do not actively ponder the question, “what does a society look like that’s not characterized by racism?” To challenge the cycle of racism and create equality is the main aim of an anti-racist or one who is actively against racism.
In order to do this one must look at the racism in society and then become aware of what they can do to change this in their personal lives. This reflection is called viewing society through an “anti-racist lens.” For many, anti-racism comes through self-exploration. For Holly Hanson her “lens” came through her upbringing. She saw racial disparities and diversities as a young child. Her parents were both college Professors and made sure that she was able to recognize the inequalities in society. Her mother was part of the first generation to receive head start training which changed the lives of her entire family.
These experiences formed her desire to see the world and how political inequalities effect the development and depression in the world. She believes that the educational system is not entirely at fault for creating inequalities but rather the social injustice of society. In order to change the system as a whole the people within the society need to become aware of the racism that is still prevalent. As an educator Hanson has become a model for her students. In order to help us further understand the extent to which one can use anti-racism to make a difference, we have interviewed anti-racist educator Holly Hanson, a professor from Mount Holyoke, whose views helped us gain some insight to how we, as individuals, could somehow make a difference.
In modern society, it is difficult to completely eradicate racism due to the incomplete understanding of what racism is. Before we can consider ourselves anti-racists, we must look at our society and see how we can make a difference, however minimal it may be. People can make a difference by the everyday choices they make. For instance supporting local business owned by people of color. Changing one's course of actions and choices can impact how society is made up and how individuals within society perceive one another. Immediate and gradual resistance to institutionalized racism can help with the development of positive societal perceptions of people of color. Holly Hanson has made it her mission to do so as observed in the following quote:
“One thing I think is really important is economy, so I try to buy from minority owned businesses, businesspeople. Before I came to South Hadley, my dentist and my doctor were people of color. In South Hadley, my dentist isn't, but my doctor is.”
Through this action, Dr. Hanson is directly influencing the performance of people of color in her surroundings. She recommends these businesses to her friends, peers, and colleagues to further support the economic livelihood of the people who own them. Word of mouth and direct participation is often the most reliable and effective method of support for minority owned businesses. Dr. Hanson's decision not only to buy from minority owned businesses, but to make sure she made use of local professionals of color is a testament to her desire for fairness in modern society. Through her actions she is helping to create systematic change.
Dr. Hanson has been a role model for her students to follow. On an individual level students can make a difference through their actions and aid in creating change. To make a difference in government students can write letters to Congress and other legislators to make them aware of racial discrimination and how it affects not just people of color, but society as a whole by molding them into one mindset. For example, in Massachusetts the transitional living program application still uses Negroid for African Americans to check for race and Yellow for people of Asian descent. Students can call the individual transitional housing programs to raise their concern and educate them on the harmful effects this language has on society.
Resources: http://www.odnetwork.org/events/conferences/conf2004/followup/214M.pdf
Professors can implement multicultural curriculum and serve as role models to their students and provide support and encouragement when working through issues of race. First educators have to explore and identify their own cultural preconceptions by carefully and truthfully engaging in reflective self-analysis. Until that step has been reached there will not be productive multicultural education, because being an anti-racist educator means much more than providing content and knowledge. Anti-racist education is about building a cultural climate or safe zone for the classroom, for students to feel secure to learn and communicate and reach their full development.
Educators must look beyond content integration where an occasional hero or holiday is added to a curriculum to represent diversity. Educators need to make clear to students that all knowledge is socially constructed, just as race is, and therefore ideas in society change over time. Teachers should become familiar with and use practices of equity pedagogy, where teachers alter their teaching methods to accommodate the various cultural differences of their students to help inspire academic achievement. This practice can happen at all grade levels and in fact the younger the better as children will be able to recognize the stereotypes and biases that they are constantly being exposed to in this world. There are programs such as Teaching Tolerance that help teachers integrate multicultural education into their curriculums, providing lesson plans and guidance needed in doing so. In higher education, professors can look at the systemic forms of racism on campus and then try to create change through a more constructive curriculum and programs which will enable students to take action. Institutions should aim to influence their students to become the catalysts for change.
“YOU SHOULD BE REQUIRED TO TAKE A FIRST YEAR SEMINAR TAUGHT BY VARIOUS FACULTY MEMBERS OF THE MULTI-CULTURALISM AND ANTI-RACISM PRACTICES. THIS WOULD LEAD TO STUDENTS’ AWARENESS OF DIFFERENT RACIST ATTITUDES IN MODERN SOCIETY AND NOT JUST A SELECT FEW AT INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION.” HOLLY HANSON
Resources: www.rethinkingschools.org/archive/20_02/orga202.shtml Banks, J.A. Teaching strategies for ethnic studies www.teachingtolerance.org (10 Ways to Fight Hate on Campus)
It is true that racism cannot be eradicated by any one individual but it is equally true that it takes the personal responsibility of each person in order to advance equality. Listed below are some simple steps one can take to ending racism on a personal level.
*Make it your personal obligation to recognize how racism is denied, ignored or justified in your community.
*Realize that it's your responsibility to speak out against racist comments or jokes, regardless of whether or not your racial group is the target.
*Become more involved in cultural events that do not usually attract your own racial/ethnic group. Include family and friends in an effort to promote understanding and appreciation.
*Support institutions that are currently or historically owned by minorities. (Dr. Hanson made this a priority in her own life by consciously visiting doctors and professionals that were people of color).
*Be proactive in eliminating the gaps that exist between whites and minority groups. For more information on finding a chapter in your area, visit http://www.nul.org/howtogetinvolved.html
*Encourage and speak openly about the importance of minority representation in all leadership positions. Don't underestimate the power of your vote and voice. If you are a parent, form a coalition with other parents to stress the importance of a diverse student and teacher population. Demand to see equality working in action.
*Educate yourself. Many influential writers and scholars have produced work for the purpose of educating whites on their privilege and in recognizing the inequalities that exist past the Civil Rights Movement. An impressive compilation of work, including selections on anti-racism for children, can be found at: http://www.newsfromnowhere.org.uk/books/DisplayCategoryBooklist.php?CatID=20 as well as http://www.tolerance.org.
*Network with other anti-racist groups. Sign petitions, raise money or just be aware. Inspiration for an idea or help for getting starting can be found below:
Resources: http://www.nul.org/howtogetinvolved.html http://www.now.org/chapters/index.html - designed specifically for women http://www.blink.org.uk/act_now.asp http://apex-ny.org/content/index.php?page=programs
Data Types and Operations on Point Values
It is necessary to declare a current directory before saving a file, loading a file, or running an M-file. By default, unless you edit the Octave shortcut, the current directory will be .../Octave/work. After you start Octave, change the current directory by either using the toolbar at the left-hand side of the screen, or entering the path in the bar at the top.
The current directory is the directory Octave will look in first for a function you try to call. Therefore if you have multiple folders and each of them has an M-file of the same name, there will not be a discrepancy if you set the current directory beforehand. The current directory is also the directory in which Octave will first look for a data file.
You could also go to "add folder with subfolders...", if you're adding an entire group ,as you would if you were installing a toolbox. Then look for and select the folder you want. If you forget to do this and attempt to access a file that is not part of your defined path list, you will get an 'undefined function' error.
There are many ways to save to files in Octave.
The files are saved in your current directory, as seen on the top of the window. By default the current directory is .../Octave/work.
Likewise, there are many ways to load files into the workspace
To load a saved .mat file, type:
The file must be in a recognized directory (usually your current directory, but at least one for which the path has been set).
The data in the .mat file is stored with the same name as the variable originally had when it was saved. To get the name of this and all other environment variables, type "who".
To open an .m file, you can use file -> open, or type
For instructions on how to open a data file, see Basic Reading and Writing data from a file.
Octave for Windows retains the file naming constraints set by DOS. The following characters cannot be used in filenames:
You're also not allowed to use the name of a reserved word as the name of a file.
When you declare an m-file function, the m-file must be the same name as the function or Octave will not be able to run it. So for example if you declare a function 'factorial' as:
You must save this as "factorial.m". Octave will name it for you if you save it after typing the function declaration, but if you change the name of the function you must change the name of the file manually, and vice versa.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
A negative number is a number less than zero. You make a negative number by doing the negative operation on a positive number. You use the " – " sign for the negative operation. This sign is the same you use for subtracting.
Adding a negative number is the same as subtracting a positive number.
Subtracting a negative number is the same as adding a positive number.
Multiplying a negative number by a positive number, or a positive number by a negative number makes the result negative.
Multiplying a negative number by a negative number makes the result positive.
You do the same for dividing.
Exponentiating a negative number to an even (a number you can divide by two) power makes the result positive.
Exponentiating a negative number to an odd (a number you can not divide by two) power makes the result negative.
The negative operation has the same precedence as multiplying and dividing.
European Integration Theory- Neo-Functionalism & Intergovernmentalism
Wikipedia has related information at Houdini (software)
Houdini 101 is a book to help you get started with using version 10 of Houdini digital modelling and animation package developed by SideEffects Software. It is assumed that the reader has very little prior experience in using Houdini or similar software. As a result, we have tried to introduce the fundamentals of Houdini in a way that is as simple and easy to understand as possible. Note that this is a very broad introduction that necessarily glosses over many of the details.
In particular, this book focuses on the concepts and assumes that you have a basic knowledge of Houdini user interface. This basic knowledge can best be learnt by watching the various videos online. (Note that Houdini changed its interface significantly when they released version 9, but version 10 remains very similar to version 9. So any videos for version 9 are still relevant.) A good place to start is the videos available here:
Noted contributors · External links
The three Hesperides were sisters who guarded the Garden of the Hesperides, aptly named. They were the daughters of Atlas.
The garden was a gift of Mother Earth to Hera on her wedding day. In this garden, which only immortals could reach, were the Golden Apples. One of Hercules' twelve labors was to retrieve these apples, but, being mortal, he could not. He convinced Atlas to do so for him.
To derive the wave equation, three relations are combined: the equation of state, ideal gas law; continuity equation, conservation of mass; and Newton's law, conservation of momentum. From the speed of sound, a relation between the acoustic pressure and the bulk modulus can be derived,
.
The general form of the continuity equation for a control volume from fluid dynamics is simplified to its one-dimensional form in Cartesian coordinates.
Pressure on fluid element inside a tube
Using Newton's law on the fluid element, the net force acting on the fluid boundaries causes an acceleration on the fluid proportional to its mass,
.
To obtain the wave equation, the partial derivative with respect to time is taken for the continuity equation and the partial derivative with respect to space for the conservation of momentum equation. By equating the two results and eliminating the density term on both sides,
The equation above is the acoustic wave equation in its one-dimensional form. It can be generalized to 3-D Cartesian coordinates
Using the Laplace operator, it can be generalized to other coordinate systems
The one-dimensional acoustic wave equation is described by the second order partial differential equation,
.
It can be solved using separation of variables. Suppose the pressure is the product of one function only dependent on space and another function only dependent on time,
.
Substituting back into the wave equation,
.
This substitution leads to two homogeneous second order ordinary differential equations, one in time and one in space.
The time function is expected to be dependent on the angular frequency of the wave
.
Substituting and solving for the constant which is define as the wave number,
.
The wave number relates the angular velocity of the wave to its propagation speed in the medium. It can be expressed in different forms,
.
The real and imaginary parts of the solution are also solutions to the 1-D wave equation.
.
The actual solution is recovered by taking the real part of the above complex form. The value of the constants above is determined by applying initial and boundary conditions. In general, any function of the following form is a solution for periodic waves,
Note: Unicode character visualization will depend on the character support of your web browser and the fonts installed on your system.
Jesus' ministry began with a trip to the wilderness where he was tempted by Satan (Matthew 4). First, Satan suggested that Jesus use His power to satisfy his physical hunger; this was a temptation to use His divine power to satisfy His own needs. Second, he suggested that Jesus leap from a high place, so that the angels would catch him; this was a temptation to use His divine power to glorify Himself. Third, he told Jesus that if He would worship him, he would release his claim on the world; this was the temptation to admit that Satan's charges were correct, and that God's law was unfair.
Jesus overcame the temptations, quoting scripture to refute Satan on each point. Jesus used the time He spent in the wilderness to commune with His Father, and to lay out His mission. We too can use time spent in the wilderness to do the same.
Delta3D is a work in progress. There are several very smart people constantly adding, changing, and improving the library for us. They are all marines and work at an aquarium apparently. : )
This means, somewhat unfortunately, that the "ground floor" can shift a bit here and there as new, cool ideas are implemented.
So, I'd like to say "the following is how ALL Delta3D applications work" but that's skipping the fact that there are now various ways to structure a Delta3D app depending on what you're trying to build.
So, the following is one of the most basic ground floors for Delta3D, but not the only one.
In order to have a game you need a game loop. This is some kind of timed, cycling if-then code block that is checking for mouse movement, updating zombies positions, making plasma shots inch slightly closer to the zombies, etc.
Do you program your own loop? NEVER! That would so old-school.
Delta3D takes care of this when you create an instance of the Application class.
The Application class has a game loop built into it along with other functions to make useful stuff happen inside the game loop.
So one of the first things you'll see is a variable getting initialized as an Application? NO!
What?! Why?!
Because the Application class has virtual functions, which means its got functions that it really, really wants to make real but doesn't know what their internals should look like. This means you have to provide the internals. Which means you have to "derive" your own class from the Application class, THEN you can create a new variable to store this game instance.
So chances are, most Delta3D code you've looked at (or will), will have something like this:
Here our MainApp is OUR class that's derived from the Application class (that is stored in the dtABC 'namespace')
And then somewhere in the main block something like
Which creates a new variable app to store our MainApp object. Inside app now lives our game loop which can be started with
This game was invented by Eurogame design legend Sid Sackson in the 1970s (Doctorow). It is a unique and fun solitaire game using one deck of playing cards. The object of the game is to try to fill as many Pins as possible for each of the ten frames.
Bowling has ten Pin Piles. The Deck is located at the right and turns up one card at a time. There are two Ball Piles located below the Deck. The two Ball Piles can contain up to three cards each. The scoring frame is located either above or below the gameplay.
To begin playing, turn up one card at a time. The card turned up must be planted on one of the Pin Piles, or placed onto one of the Ball Piles. All the Pin Piles should be filled in order from lowest ranking cards (towards the bottom) to the highest ranking cards (towards the top right). There are only ten Pins, but there are thirteen ranks of cards. The difficult part of this game is anticipating what ranks will not be drawn from the Deck.
Only a ten or a Jack can be placed onto the empty Pin between the nine and Queen. Only a six can fill the empty space between the five and seven. Place multiple cards of the same rank into the same piles. If a three or an eight is drawn, they must be put in the Ball Pile because it cannot be placed with the Pins. Bowling solitaire is scored the same way regular Bowling is scored (Bowling SoliTaire!). To get a Strike, fill all the Pins before placing a card in the Ball Pile. To receive a Spare, fill all Pins before placing cards into the second Ball Pile. After both Ball Piles have been filled with three cards each, that round of the game will end. The game consists of ten rounds.
The following examples demonstrate data types, arithmetic operations, and input in JavaScript.
String s = string
Boolean b = true
i = , d = , s =, b = assign literal values to the corresponding variables
+, -, *, /, and % represent addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and modulus, respectively.
These are the characters in Final Fantasy Mystic Quest. The game's plot centers around a single main character named Benjamin. Benjamin begins his quest solo, but he meets allies along the way: Kaeli, Tristam, Phoebe, and Reuben. These other playable characters accompany Benjamin at different junctions in the plot, but no two allies accompany Benjamin at the same time, limiting the player to a two-person party system. Several other non-playable characters also play important roles in the game's plot, particularly the Old Man, who acts as Benjamin's guide and mentor.
Most of the characters in Final Fantasy Mystic Quest are human, with few exceptions. The Old Man later reveals that he is a crystal in the guise of a human, while a race of talking trees lives in the Level Forest.
File:FFMQArtBenjamin.jpg
File:FFMQArtKaeli.jpg
File:FFMQArtTristam.jpg
Due to his trade, Tristam is highly resourceful, teaching Benjamin how to use bombs and giving him Elixir, the multi-key, and the dragon claw (which doubles as a grappling hook). Much to Benjamin's annoyance, Tristam affectionately refers to him as "kid". Tristam is the game's only character to have his own theme music. He battles using replenishable shuriken.
File:FFMQArtPhoebe.jpg
File:Ffmq reuben.png
File:FFMQArtElder.jpg
The Giant Tree is one of a race of talking trees and the king of the Living Forest. He resembles the Great Deku Tree from The Legend of Zelda: The Ocarina of Time, but like the Ents in The Lord of the Rings, he is mobile. He agrees to carry Benjamin and Kaeli across the Living Forest to the Windia region after the two destroy the monsters that have taken residence inside of him.
The four major enemies in the game are the Vile Evils, creatures which have stolen the crystals that keep the earth's elements in check. They are analogous to the Four Fiends from Final Fantasy, Final Fantasy IV, and Final Fantasy IX. They are servants of the Dark King, a wicked man who wishes to rule the world. At the end of the game, the player must ascend Doom Castle, at the top of which the Dark King resides; on each of the Doom Castle's floors, the player must defeat a second, more powerful version of each of the Vile Evils.
Flamerous Rex, a giant, zombie Tyrannosaurus, is the boss of the Bone Dungeon. Flamerous Rex fulfills Lich and Scarmiglione's role in previous Final Fantasy games as the undead ruler of the Crystal of Earth. It causes destructive earthquakes, one of which is the catalyst for the beginning of the game. Since it is undead, a simple Life spell instantly kills it. It has a double in the Doom Castle called Skullrus Rex. Oddly enough, an Exit spell works just as well, and you can have it in time for the rematch in Doom Castle.
The Ice Golem resides in the Ice Pyramid and guards the Crystal of Water. The Ice Golem is a giant humanoid monster whose body is composed entirely of blocks of ice. It has turned Aquaria's lake into a giant sheet of ice and covered the region in thick blankets of snow. It has a double in the Doom Castle called Stone Golem. Like the one before, the Stone Golem can be defeated by an Exit spell, to further hasten your climb up the Doom Castle.
The Dualhead Hydra, a two-headed dragon, is ecountered at the Lava Dome. It causes Fireburg's volcano to erupt violently, which in turn triggers massive earthquakes. It has a double in the Doom Castle called Twinhead Wyvern.
Pazuzu invaded Otto's tower and claimed it as his own. A giant, demonic Eagle dressed in finery and jewels, he is the chief lieutenant to the Dark King. Using the power of the Crystal of Wind, Pazuzu summons gale force winds to ravage the Windia region. He has a double in the Doom Castle called Zuh.
File:Ffmq darkking.png
Development Cooperation in Action: steps and tools
Integrate with Communicating Financial Information and Control and Manage Costs Established in the Project Budget Tasks and Structure and Capitalization
The financial plan is a critical element of any project/program plan. This module discusses why the financial plan is so important, what financial statements are necessary, and how financial projections are made. In addition, the module discusses common mistakes that managers must be careful to avoid.
A programme should contain budget indication regarding what is the expected cost of the projects and of project origination, supervision and evaluation. it should also give inductions on how the projects are expected to obtain the financial resources they will need.
This was prepared for a busness plan of a profit company and need to be wriretten for the programme plan of an NGO
Checklist for Preparing Financial ProjectionsThe financial plan is the culmination of the earlier section of the project/program plan. Each previous section impacts the projected costs, sales, etc. The following is a checklist for assembling a financial plan:1. Assemble the key points of the project/program plan from the previous sections of the plan.2. Identify the organization structure of the project/program, indicating who will be responsible for making the key decisions with regard to operations, marketing, production, financial management, staffing, and legal compliance.3. Identify the operational activities that are required for the project/program to operate. 4. Identify the operating support systems required for the organization to operate. 5. Identify the information that is needed to turn these activities into estimates of the following:6. Take the estimates and post them as entries into the accounting model. These estimates will enable managers to compose the key statements which include:Balance statement Income statementCash flow statement7. Modify key estimates and prepare iterations on the financial plans for a more optimistic scenario and a less optimistic scenario.
Income Statement The income statement is perhaps the most noticeable element of the financial plan since it summarizes the profit potential of a new or existing project/program. The income statement typically is divided into the following:Revenues – The total amount of funds coming into the project/program from sales.Cost of Goods/Services – The amount of funds required to produce the product or service.Expenses – Other areas that require funds including marketing, salaries, rent, etc.Essentially, the revenues are totaled, and from them are subtracted the cost of producing the goods and the other expenses the organization has incurred. What’s left is referred to as the pre-tax profit. From this, taxes are subtracted leaving the Profit after Taxes.
It is important to consider the perspective of the audience in reading financial plans. Lenders will be looking for stable profits that enable the organization to make the determined loan payments. Investors, however, want to see that there is the potential for growth. They may be less concerned about stable profits, and even be willing to see an operating loss for a few years, providing the future outlook supports growth. In compiling the income statement, managers should be sure to note the following: Often elements of the plan are presented as a percentage of sales. For example, cost of goods sold is often represented as a certain percentage of sales, depending on the product’s margin. By highlighting the percentages, they can easily be compared to other organizations. The percentages of the various items in the income statement should be similar to sector of activity standards or, if not, the difference should be explained. The income statement must be compatible with the rest of the project/program plan. If certain limitations or restrictions have been noted in the plan, their affect must be visible in the financial plans. The income statement should accurately reflect the organization’s tax status.
Balance SheetWhile the income statement highlights a organizations projected profit potential, the balance sheet provides a snapshot of the organization’s financial health. By looking at a balance sheet, the audience can determine the organization’s financial strengths and weaknesses at a certain point in time. A balance sheet encompasses and summarizes the following: Assets – These includes those things that the organization owns. There are several types of assets. Current assets include liquid assets such as cash, inventory, and accounts receivable. Fixed assets are less liquid assets such as plants, equipment, etc. Intangible assets are assets that cannot be touched – such as licenses, brand names, good will, etc. Liabilities – Liabilities are the things that a organization owes. This can include any outstanding loans, accounts payable, salary payable, etc. Net Worth – The difference between the value of a organization’s assets and the amount of their liability is called the organization’s net worth.A organization’s initial balance sheet is relatively simple to prepare. It simply reflects the capital that needs to be raised (debt or equity) at start-up and how that capital will be spent (assets). In addition to this balance sheet, managers should also project balance sheets for the next three to five years, allowing investors to see how the proportion of assets and liabilities is expected to change. In addition, managers should consider the following in preparing balance statements: First-time managers often believe they can fund a new project/program entirely through debt. However, almost all lenders require some portion of the capital be provided through equity to other investors. Lenders and investors also want to see a significant financial commitment from the manager. This indicates that the individual is committed to the success of the project/program because they have personal wealth to lose. Investors and lenders don’t want to support a organization where the manager can simply walk away. Young organizations require liquid assets to survive. They need cash and other liquid assets to be able to weather unexpected emergencies.
Cash Flow StatementThe cash flow statement is the most critical of all the financial forecasts in a project/program plan. While many may look to the income statement to get an understanding of the profit generated by the organization, the cash flow statement documents the amount of cash actually flowing into and out of the organization. Thus, the cash flow statement represents the organization’s net cash position, rather than the profit. The cash flow statement is extremely telling, because it shows where cash is going. A organization can be delivering profits and still be bleeding cash or heading towards danger.
The cash flow statement springs from the income statement. Some key differences are: The cash flow statement reflects the actual receipt of cash from sales or other sources. The income statement records revenue when it is earned, not when the funds are actually collected. The cash flow statement includes the receipt of cash from all sources, including sales, money from debt or equity, sales of an asset, etc. The income statement will not include all of these. Cash flow statements reflect the expenses actually paid, while the income statement reflects the expenses incurred. This is important, especially with expenses that are paid over a period of time. Income statements record the depreciation of assets such as plants and machinery. However, since this is an expense that does not involve the outflow of cash, it is not represented in the cash flow statement. Acquisition of equipment or the payment of dividends or loan principal is not considered expenses on an income statement. However, they do involve cash, and are therefore represented on the cash flow statement.Early in a organization’s life, cash is more critical than profitability because it represents the organization’s ability to survive and maintain operations.
RatiosOften when looking at financial statements, any single elements on a balance sheet or income statement will have little meaning. However, by comparing the elements relative to one another, a great deal of information can be determined about a organization’s financial health. This is accomplished by looking at key ratios of elements of the income statement and balance sheet. These rations include the following:
Liquidity Ratios – These ratios typically compare all of some of the organization’s current assets to its current liabilities. This can show how liquid the organization is and how well they can meet their debt obligations in the near term. For example, the current ratio is the current assets divided by the current liabilities. The ratio should be positive, indicating that there are more current assets than the liabilities that are coming due.
Asset Management Ratios – These ratios can illustrate how well the organization is employing the assets that are at the organization’s disposal. For example, the inventory turnover is determined by the dividing the cost of goods sold by the amount of inventory. This indicates how often the inventory is being turned over. The higher the number, the faster the organization is selling inventory and the less time the product is sitting on the shelf.
Debt Ratios – These ratios help show how the organization is capitalized and how highly the organization is leveraged against lenders. These ratios allow readers to understand how the stable the organization is and what their capacity for raising further capital is. For example, the debt ratio divided the organization’s current liabilities by the total assets. This provides a percentage of the organization’s assets that are debt. The higher the percentage, the more leveraged the organization is and the more limited their ability to raise capital is.
Breakeven AnalysisOften times managers feel it is helpful to include a break-even analysis in the financial plan section. A break-even analysis demonstrates the level of sales that are required for a organization to meet its cash obligations and expenses. Essentially, once a organization passes the break-even point they begin generating profits. This is useful for investors who are eager to see returns on their investment and lenders who are concerned with the organization’s capacity to service debt. In addition, the break-even analysis demonstrates how long the organization expects to operate in a deficit. The break-even point is typically a major milestone in the life of a organization.
In order to conduct a breakeven analysis, managers should follow these steps:1. Divide all cash obligations into fixed or variable obligations. Fixed obligations are those that do not vary with the level of sales such as rent or debt repayment. Variable obligations do vary with sales, such as cost of goods sold.2. Calculate the total fixed costs and the total variable cost. Total fixed costs should be stated as an absolute number (i.e. $50,000) while total variable costs should be stated as a percentage of sales (i.e. 55%).3. Insert these figures into the following formula:Break-even sales = Fixed costs/contribution margin(Note: the contribution margin = 1 – variable costs as a percentage of sales)For example, using these examples, the break-even would be:Break-even sales = $50,000/1-.55Break-even sales = $111,111This figure does have a number of limitations. The size of the operation will have a large impact on the break-even level of sales. However, this calculation can provide managers with an idea of what volume is needed in order for the organization to become a self-supporting enterprise.
Assumptions In order to make projections about the future, managers must make a certain set of assumptions about the market, the competition, the sales levels, the economy, etc. managers often feel uneasy about making these assumptions, however they are a necessary and normal part of making financial projections. However, managers must consider each assumption carefully, and strive to make them as strong as possible. Financial projections are only as reliable as the assumptions they are based upon.
Since assumptions are so important, managers should spend some time in the financial plan discussing their assumptions and how they came to them. Readers want to know why the founders feel their assumptions are valid. The following are key areas that managers need to make assumptions when creating a financial plan for a new project/program: Inventory turnover Accounts receivable collection period Accounts payable payment period Startup and future capital expenditures Useful life of the organization’s assets and depreciation schedules Interest rates on debt Income tax rate Expected capacity and utilization of plants and equipment Production levels, seasonality, etc. Sales and share of the market Growth and success based on management training and the learning curve Sales by market and product and the respective margins of eachmanagers can use sector of activity data, effective research, common sense, and many other methods to determine what assumptions to use. However, when in doubt, more conservative assumptions should always be used.
Know the NumbersIt is not enough for an manager to merely complete a financial plan; they must also understand how the various elements interact with one another. This is often difficult for many managers, especially those without a solid background in accounting and finance. However, skilled managers need not be professional accountants, they only need to understand the basic relationships between each aspect of their organization’s financial plan.
For example, potential investors or lenders are going to ask tough questions to an manager prior to providing the capital for the enterprise. These questions could be specific questions about how the manager believes he or she will be able to reach the projected sales level, or what would happen to the organization’s income if the cost for a key product ingredient increased dramatically. managers must understand these questions and know how to answer them.
In addition, managers must know what the projections are and be able to track the organization’s progress along with them. They must know how fast inventory is turning over, how sales are going, and how much of the organization is leveraged with debt. Each of these questions will be critical for ensuring the organization is on the path to meeting the financial projections. If the organization is going to fall short of these projections, then the manager must understand what is wrong and attempt to correct it in a timely matter.
Each of the instances speaks to the fact that managers cannot be passive with regards to the financial projections of the organization. They must have a strong understanding, but also a level of comfort with the financial projections and progress of the organization. Otherwise, the organization will drift off course and the managers will be unaware that there is a problem.
Common MistakesCrafting a set of financial projections is no easy task. However, by understanding the common mistakes made by others, managers can increase the likelihood of their financial plans being a success. The following are a list of these key errors: Failure to provide financial statements – some managers ignore the need of providing financial projections, hoping to convince investors on the strength of their ideas alone. Unrealistic incomes/profit potential – Investors are wary of managers who pain a picture of a future that is a little too rosy. Failure to clarify assumptions – When managers fail to clarify their assumptions, they leave the reader confused and doubtful. Underestimating expenses – Many managers assume they’ll be able to keep expenses very low, which is difficult for a young organization. Salaries are too big – No investor wants to provide capital for a organization that plans on overpaying their employees. Failure to project the downside – By not providing a sensitivity analysis, managers risk the appearance that they have not considered what happens if the organization performs below expectations. Failure to have the statements checked – managers often rush to have their financial projections completed, however they do not have their statements reviewed by a reputable accountant. This can leave glaring errors or poor assumptions that could have been easily corrected. The proposed rate of return is too low – Often managers create a financial plan that offers investors a rate of return that is lower than what they could earn from similar project/programs. Crafting a plan to provide a specific return – managers who are eager to show a strong return often craft a plan that show the organization meeting that goal. However, the underlying power of the project/program is not enough to support the goal.
See also the 9 topic areas of project management knowledge, i.e.: Integration, Scope, Time , Cost, Quality, Human Resources, Communication , Risk, Procurement.
See alsoThe 9 topic areas of project management knowledge: Cost, Introduction to creating a budgetWhat is the cost tracking process?How do you create budgets and track costs against them?The steps for Creating a budgetControl and Manage Costs Established in the ProjectEarned Value Management With MS Project How do you create budgets and track costs against them?
Templates:Project Execution, Control and Closure Checklist
Programme Implementation Evaluation and Closure Checklist Programme Identification and Formulation Checklist Annual Operating Budget—Services Diem request / receipt form - Expense claim form 1 - Expense claim form 2 (doc) - Expense claim form 2 (xls) Weekly time sheet Project Time Card
The Submarine hunt minigame is a minigame that occurs when you first 'acquire' your very own submarine in Disk 2. The game consists of politing your submarine around a fairly small map, avoiding mines and torpedo fire from other submarines while trying to sink the red Shin-Ra submarine with torpedoes, which is transporting the huge materia that the party is after. The minigame can be won very easily, as the Shin-Ra sub starts out right in front of the player sub, and sinking it is just a matter of pressing the "Fire" button enough times.
(Todo: Controls, strategies, wikifying, other stuff.)
OpenDocument (OASIS Open Document Format for Office Application) is the native file format of OpenOffice.org. It is an Open Standard file format, meaning it is freely available and implementable without the need for paying a royalty fee. A common OpenDocument Format file is a plain XML file (Extensible Markup Language), usually contained inside a ZIP archive.
OASIS (Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards) takes the base for the OpenDocument standard from OpenOffice's native file format, which originates from Sun's proprietary office suite StarOffice file format. Later OpenOffice became the first and the de facto standard for implementation of OpenDocument.
Microsoft's OpenXML file format, which is largely hailed as an incompatible competitor to the OpenDocument Format. This standard is implemented on the new Microsoft Office 2007, and updates would be available to support this format on previous versions of Microsoft Office. On the most current release, OpenOffice.org does natively support Microsoft's OpenXML format.
Microsoft's binary proprietary format, which is Microsoft Office's native file format prior to Microsoft Office 2007. OpenOffice.org could open and save to this format, however the conversion process could take some time for really large and complex files. OpenOffice.org is reported to be capable to open old files created by previous version of Microsoft Office that even the newer Microsoft Office Suites cannot.
Microsoft Works format - OpenOffice.org can open documents in Works' format, however saving is not supported.
Oddly enough this article makes sense. I don't think there was a solution to the zero offered but it was confusing at times. The article did do what it stated in the beginning, it made me rethink giving zeros for missing work. But giving a zero is basically the same as leaving the grade blank even if it isn't mathematically wrong.Jnemo001 (talk) 03:06, 8 August 2009 (UTC)
I definitely see where the author makes a point about the grading scale. But I think if a student fails to hand in an assignment, then they are deserving of a 0. 0 grade for 0 work. I think it's a good argument, but if a student simply fails to turn something in a zero is fair. Of course, there are plenty of reason why a student wouldn't turn something in so they should be given a chance to make up the work, but why give a grade above a 0 for work that doesn't exist?
It is funny that this just popped up. When I was doing my student observation this summer, the teacher I was assigned to had an interesting system that surrogates the infamous zero. Whenever a student fails to complete an assignment they sign for it. That is, they literally walk across the room to a clip board and sign their name, the date, the assignment they did not turn in, and the reason why. They then get two more class periods and if it is still not complete they go to ISS. Everything that is late receives and automatic 50, but the work is done. I had the luxury of filing some of her graded papers for her at the end of the year, and notated that the system seemed to be semi-effective. There were quite a few students who just never cared, they got the work done eventually to escape ISS but their folders were full of 50's. However, I noticed there were very few, that were not in the previous category, that had more than two or three late assignments for the whole year. Her opinion was that: "If you give a child a zero, what has he learned? Make them do the work, even if you have to force them to. It is your job to educate them." She was a bit strict about it, but the vast majority of the class seemed to enjoy her as a teacher. Hsmit022 (talk) 02:58, 19 June 2009 (UTC)
Reading this article was both enjoyable and informative. I never really thought of the grading system as he was defining it. I really thought his idea of making the students who do not complete his assignments lose free time to complete the required work a great idea. It do not make much sense when a D is a 60 and anything below that is a F. If the grading scale is set on ten points betweeen each grade it should be that way for every grade. I do think if a student does not turn in an assignment that the threat of a zero could be used, however, if the students makes up the work partial credit can be given varying with how many days late the assignment is turned in. I truly think when students who are not completing their assignments are just given Fs, they are not learning much from this except they failed. I think taking away something the students love like recess or free time will help them staty motivated to complete their required work. Overall I thought this article was very good and will take this information with me when I begin to teach. Lwill031 (talk) 20:24, 17 June 2009 (UTC)
Reading this article really makes one think about the grading system. I, myself, never gave it much thought, but I have always been graded on the 10 point grading scale, where anything below a 75 was a "F". I think giving students that do not complete an assignment deserves to have a chance to complete it and receive a decent grade, but if they do not do it then they deserve the grade they do get. I will be keeping this article around to remind me how the grading system can get so complicated.Msmhobbs04 (talk) 12:25, 17 June 2009 (UTC)
Wow! I really enjoyed reading this article. The author made so many important points. All of his examples and reasoning behind his argument made perfect sense. I never thought about simple grading as being such an emotional task. I laughed when he stated that teachers just want to get back at those kids who failed to turn in assignments. I think that's really true. Are those kids really much worse than other students who hardly tried at all and turned it in? Probably not! Each article we have read thus far has really brought up great points, this article included! After reading each one, I find that I have a new outlook on teaching. There are so many practices that continue simply because 'that's they way its always been'. I think that the idea of giving a zero to those who don't complete work is just another example of this. I think these outdated (and poorly thought out) teaching practices will continue until people bring up good reasoning to make things change. This article definitely gave me insight into grading and I plan to carry this information with me when I begin teaching! Khedl002 (talk) 17:29, 16 June 2009 (UTC)khedl002
This article was definitely my favorite to read of all the articles so far. It was extremely fascinating and captured my attention from beginning to end. It really opened my eyes to the fact that students who receive a "0" should really be receiving a -6 on a 100 point scale! I do agree with Reeves that should be forced to complete an assignment, and if they do not, they should lose privileges (free time, study hall) until the assignment is complete. Students are motivated by the opportunity to earn greater freedom, and this will help them to complete their work accurately and on time. If you had asked me prior to reading this article, I probably would have said that if a student fails to turn in an assignment, I would give them a "0" initially and half credit if it was turned in two-three days after the due date. However, I think it is best to have the student complete the assignment no matter what,(during recess or free time) but still be somewhat penalized for not having it completed on time. This way it is still fair for the other students who did complete the assignment on time. Afett001 (talk) 18:07, 16 June 2009 (UTC)
Both articles were informative, and had good clear arguments for their grading methods. I like the idea of four point grading system. I will be considering both methods when it is time for me to start grading my own class. Mlipl001 (talk) 16:51, 20 June 2009 (UTC)
This article is very fascinating. Reeves is an advoacate of using the 0-4 scale for grading where "0" represents the lowest grade or as we commonly label it, an "F". I agree with his argument that a zero on a 100 pt. scale is not fair to a student because there is a 60 pt. spread between the lowest grade and lowest "F" value. At my school, our grading practices include using 50 as the lowest possible grade a student can receive. If a child receives a grade less than or equal to 50, it is recorded as a 50. Our principal chose those scale for two reasons: a zero can destroy a student's academic average and self confidence quicker than a 50 and assigning a "0" on a 100 pt. scale is unfair to the student. If a student does not complete as assignment, they are given other punishment such as silent lunch or detention. However, it is their responsibility to complete the assignment. I rarely gave a 50 because someone didn't do an assignment. If students think they can get away with not doing the work without a penalty then some will never make an effort. Acrow005 (talk) 13:47, 16 June 2009 (UTC)
I absolutely agree with this article. I have always thought the grading system needed a face lift. I also do believe that we should not punish students with a zero for possibly missing a due date. Everyone works at their own pace and needs more time then others or whatever the reason may be. I feel as long as work is turned in at some point in the year it should be acceptable. I also feel that if a student has not done well on an assignment then they should be able to take it home fix all of the problems and turn it in for regrading. This is a continuing learning process for the students and probably some of the best lessons they will learn. Even test and squizzes. I at times fell that they should be able to retake tests an dquizzes. Yes, they will be different but they would have studies and worked harder for that grade rather than giving the student a brick wall and there is no hope to change that grade. They will earn the grades that are given. I truly feel that the teacher should all that is in his/her power to make it difficult for a student to fail. There should never be an F. It was always tough in school that a 100 would weight less on a final grade then a zero would. It is interesting how there is such an imbalance. Sston008 (talk) 01:40, 16 June 2009 (UTC)
This was a great article. I enjoyed the author's tone and his tactics in writing. I must admit that I have been a teacher that at one time or another has wanted to punish a student for failing to turn in an assignment. At the time I thought that a "0" was an appropriate grade. The zero signified exactly how much work this student put into the assignment. While the zero might be harsh, I believe the author's comments about proper ratios would be to give the student a 50 are off base. I believe that would enable too many students to skate by with C's and D's by doing to bare minimum. The best scenario that I see, but also believe it has to the most public perception issues to overcome is the 4 point scale. The author made some very valid points that I agree with when it comes to using the 4 point scale. We can take the specificity of the points as many decimal points to the right as needed for those that need to know exactly where they stand. I am going to share this article with my colleagues.
This article was very interesting and I can see how it would be helpful for teachers. I thought the article was written very well and was enjoyable and easy to read. The best point that the author brought up was the difference between a "four point" grading scale and the normal hundred point grading scale. I do believe, however, that some students deserve zeros. When a student blatantly ignores and assignment and does not turn it in, they deserve the grade that matches the amount of work they put in. Sbutl016 (talk) 18:02, 14 June 2009 (UTC)
It's just amazing what a zero can do huh? I honestly never knew that 2 or 3 zeros could cause failure of an entire course. The author has a very good debate going. I don't like the idea of a 4 point grading system though. I would much rather keep the 100 point system and just let a 50 be the worse grade you could get. I agree that there are other ways of punishing a student and that a zero is not one of them. I do not know how it feels (emotionally) to receive a zero, but I can say that my friend was a zeroholic. She didn't care one bit about doing well in school, so she set out to zeroville. I believe this attitude came from homelife. She didn't want to please anybody. Today she is a nurse. Go figure. I just found this article ironic; especially when it talked about how a zero had such a negative impact that it made kids start to fail and drop out of school. Hcomb003 (talk) 01:58, 16 June 2009 (UTC)
I thought this article was excellent. The author, Mr. Reeves, makes a compelling case as to why students who don't turn in homework or projects should not be given a "0". There will always be some assignment that a student would be willing to accept a "0" for just so they don't have to do it. It makes much more sense to require the assignment be done, even if late, and utilize some other form of punitive response to modify the student's behavior such as not allowing them to do something fun in the classroom. Failing to turn in an assignment might be an indication that the student was unable to complete it for some reason (too hard, didn't understand what to do, etc.) and it would be sensible to talk to the student to find out their real reason for not completing it. Sciaston (talk) 15:41, 16 June 2009 (UTC)
I found this article to be very beneficial as a future teacher. I never knew that zeros could cause a student to fail a course so quickly, I figured that they were not weighted as much as other grades were! It's amazing that two or three zeros can cause a student to fail a course. I do believe that some students need a lower grade if they consistently turn in assignments late, but I believe if teachers continue to give students zeros for assignments then the student will persist in not turning in the assignment because the only consequence they see is the zero. I do believe that students should be graded on the normal hundred point scale, that way then can be graded in a way so that two or three bad grades do not cause them to fail a course completely. I also agree that the four point scale for the zero is better than the hundred point scale with a zero because there is a greater difference on that scale than the four point scale. Rburt005 (talk) 23:00, 16 June 2009 (UTC)
I had never thought about grades in this way. After having it broken down, though, it makes complete sense that a 100 point grading scale is not accurate. If it were to be accurate it would need to be a 50 point grading scale, or each letter grade needs to be worth more than 10 points. Students that do not turn in homework assignments should not be able to fail a class after a few assignments. There should be a different criteria to go by for what their punishment will be. If a student does not turn in an assignment it does not always mean they are being defiant. Maybe they could not read the assignment, or maybe it was too hard and they just gave up. Sometimes students just need extra help they do not always receive at home, and giving a zero for that reason does not seem very fair. Hcogg001 (talk) 15:54, 18 June 2009 (UTC)
I really enjoyed reading this article. Reeves makes many good points. I agree with the statement about assigning a zero when using a 100 point scale, can sometimes be a little harsh. at the same time i can also see the other side of that argument. If a teacher tells their class at the beginning of the semester that you have a paper due on this day, this day and this day, and the student doesn't do it, then that is kind of on them. If they come to you and ask about an extension or have some kind of extenuating circumstances then an automatic zero is a little harsh. I think that it all depends on what grading scale you apply to an assignment. If you are using the four point scale then a zero is acceptable because that assignment can be weighted differently in the grade book. This article opened up a different perspective that i hadn't really thought about before. Rcoll029 (talk) 16:41, 18 June 2009 (UTC)
This was a very thought-provoking article. I had never really thought about our grading scale in such a way. Reeves' points are very valid. It does not mathematically make sense to assign a zero for not completing work on a 100 point scale. It seems that he is not saying that the student should be "given" those 50 points, but that it really does not make sense for no work to equate to a zero when every other grade is on a 10 point scale. He is advocating for a 4 point scale, which would make more sense mathematically. I really agreed with his "punishment" for not turning in work. Instead of punishing with grades, you can take away privileges, etc. Students may be even more likely to work hard and get the work done on time because they don't want to lose their activity hour, etc. This article really made me think about our current grading scale and how it may need a reform. It should be mathematically sound and fair. Alucy001 (talk) 01:31, 19 June 2009 (UTC)
This was an informative article which bring fourth many important points. I agree that it is unfair to give a 0 on a 100 pint scale. As a math teacher, I fully understand the negative effects a zero can play on a students overall grade, however it is beyond me the lack of effort some students put fourth. How hard is it to put your name, and maybe write down one problem on a sheet of paper? They do not even have to work it out, but simply put something down on a sheet of paper. I can not justify giving a 50 out of a 100 when I personally grade classwork and homework for completeness, not correctness. Where I teach the grade percentages are not the teacher's choice. Homework is 10%, classwork is 20%, quizzes are 30% and tests are 40%. That means that any student who at least turns in something for their homework and classwork, gets 30% of their grade just for putting fourth some kind of effort. Mathematically, only 40% remaining 70% for quizzes and tests is necessary for the student to pass. That works out to maybe a 60 average on quizzes and tests. With all this in mind, giving a 50 out a 100 for an assignment that was not done is unthinkable. In that case, a student could pass a class with a D average on quizzes and tests and never have done their homework or classwork. Maybe it is because of my math background, but this is absurd. The idea of the article is fine, make the student do the work late facing punitive measures and get a 50, but the reality is that some students will not ever do the work. No matter how many times they sit in ISS, some students just don't care, and nothing will get them to do the work. And passing a student who never completed homework, or classwork and only barely passed quizzes and tests is unthinkable, and unethical. Scrai010 (talk) 16:28, 19 June 2009 (UTC)
Interesting article to say the least. Being a parent of a twelve year old soon to be 7th grader, we have found that she is not motivated in regards to some of her homework and thanks to the addition of Edline, the ability to check her grades on the internet, we have caught some of those 0s showing up in homework. This is the first year that we have required her to have an agenda and do her homework but we were not checking it as we have done in the past. There were so many reasons for this but mainly I felt that she needed to know that she was no the responsible party for her grades and 0s to count as far as grades go. In the article is talked about making sure that the student was not just handed a grade when they did no work to deserve it. I agree wholeheartedly. When a good student makes a zero it carries a heavy load to their average and if they chose not to do the work, even if it was wrong, their average would not be affected nearly as much! Hard lesson for my twelve year old to learn, aside from having to give up her cell phone and ipod if she brings home anything under a C, but if she had a 0 on her grades she gave them up for the rest of the nine weeks and had to turn the work in. I know mean Mom, but the end result was no 0s by the end of the school year and grades need to be earned not just given!
I find absolutely amazing how a number that has seem logically fair for decades suddenly appears to be the most illogical thing you can do when grading. The grading system, at least in America, is typically based on 100 points, with 10 points aligned with each letter up to D (A = 100-90, B = 89-80, C = 79-70, D = 69-60). Once the grade goes below 60, it is automatically an F which does not make sense, because by that reasoning we are telling students that because you performed less than 60%, you have earned an F. Honestly, after reading the article (and doing some simple math), I discovered that the reasonably fair way to associate letters with a 100 point grading scale is to divide the 100 points into 20 per letter. In other words, A = 100-80, B = 79- 59, C = 58-39, D = 38-19, and F = 18-0 (I think, math was never my strongest suit). Yet, we most live with the flawed grading system where more than half of it guarantees an F. Perhaps it is because we have lived with it so long, that we have just accepted it as a “fact” that cannot be changed. But I do like how Reeves gave advice to attack this problem by taking away privileges to have students do their work on time. Most current and new teachers would not know any other way to combat late work because they were brought up on a flawed system. If they did not turn in an assignment or turned it in late, a zero was expected. It was only until you got old enough to realize how damaging a zero was, but only a few young students realize this and most of them realize it too late. Personally, it may take time for me to use a 4-point grading system when I become a teacher because it would mean erasing 13 years of being on the system, not including my years in college. Nevertheless, it will be more beneficial for my students and teaching experience. Adart001 (talk) 01:05, 21 June 2009 (UTC)
I don’t think that zeroes add anything to the learning experience of students. It can be said, however, that they reinforce concepts of repercussion for one’s actions. This is sadly different from actually motivating one to learn. I think, as the article demonstrates, that zeroes are more a byproduct of teacher mentality than a result historically being effective. A zero merely teaches a student the price of failure, it does not motivate them to rise above or avoid this consequence. There is no improvement because a zero offers no critique of a student’s progress other than its numerical value. There is no communication with zeroes. They are the grading equivalent of summary execution and as such, offer no real motivation for reform other than the fear they inspire. However, in teaching the goal is purely to reform, not to punish and it is here that zeros fail most egregiously to me. Unlike criminals, students are in school to grow and more importantly, learn from mistakes. There should be no “crime” that they are capable of that obscures this goal.BitterAsianMan (talk) 01:48, 21 June 2009 (UTC)
As I stated on the soapbox, I believe in the "zero" when the student is offered various chances to complete and assignment, yet, fail to do so. Zeros should not be a form of settling for students; however, I strongly agree with the author when he states that students should give up free time to do the work missing. It's a great strategy not only to complete the assignment but let's face it, no student wants to be doing work when they can be playing. It's a great form of under-the-radar motivation in order to push students to complete their assignments in a timely manner. Ehern004 (talk) 18:25, 21 June 2009 (UTC)
I would like to first comment that Mr. Reeves makes some great points regarding most grading systems. However, unlike the comments above, I had a hard time staying focused on this article (and I read it twice). The reason I think is because Mr. Reeves seems to make his point over and over again until it became redundant. I agree that students who do not turn in their work should be held accountable for it. Giving a "zero" is not a very good choice, as Mr. Reeves states. I liked the fact that Mr. Reeves gave other options to giving a zero. With this being said, I think the article could have been more condensed so as not to be redundant and offer more examples of what to do instead of giving a zero.Scarlett1 (talk) 23:23, 21 June 2009 (UTC)
I can speak from personal experience when I say I don't agree with the "0" grading system. I slipped once and my grade fell by two letters. I think one should receive a harsher punishment if and only if they've continued to be irresponsible. I agree that the more effective approach is to make the student complete their work, letting them feel the weight of being behind and missing out. That is more of a motivator than being knocked in a hole that you have to crawl out of. It's just to overwhelming and not a fair equivalent to a missed assignment. Rpaige (talk) 02:54, 22 June 2009 (UTC)
Whether or not to use a 0 depends once again on the circumstance. If a teacher is dealing with a class of highly self-motivated students, in a class where there are very high standards, I thinking giving a 0 for work that is not turned in on time is feasibe and appropriate. However, if you are dealing with a class of mostly students who are very unmotivated, then giving a 0 for assignments not turned in on time is not helpful for anyone. In the latter scenario, a 0 may discourage the student and keep him or her from doing less work in the long run rather than more. Plus, as the article suggests, the big jump between a high F and a 0 is relatively big compared to the score levels of each letter grade. Such an imbalance scale may be an appropriate challenge for competitive motivated students, but not for classes of unmotivated students who have a track record of doing little in school. Mbrowder (talk) 01:16, 19 July 2009 (UTC)
The formula Shu Jing Huo Xue Tang, designed to expel wind, remove dampness, regulate blood, and relieve arthralgia, consists of the following:
GIMP can understand a number of different colour formats with a varying degree of support. It supports three so called modes: RGB, grayscale, and indexed.
True Colour (RGB): This has the best support in GIMP. It is made up from 3 channels of 256 tonal variants, making a total of 16.7 million colours - 256 * 256 * 256. Supported formats: XCF, PNG, TGA, TIFF, SGI, BMP.
Grayscale: The grayscale mode uses one channel to display a gray image. GIMP supports grayscale well and is usable for most tools that don't specifically require colour information.Supported formats: XCF, PNG, TGA, TIFF, SGI.
Indexed: In this mode, the image consist of pixels picked from a palette of up to 256 colours.When you convert an image into this mode, or when you are reducing the color depth of an image, dithering options give you control over how colours are scattered. For the best quality results (especially with pictures that have gradual tonal variance) use Floyd-Steinberg dithering: it will give a grainy texture to the picture, but reduce visible banding between different colours. On the other hand, reduced or no dithering will result in smaller files when saved as GIF or PNG (or BMP with the Run-Length Encoded option set).Supported formats: XCF, PNG, GIF, BMP.
Monochrome: Two colours, often black and white. GIMP sees this as an indexed image with only 2 colours. Supported formats: XCF, PNG, GIF, BMP.
Regardless of the mode, images can have an optional alpha channel for transparency. An image with an alpha channel can have transparent and semitransparent pixels, the degree of transparency of each pixel ranging from 0 to 255. Using transparency enabled by alpha channel, you can create a picture by stacking several layers on top of each other, save images for the web, or create images for 3D graphics that have holes or semi-opaque areas.
Formats that fully support alpha channel: XCF, PNG, TIFF, TGA, SGI. Formats that only support alpha channel as fully opaque or fully transparent: GIF, XPM.
Only Internet Explorer versions later than version 7 support transparency. Internet Explorer 6 and earlier do not.
Layer > Transparency > Add Alpha Channel
Layer > Transparency > Remove Alpha Channel
Layer > Transparency > Add to Selection
Image, Mode, Decompose will split a colour image into a set of greyscale images, based on various colour models. Image, Mode, Compose does the opposite, combining greyscale images into colour ones. Striking effects may be obtained by recombining channels in a different model or order than they were decomposed in.
A number of colour adjustments can be found under Image, Colours, and colour effects under Image, Filters, Colours
See below for Chapter 1 exercises.
3.) If you run a 10 kilometer race in 42 minutes 42 seconds, what is your average time per mile? What is your average speed in miles per hour? (Hint: there are about 1.61 kilometers in a mile.)
If you type an integer with a leading zero, you might get a confusing error:
Other number seem to work, but the results are bizarre:
So python is assuming you want to convert an octal number to a decimal number. In the base 8 numbering system where valid numbers are 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7.
Every 8 numbers we increment the left hand columns. This means that the right most column is the number of 'ones'. The one to the left of that is a tally of the number of 'eights', the one next to that is a tally of a full column of 'eight' times the 'eight column' - 64. The one next to that is 64*8 - 512 and so on.
For more information read Base Eight math.
That is why zipcode = 02492 is invalid as the digit 9 is not a valid octal number. We can do the conversion manually as follows:
>>> 4/3*pi*r**3 # This is the wrong answer
>>> r = 5.0 # Radius can be a float here as well, but is not _necessary_.
>>> 4.0/3.0*pi*r**3 # Using floats give the correct answer
Suppose the cover price of a book is $24.95, but bookstores get a 40% discount. Shipping costs $3 for the first copy and 75 cents for each additional copy. What is the total wholesale cost for 60 copies?
$9.98 Discount per book
$14.97 Cost per book after discount
$898.20 Total cost not inc delivery
$3.00 First book delivery
$0.75 Delivery cost for extra books
$44.25 Total cost for extra books
$47.25 Total Delivery cost
This answer is wrong because 40.0/100.0 return wrong value 0.40000000000000002 for more info see IEEE 754 (Standard for Floating-Point Arithmetic)
You can use the decimal module to maintain precision.
..
...
Another solution using functions as well as input prompts:
If I leave my house at 6:52 am and run 1 mile at an easy pace (8:15 per mile), then 3 miles at tempo (7:12 per mile) and 1 mile at easy pace again, what time do I get home for breakfast?
Python provides a built-in function called len that returns the length of a string, so the value of len('allen') is 5. Write a function named right_justify that takes a string named s as a parameter and prints the string with enough leading spaces so that the last letter of the string is in column 70 of the display.
You can see my solution at http://thinkpython.com/code/grid.py.
Solution to Exercise 3.5 on page 27 of Think Python
Allen B. Downey, Version 1.1.24+Kart [Python 3.2]
After writing a draft of the 4x4 grid, I noticed that many of the
So I wrote one_four_one, which takes three functions as arguments; it
Then I rewrote print1beam, print1post, print4beams, print4posts,
Why not using the first solution and adapt it to the number of rows
""" Draw a single line like this:
[ (B M*repeat)*lenght B]
""" Draw a grid like this:
"""returns true if word is made only out of letters else flase"""
Write a function called nested_sum that takes a nested list of integers and add up the elements from all of the nested lists.
Write a function named "capitalize_nested" that takes a nested list of strings and returns a new nested list with all strings capitalized.
Write a function that takes a list of numbers and returns the cumulative sum.
Write a function called middle that takes a list and returns a new list that contains all but the first and last elements.
This can also be done simply with a slice.
Write a function called chop that takes a list and modifies it, removing the first and last elements, and returns None.
Write a function that reads the words in words.txt and stores them as keys in a dictionary. It doesn’t matter what the values are. Then you can use the in operator as a fast way to check whether a string is in the dictionary.
Use get to write histogram more concisely. You should be able to eliminate the if statement.
Dictionaries have a method called keys that returns the keys of the dictionary, in no particular order, as a list. Modify print_hist to print the keys and their values in alphabetical order.
Modify reverse_lookup so that it builds and returns a list of all keys that map to v, or an empty list if there are none.
y_list = [res[i], res[i+1]]
"""represents a point in 2-D space"""
""" does a deep copy and return the newRec with changes applied """
m = time.minute/60
r.second += seconds
r.minute += r.second//60
r.hour += r.minute//60
Write a class definition for a Date object that has attributes day, month and year. Write a function called increment_date that takes a Date object, date, and an integer, n, and returns a new Date object that represents the day n days after date. Hint: “Thirty days hath September...” Challenge: does your function deal with leap years correctly? See wikipedia.org/wiki/Leap_year.
d1.day, d1.month, d1.year = 8, 3, 2012
Use the datetime module to write a program that gets the current date and prints the day of the week.
Write a program that takes a birthday as input and prints the user’s age and the number of days, hours, minutes and seconds until their next birthday.
'the format "mm/dd/yyyy": '))
"seconds left until your next birthday.").format(
Download http://thinkpython.com/code/color_list.py and use the function read_colors to generate a list of the available colors on your system, their names and RGB values. For each named color draw a sphere in the position that corresponds to its RGB values.
"""Extract a list of unique RGB-tuples from COLORS.
The tuples look like (r, g, b), where r, g and b are each integers in
[0, 255].
b=input("Enter your second no here: ")
'8', '9', '10', 'Jack', 'Queen', 'King']
Card.suit_names[self.suit])
'Four of a Kind', 'Straight Flush']
d[l[k]] = 1 + d.get(l[k],0)
"""Estimates probability that the
Write a function called bisection that takes a sorted list and a target value and returns the index of the value in the list, if it’s there, or None if it’s not.
Use the commands cd, ls and pwd to explore the file system.
(Remember, if you get lost, type cd by itself or cd ~ to return to your home-directory).
Click to see the correct command lines
% mkdir ~/unixstuff/archive
Complete the following text that summarizes the meaning of some commands that we have covered.
Using most varieties of UNIX, the user can get a listing of files in the current directory using the command
. To find out which is the current directory in the file system, the user types
Complete the following text that summarizes the meaning of some commands that we have covered.
Using most varieties of UNIX, the user can move to the directory immediately above the current directory by typing
.
A tuple is a sequence of values. The values can be any type, and
To create a tuple with a single element, you have to include the final
Without the comma, Python treats ('a') as a string in
Another way to create a tuple is the built-in function tuple.
With no argument, it creates an empty tuple:
If the argument is a sequence (string, list or tuple), the result
('l', 'u', 'p', 'i', 'n', 's')
Most list operators also work on tuples. The bracket operator
And the slice operator selects a range of elements.
But if you try to modify one of the elements of the tuple, you get
You can’t modify the elements of a tuple, but you can replace
('A', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e')
With conventional assignments, you have to use a temporary
All the expressions on the right side are evaluated before any
More generally, the right side can be any kind of sequence
(string, list or tuple). For example, to split an email address
The return value from split is a list with two elements;
Strictly speaking, a function can only return one value, but
The built-in function divmod takes two arguments and
Or use tuple assignment to store the elements separately:
Functions can take a variable number of arguments. A parameter
a tuple. For example, printall
The gather parameter can have any name you like, but args is
You can combine the gather operator with required and positional
Run this function with 1, 2, 3 and 4 or more arguments and
For example, divmod takes exactly two arguments; it
TypeError: divmod expected 2 arguments, got 1
But if you scatter the tuple, it works:
But 'sum' does not.
TypeError: sum expected at most 2 arguments, got 3
Write a function called 'sumall' that takes any number
“zips” them into a list1 of tuples where each tuple contains one element from each
a character from the string and the corresponding element from
If the sequences are not the same length, the result has the
You can use tuple assignment in a for loop to traverse a list of
Each time through the loop, Python selects the next tuple in
If you combine zip, for and tuple assignment, you get a
t2, and returns True if there is an index i
If you need to traverse the elements of a sequence and their
Again.
Dictionaries have a method called items that returns a list of
As you should expect from a dictionary, the items are in no
Conversely, you can use a list of tuples to initialize
Combining dict with zip yields a concise way
Combining items, tuple assignment and for, you
Again.
It is common to use tuples as keys in dictionaries (primarily because
This loop traverses the keys in directory, which are tuples. It
There are two ways to represent tuples in a state diagram. The more
a list. For example, the tuple ('Cleese', 'John') would appear:
But in a larger diagram you might want to leave out the
Here the tuples are shown using Python syntax as a graphical
The telephone number in the diagram is the complaints line for the
The comparison operators work with tuples and other sequences;
Python starts by comparing the first element from each
The sort function works the same way. It sorts
This feature lends itself to a pattern called DSU for
For example, suppose you have a list of words and you want to
The first loop builds a list of tuples, where each
The second loop traverses the list of tuples and builds a list of
In this example, ties are broken by comparing words, so words
'random' module.
To start with the obvious, strings are more limited than other
Lists are more common than tuples, mostly because they are mutable.
But there are a few cases where you might prefer tuples:
In some contexts, like a return statement, it is syntactically simpler to create a tuple than a list. In other contexts, you might prefer a list.
If you want to use a sequence as a dictionary key, you have to use an immutable type like a tuple or string.
If you are passing a sequence as an argument to a function, using tuples reduces the potential for unexpected behavior due to aliasing.
Because tuples are immutable, they don’t provide methods
But Python provides the built-in functions sorted
Lists, dictionaries and tuples are known generically as data
For example, if you are expecting a list with one integer and I
To help debug these kinds of errors, I have written a module
You can download it from thinkpython.com/code/structshape.py
Here’s the result for a simple list:
A fancier program might write “list of 3 ints,” but it
If the elements of the list are not the same type,
And here’s a dictionary with 3 items that map integers to strings.
If you are having trouble keeping track of your data structures,
Write a function called most_frequent that takes a string and
'wikipedia.org/wiki/Letter_frequencies'.
More anagrams!
''['deltas', 'desalt', 'lasted', 'salted', 'slated', 'staled']
['resmelts', 'smelters', 'termless']
Hint: you might want to build a dictionary that maps from a
Modify the previous program so that it prints the largest set
Hint: there are seven.
'Two words form a “metathesis pair” if you can transform one
“converse” and “conserve.” Write a program that finds all of
'You can download a solution from '''thinkpython.com/code/anagram_sets.py'''.'
What is the longest English word, that remains a valid English word,
Now, letters can be removed from either end, or the middle, but you
English word—one that’s found in the dictionary. I want to know
I’m going to give you a little modest example: Sprite. Ok? You start
Write a program to find all words that can be reduced in this way,
This exercise is a little more challenging than most, so here are
You might want to write a function that takes a word and
The wordlist I provided, 'words.txt', doesn’t
“I”, “a”, and the empty string.
You can see my solution at 'thinkpython.com/code/reducible.py'.
There are many reasons why one should invest time and effort in creating a P2P Application. As we already covered in the first chapter the P2P technology touches and has begun even to have impact in many fields of human endeavor. Besides the normal reasons behind any type of programming task (money, fame, and fun), it can also be an expression of a political stance or a vehicle to implement new concepts in networks or even economics. The bottom line is that P2P resumes itself to person-to-person, people working together for a specific goal. It is up to you, the programmer to create the infrastructure necessary to make this happen.
Any P2P project aims to become a widely used, trusted and reliable. Few are open, secure, free, non-discriminating, egalitarian, unfettered and censorship-resistant.
To do: RAD (prototype) vs resource use optimization
Selecting the right license is the most important step for any software for public distribution. It will determine how the project will be done, even restrict the programming language that is selected to implement the solution, the time it takes to get to a final product and is of increasingly importance to the relation with the users.
There is a never ending list of licenses one can use out of the box and as the implementer you can even create your own. On this last step be very careful if you don't have a grasp on all the implications you shouldn't risk it.
The Open Source Initiative (OSI) offers a great an annotated definition of what Open Source is, here ( http://www.opensource.org/docs/osd ).
"New Rule No. 1: Get profitable sooner. Forget B2B or B2C: The new catchphrase among dot-coms is P2P, for path to profitability. Venture-capital investors once tolerated profits forecasts three or four years in the future. Now they're looking for business plans that target profitability less than one year after an initial public offering."
—Dennis K. Berman, "Dot Coms: Can They Climb Back?," Business Week, June 26, 2000
Monitoring and Control (know what your customers are searching for,control what they see)
Donations is a model that is open for all types of software, open source or closed source, the objective is to let users to freely contribute to a project they like, most probably you will not get a fixed income of this revenue
If you use this method attempt to be clear on how the donations will be used (to further development, etc...), immediate needs you may have (hosting, services and equipment to develop and test ).
Depending were your project is located and how it is structured and focused there are ways to maximize the revenue, a common way to run a donation based project is to set up a non-profit corporation (you can even issue receipts for tax purposes).
Most people my not like it but providing a donors/supporters page list does incentive participation, and may event show users that small amounts are of help, if you decide to list donors do offer an option to be excluded from it.
For an in depth look on the most of donation problems, you may read the article, When Do Users Donate? Experiments with Donationware: Ethical Software, Work Equalization, Temporary Licenses, Collective Bargaining, and Microdonations ( http://www.donationcoder.com/Articles/One/index.html ). You may even try to join their project or support similar ones, like for instance microPledge ( http://micropledge.com/ ) or even create a similar offering around your own product.
Software in the Public Interest(SPI) (http://www.spi-inc.org/) a non-profit organization which was founded to help organizations develop and distribute open hardware and software. (used by the Debian project)
To do:micro-payment - PayPal, Amazon Gift Certificate.
It is also common programmers or projects to accept hardware donations by request or as incentive to the project for adding support to exclusive features or specific setups. If you adopt to support this feature, do provide and maintain a list of hardware that is wanted and how it would help you.
This is the most problematic setup due to the legal hot-waters it can get you into and the formalisms and obligations that you need to comply to.
Also restricting the participation on the network will be intentionally reducing its usefulness, this is why most P2P services are free or at least support some level of free access.
There are several models that are variations of the simple donation/pay model, they give specific goals to the users or to the project in relation to the values collected.
Put features or the code of the application up for a ransom payment, if people do contribute and fill that goal you accept to comply with your proposal (ie: opening the source code, fix or implement a feature).Ransom has been shown to works in practice, it is used in several open source initiatives and even writers have tested this scheme, an example of the later is the test the writer Lawrence Watt-Evans has done on several titles, all successfully reached his monetary and production goal.
In a variation of the ransom model, in this particular case you should be extra careful to inform users on what they are paying for, and the legality of what you are providing for that payment. Extra feature may be better services or even a better quality for the existing ones.
Paid support include providing users access to a paid prioritized service for technical support, this is very commonly use on Open Source projects. You should restrain yourself for over complicating the software so you can profit from it, as the users will be the network. One solution is to provide a default dumb down version for public consumption and enable a very high degree of tweaking of the software, protocol or network and then attempt to profit for it.
In case you came up with a new technology or a way new interconnect existing ones that to can be made into revenue source.
To do:add know list of VC firms that support P2P development
The Peer and the user running it, is the corner stone of all P2P systems, without peers you will not be able to create the Network, this seems obvious but it is very common to disregard the users needs and focus on the final objective, the Network itself, kind of looking to a forest and not seeing the trees.
To do:...personal computer...
There is a benefit in incorporating the social element into the software. Enabling people to come together not only to share content or services but around a common goal were cooperation for an optimal state should remain the final objective.
Social software is defined as any software that promotes and enables social collaboration. This is of course part of what defines a modern p2p system, where the gatekeeper is no more and participants are free to interact on their own terms. The p2p applications becomes an enabling tool in this reality.
The world can increasingly be defined as a network of networks, all things are interconnected at some level. As ubiquity of Internet becomes a reality it not only makes communications speed increase but also the volume of sources this creates a quality assurance problem.
Online collaboration, built around the shared goal of a functional peer to peer network will help not only to improve the system but to establish a relation of trust that is followed by the emergence of a reputation latter. Across the participants and in the network and software itself, this personalization will ultimately enable to extend this trust and reputation to the multitude of relations that are possible in a peer to peer network.
To do:link to security and leeching behaviors
As communities emerge and aggregate, they increase the addressability not only of content as before but between producers and consumers that will self organize as to establishing of super and subgroups (many-to-many) based on personal preferences.
Enabling meaningful exchange of information and promoting increased collaboration also increases disponibility of rare or obscure content and the importance of microcontent, due to the removal for extraneous information, since content can
Using a social software or any type of centralized social network permits the easy extraction of metrics on user actions this has been highly explored by corporations, that have for some time been waging war not only to get a share of the data such interactions generate but also for control of such information (ie: Google and Microsoft). Microsoft has a research project dedicated especially to this subject (Enterprise Social Computing).
As you start to project your P2P application the GUI is what the users will have to interact with to use your creation, you should attempt to define not only what OS you will support but within what framework you can design the application to be used from a WEB browser or select a portable framework so you can port it to other systems.
Overwhelming a user with options is always a bad solution and will only be enticing to highly experienced users, even if it done based on what you like, you should keep in mind that you aren't creating it for your own use.
Aside from the technical decisions the functionally you offer should also be considered, the best approach is to be consistent and offer similar options to existing implementations, other applications or even how it is normally done on the environment/OS you are using. There are several guidelines you may opt to follow for instance Apple provides a guideline for OSX ( http://developer.apple.com/documentation/UserExperience/Conceptual/OSXHIGuidelines/ ).
The topology of a P2P network can be very diverse, it depends on the medium it is run (Hardware), the size of the network (LAN,WAN) or even on the software/protocol that can impose or enable a specific network organization to emerge.
Below we can see the most common used topologies (there can be mixed topologies or even layered on the same network), most if not all peer to peer networks are classified as overlay networks, since they are created over an already existing network with its own topology.
A fully connected P2P network is not feasible when there is a large numbers of peers participating.
Were a peer would have to handle O(n2) overall connections, it wouldn't scale.
Since most P2P networks are also a type of overlay networks, the resulting topology of a P2P system depends also on the protocol, the infrastructure (medium/base network) or by the interaction of peers. This "variables" add more layers to the complexity of the normal networks, where the basic characteristics are bandwidth, latency and robustness, making most P2P networks into self-organizing overlay networks.
When performing studies of P2P networks the resulting topology (structural properties) is of primary importance, there are several papers on the optimization or characteristics of P2P networks.
P2P systems fall by default in this category, taking in account that most try to remove the centralization or Control and Command (C&C) structure that exists in most centralized systems/networks.
The study of self-organizing systems is relatively new, and it applies to a huge variety of systems or structures from organizations to natural occurring events). Mostly done with math and depending on models and simulations, its accuracy depends on the complexity of the structure, number of intervenients and initial options.
This book will not cover this aspect of the P2P systems in great detail but some references and structural characteristics do run in parallel with the SOS concepts. For more information on SOS check out the Self-Organizing Systems (SOS) FAQ for USENET Newsgroup comp.theory.self-org-sys (http://www.calresco.org/sos/sosfaq.htm).
One of the emerging characteristic of SOS is synergy, where members aggregate around a common goal each working to the benefit of all. This is also present in most P2P systems were peers work to optimally share resources and improve the network.
The effect generated of participants in a SOS, to aggregate and do complementary work so to share knowledge and behavior in a way it improves coordination. This is observable in the natural world on flocks of birds or social insects. We will covert this aspect of P2P later on, but keep it in mind that it related to SOS.
Most P2P systems don't have (or need) a central server, but need to know an entry point into the network. This is what is called bootstrapping the P2P application. It deals with the connectivity of peers, to be able find and connect other P2P peers (the network) even without having a concrete idea who and what is where.
This is not a new problem; it is shared across several network technologies, that avoid the central point of failure of requiring a central server to index all participants - a gatekeeper.
One solution, Zero Configuration Networking (zeroconf) (see http://www.zeroconf.org/), compromises a series of techniques that automatically (without manual operator intervention or special configuration servers) creates a usable Internet Protocol (IP) network. These techniques are often used to help bootstrap, configure or open a path across routers and firewalls.
To do:Complete... Avahi ( http://avahi.org/ )
One of the main objectives of the P2P system is to make sure no single part of it critical to the collective objective. By introducing any type of centralization to a peer-to-peer Network one is creating points of failure, as some Peers will be more than others this can even lead to security or stability problems, as with the old server-client model, were a single user could crash the server and deny its use to others in the network.
Due to the instability of a P2P network, where nodes are always joining and leaving, some efforts must be made to guarantee not only that the network is available and enabling new peers to join, but that the resources shared continue to be recognized or at least indexed while temporarily not available.
Due to the open nature of peer-to-peer networks, most are under constant attack by people with a variety of motives. Most attacks can be defeated or controlled by careful design of the peer-to-peer network and through the use of encryption. P2P network defense is in fact closely related to the "Byzantine Generals Problem". However, almost any network will fail when the majority of the peers are trying to damage it, and many protocols may be rendered impotent by far fewer numbers.
Computer science defines a computer cluster in general terms as a group of tightly coupled computers that work together closely so that in many respects they can be viewed as though they are a single computer.
The components of a cluster are commonly, connected to each other through fast networks and usually deployed to improve performance and/or availability over that provided by a single computer, while typically being much more cost-effective than single computers of comparable speed or availability.
As we have seen before, this concept if applied to distributed networks or WANs (in place of LANs), generates distributed computations, grids and other systems. All of those applications are part of the P2P concept.
We loosely define clusters as a physical, social or even economical/statistical event. That is is defined by the aggregation of entities due to sharing a property in common, that property may be a shared purpose or a characteristic, or any other communality.
As we look at the topologies generated by P2P networks we can observe that most protocols generate some kind of clustering around networks structures, resources and they can even emerge as a result of the status of network conditions. Clustering is then an unsupervised learning problem, an automatic emerging event that results on the
A cluster is therefore a collection of objects which are “similar” between them and are “dissimilar” to the objects belonging to other clusters using the same set of characteristics.
This concept is very important on not only the form of P2P networks but has also implications on the social structure/relations that can be build upon the use of P2P applications.
Efficient Algorithms for K-Means Clustering Tapas Kanungo, David M. Mount, Nathan S. Netanyahu, Christine D. Piatko, Ruth Silverman, and Angela Y. Wu
Flashcrowd is a behavioral model in that participants will tend to aggregate/crowd around an event, in P2P terms this can be a scarce resource, for instance as we will see later BitTorrent promotes big files over small ones and new over old, this is a result of a connection to the network based on single items, the speeds on BitTorrent does depend uppermost on generating flashcrowds around files (more peers, more speed that will snow ball in more seeders).
This can also result in a DoS (Denial of Service) or flood. For instance, if a P2P system is poorly designed, attempting to connect a significant number of peers to the network may disturb the bootstrap method used.
You should educate users, more connections doesn't equate to more speed, at most it will result in more responses to queries but that may depend on how the protocol is structured, but enabling them will cost bandwidth. On the other side more peers will result on more resources to be shared that will also result in overlapping of shares and so better speeds, as a P2P network gets bigger the better it can provide for its users.
There are simple optimizations that should be done in any P2P Protocol that could bring a benefit to both peers and the network in general. These are based on system metrics or profile like IP (ISP or range), content, physical location, share history, ratios, searches and many other variables.
Most of the logic/characteristics of P2P networks and topologies (in a WAN environment) will result in aggregation of peers and so this clusters will share the same properties of Distributed Behavioral Models, like Flocks, Herds and Schools this results in an easier to study environment and to establish correlation about the peers relations and extrapolate ways to improve efficiency.
To get information/characteristics from the local system/environment in order to optimize the peer "location" on the network by selecting and optimize the separation and cohesion functions to improve the local neighborhood.
To implement a way to avoid crowding with other peers based on unwanted alignment.
The P2P traffic detected on the Internet due to the nature of the protocols and topology used some times can only be done by estimation based on the perceived use (users on-line, number of downloads of a given implementation) or by doing point checks on the networks itself. It is even possible to access the information if the implementation on the protocol or application was done with this objective in mind, several implementations of Gnutella a for example have that option and Bearshare did even reports some of the users system parameters, like type of firewall etc...
Examples of services that provide such traffic information over P2P networks are for instance
Cachelogic ( http://www.cachelogic.com/research/2005_slide16.php# ).
One of your most important considerations is how you project the way peers will communicate, even if we discard the use of central servers like SuperNodes and multiple distributed clients as Peer/Nodes there will be several questions to consider:
Will communication need to go across firewalls and proxy servers?
Is the network transmission speed important? Can it be configured by the user?
Will communications be synchronous or asynchronous?
Will it need/use only a single port? what port should we use?
What resources will you need to support? Is there size limits? Should compression be used ?
Will the data have to be encrypted?
etc...
One must carefully consider your project's specific goals and requirements, this will help you evaluate the use of toolkits and frameworks. Try not to reinvent the wheel if you can't came up with a better solution or have the time,capacity or disposition to. You can also use open standards (ie: use the HTTP protocol) to, but are also free to explore other approaches.
Today even small LANs will have at least a firewall and probably a router even if all components are under the user's control, some user will just lack the knowledge on how to set them properly. Another consideration is on the simple configuration requirements of the application, most users will have problems dealing with technical terms and dependencies, even new versions of the Windows OS will have a default enabled firewall, those may prove to be a unsurmountable barrier for users, thankfully there are some tools available to make life easier for all.
The Universal Plug and Play (UPnP) architecture consists in a set of open standards and technologies promulgated by the UPnP Forum ( http://www.upnp.org/ ), with the goal of extending the Plug and Play concept to support networks and peer-to-peer discovery (automatic discovered over the network. wired or wireless), configuration and control and so enable that appliances, PCs, and services be able to connect transparently. Permitting any UPnP device to dynamically join a network, obtain its IP address and synchronize capabilities (learn from and inform other devices). It can also be seen in general terms as similar to a distributed Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP).
As UPnP is offered in most modern routers, network devices and it is also supported by Microsoft since Windows XP. While supposedly aimed to address the problem for network programs users in accepting incoming connection from the Internet ("port forwarding" or "NAT traversal"), as it would remove the necessary step in configuring router to accept incoming connections and then route them to the LAN's local machine behind the router, something that is hard to explain and for the common user to understand.
All this makes it a necessity that a Windows P2P application should support this architecture programmatically so to avoid the requirements that users deal with the necessary changes when UPnP is enabled (by default is should be disable due to security risks). With the added necessity that if there is a firewall on the local machine that doesn't conform to UPnP, it must have its configuration changed so to enable the necessary TCP (port 2859) and UDP (port 1900) communications for UPnP.
Microsoft provides the UPnP Control Point API. It is available in Windows Me, CE .Net, XP and later in the system services “SSDP Discovery Service” (ssdpsrv) and “Universal Plug and Play Device Host” (upnphost) or by COM libraries. It can be used in C++ or Visual Basic applications or in scripts embedded in HTML pages.
Further information on the UPnP technology on Windows can be gathered on this sources:
Programming control point application using the UPnP Control Point API ( http://www.codeproject.com/KB/IP/upnplib.aspx ) by amatecki
Using UPnP for Programmatic Port Forwardings and NAT Traversal ( http://www.codeproject.com/KB/IP/PortForward.aspx ) by By Mike O'Neill
CyberLink ( http://sourceforge.net/projects/clinkcc) for C++ is a development package for UPnP programmers. Using the package, you can create UPnP devices and control points easily. released under the BSD License.
MiniUPnP Project ( http://miniupnp.free.fr ) open source C implementation under a BSD compatible license.
GUPnP ( http://www.gupnp.org ), an object-oriented open source framework for creating UPnP devices and control points, written in C using GObject and libsoup. It provides the same set of features as libupnp, but shields the developer from most of UPnP's internals. Released under the GNU LGPL.
UPNPLib ( http://www.sbbi.net/site/upnp ) open source Java implementation under a Apache Software License.
By using a P2P system users will broadcast their existence to others, this in contrast to a centralized service were they may interact with others but their anonymity can be protected.
Violating the security of a network can be a crime, for instance the 2008 case of the research project from University of Colorado and University of Washington, the researchers engaged in the motorization of users across the Tor anonymous proxy network and could have faced legal risks for the snooping.
This vulnerability of distributed communications can result in identity attacks (e.g. tracking down the users of the network and harassing or legally attacking them), DoS, Spamming, eavedropping and other threats or abuses. All this actions are generally targeted to a single user and some may even be automated, there are several actions the creator can take to make it more difficult but ultimately they can't be stopped and should be expected and dealt with, one of the first steps is to provide information to the user so they can locally implement hardware or software actions and even a social behavior to counteract this abuse.
Since each user is a "server" they are also prone to denial of service attacks (attacks that may, if optimized, make the network run very slowly or break completely), the result may depend on the attacker resources and how the decentralized is the P2P protocol on the other hand to be the target of spam (e.g. sending unsolicited information across the network- not necessarily as a denial of service attack) does only depend how visible and contactable you are, if for instance other users can send messages to you. Most P2P applications support some kind of chat system and this type of abuse is very hold on such system, they can address the problem but will complete solve it, what can lead to social engineering attacks were users can be lead to perform actions that will compromise them or their system, on this last point only giving information to users that enables them to be aware of the risk will work.
To do: ISPs and Net Neutrality, filtering (network operators may attempt to prevent peer-to-peer network data from being carried)
Since most Network applications and in specific P2P tools are prone to be a source of security problems (they will bypass some of the default security measures from inside), when using or creating such a tool one must take care on granting the possibility or configuring the system to be as safe as possible.
There are several tools and options that can be used for this effect, be it configuring a firewall, adding a IP blocker or making sure some restrictions are turned on by default as you deploy your application.
PeerGuardian 2 ( http://phoenixlabs.org/pg2/ ) a OpenSource tool produced by Phoenix Labs’, consisting in a IP blocker for Windows OS that supports multiple lists, list editing, automatic updates, and blocking all of IPv4 (TCP, UDP, ICMP, etc)
PeerGuardian Lite ( http://phoenixlabs.org/pglite/ ) a version of the PeerGuardian 2 that is aimed at having a low system footprint.
Blocklists are text files containing the IP addresses of organizations opposed and actively working against file-sharing (such as the RIAA), any enterprise that mines the networks or attempts to use resources without participating in the actual sharing of files. It is basically a spam filter like the ones that exist for eMail systems.
As computers attempt to be more secure for the user, today's OS will provide by default some form of external communication restriction that will permit the user to define different levels of trust, this is called a Firewall. A Firewall may have hardware or software implementation and is configured to permit, deny, or proxy data through a computer network. Most recent OSs will come with a software implementation running, since a connection to the Internet are becoming common and the lack or even the default configuration of the Firewall can cause some difficulties to the use of P2P applications.
Microsoft in the last OS releases has taken the option for the security of user but without his intervention to include and enabling by default a simple firewall solution since Windows XP SP2. This blocks any incoming (HTTP over port 80 or mail over ports 110 or 25), the classification of "unsolicited messages" is a bit over empathized since the messages can well be part of a P2P (or any other type of distributed) network. This can also have implications on blocking UPnP capabilities on the local machine.
ICF (Internet Connection Firewall) is included with Microsoft's Windows XP, Windows Server 2003, and Windows Vista operating systems.
To do:Add missing content (Protocol and application level implementation)
To do:ICS (Internet Connection Sharing) in Windows 2000+
Users behind NAT should be able to connect with each other, there are some solutions available that try to enable it.
STUN (Simple Traversal of UDP over NATs) is a network protocol which helps many types of software and hardware receive UDP data properly through home broadband routers that use NAT ).
Quoted from its standard document, RFC 3489:
"Simple Traversal of User Datagram Protocol (UDP) Through Network Address Translators (NATs) (STUN) is a lightweight protocol that allows applications to discover the presence and types of NATs and firewalls between them and the public Internet.
It also provides the ability for applications to determine the public IP address allocated to them by the NAT.
"STUN works with many existing NATs, and does not require any special behavior from them. As a result, it allows a wide variety of applications to work through existing NAT infrastructure."
As STUN RFC states this protocol is not a cure-all for the problems associated with NAT but it is particularly helpful for getting voice over IP working through home routers. VoIP signaling protocols like SIP use UDP packets for the transfer of sound data over the Internet, but these UDP packets often have trouble getting through NATs in home routers.
STUN is a client-server protocol. A VoIP phone or software package may include a STUN client, which will send a request to a STUN server. The server then reports back to the STUN client what the public IP address of the NAT router is, and what port was opened by the NAT to allow incoming traffic back in to the network.
The response also allows the STUN client to determine what type of NAT is in use, as different types of NATs handle incoming UDP packets differently. It will work with three of four main types: full cone NAT, restricted cone NAT, and port restricted cone NAT. It will not work with symmetric NAT (also known as bi-directional NAT) which is often found in the networks of large companies.
If a peer is behind a router or firewall (using NAT) it may be necessary to configure it by hand, as to allow the P2P programs to function properly, this can be a daunting task for those technically challenged and can even have an impact in the adoption of the P2P application. This can be resolved automatically using some solutions like UPnP.
Port forwarding or port mapping, as it is sometimes referred, is the act of forwarding a network port from one network node to another, virtually creating a path across the network, in the case at hand, from the Internet side that is connected to the router or firewall to a computer inside the LAN permuting an external user to reach a port on a private IP address (inside a LAN) from the outside. Otherwise the computer inside the LAN couldn't be accessible and P2P wouldn't be able to fully work (it could contact outside machines but it wouldn't be fully visible from the outside).
Due to the great variety of different implementations of GUIs that ultimately permits the same functionality, making the needed changes isn't a trivial process and one solution will not fit all instances.
The first fact that one should be aware of is that routers or the computer that is connected to the Internet will have a distinct IP addresses, one is provided by your ISP and is visible from the Internet the other will be visible only inside the LAN, this one can be assigned by the user or will default to a factory or Operative System factory setting.
To perform any changes to the configuration of the router you will need to know the IP that you can access its configuration page and login into it, if using a computer this same task can be done locally or remotely if the software allows it. Some minimum knowledge on how IPs and ports, even protocols (some configurations permit to distinguish between TCP and UDP packets) are used is required from the user to perform those tasks, as such this can become complicated to the normal user.
For security reasons don't leave the default passwords unchanged, as this will allow outsiders to control your property or leach your bandwidth.
Numbers control your life. Over time anyone identified by multitude of numbers. Like a phone number, your credit card numbers, the driver's license number, the social security number, even zip codes or your car license plate. They way this unique numbers are created, attributed and verified is fascinating. The Unique ID site (http://www.highprogrammer.com/alan/numbers/) by Alan De Smet provides information on the general subject. To our particular subject what is relevant is the algorithms behind it all. How to establish a unique identifiers for users and resources.
For a P2P protocol/application to be able to manage user identification, authentication, build a routing protocol, identify resources etc... there is a need for (a set of) Unique Identifiers. While a true peer to peer protocol doesn't intend to establish a centralized service, it can frequently make use of an already established such service. So for instance, Usenet makes use of domain names to create globally unique identifier for articles. If the protocol refrains from even make use of such a service then uniqueness can only be based on random numbers and mathematical probabilities.
The problem of generating unique IDs can be broken down as uniqueness over space and uniqueness over time which, when combined, aim to produce a globally unique sequence. This leads to a problem detected over some P2P networks using Open Protocols/Multiple vendors implementations, due to the use of different algorithms on the generation of the GUIDs the uniqueness over space is broken leading to sporadic collisions.
UUIDs are officially and specifically defined as part of the ISO-11578 standard other specifications also exist, like RFC 4122, ITU-T Rec. X.667.
Usenet article IDs.
In Microsoft's Component Object Model (COM) morass, an object oriented programming model that incorporates MFC (Microsoft Foundation Classes), OLE (Object Linking Embedding), ActiveX, ActiveMovie and everything else Microsoft is hawking lately, a GUID is a 16 byte or 128 bit number used to uniquely identify objects, data formats, everything.
The identifiers in the windows registry.
Within ActiveMovie, there are GUID's for video formats, corresponding to the FOURCC's or Four Character Codes used in Video for Windows. These are specified in the file uuids.h in the Active Movie Software Developer Kit (SDK). ActiveMovie needs to pass around GUID's that correspond to the FOURCC for the video in an AVI file.
There is a know fragility on UUIDs of version 1 (time and node based), as they broadcast the node's ID.
Programmers needing to implement UUID could take a look on these examples:
OSSP uuid ( http://www.ossp.org/pkg/lib/uuid/ ) is an API for ISO C, ISO C++, Perl and PHP and a corresponding CLI for the generation of DCE 1.1, ISO/IEC 11578:1996, and RFC4122 compliant Universally Unique Identifiers (UUIDs). It supports DCE 1.1 variant UUIDs of version 1 (time and node based), version 3 (name based, MD5), version 4 (random number based), and version 5 (name based, SHA-1). UUIDs are 128-bit numbers that are intended to have a high likelihood of uniqueness over space and time and are computationally difficult to guess. They are globally unique identifiers that can be locally generated without contacting a global registration authority. It is Open Sourced under the MIT/X Consortium License.
Hashes, Cryptography and Compression
Most P2P systems have to implement at least one algorithms for Hashing, D/Encryption and De/Compression, this section will try to provide some ideas of this actions in relation to the P2P subject as we will address this issues later in other sections.
Detailed information on the subject can be found on the Cryptography Wikibook ( http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Cryptography ).
One way of creating structured P2P networks is by maintaining a Distributed Hash Table (DHT), that will server as a distributed index of the resources on the network.
Another need for cryptography is in the protection of the integrity of the distributed resources themselves, to make them able to survive an attack most implementations of P2P some kind of Hash function (MD5, SHA1) and may even implement a Hash tree designed to detect corruption of the resource content as a hole or of the parts a user gets (for instance using Tiger Tree Hash).
A hash function is a reproducible method of turning some kind of data into a (relatively) small number that may serve as a digital "fingerprint" of the data. The algorithm substitutes or transposes the data to create such fingerprints. The fingerprints are called hash sums, hash values, hash codes or simply hashes. When you referring to hash or hashes some attention must be given since it can also mean the hash functions.
A group of hashes (the result of applying an hash function to data) will sometimes be referred as a bucked or more properly a hash bucket. Most hash buckets if generated by a non colliding hash function will generate distinct hashes for a give data input, there are other characteristics that should be considered when selecting an hash function but it goes beyond the scope of this book, just remember to check if the hash function/algorithm you are implementing satisfies your requirements. Wikibooks has several books that covers hashes in some way, you can check more about the subject in Algorithm implementation or Cryptography
Hash sums are commonly used as indices into hash tables or hash files. Cryptographic hash functions are used for various purposes in information security applications.
A good hash function is essential for good hash table performance. A poor choice of a hash function is likely to lead to clustering, in which probability of keys mapping to the same hash bucket (i.e. a collision) is significantly greater than would be expected from a random function. A nonzero collision probability is inevitable in any hash implementation, but usually the number of operations required to resolve a collision scales linearly with the number of keys mapping to the same bucket, so excess collisions will degrade performance significantly. In addition, some hash functions are computationally expensive, so the amount of time (and, in some cases, memory) taken to compute the hash may be burdensome.
One of the first hash algorithms used to verify the integrity of files in p2p systems (and in file transfers in general) was the MD5 created in 1992 (see rfc1321 The MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm). But as all hash most algorithms after some time some weaknesses where found, this sequence was repeated with the SHA1 algorithm and there is a high probability that others will fallow. Selecting the right tool for the job isn't enough, the programmer must continuously examine how the security of his choice is holding on in regards to the requirements placed on the selected hash algorithm.
Simplicity and speed are readily measured objectively (by number of lines of code and CPU benchmarks, for example), but strength is a more slippery concept. Obviously, a cryptographic hash function such as SHA-1 (see Secure Hash Standard FIPS 180-1) would satisfy the relatively lax strength requirements needed for hash tables, but their slowness and complexity makes them unappealing. However, using cryptographic hash functions can protect against collision attacks when the hash table modulus and its factors can be kept secret from the attacker, or alternatively, by applying a secret salt. However, for these specialized cases, a universal hash function can be used instead of one static hash.
In the absence of a standard measure for hash function strength, the current state of the art is to employ a battery of statistical tests to measure whether the hash function can be readily distinguished from a random function. Arguably the most important test is to determine whether the hash function displays the avalanche effect, which essentially states that any single-bit change in the input key should affect on average half the bits in the output. Bret Mulvey advocates testing the strict avalanche condition in particular, which states that, for any single-bit change, each of the output bits should change with probability one-half, independent of the other bits in the key. Purely additive hash functions such as CRC fail this stronger condition miserably.
CRC is often used to denote either the function or the function's output. A CRC can be used in the same way as a
Hashing Function Lounge it includes a summary of what algorithms have known security flaws.
Most hash algorithms have an high degree of complexity and are designed for a specific target (hashing function) that may not apply, with the same level of guarantees, in other tasks. These algorithms (or raw descriptions of tem) are freely accessible, you can implement your own version or select to use an already existing and tested implementation (with a note for security concerns). Some examples of publicly available implementations are available at the Cryptography Wikibook.
Keep in mind that some Hash functions may be subject to export restrictions.
There is a need for consistent results and repeatability, as you select and implement your hash algorithm, remember to run it over a batch of test vectors. If you are using a test framework this should be added to your tests.
Hash trees where the underlying hash function is Tiger ( http://www.cs.technion.ac.il/~biham/Reports/Tiger/ ) are often called Tiger trees or Tiger tree hashes.
The main use of hash trees is to make sure that data blocks received from other peers in a peer-to-peer network are received undamaged and unaltered, and even to check that the other peers do not send adulterated blocks of data. This will optimize the use of the Network and permit to quickly exclude adulterated content in place of waiting for the download of the hole file to complete to check with a single hash, an partial or complete hash tree can be downloaded and the integrity of each branch can be checked immediately (since they consist in "hashed" blocks or leaves of the Hash tree), even though the whole tree/content is not available yet, making also possible for the downloading peer to upload blocks of an unfinished files.
Usually, a cryptographic hash function such as SHA-1, Whirlpool, or Tiger is used for the hashing. If the hash tree only needs to protect against unintentional damage, the much less secure checksums such as CRCs can be used.
In the top of a hash tree there is a top hash (or root hash or master hash). Before downloading a file on a P2P network, in most cases the top hash is acquired from a trusted source (a Peer or a central server that has elevated trust ratio). When the top hash is available, the hash tree can then be received from any source. The received hash tree is then checked against the trusted top hash, and if the hash tree is damaged or corrupted, another hash tree from another source will be tried until the program finds one that matches the top hash.
What is a trusted source for the root hash.
A consistent implementation of the hashing algorithm (for example the size of the blocks to be transferred must be known and constant on every file transfer).
The Tiger tree hash is one of most useful form of hash tree on P2P Networks. Based on the cryptographic hash
Tiger created in 1995 by Eli Biham and Ross Anderson (see http://www.cs.technion.ac.il/~biham/Reports/Tiger/ for the creator's info and C source example). The hash algorithm was designed with modern CPU in mind, in particular when dealing with working in 64-bit, it is one of the fastest and secure hashes on 32-bit machines.
The TTH uses a form of binary hash tree, usually has a data block size of 1024-bytes and uses the cryptographically secure Tiger hash.
Tiger hash is used because it's fast (and the tree requires the computations of a lot of hashes), with recent implementations and architectures, TTH is as fast as SHA1, with more optimization and the use of 64-bit processors, it will become faster, even though it generates larger hash values (192 bits vs. 160 for SHA1).
Tiger tree hashes are used in the Gnutella, Gnutella2, and Direct Connect and many other P2P file sharing protocols and in file sharing in general.
A step by step introduction to the uses of the TTH was available as part of the Tree Hash Exchange (THEX) format ( see page at the WEB Archive ).
In computer science, a hash table, or a hash map, is a data structure that associates keys with values. The primary operation it supports efficiently is a lookup: given a key, find the corresponding value. It works by transforming the key using a hash function into a hash, a number that is used to index into an array to locate the desired location ("bucket") where the values should be.
Hash tables support the efficient addition of new entries, and the time spent searching for the required data is independent of the number of items stored (i.e. O(1).)
In P2P system Hash tables are used locally on every client/server application to perform the routing of data or the local indexing of files, this concept is taken further as we try to use the same system in a distributed way, in that case distributed hash tables are used to solve the problem.
The Distributed hash tables (DHTs) concept was made public in 2001 but very few did publicly-release robust implementations.
Chord ( http://pdos.csail.mit.edu/chord/ ) - aims to build scalable, robust distributed systems using peer-to-peer ideas. It is completely decentralized and symmetric, and can find data using only log(N) messages, where N is the number of nodes in the system. Chord's lookup mechanism is provably robust in the face of frequent node failures and re-joins. A single research implementation is available in C but there are other implementations in C++, Java and Python.
Bamboo (http://bamboo-dht.org/) - based on Pastry, a re-engineering of the Pastry protocols written in Java and licensed under the BSD license.
To do:Tulip seems to have a C++ implementation couldn't find info about it...
A part of the security of any P2P Network, encryption is needed to make make sure only the "allowed" parties have access to sensitive data. Examples are the encryption of the data on a server/client setup (even on P2P) were clients could share data without fear of it being accessed on the server (a mix of this is if the Network would in itself enable a distributed cache mechanism for transfers, server-less), encryption of transfers, to prevent man-in-the-middle attacks, or monitor of data (see FreeNet) and many other applications with the intent of protecting the privacy and enable an extended level of security to Networks.
There are several algorithm that can be used to implement encryption most used by P2P project include: BlowFish.
P2P applications can be used to share any type of digital assets in the form of packed information that can be uniquely identified. P2P applications are well know for sharing files, this raises several issues and possibilities.
Metadata (meta-data, or sometimes meta-information) is "data about data". An item of metadata may describe an individual datum, or content item, or a collection of data including multiple content items and hierarchical levels, for example a database schema.
Data is the lowest level of abstraction for knowledge, information is the next, and finally, we have knowledge highest level among all three. Metadata consists on direct and indirect data that help define the knowledge about the target item.
The hierarchy of metadata descriptions can go on forever, but usually context or semantic understanding makes extensively detailed explanations unnecessary.
The role played by any particular datum depends on the context. For example, when considering the geography of London, "E83BJ" would be a datum and "Post Code" would be metadatum. But, when considering the data management of an automated system that manages geographical data, "Post Code" might be a datum and then "data item name" and "5 characters, starting with A – Z" would be metadata.
In any particular context, metadata characterizes the data it describes, not the entity described by that data. So, in relation to "E83BJ", the datum "is in London" is a further description of the place in the real world which has the post code "E83BJ", not of the code itself. Therefore, although it is providing information connected to "E83BJ" (telling us that this is the post code of a place in London), this would not normally be considered metadata, as it is describing "E83BJ" qua place in the real world and not qua data.
Usually it is not possible to distinguish between (plain) data and metadata because:
Something can be data and metadata at the same time. The headline of an article is both its title (metadata) and part of its text (data).
Data and metadata can change their roles. A poem, as such, would be regarded as data, but if there were a song that used it as lyrics, the whole poem could be attached to an audio file of the song as metadata. Thus, the labeling depends on the point of view.
When structured into a hierarchical arrangement, metadata is more properly called an ontology or schema. Both terms describe "what exists" for some purpose or to enable some action. For instance, the arrangement of subject headings in a library catalog serves not only as a guide to finding books on a particular subject in the stacks, but also as a guide to what subjects "exist" in the library's own ontology and how more specialized topics are related to or derived from the more general subject headings.
Metadata is frequently stored in a central location and used to help organizations standardize their data. This information is typically stored in a Metadata registry.
A good example on work being done on Metadata and how to make it accessible and useful can be examined in the W3C's old page Metadata Activity Statement (http://www.w3.org/Metadata/Activity.html) and the Resource Description Framework (RDF), that by the use of a declarative language, provides a standard way for using XML to represent metadata in the form of statements about properties and relationships of items on the Web. The RDF has it's own and more up to data page at http://www.w3.org/RDF/.
MusicBrainz ( http://musicbrainz.org/ ) is a community music metadatabase (nonprofit service) that attempts to create a comprehensive music information site. You can use the MusicBrainz data either by browsing this web site, or you can access the data from a client program — for example, a CD player program can use MusicBrainz to identify CDs and provide information about the CD, about the artist or about related information. MusicBrainz is also supporting MusicIP's Open FingerprintTM Architecture, which identifies the sounds in an audio file, regardless of variations in the digital-file details. The community provides a REST styled XML based Web Service.
To do:...type... ...location... ...route... ...tracking... ...scalable... ...flexible...
Users of a P2P application may select files as the resource to be shared across the network. The simplest and secure method is to just share the content of files in a immutable way, most P2P applications cover this need, in any case other simultaneous models can be build around the file resource and the number of possible state of those files, being the most complex the implementation of a distributed filesystem.
Sharing Files on a P2P network consists in managing (indexing, enable searches and transfer) two distinct resources, the local files and the remote files.
If the a P2P application has support for file sharing. The most common method for sharing of files is to enable the user to select one or more directories of the local file system volumes. This includes providing, in the application preferences, the capability to select the path(s) to the files to be shared and to where to put the downloaded files.
It is also common practice to automatically add the download directory to the list of shared paths, or the downloaded files, so that the peer will immediately contribute to the replication of the downloaded resources.
It should be a concern to the implementor to stress to the user the importance about security and legal matters regarding the sharing of files on the network.
After having the resources determined by the user, it is up to the application to as it is running verify any deletion, renaming or write action in general to any of the shared files since this could constitute a change to the file status (content change) or any addition of files, or alterations to the shared resources in general. This would could invalidate previously generated hashes or indexes. This problem can be addressed by generating an hash for the file content and use the OS control over the file-system to monitor changes as they happen (for instance on Windows one could use the Win32 API ReadDirectoryChangesW).
Depending on the requirements of the implementation, it may be beneficial to use multiple content hashes, a stronger to be used across the network and s faster and lower quality just to monitor local changes.
Detected shared files and changes to them
Since the application is not expected to be running all the time, and able to consistently monitor any changes done to the resources one must take steps to maintain further integrity. Because if the application is closed it will have no way to continue to monitor for changes and it will be up to the OS to permit some kind of API to detect file changes, like the last write access timestamp. So the steps needed to guarantee integrity each time the application is run is:
Verify that the resources (know files and shared paths) remain valid (they still exist and are unaltered).
Update the local index to reflect what was found in the above step (remove any invalid directories or volumes from the shared list). One can even prompt the user for corrective actions, as some my be removable media (DVDs etc...)
Start monitoring new changes.
Check all the resources content for changes since the last time the application exited, this may mean that each file must be checked individually for the last write date (most modern OS permit this). Depending on how it is implemented the next to steps can be included so to reduce duplication of work.
Verify that all previous indexed files are still present.
Verify for the existence of new files.
There are at least two paths with an higher degree of usefulness for the P2P application. The path were the application resides, since it can be needed for updating or for any required security checks and even possibly to serve as the base to locate the application preferences (if not using another setup, like the system registry on the Windows OS) and/or the download directory, a write enabled directory, where all downloads will be put.
The download directory should be monitored for the available free space, and if the content is automatically shared it should be a security concern as it will be prime vector for attacks, more than any other shared paths were a usurpation from an external source could not only make unwanted content available to the outside but enable external entities to upload into the local machine dangerous content.
This are the files that aren't directly under the local user control.
To do:to extend...
Most P2P application do not enable selecting single files for sharing but do it in bulk by enabling the selection of specific directories, there is a need to provide a mechanism to exclude specific files from being shared, by the will of the user, the specific of the network or even to reduce the pollution or the filesharing system burden in handling unwanted files. Be it by size, extension or even the intrinsic content of the file having the ability to weed them out is useful.
Indexing, the task of indexing resources, like shared file, has the objective of enabling the application to know what resources are available to be shared on the network.
Indexing occurs each time the application is run, since the resources can only be monitored for changes while the application runs and when a change to the shared resources preferences is performed. This also makes it a necessary to have during the application run-time a function that monitors changes to resources.
Most P2P application also support the exclusion or filtering of shared resources, for instance if a directory is selected to be shared but some of the content needs to be excluded.
To do:...tracking...
In Nature, cooperation is widespread but so too are leechers (cheats, mutants). In evolutionary terms, cheats should indeed prosper, since they don't contribute to the collective good but simply reap the benefits of others’ cooperative efforts, but they don't. Both compete for the same goal using different strategies, cooperation is the path of less cost to all (even for leechers on the long run), cooperation provides stability and previsibility and on the other hand if cheats are not kept in some sort of equilibrium they generate a degradation of the system that can lead to its global failure.
In computer science and especially on the Internet, being a leech or leecher refers to the practice of benefiting, usually deliberately, from others' information or effort but not offering anything in return, or only token offerings in an attempt to avoid being called a leech. They are universally derided.
The name derives from the leech, an animal which sucks blood and then tries to leave unnoticed. Other terms are used, such as freeloader, but leech is the most common.
On peer to peer networks, a leecher shares nothing (or very little of little worth) for upload. Many applications have options for dealing with leeches, such as uploading at reduced rates to those who share nothing, or simply not allowing uploads to them at all. Some file-sharing forums have an anti-leech policy to protect the download content, where it will require users to expend more energy or patience than most leechers are willing to before they can access the "download area".
Most BitTorrent sites refer to leeches as clients who are downloading a file, but can't seed it because they don't have a complete copy of it. They are by default configured to allow a certain client to download more when they upload more.
When on a shared network (Such as a school or office LAN), any deliberate overuse of bandwidth (To the point at which normal use of the network would be noticeably degraded) can be called leeching.
In online computer games (especially role-playing games), leeching refers to the practice of a player joining a group for the explicit purpose of gaining rewards without contributing anything to the efforts necessary to acquire those rewards. Sometimes this is allowed in an effort to power-level a player. Usually it is considered poor behavior to do this without permission from the group. In first person shooters the term refers to a person who benefits by having his team mates carry him to a win.
Direct linking is a form of bandwidth leeching that occurs when placing an unauthorized linked object, often an image, from one site in a web page belonging to a second site (the leech). This constitutes an unauthorized use of the host site's bandwidth and content.
In some cases, leeching is used synonymously with freeloading rather than being restricted to computer contexts.
Due the volatility and modularity of peer to peer networks, peer trust (mentioned in the reference to building communities) and user participation is one of the few motivations or lubricant for online transactions of services or resources that falls ultimately to the creator. Having an average good reputation in participants will also boost the trust on the network and the systems built upon it.
Traditionally, file transfers involve two computers, often designated as a client and a server and most operations are for the copying files from one machine to another.
Most WEB and FTP servers are punished for being popular. Since all uploading is done from one central place, a popular site needs more resources (CPU and bandwidth) to be able to cope. With the use of P2P, the clients automatically mirror the files they download, easing the publisher's burden.
One limitation of most P2P protocols is that they don't provide a complex file-system emulation or a user-right system (permissions), so complex file operations like NFS or FTP protocols provide are very rare, this also has a reason to be, since the networks is decentralized a system for the authentication of users is hard to implement and most are easy to break.
Another concept about P2P transfers is the use of bandwidth, things will not be linear, transfers will depend on the availability of the resource, the load of the seeding peers, size of the network and the local user connection and load on its bandwidth.
As seen before, Downloading files with a restrictive copyright, license or under a given country law, may increase the risk of being sued. Some of the files available on these networks may be copyrighted or protected under the law. You must be aware that there is a risk involved.
To do:...authentication... ...digital signature...
Multiple source download, (segmented download, swarming download), can be a more efficient way of downloading files from many peers at once. The one single file is downloaded, in parallel, from several distinct sources or uploaders of the file. This can help a group of users with asymmetric connections, such as ADSL to provide a high total bandwidth to one downloader, and to handle peaks in download demand. All swarm transfers depends on at least the existence of one full complete copy of the wanted file (a possible evolution could include adding some sort of Reed–Solomon (RS) Algorithm into the mix) and it is mostly useful for large files (size depending on the available bandwidth, since the trade off includes a higher cost in CPU and extraneous data transfers to make the system work.
This technique can not magically solve the problem, in a group of users that has insufficient upload-bandwidth, with demand higher than supply. It can however very nicely handle peaks, and it can also to some degree let uploaders upload "more often" to better utilize their connection. However, naive implementations can often result in file corruption, as there is no way of knowing if all sources are actually uploading segments of the same file. This has led to most programs using segmented downloading using some sort of checksum or hash algorithm to ensure file integrity.
Is may help to let users preview files before the downloading process finishes and as soon as possible, this will improve the quality of shares on the network increasing users confidence and reducing lost time and bandwidth.
Protecting the copyrights over content shouldn't be imposed on the public, even if most copyrights policies today have removed the need to state that a work has reserved rights, there shouldn't be any expectation that the general public would have to go out of way to protect the benefits of a minority even more if they aren't clearly stated. It is expected that the works in the public domain will today outnumber works that have valid copyrights.
Given the actual situation, any p2p application will have the moral duty to inform users of the issues risen due to this very confusing situation. Some solutions to ease the problem and help copyright holders to protect their works have over time came forward but no interest seems to have been raised by those that should care about the issue. This section will try to show the possibilities available.
A simple solution to this issue would be to clearly put the responsibility of identifying work under copyright to the right owners, to implement this solution a database needs to be freely available to p2p applications so content can be declared as copyrighted or a standard must be created to clearly identify those works. In response to this problem several solution were discussed and proposed but in July 2003, a solution by the name of BluFilter was put forward by the Kokopelli Network Inc. (co-founded by Alex Sauriol), that would permit to identify the copyright status, by comparing the waveforms that are stored within the mp3 (see kokopellinetworks.com @ web.archive.org), this approach seemed viable but no adoption of a similar technology seems to be openly used to inform users but rumors have appeared that similar approaches have been used as a base legal litigations.
To do:Complete (Tor,Squid)
Enabling the dynamic set of priorities on transfers will not only keep users happy but provide an easy way to boost transfers on highly sicked content increasing the speed of replication of the same on the network.
One can even go a step further and permit a by resource configuration, enabling the removal or configuration access rights to each resource, like on a file system or even enable a way to permit a market for free trading of data letting users set a specific ratio for that resource.
Managing local resources is important not only to the local user but to the global network. Managing and enabling control of the application use of bandwidth will serve as incentive for users to improve how they manage that resource (what and how it is being used) and if taken in consideration by the application as a dynamic resource it can have positive effects on the global network by reducing wasting.
Many of the actual P2P applications enable users such control of their bandwidth, but not only P2P benefits from this strategy, today with a significant part of most computers connected to the Internet, managing this scarce resource is of top most importance. One example is Microsoft's Background Intelligent Transfer Service (BITS) aimed at enabling system updates or even the MS IM service to transfer data whenever there is bandwidth which is not being used by other applications, of note is also the ability to use the BITS technology since it is exposed through Component Object Model (COM).
How to use a Motorola DVRIdentify | Connections | Setup | i-Guide | MSTV | Passport | Tivo | FireWire | Remote | Firmware/Software | Configuration | Bugs | Boot Errors | VOD Errors | Resets | Help
In Washington State, Comcast tried the Microsoft TV: Foundation Edition for several months, but switched to i-Guide in 2007.
No cable companies are currently using MSTV on Motorola DVRs.
A PDF version is available. (info)
The Rise and Decline of the Dutch Republic (1652-1795)
Maps and Pictures of the Dutch Empire
Beginning Xcode and WebObjects: From Novice to Professional
This book has been cancelled. We are planning on writing a book like "Beginning WebObjects: From Novice to Professional", but it will be based on Eclipse and WOLips. This is not yet underway, so please don't ask about the schedule. -- Chuck
Practical WebObjects is a must-have book for anyone who is serious about WebObjects development. Chuck Hill, of WebObjects mailing list fame, covers a huge number of topics that will be useful at almost any level of WebObjects development. In particular, his coverage of the request-response loop is one of the best explanations available.
WebObjects 5 for Mac OS X: Visual QuickPro Guide
WebObjects 5 is the powerful new release of Apple's award-winning application server, built from the ground up in Java. This allows WebObjects to run on virtually any server making it easily accessible to millions of Java programmers. WebObjects also integrates with other Java-based solutions such as EJB containers, servlets, ORBs, and web services.
The combination of a Java runtime with advanced native tools for Mac OS X and Windows 2000 makes WebObjects an obvious environment for customers needing rapid development of flexible, scalable web applications.
Complete guide to installing and using WebObjects 5.0
Multi-platform approach, for WebObjects running on either Mac OS X or Windows 2000
Comprehensive tour of WebObject's application development tools
Object-relational mapping to databases using the Enterprise Object Framework
Advanced features including Direct To Web and Java Client
Practical worked examples throughout, including a detailed case study
You will get the most from this book if you are an experienced Java software developer with an interest in building sophisticated, database-driven web application using WebObjects. Apple has applied all their graphical user interface expertise to make using WebObjects pretty straightforward, but to unlock its potential, a thorough understanding of Java is needed.
In some instances, people cannot repair disagreements by relying on everyday routines, and must instead choose between argumentation and the potential or actual use of force. Argumentation is a practice that is ultimately based upon reason, in the sense that the rationality of the participants in an argument is determined by whether they could, if necessary, under suitable circumstances, provide reasons for their expressions. Reasons that count for this purpose may include any of three different kinds of rational expressions and their corresponding speech acts: objective (constative speech acts), normative (imperative speech acts), or subjective (expressive or preference speech acts).
The potential or actual use of force (i.e., the negation of argumentation) occurs when the situation fails to supply the necessary conditions -- the regulating principles -- for a communicative setting in which reasons can be given and discussed. Those conditions include the presence of people who, at the time, share equal social status, autonomy, and responsibility, and are open to criticism and willing to discuss reasons rather than assert dogmas. These conditions are the compenents of an ideal speech situation which, though rarely encountered in daily life, is tacitly understood as the ideal for communication -- which, that is, if not understood by one or more parties, negates their capability to participate in reasoned argumentation. It is the limit case in the sense that perfection is a limit case: within its specified criteria, one cannot exceed it.
According to the foregoing comments, an example would arise where the professor does not threaten or command, but simply asserts and repeats dogma (e.g., "An ethnography class is always essential"). Even without that, the mere disparity in social status and autonomy between professor and student typically limit the latter’s freedom to offer a spirited, self-respecting defense, such that almost any diagreement between a professor and student on a curricular matter would tend to transgress one or more of the foregoing regulating principles, though it seems unlikely that all such transgressions would be thematized (i.e., made a theme, in itself, of the ensuing discussion) -- that, indeed, it could be risky for the student to do so.
Strategic action seeks to get something from others, as distinct from being honest. Absent sincerity, an expression of a subjective state fails to raise a claim of validity, and thus, unlike communicative action, is not a candidate for theoretical or practical discourse. An example arises when a person says that s/he enjoys something that, in fact, s/he does not, and is saying so only for purposes of creating an image of him/herself in the mind of the listener.
Grounding Is Interwoven with Learning (18.bot.3)
Truth claims are assertions about objective states of affairs. As such, they are a subset of validity claims, which also include normative and subjective rational expressions. Habermas understands "theoretical discourse" to be argumentation in which truth claims are thematized and discussed, and "moral-practical discourse" to be argumentation in which normative claims are thematized and discussed. Reasons advanced in argumentation may include objective, normative, or subjective expressions, all of which are (or perhaps have at least the potential to be) rational.
I am not certain, however, whether theoretical, moral-practical, and subjective forms of discourse are all capable of being grounded. All three are falsifiable (by e.g., pointing out that my allegation of a subjective state of mind does not square with my outward affect), and as such are a subset of validity claims. But the significance of falsifiability is that the expression in question "therewith has a relation to the objective world (that is, a relation to the facts) and is open to objective judgment" (TCA1, p. 9). To say that a normative or subjective expression "satisfies the precondition for rationality if and insofar as" it has this connection to objectivity (id.) seems tantamount to saying that a speech act is rational only to the extent that directly, or by objectification, it places the objective world in the foreground). Certainly an objective expression is "susceptible of criticism and grounding" (TCA1, p. 9) in this sense; but it seems that a normative or subjective expression is not, per se, but rather than that it can be made to be so through objectification -- when, that is, it is supported with objective, real-world reasons that supply its grounds (TCA1 p. 39).
Grounding is interwoven with learning, in that learning depends upon the ability to successfully identify one’s mistakes and learn from them, and also from the refutation of hypotheses and the failure of interventions (TCA1, p. 18). In studies of cultures, it seems that all three of those aspects of learning are implicated, insofar as one must learn to think as the people being studied think. Similarly, in a developmental context, Habermas believes that learning is best understood as an internal progression through stages of competence, whether in person-physical (Piaget) or moral practical (Kohlberg) terms. The emphasis upon internality appears to indicate that the study of development is best done, not as an externalist series of judgments upon the person’s relative capacity for a given kind of knowledge or performance, but rather as an internalist, phenomenological understanding of what it is like to be him/her at that time.
One of the industry leading software for motion graphics is Lightwave. Maya monopolized character animation (for film, cartoon, etc.), but most professionals agree that Lightwave is a superior tools for motion graphics like the kind you see on sports shows and openers for TV programming.
3-D software can be overwhelming on first encounter because the professional tools are more complex than video/audio editing software and other multimedia software products. The learning curve is well-worth it when you realize how 3-D expertise can set apart your work in a very competitive job market.
Wikipedia tells us, "LightWave gained fame as the program used to create special effects for the Babylon 5, Star Trek Voyager and seaQuest DSV science fiction television series; the program was also utilized in the production of Titanic as well as the recent Battlestar Galactica TV-series, Sin City and Star Wars movies." Most recently though, Lightwave was used for the special effects and environmental effects in the film, "300." Quote reference: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lightwave
External link: http://www.newtek.com/lightwave/profiles/300/index.php
Lightwave is not only used for motion graphics however. It, like Maya, is used to create still images of 3d renders for use in graphic designs. Graphic artists have been known to utilize the imported image data from Lightwave as focus points for artwork or for complimentary geometry within a design.
The actual Lightwave program consists of two separate programs that were designed for specific tasks.
Modeler is the application within the Lightwave package that allows the user to create or manipulate 3D models within a limitless workspace.
Layout is the application within the Lightwave package that allows lighting and animation to be added to models that were created within Modeler.
Principles of Sociology/Cohousing and the New Everyday Life Model
This American Life presents... The Sanctity of Marriage[1]... Stories trying to understand what actually happens in marriages, during this time when the definition of marriage is up in the air.
Prologue. Ira visits Kassie Hannah's Adult Living class at Rock Island High School in Rock Island, Illinois, where they stage a mock wedding each year as part of the curriculum. (6 minutes)
Act One. What Really Happens in Marriage. Ira visits marital researcher John Gottman, who's part of a generation of researchers that have revolutionized the way we see marriage by observing successful and unsuccessful marriages and trying to figure out what the successful happy ones are doing that the ones who end up in divorce are not. Marriage research and links to marriage education programs for couples are online at www.smartmarriages.com . (23 minutes)
Act Two. The Defense of Marriage Act. Adam Felber explains how legalized gay marriage are ruining his marriage with his wife. (His comments first appeared on his blog felbers.net .) And Ira talks about legal strategies with Matt Staver, the head of the group defending traditional marriage in the California lawsuits, and with David Cruz, a law professor at the University of Southern California. (8 minutes)
Act Three. I Want to be a Statistic. Starlee Kine gets answers about her parents marriage from her dad ... after a lifetime of mystery. She and her sister had wanted her parents to divorce since they were little. (16 minutes)
The F# is a functional programming language is developed by the F# Software Foundation, Microsoft, et al.
It is licensed under GPL V3.
The coding is generated using SWIG.
GLPK for C#/CLI supports callback and terminal listeners. Errors occurring in the GLPK native library are thrown as exceptions. All functions of the GLPK API are available as methods of the GLPK object as shown in the example below:
I do create the EO and insert it into an editing context dedicated to the task of creating and eventually saving that EO. That editing context is peer to the default editing context. Actually all my edits happen in dedicated peer contexts. The session default is used for reads only. This eliminates the risk of having a pending change hang around.
Doing so I get the default values set in awakeFromInsertion() in my initail form.
I however do not bind the EO directly to the form. I transform the EO into a dictionary of strings. Using key-value coding I first extract a set of values I want in the form. Then again using key-value coding as well as formatters I derive a string representation for each value. The form is bound to a _clone_ that dictionary of values.
After the form is submitted I compare the modified clone to the original dictionary. Only for the changed values I do a reverse transformation from String to object or EO value. This is done by first parsing the string using a formatter and the possibly calling a fetch specification.
I can map to-one relationships to a plain form
I only set actually modifed values on the EO
I do not lose precision on a value which internally had a higher precision than what the form shows
I handle parsing exceptions in code. For one this allows keeping the unparsable value in the form
Depends on the application.
But most often, I am eating my cake and still having it by creating the EO first, but saving it into EC only when properly set up. That way, it can be wired up directly, and still, if the user abandons it, it just vanishes when the GC decides so :)
I find it much cleaner to have a formValues NSMutableDictionary and have the key names the same as my EO attribute names. In my WOD file I can bind text field values etc. to 'formValues.myAttribute. It also allows me to preset some defaults, hide any hidden fields I may need, stuff like that. I can then easily blat the dictionary into an inserted EO once I am pretty happy with the data that has been collected.
Do most of you create the EO up-front and attach the form fields directly to the attributes of the EO, or do you clone the fields into the WOComponent and attach to those, then move them into a new EO in the "save" action? The problem with the first route is that if someone navigates away, you've got an empty EO inserted into the EC and the user doesn't realize that it's still sitting in their session, but it's obviously nicer because you can just wire up directly to the EO attributes and you don't have to keep the Component and the EO fields in-sync
I use a new EO, in a 'peer' editingContext used for insertion/edition. That way, If changes are made to the eo, but not saved, and user change page, or even use the browser back button, I do not care, he doesn't screw-up the 'main' editingContext.
I forgot to mention another option that I used in some special situation :
Instead of binding to an EO, bind to a NSMutableDictionary, then when you're ready to save, you can create your eo and apply the dictionary values to it (there is a method for that).
When using tutor applications, the computer or software possesses all of the information and controls the learning environment. The computer presents the information to the students. The students respond to the information or question and the computer analyzes the response and presents new information or more practice. Tutor applications include drill and practice, tutorials and simulations.
These types of software are designated as "courses in a box" and are found in many subject areas such as, math, music, software training, and even typing. Their application can be utilized in almost any category where learning is to be supplemented by a self study or self tutoring approach.
Entering the keywords tutoring software in any web browser will produce millions of sites that offer specific tutoring application software on almost any topic.
Just the effects of web-based tutoring software for mathematics can be explored further in a research project supported by the Wayang Outpost.
A graticule slide is a microscope slide that contains a mm grid of lines. They allow the size of objects seen under magnification to be measured. A simple version of a graticule slide can be made by anyone with access to a drawing program. Something as simple as the drawing tools that come with Microsoft Word will do (see instructions below).
Fig. 1vector rasterized grid (low quality)
Once there is a suitable grid on the computer [you could download the one to the side; see figure 1], a test print should be produced. The size of the printed square should be measured and the grid should be resized until a cm2 grid is printed. This grid can now be printed on photocopiable OHP sheets.
The OHP sheets can be glued to a glass slide with clear nail varnish.
Draw a single straight, vertical line. Copy and paste the line 9 times.
Use the arrow keys on the keyboard to line up the lines so that you have 10 evenly spaced lines.
Go to Draw then Group, to group all ten lines into a single object.
Copy then paste the lines then go to 'Draw' then 'Rotate or flip' and rotate by 90°
Line up the vertical and horizontal lines and by using the corner tabs resize them until there is a perfect grid without any overhangs. Then select both sets of lines and group them together into one object.You should now have a square grid.
In rexx, variables are typeless and are treated as variable length strings. When a number is assigned to a variable, the string that represents the number is stored in the variable. In Rexx, numbers are simply a string of one or more digits with an optional decimalpoint.
Numbers can be represented using a variety of common notations:
An integer is a positive or negative whole number without a fractional part. In Rexx, we write integers much as we would write them in daily life, as a sequence of digits with an optional positive or negative sign out front.
Rexx numbers may also have fractional parts expressed using the decimal point.
Exponential floating point numbers may be represented in either scientific notation or engineering notation. The default floating point representation is scientific notation.
Rexx has built-in functions to convert decimals from binary to hexadecimal, hexadecimal to decimal, decimal to hexadecimal, and hexadecimal to binary.
This book is a full reference manual for the Gerris Flow Solver. It contains both a step-by-step introduction to Gerris and in-depth examples of its application to solve complex problems.
The violin is tuned (from low to high) G3, D4, A4, E5. The A is usually 440 hertz (420-435 hertz for Baroque tuning).
The viola is played in the same fashion, but tuned a fifth lower (C3, G3, D4, A4).
As you play, rosin from the bow will collect on the top of the fiddle. Clean this off gently with a soft cloth regularly to ensure it doesn't harm the finish or the tone quality.
There are several positions for your left hand depending how close to your face on the fingerboard your hand is. The 1st position is when your 1st finger on the A string plays B4, the 2nd position is when it plays C5, 3rd when it plays D5, etc. When a change of position is required a number is printed above or below the score to indicate which finger is used to play that particular note.
Before playing, the bow should be rubbed with rosin. You can buy some at any musical instrument store. Keep rosin in your left hand and rub the bow against it in the same way you play. Do not overdo this, since it will result in the fiddle sounding harsh.
Violins do come in several sizes, but the smaller sizes are only meant for students too small to properly play a full sized violin. If your violin is less than full size, you can measure whether or not you are ready for the next larger size by placing the violin on your shoulder just as you would play it and reaching with your fingers around the scroll. If your fingers extend all the way around the scroll and touch the pegbox (the portion just below the scroll into which the pegs fit), you are most likely ready for the next size up.
Playing with vibrato involves your left wrist and/or elbow. Keep bowing with your right hand as you normally would.
A Wikibookian has nominated this page for cleanup.You can help make it better. Please review any relevant discussion.
Banana 1/blueprint: The other cave has Diddy's Kasplat. Defeat him and you are done.
Banana 2: The second one needs you to pound Diddy's switch. It sounds simple, but the banana is next to Funky's armory and you only have 50 seconds to grab it. Use the banana warps to your advantage and grab it.
Banana 3: This involves Diddy's Weapon the peanut popguns, and Cranky's move. Shoot the peanut switch and make your way up the appearing walkway. Go through the gap in the mountain to reveal a mineshaft. In the mineshaft, there's a tunnel. Going through this will lead to a gate. Chimpy charge at the piece of loose fencing and defeat the clomp. There will be a lowered button which when charged into will have a shaft appear. Pound the switch, defeat the clomps, and walk into the shaft. After this, there will be a minecart mini-game, complete that and the banana is yours.
Banana 4: In the shaft there will be a bunch of crates. Jump on those and there will be a peanut switch. Shoot that and a walkway will appear for 30 seconds. Go across and pound the switch to make the banana appear. After getting banana 3, go to the top of the mountain to grab it.
Banana 5: In the entrance cave there are 2 peanut switches. Shoot them to reveal a new area. Grab the banana and Diddy's done.
You don't need too much to begin creating your own circuits. In most cases, you will be perfectly fine with following stuff:
The first, and most important tool you will need is some sort of soldering iron or soldering gun, which you can purchase at your local electronics store. They come in many different wattages and designs, and may be powered from the AC mains, a rechargeable battery, or even butane gas. You will use your iron to melt the solder in order to make the connections in your circuit. For serious work with sensitive semiconductor components, look for a pencil-style iron powered through a low-voltage transformer connected to the AC mains, with a rating of about 40 watts, having an assortment of interchangeable soldering tips and some type of automatic temperature control. You should also have a moist cellulose sponge to wipe dross from the iron tip while working. Better soldering stations usually include a tray for a sponge in their base.
Second, you will need solder. Solder can be one of various metal alloys with a relatively low melting point (lower than the component leads, and printed circuit board). The most common soldering alloy for electronic work is called Sn63, because it contains 63% tin and 37% lead. Also known as eutectic solder, it has the lowest melting point of any combination of tin and lead. Choose a type with a rosin flux core. Choose a spool of small-gauge solder for work with modern surface-mount components, as a large-gauge solder wire can cause one to overheat parts and circuit board traces while waiting for the solder to melt.
Third, you will need electronic components with which to work. You can purchase them individually at an electronics store, or simply salvage them from broken or unneeded electronic devices you have lying around. To de-solder them, desoldering braid (e.g., "Soder-Wick") is very useful. The desoldering braid acts like a sponge, soaking up the molten solder and "un-gluing" the component. A spring-loaded, manual desoldering vacuum pump can be useful for rapidly removing a blob of liquid solder from a joint, and has the advantage over desoldering braid in that it can be cleaned out and reused again and again. An electric hot-air gun, the high-temperature type used for stripping paint, or a small propane blowtorch can also be used to good effect for salvaging components from old circuit boards: If you are like most people, you don't have five heat-proof hands that you can use to melt the solder on all of the leads of a component and pull it out at the same time.
Other essentials include a small pair of needle-nose pliers, side-cutting pliers, stainless steel or nickel-plated tweezers, wire strippers, a hobby knife with replaceable blades (e.g., X-Acto), and an analogue or digital multimeter with test leads.
A magnifying glass is useful for reading small markings on components, and if mounted on a goose-neck or pantograph stand, can also be used while soldering. Task lighting on your work surface should be the equivalent of a 100-watt incandescent bulb at a distance of 1 meter (3 feet), or even brighter. If the heat from incandescent lighting at close range bothers you, use fluorescent lighting instead. The light should approximate daylight in color, to aid in correctly identifying color codes on components.
Not to be overlooked, obtain and faithfully use a pair of safety glasses with plastic or tempered glass lenses, as a flying droplet of liquid solder or a piece of wire or component lead clipped with wire cutters can cause serious, permanent damage to your eyes. (If you already wear corrective eyeglasses, they will serve this purpose adequately, as long as the lenses are large enough to cover the entire orbit of each eye. If the corrective lenses are small, choose plastic goggles that will comfortably fit over your glasses.)
A group of letters is shown connecting as they would in a word. Your job is to read the word from right to left (that is the way Arabic is written and read), and write the English transliteration letters (from left to right). Separate transliterated letters with dashes.
Note: Because you have not learned about writing vowels in Arabic, the transliteration only includes consonants. For example, "b-t-t": this means that the word contains the consonants in the word in that order, while the vowels are not indicated yet. Because the vowels aren't indicated the pseudo-word might be pronounced /ba-ta-ta/, /bi-ti-ti/, /bit-ti/, /bat-tu/, /bu-tat/, /bat-ta/ and so on.
Transliterate, use the reference chart below the exercise to help.
"Proper punctuation" shows up repeatedly in discussions about expectations and criteria for what constitutes good academic writing — whether it's administrators, teachers, students, or legislators talking about what should be taught in the first-year writing classroom. But the word "proper" might limit or even mislead our thinking of punctuation. Used knowledgeably and deliberately, punctuation is more than proper; it's essential to making meaning. Also, there's a faint connotation of "arbitrary" with the word "proper" — and effective punctuation is anything but arbitrary.
Nor is punctuation merely a reflection of oral behavior, as suggested by the familiar injunctions "Use a comma for a pause" or "Where your voice drops, use a period." Instead, punctuation functions as a rich set of clues that have emerged specifically for readers working through text on a page or screen, visually and two-dimensionally.
The nature of reading demands such clues precisely because text is not speech. Speakers have pitch, pace, hand gestures, facial expressions, and other means to let a listener know such things as which points to link to each other and which points should stand on their own, or whether information is necessary in that it restricts meaning or whether it is extraneous. Moreover, ordinary speech usually accommodates a listener's questions, allowing for a more rapid arrival at a joint understanding between speaker and listener. The greater temporal and spatial distance between writer and reader, however, calls for a code that can work to give clues about the writer's intended meaning in the absence of such direct two-way communication.
While punctuation does function as a vital part of making meaning within a text, it can’t be denied that it serves another function as well: that of credibility marker. Using punctuation according to the conventions of the academic community does serve as a sort of license into, and within, that community. To take the time and effort to learn and use punctuation conventionally sends the message to readers that “I’m part of your community; I can speak your language (use your code). So, listen to me.” It signals a sort of collegial willingness to hear and to be heard: to use a common code that enhances and expands understandability instead of restricting it to yourself. Codes can exclude and include; by using the code of “correct” punctuation, you’re signaling a willingness to be included in a group of people who’ve agreed on how to use certain dots and squiggles on the page to indicate certain relationships among ideas. For whatever reason you value inclusion in the academic community, subscribing to (buying into) conventional punctuation is one among many certificates of authenticity you can carry.
Why is that? Why should conventional punctuation exert such influence? Part of the answer can be found in the way different punctuation marks support characteristics that the academic community values in its overall discourse. This is another way in which conventional punctuation operates on more than a merely arbitrary level: It serves to indicate relationships among ideas in a sentence or paragraph that echo the very ways in which the academic community organizes and develops its lines of thought. Those ways include segmentation, coordination, subordination, modification, and supplementation -- concepts discussed later in this section.
What's With All the Jargon?
Have you ever tried to complete a task with someone who doesn’t know the names of the objects you’re working with? Think of changing your oil with a person who doesn’t know the terms “dipstick,” “oil pan,” “drain plug,” or “filter wrench.” Or imagine trying to show someone how to make an omelet, and they don’t know what a “whisk” is or what it means to “dice” onions. Chances are, it will take longer than usual for you to get the task done; perhaps you may even decide to start off with a brief vocabulary review before focusing on the task itself. Let’s face it, “that thingy there” takes you only so far.
Like other specialized subjects, punctuation has a specialized vocabulary that allows us to talk about it: a set of terms we use to name parts, describe purposes, explain activities, and identify errors. The attractive thing about a lexicon is that it saves time by eliminating a lot of guesswork and reinvention. While punctuation jargon can sometimes sound unnecessarily inflated (the word “and,” for example, is a “coordinating conjunction”) or even faintly accusatory (an unnecessary comma is called “disruptive”), having a consistent set of terms makes it easier to use punctuation correctly.
In short: Yes, it does help to know some of the jargon when learning punctuation. The good news is, once you learn a few terms, you can plug them into formulas that you can use to quickly get a solid grasp on correct punctuation.
The sections below about specific punctuation marks introduce terms as you’ll need them. But there are a few terms it helps to know beforehand.
This is a group of words that could stand on its own as a complete sentence because it expresses a complete thought.
How can you tell if a thought or sentence is “complete”? While there are more complicated tests involving more jargon, one simple test that usually works is to read the group of words out loud with extra expressiveness. We almost always can “hear” completeness or incompleteness. Every independent clause must have a subject (even if it is only implied as in a command) and a verb (even if it is only the verb to be).
When you read an independent clause aloud, it has a sound of being finished. You and any other listener are not waiting for more information. Your voice usually drops with an air of finality when you are done reading an independent clause aloud.
Conflict resolution requires looking first at involved parties collectively.
One challenge is determining whether all parties truly want to resolve the conflict.
The conflict may be serving another purpose.
In contrast, when you read a dependent clause aloud, you or your listener has the feeling of “Well...? What’s next? Finish it up!” A dependent clause is a group of words that can’t stand on its own as a sentence because it does not express a complete thought. It leaves the listener (and reader) hanging.
In addition, there are certain words that make a clause dependent. When the following words appear at the beginning of a clause, that clause is dependent:
Until all parties agree that resolution is a shared priority
Which allows the process to move forward
An example being one person who retains power as long as the conflict goes unsolved
Independent clause and dependent clause refer to groups of words. Two more terms it helps to know beforehand are labels for certain individual words.
When these seven short words words link two independent clauses together within one sentence, they are called coordinating conjunctions:
Each coordinating conjunction signals a specific relationship between the independent clauses it joins.
And signals addition and extension. Used with a comma between two independent clauses, it tells the reader that the thoughts expressed in those clauses should be considered together and with equal weight.
Each workplace conflict is unique, and each requires its own assessment.
But expresses contrast. It tells readers that the thought expressed in the second independent clause is in opposition to, or otherwise different from, the thought expressed in the first independent clause.
Each workplace conflict is unique, but several general principles apply to finding solutions.
For signals that the second thought is a statement of causation relative to the first thought or that the second thought should be considered as significantly informing the first thought.
Nor links two complete thoughts expressed as negatives, indicating that neither is an option.
Serious conflicts cannot be solved by ignoring them, nor can they be solved by attempting to legislate past them.
Or conveys option/choice or consequence (as in the sense of “or else”) between the two thoughts.
Conflicts may be resolved with one mediated discussion, or extended negotiation may be required to bring about consensus.
So signals that the second thought is a statement of effect or consequence relative to the first thought.
Workplace conflicts can ultimately be opportunities for growth, so managers should approach them confidently.
Yet tells the reader that the thought expressed in the second independent clause is in opposition or contrast to the first. It also can indicate simultaneity, in effect saying to the reader, “At the same time, after you’ve read the first thought, you should also consider this thought.”
Workplace conflicts can ultimately be opportunities for growth, yet most managers approach them with dread and apprehension.
These are words expressing a relationship or transition between two independent clauses. Common conjunctive adverbs are:
Conjunctive adverbs other than SO or OTHERWISE require either a period or semicolon preceding them and a comma following them. Once you understand these terms, you’re ready to look at punctuation formulas for using commas, semicolons, and colons.
Example #1 The CEO will be attending the lecture; accordingly, the vice president will be available for the luncheon at noon.
The two clauses are independent. The semicolon replaces a coordinating conjunction and indicates that the two clauses are independent.
Example #2 Jaime wanted to see "Billy Madison"; however, Nick wanted to see "Happy Gilmore."
The two clauses are independent. The semicolon replaces a coordinating conjunction and indicates that the two clauses are independent.
That in the English language serves five different syntactic functions. They are:
The assessment is probably the most important aspect of your work because without a good assessment, there is almost no way for you to get a handle on what's actually wrong with your patient. Many therapists will have many different ideas on what constitutes a good assessment and there are many different variations on what to do and when to do it.
This is an attempt to lay out a few basic principles of assessing patients. I'm going to use the ‘patient’ label because most of the people reading this book will probably be students who work in an acute hospital setting. I’ve also used the term ‘physiotherapist’ as opposed to ‘physical therapist’, the distinction being mainly a grammatical one with the United States using the latter and everyone else the former. Along the same lines, it may be important to note that physiotherapists are physical therapists who have respiratory therapy included in their training, while in the US, this is a separate profession.
You may find that the order of questions/techniques is different from what you've been shown before. You may find that I've left questions out, or included ones you've never seen. You should therefore bear in mind that this is only a guideline, something that you can use while you get comfortable with the idea of performing an assessment.
I was always told that in your subjective examination (interview), the answers you get should be used to initiate or guide the direction of the next question. It's not about learning the questions off by heart and then sitting down with a pen and saying, "Right, number one...” Your patient’s answers should be clues in your search for the cause of their pain or stiffness.
I've divided the book into several chapters, each focusing on a particular type of assessment. For example, Chapter 5 is a Respiratory assessment. I've divided them up for the sake of simplicity and ease of explanation. In reality there is no hard and fast dividing line for what type of assessment you'll use. In fact, you'll generally use a combination of all of them. Think about the 83 year old lady who's just had a stroke and also has a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). You'll be doing a neurological assessment while taking note of her respiratory system, while possibly mentally scoring her on an Elderly Mobility Scale.
Note: While the subjective assessment is examined in detail in it's chapter, the objective assessment will be dealt with separately in each following chapter, as they will all be slightly different depending on the type of condition being assessed. Therefore each chapter after the subjective assessment will actually be an objective assessment of that type of condition i.e. the chapter on Respiratory assessments is actually a description of the objective assessment performed on a respiratory patient.
This Wikibook is intended to be a concise introduction to important concepts in Calculus (alongside a few tidbits of additional mathematics), Special Relativity, and Quantum Physics, and to show how these fields are related to one another. This book is not intended to be a comprehensive work on any of the three subjects, but is intended to be a good starting point for the study of higher mathematics and modern physics. This book will give the reader a good idea of where to go next and give them a solid base when moving on to higher level texts.
What type of book will it be? This book will be a textbook which would be suitable for a sort of survey course, investigating the basics of many important topics in advanced mathematics and modern physics. The focus will be placed on a conceptual understanding of these ideas, as well as the provision of links where the reader can find more detailed information.
Who is the target audience? This book is targeted at anyone with a knowledge of pre-calculus and basic physics, who wishes to gain a basic understanding of these more advanced subjects.
What is the scope of the book? This book will cover the concepts typically included in introductory, undergraduate-level courses in special relativity and quantum mechanics, as well as the mathematical background necessary to define said concepts.
The following are a few key stylistic guidelines that this book should adhere to:
Flat structure - The deepest level of page organization for this book is one level below the main page, referred to as the Chapter level. For robust organization, chapters should be referred to by name using links. The organizational structure seen in the table of contents on the main page may be subject to change, so references to Parts or Sub-parts should be avoided, and Part, Sub-part, Chapter, or Section numbers should not be used.
Naming convention - Chapter names should capitalize only their first letter.
Wikilinking - Intra-book piped links should be used for chapter references. Cross-project links should be used to provide readers with a jumping-off point to find additional information on a topic which is beyond the scope of the book. External links should be avoided.
Standard navigation - No navigation scheme is implemented, beyond the default link back to the main page. The necessity of an index remains to be determined.
Images on the right - To avoid conflicts with alignment of mathematical formulae, images should be wrapped on the right as captioned thumbnails.
Mathematical formulae on the left - Formulae should be on their own lines, left aligned, and indented once.
Single category - All chapters should be categorized together using BookCat.
The necessity of an introduction, glossaries, appendices, bibliography, print and PDF versions, and a collection remains to be determined.
Mild pleural thickening, fibrosis and multiple calcific nodules are seen in the left apex.
Mild atelectasis is found at left lung base.
Studies on computer / digital art in the Netherlands
The history of computer arts in the Netherlands between 1955 and 1980 has been extensively researched and described by Darko Fritz. Darko Fritz (2011): Beginning of computer-generated art in the Netherlands . first findings http://darkofritz.net/text/DARKO_FRITZ_NL_COMP_ART_n.pdf
Online databases, knowledge bases and archives
LIMA collection (formerly Montevideo and Netherlands Media Art Institute)
Monoskop.
Relevant entries (esp. bibliographies): Netherlands, Dick Raaijmakers, Jodi, Nettime, Piet Zwart Institute.
City entries covering primarily media culture of the 1990s-2000s, with links to profiles of initiatives and protagonists: Almere, Amersfoort, Amsterdam, Arnhem, Deventer, Eindhoven, Enschede, Groningen, The Hague, Leeuwarden, Leiden, Maastricht, Nijmegen, Rotterdam, Utrecht, Wageningen.
Academie van Bouwkunst Amsterdam. 1971. "Computer en Kunst."
Alberts, Gerard, en Ruth Oldenziel. 2014. Hacking Europe; From Computer Cultures to Demoscenes. Berlijn: Springer.
Altena, Arie. 2006. The Anthology of Computer Art; Sonic Acts XI. Amsterdam: Sonic Acts Press.
Ars electronica. 1995. Mythos Information; Welcome to the Wired World.
Ars electronica. 1997. Fleshfactor; Informationsmachine mensch.
Ascott, Roy. 1991. Connectivity; Art and Interactive Telecommunications. Leonardo vol. 24 nr. 2.
Baumgärtel, Tilman. 1997. Immaterialien; aus der Vor- und Frühgeschichte der Netzkunst. Telepolis nr. 3.
Baumgärtel, Tilman. 2002. Install.exe-jodi. Berlijn: Büro Friedrich.
Berkum, Ans van, en Tom Blekkenhorst. 1986. Science * Art. Utrecht: The Fentener van Vlissingen Fund.
Berliner Festspiele. 2007. Vom Funken zum Pixel; Kunst + Neue Medien.
Birringer, Johannes. 1998. Media & Performance; Along the Border. Baltimore / London: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Blotkamp, Carel, en Peter Struycken. 2007. P. Struycken. Rotterdam: Groninger Museum, NAi Publishers.
Bonnefantenmuseum. 1986. Digitale Beelden.
Bonner Kunstverein / Neuer Berliner Kunstverein. 2000. Rewind to the Future.
Boomen, Marianne van den, red. 2009. Digital Material; Tracing New Media in Everyday Life and Technology.
Bosma, Josephine. 1998. How Mr. net.art was elected. Nettime, febr. 1998.
Bosma, Josephine. 2011. Nettitudes; Let’s Talk Net Art. Rotterdam / Amsterdam: NAi Publishers, Institute of Network Cultures.
Breitwieser, Sabine. 1996. White Cube / Black Box.
Broekman, Andreas, en Inke Arns, red. 1997. Deep_Europe the 1996-97 Edition. Syndicate Publication Series.
Brouwer, Joke, en Arjen Mulder. 2003. Information is Alive; Art and Theory on Archiving and Retrieving Data. Rotterdam: V2_Publishing / NAI Publishers.
Brouwer, Joke. 2000. Machine Times. Rotterdam: NAi Publishers.
Brown, Paul, red. 2008. White heat cold logic: British computer art 1960-1980. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Claus, Jürgen. 1985. ChippppKunst.
Curnow, Wystan, red. 1996. The world over; art in the age of globalisation.
Daniels, Dieter, en Gunther Reisinger. Net Pioneers 1.0; Contextualizing early net-based art. Berlijn / New York: Sternberg Press.
Daniels, Dieter. Die Kunst der Kommunikation; von der Mail Art zur E-Mail.
De Ketelfactory Schiedam. 2011. Stansfield-Hooykaas; Revealing the Invisible.
Dery, Mark. 2003. Escape Velocity; Cyberculture at the end of the century.
Dinkla, Söke. 1997. Pioniere interaktiver Kunst von 1970 bis heute. Ostfildern: Cantz.
Dixon, Steve. 2007. Digital Performance; a History of New Media in Theater, Dance, Performance Art and Installation. Camebridge: The MIT Press.
Druckey, Timothy, red. 1996. Electronic Culture; Technology and Visual Representation. Reading: Aperture Press.
Franke, Herbert W. 1985. Computer Graphics, Computer Art. Berlijn, Springer.
Franke, Herbert W. en Gottfried Jäger.1973. Apparative Kunst.
Frieling, Rudolf, en Dieter Daniels. Medien Kunst Netz 1; Medienkunst im Überblick. Wenen / New York: Springer.
Fuller, Matthew. 2003. Behind the Blip; Essays on the Culture of Software. Brooklyn NY: Autonomedia.
Gemeentemusem Den Haag. 1967. Structuur '67
Gerritzen, Mieke, en Frank Mekkenholt. 1995. Datadandy; Floppyboek. Amsterdam: de Balie
Goodman, Cynthia. 1987. Digital Visions; Computers and Art. New York: Harry M. Abrams.
Grafiet. nr. 7, 1986. “Geest, computer, kunst.”
Grau, Oliver. 2007. MediaArtHistories. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Greene, Rachel. 2004. Internet Art. New York: Thames & Hudson.
Hamburger Kunsthalle. 1997. Extension; Das Netz als Material und Gegenstand.
Hershmann Leeson, Lynn. 1996. Clicking In; Hot Links to a Digital Culture. Locatie?: Bay Publishers.
Higgins, Dick. 1970. Computers for the Arts.
Higgins, Hannah, en Douglas Kahn, red. 2012. Mainframe Experimentalism: Early Computing and the Foundations of the Digital Arts. Oakland: University of California Press.
Hudson, David. 1997. Rewired; a Brief (and Opinionated) Net History. Indianapolis; Macmillian Technical Publishing.
Hunnekens, Annette. 1997. Der bewegte Betrachter; Theorien der interaktiven Medienkunst.
iMal Brussel. 2008. Holy Fire; Art of the Digital Age.
Institute of Contemporary Art London. 1968. Cybernetic Serendipity; the Computer and the Arts.
Jacobs, Karin et al, red. 2005. Click Me; a Netporn Studies Reader.
Jahrmann, Margarete. 1996. Digitale Hijacker. Hefte für Gegenwartskunst Band 2. Springer.
Kacunko, Slavko. 2004. Closed Circuit; Videoinstallationen. Berlin: Logos.
Kane, Carolyn L. 2014. Chromatic Algorithms: Synthetic Color, Computer Art, and Aesthetics after Code. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kriesche, Richard. 1985. Artificial Intelligence in the Arts, nr 1 "Brainwork".
Kubus Gallerie Hanover. 1969. Computerkunst; on the Eve of Tomorrow.
Kunstencentrum Badhuis Gorinchem. 1979. Sykora; computer-schilderijen.
Künstlerhaus Bethanien. 2003. Ist Code Kunst?
Lantaren/Venster. 1986. Perfo-festival.
Leonardo. 1988. bijlage “Digital Art”.
Lieser, Wolf. 2009. Digital Art. Keulen: H.F. Ullmann.
Lieser, Wolf. 2011. The World of Digital Art. Keulen: H.F. Ullmann. UvA (onvindbaar) OBA, Picarta
Lopez, Sebastian. 2005. A short History of Dutch Video Art. Rotterdam: Episode Publishers.
Lothringer13/halle München. 2003. The Chrono-Files; from Time-based Art to Database.
Lovink, Geert. 2002. Dark Fiber; Tracing Critical Internet Culture. Camebridge, Mass: The MIT Press.
Lovink, Geert. 2009. Dynamics of Critical Internet Culture. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures.
Lovink, Geert. 2011. My First Recession; Critical Internet Culture in Transition. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures.
Manovich, Lev, en Joke Brouwer, red. 2003. Making Art of Databases. Rotterdam: NAi Publishers.
Mason, Catherine. 2008. A Computer in the Art Room; the Origins of British Computer Arts 1950-80. Hindrigham: JJG.
Mclver Lopes, Dominic. 2010. A Philosophy of Computer Art. Londen: Routledge.
Mitchell, William J. City of Bits; Space, Place and the Infobahn.
Moles, Abraham A. 1971. Kunst & Computer.
Mulder, Arjen, red. 2009. Dick Raaijmakers; A Monograph. Rotterdam: nai010 uitgevers.
Museum Fodor. 1989. Computergrafiek.
Museum Fodor. 1991. You can't touch this - Hands on/Hands off.
Olsthoorn, Peter. 2015. 25 jaar internet in Nederland. Amsterdam: Fast Moving Targets.
Paul, Christiane. 2003. Digital Art. New York: Thames & Hudson.
Penny, Simon, red. 1995. Critical Issues in Electronic Media.
Perspectief. nr. 47-48, juni 1994.
Popper, Frank. 1993. Art of the Electronic Age. London: Thames & Hudson.
Reichardt, Jasia. 1971. Computer in Art. Littlehampton Book Services.
Rosen, Margit, et al. 2011. A Little-Known Story About a Movement, a Magazine, and the Computer's Arrival in Art. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Rötzer, Florian, en Peter Weibel, red. 1993. Cyberspace; zum medialen Gesamtkunstwerk.
Rush, Michael. 1999. New Media in Late 20th-century Art. Londen: Thames & Hudson.
Schirn Kunshalle Frankfurt. 2007. Kunstmachinen Machinenkunst.
Schwarz, Hans-Peter. 1997. Media-Art-History.
Science Museum London. 1980. The Challenge of the Chip.
Shanken, Edward A. 2009. Art and electronic media. Londen: Phaidon Press. Accompanied online by the website http://www.artelectronicmedia.com, maintained by Edward Shanken and students.
Sleegers, Femke, en Theo Ploeg, red. 2007. 54.780 Woorden over Nieuwe Media Cultuur in Nederland. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures i.s.m. Sandberg Instituut.
Smite, Rasa en Raitis. 1998. acoustic.space; net.audio issue.
Sollfrank, Cornelia. 1997. Netzkunst, Net Art.
Stallbrass, Julian. 2003. Internet Art; the Online Clash of Culture and Commerce. Londen: Tate Publishing.
Stedelijk Museum het Prinsenhof Delft. 1987. Delftse Signalementen.
Stedelijk Museum. 1961. Bewogen Beweging
Stedelijk Museum. 1971. Geluid <==> kijken; drie audiovisuele projecten; Ton Bruynèl, Dick Raaijmakers, Peter Struycken.
Stedelijk Museum. 1996. Under Capricorn.
Steirischen Kulturinitiatieve Graz. 1993. Online; Kunst im Netz.
Stichting creatieve computerapplicaties. 1985. Project computerkunst. Rotterdam: Stichting creatieve computerapplicaties.
Studium Generale Delft. 1992. Kunst en technologie; the beauty and the beast? Delft: Ebrun.
Taylor, Grand T. 2014. When the Machine Made Art: The Troubled History of Computer Art; International Texts in Critical Media Aesthetics. New York: Bloomsbury Academic.
Tazelaar, Kees. 2013. On the threshold of beauty: Philips and the origins of electronic music in the Netherlands, 1925-1965. Rotterdam: nai010 uitgevers.
Ungerer, J. 1967. Kunst Aus dem Computer.
Urbons, Klaus. 1994. Elektrographie; analoge und digitale Bilder.
Vartanian, Ivan. 2001. Now Loading; the Aesthetics of Web Graphics. Tokyo: Ginko Press
Vleeshal Middelburg. 1984. The Image of Sound
Vleeshal Middelburg. 1985. Sonor Robotica Lux, Floris Kolvenbach.
Vleeshal Middelburg. 2000. Geert Mul.
Waag Society, ed. 2001. Metatag, 26 Hits on Technology and Culture. Amsterdam: The Waag.
Wands, Bruce. 2006. Art of the Digital Age. Londen: Thames & Hudson.
Weibel, Peter, red. 2001. Net_Condition; Art and Global Media. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Weibel, Peter. 1987. Jenseits der Erde; Das orbitale Zeitalter.
Wilson, Stephen. 2002. Information Arts; Intersections of Art, Science and Technology.
Wolk, Jan van der. 1970. “Preformulated Art; on the Philosophy and Generation of Visual Computer Art.” Simiolus vol. 4 nr. 2.
The biology of a complex healthy (homeostatic), injured, or diseased human is phenomenally complex. The amount of known information about human bio-medicine doubles every ten years. Much of what a physician learns in medical school is out of date, or known to be in error (or forgotten) within a few years of completing residency training and entering in regular clinical practice. It has long been established, and is gaining acceptance, that human cognition, both from a recall of facts, and capacity for error free judgment is a limiting factor in optimal care. Medical informatics is reasonably novel hybrid discipline which employs methodology from cognitive science, human factors engineering, computer science, epistemology, evidence based medicine, statistics, molecular biology, research method logy, systems analytics, project management, information theory and data visualization to help physicians (as well as other health care providers in a primary clinical diagnosis and treatment role) improve the care they can provide. As a consequence, it is largely believed (based on well done studies at a handful of academic medical centers) that costs will be reduced (largely by avoiding costly complications and to some extent avoiding wasteful behaviors) with a subsequent narrowing of the gap between those receiving the most expensive health-care (per capital) in the world, and the tremendous (up to 1/3 of the United States population in some estimates) with substandard or no access to modern health care.
Medical Informatics is an approximately 50 year-old discipline closely related to Clinical or Health Informatics, and many users interchange the terms freely. However, as a discipline chiefly concerned with semantics, it warrants are precise explanation. It is a discipline which is a predominantly applied science, sharing some features with engineering, as well as having some purely exploratory and theoretical aspects, similar to the usual conception of a science. It draws heavily from the structure, meaning, representation, transmission, and comprehension of information in the biomedical domain, predominantly allopathic human clinical medicine. It is closely related to studies of (and provides means to study and interventions for) public health informatics, evidence based medicine, clinical research, health information technology, medical library science, and artificial intelligence.
Medical Informatics attempts to study, understand and augment the management of the complexity surrounding the decision making and automation of clinical care, principally via the use of electronic health record systems (EHRS), creation of clinical decisions support systems and augmentation of human decision support through better understanding of the cognitive science surrounding expert decision making and medical errors.
Some of the key concepts in medical (shared with clinical/health informatics, and as well as with public health informatics, nursing informatics, and many other closely related disciplines) include:
Semiotics and the conveyance of information, knowledge, data, such that it has (formal) computable semantics.
Analytics of biomedical information, using methods from machine learning and statistical analysis, leading to knowledge discovery, and better recognition of patterns of disease (either via optimizing display or retrieval and / or comparison of prior results).
Creation of clinical decision support systems, using algorithms, predictive instruments (such as decision trees), and rules based expert systems and implementing them within the workflow of an electronic health record system.
Given two triangles of the same area, can we cut one up into a finite number of pieces which can then be rearranged to make the other?
If we can cut a triangle up and rearrange the pieces to make a rectangle, then we're doing well. Rectangles are easy to work with. If we can get a number of small rectangles, somehow make them into rectangles with one side of length one, then stack them all up on that side into one rectangular bar with one side of one, then we've won. Why? Because the process of cutting and rearranging is reversible. To spell that out:
We can cut and rearrange the first triangle to make a rectangle with the same area and one side of length one. We can do the same for the other. If we superimpose the cut-lines of the two ways of dividing up this unit rectangle we have pieces which can be rearranged to make either the first triangle or the second.
Well, we can cut any triangle into two right triangles, and each of those right triangles can be cut and reassembled to make a rectangle. So we can certainly get two rectangles out of each triangle. We can cut these up into lots of small rectangles.
Now, how do we convert those rectangles to rectangles with one unit side?
A little experimentation shows that the way to go is via parallelograms. We can make cuts at an angle to get the length of side that we want. And we can cut parallelograms up and reassemble them to make rectangles, whilst preserving the length of one side. Once we've hit on the idea of using parallelograms, and looked at ways of slicing and reassembling them, we see that we don't really need to do anything special with rectangles. Here's how we do it.
We don't have to do our dissection into small pieces at the start. We can do it as we go. Then whatever solution we end up with we can translate into a solution where we did dissect the triangles at the start.
Solution to Converting one Triangle into Another
First take one triangle of area A, and cut it into two pieces and reassemble as a parallelogram with the same base, using move I, like so:
We've taken the top triangle of half the dimensions and rotated it 180 degrees.
Now given any parallelogram we can use move II, a cut and swapping of the order of the two pieces that preserves the base and shifts the top edge left or right by up to the length of the base:
By repeating move II enough times we can make the length of the side that isn't the base anything we like, as long that is as it is at least
. That's not a very stringent restriction. We're aiming to get a parallelogram that has one pair of sides the length of one triangle's base and the other pair of sides the length of the other triangle's base.
Why do we want to do that? Because then we have a parallelogram which could either have been formed from the first triangle or from the second.
What could go wrong? The only thing that could go wrong is if the side we are trying to get is
. To avoid that we position our original triangles so that each has its longest side as its base. Then by using move II one or more times:
(a) We do not change the base length, which is the same as that of the original triangle.
Just to confirm that we're not trying for too short a side length, we note that in each triangle the longest side must be at least the length of a side of an equilateral triangle of area A. That's because the equilateral triangle does the best job of keeping its longest side short for a given area. In the equilateral triangle each side is
. Those longest sides of our two triangles must both be at least
We now have a parallelogram with its base the length of the base of one triangle and the other side the length of the base of the other.
We're exactly half way through converting one triangle into the other. We can flip the parallelogram so that the other side is the base. Now doing the steps in reverse, finishing with move I in reverse, we have reassembled our pieces into the second triangle.
A weblog can be loosely defined as a journal or diary which is published on the World Wide Web. The process of updating and maintaining a weblog is known as blogging and the author is known as a blogger. Weblogs are usually updated at regular intervals using user-friendly software that requires little or no technical background.
The rate of growth of blogging has been astounding. According to Technorati there are now over 26 million weblogs in existence. They reckon that:
The blogosphere (that is, the weblog universe) doubles in size about every 5.5 months.
A new weblog is created roughly every second and there are over 80,000 weblogs created daily.
About 55% of all weblogs are active.
About 13% of all weblogs are updated at least weekly.
Technorati carries out a major survey of weblog activities every six months. Check their website for the current values.
It is difficult to come up with a definition that fits all weblogs, or even most weblogs. In essence, weblogs are web pages that have several posts or distinct items of information per page. They are normally in reverse chronological order, with the most recent post at the top of the page and the oldest at the bottom.
Weblogs often contain links to other Web sites or weblogs. Many of the earliest weblogs relied heavily on links, and consisted mainly of short pieces of text, mixed with news items or useful links the author had found that day. Modern weblogs may link to external sites, but they may also have more of an inward focus, acting as a personal journal or diary for the author. Weblogs are often created and maintained by an individual, but they may also be produced by small groups of people, or involve large communities in a single weblog.
Most weblogs are non-commercial in nature, but they are increasingly being added to commercial sites and being used as a new form of business communication. A weblog can be a small part of a larger site, a small portion of a single page or an entire Web site. Weblogs are usually updated more frequently than traditional Web sites, due largely to the smaller changes and lower amount of effort required to add a new weblog post as compared to adding an entire Web page full of content.
Weblogs are based on discrete posts, sometimes known as articles or entries. Each page is usually a collection of posts over a period of time, sometimes several years. Tools are available to automate the creation of new posts, leaving the details of creating archive pages, uploading amended files to a server and applying HTML templates to automated scripts. Bloggers can add new posts using a simplified interface that operates like a word processing application.
Weblogs are a rapidly-developing area, so it is likely that the information given below will become outdated very quickly. The following links are good sources of current information: http://weblogs.about.com/ and http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weblog
Follow some of the links given above and read what they have to say about weblogs.
It is difficult to specify exactly when the first weblogs appeared because no single person was responsible for their invention and several weblogs appeared spontaneously on several sites about the same time. The earliest weblogs were simply lists of links and personal filters of billions of pages that were swamping the World Wide Web, but they’ve since become personal journals or diaries, with much more opinion and editorial content.
Pages going back to the earliest days of the Web share many characteristics of weblogs and can be regarded as their predecessors or forerunners. Tim Berners-Lee, the inventor of the Web, used his own website on the first-ever Web server to keep his colleagues at CERN, the European Nuclear Research Centre, informed about other Web pages and servers within the organisation. The diary and journal formats which appeared soon after the Web's expansion outwith the research community bore some resemblance to the weblog format. They were updated at regular intervals and shared tales from the author's life.
One of the earliest forerunners the weblog was Justin Hall's Links from the Underground website which the author used to share links to interesting sites and tell stories of his life and travels, beginning in 1994.
The site continued to be updated until mid-2005, when the author decided to take a well-earned rest. Another weblog predecessor was Michael Sippey’s website The Filter, a section of a larger site, which shared links about technology news. The Filter was updated daily as early as 1996 and was used to publish essays and articles complementing the main part of the site.
The What's New page, seen on thousands of Web sites, has much in common with the weblog format. One of the earliest What's New pages appeared in 1993 at the National Center for Supercomputing (NCSA), producers of the first graphical Web browser, Mosaic. The NCSA/Mosaic What's New page served as a central point for information about new servers, sites and pages coming online.
Around 1997, a few web authors began publishing short bits of text each day without giving this activity a name. For example, Dave Winer of UserLand Software, started publishing essays on technology issues on his website in 1994. In April 1997 he started a new site which kept track of Web sites devoted to programming and scripting and gave daily updates about his company's software. The site was still being maintained in late 2005, but now he adds a personal commentary to each day's postings.
Also in 1997, Jorn Barger began compiling a list of links with short descriptions on a regular basis. His site initially consisted of a list of 20 to 30 links, with single sentence descriptions, added at a rate of 5 to 10 a day. He later started writing an online diary to complement the links. Barger coined the term weblog to describe his site, and over the next year or two, the term was adopted by other authors.
Jesse James Garrett, editor of Infosift began compiling a list of similar sites as he encountered them his travels around the Web. In November 1997, he sent that list to Cameron Barrett, who published it on list on CamWorld, and others maintaining similar sites began sending him their details for inclusion on the list. Garrett’s "page of only weblogs" listed the 23 weblogs known to exist at the start of 1999.
All the earliest weblogs followed a similar format, giving short pieces of text on a single, rapidly changing page which provided links to interesting sites the author had found. The notion of creating a website purely to direct visitors to other Web sites was a novel idea at the time, as the prevailing wisdom was that commercial Web sites had to be "sticky" in order to keep visitors within the site for as long as possible. In contrast, the early weblogs were eager to provide visitors with links to other sites, rather than confining them to a single site.
It was easy to read all of the weblogs on Garrett’s list, and many people did. However, as more and more people began publishing their own weblogs it became difficult to read every weblog every day, or even to keep track of all the new ones that were appearing. In early 1999, Brigitte Eaton compiled a list of every weblog she knew about and created the Eatonweb Portal. She evaluated all submissions by a simple criterion: the site consist of dated entries. This rapidly became part of the definition of weblogs.
1999 also marked the beginning of the “weblog explosion” when tools to enable anyone to create a weblog were initially released. Prior to this, weblog creators had to write their own software and code each day's postings by hand, using HyperText Markup Language (HTML), so people producing weblogs up until 1999 were generally Internet technology professionals or programmers.
July 1999, saw the release of Pitas , the first tool designed for creating, managing and maintaining weblogs. Pitas, which is still in operation today, enables users to sign up for an account and create a weblog, which is hosted for free with an address of the form: http://username.pitas.com. A Pitas weblog has several automated components, including features to let users customise their sites. There is a user-friendly posting page where users can add the title, URL and description of each post.
Pitas weblog authors don’t need to know HTML because the software automates the creation of links. However, templates allow knowledgeable users to change the HTML behind the visual design of their site without affecting the automatic elements of each post. Automatic archiving is an important feature of Pitas. As users post regular updates to their sites the software automatically moves older entries to the archive pages.
In August 1999, Pyra Labs released the first version of Blogger, which is also still online at http://www.blogger.com, although it is now owned by Google. Blogger provides similar features to Pitas, but with a number of important differences.
Blogger initially required users to have their own Web site. It could take user posts, create static files and transmit the amended files to the users’ server when they updated.
The tasks of programming, maintaining and archiving information were handled by Blogger on a central server accessible from anywhere, leaving users to host output on their own sites. Blogger also offered the ability to maintain more than one weblog from a single account and provided additional ways to customise sites, e.g.: templates could be customised by using a series of special tags, and an archive template allowed users to specify how older posts should appear.
1999 also saw the release of LiveJournal, which actually came out a few months before Pitas and Blogger, but wasn't regarded as a weblog tool until much later. The tools available through Pitas and Blogger led to a massive explosion in the number of people maintaining weblogs. The number of weblog authors grew from dozens to hundreds and then thousands within months of these tools being released. Weblogs were filled with original writing, journals of author's lives and links to interesting sites, including other weblogs.
Additional tools followed, e.g.: UserLand Software released Manila, a content management system which incorporated weblogs and an integrated discussion system. A public server at http://www.editthispage.com allowed prospective users to try out the software without buying the server. Other tools released that year included Velocinews and Groksoup which also automated weblog posting and offered free hosting for weblogs. All of these services were free and all of them were designed to enable individuals to publish their own weblogs quickly and easily.
The original weblogs were link-driven sites containing a mixture of links, commentary and personal opinions. Their editors presented links to obscure websites and to current news articles they felt were worthy of note. These links were usually accompanied by an editorial commentary, often with an irreverent or sarcastic tone. The format of the typical weblog, providing only a very short space in which to write an entry, encourages brevity on the part of the writer. Longer commentary is often published elsewhere. These weblogs provided a valuable filtering function for their readers by pre-surfing the web for them.
In 2000, second-generation weblog tools began to appear. Greymatter a weblog management system designed to be installed on your own server, provided dozens of features which were not available in existing weblog tools. Since the software was installed on your own server, there were none of the traffic problems a large, central service such as Blogger sometimes suffered from.
Since 2001, the explosion in weblog growth and popularity has continued. Stories about weblogs have featured in national magazines, and weblogs have supplemented traditional media coverage in some cases. Notable examples include the South Asian Tsunami, the invasion of Iraq and the US Presidential Election.
Weblog tools have continued to develop with the release of packages such as MovableType and Radio, as well as dozens of more specialised tools. Articles about weblogs continue to appear in the mainstream press, and the registered users at popular services, such as Blogger and LiveJournal, are now numbered in millions. Weblogs are appearing on business and media sites, and they are being used increasingly by grassroots organisations as a way of bringing their causes to the attention of the public.
Follow some of the links given above and read what they have to say about weblogs.
According to [1] Wikipedia:
“Social software is a broad term used to describe software-based tools that facilitate interaction and collaboration. Social software connects people together intellectually and makes it possible to share and evolve ideas. Social software is not bound just by what features the tool provides, but also by social conventions and etiquette on how to use it appropriately. Such software includes email, Usenet, IRC, instant messaging, blogs, wikis, NNTP, folksonomy, and virtual online communities.”
Useful summaries of the different kinds of social software can be found at:
Wikipedia also notes that “Blogs mean many things to different people: ranging from “online journal” to “easily updated personal website”. While these definitions are not wrong, they fail to capture the power of blogs as social software. Beyond being a simple homepage, or an online diary, some blogs also allow comments on the entries thereby a discussion forum, have blogrolls, i.e.: links to other blogs which the owner reads, and/or have trackback which allows one blog to notify another blog, creating an inter-blog conversation. You can find more information about trackback at http://www.movabletype.org/trackback/beginners/.
One of the most critical features of blogs is that they allow communication on a many-to-many basis, rather than simply one-to-one or one-to-many, as permitted by other types of software. Blogs engage readers and build a virtual community around a particular person or interest, e.g.: Slashdot (http://slashdot.org/) LiveJournal (http://www.livejournal.com/) and BlogSpot (http://www.blogspot.com).
Social software is fundamental to some of the latest developments on the World Wide Web, sometimes referred to collectively as Web 2.0 (see http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/oreilly/tim/news/2005/09/30/what-is-web-20.html).
Wikipedia (http://www.wikipedia.org) is a good starting point for obtaining further information about social software. Some of the main types of social software are listed below.
E-mail will already be familiar to most people. However it can be regarded as one of the earliest forms of social software, particularly with regard to some of its one-to-many communication features, such as the use of the cc: field and mailing lists, as well as the use of contact lists or address books.
Instant Messaging (IM) allows individuals to communicate privately with one another over a public network. Popular clients include MSN Messenger (http://messenger.msn.com/Xp/Default.aspx) and Yahoo Messenger (http://messenger.yahoo.com/) IM communications were initially text based but they have now been expanded to include audio and video and clients can also exchange files.
Chat is an abbreviated name for Internet Relay Chat (IRC) which lets users join chat rooms and communicate with many people simultaneously. Users can join an existing chat room or create one of their own, on any topic of interest to them. Once in a chat room they can post comments and respond to the comments of others and invite other users to participate in private chats. You can find out anything you want to know about IRC at http://www.irchelp.org/. Popular suppliers include Yahoo. (http://chat.yahoo.com/)
Newsgroups or forums are the Internet version of electronic bulletin boards, popular among computer users long before Internet. A user can post comments on a topic and other users can respond. Messages are visible to all members of the group and some services provide extensions such as file storage and calendaring. The original newsgroup service, Usenet, is now available via Google Groups (http://groups.google.co.uk/). Other services include Smartgroups (http://www.smartgroups.com/) and Yahoo Groups (http://groups.yahoo.com/).
A Wiki is a group of Web pages that allows users to add their own content and permits others to edit the content. It provides a simple method of producing HML content and is an effective medium for collaboration. The term is also used to describe the collaborative software, sometimes known as a wiki engine, used to create such a website. Examples include:
Wikipedia (http://c2.com/cgi/wiki), Wikibooks (http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Main_Page), Wikinews (http://en.wikinews.org/wiki/Main_Page) and WikiWikiWeb (http://c2.com/cgi/wiki).
Social network services allow people to meet on-line around shared interests or causes. In some cases it is only possible to join a social network by being recommended by an existing member. Examples include Orkut (http://www.orkut.com), MeetUp (http://www.meetup.com), LinkedIn and Tribe Networks (http://www.tribe.net). An offshoot of this area is social network search engines, which allow people to find each other according to their XFN social relationships, e.g.: XHTML Friends Network (http://gmpg.org/xfn/).
Social guides recommend places to visit in the real world such as coffee shops, restaurants and WiFi hotspots, etc. Popular applications include CafeSpot (http://cafespot.net), Tagzania (http://www.tagzania.com/) and Wikivoyage (http://en.wikivoyage.org/).
Social bookmarking sites allow users to post their list of bookmarks or favourite websites for others to search and view. The object is for people to meet others with whom they share a common interest. Examples include Del.icio.us, Furl (http://www.furl.net/) and Connectedy (http://www.connectedy.com/).
Social Shopping applications allow group members to make recommendations and give product reviews, e.g.: SwagRoll (http://swagroll.com/).
Virtual Worlds and Massively-Multiplayer On-line Games (MMOGs) are places where it is possible to interact with other people in a virtual world. Popular commercial worlds include Second Life (http://secondlife.com/), ActiveWorlds (http://www.activeworlds.com/), There (http://www.there.com/index.html), and The Sims Online (http://www.ea.com/official/thesims/thesimsonline/us/nai/index.jsp).
Commercial MMOGs include Everquest (http://eqplayers.station.sony.com/index.vm) and World of Warcraft (http://www.worldofwarcraft.com/lowbw.html).
Non-commercial projects include Planeshift (http://www.planeshift.it/) and Solipsis (http://solipsis.netofpeers.net/wiki2/index.php/Main_Page).
Folksonomy is the name given to the informal classifications (sometimes called tags or keywords) that Internet users invent to categorise the objects with which they interact on-line. Social software makes these classifications available to other Internet users, so folksonomy can be viewed as a distributed classification system. Examples of folksonomy-enabled social software include Furl , Flickr and Del.icio.us.
Choose two types of social software which sound particularly interesting to you and follow the links given above to find out more about them, or sign up for them.
Social conventions and etiquette play an important role in weblogs, as in other forms of online communication. The following observations are summarised from a number of online sources:
Avoid hotlinking: Hotlinking is the practice of linking directly to an image on someone else’s website or blog. Most website owners disapprove of this practice – they would much rather see a link to their homepage.
Always credit your sources: if you quote or refer to an article or website, credit the original author appropriately.
Always check the validity of your information: just because information appears on a website doesn’t necessarily mean it’s true. You should always check your facts against several authoritative sources, especially if they are likely to be contentious.
Correct your mistakes and post updates: you’ll inevitably make mistakes at some point when posting to your weblog. The best practice is to own up to these and correct them.
Never leave spam comments: if you are commenting on someone else’s weblog, make sure that your comments are meaningful and relevant. A simple statement like “visit my weblog” without any additional relevant content may be regarded as spam by some people. You should also ensure that you delete any spam comments made on your own weblog.
Remember your audience: anything you post potentially has a worldwide audience and could be there for a long time. Even if you delete something there are always archives and caches, so make sure you really want to say something before going public with it.
Use good English: you don’t need to write perfect prose, but you should write clear and simple grammatically-correct English and avoid the use of non-standard abbreviations. Remember that WRITING IN CAPITALS is regarded by many as the online equivalent of shouting.
Always respect copyright: Never quote large extracts from any source without the explicit permission of the copyright holder. Quoting of small excerpts for the purposes of review or criticism is normally acceptable, but the sources should always be acknowledged, as noted earlier.
Identify yourself: if you leave comments on someone else's weblog, you should identify yourself properly, giving your email address whenever possible. If you don’t want to have a comment attributed to you, you should think again about whether you really want to make it.
Allow your readers to contact you: it is good practice to provide a way fro your readers to contact you, e.g.: via email or by leaving comments.
Rebecca Blood devotes a whole chapter to etiquette and ethics in The Weblog Handbook: Practical advice on creating and maintaining your blog. (Perseus Publishing, 2002). These can be summarised as follows:
Personal attacks: never attack another blogger online. This will only reduce your own credibility, and can lead to problems which will never be resolved.
Responding to attacks: if someone makes an attack on you, you should simply ignore it. Any time you spend on defending yourself reduces the time you have available for writing new material.
Asking for a link: don't ask other bloggers to link to your site. If they want to want to direct their readers to your weblog, they’ll do so without being asked.
Complaining about traffic: don't complain about how few (or how many) hits your weblog is receiving. The more you complain, the less appealing you will appear to your readers.
Crediting links: always give proper credit when linking to others' websites or weblogs or when passing on links found on someone else's website.
Announcing your schedule: if you won’t be able to update your weblog for some time, let your readers know when you plan to make the next update so they don't waste their time checking it when nothing is happening.
Giving warnings: always warn readers clearly if the content of a link might be something they might not approve of or may not want to see.
Answering e-mails: answer as many e-mails from your readers as you can, but don't let the time spent doing this affect the development of your weblog.
Publishing facts: only claim that something is a fact if you know it to be true and can prove that this is the case.
Linking to sources: if you quote material from online sources, give links to the original sources.
Correcting mistakes: if you feel that you need to correct mistakes in an entry, let your readers know. If possible, leave the original entry intact and make corrections by adding additional information. Try to avoid rewriting or deleting posts, since others may rely on them via links. If this is to operate successfully your original material must remain unchanged.
Disclosing conflicts of interest: if you have any conflicts of interest, e.g.: if you’re likely to benefit financially or in some other way from information you are posting, then be open about this.
Questionable sources: if you think a source is questionable or obviously biased, let your readers know before giving them a link to it, so they will be prepared to interpret it cautiously.
Links are an important element of blogs and they play a major role in the development of virtual communities. Links can direct the reader to another weblog or web site. Many weblogs include an “interesting links” section, usually giving links which relate to the theme of the weblog. Others provide lists of “friends’ weblogs”. These can be a useful way of discovering new sites which might be of interest to you.
If you read an interesting post in another weblog and you decide to discuss the same topic in your own weblog, it’s a good idea to add a link to the original post that inspired you. When the administrator of the original weblog checks her access statistics she will find out how many visitors have reached her site through the link you’ve provided, and she’ll probably want to take a look at your weblog. If she likes it, she’ll probably put a link into her weblog, encouraging her readers to visit your site. Another way of encouraging visitors to your weblog is to put your URL in any comments that you write in other weblogs, although a comment consisting only of your URL is unlikely to be welcomed.
These kinds of links create informal communities. Some of these last for a long time while others disappear rapidly, just as in real life. Links are covered in greater detail elsewhere in this wikibook.
Waves are a form of energy. They include electromagnetic waves and sound waves. Electromagnetic waves are the visible light waves and the microwaves that you use every day. The sound waves are just what they are the way sound transfers in a volume.
The electromagnetic spectrum is the range of all the possible frequencies of electromagnetic radiation. This includes all visible light infrared light, microwaves,X-rays, and gamma rays. The way a we've is measured is using frequencies. These are the different levels of vibration that take place in a wave. For example a gamma ray has a much higher frequency than a ray of infrared light, because the distance between the peak of the waves are much greater in a gamma ray than in a ray of infrared light.
Sound waves are the oscillation of pressure through the atoms and molecules of matter such as a solid, liquid, or gas. It like electromagnetic waves is composed of a group of frequencies usually measured in Hertz. The higher the measure of Hertz the higher the pitch. As many older people can confirm sometimes very high or very low pitches can be hard or impossible to hear by the human ear.
The second set of three habits, 4. think win-win, 5. seek first to understand, then be understood, and 6. synergize, are the basis for public victory.
Public victory is success with others in teams and in relationships in general. They are shared victories where you help and are helped by other people.
Public victories are built on the private victories of the first three habits. To be publicly successful in a deep or real way, you should first build the first three habits into your character. To try to do things another way is building on a false foundation and will bring about only short-term results.
Many of us grow up with a competitive mindset, "I win, you lose". Or, a beaten-down mindset, "I give up, do whatever you want to me". Or, a mix of these and other mindsets. Each of these has its place. However, for most of the most valuable interactions we have in family and business, the most mature and effective point of view is seeking situations that benefit everyone involved.
When we negotiate, we should seek to make deals that help everyone. In cases where this is not possible, it is best to have the mindset from the outset that you will walk away from the deal.
Habit 5: Seek first to understand, then be understood
To influence and help others, you must first actively listen to them and understand their situation and concerns. Think of the example of a doctor who gives a prescription over the telephone without getting all of the necessary information about the patient or his condition. This could lead to a serious or fatal error if the patient takes the wrong medicine. In the same way, you should be very careful when you start to give anyone advice that you understand the preoccupations and situation of that person. Even if your advice is very good, it will likely not apply to the situation.
Part of this is not just to listen passively but to listen actively and empathetically. Put yourself in the shoes of the other person. See the world from their perspective as best you can. Listen without judging.
Three main errors to avoid: 1. "Hearing" everything through a filter formed by your own world-view, imposing your pre-conceived ideas on everything that you hear. 2. 3.
For most of us, we have extensive experience being frustrated by someone who just doesn't or won't understand us, or worse, someone who just argues for their position. We can minimize these frustrations by seeking first to understand and honestly empathize with the person. We can listen actively and then state their case back to them so they say "yes that's exactly how I see it". When that happens, you are truly seeking to understood. The resulting exchange of ideas and feelings is bound to be synergistic, win-win. Genuine empathic understanding is the doorway to collaboration, friendship, and more.
This habit deals with teamwork and opening yourself up emotionally to work with other people. It says that optimistic, emotionally-charged individuals who are living out the previous habits are able to work in amazing ways and come up with new alternatives together that no one of them would have come up with alone. The idea is that one plus one is three, or more, and the synergy happens when these "third alternatives" appear. It is a bit chaotic but fun and stimulating. Along with these there is a 3rd NOVEL.
The OpenSSH suite provides secure remote access and file transfer. Since its initial release, it has grown to become the most widely used implementation of the SSH protocol. During the first ten years of its existence, ssh has largely replaced older corresponding unencrypted tools and protocols.
The OpenSSH client is included by default in most operating system distributions, including MacOS, Linux, BSD, AIX and Solaris. Any day you use the Internet, you are using and relying on dozens if not hundreds of machines operated and maintained using OpenSSH. A survey in 2008 showed that of the SSH servers found running, just over 80% were OpenSSH. [1]
The first release of OpenSSH was in December 1999 as part of OpenBSD 2.6. The source code was originally derived from a re-write of the last available open version, ssh 1.2.12 specifically, of SSH[2]. SSH went on to become Tectia SSH.
Ongoing development of OpenSSH is done by the OpenBSD group. Core development occurs first on OpenBSD, then portability teams bring the changes to other platforms. OpenSSH is an integral part of as good as all server systems today and a good many network appliances such as routers, switches and networked storage.
The first steps were in many ways the biggest.
Telnet was one of the original ARPAnet application protocols, named in RFC 15 from September 1969. It was used to access a host at a remote site locally. Telnet was described starting two years later in RFC 137, RFC 139, RFC 318 and others, including RFC 97. That is as good a turning point as any to delineate Telnet.
Thompson Shell, by Ken Thompson, was an improvement on the old text-based user interface, the shell. This new one allowed redirects but was only a user interface and not for scripting.
In the same year FTP, the file transfer protocol, was described in RFC 114. A key goal was to promote use of computers over the net by allowing users at any host on the network to use the file system of any cooperating host.
Bill Joy created BSD's C shell which is named for the C-like syntax it uses. It allows job control, history substitution, and aliases, which features we find in today's interfaces.
In the same year, the Bourne Shell by Steve Bourne at Bell Labs [5] was created. It is the progenitor to the default shells used in most distros today: ksh and bash.
The remote file copy utility, rcp, appeared in 4.2 BSD. rcp copied files across the net to other hosts using rsh, which also appeared staring 4.2 BSD, to perform its operations. Like telnet and ftp, all passwords, user names, and data are transmitted unencrypted in clear text. Both rsh and rcp were part of the rlogin suite.
PGP, written at MIT by Philip Zimmermann[6], charted new waters for encrypted electronic communications with the goals of preserving civil liberties online, ensuring individual privacy, keeping encryption legal in the USA, and protecting business communications. Like SSH it uses asymmetric encryption with public / private key pairs.
Kerberos V (RFC 1510) authentication service from MIT's project Athena [7] provides a means for authentication over an open, unsecure network. Kerberos got its original start in 1988.
Tatu Ylönen at the then Helsinki University of Technology developed the first SSH protocol and programs, releasing them under an open license[8] as per the norm in computer science, software engineering, and advanced development. [9]
1995?
Björn Grönvall dug out the most recent open version of ssh, version 1.2.12[10] [11]. He and Holger Trapp did the initial work to free the distribution, resulting in OSSH
OpenSSH begins based on OSSH. Niels Provos, Theo de Raadt, Markus Friedl developed the cryptographic components during the port to OpenBSD which became the OpenSSH we know today. Dug Song, Aaron Campbell and many others provided various non-crypto contributions. openssl library issues were sorted by Bob Beck. Damien Miller, Philip Hands, and others started porting OpenSSH to Linux. Finally OpenSSH 1.2.2 was release shipped with OpenBSD 2.6 in December 1, 1999.[12]
Markus Friedl added SSH 2 protocol support to OpenSSH version 2.0, which was released in June.[13] OpenSSH 2.0 shipped with OpenBSD 2.7. Niels Provos and Theo de Raadt did most of the checking. Bob Beck updated OpenSSL. Markus also added support for the SFTP protocol later that same year.
In September of 2000, the long wait in the USA for the patents on the RSA algorithms to expire was over. In the European Union the European Patent Convention of 1972 frees software, algorithms, business methods or literature, unlike the unfortunate, anti-business situation in the USA. This freedom in Europe hangs by a thread at the moment.
Built-in chroot support for sshd.
As of OpenSSH 5.4, the legacy protocol SSH1 is finally disabled by default.
As of OpenSSH 6.7, both the base and the portable versions of OpenSSH can build against LibreSSL instead of OpenSSL for certain cryptographic functions.
OpenSSH 7.4 removes server support for the SSH1 legacy protocol.
Note: OpenSSH can be used anywhere in the whole world because it uses only algorithms unencumbered by software patents, business method patents, algorithm patents, and so on. These types of patents do not apply in Europe, only physical inventions can be patented in Europe, but there are regions of the world where these problems do occur. Small and medium businesses in Europe have been active in politics to keep the advantage.
Why Use OpenSSH?
By then, the WWW was more than a few years under way and undergoing explosive growth. The estimated number of web servers online in 1996 grew from 100,000 at the beginning of the year to close to 650,000 by the end of the same year[14]. When other types of servers are included in those figures, the estimated year-end number was over 16,000,000 hosts, representing approximately 828,000 domains.[14]
Nowadays, hosts are subject to hostile scans from the moment they are connected to the network. Any and all unencrypted traffic is scanned and parsed for user names, passwords, and other sensitive information. Currently, the biggest espionage threats come from private companies, but governments, individuals, and organized crime are not without a presence.
Each connection from one host to another goes through many networks and each packet may take the same or a different route there and back again. This example shows thirteen hops among three organizations from a student computer to a search engine:
% /usr/sbin/traceroute -n www.google.com
9 216.239.48.154 64.935 ms	6.848 ms	6.793 ms	Google, Inc.
10 72.14.232.141 17.606 ms	17.581 ms	17.680 ms	Google, Inc.
11 209.85.241.27 17.736 ms	17.592 ms	17.519 ms	Google, Inc.
12 72.14.239.193 17.767 ms	17.778 ms	17.930 ms	Google, Inc.
13 74.125.95.106 17.903 ms	17.835 ms	17.867 ms	Google, Inc.:
The net is big. It is not uncommon to find a trail of 15 to 20 hops between client and server nowadays. Any machine on any of the subnets the packets travel over can eavesdrop with little difficulty if the packets are not well encrypted.
Encrypted remote access, including tunneling insecure protocols.
Run remote commands, programs or scripts and, as mentioned,
Replacement for rsh, rlogin, telnet and ftp
More concretely, that means that the following undesirable activities are prevented:
Eavesdropping of data transmitted over the network.
Manipulation of data at intermediate elements in the network (e.g. routers).
Address spoofing where an attack hosts pretends to be a trusted host by sending packets with the source address of the trusted host.
As a free software project, OpenSSH provides:
Flexible License - freedom emphasized for developers
Strong Authentication, supported methods: gssapi-with-mic, hostbased, keyboard-interactive, none , password and publickey[16]
Public Key: if the publickey method is listed more than once, for example, publickey,publickey OpenSSH requires successful authentication using two different public keys, available since March 2015 (OpenSSH 6.8)[17]
Encrypted X11 forwarding for X Window System
OpenSSH is a very useful tool, but much of its effectiveness depends on correct use. It cannot protect from any of the following situations.
Misconfiguration, misuse, or abuse.
Compromised systems, particularly where the root account is compromised.
Insecure or inappropriate directory settings, particularly home directory settings.
OpenSSH must be properly configured and on a properly configured system in order to be of benefit. Arranging both is not difficult, but since each system is unique, there is no one-size-fits-all solution. The right configuration is dependent on the uses the system and OpenSSH are put to.
If you login from a host to a server and an attacker has control of root on either side, he can listen to your session by reading from the pseudo-terminal device because even though SSH is encrypted on the network it must communicate in clear text with the terminal device.
If an attacker can change files in your home directory, for example via a networked file system, he may be able to fool SSH.
Last but not least, if OpenSSH is set to allow everyone in, whether on purpose or by accident, it will.
↑ "Statistics from the current scan results". OpenSSH.org. 2008. http://www.openssh.com/usage/ssh-stats.html.
↑ "OpenSSH History". OpenSSH. http://openssh.org/history.html. Retrieved 2012-11-17.
↑ "Hobbes' Internet Timeline". Robert H'obbes' Zakon. http://www.zakon.org/robert/internet/timeline/. Retrieved 2011-02-17.
↑ Howard Dahdah (2009). "The A-Z of Programming Languages: Bourne shell, or sh". Computerworld. http://www.computerworld.com.au/article/279011/a-z_programming_languages_bourne_shell_sh/. Retrieved 2011-02-18.
↑ Phil Zimmermann (1991). "Why I Wrote PGP". Massachusetts Institute of Technology. http://www.mit.edu/~prz/EN/essays/WhyIWrotePGP.html. Retrieved 2011-02-18.
↑ "Designing an Authentication System: a Dialogue in Four Scenes.". 1988. http://web.mit.edu/Kerberos/dialogue.html. Retrieved 2011-02-17.
↑ "Help:SSH 1.0.0 license". FUNET. ftp://ftp.funet.fi/pub/mirrors/ftp.cs.hut.fi/pub/ssh/old/ssh-1.0.0.tar.gz. Retrieved 2013-04-13.
↑ Tatu Ylönen (1995-07-12). "ANNOUNCEMENT: Ssh (Secure Shell) Remote Login Program". news://comp.security.unix. https://groups.google.com/group/comp.security.unix/msg/67079d812a19f499?dmode=source&hl=en&pli=1. Retrieved 2011-11-26.
↑ "Help:SSH 1.2.12 license". friedl. http://wwwcip.informatik.uni-erlangen.de/~msfriedl/LIC/ssh-1.2.12/COPYING. Retrieved 2011-02-17.
↑ "Help:SSH 1.2.12.92 license". friedl. http://wwwcip.informatik.uni-erlangen.de/~msfriedl/LIC/ssh-1.2.12.92/COPYING. Retrieved 2011-02-17.
↑ https://www.openssh.com/history.html
↑ "OpenSSH Project History and Credits". OpenSSH. http://www.openssh.com/history.html. Retrieved 2011-03-10.
↑ a b Robert H'obbes' Zakon. "Hobbes' Internet Timeline". Zakon Group LLC. http://www.zakon.org/robert/internet/timeline/. Retrieved 2011-02-17.
↑ Damien Miller (2013-11-29). "ChaCha20 and Poly1305 in OpenSSH". http://blog.djm.net.au/2013/11/chacha20-and-poly1305-in-openssh.html. Retrieved 2014-04-26.
↑ https://linux.die.net/man/5/sshd_config
↑ https://lists.mindrot.org/pipermail/openssh-unix-announce/2015-March/000120.html
Logging and Troubleshooting •
File Transfer with SFTP •
Public Key Authentication •
Certificate-based Authentication •
Host-based Authentication •
I want to be a bird,
I do not want to become a kite,
I want to become a brave man,
I do not want to become a coward,
YafRay (Yet Another Free Raytracer) is an open source ray tracing program available under the LGPL license. It enables the creation of images and animations to a photo-realistic quality.
Yafray was developed in C++ and can be ported to a number of operating systems including Linux, Windows (9x, 2000 and XP), Mac OSX and Irix.
It has a number of rendering features including: global illumination, skydome illumination, caustics, depth of field and blurry reflections.
How do I add my own scene?
The specification highlights the following topics which must be covered.
a) The Arithmetic and Logic Unit; ALU,
Counter; PC, Accumulator; ACC, Memory
Address Register; MAR, Memory Data
Register; MDR, Current Instruction
Register; CIR). Buses: data, address and
b) The Fetch-Decode-Execute Cycle,
c) The factors affecting the performance of
e) Von Neumann, Harvard and contemporary
B) The Fetch-Decode-Execute Cycle, including its effect on registers.
C)The factors affecting performance of the CPU.
Clock speed: is the number of instructions which can be completed in one second, recently this has been measured in GHz (1 Billion instructions per second). So for a 3.0 GHz CPU, it would be able to perform 3 billion instructions per second.
Number of Cores: Each core in a processor is its own processing unit on the CPU. As well as having its own cache, the core will share a higher-level cache. When multitasking, different applications can be assigned on different cores. In addition, it is also possible to use multiple cores to solve a problem. A comparison between a 3.0 GHz single core CPU, and a dual core 3.0 GHz CPU. In theory this would lead to double the performance. However, the additional cores speeds are limited by algorithms which run the fetch-execute-decode cycle. A misconception when it comes to parallel processing, is that having 4 cores does not mean a processor will work at 4 times the speed. Furthermore, there are very few programs that are designed to be run on a parallel core system, so multi-core benefits are limited to running different programs as of now.
Cache: RAM, while faster than a standard hard drive, it is slower than the processor. This is known as a bottleneck. To try and reduce the likelihood of that bottleneck, a small amount but very fast memory was built into the CPU. This is known as cache memory. This will reduce the distance/time, data has to travel from and to it. By anticipating the data and instructions that are likely to be accessed regularly, it is kept in cache memory, hence it tries to avoid the bottleneck. As well as being expensive, the larger cache becomes slower as it operates. Therefore, modern processors have multiple (usually 3) levels of cache. When cache is stored, it starts from the smallest and fastest level of cache (L1) followed by the larger but slower levels of cache (L2, L3...), then eventually the RAM, and sometimes a small allocation of a users primary storage is set aside to store cache, this is known as virtual memory. Virtual memory is much slower than RAM, and much slower than the CPU cache.
This will increase the speed of the CPU, as more instructions can be completed per second.
This will decrease the speed of the CPU, as less instructions can be completed per second.
As the number of cores increase (2, 4, 6, 8...) the speed will also increase, but it is not exactly proportional, so it is not necessarily doubling every time.
As the number of cores decrease, the speed of the CPU will also decrease as less instructions can be completed in parallel.
As levels (L1, L2, L3...) and/or size of the cache increases (25MB, 30MB, 35MB...) there is less reliance upon having the cache stored being stored in RAM where it is much slower. When it comes to demanding applications and software,
As the levels and/or the size of cache decreases, there will be an increase in the reliance upon the RAM, and possibly virtual memory (a small allocation is set aside from the primary storage to be used as a form of RAM, to store cache). When it comes to demanding applications, it is noticeable to see longer loading times for a website, or when an input is made, that the output is taking a considerable amount of time to be returned. This is because, the cache is stored on the RAM, or as virtual memory, which is much slower than the levels of cache in a CPU.
Pipelining: In modern processors, the technique pipelining is used. What it does is it executes one instruction, whilst the next instruction is being decoded, and the instruction after that is being fetched. This allows high efficiency of the components/processes in a CPU.
Pipelining does have its downsides for instance, it is not always possible to predict the instruction that needs to be fetched and decoded next. For instance, a program that has IF statements will require ‘instruction jumps’. As a result, the pipeline must be ‘flushed’, and then obtain the correct instruction. The more often the pipeline is flushed, the less of a benefit the pipeline becomes.
E) Von Neumann, Harvard and contemporary processor architecture.
Von Neumann, has a single control unit and a single address, data and control bus. By working sequentially through the instructions, and data in the same memory location. Von Neumann cannot fetch multiple instructions at the same time, because data will fill the single bus. Known as Von Neumann bottleneck. Takes two clock cycles (decode and execute). (Desktops and laptops)
Harvard, is almost identical to Von Neumann, however it stores data and instructions separately in memory units. The CPU is capable of reading an instruction and perform memory access at the same time; even without a cache. As there’s separate buses for data and instructions. It’s possible to use pipelining in Harvard architecture. When pipelining is used instructions are carried out on a single clock cycle. (Small embedded computers; single processing).
LaTeX is perfectly suited to for writing scientific reports. Examples might include bachelor's, master's, or doctoral theses. Regardless of the report type, the LaTeX commands are always the same.
Before starting your big project, familiarize yourself with the LaTeX typesetting system. Learn it well enough to focus on content without fumbling over LaTeX commands.
Check if there is an official template at your university, department, institute, or school. If there is one, consider using it, if it's updated and you don't care about potential downstream issues and how it works. A good template should contain a proper copyright note, a support email address, documentation and a proper license.
If there is none, you have to set up your own document. All you need is the stuff below, paper size, font size, headers and footers, everything is taken care of by LaTeX defaults. It is the most basic template[1] and you can change every aspect that you want to change relatively easily.
You will notice missing packages as you write, don't invest too much time at the beginning. Your preamble will grow a bit over time to customize the layout or add packages for comfortable input of units (for example).
Can I use the template of a friend or one I found online?
If a friend of yours wants to give you their template, it is a very nice gesture. Say Thanks, but no, Thanks. You won't believe how many strange things are in there without them even noticing it. All those are little tripwires that you don't want in your document. Unfortunately, the same is true for many templates you can find online.
A short introduction to LaTeX is a free e-book about the very basics. It was translated in many different languages.
LaTeX to write a Phd Thesis is a free e-book that you can consult. It has some valuable tips.
If you have trouble, you can always get help.
↑ Creating a Scientific Report with LaTeX
An economy consists of a set of people or individuals and their environment. Each individual in an economy has an economic problem.
An economic problem arises because each individual has unique desires (defined as experiences he or she would like to have) and a limited set of assets (consisting of human capital, possessions, and time). This limitation prevents the individual from ever satisfying all his desires and dictates his behavior.
Human Capital includes physical attributes, mental capabilities, skill, personality, associates (people she knows or know her), creativity, influence, and a philosophy of life.
Possessions are the physical objects the individual posses or, more properly, has a claim on.
Time is limited to 24 hours each day for the remainder of an individual's life.
The economic problem we face forces us to economize, that is, to decide which desires to satisfy and which ones to leave unsatisfied. This behavior is both economically rational and the rationale behind economics.
Economics is relevant as an internal model against which we can compare our present situation and make better decisions about our behavior. It does not give a set of tools to use, but rather an understanding of the world in which we live.
The following article provides an easy guide and some simple snack ideas for how to balance healthy eating on a University students budget. For individually tailored advice, please visit an Accredited Practicing Dietitain near you.
1.1.5 5. Dairy and dairy alternatives
The diet we follow is one of the key players in how we look and feel every day, as well as our chance of developing things like obesity, heart disease, diabetes and some cancers[1]. The Australian Guide to Healthy Eating[2] has gone through thousands of evidence-based resources to figure out what a healthy diet is, with the following five food groups as a final product.
Variety of vegetables bursting with nutrients.
A+ fuel for your body- wholegrains.
A healthy diet involves foods from each of the 5 food groups (plus 'sometimes' foods when you're feeling cheeky) listed below.
Vegetables are a great source of nutrients, and we should be eating lots of them every day. Whether they be fresh, frozen, cooked or tinned, getting a wide variety of a rainbow of vegetables is important to feel and look your best. Legumes, such as chickpeas and beans, should also be eaten often.
A cheap, easy-to-prepare source of protein.
Fruit are another food group where a variety of colours are key, and can be eaten fresh, frozen, cooked, tinned, or as juice (with no added sugar). Packed full of fibre and antioxidants (the good guys), fruits can be a delicious burst of healthy energy.
Milk: Rich in vitamins and minerals.
Grain (cereal) foods are a huge source of energy, so it's important to use your brain when choosing which ones to eat. Wholegrain and/or high fibre varieties of cereals provide more fibre, vitamins and minerals, and can be found as breads, cereals, rice, and pasta varieties, amongst others.
'Sometimes' foods for when you're feeling cheeky.
Choosing a variety of lean red meats and poultry (like chicken or turkey), fish, eggs, tofu, nuts and seeds, and legumes/beans, is a super nutritious way to fuel your body to tackle the day. The AGHE[2] recommend trimming fat from meat and skin from poultry before cooking, as well as stir frying or grilling your meats, as opposed to frying or roasting in fat/oil, to reduce fat intake.
Milk, cheese and yoghurt are excellent sources of vitamins and minerals key to good health. The AGHE[2] recommend choosing reduced-fat options when you can. Milk can be fresh, powdered, evaporated or UHT long life.
These are the foods that don't fit into the above groups, because they're not needed to be healthy. They can be too high in energy, as well as fats, sugars, salt and/or alcohol, which can increase your risk of things such as obesity, cardiovascular disease, diabetes and some cancers[3]. This group includes choices such as desserts, pastries, processed meats like salami, potato chips and alcohol.
And don't forget to drink plenty of water!
According to the AGHE[4], 19-50 year old adults should follow the below guide-
How to snack on a budget?
Where can I save?
You save!
Reference supermarket/store bought/frozen foods found on Coles Online[5]
Muesli bar slice. Great to make a big batch of and freeze in individual serves to take with you on the go.
Mason Jar Breakfasts. Portable, leak-proof and tailorable to anybody's taste buds! My favourite is the blueberry lemon yoghurt jar.
Salad in a mason jar. (The deconstructed chicken taco salad holds a special place in my heart).
Anything in a mason jar, really.
Carrot + celery + dip snack pack
Popcorn as an alternative to potato crisps.
A handful of nuts are a great food to snack on between meals to ward off those in between meals hunger pangs.
See if your uni has any cafe's that offer a discount for BYO Keep Cup. Helping the environment and your wallet.
Love a nice hot meal? Most universities provide microwaves. Invest in a good container and bring last nights leftovers for a free, hot meal. (Bonus- Tuppaware offers lifetime warranties!)
Water water water! Invest once off in a reusable bottle and save re-purchasing disposable bottles (that end up rolling around on the floor of your car) when thirst strikes, as well as warding off dehydration masked as hunger.
Bring your backpack-friendly snack ideas to uni with you to keep you full between meals!
And of course... Mason jars! Not only do they look adorable, but they provide a leak-proof lid for any filling (salads, smoothies, deconstructed dinners... The list is endless!)
Australian Guide to Healthy Eating.
DAA Cheap and Cheerful recipes.
Creating Quick and Easy Meals using Common Pantry Items
Are weight loss diets worth their dollar $?
↑ National Healthy and Medical Research Council (2010). Australian dietary guidelines 1-5. Retrieved October 15, 2014, from http://www.eatforhealth.gov.au/guidelines/australian-dietary-guidelines-1-5 .
↑ a b c National Healthy and Medical Research Council (2010). About the Australian Guide to Healthy Eating. Retrieved October 15, 2014, from http://www.eatforhealth.gov.au/guidelines/about-australian-dietary-guidelines .
↑ National Healthy and Medical Research Council (2010). Discretionary food and drink choices. Retrieved October 15, 2014, from http://www.eatforhealth.gov.au/food-essentials/discretionary-food-and-drink-choices .
↑ National Healthy and Medical Research Council (2010). Recommended number of serves for adults. Retrieved October 15, 2014, from http://www.eatforhealth.gov.au/food-essentials/how-much-do-we-need-each-day/recommended-number-serves-adults .
↑ Coles Supermarket (2014). Coles Online. Retrieved October 15, 2014, from https://www.google.com.au/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&es_th=1&ie=UTF-8#q=coles%20store .
Space Elevators have been a theoretical transportation method since 1895. The original idea is impractical to build. This step adds a much more practical design as a transport hub for getting from one orbit to another quickly and efficiently. Initial construction can use materials from Earth, but in larger sizes or locations beyond Earth orbit using local materials is assumed.
6 [Text still to be integrated]
The popular concept of a space elevator is based on the original design proposed by Tsiolkovsky in the late 19th century. It involves a single tower/cable extending all the way past Geosynchronous (24 hour) Earth Orbit (GEO). If the center of mass is at GEO and matches the Earth's daily rotation it will appear to hang motionless relative to the ground. Getting to space in theory then becomes an elevator ride. There are several problems with this simplistic design:
The depth of the Earth's gravity well (6378 g-km) exceeds the scale length of the best available materials (350 km for carbon fiber) by 18 times, which then requires a structure-to-payload mass ratio of 65 million to 1. This would require more carbon fiber than the world makes to lift a reasonable cargo mass, and would never be economical because it would take too long to transport sufficient payload to justify the massive cost of that much structure.
It is of no use for delivering cargo to low orbits. Release points somewhat below GEO result in elliptical orbits with a low perigee, but lower circular orbits cannot be reached. It also is of no use transporting cargo from the ground when partially built.
Even with a magnetically levitated elevator car running at 300 km/hr, it will still take 5 days to deliver one payload to GEO, and you can only deliver one payload at a time.
A single cable catastrophically fails when hit by natural or man-made debris. A cable over 35,000 km long has a lot of area exposed to such hits.
The Skyhook concept addresses all these problems. Instead of a static cable that stays over a fixed location, it can be either a rotating cable in a moving orbit, much like two spokes of an imaginary wheel rolling around the Equator, or a non-rotating cable in a moving orbit that maintains a vertical orientation relative to the parent body.
The non-rotating orbiting Skyhook is a much shorter version of the planetary surface to geostationary orbit Space Elevator that does not reach down to the surface of the parent body, is much lighter in mass, can be affordably built with existing materials and technology, and in its mature form, is cost competitive with what is thought to be realistically achievable using a Space Elevator. It works by starting from a relatively low altitude orbit and hanging a cable down to just above the Earth's atmosphere. Since the lower end of the cable is moving at less than orbital velocity for its altitude, a launch vehicle flying to the bottom of the Skyhook can carry a larger payload then it could carry on its own. When the cable is long enough, Single Stage to Skyhook flight with a reusable launch vehicle becomes possible at a price that is affordable to just about anyone.
A full orbit velocity rotating Skyhook reduces the structural requirement to about 2868 g-km, because only the tip sees the full Earth's gravity. The center is in orbit and thus has zero acceleration load. This immediately reduces the theoretical mass ratio from 65 million to 3,620:1. There is still an exponential relation of mass to tip velocity. Since conventional rockets also have an exponential relation of mass to velocity, it makes sense to split the job between both, because the sum of two exponents, for example e^2 + e^2 = 14.8 is less than a single exponent of the combined powers, i.e e^4 = 54.6. The optimum division of work between the Skyhook and vehicle coming from Earth will depend on technical details and costs, but a simple division of half to each results in a theoretical Skyhook mass ratio of 60:1. A real design will be heavier, but 60:1 is a feasible starting point, where 65 million is not. Reaching half of orbit velocity for a single stage rocket with a life of many flights is quite feasible.
Assuming the tip is at 1 gravity, a rotating Skyhook with a tip velocity of 30-50% of orbit velocity has a radius of 500-1400 km. The center point needs to be that altitude plus enough that the tip does not dip into thick atmosphere and create drag (100-200 km). Releasing from the center of the Skyhook at 600-1600 km altitude allows access to low Earth orbits.
A partially built Skyhook can still function because the remainder of the velocity is provided by the Earth vehicle. During construction the velocity split is more towards the Earth vehicle. This reduces payload mass, but it can still deliver some. In particular, if part of your payload is more Skyhook structure, that payload pays for itself in increased payload on later trips. This is a literal version of "lifting yourself by your bootstraps".
The same fast elevator car at 300 km/hr can reach the center in 2 to 5.3 hours. If your destination is high orbit or Earth escape, you do not have to ride the elevator at all. You wait half a rotation of the Skyhook and let go, at which point you are going at orbit velocity plus tip velocity. To imagine this, think of the top point of a bicycle wheel. It moves faster than the center relative to the ground. A half rotation takes only 10 to 20 minutes.
Space debris cannot be eliminated. Even if all the man-made junk in Earth orbit is eliminated, the natural flux of meteors will continue. Therefore the Skyhook design has to take that into account. The most practical way to do that is to use multiple redundant cables to distribute the load such that cutting one or two is not catastrophic. The cables should be spaced far enough apart that any single object will only hit one or two strands. The strands should also be cross-connected periodically to distribute the load around a break. Repairing a break then becomes replacing a short segment of one strand. Since you have the ability to install segments during original construction, you are able to replace segments as a maintenance job.
The Moon and Mars have smaller gravity wells than the Earth, by ratio of 22 and 5 respectively, so Skyhooks with the same materials can do more of the transportation job relative to Earth. But in this step-by-step combined system example, getting off the Earth comes first. We will discuss the other locations here, but the actual construction will be delayed until easy transport to those locations is needed.
There are two systems that are feasible because of the small gravity well of the Moon. The first is a catapult system to launch bulk materials off the Moon. The catapult uses a rotating cable driven by an electric motor to throw payloads directly into Lunar orbit, where they are picked up by a collector system. The second is an orbiting Skyhook which can deposit and pick up cargoes at zero velocity close to the surface.
Catapults - Basalt fibers are similar to fiberglass in that they are an extruded mineral. They have a strength of 4800 MPa, or 80% of carbon fiber, and a density of 2.7 g/cc, or 50% higher than than carbon. Thus the scale length of Basalt fiber is 178 km, or about half that of carbon fiber. The dark areas (Maria or seas) of the Moon are covered in basalt lava [1], so there is an a very large supply of raw materials. If a Lunar catapult delivers basalt to an orbital processing factory, or spools of fiber already spun on the Moon, it would be possible to build a Lunar Skyhook out of local materials. The choice of Lunar basalt for a Skyhook would have to be compared to the higher performance carbon fiber brought from Earth or made from NEO carbon. Certainly for Lunar surface construction it would have the advantage of being very local.
Catapults could also be built on the Earth or Mars, but for Earth it would need to be placed above the atmosphere on a tall tower to get significant velocity. It is probably not the best method when compared to the alternatives. Mars is much smaller, has less atmosphere, and very tall volcanoes that a catapult can be placed on. So it is worth considering placing a catapult there to deliver materials to orbit. Any catapult (Lunar or other) will need a significant power supply for the motor. In order to not waste the rotation energy when stopping to load the next cargo, it makes sense to consider two catapults, and use one as a generator to supply power to the other. Motor-generator efficiencies can be above 90%, so most of the energy could be recycled.
Skyhook - The Moon's gravity well is equal to 287 km at 1.0 Earth gravity. Thus even for the lower strength basalt fibers, the gravity well is only 1.6 times the scale length of 178 km. For the higher strength carbon fibers with 361 km scale length the ratio is 0.80. Note that scale length is based on breaking strength, actual designs will use lower loads and have overhead above a bare cable. For Earth the theoretical gravity well to carbon fiber scale length ratio is 18, so it is much easier to build a Lunar Skyhook on a relative basis. Another way to say this is the Lunar orbit velocity of 1680 m/s is less than the 2400 m/s tip velocity assumed below for the Earth Skyhook. That provides all of the velocity between the Lunar surface and orbit, while the Earth orbit version only provides 1/3. Since escape velocity is 1.414 times circular orbit velocity, and a full Lunar Skyhook is capable of releasing cargo at 2.0 times orbital velocity, it can handle cargo well beyond escape velocity. By climbing to a chosen radius from the center, and timing when you let go, you can get a wide variety of orbits.
Besides using it as transport to and from the Moon, there is also an opportunity for work crews to use the Skyhook at 1.0 gravity as a rest location, because we don't know the long term effects of 0.16 gravity on the human body. A lunar surface alternative is to use centrifuges to get 1.0 gravity or whatever level is needed. A full Lunar Skyhook would have a radius of 283 km and a rotation period of 17 min 40 sec at 1.0 gravity. Since Lunar orbit period is 108 minutes or longer depending on altitude, the Skyhook will make 6 or more rotations per orbit. If the orbit is equatorial, that allows it to service multiple locations around the Lunar equator, and transport cargo between those points at orbital speed at no cost.
It is an open question if an equatorial orbit is best. A polar orbit would let the Skyhook reach any point on the Lunar surface, but generally only twice a month. The Moon rotates very slowly, so the benefit of the rotation towards the orbit velocity is only 4.6 m/s, 1% of the Earth's contribution. A polar orbit can be arranged as a Sun-synchronous orbit, where the orbit plane always is in sunlight, while an equatorial orbit is in shadow about 40% of the time. Thus the solar arrays that power the Skyhook are more effective in the polar orbit. You can have both Skyhooks in orbit around the Moon, as long as you arrange their orbits to never intersect, such as by using different altitudes. In that case you might want to make the g-forces at the tips higher so the radius is smaller, and move humans quickly up the cable to a more comfortable g-level.
In any Lunar Skyhook, a lander vehicle will need some propulsion because the Moon is not a perfect sphere. So the tips need to stay high enough to miss any high points of the terrain, and some maneuvering is needed for an accurate landing. If you have two Skyhooks at different altitudes, the vehicle will need more fuel to land and take off.
The largest asteroid, 1 Ceres, is 487 km in radius at the equator, with a day length (rotation period) of 9.074 hours. Therefore the equator is moving at 94 m/s. Orbit velocity is estimated at 360 m/s. The exact number will be found when the Dawn spacecraft arrives at Ceres in 2015 (it is in orbit around the 2nd largest asteroid, Vesta, as of 2012). A Skyhook thus needs only the difference of 266 m/s in order to land and pick up cargo and then toss them at more than escape velocity. The radius in this case at 1 g works out to 7.25 km. This is small enough that it could be built near the Earth, and then transported whole to Ceres. Setting it up in orbit would allow mining of the largest asteroid with easy access. A synchronous space elevator would be longer and not provide a 1 gravity environment, but could be used to launch cargo into transfer orbits away from Ceres or capture incoming cargo.
For small asteroids, a Skyhook isn’t necessary for surface access. Even low efficiency chemical rockets do not use much fuel to land, and you can just mechanically throw stuff into orbit or escape.
Pavonis Mons is one of the large mountains on Mars. Since it is located on the Equator, it is an ideal location for some kind of transport system. Candidates include a centrifuge launcher like with the Moon, or a linear accelerator. The higher mass of Mars makes it more difficult than for the Moon, but a ground-based transport system can still do most or all of the job of reaching orbit velocity. Similarly, Mars orbit velocity of 3.6 km/s is within reach of a Skyhook, and there are two convenient former asteroids (Phobos and Deimos) as a source of building materials. A Martian Skyhook would likely be placed in low Mars orbit, with the ability to transfer down to the surface and up to Phobos, Deimos, or escape orbits.
A catapult can be used in combination with a Skyhook to enable higher velocity missions with lower total mass ratios. Bodies as small as the Moon do not require very large mass ratios o reach orbit, so doing a split system will not gain much at the cost of the extra complexity. Conversely the Earth has a fairly dense atmosphere, so a high velocity centrifuge would see a lot of drag unless placed on a very tall structure. The best location for a split system turns out to be Mars, particularly with its tall mountains that are in near vacuum at their peaks. By dividing the velocity between two systems, it becomes 1.8 km/s each, which can be reached with existing materials and conservative mass ratios.
The Earth orbit Skyhook does not have a fixed design as noted above, but rather grows over time. We also do not as yet know what an optimum size will be for given circumstances. A concrete example, however, lets us examine the feasibility and understand what is needed for the various parts. We will assume a tip velocity of 2400 m/s for this example, or roughly 1/3 of orbit velocity, and derive the other characteristics.
Tip Acceleration = 10 m/s^2 - Earth surface gravity is 9.80665 m/s^2. We use 10 for simplicity. That provides normal gravity for any humans on the Skyhook.
Skyhook Radius = 576 km - This is found by solving the centrifugal acceleration formula ( a = v^2/r ) for the radius.
Rotation Period = 25 minutes - We know the circumference of a circle by 2 x pi x r, or 3619 km in this case. Dividing by tip velocity gives the time. For convenience to reach the Skyhook from a launch site, the numbers can be adjusted so the period is an even fraction of the orbit time, i.e. 100 minute orbit with 25 minute rotation time. That way the landing platform will be in the same place each time relative to the launch site.
Orbit Altitude = 750 km - If the tips of the Skyhook reach deeply into the Earth's atmosphere, that will cause drag and heating, and eventually cause the Skyhook to fall down. By placing the tips at least 175 km altitude, then the center must be that plus the radius high. The exact height will be a trade off between less drag, and ease to reach from the ground.
Orbit Velocity = 7474 m/s - Found from the formula below where G is the Gravitational constant, M is the mass of the Earth, and r is the orbit radius, which is the Earth's radius plus the orbit altitude:
Launch Vehicle Payload = 13% - A good chemical rocket would have an exhaust velocity of 4.5 km/s and empty weight of 10%. Without a Skyhook, the total velocity required is about 9 km/s, which results in a payload fraction of 3.5%. Subtracting the 2.4 km/s provided by the Skyhook results in a payload of 13%, or 3.7 times higher. The exact numbers will vary depending on the launch vehicle design, but that gives an idea of the payload improvement the Skyhook can provide, and thus part of the reason to build it. The greatest advantage of a Skyhook is not from the increased payload it provides, but using some of the increase to increase the fatigue life of the vehicle, which is highly non-linear - typically ten times higher for a 10% addition in structure. Airplanes and rockets cost about the same per kg to build. This is not surprising since both are built by aerospace companies out of the same materials. The vast difference in transport cost is due to airplanes flying about 20,000 times during their service life, and rockets usually only flying once. By taking some of the payload increase from a Skyhook and applying it to giving the launch vehicle a long operating life, the operating cost will be vastly reduced.
Payback Time = 1 to 76 launches (average of 43) - If we remove the last 100 m/s of tip velocity, the launch vehicle payload falls to 12.56% from 13.07%. So the incremental benefit of the last 100 m/s is 0.51% of the vehicle mass. Assume we use Torayca T1000G carbon fiber as our main cable material. It has a tensile strength of 6370 MPa and a density of 1.8 g/cc. We allow 40% overhead mass above the bare fiber for a finished cable system, and a 2.0 factor of safety. Thus the working strength is reduced to 2275 MPa, and at a tip acceleration of 10 m/s, the working length becomes 126.4 km.
The 2400 m/s Skyhook has a radius of 576 km, and the acceleration varies from 0 at the center to 10 m/s at the tip, so effective length is half, or 288 km. The cable mass ratio is then e ^ (288/126.4) = 9.762:1. Subtracting the payload mass gives a theoretical cable mass of 8.762. Since this calculation is only for one arm of the Skyhook, we double it to 17.524. The payload of the Skyhook is the launch vehicle payload + the empty vehicle structure without fuel (10% of launch weight), for a total of 23.07% of launch weight. The Skyhook cable mass is then 404.3% of the launch vehicle weight. Doing the same calculations for the 2300 m/s Skyhook, we have a radius of 529 km, effective length of 264.5 km, mass ratio of 8.106, and cable mass of 16.211 times the vehicle arrival mass of 22.56% = 365.7%. The incremental cable mass is then 404.3 - 365.7 = 38.6%. Since we gain 0.51% in payload from this incremental addition to the Skyhook, it pays for itself in payload mass in 76 launches if we use the launch vehicle to deliver the added cable. If we get the extra cable from another source, such as our hypervelocity gun, or from NEO carbon, the payback could be much faster.
Doing the same type of calculation over the whole Skyhook, we have a gain in payload from 3.5 to 13%, or 9.5% of liftoff mass. The Skyhook cable mass is 404.3% of liftoff mass, so the payback time in increased payload is 43 launches. The first 300 m/s increment of the Skyhook increases payload from 3.53% to 4.46%, a gain of 0.93% of liftoff mass. It would have a radius of 9 km, and a cable mass of 7.25% times arrival mass, or 0.98% of launch mass. Thus the payback time is 1 launch, and the cable fits in roughly 1/4 of a payload on it's delivery flight. So the first part of the Skyhook has an immediate payback and is very desirable. Note that a Skyhook massing less than the arrival mass would not have enough orbital energy to give the vehicle on arrival. It would need to be attached to a larger "ballast" mass such as an assembly platform, bulk mined materials, or collected space debris.
Mass payback is not the same as cost payback, but if we assume they are for now, at a relatively low rate of one launch/month, payback takes about 3.6 years, which is reasonable from an economic standpoint. Since the cable mass grows exponentially with tip velocity, the earlier parts will pay back faster, and growth beyond this point will take longer at a fixed launch rate. A real payback analysis will have to take into account real cost instead of mass ratios, and actual launch rates. If less expensive launch systems from Earth are developed, then the cost benefit of a Skyhook goes down, even if the payload mass increase stays the same. On the other hand, if traffic rates go up, do does the cost benefit. No matter what numbers are used, the exponential growth of the Skyhook mass with tip velocity will eventually limit it's size for economic reasons. That is when the incremental cost of making the Skyhook larger becomes more than the incremental payload increase is worth. We emphasize that limit can change over time, however, as new materials become available, different methods of cable delivery are used, and traffic rates change. The Skyhook/launch vehicle interaction is a good example of why combined systems have to be looked at in their entirety, and not as single technologies or methods.
The main structural component of the Skyhook will be the tension strands. In addition there will be secondary structure holding the strands in position, and for the landing platform, propulsion system, habitats, and other items attached to the structure. Cables are not a stable structure unless they are in tension, so for the central portion of the Skyhook before it is set rotating, we assume a core rigid truss structure. The initial total radius is 2500 m, counting core plus cables. This allows 1.0 gravity acceleration at the tips with a rotation period of 100 seconds. The latter number is chosen so that humans are not dis-oriented by rapid rotation. Initial habitats would be placed at the 2500 m radius. Strands are installed both lengthwise and in parallel to expand the Skyhook.
Damage Tolerant Design - Man-made satellites and orbital debris are the largest impact hazard for the structure. For now we assume no cleanup of Earth orbit, though that is desirable. Doing so would reduce the risks by about ten times. If we assume there is a 0.5 mm protective sheath around the strand core, then objects smaller than half that thickness will merely make a crater and not penetrate the core. If we assume a large Skyhook supports 1000 tons of payload at 1.0 gravity, with an 8:1 mass ratio, we have a total load of 10 MN. Given the 2275 MPa working strength, that requires a total area of 44 cm^2 of cable. Assume each strand is 2 cm in diameter. Then we need 14 load carrying strands, and some number of extra strands for damage tolerance, which we will use 7 for now, giving 21 total strands.
Any debris object larger than 1/3 the strand diameter will likely cause enough damage that it fails. Based on a 1995 orbital debris assessment [2] there were about 1 million objects that size and larger. That produces an impact flux of about 10 ^ -4 per square meter per year. If we want a 1% chance of strand failure per year, then we are allowed 100 square meters of area. Since the diameter is assumed to be 2 cm, then the allowed length is 5000 meters. We place cross-connecting rings at that interval to distribute load around a failed strand. At each ring, there are 7 points where 3 strands each fan out. Since by design two are required to handle the load, the failure of the third by debris impact does not cause any reduction in the Skyhook's total load carrying ability.
We do not want a single object to impact too many strands at one time. In the worst case, the largest object in orbit besides the Skyhook, currently the Space Station, should not hit more than our reserve of 7 extra strands. In reality, 99% of damaging debris is smaller than 30 cm, and the Space Station is under active control, so it should not ever hit the Skyhook, but we are looking at a worst case. Since the Station is about 120m wide, if the strands are arranged in a circle, and there are 21 total, a 120m object should not intersect more than 120 degrees of the perimeter. Doing a little geometry yields 120m = 50% of the radius, thus the diameter of the circle is about 480 meters, and the 7 attachment points are spaced about 200 meters apart. A truss spans between each attach point, making a 7-sided ring. If a given strand is damaged, then it is simply replaced by the same construction method the Skyhook was built in the first place. As long as strands can be replaced at least as fast as they are damaged, the Skyhook can be maintained indefinitely.
The above calculations are an example. For a real design, you would find the optimum strand diameter and count, rather than just assume 2 cm and 21. The real debris population is not all in orbits that could intersect the Skyhook. For example, the Space Station is about 400 km altitude, and could only intersect with the bottom 225 km of the Skyhook when it is in the vertical position. Some efforts may be made to clean up orbital debris. But even if not, we can make a reasonable design that can withstand worst case damage and reduce expected damage to a 1% per year maintenance job.
Landing Platform - This functions somewhat like the deck of an aircraft carrier, in that it is a mobile platform which vehicles land and take off from. We assumed above that the Skyhook structure supports 1000 tons of load. This includes everything besides the main structure, including the landing platform. Arriving vehicles would have a smaller mass that is added to the load temporarily. Unlike zero-g docking, which is done slowly, the landing platform is rotating at 1 gravity, so landings will be similar speed to landing on Earth. The size of the platform will be governed by the accuracy of the vehicle navigation. The design can be a horizontal platform, or something like a latching hook or arresting cable, such as used on aircraft carriers. In that case the Skyhook name becomes a literal description. An alternate method is have a vertical capture net. It's as wide and tall as needed to make a good target. The vehicle has redundant capture latches deployed ahead of it, and arrives slightly faster so it runs into the net, and snags multiple cables.
It is assumed the landing will be automated for uncrewed cargo delivery, with radar, lidar, and other aids to getting within the landing target area. The landing platform is made a multiple of the navigation accuracy in size to have a high probability of hitting the target. The best design is an open question, but since landing at 1 gravity has been solved multiple times on Earth, it should be solvable for this task.
After delivering it's payload, the vehicle just needs to let go or be pushed off the platform at the right time. At it's low point, the platform is sub-orbital, so the vehicle will automatically re-enter. The vehicle will be moving at 4,600 m/s relative to the Equator, compared to 7,400 m/s for a rocket without a Skyhook trying to re-enter. Therefore the vehicle has to dissipate 39% as much kinetic energy, which makes the heat shield design much easier.
Low Gravity Platforms - Low- or Zero-gravity is desirable for some tasks in Space. You can place platforms or pressurized habitats at chosen distances from the Skyhook center and get any value between 0 and 1 gravity. For true zero-g, you would need to de-spin the structure so it does not rotate along with the rest of the Skyhook. Likely this will be a structure extending along the axis of rotation like the axle of a wheel, where the Skyhook cables would be spokes of the wheel.
Due to fundamental conservation of energy, transporting more payloads up than down causes the Skyhook to lose orbital energy and eventually re-enter if not corrected. We use the highly efficient electric thrusters developed in an earlier step to maintain orbit. In effect, the electric thrusters substitute for the lower efficiency chemical rocket engines on the launch vehicle. Electric type engines have too low a thrust to reach orbit by themselves, but by attaching them to a Skyhook, we can add orbital energy gradually, and then give that to the payload in a short time. The Skyhook becomes a very efficient battery for storing orbital energy, about 25 times the energy/mass of Lithium batteries on Earth.
Power Rquirements - For each kg of payload we are placing in orbit, we are changing the velocity from 5074 to 7474 m/s. This requires adding 15 MJ of energy. Since there are 31.5 million seconds in a year, then that means for each kg/year of payload, we need 0.477 watts of delivered orbital energy. In Earth orbit we are not in sunlight 100% of the time, so solar panels would need to be larger to average this power level, and electric thrusters are not 100% efficient, either. Using reasonable numbers of 60% sunlight time and 65% thruster efficiency, we get our solar panels need a peak output of 1.22 Watts/kg/year. If we want to deliver 1000 tons/year, then the power supply needs to be 1.22 MW. Nuclear power is excluded from consideration for political and safety reasons so close to Earth. Existing solar cells, allowing for 100% overhead, have a mass of 1.68 kg/m^2[3], and an efficiency of 29.5% vs a Solar constant of 1360 W/m^2. Therefore they produce 238 W/kg of output and their mass is 5.1 tons.
Thruster Type - For low Earth orbit, there are three types available with near-term technology: Ion, Plasma, or Electrodynamic. Electrodynamic uses less "fuel", but is not as well developed. Ion is well developed, but does not scale up to the high power levels as well. We will assume Plasma thrusters, but development of Electrodynamic should be pursued, and all three types considered as candidates. Current plasma thrusters in development are designed for 200 kW continuous power, so 6 units plus some number of spares would be needed for the Skyhook design. The estimated mass of the thrusters is 3 tons.
Fuel Requirement - With 1000 tons/year of cargo delivery to which 2.4 km/s of velocity is added, we need to expel 48 tons/year of thruster propellant at 50 km/s to maintain the Skyhook orbit. This can either come along with the cargo, serving as 4.8% overhead, or if materials are being extracted from nearby asteroids can come from them. The latter is preferred since it's more efficent for the launch vehicle.
Plasma Environment - The ionosphere can cause charge build up.
[Text still to be integrated]
A space elevator system in the form of a rotating Skyhook would allow using highly efficient electric thrusters in place of low performance chemical rockets for much of the transport job in gravity wells or between orbits. The first one could be built in Low Earth Orbit, and then others in higher orbits and around other bodies. The Earth's gravity well is too deep to fully span with current materials, so the low orbit Skyhook is not a full ground-to-orbit elevator. Still, reducing the work for a launch vehicle by 30-50% brings dramatic cost reductions. For smaller bodies such as the Moon or Mars, a Skyhook could span the whole gravity well.
As a large transport infrastructure project, similar to a bridge or airport on Earth, the Skyhook is built when traffic demands it and not before, and then expanded incrementally. The materials for the Skyhooks, such as carbon fiber, may come from orbital mining and processing. In that case their construction would not require large amounts of mass to be launched from Earth. Even if all the mass has to be brought from Earth, the potential for improved payload justifies at least more analysis to see if it is feasible.
↑ Gunn, Dr. B.M.Lunar Basalts and Anorthosites
↑ National Academies Press Orbital Debris: A Technical Assessment, 1995
↑ Emcore Space Solar Cell Products
The numbers one and two have a masculine and a feminine form. As the singular and dual form of the noun already imply the number, those numbers are only used with a noun in order to stress it. In that case the numbers follow the noun like an adjective.
The numbers 3 to 19 have two forms as well, one used independently and one preceding a noun. The noun is plural only after the numbers 3 to 10. After numbers larger than 10 the singular is used.
Ordinal numbers can either precede or follow the noun. When preceding the noun, the masculine singular form is used without the definite article.
There are no ordinal numbers above 10, instead the cardinal numer is used following the noun.
The rendering engine in Revit was vastly improved in the 2009 version. This chapter should be expanded upon to discuss the new engine.
When a rendering is exported in the TIFF file format, the sky area is saved as an alpha channel. This makes it very easy to strip out in Photoshop to be replaced with a background image of your choice.
Export your rendering as a TIFF file.
Open the TIFF file in Photoshop.
You won't have any layers in your document (and you need these to have a transparent background), so double click the background layer in the layers pallette. *This will turn the background into a new layer (through a dialogue box).
Ensure that the document is correct (the same as the one you are working on)
Ensure that the Channel is Alpha 1
Use "New Selection" as the operation
If your selection is the sky, hit the delete button and the sky will disappear. If your selection is your building, choose Copy and then you can paste the building into another Photoshop file that has a background image.
Computing » Computer Science » Computer Programming » Ada Programming
Analects of Confucius (Translated by James Legge)
CHAP. I. The Master said, 'It is virtuous manners which constitute the excellence of a neighborhood. If a man in selecting a residence, do not fix on one where such prevail, how can he be wise?'
CHAP. II. The Master said, 'Those who are without virtue cannot abide long either in a condition of poverty and hardship, or in a condition of enjoyment. The virtuous rest in virtue; the wise desire virtue.'
CHAP. III. The Master said, 'It is only the (truly) virtuous man, who can love, or who can hate, others.'
CHAP. IV. The Master said, 'If the will be set on virtue, there will be no practice of wickedness.'
CHAP. V. 1. The Master said, 'Riches and honours are what men desire. If it cannot be obtained in the proper way, they should not be held. Poverty and meanness are what men dislike. If it cannot be avoided in the proper way, they should not be avoided.
'If a superior man abandon virtue, how can he fulfil the requirements of that name?
'The superior man does not, even for the space of a single meal, act contrary to virtue. In moments of haste, he cleaves to it. In seasons of danger, he cleaves to it.'
CHAP. VI. 1. The Master said, 'I have not seen a person who loved virtue, or one who hated what was not virtuous. He who loved virtue, would esteem nothing above it. He who hated what is not virtuous, would practise virtue in such a way that he would not allow anything that is not virtuous to approach his person.
'Is any one able for one day to apply his strength to virtue? I have not seen the case in which his strength would be insufficient.
'Should there possibly be any such case, I have not seen it.'
CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'The faults of men are characteristic of the class to which they belong. By observing a man's faults, it may be known that he is virtuous.'
CHAP. VIII. The Master said, 'If a man in the morning hear the right way, he may die in the evening without regret.'
CHAP. IX. The Master said, 'A scholar, whose mind is set on truth, and who is ashamed of bad clothes and bad food, is not fit to be discoursed with.'
CHAP. X. The Master said, 'The superior man, in the world, does not set his mind either for anything, or against anything; what is right he will follow.'
CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'The superior man thinks of virtue; the small man thinks of comfort. The superior man thinks of the sanctions of law; the small man thinks of favours which he may receive.'
CHAP. XII. The Master said: 'He who acts with a constant view to his own advantage will be much murmured against.'
CHAP. XIII. The Master said, 'Is a prince is able to govern his kingdom with the complaisance proper to the rules of propriety, what difficulty will he have? If he cannot govern it with that complaisance, what has he to do with the rules of propriety?'
CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'A man should say, I am not concerned that I have no place, I am concerned how I may fit myself for one. I am not concerned that I am not known, I seek to be worthy to be known.'
CHAP. XV. 1. The Master said, 'Shan, my doctrine is that of an all-pervading unity.' The disciple Tsang replied, 'Yes.'
The Master went out, and the other disciples asked, saying, 'What do his words mean?' Tsang said, 'The doctrine of our master is to be true to the principles of our nature and the benevolent exercise of them to others,-- this and nothing more.'
CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'The mind of the superior man is conversant with righteousness; the mind of the mean man is conversant with gain.'
CHAP. XVIII. The Master said, 'In serving his parents, a son may remonstrate with them, but gently; when he sees that they do not incline to follow his advice, he shows an increased degree of reverence, but does not abandon his purpose; and should they punish him, he does not allow himself to murmur.'
CHAP. XIX. The Master said, 'While his parents are alive, the son may not go abroad to a distance. If he does go abroad, he must have a fixed place to which he goes.'
CHAP. XX. The Master said, 'If the son for three years does not alter from the way of his father, he may be called filial.'
CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'The years of parents may by no means not be kept in the memory, as an occasion at once for joy and for fear.'
CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'The reason why the ancients did not readily give utterance to their words, was that they feared lest their actions should not come up to them.'
CHAP. XXIII. The Master said, 'The cautious seldom err.'
CHAP. XXIV. The Master said, 'The superior man wishes to be slow in his speech and earnest in his conduct.'
CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'Virtue is not left to stand alone. He who practises it will have neighbors.'
CHAP. XXVI. Tsze-yu said, 'In serving a prince, frequent remonstrances lead to disgrace. Between friends, frequent reproofs make the friendship distant.'
Ref: http://www.gutenberg.org/files/4094/4094-h/4094-h.htm
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
There are currently a few great products that utilize artificial intelligence for home use. Many monotonous chores can be replaced by such technologies and give the individual more time to pursue other activities.
One such product is the robotic vacuum made by IRobot. This vacuum will automatically release itself from itself charging craddle and proceed to automatically vacuum your carpet or hardwood floors. One charge is good for 45min of vacuuming and it will let you know when it needs to be emptied out. A similar product by the same manufacturer will wash your hardwood floors. With the use of sensors and infrared tracking beams it will avoid carpets and will cover a 12 foot by 12 foot kitchen in 45 min. There is also an industrial version of this used in warehouses and industry shops. Needless to say that this is just a sure sign of great things to come with the implementation of AI being used to make jobs easier.
RoboMower® is as the name implies. It is a robotic lawn mower that actually does the mowing for you. The charger station is also set up so that your mower is charged. This mower comes supplied with a wires and pegs and a charger station. Set up your charger station to make sure your mower is powered up and ready to go. Next, you lay the wire and pegs around the perimeter of your lawn. Sensors in the mower make sure the mower does not but your neighbors lawn as well. The idea is that the wire sinks into the lawn and becomes unnoticable. The Romomower crisscrosses the lawn to make sure the whole lawn is as short as you like it. All you need to do next is set the schedule of operation (which can be rescheduled any time) and let your dog chase it around all summer long (not recommended for safety reasons though).
Reference:http://www.friendlyrobotics.com/robomow/howitworks/ January 16, 2007
Another application of Artificial Intelligence around the home can be found in the increasing number of "Robo pets" that are being marketed to a market segment in search of a low maintenance relationship. While this sector is still in the earliest stages of development, some of these toys, like Tamagotchis(little egg-shaped virtual pets that require constant care and nurturing in order to be kept alive), have had a great success. Another example is the AIBO dog developed by Sony a few years ago having seeing eyes and stereo ears. It has programmed emotions and can recognize words as it "grows". Researchers are now trying to develop a pet prototype that would be sensitive to human emotions.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Schizophrenia is a severe mental disorder affecting more than 21 million people worldwide.
Schizophrenia is characterized by distortions in thinking, perception, emotions, language, sense of self and behaviour. Common experiences include hearing voices and delusions.
Worldwide, schizophrenia is associated with considerable disability and may affect educational and occupational performance.
People with schizophrenia are 2-2.5 times more likely to die early than the general population. This is often due to physical illnesses, such as cardiovascular, metabolic and infectious diseases.
Schizophrenia is characterized by distortions in thinking, perception, emotions, language, sense of self and behaviour. Common experiences include hearing voices and delusions.
Schizophrenia affects more than 21 million people worldwide but is not as common as many other mental disorders. It is more common among males (12 million), than females (9 million). Schizophrenia also commonly starts earlier among men.
Schizophrenia is associated with considerable disability and may affect educational and occupational performance.
People with schizophrenia are 2-2.5 times more likely to die early than the general population. This is often due to physical illnesses, such as cardiovascular, metabolic and infectious diseases. For example, the prevalence of diabetes in people with schizophrenia is 2-3 times higher than the general population. This is partly due to the lifestyle of people living with schizophrenia and partly due to antipsychotic treatment, both of which can lead to weight gain.
Research has not identified one single factor. It is thought that an interaction between genes and a range of environmental factors may cause the disorder. Environmental factors include early exposure to certain infections, malnutrition during pregnancy and infancy, and problems during childbirth.
Psychosocial factors also contribute to schizophrenia. These include urbanization, immigration, psychological trauma and stress.
More than 50% of people with schizophrenia are not receiving appropriate care. Ninety per cent of people with untreated schizophrenia live in developing countries. Lack of access to mental health services is an important issue. Furthermore people with schizophrenia are less likely to seek care than the general population.
Schizophrenia is treatable. Treatment with medicines and psychosocial support is effective. However, the majority of people with chronic schizophrenia do not receive treatment.
There is clear evidence that old-style mental hospitals are not effective in providing the treatment that people with mental disorders need and violate basic human rights of persons with mental disorders. Efforts to transfer care from mental health institutions to the community need to be expanded and accelerated. The engagement of family members and the wider community in providing support is very important.
Pilot programmes in several developing countries (e.g. Ethiopia, Guinea-Bissau, India, Iran, Pakistan, Tanzania) have demonstrated the feasibility of providing care to people with severe mental illness through the primary health-care system by:
People with schizophrenia are prone to human rights violations both inside mental health institutions and in communities. Stigma of the disorder is high. This contributes to discrimination, which can in turn limit access to education, housing and employment.
High altitude Map view Driver mode map image of a Trainz users route undergoing a major expansion North and East from the more developed and debugged route at the left and the lower left corner. • Gray region from the Northeast corner are recently added 'Trainz boards' (720m x 720 m) with some odd looking track segments seen on the picture's right side. These and other disconnected tracks were used to help set gradients in the slopes of the terrain, where 'E07743' are hand labeled altitude references (Elevation 0774.3 metres) in this mountainous fantasy model railroad. • Light blue 'human names' are Trainz AI Drivers operating trains to a scripted command sequence. • The modeler has established the altitude, gradients and colorized a small river and it's banks before adding higher terrain detailing and shaping. • Various rectangular swatches show where the modeler copied base coloration and scrub forest areas from elsewhere on the model preparatory to finer detailing. • Various place labels are on the map with the temporary terrain shaping labeling, including a train station and a 'spray painted' name of a planned town called Afton. The region shown 5w x ~4h Trainz-boards (720m x 720m) represents 3600 x ~2880 meters, 1036.8 hectares, 10.368 sq-km, 4.003 sq-mi, and 2562 Acres of mountainous terrain.
A full Trainz release is an advanced 'industrial strength' railroading simulator with world modeling abilities, not just a computer game. It is designed to allow model railroading in 'V-scale', or Virtual-scale, meaning creates and allows a user to interact with a virtual reality, which is the computing technical term for creating and playing around in an alternative reality of your own or another's making. It was one of the first commercially released software packages that did so, and unlike the big budget Microsoft Train Simulator (MSTS), released the same year—and quite a few others—it is both relatively easy to model in, and still going strong as a series.
It is extensible in all versions and Trainz releases make up a family of backwards compatible products with new releases and upgrades steadily growing in capability and power. The software system gives you everything you need to build a Virtual Model Railroad far larger and far less expensively than the dedicated hobbyist who has slaved away devotedly to build an expensive Basement Railroad Empire. In Trainz you can unleash your own creative streak to make a prototype model railroad—model a real railroad down to amazing degrees of accuracy, including if you like, automated topography from the United States Geological Survey (USGS) agency or other government's agencies (Trainz is world wide, Trainzers come from everywhere) that host satellite measured height above ground (HOG) data that can be rendered into a Digital Enhanced Map (DEM data). Alternatively, you can unleash the wild beast creative in yourself and create a Fantasy or Fictional Railroad in any setting and type of terrain that you dream up and can justify to yourself. Many Trainzer operating in that mode create a Fictional History to provide a backstory for their creation.
Given that background, consider that most dedicated 'Trainzers' do not typically operate or drive Trainz in their ordinary everyday time spent in Trainz! Trainzers all drive now and then, and enjoy the heck out of that game aspect, but that is not the magic of the software to Trainzers most days 'playing' in Trainz. Most Trainzers, like the user group Yesterdayz Trainz who among others, maintain this Wikibook, spend more Trainz time building stuff—and get a lot of payback from anticipating how their time will show up as a 3D Virtual World (Route building) or in creating other 'assets' that are static or dynamic 3D models that will come to life and populate such routes or layouts. A lone creator doesn't get much satisfaction from a monopoly on an asset she built, so we generally share these goodies with others in the world wide Trainz Community by uploading them to the massive data base in the cloud at Auran.com known as the Download Station. Other community members can then share the joy of that new asset, and this is the true strength of any Trainz version—technology permitting, you can always access and add more free content.
There is a lot of satisfaction to create something at all, much less something admired and complimented by others, so there are Trainzers who do little else but create 'professional grade' assets, and many a tyro with ambitions of acquiring such high-level skills who learn the Trainz ropes step-by-step and build up to that level, gaining satisfaction at every little victory. There are many more willing to help in acquiring that knowledge and that's what this Wikibook is all about. Members of the Trainz community have come together to share their knowledge and make a reference you can tap into any time you need to advance your knowledge of Trainz.
That means if you get joy from creation, that you never "reach the end" and there are always more things to do, and even more to learn, for not only does the Trainz technology continue to change and improve, but you'll find there is always something more you can do on your own projects. Other users, skilled in the arcana of script computer languages continue to create those generalized assets which extend the flexible game capabilities even farther that the N3V programmers sometimes envision. Features can be requested, and when honored in a Service Pack or new Trainz Retail release, can then be exploited by such scripts or new graphical features. Since there is a world wide user community, and there is a free website many add content and new routes up to, you can expand and select from a lot of non-Payware—over 267,000 assets were available for the four year old technology in TRS2009-SP1 in May 2013!
Another strength of Trainz is a 3D asset can be imported from one (older) version to another; some times with only a little bother, mostly just by downloading it or cross loading it from an older Trainz release into a newer one. Many underlying parts of the technology haven't changed, so are very stable requiring no adjustments since Trainz 1.0! Hence many Trainzers, especially content creators operate more than one version of Trainz, for there is a unique asset technology level code that is part of the asset and the lower that "Trainz-build" code, the more Trainzers with older versions can use it. Understand, many assets do not or cannot exploit new technology features, so creating them a a higher-than-necessary tech level makes them less useful to the community of Trainzers.
Your biggest container is your simulator's Content Manager data base. Your routes and sessions and any other assets you download, create or import are organized and saved therein. The next container is a route or layout, which accesses that data base and in the GUI software modules launched from the Trainz Main Menu's Surveyor, Railyard, and Driver bring the assets into a 3D virtual reality.
The simplest of these is Railyard, where only rolling-stock-classed assets can be viewed as if walking around nearby, climbing on top of, or examined by browsing through the alphabetical menu, which allows as well a view of the assets description, some of which contain histories, specifications, and even which rail road companies used the transport vehicle.
This Trainz/Things You Can Do In Trainz section is a stub placeholder, an outline or marker that this section of the book is otherwise incomplete. You can help the Wikibooks Trainz project by expanding it with fuller discussion of the topic. Work needed: Needs a para on each major GUI and what they do.
When an 'asset' is placed in a container, it then becomes 'content'. On the web boards and in casual talk, the two terms are oft used interchangeably, albeit sometimes a bit less or more incorrectly. The biggest container is one's database (and the Content Manager utility data base manager) followed then in size by a Route (layout) and a Driver Session; each of which share the attributes of combining many different kinds of train assets in a system. Many separate KINDs of train asset also may group different sub-assets, including sub-assets by reference to a KUID (unique ID number).
There was a '60s expression which fits Trainz well... "Different strokes for different folks!" Like in physical scale model railroading, different owners are interested in different aspects of railroading— some like creating realistic scenery, others modeling an actual real world railway (a prototype railroad), others the experience of driving, some designing the 'game play' aspect of Trainz, sessions for others to Drive and experience on a particular map or layout. Many like a bit of each in their turn.
In Trainz if you don't like a layout, a few mouse clicks puts you back in the menu to select a different one. If you don't like one from the version's base content, there are over 3,500 routes listed on the Download station. You don't have to face tearing down man-years worth of painstaking effort of that model railroad which has been king of the basement all these many years, nor do you have to spend years building it's virtual equivalent: Many Trainz routes began modeled on model railway layouts, and today many model railroad clubs Trainz in 'V-scale' as much as meet at the club house where they pay dues, etc.
The difference between V-scale and other 'standard' model railroading scales is vast. Perhaps the most popular is the H.O. scale train sets sold so often during the Christmas holiday season. Model Railroaders look with some disdain at the technology level of the undercarriages, meaning couplers, wheels (plastic) and trucks; so would immediately replace with steel wheels, better trucks and much better couplers. Such an upgrade can cost up to $5.00 a car. In Trainz, it takes a few minutes editing a configuration file "config.txt", which is an initialization file common to all Trainz assets, and an whole consist of thirty coal hopper cars would be updated forevermore for five minutes of editing using a common text editor. If you want to run 90' to 120' passenger coaches, the least 'radius of curvature' you can put on a layout and not expect frequent derailments operating 'at speed' on a H.O. layout is 23-24 inches. To make a full 180° turn the inner track uses a full width of a 4'x 8' plywood panel. that means a H.O. model railroad takes a lot of space.
A Trainz route needs a reasonably good computer and can display and run a route that is well into the hundreds of miles. Many of these routes now are created using Digital elevation model (DEM) technologies, accurately positioning real railroad trackage in V-scale.
Furthermore, a major feature of Trainz is that it replaces all the messes, wiring, sweat, tears, track laying and hammered fingers, torn/ruined clothing, physical insults to oneself such as nicks, cuts and scraped fingers—not to mention the several thousands of dollars— necessary to build a modest model railroad of your dreams in all too little space (most HO railroad projects need a large room to affect a small railroad)—Trainz programs give one all that without messy paints, plaster of Paris over a wood and chicken wire frame in a virtual space that can extends tens of miles in a given Route (railroad), and you don't have to give up the spare room, crowd up the basement, nor squeeze into the attic to create just a shortline model for a few miles of track in a repetitive quasi-circular motif.
The world is filled with learning curves
Like a new comer in the model railroading world, there are learning curves to surmount, not the least for example, the fact the simulator really models the physics of an actual train, it's responses and load effects in what is called CAB (in the Cab) mode. Or there is the option of DCC, which is much like the model railroad electrical controls, dial and all, with hot keys for switching and similar 'arcade game' play options. Learners start there, then learn to tame the CAB mode. Both are fun, and have their uses.
The current release of Trainz is Trainz 2012 (TS2012) which still only requires 32 bit computer architecture but does need more advanced video cards. Trains 2004/2006 run fine on even laptops of their era and look quite stunning on newer more modern high definition monitor technologies. 1.3Trainz 1.x Trainz 1.3Trainz 1.x was released in 2001, and looks, feels and operates in Driver much like it's successors, only with less capable graphics, far less available built-in content. TRS2004 was a major step forward introducing Sessions, interactive industries, and utilities for uploading and downloading content to the Download Station; initially full of bugs after the release of four service packs the version gradually took on iconic status, became a 'best seller' and many Trainzer both still run it and saw no reason to upgrade beyond it.
In 2005 Auran begat TRS2006 with much the same graphics engine and a huge base data cabinet of ready to use assets, but the release improved upon Trainz 2004's gameplay very little but advanced instead by fixing data management issues by introducing the Content Manager Plus. Auran then sat on their laurels involving itself instead in developing a massive MMORPG, Fury which bombed. Thereafter, each Trainz release was one of the many code stable Trainz 2006 variants (and there were a lot), exploiting regional pride with partnerships providing custom content opening up many new non_English-speaking markets and the capstone of that flurry of series Trainz Classics were iteratively better looking, smoother operating and used better technologies.
The TRS's graphics engine and technology found it's way into a flurry of other non-railroad modeling and several major road companies (i.e. Real Railroad Operating companies) were interested in adapting the simulator for training staff; ultimately a mis-guided bad fit for the software, and one which slowed new releases, and in the end effectively killed Auran which had used the cash stream from the steadily growing Trainz franchise to invest heavily on this speculative direction, Fury, and several other products which didn't return anything but business liabilities. Auran was legally reorganized when is sought bankruptcy protection from creditors and sought other investors.
After a while Auran became N3V Games and returning to it's strength eventually produced the Trainz 2009, the World Builder Edition and the name is eponymous, the improvements in TRS2009 greatly improved route building ease, content selection and save lots of a user's time when operating Surveyor. TC 1,2, and TC3 and TS2009, look a bit different, somewhat spiffier with a new skin and semi-transparent drop down menus versus that look-see-and aspect of the preceding main releases, but the operating feel is the same, and the tools have only gotten better version to version. If you don't yet own a Trainz or unsure of your hardware's capabilities, TS2009 is available still for download at Auran.com and various web site vendors like Amazon.com. It runs fine on a 2003 era 2Ghz Pentium 4 and updated video card, as well as a 7 year old business laptop (both have 2 Gbytes RAM memory); and neither were ever 'gamer' machines.
TS2010 and TS2012 have more taxing graphical and computer performance requirements, but may run still run fine on younger generation laptops. One stable staple of the company philosophy is keeping the graphical engine a few years behind leading edge technology, allowing today's Trainz release to run on yesterdays advanced graphics, which of course gradually permeate into a staple computer ability. This means a new Trainz version runs on just about anything from several years ago, creating a broad base of platforms serving the needs of it's million plus registered Trainz users. (Many of those have multiple versions, or the whole collection. Visit the website and see some posts; the users have 'Stations' shown in a track diagram indication registered versions. Want a question answered, ask a Trainz veteran.)
Beginning with the Trainz 2004 (TRS2004) release and the much improved database facilities of the TRS2006 releases, there are three main operating modes or modules and several auxiliaries accessed via a common Launcher program: A database manager (formerly and initially long called CMP or Content Manager Plus which debuted as TRS2006's most significant improvement to users with respect to time, and which also incorporated the formerly separate uploading and downloading content run time programs—separate .EXE files launched independently—to upload and download from the DLS or Download Station server and website. TRS2006.exe is a typical launcher program, or front-end menu. Except for a few set up options adjustments and linking various parts of Trainz and the web site, it is small and does just that, connect things to make them simple. It or the equally eponymous TRS2004, TRS2009,..., TRS2012 are usually also the install folder name, so serve as a shorthand identifying the base release.
CMP was a big step forward, for it included the ability to set certain selection criteria (region+building+era or industry+build+maker, and many other combinations) called filters, and look at them both in installed content but also in what was available on the DLS for the same criteria —CMP has lost it's plus, and is now just called 'CM' in newer releases; the CM or database manager will automatically list and download content from the Auran database, inform you that an upgrade exists, and download your shopping cart of free goodies when you ask it... allowing even more extensibility of your created worlds).
The DLS and free user created (shared freeware under version control) content is one of the nicest features of Trainz, and by shopping the website or by DLS filters it is where you can access parts (assets) and download new (free or for pay) content/extensions/assets, the world building/editing Gui environment tool called Surveyor, and the Driver module where one enters play mode and interacts with the virtual worlds created in Surveyor. Surveyor can also use that same set of filters, allowing you to narrow down and exclude (Indian+Japanese+Austrailian+USA+German railway assets on a Irish Railway. Or selectively include as you like. Trainz is all about home cooking to suit yourself.
There are also two auxiliary GUI database modes called Railyard and Paintshed; the first allows one to browse rolling stock; the second to modify paint schemes and adapt it to a local color scheme (Livery in Railroad speak). CM/CMP has thumbnail images so the full screen Railyard is useful for choosing period or line specific assets for a Driver Session; the asset which merges the Session's asset (scenario) tasks, rolling stock, Interactive Industries and you into a virtual railroad on a particular Route you or someone else created or modified in Surveyor. 'Tasking' is what the Model Railroad clubs do with one another worldwide—usually in timed contests, puzzle tests to use the least number of switching operations or junction changes or with co-operative sharing of rolling stock across parts of a layout (switching consists or engineers at the border, so to speak). Operation of such a physical model railroad and Auran's Driver Module are the real world and virtual world equivalents.
There are two driving modes, DCC (Digital Command Control which is simpler based on model railroad electrical systems and CAB mode (Cabin mode) which is considerably more challenging and realistic, placing you in charge of modeled real world train cab controls.
In each, one's Viewpoint can be outside the train (External mode) which can be focused and located as if attached on any of the trains cars (usually 'begins' on the Locomotive driven, but can center on any car in the consist), from an exterior fixed camera position one adds in Surveyor (Tracking camera/mode), inside the train CAB (giving the mode its name 'Cab mode' but also sometimes selectable inside some passenger vehicles), or Free Roaming, which allows one to use the mouse to fly down the virtual world ahead or behind the train and see signals, switches (turn outs, junctions, switches or points are all equivalent in railroad-speak) and generally see anything in the virtual world of your route. Each viewing mode but the fixed tracking camera allows the user to pan and change angles, rotate in all three dimensions and look around. They also zoom in or out using the mouse wheel and or cursor arrow keys on the keyboard. Both driving modes also have a set of operator hot keys allowing one to not use the mouse pointer drag method if desired.
DCC emulates the forgiving and speedier reaction physics of driving a model railroad, in many respects but a big consist still takes a while to slow or speed up. The mouse tip turns a dial and your engine responds quite a bit quicker than a train would in a real world. Alternatively, one can use hotkeys centered about the classic gaming control practice centered about the S key to control the loco. In practice, one uses both. The mass of the train is not neglected, and you still can't start on a dime, but speed changes and stops occur far faster and so driving a task is much easier (and/or safer).
CAB mode puts you in the virtual cab where you control the train using analogs of real modeled controls used by real world engineers. The mouse cursor point moves levers, turns valves to replenish boiler water, pushes buttons, tugs the horn cable and so forth, then the control takes effect. In short, like driving a real world vehicle, there are delays, sometimes appreciable delays that compound in the modeling of long trains with long consists of rail-cars depending upon air brakes and pressure changes through a lengthy system of hoses and pipes to effectuate actual braking, or brake releases. A 3500 ton train has a lot of momentum and takes some thinking ahead to drive safely. This can be fun and challenging, particularly when one needs to complete a picky task without running off the end of a siding when parking that particular car at an industry loading dock with little room to spare! Many coupling and decoupling sessions will also take off points for overenthusiastic coupling speeds. Coupling too fast will also virtually break consist couplers, leaving you to replay the mission (and hopefully learn from your mistake).
These are scripts hidden as debugged graphical icons which you can set up in a list (queue) in Surveyor so AI Drivers (Artificial intelligence assistants) will follow and obey automatically. Conversely, in Driver, they can be dragged and dropped on the fly into a similar command queue, which allows you to dynamically change the instruction set for that particular AI Driver.
These include visiting industries and loading or unloading at them, stopping at train stations, following schedules, and so forth. These can be event triggered creating traffic you have to work around, or just add flavor while they go past where you are working. The system also contains portals, which are off the layout but provide simulated far off destinations and train sources that traverse your layout under similar programming one sets up in a session using surveyor for the particular train and its AI Driver. Time controls then generate the new train and Driver on your route which enters from the portal. Commands even span entering one portal (leaving your route) and returning from the same asset or from another portal. These can also be set up to empty a loaded train or load an empty train then return it.
More dynamically, iPortals allow co-operative train sharing between on-line players connected by Trainz chat similar to the way a Model Railroading Club set up in a hobby show will turn control over to another operator on the next part of the interconnected model railroad tables (Track alignment and spacing in such groups is possible because the clubs have developed a standard.) Iportals are far more flexible, requiring no alignments and can be in the middle of a much larger layout.
Explore the built-in Routes (layouts) which come with the program
These are changeable and extensible and yet will remain unchanged! Auran's Trainz disallows overwriting alterations of the canned content, but will happily clone such assets and allow you to create and fiddle from that copy at will. Most have associated Driver Session assets that will allow you to play before you put on your virtual carpenters apron. But jump right in. You can't hurt anything, but if you change it and overwrite a copy, there's no backup. You have to make that yourself by changing the name when saving. When launching, the simulator automatically indexes you to the last thing you accessed.
This is the easiest way to gain some fun experience with the many tools in the Surveyor GUI, go ahead and change a fields' appearance, 'paint' a different texture on that cliff, lay some new track, extend the world off the edge by adding a new baseboard (720x720 meters), add that industry or tree or grove, program that train station or add another five or ten trains or consists (groups of cars, assemblies). Once you change it, it's your own private world until you choose to share it.
Similarly, learning the art of creating bug proof Drivers command queues using the graphical script writing command system by modifying one of the tutorials in Surveyor is the best way to begin to learn and employ the extensive Driver Command system. (As I write this there are 14 AI Drivers systematically running as many locomotives to and from interactive industries on a watershed following route through mountainous terrain that is 25×16 baseboards (map squares) or 18.0×11.52 kilometers, that began exactly that way—as an adaptation of the Highland Valley Industries scenario used for the fifth tutorial, and which was bundled with all releases from the first through TRS2006. It uses only stock assets from TRS2004 and TRS2006, and is now in its fourth year, so you need not investigate on-line extensions at all to spend many a fun hour recreating and creating on Trainz.)
Run the built-in Driver sessions and/or scenarios
These include tutorials and challenges of various types. Many of these are based on Model Railroading Club practices, many of which have self-organized as prolific Trainz contributors providing much of the overwhelming wealth of free or for-pay content available to download. Need a new building type? Odds are there are ten or twelve out there modeled on real world structures put together by guys and gals experienced with model building in physical model railroads who have spread their enthusiasms and talents throughout the world community. Go ahead, boldly change that tutorial to run in a blinding rainstorm, steady snow, or at night. Surveyor gives you control of the world (virtually) to do as you will.
Tip: One of the great features of TRS2006 is that you can save many different operations session setups with a given route. E.g. an early morning passenger run or a midnight freight haul.
The Surveyor module of Trainz makes the inevitably complicated process of making a layout as easy as possible. However, while a small simple layout can be made by anyone, creating a worthwhile layout will take a very considerable amount of time, effort and skill. Starting with a stock kernel is easier, so add another baseboard square or three dozen, use the editing tools to copy terrains or towns and build some skills using the editor as you learn the art of terrain shaping and the tougher art of painting.
Additional items are available on Auran's (the program's publisher) web site or a large number of Trainz fan-sites. Much of this material is freeware but some is payware, requiring a payment per item or a subscription for a period of time. The quality of these additional items varies enormously but some are of the highest standard.
Many assets are required by newly acquired layouts or Driver modules but which aren't readily provided from the same source. Most often, a little diligent web searching can locate a source. It can be very frustrating when that fails, but an appeal on the website chats will likely find willing help that will email the asset to you, including older asset versions which have not been updated or vice versa; many times a party will adapt things into the newer flavor after a major release. Website chats and fan-sites are active and useful places.
These have their own special challenges and enjoyments.
Learn how to correct errors in downloaded assets
Since most additional items are created by Trainz owners with varying skill levels, they sometimes need to be mended before they will work. This is particularly true of older assets imported into newer versions or vice versa.
Some new constructs use features not found in older releases, as the system continues to evolve capabilities and features.
Other times older assets use a data element that has been found to be relatively useless, so has been deleted from updated content.
Since the simulator is at its heart, script based, it is highly reconfigurable, and extensible. Like any programming, a version change can require tweaks to the code, of a generally simple nature. This skill involves some programming like knowledge and little commonsense. Many things can be fixed up in a few moments using the edit feature in Content Manager Plus or a simple text editor like windows Notepad.
Join in discussions on the forums provided by Auran and the Trainz fan-sites
The forums are an invaluable method of obtaining solutions to problems.
These are an outgrowth of discussions on the forums provided by Auran and the Trainz fan-sites, where a group gets together to co-operatively make a route, usually based on modeling a particular real world railroad during a specific era. As a spin-off benefit, you'll make friends and likely gain a wide range of mentors willing to answer dumb questions.
Apply new textures to existing 3D meshes this is done with a graphics program such as Photoshop, paint.net or GIMP to edit the .tga or .bmp formated files used in Trainz graphics rendering. The PaintShed program which comes with Trainz can be used to create new skins for existing Paintshed meshes.
Get involved in contributing to the Trainz community
For example by offering help on a forum or acting as a beta tester on a fan-site.
Using a graphical modeling program such as Blender (freeware) or GMAX
While these programs are generally regarded as being difficult to learn, the results can be extremely rewarding.
Creating your own is one thing, creating ones which are of a high enough standard to justify distribution to the general Trainz community in a whole different league. There is a lot of help out there to do so, but the time investment is yours to commit.
This may require learning how to use the administration functions of server-based software such as forums and Content Management Systems.
Contribute to this Wikibook!
This includes a group of tables. They are listed below:
The following table indexes various authors of The Internationale and which types of works they have made, with their copyright status noted regarding performing and respecting copyright. The index of source texts may be obtained from Multilingual Wikisource.
The copyright terms are until year end, unless otherwise noted below, such as French copyright expiration after wartime extensions.
Public domain for death before more than 100 years, USA public domain due to pre-1923 publication
Public domain where copyright is lifetime plus up to 80 years, USA public domain due to pre-1923 publication, also public domain in source country (France) since October 2017
Public domain where copyright is lifetime plus up to 60 years, USA public domain due to pre-1923 publication
Public domain where copyright is lifetime plus up to 75 years, USA public domain due to public domain in 1996 in source country (China)
Public domain where organizational copyright is publication plus up to 80 years, USA public domain due to public domain in 1996 in source country (China)
Copyrighted in source country (United Kingdom) and elsewhere with copyright permission not compatible with GFDL
Public domain where copyright is lifetime plus up to 80 years, USA public domain due to pre-1923 publication
Czech lyrics with Skalák
Copyrighted in source country (Czech Republic) through 2038 (life + 70 years), USA public domain due to pre-1923 publication
Copyrighted in source country (Norway) through 2021 (life + 70 years), USA public domain due to pre-1923 publication
Copyrighted in source country (Finland) through 2034 (life + 70 years), USA public domain due to pre-1923 publication
Public domain for death before more than 100 years, USA public domain due to pre-1923 publication
Copyrighted in source country (Japan) through 2028 (life + 50 years), USA public domain due to pre-1923 publication
Early on in the days of computer science, computer programs were hard-wired, only using memory to store data. Reprogramming computers involved changing hardware switches manually, taking ridiculous amounts of time and having a high potential for coding errors. As a workaround to these problems, mathematician and computer scientist John von Neumann proposed what is now known as the von Neumann architecture, which stores programs in memory, thereby avoiding the need to hard-wire them.
In a von Neumann architecture, a circuit called a microprocessor is used to process program instructions and execute them. To execute a program, the microprocessor first fetches a programs' instructions from memory and the data necessary to run them. Then, the microprocessor decodes and separates the instructions and data and activates the necessary components and pathways needed to run the program. Finally, the microprocessor executes the program, running through the instructions, manipulating the data, and storing the results.
This three-step process of fetching, decoding, and executing is typically implemented with two hardware components: a control unit and a datapath. If data is thought of as water, then the datapath acts as a canal with many branches, and the control unit acts as a series of locks. The control unit reads instructions fetched from memory and uses them to direct where data flows in the datapath. Along the way, different branches of the datapath will contain different mechanisms for modifying and transforming the data flowing through it. These mechanisms are termed Arithmetic Logic Units (ALUs) (discussed in more depth later on), and they perform arithmetic operations (such as addition, subtraction, shifting, and inverting) and logic operations (such as AND and OR) on data flowing through the datapath.
A more nuanced discussion of control units and datapaths will be had in a later section, conveniently titled
Control and Datapath.
In a Harvard Architecture machine, the computer system's memory is separated into two discrete parts: data and instructions. In a pure Harvard system, the two different memories occupy separate memory modules, and instructions can only be executed from the instruction memory.
Many DSPs are modified Harvard architectures, designed to simultaneously access three distinct memory areas: the program instructions, the signal data samples, and the filter coefficients (often called the P, X, and Y memories).
In theory, such three-way Harvard architectures can be three times as fast as a Von Neumann architecture that is forced to read the instruction, the data sample, and the filter coefficient, one at a time.
Modern desktop computers, especially computers based on the Intel x86 ISA are not Harvard computers, although the newer variants have features that are "Harvard-Like". All information, program instructions, and data are stored in the same RAM areas. However, a modern feature called "paging" allows the physical memory to be segmented into large blocks of memory called "pages". Each page of memory can either be instructions or data, but not both.
Modern embedded computers, however, are typically based on a Harvard architecture. Instructions are stored in a different addressable memory block than the data is, and there is no way for the microprocessor to interchange data and instructions.
Historically, the first type of ISA (Instruction Set Architecture) was the complex instruction set computers (CISC), and the second type was the reduced instruction set computers (RISC). It is a common misunderstanding that RISC systems typically have a small ISA (fewer instructions) but make up for it with faster hardware. RISC system actually have "reduced instructions", in the sense that each instruction does so little that it takes very little time to execute it. It is a common misunderstanding that CISC systems have more instructions, but typically pay a steep performance penalty for the added versatility. CISC systems actually have "complex instructions", in the sense that at least one instruction takes a long time to execute -- for example, the "double indirect" addressing mode inherently requires two memory cycles to execute, and a few CPUs have a "string copy" instruction that may require hundreds of memory cycles to execute. MIPS and SPARC are examples of RISC computers. Intel x86 is an example of a CISC computer.
Some people group stack machines with the RISC machines;
Other ISA types include DSPs, stack machines, VLIW machines, MISC machines, TTA architectures, massively parallel processor arrays, etc.
A brief introduction to these components is placed below.
The control unit, as described above, reads the instructions, and generates the necessary digital signals to operate the other components. An instruction to add two numbers together would cause the Control Unit to activate the addition module, for instance.
The processor needs to be able to communicate with the rest of the computer system. This communication occurs through the I/O ports. The I/O ports will interface with the system memory (RAM), and also the other peripherals of a computer.
The Arithmetic Logic Unit, or ALU is the part of the microprocessor that performs arithmetic operations. ALUs can typically add, subtract, divide, multiply, and perform logical operations of two numbers (and, or, nor, not, etc).
Wikipedia has related information at processor register
Wikipedia has related information at hardware register
This book includes data about different kinds of registers.
Hopefully it will be obvious which kind of register we are talking about from the context.
The most general meaning is a "hardware register": anything that can be used to store bits of information, in a way that all the bits of the register can be written to or read out simultaneously.
Since registers outside of a CPU are also outside the scope of the book, this book will only discuss processor registers, which are hardware registers that happen to be inside a CPU.
But usually we will refer to a more specific kind of register.
Registers are mentioned in far more detail in a later chapter, Register File.
The programmer-visible registers, also called the user-accessible registers, also called the architectural registers, often simply called "the registers", are the registers that are directly encoded as part of at least one instruction in the instruction set.
The registers are the fastest accessible memory locations, and because they are so fast, there are typically very few of them. In most processors, there are fewer than 32 registers. The size of the registers defines the size of the computer. For instance, a "32 bit computer" has registers that are 32 bits long. The length of a register is known as the word length of the computer.
There are several factors limiting the number of registers, including:
It is very convenient for a new CPU to be software-compatible with an old CPU. This requires the new chip to have exactly the same number of programmer-visible registers as the old chip.
Doubling the number general-purpose registers requires adding another bit to each instruction that selects a particular register. Each 3-operand instruction (that specify 2 source operands and a destination operand) would expand by 3 bits. Modern chip manufacturing processes could put a million registers on a chip; that would make each and every 3-operand instruction require 60 bits just to select the registers, not counting the bits required to specify what to do with those operands.
Adding more registers adds more wires to the critical path, adding capacitance, which reduces the maximum clock speed of the CPU.
Historically, CPUs were designed with few registers, because each additional register increased the cost of the CPU significantly. But now that modern chip manufacturing can put tens of millions of bits of storage on a single commodity CPU chip, this is less of an issue.
Some computers have highly specialized registers -- memory addresses always came from the program counter or "the" index register or "the" stack pointer; one ALU input was always hooked to data coming from memory, the other ALU input was always hooked to "the" accumulator; etc.
Other computers have more general-purpose registers -- any instruction that access memory can use any address register as a index register or as a stack pointer; any instruction that uses the ALU can use any data register.
Other computers have completely general-purpose registers -- any register can be used as data or an address in any instruction, without restriction.
Besides the programmer-visible registers, all CPUs have other registers that are not programmer-visible, called "microarchitectural registers" or "physical registers".
Wikipedia has related information at register renaming
Wikipedia has related information at prefetch input queue
Some people consider on-chip cache to be part of the microarchitectural registers; others consider it "outside" the CPU.
There are a wide variety of ways to implement any one instruction set.
The vast majority of these microarchitectural registers are technically not "necessary".
A designer could choose to design a CPU that had almost no physical registers other than the programmer-visible registers.
However, many designers choose to design a CPU with lots of physical registers, using them in ways that make the CPU execute the same given instruction set much faster than a CPU that lacks those registers.
Most CPUs manufactured do not have any cache.
Cache is memory that is located on the chip, but that is not considered registers. The cache is used because reading external memory is very slow (compared to the speed of the processor), and reading a local cache is much faster. In modern processors, the cache can take up as much as 50% or more of the total area of the chip. The following table shows the relationship between different types of memory:
Cache typically comes in 2 or 3 "levels", depending on the chip. Level 1 (L1) cache is smaller and faster than Level 2 (L2) cache, which is larger and slower. Some chips have Level 3 (L3) cache as well, which is larger still than the L2 cache (although L3 cache is still much faster than external RAM).
Different computers order their multi-byte data words (i.e., 16-, 32-, or 64-bit words) in different ways in RAM. Each individual byte in a multi-byte word is still separately addressable. Some computers order their data with the most significant byte of a word in the lowest address, while others order their data with the most significant byte of a word in the highest address. There is logic behind both approaches, and this was formerly a topic of heated debate.
This distinction is known as endianness. Computers that order data with the least significant byte in the lowest address are known as "Little Endian", and computers that order the data with the most significant byte in the lowest address are known as "Big Endian". It is easier for a human (typically a programmer) to view multi-word data dumped to a screen one byte at a time if it is ordered as Big Endian. However it makes more sense to others to store the LS data at the LS address.
When using a computer this distinction is typically transparent; that is that the user cannot tell the difference between computers that use the different formats. However, difficulty arises when different types of computers attempt to communicate with one another over a network.
With a big-endian 68K sort of machine,
The little-endian x86 sort of machine would interpret the last part as the integer 0x0500_0000.
When communicating over a network composed of both big-endian and little-endian machines, the network hardware (should) apply the Address Invariance principle, to avoid scrambling text (avoiding the NUXI problem).
High-level software (should) format packets of data to be transmitted over the network in Network Byte Order.
High-level software (should) be written as "endian clean" -- always reading and writing 16 bit integers as whole 16 bit integers, 32 bit integers as whole 32 bit integers, etc. -- so no changes are needed to re-compile it for big-endian or little-endian machines.
Software that is not "endian clean" -- software that writes integers, but then reads them out as 8 bit octets or integers of some other length -- usually fails when re-compiled for another computer.
A few computers -- including nearly all DSPs -- are "neither-endian".
They always read and write complete aligned words, and don't have any hardware for dealing with individual bytes.
Systems build on top of such computers often *do* have a particular endianness -- but that endianness is written into the software, and can be switched by re-compiling for the opposite endianness.
A stack is a block of memory that is used as a scratchpad area. The stack is a sequential set of memory locations that is set to act like a LIFO (last in, first out) buffer. Data is added to the top of the stack in a "push" operation, and the top data item is removed from the stack during a "pop" operation. Most computer architectures include at least a register that is usually reserved for the stack pointer.
Some microprocessors include a small hardware stack built into the CPU, independent from the rest of the RAM.
Some people claim that a processor must have a hardware stack in order to run C programs.[1]
Most computer architectures have hardware support for a recursive "call" instruction in their Assembly Language.
Some architectures (such as the ARM, the Freescale RS08, etc.) implement "call" like this:
Some architectures (such as the 6502, the x86, etc.) implement "call" like this:
A few architectures (such as the PIC16, the RISC I processor, the Novix NC4016, many LISP machines, etc.) implement "call" like this:
The "call" instruction pushes a return address into a dedicated return stack, separate from main memory, and jumps to the subroutine.
Wikipedia has related information at system bus
Walter Banks.
"The Stack Controversy".
You may try out the following examples, launching do followed by one of the link below:
k "7" #"7" k "8" #"8" k "9" #"9" k " * " #"*" return
k "4" #"4" k "5" #"5" k "6" #"6" k " - " #"-" return
k "1" #"1" k "2" #"2" k "3" #"3" k " + " #"+" return
k "0" #"0" k "-" k "." #"."
[make error! [user message "parse error"]]
[start-button/text: "Start" show start-button akt-falling: none]
[sens/rate: 2 show sens start-button/text: "Stop" show start-button pause: no points: 0 if points-pane [show points-pane] clear pan/pane clear stoning show pan new-start]
] with [font: [align: 'left]]
(append/only last walls to-pair reduce [akt-column akt-row])
This book is the result of the course 'Social Web', taught in the media engineering program at GSO Hochschule Nuremberg. It is a class project, hopefully turning into a real wikibook at some later point in time.
a Blog: Social Web Ohm
a Facebook page: Social Web Class
A PDF version of Social Web Lecture Notes is available. 854 KB (info)
This book is intended for intermediate readers.
This class is a tour of the Social Web. It covers many topics, mostly just touching the surface. But there will be plenty of opportunity to digg deeper and learn more by doing.
Blogs, Microblogs and Podcasts
We will heavily use blogs and touch a little on microblogs. They are a big help in documenting and in communicating. We may also record the lectures and post them on YouTube.
The Wikipedia is a very good example for collaboration. Although the edits are done by individuals, the result is a team effort, a collaboration. Here we will learn about group sizes and team building.
The social networks are the most popular form of the social web. They range from personal, professional to dating networks and many more.
Social games have been around for some 5000 years. Basically any game involving more than one player is a social game. But that is not what we mean by a social game.
The revolution that is currently under way is not only restricted to the net, but is also entering the class room. Let’s see how teaching and learning are affected by the social web and its technologies.
If you expect to read about how companies can make lots of money using the social web here, you have come to the wrong place. There is tons of good books on that subject, so no need for another one. Instead we learn a little about new ways to raise and save money, and a few facts about marketing in the social web.
With the advent of Web 2.0 and especially the social web, democracy has reached the internet. Where before a few companies owned all the information, controlled all the access, and the primary medium was broadcast, this has changed. But even more, not only has the idea of democratization reached the internet, also, the ideas of the social web start to have an influence on democracy.
With the advent of the internet, with search engines and social web, with internet banking and hackers, the terms privacy and security have gotten a new meaning. To protect and control them has become an important issue.
The social web also influences the sciences and the arts. We will look at a few interesting projects, and you will learn that there are many, many more.
An Application Service Provider (ASP) is a business model for delivery of business or IT services across a network. It may also be a service enterprise whose primary business is delivery of application services using the ASP model. ASP usually implies a central (vendor) data center that runs the application.
For further discussion, see the Wikipedia article.
(a) by force or violence breaks a prison with intent to set at liberty himself or any other person confined therein, or
(b) with intent to escape forcibly breaks out of, or makes any breach in, a cell or other place within a prison in which he is confined,
R.S., c. C-34, s. 132; 1976-77, c. 53, s. 5.
Binary search locates the position of an item in a sorted array.
A quick way to remember how this search works is to imagine searching for words beginning with 'S' in a dictionary. You know that the dictionary is in alphabetical order but you don't yet know if there are any words beginning with 'S' in it, nor do you know where the 'S' section begins and ends.
Open the Dictionary in the centre - you find the letter 'L'
Letters before 'L' aren't any good, so ignore that part of the dictionary
Taking the 'L' to 'Z' section, you split it in half and find 'P'
Letters before 'P' aren't any good, so ignore that part of the dictionary
Taking the 'P' to 'Z' section, you split it in half and find 'U'
Letters after 'U' aren't any good, so ignore that part of the dictionary
Taking the 'P' to 'U' section, you split it in half and find 'S'
How to work out the maximum number of searches (n) on a x sized array:
2^n > size of list (x) where n = max searches
Note: This code assumes 1-based array indexing. For languages that use 0-based indexing (most modern languages), min and max should be initialized to 0 and N-1.
Note 2: The code above does not return a result, nor indicates whether the element was found or not.
Note 3: The code above will not work correctly for empty arrays, because it attempts to access an element before checking to see if min > max.
Given a 256 item sorted list, what is the maximum number of searches needed to find an item?
2^n > size of list where n = max searches
Given a 1000 item sorted list, what is the maximum number of searches needed to find an item?
2^n > size of list where n = max searches
Note that SI units are shown in bold
Notes: An SI unit named after a person has the first letter of its symbol capitalised, but the full name of the unit written out is all lower case. For example, the unit of energy named after James Joule is called the joule (lower case) and has the symbol J (upper case). An SI unit that is not named after a person has an all-lowercase name and symbol. For example, the unit of amount of substance is called the mole (lowercase) and has the symbol mol (lowercase). The symbols for quantities are always in italic type, whereas the symbols for units are always in upright (normal) type.
Welcome to the wiki-based annotated text and analysis Wikibook for the novel Angels and Demons by Dan Brown.
Background — background information on the mythology upon which the book is based
Divergence from reality — where and how the book diverges from reality
Offer critical commentary and analysis of the book presented to help others better understand detailed situations
This book is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
A pointed metal rod or plate with a handle at one end and a hole at the other used to push twine through the bales and stitch them from one side to the other, holding mesh tightly to each surface.
This is a unit for measuring energy which is now mostly replaced by the joule. One BTU is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of one pound avoirdupois of water by one degree Fahrenheit. One BTU is approximately 1054–1060 joules.
If a structure is made a various materials some of which insulate more than others, any part of the structure which is a potential path warmth can use to escape is a cold bridge. A common example is a well insulated house with solid aluminium windows which transfer large amounts of heat throughout the structure.
The land, air and water that a city or nation needs to produce all of its resources and to dispose of all its waste. It is a way to determine if the lifestyle of a community is sustainable. It shows if a city or nation is utilizing more or less than its fair sustainable share of the world’s resources.
The total energy used to bring a product or material to its present phase in its life cycle. It includes the energy required to extract or produce raw materials, their transport to the place of production, and the energy used for manufacturing. It can also include the energy used in the distribution and retail chain, for maintenance processes, for repair, etc. It is measured in MJ per kg or GJ per tonne. There is a list of the embodied energy of various material on the Embodied energy page of Australians Governments Your Home Design Guide.
The moment when a product ceases to fulfil the tasks it was designed for. The end-of-life
A metal cage full of some hard material, typically stones. Often used for retaining wall especially on river sides. Can be successfully used as part of a building foundation.
Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning.
Straw bales used between the vertical elements of a structure to form non-bearing walls and act as insulation. Often an option where building regulations are otherwise too restrictive.
Life Cycle Analysis or Life Cycle Assessment (LCA)
A calculation of the environmental impact of a product over its complete life cycle. It starts with an inventory of the ’input’ (all resources and energy consumption) and ’output’ (emissions, solid waste, waste water). The elements in this inventory are grouped into environmental categories, which are quantified according to their environmental impact. The goal is to compare different design strategies within a category.
A load bearing wall is one where all or most of the weight of the building is taken by the straw bale walls. The walls are 'bearing' the 'load'.
See Post and Beam. Modified simply means that the dimensions are modified to suit the dimensions of your straw bales.
A construction using vertical elements (posts) and horizontal elements (beams) to form a structural framework. The term often refers to using a smaller number of larger than normal timbers compared to conventional 'baloon' timber framing.
A trench dug into the ground and filled with a rigid material such as demolition rubble, gravel or sea shells. Important functions of such a wall are: it cannot be further compressed, and moisture will not rise through the rubble into the wall.
When stress it put into your structure some elements will be compressed. Pre-compression adds this stress to the building before it is finished to stop the structure suddenly settling, or the plaster suddenly cracking, once finished.
A stemwall is the part of the foundation between the floor level and ground level, and may rest on and be attached to a rubble trench or whatever else is in the ground. It can be made of concrete blocks or such or be concrete poured into forms. Think raised foundation.
The ground of the site and anything below the surface. Subgrade foundation insulations is therefore insulation below the finished ground level to insulate the foundation from the surrounding temperature.
A beam made up of a large number of small elements, typically in a criss-cross pattern, which together perform as one large beam.
These heating specific definitions should be edited and added into the rest alphabetically
A.F.U.E.: Annual Fuel Utilization Efficiency represents the percentage of fuel that is converted into usable heating energy - the balance is vented through your chimney or other venting systems. It is an industry agreed upon standard. All furnaces and brands are tested the same way to provide "apples to apples" comparisons.
Air Conditioner - a device used to decrease the temperature and humidity of air, which moves through it. Typical air conditioners include central air conditioning which utilizes existing forced air ductwork and “Ductless Splits”.
Anode Rod - a sacrificial metal used to protect against corrosion in a hot water heater.
Baseboard Heating - heating elements located around the perimeter of a room, used to warm room air by transferring the heat from the hot water circulating through them.
Blower – an air handling device used with a furnace to circulate air through a network of ducts.
Boiler: A heating appliance that heats water to a pre-set temperature and feeds it to a circulator, which transfers the water to radiant heating units including some or all of cast iron radiators, slim baseboard radiators, under floor tubing or wall panels. Some boilers produce steam for heating purposes.
B.T.U.: British Thermal Units are the standard efficiency comparison between heating fuels. One BTU is the amount of heating energy that will raise one pound of water one degree Fahrenheit.
B.T.U./Hr.: British Thermal Units Per Hour. Used to express capacities of furnaces and boilers.
Burner - a device which supplies a mixture of air and fuel to the combustion area.
Cast Iron - a durable metal with an exceptional capability to hold and transfer heat.
Chimney Liner: A clay-tile or metal liner that is inserted into a chimney.
Chimney Venting - a vertical vent used to transfer products of combustion from a furnace or boiler to the outdoors.
Combustion - the process of converting fuel into heat. This requires oxygen.
Combustion Air: An air supply brought into the furnace's combustion chamber - supplied from within the basement, or from outdoors. Combustion air is necessary to burn fuel.
Controls: Devices such as a thermostat that regulate a heating or cooling system.
Convection: The transfer of heat through a moving gas (air) and a surface, or the transfer of heat from one point to another within a gas. In hydronic heating, cool air falls to the floor where it is heated by metal fins in a baseboard radiator and then rises to transfer heat to the environment through natural convection.
Convective Heat: the natural circulation of air across a heat source to heat the air.
Degree Days: A system by which heating oil dealers measure and record the daily temperature. This information is compared to what they know about your heating system to ensure automatic delivery before your system uses all of the oil in the storage tank.
Direct Venting: A process in which the products of combustion are vented to the outdoors via sidewall venting, (without the use of a chimney).
Direct Vent - a furnace or boiler design where all the air for combustion is taken from the outdoors and all exhaust products are released to the outdoors, also known as sealed combustion. Direct Vent is also known as balanced flue venting in oil furnaces and boilers.
Distribution System: The component of a heating or cooling system that delivers warmed or cooled air, or warmed water, to the living space.
Draft Hood - a device that prevents a backdraft from entering the heating unit or excessive chimney draw from affecting the operation of the boiler or furnace.
Ductless Split A/C System - A system that cools and dehumidifies air without the use of conventional duct work. The equipment location is split, with the condenser and heat pump outside of the home and the air handler and controls inside.
Efficiency Rating - the ratio of heat actually generated versus the amount of heat Theoretically possible from the amount of fuel inputted.
Flame Retention Burner: A modern oil burner which retains the flame near the mouth of the burner, for improved efficiency and operational savings.
Flue: An enclosed passage that is designed to convey hot flue gases. (Also known as a breech).
Flue Gases: The gases (eg. carbon dioxide, water vapour and nitrogen) that are formed when the fuel oil, natural gas, or propane is burned with the air. (Products of combustion are technically all of the flue gases less the nitrogen that was present before combustion).
Forced Air: A distribution system in which a fan circulates air from the heating or cooling unit to the rooms through a network of supply air and return air ducts.
Furnace: A heating appliance that warms air around a heat exchanger. The air is conveyed by fan, into a central duct system to distribute warm air to all areas of the home or building.
Heat Exchanger: A structure that transfers heat from the hot combustion gases inside the furnace heat exchanger to the circulating room air flowing across the exterior of the heat exchanger.
Heat Loss: Term used for all areas of your home where heated air may escape due to construction styles, age of house, windows, weather-stripping, etc. All homes will experience some level of heat loss.
Heat Loss Calculation: This is the means by which a heating contractor will determine the required capacity of a furnace or boiler to adequately heat the home (or building).
Heat Recovery Ventilator (HRV): A device used in central ventilation systems to reduce the amount of heat that is lost as household air is replaced with outside air. As fresh air enters the house, it is warmed as it passes through a heat exchanger, heated by the warm outgoing air stream.
Heat Transfer: the transmission of heat from the source (flame) to air or water.
Heating Capacity: the amount of usable heat produced by a heating unit.
High-boy: a term used to describe a furnace which has a small "footprint" but is tall. The blower is under the heat exchanger. This is also known as an upflow furnace.
Hot Water Boiler: a heating unit that uses water circulated throughout the home in a system of baseboard heating units, radiators, and/or in-floor radiant tubing.
Hot Water Heater: a unit with its own energy source that generates and stores hot water.
Hydronics: Hydronics, or heating with water, consists of a compact boiler (fired by any fuel) that heats water, which is distributed to a network of slim baseboard, panel or space radiators, or under floor tubing by a circulator. This term also applies to the science of heating (or cooling) with water.
Indirect Hot Water Storage Tank: a unit that works in conjunction with a boiler to generate and store domestic hot water, it does not require its own energy source.
In-floor Radiant Tubing: tubing, typically plastic or rubber, used in conjunction with heated boiler water to heat floors.
Low-boy: a term used to describe a furnace which has a low profile. The blower is located on the same level plane as the heat exchanger. This furnace style has both the return air plenum and the supply air plenum on the top of the furnace. This furnace style is sometimes called a console-style furnace.
Low Water Cut-off: a device used to shut down a boiler in the event that a low water condition exists. This is required whenever radiators are located at a lower level than the boiler. Some jurisdictions require them on all boiler installations.
Natural Gas: any gas found in the earth (e.g. methane gas) as opposed to gases which are manufactured.
Nozzle: A burner component that atomizes, meters and patterns fuel oil into the heat exchanger / fire-pot.
Oil Heating: the production of heat by burning oil.
Propane: a manufactured gas typically used for cooking or heating. This is also known as L.P. gas. (liquid petroleum).
Push Nipples: machined metal sleeves used to join adjacent sections of a boiler.
Radiant Floor Heating: Under floor heat is provided by flexible, long-lasting tubing. The continuous tubing can be placed under any flooring, and circulated hot water provides invisible heat anywhere in the home, swimming pool or driveway.
Radiant Heating: the method of heating the walls, floors or ceilings in order to transfer heat to the occupants of a room.
Radiator: a heating element, typically metal, used in conjunction with water or steam to give off heat.
Safety Shut-off Device: any device used to shut down a heating appliance in the event an unsafe condition exists.
Seasonal Efficiency: A performance rating that considers the heat actually delivered to the living space, the total energy available in the fuel consumed, and the impact the equipment itself has on the total heating load through an entire heating season.
S.E.E.R.: Seasonal Energy Efficiency Rating. The standards by which equipment is measured. The higher the S.E.E.R., the more efficient the equipment (especially air conditioning).
Sealed Combustion: a furnace or boiler design where all the air for combustion is taken from the outside atmosphere and all exhaust products are released to the outside atmosphere, also known as direct vent.
Steam Boiler: a heating unit designed to heat by boiling water, producing steam, and circulating it to radiators or steam baseboard units throughout the home.
Stack Damper: a device installed in the venting system that will automatically close when the appliance shuts down. This device is used to reduce the amount of warm indoor air being drawn up the chimney between heating cycles.
Supply Tapping: opening in a boiler by which hot water enters the heating system.
Setback Thermostat: A programmable thermostat with a built-in timer. You can adjust it to vary household temperature automatically.
Tankless Heater: a copper coil submerged into the heated boiler water used to transfer heat to domestic water.
Venting: An opening for combustion gases to exit the house. Can be a chimney or a vent
Zone Control: A heating control system in which the space to be heated is divided into zones and each zone is controlled by a separate thermostat.
The history of Greece begins long before our earliest written records. Archeology has provided us with what little information we have about such civilizations as the Minoans, Mycenaeans, and the world of the Greek Dark Ages. These civilizations were not even believed to have existed until very recently, when archeologists began to think the epic poetry of Homer's Iliad might contain more truth than previously thought. During the Classical Period, Greek culture was reborn and flourished, and was spread throughout the Mediterranean Sea by the Athenian Empire, as well as other Greek traders, colonists, and conquerors.
"History of Greece: Introduction" (Wikipedia) http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/History_of_Greece/Introduction
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
1.c4 e6 2.Nf3 d5 3.g3 Nf6 4. Bg2
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at English Opening
Nunn's Chess Openings. 1999. John Nunn (Editor), Graham Burgess, John Emms, Joe Gallagher. ISBN 1-8574-4221-0.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon · Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
This Chess related article is a Wikibooks:Chess stub. Please assist Wikibooks by expanding it.
Computing » Computer Science » Computer Programming » Ada Programming
This language feature is only available from Ada 2005 on.
Ada.Strings.Fixed.Hash is a unit of the Predefined Language Environment since Ada 2005.
This page is a stub. You can improve the Ada Programming wikibook by reading the contributing guidelines and expanding it.
-- Standard Ada library specification
-- SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause and LicenseRef-AdaReferenceManual
Search for examples of Ada.Strings.Fixed.Hash in: Rosetta Code, GitHub or this Wikibook.
Search for any post related to Ada.Strings.Fixed.Hash in: Stack Overflow, comp.lang.ada or any Ada related page.
Specification: hash/a-stfiha.ads
Some people find this section useful, and some find it confusing. If you find it confusing you can skip it. Now we will do a walk through for the following program:
Basically this program creates a positive integer multiplication function
(that is far slower than the built in multiplication function) and then
Question: What is the first thing the program does?
Answer: The first thing done is the function mult is defined with the lines:
This creates a function that takes two parameters and returns a value when it is done. Later this function can be run.
What happens next?
The next line after the function, result = mult(3, 2) is run.
What does this line do?
This line will assign the return value of mult(3, 2) to the variable result.
And what does mult(3, 2) return?
We need to do a walkthrough of the mult function to find out.
What happens next?
The variable a gets the value 3 assigned to it and the variable b gets the value 2 assigned to it.
And then?
The line if b == 0: is run. Since b has the value 2 this is false so the line return 0 is skipped.
And what then?
We will need to run the function mult with the parameters 3 and 1.
So what happens next?
The local variables in the new run of the function are set so that a has the value 3 and b has the value 1. Since these are local values these do not affect the previous values of a and b.
And then?
Since b has the value 1 the if statement is false, so the next line becomes rest = mult(a, b - 1).
What does this line do?
This line will assign the value of mult(3, 0) to rest.
We will have to run the function one more time to find that out. This time a has the value 3 and b has the value 0.
So what happens next?
The first line in the function to run is if b == 0:. b has the value 0 so the next line to run is return 0
And what does the line return 0 do?
This line returns the value 0 out of the function.
So?
So now we know that mult(3, 0) has the value 0. Now we know what the line rest = mult(a, b - 1) did since we have run the function mult with the parameters 3 and 0. We have finished running mult(3, 0) and are now back to running mult(3, 1). The variable rest gets assigned the value 0.
The line value = a + rest is run next. In this run of the function, a = 3 and rest = 0 so now value = 3.
What happens next?
The line return value is run. This returns 3 from the function. This also exits from the run of the function mult(3, 1). After return is called, we go back to running mult(3, 2).
We had the variables a = 3 and b = 2 and were examining the line rest = mult(a, b - 1).
So what happens now?
The variable rest get 3 assigned to it. The next line value = a + rest sets value to 3 + 3 or 6.
So now what happens?
The next line runs, this returns 6 from the function. We are now back to running the line result = mult(3, 2) which can now assign the value 6 to the variable result.
What happens next?
The next line after the function, print("3 * 2 = ", result) is run.
And what does this do?
Programming constructs solving a problem by solving a smaller version of the same problem are called recursive. In the examples in this chapter, recursion is realized by defining a function calling itself. This facilitates implementing solutions to programming tasks as it may be sufficient to consider the next step of a problem instead of the whole problem at once. It is also useful as it allows to express some mathematical concepts with straightforward, easy to read code.
Any problem that can be solved with recursion could be re-implemented with loops. Using the latter usually results in better performance. However equivalent implementations using loops are usually harder to get done correctly.
If you still don't get it, see recursion.
Try walking through the factorial example if the multiplication example did not make sense.
-3! = Error, negative values do not have factorial values!!
The parameter evaluation strategy adopted by a programming language defines when parameters are evaluated during function calls. There are two main strategies: strict and lazy evaluation.
The strict evaluation strategy consists in the full evaluation of parameters before passing them to functions. The two most common evaluation strategies: by-value and by-reference, fit into this category.
Call-by-Value: The call-by-value strategy consists in copying the contents of the actual parameters into the formal parameters. State changes performed in the formal parameters do not reflect back into the actual parameters. A well-known example of this type of behavior is given by the swap function below, implemented in C:
The call-by-value strategy is very common among programming languages. It is the strategy of choice in C, Java, Python and even C++, although this last language also supports call-by-reference.
Call-by-Reference: whereas in the call-by-value strategy we copy the contents of the actual parameter to the formal parameter, in the call-by-reference we copy the address of the actual parameter to the formal one. A few languages implement the call-by-reference strategy. C++ is one of them. The program below re-implements the swap function, using the call-by-reference policy:
In C++, parameter passing by reference is a syntactic sugar for the use of pointers. If we take a careful look into the assembly code that g++, the C++ compiler, produces for the function swap, above, and the function swap with pointers, we will realize that it is absolutely the same.
This function might lead to unexpected results if the formal parameters x and y alias the same location. For instance, the program below, which uses the xor_swap implementation zeros the actual parameter, instead of keeping its value:
The strict evaluation strategies force the evaluation of the actual parameters before passing them to the called function. To illustrate this fact, the program below, implemented in python, loops.
Call by Macro Expansion: many programming languages, including C, lisp and scheme, provide developers with a mechanism to add new syntax to the core language grammar called macros. Macros are expanded into code by a macro preprocessor. These macros might contain arguments, which are copied in the final code that the preprocessor produces. As an example, the C program below implements the swap function via a macro:
This macro implements a valid swap routine. The preprocessed program will look like the code below. Because the body of the macro is directly copied into the text of the calling program, it operates on the context of that program. In other words, the macro will refer directly to the variable names that it receives, and not to their values.
The expressions passed to the macro as parameters are evaluated every time they are used in the body of the macro. If the argument is never used, then it is simply not evaluated. As an example, the program below will increment the variable b twice:
Once this program is expanded by the C preprocessor, we get the code below. This program fails to exchange the values of variables temp and a:
There are a number of lazy evaluation strategies that avoid the variable capture problem. The two best known techniques are call-by-name and call-by-need.
Call by Name: in this evaluation strategy the actual parameter is only evaluated if used inside the function; however, this evaluation uses the context of the caller routine. For instance, in the example below, taken from Weber's book, we have a function g that returns the integer 6. Inside the function f, the first assignment, e.g., b = 5, stores 5 in variable i. The second assignment, b = a, reads the value of i, currently 5, and adds 1 to it. This value is then stored at i.
Very few languages implement the call by name evaluation strategy. The most eminent among these languages is Algol. Simula, a direct descendent of Algol, also implements call by name, as we can see in this example. The call by name always causes the evaluation of the parameter, even if this parameter is used multiple times. This behavior might be wasteful in referentially transparent languages, because, in these languages variables are immutable. There is an evaluation strategy that goes around this problem: the call by need.
Call by Need: in this evaluation strategy, a parameter is evaluated only if it is used. However, once the first evaluation happens, its result is cached, so that further uses of the parameter do not require a re-evaluation. This mechanism provides the following three guarantees:
The expression is only evaluated if the result is required by the calling function;
The expression is only evaluated to the extent that is required by the calling function;
The expression is never evaluated more than once, called applicative-order evaluation.
Haskell is a language notorious for using call by need. This evaluation strategy is a key feature that the language designers have used to keep Haskell a purely functional language. For instance, call by need lets the language to simulate the input channel as an infinite list, which must be evaluated only as much as data has been read. An an example, the program below computes the n-th term of the
Fibonacci Sequence. Yet, the function fib, that generates this sequence, has no termination condition!
The getIt function expands the list produced by fib only as many times as it is necessary to read its n-th element. For instance, below we have a sequence of calls that compute the 4-th element of the Fibonacci sequence:
When you write a sentence, make sure that your subject and verb agree. For example, do not use the plural first person conjugation of a verb when your subject is the singular first person. "I are" is wrong and it sounds wrong. Now, it's hopefully unlikely that you'd make such an obvious mistake, but there are tricky situations in which you might not be sure which verb form to use that often arise when combining subjects. For example "You/He/She/They and I" will take the plural first person conjugation. The conjunction 'and' in this sentence makes all the difference. If it were "You/He/She/They or I" will simply take the singular first person. "You or I am" not "You or I are".
Also remember that some words take singular third person form when you would think they take plural form, an example being the word 'everyone'. "Everyone knows" is correct, not "Everyone know". On the other hand, remember "All people know" not "All people knows". Just remember the 'one' in 'everyone' is an important distinction. It implies each individual, whereas 'all people' implies a collective whole. Other words like 'everyone' include each, each one, either, neither, everybody, anybody, anyone, nobody, somebody, someone, and no one. All take singular third person form.
The good news is that in English, many verbs take the same form no matter how you conjugate them (I eat, you eat, he/she/it eats, we eat, they eat).
Over the years as more women started to become involved in competitive sport it became clear there were medical issues specifically related to women. Several medical issues were regularly occurring either together or as a result of another so the female athlete triad was created, which involves eating disorders, amenorrhoea and osteoporosis.[1][2]
This sheet will focus on the issue of amenorrhea in female athletes and how exercise affects it. Amenorrhea can particularly affect females involved in gymnastics, ballet and long distance running.[3]
Amenorrhea or menstrual irregularity involves a delay or cessation in a regular menstrual cycle.
It can be divided into two main categories:
Primary amenorrhea – menarche has not yet occurred by the age of 14-16
Secondary amenorrhea – regular menstrual cycles cease for longer than six months[2][4]
Why it occurs due to exercise?
High intensity exercise can affect the body’s ability to regulate menstruation. High levels of exercise cause an abnormality in the production of gonadotrpin releasing hormone (GnRH) in the hypothalamus. GnRH is secreted in a pulse like fashion and in turn stimulates the pituitary gland to secrete luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormone(FSH).[1]
Abnormal GnHR secretion is thought to be caused by either:
The activation of the adrenal axis during exercise, which inhibits the GnRH pulse activator
Low energy intake and high energy expenditure causing an “energy drain” [1]
These hormones regulate the ovaries and the production of oestrogen and progesterone which in turn control the menstrual cycle and other sexual characteristics during puberty.[3][5]
The menstrual cycle may also be affected by the imbalance of energy intake and expenditure that may occur with high intensity sports.[2] This imbalance may cause a reduction in metabolic rate which in turn may affect reproductive function.[3][5] A low body weight can result from an imbalance of energy intake and expenditure but potentially a psychological condition such as an eating disorder may also be a contributing cause to amenorrhoea developing.[3]
There are few serious short term effects of the loss of regular menstruation. Some athletes may even welcome it as the side effects of menstruation such as period pain and mood swings may not be conducive to performance. Amenorrhea causes temporary infertility as a result of a condition called anovulation which means that the ovaries are unable to produce viable eggs. However once normal menses resume fertility returns. There are however much more serious long term consequences of the loss of regular menstruation. Bone density decreases and if left untreated increases the risk of developing osteoporosis.[1] A lower bone density also increases the risk of developing stress fractures or suffering more severe bone breaks.
Amenorrhoea is a serious condition that if left untreated can have long term effects after an athletes career. Ways to assist athletes in treating amenorrhoea will involve the athlete, coach and nutritionist:
Improving diet to create an equal balance of energy intake/expenditure
Increase of calcium intake eg 3 glasses of skim milk or if necessary calcium supplementation to improve bone density
Estrogen replacement therapy if exercise reduction and diet improvement do not cause an change
Once menses restart if still irregular can use oral contraceptive pill to help regulate them.[3]
Prevention is the best treatment rather than having to deal with the issue once it has occurred.
Encourage athletes to keep a diary of menstrual cycles so if irregularities occur repeatedly advice can be sought
Provide advice about the importance of proper energy balance
Better Health Channel , Menstruation – Amenorrhoea
Australian Sorts commission – Female athlete triad
The Sydney Children’s Hospital Network, -Amenorrhoea http://www.schn.health.nsw.gov.au/files/attachments/amenorrhoea_long_version.pdf
Vereeke, R, (1998), The Female Athlete - The Triad of Disordered Eating, Amenorrhoea and Osteoporosis, Sports Medicine, Vol 26, No 2, p 63 - 71
Australian Sports Commission, (2010), Female Athlete Triad, http://www.ausport.gov.au/ais/nutrition/factsheets/basics/female_athlete_triad
Virginia Commonwealth University medical Centre, (2014), Exercise Induced Amenorrhoea, http://www.vcuhealth.org/?id=1045&sid=1
Better Health Channel, (2014), Menstruation - Amenorrhoea, http://www.betterhealth.vic.gov.au/bhcv2/bhcarticles.nsf/pages/Menstruation_amenorrhoea
The Sydney Childrens Hospital Network, (2014), Amenorrhoea, http://www.schn.health.nsw.gov.au/files/attachments/amenorrhoea_long_version.pdf
Loucks, A, (1990), Effects of exercise training on the menstrual cycle: existence and mechanisms, Medicine and Science in Sport and Exercise, Vol 22, No 3, p 275-280
Pneumocytes type II —> main target of radiation
Go Back!
In this section, we will provide activity prompts that draw on the adverbial grammatical concepts.
Activity 1: For this activity, use the adjective given and make a list of corresponding adverbs.
Activity 2: Story Creation In this section, create your own book on animals in Spanish. Make sure to include some adverbs to make your writing more interesting.
Read the featured story again to get ideas.
Go to Unit 4!
Front Page: Radiation Oncology | RTOG Trials | Randomized Trials
MD Anderson; 2007 (1960-2003) PMID 17689031 -- "Long-term outcomes for synovial sarcoma treated with conservation surgery and radiotherapy" (Guadagnolo BA, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2007 Nov 15;69(4):1173-80. Epub 2007 Aug 6.)
Retrospective. 150 patients with M0 synovial sarcoma. Conservation surgery + RT (32% preop RT, 68% postop RT). Median F/U 13.2 years
Poor predictors: tumor >5cm, age >20
Conclusion: Adequate local control with surgery + RT. Elective nodal RT not indicated
Height: 2.1m/6'11"
Weight: 220kg/485.0lb
Gender Distribution: 50% Male
Move types which are very good on Mantine: Electric
Move types which are good on Mantine: Rock
Move types which are bad on Mantine: Bug, Fighting, Fire, Steel, Water
Move types which don't effect Mantine: Ground
All other move types are normal effectiveness on Mantine.
GS/C/RS/FL: Attract, Blizzard, Frustration, Hidden Power, Protect, Rain Dance, Rest, Return, Surf, Toxic, Waterfall
GS/C: Curse, Endure, Headbutt, Icy Wind, Mud-Slap, Sleep Talk, Snore, Swagger, Swift, Whirlpool
c5 is rarely played so early, though it does ask questions of white, and in master play black has a far superior record after this move.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 d5 3. Bg5 c5
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Batsford Chess Openings 2 (1989, 1994). Garry Kasparov, Raymond Keene. ISBN 0-8050-3409-9.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon · Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
The early completion of the rights distribution allows global broadcasters to concentrate on programming and product development around the FIFA World Cup™, ensuring production quality of the highest order [1]
FIFA is pleased to announce the extension of its broadcast rights agreement with Al Jazeera Sport for the 2018 FIFA World Cup Russia™ and the 2022 FIFA World Cup Qatar™. The agreement is the first to be signed in FIFA’s media rights distribution process for the 2018 and 2022 FIFA World Cups™ and, coming just a few weeks after the host country announcement in December, is testimony to the enduring appeal of the world’s most-watched event.
The agreement with the Qatar-based TV channel covers cable, satellite, terrestrial, mobile and broadband internet transmission across 23 territories and countries in the Middle East and North Africa. Moreover, Al Jazeera Sport has made a commitment to FIFA that the matches of the 2022 FIFA World Cup will be widely accessible for football fans across the Middle East and North Africa.
Al Jazeera Sport has been a FIFA licensee since 2009 and this new extension of the rights means that the channel can now tailor its programming over three consecutive FIFA World Cups. Al Jazeera Sport has committed to unprecedented presence and production levels from the 2014 FIFA World Cup Brazil™ onwards, including free TV coverage as agreed between the two parties and in line with FIFA distribution policies [1]
A total of 189 territories will be covered by media rights licensees and broadcasting.
The raise in internet users and improvement in web broadcasting requires a more sophisticated online streaming tools, designed to reach the expectations of web followers.
According to FIFA it will be possible to watch world cup online streaming in live TV sport channel from all over the world. Free 24 hours a day for football or soccer TV channels live on your computer. The 2014 FIFA World Cup comes to Brazil, Live online World Cup streaming quarter-final, semi-final, and final [2]
[1].^ FIFA: 2014 FIFA Public Guidelines (2011, January). Retrieved on 11 December 2011 from http://FIFA.com/
[2].^ FIFA: Laws of the Game 2008/2009 (2008, July). Retrieved on 4 December 2011 from http://FIFA.com/
Sport Innovation/Technology on- and off-field at the 2014 FIFA World Cup
This chapter introduces the Feed-Forward Neural Network package for prediction and classification data. An artificial neural network (ANN), usually called "neural network" (NN), is a mathematical model or computational model that is inspired by the structure and/or functional aspects of biological neural networks. A neural network consists of an interconnected group of artificial neurons, and it processes information using a connectionist approach to computation. In most cases an ANN is an adaptive system that changes its structure based on external or internal information that flows through the network during the learning phase. Modern neural networks are non-linear statistical data modeling tools. They are usually used to model complex relationships between inputs and outputs or to find patterns in data. In this chapter will explore the use of feed-forward neural network through the package NNET[1][2] created by Ripley.
A feedforward neural network is an artificial neural network where connections between the units do not form a directed cycle. This is different from recurrent neural networks.
The feedforward neural network was the first and arguably simplest type of artificial neural network devised. In this network, the information moves in only one direction, forward, from the input nodes, through the hidden nodes (if any) and to the output nodes. There are no cycles or loops in the network.
ADALINE stands for Adaptive Linear Element. It was developed by Professor Bernard Widrow and his graduate student Ted Hoff at Stanford University in 1960. It is based on the McCulloch-Pitts model and consists of a weight, a bias and a summation function.
Its adaptation is defined through a cost function (error metric) of the residual
The Adaline has practical applications in the controls area. A single neuron with tap delayed inputs (the number of inputs is bounded by the lowest frequency present and the Nyquist rate) can be used to determine the higher order transfer function of a physical system via the bi-linear z-transform. This is done as the Adaline is, functionally, an adaptive FIR filter. Like the single-layer perceptron, ADALINE has a counterpart in statistical modelling, in this case least squares regression.
There is an extension of the Adaline, called the Multiple Adaline (MADALINE) that consists of two or more adalines serially connected.
The package NNET created by Ripley provides methods for using feed-forward neural networks with a single hidden layer, and for multinomial log-linear models. Specifically, this chapter of the book will be portrayed NNET method. Below is briefly described the method and parameters used.
Fit single-hidden-layer neural network, possibly with skip-layer connections.
x matrix or data frame of x values for examples.
y matrix or data frame of target values for examples.
Wts initial parameter vector. If missing chosen at random.
MaxNWts The maximum allowable number of weights. There is no intrinsic limit in the code, but increasing MaxNWts will probably allow fits that are very slow and time-consuming.
... arguments passed to or from other methods.
If the response in formula is a factor, an appropriate classification network is constructed; this has one output and entropy fit if the number of levels is two, and a number of outputs equal to the number of classes and a softmax output stage for more levels. If the response is not a factor, it is passed on unchanged to nnet.default.
The case study is designed to illustrate just one among many possible applications of the package NNET.
Accurate diagnosis may avoid complications for patients. Desiring to establish whether a patient has breast cancer, the analysis of several factors help determine an accurate diagnosis. Thus, from the collection of data from many patients seek to infer the diagnosis of patients with satisfactory accuracy.
The data used in this case study are from a database of the UCI[3][4][5][6]. The database consists of 10 variables (9 input and 1 output) having 569 instances of records of patients diagnosed.
The implementation using the package is pretty simple. Below is the part of the training and test data.
As a result of the training function neuralNetoworkModel <- nnet (...) has the steps of iteration and approximation of operations in accordance with the parameters set for rang, decay and maxit.
After training, there is confusion over the matrix (function neuralNetworkTest) the results obtained. From the matrix it is possible to apply various metrics for information as accuracy, error, among others.
From this case study, the neural net model obtained from data sets of patients are sufficient to provide a reliable diagnosis. But for this, the patient data must respect the reality of the model represented by the network, otherwise the ANN present a misdiagnosis. Thus, it is noted that the package NNET is convenient to use, making it accessible to various distinct audiences, which may make use of it without needing a thorough knowledge on the subject.
^ B. D. Ripley: "Pattern Recognition and Neural Networks", Cambridge, 1996.
^ W. N. Venables and B. D. Ripley: "Modern Applied Statistics with S.", Fourth edition, Springer, 2002.
^ O. L. Mangasarian and W. H. Wolberg: "Cancer diagnosis via linear programming", SIAM News, Volume 23, Number 5, September 1990, pp 1 & 18.
^ William H. Wolberg and O.L. Mangasarian: "Multisurface method of pattern separation for medical diagnosis applied to breast cytology", Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A., Volume 87, December 1990, pp 9193-9196.
^ O. L. Mangasarian, R. Setiono, and W.H. Wolberg: "Pattern recognition via linear programming: Theory and application to medical diagnosis", in: "Large-scale numerical optimization", Thomas F. Coleman and Yuying Li, editors, SIAM Publications, Philadelphia 1990, pp 22-30.
^ K. P. Bennett & O. L. Mangasarian: "Robust linear programming discrimination of two linearly inseparable sets", Optimization Methods and Software 1, 1992, 23-34 (Gordon & Breach Science Publishers).Other languages...
Reading and writing —
Essential Pronunciation Rules •
Note: If you are not aware of the general interpretations of the Korean alphabet, please first read Alphabet before continuing.
This page uses the International Phonetic Alphabet to transcribe pronunciation. All text within square brackets [skwɛər ˈbrækət̩s] uses that system. See the Wikipedia entry on IPA for more information.
The few essential pronunciation rules and exceptions in this lesson will improve your accuracy in speaking and interpreting Korean.
Plain, aspirated, and tense
In English, certain pairs of consonants, like p/b, t/d, s/sh/z, and k/g, have a pronunciation that differs mostly in whether they are voiced or voiceless. Korean consonants do not have that same distinction, but rather differ according to whether they are "plain", "aspirated", or "tense".
Some consonant jamo are plain, some aspirated, some tense:
g or k [g] or [k]
d or t [d] or [t]
b or p [b] or [p]
Aspirated consonants (ㅋ, ㅌ, ㅍ, and ㅊ) are pronounced with a burst of air that does not accompany their plain counterparts. To feel or see the difference between aspirated and unaspirated sounds, put a hand or a lit candle in front of your mouth and say "tore" ([tʰɔɹ]) and then "store" ([stɔɹ]). You should either feel a puff of air or see a flicker of the candle flame with "tore" that does not appear with "store". In English, the t should be aspirated in "tore" and unaspirated in "store". In Korean, the aspirated consonants are like the t in "tore", in that you must expel a burst of air to say them correctly.
Tense consonants (ㄲ, ㄸ, ㅃ, ㅆ, and ㅉ) are said with a harder, stiffer voice than their plain counterparts. With these "tense" consonants, the diaphragm, glottis, and tongue are tense. For example, imagine you were to say "duck!" rather loudly. The hard d sound in "duck!" is like the sound made by the Korean ㄸ.
Proper pronunciation of the Korean letter ㄹ takes some practice for most English speakers. It is pronounced sort of like a half r and half l sound. Specifically, it is either an alveolar tap or an alveolar lateral approximant, depending on the following sound. While difficult at first, mastery is fairly easy.
Initial, Medial, and Final Consonants
Korean alphabet charts have two tables: initial sounds, and final sounds. The sound of a Korean consonant can change slightly when it is preceded or followed by another consonant. For example, ㄱ can be pronounced as a voiced sound (the English g) or voiceless (like the English k). To know how to pronounce such letters, it's important to know the difference between an initial, a medial, and a final consonant.
ㅇ (ieung) is a special letter in Korean, because sometimes it makes a sound and sometimes it doesn't. This is determined by whether it is in the initial, middle, or final position.
In the middle position, there are two possibilities.
The final-initial pairs ㄴㄹ and ㄹㄹ each become [ll] (or for some speakers, [ɭl]):
Note that the final-initial pair ㄴㄴ does not follow this rule. Each ㄴ in ㄴㄴ retains its natural sound ([n̚n]).
There are a few consonants that, when they are in the final position, are pronounced [t̚] (an unreleased t, like in the English word "atlas"). These characters are: ㄷ, ㅌ, ㅅ, ㅆ, ㅈ, and ㅊ:
However, if an ㅇ (ieung) follows a t-stop letter, then the normal sound is simply carried over:
If a character ending with 'ㅅ' is followed by another word that begins with 'ㅇ', the t-stop sound is carried over:
[togil]: unvoiced initial ㄷ, final ㄱ moves into subsequent initial position
[pulljuhak̚]: unvoiced initial ㅂ, final-initial pair ㄴㄹ, unreleased final ㄱ
[met̚dwɛʥi]: final ㅅ as t-stop
[koŋbjʌŋ]: unvoiced initial ㄱ, nasal final ㅇ
If you want to know more about specific pronunciation rules, then you can read more in the Advanced Pronunciation Rules section. Otherwise, you are ready to start learning Korean vocabulary and grammar!Other languages...
Reading and writing —
Essential Pronunciation Rules •
The 1,400 years old zodiac mosaic of Bet Alfa
Introduction: The aim of this level, what you will learn in it and how the lessons are structured.
Review: Complete review of this level, alphabet and niqqud tables, extra notes regarding pronunciation, transliteration and shape.
Test: Tests what you've learned this level.
You really should know, before you learn the Hebrew alphabet, that the average Israeli needs to know how to read words without niqqud, and that to read an Israeli newspaper you have to know about 2000 words without niqqud.
Applicable Blender version: 2.75.
Note: Some Pictures are outdated.
Put the 3D cursor at the scene center by pressing Shift + C .
Note: after deleting the cube you must be in Object Mode. If not, Press CTRL-Z and switch with TAB and redo the operation.
Noob note: to ensure that you don't become confused, make sure that your viewport is set up in the same direction you see in these pictures. The colored arrows are red, green, and blue and they control the x, y, and z axes, respectively.)
We start by creating our main body from a sphere. Press SHIFT + A → Mesh → UVSphere, then choose 16 segments and 16 rings.
We're going to make it look like a penguin body:
Note: Make sure the mouse cursor is not too far away from the sphere when hitting the S or else you may not be able to reach a 2.000 scale value. The scaling steps are proportional to the distance from the 3D cursor when calling the scale tool.
Note: You can also do this by typing in 2 after starting the scale and restricting movement to the Z-axis: S -> Z -> 2
We’re going to shape the penguin head from the top of the sphere.
Start by selecting the top-most single vertex as well as the top two smallest circle segments.
Note: Selection has been explained in a previous tutorial. Here, the easiest methods are either box selection B ) in the front view NUM1 ) and Limit selection to visible off, or lasso selection ( CTRL + LMB ) in the top view ( NUM7 ) and Limit selection to visible on. You can also switch to top view, center your mouse on the topmost vertex and use the circle tool. Don't forget to deselect all first ( A )
Noob note: Make sure the Limit selection to visible/Occlude background geometry button is in the right state each time you select vertices, edges or faces. When it's off, selection affects any item, visible or not.
Building the neck with the 3D transform manipulators
To turn on the 3D transform manipulator, either push down its button or use CTRL + SPACE and choose Enable/Disable.
Go to the front view ( NUM1 ). Drag the blue arrow while holding the CTRL key down to move the selected vertices 0.3 units up.
Noob note: you may not be able to snap the extrusion lengths to tenths of units. CTRL snaps to the grid size by default: if you can only translate by one unit (1.0), zoom in until the grid divides itself into tenths (SCROLL). Some Blender versions allow to snap to one tenth of the current step by holding both the SHIFT and CTRL keys while moving the mouse.
Noob note: instead of the Transform manipulator, you can use the G and constraint the movement to the Z axis ( Z ).
Now switch to the side view ( NUM3 ) and make sure that the rotation/pivot point is set to "median point" either by selecting it from the third drop down menu right of the "Mesh" menu, or by pressing CTRL + , . Choose the Rotate tool ( R ). Move the mouse with the CTRL key down to rotate the selection 30 degrees counter-clockwise. Use LMB to validate the rotation.
Repeat those steps (selection expansion, translation and rotation) two more times and you'll end up with the body seen in the below.
That doesn’t really look like a penguin, yet!
Now move all of the selected vertices to the left 0.4 units by pulling the manipulator's green arrow (and of course holding the CTRL key down). This straightens out the neck as seen in the next picture.
Noob note: you can also use the G and translate the selection by -0.4 as displayed in the bottom left corner of the viewport. Still do this in the side view ( NUM3 ).
Noob note if you had to pull the red arrow, not the green one, then you probably didn't switch to side view, and modeled the neck in front view. If you realize here that you have this done from another view then press AKEY twice, then NUM7, then Space -> Transform -> Rotate and type 90 or 270
Switch to the front view ( NUM1 ), and select the frontmost vertex (the one that originally was the top vertex of the sphere) with the RMB . Then switch to the side view ( NUM3 ) and translate this vertex to the left by 1.2 units using the manipulator's green arrow or the translate tool.
Note: some Blender versions allow moving the vertices from the keyboard with the following sequence: G , Y , -1.2, ENTER .
The main body of the penguin is now finished. The next step is to create some flappers for the poor little guy.
We are going to create the wings by extruding faces on each side of the penguin.
Noob Note: You can rotate the whole object by pressing A to select all of its vertex and then rotate it pressing R or using the Rotate Manipulator until the axis on your screen matches the axis on the example image. That way, also, you can practice a little more.
Now, select two faces that will make up the penguin’s shoulder as shown on the right (either select the first one with RMB and the second one holding SHIFT , or use box selection ( B ) to select them both in a single operation).
Then switch to front view ( NUM1 ) and extrude the selection:
We'll now extrude the bottom face of this new extrusion. Rotate the view to show it with:
Now do the same on the penguin's other side: use CTRL + NUM3 to view the left side (you can also rotate with MMB , or press NUM4 several times).
We’re going to smooth out the shoulders and improve the wings. Though this can be done in many ways, we'll only use the merge tool.
Rotate your penguin so that you can see one shoulder from above. Then switch to Vertex select mode ( CTRL + TAB → Vertices). Press A to deselect all, then select the two shoulder vertices with RMB and SHIFT .
Press ALT + M , choose At Center from the popup in order to merge the two vertices at their center. Finally dismiss the message saying Removed 1 Vertices.
Repeat the steps with the two other vertex pairs shown on the right picture, and smooth the other wing. I’m leaving the middle segments for now, else the wing tips will be too pointy.
Note: if you have troubles merging vertices, it comes from vertex duplicates in your mesh. You probably chose Individual Faces instead of Region when extruding the wings, which creates duplicate vertices and neighbouring faces. To clean up your model: select all vertices ( A ) and choose W → Remove Doubles.
You must do them one by one!
Finish off the wings by selecting the two backmost vertices of the wings, and moving them up using the blue arrow by 0.1 unit.
We're going to cut the penguin's lower end, for it to stand up! Select the bottom vertices (bottom vertex and the first ring above it) as shown in the picture. There are many ways, this is left as an exercise.
Noob note: To quickly select all the vertices around the hole, you can enter edge mode CTRL + TAB -> "Edges", and then select one edge that goes around the hole. Now press CTRL+E -> "Edge Loop Select", which should select all edges around the hole. Now go back to Vertex select mode and continue with ALT + F .
The next step is to provide the little guy with feet. To do this, we’re going to extrude two of the front faces:
Then switch to the side view ( NUM3 ) and extrude the selection by -0.6 units ( E → Region, restrict to the Y axis: Y ).
Keep the selection and look for the Mesh Tools in the Tool Shelf. If you can’t see it, press T to make the Tool Shelf visible. Then click on the Subdivide button (under Add in the Tools tab). Or press W and choose Subdivide.
Note: if something goes wrong here, you may need to remove double first. As always, to move the vertices, either use the manipulator or G and Y sequence.
You should end up with what's shown in the right picture (minus the selection).
Then choose the scale tool ( S ), limit its action to the Z axis ( Z ) and scale down by a factor of 0.4.
The feet still look rather peculiar, so please go ahead and move the vertices around on your own as you like.
Reminder: you can use the G and restrict movements to the X or Y axis using the X or Y . Try not to move vertices along the Z axis to keep the penguin's bottom flat.
To complete the penguin, we have to add a tail (the end of the tuxedo):
Noob Note: Or you can extrude the edges 0.3 units away from the penguin, then G Z -0.08, LMB or ENTER .
Press CTRL + S to save your work!
Go to Object Mode ( TAB ), and make sure the penguin is selected. Then check for the Modifiers toolkit in the Buttons panel. Press Add Modifier → Subsurf (or Press SHIFT + O ).
Look at the penguin now, he’s much smoother. You can alter the levels of the subsurfing if you like, but I’ll settle for level one.
Under the Links and Materials toolkit, you can press the Set Smooth button as well, which makes the penguin really slick.
Note: you may see some weird effects at the bottom and the tail after subsurfing the penguin. If so, there is an issue with normals: they have to be all pointing outwards. This can be achieved by selecting all vertices in Edit Mode and recalculating the normals outside ( CTRL + N ). Click on the message to confirm. Note that CTRL + SHIFT + N will turn the normals inwards and that W → Flip Normals flips them.
Question: The finished penguin looks fine in Object Mode, but when I render it, it looks odd. Quite patchy.
Answer: Make sure you adjust the "Render Levels" parameter (directly under "Levels") to be greater-or-equal than "Levels".
The penguin can be colored or textured, but that will be part of later tutorials!
This is what the penguin (sans tail) looks like, textured and ready. Orbisonitrum
The eyes are there, just not easily visible in the thumb. At the top of the white part, two faces on the chest were subdivided to give the white more of a curve at the top. The faces were selected that were going to be white, and the I used separate (P) to make them a different mesh. I used a white material for the chest, black for the body, and grey uvspheres for the eyes. Apparently, an easier way to colour the chest can be found at Multiple Materialsplease feel free to replace this with your own image of the penguin you made, with comments on how you put your own style into it
A pretty basic picture of a penguin. I subdivided the stomach and eyes, but then I also added some eyeballs by making a UVSphere, cutting the top of it off, and then placing it inside of my penguin's head. All the colors have specular colors, giving the penguin a slight blue glow under the black.
Studies have been carried out to gauge the effect of Open Educational Resources (OER) use on teaching and learning. The Jisc OER Impact Study was conducted between November 2010 and June 2011 by a team from the University of Oxford. It concluded in July 2011, the research report concluding that OER's main impact factors are pedagogic, attitudinal, logistical and strategic. The OER Research Hub is also looking at the question 'What is the impact of OER on learning and teaching practices?' and will be releasing reports in forthcoming years. Some argue that OER have so far failed to reach their potential. The paper, Ten Years Later: Why Open Educational Resources Have Not Noticeably Affected Higher Education, and Why We Should Care notes that significant adoption hurdles to OER exist including discoverability, quality control, failure to organise and acquisition.
A recent study by Pirkkalainen, Jokinen & Pawlowski lists the following barriers to OER adoption:
Lack of motivation to share resources or information around those resources
Lack of contextual information for the resources – how can be used or modified
Open content does not fit the scope of the course / curriculum
Lack of trust towards unknown authors or systems where resources retrieved from
“Not invented here” notion; hesitation to receiving knowledge someone else has created
Hard to assess the quality and relevance
The EU funded Open Educational Ideas project claims: "The main purpose of licensing educational material under open licences is to allow for anyone to use, re-use or re-purpose them. However, despite a strong movement in recent years to publish such material, OER reuse is still not a common practice in Higher Education, schools and enterprises."
OER are being used by K-12 teachers (who teach school education), but this is still an emerging area.
The teachers in some countries have embraced open materials more that those in others, this is often driven by cost and availability of traditional materials. For example in the United States College open textbooks have become more common due to the high cost of textbooks that has to be borne by parents and students.
One interesting project is the initiative by Leicester council in the UK to create guidance for secondary school staff. The OER project is part of the Council’s DigiLit Leicester initiative, designed to support schools in making the most of the city’s current investment in technology, as part of Leicester’s £340 million pound Building Schools for the Future Programme. The project has identified a gap in support and information for teachers relating to the use and creation of Open Educational Resources. An understanding of OER and open licencing will support schools and staff in sharing and accessing resources, and in developing staff and learner digital literacy skills and knowledge.
The team working on the project have previously worked on several initiatives which support the creation and use of use of Open Education Resources by schools across Europe and internationally, including the ORBIT project and the OER4Schools programme, at the Faculty of Education, University of Cambridge.
OER4Schools, Cambridge University
Open Educational Resources for Teacher Education (ORBIT)
Open Education Germany - by Zwetana Penova
Understanding Open Educational Resources: Information for Schools
What's wrong with Open Educational Resources? Barriers and Solutions
Front Page: Radiation Oncology | RTOG Trials | Randomized Trials
Title: A Phase I/II Trial to Evaluate 3D-CRT Confined to the Region of the Lumpectomy Cavity for Stage I and II Breast Carcinoma
38.5 Gy Total/10 fractions (3.85 Gy per fraction), 2 fractions/day (separated by 6 hours), Given in 5 consecutive working days
Radiotherapy should begin within eight weeks of surgery (If chemotherapy is given first, RT begins 2 weeks after the last cycle of chemotherapy)
Invasive pathology; AJCC Stage I-II; single focus
Negative surgical margin; up to 3 LN+
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Some of the first things I heard from students about the process of creating an interactive, immersive, multimedia project were frustrations such as:
"I'm not sure what I'm supposed to be doing to get my part of the project finished. I know I'm on the ________ team but it's not clear what we're supposed to be doing right now".
"How is this different from other projects we've done in the MultiMedia Institute so far. Is this going to be like creating one of our video pieces, or light making my own web site?"
"I have to wait until the Design Team gets their work done before I can get started" - or "I have to wait until the Project Director gives us the navigation outline before I can do my part" - or "I have to wait until the Interactive Team tells us what software they're going to use before I can get started".
It makes sense that students who have never created an interactive team project before are unsure what they are to do to help their particular team accomplish their work. Interactive design is deceiving in that the processes are very similar to those used to make a video documentary or any other piece of conventional, linear media. It's confusing because rules for conventional media are not enough to finish an interactive product.
For example, video components must be planned, shot and edited for either presentation format. Interactive clips must, however, make sense when played out of sequence or all by themselves. Transitions to and from many other non-linear components must be created and, in most cases, video clips will be very short and numerous.
The sequential order for interactive development usually looks like this:
Define the end user, time line and budget in detail.
Describe and understand all possible environments where the project might be accessed (at a living room desktop computer, integrated with live actors, from a lap top, in a classroom, etc.)
Decide what format of media (pictures, video, PDFs, text, VRs, URL links, etc.) will communicate your story the best.
Describe (storyboard) for each type of media.
Collect media and translate, compress, reformat it into a form that can be read by the final authoring tool (in this case, Adobe's Director software).
Create at least one prototype for each kind of media and test it on an end-user's playback device (computer, DVD player, etc.).
Author the project, keeping in mind to give users what they expect as well as something they didn't expect that makes the product memorable ("sticky") and effective.
Test the product.
Debug.
Duplicate, if necessary, and distribute.
With this much information it is possible for every team member to tackle their part of the project while giving direction to other development teams.
Mizar32 comes in three versions with different amounts of flash memory and static RAM:
Model A: 512KB flash / 64KB SRAM / 32MB SDRAM
Model B: 256KB flash / 64KB SRAM / 32MB SDRAM
Model C: 128KB flash / 32KB SRAM / 32MB SDRAM
The flash memory is built into the AT32UC3A0128/256/512 processor chip and responds from address 0x80000000.
The first 8KB (0x80000000-0x80001FFF) contain the "Atmel AT32UC3 USB DFU bootloader", which is able to download and write new contents to the rest of the flash memory over the USB port.
When the chip resets or powers up, it starts executing at 0x80000000, which is the USB DFU bootloader. This checks whether the user button is pressed and, if it is, gets ready to download and program the rest of the flash memory. If the button is not pressed, it jumps to address 0x80020000 which contains the first word of the executable code for the Hempl interpreter.
Alternatively, the flash memory from 0x80020000 can be programmed with emBLOD, the embedded boot loader, which loads the executable code from a file "autorun.bin" on the SD card into SDRAM and executes it there. In SDRAM code runs about 6 times slower that a program in flash memory but you can load and run programs up to 32MB in size.
If you have a JTAG programming device, you can program the entire 128/256/512KB by overwriting the USB DFU boot loader.
There is also a second, 512-byte area of flash at 0x80800000 - 0x808001FF, the "Flash user page", which keeps a configuration word for the USB DFU bootloader in the last word, but is otherwise free.
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
Arriving at The Burrow, Dumbledore and Harry are met by Mrs. Weasley. Also present is Tonks, whose colorless and sad appearance shocks Harry; her usually vibrant pink hair is now a mousy brown. Tonks insists she must go and declines a weekend dinner invitation, hearing that Lupin and Mad-Eye will be there. Mrs. Weasley asks Harry about Slughorn. Apparently, he started teaching at Hogwarts about the same time as Dumbledore, and he taught Mrs. Weasley. She disapproved of Slughorn's favorites, apparently since Arthur Weasley was not among them.
Mr. Weasley has recently been appointed head of the new Office of Detection and Confiscation of Counterfeit Defensive Spells and Protective Objects. This promotion will help improve the Weasley finances. When Mr. Weasley arrives home, he discusses the counterfeit devices he has found. Harry is actually interested, but when he attempts to stifle a yawn, Mrs. Weasley sends him to bed in the twins' vacant room. They are now living in a little apartment over their Diagon Alley shop.
The next morning, Harry is awakened by Ron and Hermione, who are concerned about his well-being after the battle at the Ministry. Harry tells them about Horace Slughorn, who is replacing former Defence Against the Dark Arts instructor, Professor Umbridge. Ginny slouches in, complaining about someone she refers to as "her"; Harry's curiosity is ended when Fleur Delacour enters with his breakfast tray, and Mrs. Weasley in her wake. Fleur says she and Bill Weasley are marrying next summer, then heads back downstairs. Ron is still clearly rather infatuated by Fleur, but the three women feel she is very full of herself and wonder what Bill sees in her. Ginny derogatorily calls her "Phlegm", upsetting Mrs. Weasley, but making Harry and Hermione laugh.
When Mrs. Weasley departs, Ron, clearly still embarrassed in Fleur's presence, confides it is hard getting used to having Fleur around when she jumps out like that. Ron, Ginny, and Hermione agree that Mrs. Weasley is unlikely to get Bill interested in Tonks rather than Fleur. Tonks has been depressed since her cousin, Sirius Black, had died. That she evidently blames herself for Sirius' death interests Harry, who carries the same guilt. As a result, Tonks has apparently lost the ability, or perhaps the inclination, to transform her physical appearance at will.
After Ginny leaves, Ron tells Harry that the family and Percy remain estranged, despite Voldemort's return. Ron and Hermione are amazed that Dumbledore wants to give Harry private lessons. Harry reveals the prophecy to them, and Ron and Hermione worry that Harry will have to face Voldemort. Harry is also worried, but on reflection, realizes he has always known he would eventually have to face Voldemort. Privately, he is greatly reassured by Ron and Hermione not abandoning him at the revelation that he is fated to either kill Voldemort or be killed by him.
Shortly, Harry, Ron, and Hermione receive their O.W.L. results. It is revealed that "T", rather than a joke by the Twins, is an actual grade meaning Troll, not Terrible as might be imagined. Harry's grades are:
Care of Magical Creatures: Exceeds Expectations (E)
Defence Against the Dark Arts: Outstanding (O)
These results are good, but Harry's hope to become an Auror has apparently been dashed. He needed an 'O' in Potions for Snape to accept him into his advanced Potions course, one of the N.E.W.T. subjects required to become an Auror.
Ron receives similar grades, minus the one 'Outstanding', and is quite pleased that he only failed Divination and History of Magic. Mrs Weasley is also very proud, noting that Ron has achieved more O.W.L.s than Fred and George together. Hermione, as everyone except herself expected, receives 9 'O's and one 'E' (in Defence Against the Dark Arts). All three have passed into N.E.W.T. level, although Harry privately regrets that he will be unable to join the Auror profession and cannot think what else he would like to be.
Harry is shocked by Tonks' radically changed appearance. There is no explanation yet as to what might have happened since she was last seen about a month ago, but she is no longer the cheerful and vibrant person Harry last saw. Some readers may believe, given the amount of Ministry hysteria about Dark wizards, that Tonks is being controlled by the Imperius curse. Hermione, Ginny, and Ron think she is suffering from grief and guilt over Sirius' death and may even have been in love with him. Readers who are aware that Sirius was Tonks' cousin may believe the relationship is too close for marriage, but examination of the Black family tree shows that they are in fact second cousins, and so distantly enough related that they could marry. Sirius' mother, Walburga, is sister to Cygnus, Andromeda Black's father, making Andromeda a first cousin to Sirius, and Tonks, as Andromeda's daughter would be second cousin to Sirius. As a side note, we will point out that the Black family is no stranger to inbreeding: Sirius' father and mother both descend from the marriage of Phineas Nigellus and Ursula Flint, their mutual great-grandparents.
Harry also fears, on getting his OWL results, that his professional future has been permanently derailed. The only career that interested him is an Auror (Dark wizard catcher), even though the primary person who encouraged him was actually a Death Eater in disguise (Barty Crouch). Unfortunately, Harry's Potions grade is too low to admit him into Snape's N.E.W.T.-level Potions classes, which he needs to fulfill the Auror prerequisites. This will deeply trouble Harry, and being unable to pursue his chosen career path leaves him discouraged and feeling adrift. Harry's tendency to be single-minded has, as yet, prevented him from seriously considering other professions, and with his chosen career track now apparently closed to him, he is uncertain how to proceed.
In another continuity glitch common in this lengthy series, we see Mrs. Weasley's clock, now with all its nine hands, one for each family member, pointing at Mortal Peril. The astute reader may have noticed that here it is apparently a mantel clock, while in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire it is described as a grandfather clock. Mrs. Weasley claims that nobody else has a clock like that, which is probably why Dumbledore specifically mentioned it at one point. The unique nature of the clock would suggest that possibly someone in the family built it or had it built to specification, and in fact with his known ability with mechanical magical devices, it might well have been Dumbledore himself who built it for them. As the clock has a hand for Ginny, it must have been built or modified after Ginny was born, in 1981, which would argue that the clockmaker is still alive. It is possible that Mrs. Weasley wanted the clock to be more portable, and had the original builder, or a clock-maker, separate the mechanism from the clock case and build a mantel-type case for it. This continuity problem does not hinder our appreciation of the story; it is only mentioned as a side light.
Another minor problem occurs in early editions of this book. Hermione had initially been taking "everything", which came to twelve graded courses, in Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban. She dropped Divination mid-year, and reports that she will no longer need the Time-turner at the end of the year because, having also dropped Muggle Studies, she can now fit all of her courses in a normal schedule. Thus, she must now be taking 10 courses. Early editions of the book show her receiving 10 Outstanding and one Exceeds Expectations grades, for a total of eleven courses. Later editions drop that to nine Outstanding grades.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Why is Harry worried about his future?
Why are the Weasleys unhappy about Bill's engagement to Fleur?
What might account for Tonks' changed appearance and demeanor?
Are Ron and Hermione right to be concerned about Harry's well being? If so, why?
Harry wants to be an Auror, but what other careers would he be good at?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Harry's belief that Slughorn is the new Defence Against the Dark Arts instructor is to be expected, as we have seen five different teachers fill that post in the previous five books. The author clearly intends for us to make this erroneous assumption, as Slughorn, Dumbledore, and Mrs. Weasley all fail to mention that Slughorn had previously taught Potions. This revelation, when it occurs in a few chapters, will have major effects on Harry and his future, and will provide a core plot device for this book.
Tonks' forlorn emotional state has little to do with Sirius' death, but is actually because she is in love with Remus Lupin, who spurns her affection. Lupin believes that being a Werewolf makes him unworthy, that he is too old for her, and that the times are too unsettled to risk bringing children into the world in any event. Mrs. Weasley comments that in troubled times like these, people "rush into decisions that they'd normally take time over." She is referring to Bill and Fleur's engagement, that she believes was made rather hastily, but it could equally apply to Tonks, who wants to pursue a relationship with Lupin. His repeated refusal (which we must infer, as we never see it directly) will, over the course of this book, cause Tonks' increasing depression. As another result, we will see later that Tonks' Patronus has changed into "something large and hairy." It appears to Harry to be a dog, which reinforces the mistaken belief that she was in love with Sirius Black. We will finally learn the facts of the relationship between Tonks and Lupin late in this book, and Harry will then realize that Tonks' Patronus is now a wolf.
In retrospect, Percy's continued estrangement from the family will be seen as quite in character. Dumbledore at one point will comment that it is sometimes much easier to forgive someone for being wrong, than it is to forgive them for being right. While we note that this makes Dumbledore an observant man and an excellent student of human behaviour, we must also point out that in order for Dumbledore to have this insight, the author must also possess this level of understanding.
Apart from ongoing plot lines, there is little that connects this chapter to other sections of the series. We do find out some trivia about Mr. and Mrs. Weasley in this chapter, but while they are possibly of interest to the student, they are not referenced outside this chapter.
Calculus is the broad area of mathematics dealing with such topics as instantaneous rates of change, areas under curves, and sequences and series. Underlying all of these topics is the concept of a limit, which consists of analyzing the behavior of a function at points ever closer to a particular point, but without ever actually reaching that point. As a typical application of the methods of calculus, consider a moving car. It is possible to create a function describing the displacement of the car (where it is located in relation to a reference point) at any point in time as well as a function describing the velocity (speed and direction of movement) of the car at any point in time. If the car were traveling at a constant velocity, then algebra would be sufficient to determine the position of the car at any time; if the velocity is unknown but still constant, the position of the car could be used (along with the time) to find the velocity.
However, the velocity of a car cannot jump from zero to 35 miles per hour at the beginning of a trip, stay constant throughout, and then jump back to zero at the end. As the accelerator is pressed down, the velocity rises gradually, and usually not at a constant rate (i.e., the driver may push on the gas pedal harder at the beginning, in order to speed up). Describing such motion and finding velocities and distances at particular times cannot be done using methods taught in pre-calculus, whereas it is not only possible but straightforward with calculus.
Calculus has two basic applications: differential calculus and integral calculus. The simplest introduction to differential calculus involves an explicit series of numbers. Given the series (42, 43, 3, 18, 34), the differential of this series would be (1, -40, 15, 16). The new series is derived from the difference of successive numbers which gives rise to its name "differential". Rarely, if ever, are differentials used on an explicit series of numbers as done here. Instead, they are derived from a continuous function in a manner which is described later.
Integral calculus, like differential calculus, can also be introduced via series of numbers. Notice that in the previous example, the original series can almost be derived solely from its differential. Instead of taking the difference, however, integration involves taking the sum. Given the first number of the original series, 42 in this case, the rest of the original series can be derived by adding each successive number in its differential (42+1, 43-40, 3+15, 18+16). Note that knowledge of the first number in the original series is crucial in deriving the integral. As with differentials, integration is performed on continuous functions rather than explicit series of numbers, but the concept is still the same. Integral calculus allows us to calculate the area under a curve of almost any shape; in the car example, this enables you to find the displacement of the car based on the velocity curve. This is because the area under the curve is the total distance moved, as we will soon see.
Why learn calculus?
Calculus is essential for many areas of science and engineering. Both make heavy use of mathematical functions to describe and predict physical phenomena that are subject to continuous change, and this requires the use of calculus. Take our car example: if you want to design cars, you need to know how to calculate forces, velocities, accelerations, and positions. All require calculus. Calculus is also necessary to study the motion of gases and particles, the interaction of forces, and the transfer of energy. It is also useful in business whenever rates are involved. For example, equations involving interest or supply and demand curves are grounded in the language of calculus.
Calculus also provides important tools in understanding functions and has led to the development of new areas of mathematics including real and complex analysis, topology, and non-euclidean geometry.
Notwithstanding calculus' functional utility (pun intended), many non-scientists and non-engineers have chosen to study calculus just for the challenge of doing so. A smaller number of persons undertake such a challenge and then discover that calculus is beautiful in and of itself.
Learning calculus, like much of mathematics, involves two parts:
Understanding the concepts: You must be able to explain what it means when you take a derivative rather than merely apply the formulas for finding a derivative. Otherwise, you will have no idea whether or not your solution is correct. Drawing diagrams, for example, can help clarify abstract concepts.
Symbolic manipulation: Like other branches of mathematics, calculus is written in symbols that represent concepts. You will learn what these symbols mean and how to use them. A good working knowledge of trigonometry and algebra is a must, especially in integral calculus. Sometimes you will need to manipulate expressions into a usable form before it is possible to perform operations in calculus.
What you should know before using this text
There are some basic skills that you need before you can use this text. Continuing with our example of a moving car:
You will need to describe the motion of the car in symbols. This involves understanding functions.
You need to manipulate these functions. This involves algebra.
You need to translate symbols into graphs and vice versa. This involves understanding the graphing of functions.
It also helps (although it isn't necessarily essential) if you understand the functions used in trigonometry since these functions appear frequently in science.
The first four chapters of this textbook cover the topics taught in a typical high school or first year college course. The first chapter, Precalculus, reviews those aspects of functions most essential to the mastery of calculus. The second, Limits, introduces the concept of the limit process. It also discusses some applications of limits and proposes using limits to examine slope and area of functions. The next two chapters, Differentiation and Integration, apply limits to calculate derivatives and integrals. The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus is used, as are the essential formulas for computation of derivatives and integrals without resorting to the limit process. The third and fourth chapters include articles that apply the concepts previously learned to calculating volumes, and as other important formulas.
The remainder of the central calculus chapters cover topics taught in higher-level calculus topics: parametric and polar equations, sequences and series, multivariable calculus, and differential equations.
The final chapters cover the same material, using formal notation. They introduce the material at a much faster pace, and cover many more theorems than the other two sections. They assume knowledge of some set theory and set notation.
Parametric and Polar Equations ·
Sequences and Series ·
Multivariable Calculus & Differential Equations ·
Configuration | Design | Content | Development | Miscellaneous
Which options will be available to the different usertypes?
Which options will be available to the different user types?
Not directly Mambo related, but applies to mambo.
Chmod (change mode) to manage permissions (eg: chmod 777 MyFile allows everyone to do everything).
Stuff that doesn't fit into any category at all.
R v Edwards (1994) 91 CCC 3d 123 (ONCA) -- cell phone messages suggestive of trafficking -- admitted for purpose of establishing the activities of accused and intent to respond.
R. v. Deelespp, 2002 ABPC 85 (CanLII) - admitted
R. v. Agwa and Ojulu, 2011 MBPC 21 - admitted
R. v. Sasakamoose, 2008 SKPC 164 - rejected
R. v. E.C., 2007 SKPC 27
R. v. K.P.H., 2007 ABQB 728
R. v. Kontzamanis, 2007 BCSC 1603 - dismissed
R. v. Williams, 2006 NSCA 23, [2006] N.S.J. No. 63 (NSCA)
R. v. Sigovin [2006] O.J. No. 1967 (Ont. Ct. Jus.)--admitted statement
R. v. White, 2006 ABQB 888 - dismissed
R. v. Adam et al, 2006 BCSC 1355 -
R. v. Aronis, 2005 CanLII 2057 (ON SC), [2005] O.J. No. 286 (Ont. S.C.)
R. v. Levesque [2004] O.J. No. 2528 (Ont. S.C.)
R. v. A.M., 2004 ONCJ 185, [2004] O.J. No 3770 (Ont. S.C.)
R. v. Johnson, 2004 NSCA 91, [2004] N.S.J. No. 280 (NSCA)
R. v. Michaud, 2004 CanLII 7714 (ON CA), [2004] O.J. No. 2098, (Ont. C.A.)
R. v. P.S.B., 2004 NSCA 25, [2004] N.S.J. No. 49 (NSCA)
R. v. Singh [2004] O.J. No. 1799 (Ont. Ct. Jus) --Domestic offence--statement admitted
R. v. Scott, 2004 NSCA 141, [2004] N.S.J. No. 451 (NSCA)
R. v. Malik [2004] BCJ No. 456 (B.C.S.C.)
R. v. Morehouse, 2004 ABQB 97, [2004] A.J. No. 123 (Alta. Q.B.)
R. v. Strauss, 2004 SKPC 146, [2004] S.J. No. 846 (Sask. Prov. Ct.)
R. v. Wodage [2004] M.J. No. 61 (Man. Prov. Ct.)
R. v. Prince, 2004 BCPC 163, [2004] B.C.J. No. 1277 (BC. Prov. Ct.)
R. v. Czibulka, 2004 CanLII 22985 (ON CA), [2004] O.J. No. 3273 (Ont. C.A.)
R. v. Nolin, 2003 CanLII 5923 (MB PC), [2003] M.J. No. 270 (Man. Prov. Ct.)
R. v. Wilder [2003] B.C.J. No. 2884
R. v. Campbell, 2002 NSCA 35, [2002] N.S.J. No. 120 (NSCA)
R. v. Nazareth [2002] O.J. No. 4085 (Ont. Ct. Jus.)
R. v. E.J.F., 2001 NSCA 158 (CanLII), [2001] N.S.J. No. 434 (NSCA)
R. v. Oakley, 2001 NSPC 36, [2001] N.S.J. No. 537 (NS Prov. Ct.)
R. v. Pennell, 2001 NSPC 12, [2001] NSJ No. 211(NS Prov. Ct.)
R. v. Glowatski, 2001 BCCA 678 [2001] B.C.J. No. 2499 (B.C.C.A.)
R. v. Auger [2001] N.W.T.J. No. 45 (NWT Sup. Ct.)
R. v. Morrissey [ 2001] O.J. No. 498 (Ont. Ct. Jus.)
R. v. Armstrong [2001] O.J. No. 2348 (Ont. Sup. Ct. Jus.)
R. v. J. M. [2001] O.J. No. 1748 (Ont. Ct. Jus.)
R. v. Lavallee [2000] S.J. No. 43 (Sask. Prov. Ct.)
R. v. Diu, 2000 CanLII 4535 (ON CA), [2000] O.J. No. 1770 (Ont. C.A.)
R. v. Deschenes [2000] O.J. No. 4658 (Ont. Ct. Jus.)
R. v. R. B. [2000] O.J. No. 1888 (Ont. Ct. Jus.)
R. v. Schwartzenburg [2000] O.J. No. 2655 (Ont. S.C. Jus.) --domestic offence--not admitted--
R. v. Van Osselaer [1999] B.C.J. No. 3140 (B.C.S.C.)
R. v. St. Croix [1999] N.J. 214 (Nfld. S.C.)
R. v. MacLeod [1999] O.J. No. 4325--domestic offence--statement admitted--victim claimed at trial it was accident--not under oath or video tapted
R. v. Duong [1999] O.J. No. 1651 (Ont. Ct. Jus.)
R. v. Bartlett [1999] O.J. No. 3313 (Ont. Ct. Jus.)--domestic offence--statement admitted--statement given within an hour of incident, detailed and signed--witness agreed contents were reliable to what was said--
R. v. S. H. [1998] O.J. No 613 (Ont. Prov. Ct.)
R. v. Fraser, 1997 CanLII 2562 (NS SC), [1997] N.S.J. No. 541 (NSSC)
R. v. O’Keefe [1997] N.J. No. 314 (Nfld. Prov. Ct.)
R. v. Chartrand [1997] M.J. No. 552 (Man. Q.B.)
R. v. Mohamed [1997] O.J. No. 1298 (Ont. Prov. Ct.)
R. v. Campbell [1997] O.J. No. 5837 (Ont. Prov. Ct.)
R. v. W.B. [1997] O.J. No. 5382 (Ont. Prov. Ct.) --domestic assault, threats--witness gave video statement, left country--admitted statement--corroboration
R. v. Leopold [1996] N.S.J. No. 544 (NS Prov. Ct)
R. v. Pottie [1996] N.S.J. No. 138 (NSCA)
R. v. Collins [1996] O.J. No. 2881 (Ont Prov. Ct.)--statement admitted--recanted witness
R. v. J.K. [1996] B.C.J. No. 2751 (B.C.Y.C.)
R. v. Woycheshen [1996] M.J. No. 570 (Man. Prov. Ct.) -- statement not admitted --
R. v. Smart [1995] O.J. No. 4182 (Ont. Prov. Ct.)
R. v. Chretien, 2009 CanLII 9390 (ON SC) -- video statement admitted for truth of contents under KGB
R. v. McCotter, 2012 BCCA 54 -- statements made to co-workers before death admissible
R. v. Candir,2009 ONCA 915 -- admissible
R. v. Mohammed, 2007 ONCA 513 -- admissible
R. v. Assoun, 2006 NSCA 47
R. v. Ackland, 2006 ABQB 347 -- deceased mother's statement excluded
R. v. Solic, 2003 ABQB 1069 -- deceased gave video statement; admissible
R. v. C.M., 2012 ABPC 102 - witness gave preliminary inquiry testimony, later said that it was all a lie--prior statement admitted
R. v. McCormack et al., 2008 ONCJ 286 -- prior written statement evidence partially admitted
R. v. Tomlinson, 2008 CanLII 58424 (ONSC) -- oral utterance to police; inadmissible
R. v. Devine, 2007 ABCA 49 -- girlfriend keeps changing story; ID evidence admitted
R. v. Rombough, 2006 ABPC 262 -- video statement admitted
R. v. Nejad, 2004 BCSC 1819 -- statement to police admitted
R. v. Duong, 1998 CanLII 3585 (ON C.A.) [1] -- reject prior testimony of co-accused placing accused at scene; witness proven liar
R. v. Hrynyk, 1998 ABPC 160 -- under oath statement admitted
R. v. Thomas (R.J.), 2009 MBCA 85 -- "forgetful" witness gave video statement; admitted.
R. v. Woodard, 2009 MBCA 42 -- "forgetful" witness; prior statement admissible
R. v. E.C., 2007 SKPC 27 -- witness "forgets"; prior statement admissible
R. v. Moreau, 2006 NUCJ 8 -- prior statement not admitted
R. v. Malik and Bagri, 2004 BCSC 2004 -- forgetful witness gave statement; admitted as past recollection recorded
R. v. Cansanay, 2009 MBCA 59 -- gang members refuse to testify; overturn exclusion of statements
R. v. U. (S.), 2007 NUCJ 20 -- statement admitted
R. v. Goodstoney, 2005 ABQB 128 -- 2 out of 3 KGB statements rejected
R. v. Scott, 2004 NSCA 141 -- KGB statement wrongly admitted in 2004 NSSC 13
R. v. Charles, 1997 CanLII 9699 (SK C.A.) -- 3 prior statements inadmissible
R. v. Pearson, 1994 CanLII 8751 (BCCA)
R. v. Weselak, 1999 CanLII 14165 (MBQB) -- admitted PI testimony of child
R. v. Clark, 2008 ABQB 384 -- missing witness; PI testimony admissible
R. v. Lewis, 2003 NSPC 3 -- witness gave 2 statements, was available but failed to attend court; statement inadmissible
R. v. Edgar, 2010 ONCA 529 -- prior statements admitted
R v Singh-Murray, 2011 NBPC 33 -- KGB statement not admissible
R. v. Abel, 2011 NLTD 173 -- hearsay evidence of murder victim reporting multiple incidents of violence to family was inadmissible under principled approach
R. v. Pasqualino, 2008 ONCA 554 -- admitted for est. motive, intent and animus -- statement of victim reporting past physical and verbal abuse.
R. v. Moo, 2009 ONCA 645 -- statement by deceased reporting nature of relationship and marriage -- admitted for 1) motive, intent, and animus 2) rebut accused claim of unintentional killing and 3) credibility if accused testifies
R. v. Polimac, 2010 ONCA 346 -- admitted to establish motive in domestic homicide
R. v. Bari, 2006 NBCA 119 -- admissible to show victim's fear / state of mind
R. v. Van Osselaer, 2002 BCCA 464 -- admissible to show nature of relationship bw accused and deceased, show motive and identity of killer, shows intent, rebut defence of accident, narrative
R. v. Misir, 2001 BCCA 202 -- admitted to prove intent, motive and identity, and relationship between the parties
R. v. Nickerson, [1996] N.S.J. No. 342 -- 3 witnesses recanted, saying they forgot, were intoxicated at time, were misunderstood by police--court admitted prior statements--reliability found based on separate and corroborating statements, the witnesses understood need for truth, and it was accurately recorded--
Some words that are very similar in Tajik and English
Try to sound out each of the following words using the phonetic mapping above.
This book is donated by UNDP Asia-Pacific Development Information Programme (UNDP-APDIP) to the community. The original publication by:
Author: Victoria L. Tinio
© UNDP-APDIP, 2003, 32 pages
This wikibook is available under the terms of GNU Free Documentation License and Creative Commons Attribution License 2.5
Forensic anthropologists help to identify badly decayed or skeletal human remains by determining age, ancestry, sex, stature, and in rare cases occupation. They are often called upon to assist the police department, the county coroner's office, medical examiner's office, homicide detectives from the local police department, or field archaeologists investigating a burial site.
Anatomical position - Standing erect with the palms facing forward
Anterior - The front of the body or situated near the front of the body
Coronal plane - Vertical plane running through the body that divides it into more or less equal front and back halves
Distal - Away from the point of attachment to the trunk or the centre of the body. Used especially to denote parts of limbs.
Inferior (caudal) - Toward the soles of the feet
Palmar - Direction the palms are facing, however they may be oriented (forward in anatomical position)
Plantar - Direction the soles of the feet are facing, however they may be oriented (inferior in anatomical position)
Proximal - Nearer the centre of the body or away from the point of attachment to the trunk. Used especially to denote parts of limbs.
Posterior - The back of the body or situated near the back of the body
Sagittal plane - Vertical plane running through the body that divides it into more or less equal right and left halves
Superior (cranial) - Toward the crown of the head
Transverse plane - Horizontal plane (at right angles to the sagittal and coronal) that divides the body into more or less equal upper and lower halves
Condyle - A knuckle-like prominence at the end of a bone, usually where it connects to another bone
Diaphysis - The shaft or central section of a long bone.
Epiphysis - Growing end of a long bone. it is separated by a cartilage from the shaft of the bone.
Foramen - A hole in the bone that allows for the passage of veins and/or nerves into and out of the bone
Fossa - A more or less circular depression in the bone
Sinus - An air space in the bone
Human bones - The bones should be sorted out into Human and Non Human bones.
Determination of Sex - The adult skeleton has several morphological differences between the sexes which are used to determine the sex of the individual.
Determination of Race - Although race is not biological, bones have morphological characteristics which are confined to individuals of a particular race. There are a variety of factors that account for this including cultural practices, but also differences between populations. IE, a 20 year old Caucasian from 1786 will have different morphological characteristics from a 20 year old Caucasian from 2014. Determinations of race are only accurate 80% of the time.
Height - The height of the individual can be calculated with reasonable accuracy by applying formulae to the length of individual bones, especially the long bones of limbs.
The title screen of Kirby Super Star
Kirby Super Star is a Super Nintendo game released at near the end of the system's life cycle. It actually has many modes to play and lots of abilities. Many Kirby fans agree this is one of the best Kirby games with a lot of replay value. In 2008, it received a remake for the Nintendo DS, Kirby Super Star Ultra, which has even more features.
Wikipedia has related information at Kirby Super Star
A PDF version is available. (info)
DNA, The Genetic Material
Gray Treefrog, Hyla versicolor
EvoWiki wiki website devoted to biology and evolution
Alphabetical list - Biosites.org
Associated Wikimedia for Biologyv • d • e
You want to use environment variables to change the way an XQuery executes.
XQuery 3.0 introduced two new functions:
Here are some sample results on a Windows 7 System:
Note that Environment Variables are not the same as system-properties. System properties are key-value pairs typically set by Java. Environment Variables are typically key-value pairs associated with a shell.
W3C XQuery 3.0 Specification
A pelican wants to see who is talking
« more permanent measures may be enacted. The most common such method is known as pinioning. Typically performed on young birds, it entails the amputation of the third and fourth metacarpal bones and those attached to them.
The cut is made below the radius and ulna and the alula or so-called bastard wing. The analogous bones in humans are in the hands. In birds, these bones support the flight feathers. If one is disabled, the bird cannot balance well enough to fly.
Pinioning typically occurs when birds are several days old, when the bone is still developing and the tissue is not yet densely filled with blood vessels. Particularly with smaller waterfowl such as ducks and geese and with guinea fowl and peafowl, it is performed with no anaesthetic and the wound is left open to heal.
With larger birds such as cranes and flamingos, the surgery is more complex and involves first opening the skin of the wing and then slicing through the bone, after which the skin is sutured over the stump. Practitioners claim that healing is relatively rapid and that long-term effects are negligible on young birds. Older birds are more traumatized and may succumb to shock.
As Bjarne Klausen, vice director of Odense Zoo in Denmark, points out, this relict process is the among the few remaining forms of animal mutilation still practiced by reputable zoos. » Richard Pallardy, The pinioning of captive birds, 2012
(1) Every one who is required or authorized by law to do anything in the administration or enforcement of the law
(b) as a peace officer or public officer,
(d) by virtue of his office,
When considering the use of potential excessive force, the court should consider "the reasonable belief of the officer in all the circumstances as they existed at the time which belief must be justified by the facts at the time." The belief must be subjectively held as well as objectively reasonable.[1]
R. v. Hannibal, 2003 BCPC 504 at 143
( "Fine arts" "Humanities" "Visual arts" ).
This class will be a tour of the Unity Game Engine. It will cover many topics, mostly just touching the surface. But there will be plenty of opportunity to dig deeper and learn more by doing.
This class is an introduction into the Unity Game Engine. Before we can get started creating games, we need to install the necessary software and get our environment set up.
For me the second aspect is actually the more important one. .
How to install Unity, supported platforms, etc...
If you find a cool tutorial or a neat link, post it here for now:
Example of a www link: (http://www.ethority.de/weblog/social-media-prisma/)
How to do referencing?
"The Social Web is a set of social relations that link people through the World Wide Web."
It has to be distinguished from what is called the Web 2.0 [2], a phrase termed by Tim O’Reilly [3]. Whereas Web 2.0 is about technology, the social web is about people.
So for instance, the map of the Internet, maps machines:
Whereas, a maps of friends on Facebook (a social network) maps people:
↑ Social web, w:Social_web
↑ Web 2.0, w:Web 2.0
↑ Tim O’Reilly (2005-09-30). "What Is Web 2.0". O’Reilly Network
I'm Greek.
Lengthen the central vowel, if possible,
Add the ending \`B`V -ië (\`B`V6 -ier in the plural).
t#1\ mat- "eat" → `Ct~C1T`V amátië
1Ra\ tec- "write" → `V1~VaG`V etécië
5^1\ not- "count" → `N5~N1T`V onótië
The A-verbs and U-verbs lose their final vowel before adding \`B`V -ië:
t#qE\ mapa- "take" → `Ct~CqT`V amápië
qEj&\ palu- "spread" → `Cq~Cj%`V apálië
Verbs with a central vowel that cannot be lengthened are divided into three types:
When the stem ends in a consonant-cluster, we cannot lengthen the central vowel, but otherwise the basic rule is followed:
5#81E\ nasta- "prick" → `C5$81T`V anastië
5&7;U\ nurru- "grumble" → `M5&7;T`V unurrië
While `N61E\ orta- and 9R4#\ henta- have `N1E5%`V ortanië and `VdR4#5%`V ehentanië.
9.D1E\ hauta- "stop" → `Cd.D1T`V ahautië
8lUj#\ suila- "greet" → `M8lUj%`V usuilië
1.G1E\ tiuta- "fatten" → `B1.G1T`V itiutië
When the verb starts in a vowel, we don't add an extra vowel to the beginning of the stem:
`C4#\ anta- "give" → ~C5%`V ánië
`Cj°&\ allu- "wash" → `Cj°%`V allië
`MjzD\ ulqua- "rend" → `MjzG`V ulquië
`B1E\ ita- "sparkle" → ~B1T`V ítië
Some verbs are formed by placing a prefix before another verb, in this case we first form the perfect tense of the original verb and then we put the prefix again in front:
Verbs on hÍE -ya lose both these letters:
1Uj´#\ tulya- "lead" → `M1~Mj%`V utúlië
Some ancient verbs end on a diphtong followed by \1ÎE -tya, they probably follow the same rule as the others:
Some verbs have a vowel before the ending \hÍE -ya.
Possibly the perfect can be formed by the insertion of an \5\ -n- between the stem and the ending:
Some verbs can be conjugated by using an ancient stem and don't need an extra n
The verb 1.G`C\ tuia- comes from the ancient stem 1UhÍ tuy, so the perfect tense would also need 5 n:
1.G`C\ tuia- "sprout" → `M1~M5%`V utúnië
Most likely certain verbs undergo historical influences. The problem can be found in the prefixed vowel. Quite a few letters are allowed in the middle of a word but not in the beginning, so they have evolved differently in the perfect tense.
In most verbs there is no problem because they begin in a letter that is allowed in both places: 1Uj\ tul- "come" has `M1~Mj%`V utúlië "has come" as perfect tense.
(note: the Passive infinitive shows the same irregularities as a prefixed `C\ a- has the same effect).
Take now the Primitive-Elvish verbs 2#4 'dant' "fall" and 2#w 'dab' "allow". The letter d is no longer a separate letter in Neo-Quenya, neither in the beginning nor in the middle of a word. In the evolution a d in the beginning of a word changed into an j l and in the middle of a word it changed into 6 r.
So these verbs evolved into the Quenya verbs j#4#\ lanta- "fall" and j#y\ lav- "allow"
(the b changed into v but here there is no problem as this letter never appears at the end of a word).
But in the perfect tense the d changed into r:
j#4#\ lanta- "fall" → `C7E4%`V arantië
If we apply this to j#y\ lav- we get a nice consequence: Primitive-Elvish also had a verb j#w\ 'lab' "lick".
In Quenya this verb also evolved into j#y\ lav-, but their perfect tenses have remained different:
j#y\ lav- "allow" → `C7~CyT`V arávië
j#y\ lav- "lick" → `Cj~CyT`V alávië
These verbs are however not the only ones, in Primitive-Elvish we had verbs that began with the consonant clusters tw\ mb-, 52\ nd- or g\ ng-. In Quenya these are no longer allowed in the beginning of a word, but in the middle of words they are still allowed.
5#w#\ namba- "hammer" → `C2#w%`V andambië
The next verbs show Primitive-Elvish forms to Quenya, then to their perfect tenses:
The verbs beginning with g\ ng- can in Tengwar script can still be recognised, as they are still written with the Tengwar g ñoldo or ngoldo (Tengwa 19).
In Exilic Quenya pronunciation, there is no difference between g ñoldo and the normal 5 n (númen). Because of this, they can be written with either characters and both forms are acceptable. Note that g can only be written as an initial consonant of a word only.
g^j 'ngol' → g^j\ = 5^j\ nol- "smell" → `Ns~Nj%`V ongólië
g#5#2 'nganad' → g#2#\ = 5#2#\ nanda- "harp" → `Cs#2%`V angandië
Verbs beginning with 9\ h- can show the same problems because this 9 h could have evolved from either d\ 'kh'- or 8a\ 'sk'-.
This last combination gives in Neo-Quenya the letter 9 h at the beginning of a word and an a| x in the middle of a word.
Here we have following verbs and perfect tenses:
8aDj 'skal' → 9Cj´#\ halya- "hide" → `Ca|~CjT`V axálië
8aD6 'skar' → 9C65#\ harna- "wound" → `Ca|D65%`V axarnië
8aD1 'skat' → 9C1\ hat- "split" → `Ca|~C1T`V axátië
8aRj 'skel' → 9Rj1E\ helta- "undress" → `Va|Rj1T`V exeltië
When this starting h appears in the combinations hy-, hl- or hr- then we find following forms:
½j#6\ hlar- "hear" → `Cj°~C7T`V allárië
In the combination c hw- the changes are like these:
cR81E\ hwesta- "breathe" → `V8nR81T`V eswestië
iDjqE\ salpa- "sip" → `CiDjqT`V asalpië
iR6\ ser- "rest" → `V8~V7T`V esérië
iGj\ sil- "shine" → `B8~Bj%`V isílië
iG6\ sir- "flow" → `B8~B7T`V isírië
iUa\ suc- "drink" → `M8~MaG`V usúcië
Derived from -th- / -þ-:
yEiD7ÎE\ vasarya- "veil" → `CyE8~C7T`V avasárië
yE3D7ÎE\ vaþarya → `CyE3~C7T`V avaþárië
Lubliner Klezmorim[Warsaw
Her band is Klezmatics and she is considered by many to be the world's foremost living klezmer fiddler.
Leon Schwartz (1901–1989) was a klezmer and classical music violinist
Kenny Kosek Generalist, also plays bluegrass and country
Dave Tarras highly influential klezmer clarinetist, played with Claude "Fiddler" Williams ,who is also known as a jazz and swing fiddler
Roby Lakatos, billed as "The Devil's Fiddler", credits include "Klezmer Karma with the Franz Liszt Chamber"
Some academic musicology [4] suggests that ancient Semitic traditions preceded and influenced, along with Tanahk hymns, [5] Greek Pythagoran music praxis. (It was a blend of dance tunes, liturgy and meditative chant (nigunim). In Archeomusicology of the Ancient Near East, Richard J. Dumbrill of City University of New York traces evolution of Jewish harp, balags, lyre, lute and aerophone instrumental music. [6]. Following the destruction of the second Temple, all rejoicing and use of musical instruments was banned, with the exception of occasional use of the Rams Horn (Shofar).[citation needed]
Traditions blended ikn medieval klezmer include Greek, “Gypsy”, Turkish, Slavic and in the later phase, Jazz. Some modern bands|[7] incorporate " gospel, punk, and Arab, African, and Balkan rhythms"[8]
As per the above description, all klezmer is eclectic and thus the term fusion, as used with reference to combinations of disparate genres, may be redundant, but some klezmer musicians combine the specific eclecticism of klezmer with very specific genres such as rock, dub or reggae. [9]
Amsterdam Klezmer Band ft. Shantel - Sadagora Hot Dub [10]
Dissonance is frequently employed, harmonically, and klezmer uses accidentals quite freely, creating its signature mood tones.[citation needed]
Wiltrud Apfeld (Red.): klezmer. Hejmisch und hip. Klartext Verlag, Essen 2003, ISBN 3-89861-379-8 (Ausstellungskatalog mit 1 CD)
Rita Ottens, Joel Rubin: Jüdische Musiktraditionen (Musikpraxis in der Schule; 4). Verlag Gustav Bosse, Kassel 2001, ISBN 3-7649-2694-5.
Rita Ottens, Joel Rubin: Klezmer-Musik. Bärenreiter, Kassel 2003, ISBN 3-7618-1400-3.
Seth Rogovoy: The essential klezmer. A music lover's guide to Jewish roots and soul music. Algonquin Books, Chapel Hill, N.J. 2000, ISBN 1-56512-244-5.
Joan Sfar: Klezmer Band 1 Die Eroberung des Ostens. Avant-Verlag, Berlin 2007, ISBN 978-3-939080-17-6.
Mark Slobin (Hrsg.): American Klezmer. Ita roots and offshoots. University of California Press, Berkeley, Calif. 2002, ISBN 0-520-22718-2.
Georg Winkler: Klezmer. Merkmale, Str
Fiddler on the Move : Exploring the Klezmer World by Mark Slobin
↑ Hankus Netsky, "American Klezmer: A Brief History" from American Klezmer: Its Roots and Offshoots Ed. Mark Slobin, p.13
↑ ref name= Haupt|http://www.fiddlingaround.co.uk/klezmer/Klezmer%20frame.html
↑ refname=Dumbrill|The Archaeomusicology of the Ancient Near East |Professor Richard J. Dumbrill|City University of New York||Preface|2005
↑ Old Testament/Tanahk|Book of Psalms|Attributed to King David and others|1000-2500[?]b.c.e.|King James Authorized Version|c.1600|Britain
↑ source= The Klezmatics| type=Online encyclopedic article|lang=German|source=German Wikipedia|url=http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Klezmatics
↑ Liner notes|The Klezmatics|Album=Jews With Horns"Nign"|Jada Jen|June 21,2010
↑ http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sOg6LkCaA38&feature=related
↑ http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TreiNNjc8EY&feature=related
The sources of information that can be documented will be documented here. Some information however is within the head of the writer and the source is lost to time.
Tom Van Vleck's Unix and Multics article
Quasijarus' website - an excellent resource on the stance of the project and its goals.
The Register - home of a few choice quotes
How To Become A Hacker - by Eric Steven Raymond
Open Sources: Voices from the Open Source Revolution - Published by O'Reilly & Associates, Inc.
DouglasGreen - Proof reading and editing.
Michael Sokolov, the Developer of 4.3BSD-Quasijarus, who spoke with Nate via e-mail.
This wikibook in all that was contributed by Nate Montague, the base writer, is released as public domain for anyone to do as they wish with. Nate does not support the ideals nor the means of the GNU movement, he believes in true freedom, not forced cooperation and needless restrictions.
"HS" refers to Heavenly Stems, "EB" refers to Earthly Branches, and "Hid" refers to Hidden Stems.
Luck Pillars for H5 - E4 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 0] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H5 - E4 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 1] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H5 - E4 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 2] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H5 - E4 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 3] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H5 - E4 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 4] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H5 - E4 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 5] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H5 - E4 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 6] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H5 - E4 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 7] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H5 - E4 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 8] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H5 - E4 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 9] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H5 - E4 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 10] in direction F (forward).
By the end of this lesson, the EMT-Basic should be able to:
Identify the following topographic terms: medial, lateral, proximal, distal, superior, inferior, anterior, posterior, midline, right and left, mid-clavicular, bilateral, and mid-axillary.
Describe the anatomy and function of the following major body systems: respiratory, circulatory, musculoskeletal, nervous, and endocrine.
The metric is now the official system of measurements for sizes and weights in the Philippines. At this writing, however, lumber, shoes, paper, and machine parts are still measured by the English system. Since it will take time to metricize all existing English measurements, the conversion table is provided below to help students adjust themselves to the transition.
The metric equivalent of the English linear measurements are printed in decimal figures and are mostly in fractions of a meter. To read these fractional measurements which are given in decimal figures, it is suggested that the following simple rule be followed:
All numbers at the left side of the decimal point are in meters; the first two numbers to the right of the decimal point are in centimeters; the third number to the right of that is in millimeters; and the rest of the numbers to the right of the third number are a fraction of a millimeter.
For example, 1.016 reads: one meter, one centimeter, and 6 millimeters. Similarly, 5.55525 is read as 5 meters, 55 centimeters, and 5 1/4 millimeters. The last two numbers, or 25, is 1/4
0.0794 which reads: seven centimeters, nine millimeters, and 4/10, or 2/5, of a millimeter
Write a variation of our program so that it first asks whether the user wants to read from a
For example, running this program might produce:
Do you want to [read] a file, [write] a file, or [quit]?
Enter text (dot on a line by itself to end):
.
Do you want to [read] a file, [write] a file, or [quit]?
I don't understand the command blech.
Do you want to [read] a file, [write] a file, or [quit]?
Goodbye!
SLI is a feature that allows two NVIDIA cards to work as one providing increased performance. SLI was first supported in the 1.0-8174 driver, for a review read the Phoronix NVIDIA Linux SLI (1.0-8174) article.
To be able to use SLI (Scalable Link Interface) you will need two or more graphics card that are capable of running in SLI. You will also need a certified power supply that can handle two or more graphics cards. You will also need a motherboard that supports SLI, typically a motherboard with two pci-express x16 lanes, and a graphics chipset that is capable of supporting dual GPU's.
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Yipee! We have covered all the basic colors. Make sure you practice writing them down on a notebook and read them aloud to print them Into memory. Best of luck!
Blender provides two different ways of viewing 3D scenes:
In order to use them effectively, you need to understand their properties.
An orthographic view (or projection) of a 3D scene is a 2D picture of it in which parallel lines appear parallel, and all edges perpendicular to the view direction appear in proportion, at exactly the same scale.
Orthographic views are usually aligned with the scene's primary axes. Edges parallel to the view axis disappear. Those parallel to the other primary axes appear horizontal or vertical. The commonly used orthographic views are front, side, and top views, though back and bottom views are possible.
Uniform scale makes an orthographic view very useful when constructing 3D objects, not only in computer graphics, but also in manufacturing and architecture.
Here's one way to think about the orthographic view:
Imagine photographing a small 3D object through a telescope from a very great distance. There would be no foreshortening. All features would be at the same scale, regardless of whether they were on the near side of the object or its far side. Given two (or preferably three) such views, along different axes, you could get an accurate idea of the shape of the object, useful for "getting the feel" of objects in a virtual 3D world where you're unable to touch or handle anything!
Figure 1: "First Angle" Orthographic views of a staircase
The views are from the front, top, and left. Dashed lines represent edges that, in real life, would be hidden behind something, such as the left wall of the staircase. (Think of each view as an X-ray image.)
The leading edges of the steps are visible in both the front and top views. Note that they appear parallel and of equal length in 2D, just as they are in 3D reality.
Orthographic projection at Wikipedia.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Most sleeplessness has the problems of sleep difficulty, wake up earlier, cannot sleep well, easy to make bad dreams, and easy to be awakened. These problems are caused by the functional disorder of the outer layer of the brain and autonomic nervous system.
. Then the parallel order on
.
. Then the pair
.
. The series order on
.
. Then the pair
.
A series-parallel order is the order of an ordered set that arises from a family of singleton ordered sets
The authors introduced the organization-based self-esteem construct and its measurement. They conducted several field studies to inspect different types of reliability and validity.
The authors define organization-based self-esteem as "the degree to which organizational members believe that they can satisfy their needs by participating in roles within the context of an organization".
I count around here.
I am taken seriously (around here).
I am important (around here).
I am trusted (around here).
I can make a difference (around here).
I am valuable (around here).
I am helpful (around here).
I am efficient (around here).
I am cooperative (around here).
The wording "around here" was later appended to all items to increase adjusted item-total correlations. 5-point Likert scales were employed, except for one of the seven studies where a 7-point scale was used.
Pierce et al. (1989): Organization-Based Self-Esteem: Construct Definition, Measurement, And Validation. Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 32, No. 3, pp. 622-648.
In all studies, the means turned out to be above the center. Given that a 5-point scale was employed, future researchers might use words like "always" to shift the means to the center, i.e., towards 3.
French adverbs, like their English counterparts, are used to modify adjectives, other adverbs, and verbs or clauses. They do not display any inflection; that is, their form does not change to reflect their precise role, nor any characteristics of what they modify.
In French, as in English, many adverbs are derived from adjectives. In most cases, this is done by adding the suffix -ment (English "-ly") to the adjective's feminine singular form. For example, the feminine singular form of lent ("slow") is lente, so the corresponding adverb is lentement ("slowly"); similarly, malheureux → malheureusement ("unhappy" → "unhappily").
As in English, however, the adjective stem is sometimes modified to accommodate the suffix:
If the adjective ends in an i, then -ment is added to the masculine singular (default) form, rather than to the feminine singular form:
If the adjective ends in -ant or -ent, then the corresponding adverb ends in -amment or -emment, respectively:
(Look out though, as the -ment suffix is also used to create nouns from verbs where it then corresponds with English -ing.)
Some adverbs are derived from adjectives in completely irregular fashions, not even using the suffix -ment:
And, as in English, many common adverbs are not derived from adjectives at all:
An adverb that modifies an adjective or adverb comes before that adjective or adverb:
An adverb that modifies an Infinitive (verbal noun) generally comes after the infinitive:
But negative adverbs, such as pas ("not"), plus ("not any more"), and jamais come before the infinitive:
An adverb that modifies a main verb or clause comes either after the verb, or before the clause:
Jamais je n'ai fait cela or Je n'ai jamais fait cela ("Never have I done that" or "I've never done that")
On va au bar après
I also played in the same team
Et autrement, comment ça va ?
How's it going, otherwise?
Rédigez votre message ci-dessous
a success, oh how deserved
Comment allez-vous aborder le match ?
How are you going to approach the match?
a match to send you to sleep
The two teams are now level on points
Fortunately he does not have any injury
Et maintenant on fait quoi?
And now, what do we do?
Malheureusement, nous avons encaissé un but
Trained as right back, he can nevertheless render service in the centre of the defence.
Pourquoi le PSG sont-ils sifflés ?
Why are Paris St. Germain whistled at?
Si près, et pourtant si loin !
So near, and yet so far!
a attempt at short range
This game is broadcast at 12.30 p.m. and then rebroadcast at 7:30 p.m.
Il est assez prometteur. - He is quite promising.
Il est trèszprometteur.[1] - He is very promising.
Il est vraiment prometteur. - He is really promising.
Grammar(upload audio)The Comparative · Le Comparatif
This page is based on original text from French/Grammar/Adverbs dated 29 October 2009.
Firefox requires plugins in order to read or display special content from the websites. Plugins are programs that are integrated into Firefox that allows websites to provide content to you. Such content includes flash videos, java games and streaming video from the Internet. Examples of plugins are Flash, RealPlayer, and Java. Plugins are a necessary component to truly access the Internet's interactive stuff.
Firefox plugins should be updated to latest version. Firefox plugin check page will find the latest update of plugins. Having said that, There are few plugins will be given as unknown plugins if Firefox is unable to recognize. These unknown plugins should be updated manually by finding the current version plugin in search engine. Any plugin update can be found by prefixing keyword current version plugin in search engine.
Firefox should be closed before running any plugin installation programs, as existing files may be overwritten during the installation process.
Some plugins are available as XPInstall packages (XPIs), the same format as that for extensions. Where XPIs are available, it is recommended you use them as they often install the plugin automatically without you having to restart Firefox. After the XPI has finished installing, you should restart your browser.
To check what plugins you have installed, simply type about:plugins in the Location bar. This page will show which plugins are installed, what file types they are associated with and if the plugin is enabled or disabled.
In order to read .pdf files, you need to install a pdf reader. Adobe Reader, one of the more popular software, can do this. Simply go to Adobe's official site and download Adobe Reader. With Firefox closed, install Adobe Reader and it will also install the plugin necessary for Firefox to view PDF files. No other steps are necessary. Firefox will now open all PDFs from within a Firefox tab.
If you install Adobe Reader after Firefox, Adobe Reader will automatically select the right plugin. If you already have the latest version of Adobe Reader installed then Firefox will automatically use the plugin. Some people have problems with the Adobe Reader plugin in Firefox. The explanation and solution is here.
The Java Plugin is part of the Java Runtime Environment (JRE, for short). The JRE installer will install the Java Plugin for Netscape 7.2 and Mozilla automatically.
To get the it simply go to java.com and click the "Download Now!" button to download and install the latest JRE.
When you encounter a site that makes use of Flash graphics, a yellow bar will appear at the top of the page telling you that there is a missing plugin preventing you from viewing all the content on the current page. Click on Install Missing Plugins button and the Mozilla Plugin Finder Service will appear automatically. After accepting the User Agreement from Macromedia, the necessary components to view Flash will be installed.
Alternately, you may install Macromedia Flash Player (without having to go to a site) by installing the plugin manually. Simply go here and click on the Macromedia Flash Player 8.0 link.
Simply go to the Macromedia Shockwave site and download the plugin. When you are installing it, Firefox will appear in the list of browsers that you can install the plugin for. (Remember, Firefox should be closed when installing).
Simply go to Real's (the developer of RealPlayer) website and download the program. The RealPlayer installer will automatically detect your browser's plugins folder and install the plugin.
A list of your installed plugins can be obtained from about:plugins. As a general rule, to remove a plugin, you remove the file listed in about:plugins for it. Typically a .dll file.
On a XP machine this can typically be found at c:\Program Files\Mozilla Firefox\plugins
Links to online resources relating to learning how to program in C:
The C Book, second edition by Mike Banahan, Declan Brady and Mark Doran, originally published by Addison Wesley in 1991. This version is made freely available.
Programming in C: A Tutorial, by Brian W. Kernighan; 9600 words
The GNU C Reference Manual -- a reference for the C programming language, as implemented by the GNU C Compiler
The GNU C Library -- a manual for the GNU C library, which defines all of the library functions specified by the ISO C standard, and other functions
Wikipedia:C syntax - cca 9700 words, as of March 2012
Jones, Derek M.. The New C Standard: A Cultural and Economic Commentary. Addison-Wesley. ISBN 0-201-70917-1. http://www.coding-guidelines.com/cbook/cbook1_2.pdf.
Kernighan, Brian W.; Ritchie, Dennis M. (1988). The C Programming Language (2nd Edition ed.). Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall PTR. ISBN 0131103709.
Exons are protein-coding segments and one of the two major divisions of DNA that is transcribed into RNA. All genes start with exons which are often interrupted by introns (non-protein coding segments). Exons received their name because they exit the nucleus and allow the DNA sequences to be expressed (prefix ex-comes from "expressed")1. Exons are the actual part that contains codes for particular protein parts. The number of exons in DNA can vary from one species to another. Before the functional mRNA is formed, a splicing complex called spliceosome cleaves exons to bring them together, then removes all introns and connects exons to each other. Exons join together and travel out of the nucleus where they eventually code for proteins.
Exons were first discovered in 1977 by American molecular biologists and Nobel Prize winners (1993) Richard Roberts and Phillip Sharp. They used electron microscopy to study mRNA and DNA hybrids. In the absence of introns, the entire region that is hybridized to the mRNA would be displaced. In their experiment, they observed regions that were not displaced, creating a loop that is indicative of an intron. Initially it was assumed that the sequence of both DNA and mRNA were identical or continuous. The result of their experiments revealed that DNA had stretches of bases not present in mRNA. Based on that they explained the nature of exons.
With the help of introns, exons can undergo recombination or exon shuffling. Crossovers occur in random, but homologous, positions at a frequency that depends on DNA length. Exon shuffling is a natural process that allows the formation of new functional proteins by creating new arrangements and thus new interactions with minimal risk to the sequence encoding of the functional parts. In the absence of introns, crossovers are likely to disrupt the exon sequence and often create a loss of function.
Moreover, exon shuffling can produce new and useful proteins which lead to evolution. It encode different domains of the protein products with the processes of transcription, RNA processing, and translation.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
A stroke is an event which damages part of the brain. This can happen if an artery that feeds blood to the brain gets clogged, or if it tears and leaks.
As a result, the affected area of the brain cannot work properly. Symptoms might include: hemiplegia (an inability to move one or more limbs on one side of the body), aphasia (inability to understand or use speech), or an inability to see one side of the visual field.
A stroke is a medical emergency. It can cause permanent damage. If it is not quickly treated, it may lead to death. It is the third most common cause of death and the most common cause of disability for adults in the United States and Europe.
Factors that increase the risk of a stroke include old age, high blood pressure, a previous stroke, diabetes, high cholesterol, smoking, atrial fibrillation, migraine with aura, and thrombophilia (a tendency to thrombosis). Of those factors, the most easy to fix are high blood pressure and smoking.
Many of the concepts that we have learned so far have been dealing with random variables. However, these concepts can all be translated to deal with vectors of random numbers. A random vector X contains N elements, Xi, each of which is a distinct random variable. The individual elements in a random vector may or may not be correlated or dependent on one another.
Where each element of the correlation matrix corresponds to the correlation between the row element of X, and the column element of XT. The correlation matrix is a real-symmetric matrix. If the off-diagonal elements of the correlation matrix are all zero, the random vector is said to be uncorrelated. If the R matrix is an identity matrix, the random vector is said to be "white". For instance, "white noise" is uncorrelated, and each element of the vector has an equal correlation value.
As discussed earlier, we can diagonalize a matrix by constructing the V matrix from the eigenvectors of that matrix. If X is our non-diagonal matrix, we can create a diagonal matrix D by:
If the X matrix is real symmetric (as is always the case with the correlation matrix), we can simplify this to be:
A matrix can be whitened by constructing a matrix W that contains the inverse squareroots of the eigenvalues of X on the diagonal:
Using this W matrix, we can convert X into the identity matrix:
If we have two matrices, X and Y, we can construct a matrix A that will satisfy the following relationships:
Where I is an identity matrix, and D is a diagonal matrix. This process is known as simultaneous diagonalization. If we have the V and W matrices described above such that
We can then construct the B matrix by applying this same transformation to the Y matrix:
We can combine the eigenvalues of B into a transformation matrix Z such that:
This A matrix will satisfy the simultaneous diagonalization procedure, outlined above.
The Covariance Matrix of two random vectors, X and Y, is defined as:
Where each element of the covariance matrix expresses the variance relationship between the row element of X, and the column element of Y. The covariance matrix is real symmetric.
We can relate the correlation matrix and the covariance matrix through the following formula:
An N-vector X has a cumulative distribution function Fx of N variables that is defined as:
The probability density function of a random vector can be defined in terms of the Nth partial derivative of the cumulative distribution function:
WaitBlanking at high priority (see Rush and Priority) for reliable timing. To keep this routine as fast as possible, no value is returned unless you supply an argument to receive it. When processor priority is at or below MaxPriorityForBlankingInterrupt the WaitBlankingUsesInterrupt 'Preference' controls, for each screen, whether WaitBlanking calls SetClut (default) or waits for a blanking interrupt. When processor priority is above MaxPriorityForBlankingInterrupt, WaitBlanking always uses SetClut (i.e.
While Wikibooks offers somewhat clearer opportunities for "authorship" than Wikipedia, there remains the fact that anything put here is really just a contribution, and everyone who furthers the effort is a contributor. In this respect there are no "authors". If you are interested in developing a particular subject within the field of botany as part of this textbook, please start the module and link it here. We will work out the chapter arrangement after you get started. Of course, you can also just expand on an existing chapter.
Eric Guinther is a biologist and environmental consultant living in Kane'ohe, Hawai'i. He envisioned this particular textbook "project" and developed the approach of creating a textbook around articles found in Wikipedia. By then working specifically on those articles referred to, the quality and quantity of the Study Guide to the Science of Botany was gradually enhanced. These efforts were done with the steady help of numerous talented contributors at Wikipedia who, collectively, would have no interest in working on a textbook project per se. Ultimately, the user of the guide benefits from the textbook's approach: 1) by having more control over the depth into any subtopic pursued and 2) being limited in that pursuit only by that considerable information available at Wikipedia and other linked websites.
Ransom Akinlade is a final year student of the department of Botany, Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile Ife. He developed a keen interest in this project and he regularly contributes to the articles foi=und therein.
Other anonymous Wikibook contributors (see individual page histories).
Numerous other Wikipedia contributors.
This section of the Analog and Digital Conversion wikibook is a stub. You can help by expanding this section.
Two or more resistor can be connected in parallel to decrease the total resistance.
.
When connect two reistors of the same resistance the total resistance is halved
Author: Mary M. Hobbs
Readers will be able to identify the six different types of assessments
Readers will be able to know the kind of assessment to use when it comes to assessing the students.
Readers will be able to identify what a student feels when they get assessed
Readers will know the five key dimensions of quality classroom assessment
Students should be involved in the process
Wikipedia says,"an assessment is the process of documenting, usually in measurable terms, knowledge, skills, attitudes, and beliefs. <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assessment
There are six types or kinds of assessments that I will identify. They are:
Teachers use the formative assessment method when they want to accommodate their teaching and learning to meet the students needs. Examples would be teacher observations and classroom discussions.
Summative assessments are used for final exams, statewide tests, and college entrance exams such as SAT's and ACT's.
To learn more about formative and summative
Assessments Improve Learning by Thomas R. Guskey.
Objective assessments are questions that has only one correct answer. Objective assessments include true/false, multiple choice, and matching questions or statements.
Subjective assessments can have more than one correct answer. These assessments are usually extended-response questions and essays.
What are Informal Assessments?
Informal assessments include teacher observations, rubrics, peer evaluations, self evaluations and discussions.
What are Formal Assessments?
Formal assessments are quizzes, tests, or papers that students receives a grade based on their performance.
Teachers and students can learn from assessments. Assessments give understandable information in a way they can use to improve their performance, and when teachers and students improve their performance they can only enhance their learning.
According to Black & Wiliam, "extensive research conducted around the world shows that by consistently applying the principles of assessment for learning, we can produce impressive gains in student achievement, especially for struggling learners."
The assessment experience gives a look into how a student feels when they are assessed.
-hopeful and optimistic - hopeless
-empowered to take productive action - initially panicked, giving up
-It's all good. I'm doing fine. I - this hurts. I'm not safe here
-Feedback helps me. - Nothing I try seems to work.
-Public success feels good -Public failure is embarrassing
-seek challenges - seek what is easy
-seek exciting new ideas - avoid new concepts ==
-take initiative - avoid initiative
-self-enhancement - self-defeat,self-destruction
-curiosity, enthusiasm - boredom, frustration, fear
-resilience - yielding quickly to defeat
-strong foundations for future success - failure to master
According to Stiggens, Arter, Chappuis, and Chappuis, there are five key dimensions of sound and productive classroom assessments. They are:
Quality assessments arise from and are designed to serve the specific information needs of intended user(s). Assessments are used by teachers, administrators, and students to help them find out what kind of strategies to use.
Quality assessments arise from clearly articulated and appropriate achievement targets. Simply put, students need clear and specific instructions as to what is wanted from them to help them learn.
Quality assessments accurately reflect student achievement. No matter what kind of assessment that is used it should be one that gears toward achieving student success.
Quality assessments yield results that are effectively communicated to their intended users. Teachers, administrators, and students should be able to understand the results that are made.
Quality assessments involve students in classroom assessment, record-keeping, and communication of result. Students are more involved and held accountable for what they learn.
For interactive assessment games go to website: www.shodor.org/interactive/assessments/ retrieved on June 6, 2009.
A teacher wants to adapt her teaching methods to meet her student's needs. Which assessment would she use?
A teacher gives a multiple choice test to her students. Which assessment is she doing?
c) norm-referenced assessment
A teacher uses a rubric to grade her students written report. What assessment is she demonstrating?
4)A teacher brings her students together to discuss a lesson on "What Makes A Good President." The class is discussing this lesson intently. What kind of assessment is taking place?
Black,P., & Wiliam, D. (1998). Assessment and classroom learning. Educational Assessment: Principles, Policy, and Practices, 5(1),7-74.
Stiggens, Rick. Educational Leadership, Best of. 2006-2007, p43-46, 4p
Stiggens, R. J., Arter, J. A., Chappuis, J., & Chappuis, S. (2004). Classroom assessment for student learning: Doing it right-using it well, p12
Rate This!
Wikipedia has related information at Damm algorithm
"""Damm algorithm decimal check digit
For reference see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Damm_algorithm
' The implementation of the damm algorithm based on the details on https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Damm_algorithm
Public Function Encode(ByVal number As String) As Byte
Public Function check(ByVal number as String) as Boolean
The implementation of the damm algorithm based on the details on https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Damm_algorithm
The quasigroup table from http://www.md-software.de/math/DAMM_Quasigruppen.txt
Calculate the checksum digit from provided number
Checks the checksum digit from provided number
The implementation of the damm algorithm based on the details on https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Damm_algorithm
The quasigroup table from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Damm_algorithm
Calculate the checksum digit from provided number
@return calculated Damm checksum digit
Calculate the checksum digit from provided number
@return calculated Damm checksum digit
Calculate the checksum digit from provided number
@return calculated Damm checksum digit
Calculate the checksum digit from provided number and return the full
@return full number with the Damm checksum
Calculate the checksum digit from provided number and return the full
@return full number with the Damm checksum
Calculate the checksum digit from provided number and return the full
@return full number with the Damm checksum
@return True if valid; otherwise false
Calculates the checksum from the provided string
@param str a string, only the numerics will be calculated
Unapply method returning the string without the checksum if it matches otherwise None
Determines if the string contains a valid checksum
|> List.to_tuple
As discussed before, about 70% percent of our planet is covered by water.
But what is water? Where does it all come from?
Had you visited our planet 5 billion years ago, you would have seen a completely different scene than today. Our lovely blue, brown and green planet was a molten ball of lava. During the geological time our planet has undergone considerable cooling that has allowed water to accumulate in the ocean basins.
The relative occurrences of different gases in our atmosphere suggest that they have a different origin from that of the original gas cloud, the nebula, which eventually condensed to be our planet.
The accumulation of mainly silica compounds and iron oxides in this nebula caused an intensive heating. This heat was released as a result of lowering in the potential energy of those particles which accumulated in the early nebula, and also due to the condensation of outer particles, which accelerated increasing pressure on the inner particles. The decay of radioactive elements also contributed to the heat release. The rise of the temperature caused the partial melting of our planet. This melting has caused a differentiation of the elements abundant in the earth materials. Heavy particles like iron and nickel sunk into the core; light particles like aluminum, silicon, sodium, and volatile gases migrated to the outer mantle.
The massive eruptions of volcanoes through the early development of our planet released huge amounts of volatile gases from the molten rocks into the early atmosphere. It is presently thought that the composition of gases erupting from volcanoes today has changed little (or not at all) during this geological period.
In the early stages of earth's history, its surface was too hot to allow water vapor to condense. Another thing worth mentioning is our great luck living on the third rock from the Sun. Venus has no atmosphere, nor water on its surface.
Mars, our second neighbor, has a very thin atmosphere, but no free water on its surface. We got lucky in that we are located right between those two, so our surface temperature - as we shall see in the next chapter, which is mainly determined by the amount of solar radiation the Earth receives - is neither too cold nor hot, and hence allows for most of the water to remain in its liquid state. But this process that filled the Earth's oceans started only after its surface cooled below a temperature of 100 degrees Celsius.
Water molecules are made of one oxygen atom and two molecules of hydrogen. The structure of the water molecule causes it to be electrically unbalanced. The oxygen atom at one end is much bigger than the hydrogen atoms and is thus more positively charged. The oxygen atom has six protons carrying six units of positive charge, compared to one positive charge of each hydrogen atom. Thus, the water molecule has an electric dipole.
Left: The molecular model of the Water molecule. Right: The distribution of electric charge on the molecule
The electric dipole of the water molecule is the main reason that water is a unique substance.
Since water molecules have an electric dipole, they are the ultimate solvent and hence can dissolve almost every naturally occurring substance. Later on in this book we shall see how this fact contributes to the chemical properties of the ocean.
The dipole of water molecules causes them to electrically attract each other. Hence, liquid water tends to have micro-structures of molecules that group together and constantly break apart. These micro-structures are based on hydrogen bonds, which, again are based on the unique structure of the water molecules. The temperature of a substance is an expression of the vibrations of the molecules inside the substance. So if we heat water molecules, they do not easily shake, thanks again to hydrogen bonds.
Another important implication of the water dipole is the relatively high boiling point and high freezing point. All hydrogen bonds must break before water can boil. This also leads to a high energy of heating. As you probably already know, water boils at 100oC and freezes at 0oC. The reason water boils at such a high temperature is due to hydrogen bonds, which give water a large 'heat capacity.' 'Heat capacity' is the energy needed to raise the temperature of 1 cubic cm of water by 1 degree Celsius. For water we need to invest 4.18 K Jouls. This is known also as specific heat. Water has the highest specific heat of all solids and liquids (except of NH3 known as liquid ammonia). This causes the oceans to be a huge 'temperature buffer,' as we shall later see.
Taken from wikipedia as starting point...please edit to make more relevant to filmmakers....
Super 8mm film is a motion picture film format that was developed in the 1960s by Eastman Kodak as an improvement of the older 8mm home movie format. The film, 8mm wide, comes in plastic cartridges containing a 50-foot reel (about 3 minutes, depending on the film speed). Color stocks were available only in tungsten (3200K), and cameras were required to come with a built-in daylight filter, allowing for both indoor and outdoor shooting.
Amateur usage of Super 8 has been largely replaced by video, but the format is sometimes used by professionals trying to imitate the look of old home movies, or create a stylishly grainy look. Many independent filmmakers such as Derek Jarman have made extensive use of 8mm film with remarkable results, and it appears to have made something of a minor comeback in both the art and experimental film world. Oliver Stone, for example, loves to use it in his more recent films, such as The Doors Natural Born Killers, Nixon, U Turn, and JFK where his DP Robert Richardson employed it to evoke period or to give a different look to setups within a scene.
Until 1999, the University of Southern California's famous School of Cinema-Television required students to shoot their initial projects using Super 8, but the dwindling availability of equipment and processing facilities eventually forced the school to switch these classes to Digital Video. However the film is still used elsewhere by film students who wish to learn the basics of shooting film.
Super 8 is supplied in a light proof cartridge, the design of which allows it to be inserted into a camera without directly threading the film, which made the format even more user-friendly.
Kodak (as of 2004) still manufactures several color and black-and-white Super 8 films, and even introduced new emulsions since year 2002. The most popular Kodak stocks usually have been either Kodachrome or Ektachrome, and usually tend to be quite slow, usually around ISO 25, although there are known stocks that go up to ISO 100 and higher.
The Japanese company Fuji produced another variant called Single 8. The film was exactly the same as Super 8, but used a different design of magazine.
Assault Peace Officers. 270 of the Crim. CodeElection / PleaCrown Election
5 years jailReferencesOffence Elements Sentence Principles Sentence Digestsview • talk • edit
(1) Every one commits an offence who
(a) assaults a public officer or peace officer engaged in the execution of his duty or a person acting in aid of such an officer;
(b) assaults a person with intent to resist or prevent the lawful arrest or detention of himself or another person; or
(i) who is engaged in the lawful execution of a process against lands or goods or in making a lawful distress or seizure, or
(ii) with intent to rescue anything taken under lawful process, distress or seizure.
v • d • e Violent OffencesOffences
Administering a Noxious Substance (245), Criminal Harassment (264), Uttering Threats (264.1), Common Assault (266), Assault with a Weapon (267), Assault Causing Bodily Harm (267), Aggravated Assault (268), Assault Peace Officer (270), Kidnapping and Unlawful Confinement (279), Robbery (343, 344), Extortion (346), Intimidation (423), Animal Cruelty (445, 445.1)Sentencing
Administering a Noxious Substance (245), Criminal Harassment (264), Uttering Threats (264.1), Common Assault (266), Assault with a Weapon (267), Assault Causing Bodily Harm (267), Aggravated Assault (268), Assault Peace Officer (270), Kidnapping and Unlawful Confinement (279), Robbery (343, 344), Extortion (346), Intimidation (423), Animal Cruelty (445, 445.1)
This level is by far the most confusing level of Star Road, you will probably need a Blue Yoshi for this level as flying will help greatly. It would also help if the blue switch has not yet been activated.
Swallow a green shell and fly all the way to the top before heading right. When Yoshi is close to eating the shell he will begin to make gulping noises, so prepare to lose the ability to fly.
After Yoshi eats the shell, hold the B and Y buttons to drift down slowly until you see more Koopas. Swallow another shell and continue right.
Eventually you will reach some ground with several tubes, before encountering a Red Koopa. Swallow it and head up until you see empty blue squares, go up and go right to the Special Road entrance.
If you do not have a Blue Yoshi, you will have to fly using a cape, but it is considerably more difficult.
To continue the star road reach the normal exit by flying right.
[The following solution is more involved than what is strictly needed. It may avoid
Here is a little example on how to overwrite WOComponent.template() so
First you will need to overwrite WOComponent.template()
Now, templateForComponent could look like this:
The componentTemplateWithExtension method could look like the following:
And finally componentStreamForResource could be something along these
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Cyber villains are people who abuse the power that they're given whether it's over the internet or through a network that allows them to hack and either steal or change information from the original source. Some hack into systems just for fun while others do it to point out how dangerously flawed a security system is. Some say that the Wikileaks founder Julian Assange is a cyber villain for releasing U.S government classified documents to the public. He is declared as an enemy of the state by the U.S Department of Defense for releasing military documents.
Another example of cyber villainy is the group Anonymous, as seen below.
One of the hackers of the group Anonymous, Hector Xavier Monsegur, told the names of 5 of his fellow hackers to the FBI after being charged for computer hacking and conspiracy. Anonymous has claimed responsibility for attacks against Visa, MasterCard, PayPal, Fox, and the FBI. The group has several slogans but two of the most well-known are:
"The world's Internet hackers and Fighters for Internet Freedom"
The arrests, however, appear to not have deterred the other members of the structure less group. Anonymous claimed credit the next day for a cyber-attack on the Vatican's web site.
The GRE contains many passages which are commentaries or analyses of arts or literature. Pay attention to theories about the subject discussed.
Liber de Coquina is one of the oldest known cookbooks, dating back to approximately the 13th century, but even at its age, the mysteries surrounding the
5	book are a curiosity. The book seems to have been written by two authors, one French and one Italian, but neither the authors' names nor the date of publication are clear. While this may seem expected
10	for a book of its age, Apicius' De re coquinaria from approximately 500 as well as Viandier by Guillaume Tirel each contained its authors name. The anonymity of the work has led some to
15	believe that the authors had reason to conceal their identity, perhaps because the authors were female. It was considered improper for women to appear in public fields during the Middle Ages; even at the
20	time of Shakespeare, female roles in plays were usually played by men. Yet culinary trades were known to be common amongst women in the Middle Ages.
What does the author think may be the case about the authors of Liber de Coquina?
What reasons does the author state for this conclusion?
The author thinks that the authors of the book may have been female.
The author's reasons for potential female authorship of Liber de Coquina are both the nature of medieval society - where it was shameful for women to have public professions - as well as the fact that culinary duties were often the prerogative of women in many contexts during the era.
This page lists numbers used in English and provides phonetic transcriptions to help you pronounce them.
Do you have the time?
Pharmacology is not to be confused with pharmacy. Pharmacy is a professional field in medicine concerned with preparation and distribution of medicine. Pharmacology is the study of the interaction and effects between chemicals and biological systems and vice versa.
Adventist Youth Honors Answer Book/Household Arts/Quilting (General Conference)
Adventist Youth Honors Answer Book/Household Arts/Housekeeping
Adventist Youth Honors Answer Book/Household Arts/Quilting (North American Division)
In the above table, "5Com" means the 5 Combinations of two adjacent Heavenly Stems. These combinations result in a good structure of a person's Ba Zi
"Clash" means that the Heavenly Stems clash with each other in the Ba Zi, when they are next to each other. Clashes will result in a poor structure of a person's Ba Zi.
If there is a Clash of two adjacent Stems, as well as a Combination with another Stem, the Clash will not occur, as Combinations take precedence over Clashes.
This page gives the overall aim and style of the book for the guidance of contributing authors, and is intended to remain fairly stable while the book is being written. The detailed contents of the book and progress of the writing are shown on the Planning page. Current activity is concentrated on gathering suitable source material in a phrase book and glossary. The book introduction presented to the student is shown here: Introduction
Intended Users of "French For Football"
Students from beginners onwards, who are looking for a different kind of course to motivate their learning of French.
The students must have a strong interest in football.
Most students are most likely to studying the book at home with each module designed to take about 45 minutes. Two successive modules would be suitable for an evening class of 1.5 to 2 hours.
Substantial use is made of external media including DVDs, web pages and internet radio stations so the student needs a DVD player and internet access (preferably broadband).
To understand the greater part of match commentaries broadcast over TV or radio in French.
To understand a large part of TV and radio interviews and discussions about football.
To understand the essential information from sports reports and features in newspapers, magazines or on the internet.
To be able and willing to hold extended conversations in French, about football.
A major purpose of this book is to give a more rewarding appreciation of French society to students who might otherwise only engage with the French people on a superficial level.
A school text book or supplementary information pack
A book that covers any other individual sports or sport in general
The course is broken down into modules/lessons suitable for about 45 minutes of study. When printed in book form, it is planned that there would be two pages of about 50% study material and 50% exercise material making up the module. In addition to proper names, it is estimated that each module can introduce about 40 - 60 new words. All spoken material is to be placed in a separate appendix for scripts, which will include scripts which form part of the lesson and also extra spoken material associated with the lesson.
Material in appendices for grammar, verb tables, vocabulary and answers to exercises are considered additional to the estimates shown above.
These modules or lessons are grouped under 4 main stages or chapters appropriate to the student's progress and linked with particular types of supplementary material. i.e. DVDs, radio & TV broadcasts, web sites and printed sports news.
Essential material is presented to enable comprehension of match commentaries of recent World Cup and European Championships on DVDs or videotapes. French versions of these can be imported at reasonable cost, and the students are encouraged to believe they have embarked on an enjoyable course. There will be easy exercises in writing and speaking to describe the main events in the matches.
Further material and information about the French football leagues is provided. Match reports broadcast by French radio stations and brief reports on the internet is studied. There is some use of video material, but less than in the previous stage.
Students develop their conversational skills by describing the team they support and their own involvement as a player or supporter. Material for skills training is introduced. Sports reports in newspapers and longer articles on the French Wikipedia is studied.
An overall grammar reference, verb tables and glossary are provided. Also answers to exercises and scripts for spoken mini-dramas used with the modules.
Colourful and striking language is preferred including colloquial usages, but no little or no slang.
The style should be equally acceptable to teenagers and adults; i.e. not too stuffy or too jazzy.
Translations included are the ones used in the context of football, other alternative meanings are generally omitted. (Unless this creates particular problems.)
Module topics are relevant to the grammatical content where possible, e.g. by using well known sequences of past or planned events to explore the use of different verb forms.
Use is made of students' existing knowledge of football, e.g. by discussing well known events and current issues on which student are likely to have their own views.
Additional vocabulary may be provided by the tutor, or researched by the students.
To avoid confusion a focussed and graduated approach to different elements of grammar and linguistics underpins the material. This applies particularly to exercises whose results can be assessed.
Grammar and essential vocabulary can be revised in say, every 3rd or 4th module, which could otherwise be skipped if no revision is thought to be needed.
The material is suitable either for private study, or classroom use by selection of optional exercises and activities.
Any biographical information that is included should be kept to a minimum and avoid gossip or controversy.
Other “facts” about football should be verifiable from reliable sources to avoid too many embarrassing goofs.
In a classroom situation, students may want to resort to English in order to say things for which they do not yet have the words. The tutor should be ready to handle this.
Students working on their own may find it difficult to practice their speaking and conversation skills.
It is suggested that you save your .Blend files (Blender source file) under a slightly different name on each step just in case you do something wrong and want to go back. This new thumbnail format is best used by right clicking the thumbnail then open in new tab so you can come back and refer to the text as well as the image.
By default Blender creates everything with double sided textures. This means twice as many polys for Trainz to render for no visual effect so untick the double sided box.
In Jan's words "On the properties bar find the icon 'Object Data', it's the little upside down triangle and in the normals section there uncheck double sided. Sadly this isn't persistent, so every time you add a new primitive (shift-Akey) it will come up as double sided by default and you have to remember to uncheck this one again.
On a side note adding such a new primitive to an allready single sided mesh will promote it to single sided as well. In fact the settings of the last mesh selected with shift-rightmouseclick is the one with the persistent properties."
We want to be able to adjust the size easily and exactly so we need the properties on screen. Press the "n" key to show this. 2.65 has a super set of properties. Also note in 2.65 you may need to go to view menu and select view persp/ortho to select the ortho view.
Our basic house is going to be 18 feet wide, 30 feet deep and 18 feet high. It's simpler to work in meters with Blender so go to Google and type in "18 feet in meters to feet" the answer is 5.48, 30 feet is 9.144 so we type these numbers into the dim property tag. Z is height, y is width, and X is depth. For 2.65 these go into the dimensions:
Blender centers the object at 0,0,0 we want our house to be at ground level. So we divide the Z value (height) by two and put that number into the Z location field.
It's easier in wireframe mode so we'll switch the display.
Roofs are usually pointed so we need to edit our cube. We press "A" to deselect everything.
To adjust the shape go back to object mode and adjust the numbers in the properties tag to make the roof a little wider than the house giving it eaves by increasing the Y value and a little lower in height by reducing the Z value. We can also change the name of the cube to roof too make it a bit easier for us to keep track.
That is the basic house created. Now we need to texture it.
The onset may occur suddenly, or it may occur after many symptoms and signs gradually develop slowly, called early stage. Up to 75% of schizophrenic patients are in the early stages.
State Newton's method for the approximate solution of
State and prove a convergence result for the method.
Consider the Newton's method as a fixed point iteration i.e.:
, then we have better than quadratic convergence.
Derive a variational formulation for (1).
What do we mean by Finite Element Approximation
. Choose a an appropriate discrete subspace
.
. Consider the following integral
.
. A numerical method called the midpoint rule for solving this problem is defined by
Suppose the problem is posed on a finite interval
. Show directly,i.e., without citing any major results, that the midpoint rule is stable. That is show that if
Subtracting both equations, letting
, and applying the Lipschitz property yields,
Suppose instead we are interested in the long term behavior of the midpoint rule applied to a particular example
Substituting into the midpoint rule we have,
.
Moves: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. Nxe5 Qf6 4. Nc4 fxe4 5. Nc3 Qf7
Latvian Gambit, Leonhardt Variation
Black is planning ...d5 again. Now comes perhaps the only "unnatural" move with which a White player facing the Latvian must be familiar: 6. Ne3. There's no other way to defend against ...d5.
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Latvian Gambit
Nunn's Chess Openings. 1999. John Nunn (Editor), Graham Burgess, John Emms, Joe Gallagher. ISBN 1-8574-4221-0.
Batsford Chess Openings 2 (1989, 1994). Garry Kasparov, Raymond Keene. ISBN 0-8050-3409-9.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon · Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
A direct current (DC) circuit usually has a steady and constant voltage supplied to it. A direct current does not have a continually changing polarity, unlike an alternating current (AC), but instead a constant direction and rate of flow. DC is generally provided by batteries or via a transformer, rather than generators.
Below are the symbols and names for all of the components that you are required to know:
When resistors are set up in series, the formula to work out the total resistance is:
.
When resistors are set up in parallel, the formula to work out the total resistance is:
.
A electrical source has its own resistance, known as Internal Resistance. This is caused by the electrons in the source having to flow through wires within it, or in the case of a chemical battery, the charge may have to flow through the electrolytes and electrodes that make up the cell.
Combining with V=IR:
The quantity Ir is called the lost volts. The lost volts shows us the energy transferred to the internal resistance of the source, so if you short circuit a battery, I is very high and the battery gets warm.
A potential (or voltage) divider is made up of two resistors. The output voltage from a potential divider will be a proportion of the input voltage and is determined by the resistor values.
The values of a battery with voltage V1 passing through two resistors in series of resistance R1 and R2, with an output circuit in parallel with Resistor R1 with output voltage V2 are related by the equation:
First Law states "The sum of the current (A) entering a junction is equal to the sum of the current (A) leaving the junction".
Thermistors can be placed in circuits when temperature plays a role. As the temperature increases, the resistance of the device decreases. This does not obey the Ohms law. Light dependent resistors are resistors that decrease their resistance when exposed to light.
A reader requests expansion of this page to include more material.You can help by adding new material (learn how) or ask for assistance in the reading room.
v • d • e A-level physicsCosmology
Models of the known universe • Stars and Galaxies • Structure of the universe • Information from stellar observation • How the universe may evolve • RelativityElectrons, Waves, and Photons
Electric current • D.C. circuits • Magnetic effects of current • Quantum physics • Electromagnetic wavesForces, Fields, and Energy
Further dynamics • Work and energy • Motion in a circle • Oscillations • Gravitational fields • Electric fields • Capacitors • Electromagnetism • Electromagnetic induction • Thermal physics • The nuclear atom • Radioactivity • Appendix of FormulaeForces and Motion
Programmers familiar with C, C++ or Java are likely to find this section familiar, and may want to skim or skip it at their discretion.
The switch statement can be found in almost every programming language, it's commonly used for checking multiple conditions. Syntax is identical as it is in C++ or Java. It has following form:
Hello!
Note break keyword after each case! If it's bypassed each case after it will be called. So here's console output of code without breaks:
Hello!
Bye!
As you may see, all cases after /hello were "called", this is useful if we want to call same statements in more that one case. Here's one more example:
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Global shares have fallen sharply after trading was suspended on Chinese stock markets for the second time this week.
, and this is the definition that we will use most in the future. It can, however, be helpful to understand the tangent function from a geometric perspective.
A line is drawn at a tangent to the unit circle: (i.e.
). Another line is drawn from the point on the radius of the circle where the given angle falls, through the origin(O), to a point (Q) on the drawn tangent. The ordinate (QP) of this point is called the tangent of the angle.
The slope of the line OQ =
Hence , the Slope of the line OQ =
.
R represents the set of all real numbers.
No such restrictions apply to the tangent, however, as can be seen in the diagram in the preceding section. The only restriction on the domain of tangent is that odd integer multiples of
Applying the trigonometric functions to a right-angled triangle
If you redefine the variables as follows to correspond to the sides of a right triangle:
The obvious goal of the medical exam is to find, define and explain the patient’s problems. The standardized convention for recording this exam is referred to as a S.O.A.P. note. This stands for SUBJECTIVE (history), OBJECTIVE (physical exam and supporting tests), ASSESSMENT (diagnosis) and PLAN (treatment). When the patient &/or the problem is new, the most valuable information will most likely be provided in the History. At the very least, the history will allow the clinician to get an idea of what is wrong with the patient. It will also allow the clinician to get an idea of what kind of testing should be performed on the patient to determine the injury/illness and what kind of care that the patient should receive.
Any problem should be defined with as many adjectives as possible. Every problem should be defined in terms of site, onset, timing (duration, recurrence, periodicity), character (description, severity), exacerbation or relief, associated symptoms and the results of prior treatment attempts. [see the P-Q-R-S-T mnemonic.] When records are available, it is also important to ask about the status (resolution?) of prior known problems. Each problem should be addressed in terms of its Anatomy, Physiology, Etiology and Function.
Most exams begin with documenting the reason that the patient is there at that time: the Chief Complaint. From there, the examiner can pursue a directed line of questioning concerning the history of this complaint. This is the S of SOAP and is recorded as such. This section should be very thorough.
The O consists of a directed exam and results of indicated tests. Objective is what the examiner finds.
The A is the diagnostic conclusion arrived at from the synthesis of the above information. Sometimes no precise diagnosis can be determined on the spot. In such cases, the A-portion of the record would be a Differential Diagnosis or a list of diagnoses to Rule Out (R/O).
In such cases, the P-portion is the list of steps to better define the problem; likely more tests. If the A is a definitive diagnosis, then the P-portion will be the treatment planned. Explain all treatsment to be done. Remember that the plan might change as time goes on.
The above are the minimum elements of a proper exam and record. There are times when a more comprehensive approach is called for; at admission to hospital, for example, or at the intake exam for a new patient.
The additional elements of such a comprehensive exam include a Family History of Disease, a Social History (activities, hobbies, alcohol intake, smoking), a list of any known Allergies, prior Hospitalizations and Surgeries and any current medical problems under treatment.
Occasionally, a history of childhood illnesses and immunizations may be pertinent as well. An area often overlooked in such history taking is a Work history or Occupation (this might shed light on the Etiology of the problem as mentioned above).
When the Chief Complaint is of a physical nature as opposed to a disease, a traumatic injury for example, a brief statement as to the circumstances of the injury may prove very useful for record, statistical or even legal purposes. The statement might read something like “fractured leg, sustained while a passenger in a vehicle accident.” Such statements are especially valuable when the injury was sustained on the job.
When the Physical Exam is a comprehensive one, the examiner should be schooled to proceed in the same manner every time. Each and every area of the body must be observed and properly tested and the results recorded. If one always does the same exam, then when recording the results, one only need remember the abnormal findings and can safely record all other areas as WNL (within Normal Limits). One normally begins such an exam at the head and works down the body ending at the feet. Depending on personal preference and training, there are some minor exceptions to this head to toe approach. For example, the examiner might defer the neurologic exam of reflexes in the arms until he reaches the legs and picks up the reflex hammer. When recording the physical findings, normal values (WNL) should not be overlooked. They can sometimes be very helpful later in establishing the timing of the onset of a new problem.
Initially, the great tower on the west portion of Death Mountain is closed to explorers. Only after rescuing all seven of the maidens and receiving the seven Crystals can you enter the tower. Once you have all seven Crystals, return to Ganon's Tower and the way will open up.
File:Zelda ALttP unlocking ganons tower.png The power of the Crystals can open the Tower
This impressive structure is said to be where Ganon spent most of his evil reign over the Dark World. Legend says that you can only break the seal of the tower after collecting the seven Crystals which Ganon has hidden in the dungeons of the Dark World. The seven maidens held captive in the Crystals can use their power to make the seal disappear. You are then free to explore the tower and search for Ganon. But you won't find this master of evil until after you survive battles with four creatures that you have already encountered in the Light World. Your long journey is close to completion.
File:LoZLttP Ganons Tower F2.png Floor 2
Just as with the Tower of Hera, you will enter Ganon's Tower on the second floor. There are two stairways to the floor below, and one that leads up above. You will not be ready to explore the upper floors until you have collected the Big Key. The map and the Red Mail will also be particularly useful. You must begin by exploring the maze that lies below on Floor 1. Start out by heading down through the left staircase to room 1K. When you have collected the necessary items, you can return here and head to Floor 3.
File:LoZLttP Ganons Tower F1.png Floor 1
Note: It is not necessary to explore every room on this floor. A number of rooms are merely traps. Ideally, start with room 1K.
When you warp into this room from room 1V, you'll be on the left side of the room. Two blue Baris hover above a series of conveyor belts and pits. The conveyor belts arrive at a series of Star Tiles which alter the arrangement of the pits to force you to rely on the conveyor belts. The exit to the room is locked, and aSmall Key is hidden beneath one of the skulls at the top of the room. You'll need to pass them by once and step on a Star Tile to rearrange the floor in order to gain access to them. Then you can unlock the door and head to room 1B.
The bridge trap in this room can be very unforgiving. You have a very limited amount of time to run down from the left side of the bridge to the right side. Don't bother traveling up since you will get trapped up there. You must remove the skull in your way, run down to the next skull, and avoid two fire bars and a spike trap; not an easy feat. If you manage to reach the second skull before the bridge collapses alongside of it, you can access the remainder of the room, guarded by one blue Pon, and exit through the lower left door to room 1F.
This room, occupied by one blue Bari and a Tail Worm, is covered with floor tiles, but only one has any effect. Find the right tile, and the wall dividing the north and south portions of the room will be destroyed. You may then explore the north portion where you will find treasure chests that contain generous supplies of bombs and arrows. When you're done, head back through the hole you created to room 1G.
You will warp into this room from room 1T. There are four fire chain Winders wrapping around the wall segments. You can use the Magic Cape to avoid contact with them as you make your way to the left. You will come across a solitary block that can be pushed in any direction to make a treasure chest appear on the left side of the room. With this chest in place, you can use your Hookshot to grapple over to the chest, open it, and collect anotherSmall Key. Use it to unlock the door to the south and proceed to room 1G.
When you enter this room, the door will shut behind you, and will not open until all three red Stalfos have been defeated. There are four fireball traps that will make life difficult for you whenever you swing your sword. There are four treasure chests in the room, but they merely contain supplies of bombs, arrows, and Rupees.
At first, there is no clear way to access the warp tile in the center of the room. As it happens, there is a Star Tile underneath the movable statue on the left side of the room. Pull it out of the way to step on the Star Tile, and fill in the gap. Watch out for the blue Pon that guards the tile. Step on the tile to be warped to room 1Z.
This room and its many warp tiles are intimately associated with the warp tiles in room 1Y. You will need to traverse a number of them to proceed. Start out by stepping on the left tile and warping to the upper left corner of 1Y. You will return from 1Y in the upper left corner of the room. Before you step on the warp tile below, you may bomb the left wall and expose an opening to room 1C. When you return, step on the lower warp tile to end up in the center along the left wall of room 1Y. Upon your next return to this room, you should arrive just left of the center of the room. Walk down and left to the warp tile in the bottom left corner back to room 1Y.
Following the walkthrough, you will first arrive in this room by warping in from the right portion of room 1Y. You will be contained in a small boarded-off portion of the top of the room. Take the warp tile above back to 1Y to reach its exit. If you entered this room from 1N below, it will appear as little more than a petting zoo for common dungeon enemies and you'll have to return south.
When you arrive from room 1J, you will be standing near a series of island platforms over a chasm. Each island will have a block or two situated on it. The idea is to use your Hookshot to maneuver yourself across the pits and around the room. You may optionally head through the top door to room 1E, but you must ultimate make your way to the bottom of the room. When you reach the bottom, deal with the Stalfos. Then unlock the door to the right and collect the map from room 1O. When you return, you must lower the blue fence blocks. Then place a bomb by the switch and run below the blue fence blocks before they rise again. Enter the door below to room 1S.
First, collect theSmall Key hidden beneath the skull in the lower right corner of the room. Then step on the conveyor belt and utilize your Magic Hammer to crush the bobbing pegs situated around the center block. When enough pegs are out of the way, push the center block out of the way to reveal a Star Tile. Stepping on the star tile will fill the gaps in the floor created by the pits, giving you access to the left door. Head through it to enter 1I.
The first room that you explore on this floor contains two torches and two Stalfos. A fireball will hug the right torch, upon which aSmall Key has been situated. One dash bash into the torch will knock the key to the floor for you to collect, but be careful of the fireball. There is no reason to use the key on the right door since you can freely access that room through the right staircase in Floor 2. Instead, head left to room 1J.
You will arrive at this room if you took the right staircase. The path laid out in this portion of the walkthrough is entirely optional, and is only necessary if you wish to collect the Compass. The left treasure chest contains arrows while the right one contains bombs. A switch on the wall may appear to be the answer to opening the shutter door, but pulling it will make bombs rain from the ceiling. Instead, a switch can be found in the lower right corner which opens the door to room 1M.
This room contains a number of traps, including spinning floor tiles, a Bubble, a "Bunny Beam" trap, two fireball traps, and worst of all, a Wallmaster hand. The treasure chest at the top contains aSmall Key. Collect it and use it to open the right door and enter room 1N.
Presuming that you entered this room from room 1M, there are three other exits from this room. The north exit close to you, leads to the nonfunctional portion of room 1H. Lower down is an open door that leads to another dead-end room 1R. The only exit that is truly of value is the shutter door to the south. There is a Gidbos, a red Stalfos, two blue Baris, and a Wallmaster in this room, but defeating all of the enemies won't make the door budge. There are, however, four torches that can be difficult to light all at once, but if you are able to do it, the door to room 1X will open. Start by clearing out all of the monsters in the room. There are two blocks in an upper right corner of part of the room. The lower of the two blocks can be pushed left. Once this block is moved, you must quickly light all of the torches from the top of the room to the bottom and escape through the lower door before one goes out.
Two fire bars spin around a treasure chest, and various pits make accessing the bottom of the chest even more difficult. The Magic Cape or Cane of Byrna can help you here. Reach the chest and open it to discover the dungeon Map. Then return to room 1I and proceed to room 1S.
You should arrive here after defeating the Armos Knights and collecting the Big Key. Fortunately, this is also where the large treasure chest resides. Push the single block aside, and dodge the spike traps and the fire chain Winders to reach the chest. Open it up, and claim the greatest defense item in the game, the Red Mail. Once you collect this treasure, you are free to enter room 1K above, and begin your exploration of the upper floors.
Bubbles and a fireball occupy this otherwise deserted room. A number of skulls contain bombs, and there are a number of cracks on the floor. Naturally, you may wish to investigate these cracks by placing bombs on each of them. It turns out that the crack below the skull and next to the treasure chest can be blown open, revealing a hole to the floor below. After you open the treasure chest alongside it (which contains arrows), fall through the hole to Basement 1.
This room is occupied by a fire bar and a Wallmaster. Several of the blocks around the skulls can be pushed aside, and you will find hearts underneath two of them, but in all likelihood, you may lose more health in the process than you stand to gain. Ultimately, you must return to room 1N through the right door.
With the orange fence blocks lowered, you can access a good portion of the room. Everything, in fact, except the locked door to the right. Start by collecting theSmall Key from the skull in the bottom right corner. Now you need to deal with the blue fence blocks. Two Crystal Switches are situated side-by-side. At first, this may not appear to be much of an issue. But one bomb positioned close to both switches will in fact trigger the switches twice, resulting in no change. You need to place a bomb at just the right distance to trigger only one switch and not both. Make sure that as it explodes, you are safely beyond the orange fence blocks. Unlock the door and head to 1T.
Hit the Crystal Switch when you enter the room in order to lower the orange fence blocks and allow passage to the right side of the room. Travel along the top or bottom and make your way to the right wall. Run up to the warp tile when the passage is safe. You will be transported to room 1D.
File:Zelda ALttP Ether light.png Ether magic can light the way, but only briefly This room contains two pathways, one visible, and the other predominantly invisible. You need to take the invisible one to proceed. By walking up the visible path to the top wall, you will be able to see a torch on the opposite side of the room. Shoot at it with your Fire Rod to make the invisible path visible for a short while. Do your best to maximize the visibility of the path, which starts from the two skulls at the end of the visible path. If time runs out while you are still on the path, you have a couple of resources. The blue Pons will never willingly fall off the path, so you can use their position as a reference. You can also use the Cane of Somaria to create and push blocks that will fall off the ledge when you reach a boundary. Make your way to the right door along the top wall and proceed to room 1Q.
In this room with one blue Pon and one red Pon, defeat them before pushing the lone block near the Warp Tile to make four treasure chests and a series of holes appear. The upper left treasure chest contains the Compass, while the remaining chests contain arrows and Rupees. Step on the warp tile to be sent to room 1A.
Three Gibdos wander around this room, segmented by fence blocks. The only Crystal Switch in the room is beyond a wall partition over which you can not fire any weapon. A conveyor belt, however, leads straight up to it. So it is possible to pitch a bomb over the low portion of the wall, and let the belt bring it closer to the switch before it explodes. Use this technique once to get beyond the blue fence blocks (if they start out raised when you enter), and use it one more time to get beyond the orange ones by quickly running behind the blue fence blocks before the bomb explodes. Another option is to use the Cane of Somaria, which can be thrown and exlodes when unsummoned. Deal with the Gibdos carefully (or just use your Fire Rod), and enter room 1V to the left.
Following the walkthrough, you will first warp into the upper left corner of the room from 1G. Accordingly, you will step on the only available warp tile back to the upper left corner of room 1G. When you return along the left wall, use the left active warp tile below the skulls back to room 1G. Ultimately, you should arrive in the bottom left corner of the room, from which you can travel right to the remainder of the room. Two blue Pons make combat around the pits difficult. In order to escape, you must step on one more warp tile. This one takes you to room 1H. Once you return, you can proceed through the right door to room 1U.
Like room 1U to the left, there are invisible pathways from the left side of the room where you arrive to the right. Lighting the torches in the room can help you see the paths. However, a straight walk to the left will also bring you safely to the door on the left that deposits you in room 1U.
File:LoZLttP Ganons Tower B1.png Basement 1
You will arrive on this floor from room 1Q above. You will land on an icy floor, where you will experience a return visit by the Armos Knights; the boss of the Eastern Palace. The strategy is exactly the same as before, only if you have already collected the Silver Arrow from the Faerie in the Chamber of Wishing at the Pyramid, you will be able to destroy the knights with a single arrow. They should pose little threat to you at this point in the game since their behavior is fairly predictable. Once you defeat the knights, the shutter doors will open. Proceed through the top door.
You will enter a treasure room with three chests. Opening the back two will reveal supplies of arrows and bombs, but the lower chest contains the Big Key. Collect it and return to the room below and head left. In the room with four torches, you may choose to head immediately up the staircase to room 1P. However, it's worth your while to explore the north wall, which may be bombed to expose a route to the room above. In it, you will find four fairies hovering over a pit. If you intend to catch them with your net, you'll have to wait for them to fan out a little bit, but if you simply wish to collect them right away, throw your Boomerang at them. Then head back down and climb the stairs to room 1P.
File:LoZLttP Ganons Tower F3.png Floor 3
Upon your arrival to this floor, you are immediately presented with a Crystal Switch puzzle with fence blocks surrounded by a bed of spikes. To make matters worse, one green and one red Goriya occupy the room, as well as a Bubble. The door to the room below is shut, and the only way to open it is to safely arrive at the block on the left side of the room and push it. Use your boomerang to create safe pathways from the entrance to the block, and then to the door below, while fighting or avoiding the Goriyas.
You will now be in a room with two red Goriyas, and two red spike traps. If you wish to diminish the amount that the spike traps interfere with your progress, you can pull the nearby statue to the right, and push it down to block the higher spike trap, but it's not completely necessary. All that you must do is kill the two Goriyas with arrows in order to open the shutter doors and advance to the room on the right.
Two more Goriyas accompanied by two sentry statues must be dealt with in order to open the doors in this room. Take them out as quickly as you can before you get shot at by the statues too much, then advance through the door above. Cross the empty corridor and unlock the door above to continue.
A shutter door stands at the end of a long passageway with an exposed lower level. A switch in the back of the lower level opens the door, but to reach it, you must pass through an area with many spike traps. If the orange blocks were already up when you entered the room, it will keep many of the spike traps at bay. It is difficult to arrange it so that all of the traps are behind the orange fence blocks. Rush to the top of the room, and lower the orange blocks when you reach the end. Two Eyegores, one green and one red, will wake up and advance upon you. Shoot their eyes with your arrows, and locate the switch in the middle of the row of skulls. Step on it and return to the ladder at the bottom of the room. Climb up, and run around the top layer to the door.
File:Zelda ALttP bounce back.png Dash Bash the blocks to bounce backwards
One last room stands between you and the next floor. A long bridge is surrounded by cannons that move back and forth, firing across the bridge. You can dash across with very little to worry about and run right up to the stairs, but the map indicates that there's one extra room to the south. A platform on the bottom leads to a wall with a crack on it, but there does not appear to be a way to reach it. It turns out that if you dash bash the blocks at the very end of the bridge, the force of the bash will be enough to knock you back, across the gap, and on to the platform, where you can lay a bomb and pass through the hole to the southern room. In this room, you will find two fairies as well as a full magic refill under one of the skulls. When you return to the room above, use your Hookshot to return to the bridge and continue on to the next floor.
File:LoZLttP Ganons Tower F4.png Floor 4
At the top of the stairs, you will encounter four enemies, two Stalfos and two Zahzaks, walking along conveyor belts. Attack them and defeat every one of them to open the shutter door on the left. In the next room, three red Stalfos stand guard over a sentry statue situated on the conveyor belt. You must once again defeat all of the Stalfos to open the shutter doors and advance to the room below.
The next room contains, not one, but two sentry statues on a rotating conveyor belt. This time, they are guarded by three blue Zahzaks, and a set of immobile spike traps rest in the center. Defeat the three Zahzaks to open the door and continue south. The next room builds upon the complexity of the previous by adding ice floors, and more spike traps. Now you only have two red Zahzaks to defeat in order to continue.
You will finally end up in a room with an iced-over floor. One (stationary) sentry statue and a fireball trap occupy the room along with a Stalfos and a Zahzak. A fireball revolves around a set of skulls containing health and magic, so they are worth investigating. Defeat the enemies to open up the door on the left. When you enter the next room, a "Bunny Beam" trap will instantly rush towards you from the center of the room. Unless you quickly duck behind one of the Ganon statues, it will hit you. Simply wait for its effects to wear off before entering the next room.
When you arrive, you will be treated to a repeat battle with the three Lanmolas, the boss from the Desert Palace. This one should go much more quickly since your sword is more powerful, and they have the same defense and health as when you first encountered them. The only difference with this battle is the Snake Medusa in the corner, just to make life difficult. Defeat the Lanmolas to access the room above. After a quick restock of supplies, you may climb the stairs to the floor above.
File:LoZLttP Ganons Tower F5.png Floor 5
When you climb the stairs, you are deposited on a platform in front of a seemingly vast empty room. Skull wearing Wizzrobes will appear, attack you, and fade away. The truth is, an invisible pathway exists, but there are no torches to light the way. You can accomplish two things at once, kill the Wizzrobes and light the path, by using Ether magic when the Wizzrobes are fully visible. Cross the invisible path to the doorway below.
The next room contains a bridge guarded by two Tauros, as well as a pair of eye beams on the wall. You can dash past all of them, if you like, to reach the other side as there is little reason to stay and fight. Enter the door to the room above. More skull masked Wizzrobes will appear to fight you on a series of conveyor belts with a spike trap. You must defeat them all to open the shutter door at the top. Proceed through the door when the enemies are removed.
The next room contains another long bridge guarded by four Tauros. When you enter, the solid tiles in the center of the bridge will begin to fall away, but the conveyor belt remains. Either dash up the middle before the bridge disintegrates or stick to the conveyor belt to reach the top, dashing through the Tauros along the way. When you reach the top, head up and over to the right and enter the next room.
The next room contains a shutter door and four torches. You will once again need to light all four torches to gain access to the room below. A very narrow ledge leads to a platform on which a fire bar rotates. You need to move around with the bar, and shoot the top and right torches as soon as you can. Then rush back to the left, lighting the left torch, and fire across the chasm to the bottom torch. You should have just enough time to reach the shutter door before it closes again.
In this final room, you will find a heart and a full magic refill before you climb the ladder and arrive at floor 6. The giant room below is only accessible if you fall off the floor fighting the Moldorm in the floor above. It contains a number of spikes, four regular Wizzrobes, and a Bubble. Climb the stairs in the upper right corner to return to the fight with Moldorm.
File:LoZLttP Ganons Tower F6.png Floor 6
When you arrive on this floor, you only have a few moments to rush around, and light every torch in the room in order to open the door at the top before the falling tiles prevent access to the various corners of the room. Start with the bottom right torch and work your way around the room in a clockwise direction. You should have enough time to light all four torches before the falling tiles catch up to you. Enter the door to the room above.
Two Helmasaurs guard this spike-filled room. Defeat them and one will drop aSmall Key that you can use on the door to the left. The two treasure chests in the corners both contain bombs (as do both skulls). The room on the left may appear to be a dead-end, but the crack on the bottom wall indicates otherwise. Unfortunately, a conveyor belt runs along the wall, as do a large and small spike trap. Deposit a bomb along the belt such that it explodes when the belt brings it close to the crack in the wall so that you can proceed south.
A Crystal Switch puzzle room hides a vast number of traps that you'll wish to avoid. The treasure chest in the center contains aSmall Key that you'll need to open the door to the south. If you get hit with the "Bunny Beam", simply wait for the effects to wear off before proceeding.
You will arrive at a recreation of the original Moldorm's nest from the Tower of Hera. The strategy is the same as before; you must constantly direct your attacks on the tail end of the Moldorm. If you get knocked off the floor in the heat of the battle, you will arrive in a singular room on floor 5, from which you can escape and return to the upper right corner of the room so you can continue your fight. If you beat the Moldorm, a treasure chest will appear on the platform to the south. You can Hookshot over to it to continue. All that it contains is a red Rupee. Push the blocks that you encounter out of the way and reach the left exit.
Battle Tip: Use the cape to turn invisible while fighting Moldorm. Once invisible, quickly focus attacks on the tail.
The last room before the climb to the final floor of Ganon's Tower contains a huge variety of elements designed to make reaching the top as difficult as possible. Everything from ice, to spikes, to conveyors and bumpers are employed, and a set of Helmasaurs guard the room. There's no rush, so approach each portion of the room slowly, and attack the Helmasaurs as they approach you. Reach the stairwell at the top and climb up to the final floor.
File:LoZLttP Ganons Tower F7.png Floor 7
After all of your trials, you are greeted to a torch lit hallway that wraps around from the stairwell to the locked door at the very end. Ensure that you have all the health and magic that you need, and proceed through the door to fight against the master of this tower.
File:Zelda ALttP Agahnim fight2.png The second duel with Agahnim
Even though you fought him far earlier in the tower of Castle Hyrule, you never truly defeated him. And he intends not to lose to you twice. This time, in exchange for his lightning magic, he will invoke a duplication spell that sends two clones of himself around the room. All three images of him will attack you at once, although the solid image is the only one that's vulnerable. Keep your eye on the solid image, and be sure to swing at every large fireball that he or the clones send your way. They must reflect and strike the solid image to do damage. Be careful not to strike the ice attack that splits into six pieces. Continue to reflect Agahnim's spells back at him until he sustains too much damage and the battle ends.
If you were expecting to meet your ultimate foe on top of the Tower, you are in for a surprise. First you run into Agahnim, miraculously returned from his earlier defeat at Hyrule Castle. Only after Agahnim falls for a second time does Ganon appear out of the ashes, but the battle is not yet to be. You must watch as Ganon transforms into a bat and flies off to the Pyramid of Power. You will then utilize your flute to summon a bird who will oblige by dropping you off at the top of the Pyramid. When you arrive, you will find that a hole has been created in the top. Inside, Ganon is waiting. The only way to get inside the Pyramid seems to be to jump into the hole.
Zelda ALttP Agahnim defeated.png
Zelda ALttP Ganon crash.png
Zelda ALttP Link arrives.png
File:Zelda ALttP Ganon fight.png Without Silver Arrows, the fight is nearly impossible.
The final battle with Ganon takes place in the Dark Pyramid. Ganon, in the form of a giant black bat, smashes through the top of the pyramid. You must jump into the hole he has created. Before entering, make sure you are properly equipped. It is incredibly more difficult to defeat Ganon if you don't have the Silver Arrows.
Ganon first attacks with his Trident and then he attacks with his Blazing Bats. He will also jump up and come smashing down, causing the edges of the floor to break away. Stay toward the middle and be careful not to fall off the edge of the floor.
After he invokes the technique of darkness, you must ignite both of the lanterns at the bottom of the room with the Lamp or Fire Rod to break through Ganon's secret technique of Darkness. After a while they will darken again so you will need to relight them.
When Ganon appears, strike him with the Sword. He will turn blue and freeze for a second. When you see Ganon turn blue, immediately fire a Silver Arrow at him. Repeat this process until four Silver Arrows have struck him. If you have come this far without the Silver Arrows, you will need to use a Spin Attack at the exact moment he is teleporting, and to finish him requires 12 strikes.
If the fight is proving difficult, it would be prudent to make a quick trip back to the Light World and head to the Witches' Hut in order to stock up on potions. After his defeat a path opens to the north. Go in, and you will be treated to the ending.
This is a bibliography of texts referred to in this book, there is also a section on Technical Studies, Reports and Tests. Some of these texts are available on the internet.
Development Center for Appropriate Technology, 1993, Summary of New Mexico ASTM E-119 Small Scale Fire Tests On Straw Bale Wall Assemblies SHB Agra Engineering and Environmental Services Laboratory, New Mexico, USA
Hayes, Katrina 2000 ASTM E84-98 Surface Burning Characteristics report Omega Point Laboratories, USA
Jones, Barbara 2001 Information guide to straw bale building Amazon Nails, UK
Olivier, Paul A., The Rice Hull House around 2004
Stone, Nehemiah 2003, Thermal Performance of Straw Bale Wall Systems Ecological Building Network, USA
Theis, Bob, 2003 Straw Bale Fire Safety - A review of testing and experience to date Ecological Building Network, USA
Wanek, Catherine, 2003 The New Strawbale Home Gibbs Smith Publisher, Layton, Utah, USA http://www.gibbs-smith.com/
This list contains a list of common words in French with their English meanings.
Tip:- If you want to search for a particular word, use the Find feature in your browser (CTRL + F, or F5 in Internet Explorer).
↑ the letter "t" can be doubled in certain conjugations
Dates, time, and numbers ·
Front Page: Radiation Oncology | RTOG Trials | Randomized Trials
Predisposition for basal cell carcinoma, particularly in non-sun-exposed areas
The major criteria consist of the following:
Protein acts as a receptor for sonic hedgehog, implicated in formation of embryonic structures
Actual function not completely clear (as of 6/2009)
⇒ Does Charity empower?
⇒ And now let's programme!
⇒ Integrating KFI programme development in the Handbook
⇒ MDG 2: Achieve universal primary education
⇒ MDG 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
⇒ MDG 5: Improve maternal health
Play media MDG2: Achieve universal primary education
Play media MDG6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
This scene shows how educators in India are contributing to the 2nd MDG that aims at achieving primary universal education for all children. We take the example of a particular educational institution where educators are trying to achieve this goal without the direct help of EU funds.
The story showcases the Krishnamurti Foundation that runs a private residential school whose profits are utilised to fund a rural school and a rural clinic. "It was with a feeling of responsibility towards the community that motivated Krishnamurti to start the rural institutions," says Prof. Krishna, Secretary of the Krishnamurti Foundation of India in Raj Ghat, Varanasi
But what are the perceptions of villagers regarding this help they receive from the Krishnamurti Foundation?
In this very interesting documentary, we discover how people can become accustomed to aid and stop valuing it in the same way as they did earlier. Should this change in people's approach stop the Krishnamurti Foundation from giving assistance?
In this scene, we try to understand if we as individuals can contribute in any way to the achievement of primary education for all. Here, we focus on the success story of a particular education institution and see how educators here have been able to contribute to primary education for the poor living in local villages. We will do this by:
The rich school and the poor school - Can we do it? Can we help excluded children in being included in education? Can the educators cope with these challenges?
In the middle of a city but out of the ordinary world. Searching for knowledge. Is there a tranquil and peaceful place ? Or is it a battlefield for ideals? Neighbourhood, sharing a place ... and a hope.
Through this scene, we want the audience to be aware of how high Indian ideals relate to social realities; see how it is possible to "do something"; to make a change; how problems do not discourage believers; and document the success stories of some authentic persons contributing justice and learning.
New footage: http://docs.google.com/Doc?id=ddf4q7jp_0hhh9skft Visual Tour of the area: The school and the field nearby. Other Camera Operations. One shot will be done from the car (or from the cycle rickshaw). Will drive through the school gate.
First cut by Gauri ⇒ Does Charity Empower ?
On Wikimedia Commons ⇒ Learning to share learning - edited version
Seva done for waking up the consciousness that providing health services to all is everybody's duty.
General objective: To show who are the people, institutions and organizations working for the MDGs:
Specific objective: This scene wants to portray one institution in Varanasi, India, that is working towards the achievement of child health through combatting diseases affecting children in the rural areas of India.
We will try to analyze who are the people working for this institution, what is it that motivated them to work in this field, what they have achieved so far and most importantly where does the aid come from?. We will also try to verify the pre-supposition that most aid comes from the west.
To analyze the challenges of working in the field of health for an Indian NGO by portraying their story and what their project delivers.
To analyze the direct and side impact of foreign aid given to this institution. To challenge the presupposition that this aid is wasted or misused and to verify if the aid is coming mostly from the west.
The story here is Front-stage.
We are giving the ongoing status of the MDGs related to reducing child mortality and combatting various diseases affecting children in the rural areas of India.
How much can individuals do to help? Is it possible to work in a global way to improve the health systems in India? Is aid the solution for solving this problem? What's the responsibility of individuals?
What is the "drama" Infant mortality in rural India is still high and kids still die from diseases that can be prevented through modern medicine. People in Indian villages have very little awareness about diseases that cause infant mortality and affect child health, the symptoms and effects of such diseases and the way to treat thm. Access to health in terms of hospitals and facilities are missing in many parts of India.
What is the "atmosphere"? There is human suffering here. There is question of basic human dignity and rights here. Where is the Sanjivan Hospital located? Inside the fields? Or inside the ideals?
What alternative views, facts or ideas does the audience need to understand? The audience needs to understand how responsible people in India are taking care of the disadvantaged and marginalised. Education and health services: are these rights or gifts? And if they are rights, whose duty is it to ensure and protect these rights?
What evidence will you show to get the audience to see those different truths? Do the villagers see this issue in the same way that the managers at Krishnamurti see it? Let's find out ...
What facts must the audience gather by watching it ? That some people take up the responsibility of taking care for others. Ultimately through this scene, I want the audience to feel : Some people are taking care. And you who are watching the TV, don't you feel also some responsibility? Why don't you contribute?
File:Does Charity Empower ?.webm
P. Krishna - Director Krishnamurti foundation school playlist
Play media The students of the Urban School teaching to the students of the Rural Centre - P. Krishna
Play media The mission of the Krishnamurti Rural Centre and the social responsibility of educational institutions
Play media The programme of the Krishnamurti Rural Centre
Why should I feel resposible for the poors
Individual Difference to the Poorest in the World
Common People's Influence in Global Partnership for Development
"I like the idea of making films about ostensibly absolutely nothing. I like the irrelevant, the tangential, the sidebar excursion to nowhere that suddenly becomes revelatory. That's what all my movies are about. That and the idea that we're in possession of certainty, truth, infallible knowledge, when actually we're just a bunch of apes running around. My films are about people who think they're connected to something, although they're really not." - *Errol Morris
Screenwriting is different from other literary forms. The script is essentially a "blueprint" that will guide the other filmmakers through the production of the film. Often, the final film will differ from what was on the page. These differences can be as small as a few simple dialogue changes, or as large as a complete change in tone, direction, and intent. Accepting this process is key to being a screenwriter who not only writes well, but will work well with the other people involved in the film's production.
In addition to being the blueprint for the film, the script also serves as a way to get that film made in the first place. Based on the strength of your screenplay, budget, talent, and enthusiasm will fall into place. It is the strength of the story that can secure financing and production talent. It's not innovative and thrilling setpieces or even a smattering of really great scenes peppered throughout your script, but a cohesive, intriguing story that holds the reader's (and eventually the viewer's) attention from beginning to end. This is such a basic concept, and yet one that seems utterly lost on some screenwriters, even those already established in Hollywood.
Every script should be written in the industry format. The industry's script format help readers to understand how long the movie is going to be.
The screen writer has to be creative and original and also to be flexible with the script and to adapt it to the budget of the film
This adage is always "Write what you know". This is excellent advice as writing from your personal experience will make the story, characters and tone believable.
The flip side of this is the joke that all first time scripts by writers who have recently moved to Hollywood are about...the struggles of a young writer recently moved to Hollywood. So write what you know but choose something of interest to an audience. You would be amazed at how easily a little known hobby of yours or a quirky friend translates into a scene or a character. Shamelessly mine your personal history and cut and paste characteristics of your friends together and you will be surprised at how little you need to spin from whole cloth.
The first ten pages of script are said to be the most important. They should begin to show how the entire film will work as a whole.
More often than not, the beginning screenwriter will find that his first sold screenplay will result in low-budget film. This also applies to those writing for the independent film scene.
It is not only extended special effects sequences that can break a budget, but also a large cast and/or sets. For low-budget films, try to keep both the cast and the different locations as few in number as possible. While this may seem limiting to a writer's creativity, many find the opposite to be true when they are confronted with the challenge of creating a compelling and memorable story within the confines of a low budget.
Of course, if money is not an issue, feel free to create a Lawrence of Arabia-style epic with a cast of thousands and computer-generated graphics that would break Industrial Light and Magic.
Screenwriting books come in two forms: those written by successful screenwriters in Hollywood and those by, well, other types of people. And while you may be thinking that you would prefer to read a book on screenwriting by someone who has actually sold a script, both types of books actually have their strengths and weaknesses.
Successful screenwriters have a certain pedigree to their "how-to" books because they have actually been there and done that. However, success in artistic fields is rarely formulaic. They themselves may be confused as to what it was exactly in their script that allowed them to sell it in the first place. These books tend to be slightly muddled in thought and offer a strong temptation to handle things the way this particular author did (because, after all, he did sell his script).
While his method may have worked for him, it may not work for you for any number of reasons. These books are worth reading because they do offer a glimpse into the thought-process of a successful screenwriter, along with the usual samples that you can study, but just remember to take their pathway and alter it to fit your writing style and personality.
The other type of screenwriting books usually comes from academia: often from a professor who has never sold a screenplay, but seems to know a lot about the format. These books are useful in learning the mechanics of the screenplay. It is crucial for a first-time writer to remember that all the characterization and pathos in the world cannot help a script that doesn't hold true to the basic foundation of what makes a screenplay a screenplay in the first place. While it is true that there are plenty of scripts that break convention, knowing the convention is the only way you can break it successfully. The writers of these books can take a more generalized view of the process and focus in on things like act structures, climaxes, and inciting incidents, but rarely offer the advice on making your characters and story come alive. So any good writer will have a library that has at least two books from these two separate categories.
These are the two most well known screenwriting "gurus," though neither has written a successful movie. This does not mean they have nothing worthwhile to say; both writers are good analysts of structure and form. However, what you won't find in their books is how to put heart and spirit into your story. What is a story without heart and spirit? Lifeless. So get their books, read them, and use them to help you with structure. Just don't take their methods as gospel and don't be afraid to discard what they teach when the time is right.
Goldman won an Academy Award for "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid", another one for "All the President's Men" and he has written (among others) two famous books on screenwriting, Adventures in The Screen Trade and More Adventures in the Screen Trade. The oft-quoted "nobody knows anything" (meaning you can have all the right elements for a great movie and flop at the box office) is a quote from "Adventures in the Screen Trade". Although he does not teach structure, as Syd Field or Robert McKee do, he does provide often funny, sometimes heart-breaking insights into the life of a working (striving and surviving) screenwriter in Hollywood. His books are no screenwriting manuals, but the life and heart that are lacking in McKee's or Field's books are abundant in his memoirs. Read McKee once, so you know what people talk about when they mention "inciting incident" and other McKeeisms, but read Goldman every now and then, to be inspired, and know that, as hard as you think writing is for you, it is even harder for him.
An excellent counterweight to the more structural and formalistic screenwriting guides. Includes inspiring and original suggestions for approaching the process of generating and elaborating story ideas. Also contains insightful analyses of a number of classic films, concentrating on the sequence (a series of scenes) as an essential building block.
J. Michael Straczynski - The Complete Book of Scriptwriting
The Creator of the Emmy-winning series Babylon Five (as well as other credits too numerous to mention), J. Michael Straczynski provides a notable tome that marries insider experience with practical tips for outlining, writing, finding an agent, pitching and more. While his topic is broad (with sections on writing for movies, television, animation, radio, theatre and the business itself) his grasp and the script examples alone make it a worthy read. Producing between 2000 and 3000 pages of published or produced material every year, authors don't get much more credible than this.
Elliot Grove - Write and Sell the Hot Screenplay
From the director of Raindance, this book presents a down-to-earth, systematic approach to all the elements of writing a screenplay, plus a detailed strategy for selling it once it’s written. It covers a lot of ground and is therefore inevitably concise, but the clarity of the concepts and practical advice is hugely valuable. Elliot Grove regularly presents a two-day workshop of the same name, which is well worth attending
Blake Snyder - Save the Cat!
Save the Cat! is a popular screenwriting book (and book series) by Blake Snyder. Even its critics (and there are) say you should read it but you have to know its strengths and weaknesses.
Okay, so he's not a screenwriter. He is, however, one of the best-selling authors of all time, so anything he has to say about writing is probably worth listening to. King's book On Writing is excellent as he tries to come to grips with what causes us to create and looks at from where the writing comes. Anybody doing any sort of writing will find this book most useful.
WORDPLAY / wordplayer.com is a phenomenal resource. Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio are working screenwriters who co-wrote the DreamWorks animated feature SHREK, winner of the first Academy Award for Best Computer Animated Film in 2002. These guys have written a number of brilliant essays and articles on the art and business of screenwriting that are essential reading.
A blog on "information, theory and debate for the professional television and film writer". Lots of useful info.
Screenplay Talk is a free community for screenwriters to share ideas and discuss industry trends.
A blog on all aspects of filmmaking including script writing
The TRON X statement is a debugging tool. It examines the event queue for any recent Command-period keypresses by the user. If a Command-period keypress is found, TRON X displays a dialog giving the user the option to quit the program (this is the same dialog that is displayed by HANDLEEVENTS when the user pressed Command-period and there is no designated break-handling routine). TRON X is handy for manually breaking out of a loop. If your program seems to get "stuck" inside a loop for a long time, try inserting a TRON X statement inside the loop. The next time you run your program, you will be able to break out of the loop by pressing Command-period.
Knowing how much yarn is needed to complete a project is important if you are making something for your own use or as a gift, to make sure you buy enough yarn, and if you are making the items to sell, to make sure you are charging enough considering the cost of materials.
Usually this will be rectangular but it can vary depending on the project.
Use a high-enough precision scale to weigh the swatch.
Calculate the swatch's area.
Divide the swatch's weight by its area to find the weight of yarn needed to make each square inch.
Multiply the weight of yarn per square inch by the number of square inches in the project to find the total weight of yarn needed for the project.
If necessary, do a unit conversion to get the amount of yarn into a convenient unit.
How much yarn would you need to make a scarf 10 inches wide and 4 feet long?
Pick a project you would like to make, and figure out how much yarn you need for it.
The advantages of this dosage form is that it can be absorbed relative quickly in the gastrointestinal tract, easier to swallow so that it is usually prescribed for pediatric or geriatric doses.
If drug is an external solutions form it must be carefully label.
This is probably the most widely used type of liquid dosage form because of its pleasant taste, relative stability, and ease of preparation characteristics. It is a sweetened hydroalcoholic solution in with the concentration of alcohol may vary (no more than 20%)
Tinctures is another form of alcoholic or hydroalcoholic solutions like elixers but with a higher concentration of alcohol. Vegetable, animal, or chemical materials are main ingredient for this form.
Patients can take this drugs by mouth or being applied externally like lotions or be injected into the body depend on which type of suspensions was dispensed to them.
Available in both internal and external preparations. Must carefully read the instruction to see if the emulsion is to be used internally or externally. This medicinal products contains water dispersed in oil (stabilized by emulsifying agent) or oil dispersed in water ( both stabilized by emulsifying agent) and microemulsion or transparent emulsion.
Reifman, Noah. Certification Review For Pharmacy Technicians. 9th ed. the United States of America: AuthorHouse, 2011. 61-88. Print.
Large Intestine Meridian |
Small Intestine Meridian |
Urinary Bladder Meridian |
Head And Neck Acupuncture Points |
Chest And Abdomen Acupuncture Points |
Back Acupuncture Points |
Upper Extremities Acupuncture Points |
Computer programming (often shortened to programming or coding) is the process of designing, writing, testing, debugging / troubleshooting, and maintaining the source code of computer programs. This source code is written in a programming language. The purpose of programming is to create a program that exhibits a certain desired behaviour. The process of writing source code often requires expertise in many different subjects, including knowledge of the application domain, specialized algorithms and formal logic.
Hoc and Nguyen-Xuan define computer programming as "the process of transforming a mental plan in familiar terms into one compatible with the computer." [1] Said another way, programming is the craft of transforming requirements into something that a computer can execute.
Within software engineering, programming (the implementation) is regarded as one phase in a software development process.
Another ongoing debate is the extent to which the programming language used in writing computer programs affects the form that the final program takes. This debate is analogous to that surrounding the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis [3] in linguistics, which postulates that a particular spoken language's nature influences the habitual thought of its speakers. Different language patterns yield different patterns of thought. This idea challenges the possibility of representing the world perfectly with language, because it acknowledges that the mechanisms of any language condition the thoughts of its speaker community.
Wired plug board for an IBM 402 Accounting Machine. The Antikythera mechanism from ancient Greece was a calculator utilizing gears of various sizes and configuration to determine its operation,[4] which tracked the metonic cycle still used in lunar-to-solar calendars, and which is consistent for calculating the dates of the Olympiads.[5] Al-Jazari built programmable Automata in 1206. One system employed in these devices was the use of pegs and cams placed into a wooden drum at specific locations. which would sequentially trigger levers that in turn operated percussion instruments. The output of this device was a small drummer playing various rhythms and drum patterns.[6][7] The Jacquard Loom, which Joseph Marie Jacquard developed in 1801, uses a series of pasteboard cards with holes punched in them. The hole pattern represented the pattern that the loom had to follow in weaving cloth. The loom could produce entirely different weaves using different sets of cards. Charles Babbage adopted the use of punched cards around 1830 to control his Analytical Engine. The synthesis of numerical calculation, predetermined operation and output, along with a way to organize and input instructions in a manner relatively easy for humans to conceive and produce, led to the modern development of computer programming. Development of computer programming accelerated through the Industrial Revolution.
In the late 1880s, Herman Hollerith invented the recording of data on a medium that could then be read by a machine. Prior uses of machine readable media, above, had been for control, not data. "After some initial trials with paper tape, he settled on punched cards..."[8] To process these punched cards, first known as "Hollerith cards" he invented the tabulator, and the keypunch machines. These three inventions were the foundation of the modern information processing industry. In 1896 he founded the Tabulating Machine Company (which later became the core of IBM). The addition of a control panel (plugboard) to his 1906 Type I Tabulator allowed it to do different jobs without having to be physically rebuilt. By the late 1940s, there were a variety of plug-board programmable machines, called unit record equipment, to perform data-processing tasks (card reading). Early computer programmers used plug-boards for the variety of complex calculations requested of the newly invented machines.
Data and instructions could be stored on external punched cards, which were kept in order and arranged in program decks.
The invention of the von Neumann architecture allowed computer programs to be stored in computer memory. Early programs had to be painstakingly crafted using the instructions (elementary operations) of the particular machine, often in binary notation. Every model of computer would likely use different instructions (machine language) to do the same task. Later, assembly languages were developed that let the programmer specify each instruction in a text format, entering abbreviations for each operation code instead of a number and specifying addresses in symbolic form (e.g., ADD X, TOTAL). Entering a program in assembly language is usually more convenient, faster, and less prone to human error than using machine language, but because an assembly language is little more than a different notation for a machine language, any two machines with different instruction sets also have different assembly languages.
In 1954, FORTRAN was invented; it was the first high level programming language to have a functional implementation, as opposed to just a design on paper.[9][10] (A high-level language is, in very general terms, any programming language that allows the programmer to write programs in terms that are more abstract than assembly language instructions, i.e. at a level of abstraction "higher" than that of an assembly language.) It allowed programmers to specify calculations by entering a formula directly (e.g. Y = X*2 + 5*X + 9). The program text, or source, is converted into machine instructions using a special program called a compiler, which translates the FORTRAN program into machine language. In fact, the name FORTRAN stands for "Formula Translation". Many other languages were developed, including some for commercial programming, such as COBOL. Programs were mostly still entered using punched cards or paper tape. (See computer programming in the punch card era). By the late 1960s, data storage devices and computer terminals became inexpensive enough that programs could be created by typing directly into the computers. Text editors were developed that allowed changes and corrections to be made much more easily than with punched cards. (Usually, an error in punching a card meant that the card had to be discarded and a new one punched to replace it.)
As time has progressed, computers have made giant leaps in the area of processing power. This has brought about newer programming languages that are more abstracted from the underlying hardware. Although these high-level languages usually incur greater overhead, the increase in speed of modern computers has made the use of these languages much more practical than in the past. These increasingly abstracted languages typically are easier to learn and allow the programmer to develop applications much more efficiently and with less source code. However, high-level languages are still impractical for a few programs, such as those where low-level hardware control is necessary or where maximum processing speed is vital.
Throughout the second half of the twentieth century, programming was an attractive career in most developed countries. Some forms of programming have been increasingly subject to offshore outsourcing (importing software and services from other countries, usually at a lower wage), making programming career decisions in developed countries more complicated, while increasing economic opportunities in less developed areas. It is unclear how far this trend will continue and how deeply it will impact programmer wages and opportunities.[citation needed]
Whatever the approach to software development may be, the final program must satisfy some fundamental properties. The following properties are among the most relevant:
Efficiency/performance: the amount of system resources a program consumes (processor time, memory space, slow devices such as disks, network bandwidth and to some extent even user interaction): the less, the better. This also includes correct disposal of some resources, such as cleaning up temporary files and lack of memory leaks.
Reliability: how often the results of a program are correct. This depends on conceptual correctness of algorithms, and minimization of programming mistakes, such as mistakes in resource management (e.g., buffer overflows and race conditions) and logic errors (such as division by zero or off-by-one errors).
Robustness: how well a program anticipates problems not due to programmer error. This includes situations such as incorrect, inappropriate or corrupt data, unavailability of needed resources such as memory, operating system services and network connections, and user error.
Usability: the ergonomics of a program: the ease with which a person can use the program for its intended purpose, or in some cases even unanticipated purposes. Such issues can make or break its success even regardless of other issues. This involves a wide range of textual, graphical and sometimes hardware elements that improve the clarity, intuitiveness, cohesiveness and completeness of a program's user interface.
Portability: the range of computer hardware and operating system platforms on which the source code of a program can be compiled/interpreted and run. This depends on differences in the programming facilities provided by the different platforms, including hardware and operating system resources, expected behaviour of the hardware and operating system, and availability of platform specific compilers (and sometimes libraries) for the language of the source code
Maintainability: the ease with which a program can be modified by its present or future developers in order to make improvements or customizations, fix bugs and security holes, or adapt it to new environments. Good practices during initial development make the difference in this regard. This quality may not be directly apparent to the end user but it can significantly affect the fate of a program over the long term.
The academic field and the engineering practice of computer programming are both largely concerned with discovering and implementing the most efficient algorithms for a given class of problem. For this purpose, algorithms are classified into orders using so-called Big O notation, O(n), which expresses resource use, such as execution time or memory consumption, in terms of the size of an input. Expert programmers are familiar with a variety of well-established algorithms and their respective complexities and use this knowledge to choose algorithms that are best suited to the circumstances.
The first step in most formal software development projects is requirements analysis, followed by testing to determine value modeling, implementation, and failure elimination (debugging).
There exist a lot of differing approaches for each of those tasks. One approach popular for requirements analysis is Use Case analysis. Nowadays many programmers use forms of Agile software development where the various stages of formal software development are more integrated together into short cycles that take a few weeks rather than years. There are many approaches to the Software development process
Popular modeling techniques include Object-Oriented Analysis and Design (OOAD) and Model-Driven Architecture (MDA). The Unified Modeling Language (UML) is a notation used for both the OOAD and MDA.
A similar technique used for database design is Entity-Relationship Modeling (ER Modeling).
Implementation techniques include imperative languages (object-oriented or procedural), functional languages, and logic languages.
It is very difficult to determine what are the most popular of modern programming languages. Some languages are very popular for particular kinds of applications (e.g., COBOL is still strong in the corporate data center, often on large mainframes, FORTRAN in engineering applications, scripting languages in web development, and C in embedded applications), while some languages are regularly used to write many different kinds of applications.
Methods of measuring programming language popularity include: counting the number of job advertisements that mention the language,[11] the number of books teaching the language that are sold (this overestimates the importance of newer languages), and estimates of the number of existing lines of code written in the language (this underestimates the number of users of business languages such as COBOL).
Debugging is a very important task in the software development process, because an incorrect program can have significant consequences for its users. Some languages are more prone to some kinds of faults because their specification does not require compilers to perform as much checking as other languages. Use of a static analysis tool can help detect some possible problems.
Debugging is often done with IDEs like Eclipse, Kdevelop, NetBeans, and Visual Studio. Standalone debuggers like gdb are also used, and these often provide less of a visual environment, usually using a command line.
Different programming languages support different styles of programming (called programming paradigms). The choice of language used is subject to many considerations, such as company policy, suitability to task, availability of third-party packages, or individual preference. Ideally, the programming language best suited for the task at hand will be selected. Trade-offs from this ideal involve finding enough programmers who know the language to build a team, the availability of compilers for that language, and the efficiency with which programs written in a given language execute. Languages form an approximate spectrum from "low-level" to "high-level"; "low-level" languages are typically more machine-oriented and faster to execute, whereas "high-level" languages are more abstract and easier to use but execute less quickly.
Allen Downey, in his book How To Think Like A Computer Scientist, writes:
The details look different in different languages, but a few basic instructions appear in just about every language:
Computer programmers are those who write computer software. Their jobs usually involve:
↑ Hoc, J.-M. and Nguyen-Xuan, A. Language semantics, mental models and analogy. J.-M. Hoc et al., Eds. Psychology of Programming. Academic Press. London, 1990, 139–156, cited through Brad A. Myers , John F. Pane , Andy Ko, Natural programming languages and environments, Communications of the ACM, v.47 n.9, September 2004
↑ Paul Graham (2003). Hackers and Painters. http://www.paulgraham.com/hp.html. Retrieved 2006-08-22.
↑ Kenneth E. Iverson, the originator of the APL programming language, believed that the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis applied to computer languages (without actually mentioning the hypothesis by name). His Turing award lecture, "Notation as a tool of thought", was devoted to this theme, arguing that more powerful notations aided thinking about computer algorithms. Iverson K.E.,"Notation as a tool of thought", Communications of the ACM, 23: 444-465 (August 1980).
↑ "Ancient Greek Computer's Inner Workings Deciphered". National Geographic News. November 29, 2006.
↑ Freeth, Tony; Jones, Alexander; Steele, John M.; Bitsakis, Yanis (July 31, 2008). "Calendars with Olympiad display and eclipse prediction on the Antikythera Mechanism". Nature 454 (7204): 614–617. doi:10.1038/nature07130. PMID 18668103. http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v454/n7204/full/nature07130.html.
↑ A 13th Century Programmable Robot, University of Sheffield
↑ Fowler, Charles B. (October 1967). "The Museum of Music: A History of Mechanical Instruments". Music Educators Journal (Music Educators Journal, Vol. 54, No. 2) 54 (2): 45–49. doi:10.2307/3391092. http://jstor.org/stable/3391092
↑ "Columbia University Computing History - Herman Hollerith". Columbia.edu. http://www.columbia.edu/acis/history/hollerith.html. Retrieved 2010-04-25.
↑ 12:10 p.m. ET (2007-03-20). "Fortran creator John Backus dies - Tech and gadgets- msnbc.com". MSNBC. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/17704662/. Retrieved 2010-04-25.
↑ "CSC-302 99S : Class 02: A Brief History of Programming Languages". Math.grin.edu. http://www.math.grin.edu/~rebelsky/Courses/CS302/99S/Outlines/outline.02.html. Retrieved 2010-04-25.
↑ Survey of Job advertisements mentioning a given language>
Weinberg, Gerald M., The Psychology of Computer Programming, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1971
How to Think Like a Computer Scientist - by Jeffrey Elkner, Allen B. Downey and Chris Meyers
w:Particle picking takes the image obtained from the electron microscopy and its goal it to obtain individual particles from the image. For some particles it works best with certain particle picking programs since many particles have different orientations. Finding individual particles could be done in four ways.
The four ways to find individual particles:
It is best to select particle that are not to close to the edge and is not overlapping other particles. When placing the marker on a particle it is good to have the marker as close to the center as possible.
Manual picking is a technique of particle picking that requires the user to manually select the particles from the micrograph. Manual picking is a time consuming technique, which makes it the less preferable over other methods of particle selection. In order to obtain better quality, the user need avoid the particles that are close to the edges, the particles that overlap each other, and the contaminated particles.
w:Template matching is a digital technique that is used for object classification. The template matching technique can be used to find particular parts in an image by comparing it to a similar template image. It requires a sample patch image that is used to identify most similar area in the source image [1]. Templates are often used to identify numbers, characters, and any kind of small areas in images. The patch is compared by sliding it on one pixel at a time [2]. Consequently, it calculates an index number that represents how similar the template matches the image in that particular position[1]. The similarity to the template image can be calculated using the correlation coefficient.
The use of mathematical function helps form templates by using the w:Difference of Gaussian (abbreviated to DoG). DoG picker sorts particle by its size using the radius of a particle and it works along as a reference-free particle picker[3]. The Mathematical function works best with particles that are symmetrical in shape, however not all particles are symmetrical and many are asymmetrical. Unlike manual selection, there are some errors that may occur when using DoG picker. As what was said before some particles are asymmetrical and the DoG picker will have difficulties picking those particles. [3].
Machine learning technique provides automatic particle selection from electron micrograph. Through automatic particle picking, a large number of particles can be selected in a short period of time without the need of extensive manual intervention. The machine learning method can utilize an algorithm to discriminate particles from non-particles [4] The algorithm can be corrected during picking in the training phase to minimize the number of false positives [5] [4]. The training phase has to be semi-supervised to allow the user for algorithm correction to identify the particles selected incorrectly [4]. The method eliminates the need for initial reference volume as it learns the particles of interest from the user.
↑ a b Template Matching." Template Matching — OpenCV 2.4.7.0 documentation. N.p., n.d. Web. 22 Nov. 2013
↑ Jan Latecki, Longin . "Template Matching." Template Matching. N.p., n.d. Web. 22 Nov. 2013.
↑ a b Voss, N.R., C.K. Yoshioka, M. Radermacher, C.S. Potter, and B. Carragher. "DoG Picker and TiltPicker: Software Tools to Facilitate Particle Selection in Single Particle Electron Microscopy." Journal of Structural Biology 166.2 (2009): 205-13. Print.
↑ a b c Sorzano C.O.S, Recarte E, Alcorio M, Bibao-Castro J.R., San-Martin C, Marabini R, Carazo J.M., (2009). Automatic particle selection from electron micrograph using machine learning techniques. J Structural Biol. 167 (3), pp.252-260.
↑ Zhu Y, Carragher B, Glaeser RM, Fellmann D, Bajaj C, Bern M, Mouche F, de Haas F, Hall RJ, Kriegman DJ, Ludtke SJ, Mallick SP, Penczek PA, Roseman AM, Sigworth FJ, Volkmann N, Potter CS., (2004). Automatic particle selection: results of a comparative study.. J Structural Biol. 145, pp.3-
Weight is key, especially in small species. Some falconers recommend beginners start with a kestrel, a tiny species of falcon. They are ready sparrow hunters, and as they are so small one must pay close attention to their weight and training to avoid hurting them. Similarly, some falconers detest the use of Harris' Hawks by beginners as the birds are so forgiving the novice falconer can make constant mistakes in the bird's care and still hunt successfully. If the bird is a non-imprinted captive-bred, it is very important to establish in the bird's mind that food comes from the falconer. The bird will be getting accustomed to its new 'furniture' (equipment) as well as its new owner.
Since the success of the Harry Potter series, some novices are desperate to keep (or hunt with) an owl. Seldom does this lead to success. Many states in the F.S.P. provide for keeping a great horned owl for hunting, but it is a difficult venture. Owls can be a horror to hunt with, as they find prey more by hearing than their diurnal(daytime) counterparts. Even the Great Horned Owls and Eagle Owls, which can see well enough during the day, will still prefer hunting at night.
There's also greater risk to the owl when it is out during the daytime. All of the diurnal raptors see owls as mortal enemies in competition with them for food and territory. Accordingly, wild birds of prey will attack an owl mercilessly if given the opportunity, even killing it if they're able to do so.
Laws also carefully regulate falconry in many areas. Throughout the United States, for example, you will be required to pass a written exam, build facilities, have them inspected, serve a two-year apprenticeship, and keep diligent records on your birds. In order to catch a wild bird, you may need additional licensing and permission.
Contacting a local falconry club or association is usually the first step to learning.
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire
A Cockatrice is, in Muggle texts, a synonym for a Basilisk. Though never fully defined in the Harry Potter series, it is apparently a dangerous creature that reproduces by means of eggs.
Beginner warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
There are only two mentions of a Cockatrice anywhere in the series. One is when Karkaroff is accusing Professor Moody of being over-cautious, perhaps to the point of paranoia. Karkaroff says that Moody had destroyed a gift given to him because it was ticking and he had thought it might contain a Cockatrice egg; in fact it was a carriage clock.
The other is when Hermione, in response to Ron's question about who the five judges for the Triwizard Tournament are, says that three of the judges must be the heads of the three schools. This was because she has found mention of the Triwizard Tournament of 1792, in which all three school heads were injured when a cockatrice the Champions were supposed to be catching went on a rampage.
Interestingly, cockatrices are not mentioned in "Newt Scamander"'s Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them.
From the limited description we have, we do not know whether Basilisks and Cockatrices are the same creature, as our Muggle literature would indicate. As a Basilisk hatches from a chicken's egg (in Muggle mythology, a rooster's egg) incubated by a toad, it is possible; but no mention is made of the basilisk egg making a ticking sound. One also would have to wonder if the egg could be taken away from the toad before it hatched: would the lack of incubation prove fatal to the basilisk?
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Size: The skunk ranges anywhere from 20 to 30 inches (575 mm to 800 mm) and weigh anywhere from 42 to 186 oz (1200 to 5300 g) with a long fluffy tail.[1]
Description: The striped skunk is known for having large stripes along its back. Starting as one from the top of the head, these stripes then break into two or more strips along the back. Each skunk has an individual stripe pattern from one another. Their tails are very large and bushy with both black and white fur in it.[1]
Similar Species: With small ears and triangle shaped head, the skunk takes on a similar shape of that as a cat differing with short legs and webbed toes with long nails for digging.[1]
Range: The striped skunk is only found on the continent of North America. Not only in the United States, the striped skunk runs all the way from Central Canada to Northern Mexico.[1]
Habitat: Although the striped skunk never lives far from water, the striped skunk lives in a lot of different habitats. They tend to live in open areas in the woods, grasslands and meadows. They like to make dens in places that are warm such as caves, stumps, logs and rock openings.[1][2]
Diet: The striped skunk eats both meat and plants. It eats things such as insects, small mammals, fish, fruits, nuts and leaves. This species also likes to eat fruits and vegetables when they are ripe in the summer months. Most of the time skunks dig to find their food buried in the ground and often come across the eggs of other animals to eat.[1]
Activity: The skunk is mostly nocturnal. It will sleep during the day and hunt for its food during the hours of night. Striped skunks normally live in a burrow that they find that is abandon and make it their own. They are inactive from November to March for the most part but do not hibernate.[1][2]
Reproduction: Mating season starts at mid-February and go through mid-March. Two months after mating, around five or six baby skunks are born per litter. Born both blind and deaf, a baby will nurse in the den with the mother for almost two months and will then stay with the mother for almost a year after birth before weaning onto their own. Male skunks provide no parental care and females only have one litter per year.[1]
Lifespan: Up to 90% of striped skunks die in their first winter but some can live up to two or three years old in the wild.[1]
Notes: Striped skunks might like to live in open wooded areas but they also like to wonder into suburban areas because they like the buildings that are there to give them cover if they ever need it. Males provide no parental care after birth because females will no longer associate with the male except for the few days during fertilization. The dens in winter usually consist of separate male and females. Most mothers will hibernate in packs of six with their young. The striped skunk is mostly known for its defensive system. When it feels in danger, it will lift its tail, arch its back and spray two streams of fluid from their scent glands. The spray causes nausea and burns the eyes of the predator.[1]
↑ a b c d e f g h i j Wilke, C. (2001), mephitis/ Mephitis Mephitis, http://animaldiversity.ummz.umich.edu/accounts/mephitis mephitis/, retrieved October 5, 2012
↑ a b Striped Skunk Mephitis Mephitis, 2012, http://www.nhptv.org/natureworks/stripedskunk.htm, retrieved October 5, 2012
What then?
Now would be a good time to spend an afternoon getting yourself a Golden Chocobo. This is the first ocassion to get one, and it's fun to have a reasonably well grown Knights of Round materia arould in the giant big end battles. =)
Basically, do whatever you want - and once you're bored, go to Junon.
They all lived in a Red Submarine
Recommended average party level: 45—55
In Junon, head up to the airport. Wow, did you notice something seems to be gone from the city? Can't quite put your finger on it yet.
The basic idea of this section - as revealed to you, the idea is to head to the Underwater Reactor - is quite simple. You go down the tunnel that begins from the upper level; head the way you went to the cargo ship, until you come to the narrow tunnel to the left where Shin-Ra soldiers are doing drills. They head to the tunnels. Fight your way through (none of the enemies here are very tough), go through the seafloor tunnel, take elevator up, fight more Soldiers, and stop Reno from loading the Huge Materia to a submarine. (Oh, by the way, in the seafloor tunnel you can Morph the Ghost Ship enemies to Guide Books, items the trader in Kalm wants. Trade them for Underwater materia, which can be handy when fighting the Emerald Weapon.)
Of course, there's a little snag in our perfect plan: Reno gets the thing packed to the sub, leaves in a hurry to his next appointment, and leaves the party to fight the single most frustrating boss in the game. (I don't say I hate it as much as Demon's Gate though, as that boss merely inspires me to have emotional rage; this boss inspires throughoutly cold methodical hatred.)
Lv: 45, HP: 24000/10000/10000, MP: 200/100/100, Weaknesses: Lightning, Strong against: Gravity, Poison, Absorbs: -
Before I start telling you what this major migraine source does to your sanity, let me tell you why I told you to breed a Golden Chocobo and pick up Knights of Round earlier: With KoR, this thing is a one-hit KO. While it may get an initial attack and make your jaw hurt, when you see knights march and torch this nuisance, you'll find it worthwhile.
Without KoR, this thing can be considerable hairy. The boss consists of three parts: The body (Carry Armor) and arms (Left Arm and Right Arm). Each is a level 45 creature, though obviously the body has higher stats. The body has Lapis Laser, which kills your party dead without any precautions, and the arms can grab the characters. The arm grab means the grabbed characters get damaged as well when you damage the boss, and worse, it can grab up to two characters. No might in the world will make it let go of the characters until they're dead, so revive your fallen comrades immediately - if your remaining kicking member gets grabbed, the fight ends unhappily!
Good protection (MBarrier or Big Guard) is essential. Some techniques are effective, among them everything that has anything to do with lightning, including Bolts, Ramuh a little bit, and Magic Breath and Trine enemy skills. Aside of that, hit the thing with everything and anything.
Carry Armor leaves God's Hand, a nice weapon for Tifa. After the fight, you get the bright idea to get into the other sub. In the submarine bay, be sure to check every box: Battle Trumpet (for Cait Sith), Scimitar (a weapon for Cid that has triple materia growth rate!) and Leviathan Scales key item, which will douse the flames of Wutai cave.
In the other sub, you first need to fight your way in. There's a save point in the entryway. In the command cabin, you have the option to either fight the commander and two soldiers, but who has the heart to fight Cloud's old (if brief) friends? So, you can take them hostage.
Das Boot: Edward Scissorhands' Cut—a submarine movie in 0:00:10
This Wikibook will undoubtedly one day have a complete guide to submarines (never guessed there would be yet another unlockable minigame, right? No? Aww.) but for now, here's a brief tutorial: Directional buttons control where the thing is going, like an airplane. Triangle increases speed, Cross slows down. Square fires a torpedo, and it will hit more surely if you have a lock-on. R1 for sonar view, R2 to change views.
The reason I'm not going to explain it too well is that either you're a complete newbie, and will nevertheless master this simple task in no time at all and destroy the red submarine in good time, or you're a veteran, and destroy the red sub in ten seconds flat - just speed after the red sub, get a lock-on, and torpedo away.
If you fail - well, you did save in the sub entryway, right? If not, it's not that bad, you just missed the Huge Materia. If you succeeded, the thing stays safe in the bottom of the ocean until you grab it, no need to hurry though.
You get orders to return to Junon. Once you do, all you see is an airplane going to...
...Rocket town! Darn! Looks like they're carrying out their meteor-smashing plans!
As you reach the Rocket Town, you find out Shin-Ra is fussing all over the rocket. As you head there, the soldiers spot you and attack you. Fight them off.
If Cid isn't in your party, he comes along now, obviously eager to defend his beloved rocket. (Rearrange your stuff here if needed.)
Climb up. Rude and a few soldiers are responsible for this Huge Materia shipment - time to knock them all down!
Lv: 42, HP: 9000, MP: 240, Weaknesses: -, Strong against: Gravity, Absorbs: -
Rude and his two Attack Squad flunkies are pretty easy to beat. Rude does have some nasty attacks (Bolt2 and, just to draw this on for a while, Cure2). But if you watch out and keep healing yourself, there's really no practical reason you shouldn't beat this. This is one of your two chances to steal the Ziedrich armour from Rude (the other time is in the sunken Gelnika (before or after his defeat at Rocket Town)). It pays to steal it, as it is arguably the best armour in the game.
In the rocket, there's one more baddie to beat. Enter the cockpit. Cutscene follows: Cid's workers leave the rocket to Cid, and then we hear that Palmer is launching the rocket. Eep.
Once in space, you can go fetch the rocket by using the ladders to right. The combination lock needs button key presses; If you get it wrong, you have three minutes to get it right, listen to Cid's ideas. The correct combination is [OK], [Switch], [Cancel], [Cancel] (on Playstation, Circle, Square, Cross, Cross).
To get to the escape pod, go left. There's a cutscene involving Shera, who shows up and leads you to the pod.
The rocket will hit the Meteor, and won't cause much damage to it at all, not even if you leave the Huge Materia in the rocket.
What then?
Red XIII has the bright idea that we should go to ask Bugenhagen what to do next - and that would be prudent. However, at this point, the immediate danger is gone; you can explore a bit if you want.
Take the submarine and visit the sunken Gelnika (near Costa del Sol).
Grab the sunken Huge Materia too (you should be able to find the red submarine on the ocean floor somewhere around the Junon area, if you killed it straight off the bat it will be due west of The Temple of the Ancients - just move your sub close to it and you should pick it up automatically). This, of course, assuming you managed to stop the red submarine!
If you have the Guide Book, Visit Kalm to exchange it to Underwater materia - even if you probably are way too weak to face Emerald Weapon right now...
If you were victorious in all materia tricks, it would be a good time to see that Bugenhagen has all of your Huge Materias. Leave them to his care when you visit Cosmo Canyon and ask the old man what to do next!
On to...Weapon Raid at Midgar and Requiem for Shin-Ra
NOTE: In this subsection there are 3 readings, a look at political institutions from a historic perspective, a look at civil society's definition, causes and functions, and finally a look at how contemporary organizations use our understanding of culture, social organizations and leadership (political institutions) to enhance engagement.
3.4 What are examples of social networks and ethnic organizations that a community builder can use to learn about the social organization of a group, to identify and engage its leaders?
3.5 What are the challenges that you should be aware of and how can the challenges be overcome?
Mikael Sandberg1,2*, Per Lundberg1
1 Theoretical Population Ecology and Evolution Group, Department of Biology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, 2 School of Social and Health Sciences, Halmstad University, Halmstad, Sweden
Traditionally, political scientists define political institutions deductively. This approach may prevent from discovery of existing institutions beyond the definitions. Here, a principal component analysis was used for an inductive extraction of dimensions in Polity IV data on the political institutions of all nations in the world the last two centuries. Three dimensions of institutions were revealed: core institutions of democracy, oligarchy, and despotism. We show that, historically and on a world scale, the dominance of the core institutions of despotism has first been replaced by a dominance of the core institutions of oligarchy, which in turn is now being followed by an increasing dominance by the core institutions of democracy. Nations do not take steps from despotic, to oligarchic and then to democratic institutions, however. Rather, nations hosting the core democracy institutions have succeeded in historically avoiding both the core institutions of despotism and those of oligarchy. On the other hand, some nations have not been influenced by any of these dimensions, while new institutional combinations are increasingly influencing others. We show that the extracted institutional dimensions do not correspond to the Polity scores for autocracy, “anocracy” and democracy, suggesting that changes in regime types occur at one level, while institutional dynamics work on another. Political regime types in that sense seem “canalized”, i.e., underlying institutional architectures can and do vary, but to a considerable extent independently of regime types and their transitions. The inductive approach adds to the deductive regime type studies in that it produces results in line with modern studies of cultural evolution and memetic institutionalism in which institutions are the units of observation, not the nations that acts as host for them.
Traditionally, political institutions are defined deductively in political science. Already Aristotle deductively distinguished between democracy, oligarchy and tyranny on the basis of his taxonomy of constitutions [1]. Such distinctions are still common. For example, the major institutions of democracy, ‘parliamentarism’ and ‘presidentialism’, are defined in term of who appoints the government according to the constitution. Similarly, ‘democracy’, in modern political theory, has been defined as “that institutional arrangement for arriving at political decisions in which individuals acquire the power to decide by means of a competitive struggle for the people's vote” [2], or a political system “responsive to all citizens” [3]. These definitions are not results of prior empirical tests, experiments or investigation of all observed institutions, but are classifications developed on the basis of common knowledge, logic and conceptual distinctions. One problem with this conceptually rather than empirically driven approach is that one can never be sure that these man-made classifications of institutions—or other conceptually defined phenomena—correspond to actually existing conditions. A serious consequence of this approach is that institutions that have not been conceptually defined cannot be detected. If natural sciences had followed the research principles of political science, no discoveries beyond a priori conceptualization could have been made.
One can argue that institutions, just like genes, are particulate units. An institution, just like a gene, exists or not. Further, one could argue that the possible combinations of non-existing and existing institutions at any time and social space are beyond quantitative limits; any political or social unit may have an infinite number of combinations of institutions and the lack of them. In analogy with Dawkins' expression, “however many ways there may be of being alive, it is certain that there are vastly more ways of being dead, or rather not alive” [4], one task for the political or social scientist should be to detect exactly what combinations of existing and non-existing institutions there actually are in each political system over time. For example, rule of law, or the lack of rule of law, can be combined with parliamentarism or the lack of parliamentarism (such as presidentialism), in turn combined with various types of elections systems. However, considering the number of institutions, nation-states and years of their existence, this task is a challenge for an industry of political scientist. The idea in this study is therefore to limit the endeavor to the investigation of already existing institutional data for an inductive exploration and analysis. What key dimensions among institutional variants at nation-state level can be found using already existing data? How have these institutional dimensions evolved over time? What nation-states have these institutions been able to “invade” and for what periods in time? What can we learn from this exploration of institutional data inductively in relation to traditional deductive approaches? In particular, how do these inductively extracted institutions relate to the regime types understood and defined deductively?
In the definitions of ‘institutions’, as well as in the approaches to studying them, political science has been greatly influenced by institutional economics (such as [5], [6]–[8], for an overview see [9]). In particular, North's understanding of institutions as “rules of the game” or more specifically the “humanly devised constraints that structure political, economic and social interaction” [6] has been hugely influential. Ostrom has applied a similar concept of institutions in various studies of the commons (exploitation of common local resources) in ways that come closer to a political economics of political science [10]. Traditional subfields of political science, however, have made historically fewer contributions to institutional theory (see however [11], [12]–[14]), despite the ancient traditions from Aristotle. Instead, deductively motivated empirical analyses of institutions are more common in political science; in particular studies of what is first defined as democracy and then explained in terms of ‘requisites’, determinants and diffusion patterns ([15]–[45] to name of few studies in this field). Interestingly, compared with the numerous studies of democracy and its correlates, much less research has focused on non-democratic regime-types. This is unfortunate, since the potential for democracy's survival depends on the regime-type it succeeds. In particular Dahl [4] and Linz and Stepan [28] acknowledge this understanding of historical dynamics in their analysis of fundamental pathways toward a consolidated democracy.
If institutional economics is richer in theory, institutional political science is richer in data. In particular, the Polity IV data set is interesting since it covers all nation-states with a population of more than 500,000 inhabitants for all years starting from 1800 [27], [39], [46]–[49]. The Polity IV data set includes a number of institutional (ordinal scale) variables. These variables have typically been used for measuring the degree of autocracy and democracy as well as the institutional steps between the two (“anocracy”). As described in their Polity IV codebook [47], the autocracy value subtracted from the democracy value gives the “Polity score” from -10 (strongly autocratic) to 10 (strongly democratic). The variables are the product of the conceptual work of Eckstein and Gurr [49] and though it is thus a list of institutions defined deductively, the resulting variable list of institutions is the result of pragmatic operationalization (see especially [47], p. 16). Polity IV is the most impressive data set of political institutions from an explorative point of view. The rational in this study can be formulated as “it is more likely you find the key the more lampposts there are”, and it can be economical to search there before investing in further illumination.
The institutions that the Polity IV data set measures are, first, three variables of executive recruitment: (1) regulation of chief executive recruitment, (2) competitiveness of executive recruitment, and (3) openness of executive recruitment; second, one variable on the independence of executive authority: (4) executive constraints (decision rules); and, third, two variables on political competition and opposition: (5) regulation of participation, and (6) competitiveness of participation. Since these six variables are ordinal scales, each of their values can be transformed into separate variables. In this case, we end up with 30 institutions with values 0 if they do not occur in a country a particular year, or 1 if they do (see Appendix S1). These 30 variables of political institutions are strongly correlated and it is obviously the case the there is a significant redundancy among them. In addition, they suffer from group-wise singularity, since they are created from original variables in which the values are mutually exclusive. What we need is therefore a technique to find the most important, uncorrelated dimensions behind the values of these variables, i.e. to reduce the number of variables into key dimensions and at the same time splitting up their group-wise singularities. This is why a principal component analysis (PCA) with strict selection criteria is used. PCA is a procedure for reducing the number of variables in both cross section and time series data in cases where no causation is assumed between the variables. PCA reduces the number of variables into a set of principal components that are uncorrelated and account for most of the variance. Each principal component is a linear combination of the original variables so it is often possible to ascribe meaning to what the components represent, in this case an “institutional dimension” (correlated institutions that differ from other dimensions of correlated institutions). PCA is similar to factor analysis, but has the advantage that it does not rely, as opposed to factor analysis, on any assumption of underlying causal structure [50], [51]. In this case the analysis has been based on the Polity IV original data set, covering the years 1800–2007. The procedure has been the following.
Polity data was first transformed into the 30 dummy variables as described above and in the Appendix S1. The 30 variables were included in an initial principal component analysis, using varimax (orthogonal) rotation on a covariance matrix. Applying a number of selection criteria in repeated PCAs, the number of valid variables was reduced for arriving at a robust solution and avoiding singularity. Variable finally selected were only those that: (1) gave a solution with commonalities ≥0.50, (2) high loading (≥0.50) on only one component, (3) made possible the reproduction of acceptable levels of commonalities and the same components in repeated analyses with randomly selected halves of the sample, (4) had values ≥0.50 in the diagonal table of anti-image correlations, (5) had a value ≥0.50 on the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin measure of sampling adequacy, (6) had a significant value (<.000) on the Bartlett test of sphericity, and (7) a value ≥0.70 on Chronbach's alpha for the extracted variables of each principle factor (alpha = 0.716, 0.878 and 0.681 for the three dimensions, indicating a somewhat weaker reliability of the third component, based on the two core institutions of despotism, should they be used as a scale, something which is not the case in this study). Only seven of the 30 original variables passed these tests. In three cases were two values from the original variables kept, thus indicating that the problem of singularity had been avoided to a great extent. In addition, component loadings found to be ≥3.0 were excluded as outliers (642 of 15520, or 4,2%), as recommended by the SPSS documentation.
The principal component analysis on Polity IV data 1800–2007 reveal three components which together explain more than 83 percent of the total variance of the seven variables that passed the tests listed above (table 1).
The first dimension: core institutions of democracy
In the first dimension we find the following institutions (values on Polity IV variables): (1) Regulation of Participation: regulated, (2) Competitiveness of Participation: competitive, and (3) Executive Constraints: parity or subordination.
Regulated and competitive participation and subordination of the executive is at heart of democracy. The three institutions are part of an institutional dimension to which democracies belong. Regulated participation indicates that there are binding rules for when and how political preferences are expressed. Both one-party states and Western democracies exhibit regulated participation but they do so in different ways. Marshall and Jaggers state that ”regulated” implies that [47]:
The next variable in the analysis supports this conclusion. Second highest ranking on this first dimension is given competitiveness of participation. Marshall and Jaggers state that this value indicates “stable and enduring, secular political groups which regularly compete for political influence at the national level” [47]. Under the third institution parity and subordination in executive constraints, accountability groups “have effective authority equal to or greater than the executive in most areas of activity”, such as “a legislature, ruling party, or council of nobles initiates much or most important legislation” (p. 25).
Nations with all three core institutions of democracy may or may not be democratic as defined by the Polity score, for which 6 is considered the threshold value for being democracy, as recommended on the Polity IV home page. Several countries are defined as democracies in Polity score terms without having acquired the three core democracy institutions, such as Albania, democratic since 2002, Argentina, democratic in 1973–75 and since 1983, and Armenia, democratic in 1991–94. In fact there are 118 countries that have at least one year been democratic, while only 43 countries have ever fulfilled the criteria of having all the three institutions of the core democracy dimension. On the other hand, the 43 countries with the core democracy institutions in place are not always considered democratic in terms of the Polity score the same years. The reason is that the Polity score is the sum of both institutionalized democracy and (the negative value of) institutionalized autocracy. A value over 6 can therefore be based on a very high value of democracy and a low (negative) value of autocracy.
In some cases, the Polity score definition of democracy and acquisition of the three core institutions of democracy coincide. Australia, for example, has the three core democratic institutions from 1901- and indeed more than 6 on the Polity score from the same year. Austria, on the other hand, had the core democracy institutions from 1946-, while being democratic in the sense of having more than 6 on the Polity score already in 1920–32. Belgium had the three core institutions in 1919–38 and in 1944–2006, while its Polity score is above six already from 1843. Canada had the core democracy institutions from 1921, but was democracy already from 1888. Chile had gained the three core democratic institutions from 2006, but was considered democratic in Polity score terms between 1964 and 1972, and from 1989. As Chile's case illustrates, a society can be considered democracy without having all critical democratic institutions in place, and one might hypothesize that the nations lacking the core democratic institutions are more likely to become victims of reversals into non-democratic regime types than those that have them. On the other hand, democracy may also lead to the subsequent introduction of the lacking core democratic institutions that may consolidate democracy. In fact, in all cases, except Egypt 1922–27, nations are considered democratic in Polity score terms the same year or prior to gaining the three core democracy institutions. Democracy as regime type obviously may “breed” or innovate its own consolidating institutions, if they are not at hand initially (see Appendix S2). Figure 1 describes the historical dynamics of this dimension in terms of how many nations acquired each of the three core institutions of democracy.
If we instead look at the historic evolution of the core democracy dimension of institutions, the US as first polity gains the core three institutions in 1845, but in 1849–1871, in connection with the Civil War, fails to fulfill these criteria. Switzerland from 1848 is the only country with an unbroken sequence of years with the required values on the three dimension variables until the present day. In 1857, as third nation acquiring the core democracy variable values, we find New Zealand. In 1880, Greece, as fourth country, meets the criteria. In 1890, Costa Rica becomes the fifth polity of the democracy dimension, and in 1898 Norway becomes the sixth. By 1927, we have 17 nations of that dimension: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Costa Rica, Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, Greece, Ireland, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. In connection with the World War II, the number decreased to eight. From the 1950s, with the exception for some of the years in the late 1960s and the early 1970s, the increase of nations with the three institutions of the democracy dimension is monotonic. In 2006, the number of nations having the three core democracy institutions is 35 (figure 1).
The second component given by the principal component analysis in table 1 is called ‘oligarchic’ due to the factional or sectarian institutions involved: Competitiveness of Participation: factional and Regulation of Participation: sectarian. The variables of the factional or sectarian institutions focus on participation and regulation of participation. The factional aspect of competition in participation is defined by Marshall and Jaggers as polities “with parochial or ethnic-based political factions that regularly compete for political influence in order to promote particularist agendas and favor group members to the detriment of common, secular, or cross-cutting agendas” [47]. Factional competitiveness is thus typical to divided societies that have not created sufficient institutions for democracy. The second variable, regulation of participation: sectarian, imply that political demands are characterized by “incompatible interests and intransigent posturing among multiple identity groups and oscillate more or less regularly between intense factionalism and government favoritism” [47]. The term ‘oligarchic’ in this case implies the institutions where one identity group favors group members in central allocations and restrict competing group's activities and when significant portions of the population historically have been excluded from access to power.
In 2000, Algeria, Angola, Burundi, Chad, Estonia, Ethiopia, Guinea, Iran, Ivory Coast, Kazakhstan, Liberia, Malaysia, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Yemen, and Zimbabwe (19 nations) had positive values on the two variables in the faction/sectarian (oligarchic) dimension. The dimension's all time high was in 1886–1889, when 29 countries had both core oligarchy institutions. Historical dynamics are described in Figure 2.
In the third principal component variable we find the variable values Executive Constraints: unlimited authority and Openness of Executive Recruitment: closed.
Constitutional restrictions on executive action are ignored.
2.Constitution is frequently revised or suspended at the executive's initiative.
There is no legislative assembly, or there is one but it is called and dismissed at the executive's pleasure.
4.The executive appoints a majority of members of any accountability group and can remove them at will.
5.The legislature cannot initiate legislation or veto or suspend acts of the executive.
6.Rule by decree is repeatedly used.
Such regimes are strongly correlated with polities in which executive recruitment is closed [47]:
1.Chief executives are determined by hereditary succession, e.g. kings, emperors, beys, emirs, etc. who assume executive powers by right of descent.
2.Executive recruitment is closed to everyone who is not a member of the hegemonic party/faction that controls the government.
As mentioned, there were 642 outliers in the material, constituting the 4.2 percent of the 15520 country-year cases with higher loading than the 3.0 recommended as ceiling by SPSS documentation for the saved component loadings. Typically, these countries did not combine despotic unlimited authority in executive recruitment with the expected closed executive recruitment of the despotic dimension. Since the late 1920s, a substantial number of these political systems instead combined despotic unlimited authority in executive recruitment with a factional regulation of participation. They thus exhibited other combinations of institutions than those of the major dimensions.
The three institutional dimensions have interesting historical dynamics, as is obvious from the figure 4, in which percentages of country cases with all the core institutions of despotism, oligarchy and democracy are given. In the last two centuries, the despotism dimension decreases from over 70 percent of all nations in 1800 to less than 5 percent in 2000.
The oligarchic dimension increases in the mid 1800s, with a peak around 1885, and then declines to around five percent in the 1980s, with two recoils around 1950 and 2000. The democracy dimension is slowly increasing with wave-like steps ahead in the beginning of the last century, in the early twenties, thirties and fifties, but recoiling into a rift around the Second World War. From the three dimensions one can hypothesize a substitution in the sense that oligarchic institutions succeed the despotic, and the democracy dimension replaces the oligarchic. This hypothesis does not find support in evidence at nation-state level, however (see Table 2 and Appendix S2). On the contrary, the nations having the core three democratic institutions tend previously to have had neither the core despotic nor the core oligarchic institutions. For instance, only Austria, Belgium, Chile, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain and Uruguay (12 nations) have both had oligarchic and democratic core institutions, while 22 nations have had the three core democratic but never the core oligarchic institutions. Only eight of the 43 nations that ever have gained the core democratic institutions have also previously had core despotic institutions; Austria, Denmark, Egypt, Japan, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, and Sweden. These facts suggest a path-dependency among political institutions in the sense that an oligarchic or despotic past seems to be an impediment to later acquisition of the core democracy institutions. Indeed, an OLS regression of the sum of values of the core despotism and oligarchy institutions on the sum of values on the democratic dimension explains only 0.076 of the variance (R squared), but the standardized regression coefficient of the oligarchy dimension is −0.21*** as compared with −0.18*** for the despotism dimension, indicating that oligarchy has slightly more negative influence than despotism on acquisitions of the core democracy institutions.
Interestingly, the “market saturation” is decreasing, that is, a much lower share of the world's nations are exhibiting any of the dimensions in the 20th than in the 19th century. In the 1800s, more than three fourths of the nations belonged to the despotism dimension, and nearly the rest the oligarchic. As the oligarchic dimension expands in the world system, at the cost of despotism, some countries are lost and not yet influenced by the core democracy institutions. The tide is lowest during World War II: together the despotism, oligarchy and democracy dimension influence less than half of the nations. After the war, the core democracy institutions gain momentum and around the end of the 1900th century, its “market share” is more than 20 percent. Together with oligarchic and despotism institutions, around a third of the nation-states are influenced. The rest of the 160 nations have none of these dimensions in full. So, as democratic institutions substitute the oligarchic and the despotism dimensions, there is an increasing share of country cases with idiosyncratic institutional set ups, indicating an increasing institutional diversity. Not only are there many countries that are not influenced by any dimension in full. Some nations are instead affected by more than one dimension and other institutions than those included in the three major dimensions. The situation is quantified in table 2 and described in country case detail in Appendix S2.
As we can notice in table 2, there are 539 country and year cases with both the despotism and oligarchy dimensions present. In addition, they all have one of the three institutions of the democratic dimension. Even among countries with a maximum value on the democracy dimension, there are 6 country and year cases (Egypt 1922–1927) with one of the despotism institutions. So, nation-states may host several institutional dimensions depending on the exact composition of constituent institutions.
One should keep in mind that the evolution of the institutional dimensions occurs across nations with varying degree of democracy and autocracy as defined by the Polity score [47]. In figure 5, we see that institutions from the democracy dimension dominate only in the Polity score 10 value (strong democracy), while the despotism dimension is found in the −10 score (strong autocracy) and occasionally in the −10 to −6 scores. The oligarchy dimension is frequent in the −6 to 7 revised Polity score, but not systematically, indicating a weak correlation between these dimensions and the deductively constructed Polity score (Pearson's r: 0.721** with the democracy dimension, −0.016 with the oligarchy dimension and −0.617** with the despotism dimension). Only the inductively extracted core institutional democracy and despotism dimensions are strongly related to the revised Polity score, which in turn is created from two Polity IV variables—the autocracy value subtracted from the democracy value. Normally, as described on the Polity IV home page, countries with a Polity score +6 to +10 are deductively defined “democratic”. Results here show that this deductive regime classification does not correspond to inductively extracted core institutional dimensions. In particular, the deductive regime type classification is void of oligarchy as regime type, despite the fact that, at institutional level, there is one core oligarchic institutional dimension extractable in the material.
The figure 5 clearly shows how deductive versus inductive approaches to institutional analysis produce quite different results. Clearly, the deductive and inductive approaches to classification produce answers to different questions. The deductive approach answers the question to what degree the nations' regime types fulfill the requirements we define as democracy versus autocracy (or “anocracy”, as suggested by Polity IV). But the core democracy, oligarchy and despotism dimensions do not fit neatly into the deductive autocracy-anocracy-democracy scale of the Polity score. In particular, the core oligarchy dimension is scattered in several Polity score values and years. The deductive scale and the inductive dimension obviously cut data quite differently. The inductive approach instead produces information about major dynamics historically at institutional level. For instance, we are informed that nations may simultaneously be hosts of core institutions of different political dimensions. The two approaches thus produce knowledge from the regime versus the institutional perspectives. The deductive approach reveals historical degree of nation-state democracy as we conceptualize it in one case. The inductive approach gives insights into dimension of political institutions as they evolve over time across all regime types in all nations. This fact implies that the results of this study do not necessarily contradict results of recent studies of dynamics in transitions between autocracy and democracy [43], but that units, levels and perspectives of analysis are different. The inductively found variable values of the three institutional dimensions open up for a new approach to studies of the underlying institutional dynamics of the political regimes as we know them. Rather than only considering each nation each year a democracy, “anocracy” or autocracy with a specific Polity score and specific institutions at hand, we discover that institutions exhibit dynamics below and in interaction with changes at the regime type level. In some cases, core institutions of more than one regime-type invade regimes; in others there is a lack of any of the core institutions in a regime. We therefore conclude that the political meso-scale (the political institutional level) and the macro-scale (regime types) partly have decoupled dynamics and that the derivation of regime type from institutions is not always straightforward. The increase of the democratic regime type over time does imply that a certain set of institutions also becomes more widespread, but not unambiguously so. A smaller fraction of the world's polities cannot easily be categorized as any given regime type. The reason for this increase in institutional diversity calls for an evolutionary understanding of how the meso- and macros-scales of political culture are interacting.
Traditionally, political scientists define democracy as well as other political institutions conceptually and deductively. Attempts are made to fit polities and nations into pre-defined categories and classes. This approach may prevent from discovery of actually existing institutions or dimensions of institution that are outside of the scope of the definitions. Here, a principal component analysis was used as a tool for inductive extraction of institutional dimensions in the Polity IV data. Three dimensions were revealed, based on seven institutional variables that passed a strict series of test for a principal component analysis. The three recovered dimensions correspond to intuitively sensible categories, but now being the result of posterior classification. The overall time dynamics of those dimensions are the core institutions of the regime types democracy, oligarchy and despotism. The despotism dimension was historically succeeded by the oligarchic dimension, which in turn was followed by the democratic. Curiously, this result is congruent with Aristotle's classic distinctions between the three ‘deviant’ (unjust) constitutions of city-states: democracy, oligarchy and ‘tyranny’ (!). We also show that some country cases are influenced by none of these, some only by one dimension, while a few have had institutions from two or three of these core institutional variables. Nation-states' regimes do not typically take steps from core institutions of despotism, to oligarchy, and finally to democracy, however. In fact, core institutions of despotism and oligarchy of a regime impede the later acquisition of core democratic institutions, even if there are a number of exceptions to this rule. Our conclusion is therefore that, instead of only considering each nation each year a democracy or autocracy with a specific Polity score, we should also study how institutional dimensions and institutions evolve historically across nations' regime types. Our results are in line with modern studies of cultural evolution and evolutionary (memetic) institutionalism [43], [54]–[56], where institutions are considered the units of observation, not the nations or polities that act as host for them. Results here add to these new areas of research in suggesting that the relationship between the meso-scale dimensions of political institutions and the macro-scale regime types may be considered analogous to the biological distinction between genotypes and phenotypes. In biology, many quantitative traits are genetically canalized [52], [53], i.e., insensitive to the exact genetic architecture underlying the trait development. Small to moderate genetic changes are invisible at the trait level. In the same vein, political regime types can apparently also be canalized; the underlying institutional architecture can vary; sometime quite considerably, yet the regime type prevails. To understand the interactions between the dynamics of the political institutions and the transitions of regime-types is a critical challenge for a modern, evolutionary political science.
To access Tables/Figures, please click on link: http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0045838
1.Aristotle (1998) Politics. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.
2.Schumpeter JA (1942) Capitalism, socialism, and democracy. New York, London,: Harper & Brothers.
3.Dahl RA (1971) Polyarchy; participation and opposition. New Haven,: Yale University Press.
4.Dawkins R (1986) The Blind Watchmaker; London: Penguin, p. 9.
5.Veblen T (1912) The theory of the leisure class; an economic study of institutions. New York,: The Macmillan Company.
North DC (1990) Institutions, institutional change, and economic performance. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press.
Young HP (1998) Individual strategy and social structure: an evolutionary theory of institutions. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Bowles S (2004) Microeconomics: behavior, institutions, and evolution. Princeton, N.J.; Woodstock: Princeton University Press.
Hodgson GM (1988) Economics and institutions: a manifesto for a modern institutional economics. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Ostrom E (1990) Governing the commons: the evolution of institutions for collective action. Cambridge [England]; New York: Cambridge University Press.
March JG, Olsen JP (1989) Rediscovering institutions: the organizational basis of politics. New York: Free Press.
Olsen JP (1983) Organized democracy: political institutions in a welfare state, the case of Norway. Bergen; Oslo; New York: Universitetsforlaget; Distributed by Columbia University Press.
Pierson P (2004) Politics in time: history, institutions, and social analysis. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
14.Peters BG (1999) Institutional theory in political science: the ‘new institutionalism’. London: Pinter.
Lipset SM (1960) Political man. London: Heinemann.
Huntington SP (1991) The third wave: democratization in the late twentieth century. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Almond GA, Verba S (1963) The civic culture; political attitudes and democracy in five nations. Princeton, N.J.,: Princeton University Press.
Moore B (1966) Social origins of dictatorship and democracy; lord and peasant in the making of the modern world. Boston,: Beacon Press.
19.O'Donnell GA, Schmitter PC (1986) Transitions from authoritarian rule: tentative conclusions about uncertain democracies. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
20.Dahl RA (1989) Democracy and its critics. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Przeworski A (1991) Democracy and the market: political and economic reforms in Eastern Europe and Latin America. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
22.Starr H (1991) Democratic Dominoes: Diffusion Approaches to the Spread of Democracy in the International System. The Journal of Conflict Resolution 35: 356–381. Find this article online
Diamond L (1992) Economic Development and Democracy Reconsidered. In: Marks G, editor. Reexamining Democracy Essays in Honour of Seymour Martin Lipset. Newsbury Park, CA: Sage. pp. 93–139.
Hadenius A (1992) Democracy and development. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press.
Putnam RD (1992) Making democracy work: civic traditions in modern Italy. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
26.Diamond LJ, Plattner MF (1993) The Global resurgence of democracy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Jaggers K, Gurr TR (1995) Tracking Democracy's Third Wave with the Polity III Data. Journal of Peace Research 32: 469–482. Find this article online
28.Linz JJ, Stepan AC (1996) Problems of democratic transition and consolidation: southern Europe, South America, and post-communist Europe. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press.
Collier D, Levitsky S (1997) Democracy with Adjectives: Conceptual Innovation in Comparative Research. World Politics 49: 430–
30.Vanhanen T (1997) Prospects of democracy: a study of 172 countries. New York: Routledge.
31.O'Loughlin J, Ward MD, Lofdahl CL, Cohen JS, Brown DS, et al. (1998) The Diffusion of Democracy, 1946–1994. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 88: 545–574. Find this article online
Barro RJ (1999) Determinants of Democracy. Journal of Political Economy 107: 158–183. Find this article online
33.Lijphart A (1999) Patterns of democracy: government forms and performance in thirty-six countries. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Brinks D, Coppedge M (2001) Patterns of Diffusion in the Third Wave of Democracy. Annual Meeting of American Political Science Association. San Francisco, CA.
35.Inglehart R, Welzel C (2005) Modernization, cultural change, and democracy: the human development sequence. Cambridge, UK; New York: Cambridge University Press.
Wejnert B (2005) Diffusion, Development, and Democracy, 1800–1999. American Sociological Review 70: 53–81. Find this article online
Epstein DL, Bates R, Goldstone J, Kristensen I, O'Halloran S (2006) Democratic Transitions. American Journal of Political Science 50: 551–569. Find this article online
Gates S, Hegre H, Jones MP, Strand H (2006) Institutional Inconsistency and Political Instability: Polity Duration, 1800–2000. American Journal of Political Science 50: 893–908. Find this article online
Gleditsch KS, Ward MD (2006) Diffusion and the International Context of Democratization. International Organization 60: 911–933. Find this article online
40.Coppedge M, Alvarez A, Maldonado C (2008) Two persistent dimensions of democracy: Contestation and inclusiveness. Journal of Politics 70: 632–647. Find this article online
Ringen S (2010) The Measurement of Democracy: Towards a New Paradigm. Society 48: 12–16. Find this article online
Coppedge M, Gerring J, Altman D, Bernhard M, Fish S, et al. (2011) Conceptualizing and Measuring Democracy: A New Approach. Perspectives on Politics 9: 247–267. Find this article online
Lindenfors P, Jansson F, Sandberg M (2011) The cultural evolution of democracy: saltational changes in a political regime landscape. PLoS ONE 6 (11) e28270 doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0028270.
Barro Robert J (1999) Determinants of Democracy. The Journal of Political Economy 107: 158–183. Find this article online
45.Vanhanen T (2003) Democratization: a comparative analysis of 170 countries. London; New York: Routledge.
Gurr TR (1974) Persistence and Change in Political Systems, 1800–1971. The American Political Science Review 68: 1482–1504. Find this article online
47.Marshall MG, and Jaggers Keith (2002) Political Regime Characteristics and Transitions, 1800–2002: Dataset Users' Manual. Polity IV Project, University of Maryland, College Park, MD.
Marshall MG, Jaggers K (2010) Polity IV Project: Political Regime Characteristics and Transitions 1800–2008. University of Maryland.
49.Eckstein H, Gurr TR (1975) Patterns of authority: a structural basis for political inquiry. London: Wiley-Interscience.
Raychaudhuri S, Stuart JM, Altman RB (2000) Principal component analysis to summarize microarray experiments: application to sporulation time series. Pac Symp Biocomput 455–466. Find this article online
Waddington CH (1957) The strategy of the genes; a discussion of some aspects of theoretical biology. London,: Allen & Unwin.
53.Morris DW, Lundberg P (2011) Pillars of evolution: fundamental principles of the eco-evolutionary process. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.
Dawkins R (1976) The selfish gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dawkins R (1982) The extended phenotype: the gene as the unit of selection. Oxford [Oxfordshire]; San Francisco: Freeman.
56.Åberg M, Sandberg M (2002) Social capital and democratisation: roots of trust in post-Communist Poland and Ukraine. Aldershot: Ashgate
CIVIL SOCIETY: Definitions, Causes, and Functions
Recent years has seen a proliferation of the literature about civil society. One way to look at it is as a revitalization of the concept of civil society. In the long tradition of thoughts since the Enlightenment political philosophers (especially Montesquieu), Hegel, and Tocqueville, this concept has been kept alive for centuries. After World War II, in retrospection of this greatest bloodbath the world has ever known, scholars employed this concept in the investigation into the reasons why some democracies survived the Great Depression while others crumbled and gave way to Fascism. Almond and Verba’s The Civic Culture is one of the major examples in the 1960s. The revitalization of the concept of civil society in the past two decades can be at least partially attributed to the inspiration aroused by the resistance of the autonomous civil societies against the post-totalitarian regimes in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. The dramatic democratic transitions in these areas and in other Third World countries during these two decades, the so-called "third wave", provided new opportunities and challenges to the study of civil society.
In this paper I try to outline this tradition and revitalization of the concept of civil society. Inevitably there are both continuity and change between them. So my approach will be from three parallel perspectives, i.e., the definition, causes, and functions of civil society.
In Section II, I will analyze the dichotomization in the definitions of civil society: one is from the "civic culture" point of view, defined principally in terms of the relationship between the state and the society; the other is from the perspective of voluntary associational life. Regarding the latter mainly as the institutionalization of the former, I will proceed in this paper with special emphasis on the organized social life. Also in Section II, I will address another important question in the definitions of civil society, that is, should we include political organizations and economic organizations in the sphere of civil societies?
In Section III, I will go over the explorations that have been made about the causes of civil society. I can discern from the literature three different accounts of the causal mechanisms that generate civil society: some scholars seem to take civil society as mostly self-generating; others find the causes of civil society in economic development and material improvement; and still others think that the independent interests are the underlying driving force.
In Section IV, I will examine the most complicated and also the most controversial point about civil society: its functions. This section will be divided into three parts, dealing respectively with three of the major fields of controversy about the functions of civil society, i.e., the economic function, the society-stabilizing function, and the democratic function. The third part will also focus on the role of civil society in the "third wave" of global shift toward democracy. Last, Section V concludes with some suggestions for future avenues of research on civil society.
Early European political philosophers mainly defined civil society in the context of the relationship between the state and the society. For Hobbes and even more clearly for Locke, the state originates in, is ultimately answerable to, and is therefore identified with (but not identical to) civil society. For later philosophers, such as Montesquieu and Tocqueville, civil society stands at least partially in opposition to the state. Marxists such as Gramsci identifies civil society with realms outside the power of the state. These definitions of civil society in relational terms are also reflected in recent literatures. Fukuyama defined civil society as the realm of spontaneously created social structures separate from the state that underlie democratic political institutions (Fukuyama 1995:8). To Dunn, "[c]ivil society is broadly regarded as the domain of relationships which falls between the private realm of the family on the one hand and the state on the other"(Dunn 1996:27).
Another way to define civil society is to restrict to the associational life of it. Charles Taylor defined civil society as "a web of autonomous associations independent of the state, which bind citizens together in matters of common concern, and by their existence or actions could have an effect on public policy"(Kligman 1990:420). Schmitter defined civil society as "[a] set or system of self-organized intermediary groups"(Schmitter 1995:1). Similarly, The Concise Oxford dictionary of Politics defined civil society as "the set of intermediate associations which are neither the state nor the (extended) family; civil society therefore includes voluntary associations and firms and other corporate bodies." One of the advantages of this kind of definition is that civil society can thus be operationalized and be empirically tested on.
The latter kind of definitions is closely related with the former one. As Tester sees it, civil society is "the social relationships which involve the voluntary association and participation of individuals acting in their private capacities. In a simple and simplistic formula, civil society can be said to equal the milieu of private contractual relationships"(Tester 1992:8). We can regard the voluntary organizations as the institutionalization of the social relationships as defined by the former scholars. So for the rest of this paper I will use the term "civil society" mainly as the latter kind defines it.
However, even in this restricted form, problems remain. First, should political organizations be included as civil society? Tocqueville certainly did not think so. He offers a narrower specification of "political society", by which he means the activities of the population as it engages actively with matters of government and power. In this approach, political society is distinct from civil society, the private relationships between citizens and their myriad non-political associations(Hann 1996:5). Antonio Gramsci also made this distinction between political society and civil society(Foley and Edwards 1996:38). However, the question whether to include political associations remains mostly unanswered, which will reappear in Section IV, when I go over the functions of civil society.
Second, should we include business organizations in our discussion of civil society? In this respect, Marx follows Adam Smith in identifying civil society primarily with economic interaction through the market(Hann 1996:4), but in recent literature, Cohen and Arato distinguished civil society equally from the market and from the state(Cohen and Arato 1992:5). So the role of market in civil society is still a problem largely unresolved here. I will come back to this later in the next section.
The question, "how is civil society formed?", produces different answers. Some scholars, such as Larry Diamond, think that civil society is "self-generating"(Diamond 1994:4). This seems to scent of Rousseau, who, unlike Hobbes and Locke, addresses explicitly the course of forming civil society. Rousseau treats the formation of civil society as a process that is conscious and deliberate. Enigmatically, he relies upon a "Legislator" as a seemingly essential midwife in the birth of civil society, one who is apart from the people on whose behalf he acts and who remains outside of civil society once it is created(Harbeson et al. 1994:17).
Some later scholars take other approaches. There is a Marxist version that emphasizes the effect of inevitable progress of material improvement on the civic culture(Almond and Verba 1980:8). Nie, Powell, and Prewitt also offered another explanation on the formation of civil society. They found that "economic development alters the social structure of a nation. As nations become more economically developed, three major changes occur: ... (3)the density and complexity of economic and secondary organizations increases"(Nie et al. 1969:808). From their chart as shown below, it is clear that economic development leads to alterations in the stratification, urban, and group membership patterns.
B=Alterations in the Stratification, Urban, and Group Membership Patterns
There is still another kind of explanation about the causes of civil society. As Weigle and Butterfield conclude from their study of the democratic transitions in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, "social groups would form on the basis of independently articulated interests and goals"(Weigle and Butterfield 1992:3).
What can we say about the causes of civil society from the above? It seems to me that we can at least conclude that economic factors really play a role in the formation of civil society. Even if we regard independent interests as a necessary condition for the formation of civil society, this condition will still be largely shaped by the economic development. So in my opinion economic organizations should be included in our analysis of civil society, otherwise we would be missing one of the driving forces in the creation of civil society.
Now we come to the most difficult and most controversial question: what is the function of civil society? Different people see different benefits and harms in the functions of civil society. As Rousseau simply put it, civil society engenders both "the best and the worst ... both our virtues and our vices"(Fine 1997:16).
There are both pessimistic and optimistic stories about the economic functions of civil society. One of the pessimists, Mancur Olson, building on his own logic of collective action, argues that small interest groups have no incentive to work toward the common good of society and every incentive to engage in costly and inefficient "rent-seeking"—lobbying for tax breaks, colluding to restrain competition, and so on(Putnam 1993:176). Rousseau also pointed out that "[m]an are forced to caress and destroy one another at the same time" in civil society(Fine 1997:17). Worse yet, as Olson holds, in the absence of invasion or revolutionary change, the thicket of special interest groups in any society grows ever denser, choking off innovation and dampening economic growth. More and stronger groups mean less growth(Putnam 1993:176). Another pessimist is Callaghy, who fears that the "wild passions" of civil society may undercut sound economic management and economic reform(Harbeson 1994:294).
Other scholars, however, hold that civil society has the function of provoking economic growth. Analyzing Italian regional-level data from the nineteenth century to the 1980s, Putnam found that levels of civic involvement around 1900 predicted subsequent levels of economic development even better than did economic variables. Historically, he argued that norms and networks of civic engagement have fostered economic growth, not inhibited it.
Inglehart tries to reconcile these two diametrically opposed theories about the economic functions of civil society. Analyzing data from 43 societies, he concludes that relatively dense networks of associational membership seem to be conducive to economic growth in the earlier stages of development, as Putnam has argued; but (as Olson has argued) these associations can become hypertrophied and excessively powerful in advanced industrial societies, distorting policy to defend well-organized interests at the expense of overall economic growth(Inglehart 1997:228).
Can civil society stabilize the state? Both Tocqueville and Putnam stress the importance of networks of voluntary associations in support of a culture of trust and cooperation, which were essential to the successful functioning of democratic institutions. However, the answers to the question from other empirical test and theoretical analysis seem to be "not necessarily". In Inglehart’s multiple regression tests, although membership in voluntary associations is strongly correlated with stable democracy, this variable did not show a statistically significant impact when the effects of other variables are controlled for. Schmitter also argues that "[c]ivil society, ... can affect the consolidation and subsequent functioning of democracy in a number of negative ways". Among these he includes: "(5)most dangerously it may prove to be not one but several civil societies -- all occupying the same territory and polity, but organizing interests and passions into communities that are ethnically, linguistically or culturally distinct -- even exclusive" (Whitehead 1997:106). The analysis of the stabilizing functions reveals just the "paradox of civil society" proposed by Foley and Edwards: democracy and a strong state depend on the enforcing effects of its civil society, but such effects depend on the prior achievement of both democracy and a strong state(Foley and Edwards 1996:48).
The democratic functions of civil society seem long recognized. As Almond and Verba conclude from the examination of the survey data from five nations: the organizational member, political or not, compared with the nonmember, is likely to consider himself more competence as a citizen, to be a more active participant in politics. The member, in contrast with the nonmember, appears to approximate more closely what we have called the democratic citizen. He is competent, active, and open with his opinions(Almond and Verba 1963:320). The most striking finding is that any membership—passive membership or membership in a nonpolitical organization—has an impact on political competence, and thus on pluralism, one of the most important foundations of political democracy(Almond and Verba 1963:321).
Nie, Powell and Prewitt also investigate the democratic functions of civil society in terms of its effects on political participation. As shown in the Figure I above, as the density and complexity of economic and secondary organizations increases, greater proportions of the population find themselves in life situations that lead to increased political information, political awareness, sense of personal political efficacy, and other relevant attitudes. These attitude changes, in turn, lead to increases in political participation(Nie, Powell, and Prewitt 1969:808).
Civil society has yet another democratic function, that of facilitating democratic transitions. Montesquieu clearly believed from a theoretical perspective that civil society should function as a counterbalance to governments in order to inhibit their tyrannical tendencies; he also suggested that civil society actually did perform in this capacity (Harbeson 1994:26). This is enforced by the empirical finding by Inglehart that organizational membership does show a statistically significant linkage with changes in levels of democracy from 1990 to 1995(Inglehart 1997:193). Weigle and Butterfield’s case studies of the democratic transitions in the Eastern European countries and in the former Soviet Union also show the important role played by the civil society.
This paper tries to explore the different opinions and perspectives in the definitions, causes, and functions of civil society. Civil society can be defined in both relational and associational terms, with the latter as the institutionalization of the former. So further research can be directed at the relationship between political, economic (market), and the (strictly) civil society. Tocqueville saw specifically political associations as the "great free schools" of democracy and in practice the mother of civil association(Foley and Edwards 1996:44). As regards the causes of civil society, we may try to further specify the causal mechanisms that form civil society. More empirical tests are also needed for the theories about the functions of civil society, such as the relationship between stability, economic growth, political participation and civil society.
Almond, Gabriel A., and Sidney Verba, The Civic Culture: Political Attitudes and Democracy in Five Nations, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1963.
Almond, Gabriel A., and Sidney Verba ed., The Civic Culture Revisited, Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1980.
Cohen, J. L. and Arato, A., Civil Society and Political Theory, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1992.
Diamond, Larry, "Rethinking Civil Society: Toward Democratic Consolidation", Journal of Democracy, Vol. 5, No. 3 (July 1994): 4-17.
Dunn, Elizabeth, Money, morality and modes of civil society among American Mormons, in Hann, Chris, and Elizabeth Dunn ed., Civil Society: Challenging Western Models, London: Routledge, 1996.
Fine, Robert and Shirin Rai ed., Civil Society: Democratic Perspectives, London: Frank Cass & Co. Ltd., 1997
Foley, Michael W. & Bob Edwards, "The Paradox of Civil Society", Journal of Democracy, Vol. 7, No. 3 (July 1996): 38-52.
Francis Fukuyama, "The Primacy of Culture", Journal of Democracy, Vol. 6, No. 1 (January 1995): 7-14.
Hann, Chris, and Elizabeth Dunn ed., Civil Society: Challenging Western Models, London: Routledge, 1996.
Harbeson, John W., Donald Rothchild and Naomi Chazan ed., Civil Society and the State in Africa, Boulder: Lynne Rienner Publishers, Inc., 1994.
Inglehart, Ronald, Modernization and Postmodernization: Cultural, Economic, and Political Change in 43 Societies, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997.
Kligman, G., "Reclaiming the public: a reflection on recreating civil society in Romania", Eastern European Politics and Societies, 1990, 4(3): 393-438.
Nie, Norman H., G. Bingham Powell, Jr., and Kenneth Prewitt, "Social Structure and Political Participation: Developmental Relationships, II", The American Political Science Review, Vol. 63, Issue 3(Sep., 1969), 808-832.
Putnam, Robert D., Making Democracy Work, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993.
Schmitter, Philippe, "On Civil Society and the Consolidation of Democracy: Ten Propositions", mimeograph, Stanford Department Of Political Science, July 1995.
Tester, K., Civil Society, London: Routledge, 1992.
Weigle, Marcia A. and Jim Butterfield, "Civil Society in Reforming Communist Regimes: The Logic of Emergence", Comparative Politics, Vol. 25, No. 1 (October 1992): 1-23.
Whitehead, Laurence, "Bowling in the Bronx: The Uncivil Interstices between Civil and Political Society", in Fine, Robert and
Shirin Rai ed., Civil Society: Democratic Perspectives, London: Frank Cass & Co. Ltd., 1997.
Understanding Culture, Social Organization, and Leadership to Enhance Engagement
How do culture and other factors affect the social organization of a community?
How do culture and other factors affect the leadership of a community?
What are examples of social networks and ethnic organizations that a community builder can use to learn about the social organization of a group and to identify and engage its leaders?
What are some of the common challenges that a community builder might face when working in a diverse community?
In order to work effectively in a culturally and ethnically diverse community, a community builder needs to first understand how each racial and ethnic group in that community is organized in order to support its members. It is not uncommon to hear a community leader, a funder, a political representative, or a service provider say, "We were not able to engage that group over there because they are not organized. They have no leaders. We need to organize them first." This statement is not always accurate; most groups have their own network of relationships and hierarchy of leaders that they tap into for mutual support. These networks or leaders may not be housed in a physical location or building that is obvious to people outside of the group. They may not even have a label or a title. There is an unspoken understanding in some groups about when and whom they should turn to among their members for advice, guidance, and blessing. Once a community builder understands the social organization of the group, it will become easier to identify the most appropriate leaders, help build bridges, and work across multiple groups in a diverse community.
What do we mean by "social organization?" Social organization refers to the network of relationships in a group and how they interconnect. This network of relationships helps members of a group stay connected to one another in order to maintain a sense of community within a group. The social organization of a group is influenced by culture and other factors.
Within the social organization of a group of people, there are leaders. Who are leaders? Leaders are individuals who have followers, a constituency, or simply a group of people whom they can influence. A community builder needs to know who the leaders are in a group in order to get support for his community building work.
In this section, you will learn more about the social organization and leadership of different cultural and ethnic groups. The material covered in this section focuses primarily on African Americans and immigrants for two reasons:
1.Tensions tend to occur among groups that are competing for resources that are already limited and not always accessible to them; and
Most of the struggles facing community builders and other individuals have been with recent immigrants whose culture, institutions, and traditions are still unfamiliar to mainstream groups.
As recent immigrant groups integrate into their new society, their social organization and leadership structures transform to become more similar to those of mainstream groups. This process could take decades and generations; all the more reason why it is important for community builders to understand the social organization and leadership structure of the new arrivals and to build on their values and strengths. While some traditional social structures may prevail, others may adapt to those of the mainstream culture.
Take a moment and think about the most recent group of newcomers to your community.
Who are their leaders? Where do their members go to for help?
Think about the group you belong to. Who are the leaders? Whom do you go to for help? How is your group organized to communicate among its members?
Obviously there are too many groups in this world to include in this section. We will try to share information about as many groups as we can. While the section may not inform you about the social organization and leadership of groups other than the ones described here, we hope it will help you understand enough about the influence of culture on social organization and leadership to ask the right questions of any group.
How do culture and other factors affect the social organization of a community?
There are many definitions of culture. Culture typically refers to a set of symbols, rituals, values, and beliefs that make one group different from another. Culture is learned and shared with people who live or lived in the same social environment for a long time. Culture is captured in many, many ways—in the way members of a group greet and interact with one another, in legends and children's stories, in the way food is prepared and used, in the way people pray, and so on. Since it is difficult and not always appropriate to change someone's culture, how do you then use culture as a positive force to aid community building?
The Chinese community is the largest and the fastest growing group among Asian and Pacific Islander populations.
The Chinese form a very heterogeneous group that includes people from mainland China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore, and other parts of South East Asia. There are many dialects spoken among the Chinese and not all Chinese persons can understand one another's dialects. Therefore, make sure you know which Chinese dialect requires translation if you have to provide translation services.
The Chinese culture places heavy emphasis on taking care of one's family. The Chinese believe that taking care of their families is a contribution to civic welfare, because healthy families lead to a healthy society. This belief is based on Confucian values, which emphasize filial piety, or a respect for family. The concept of filial piety is instilled in Chinese children from a very young age. In other words, familial relationships form the basis for Chinese social organization and behavior.
Chinese parents place a heavy emphasis on their children and their ability to become successful. Confucian values include reaching for perfection, and perfection can be achieved through education. This is why Chinese parents invest a lot of resources in making sure that their children excel academically.
How does this value affect the way Chinese communities are organized and participate in their communities?
In Chinese communities in America and other countries, it is common to find local associations or huiguan formed by members from the same province or village in China and Taiwan. These local associations provide capital to help their members start businesses. They also perform charitable and social functions and provide protection for their members. These associations play a key role in community building efforts, particularly in Chinatowns. They are formed because of the Chinese emphasis on the importance of family; in China, you consider the people from the same province or village as your extended family. Therefore, in order to engage any Chinese community in a community building effort, it will be useful to identify and involve the leaders of these associations. How do you find out about huiguans? Look in the Chinese newspapers (if you don't read Mandarin, ask someone who does); attend Chinese events and find out who sponsored them; walk around Chinatown (if there is one in your community or city) and look at the advertisements posted in grocery stores, restaurants, and shops.
Education also becomes an issue that can be used to mobilize the Chinese community. With the heavy emphasis on academic excellence, it is more likely that you can convince Chinese parents to show up for a meeting about the quality of their children's education than for a meeting about a recreational center for the community. This means that you should look for ways to link education to the issue that you are trying to address in your community building effort.
Recent Chinese immigrants fear very much that their children or the next generation will lose touch with their culture. Hence, they do whatever they can to teach their children how to speak and write Mandarin. This desire has led to the creation of many Chinese schools in areas that have large populations of Chinese immigrants. Sometimes, these schools have their own buildings; at other times, they are conducted on the weekends in a public school. These schools can play a critical role in reaching out to the Chinese community.
A group's history of oppression and survival also affects the way it is organized. The networks and organizations that form to protect the rights of their members influence the way in which members of the group organize for self-help. African slaves, who were "christianized" by their European owners, used spiritual symbolism to preach freedom and to give their people hope and strength. As a result, in the African American culture, religious institutions, primarily Christian (e.g., the African Methodist Episcopal church), have functioned as mutual-aid societies, political forces, and education centers. While Christian churches are predominant among African Americans, the existence and leadership of the Nation of Islam and Muslim leaders in organizing the African American community should also be considered. Today, African American spiritual leaders are among the most influential leaders in African American communities. Therefore, in order to engage any African American community in a community building effort, it will be important to identify and involve that community's spiritual leaders.
How does this value affect the way African American communities are organized and participate in their communities?
In most African American communities, it is common to find one or more churches that are the focal point for social, economic, and political activities. Spirituality, especially Christianity, provides an effective bridge among African Americans, Latinos, and European Americans. The Allied Communities of Tarrant (ACT) in Fort Worth, Texas, is an example of using spirituality to organize a coalition among leaders from these three communities. African American Baptist ministers, European American Lutheran and Disciples of Christ ministers, as well as Latino and European American Catholic priests who were connected to one another through their spiritual interests decided to work across racial lines in order to improve the quality of life for their members. With the help of the Industrial Areas Foundations (IAF), they struggled to identify their commonalties, differences—especially related to race—power, and assets. Eventually, they established ACT and took on the issue of school reform, starting with the African American community. African American church leaders came together to develop initiatives within their own churches to empower and support parents to participate in the effort.
Many Central Americans fled the poverty and oppression in their countries to seek a more secure and better life in a new place. As one person settled in the new location and saved enough money, he or she would help family members to migrate. Because of the informal and extended family networks that are part of the Central American culture, natural support systems develop to assist new arrivals.
Aside from culture, what other factors affect the social organization of Central Americans?
The close proximity of Central America to the United States (compared to other continents) plays a role in the social organization of Central Americans. Regional associations that are typically named after a town, a city, or a region in Central America emerge in the immigrants' new geographic setting to provide support in cultural identification, security, and maintenance of connection with their families and friends who remained behind in Central America. These associations are usually affiliated with religious groups, soccer clubs, political parties, revolutionary movements, or social service organizations in Central America. Because of this form of social organization, the Salvadoran community in the United States has been able to raise a large amount of funds to assist earthquake and hurricane victims in their homeland.
How can you build on these forms of social organization to engage the Central American community?
Soccer is a favorite activity among Central Americans. It is not unusual to see adults and children from Central American countries playing soccer in public parks and school compounds. Central American countries are very proud of their national soccer teams. It's similar to the way football or baseball is valued in the United States, but it is more than just a game for immigrants. Soccer becomes an avenue for meeting other people from the same country or region and forming a social support network. If you are a community builder who is trying to bring various Central American groups together, try using soccer as the common ground!
The Catholic Church is also a key institution that holds members of the Central American communities together. Even in Central America, the church has played a leading role in political advocacy and organizing. In the immigrants' new country, the church continues to play this role, in addition to providing services and social support, and maintaining a line of communication between the immigrants and their families and friends in Central America. Build on the strength and influence of the church to bring credibility to your community building effort and to reach out to Central American communities.
Migration patterns can provide important information about a group of people. Typically, most immigrants come because they already have a relative or a friend that lives in the United States. They move in with the relatives or friends who also help them find their first job. In the Caribbean culture, there is a tradition of helping the new arrivals through rotating credit associations or saving clubs, otherwise known as susus. According to this tradition, a group of people pools their money and then loans it to someone who needs it. The borrower pays back the loan over a period of time and commits to stay in the susu until the payment is complete.
How can you build on these forms of social organization to engage the Caribbean community?
If your community building effort focuses on economic development, then it is important for you to identify the person who manages the susu. You could ask a Caribbean business or a mutual aid society for Caribbean immigrants for the contact person.
What do all these organizations and institutions have in common?
They support the social organization of a community. Depending on the community's culture and the context that the community has to survive in and adapt to, they all serve different functions.
How do culture and other factors affect the leadership of a community?
The information above showed that culture and other factors (social, economic, historical, and political) have an effect on the way a community organizes itself for self-help and support. The same can be said about leadership. There are different levels and types of leaders that support the social organization of a community. Sometimes, we make the mistake of assuming that there is only one leader in a community or that a leader has to look a certain way. Just as we respect and value the cultural diversity of communities, we have to respect and value the diversity of leadership.
What qualities do you think a leader should have?
In every ethnic or cultural group there are different individuals who are regarded as leaders by members of the group. Every leader has a place and a role in his or her community. Leaders can be categorized by type (e.g., political, religious, social), by issue (e.g., health, education, economic development), by rank (e.g., president, vice president), by place (e.g., neighborhood block, county, city, state, country), by age (e.g., elderly, youth), and so on.
Let's use the same communities described before. In Chinese communities, the leader is typically the head of the family. If family refers to a grandfather, father, mother, sons and daughters, and grandchildren, then the leader is the grandfather. If family refers to the congregation of a church, the leader is the pastor. If family refers to a clan, the leader is the President of the clan's association (or hui guan).
In African American communities, the leader is typically a spiritual leader. A leader can also be someone who is successful in overcoming the barriers of institutionalized racism and provide opportunities for other African Americans to be treated equally by others in the mainstream society (e.g., a business person, an educator, or an elected official).
In Central American communities, the leader is also typically a spiritual leader. It can also be the coach of a soccer team or the president of an association that links a city in Central America with one in another country.
What do all these leaders have in common?
They provide guidance, they have influence over others, others respect them, they respond to the needs of others, and they put the welfare of others above their own. Every leader serves a specific function within the social organization of a community; however, the same type of leader in one community does not necessarily have the same role in another community. For example, a spiritual leader in a Chinese community is not regarded as a political leader, as he might be in the African American community.
Groups adapt to their new surroundings. Sometimes, new organizations develop in response to the way business is done in the larger society. For example, recent immigrant groups establish nonprofits because they learned that a particular organizational structure and status is required in order to receive aid. The executive director or president of a nonprofit becomes the most visible and accessible leader. But he or she may not be the only leader for the group. So, don't stop looking after you identify the nonprofits that serve a group. There are likely to be other forms of social organization that support the group.
What did you learn from the above information and examples?
How can you, the community builder, learn about the social organization of other ethnic and cultural groups?
•Go into the process with an open mind.
•Don't assume that the same leader, organization, or institution serves the same function across groups.
•Keep in mind that the social organization and leadership of a group is influenced by its culture, history, reasons for migration, geographic proximity to its homeland, economic success, intra-group tensions, and the way it fits into the political and social context of its new and surrounding society.
•Look for the formal and informal networks.
•Interview members of a group and ask where and whom they go to for help or when they have a problem.
Among different groups, the church has different functions. For example, Korean and Chinese churches do not have strong political functions compared to Latino or African American churches. Korean churches serve their members socially by providing a structure and process for fellowship and sense of belonging, maintenance of ethnic identity and native traditions, social services, and social status. Korean pastors consider their churches as sanctuaries for their members and do not wish to burden them with messages related to political or economic issues. Instead, they focus on providing counseling and educational services to Korean families as well as clerical and lay positions for church members. Korean immigrants hold these positions in high regard.
What are examples of social networks and ethnic organizations that a community builder can use to learn about the social organization of a group, to identify and engage its leaders?
The section before emphasized the importance of learning about the social organization and leadership of various groups in a community so that you can tap into the appropriate resources and assets of each group. You understand that different organizations, institutions, and leaders play different roles in each group. Where do you start? How do you go about getting that knowledge?
Identify natural gathering points and traditions related to social gatherings. Tapping into natural gathering points and traditions related to social gatherings are excellent ways to identify and engage the local leaders and build community relationships. For example, in the Filipino community, tea time is a common practice due to historical European influence. Therefore, "tea meetings" in restaurants are useful for attracting community members to discuss issues and to ask how to involve them in community building efforts. Ethnic grocery stores also play a major role in distributing information to large numbers of people. These stores frequently have bulletin boards where notices are posted about all kinds of activities in that community. In addition, cultural celebrations draw large crowds and provide an effective avenue for outreach. Attend these gatherings. Find out who sponsored and organized them. Talk to the people who attend them. Ask them how they found out about the gatherings. Ask them who you should contact if you wanted more information about the gatherings.
Build on the informal networks of women. One way to engage a racial, ethnic, or cultural group is to tap into the informal networks of women. Go to places where women tend to go, such as the grocery store, the school their children attend, and the hair salon. Ask the parent coordinator at the school if you could speak to some of the mothers. It is likely that you will be able to identify one or more women who are respected by their peers and to whom everyone tells their problems.
Gain entry and credibility through traditional leadership structures. The approach is applicable to any group with a traditional leadership structure serving as a gatekeeper to its members. If you already understand the traditional leadership structure, use it to get support for what you are doing.
Identify and work with the "bridge generation." Young people are the ideal bridge in most communities, especially in immigrant communities, because they are raised in traditional ways but schooled in the ways of the dominant culture. Young people typically accompany their parents to the clinic, school, faith institution, and many other places. Sometimes, they translate for their non-English speaking parents. Therefore, they are likely to know where their parents go for help and who organizes the events in their community.
Ask national organizations that serve and advocate on behalf of different racial, ethnic, and cultural groups for assistance.
Mujeres Unidas y Activas, a women's organization was born when a project that brought together women from various cultures showed that the women experienced similar concerns (e.g., public health issues related to their housing conditions, domestic abuse, concern for their children's education). After the project was completed, the women felt the need to continue to meet informally for mutual support. The network eventually became an organization that is involved in addressing issues that concern women.
You can contact Mujeres Unidas y Activas at (415) 621-8140.
Engaging the traditional leadership structures in some communities may perpetuate class, gender, or other differences. For example, the traditional leadership structure in Middle Eastern communities tends to be patriarchal. By choosing to engage the male leaders as a way to involve the larger community, you may be reinforcing that culture's treatment of women. Community builders must always be aware of the extent to which they might encounter and be required to address cultural traditions that reinforce inequities.
At the same time, you have to be aware that by bypassing or trying to expand the traditional power structure, you may be sacrificing credibility with the community or, at the very least, losing some of the most powerful community leaders. If you think there's a need to change some aspects of the culture in a community that is not your own, it makes much more sense to work through members of that community, rather than challenging the leaders directly. Over time, you may be able to convince them, but you have to approach them in a way that doesn't rob them of dignity or belittle customs that have been taken for granted for generations.
National organizations with special concerns have become powerful forces in linking immigrants to mainstream American institutions. Examples include the American Physicians of Indian Origin, Japanese American Citizens League, National Association of Latino Elected and Appointed Officials Education Fund, Mexican-American Legal Defense Fund, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, and the National Asian Pacific Center on Aging. These organizations play a more extensive role than faith-based institutions, community centers, or cultural programs do in bridging immigrant traditions with mainstream American institutions and values. As a community builder, you might want to engage these organizations if your community building effort is focused on advocacy for a specific issue.
Take advantage of programs that serve large numbers of immigrants. English as a Second or Other Language classes (ESOL) and citizenship workshops often attract large numbers of immigrants, particularly recent newcomers, and provide another way to reach them. Many of these programs are conducted on weekends and evenings. Even though their primary intent is to teach new immigrants how to function biculturally, they can also become social support systems. If you want to talk to or engage large numbers of people, try the ESOL classes and citizenship workshops.
Take advantage of ethnic neighborhoods. In places like Chinatown, Koreatown, and Little India, there are many businesses and organizations that serve the needs of the residents. Go to these neighborhoods, walk through them, and look for community centers, mutual aid organizations, and other businesses that advertise programs or attract larger numbers of people.
How else can you find out more about a community?
•Find an informant from that community and utilize his or her contacts to guide you toward other community members and leaders.
•Spend time at places that are frequented by members of the target group and talk to people there.
•Scan the neighborhood and/or ethnic newspaper for articles about major events and activities in a community and the organizations that sponsor them.
•Contact the editor of the newspaper to ask his/her opinion about who the leaders are in a community.
•Go to the ethnic grocery or convenience stores to review the announcements about events and other activities and the organizations that sponsor them.
•Look in the phone directory or search the Internet for a list of organizations that support a communinty.
Relationship building and trust building are fundamental parts of the work, especially in cultures that may be less familiar to you and/or those that have experienced racism and other forms of oppression. Getting to know people and gaining their trust takes time, patience, and flexibility.
What are the challenges that you should be aware of and how can the challenges be overcome?
•During the relationship building and information gathering process, the informant may have expectations about being invited to be part of your community building effort. The informant may think that he or she is the most appropriate person to engage. The informant may also seize the opportunity to talk about the merits or the weaknesses of another leader in the group.
You must remember NOT to make any promises to the leader about anything until you have had the opportunity to speak to as many individuals as possible and determined the most appropriate leader to involve in the effort. Also, don't get drawn into the discussions about the merits or weaknesses of other leaders. Don't share information about what other leaders might or might not have said already. Just listen.
•There may be misperceptions in the community about which group you represent and who "owns" the community building effort. Such misperceptions would make it very difficult for you to build relationships in the community.
You have to consider several factors before you begin to engage any of the leaders in the community. How were previous community building efforts, if any, initiated in the past? Who initiated them? Was the effort effective? If not, what happened? This knowledge would help you understand the attitudes toward you and the community building you are involved in. You might also want to consider establishing an advisory group made up of leaders from different groups to help announce and plan the effort (See Chapter 29, Section 2 for tips on putting together a diverse advisory group)
•It is impossible for you, the community builder, to know everything about every group and its culture. You may be an outsider to a group.
Don't be afraid to acknowledge your ignorance. Display humility, respect the influence of each leader, and ask to be educated. You might consider starting off the conversation with a statement such as, "I know very little about your culture, but I understand that it is important to learn about it so that the community building effort I'm involved in can build on your cultural strengths and will not make assumptions about your group's needs. I really appreciate the time you are taking to talk to me and I look forward to learning from you."
•When working in a diverse community that is made up of two or more racial, ethnic, or cultural groups, it is unlikely that any one community builder will have all the linguistic skills and cultural knowledge needed to relate to all the groups. At the same time, you, the community builder may be a member of one of the groups. You must be aware of the advantages and disadvantages of working with a group of people that share your culture (e.g., a Chinese community builder working in a Chinese community). You have the advantage of already knowing the culture and the language. A disadvantage is that the informant may expect you to play favoritism because you "owe" your community.
A team made up of community builders from different racial, ethnic, and cultural backgrounds would allow for the ability to relate to a wide range of experiences, to speak multiple languages, and to empathize with the variety of challenges that community leaders face. It would also help to avoid some of the expectations and misperceptions about whom you represent and who would benefit from your effort. Furthermore, working in diverse community building teams set an example for the leaders of a group and across groups.
•There are usually several subgroups within an ethnic or cultural group that compete with each other because of differences in political affiliation, socioeconomic status, ancestry, or regional origins. As a community builder, you have to be careful not to create further tensions.
Maintain a neutral perspective and don't get drawn into discussions about other leaders. Reach out to as many types of leaders as possible. Explain that you are just in the information gathering stage; however, make note of the tensions so that you can be prepared to facilitate any potential conflicts in the future if those leaders happen to participate more extensively in the community building effort (See Chapter 20, Section 6 for tips on conflict resolution).
•The process of building relationships and gathering information may lead to the identification of needs in one or more groups. For example, suppose that local and informal leaders in a given group require assistance in strengthening their leadership, coalition building, or cross-cultural communication skills.
You could identify outside resources and expertise to help them or you could serve as a coach to the local group. This process itself can be a useful community building strategy.
Casinitz, P. (1992). Caribbean New York. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Cordoba, C. (1995). Organizing with Central-American immigrants in the United States. In F.Rivera & J.Erlich (Eds.), Community organizing in a diverse society (pp. 177–196). Needham Heights, MA: Simon & Schuster.
Feagin, J. & Feagin, C. (1999). Racial and ethnic relations. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Simon & Schuster.
Hamilton, N. & Chinchilla, N.S. (2001). Seeking Community In A Global City. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Hofstede, G. (1997). Culture and organizations. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Karpathakis, A. (1999). Home society politics and immigrant political incorporations: The case of Greek immigrants in New York City. International Migration Review, 31 (4), pp. 55–78.
Lee, K. (2002). Lessons learned about civic participation among immigrants (draft). Report to the Community Foundation for the National Capital Region, Washington, DC.
Lee, P. (1995). Organizing in the Chinese-American community: Issues, strategies, and alternatives. In F.Rivera & J.Erlich (Eds.), Community organizing in a diverse society (pp. 113–142). Needham Heights, MA: Simon & Schuster.
Leonard, K. (1997). The South Asian Americans. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Min, P.G. (2000). The structure and social functions of Korean immigrant churches in the United States. In Zhou, M., & Gatewood, J. (eds.). Contemporary Asian American: A Multidisplinary Reader. New York: New York University Press.
Perkins, J. (Ed.) (1995). Restoring at-risk communities. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Books.
Warren, M. (2001). Dry bones ratting. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Definite articles are words that translate to " the". Indefinite articles correlate to the English "a" or "an".
Spanish articles change form to agree with the noun they're modifying in number and gender. Therefore, there is more than one word for "the" and more than one word for "a/an":
The three elements at play here are definite vs. indefinite, masculine vs. feminine, and singular vs. plural.
The difference between definite and indefinite articles is the same as in English: you are either talking about something individual and specific (definite, "the - el/la"), or generally referring to something in a slightly abstract way (indefinite, "a/an - un/una/unos/unas").
Plurality is simple: if you're talking about more than one (or zero, same as in English), you use the plural form:
The four boys gather around where the fire had been, bloody and wounded. Ralph calls a meeting for the boys who remain with them, and Piggy asks Ralph to tell them what could be done. Ralph says that all they need is a fire, and if they had kept the fire burning they might have been rescued already. Ralph, Sam and Eric think that they should go to the Castle Rock with spears, but Piggy refuses to take one. Piggy says that he's going to go find Jack himself. Piggy says that he will appeal to a sense of justice. A tear falls down his cheek as he speaks. Ralph says that they should make themselves look presentable, with clothes, to not look like savages. They set off along the beach, limping. When they approach the Castle Rock, Ralph blows the conch. He approaches the other boys tentatively, and Sam and Eric rush near him, leaving Piggy alone. Jack arrives from hunting, and tells Ralph to leave them alone. Ralph finally calls Jack a thief, and Jack responds by trying to stab Ralph with his spear, which Ralph deflects. They fight each other while Piggy reminds Ralph what they came to do. Ralph stops fighting and says that they have to give back Piggy's glasses and reminds them about the fire. He calls them painted fools, Jack arrogantly dismisses him. Then they take the spears from the twins and Jack orders them to be tied up. Ralph screams at Jack, calling him a beast and a swine and a thief. They fight again, but Piggy asks to speak as the other boys jeer. Piggy asks them whether it is better to be a pack of painted savages or to be sensible like Ralph, to have rules and agree or to hunt and kill. Roger leans his weight on the lever, causing a great rock to crash down and knocks Piggy over a cliff and kills him. Quite suitably, the conch is also destroyed with Piggy, as with the death of reason (Piggy) comes the death of order and civilization (the conch). Jack declares himself chief, and hurls his spear at Ralph, which tears the skin and flesh over his ribs, then shears off and falls into the water. Ralph turns and runs, but Sam and Eric remain. Jack orders them to join the tribe, but when they only wish to be let go he pokes them in the ribs with a spear.
Lilka, a witch in training, is one of the less serious characters in Wild ARMs 2. Aside from a few scenes involving her mother and sister, her character is largely carefree and humorous. What is worth noting, however, is that she is among the first two characters to join Ashley in the group ARMs, and remains in your party for longer than any other character, thus lending perhaps the most support to the group in times of need.
In terms of gameplay, Lilka is essential throughout the first part of the game, as she is the only character that can heal without using items until you acquire Tim. Once you acquire Tim, the only other magic user, however, her usefulness is debated. Many prefer her over Tim for solely personal reasons, however, as Tim is regarded as a weak character in the plot. Tim is also rather slow, and most of Lilka's proponents state her speed (the second-highest in the game) as their main reason for using her over Tim.
Fire Rod - Shoots a ball of fire straight ahead. Only useful for triggering switches.
Ice Rod - Shoots ice straight ahead, extinguishing any form of fire.
Change Rod - Converts healing gems to walkable blocks and vice versa.
Mystic - Enhances power of usable items in inventory. Most of the time this simply makes them multi-target.
Combine - The equipped medium takes form and attacks as a guardian. Only usable when Tim is in the party.
Extend - Makes a magic spell multitarget and increases its power by 150%.
DualCast - Allows the casting of two spells in one turn; some combinations result in a new spell.
Revive - Resurrect ally with minimal HP
Flame - Fire magic on a single target
Aqua - Water magic on a single target
Vortex - Wind magic on a single target
Break - Earth magic on a single target
Freeze - Ice magic on a single target
Spark - Lightning magic on a single target
Reflect - Reflects enemy magic at caster
Dispel - Removes magic effects and stat bonuses from a single character
Hi-Flame - Strong fire magic on a single target
Hi-Aqua - Strong water magic on a single target
Hi-Break - Strong earth magic on a single target
Hi-Spark - Strong lightning magic on a single target
Saber - Non-elemental magic damage on a single target
Field - Decreases elemental damage by 50% for one ally
In this chapter, we will discuss yet another congruence theorem, the Side-Angle-Angle congruence theorem, usually abbreviated as SAA(or AAS - Angle-Angle-Side , commonly used in India)
.(they have the same angle
.(they have the same side
Then the triangles are congruent and their other angles and sides are equal too.
The Oriya script or Utkala Lipi Oriya: ଉତ୍କଳ ଲିପି) or Utkalakshara (Oriya: ଉତ୍କଳାକ୍ଷର) is used to write the Oriya language, and can be used for several other Indian languages, for example, Sanskrit. It has developed from the Brahmi script as most of the other scripts that are used to write South-Asian Languages.
As in other abugida scripts, Oriya consonant letters have an inherent vowel. It is transliterated as ⟨a⟩, phonetic value [ɔ]. Its absence is marked by a halanta (virāma):
(Note: In many Oriya fonts the vowels e, ai, o, au do not display properly; these are given work-arounds in parentheses below.)
Vowel diacritics may be more or less fused with the consonants, though in modern printing such ligatures have become less common.
The most important concept underlying GtkTreeView is that of complete separation between data and how that data is displayed on the screen. This is commonly known as Model/View/Controller-design (MVC). Data of various type (strings, numbers, images, etc.) is stored in a 'model'. The 'view' is then told which data to display, where to display it, and how to display it. One of the advantages of this approach is that you can have multiple views that display the same data (a directory tree for example) in different ways, or in the same way multiple times, with only one copy of the underlying data. This avoids duplication of data and programming effort if the same data is re-used in different contexts. Also, when the data in the model is updated, all views automatically get updated as well.
Cell renderers are packed into tree view columns to display data. A tree view column needs to contain at least one cell renderer, but can contain multiple cell renderers. For example, if one wanted to display a 'Filename' column where each filename has a little icon on the left indicating the file type, one would pack a GtkCellRendererPixbuf and a GtkCellRendererText into one tree view column. Packing renderers into a tree view column is similar to packing widgets into a GtkHBox.
Wu grammar is in many ways simpler than those of European languages and is mostly identical to Mandarin Chinese (with no tenses, plurals, or subject-verb agreement, for example). There are also plenty of pitfalls that will trip up the unsuspecting beginner, such as tones, measure words, and discourse particles, none of which feature as strongly in European languages.
Wu uses the Chinese writing system, and the complexity often daunts newcomers, as Chinese is one of the few systems in the world that does not use an alphabet or a syllabary. Instead, thousands of characters are used, each representing a word or a part of a word. However, most complex Chinese characters are composed of only a few hundred simpler characters and many contain phonetic hints. The Western perception of Chinese writing as having thousands of distinct and idiomatic symbols each representing a word is false. Chinese writing is surprisingly mnemonic, though granted it is not as simple as, say, Spanish writing.
Chinese characters have also been used in the past by other neighbouring Asian countries, and are still being used by some of them today. Some older Koreans still know how to read and write Chinese characters, but although the younger generation are taught Chinese characters or hanja, they are rarely used and unnecessary for literacy in Korean, with the native alphabet, hangul. Chinese characters are occasionally used for abbreviations, to clarify technical vocabulary (as Chinese serves roughly the same role in Korean that Latin serves in English), and to write family and many personal names. The Japanese still preserve many Chinese characters or kanji today and use them along with two syllabaries to write the Japanese language.
Why can't I use Enter to move to the next question?
As the enter key (or return key) is used in essay questions, it can't be used solely for advancing through questions, but the TAB/Enter is a well known and supported keyboard navigation method.
Go To Introduction, Basic Navigation, Quiz Options, About Questions, Sections, Look and Feel, Save and Publish, Extras or Quick Start Tutorial
In microprocessor-based software systems, instructions are performed sequentially. Each instruction is allowed to complete before the following instruction may begin. Even in situations where this is not strictly the case, such as pipelined and superscalar processors, the changes to this pattern are transparent to the programmer and can essentially be ignored.
In programmable logic, however, this is the case. Instructions can neither be expected to occur in a particular timeframe, nor in a particular order. Verilog and VHDL both contain constructs to force certain synchonization, although these constructs may carry with them a performance penalty.
Typically, a hardware design should have a clock signal that all the various modules have access to. Actions that occur in response to the clock signal are known as synchronous, and actions that occur without the clock signal are known as asynchronous. Furthermore, through the use of clock multipliers, different modules in a design can be moving at different speeds. Needless to say, timing and synchronization can be very important problems to solve for a hardware designer.
The coast is defined as the part of the land adjoining or near the ocean.
November 11-23, 2016: An alt NeldonaxKYSXXX vandalises multiple pages and renamed them, most are reverted back by SconesAndTeaMapping and EthanKoenigsberg. The user wants to "end FOE", "Nordemian Civil War Do not Vote Nordemia Now" and so on. He also "demanded a pay for them" as part of vandalism, replacing most content with Sccones and Ethan You must pay $999,999,999,999,999,999,999,999,999
December 6, 2016: SercatMapper starts a new tournament for ON nations, called MITF (Mapperdonian International Tennis Federation) and nations start to join.
December 7-31, 2016: CJets is Here was blocked by staff for making a certain blog post. A user from Althistory wiki came to TFOE's chat claiming that TFOE users were invading their wiki, and were told to stop. CJets is Here made multiple alts to try to get around this block, but he was blocked on his alts too. He finally left after that.
December 18, 2016: KingOfCentrium starts vandalizing the North American Economic Alliance, changing the title to "North American Economic Alliance and Anti Neldonax Union for boycott", and added this page to the categories "Justise for Wiki for no more Neldonax" and "Anti Neldonax". These edits were reverted by user CJets Aviation and CorrosiveDragon.
December 31, 2016: The Map game, Mappers in the Wild XXIX , was officially declared to be finished on this day after 100 days. It was declared the third successful map game ever to finish on the wiki.
The Sequential Model of the hemoglobin explains the cooperativity involved in the binding of oxygen. This model follows the concept that after binding occurs at one site in the active site, the binding affinity in the other sites around the protein will increase as well. Hence, the plot of substrate concentration versus reaction rate is of a sigmoidal shape. Because of this cooperativity, it does not follow Michaelis-Menten Kinetics. The difference between this model and concerted model is that the T states do not have to convert to R states. In this model, the ligand will change the conformation of the subunit that it is bound to and induce changes in the neighboring subunits. The Sequential model does not require the states to be in an "either T or R" ultimatum. Simply, each binding site influences nearby binding sites until all of the binding sites are in the same state. Neither the sequential model or the concerted model fully explains the nature of hemoglobin. Properties from both models appear in a real system.
This function returns true if c is a character that has a glyph associated with it. Whitespace characters are not considered graphic.
Pineapple is a game similar to Texas Hold'em but the players receive 3 cards instead of 2 and must discard one of those cards before the flop is dealt. Otherwise the gameplay is the same as in Texas Hold'em.
This statement sends a line of text to the printer. The @(col,row) and %(h,v) options specify where on the page the line should be printed (see the PRINT statement); if you don't specify one of these, the line is printed at the current pen position of the printing grafPort (this is usually just under the previously-printed line).
LPRINT is inefficient if you are printing many lines to a page, because it reroutes the output each time LPRINT is executed. In such cases, it's better to execute a sequence of PRINT statements, with the entire sequence preceded by a single ROUTE _toPrinter statement and followed by a single ROUTE _toScreen statement.
When you use the "FB Lite" runtime, the text-position parameters [@(col,row)|%(h,v)] are ignored.
You should execute CLEAR LPRINT or CLOSE LPRINT in order to cause the printed page to be put out, after you have finished printing to it.
Educational Milestones of the 17th and 18th Centuries
a) Identify the two major institutions founded by Benjamin Franklin and Frederick Froebel that are still in use today.
b) Be able to name the major methods or practices invented by Sir Francis Bacon, René Descartes and Thomas Jefferson.
c) Be able to identify early education practices and their purposes. I.e. Hands on or object centered learning and learning through play.
d) Name the common theory held by many 17th and 18th century philosophers and apply it to teaching in today's classroom.
3 17th and 18th Century Influences on Modern Early Education
Education Today: Lets See How Far We've Come
The first concept of a teacher instructing a body of students and spreading the "love of learning" or philosophy was introduced by the great thinkers of Ancient Greece and Rome who taught and explored subject areas ranging from art, nature and science to "rhetoric" the ability to sway audiences much like today's modern public speaking classes. (Spielvogel, 2009) From then on, as this early idea of learning through instruction spread, pedagogy or the study of learning became one of the most speculated on and debated subject areas among mankind and remains to be so today.
For the purpose of this text, we will examine some of the ideas and philosophies that were developed by the great thinkers of the 17th and 18th centuries in particular, that continue to be practiced by the instructors of today.
Like their predecessors in Ancient Greece and Rome, the learned men of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries liked to assess the world around them, questioning their existence, methodologies and practices (Spielvogel, 2009) . At times, these men debated their ideas with their colleagues and other times they wrote pieces based on their findings that occasionally would gain popularity and would eventually make these men famous. Some of the more famous of these men included Sir Francis Bacon, Rene Descartes, a man named John Locke and the American founding fathers Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson.
The first name mentioned, Sir Francis Bacon, belongs to the man who was long known as the father of modern science and was the founder of the still widely used today Scientific Method (Review:scientific, 1975). Born in 1561, Bacon theorized that scientific experimentation should be experienced first hand, and that any such experimentation should be done for a practical purpose, or end in sight (Review:scientific, 1975). Students today still actively participate in experiments in the classroom and in labs in schools worldwide. They also still use Bacon's Scientific Method to record their observations and findings during these firsthand experiences with science.
Another great mind of that era was René Descartes(1596-1650), is best known for creating a systematic form of what is known as analytic geometry, sometimes now referred to as Cartesian geometry (Descartes, Rene, 2009). He also invented the way that equations are plotted on graphs, and made considerable contributions to algebra and its use of lower case letters in variable equations (Descartes,Rene, 2009). The mathematician's theory on learning and philosophy drifted considerably from the romantic notions of limitless possibilities and causes of things in nature and of man into a more logical way of looking at the world around him (Descartes, Rene, 2009). He is famously quoted as saying "I think; therefore I am," meaning that because he was of sound mind and the thought had occurred to him that he must, therefore exist. In short Descartes thought it was a waste of time to dwell on that which could not be proven by fact (Descartes, Rene, 2009).
In 1632, another scientific theorist, and close friend and colleague of famous physicist Sir Isaac Newton, John Locke was born (Axtell, 1965). John Locke is ironically most famous for an essay written to a student of his that is speculated to have been a collaborative effort between himself and Mr. Newton (Axtell, 1965). The genius of what was written was the reason for why it was written in the first place (Axtell, 1965). Locke wanted to write an essay on the current scientific findings of the day in such a way as to be easily understood and learned by the student (Axtell, 1965). He wanted the this essay to be an aid of understanding scientific method and research rather than a study of the broad spectrum of scientific phenomena (Axtell, 1965). His desire for easily understood material for his pupil, lends itself to one of the commonly sought after goals in the world of teaching today for learning to be student centered rather than authoritarian and teacher based (Axtell, 1965).
Perhaps a man after Locke's own heart, Benjamin Franklin lived between the years 1706 and 1790 (Korty, 1965). Among several of his more famous quotes, Franklin once said on writing that it should better it's reader in some sense either intellectually or morally and above all things, a good piece of writing should be, "smooth, clear and short (Korty, 1965)." He was also a big proponent of student based learning and believed that pupils retained knowledge best when they were involved in the lesson in some way (Korty, 1965). His desire for widespread education of the masses also led him to become the developer of the first library (Korty, 1965). The Library Company of Philadelphia began in 1731, and was the first institution of its kind that lent books, which were very expensive at the time, to the public in exchange for promissory notes as collateral (Korty, 1965). Arguably, the library could be considered one of the most provincial additions to the educational system in history (Korty, 1965).
Thomas Jefferson (1743-1826) who, like Benjamin Franklin, is also one of the great founding fathers of the great nation, the United States of America, shared and expounded upon many of the aforementioned pioneers in education's beliefs and ideologies greatly (Honeywell,Jefferson,1969). A core belief he held in common with Franklin was his great desire for a citizen base in America that was well educated (a philosophy that also began in the republic of Ancient Greece)(Spielvogel, 2009). Jefferson, one might speculate, was probably thrilled by Francklin's library because it was his belief that "no person of legal age [at the time it was 15] should enjoy the privileges of citizenry unless they were able to read in some language (Honeywell, Jefferson, 1969)." The father of the University of Virginia, contributed greatly to our modern educational system through the idea of creating districts for schools and making them accessible for free by the nation's children (Honeywell, Jefferson, 1969). At the time, this free education would last for the first three years of one's schooling, after that Jefferson, established that "poor but promising students" could compete for free tuition (Honeywell, Jefferson, 1969). Thus Jefferson, really created the idea of scholarship that continues to give less affluent students today an opportunity to afford an education that they might not otherwise be able to through the merits of their academic performance.
17th and 18th Century Influences on Modern Early Education
While the philosophers of Ancient Greece shared with those of the seventeenth and eighteenth century, the vision of a well educated and able bodied citizenry, it wasn't until the latter period that early education had really become a major focus area and source of debate.
Johann Pestalozzi (1746-1827), the developer of the idea of intellectual property, or the idea that ones the products of ones thoughts, words, and actions belong to their originator, was arguably one of the most influential persons in the history of early childhood education (Classics of science, 1929). He was responsible for the spread of ideas like teacher education and lesson plans (Pestalozzi,Johann, 2005). Pestalozzi believed that education began in the home and that child play had the ability to be incredibly influential in ones learning (Classics of science, 1929). He encouraged learning from objects and believed that teaching could occur in almost any situations or occurrence in ones early experiences (Classics of science, 1929). In a letter to a friend, Pestalozzi wrote, "...Let the child not only be acted upon, but let him be an agent in intellectual education (Classics of science, 1929)."File:A summer day in december 039.jpg Jacob age 3 and Amaya age 7 are the age groups that were taught in the first kindergarten. They are engaged in the type of free play that would have been encouraged by Pestalozzi and Froebel (Taken from the Wiki Community Portal, 2009)
Ten years after the death of Johann Pestalozzi, Frederick Froebel established the first Kindergarten in Blackenburg, Germany in 1837 (Kindergarten, 2005). This school taught children age three to age seven by game play, story reading and singing songs (Kindergarten, 2005). It served as a transition from the home to the school environment, Froebel believed like, Pestalozzi that a great deal could be learned from play and encouraged the children to interact and take part in games freely (Kindergarten, 2005).
The first person credited with creating the first illustrated children's text is Jan Komensky, also known as Comenius, a name affectionatley given to him by his colleagues (Comenius, John Amos, 2009). Comenius also believed that learning should not focus on words but on the things or objects around the student (Review:[untitled], 1970). Another major contribution made not just to early education but to learning as a whole was the learning of languages through "parallel passages", that is taking a sentence from ones native language and corresponding it with the same sentence of the targeted language (Review:[untitled], 1970).
Finally, eighteenth century education philosopher Jean Jacques was born in 1712 and lived until 1778 (Rousseau, 2009). His major contribution to early education in particular was the idea of psychologically based childcare (Rousseau, 2009). His theory that expression rather than the repression of children's thoughts produced more liberal thinking and "well-balanced" children, an idea that was adopted both by Froebel and Pestolozzi (Rousseau, 2009).
Students actively participating in a modern day elementary school classroom (Taken from the Wiki Community Portal).
Although many important contributions were made during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries such as the library, and the establishment of the kindergarten, a unifying theme and theory of education was notably unique to the philosophers of this period. Although the Greeks and Romans both undoubtedly influenced this era with the idea of pedagogy or the study of learning, Locke,Bacon,Froebel,Pestalozzi,Komensky, and Rousseau, all shared the revelation that education should be experienced first hand. Every time a student dissects a frog and records their observations about it, or a child observes the similarity between a bouncing ball and an orange, they do so via the influence of these men. When teachers are trained to put the student at the center of the lesson rather than simply regurgitate the thoughts and writings of others that have gone before them, they do so because of these men.
As future educators it is your job to take these philosophies and put them to practice. Make them valid in your classroom and with the technologies available to you. Make the student your priority, and remember another famous statement by Benjamin Franklin:
"Tell me and I forget.
Teach me and I remember.
Involve me and I learn."
Go now and become a philosopher of education in your era, and perhaps the students of tomorrow will be writing contributions to pedagogy in the Wiki texts of the future!
Axtell, J. L. (1965). Locke, Newton, and "the elements of natural philosophy". Paedagogica Europaea, 1, Retrieved February 5, 2009, from http://www.jstor.org/stable/1502458
(1929). Classics of science: Pestalozzi on education.. The Science News-Letter, 15, Retrieved February 5, 2009, from http://www.jstor.org/stable/3905366
(2009). Comenius, John Amos. Retrieved February 8, 2009, from Discovery Education Web site: http://discoveryeducation.com/
(2009). Descartes, Rene.. Retrieved February 8, 2009, from Discovery Education Web site: http://discoveryeducation.com/
Honeywell, R. J., & Jefferson, T. (1969). A note on the educational work of Thomas Jefferson. History of Education Quaterly, 9, Retrieved February 8, 2009, from http://www.jstor.org/stable/367130.
(2005). John Locke, philosopher and political theorist.. Retrieved February 8, 2009, from Discovery Education Web site: http://discoveryeducation.com/
(2005). Kindergarten.. Retrieved February 8, 2009, from Discovery Education Web site: http://discoveryeducation.com/
Korty, M. B. (1965). Benjamin Franklin and eighteenth-century American libraries. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, New Series, 55, Retrieved February 5, 2009, from http://www.jstor.org/stable/1006049
(2005). Pestalozzi, Johann Heinrich.. Retrieved February 8, 2009, from Discovery Education Web site: http://discoveryeducation.com/
(1970). Review:[untitled] reviewed work(s): Comenius:versucheines umrisses von leben;werk und schicksal des Jan Amos Kemensky by Milada Blekastad.. The Slavic and East European Journal, 14, Retrieved February 5, 2009, from http://www.jstor.org/stable/305746
(2009). Rousseau, Jean Jacques.. Retrieved February 8, 2009, from Discovery Education Web site: http://discoveryeducation.com/
Schmitt, C. B. (1975). Review: scientific knowledge in the seventeenth century.. History of Education Quarterly, 15, Retrieved February 5, 2009, from http://www.jstor.org/stable/368032
Spielvogel, J. J. (2009). Western civilization.. Belmont, C,A,: Thomson Higher Education.
(2005). Thomas Jefferson, Washington's secretary of state. Retrieved February 8, 2009, from Discovery Education Web site: http://discoveryeducation.com/
In 1731, Benjamin Franklin established what institution that allows the public to freely borrow books and have free access to the internet and other resources
b) the forum.
c) the shopping mall.
d) Barnes and Noble.
When a student, usually in science class, does an experiment and records the details of that experiment along with his/her predictions and findings what longstanding method should they use and who created it?
a) Software Developement Process, ISO
b) Method Acting, Stanislovsky
c) The Scientific Method, Sir Francis Bacon
d) Discourse on Methodology, Descartes
René Descartes developed Cartesian geometry and how we plot these on graphs...
A student performing well in high school should apply for one of these, if he gets one he could possibly get a free ride to college, and if he does he has Thomas Jefferson to thank for the invention.
You are teaching a class of very young students, you might have them do this to learn the similarities and differences between shapes. Pestalozzi would recommend it.
a) Set out an assortment of blocks and balls and ask the students questions about what they see and feel.
b) Set out an assortment of blocks and balls and explain the differences between the shapes.
c) Set out an assortment of blocks and balls and have the children throw them at each other.
Pestalozzi believed that a good teacher could create a lesson from any experience. The children in your class are playing with a pretend kitchen set. What type of lesson could be taught in this situation?
a) Ask the children to describe what steps they might take to bake a cake.
b) Ask the children to make a list of the different action words that take place in a kitchen after their play.
c) Have the children demonstrate how to work together in a group by asking each group member to "make" a different part of the
Locke, Bacon, Froebel, Pestalozzi, Komensky and Rousseau all believed in this basic principle.
a) Learning is best done through experience and allowing the student to participate in his/her education.
c) Learning is done best when the instructor dictates passages from a famous author.
d) Learning is best done when students memorize scientific facts or phenomena.
Rate This!
RNA splicing takes place after RNA is transcribed from DNA, but before RNA is translated into mRNA. Splicing takes out the interfering sequences (introns) from the expressed gene sequence (exons).
Small Nuclear RiboNucleoprotein Particles (snRNPs) are the secondary molecules made of small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) and specific proteins. snRNP molecules make up the larger splicosome molecules. U1 snRNP recognizes the binding site on the 5’ end and the six-nucleotide sequence of the U1 snRNA binds to the splice site on the pre-mRNA. From this, the spliceosome will assemble along the pre-mRNA molecule. The U2 snRNP will bind to the branch site on the intron with its complementary sequence between the U2 snRNA sequence and the pre-mRNA. The U4, U5, and U6 snRNPS then bind with the U1 and U2 complexes and form the necessary spliceosome.
The splicing process itself begins with the U5 interaction with the exon sequence on the 5’ splice site. The U6 goes through intramoleculear reorganization after breaking from U4, which allows U2 to base pair and interact with the 5’ end of the intron, taking U1 out of the spliceosome. The U2-U6 complex forms a helix that forms the center of the spliceosome itself. U4 prevents U6 from splicing until the splice sites are correctly aligned. Once alignment has occurred, the transesterification reaction cuts the 5’ exon at the phosphodiester bond and produces a lariat intermediate. Splicing continues with rearrangements with the spliceosome that will then produce the next transesterification reaction on the pre-mRNA. In the rearrangement, the U5 aligns with the 5’ exon so that it is easier to attack the 3’ splice site to produce another spliced product. To finish the splicing process, the U2, U5, and U6 release itself from the lariat intron.
Turkmenistan was a region of the former Soviet Union and became an independent country in 1991. Post independence meter stamps with old Soviet Union markings (“CCCP”, hammer and sickle logo) are known used, but franks with Soviet inscriptions removed or inscribed with the new country name have not yet been reported. It is probable that such stamps do exist.
Rectum bleeding is usually checked and treated by digestion tract doctor, colon doctor or GP.
Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them
An extremely shy creature that emerges from its burrow only at the full moon, the Mooncalf has a smooth, pale grey body, bulbous eyes on the top of its head, four spindly legs, and large, flat feet.
Beginner warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
When they emerge from their burrows, mooncalves engage in complicated geometric dances, which are believed to be in some way related to mating. The patterns these dances leave in fields have mystified Muggle farmers and fueled many interstellar conspiracy theories.
If collected before sunrise, the silvery dung of the Mooncalf provides an extremely good fertilizer for magical herb and flower gardens.
The term "mooncalf" actually appears in Muggle literature, typically used to refer to a lovestruck youth, always mooning after the object of his affections. Muggle mooncalves are not known either for their dancing ability or the quality of their droppings, though they often seem to trip over their own feet, as if they were overlarge, and can appear almost painfully shy, particularly if the one they are following happens to look at them.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
While mooncalves never directly appear in the principal seven books, we suspect there might be a passing reference made to "mooncalf dung" by Professor Sprout at some point in the series.
The traditional (MIME) base64 encoding and decoding processes are fairly simple to implement. Here an example using JavaScript is given, including the MIME/etc required line breaks at particular line lengths. It is worth noting however, that many base64 functions (e.g. in PHP) return base64 encoded strings without the line breaks, as the line breaks can be inserted easily after encoding, and many times the base64 encoding is desired only for safely transferring data via XML or inserting into a database, etc. — times when the line breaks are known to be unnecessary and therefore undesirable. The newline inserting and removing in these functions here can easily be commented out (they are each only one line in the respective functions) if they are not needed.
An array of the base 64 characters is necessary for encoding, such as:
And decoding will require the inverse list (swap the indices for the values), such as:
Note that in real implementations, it is better to explicitly list the entire array/hash for each list above — the one-liners here are given to demonstrate the concept as directly as possible, rather than being the ideal in practice.
r += base64chars[n[0]] + base64chars[n[1]] + base64chars[n[2]] + base64chars[n[3]];
An alternate implementation could use Java Streams. For example, one could create a Base64EncoderStream, inheriting from FilterOutputStream.
Base64 module documentation show the shortest way to encode a string:
Ruby version, implemented as a tool that encodes the file specified on the command line:
BASE64_CHARS = 'ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZabcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz0123456789+/'
File.open(ARGV[0], 'rb') do |file| # read file name passed on command line
c = 0 # count outputted characters
C version of the base64 encoding function:
They are defined by default in Windows.h
b64c <- "ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZabcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz0123456789+/"
The above implementation is best with a language like JavaScript that handles string concatenation of arbitrary length strings very efficiently. Other languages (e.g. C) will work much more efficiently by allocating memory for a new string/array of the appropriate size (the output string length is easily calculated from the input string at the very beginning) and then simply setting each character index, as opposed to concatenation.
An alternate implementation could use Java Streams. For example, one could create a Base64DecoderStream, inheriting from FilterInputStream.
Counterpart C decoder for the encoder above. This code is also public domain.
This solution has been optimized using pointer math and a look-up table. This algorithm handles multiple encoding formats:
*outLen = len; /* modify to reflect the actual output size */
Counterpart C++ decoder for the encoder above. This code is also public domain.
While a more general solution is possible by using a table similar to that in encoding, and then finding the index of the character we want in that table, and while that solution is much simpler, this version with the if-else-if ladder is faster because it does not need to run as many character comparisons to find the right character to use. The alphabet specific parts of this code are pretty much the same across most base64 alphabets however.
Items that need changed to accommodate the base64url encoding are commented as such.
They are defined by default in Windows.h
b64c <- "ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZabcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz0123456789+/"
The viscosity of a fluid (gas or liquid) is a measurement of the resistance said fluid has to its deformation by stress. For a liquid, this is a relatively easy concept to understand. Water, for example, has a lower viscosity than maple syrup. The concept is slightly less tangible when considering a gas. The system we will analyze in order to better understand the viscosity of a gas is two parallel plates where the gas is contained between them.
The top plate is considered to be moving with constant velocity. That is,
When a gas is filling the gap between the two plates, the gas molecules exert a force of drag on the motion of the upper plate. This Shear Stress is the previously mentioned force of drag per unit area between the two parallel planes. This relationship is shown by the following formula:
As previously mentioned, the viscosity coefficient is a specific constant for the gas being examined. The Kinetic Theory of Gases must be considered in order to derive the equation for the viscosity coefficient. It is assumed from this theory that:
The particles are hard spheres which implies that elastic collisions occur when particles are within the radius of another molecule.
The distributions of these velocities follow the Maxwell Distribution of molecular speeds.
From these requirements determined by the Kinetic Theory of Gases, the simple version of the viscosity coefficient can be derived.
The only difference between these two determinations of the viscosity coefficient is the numerical factor. The ratio of these two equations is determined here:
When looking at the formula for the viscosity coefficient, it is clear that the viscosity if a gas is not dependent on very many factors. The viscosity coefficient only depends on the mass of the molecule,
, the collision cross section,
, and the Temperature of the gas. Since the viscosity coefficient of a gas is proportional to the viscosity of the gas, the impacts of these values are outlined below:
The viscosity of the gas increases as the mass of the molecule increases.
The viscosity of the gas decreases as the collisional cross section of the molecule increases.
The viscosity of the gas increases as the temperature of the molecule increases.
These general trends are the most important take away of the viscosity coefficient.
We will now look at some examples of the viscosity coefficients of some molecules and determine how the trends outlined above apply. The first example we will look at is the viscosity coefficients of N2 and CO2 at 273.15 K. The value of
Another example of the phenomenon outlined above is the viscosity coefficients of helium and argon. The viscosity coefficients of these molecules are 29.7 and 21.0
Pa s. Helium is much lighter than argon but it has a much larger viscosity coefficient due to its much smaller collision cross section.
One example which shows a greater dependence on the mass than the collision cross section is shown when examining the viscosity coefficients of argon and krypton. The viscosity coefficients of these molecules at 273.15 K are 21.0 and 23.3
Pa s, respectively. This is because the collision cross sections of the two atoms are relatively close so the masses begin to have a larger impact. The mass of krypton is almost double of that of argon so this drastic difference in mass combined with the relatively close collision cross sections makes it so that the viscosity of krypton is larger than the viscosity of argon.
↑ McQuarrie, D. A., Statistical Mechanics, University Science Books, 2000, QC 174.8 M3
1.1 GROUP A: Stamps issued after Slovakia declared independence from Czechoslovakia in 1939
1.2.1 Sub-group BA: Provisional issue with altered die, “CZECHO” removed from “CZECHOSLOVAKIA”
1.2.2 Sub-group BB: General issues since independence in 1993, stamps with complete outer frames
The first meters exclusive to Slovakia came into use in 1939 when the Slovak area of Czechoslovakia declared itself independent. After World War 2 and the reformation of Czechoslovakia, separate stamps for Slovakia were discontinued.
In 1993 when Czechoslovakia voluntarily reformed as two independent states (Slovakia and the Czech Republic) Slovak stamps again came into use.
All stamps show “SLOVENSKO” in the frank.
For issues between 1945 and 1993, see CZECHOSLOVAKIA.The stamps are grouped according to political conditions at time of introduction:A - Independence between 1939 and 1945
B - Stamps introduced since independence in 1993NOTE: A few machines with unchanged Czechoslovak inscription were used for a short period after the re-birth of Slovakia in 1993.
GROUP A: Stamps issued after Slovakia declared independence from Czechoslovakia in 1939The franks have diagonal indents at sides and semi-circular projections at top and bottom.
Horizontal frank with diagonal indents at sides and semi-circular projections at top and bottom.
Approximately 60 mm between centers of date and value figures.
With S# raised or centered between TM and frank.
Date figures without stops.
As Type A1 but wider spacing, about 77 mm between centers of date and value figures.
TM: SC, 24 or 26 mm in diameter
GROUP B: Stamps issued since independence in 1993All franks have simulated-perforation outer border, straight-line inner border and country name in panel at top.
Sub-group BA: Provisional issue with altered die, “CZECHO” removed from “CZECHOSLOVAKIA”
Upright frank with simulated-perforation outer border touching straight line inner border.
Panel at top contains “[space]SLOVENSKO”.
Value figures thin and narrow.
Sub-group BB: General issues since independence in 1993, stamps with complete outer framesFor most of these stamps types the country inscription "SLOVENSKO" can vary in size and shape of letters.
BB1. Postalia “D2”/”D3” (MV).
As Type BA1 but top panel contains “SLOVENSKO” centered horizontally.
Value figures thin and narrow.
Spacing between centers of date and value figures approximately 31/32 mm.
A. “SLOVENSKO” closer to bottom of panel
a. Value figures with stop misplaced at top: 00.00
Value figures larger than Type A1.
Date with stops after D and between M and Y.
A. "SLOVENSKO" closer to bottom of top panel, frank empty below value figures
B. As A, but frank with post horn-envelope logo at bottom
C. "SLOVENSKO" slightly larger and centered in top panel, frank with small post horn-envelope logo at bottom
D. As C, but frank with large post horn-envelope logo at bottom
BB3. Frama “M/E bzw 100” (MV).
Value figures large and thick.
Wide date with stops after D and M.
A. Frank empty below value figures
B. Frank with large post horn-envelope logo at bottom
C. Frank with small post horn-envelope logo at bottom
BB4. Pitney Bowes-GB “A900” (MV).
Horizontal frank, much wider than tall.
A. Frank empty below value figures
B. Frank with post horn-envelope logo at bottom
BB5. Pitney Bowes-GB “6600” (MV).
Square frank without post horn-envelope logo similar to Type BB1B.
Frank height 30 mm.
Value figures more widely spaced than with Type BB1.
Frank square or slightly upright similar to Type BB5 but smaller frank and with slightly smaller value figures.
Frank height 27 mm.
The right-most value figure is a fixed zero.
A. Frank empty below value figures
B. Frank with post horn-envelope logo at bottom
BB7. Francotyp-Postalia "EFS3000/NEF300” (MV).
Square frank with narrow value figures similar to BB1 but spacing between the centers of the date and value figures is wider, approximately 38-39 mm.
A. Frank empty below value figures
B. Frank with post horn-envelope logo at bottom
BB8. Francotyp-Postalia "T-1000” (digital).
Upright frank with narrow value figures similar to BB1 except digitally printed.
Spacing between the centers of the date and value figures is narrow, approximately 29-30 mm.
A. Frank empty below value figures
B. Frank with post horn-envelope logo at bottom
BB9. Francotyp "Cc" or "Ccm” (MV).
A pre-independence stamp with "SLOVENSKO" replacing "CESKOSLOVENSKO".
Horizontal frank with thick border and wide spacing between TM and frank.
Nearly square frank with spacing between the centers of the date and value figures approximately 40 mm.
Frank size 25 mm wide by 26.5 mm tall.
Wide spacing between month and year figures in the date.
A. Frank empty below value figures
B. Frank with large post horn-envelope logo at bottom
a. As B but with small post horn-envelope logo
Small square frank 24 mm wide with value figures closer to the bottom than the middle.
Sub-group BC: Digital stamps without outer frames
Horizontal 2D barcode at lower left.
"Slovakia" reading up and post horn & envelope logo at upper right above the value figures.
Identification number without prefix reads up right of the logo.
Date at bottom right.
Value figures including the Euro sign, 16 mm wide.
Identification number starts with 79.
Very similar to Type BC1 but value figures including the Euro sign, 17.5 mm wide.
Identification number starts with 75.
Value figures 17 mm wide.
BC3. Pitney Bowes "DM1000" (digital).
As Types BC1 and BC2 but value figures including the Euro sign, 19 mm wide.
Value figures are quite thick.
The letters in the town line and the numbers in the date are narrow.
A. Identification number starts with 81
B. Identification number starts with 84
Value figures 18 mm wide.
BC4. Pitney Bowes "DM300C" (digital).
As Types BC1-3 but value figures including the Euro sign, 20 mm wide.
Identification number starts with 81.
Similar to previous BC types but with a small space added between the Euro sign and the value figures.
Identification number starts with 88.
Value figures 17 mm wide as with BC2.
On BC2 the data above the bar code field extends to the right of the field by about 3 mm. With BC5 the data extends only a half millimeter to the right.
One Belt One Road, is a development strategy and framework. It is proposed by the People's Republic of China. It is mainly focused on economic connection and cooperation between the countries of Eurasia. It consists of two main parts, the "Silk Road Economic Belt" (SREB) on the land, and the "Maritime Silk Road" (MSR) on the sea.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Large size, covered in white hair
Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets
The yeti, commonly known as Bigfoot or the Abominable Snowman, is a troll-like carnivore completely covered in pure white hair. Native to Tibet, yetis fear fire.
Beginner warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
In Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, Year with the Yeti is one of the several supposed autobiographies of Gilderoy Lockhart that are assigned to Harry's Defence Against the Dark Arts class. Harry is selected by Lockhart to play a "yeti with a head-cold" in a dramatisation of one such story.
Whilst being largely regarded as a myth by the scientific community, the yeti remains a common feature of fiction and one of the most famous creatures of cryptozoology. True to this, it is mentioned in Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them that an International Task Force is based in the Himalayan mountains so as to prevent reporting of Muggle sightings of the yeti, which are apparently numerous.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Verene makes a claim for philosophy being about argument as long as the argument exists within a wider range of rhetorical elements, notably metaphor and narrative. He asserts that such forms of speech “are not part of argument’ arguments are part of them” (144), drawing on Grassi’s discussion of rational language as dependent on semantic language (Grassi 21) to ground his view of rhetorical speech as the “beginning point of reasoning” (142). The article assesses Grassi’s assertion that “rhetoric is a necessary moment in argument” (142), acknowledging that this places rhetoric within the realm of philosophical argument. Verene expands on Grassi’s claims by adding observations about philosophical systems which he feels are both compatible with the discussion of argument as well as useful in revealing additional roles for argument within these systems (142). These views incorporate what Verene refers to as “senses of speech” and recognizes that his view sees “philosophical reasoning as essentially meditation” in that philosophy is attempting the consider a problem “through a question to an answer” (143).
In this brief article, Verene begins his argument by mentioning the work of Johnstone, Passmore, Toulmin, Perelman and Meyer as he asserts his claim that philosophy is steeped in rhetorical speech and that logic/dialectic and rhetoric are forever connected as forms of thought. He questions the purpose and form of philosophy as well as how much argument factors into the truths of philosophy, among other things. He notes the work of humanist Ernesto Grassi who suggests that all speech comprised of argument and claims and that relies upon deduction “depends upon another form of speech that is non-rationalistic, non-argumentative, and non-deductive,” or the archai (142). The starting points of reasoning are not provided by the form of deduction, and because of this, Verene notes, Grassi believes that argument requires the use of rhetoric; in this equation, rhetoric allow reasoning to begin and is required for philosophical argument to begin. Verene also carefully notes the relationship between argument and narration as he discusses Vico and Grassi’s idea of fable in brief; in this metaphor, the archai is a narrative-based, as it “exists in the way the metaphor begins the speech of the argument” (143). He concludes by summarizing the connection between argument and narration and asserts that argument is a part of narrative, among other forms of speech.
Representation of methane burning to produce carbon dioxide and water.
Carrying out the reaction following standard procedure
m, the mass of the sample which changes temperature.
The heat capacity measures how much energy is required to change the temperature of 1 g of the substance by 1 oC.
This will give the energy released during the reaction i.e. kJ. To calculate the molar enthalpy change, kJ mol−1, we have to divide by the number of moles used in the reaction.
Consider the enthalpy change which accompanies the reaction occurring when a particular bond is broken in a molecule: e.g. in the methane molecule there are four carbon - hydrogen bonds and each could be broken in turn. The energy required at each stage is different since the C-H bond is in a different molecular species i.e. a different atomic environment.
Since bond enthalpy is defined as the enthalpy required to break a bond, all values will be positive.
Now the C-H bond enthalpy will be slightly different in particular molecules e.g. methane, ethane, benzene, ethanol etc. However these differences are not significantly large and we are able to use bond energy terms to make useful predictions.
The average bond enthalpy is the average of the bond enthalpies as measured for the particular bond in a wide variety of “representative” molecules. It is also known as the bond energy term. (See table below).
Table of average bond enthalpies at 298 K
To estimate the reaction enthalpy from bond enthalpies:
i)	Add the energy required to break all the bonds in the reactants. This is an endothermic process.
Summing the two processes: 1368-1858 = -490 kJ mol−1
The bond enthalpies for the formation of HI are as follows:
Bonds broken: 436 + 151 = 587 kJ mol−1
Bonds formed: -2 x 299 = 598 kJ mol−1
The overall reaction has an enthalpy change of –11 kJ mol−1, according to this calculation. This compares well with the experimental value of +26.5 kJ mol−1 (value has to be multiplied by 2 because 2 moles HI are formed in the reaction). In the experimental value the sublimation energy is also included: I2(g) -> I2(v) -63 kJmol−1. Taken this into account will show only minor differences between the calculation and the experimental values. But errors of a few tens of kJ mol−1 are expected because the bond enthalpies are average values.
A bond consists of two molecules e.g. carbon or hydrogen and the overall reaction has an enthalpy change of 11.
(i) Using the average bond enthalpy values, calculate a value for the enthalpy change of the following reaction.	[5]
CH3OH + HBr → CH3Br + H2O
(ii) The value for this reaction was experimentally determined. It was found to be significantly different from the value you have calculated in (i). By significantly different we mean that the difference is greater than the experimental errors (precision / tolerance). Suggest two different possible reasons for this. [2]
(iii) Which would you say is the correct value – that calculated in (i) or that given in (ii)?	[1]
For the combustion of propane, C3H8:
(i)	Describe the changes in bonding that take place during this reaction.	[4]
(ii)	Write a balanced equation for this reaction and calculate the enthalpy change using the bond enthalpies below.	[6]
Combustion reactions have been used as a source of heat and light throughout human history. Fire has also been used in warfare, to clear forested areas, in metallurgy and as a source of smoke. Since the Industrial Revolution, combustion reactions have also been used to power machinery and vehicles. Electricity is generated by combustion of fuels such as gas, oil and coal. [1]
In the blast furnace reaction, combustion creates carbon monoxide as well as heat. CO is the reducing agent which converts iron ore to iron. [2]
Animation of a four-stroke petrol engine. 1. Intake 2. Compression 3. Ignition/Expansion 4. Exhaust
Annual carbon dioxide emission broken down into various fuel types during 1800-2004 AD. Shows the increasing rate at which fossil fuels are being consumed.
What determines the type of bond formed between two elements? There are two ways of classifying elements to determine the bond formed: by electronegativity, or by metallic/non-metallic character.
Electronegativity is a relative measure of how strongly an atom will attract the electrons in a bond. Although bonds are the result of atoms sharing their electrons, the electrons can be shared unequally. The more electronegative atom in a bond will have a slight negative charge, and the less electronegative atom will have a slight positive charge. Overall, the molecule may have no charge, but the individual atoms will. This is a result of the electronegativity—by attracting the electrons in a bond, an atom gains a slight negative charge. Of course, if two elements have equal electronegativity, they will share the electrons equally.
Linus Pauling created a commonly-used measure of electronegativity.
Metallic elements have low electronegativity, and non-metallic elements have high electronegativity. If two elements are close to each other on the periodic table, they will have similar electronegativities.
Electronegativity is measured on a variety of scales, the most common being the Pauling scale. Created by chemist Linus Pauling, it assigns 4.0 to fluorine (the highest) and 0.7 to francium (the lowest).
When drawing diagrams of bonds, we indicate covalent bonds with a line. We may write the electronegativity using the symbols
. Look at this example.
The plus goes over the less electronegative atom. From the above diagram, we can see that the fluorine attracts the electrons in the covalent bond more than the hydrogen does. Fluorine will have a slight negative charge because of this, and hydrogen will have a slight positive charge. Overall, hydrogen fluoride is neutral.
Betty Corrigal's grave. A sad tale of an unmarried pregnant girl who committed suicide and was forbidden to be buried in consecrated ground. She was interred in an unmarked grave on a lonely moor. Long afterwards a retired customs officer erected a memorial to her at his own expense. 18 June 1995.
Detail of the wall painting showing the suicide of Judas. St. Nicetas Church. Banjani, Macedonia. XIV c.
Greek verbs are simultaneously incredibly complicated and remarkably simple, as many verbs follow common ending patterns, or inflections, but there are vast number of these endings. Unlike English verbs, which normally have at most five forms (sing, sang, sung, singing, sings), a single Greek verb can have hundreds of forms. However, by breaking Greek verbs down into their respective components, each verb can quickly and easily be identified. This means every verb can give out a lot of useful information about the rest of the sentence. For instance, the English verb form are singing could take a variety of subjects (you are singing, you all are singing, we are singing, they are singing), but a Greek verb includes the subject within its ending.
A verb in Greek has any of 6 principal parts. A principal part is a form of a verb that cannot be derived from another form—that is to say, they are principal, fundamental to the verb. Tenses are formed by adding inflectional affixes to an appropriate stem, given by a principal part. The 6 principal parts are:
Present and imperfect, active and middle
Future, active and middle
Aorist, active and middle
Perfect and pluperfect, active
Perfect and pluperfect, middle
Future and aorist, passive
The most important marker on a verb (and usually the easiest to spot) is its personal ending. A finite verb will alter its ending depending upon its subject's person (first, second, or third person) and number (singular or plural). This is similar to the way verbs are formed in English: for example, if you take almost any verb in the present tense in the third person singular (the he/she/it form) will add an -s to the end: I work, but she works. Here is how the present of a simple verb conjugates, or changes its personal ending:
A simple mnemonic (with a twist) for the plural is "Men eat sushi".
Verbs also change according to their time frame. Since most narrative occurs in the past, these verb forms are critical to know. There is a slightly different set of endings used by verbs in the past, and, in Classical Greek, the past time frame is denoted by adding a past temporal augment, commonly as an ἐ-, to the beginning of the verb.
The future tense takes the same endings as the present tense. However, it is different from a present verb by the addition a sigma to the present stem, then adding the present endings as normal:
Like most languages, Ancient Greek has irregular verbs, which cannot be conjugated on the basis of principal parts alone. There are a number of irregular verbs that appear often in Ancient Greek texts, and they must be known along with the regular verbs. Here follows the present tense of the verb to be:
As you can see, like Ancient Greek, even the English forms of to be are far from predictable!
Not quite as powerful as Weapon 5, but it will still get you through the tougher levels if you have enough skill. However, because it does not spread much, sometimes it is better to use Weapon 3.
GROUP G – Wide rectangular design with faux-perforation outer border and large sitting eagle in center
Click here to return to the United States Postage Meter Stamp Catalog
Circular town mark at left, value figures in tombstone shaped box at right, all within greater border.
Two sub-groups exist. Sub-group GA stamps were printed by the "JD" and "JDC" models which were versions of the "J" and "JC" meters (see Group F) modified to allow the town mark dies to be easily toggled on or out from the stamp. Earliest known use of a GA stamp is April 4, 1936.
Sub-group GB stamps were experimental designs produced by trials of what would become the "RS" mailing machine and the "RT" meter. The "R" series was similar to the "J" series but much faster. (After these trials the "R" series machines were used for the long-lived Group I stamps introduced in 1940.) Earliest known use of a GB stamp is July 13, 1938.
Sub-group GA – Eagle faces right
Three stars above eagle's head.
"U.S. POSTAGE" curved above "PAID" inside tombstone shaped value box at right.
Meter number appears at bottom center below "P.B.METER".
Meter numbers: 91000-93999 and 95000-98000. (Meters in the 94000 series were used in Canada except for machines 94500, 94501 and 94502 which were used in the Philippines.
GA1. Models "JD" and "JDC" (multi-value), April 4, 1936.
a. With "REGISTERED / MAIL" slug at left
GA2. Models "JD" and "JDC" (multi-value).
As GA1 but with different value figures.
a. With "PERMIT (number)" at left
c. With "P— (number)" at base of town mark
d. With hour slug in vertical lines at left
e. As d but hour slug removed leaving only the vertical lines: 91463, 92735, 96259
f. With "REGISTERED / NO" at left (See also Type FB2.1.)
g. With "REGISTERED / MAIL" at left
h. With "INSURED" at left: 92745
j. With "INSURED No." at left: 93923
k. With town name and state inverted, date upright: 93374, 95502
l. Without meter number and with "U.S." of "U.S. POSTAGE" missing: "TWIN FALLS / IDAHO" (This is possibly a contrivance engineered unofficially by a Pitney Bowes shop employee.)
m. With small ornaments in the town mark
n. With "SPECIAL DELIVERY" at left
-1. "AD'L ⅛¢ PD." at left: 93030 [RRRR]
-2. "AD'L ¼¢ PD." at left: 93030, 95911, 96644 [RR]
-3. "AD'L ⅜¢ PD." at left: 92981 [RRRR]
-4. "AD'L 0.8¢ PD." at left: 96509 [RRRR]
-5. "Additional Postage at Third Class Rate Paid for Enclosures (town name) Permit No. (number)" at left: 95171, 96586 [R]
Sub-group GB – Eagle faces left
Stamp designs used in trials of experimental high speed multi-value "RS" mailing machine and "RT" meter.
Meter numbers: X1003-X1005, 100000, 100003, 100006-7, 100011-13.
GB1.1. Model "RT" (multi-value), July 13, 1938.
Similar to Sub-group GA stamps but the tombstone value box is taller with "U.S.POSTAGE" fitted into the arc at top and with "PAID" at bottom. Frank 51 mm wide.
The town mark is closer to the top of the frank rather than the bottom.
Three stars above eagle's head.
A. Meter X1003 used by Prentice Hall of New York [RR as tape or piece, RRRR on cover]
B. Meter X1004 used by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York with hour slug at left [R as tape or piece, RRR on cover]
C. Meter X1004 used by Pitney Bowes in Stamford CT [RRRR]
Used for nine months between July 1938 and February 1939.
GB1.2. Model "RT" (multi-value). [RR as tape or piece, RRRR on cover]
As Type GB1.1 but the town mark is closer to the bottom of the frank rather than the top.
"P.B.METER" is much smaller.
Meter X-1005 used by Yale & Towne of Stamford CT for nine months between July 1938 and February 1939. Both the Yale & Towne building and the meter were destroyed in a fire.
GB2.1. Model "RT" (multi-value), January 11, 1939.
At 50 mm the frank is slightly narrower than Types GB1.1 and GB1.2.
No stars above the eagle's head.
"P.B.METER" and meter number is in an elongated oval below the eagle.
A. Meter 100000 used by the American Chicle Company in Long Island City NY [RR]
B. Meter 100003 used by five different firms in three cities [R]
C. Meter 100006 used by several companies in New York [R]
D. Meter 100011 used by the Bank of the Manhattan Company in New York [RRRR]
All these machines were used for one year from January 1939 to January 1940.
V/F oval with serifs: .00: (range: .00½ to 9.99½)
Proofs from meter 100007 exist, but no postally used examples are known. [RR]
Meter 100000 is known with town mark STAMFORD CONN. with November 22, 1938 date. It is assumed to be a pre-test proof.
Two of the five companies that used meter 100003 are the Mathieson Alkali Works of New York and the Loose-Wiles Biscuit Company of Long Island City NY.
At least five different companies are known to have used meter 100006. They are Peter A. Frasse & Co., Columbia Broadcasting System, The Bank of the Manhattan Co., International Illustrated News, and The Hills Brothers Co.
Stamps of this appearance but with meter numbers in the 51000 series are from self-service "Mailomat" machines. See Group PV for these stamps.
GB2.2. Model "RT" (multi-value), October 10, 1939.
Very similar to Type GB2.1 but the Value Figures are smaller and sanserif.
A. Meter 100012 used by The Mathieson Alkali Works in New York [R]
B. Meter 100013 used by the Schick Shaver Co. of Stamford CT [R]
a. With hour slug slug at left: 100012 [RR]
NOTE: Stamps of this appearance but with meter numbers in the 51000 series are from self-service "Mailomat" machines. See Group PV for these stamps.
This is one way to decline the King's Gambit. This can arise from many different positions, but this transposition to the King's Gambit Declined is most common. This is somewhat sounder than the King's Gambit Declined, Classical Variation, as in the Classical Variation, white can chase the bishop out of c5 and put more pressure on e5, especially with Nf3. Here, on the other hand, if white plays 3. Nf3?!, then black plays 3...exf4! transposing to the King's Gambit Accepted, Fischer Defense. This is similarly true with with 3. Nc3!?, but in this case, white gets a lot more compensation for the pawn compared to 3. Nf3. In fact, the best move here is 3. d3!, defending the pawn on f4 and blocking all transpositions to the King's Gambit Accepted. However, white had to make a concession for this: block his light-squared bishop. Nevertheless, 3.d3 leads to equality with best play. Note: If white plays 3. Bc4 (to not block the bishop), 3...exf4! also works.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
1.e4 e5 2.f4 d6
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at King's Gambit Declined
Nunn's Chess Openings. 1999. John Nunn (Editor), Graham Burgess, John Emms, Joe Gallagher. ISBN 1-8574-4221-0.
Modern Chess Openings: MCO-14. 1999. Nick de Firmian, Walter Korn. ISBN 0-8129-3084-3.
Batsford Chess Openings 2 (1989, 1994). Garry Kasparov, Raymond Keene. ISBN 0-8050-3409-9.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon · Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
Open Xcode located in "/Developer/Applications/"
Choose "New Project" from the file menu
Choose "Command Line Tool" under the Application template for Mac OS X
Choose type "C++"
Enter your desired project name and directory and click create
Repeat for "GLUT.framework"
When #including OpenGL & GLUT header files (but not the regular ones like iostream) within Xcode, make sure to do so like this:
Video is the constant stream of visual information. When a video is recorded, it is broken down into separate frames. Frames are projected at a rate of about 30 frames per second to keep the video looking continuous. Video data is often compacted. “Lifestreaming” is becoming a larger part of today’s society. Creating an online record of daily activities and submitting them on the Internet is a way for people to broadcast themselves.
Video player is that software applications used in computer system of entertainment purpose. Some of the popular ones are Realplayer, Windows media player. Video players can review movies, download movies from internet, DVD or CD burner, play music and ect. Video players let users feel more entertained while using a computer.
This is an all purpose media player that plays audio and video files. Media Players are software programs for playing multimedia files, audio or video on your computer developed by Microsoft. Windows has various types of free downloadable devices you can choose from. You can create your own library of playlists by purchasing music through ITunes and transferring them to a cd. I like purchasing the music because you just buy the songs you really like. These playlists allow you to burn cd’s or watch dvd’s. You can also stream music on your computer (listening) while working on files or documents. I found that out this year when I wanted to listen to music but didn’t have a small radio or cd player. This is a nice feature and I don’t normally use media players. My husband has burned cd’s for our car cd player using this. But you have to be careful because of copyright laws, do not do this to sell music.
QuickTime is an Apple technology for handling video, sound, animation, graphics, text, and music. It is compatible with MAC and Windows users. QuickTime can also be described as a file format, an environment for media authoring and a suite of applications which include but are limited to the following:
QuickTime Player – is a free download from the Apple website which can be used for basic audio and video files. A number of features are disabled that would be present in the Pro version.
QuickTime Pro – is an upgrade to the QuickTime Player and can be purchased and can be used for flexible multimedia authoring. It also includes full-screen playback, editing clips through the cut, copy and paste functions, merging separate audio and video tracks and the options of cropping and rotation.
RSA is an asymmetric algorithm for public key cryptography, widely used in electronic commerce. The algorithm was described in 1977 by Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir and Len Adleman; the letters RSA are the initials of their surnames.
Clifford Cocks, a British mathematician working for GCHQ, described an equivalent system in an internal document in 1973. His discovery, however, was not revealed until 1997 due to its top-secret classification.
The security of the RSA system relies on the difficulty of factoring very large integers. New fast algorithms in this field could render RSA insecure, but this is generally considered unlikely.
The algorithm was patented by MIT in 1983 in the United States of America. The patent expired 21 September 2000. Since the algorithm had been published prior to the patent application, it could not be patented in other countries.
Suppose a user Alice wishes to allow Bob to send her a private message over an insecure transmission medium. She takes the following steps to generate a public key and a private key:
Choose two large prime numbers p ≠ q randomly and independently of each other. Compute N = p q.
Destroy all records of p and q.
(Steps 2 and 3 can be performed with the extended Euclidean algorithm; see modular arithmetic. Additionally, solving for either e or d may be performed using the diophantine equation
N and e are the public key, and N and d are the private key. Note that only d is a secret as N is known to the public. Alice transmits the public key to Bob, and keeps the private key secret.
You can generate and examine a real RSA keypair using OpenSSL and some Unix utilities.
( Cryptography/Generate a keypair using OpenSSL ).
Suppose Bob wishes to send a message m to Alice. He knows N and e, which Alice has announced. He turns m into a number n < N, using some previously agreed-upon reversible protocol. For example, each character in a plaintext message could be converted to its ASCII code, and the codes concatenated into a single number. If necessary, he can break m into pieces and encrypt each piece separately. He then computes the ciphertext c:
This can be done quickly using the method of exponentiation by squaring. Bob then transmits c to Alice.
Alice receives c from Bob, and knows her private key d. She can recover n from c by the following procedure:
Alice can then extract n, since n < N. Given n, she can recover the original message m.
RSA can also be used to sign a message. Suppose Alice wishes to send a signed message to Bob. She produces a hash value of the message, encrypts it with her secret key, and attaches it as a "signature" to the message. This signature can only be decrypted with her public key. When Bob receives the signed message, he decrypts the signature with Alice's public key, and compares the resulting hash value with the message's actual hash value. If the two agree, he knows that the author of the message was in possession of Alice's secret key, and that the message has not been tampered with since.
Suppose Eve, an eavesdropper, intercepts the public key N and e, and the ciphertext c. However, she is unable to directly obtain d, which Alice keeps secret. The most obvious way for Eve to deduce n from c is to factor N into p and q, in order to compute (p-1)(q-1) which allows the determination of d from e. No polynomial-time method for factoring large integers on a classical computer has yet been found, but it has not been proven that none exists. See integer factorization for a discussion of this problem.
It has not been proven that factoring N is the only way of deducing n from c, but no easier method has been discovered (at least to public knowledge.)
If N is 256 bits or shorter, it can be factored in a few hours on a personal computer, using software already freely available. If N is 512 bits or shorter, it can be factored by several hundred computers as of 1999. It is currently recommended that N be at least 1024 bits long.
In 1993, Peter Shor showed that a quantum computer could in principle perform the factorization in polynomial time. If (or when) quantum computers become a practical technology, Shor's algorithm will make RSA and related algorithms obsolete.
Should an efficient classical factorization code be discovered or a practical quantum computer constructed, using still larger key lengths would provide a stopgap measure. However, any such security break in RSA would obviously be retroactive. An eavesdropper who had recorded a public key and any ciphertext produced with it (easily found by just recording traffic to that public key's owner), could simply wait until such a breakthrough. And then decipher that ciphertext into the plaintext message. Therefore, it is inherently unsafe to exchange long-term secrets with RSA or any cipher with similar vulnerabilities.
Finding the large primes p and q is usually done by testing random numbers of the right size with probabilistic primality tests which quickly eliminate most non-primes. If such a test finds a "probable prime", a deterministic test should then be used to verify that the number is indeed prime.
p and q should not be 'too close', lest the Fermat factorization for N be successful. Furthermore, if either p-1 or q-1 has only small prime factors, N can be factored quickly and these values of p or q should therefore be discarded as well.
One should not employ a prime search method which gives any information whatsoever about the primes to the attacker. In particular, a good random number generator for the start value needs to be employed. Note that the requirement here is both 'random' and 'unpredictable'. These are not the same criteria; a number may have been chosen by a random process (i.e., no pattern in the results), but if it is predictable in any manner (or even partially predicatable), the method used will result in loss of security. For example, the random number table published by the Rand Corp in the 1950s might very well be truly random, but it has been published and thus can serve an attacker as well. If the attacker can guess half of the digits of p or q, they can quickly compute the other half (shown by Coppersmith in 1997).
It is important that the secret key d be large enough. Wiener showed in 1990 that if p is between q and 2q (which is quite typical) and d < N1/4/3, then d can be computed efficiently from N and e.
The encryption key e = 2 should also not be used.
RSA is much slower than DES and other symmetric cryptosystems. In practice, Bob typically encrypts a secret message with a symmetric algorithm, encrypts the (comparatively short) symmetric key with RSA, and transmits both the RSA-encrypted symmetric key and the symmetrically-encypted message to Alice.
This procedure raises additional security issues. For instance, it is of utmost importance to use a strong random number generator for the symmetric key, because otherwise Eve could bypass RSA by guessing the symmetric key.
As with all ciphers, it is important how RSA public keys are distributed. Key distribution must be secured against a man-in-the-middle attack. Suppose Eve has some way to give Bob arbitrary keys and make him believe they belong to Alice. Suppose further that Eve can intercept transmissions between Alice and Bob. Eve sends Bob her own public key, which Bob believes to be Alice's. Eve can then intercept any ciphertext sent by Bob, decrypt it with her own secret key, keep a copy of the message, encrypt the message with Alice's public key, and send the new ciphertext to Alice. In principle, neither Alice nor Bob would be able to detect Eve's presence. Defenses against such attacks are often based on digital certificates or other components of a public key infrastructure.
Kocher described an ingenious unexpected new attack on RSA in 1995: if the attacker Eve knows the hardware of Alice and is able to measure the decryption times for several known cyphertexts, she can deduce the decryption key d quickly. To thwart this attack, the decryption code should decrypt in constant time. This is known as RSA blinding.
In 1998, Daniel Bleichenbacher described the first practical adaptive chosen ciphertext attack, against RSA-encrypted messages using the PKCS #1 v1 redundancy function (a redundancy function adds structure to an RSA-encrypted message, so it is possible to determine whether a decrypted message is valid.) Due to flaws with the PKCS #1 scheme, Bleichenbacher was able to mount a practical attack against RSA implementations of the Secure Socket Layer protocol, and potentially reveal session keys. As a result of this work, cryptographers now recommend the use of provably secure redundancy checks such as Optimal Asymmetric Encryption Padding, and RSA Laboratories has released new versions of PKCS #1 that are not vulnerable to these attacks.
Ninety-nine Problems, Solved in Elm
Elm is an easy to use pure functional programming language. These exercises give you a path to learn and practice functional idioms. The techniques demonstrated in this book apply to any functional programming language.
This book makes it easy to jump into programming, no installs required. You can code and test your solutions on https://ellie-app.com/new. Every problem has a unit test and a full program to test your solution. Many problems have multiple solutions, demonstrating different approaches to solving a problem.
Who isn’t this book for?
Elm is an easy to use web development language. The problems posed in this book do not cover web specific topics. If you are comfortable with functional programming and are looking to learn how to use Elm to develop web apps and web pages, then this book is NOT for you. Try instead Evan Czaplicki’s Introduction to Elm. However there are two problems that use the Elm Architecture to handle randomness (Problem 23) and time (Problem 38).
If you’re new to functional programming, start with the Learning Track. This will introduce you to the basic techniques of functional programming in a progression to help you learn through practice. If you just want to jump into the problems, start at Problems by Category.
These problems are adaptations for Elm from Ninety-Nine Haskell Problems, which are adaptations of Ninety-Nine Prolog Problems developed by Werner Hett. The title is more figurative than literal. There weren’t 99 problems in the original Prolog collection. A few of the original Prolog problems don’t apply to Elm. The numbering of the problems is consistent with the other collections to ease comparisons. Other adaptations include Lisp, Scala, OCaml, Python and R.
You can compile and execute the examples online at https://ellie-app.com/new.
The Learning Track presents the problems in an order designed to learn functional programming building from the most basic idioms to more complex. These problems let you practice your skills before moving on to the next concept. Each step of the Learning Track presents a new technique and problems that you can solve with that technique.
The problems are numbered to match the original 99 Problems in Prolog.
Maglev is a system of train transportation that uses two sets of magnets, one set to repel and push the train up off the track, and another set to move the elevated train ahead, taking advantage of the lack of friction.
Step 2. Creating a Model Animation
Now we will draw the model animation since the logical structure of the model is generated from the animation you draw. To simplify drawing, we will add the model layout first. You can draw the department layout using AnyLogic presentation shapes, or you can import any picture as the layout. The drawing approach is good for prototyping, when you want to experiment with draft layouts. The image approach is excellent for working with an existing layout.
First, open the Presentation stencil of the Palette view. This stencil contains shapes and controls you can add on your presentation. To open some stencil of the Palette view, just click on the corresponding tab of the view.
Drag the Image element from the Presentation palette into the graphical editor (right in the place shown in the figure below).
Now we will draw the model animation. Drawing an animation, we define the transportation network, where rectangles represent network nodes and polylines — network links.
We will draw a rectangle for each department room and connect rectangles with polylines playing the role of moving paths in our model.
Draw rectangles representing department rooms. Ophthalmology department has the following functional areas: waiting room, three procedure rooms, storage room for ophthalmoscopes and private office space for medical staff.
To draw a rectangle, drag the Rectangle element from the Presentation page of the Palette view into the graphical editor.
Resize rectangles by dragging to fit into the corresponding areas of the layout as shown in the figure below. To simplify drawing, switch binding to grid off by clicking the Enable/Disable Grid toolbar button.
To make moving in our model more sophisticated, we will also add some additional rectangles to represent intermediate moving destinations. Draw four additional rectangles standing for intermediate network nodes and place them as shown in the figure:
Now we will define network segments by drawing polylines. In network-based model polylines represent moving paths.
Using the Polyline drawing tool, draw polylines as shown in the following figure:
To draw a polyline, drag the Polyline element from the Presentation page of the Palette view into the graphical editor. Then double-click the drawn polyline to switch to editing points mode. In this mode you can add new points by double-clicking on the polyline and move points by dragging them.
Note that all end points of polylines should necessarily lie inside the connected rectangles.
The logical structure of the network will be constructed from the presentation shapes added to the group we will specify as the Group of the network shapes. So now we should create a group and add all just drawn shapes to it.
Drag the Group element from the Presentation palette into the graphical editor.
Name the group networkGroup.
The selected shapes will be highlighted in blue (see the figure below). If some shape has not been selected, you can press Ctrl and while holding it, click this shape with the left mouse button. The shape will be added to the selection.
When finished selecting shapes, right-click the selection (you should click exactly on the outline of some selected shape), and then choose Grouping|Add to existing group from the popup menu.
Finally, click on the networkGroup.
Draw a polyline connecting rectangles representing the procedure rooms. We will use it later on.Place polyline points exactly inside the procRoom1, procRoom2 and procRoom3 rectangles.
Name it roomsLocation and set custom line color.
International Financial Reporting Standards. A set of international accounting standards. Contrast with GAAP.
This will be our final obby tutorial, we are going to move on to lighting and effects next. One basic hinge is a seesaw. To build it, first we need to make two supporters for the seesaw. Make sure that the supporters have anchored true and CanCollide false so that the player don't just pass the level by jumping on the supporter. Now, make the part that the player have to balance on so they're not dumped into empty space. Make sure that the balancing part is NOT anchored. Go to models and select surface select hinge inside surface. Put hinges on the supporters and name them Hinge0 or something(If I'm wrong then I will say the correct name in discussion). And put hinges on the opposite sides of the seesaw and rename them Hinge1. Test your game and the seesaw should not fall into empty space(If it did I apologize for that and I will say the correct way in discussion). You can also make doors with this strategy too. The other kind of hinge we are going to talk about is spinning blocks. (I think it is like this, if not, same thing, discussion)First, you make one supporter for the spinning block. Put the block that is going to spin on top of the supporter. Connect them using hinges again and change the hinge type to motor. Test your game and the block should spin! You can also use spinning lava too. Now it is time for jump boost. First, insert a new part, go to properties, expand velocity, change y velocity to something no bigger than 200. Test your game and your character should be able to jump very high!
Use: Use the double fisherman's knot to tie together two ropes of unequal sizes. This knot and the triple fisherman's knot are the variations used most often in rock climbing, but other uses include search and rescue.
Read XML data by using the XmlReader.
MSDN - Reading XML with the XmlReader
Read all XML element and attribute content.
Read specific element and attribute content.
Read XML data by using the XmlTextReader class.
Read node trees by using the XmlNodeReader.
Validate XML data by using the XmlValidatingReader.
Write XML data by using the XmlWriter.
MSDN - Writing XML with the XmlWriter
Service Station - What's new in System.Xml 2.0?
Contextualizing Open Content —
Emergence of the Open Content Paradigm —
Open Content and the New Knowledge Paradigm —
About the Author —
In response to the excesses of copyright system, there has been a need for strong alternatives. The FOSS movement was perhaps one of the first to articulate such an alternative in a formal manner. While phrases such as "Free Software" and "copyleft" conjure up an image of alternatives to copyright, it is relevant to note that FOSS is not a model that abandons copyright. In fact, quite the opposite, it relies on copyright law, but users it creatively to articulate a positive, rather than a negative rights discourse. What does a positive rights framework mean?[ 50 ] As we have seen, copyright has traditionally been an exclusive right that is granted to the owner of copyright to exploit his / her work.
Copyright is usually thought of as a bundle of rights that are available to the owner, and these are:
Reproduction rights: the right to reproduce copies of the work (for example, making copies of a book from a manuscript).
Adaptation rights: the right to produce derivative works based on the copyrighted work (for example, creating a film based on a book).
Distribution rights: the right to distribute copies of the work (for example, circulating the book in bookshops).
Performance rights: the right to perform the copyrighted work publicly, (for example, having a reading of the book or a dramatic performance of a play).
Display rights: the right to display the copyrighted work publicly (for example, showing a film or work of art).
Another important dimension is that there are no procedural requirements for obtaining copyright; it vests automatically with the creator the moment the work has been created and fixed in some tangible form. This can be a very serious problem. For instance, suppose that I have made a useful graphic file and posted it on the Internet. Even if I do not object to having the file downloaded and used for any purposes, such as including it in a teaching pack or on a homepage, the law of copyright is such that someone who uses the graphic without my permission would be infringing my copyright.
It may be that I choose not to prosecute them, but what has effectively happened is that the rule of exclusion has become the default rule in copyright. We have effectively moved away from a time when everything was presumed to be in the public domain unless otherwise stated, to a system where everything is presumed to be protected unless otherwise stated.
At this point, it is useful to return to the story of the extension of copyright law. Given the fact that copyright includes so many rights, it basically becomes impossible for any person to use another's work without running into the danger of being an "infringer." Thus, one needs to obtain a license from the owner of copyright to use any portion of the work. A license in copyright law is basically the grant of a right by the owner of copyright which allows the recipient of the license, the licensee, to exercise certain rights with respect to the copyright work. Without this license, any use not granted by copyright by default would be considered an infringement.
Derived from the Latin word licere, "to allow," license literally means "permission." Theoretically, a license can only permit things that copyright law places under the provision of the copyright owner and does not already permit by default. A license can thus only allow more, not less than, the default copyright regulations. FOSS and Open Content licenses, therefore, are licenses in the proper sense of the word. Proprietary software licenses, however, are even more restrictive than default copyright regulation.
Information can mean anything from numbers to images, from white noise to sound. A weather report, a portrait, a shadow in surveillance footage, a salary statement, birth and death statistics, a headcount in a gathering of friends, private email, ultra-high pedestrians as they walk in a city - all of this is data.
Etymology: 1646, from Latin datum "(thing) given," neuter pp. of dare, "to give."
Similarly, the word "data" in Hindi / Sanskrit is taken to mean "giver", which suggests that one must always be generous with information, and make gifts of our code, images and ideas. To be stingy with data is to violate an instance of the secret and sacred compacts of homophonic words from different cultural / spatial orbits as they meet in the liminal zone between languages, in the thicket of the sound of quotidian slips of the tongue. Errors in transmission and understanding too carry gifts and data.[ 51 ]
How is it possible that such a "license" is not a permission, but imposes additional restrictions? The catch lies in the term "license agreement", which shifts the whole matter from copyright to contract law. By making users click on a box signifying their agreement to the terms of the license agreement, software vendors make you sigh a usage contract with them, thus circumventing even the scarce "fair use" liberties granted by copyright law (such as public lending of works in libraries).[ 52 ]
Software is not the first time that they have attempted to restrict user rights via a license, and even book publishers have attempted to do so. Book publishers and sound recording companies once tried to restrict what purchasers of their products could do with they by "licenses", but fortunately the courts didn't let them get away with it. (Take a look at an old Victoria recording jacket and you'll see that it purports to license use of the recording to one Victoria machien and to deny authority to retransfer one's copy of the recording.) One important case was Bobbs-Merrill vs Straus. Bobbs-Merrill sued Straus because he sold copies of bobbs-Merrill books in violation of a license restriction that conditioned the right to retransfer copies of the books on an agreement to charge at least US$1 per copy. The US Supreme Court treated the license restriction as ineffective as a matter of copyright policy. The Bobbs-Merrill decision contributed to the emergence of the "first sale" or "exhaustion of rights" doctrine in copyright law, under which publishers lose authority to control redistributions of copies of their works when, in commercial reality, the transaction is a sale. In the aftermath of this and similar cases, publishers and sound recording companies abandoned these overly restrictive practices.
It is within this highly rigid regime of copyright that the Free Software movement sought to make an intervention. As a result, it has become highly popular across the world, and has become an inspiration for similar licensing models beyond the world of software. While the traditional software license specifically denies certain rights, the GNU General Public License is a license that is designed to grant certain fundamental freedoms.[ 53 ] These are:
Users should be allowed to run the software for any purpose.
Users should be able to closely examine and study the software and should be able to freely modify and improve it to better serve their needs.
Users should be able to give copies of the software to other people to whom the software will be useful.
Users should be able to freely distribute their improvements for the benefit of the broader public.
The Free Software model differs drastically from the "closed source" principles of licensing. Why then do we say that the GNU GPL model is based on an innovative use, rather than an abandonment of copyright? The Free Software model is predicated on ensuring that the fundamental freedoms are not taken away or removed from the public domain by anyone; thus, there is a condition attached to the use of Free Software.
The fundamental condition is that any person who uses Free Software to create a derivative work, or an adaptation of the software, must ensure that this software is also licensed on the same terms and conditions, namely under the GNU GPL. If the author of a piece of Free Software decided to relinquish his copyright, it would mean that someone could use his or her code and create a derivative work and then license it as a proprietary piece of code, therefore preventing others from making use of the software in a free manner.
What the Free Software movement did was to use copyright in an innovative manner to ensure access rather than restrict people's ability to use, distribute and modify code.
At the heart of the Free Software movement lies a radical reworking of the very idea of the user. While in the realm of proprietary software, the user was a passive consumer, the Free Software model is based on the idea of the user as producer - a user who has the ability to contribute to the existing work and simultaneously become a producer as well. Copying, cutting and pasting, changing things, applying filters, and so on are part of the basic language of digital media. The user-producer concept speaks to he digital experience and the freedoms that this digital culture allows for ordinary people to become artists and producers. This model fundamentally challenges the traditional assumptions of copyright law. It moves away from the romantic notion of authorship which saw cultural production as an isolated activity carried out by a solitary genius creating something out of nothing. Instead, it argues that the very essence of cultural production has been about learning by creatively using works that exist in the public domain. It also moves away from the mythical notion of the originality of the work to recognize the value that various users contribute through their modifications and adaptations to an existing work, thus placing a higher premium on collaborative rather than isolated production.
Hip-hop music has been about the ability to build on previous work by sampling and creating new works.
The world of dance is marked by a constant culture of borrowing and building on previous efforts.
Media design is constantly building upon and linking to the work of others.
The Open Content model also brings into place a community of givers and receivers who see themselves as linked within chains of reciprocity. So, while the formal trappings of the exclusivity of property may not exist, this does not mean that the social norms and etiquette governing relationships of creation and use within Open Content communities do not exist. The gift economy may, therefore, be a useful way of characterizing relations in Open Content projects. The gift is a fascinating phenomenon marked by complex relationships of reciprocities, and the idea that there is no such thing as a free gift is true, though not in the monetary sense of the term. The giving and taking of a gift sets in chain a complex relationship of reciprocity, where a gift transaction is always incomplete until the person receiving the gift has also given the gift back. While the relationship of reciprocity may be between the gift giver and the gift taker, it is certainly not restricted only to them. The exchange of the gift actually brings into play an economy of circulation, which includes a wider network of participation by members of the community.
The gift is something freely given, and taken, as in free code. Gift givers and gift takers are bound in networks of random or pre-meditated acts of symbolic exchange. The code begets the gift as the form of its own survival over time. In this way a gift is a quiet meme. Reciprocity begets reciprocity. The principle of the gift demands that the things being given be price-less, in other words so valuable as to be impossibe to quantify in terms of the possibilities of abstract generalized exchange.[ 54 ]
What was unique about the FOSS model was that it used the copyright regime for the first time to express this aspect of collaborative production, and also afford it protection to ensure that it remained within the public domain. Having gotten rid of the heavy burden of the myth of copyright, the challenge was then to translate the terms of the GNU GPL into other models of creative licensing would enable people to ct as collaborators / producers rather than merely as passive users, and also ensure that there is a rich public domain of materials that people can use and build on for the future.
Wikipedia is a global and multilingual web-based cooperative free-content encyclopedia.
It exists as a wiki, a type of website that allows visitors to edit its content; the word
The project began on 15 January 2001 as a complement to the expert-written (and now
English-language version. Since its inception,Wikipedia has steadily risen in popularity and
Wikipedia combines two core characteristics: First, it uses a collaborative authorship tool, a
Kenneth F. Kister, Kister's best encyclopedias: a comparative guide to general and specialized encyclopedias, (1994) p. 450. [Article count is for the 82-volume edition,
Includes 10,000 historical archives.
§ Advertised as containing “over 63,000 articles, with 36,000-plus map locations and over 29,000 editor-approved website links.” The 2006 Premium CD-ROM had 68,000 articles.
It is important to note that the Wikipedia has also answered one of the usual criticisms against Open Content projects, namely, the question of the reliability of the information of knowledge that is produced. The journal Nature compared science articles from Wikipedia to the gold standard of the Encyclopædia Britannica and concluded that "the difference in accuracy was not particularly great."[ 57 ]
We have been using the idea of the public domain. What exactly do we mean by that? For the purposes of understanding cultural production, the public domain could be understood as the body of works to which we have access to create newer works. Thus, while Shakespeare was a brilliant playwright, we should also remember the fact that he drew rather liberally from various sources, from history, mythology and the works of his peers, etc. as inspiration and as sources to modify. Similarly, even Walt Disney had a rich variety of sources from which he could draw from to make his cartoon versions of Fantasia, Steamboat Willie, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, etc. This public domain has also often been referred to through the metaphor of the "commons" - resources that are not divided into individual bits of property but rather are jointly held so that anyone may use them without special permission. Think of public streets, parks, waterways, outer space, and creative works in the public domain - all of these things are, in a way, sub-set of the commons.[ 58 ]
The idea that a cultural good can be marked as an ‘original’, that it is therefore of higher
While this may be true of some material goods, (and is strictly true only for rapidly
In fact, with each instance of a data object moving from person to person, the information
‘end users’ of digital information; rather it would be more accurate to speak of custodians
Raqs Media Collective, Value and its Other in Electronic Culture: Slave Ships and Private
It is as a response to the shrinking of the public domain through stronger enforcement of copyright laws that the FOSS and Open Content movements have emerged. What are some of the benefits of licensing works on an Open Content model rather than relying on the traditional copyright model? There may be a number of reasons and advantages for wanting to do so.[ 59 ]
For most artists, musicians or designers who are not already established, the easiest way to make a name for yourself is by ensuring that your work is sen by a large number of people, and by a wide range of audiences, as this helps to popularize your work, and establish your reputation. Open Content licenses enable your work to circulate in a much wider manner than if there were restrictions on the work. Apart from making you more visible, this model of distribution also enables you to obtain more shows, more work, sponsorship, etc. The English music group Thermal and a Quarter based in Bangalore, for instance, have made their albums available online for people to download, to enable their fans to listen to them and attend more of their shows.
Since the model of distribution relies, more often than not on a P2P system of sharing, it cuts out significant costs in terms of a middleman, an agent or a gallery who act as distributors. This is a system in which people can often contact the content creator directly rather than having to go through an institution of an individual who mediates on their behalf. Often creators who are struggling to establish themselves have no bargaining power with publishers, record companies, etc. since they do not have the ability to distribute on their own. The Open Content model, combined with the powers of the internet, is a great way for someone to establish themselves without having to rely on the big business model of authors and artists.
The value of value - added distribution: One of the major advantages of using an Open Content model arises when you are looking at the distribution process not merely as the distribution of a final end product but also as a way of harnessing extra support and labour in projects which require, for instance, value-added contributions. An instance of this is "Distributed Proofreading." Originally unaffiliated with Project Gutenberg, the site is devoted to proofing Project Gutenberg e-texts more efficiently by distributing the volunteer proofreading function in smaller and more information - rich modules.[ 60 ]
More often than not, people do not create content only for monetary reasons. They do it to express themselves, to share their works, to get an idea across, etc. In such cases, by licensing the work through an Open Content license, you have the ability to reach out to a much larger group of people as people can freely use your work, and distribute your work without the fear of violating your copyright.
But leaving aside the romance of altruism, assuming that you do want to make money out of your work, it is important to remember that Free / Open Content is not inconsistent with the abiliy for you to charge for your work. The licensing model allows enough flexibility for you to determine the manner in which you will license the use of your work. For instance, while you may allow for academic uses and other not-for-profit use (or even charge for them), you could reserve the right to any commercial usage (such as distributing copies of a book for sale, or using a design on a t-shirt or website). Thus, you will still be able to charge for such usage.
There are also cases of relatively unknown part-time musicians such as Allan Vilhan from Slovakia, working under the name Cargo Cult, who made his group's music available online for free and receives donations from people who have enjoyed the music (this and many similar stories are available at the Creative Commons website, http://creativecommons.org).
The Internet model of distribution may seem like a disaster for large content companies or already-established artists (even that is contestable), but for emerging artists or creators who do not hve access to a great deal of capital investment, the Internet is truly a god-send in terms of its ability to reach out to a large number of people at a relatively low cost.
There have been some recent examples of how people make their works available for free online, and yet this has not affected their offline sales. Science fiction author Cory Doctorow took advantage of this trend when he released an online version of his book, Down and Out in the Magic Kingdom simultaneously with a print version of the book. The print version has done very well; in fact, it could even be argued that the print version has sold better as a result of the book having been distributed for free. This is very similar to allowing people to browse through a book in a shop before they decide whether they want to buy it.
More and more people are realizing the value of collaborative content creation. By making their works available not only to a larger community of users but also a larger community of creators, they also realize that there is a value that is added to their work. Most Open Content licenses demand a detailed recording of the process of authorship, and every use of your work is also at the same time a record of your authorship. There is therefore a very significant attempt to move away from the binaries of originals and copies, to the idea of a rescension, a version or a re-mix that is neither a copy nor an original but instead a work that builds on existing work and yet has an autonomy of its own.
A re-telling, a word taken to signify the simultaneous existence of different versions of
a narrative within oral, and from now onwards, digital cultures.Thus one can speak of a
A rescension cannot be an improvement, nor can it connote a diminishing of value. A
Some people may want to use the open licenses model for distributing their content simply because they are tired of the monopoly of the content industry and the limitations of the system of copyright. Thus, the idea of being able to contribute to an intellectual commons may seem highly attractive. Some people may be attracted by the notion of others building upon their work, or by the prospect of contributing to an intellectual commons.
This idealism has not only inflicted young people who are used to an age of access, but even established stars like George Michael, who recently announced that he was not going to produce any commercial music in the future and that all of his music in the future will be available for free via the Internet.
Very often, we forget that a lot of content owners - especially those in the world of academia or artists who benefit from endorsement grants from public bodies - are actually producing intellectual property using public resources. In such case, it is important for us to start thinking in terms of "public intellectual property for public money."
Case Study: Shoot, Share and Create
A Case For using Open Content by Documentary Film Makers
Copyright licensing makes the acquisition or use of a pre-existing work very expensive.
If copyright owners have their way, then as a film maker, you may have to obtain a
A cautionary take: In 1990, Jon Else, an American documentary film maker was working
Francisco Opera.Stage-hands are a particularly funny and colourful element of an opera.
During a show, they hang out below the stage in the grips’ lounge and in the lighting
During one of the performances, Else was shooting some stage-hands playing checkers.
Else thought this shot would be great to use and he went ahead and shot it; he then
Else obviously could not afford to pay Gracie Films.He could have gone ahead and used
The situation in the US is pretty bleak now, and any documentary film maker submitting
a film to a broadcast organization has to get copyright clearances for all materials used,
So why should documentary film makers start taking the Free Software movement
Distribution is a major headache: One of the biggest problems faced by documentary
If the work were available freely (note, this does not mean that you cannot charge for the
It is a fact that, currently, if you want to access documentaries, then you either have to
If you have no problem, say so: I am sure that most documentary film makers do not
In that sense, copyright by default applies to your work, which is why it is important to
You do not have to waive all your rights: There may be one or two immediate
By licensing under an ‘Open Content’ license, you do not waive all your rights as the
For instance, you could have a license that allows the work only to be copied for
Film makers do not live off of royalties: More importantly is the fact that most
So, fear of lost revenue cannot be a very serious one.But apart from the film maker's fear
Let's assume that the money that is provided for the film is not that great and cannot be
Film-making is collaborative by nature: Copyright's myth of the individual creator
Yet, for the purposes of copyright, the author of the film is considered to be a single
Copyright increasingly threatens creativity: If copyright is increasingly threatening
One thing is sure: the digital revolution has arrived.You have more and more people from
At some level, whether we are academics or lawyers or activists, we all have to start
Adapted from, Lawrence Liang, Shoot, Share and Create (Rajiv Mehrotra, The Open Frame
Reader, PSBT: New Delhi, 2006)
This article examines the impact exercise intensity has on mitigating depressive symptoms by reducing inflammation [1]
What is the background to this research?
This study examines whether exercise intensity effects the efficacy of exercise intervention in reducing depressive symptoms by lowering inflammation in non-clinical populations [1]. Specifically, the research assesses cytokine activity in exercised student sample groups and concludes that moderate intensity continuous exercise is more effective at reducing inflammation caused by depressive symptoms than high-intensity. While there is a significant amount of research studying the positive impact that regular exercise has on negative mood states including depression and anxiety in clinical populations, this study fills a gap in the literature by using exercise intensity as an independent variable and makes an important contribution to the research regarding the prescription of exercise intervention to achieve better mental health outcomes[2].
The research was conducted at McMaster University, all four authors are reputable academics. Two of the authors, Emily M Paolucci and Jennifer J. Heisz have published a number of dissertations in the fields of health science, kinesiology, neurological and mental health. The authors Dessi Loukov and Dawn M.E Bowdish are experienced pathologists and their research is mainly in the field of molecular medicine[1].
This study is a randomised control trial (RCT). RCTs are widely considered to produce the highest evidentiary level on the efficacy of healthcare interventions [3].
What did the research involve?
The study involved a six-week exercise intervention program and measuring its effects on pro-inflammatory cytokines and mood disorders. The study participants were sixty-one adult university students from McMaster University between 18-30 years old (72% Female)[1].
Participants were randomised into three groups, all of them completed 18 bouts of exercise;
Limitations from the research design methodology;
Firstly, the study relies on the assumption that there is an inverse causal relationship between inflammation and the development of depression symptoms.
Secondly, the authors selected a small sample group with a high gender bias (female) comprised of individuals from student populations (not representative or randomised), none of whom suffer clinical mood disorders. Problematically, the researchers purport to generalise conclusions from the subject group data to the general population, without clearly stating the relationship between the sample group and the general population or highlighting any obvious difficulties in extrapolating the results more broadly. [4]
Thirdly, the study measured the participants’ mental health and assessed particular symptoms of depression and anxiety using the Beck Depression Inventory II & Beck Anxiety Inventory respectively. However, because both inventories, which consists of 21 self-rating items, are, crucially, designed to assess the severity of a particular symptom of depression and anxiety in clinical populations[5], they may not be suitable to assess nuanced psychological changes in a healthy population sample[4].
Finally, the experiment showed outcome biases as it only examined four pro-inflammatory cytokines related to inflammation and depression. The study also failed to test hormones released during exercise that may impact inflammation and depression[6].
What were the basic results?
For example, in contrast with the authors’ results, The National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) conducted similar research using exercise intervention which showed a decrease in pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6 in depressed patients. The study's results displayed in Table two, indicated that pro-inflammatory IL-6 levels were inconsistent in the patients displaying depressive moods, and reported no difference in relation to IL-6 levels in their healthy patients. The NCBI study goes on to suggest that evidence supporting the proposition IL-6 is casually related to depression remains inconsistent, as far too many studies have generated quantitative results opposing this conclusion[7].
What conclusions can we take from this research?
Most scientific literature supports the proposition that exercise programs in general are effective at lowering pro-inflammatory cytokines and in turn contribute to a reduction in depressive symptoms, however evidence regarding the optimal exercise intensity remains equivocal. In addition to the methodological limitations, the researchers fail to account for other physiological factors that reduce cytokines when exercising, such as the release of endorphins[8].
The study concluded that the patients subject to high intensity bouts of exercise had the highest reduction in depressive symptoms as well. The study used the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D), which saw a 77% reduction from baseline for the HIT exercisers compared to the MCT group that experienced a 65% decrease[8].
Notwithstanding the limitations outlined above, this study is important in encouraging further research into the possible impact of exercise intensity on mental health outcomes. It is recommended that researchers should design longitudinal studies with larger randomised sample groups to produce more reliable data on the efficacy of exercise on psychological well-being over time[3].
Start with simple exercise like walking or jogging
Do what is enjoyable; team sports, exercise with friends, plan activities
Track your mood response to different intensity workouts
Complete an APSS form prior to exercising[9].
Beyond blue - https://www.beyondblue.org.au/
Black Dog institute - https://www.blackdoginstitute.org.au/
Head Space - https://headspace.org.au/
ESSA (free Exercise and Mental Health ebook) https://exerciseright.com.au
Add in the references using this code
↑ a b c d e f g h i j k Paolucci EM, Loukov D, Bowdish DME, Heisz JJ. Exercise reduces depression and inflammation but intensity matters [Internet]. 2018 Feb 3 [cited 2020 August 14]: 133:79-84. Available from database: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2018.01.015
↑ 2.William P, Morgan MD. Anxiety Reduction Following Acute Physical Activity [internet]. 1979 Mar 1 [cited 2020 September 10]:9(3):36-45. Available from database: https://www.healio.com/psychiatry/journals/psycann/ doi.org/10.3928/0048-5713-19790301-06
↑ a b Thiese M. S. (2014). Observational and interventional study design types; an overview. Biochem. Med. 24 199–210. 10.11613/BM.2014.022
↑ a b Byrne A, Byrne DG. The Effect of Exercise on Depression, Anxiety and Other Mood States: A Review, In Journal of Psychosematic Research [internet].1993 Sep 6 [cited 2020 September 12]: 37:565-574. Available from database: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs doi.org/10.1016/0022-3999(93)90050-P.
↑ Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) [Internet]. Washington DC, US, American Psychological Association, 2020. Construct: Depressive Symtoms; 2020 June 1 [cited 202 September 14]; about 2 screens], Available from: https://www.apa.org/pi/about/publications/caregivers/practice-settings/assessment/tools/beck-depression
↑ Cochrane Methods Bias [Internet]. [London, UK]: Julian Higgins and James Thomas; 2019. Cochrane Handbook for Systemic Reviews of Interventions, Chapter 10; 2020 [cited 2020 September 12]; [about 5 screens]. Available https://methods.cochrane.org/bias/reporting-biases
↑ a b Zou W, Feng R, Yang Y. Changes in the serum levels of inflammatory cytokines in antidepressant drug-naïve patients with major depression [internet]. 2019 Jun 1 [cited 2020 Sep 14]:13(6). Available from database: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0197267
↑ a b c Balchin R, Linde J, Blackhurst D, Rauch HG, Schonbachler G. Seating away depression? The impact of intensive exercise on depression [Internet]. 2016 August 1 [cited 2020 Sep 12]:200: 218-221. Available from database : https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2016.04.030
↑ Exercise Depression [Internet]. New South Wales, Sydney: Blackdog Institute, 2020. Exercise & Depression; 2020 Apr [cited 2020 September 13]; [about 2 screens]. Available from https://www.blackdoginstitute.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/5-exercise_depression.pdf
(if you have done the in-text referencing correctly, it will appear here - check the tips on Moodle for details, or of course the help options in wikimedia (or google it)
And add code in so this below appears (see Moodle - 2. Creating your page and editing tips - please look on this)
The TAM model of innovation adoption tends towards relying on analysis of the factors around an individual’s acceptance or rejection of an innovation rather than framing such analysis in terms of a group or groups’ reception of an innovation. In my experience that is not an effective or realistic approach, as the innovations I've witnessed being researched, predicted, developed and implemented do not affect an individual… they affect entire teams and divisions internally and subsume entire demographic groups within our external user base.
An example of this phenomenon in our organization can best be illustrated by looking at the elements of the Diffusion of Innovations model instead and relating them to the specifics of our technological and cultural environment. The innovation I’ll describe is a CMS (content management system).
We have relied for many years on an outdated and ill-fitted CMS platform despite a number of attempts (by individuals in power vs. by empowered and knowledgeable groups) to install replacement platforms. The communication channels used in the past were limited to a small group of executive members which resulted in isolation from communal knowledge, from input of subject matter experts and most importantly from a nearly complete lack of feedback and subsequent buy-in from stakeholder groups.
In each effort to acquire a new software platform or build one from scratch, the length of time needed to complete the innovation-decision process was impractically extended by the failure to visualize properly and design a solution for the relationships within the company’s social system - namely that of the sales, editorial, design and technology groups. This was a failure in two ways.
First, the leadership underestimated the need to engage these groups such that their common goals were identified and mapped to formal software requirements. Second - the time needed to effectively gather requirements and implement a solution was at direct odds with the goals set for these groups in terms of revenue, service level agreements and standards of publication quality.
We’re currently in the latter stages of a recent effort at developing and implementing a modernized CMS which is showing great success and which has been successful in large part due to altering the baseline approach, i.e. the type of innovation-decision.
Past attempts seemingly relied on the Authority Innovation-Decision approach, relying on precedent-setting non-technology decisions made in the company’s past (primarily a newspaper legacy). These failed as already discussed.
The success we’ve seen in this iteration is due to the apparent adoption of the Collective Innovation-Decision approach, which although has been time-intensive and cost-intensive has proven to be effective at both ensuring the product itself is what is necessary to meet our business agenda and social group needs but also has allowed us to deploy the system to a surprisingly high rate of initial adoption and few instances of failure as defined by service outages, loss of revenue and employee frustration.
To summarize, the TAM model would not been nearly as useful as the Diffusion model in predicting the failure or success of the attempts we’ve made over the last decade to overhaul our enterprise publishing platform CMS.
Rcragun Ryan T. Cragun, Associate Professor of Sociology, The University of Tampa
Contribution: Initial book layout and the development of most of the chapters
Jsumerau J. Edward Sumerau, Assistant Professor of Sociology, The University of Tampa
Contribution: Significant editing of the content; primary author of chapter on sexuality; co-author of chapter on Sociological Practice.
Contribution: Primary author of chapter on Sociological Practice.
Contribution: Primary author of chapter on Human Rights
Contribution: Contributed a number of introductions and conclusions to various chapters.
Contribution: Primary author of chapter on stratification.
Deborahcragun Deborah Cragun, Ph.D. Public Health
Contribution: Developed the chapters on health care and medicine and race and ethnicity.
Contributions: various small changes, videos, slides and downloadable tools
A Wikibookian believes this page should be split into smaller pages with a narrower subtopic.
You can help by splitting this big page into smaller ones. Please make sure to follow the naming policy. Dividing books into smaller sections can provide more focus and allow each one to do one thing well, which benefits everyone.
You can ask for help in dividing this book in the assistance reading room.
This message box is using an invalid "type=growth" parameter and needs fixing.
Aa Bb Cc Çç Dd Ee Ff
Gg Hh Ii Jj Kk Ll Mm
Nn Ññ Oo Pp Qq Rr Ss
Tt Uu Vv Ww Xx Yy Zz
"ç" is pronounced as retroflex r in Rohingya words such as caça and naça meaning mat and closed.
"ñ" is pronounced as silent or half n such as in Rohingya words fiañs and fañs meaning onion
"y" is used as consonant only, not used as a semi vowel. So My must be written as Mai.
Rohingya has two sets of vowels.
The last two-letteredvowels in each line below - ou and óu - are treated as if it is a single vowel respectively. Accented vowels are always emphasized with high tone and unaccented vowels are always pronounced as soft vowels.
a e i o u ou
Each vowel gives only one sound as shown in bold in the English and Rohingya phrase below:-
"Alemi modúr houli" - meaning International Honey Center.
You cannot add "i" to "i".)
Rohingya uses double vowels to extend the sound in three different ways such as horizontal, rising and falling. For example;
In Rohingya Language yes/no questions are created by adding "né" at the end of the sentense:
Usman ottú = 'with Usman'
Other questions are created by USING question pronouns like:
Tui hoçé zaibi? - Where will you go?
Ali hoñótte aibou? - When will Ali come?
Tui hotúkkun ot zaibi? - When will you go?
Hoddúr - How far/How much
Lamba hoddúr? - How much is the length?
This morning = Aijja beínna
This afternoon = Aijja Duíñjja
This evening = Aijja Ázinna
Tomorrow = Aiyérde Hailla / Hailla
Day before yesterday = Goto Foóuru
Last week = Goto Háfta
Next week = Tarfor Háfta
Twenty-five = Ekkuri fañs
Twenty first = Ek kuri ek lombór
Thickness = Dhaço / Mutha
How are you? - Keén aso?
Thank you = Cúkuria
zúl = curry soup / curry water
zál = hot (due to hot chilli)
Sul zórer = hair falling
Sul fager = hair graying
Sulot sussuri = dandruff
Matá thon-tho-nar = head pain
Matá furer = head burning
Gaa hoñrar = body cramp
Gaa bic óiye = body pain
Gaa sissiar = body pain
Gaa moth-moçar = body brittle sensation
Baáre zar = frequent motion
Feth hoñrar = stomach pain
Gaa furer = body burning sensation
Gaa zoler = body burning sensation
sína zoler = chest burning
Súañfira = sudden unconciousness
Dhák baijjani = pain in the rib
Hórai = urinary infection
Dhónu Thokkor = sudden squeez-treat with ATS
Zulantai = sudden stomach squeez caused by cold
Kurus = skin becoming white
góoñsi = little pimple due to heat
Bat = skin deep infection formed puss inside
Beng bat= another kind of skin deep infection
Fisála = blockage at both side of the throat
Zor Thúañ = watery pimple after fever
Soru = a kind of skin infection
Gola fúla = neck swelling
Finak = extra flesh in the nose.
Añma = eye sight blurring
Fakkwá = infection between fingers and toes
Ketur = eye related dieses
Doout = a kind of skin infection
Sammwa Doout = a kind of skin infection
áñis = small roof attached to the side of a house for poor family living
hóla = a temporary work place used while harvesting agricultural products
As one of the most abundant molecules on Earth’s surface, and one vital to life, water plays an important role in the very dynamic nature of Earth, particularly how water interacts with the rocks, the soil, and the atmosphere, and how it changes depending on its depth in the Earth’s oceans.
A hydrometer measuring specific density.
Density is the mass per unit volume of a substance, which means that an equal volume of a substance with high density will weigh more than an equal volume of a substance with low density. Liquid water has a density of 1 gram per milliliter (1 g/ml) or 1 gram per cubic centimeter (1 g/cm3). This makes comparing the density of water to other substances, both liquids and solids easy. Specific density is the density of water compared to other substances. For example, a solid cube that floats in a glass of water, will have a specific density less than 1, while a solid cube that sinks will have a specific density of more than 1. A hydrometer is a special tool used to measure the specific density of water or other liquids in a solution by floating a standardize weight in the water to be measured. Liquids with different specific densities will organize in layers, with the least dense liquid at the top and most dense at the bottom. A mixture of liquids with difference densities may take time to form layers as they reach equilibrium, and as long as the individual liquids don’t go into solution with each other. In large bodies of water on Earth, differences in densities can stratify the water in lakes and oceans into different layers with depth.
Different liquids can have different densities and float on top of each other.
Water's density varies with temperature, such that pure water will have a density of 1 at 4°C, but water heated to the boiling point will have a density of 0.959 at 100°C. This means warm water will float on top of cold water. If the water is heated from the bottom, convection will cause the warm water to rise and more evenly distribute heat, however if water is heated at the surface, the warmer water will remain near the surface because it will be less dense than water at deeper colder layers. Water found in hot climates heated by the sun at the surface, will be more stratified (layered) than water heated by hydrothermal magma from below, which will cause the warm water to circulate convectively with surface waters and become mixed.
One strange aspect of water is that when it approaches the freezing temperature, the ultra-cold water near freezing and frozen water will be less dense, and float. It may seem like an obvious observation, that ice floats, especially if you have ever had a glass of ice water. But most substances when they freeze into a solid, will sink, as solids are typically denser then the liquid phase. Water is strange in that at about 4°C water is slightly denser than water at 0°C. In oceans and lakes and other large bodies of water as the water gets close to freezing it becomes slightly less dense and will rise from the bottom. Before it can freeze into a solid, the water will rise up to the surface and float. Frozen water, in the form of ice is only found near the surface as the top layer of bodies of water on Earth. This results in the floating ice on water to act as insulation to the warmer water below, due to the high heat capacity of the liquid water and high latent heat of the ice above. If frozen water sank, the bottom of oceans would be covered in thick layers of ice, and prevent life from living on the ocean floor.
Thanks to hydrogen bonding in water, an odd feature of ice is that it floats (and is less dense than liquid water), even as a solid. Sea ice is found on the surface of the ocean, rather than deep on the ocean floor.
Hydrogen bonding can explain why ice is less dense than liquid water. As water molecules become linked together in a crystal lattice structure as they freeze, they are packed less densely together with hydrogen atoms linked to oxygen atoms. The individual molecules become arranged in a hexagonal crystalline structure, with each angle of the hexagon represented by an oxygen atom. This crystalline structure is approximately 8.3% less dense than liquid water, and when frozen will expand in volume about 9% more than liquid water. This is why leaving a soda can in a freezer will result in an exploded open can, because the water when it freezes takes up more volume. The effect of the expansion of the freeze-thaw cycle of water is important in rock weathering on Earth’s surface especially in temperate climatic zones.
Phase diagram of water, showing different types of solid water (ice) at different pressures and temperatures.
There are 18 known solid crystalline phases of ice, which can also form amorphous solid states, with inclusions of air and various gasses during its formation. Most ice on Earth’s surface is classified as ice-phase-1, or Ice Ih, at extremely cold temperatures and high pressures other types of crystalized ice will form. Most liquids under increasing pressures will freeze at higher temperatures because the pressure pushes the individual molecules tightly together. However, the hydrogen bonds in water resist this increase pressure, and results in a slight melting of ice at high pressure, below 0 °C. This peculiarity of ice will contribute to the motion of glaciers and ice sheets on Earth’s surface, by imposing a thin layer of liquid melt water which forms at the base of thick ice sheets.
Sea surface salinity of the Earth's oceans.
Salinity is a measurement of the amount of salt dissolved in a body of water. Water with salt dissolved within it is called saline water. This is typically measured by the number of grams of salt that are found in 1,000 grams of water. Typical sea water has a salinity around 35 g/kg (sometimes written as parts per thousand, or 35 ppt). Drinking water has very low salinity of just 0 to 0.5 g/kg. The saltiest portions of the ocean include the Red Sea, where ocean salinity can get up to 40 g/kg, as well as in the Mediterranean Sea at 38 g/kg, which is due to the hot climates and enhanced evaporation over these portions of the ocean. The Great Salt Lake in Utah has salinity levels that range from 50 to 270 g/kg, making it significantly saltier than sea water.
The saltiest water on Earth, Don Juan Pond in Antarctica
The saltiest body of water on Earth is Don Juan Pond, a small lake found in a dry glacial valley near the McMurdo Station in Antarctica. Salinity in the lake is 400 g/kg (or 40% by weight). The extremely high salinity of Don Juan Pond allows the lake to be liquid, even in the freezing cold of Antarctica. The water is so enriched with salt that it has a viscosity of syrup. Viscosity is a measure of how well a liquid flows.
Salt is often added to icy roads to help melt the ice in the cold winter.
The addition of salt to water lowers the freezing point of water by a process called freezing point depression. The freezing point depression occurs because the more random the nature in a solution of water with various dissolved salts, the more opposed it will be to freezing, so that lower temperatures must be reached before the liquid will form a solid. The freezing point of water is lowered when the salt is added, as the salt makes it more difficult for water to freeze. This is why salt is often sprayed on roads and sidewalks to prevent ice in the winter.
Water with a salinity of 100 g/kg will freeze at -6°C, rather than 0°C. It is important to note that a solution containing water with salt as it freezes will not incorporate any of the salt within the crystal lattice, and instead the remaining water will become saltier over time. Just like boiling water where dissolved salts become enriched in the remaining water through distillation, freezing water can also be used to remove much of the salt content of the water, as the frozen water will contain no salts.
Ocean water is left to evaporate leaving behind various salts, which is collected in Tamil Nadu, India.
Dissolved salts in ocean water is not limited to sodium chloride (NaCl), table salt, but also includes sulfate (SO24-), magnesium (Mg2+), calcium (Ca2+), and potassium (K+) ions. If you were to boil ocean water through distillation, the salts that would be left behind would be a mixture of table salt (NaCl), anhydrite (CaSO2), gypsum (CaSO4·2H2O), magnesium sulfate MgSO4·7H2O also known as Epsom salt, and potassium sulfate (K2SO4) which is also called potash. Many of these salts are mined from regions on Earth where oceans or large bodies of water evaporated leaving behind these salts deposited in rock layers now buried underground.
Potash mine in Moab Utah, which mines potash and other salts deposited in an ancient ocean, and buried under Moab.
The higher the salinity of water, the greater its density. In the ocean, water at depth tends to be saltier than water found near the surface of the ocean, this is due, in part to the continuous flow of freshwater that enters the ocean from land and will float on its surface. The density of surface ocean water can increase underneath the formation of sea ice. As the ice forms on the surface of the ocean, the remaining cold ocean water just below the icy surface will become salter, and will tend to sink due to the combined increase in salinity and cold temperature making the ocean water denser below sea ice.
Higher salinity of water makes it more dense, in addition to the fact that colder temperatures makes water also dense. Hence the densest (and deepest) ocean water is both cold and salty.
Salinity of the Earth's Oceans Over Time
The HMA Challenger on the ocean, painting by William Frederick Mitchell.
The ocean is salty because of the gradual concentration of dissolved ions that erode from the land and are wash into the sea. As such, scientists such as Edmond Halley in the early 1700s proposed that the oceans act as a net reservoir for the world’s salt, and that throughout Earth’s long history the oceans have increased in salinity over time. Little was known of variation in ocean salinity, but in 1872 the Royal Society converted a naval warship, the HMS Challenger to voyage around the world and study the ocean, collecting water samples, and dredging the ocean floor for deep sea life. The ship was equipped with oceanographic laboratories, state-of-art microscopes, and scientific tools to better understand the world’s oceans. From 1872 to 1876, the ship traveled around the world gathering samples of ocean water and recording its temperature. The samples were sent to a professor of chemistry, a German named William Dittmar for analysis. The results of the study demonstrate that the constitutes of the salts dissolved in the oceans don’t vary greatly from region to region. Each sample had nearly equal amounts of Chloride (Cl) 19.350 ppt, Sodium (Na) 10.710 ppt, Sulfate (SO4) 2.690 ppt, Magnesium (Mg) 1.304 ppt, Calcium (Ca) 0.419 ppt, Potassium (K) 0.390 ppt, Bicarbonate (HCO3) 0.146 ppt, and Bromide (Br) 0.070 ppt, for a total of 35.079 ppt, or a salinity near 35 g/kg or ppt.
A piece of limestone composed of calcium carbonate from tiny fossil organisms.
One of the surprising discoveries was when these values were compared to freshwater from rivers entering the ocean, Dittmar found significantly more Calcium (Ca) and Bicarbonate (HCO3), compared to Sodium (Na) and Chloride (Cl). So why does ocean water contain less of these two salts? The reason is that both Calcium and Bicarbonate are used by organisms to build their aragonite and calcite shells, using calcium carbonate (CaCO3). Over time these organisms die, the empty shells fall to the ocean floor and are buried, forming limestones. There is a cycle over long periods of time, in which limestones are uplifted onto the land, erode into Calcium (Ca) and Bicarbonate (HCO3), wash into the ocean, and are again used by organisms to build their shells, and then redeposited. This cycle likely has resulted in the oceans salinity over time to reach an equilibrium. Sodium (Na) and Chloride (Cl) are also removed from the oceans during burial, when inlets and shallow seas evaporate, leaving a salty crust that becomes buried. Although it is difficult to estimate salinity over all of Earth’s history, it is likely that salinity of the oceans during the Phanerozoic Eon (last 541 million years) has not changed much because of these processes.
Oxygen is necessary for aerobic animals, which require a source of oxygen for respiration, even underwater. Oxygen makes up 20.95% of the atmosphere. Oxygen, as a gas gets mixed into the ocean near its surface, where this dissolved oxygen gas is greater than about 7 parts per million (ppm). Ocean water with 10 ppm or greater is considered well-oxygenated water able to support a healthy population of fish. The amount of oxygen however decreases with depth, with deep ocean water becoming depleted in oxygen, from hypoxic (low oxygen) to anoxic (no oxygen) bottom waters. This results in fewer aerobic animals living in these deep ocean waters, which are dominated by anaerobic organisms, those are organisms that don’t require the presence of oxygen to live.
The amount of oxygen dissolved in the ocean is also related to the water’s salinity and temperature. As salinity increases, the amount of gas dissolved decreases because more water molecules are linked up with calcium and sodium ions. As water temperature increases, the heat increases the mobility of oxygen dissolved gas molecules allowing them to more easily escape from the water, reducing the amount of oxygen. This is why healthy fish populations are never found in salty and extremely warm waters. The colder and fresher the ocean water, the more availability there is for oxygen gas to be present. This is why estuaries, where cold freshwater flows into the oceans are such healthy regions for large schools of fish and other aerobic life forms in the oceans.
Low Oxygen levels in the Gulf of Mexico, are known as dead zones, since they kill fish and other animals that require oxygen.
Boiling water removes all oxygen (warmer water holds less oxygen than cold water)
Oxygen solubility is a function of pressure and temperature, and at sea level (with 1 atmosphere of pressure), the amount of oxygen found within the ocean surface water is directly related to the temperature of the ocean water at its surface. Pure water near freezing temperatures (0° C) can hold upwards of 14 ppm oxygen, at 25° C (77° F), water holds about 8 ppm oxygen, however, when warm water is heated to 45° C (113° F) it only holds 6 ppm oxygen. As water approaches the boiling point 100° C (212° F) little to no oxygen can be dissolved in the water. If you have ever boiled water, you may have noticed that as the water is heated, tiny air bubbles start to form, because the warmed water cannot hold the dissolved oxygen gas. At 100° C (212° F) the water itself starts to boil, and the large bubbles are formed by evaporation of water. However, if the water is cooled back down and then again reheated, bubbles will not appear until the water starts to boil, because the oxygen and other gasses have already escaped from the water during the first time the water was heated.
Since ocean water has a higher salinity than pure water, it is more susceptible to the loss of oxygen. With a salinity of 35 g/kg or ppt, most ocean water will fall below 10 ppm oxygen, and in areas of high salinity where there is increased evaporation and little wave action to contribute oxygen, ocean water near the surface can become deoxygenated. Deoxygenated surface waters are referred to as “dead zones,” because fish lack the necessary oxygen for respiration and die on mass. Dead zones can manifest when lakes or seas become too hot and salty, and lack mixing from crashing waves. In 2017, a dead zone in the Gulf of Mexico was observed when oxygen levels fell below 2 ppm and extended over 8,776 square miles of the coast of Texas, killing fish and shrimp that need more oxygen dissolved in the water. Fear exists that with rising global temperatures, dead zones, such as this 1 will become more common, and could destroy the fishing industry.
Another important factor in the amount of oxygen available in water is eutrophication. Eutrophication is when a body of water becomes enriched in fertilizers (nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfate) which results in excess growth of algae on a water’s surface. Algae, which photosynthesizes and produces oxygen. Knowing this fact, it would seem that a healthy coat of algae on the surface of water would increase the amount of oxygen in the water. However, the excessive algae growth on the surface blocks light from reaching deeper depths in the water, resulting in a zone just below the algae covered surface where photosynthesizing lifeforms cannot grow. This dark zone becomes depleted in oxygen over time, and accumulates layers of dead algae that sinks into these dark waters. This graveyard of decaying algae supports scavenging microbial bacteria that feed on this decaying organic matter and thrive in the anoxic deep waters. Eutrophication is a major problem for bodies of water that receive run off from agricultural land where fertilizers have been used heavily.
The eutrophication of Lake Erie results in less oxygen in the lake waters. This build up of algae can be seen from the NASA's MODIS satellite.
Carbon dioxide gas reduces the pH of ocean water making it more acidic.
Carbon dioxide gas is added to water to carbonate it, resulting in sparkling or soda water found in many "soft" drinks. It significantly lowers the pH of the water in the process.
Just like oxygen gas, carbon dioxide solubility is a function of pressure and temperature, and at sea level (with 1 atmosphere of pressure), the amount of carbon dioxide found within the ocean surface water is directly related to the temperature of the ocean water at its surface. The warmer the ocean water becomes the less carbon dioxide gas the water will be able to hold. There is a fear that with increasing carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and warming global temperatures, the ocean will no longer act like a sink or reservoir for carbon dioxide gas, and the oceans will reach a saturation point with respect to carbon dioxide. If this were to happen, the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere would rise more dramatically, since less carbon dioxide would able to be dissolved in the oceans. However, carbon dioxide reacts with water to form H2CO3 (carbonic acid), which would result in the continued capacity for the absorption of carbon dioxide. The product of this reaction, carbonic acid, will release more hydrogen H+ ions (H2CO3 -> H+ + HCO3- ), resulting in the ocean water becoming more acidic over time. Ocean water is slightly basic, with a pH of 8.12, which has been dropping in recent years to a pH of 8.06 pH since the 1990s. The slightly basic nature of ocean water is largely due to the excess bicarbonate (HCO3- ) ions that erode from land and are washed into the oceans by rivers. Normally with pH greater than 8, the excess bicarbonate (HCO3- ) ions further contribute a hydrogen ion (H+) resulting in carbonate ions (CO3-2), when this occurs the carbonate ions react to any Ca+2 forming CaCO3 which precipitates out as a solid. You may have noticed this type of reaction if you have used a household cleaner to clean a bathtub. Most cleaners contain calcium carbonate and calcium hydroxide, the calcium hydroxide keeps the pH very high, resulting in any excess of calcium Ca+2 ions in the water to precipitate out as a solid, as white flakes of calcium carbonate CaCO3 you might observe in the rinse water after cleaning. However, if the pH becomes less than 8, the bicarbonate (HCO3- ) ions no longer contribute an extra hydrogen ion (H+), and carbonate ions (CO3-2) no longer form. This results in a lack of deposition of calcium carbonate, and most of the bicarbonate (HCO3- ) ions would remain in solution in ocean water with pH lower than 8.
Oceanographers worry that as the Earth’s oceans become more enriched in H2CO3 (carbonic acid) and become increasingly acidic, that its carbonate chemistry is going to fundamentally change. With ocean depth, water increases in pressure and decreases in temperature, resulting in the dissolution of CaCO3. The carbonate compensation depth (CCD) is defined as the water depth at which the rate of supply of CaCO3 from the surface is equal to the rate of dissolution into Ca+ and CO3-2 ions. Below this depth, CaCO3 dissolves in the water. Organisms that live below the CCD depth in the ocean are unable to compose their shells with calcite or aragonite the two minerals that are made of CaCO3, some deep-water sponges use silica instead, but most reef building organisms can’t live in water that is below the CCD depth.
Play media Video on the impact of ocean acidification due to rising carbon dioxide levels in the Earth's oceans (and decrease of pH values).
The geological record contains several examples of deep-sea calcium carbonate (CaCO3) dissolution events that were driving by acidification of the oceans, for example, the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum (55.5 million years ago), and the Permian-Triassic boundary (252 million years ago). During these global warming events, where the atmosphere was enriched in carbon dioxide, calcium carbonate deposition was dramatic reduced. This can be observed in ancient ocean sediments bracketing these events, where calcium carbon rich limestones are replaced by silica and clay rich mudstone and claystone. Tropical coral reefs are heavily impacted by such events, as these communities require ocean water that can support healthy amounts of calcium carbonate used to make calcite and aragonite skeletons for coral reef communities. When carbon dioxide increases in the world’s oceans, the coral reefs in tropical environments vanish, and most colonial organisms that live in these marine environments become extinct.
COM files are loaded into RAM at offset $100. The space before that would be used for passing data to and from DOS (for example, the contents of the command line used to invoke the program).
Note that COM files, by definition, cannot be 32-bit. Windows provides support for COM files via a special CPU mode.
Notice that MS-DOS COM files (short for "command" files) are not the same as Component-Object Model files, which are an object-oriented library technology.
All memory accesses are 16-bit (segment registers unchanged). Produces a .COM file instead of an .EXE file.
All memory accesses are 16-bit (segment registers unchanged).
Data addresses include both segment and offset, reloading the DS or ES registers on access and allowing up to 1M of data. Code accesses don't change the CS register, allowing 64K of code.
Code addresses include the segment address, reloading CS on access and allowing up to 1M of code. Data accesses don't change the DS and ES registers, allowing 64K of data.
Both code and data addresses are (segment, offset) pairs, always reloading the segment addresses. The whole 1M byte memory space is available for both code and data.
Same as the large model, with additional arithmetic being generated by the compiler to allow access to arrays larger than 64K.
When looking at an EXE file, one has to decide which memory model was used to build that file.
A Portable Executable (PE) file is the standard binary file format for an Executable or DLL under Windows NT, Windows 95, and Win32. The Win32 SDK contains a file, winnt.h, which declares various structs and variables used in the PE files. Some functions for manipulating PE files are also included in imagehlp.dll. PE files are broken down into various sections which can be examined.
In a Windows environment, executable modules can be loaded at any point in memory, and are expected to run without problem. To allow multiple programs to be loaded at seemingly random locations in memory, PE files have adopted a tool called RVA: Relative Virtual Addresses. RVAs assume that the "base address" of where a module is loaded into memory is not known at compile time. So, PE files describe the location of data in memory as an offset from the base address, wherever that may be in memory.
Some processor instructions require the code itself to directly identify where in memory some data is. This is not possible when the location of the module in memory is not known at compile time. The solution to this problem is described in the section on "Relocations".
The PE portable executable file format includes a number of informational headers, and is arranged in the following format:
The basic format of a Microsoft PE file
Open any Win32 binary executable in a hex editor, and note what you see: The first 2 letters are always the letters "MZ", the initials of Mark Zbikowski, who created the first linker for DOS. To some people, the first few bytes in a file that determine the type of file are called the "magic number," although there is no rule that states that the "magic number" needs to be a single number. Instead, we will use the term "File ID Tag", or simply, File ID. Sometimes this is also known as File Signature.
After the File ID, the hex editor will show several bytes of either random-looking symbols, or whitespace, before the human-readable string "This program cannot be run in DOS mode".
Hex Listing of an MS-DOS file header
What you are looking at is the MS-DOS header of the Win32 PE file. To ensure either a) backwards compatibility, or b) graceful decline of new file types, Microsoft has written a series of machine instructions(an example program is listed below the DOS header structure) into the head of each PE file. When a 32-bit Windows file is run in a 16-bit DOS environment, the program will display the error message: "This program cannot be run in DOS mode.", then terminate.
The DOS header is also known by some as the EXE header. Here is the DOS header presented as a C data structure:
After the DOS header there is a stub program mentioned in the paragraph above the DOS header structure. Listed below is a commented example of that program, it was taken from a program compiled with GCC.
;# Using NASM with Intel syntax
At offset 60 (0x3C) from the beginning of the DOS header is a pointer to the Portable Executable (PE) File header (e_lfanew in MZ structure). DOS will print the error message and terminate, but Windows will follow this pointer to the next batch of information.
Hex Listing of a PE signature, and the pointer to it
The PE header consists only of a File ID signature, with the value "PE\0\0" where each '\0' character is an ASCII NUL character. This signature indicates a) that this file is a legitimate PE file, and b) the byte order of the file. Byte order will not be considered in this chapter, and all PE files are assumed to be in "little endian" format.
The first big chunk of information lies in the COFF header, directly after the PE signature.
The COFF header is present in both COFF object files (before they are linked) and in PE files where it is known as the "File header". The COFF header has some information that is useful to an executable, and some information that is more useful to an object file.
Here is the COFF header, presented as a C data structure:
This field determines what machine the file was compiled for. A hex value of 0x14C (332 in decimal) is the code for an Intel 80386.
Here's a list of possible values it can have.
The number of sections that are described at the end of the PE headers.
IMAGE_FILE_RELOCS_STRIPPED
IMAGE_FILE_EXECUTABLE_IMAGE
IMAGE_FILE_LINE_NUMS_STRIPPED
IMAGE_FILE_LOCAL_SYMS_STRIPPED
IMAGE_FILE_AGGRESIVE_WS_TRIM
IMAGE_FILE_LARGE_ADDRESS_AWARE
The application can handle addresses greater than 2 GB
IMAGE_FILE_BYTES_REVERSED_LO
The bytes of the word are reversed(obsolete)
IMAGE_FILE_DEBUG_STRIPPED
IMAGE_FILE_REMOVABLE_RUN_FROM_SWAP
If the image is on removable media, copy it to and run it from the swap file
IMAGE_FILE_NET_RUN_FROM_SWAP
If the image is on the network, copy it to and run it from the swap file
IMAGE_FILE_UP_SYSTEM_ONLY
The image should only be ran on a single processor computer
IMAGE_FILE_BYTES_REVERSED_HI
The bytes of the word are reversed(obsolete)
The "PE Optional Header" is not "optional" per se, because it is required in Executable files, but not in COFF object files. There are two different versions of the optional header depending on whether or not the file is 64 bit or 32 bit. The Optional header includes lots and lots of information that can be used to pick apart the file structure, and obtain some useful information about it.
The PE Optional Header occurs directly after the COFF header, and some sources even show the two headers as being part of the same structure. This wikibook separates them out for convenience.
Here is the 64 bit PE Optional Header presented as a C data structure:
This is the 32 bit version of the PE Optional Header presented as a C data structure:
This is the data_directory(also known as IMAGE_DATA_DIRECTORY) structure as found in the two structures above:
Contains a signature that identifies the image.
IMAGE_NT_OPTIONAL_HDR32_MAGIC
IMAGE_NT_OPTIONAL_HDR64_MAGIC
IMAGE_ROM_OPTIONAL_HDR_MAGIC
The major version number of the linker.
The minor version number of the linker.
The size of the code section, in bytes, or the sum of all such sections if there are multiple code sections.
The size of the initialized data section, in bytes, or the sum of all such sections if there are multiple initialized data sections.
The size of the uninitialized data section, in bytes, or the sum of all such sections if there are multiple uninitialized data sections.
A pointer to the entry point function, relative to the image base address. For executable files, this is the starting address. For device drivers, this is the address of the initialization function. The entry point function is optional for DLLs. When no entry point is present, this member is zero.
A pointer to the beginning of the code section, relative to the image base.
A pointer to the beginning of the data section, relative to the image base.
The alignment of sections loaded in memory, in bytes. This value must be greater than or equal to the FileAlignment member. The default value is the page size for the system.
The alignment of the raw data of sections in the image file, in bytes. The value should be a power of 2 between 512 and 64K (inclusive). The default is 512. If the SectionAlignment member is less than the system page size, this member must be the same as SectionAlignment.
The major version number of the required operating system.
The minor version number of the required operating system.
The major version number of the image.
The minor version number of the image.
The major version number of the subsystem.
The minor version number of the subsystem.
This member is reserved and must be 0.
The combined size of the following items, rounded to a multiple of the value specified in the FileAlignment member.
e_lfanew member of DOS_Header
The image file checksum. The following files are validated at load time: all drivers, any DLL loaded at boot time, and any DLL loaded into a critical system process.
The Subsystem that will be invoked to run the executable
No subsystem required (device drivers and native system processes)
IMAGE_SUBSYSTEM_WINDOWS_GUI
IMAGE_SUBSYSTEM_WINDOWS_CUI
IMAGE_SUBSYSTEM_POSIX_CUI
IMAGE_SUBSYSTEM_WINDOWS_CE_GUI
IMAGE_SUBSYSTEM_EFI_APPLICATION
IMAGE_SUBSYSTEM_EFI_BOOT_SERVICE_DRIVER
IMAGE_SUBSYSTEM_EFI_RUNTIME_DRIVER
IMAGE_SUBSYSTEM_WINDOWS_BOOT_APPLICATION
IMAGE_DLLCHARACTERISTICS_DYNAMIC_BASE
The DLL can be relocated at load time
IMAGE_DLLCHARACTERISTICS_FORCE_INTEGRITY
IMAGE_DLLCHARACTERISTICS_NX_COMPAT
The image is compatible with data execution prevention (DEP)
The image is isolation aware, but should not be isolated
The image does not use structured exception handling (SEH). No handlers can be called in this image
IMAGE_DLLCHARACTERISTICS_APPCONTAINER
The image must be executed within an App container
IMAGE_DLLCHARACTERISTICS_WDM_DRIVER
IMAGE_DLLCHARACTERISTICS_TERMINAL_SERVER_AWARE
The number of bytes to reserve for the stack. Only the memory specified by the SizeOfStackCommit member is committed at load time; the rest is made available one page at a time until this reserve size is reached.
The number of bytes to commit for the stack.
The number of bytes to reserve for the local heap. Only the memory specified by the SizeOfHeapCommit member is committed at load time; the rest is made available one page at a time until this reserve size is reached.
The number of bytes to commit for the local heap.
The number of directory entries in the remainder of the optional header. Each entry describes a location and size.
Possibly the most interesting member of this structure. Provides RVAs and sizes which locate various data structures, which are used for setting up the execution environment of a module. The data structures that the array of DataDirectory points to can be found in the various sections of the file as pointed to by the Section Table. The details of what these structures do exist in other sections of this page. The most interesting entries in DataDirectory are as follows: Export Directory, Import Directory, Resource Directory, and the Bound Import directory. The .NET descriptor table (CLI Header) contains the metadata of the .NET assembly, the table is an IMAGE_COR20_HEADER structure, which is defined in winnt.h. Note that the offsets in bytes are relative to the beginning of the optional header.
IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_EXPORT
IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_IMPORT
IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_RESOURCE
IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_EXCEPTION
IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_SECURITY
IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_BASERELOC
IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_DEBUG
IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_ARCHITECTURE
IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_GLOBALPTR
IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_TLS
IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_LOAD_CONFIG
IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_BOUND_IMPORT
IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_IAT
IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_DELAY_IMPORT
IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_COM_DESCRIPTOR
COM or .net descriptor table (CLI Header)
Immediately after the PE Optional Header we find a section table. The section table consists of an array of IMAGE_SECTION_HEADER structures. The number of structures that we find in the file are determined by the member NumberOfSections in the COFF Header. Each structure is 40 bytes in length. Pictured below is a hex dump from a program I am writing depicting the section table:
The outlined areas correlate to the Name member of three IMAGE_SECTION_HEADER structures
The IMAGE_SECTION_HEADER defined as a C structure is as follows:
8-byte null-padded UTF-8 string(the string may not be null terminated if all 8 characters are used). For longer names, this member will contain '/' followed by an ASCII representation of a decimal number that is an offset into the string table. Executable images do not use a string table and do not support section names greater than 8 characters.
PhysicalAddress - The file address.
VirtualSize - The total size of the section when loaded into memory, in bytes. If this value is greater than the SizeOfRawData member, the section is filled with zeroes. This field is valid only for executable images and should be set to 0 for object files.
The Misc member should be considered unreliable unless the linker and the behavior of the linker that was used is known.
The address of the first byte of the section when loaded into memory, relative to the image base. For object files, this is the address of the first byte before relocation is applied.
The size of the initialized data on disk, in bytes. This value must be a multiple of the FileAlignment member of the PE Optional Header structure. If this value is less than the VirtualSize member, the remainder of the section is filled with zeroes. If the section contains only uninitialized data, the value is 0.
A file pointer relative to the beginning of the file to the first page within the COFF file. This value must be a multiple of the FileAlignment member of the PE Optional Header structure. If a section contains only uninitialized data this value should be 0.
A file pointer to the beginning of the relocation entries for the section. If there are no relocations, this value is 0.
A file pointer to the beginning of the line-number entries for the section. If there are no COFF line numbers, this value is 0.
The number of relocation entries for the section. This value is 0 for executable images.
The number of line-number entries for the section.
The table below defines the possible 32-bit mask values for this member:
IMAGE_SCN_TYPE_NO_PAD
The section should not be padded to the next boundary. This flag is obsolete and is replaced by IMAGE_SCN_ALIGN_1BYTES
IMAGE_SCN_CNT_INITIALIZED_DATA
IMAGE_SCN_CNT_UNINITIALIZED_DATA
The section contains comments or other information. This is valid only for object files
The section will not become part of the image. This is valid only for object files
The section contains COMDAT data. This is valid only for object files
IMAGE_SCN_NO_DEFER_SPEC_EXC
Reset speculative exceptions handling bits in the TLB entries for this section
The section contains data referenced through the global pointer
Align data on a 1-byte boundary. This is valid only for object files
Align data on a 2-byte boundary. This is valid only for object files
Align data on a 4-byte boundary. This is valid only for object files
Align data on a 8-byte boundary. This is valid only for object files
Align data on a 16-byte boundary. This is valid only for object files
Align data on a 32-byte boundary. This is valid only for object files
Align data on a 64-byte boundary. This is valid only for object files
Align data on a 128-byte boundary. This is valid only for object files
Align data on a 256-byte boundary. This is valid only for object files
Align data on a 512-byte boundary. This is valid only for object files
IMAGE_SCN_ALIGN_1024BYTES
Align data on a 1024-byte boundary. This is valid only for object files
IMAGE_SCN_ALIGN_2048BYTES
Align data on a 2048-byte boundary. This is valid only for object files
IMAGE_SCN_ALIGN_4096BYTES
Align data on a 4096-byte boundary. This is valid only for object files
IMAGE_SCN_ALIGN_8192BYTES
Align data on a 8192-byte boundary. This is valid only for object files
IMAGE_SCN_LNK_NRELOC_OVFL
The section contains extended relocations. The count of relocations for the section exceeds the 16 bits that is reserved for it in the section header. If the NumberOfRelocations field in the section header is 0xffff, the actual relocation count is stored in the VirtualAddress field of the first relocation. It is an error if IMAGE_SCN_LNK_NRELOC_OVFL is set and there are fewer than 0xffff relocations in the section
IMAGE_SCN_MEM_DISCARDABLE
The section can be discarded as needed
IMAGE_SCN_MEM_NOT_CACHED
IMAGE_SCN_MEM_NOT_PAGED
The section can be shared in memory
The section can be executed as code
.text/.code/CODE/TEXT - Contains executable code (machine instructions)
.textbss/TEXTBSS - Present if Incremental Linking is enabled
.data/.idata/DATA/IDATA - Contains initialised data
.bss/BSS - Contains uninitialised data
.rsrc - Contains resource data
There are two types of linking that can be used: static and dynamic. Static uses a library of precompiled functions. This precompiled code can be inserted into the final executable to implement a function, saving the programmer a lot of time. In contrast, dynamic linking allows subroutine code to reside in a different file (or module), which is loaded at runtime by the operating system. This is also known as a "Dynamically linked library", or DLL. A library is a module containing a series of functions or values that can be exported. This is different from the term executable, which imports things from libraries to do what it wants. From here on, "module" means any file of PE format, and a "Library" is any module which exports and imports functions and values.
It saves disk space, if more than one executable links to the library module
Allows instant updating of routines, without providing new executables for all applications
Can save space in memory by mapping the code of a library into more than one process
Increases abstraction of implementation. The method by which an action is achieved can be modified without the need for reprogramming of applications. This is extremely useful for backward compatibility with operating systems.
This section discusses how this is achieved using the PE file format. An important point to note at this point is that anything can be imported or exported between modules, including variables as well as subroutines.
The downside of dynamically linking modules together is that, at runtime, the software which is initialising an executable must link these modules together. For various reasons, you cannot declare that "The function in this dynamic library will always exist in memory here". If that memory address is unavailable or the library is updated, the function will no longer exist there, and the application trying to use it will break. Instead, each module (library or executable) must declare what functions or values it exports to other modules, and also what it wishes to import from other modules.
As said above, a module cannot declare where in memory it expects a function or value to be. Instead, it declares where in its own memory it expects to find a pointer to the value it wishes to import. This permits the module to address any imported value, wherever it turns up in memory.
Exports are functions and values in one module that have been declared to be shared with other modules. This is done through the use of the "Export Directory", which is used to translate between the name of an export (or "Ordinal", see below), and a location in memory where the code or data can be found. The start of the export directory is identified by the IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_EXPORT entry of the resource directory. All export data must exist in the same section. The directory is headed by the following structure:
The "Characteristics" value is generally unused, TimeDateStamp describes the time the export directory was generated, MajorVersion and MinorVersion should describe the version details of the directory, but their nature is undefined. These values have little or no impact on the actual exports themselves. The "Name" value is an RVA to a zero terminated ASCII string, the name of this library name, or module.
Each exported value has both a name and an "ordinal" (a kind of index). The actual exports themselves are described through AddressOfFunctions, which is an RVA to an array of RVAs, each pointing to a different function or value to be exported. The size of this array is in the value NumberOfFunctions. Each of these functions has an ordinal. The "Base" value is used as the ordinal of the first export, and the next RVA in the array is Base+1, and so forth.
Each entry in the AddressOfFunctions array is identified by a name, found through the RVA AddressOfNames. The data where AddressOfNames points to is an array of RVAs, of the size NumberOfNames. Each RVA points to a zero terminated ASCII string, each being the name of an export. There is also a second array, pointed to by the RVA in AddressOfNameOrdinals. This is also of size NumberOfNames, but each value is a 16 bit word, each value being an ordinal. These two arrays are parallel and are used to get an export value from AddressOfFunctions. To find an export by name, search the AddressOfNames array for the correct string and then take the corresponding value from the AddressOfNameOrdinals array. This value is then used as index to AddressOfFunctions (yes, it's 0-based index actually, NOT base-biased ordinal, as the official documentation suggests!).
As well as being able to export functions and values in a module, the export directory can forward an export to another library. This allows more flexibility when re-organising libraries: perhaps some functionality has branched into another module. If so, an export can be forwarded to that library, instead of messy reorganising inside the original module.
Forwarding is achieved by making an RVA in the AddressOfFunctions array point into the section which contains the export directory, something that normal exports should not do. At that location, there should be a zero terminated ASCII string of format "LibraryName.ExportName" for the appropriate place to forward this export to.
The other half of dynamic linking is importing functions and values into an executable or other module. Before runtime, compilers and linkers do not know where in memory a value that needs to be imported could exist. The import table solves this by creating an array of pointers at runtime, each one pointing to the memory location of an imported value. This array of pointers exists inside of the module at a defined RVA location. In this way, the linker can use addresses inside of the module to access values outside of it.
The start of the import directory is pointed to by both the IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_IAT and IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_IMPORT entries of the resource directory (the reason for this is uncertain). At that location, there is an array of IMAGE_IMPORT_DESCRIPTOR structures. Each of these identify a library or module that has a value we need to import. The array continues until an entry where all the values are zero. The structure is as follows:
The TimeDateStamp is relevant to the act of "Binding", see below. The Name value is an RVA to an ASCII string, naming the library to import. ForwarderChain will be explained later. The only thing of interest at this point, are the RVAs OriginalFirstThunk and FirstThunk. Both these values point to arrays of RVAs, each of which point to a IMAGE_IMPORT_BY_NAMES struct. The arrays are terminated with an entry that is equal to zero. These two arrays are parallel and point to the same structure, in the same order. The reason for this will become apparent shortly.
Each of these IMAGE_IMPORT_BY_NAMES structs has the following form:
"Name" is an ASCII string of any size that names the value to be imported. This is used when looking up a value in the export directory (see above) through the AddressOfNames array. The "Hint" value is an index into the AddressOfNames array; to save searching for a string, the loader first checks the AddressOfNames entry corresponding to "Hint".
To summarise: The import table consists of a large array of IMAGE_IMPORT_DESCRIPTORs, terminated by an all-zero entry. These descriptors identify a library to import things from. There are then two parallel RVA arrays, each pointing at IMAGE_IMPORT_BY_NAME structures, which identify a specific value to be imported.
Using the above import directory at runtime, the loader finds the appropriate modules, loads them into memory, and seeks the correct export. However, to be able to use the export, a pointer to it must be stored somewhere in the importing module's memory. This is why there are two parallel arrays, OriginalFirstThunk and FirstThunk, identifying IMAGE_IMPORT_BY_NAME structures. Once an imported value has been resolved, the pointer to it is stored in the FirstThunk array. It can then be used at runtime to address imported values.
The PE file format also supports a peculiar feature known as "binding". The process of loading and resolving import addresses can be time consuming, and in some situations this is to be avoided. If a developer is fairly certain that a library is not going to be updated or changed, then the addresses in memory of imported values will not change each time the application is loaded. So, the import address can be precomputed and stored in the FirstThunk array before runtime, allowing the loader to skip resolving the imports - the imports are "bound" to a particular memory location. However, if the versions numbers between modules do not match, or the imported library needs to be relocated, the loader will assume the bound addresses are invalid, and resolve the imports anyway.
The "TimeDateStamp" member of the import directory entry for a module controls binding; if it is set to zero, then the import directory is not bound. If it is non-zero, then it is bound to another module. However, the TimeDateStamp in the import table must match the TimeDateStamp in the bound module's FileHeader, otherwise the bound values will be discarded by the loader.
Binding can of course be a problem if the bound library / module forwards its exports to another module. In these cases, the non-forwarded imports can be bound, but the values which get forwarded must be identified so the loader can resolve them. This is done through the ForwarderChain member of the import descriptor. The value of "ForwarderChain" is an index into the FirstThunk and OriginalFirstThunk arrays. The OriginalFirstThunk for that index identifies the IMAGE_IMPORT_BY_NAME structure for a import that needs to be resolved, and the FirstThunk for that index is the index of another entry that needs to be resolved. This continues until the FirstThunk value is -1, indicating no more forwarded values to import.
Resources are data items in modules which are difficult to be stored or described using the chosen programming language. This requires a separate compiler or resource builder, allowing insertion of dialog boxes, icons, menus, images, and other types of resources, including arbitrary binary data. Although a number of Resource API calls can be used to retrieve resources from a PE file, we are going to look at the resources without the use of those APIs.
The first thing we need to do when we want to manually manipulate a file's resources is to find the resource section. To do this we need some information found in the DataDirectory array and the Section Table. We need the RVA stored in the VirtualAddress member of the DataDirectory[IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_RESOURCE] structure found in the PE Optional Header. Once the RVA is known we can then lookup that RVA in the Section Table by comparing the VirtualAddress member of the DataDirectory[IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_RESOURCE] structure with the VirtualAddress member of an IMAGE_SECTION_HEADER. Except in rare cases, the VirtualAddress member of the DataDirectory structure will equal the value of the VirtualAddress member of an IMAGE_SECTION_HEADER. The name member of that particular IMAGE_SECTION_HEADER will except in rare cases be named, '.rsrc'. Once the correct IMAGE_SECTION_HEADER structure is found the PointerToRawData member can be used to locate the resource section. The PointerToRawData member contains an offset from the beginning of the file that will lead you to the first byte of the resource section. The picture below depicts an example of a DataDirectory array on the left with an IMAGE_SECTION_HEADER on the right populated with the information for the resource section. We can see the highlighted line underneath of Directory Information '2 RVA: 20480 Size: 3512' has a VirtualAddress(RVA) of 20480, this corresponds to the VirtualAddress of 20480 for the .rsrc(resource) section. You can also see that the value of PointerToRawData is equal to 7168. In this particular PE file we will find the resource section starting at offset 7168 from the beginning of the file.
Once the resource section is found we can start looking at the structures and data contained in that section.
The IMAGE_RESOURCE_DIRECTORY is the very first structure we come across and it starts at the 1st byte of the resource section.
IMAGE_RESOURCE_DIRECTORY structure:
Characteristics is unused, and TimeDateStamp is normally the time of creation, although it doesn't matter if it's set or not. MajorVersion and MinorVersion relate to the versioning info of the resources: the fields have no defined values. Immediately following the IMAGE_RESOURCE_DIRECTORY structure is a series of IMAGE_RESOURCE_DIRECTORY_ENTRYs, the number of which are defined by the total of NumberOfNamedEntries and NumberOfIdEntries. The first portion of these entries are for named resources, the latter for ID resources, depending on the values in the IMAGE_RESOURCE_DIRECTORY struct. The actual shape of the resource entry structure is as follows:
The NameId value has dual purpose: if the most significant bit (or sign bit) is clear, then the lower 16 bits are an ID number of the resource. Alternately, if the top bit is set, then the lower 31 bits make up an offset from the start of the resource data to the name string of this particular resource. The Data value also has a dual purpose: if the most significant bit is set, the remaining 31 bits form an offset from the start of the resource data to another IMAGE_RESOURCE_DIRECTORY (i.e. this entry is an interior node of the resource tree). Otherwise, this is a leaf node, and Data contains the offset from the start of the resource data to a structure which describes the specifics of the resource data itself (which can be considered to be an ordered stream of bytes):
The Data value contains an RVA to the actual resource data, Size is self-explanatory, and CodePage contains the Unicode codepage to be used for decoding Unicode-encoded strings in the resource (if any). Reserved should be set to 0.
The above system of resource directory and entries allows simple storage of resources, by name or ID number. However, this can get very complicated very quickly. Different types of resources, the resources themselves, and instances of resources in other languages can become muddled in just one directory of resources. For this reason, the resource directory has been given a structure to work by, allowing separation of the different resources.
For this purpose, the "Data" value of resource entries points at another IMAGE_RESOURCE_DIRECTORY structure, forming a tree-diagram like organisation of resources. The first level of resource entries identifies the type of the resource: cursors, bitmaps, icons and similar. They use the ID method of identifying the resource entries, of which there are twelve defined values in total. More user defined resource types can be added. Each of these resource entries points at a resource directory, naming the actual resources themselves. These can be of any name or value. These point at yet another resource directory, which uses ID numbers to distinguish languages, allowing different specific resources for systems using a different language. Finally, the entries in the language directory actually provide the offset to the resource data itself, the format of which is not defined by the PE specification and can be treated as an arbitrary stream of bytes.
Windows DLL files are a brand of PE file with a few key differences:
The DLL flag set in the PE header.
DLLs may be loaded in one of two ways, a) at load-time, or b) by calling the LoadModule() Win32 API function.
Functions are exported from a DLL file by using the following syntax:
The "__declspec" keyword here is not a C language standard, but is implemented by many compilers to set extendable, compiler-specific options for functions and variables. Microsoft C Compiler and GCC versions that run on windows allow for the __declspec keyword, and the dllexport property.
Functions may also be exported from regular .exe files, and .exe files with exported functions may be called dynamically in a similar manner to .dll files. This is a rare occurrence, however.
There are several ways to determine which functions are exported by a DLL. A common approach is to use dumpbin in the following manner:
This will post a list of the function exports, along with their ordinal and RVA to the console.
In a similar manner to function exports, a program may import a function from an external DLL file. The dll file will load into the process memory when the program is started, and the function will be used like a local function. DLL imports need to be prototyped in the following manner, for the compiler and linker to recognize that the function is coming from an external library:
If is often useful to determine which functions are imported from external libraries when examining a program. To list import files to the console, use dumpbin in the following manner:
You can also use depends.exe to list imported and exported functions. Depends is a a GUI tool and comes with Microsoft Platform SDK.
This book is intended for adult and teenage learners of English as a second language who are at B2 (Upper Intermediate) level. B2 refers to level B2 on in the Common European Framework of Reference. Usually students of this level have studied English for at least 4 years or have previously taken the University of Cambridge PET examination or wish to sit the FCE (First) examination in the future. This book is also suitable for use by students who are preparing for similar examinations, for example the 'matura' examination in Polish state schools.
Because this book is read by people of all ages any new edits will have to be reviewed by an administrator or a reviewer before they are visible.
Clare Bridge, Cambridge University, United Kingdom
Niagara Falls, Canada / United States
Unit 2 - I am learning English for travel
Unit 5 - I'm going to Athens in the summer
Unit 6 - I used to be a student
Unit 7 - I'm looking forward to Christmas
Unit 9 - I want to be a scientist
Unit 10 - You mustn't smoke in here
Unit 11 - Mary is wearing a beautiful, old dress
Unit 12 - Rome wasn't built in a day
v • d • e OERlabs OpenbookFieldbook
Field Notes: What is the setting? · Project: Our approach · Lessons lOERned: Our experiences · Headnotes: Explaining and following the experiencesOpenlabs
Field Notes · Project · Lessons lOERned · HeadnotesOER-Seminars
Field Notes · Project · Lessons lOERned · HeadnotesStudent Participation
Field Notes · Expert questionnaire OER · Power relations in higher education · Headnotes: Explaining and following the experiencesPodcast
Field Notes · Project · Lessons lOERned · HeadnotesWeblog
Project · Lessons lOERnedTwitter
Communication between understanding and comprehension · Wanting to change higher education institutions · Higher education between researching and designingPeople
OERlabs seminars - broadly based detailed work
University and teaching development represent a fundamental part of the project efforts in the OERlabs. To this end, there was a structural link within the project between the sub-areas and the stakeholders involved. One of these stakeholders is the group of students, more precisely the debate about students within the teacher education chain and freely available educational materials and open practices.
The implementation of the round tables (see MSD Setup) represents an overarching macro-level of sustainable university and teaching development within the framework of the project. Our OERlabs seminars play a role on the meso and micro level in the course of the project. The seminars deal on the one hand with the OER topic and on the other hand build a bridge between science and profession/practice. After all, sustainability is not ensured by institutional changes alone, but also by the actors and stakeholders who pick up a topic, accept it and put it into practice.
How do OER get to the students?
In theory, this question would be easy to answer, but when formulating an answer, appropriate institutional framework conditions must be taken into account (see Number of Students: UoC Profile). More precisely, the focus of the OER topic is not on the definition of the field (e.g.: "What are OER?"; "What are licenses?"), since these points are clearly defined both by research and the practical community (see Creative Commons). Rather, the question of attitudes towards openness, cooperation and collaboration comes to the forefront.
Accordingly, OER is not so much a problem for students to use as an information resource or educational material, but rather to exploit the actual potential based on the 5R permissions of Open Educational Resources:
Based on previous experience in teaching, the joint creation and transfer/processing of OER is more likely to emerge as a difficulty in the higher education landscape. This applies not only to students, but also to lecturers and teachers, because cooperation and collaboration are possible at all levels. Understandably, this is aggravated by the fact that participants have different levels of knowledge about media technology and media law issues. In some cases (digital) media are seen as part of a media didactic arrangement, but in others they are used purely as "add-ons" to motivate or activate learners.
In order to initiate cooperation and knowledge sharing along the teacher education chain and to bring all relevant actors into cooperative action, practice-oriented solutions for OER as teaching material, as well as open and collaborative educational practice with regard to school and teaching should find their place at the UzK, namely among students, future teachers and their lecturers. In order to make all this possible, the OERlabs were involved in basic teaching in the practical phases of teacher training, as well as in suitable modules in other courses of study.
Practical training/phases during teacher training and media didactics
The OERlabs seminars were located at the interfaces to the traineeship and to teacher training. The connection to the practical phases of the teacher training course and the combination of modules within media didactics made it possible to deal with the topic more intensively than before. In order to give an overview of the basic structure of the OER seminars, it should be mentioned that the corresponding courses were held in tandem (cooperative and collaborative) by experienced teachers and university lecturers. This meant that topics were taken into the courses and dealt with in a practice-oriented manner. Furthermore, the practical phases were predestined for dealing with the practical implementation of the 5-R of the OER, since, as described in more detail below, student teachers should recognize, experience and understand important connections between theory and practice in this phase. For this reason, these courses were also coordinated by the Centre for Teacher Education (ZfL), i.e. the teaching planning was in the hands of a participating cooperation partner. In addition, an OER course was embedded in the curriculum of the junior professorship Media Didactics, since the project management as junior professor was involved in the teaching with half of the teaching load anyway.
The work placements are part of the teacher training program at the UzK and take place in the second practical phase of the Bachelor's program. Here the students have three different possibilities to complete the vocational field internship (BFP): By spending time at a school or in an extracurricular vocational field in connection with an accompanying seminar; recognition of an activity before studying, as well as an accompanying seminar; or as a project within the framework of a seminar. There were three topic-specific seminars to choose from:
Design and production of digital learning materials
These three project seminars were organised within the framework of OERlabs and followed the following principles:
Not (only) OER, but OEP
Design and production of digital teaching/learning content
In contrast to the BFP seminars mentioned above, which are only aimed at students of teaching professions, the OERlabs seminar was offered through the junior professorships in media pedagogy and media didactics to students from various fields of study, including educational science, pedagogy, music mediation and intermedia. This seminar dealt with current research and practical issues in media didactics, and students had the opportunity to design, develop and, if possible and desired, implement their own learning materials within the framework of a project. Finally, the respective projects and products were presented and evaluated by an external jury from the media, publishing, educational and university environment.
The structure of the seminars and the integration of the OER theme led to a unique working process in the OERlabs seminars, which on the one hand influenced the attitude towards open practices and freely available material among the students, and on the other hand brought the necessity of cooperative and collaborative work to the forefront through the format. The practical relevance and the theoretical context of both seminar forms brought students in the teacher education chain close to their future working environment and sensitized them equally to the use of OER material in their own teaching.
With regard to the implementation of the student projects, the OERlabs seminars made substantial reference to many aspects of the Frey project method (2010) due to their subject matter, as well as the actors and objectives. The OER was strongly based on the 5-R, which brought action-oriented learning to the forefront. In many cases the instruction was given to fall back on already existing material and to adapt this material according to one's own ideas in order to be able to continue working with it. The practical examination of material was always on the agenda, but it was pointed out and produced by the teachers themselves (see Seminar Information/Tasks for Students and Analysis sheet for digital tools) that freely available materials should be found, used and adapted.
The project groups were also instructed accordingly to reflect together on project steps, especially in the first steps of the concept, the focus was on joint reflection. Although the objective had been set, the project groups first had to formulate appropriate topics in order to be able to carry out the project. The groups always had to keep in mind that the projects or the product should not loose its practical value for learning, teaching or school and teaching. Based on the semester logic - seminars integrated into the curriculum follow the regular course of the semester, whereas BFP seminars follow a block seminar procedure (e.g. some units take place as a block seminar on a weekend and are supplemented by blind learning self-learning phases) - the project work usually lasted an entire semester. Thus, the project groups were faced with the challenge of communicating as openly as possible about the individual work process and the status of their own work, as well as learning to deal independently with situations and dynamics within the group.
Finally, the students were able to look back on a project-based work process, which not only brought with it a corresponding OER product, but could also show them much more the open practices and their potentials. In the OERlabs seminars the students were to be given the opportunity and the perspective to take with them and apply both (self-made) materials and open practices in their future working environment.
The OER seminars at the TU Kaiserslautern are integrated into the courses of the educational science part of the teacher training course. Since there are curricular standards of teacher training in Rheinland-Pfalz, a module is sought in which the contents can be well embedded. From the structure of teacher training, three seminars were shortlisted: First, the seminar "Introduction to Media Education", which is offered in Module 2 for Bachelor students of the 2nd/3rd semester (cf. Field Note TUK). Contents are according to the module manual "Reflective, self-determined and creative handling of media under technical, practical, aesthetic-forming and emancipatory aspects: education and media competence, media concept, media development and concepts of media pedagogy, communication and media also in connection with individual impairments [...]". Students "can reflect on their own use of media and select and design media according to teaching goals and individual learning requirements".[1] In addition, there is a seminar "Approaches and current trends in school development" in module 6 in the Master's program, in which OER could also find a home, the topic of cooperative development of teaching-learning material and open education is a focal point, which raises close intersections on school development issues. A third seminar, which would be fitting, deals with the content "Didactics of E-Learning". Students "know the most important media-specific design possibilities and can assess their application" are the learning objectives of this seminar.
The conception of the seminars should take two conditions into account: firstly, the problem of cooperation in teacher education (A) and secondly, the problem of incentive structures for something new (B).
It is the declared aim of the project measures to establish and develop a cooperative culture. Such a culture benefits from the mutual exchange of intellectual resources and knowledge between the participants and in turn makes this knowledge available, which in turn can lead to the emergence of collective knowledge. Cooperation is a central construct for school quality and school effectiveness (Fend 1998; Dalin & Rolff 1990; Dalin 1999; Ditton 2000, Rolff 1998), but it is mainly investigated in the context of organisational development (e.g. Bauer 2002; Dalin & Rolff 1990), rarely in the context of professionalisation issues. Questions of cooperative media action along the teachers' education chain therefore remain largely unanswered from a media pedagogical point of view. In this context, cooperative media action means joint development and exchange; the mere exchange of materials among one another is less relevant. Almost two thirds of teachers already regularly exchange teaching materials with each other (Richter & Pant, 2016). These materials, however, always remain in the same evaluation circle, where little of their development and individualization potential can unfold. The professional achievements of teachers are thus excluded from the possibilities of being known, shared and further developed in growing networks, whereby specialist knowledge is lost and cooperation in larger networks becomes virtually impossible (cf. Manila 2013[2]). Richter & Pant (2016) state: "The results have shown that most teachers in Germany regularly exchange information and materials related to teaching within the teaching staff, but time-consuming and complex forms of cooperation are rare and can only be observed with a small group of teachers". (Richter & Pant, 2016, p. 34)). In addition, findings from other empirical studies show that even teaching and learning materials are hardly developed jointly (Ihme et al., 2009). The aim of the OERlabs is therefore to establish a culture of joint "creation" and sharing that creates occasions for collaboration in all stages of OER use, production and dissemination. We wanted to illustrate this in the seminars as well. So it was important to us that we sensitize students of teaching professions to OER in a cooperative way and that we integrate school practice from the beginning. To a large extent, teaching is still individual action, cooperation hardly takes place. At the same time, the OERlabs seminars are also an opportunity not only to make cooperation visible through the topic of the seminar, but also to live it in its design. Teamteaching is a possibility to make cooperative teaching visible (Krick & Reich, 2016[3]). Therefore we were looking for teachers from practice who could support us in the organization of the seminars. The OERlabs will be accompanied by an external lecturer who will ensure the right balance between advising and supporting students and their peer-to-peer learning processes in line with the lab concept. As Director of Studies, Head of Department at the State Study Seminar of the Saarland and OER Coach, she brings along an alternative (open) practice and has already initiated the advisory circle, in which the students deal with specialist knowledge, exchange their own generated knowledge and thus approach open educational practices.[4] A student assistant supported the development of these OERlabs seminars and founded the Tutor model by developing into an OER coach. It acts as an additional communicator between experts, consultants and students.
B) Organization of work processes and knowledge management
Even in schools that use digital media and employ motivated teachers, media are usually seen in a narrow context of the educational technology approach, which leads teachers to use technologies only for learning (cf. Schiefner-Rohs & Hofhues 2015) and thus to remain with their concepts, materials and experiences either within themselves or within their colleagues. Media to support everyday work processes - also in class preparation and follow-up - are usually rarely discussed. Thus, in addition to the cooperation problem, a narrower concept of media and the blind spot of the work process organisation become the topic of OERlabs. In addition, there are individual reservations about working with OER. These concern, for example, the potential "gifting" of intellectual property from which others could gain an unfair advantage (cf. Malina & Bonarius 2013[5]). These reservations can prevent productive knowledge management among teachers. The OERlabs have taken these as their starting points in order to create new incentive structures for teachers to approach collaborative media work with the help of OER.
The OERlabs seminars also focus on the following aspects:
Overall societal developments in digitization, migration and inclusion that lead to increasingly heterogeneous learning (and teaching) groups and therefore make adaptable, individualisable teaching and corresponding materials and methods indispensable. This teaching guidance is made possible by OER practices.
OER become interesting for reasons of independence: the material can be constantly updated without having to wait for new books or materials. In addition, teachers benefit from the experience of others on a specific subject, and there may not yet be any publications.
In the seminar evaluations of the teacher training offers, it is usually criticised that only the use of media and media pedagogical competence training can be discussed and discussed in theory, but that there is no concrete practical relevance. This changes due to the concrete work assignments associated with the creation of OER and the exchange of information on it. At the TU KL, various cooperation partners will also offer concrete occasions and support in the labs for the production of media.
With regard to copyright protection, OER licensing is a very secure way to protect intellectual property. Today, digital content is so easily distributed and shared in so many ways that the license can at least ensure the attribution of the material to the original author, thus reducing the incentive for others not to cite the source.
The OER seminars are oriented towards action-oriented media education (Schorb, 2008[6]), in which "it is not the media, but the appropriating individuals in their social context, in which media play an essential role, who are at the centre of media education efforts (...)" (ibid., p. 77), but also project learning according to Frey (2002[7]) such as student orientation (students focus on their own questions), reality orientation (complex phenomena of current social discourse are addressed) and product orientation (e.g. by designing a continuing education course or producing teaching and learning material). Both aspects serve the professional development of students with regard to the acquisition of competences relevant to the work process, especially in the teaching profession.
In the summer semester 2017 there will be a total of five four-hour classroom sessions for bachelor students at TU KL's Media Pedagogy Seminar between May and July, which will provide a framework for the first OERlabs. The sessions deal with finding, creating and sharing OER and later also with their further development, quality assurance and possible uses for and by OER. The seminar also takes up media pedagogical theories and concepts and relates them to OER practices. As "highlight" and quasi "product" of the first OERlabs seminar the students prepare a Workshop on iMedia[8] in Mainz on 30 May at the Open Educational Resources Forum for the participants to prepare, design, implement and reflect on their own responsibility (documented in the blog and wiki!). (see Projektwiki/OERlab). By making the OER practices accessible to others (teachers), the security in one's own dealings with OER is strengthened and new impulses and conceptual thoughts from the workshops are collected for the progress of the OERlabs. In the seminar "Didactics of E-Learning" (Master level), a seminar unit was used for the topic of copyright with OER insertion. Students of the bachelor's seminar in media pedagogy developed a lecture on this subject and had a copyright/license memory created in the group work phase. This not only made a networking with school practice visible, but also a vertical networking between students of the Bachelor and Master phases.
In the winter semester 2017/2018, this concept was implemented in a similar way, only at one point or another refined or adapted to the semester structure. Once again, the focus was on designing a continuing education event at iMedia as a product, but this time with a focus on school development. The teacher was integrated by Skype for support, the documentation took place in an OLAT course. Students designed OpenLabs events in this seminar. In the 2018 summer semester, the seminar was to be expanded to include school development issues, but did not take place as planned due to a lack of registrations.
↑ http://landesrecht.rlp.de/jportal/portal/t/1tc/page/bsrlpprod.psml?doc.hl=1&doc.id=VVRP-VVRP000003736&documentnumber=14&numberofresults=14&doctyp=vvrp&showdoccase=1&doc.part=F&paramfromHL=true#ivz11
↑ Malina, B. & Bonarius, N. (2013). Leitfaden zu Open Educational Resources in der Hochschulbildung https://www.unesco.de/sites/default/files/2018-01/DUK_Leitfaden_OER_in_der_Hochschulbildung_2015_barrierefrei-1.pdf
↑ Kricke, M. & Reich, K. (2016) Teamteaching. Weinheim and others: Beltz.
↑ For example, the OERlabs seminars are publicly documented, e.g. the 2017 seminar at http://projektwiki.zum.de/wiki/OERlab
↑ Malina, B. & Bonarius, N. (2013). Leitfaden zu Open Educational Resources in der Hochschulbildung https://www.unesco.de/sites/default/files/2018-01/DUK_Leitfaden_OER_in_der_Hochschulbildung_2015_barrierefrei-1.pdf
↑ Schorb, B. (2008). Handlungsorientierte Medienpädagogik. In U. Sander, F. von Gross & K.-U. Hugger (Hrsg.), Handbuch Medienpädagogik (S. 75-86). Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.
↑ Frey, K. (2002). Die Projektmethode. Weinheim: Beltz.
↑ The iMedia is the largest training further meeting of the country Rhineland-Palatinate for teachers inside. It is conceived and accomplished on behalf the Ministry of Education of the Pedagogical Landesinstitut for teachers of all school types after annually changing main topics. (...)It sees itself as a forum for practice-oriented exchange and would like to set important impulses. The scientific keynote lecture at the beginning and a large number of information shops throughout the day will focus on exploring the potential of digital media for innovative and motivating, differentiating and inclusive teaching and learning. The aim of learning about and through digital media is to contribute to increasing the quality and efficiency of educational processes" (https://imedia.bildung-rp.de/ueber-die-imedia.html)
Since the introduction of the modern running shoe in the 1970's (Lieberman, et al., 2010), footwear manufacturers have claimed to accommodate specifically for every foot; motion control for low arches, cushioning for high arches and stability for normal arches (Rixe, Gallo, & Silvis, 2012). This has been achieved through fancy air-pocket and gel sacks, to cushioned soles and "motion control" technology (Collier, 2011; Rixe, Gallo, & Silvis; Ryan 2010).
Despite these advances, the prevalence of running injuries, especially to the hips, knees and ankles, have increased (Kerrigan, et al., 2009; McGregor & Wallack, 2011). It has been suggested that it was Christopher McDougall's 2009 "Born To Run" book which started the barefoot-running craze (Bates, 2012; McGregor & Wallack). Since then, a number of barefoot shoes have hit the market offering a safe alternative to the latest shod-footwear, whilst still providing the benefit of protection to uneven terrains, adverse weather conditions and outright dangerous surfaces (Ryan, 2010). Some of these innovative footwear include ....... However, it is the first (and most popular) barefoot running product,Vibram's FiveFingers which will be discussed in further detail.
Wikiversity has learning materials about Barefoot running
Physical goods with industrial origin (apparel, shoes, cars)
Services for personal satisfaction (films, bodycare).
Foe each type of industry organizational best practices, KPIs and data collection instruments have been defined but I believe that, up to now, information systems have developed only a local coverage related to immediate needs or to the existence of a single cell information model.
Looking at the whole information context it turns out that quite a few cell have information characteristics (timing, number of data, algorithms) that make a complete formal model unfeasible to exist. It turns out more useful to adopt a simplifying approach and reengineer the process.
Sometimes the general approach is not possible also because it might happen that you are still defining the elementary process. In particular there are many cells not covered by information models and instruments; most of these situation occurs from historical priorities or from lack of technical instruments.
I think that, actually, the whole part related to customer subjectivity and sociality is left to the retailer experience and intuition. This attitude implies that satisfaction indexes are bound to be very inaccurate and inefficient.
Obviously the relative weight of the various cells is related to the context we are working and, up to now, the “product” cells have been the most important.
In a globalized world were access to product will be eased by technical instruments, other factors will become more and more important so we shall get to analyze them.
We also need to stress that subjectivity and sociality assume a fairly different meaning in the internet world and this aspect is completely unknown at the moment.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Since you completed Bottle Grotto, you don't need BowWow to continue the quest. If you keep him around, he can still help you in combat, or help detect the locations of Secret Seashells, but neither Richard nor the monkey will help you.
Exit to the right, and find Richard's Villa. He gives a quest to find the Golden Leaf in the castle. There's five leaves to find, and you'll need to get a shovel. Purchase it from the store if you haven't already.
You will also need to start on the Trading Sidequest. get the Yoshi Doll from the store and trade it to the northern house for a ribbon. The ribbon is given to the chain-chomp puppy for Dog food. The dog food is then used to purchase bananas.
With the bananas, you can head to the castle. The moneys will build a bridge for you, to the right of the castle. In addition, you will receive a stick for the trading sidequest.
Continue north, and turn west. Slash the bush, and continue underground into the castle. There are five leaves to collect:
To the right of a castle is a set of six holes. Hit the Mad Bomber as he pops out, and dodge the bombs he throws. He drops a leaf when defeated.
To the left of the castle is a bird sitting in a tree. Startle the crow with a rock on the bottom right, and defeat it for the leaf.
Enter the castle. In the second room, eliminate the enemies for a leaf.
Head upstairs. Bomb the two wall statues in the first upstairs room to detach them from the wall. Defeat them both for the leaf (If you don't have bombs, you can harvest some in the room before the final leaf.)
Exit to the south, and re-enter by the center doorway. The door will block progress, but you can grab an urn and throw it to smash it open. Continue north and defeat the Ball & Chain Trooper.
File:TLoZ LA Dungeon 3 map.png Map of the Key Cavern
You may now explore the key cavern proper. In the first room, pickup a pot, and throw it against the northern door. Continue north, defeat all monsters in the room, and get a small key. Since the west path is blocked, take the east path. The doors will close, forcing you to defeat all monsters in the room to continue (excluding the one in the chest).
Continue north, until you reach a staircase. when you head down, you should be in a room with four locked doors. Of those four doors, the west and south passages lead to dead ends, but you can obtain a key if you defeat all monsters within the room.
If you take the northern exit in the 4-way, you will see a crystal that you can strike. When you do, you may now access the chest just before the staircase, which contains the Owl Beak. You can head two screens south and one screen east to also collect the Map of the dungeon.
Taking the east route opens a room with a conveyor belt, with stairs at the end. Climb up the stairs. Within this section, you will need to collect enough keys to reach the nightmare. In the first room, you will need to find all hidden Zols and destroy them to get the key. Continue north, and head left. In this room, you need to defeat all enemies to unblock both doors. If you have sufficient bombs, you may head north to the miniboss; otherwise, continue west.
In the southwest room, you will be attacked by two Pairodds. You can defeat them for another small key, although doing so may be difficult without the Pegasus boots. However, you can place a bomb at the point they will teleport and approach them to destroy them. Defeating them should release a key. Continue north for two rooms, and grab the bomb pickup. You may now return through the stairs, and proceed to the miniboss.
The miniboss are two Dodongo Snakes. To defeat one of them, you need to place three bombs in its mouth. To defeat both, you will need six bombs, although a quirk allows you to only defeat one snake and leaving the room to destroy the second. When they are destroyed, you can proceed right to collect the Pegasus Boots.
With these boots, you can backtrack to the beginning of the dungeon, and head east. You can now run past the vacuum, and collect the small key. However, you will still need to continue to the east from where you collected the boots.
The arrow shows where you can place a bomb, which can be done later. Continue north, and defeat the Bombites and other hidden monsters. Continue left for a compass and search for a breakable wall on the left (by tapping it with your sword) and blow it open. You should find another key.
Next, bomb the wall marked by the arrow. Use the boots and feather to jump over the gap, and turn north to obtain the nightmare key.
To reach the nightmare, head to the room south of the miniboss. Unlock the series of four gates using the keys collected. You will need to get past the spikes, which is performed by ramming the Thwomp to the right. When you get to the stairs, you can ram the Pairodds with the boots and sword to quickly defeat them.
Continue left. If you want to explore more of the dungeon (which is optional at this point), you can defat all the keese to release a key. otherwise, head north to engage Slime Eyes. It will first taunt you, saying that you can't see it. Ram the back wall to force it to fall down, then attack it with your sword. When it begins to divide, use the boots again to split it in half.
Once the eyes are separate, you can slash them to death. However, if one of them jumps high up, you will need to switch the pegasus boots with the feather to avoid being stunned when they slam against the ground. Once both eyes are destroyed, you may proceed north to collect the Sea Lily's Bell.
✔ Appearance ✔ Standard ✔ Console
If an EXIT "Label" is in the main program, the "Label" must be inside the main. If an EXIT "Label" is in a LOCAL FN, the "Label" must be inside the same LOCAL FN. If an EXIT "Label" is nested inside one or more SELECT [CASE] statements, the "Label" must be after the last END SELECT.
Any exceptions to the above conditions could result in substantial penalties or crashes.
Originality is a defining feature of academic research. Using new media can empower you to conduct
William Isaac Monkhouse's Electoral Roll registration 1911 Waimarino, Bay of Plenty
New Zealand Electoral Rolls, 1853-1981
Legend: No on Roll, Name in full, Residence, Occupation or Addition, and Property Qualification, if any
Entry: 7777, Monkhouse, William Isaac, Rangataua, Electrician[1]
Monkhouse commences with PMGD as a mechanic in the Electrical Engineer's Branch but has not yet been appointed to the public service and requires an exemption to give effect
COMMONWEALTH PUBLIC SERVICE. Melbourne, 6th June, 1913. THE following notification respecting staff changes, &c., is made in accordance with the Commonwealth Public Service Act and Regulations:— . . . Exemptions from the Provisions of the Act. . . . Walter Isaac Monkhouse, Mechanic, Electrical Engineer's Branch, not exceeding three months from 14th May, 1913. . . . [2]
Monkhouse passes PMGD examination held May/June 1913 for appointment as mechanic
COMMONWEALTH PUBLIC SERVICE. Examination No. 442. For Appointment as Mechanic, Postmaster-General's Department, New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, and South Australia. (Held, 17th May to 17th June, 1913.) THE following are the names of the candidates, in their order of merit, who were successful at the above Examination, and have thereby qualified for appointment to vacancies arising during the ensuing period of eighteen months, viz., until and including 10th January, 1915. Each candidate underwent the Practical Tests, but was allowed his choice of the remaining sections of the Examination, viz., Oral Examination or Written Examination. To pass the Examination a candidate was required to obtain at least 300 of the 500 marks available. A candidate from outside the service was also required to pass a qualifying Examination in Handwriting, Spelling, and Arithmetic. Where two or more candidates secure the same total number of marks their order of merit has been determined by the number of marks allotted for the Practical Tests, and, where such marks are equal, then by ballot. As notified in the Commonwealth Gazette, of 15th February, 1913, the number of vacancies which it is estimated will probably occur during the ensuing period of eighteen months, are:— New South Wales, 50; Victoria, 20; Queensland, 10; South Australia, 10. Successful candidates, up to the twice the estimated number of vacancies for each State, have, where that number is available, been entered on the "Register of Qualified Candidates" in accordance with the Regulations; the names are also given of those who, though successful, were not sufficiently high on the list to be registered. In the event of the vacancies arising during the prescribed eighteen months being in excess of the number of candidates registered, such vacancies may be filled from the list of unregistered successful candidates. Upon appointment, a successful candidate from outside the service will be required to produce evidence of the date of his birth, and a medical certificate, satisfying the Commissioner in whatever particulars he may determine, of sound bodily health and freedom from physical defects. An appointee will also be required to assure his life in accordance with the Regulations. If a successful candidate decline to accept an appointment offered to him, or fail to reply within seven days to a communication from the Commissioner or a Public Service Inspector respecting his nomination to the Public Service, his name may be removed from the "Register of Qualified Candidates." . . . NEW SOUTH WALES. . . .
Name: Monkhouse, Walter Isaac
Subject, Maximum Marks, Pass Marks, Actual Marks
Oral Examination: 200, N/A, Not taken
D. C. MoLACHLAN, Commissioner. W. J. CLEMENS, Secretary. Office of the Commonwealth Public Service Commissioner, Melbourne, 11th July, 1913.[3]
William Isaac Monkhouse's Electoral Roll registration 1914 Waimarino, Bay of Plenty
New Zealand Electoral Rolls, 1853-1981
Legend: No on Roll, Name in full, Residence, Occupation or Addition, and Property Qualification, if any
Entry: 4646, Monkhouse, William Isaac, Rangataua, Electrician[4]
Registration District: PETERSHAM[5]
NSW BDM birth registration for Walter Isaac Monkhouse's daughter Alma Irene Monkhouse
Mother's name: Irene O.
Father/parent's name: Walter I.
Likely Walter Isaac Monkhouse arrives in Brisbane on the steamer Wyreema ex Melbourne and Sydney
SHIPPING. ARRIVALS. January 8.— WYREEMA, 6,500 tons, Captain Grahl, from Melbourne and Sydney. Passengers: Mesdames M. Flitson, F. Shaw, S. Watson, R. Wishart, D. Oliver, W. Conwey, M. Bodsworth, S. Long, S. Lord, D. McGregor, M. Horsburgh, L. Andrawatha, N. Power, J. Howard, T. Gerler, Borrowdale, A. Baxter, C. Crocker, T. Glen, T. Schweikert, G. Postans, F. Cathermole, E. Ballantyne, T. Bannister, Misses E. Bevan, F. Badham, A. Elliott, M. Smith, M. Marriott, C. E. King, O. Roberts, Horsburgh, R. Blease, P. Hodsdon, A. C. Mills, E. Thompson, J. Nickolls, Thompson, J. Moran, J. Glen, More, N. Brady, S. King, L. Devlin, E. Ballantyne, Messrs. C. Monteath, F. Wood, A. Luder, H. Griffiths, A. M. Hislop, F. Shaw, D. Watson, A. Bell, D. Paterson, W. Eaton, E. Davis, W. Thorpe, Foote (2), C. H. Watson, E. B. Tregear, R. Wishart, E. Oliver, T. Johnson, Denver, A. Rosebrook, W. Remington, Disker (2), E. Bailey, D. Kilgour, E. Hutchison, F. Robson, P. Mackay, F. Bardsley, W. Prossor, J. A. Ogle, P. Foxwell, S. Blackett, T. Cooke, D. Hall, N. P. McRae, B. Wells, A. Morey, G. D. Payne, D. McGregor, J. B. Fell, Brown (2), M. Freeman, E. Thompson, G. Horsburgh, J. Kullner, J. Howard, Banks (2), W. Clabburn, F. Kelly, E. Phillips, W. Monkhouse, J. Estems, E. Gerber, R. Hobo, Faulkner, T. Peate, C. Davis, T. Sherwan, J. Filmer, G. Wallis, H. B. Hart, W. Wrightson, Hemmings (2), Howard (2), Thompson, Phipps, A. Clarke, T. W. Scott, W. Nield, F. Hancock, E. Christensen, W. Donaldson, H. Thomsett, F. Smith, K. Holmston, C. Crocker, Glew, Baxter, Kenelly, O'Neill, A. Arnold, C. C. Harris, C. W. Sullivan, Kelly, Flaherty, H. Soderling, C. S. Phillips, L. Wilson, L. Furman, W. Crimp, G. Postang, Turry, Flanagan, Bell, J. Sim, J. Davis, E. Rice, A. Neville, A. R. Kayel, L. Ballet, G. Duffeym, G. Beckett, J. Hickings, J. Rocket, F. Hunter, W. Holland, T. Bannister, P. Anglim, E. Watkins, H. Jones, C. Willoughby, Quinn, G. Heslop, J. Reest, A. Ekeland, R. Davidson, G. Harrington, T. S. Rudd, W. Preston, G. Clarke, H. Passmore. Through passengers: Mesdames A. Billett, H. Church, E. A. Knell, C. Dewar, Priestly, Elliott, E. Bare, E. O. Edwards, Miss E. Somerville, Messrs. A. Hunter, Devlin, L. Eddy, Locke, Howard, Gahan, Riley, Donelly, Harris, R. Reeve, C. Anderson, F. Eyre, A. Billett, Leonard, E. A. Knell, W. Thurhvalle, Hilton, Gibb, Okley, Reid, Carter, Rich, Bangholz, Warrop, C. Ross, Haincough, Lawry (4), B. Luke, J. Melville, Glen (2), W. Sam, J. Walters, E. Mahoney, A. Mitchell, C. Dewar, Priestly, Daly, H. Petersen, C. Luke, Rea, Rogers, Farrell, P. Moore, W. Wilkins, A. Uhlmann, Elliott, E. May, H. Church. B. T. and Q. A. Company, agents. ARRIVAL OF WYREEMA. The steamer Wyreema arrived at Brisbane this morning from Melbourne and Sydney. Captain Grahl reports that light winds and fine weather generally were experienced throughout the trip. The voyage from wharf to wharf occupied 39 hours. The Wyreema entered the river at 8.22 a.m. today, and berthed at the company's Norman wharf.[7]
Monkhouse's appointment as mechanic with the PMGD finally confirmed in May 1914 with effect from July 1913
COMMONWEALTH PUBLIC SERVICE. Melbourne, 22nd May, 1914. THE following notifications respecting staff changes, &c., are made in accordance with the provisions of the Public Service Act and Regulations:— POSTMASTER-GENERAL'S DEPARTMENT. Ex. Mins. Nos. 264, 265. 266, 267, 268, 269, 271, 273, 278, 280, 281, 283, 284, T.225. Appointments Confirmed. . . . . Walter Isaac Monkhouse, Mechanic, Electrical Engineer's Branch, from 12th July, 1913.[8]
Monkhouse listed in Aug 1914 as permanent officer of the Commonwealth public service
Index to List of Officers — New South Wales — continued.
Name, Page, No on Page
Monkhouse, Walter Isaac 94 5[9]
Monkhouse passes examination for promotion to Senior Mechanic in the PMGD
COMMONWEALTH PUBLIC SERVICE. Examination No. 571. For Promotion as Senior Mechanic, Postmaster-General's Department. (Held 20th March to 21th April, 1915.) THE following are the names, in alphabetical order, of the candidates who were successful at the above examination, and the marks allotted. As notified in the Commonwealth Gazette of the 14th November, 1914, the examination is a qualifying one, and successful candidates will be promoted, as vacancies occur, in the order of their appointment to the position of mechanic.
Name: Monkhouse, Walter Isaac
Subject, Maximum Marks, Pass Marks, Actual Marks
Practical Tests: 200, 120, (Passed in a previous examination)
. . . . D. C. McLACHLAN, Commissioner. W. J. CLEMENS, Secretary. Office of the Commonwealth Public Service Commissioner, Melbourne, 14th May, 1915.[10]
Monkhouse resigns his position with the PMGD effective 31 July 1915
COMMONWEALTH PUBLIC SERVICE. Melbourne, 26th August, 1915. THE undermentioned notifications respecting staff changes, &c., are made in accordance with the Commonwealth Public Service Act and Regulations:— POSTMASTER-GENERAL'S DEPARTMENT. Ex. Mins. Nos. 388, 389, 390, 391, 393, 394, 396, 397. New South Wales. Services Terminated. . . . Walter Isaac Monkhouse, Mechanic, Electrical Engineer's Branch, from 31st July, 1915 (resigned).[11]
Monkhouse on the list of Commonwealth public servants as at 30 June 1915
Name, Page, No on Page
Monkhouse, Walter Isaac, 95, 2[12]
Qld birth registration for Walter Isaac Monkhouse's daughter Joan Frances Monkhouse
Registration details: 1916/B/44070[13]
Monkhouse appointed as instructor in telephone mechanics at Central Technical College, Brisbane
TELEPHONE MECHANICS. Instructor Appointed. The Governor-in-Council has appointed W. I. Monkhouse, instructor in telephone mechanics at the Central Technical College, Brisbane, as from the 10th February, 1916, and has exempted him from the operations of the Public Service Acts.[14]
Monkhouse assists with the supervision of group of students of Central Technical College on field trip to Ipswich railways works
IPSWICH AND WEST MORETON. IPSWICH, September 14. About 70 or 80 students from the Brisbane Central Technical College, in the engineering diploma, engineering mechanics, and electricity classes, in charge of Messrs. H. W. May (supervisor of the department), S. Closs, Monkhouse, F. Crane (superintendent trade classes), V. Brown, W. Brown, and F. Armitage visited Ipswich today and inspected the railway works. They were shown round by Mr. J. H. Wall (works manager) and assistants, a very interesting and instructive time being spent.[15]
Monkhouse qualifies (barely) for appointment as Assistant Engineer in the PMGD (but is never appointed)
COMMONWEALTH PUBLIC SERVICE. Examination No. 663. For Appointment as Assistant Engineer, Class E, Professional Division, Electrical Engineer's Branch, Postmaster-General's Department. Held 19th and 20th December, 1916. THE following are the names, in alphabetical order, of the candidates who were successful at the above examination, and who have thereby qualified for appointment to vacancies arising in the position of Assistant Engineer, Class E, Professional Division, during the ensuing period of eighteen months, viz., until and including the 6th September, 1918. Successful candidates will be appointed, as vacancies arise, according to relative fitness for the duties to be performed as determined upon examination results and the qualifications disclosed by a successful candidate who is an officer of the Commonwealth Public Service in the previous performance of his duties. Upon appointment, a successful candidate from outside the Service must produce evidence of the date of his birth, and a medical certificate, satisfying the Commissioner in whatever particulars he may determine, as to the appointee's sound bodily health and freedom from physical defects. He must also assure his life in accordance with the regulations. . . .
Name: Monkhouse, Walter Isaac
Position: N/A (Candidate is not an officer of the Commonwealth Public Service)
Subject: Maximum marks, Pass marks, Actual marks
Qld birth registration for Walter Isaac Monkhouse's daughter Eileen Olive Monkhouse
Registration details: 1917/B/49585[17]
Monkhouse files patent application for "Improvements in and relating to wire joints."
FARMING AND MINING INVENTIONS. Messrs. Griffith and Hassel, Patent Attorneys, of 77 Castlereagh-street, Sydney, report that the following applications for patents connected with the farming and mining industries, have been lodged at the Commonwealth Patent Office, Melbourne:— Walter Isaac Monkhouse: "Improvements in and relating to wire joints." Filed December 3, 1917. William Cumming: "An improved automatic solenoid type of electrical circuit breaker." Filed December 5, 1917. John Lloyd Stevens: "Improvements in the treatment of complex sulphide ores, concentrates and the like." Filed December 5, 1917. Martin Joseph Fogarty, Amos Smith and Alfred Edward Upton: "An improved animal trap." Filed November 29, 1917. John Spilsbury: "An improved garden tool." Filed November 30, 1917. James Martin and Company Limited: "Improved means for attaching comb fingers to cutter or comb bars of reaper-threshers, stripper-harvesters and like agricultural implements." Filed November 30, 1917. T. Robinson and Company Proprietory Limited: "Improvements in reaper-thresher, harvesters and the like. Filed December 3, 1917.[18]
Monkhouse gives evidence at Arbitration Court consideration of technical teaching salaries
ARBITRATION COURT. Friday, April 12. Before the President, his Honour Mr. Justice McCawley. PROFESSIONAL OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION. This case, which is a claim by the Professional Officers' Association, on behalf of the Queensland Government professional officers for increased salaries and improved conditons, was continued. Mr. H. Bond, Mr. L. Kempster, and H. Ball appeared for the Professional Officers' Association; Mr. C. B. de Costa for the Australian Union of Architects, Engineers, and Surveyors; Mr. C. White for the Printing Trade Union; Mr. R. J. Carroll for the Amalgamated Society of Engineers (on behalf of certain trade instructors at the Technical College); and Mr. Partridge for the General Officers' Association. Mr. J. D. Story (Under Secretary, Public Instruction Department) represented the Government. . . . The claims of Trade Instructors at the Technical College were next proceeded with. Sydney John Seymour, instructor in metal work at the Technical College, said he received £200 per year. Witness had to have high qualifications. His work included theoretical and practical knowledge, and he had to deliver lectures. He had to do night work, which would have materially increased his wages if working outside. He claimed that he was entitled to considerably more than the ordinary workman outside. He had no assistance during the day, but he had an assistant for night work. To Mr. Story: He based his claim on the ground that he was an instructor. William Richard Kingwell, instructor in carpentry and joinery, stated that, notwithstanding the extra training and knowledge he had, his pay was much the same as that of the ordinary tradesman. His hours of work might average over 40 per week. He had been instructor for 12 months, and had now the care of 100 pupils. He had also to lecture and supervise manual training in wood work. He had no assistant. Walter Isaac Monkhouse, instructor in telephone mechanics, said he had 62 pupils at present, and his teaching hours were 28½ per week. W. F. Armitage, instructor in fitting and machinery, said he had a first class engineeers' certificate. He had a knowledge of all the branches of fitting and engineering, and he was paid a very little more than an ordinary fitter received. There were seven pupils when he took the work up, and there were now 118, and there was likely to be an increase. He considered his position should carry a salary superior to that of a foreman in the Ipswich workshops. This completed the evidence, and the court adjourned till 10 o'clock on Monday, when the addresses will be proceeded with.[19]
Monkhouse attends annual conference of Mining Engineers' Institute at Newcastle
MINING ENGINEERS' INSTITUTE. ANNUAL CONFERENCE. The Australasian Institute of Mining Engineers has been holding its annual meeting in Newcastle. One of the features of the conference was a visit to the Proprietary steel works at Newcastle. The members of the institute, reports the "Daily Telegraph," accompanied by students of the engineering profession, arrived in Newcastle on Saturday, August 24. The party included about 60 members of the institute, among whom were representatives of each of the Australian States, New Zealand, and New Guinea, and they were accompanied by an equal number of students from various Australian universities and schools of mines. Following is a list of members of the Australasian Institute of Mining Engineers with the party:— Victoria: Professor E. W. Keats, Messrs. C. F. Courtney, A. S. Kenyon, H. Herman, E. C. Dyason, S. N. Rodda, W. N. Kernot, G. T. Brown, K. O'Brien, J. R. B. Anderson, E. Martin, E. Lewis, W. Kingston, Captain Akeroyd, D. B. Mitchell, S. R. Mitchell, H. Wilson, G. Young, D. L. Stirling. A. V. Leggo. Queensland: Messrs. W. Alpin, J. F. Hall, W. I. Monkhouse, J. Anschau, W. R. Underhill. South Australia: Messrs. L. K. Ward, P. Mottram, and G. F. Bull. West Australia: Messrs. H. Stewart, E. K. Beaumont, I. Herman, W. F. Fallowfied, A. E. Builder, A. Fraser, and A. J. Herman. Tasmania: Messrs. G. Barker, L. V. Waterhouse, W. E. Hitchcock, R. C. Eyes, E. Barkley, J. B. Scott, J. O. Hudson, A. D. Sligo, H. Sampson, and W. A. Beamish. New South Wales: Messrs. J. Hebbard, W. Poole, R. Slessor, G. S. Hart, M. O. McKeown, C. L. Garland, H. Rickleman, S. G. Le Soeuf, E. H. Tyalor, E. A. White, W. J. Mulligan, T. J. Horwood, and A. H. R. Guppy; and New Zealand: Messrs. H. J. H. Lowe, Boyd, Bennie, and J. F. Downey. A Civic Reception. The visitors, continues the "Daily Telegraph," were accorded a reception in the Newcastle Council Chambers, and among those present to welcome them were members of the Northern Engineering Institute and other organisations, and manufacturing representatives. Alderman R. G. Kilgour, the Mayor, presided. He said that he was proud to welcome the party to Newcastle, and to extend to them the greetings of the citizens. He hoped that the members of the institute and the students would realise all they expected in their visit. Newcastle was well seized with the importance of the visit of so many representatives of such an important organisation. Inasmuch as Newcastle, from an engineering point of view, was a most important place, he believed they would find their inspections of much value. While he was proud to see so many "big guns" what appealed to him very strongly was the presence of the students. He regretted that on account of the war the visitors would not see the port in its true character as a shipping centre, for vessels were very sparse. Newcastle had, however, much to be thankful for in the activity of its industrial life. He believed that Newcastle was going to be the industrial hub of the Commonwealth, and he trusted that every visitor would carry from the port and the district happy, profitable, and pleasant memories. Mr. Richard Thomas said that he tendered the visitors a very warm welcome on behalf of the members of the Northern Engineering Institute. He fully endorsed what the Mayor had said respecting the importance to the community of the visit of the party, and he would like to add that it would also be a blessing to the engineering profession. Iron sharpened iron, and there were likely to be mutual benefits derived from the discussions with one another. The Northern Institute cordially welcomed the students, who were starting upon the arduous climb of the ladder, and needed all the encouragement possible. The week's activities of the visitors had been cut out in a useful fashion. They would be taken to one of the finest coalfields in Australia, one that was discovered by a highly-esteemed fellow-engineer and honorary member of their institute, Professor (now Major) David. (Applause.) "He has," said Mr. Thomas, "given us many a good lift, and since then a lift to the Germans in another sense," a point that was heartily appreciated. Those fields, continued Mr. Thomas, were but a barren wilderness 15 years ago. Now they were occupied by from 30,000 to 40,000 people. There were seams of coal over 30ft. deep, and fine seams they were, too. The South Maitland district was one of the best-equipped coal fields in the world. It could put out 20,000 tons of coal per day. The visitors would be taken across the harbor, which, though not so fine as Sydney, was nevertheless well equipped in its shipping appliances and other facilities. There were six to seven miles of wharfage for coal loading, and three miles of wharfage for other things. The output of the Maitland coalfields would be over 20,000 tons per day if working at full capacity, and the Newcastle district could put out 10,000 tons daily. The visitors would also be shown the secondary industries. There was the great steel works, which had risen on the site of the old smelting works. It was a fine monument to the engineering profession. They would also see another great industry in the works of the Sulphide Corporation. No wonder Newcastle claimed to be the hub of the wheel of State progress, and not the tyre for the wheel of Sydney. He hoped the visit would be of mutual benefit. Mr. J. L. C. Rae, on behalf of the mining engineers; Mr. A. Goninan, speaking for the Manufacturers' Association of New South Wales; Mr. Guy Allbut, representing the electrical engineers; and Mr. E. Scott Holland, town clerk, supplemented the welcome to the visitors. Professor E. W. Skeats, of the Melbourne University, responded. He said that in the unavoidable absence of the president of their institute, Mr. J. D. Sutherland, he had been asked to reply to the warm and appreciated welcome extended to himself and his visiting colleagues that evening. The membership of the Australasian Institute of Mining Engineers was widespread. It had no State boundaries, and its membership extended to New Zealand and New Guinea. They were fortunate in having three or four representatives of the Dominion in that gathering. Every State of the Commonwealth, and New Zealand and New Guinea were represented in the party. The institute and the students were present in almost embarrassing numbers, but that was a tribute to Newcastle, as showing the interest they felt in its importance, and he felt sure they would derive much profit and pleasure from their visit. To some of them Newcastle was more or less known. It was his third visit. He was glad that the various speakers had emphasised the importance of the presence of so many students. The party was almost equally divided between students in the technical and junior sense, and the others, who were all students in the more senior sense. It had always been a strong point with the institute to encourage the students of mining engineering and the allied sciences in every possible way, and there was no better way than by providing all the facilities possible for visiting important mining and manufacturing centres of the Commonwealth. Mr. H. Herman, of Melbourne, leader of the party, also spoke in appreciative terms of the welcome. An adjournment was then made to St. Philip's Presbyterian Hall, where Mr. A. Goninan addressed the visitors and members of kindred organisations upon "Engineering Impressions during mv recent trip through America and England." Visit to Newcastle Steel Works. The inspection of the industries of the Newcastle district by the delegation of members of the Institute and students was made to the Broken Hill Proprietary Company's Steel Works on Monday. The party numbered about 130, and they were accompanied by several members of the Northern Engineering Institute. An inspection was first made of the works. With the company, one heard many passing ejaculations. "Newcastle is going to be worth living in," said one. "How are land values here?" This was a man with a speculative eye, land for factories and workshops to be acquired while land was cheap, and land for the housing of the thousands of workmen who would follow in the steps of industrial expansion. One of the visitors remarked that directly, or indirectly the development of the steel works would have beneficial results upon every industry in the Commonwealth. "What is the total approximate cost of the works?" was asked by one visitor to another. "I read the other day," was the reply, "that the exact sum was £2,800,000, and still spending. The truth of the latter portion of the statement was demonstrated in the steel and wooden supports of rising new structures, the digging of underground passages, the bricking of archways, and the installation of new machinery. The visitors were entertained by the Broken Hill Proprietary Company at luncheon, served in a large marquee specially erected for the occasion. Mr. G. D. Delprat, general manager, presided, and among the guests was Mr. Fitzpatrick, State Minister for Mines. Following up the toast of "The King," Mr. Delprat, on behalf of the company, extended a hearty welcome to the visitors. He said that he was happy to see so large and important a gathering, and he hoped they would take away from Newcastle kindly recollections of the steel works. Mr. Hebbard proposed "Prosperity to the Broken Hill Proprietary Company, Limited," coupled with the name of Mr. Delprat, who was to a very large extent responsible for the great industry they had the pleasure of seeing that day. Mr. Delprat, in responding, said: "I thank you very much for the toast and its hearty reception, but my name is merely incidental. The credit is not all mine, but it is due to the excellent work of Messrs. Baker, McMeekan, Noyes, Mitchell, and other members of the staff. They are all exceptionally capable and willing officers, and work well together." The visiting engineers and students were the guests of the Northern Engineering Institute at a smoke concert in St. Philip's Hall in the evening. Mr. C. A. Sussmilch read a paper upon the "Geological Formation of the Main Coal Basin of New South Wales." Orchestral selections were contributed by Messrs. J. Webb, C. Hardacre, and J. Hiley. Mr. P. H. Monkley recited, and songs were given by Professor Skeats and Messrs. E. K. Beaumont, R. P. Breden, and R. S. Mitchell. A party of students were associated in a humorous chorus. The accompaniments were played by Professor Skeats, Mr. E. K. Beaumont, and Mr. C. Hum. Mr. J. B. Henson presided over the function.[20]
Walter Isaac Monkhouse Electoral Roll registration 1919 Brisbane South
Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980
Entry: 9040, Monkhouse, Irene Olive, Hillside, home duties, female
Entry: 9041, Monkhouse, Walter Isaac, Sussex st, tele. instructor, male[21]
Monkhouse is appointed a council member at the first meeting of the Queensland Wireless Institute
THE QUEENSLAND WIRELESS. Inauguration of Institute. A meeting of members of the Queensland Wireless Institute was held in the rooms of the Chamber of Commerce, Courier Buildings, on Wednesday, 19th March, at 8 p.m., Mr. H. Cornwell (in the chair). Mr. S. V. Colville (secretary) read the notice convening the meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting were read and confirmed. The following were elected for the current year: Patron, Professor Hawken, B.A., B.E., A.M.I.C.E.; president, Mr. R. A. Wearne, B.A.; vicepresident, Messrs. S. S. Smith, A. G. Jackson, H. Cornwell, E. A. Blackboro, W. M. Nelson; hon. secretary and treasurer, Mr. S. V. Colville; council, Messrs. E. H. Jack, W. I. Monkhouse, J. D. Garland, R. Stephens, H. Priest, and J. C. Price. The rules of the institute were submitted, discussed, and adopted. The meeting concluded with a vote of thanks to the chairman.[22]
Monkhouse to lecture to a meeting of the Electrical Trade Union
ELECTRICAL TRADE UNION. IMPORTANT MEETING. A number of important matters will be considered at the quarterly general meeting of the Electrical Trade Union to be held on Wednesday, July 2. Consideration will be given to a new award covering the electroplating industry, also the report of the delegate on the Federal Council will be submitted. Mr. S. Brodney will place before members the work and objects of the Workers' School of Social Science, and an address will be given by Mr. W. I. Monkhouse, on a technical electrical subject.[23]
Monkhouse gives a lecture on AC motors and starters to a meeting of the Electrical Trade Union
ELECTRICAL TRADES UNION. LECTURES FOR MEMBERS. A most interesting lecture was delivered at the last meeting of the Electrical Trades' Union by Mr. W. I. Monkhouse, a teacher of electrical engineering at the Technical College, and a member of the union. Mr. Monkhouse's subject was the connecting of A.C. motors and A.C. starters, and as the use of both is growing in Brisbane, the lecture, which was of a most informative character, was listened to with great interest by the members. The policy of the union is to obtain lecturers at the general meetings for the benefit of members, and arrangements have been made for another lecture to be delivered at the next general meeting by a teacher from the Workers' School of Social Science.[24]
PATENT APPLICATIONS. List of Commonwealth Patent Ap-plications lodged from the 30th Oct. to 5th Nov., 1919:— . . . Photographic films — W. I. Monkhouse.[25]
QUEENSLAND WIRELESS. As will be noticed by advertisement in this issue the Queensland Wireless Institute will hold its opening meeting at the Central Technical College on Friday next, 6th February, 8 p.m. The institute is established for the purpose of encouraging the scientific research of wireless telegraphy, telephony, and its associated subjects in Queensland.[26]
Advertisement, as previous
MEETINGS. THE QUEENSLAND WIRELESS INSTITUTE, OPENING MEETING. The Opening Meeting of the Queensland Wireless Institute will be held at the Central Technical College, on FRIDAY NEXT, 6th February, at 8 p.m. Members and persons interested in wireless research are cordially invited. S. V. COLVILLE, Hon. Secretary.[27]
First annual meeting of QWI to be held at Monkhouse's place of employment
THE QUEENSLAND WIRELESS INSTITUTE. ANNUAL MEETING. The Annual Meeting of the Queensland Wireless Institute will be held at the Central Technical College, Engineering lecture room, on Friday, 19th instant, at 8 p.m. Members are particularly requested to be present. S. V. COLVILLE, Hon. Secretary.[28]
Monkhouse appointed to QWI council and research committee at its first annual meeting
WIRELESS INSTITUTE. The report presented at the first annual meeting of the Queensland Wireless Institute, held in the Technical College last night, stated that owing to the influenza epidemic the institute, during the first ten months of its existence, had been practically in abeyance, the epidemic having precluded experiments in wireless research. The membership of the institute was now about 40. It was hoped to acquire suitable accommodation within a short period, when it was proposed to establish a laboratory for carrying out research work. The financial statement showed a credit balance. The following officers were elected:— Patron, Professor Hawken; president, Mr. W. M. Nelson; honorary members, Captain G. A. H. Curtis and Mr. H. May; vicepresidents, Messrs. H. Cornwell, A. G. Jackson, and S. H. Smith; council, Messrs. D. J. Garland, E. M. Jack, W. I. Monkhouse, J. C. Price, W. H. Rix, and A. L. Moore; hon. secretary and treasurer Mr. S. V. Colville; assistant secretary, Mr. P. E. Cuslack; research committee, Messrs. G. Chilton, H. M'Lean, and W. I. Monkhouse.[29]
Monkhouse appointed as assistant teacher of engineering subjects at Central Technical College, Brisbane
EDUCATION DEPARTMENT. . . . Walter I. Monkhouse, to be assistant teacher of engineering subjects at the Central Technical College, Brisbane, as from July 1.[30]
Monkhouse enjoys a fishing outing with his fellow teachers at the Central Technical College
TECHNICAL COLLEGE ANGLERS. A party of fishing enthusiasts from the Central Technical College (Messrs. O'Shaughnessy, J. A. Hobson, F. H. Hobson, Monkhouse, Russell, Worthington, and Keenan) visited fishing grounds off Cleveland and Peel Island on the night of the 9th and the morning of the 10th instant, under the able direction of Mr. Charles Taylor, a local resident. The outing proved enjoyable and profitable, the catch totalling 117 fish of many varieties. The largest fish, a mowong, weighing 10 lbs., and the largest snapper, weighing 5 lbs., were caught by Messrs. Russell and J. A. Hobson respectively. The individual aggregates ranged from 10 to 25, the most successful fishermen being Messrs. O'Shaughnessy, J. S. Russell, and F. H. Hobson, with catches of 25, 19, and 18 respectively. A fishing dub has now been formed at the Central Technical College, particulars of which will appear later.[31]
Second annual meeting of QWI refers to two lectures given during the year by Monkhouse but he is no longer on the council or research committee
WIRELESS INSTITUTE. THE ANNUAL MEETING. The second annual meeting of the Queensland division of the Wireless Institute of Australia, was held in the institute rooms, Edward street, Brisbane. Mr. W. M. Nelson (president) presided and others present included Messrs. S. H. H. Smith (vicepresident), and S. V. Colville (hon. secretary). SECRETARY'S REPORT. The secretary reported that the progress of the institute during the twelve months ended March last had not been what might be termed brilliant, although some very interesting and useful work had been accomplished. The main drawback to the rapid progress, which promised early in the year, was the lack of support by members in the matter of lectures and papers. The council had had to convert itself into a working committee for the purpose of manufacturing the apparatus, which had been installed. Thanks were due to about a dozen members, who came forward to assist in this connection. Although the number of lectures and papers delivered was not very great, quite a large quantity of interesting matter had been dealt with by discussion at the ordinary meetings. The following lectures and papers had been delivered before general meetings: Electromagnetic induction, by Mr. W. I. Monkhouse; submarine cable, by Mr. S. H. H. Smith; an amateur receiving set, by Mr. W. I. Monkhouse; crystal rectifiers as applied to wireless reception, by Mr. S. V. Colville; electronic theory as applied to valves, by Mr. S. V. Colville; electrical oscillations, by Mr. E. C. Barton; wireless waves and wave motion by Mr. S. V. Colville; valves and their application in wireless telegraphy and telephony, by Mr. L. S. Lane. INCREASED MEMBERSHIP. At the end of last year the membership totalled 38, of whom only 17 became active and financial. The balance did not attend, neither did they respond to appeals for the fulfilment of their financial obligations. This year 21 new members were accepted, of which 17 were active and financial, making a total active membership of 34. Mr. S. H. H. Smith expressed appreciation of the Education Department's action in providing the excellent accommodation for the institute in the education buildings. Mr. S. V. Colville mentioned that, although the institute was officially opened in March, 1919, suitable accommodation was only secured in July last, when, thanks to the courtesy of the Education Department, rooms were provided rent free. The report was adopted. ELECTION OF OFFICERS. Election of officers resulted as follows: Patron, Professor R. W. Hawken, B. A., M.I.C.E.; president, Mr. W. M. Nelson; vicepresidents, Messrs. S. H. H. Smith, G. Chilton, and L. S. Lane; hon. member, Mr. R. A. Wearne, B.A.; hon. general secretary and treasurer, Mr. S. V. Colville; hon. assistant secretary, Mr. G. A. Wilson; librarian, Mr. W. Shepley; assistant librarian, Mr. A. Dillon; council, Messrs. A. L. Moore, E. Little, H. McLean, W. Finney, G. Tucker, and L. Gibson; Research Committee, Messrs. A. L. Moore, S. E. Colville, G. Chilton, L. S. Lane, and P. Wolstenholme. Votes of thanks were accorded the president (Mr. W. M. Nelson), the vicepresident (Mr. S. H. Smith), and the hon. secretary (Mr. S. V. Colville).[32]
Monkhouse is promoted to senior instructor in the electrical engineering and electrical trades engineering branch at the Central Technical College as part of a reorganisation
"REORGANISATION." CENTRAL TECHNICAL COLLEGE. NEW OFFICES CREATED. ELEVEN TEACHERS TO BE DISPENSED WITH. Under a "reorganisatíon" scheme which is now being carried out in connection with the Central Technical College, Brisbane, the designations of some officers have been altered, and new offices created, while all work in connection with the preparation of teachers for examination and correspondence tuition will be relegated to the Teachers Training College as from July 1. The services of 11 teachers also are to be dispensed with. In Saturday's "Government Gazette" it is announced that the services of the following members of the staff at the Central Technical College shall be terminated as from February 9, next:— Felix H. Brazier, part time teacher of engineering-drawing; Dunmore F. Cribb, assistant teacher of commercial subjects; Frank W. Dunstan, part-time teacher of engineering drawing; Phillip A. Edwards, part-time teacher of building construction and drawing; Frederick W. James, part-time teacher in the department of languages, literature, and mathematics; Charles V. Rees, part-time teacher of architectural rendering; Mrs. Margaret Scott, cleaner; Muriel M. Staeheli, part-time teacher of dressmaking; Georgina L. Stodart, part-time teacher of drawing; Frederick T. Sweatman, part-time teacher of fitting and machining; James M. Tarvitt, part-time teacher of cabinet making; Charles W. White, part-time teacher of modelling. In accordance with this "reorganisation," the Central Technical College will be divided into three distinct sections — the departments of commerce, women's work, and technology — and it is also announced that the office of senior instructor, general branch, department of commerce, has been created, and that Mr. J. H. Jones, M.A., now assistant teacher in the department of languages, literature, and mathematics, has been appointed to the position on probation for six months. The gazetted notices also show that the office of chief instructor, general branch, department of technology, has been created and that Mr. M. A. Longworth, B.Sc., now teacher of physics in the science department, has been appointed to the new post. Miss A. Schauer, at present teacher of cookery and allied subjects has been appointed to a newly created position — that of senior instructress domestic arts section of the domestic science branch. Several other now offices have been created. These are those of senior instructor in the electrical engineering and electrical trades engineering branch, to which Mr. W. I. Monkhouse, assistant teacher of engineering subjects, has been appointed, and of senior instructor of the commercial branch, to which Mr. A. F. Hess, teacher of bookkeeping and accountancy, has been appointed. Mr. W. R. Kingwell, chief instructor of carpentry and joinery, will be known as senior instructor. Mrs. H. Young, the supervisor of the department of domestic science, will be the officer in charge of the department of women's work. The supervisor of the department of commerce (Mr. E. H. George) will be the officer in charge of that department. The positions of officer of the Department of Technology and Chief Assistant of the Engineering Branch are to be filled. The designation "supervisors" of departments is to be abolished, and the title altered to "chief instructors" of "branches." Those responsible for the new scheme claim that it will lend to greater efficiency and render the institution in every respect a technical college.[33]
Monkhouse prominent at a fete at the Central Technical College including a demonstration of Xrays and alongside a demonstration of wireless transmission and reception by Lecester of the Naval Department
TECHNICAL COLLEGE FETE. The grounds of the Central Technical College were bright with colour on Saturday afternoon, when a fete on a large scale was held in aid of the College Gymnasium Fund. Festoons of flags were suspended between the buildings, while gaily decorated and attractively stocked stalls were arranged in the angles of the different blocks, and attended by girls in daintily coloured hats and aprons. The official opening of the gymnasium was performed by his Excellency the Governor (Sir Matthew Nathan), who was attended by Captain Hammond, A.D.C., and was received by a recepuon committee comprising the officers in charge of departments (Messrs. McGillivray and George, and Mrs. Young). In an interesting address to the very large gathering assembled in the gymnasium, his Excellency emphasised the importance and the benefits of physical culture. A panel carving representing the principal of the college (Mr. R. A. Wearne), executed by Mr. L. J. Harvey, was unveiled by his Excellency. At the instance of the Minister for Public Instruction (Mr. J. Huxham), a vote of thanks was accorded to his Excellency. Others who were present at the opening ceremony included Colonel D. C. Cameron, M.H.R., Mr. Wearne, Mr. W. Bertram and Miss Bertram, members of the Domestic Science Advisory Board (Mesdames J. Huxham, J. N. Devoy, A. Skirving, and G. Carter), Messrs. A. S. Kennedy, L. C. Morris (Superintendent of Technical Education), and Daly. The gymnasium building was erected by returned soldiers under the direction of Mr. Kingwill, and others who rendered valuable assistance in connection with the building and the fete were Colonel Cameron, Messrs. Watkins and Owens, and the staff of the college. During the afternoon musical selections were rendered by the Naval Band, and a guard of honour for his Excellency the Governor was formed by the naval cadets. A basket ball contest arranged between the Technical High School, Commercial, and Domestic Science Schools was won by the first named. Various forms of amusement comprised demonstrations of different kinds. In the evening the grounds were illuminated by electric light, and a dance was held in the gymnasium. The duties of hon. organisers were carried out by Mrs. Young, Messrs. Wearne, Monkhouse, and Watkins. The gymnasium fund committee comprised Messrs. Watkins (president), J. A. Hobson (hon. secretary), Burton (hon. treasurer), Mrs. Young, Misses M. Palmer and Wendt, Messrs. Armitage, Bremner, Burton, Claire, Crane, Ferry, Harvey, Hobson, Howes, Jones, King, Kingwill, Lewis, Longworth, Marienthal, Maynard, McGillivray, O'Shaughnessy, Palmer, Seymour, Watkins, Wilton, and Plant. The gymnasium fete committee was formed of a number of members from the gymnasium fund committee. The stalls and stallholders were as follows:— Engineering Stall: Engineering branch, Department of Technology, Messrs. Armitage (convener), Messrs. Monkhouse, Wilson, Taylor, Gowd, Bremner, Manion, and Marienthal. Tinware: Sheet metal work branch, Messrs. S. J. Seymour and G. Howes. Fruit and vegetables: Chemistry, wool, and art branches, Mr. S. B. Watkins (convener), Miss Nagel, Messrs. Broe, Lewis, Harvey, and Malyon. Cake and sweets: Domestic science department, Mrs. Young (convenor), Misses Wendt, Slaughter, Bell, Baird, Staunton, Allison, E. Young, M. Barker, D. Williams, I. McDonnell, R. Riggall, E. O'Brien, J. Herbert, E. Fry, and Mrs. Dineen. Jazz and bachelors' stall: Administrative department, Mr. N. O'Shaughnessy (convener), Mr. R. D. Ferry, Misses O. Clarke, B. Jones, G. McKenzie, M. Owens, N. Smart, L. A. Wells, D. Williamson, G. Wood, Messrs. M. Burton, T. Claire, A. Hickerton, J. Hobson, H. Kay, G. Lewis, H. D. Noyes, W. Owens, J. A. Rigby, W. Wood, and J. H. Woodward. Flowers and pot plants: Mr. F. H. Hobson (convenor), Mesdams K. Bohan, R. Calthorp, C. Mullens, C. Murison, H. and C. Reid, S. J. Ryan, M. Tucker, Misses S. J. Beatty and A. Massey, Messrs. P. Birkbeck, W. C. Johnston, J. F Ludgate, and J. Wilkinson. Refreshments: Department of commerce, Miss M. Palmer and Mr. J. H. Jones (conveners), Miss E. Henry, Messrs. Arthur and Andrews, assisted by the staff and students of the department. Furnishing and Woodwork: Sections of building branch, Messrs W. R. Kingwell (convener), L. Cockburn, J. J. Dryden, G. J. Hoey, R. C. Hammond, R. King, E. G. Maynard, R. Nasmyth, F. Pethebridge, and L. Potts. Demonstrations were conducted as follow:— Chemical experiments, directed by Mr. Broe; pottery, Mr. Harvey; X Rays, Mr. Monkhouse; wireless transmission and reception, Mr. Lecester, of the naval department.[34]
REPRESENTATIVES OF DEPARTMENTS OF THE CENTRAL TECHNICAL COLLEGE. Front row: A. Davies, M.A. (officer in charge of the department of correspondence tuition), N. O. O'Shaughnessy, A.I.C.A. (chief clerk), E. H. George, F.I.C.A., F.F.I.A. (officer in charge, department of commerce), R. A. Wearne, B.A. (principal), H. I. McGillivray, M.A. (officer in charge, department of technology), Mrs. H. Young (officer in charge, department of women's work), A. E. Palfery, M.A. (officer in charge of matriculation classes). Second row: C. E. Plant, F.S.I., M.R., San. I. (chief instructor, building branch), Miss C. Slaughter (teacher of cookery), F. J. M. Roberts (chief instructor, art branch), S. B. Watkins, M.Sc., (chief instructor, industrial chemistry branch), Miss A. F. Allison (teacher of millinery), M. A. Longworth, B.Sc. (chief instructor, general branch, department of technology). Third row: Miss D. Wendt (teacher of dressmaking), A. F. Hess, F.I.C.A., A.F.I.A. (senior instructor, department of commerce), H. G. Lewis (instructor, sheep and wool branch), H. F. Robinson (draftsman), W. R. Kingwell (senior instructor of woodworking trades), J. H. Jones, M.A. (senior instructor, department of commerce), Miss M. Palmer (teacher of typewriting). Back row: C. F. Whitcombe, A.R.I.B.A. (instructor of architecture), W. F. Armitage (instructor, engineering branch), M. Elliott, B.E. (chief instructor, engineering branch), W. I. Monkhouse, A.M.I.E.E. (senior instructor, electrical engineering). (Photo Caption)[35]
Monkhouse appointed to the committee of management of the Central Technical College gymnasium
TECHNICAL COLLEGE. MANAGEMENT OF GYMNASIUM. A meeting of the Central Technical College staff was held on Tuesday, the 27th June, for the purpose of adopting rules and appointing a committee and office bearers for the management or the gymnasium, recently officially opened by his Excellency the Governor. The following officers were elected: Patron, Colonel D. Cameron, M.P., C.M.G., D.S.O.; president, Mr. R. A. Wearne, B.A.; vicepresidents, Messrs. S. B. Watkins, M.Sc., J. H. Jones, M.A.; hon. secretary, Mr. J. A. Hobson; hon. treasurer, Mr. M. St. C. Burton; Committee of Management, Mrs. H. Young, Miss E. Henry, Messrs. R. D. Ferry, H. I. McGillivray, M.A., W. I. Monkhouse, A.M.I.E.E., C. J. Connell. It was decided to make the building available for instruction purposes on and after the 1st July. Students and ex-students are now notified that they are eligible for enrolment. The amount collected to date, representing one year's effort, for the erection of the gymnasium totals £783 8s, 2d. The building cost £767 2s. 7d., and the equipment, including piano, cost £128 7s. It will thus be seen that owing lo the efforts of the staff and students, the building is now free from debt, and an amount of £112 1s. 5d. is required to pay for the equipment, including piano.[36]
Monkhouse on a committee to organise a charity continental ball
SOCIAL. . . . A strong committee has been formed to carry into effect the idea of a continental masked ball on October 6 in aid of the Children's Hospital. Mrs. E. G. Theodore presided at a meeting on Thursday, and there were also present:— Mesdames J. Huxham, A. J. Jones, J. S. Devoy, Naylor, Misses Sheahan, Messrs. N. O'Shaunghnessy, J. Herbert, S. B. Watkins, E. Thurlow, R. D. Ferry, J. O. Alexander, E. Bates, H. Doughty, W. I. Monkhouse, W. Owens, and E. Moulton. Amongst the attractions will be a jazz floor for open-air dancing in the grounds adjoining the Central Technical College Gymnasium. The grounds will be specially illuminated, and the water front of the Domain is available for decorated motor boats.[37]
SOCIAL His Excellency the Governor has kindly consented to be present at the continental masquerade ball, in aid of the Children's Hospital, to be held in the Central Technical College gymnasium hall, and adjoining grounds, on 6th October. A notable feature of the evening will be the special decorations and lighting, which are in the hands of an experienced subcommittee. Provision will be made for cardtables and smoking rooms. A special landing will be erected for dancers from decorated motor boats. Invitations may be obtained from the hon. secretary, W. I. Monkhouse, Central Technical College.[38]
Masquerade ball at Central Technical College a success, Monkhouse on committee
MASQUERADE BALL. The river frontage of the Domain was ablaze with coloured lights last night, when a Continental masquerade ball was held in aid of the Hospital for Sick Children. An open-air dancing floor was erected, where jazzing took place, as well as in the gymnasium hall. Paper streamers and bells and large jazz spots decorated the walls. A palm grove was arranged for the Viceregal party, his Excellency the Governor, attended by Colonel Parsons, being present during the evening. Both floors were crowded with dancers, all of whom were masked, and many wore fancy costumes. The scene presented was picturesque, particularly from the river, where motor boats plied to and fro. A tent was set apart for card players, and two refreshment tents were available for supper. The attendants all wore fancy dresses. The Naval Jazz Band and two other orchestras were in attendance. The committee responsible for the success of the evening comprised Mesdames E. G. Theodore (president), J. Huxham, A. J. Jones, T. Wilson, W. N. Gillies, Naylor, W. Young, J. N. Devoy, Miss Sheahan, Messrs. E. W. Moulton, Doughty, Lewis, E. R. Thurlow, D. Ferry (treasurer), W. Owens, Herbert, Alexander, Curtis, Bates, Smith, Walker, O'Shaunessey, R. A. Wearne, Wood, McGillvray, and W. I. Monkhouse (secretary). Mr. and Mrs. E. G. Theodore entertained Sir Matthew Nathan at supper at the Technical College. Others present were Colonel Parsons, the Chief Justice (Mr. Justice McCawley) and Mrs. McCawley, Mr. and Mrs. J. Huxham, Mrs. A. J. Jones, Mr. R. A.Wearne, and Mr. Walter Kirby.[39]
Monkhouse appointed to the Qld committee for the WIA Trans Pacific Tests
AMATEUR RADIO. THE TRANSPACIFIC TEST. ORGANISING LOCAL ENTHUSIASTS. A meeting of amateur wireless enthusiasts was held last evening, under the auspices of the Wireless Institute of Australia (Queensland division) for the purpose of organising in connection with the trans-Pacific amateur tests, which will commence about 1st May, 1923. The scheme originated with Mr. H. Kingsley Love, past president of the Victorian division of the Wireless Institute. The scheme has extended to New South Wales, and is now being taken up by the Queensland division. The signals are to be transmitted from Long Beach, California, U.S A., and will be listened for by amateurs who have entered for the test under the organisation of the respective subcommittees. The transmitted power will be 1 k.w. on a low wave length. The meeting passed the following resolution: "That a committee consisting of four representatives be elected at this meeting, and that other interested persons be asked to co-operate, the committee having power to add. The following gentlemen were elected to the committee: Chairman, Mr. A. G. Jackson; hon. secretary, Mr. W. Finney, and Messrs. Monkhouse, Milner, and Derrick, The organising committee are anxious that all owners of wireless installations. whether members of a club or the institute or not, should (1) either enter for the test, or (2) agree to help by co-operation with other station owners to compete.[40]
Monkhouse suggests an effective modification to the microphone circuit for 4AE, notes Monkhouse as vicepresident of QWI
RADIO BROADCAST. LAST NIGHT'S CONCERT. A very successful broadcast was conducted last evening by the Queensland Wireless Institute. An alteration of the microphone circuit suggested by Mr. W. I. Monkhouse (vicepresident) has made a marked improvement in the modulation strength. The broadcast consisted of a number of special records loaned by Mr. Hudson (a member of the institute), which were played on a Salonola gramophone loaned by Home Recreations Ltd. Mr. Milner operated the radiophone.[41]
Monkhouse to give a lecture and demonstration on "Inductance and Capacity" to QWI, notes appointed vicepresident due to departure of Colville
Queensland Wireless Institute. The first of a series of demonstrations will be given this evening, at 7.30, in the lecture room of the Queensland Wireless lnstitute, by Mr. W. I. Monkhouse (vicepresident). The subject of the demonstration will be "Inductance and Capacity." All members of the institute are requested to be present, and also any person who is interested in the work done by the institute. The executive of the Queensland Wireless Institute recently underwent a change. Owing to the late secretary removing to Sydney, Mr. W. Finney undertook the secretaryship. Mr A. G. Jackson being appointed president, Mr. W. I. Monkhouse vicepresident, and the new position of treasurer was allotted to Mr. A. N. Stephens. The arrangements in connection with the Trans-pacific (amateur) tests are well advanced, and all licensed stations will receive a circular and form within the next few days. Those desirous of taking part in the tests or in assisting will greatly help the committee by forwarding their registration as early as possible.[42]
As previous, meeting and lecture report
QUEENSLAND WIRELESS INSTITUTE. Those who braved the elements on Friday evening last to attend the demonstration given in the Wireless Institute lecture room by Mr. W. I. Monkhouse (vicepresident) were well repaid. The demonstrator dealt chiefly with capacity and condensers, and in such an interesting manner that every person present thoroughly enjoyed the demonstration. Using a Wimshurst machine, Leyden jar, pith balls, &c., Mr. Monkhouse took his listeners from the early days of electricity to the present day antenna or aerial, as used in wireless telegraphy and telephony, and explained their action in each instance. Mr. Monkhouse has promised to give further demonstrations.[43]
Promotional article for QWI in advance of annual general meeting, incorrectly notes Monkhouse as State Electrical Engineer
RADIO EXPERIMENTS. WIRELESS INSTITUTE OF AUSTRALIA. The Wireless Institute of Australia, which was founded in pre-war days, is the pioneer body so far as experimenters in both radio telegraphy and telephony in Australia is concerned. It has as its patrons Senatore Guglielmo Marconi, G.G.V.O., L.D.D., D.Sc., M.I.E.E. There are divisions in each of the States, and the councils are composed of men, most them true radio engineers and of high standing in the electrical and radio world. The council of the New South Wales division comprises such men as Messrs. E. T. Fisk (Amalgamated Wireless), C. P. Bartholomew, C. D. Maclurcan (the Australian pioneer experimenter and broadcaster), and S. V. Colville (founder of the Queensland division) The Victorian division includes Messrs. H. Kingsley Love (organiser of the Transpacific tests), O. J. Philpott and R. H. Hull. Queensland division contains in its ranks Messrs. A. G. Jackson, W. I. Monkhouse (State electrical engineer), J. Milner, and W. Finney. All these men have done much for the furtherance of radio research, extending over years. The Queensland division has experimented in several branches of wireless, including spark, buzzer, arc, continuous wave, and telephony. It is due to the broadcasting done at the institute — the excellence of which has yet to be surpassed — that radio enthusiasts in Brisbane have derived such pleasure. The annual meeting of the Queensland division will be held on Friday, April 13, in the lecture room, Old Fire Brigade Building, at which all members are invited to be present.[44]
Monkhouse appointed as a vicepresident of the QWI at annual general meeting
WIRELESS INSTITUTE. The annual meeting of the Queensland Wireless Institute was well attended last night, when Mr. A. G. Jackson occupied the chair. The president, in his report, stated that owing to the activities of the institute, it had helped to increase public interest in radio, which, he said, can now be claimed as an established fact to Queensland in general and Brisbane in particular. The number of aerials now to be seen in the suburbs is quite surprising, whilst applications for membership and from enthusiasts who wished to become initiated in the popular science were encouraging. The election of officers resulted:— Patron, Professor Hawkin; vicepatron, Professor Parnell; hon. members, J. McConachie (Deputy Postmaster-General), J. W. Sutton (State Electrical Engineer), F. Walker (Deputy State Electrical Engineer), S. V. Colville (founder Q.W.I.); president, A. G. Jackson; vicepresidents, C. W. Inglis [sic, Isles], A. K. Lawton, W. I. Monkhouse, P. S. Trackson, S. H. Smith: secretary, W. Finney; treasurer, A. N. Stephens; auditor. H. Maddock; broadcasting; committee, E. C. Littler, J. Milner, A. N. Stephens; committee, A. M'Leod, J. Milner, J. C. Price, and E. j C. Littler.[45]
Monkhouse gives a lecture on antennas at a meeting of the QWI
WIRELESS INSTITUTE. LECTURE ON AERIALS. Mr. W. I. Monkhouse delivered a most interesting lecture and demonstration last evening at the institute rooms, to a large gathering of members and their friends, the room being filled. Mr. Monkhouse outlined the functioning of the antenna as pertaining to wireless transmission and reception. He also demonstrated the construction and action of the T, inverted L, and umbrella types of antennae or aerials. By special request the lecturer also repeated portion of his previous demonstration to the members on electrostatics and inductance. A hearty vote of thanks was accorded to Mr. Monkhouse, who stated he would give a further demonstration at a future date. A vote of thanks was also accorded to the University authorities for the loan of the apparatus used by Mr. Monkhouse in his demonstrations.[46]
Monkhouse presides over a meeting of the QWI
WIRELESS INSTITUTE. CALIBRATING THE RADIO-PHONE. A council meeting of the Queensland Wireless Institute was held on Friday night, Mr. Monkhouse presiding. After the general business the broadcasting committee furnished their report. Radio Inspector Crawford (Commonwealth) visited the station on Tuesday evening and calibrated the radiophone, which was found to have a wave length of 662 metres. This has to be reduced to 250 metres. On Tuesday evening next the broadcast will only be for about 30 minutes, ??? 8.30 p.m., which will allow amateurs to calibrate their sets to a definite wave length . . . i.e., 662. Further notice will be given when alterations have been completed. Drawing for a new receiving set and wave meter were passed by the council, the construction to be proceeded with immediately. All amateur transmissions in the future will be wave lengths of 100 to 250 metres. Mr. McLeod, of Red Hill, Brisbane, has had some surprising results on one valve, hearing plainly as many as five Sydney amateurs in an evening. A report from Melbourne states that a petition protesting against the wireless regulations has been proposed, and those holding copies of the petition declare that it is being freely signed by the public. Despite the fact that the regulations have been passed, it has been decided to continue with the petition, and it will probably be presented to the Postmaster-General (Mr. Gibson) on Tuesday. Special objection is taken to the requirement that listeners-in shall use a "sealed receiver," which limits them to one broadcasting service. Another excellent programme of vocal and instrumental numbers is to be sent out by Dr. McDowall this (Sunday) evening. (Our full budget of wireless news and notes will be found on Page 23 of this issue.)[47]
Monkhouse applies for rent reduction to the Fair Rents Court
This Morning's Court Cases. In the Fair Rents Court this morning, before Mr. P. M. Hishon, P.M., the following cases were dealt with. Walter lsaac Monkhouse applied to have the rent of premises situated in James-street, Teneriffe, determined. He stated the house contained five rooms, a kitchen, and an enclosed veranda. The house next door, which was of equal value, was let for 23s 6d per week, whilst he was paying 35s, and the owner (John Julius Cranston, of Terrace-street, New Farm) had notified him he intended increasing it to 37s 6d per week. The applicant considered 30s per week a fair rental. The rent was fixed at £1 17s 6d per week for six months from November 17.[48]
QWI annual report notes that Walter Isaac Monkhouse gave three lectures during the year on "Electricity and Magnetism"
WIRELESS CIRCLE. WIRELESS INSTITUTE. PROGRESS FOR YEAR. The improved financial position of the Queensland Wireless Institute was emphasised by the secretary (Mr. A. N. Stephens) in his report to the final meeting of the year, held in the club rooms last week. In March of this year, he said, the debt stood at £52 10s, but the strenuous efforts which have been put forth during the ensuing period have resulted in that amount having been reduced to approximately £11. During the year Mr. Monkhouse had contributed three lectures on "Electricity and Magnetism," and Mr. Williams, in loaning his set, had given a demonstration on an inside aerial and a Ducon electric aerial, messages from amateur stations being received with great clarity. The 440 main had been substituted for a 220, a new 10-watt set had been installed with grid modulation, and the aerial altered. In addition, two demonstrations had been conducted during the 12 months — one at the Majestic Theatre and the other at the Ascot State school fete — with success. The members of the institute had acted concertedly in the city transmission and reception, and Mr. H. Miller had conducted the transmission at Ascot.[49]
Monkhouse attends the public meeting of all interested in amateur wireless with James Joseph Malone
Mr. Malone's Visit Clears Up Misapprehensions. The visit of the manager of Commonwealth Wireless (Mr. Malone) has certainly done a lot of good for the interests of radio in this State. The amateur has at last had a chance of learning exactly what the prospects of future research work will be. Amateurs now know that they may be in a position to carry on work of a genuine experimental nature without the drawbacks of having to comply with regulations that may be made for the adherence of listeners-in. Restrictions, of course, must be enforced that will compel the experimenter to remain so, and not be a limiter of entertainment, as is the definition of a listener-in. Professor Parnell, of the Queensland University and the Wireless Institute, certainly explained the right policy of the amateur in his speech at the reception tendered to Mr. Malone. "The experimenter," said Professor Parnell, "must be educated to such a degree that he may be qualified to operate his set and carry out scientific experiments in such an efficient manner that it will not be necessary for regulations to be enforced to prevent the use of any circuits that will tend for the uplifting of the class of transmitting and receiving apparatus that may be used in any experimental capacity." The experimenters' views were well expressed by Mr. E. Gabriel, of the Radio Society of Queensland, when that gentleman said "That the amateur experimenters should be allowed to have a go in any manner that is considered to be in the best interests of the development of radio." Mr. Gabriel said that, "From exhaustive inquiries that have been made it is a fact that the experimenters want to have a clearcut situation on the events of future developments and the only way to make this possible is by the removal of any restrictions that will keep the experimenter in a minor stage of research work. The amateurs are prepared to share in any reasonable expense that may be incurred in the bettering of conditions generally. The Queensland amateurs will welcome any scheme whereby efficient service can be obtained in the line of broadcasting." The newly appointed radio inspector, Mr. W. Finney, gave a very detailed report on the progress of the establishment of radio clubs throughout the State, and it can be easily seen that the popularity of radio is extending to large proportions. Mr. A. G. Jackson was a most interesting speaker, in view of the fact that he could refer to the times when wireless was hot even a realised possibility. Mr. Jackson told of the time in England when he journeyed miles to see the first piece of wireless apparatus that was manufactured. The general impressions given tended to convey the direct message to Mr. Malone that the amateurs of Queensland were wanting to have an unrestricted go in the field of experiments and in reply Mr. Malone hoped that the amateur bodies at present existing would combine in a common council and thereby strengthen their chances of receiving favorable consideration of any matters that required amending or attention. Mr. Malone viewed with pleasure that the position of radio in Queensland, as signified by the large gathering at the reception, was on an equal footing with that of any other part of Australia. . . . ABOUT WIRELESS MEN. Mr. Malone has returned to Sydney, where he has many matters to attend to in the radio world. Mr. Con. Daley is still in charge of 4CM, and amateurs express their satisfaction at his good work. Mr. Walter Trattles will conduct the "Standard" wireless column for two weeks during the absence in Sydney of Reprah." Mr. W. I. Monkhouse and Mr. Lawton were both interested in the matters discussed at Mr. Malone's reception.[50]
Monkhouse again appointed as a vicepresident of the QWI at the annual general meeting
Wireless Institute. The annual meeting of the Wireless Institute of Australia (Queensland section) was held on Friday, April 4. Following were elected as officers:— Patron, Prof. Hawken, B.Sc., M.E., M.I.E., Aust.; vicepatrons, Prof. Parnell, M.S.C., Dr. Boyd, D.Sc.; hon. members, J. McConochie, F. Walker, A.M.I.E.E., S. V. Colville, J. Sutton, M.I.E.E., C. W. Isles; president, A. G. Jackson, A.M.I.E.E., A.M.I.E., Aust.; vicepresidents, S. H. Smith, W. I. Monkhouse, A.M.I.E.E., A.M.I.E., Aust., A Langford-Ely, W. Ranger, B.Sc., A. K. Lawton; council, Messrs Casperson, Ingram, Dutton, Searle, J. Hindman, and A. A. Jackson, A.M.I.E., Aust.; hon. secretary, A. N. Stephens, hon. treasurer, J. Williams; hon. auditor, H. Maddicks. A meeting of the council will be held on Friday to consider the position of honorary radio inspectors and the appointment of a technical committee to approve of the qualifications of applicants for experimental licences. The appointment of delegates to the Federal Council was held over till after the meeting of metropolitan clubs called for Wednesday next. The financial statement was read and great enthusiasm was aroused by the passing for payment of the last amount due by the division. The whole of the debt owing when the present committee took charge has been wiped off, all current expenses being paid up to date, and the new officers to take over with a clean sheet. A vote of thanks was passed to Mr. A. N. Stephens for his work during the year, and special mention was made of the capable way in which he managed the reception to Mr. Malone. Although it was intended that the institute should play a minor part in this function, over 50 per cent of the tickets were sold by and to the institute members, and almost the whole of the actual work of organising the function was done by Mr. Stephens. The syllabus for the year will be published in next week's paper. Some very fine practical demonstrations are promised which members are advised not to miss. The Victorian and South Australian Divisional Magazines were commented on, and when conditions in Queensland become more stable the advisability of publishing a Queensland paper will be considered. At the conference to be held on the question of sealed or open wave length receiving sets the southern divisions of the institute will represent the amateurs. Several members were present at the test on Tuesday night, and some interesting work was done. Subscriptions for 1924 are now due, and the secretary will appreciate the early remittance of these. Membership is open to any person interested in wireless work, and is not confined to licence holders. A series of lectures suitable for those desirous of qualifying for experimental licences will be given during the year. Membership applications can he obtained from any of the office bearers mentioned above.[51]
Monkhouse lectures to the QWI on Sound Waves
WIRELESS INSTITUTE. Lecture on Sound Waves. The monthly meeting was held at the club's room, corner Edward and Ann streets. There was a large attendance of members. At the conclusion of the business, an interesting lecture was given by Mr. W. J. Monkhouse, M.I.E.E., on "Sound Waves." A very clear description of wave motion and transverse waves led up to a summary of the requirements of a modern microphone transmitter. The importance of harmonics, which enable sounds of the same pitch made by different methods to be clearly separated by the human ear, was demonstrated. The speaker traced the various stages of the microphone, from the first invented by Professor Hughes to those in use at the present day. He further pointed out the enormous difficulties that had to be overcome to produce a single microphone that would respond to all frequencies, such as is necessary in a modern broadcasting station. [52]
Monkhouse attends a general meeting of the QWI, seconds a vote of thanks to the lecturer Professor Parnell
WIRELESS INSTITUTE. The Wireless Institute of Australia (Queensland division) held its monthly meeting last evening at the Queensland University, when Professor Parnell (a vicepresident of the institute) gave an interesting lecture and demonstration on the "Principles of Tuning." There was a large attendance of members and friends. Professor Parnell pointed out that most tuning operations could be reduced to two cases — first, the effect of inductance, and second, the effect of capacity. All circuits possessed inductance and resistance, and it was impossible to separate them, but it was convenient to consider their effect separately. When a circuit was in resonance the current was in phase with the voltage. The effect of this was, first, that with given voltage a larger current flowed than otherwise, and second, the voltage drop across parts of the circuit was comparatively large. By means of loud speakers the effect of tuning of circuits by alternations of values of capacity or inductance was clearly shown. Lantern slides illustrated an in-teresting lecture. A vote of thanks by the president, Mr. A. E. Jackson, was seconded by Colonel Thynne and Mr. Monkhouse.[53]
Monkhouse gives a lecture on Selection and Training of Apprentices to the Australian Institute of Engineers
SKILLED LABOUR. TRAINING THE BOYS. QUALIFICATIONS OF APPRENTICES. Interesting suggestions as to the best methods of training apprentices in various trades were advanced by Mr. Walter I. Monkhouse associate member of the Australian Institute of Engineers, in a paper read by him before the Brisbane division of the Society last night. There was a good attendance of members, and also several distinguished visitors, íncluding the President of the Arbitration Court (Mr. T. W. McCawley). The chair was taken by Mr. R. J. Chalmers (vicepresident). Mr. Monkhouse, at the outset, referred to the vital concern felt by engineers regarding the factors that had to be considered in the training of apprentices. Without suitable training and education it was impossible to produce skilled workmen, and without skilled workmen the best design in the world could not be reproduced to give the results it should. "The tendency of late," continued Mr. Monkhouse, "has been to reduce the skilled man more and more to the level of the unskilled. This is one of the effects of the basic wage. Increases in that wage tend to reduce the margin that exists between the skilled workman and the unskilled." Prospective recruits, he suggested, could well be taken over manufacturing works to be educated and interested in the various undertakings. SELECTION OF APPRENTICES. Dealing with selection of apprentices, the lecturer claimed that among the many important things that has to be considered were the attractiveness of a particular trade, and the wish of the candidate and of the parents. Not all of the recruits that were offering to the profession were suitable to be trained and it was really a question of whether or not the candidate possessed the essential characteristic traits. In America 7000 engineers were asked to state what they considered the most desirable qualities in candidates seeking employment in their works. The majority of the replies indicated the skill and knowledge in a vocation were of small importance as compared with personal qualities. Out of six groups of "qualities," character was placed at the head of the list, with technique at the bottom. "Skill and knowledge," continued Mr. Monkhouse, "can be acquired during the period of apprenticeship. What is required is the proper foundation upon which to build, and that is something which all the training in the world will never produce or make." GOVERNMENT SUBSIDY. Dealing with the employment phase, Mr. Monkhouse said that only by increasing the number of lads in training were engineers going to increase the number of skilled workmen available in the future. If the training of the apprentice was what it should be, he should never be a source of earning power during his training. The training shops should be carefully selected perhaps subsidised by the Government, and should be kept up to a very high standard, in order to produce a skilful all-round workman. The education of the apprentice could best be undertaken by a skilled instructor, who should do the work explaining to the student the vari-ous stages, and showing him the results achieved by correct and incorrect procedures. This education was essentially the field of the technical colleges. These should be under the direction of technical men in preference to secondary teachers. What was required in the college was a demonstrating theatre, where the work could be carefully followed and noted by the students. The art of teaching mechanical subjects was not quite the same as that of teaching other subjects, as with technical work the student was actually working in the art. It was necessary also for a lad to realise the importance of civics and the best method of bringing about that realisation was by introducing during his term of apprenticeship a certain amount of education in civics.[54]
Walter Isaac Monkhouse Electoral Roll registration 1925 Merthyr
Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980
Entry: 4040, Monkhouse, Walter Isaac, Highgate, James st., Teneriffe, engineer, male[55]
Walter Isaac Monkhouse Electoral Roll registration 1925 Merthyr (Second Print)
Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980
Entry: 4488, Monkhouse, Irene Olive, 71 Kent st., home duties, female
Entry: 4489, Monkhouse, Walter Isaac, 71 Kent st., engineer, male[56]
Likely Monkhouse stays at Commercial Hotel, Rockhampton
SOCIAL NOTES. . . . Messrs. G. Hughes, T. Lynch, E. Leddy, W. J. Monkhouse, and M. T. Kelly arrived from the south yesterday and are staying at the Commercial Hotel.[57]
PERSONAL NEWS. . . . Messrs. W. I. Monkhouse, and T. Cutbush left for Brisbane yesterday. They have been staying at the Commercial Hotel.[58]
Monkhouse applies for a patent for fire-proof doors
INDUSTRIAL SECTION. PATENT APPLICATIONS. List of applications for letters patent received from February 12 to 18, 1925. . . . 21,870. W. I. Monkhouse. Fire-proof doors. [59]
Monkhouse again elected as a vicepresident of the QWI
WIRELESS INSTITUTE OF AUSTRALIA (QUEENSLAND DIVISION). The annual general meeting was held in the rooms Courier Building, Queen-street, on April 3. There was a good attendance of members, and great enthusiasm was shown at the satisfactory state of affairs of the division. The annual report was read, and the financial statement showed a bank balance of approximately £40, and assets valued at £80. Two years ago the statement showed a debt of £60, and it speaks well for the management that such an improvement has been brought about. The election of officers for the ensuing year resulted:— Patron, Mr. J. S. Just, M.A.M., I.E.E., M.I.E.A., M.I.E.E.; vicepatrons, Prof. T. Parnell, M.A., Dr. Boyd, Mr. J. M'Conachie; past president, Mr. A. G. Jackson, A.M.I.E. (Aust.); president, Mr. A. K. Lawton; vicepresidents, Messrs. E. M. Gibson, T. Langford-Ely, W. Monkhouse, S. H. Smith, P. L. Trackson; hon. members, Messrs. S. V. Colville, C. W. Isles, J. Sutton, F. Walker, the Commonwealth Radio Inspector for Queensland, and the Manager of the State Radio Station; council, Messrs. R. W. Burt, C. H. Casperson, Chas. Danne, W. Ingram, A. A. Jackson, C. W. Stevenson; hon. organiser, Mr. A. N. Stephens; hon. secretary, Mr. T. H. Dutton; hon. treasurer, Mr. J. Williams; hon. auditor, Lieut.-Col. F. O'Donnell, V. D.; Laboratory or Experimental Committee, Messrs. W. G. Best, C. J. Brosnan, A. A. Jackson, J. Williams, and A. WiIson. Laudatory reference was made to the work of last years officers, especially Mr. A. N. Stephens, the late secretary. As practical appreciation of his efforts during the exhibits a cheque for £10 was handed to him by the past president. Mr. Stephens, in accepting the gift, stated that his work could not have been successful if he had not had the great help of the other officers of the division. A number of useful suggestions for increasing the effectiveness of the institute were made by those present, and the retiring president gave a short address on loud speaker working which was interesting and instructive. On the motion of Mr. Lawton (president-elect), a vote of thanks was accorded Mr. A. G. Jackson, who has been at the head of the institute during the whole of the strenuous times. A new edition of the rules is being prepared and will be distributed to all financial members very shortly. Included in this booklet will be the syllabus of lecturers and demonstrations arranged for the year. Membership application forms may be obtained from the hon. secretary, Mr. T. H. Dutton, care of Watson, Ferguson and Co., Queen-street Brisbane.[60]
Monkhouse in Rockhampton for a few days for his employment
PERSONAL NEWS. . . . Mr. W. L. Monkhouse arrived from Brisbane yesterday afternoon, and he is at the Commercial Hotel.[61]
PERSONAL NEWS. . . . Messrs. W. J. Monkhouse and J. Klinger left for the south yesterday. They have been staying at the Commercial Hotel.[62]
Monkhouse back in Rockhampton again for a few days
PERSONAL NEWS. . . . Messrs. W. J. Monkhouse, Klinger, G. Roberts, and J. C. Johnson arrived by the southern mail train yesterday afternoon and are staying at the Commercial Hotel.[63]
PERSONAL NEWS. . . . Messrs. J. Sanderson and W. Monk-house, who have been staying at the Commercial Hotel, departed for the South yesterday.[64]
CLUB ACTIVITIES. . . . WIRELESS INSTITUTE OF AUSTRALIA, QUEENSLAND DIVISION. The continued interference that is causing broadcast listeners so much annoyance seems to be getting worse, and so far the source has not been located. Members of the institute have been endeavouring to find some reason for the trouble, but so far have not been successful. Certain tests have been made and others are now being made. A considerable amount of information has been collected, but in a case like this the more data available the more assistance it will be. Any one who can give any log of times or periods of duration. or any special definite feature about this annoyance, will be assisting greatly if they will pass it on to Mr. Dutton, the hon. secretary, who will see that it goes to the right quarter. The trouble does not appear to be due to electric light mains, and must be sought elsewhere. A circular letter to all transmitting stations, received during the week, pointed out that it was intended to prosecute those who broadcast copyright musical works. The reading that is generally taken of this is that the intention is to try to prevent the use of gramophone records for amateur broadcasting. It is expected that combined action will be taken to strongly protest against this. Circumstances prevented the securing of the orchestra on Tuesday last. The visit is postponed till a later date. If the Government is not on the air before, an instrumental quartette will visit 4AE next Tuesday. The council will be pleased to welcome any one interested in the science of wireless telephony on any Wednesday evening or on monthly meeting nights (first Friday in the month). At the next monthly meeting on August 7 a lecture on "Inductance" will be given by Mr. W. J. Monkhouse, A.M.I.E.[65]
SOCIAL NOTES. . . . Messrs. J. W. Smith, R. Wainwright, F. L. Funnie, J. W. Buchanan, I. Monkhouse, and C. Grant arrived from the south yesterday. They are staying at the Commercial Hotel.[66]
QWI foreshadows a lecture on 6 November 1925 by Monkhouse on "Aerials in Theory and Practice"
CLUB ACTIVITIES. . . . WIRELESS INSTITUTE OF AUSTRALIA, QUEENSLAND DIVISION. Considerable interest is being shown in the static tests, which are being conducted by the New South Wales division next month. Entries which closed today are very numerous, and it is hoped that some valuable data will be secured. It is proposed to conduct a similar test in Queensland, and members will be circularised to this effect. The next general meeting will be held on Friday night, November 6, at 8 o'clock, in the Courier Building. Mr. Monkhouse will give another of his interesting talks; this time the subject is "Aerials in Theory and Practice." The Morse class is open every Friday evening, and members are urged to join. Regular lectures on the subject matter of the A.O.P. certificate will be given, in addition to code practice. On Wednesday evenings, the room will be open to members for receiving purposes. The shortwave pipe aerial, it is hoped, will be in position this weekend for low loss and shortwave enthusiasts. The council will meet next Wednesday, at the usual time.[67]
Monkhouse agrees to postpone his lecture due to stormy weather and poor attendance at the meeting of the QWI
WIRELESS INSTITUTE OF AUSTRALIA (QUEENSLAND DIVISION). The monthly meeting of the Queensland Division was held on Friday night of last week in the rooms, Courier Building, Queen-street. Owing to the stormy conditions, the attendance was very small, and Mr. Monkhouse kindly consented lo give his lecture at the next monthly meeting to be held on Friday, December 4. This will be the last ordinary general meeting this year. . . .[68]
Monkhouse to lecture at the next general meeting of the QWI
WIRELESS INSTITUTE OF AUSTRALIA, QUEENSLAND DIVISION. Particular notice of members is drawn to the fact that the December general meeting will be held tomorrow at 8 p.m., in the rooms when not only will there be an interesting lecture illustrated by experiments by Mr. W. I. Monkhouse, A.M.I.E.E., but much interesting information will be given to members regarding the new Traffic Bureau which has been formed. On Wednesday next a test of the organisation will be made. As a test a message will originate at Federal Executive headquarters and be broadcast by 2WL [sic, 2WI]. Stations in the various States will forward the text to their respective Federal delegates who will be required to ascertain the views of those members of the State council who are available. A resume of the State division's views on the test matter will be handed by the Federal delegate to the official operator who will pass it on to 2WL [sic, 2WI]. Ordinary traffic procedure will be followed and with the replies first come first served will be the order of the day. Will Queensland be the first to come back? If this test is successful a further test will be made the following Wednesday, conditions permitting when the American Radio Relay League will be asked to forward a message for Australian comment to be relayed through 2WL. An interesting relay was received through 4HR and 2HM during the week. Apparently the Brisbane transmitters now are neglecting 80 metres altogether. Further logs have been received of the Toowoomba trip, and the results are now being analysed by the committee. The membership continues to grow slowly but surely, and Mr. Dutton, the hon. secretary, will be pleased to give particulars to any one interested. The rooms are open on Wednesday evenings on the fifth floor, Courier Building.[69]
Walter Isaac Monkhouse Electoral Roll registration 1926 Merthyr
Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980
Entry: 4538, Monkhouse, Irene Olive, 71 Kent st., home duties, female
Entry: 4539, Monkhouse, Walter Isaac, 71 Kent st., engineer, male[70]
Monkhouse, as chairman of the Electrical Workers Board, calls for nominations a replacement board member
"ELECTRICAL WORKERS' ACT OF 1923." NOMINATION OF CANDIDATE FOR VACANCY ON ELECTRICAL WORKERS' BOARD. NOMINATIONS are called for one representative on the Board elected by the Electric Authorities of the State in the room of Mr. E. S. Cornwall, retired, and should reach the undersigned not later than 4th March, 1926. Every nomination form must be endorsed by at least three of the Electric Authorities. Any retiring member is eligible for re-election. If more than one nomination is received a secret Ballot shall be taken of the persons qualified to vote. Ballot papers will be issued and a Ballot shall be held, closing on the 12th April, 1926. W. I. MONKHOUSE, A.M.I.E.E. and A. Chairman of the Board. Department of Public Works. Brisbane, 8th February, 1926. 43 [71]
Monkhouse applies for a patent relating to fire alarms
INDUSTRIAL SECTION. COMMONWEALTH APPLICATIONS. List of Applications for Letters Patent received from 25th March to 7th April, 1926. 1145. W. I. Monkhouse. Fire alarms.[72]
Monkhouse appointed president of the QWI at its annual general meeting
RADIO TOPICS. CONDUCTED BY '"LISTENER." . . . At the annual general meeting of the Queensland division of the Wireless Institute of Australia, the following office-bearers were elected for 1926-27: Patron, A. G. Jackson, A.I.E.E., A.M.I.E. (Aust.); vicepatrons, Professor T. Parnell; M.A.; Dr. Boyd, J. Christie (Deputy Postmaster-General); pastpresident, A. K. Lawton; president, W. Monkhouse, A.I.E.E., A.M.I.E. (Aust.); vicepresidents, C. H. Casperson, Chas. Dunn, E. M. Gibson, A. A. Jackson, J. C. Price, S. H. Smith, A. N. Stephens; hon. members, S. V. Colville, C. W. Isles, J. Sutton, F. Walker, the Commonwealth radio inspector for Queensland, the manager of State radio station; council, R. J. Browne, R. W. Burt, F. E. Poulis, F. V. Sharpe, H. J. Stephenson, C. W. Stephenson, J. Williams; hon. secretary, O. R. Chas. Runge; hon. treasurer, T. H. Dutton; hon. auditor, A. Hope-Jones.[73]
Monkhouse gives a lecture on "Experimenters" at the radio and electrical exhibition from the 4QG temporary studio established there
RADIO TOPICS. BY "LISTENER." The radio and electrical show at the Exhibition Hall contains a wealth of interest to the amateur and the listener-in. There will be seen all that is latest in factory-made receivers and components, and one notes with pride that the Australian-made article occupies pride of place in many instances. . . . Each evening during the exhibition, station 4QG is transmitting a programme from a broadcasting studio, which has been erected on the stage. This gives country visitors a good idea of how broadcasting is accomplished from the station, and what is more it provides good entertainment for those attending the exhibition. The Monday and Tuesday night programmes were much enjoyed, opening as they did with lecturettes appropriate to the occasion. On Monday night Mr. J. H. Broome (Siemens Proprietary, Limited) lectured on "Automatic Telephone Exchanges," and last night Professor Parnell, of the Queensland University, dealt with "The development of electrical science." Tonight, Mr. J. W. Robinson (director, Queensland Radio Service) will lecture on "Broadcasting"; tomorrow night Professor Hawkins (Queensland University) will speak on "Engineers and Engineering" and on Friday night Mr. W. I. Monkhouse (president, Queensland division, Wireless Institution) will lecture on "Experimenters." [74]
Monkhouse gives a lecture over 4QG about amateur radio, other presenters that week included John William Robinson and Frederick William Stevens
RADIO PROGRAMME. WEEK'S ARRANGEMENTS. DAILY.— 1 p.m. market and weather reports and "The Daily Mail" and "The Daily Standard" news items; 1.30 pm., lunch hour music by the Hotel Carlton orchestra; afternoon, "The Telegraph" news service; 3.30 p.m., music from the studio; every evening at 6.30, children's sessions — stories, music, and nursery rhymes; 7 p.m., market reports by the Council of Agriculture and lecturettes on agricultural subjects; 7.20 p.m., news service, and stock exchange and shipping information; 9.15 p.m., weather information; 10 p.m., "The Daily Mail" news service. MONDAY.— 7.45 p.m., talk by the Queensland Preference League; 8 p.m., Federal Band and Anglo Quartette party. TUESDAY.— 7.45 p.m., lecture on amateur wireless by the president of the Queensland division, Wireless Institute of Australia (Mr. Monkhouse); 8 p.m., Blind Society concert, relayed from the Institute's technical school. WEDNESDAY.— 7.45 p.m., lecture by Mr. J. W. Robinson, on "The Divine Spark"; 8 p.m., popular concert and Savoy orchestra; 9.45 p.m. Crystal Palace orchestra. THURSDAY.— 7.45 p.m., talk on books, by Mr. W. A. Braiden; 8 p.m., Gaiety orchestra, St. Joseph's Church choir, radio voice contests, etc. FRIDAY.— 7.30 p.m., talk by the Workers' Educational Association; 7.45 p.m., lecture "The Mercantile Marine in War Time," by Mr. F. W. Stevens; 8 p.m., a "Nautical Night," Federal Band; radio voice contests, Savoy orchestra; 9 p.m. weekend road information by the Royal Automobile Club. SATURDAY.— 2 p.m., Nambour Rural School fete relayed from Nambour; opened by the Minister for Public Instruction; presentation of the Lilley Medal; opening of the school wireless plant, and then a musical programme provided in the studio of 4QG, 3.30 p.m.; Seventh Day Adventist Church service, from Buranda; 7.45 p.m., cricket talk by Mr. Roger Hartigan; 8 p.m., violin concert from the studio of Mr. Luis Amadeo Pares, "The Hall of Muses," "Sunday Mail" news service.[75]
George Augustine Taylor gives a lecture on the "Future of Radio" to a meeting of the WIA Qld, Monkhouse, as president, leading a vote of thanks at the conclusion
Monkhouse, as president of the QWI gives a lecture about "Wireless" over 4QG
ON THE AIR. 4QG PROGRAMME. The following programme will be broadcast by 4QG on Friday, November 12 — Midday Session. 12.55 p.m.— Tune in. 12.58 p.m.— Time Signal. 1.0 p.m.— Market Reports; Weather information; "The Daily Mail" News; "The Daily Standard" News. 1.20 p.m.— From Hotel Carlton — Lunch Music from the Lounge, Hotel Carlton, played by Hotel Carlton Symphony Orchestra. 2.0 p.m.— Close Down. Afternoon Session. 3.30 p.m.— From Hotel Carlton — Afternoon Tea Music from the Lounge, Hotel Carlton, played by Hotel Carlton Symphony Orchestra. 4.15 p.m.— From the Studio — 4.15 p.m.— "The Telegraph" News. 4.30 p.m.— Close Down. Early Evening Session. 6.25 p.m.— Tune in. 6.30 p.m.— The Children's Session — Stories by "The Sandman." 7.0 p.m.— From the Council of Agriculture Studio — The Farmers' Session. Market Reports. Lecturette — "Lessons from Rural Denmark" — Mr. J. F. Reid, Editor Queensland Agricultural Journal. "The Standard" News, Stock Exchange. 7.40 p.m.— Announcements. Night Session. 7.45 p.m.— Lecture Session — "Wireless," by Mr. Monkhouse (President Wireless Institute of Australia, Queensland Division). The Studio Orchestra. 8.0 p.m.— Overture — "Aladdin " (Rollinson), the Studio Orchestra (conductor, Mr. A. K. Featherstone); bass solo, "In the Great Unknown" (d'Hardelot), Mr. J. Watson; Hawaiian Instrumentalists, the Kulua Trio; monologue, "His Pipe" (Clarkc), Miss Eileen MCLennan; popular numbers — (a) one-step; "Peter Gink" (Cobb); (b) "Sahara " (Nicholls) the Studio Orchestra; soprano solo, "The Prayer " from "La Tosca" (Puccini), Miss Ivy Plane; cornet solo, "Banks of Allan Water" (Hartmann), Mr. W. H. Davis; valse "Woing of the Waves" (Braham), the Studio Orches-tra bass solo, "The Monarch of the Storm" (Mullen), Mr. J. Watson; Hawaiian Instrumentalists, the Kalua Trio; monologue, "The Kid" (Kilfoy), Miss Eileen McLellan; selection, "The Spring Chicken," the Studio Orchestra; contralto solo, "Vale" (Russell), Miss Doris Keys; cornet solo, "Thora" (Adams), Mr. W. H. Davis. 9.10 p.m.— Weather information officially supplied by the Commonwealth Weather Bureau. Announcements. Weekend road information for motorists, officially supplied by the Royal Automobile Club of Queensland. . . . [77]
Monkhouse, as president QWI gives a lecture on "Amateur Wireless" over 4QG
BROADCASTING. STATION 4QG. MIDDAY SESSION. 12.55 p.m.— Tune in. 12.58 p.m.— Time signal. 1 p.m.— Market reports, &c. . . . NIGHT SESSION. 7.45 p.m.— Lecture session, "Amateur Wireless," by Mr. W. T. Monkhouse, president, Wireless Institute, Queensland Division,[78]
Monkhouse, as president QWI gives a lecture about "Amateur Radio" over 4QG
4QG. TONIGHT'S PROGRAMME. 6.30 p.m.— News service supplied by "The Dally Standard." 6.30 p.m.— The children's session — stories by "The Sandman." 7 p.m.— Market reports. Lecturette — "Prospects for the New Year Pig Market," by Mr. E. J. Shelton, instructor in pig raising. 7.30 p.m.— Stock reports. Weather news. Announcements. 7.45 p.m.— Lecture session — "Amateur Wireless," by Mr. W. T. Monkhouse (president, Wireless Institute of Australia, Queensland division).[79]
Monkhouse as president of the QWI, gives evidence on amateur radio to the Royal Commission on wireless
Wireless Amateurs. Suggestions to Commission. Evidence in Brisbane. The Royal Commission on Wireless, composed of Mr. J. H. Hammond, K.C. (chairman), Sir James Elder, Mr. C. E. Crocker, and Mr. J. McMaster, continued the hearing of evidence this afternoon. . . . W. J. Monkhouse, assistant electrical engineer, Public Works Department, representing the "Wireless Institute of Australia (Queensland division), read a statement in the course of which he suggested that definite wavelengths be allocated for amateur work. He submitted that 10, 15 to 16½, 30 to 33, 60 to 66, and 100 to 200 metres would be satisfactory. With no definite wavelengths amateurs were left in an undesirable position. He was also of the opinion that the conditions under which the amateur transmitting license is granted should be amended to allow more personal data to be transmitted, provided that it only applied to the persons exchanging such messages. His association urged that provision should be made whereby amateur stations could be used in times of stress for the transmission of public messages, and also desired that isolated outback stations be allowed to make use of amateur stations to send messages of everyday value. Other suggestions offered were:— The placing of all parties using wireless under one controlling authority. That provision be made so that a power of more than 10 watts can be used continuously without the necessity for a periodical application for the right to use higher power. That if a board of research is founded amateur experimenters be represented. That amateurs be enrolled in sectional groups as has been done in America. Relay organisations would be built up in this way, and they would be extremely valuable in war time or in times of national stress. [80]
INDUSTRIAL SECTION. TRADE MARK APPLICATIONS. Any person interested in opposing the registration of any Mark appearing hereunder may lodge, at the Trade Marks Office, Melbourne, a Notice of Opposition, in duplicate, in the Form F, in the Third Schedule, Trade Marks Rules, 1913. Information concerning the closing date for the lodging of Notices of Opposition, etc., obtainable from, and all communications to be addressed to, the Registrar of Trade Marks, Department of Patents, 581-585 Bourke Street, Melbourne. On filing Notice of Opposition, a fee of £2 is payable in respect of each application opposed. . . . 8392. W. I. Monkhouse. Advertising signs.[81]
Walter Isaac Monkhouse Electoral Roll registration 1928 Merthyr
Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980
Entry: 4640, Monkhouse, Irene Olive, 71 Kent st., home duties, female
Entry: 4641, Monkhouse, Walter Isaac, 71 Kent st., engineer, male[82]
Monkhouse appointed as a Government representative on the Electrical Workers Board
ELECTRICAL WORKERS. REPRESENTATION ON BOARD. A proclamation has been issued proclaiming Monday, April 2, as the day on which the Electrical Workers Act of 1927 shall come into operation. The following have been appointed members of the Electrical Workers Board: A. E. Hall and W. I. Monkhouse, representatives of the Government nominated by the Minister. E. S. Cornwall, representative elected by the Electric Authorities in the State. R. Silcock, representative nominated by the Fire Underwriters' Association of Queensland. P. S. Trackson, representative elected by the employers in the electrlcal industry in the State. S. J. Bryan and A. M. Bowman, representatives elected by the certificated employees in the electrical industry in the State. S. Wood and D. C. Thomson, representatives nominated by the Queensland branch of the Electrical Trades Union of Australia. Mr. A. E. Hall is to be chairman of the board. [83]
Staff Dance. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS. On Saturday night the staff of the Department of Public Works held a successful dance in aid of the Queensland Cancer Campaign fund. Smellie's Buildings, which were used for the dance, presented a gay appearance. The dancing hall was decorated with myriads of softly veiled lights glowed from a canopy of greenery and trails of wisteria blooms. Garlands of roses were suspended overhead and large flags of all nations lined the walls. Palm fronds tied with festoons of scarlet paper were set about the hall and the staircase was decorated with greenery and streamers. The committee responsible consisted of Miss P. Hansen and Mr. L. Weston (joint secretaries), Misses J. Joyce, V. Schneider, K. Carberry, M. Nelson, Messrs. J. Bambach, R. Gladwyn. Those present included the Minister for Public Works (Mr. M. J. Kirwan) and Mrs. Kirwan, the Under Secretary for Public Works (Mr. A. H. Smith) and Mrs. Smith, Mr. and Mrs. Bell, Mr. and Mrs. J. J. Grier, Mr. and Mrs. C. Trail, Mr. and Mrs. L. O'Connor, Messrs. W. I. Monkhouse, C. D. Hogan, and Ludwig, Mrs. J. J. Roberts, Misses K. and E. Hynes, K. Gorban, B. Cameron, E. McGinley. Misses K. and V. Caulfield, K. Fisher, R. Bagley, Thelma Buchan, May Fisher, Grace Jenkins, P. Hansen, J. Joyce, D. and C. Hansen, V. Schneider, J. Torrance, W. and M. McGuffie, F. Parker, F. Currie, H. Mackay, J. Cameron, Sybil Green, Ruth McNab, P. Scott, E. Smith, Mary Joyce, T. Brunckhurst, V. Spillbeck, D. and F. Bateman, O. Hoy, K. Gray, M. O'Connor, M. Williams, T. Knudsen, M. O'SulIivan, K. Ferris, B. Kiely, K. O'Brien, Iris Allen, Linda Buchanan, G. Burrows, Nancy Warren, P. Singer, Ida Walker, Moira Bodkin, P. and T. Richardson, W. and R. Skyring, D. Lapraik, A. Flynn, Amy Mulbett, Nell Flynn, G. Nisbet, Nancy Flynn, Gladys McKenna, Nancy Bredhouer, T. Hourigan, M. O'Brien, D. and E. Dunleagh, V. and E. Salisbury, Eleanor and Etta Dunne, Melda and Mona Dwyer. Messrs. W. T. Johnson, R. McCabe, A. A. Meadmore, J. M. Watson, E. Scott, L. Currie, C. Colenso, F. G. MacMinn, C. Bateman, J. Miller, C. Johnstone, E. Carter, W. E. Mills, Knight, M. W. Connors, J. Pope, R. Healy, R. McCabe, H. W. Johns, W. Morgan, A. Eshbourne, A. Hull, H. E. Thomas, P. Hoare, R. Dunsmore, E. Bulger, I. Duffy, E. McGillivray, M. Bleaney, L. Doherty, G. Gilfoyle, E. Whitmee, J. Daly, E. A. Richardson, F. C. Narborough, I. and L. Soden, W. Webb, R. M. Graham, J. D. Craig, F. C. Brady, N. Kelly, J. M. Donnellan, S. A. Trout, R. Blower, J. Hughes, A. Moorhead, B. Marquis, J. Craig, E. R. Sweetman, N. Noon, W. N. Preston, N. S. Harvey, C. R. Bearpark, K. McGrath, M. Murphy, S. Parkinson, P. Jackson, P. Dowd, A. Anderson, V. Boyan, J. Mennis, E. Leach, E. Mulberg, B. England, C. Morton, A. Gleaspen, F. and J. Reville, P. Laugher, J. Carberry, M. J. Trotter, J. C. Morrisby, H. Gillies, T. Rasey, J. Corkin, V. Tynan, T. Casey, C. Flynn, R. Abdy, M. Cahill, J. Murphy, A. J. Cooper, C. J. Baird, J. W. Calcott, V. J. O'Brien, N. T. Wood, D. J. Cameron, I. Schmenke, J. C. Marshall, L. Arnell, A. Braddy, J. Donnelly, J. Morris, F. J. Foley, A. J. Wright, V. Leadbeater, J. J. Roberts, W. Gladwin, H. Healy, and V. Viertel. Supper was served on the floor above the dance hall. The tables were beautified by vases of pink peach blossoms and sweetpeas, set amidst swathes of pink and scarlet tulle.[84]
Monkhouse an invited guest of the traders at a Christmas Lunch for the Queensland Electrical Federation
CHRISTMAS LUNCH. ELECTRICAL FEDERATION. HOPES FOR ANNUAL FUNCTION. Hoping that the function would be a yearly one, the members of the Queensland Electrical Federation held a Christmas luncheon at Lennon's Hotel yesterday. A lengthy list of city firms was represented, and the gathering included many guests of the federation, and the traders comprised in it. After the health of his Majesty the King had been drunk in silence, the chairman and vicepresident of the association (Mr. R. F. Galloway) proposed "Our Guests." The president (Mr J. B. Chandler), he said, was absent in the South, but a wire had been received from him wishing the gathering every success. Mr. Galloway said that he hoped the function would be held every year. The idea behind gatherings of the sort was a happy one, as it gave members of the federation an opportunity to meet in a festive season of the year to settle up any scores. (Laughter.) On behalf of the federation, he wished all present the compliments of the season. Mr. H. D. Lee, who amused the gathering with foreign estimates of the Commonwealth, gleaned during a recent trip abroad, supported the toast. In the unavoidable absence of the Mayor (Mr. W. A. Jolly, C.M.G.), the Deputy Director of Posts and Telegraphs (Mr. A. J. Christie) responded. He said that today electrical science was invading every sphere of life. He spoke of the great advance being made in Queensland with the installation of automatic exchanges. They were completing a £300,000 job in Brisbane, and in Queensland in the last 18 months £500,000 had been spent on the work. One would soon be installed at Cairns. He wished the federation success and prosperity. Mr. J. H. Hindman, of the City Council's Electricity Supply Department, spoke in support. The list of firms represented was: Electric Construction Co. of Australia, Ltd., Waygood Otis (Australia) Pty., Ltd., Edison Swan Electrical Co., Ltd., Engineering Supply Co. of Australia, Ltd., Lawrence and Hanson Electrical Co., Ltd., Noyes Bros. (Sydney) Ltd., W. E. Peterman, Trackson Bros., Ltd., Siemens (Australia) Pty., Ltd., W. T. Henley's Telegraph Works Co., Ltd., Evans, Deakin, and Co., Ltd., Warburton, Franki (Brisbane), Ltd., J. B. Chandler and Co., W. G. Watson and Co., Ltd., V. J. Griffiths, Australian General Electric Co., Ltd., William Adams and Co., Ltd., F. Broad and Son, Jas. Campbell and Sons, Ltd., Synchronome Electrical Co. of Australia, Ltd., L. B. Thayer-Wood, Queensland Machinery Co., Ltd. The guests of the federation were: Messrs. J. S. Just, J. H. Hindman, G. R. Steer, W. Arundell, J. J. Grier, J. E. Plumridge, J. W. Robinson, A. J. Christie, and Dr. Boyd. The traders' guests were: Messrs. H. W. Hardie, W. I. Monkhouse, A. D. Henry, J. Macpherson, F. Trackson, W. B. Journeaux, C. H. Willey, H. Eklund, F. W. Sabine.[85]
Monkhouse part of the QWI executive attempting to resist the inevitable takeover of the Wireless Institute name in Queensland by the progressive Australian Radio Transmitters' League
Amateur Bodies. Proposed Amalgamation. Wireless Institute Views. In last Wednesday's radio notes there appeared a special article in which Major Leo J. Feenaghty (Federal secretary of the Australian Radio Transmitters' League) referred to a proposal for the amalgamation of the league with the Wireless Institute of Australia. Major Feenaghty stated that as a result of a conference which was held in Melbourne towards the end of last year, a satisfactory scheme for amalgamation was drawn up, and that so far as Queensland is concerned, the result will be that the A.R.T.L. will take control of the A.R.T.L. — W.I.A. combine, under the name of the Wireless Institute of Australia (Queensland division). Since, the article appeared Mr. A. A. Jackson (hon. secretary of the Wireless Institute of Australia (Queensland section) has written to the Editor of "The Telegraph" as follows:— The attention of the council of the Queensland Division of the Wireless Institute has been drawn to certain statements made over the signature of L. J. Feenaghty, hon. sec. Q.R.T.L., in reference to the amalgamation of that league with the W.I.A., in which he states that the Q.R.T.L. will take charge of arrangements and that all inquiries should be addressed to him. These statements are incorrect. In order to make the position clear the Queensland Council of the W.I.A. state: 1. That all communications to the Wireless Institute should be addressed to the official address, Box 689, G.P.O., Brisbane. 2. That Mr. Feenaghty is not a member of the W.I.A. and therefore has no official standing in any matters relating thereto in this State. 3. That a circular is being sent to all members of the Queensland division, a copy of which is attached, so that all country members may express their opinion on the proposal. 4. That Instead of so much newspaper propaganda that all members of the Q.R.T.L. may immediately become members of the W.I.A. by the obvious method of paying their fees and then, if of sufficient numbers, electing their own officers. 5. That the Queensland division has the right to self-government, and that the Federal Council has no other right than to suggest that certain action be taken. The State Council is not bound in any action that the Federal Council may have taken without their consent. The proposed amalgamation will be discussed at a general meeting to be held after all members have expressed their opinion on the matter. The circular letter referred to reads as follows:— Dear Member,— The attached is a copy of the deliberation between the Q.R.T.L. and the Wireless Institute, and as you are vitally concerned the council of the Queensland division, before any action is taken, would like an expression of opinion from the various members as to the following points:— 1. Are you agreeable to the proposed amalgamation? 2. Does the proposal to hand over the assets of the Queensland division meet with your approval? 3. What are your suggestions in reference to the disposal of funds? 4. Does the proposed method of government meet with your approval? The council desire to inform members that the whole of the negotiations were carried out without the council being in any way officially advised that proposals to amalgamate were to be put in hand, although the president and secretary attended a meeting of the Q.R.T.L. just on two years ago with a proposal for their members to join up. The grave lack of courtesy of the Federal council in not keeping the Queensland council advised is to be regretted, and the members of the council draw attention to this fact so that members will understand why they were not informed earlier of the trend of events, The letter was signed on behalf of the council by W. I. Monkhouse (president) and A. A. Jackson (hon. secretary).[86]
ADDRESS ON ELECTRICITY. An address of interest to users of electricity as well as to engineers was delivered on Wednesday evening before the Brisbane Division of the Institution of Engineers, Australia, by Mr. E. E. Sharpe, A.M.I.E.E., F.B.H.I., a director of Messrs. Venner Time Switches Limited, London, who is now on a visit to Australia. Mr. Sharpe drew attention to the electrical development in England and the operation of the Electric Supply Act on the cost and added value of the service to the consumer. The lecturer stressed the point of economy to be gained by reducing the power stations in Great Britain to 17. This economy was not only gained by the difference between the works costs of the various undertakings, but chiefly the saving in capital charge on installed plant. He stressed the fact that because the demand was not made in each area exactly at the same time, peak demand could be met by interconnected stations, and to this should be added the saving in emergency and standby plant. In dealing with the cost of electricity the lecturer stated that he was not in favor of a maximum demand tariff because maximum demands which did not represent increase in loading to the supply authority must be charged for, even when they occurred at the time of peak loading. He stated that the ideal charge was one which covers the cost of giving the maximum demand over set hours of the day and cheaper rates at other times. This could be done in many ways but is chiefly carried out by a meter with two dials and/or a clock switch which connected one set of meter dials during stated hours and another set during the balance of the 24 hours. A lengthy discussion by Messrs. W. M. L'Estrange, J. J. Grier, W. Arundell, A. E. Axon, B. S. Goadby, W. I. Monkhouse, C. E. Parkinson, and the chairman, Mr. J. S. Just, followed, and many interesting points were raised, especially those dealing with the psychological effect on the public of scientifically correct tariffs which, because they were involved, were not usually understood. After the lecturer had replied to the various points raised during the discussion the meeting closed with a hearty vote of thanks to Mr. Sharpe.[87]
Monkhouse gives evidence to Commonwealth Public Service arbitrator in respect of wages for telephonic mechanics
MORE COMPLICATED. DEVELOPMENTS IN TELEPHONIC WORK. INSTRUCTOR'S VIEWS. "My impression regarding the development in telephonic work In recent years is that generally it is more complicated, due to increased facilities, and that the maintenance involved more extensive knowledge." This statement was made by Mr. W. I. Monkhouse, A.M.I.E., assistant electrical engineer of the Public Works Department, and Queensland examiner for electrical mechanics, when giving evidence yesterday to the Commonwealth Public Service Arbitrator (Mr. Atlee Hunt), who resumed the hearing of an application made by the Australian Postal Electricians' Union for the variation of the award in the matter of salaries to postal and telephonic mechanics. Mr. E. F. Meier and Mr. W. Settle appeared for the union, Mr. G. P. N. Watt, for the Commonwealth Public Service Board, Mr. E. Dowse for the Postmaster-General. Mr. R. G. Ramsay was present as secretary to Mr. Hunt. Mr. Monkhouse further said that the telephonic mechanic must have higher capabilities than the telegraphic mechanic. The telephonic mechanic must have a greater specialising knowledge of telephone work. He would not rate telephonic mechanics lower than electrical fitters. There was a distinct line of demarcation between the telephonic and telegraphic mechanic. Australians Superior. Frank E. Mason, senior mechanic at Nundah automatic exchange, a satellite of the Albion exchange, said he had had training in telephonic and telegraphic work in England after the war, and his impression gained was that the Australian mechanic was far superior in specialised work than the English trainee. Nundah was a one-man station, and for that reason, he thought, he required a greater working knowledge and capabilities than a mechanic stationed at South Brisbane Station, where there was more than one employee. Instructor's Evidence. Norman G. Mills, instructor of electrical subjects at the Central Technical College, said he was formerly in the postal service. Witness thought that the work done by the telephone mechanic was much more complicated than that of mechanics outside the department. He had instructed mechanics, and at the Technical College he found it necessary to set aside a special class by telephonic mechanics. He kept abreast of the times and developments in the service by continually visiting the exchanges in his spare time. Witness said he had left the department in 1920, and he would truthfully say that the improvements in the service had doubled since that time. Greater development had taken place from 1924 and the department required a higher standard today. Up to 1928 the College training course for mechanics had been set down for three years, but had since been increased to five years. Continued Study Needed. T. J. Goggins, foreman, installation, branch, stated that he had held his present position for 12 years, and had had charge of 60 mechanics at the one time. Witness based his claim for an increased salary from £432 plus £6, to £546 for a grade 2 mechanic on the grounds that the position be held at present called on more complicated work, and that with the additional and new apparatus that had been, or was being installed, he needed continual study to keep abreast with the new facilities and circuits. His work was more important than the work of an exchange foreman on maintenance work, as that class of foreman had only to know his own exchange, whereas witness had to know the working of all the exchanges in the metropolitan areas. Two applicants for increased wages, Mr. E. Farrell, senior mechanic, of the telephonic workshop, and J. E. Joseph, senior mechanic in charge of light and power, gave evidence. Both considered that the class of work they performed called for a great deal of supervision, and was more complicated since the new installation of new apparatus.They had also to consider the financial aspect of the workshop. Another applicant was J. T. Swan, foreman of a section of the installation staff, who said that he supervised 10 mechanics. W. C. E. Robins, a senior mechanic, said that more precision was required by mechanics in repairs since the installation of the new automatic installation. Witness said that he had been instrumental in improvements in the Murray Multiplex telephonic system, and had been awarded a bonus by the department. Witness said that he got 9s 7d overtime work of two hours on Sundays. It was one of his duties to do points once in three Sundays. The inquiry was adjourned until to-morrow morning.[88]
Monkhouse, as assistannt electrical engineer for Public Works Dept, gives evidence at inquiry into three cases of electrocution
Death by Electrocution. Evidence at Inquiry. Methods of Resuscitation. The inquiry into the three electrocution tragedies which occurred in Brisbane in March was continued in the Magisterial Inquiry Court this morning before Mr. A. Staines, Justice of the Peace. Leslie Payne, 31, an employee of Tristram's Ltd., of 77 Grey Street, South Brisbane, was using an electric hand drill attached to a flexible cord connected to an electric pilot lamp point in a laneway adjoining Tristram's premises on March 26. He was electrocuted. When using a portable electric grinding machine connected to an electric current over a bench at Binnie's Engineering Works (Evans, Deakin, and Co., Ltd.), at Montague Road, West End, on March 26. Clarence A. Shaw, 25, received an electric shock from which he died. Leonard Francis Winter was electrocuted on March 25 when at work under a house at Kirkland Avenue, Coorparoo. He was using an electric light lead and was repairing a motor car. Sergeant S. Warner examined the witnesses. Mr. J. J. Grier (Chief Government Electrical Engineer) and Mr. W. I. Monkhouse represented the State Department of Public Works. Mr. R. Silcock appeared for the Fire and Accident Underwriters' Association, Mr. C. W. Francis (Messrs. Thynne and Macartney) for the City Electric Light Co., Mr. S. J. Bryan for the Electrical Trades Union, and Mr. J. Willis for Evans, Deakin, and Co., Ltd. Walter Isaac Monkhouse, assistant electrical engineer attached to the Public Works Department, said that he made a test on the electric drill used by Payne, and it disclosed an earth. Otherwise the winding was making contact with the frame of the machine. A failure of the insulation of the wiring would cause that defect, which would result in an electric shock to anyone using the machine, providing he was in contact with the earth. With regard to the Sylvester and Schafer methods of resuscitation, witness said that the Sylvester method, although giving good results as regards artificial respiration, did not produce the necessary massage effect from the heart and lungs, to bring the heart into action after an electric shock. Witness tendered a copy of an article which set out that 86 per cent of cases of electric shock, recovered successfully through artificial respiration if it was applied promptly, and continued over a period of time. In one case, it was reported, three and a-half hours elapsed before the patient revived. Witness said that in the case of Payne, it would appear that the half-hour treatment was not quite long enough. Questioned by Mr. Bryan in regard to the electric installation, witness said that he considered that periodical inspections of installation should take place. The importance of this fact was recognised in other countries, New Zealand having passed a regulation concerning the matter. The Victorian Commission were also considering regulations on a similar line. In connection with the death of Clarence A. Shaw, Joseph Charles Williams, ambulance bearer, said that about 1.22 p.m. on March 26 he attended Shaw at Binnie's foundry. Shaw was lying on his back on the damp floor. Witness was informed that he had been electrocuted. Fellow employees of Shaw were applying the Sylvester method of resuscitation, but witness changed to the Schafer method, considering it better in the case of electrocution. He continued until Dr. Haynes arrived and examined the patient. Later, after another examination, the doctor pronounced life extinct, stating that further efforts were useless. To Mr. Monkhouse, witness said that if the doctor had not been in attendance they would have continued the Schafer method for a good deal longer. Proceeding.[89]
PERSONAL. . . . Southern visitors staying at the Commercial Hotel include Mr. and Mrs. J. Stopford, Mr. and Mrs. J. Martin, Messrs. H. E. Twamley, J. Walden, S. Cameron, W. I. Monkhouse, F. G. Foy, and W. McKean.[91]
PERSONAL. . . . Visitors who have been staying at the Commercial Hotel and went to Mackay yesterday include Messrs. W. J. Monkhouse and C. M. Williams.[92]
Monkhouse comments on a recent resucitation case
Resuscitation. Cudgen Creek Case Recalled. Doctors Declare It a Record. Reginald Ernest Daniels, an eight years old Brisbane boy, may become famous as the result of the accident which occurred at Cudgen Creek, near Murwillumbah on December 26. After having fallen into the water and been submerged for half an hour, he was resuscitated. Prominent medical authorities in Brisbane declare that nowhere in their medical journals, or in their experience, can they find a parallel. "It appears to be easily a record," said one. INJECTION OF DRUG. A British Medical Association official said that the case was very interesting, as he could not find in his records a case in which a body which had been resuscitated had been immersed for more than ten minutes outside. "It appears to be easily a record," he declared. "The great factor in the bringing of life into the body is the injection of a drug called andrenalin into the heart. It is no new idea as it was discovered years ago and is used extensively when patients under anaesthetic fail to stand the ordeal. An injection into the heart itself immediately has a stimulating effect. If the heart has stopped its action all the resuscitation methods in the world will not restore life." "Then you think," he was asked, "that an injection of andrenalin would in many cases effect a save, when resuscitation methods alone had failed?" "I certainly do," he replied. "Andrenalln will set the heart going when it is just on the point of coming to a standstill. I feel sure that if every drowning person was treated with it immediately he was taken from the water, provided of course that the immersion had not been too long the task of the men adopting resuscitation methods would be greatly lightened." He declared that too much attention could not be given to resuscitation methods. It was a pity that the general public could not be more conversant with them. THE SCHAFER METHOD. Mr. W. I. Monkhouse, an officer of the Public Works Department, who has made a special study of resuscitation in all its phases, said that the case was unusual. He had taken most interest in resuscitation after electric shock. It was not generally known that a man struck down by coming into contact with an electric current could be revived. Very exhaustive experiments had been carried out in America in this direction, and it was now generally recognised that the best was the Schafer method, in which the patient was placed stomach downwards, and pressure applied in a rhythmic way to the back so that the lungs were deflated and inflated and at the same time the heart massaged. "By this method," he said, "patients have been restored after four hours of continuous effort. I really think that lives are lost occasionally by the failure to continue resuscitation methods long enough. Nor do X think that even medical authorities are fully seized with the importance of continuing this treatment when life is apparently extinct. After 15 or 30 minutes of fruitless effort the patient is given up for dead, whereas if it had been continued life would have been restored." VALUE OF PLACARDS. Six months ago Mr. Monkhouse gave evidence on this question in the Inquiry Court. Since that time, he said, his department had drawn up placards on which the methods were outlined. These placards had been widely distributed. It was more than a coincidence, he thought, that although accidents had occurred through electric shock none had proved fatal. It would seem, that the putting into practice of this method was having good results. His department was willing to supply anyone with these placards.[93]
Monkhouse responds to criticism of the Public Works Department recommended resucitation method, in a measured, thoughtful and professional manner
Resuscitation. Which is the Best Method? To the Editor of "The Telegraph." Sir,— I have read with considerable interest the comments of medical men and others regarding the recent resuscitation of a boy at Cudgen Headland published in "The Telegraph" on Friday last. It may be stated that the time the boy was submerged before being recovered from the water could not be fixed with accuracy hence half an hour can be taken as approximate only. Although it is stated that medical journals do not record any case of resuscitation after immersion for a greater period than 10 minutes there are on record two instances of resuscitation after the patients had been submerged for 30 minutes. I have particulars of these cases pigeon-holed but at the moment am unable to locate them. It is pleasing to have the assurance of Mr. W. Monkhouse that the placards issued by the Public Works Department are proving effective but I can assure him that the methods practised in the successful case at Cudgen Headland were not the methods set out on the placards issued by his department, nor are the methods recommended by the department these of any recognised life saving organisation in Australia. Mr. Monkhouse remarks that it is generally recognised that the Schafer method is the best in existence, which I heartily endorse, but if Mr. Monkhouse has made a special study of resuscitation he must know that the methods outlined and illustrated on the Public Works placards are not the methods of Professor Sir E. Sharpley Schafer, F.R.S., as devised by him in 1907 and improved at a much more recent date. Furthermore, any person practising the methods as outlined by the Public Works Department would not be granted a certificate of competency by any recognised life saving organisation in Europe, Asia, Africa, or Australia. I cannot make any definite statement regarding America but in view of the fact that the Schafer method is in operation in that continent I feel certain that the Royal Lite Saving Society would not depart from the method included in the Society's handbook. Why the department decided to adopt a method — which is described on the placard as the prone method — from some American source, when thousands of competent instructors of the Schafer method are available in Australia, is difficult to understand, the Australian system having the backing of the best medical brains in the Commonwealth. I do not say that the method illustrated by the department is not effective, but I have no hesitation in saying that the placing of the hands cannot possibly achieve the same success — particularly in the case of amateur operators — as does the correct Schafer method. One minute's operating under the system advocated on the placards will convince any person with any knowledge of resuscitation of the difficulty of retaining position and continuity, both essential in successful operating. Figure 3 on the placard issued by the department shows the operator lifting his hands clear of the patient's body, which is a direct contravention of the very definite instructions issued by Professor Schafer, namely, "the operator will swing backward, releasing all pressure, but without lifting his hands from the patient's body." The lifting of the hands is a reversion to the system invented by the late Dr. Howard, of the New York Life Saving Association, and generally practised by the Humane Societies and Lifeboat Institutions in the United States of America. This system was never in general use in Great Britain and the Continent, and was considered by experts to possess an element of danger if practised by unskilled persons. This method was discarded as far as general use is concerned at least 20 years back, but is evidently retained to some extent in America, and is now passed on to the Public Works Department. Incidentally, it may be mentioned that as far as life saving work is concerned Australia is well ahead of America, and our very efficient organisations are at the disposal of the Public Works Department at any time. As a matter of fact members of the Surf Life Saving Association of Australia, and I believe, the Queensland head centre of the Royal Life Saving Society also, offered their services in giving instruction in the correct methods of resuscitation in metropolitan factories, &c. As an instructor and examiner of long standing I regret that a Government department has recommended for general use any resuscitation method other than the Schafer method, which has stood the test for 23 years as the most efficient and successful ever devised. The saving of human life demands the best effort we are capable of. Mr. Monkhouse agrees that the Schafer method is the best. Why not adopt it for the departmental placards, which are capable of being made of inestimable value to the community? The method illustrated on the placards at present is not the Schafer method.— Yours, &c., S. W. WINDERS, Member Board of Examiners, Surf Life Saving Association of Australia. Coolangatta. VIRTUES OF PRONE POSITION METHOD. The above letter was laid before Mr. Monkhouse for his views. He said:— "I fully realise the excellent work which the Queensland life-saving authorities are doing and I do not wish to bring into disrepute any of their established methods." "But," he went on, "I would like to point that the Schafer method, as originally designed, has been subjected to certain modifications in America, as a result of numerous conferences and as a result of the work of a Resuscitation Commission. A very full and exhaustive inquiry was made into this method." These modifications had to do mainly with the position of the hands on the back. It was found that when the thumbs were touching, a heavy person could do damage to the vertlbrae and as a result the modification whereby the thumb was placed alongside the fingers and the pressure exerted on the floating ribs of the body rather than further back on the back, was designed. "I want it to be clearly understood that I am speaking more particularly of resuscitation after electric shock," he continued. "The Public Works Department is advocating this prone position method, an improvement of the Schafer method, because we think that it is the best method that we can find, having regard to the most modern developments. I am inclined to agree with Mr. Winders in his objection to the lifting of the hands off the back, as the essential feature of the prone position method is the position of the hands on the floating ribs. If the hands are lifted every time it means that that position over the floating ribs has to be found again. But, certain advantages are to be gained by lifting the hands; if this method is used intelligently by properly trained persons this danger should not arise. Certain objections can be taken to the placing of the thumbs together across the back. When the width of the back of the patient varies there is no guarantee, if the thumbs touch, that we are not damaging the vertibrae; or on the other hand there is no guarantee that the floating ribs are being pressed in — a very vital part of the system. The experiences in America show this prone position method to be better than the original Schafer method and the Americans have arrived at this conclusion after collecting much data. "I fear that it is a characteristic of English-speaking peoples not to look into these questions sufficiently from this aspect. Moreover, life-saving bodies and even the medical profession are inclined to be conservative regarding modern developments in methods which they have adopted as being the best. I do not wish to enter into a controversy with Mr. Winders, but I feel that on this important question we may both learn something to our ad-vantage by an exchange of opinions. I would like to see this question discussed publicly, as it is one which ought to receive much greater attention from the man in the street."[94]
PERSONAL. . . . Messrs. W. Inglis and W. Monkhouse left for the South and Mr. H. Bachert left for Mackay on Saturday. They have been staying at the Commercial Hotel.[95]
Monkhouse elected patron at the first annual meeting of the Queensland Listeners' League
Queensland Listeners' League. The first annual report of the Queensland Listeners' League, read at a meeting of the league in the Teachers' Training College, Turbot-street, on March 11, disclosed a very satisfactory condition of affairs. Mr. Thomas H. Dutton (president) was in the chair. Reviewing the year's activities the report stated that a preliminary meeting of metropolitan licence holders was held in the Anzac Club rooms, Elizabeth-street, on January 22, 1930. It was then decided that a listeners' league be formed for the purpose of protecting the interests of listeners, and helping by technical advice, and to do all possible for the advancement of radio science in the State. Herewith the Results. The league got the support and hearty co-operation of a great number of listeners in all parts of the State. A programme committee was formed, with the objective of formulating request programmes from the league. Applications have been received from several country members requesting authority to form new branches. This has been decided upon, and the branches give every promise of thriving lustily. Social Functions. Activities were not confined to one channel only. Under the name of the league a dance was held in the Rosalie School of Arts, and dance music was appropriately obtained from the air — VK4LW transmitted the music, and it was picked up in the hall, amplification being obtained by means of a four-valve concert amplifier loaned by Mr. Golden. An application to the Commonwealth authorities for the granting of an experimental licence to the league met with success, and it was granted in the name of Mr. H. D. Walsh, who operates as VK4HW, and, who has rendered grand service to the league as technical adviser. Through courtesy of the executive of the late Queensland Wireless Institute, a transmitter and most of the required equipment have been received on trust. When slight alterations have been made, listeners will soon be able to tune in to the League's station, VK4QL, on Sunday mornings, afternoons, and nights. Wavelength from 230 to 250 metres. Election of Officers. Officers for the ensuing year were elected as follow: Patron: W. I. Monkhouse, A.M.I.E.E., A.M.I.E. Aust.); president, T. H. Dutton; vicepresidents Messrs. A. Jackson (A.M.I.E.); J. Williams, S. H. Smith, H. Kington, T. Armstrong, E. M. Hanlon, M.L.A.; Colonel Cameron, M.H.R.; Alderman A. Watson (Lord Mayor), G. Brandon; chairman of committees, Mr. J. Linton; secretary and treasurer, Mr. V. E. Kington. Annual membership fee was fixed at 3s.[96]
PERSONAL. . . . Messrs. J. J. Grier (electrical engineer, Department of Public Works), W. I. Monkhouse (assistant electrical engineer), and J. C. M. Wilson (junior assistant electrical engineer) have been appointed to be also electric in-spectors under the Electric Light and Power Act and Regulations.[97]
Monkhouse gives evidence at another inquiry into electrocution, continues to press the case for better education
BUTCHER'S DEATH. FOUND WITH ELECTRIC WIRE IN BOTH HANDS. How Thomas Victor Bunkum (58, married}, who resided at Gympie-road, Aspley, was electrocuted in the yard of a residence in the same street about 6.20 a.m. on January 13, after having delivered meat there was related to the City Coroner (Mr. W. Harris, P.M.) today. CONSTABLE T. LONG assisted at the inquest. Deceased was a butcher by trade, and was employed by Mr. George Lemke, of Chermside. His death took place in the yard of Mr. Albert Barrett's residence, where deceased had touched an electric light wire with both hands. The wire had apparently been broken during a storm on the previous night. Albert Edward Barrett, painter, said that he heard the butcher approaching about 6.20 a.m. while in bed. Witness's daughter got the meat from deceased. "The next thing I heard was a muffled scream," continued witness. Witness's little daughter then said: "The butcher has been knocked down by the electric wire." Witness ran down the back steps, where he saw deceased lying on the ground about 6ft from an electric light pole on witness's land. The wires were on the ground, evidently been carried down by a storm on the previous night. No Sign of Life. Deceased had the wire in both hands, and was lying on the broad of his back. His arms were above his head, and he was stretched straight out and unconscious. Witness saw no sign of life in him. There had been a storm about 10 o'clock on the previous night, accompanied by strong wind and continued flashes of lightning. Witness was of the opinion that deceased walked into the wire before he saw it, and that the wire caught in his basket on his left elbow. Deceased probably caught the wire to try and set it off the basket, and thus electrocuted himself. Witness knew nothing about electricity, and made no attempt to release deceased from the wire. Card of Instruction. Walter Isaac Monkhouse, assistant electrical engineer, attached to the Public Works Department, said that about 10 a.m. on the day in question he made an inspection of the scene. "I would suggest that the attention of the police be directed to the card of instructions for a method of artificial resuscitation to be used in case of an electric shock," said witness. "Electric shock such as deceased suffered," added witness, "did not cause instant death, but immediate unconsciousness. There were instances of persons having been brought round eight hours after receiving an electric shock." Other evidence was given, and the inquest was closed.[98]
Monkhouse attends conference of Institution of Engineers Australia, Civic Reception and Ball
ENGINEERING DELEGATES. Civic Reception and Ball. In keeping with yesterday's holiday atmosphere the first day of the Engineering Conference was devoted chiefly to social intercourse and to showing the visitors some of the attractions of the city and its environs. Following the river trip of the daytime, a civic reception and ball in the City Hall served to entertain the visitors in the evening. Massed palms and multicoloured lights decked the platform, whence the Lord Mayor (Alderman J. W. Greene) welcomed the delegates and visitors. The Lady Mayoress accompanied her husband, and also on the platform were the Minister for Public Works (Mr. H. A. Bruce) and Mrs. Bruce, the president of the conference (Mr. A. J. Gibson) and Mrs. Gibson, the president-elect (Mr. H. R. Harper) and Mrs. Harper, and members of the conference executive committee and of the ladles' committee. After the speeches of welcome dancing was enjoyed, the rendezvous round the hall being enlivened with humorous cartoons, and labelled with engineering terms, such as "The Culvert," "The Blast Furnace," and "The Air Lock." Engineering terms also appeared on the programme, the "Jolly Miller" dance being translated as "The Variable Coupling," and the old-time waltz and one-step as "The Centrifugal Whirl," and "The Magnetic Blowout," respectively. Supper was served in the basement rooms, where civic shields and groupings of flags affixed to the pillars lent a note of brightness. THE COMMITTEE. The Brisbane division of the conference were the hosts at the ball, and the executive committee in charge of arrangements comprised Messrs. J. S. Just (chairman), N. J. Amos, W. Arundell, A. E. Axon, W. E. Bush, P. L. Day, J. R. Kemp, W. M. L'Estrange, and W. Nimmo with Mr. A. E. Sharman as hon. conference organiser. A subcommittee for hospitality and entertainment, with Mr. P. L. Day as convener, comprised Messrs. H. F. Brier, E. B. Cullen, J. S. Izatt, A. M. Midson, W. Nicoll, L. G. Pardoe, R. Silcock, and A. Te Kloot. The ladies committee included Mesdames N. J. Amos, A. E. Axon, W. E. Bush, P. L. Day, W. J. Doak, E. F. Gilchrist, R. W. H. Hawken, J. S. Just, J. R. Kemp, W. Nimmo, and Miss D. L'Estrange. . . . THE ATTENDANCE. . . . R. J. H. Risson, T. C. McKale, B. McLeod, W. I. Monkhouse, P. C. Tibbits, F. Thompson, O. L. Davidson, C. Winnett, H. G. Jenkinson, E. R. Turner, M. H. Parsons (of Adelaide) . . .[99]
Monkhouse attends conference of Institution of Engineers Australia, field trip to Booval Butter Factory
ENGINEERS' VISIT WORKSHOPS INSPECTED. At Gatton and Lake Manchester. Nearly 200 members of the Institution of Engineers, Australia, now in conference at Brisbane, passed through Ipswich yesterday morning in over 30 cars on a tour of inspection of various points of interest. Leaving Brisbane shortly after 9 o'clock some of the party visited the Darra cement works and the Booval butter factory on the way to Ipswich and were much impressed by the up-to-date machinery at both places. . . . VISITORS AT BOOVAL. At the Booval butter factory among those present were Messrs. Norman Bell, of Norman Bell and Company, G. W. Barlow, Main Roads Commission, W. T. Monkhouse, Public Works Department; Gordon Berg, Alfred Suachall, Anton P'ty. Ltd.; H. B. Marks, City Electric Light Company; H. Maltman, Main Roads Commission; and R. Martin Wilson, of Martin Wilson Bros. The visitors were shown through the factory by the General Manager, Mr. D. Saxelby. They expressed considerable interest in the various operations and appliances employed in the manufacture of butter, special interest being taken in the packing of butter for the markets, such as Singapore, Colombo, &c., and the butter-milk drying plant. Members were entertained at morning tea, and Mr. Martin Wilson, on behalf of the visitors, expressed their thanks to the company for enter-tainlng them and showing them over the premises. Mr. D. Saxelby responded on behalf of the company and apologised for the unavoidable absence of the Chairman, Mr. A. G. Muller. He expressed the opinion that the interest of the engineering world in connection with the dairying industry would be of great service to the industry and eventually lead to better and more up-to-date methods.[100]
Monkhouse attends conference of Institution of Engineers Australia, official dinner at the Belle Vue Hotel
In the Social Sphere. ENGINEERS' CONFERENCE. Official Dinner. The members of the Engineers' Conference signalised the conclusion of their programme of work by a dinner at the Belle Vue Hotel last night. The chief guest was his Excellency the Governor (Sir Leslie Orme Wilson), who was met by Mr. H. R. Harper (president of the Institution of Engineers, Australia), Mr. W. M. L'Estrange (chairman of the Brisbane division), and Mr. J. S. Just (chairman of the conference committee). The dinner was held in the main dining-room and two annexes. The guests at the official table were his Excellency Sir Leslie Orme Wilson, the Premier (Mr. W. Forgan Smith) and Mrs. Smith, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr. A. E. Moore) and Mrs. Moore, the Commissioner for Railways (Mr. J. W. Davidson, C.M.G.) and Mrs. Davidson, and Alderman A. Faulkner and Mrs. Faulkner. The members of the conference at the official table were Mr. and Mrs. H. R. Harper, Mr. and Mrs. A. J. Gibson, Mr. and Mrs. J. S. Just, Mr. W. M. L'Estrange and Miss D. L'Estrange, and Mr. H. G. Jenkinson. Roses and dahlias decorated the tables, which were backed by the Union Jack and the Australian flag. . . . Among the visitors present were: . . . R. L. Foote, F. C. Parker, W. R. Steele, J. Wilson, R. F. Galloway, W. Monkhouse, T. J. O'Donohoe, F. R. L'Estrange, D. Fison, A. G. Jackson, A. A. Jackson, F. A. Griffiths, J. Lewis, F. Walker, J. G. Mulcahy, H. F. Brier, G. J. Twine, J. Beiers, C. R. Tranberg, T. Gaffney, Dr. Gaffney, Messrs. R. Hancock, D. McLeod, Deering, J. Wilson, Mitchell, Maxwell, and Midson.[101]
Monkhouse provides report to Wondai Hospital Board on changeover to town electricity supply
WONDAI HOSPITAL. Lighting Arrangements. CHANGE TO TOWN SUPPLY. WONDAI, October 25. Wienholt Hospital Board.— A special meeting of the Wienholt Hospital Board took place on Tuesday for the purpose of receiving a report furnished by Mr. W. I. Monkhouse in connection with the lighting plant of the hospital. Mr. J. H. Langford occupied the chair and introduced Mr. Monkhouse to the committee as the Home Department's officer, who had been appointed to investigate and report to the committee. Mr. Monkhouse gave full and detailed revision of the present generating plant and its cost of operation. He stated that the report regarding the plant furnished previously to some board members had not taken into account all factors. He had inspected the plant and found it was not in the best of repair. He estimated that the necessary replacements and the full overhaul of the engine would entail £50. He estimated that it would cost about £250 to replace the batteries, using new cells. Regarding the costs of operating the plant, he said that there were now 69 lights, one laundry iron, and the X-ray plant. He gave detailed estimates of electricity consumed, as 22 units per week for lighting and 12 for power. There was to hand from Wondai Electric Authority (letter to the board secretary) an offer to supply to the hospital, lighting at 8d. per unit nett, and power at the rate of 4½d. for the first 50 units and 3d. for all over 50 per month. On present consumption at that rate the cost would be 19/2 per week. Oil and kerosene for the present plant for the year cost £60/8/1, to which should be added a proportion of the cost of the wardsman's labour. If £300 was spent in replacements and capitalised over a period and added to the above costs the total would be £1/17/8 per week. The quote (by Mr. F. Kemp) for converting to the town scheme and readjustment of the X-ray plant was £78/10/-, a first year cost only. The X-ray plant would give better results if operated from the powerful town scheme. After general discussion, Mr. Considine moved a vote of thanks to Mr. Monkhouse. Mr. Christiansen in seconding said he was pleased that figures submitted by Mr. Monkhouse consequently upon his investigation had been borne out those previously submitted by Mr. Outridge and accepted by a majority of the board members. There was no doubt but that a changeover to the town supply should be effected. The motion was supported by Mr. Hess and carried by acclamation, and the meeting dispersed.[102]
Monkhouse gives evidence at another inquiry into an electrocution
"BRASS HOLDERS DANGEROUS IN ELECTRIC LEADS." Evidence at Inquest. Mechanic Electrocuted. The need for the use of properly insulated electric lamp holders on leads from fixed sockets was stressed by an officer of the Public Works Department at an inquest today. Leads with brass lamp holders were not allowed under the wiring rules, and constituted improper connections as determined by the Electric Light and Power Act regulations. His evidence was called at the inquest into the death of Robert Francis Breeze, 30, married, a mechanic, who was electrocuted while working with a lead under his house on December 6, 1933. The City Coroner (Mr. J. J. Leahy, Police Magistrate) presided. BURNS ALL OVER BODY. Constable William Charles Fuge, of Stephens station, stated that the deceased had been doing some repairs to his car under the house, and had attached a 30 feet flex lead to a socket in the house. The ground was very wet, and there was water lying about from recent showers. At the postmortem examination witness had been informed that there were numerous burns all over the deceased's body. IMPROPER LEADS. Walter Isaac Monkhouse, assistant electrical engineer employed by the Department of Public Works, disclosed that one wire had become broken adjacent to the lamp holder, and the small particles of copper conductor had penetrated the insulation, making contact with the brass portion of the holder. "This, I understand, was found in the hand of Breeze," he added, "and I am of the opinion that it was the cause of the accident and his electrocution." This witness, commented on the danger of using other than properly insulated lamp holders. The Department had always advised the use of insulated holders to prevent such accidents. There was always a danger in the use of a brass holder of the nature of that used by Breeze, though this type was frequently used. The inqiicst was adjourned sine die.[103]
Monkhouse inspects facilities at Warwick Hospital, to provide a report
HOSPITAL IMPROVEMENTS. Last week Mr. W. Monkhouse, electrical engineer for the Public Works Department, visited Warwick in connection with the proposed installation of a steam heating water service for the Warwick district hospital. After making full investigation into the matter certain suggestions were conveyed to members of the board, and a report will be available at the next meeting. It is understood that the plans are practically finalised for the proposed general improvements at the institution and will be available probably within a week or ten days.[104]
Monkhouse designation changed from assistant electrical engineer to electrical engineer
Works Department Staff Adjustments. The following staff adjustments in the electrical and mechanical branch, Department of Public Works, have been approved:— The designation of the position of electrical engineer to be changed to that of chief electrical engineer. The designation of the position of assistant electrical engineer to be changed to that of electrical engineer, and Walter Isaac Monkhouse (assistant electric engineer) to be appointed electrical engineer. The designation of the position of junior assistant electrical engineer to be changed to that of assistant electrical engineer and inspector, and J. C. M. Wilson (junior assistant electrical engineer) to be appointed assistant electrical engineer and inspector. That an additional position of assistant electrical engineer be created with classification, minimum £320, maximum £425.[105]
Monkhouse gives evidence at Inquiry into electrocution of a woman
ELECTROCUTED. Evidence About Woman's Death. When a young man left his home on the night of January 31 his mother, in her usual good health, had just commenced using an electric iron. When he returned half an hour later she was lying on the floor, dead. A neighbour, who was visiting the woman, described the fatality in the Coroner's Court today. She stated that the deceased removed the plug from the iron and went to touch it with a pair of scissors, but collapsed face forwards on to the floor. This evidence was given at the inquest into the death of Annie Thompson, 59, housewife, who was electrocuted at her residence at about 8.30 p.m. on January 31. Mr. M. J. Hickey, Deputy City Coroner, heard the evidence. Acting Sergeant T. G. Long examined the witnesses. SON'S EVIDENCE. John William Lee Thompson, mattress maker, residing at Newmarket Street, Hendra, said that an ironing point was installed in the breakfast room, and his mother had used it for several years. She had never complained of having difficulty with it, but he had known it to fuse once or twice. He had heard his mother say that at times she had to make adjustments to the iron, such as tightening a screw in the plug. FELL FACE FORWARD. Mrs. Alice Massey said that she visited Mrs. Thompson, who was a neighbour, about 7.30 p.m. on January 31. During a conversation witness mentioned that her dress had been wet the day before. "'I'll soon do that," Mrs. Thompson replied and connected the iron with the point. Five minutes later Mrs. Thompson touched the iron and remarking "The iron is still cold," pulled the plug out and held it with her left hand. She then picked up a pair of scissors and put them towards the connection of the plug. Two seconds later she fell face forward towards the kitchen door. When a doctor arrived he said that she was dead. ENGINEER'S OPINION. Walter Isaac Monkhouse, an electrical engineer in the Department of Public Works, said that he had noticed in handling the cord that one of the contacts had been moved apart. That would probably have made bad contact with the iron. He considered that this would be the reason why Mrs. Thompson endeavoured to clean the contacts. As far as he knew, the shock would have been due to the fact that she held the plug in her hand, thus making contact with earth. After further evidence the inquest was closed.[106]
As previous, Monkhouse makes specific suggestions for improvements
Monkhouse gives evidence at Inquiry into explosion at fruit ripening works
WHO TURNED ON GAS TAP? Explosion At C.O.D. Rooms. EXPERT'S EVIDENCE. Several persons were injured, and damage estimated at over £540 was caused to property, when an explosion — the third of a series at different periods — followed by fire, occurred at the premises of the Committee of Direction of Fruit Marketing, in Turbot Street, city, on September 25 last. Mr. M. J. Hickey, P.M. (Deputy Coroner), yesterday began an inquiry into the cause of the explosions. Acting Senior Sergeant T. Long examined the witnesses. Keith Macdonald Fraser, chief technician of the C.O.D., said that on September 25, when witness went to the premises at 7.30 a.m., he found that the room temperatures were what they were required to be, and that everything was in order. Before leaving he saw that every gas tap was turned off. When he returned about noon to go on duty he made his usual tour of inspection with Mr. Ellison, the submanager. On opening the door of room 16 he noticed that the temperature was a little lower than it should have been, and that the "trickle" tap was turned on. He also detected a slight smell of gas. He and Mr. Ellison walked into the room, and witness put a thermometer in the fruit in a case, and waited for it to register the temperature of the pulp. After about a minute, when he was in the centre of the room, and Mr. Ellison was near the door, an explosion occurred. Witness was rendered unconscious. Mr. Ellison also was injured. Witness considered that there were two logical possibilities of the cause of the explosion — either the tap was accidentally knocked on or was turned on by some person. Any one who might enter the building would have access to the gas taps, and he considered it more than probable that the tap being 6ft. from the floor it would be deliberately rather than accidentally turned on. To the Deputy Coroner: I would not say that I think the gas was deliberately turned on, but I think it might have been. It might have been turned on by some irresponsible person. I have not the slightest intention or reason to suggest that any one turned it on with criminal intention. "QUITE SAFE NOW" William Ellison, submanager of the C.O.D., said that when the explosion occurred he was blown out of the room. He was in hospital for 5½ weeks. Since the explosion certain alterations had been made and innovations introduced, and he considered the plant absolutely safe now. The C.O.D. was open to receive any suggestions for safety, as it would like regulations, embodying all the safety suggestions, made by legislation. He agreed that the use of rubber and trickle feed should be prohibited. In his opinion the relay was the cause of the explosion — it would cause a spark. William Younger, chief officer of the Metropolitan Fire Brigade, said he had suggested certain alterations, which the C.O.D. had since carried out. Roderick A. Frazer, chief inspector and secretary of the Department of Public Health, said that certain alterations to prevent the possibility of any future explosions, due to similar causes, had been carried out; and the C.O.D. thus had completed effectiveness and eliminated the risks that previously existed. He supported the idea that legislation should be introduced to put all persons engaged in the fruit ripening business under the same code of safeguard. Walter Monkhouse, electrical engineer in the Department of Public Works, said he had noted several points about the electric installation at the C.O.D. building, which indicated that it had not been installed in accordance with the standard wiring rules, which were statutory law in Queensland. Had these regulations been obeyed there would not have been anything like the same risk. It was also required that such installations should be inspected by a qualified installation inspector before being connected. That was the duty of the City Electric Light Co. inspector. The inquiry was adjourned till 10 a.m. today.[108]
As previous, Monkhouse gives further evidence
DANGER IN CITY AREAS. Banana Ripening Rooms. The opinion that banana ripeners, including the Committee of Direction of Fruit Marketing, should not be allowed to operate in a thickly populated centre, and, if necessary, legislation should be passed to control this and any other process which was likely to bring in the risk of explosion through the use of inflammable vapours, was expressed yesterday by Mr. John Brownlee Henderson, Government Analyst and Chief Inspector of Explosives, at the inquiry into the explosion, followed by fire, which occurred at the premises of the C.O.D. on September 25. Mr. M. J. Hickey (P.M. and Deputy Coroner) conducted the inquiry, and Acting Sergeant T. Long examined the witnesses. Mr. Henderson said that the explosion did not come under the Explosives Act. If the C.O.D. premises were safe they might be suitable for the class of business carried on, but in the condition in which they were before the explosion there was obviously risk of a very serious explosion occurring. Witness said that certain recommendations made to the C.O.D. by him were carried out, and others were to be carried out at an early date. To the Deputy Coroner: He did not think all his suggestions had been adopted by the C.O.D., but for the safety of all persons handling that plant they should be. The danger of explosion could be cut down until the probability of explosion, instead of being great as it was in this case, would be very small indeed, by the adoption of all of his suggestions. Walter Monkhouse, electrical engineer in the Department of Public Works, in further evidence, said an explosion could be caused by an electric light bulb bursting where an explosive mixture was present. Thomas Edward Alford, Chief Inspector of Machinery, Scaffolding Department, said his department had no jurisdiction over the ripening room, but, with regard to the regulations being issued for the safeguarding of these rooms, the Inspection of Machininery Acts might be applied by an Order-in-Council. In reply to evidence given by Mr. Monkhouse on the previous day William Waddington, electrical mechanic and installation inspector for the City Electric Light Co., Ltd., said he passed the electrical installations at the C.O.D. as satisfactory, after having satisfied himself that the workmanship was in accordance with the standard wiring rules and regulations of the State. To the Deputy Coroner: The relay on the plant did not have a covering to protect it from the accumulation of dust. It was not necessary to have such covering to comply with the rules. He did not see how dust would affect the relay system, as suggested by Mr. Monkhouse. The inquiry was closed.[109]
Monkhouse staying in Rockhampton after travelling further north
PERSONAL. . . . Mr W. I. Monkhouse, who arrived from the North, is staying at the Leichhardt Hotel.[110]
PERSONAL. . . . Mr Roland Love left for Sydney, Mr N. Jameson left for Brisbane, Mr T. M. Jones left for Emu Park, Mr F. A. Burley left for Mackay, and Messrs W. I. Monkhouse and A. Moss left for the South after staying at the Leichhardt Hotel during their visit to Rockhampton.[111]
FUNERALS. . . . ARNOLD.— The Relatives and Friends of the late Mrs. EMMA ARNOLD are invited to attend her Funeral; to leave her late residence, Hazelwood, Prospect-road, Summer Hill, THIS DAY, after ser-vice commencing at 10.45 a.m., for the Randwick General Cemetery. Per motor service. T. J. ANDREWS, Funeral Director, L2873 and U2038. 214 Liverpool-rd, Ashfield. ARNOLD.— The Relatives and Friends of Mr. and Mrs. ARTHUR MOAD, of Blayney, Mr. and Mrs. LEN. DERBYSHIRE, of Summer Hill, Mr. and Mrs. CHARLES ARNOLD, of Harris Park and Riverstone, Mr. and Mrs. WALTER MONKHOUSE, of Brisbane, Mr. and Mrs. FRED ARNOLD, of Milperra, Mr. and Mrs. JOSEPH HOMER, of Liverpool, Mr. and Mrs. JOHN ARNOLD, of Burwood, Mrs. HENRY ARNOLD, of Auburn, and their FAMILIES are in-vited to attend the Funeral of their dearly beloved MOTHER, MOTHER-IN-LAW, and GRANDMOTHER, Emma Arnold; to leave her daughter's residence, Hazelwood, Prospect-road, Summer Hill, THIS DAY, after service commencing at 10.45 a.m., for the Randwick General Cemetery. Per motor service. T. J. ANDREWS.[112]
Walter Isaac Monkhouse Electoral Roll registration 1936 Toowong
Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980
Entry: 7342, Monkhouse, Alma Irene, George st., Taringa, stenotypist, female
Entry: 7343, Monkhouse, Irene Olive, George st., Taringa, home duties, female
Entry: 7344, Monkhouse, Walter Isaac, George st., Taringa, engineer, male[113]
PERSONAL. . . . Mr W. Monkhouse arrived from Brisbane yesterday, and is staying at the Commercial Hotel.[114]
PERSONAL. . . . Messrs W. Monkhouse and N. E. Thomas left for Brisbane, Mr J. Ellwood left for Gladstone, and Messrs S. Solomon and C. Phillips left for Mackay yesterday. They had been staying at the Commercial Hotel.[115]
STAFF PRESENTATION. (Start Photo Caption) Mr. W. I. Monkhouse (right) makes a presentation on behalf of the staff of the Works Department to Mr. W. I. Tytherleigh, on the occasion of his approaching marriage.(End Photo Caption)[116]
Monkhouse gives evidence at Inquiry into death by electrocution of an electrical worker
Coroner Says Something Should Be Done to Stop Workmen's Electrocution. "It seems to me that something should be done to prevent these recurring fatal accidents," said Mr. J. J. Leahy, City Coroner, when closing an inquest held in the Coroner's Court today into the death of a man who was electrocuted at Toowong. Mr. Leahy said that two years ago at an inquiry held by him into a fatal accident to an employee caused by electrocution, he drew attention to the dancers to which employees in electrical work were subject. They had to work in the surroundings of live electric wires. He did not know whether there was any provision in the regulations dealing with electrical work requiring the electrical power to be shut off, while men were working on or about the wires or any insistence on the observance of safety precautions, but it seemed as though something should be done to prevent these recurring fatal accidents. The inquest concerned the death of Sydney Joseph Baker, 26, electrical mechanic, single, last residing at Armagh Street, Eagle Junction, who was electrocuted when he was working on an electric light pole in Sherwood Road, Toowong, about 11.25 a.m. on September 23 last. Acting Sergeant T. G. Long examined the witnesses. Mr. W. J. Monkhouse appeared to represent the Public Works Department; Mr. S. J. Bryan for the Electrical Trades Union; and Mr. J. T. Maguire, City Solicitors' Office, for the Brisbane City Council. CAREFUL AND COMPETENT. George Eric Guy McClintock, electrician, Parooba Avenue, Coorparoo, said that Baker was a careful and competent tradesman. At Toowong on the day of the accident, witness was in charge of Baker and a man named Creedy. They had to change current transformers in Sherwood Road. About 11.25 a.m. Baker was working on a ladder and had just completed isolating the circuits when he received the shock. Witness was on the ground and heard the ladder rattle. He could see Baker was in trouble. Witness removed the ladder to allow Baker to swing clear in his safety belt. Witness and Creedy lifted Baker on to the platform and applied resuscitation. The transformer Baker was working on was between two electric light poles about two feet apart. Rubber gloves were supplied but were not used that day. The use of gloves, said witness, depended on the nature of the work. The job had almost been completed when the accident occurred. It was a hard thing to say how Baker got the shock. One of the bridges, which he had disconnected, was pulled out of place and he must have been caught on the end of that bridge. 415 VOLTS. The two disconnected bridges, said witness, were alive and were at a voltage of 415 volts. There was no other live metal near. They had no authority to interrupt the low tension main, the work being called "live work." Such authority could be obtained but it was very unusual to ask for it on low tension work. Walter Isaac Monkhouse, electrical engineer, gave evidence that he proceeded to the scene of the accident. He made an examination and concluded that Baker had received the shock when he leant over to shift one of the connecting lugs. He must have inadvertently made contact with the live metal lug. The voltage would be 415. The passage through his body would be aided by perspiration as it was a very sultry morning. Baker should have used rubber gloves on the job he was on. There was a regulation to cover that under the Electric Light and Power Act. If this regulation had been car-ried out the accident would not have occurred. Witness said that he was assuming that Baker's hands had come into contact with the current. It was quite possible that he had touched it with his face. After evidence by Police Constable W. R. Brown, Mr. Leahy, making the above remarks, closed the inquest.[117]
Walter Isaac Monkhouse Electoral Roll registration 1937 Toowong
Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980
Entry: 7680, Monkhouse, Alma Irene, George st., Taringa, stenotypist, female
Entry: 7681, Monkhouse, Irene Olive, George st., Taringa, home duties, female
Entry: 7682, Monkhouse, Walter Isaac, George st., Taringa, engineer, male[118]
Monkhouse elected to committee of recently formed Indooroopilly Bowling Club
INDOOROOPILLY GREEN READY SOON. The annual general meeting of the Indooroopilly Bowling Club was held in the Stamford Hall, Indooroopilly, on Monday evening. The report, covering the first year of the club's existence, showed that an area of land occupying 3 acres 1 rood 15 perches had been purchased near the railway line. A green has been laid down, and will be ready for play within the next few months. More than 50 members had been enrolled during the year, and eight more were added during the meeting. The financial statement allowed a credit balance of £23/5/8. Officers elected were: Patron, Mr. W. Binnie; president, Mr. C. W. Reeve; vicepresidents, Messrs. B. H. Matthews and Y. F. Jesser; treasurer, Mr. F. J. Price; secretary, Mr. T. W. Shield; assistant secretary, Mr. R. C. Bulcock; committee, Messrs. J. Paterson, R. A. Mclnnes, W. T. Monkhouse, H. G. MacInnes, and M. J. Lyons.[119]
Monkhouse gives evidence at Commonwealth Public Service Board arbitration on salaries for Postal Electricians
"More Knowledge Now Required Of Postal Mechanics" A much wider technical knowledge is now required of postal mechanics than in 1929. Evidence to this effect was heard by the Commonwealth Public Service Arbitrator (Mr. J. C. Westhoven) today on the claims made by the Australian Postal Electricians' Union for increased salaries for mechanics in the Postmaster-General's Department. The hearing of the union's case began on Tuesday. Appearances were: Mr. E. F. Meier, advocate for the applicant union; Mr. C. Gabel, representing the Commonwealth Public Service Board, and Mr. R. V. McKay, representing the Postmaster-General. Ernest Morgan Richards, foreman mechanic, grade 2, in charge of trunk testing and carrier maintenance in Brisbane, said that testing officers today were required to have a much wider knowledge than they were in 1929. That was due, he added, to the expansion of broadcasting and the greater use of relays from station to station. A testing officer had to have a technical knowledge that would enable him to discuss faults with the engineers of broadcasting stations in such a way that he would uphold the prestige of the department. Moreover, there had been an appreciable expansion of traffic and equipment on trunk lines which demanded greater knowledge on the part of the testing officer and bigger responsibility. Part, heard. TRAINING FOR TESTING OFFICERS. In reply to the Arbitrator, the witness said that making a mechanical officer into a testing officer required training over at least six months. A testing officer had to be temperamentally fitted for the work, must be prepared to accept responsibility, and must have initiative to enable him to work quickly. Recruitment was left to the engineering officers. Answering Mr. Gabel, the witness stated that testing equipment was now more efficient and faults could be more easily located. WORKSHOP REPAIRS. Frederick George Serine, senior supervising mechanic in the telephone workshops, said that a mechanic today was required to have a greater knowledge than in 1929 in that the standard of repair was higher than previously and there was a wider range of instruments. The Arbitrator: But in carrying out repairs have you not now received definite instructions of standards to be preserved? Witness: Yes, but the man has to have a greater technical knowledge to do the work. Further, in reply to the Arbitrator, the witness said that there had been no material increase in the staff at the workshops since 1929. Details of certain duties required of him by broadcasting stations as senior mechanic of the transmitting staff, which required initiative and technical knowledge, were outlined by William Campbell Rohde. WORK AND RESPONSIBILITY. Dr. A. Boyd, lecturer in mechanical and electrical engineering at the University of Queensland said that the work of a telephone mechanic, due to the science of communication, undergoing a remarkable advance in the last ten years, had become more involved and complicated. His responsibility in maintenance and continuity, had increased. Comparing an electrical fitter with a telephone mechanic, Mr. W. I. Monkhouse, electrical engineer, Department of Public Works, said that the range of work of both had increased, but greater skill and knowledge were required of the telephone mechanic. The mechanical parts handled by an electrical fitter were on defined principles of assembly. Mr. N. G. Mills, instructor in electrical subjects at the Central Technical College, stated that the range of mechanical work in communication had increased more rapidly than that in general electrical pursuits. Mechanics in the Postmaster-General's Department now had more complex duties. Part heard.[120]
Monkhouse attends farewell for senior colleague in Public Works Department
Works Department Officer Appointed to Bureau of Industry. At the office of the Minister for Public Works officers of the department assembled in large numbers to officially farewell Mr. N. Andersen, who formerly occupied the position of accountant in the department. The Under Secretary (Mr. G. M. Colledge) occupied the chair and after apologising for the unavoidable absence of the Minister, spoke appreciatively of the faithful service rendered by Mr. Andersen while in the department. Eulogistic references to Mr. Andersen's courtesy and willingness to oblige were made by other wellwishers, including Mr. A, B. Leven (chief architect), Mr. A. C. Sorensen (chief clerk), Mr. W. I. Monkhouse (electrical mechanical branch), Mr. J. Budge (accounts branch), Mr. J. Maguire (works order branch), and Mr. E. B. Rigby, Minister's private secretary (on behalf of the ladies). In asking Mr. Andersen to accept from the officers a handsome silky oak secretaire as a token of the esteem in which he was held. Mr. Colledge expressed the wish that he would have a happy and successful term in his new position. Mr. Anderson said he deeply appreciated the kindly remarks that had been made about him. He had at all times given of his best while in the department, and the presentation, which he was very proud to receive, would serve as a reminder of his very pleasant association with the Works Department. Mr. Andersen was recently appointed to the position of senior clerk, accounts and costings branch, Bureau of Industry.[121]
Monkhouse again elected to committee of Indooroopilly Bowling Club
Indooroopilly Club's Progress. At the annual meeting of the Indooroopilly bowling club, the report showed a total of 80 members. The ladies' club has a membership of 37. The meeting decided to have three selectors in place of a sole selector, and Messrs. J. H. Feather, R. C. Bulcock, and F. W. Kingston were elected. The election of officers resulted:— Patron, Mr. W. Binnie; president, Mr. C. W. Reeve; vicepresidents, Messrs. Y. F. Yesser and J. Paterson; honorary treasurer, Mr. F. J. Price; honorary secretary, Mr. A. T. Biggs; hon. assistant secretary, Mr. H. G. Maclnnes; honorary auditor, Mr. N. H. Robertson; honorary solicitor, Mr J. Paterson; delegate to Queensland Bowling Association, Mr. A. R. Small; selectors, Messrs. J. H. Feather, R. C. Bulcock and F. Kingston; committee, Messrs. J. C. Arkell, R. C. Bulcock, J. G. Cribb, W. I. Monkhouse, and T. W. Shield.[122]
Monkhouse nominated by the Standards Association of Australian (Qld State Committee) to the examining committee for electrical appliances approvals
Approval System For Electrical Appliances to Operate Here. "The need for a system of approval of electrical appliances and materials has become more and more apparent over recent years, not only to protect the general public against the risks attached to the use of electrical appliances and materials of an unsatisfactory standard but also to provide a means of protection to the retailer who is selling electrical goods of standard quality," the Premier (Mr. W. Forgan Smith) said today, when announcing that the Executive Council had approved of regulations drafted by the State Electricity Commission governing a system of approval in Queensland. The Premier said that both New South Wales and Victoria approvals schemes were already in operation, and the system formulated for Queensland aimed at securing reciprocity between the States so that there would be a mutual acceptance of electrical articles approved after test by the prescribed authority in each State. In this way the public interest would be protected and at the same time a duplication of testing and other work would be avoided. EXAMINING COMMITTEE. In Queensland the co-operation of the principal authorities had been secured in the actual operation of the approvals scheme. An examining committee, which would function in an advisory capacity to the State Electricity Commission, had been appointed as follows:— A member, of the Stale Electricity Commission, chairman, Mr. F. R. L'Estrange, nominated by the electricity supply authorities in Queensland; Mr. P. S. Trackson, nominated by the Electrical and Radio Federation (Queensland); Mr. F. Tytherleigh, nominated by the Electrical Trades Union of Australia (Queensland Branch); Mr. W. I. Monkhouse, nominated by the Standards Association of Australia (Queensland State Committee); Mr. H. Clacher (State Electricity Commission) will be the technical approvals officer. HOW SYSTEM WILL OPERATE. The Premier said the approvals system would operate in the following way: On the advice of the examining committee, the Commission will recommend the issue of a proclamation in the "Government Gazette" to the effect that after a certain date articles of the class, description or type specified in the notice may not be sold, hired or exposed for sale or hire, or advertised for sale or hire anywhere in Queensland, unless they have been approved by the Commission as conforming with certain prescribed standards and have been marked as authorised. Generally, the standards will be those adopted by the Standards Association of Australia. Application for approval of a "proclaimed" article must be made. Applications will be dealt with by the examining committee, which will decide whether an examination and test of the article is required. The examining committee will submit to the Commission a recommendation in respect of each application, and the Commission will finally approve or withhold approval. All articles of the class, description or type approved must be marked with an adhesive seal bearing the identifying reference number. Penalties are provided against the selling or hiring, exposing for sale or hire, or advertising for sale or hire of proclaimed articles unless they are properly marked with the seal of approval.[123]
Monkhouse appointed to the wiring rules committee of the Standards Association of Australia
STANDARDISING ELECTRICITY WIRING RULES. To standardise the wiring rules for electricity installations throughout Queensland the Premier (Mr. Forgan Smith) has approved the recognition of the wiring rules committee of the Standards Association of Australia as the body to advise the State Electricity Commission on all interpretations of the rules. The chairman of the commission (Mr. S. F. Cochran) announced yesterday that the committee would comprise Messrs. J. C. M. Wilson (chief inspector of the commission), chairman, F. R. L'Estrange, and J. McClintock (electric supply authorities), S. E. T. Burrows (Electrical Contractors' Association), J. H. Hornibrook (Fire and Accident Underwriters' Association), S. Wood (Electrical Trades Union), P. S. Trackson (Electrical Federation), and W. I. Monkhouse (Queensland Joint Electrical Committee of the Standards Association of Australia). The secretary would be Mr. S. G. Palmer, Queensland branch secretary of the Standards Association. All interpretations, said Mr. Cochran would be subject to the approval of the commission before being promulgated in its monthly bulletin.[124]
Possible second marriage for Monkhouse (seems unlikely)
MARRIED AT CAMBERWELL. Mr. and Mrs. Walter Monkhouse entering their car after their marriage at the Camberwell Methodist Church on Saturday. The bride was formerly Miss Elsie Mary Fenn.[125]
Monkhouse elected as a vicepresident of the Indooroopilly Bowling Club
Indooroopilly Bowls Officers. Officers appointed at the annual meeting of the Indooroopilly Bowling Club were: Patron, Mr. W. L. Binnie; president, Mr. Y. F. Jesser; vicepresidents, W. I. Monkhouse and A. T. Biggs; honorary treasurer, Mr. F. J. Price; honorary secretary, Mr. H. G. Mclnnes; assistant secretary, Mr. E. E. Faux; council, Messrs. J. C. Arkell, R. C. Bulcock, R. J. Chalmers, J. Paterson and J. P. Tunn; honorary solicitor, Mr. J. Paterson; honorary auditor, Mr. N. Robertson; immediate past president and Q.B.A. delegate, Mr. C. W. Reeve; selection committee, Messrs. J. H. Feather, J. C. Arkell and R. C. Bulcock; social committee, Messrs. F. Brimson, J. Jesser, C. Beswick, E. C. Waldron, J. C. Arkell, A. G. Price, W. Wilkie, H. R. D. Fuller and J. C. Campbell.[126]
Monkhouse's wife has a trousseau party for her eldest daughter assisted by her two younger daughters
TROUSSEAU PARTY.— In honour of the approaching marriage of Miss Alma Monkhouse to Mr. Norman Alexander Bagnall, which takes place next Saturday, Mrs. W. I. Monkhouse entertained a large number of guests at a trousseau party at her home, Adsett Street, Taringa, this afternoon. Mrs. Monkhouse was assisted in entertaining by her daughters, Francis and Eileen Monkhouse.[127]
Qld marriage registration for Walter Isaac Monkhouse's daughter Alma Irene Monkhouse
Registration details: 1940/B/40380 [128]
Marriage of Monkhouse's eldest daughter Alma Irene
Bagnall — Monkhouse. In All Saints' Church of England tonight the marriage of Miss Alma Irene Monkhouse, eldest daughter of Mr. and Mrs. W. T. Monkhouse, Adsett Street, Taringa, to Mr. Norman Alexander Bagnall, only son of Mrs. A. Bagnall, Red Hill, and the late Mr. E. Bagnall, will be celebrated. To be given away by her father, the bride will be attended by her sisters. Misses Frances and Eileen Monkhouse, as bridesmaids. A frock of white silk lace over white satin featuring a bustle effect at the back will be worn by the bride with her veil, which is held in place with orange blossom. She will carry a bouquet of white lilies. Deep mauve and apple green chiffon over taffeta will be worn by the two bridesmaids respectively. Orchids over cut tulle will be worn on their heads and they will carry small baskets of flowers in violet and autumn tonings. Mr. Albert Adams will be best man and Mr. Edward Adams the groomsman. Mrs. Monkhouse, mother of the bride, will be frocked in mystic blue jermaine with a navy edge to edge coat and navy accessories. On leaving for the honeymoon, which will include a tour of the Northern Rivers, the bride has chosen navy accessories and a navy hat to wear with her dusty pink wool sheer frock. [129]
Marriage Notice for Monkhouse's eldest daughter Alma Irene
MARRIAGE NOTICES. BAGNALL — MONKHOUSE.— On the 13th July, 1940, at All Saints' Church of England, Norman Alexander, only Son of Mrs. A. Bagnall, of Red Hill, and the late Mr. E. Bagnall, to Alma Irene, eldest Daughter of Mr. and Mrs. W. I. Monkhouse, of Adsett Street, Taringa. [130]
Monkhouse has a win in the casket
Last Ticket Bought Wins Casket. Last ticket bought at the Black Cat Casket Agency, Queen and Albert Street, at 12.30 p.m. netted the two purchasers £600 in today's drawing. A minute later and the ticket would have been taken by the proprietor of the shop, Mr. A. C. Matthews, who, sharing in the first prize as it was, also sold the third and fifth major prize winning tickets. It is a custom of Mr. Matthews since he established this branch of his Black Cat Casket agencies to conduct syndicates whereby purchasers of tickets may participate in ten running numbers in each casket. It was such a syndicate that won the major prize of £6,000 in the Golden Casket drawn this afternoon. Mr. Matthews and a friend, Mr. Roberts, who have been taking Casket tickets for a long time, had one of the tickets, but when Casket closing time was drawing near the former decided to purchase the remaining ticket to finalise his returns to the Casket Office. A seller was about to write his name on the ticket when it was bought up by two people, Messrs. Macarthur and Hackett, of 68 Queen Street. Others who shared in the first prize were V. and D. McCorley, Box 66H, G.P.O.; W. J. Monkhouse, Box 897, G.P.O.; M. J. Curran, of Buranda; Miss Mullin. Box 786, G.P.O.; Jack Hewson, Light Street tram depot; Mrs. A. R. Bennett, 16 Sussex Street, West End; and P. Birkus, Woondooma Street, Bundaberg. The Black Cat agencies conducted by Mr. Matthews also accounted for the third and fifth prize. The former went to a syndicate in the name of M. J. Sheehan, of Coomera, and the fifth to a syndicate in the name of Mr. G. Hooper, of 43 Elizabeth Street, City, both regular Casket subscribers. [131]
INDOOROOPILLY: At tea on Saturday the president, Mr W. I. Monkhouse, announced that their club member, Allan Munro, has been notified that his eldest son, who was a pilot-officer in the RAAF, has been killed in action. Players to meet Toowong at Toowong on Saturday in a home and home match, J. Matthews, A. Crowther, W. Dennis, U. Falk, G. Gibson, C. Munro, C. Eldred, R. Bulcock, E. H. Jones, K. Thompson, J. Feather, J. Bradshaw, P. Cooke, M. O'Donnel, G. Tait, U. Biggs, G. Grimes, F. Malcolm, H. Burbank, R. Laverack. [132]
Walter Isaac Monkhouse Electoral Roll registration 1943 Toowong
Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980
Entry: 8891, Monkhouse, Eileen Olive, Adsett st., Taringa, home duties, female
Entry: 8892, Monkhouse, Irene Olive, Adsett st., Taringa, home duties, female
Entry: 8893, Monkhouse, Walter Isaac, Adsett st., Taringa, engineer, male[133]
Monkhouse elected as Indooroopilly Bowling Club's delegate to the Queensland Bowling Association
Indooroopilly Club's office-bearers for 1947, include:— President, Mr. A. W. Munro; vicepresidents, Mr. F. A. Manning and Mr. Justice B. H. Matthews; hon. treasurer, Mr. F. J. Price; hon. secretary, Mr. H. G. Maclnnes; hon. asst. secretary, Mr. J. Steele; committee, Messrs. J. C. Arkell, H. R. D. Fuller, A. J. Jamieson, C. W. Munro, and G. W. Tait; Q.B.A. delegate, Mr. W. I. Monkhouse; providor, Mr. C. W. Reeve; asst. providor, Mr. A. F. Jamieson; green director, Mr. Y. F. Jesser; games committee, Messrs. F. A. Manning, E. J. Bedford, and G. W. Tait; club coaches, Messrs. J. R. Gregory and A. M. Sargeant. [134]
Social News. . . . Mr W. I. Monkhouse, Department of Public Works, returned to Brisbane yesterday, after spending a few days at Rockhampton on official business.[135]
Monkhouse appointed Chief Electrical Engineer for Qld Public Works Department
PERSONAL. . . . Mr. W. A. Monkhouse has been appointed chief electrical engineer of the State Works Department, in succession to Mr. J. Grier, who retires at the end of the year. Mr. J. Normile has been appointed electrical engineer.[136]
Qld death registration for Walter Isaac Monkhouse's wife Irene Olive Monkhouse
Registration details: 1948/B/15560[137]
Funeral notice for Irene Olive Monkhouse, wife of Walter
Births, Marriages, Deaths. . . . MONKHOUSE.— The Relatives & Friends of Mr. W. J. Monkhouse, Adsett St., Taringa, Mr. & Mrs. N. Bagnall, Walter & Joan, Miss Fran Monkhouse, Miss Eileen Monkhouse, are invited to attend the Funeral of his beloved Wife, their Mother, Mother-in-law & Grandmother, Irene Olive Monkhouse, to leave the Funeral Parlour, 45 Adelaide St., City, Tomorrow (Saturday) Afternoon, after service commencing at 1.45 o'clock, for the Crematorium, Mt. Thompson.— CANNON & CRIPPS, LTD., Funeral Directors. [138]
Walter Isaac Monkhouse Electoral Roll registration 1949 Toowong
Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980
Entry: 8626, Monkhouse, Eileen Olive, Adsett st., Taringa, home duties, female
Entry: 8627, Monkhouse, Walter Isaac, Adsett st., Taringa, engineer, male[139]
Monkhouse as State Electrical Engineer warns of dangers of running flexible cords for wiring
Bath ban on quick boiler. If you have one of those large electrical immersers sold for quick boiling of the copper, don't use it to heat your bath water. Use of these heaters for baths has been banned by the State Electricity Commission. They are 240 volt, 2400 watt, and clip on the side of the copper in an upright position. They cannot be supported properly in a bath, as some people have attempted, and this misuse of them is dangerous. The Electrical Trades Union and all electricity authorities in Queensland have been warned about the immerser, which must now be sold with a label with strict instructions for use. Danger flexes Warning against careless handling of other electrical equipment was given yesterday by the State Electrical Engineer (Mr. W. I. Monkhouse). One of the most dangerous practices was running flexes through doors and windows or through holes bored in the floor to light up under the house, he said. This was often done with unsuitable clamp holders with no means of earthing or on damp ground. All electrical installation work must be done by an electrician holding a certificate from the Electrical Workers' Board.[140]
Monkhouse inspects Eventide Home at Rockhampton prior to opening
Eventide Homes Inspection. An announcement of the date of the opening of the Eventide Homes in North Street is expected to follow inspections being made of the homes by officials of the Departments of Health and Home Affairs and Public Works. The manager of the Eventide Home at Sandgate (Mr. E. C. Cramb) arrived from Brisbane yesterday accompanied by Mr. S. Beedham, staff officer from the Department of Health and Home Affairs. They will make a preliminary inspection of the homes. Another arrival was Mr. W. I. Monkhouse, chief engineer, Department of Public Works, who will inspect installations of electrical, cooking and other equipment in the homes.[141]
Funeral Notice for James Monkhouse, father of Walter Isaac Monkhouse
Births, Marriages and Deaths. . . . MONKHOUSE.— The Relatives & Friends of Mr. W. Monkhouse, Mr. & Mrs. C. Pacey, Miss A. L. Monkhouse, Mr. & Mrs. J. N. Monkhouse, & Eleanor, Mrs. J. E. Cleeve, Mr. & Mrs. C. J. Monkhouse, Donald, & Allan (Proserpine), are invited to attend the Funeral of their beloved Father, Father-in-law & Grandfather (Mr James Monkhouse), of 111 Crosby Rd., Albion, to leave St. Colomb's Church of England, Clayfield, after service commencing Tomorrow (Friday) Afternoon at 3.30 o'clock, for the Lutwyche Cemetery.— CANNON & CRIPPS LTD., Funeral Directors. MONKHOUSE.— The Relatives & Friends of Mrs. Julia Nugent & Family, Mr. John Nugent, Mr. & Mrs. T. Nugent are invited to attend the Funeral of their beloved Brother-in-law & Uncle, Mr. James Monkhouse to leave as per Family Notice.— CANNON & CRIPPS LTD., Funeral Directors. [142]
Monkhouse attends farewell luncheon for Qld State Architect
Farewell Luncheon. (Start Photo Caption) Mr. A. B. Leven, who has been in the Public service as an architect for 40 years, was given a farewell luncheon at the Canberra Hotel today by his associates. Mr. Leven was Chief Government Architect. Left to right: Messrs. E. J. A. Weller, A. B. Leven, J. R. Way, and W. I. Monkhouse. (End Photo Caption)[143]
Monkhouse on illuminations and decorations committee for 1954 royal visit
Planning big glow. Brisbane is quietly getting ready to switch on the lights and erect decorations for the Royal visit next year. Under the chairmanship of the State Electricity Commissioner (Mr. H. N. Smith), a committee known as the illuminations and decorations committee will meet at the Brisbane Chamber of Commerce on Monday. The secretary of the chamber (Mr. C. Robertson), honorary secretary of the committee, said today that members of the chamber were being urged to co-operate and arrange displays worthy of the occasion. Deputy chairman of the committee is the Town Clerk (Mr. J. C. Slaughter). The assistant State director for the Royal visit (Mr. H. O. Muhl) is a member. Other members are: Messrs. P. A. W. Anthony, L. U. C. Kempster, J. R. Way, W. I. Monkhouse, F. Jesson, Leon Trout, E. Barry, Paul Barry, F. C. L. Derrick and M. Finlayson.[144]
Monkhouse reports on plans for lighting of Government Buildings for the 1954 Royal Visit
Queen will see city radiant with lights. THE Queensland Government, spending literally 10 times as freely as in the Coronation, is determined to transform Brisbane for the Royal visit into a city flooded with light and splashed with Treasury Building . . . "Make the most of its lacy character." colour. The lead to private business houses will come from the Government's treatment of its own buildings, and how the Brisbane City Council decorates the dominating City Hall. Brisbane has some Government architecture which is claimed to be as fine as anything in the Southern Hemisphere. Giving meticulous care to the characteristics of individual buildings, Government officials under the Public Works Department chief electrical engineer (Mr. W. I. Monkhouse) and the chief architect (Mr. J. R. Way) have now planned lighting and decoration for the chief Government buildings. Here is how Mr. Monkhouse sees the planning:— PARLIAMENT HOUSE — "We see this as a functional building, expressing its purpose in its solidness. . . . Main decoration will be flood lighting, expressing the purpose behind the graceful lighting of the wroughtiron gates. . . . Amber lighting will fling the battlements into bold relief." EXECUTIVE BUILDING (George Street) — "This is a rich architectural gem, and we will make the most of its bold features . . Outstanding are the columns incorporated in the upper portion, and here we are going to strive for a third-dimensional effect, with colour in depth. . . . There will be a mass of colour along the balustrade." TAXATION BUILDING (George Street) — "Here we have a different type of building altogether, more businesslike and with not such good proportions for lighting . . . The exterior surface will be well floodlit, and a bold ER II will break the flat wall of the building . . . . A feature will be the coronet effect we can achieve around the top of this building." Amber and blue TREASURY BUILDING (Queen Street) — This building in its way is just as much an architectural treasure as the Executive building . . . In this case, we are trying to get the effect of colour in depth by showing up the contours of the building . . . We hope to make the most of the "lacy" character of the building. PUBLIC LIBRARY (William Street) — Small, but a pearl . . . We plan a striking treatment of amber and blue, as a contrast to the strong white lighting which will enhance the building's classic lines. DENTAL COLLEGE (Albert Street) — A straight flood lighting topped off with stripped amber and blue . . . Flagpoles floodlit to give a greater effect of height . . . Important because from Government House it is one of the main city landmarks. ANZAC SQUARE (Adelaide Street) — Flood-lighting will bring out the straight line of the buildings . . . A feature will be blue lighting of the ver-tical window embrasures. GOVERNMENT HOUSE — A fairyland effect will be given by festooning the wooded slopes, but Government House itself will not be floodlit . . . This is because strong lighting could be a discomfort to the Royal party, when in residence there.[145]
Monkhouse set to retire but held back to conclude his work on illuminations for the Royal Visit
FEW RETIRE FROM PUBLIC SERVICE. Comparatively few high State Government officials are retiring on December 31. Most notable is Sir John Kemp (Co-Ordinator General of Public Works) who will leave behind him many monuments to his engineering skill and his outstanding administrative ability. After more than 41 years of service, Mr. E. A. Godfrey, one of the outstanding architects of the Public Works Department will be going out. He joined as a draftsman in 1921 and after he was appointed an architect in 1938 most of his work was associated with the planning of Queensland's mental hospitals. Mr. W. I. Monkhouse Chief Electrical Engineer of the Public Works Department, was to have retired on December 31, but as he is one of the key men, as he has been on other similar occasions in the past, for the planning of the decorations and illuminations of public buildings for the Royal visit, his services are being retained by the Government until March. Ipswich Clerk of Petty Sessions since 1943, Mr. Charles Innes will finish up on December 31 after 46 years of Government service. From 1902 to 1912 he was in the teaching service, and after his transfer to the Justice Department in 1912 as an officer in the C.P.S. office at Rockhampton he served at many country centres before his appointment to Ipswich. Head teachers of State schools retiring are: Mr. C. C. Oldham, head of the Milton school since 1947 who began as a pupil teacher in the Ipswich North Boys' School in 1902, and was appointed a head teacher in 1922; Mr. C. L. Sumner, head teacher at Rita Island (Ayr), for 23 years, who began as a pupil teacher at the Brisbane Central Boys in 1903; and Mr. John C. Seaniger, who retires from the Woodview (via Oakey) School, of which he became head teacher in 1926 after joining the Glencoe School as a pupil teacher in 1903. His first head teacher position was at Eton Vale in 1910.[146]
As previous, photo
THREE TOP PUBLIC MEN RETIRING. (Start Photo Captions) SIR JOHN KEMP, Co-ordinator-General of Public Works, who will leave behind him a monumental record of engineering achievement, retires today. He is one of the State's best-known public servants. MR. W. I. MONKHOUSE, Chief Electrical Engineer of the Public Works Department, was also to have retired today, but he will continue in office until March to work on decorating public buildings for the Royal visit. MR. S. L. QUINN, general manager of the City Council transport department, retires today after 51 years' association with public transport. He became general manager in 1938. (End Photo Captions)[147]
Walter Isaac Monkhouse Electoral Roll registration 1954 Toowong
Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980
Entry: 10227, Monkhouse, Eileen Olive, Adsett st., Taringa, home duties, female
Entry: 10228, Monkhouse, Walter Isaac, Adsett st., Taringa, engineer, male[148]
Monkhouse is presented with a watch upon his retirement
39 years with the State Govt. Mr. W. I. Monkhouse, who designed and supervised the illuminations for the Victory Coronation and Royai visit celebrations, will retire tomorrow after 39 years of Government service. Mr. Monkhouse was chief electrical engineer in the Public Works Department from 1948. For a number of years he was chairman and member of the electrical workers' board. He was examiner for the board for about 20 years. From 1922 to 1948, when he was in charge of electrical construction work at the department, he put through more than 100 electrical apprentices. Recently 50 of them had a reunion, with Mr. Monkhouse as their guest. They presented him with a complete fishing outfit. Born in New Zealand, Mr. Monkhouse served an electrical engineer's apprenticeship in the railway shops at Wellington and later joined the post and telegraph service in Auckland. Coming to Australia in 1913, he took charge of the power plant at the Sydney telephone exchange, and became senior telephone technician there. He came to Brisbane in 1915 to become telephone instructor at the Central Technical College. Later he was appointed senior instructor in engineering at the college. He joined the Public Works Department as an electrical engineer in 1922. Mr. Monkhouse completed his period of service on December 31, 1953, but the Government retained him in a temporary capacity for 12 months, mainly to enable him to design and supervise the illuminations for the Royal visit to Queensland. This afternoon, the undersecretary of the Public Works Department (Mr. T. F. Lyons) presented a watch to Mr. Monkhouse from the staff.[149]
Walter Isaac Monkhouse Electoral Roll registration 1958 Ashgrove
Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980
Entry: 4150, Monkhouse, Eileen Olive, 107 Cecil rd., Bardon, clerk, female
Entry: 4151, Monkhouse, Walter Isaac, 107 Cecil rd., Bardon, engineer, male[150]
Walter Isaac Monkhouse Electoral Roll registration 1963 Ashgrove
Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980
Entry: 4528, Monkhouse, Eileen Olive, 107 Cecil rd., Bardon, clerk, female
Entry: 4530, Monkhouse, Walter Isaac, 107 Cecil rd., Bardon, engineer, male[151]
Qld death registration for Walter Isaac Monkhouse
Registration details: 1964/B/69559[152]
Probate notice for Water Isaac Monkhouse (previously living in NSW but died in Qld)
IN the matter of the estates of the undermentioned deceased persons, and pursuant to the Wills, Probate and Administration Act, 1898-1954; the Public Trustee Act, 1913-1960; Testator's Family Maintenance and Guardianship of Infants Act, 1916-1954; and Trustee Act, 1925-1942; the Public Trustee hereby gives notice that creditors and others having any claim against or to the estate of any of the undermentioned deceased persons, who died on or about the respective dates hereunder mentioned, and representation of whose estates was obtained by the Public Trustee in the manner and upon the dates hereunder mentioned, are required to send particulars of their claims to the said Public Trustee at his Branch Office hereunder mentioned, on or before the 13th day of December, 1965, at the expiration of which time the said Public Trustee will distribute the assets of the respective deceased persons to the respective persons entitled, having regard only to the claims of which he then has notice. . . . Walter Isaac Monkhouse, late of Bardon, Brisbane, Queensland, retired engineer, died 5th November, 1964; administration of the estate with the will dated 26th April, 1938, as contained in a sealed certified copy of an order to administer granted by the Supreme Court of Queensland, annexed, was granted on 24th September, 1965. B. ADCOCK, Branch Manager, Public Trust Office, T. & G. Building, cnr. Molesworth and Woodlark Streets, Lismore. 3678 — £2 18s.[153]
Qld death registration for Walter Isaac Monkhouse's daughter Alma Irene Bagnall
↑ "New Zealand, Electoral Rolls, 1853-1981", Ancestry.com LLC, https://www.ancestry.com.au/search/collections/nzelectoralrolls/, retrieved 15 December 2019, "William Isaac Monkhouse, Waimarino, Bay of Plenty, 1911"
↑ "COMMONWEALTH PUBLIC SERVICE.". Commonwealth Of Australia Gazette (Australia) (43): p. 1507. 7 June 1913. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article232458190. Retrieved 10 December 2019.
↑ "COMMONWEALTH PUBLIC SERVICE.". Commonwealth Of Australia Gazette (Australia) (51): p. 1690. 12 July 1913. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article232469624. Retrieved 10 December 2019.
↑ "New Zealand, Electoral Rolls, 1853-1981", Ancestry.com LLC, https://www.ancestry.com.au/search/collections/nzelectoralrolls/, retrieved 15 December 2019, "William Isaac Monkhouse, Waimarino, Bay of Plenty, 1914"
↑ "Walter Isaac Monkhouse, marriage registration, NSW Government family history research service", New South Wales Government, Department of Justice, https://familyhistory.bdm.nsw.gov.au/lifelink/familyhistory/search/marriages?11.
↑ "Alma Irene Monkhouse, birth registration, NSW Government family history research service", New South Wales Government, https://www.bdm.nsw.gov.au/familyhistory.
↑ "SHIPPING.". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia) (12,835): p. 2 (SECOND EDITION). 8 January 1914. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article174258624. Retrieved 10 December 2019.
↑ "COMMONWEALTH PUBLIC SERVICE.". Commonwealth Of Australia Gazette (Australia) (28): p. 928. 23 May 1914. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article232367152. Retrieved 10 December 2019.
↑ "STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES.". Commonwealth Of Australia Gazette (Australia) (64): p. 2036. 29 August 1914. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article232448125. Retrieved 10 December 2019.
↑ "COMMONWEALTH PUBLIC SERVICE.". Commonwealth Of Australia Gazette (Australia) (38): p. 928. 15 May 1915. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article232451891. Retrieved 10 December 2019.
↑ "COMMONWEALTH PUBLIC SERVICE.". Commonwealth Of Australia Gazette (Australia) (99): p. 1683. 28 August 1915. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article232465801. Retrieved 10 December 2019.
↑ "INDEX.". Commonwealth Of Australia Gazette (Australia) (109): p. 2244. 13 September 1915. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article232466031. Retrieved 10 December 2019.
↑ "Joan Frances Monkhouse, Birth registration, Queensland Government family history research service", Queensland Government, https://www.familyhistory.bdm.qld.gov.au/, retrieved 17 December 2019.
↑ "TELEPHONE MECHANICS.". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia) (13,563): p. 9 (SECOND EDITION). 12 May 1916. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article178005371. Retrieved 10 December 2019.
↑ "IPSWICH AND WEST MORETON.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia) (18,304): p. 3. 15 September 1916. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article20096151. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
↑ "COMMONWEALTH PUBLIC SERVICE.". Commonwealth Of Australia Gazette (Australia) (38): p. 440. 8 March 1917. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article232453152. Retrieved 10 December 2019.
↑ "Eileen Olive Monkhouse, Birth registration, Queensland Government family history research service", Queensland Government, https://www.familyhistory.bdm.qld.gov.au/, retrieved 17 December 2019.
↑ "FARMING AND MINING INVENTIONS.". Daily Observer (New South Wales, Australia) VII, (307): p. 6. 20 December 1917. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article103728880. Retrieved 9 December 2019.
↑ "ARBITRATION COURT. Friday, April 12.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia) (18,794): p. 11. 13 April 1918. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article20221141. Retrieved 9 December 2019.
↑ "MINING ENGINEERS' INSTITUTE.". Barrier Miner (New South Wales, Australia) XXXI, (9368): p. 6. 7 September 1918. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article45452896. Retrieved 9 December 2019.
↑ "Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980", Ancestry.com LLC, https://www.ancestry.com.au/search/collections/auselectoralrolls/, retrieved 15 December 2019, "Walter Isaac Monkhouse, Brisbane South, Qld, 1919"
↑ "THE QUEENSLAND WIRELESS.". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia) (14,453): p. 7. 22 March 1919. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article185304171. Retrieved 10 December 2019.
↑ "ELECTRICAL TRADE UNION.". Daily Standard (Queensland, Australia) (2028): p. 3 (SECOND EDITION). 25 June 1919. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article190748889. Retrieved 10 December 2019.
↑ "ELECTRICAL TRAJDES UNION.". Daily Standard (Queensland, Australia) (2040): p. 3 (SECOND EDITION). 9 July 1919. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article190750585. Retrieved 10 December 2019.
↑ "PATENT APPLICATIONS.". Daily Commercial News And Shipping List (New South Wales, Australia) (9838): p. 12 (Weekly Summary). 26 November 1919. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article159302635. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
↑ "QUEENSLAND WIRELESS.". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia) (14721): p. 5 (SECOND EDITION). 31 January 1920. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article179520026. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
↑ "Advertising". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia) (14721): p. 3 (SECOND EDITION). 31 January 1920. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article179519915. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
↑ "Advertising". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia) (19,396): p. 1. 19 March 1920. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article20425913. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
↑ "WIRELESS INSTITUTE.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia) (19,397): p. 5. 20 March 1920. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article20416507. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
↑ "EDUCATION DEPARTMENT.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia) (19,491): p. 8. 9 July 1920. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article20405193. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
↑ "TECHNICAL COLLEGE ANGLERS.". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia) (15095): p. 6. 15 April 1921. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article177032481. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
↑ "WIRELESS INSTITUTE.". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia) (15128): p. 6. 24 May 1921. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article176851399. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
↑ ""REORGANISATION."". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia) (19,971): p. 6. 23 January 1922. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article20552147. Retrieved 11 December 2019.
↑ "TECHNICAL COLLEGE FETE.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia) (20,090): p. 15. 12 June 1922. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article20530041. Retrieved 12 December 2019.
↑ "SCIENCE NOTES.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia) (20,113): p. 16. 8 July 1922. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article20557819. Retrieved 12 December 2019.
↑ "TECHNICAL COLLEGE.". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia) (15,481): p. 7 (SECOND EDITION). 11 July 1922. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article176895009. Retrieved 12 December 2019.
↑ "SOCIAL.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia) (20,167): p. 18. 9 September 1922. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article20570375. Retrieved 12 December 2019.
↑ "C.R.C. DANCE.". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia) (15539): p. 9. 16 September 1922. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article177883842. Retrieved 12 December 2019.
↑ "MASQUERADE BALL.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia) (20,191): p. 18. 7 October 1922. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article20576071. Retrieved 12 December 2019.
↑ "AMATEUR RADIO". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia) (15,664): p. 15. 10 February 1923. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article184317124. Retrieved 12 December 2019.
↑ "RADIO BROADCAST". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia) (15,673): p. 6. 21 February 1923. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article184315377. Retrieved 12 December 2019.
↑ "Queensland Wireless Institute.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia) (20,315): p. 8. 2 March 1923. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article20605409. Retrieved 12 December 2019.
↑ "QUEENSLAND WIRELESS INSTITUTE". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia) (15,683): p. 12. 5 March 1923. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article180455836. Retrieved 12 December 2019.
↑ "RADIO EXPERIMENTS.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia) (20,347): p. 6. 10 April 1923. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article20613397. Retrieved 12 December 2019.
↑ "WIRELESS INSTITUTE". The Daily Mail (Queensland, Australia) (6585): p. 7. 14 April 1923. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article220565911. Retrieved 12 December 2019.
↑ "WIRELESS INSTITUTE". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 15. 5 May 1923. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article184517120.
↑ "WIRELESS INSTITUTE". The Daily Mail (Queensland, Australia): p. 8. 29 July 1923. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article218212224.
↑ "RENTS REDUCED.". Daily Standard (Queensland, Australia): p. 1. 21 November 1923. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article181760858.
↑ "WIRELESS CIRCLE". The Daily Mail (Queensland, Australia) (29): p. 27. 16 December 1923. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article218973648. Retrieved 8 December 2019.
↑ "WIRELESS NEWS AND NOTES.". Daily Standard (Queensland, Australia): p. 7. 22 March 1924. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article178984398.
↑ "WIRELESS NEWS AND NOTES.". Daily Standard (Queensland, Australia): p. 8. 12 April 1924. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article198532222.
↑ "WIRELESS INSTITUTE". The Daily Mail (Queensland, Australia): p. 23. 13 July 1924. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article219051723.
↑ "WIRELESS INSTITUTE.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia): p. 7. 9 August 1924. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article20759556.
↑ "SKILLED LABOUR.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia): p. 8. 16 August 1924. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article20742429.
↑ "Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980", Ancestry.com LLC, https://www.ancestry.com.au/search/collections/auselectoralrolls/, retrieved 15 December 2019, "Walter Isaac Monkhouse, Merthyr, Qld, 1925"
↑ "Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980", Ancestry.com LLC, https://www.ancestry.com.au/search/collections/auselectoralrolls/, retrieved 15 December 2019, "Walter Isaac Monkhouse, Merthyr, Qld, 1925 (Second Print)"
↑ "SOCIAL NOTES.". The Evening News (Queensland, Australia): p. 4. 4 March 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article202674462.
↑ "PERSONAL NEWS.". Morning Bulletin (Queensland, Australia): p. 6. 6 March 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article54299852.
↑ "Advertising". Daily Commercial News And Shipping List (New South Wales, Australia): p. 8 (Weekly Summary). 11 March 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article159945505.
↑ "WIRELESS NOTES AND NEWS.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia): p. 16. 11 April 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article20898292.
↑ "PERSONAL NEWS.". Morning Bulletin (Queensland, Australia): p. 6. 7 May 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article54306551.
↑ "PERSONAL NEWS.". Morning Bulletin (Queensland, Australia): p. 6. 9 May 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article54311938.
↑ "PERSONAL NEWS.". Morning Bulletin (Queensland, Australia): p. 6. 2 June 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article54310989.
↑ "PERSONAL NEWS.". Morning Bulletin (Queensland, Australia): p. 6. 4 June 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article54307934.
↑ "CLUB ACTIVITIES.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia) (21,043): p. 20. 4 July 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article20940251. Retrieved 8 December 2019.
↑ "Advertising". The Evening News (Queensland, Australia): p. 4. 21 July 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article203144918.
↑ "CLUB ACTIVITIES.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia) (21,132): p. 11. 16 October 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article20969392. Retrieved 8 December 2019.
↑ "WIRELESS NOTES AND NEWS.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia): p. 18. 13 November 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article20977060.
↑ "WIRELESS INSTITUTE OF AUSTRALIA, QUEENSLAND DIVISION.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia): p. 12. 10 December 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article20984655.
↑ "Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980", Ancestry.com LLC, https://www.ancestry.com.au/search/collections/auselectoralrolls/, retrieved 15 December 2019, "Walter Isaac Monkhouse, Merthyr, Qld, 1926"
↑ "Advertising". Toowoomba Chronicle And Darling Downs Gazette (Queensland, Australia): p. 12. 10 February 1926. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article253849911.
↑ "INDUSTRIAL SECTION". Daily Commercial News And Shipping List (New South Wales, Australia): p. 8 (Weekly Summary.). 21 April 1926. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article159998004.
↑ "RADIO TOPICS". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 4. 9 June 1926. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article182193404.
↑ "RADIO TOPICS". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 15. 11 August 1926. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article177769101.
↑ "RADIO PROGRAMME". The Daily Mail (Queensland, Australia): p. 18. 9 October 1926. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article220608665.
↑ "Future of Radio". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 12. 28 October 1926. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article177794956.
↑ "ON THE AIR.". Morning Bulletin (Queensland, Australia): p. 6. 6 November 1926. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article54333792.
↑ "BROADCASTING.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia): p. 14. 13 December 1926. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article21078699.
↑ "4QG.". Daily Standard (Queensland, Australia): p. 4 (SECOND EDITION-3 p.m.). 3 January 1927. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article185439908.
↑ "Wireless Amateurs". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 5 (5 O'CLOCK CITY EDITION). 18 May 1927. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article180738104.
↑ "Advertising". Daily Commercial News And Shipping List (New South Wales, Australia): p. 8 (Weekly Summary.). 3 August 1927. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article160036037.
↑ "Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980", Ancestry.com LLC, https://www.ancestry.com.au/search/collections/auselectoralrolls/, retrieved 15 December 2019, "Walter Isaac Monkhouse, Merthyr, Qld, 1928"
↑ "ELECTRICAL WORKERS". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 14 (CITY EDITION). 29 March 1928. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article182217666.
↑ "Staff Dance". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 19 (CITY EDITION). 23 July 1928. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article179089055.
↑ "CHRISTMAS LUNCH.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia): p. 16. 21 December 1928. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article21360918.
↑ "Amateur Bodies". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 12 (5 O'CLOCK CITY EDITION). 23 January 1929. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article179694524.
↑ "ADDRESS ON ELECTRICITY.". Daily Standard (Queensland, Australia): p. 4. 2 March 1929. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article178908044.
↑ "MORE COMPLICATED.". Daily Standard (Queensland, Australia): p. 7. 12 June 1929. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article192378203.
↑ "Death by Electrocution". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 2 (CITY EDITION). 14 June 1929. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article179338476.
↑ "Death by Electrocution". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 4. 18 June 1929. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article179338220.
↑ "PERSONAL". Morning Bulletin (Queensland, Australia): p. 5. 25 September 1929. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article55332622.
↑ "PERSONAL". Morning Bulletin (Queensland, Australia): p. 5. 27 September 1929. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article55335858.
↑ "Resuscitation". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 5 (SECOND EDITION). 2 January 1930. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article181984204.
↑ "Resuscitation". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 10 (5 O'CLOCK CITY EDITION). 9 January 1930. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article181991350.
↑ "PERSONAL". Morning Bulletin (Queensland, Australia): p. 5. 19 January 1931. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article54688998.
↑ "Queensland Listeners' League.". Daily Standard (Queensland, Australia): p. 15. 21 March 1931. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article180982051.
↑ "PERSONAL.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia): p. 17. 13 November 1931. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article21764065.
↑ "BUTCHER'S DEATH.". Daily Standard (Queensland, Australia): p. 16. 15 February 1932. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article178933070.
↑ "ENGINEERING DELEGATES.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia): p. 16. 2 May 1933. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article22171456.
↑ "ENGINEERS' VISIT.". Queensland Times (Queensland, Australia): p. 6 (DAILY.). 4 May 1933. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article118501428.
↑ "In The Social Sphere ENGINEERS' CONFERENCE.". The Brisbane Courier (Queensland, Australia): p. 18. 5 May 1933. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article22172538.
↑ "WONDAI HOSPITAL". Maryborough Chronicle, Wide Bay And Burnett Advertiser (Queensland, Australia): p. 2. 28 October 1933. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article149248876.
↑ ""BRASS HOLDERS DANGEROUS IN ELECTRIC LEADS"". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 3 (CITY FINAL LAST MINUTE NEWS). 26 January 1934. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article188421508.
↑ "HOSPITAL MPBOVEMENTS". Warwick Daily News (Queensland, Australia): p. 2. 16 April 1934. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article177502734.
↑ "Works Department Staff Adjustments". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 9 (SECOND EDITION). 9 August 1934. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article181846747.
↑ "ELECTROCUTED". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 10 (LATE CITY). 20 February 1935. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article182006200.
↑ "MAKE ELECTRIC IRON FOOLPROOF". The Courier-mail (Queensland, Australia): p. 11. 21 February 1935. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article35869740.
↑ "WHO TURNED ON GAS TAP?". The Courier-mail (Queensland, Australia): p. 21. 14 March 1935. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article35880422.
↑ "DANGER IN CITY AREAS". The Courier-mail (Queensland, Australia): p. 11. 15 March 1935. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article35871715.
↑ "PERSONAL". Morning Bulletin (Queensland, Australia): p. 4. 12 August 1935. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article54789075.
↑ "PERSONAL". Morning Bulletin (Queensland, Australia): p. 4. 13 August 1935. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article54789209.
↑ "Family Notices". The Sydney Morning Herald (New South Wales, Australia): p. 9. 2 September 1935. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article29538157.
↑ "Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980", Ancestry.com LLC, https://www.ancestry.com.au/search/collections/auselectoralrolls/, retrieved 15 December 2019, "Walter Isaac Monkhouse, Toowong, Qld, 1936"
↑ "PERSONAL". Morning Bulletin (Queensland, Australia): p. 4. 4 February 1936. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article55564126.
↑ "PERSONAL". Morning Bulletin (Queensland, Australia): p. 11. 7 February 1936. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article55564885.
↑ "STAFF PRESENTATION". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 15 (CITY FINAL LAST MINUTE NEWS). 29 September 1936. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article197268289.
↑ "Coroner Says Something Should Be Done to Stop Workmen's Electrocution". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 10 (SECOND EDITION). 4 November 1936. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article180734834.
↑ "Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980", Ancestry.com LLC, https://www.ancestry.com.au/search/collections/auselectoralrolls/, retrieved 15 December 2019, "Walter Isaac Monkhouse, Toowong, Qld, 1937"
↑ "INDOOROOPILLY GREEN READY SOON". The Courier-mail (Queensland, Australia): p. 11. 26 February 1938. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article39742408.
↑ ""More Knowledge Now Required Of Postal Mechanics"". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 13 (SECOND EDITION). 2 September 1938. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article183454484.
↑ "Works Department Officer Appointed to Bureau of Industry". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 16 (CITY FINAL LAST MINUTE NEWS). 6 December 1938. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article184347083.
↑ "EX-QUEENSLANDERS IN TO-DAY'S RACING NEWS AT CAULFIELD.". The Courier-mail (Queensland, Australia): p. 8. 25 February 1939. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article39007058.
↑ "Approval System For Electrical Appliances to Operate Here". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 6 (SECOND EDITION). 16 March 1939. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article184335548.
↑ "STANDARDISING ELECTRICITY WIRING RULES". The Courier-mail (Queensland, Australia): p. 2. 31 May 1939. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article40850700.
↑ "MARRIED AT CAMBERWELL". The Age (Victoria, Australia): p. 3. 5 June 1939. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article205624645.
↑ "Indooroopilly Bowls Officers". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 15 (SECOND EDITION). 2 March 1940. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article187487501.
↑ "MORNING TEA". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 10 (SECOND EDITION). 4 July 1940. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article186288319.
↑ "Alma Irene Monkhouse, marriage registration, Queensland Government family history research service", Queensland Government, https://www.familyhistory.bdm.qld.gov.au/, retrieved 17 December 2019.
↑ "BRIDE WEARS HEIRLOOM VEIL". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 7 (SPORTS FINAL). 13 July 1940. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article186281437.
↑ "Family Notices". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 18 (CITY FINAL LAST MINUTE NEWS). 29 August 1940. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article172629428.
↑ "Last Ticket Bought Wins Casket". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 11 (LATE WEEK END). 1 February 1941. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article172715614.
↑ "Bowls Notes". The Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 6 (Second Edition). 11 May 1942. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article171967249.
↑ "Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980", Ancestry.com LLC, https://www.ancestry.com.au/search/collections/auselectoralrolls/, retrieved 15 December 2019, "Walter Isaac Monkhouse, Toowong, Qld, 1943"
↑ "Farmers Build Bowling Green". The Courier-mail (Queensland, Australia): p. 7. 25 March 1947. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article49341685.
↑ "Social News". Morning Bulletin (Queensland, Australia): p. 6. 28 October 1947. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article56799773.
↑ "PERSONAL". The Courier-mail (Queensland, Australia): p. 8. 12 December 1947. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article49656294.
↑ "Irene Olive Monkhouse, Death Registration, Queensland Government: Family history research service", Queensland Government, https://www.familyhistory.bdm.qld.gov.au/, retrieved 17 December 2019.
↑ "Family Notices". Brisbane Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 6 (CITY FINAL). 27 February 1948. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article212262252.
↑ "Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980", Ancestry.com LLC, https://www.ancestry.com.au/search/collections/auselectoralrolls/, retrieved 15 December 2019, "Walter Isaac Monkhouse, Toowong, Qld, 1949"
↑ "Bath ban on quick boiler". The Courier-mail (Queensland, Australia): p. 3. 10 February 1949. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article49918256.
↑ "Eventide Homes Inspection". Morning Bulletin (Queensland, Australia): p. 4. 13 December 1949. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article56926598.
↑ "Family Notices". Brisbane Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 6 (CITY FINAL). 9 March 1950. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article217763911.
↑ "Farewell Luncheon". Brisbane Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 8 (CITY FINAL). 2 February 1951. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article212596797.
↑ "Planning big glow". Brisbane Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 12 (LAST RACE). 1 July 1953. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article217193913.
↑ "Queen will see city radiant with lights". Sunday Mail (Queensland, Australia): p. 5. 8 November 1953. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article100178439.
↑ "FEW RETIRE FROM PUBLIC SERVICE". Brisbane Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 2 (LAST RACE). 28 December 1953. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article217740300.
↑ "THERE TOP PUBLIC MEN RETIRING". Brisbane Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 5 (CITY FINAL). 31 December 1953. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article217738021.
↑ "Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980", Ancestry.com LLC, https://www.ancestry.com.au/search/collections/auselectoralrolls/, retrieved 15 December 2019, "Walter Isaac Monkhouse, Toowong, Qld, 1954"
↑ "39 years with the State Govt.". Brisbane Telegraph (Queensland, Australia): p. 2 (CITY FINAL). 30 December 1954. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article217163696.
↑ "Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980", Ancestry.com LLC, https://www.ancestry.com.au/search/collections/auselectoralrolls/, retrieved 15 December 2019, "Walter Isaac Monkhouse, Ashgrove, Qld, 1958"
↑ "Australia, Electoral Rolls, 1903-1980", Ancestry.com LLC, https://www.ancestry.com.au/search/collections/auselectoralrolls/, retrieved 15 December 2019, "Walter Isaac Monkhouse, Ashgrove, Qld, 1963"
↑ "Walter Isaac Monkhouse, Death Registration, Queensland Government: Family history research service", Queensland Government, https://www.familyhistory.bdm.qld.gov.au/, retrieved 17 December 2019.
↑ "IN the matter of the estates of the undermentioned deceased". Government Gazette Of The State Of New South Wales (New South Wales, Australia) (131): p. 3347. 8 October 1965. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article219999174. Retrieved 10 December 2019.
↑ "Alma Irene Bagnall, Death Registration, Queensland Government: Family history research service", Queensland Government, https://www.familyhistory.bdm.qld.gov.au/, retrieved 17 December 2019.
Analects of Confucius (Translated by James Legge)
CHAP. I. 1. The Duke Ling of Wei asked Confucius about tactics. Confucius replied, 'I have heard all about sacrificial vessels, but I have not learned military matters.' On this, he took his departure the next day.
When he was in Chan, their provisions were exhausted, and his followers became so ill that they were unable to rise.
Tsze-lu, with evident dissatisfaction, said, 'Has the superior man likewise to endure in this way?' The Master said, 'The superior man may indeed have to endure want, but the mean man, when he is in want, gives way to unbridled license.'
CHAP. II. 1. The Master said, 'Ts'ze, you think, I suppose, that I am one who learns many things and keeps them in memory?'
Tsze-kung replied, 'Yes,-- but perhaps it is not so?'
'No,' was the answer; 'I seek a unity all-pervading.'
CHAP. III. The Master said, 'Yu, those who know virtue are few.'
CHAP. IV. The Master said, 'May not Shun be instanced as having governed efficiently without exertion? What did he do? He did nothing but gravely and reverently occupy his royal seat.'
CHAP. V. 1. Tsze-chang asked how a man should conduct himself, so as to be everywhere appreciated.
The Master said, 'Let his words be sincere and truthful, and his actions honourable and careful;-- such conduct may be practised among the rude tribes of the South or the North. If his words be not sincere and truthful and his actions not honourable and careful, will he, with such conduct, be appreciated, even in his neighborhood?
'When he is standing, let him see those two things, as it were, fronting him. When he is in a carriage, let him see them attached to the yoke. Then may he subsequently carry them into practice.'
Tsze-chang wrote these counsels on the end of his sash.
CHAP. VI. 1. The Master said, 'Truly straightforward was the historiographer Yu. When good government prevailed in his State, he was like an arrow. When bad government prevailed, he was like an arrow.
A superior man indeed is Chu Po-yu! When good government prevails in his state, he is to be found in office. When bad government prevails, he can roll his principles up, and keep them in his breast.'
CHAP. VII. The Master said, 'When a man may be spoken with, not to speak to him is to err in reference to the man. When a man may not be spoken with, to speak to him is to err in reference to our words. The wise err neither in regard to their man nor to their words.'
CHAP. VIII. The Master said, 'The determined scholar and the man of virtue will not seek to live at the expense of injuring their virtue. They will even sacrifice their lives to preserve their virtue complete.'
CHAP. IX. Tsze-kung asked about the practice of virtue. The Master said, 'The mechanic, who wishes to do his work well, must first sharpen his tools. When you are living in any state, take service with the most worthy among its great officers, and make friends of the most virtuous among its scholars.'
CHAP. X. 1. Yen Yuan asked how the government of a country should be administered.
The Master said, 'Follow the seasons of Hsia.
'Wear the ceremonial cap of Chau.
'Let the music be the Shao with its pantomimes.
Banish the songs of Chang, and keep far from specious talkers. The songs of Chang are licentious; specious talkers are dangerous.'
CHAP. XI. The Master said, 'If a man take no thought about what is distant, he will find sorrow near at hand.'
CHAP. XII. The Master said, 'It is all over! I have not seen one who loves virtue as he loves beauty.'
CHAP. XIII. The Master said, 'Was not Tsang Wan like one who had stolen his situation? He knew the virtue and the talents of Hui of Liu-hsia, and yet did not procure that he should stand with him in court.'
CHAP. XIV. The Master said, 'He who requires much from himself and little from others, will keep himself from being the object of resentment.'
CHAP. XV. The Master said, 'When a man is not in the habit of saying-- "What shall I think of this? What shall I think of this?" I can indeed do nothing with him!'
CHAP. XVI. The Master said, 'When a number of people are together, for a whole day, without their conversation turning on righteousness, and when they are fond of carrying out the suggestions of a small shrewdness;-- theirs is indeed a hard case.'
CHAP. XVII. The Master said, 'The superior man in everything considers righteousness to be essential. He performs it according to the rules of propriety. He brings it forth in humility. He completes it with sincerity. This is indeed a superior man.'
CHAP. XVIII. The Master said, 'The superior man is distressed by his want of ability. He is not distressed by men's not knowing him.'
CHAP. XIX. The Master said, 'The superior man dislikes the thought of his name not being mentioned after his death.'
CHAP. XXI. The Master said, 'The superior man is dignified, but does not wrangle. He is sociable, but not a partizan.'
CHAP. XXII. The Master said, 'The superior man does not promote a man simply on account of his words, nor does he put aside good words because of the man.'
CHAP. XXIII. Tsze-kung asked, saying, 'Is there one word which may serve as a rule of practice for all one's life?' The Master said, 'Is not RECIPROCITY such a word? What you do not want done to yourself, do not do to others.'
CHAP. XXIV. 1. The Master said, 'In my dealings with men, whose evil do I blame, whose goodness do I praise, beyond what is proper? If I do sometimes exceed in praise, there must be ground for it in my examination of the individual.
'This people supplied the ground why the three dynasties pursued the path of straightforwardness.'
CHAP. XXV. The Master said, 'Even in my early days, a historiographer would leave a blank in his text, and he who had a horse would lend him to another to ride. Now, alas! there are no such things.'
CHAP. XXVI. The Master said, 'Specious words confound virtue. Want of forbearance in small matters confounds great plans.'
CHAP. XXVII. The Master said, 'When the multitude hate a man, it is necessary to examine into the case. When the multitude like a man, it is necessary to examine into the case.'
CHAP. XXVIII. The Master said, 'A man can enlarge the principles which he follows; those principles do not enlarge the man.'
CHAP. XXIX. The Master said, 'To have faults and not to reform them,-- this, indeed, should be pronounced having faults.'
CHAP. XXX. The Master said, 'I have been the whole day without eating, and the whole night without sleeping:-- occupied with thinking. It was of no use. The better plan is to learn.'
CHAP. XXXI. The Master said, 'The object of the superior man is truth. Food is not his object. There is plowing;-- even in that there is sometimes want. So with learning;-- emolument may be found in it. The superior man is anxious lest he should not get truth; he is not anxious lest poverty should come upon him.'
CHAP. XXXII. 1. The Master said, 'When a man's knowledge is sufficient to attain, and his virtue is not sufficient to enable him to hold, whatever he may have gained, he will lose again.
'When his knowledge is sufficient to attain, and he has virtue enough to hold fast, if he cannot govern with dignity, the people will not respect him.
'When his knowledge is sufficient to attain, and he has virtue enough to hold fast; when he governs also with dignity, yet if he try to move the people contrary to the rules of propriety:-- full excellence is not reached.'
CHAP. XXXIII. The Master said, 'The superior man cannot be known in little matters; but he may be intrusted with great concerns. The small man may not be intrusted with great concerns, but he may be known in little matters.'
CHAP. XXXIV. The Master said, 'Virtue is more to man than either water or fire. I have seen men die from treading on water and fire, but I have never seen a man die from treading the course of virtue.'
CHAP. XXXV. The Master said, 'Let every man consider virtue as what devolves on himself. He may not yield the performance of it even to his teacher.'
CHAP. XXXVI. The Master said, 'The superior man is correctly firm, and not firm merely.'
CHAP. XXXVII. The Master said, 'A minister, in serving his prince, reverently discharges his duties, and makes his emolument a secondary consideration.'
CHAP. XXXVIII. The Master said, 'In teaching there should be no distinction of classes.'
CHAP. XXXIX. The Master said, 'Those whose courses are different cannot lay plans for one another.'
CHAP. XL. The Master said, 'In language it is simply required that it convey the meaning.'
CHAP. XLI. 1. The Music-master, Mien, having called upon him, when they came to the steps, the Master said, 'Here are the steps.' When they came to the mat for the guest to sit upon, he said, 'Here is the mat.' When all were seated, the Master informed him, saying, 'So and so is here; so and so is here.'
The Music-master, Mien, having gone out, Tsze-chang asked, saying. 'Is it the rule to tell those things to the Music- master?'
The Master said, 'Yes. This is certainly the rule for those who lead the blind.'
Ref: http://www.gutenberg.org/files/4094/4094-h/4094-h.htm
The Output function is used for displaying values or strings on the home screen. Output will override anything that the displayed characters may overlap with that is previously on the screen.
Where row is the vertical positioning of the output. A value of 1 prints on the first row, etc.
Where column is the horizontal positioning of the output. A value of 1 prints on the first column, etc.
Where "text" or value is the text or value to be displayed to the screen.
In this example, the calculator would display WIKIBOOKS at 2 rows down (from the top of the screen) and 6 columns over (from the left of the screen). Notice that to display a string, the string must be enclosed in quotation marks. Make sure to separate values of row column and display value with commas.
To display a numerical value, do NOT place quotes around the value, as it is not a string.
Only one value can be displayed per Output statement.
You want to build a form that will allow you to quickly test replacement regular expressions using XQuery's replace function.
We will use an XForms client that has several controls:
a regular expression to evaluate
a new string to be used in the replace
When the submit trigger is pressed, the three strings are sent to the server and the XQuery replace() function will be executed. The result is an output text area that is returned from the server to the web browser.
This tool will allow you to do things such as test your URL-rewrite rules.
@namespace xf url("http://www.w3.org/2002/xforms");
If you are using eXist, just place this file on the server in the same folder as your XForms test driver.
In the example above I used a test folder on the localhost:
This shows that you can quickly build tools to teach yourself complex functions like regular expression handling. You can also use the XQuery match function, which returns true or false if the regular expression matches an input string.
There are two variations of this example that are interesting. The first is where you replace the input form with a large text area for doing global replacements of large blocks of text. The second is where you replace the input box with a selection list with common replacement patterns.
Examples of replacement functions can be found here:
Back: Dictionary Editor • Next: Autoincrement File ID
Wikibooks presents this book in E-Prime to aid clarity of communication.
Wikipedia has related information at Klingon language
Look up Appendix:Klingon in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.
Wikiquote has a collection of quotations related to: Klingon proverbs
This Wikibook teaches the reader to speak the Klingon Language. It supplies a fast yet complete method of learning tlhIngan Hol, by providing auditory aid and structured information for fast absorption by the reader.
This Wikibook presents a structure which conveys basic Klingon language first; then moves into example usage and extended vocabulary. Some chapters consist entirely of Klingon, with the occasional annotation introducing a new word; these chapters present the reader with a straight-forward exercise to reinforce their interpretive Klingon language skills.
Sound clips of Klingon speech provide the reader with an auditory aid; some of the Klingon-only chapters supply complete recordings of entire sections. Readers will benefit greatly by reading these sections aloud and using the recordings to check their pronunciation.
Why learn Klingon?
"HS" refers to Heavenly Stems, "EB" refers to Earthly Branches, and "Hid" refers to Hidden Stems.
Luck Pillars for H1 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 0] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H1 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 1] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H1 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 2] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H1 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 3] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H1 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 4] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H1 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 5] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H1 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 6] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H1 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 7] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H1 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 8] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H1 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 9] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H1 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 10] in direction R (reverse).
Here you can configure where KTorrent should store its files. These files can either be the torrent data you want to download, or the torrent settings and stats KTorrent keeps track of. Downloaded files and torrent profile files will have to be saved in their own folders.
The temporary folder is the folder where KTorrent stores a profile for each torrent which includes information such as the settings for file priority on a multi-file torrent, settings for which files you do not want to download, the torrent file for the torrent itself, and symlinks so that KTorrent knows where the data for a particular torrent should be saved.
The setting “automatically save downloads to” will effectively disable the dialog which requests you to choose a save location after you open a torrent.
The setting, show system tray icon, is for selecting whether you want to have an icon placed in the system tray while KTorrent is running. If you have enabled this option, it will change the function of the quit button from quitting program to only minimizing the window into the system tray. Clicking on the system tray icon will also display a menu to control some of KTorrent's settings. The system tray icon is useful for users who want quick access and control of torrents while using other programs.
The Show speed bar allows you to enable an additional bandwidth indicator on the system tray to easily monitor how fast your torrents are being uploaded and downloaded.
Show system tray pop-up messages is a useful option if you like passive messages to pop up when events such as a torrent getting completed, a torrent reaching its configured share ratio, or a chunk failing the hash test while uploading occur.
You can configure KTorrent to send a fixed IP address or hostname to the tracker. This is useful if you use a proxy.
Use DHT to get additional peers to enable or disable DHT globally. While using DHT, you can:
KTorrent respects the private flag inside torrent files and will automatically exclude private torrents from using DHT.
DHT will increase the load on a router. If you are finding that your Internet is bogging down, you can disable DHT to increase the Maximum number of Downloads and Seeds available.
Encryption was introduced by the maintainers of two other BitTorrent clients after some ISPs decided to throttle their customers' internet connections. Throttling was introduced because some ISPs thought it would be a good idea if they could spare themselves costs generated by the use of the BitTorrent protocol. Encryption in BitTorrent was designed to obfuscate BitTorrent traffic so the detection of BitTorrent traffic, and therefore throttling of bandwidth, would fail. The encryption standard used in BitTorrent, RC4, is BY NO MEANS designed to make data secure. It was designed only to get around bandwidth throttling.
KTorrent is able to establish both unencrypted and encrypted connections.
Even if your ISP is not throttling your connection, you still may find enabling encryption helps some peers to send data with a proper download bandwidth. Other peers may use BitTorrent applications that do not support encryption, and you will not be able to connect to them. You will need to experiment with the encryption settings to see what works best with the torrent you are trying to download.
The Practicum course is the capstone of George Mason University's School of Policy, Government and International Affairs Master's in Transportation Policy, Operations and Logistics (TPOL). The objective of the course is to engage students in an in-depth field study of ongoing transportation policy, operations, and/or logistics situations, and the design and delivery of actions to manage or resolve problems and opportunities. Students obtain a working knowledge of the theory, policy, law, research, and practices required to effectively and efficiently supply and operate transportation facilities and services. They also learn to think critically and analytically about the problems and challenges in this field and communicate their analyses clearly and effectively through written and oral presentations.[1] Copies of the reports of previous semesters are available at http://spgia.gmu.edu/programs/graduate-degrees/transportation-policy-operations-logistics-tpol/tpol-practicum-reports/.
School of Policy, Government and International Affairs
Just In Time: Enhanced Mobility and Equity through Real-Time Information
The spring 2016 Practicum in Transportation Policy, Operations and Logistics focuses on the best of use of public computer display screens for transportation information. Cities own or regulate thousands of computer screens used for public display of information. Screens are becoming ubiquitous on bus shelters, stations, subway entrances, kiosks, bike share stations, and other indoor and outdoor locations. The type of information presented varies: advertising, transit schedules and real-time performance, shared use options, weather, AMBER Alerts and emergency response, for example. Cities, and transportation system operators in particular, control or influence the content of such screens through regulations, contracts and strategic partnerships. Advertisers, for example, underwrite the cost of bus shelters in exchange for use of the shelters as advertising platforms. Subway system operators sell advertising space in their systems.
The report examines appropriate public policies to govern the use of such public space. What is the range of practice? How transparent are policies and contracts? What is the right balance between their use for private profit and public benefit? Is there a “sweet spot” where sharing screens for useful transportation information can attract more “eyeballs” to advertisements?
Students concentrated on the urban transit space — stations, bus shelters and stops, and other street furniture, indoor and particularly outdoor. The goal is to develop policy recommendations for governing public computer display screens tied to public transportation systems.
Although the specific focus of the project is the urban transit space, the issues raised cut across a wide range of transportation systems. Broader issues include the regulation of outdoor advertising, public signage, free speech, potential distractions to drivers, “visual pollution” (for example, sign regulations for sports venues or electronic billboards), and how to balance public and private interests. Such issues arise in the airport and highway sectors, public streets and other public spaces. Thus the 2016 Practicum may draw source material from research and experience in these other domains, as well as provide relevant results and insights.
The client for the report is TransitScreen, Inc., a leading provider of transportation displays featuring live, real-time dashboards of transportation options. TransitScreen’s clients include real estate developers, universities, employers, cities and transit agencies. TransitScreen was launched in 2013, emerging from a civic technology project at Mobility Lab in Arlington, Virginia. It is based at the 1776 business incubator in Washington, D.C., with offices at Code for America in San Francisco, and in other major metropolitan areas.
↑ [1], Transportation Policy, Operations, and Logistics.
Books on this shelf cover corporate finance, and deal with the financial decisions corporations make and the tools and analysis used to make these decisions. The primary goal of corporate finance is to maximize corporate value while managing the firm's financial risks.
Binomial:Cornus amomumType:ShrubWater requirements:Grows in very wet soilsPropagation:StakesPruning tolerance:Tolerates coppicing and cutbacksPollination:Insect pollenated
The Swamp Dogwood (Cornus amomum) is a shrub native to eastern North America, commonly found in wetlands and along streambanks. It is rarely planted in gardens, but is useful for stabilizing stream and river banks.
Other common names include: Kinnikinnik, Silky Cornel, Blueberry Cornel, Red Osier, Redbrush, Red Willow, Rose Willow and Squaw Bush.
A large, suckering shrub with dark reddish bark.
Wet soils, but not in standing water.
Tolerates cutback cultivation.
Propagated by stakes.
This page is a list of the latest homebrew news, used for the "Latest news" section on the Main Page. This is not a list for homebrew applications. A list of the most recent homebrew releases and updates can be found at PSP/Homebrew Releases.
Log in to the wiki. Editing is disabled if you don't have an account.
Add the news event to the top of the list, using this format for the date: '''YYYY/MM/DD:''' . Please include the author and a link to a page on Wiibrew about the topic. No external links please.
Move the last entry to the appropriate archive. There should be no more than 3 entries in the list. If an topic was posted in June 2021, move it to WiiBrew:News/June 2021
Avoid editing existing entries. The entries below are scraped to make the RSS feed, and changing what's already there makes a duplicate entry.
2015/01/16 - In preparation for the remake of Brandish: The Dark Revenant, firmware 6.61 has been released for the PSP.
2014/10/31 - Davee announces to Wololo that he is developing a permanent CFW patch that will work on all PSP models.
2013/03/13 - Created a front page for the PSP Wikibook.
CSV data can be overlayed onto the vertices of the object mesh. The file must have one row per vertex and have the same order as vertices in the object.
Clicking any point on the surface will bring the index of the vertex in the object file, and the value of the overlayed data in the Resources pane.
Turkish Table of Contents view ⋅ edit ⋅ talk
I am...
Are you busy today?
You can give your feedback about this page on the talk page.
Instead of using a toggle object to simulate the break, the same functionality is implemented by moving the mouse cursor into the right or left half of the screen.
Fig 45.4/45.5: A four cylinder engine with slugging speed
Fig 45.8: Advanced Engine
Advanced engine with multiple transmission paths and warping non-linear waveguide. Contains the subpatches from fig 45.5, 45.6 and 45.7. At the end there is also an example how to control some parameters via a MIDI controller.
For testing so many different parameters at once, a device with multiple controllers is your best friend.
The SI unit for power is Watts(W). One Watt is equal to Joule per second (J/s) or kg*m^2s^-3.
Power is equal to Work divided by seconds.
Young, Hugh. University Physics: With modern Physics. 12. Pearson College, 2007. Print.
A variety of things can trigger an increase in blood sugar level, including:
This page documents glitches from Super Mario 63, whether they are helpful, terrible, or just for fun.
See the YouTube video for a demonstration of this glitch.
In a Bowser level (tested in Bowser's Second Trap (Fire Sea Course)), if Bowser is thrown at just the right moment, hitting the bomb just right, he will go very fast and fly offscreen, then come back up, still flying in the same direction, causing him to infinitely repeat this flight. This forces the player to exit the stage or jump into the lava. If the bomb takes away all of Bowser's remaining life, however, the cutscene will interrupt the glitch and the game will continue on as normal.
Try to Hover and Spin Attack at the same time. When you're on the ground, you'll start to spin, but it'll make the sound F.L.U.D.D makes.
Fall below the floor of the map
Leave the game alone for too long and Mario will fall through the bottom of the map infinitely. Mario's sprite sometimes has the animation of either being killed by squashing, hot stuff, or enemy damage. This can also happen for those who lag a lot, who will randomly fall through the floor for no reason.
Popping up at the other side of an object
Use this angle.
Enter the Level Designer, then put a large flipping platform on the map at the starting position with the angle noted in the image (about 5 degrees).
Then test the map. Do not touch anything until the platform crushes you. When Mario has been crushed, he will pop up on the other side.
Dash toward the slide in the first part of the Basement (across from the metal door that requires the Green Shine Sprite) and jump as you enter it. Dive as Mario peaks and you'll slide right through. Spamming spin jump also works sometimes.
Sometimes, with the rocket FLUDD equipped, if you spam the pause button while charging it on the ground, Mario/Luigi will be able to blast off twice. This glitch most likely happens because the game is able to refill the "charge" meter while on the ground, even though you are in the air. This can be used to skip parts of Bowser's castle entirely.
Making a sling star and setting the speed to any value that isn't a number (for example, NAN), will result in Mario/Luigi being trapped forever until you quit the level (https://pastebin.com/b6w7SsGY).
Creating a Flipping platform with a speed set to 180 will oddly make it so you get stuck on it when you walk on it. However, if you press P to pause the game, then unpause, you get launched into the air. (https://pastebin.com/nhR954Ah). Larger ones may crush you or just warp you below the platform.
A similar thing happens with circle platforms, setting the speed to 180 and jumping on one of the platforms can cause strange things to happen. (in this level, try to land on the top green platform after a triple jump. https://pastebin.com/Vw7KfCcv)
Oddly, placing 2 Horizontal Level Transitions as close as possible causes the screen to shake. Editing the level code to make them even closer results in weird camera glitches. (https://pastebin.com/Mbi3ECtu)
If you take an extra long cloud (or any similar object) and set the angle to 90 or 270, touching the side will cause the player to upwarp to the highest point of said object. (https://pastebin.com/Ws5xa42T)
If you take a Floating Platform to under the water and pause, the platform will still rise if it is still underwater. This means that players can create puzzles cannot be solved without pausing. (https://pastebin.com/Zra8C99E)
If you click File and click Load Course, then click Input Code, then click Load Course, the game will load an undefined level. All of the tiles will flash by on the screen. Trying to load the Course Info will result in the name being "undefined", there is no music or background set (though you can still set one), and the level length and height are set to NaN (Not a Number). Both of the no music or background being set is obviously unused, since by default, the music is Mushroom Kingdom and the background is Hills and Clouds. Attempting to place objects will usually crash or softlock (the game still runs, but you cannot do or interact with anything) the game in this state. If you attempt to play the level, all that will happen is that the main character will fall effectively forever, as there is no limit to how far down he can go (no music will play, as none is set, and the background appears to be the same as the one that shows in the level designer while creating a level). This is because the game does not do any validation to see if the code is valid, so it will run any code you throw at it. (no paste required, just type in random gibberish and the glitch will activate.)
It's possible to use some HTML code in signs. While not a glitch, you can do things like add custom pictures (like in this level https://pastebin.com/uBqXaY2M), or even run an SWF file. .GIF files will not animate, only showing the first frame of animation. You can also link to websites, if you really wanted to (https://pastebin.com/BghNRXWL).
Bullet Bills can be made to be invincible. Directly editing the code for a spawner can cause a bullet bill to be invincible (https://pastebin.com/SyVvSTiW). Under normal means, an expected number is supposed to be between 0-9. However, if you replace it with something that isn't a number, bullet bills will be invincible. You can still step on them, but that will only cause them to go a different direction. If chase? is enabled, then the bullet bill will eventually turn around to face you.
There is an item called Orange Block Switch. When pressed, blocks that you set will spawn. However, setting its timer to 1e20 will cause the switch to rapidly make the ticking sound indefinitely. As well, if you set the timer to -1, the orange blocks will be intangible, meaning that you cannot touch them, you will just go through them. (https://pastebin.com/E3kUnybp)
There are many more tricks, glitches, and curiosities.
An estimate of total biomass of planktonic algal species may be obtained by counting plankton in several samples of the brine. Microalgae are settled, and to a limited extent preserved, by the settling agent. A subsample of the cells in the concentrated algal mass is counted. This figure is extrapolated to give a rough idea of the total algal biomass and the main phyla present.
Reagents and equipment required to settle algae and concentrate sample
Measuring cylinder and vacumn pump (or siphon)
Haemocytometer, cover slip and transfer pipette
Add approximately one millilitre of Lugol's Media to an empty 250 millilitre measuring cylinder. Fill the 250 mL measuring cylinder to the 200mL mark with a sample from the field. Make sure that the media and the sample are well mixed. This solution must sit undisturbed for a day before the next step. If too much sample is added, some of the solution can be poured out if the excess is less than 25 millilitres. If a larger amount has been added, pouring some away will upset the ratio of sample to Lugol's Media, so start again.
After the solution of sample and Lugol's Media has been left for a day the top 180 millilitres must be removed without disturbing the remaining 20 millilitres. This is done by using a vacuum pump attached to a water trap, a venturi pump, or by simple siphoning. It is important that the bottom 20 millilitres is not disturbed while the upper 180 millilitres is being removed.
Mix the remaining 20 mL of sample thoroughly and place a drop on a haemocytometer slide, using the following instructions, prior to viewing under the microscope.
Add 10g of I2 and 20g of KI to a 500mL beaker. Add about 150mL of distilled water and mix well to dissolve the chemicals. Make up to 200mL and add 20gm of acetic acid and mix again. Store in a glass reagent bottle. Do not use until several several days have passed.
The haemocytometer is a glass slide normally used to count blood cells. It may be used to count algae cells in the same manner. The diagram shown here and discussed in this text is an Improved Neubauer Haemocytometer. Refer to diagram 1 for the general structure of the haemocytometer.
The two rails that support the slide coverslip are moistened with water to stop the coverslip from moving. The coverslip is placed on the rails equal distance between the two slides. The coverslip may tend to slide off the haemocytometer, so use your fingertip to hold it in place.
The bottom 20 millilitres of the concentrated sample is then well mixed and, using a transfer pipette, a small sample of the concentrated algae is sucked into the tube. A drop of this is placed on the small (2 by 4mm) half cone notch on the side of the haemocytometer. The sample will draw up the cone to fill the area between the raised platform of the haemocytometer and the coverslip. Sometimes the drawing or capillary action does not start by itself, so move the coverslip slightly to start the action by pushing gently on the side, not top, of the coverslip. Be careful as the coverslip is fragile and may crack if handled roughly. This process is repeated for the other side of the haemocytometer. This entire process should only take about one minute. There should be an even cover of brine across both raised platforms and no excess brine on the top of the coverslip.
Not all haemocytometers have a notch in the side. In these, place a drop of the concentrated sample on each stage of the haemocytometer slide and gently slide the coverslip into place.
Haemocytometers have two main counting areas. A single counting area is shown in the diagram 2. Each counting area is divided into nine equal portions of 1mm by 1mm. These portions are referred to as CELLS.
To do a simple count, the number and type of microalgal cells present in a single haemocytometer cell is totalled and recorded in your laboratory daybook.
The number of counting cells examined is limited to a maximum of 18 cells. If too many algal cells are present counting all 18 cells may be too time consuming and less than 18 areas may be examined. So, the number of cell areas counted should always be scored and recorded in the neighbouring column to the count, for use in the final plankton density calculation.
If you wish to know which groups of plankton are the dominant species, the algae may be identified with the aid of the literature to the taxonomic level you require and the groups counted separately. You may find drawing up a matrix with separate columns for each group of microalgae you are scoring simplifies this type of count.
Once you have your microalgae counts, the number of counting area cells you counted and the concentration factor then:
The concentration factor is normally 1:10 and plankton cells are expressed as plankton x 103 per mL
Therefore, more normally :
Wet algal biomass (biovolume) may be calculated (as a volume) from the shape and size of typical plankton present in your count, multiplied by the plankton count. Typical plankton volume calculations are illustrated in Diagram 3. Click on the thumbnail to obtain a larger version of the diagram. The groups of plankton illustrated in the diagram include those groups most commonly found in saline lakes.
The biovolume is reported as mm3/L and is obtained by multiplying the calculated cell volume (in cubic micrometres) for each plankton group or species by the count for that group or species per millilitre, and summing all the groups/species (Eaton et al, 1995):
Reference to methods manuals such as Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater (Eaton et al, 1995) will provide information on:
Should you be using samples of hypersaline brines, remember that you may need to wash any filter pads rather more thoroughly that you would for a similar sample of marine or freshwater origin. Poor rinsing will result in the inclusion of a mass of salts in your biomass, invalidating the results.
Rinsing so thoroughly is not always appropriate. For example, the green Alga Dunaliella salina has no cellulose cell wall and is likely to lyse when exposed to fresh water. Filtering this species requires very gentle suction or even gravity filtration, and no exposure to deionised water. To correct for the inevitable quantity of salt that will be trapped in the filter, one could pass an equivalent quantity of filtered brine through a second filter and treat it in exactly the same manner as the filter used to concentrate the biomass sample.
To make sure there are no other conflicts. For example, two mysql jdbc drivers in the tomcat/lib makes this exception, too.
Web Servers that don't support JSP 2.0
ZK 3.0 or later
ZK allows developers to use EL expressions, but it doesn't require the Web server to support JSP 2.0.
ZK 2.4 or earlier
For those who use older version of ZK (before 3.0), it is possible to configure an old Web server to support JSP 2.0 as described MyFaces's Installation.
The basic idea is to copy jsp-api.jar to the proper directory, which depends on the Web server. For example, the directory is common/lib if Tomcat 4.1.x is used.
If you find a way to enable ZK on an old Web server, don't hesitate to share the information with us by adding them the proper section above.
The jsp-api.jar file can be found in Tomcat's download, or ZK Subversion.
Cursor lost in overlapped over a Div with "overflow:auto"
This issue existed in Firefox's bugs-list for a long time. -- input field over div with overflow has no input cursor
1.remember to set headless and DISPLAY in linux
When Component Actions are used with WebObjects, to be able to preserve state across requests, the server must maintain a cache of previously visited pages. This page cache has a limited size. As a result, if the user presses the back button too many times to the point of exhausting this cache, it will result in a "User has backtracked too far" error.
Because direct actions don't require page state like component actions, the best way to avoid backtracking problems is to use Programming:WebObjects/Web Applications/Development/Direct Actions in your app.
What is the simplest way to prevent a user from backtracking (using the browser back button) to the pages previously used by another user who has logged out?
This will prevent the session from working if someone uses the back button, but it doesn't prevent them from seeing the content on the pages. If sensitive content is the issue, the best thing to do is to close the window when the user logs out. This would assume that when they loged in, you opened a window for the sensitive part of the app to run in. That way, when you use javascript to close it, you won't trigger a warning message that the user can intercept. With a window that you opened, you can do the redirect like above, to an html page that looks like:
Then there won't be any pages to go back to.
Graphics software, also called digital imaging software. This is used to create or modify images. Graphics software programs are commonly distinguished by whether they are primarily oriented toward painting, drawing, or image editing.
One of the most common painting programs in Microsoft Windows OS is the included Microsoft Paint. This is mostly used for creating and modifying simple images. Drawing programs also known as illustration programs are typically used to create vector graphics (mathematical formulas to represent image content instead of pixels). An image editing or photo editing program is a drawing or paint program that are specifically designed for touching up or modifying images (example: digital images and digital photos).
Illusion of Movement Animation Software is used frequently on websites to create the effect of movement.Unlike, video or computer generated animation which use a continuous stream of images to create moving images, animation software uses several images at one time to create what is truthfully the illusion of movement. Animation software is easy to use for beginners and pros, it allows designers of presentations and web pages the ability to create 3D animation graphics with the click of mouse. The software comes with extensive content galleries that are full of images that can be animated.
GIF One of the most popular animation formats is the Grafics Interchange Format (GIF). A palette of 256 colors can be use for each frame. GIF is commonly used by software engineers to give low resolution animated effects to web pages. Lossless data compression allows the gift format to compress files with out damaging visual quality, if the image does not exceed 256 colors. GIF is not suitable for high resolution images such as digital photos.
Adobe After Effects is a very powerful editing tool used mostly in post-production by filmmakers. It is used for creating motion graphics and 2D animation. This software allows someone to create their own graphics and animation or alter the graphics that are already filmed in order to manipulate them into what they want. This software is very useful because it can be incorporated with other software like Flash, which allows you to use After Effects in other media beside just film.
This format (Portable Network Graphics) using the file extension .png. is the format specifically created in 1996 for Web page images in response to patent issues surrounding the GIF format. The PNG format uses lossless compression, similar to GIF, but it can compress more efficiently than the GIF format for nonphotographic images, which results slightly smaller file sizes. PNG images can use a specific color palette of 256 colors or less (like GIF images) or they can use true color - more than 16 million colors. PNG images can also be interlaced and transparent.
These images can be displayed virtually in all web browsers without a special plug-in. The file format and file size of an image can be changed using an image editing program which allows the image to be optimized for use on a web page.
Power Point Microsoft PowerPoint allows the user to give text life as it appears on the screen. Text can appear in 3D, waves, one character at a time, fast or slow. These are just a few of effects the user can put to use. PowerPoint also has a selection of images (clip art) readily available which can be dragged and dropped right onto the slide. Larger images can also be taken from the web and inserted into a presentation. Images like a flag waving or sun rising are simple and easy to create.
MapPoint is a useful tool for people finding locations on-line.
MapPoint technology is used in our desktop products and the MapPoint Web Service. It is fast, accuracy and clear shows the locations which people are looking for.
The MapPoint System is an integrated set of products, servers, and services that helps businesses to improve their results by applying mapping and location. By enabling customers to locate and track key enterprise assets, as well as analyze geospatial data, the MapPoint System enables customers to increase revenue, reduce operational cost and complexity, and improve business decisions.
( "Computer programming" "Computer science" "Computing" "Internet" "Web development" ).
Dealing with death |
One of the most important factors to properly raise chickens is having a suitable chicken house or better known as chicken coop. A chicken coop can be an old building or built from scratch. It is especially important that it is well ventilated, yet does not provide easy access for predatory animals such as dogs, foxes and wolves. Another thing to keep in mind is the climate in your area. In colder climates you would probably want to build a shelter that will hold in heat more. While in warmer climate the opposite effect is more desired. The primary goal is to reach a comfortable temperature.
Your coop should have some chicken wire under the floor if it is on the ground. If it is off the ground make sure it is high enough so that rodents don't nest under it. Also, make sure the ground absorbs moisture quick enough. To test this, dig a hole in the ground and pour a little water into it.
Building a suitable coop is not an easy task. However, if you have some good guidance then it will be much easier.There are lots of plans available on the internet. Try searching for one which can explain to you the building process step by step.
Public domain instructions for constructing a small chicken house are available from the Institute for Appropriate Technology.
Further guidelines on how to build a chicken coop are available at EasyBuildChickenCoop.com
For a comprehensive guide on DIY Chicken Coop Plans and a lot of additional Chicken Care information visit BuildingaChickenCoop.com
So you have a title and a "list" of objects. The list has a minimum and maximum number of objects to display. If there is "too many" objects there is a "more..." link.
Anonymity in John 19 We have mention of Christ, Mary, Mary wife of Clopas, Mary Magdalene, Pontius Pilate, Nicodemus, and Joseph of Arimathea in John 19. All of these people were, to a lesser or greater degree, supporters and / or followers of Christ. The name-dropping of these supporters is quite rampant in this chapter, but as for those opposed to Christ, we have only the vague titles of "the Jews" and "the chief priests." Caesar is mentioned briefly, but only in an invocation by the chief Jewish priests. Why all this anonymity? I'm not sure of the reason, but I would like to point out that the anonymity is an indicator of political motivations. If the author of John was Gentile and anti-Semitic, it would have been more effective for him/her to name specific Jews to polarize his audience, in addition to the already negative portrayal of the Jews and chief priests. The fact that he/she does not do this suggests one of two things: 1) he/she did not know the names of those priests and officials involved or 2) he / she was less actively anti-Semitic than he / she could have been, which is an encouraging thought.
After Jesus' arrest, He appeared in front of multiple Jewish leaders, who eventually passed him off to the Romans because according to Jewish law, they had "no right to execute anyone" (18:31). Pushing the decision on the Romans, the Jews were using the Romans as a means to execute Jesus, while avoiding the penalty of their own law. Even Pilate, a Roman leader, had trouble punishing an innocent man. He looked toward the people and encouraged them to free Jesus on the basis that he found "no basis for a charge against him" (18:38).
“This man is a wizard, shaman, warlock, and an insurrectionist. He is stirring up the people telling them not to pay taxes to Caesar, and claiming to be the Messiah, the King of the Jews.”
Pilate said he finds "no basis for a charge against" Jesus. As Pilate hears that Jesus is the Son of God, he is "afraid" (19:8), and tries to set him free (v. 12). Yet he shows his true alliance to the government as the Jews bring the Roman law into focus by basically calling Pilate disloyal. The fact of the matter remains, Caesar himself had warned Pilate twice that another rebellion and bloodletting in the Jewish community would result in his punishment (Smith). Pilate therefore had a very interesting decision to make. Does he execute a man that some consider to be a prophet? This in itself may cause a rebellion. Or does he defy the Jewish law and set him free? Caiphus and the Jewish community at large would surely be outraged. Either way, Pilate felt deep concern regarding this decision. This is probably the main reason he wished to debate with the chief priests on the nature of Jesus' punishment. Even at this point, Pilate is still uncomfortable with punishing an innocent man, especially the Son of God (see 19:35), and the text concludes Pilate's fight to free Jesus by saying that he "Finally handed Him over," thus showing that it wasn't a willing choice, but one made through time and pressure.
Women in Jesus' Family and their Presence at the Cross John 19: 25 states, "Meanwhile, standing near the cross of Jesus were his mother, and his mother's sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene." While women are present at the crucifixion in all the other Gospels, all have different lists of which women were present (except for Luke, whose Gospel doesn't contain a list at all). It is quite interesting that the narrator of John had Jesus' mother appear only at the beginning of His ministry and at the end. D. Moody Smith says that her appearance at the crucifixion is similar to "her presence in the upper room, with Jesus' brothers, after the Ascension" in Acts 1:14 (Smith 359). There are examples of Jesus' brothers that became disciples and missionaries after the risen Jesus appeared to them (1 Cor 15:7) and 1 Cor 9:5 are two such examples). Since the Gospel of John doesn't contain an infancy narrative, the readers of John don't see Mary "venerated" or become a disciple of Jesus like she is in both Matthew, Luke, and Acts. The narrator of John includes Mary's presence at the crucifixion while showing Jesus wanting to provide for his mother: in John 19: 26-27, Jesus presents "the disciple whom he loved" to his mother saying "here is your son" and presents his mother with the disciple saying "here is your mother." It is possible that narrator of John "knew a tradition that placed the mother of Jesus at the foot of the cross, and this fact occasioned his construction of this narrative in which she is linked most closely to the Beloved Disciple, the model disciple and witness who takes her to his home" (Smith 360).
This strange episode in 26-27 is also significant because it seems to show Jesus circumventing the traditional model of the brothers taking care of the mother after the oldest child's death, but instead Jesus is giving care of his mother over to one of his disciples. Many Catholics point to this passage as evidence that Mary may have in fact stayed a perpetual virgin and did not mother the other children of Joseph. Though it is possible to take such an interpretation of this passage, there are other passages in the New Testament that make it difficult. Others have tried to claim that the mother being referred to in the passage is actually Mary Magdalene and that Jesus is talking to his son whom he fathered with Mary. Obviously this view is a rather dramatic departure from the actual content of the chapter. John clearly identifies her as "Jesus' mother" and later that the beloved disciple took her "into his home" which clearly identifies the disciple as a man. People who hold this view though, would say that John deliberates misrepresents the situation because Jesus' life with Mary was somewhat secret and could not be openly expressed. Both of these views seem to be reading into the text things that are not there, but it is true that all translation of ancient text require some degree of interpretation and it is not possible to rule them out as possibilities.
In John 19 Jesus' last words seem to express triumph over defeat. In verse 11 Jesus states: "You would have no authority over Me, unless it had been given you from above; for this reason he who delivered Me up to you has the greater sin."(NAS) Jesus is pointing to Satan as the one who rules the earth and ruled over Pilate. It is important to note, however, that Pilate's actions are not without sin.. Pilate is believed to have come from Scotland, he ruled from 26 to 36 AD. The Jewish Encyclopedia says,
“His administration was characterized by corruption, violence, robberies, ill treatment of the people, and continuous executions without even the form of a trial…Pilate looted “funds from the sacred treasury in order to provide for the construction of an aqueduct”…when the citizens protested he sent among the crowds disguised soldiers carrying concealed daggers, who massacred a great number, not only of the rioters, but of casual spectators…Pilate's last deed of cruelty, and the one which brought about his downfall, was the massacre of a number of Samaritans who had assembled on Mount Gerizim to dig for some sacred vessels.” http://www.jewishencyclopedia.com/view.jsp?artid=312&letter=P&search=pilate
Jesus mentions that the one who handed him over to Pilate--Caiaphas, not Judas--has the greater sin. This implies that there is certainly a lesser sin, and it has been done by Pilate. This also predicts this overcoming just as the rest of previous chapters in John. However, what is interesting in John is that it has no mention of the veil of the temple being torn after Jesus gives up his spirit. This veil was used to "serve as a partition between the holy place and the holy of holies" mentioned in Exodus 26:33.It was used in Jerusalem and was the center of religious Jewish life where animal sacrifices and worship were performed in order to make anointment for people's sins. In all the synoptic gospels this account was mentioned as well as an earthquake in Matthew. This tearing of the veil was a historic catastrophe to the people at this time, so why did the author of John leave this significant event out? One belief is that the author left this piece of evidence out to emphasize the next verses. In John 19: 31-37 the Jews are said to break the bones of the other men who were crucified, but not Jesus' because He was already dead. (v.31-33) Then in verse 34, Jesus is pierced in the side with a spear and blood and water came out. Many believe the blood is a symbolism of sacrifice and the water is of purification. With that said, in verse 35 it states: "And he who has seen has borne witness, and his witness is true; and he knows that he is telling the truth, so that you also may believe." (NAS)This seems to be a reoccurring theme in John, for the author to educate and almost "evangelize" his readers. Then, we have again another theme in John that Jesus was not a sacrifice but a ransom and the ransom was paid to Satan. Jesus saved us from the land of Death by presenting himself alive as a sinless man. Satan was smugly confident that he could make Jesus sin by nailing him to a cross and blaming it on the Father making Yah into just another blood thirsty pagan God. This was the last temptation. Jesus could have called down 70,000 angels, but by refusing he went to the point of death without sinning and died a sinless man. Satan had the right to kill every sinner, but he did not have the right to kill a sinless man and when he did he fell under the curse of God. His throne was toppled.
Jesus' body bears witness to his identity and his fulfillment. When the soldiers find Jesus dead one of them stabs him to be sure he is dead, and out comes a sudden flow of blood and water (v. 34). There is some uncertainty as to where the water and blood came out. Did it flow from beneath His skin or from a deeper source? It is the fact of death, not the cause of death that the author was more concerned about. The significance of this flow is that Jesus is the Passover sacrifice. Furthermore, Jesus used both blood and water as significant symbols in his teaching, and this gives us guidance for their significance. Water symbolizes purification, the Spirit, and salvation. Blood symbolizes Jesus' death, which brings life to the world (6:53-56). From these relations it would seem that in this flow of blood and water "John saw a symbol of the fact that from the Crucified there proceed those living streams by which men are quickened and the church lives" (Dodd 1953:428)
Another important part in these last verses is the fact that none of the soldiers did break his bones coincidently just as scripture had earlier prescribed it to be: " Break none of his bones". Now, the fact being that they knew they were fulfilling scripture or not is a whole other matter, but is unlikely since it said that they only did not break his legs since he was already dead. Still, the fact that things like this happen and fulfill scripture is interesting.
Also, the fact that Nicodemus, the one who had originally come in the dark because he did not believe, came back at the end to show his respects to Jesus is a sign of coming full circle in John. It is also a character that is specific to this gospel as well.
These chapters are essential in the Gospel of John because of the death of Jesus which is the central theological theme of this Gospel has been misunderstood by the writers of the other new Testament books who mistake Jesus for the goat of the atonement or the bull. It is important to note that the death is expressed much different than the rest of the New Testament. Most noteworthy is the lack of elaborate account of Jesus' trial before Jewish authorities.
At Their Second Meeting, Pilate Angers the Rogues by saying He Plans to Release Yahshuah
When the rogues met the second time with Pilate, Pilate said, “First you brought this man accusing him of trying to overthrow your nation and Caesar. I examined him and found him to be harmless, and I told you it is no crime for a fool to claim to be a king. Then you took him to Antipas, who as near as I can tell, did not find any crimes in him either, but sent him back dressed as a king, to show that he too thinks he is a harmless fool. Under Roman law, being a fool is not a crime. Therefore, here is what I will do. I will have him scourged, and since it is the Passover feast, when I usually release a prisoner, I will release him.”
The rogues all cried out at once. “No, execute this Yahshuah and release to us the other Yahshuah, the son of Abba, (Barabbas). Barabbas was a robber and an Israeli extreme patriot who had been arrested for murder and causing a riot in Jerusalem.
Pilate said, “But this Yahshuah of the Galil has committed no crime.”
They cried, “Impale him. Impale him!” He has blasphemed against our nation claiming he is the son of Adonai.”
Introduction | Contributors | Textual Introduction
Bibliography A-M | Bibliography N-Z | Encoded Materials
←What dethe is worsse then this
Attributed to Sir Thomas Wyatt,[1] this poem was entered by H8 and is a translation of Serafino Aquilano’s strambotto “Sio son caduto interra inon son morto.”[2] The speaker has fallen from favour, but hopes that Fortune will smile again on him (in love or political matters). The poem also appears in Tottel's Miscellany under the title “That louer hopeth of a better chance” (item 72).[3]
↑ R.A. Rebholz, ed. Sir Thomas Wyatt: The Complete Poems. London: Penguin, 1978. 92.
↑ ibid., 366.
↑ Tottel's Miscellany: Songes and Sonettes. Richard Tottel, 1557; rpt. Exeter: Shearsman, 2010. 62.
LEge12, STC13860_09, L36529_02
1 I am] IH amehe is LEge12 HE is STC_13860_09 ded] dead L36529_02 dead, STC_13860_09 altho] although L36529_02 altho I had] all though I hadthat sometyme hath LEge12 altho I] that somtime STC_13860_09 falle] fall L36529_02 fall. LEge12 STC_13860_09 2 the] The STC_13860_09 sonne] sonn L36529_02 Sonne LEge12 STC_13860_09 retornis] returns L36529_02 retornesth/ LEge12 returnes, STC_13860_09 that was undre] that hid was vnder STC_13860_09 undre] hid vnder L36529_02 vnder LEge12 the clowde] clowde L36529_02 the clowde. LEge12 clowd. STC_13860_09 3 and] And STC_13860_09 when] whan L36529_02 fortune] Fortune STC_13860_09 spit] spitt LEge12 spit out] spytt owt L36529_02 out] oute LEge12 gall] gall// LEge12 gall, STC_13860_09 4 truste] trust L36529_02 LEge12 trust, STC_13860_09 luk] luck L36529_02 LEge12 STC_13860_09 to me shalbe] shalbe to me L36529_02 shalbe] shall be STC_13860_09 allowide] allowde L36529_02 allowede. LEge12 alowd. STC_13860_09 5 for] For, STC_13860_09 have] haue L36529_02 STC_13860_09 sene] seen L36529_02 STC_13860_09 ship] shipp L36529_02 LEge12 in to] into L36529_02 LEge12 to] STC_13860_09 haven] the haven L36529_02 hauen STC_13860_09 fall.] fall, STC_13860_09 6 after] After STC_13860_09 after the] when L36529_02 the] that STC_13860_09 both] boeth LEge12 maste] mast L36529_02 LEge12 maste, STC_13860_09 & shrowde] and shroude. STC_13860_09 shrowde] also shrowde L36529_02 shrowde LEge12 7 and eke the willowe that slowpith] The willowe eke, that stoupeth STC_13860_09 willowe] willow L36529_02 slowpith] stowpith L36529_02 stoppeth LEge12 wynde] winde L36529_02 winde, STC_13860_09 8 Dothe] Doth STC_13860_09 Dothe Rise againe &] doth ryse againe and L36529_02 doeth ryse again: and LEge12 Rise] rise STC_13860_09 againe &] againe, and STC_13860_09 greter] greater L36529_02 LEge12 STC_13860_09 wod] wood L36529_02 STC_13860_09 wode LEge12 doth] doeth LEge12 binde] bynde L36529_02 bynd. LEge12 binde. STC_13860_09
This page describes some of the possible methods for creating an island.
The easiest (and simplest) method is to import large quantities of rocks and soil into a shallow pool of water until the hill it forms breaks the surface.
Must be placed in shallow water (unless you have a REALLY huge amount of material)
Expansion requires enough material to fill a volume from your extended surface to the sea floor i.e. 10 m^2 of extra land in 10 m of water will require at least 100 meters cubed of material.
Erosion will be a problem without some way to hold the island together.
Get broken fishnets from trash and fill with empty plastic bottles, tie to discarded wooden pallets, or bamboo lattice work. To make it larger you tie additional segments together. Cover the pallets or latticework on soil, plant mangroves and other salt tolerant plants. The roots will help stabilize the structure and provide nourishment. Further information available at http://www.spiralislanders.com/ .
If built as a set of modules then expansion is almost unlimited
Poor anchors will result in island drifting
Storm damage may be more severe as center of gravity is much higher compared to a normal sea floor constructed island
This method utilizes electricity to cause minerals to be deposited onto a mesh of conductive wire. Over time it will form a substance similar in strength to concrete.
Construction is inexpensive. Cost is the price of the mesh foundation and the electricity required to deposit the seacrete.
Massive structures can be built.
Seacrete structures may become the basis of new reefs
Could take long periods of time depending on settings
Most expensive method compared to any listed above. This method was depicted in the movie Waterworld and in the book Snowcrash by Neal Stephenson as a place where people made a permanent residence on an abandoned large ship. Snowcrash in particular makes mention of a large inter-connected city of lashed boats connected to a decommissioned aircraft carrier (the U.S.S. Nimitz in this case). With little propulsion it was forced to go with the flow of the sea currents using its engines to only keep away from the territorial waters of countries.
Also the Mindstar series of books by Peter F Hamilton (Mindstar Rising, A Quantum Murder and The Nano Flower) also describe the use of ships and large floating concrete structures in the middle of the Atlantic as a manufacturing facility and spaceport, using large OTEC generators to provide cheap electricity from the thermal difference between deep sea water and surface water.
May be used in deep sea oceans without anchorage being strictly necessary.
Basic utilities and resources such as water purification, power generation, communications, and other basic requirements for survival are usually available and built-in to basic design of ship.
Survival of major storms is possible, although deep sea natural phenomena are still not totally understood.
May serve as "anchor" to a larger island complex using one or more of the above listed methods.
Gives an "instant start" to any island structure, including basic life support and shelter.
Dragging around a "flotilla" of other island structures (like many of those listed above besides this method) may prove difficult at best.
Sovereignty claims may be made on the original vessel. Most major ships are usually "flagged" to a specific nation-state, although there are "flags of convince" to many vessels, and it may be possible to find a "stateless" vessel.
Any abandoned or decommissioned ship may have significant structural damage, including saltwater corrosion, damaged components, or genuine antique facilities with no spare parts. This may require knowledge of a machine shop to maintain to build custom tools.
External link: Ships and boats for sale worldwide
Please refer to materials section for explanation. Pykrete is a very potent material, but as of yet it has not been used, by any nation. Only small scale use by individuals, no nation has built anything with it.
Pikecrete can serve as an extremely strong island material, it has the same strength as concrete but it floats. It can be used to hold a foundation until a permanent location is found. Alternately, if you would like to roam, just make a mold of a vessel and then pour it onto the mold with a flat top as a foundation. It could also potentially serve as a boxing fence to pour in dirt or sand to form an island.
Can be applied to the entire construction from sea-bed to above-sea level
Using it to construct an entire island can be expensive as a barge with dirt or other, terra-firma materials are needed and can be costly
Subsequent freezing or refreezing can be costly as well
Note: It may be possible to use these disadvantages as advantages. It should be possible to build a vessel from pykrete and use it to transport raw materials en-masse to the site and then use them. No costly ship to return and this would also be biodegradable.
Many islands have been formed as the result of undersea volcanic activity - the Hawaiian Islands are an example. A volcano is simply a point where the molten rock has squeezed through a fissure leading to the surface of the earth. Theoretically if an appropriate point can be found where a volcano can be stimulated by drilling or placement of explosive on the ocean floor, a subsequent eruption may form a cone of lava that reaches above the surface of the water.
Creates a sturdy and solid landform; weathering will eventually turn the igneous rock surface into fertile soil.
Immensely expensive and disruptive to the local ecology
No technology exists to stabilize a volcano once one has been formed
Location would be dictated by existing geological structures
All you need is water (estuaries/pool of water) and sand/loam (If built in estuaries a lot). First,Dump sand/loam into the water. Then,When it reaches the sea level carve it with your hands. Do it again and again until it stands on its own.
If with loam then its can be placed with plants
Kid-Friendly (Can be used in school , Can widen children's imagination)
Source:http://how-to.ask.com/make/how_to_make_an_island
This VBA code module works only in MS Word. It generates a pseudo random list of dictionary words, listing them in the immediate window of the VBA editor.
Copy the code listing into a standard VBA module in MS Word and save the file as a docm type. Set the user options in the top section and run the procedure to produce the list.
The variable Num sets the number of words as output, and the variable TypoLen should be set to the approximate length of the sought-after words.
There is no ready-made collection of English words called a Dictionary in MS Word; the term is used for sets of user-constructed word lists. To access a list of English words, an indirect method needs to be used. A random word is first generated equal in length to TypoLen. The spell checker then fails to recognize the word so generates suggestions, this time as a proper collection. Provided that there is at least one such suggestion in the spell check collection, a random choice is made from among them for the output list. The loop continues until the chosen number of words has been produced.
'Prints N randomly selected words
Dim TypoLen As Long, n As Long
Dim sMakeWord As String, nR As Long
Dim Num As Long, p As Long
TypoLen = 7 'trial text length
'make a misspelled word of length TypoLen
For n = 1 To TypoLen
'concatenate random charas
'get resulting spelling suggestions collection
If Sugg.Count >= 1 Then 'assuming there is at least one
Debug.Print Sugg(nR) 'OUTPUT
If 5.60kg of ice were initially at −3.5∘C, how much energy would be taken to warm it to melting point and then melt it?
Through community based outreach, consultative processes, local capacity building, creating an enabling environment and carrying out financial interventions, a development actor/ entity/ organization creates platforms and mechanisms of interaction among communities and their municipalities for sustainable development. The methodology of facilitating constructive dialogue and proactive participation contributes to increased community engagement and municipality effectiveness for local economic development based on common local interest and a wider community consensus.
Back to the ⇒Table of Content
Paras Romanttinen komedia.
... Rakkautta vain! (Love, actually) Ehdottomasti paras rakkauselokuva jonka olen ikinä nähnyt.
Ei saanut Hohdolta turhaan viittä tähteä.
Sekaisin Maristakaan ei ole paha.
Notting Hill.
Rushmore on aika hyvä, mutta tiedä nyt sitten onko se virallisesti romanttinen komedia.
Orla Quirke is a Ravenclaw who arrived at Hogwarts in Harry's fourth year.
Beginner warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Orla Quirke was Sorted into Ravenclaw House.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
This page is looking at the article "Exercise and cancer rehabilitation: a systematic review." Cancer treatment reviews 36.2 (2010) Spence, Rosalind R., Kristiann C. Heesch, and Wendy J. Brown.
In recent times cancer has begun to be looked at like other chronic diseases that require a long term approach and management. With that the need for evidence based interventions for cancer survivors in rehabilitation is increasing. There have been reviews that looked at the benefits of exercise as a part of the treatment process. Therefore this review looks at literature that is looking at the health effects of exercise during cancer rehabilitation that immediately follows the completion of treatment.
The Type of Research, Where it Originated and How it was Achieved
The review was done by first identifying relevant studies with systematic searches of both PubMed and Embase. Taking data on areas such as study design, recruitment strategy, participants, exercise intervention, adherence rates, and outcomes. While using a structured rating system to assess the Methodological rigor of each of the studies. All in all there were 10 studies looked at for the review.
It was found that breast cancer patients were the most common/predominant group looked at in the research. The interventions used by the studies were either aerobic based or resistance training based. With variations in areas such as exercise type, frequency, duration and intensity across the studies.
There were encouraging signs with improvements seen in physical functioning, strength, physical activity levels, quality of life, fatigue, immune function, and body composition across the 10 different studies. Although not all of these areas were recorded in each of the studies looked at. With at any point a few different studies looking at each on of the parameters mentioned.
The researches found that the Methodological limitations have really held back the research done in the area up to this point. Given it is still a rising field that still requires more research done in the area to be able to firm up the findings.
The implications from this review goes to show that there is a need for further research into the area of exercise as a part of the rehabilitation of cancer patients post treatment. With greater Methodological rigor to help with the quality to help draw stronger conclusions from the research.
Some things to take into consideration for future research in the area would be;
Develop a consistent timeframe to define the rehabilitation period
Evaluate changes in outcomes most relevant to the rehabilitation period
Identify appropriate measures of these outcomes for the target population, and standardise
And these are just a few taken directly from the "Future Directions" part of the Review
Spence, Rosalind R., Kristiann C. Heesch, and Wendy J. Brown. "Exercise and cancer rehabilitation: a systematic review." Cancer treatment reviews 36.2 (2010): 185-194.
Systems exhibit behaviors. These behaviors are the result of the application of parameters for the system’s elements - the rules. The subsequent behavior is interpreted based on the knowledge of the current system and the anticipated results of various inputs and processes.
When systems behave in the expected manner they are generally regarded as stable and thus, in order. The term “order” is not absolute, however. Generally, terms such as “stable”, “balanced” and “in order” are describing all known (considered) inputs and outputs of a system, and based on those factors alone, the system appears to be exhibiting the desired behaviors.
Order describes the history of a system or system segment. Order illustrates that a system has responded to a rule or rules that have made the system behave in a manner that is expected. Specific forms of order exist in many systems: homeostasis, autonomy and chaos. These forms of order describe the system’s inherent behavior and how fluctuations in a system can occur.
When systems respond to external forces by eventually returning to their starting points, they are considered homeostatic. An example of this form of order is in living systems. A population of animals supported by an island will, over time, maintain a certain number. An external disease, predator, or other force may diminish the number, but eventually the population will increase (all other forces being equal). If the population spikes, shortages in food will eventually lead to less animals. These natural laws work to create homeostatic order.
Systems do not require external forces to create fluctuations, though. Often, systems that maintain the same inputs and processes over time experience diminishing desired outputs due to entropy (see wikipedia:Entropy). Systems that produce ongoing fluctuations or change but follow an average output yield autonomy. Autonomy is best described as oscillation in a system over a period of time. Although this oscillation is not necessarily harmonic motion, it does tend to be around a general mean. A small change in the input parameters of homeostatic order can create autonomic order. If the system fluctuates further they can become unable to be predicted. Although this does not indicate system failure, the behavior suggests “deterministic unpredictability” – the concept that the same inputs generate different results. This unpredictability is often considered chaotic. The term “chaos” does not mean that the system is failing or will fail; rather it is a method of describing a system that can not be predicted will full certainty. Most often, systems are considered to be chaotic when the underlying rules are unknown, thus the results can not be known.
This, however, does not mean that unpredictable or complex output structured systems are chaotic. When there is no underlying rule that governs the unpredictable system it is considered to be non-deterministic. An example of a non-deterministic system is when a coin is flipped. Although the coin has only two sides, predicting which side will land face-up is quite difficult. There is no underlying rule that governs the coin flip, rather it is the interaction of several inputs: the force of the flip, the original position, friction of fingernails, wind speed and direction, height of the flip, rotational velocity, current gravity of the object on which the person is standing, etc. Unpredictability results from not considering, or being able to consider all of these factors. Over time we would normally assume that the number of coins flips would be about average for each side to land face-up, it is not a definite prediction. This system is not considered autonomic since it does not internally correct itself, nor does the low number of outputs available immediately make it a homeostatic environment.
Thus, chaotic systems can be considered to have a highly complex order, sometimes too complex to understand without the aid of analytical tools or complex mathematics. Most approaches to studying complex and chaotic systems involve understanding graphical plots of fractal nature, and bifurcation diagrams. These models illustrate very complex reoccurrences of outputs directly related to inputs. Hence, complex order occurs from chaotic systems.
Serendip. On Beyond Newton: From Simple Rules to Stability, Fluctuation, and Chaos
Cybernetics:Principles of Systems and cybernetics: an evolutionary perspective
Sterman, John. Business Dynamics: Systems Thinking and Modeling for a Complex World. 2000.
A comprehensive biography of William Trevor Watkins has not yet been prepared, however the following resources have been assembled in preparation:
Photos, QSL cards and other graphics - William Trevor Watkins - Nothing uploaded as yet, but QSLs for both 7AA and 7DX held
Incubator of Wikipedia Article on William Trevor Watkins - Coming real soon now!
Pending further progress on the foregoing, the following obituary in the Hobart Mercury for William Trevor Watkins touches briefly on how much Watty contributed to the development of wireless in Tasmania in the 1920s and how well-loved he was in the amateur radio community
↑ "OBITUARY". The Mercury (Tasmania, Australia) CXXXV, (19,986): p. 6. 28 August 1931. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article29922396. Retrieved 20 January 2021.
By the way...
Vietnamese does not give months, days of the week, or years special names. Rather, Vietnamese merely uses the number. For example, "July 31st, 2004" would be written:
Take hede be tyme leste ye be spyede
My harte I gave the not to do it paine
Hand 1, additional material by MD, annotation/mark possibly by MD
My pen take payn a lytyll space
Hand 2, annotation/mark by unknown hand (possibly MD)
I lowe lovyd and so doithe she
Hand 1, annotation and mark/annotation by unknown hands
Hand 2, annotations by MD and an unknown hand (possibly MS)
My ferefull hope from me ys fledd
Hand 2, annotations/marks by an unidentified hand
Bownd am I now & shall be styll
Hand 2, annotations/marks by an unidentified hand
Hand 2, annotations by MD, marks/annotations by an unidentified hand
May not thys hate from the estarte
Yff I had sufferd thys to yow vnware
Hand 2, annotation/mark by MD
The hart & servys to yow profferd
Hand 2, annotations/marks by an unidentified hand
Hand 2, annotation and mark by MD
What menythe thys when I lye alone
Hand 2, annotation and mark by MD, mark/annotation by an unidentified hand
Hand 2, annotation/mark by MD, mark/annotation by an unknown hand
My lute awake performe the last labor
Hand 2, annotation and mark by MD, and an insertion by an unknown hand (possibly Hand 1 or MD)
Alas poore man what hap have I
Hand 2, with annotation and mark by unidentified hand (possibly hands)
Hand 2, mark/annotation(s) by an unknown hand, annotation/mark by MD
That tyme that myrthe dyd stere my shypp
The restfull place Revyver of my smarte
Hand 2, annotation by MD, annotation by an unknown hand
All women have vertues noble & excelent
Hand 2, annotation/mark by an unidentified hand, annotation/mark by MD, flourishes in an unidentified hand (possibly)
What no perde ye may be sure
Hand 2, annotation/mark by MD, annotation/mark by an unidentified hand
Was neuer yet fyle half so well fylyd
Hand 2, annotation by an unidentified hand, annotation/mark by MD
As power & wytt wyll me Assyst
Hand 2, annotation/mark by an unknown hand
Sum tyme I syghe sumtyme I syng
Hand 2, mark by an unidentified hand
Hand 2, annotations/marks by an unidentified hand
In faythe methynkes yt ys no Ryght
Hand 2, annotation/mark by MD, annotations/marks by an unknown hand
The knot which fyrst my hart dyd strayn
Hand 3, annotation above and below the text in Hand 10.
A wel I hawe at other lost
Hand MS, signature by an unidentified hand
The knot which fyrst my hart did strayn
Hand 3, annotation by MD, annotations/marks by an unknown hand
Hand 3, annotation by MD, addition by an unknown hand
Now may I morne as one off late
Hand TH2, annotations in unidentified hands
What thyng shold cawse me to be sad
Who hath more cawse for to complayne
I may well say with Ioyfull harte
To yowr gentyll letters an answere to resyte
And now my pen alas wyth wyche I wryte
O very lord o loue o god alas
O ye louers that hygh vpon the whele
Hand 4, annotation/mark by an unidentified hand
Suche Wayn thowght / as wonted to myslede me /
So vnwarely was never no man cawght /
Hand 4, annotation/mark by an unidentified hand
The knott whych ffyrst my hart dyd strayn /
Hand 4, annotations/marks by an unknown hand and MD
The Wandryng gadlyng in the somer tyde /
The lyvely sparkes that yssue frome those Iies /
Tho I can not yowr cruelte constrayne /
Hand 4, annotation/mark by MD
Somtyme I fled the fyre that me brent /
What deth ys worse then thys /
I se the change ffrom that that was
Hand TH2, corrections by the same hand but different ink
This rotyd greff will not but growe
Hand TH2, mark by an unknown hand
Hand 911Hand 11, insertions by an unknown hand (possibly Hand 5)
So feble is the therd that dothe the burden staye
Hand 6, second 'finis' possibly by another, unidentified hand
Syns love ys suche that as ye wott
Lo how I seke & sew to haue
My loue ys lyke vnto theternall fyre
Syns so ye please to here me playn
Yf in the worlde there be more woo
Now must I lerne to lyue at rest
o happy dames that may enbrayes
Hand MF, addition by MD
My hope is yow for to obtaine,
Hand 7, initials and annotation by an unidentified hand (possibly two), annotation by MD (possibly)
Sum summ say I love sum say I moke
Myn vnhappy chaunce / to home shall I playn
Go burnynge siths vnto the frosen hert
Hand MD, insertions by an unknown hand
Hand 912Hand 12, annotation by an unidentified hand
If that I cowlde in versis close
Hand 1.1, annotation/mark by an unknown hand
I ame not she be prowess off syt
Myght I as well within my songe
The pleasaunt beayt of swet Delyte Dothe blynd
Hand 913Hand 13, Latin annotations by the same hand, annotation by MD
Hand MD, annotation by MS, mark by an unknown hand
Hand 8, addition by TH2, annotation/mark by MD
All yn the sight my lif doth hole depende
Hand 8, annotation/mark by MD, drawings and letters by an unknown hand
Beholde love thye powre how she despisith
Theye fle from me that some tyme ded me seke
Hand 8, annotation/mark by MD
Hand 8, annotation by MD (possibly not referring to this poem)
Nature that gave the bee so fete agrace
Resounde my voyse ye woods that herithe me plaine
Hand 8, annotation/mark by MD
The fruite of all the seruise that I serue
Hand 8, annotation/mark by MD
Hand 8, annotation by MD (possibly not referring to this poem)
Venus thorns that are so sharp and kene
Hand 8, annotation by MD (possibly not referring to this poem)
Hand 8, annotations/marks by MD, (possibly not referring to this poem)
Lyk as the swanne towardis her dethe
Hand 8, annotation by MD (possibly not referring to this poem), mark by MD
Yf with complaint the paine might be exprest
Cruell desire my master and my foo
She sat and sewid that hathe done me the wronge
Who hathe harde of such tyrannye before
Ye know my herte my ladye dere
Sins you will nedes that I shall sing
Hand 8, annotation by MD (possibly not referring to this poem)
Hand 8, mark by an unidentified hand (possibly scribal)
I am not ded altho I had a falle
Hand 8, annotation/mark by unidentified hand (possibly scribal)
Nowe fare well love and theye lawes forever
To Rayle or geste ye kno I vse yt not
My herte I gave the not to do yt paine
The Ioye so short alas the paine so nere
Eche man telles me I chaunge of my devise
Payne of all payne the most grevos paine
Gyve place all ye that dothe reioise
Dyvers dothe vse as I have hard & kno
Spight hathe no powre to make me sadde
Grudge on who liste this ys my lott
Greting to you bothe yn hertye wyse
Mye love toke skorne my servise to retaine
Hand 8, annotation by MD, mark by an unidentified hand
Hand 8, annotation by MD (possibly not referring to poem)
Dryven bye desire I dede this dede
I abide and abide and better abide
I finde no peace and all my warre is donne
To make an ende of all this strif
Wyll ye se / What Wonderous love hathe wrought
Deme as ye list vppon goode cause
I am as I am and so wil I be
My nowne Iohn poyntz . sins ye delight to know
My mothers maides . when they dyd sow or spin
Hand TH2, mark by an unknown hand
O marble herte and yet more harde perde
Alas what shuld yt be to yow preiudyce
And who that sayth that for to love ys vyce
(This was written using Blender v2.43)
Using the Fluid Simulator and Yafray to create realistic looking water
This tutorial will (hopefully) successfully walk you through creating semi-realistic looking water using the Fluid Simulator in Blender, then rendering in Yafray.
When you first open blender there will be nothing but a blank cube.
We are now going to enable the cube for Fluid Simulation. With the cube still selected in object mode, press F7 (object button) and then press the "Physics Button".
You should see a tab labeled "Fluid Simulation" press Enable and then Domain. After pressing Domain several buttons will pop up, these will be used later.
Now middle click and drag in the 3d view to see the cylinder inside your beautiful box. (yay!) What's going to happen is the cylinder is going to be turned into liquid, and the big box is where the liquid can flow about. (it is the "invisible wall")
Move the cylinder to a corner of the cube, you can give it some height if you like. Now with the cylinder still selected press Shift-D to duplicate it. Move the new cylinder to the opposite corner.
On both of the cylinders go the fluid sim. tab and press Enable then Fluid. This tells blender that these cylinders are fluid.
IMPORTANT!!! After this, you MUST subsurf both of the cylinders, but don't apply it. Instead, when the cylinder shows a preview of the subsurf, click the "X" in the top-right of the subsurf preferences.
(noobie note: I don't know what the above step is for, adding the subsurf then click "X" removed it.)
Switch to Object Mode then Right click on the big box (the domain) and press the big BAKE button. A little box will pop up and just click on the top option.
Now you should see a blob looking thing appear in the cylinders, and it will fall to the ground and splash around. Your computer is "baking" the liquid. (Calculating where it should go)
As you see now, the liquid isn't very realistic looking. If you do a render, you will see. You would also see that the cylinders are appearing in the image. This is not wanted, so with both of the cylinders selected, press M then click on one of the little boxes that isn't already pressed. This moves them to another layer.
Now we are going to move the camera to a different position for a better view. Move the viewport around until it's where you think will give you the best view and press SHIFT-NUM0 to make the camera match your current view.
Drag the newly placed camera back a bit, so the when NUMPAD0 is pressed most of the scene is in view. You should now have something that looks similar to this:
Now we are going to rebake the water at a higher resolution for a more detailed result. Select the goo looking mesh, (both blobs should turn purple if either is clicked) and go the fluid simulation tab again. Turn the resolution up to about 100 (or whatever you want) this rebakes the fluid for more detail. If you turn preview mesh up too, you will see it more detailed before rendering. Baking now may take a while.
After its done baking, you are ready to change the material of the water to something better looking.
Change the background white by pressing F5 then click on the box that has world buttons appear when the cursor is hovered over it.
You will see HoR, HoG, and HoB. Turn these all the way over to one. The preview should turn white.
Now go to the material buttons (red sphere) and make everything look like the following: (I think I circled all the changed options, but maybe not.)
After this is completed look through the frames by pressing right arrow, find one that looks cool then press render and you may get something like this:
Hopefully you got something like that :)
If the render does not look smooth, apply a subsurf.
This YouTube tutorial on fluids might also help: Link and this Realistic Water Texture
Video tutorial showing fluid simulator objects in Blender 2.49b: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wX5w1Kmsv_A
User Question: When I click Bake there is no box that shows up, I cannot get it to bake my fluids at all, all it does is add a
Answer: Be sure to set the directory that you would like the files to be saved to, the option to do so is in the area where you changed the box to a domain very bottom there is a folder. Chose a directory and all will be good.
User question: When i click the bake button it says there can't be more than one domain object. I did everything you said to do but i don't understand why it says that.
Answer: The only solution I have found around that is to go to the top header and where it says "SR:2-Model" change that to actor and select the different objects until you find something that doesn't highlight. Delete those. I found that occasionally a domain "disappears" and when you make a new one causes this problem. I have also found it better to set up the domain last around your scene to prevent this annoyance as well.
Note: The domain object does NOT disappear - the Domain object IS the object on your screen which represents the fluid itself.
Conductors & Insulators - Electronic Circuits - AND & OR Gates - Circuit/Systems Diagram - Hydraulics - Hydraulics & Pneumatics - Technological Products - Preservation-1 - Identifying Materials - Properties of Materials - Preservation-2 - Electroplating - Conditioning-Strengthening/Waterproofing-1 - Conditioning-Strengthening\Waterproofing-2 - Shaping - Forming - Forces - Types of Structures - Mechanisms Worksheet
Reinforcing structures.
Appropriate use of Technology to present information
I cannot take credit for this. This was originally posted by BLKMGK and Wadzii on the aem ems forums (hope you guys dont mind this being regurgitated!). This is a repost of their explanation of this simple, yet effective method:
You need to get the car running and driving first before you can do this.
If you look at a Full Boost Comp'd mapping you will see that all fuel columns are the same vertically. The way that fuel is taken care of is there's a Fuel Modifier table called Boost Fuel Correction. This is setup usually so that say 100KPA is a "zero point" - no change (the zero point can be anywhere you choose). But 200KPA effects a +100% change in fuel and 0KPA is a -100% change in fueling. Points in between are linear. Making sense so far?
Now you can Boost Comp, a mapping that's done cell by cell, just by applying those percentage changes to the existing map. The effect is greater granularity in fueling although you MAY need to modify something called the MicroSec/Bit. MicroSec/Bit defines the number "1" in the RAW view of the fuel map - more on that later. Okay, so you now have a mapping that is Boost Comp'd but numbers up and down are not the same - should drive as fine as the original map. You can stop at this point or go further. IF you stop here, as I did once upon a time, and tune multiple load rows for the same A/F you'll get a surprise as they all become the same number.
To get the vac area done for a "full" Boost Comp map continue copying those same numbers down vertically - the car will now run pig rich. Go into a table called the Throttle Inj Modifier. Adjust the table so that at idle you have a decent A/F and then go for a drive. At cruising speed\throttle adjust the table so that you get a decent cruise A/F and then calculate between the two points to get a linear table. Play with this some but in the end you'll have a table that removes more fuel as the throttle is closed (mine is -26%) and less at say 50% throttle (mine is -3%) in a linear table. Ta Da - "full" Boost Comp.
Another way to do those vac areas is to do a little math. Say you want 12:1 in one row but the vertical numbers give you 11.5:1 - calculate the percentage of difference between the two and either apply that to the Boost Fuel Correction table for that load range or to the fuel table load area. Do this for every area you want something other than whatever your WOT fueling was. In this case there's NO Throttle Mod table filled in. So, why do it this way? Because some small turbos will spool at part throttle - say on hills and things. With Full Boost Comp it's also possible to get into a situation where say the car is lugging on a hill and more throttle just makes it go pig rich but load doesn't go up quickly. I'm actually about to convert to this method to try it out.
First this setting can only be found if you look at the Options, Full List. It's called MicroSec/Bit.
Okay, so what's MicroSec/Bit? Pull up the Fuel Map, Right Click, View RAW. The numbers in those cells can be between 0-255. Look at peak torque at peak load - are you close to 255? Now look at idle - are you close to 0? You can actually have 255 in one of those cells and NOT have full fueling! You can also have very small numbers in the idle area and find that making changes as small as one increment will swing A/F by a LARGE amount. Neither of these situations is one that you want. Let's say the idle range has a number of 10 in it - moving to 11 you swing fueling by 1/10th - that's a lot! My idle numbers are over 100 - now THAT is granularity. MicroSec/Bit is what defines the value of "1" in the fuel table. You CAN modify it!
So, before you go playing with that number realize it will have BIG impacts on your fueling. Here's how you change it "safely". Open the fuel map, right click, View Duty Cycle. Highlight the ENTIRE map, right click, Copy to clipboard. Now modify MicroSec/Bit up or down and then Paste the fuel mapping back while still looking at Duty Cycle. Right Click, View RAW. Any numbers over 255? IF yes then MicroSec/Bit is too small, switch back to Duty Cycle view, make it bigger, Paste the previously saved table, and check the RAW view again until the numbers are big but not huge. Note that if you use Boost Comp as explained above you'll also gain granularity. Done CORRECTLY fueling shouldn't change much and the car shouldn't need too much retuning when you now upload this mapping to the ECU.
When you change MicroSec/Bit you will also have to modify the crank time table ( the main table in the startup template). I devised this forumula to correctly change that table. We will assume the crank time table is all set to one number.
CT1=original number in the crank time table
MSB1= original MicroSec/Bit
CT2= new value for the crank time table
Changing MicroSec/Bit will also get you a lot more resolution for cranking so you can dial that in better.
The key to getting boost comp tuned right is to make sure AFR at WOT is flat first. Don't worry with fine tuning the throttle inj correction table until WOT is right.
A formula I use to set up the boost comt table is as follows. (I use PSIg, you can modify this for KPA. But I never use kpa )
Enter those 2 points and use the calculate function to create a straight line between those 2 points.
More tips for tuning the throttle inj correction table.
Set that table up on the highway cruising in a high gear. If the car doesn't idle or drive well at low RPMs, modify the fuel map (making sure to change the whole column). It's okay for the fuel map to be leaner in the lower RPMs. Usually you will make more power that way any how.
GENERATING AND MANIPULATING DATA: ROTATOR CUFF STAMINA
To work through the assessment criteria as a class and learn about how to generate data and process them using the t-test.
By the end of this activity, students will be able to design a fair, controlled and reliable investigation and use the t-test to assess the significance of the differences between datasets.
Write a brief introduction to your activity
This IB Biology Practical Investigation was uploaded by:
Most historians agree that the Italian scholar Petrarch (Francesco Petrarca, 1304-1374) was the first of the Renaissance humanists and that Petrarch, himself, was one of the first Europeans to critique the era after the fall of the Roman Empire as an era of darkness. According to Petrarch, and other humanist successors, this darkness could be overcome by the careful study and imitation of classical authors. Humanist scholars "went back to the sources" and scrutinized them quite closely, encouraging the mastery of Latin as a way to gain wider and more accurate insight into the minds of the greats of classical thinkers. Early humanists like Petrarch, Coluccio Salutati and Poggio Bracciolini had access to and collected classical manuscripts as they were members of the clergy, lawyers or chancellors of cities, and thus had access to book copying workshops. There were important centers of humanism at Florence, Naples, Rome, Venice, Mantua, Ferrara, and Urbino.
Getting it into the game »
All the walls should be textured and done by now, and be in their correct positions, if not, go back to the last chapter and repeat it. So, if you're done, lets make the ceiling.
The first way to do this would be to make a completely new brush, texture one side of it and caulk the other ones, but, I guess you have enough of caulking and texturing by now, so let's do it in another way. So start by selecting the floor (SHIFT+CLICK) and duplicate it (SPACE), now, switch to the side view and drag the duplicate of the floor all the way to the top of the room where the ceiling should be. But now, the texture is still on the wrong side, right, so we need to flip the whole brush around to make that the texture is on the correct side, to do so, click the button on the toolbar. This should flip the brush around the Z axis which means that the brush is now upside-down and the textured surface is the one facing the room. Just make sure the brush is in the correct position as brushes sometimes move a bit during a flip or rotate, when you are sure the brush is in the correct position, we can go on to making the light.
To make the light, right click somewhere on the 2D grid on and select light in the context menu that appears, a dialog should pop up asking you about the light intensity i.e. how strong the light is, in most cases the default is a good value, but if you want to make dimmed or super bright areas, you can adjust it here, so, for now, simply click the OK button and a small, diamond-shaped thing should appear, and you have created your first entity. An entity is something that interacts with the game or the compiler or both. Our light in this case interacts with both, anyway, an entity can have many different properties, for example the light entity can flicker, be colored etc.
You could try to make a flickering light by selecting the light (if it isn't already selected) and opening the entity window (N). You should now see the entity window which contains an explanation of the current entity, a list of properties assigned to it and some buttons and fields which you can read about here. To make the light flicker, just type style into the textfield labeled Key and 1 into the field labeled value, then press enter and you will see that a new property has been assigned to the light entity called style, which has the value 1. So make sure the light is inside the room and not in the walls or outside it. If it's inside the room and looks alright, the light is done.
Now the light is done, so let's go on to the spawn point. A spawn point is an entity as well, just like the light entity, which means that it's something that interacts with the game. A spawn point simply tells the game where you will spawn when you join the game. To place one, right click the 2D grid again, but this time hover over the sub menu called info and select info_player_start or info_player_deathmatch. A red or pink box should appear where you clicked, move that box somewhere in the room, it must not be inside a wall or floor, it should be on the floor.
The size of the box is also important as it is the same size as a player in the game. You may also have noticed the arrow on the side of the box. This arrow indicates the direction which the player will face upon entering the game. This can be changed by selecting the entity and clicking the button.
Be ye angry and sin not: let not the sun go down on your wrath: Neither give place to the devil. Ephesians 4. 26 - 27.
The crux of the matter --as far as anger is concerned is that it's an emotion that can be provoked in us by the actions of others or our response to situations around us. Emotions are a part of our soul (mind, will & emotions) and created by Almighty God. However, if not properly managed, anger can be very destructive. Anger is an emotional sign that tells us that something is wrong. It's okay to be angry, it's what we do with that anger that can get us into trouble! That is why Paul acknowledges that we will get angry on occasion. We must deal with the cause of the anger. Allowing it to linger could give room for the devil to manipulate us.
Front Page: Radiation Oncology | RTOG Trials | Randomized Trials
Decision to proliferate and enter cell cycle highly regulated process
Binding of extrinsic growth factors typically necessary
mTOR integrates input from growth factor receptors, cellular nutrient and energy levels, and redox status to stimulate new protein synthesis in preparation for cell cycle entry via S6K to regulate translational machinery and eIF4E to regulate cyclin D
Regulation of cell cycle through complex of cyclins with cyclin-dependent kinases (cdk)
Progression is unidirectional from G1 -> S -> G2 -> M
Prevent or delay progression through cell cycle when critical events have not been completed
4 main checkpoints (please see DNA damage response for information about effect of RT on the checkpoints
G1 checkpoint is integrated at p53. Please see DNA damage response for more information
If there is a G1 arrest, p53 increases levels of p21, which inhibits cyclinD-cdk4/6 complex
If there is no arrest (low p53 levels), the cyclinD-CDK4/6 complex becomes active, and phosphorylates Rb protein
Rb protein is normally associated with E2F, but upon phosphorylation dissociates from it
E2F is a DNA transcription factor, which triggers entry into S phase
Cyclin D and E2F levels are promoted by myc and by eIF4E
S phase checkpoint serves to insure that there is no replication through DNA damage that could result in double strand DNA break
S phase checkpoint is triggered by DNA damage -> ATM -> Chk2 -> CDC25A -> CDK2 phosphorylation
If there is an S phase arrest, CDC45 fails to load onto DNA, and DNA replication halts
If there is no arrest, CDK2 remains dephosphorylated and CDC45 begins DNA replication
CyclinD/CDK2 also inhibits p27kip1, which promotes expression of Cyclin A and progression through S-phase
CyclinB/CDK1 kinase is called the Maturation-Promoting Factor (MPF), and promotes entry into mitosis by phosphorylating multiple proteins. The complex also includes Cyclin A and CDC 20
G2/M checkpoint is triggered by DNA damage -> ATR -> Chk1 -> CDC25C -> CDK1 phosphorylation
At the same time, CDK1 must be dephosphorylated to trigger mitosis
Golgi matrix, which leads to fragmentation
Dephosphorylation of Rb protein, prior to start G1 of the next cycle
There are two distinct G2/M checkpoints (PMID 11809797)
A very rapid, dose-independent, ATM-dependent arrest of cells that were in G2 at the time of irradiation (and consequent failure to enter mitosis), which can be assayed using flow cytometry against phosphorylated histone H3 (a marker of mitosis)
A slower, dose-dependent, ATM-independent accumulation in G2 of cells which were in earlier stages of the cell cycle at the time of irradiation, which can be assayed using standard propidium iodide flow cytometry
Please see the cell cycle checkpoints for further information
These block Rb, which leads to dissociation of E2F and cell entry into S phase
Block cyclins to prevent entry into next cell cycle phase. They act primarily in G1 to stop progression into S
p21WAF1/CIP1 blocks cyclin D
p27KIP1 blocks cyclin D & E
p57KIP2 blocks cyclin E & A, and to lesser degree mitotic cyclin B
p16Ink4a, p15Ink4b, p18Ink4c, p19Ink4d
Structurally related, they destabilize association of cyclin D with CDK4/6
p21 and p16 increase in senescence and contribute to G1 arrest
Multiple actions to promote entry of cells into S phase
Cyclin D transcription -> Rb phosphorylation -> E2F activity
Activation of ras triggers two major pathways related to entry into cell cycle:
Ras -> Raf -> MEK -> MAPK -> transcription of cyclin D and block of p27 inhibitor
Ras -> PI3K -> PKB -> stabilization of cyclin D and block of p21 inhibitor
By this point home console graphics became more capable, and were able to more easily represent characters and believable locations with colorful 2D graphics. Music began to take a bigger role in home game consoles.While consoles were still limited in their audio capabilities, many classic game soundtracks have their origins in this generation.
By this point, most home consoles contained most of their computer hardware in the console itself rather than in the cartridges, allowing for cheaper cartridges to be made. This freed up resources to either make cheaper cartridges, or to place enhancements in cartridges such as specialty chips that enhanced features such as audio. This generation also saw increased adoption of save game functionality, which was typically achieved with battery backed RAM located on the cartridge. Still, many games required gamers to save their progress by writing down a password which indicated their progress, and then re entering it when loading the game, which was a tedious endeavor.
A few companies attempted to leverage the audio visual capabilities of Video Home System (VHS) analog cassettes to improve the gaming experience, though no VHS consoles saw huge levels of success. By the fourth generation, companies pursing the same strategy would elect for the digital focused CD-ROM drives instead, though it would take till the fifth generation to see successful game consoles capable of full motion video.
Wikipedia has related information at Third generation of video game consoles
The Action Max system with headphones, light gun, and red light.
The Action Max was developed by Worlds of Wonder, a company founded by former Atari Employees who helped Nintendo distribute the NES in America.[1]
Worlds of Wonder had a limited launch of the Action Max in 1987.[2] The system was a poor seller due to needing a VCR.[3], and unable to bail out the company from it's massive debts. Worlds of Wonder went bankrupt in 1988, with many employees going on to join Nintendo.[4][1]
The Action Max ran lightgun games off of VHS tapes.[5] A small seven segment display on the unit displayed the player score.[2][6]
The Action Max CPU is an an 8-bit Hitachi HD401010 clocked at 4MHz.[2][4][7] The Action Max has 32 bytes of RAM.[4]
Five games were released for the Action Max.[4]
Blue Thunder - Based on the film
Headphone and light gun jacks are located on the console front.
Switches, dials, and the segmented display are on the top of the unit. Note that the top is not smooth, but slightly textured.
Rear IO ports are on the back of the console.
The Action Max gun controller.
This red light was used to indicate successful hits.
Action Max Stereo Headphones.
Much of the console internals are empty.
Action Max has a main board and two daughterboards, as well as an internal speaker.
A ring is used to hold the speaker.
The motherboard bottom.
The motherboard top, with a two character 7 segment display.
Note the custom WOW chip, as well as the large number of discrete components compared to integrated circuits.
Wikipedia has related information at Action Max
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Action Max
Parts of this page are based on materials from: Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia.
↑ a b "System Overview: System Overview - Worlds of Wonder Action Max - Beyond the Mind's Eye - Thoughts & Insights from Marriott_Guy". https://www.rfgeneration.com/blogs/marriott_guy/System-Overview-Worlds-of-Wonder-Action-Max-569.php. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
↑ a b c "ActionMax - Game Console - Computing History". https://www.computinghistory.org.uk/det/24754/ActionMax/. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
↑ "BIG TROUBLE IN TOYLAND : Debt-Ridden Worlds of Wonder, the Maker of Teddy Ruxpin, Is Looking for Way Out of Woods". 14 December 1987. https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-1987-12-14-fi-19281-story.html. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
↑ a b c d "Home Page". https://www.videogameconsolelibrary.com/pg80-actionmax.htm#page=reviews. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
↑ "Only In The 80's Would They Put Video Games On A VHS Tape" (in en-us). Kotaku. https://kotaku.com/only-in-the-80s-would-they-put-video-games-on-a-vhs-tap-5786220. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
↑ "Action Max" (in en). https://thegamesdb.net/platform.php?id=4976.
↑ "About - WoW Action Max - Games Database". https://www.gamesdatabase.org/system-wow_action_max. Retrieved 4 November 2020.
An Amstrad GX4000 with Controller.
Bring the whole arcade into your home.
—Tagline for the Amstrad GX4000, The Game Show[1]
The Amstrad GX4000 was launched in 1990 as a console version of the Amstrad CPC series of 8-bit computers that cost $150 at launch.[2] The console was to have a 15 million British pound marketing campaign.[3]
The console did not sell well, and retailers tried to unload stock by selling the GX4000 as a price as low as $30.[2] The console is often said to have sold about about 15,000 units,[4] though some sources give sales figures for the console as high as 150,000 units.[5][6] The Amstrad GX4000 was discontinued in 1991.[4]
The included Amstrad GX4000 power supply is very temperamental and is notorious for destroying the GX4000 when used.
The Amstrad GX4000 used a 8-Bit Z80A CPU clocked at 4MHz.[7] The system was capable of about 0.58 million instructions per second (MIPS).[8]
The Amstrad GX4000 uses a General Instrument AY-3-8912 chip for audio.[11] Though General Instrument was once a major supplier of chips in the first consoles, the GX4000 is a notable late use of such chips, owing to it's 1980's computer heritage.
The GX4000 Power Supply is among the most notorious official power supplies in any console,[12] as it's use typically results in the console being destroyed due to it's exceptionally poor quality.
The beige controller features a design similar to that of the Nintendo Entertainment System, consisting of a direction shield, a red "A" button, and a red "B" button. The classic Amstrad logo is printed in color is on the center of the controller. Notably however, there is no start or select button.
Though the controller is mostly square, corners have been softened, especially on the bottom right and left, likely for ergonomic reasons.
The controller cable connects at the back of the controller. A ridged protective protrusion encloses the cable near the base, preventing extreme flexing of the cable at the mounting point.
The bottom of the controller contains holes to access 5 Philips head screws.
The casing bottom.
The casing top.
The controller interior.
Wikipedia has related information at Amstrad GX4000
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Amstrad GX4000
↑ "Amstrad GX4000 - The Amstrad CPC Games Console" (in en). https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k6OH4388uFM.
↑ a b c Rignall, Jaz (3 January 2016). "Consoles You've Never Heard of: Amstrad GX4000" (in en). USgamer. https://www.usgamer.net/articles/gx4000. Retrieved 25 October 2020.
↑ (in en) Screen Digest. Screen Digest Limited. https://www.google.com/books/edition/Screen_Digest/QUrvAAAAMAAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1&bsq=Amstrad+GX4000&dq=Amstrad+GX4000&printsec=frontcover. Retrieved 3 December 2020.
↑ a b McFerran, Damien (March 9th, 2017). "6 games console flops that gave gaming a bad name" (in en). TechRadar. https://www.techradar.com/news/6-games-console-flops-that-gave-gaming-a-bad-name. Retrieved 25 October 2020.
↑ Civera, David (January 11, 2013). "21 Consoles And Handhelds That Crashed And Burned" (in en). Tom's Hardware. https://www.tomshardware.com/picturestory/611-console-handheld-fail.html.
↑ "Info on the Amstrad GX-4000". RetroRGB. 4 November 2019. https://www.retrorgb.com/info-on-the-amstrad-gx-4000.html.
↑ "Amstrad GX4000 - Game Console - Computing History". https://www.computinghistory.org.uk/det/39590/Amstrad-GX4000/. Retrieved 25 October 2020.
↑ Murnane, Kevin. "From Pong To Playstation: The 40-Year Evolution Of Gaming Processing Power" (in en). https://www.forbes.com/sites/kevinmurnane/2016/04/25/charting-forty-years-of-power-ratings-for-video-game-consoles-and-arcade-machines/#63dfddee2472. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
↑ "Home Page". https://www.videogameconsolelibrary.com/pg90-gx4000.htm#page=specs. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
↑ "Amstrad GX4000 [BINARIUM"]. https://binarium.de/amstrad_gx4000. Retrieved 20 November 2020.
↑ "OLD-COMPUTERS.COM : The Museum". https://www.old-computers.com/museum/computer.asp?st=2&c=1082. Retrieved 20 November 2020.
↑ "Feature: Your Beloved Games Console Is Slowly But Surely Dying". Nintendo Life. 25 December 2019. https://www.nintendolife.com/news/2019/12/feature_your_beloved_games_console_is_slowly_but_surely_dying.
An Atari 7800 ProSystem with controller.
The Atari 7800 was announced in 1984, mothballed despite being ready for launch for two years following losses Atari sustained during the crash of 1983, and launched in 1986.[1] The system cost $140 on launch.[2]
The Atari 7800 was discontinued in 1992.[3][4] 3.77 million Atari 7800 consoles were sold, with its peak sales year being 1988.[5]
The system is well regarded for it's clean yet techie design aesthetic.[6]
The Atari 7800 was meant to be followed by the Atari Panther, though was instead followed by the Atari Jaguar.
The Atari 7800 is backwards compatible with the Atari 2600.[3]
The Atari 7800 uses an 8-bit Atari "Sally" (MOS 6502c) CPU clocked at 1.79 megahertz.[7]
The Atari 7800 used a "Tia Maria" chip for graphics.[8] This chip allowed for the 7800 to display nearly 100 sprites.[9]
The 7800 controller with thumbstick installed.
The 7800 controller without the thumbstick.
The controller had two buttons, 1 and 2.
The cable enters the controller on the top right side.
The back of the controller, with triangular textured area.
Controller connector.
Atari 7800 motherboard.
A PAL motherboard featuring the official RGB mod for the French market used standoffs to securely separate it from the motherboard.
A PAL motherboard featuring the official RGB mod for the French market.
Wikipedia has related information at Atari 7800
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Atari 7800
↑ Rignall, Jaz (30 April 2016). "Steve Golson Interview: The Story of Ms. Pac-Man, the Atari 7800, and the Hyperdrive" (in en). USgamer. https://www.usgamer.net/articles/steve-golson-interview-the-story-of-ms-pac-man-the-atari-7800-and-the-hyperdrive/page-2. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
↑ "Atari 7800 - Game Console - Computing History". http://www.computinghistory.org.uk/det/15473/Atari-7800/. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
↑ a b "CVGA Disassembled Third Generation (1983-1990) · Online Exhibits". https://apps.lib.umich.edu/online-exhibits/exhibits/show/cvga-disassembled/gamegen3. Retrieved 18 November 2020.
↑ "Atari 7800 ProSystem (1987 - 1992)". 9 January 2014. https://obsoletemedia.org/atari-7800-prosystem/. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
↑ "Atari 7800 Sales Figures (1986 - 1990)" (in en). www.gamasutra.com. https://www.gamasutra.com/blogs/MattMatthews/20090526/84050/Atari_7800_Sales_Figures_1986__1990.php. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
↑ "Lance Barr Interview". nintendojo ~ a site to see. 13 February 2006. https://web.archive.org/web/20060213124455/http://www.nintendojo.com/interviews/view_item.php?1130801472.
↑ a b "OLD-COMPUTERS.COM : The Museum". https://www.old-computers.com/museum/computer.asp?st=1&c=898. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
↑ "An Atari Graphics Chip, Ready For You To Build". Hackaday. 10 November 2019. https://hackaday.com/2019/11/10/an-atari-graphics-chip-ready-for-you-to-build/. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
↑ "The Atari 7800 Pro System - The Atari Museum". http://www.atarimuseum.com/videogames/consoles/7800/7800menu/. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
The Atari XEGS with keyboard and XG-1 lightgun attached.
The Atari XE Game System at the Helsinki Computer and Game Console Museum.
At launch the XEGS often sold out, attracting users who were intimidated by the 8-bit computes the XEGS was based on.[3] All 100,000 units manufactured at the time had sold during the US Christmas 1987 season.[4]However Nintendo and Sega were already vastly ahead in the market and were spending millions on marketing, while Atari only spent $300,000 on marketing the XEGS.[5]
The Atari XEGS is essentially an Atari 65XE computer.[2][1]
The XEGS uses the 8 bit Atari 6502c CPU, a custom version of the MOS Technology 6502 clocked at 1.79 MHz.[6]
See the List of Atari XEGS games on Wikipedia.
XEGS Keyboard. A prominent help button sits on top of the unit.
Compatible Atari XE joystick.
Wikipedia has related information at Atari XEGS
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Atari XEGS
↑ a b "The Atari XEGS (XE Game System)". http://www.atarimuseum.com/computers/8BITS/XE/XEGS/xegs.html. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
↑ a b "Retro Gaming : ​The Atari XE Game System" (in en). http://www.retrogamingmuseum.com/the-collection/atari-xegs. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
↑ "First Look Inside the XE Game System". www.atarimagazines.com. https://www.atarimagazines.com/v7n4/firstlook.html. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
↑ "Antic Magazine Volume 7 Number 01 (Sixth Anniversary)". May 1988. https://archive.org/stream/1988-05-anticmagazine#page/n40/mode/1up. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
↑ Schilling, Melissa A. (2003). "Technological Leapfrogging: LESSONS FROM THE U.S. VIDEO GAME CONSOLE INDUSTRY". California Management Review 45 (3): 6–32. doi:10.2307/41166174. https://web.b.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?vid=1&sid=b2d46f68-463b-411b-b85b-bee9d1eb106f%40sessionmgr101. Retrieved 19 November 2020.
↑ a b "Home Page". https://www.videogameconsolelibrary.com/pg80-xegs.htm#page=specs. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
The BBC Bridge companion with the Bridge Builder cartridge inserted.
Andrew Kambites was a programmer for the BBC Bridge Companion, and also programed the otherwise unrelated handheld Saitek Pro Bridge Professor.[1]
The BBC Bridge player uses a Z80A CPU and a TMS9129NL graphics chip.[2]
The system could output 8 colors and had spartan audio capabilities.[4]
The system has 16 kilobytes of RAM.[2]
Various bridge themed cartridges were released for the system.
The Bridge companion motherboard.
A traditional game of Bridge in progress. The popular game inspired the BBC Bridge Companion.
Wikipedia has related information at BBC Bridge Companion
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: BBC Bridge Companion
Parts of this page are based on materials from: Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia.
↑ "Andrew Kambites English Bridge Union". https://www.ebu.co.uk/biographies/andrew-kambites. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
↑ a b c "Home Page". https://www.videogameconsolelibrary.com/pg80-bbc_bridge_companion.htm#page=specs. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
↑ "BBC Bridge Companion by BBC Enterprises Ltd – The Video Game Kraken". http://videogamekraken.com/bbc-bridge-companion-by-bbc-enterprises-ltd.
↑ "BBC Bridge Companion (1985 - mid 1980s)". 13 May 2018. https://obsoletemedia.org/bbc-bridge-companion/. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
↑ a b c d e f g h i "BBC Bridge Companion" (in en). 4 July 2020. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BBC_Bridge_Companion. Retrieved 4 November 2020.
The Commodore 64 Games System with controller.
A Commodore 64GS powered on.
About 20,000 Commodore 64 Games Systems were sold.[3]
The Commodore 64 Games System is essentially a regular Commodore 64, but with reduced ports and no keyboard built in.[3] The system still used an 8-bit MOS 6510 CPU clocked at 0.985MHz, 64 kilobytes of RAM, and SID sound chip.[3]
The Commodore 64 Games System is technically compatible with every Commodore 64 game, though since most Commodore 64 games required the use of a keyboard which could not be added to the Games System, most Commodore 64 games could not actually be played on the GS.[3]
The Commodore 64 GS.
The controller of the Commodore 64 GS.
The C64 Games System viewed from the top.
A Turbo Chameleon 64 being used on a Commodore 64 GS. By the time this cartridge was released, the Commodore 64 GS was long off the market.
Wikipedia has related information at Commodore 64 Games System
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Commodore 64 Games System
↑ "Consoles that won’t die: The Commodore 64". VentureBeat. 19 April 2013. https://venturebeat.com/2013/04/19/consoles-that-wont-die-commodore-64/. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
↑ "Commodore 64 Games System (1990 - 1991)". 19 April 2020. https://obsoletemedia.org/commodore-64gs/. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
↑ a b c d e "Commodore 64 Games System". https://www.retrogamingconsoles.com/consoles/commodore-64-games-system/. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
Videos for the Connor Videosmarts were made up to 1990.[2]
The Conner Videosmarts uses standard VHS Tapes.[1]
The Connor Videosmarts uses four C type batteries.[2]
A number of educational video cassettes were made for the Conner Videosmarts.[2]
↑ a b Stevens, Mary. "VIDEOSMARTS CASSETTES TAP INTO KIDS` MINDS". https://www.chicagotribune.com/news/ct-xpm-1986-10-03-8603140499-story.html. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ a b c "Dr. Christopher J. Hopkins". https://www.christopherjhopkins.com/videosmarts-the-interactive-video-learning-system.html. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
The Control Vision planned to leverage standard VHS tapes to create interactive games.
The NEMO / Control-Vision is an unreleased console funded by Hasbro.[1][2]
The console began development in 1985.[2][1] Development was difficult because the idea of an interactive movie had not yet been perfected, and the film makers in charge of recording were unable to leverage tricks they could normally use to improve results in linear movies.[2] An early prototype of the console was simply a modified ColecoVision.[2] Hasbro refused to launch the product due to it's high price of $299 vastly overshooting Hasbro's goal of under $100, and pulled funding in 1988 two months before launch.[1][2]
Developer Tom Zito later purchased the rights to Control-Vision titles, then reworked them into games for other platforms like the Sega CD.[1][2] The release of the game Night Trap in particular is noted for being a factor in the creation of video game ratings boards.[3]
The Control-Vision was able to offer choice on linear VHS tapes by exploiting television interlacing.
Using linear VHS tapes played through an external VCR as it's media, the Control-Vision exploited interlacing of video to have two simultaneous videos being run, with only one of the videos being shown.[3] More streams could be added for more choices, at the cost of reducing video frame rate.[3]
Night Trap - Later released on other platforms, causing major controversy.
Parts of this page are based on materials from: Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia.
↑ a b c d e "Only In The 80's Would They Put Video Games On A VHS Tape" (in en-us). https://kotaku.com/only-in-the-80s-would-they-put-video-games-on-a-vhs-tap-5786220. Retrieved 8 November 2020.
↑ a b c d e f "Finding NEMO: The Story Behind Hasbro’s ‘Nintendo-Killer’ - IGN" (in en). https://www.ign.com/articles/2013/12/25/finding-nemo-the-story-behind-hasbros-nintendo-killer. Retrieved 8 November 2020.
↑ a b c Parish, Jeremy (31 October 2018). "The story of NEMO, Hasbro’s console that never was" (in en). https://www.polygon.com/features/2018/10/31/17997106/nemo-hasbro-vhs-console-mark-turmell. Retrieved 8 November 2020.
The small city of Bryan, Ohio - the provenance of the Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000.
Ohio Art is a company based in Bryan, a small community in northwest Ohio.[1] The company had begun to experiement with an electronic Etch-A-Sketch when they released the original Etch-A-Skech animator, a device capable of 12 frames of animations, in 1986.[2][3] The system retailed for $139.99 and cartridges cost $29.99.[4] It's important to note that the original Etch-A-Sketch animator was essentially a digital version of the analog Etch-A-Sketch,[5] and as purely an art and animation device it did not play games.
Development of the Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000 began in 1987.[6] In 1988 Ohio Art received a patent for the original Etch-A-Sketch Animator.[7][8]
—Marketing slogan, Philadelphia Inquirer[9]
The Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000 launched in 1988.[6][10]
The Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000 was not a success and production ended by 1990.[11]
A TV plug and play system, the Etch-A-Sketch ETO was launched in 2004 for $35.[12]
The Etch-A-Sketch Animator was advertised as having "196K memory", as well as having "30 functions".[4]
22 images could be stored in the Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000, and 99 animation frames using those pictures could be saved.[13] A memory cartridge was available to expand storage.[14][15]
The Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000 has a black and white LCD with a resolution of 60 pixels by 40 pixels.[16]
The Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000 has a touch pad and stylus.[14][17]
The Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000 uses six AA batteries.[14]
The system was protected by a styrofoam shell while in its box.[18][14]
The system was made in the USA with some parts sourced from Hong Kong and Japan.[19]
The original Etch-A-Sketch Animator has a 4-bit Sanyo LC6523 microcontroller, two kilobytes of RAM, and an LCD screen with a resolution of 40 by 30 pixels.[20]
Three games were released for the Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000.[21]
Putt-Nuts - 18 hole Mini golf game.[21][6] Has a two player mode.[22]
Flyby - Flight simulator.[23][6] Todd Marshall worked on this game.[24]
Overdrive - Racing game.[6]
A racing game cartridge for the Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000.
The original 1986 Etch-A-Sketch Animator.
Wikipedia has related information at Etch A Sketch
↑ "History of Ohio Art Company Metal Lithography Ohio Art Company". https://ohioart.com/history/. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Disappointing Gifts, 1986 Edition: The Etch A Sketch Animator". https://techcrunch.com/2009/12/11/disappointing-gifts-the-etch-a-sketch-animator/. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Significant dates in Etch A Sketch history" (in en). https://www.toledoblade.com/local/2010/06/13/Significant-dates-in-Etch-A-Sketch-history/stories/201006130003. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ a b Magazines, Hearst (in en). Popular Mechanics. Hearst Magazines. p. 27. https://books.google.com/books?id=z-QDAAAAMBAJ&pg=PA28&source=gbs_toc_r&cad=2#v=onepage&q&f=false. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ Belkin, Lisa (25 December 1986). "FOR ONCE, A CALM TOY SEASON (Published 1986)". The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/1986/12/25/business/for-once-a-calm-toy-season.html.
↑ a b c d e "Etch A Sketch invented by Arthur Granjean in year 1959". https://targetstudy.com/knowledge/invention/151/etch-a-sketch.html. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Etch A Sketch!". https://hlflegal.com/Blogs/Pages/2020_05_22.html. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Electronic sketching device" (in en). 13 December 1985. https://patents.google.com/patent/US4764763. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "ELECTRIFYING GIFTS & GIZMOS: FOR KIDS, TOYS THAT TEACH" (in en). search.proquest.com (Philadelphia Inquirer). November 24, 1988. https://search.proquest.com/docview/1833082226?pq-origsite=summon. Retrieved 19 November 2020.
↑ "A Revival for Makers of Classic Toys (Published 1988)". The New York Times. 9 March 1988. https://www.nytimes.com/1988/03/09/business/a-revival-for-makers-of-classic-toys.html.
↑ "History of The Ohio Art Company – FundingUniverse". http://www.fundinguniverse.com/company-histories/the-ohio-art-company-history/. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ Zipern, Andrew (12 August 2004). "NEWS WATCH: TOYS; A Classic Pad Goes Digital, But Is It Shakable? (Published 2004)". https://www.nytimes.com/2004/08/12/technology/news-watch-toys-a-classic-pad-goes-digital-but-is-it-shakable.html. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Etch-A-Sketch Animator ilovethe80s.com". http://ilovethe80s.com/toy/unisex-toys/etch-a-sketch-animator-80s-toys. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ a b c d "A closer look at the Ohio Art Etch A Sketch Animator 2000 Family Entertainment System" (in en). https://imgur.com/gallery/9QYJ1. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "BACK TO THE FUTURE: The Gadget Show closes at - ProQuest" (in en). https://search.proquest.com/docview/1672330937?pq-origsite=summon. Retrieved 19 November 2020.
↑ "English: My Etch A Sketch Animator 2000". 21 January 2013. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Etch_A_Sketch_Animator_2000.JPG. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Unique Etch A Sketch Animator 2000 Game System Review Gamester 81". https://gamester81.com/unique-etch-a-sketch-animator-2000-game-system-review/. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "The Etch A Sketch Animator 2000 Ohio Art Rare-with Box And Original Pen #1936265130" (in en). https://www.worthpoint.com/worthopedia/etch-sketch-animator-2000-ohio-art-1936265130. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000 and "Overdrive" - Unboxing, Gameplay, & Review". https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cHz-FJf2OyU. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Etch-A-Sketch Animator: Demo and Repair". https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ult_pn1G5zs. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ a b "Review and full play through of Putt-Nuts for Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000". https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NtiyVESSrLk. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Unique Etch A Sketch Animator 2000 Game System Review Gamester 81". https://gamester81.com/unique-etch-a-sketch-animator-2000-game-system-review/. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "video game: Flyby - The Ohio Art Company" (in en). https://artsandculture.google.com/asset/video-game-flyby-the-ohio-art-company/vAHQ8rG6R8e76A?hl=en. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Atari Compendium". http://www.ataricompendium.com/archives/interviews/todd_marshall/interview_todd_marshall.html. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
The Halcyon uses Laserdisks an early optical medium which can be seen on the left. A DVD for comparison can be seen on the right.
RDI was a small company based out of Carlsbad, California.[1] The company was headed by Rick Dyer, and had prior experience in the industry, most notably producing Don Bluth's milestone laserdisk arcade game Dragon's Lair.[2][3]
The Halcyon was set to release in 1985 with the voice controlled console costing either $2,500,[4] or $2,100[5] and the non-voice enabled console costing $1,800.[5] Though the produced consoles were never sold at retail, up to ten Halcyon consoles exist from kits sent to investors.[4][6] RDI projected their own first year sales to be 25,000 units sold,[7] though it is impossible to say if this would have actually occurred had the console actually launched.
The Halcyon used an 8-bit Z80B CPU clocked at 6 megahertz and had 64 kilobytes of RAM.[8]
The Halcyon could interpret 200 words.[1]
Wikipedia has related information at Halcyon (console)
Video Game Kraken - Halcyon by RDI video systems page.
Handheld Museum - RDI Halcyon page.
Parts of this page are based on materials from: Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia.
↑ a b Corporation, Bonnier (in en). Popular Science. Bonnier Corporation. https://books.google.com/books?id=iwAAAAAAMBAJ&pg=PA108&dq=RDI+Halcyon&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjw_IS68LHtAhVuh-AKHZm0BG0Q6AEwCXoECAcQAg#v=onepage&q=RDI%20Halcyon&f=false. Retrieved 3 December 2020.
↑ "10 Crazy Things You Never Knew About Dragon's Lair". TheGamer. 2020-04-20. https://www.thegamer.com/crazy-things-never-knew-dragons-lair/.
↑ "RDI Video Systems" (in en). 2021-04-08. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RDI_Video_Systems.
↑ a b Rochefort, Simone de (1 March 2018). "More than a machine: The history of Halcyon" (in en). Polygon. https://www.polygon.com/videos/2018/3/1/17063348/halcyon-rare-console-history. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
↑ a b "After the prototype PlayStation: six more obscure games consoles" (in en). the Guardian. 7 July 2015. https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/07/prototype-nintendo-playstation-obscure-games-consoles-snes-cd.
↑ "MGs Game Take: The True Holy Grails of Video Game Hardware - "The Majors" - Beyond the Mind's Eye - Thoughts & Insights from Marriott_Guy". https://www.rfgeneration.com/blogs/marriott_guy/The-True-Holy-Grails-of-Video-Game-Hardware-The-Majors-1412.php. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
↑ (in en) Television Digest, with Consumer Electronics. Television Digest, Incorporated. https://www.google.com/books/edition/Television_Digest_with_Consumer_Electron/kWk9AQAAIAAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1&bsq=RDI+Halcyon&dq=RDI+Halcyon&printsec=frontcover. Retrieved 3 December 2020.
↑ "Home Page". https://www.videogameconsolelibrary.com/pg80-rdi.htm#page=specs. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
↑ a b "Halcyon (console)" (in en). 6 March 2021. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Halcyon_(console).
The console would slightly outlive the Soviet Union, which dissolved on the 24th of December in 1991.[4] Development for the IM-26 stopped after 1992.[1]
The IM-26 is powered by two LR43 batteries.[3]
The IM-26 with cartridge inserted.
The IM-26 with cartridge detached.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Elektronika IM-26
Video Game Kraken - IM-26 page.
Game Medium - IM-26 page.
↑ a b c d "IM-26 by Electronika – The Video Game Kraken". http://videogamekraken.com/im-26-by-electronika. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Electronika IM-26". https://gamemedium.com/console/im-26. Retrieved 20 December 2020.
↑ a b c "Pocket Legion - Elektronika IM-26 - YouTube". https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t0vGx0TSkG4&t=67s. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "The Fall of the Soviet Union | CES at UNC". https://europe.unc.edu/iron-curtain/history/the-fall-of-the-soviet-union/.
A Playtime Light Games console.
The Grandstand Light Games system was a projector based console released in 1988.[1] It is one of the few consoles that elected to go with a projector based design, alongside its contemporary the Proscreen, and the much later 2020 console the BL6.
The Grandstand Light Games uses a projector to display graphics.[1] The projector shines through a LCD in the cartridge, which produces the graphics.[2]
The top of the console includes a cartridge slot.[3]
There are at least nine cartridges for the Light Games console.[4]
Wikipedia has related information at Grandstand (game manufacturer)
Handheld Museum - Playtime Light Games page.
Game Medium - Light Games page.
Video Game Console Library - Gallery of Educational Systems including Light Games.
↑ a b "Gallery of Educational Systems". https://www.videogameconsolelibrary.com/art-educational_systems.htm. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Grandstand Light Games". http://20thcenturyvideogames.com/index.php?action=vermodelos&pass=&submenu=&tipo=5&sistema=Grandstand-LightGames&verletra=G. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Playtime Light Games". https://www.handheldmuseum.com/Misc/PlaytimeLightGames.htm. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Grandstand Light Games". https://gamemedium.com/console/light-games. Retrieved 20 December 2020.
On October 30th, 1986 LJN filed a patent with the US Patent office concerning technology used in the device.[1]
The LJN Video Art was launched in 1987.[2] The system cost around $100.[3] A rap jingle was used to promote the device.[4]
The LJN Video Art was discontinued in either 1988[5] or 1989.[6] The discontinuation was spurred in part due to difficulties faced by LJN during that time.[5]
Unlike most platforms, the LJN Video Art is perhaps better know for events following discontinuation. In 1990 patents concerning the Video Art were transferred from LJN to an individual.[1] From 1993 to 1995 a court battle ensued over LJN Video Art patents and the popular SNES software Mario Paint, though this usage was ultimately ruled as non-infringing.[7][8]
Much later, the system gained notoriety online for it's poor design.[9]
There does not appear to be any reliable information on technology used by the LJN Video Art.
The system supported drawing with 16 colors.[4][10]
New York Magazine suggested saving art drawn on the LJN Video Art by recording to videotape.[3]
About 8 cartridges were released for the LJN Video Art, with Marvel, Disney, and Loony Toons licensed releases.[2]
A Trip To The Zoo[6]
On the Move[6]
Video Art Activity Cartridge[6]
Wikipedia has related information at LJN Video Art
Parts of this page are based on materials from: Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia.
↑ a b "Video art electronic system" (in en). 1986-10-30. https://patents.google.com/patent/US4782335A/en?oq=4%2c782%2c335.
↑ a b "The LJN Video Art System Review - Gamester81". https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D4NsRAZy1MM. Retrieved 31 October 2020.
↑ a b LLC, New York Media (in en). New York Magazine. New York Media, LLC. https://books.google.com/books?id=c-QCAAAAMBAJ&pg=PA22&dq=LJN+Video+Art&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwiw4MTX7rHtAhUwmuAKHTefANo4ChDoATAAegQIABAC#v=onepage&q=LJN%20Video%20Art&f=false. Retrieved 3 December 2020.
↑ a b "1987 LJN Video Art commercial". https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=neURIc_A3js.
↑ a b "Video Art by LJN Toys Ltd – The Video Game Kraken". http://videogamekraken.com/video-art-by-ljn-toys-ltd. Retrieved 7 November 2020.
↑ a b c d e f g h i j "LJN Video Art" (in en). 2021-04-07. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LJN_Video_Art.
↑ "Edward L. Gussin, Plaintiff-appellant, v. Nintendo of America, Inc., Defendant-appellee, 62 F.3d 1433 (Fed. Cir. 1995)" (in en). https://law.justia.com/cases/federal/appellate-courts/F3/62/1433/535009/.
↑ "The Story of Mario Paint | Gaming Historian" (in en). https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=54bXwb5DfRI.
↑ Schellenberg, Kathryn (in en). Computers in Society. Dushkin. ISBN 978-0-87967-727-5. https://www.google.com/books/edition/Computers_in_Society/f8MlRheep0UC?hl=en&gbpv=1&bsq=LJN+Video+Art&dq=LJN+Video+Art&printsec=frontcover. Retrieved 3 December 2020.
The Sega Master System console and controller.
A demo kiosk for the Sega Master System on display at a historical exhibit at E3 2011, surrounded by boxes for console accessories.
The Sega Master System was preceded by the SG-1000.
On October 20th, 1985, the Sega Master System launched in Japan.[1]
Discontinued in Europe in 1996, the Master System sold over 20 million units.[2] The Master System saw it's greatest success in Brazil, where it enjoyed a status similar to the NES in North America and remained popular and in production even in the year 2016.[3] Elsewhere the Master System was a more modest success, where it sold 1 million units in Japan, 2 million units in North America, and 6.8 million units in Europe.[1]
The Sega Master System was followed by the Sega Mega Drive and Sega Genesis.
The Sega Master System is powered by an 8-bit Zilog Z80 processor clocked at 3.58 megahertz, with an identical second source NEC NEC D780C-1 CPU being used alternitively sometimes.[4][5]
The Master System has eight kilobytes of RAM and 16 kilobytes of low latency VRAM.[4]
The Master System uses a modified TMS9918 processor, called the Video Display Processor, with added features over the base design by adding mode 4.[4][6] The VDP also includes a Texas Instruments SN76489 for sound.[4][7][8]
SegaScope 3D Glasses.
Games boxes for the Sega Master System games were made of durable plastic.[10] Box art for these games was relatively uniform.[11][12]
Read more about Alex Kidd in Miracle World on Wikipedia.
Phantasy Star is noted as an early example of a game with a female protagonist.[13]
Read more about Phantasy Star on Wikipedia.
The redesigned Master System Mk II front.
The redesigned Master System Mk II rear.
Wikipedia has related information at Master System
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Sega Master System
Parts of this page are based on materials from: Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia.
↑ a b "Sega Consoles: What You Need to Know About the Retro Game Giant". CBR. 5 May 2019. https://www.cbr.com/sega-consoles-retro-game-history/. Retrieved 24 October 2020.
↑ "Sega Master System (1986 - 1996)". 26 February 2014. https://obsoletemedia.org/sega-master-system/. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
↑ "Brazil's Obsession With the Sega Genesis Won't Slow Down" (in en-us). Gizmodo. https://gizmodo.com/brazils-obsession-with-the-sega-genesis-wont-slow-down-1788698522. Retrieved 24 October 2020.
↑ a b c d "Sega Master System Architecture A Practical Analysis" (in en). 12 October 2020. https://www.copetti.org/projects/consoles/master-system/. Retrieved 7 November 2020.
↑ "Prototype Master System: M404 - Development - SMS Power!". https://www.smspower.org/Development/PrototypeMasterSystemM404. Retrieved 7 November 2020.
↑ Langston, J. B. (11 October 2020). "jblang/SN76489". https://github.com/jblang/SN76489. Retrieved 7 November 2020.
↑ "SEGA MASTER SYSTEM TECHNICAL INFORMATION". https://www.smspower.org/uploads/Development/richard.txt. Retrieved 7 November 2020.
↑ "That Time Nintendo and Sega Introduced 3D Gaming, In 1987" (in en-us). https://kotaku.com/that-time-nintendo-and-sega-introduced-3d-gaming-in-19-1795623602. Retrieved 24 October 2020.
↑ "Collecting Sega Master System Games Is A Huge Pain In The Ass" (in en-us). Kotaku. https://kotaku.com/collecting-sega-master-system-games-is-a-huge-pain-in-t-1795243730. Retrieved 24 October 2020.
↑ "Happy 25th Birthday, Sega Master System!" (in en-us). https://kotaku.com/happy-25th-birthday-sega-master-system-5670383. Retrieved 24 October 2020.
↑ "The Laziest Box Art in Video Game History" (in en-us). Kotaku. https://kotaku.com/the-laziest-box-art-in-video-game-history-5886757. Retrieved 27 October 2020.
↑ "A Brief History of Women in Gaming: The 1980s - The Strong National Museum of Play" (in en). https://artsandculture.google.com/exhibit/a-brief-history-of-women-in-gaming-the-1980s-the-strong/CwKCGJf3HpdoIg?hl=en.
The Nichibutsu My Vision console.
The My Vision was launched briefly in 1983 only in Japan for 39,800 yen, and also known as the KH-1000.[1]
The My Vision is supported by the open source z88DK development kit.[2]
The My Vision used an 8-bit Z80 CPU clocked at 3.57 megahertz.[3]
The My Vision used a Texas Instrument TMS9928 chip with 16 kilobytes of video RAM for graphics[3], and had composite and RF output.[1] The console had a 16 color palette.[4]
A General Instrument AY-3-8910 was used for generating audio.[3] Sound was produced by a speaker inside the console.[5]
The console had a cartridge slot, as well as a port for expanding Majohng games.[1] Two consoles could be linked for multiplayer over a link cable.[5]
The system used per game overlays for it's integrated keys to explain the controls.[6]
Six games were released for the My Vision, with each game costing 4,500 yen.[5]
Wikipedia has related information at My Vision and Nihon Bussan
Game Medium - My Vision page.
Video Game Kraken - My Vision page.
Parts of this page are based on materials from: Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia.
↑ a b c "Nichibutsu My Vision". https://www.videogameconsolelibrary.com/pg80-my_vision.htm#page=reviews. Retrieved 23 October 2020.
↑ "z88dk/z88dk" (in en). https://github.com/z88dk/z88dk/blob/6b16b85caf82b1252ab2bc4d18c531fd09421c81/changelog.txt. Retrieved 23 October 2020.
↑ a b c d "z88dk/z88dk" (in en). https://github.com/z88dk/z88dk/wiki/Platform---Nichibutsu-My-Vision. Retrieved 23 October 2020.
↑ Manikas, Pantelis. "Nichibutsu My Vision" (in en). https://gamemedium.com/console/my-vision. Retrieved 20 December 2020.
↑ a b c "My Vision by Nichibutsu – The Video Game Kraken". http://videogamekraken.com/my-vision-by-nichibutsu. Retrieved 23 October 2020.
↑ "My Vision - Ultimate Console Database". https://ultimateconsoledatabase.com/classics/my_vision.htm. Retrieved 23 October 2020.
↑ a b c d e f "My Vision" (in en). 29 June 2020. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/My_Vision. Retrieved 23 October 2020.
The iconic Japanese Famicom and controllers.
The iconic North American NES and controller.
The Nintendo Advanced Video System, a prototype for the NES
The Nintendo Entertainment System was proceeded by the Color TV-Game Series.
Following a decision by Nintendo President Hiroshi Yamauchi to reinvest profits from the Color TV Game and Game and watch systems into further game products, the Famicom was released in Japan on July 15, 1983 at a cost of 14,800 yen.[1] Plans for the system originally called for a 16-bit CPU but a more economical 8-bit CPU was chosen.[2][3] Nintendo was able to further optimize the cost of the CPU by placing a very large bulk order with Ricoh.[4]
In 1983 Nintendo approached Atari about releasing their console in the USA, and agreed on it until a misunderstanding at CES 1983 sunk the deal.[5]
Designer Lance Barr was charged with refining the design of the NES to make it appealing to American audiences while keeping costs low,[6] ultimately creating an iconic design.
Nintendo would attempt to make an user avatar system for the console, but this would ultimately be scrapped and shelved until the release of Miis on the Nintendo Wii decades later.[7][8]
The first NES sold in the United States on display at the Nintendo World Store
Now you're Playing with Power!
In 1983 Nintendo released the Family Computer (Famicom) in Japan.[10] They later released the similar Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) to international markets. The NES saw its American release in 1985, and European release in 1986.[11][10] In the United States the NES was a dominant player in the market,[12] and was so popular that it began to alter how people discussed gaming, with many people using the word "Nintendo" to describe video games in general for a time, even those not made by Nintendo.[13][14] Fearing the word "Nintendo" might become a generic trademark, Nintendo promoted the word "Game Console" instead.[15]
Internationally the NES received significant challenges from the Sega Master System particularly in South America and Europe.[12]
1983 also saw the launch of the Sharp Game Television (Also known as the Sharp Nintendo Television or as the Sharp C1 NES TV) which integrated a Famicom with a 19 inch TV costing 145,000 yen or a 14 inch TV that cost 93,000 yen.[16]
To avoid negative associations with video game consoles following the video game crash of 1983, Nintendo used careful wording in its marketing to brand the NES as an "Entertainment" system, rather then a game console.[12] To avoid a repeat of the poor quality games that caused the crash, Nintendo required licensed developers to limit game releases to two a year, as well as to censor overt depictions of gore and other sensitive subjects.[12] These policies were a cause of friction between some developers and Nintendo.[17]
Later on in the system life, an Atari subsidiary would break the lockout protection used to enforce Nintendo's licensing, though this resulted in legal challenges.[18] This inspired other companies to make their own bypass, though methods that used a charge pump or negative voltage spike could damage the system.[18][19]
The NES had a limited United States of America launch in New York City and Los Angeles October 15th, 1985, with a nationwide release a year later.[20][21] These first markets were picked to see if the NES could survive in difficult markets, and retailers were persuaded to carry the system by only needing to pay for systems sold, with unsold stock being fully returnable.[21] The 1989 television show Captain N was used to promote Nintendo products.[22]
The Famicom Tiler was jointly launched by Nintendo and Sharp in 1989 at a cost of 43,000 yen, and added video editing features and S-Video to improve screen captures for media outlets.[23]
Some regions such as India saw officially licensed versions of the NES released under other names.[24][25][26]
Other clones were unlicensed, like the Dendy console, made in Taiwan for the newly accessible Russian market where it was legal due to a lack of Intellectual property laws at the time.[27] This later led to an official partnership between Dendy and Nintendo.[27][28]
In 1993 the NES 101, a cost reduced version of the NES was released, removing the composite output and lowering the price to $49.99.[29]
The Nintendo Entertainment System and the Famicom was succeeded by the Super Nintendo Entertainment System and the Super Famicom.
Nintendo stopped producing new NES units in 1995, new Famicom systems in 2003, and stopped repairing Famicom systems in 2007.[12]
The NES CPU was a reduced feature version of the MOS 6502, a Rioch 2A03.[32] The CPU was clocked at 1.789773Mhz in NTSC regions, and at 1.773447Mhz in PAL regions.[32]
The NES had a Rioch 2C02 Picture Processing Unit for graphical output, supporting up to 52 colors and 64 sprites.[32] The PPU of the NES was quite capable for it's time, and gave the system a graphical edge over much of it's competition.
Chiptune music designed to be similar to typical music on the NES.
Problems listening to this file? See media help.
The Nintendo Entertainment System had 2 pulse wave channels, 1 triangle wave channel, 1 noise channel, and 1 DPCM channel.[32] Games for the Famicom often featured much better audio then on the Nintendo Entertainment System, as the Famicom has additional pins for cartridge based sound chips.[34] A number of different additional audio chips were used in Famicom cartridges.[35]
Donkey Kong Jr.
Mario Bros.
A recreation of the arcade game.
Read more about Mario Bros. on Wikipedia.
First version of Mario as an adventure platformer.
From here on, designers Shigeru Miyamoto, Takashi Tezuka, developer Toshihiko Nakago and musician Koji Kondo would typically work together as a unit on future projects, to great success.[36]
Read more about Super Mario Bros 1 on Wikipedia.
An early Mario puzzle-platformer.
Read more about Wrecking Crew on Wikipedia.
Wikipedia has related information at The Legend of Zelda (video game)
The iconic 'The Legend of Zelda NES cartridge.
The Legend of Zelda is one of the most iconic Famicom and NES games, mainly because of the expansive multimedia franchise it started. Sigeru Miyamoto was inspired to make this game by his personal experience of exploring the countryside and caves as a child.[37]
Metroid is noted for being an early game with a female protagonist.[38]
Read more about Metroid on Wikipedia.
Zelda II: The Adventure of Link - 2D scroller adaptation of the Zelda format.
Mega Man - Known as Rockman in Japanese markets.
Punch-Out!!
Hironobu Sakaguchi was a developer on the original Final Fantasy, seen here at Tokyo Game Show 2006.
The first game in the popular RPG series.
The game was named Final Fantasy because the developers thought it would be their final game before Square went bankrupt.[39]
Many elements of Final Fantasy appear to be inspired by Advanced Dungeons and Dragons.[40][41]
Read more about Final Fantasy I on Wikipedia.
Early popular stealth game.
The NES port of Metal Gear was made without the involvement of Hideo Kojima, who disliked the NES version.[42]
Read more about Metal Gear on Wikipedia.
Super Mario Bros. 2 - Remake of the Japanese game Doki Doki Panic.
Super Mario Bros. 3
Mega Man 2 - The best selling Mega Man game.[43]
Famicom Detective Club The Missing Heir Volumes 1 and 2
Yoshio Sakamoto, a key figure in the development a number of games for the platform, including Metroid, Kid Icarus, Balloon Fight, and the Famicom Detective Club.
An Japan only primeval visual novel that notably strayed from adventure game conventions to make a more story focused game.[44]
Character Ayumi Tachibana would later be considered as a Super Smash Brothers Melee character.[45][46]
Read more about the Famicom Detective Club series on Wikipedia.
A Boy and His Blob: Trouble on Blobolonia
The first game in the Mother series.
A documentary was produced about an unreleased prototype english cartridge.[47]
Read more about Mother on Wikipedia.
Popular game from the Soviet Union, licensed to Nintendo for home consoles in the west.
In 2021 a new technique for the NES version of the game was discovered where pressure was applied to the back of the controller to allow for faster inputs, allowing world records to be broken.[48][49]
Read more about Tetris on Wikipedia.
Famicom Detective Club The Girl Who Stands Behind Volumes 1 and 2
The second entry in the then Japan exclusive Famicom Detective Club series.[44] Series director Yoshio Sakamoto was able to better work around system limitations to his satisfaction in this entry.[44]
Read more about the Famicom Detective Club series on Wikipedia.
Fire Emblem: Shadow Dragon and the Blade of Light
Not to be confused with the North American Final Fantasy III for the SNES, which was Final Fantasy VI in other regions but had its name changed in North America to avoid skipping missed releases.[50] This was done to avoid confusion at the time, though it caused some confusion later.[50]
Final Fantasy III was the first Final Fantasy series game to break a million sales.[51]
Read more about Final Fantasy III on Wikipedia.
Dates are for the earliest release on the NES. International releases often occurred one or two years later.
The Family BASIC keyboard and cartridge, which allowed the user to program in a dialect of BASIC.
The Famicom Data Recorder, which, used with the Family BASIC keyboard, could be used to save and load BASIC programs as well as data to be used with some games.
Famicom Box for use in hotels.
NES power pad, used for fitness games and one dance game
R.O.B. (Robotic Operating Buddy) was an optional toy robot for the NES used by two games. Bundled with the deluxe set, it managed to become an iconic part of the NES legacy, despite its relatively small overall role.
A Famicom 3D system add on, which created stereoscopic images from existing Famicom games. It was a commercial failure.
A Game Genie for the NES, a common 3rd party cheating device.
Software card for Horse Betting through the Network System
A Famicom Disk System Floppy Drive Protector
Finnish NES rental bag and magazines.
A standard NES cartridge. This gray plastic cartridge was most common among official NES games. A notch is used to aid in insertion and removal from the system. A large area is devoted to labeling, which has been removed in this example.
A red Famicom cartridge for the game Mother. Famicom cartridges were significantly smaller then NES cartridges.
A disk for the Famicom Disk System.
An NES cartridge for Tetris with the cover removed. Here the game ROM, lockout chip, and MMC1 chip can be seen.
The Konami Code (Up, Up, Down, Down, Left, Right, Left, Right, B, A), a common cheat code used on Konami games for the NES and other systems.
Original Famicom motherboard.
An NES motherboard, with external ports visible.
An NES motherboard, viewed from the top.
The cost reduced NES 101 motherboard.
The AV 101 motherboard.
An NES Debug cartridge, used during game development.
A closeup of an 1988 10NES Lockout chip
An NES to Famicom Pin adapter, which adds a lockout chip and was used on some early games.
US Patent, showing a system similar to the Famicom.
A Nintendo patent possibly related to ROB.
A third party company, Power 10 Inc., made a early motion controller for the NES that used mercury switches called the Hot Stik.[52]
There is a WikiBook on NES programming.
Wikipedia has related information at Nintendo Entertainment System
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Famicom and variants
Video Game Console Library - Famicom/NES page.
Nintendo UK Blog - Post showing design documents for the original Legend of Zelda.
Parts of this page are based on materials from: Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia.
↑ Hongo, Jun (15 July 2013). "Nintendo brought arcade games into homes 30 years ago". The Japan Times. https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2013/07/15/reference/nintendo-brought-arcade-games-into-homes-30-years-ago/. Retrieved 25 October 2020.
↑ "NintendoLand - The best site for info about Nintendo's classic video games.". web.archive.org. 25 May 2009. https://web.archive.org/web/20090525223925/http://www.nintendoland.com/home2.htm?nes%2Fhistory.htm.
↑ "NES". https://scf.usc.edu/~jeffcui/itp104/final/nes.html.
↑ Arsenault, Dominic (in en). Super Power, Spoony Bards, and Silverware: The Super Nintendo Entertainment System. MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-34150-9. https://books.google.com/books?id=ziozDwAAQBAJ&pg=PA31&lpg=PA31#v=onepage&q&f=false. Retrieved 20 December 2020.
↑ "Feature: Remember When Atari Turned Down Nintendo And Sega?". Nintendo Life. 3 February 2020. https://www.nintendolife.com/news/2020/02/feature_remember_when_atari_turned_down_nintendo_and_sega. Retrieved 23 October 2020.
↑ "Lance Barr Interview". nintendojo ~ a site to see. 13 February 2006. https://web.archive.org/web/20060213124455/http://www.nintendojo.com/interviews/view_item.php?1130801472.
↑ "GDC: Miyamoto Keynote Extend Extra" (in en-us). Wired. https://www.wired.com/2007/03/gdc-miyamoto-ke/.
↑ "Why Nintendo is Bringing Back Miis". https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vr5VgHaM9ac.
↑ Koch, Cameron (21 July 2016). "Nintendo Brings Back Retro 'Now You're Playing With Power' Slogan For New NES Classic Edition Ad" (in en). Tech Times. https://www.techtimes.com/articles/170917/20160721/nintendo-brings-back-retro-now-youre-playing-with-power-slogan-for-new-nes-classic-edition-ad.htm.
↑ a b Sottek, T. C. (15 July 2013). "The Nintendo Famicom turns 30 years old today" (in en). The Verge. https://www.theverge.com/2013/7/15/4524758/NES-famicom-30-year-anniversary. Retrieved 19 October 2020.
↑ "Nintendo Entertainment System Video Game Console" (in en). https://www.si.edu/object/nintendo-entertainment-system-video-game-console%3Anmah_1436726. Retrieved 18 October 2020.
↑ a b c d e Cunningham, Andrew (15 July 2013). "The NES turns 30: How it began, worked, and saved an industry" (in en-us). Ars Technica. https://arstechnica.com/gaming/2013/07/time-to-feel-old-inside-the-nes-on-its-30th-birthday/. Retrieved 19 October 2020.
↑ Ward, Cassidy (5 June 2019). "Science Behind the Fiction: How Nintendo saved and redefined the game industry" (in en). https://www.syfy.com/syfywire/science-behind-the-fiction-how-nintendo-saved-and-redefined-the-game-industry.
↑ "'Genericide': When brands get too big" (in en). The Independent. 18 January 2019. https://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/analysis-and-features/genericide-when-brands-get-too-big-2295428.html.
↑ "This Nintendo Was Inside A Television Set" (in en-us). Kotaku. https://kotaku.com/this-nintendo-was-inside-a-television-set-5787855. Retrieved 27 October 2020.
↑ "The Untold Story of Maniac Mansion". Wierd (Magazine-1.04). 04/01/1993. https://www.wired.com/1993/04/nintendo-2/.
↑ a b "That Time Atari Cracked The Nintendo Entertainment System". Hackaday. 22 October 2018. https://hackaday.com/2018/10/22/that-time-atari-cracked-the-nintendo-entertainment-system/#more-329497. Retrieved 25 October 2020.
↑ "How Third-Party Game Devs Reverse-Engineered Their Way Onto Your Consoles (and Into Your Heart)" (in en). https://www.vice.com/en/article/9amg87/how-third-party-game-devs-reverse-engineered-their-way-onto-your-consoles-nintendo-sega-atari.
↑ "The NES Was Once So Rare You Could Only Get It In Two Cities" (in en-us). Kotaku. https://kotaku.com/the-nes-was-once-so-rare-you-could-only-get-it-in-two-c-1686643953. Retrieved 27 October 2020.
↑ a b "Oct. 18, 1985: Nintendo Entertainment System Launches" (in en-us). Wired. https://www.wired.com/2010/10/1018nintendo-nes-launches/. Retrieved 27 October 2020.
↑ Weber, Rachel (3 March 2017). "Flashback: Nintendo's Gamer Cartoon 'Captain N: The Game Master'". Rolling Stone. https://www.rollingstone.com/culture/culture-news/flashback-nintendo-entertains-gamers-with-captain-n-the-game-master-cartoon-124904/.
↑ "The Nintendo Console From The 80s Made For Recording Gameplay Footage" (in en-us). Kotaku. https://kotaku.com/the-nintendo-console-from-the-80s-that-could-record-gam-1739086864. Retrieved 27 October 2020.
↑ Patil, Siddharth (12 May 2016). "Nintendo And India :: A complicated Love Story". https://gameffine.com/nintendo-india-complicated-love-story/.
↑ Ghoshal, Abhimanyu (30 December 2017). "Why has Nintendo ignored India for 30 years?" (in en-us). https://thenextweb.com/in/2017/12/30/why-has-nintendo-ignored-india-for-30-years/.
↑ "The NES Samurai boxed!" (in en). https://consolevariations.com/blog/the-nes-samurai-boxed.
↑ a b Calvin, Alex (17 December 2017). "How a counterfeit NES console opened up the Russian games market" (in en). https://www.eurogamer.net/articles/2017-12-17-how-a-counterfeit-nes-console-opened-up-the-russian-games-market.
↑ Muradov, Roman (23 October 2017). "Dendy’s Dream Debased" (in en). https://medium.com/@bluebed/dendys-dream-debased-a3c35f9e173a.
↑ Byford, Sam (11 July 2019). "A brief history of cutdown game consoles" (in en). The Verge. https://www.theverge.com/circuitbreaker/2019/7/11/20690011/nintendo-switch-lite-game-console-redesign-xbox-playstation. Retrieved 19 October 2020.
↑ "Genesis vs. SNES: By the Numbers - IGN" (in en). https://www.ign.com/articles/2009/03/20/genesis-vs-snes-by-the-numbers. Retrieved 13 November 2020.
↑ "IR Information : Sales Data - Dedicated Video Game Sales Units" (in en). https://www.nintendo.co.jp/ir/en/finance/hard_soft/. Retrieved 14 November 2020.
↑ a b c d e "NES Programming - Wikibooks, open books for an open world". https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/NES_Programming. Retrieved 25 October 2020.
↑ "Nintendo Family Computer (Famicom) Teardown" (in en). 1 July 2010. https://www.ifixit.com/Teardown/Nintendo+Family+Computer+(Famicom)+Teardown/3199. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
↑ "Famicom vs NES". 16 May 2014. http://www.1morecastle.com/2014/05/famicom-nes/.
↑ "Nerdly Pleasures: Famicom Expansion Audio Overview". 4 August 2017. https://nerdlypleasures.blogspot.com/2017/08/famicom-expansion-audio-overview.html.
↑ Davison, John (12 December 2016). "Shigeru Miyamoto on Mario, 'Minecraft' and Working With Apple". Rolling Stone. https://www.rollingstone.com/culture/culture-news/shigeru-miyamoto-on-mario-minecraft-and-working-with-apple-106277/.
↑ Sheff, David; Sheff, David (9 January 1992). "Mario's Big Brother: Sigeru Miyamoto". Rolling Stone. https://www.rollingstone.com/culture/culture-news/marios-big-brother-sigeru-miyamoto-198593/.
↑ Tappin, Steve (5 August 2016). "30 years of Samus Aran: a feminist icon?". BBC Three. https://www.bbc.co.uk/bbcthree/article/39a1b88f-79dc-4602-8207-f86918afd457.
↑ "Why's It Called 'Final Fantasy'? Uematsu Explains" (in en-us). https://www.wired.com/2009/07/final-fantasy/. Retrieved 2 November 2020.
↑ "Dungeons & Dragons Classes Inspired The Final Fantasy Jobs". 16 July 2020. https://screenrant.com/dungeons-dragons-classes-final-fantasy-jobs-dnd-ff/. Retrieved 2 November 2020.
↑ "» Discussion: Final Fantasy’s D&D Origins". http://finalfantasy.istad.org/2013/01/final-fantasy-vs-dnd/. Retrieved 2 November 2020.
↑ "Turns Out Hideo Kojima HATES Metal Gear On the NES" (in en-us). https://kotaku.com/turns-out-hideo-kojima-hates-metal-gear-on-the-nes-5811630. Retrieved 8 November 2020.
↑ "Mega Man 11 Now Third Best-Selling Game In The Franchise At 1.3 Million Units Sold". NintendoSoup. 12 November 2020. https://nintendosoup.com/mega-man-11-now-third-best-selling-game-in-the-franchise-at-1-3-million-units-sold/.
↑ a b c "Before visual novels, ’Famicom Detective Club’ writer recalls the genre’s limitations". Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/video-games/2021/05/26/famicom-detective-club-yoshio-sakamoto/.
↑ "Famicom Detective Club: One of the first visual novel series resurrected on Switch". App Trigger. 2021-05-16. https://apptrigger.com/2021/05/16/famicom-detective-club-switch/.
↑ Gordon, Justin (2021-05-05). "A character from Famicom Detective Club was briefly considered as a character on the roster by Masahiro Sakurai for Super Smash Bros. Melee" (in en). EventHubs. https://www.eventhubs.com/news/2021/may/05/famicom-detective-sakurai-roster-ssbm/.
↑ Mattise, Nathan (14 March 2021). "Mother to Earth: When an NES prototype lands on eBay and inspires a documentary" (in en-us). Ars Technica. https://arstechnica.com/gaming/2021/03/mother-to-earth-when-an-nes-prototype-lands-on-ebay-and-inspires-a-documentary/.
↑ "NES Tetris Players Are Using a Special Technique Called Rolling to Set New World Records - IGN" (in en). https://www.ign.com/articles/tetris-players-are-using-a-special-technique-called-rolling-to-set-new-world-records.
↑ a b Statt, Nick (26 June 2017). "Nintendo’s SNES Classic has a confusingly named Final Fantasy game" (in en). https://www.theverge.com/2017/6/26/15874710/nintendo-snes-classic-final-fantasy-vi-rpg-classic.
↑ "FINAL FANTASY III - new patch released today Square Enix Blog" (in en). https://square-enix-games.com/en_GB/news/final-fantasy-iii-patch.
↑ "The Original NES Console Had a Motion Control Joystick 15 Years Before the Nintendo Wii Did" (in en-us). Gizmodo. https://gizmodo.com/the-original-nes-console-had-a-motion-control-joystick-1835626330. Retrieved 25 October 2020.
The Philips Videopac+ G7400 is an enhanced version of the Magnavox Odyssey² which had been released in Europe as the Phillips G7000 Videopac, and would have likely been the Odyssey 3 had it released in the United States of America.[1]
The Philips Videopac+ G7400 saw a limited release in Europe in 1983, with an American release being scrapped due to the Video Game Crash of 1983.[2]
The Philips Videopac+ G7400 is powered by the 8-bit Intel 8048 microcontroller clocked at 5.91 megahertz.[3] The system has six kilobytes of RAM with an additional 192 bytes of RAM.[3] The system has one kilobyte of ROM.[3]
Only a few games were released specifically for the Videopac+ G7400.[4]
Wikipedia has related information at Philips Videopac+ G7400
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Philips G7400
↑ "OLD-COMPUTERS.COM : The Museum". https://www.old-computers.com/museum/computer.asp?c=695&st=2. Retrieved 30 October 2020.
↑ "Philips Videopac+ G7400 - Game Console - Computing History". http://www.computinghistory.org.uk/det/61004/Philips-Videopac-G7400/. Retrieved 30 October 2020.
↑ a b c "Philips Videopac+ G7400" (in en). 12 July 2020. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philips_Videopac%2B_G7400. Retrieved 6 November 2020.
↑ "G7400". http://www.videopac.org/G7400/. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
The V-Tech PreComputer 1000 is powered by either an 8-bit Zilog Z84C0004PEC or a Toshiba TMPZ84C00AP Z80 clone processor clocked at 4 megahertz.[2][3]
The V-Tech PreComputer uses 2 kilobytes (16 kilobits) of RAM and 126 kilobytes (1 megabit) of RAM.[1]
The display is a one line, 20 character LCD.[2] Below is a representation of what could be displayed on such a screen, where a black box is an alphabetical character.
Famous Places and Things [1]
Wikipedia has related information at VTech PreComputer 1000
Parts of this page are based on materials from: Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia.
↑ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n "VTech PreComputer 1000" (in en). 10 October 2020. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VTech_PreComputer_1000. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ a b "Teardown: VTech PreComputer 1000 Is An Iconic PC In A Toy Wrapper". 19 November 2019. https://hackaday.com/2019/11/19/teardown-vtech-precomputer-1000-is-an-iconic-pc-in-a-toy-wrapper/. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "BASIC for Kids: The VTech PreComputer 1000". https://www.vintagecomputing.com/index.php/archives/324/324.
The Proscreen can project images through an LCD onto a wall, or onto itself.[3][4] Light is produced through a bulb.[5]
The Proscreen included a pack in game, and two other games were available separately.[6]
Game Medium - Proscreen page.
↑ "20th Century Video Games". http://20thcenturyvideogames.com/index.php?action=vermodelos&submenu=&tipo=5&sistema=Vtech-ProScreen&verletra=V. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ Manikas, Pantelis. "VTech ProScreen" (in en). https://gamemedium.com/console/proscreen. Retrieved 20 December 2020.
↑ "Ludotronic Pro Screen". https://www.handheldmuseum.com/Ludotronic/ProScreen.htm. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Grandstand Light Games : projection system.". https://pyra-handheld.com/boards/threads/grandstand-light-games-projection-system.63597/. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "The www.HandheldMuseum.com Forum :: View topic - VTech ProScreen Games". https://www.handheldmuseum.com/forum/viewtopic.php?t=2037&sid=4b162a58e899875b1f17f2ae1984f34b. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Pro Screen, Console by Ludotronic (1984)". https://www.arcade-history.com/?n=pro-screen&page=detail&id=101272. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
The Casio PV-1000 with controller attached.
A common claim is that the Casio PV-1000 was discontinued within weeks of launching.[2][3][4] The PV-1000 was later followed by the Casio Loopy.
The system is often remembered for its unique visual design,[5] featuring a concave deck curve and deep blue colors.
The PV-1000 uses a D780C-1 processor, a version of the Z80A, clocked at 3.579 MHz.[1][6] The system had 1 kilobyte of RAM, plus an additional 1 kilobyte of memory for the character generator[1][3] This gave the system a combined 2 kilobytes of RAM.
A D65010G031 generates graphics with an 8 color palette and 32 sprites.[5] This chip also generates 3 channel sound.[5]
Controller ports are conveniently located on the front of the console.
Rear ports.
The PV-1000 controller uses a joystick.
Some buttons are on the base of the controller.
The controller connects to the console over a wire.
The area by the cartridge port is relatively bare compared to the rest of the board.
Significant RF shielding covers the console internals.
The motherboard with casing removed.
The large metal plate in the back of the motherboard is connected to an HA 17805 voltage regulator - likely to serve as a heat sink.
The external ports can clearly be seen.
Wires seem to be channeled near the front of the console when possible.
A top down view of the motherboard.
The bottom of the motherboard, with traces and one IC.
The bottom casing of the console has helpful labels molded into the plastic. This system was made in Japan.
Tall pegs hold the motherboard in place.
RF shielding is also used on the bottom of the console case.
Note the thick plastic used around the cartridge port - a place likely to experience extra wear.
A small mechanical assembly can be seen under the cartridge sheath, likely related to the cartridge flap.
The joystick with casing removed.
Several layers sit on top of the PCB.
The mechanical parts of the joystick.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Casio PV-1000
Parts of this page are based on materials from: Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia.
↑ a b c "OLD-COMPUTERS.COM : The Museum". https://www.old-computers.com/museum/computer.asp?st=2&c=849. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
↑ Dunn, Jeff. "Chasing Phantoms - The history of failed consoles" (in en). https://www.gamesradar.com/chasing-phantoms-history-failed-consoles/2/.
↑ a b "Casio PV-1000 - Player's Choice Video Games". https://www.playerschoicevideogames.com/cat-casio-pv-1000.cfm.
↑ "GamePayne". https://www.gamepayne.com/casio-pv-1000.
↑ a b c "Home Page". https://www.videogameconsolelibrary.com/pg80-pv1000.htm#page=specs. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
↑ "Casio PV-1000" (in en). https://thegamesdb.net/platform.php?id=4964.
The Sega SG 1000 and controller.
Sega has its origins in Standard Games, a Honolulu, Hawaii based American amusement company founded in 1940.[1][2] Sega, a shortened version of Service Games, would form into a Japanese amusement company in a roundabout way as American legislation banned coin operated gambling games in their primary markets.[3] [2][4]
The SG-1000 was launched on July 15, 1983 in Japan on the same day as the Nintendo Famicom launch.[5]
The SG-3000 model added a keyboard, and proved to be more popular in Japan then the original SG-1000.[7]
By 1985 the SG-1000 sold about two million units.[8] The SG-1000 was followed by the Sega Master System.
The Dina game console was also related to the SG-1000.
The cartridges used by the SG-1000 and the SC-3000.
The SG-1000 CPU uses a 8 bit Zilog Z80A clocked at 3.58 megahertz.[9]
The SG-1000 uses a Texas Instruments TMS9928A for graphics processing, and a Texas Instruments SN76489 for sound processing.[9]
Read more about Girl's Garden on Wikipedia.
The back of the SG-1000 with ports visible.
The MKIII has two controller ports on the front of the console - A design decision also used on the Master System.
The Telegames Personal Arcade, a ColecoVision and Sega SG-1000 compatible console.
The console, also known as the Dina 2 in 1, could dock controllers on the side.
The console rear hosted I/O ports.
The controller for the Telegames Personal Arcade.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: SG-1000
Parts of this page are based on materials from: Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia.
↑ "Your Turn: A brief history of Sega" (in en). 8 August 2013. https://www.smh.com.au/technology/your-turn-a-brief-history-of-sega-20130808-2rkfm.html.
↑ a b "Meet The Four Americans Who Built Sega" (in en-us). https://kotaku.com/meet-the-four-americans-who-built-sega-5788468.
↑ "Service Games, Hawaii" (in en). 5 November 2020. https://segaretro.org/Service_Games,_Hawaii.
↑ "Sega History - Zippia". 18 December 2020. https://www.zippia.com/sega-careers-62207/history/.
↑ McGuire, Keegan (23 October 2020). "The untold truth of Sega's first console". https://www.looper.com/266460/the-untold-truth-of-segas-first-console/. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
↑ "HISTORY SEGA 60th Anniversary" (in en). https://60th.sega.com/en/history/. Retrieved 18 November 2020.
↑ "The Story of Sega's First Console, Which Was Not The Master System" (in en-us). Kotaku. https://kotaku.com/the-story-of-segas-first-console-which-was-not-the-mas-5888800. Retrieved 27 October 2020.
↑ "Feature: A Look Back At the SG-1000, Sega's First Ever Home Console". Nintendo Life. 25 June 2018. https://www.nintendolife.com/news/2018/06/feature_a_look_back_at_the_sg-1000_segas_first_ever_home_console. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
↑ a b "Playing the SG-1000, Sega's First Game Machine" (in en-us). Wired. https://www.wired.com/2009/10/sega-sg-1000/. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
The Super Cassette Vision with two controllers, one with a red accent and one with a blue accent.
Despite the name, the Super Cassette Vision actually used cartridges, as shown here.
The Super Cassette Vision was released by Epoch in 1984 to replace the older 1981 Epoch Cassette Vision and the cost reduced 1983 Epoch Cassette Vision Jr.[1]
On launch the Super Cassette Vision sold well in Japan, as well as in France.[2]
The Super Cassette Vision Lady was launched in 1985 and marketed to women.[3][4][1] This was the first notable console to pursue this strategy, later followed by others such as the Casio Loopy.[5]
The Super Cassette Vision used an 8-bit NEC PD7801G CPU (Based on the Z80) clocked at 4 megahertz.[6]
Dragon Ball: Dragon Daihikyō
Doraemon Nobita's Time Machine the Great Adventure
The system featured both RF and RGB outputs.
The system rear also featured a power jack, as well as an RGB or RF channel selector.
The bottom part of the unit served as a handy container for storing controllers while not in use.
The bottom of the Motherboard. Note the large Capacitor protruding from the daughterboard near the power input.
Wikipedia has related information at Super Cassette Vision
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Epoch Super Cassette Vision
Parts of this page are based on materials from: Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia.
↑ a b "Japanese Company Made Consoles For Girls, And Also Cute Toys" (in en-us). https://kotaku.com/when-a-company-makes-consoles-for-girls-and-also-cute-t-1792366190. Retrieved 24 October 2020.
↑ "Epoch Super Cassette Vision (1984 - late 1980s)". 8 March 2014. https://obsoletemedia.org/epoch-super-cassette-vision/. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
↑ "Super Lady Cassette Vision – The Video Game Kraken". http://videogamekraken.com/super-lady-cassette-vision.
↑ "The Most Unusual Video Game Consoles" (in en). PCMAG. https://www.pcmag.com/news/the-most-unusual-video-game-consoles. Retrieved 24 October 2020.
↑ Packwood, Lewis (15 July 2018). "In the Loopy: the story of Casio's crazy 90s console" (in en). Eurogamer. https://www.eurogamer.net/articles/2018-07-15-in-the-loopy-the-story-of-casios-crazy-90s-console. Retrieved 24 October 2020.
↑ a b "OLD-COMPUTERS.COM : The Museum". https://www.old-computers.com/museum/computer.asp?st=1&c=708. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
The Video Challenger makes use of standard VHS Tapes.
The Video Challenger uses a Hitachi 8-bit HD401010 processor clocked at four megahertz, with access to 32 bytes of RAM.[4]
After Burner II by Sega[5]
Turtle Challenge - Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles game.[5]
Thunder Storm by Data East[5]
Road Blaster by Data East[5]
Wikipedia has related information at Video Challenger
Video Game Kraken - Video Challenger page with photo and marketing information.
Video Game Console Library - Video Challenger page with model and spec info.
Parts of this page are based on materials from: Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia.
↑ "Video Challenger Road Blaster (Japan)". 1 January 1987. https://archive.org/details/VideoChallengerRoadBlasterTakaraDataEast. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
↑ "Home Page". https://www.videogameconsolelibrary.com/pg80-video_challenger.htm#page=specs. Retrieved 4 November 2020.
↑ a b c d e f g h "Video Challenger" (in en). 19 January 2021. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Video_Challenger.
Montreal in 1989, the year and place the Videoway launched.
Dayton, Ohio - a perspective market of the Videoway.
—Videoway Slogan, 1993 New York Times Article[2]
By 1994 the service had 220,000 subscribers in the Montreal Market alone[1], with 330,000 customers globally, having expanded to the UK.[8] In 1994 the video games offered on the system were considered it's main selling point, rather then the other interactive television features supported by the platform.[1]
By 1995 the number of Vidéoway subscribers in Quebec remained steady at 222,000 with a monthly price of $8.95 Canadian dollars.[9]
The Vidéoway service was discontinued in 2000,[10] and shut down in 2006, with the original games having been lost to time.[3] In the 2015 Temporel, Inc was unofficially remade based on using a VHS recording of a play-through.[3]
Despite being poorly documented, this service is notable for being one of the best performing Canadian platforms in console gaming, as well as an early adoption of the game streaming model later seen decades later in the cloud gaming market of the 2010's on.
A Motorola MC68B09EP processor, a similar processor the the MC68A09EP used on the Vidéoway.
System RAM temporarily stored downloaded games for the Vidéoway.[3]
In 1994 a partnership was made with the massive American technology corporation IBM (International Business Machines) to improve the Vidéoway.[8]
Temporel Inc.[4] - An adventure game exclusive to the Vidéoway[3] during the life of the system.
Burger Time[3] / Hamburger[4]
Throughout the long life of the system, Vidéotron updated its brand identity twice. Most game platforms see their parent organization update their branding only once, if they do so at all, in their time on the market, making this somewhat unusual.
The Vidéotron logo used from 1980 to 2001. This was the logo used by the company during the hayday of the service.
The Vidéotron logo used from 2001 to 2004. This was the logo used by the company while the service was being sunset.
The Vidéotron logo from 2004 to 2009. This was the logo used by the company during the final years of the service.
↑ a b c d "Videotron Videoway". 11 April 1994. pp. 31. https://www.newspapers.com/clip/3464000/videotron-videoway/. Retrieved 7 November 2020.
↑ a b c d e f g h Tierney, John (20 June 1993). "Will Tomorrow's TV Viewers Sit by the Set, or Ride a Data Highway? (Published 1993)". The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/1993/06/20/technology/will-tomorrows-tv-viewers-sit-by-the-set-or-ride-a-data-highway.html.
↑ a b c d e f g h i "Temporel, inc. and the Videoway system – Hardcore Gaming 101". http://www.hardcoregaming101.net/temporel-inc-and-the-videoway-system/. Retrieved 31 October 2020.
↑ a b c d e f g h i j "Videoway – Montreal Video Game Museum". http://en.mvmtl.org/timeline/videoway/. Retrieved 31 October 2020.
↑ "GROUPE VIDEOTRON LTEE TO INSTALL VIDEOWAY". 2 November 1993. https://www.cbronline.com/news/groupe_videotron_ltee_to_install_videoway/. Retrieved 7 November 2020.
↑ "Financial Briefs". 1 November 1993. https://variety.com/1993/biz/news/financial-briefs-149-115505/. Retrieved 7 November 2020.
↑ "NETWORKING". 16 August 1994. https://wwd.com/fashion-news/fashion-features/article-1158239/. Retrieved 7 November 2020.
↑ a b c "COMPANY NEWS; Videotron and I.B.M. to Explore Interactive Technology (Published 1994)". The New York Times. 12 March 1994. https://www.nytimes.com/1994/03/12/business/company-news-videotron-and-ibm-to-explore-interactive-technology.html.
↑ Sandomir, Richard (17 April 1995). "THE MEDIA BUSINESS; California Viewers Getting the Chance to Direct Their Sportscasts (Published 1995)". The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/1995/04/17/business/media-business-california-viewers-getting-chance-direct-their-sportscasts.html.
↑ a b "Videoway device". https://codewalr.us/index.php?topic=1462.0.
↑ a b c "The Vidéoway emulation thread - Forums". 17 January 2018. https://web.archive.org/web/20180117205840/http://forums.bannister.org/ubbthreads.php?ubb=showflat&Number=99891&page=1.
Though not used by this console, the Interactive Vision was made by the View-Master Ideal Group, the result of mergers including the companies that made the original View Master shown here.
The View-Master Interactive Vision was released in 1988 by the View-Master Ideal Group at a cost of $130.[2][3][4]
The View-Master Interactive Vision makes use of standard VHS Tapes.
The system was primarily used to generate graphic overlays on VHS tapes, creating interactive experiences where players could determine the outcome of scenes.[2][5] The VHS tapes used by the system contains the software to run the system.[6]
The View-Master uses a TMS9128NL chip for video.[7]
All the games for the View-Master Interactive Vision are either based on Sesame Street, The Muppets, or Disney.
Sesame Street: Let’s Learn to Play Together
The circuit board of the Interactive Vision fits the irregular shape of the console.
This side of the circuit board houses components
A large RF Shield is kept around the circuitry.
Wikipedia has related information at View-Master Interactive Vision
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: View-Master Interactive Vision
Parts of this page are based on materials from: Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia.
↑ a b "60 Years of View-Master History from Sawyers to Mattel". https://www.viewmaster.co.uk/htm/history.asp. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
↑ a b "[View-Master Interactive Vision Muppet Madness"]. 1 January 1988. https://archive.org/details/renderedgraphicsmuppetmadness. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
↑ "What is the View-Master Interactive Vision? YoExpert Q&A". https://classic-video-games.yoexpert.com/classic-video-games-general/what-is-the-view-master-interactive-vision-33187.html. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
↑ (in en) Personal Computing. Personal Computing Magazine. https://www.google.com/books/edition/Personal_Computing/80gqAAAAMAAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1&bsq=View-Master+Interactive+Vision&dq=View-Master+Interactive+Vision&printsec=frontcover. Retrieved 3 December 2020.
↑ "Only In The 80's Would They Put Video Games On A VHS Tape" (in en-us). Kotaku. https://kotaku.com/only-in-the-80s-would-they-put-video-games-on-a-vhs-tap-5786220. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
↑ Paul, Franzen (1 October 2008). "Dear Readers: View-Master Interactive Vision". https://gamecola.net/2008/10/dear-readers-view-master-interactive-vision/. Retrieved 26 October 2020.
↑ "The motherboard of a View-Master Interactive Vision, a sorta gaming, edutainment console from 1988. This is the flat view, and is shown with the RF shielding removed. The following is some chip data and information copied from the board:". 14 June 2014. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:ViewMaster-Interactive-Vision-Motherboard-Flat.jpg. Retrieved 29 October 2020.
The VTech Socrates with keyboard and controllers.
The VTech Socrates was preceded by the VTech CreatiVision.
The VTech Socrates was released in 1988 at a cost of $130.[1] Marketing for the system emphasized it's educational value.[2] The system featured a robot mascot named Socrates, who borrowed its name from the ancient Greek philosopher Socrates.[3]
The VTech Socrates uses either a 8-bit TMP Z84C00AP-6 CPU, which is based on the Z80 and is clocked at 3.58 MHz[4] or a similar Zilog Z84C0004PSC.[5]
The system came with a wireless keyboard, and an optional touchpad and optional wireless mouse and mouse pad were made available.[1]
A voice cartridge add on was available for the system.[1]
Around the World - World geography software[6]
CAD Professor - Uses the mouse add on.[6]
Numbers, Shapes, and Letters - Uses the touchpad add on.[6]
The Inferred communication system is visible on the back.
A light near the top of the keyboard indicates when communication occurs.
The right side of the motherboard contains both the Zilog Z80 CPU, and the game cartridge connector.
The connector on the left can be populated with a voice cartridge.
The game cartridge connector is directly mounted on the motherboard.
Ample edge plating protects the sides of the motherboard.
A top down view of the motherboard. The smooth curves of the traces suggest a hand drawn design.
Wikipedia has related information at VTech Socrates
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: VTech Socrates
Parts of this page are based on materials from: Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia.
↑ a b c "ARCHIVE.ORG Console Library: Socrates : Free Software : Free Download, Borrow and Streaming : Internet Archive" (in en). https://archive.org/details/socrates_library?tab=about. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
↑ Dines, Gail; Humez, Jean M. (in en). Gender, Race and Class in Media: A Text-Reader. SAGE Publications. ISBN 978-0-8039-5163-1. https://www.google.com/books/edition/Gender_Race_and_Class_in_Media/I9FiAAAAMAAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1&bsq=Socrates%20Educational%20Video%20System. Retrieved 3 December 2020.
↑ "ARCHIVE.ORG Console Library: Socrates : Free Software : Free Download, Borrow and Streaming : Internet Archive" (in en). archive.org. https://archive.org/details/socrates_library.
↑ a b "68k Mentat - VTech Socrates". https://new.68kmentat.com/computers/info/socrates.html. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
↑ "The motherboard of the Socrates, an educational entertainment ("edutainment") video game console released in 1988 by VTech. Powered by a Zilog Z80 processor, the board has two expansions for a voice cartridge and game cartridge. The system is comparatively weak, due to being designed to run off 6 D batteries.". 18 November 2015. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:VTech-Socrates-Motherboard-Flat.jpg. Retrieved 28 October 2020.
↑ a b c d e f g h i "VTech Socrates" (in en). 17 February 2021. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VTech_Socrates.
The former Daewoo headquarters building in Seoul, South Korea. The building is now known as Seoul Square.
An add on was made to allow Famicom games to be played on the Zemmix.[5]
Zemmix game compatibility depends on the particular MSX standard used by a given Zemmix console.
Game Medium - Zemmix page.
Video Game Geek - Zemmix CPC 50 page.
Hardcore Gaming 101 - History of Korean Gaming.
↑ "Home Page". https://www.videogameconsolelibrary.com/pg80-zemmix.htm#page=reviews. Retrieved 31 October 2020.
↑ "Daewoo Zemmix - Ultimate Console Database". https://ultimateconsoledatabase.com/golden/daewoo_zemmix.htm. Retrieved 8 November 2020.
↑ a b c d "Hardcore Gaming 101: A History of Korean Gaming". http://www.hardcoregaming101.net/korea/appendix-consoles.htm. Retrieved 8 November 2020.
↑ "Diehard Fans in Korea Made Their Own MSX Console. It's Pretty." (in en-us). https://kotaku.com/diehard-fans-in-korea-made-their-own-msx-console-its-p-498066549. Retrieved 13 November 2020.
↑ H, Jimmy (31 March 2015). "Obscure Video Game Systems: The Daewoo Zemmix". https://obscurevideogamesystems.blogspot.com/2015/03/the-daewoo-zemmix.html. Retrieved 13 November 2020.
Zwunzwuo a̱lyem Tyap ※ Tyap alphabet
The letters above are the simplified basic Tyap letters. There are other sounds not included above.
a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p r s t u w y z
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P R S T U W Y Z
Pronounce outrightly as :
Fundamentals for Trainz Trainees Introductory Trainz — written for those new to Trainz
Operations Note: Clicking on a footnote ([2]) or note tag ([note 12]) in the main body of text will navigate you (position the page) to the exact text for the entry. • Then: Clicking there on the ? symbol, will return you back to read on from where you started.
Content Manager in it's early 'CMP' incarnation.
File:Category-era and Category-region in Trainz's CM are separate dropdown entries for sorting and selecting appropriate mixes of criteria when narrowing down content numbers.
A Category in Trainz's CM are an aid to sorting and selecting appropriate content varieties which are classified into groups by N3V loosely based on category-class and Kinds.
Releases earlier than Trainz: A New Era (TANE) are covered in the main page: Trainz/Content Manager 2.0--CM3.7
Early versions coverage: Content Manager Plus, AM&C/Content Manager
This page is a stub of an intended page, its' outline, or otherwise a page in major ways temporarily incomplete relative to plans for future contents Trainz Wikibook writing and in-progress overhaul. You can help Wikibooks and the Trainz Wikibook project by adding to it and expanding it.Work needed: This Page is currently a clone of previously covered versions (See above links)... It will be r
Background to the Content Manager and the DLS
Predecessors to CM or CMP were a stand alone utilities from Trainz 1.0 through TRS2004-SP4 (also named ContentManager.exe,. hence the 'Plus' of TRS2006's CMP) with which users could install new modeling assets. There weren't many options but installing assets. Other utilities performed some of the tasks (e.g. uploading) but Data Management was mainly manual by moving folders about.
In essence the early simple ContentManager.exe programs did some simple file management and unpacked cdp files and tucked their contents away in a scheme using open folders, enumerated folder locations, and a data system that had no real data base to it. They could also create cdp files, allowing the early growing Trainz community to feast on shared creations. Eventually, the early Download Station was hosted by Auran and users could browse without much search capability much as one can on today's less sophisticated 3rd party Trainz fan-sites. Most of these are operated by an individual or a small group of Content Creators.
Prior to TRS2004, the cloud services we know as the DLS was more list presenting access to a disorganized collection of zip and cdp files than an organized database with a built in search engine, FTP manager. It was a central repository but a chaotic one, and the chaos was converted into today's order when DLS was established during UTC's hey days (v1.5), a little before the time TRS2004 (v2.0) came about.
The early local Trainz install's database was more organized as groups of open files as well, and data corruption was thus more likely until TRS2004 evolved a better file structure and compressed data formats, which was best exploited with the advent of TRS2006 and its Content Manager Plus became a data base manager and search and access tool. With a database manager on the servers to handshake with on the DLS end, the more sophisticated user-end software became feasible and it arrived with trainz-build v2.5 (TRS2006 Content Manager—then retitled as Content Manager Plus (or CMP).
CMP had capabilities unknown in the earlier Trainz 'Content Manager' which relied on a primitive region and type tags classification system for it's limited capabilities of asset grouping and searching. The earlier module was mostly a listing/cataloging utility allowing a user to examine her own inventory of assets, with no information from the DLS.
CMP took on a whole host of additional capabilities formerly performed by several separate *.exe utility programs, including those of 3rd party providers, and incorporated a ton of new powerful search, classification, and asset management features such as:
The content manager in Trainz: A New Era (TANE) is (finally) a different 'Windowed' user interface with multiple 'main view report views' than the historic CM's described and depicted here with their 'fixed left panes' and TANE's has an ability to locate it's windows on any monitor (untied to the control panes), and each of which may then spawn an alternative sub-search and display another 'main view'.
Editor's note: The TANE CM, as of the May 15th 2015 launch of the TANE 'Release Version', is still a work in progress in September—with N3V and the developer's user group refining it's user interface throughout the summer. It's firm or final interface and hotkeys, et. al. is expected to arrive with Trainz:A New Era's first Service Pack[1]
CM/CMP (Content Manager Plus) is accessible via the Trainz Launcher screens or by directly launching the ContentManager.exe file from the Trainz installation's root directory \bin sub-folder (recommended, or by shortcut thereto). Many users with multiple Trainz installations will bundle shortcuts to launch the CM or Trainz launcher programs from a common Trainz folder. CM's primary purpose is to manage the data flow to and from the DLS and manage the local assets on your hard drive (located in your ..\UserData folder) and the sub-folders therein (such as the ..\local, ..\settings, ..\screenshots, ..\editing folders) as well as the Trainz release's special data base of built-in items. (See JA files and Libraries.)
Mainly Trainzer's use it to communicate and manage downloading from the DLS, and to select and filter assets for surveyor. TS2009 introduced enhanced filtering (selectable savable criteria were part of the T'06 CMP, but the way they could be combined was limited. In T'09, the new power was in the addition of new search-refining Boolean logic operators: OR, AND NOT, and AND [the latter of which is somewhat redundant in most uses[note 1]]) so power users will often define a search criteria, called a search filter, save that and then use that to trim down the list of assets one must look through to find a desired asset when route building.
CM/CMP has a sophisticated search facility and automatically identifies and downloads dependencies associated with each asset. CM/CMP is closely integrated to CCP and is also used to open assets for editing and committing them for use in Trainz. In TRS2006 and above, new assets and asset clones (copies with new kuids) are created via CM/CMP, though a route or session may be cloned using a Save As option in Surveyor.
The original 'Content Manager Plus' precursor page to this page was overhauled in March 2014, and the 'Blog' section within it is so charmingly written and mostly still applicable, (from an experiential point of view, it gives the flavor of using the CMs your first few time really well--provided sounds are enabled!) It was worth retaining for new users, so take time to read it. After wrestling with CM a month or so, re-read it and laugh at what you missed the first time. Despite the improvements, the operations are so very similar it's worth taking the 'grin-making' time after you've acquired some CM operations experience.
Using an ORed KUID list to view fixed asset - Some faults won't show as fixed, until the asset is recommitted. See the description on this image when blown up.
CMP through CM-3.7 looks much like a spreadsheet with relocatable columns (from CM-2.0 of TS2009) meaning columns selected for viewing in the 'main view' (the right hand part of the screen) using ALT+V can later be slide left or right and rearranged to suit the user preferences, or the type of task you might be about. For example, one day you might want to locate all the assets that were installed with the download of XYZ route and sessions, so want to see install date... an otherwise uninformative data column. Some days you want modification date, and on others perhaps, the regions, era or the trainz-build values are your primary sorting and searching interests. The check box in the ALT+V menu allow hiding columns or turning their display on, whilst dragging them allows you to rearrange them left to right.
The notations CM-X.Y appears in the CM/CMP title bar after TC3 and after TS2009-SP3 the X.Y (initially just CM-2.0) was incremented with each code build and so displayed as a suffix to give a visual reminder of the trainz-build tag or 'version' of the Trainz software. It now signifies the trainz-build code an asset created or updated using Content Creator Plus (CCP) editing will be given.
CM supports asset editing in two forms: CCP, which is a table-like fill in the blanks rigid form for getting the proper parts assigned to a new asset, or by free form editing using Windows utilities. For asset repairs, virtually everyone avoids CCP and uses a Windows Explorer editing folder with direct access to the files making up the asset. This folder and files can be opened in several ways:
Hotkeys SHFT+CTRL+E directly opens a Windows Explorer folder with no processing, and it pops up immediately on top of other screen windows.
RMBH+drag+Open With accesses one of the PEVtools or other batch utility that has been installed in the \bin\...\Tools sub-folder. Thusly, for example, if a repair requires accessing textures (say in the error message you see an alphamask and it's base texture don't match in size, so one needs re-sized) one can open the asset with PEV's images2TGA utility and be ready to fix the problem immediately. In this case the window will often be behind or other another Windows application window depending upon your video set up and the biases built-in to Windows. If running a dual or three monitor system, often these can be biased to open in the other screen(s) from CM, so will open where it can be seen immediately.
In truth, the left hand panes are an overcrowded mess cramped for space since TRS2006 was written long enough ago (2004-2005) that dual and triple head systems were very rare, and the arrangement made sense for single monitor systems. The Windows software interface in TANE has an entirely different look, see, and feel with floating and resizable windows but can get a bit messy in a different way; while still following the spirit of the original TRS2006 Content Manager Plus and those CM versions since.
For the moment, notice the default tabs along CM's top of the main view each load a search criteria in the Search pane when pressed; and also that by using Tab ↹ (Toggles) one can hide or open the left panes. The How-To Search efficiently in CM
Image of TS12's left hand tools windows or control panes (most closed, with little change in appearance since TR'6). 1. The Down Load Helper (DLH pane) opens as the top Pane, here showing one item needing updated. (Note the icon)2. the Search pane window opens next down (partially obscured off-pane), and 3. the third down, Details pane shows a thumbnail of the asset and part of it's description tag's data field information. Other information is obscured off-pane.4. Whereas, each when minimized looks like the other three 'collapsed' pane bars on the bottom, saving for their labels.
As can be seen in the image below and left, each left hand pane has a little click icon to open it or close it, and in normal operations, one will be the DLH (Download Helper) pane, another the Asset Details pane, and as needed, the Search pane, or other combinations (uploads, archive, and pick list) based on what you are doing that give you the desired flexibility. Each can be closed when set up and still have effect, or the whole set of panes can be toggled open or closed with commensurate widening or narrowing by alternate presses of the Tab ↹ key. Other panes shown are for uploading, archiving, and so forth, but like the DLH pane, these are used primarily by dragging and dropping from the Main View into the pane, so must be open to be in actual use. Play a bit and read the manual, whether printed or in pdf format, then re-read it. Wait a month and read it again. Each time will give you the power of additional knowledge and insights as to the capabilities shedding further light on what we present here.
As can be seen in the images above, Trainz has various RMBH drop down menus, as with the one shown here from right clicking on an asset in the 'Main View'. This particular image doesn't show you the currently selected line which like the currently selected asset would be highlighted in blue as I dragged down the menu. If you fixing a batch of new faulty assets, as in this view, the most common use is the line saying 'open with' which allows you to use external tools, such as PEVtools to begin preparing an asset for examination and tweaking—normally all that is needed to make an asset workable. Another commonly used RMBH+drag command is show asset versions, which allows you to compare older and newer assets, and those which may have been obsoleted by an entirely different kuid series, perhaps by a different author entirely! Similarly, Show dependencies and show Config.txt files are both workhorse selections.
You should always give the DLH some 'few minutes' of time to settle before hitting Start, but once it's cranked the top of your list for a couple of minutes, these days hitting start seems risk free, unlike some of the instabilities CMP used to exhibit as are alluded to in the CMP article. True, CM-2.0 may suffer some of the same issues, but CM-3.3 and after offload much of the data management to a better implementation of TADdaemon.exe which gates data to and from the DLS whilst TrainzUtil.exe manages adds, extractions, and so forth to the database proper; both being invisible in the background save to power users. The TS12 TADdaemon is much improved over that of TS09 & TS10s shared technology.
To pick something for download, one sets up a search criteria (see image left) then clicks on one or more assets to select them (Highlighted, colors of CM and highlighting are as you set them in your Windows theme) then drag them into the DLH pane. As you add more you'll likely note some activity going on, part of which is CM and the DLS are filling in dependencies—sub-assets the asset you selected depend upon as parts, for example the bogeys, wheels, or couplings of that railcar type, or textures, etc. which are parts of the assets you selected. As you add more by drag and drop, the list will grow a scroll bar and grow longer as dependencies are identified and added.
One problem with DLS Route downloads:Grabbing a Route or Session can bringin 'bunches of tonnes' of dependencies!(And their faults, if they use an old kuid!)[note 2]
These six assets were in the DLH
New Trainzer's need be aware of the perils of downloading too much too soon. There is a smart way to proceed, and ones less effective. The Table at right illustrates this point. Six assets were listed as downloads in the DLH pane. When the dependencies were added by CM, the download was 36! A sixfold increase, and this is a mild example. Downloading a session will bring in a route, the route (and since Layers were introduced in TS10) and sessions might both have several thousand or several hundred asset dependencies respectively.
Perhaps even more than the DLH the Search Pane will likely receive your most frequent attentions.
Notes, Footnotes & References
Config.txt files are endemic and ever present in Trainz assets, for no asset can be defined without this type of Computer Science container. The keyword-value_of_key pairing must always be kept in mind in editing or creating Trainz content. The TrainzBaseSpec contains values and containers which are most common in asset defining config.txt files.
↑ AND Boolean Operator: Is rarely needed in simple filters, for two filter entry windows entered (stacked) one-after-another automatically combine in a Boolean AND. Hence, It's usefulness comes mostly in filter formations using the AND NOT operator first with a conditional linked to a second or third criteria separated by an OR operator.
↑ TANE CM/SP1-Situation normal: Announced in the planning by Tony Hilliam in early August, without any expected publication date/deadline.
Trainz printed or pdf file Manuals, applicable version - usually in the ..\extras or ..\extras\manuals folder
TrainzOnline Wiki Config.txt file page and various other pages
TrainzOnline Wiki: Content Creator's Guide pages (various)
Previous page:↑ Trainz
This page is a stub of an intended page, its' outline, or otherwise a page in major ways temporarily incomplete relative to plans for future contents Trainz Wikibook writing and in-progress overhaul. You can help Wikibooks and the Trainz Wikibook project by adding to it and expanding it.Work needed: Page needs written as introductory tour, with worked-in How-To immediately empowering users.
Internal process - a process that shapes the earth with forces from the interior of the earth
Note: Internal processes are known as endogenetic process in pre-DSE syllabuses, which you need to know when you do past papers.
The three forces are compressional force, tensional force and shear/lateral force.
v • d • e HKDSE Geography : Core Module 1 - Opportunities and Risks: Is It Rational to Stay in Hazard-Prone Areas?Internal Processes
The Earth's Layers · Plates · Folding · Faulting · Intrusive Vulcanicity · Extrusive VulcanicityPlate Boundaries
Destructive (Continental-Continental · Continental-Oceanic · Oceanic-Oceanic) · Constructive · ConservativeTectonic Hazards
Distribution · Formation · Impacts · Factors Affecting Power · Measures · Effectiveness of MeasuresStay-Leave Decisions
Reasons for Stay · Perception of Risks
1rbqkb1r/p4ppp/2p2n2/nB2p1N1/8/5Q2/PPPP1PPP/RNB1K2R
Colman Defence. Black ignores the attacked pawn and develops the Rook.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bc4 Nf6 4.Ng5 d5 5.exd5 Na5 6.Bb5+ c6 7. dxc6 bxc6 8. Qf3 Rb8
Bd3 70%, Bxc6 19%, Ba4 6%, Be2 5%
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Two Knights Defence
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon · Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
Master of City and Regional Planning (55 semester hours)
Modeling and Simulation Certificate Program - certificate from Georgia Tech (3 core courses plus 3 elective courses), no water focus here.
Decision support tools for river basin planning and management - short course on simulation models, at Georgia Tech
Hydrologic engineering for dam design - short course at Georgia Tech
Building a GIS database for water resources applications - short course at Georgia Tech
Programming water resources tools (models) with ArcObjects - short course at Georgia Tech
"Development of a Curriculum for a Masters Degree Program in Water Resources Planning" A Discussion Paper Prepared for the AWRA/UCOWR 2001 Conference, Snowbird, UT, June 28, 2001, Prepared by a UCOWR Academic Advisory Committee established by the Army Corps of Engineers: Duane Baumann, Geography, SIU; Darrell Fontane, Engineering/Planning, CSU; Steve Gloss, Ecology/Biology, Univ. of Wyoming; Ray Huffaker, Law/Economics, WSU; Ari Michelsen, Economics, TAM; Leonard Shabman, Economics, VTU; And representatives from the Corps of Engineers: Larry Donovan, Mark Dunning, Russ Rangos. June 14, 2001 (Modified March 2002)
These functions compute and return the complex exponential value of z.
Abia Gaitezen!
Wikipedia has related information at Basque language
Wikivoyage has travel information related to: Basque phrasebook
Im sorry but this is the wrong answer. B is quite possibly true, both rods could be negative because two like charges repel. Hit back and try again.
To view this page in Manchu script, please visit here.
Manchu's word order is SOV(Subject-Object-Verb), similar to Japanese and Korean.
My father went to Harbin yesterday. There are many Manchus in Harbin.
In Harbin my father bought this Manchu language learning book.
i ere bithe be mini eme de buhe.
He gave this book to my mother.
Now my mother studies Manchu everyday.
My mother says that Manchu is easier than Chinese.
.........................................................................................................................
............................................................
Repetitive suffix, each, every..
Present tense of hendumbi (to say) with converb -me
Became (past tense of ombi - to become)
There (literally tu-ba-de, at that place)
............................................................
Manchu nouns have number and case but do not really have gender. Nouns can consist solely of a stem such as 'bithe' (book), be formed by adding suffixes to other words, or be formed by adding two nouns together such as 'ahūn deo' (brothers).
The most common suffixes that can be added to words to form nouns include:
............................................................
-gan, -gen, -gon, -han, -hen, -hon
............................................................
Note: of the above suffixes, the suffixes –ku,-kū are used for instruments, the suffix –cun is used for abstract concepts, and the suffixes –si, -ci, and –ji are used to denote people by what they do (Gorelova, M. P.198). When adding suffixes to nouns, the final ‘-n’ is often dropped.
Nouns usually do not have gender, although some obviously masculine nouns have masculine vowels, while feminine nouns have feminine vowels, e.g. haha (man), hehe (woman), ama (father) and eme (mother).
There are several ways to express the plural in Manchu:
Through the use of the suffix -sa (-se, -so, -si)
E.g. manjusa - Manchus
This is mostly used for family relationships (note final 'n' is often omitted).
E.g. amata - fathers
The suffix '-ri' is only used with a few words. E.g. mafari - grandfathers/ancestors
Manchu has 5 different cases. Cases can be attached to the proceeding noun or written separately:
This is the natural case and has no suffix.
E.g. bithe - book
Genitive (-i, -ni after -ng).
This case is used to show the possessive. The suffix -i (-ni) can also be used for instrumental case which shows the means or cause of which something happens.
E.g. ere oci mini eme i bithe - This is my mother's book (Possessive)
E.g. mafa gurun i ilha - The fatherland's flowers (Possessive)
E.g. manju gisun i arambi - To write by means of Manchu (Instrumental)
This case is used to show location or direction (at/to).
E.g. Direction: Harbin de genehe - He went to Harbin (Dative)
E.g. Location: Harbin de manjusa labdu - There are many Manchus in Harbin (Locative)
This case is used to make a noun the direct object of an action.
E.g. i ere bithe be mini eme de buha - He gave this book to my mother
E.g. te mini eme inenggidari manju gisun be tacimbi - Now my mother studies Manchu everyday.
E.g. be mafa gurun be hairambi - We love the fatherland
This case is used to show point of departure or for comparison.
E.g. monggo gurun ci jihe niyalma - The people who came from Mongolia (Point of departure)
E.g. nikan gisun ci manju gisun ja - Manchu is easier than Chinese (Comparison)
E.g. emu inenggi ci emu inenggi halukan oho - Each day is hotter than the one before (Comparison)
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
One might begin the journey by focusing on how to facilitate and support the learning process in an on-line collaborative networked environment. Not only does one need to turn the traditional model of learning upside down to construct a new model of collaboration but also a new model of learning as construction. It is a model of drawing out and drawing together ideas and participants rather than a model of memory and recall of existing accepted knowledge to fill in the tabla rasa.
The key characteristics of communication go beyond simple data and information transmission to the symbolic communication necessary for value-added learning to occur in today's workplace and
Value-added learning involves both intra-personal and interpersonal communication processes.
Facilitation occurs within the framework of a group communication model. The model and knowledge shared can serve as the basis for developing guidelines for facilitators of collaborative networked learning. It is important to focus on the following summary statements as guidelines: learners form concepts based on perceived similarities and differences among examples, e.g. data and information from the work environment, sufficiently rich data and information is available on-line from co-workers and co-learns and external databases to aid learning and knowledge creation, socio-emotional messages can establish and maintain a context where members trust one another, mutual trust supports learning and encourages the personal risk taking necessary to share ideas, articulate tentative constructs, and test out hypotheses about the world, representational tools and strategies that facilitate intra-personal message formulation need to be available for on-line interpersonal communication in order for the learner to validate personal constructs.
Communication strategies and tools which facilitate interpersonal message sharing need also to create and provide access to a record of group messages, a group database, as an aid to memory and an additional source of examples for other learners from other networks, and communication norms and a messaging structure which elicit and process feedback from participants are necessary to validate learning in the real world.
Performance platforms can be created to support on-line collaborative learning, not as a substitute for effective human communication but as tools to enhance and augment human intelligence in the workplace or adult learning spaces. Learning platforms might be supported through tools in the following categories: personal construct elicitation, personal information management tools such as hyper information and information management with intelligent linkages, and visualization and modeling tools to facilitate externalization of constructs.
Features of groupware might be used to support on-line interpersonal communication. The features include: knowledge worker tools which help groups share ideas and compare conceptual linkages, context building features of groupware, sharing feedback and refining ideas such as voting and annotation and simultaneous sending and receiving of feedback, hyper information for group concept formation, and sharing personal constructs with others in a network.
Real sufferings, for example, have manifested themselves in
1st, The reformed tariff;
2d, Two bad harvests in succession.
To which of these two last circumstances are we to attribute the first?
It is this accursed free-trade which does all the harm. It
Cum hoc, ergo propter hoc.
Free-trade distributes in the most uniform and equitable
Liberty acts on the same principle as insurances. When an
England. At the same time the harvests were very abundant;
Provisions rose in price; and the people were forced to
UNIT 4 - ⇑ The Computing Practical Project ⇑
Before you start making your project you need to know what you are going to make. This is where your analysis comes in useful and it's also worth 12 marks, that's 16% of the overall project! We'd better get started.
What do you need to include?
Hopefully by now you have some idea of your user and what they want you to do, we need to codify (write it down) it all so we can start getting some marks. The exam board has been very kind and if you check out the mark scheme they even provide a list of things that you need to include in your Analysis. We're going to take these and use them as our headings.
This should be done first. You have an idea on the sections that you need to present so you should put together some questions for your main user to get the answers you need to start putting this together. From your research you need to know the following:
The current system and how it runs
The skill levels of people using it
What they want the new system to do
Any preferences in terms of web based, phone based, application based. What platform are you developing for
A structured interview might do the trick and you need to note down all the responses to each of your questions. You should try to understand the current situation and the problem and it is recommended you perform and evidence at least two of the following methods and explain why you used each:
Once you have finished presenting your research you need to summarise what it said and explain why you used each research method.
You need to introduce your problem, a quick two paragraphs of what the problem is and how a computer might solve it. For example mention how the current system is paper based, slow and people are always losing things, the computerised system would be faster, secure and allow them to run reports and calculate things. But don't mention any languages or databases at this point, we will decide that at the end of the analysis.
Describe the current system, what it does and how it currently stores its data. Describe the flaws in the current system, is it slow, secure, easy to query, easy to use, can it have multiple people use it at once, is it easy to access?
Back up your description using as many resources as you can, including interviews, observations and pictures. This will prove to the marker that your project has a real client.
In some instances your system will involve only one user, the person you are writing it for. In most cases it will involve more than one person. You need to recognise all the users, big and small, of your system.
For example if you were making a maths revision website you have the maths teacher as your main user, but who else is going to use the system? The students of course! You would then need to write how each of these user groups would use the system and how some users would have more access than others. The teacher would be able to change the tests and see the results of all their students, they should be able to add and delete student users. The students should be able to take tests and only see their results.
For example if you were making a stock control system then the system administrator should be able to add/delete/update and re-order items of stock, run reports and add/delete/update users and suppliers. The general shop floor staff should only be able to sell items and print out receipts. The customers will have no direct use of the system.
You should also mention for each user the skills they possess. For example if they use a Mac all the time then an interface similar to an OS X interface would be useful. If they use Microsoft Office 2010 then an interface similar to that software suite would be suitable.
Identification of user needs and acceptable limitations
Summarise your research findings, what do each of your users want you to do? For example:
The teacher needs me to create a system that
The students need me to create a system that
Limitations are slightly harder to list. You need to write down what your system won't be doing for reasons of time, complexity, or user preference. These might include the system not storing user log in details as these will be managed by LDAP or, a system not enforcing spin on a pool ball, as that specific feature isn't needed by the teacher and the developer not having enough time to implement it.
In most cases you'll use a database, but you could also use a file-based system or xml.
By now you should have mentioned a couple things that your project will need to store and process (this should have come from your interviews). Where are you going to get this data from?
The new system would then look like (notice that there might be some more attributes):
An important thing to think about when building any system is how much data you will need to store and how much processing is required. This should come directly from your research and will influence how you complete your project and what sort of hardware you will need to use. For example if you only have one person sitting an online test at one time, you only need a simple computer. If you are looking to have hundreds of people using your system at once then you will need a very fast computer and probably a web based solution.
I will be storing several hundred customers and...
The revision system will store up to 100 different questions and 300 student details
Each student will have their attempt at each question recorded, making potentially 300*100 = 30000 question answer results
The system only needs to process one sale at a time because...
Like a dictionary describing all the words you can use in a sentence, this will record all the pieces of data that you want to store and process in your system. You will need to provide the following information for everything you will store data on:
If you are storing a database make sure that you have stored data on all the fields that will be in your database, for example the data above is storing data on a student in a school. What data will you need to store for your system to work?
If you are making a program, you will want to list all the variables that your program will store whilst it is running. For example, if you were creating a program to tally the score someone achieved in a quiz, you should list the variable that will store this score.
Warning: A very common mistake is to mis-size your fields. For example you are making a markbook system where you will store the age of students. The ages are between 11 and 16, so why not make the age 16 in length? The answer is because length sixteen allows you to store the age "9999999999999999 years", and this is impossible to have a student (let alone a human) that old. The length should be a more sensible 3. While the expected numbers are two digits long it is conceivable that the software may be extended to be used for older students one day and so the length should be set to cover this contingency. Do not repeat the "year 2000" problem where developers stored the year as only two digits causing millions of pounds to be spent fixing it when the year "ticked over" to zero again.
There are many ways that you can draw data flow diagrams, so if your teacher tells you one way and the way you read here is completely different, don't worry. The important thing is that you show how data moves through the current system, where it is stored, where it will be processed and how you plan it to move through the new system. It is called a data flow diagram after all! For these examples we are using the Gane Sarson method.
A typical Data Flow Diagram, you'll need a lot more detail!
There are four main components that you need to be aware of:
This generally shows all the people involved in the system. It may also indicate other external systems that you are interacting with
This describes the processing that happens to the data as it is moved from one location to another, it has data inputted and will output to a data store, another process or an entity
Generally this indicates the different computational stores used to hold your data, such as hard disk files, databases, CD ROMs etc.
This shows how data moves from one part of the system to another. You need to label the arrows to explain exactly what is moving about.
Using the descriptions we can see the diagram above means the following:
A customer can enquire about store items, the system processes the enquiry and fetches the data from the item datastore, sending the results to the customer
A customer can order an item, the system checks that the customer is real, checks the item is in stock, sends an order and finally sends the item and an invoice to the customer.
You need to produce four data flow diagrams, two showing the current situation and two showing the proposed system. For each you must show the following diagrams:
You can make them using a word processor but it's far easier to use specialist software. You can try to use dia or Open ModelSphere, which are both free. Alternatively you can use Microsoft Visio.
In software and systems engineering, a use case is a list of steps, typically defining interactions between a role (known in UML as an "actor") and a system, to achieve a goal. The actor can be a human or an external system. For example in a system where a user wants to invite some people to a party on a social network. Person:
Four related entities shown using Crow's Foot notation. This relationship shows that a receipt has one customer, one staff member and one product. And a customer can have many receipts; a staff member can process many receipts; and a category of product can be sold many times.
When thinking about how you are going to save data on your system you might decide to use a database, if this is the case you must include an E-R Diagram. If you aren't using a database explain that there is no need to complete this section. You need to recognise your main tables. There should be at least 3 tables and relationships between them. The tables don't have to be normalised at this stage but the relationships should be described in a little detail.
For each class that you are using describe:
For example, the attributes of a monster class might contain:
This will store the health of the monster, when the health gets to 0 the monster should die
This will track the x location of the monster
This will move the monster 3 points to the left
This is the most important part of your Analysis, because this is how you are going to check if your end system meets all your user needs. You need to outline three sets of objectives that are all SMART and numbered:
As far as possible all your objectives should be SMART. But what does SMART mean?
Not acceptable!
The system should be able to display 5 top scores in descending order
Is there any way that you can easily prove that you have met this objective.
Each page should load in less than 5 seconds
My system will allow the saving of user preferences
There will be a facial recognition system to allow users to log into the system
Is the objective going to help you meet your user needs?
A receipt will be printed and emailed to the customer
My cashier system will play MP3s in the background
You are limited in the time you have to complete this project. You must list the deadline in your Analysis somewhere and can you finish each objective in time?
I will show the player position on the map using 2D Vector graphics
The game will have 3D graphics as good as League of Legends
As you can probably recognise, several of the incorrect objectives above fail to meet multiple SMART criteria. Test yourself, which of these objectives are SMART enough to get you started on a good project:
M - Yes, You could evidence this by showing screen shots of this happening
A - Yes, this should be possible
R - Yes, this is core to running the system
T - Yes, this should be achievable within the time given
M - Yes, You could evidence this by showing screen shots of this happening
A - Yes, this should be possible
R - No, why can't they use the clock on the desktop
T - Yes, this should be achievable within the time given
M - You could evidence this by showing screen shots of this happening
A - Maybe, this should be possible, but why are you writing your own code, can't you use a library?
R - Yes, the game will need graphics
T - No, SVG is a complex thing to use, will you have time to implement this? Is it that core to what you are doing? Why not use pre-existing libraries?
M - Yes, You could evidence this by showing screen shots of this happening and the code behind it
R - Yes, as long as this is called for from the interview or other part of the analysis
M - Yes, You could evidence this by showing debug information, maybe a counter tallying transactions
A - Maybe, you would be hitting processing speed limitations and probably limitations in speed
R - No, this system sounds too complex as this level of speed would only be required in something like Google or Facebook
T - No, this sounds like cutting edge industry level stuff, are you sure you could achieve it in the time given?
Get these numbered objectives signed off by your client and put evidence in your writeup. This might involve copying an email into the document.
There are several ways that you could solve the problem at hand you need to list at least 3 different options. For each of them you need to mention positive and negative things and then argue out your chosen solution.
For example. If I was tasked with making a stock control system I could use the following things (with a lot more detail!)
I know how to use excelthe user also has experience in excelExcel and VBA will allow me to perform calculations and display results
Excel is a flat file database and won't let me handle links between data.The solution will only be available offline
Visual Basic.NET application and Access Database backend
I have some experience of Visual Basic from the first yearVB.NET lets me easily build a solution that will have similar interfaces to MS Office programsThey already own Access and use Windows
I need to learn more VB.NET to complete this projectThis solution will be offline only
ASP.NET and MSSQL database website based solution
This solution will allow the user to login online.Relationships will be enforceableI will be able to use SQL to perform searches
I have a lot to learn in ASP.NETThe user doesn't need to access it from multiple computersIt requires a server and networking know-how
From the choices that you suggested pick the best one and explain why. This is going to be how you are going to solve this problem!
In this section you need to justify that the techniques you used to write your analysis were correct and made sure that you managed to get all the objectives of the new system. Go back to the questionnaires, interview and observations. Include them here and explain how this made sure that you could produce a comprehensive Analysis.
Now you have completed your Analysis you need to start making your project. You should have some idea of how you are going to make your system and you now need to start acquiring all the skills you will need to complete this project. Get yourself a text book about the programming language you have chosen and make sure you can perform some simple tasks using it. At this point it would be a good idea to write a quick list of skills that you will need to learn.
Whilst you are getting those skills, head over to Design
Three versions of the software are available:
Basic: available free but limited to multiple choice questions only
Standard: all you need to create quizzes complete with 7 question types – Multiple Choice; Multiple Response; True or False; Fill in the Blank; Matching; Sequencing; Essay
Professional: fullest version of the software with added features including the partial credit question type, the plugin question type (which in effect gives you the opportunity to create almost any question type you need) – and the facility to create sections and explanation pages; add your own background and loader images and adjust image quality.
This manual contains a Quick Start Tutorial which should help you create your first quiz but there are also 5 chapters which describe how to use the software in more detail. The Extras chapter outlines some new or different ways to use the software. If you experiencing some difficulties you might find some useful information in the Frequently Asked Questions chapter.
You can print this manual if you prefer. There is an on-demand PDF and HTML version on the front page. Both versions are fully up to date and we recommend using the PDF version if you're printing the whole manual.
Have your quiz ready – think about what type of questions you want to write and above all be sure that you know the correct answer!
Go to Basic Navigation or Quick Start Tutorial
In order to send Morse Code via wigwag flag, one must obviously first learn Morse Code. See section a for details. Second, one must know how to transmit dots and dashes with the wigwag flags. The sender holds two flags, one in each hand. The "rest" position is both flags straight up. To send a dot, the flag on the right is lowered straight out to the right and then raised again. To send a dash, the left flag is lowered straight out to the left and then raised again.
Indicative (In.di.ca.ti.vo)
It doesn' t matter the irregularity of the verb. In this tense, increasing the "-s" or "-es" (consonant-ending) in the third person of the singular, it comes to the second.
To put an obliqual pronoun, put a hiphen (-) following the verb and the pronoun.
When it's in the third person, see the rules.
You can put a normal "-lhe" in the normal rule, unclearing gender.
When it ends with r, s or z, exclude the final letter and use the rule with the pronouns "-lo (s)" and "-la (s)".
Do the same thing with words ending in "m", "õe", "ões" (excluding the "s") and "ão".
Sometimes the infinitive isn' t used and it' s substituted, something rare.
Dar-te-ei = I will give you
Trazer-vos-emos = We will bring ... to You.
The obliqual form, the formation and irregularity are the same of the future of the present, but the suffix isn' t.
After he had breakfast yesterday, he walked.
Depois de tomar café ontem, ele andou.
We would know what really happened after reading that message.
The murderer had already killed his mother.
(O assassino já teria matado sua mãe.) or O assassino matara sua mãe.
Increase this particles to the conditional future:
The obliqual form is separated ever.
Eu lhe dera. or Eu dera-lhe.
Indications are that most test forms of the February 2002 LSAT included an experimental (unscored) third section. Be aware, however, that LSAC often administers a few selected forms with identical scored sections, but with their experimental sections in a different location. Ratings of this administration placed its difficulty in line with that of recent exams.
The first game was of a type that has been a staple of the LSAT's makers for years. This so-called "birthday" game involved deciding in what order bands would perform.
The second game featured another, and more difficult, staple of the test-makers: a distribution game. In this one, six campers were buying at least one of three pieces of equipment. Those who noted that the clues primarily had implications for the number of items each camper purchased were able to recognize it as a distribution game, and make a host of deductions that gave virtually complete information about four of the six campers. Those who missed the deductions found this game particularly time-consuming and frustrating.
In the third game, deductions were once again crucial to working the questions well, along with a useful and flexible diagram. Six teachers each taught one of three languages, at one of two schools. Having an efficient system for representing which teachers taught the same languages and which taught at the same school was crucial, as test-takers were often required to sort through multiple possible scenarios to arrive at their answers.
Most students of the exam recognized the final game as one of the more difficult two, although superficially it appeared similar to the first one. Here there were five positions, each one of which held one of three types of hats. Familiarity with conditional clues and their deductions was crucial here, as test-takers were asked to work several quite involved examples to arrive at their answers.
Any student familiar with the LSATs administered in the past two years should not have been surprised by the arguments sections on this February's exam, which continued the trend of having a different mix of questions than was common before the 2000 testing year. The writers of the exam continue to use slight variations on the types of questions that have historically been the staple of the LSAT.
Passage topics included the role of African American women in building the Baptist church, environmental law and the regulation of industry in the Netherlands, the use of superconductors in medical imaging technology, and a discussion of the way oral works of art are misunderstood and marginalized by contemporary scholars. In all, the subject matter, questions, and structures of all these passages fit quite closely with past Reading Comprehension sections, with an ever increasing emphasis on questions that require test-takers to draw strongly supported conclusions from the passage material. The increased emphasis on this section of reasoning skills over the simple ability to identify fair paraphrases of passage material makes exposure to these types of questions in particular all the more important for those who intend to take the LSAT in the near future.
When the system gets far too complicated, i.e. more than 3 peripheral atoms, then it is hard to reduce the reducible representation to irreducible representations. To overcome this, a formula can be used to calculate the irreducible representations.
Ammonia belongs to C3v point group.
C3v point group character table is given below.
Because there are three orbitals going in, there are three SALCs coming out.
Now the reduction formula can be applied to find the irreducible representations of the SALCs.
This means that there is one A1 SALC in the irreducible represenation
The second 1 in first term represents the character in the character table
The 0 in the second term represents the character in the reducible representation
The 1 in the second term represents the character in the irreducible representation
The first 1 in the third term represents the character in the reducible representation
The second 1 in the third term represents the character in the irreducible representation
The number of irreducible representation of A2 and E can be found with the same fashion.
Although there is A1 and only one E, this E SALC actually composed of two SALCS. As the result, in total, we have three SALCs.
Now that we know that ammonia molecule is made up by one A1 and one E SALC sets. How do we know how they look like? Projection operation is a tool to help us visualize the SALCS. It maps the SALCs into its correct orientation according to its symmetry.
The formula for projection operator is as followed:
The SALCs in ammonia, for example, can be found by using this projection operator formula.
There are a few rules to followed in order to use this formula correctly
Name the atoms alphabetically.
The axis of rotation in this case is along the z-axis counterclockwise. Hydrogen A is align with the x-axis. It is important to remember to put one peripheral atom along x or y axis in a three-fold symmetry for convenience.
Now, we first determine how A1 should look like. (You should be able to immediately visualize A1. However, here is a simple demonstration)
(Note that the symmetry operation is expanded to its unique operation.)
First row is focusing on hydrogen A atom.
When E operation is done on hydrogen A, hydrogen A is returned. Then A is multiply by the character from the irreducible representation, which is 1.
When C3 operation counterclockwise is done on hydrogen A, hydrogen B is returned. Then B is multiply by the character from the irreducible representation, which is 1.
When C32 operation counterclockwise is done on hydrogen A, hydrogen C is returned. Then C is multiply by the character from the irreducible representation, which is 1.
When vertical reflection plane operation along hydrogen A is done on hydrogen A, hydrogen A is returned. Then A is multiply by the character from the irreducible representation, which is 1.
When vertical reflection plane operation along hydrogen B is done on hydrogen A, hydrogen C is returned. Then C is multiply by the character from the irreducible representation, which is 1.
When vertical reflection plane operation along hydrogen C is done on hydrogen A, hydrogen B is returned. Then B is multiply by the character from the irreducible representation, which is 1.
Using similar operation focusing on hydrogen B and C, the outcome is the same. (Note: this is because A1 is singly degenerate)
Which can be further reduced to A + B + C
As the result, the SALC looks exactly like:
Now, we will determine how the E SALCs would look like, which is not as trivial as the A1 SALC.
(Note that the coefficients are different because the coefficients from the character table for E is 2 -1 0)
We need to figure out two unique E SALCs from these three equations. This is why we need to put a peripheral atom along one of the axis.
Since hydrogen A is along the x-axis, the first equation is a unique equation.
However, the second unique equation should not contain hydrogen A. In order to get an equation without hydrogen A, the other two equations must subtract each other.
As the result, one of the unique equations is 2A – B – C, while the other one being 3B -3C, which further reduces to B – C.
Now we are ready to draw the E SALCs.
In ammonia, the 2S orbital of nitrogen not only forms 1a1 molecular orbital with the A1 SALC but also mixes with 2Pz to form the 2a1 molecular orbital. This orbital is hence known as sp hybridization. Because 2a1 molecular orbital is formed by mixing with the 2S orbital, the orbital is stabilized and hence has lower orbital energy.
The electrons in the 2a1 molecular orbital are the lone pair on ammonia. This sp hybridized orbital has an inversion center. This inversion center can readily flip the nitrogen as the figure shown below. As the result, there is never a chiral center in amine groups, even though four different constituents are attached to nitrogen.
Figueroa, Joshua. "Character Tables, Irreducible Representations of Central Atom." Lecture 9. University of California, San Diego, La Jolla. Lecture.
Figueroa, Joshua. "SALCs, Molecular Orbital Diagrams, and High Symmetry Point Groups." Lecture 10. University of California, San Diego, La Jolla. Lecture.
Figueroa, Joshua. "More SALC’s Molecular Orbital Diagrams and High Symmetry Point Groups." Lecture 11. University of California, San Diego, La Jolla. Lecture.
Figueroa, Joshua. "Molecular Orbital Diagrams Featuring and Pi-Bonding and High Symmetry Point Groups." Lecture 13. University of California, San Diego, La Jolla. Lecture.
Figueroa, Joshua. "Degenerate Orbitals, Methods for Determining Irreducible Representations and SALCs." Lecture 14. University of California, San Diego, La Jolla. Lecture.
This page gives sources for page Conlang/Types.
Aesthetics in success of Esperanto: A Personal Analysis, How to Build a Language, Donald J. Harlow, 2000.
Drifting apart of Loglan and Lojban: Re: LUNATIC again, CONLANG-L, Logical language group, November 5, 1998.
A Wikibookian has nominated this page for cleanup because:Add to a book.You can help make it better. Please review any relevant discussion.
With lessons learnt from C and C++, Java emerged as a language of choice for the Internet programmer in it's early days circa 1995. Many a programmers adopted this easy-to-use language almost instantly after its launch and why wouldn't they when it offered all the goodies in one bag: Automatic Garbage Collection, Graphics, Animation, Graphical User Interfaces, Platform Independence, Networking, Internationalisation and Documentation.
All that hype: Rise and fall of Java
The year 1996 saw Java develop a massive following as Usenet groups flooded with vast amounts of news and information about the language. The Java beta and 1.0 might have caused a huge noise in the development community, but it was the version 1.1 launch in March 1997 that led people into thinking "Can Java replace Windows?"1.
People began measuring Java up against systems like Microsoft Windows and no matter how impressive Java seemed, people began scratching up tidbits against the language. Some said it was slow, some simply disliked it because the drawLine(...) method in the Graphics class drew a line that was of 1px width. And soon technical papers began appearing on websites benchmarking Java speeds and issues related to performance hits and glitches in Java programs. Java faded out.
With Java out of the scene, software vendors like Microsoft adopted almost all of the functionalities of Java (the Virtual Machine Bytecode, Garbage collection and Multithreading), plastered it over their existing products namely Visual C++ and Visual Basic to come out with a new language, C# and a brand new platform, .Net. Java was long forgotten. C# was now the language of choice for a programmer, a language with the same functionality as that of Java and the speed of C/C++. C# ruled over Java in all aspects.
Java started losing developers, heck, I was one of them. But then the minor version incremented. The 1.3 was now 1.4. Hope appeared at the horizon of neglect as streaks of bright red at sunrise would. The Java language was not dead yet! Still in beta it clambered, resurrected but to vain. C# development had juiced out half of developers once devoted Javaholics. A few months later Java incremented to 1.5, but this time Java had some major changes introduced into the language syntax to match some constructs like enum and the foreach loop equivalent common to C#. Java attracted a few more developers but it had yet to convince the end-users. Can it?
We'll be exploring how Java can be useful for developers and users both on the Windows platform in this book and will travel deep into the world of Java to learn what's new in Java.
It doesn't just end with this book. We will try to provide ongoing support to readers of this book and keep on improving the text of the book through the discussion link on the top of each and every page of this book.
What makes an author more merrier than response? We welcome comments to the manuscript and would like to hear from all the readers of the book. If you'd like to talk to any of the authors of the book, go ahead and do so using the discussion link on top of the page.
Please let us know if there are any errors in this book, lest correct them yourself and provide us with your suggestions fro future editions.
Can Java replace Windows? http://pandonia.canberra.edu.au/java/auugjava/paper.html
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Evaluate the appropriate competition policy for a natural monopoly
Most true monopolies today in the U.S. are regulated, natural monopolies. A natural monopoly poses a difficult challenge for competition policy, because the structure of costs and demand seems to make competition unlikely or costly. A natural monopoly arises when average costs are declining over the range of production that satisfies market demand. This typically happens when fixed costs are large relative to variable costs. As a result, one firm is able to supply the total quantity demanded in the market at lower cost than two or more firms—so splitting up the natural monopoly would raise the average cost of production and force customers to pay more.
Public utilities, the companies that have traditionally provided water and electrical service across much of the United States, are leading examples of natural monopoly. It would make little sense to argue that a local water company should be broken up into several competing companies, each with its own separate set of pipes and water supplies. Installing four or five identical sets of pipes under a city, one for each water company, so that each household could choose its own water provider, would be terribly costly. The same argument applies to the idea of having many competing companies for delivering electricity to homes, each with its own set of wires. Before the advent of wireless phones, the argument also applied to the idea of many different phone companies, each with its own set of phone wires running through the neighborhood.
The Choices in Regulating a Natural Monopoly
So what then is the appropriate competition policy for a natural monopoly? [link] illustrates the case of natural monopoly, with a market demand curve that cuts through the downward-sloping portion of the average cost curve. Points A, B, C, and F illustrate four of the main choices for regulation. [link] outlines the regulatory choices for dealing with a natural monopoly.
Regulatory Choices in Dealing with Natural Monopoly(*Total Revenue is given by multiplying price and quantity. However, some of the price values in this table have been rounded for ease of presentation.)
The first possibility is to leave the natural monopoly alone. In this case, the monopoly will follow its normal approach to maximizing profits. It determines the quantity where MR = MC, which happens at point P at a quantity of 4. The firm then looks to point A on the demand curve to find that it can charge a price of 9.3 for that profit-maximizing quantity. Since the price is above the average cost curve, the natural monopoly would earn economic profits.
A second outcome arises if antitrust authorities decide to divide the company, so that the new firms can compete. As a simple example, imagine that the company is cut in half. Thus, instead of one large firm producing a quantity of 4, two half-size firms each produce a quantity of 2. Because of the declining average cost curve (AC), the average cost of production for each of the half-size companies each producing 2, as shown at point B, would be 9.75, while the average cost of production for a larger firm producing 4 would only be 7.75. Thus, the economy would become less productively efficient, since the good is being produced at a higher average cost. In a situation with a downward-sloping average cost curve, two smaller firms will always have higher average costs of production than one larger firm for any quantity of total output. In addition, the antitrust authorities must worry that splitting the natural monopoly into pieces may be only the start of their problems. If one of the two firms grows larger than the other, it will have lower average costs and may be able to drive its competitor out of the market. Alternatively, two firms in a market may discover subtle ways of coordinating their behavior and keeping prices high. Either way, the result will not be the greater competition that was desired.
A third alternative is that regulators may decide to set prices and quantities produced for this industry. The regulators will try to choose a point along the market demand curve that benefits both consumers and the broader social interest. Point C illustrates one tempting choice: the regulator requires that the firm produce the quantity of output where marginal cost crosses the demand curve at an output of 8, and charge the price of 3.5, which is equal to marginal cost at that point. This rule is appealing because it requires price to be set equal to marginal cost, which is what would occur in a perfectly competitive market, and it would assure consumers a higher quantity and lower price than at the monopoly choice A. In fact, efficient allocation of resources would occur at point C, since the value to the consumers of the last unit bought and sold in this market is equal to the marginal cost of producing it.
Attempting to bring about point C through force of regulation, however, runs into a severe difficulty. At point C, with an output of 8, a price of 3.5 is below the average cost of production, which is 5.7, and so if the firm charges a price of 3.5, it will be suffering losses. Unless the regulators or the government offer the firm an ongoing public subsidy (and there are numerous political problems with that option), the firm will lose money and go out of business.
Perhaps the most plausible option for the regulator is point F; that is, to set the price where AC crosses the demand curve at an output of 6 and a price of 6.5. This plan makes some sense at an intuitive level: let the natural monopoly charge enough to cover its average costs and earn a normal rate of profit, so that it can continue operating, but prevent the firm from raising prices and earning abnormally high monopoly profits, as it would at the monopoly choice A. Of course, determining this level of output and price with the political pressures, time constraints, and limited information of the real world is much harder than identifying the point on a graph. For more on the problems that can arise from a centrally determined price, see the discussion of price floors and price ceilings in [/contents/51f2070b-4aae-4229-90e9-f4cc3842b987%405 Demand and Supply].
Indeed, regulators of public utilities for many decades followed the general approach of attempting to choose a point like F in [link]. They calculated the average cost of production for the water or electricity companies, added in an amount for the normal rate of profit the firm should expect to earn, and set the price for consumers accordingly. This method was known as cost-plus regulation.
Cost-plus regulation raises difficulties of its own. If producers are reimbursed for their costs, plus a bit more, then at a minimum, producers have less reason to be concerned with high costs—because they can just pass them along in higher prices. Worse, firms under cost-plus regulation even have an incentive to generate high costs by building huge factories or employing lots of staff, because what they can charge is linked to the costs they incur.
Thus, in the 1980s and 1990s, some regulators of public utilities began to use price cap regulation, where the regulator sets a price that the firm can charge over the next few years. A common pattern was to require a price that declined slightly over time. If the firm can find ways of reducing its costs more quickly than the price caps, it can make a high level of profits. However, if the firm cannot keep up with the price caps or suffers bad luck in the market, it may suffer losses. A few years down the road, the regulators will then set a new series of price caps based on the firm’s performance.
Price cap regulation requires delicacy. It will not work if the price regulators set the price cap unrealistically low. It may not work if the market changes dramatically so that the firm is doomed to incurring losses no matter what it does—say, if energy prices rise dramatically on world markets, then the company selling natural gas or heating oil to homes may not be able to meet price caps that seemed reasonable a year or two ago. But if the regulators compare the prices with producers of the same good in other areas, they can, in effect, pressure a natural monopoly in one area to compete with the prices being charged in other areas. Moreover, the possibility of earning greater profits or experiencing losses—instead of having an average rate of profit locked in every year by cost-plus regulation—can provide the natural monopoly with incentives for efficiency and innovation.
With natural monopoly, market competition is unlikely to take root, so if consumers are not to suffer the high prices and restricted output of an unrestricted monopoly, government regulation will need to play a role. In attempting to design a system of price cap regulation with flexibility and incentive, government regulators do not have an easy task.
In the case of a natural monopoly, market competition will not work well and so, rather than allowing an unregulated monopoly to raise price and reduce output, the government may wish to regulate price and/or output. Common examples of regulation are public utilities, the regulated firms that often provide electricity and water service.
Cost-plus regulation refers to government regulation of a firm which sets the price that a firm can charge over a period of time by looking at the firm’s accounting costs and then adding a normal rate of profit. Price cap regulation refers to government regulation of a firm where the government sets a price level several years in advance. In this case, the firm can either make high profits if it manages to produce at lower costs or sell a higher quantity than expected or suffer low profits or losses if costs are high or it sells less than expected.
Draw the demand, marginal revenue, marginal cost, and average cost curves. Do they have the normal shapes?
Yes, all curves have normal shapes.
From the graph you drew to answer [link], would you say this transit system is a natural monopoly? Justify.
Yes it is a natural monopoly because average costs decline over the range that satisfies the market demand. For example, at the point where the demand curve and the average cost curve meet, there are economies of scale.
If public utilities are a natural monopoly, what would be the danger in deregulating them?
If public utilities are a natural monopoly, what would be the danger in splitting them up into a number of separate competing firms?
In the middle of the twentieth century, major U.S. cities had multiple competing city bus companies. Today, there is usually only one and it runs as a subsidized, regulated monopoly. What do you suppose caused the change?
Why are urban areas willing to subsidize urban transit systems? Does the argument for subsidies make sense to you?
Use [link] to answer the following questions.
If the transit system was allowed to operate as an unregulated monopoly, what output would it supply and what price would it charge?
If the transit system was regulated to operate with no subsidy (i.e., at zero economic profit), what approximate output would it supply and what approximate price would it charge?
If the transit system was regulated to provide the most allocatively efficient quantity of output, what output would it supply and what price would it charge? What subsidy would be necessary to insure this efficient provision of transit services?
An actor is something that may perform an action. This commonly will be a user, a process, a thread, or similar.
An actee or object is something that may be manipulated by an actor. It may be a file, registry key, relational database entry, hardware device, or similar. Generally, this is data. Actors can generally serve as objects too; one process (serving as actor) may kill another process (serving as object).
An action or right is something that an actor may do to an object. Example actions include reading and writing.
Security systems generally implement a useful subset of a 3-dimensional matrix with dimensions of actor, object, and action. Implementing the full matrix is never done for both performance and usability reasons.
Mainstream operating system security is primarily based on access control lists. For each object, we can maintain a list of actors which may manipulate it.
Capability-based systems, not to be confused with systems that refer to special administrative abilities as capabilities, flip things around the other way. For each actor, they maintain a list of objects upon which the actor may act.
Mainstream operating system security is discretionary. That is, an object owner may decide who else has access to the object.
Mandatory access control is non-discretionary. A set of rules acts to enforce security, setting up permissions that users are unable to override. This stops insiders from being effective spies, selling designs to the competition, sharing medical records with the press, running spyware, and making many types of user errors.
None of the above methods excludes any other of the above methods. DG/UX had capabilities, discretionary ACLs, and mandatory access control. Linux provides discretionary ACLs and several choices for mandatory access control. File descriptors, available on all UNIX-like systems, can serve as capabilities.
The first security attempts were protection schemes, which controlled the access of programs to sensitive areas like the 0 page, where the software interrupts for the operating system calls were usually stored for efficient calling, or the operating system areas, where the operating system code was kept while it was running. This capability was required for time-sharing because neophyte programmers sometimes overwrote the operating system shutting down the whole computer because they didn't understand the addressing system. CPU's like the Z80 began to be designed to set aside "System" areas so that they couldn't be overwritten by mistake.
One way of doing this was to create a separate name space for the system and control access to it.
Often the documentation of how to access the protected mode was scant, or missing from popular books, as an attempt to secure it by obscurity. This turned out to be relatively useless since it meant that an underground market for information was created, and only the crackers knew for sure how they were breaking into the operating systems.
An application like Windows could create a virtualized version of itself, and modify the interrupts within that one virtual version, without affecting the rest of the operating system. This is usually what the difference is, between 286 and 386 protective mode, the Virtual copy of windows with the ability to modify its own interrupt vectors and not affect the rest of the machine. Up until the 386 protected mode, all programs shared the same interrupt vectors and one programs mishandling or malware sabotage of the interrupts could trigger the collapse of the whole system.
Traditional UNIX access control is a type of discretionary ACL. The many possible actions are grouped into four categories: read, write, execute, and special operations normally reserved for an object owner. The list of actors associated with each object is rather restricted, simplifying both the implementation and the user experience. There are three actors listed: owner, group, and other. An actor gets the permissions of the first of those that it qualifies as. The owner always gets special operations that the others do not get. The group is an indirect reference to a list of actors specified elsewhere, and thus is a form of compression. The "other" is just that, all other actors. Through the creation of groups, traditional UNIX access control can provide a great deal of power. The creation of groups is normally limited however, often being an administrative action that requires human approval.
The action categories may be more or less fine-grained. Netware uses read, write, create, erase, modify, file scan, access control, and supervisor. A system may split the normal "write" category into overwrite and append. A system may lack an "execute" category, instead simply requiring read access to execute a file.
Many systems allow for somewhat arbitrary lists of actors to be associated with each object. This includes Windows, modern UNIX-like systems including Linux, and Netware. The list might support a dozen entries or a few hundred entries, as determined to be a good compromise between performance and control.
An interesting innovation in ACLs has been hierarchical actors. For example, the VSTa OS used decimal, dot-delimited actor identifiers. In this scheme, a userid is a series of decimal numbers separated by dots (e.g., 1.85.23.323.888) and if a user possesses a userid which corresponds to the object's userid up to its end, then the user owns the object. So for example, a user possessing userid 1.85.23 would own any object assigned to 1.85.23.323.888 whereas the object itself (whether another user or program) wouldn't be able to access other objects owned by 1.85.23. This scheme allows for the dynamic creation of a hierarchy of users and subusers. A weaker form of this, compatible with the vast body of POSIX software, can be had by providing a mechanism for users of a UNIX-like system to create and control groups.
Capabilities are unforgeable references to objects that let their holder access a well-defined subset of operations defined on that object.
There are many different things which may serve as capabilities. There are human-readable capabilities called "passwords" which people make use of. There are flat, low-level, centralized capabilities implemented by experimental OS kernels. There are tickets granted by Kerberos servers. There are UNIX-style file descriptors, which may be passed from process to process to provide access.
Operating systems such as KeyKOS and EROS have used flat, low-level and highly centralized capabilities, leaving the implementation of human-useful capabilities to higher level layers.
Capabilities in such schemes are flat because they can't be interrogated. You can't ask such a capability about, say, when it was created or how many times it's been accessed. Neither do such capabilities possess internal state which can be mutated. Typically, one can create a new downgraded capability from a capability one possesses, but one can't downgrade or change in any way the original capability itself. These capabilities aren't objects but primitive data types.
Capabilities in such schemes are low-level because they do not offer high-level security abstractions. In KeyKOS, capabilities were exactly of two types, read and read+write, though KeyKOS capabilities could contain additional information to implement service levels and other such. Capabilities in such schemes do not naturally aggregate other capabilities (a very simple and highly useful security abstraction), one must artificially create an object in between whose sole job is to aggregate them. Note that certain security abstractions (like dynamic permission inheritance) are practically unimplementable on top of a low-level system.
Capabilities in such schemes are centralized because the kernel, and only the kernel, manages all capabilities. Rather than every module exporting its own capabilities, the only capabilities there are in the kernel. This is actually a consequence of using low-level capabilities. If capabilities were sufficiently high-level as to provide message-passing services, then it would be feasible to force every module to use secondary capabilities that all route through a single protected kernel capability. Instead, each module (called a Domain) in KeyKOS had access to a maximum of exactly 16 capabilities in special slots protected by the kernel and accessible only through special calls.
Tradational mandatory access control or MAC is modeled on the scheme used by the U.S. government for handling classified information. More specifically, this is mandatory sensitivity control, or MSEN. There are levels of security such as TOP SECRET, SECRET, CLASSIFIED, and UNCLASSIFIED. There are categories based on need-to-know or special program access. An actor with SECRET access is prohibited from reading TOP SECRET data, but might be permitted to write to it. (there may be an additional discretionary ACL which prevents this though) One may be able to read from lower security levels and write to higher security levels. There may be a concept of contamination, allowing an actor with SECRET access to write UNCLASSIFIED data as long as no CLASSIFIED or SECRET data has been read.
Mandatory integrity control (MINT) works the other way, preventing pristine objects from being contaminated with junk. In this case, all actors are permitted to read the most trusted data. An actor that tries to execute something downloaded from an untrusted source will either be stopped or will lose the ability to write to more trusted objects.
More modern systems combine the functions of MSEN and MINT into a state-transition model with roles. As actors do things, their state may change. In a UNIX-like system with role-based access control, the execution of a new executable is a particularly important point at which state transitions happen. Role-based security is particularly useful for enforcing privacy regulations such as HIPPA (U.S. medical info law) and the EU privacy laws. Two popular implementations of this are SE Linux and RSBAC, both available for Linux.
The advent of International Networking spread the security concerns outside the usual realm of the operating system, to the data that was moving to and from the system over the network. The ability to mimmic a valid data packet meant that data could be changed enroute simply by rerouting the valid packet, and replacing it with an invalid packet. As a result, security had to be spread not only to the local system, but also to all critical correspondence between systems. At first such mechanisms were implemented by sending digests of the original data as part of the datastream, under the assumption that a changed packet would not fit the original digest. However it was found that digests were not cryptographically secure and could be fooled into thinking that data was valid when it wasn't. As well, sending data in clear meant that someone in an intervening system could read the packet with a packet sniffer, and learn what the information was.
The idea when this was determined became to cryptographically protect the data, which would at least it was hoped slow down the reading of the mail, and cryptographically secure the digest, so that it couldn't be fooled as easily.
Today in 2004 the OpenNet Initiative was announced. It monitored and reported on filtering and surveillance of Internet traffic.
For a download, see github: https://github.com/lindsay-stevens/openclinica_sqldatamart
Windows OS (tested with Server 2008 R 2, 64-bit, and Windows 7)
Progress tested with 9.2.2, 64-bit)
Progress ODBC drivers (tested with 9.02.0100, both 32-bit and 64-bit installed)
Access Run-time (tested with 2010, 32-bit) or MS Office
Batch script which restores a daily production backup into the target server, then executes the sql script and Access database.
Availability of all data in the OpenClinica database in SQL without needing to go through the ODM XML extract as an intermediate data source, or being limited by what it includes.
Availability of all related code for customisation and bug fixing. The code that generates ODM XML is open source but the code for OpenClinica Enterprise Data Mart is not.
The provided SQL script and Access database process the data in an OpenClinica database into a set of study metadata tables, as well as a table per item group with the data pivoted such that variables are in their own column.
A schema is created for each study.
A role is created for each schema; the role has access to only that schema. These roles are intended to limit the scope of database connections in order to avoid mistakes, rather than as a security measure.
A table is created for each item group.
In each item group table, a column is created for each item in the item group. An accompanying column is created for the item if it uses response options. If the item uses multi-choice, this pair of columns is created for each response where there is value.
Additional tables are created with the following data:
Null value handling: At the moment null codes in non-text are dropped when the data is transformed because it is the wrong type (OC Data Mart doesn't handle null codes either).
Install the Access Runtime on the server (if MS Office not installed already)
Edit postgres configuration (both postgresql.conf and pg_hba.conf) to allow remote connections, e.g. allow local, all, or allow connections from IPs on your network, etc.
Configure oc_access_processor
Enter details of your postgres database.
If you want to add to the standard columns in each item group dataset, modify the array in mod_populate_rowheaders. Make sure the dimensions in the public rowheaders variable are the same as the number of elements (default 13x2).
Use Access to package oc_access_processor into an installable runtime file, and install it on the server. If the server has a copy of MS Office, just copy it to the server.
If packaging in Access 2010, you must add a registry key in order to avoid a bug in the packager which results in the runtime user being unable to permanently trust the database. This means that a privacy warning will be shown every time the database is opened, halting the process until the warning is manually acknowledged. Required registry key settings are:
Key - "Software\Microsoft\Office\14.0\Access\Security\Trusted Locations\2013-09-20 oc access processor"
Change the last part according to the application name
Modify batch file to suit your file locations. It needs to restore the daily backup (preferably on a different server), run the warehousing script and open the Access database and run the ‘run_get_study_list’ macro.
Add scheduled task to run the batch script after the daily backup is run, e.g. 30 mins after.
A log is kept in oc_access_processor with the start, stop time for each study processed. It is created automatically the first time. Once the log has 150 or more entries, the oldest 25% are deleted.
Once set up, the study data will be refreshed every day and ready for use in other programs.
In order to get other Access databases to connect to postgres and get a copy of the study data, do the following:
Ensure that the postgres ODBC drivers are installed on each client machine.
The ‘import / link tables’ action opens a form that allows a user to select a list of tables from their study schema, and either create corresponding linked tables, or create local table copies of the remote tables. The table list is saved as a query definition (called oc_tables_to_copy). Both actions delete the existing definition with the same name so keep this in mind for any defined relationships.
Naming limitations beyond those imposed by OpenClinica are as follows. The function ‘process_text’ truncates strings to 45 characters, after removing any non-alphanumeric characters and replacing spaces with underscores.
Study name is run through process_text, so each study name needs to be unique in the first 45 characters. OpenClinica allows 255 characters. The processed name is used for the role name and password created for each study.
Item name is converted to lowercase, and truncated to 12 characters. OpenClinica allows 255 characters.
It is assumed that item names are created with maximum 8 alphanumeric characters (underscores allowed) for CDISC / SAS compatibility. Not enforced, it has not been tested what happens when longer item names are used.
The additional 4 characters are an allowance for multi-value fields. Their item names are modified to add the coded value after an underscore. E.g. item name ‘MYMULTI’ has a coded response 99 which means ‘something’; the item name becomes ‘mymulti_99’. Longer multi-value codes would need to be unique within the first 3 characters (this has not been tested).
Item description is run through process_text. OpenClinica allows 4000 characters.
Item variable column names in the item group tables are composed of the processed item name and item description joined together. E.g. item name ‘MYITEM’ description ‘My first OpenClinica item which collects my favourite variable’ will get a column name of ‘myitem_my_first_openclinica_item_which_collects_my_f’, which highlights the virtue of short, meaningful item descriptions.
Processing of null value codes has not been added at this stage. If they are used, and the item is not a string, Access will throw a type mismatch error and not insert the value (e.g. failed to insert ‘NI’ into an integer field). At present the transform_insert_ig_data function resumes if a type mismatch errors occurs in the position where they are expected.
A way to look up null codes would be to filter the clinicaldata table for CRFs where null codes are allowed, and filter the item value column for values containing any of those null codes.
To avoid this issue, add an item or response list option to capture why a value is missing instead of using the Null Value code feature, or add an explanation in an annotation discrepancy note.
Access cannot process tables or queries with more than 255 columns. Whether or not this is a problem depends on the number of items, how many of them are single-select and how many of them are multi-select. For example:
This is OK: 13 rowheaders + 15 multi-value items with 6 response options each (results in up to 90 columns, depending on responses) + (up to) 90 code label columns = 193 columns.
This is OK: 13 rowheaders + 10 date fields + 10 single-select items + 10 integer fields + 10 float fields + 5 multi-value items with 10 response options each (results in up to 50 columns, depending on responses) + (up to) 60 code label columns = 163 columns.
This issue was encountered during development; the easiest solution was to add update queries which serialised the item group items according to their item form order. These update queries have been commented out but are present and would be required in functions make_local_clinicaldata, make_local_metadata, make_local_item_metadata.
Write the data out to an SQL file or a set of CSVs for import to other RDBMS or programs. It is possible to write text files from Access using the Microsoft Scripting Runtime library, the main advantage being that both the DDL and DML statements could be included, like in the Enterprise Data Mart downloadable file. It may be simpler to use Postgres’ COPY function for CSV. Alternatively an ODBC connection could be set up.
Re-write VBA code in a less reprehensible language that can be run on linux, like java or python. I have no immediate purpose for this other than personal satisfaction, so it might be a while.
The main hurdle is reproducing the Access crosstab/pivot function, which could be done at once with an enormous CASE…WHEN-style pivot. This can’t be done from Access because it can’t send SQL statements over 64000 characters long. Postgres has a much larger statement size limit.
Another approach could be to insert the distinct rowheader data, and then add each column using a series of UPDATE statements – which would also avoid / relax the column limit issue, as the limit for Postgres is somewhere between 250 and 1600, depending on the data.
While I avoid null value codes, some users probably value the feature and would like the null type information to be as usable as the rest of the data. A possible implementation could be to add a column for the null code string for any column where it is present; however this could worsen the issue of Access’ 255 column-per-table limit.
The iPhone is a global product. Apple does not manufacture the iPhone components, nor does it assemble them. The assembly is done by Foxconn Corporation, a Taiwanese company, at its factory in Sengzhen, China. But, Samsung, the electronics firm and competitor to Apple, actually supplies many of the parts that make up an iPhone—about 26%. That means, that Samsung is both the biggest supplier and biggest competitor for Apple. Why do these two firms work together to produce the iPhone? To understand the economic logic behind international trade, you have to accept, as these firms do, that trade is about mutually beneficial exchange. Samsung is one of the world’s largest electronics parts suppliers. Apple lets Samsung focus on making the best parts, which allows Apple to concentrate on its strength—designing elegant products that are easy to use. If each company (and by extension each country) focuses on what it does best, there will be gains for all through trade.
In this chapter, you will learn about:
What Happens When a Country Has an Absolute Advantage in All Goods
The Benefits of Reducing Barriers to International Trade
We live in a global marketplace. The food on your table might include fresh fruit from Chile, cheese from France, and bottled water from Scotland. Your wireless phone might have been made in Taiwan or Korea. The clothes you wear might be designed in Italy and manufactured in China. The toys you give to a child might have come from India. The car you drive might come from Japan, Germany, or Korea. The gasoline in the tank might be refined from crude oil from Saudi Arabia, Mexico, or Nigeria. As a worker, if your job is involved with farming, machinery, airplanes, cars, scientific instruments, or many other technology-related industries, the odds are good that a hearty proportion of the sales of your employer—and hence the money that pays your salary—comes from export sales. We are all linked by international trade, and the volume of that trade has grown dramatically in the last few decades.
The first wave of globalization started in the nineteenth century and lasted up to the beginning of World War I. Over that time, global exports as a share of global GDP rose from less than 1% of GDP in 1820 to 9% of GDP in 1913. As the Nobel Prize-winning economist Paul Krugman of Princeton University wrote in 1995:It is a late-twentieth-century conceit that we invented the global economy just yesterday. In fact, world markets achieved an impressive degree of integration during the second half of the nineteenth century. Indeed, if one wants a specific date for the beginning of a truly global economy, one might well choose 1869, the year in which both the Suez Canal and the Union Pacific railroad were completed. By the eve of the First World War steamships and railroads had created markets for standardized commodities, like wheat and wool, that were fully global in their reach. Even the global flow of information was better than modern observers, focused on electronic technology, tend to realize: the first submarine telegraph cable was laid under the Atlantic in 1858, and by 1900 all of the world’s major economic regions could effectively communicate instantaneously.This first wave of globalization crashed to a halt in the beginning of the twentieth century. World War I severed many economic connections. During the Great Depression of the 1930s, many nations misguidedly tried to fix their own economies by reducing foreign trade with others. World War II further hindered international trade. Global flows of goods and financial capital rebuilt themselves only slowly after World War II. It was not until the early 1980s that global economic forces again became as important, relative to the size of the world economy, as they were before World War I.
Con geologie on studia li terra e li coses in it...
...e con chimie coses quam ferre, argente, aure.
Con magnetes on posse crear marvelosi cosis sin glutine.
E con li electricitá on posse leer libres mem durant li nocte.
Ti-ci por Jonathan Harker.
4 octobre. – Pos har leet li fonografic missage de Van Helsing a Mina, li povri puella aleviat se mult. Ja li certitá que li Comto es in extrania ha comfortat la. Por mi parte, nu quande li horribil dangere ne es proxim it sembla desfacil a creder. Mem mi terribil experienties in Castelle Dracula sembla un reve de long obliviat. Ci u hay li frisc aere de autun e li brilliant luce solari –
Denov li dies passa velocimen, quam in anteyan témpores. It es ja tri horas.
5 octobre, 5 horas. – Raporte pri nor incontra. Present: Professor Van Helsing, Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, Sr. Quincey Morris, Jonathan Harker, Mina Harker.
Dr. Van Helsing descrit qualmen ili decovrit quel nave Comto Dracula prendet e ad u il ea:
“Pro que yo savet que il volet retornar a Transylvania, yo esset cert que il vell ear tra li Rivere Danube, o ad alcú in li Nigri Mare. Noi savet nullcos, e li comense esset desfacil. Noi serchat li naves queles departet por li Nigri Mare li nocte passat, e un nave con segles, pro que Madam Mina parlat pri to. Lord Godalming suggestet que noi mey leer ne li jurnale li Times, ma li Lloyd’s, u omni naves es registrat, mem li micris. Ta noi trovat solmen un quel departet por li Nigri Mare con li marea (mareas = alt e bass mare), nominat li Tsaressa (tsar = rey de Russia) Catherine.
Talmen noi visitat li portu, e trovat un mann in un oficie quel es tam micri que li mann sembla plu larg (larg = láteralmen grand) quam li oficie self. A le noi inquisite pri li eada del Tsaressa Catherine. Il blasfema (blasfemar = dir mal coses) mult, e su visage es rubi e voce grand, ma il es un bon chap, e quande Quincey dat le alquo de su tasca il auxiliat nos mult. Il venit con nos e trovat altri simil mannes, e anc tis blasfema, diente paroles queles yo ne comprende ma posse divinar (divinar = comprender sequente su sentiment), paroles quam sanguant e maledit.
Li naveros esset ocupat con li preparationes e ne cuidat se pri li mann, ma subitmen venit un nebul del rivere, e li Tsaressa Catherine ne posset departer tam tost quam expectat. Denov li capitano blasfemat, diente ‘sanguant’ mult vezes, poy que il ne volet departer pos li alt marea. Li alt marea venit, e subitmen aparit li tenui mann, qui questionat u su buxe hat esset plazzat. Li capitano replicat que il volet que li buxe esse in li inferne. Ma li tenui mann trovat su buxe, e venit sur li borde in li nebul, quel strax desaparit. Questionante altri naveros on savet que li nebul ne esset trovat in altri locs del rivere, ma que li Tsaressa Catherina departet li portu in li matine con li marea.
Talmen, mi car Madam Mina, noi va reposar un poc, nam nor ínamico es sur li mare, con li nebul, vers li bocca del Danube. Un segle-nave ne es tre rapid, e noi va posser ear ta plu rapidmen sur terre. Lu max bon es trovar le quande il es in li buxe inter li leva e cade del sole, quande il ne posse luctar. Noi have quelc dies por fabricar (fabricar = crear detalliatmen) nor plan. Noi conosse omnicos pri u il posse ear, nam noi conosse li proprietario del nave, qui dat nos li tot facturas e paperes pri it. Li buxe va aterrar (aterrar = atinger li terre) in Varna, u in firma nominat Ristics va prender it.”
Pos li raporte de Dr. Van Helsing, yo questionat le ca il esset cert que li Comto esset sur li nave. Il respondet: “Noi have li max bon pruva pri to: tui hipnose ti-ci matine.” Yo questionat esque it esset vermen necessi chassar li Comto, nam yo time li pensada de Jonathan lassar me ci. Il respondet con passion, in prim con un quiet voce, poy plu grand, e yo videt de u ha venit su heróic reputation (reputation = li coses queles on di pri un person).
Nu pri li relation inter le e nos. Il ha ja infectet te (infecter = far malad) – oh, yo peti pardon ma it es necessi que tu audi it. Il ha infectet te, talmen que mem si il fa nullcos desde nu, tu va viver tui vive, e un die pos li morte tu va devenir quam il, vice esser junt con Deo. Noi ha jurat que un tal cose ne mey evenir! Talmen noi es li servitores del volentie de Deo: que li munde, e li homes por queles Su Filio ha morit, ne va esser dat al monstrus qui lucta contra Le. Il ha ja auxiliat nos salvar un anim, e noi va departer quam li anteyan cavalleros por salvar li altris, e si noi mori, noi mori por un bon scope.”
“Ma fórsan li Comto va comprender que il ha esset forpussat de Anglia, e desde nu va evitar it, quam un tigre qui ha esset forpussat de un village (village = micri borgo).”
Nu in nor present epoca u li scientie reye, li homes dubita omnicos, e to da le fortie. Pro to noi deve luctar in silentie, por li final honore e glorie (glorie = bon reputation) de Deo.”
Pos li discussion noi decidet dormir, poy plu pensar e planar. Deman por li dejuné noi va reincontrar, e decider quo far.
Yo senti ho-nocte un marvelosi pace. Quam si un chassant presentie ha forlassat me. Fórsan…
Ma it ne es possibil, nam yo videt mi image in li spegul e videt li rubi marca sur mi fronte; e yo savet que yo esset ancor ínpur.
Establish rapport with small talk-acknowledge prior contact (Jane)
Assess the understanding for the referral to genetics
Assess the concerns of the family and what they hope to learn today
Discuss topics to be covered during the appointment- review medical/family history, physical exam
It is important to establish a thorough, detailed medical history as certain medications (such as warfarin or valproic acid) may be teratogenic to the fetus or embryo if taken during pregnancy, and this may result in an exacerbation of congenital abnormalites.
Confirm family history taken by Jane- any updates?
Often FAS-affected children are taken away from their biological parents and put into a foster or adoptive home, and a complete and thorough history is therefore important.
For the maternal history, the genetic counsellor should note such things as: documented high blood-alcohol concentration
The genetic counsellor should ask what kind of alcohol was consumed, the amount of consumption, and the frequency (Welch-Carre, 2005).
The genetic counsellor needs to record the child’s history, such as milestones, growth deficits, or CNS abnormailities (Welch-Carre, 2005).
Often FAS-affected children are taken away from their biological parents and put into a foster or adoptive home, and a complete and thorough history is therefore important.
For the maternal history, the genetic counsellor should note such things as: documented high blood-alcohol concentration
The genetic counsellor should ask what kind of alcohol was consumed, the amount of consumption, and the frequency (Welch-Carre, 2005).
The genetic counsellor needs to record the child’s history, such as milestones, growth deficits, or CNS abnormailities (Welch-Carre, 2005).
Fetal alcohol syndrome is a disorder characterized by abnormalities in physical and mental development as a result of prenatal alcohol exposure.
Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) is caused by ethanol and/or its by-products
Ethanol is a teratogen that can cross the placenta and interrupt development during any stage of pregnancy.
Currently, it is not known whether alcohol is a mutagen affecting the ova or sperm prior to conception
Alcohol is now recognized as the most common major teratogen to which a fetus is liable to be exposed
2 alcoholic drinks consumed per day by pregnant women have been shown to result in smaller birth size, while 4-6 drinks consumed per day show additional clinical features; both of the above can result in fetal alcohol effect (FAE)
FAE is a condition characterized by some, but not all, of the birth defects associated with FAS.
Most of the children believed to have FAS have been born to alcoholic women whose intake of alcohol was 8-10 or more drinks per day (Smith's pg. 555).
Although FAS is usually associated with exposure to large amounts of alcohol, this is not always the case.
The U.S. Surgeon General's conclusion that zero exposure to alcohol equals zero risk remains the only defensible true statement.
An accurate incidence rate of FAS has not been established
One study suggests approximately 1-3:1,000 live births (Management Of Genetic Syndromes pg.151).
Alcohol exposure during the first trimester is associated with facial dysmorphology
Exposure during the second half of pregnancy is associated with growth deficiency
The brain appears to be uniquely vulnerable to alcohol
Variations in abnormalities are due to dose, frequency, timing of exposure and genetic factors of the mother and fetus.
The brain appears to be most vulnerable during the first trimester but can be affected throughout gestation.
Short palpebral fissures, ptosis, epicanthal folds
Smooth philtrum with thin and smooth upper lip
Joint anomalies, abnormal position and/or function
Clinodactyly of the 4th and 5th fingers
Heart murmur (usually disappears by age 1)
Renal anomalies are reported to occur at an increased frequency
Cleft lip with or without cleft palate
10-20% have cervical vertebral malformations
Ethanol exposure leads to structural alterations of the brain resulting in cognitive and behavioral dysfunction
Most serious consequence of heavy prenatal alcohol exposure
Subtle problems such as clumsiness and difficulties with visual-motor integration
The average IQ for patients with FAS is 63, which is considered mild mental retardation. Some patients with FAS have higher intelligence; patients can have a wide range of IQ's, including normal.
Cardinal features for FAS were established in the late 1970's
A problem with the above criteria is the precision of measurement of each component (How many facial characteristics need to be present? How small must the child be?)
Overcome this problem with the 4-digit diagnostic code
A score of 1 reflects complete absence of the FAS feature and 4 reflecting a strong classic presence of the FAS feature
A score of 4444 denotes the most severe form of FAS while 1111 denotes a complete absence of FAS.
Scores between 1111 and 4444 represent the broad spectrum of outcome and exposure combinations
Risk of recurrence varies and is dependent upon the woman's drinking status during future pregnancies.
Women who do not drink during pregnancy have a 0% risk of recurrence
Women who are chronic alcoholics are at an increased risk of having a child with FAS.
Children with FAS have an increased risk of being alcoholics in adulthood.
Glue and solvent sniffing (toluene exposure) throughout pregnancy can produce infants who look strikingly like children with FAS
Seizure medications such as phenobarbital, valproic acid, and hydantoin can result in facial anomalies and organic brain damage
Carefully monitor growth by plotting on a growth curve
Children with FAS can be born as a SGA infant
Or birth size can be normal and fall below the growth curve during the 1st 12-18 months of life
Psychological and psychiatric assessments including a developmental evaluation (medication can be prescribed as necessary)
Cardiovascular clinical evaluation at time of diagnosis
Renal ultrasounds (if patient has had a UTI or enuresis after age 8)
Biological mothers are often alcohol abusers and have a variety of health problems of their own.
One study shows that 50% of these mothers are missing or dead within 5 years of the birth.
Generally the reasons for final separation from the biological parent(s) were abuse and neglect.
This movement from home to home compounded by abuse and neglect usually has a profound effect on the child and his/her behavior.
Jones KL (1997). Smith's Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Company.
Allanson JE, Cassidy SB (2001). Management of Genetic Syndromes. New York: Wiley-Liss, Inc.
Fetal Alcohol Syndrome: A Handbook for Parents and Caregivers. The University of New Mexico (1999)
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
The current, editable version of this book is available in Wikibooks, the open-content textbooks collection, at
9.6.1 3rd party data structure
29.9.1.3 __enter__ and __exit__
65.1 3D Game Programming
65.1.1 3D Game Engine with a Python binding
65.1.2 3D Game Engines written for Python
65.2 2D Game Programming
Python is a high-level, structured, open-source programming language that can be used for a wide variety of programming tasks. Python was created by Guido Van Rossum in the early 1990s; its following has grown steadily and interest has increased markedly in the last few years or so. It is named after Monty Python's Flying Circus comedy program.
Python is used extensively for system administration (many vital components of Linux distributions are written in it); also, it is a great language to teach programming to novices. NASA has used Python for its software systems and has adopted it as the standard scripting language for its Integrated Planning System. Python is also extensively used by Google to implement many components of its Web Crawler and Search Engine & Yahoo! for managing its discussion groups.
Python within itself is an interpreted programming language that is automatically compiled into bytecode before execution (the bytecode is then normally saved to disk, just as automatically, so that compilation need not happen again until and unless the source gets changed). It is also a dynamically typed language that includes (but does not require one to use) object-oriented features and constructs.
For example, the following Python code can be interactively typed at an interpreter prompt, display the famous "Hello World!" on the user screen:
Hello World!
Another great feature of Python is its availability for all platforms. Python can run on Microsoft Windows, Macintosh and all Linux distributions with ease. This makes the programs very portable, as any program written for one platform can easily be used on another.
Python provides a powerful assortment of built-in types (e.g., lists, dictionaries and strings), a number of built-in functions, and a few constructs, mostly statements. For example, loop constructs that can iterate over items in a collection instead of being limited to a simple range of integer values. Python also comes with a powerful standard library, which includes hundreds of modules to provide routines for a wide variety of services including regular expressions and TCP/IP sessions.
Python is used and supported by a large Python Community that exists on the Internet. The mailing lists and news groups like the tutor list actively support and help new python programmers. While they discourage doing homework for you, they are quite helpful and are populated by the authors of many of the Python textbooks currently available on the market.
Python 2 vs Python 3: Several years ago, the Python developers made the decision to come up with a major new version of Python. Initially called “Python 3000”, this became the 3.x series of versions of Python. What was radical about this was that the new version is backward-incompatible with Python 2.x: certain old features (like the handling of Unicode strings) were deemed to be too unwieldy or broken to be worth carrying forward. Instead, new, cleaner ways of achieving the same results were added.
In order to program in Python you need the Python interpreter. If it is not already installed or if the version you are using is obsolete, you will need to obtain and install Python using the methods below:
In 2008, a new version of Python (version 3) was published that was not entirely backward compatible. Developers were asked to switch to the new version as soon as possible, but many of the common external modules are not yet (as of Aug 2010) available for Python 3. There is a program called 2to3 to convert the source code of a Python 2 program to the source code of a Python 3 program. Consider this fact before you start working with Python. Now we are in the era of Python3.6
The latest version of Python 2, i.e. Python 2.7.x, was officially discontinued on 1 January 2020.
Go to the Python Homepage or the ActiveState website and get the proper version for your platform. Download it, read the instructions and get it installed.
In order to run Python from the command line, you will need to have the python directory in your PATH. Alternatively, you could use an Integrated Development Environment (IDE) for Python like DrPython[1], eric[2], PyScripter[3], or Python's own IDLE (which ships with every version of Python since 2.3).
The PATH variable can be modified from the Window's System control panel. To add the PATH in Windows 7 :
Go to Start.
Right click on computer.
Click on properties.
Click on 'Environmental Variables'.
If you prefer having a temporary environment, you can create a new command prompt short-cut that automatically executes the following statement:
If you downloaded a different version (such as Python 3.1), change the "27" for the version of Python you have (27 is 2.7.x, the current version of Python 2.)
By default, the Cygwin installer for Windows does not include Python in the downloads. However, it can be selected from the list of packages.
Users on Apple Mac OS X will find that it already ships with Python 2.3 (OS X 10.4 Tiger) or Python 2.6.1 (OS X Snow Leopard), but if you want the more recent version head to Python Download Page follow the instruction on the page and in the installers. As a bonus you will also install the Python IDE.
Python is available as a package for some Linux distributions. In some cases, the distribution CD will contain the python package for installation, while other distributions require downloading the source code and using the compilation scripts.
Gentoo is an example of a distribution that installs Python by default — the package management system Portage depends on Python.
Users of Ubuntu will notice that Python comes installed by default, only it sometimes is not the latest version. To check which version of Python is installed, type python -V
Arch Linux does not come with Python pre-installed by default, but it is easily available for installation through the package manager to pacman. As root (or using sudo if you've installed and configured it), type:
Other versions can be built from source from the Arch User Repository.
Some platforms do not have a version of Python installed, and do not have pre-compiled binaries. In these cases, you will need to download the source code from the official site. Once the download is complete, you will need to unpack the compressed archive into a folder.
To build Python, simply run the configure script (requires the Bash shell) and compile using make.
Python, which is also referred to as CPython, is written in the C Programming language. The C source code is generally portable, that means CPython can run on various platforms. More precisely, CPython can be made available on all platforms that provide a compiler to translate the C source code to binary code for that platform.
Apart from CPython there are also other implementations that run on top of a virtual machine. For example, on Java's JRE (Java Runtime Environment) or Microsoft's .NET CLR (Common Language Runtime). Both can access and use the libraries available on their platform. Specifically, they make use of reflection that allows complete inspection and use of all classes and objects for their very technology.
CPython ships with IDLE; however, IDLE is not considered user-friendly.[1] For Linux, KDevelop and Spyder are popular. For Windows, PyScripter is free, quick to install, and comes included with PortablePython. The best py used GUI Builder is actually Boa Constructor, but has suffered from bit rot significantly, so it is best to be used in conjunction with LiClipse.
Some Integrated Development Environments (IDEs) for Python
Highly flexible, Pythonwin IDE
Open-source Linux/Windows IDE.
Cross-platform open-source IDE.
The Python official wiki has a complete list of IDEs.
There are several commercial IDEs such as Komodo, BlackAdder, Code Crusader, Code Forge, and PyCharm. However, for beginners learning to program, purchasing a commercial IDE is unnecessary.
You can try Python online, thereby avoiding the need to install. Keywords: REPL.
Python shell, python.org
Python 3 REPL, repl.it
Python 2 REPL, repl.it
Python has a very active community and the language itself is evolving continuously. Make sure to check python.org for recent releases and relevant tools. The website is an invaluable asset.
Public Python-related mailing lists are hosted at mail.python.org. Two examples of such mailing lists are the Python-announce-list to keep up with newly released third party-modules or software for Python and the general discussion list Python-list. These lists are mirrored to the Usenet newsgroups comp.lang.python.announce & comp.lang.python.
↑ The Things I Hate About IDLE That I Wish Someone Would Fix .
There are several IDEs available for Python. A full list can be found on the Python wiki.
Installing Python PyDev Plug-in for Eclipse IDE
You can use the Eclipse IDE as your Python IDE. The only requirement is Eclipse and the Eclipse PyDev Plug-in.
Go to http://www.eclipse.org/downloads/ and get the proper Eclipse IDE version for your OS platform. There are also updates on the site, but just look for the basic program, Download and install it. The install just requires you to unpack the downloaded Eclipse install file onto your system.
Suggested: Use Eclipse's update manager, found in the tool bar under "Help" -> "install new Software". add http://pydev.org/updates/ in "work with" click add, and select PyDev ,and click "Next" and let Eclipse do the rest. Eclipse will now check for any updates to PyDev when it searches for updates.
If you get an error stating a requirement for the plugin "org.eclipse.mylyn", expand the PyDev tree, and deselect the optional mylyn components.
Or install PyDev manually, by going to http://pydev.sourceforge.net and get the latest PyDev Plug-in version. Download it, and install it by unpacking it into the Eclipse base folder.
There is also a python mode for Emacs which provides features such as running pieces of code, and changing the tab level for blocks. You can download the mode at https://launchpad.net/python-mode
Although many applications and modules have searchable webpages, there is a central repository for searching packages for installation, known as the "Cheese Shop".
Python has two basic modes: script and interactive. The normal mode is the mode where the scripted and finished .py files are run in the Python interpreter. Interactive mode is a command line shell which gives immediate feedback for each statement, while running previously fed statements in active memory. As new lines are fed into the interpreter, the fed program is evaluated both in part and in whole.
Interactive mode is a good way to play around and try variations on syntax.
On macOS or linux, open a terminal and simply type "python". On Windows, bring up the command prompt and type "py", or start an interactive Python session by selecting "Python (command line)", "IDLE", or similar program from the task bar / app menu. IDLE is a GUI which includes both an interactive mode and options to edit and run files.
Python 3.0b3 (r30b3:66303, Sep 8 2008, 14:01:02) [MSC v.1500 32 bit (Intel)] on win32
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
(If Python doesn't run, make sure it is installed and your path is set correctly. See Getting Python.)
The >>> is Python's way of telling you that you are in interactive mode. In interactive mode what you type is immediately run. Try typing 1+1 in. Python will respond with 2. Interactive mode allows you to test out and see what Python will do. If you ever feel the need to play with new Python statements, go into interactive mode and try them out.
However, you need to be careful in the interactive environment to avoid confusion. For example, the following is a valid Python script:
If you try to enter this as written in the interactive environment, you might be surprised by the result:
What the interpreter is saying is that the indentation of the second print was unexpected. You should have entered a blank line to end the first (i.e., "if") statement, before you started writing the next print statement. For example, you should have entered the statements as though they were written:
Which would have resulted in the following:
...
Instead of Python exiting when the program is finished, you can use the -i flag to start an interactive session. This can be very useful for debugging and prototyping.
To start Python's interactive help, type "help()" at the prompt.
You will be presented with a greeting and a quick introduction to the help system. For Python 2.6, the prompt will look something like this:
Welcome to Python 2.6! This is the online help utility.
If this is your first time using Python, you should definitely check out
Enter the name of any module, keyword, or topic to get help on writing
Python programs and using Python modules. To quit this help utility and
To get a list of available modules, keywords, or topics, type "modules",
"keywords", or "topics". Each module also comes with a one-line summary
Notice also that the prompt will change from ">>>" (three right angle brackets) to "help>"
You can access the different portions of help simply by typing in modules, keywords, or topics.
Typing in the name of one of these will print the help page associated with the item in question. To get a list of available modules, keywords, or topics, type "modules","keywords", or "topics". Each module also comes with a one-line summary of what it does; to list the modules whose summaries contain a given word such as "spam", type "modules spam".
You can exit the help system by typing "quit" or by entering a blank line to return to the interpreter.
You can obtain information on a specific command without entering interactive help.
For example, you can obtain help on a given topic simply by adding a string in quotes, such as help("object"). You may also obtain help on a given object as well, by passing it as a parameter to the help function.
Welcome to Python! This tutorial will show you how to start writing programs.
Python programs are nothing more than text files, and they may be edited with a standard text editor program.[1] What text editor you use will probably depend on your operating system: any text editor can create Python programs. However, it is easier to use a text editor that includes Python syntax highlighting.
The very first program that beginning programmers usually write or learn is the "Hello, World!" program. This program simply outputs the phrase "Hello, World!" then terminates itself. Let's write "Hello, World!" in Python!
Open up your text editor and create a new file called hello.py containing just this line (you can copy-paste if you want):
The below line is used for Python 3.x.x
You can also put the below line to pause the program at the end until you press anything.
This program uses the print function, which simply outputs its parameters to the terminal. By default, print appends a newline character to its output, which simply moves the cursor to the next line.
In Python 2.x, print is a statement rather than a function. As such, it can be used without parentheses, in which case it prints everything until the end of the line and accepts a standalone comma after the final item on the line to indicate a multi-line statement. In Python 3.x, print is a proper function expecting its arguments inside parentheses. Using print with parentheses (as above) is compatible with Python 2.x and using this style ensures version-independence.
Now that you've written your first program, let's run it in Python! This process differs slightly depending on your operating system.
Create a folder on your computer to use for your Python programs, such as C:\pythonpractice, and save your hello.py program in that folder.
Type cd \pythonpractice to change directory to your pythonpractice folder, and hit Enter.
Type hello.py to run your program!
If it didn't work, make sure your PATH contains the python directory. See Getting Python.
Create a folder on your computer to use for your Python programs. A good suggestion would be to name it pythonpractice and place it in your Home folder (the one that contains folders for Documents, Movies, Music, Pictures, etc). Save your hello.py program into it. Open the Applications folder, go into the Utilities folder, and open the Terminal program.
Type cd pythonpractice to change directory to your pythonpractice folder, and hit Enter.
Type python ./hello.py to run your program!
If you have both Python 2 and Python 3 installed (Your machine comes with a version of Python 2 but you can install Python 3 as well), you should run python3 hello.py
Create a folder on your computer to use for your Python programs, such as ~/pythonpractice, and save your hello.py program in that folder.
Open up the terminal program. In KDE, open the main menu and select "Run Command..." to open Konsole. In GNOME, open the main menu, open the Applications folder, open the Accessories folder, and select Terminal.
Type cd ~/pythonpractice to change directory to your pythonpractice folder, and hit Enter.
Don't forget to make the script executable by chmod +x.
Type python ./hello.py to run your program!
Create a folder on your computer to use for your Python programs, such as ~/pythonpractice.
Open up your favorite text editor and create a new file called hello.py containing just the following 2 lines (you can copy-paste if you want):[2]
Open up the terminal program. In KDE, open the main menu and select "Run Command..." to open Konsole. In GNOME, open the main menu, open the Applications folder, open the Accessories folder, and select Terminal.
Type cd ~/pythonpractice to change directory to your pythonpractice folder, and hit Enter.
Type chmod a+x hello.py to tell Linux that it is an executable program.
Type ./hello.py to run your program!
In addition, you can also use ln -s hello.py /usr/bin/hello to make a symbolic link hello.py to /usr/bin under the name hello, then run it by simply executing hello.
Note that this mainly should be done for complete, compiled programs, if you have a script that you made and use frequently, then it might be a good idea to put it somewhere in your home directory and put a link to it in /usr/bin. If you want a playground, a good idea is to invoke mkdir ~/.local/bin and then put scripts in there. To make ~/.local/bin content executable the same way /usr/bin does type $PATH = $PATH:~/local/bin (you can add this line to your shell rc file, for example ~/.bashrc).
File extensions aren't necessary in UNIX-like file-systems. To linux, hello.py means the exact same thing as hello.txt, hello.mp3, or just hello. Linux mostly uses the contents of the file to determine what type it is.
/usr/bin/hello: Python script, ASCII text executable
Hello, world!
Congratulations! You're well on your way to becoming a Python programmer.
Modify the hello.py program to say hello to someone from your family or your friends (or to Ada Lovelace).
Change the program so that after the greeting, it asks, "How did you get here?".
Re-write the original program to use two print statements: one for "Hello" and one for "world". The program should still only print out on one line.
↑ Sometimes, Python programs are distributed in compiled form. We won't have to worry about that for quite a while.
A Quick Introduction to Unix/My First Shell Script explains what a hash bang line does.
In this section, you will be introduced to two different kinds of data in Python: variables and strings. Please follow along by running the included programs and examining their output.
A variable is something that holds a value that may change. In simplest terms, a variable is just a box that you can put stuff in. You can use variables to store all kinds of stuff, but for now, we are just going to look at storing numbers in variables.
This code creates a variable called lucky, and assigns to it the integer number 7. When we ask Python to tell us what is stored in the variable lucky, it returns that number again.
You can also assign the value of a variable to be the value of another variable. For example:
To understand this code, keep in mind that the name of the variable is always on the left side of the equals sign (the assignment operator), and the value of the variable on the right side of the equals sign. First the name, then the value.
We start out declaring that red is 5, and blue is 10. As you can see, you can pass several arguments to print to tell it to print multiple items on one line, separating them by spaces. As expected, Python reports that red stores 5, and blue holds 10.
Now we create a third variable, called yellow. To set its value, we tell Python that we want yellow to be whatever red is. (Remember: name to the left, value to the right.) Python knows that red is 5, so it also sets yellow to be 5.
Now we're going to take the red variable, and set it to the value of the blue variable. Don't get confused — name on the left, value on the right. Python looks up the value of blue, and finds that it is 10. So, Python throws away red's old value (5), and replaces it with 10. After this assignment Python reports that yellow is 5, red is 10, and blue is 10.
But didn't we say that yellow should be whatever value red is? The reason that yellow is still 5 when red is 10, is because we only said that yellow should be whatever red is at the moment of the assignment. After Python has figured out what red is and assigned that value to yellow, yellow doesn't care about red any more. yellow has a value now, and that value is going to stay the same no matter what happens to red.
The interplay between different variables in Python is, in fact, more complex than explained here. The above example works with integer numbers and with all other basic data types built into Python; the behavior of lists and dictionaries (you will encounter these complex data types later) is entirely different, though. You may read the chapter on data types for a more detailed explanation of what variables really are in Python and how their type affects their behavior.
However, it is probably sufficient for now if you just keep this in mind: whenever you are declaring variables or changing their values, you always write the name of the variable on the left of the equals sign (the assignment operator), and the value you wish to assign to it on the right.
A 'string' is simply a list of characters in order. A character is anything you can type on the keyboard in one keystroke, like a letter, a number, or a backslash. For example, "hello" is a string. It is five characters long — h, e, l, l, o. Strings can also have spaces: "hello world" contains 11 characters: 10 letters and the space between "hello" and "world". There are no limits to the number of characters you can have in a string — you can have anywhere from one to a million or more. You can even have a string that has 0 characters, which is usually called an "empty string."
There are three ways you can declare a string in Python: single quotes ('), double quotes ("), and triple quotes ("""). In all cases, you start and end the string with your chosen string declaration. For example:
You can use quotation marks within strings by placing a backslash directly before them, so that Python knows you want to include the quotation marks in the string, instead of ending the string there. Placing a backslash directly before another symbol like this is known as escaping the symbol.
>>> print ("So I said, \"You don't know me! You'll never understand me!\"")
So I said, "You don't know me! You'll never understand me!"
>>> print ('So I said, "You don\'t know me! You\'ll never understand me!"')
So I said, "You don't know me! You'll never understand me!"
The double quotation mark (") is used to indicate direct quotations.
If you want to include a backslash in a string, you have to escape said backslash. This tells Python that you want to include the backslash in the string, instead of using it as an escape character. For example:
This will result in only three backslashes: \ \ \
As you can see from the above examples, only the specific character used to quote the string needs to be escaped. This makes for more readable code.
To see how to use strings, let's go back for a moment to an old, familiar program:
Hello, world!
Look at that! You've been using strings since the very beginning!
You can add two strings together using the + operator: this is called concatenating them.
Hello, world!
Notice that there is a space at the end of the first string. If you don't put that in, the two words will run together, and you'll end up with Hello,world!
You can also repeat strings by using the * operator, like so:
The string bouncy gets repeated 5 times in the 1st example and 10 times in the 2nd.
If you want to find out how long a string is, you use the len() function, which simply takes a string and counts the number of characters in it. (len stands for "length.") Just put the string that you want to find the length of inside the parentheses of the function. For example:
Now that you've learned about variables and strings separately, let's see how they work together.
Variables can store much more than just numbers. You can also use them to store strings! Here's how:
What did you have for lunch?
In this program, we are creating a variable called question, and storing the string "What did you have for lunch?" in it. Then, we just tell Python to print out whatever is inside the question variable. Notice that when we tell Python to print out question, there are no quotation marks around the word question: this tells Python that we are using a variable, not a string. If we put in quotation marks around question, Python would treat it as a string, as shown below:
Let's try something different. Sure, it's all fine and dandy to ask the user what they had for lunch, but it doesn't make much difference if they can't respond! Let's edit this program so that the user can type in what they ate.
To ask the user to write something, we used a function called raw_input(), which waits until the user writes something and presses enter, and then returns what the user wrote. Don't forget the parentheses! Even though there's nothing inside of them, they're still important, and Python will give you an error if you don't put them in. You can also use a different function called input(), which works in nearly the same way. We will learn the differences between these two functions later.
In Python 3.x raw_input() was renamed to input(). That is, the new input() function reads a line from sys.stdin and returns it without the trailing newline. It raises EOFError if the input is terminated prematurely (e.g. by pressing Ctrl+D). To get the old behavior of input(), use eval(input()).
In this program, we created a variable called answer, and put whatever the user wrote into it. Then, we print out a new string, which contains whatever the user wrote. Notice the extra space at the end of the "You had " string, and the exclamation mark at the start of the "! That sounds delicious!" string. They help format the output and make it look nice, so that the strings don't all run together.
Take a look at this program, and see if you can figure out what it's supposed to do.
This program should take a number from the user, add 10 to it, and print out the result. But if you try running it, it won't work! You'll get an error that looks like this:
TypeError: cannot concatenate 'str' and 'int' objects
What's going on here? Python is telling us that there is a TypeError, which means there is a problem with the types of information being used. Specifically, Python can't figure out how to reconcile the two types of data that are being used simultaneously: integers and strings. For example, Python thinks that the number variable is holding a string, instead of a number. If the user enters 15, then number will contain a string that is two characters long: a 1, followed by a 5. So how can we tell Python that 15 should be a number, instead of a string?
Also, when printing out the answer, we are telling Python to concatenate together a string ("If we add 10 to your number, we get ") and a number (plusTen). Python doesn't know how to do that -- it can only concatenate strings together. How do we tell Python to treat a number as a string, so that we can print it out with another string?
Luckily, there are two functions that are perfect solutions for these problems. The int() function will take a string and turn it into an integer, while the str() function will take an integer and turn it into a string. In both cases, we put what we want to change inside the parentheses. Therefore, our modified program will look like this:
Another way of doing the same is to add a comma after the string part and then the number variable, like this:
That's all you need to know about strings and variables! We'll learn more about types later.
The difference between the two is that raw_input accepts the data coming from the input device as a raw string, while input accepts the data and evaluates it into python code. This is why using input as a way to get a user string value returns an error because the user needs to enter strings with quotes.
It is recommended to use raw_input at all times and use the int function to convert the raw string into an integer. This way we do not have to bother with error messages until the error handling chapter and will not make a security vulnerability in your code.
Write a program that asks the user to type in a string, and then tells the user how long that string was.
Ask the user for a string, and then for a number. Print out that string, that many times. (For example, if the string is hello and the number is 3 you should print out hello hello hello .)
What would happen if a mischievous user typed in a word when you ask for a number? Try it.
There are five fundamental concepts in Python.
All variables are case-sensitive. Python treats 'number' and 'Number' as separate, unrelated entities.
Instead of block delimiters (braces → "{}" in the C family of languages), indentation is used to indicate where blocks begin and end. Because whitespace is significant, remember that spaces and tabs don't mix, so use only one or the other when indenting your programs. A common error is to mix them. While they may look the same in editor, the interpreter will read them differently and it will result in either an error or unexpected behavior. Most decent text editors can be configured to let tab key emit spaces instead.
Python's Style Guideline described that the preferred way is using 4 spaces.
Tips: If you invoked python from the command-line, you can give -t or -tt argument to python to make python issue a warning or error on inconsistent tab usage.
This will issue an error if you have mixed spaces and tabs.
In Python, like all object-oriented languages, there are aggregations of code and data called objects, which typically represent the pieces in a conceptual model of a system.
Objects in Python are created (i.e., instantiated) from templates called classes (which are covered later, as much of the language can be used without understanding classes). They have attributes, which represent the various pieces of code and data which make up the object. To access attributes, one writes the name of the object followed by a period (henceforth called a dot), followed by the name of the attribute.
An example is the 'upper' attribute of strings, which refers to the code that returns a copy of the string in which all the letters are uppercase. To get to this, it is necessary to have a way to refer to the object (in the following example, the way is the literal string that constructs the object).
Code attributes are called methods. So in this example, upper is a method of 'bob' (as it is of all strings). To execute the code in a method, use a matched pair of parentheses surrounding a comma separated list of whatever arguments the method accepts (upper doesn't accept any arguments). So to find an uppercase version of the string 'bob', one could use the following:
In a large system, it is important that one piece of code does not affect another in difficult to predict ways. One of the simplest ways to further this goal is to prevent one programmer's choice of a name from blocking another's use of that name. The concept of scope was invented to do this. A scope is a "region" of code in which a name can be used and outside of which the name cannot be easily accessed. There are two ways of delimiting regions in Python: with functions or with modules. They each have different ways of accessing from outside the scope useful data that was produced within the scope. With functions, that way is to return the data. The way to access names from other modules leads us to another concept.
It would be possible to teach Python without the concept of namespaces because they are so similar to attributes, which we have already mentioned, but the concept of namespaces is one that transcends any particular programming language, and so it is important to teach. To begin with, there is a built-in function dir() that can be used to help one understand the concept of namespaces. When you first start the Python interpreter (i.e., in interactive mode), you can list the objects in the current (or default) namespace using this function.
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
['__builtins__', '__doc__', '__name__']
This function can also be used to show the names available within a module's namespace. To demonstrate this, first we can use the type() function to show what kind of object __builtins__ is:
Since it is a module, it has a namespace. We can list the names within the __builtins__ namespace, again using the dir() function (note that the complete list of names has been abbreviated):
['ArithmeticError', ... 'copyright', 'credits', ... 'help', ... 'license', ... 'zip']
Namespaces are a simple concept. A namespace is a particular place in which names specific to a module reside. Each name within a namespace is distinct from names outside of that namespace. This layering of namespaces is called scope. A name is placed within a namespace when that name is given a value. For example:
['__builtins__', '__doc__', '__name__']
['__builtins__', '__doc__', '__name__', 'math', 'name']
Note that I was able to add the "name" variable to the namespace using a simple assignment statement. The import statement was used to add the "math" name to the current namespace. To see what math is, we can simply:
Since it is a module, it also has a namespace. To display the names within this namespace, we:
['__doc__', '__name__', 'acos', 'asin', 'atan', 'atan2', 'ceil', 'cos', 'cosh', 'degrees', 'e',
'exp', 'fabs', 'floor', 'fmod', 'frexp', 'hypot', 'ldexp', 'log', 'log10', 'modf', 'pi', 'pow',
'radians', 'sin', 'sinh', 'sqrt', 'tan', 'tanh']
If you look closely, you will notice that both the default namespace and the math module namespace have a '__name__' object. The fact that each layer can contain an object with the same name is what scope is all about.
To access objects inside a namespace, simply use the name of the module, followed by a dot, followed by the name of the object. This allows us to differentiate between the __name__ object within the current namespace, and that of the object with the same name within the math module. For example:
This module is always available. It provides access to the
Sequences allow you to store multiple values in an organized and efficient fashion. There are seven sequence types: strings, Unicode strings, lists, tuples, bytearrays, buffers, and xrange objects. Dictionaries and sets are containers for sequential data. See the official python documentation on sequences: Python_Documentation (actually there are more, but these are the most commonly used types).
We already covered strings, but that was before you knew what a sequence is. In other languages, the elements in arrays and sometimes the characters in strings may be accessed with the square brackets, or subscript operator. This works in Python too:
Indexes are numbered from 0 to n-1 where n is the number of items (or characters), and they are positioned between the items:
H e l l o , _ w o r l d !
The item which comes immediately after an index is the one selected by that index. Negative indexes are counted from the end of the string:
But in Python, the colon : allows the square brackets to take as many as two numbers. For any sequence which only uses numeric indexes, this will return the portion which is between the specified indexes. This is known as "slicing," and the result of slicing a string is often called a "substring."
'o, world!'
'Hello, world!'
As demonstrated above, if either number is omitted it is assumed to be the beginning or end of the sequence. Note also that the brackets are inclusive on the left but exclusive on the right: in the first example above with [3:9] the position 3, 'l', is included while position 9, 'r', is excluded.
A list is just what it sounds like: a list of values, organized in order. A list is created using square brackets. For example, an empty list would be initialized like this:
The values of the list are separated by commas. For example:
Lists may contain objects of varying types. It may hold both the strings "eggs" and "bacon" as well as the number 42.
Like characters in a string, items in a list can be accessed by indexes starting at 0. To access a specific item in a list, you refer to it by the name of the list, followed by the item's number in the list inside brackets. For example:
You can also use negative numbers, which count backwards from the end of the list:
The len() function also works on lists, returning the number of items in the array:
Note that the len() function counts the number of item inside a list, so the last item in spam (42) has the index (len(spam) - 1).
The items in a list can also be changed, just like the contents of an ordinary variable:
(Strings, being immutable, are impossible to modify.) As with strings, lists may be sliced:
It is also possible to add items to a list. There are many ways to do it, the easiest way is to use the append() method of list:
IndexError: list assignment index out of range
['bacon', 'and', 'eggs', 42, 10]
As you can see, the list re-orders itself, so there are no gaps in the numbering.
Lists have an unusual characteristic. Given two lists a and b, if you set b to a, and change a, b will also be changed.
This can easily be worked around by using b=a[:] instead.
For further explanation on lists, or to find out how to make 2D arrays, see Data Structure/Lists
Tuples are similar to lists, except they are immutable. Once you have set a tuple, there is no way to change it whatsoever: you cannot add, change, or remove elements of a tuple. Otherwise, tuples work identically to lists.
To declare a tuple, you use commas:
It is often necessary to use parentheses to differentiate between different tuples, such as when doing multiple assignments on the same line:
Unnecessary parentheses can be used without harm, but nested parentheses denote nested tuples:
For further explanation on tuple, see Data Structure/Tuples
Dictionaries are also like lists, and they are mutable -- you can add, change, and remove elements from a dictionary. However, the elements in a dictionary are not bound to numbers, the way a list is. Every element in a dictionary has two parts: a key, and a value. Calling a key of a dictionary returns the value linked to that key. You could consider a list to be a special kind of dictionary, in which the key of every element is a number, in numerical order.
Dictionaries are declared using curly braces, and each element is declared first by its key, then a colon, and then its value. For example:
Also, adding an element to a dictionary is much simpler: simply declare it as you would a variable.
For further explanation on dictionary, see Data Structure/Dictionaries
Sets are just like lists except that they are unordered and they do not allow duplicate values. Elements of a set are neither bound to a number (like list and tuple) nor to a key (like dictionary). The reason for using a set over other data types is that a set is much faster for a large number of items than a list or tuple and sets provide fast data insertion, deletion, and membership testing. Sets also support mathematical set operations such as testing for subsets and finding the union or intersection of two sets.
Note that sets are unordered, items you add into sets will end up in an indeterminable position, and it may also change from time to time.
Sets cannot contain a single value more than once. Unlike lists, which can contain anything, the types of data that can be included in sets are restricted. A set can only contain hashable, immutable data types. Integers, strings, and tuples are hashable; lists, dictionaries, and other sets (except frozensets, see below) are not.
The relationship between frozenset and set is like the relationship between tuple and list. Frozenset is an immutable version of set. An example:
Python also has other types of sequences, though these are used less frequently and need to be imported from the standard library before being used. We will only brush over them here.
A typed-list, an array may only contain homogeneous values.
A dictionary that, when an element is not found, returns a default value instead of error.
A double ended queue, allows fast manipulation on both sides of the queue.
A thread-safe multi-producer, multi-consumer queue for use with multi-threaded programs. Note that a list can also be used as queue in a single-threaded code.
For further explanation on set, see Data Structure/Sets
Some useful data types in Python do not come in the standard library. Some of these are very specialized in their use. We will mention some of the more well known 3rd party types.
Write a program that puts 5, 10, and "twenty" into a list. Then remove 10 from the list.
Write a program that puts 5, 10, and "twenty" into a tuple.
Write a program that puts 5, 10, and "twenty" into a set. Put "twenty", 10, and 5 into another set purposefully in a different order. Print both of them out and notice the ordering.
Write a program that constructs a tuple, one element of which is a frozenset.
Write a program that creates a dictionary mapping 1 to "Monday," 2 to "Tuesday," etc.
Data types determine whether an object can do something, or whether it just would not make sense. Other programming languages often determine whether an operation makes sense for an object by making sure the object can never be stored somewhere where the operation will be performed on the object (this type system is called static typing). Python does not do that. Instead it stores the type of an object with the object, and checks when the operation is performed whether that operation makes sense for that object (this is called dynamic typing).
Python's built-in (or standard) data types can be grouped into several classes. Sticking to the hierarchy scheme used in the official Python documentation these are numeric types, sequences, sets and mappings (and a few more not discussed further here). Some of the types are only available in certain versions of the language as noted below.
Some others, such as type and callables
In general, data types in Python can be distinguished based on whether objects of the type are mutable or immutable. The content of objects of immutable types cannot be changed after they are created.
Only mutable objects support methods that change the object in place, such as reassignment of a sequence slice, which will work for lists, but raise an error for tuples and strings.
It is important to understand that variables in Python are really just references to objects in memory. If you assign an object to a variable as below,
Typically, this behavior of Python causes confusion in functions. As an illustration, consider this code:
This will give the above indicated, and usually unintended, output. myseq is a local variable of the append_to_sequence function, but when this function gets called, myseq will nevertheless point to the same object as the variable that we pass in (t or l in our example). If that object is immutable (like a tuple), there is no problem. The += operator will cause the creation of a new tuple, and myseq will be set to point to it. However, if we pass in a reference to a mutable object, that object will be manipulated in place (so myseq and l, in our case, end up pointing to the same list object).
3.1. Objects, values and types, The Python Language Reference, docs.python.org
5.6.4. Mutable Sequence Types, The Python Standard Library, docs.python.org
Literal integers can be entered in three ways:
Python 2.x: octals can be entered by prepending a 0 (0732 is octal 732, or 474 in decimal)
Python 3.x: octals can be entered by prepending a 0o or 0O (0o732 is octal 732, or 474 in decimal)
Floating point numbers can be entered directly.
Long integers are entered either directly (1234567891011121314151617181920 is a long integer) or by appending an L (0L is a long integer). Computations involving short integers that overflow are automatically turned into long integers.
Complex numbers are entered by adding a real number and an imaginary one, which is entered by appending a j (i.e. 10+5j is a complex number. So is 10j). Note that j by itself does not constitute a number. If this is desired, use 1j.
Strings can be either single or triple quoted strings. The difference is in the starting and ending delimiters, and in that single quoted strings cannot span more than one line. Single quoted strings are entered by entering either a single quote (') or a double quote (") followed by its match. So therefore
'bar" does not work, and
"baz' does not work either.
Triple quoted strings are like single quoted strings, but can span more than one line. Their starting and ending delimiters must also match. They are entered with three consecutive single or double quotes, so
'"'bar'"' does not work, and
"""baz''' does not work either.
'"'quux"'" is right out.
Tuples are entered in parentheses, with commas between the entries:
Also, the parenthesis can be left out when it's not ambiguous to do so:
10, 'whose fleece was as white as snow'
Note that one-element tuples can be entered by surrounding the entry with parentheses and adding a comma like so:
Lists are similar, but with brackets:
Dicts are created by surrounding with curly braces a list of key/value pairs separated from each other by a colon and from the other entries with commas:
Any of these composite types can contain any other, to any depth:
The Python analogue of null pointer known from other programming languages is None. None is not a null pointer or a null reference but an actual object of which there is only one instance. One of the uses of None is in default argument values of functions, for which see Python Programming/Functions#Default_Argument_Values. Comparisons to None are usually made using is rather than ==.
...
PEP8 states that "Comparisons to singletons like None should always be done with is or is not, never the equality operators." Therefore, "if item == None:" is inadvisable. A class can redefine the equality operator (==) such that instances of it will equal None.
You can verify that None is an object by dir(None) or id(None).
See also Operators#Identity chapter.
Built-in Constants, docs.python.org
Python None comparison: should I use “is” or ==?, stackoverflow.com
vG = bool([False]) # True - non-empty list
Keywords: type casting.
Built-in Functions # bool, docs.python.org
Built-in Functions # list, docs.python.org
Built-in Functions # float, docs.python.org
Built-in Functions # int, docs.python.org
Built-in Functions # set, docs.python.org
Built-in Functions # str, docs.python.org
Built-in Functions # type, docs.python.org
Built-in Functions # tuple, docs.python.org
Write a program that instantiates a single object, adds [1,2] to the object, and returns the result.
Find an object that returns an output of the same length (if one exists?).
Find an object that returns an output length 2 greater than it started.
Find an object that causes an error.
Find two data types X and Y such that X = X + Y will cause an error, but X += Y will not.
Python 2.x supports 4 built-in numeric types - int, long, float and complex. Of these, the long type has been dropped in Python 3.x - the int type is now of unlimited length by default. You don’t have to specify what type of variable you want; Python does that automatically.
Int: The basic integer type in python, equivalent to the hardware 'c long' for the platform you are using in Python 2.x, unlimited in length in Python 3.x.
Long: Integer type with unlimited length. In python 2.2 and later, Ints are automatically turned into long ints when they overflow. Dropped since Python 3.0, use int type instead.
Float: This is a binary floating point number. Longs and Ints are automatically converted to floats when a float is used in an expression, and with the true-division / operator. In CPython, floats are usually implemented using the C languages double, which often yields 52 bits of significand, 11 bits of exponent, and 1 sign bit, but this is machine dependent.
Complex: This is a complex number consisting of two floats. Complex literals are written as a + bj where a and b are floating-point numbers denoting the real and imaginary parts respectively.
In general, the number types are automatically 'up cast' in this order:
The result of divisions is somewhat confusing. In Python 2.x, using the / operator on two integers will return another integer, using floor division. For example, 5/2 will give you 2. You have to specify one of the operands as a float to get true division, e.g. 5/2. or 5./2 (the dot specifies you want to work with float) will yield 2.5. Starting with Python 2.2 this behavior can be changed to true division by the future division statement from __future__ import division. In Python 3.x, the result of using the / operator is always true division (you can ask for floor division explicitly by using the // operator since Python 2.2).
For operations on numbers, see chapters Basic Math and Math.
5.4. Numeric Types — int, float, long, complex, docs.python.org
See also chapter Regular Expression for advanced pattern matching on strings in Python.
Two strings are equal if they have exactly the same contents, meaning that they are both the same length and each character has a one-to-one positional correspondence. Many other languages compare strings by identity instead; that is, two strings are considered equal only if they occupy the same space in memory. Python uses the is operator to test the identity of strings and any two objects in general.
There are two quasi-numerical operations which can be done on strings -- addition and multiplication. String addition is just another name for concatenation. String multiplication is repetitive addition, or concatenation. So:
There is a simple operator 'in' that returns True if the first operand is contained in the second. This also works on substrings
Note that 'print x in y' would have also returned the same value.
Much like arrays in other languages, the individual characters in a string can be accessed by an integer representing its position in the string. The first character in string s would be s[0] and the nth character would be at s[n-1].
Unlike arrays in other languages, Python also indexes the arrays backwards, using negative numbers. The last character has index -1, the second to last character has index -2, and so on.
We can also use "slices" to access a substring of s. s[a:b] will give us a string starting with s[a] and ending with s[b-1].
TypeError: object does not support item assignment
TypeError: object does not support slice assignment
Another feature of slices is that if the beginning or end is left empty, it will default to the first or last index, depending on context:
You can also use negative numbers in slices:
To understand slices, it's easiest not to count the elements themselves. It is a bit like counting not on your fingers, but in the spaces between them. The list is indexed like this:
So, when we ask for the [1:3] slice, that means we start at index 1, and end at index 2, and take everything in between them. If you are used to indexes in C or Java, this can be a bit disconcerting until you get used to it.
String constants can be found in the standard string module. An example is string.digits, which equals to '0123456789'.
Python documentation of "string" module -- python.org
Only emphasized items will be covered.
The length of the string object being compared must be at least 1, or the is* methods will return False. In other words, a string object of len(string) == 0, is considered "empty", or False.
Title, Upper, Lower, Swapcase, Capitalize
Returns the string converted to title case, upper case, lower case, inverts case, or capitalizes, respectively.
The title method capitalizes the first letter of each word in the string (and makes the rest lower case). Words are identified as substrings of alphabetic characters that are separated by non-alphabetic characters, such as digits, or whitespace. This can lead to some unexpected behavior. For example, the string "x1x" will be converted to "X1X" instead of "X1x".
The swapcase method makes all uppercase letters lowercase and vice versa.
The capitalize method is like title except that it considers the entire string to be a word. (i.e. it makes the first character upper case and the rest lower case)
Keywords: to lower case, to upper case, lcase, ucase, downcase, upcase.
Returns the number of the specified substrings in the string. i.e.
Hint: .count() is case-sensitive, so this example will only count the number of lowercase letter 'o's. For example, if you ran:
Returns a copy of the string with the leading (lstrip) and trailing (rstrip) whitespace removed. strip removes both.
Note the leading and trailing tabs and newlines.
Strip methods can also be used to remove other types of characters.
s = 'www.wikibooks.org'
.wikibooks.
Note that string.lowercase and string.printable require an import string statement
Joins together the given sequence with the string as separator:
The find and index methods return the index of the first found occurrence of the given subsequence. If it is not found, find returns -1 but index raises a ValueError.
Because Python strings accept negative subscripts, index is probably better used in situations like the one shown because using find instead would yield an unintended value.
Replace works just like it sounds. It returns a copy of the string with all occurrences of the first parameter replaced with the second parameter.
Or, using variable assignment:
Replaces tabs with the appropriate number of spaces (default number of spaces per tab = 8; this can be changed by passing the tab size as an argument).
Notice how (although these both look the same) the second string (t) has a different length because each tab is represented by spaces not tab characters.
Please note each tab is not always counted as eight spaces. Rather a tab "pushes" the count to the next multiple of eight. For example:
The split method returns a list of the words in the string. It can take a separator argument to use instead of whitespace.
['He', '', 'o, wor', 'd']
Note that in neither case is the separator included in the split strings, but empty strings are allowed.
The splitlines method breaks a multiline string into many single line strings. It is analogous to split('\n') (but accepts '\r' and '\r\n' as delimiters as well) except that if the string ends in a newline character, splitlines ignores that final character (see example).
['', 'One line', 'Two lines', 'Red lines', 'Blue lines', 'Green lines', '']
['', 'One line', 'Two lines', 'Red lines', 'Blue lines', 'Green lines']
The method split also accepts multi-character string literals:
Write a program that takes a string, (1) capitalizes the first letter, (2) creates a list containing each word, and (3) searches for the last occurrence of "a" in the first word.
Run the program on the string "Bananas are yellow."
Write a program that replaces all instances of "one" with "one (1)". For this exercise capitalization does not matter, so it should treat "one", "One", and "oNE" identically.
Run the program on the string "One banana was brown, but one was green."
"String Methods" chapter -- python.org
Python documentation of "string" module -- python.org
A list in Python is an ordered group of items (or elements). It is a very general structure, and list elements don't have to be of the same type: you can put numbers, letters, strings and nested lists all on the same list.
There are two different ways to make a list in Python. The first is through assignment ("statically"), the second is using list comprehensions ("actively").
To make a static list of items, write them between square brackets. For example:
[ 1,2,3,"This is a list",'c',Donkey("kong") ]
The list contains items of different data types: integer, string, and Donkey class.
Objects can be created 'on the fly' and added to lists. The last item is a new instance of Donkey class.
Creation of a new list whose members are constructed from non-literal expressions:
Using list comprehension, you describe the process using which the list should be created. To do that, the list is broken into two pieces. The first is a picture of what each element will look like, and the second is what you do to get it.
To take the first letter of each word and make a list out
['t', 'i', 'a', 'l', 'o', 'w']
List comprehension supports more than one for statement.
It will evaluate the items in all of the objects sequentially and will
['cp', 'co', 'ct', 'ap', 'ao', 'at', 'tp', 'to', 'tt']
List comprehension supports an if statement, to only include members into the list that fulfill a certain condition:
['cp', 'co', 'ct', 'ap', 'ao', 'at', 'tp', 'to', 'tt']
>>> print [x+y for x in 'cat' for y in 'pot' if x != 't' and y != 'o' ]
>>> print [x+y for x in 'cat' for y in 'pot' if x != 't' or y != 'o' ]
['cp', 'co', 'ct', 'ap', 'ao', 'at', 'tp', 'tt']
In version 2.x, Python's list comprehension does not define a scope. Any variables that are bound in an evaluation remain bound to whatever they were last bound to when the evaluation was completed. In version 3.x Python's list comprehension uses local variables:
>>> print x, y #Input to python version 2
t t #Output using python 2
>>> print x, y #Input to python version 3
NameError: name 'x' is not defined #Python 3 returns an error because x and y were not leaked
This is exactly the same as if the comprehension
You can initialize a list to a size, with an initial value for each element:
But there is a caveat. When building a new list by multiplying, Python copies each item by reference. This poses a problem for mutable items, for instance in a multidimensional array where each element is itself a list. You'd guess that the easy way to generate a two dimensional array would be:
What's happening here is that Python is using the same reference to the inner list as the elements of the outer list. Another way of looking at this issue is to examine how Python sees the above definition:
Assuming the above effect is not what you intend, one way around this issue is to use list comprehensions:
To find the length of a list use the built in len() method.
Lists can be combined in several ways. The easiest is just to 'add' them. For instance:
Another way to combine lists is with extend. If you need to combine lists inside of a lambda, extend is the way to go.
The other way to append a value to a list is to use append. For example:
However, [3,4] is an element of the list, and not part of the list. append always adds one element only to the end of a list. So if the intention was to concatenate two lists, always use extend.
Like strings, lists can be indexed and sliced:
We can assign new values to slices of the lists, which don't even have to be the same length:
[2, 'opportunistic', 'elk', 'n']
It's even possible to append items onto the start of lists by assigning to an empty slice:
[3.14, 2.71, 2, 'opportunistic', 'elk', 'n']
Similarly, you can append to the end of the list by specifying an empty slice after the end:
[3.14, 2.71, 2, 'opportunistic', 'elk', 'n', 'four', 'score']
You can also completely change the contents of a list:
['new', 'list', 'contents']
The right-hand side of a list assignment statement can be any iterable type:
With slicing you can create copy of list since slice returns a new list:
[1, 'element', [], 'new element']
Note, however, that this is a shallow copy and contains references to elements from the original list, so be careful with mutable types:
It is also possible to get non-continuous parts of an array. If one wanted to
Lists can be compared for equality.
Lists can be compared using a less-than operator, which uses lexicographical order:
Sorting lists is easy with a sort method.
Note that the list is sorted in place, and the sort() method returns None to emphasize this side effect.
If you use Python 2.4 or higher there are some more sort parameters:
Python also includes a sorted() function.
Note that unlike the sort() method, sorted(list) does not sort the list in place, but instead returns the sorted list. The sorted() function, like the sort() method also accepts the reverse parameter.
Built-in Functions # sorted, docs.python.org
Sorting HOW TO, docs.python.org
Read-only iteration over a list, AKA for each element of the list:
For each element of a list satisfying a condition (filtering):
See also Python Programming/Loops#For_Loops.
Removing aka deleting an item at an index (see also #pop(i)):
Keeping only items in a list satisfying a condition, and thus removing the items that do not satisfy it:
This uses a list comprehension.
Removing items failing a condition can be done without losing the identity of the list being made shorter, by using "[:]":
Removing items failing a condition can be done by having the condition in a separate function:
Removing items while iterating a list usually leads to unintended outcomes unless you do it carefully by using an index:
Remove items from a list while iterating, stackoverflow.com
There are some built-in functions for arithmetic aggregates over lists. These include minimum, maximum, and sum:
The max and min functions also apply to lists of strings, returning maximum and minimum with respect to alphabetical order:
The above does not make a deep copy, which has the following consequence:
See also #Continuous slices.
8.17. copy — Shallow and deep copy operations at docs.python.org
Clearing using a proper approach makes a difference when the list is passed as an argument:
Removing duplicate items from a list (keeping only unique items) can be achieved as follows.
If each item in the list is hashable, using index iteration, much slower:
If some items are not hashable, the set of visited items can be kept in a list:
If each item in the list is hashable and preserving element order does not matter:
In the above examples where index iteration is used, scanning happens from the end to the beginning. When these are rewritten to scan from the beginning to the end, the result seems hugely slower.
How do you remove duplicates from a list? at python.org Programming FAQ
Remove duplicates from a sequence (Python recipe) at activestate.com
Removing duplicates in lists at stackoverflow.com
Add item x onto the end of the list.
Remove the item in the list at the index i and return it. If i is not given, remove the last item in the list and return it.
To concatenate two lists.
To multiply one list several times.
The operator 'in' is used for two purposes; either to iterate over every item in a list in a for loop, or to check if a value is in a list returning true or false.
To get the difference between two lists, just iterate:
To get the intersection between two lists (by preserving its elements order, and their doubles), apply the difference with the difference:
Use a list comprehension to construct the list ['ab', 'ac', 'ad', 'bb', 'bc', 'bd'].
Use a slice on the above list to construct the list ['ab', 'ad', 'bc'].
Simultaneously remove the element '2a' from the above list and print it.
Copy the above list and add '2a' back into the list such that the original is still missing it.
Use a list comprehension to construct the list ['abe', 'abf', 'ace', 'acf', 'ade', 'adf', 'bbe', 'bbf', 'bce', 'bcf', 'bde', 'bdf']
>>> ['abe', 'abf', 'ace', 'acf', 'ade', 'adf', 'bbe', 'bbf', 'bce', 'bcf', 'bde', 'bdf']
Python documentation, chapter "Sequence Types" -- python.org
Python Tutorial, chapter "Lists" -- python.org
A tuple in Python is much like a list except that it is immutable (unchangeable) once created. A tuple of hashable objects is hashable and thus suitable as a key in a dictionary and as a member of a set.
Tuples may be created directly or converted from lists.
Generally, tuples are enclosed in parentheses.
A one item tuple is created by an item in parentheses followed by a comma:
Also, tuples will be created from items separated by commas.
You can also perform multiple assignment using tuples.
>>> article, noun, verb, adjective, direct_object = t #t is defined above
Note that either, or both sides of an assignment operator can consist of tuples.
The example above: article, noun, verb, adjective, direct_object = t is called "tuple unpacking" because the tuple t was unpacked and its values assigned to each of the variables on the left. "Tuple packing" is the reverse: t=article, noun, verb, adjective, direct_object. When unpacking a tuple, or performing multiple assignment, you must have the same number of variables being assigned to as values being assigned.
These are the same as for lists except that we may not assign to indices or slices, and there is no "append" operator.
AttributeError: 'tuple' object has no attribute 'append'
TypeError: object does not support item assignment
Finding the length of a tuple is the same as with lists; use the built in len() method.
Convert list to tuples using the built in tuple() method.
Converting a tuple into a list using the built in list() method to cast as a list:
Dictionaries can also be converted to tuples of tuples using the items method of dictionaries:
Tuples can be used in place of lists where the number of items is known and small, for example when returning multiple values from a function. Many other languages require creating an object or container to return, but with Python's tuple assignment, multiple-value returns are easy:
This resulting tuple can be easily unpacked with the tuple assignment technique explained above:
Using List Comprehension to process Tuple elements
Occasionally, there is a need to manipulate the values contained within a tuple in order to create a new tuple. For example, if we wanted a way to double all of the values within a tuple, we can combine some of the above information in addition to list comprehension like this:
'double() - return a tuple with each tuple element (e) doubled.'
Create the list ['a', 'b', 'c'], then create a tuple from that list.
Create the tuple ('a', 'b', 'c'), then create a list from that tuple. (Hint: the material needed to do this has been covered, but it's not entirely obvious)
Create a tuple containing just a single element which in turn contains the three elements 'a', 'b', and 'c'. Verify that the length is actually 1 by using the len() function.
Python documentation, chapter "Sequence Types" -- python.org
Python documentation, chapter "Tuples and Sequences" -- python.org
A dictionary in Python is a collection of unordered values accessed by key rather than by index. The keys have to be hashable: integers, floating point numbers, strings, tuples, and, frozensets are hashable, while lists, dictionaries, and sets other than frozensets are not. Dictionaries were available as early as in Python 1.4.
Dictionaries may be created directly or converted from sequences.
Dictionaries are enclosed in curly braces, {}
Also, dictionaries can be easily created by zipping two sequences.
The operations on dictionaries are somewhat unique. Slicing is not supported, since the items have no intrinsic order.
Asks the user for a string, then creates the following dictionary. The values are the letters in the string, with the corresponding key being the place in the string. https://docs.python.org/2/tutorial/datastructures.html#looping-techniques
Replaces the entry whose key is the integer 3, with the value "Pie".
Asks the user for a string of digits, then prints out the values corresponding to those digits.
5.5. Dictionaries in Tutorial, docs.python.org
5.8. Mapping Types in Library Doc, docs.python.org
Starting with version 2.3, Python comes with an implementation of the mathematical set. Initially this implementation had to be imported from the standard module set, but with Python 2.6 the types set and frozenset became built-in types. A set is an unordered collection of objects, unlike sequence objects such as lists and tuples, in which each element is indexed. Sets cannot have duplicate members - a given object appears in a set 0 or 1 times. All members of a set have to be hashable, just like dictionary keys. Integers, floating point numbers, tuples, and strings are hashable; dictionaries, lists, and other sets (except frozensets) are not.
One way to construct sets is by passing any sequential object to the "set" constructor.
We can also add elements to sets one by one, using the "add" function.
Note that since a set does not contain duplicate elements, if we add one of the members of s to s again, the add function will have no effect. This same behavior occurs in the "update" function, which adds a group of elements to a set.
The set function also provides a copy constructor. However, remember that the copy constructor will copy the set, but not the individual elements.
We can also test the membership of entire sets. Given two sets
.
Note that "issubset" and "issuperset" can also accept sequential data types as arguments
Note that the <= and >= operators also express the issubset and issuperset functions respectively.
Like lists, tuples, and string, we can use the "len" function to find the number of items in a set.
There are three functions which remove individual items from a set, called pop, remove, and discard. The first, pop, simply removes an item from the set. Note that there is no defined behavior as to which element it chooses to remove.
We also have the "remove" function to remove a specified element.
However, removing a item which isn't in the set causes an error.
If you wish to avoid this error, use "discard." It has the same functionality as remove, but will simply do nothing if the element isn't in the set
We also have another operation for removing elements from a set, clear, which simply removes all elements from the set.
We can also have a loop move over each of the items in a set. However, since sets are unordered, it is undefined which order the iteration will follow.
...
r b e l g
. The other form, s1.function_update(s2), will change
. Finally, some functions have equivalent special operators. For example, s1 & s2 is equivalent to s1.intersection(s2)
Python can also find the set difference of
.
Starting with Python 2.6, "union", "intersection", and "difference" can work with multiple input by using the set constructor. For example, using "set.intersection()":
A frozenset is basically the same as a set, except that it is immutable - once it is created, its members cannot be changed. Since they are immutable, they are also hashable, which means that frozensets can be used as members in other sets and as dictionary keys. frozensets have the same functions as normal sets, except none of the functions that change the contents (update, remove, pop, etc.) are available.
AttributeError: 'frozenset' object has no attribute 'add'
Create the set {'c', 'a', 't', '1', '2', '3'}.
Python Tutorial, section "Data Structures", subsection "Sets" -- python.org
Python Library Reference on Set Types -- python.org
PEP 218 -- Adding a Built-In Set Object Type, python.org, a nice concise overview of the set type
Now that we know how to work with numbers and strings, let's write a program that might actually be useful! Let's say you want to find out how much you weigh in stone. A concise program can make short work of this task. Since a stone is 14 pounds, and there are about 2.2 pounds in a kilogram, the following formula should do the trick:
So, let's turn this formula into a program!
Run this program and get your weight in stone! Notice that applying the formula was as simple as putting in a few mathematical statements:
Here are some commonly used mathematical operators
In order to use the math.sqrt() function, you must explicitly tell Python that you want it to load the math module. To do that, write
Beware that due to the limitations of floating point arithmetic, rounding errors can cause unexpected results. For example:
For the Python 2.x series, / does "floor division" for integers and longs (e.g. 5/2=2) but "true division" for floats and complex (e.g. 5.0/2.0=2.5). For Python 3.x, / does "true division" for all types.[1][2]
This can be fixed by putting a round([math]-0.5) around a normal division sign, because of a Python error causing round(0.5) to round down.
The operator // always performs Euclidean (or integer-type) division, which includes a quotient term (obtained from the // operator) and a remainder term (obtained from the % operator). In the previous example we have seen that the quotient term 0.6 // 0.2 is 2.0, which can be verified by extending the above example:
The difference between the operations / and // when applied to decimal numbers is due to the way decimal numbers are stored in Python and rounding.
Python uses the standard order of operations as taught in Algebra and Geometry classes at high school or secondary school. That is, mathematical expressions are evaluated in the following order (memorized by many as PEMDAS), which is also applied to parentheticals.
(Note that operations which share a table row are performed from left to right. That is, a division to the left of a multiplication, with no parentheses between them, is performed before the multiplication simply because it is to the left.)
Before operating on anything else, Python must evaluate all parentheticals starting at the innermost level. (This includes functions.)
As an exponent is simply short multiplication or division, it should be evaluated before them.
Again, multiplication is rapid addition and must, therefore, happen first.
Wouldn't it be nice if we always worked with nice round numbers while doing math? Unfortunately, the real world is not quite so neat and tidy as we would like it to be. Sometimes, we end up with long, ugly numbers like the following:
You weigh 10.2142857143 stone.
By default, Python's print statement prints numbers to 10 decimal places. But what if you only want one or two? We can use the round() function, which rounds a number to the number of decimal points you choose. round() takes two arguments: the number you want to round, and the number of decimal places to round it to. For example:
Now, let's change our program to only print the result to two decimal places.
This also demonstrates the concept of nesting functions. As you can see, you can place one function inside another function, and everything will still work exactly the way you would expect. If you don't like this, you can always use multiple variables, instead:
Ask the user to specify the number of sides on a polygon and find the number of diagonals within the polygon.
Take the lengths of two sides of a right-angle triangle from the user and apply the Pythagorean Theorem to find the hypotenuse.
↑ PEP 238 -- Changing the Division Operator
Python math works like you would expect.
Note that Python adheres to the PEMDAS order of operations.
There is a built in exponentiation operator **, which can take either integers, floating point or complex numbers. This occupies its proper place in the order of operations.
For Python 2.x, dividing two integers or longs uses integer division, also known as "floor division" (applying the floor function after division. So, for example, 5 / 2 is 2. Using "/" to do division this way is deprecated; if you want floor division, use "//" (available in Python 2.2 and later).
"/" does "true division" for floats and complex numbers; for example, 5.0/2.0 is 2.5.
For Python 3.x, "/" does "true division" for all types.[1][2]
Dividing by or into a floating point number (Python never uses the fractional type in such a case) will cause Python to use true division. To coerce an integer to become a float, 'float()' with the integer as a parameter
Beware that due to the limitations of floating point arithmetic, rounding errors can cause unexpected results. For example:
The modulus (remainder of the division of the two operands, rather than the quotient) can be found using the % operator, or by the divmod builtin function. The divmod function returns a tuple containing the quotient and remainder.
Unlike some other languages, variables can be negated directly:
Numbers, strings and other types can be compared for equality/inequality and ordering:
The operators is and is not test for object identity and stand in contrast to == (equals): x is y is true if and only if x and y are references to the same object in memory. x is not y yields the inverse truth value.
Note that an identity test is more stringent than an equality test since two distinct objects may have the same value.
For the built-in immutable data types (like int, str and tuple) Python uses caching mechanisms to improve performance, i.e., the interpreter may decide to reuse an existing immutable object instead of generating a new one with the same value. The details of object caching are subject to changes between different Python versions and are not guaranteed to be system-independent, so identity checks on immutable objects like 'hello' is 'hello', (1,2,3) is (1,2,3), 4 is 2**2 may give different results on different machines.
In some Python implementations, the following results are applicable:
Data model, python.org
Built-in Functions # id, python.org
The order of operations here is: not first, and second, or third. In particular, "True or True and False or False" becomes "True or False or False" which is True.
Caution, Boolean operators are valid on things other than Booleans; for instance "1 and 6" will return 6. Specifically, "and" returns either the first value considered to be false, or the last value if all are considered true. "or" returns the first true value, or the last value if all are considered false.
.
Use Python to calculate 11111111111111111111+22222222222222222222, but in one line of code with at most 15 characters. (Hint: each of those numbers is 20 digits long, so you have to find some other way to input those numbers)
Exactly one of the following expressions evaluates to "cat"; the other evaluates to "dog". Trace the logic to determine which one is which, then check your answer using Python.
↑ PEP 238 -- Changing the Division Operator
As with most imperative languages, there are three main categories of program control flow:
Function calls are covered in the next section.
Generators and list comprehensions are advanced forms of program control flow, but they are not covered here.
In Python, there are two kinds of loops, 'for' loops and 'while' loops.
A for loop iterates over elements of a sequence (tuple or list). A variable is created to represent the object in the sequence. For example,
The for loop loops over each of the elements of a list or iterator, assigning the current element to the variable name given. In the example above, each of the elements in x is assigned to i.
A built-in function called range exists to make creating sequential lists such as the one above easier. The loop above is equivalent to:
The next example uses a negative step (the third argument for the built-in range function):
For loops can have names for each element of a tuple, if it loops over a sequence of tuples:
4.2. for Statements, The Python Tutorial, docs.python.org
4.3. The range() Function, The Python Tutorial, docs.python.org
A while loop repeats a sequence of statements until some condition becomes false. For example:
x = x - 1 #the algebra need not be done within the parenthesis
Python's while loops can also have an 'else' clause, which is a block of statements that is executed (once) when the while statement evaluates to false. The break statement inside the while loop will not direct the program flow to the else clause. For example:
Unlike some languages, there is no post-condition loop.
3.2. First Steps Towards Programming, The Python Tutorial, docs.python.org
Python includes statements to exit a loop (either a for loop or a while loop) prematurely. To exit a loop, use the break statement:
The statement to begin the next iteration of the loop without waiting for the end of the current loop is 'continue'.
This will not produce any output.
The else clause of loops will be executed if no break statements are met in the loop.
Another example of a while loop using the break statement and the else statement:
x += step # Change this to 3 to make the while statement
I am waiting for my melon .
I hate strawberry !
Going back home now !
Python determines where a loop repeats itself by the indentation in the whitespace. Everything that is indented is part of the loop, the next entry that is not indented is not. For example, the code below prints "1 1 2 1 1 2"
On the other hand, the code below prints "1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2"
There is basically only one kind of branch in Python, the 'if' statement. The simplest form of the if statement simple executes a block of code only if a given predicate is true, and skips over it if the predicate is false
...
You can also add "elif" (short for "else if") branches onto the if statement. If the predicate on the first “if” is false, it will test the predicate on the first elif, and run that branch if it’s true. If the first elif is false, it tries the second one, and so on. Note, however, that it will stop checking branches as soon as it finds a true predicate, and skip the rest of the if statement. You can also end your if statements with an "else" branch. If none of the other branches are executed, then python will run this branch.
... else:
...
4.1. if Statements, The Python Tutorial, docs.python.org
Print the numbers from 0 to 1000 (including both 0 and 1000).
Print the numbers from 0 to 1000 that are multiples of 5.
Print the numbers from 1 to 1000 that are multiples of 5.
Use a nested for-loop to prints the 3x3 multiplication table below
Print the 3x3 multiplication table below.
More Control Flow Tools, The Python Tutorial, docs.python.org
Python, like many other computer programming languages, uses Boolean logic for its decision control. That is, the Python interpreter compares one or more values in order to decide whether to execute a piece of code or not, given the proper syntax and instructions.
Decision control is then divided into two major categories, conditional and repetition. Conditional logic simply uses the keyword if and a Boolean expression to decide whether or not to execute a code block. Repetition builds on the conditional constructs by giving us a simple method in which to repeat a block of code while a Boolean expression evaluates to true.
What is going on? The program consists of a bunch of funny looking print statements. Each print statement prints a number and an expression. The number is to help keep track of which statement I am dealing with. Notice how each expression ends up being either True or False; these are built-in Python values.
Note that if the first expression is false Python does not check the second expression since it knows the whole expression is false.
The next line, print (5, not a == 7 and b == 7), uses the not operator. not just gives the opposite of the expression (The expression could be rewritten as print (5, a != 7 and b == 7)). Here's the table:
The two following lines, print (6, a == 7 or b == 7) and print (7, a == 7 or b == 6), use the or operator. The or operator returns true if the first expression is true, or if the second expression is true or both are true. If neither are true it returns false. Here's the table:
Note that if the first expression is true Python doesn't check the second expression since it knows the whole expression is true. This works since or is true if at least one of the expressions are true. The first part is true so the second part could be either false or true, but the whole expression is still true.
The next two lines, print (8, not (a == 7 and b == 6)) and print (9, not a == 7 and b == 6), show that parentheses can be used to group expressions and force one part to be evaluated first. Notice that the parentheses changed the expression from false to true. This occurred since the parentheses forced the not to apply to the whole expression instead of just the a == 7 portion.
See the Lists chapter to explain what [:] means on the first line.
This program works by continuing to check for a match while count < len(copy) and copy[count] != prev. When either count is greater than the last index of copy or a match has been found the and is no longer true so the loop exits. The if simply checks to make sure that the while exited because a match was found.
The other 'trick' of and is used in this example. If you look at the table for and notice that the third entry is "false and won't check". If count >= len(copy) (in other words count < len(copy) is false) then copy[count] is never looked at. This is because Python knows that if the first is false then they both can't be true. This is known as a short circuit and is useful if the second half of the and will cause an error if something is wrong. I used the first expression ( count < len(copy)) to check and see if count was a valid index for copy. (If you don't believe me remove the matches `Jill' and `Life', check that it still works and then reverse the order of count < len(copy) and copy[count] != prev to copy[count] != prev and count < len(copy).)
Boolean expressions can be used when you need to check two or more different things at once.
I don't know you.
Write a program that has a user guess your name, but they only get 3 chances to do so until the program quits.
A Decision is when a program has more than one choice of actions depending on a variable's value. Think of a traffic light. When it is green, we continue our drive. When we see the light turn yellow, we reduce our speed, and when it is red, we stop. These are logical decisions that depend on the value of the traffic light. Luckily, Python has a decision statement to help us when our application needs to make such decision for the user.
Here is a warm-up exercise - a short program to compute the absolute value of a number:
n = input("Integer? ")#Pick an integer. And remember, if raw_input is not supported by your OS, use input()
n = int(n)#Defines n as the integer you chose. (Alternatively, you can define n yourself)
Here is the output from the two times that I ran this program:
What does the computer do when it sees this piece of code? First it prompts the user for a number with the statement "n = input("Integer? ")". Next it reads the line "if n < 0:". If n is less than zero Python runs the line "print ("The absolute value of",n,"is",-n)". Otherwise python runs the line "print ("The absolute value of",n,"is",n)".
More formally, Python looks at whether the expression n < 0 is true or false. An if statement is followed by an indented block of statements that are run when the expression is true. After the if statement is an optional else statement and another indented block of statements. This 2nd block of statements is run if the expression is false.
Another feature of the if command is the elif statement. It stands for "else if," which means that if the original if statement is false and the elif statement is true, execute the block of code following the elif statement. Here's an example:
Notice how the elif a <= 7 is only tested when the if statement fails to be true. elif allows multiple tests to be done in a single if statement.
High_low.py
Let's play the guessing game!
What number am I thinking of? 22
What number am I thinking of? 25
What number am I thinking of? 23
MINDREADER!!!
As it states in its comments, this code is not prepared to handle invalid input (i.e., strings instead of numbers). If you are wondering how you would implement such functionality in Python, you are referred to the Errors Chapter of this book, where you will learn about error handling. For the above code you may try this slight modification of the while loop:
Sample runs.
This program will take several numbers, then average them.
How many numbers would you like to sum: 2
This program will take several numbers, then average them.
How many numbers would you like to sum: 3
Write a password guessing program to keep track of how many times the user has entered the password wrong. If it is more than 3 times, print You have been denied access. and terminate the program. If the password is correct, print You have successfully logged in. and terminate the program.
Write a program that asks for two numbers. If the sum of the numbers is greater than 100, print That is a big number and terminate the program.
Write a program that asks the user their name. If they enter your name, say "That is a nice name." If they enter "John Cleese" or "Michael Palin", tell them how you feel about them ;), otherwise tell them "You have a nice name."
Ask the user to enter the password. If the password is correct print "You have successfully logged in" and exit the program. If the password is wrong print "Sorry the password is wrong" and ask the user to enter the password 3 times. If the password is wrong print "You have been denied access" and exit the program.
b = "sefinew" # the password
Many languages (like Java and PHP) have the concept of a one-line conditional (called The Ternary Operator), often used to simplify conditionally accessing a value. For instance (in Java):
For many years Python did not have the same construct natively, however you could replicate it by constructing a tuple of results and calling the test as the index of the tuple, like so:
It is important to note that, unlike a built in conditional statement, both the true and false branches are evaluated before returning, which can lead to unexpected results and slower executions if you're not careful. To resolve this issue, and as a better practice, wrap whatever you put in the tuple in anonymous function calls (lambda notation) to prevent them from being evaluated until the desired branch is called:
Since Python 2.5 however, there has been an equivalent operator to The Ternary Operator (though not called such, and with a totally different syntax):
A switch is a control statement present in most computer programming languages to minimize a bunch of If - elif statements. Sadly Python doesn't officially support this statement, but with the clever use of an array or dictionary, we can recreate this Switch statement that depends on a value.
This works because Python stores a reference of the function in the array at its particular index, and by adding a pair of parentheses we are actually calling the function. Here the last line is equivalent to:
Another way. Using function through user Input
Another way is to use lambdas. Code pasted here with permissions1
For more information on lambda see anonymous functions in the function section.
This is our first control structure.The version used is 2.7. Ordinarily the computer starts with the first line and then goes down from there. Control structures change the order that statements are executed or decide if a certain statement will be run. As a side note, decision statements (e.g., if statements) also influence whether or not a certain statement will run. Here's the source for a program that uses the while control structure:
So what does the program do? First it sees the line a = 0 and sets the variable a to zero. Then it sees while a < 5: and so the computer checks to see if a < 5. The first time the computer sees this statement, a is zero, and zero is less than 5. In other words, while a is less than five, the computer will run the indented statements.
Enter Numbers to add to the sum.
Enter 0 to quit.
Notice how print 'Total Sum =',s is only run at the end. The while statement only affects the lines that are tabbed in (a.k.a. indented). The != means does not equal so while a != 0 : means until a is zero run the tabbed in statements that are afterwards.
Now that we have while loops, it is possible to have programs that run forever. An easy way to do this is to write a program like this:
This program will output Help, I'm stuck in a loop. until the heat death of the universe or you stop it. The way to stop it is to hit the Control (or Ctrl) button and `c' (the letter) at the same time. This will kill the program. (Note: sometimes you will have to hit enter after the Control C.)
b = old_a + old_b
The next type of loop in Python is the for loop. Unlike in most languages, for requires some __iterable__ object like a Set or List to work.
The output looks very familiar, but the program code looks different. The first line uses the range function. The range function uses two arguments like this range(start,finish). start is the first number that is produced. finish is one larger than the last number. Note that this program could have been done in a shorter way:
Here are some examples to show what happens with the range function:
Another way to use the range() function in a for loop is to supply only one argument:
The code would cycle through the for loop 10 times as expected, but starting with 0 instead of 1.
The next line for count in onetoten: uses the for control structure. A for control structure looks like for variable in list:. list is gone through starting with the first element of the list and going to the last. As for goes through each element in a list it puts each into variable. That allows variable to be used in each successive time the for loop is run through. Here is another example to demonstrate:
Notice how the for loop goes through and sets item to each element in the list. (Notice how if you don't want print to go to the next line add a comma at the end of the statement (i.e. if you want to print something else on that line). ) So, what is for good for? The first use is to go through all the elements of a list and do something with each of them. Here a quick way to add up all the elements:
Or you could write a program to find out if there are any duplicates in a list like this program does:
How does it work? Here is a special debugging version:
Note: The reason there are so many print statements is because print statements can show the value of each variable at different times, and help debug the program.
First the program starts with a old list. Next the program sorts the list. This is so that any duplicates get put next to each other. The program then initializes a prev(ious) variable. Next the first element of the list is deleted so that the first item is not incorrectly thought to be a duplicate. Next a for loop is gone into. Each item of the list is checked to see if it is the same as the previous. If it is a duplicate was found. The value of prev is then changed so that the next time the for loop is run through prev is the previous item to the current. Sure enough, the 7 is found to be a duplicate.
The other way to use for loops is to do something a certain number of times. Here is some code to print out the first 9 numbers of the Fibonacci series:
Everything that can be done with for loops can also be done with while loops but for loops give an easy way to go through all the elements in a list or to do something a certain number of times.
Above, you were introduced to the range function, which returns a list of all the integers in a specified range. Supposing you were to write an expression like range(0, 1000000): that would construct a list consisting of a million integers! That can take up a lot of memory.
Often, you do indeed need to process all the numbers over a very wide range. But you might only need to do so one at a time; as each number is processed, it can be discarded from memory before the next one is obtained.
To do this, you can use the xrange function instead of range. For example, the following simple loop
This is an example of an iterator, which yields values one at a time as they are needed, rather than all at once. As you learn more about Python, you will see a lot more examples of iterators in use, and you will learn how to write your own.
Python 3 Note: In Python 3.x, there is no function named xrange. Instead, the range function has the behaviour described above for xrange.
A while-loop checks its termination condition before each entry into the loop body, and terminates if the condition has gone False. Thus, the loop body will normally iterate zero, one or more complete times.
A for-loop iterates its body once for each value returned from the iterator expression. Again, each iteration is normally of the complete loop body.
Sometimes you want to conditionally stop the loop in the middle of the loop body. An example situation might look like this:
Is there in fact another value to check? If not, exit the loop with failure.
Is the value what I’m looking for? If so, exit the loop with success.
Otherwise, go back to step 1.
As you can see, there are two possible exits from this loop. You can exit from the middle of a Python while- or for-loop with the break-statement. Here is one way to write such a loop:
The trouble with this is the asymmetry between the two ways out of the loop: one through normal for-loop termination, the other through the break. As a stylistic matter, it would be more consistent to follow this principle:
If one exit from a loop is represented by a break, then all exits from the loop should be represented by breaks.
In particular, this means that the loop construct itself becomes a “loop-forever” loop; the only out of it is via a break statement.
This uses the special Python value None to indicate that the iterator has reached its end. This is a common Python convention. But if you need to use None as a valid item in your sequence of values, then it is easy enough to define some other unique value (e.g. a custom dummy class) to represent the end of the list.
Create a program to count by prime numbers. Ask the user to input a number, then print each prime number up to that number.
Instruct the user to pick an arbitrary number from 1 to 100 and proceed to guess it correctly within seven tries. After each guess, the user must tell whether their number is higher than, lower than, or equal to your guess.
A callable object is an object that can accept some arguments (also called parameters) and possibly return an object (often a tuple containing multiple objects).
A function is the simplest callable object in Python, but there are others, such as classes or certain class instances.
...
... return arg1+arg2
...
If a function takes no arguments, it must still include the parentheses, but without anything in them:
...
The arguments in the function definition bind the arguments passed at function invocation (i.e. when the function is called), which are called actual parameters, to the names given when the function is defined, which are called formal parameters. The interior of the function has no knowledge of the names given to the actual parameters; the names of the actual parameters may not even be accessible (they could be inside another function).
A function can define variables within the function body, which are considered 'local' to the function. The locals together with the arguments comprise all the variables within the scope of the function. Any names within the function are unbound when the function returns or reaches the end of the function body.
a, b = first2items(["Hello", "world", "hi", "universe"])
Keywords: returning multiple values, multiple return values.
When calling a function that takes some values for further processing, we need to send some values as Function Arguments. For example:
The output will be: 45 is greater than 30
If any of the formal parameters in the function definition are declared with the format "arg = value," then you will have the option of not specifying a value for those arguments when calling the function. If you do not specify a value, then that parameter will have the default value given when the function executes.
... print message[:truncate_after]
...
4.7.1. Default Argument Values, The Python Tutorial, docs.python.org
...
When calling the above function, you must provide value for each of the first two arguments. However, since the third parameter is marked with an asterisk, any actual parameters after the first two will be packed into a tuple and bound to "remaining."
...
If we declare a formal parameter prefixed with two asterisks, then it will be bound to a dictionary containing any keyword arguments in the actual parameters which do not correspond to any formal parameters. For example, consider the function:
4.7.3. Arbitrary Argument Lists, The Python Tutorial, docs.python.org
Objects passed as arguments to functions are passed by reference; they are not being copied around. Thus, passing a large list as an argument does not involve copying all its members to a new location in memory. Note that even integers are objects. However, the distinction of by value and by reference present in some other programming languages often serves to distinguish whether the passed arguments can be actually changed by the called function and whether the calling function can see the changes.
Passed objects of mutable types such as lists and dictionaries can be changed by the called function and the changes are visible to the calling function. Passed objects of immutable types such as integers and strings cannot be changed by the called function; the calling function can be certain that the called function will not change them. For mutability, see also Data Types chapter.
An argument cannot be declared to be constant, not to be changed by the called function. If an argument is of an immutable type, it cannot be changed anyway, but if it is of a mutable type such as list, the calling function is at the mercy of the called function. Thus, if the calling function wants to make sure a passed list does not get changed, it has to pass a copy of the list.
A function can be called by appending the arguments in parentheses to the function name, or an empty matched set of parentheses if the function takes no arguments.
A function's return value can be used by assigning it to a variable, like so:
As shown above, when calling a function you can specify the parameters by name and you can do so in any order
This above is valid and start will have the default value of 0. A restriction placed on this is after the first named argument then all arguments after it must also be named. The following is not valid
Nested functions are functions defined within other functions. Arbitrary level of nesting is possible.
Nested functions can read variables declared in the immediately outside function. For such variables that are mutable, nested functions can even modify them. For such variables that are immutable such as integers, attempt at modification in the nested function throws UnboundLocalError. In Python 3, an immutable immediately outside variable can be declared in the nested function to be nonlocal, in an analogy to global. Once this is done, the nested function can assign a new value to that variable and that modification is going to be seen outside of the nested function.
Nested functions can be used in #Closures, on which see below. Furthermore, they can be used to reduce repetion of code that pertains only to a single function, often with reduced argument list owing to seeing the immediately outside variables.
An example of a nested function that modifies an immediately outside variable that is a list and therefore mutable:
An example in which the outside variable is first accessed below the nested function definition and it still works:
Keywords: inner functions, internal functions, local functions.
Nested Function in Python stackoverflow.com
Simple statements # 7.13. The nonlocal statement, docs.python.org/3
Python nonlocal statement, stackoverflow.com
A closure is a nested function with an after-return access to the data of the outer function, where the nested function is returned by the outer function as a function object. Thus, even when the outer function has finished its execution after being called, the closure function returned by it can refer to the values of the variables that the outer function had when it defined the closure function.
Closures are possible in Python because functions are first-class objects. A function is merely an object of type function. Being an object means it is possible to pass a function object (an uncalled function) around as argument or as return value or to assign another name to the function object. A unique feature that makes closure useful is that the enclosed function may use the names defined in the parent function's scope.
A lambda is an anonymous (unnamed) function. It is used primarily to write very short functions that are a hassle to define in the normal way. A function like this:
...
Lambda is often used as an argument to other functions that expects a function object, such as sorted()'s 'key' argument.
The lambda form is often useful as a closure, such as illustrated in the following example:
... return lambda x: x + ' -- ' + name
...
Note that the lambda function can use the values of variables from the scope in which it was created (like pre and post). This is the essence of closure.
4.7.5. Lambda Expressions, The Python Tutorial, docs.python.org
When discussing loops, you came across the concept of an iterator. This yields in turn each element of some sequence, rather than the entire sequence at once, allowing you to deal with sequences much larger than might be able to fit in memory at once.
You can create your own iterators, by defining what is known as a generator function. To illustrate the usefulness of this, let us start by considering a simple function to return the concatenation of two lists:
That would work, but it would consume a lot of memory.
Consider an alternative definition, which takes two iterators as arguments:
Notice the use of the yield statement, instead of return. We can now use this something like
Note: You can still pass a list or other sequence type wherever Python expects an iterator (like to an argument of your concat function); this will still work, and makes it easy not to have to worry about the difference where you don’t need to.
Functional Programming HOWTO # Generators, docs.python.org
4.6. Defining Functions, The Python Tutorial, docs.python.org
Variables in Python are automatically declared by assignment. Variables are always references to objects, and are never typed. Variables exist only in the current scope or global scope. When they go out of scope, the variables are destroyed, but the objects to which they refer are not (unless the number of references to the object drops to zero).
Scope is delineated by function and class blocks. Both functions and their scopes can be nested. So therefore
Now when this code is tested,
The name 'bar' is not found because a higher scope does not have access to the names lower in the hierarchy.
It is a common pitfall to fail to lookup an attribute (such as a method) of an object (such as a container) referenced by a variable before the variable is assigned the object. In its most common form:
Here, to correct this problem, one must add y = [] before the for loop.
Global variables of a Python module are read-accessible from functions in that module. In fact, if they are mutable, they can be also modified via method call. However, they cannot modified via a plain assignment unless declared global in the function.
6.13. The global statement, docs.python.org
What are the rules for local and global variables in Python? in Programming FAQ, docs.python.org
Keyword nonlocal, available since Python 3.0, is an analogue of global for nested scopes. It enables a nested function of assign-modify a variable that is local to the outer function.
7.13. The nonlocal statement, docs.python.org
To find out which variables exist in the global and local scopes, you can use locals() and globals() functions, which return dictionaries:
Write access to locals() dictionary is discouraged by the Python documentation.
Built-in Functions # globals, docs.python.org
Built-in Functions # locals, docs.python.org
Execution model, docs.python.org
7.13. The nonlocal statement, docs.python.org
Note on Python version: The following uses the syntax of Python 2.x. Some of the following is not going to work with Python 3.x.
Python has two functions designed for accepting data directly from the user:
There are also very simple ways of reading a file and, for stricter control over input, reading from stdin if necessary.
Example: in order to assign the user's name, i.e. string data, to a variable "x" you would type
x = raw_input('What is your name?')
More complicated expressions are possible. For example, if a script says:
x = input('What are the first 10 perfect squares? ')
Python includes a built-in file type. Files can be opened by using the file type's constructor:
This means f is open for reading. The first argument is the filename and the second parameter is the mode, which can be 'r', 'w', or 'rw', among some others.
The most common way to read from a file is simply to iterate over the lines of the file:
This will print the first character of each line. Note that a newline is attached to the end of each line read this way.
The newer and better way to read from a file:
The advantage is, that the opened file will close itself after reading each line.
Because files are automatically closed when the file object goes out of scope, there is no real need to close them explicitly. So, the loop in the previous code can also be written as:
You can read limited numbers of characters at a time like this:
This will read the characters from f one at a time, and then print them if they're not whitespace.
A file object implicitly contains a marker to represent the current position. If the file marker should be moved back to the beginning, one can either close the file object and reopen it or just move the marker back to the beginning with:
Like many other languages, there are built-in file objects representing standard input, output, and error. These are in the sys module and are called stdin, stdout, and stderr. There are also immutable copies of these in __stdin__, __stdout__, and __stderr__. This is for IDLE and other tools in which the standard files have been changed.
You must import the sys module to use the special stdin, stdout, stderr I/O handles.
For finer control over input, use sys.stdin.read(). In order to implement the UNIX 'cat' program in Python, you could do something like this:
Note that sys.stdin.read() will read from standard input till EOF. (which is usually Ctrl+D.)
Command-line arguments passed to a Python program are stored in sys.argv list. The first item in the list is name of the Python program, which may or may not contain the full path depending on the manner of invocation. sys.argv list is modifiable.
Printing all passed arguments except for the program name itself:
Parsing passed arguments for passed minus options:
Above, the arguments at which options are found are removed so that sys.argv can be looped for all remaining arguments.
Parsing of command-line arguments is further supported by library modules optparse (deprecated), argparse (since Python 2.7) and getopt (to make life easy for C programmers).
The Python Standard Library - 28.1. sys, python.org
The Python Standard Library - 15.4. argparse, python.org
The Python Standard Library - 15.5. optparse, python.org
The Python Standard Library - 15.6. getopt, python.org
Note on Python version: The following uses the syntax of Python 2.x. Much of the following is not going to work with Python 3.x. In particular, Python 3.x requires round brackets around arguments to "print".
The basic way to do output is the print statement.
To print multiple things on the same line separated by spaces, use commas between them, like this:
While neither string contained a space, a space was added by the print statement because of the comma between the two objects. Arbitrary data types can be printed this way:
Objects can be printed on the same line without needing to be on the same line if one puts a comma at the end of a print statement:
To end the printed line with a newline, add a print statement without any objects.
If the bare print statement were not present, the above output would look like:
You can use similar syntax when writing to a file instead of to standard output, like this:
This will print to any object that implements write(), which includes file objects.
To avoid adding spaces and newlines between objects' output with subsequent print statements, you can do one of the following:
Concatenation: Concatenate the string representations of each object, then later print the whole thing at once.
Write function: You can make a shorthand for sys.stdout.write and use that for output.
You may need sys.stdout.flush() to get that text on the screen quickly.
Examples of output with Python 2.x:
Separates the two words with a space.
Prints elements of various data types, separating them by a space.
Throws an error as a result of trying to concatenate a string and an integer.
Uses "+" to concatenate strings, after converting a number to a string.
Prints "Hello " without a newline, with a space at the end.
Prints "Hello" without a newline. Doing "import sys" is a prerequisite. Needs a subsequent "sys.stdout.flush()" in order to display immediately on the user's screen.
Prints "Hello" with a newline.
Prints to standard error stream.
Prints a string that has been formatted with the use of an integer passed as an argument.
Like the previous, just that the formatting happens outside of the print statement.
Outputs "Float: 1.234". The number 3 after the period specifies the number of decimal digits after the period to be displayed, while 6 before the period specifies the total number of characters the displayed number should take, to be padded with spaces if needed.
Passes two arguments to the formatter.
Examples of output with Python 3.x:
Ensures Python 2.6 and later Python 2.x can use Python 3.x print function.
Prints the two words separated with a space. Notice the surrounding brackets, ununsed in Python 2.x.
Prints without the ending newline.
Prints the two words separated with a dash.
Outputs to a file handle, in this case standard error stream.
Printing numbers from 1 to 10 to a file, one per line:
With "w", the file is opened for writing. With ">>file", print sends its output to a file rather than standard output.
Printing numbers from 1 to 10 to a file, separated with a dash:
Opening a file for appending rather than overwriting:
See also Files chapter.
Formatting numbers and other values as strings using the string percent operator:
v2 = "Int zero padded: %03i" % 4 # 004
v3 = "Int space padded: %3i" % 4 # 4
v5 = "Hex 2: %X" % 31 # 1F - capitalized F
v7 = "Float: %f" % 2.4 # 2.400000
v8 = "Float: %.2f" % 2.4 # 2.40
v9 = "Float in exp: %e" % 2.4 # 2.400000e+00
vA = "Float in exp: %E" % 2.4 # 2.400000E+00
vB = "List as string: %s" % [1, 2, 3]
vC = "Left padded str: %10s" % "cat"
vD = "Right padded str: %-10s" % "cat"
vE = "Truncated str: %.2s" % "cat"
Formatting numbers and other values as strings using the format() string method, since Python 2.6:
Formatting numbers and other values as strings using literal string interpolation, since Python 3.6:
v2 = f"Int plus 1: {int1+1}" # 32 - expression evaluation
5.6.2. String Formatting Operations, docs.python.org
Built-in Functions # format, docs.python.org
7.1.2. Custom String Formatting, docs.python.org
7.1.3.1. Format Specification Mini-Language, docs.python.org
7.1.4. Template strings, docs.python.org
Input and Output in The Python Tutorial, python.org
6.6. The print statement in The Python Language Reference, python.org
Built-in Functions #open in The Python Standard Library at Python Documentation, python.org
Built-in Types #file.write in The Python Standard Library at Python Documentation, python.org
27.1. sys — System-specific parameters and functions in Python Documentation, python org -- mentions sys.stdout, and sys.stderr
5.6.2. String Formatting Operations in The Python Standard Library at Python Documentation, python.org -- for "%i", "%s" and similar string formatting
7.2.2. The string format operator, in Python 2.5 quick reference, nmt.edu, for "%i", "%s" and similar string formatting
In this case the "r" parameter means the file will be opened in read-only mode.
When opening a file, one starts reading at the beginning of the file, if one would want more random access to the file, it is possible to use seek() to change the current position in a file and tell() to get to know the current position in the file. This is illustrated in the following example:
Here a file is opened, twice ten bytes are read, tell() shows that the current offset is at position 20, now seek() is used to go back to position 10 (the same position where the second read was started) and ten bytes are read and printed again. And when no more operations on a file are needed the close() function is used to close the file we opened.
In this case readlines() will return an array containing the individual lines of the file as array entries. Reading a single line can be done using the readline() function which returns the current line as a string. This example will output an additional newline between the individual lines of the file, this is because one is read from the file and print introduces another newline.
Write to a file requires the second parameter of open() to be "w", this will overwrite the existing contents of the file if it already exists when opening the file:
Append to a file requires the second parameter of open() to be "a" (from append):
Note that this does not add a line break between the existing file content and the string to be added.
Since Python 2.5, you can use with keyword to ensure the file handle is released as soon as possible and to make it exception-safe:
Related to the with keywords is Context Managers chapter.
7.5. The with statement, python.org
PEP 343 -- The "with" Statement, python.org
When working on systems such as Microsoft Windows™, the directory separators will conflict with the path string. To get around this, do the following:
A better way however is to use "raw", or r:
But there are some other convenient functions in os.path, where os.path.exists() only confirms whether or not path exists, there are functions which let you know if the path is a file, a directory, a mount point or a symlink. There is even a function os.path.realpath() which reveals the true destination of a symlink:
'/boot/vmlinuz-2.6.24-21-generic'
To copy or move a file, use the shutil library.
To perform a recursive copy it is possible to use copytree(), to perform a recursive remove it is possible to use rmtree()
To remove an individual file there exists the remove() function in the os module:
The content of a directory can be listed using listdir:
Getting a list of all items in a directory, including the nested ones:
Above, root takes value of each directory in /user/Joe Hoe including /user/Joe Hoe itself, and directories and files are only those directly present in each root.
Getting a list of all files in a directory, including the nested ones, ending in .txt, using list comprehension:
To get the length of a string, we use the len() function:
You can slice strings just like lists and any other sequences:
To get the ASCII code of a character, use the ord() function.
To get the character encoded by an ASCII code number, use the chr() function.
'^'To know if all the characters present in a string are alphanumeric i.e. they are alphabets and numeric, use the isalnum() function. It returns true if there is at least one character present in the string and all the characters present are alphanumeric.
To know if all the characters present in a string are pure alphabets, use the isalpha() function. It returns true if there is at least one character present in the string and all the characters present are alphabetic.
s = input("Enter value: ") # this line requires Python 3.x, use raw_input() instead of input() in Python 2.x
Or shorter (using list comprehension instead of the for block):
s = input("Enter value: ") # this line requires Python 3.x, use raw_input() instead of input() in Python 2.x
l2=[ord(c) for c in s]
['s', 't', 'r', 'i', 'n', 'g']
Enter value: Hello, Wikibooks!
['H', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o', ',', ' ', 'W', 'i', 'k', 'i', 'b', 'o', 'o', 'k', 's', '!']
Use Python to determine the difference in ASCII code between lowercase and upper case letters.
Write a program that converts a lowercase letter to an upper case letter using the ASCII code. (Note that there are better ways to do this, but you should do it once using the ASCII code to get a feel for how the language works)
Modules are a way to structure a program and create reusable libraries. A module is usually stored in and corresponds to a separate .py file. Many modules are available from the standard library. You can create your own modules. Python searches for modules in the current directory and other locations; the list of module search locations can be expanded by expanding PYTHONPATH environment variable and by other means.
To use the functions and classes offered by a module, you have to import the module:
The above imports the math standard module, making all of the functions in that module namespaced by the module name. It imports all functions and all classes, if any.
You can import the module under a different name:
You can import a single function, making it available without the module name namespace:
You can import a single function and make it available under a different name:
You can make an import as late as in a function definition:
Such an import only takes place when the function is called.
You can import all functions from the module without the module namespace, using an asterisk notation:
However, if you do this inside a function, you get a warning in Python 2 (and error in Python 3):
Shared Objects (under Unix and Linux) with the .so suffix
DLL's (under Windows) with the .pyd suffix
Modules are loaded in the order they're found, which is controlled by sys.path. The current directory is always on the path.
Directories should include a file in them called __init__.py, which should probably include the other files in the directory.
Creating a DLL that interfaces with Python is covered in another section.
You can check whether a module has been imported as follows:
28.1. sys # sys.modules, docs.python.org
The easiest way to create a module is by having a file called mymod.py either in a directory recognized by the PYTHONPATH variable or (even easier) in the same directory where you are working. If you have the following file mymod.py
It is not feasible for larger projects to keep all classes in a single file. It is often easier to store all files in directories and load all files with one command. Each directory needs to have a __init__.py file which contains python commands that are executed upon loading the directory.
Suppose we have two more objects called Object2 and Object3 and we want to load all three objects with one command. We then create a directory called mymod and we store three files called Object1.py, Object2.py and Object3.py in it. These files would then contain one object per file but this not required (although it adds clarity). We would then write the following __init__.py file:
__all__ = ["Object1", "Object2", "Object3"]
The first three commands tell python what to do when somebody loads the module. The last statement defining __all__ tells python what to do when somebody executes from mymod import *. Usually we want to use parts of a module in other parts of a module, e.g. we want to use Object1 in Object2. We can do this easily with an from . import * command as the following file Object2.py shows:
Your program, stored in mymodule.py, can look as follows:
The uses of the above program can look as follows:
The Python Tutorial - 6.1.1. Executing modules as scripts, python.org
When import is requested, modules are searched in the directories (and zip files?) in the module path, accessible via sys.path, a Python list. The module path can be extended as follows:
Above, if ModuleFileName.py is located at /My/Path/To/Module/Directory and contains a definition of my_function, the 2nd line ensures the 3rd line actually works.
The Module Search Path at Python doc
Module names seem to be limited to alphanumeric characters and underscore; dash cannot be used. While my-module.py can be created and run, importing my-module fails. The name of a module is the name of the module file minus the .py suffix.
Module names are case sensitive. If the module file is called MyModule.py, doing "import mymodule" fails while "import MyModule" is fine.
PEP 0008 recommends module names to be in all lowercase, with possible use of underscores.
Examples of module names from the standard library include math, sys, io, re, urllib, difflib, and unicodedata.
The Python Standard Library at docs.python.org
28.1. sys # sys.builtin_module_names, docs.python.org
The Python Standard Library, docs.python.org
Modules, The Python Tutorial, python.org
Python Module Index, python.org
Importing Modules, python.org
Installing Python Modules, python.org
Idioms and Anti-Idioms in Python, python.org
Error handling when importing modules, stackoverflow.com
Classes are a way of aggregating similar data and functions. A class is basically a scope inside which various code (especially function definitions) is executed, and the locals to this scope become attributes of the class, and of any objects constructed by this class. An object constructed by a class is called an instance of that class.
"""A complex number""" # Class documentation
c1.real = 3.14 # No access protection
c1.undeclared = 9.99 # Add an instance attribute
MyComplex.classvar = 1 # Class attribute access
c1.classvar = -1 # An instance attribute overshadowing the class one
MyComplex.classvar = 2 # Class attribute access
To define a class, use the following format:
"Here is an explanation about your class"
The capitalization in this class definition is the convention, but is not required by the language. It's usually good to add at least a short explanation of what your class is supposed to do. The pass statement in the code above is just to say to the python interpreter just go on and do nothing. You can remove it as soon as you are adding your first statement.
The class is a callable object that constructs an instance of the class when called. Let's say we create a class Foo.
To construct an instance of the class, Foo, "call" the class object:
This constructs an instance of class Foo and creates a reference to it in f.
A method is a function within a class. The first argument (methods must always take at least one argument) is always the instance of the class on which the function is invoked. For example
... self.x = x
... print self.x
If this code were executed, nothing would happen, at least until an instance of Foo were constructed, and then bar were called on that instance.
In a normal function, if you were to set a variable, such as test = 23, you could not access the test variable. Typing test would say it is not defined. This is true in class functions unless they use the self variable.
Basically, in the previous example, if we were to remove self.x, function bar could not do anything because it could not access x. The x in setx() would disappear. The self argument saves the variable into the class's "shared variables" database.
Why self?
You do not need to use self. However, it is a norm to use self.
Calling a method is much like calling a function, but instead of passing the instance as the first parameter like the list of formal parameters suggests, use the function as an attribute of the instance.
This will have the same output.
As shown by the method setx above, the members of a Python class can change during runtime, not just their values, unlike classes in languages like C++ or Java. We can even delete f.x after running the code above.
AttributeError: Foo instance has no attribute 'x'
At the heart of all this is a dictionary that can be accessed by "vars(ClassName)"
At first, this output makes no sense. We just saw that g had the member y, so why isn't it in the member dictionary? If you remember, though, we put y in the class definition, Foo, not g.
And there we have all the members of the Foo class definition. When Python checks for g.member, it first checks g's vars dictionary for "member," then Foo. If we create a new member of g, it will be added to g's dictionary, but not Foo's.
Note that if we now assign a value to g.y, we are not assigning that value to Foo.y. Foo.y will still be 10, but g.y will now override Foo.y
Sure enough, if we check the values:
Note that f.y will also be 10, as Python won't find 'y' in vars(f), so it will get the value of 'y' from vars(Foo).
We can also access the members dictionary of a class using the __dict__ member of the class.
If we add, remove, or change key-value pairs from g.__dict__, this has the same effect as if we had made those changes to the members of g.
Why use classes?
Classes are special due to the fact once an instance is made, the instance is independent of all other instances. I could have two instances, each with a different x value, and they will not affect the other's x.
f.boo() and g.boo() will print different values.
New style classes were introduced in python 2.2. A new-style class is a class that has a built-in as its base, most commonly object. At a low level, a major difference between old and new classes is their type. Old class instances were all of type instance. New style class instances will return the same thing as x.__class__ for their type. This puts user defined classes on a level playing field with built-ins. Old/Classic classes are slated to disappear in Python 3. With this in mind all development should use new style classes. New Style classes also add constructs like properties and static methods familiar to Java programmers.
Properties are attributes with getter and setter methods.
... self.__egg = "MyEgg"
... return self.__egg
... def set_egg(self, egg):
... self.__egg = egg
... self.__egg = "MyEgg"
... return self.__egg
... self.__egg = egg
Static methods in Python are just like their counterparts in C++ or Java. Static methods have no "self" argument and don't require you to instantiate the class before using them. They can be defined using staticmethod()
... print "You can't have have the spam, spam, eggs and spam without any spam... that's disgusting"
You can't have have the spam, spam, eggs and spam without any spam... that's disgusting
They can also be defined using the function decorator @staticmethod.
... print "You can't have have the spam, spam, eggs and spam without any spam... that's disgusting"
Like all object oriented languages, Python provides support for inheritance. Inheritance is a simple concept by which a class can extend the facilities of another class, or in Python's case, multiple other classes. Use the following format for this:
...
... print "I'm doing Foo.bar()"
...
... print "I'm doing Bar.bar()"
...
I'm doing Bar.bar()
I'm doing Foo.bar()
Once again, we can see what's going on under the hood by looking at the class dictionaries.
As shown in section #Inheritance, a class can be derived from multiple classes:
A tricky part about multiple inheritance is method resolution: upon a method call, if the method name is available from multiple base classes or their base classes, which base class method should be called.
The method resolution order depends on whether the class is an old-style class or a new-style class. For old-style classes, derived classes are considered from left to right, and base classes of base classes are considered before moving to the right. Thus, above, BaseClass1 is considered first, and if method is not found there, the base classes of BaseClass1 are considered. If that fails, BaseClass2 is considered, then its base classes, and so on. For new-style classes, see the Python documentation online.
9.5.1. Multiple Inheritance, docs.python.org
The Python 2.3 Method Resolution Order, python.org
There are a number of methods which have reserved names which are used for special purposes like mimicking numerical or container operations, among other things. All of these names begin and end with two underscores. It is convention that methods beginning with a single underscore are 'private' to the scope they are introduced within.
One of these purposes is constructing an instance, and the special name for this is '__init__'. __init__() is called before an instance is returned (it is not necessary to return the instance manually). As an example,
__init__() can take arguments, in which case it is necessary to pass arguments to the class in order to create an instance. For example,
Hi!
Here is an example showing the difference between using __init__() and not using __init__():
Hi!
Similarly, '__del__' is called when an instance is destroyed; e.g. when it is no longer referenced.
These methods are also a constructor and a destructor but they're only executed when the class is instantiated with with. Example:
Metaclass constructor.
Converting an object to a string, as with the print statement or with the str() conversion function, can be overridden by overriding __str__. Usually, __str__ returns a formatted version of the objects content. This will NOT usually be something that can be executed.
This function is much like __str__(). If __str__ is not present but this one is, this function's output is used instead for printing.
__repr__ is used to return a representation of the object in string form. In general, it can be executed to get back the original object.
... def __setattr__(self, name, value):
... print "Nice try"
...
AttributeError: Unchangable instance has no attribute 'x'
Similar to __setattr__, except this function is called when we try to access a class member, and the default simply returns the value.
... return "You don't get to see " + name
...
"You don't get to see anything"
... print name, "cannot be deleted"
...
... return A.n + B.n
...
To override the augmented assignment operators, merely add 'i' in front of the normal binary operator, i.e. for '+=' use '__iadd__' instead of '__add__'. The function will be given one argument, which will be the object on the right side of the augmented assignment operator. The returned value of the function will then be assigned to the object on the left of the operator.
It is important to note that the augmented assignment operators will also use the normal operator functions if the augmented operator function hasn't been set directly. This will work as expected, with "__add__" being called for "+=" and so on.
Unary operators will be passed simply the instance of the class that they are called on.
It is also possible in Python to override the indexing and slicing operators. This allows us to use the class[i] and class[a:b] syntax on our own objects.
The simplest form of item operator is __getitem__. This takes as a parameter the instance of the class, then the value of the index.
...
We can also define a function for the syntax associated with assigning a value to an item. The parameters for this function include the value being assigned, in addition to the parameters from __getitem__
... def __setitem__(self,index,value):
... self.string = index + " is now " + value
...
We can do the same thing with slices. Once again, each syntax has a different parameter list associated with it.
... def __getslice___(self,start,end):
...
Keep in mind that one or both of the start and end parameters can be blank in slice syntax. Here, Python has default value for both the start and the end, as show below.
Note that the default value for the end of the slice shown here is simply the largest possible signed integer on a 32-bit system, and may vary depending on your system and C compiler.
__setslice__ has the parameters (self,start,end,value)
We also have operators for deleting items and slices.
__delitem__ has the parameters (self,index)
__delslice__ has the parameters (self,start,end)
Note that these are the same as __getitem__ and __getslice__.
Since all python members of a python class are accessible by functions/methods outside the class, there is no way to enforce encapsulation short of overriding __getattr__, __setattr__ and __delattr__. General practice, however, is for the creator of a class or module to simply trust that users will use only the intended interface and avoid limiting access to the workings of the module for the sake of users who do need to access it. When using parts of a class or module other than the intended interface, keep in mind that the those parts may change in later versions of the module, and you may even cause errors or undefined behaviors in the module.since encapsulation is private.
When defining a class, it is convention to document the class using a string literal at the start of the class definition. This string will then be placed in the __doc__ attribute of the class definition.
... making this class usable by others who don't know the code as well
... as he does.
...
Docstrings are a very useful way to document your code. Even if you never write a single piece of separate documentation (and let's admit it, doing so is the lowest priority for many coders), including informative docstrings in your classes will go a long way toward making them usable.
Several tools exist for turning the docstrings in Python code into readable API documentation, e.g., EpyDoc.
Don't just stop at documenting the class definition, either. Each method in the class should have its own docstring as well. Note that the docstring for the method explode in the example class Documented above has a fairly lengthy docstring that spans several lines. Its formatting is in accordance with the style suggestions of Python's creator, Guido van Rossum in PEP 8.
It is fairly easy to add methods to a class at runtime. Lets assume that we have a class called Spam and a function cook. We want to be able to use the function cook on all instances of the class Spam:
Spam.cook = cook #add the function to the class Spam
It is a bit more tricky to add methods to an instance of a class that has already been created. Lets assume again that we have a class called Spam and we have already created eggs. But then we notice that we wanted to cook those eggs, but we do not want to create a new instance but rather use the already created one:
Now we can cook our eggs and the last statement will output:
We can also write a function that will make the process of adding methods to an instance of a class easier.
Note that in the function add_method we cannot write instance.fxn = f since this would add a function called fxn to the instance.
Classes, docs.python.org
Built-in Functions # vars, docs.python.org
Python 2 handles all errors with exceptions.
An exception is a signal that an error or other unusual condition has occurred. There are a number of built-in exceptions, which indicate conditions like reading past the end of a file, or dividing by zero. You can also define your own exceptions.
Whenever your program attempts to do something erroneous or meaningless, Python raises exception to such conduct:
ZeroDivisionError: integer division or modulo by zero
This traceback indicates that the ZeroDivisionError exception is being raised. This is a built-in exception -- see below for a list of all the other ones.
In order to handle errors, you can set up exception handling blocks in your code. The keywords try and except are used to catch exceptions. When an error occurs within the try block, Python looks for a matching except block to handle it. If there is one, execution jumps there.
You can't divide by zero!
If you don't specify an exception type on the except line, it will cheerfully catch all exceptions. This is generally a bad idea in production code, since it means your program will blissfully ignore unexpected errors as well as ones which the except block is actually prepared to handle.
In this code, the print statement calls the function f. That function calls the function g, which will raise an exception of type ValueError. Neither f nor g has a try/except block to handle ValueError. So the exception raised propagates out to the main code, where there is an exception-handling block waiting for it. This code prints:
Sometimes it is useful to find out exactly what went wrong, or to print the python error text yourself. For example:
Sorry, 'the_parrot' has apparently joined the choir invisible.
Code similar to that seen above can be used to create custom exceptions and pass information along with them. This can be very useful when trying to debug complicated projects. Here is how that code would look; first creating the custom exception class:
Exceptions could lead to a situation where, after raising an exception, the code block where the exception occurred might not be revisited. In some cases this might leave external resources used by the program in an unknown state.
Exceptions are good for more than just error handling. If you have a complicated piece of code to choose which of several courses of action to take, it can be useful to use exceptions to jump out of the code as soon as the decision can be made. The Python-based mailing list software Mailman does this in deciding how a message should be handled. Using exceptions like this may seem like it's a sort of GOTO -- and indeed it is, but a limited one called an escape continuation. Continuations are a powerful functional-programming tool and it can be useful to learn them.
Just as a simple example of how exceptions make programming easier, say you want to add items to a list but you don't want to use "if" statements to initialize the list we could replace this:
Using exceptions, we can emphasize the normal program flow—that usually we just extend the list—rather than emphasizing the unusual case:
Errors and Exceptions in The Python Tutorial, docs.python.org
Errors and Exceptions in The Python Tutorial for Python 2.4, docs.python.org
Built-in Exceptions, docs.python.org
In python there are three types of errors; syntax errors, logic errors and exceptions.
Syntax errors are the most basic type of error. They arise when the Python parser is unable to understand a line of code. Syntax errors are almost always fatal, i.e. there is almost never a way to successfully execute a piece of code containing syntax errors.
Some syntax errors can be caught and handled, like eval(""), but these are rare.
In IDLE, it will highlight where the syntax error is. Most syntax errors are typos, incorrect indentation, or incorrect arguments. If you get this error, try looking at your code for any of these.
These are the most difficult type of error to find, because they will give unpredictable results and may crash your program. A lot of different things can happen if you have a logic error. However these are very easy to fix as you can use a debugger, which will run through the program and fix any problems.
A simple example of a logic error can be showcased below, the while loop will compile and run however, the loop will never finish and may crash Python:
Logic errors are only erroneous in the perspective of the programming goal one might have; in many cases Python is working as it was intended, just not as the user intended. The above while loop is functioning correctly as Python is intended to, but the exit the condition the user needs is missing.
Exceptions arise when the python parser knows what to do with a piece of code but is unable to perform the action. An example would be trying to access the internet with python without an internet connection; the python interpreter knows what to do with that command but is unable to perform it.
Unlike syntax errors, exceptions are not always fatal. Exceptions can be handled with the use of a try statement.
Consider the following code to display the HTML of the website 'example.com'. When the execution of the program reaches the try statement it will attempt to perform the indented code following, if for some reason there is an error (the computer is not connected to the internet or something) the python interpreter will jump to the indented code below the 'except:' command.
Another way to handle an error is to except a specific error.
If the user enters a numeric value as his/her age, the output should look like this:
Your age must be 5 years old.
However, if the user enters a non-numeric value as his/her age, a ValueError is thrown when trying to execute the int() method on a non-numeric string, and the code under the except clause is executed:
Your age must be numeric.
You can also use a try block with a while loop to validate input:
The program will prompt you for your age until you enter a valid age:
Your age must be numeric.
You must be 15 years old.
In certain other cases, it might be necessary to get more information about the exception and deal with it appropriately. In such situations the except as construct can be used.
f=raw_input("enter the name of the file:")
l=raw_input("enter the name of the link:")
Documentation is the process of leaving information about your code. The two mechanisms for doing this in Python are comments and documentation strings.
There will always be a time in which you have to return to your code. Perhaps it is to fix a bug, or to add a new feature. Regardless, looking at your own code after six months is almost as bad as looking at someone else's code. What one needs is a means to leave reminders to yourself as to what you were doing.
For this purpose, you leave comments. Comments are little snippets of text embedded inside your code that are ignored by the Python interpreter. A comment is denoted by the hash character (#) and extends to the end of the line. For example:
As you can see, you can also use comments to temporarily remove segments of your code, like the second print statement.
The following guidelines are from PEP 8, written by Guido van Rossum.
Comments that contradict the code are worse than no comments. Always make a priority of keeping the comments up-to-date when the code changes!
Comments should be complete sentences. If a comment is a phrase or sentence, its first word should be capitalized, unless it is an identifier that begins with a lower case letter (never alter the case of identifiers!).
If a comment is short, the period at the end can be omitted. Block comments generally consist of one or more paragraphs built out of complete sentences, and each sentence should end in a period.
You should use two spaces after a sentence-ending period.
When writing English, Strunk and White applies.
Python coders from non-English speaking countries: please write your comments in English, unless you are 120% sure that the code will never be read by people who don't speak your language.
An inline comment is a comment on the same line as a statement. Inline comments should be separated by at least two spaces from the statement. They should start with a # and a single space.
Inline comments are unnecessary and in fact distracting if they state the obvious. Don't do this: x = x + 1 # Increment x
But sometimes, this is useful: x = x + 1 # Compensate for border
Fortunately, Python has such a capability. Documentation strings (or docstrings) are used to create easily-accessible documentation. You can add a docstring to a function, class, or module by adding a string as the first indented statement. For example:
An example class.
"""Prints the argument given."""
The convention is to use triple-quoted strings, because it makes it easier to add more documentation spanning multiple lines.
To access the documentation, you can use the help function inside a Python shell with the object you want help on, or you can use the pydoc command from your system's shell. If we were in the directory where docstringexample.py lives, one could enter pydoc docstringexample to get documentation on that module.
Python is a strongly idiomatic language: there is generally a single optimal way of doing something (a programming idiom), rather than many ways: “There’s more than one way to do it” is not a Python motto.
This section starts with some general principles, then goes through the language, highlighting how to idiomatically use operations, data types, and modules in the standard library.
Use exceptions for error-checking, following EAFP (It's Easier to Ask Forgiveness than Permission) instead of LBYL (Look Before You Leap): put an action that may fail inside a try...except block.
Use context managers for managing resources, like files. Use finally for ad hoc cleanup, but prefer to write a context manager to encapsulate this.
Use properties, not getter/setter pairs.
Use dictionaries for dynamic records, classes for static records (for simple classes, use collections.namedtuple): if a record always has the same fields, make this explicit in a class; if the fields may vary (be present or not), use a dictionary.
Use _ for throwaway variables, like discarding a return value when a tuple is returned, or to indicate that a parameter is being ignored (when required for an interface, say). You can use *_, **__ to discard positional or keyword arguments passed to a function: these correspond to the usual *args, **kwargs parameters, but explicitly discarded. You can also use these in addition to positional or named parameters (following the ones you use), allowing you to use some and discard any excess ones.
Use implicit True/False (truthy/falsy values), except when needing to distinguish between falsy values, like None, 0, and [], in which case use an explicit check like is None or == 0.
Use the optional else clause after try, for, while not just if.
For readable and robust code, only import modules, not names (like functions or classes), as this creates a new (name) binding, which is not necessarily in sync with the existing binding.[1] For example, given a module m which defines a function f, importing the function with from m import f means that m.f and f can differ if either is assigned to (creating a new binding).
In practice, this is frequently ignored, particularly for small-scale code, as changing a module post-import is rare, so this is rarely a problem, and both classes and functions are imported from modules so they can be referred to without a prefix. However, for robust, large-scale code, this is an important rule, as it risks creating very subtle bugs.
For robust code with low typing, one can use a renaming import to abbreviate a long module name:
Note that importing submodules (or subpackages) from a package using from is completely fine:
Use enumerate() if you need to keep track of iteration cycles over an iterable:
x = l[i] # why did you go from list to numbers back to the list?
Python sequences do have an index method, but this returns the index of the first occurrence of a specific value in the sequence. To find the first occurrence of a value that satisfies a condition, instead, use next and a generator expression:
If you need the value, not the index of its occurrence, you can get it directly through:
x = next(n for n in l if n > 0)
Exceptions let you signal “no match found” (they solve the semipredicate problem): since you're returning a single value (not an index), this can't be returned in the value.
Generator expressions let you use an expression without needing a lambda or introducing new grammar.
For mutable sequences, use del, instead of reassigning to a slice:
The simplest reason is that del makes your intention clear: you're truncating.
More subtly, slicing creates another reference to the same list (because lists are mutable), and then unreachable data can be garbage-collected, but generally this is done later. Deleting instead immediately modifies the list in-place (which is faster than creating a slice and then assigning it to the existing variable), and allows Python to immediately deallocate the deleted elements, instead of waiting for garbage collection.
In some cases you do want 2 slices of the same list – though this is rare in basic programming, other than iterating once over a slice in a for loop – but it's rare that you'll want to make a slice of a whole list, then replace the original list variable with a slice (but not change the other slice!), as in the following funny-looking code:
l = l[i:j] # why not m = l[i:j] ?
You can create a sorted list directly from any iterable, without needing to first make a list and then sort it. These include sets and dictionaries (iterate on the keys):
Use tuples for constant sequences. This is rarely necessary (primarily when using as keys in a dictionary), but makes intention clear.
However, do not use in to check if a string is a single-character match, since it matches substrings and will return spurious matches – instead use a tuple of valid values. For example, the following is wrong:
To make a long string incrementally, build a list and then join it with '' – or with newlines, if building a text file (don't forget the final newline in this case!). This is faster and clearer than appending to a string, which is often slow. (In principle can be
However, there are some optimizations in some versions CPython that make simple string appending fast – string appending in CPython 2.5+, and bytestring appending in CPython 3.0+ are fast, but for building Unicode strings (unicode in Python 2, string in Python 3), joining is faster. If doing extensive string manipulation, be aware of this and profile your code. See Performance Tips: String Concatenation and Concatenation Test Code for details.
You can even use generator expressions, which are extremely efficient:
If you do want a mutable string-like object, you can use StringIO.
Efficient String Concatenation in Python – old article (so benchmarks out of date), but gives overview of some techniques.
To iterate through a dictionary, either keys, values, or both:
...
Anti-idiom (unless None is not a potential value):
Dict from parallel sequences of keys and values
Match if found, else None:
...returns None if no match, and the match contents if there is one.
↑ “Idioms and Anti-Idioms in Python”:
“Idioms and Anti-Idioms in Python”, Moshe Zadka
“PEP 20 -- The Zen of Python”, Tim Peters
Installs xlrd package from the PyPI repository, or from another repository if customized to search in additional repositories.
Upgrades a package to the latest version.
Installs the package from wheel file mypackage.whl. This is useful when for whatever reason installation from PyPI fails and you need to download the wheel file (.whl) of the package manually.
Lists installed packages and their versions.
Outputs information about an installed package (here xlrd), including version, author and license.
Calls pip via python and -m option. Useful e.g. for installing packages for PyPy (a just-in-time compiler for Python), in which case you use pypy -m pip install xlrd.
Outputs the pip version.
Upgrades pip itself.
PyPI is an online repository of Python packages, many of which are published under a rather permissive license such as MIT license or one of the BSD licenses. PyPI hosts both pure-Python packages and Python packages taking advantage of the C language. Installing pure-Python packages such as xlrd is usually seamless. As for C language packages, many of them have precompiled binaries for multiple operating systems, making the installation seamless as well. However, for a C language package that has only sources published, pip needs a working and properly set up compiler to successfully install the package.
A wheel file is a package distribution. It can contain pure-Python code but also precompiled executable binaries if required. A single package can offer multiple wheels per different Python versions and operating systems. An example wheel file containing precompiled binaries is numpy-1.16.2-cp27-cp27m-win32.whl, for numpy package, available from pypi Download files section for the package. If you are using pip with no problems, you do not need to worry about wheel files.
Installation in pip documentation, pip.pypa.io
How do I install pip on Windows?, stackoverflow.com
Installing Packages, packaging.python.org
Packaging Python Projects, packaging.python.org
The Python Package Index (PyPI), pypi.org
Over 10% of Python Packages on PyPI are Distributed Without Any License, 2018, snyk.io
Python 2 vs. Python 3
Python 3 was created incompatible with Python 2.
One noticeable difference is that in Python 3, print is not a statement but rather a function, and therefore, invoking it requires placing brackets around its arguments. Differences with deeper impact include making all strings Unicode and introducing a bytes type, making all integers big integers, letting slash (/) denote a true division rather than per default integer division, etc.; for changes, see What’s New In Python 3.0 and for all changes, see What’s New in Python.
Python 2 code can be made ready for a switch to Python 3 by importing features from __future__ module. For instance, from __future__ import print_function makes Python 2 behave as if it had Python 3 print function.
A list of Python packages ready for Python 3 is available from py3readiness.org.
A survey conducted in 2018 by JetBrains and Python Software Foundation suggests significant adoption of Python 3 among Python users.
W:History of Python#Version 3, en.wikipedia.org
What’s New In Python 3.0, docs.python.org
28.11. __future__ — Future statement definitions, docs.python.org
Porting Python 2 Code to Python 3, docs.python.org
Cheat Sheet: Writing Python 2-3 compatible code, python-future.org
Should I use Python 2 or Python 3 for my development activity?, wiki.python.org
Python3.0, wiki.python.org
Python 3 Readiness, py3readiness.org
Python Developers Survey 2018 Results, jetbrains.com (conducted with Python Software Foundation)
How we rolled out one of the largest Python 3 migrations ever, 2018, blogs.dropbox.com
Duplicated code is recognized as bad practice in software for lots of reasons, not least of which is that it requires more work to maintain. If you have the same algorithm operating twice on different pieces of data you can put the algorithm in a function and pass in the data to avoid having to duplicate the code. However, sometimes you find cases where the code itself changes, but two or more places still have significant chunks of duplicated boilerplate code. A typical example might be logging:
In a case like this, it's not obvious how to factor out the duplication. We can follow our earlier pattern of moving the common code to a function, but calling the function with different data is not enough to produce the different behavior we want (add or multiply). Instead, we have to pass a function to the common function. This involves a function that operates on a function, known as a higher-order function.
...
The above example is really just a syntax sugar for codes like this:
...
... print 'A function is called somewhere'
...
A good use for the decorators is to allow you to refactor your code so that common features can be moved into decorators. Consider for example, that you would like to trace all calls to some functions and print out the values of all the parameters of the functions for each invocation.
Now you can implement this in a decorator as follows:
Then you can use the decorator on any function that you defined by:
On running this code you would see output like
Alternately, instead of creating the decorator as a class, you could have used a function as well.
Remember it is good practice to return the function or a sensible
A basic issue in programming is resource management: a resource is anything in limited supply, notably file handles, network sockets, locks, etc., and a key problem is making sure these are released after they are acquired. If they are not released, you have a resource leak, and the system may slow down or crash. More generally, you may want cleanup actions to always be done, other than simply releasing resources.
Python provides special syntax for this in the with statement, which automatically manages resources encapsulated within context manager types, or more generally performs startup and cleanup actions around a block of code. You should always use a with statement for resource management. There are many built-in context manager types, including the basic example of File, and it is easy to write your own. The code is not hard, but the concepts are slightly subtle, and it is easy to make mistakes.
Basic resource management uses an explicit pair of open()...close() functions, as in basic file opening and closing. Don't do this, for the reasons we are about to explain:
The key problem with this simple code is that it fails if there is an early return, either due to a return statement or an exception, possibly raised by called code. To fix this, ensuring that the cleanup code is called when the block is exited, one uses a try...finally clause:
However, this still requires manually releasing the resource, which might be forgotten, and the release code is distant from the acquisition code. The release can be done automatically by instead using with, which works because File is a context manager type:
This assigns the value of open(filename) to f (this point is subtle and varies between context managers), and then automatically releases the resource, in this case calling f.close(), when the block exits.
Newer objects are context managers (formally context manager types: subtypes, as they implement the context manager interface, which consists of __enter__(), __exit__()), and thus can be used in with statements easily (see With Statement Context Managers).
For older file-like objects that have a close method but not __exit__(), you can use the @contextlib.closing decorator. If you need to roll your own, this is very easy, particularly using the @contextlib.contextmanager decorator.[1]
Context managers work by calling __enter__() when the with context is entered, binding the return value to the target of as, and calling __exit__() when the context is exited. There's some subtlety about handling exceptions during exit, but you can ignore it for simple use.
The __init__()/__enter__() distinction is important to distinguish between single use, reusable and reentrant context managers. It's not a meaningful distinction for the common use case of instantiating an object in the with clause, as follows:
...
However, in general it is a difference, notably when distinguishing a reusable context manager from the resource it is managing, as in here:
...
Putting resource acquisition in __enter__() instead of __init__() gives a reusable context manager.
Notably, File() objects do the initialization in __init__() and then just returns itself when entering a context, as in def __enter__(): return self. This is fine if you want the target of the as to be bound to an object (and allows you to use factories like open as the source of the with clause), but if you want it to be bound to something else, notably a handle (file name or file handle/file descriptor), you want to wrap the actual object in a separate context manager. For example:
For simple uses you don't need to do any __init__() code, and only need to pair __enter__()/__exit__(). For more complicated uses you can have reentrant context managers, but that's not necessary for simple use.
Note that a try...finally clause is necessary with @contextlib.contextmanager, as this does not catch any exceptions raised after the yield, but is not necessary in __exit__(), which is called even if an exception is raised.
The term context manager is carefully chosen, particularly in contrast to “scope”. Local variables in Python have function scope, and thus the target of a with statement, if any, is still visible after the block has exited, though __exit__() has already been called on the context manager (the argument of the with statement), and thus is often not useful or valid. This is a technical point, but it's worth distinguishing the with statement context from the overall function scope.
Generators that hold or use resources are a bit tricky.
Beware that creating generators within a with statement and then using them outside the block does not work, because generators have deferred evaluation, and thus when they are evaluated, the resource has already been released. This is most easily seen using a file, as in this generator expression to convert a file to a list of lines, stripping the end-of-line character:
When lines is then used – evaluation can be forced with list(lines) – this fails with ValueError: I/O operation on closed file. This is because the file is closed at the end of the with statement, but the lines are not read until the generator is evaluated.
The simplest solution is to avoid generators, and instead use lists, such as list comprehensions. This is generally appropriate in this case (reading a file) since one wishes to minimize system calls and just read the file all at once (unless the file is very large):
In case that one does wish to use a resource in a generator, the resource must be held within the generator, as in this generator function:
As the nesting makes clear, the file is kept open while iterating through it.
To release the resource, the generator must be explicitly closed, using generator.close(), just as with other objects that hold resources (this is the dispose pattern). This can in turn be automated by making the generator into a context manager, using @contextlib.closing, as:
Resource Acquisition Is Initialization is an alternative form of resource management, particularly used in C++. In RAII, resources are acquired during object construction, and released during object destruction. In Python the analogous functions are __init__() and __del__() (finalizer), but RAII does not work in Python, and releasing resources in __del__() does not work. This is because there is no guarantee that __del__() will be called: it's just for memory manager use, not for resource handling.
In more detail, Python object construction is two-phase, consisting of (memory) allocation in __new__() and (attribute) initialization in __init__(). Python is garbage-collected via reference counting, with objects being finalized (not destructed) by __del__(). However, finalization is non-deterministic (objects have non-deterministic lifetimes), and the finalizer may be called much later or not at all, particularly if the program crashes. Thus using __del__() for resource management will generally leak resources.
It is possible to use finalizers for resource management, but the resulting code is implementation-dependent (generally working in CPython but not other implementations, such as PyPy) and fragile to version changes. Even if this is done, it requires great care to ensure references drop to zero in all circumstances, including: exceptions, which contain references in tracebacks if caught or if running interactively; and references in global variables, which last until program termination. Prior to Python 3.4, finalizers on objects in cycles were also a serious problem, but this is no longer a problem; however, finalization of objects in cycles is not done in a deterministic order.
A Python script can find out about the type, class, attributes and methods of an object. This is referred to as reflection or introspection. See also Metaclasses.
The type method enables to find out about the type of an object. The following tests return True:
The type function disregards class inheritance: "type(3) is object" yields False while "isinstance(3, object)" yields True.
Built-in Functions # type, python.org
8.15. types — Names for built-in types, python.org
Determines whether an object is an instance of a type or class.
Note that isinstance provides a weaker condition than a comparison using #Type.
Built-in Functions # isinstance, python.org
Determines whether a class is a subclass of another class. Pertains to classes, not their instances.
Built-in Functions # issubclass, python.org
Duck typing provides an indirect means of reflection. It is a technique consisting in using an object as if it was of the requested type, while catching exceptions resulting from the object not supporting some of the features of the class or type.
Glossary # duck-typing, python.org
For an object, determines whether it can be called. A class can be made callable by providing a __call__() method.
Returns True, as pop without "()" returns a function object.
Returns False, as [1,2].pop() returns 2 rather than a function object.
Built-in Functions # callable, python.org
Returns the list of names of attributes of an object, which includes methods. Is somewhat heuristic and possibly incomplete, as per python.org.
Lists names of functions and other objects available in the re module for regular expressions.
Built-in Functions # dir, python.org
Returns the value of an attribute of an object, given the attribute name passed as a string.
The list of attributes of an object can be obtained using #Dir.
Built-in Functions # getattr, python.org
A list of Python keywords can be obtained from Python:
32.6. keyword — Testing for Python keywords, python.org
A list of Python built-in objects and functions can be obtained from Python:
28.3. __builtin__ — Built-in objects, python.org
Built-in Functions # dir, python.org
Built-in Functions, docs.python.org
How to determine the variable type in Python?, stackoverflow.com
Differences between isinstance() and type() in python, stackoverflow.com
W:Reflection (computer_programming)#Python, Wikipedia
W:Type introspection#Python, Wikipedia
In Python, classes are themselves objects. Just as other objects are instances of a particular class, classes themselves are instances of a metaclass.
The Pep 3115 defines the changes to python 3 metaclasses.
In python3 you have a method __prepare__ that is called in the metaclass to create a dictionary or other class to store the class members.[1]
The metaclass for all standard Python types is the "type" object.
It can be instantiated to create new class objects similarly to the class factory example above by passing the name of the new class, the base classes to inherit from, and a dictionary defining the namespace to use.
For instance, the code:
It is possible to create a class with a different metaclass than type by setting the metaclass keyword argument when defining the class. When this is done, the class, and its subclass will be created using your custom metaclass. For example
By creating a custom metaclass in this way, it is possible to change how the class is constructed. This allows you to add or remove attributes and methods, register creation of classes and subclasses creation and various other manipulations when the class is created.
Unifying types and classes in Python 2.2
↑ http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-3115/
↑ http://eli.thegreenplace.net/2011/08/14/python-metaclasses-by-example/
To do:[Incomplete] (see Putting Metaclasses to Work, Ira R. Forman, Scott H. Danforth?)
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Since Python is an interpreted language in its most commonly used CPython implementation, it is many times slower in a variety of tasks than the most commonly used compiled non-managed languages such as C and C++; for some tasks, it is more than 100 times slower. CPython seems to be on par with Perl, another interpreted language, slower on some tasks, faster on other tasks.
Performance can be measured using benchmarks. Benchmarks are often far from representative of the real-world usage and have to be taken with a grain of salt. Some benchmarks are outright wrong in that non-idiomatic code is used for a language, yielding avoidably low performance for the language.
PyPy is a just-in-time (JIT) compiler that often runs faster than CPython. Another compiler that can lead to greater speeds is Numba, which works for a subset of Python. Yet another compiler is Cython, not to be confused with CPython.
Python 3 versus C gcc fastest programs, benchmarksgame-team.pages.debian.net
Python 3 versus Java fastest programs, benchmarksgame-team.pages.debian.net
Python 3 versus Go fastest programs, benchmarksgame-team.pages.debian.net
Perl versus Python 3 fastest programs, benchmarksgame-team.pages.debian.net
Python speed center, speed.python.org
Python Interpreters Benchmarks, pybenchmarks.org
Performance of Python runtimes on a non-numeric scientific code by Riccardo Murri, arxiv.org
How To Make Python Run As Fast As Julia by Jean Francois Puget, ibm.com
PyPy is a Python interpreter containing a just-in-time compiler. Python programs can usually be run by PyPy without modification but for availability of 3rd party modules since a module made for CPython, the normal Python interpreter, does not automatically work with PyPy. Furthermore, some Python programs can run into trouble because of PyPy's different strategy of when to free up allocated objects including file handles.
The speed-up brought by PyPy compared to CPython depends on the nature of the task. For some computationally heavy tasks, the speed-up factor can reach as high as 50. PyPy speed center reports the geometric average speed-up factor as 7.6, calculated from a set of benchmarks.
PyPy is available both for Python 2 and Python 3, but the version for Python 3 is slower; the above speed statements pertain to Python 2.
Interactive use of PyPy is possible: you can type "pypy" into a command line, and start interacting with it just like with CPython.
The outputs from PyPy are not guaranteed to be exactly the same as from CPython. For instance, PyPy can yield items from a set in an order different from that of CPython since the item order in a set is arbitrary and not guaranteed to the same between different Python implementations; for verification, you can compare the results of {1,2}.pop(). Dictionaries have an arbitrary key order as well.
Floating point results may be slightly different between PyPy and CPython in some setups as long as PyPy is built with SSE2 instruction set enabled and CPython is not.
See also Performance.
PyPy, pypy.org
PyPy's Speed Center, speed.pypy.org
Cython (not to be confused with CPython) is a compiler of Python-like source code to the C language, from which it is compiled by a C compiler to binary executable. The objective is a significant speedup compared to interpreting the Python code in CPython, the standard interpreter. Cython is usually used to create extension modules for Python. The source code language compilable by Cython is a near superset of Python.
You can install Cython using pip install Cython. However, in order for Cython to work, you will need a working C compiler. On Linux, you usually have one; on Windows, you can install and use Microsoft Visual C++ compiler or MinGW.
Beyond the normal Python, Cython-compilable Python source can contain C-like declarations of variable types, leading to speedups of the compiled code.
Cython-compilable Python source code files conventionally use extension pyx.
Official website, cython.org
Basic Tutorial, docs.cython.org
Cython, pypi.org
Python Interpreters Benchmarks, pybenchmarks.org
Python can run one-liners from an operating system command line using option -c:
Calculates and outputs the result.
Imports a module required and outputs sine value.
Uses a loop to output numbers from 1 to 10.
Does not work; two loops in a line are an invalid syntax.
Outputs pairs using two analogues of loop within a comprehension.
Acts as grep: outputs each line of the input containing a substring matching a regular expression. Not a Python one-liner strength.
Acts as sed: for each line of the input, performs a regex replacement and outputs the results. Again, not a Python one-liner strength.
Outputs a year's calendar using calendar module.
On Windows, plays notification sound. Requires installation of playsound module. The module works across platforms; what is Windows specific above is the file path.
Powerful Python One-Liners, wiki.python.org
There are many tips and tricks you can learn in Python:
Triple quotes are an easy way to define a string with both single and double quotes.
String concatenation is expensive. Use percent formatting and str.join() for concatenation:
(but don't worry about this unless your resulting string is more than 500-1000 characters long)
Several modules have optimized versions written in C, which provide an almost-identical interface and are frequently much faster or more memory-efficient than the pure Python implementations. Module behavior generally does differ in some respects, often minor, and thus C versions are frequently used.
This is primarily a Python 2.x feature, which has been largely removed in Python 3, with modules automatically using optimized implementations if available.[2] However, the cProfile/profile pair still exists (as of Python 3.4).
The C version of a module named module or Module is called cModule, and frequently imported using import...as to strip off the prefix, as:
For compatibility, one can try to import the C version and fall back to the Python version if the C version is not available; in this case using import...as is required, so the code does not depend on which module was imported:
(Python 2.x) cPickle for pickle, up to 1000× faster.
(Python 2.x) cStringIO for StringIO, replaced by io.StringIO in Python 3
cProfile for profile – the Python profile adds significant overhead, and thus cProfile is recommended for most use.
(not needed in Python 3.3+) cElementTree for ElementTree, 15–20 times faster and uses 2–5 times less memory;[3] not needed in Python 3.3+, which automatically uses a fast implementation if possible.
List comprehension and generator expressions are very useful for working with small, compact loops. Additionally, it is faster than a normal for-loop.
List comprehension and generator expression can be used to work with two (or more) lists with zip or itertools.izip
Choosing the correct data type can be critical to the performance of an application. For example, say you have 2 lists:
For such small lists, this will work fine, but for larger lists, for example if each contains thousands of entries, the following will be more efficient, and produces the same result:
Sets are optimized for speed in such functions. Dictionaries themselves cannot be used as members of a set as they are mutable, but tuples can. If one needs to do set operations on a list of dictionaries, one can convert the items to tuples and the list to a set, perform the operation, then convert back. This is often much faster than trying to replicate set operations using string functions.
Decorators can be used for handling common concerns like logging, db access, etc.
While Python has no built-in function to flatten a list you can use a recursive function to do the job quickly.
To stop a Python script from closing right after you launch one independently, add this code:
Python already has a GUI built in: Tkinter, based on Tcl's Tk. More are available, such as PyQt4, pygtk3, and wxPython.
[on_true] if [expression] else [on_false]
↑ "'concat vs join - followup' on 'Python Rocks! and other rants 27.8.2004 Weblog of Kent S Johnson'". August 27, 2004. http://www.pycs.net/users/0000323/weblog/2004/08/27.html. Retrieved 2008-08-29.
↑ "The cElementTree Module", January 30, 2005, Fredrik Lundh
The Python Standard Library is a collection of script modules accessible to a Python program to simplify the programming process and removing the need to rewrite commonly used commands. They can be used by 'calling/importing' them at the beginning of a script.
A list of the Standard Library modules can be found at http://www.python.org/doc/.
The following are among the most important:
Python includes a module for working with regular expressions on strings. For more information about writing regular expressions and syntax not specific to Python, see the regular expressions wikibook. Python's regular expression syntax is similar to Perl's
To start using regular expressions in your Python scripts, import the "re" module:
Regular expression functions in Python at a glance:
One of the most common uses for regular expressions is extracting a part of a string or testing for the existence of a pattern in a string. Python offers several functions to do this.
The match and search functions do mostly the same thing, except that the match function will only return a result if the pattern matches at the beginning of the string being searched, while search will find a match anywhere in the string.
In this example, match2 will be None, because the string st2 does not start with the given pattern. The other 3 results will be Match objects (see below).
You can also match and search without compiling a regexp:
Here we use the search function of the re module, rather than of the pattern object. For most cases, its best to compile the expression first. Not all of the re module functions support the flags argument and if the expression is used more than once, compiling first is more efficient and leads to cleaner looking code.
The compiled pattern object functions also have parameters for starting and ending the search, to search in a substring of the given string. In the first example in this section, match2 returns no result because the pattern does not start at the beginning of the string, but if we do:
What if we want to search for multiple instances of the pattern? Then we have two options. We can use the start and end position parameters of the search and match function in a loop, getting the position to start at from the previous match object (see below) or we can use the findall and finditer functions. The findall function returns a list of matching strings, useful for simple searching. For anything slightly complex, the finditer function should be used. This returns an iterator object, that when used in a loop, yields Match objects. For example:
[', ', '. ', ': ']
...
If you're going to be iterating over the results of the search, using the finditer function is almost always a better choice.
Match objects are returned by the search and match functions, and include information about the pattern match.
The group function returns a string corresponding to a capture group (part of a regexp wrapped in ()) of the expression, or if no group number is given, the entire match.
Using the search1 variable we defined above:
Capture groups can also be given string names using a special syntax and referred to by matchobj.group('name'). For simple expressions this is unnecessary, but for more complex expressions it can be very useful.
You can also get the position of a match or a group in a string, using the start and end functions:
This returns the start and end locations of the entire match, and the start and end of the first (and in this case only) capture group, respectively.
Another use for regular expressions is replacing text in a string. To do this in Python, use the sub function.
"This string has a 'q' in it"
This takes any single alphanumeric character (\w in regular expression syntax) preceded by "a" or "an" and wraps in in single quotes. The \1 and \2 in the replacement string are backreferences to the 2 capture groups in the expression; these would be group(1) and group(2) on a Match object from a search.
The subn function is similar to sub, except it returns a tuple, consisting of the result string and the number of replacements made. Using the string and expression from before:
("This string has a 'q' in it", 1)
Replacing without constructing and compiling a pattern object:
The split function splits a string based on a given regular expression:
['', ' First part ', ' Second part ', ' Third part']
The escape function escapes all non-alphanumeric characters in a string. This is useful if you need to take an unknown string that may contain regexp metacharacters like ( and . and create a regular expression from it.
>>> re.escape(r'This text (and this) must be escaped with a "\" to use in a regexp.')
'This\\ text\\ \\(and\\ this\\)\\ must\\ be\\ escaped\\ with\\ a\\ \\"\\\\\\"\\ to\\ use\\ in\\ a\\ regexp\\.'
The different flags use with regular expressions:
Makes the behavior of some special sequences (\w, \W, \b, \B, \s, \S) dependent on the current locale
Makes the ^ and $ characters match at the beginning and end of each line, rather than just the beginning and end of the string
Makes the . character match every character including newlines.
Makes \w, \W, \b, \B, \d, \D, \s, \S dependent on Unicode character properties
Ignores whitespace except when in a character class or preceded by an non-escaped backslash, and ignores # (except when in a character class or preceded by an non-escaped backslash) and everything after it to the end of a line, so it can be used as a comment. This allows for cleaner-looking regexps.
If you're going to be using the same regexp more than once in a program, or if you just want to keep the regexps separated somehow, you should create a pattern object, and refer to it later when searching/replacing.
To create a pattern object, use the compile function.
The first argument is the pattern, which matches the string "foo", followed by up to 5 of any character, then the string "bar", storing the middle characters to a group, which will be discussed later. The second, optional, argument is the flag or flags to modify the regexp's behavior. The flags themselves are simply variables referring to an integer used by the regular expression engine. In other languages, these would be constants, but Python does not have constants. Some of the regular expression functions do not support adding flags as a parameter when defining the pattern directly in the function, if you need any of the flags, it is best to use the compile function to create a pattern object.
The r preceding the expression string indicates that it should be treated as a raw string. This should normally be used when writing regexps, so that backslashes are interpreted literally rather than having to be escaped.
Python re documentation - Full documentation for the re module, including pattern objects and match objects
The modern way, since Python 2.4, is using subprocess module:
The traditional way of executing external commands and reading their output is via popen2 module:
The modern way, since Python 2.4, is using subprocess module:
Keywords: system commands, shell commands, processes, backtick, pipe.
17.1. subprocess — Subprocess management, python.org, since Python 2.4
15.1. os — Miscellaneous operating system interfaces, python.org
17.5. popen2 — Subprocesses with accessible I/O streams, python.org, deprecated since Python 2.6
Python includes several modules for manipulating xml.
An example of doing RSS feed parsing with DOM
Python includes several modules in the standard library for working with emails and email servers.
Sending mail is done with Python's smtplib using an SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol) server. Actual usage varies depending on complexity of the email and settings of the email server, the instructions here are based on sending email through Google's Gmail.
The first step is to create an SMTP object, each object is used for connection with one server.
The first argument is the server's hostname, the second is the port. The port used varies depending on the server.
Next, we need to do a few steps to set up the proper connection for sending mail.
These steps may not be necessary depending on the server you connect to. ehlo() is used for ESMTP servers, for non-ESMTP servers, use helo() instead. See Wikipedia's article about the SMTP protocol for more information about this. The starttls() function starts Transport Layer Security mode, which is required by Gmail. Other mail systems may not use this, or it may not be available.
Next, log in to the server:
Note that this is a rather crude example, it doesn't include a subject, or any other headers. For that, one should use the email package.
Python's email package contains many classes and functions for composing and parsing email messages, this section only covers a small subset useful for sending emails.
We start by importing only the classes we need, this also saves us from having to use the full module name later.
Next, we attach the body of the email to the MIME message:
For sending the mail, we have to convert the object to a string, and then use the same prodecure as above to send using the SMTP server..
If we look at the text, we can see it has added all the necessary headers and structure necessary for a MIME formatted email. See MIME for more details on the standard:
The full text of our example message
From: you@gmail.com
To: target@example.com
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"
Threading in python is used to run multiple threads (tasks, function calls) at the same time. Note that this does not mean that they are executed on different CPUs. Python threads will NOT make your program faster if it already uses 100 % CPU time. In that case, you probably want to look into parallel programming. If you are interested in parallel programming with python, please see here.
Python threads are used in cases where the execution of a task involves some waiting. One example would be interaction with a service hosted on another computer, such as a webserver. Threading allows python to execute other code while waiting; this is easily simulated with the sleep function.
Thread-0 started!
Thread-1 started!
Thread-0 finished!
Thread-2 started!
Thread-1 finished!
Thread-3 started!
Thread-2 finished!
Thread-3 finished!
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Connecting to and reading an NTP time server, returning the time as follows
There are various GUI toolkits usable from Python.
Very productive are true GUI-builders, where the programmer can arrange the GUI window and other components such as database by using the mouse only in an intuitive fashion like in Windows Delphi 2.0. Very little typing is required. For python, only Boa Constructor follows this paradigm. WXglade and Qt-designer, monkey studio etc. come somewhat near but remain incomplete.
Disadvantages with the following kits described below are:
Difficult deployment - the apps won't run on a particular GNU-Linux installation without major additional work
Tkinter is a Python wrapper for Tcl/Tk providing a cross-platform GUI toolkit. On Windows, it comes bundled with Python; on other operating systems, it can be installed. The set of available widgets is smaller than in some other toolkits, but since Tkinter widgets are extensible, many of the missing compound widgets can be created using the extensibility, such as combo box and scrolling pane.
Main chapter: Tkinter.
24.1. Tkinter — Python interface to Tcl/Tk, python.org
Tkinter 8.5 reference: a GUI for Python, infohost.nmt.edu; the same as pdf
An Introduction to Tkinter, effbot.org
See also book PyGTK For GUI Programming
PyGTK provides a convenient wrapper for the GTK+ library for use in Python programs, taking care of many of the boring details such as managing memory and type casting. The bare GTK+ toolkit runs on Linux, Windows, and Mac OS X (port in progress), but the more extensive features — when combined with PyORBit and gnome-python — require a GNOME install, and can be used to write full featured GNOME applications.
PyQt is a wrapper around the cross-platform Qt C++ toolkit. It has many widgets and support classes supporting SQL, OpenGL, SVG, XML, and advanced graphics capabilities.
PyQt is a set of bindings for the cross-platform Qt application framework. PyQt v4 supports Qt4 and PyQt v3 supports Qt3 and earlier.
Bindings for the cross platform toolkit wxWidgets. WxWidgets is available on Windows, Macintosh, and Unix/Linux.
Dabo is a full 3-tier application framework. Its UI layer wraps wxPython, and greatly simplifies the syntax.
The "Hello World" example in pyFltk looks like:
PyKDE - Part of the kdebindings package, it provides a python wrapper for the KDE libraries.
PyXPCOM provides a wrapper around the Mozilla XPCOM component architecture, thereby enabling the use of standalone XUL applications in Python. The XUL toolkit has traditionally been wrapped up in various other parts of XPCOM, but with the advent of libxul and XULRunner this should become more feasible. These days, nobody uses PyXPCOM for very good reasons: PyXPCOM gives one dead links and outdated incompatible firefox extensions.
Graphic User Interface FAQ, python.org
An excerpt from Chapter 20: GUI Development, from Python Programming on Win32, onlamp.com, by Mark Hammond, Andy Robinson; covers Tkinter, PythonWin and wxPython
Google Ngram Viewer: Tkinter, wxPython, wxWidgets, PyGTK, PyQt
Tkinter is a Python wrapper for Tcl/Tk providing a cross-platform GUI toolkit. On Windows, it comes bundled with Python; on other operating systems, it can be installed. The set of available widgets is smaller than in some other toolkits, but since Tkinter widgets are extensible, many of the missing compound widgets can be created using the extensibility, such as combo box and scrolling pane.
IDLE, Python's Integrated Development and Learning Environment, is written using Tkinter and is often distributed with Python. You can learn about features of Tkinter by playing around with menus and dialogs of IDLE. For instance, Options > Configure IDLE... dialog shows a broad variety of GUI elements including tabbed interface. You can learn about programming using Tkinter by studying IDLE source code, which, on Windows, is available e.g. in C:\Program Files\Python27\Lib\idlelib.
A minimal example made more compact - later references to GUI items not required:
A minimal example creating an application class derived from Frame:
Simple message boxes can be created using tkMessageBox as follows:
The tkMessageBox dialogs module, infohost.nmt.edu
Standard Dialogs, effbot.org
The tkFileDialog module, infohost.nmt.edu
File Dialogs, effbot.org
A radio button can be used to create a simple choice dialog with multiple options:
An alternative to radio button that immediately reacts to button press:
("Program Files", r"C:\Program Files")]
The Radiobutton widget, infohost.nmt.edu
The Tkinter Radiobutton Widget, effbot.org
A list box can be used to create a simple multiple-choice dialog:
The Listbox widget, infohost.nmt.edu
The Tkinter Listbox Widget, effbot.org
TKinter Listbox example (Python recipe), code.activestate.com
Checkbox or check button can be created as follows:
The Checkbutton widget, infohost.nmt.edu
The Tkinter Checkbutton Widget, effbot.org
Entry widget, a single-line text input field, can be used as follows:
The Entry widget, infohost.nmt.edu
The Tkinter Entry Widget, effbot.org
The Menu widget, infohost.nmt.edu
The Tkinter Menu Widget, effbot.org
A frame around other elements can be created using LabelFrame widget as follows:
The LabelFrame widget, infohost.nmt.edu
Tkinter LabelFrame Widget, effbot.org
Message is like Label but ready to wrap across multiple lines. An example:
The Message widget, infohost.nmt.edu
The Tkinter Message Widget, effbot.org
Drop-down list, in Tkinter option menu, can be created as follows:
The OptionMenu widget, infohost.nmt.edu
The Tkinter OptionMenu Widget, effbot.org
Text widget is a more complex one, allowing editing of both plain and formatted text, including multiple fonts.
Example to be added.
The Text widget, infohost.nmt.edu
The Tkinter Text Widget, effbot.org
The Windows installer for Python 2.3 ships with Tcl/Tk 8.4.3. You can find out about the version:
What's new in Python 2.3, python.org
24.1. Tkinter — Python interface to Tcl/Tk, python.org
Tkinter 8.5 reference: a GUI for Python, infohost.nmt.edu; the same as pdf
An Introduction to Tkinter, effbot.org
Tkinter Summary, staff.washington.edu
TkInter, wiki.python.org
The Common Gateway Interface (CGI) allows to execute some Python programs on an HTTP server.
By default, open a .py file in HTTP returns its content. In order to make the server compile and execute the source code, it must be placed in a directory including an .htaccess file, with the lines[1]:
AddHandler cgi-script .py
Attention: on the Unix-like servers the files aren't executable by default, so this must be set with the command: chmod +x *.py.
The usage of a form needs an import cgi[2].
For a MySQL database, its import MySQLdb[3].
The following file is called CGI_MySQL.py, and uses the both modules:
↑ "HOWTO Use Python in the web". http://docs.python.org/howto/webservers.html.
↑ http://fr.openclassrooms.com/informatique/cours/apercu-de-la-cgi-avec-python
↑ https://pypi.python.org/pypi/MySQL-python/1.2.5
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
The urllib module which is bundled with python can be used for web interaction. This module provides a file-like interface for web urls.
Get and post methods can be used, too.
To save the content of a page on the internet directly to a file, you can read() it and save it as a string to a file object
This will download the file from here and save it to a file "pythonbook.pdf" on your hard drive.
The urllib module includes other functions that may be helpful when writing programs that use the internet:
>>> plain_text = "This isn't suitable for putting in a URL"
This%20isn%27t%20suitable%20for%20putting%20in%20a%20URL
This+isn%27t+suitable+for+putting+in+a+URL
The urlencode function, described above converts a dictionary of key-value pairs into a query string to pass to a URL, the quote and quote_plus functions encode normal strings. The quote_plus function uses plus signs for spaces, for use in submitting data for form fields. The unquote and unquote_plus functions do the reverse, converting urlencoded text to plain text.
With Python, MIME compatible emails can be sent. This requires an installed SMTP server.
This is a test email message.
This sends the sample message from 'sender@example.com' to 'receiver@example.com'.
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Python can also communicate via sockets.
This simple Python program will fetch a 4096 byte HTTP response from Google:
Most Python developers will prefer to use a high-level interface over using sockets, such as Twisted and urllib2.
For basic math including addition, subtraction, multiplication and the like, see Basic Math and Operators chapters. For quick reference, the built-in Python math operators include addition (+), subtraction (-), multiplication (*), division (/), floor division (//), modulo (%), and exponentiation (**). The built-in Python math functions include rounding (round()), absolute value (abs()), minimum (min()), maximum (max()), division with a remainder (divmod()), and exponentiation (pow()). Sign function can be created as "sign = lambda n: 1 if n > 0 else -1 if n < 0 else 0".
The cmath module provides similar functions like the math module but for complex numbers, and then some.
Pseudo-random generators are available from the random module:
The decimal module enables decimal floating point arithmethic, avoiding certain artifacts of the usual underlying binary representation of floating point numbers that are unintuitive to humans.
The fractions module provides fraction arithmetic via Fraction class. Compared to floating point numbers representing fractions, Fraction fractions do not lose precision.
The statistics module, available since Python 3.4, provides some basic statistical functions. It only provides basics; it does not replace full-fledged 3rd party libraries such as numpy. For Python 2.7, the statistics module can be installed from pypi.
Numeric and Mathematical Modules, python.org
9.2. math — Mathematical functions, python.org
9.3. cmath — Mathematical functions for complex numbers, python.org
9.4. decimal — Decimal fixed point and floating point arithmetic, python.org
9.5. fractions — Rational numbers, python.org
9.6. random — Generate pseudo-random numbers, python.org
9.7. itertools — Functions creating iterators for efficient looping, python.org
9.7. statistics — Mathematical statistics functions, python.org
Python has support for working with databases via a simple API. Modules included with Python include modules for SQLite and Berkeley DB. Modules for MySQL , PostgreSQL , FirebirdSQL and others are available as third-party modules. The latter have to be downloaded and installed before use.
The package MySQLdb can be installed, for example, using the debian package "python-mysqldb".
An Example with MySQL would look like this:
On the first line, the Module MySQLdb is imported. Then a connection to the database is set up and on line 4, we save the actual SQL statement to be executed in the variable query. On line 5 we execute the query and on line 6 we fetch all the data.
After the execution of this piece of code, lines contains the number of lines fetched (e.g. the number of rows in the table sampletable). The variable data contains all the actual data, e.g. the content of sampletable. In the end, the connection to the database would be closed again. If the number of lines are large, it is better to use row = cursor.fetchone() and process the rows individually:
Obviously, some kind of data processing has to be used on row, otherwise the data will not be stored. The result of the fetchone() command is a Tuple.
In order to make the initialization of the connection easier, a configuration file can be used:
...
Here, the file .my.cnf in the home directory contains the necessary configuration information for MySQL.
An example with sqlite is very similar to the one above and the cursor provides
You will frequently need to substitute dynamic data into a query string. It is important to ensure this is done correctly.
This example is wrong, because it doesn’t correctly deal with special characters, like apostrophes, in the string being substituted. If your code has to deal with potentially hostile users (like on a public-facing Web server), this could leave you open to an SQL injection attack.
For simple cases, use the automatic parameter substitution provided by the execute method, e.g.
The DBMS interface itself will automatically convert the values you pass into the correct SQL syntax.
For more complex cases, the DBMS module should provide a quoting function that you can explicitly call. For example, MySQLdb provides the escape_string method, while APSW (for SQLite3) provides format_sql_value. This is necessary where the query structure takes a more dynamic form:
This will dynamically construct queries like “select name from employees where company = 'some company'” or “select name from employees where company = 'some company' and department = 'some department'”, depending on which fields have been filled in by the user.
Python iterators are a natural fit for the problem of iterating over lots of database records. Here is an example of a function that performs a database query and returns an iterator for the results, instead of returning them all at once. It relies on the fact that, in APSW (the Python 3 interface library for SQLite), the cursor.execute method itself returns an iterator for the result records. The result is that you can write very concise code for doing complex database queries in Python.
"executes cmd on a new cursor from connection db and yields the results in turn."
In the first example, since db_iter returns a tuple for each record, this can be directly assigned to individual variables for the record fields. In the second example, the tuple has only one element, so a custom mapfn is used to extract this element and return it instead of the tuple.
Database table definitions are frequently subject to change. As application requirements evolve, fields and even entire tables are often added, or sometimes removed. Consider a statement like
You may happen to know that the employees table currently contains, say, 4 fields. But tomorrow someone may add a fifth field. Did you remember to update your code to deal with this? If not, it’s liable to crash. Or even worse, produce an incorrect result!
Better to always list the specific fields you’re interested in, no matter how many there are:
That way, any extra fields added will simply be ignored. And if any of the named fields are removed, the code will at least fail with a runtime error, which is a good reminder that you forgot to update it!
Consider the following scenario: your sales company database has a table of employees, and also a table of sales made by each employee. You want to loop over these sale entries, and produce some per-employee statistics. A naïve approach might be:
Query the database to get a list of employees
For each employee, do a database query to get the list of sales for each employee.
If you have a lot of employees, then the first query may produce a large list, and the second step will involve a correspondingly large number of database queries.
In fact, the entire processing loop can run off a single database query, using the standard SQL construct called a join.
SQL programming is a specialty skill in its own right. To learn more about this, start with the Wikipedia article.
Here is what an example of such a loop could look like:
" employees left join sales on employees.id = sales.employee_id"
" order by employees.name, sales.date"
Here the statistics are quite simple: earliest and latest sale, and number and total amount of sales, and could be computed directly within the SQL query. But the same loop could compute more complex statistics (like standard deviation) that cannot be represented directly within a simple SQL query.
Note how the statistics for each employee are written out under either of two conditions:
The employee name of the next record is different from the previous one
The end of the query results has been reached.
Both conditions are tested with row == None or employee_name != prev_employee_name; after writing out the employee statistics, a separate check for the second condition row == None is used to terminate the loop. If the loop doesn’t terminate, then processing is initialized for the new employee.
Note also the use of a left join in this case: if an employee has had no sales, then the join will return a single row for that employee, with SQL null values (represented by None in Python) for the fields from the sales table. This is why we need checks for such None values before processing those fields.
Alternatively, we could have used an inner join, which would have returned no results for an employee with no sales. Whether you want to omit such an employee from your report, or include them with totals of zero, is really up to your application.
APSW module — SQLite3 for Python 2.x and 3.x
Python has support for working with databases via a simple API. Modules included with Python include modules for SQLite and Berkeley DB. Modules for MySQL , PostgreSQL , FirebirdSQL and others are available as third-party modules. The latter have to be downloaded and installed before use.
The package MySQLdb can be installed, for example, using the debian package "python-mysqldb".
An Example with MySQL would look like this:
On the first line, the Module MySQLdb is imported. Then a connection to the database is set up and on line 4, we save the actual SQL statement to be executed in the variable query. On line 5 we execute the query and on line 6 we fetch all the data.
After the execution of this piece of code, lines contains the number of lines fetched (e.g. the number of rows in the table sampletable). The variable data contains all the actual data, e.g. the content of sampletable. In the end, the connection to the database would be closed again. If the number of lines are large, it is better to use row = cursor.fetchone() and process the rows individually:
Obviously, some kind of data processing has to be used on row, otherwise the data will not be stored. The result of the fetchone() command is a Tuple.
In order to make the initialization of the connection easier, a configuration file can be used:
...
Here, the file .my.cnf in the home directory contains the necessary configuration information for MySQL.
An example with sqlite is very similar to the one above and the cursor provides
You will frequently need to substitute dynamic data into a query string. It is important to ensure this is done correctly.
This example is wrong, because it doesn’t correctly deal with special characters, like apostrophes, in the string being substituted. If your code has to deal with potentially hostile users (like on a public-facing Web server), this could leave you open to an SQL injection attack.
For simple cases, use the automatic parameter substitution provided by the execute method, e.g.
The DBMS interface itself will automatically convert the values you pass into the correct SQL syntax.
For more complex cases, the DBMS module should provide a quoting function that you can explicitly call. For example, MySQLdb provides the escape_string method, while APSW (for SQLite3) provides format_sql_value. This is necessary where the query structure takes a more dynamic form:
This will dynamically construct queries like “select name from employees where company = 'some company'” or “select name from employees where company = 'some company' and department = 'some department'”, depending on which fields have been filled in by the user.
Python iterators are a natural fit for the problem of iterating over lots of database records. Here is an example of a function that performs a database query and returns an iterator for the results, instead of returning them all at once. It relies on the fact that, in APSW (the Python 3 interface library for SQLite), the cursor.execute method itself returns an iterator for the result records. The result is that you can write very concise code for doing complex database queries in Python.
"executes cmd on a new cursor from connection db and yields the results in turn."
In the first example, since db_iter returns a tuple for each record, this can be directly assigned to individual variables for the record fields. In the second example, the tuple has only one element, so a custom mapfn is used to extract this element and return it instead of the tuple.
Database table definitions are frequently subject to change. As application requirements evolve, fields and even entire tables are often added, or sometimes removed. Consider a statement like
You may happen to know that the employees table currently contains, say, 4 fields. But tomorrow someone may add a fifth field. Did you remember to update your code to deal with this? If not, it’s liable to crash. Or even worse, produce an incorrect result!
Better to always list the specific fields you’re interested in, no matter how many there are:
That way, any extra fields added will simply be ignored. And if any of the named fields are removed, the code will at least fail with a runtime error, which is a good reminder that you forgot to update it!
Consider the following scenario: your sales company database has a table of employees, and also a table of sales made by each employee. You want to loop over these sale entries, and produce some per-employee statistics. A naïve approach might be:
Query the database to get a list of employees
For each employee, do a database query to get the list of sales for each employee.
If you have a lot of employees, then the first query may produce a large list, and the second step will involve a correspondingly large number of database queries.
In fact, the entire processing loop can run off a single database query, using the standard SQL construct called a join.
SQL programming is a specialty skill in its own right. To learn more about this, start with the Wikipedia article.
Here is what an example of such a loop could look like:
" employees left join sales on employees.id = sales.employee_id"
" order by employees.name, sales.date"
Here the statistics are quite simple: earliest and latest sale, and number and total amount of sales, and could be computed directly within the SQL query. But the same loop could compute more complex statistics (like standard deviation) that cannot be represented directly within a simple SQL query.
Note how the statistics for each employee are written out under either of two conditions:
The employee name of the next record is different from the previous one
The end of the query results has been reached.
Both conditions are tested with row == None or employee_name != prev_employee_name; after writing out the employee statistics, a separate check for the second condition row == None is used to terminate the loop. If the loop doesn’t terminate, then processing is initialized for the new employee.
Note also the use of a left join in this case: if an employee has had no sales, then the join will return a single row for that employee, with SQL null values (represented by None in Python) for the fields from the sales table. This is why we need checks for such None values before processing those fields.
Alternatively, we could have used an inner join, which would have returned no results for an employee with no sales. Whether you want to omit such an employee from your report, or include them with totals of zero, is really up to your application.
APSW module — SQLite3 for Python 2.x and 3.x
Numpy is a numeric library for python.
It's provided with the main Linux distribution, however it can be installed through the Debian package python-numpy. On Windows, it can be downloaded on http://sourceforge.net/projects/numpy/files/.
Then, once the .zip unpacked, the installation is done by entering into the console:
ImportError “No Module named Setuptools”, save the file https://bootstrap.pypa.io/ez_setup.py into the Python folder, and install it with: python ez_setup.py install.
Microsoft Visual C++ 9.0 is required, download it on https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=44266
This section is a stub.You can help Wikibooks by expanding it.
3D Game Engine with a Python binding
Irrlicht Engine[4] (Python binding website: [5] )
Both are very good free open source C++ 3D game Engine with a Python binding.
3D Game Engines written for Python
Engines designed for Python from scratch.
BlenderOpen Source 3D creation. Free to use for any purpose, forever.Download link
Blender is an impressive 3D tool with a fully integrated 3D graphics creation suite allowing modeling, animation, rendering, post-production, real-time interactive 3D and game creation and playback with cross-platform compatibility. The 3D game engine uses an embedded python interpreter to make 3D games.
Panda3dPanda3D is a game engine, a framework for 3D rendering and game development for Python and C++ programsDownload link
Panda3D is a 3D game engine. It's a library written in C++ with Python bindings. Panda3D is designed in order to support a short learning curve and rapid development. This software is available for free download with source code under the BSD License. The development was started by [Disney]. Now there are many projects made with Panda3D, such as Disney's Pirate's of the Caribbean Online, ToonTown, Building Virtual World, Shell Games and many others. Panda3D supports several features: Procedural Geometry, Animated Texture, Render to texture, Track motion, fog, particle system, and many others.
Crystal SpaceCrystal Space is a mature, full-featured Software Development Kit (SDK) providing real-time 3D graphics for applications such as games and virtual realityDownload link
Crystal-space Is a 3D game engine, with a Python bindings, named *Crystal, view Wikipedia page of *CrystalSpace.
Pygame is a cross platform Python library which wraps SDL. It provides many features like Sprite groups and sound/image loading and easy changing of an objects position. It also provides the programmer access to key and mouse events. A full tutorial can be found in the free book "Making Games with Python & Pygame".
Phil's Pygame Utilities (PGU) is a collection of tools and libraries that enhance Pygame. Tools include a tile editor and a level editor (tile, isometric, hexagonal). GUI enhancements include full featured GUI, HTML rendering, document layout, and text rendering. The libraries include a sprite and tile engine (tile, isometric, hexagonal), a state engine, a timer, and a high score system. (Beta with last update March, 2007. APIs to be deprecated and isometric and hexagonal support is currently Alpha and subject to change.) [Update 27/02/08 Author indicates he is not currently actively developing this library and anyone that is willing to develop their own scrolling isometric library offering can use the existing code in PGU to get them started.]
Pyglet is a cross-platform windowing and multimedia library for Python with no external dependencies or installation requirements. Pyglet provides an object-oriented programming interface for developing games and other visually-rich applications for Windows, Mac OS X and Linux. Pyglet allows programs to open multiple windows on multiple screens, draw in those windows with OpenGL, and play back audio and video in most formats. Unlike similar libraries available, pyglet has no external dependencies (such as SDL) and is written entirely in Python. Pyglet is available under a BSD-Style license.
Kivy Kivy is a library for developing multi-touch applications. It is completely cross-platform (Linux/OSX/Win & Android with OpenGL ES2). It comes with native support for many multi-touch input devices, a growing library of multi-touch aware widgets and hardware accelerated OpenGL drawing. Kivy is designed to let you focus on building custom and highly interactive applications as quickly and easily as possible.
RabbytA fast 2D sprite engine using OpenGLPyPi Link
Rabbyt A fast Sprite library for Python with game development in mind. With Rabbyt Anims, even old graphics cards can produce very fast animations of 2,400 or more sprites handling position, rotation, scaling, and color simultaneously.
WARNING: The examples on this page are a mixture of PyQt3 and PyQt4 - use with caution!
This tutorial aims to provide a hands-on guide to learn the basics of building a small Qt4 application in Python.
To follow this tutorial, you should have basic Python knowledge. However, knowledge of Qt4 is not necessary. I'm using Linux in these examples and am assuming you already have a working installation of Python and PyQt4. To test this, open a Python shell (by typing 'Python' in a console to start the interactive interpreter) and type:
If no error message appears, you should be ready to go.
The examples in this tutorial as easy as possible, showing useful ways to write and structure your program. It is important that you read the source code of the example files, most of the explanations are in the code. The best way to get comfortable with PyQt is play around with the examples and try to change things.
Hello, world!
Let's start easy: popping up a window and displaying something. The following small program will pop up a window showing "Hello, world!".
About 7 lines of code, and that's about as easy as it can get.
Let's add some interaction! We'll replace the label saying "Hello, World!" with a button and assign an action to it. This assignment is done by connecting a signal, an event which is sent out when the button is pushed, to a slot, which is an action, normally a function that is run in the case of that event.
You can imagine that coding this way is not scalable nor the way you'll want to continue working. So let's make that stuff pythonic, adding structure and actually using object-orientation in it. We create our own application class, derived from a QApplication and put the customization of the application into its methods: One method to build up the widgets and a slot which contains the code that's executed when a signal is received.
""" In the constructor we're doing everything to get our application
Qt.QApplication.__init__(self, args)
""" In this method, we're adding widgets and connecting signals from
""" This is an example slot, a method that gets called when a signal is
... so we want to use Qt3 Designer for creating our GUI. In the picture, you can see a simple GUI, with in green letters the names of the widgets. What we are going to do is We compile the .ui file from Qt designer into a python class
We subclass that class and use it as our mainWidget
This way, we're able to change the user interface afterwards from Qt designer, without having it messing around in the code we added.
The way our program works can be described like this: We fill in the lineedit
Clicking the add button will be connected to a method that reads the text from the lineedit, makes a listviewitem out of it and adds that to our listview.
Here's the heavily commented code (only works in PyQt3):
""" In the constructor we're doing everything to get our application
" to make forms stand-alone runable")
"Make PyQt - Set Tool Path", label.text())
"if the Recurse checkbox is checked")
"as deep as they go.")
"take place but does not do them.")
"paths to the tools if they are not found by default")
QMessageBox.about(self, "About Make PyQt",
All rights reserved.
It runs pyuic4, pyrcc4, pylupdate4, and lrelease as
QT_VERSION_STR, PYQT_VERSION_STR,
"Make PyQt - Set Path", self.pathLabel.text())
QMessageBox.information(self, "Make PyQt - Failures",
"Try manually setting the paths to the tools "
QMessageBox.information(self, "Make PyQt - Failures",
"Try manually setting the paths to the tools "
"Lib/site-packages/PyQt4")
PYUIC4 = PYUIC4[:i] + "Lib/python2.6/site-packages/PyQt4/uic/pyuic.py"
Creating the GUI in Qt Designer not only makes creating the GUI easier, but it's also a great learning tool. You can test what a widget looks like, see what's available in Qt, and have a look at properties you might want to use.
The C++ API documentation is also a very useful (read: necessary) tool when working with PyQt. The API translation is straightforward, and after a little experience, you'll find the developers API docs one of the tools you really need. When working from KDE, konqueror's default shortcut is qt:[widgetname], so [alt]+[F2], "qt:qbutton directly takes you to the right API documentation page. Trolltech's doc section has much more documentation which you might want to have a look at.
The first 3 examples in this tutorial have been created using PyQt4,
Note: The previous version of this page (aplicable to pyqt3) is/was available at http://vizzzion.org/?id=pyqt.
This document is published under the GNU Free Documentation License.
In Linux, Dbus is a way for processes to communicate with each other. For example, programs like Pidgin instant messenger allow other programs to find out or change the user's status (Available, Away, etc). Another example is the network-manager service that publishes which internet connection is active. Programs that sometimes connect to the internet can then pick the best time to download updates to the system.
Messages are sent along buses. Services attach themselves to these buses, and allow clients to pass messages to and from them.
There are two main buses, the system bus and session bus. Services on the system bus affect the whole system, such as providing information about the network or disk drives. Services on the session bus provide access to programs running on the desktop, like Pidgin.
Services attached to a bus can be contacted using their well-known name. While this could be any string, the format is normally that of a reverse domain name: an example for a spreadsheet program called "CalcProgram" from "My Corp Inc." could be "com.mycorp.CalcProgram".
Services publish objects using slash-separated paths (this is similar to webpages). Someone on dbus can request an object if they know this path.
The object passed back is not a full object: it just refers to the service's copy of the object. It is called a proxy object.
Before the proxy object can be used, we need to specify what type of object it is. We do this by creating an interface object.
Whatever methods are set up for this type of object can be called:
Identifies an object published by a service
These examples have been tested with dbus-python 0.83.0. Older library versions may not have the same interface.
Calling an interface's methods / Listing HAL Devices:
'org.freedesktop.Hal', # service
'/org/freedesktop/Hal/Manager' # published object
These examples have been tested with pydbus 0.2 and 0.3.
Calling an interface's methods / Listing systemd units:
'.systemd1' # service name - names starting with . automatically get org.freedesktop prepended.
DbusExamples, wiki.python.org
D-Bus Howto, developer.pidgin.im
Rough notes: Python and D-Bus, archived version, A.M. Kuchling, 2007, originally at www.amk.ca
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Plot a data series that represents the square function:
Plot a data series that represents the square function but in reverse order, by providing not only the series of the y-axis values but also the series of x-axis values:
Plot the square function, setting the limits for the y-axis:
Pyplot tutorial, matplotlib.org
Python does not provide modules for sorted set and dictionary data types as part of its standard library. This is a concious decision on the part of Guido van Rossum, et al. to preserve "one obvious way to do it." Instead, Python delegates this task to third-party libraries that are available on the Python Package Index. These libraries use various techniques to maintain list, dict, and set types in sorted order. Maintaining order using a specialized data structure can avoid very slow behavior (quadratic run-time) in the naive approach of editing and constantly re-sorting.
SortedContainers - Pure-Python implementation that is fast-as-C implementations. Implements sorted list, dict, and set. Testing includes 100% code coverage and hours of stress. Documentation includes full API reference, performance comparison, and contributing/development guidelines. License: Apache2.
SortedContainers, pypi.python.org
Banyan, pypi.python.org
Python has multiple 3rd party libraries for reading and writing Microsoft Excel and Apache OpenOffice files.
For working with .xls files, there is xlrd for reading and xlwt for writing.
For working with .xlsx files, there is xlrd for reading, openpyxl for reading and writing, and XlsxWriter and PyExcelerate for writing.
For working with .ods files, there is pyexcel-ezodf for reading and writing.
Supports reading .xls and .xlsx Excel files. License: BSD.
Python: xlrd discerning dates from floats, stackoverflow.com
Supports writing .xls files. License: BSD.
Supports reading and writing .xlsx Excel files. Does not support .xls files. License: MIT.
Supports writing of .xlsx files. License: BSD.
XlsxWriter, pypi.org
Creating Excel files with Python and XlsxWriter, readthedocs.io
Supports writing .xlsx files. License: BSD.
PyExcelerate, pypi.org
Supports various operations and queries on .xls files; depends on xlrd and xlwt. License: MIT.
3.4.1. PyWin32, docs.python.org
Python for Windows Extensions files, sourceforge.net
Python Excel Mini Cookbook, pythonexcels.com
Working with Excel Files in Python, python-excel.org
Microsoft Word documents of the .docx format can be created or changed using python-docx 3rd party module.
The .doc format can be worked with on Windows using PyWin32 via COM interface, provided Word is installed. An example:
Python modules can be written in pure Python but they can also be written in the C language. The following shows how to extend Python with C.
To illustrate the mechanics, we will create a minimal extension module containing a single function that outputs "Hello" followed by the name passed in as the first parameter.
We will first create the C source code, placing it to hellomodule.c:
Then we will need a setup file, setup.py:
Then we can build the module using a procedure whose details depends on the operating system and the compiler suite.
Before our module can be compiled, you must install the Python development headers if you have not already. On Debian and Debian-based systems such as Ubuntu, these can be installed with the following command:
On openSUSE, the required package is called python-devel and can be installed with zypper:
The will compile the module to a file called hello.so in build/lib.linux-i686-x.y.
Microsoft Windows users can use MinGW to compile the extension module from the command line. Assuming gcc is in the path, you can build the extension as follows:
The above will produce file hello.pyd, a Python Dynamic Module, similar to a DLL. The file will land in build\lib.win32-x.y.
An alternate way of building the module in Windows is to build a DLL. (This method does not need an extension module file). From cmd.exe, type:
Building using Microsoft Visual C++
With VC8, distutils is broken. Therefore, we will use cl.exe from a command prompt instead:
Change to the subdirectory where the file hello.so resides. In an interactive Python session you can use the module as follows.
Hello World!
In this section, we present a module for Fibonacci numbers, thereby expanding on the minimal example above. Compared to the minimal example, what is worth noting is the use of "i" in PyArg_ParseTuple() and Py_BuildValue().
The C source code in (fibmodule.c):
The build script (setup.py):
To use SWIG, you need to get it up and running first.
You can install it on an Ubuntu system as follows:
To get SWIG for Windows, you can use binaries available from the SWIG download page.
Once you have SWIG, you need to create the module source file and the module interface file:
The above produces files hello.py and hello_wrap.c.
The next step is compiling; substitute /usr/include/python2.4/ with the correct path to Python.h for your setup:
As the last step, we do the linking:
Hello World!
Extending and Embedding the Python Interpreter, python.org
Python/C API Reference Manual, python.org
Download SWIG, swig.org
Extending with C++
There are different ways to extend Python with C and C++ code:
In plain C, using Python.h
Using Boost.Python, optionally with Py++ preprocessing
Using Cython.
This page describes Boost.Python. Before the emergence of Cython, it was the most comfortable way of writing C++ extension modules.
Boost.Python comes bundled with the Boost C++ Libraries. To install it on an Ubuntu system, you might need to run the following commands
Extension("hello", ["hellomodule.cpp"],
Now we can build our module with
The module `hello.so` will end up in e.g `build/lib.linux-i686-2.4`.
Change to the subdirectory where the file `hello.so` resides. In an interactive python session you can use the module as follows.
Hello World!
Some, but not all, functions of the CGAL library already have Python bindings. Here an example is provided for a case without such a binding and how it might be implemented. The example is taken from the CGAL Documentation.
Range_tree_2_type *Range_tree_2 = new Range_tree_2_type;
Extension("test", ["test.cpp"],
We then compile and run the module as follows:
One can also handle more complex data, e.g. Python objects like lists. The attributes are accessed with the extract function executed on the objects "attr" function output. We can also throw errors by telling the library that an error has occurred and returning. In the following case, we have written a C++ function called "afunction" which we want to call. The function takes an integer N and a vector of length N as input, we have to convert the python list to a vector of strings before calling the function.
PyErr_SetString(PyExc_ValueError,
"The string mapping must be at least of length N");
BOOST_PYTHON_MODULE(c_afunction)
Boost.Python, boost.org
Previous: Extending with C++
Pyrex is a compiler of Python-like source code to the C language, intended to make it relatively easy for Python programmers to write fast Python extension modules without having to learn the C language.
Cython is an actively developed derivative of Pyrex. Pyrex is no longer actively developed, the last stable release being from 2010.
Pyrex - a Language for Writing Python Extension Modules, cosc.canterbury.ac.nz
Pyrex (programming language), en.wikipedia.org
Previous: Extending with C++
A library is loaded using the ctypes.CDLL function. After you load the library, the functions inside the library are already usable as regular Python calls. For example, if we wanted to forego the standard Python print statement and use the standard C library function, printf, you would use this:
It is thus possible to handle Perl objects, change their attributes and call
The popularity of a programming language is one factor that people consider when choosing a language for a task or a project. Beware that even a good programming language can be unpopular.
The popularity of Python can be determined with the help of various indices, which are not identical to the real popularity in the real world. While the statistics are linked from the external links section below, it is advisable that you use them with a grain of salt.
Python is the main scripting language used by Google, per Google Python Style Guide.
Python is embedded in various software packages to support their extensibility and automation, including Gimp and Inkscape; see also Wikipedia's W:Python (programming_language)#Uses and W:List of Python software#Embedded as a scripting language.
Tiobe index, tiobe.com
RedMonk rankings, redmonk.com, combines Stack Overflow data with GitHub data
The 2015 Top Ten Programming Languages, spectrum.ieee.org, 2015
W:Programming languages used in most popular websites
Google Python Style Guide, google.github.io
Python Success Stories, python.org
Organizations using Python, wiki.python.org
Python.org:
The Python.org documents section
Current Python 2.x documentation
Current Python 3.x documentation
Python Wiki at python.org
Dive into Python by Mark Pilgrim, a free book published under GNU Free Documentation License, with around 100 000 words
Text Processing in Python, a book by David Mertz, published by Addison Wesley
Introduction to Python Programming with NCLab, a book available as a single PDF, with around 44 000 words
Invent Your Own Computer Games with Python - A complete eBook for total beginners available for free under a Creative Commons license.
Making Games with Python & Pygame - A Creative Commons-licensed book that covers the Pygame library.
Hacking Secret Ciphers with Python - A Creative Commons-licensed book for complete beginners with a focus on cryptography.
Python Programming Tutorials -- a list of Python tutorials
ActiveState Python Cookbook -- a collection of Python recipes
Dev Shed's Python Tutorials -- a collection of Python articles
Python Tutorials at awaretek.com
Python 101 -- Introduction to Python by Dave Kuhlman, around 9000 words
__future__: Future statement definitions
__main__: The environment where the top-level script is run.
_dummy_thread: Drop-in replacement for the _thread module.
_thread: Low-level threading API.
There are various naming conventions used in Python programs.
PEP 0008 specifies naming conventions for class names (e.g. GenericTree), package and module names (e.g. generictree and generic_tree), function and variable names (storestate or store_state; mixedCase is dispreferred), and more. Google Python Style Guide follows similar naming conventions.
The above stands in contrast to Java naming convention (e.g. storeState for method names) and C# naming convention (e.g. StoreState for method names).
In Python 2, the standard library contains multiple deviations from PEP 0008. For instance, Tkinter module is spelled as Tkinter with capital T; this was renamed to tkinter in Python 3.
Naming Conventions in PEP 0008: Style Guide for Python Code, python.org
Naming in Google Python Style Guide, google.github.io
Modules to Rename in PEP 3108, python.org
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
a country is an area of land that has its own government and official borders.
It connects only nouns and pronouns, never phrases and clauses. It translates into "and".
It indicates a comparison or contrast between the two nouns.
It translates into "together, with".
It is placed after a verb or an adjective to form a conditional. It translates into "as soon as," "when," "if," etc. A plain form is usually used before the particle "to".
It is used after onomatopoeic adverbs.
Upon entering the forest, the Owl flies in to tell Link to find a key in the Mysterious Forest. This key grants access to Tail Cave, the first major dungeon.
Head north till Link finds himself in a clearing with a Blue Moblin. Like the sign at the forest entrance says, they are not friendly. If a Moblin spots like, they will throw a spear from a distance, which deals a half heart of damage if it connects. Either sneak up on them, or raise the shield and cautiously approach to slash when when the opportunity presents itself. Moblins take two sword strikes to dispatch, or just one spin attack to be defeated.
Head to the northeast of the clearing and the sound of a drum becomes audible. Traveling closer to the sound will show it is coming from a racoon drumming it's belly. If you walk farther north the Racoon teleports Link to a different part of the Mysterious Forest. Here Link will encounter more moblins as well as red slimes to the south. Red Slimes jump at link and deal a half heart of damage. When Link attacks a Red slime with the sword, the Red Slime splits in two smaller red slimes, which can then be fully defeated. The smaller red slimes can't harm Link directly, but they will cling onto him to slow him down. Raise the shield or slash the sword to knock them off.
Head north to reach a Great Fairy. It is a good idea to mark this location on your map with a heart.
Just to the west of the Great Fairy is a moblin with a shield, which is the most difficult enemy faced so far. Take advantage of the nearby Great Fairy to get a feel for how to fight it without worrying about hearts.
Find and head into the log. Start breaking crystals, while avoiding standing on cracked tiles for too long. Bats can deal a half heart of damage, but are more dangerous for their ability to knock Link off of precarious paths. Make it to the opposite side of the chest, and then push the rock directly south of the chest to make the treasure chest accessible. This chest contains a whooping 50 rupees, which is a big sum at this part of the game.
North of the previous chamber is a bend with twin green slimes. These slimes don't divide when hit, making them more straightforward to dispatch. However they still deal a half heart of damage when touched.
A chamber with a Piece of Heart! Unfortunately Link doesn't have the tools to get it right now, so mark it on the map with a treasure chest for later.
Push the rock south of Link down, then push another rock down to clear a path to the exit.
Immediately after leaving the Log, Link will be spotted by a shielded moblin! Just next to the Moblin is a red toadstool behind some shrubs. Grab the toadstool (It's required), then head back into the log. Unfortunately getting back is harder then getting in.
First push the bottom right boulder to the right. Then push the boulder that was located to the upper left of that boulder to the left. Now push the northernmost boulder next to a skull upwards. Push one of the eastern boulders to the right, then push the remaining boulder that once neighbored it either up or down depending on the boulder to clear a path. Backtracking through the rest of the log is straightforward.
Head to the northeast of the forest to find an exit, then head southeast to find the Witches Hut. Along the way a charged blob patrols the path, which should be approached with caution. A Zora hiding in a pond will also pop out to shoot fireballs at Link.
Give the witch the sleepy toadstool to gain 20 doses of magic powder in exchange. More doses cost either 50 rupees or another toadstool, so don't waste them. The witch doesn't begin selling magic powder unless Link has collected at least one toadstool, so don't try to skip collecting it. Magic powder is very useful because it can not only light flames, it can also sometimes be used on enemies. To try lighting a fire, there is a handy unlit torch in the Witches Hut. As a test, try using the powder on the charged blob on the way back to the Forest. If successful, the charged blob can now be talked to!
Find the racoon and talk to it to learn it's sensitive to powder and dust. Use some Magic powder on it to get a reaction, and transform it into Tarin! The disorienting fog is now gone, so go north to find a treasure chest. The Tail Key is inside. After Link collects the key, the Owl returns to remind Link to use it at Tail Cave. Go to Tail Cave southeast of Mabe Village to use it. Once the bars lower, enter Tail Cave.
Ice2 is an elemental attack spell, similar to Lightning2 and Fire2. Ice2 summons into being a solid sheet of ice that shatters into many shards, striking nearby enemies. These shards are able to cause damage through their intense coldness as well as their physical damage. Ice2 is an upgraded form of the Ice spell, with a further upgrade being available and known as Ice3.
This option should only be used for fully-saturated flow conditions.
Plot types (Visualization Techniques for Flow Data) : [1]
Glyphs = Icons or signs for visualizing vector fields
Path lines = Extensions of stream lines for time-varying data. Trace of a single particle in continuous time
↑ Flow Visualisation from TUV
↑ Vector Field Topology in Flow Analysis and Visualization by Guoning Chen
About the Book |
Pronunciation for Italian ~ Pronuncia dell'italiano
Italian Culture ~ Cultura italiana
Why learn Italian? - Perché imparare l'italiano?
Italian is taught in many schools around the world. In parts of Canada, Italian is, after French, the second most taught language. In the United States and the United Kingdom, Italian ranks fourth. Throughout the world, Italian is the fifth most taught non-native language, after English, French, Spanish and German. It is also highly mutually intelligible with Spanish and Portuguese (and to a lesser extent French), and can give a broader understanding of Romance languages.
Now what if try to cram more information into a single bittime? If we take 2 bits at a time, and arrange them together, we can assign each set of 2 bits to a different symbol, and then we can transmit the different symbols.
"M-ary" is pronounced like "em airy".
All popular communication systems transmit an integer number of bits per symbol.
We can relate the number of bits ("k") and the number of different symbols ("m") with the following equation:
This causes the number of symbols to be a power of two.
With M-ary modulation techniques, the "symbols per second" rate can be much slower than the "bits per second" data rate.
Quadrature phase shift keying (aka 4-PSK) is PSK modulation that has four points in the constellation.
There are several variations on this technique:
[MSK]minimum shift keying
Programming LEDs using a simple programmable device - a simple programming activity to create a piece of wearable tech using Crumble sparkles. This activity teaches sequence and repetition.
Use one or more programming languages, to solve a variety of computational problems.
Design computational abstractions that model the state and behavior of real world problems.
How to use a Crumble from Redfern
Simple images of a traffic light hat, a fun hat for younger pupils to learn about road safety.
Set the scene.
Discuss: Design approach; Requirements including audience; Examples of wearable tech.
Design.
Annotate with a table or flowchart detailing an initial design of the lighting pattern, for example start, light 1 red, light 2 blue, light 3 green, wait 3 seconds, light 1 orange, light 2 blue, light 3 yellow, wait 3 seconds repeat from start. (Note this provides the algorithm.) (Note in breaking the pattern down into steps students are decomposing the algorithm.)
Trial crumble components.
Assemble the electronic components and use the algorithm to program the crumble, adding one step at a time and
5.Integrate crumble components with wearable items.
Retest the product.
User testing.
Evaluate.
Evaluate the product against the design brief.
Visual programming language downloaded from Redfern here. http://redfernelectronics.co.uk/crumble-software/
Crumble - a crumble is a small programmable circuit board from Redfern Electronics. It can be programmed using a simple 'scratch like' graphical programming language. This programming language supports sequence, selection, repetition, variables. The crumble can take inputs from sensors such as light or movement sensors and controls motors, leds and Redfern's sparkles.
Stretch material.
The format of Policy-Debate as designed by the National Forensic League (NFL) is a series of alternating speeches between the affirmative team and the negative team. Generally the time limits described below are pretty universal, only the time of cross-examination is usually altered.
8 - First Affirmative Constructive
8 - First Negative Constructive
8 - Second Affirmative Constructive
8 - Second Negative Constructive
5 - First Negative Rebuttal
5 - First Affirmative Rebuttal
5 - Second Negative Rebuttal
5 - Second Affirmative Rebuttal
As is should be, the Affirmative has the final word in the debate, because after all, the decision of the judge relies on the infallibility of the
Affirmative proposal, or the Negative's interpretation and demonstration of the fallible parts of the Affirmative proposal under the resolution.
On June 3, 1946, Idgie is at Eva's house drinking beer. Eva notices that Idgie seems upset and asks her what is wrong. Idgie tells her Ruth has moved out because Idgie lied to her. Idgie said she was going to her sister, Leona's house, but went into the woods to be by herself. Eva says that it is a shame because she remembers how upset Idgie was when Ruth left to marry Frank. She tells Idgie to watch out because Ruth could have anyone in town with a snap of her fingers. A few days later, Ruth called Idgie for the first time in three weeks. She got Idgie's note and wants to talk. Idgie is almost at Ninny and Cleo's house when she realizes she never sent a note.
Ruth and Idgie have problems like every other couple. With Mrs. Thredgood's death Idgie has withdrawn from the person she loves the most & now she fears that she may have lost her again. However, with the help of Eva, Idgie & Ruth make up with one another & Ruth moves back in with Idgie
Microphones are devices which convert pressure fluctuations into electrical signals. There are two main methods of accomplishing this task that are used in the mainstream entertainment industry. They are known as dynamic microphones and condenser microphones. Piezoelectric crystals can also be used as microphones but are not commonly used in the entertainment industry. For further information on piezoelectric transducers Click Here.
This type of microphone converts pressure fluctuations into electrical current. These microphones work by means of the principle known as Faraday’s Law. The principle states that when an electrical conductor is moved through a magnetic field, an electrical current is induced within the conductor. The magnetic field within the microphone is created using permanent magnets and the conductor is produced in two common arrangements.
Figure 1: Sectional View of Moving-Coil Dynamic Microphone
The first conductor arrangement is made of a coil of wire. The wire is typically copper and is attached to a circular membrane or piston usually made from lightweight plastic or occasionally aluminum. The impinging pressure fluctuation on the piston causes it to move in the magnetic field and thus creates the desired electrical current. Figure 1 provides a sectional view of a moving-coil microphone.
The second conductor arrangement is a ribbon of metallic foil suspended between magnets. The metallic ribbon is what moves in response to a pressure fluctuation and in the same manner, an electrical current is produced. Figure 2 provides a sectional view of a ribbon microphone. In both configurations, dynamic microphones follow the same principles as acoustical transducers. For further information about transducers Click Here.
This type of microphone converts pressure fluctuations into electrical potentials through the use of changing an electrical capacitor. This is why condenser microphones are also known as capacitor microphones. An electrical capacitor is created when two charged electrical conductors are placed at a finite distance from each other. The basic relation that describes capacitors is:
Figure 3: Sectional View of Condenser Microphone
The capacitor in a condenser microphone is made of two parts: the diaphragm and the back plate. Figure 3 shows a section view of a condenser microphone. The diaphragm is what moves due to impinging pressure fluctuations and the back plate is held in a stationary position. When the diaphragm moves closer to the back plate, the capacitance increases and therefore a change in electric potential is produced. The diaphragm is typically made of metallic coated Mylar. The assembly that houses both the back plate and the diaphragm is commonly referred to as a capsule.
To keep the diaphragm and back plate at a constant charge, an electric potential must be presented to the capsule. There are various ways of performing this operation. The first of which is by simply using a battery to supply the needed DC potential to the capsule. A simplified schematic of this technique is displayed in figure 4. The resistor across the leads of the capsule is very high, in the range of 10 mega ohms, to keep the charge on the capsule close to constant.
Figure 4: Internal Battery Powered Condenser Microphone
Another technique of providing a constant charge on the capacitor is to supply a DC electric potential through the microphone cable that carries the microphones output signal. Standard microphone cable is known as XLR cable and is terminated by three pin connectors. Pin one connects to the shield around the cable. The microphone signal is transmitted between pins two and three. Figure 5 displays the layout of dynamic microphone attached to a mixing console via XLR cable.
Figure 5: Dynamic Microphone Connection to Mixing Console via XLR Cable
Phantom Supply/Powering (Audio Engineering Society, DIN 45596): The first and most popular method of providing a DC potential through a microphone cable is to supply +48 V to both of the microphone output leads, pins 2 and 3, and use the shield of the cable, pin 1, as the ground to the circuit. Because pins 2 and 3 see the same potential, any fluctuation of the microphone powering potential will not affect the microphone signal seen by the attached audio equipment. This configuration can be seen in figure 6. The +48 V will be stepped down at the microphone using a transformer and provide the potential to the back plate and diaphragm in a similar fashion as the battery solution.
In fact, 9, 12, 24, 48 or 52 V can be supplied, but 48 V is the most frequent.
The second method of running the potential through the cable is to supply 12 V between pins 2 and 3. This method is referred to as T-powering (also known as Tonaderspeisung, AB powering; DIN 45595). The main problem with T-powering is that potential fluctuation in the powering of the capsule will be transmitted into an audio signal because the audio equipment analyzing the microphone signal will not see a difference between a potential change across pins 2 and 3 due to a pressure fluctuation and one due to the power source electric potential fluctuation.
Finally, the diaphragm and back plate can be manufactured from a material that maintains a fixed charge. These microphones are termed electrets. In early electret designs, the charge on the material tended to become unstable over time. Recent advances in science and manufacturing have allowed this problem to be eliminated in present designs.
Two branches of microphones exist in the entertainment industry. Dynamic microphones are found in the moving-coil and ribbon configurations. The movement of the conductor in dynamic microphones induces an electric current which is then transformed into the reproduction of sound. Condenser microphones utilize the properties of capacitors. Creating the charge on the capsule of condenser microphones can be accomplished by battery, phantom powering, T-powering, and by using fixed charge materials in manufacturing.
Sound Recording Handbook. Woram, John M. 1989.
Handbook of Recording Engineering Fourth Edition. Eargle, John. 2003.
While Bruel & Kjær produces microphones for measurement purposes, DPA is the equipment sold for recording purposes
Front Page: Radiation Oncology | RTOG Trials | Randomized Trials
Tis - carcinoma in situ, "flat tumor"
T2a - invades superficial muscle (inner half)
T2b - invades deep muscle (outer half)
T4a - invades prostatic stroma, uterus, vagina
T4b - invades pelvic wall, abdominal wall
Regional nodes include (primary nodal drainage): hypogastric, obturator, iliac (int/ext), perivesical, sacral, presacral
Regional nodes (secondary nodal drainage): common iliac
N1 - single LN metastasis in the true pelvis (below common iliac)
N2 - multiple LN metastases in the true pelvis (below common iliac)
N3 - metastases to the common iliac LNs
Stage IV - T4b or any N+ or M1
For T4 via prostate invasion, must invade prostate stroma. Subepithelial invasion of the prostatic urethra is not sufficient to qualify for T4.
Tis - carcinoma in situ, "flat tumor"
T2a - invades superficial muscle (inner half)
T2b - invades deep muscle (outer half)
T4a - invades prostate, uterus, vagina
T4b - invades pelvic wall, abdominal wall
Regional nodes are the nodes of the true pelvis below the common iliac.
N1 - single LN, 2 cm or less
N2 - single LN 2-5 cm; or multiple LN < 5 cm
Stage IV - T4b or any N+ or M1
3rd edition (1978) - T3 is deep muscle invasion (similar to T2b)
Legal issues in instructional technology are becoming more and more relevant as technology becomes more prevalent for delivering instruction. Potential legal issues include but are not limited to, freedom of speech, harassment, privacy, special education, plagiarism, copyright and fair use.
As the profession of Instructional Technology grows and expands in the digital era, there is an increase for potential problem and/or conflict areas. Reiser & Dempsey (2002) enumerate the following issues as possible legal areas of concern:
Failure to develop and offer training which is mandated by the government can result in litigation initiated by the government.
Taking material from the internet without getting consent, thereby violating copyright laws or intellectual property rights.
Lawsuits resulting from comments made or material handed out during a training that are discriminatory (based on age, sex, race, ethnicity, etc).
The injury of a trainee or employee who received the injury during a training if the training personnel were negligent in providing a safe training environment.
Injury due to missing or incorrect information received by training materials.
Possible lawsuits due to employees feeling that they were kept from promotions because they were denied access to the training which is necessary for the promotion.
Richard & Dempsey (2002) conclude that, "although we do not expect designer's to be legal experts, each needs to be aware of general laws (e.g., those pertaining to sexual harassment) and the laws governing specific industries (e.g., those pertaining to the discharge of pollutants)." (p. 207).
Richey, R. C., & Morrison, G. R. (2002). Instructional design in business and industry. In Reiser, R.A., & Dempsey, J.V. (eds.), Trends and issues in instructional design and technology (p.207). Columbus, Ohio: Merrill Prentice Hall.
Educational leaders understand the social, legal, and ethical issues related to technology and model responsible decision-making related to these issues. Educational leaders:
These standards can be found on the following website: http://cnets.iste.org/administrators/a_stands.html
Similar standards have been published for teachers. These standards might be important part of legal issues.
ISTE Educational Technology Standards and Performance Indicators for All Teachers
Teachers understand the social,ethical,legal,and human issues surrounding the use of technology in PK-12 schools and apply those principles in practice. Teachers:
Available at http://cnets.iste.org/teachers/t_stands.html
Traditionally, unbleached linen thread is the preferred material for bookbinding, but unbleached long-staple cotton will do almost as well. The key is that it is a natural fiber comparable in expected lifetime to the paper and the cover material, and that it have very long fibers, giving it great strength. For less traditional projects, carpet thread, strong nylon thread, or even waxed dental floss can also be used.
Before you start sewing, it helps (but is not strictly necessary) to wax the thread with beeswax. To do this, clamp the thread against a block of beeswax with your thumb and pull it through with your other hand. The thread will tend to cut a slot in the wax, so keep changing the angle of pull to even out the wear on the wax. Do this two or three times with the full length of thread before you start sewing.
This work includes text or images adapted with permission from Bookbinding: A Tutorial © 1995 by Douglas W. Jones, who has agreed to this use under the terms of the GFDL.
Chi-square distribution with n degrees of freedom
Chi-square calculation formula for a 2 Â 2 contingency table
Yates’s corrected chi-square calculation for a 2 Â 2 contingency table
Confidence interval for the relative risk estimate
Confidence interval for the odds ratio estimate
Expected frequency in the Mantel–Haenszel statistic
Stratum expected frequency in the Mantel–Haenszel statistic
Mantel–Haenszel test statistic
Mantel–Haenszel estimator of the common odds ratio
Calcium plays a role in many body functions. Firstly, it helps build and maintain bones; in fact 99% of the body’s calcium is found in bones. However, calcium is also involved in heart function, nerve transmission and blood clotting. Therefore, having an adequate calcium intake is important (Better Health Channel, 2013).
How To Improve Your Calcium Intake?
Easiest way is to eat more dairy/dairy substitutes.
How to achieve 2 ½ serves of the MYCA group per day?
Non dairy foods that are good sources of calcium and how their calcium content compares to that of dairy foods.
Cooked turnip greens (1 cup boiled and drained)
Milk (skim, low fat or whole) 1 cup
If eaten in the right amounts non-dairy foods can deliver similar quantities of calcium as dairy foods or in some cases even more (as is particularly the case with 1 cup of drained sardines which contains 569mg of calcium). Furthermore you can combine non-dairy foods to increase your calcium intake:
E.g. By combining 1 cup of broccoli (43mg of calcium) with 1 cup of drained soybeans 175mg (calcium)
43+175= calcium intake of 218mg=> therefore your calcium intake would be more than 1 cup of cottage cheese (130mg) yet less than 1 cup of skim, low fat or whole milk (300mg).
-Makes calcium soluble (able to be dissolved ) (Whitney et.al, 2011)
-Breaks calcium down to facilitate its absorption in the small intestine
-Increases calcium absorption from the small intestine
-Decreases calcium loss through urine.
Phytates: Korb mit Brötchen
-Found in nuts, seeds and grains
-Class of antinutrients that have a high affinity for calcium
-They easily bind to calcium therefore limiting its availability for absorption
-Try not to eat phytate-containing foods and dairy foods together (American Bone Health, 2006)
-Found in sweet potatoes, rhubarb, spinach and beetroot
-Bind to calcium therefore reducing its absorption
-Interfere with calcium storage in cells
-Don’t eliminate these food just be aware that they are not the best providers of calcium (Low Oxalate Diet, n.d.)
-Interferes with vitamin D activation by the liver and kidneys (WebMD, 2013)
-Inhibits vitamin D activating enzymes in the liver (Office of Dietary Supplements, 2013)
-It is a diuretic therefore it increases calcium excretion through urine (Weil, 2013)
-Increases Parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels and therefore decreases calcium reserves in the body.
-Try to limit your alcohol intake (FIT Day, 2013)
-Drinking more than 3 cups of tea or coffee per day seems to decrease calcium absorption (National Osteoporosis Foundation, n.d.)
-It is believed that caffeine decreases calcium absorption by interfering with vitamin D absoprtion
-This area is still being researched
Caffeine is also a diuretic therefore it increases calcium excretion in the urine
American Bone Health. (2006). How do Phytates Impact Calcium Absorption? Retrieved from http://www.americanbonehealth.org/blog/?p=165
Arabia MSN. (2011). Stomach Acid Essential for Calcium Absorption. Retrieved from http://arabia.msn.com/lifestyle/christmas/13625/stomach-acid-essential-for-calcium-ab/
Better Health Channel. (2013). Calcium. Retrieved from http://www.betterhealth.vic.gov.au/bhcv2/bhcarticles.nsf/pages/Calcium
FITDAY. (2013). Alcohol and Osteoporosis. Retrieved from http://www.fitday.com/fitness-articles/nutrition/healthy-eating/alcohol-and-osteoporosis.html
Health Alicioussness. (2013). Top 10 Foods Highest in Calcium. Retrieved from http://www.healthaliciousness.com/articles/foods-high-in-calcium.php
Lindemann, K. (2013). Osteopenia: Osteopenia Treatments. Retrieved from http://www.osteopenia3.com/About-Osteopenia3.html
Low Oxalate Diet. (n.d.) Retrieved from http://lowoxalate.info/
National Osteoporosis Foundation. (n.d.). Food and Your Bones: More Tips For Eating For Good Bone Health. Retrieved from http://www.nof.org/foods
NHMRC. (2013). Healthy Eating For Adults: Eat For Health and Wellbeing. Retrieved from http://www.nhmrc.gov.au/_files_nhmrc/publications/attachments/n55g_adult_brochure.pdf
Norris, J. (2013). Calcium and Vitamin D. Retrieved from http://www.veganhealth.org/articles/bones
Office of dietary Supplements. (2013). Dietary Supplement Fact Sheet: Calcium. Retrieved from http://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Calcium-HealthProfessional/
Robb, D. (2013). The Top 13 Non-Dairy Calcium Rich Foods. Retrieved from http://www.healthhabits.ca/2011/11/04/top-13-non-dairy-calcium-rich-foods/
UCSF Medical Centre. (2013). Calcium Content of Foods. Retrieved from http://www.ucsfhealth.org/education/calcium_content_of_selected_foods/
WebMD. (2013). Drinking Less for Strong Bones: How Does Alcohol Harm Your Bones? Retrieved from http://www.webmd.com/osteoporosis/features/alcohol
Weil, A. (2013). Osteoporosis Treatment. Retrieved from http://www.drweil.com/drw/u/ART02042/osteoporosis-treatment.html
Whitney, E., Rolfes, S.R., Crowe, T., Cameron-Smith, D & Walsh, A. (2011). Understanding Nutrition. South Melbourne, Vic: Cengage Learning.
The Icelandic alphabet consists of 32 letters. There are also three letters used for foreign words, and one obsolete letter. Icelandic uses the latin alphabet, which is the same as the English alphabet and most Western European languages. There are some letters that are not found in English, and even some letters that only Icelandic uses.
The Icelandic keyboard layout.
An Icelandic speaker reciting the alphabet in Icelandic
Problems listening to this file? See media help.
Letters C, Q, and W are not part of the Icelandic alphabet, but are used in foreign words:
And of course, letters C, Q, and W are used more often than letter Z is.
Until 1980, the Icelandic alphabet used to consist of 36 letters and also included the three letters that are only used for foreign words and the obsolete letter:
Icelandic words never begin with Ð, and no words end with Þ.
I and Y share the same pronunciation, as do Í and Ý.
J, L, M, N, and R are voiceless before H and in most areas before K, P, and T (no English equivalent)
L and R are voiceless at the end of a word
There are no silent letters in Icelandic., though in spoken language some letters might produce a different sound than usual.
If a K is followed by a t, it is pronounced similarly to a Spanish j (e.g. lukt – lantern).
Likewise, a P followed by a t changes into an f sound (e.g. Að skipta – to shift).
F in the middle of a word is often pronounced as a v (e.g. Að skafa – to shave).
Pronounced as öi
Stress in Icelandic always falls on the first syllable.
An ongoing process that evaluates and controls the business and the industries in which the company is involved; assesses its competitors and sets goals and strategies to meet all existing and potential competitors; and then reassesses each strategy annually or quarterly [i.e. regularly] to determine how it has been implemented and whether it has succeeded or needs replacement by a new strategy to meet changed circumstances, new technology, new competitors, a new economic environment., or a new social, financial, or political environment.
Lamb offers an important definition of strategy. Strategy is also:Strategic management
Drafting, implementing and evaluating cross-functional decisions that will enable an organization to achieve its long-term objectives. It is the process of specifying the organization's mission, vision and objectives, developing policies and plans, often in terms of projects and programs, which are designed to achieve these objectives, and then allocating resources to implement the policies and plans, projects and programs.
This book focuses on strategic management. Strategy is an ongoing process that develops both long-term and short-term objectives at the strategic and operational levels, establishes and/or modifies the organizational hierarchy to manage operational processes, and determines the suitability, feasibility and acceptability of the strategy. An explicit way to represent the corporate strategy is using strategy diagrams. Strategy diagrams aid in all aspects of strategic management. They allow us to explicitly capture strategic and operational objectives. Cascading the strategy through the organizational hierarchy provides a means to align strategy with operations. Finally, using strategy diagrams makes it possible to evaluate the strategy by determining if it is being successfully implemented and if it is the correct strategy.
An effective BI system must aid in all aspects of strategic management, including the formulation, implementation and evaluation of strategy.
For our purposes we will define strategic management as a combination of three main processes:
Strategy formulation requires examining where you are now, determining where you want to go, and then determining how to get there. This requires the following three processes: [1]
Performing a situation analysis, self-evaluation and competitor analysis: both internal and external; both micro-environmental and macro-environmental.
Concurrent with this assessment, objectives are set. These objectives should be parallel to a timeline; some are in the short-term and others on the long-term. This involves crafting vision statements (long term view of a possible future), mission statements (the role that the organization gives itself in society), overall corporate objectives (both financial and strategic), strategic business unit objectives (both financial and strategic), and tactical objectives
These objectives should, in the light of the situation analysis, suggest a strategic plan. The plan provides the details of how to achieve these objectives.
The implementation process requires the establishment or modification of the organizational hierarchy so that the company can achieve its objectives. The following items constitute the strategic implementation process:[2]
Allocation and management of sufficient resources (financial, personnel, operational support, time, technology support)
Establishing a chain of command or some alternative structure (such as cross functional teams)
Assigning responsibility of specific tasks or processes to specific individuals or groups
It also involves managing the process. This includes monitoring results, comparing to benchmarks and best practices, evaluating the efficacy and efficiency of the process, controlling for variances, and making adjustments to the process as necessary.
When implementing specific programs, this involves acquiring the requisite resources, developing the process, training, process testing, documentation, and integration with (and/or conversion from) legacy processes.
Johnson and Scholes present a model in which strategic options are evaluated against three key success criteria:[3]
Suitability (would it work?) - Suitability deals with the overall rationale of the strategy. The key point to consider is whether the strategy would address the key strategic issues underlined by the organization's strategic position.
Feasibility (can it be made to work?) - Feasibility is concerned with the resources required to implement the strategy are available, can be developed or obtained. Resources include funding, people, time and information.
Acceptability (will they work it?) - Acceptability is concerned with the expectations of the identified stakeholders (mainly shareholders, employees and customers) with the expected performance outcomes, which can be return, risk and stakeholder reactions.
Causal link maps identify the causal relationships between goals. The Activity, Chatterjee and Strategy maps can easily be translated into a causal link map. The map contains all the
Porter argues firms must achieve both operational and strategic effectiveness for superior performance. Operational effectiveness means performing similar activities better than rivals perform them by better utilizing inputs. Part, but not all of this, is efficiency. Companies achieve profitability over time through strategic positioning, meaning performing different activities from rivals' or performing similar activities in a different way.
Porter focus on strategy as unique activities is crucial. Firms must choose a set of activities to deliver a unique mix of value. These activities are linked and mutually reinforcing. Not only must companies choose the right activities but the essence of strategy is choosing to perform a set of activities different than rivals and are strong enough block any company that would seek the same market.
What does performing different activities than rivals achieve? Companies achieve profitability over time through strategic positioning, meaning performing different activities from rivals' or performing similar activities in a different way. They achieve differentiation, which arises from the choice of activities and how they are performed. A company can outperform rivals only if it can establish a difference that it can preserve
Specifically, to achieve profits companies can focus on two different types of activities. The first is for companies to provide goods or services with greater value, charge higher prices, thereby increasing revenue. The second type of activity aims to provide goods or services at a lower cost, reduce costs, thereby increasing profitability. Porter asserts that activities are the basic unit of competitive advantage. Competitive strategy is about being different. Companies must choose different sets of activities to deliver a unique mix of values.
An activity map shows how a company creates value in a competitive market (Morgan et al. 2007). The map shows which activities a company must align to generate value in the market. Activity maps identify the most critical activities needed to achieve strategic objectives and the investments necessary to support these activities. Creating the map requires focusing on the most important activities while putting less important actives to the side. The final map allows us to determine what projects, programs and activates are critical for a company to achieve its strategic objectives. The goal is to identify important activities so that it will be possible to develop ways to measure how well the company is performing these activities. An example of an activity map for Southwest Airlines appears below.
The dark blue circles denote higher-order strategic offerings. The light blue circles denote activities or investments tailored to deliver it.
Sayan Chatterjee advances the subject of strategy maps by switching the focus to customer outcomes instead of customer needs. "Focusing on outcomes generates a different set of questions from a focus on needs (Morgan et al 2007 page 153)". To this end the Chatterjee Map there starts (from the top) with customer outcomes. Then the focus becomes the competitive objectives necessary to achieve the customer outcomes.
In essence, the Chatterjee Map rearranges the Activity Map to reflect customer outcomes. This provides a different set of objectives and capabilities compared to focusing on customer needs (Morgan et al. 2007).
The Chatterjee Map contains four swimming lanes:
These generally correspond to the higher-order strategic offerings displayed in the Activity Map.
Also called strategic outcomes are the means by which a company translates core objectives into customer outcomes.
These are the leading indicators of strategic outcomes (Morgan et al. 2007). Data on lagging indicators, such as ROI, earnings per share, profit margin, etc., signals success for failure well after there is time to adjust operations. Excellence in strategic execution at the operational level will correspond to high measures on leading indicators, assuming that the Chatterjee Map is correct. Low measures on leading indicators could indicate a few problems, such as a problem with strategy-operations alignment, but always signals the need for management to take a closer look at the business.
These are operational resources and activities necessary to execute the strategy. The execution capabilities align with the strategy. A lack of alignment will often surface first among the leading indicators. If unchecked it will in turn will have a ripple effect, propagating up to the customer outcomes.
Strategy maps are a way of providing a macro view of an organization's strategy, and provide it with a language in which they can describe their strategy, prior to constructing metrics to evaluate performance against their strategies (see wikipedia article). Key Performance Indicators KPI ’s are financial and non-financial measures or metrics used to help an organization define and evaluate how successful it is, typically in terms of making progress towards its long-term organizational goals (see F. John Reh). The map must show the objectives and how objectives support other objectives.
Financial perspective: Shareholders (profit) versus subsidizers/financers (non profit).
External Customer perspective: The customer is concerned with:
Social and regulatory processes.
Learning and growth perspective: This involves developing the human, information and organizational capital.
All strategy diagrams identify important assumptions that drive the strategy. Strategy maps outline how objectives between different strategic themes and perspectives influence each other.
The purpose of a strategy map is to align the strategy with daily activities.
"The strategy map is a visual representation of the various cause-and-effect relationships that make up the strategy." [4]
Confirming a Theory/Hypothesis regarding the business (i.e., confirm causal link)
Why did it happen?: X-->Y
How did it happen?: X1 -->Y2
Running the business using Business Process Monitoring or prediction
What may happen?: Xf -->Yf
What happened?: X1 versus X2
This section focuses on reports designed to confirm theories or hypotheses. This is necessary in order to test the cause-and-effect relationships needed to confirm strategy. The causal link map explicitly identifies the cause-and-effect relationships between important business concepts. These relationships are important because they allow business leaders to make assumptions about the future performance of a company (Morgan et al. 2007).
Perhaps the most important unifying principle behind all the strategy diagrams is that each explicitly identifies causal links. First, remember that each strategy diagram is an explicit, tangible model designed to capture strategy. To capture strategy each diagram/model explicitly identifies important assumptions that drive the strategy. These assumptions are either a/an:
However, without a means to achieve an objective, or a direction for activity, the company could not function effectively. So, the company links activities and objectives. For instance:
Quicker terminal turnaround (activity) translates into on-time delivery (objective)
Closing railroad crossings (activity) translates into fewer accidents (objective)
Minimizing maintenance costs (objective) translates into higher profits (objective)
Each of the bulleted items above is a causal link. The Activity Diagram, Chatterjee Map and Strategy Map all contain these types of links. In essence, each type of diagram assumes causal links. The difference between the diagrams is simply based on the perspective it brings to understanding the strategy. The activity diagram identifies important higher-order strategic offerings and the activities or investments necessary to execute. The Chatterjee Map "made a significant contribution to the subject of strategy maps by overlaying a subtle but crucial distinction between a focus on customer outcomes versus customer needs." Finally, Norton and Kaplan Strategy Maps offer a process, when combined with scorecards, with the ability to translate specific objectives into leading indicators that help determine if objectives are being met (Morgan et al. 2007). This helps the decision maker identify those initiatives that will allow the company to achieve its objectives.
Given that all strategy maps contains objectives, activities and links, it is possible to turn any strategy diagram into a causal link map. Therefore, the unifying principle behind strategy diagrams is that they can all be translated into causal link maps. The causal link map explicitly identifies the cause-and-effect relationships between important business concepts. Identifying these relationships is important because they not only allow business leaders to make assumptions about the future performance of a company but also provide them with the means to test these assumptions. A strategy map is only useful if its empirically testable assumptions are accurate. The section on scorecards will describe how to test these assumptions.
Why Lego?
Legos have become a popular robotics resource, primarily as an educational tool, but also as building materials for fast and easy prototyping. Legos are specifically designed for ease of use, with snap together parts and pre-placed holes. This makes them ideally suited for use in projects where reconfiguration is necessary. With a basic kit of parts, many different robotic machines and mechanisms can be created, tested, modified, disassembled and recreated easily without any damage to the building materials. The pieces are also standardized, so designs can be easily documented and rebuilt. Because of the popularity of Legos, there is also a huge wealth of third party resources available – hardware, software, instructional material, and challenges.
The origins of the Lego Mindstorms Robotics kits trace back to Seymour Papert’s book Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas, in which Papert proposed that rather than using computers to provide exercises for children – “the computer programming the child”, the situation should be reversed and the child given control – “the child programs the computer”. Papert thought that in this way, the child would gain a more active role in building his own knowledge in response to a recognizable personal purpose rather than simply listening to explanations. After co-founding the MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab, Papert developed the programming language “Logo” as a tool to enable children to use simple instructions to control robotic ‘turtles’.
In the mid-1980’s, while working at the MIT Media Lab, Mitchel Resnick and Steve Ocko created a control box to interface Logo with Lego Technic elements along with motors lights and sensors. This setup was marketed as “LEGO TC Logo” and became a popular educational tool and marked the beginning of a partnership between Lego and the MIT Logo researchers. A second version was released in 1993 as the “Control Lab”[1]
In the mid-1990’s, MIT Media Lab researcher Fred Martin developed the MIT programmable brick. This brick was programmed using a Logo based software but was not required to be connected to the computer with wires and so was able to be more mobile. This design was the basis for the Lego RCX brick, released in 1998. The Lego RCX was the first of the Lego Mindstorms products, which are named after the Papert book. Mindstorms robotics kits quickly became an extremely popular educational resource, being used for robotics classes and competitions around the world.[2]
In 2006, the NXT became the successor to the RCX. The NXT has an extra sensor port and Bluetooth communication and the basic kit adds an ultrasonic sensor as well as built-in rotation sensors on all the motors.
Wikipedia has related information at Lego_Mindstorms
The RCX kits come with the following standard components as well as a variety of building pieces:
The following Lego accessories are available for the RCX:
The NXT kits come with the following standard components as well as a variety of building pieces:
The NXT kit also comes with adaptors that allow any of the RCX components to be used with the NXT.
There are many options available for programming the Mindstorms bricks. The standard NXT kits may be purchased with either the NXT-G or Robolab programming software. Both are LabVIEW based visual programming languages – Robolab allows more advanced programming, and NXT-G is a bit more beginner-friendly. There are also many other programming languages available.
Integers only – floating point numbers not supported
Each basic math operation (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division) requires a separate block
High memory usage.
No good method for creating block set functions for reuse
Text based language is harder for beginners
Must be bought separately from kit.
Can create blocks for use with NXT-G programming
Advanced programming more limited than text based languages
Free Windows IDE that supports many programming languages
NXC/NBC (C-based and assembly code for the NXT)
HiTechnic accessories are packaged in standard Lego NXT sensor cases and can be purchased through Lego:
Any Vernier sensors can be connected to Lego Mindstorms through an adapter cable.
Mind Sensors has the following available accessories:
8-channel Servo Controller
Lego Robotics Events, Challenges, and Acheivements
First Lego League[1] hosts regional competitions for middle school students. A new competition board is created each year with theme-based tasks for the robots to accomplish within a set time limit. The students also are required to research real-world issues related to the selected theme.
RoboCup Junior[2] is a robotics soccer competition. Lego Mindstorms was originally the primary construction kit used by most teams. Teams are not limited to the use of Legos, so more advanced teams also use more advanced technology.
The Botball[3] competition utilizes Lego pieces as the building materials although more advanced controllers and sensors are used. The Lego RCX served as a primary controller in early years of the competition.
To commemorate the 10th anniversary of Lego Mindstorms, the High Altitude Lego Extravaganza sent 9 NXT controlled experiments over 99,500 ft. One NXT was released in order to make the longest recorded NXT freefall of 80 seconds before releasing a parachute.
↑ Education and Technology: An Encyclopedia, By Ann Kovalchick, Kara Dawson, 2004, pgs 421-426
↑ http://el.media.mit.edu/logo-foundation/pubs/logoupdate/v7n1/v7n1-pbrick.html
What follows are command specifically pertaining to X11.
X is normally a symbolic link to the X server for your computer, such as XFree86 or Xorg. The normal way to start X is not directly, but by using xinit , xdm or startx.
You can invoke the X server with
An X display manager used to manage graphical sessions of multiple users. It is usually started automatically as a system service to present the user with a GUI login screen instead of the console login prompt. Modern systems usually use GDM (the GNOME Display Manager) and KDM (the KDE Display Manager) instead.
A normal program not a part of X11 itself, for viewing DVI form
This page or section of Guide to Unix is a stub.You can help by expanding it.
As this is a military town many of you are (or have friends who are) so called "military brats".
From what I hear, life as a "military brat" is not easy: moving from town to town, having to make new friends every two years.
And then there's school: a new one every few years. Sometimes curriculum aligns; sometimes it doesn't.
What can be done to make school transitions easier for kids whose parents are in the military?
Should we have a national curriculum so the topics for instruction will be consistent across the states? Special military school similar to the DODD (Department of Defense Dependents) [1] schools in other countries? Something else?
Add your response below. Extra credit will be awarded to multimedia responses.
Listen to my horror story!
Oh my where do I begin...my husband has been in the military for over 15 years and I have two daughters (one 16 and one going to be 7 next month). My 16 yr old has had it the hardest. We have moved all over the world and she has attended many schools. The problem that we have found, along with the socialization and adjusting aspect, is the curriculum in the different school districts she has attended. Two of the schools she attended tried to hold her back and move her back a grade because they said that her previous schools were substandard. Getting her help in reading and math, has been a struggle in some of the schools. In Hawaii, for instance, military students were told that they could not play sports for the school because since they were in the military, they would be leaving in three years or less...the coach told them that he did not have time to waste on them (this was not just one school in particular, but several)...as a result, many of the wives out of my husbands command moved back to the mainland without their husbands so their children could play sports. One of the best types of schools that she went to was the DOD school overseas...this was not because the curriculum was top notch or the sports program was outstanding...it was simply because all of the kids going there were military kids and the teachers understood what the kids were going through emotionally when their dad or mom or both went on deployment. Instead of punishing the kids for misbehaving, having emotional breakdowns, skipping school, etc...they worked with the kids, sometimes one-on-one to help them understand what was going on and how to survive the deployment. There is a really good website if you are interested in hearing stories or finding out more information about military kids: http://www.militarybrat.com/
My father grew up in a military family where his father was a Colonel in the Air Force. He moved sixteen times from the time he was age 3 until age 18. On top of being mobile he was later diagnosed (in his adult years) with an extreme case of Attention Deficit Hyperactive Disorder. He had a really difficult time adapting to the varying curriculum and cultures in each location. Once he got comfortable making friends and such he would have to move. I'm not sure if his problems derived from lack of stability due to being so mobile or ADHD... or both. All I know is the moving didn't help his cirumstances. Perhaps having a set curriculum for those in the military would assist in creating some sort of stability. I do think it is a good idea, I would just be careful not to ostracize these children from the general population creating yet another hurdle to jump. Rpaige (talk) 07:40, 26 July 2009 (UTC)
Being a so called "military brat" myself I did experience the moving around and the new schools. It wasn't so bad when I was younger because i didn't really notice the differences in the . I first noticed it when i moved from Virginia Beach to Tennessee in between the fourth and fifth grade. I was in a private school in VA and a public school in TN. I noticed that some of the material that the kids in my class in TN were just learning for the first time I had covered the previous year in VA. The other time I noticed a difference was Moving back to VA a year later. Except this time I was the one that was behind. I think that what could be done is not necessarily one set national curriculum, but a set of guidelines that will help keep grades on the same page throughout the country. Rcoll029 (talk) 04:19, 10 August 2009 (UTC)
That's not how it was for me.
I did not grow up in a military family but do have many friends who have traveled the globe as "military brats". In my experience with them, I often heard complaints about the moves and the difficulty settling into each new school. I think that the curriculum differences can be very difficult for children whose parents travel frequently; however, I believe it is the social aspect of the moving that is most difficult. In almost all the cases that I have seen, the children have adapted well to the new school curriculum. I think that when the social transition is a smooth one, the school aspect goes well too. Military brats generally become very resiliant and are quite good at making friends and settling into new places quickly. If this is done, I think that the educational aspects will also be much easier. I am not sure of a solution to the issue of varying curriculums; I don't know that I completely agree with a national curriculum. As for the military families and children, I would focus on making a smooth transition (socially) into the new home/ school and the rest will fall into place! Khedl002 (talk) 02:42, 26 July 2009 (UTC)khedl002
I have never experienced this personally but I do have friends that are the children of parents in the military. They would tell me that yes, there were some hard times, but overall they enjoyed being in the military. They enjoyed being able to see different parts of the world and meeting different people. Never, did they mention it being difficult going from school to school with the academics. Not to say this is not a problem and that not everyone has or had problems with being in a military family..it varies. I am not sure whether a national curriculum would be the best but at the same time I am not sure it would be a huge problem. It does take a lot of effort and time to make a whole country on the same page academically. Sston008 (talk) 23:35, 25 July 2009 (UTC)
I did not grow up in a military family, however, I had friends who's parents were in the military and it was always hard to see them go for me. I can only imagine how hard it was for them having to make new friends every place they moved too. I think a national curriculum would be a great idea, but it actually happening, I just do not know if it will. Every teacher teaches differently and has their own style. It would be hard to keep track of all the teachers in all the schools to make sure they are all doing what the curriculum is stating. I do not believe a national curriculum would be nice, but I do not think it will happen. I do wonder if schools would be different if a curriculum was in place. Lwill031 (talk) 18:28, 24 July 2009 (UTC)
Well this is not a story about me, but it is about my first cousin who is considered a "military brat". He has moved schools so many times I have lost count. It seemed like it was not a big deal at first but as he got older we began to notice how the moving affected him not only in school, but socially also. It always came down to one thing each time; either he was bored with the material because he already learned it or he was very far behind. He was never anywhere for such a period of time that he could make friends. By the time kids would start warming up to him he would have to move. I think a national curriculum would be great but I don't think it is possible. No teacher teaches at the same pace or the same. He has been in the same school now for 3 years and is begging to stay so he can graduate there. He has close friends there that he never has had before. He is highly intelligent and I wonder where he would be without support from his parents and his self determination. Hcomb003 (talk) 19:51, 22 July 2009 (UTC)
My oldest son is a military brat. He attended 9 different schools by the time he graduated high school. The longest he ever stayed in one school was 2 years and he only did that twice. Most of the time, there were many other students in the same circumstances as he was so he and those other students made friends quickly as they understood the situation. Curriculum issues were a totally different matter however. He was considered a "gifted student" but because qualifications were different everywhere he went, he usually didn't attend those programs. He was very bored in school and had poor study habits because the work came easily to him (until he hit college that is). I don't believe in a national curriculum, but I do have to wonder how much better off he would have been had there been one. Sciaston (talk) 20:43, 22 July 2009 (UTC)
I did not grow up in a military family, but I have some friends who did. Other than the stresses of having to get used to a new area and make new friends, they did not have many problems adjusting to the school. I think that military students should be given some assistance in catching up to the same place as the other students of their age group, but they do not need a standardized national curriculum. Sbutl016 (talk) 19:54, 24 July 2009 (UTC)
The only time I personally had to move away from home was college, and it was a hard transition as a grown young adult. However, when it comes to military brats my niece is the perfect case. My brother joined the army a little shy of ten years ago and she has had to adapt to different countries and cultures. They have not mentioned that adapting to different types of curricula is hard but the social bonding is what has made each of their (especially my little niece)moves difficult. Maybe military brats should be exempt from harsh curriculum requirements and take placement tests to meet the needs of each school.Ehern004 (talk) 16:31, 26 July 2009 (UTC)
While I am technically not a military brat, I did move overseas when my mother took a government job and I did attend a DODDS school there. I had a great experience. I thought the teachers were understanding and did their best to make me feel accepted and secure in my studies. We did move during the school year so there was some transition as far as getting on the same page but there was some leeway with the teachers and they helped me by assigning someone in my class that would "tutor" me and help me to catch up. The worst part of the transition was the year that it happened, my freshman year of high school, which is hard enough already, add moving to another country on to the stress. I think that there is a sense of national curriculum in a way in that many teachers understand that sometime in our life as students that we will be taking an SAT or ACT and there are standards that are taught to help students prepare for those tests. The benefits that I gained by living in Europe and experiencing history, art, culture and language first hand; when to that point had been in books and media, was an experience that made me grateful for the tears that were shed about going. There are always going to be struggles when you do something new and foreign to you but in the end those experiences help you and teach you things about yourself. It does not hurt that everyone else in the schools overseas are all in the same boat, so you make friends easily. I am sure that it is harder when you move from state to state, but there should be assistance from guidance counselors and administration to help smooth the transition.
I grew up in a military family but only had to endure one major move. I moved from Hawaii to Virginia and that was that. My mother was always the head of my household and I am sure that this had a lot to do with our lack of movement. My father did ,however, spend three years away from the family stationed in Madagascar and a horrific stint as a recruiter in Danville Virginia. I would’ve liked to have lived in Madagascar, but feel that missing out on that specific pleasure in order to avoid the circle of hell that is Danville Virginia was worth it. My sincerest apologies to anyone who hails from Danville or thereabouts, I have only visited three times with my father and, admittedly, only to his seedy motel room. But from what I saw, having my eyelids cut off and my eyes slowly dry in the hot summer sun seemed preferable to living there.
So all in all, I did not have a horrific experience due to my father’s military involvement. But I am sure things would’ve been different if my mother were not the primary earner in my family. I do feel cheated of time in regards to my childhood with my father but then again I was never subjected to living someplace I didn’t want to or losing what little social connections I made as a child. Most importantly I avoided living in the purgatory of Danville, Virginia. BitterAsianMan (talk) 18:45, 26 July 2009 (UTC)
Here's my solution...
I didn't grow up in a military family, so I don't know anything about the moving to one school to another. I can only imagine that this is very hard on the student(s) that have to go through this. I don't think that there is an easy solution to this situation. Depending on how long the student would be at the school, the curriculum should be geared towards giving the student the best education to help him/her to the next school.Msmhobbs04 (talk) 13:56, 30 July 2009 (UTC)
I didn't grow up moving from school to school but I can see the difference in the education system from state to state. My oldest son is starting high school this year. He has two cousins and one Aunt who are the same age and in the same grade (yes an Aunt). They all live in different states; VA, NY, NJ, and GA. The level of knowledge is vastly different. My niece and sister in NY and NJ have read many literature books, have written large essays as well have constructed projects in science. My sister who is an English teacher is shocked that my son barely has to write essays or research papers and compared to her 9th grade students he is way behind in literature. This holds true for my nephew in GA. I don't feel as though my son is learning as much as he needs to in order to be well rounded in academics. I am not going to debate the role of parents in this situation. If I moved back to NY I coul see where the school system would want to hold him back or offer tutoring. I also would like to point out that my son scores almost perfect on his math SOL's and holds a good grade in school generally but even the level of math he is learning is a grade behind what my niece and sister are learning. So just because it looks good on paper doesn't make it right. Are some school systems dumbing down the curriculum so they can show achievement? I believe that there needs to be a national curriculum with the exception of a studying local and state specific genres.Jnemo001 (talk) 06:01, 27 July 2009 (UTC)
The DOD schools sound like something nice for students in military families to attend. Not only do they get the same education curriculum wise across schools, they also are able to meet lasting friends that have similar experiences moving around and changing schools. The teachers are also more understanding and able to help students adjust to the new school and classes. Hcogg001 (talk) 16:16, 26 July 2009 (UTC)
I agree with a national curriculum in some fashion, but not because of the military...just sometimes think education should be a national issue and not a state regulated thing. Why not have standards of learning for the country, not just the states. As for the military children, I do believe that assistance is needed for them so they can better fit in in their new classes. Moving so much is devastating for young people. Of course, around here children are not alone in their military-bratiness. Classmates have gone through it too. Counselors should be sensitive to the fact that there are so many students in transition in our area and a system should be in place to assist them with their special issues. Ldomm002 (talk) 02:52, 26 July 2009 (UTC)
I do not agree with a national curriculum, but I definitely believe some kind of plan needs to be implemented for those kids of military families. I certainly believe it could be very hard for students to adjust moving so many times. Each time you may be behind or ahead of the curriculum, either circumstance could be frustrating. Honestly, not sure what a good answer would be. I hope that schools understand and are patient with these students whether they have to catch up or if they are ahead. I believe every circustance would be different. Each student should be evaluated and each teacher should adjust accordingly.
I feel that there should be some kind of program in place as a transition for military students. Since every curriculum is not going to be the same at each school, it would be beneficial to accommodate these students with an introduction to the new school's curriculum. In that introduction, the student will be introduced to the new school's curriculum, and how it is different from their previous school's. They will also be given time, and information to adjust to the new curriculum so a smoother transition can be achieved. I do not feel that there should be a special curriculum put into place just for military students, because then they will feel segregated from the other students at their school. I do feel however that implementing a program, or programs, to help facilitate the transition to the new curriculum would be beneficial to these military students who are moved from school to school. Rburt005 (talk) 15:49, 22 July 2009 (UTC)
Although I wish I had the perfect solution for military students, it’s very difficult to come up with one. I was not one to favor a National Curriculum before, but in the case of military students, I think a national curriculum would be beneficial. That way, the topics of instruction would be consistent across the states and parents and students would not have to worry about the whether the curriculums are aligned. I was never a military student myself, but I have had a few good friends who have been, and this has always been a frustration for them. I think it would be a much easier academic transition for the student if they could count on the curriculum being the same wherever they went. Afett001 (talk) 18:45, 22 July 2009 (UTC)
While I think there should be a very loose national curriculum across the United States to help especially with situations such as this, I don't think it should be so authoritarian as to dictate completely and utterly what we can teach. There should be so much wiggle room you could dance with a two-left footed, epileptic elephant. Hsmit022 (talk) 17:27, 24 July 2009 (UTC)
Transitioning to a new school is very difficult. Students from military families move often which forces children to enter several new schools. I do not believe a national curriculum is the answer. I believe most schools attempt to make this transition as smooth as possible and often offer additional assistance to new students, especially non-Virginia residents. Entering a Virginia public school and facing the SOLs is a daunting experience for a child who has never had to meet such requirements. Teachers are concerned with "catching up" students on new material and preparing them for testing. Additional instruction and assistance to fill in the cracks is valuable. I believe a positive partnership between the school staff and the family can make a stressful transition a wonderful experience. Let the student and parents know that you are there for them and not to hesitate to ask questions or for assistnace. You can't make up for all of the moving and changes but you can certain try. And of course a smiling face makes a world of difference! Acrow005 (talk) 23:42, 22 July 2009 (UTC)
Although I know nothing of coming from a military family, I understand that moving many times for a child is pretty devastating. Many of my friends come from military families and have explained the difficulties of these transitions to me. Some children feel isolated, lack confidence, and never really find stability in their education. Other children have explained to me that they simply got used to moving around all the time and that eventually it was not a big deal. Regardless of which mold a child fits in, the truth is that we still need some kind of national standards to abide by. I have read a lot of research on federal curriculum and do not see any problem with the idea. Why shouldn’t Susan from Arkansas have the same education requirements as Amber from New York? The problem…education has always been a state’s obligation. Now, instead of reform, or even trying a uniform curriculum, states and federal government just get lost in the arguments and debates of it all. In the meantime, states still have control and I see no promising way to ease the transition for military students, other than teachers doing their best to be more aware of the emotional needs of the “new kid”. Abitt002 (talk) 18:00, 23 July 2009 (UTC)
Whether a child is part of a military family or not, school transitions are never completely easy. Besides switching teaching styles and course content, children have to leave old friends and social groups and form new ones. Although finding new social groups will depend on the student, there is a possible solution for school transitions. By having a national curriculum in at least public and DODDs schools, students do not suffer academically. However, there are some disadvantages of a national curriculum. The most obvious is that education is primarily managed by the government at state and local levels. A national curriculum would contradict one of the very foundations of our national government. Another major issue is that each state has different views on what should, or should not be taught. For example, Virginia tends to only focus on a very small perspective of local history that includes minorities while California focuses strongly on all minorities in the area. If a national curriculum were to be developed, how would the country decide what a child should be taught? Would a national vote occur or would representatives from each state decide?
These questions are really difficult to answer because one year of experimental education can be extremely beneficial or damaging to a generation of children. As a military brat myself, I understand too well the frustration of constantly switching schools and being significantly ahead, or behind, my peers. I do not know if a national curriculum is entirely necessarily because I strongly believe that education should always be left within the state’s hands. Some national influence is acceptable, and sometimes even necessary to improve the country’s education system. But for the most part, education should be left to the states. I have noticed that the national associations for math, science, language arts and social studies each of standards of what a child should know kindergarten to 12th grade. Perhaps those should be a national standards and a national curriculum would be based on that. Adart001 (talk) 01:30, 26 July 2009 (UTC)
I'm really not sure how I feel about this situation. I also agree that education should be left up to the state, so a national curriculum would obviously over-step that. I am not from a military family, but I would think that it would be emotionally harder for child to switch schools than it would be academically. This is why teachers should be aware of student's situations so that they can accommodate for this. Perhaps the student could receive extra help, if needed, from some type of after school program in high military areas? I don't know the solution, but I don't think that a national curriculum is the answer. Alucy001 (talk) 03:17, 26 July 2009 (UTC)
I think that there should be a national curriculum to make sure that the entire nation is up to the same level of education as they should be state wide. I think that is education was the same nation wide, that allot of deficiencies could be avoided within students. When you travel allot and you have to get used to a new setting and probably differents standards each time I am pretty sure that may take some people through a loop and cause confusion.Bpenn005 (talk) 03:38, 26 July 2009 (UTC)
Solution? I wouldn't go that far, but at least here are my thoughts...Schools are under the legislation of individual state governments, which usually dole out responsibility to individual cities or townships. The federal government's intervention into the states' rule over education has already been demonstrated by the No Child Left Behind Act. Due to the trickle down effect of that action, states now more frequently and forcefully intervene in local governments' legislation of schools. Should a national curriculum be mandated, this will be an even further limitation of state power, and thus city power to control its own educational systems. Because of the already negative effects of NCLB, and the "dumbing down" of standards to meet such legislation, the backlash of a national curriculum that may "dumb down" the affluent and well off schools as well as the power they exert in the community, may be enough to hasten the adoption of any such national dictation of the specifics of education. However, that does leave quite the plight for those who move frequently, i.e. military brats. To avoid such hassle, those children should have access to federal schools that share the same curriculum as to not impede on states' power to determine the specifics of their education system, and also to help facilitate the unique needs of military families. Scrai010 (talk) 23:23, 26 July 2009 (UTC)
School systems in areas that have a large number of military transfers should have guidance counselors that have had some background in dealing with military families. Having that training might give the counselor some insight into needs and issues that are common for military families in transit. An example of this is a family that just moved into our district from Europe and has had to deal without furniture at their house. They were told it wouldn't be here for a few weeks. This greatly effects how a student would perform in school.
I do not believe in a national curriculum. In Virginia we have some unique issues that we would want to focus on, but we wouldn't expect the students in Wyoming to care about the Chesapeake Bay Watershed. I do believe there should be guidelines for transfer credit being accepted at schools, similar to that of transferring credit in college. Jtmitchem (talk) 02:18, 27 July 2009 (UTC)
The solution is to give military kids credit for what they have already taken. Guidance counselors should try to plan military transfer students schedules so that they do not have to repeat anything they have already done. But I believe the solution is that military transfer students should get extra leniency; instead of having to do a whole course over, they should be excused from a graduation requirement. Special summer school course opportunities should be available for military students. These summer school courses should be specifically designed for summer school students, and the content of the course should be flexible based on what the student needs. This will help make the transition less difficult. Mbrowder (talk) 17:46, 16 August 2009 (UTC)
Electric circuits include resistors, capacitors, inductors, etc. A piece of wire has a very small amount of inductance, but usually we talk about inductors when we think about coils, which are a lot of wire wound in near-circles around a core which is some kind of magnetic material, such as iron. That core magnifies the inductance of the coil.
While the wire has some resistance, the coil has not only that resistance, but also reactance. Reactance is proportional to frequency, and coils are used mainly in AC circuits for that reason. Usually the reactance(L) (in Ohms) is much higher than the resistance(R) of the inductor (also in Ohms), with the L/R ratio being important.
There is a limit to the strength of the magnetic field of an inductor, and therefore also a limit to the inductance of the inductor. Saturation is reached when a small increase in the electric current creating the magnetic field no longer causes an increase in the magnitude of the magnetic field. This is done intentionally in "Saturable reactors".
Previous chapter Capacitors | Next chapter: Semiconductors | Go back to Index
From the Specification : Big-O Notation
Linear time, polynomial time, exponential time.
Big O Notation (also known as Big-O Notation) is a mathematical way of describing the limiting behaviours of a function. In other words, it is a way of defining how efficient an algorithm is by how "fast" it will run.
You can work out the time that an algorithm takes to run by timing it:
For x = 1 to 1000000000
'count to one billion!
' Get the elapsed time as a TimeSpan value.
Dim el As TimeSpan = stopWatch.Elapsed
' Format and display the TimeSpan value.
Console.WriteLine( "Time Elapsed: " + formattedTime)
However, this isn't always suitable. What happens if you run some code on a 33 MHz processor, and some code on a 3.4 GHz processor. Timing a function tells you a lot about the speed of a computer and very little about the speed of an algorithm.
Determining if a number is even or odd; using a constant-size lookup table
Finding an item in a sorted array with a binary search or a balanced search tree as well as all operations in a Binomial heap.
Finding an item in an unsorted list or a malformed tree (worst case) or in an unsorted array; Adding two n-bit integers by ripple carry.
!
Performing a Fast Fourier transform; heapsort, quicksort (best and average case), or merge sort
Multiplying two n-digit numbers by a simple algorithm; bubble sort (worst case or naive implementation), Shell sort, quicksort (worst case), selection sort or insertion sort
Tree-adjoining grammar parsing; maximum matching for bipartite graphs
Finding the (exact) solution to the travelling salesman problem using dynamic programming; determining if two logical statements are equivalent using brute-force search
!
Solving the travelling salesman problem via brute-force search; generating all unrestricted permutations of a poset; finding the determinant with expansion by minors.
Practice writing ੜ by following its animation or click below to practice writing a different letter.
v • d • e PunjabiGurmukhi
Appendix 1 : Phonetics • Appendix 2 : Numbers
Punjabi grammar - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia • Online Punjabi Teaching -- ACTDPL, Punjabi University, Patiala • Omniglot: Useful Punjabi phrasesFurther readings
Aab Nabaat (which translates in Farsi to Candy Water) prevents upset stomachs. In most Middle Eastern countries, old wisdom for remedies base around the premise of balance between cold and warm foods. It is believed that the bacteria that mixes in the stomach from the foods based on their cold or warming effects, is what results in an upset stomach. To counterbalance the cold foods in the stomach, Aab Nabaat is used, balancing the bacteria, which makes you feel ill. The best time to consume Aab Nabaat is whenever you have an upset stomach. It especially helps before bed if you cannot sleep. Aab Nabaat consists of a piece of rock candy (the length of two fingers) stirred into a teacup of boiled water.There are no risks connected to drinking Aab Nabaat unless you are diabetic and watching your sugar-intake because the drink would probably not be smart to consume since it is so sweet.The origin of Aab Nabaat is from the Middle East’s old wisdom for remedies based on balancing hot and cold foods.
Acne can be easily prevented or fought using a few simple tips. First of all, careful hygiene practices; regular exfoliation, changing of sheets and pillow case, maintenance of hair and most importantly: proper diet and hydration.These are all natural remedies so there are no side affects to worry about unlike some acne medicines. If you have acne, or would like to prevent it, the following tips are wonderful naturopathic methods for countering such problems.
For the first consideration, the obvious hygiene practices; one must wash their face (at least once a day with soap)and after every time the face has broken a sweat. It is key to never leave sweat on the face, because it harbors bacteria. Moreover, If the face ever feels itchy, it is most likely because there is some form of microscopic creature/bacterium/parasite infecting the skin. As soon as you feel an itch on your face, wash it! The last thing you should do is scratch it with an unclean hand- if you absolutely must scratch, use the back of your hand (the palm side sweats too much and is constantly handling doorknobs and such). However, remember not to wash your face too much (more than twice a day) as this will rid your face of all its natural oils and will produce more oil to compensate for this, resulting in more spots.
Next, rid yourself of any possible facial contact with bacteria or bacteria harboring sweat, dirt, grease and/or oils. Bed sheets should be changed regularly, at least once a week, especially the pillow case! Your pillow case should be flipped after the first night of use, and turned inside out the next night so you have two new clean sides. Also, your hair should be washed before bed so that the oils from your head do not rub off on your pillow case.
In addition to the skin care methods shared above, there are some important aspects of diet one should consider: First, a large intake of water is necessary for keeping the immune system in shape. Eating fiber will help slow water from passing strait through your system, thus, letting it diffuse through the stomach and eventually into the skin, and fruit happens to be the perfect combination of water and fiber. One must also get their daily value of vitamins, A,C and E. This is essential to the maintenance of the immune system, whose function is important for kicking acne. Kyloric acid (garlic) is a good food for your skin partially because its PH level is similar to that of human skin. In addition to adding the aforementioned foods to your diet, you should also refrain from eating too much sugar, for it will damage your immune system.
One basic and easy solution to fighting acne is salt water. Get a small bowl and fill it with water, then put a teaspoon of salt in and mix. Once the salt has dissolved dip a corner of a napkin or a paper towel into the mixture. Place the wet corner on the zit and hold for a few minutes. Repeat of a couple of times. The salt water dries out the zit causing it to shrink and than eventually disappear. Another solution is to put a slice of lemon on top of acne, this to also helps to dry out the zit. Simple sunshine (or tanning beds) can also be good for your skin (in moderation). It will help, like the salt and lemon, to dry those pores out and prevent acne.
Also, Neosporin is a quick and easy way to fight acne. Its antibiotic properties work to heal the inflammation.
Basically- keep clean, eat healthy, and keep those pores dry!!
A very popular Latino home remedy has been used for years to get rid of face acne. This old wives tale to eliminate face acne has in fact proven effective. The first step is to get a fresh lemon and cut it in half. Next you must rub it on your undesired face acne. The last and most important step is to take the lemon and rub it somewhere else on your body, say your leg or arm. The process if transferring the acne from one undesirable place to a less viable place is what essentially gets rid of the acne. Although this remedy may seem unbelievable, it is still used by many Mexican families to this day to get rid of face acne.
The African Ginger is a natural anti-inflammatory remedy. It can also be used to help for many things such as headaches, influenza, mild asthma, throat infections, PMS, menstrual cramps, mood swings, colds, flu & coughs, indigestion, nausea, gas, gastro-intestinal infections, and as a mild sedative. It acts as a circulatory stimulant which can reduce high blood pressure, and can increase sweating to help reduce fevers. I can also help “thin” the blood as well as lower cholesterol, can be taken as a supplement for heartburn, helps with bad breath, relieves vomiting, and helps relieve motion and morning sickness.
In one hospital in London, the herb seemed to be more effective than traditional medicines in relieving poasperative nausea. Research at Cornell University Medical College found that Ginger can prevent recurrences of small strokes, and the hardening of the arteries.
This plant originates in Africa, and is a herb that has been used for generations as a traditional medicine for a range of conditions. The plant has become extinct in Kwa Zulu Natal, and has limited distribution Mpumalanga and the Northern Province because of its use as a medicine and being over-harvested. It contains vitamins B3 and B5 along with many minerals.
In general, the root or rhizome is the part used, and comes in jointed branches called races or hands. To treat asthma, hysteria, colds, coughs, and the flu, the rhizomes and roots are chewed fresh. Women may chew it to help ease women during menstruation. Commonly, a person may take 2 - 4 grams of the dried rhizome powder two to three times per day or a tincture of 1.5 - 3 ml three times daily. When used for nausea, a single dose of about 250 mg every two to three hours (for a total of 1 gram per day) may help. To prevent motion sickness, tablets, capsules, or liquid herbal, extract may be taken up to two days before traveling. When used properly, there are rarely any side-effects. However, it is recommended that pregnant women avoid it.
Airborne is a herbal health formula that boosts the immune system to help the body combat germs. It was created by a former second-grade school teacher, Victoria Knight-McDowell, who was constantly exposed to germs in her classroom. Its unique blend of herbal extracts, vitamins, electrolytes, amino acids and antioxidants helps give the body a fighting chance when exposed to germ-filled environments. The tablets are simply added to water to make a fizzy drink. Found in most grocery stores and gas stations it has no side effects and is very effective at keeping colds away.
Alagau is a plant commonly used for medicinal purposes in Filipino culture, and found only in the Philippines. A remedy for coughs is as follows: Alagau leaves mixed with a little bit of sugar and a cup of "calamansi" (lemon juice) to be taken in drink-form. This decoction is to be taken as needed (when the cough is at its worst), and due to its effectiveness, duration of use should be no longer than a two to three days. Other home remedies include vaginal irritation, weakness of the stomach, diarrhea, abdominal pains, tympanites, beriberi, parasiticide, and cardiac troubles.
Alka Seltzer is an effervescent to relieve minor aches and pains and most importantly hangovers. it has ingredients to wake you up, get rid of your headache and body aches, and dispel nausea. just dissolve it in water the morning after a night of drinking, when you feel like you can without puking, because it's kind of gross, and watch your hangover melt away. Usually one dose should do the trick, but you might need a second a few hours later for the residual effects. Found pretty much everywhere, grocery stores, drug stores, gas stations.
Aloe Vera is a short, green plant that grows in dry climates. The plant is most well known for its sap’s healing properties for skin conditions such as burns, cuts, athlete’s foot and eczema in the U.S., but can also be used as a laxative. Aloe’s medicinal purposes have long been discovered and re-discovered in various parts of the world. The first noted finding was in the Egypt and other parts of Africa, where the plant grows most rampant, but evidence shows that ancient Greek doctors may too have used the plant for its soothing properties.
In order for aloe to be effective, the gel needs to be applied directly onto the inflamed skin, though studies are being done to see if oral use of aloe can also heal skin irritations. Aloe should be used several times a day, for multiple days, until the skin is no longer irritated. There is some debate surrounding the use of aloe, whether or not it actually speeds up healing time. Regardless of whether aloe actually heals, it is a natural coolant, providing temporary relief of skin irritation or sunburn. Only one study, done in 1991, found that the use of aloe slowed healing time, but nothing has ever been proven.
The common household spice Alum Powder, which is usually used in cooking, can be used to get rid of canker sores. Apply the powder to the sore and let dry for a couple of minutes, this may be painful. They key is to keep the powder directly on the canker sore, this will reduce the duration of the treatment period. After a couple of minutes rinse your mouth out with water and repeat one to two times a day. Alum Powder can be found in most grocery stores.
Angelica is a herb that is useful in the prevention of fevers, colds and coughs. It can also be used as a medicinal gargle for sore throats. Angelica has an antibacterial action, preventing the growth of more bacteria. If consuming angelica in powdered form, it should be taken in amounts of 10-30 grains. If taken as the root with boiling water, two tablespoons 3-4 times a day. There are effects of taking angelica. The fresh root of Angelica is not edible,and is said to be poisonous. Do not use while pregnant or breastfeeding without consulting your doctor.
As for the origin of angelica, according to European legend in Western society, Angelica was revealed in a dream by an angel to cure the plague (hence the name Angelica or Archangel). All parts of the plant were believed effective against evil spirits and witchcraft. It was held in such esteem that it was called 'The Root of the Holy Ghost. In America it was used by the Iroquois and other tribes as Witchcraft Medicine, an infusion of smashed roots was used as wash to remove ghosts from the house.
A common remedy for pain relief is the use of anti-inflammatory drugs. This type of remedy works to alleviate pain by reducing inflammation, rather than the use of opiates, which affect the brain. This type of relief is most commonly seen in the name brands, Aspirin, Ibuprofen, and Tylenol. Typically, one to two pills should be taken every four hours, but not exceeding six tablets in twenty four hours. It is not advised to use these remedies on a long term daily basis.
There are risks involved, especially with high or chronic usage. For example, ibuprofen has been observed in elevating the risk of myocardial infarction, and has the potential to
Found in brands such as Rolaid and Tums, these chewable tablets help with the digestion process and a cure for a stomach ache. They can also cure acid ingestion, heartburn, gas and a sour stomach. It is recommended to chew these tablets before you swallow them as this helps speed the process to your digestion system. Recommended dosage is 2 to 4 tablets 4 times a day after meals and before you go to sleep. After you take this follow it up with a small glass of water or another liquid.
Doctors suggest that one should not take antacids if the person shows signs appendicitis or an inflamed bowel; these symptoms can include stomach or lower abdominal pain, cramping, bloating, soreness, nausea, or vomiting. Also if one has an extreme allergic reaction to aluminum it is recommended to not take antacids as a majority of these tablets have aluminum in them. Any person taking another prescription drug should also consult a doctor before taking antacids.
Another less well known treatment for a case of Athlete's foot is the use of apple cider. Not only does this remove the burning and itching sensations caused by the fungus, but also serves to disinfect the foot and rid it of the foul odor accompanied by the rotting dead skin. It is generally recommended to soak the infected foot in three parts apple cider and one part vinegar every morning after waking and before going to bed for around thirty minutes. Some people have been known to apply traces of lemon juice into the batch as to increase the amount of citric acid already present in the concoction.
To be on the safe side it is generally agreed to apply a mild amount of foot cream to the infected areas. Although it is imperative that the infected foot is constantly aired, if shoes must be worn they should be well ventilated and as said above, accompanied by cotton socks to help keep the foot dry. Generally there are no negative side effects unless the user is allergic to any of the above ingredients and the fungus should begin to noticeably clear within a week and should be completely gone by the end of the second week.
The origins of this cure are shaky at best but are believed to come from a combination of westernized and traditional Korean remedies.
To help clear up skin with mild acne, try apple cider vinegar. Make a mixture of one part vinegar and ten parts water. Use a cotton ball to apply the mixture to the face. Continue to do this once a day to help prevent more breakouts. The reason this remedy works is because vinegar is acidic; therefore it is important the vinegar is diluted. Use a higher ratio of vinegar to water with care. It has the potential to severely dry out the face if done improperly. This remedy has been known among primarily among American teenagers who struggle with occasional zits.
Apple cider vinegar has also been known to aid in the curing of yeast infection by either drinking two tablespoons with water three times a day or by simply bathing in it. It is recommended to start with a lower dose. While some brands of apple cider vinegar will remove a yeast infection, others are so acidic they can worsen the infection instead.
Apple Cider Vinegar and Arthritis: A great and natural way to help alleviate as well as help prevent the effects of arthritis is to have a small but consistent intake of Apple Cider Vinegar each day. Apple Cider Vinegar may have an unpleasant odor or taste, but it is recommended that one takes 1-2 teaspoons of ACV up to three times a day. Mixing the Apple Cider Vinegar with equal parts honey is a great way to make this home remedy a more pleasant one. Once mixed with honey, you can also mix it with water to taste. When purchasing ACV, make sure you get all-natural Apple Cider Vinegar, and not flavored Apple Cider Vinegar that has no benefit at all.
Apple Cider Vinegar works as a sort of body purifier. It helps the body as a whole to break down fatty and acidic deposits in the body that cause a whole slew of ailments. As far as arthritis is concerned ACV is used to dissolve these acid deposits and make it easy for your body to flush out the build-ups in your joints that cause soreness, stiffness and other uncomfortable ailments of arthritis.
This remedy has been around for thousands of years and is a common natural treatment around the world and in the United States.
Apple cider vinegar has also been used to clear the air passageway when people are having ear nose and throat problems. Making a mug of hot but tolerable apple cider vinegar with a small amount of honey to help with taste can be sipped on to release phlegm from the back of the throat. It has been found to be a fast and effective method if the case is not so serious that you must visit a physician.
Arnica is used to soothe and heal bruising or sprains and relieve irritations such as trauma arthritis or muscle pain. Commonly applied as a salve, arnica can also be used for chapped lips, irritated nostrils and acne. The properties that cause arnica to heal are the anti-bacterial and inflammatory qualities. These are what reduce the pain and swelling.
Arnica is used when symptoms are present and as long as they remain. Using to prevent a symptom or use after a symptom is semi gone will not affect the treatment or the person. However prolonged use may irritate the skin and cause eczema or blisters which arnica shouldn't be used on. Arnica is rarely used as an internal herbal remedy because it can cause dizziness, tremors and heart irregularities.
Found in North America, Arnica originated with the Catawba Indians who used a tea of arnica roots for treating back pains. This internal ingestion of arnica can be harmful if not properly prepared right.
Athlete’s foot is an infection caused by the fungus dermatophytes. There are many ways to preventively fight the fungus. Keeping one’s feet dry and using cotton socks can help, as can your diet. Alcohol and sugars along with processed foods should be avoided while fresh fruits and green vegetables should be added. These measures help fight off infections but if one should develop there are several methods to get deal with it.
Immediate relief of burning and itching can be found by soaking one’s feet in mouthwashes such as Listerine. While it may be functional, due to cultural differences, some would advise against soaking your feet in Listerine. Alternatively, they might recommend warm salt water. Additionally, soaking your feet in water and white vinegar twice daily will start to rid off the infection. The solution should be one part white vinegar to four parts water and soaking should last twenty minutes. Don't use the mixture more than once. Accompanied with the application of tea tree oil, the fungus will clear up. The tea tree oil needs to be applied to the affected areas of the foot in small amounts.
Avocados.
This fruit is rich in many vitamins and minerals essential to healthy skin, teeth and nails. It also contains fat, the good kind (as opposed to the heart-clogging kind), which provides energy. It can be eaten as a spread, on sandwiches, as guacamole, or simply by itself. It should be added to your diet as a part of an over-all balanced one, and a half of a large one or whole small one is a daily recommended amount.
Along with baby powders most common use it can be used for other common things as well. Blisters are a common sore found mainly on the feet or hands from continuous rubbing on sensitive skin. They can also be formed from burns from the sun or other forms of heat. The best thing to do to treat a blister is to pop it by using a sterilized needle and making a small puncture at the side of the blister making sure it is large enough to drain all of the fluid out. If it is possible it is better to leave the skin covering the blister intact as it serves as ‘natures’ band-aid. If it is not possible to leave the skin covering the blister you can use baby powder to relieve pain to the area. Maybe an even better method is to apply a small amount of petroleum jelly to the area and then cover it with Spenco's Second Skin dressing which acts as a temporary layer of skin while the wound heals. This is an over the counter product that can be bought at pharmacies as well as many other large department stores. The best time to apply these products is immediately after popping the blister. If the sore begins to dry up they will not help as much.
A good remedy for boils. You place raw bacon fat on the top of the boil and change two times a day. The salt in the bacon helps to draw out the pus.
Foot odor is a typical thing that everyone has to deal with. Yet for some it's harder to get rid of than others. One way to help get rid of foot odor is to sprinkle 1 or 2 teaspoons of baking soda into your shoes at night. Leave the baking soda in all day and then dump out what remains at the end of the day, before you go to sleep sprinkle another 1 or 2 teaspoons into your shoes. This helps to absorb moisture as well as hide odors. Continue to repeat this process until foot odor is gone.
A person’s smile is usually the first physical characteristic that is noticed. Lately, many people have sought a natural way to achieve whiter teeth, therefore maintaining a more healthy appearance. A common method of achieving this goal is to alternate brushing with a traditional tooth paste and a homemade mixture consisting of one half baking soda and one half salt. Water is then added to produce a paste like substance. Brushing is required for between two and four minutes. This simple and cost effective practice will immediately whiten teeth and also decrease the amount of accumulated plaque. Due to the taste of the salt, there is a possibility of a raw or bitter aftertaste in ones mouth. If desired, the frequency of brushing with this homemade formulation can be reduced to only a few times a week. Teeth whitening is a custom that originated in Western society, usually in the middle-upper socio-economic strata of this culture. Alternative whitening agents are also being developed and marketed for the consumer.
Have an unpset stomach? This is an affordable solution to alka-seltzer or other over the counter drugs for the upset stomach. The ingredients in alka-seltzer is citric acid and baking soda. The citric acid does little but make the tablets fizz when they react with the baking soda (sodium bicarbonate). This simple home remedy requires that one use 1-2 tablespoons of baking soda, mix with a glass of water (8 oz), and drink rather quickly. Generally within a 1/2 hour your stomach will feel better. If after an hour your stomach is still upset, drink another glass. Usually one glass will do the trick, and there is no need to continue use if the problem subsides after using baking soda and water. It should only be used again on the next occasion a person experiences heartburn or as a preventative measure before a person eats something that might potentially give them heartburn.
Baking soda and water can also be used not only for an upset stomach, but also to curb mild forms of Acid Reflux (or GERD). Eat that pizza right before you decided to go to bed? Many people will find themselves experiencing heartburn as well as Acid Refux symptoms. For many, baking soda and water will cure both in under 30 minutes. In a culture that thrives on instant results, baking soda is a fast working, all purpose substance that is used for instant relief.
Baking soda and water is also a remedy for bee stings. Mix a third of a cup of baking soda with two thirds of a cup of water, and put it on and around the sting. After a couple of minutes, you should start to feel relief. The paste will dry up and stop working after about 15 minutes, so repeat the process.
Have cramps? Tired muscles? Need relief? Try bananas. The potassium content in bananas helps relieve the pain caused from muscle cramping and exhaustion. Eating 3-4 bananas a week can help your muscles stamina and if cramping occurs, eat a banana to help stop the pain sooner. Eating bananas is greatly encouraged for runners or other intense workouts to improve muscle stamina and avoid cramping. Even one banana before a run can drastically decrease the likelihood that muscles with cease in the middle of the workout.
Bee Stings Ouch!
I you are in the woods and don't have these things you can apply mud onto the sting and the coolness of the mud will sooth the sting. This is a technique that has been used by hikers for a long time.
You can also rub parsley on it.
Another way to help with the pain of bee stings is to apply beef tenderizer that is mixed with water, so it makes a paste. You apply the paste in the affected area and it helps deal with the venom. After applying the paste, use a hair dryer to dry it and then cover it with a bandage to help the paste take affect and to keep it from getting further infected and irritated. More information about this remedy can be found at:
To relieve Hives and itching take an oral antihistamine, such as Benadryl. Hives are caused by an allergic reaction to some substance in the environment that a person comes in contact with. On the first occurrence of the hives take one to two Benadryl pills every six hours. After the hives have disappeared, begin decreasing the dose of the Benadryl slowly over the next week. Using antihistamines to reduce hives is part of the western biomedical model of health
Birth Root (biological name: Trillium Pendulum) is an endangered herb grown in the mid-west. Mostly birth root is directed towards women for internal and external problems. This herb is mostly used by Native American women. It is used to strengthen women's reproductive organs to keep labor short and sweet. Other illnesses this herb is used for is a common cough, and when boiled with milk it can help diarrhea. Take one teaspoon of the herb with one cup of water or milk. You may have this hot or cold and take it before bed time. May take up to 2 cups per day.
Blackberries can be used to help cure a stomach ache and nausea. By creating syrup from the roots, you are able to create a cure for both upset stomach and mild diarrhea. You can also boil the leaves in order to create a tea to sooth the stomach, the throat, and stop diarrhea. Made whenever ill, this syrup or tea made from the leaves or roots of the blackberry can be used as frequent as necessary to help settle your stomach. You can get relief without any side effects. Blackberry bushes can be found very easily in our area and through various parts of the country, so this remedy is easily accessible. This remedy is a tradition of many of the Native American Cultures around the United States.
The best treatment for a black eye is to apply something cold to the affected area without applying pressure. An example of this to hold a cold can of soda against the cheek of the swollen eye for several minutes without adding pressure to the eye itself.
Made from the leaves of an evergreen shrub known as the Camellia sinensis, Black Tea is not only used to make a caffeinated drink but also serves as a natural home remedy to help prevent foot odor. By soaking the feet in question for twenty minutes, the natural composition of the leaves, are known to prevent or cover the smell of the odorous feet for a limited amount of time. One is supposed to soak four tea bags in a gallon of hot to boiling water to form a fairly thick tea. Then let cool to a warm temperature and proceed to soak the feet for the previously mentioned amount of time of twenty minutes. Be advised to not stick odorous feet in boiling water as this may cause severe burns. The use of Black Tea has currently thrived in Western society.
When you get a bloody nose, you can use the treatment that my family uses. At first you should press firmly on your nose with a tissue until it slows down a little bit. When it is not gushing blood anymore but not totally gone you can mix up some alum powder with some Neosporin or Vaseline. On a plate or small disk that is clean, mix about one part alum powder with two parts Vaseline or Neosporin with a Q-Tip. With the Q-Tip, put a decent amount of this mixture in your nostril that was bleeding, making sure you cover the whole nostril. This should clot the blood and stop your nosebleed.
You should do this once or twice per nostril depending on how much it is bleeding about 5 min after the start of the nosebleed. This goes along with Western Culture. My dad made this up, in a sense. The alum powder is the main ingredient in the sticks that men use when they cut themselves shaving. But since it is a powder you have to mix it with Neosporin or Vaseline. This mixture also helps to repair the nose cells that bled. If you do not mix it with the Vaseline or Neosporin then it wont work as well and is harder on your nose (it stings like crazy too). Alum powder can be found in the spices section of the grocery store.
Another way to stop the bleeding is to press and hold the upper bone of the nose for few minutes,this should stop the bleeding.
Have you ever been in a public place and realized that horrible stench of body odor was emitting from your underarms? Forgot to put on deodorant today, or have a serious sweating problem like I do? Have no fear- the solutions are here!
First off- do the obvious things like routine bathing. Make sure to thoroughly wash your underarms with a generous amount of soap and apply deodorant directly after you towel off and try to shower in the morning to make this after-shower freshness last all day.
Second- avoid those unbreathable, man made fabrics that you can't even pronounce. Stick to cotton instead which allows for a lot of air flow and help to dry or soak up sweat.
Third- if you forget your normal deodorant or antiperspirant try using plain old baking soda (or choose a deodorant that includes baking soda). It has great absorbing properties and helps kill the oder-causing bacteria that come with that unpleasant damp feeling.
Body odor can be more than a hygiene problem or from pure physical exertion- it can also be related to your diet, medications, liver or kidney disorders. If you try the above suggestions and still find yourself pitting-out and making people pass out with your stank, visit your doctor. They can prescribe a special antibiotic anti-antiperspirant for your pits.
Borage oil can be used to help treat rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory disease in which the immune system attacks the joints and other body parts. Taking borage oil can help to reduce the pain. Borage oil is a fatty acid containing Omega-3 that derived from the seeds of the borage plant. It is found primarily in supplements. Borage oil has been found successful in treating rheumatoid arthritis when 1.4-2.8 grams are taken daily for at least two months. Minor side effects include bloating, nausea, indigestion, and headache.
Teething not only affects infants; it affects the parents as well. Infants are known to cry, a lot, and parents can resort to many different ways of curing the pain. Bourbon is an American made whiskey, initiating in Kentucky. Parents may add just a drop of this liquid to their fingers, and apply it to their infant's area of teething. It is very effective in numbing the area, and can help calm the infant and ease them into sleep.
This method should only be used very moderately, and when the infant is experiencing inconceivable pain. Parents should take care in giving their child only a drop; beware of intoxicating the child.
This fern is commonly found in many temperate forests along with its counterpart, the stinging nettle plant. Bracken fern serves as a remedy for nettle stings. Simply rub a crushed bracken fern stem on the stinging area for one to five minutes depending on severity, and eventually the juices that the plant secrets will numb the stinging, itching sensation and inflammation will go down. This method was developed by Native Americans in North America and passed on to Western society tradition and other places where nettles and bracken fern thrive.
For Bull Ant stings dig up rhizome, crush and apply. Won't help if you are allergic to the sting though.
A mixture of lemon juice, honey, and brandy. It clears your sinuses and soothes sores throats. It acts essentially as a home-made cough syrup. If a younger individual is taking the mixture and doesn't like the brandy taste the brandy can be left out, but some of the soothing results will be lost. The lemon juice cuts through blockages, the honey protects raw areas, and the brandy kills bacteria and numbs the throat.
Alternately, the mixture can be served warm. It's best to take the mixture in small doses, roughly 2-4 tablespoons.
Nails breaking? There is a cure! Brittle nails are caused by many things but the main reason is water. When nails are in water, they expand and become weak thus causing them to break. A way to make nails stronger is by eating cauliflower. Cauliflower contains biotin which thickens nails preventing them from breaking. The biotin is absorbed through the core of the nail making them thicker.
Another cheap and effective way of preventing your nails from breaking is soaking your nails in vegetable oil regularly. This replenishes the moisture lost from being in water so much. To ensure nails from breaking cutting the nails short will help. This is because longer nails tend to break and tear very easily. The best time to cut your nails is right after you get out of the shower or bath. This is when the nails the softest and least likely to break.
Brittle nails can also be caused by a lack of olive oil in one's diet, so making sure to incorporate it into one's daily diet can help to create stronger nails. Also, brittle nails can benefit from eating jello... the bone marrow in the jello helps replace the lost calcium in one's system and helps nails to be stronger. On that train of thought, simply increasing the calcium in one's diet should help brittle nails become stronger.
Bronchitis is a respiratory condition caused by inflammation of the bronchi within the lungs. Typical symptoms of this infection includes fever, difficulty in breathing, constant coughing and loss of appetite. Having been through chronic bronchitis three times in the last four years, I have learned a few handy ways to get through this draining condition.
First off, a large contributor to the contraction of bronchitis is smoking, for it irritates the bronchi leaving the vulnerable to germs inhaled. Obviously, kick the habit if you truly want to avoid bronchitis.
Next, it can be extremely hard to sleep through the night if you have bronchitis because of the constant coughing so I suggest that the best way to catch some Z's is to attempt sleeping while sitting up. Choose a comfy recliner and make that your bed for a while- elevating your lungs opens them up and helps prevent coughing attacks.
In some health-food stores and co-ops you can find liquid aloe-vera which my grandmother ingests every single day to prevent her chronic coughing. I prefer to take "Tussin" which is the knock-off brand of "Robatussin". It focuses on your lungs without hyping you up or making you drowsy.
To fight the inflammation in your lungs, take ibuprofen or another similar anti-inflammatory.
One home remedy (that I've never experienced first-hand) used to treat bronchitis is to take one teaspoon of raw onion juice. Raw onion juice has been found to have expectorant properties liquefying phlegm within the lungs.
The BRATY Diet is a great diet to abide by while suffering from the flu or common upset stomach. The foods listed in this diet are very simplistic and are easy digest while you are sick (aka- you're more likely to keep these down long enough to glean some nutrients from them). Each letter in the world "B.R.A.T.Y." stands for a specific type of food; B: banana, R: rice, A: apple sauce (unsweetened), T: toast, and Y: yogurt (plain, unsweetened).
It is always important to stay away from dairy when one is dealing with the flu because it doesn't sit well with one's churning stomach. However, one might also notice that yogurt is included in this list, and yogurt is commonly considered a dairy product. But, yogurt is special. Yogurt is the product of bacteria consuming lactose in milk, and it is the lactose that causes irritation of an already upset stomach. Yogurt actually helps the upset stomach by reintroducing helpful bacteria into the digestive system.
In addition, the foods listed in the BRATY Diet are very plain and don't have much of a taste which can make eating easier while one is sick. The BRATY Diet is highly recommended because it is a sure way to consume foods that are easy on one's stomach while one is sick with the flu.
Plantain is a small, leafy plant found in the Northwest and other moderate climates of the world, and it has been used to treat medical problems from malignant ulcers to snake bites. In fact, the plant is known commonly in the US as Snake Weed, because of a belief in its efficacy against various poisonous bites. It has also been used as a diuretic, a treatment for rabies, and for internal hemorrhaging; however, it is probably not effective against all of these ailments.
One thing it does work well against, though, is a bee sting. It is a very simple remedy: one simply chews 2-4 leaves (enough so that the paste will cover the sting thoroughly) until they form a fibrous paste, then applies this poultice-like substance to a sting. The pain and inflammation generally subside in a matter of minutes.
This practice comes from Anglo-Saxon culture; many of the earlier references to plantain come from Scottish highland culture. It is mentioned in Chaucer's writing, as well as in several of Shakespeare's plays (Love's Labours Lost, Romeo and Juliet, and others).
So have you ever burn your self on a hot pan or just by grabbing something hot? People will tell you to run it underneath cold water for twenty minutes which works but is only a temporary fix that will last for an hour or so. Next time you burn your self run up to your bathroom and grab your tube of crest tooth paste. Apply a dab of tooth paste and slowly rub it into your burn for a minute or so. You will find that it immediately remove all pain and helps to keep the swelling and blistering down. The nice thing is that you only have to do this once and you're set and will have a speedy recovery and be able to get back to the kitchen and cook up a storm.
Another good remedy is using potatoes. When you get a mild burn, take a potato and either cut a slice or use a grater and grate enough to cover the burned area. Take that slice or grated potato and place over the burn and leave it there for five minutes and then remove and rinse with cold water, if it wasn't a bad burn then by the next morning it should be completely healed. Also works if you burn your mouth, just chew a bit of raw potato (without the skin) and it will feel a lot better. Obviously if you have a bad burn, forget the potato and get medical attention. I think this idea originates from South America, but I am not positive.
Another cure for burns is vanilla extract! You just put it on the burn and it helps in the prevention of calluses and burn marks.
The best remedy for minor burns at home is an onion. All you need is a white onion (not a sweet onion) to cut a slice from. Place the onion slice on the burn as soon as possible. The vapors and acids in the onion dull the nerves that sense the pain and the evaporating vapors will cool the skin. Leave on for at least several minutes then rinse well with cool water. There is not one specific origin of this. This does not contradict the other remedies, it is just another useful one.
If you have an upset stomach, diarrhea, or gas, consider eating some burnt toast for breakfast. You can put butter or jam on it to make it taste better but make sure to eat the black part. The charcoal from the burning of the toast will absorb bad bacteria in your digestive tract that is making you ill. The charcoal will then carry the bacteria all the way through your system and out. This works because the charcoal absorbs the bacteria but your body will not later reabsorb the charcoal. You may eat the burnt toast alone or with other things depending on how you feel. The only risk associated with this remedy is the risk of failure. If you are experiencing nausea and eat burnt toast and it doesn’t work you may see the toast again all too soon. This trick is used in a variety of places but my source of knowledge originated in the house of a priest in Uganda.
Butterbur is an herb that originated in South Africa. It is also found in Europe and parts of North Africa and Asia. This plant grows in damp, marshy areas and along riverbanks with large heart-shaped leaves. Herbalists in the Middle Ages used butterbur’s roots to treat fevers and plague. Later on in the seventeenth-century, butterbur was used for headaches, asthma, allergies, and coughs. Recently, researchers have found that a daily dose of butterbur is effective at preventing migraine headaches. The butterbur extract contains anti-spasmodic and anti-inflammatory properties which help prevent pain by keeping the blood vessels in the head from becoming inflamed.
The butterbur extract has been proven to be safe for adults as well as children who suffer from frequent migraines. Candidates for this supplement suffer from frequent attacks that are greater than or equal to two per month, totaling three or more days. Candidates may also have recurring migraines that significantly interfere with one’s daily routines. Supplements of the butterbur extract generally come in 50 mg capsules. Adults commonly take one supplement three times daily for four weeks, then take one capsule twice daily for the following four to six months. If migraine headaches return, it is advised to restart the process by taking the butterbur supplement three times a day for four to six month. Children six to nine years old generally take one butterbur capsule daily for a constant four to six months. Children ten to seventeen years of age are advised to take one supplement twice a day for four to six months as well.
Butterbur extracts can be found in your pharmacy and vitamin shops. Supplements containing butterbur extracts are natural and do not produce harmful side effects. Through clinical studies, patients who took the herb twice a day for an extended amount of time had nearly half the amount of migraines.
A problem many people face is having trouble trying to get to sleep. Calms forte is a simple and homeopathic solution to this problem that also relieves nervous and stress related symptoms. In a simple tablet available in chewable form, several ingredients combine make up a solution to a full night’s sleep with no side or after effects. These tablets are safe and anyone, regardless of age, can use this simple remedy. According to Hyland’s, calms forte contains the following ingredients that aid in sleeplessness:
Passiflora 1X Triple Strength - for restless or wakeful sleep
Avena Sativa 1X Double Strength - for stress, nervousness or
Humulus Lupulus 1X Double Strength - for drowsiness with
Chamomilla 2X (Chamomile) - for nervous irritability
And the following biochemic phosphates for enhancing cellular function:
Calcarea Phosphorica 3X HPUS, Ferrum Phosphoricum 3X HPUS, Kali Phosphoricum 3X HPUS, Natrum Phosphoricum 3X HPUS, Magnesia Phosphoricum 3X HPUS
This is an easy and enjoyable way (if the tablets taste nice) to finally get to sleep and experience a feeling of calm replacing other stressful thoughts or feelings.
Caffeine may be used to lessen the symptoms of asthma, as it is similar to theophylline, a drug used in medical treatments of asthma. Just a couple cups of coffee (or another caffeinated drink such as Mountain Dew) can help one breathe better during an attack. However, it is important to keep track of how much caffeine you take in, as high amounts of caffeine can interact with drugs and make you more susceptible to stroke. Due to these risk factors, caffeine should not be a replacement for prescribed asthma medication, but may be used in a time of need when an inhaler is not accessible. This remedy has been used for years in the United States, but became most prominent in the 1990s when the results of new asthma studies hit the media.
Caffeine also helps minimize or temporarily alleviate feelings of drowsiness. Caffeine stimulates the central nervous system. It affects increase adrenaline and levels of serotonin, improving consumer’s mood. With its capabilities of limiting drowsiness, a person has the potential to increase their mental or physical labor. Beverages such as coffee, tea, soft drinks, and energy drinks are all known for their caffeine effects. These caffeine products are very popular in America especially in the workplace because of caffeines link to increased productivity. The amount consumed correlates to the amount of stimulation. However, this amount varies by the consumer. A person’s age, weight, liver functions, medications consumed, and other variable conditions will regulate the outcome of the substance.
Because it only disguises feelings of tiredness, need for sleep may be forgotten. Other negative effects occur when overuse of the stimulant as presented prior. Use in moderation.
Caffeine can be used to help alleviate the symptoms of a migraine. Many over the counter pain medications have caffeine included in the ingredients. Caffeine additives make pain-relievers more effective in treating headaches by helping the body absorb the medication more quickly, which in turn helps bring relief faster. While too much caffeine may cause migraines and other headaches, caffeine taken at the right time preceding a migraine attack along with a pain reliever can greatly reduce the severity.
Caffeine is a known home remedy to treat asthma attacks. By consuming two cups of coffee (or another drink with similar caffeine content), one can breathe easier during an asthma attack when there is no access to an inhaler. However, consuming caffeine should not be used as a replacement for long term control of asthmatic infliction. There are health risks involved with increased amounts of caffeine; therefore, one should measure and track how much caffeine is consumed. Health risks involved with greater consumption of caffeine include: drug interactions, increased susceptibility to stoke, anxiety, sleeplessness, and many other side effects depending on sensitivity of persons.
Caffeine has only been found to aid as an analgesic, helping many with headaches among other aches and pains. This is most often taken into account when caffeine is paired with an already known pain reliever, such as acetaminophen, to increase the likelihood of alleviated discomfort. However, in acute pain related patients, caffeine intake alone of 65 mg was found to be as effective as 648 mg of acetaminophen.
The use of caffeine as remedy for asthma attacks has been used for years in the United States, and became most widespread in the 1990s when the results of new asthma studies were announced to the public.
Camphophenic has many minor uses in relieving different kinds of pain. It usually consists of an ointment or an oil that can be applied directly to minor cuts and burns in order to temporarily numb the affected area. My personal favorite use of this ointment is on canker sores. It takes away the pain for several minutes and promotes healing. Camphopheic is also very effective for arthritis pain when applied locally. It is generally always free from side effects. The main ingredient in this ointment is Camphor. It a white transparent waxy crystalline solid with a strong penetrating aromatic odor. It is found in the wood of a tree called Camphor Laurel, a type of evergreen tree generally found in Asia (Borneo and Taiwan to be more specific). Camphor helps with blood cirulation. It is readily absorbed through the skin and produces a feeling of cooling similar to menthol and acts as a slight local anesthetic. Similar products to Camphophenic are Tiger Balm, Fastum Gel, and Watkins menthol camphor ointment.
The female species of Cannabis or Marijuana is known primarily in the United States as an illegal drug whose buds or flowers can be smoked or eaten to create a "high". Cannabis also definitely has many healing properties. One in particular is arthritic pain. It has been found that a small amount (about half a gram) of Cannabis each day can help to ease the pain cased by arthritis. The main chemical is Cannabis that creates the "high" that reduces pain is known as THC (tetrahydrocannabinol). When THC enters the brain it binds with the protein receptors of membrane nerve cells. One result of this is a "high" that numbs or reduces arthritic pain. Cannabis use dates back to around 6000 B.C. when its seeds were used for food by the Chinese. Since then it has become a fixture within countless cultures worldwide for uses of all sorts. As a modern-day pain reliever Cannabis fit into Western culture.
Cannabis is used widely within subcultures of the United States and Western Europe as an alternative inebriant to alcohol. Many find that it is safer, does not impair their everyday activities, and there are no negative day after effects. Many choose to cook the cannabis into "ganja food" in order to offset the ill effects of smoke on the lungs. It is commonly used to treat mild pain, stress, and insomnia.
The use of cannabis has also been used for the alleviation of nausea in cancer patients going through chemotherapy. That combined with the added effect of making the patient hungry allows them to eat when their condition wouldn’t allow them otherwise. This process has been used in certain Western culture where the plant has been allowed by law to use for medical purposes.
Cannabis is also widely used by and legally prescribed to patients with glaucoma in Western culture. The THC chemical found in cannabis has been proven to lower the intraocular pressures associated with glaucoma and also prevents optic nerve damage. Cannabis is most effective when smoked and the general requirement for glaucoma patients is about .5 grams every 3 hours or so. The plant is illegal in the United States, however, and a prescription must be obtained for legal use.
This pepper is most commonly used to spice dishes but has been used for centuries for medicinal purposes. One of the main uses is for poor circulation. No other herb on the planet gets your blood moving faster than the cayenne. A good dose to start with would be 1/16th of a teaspoon. Those not used to this little dynamite could burn their mouth off. Powder is preferred to the pill form. When your tongue tastes the powder it is instantly absorbed and will start moving blood. Another way in which cayenne pepper is used to treat physical ailments is in tea form. A home remedy for sore throats can be made by combining 1 cup of steaming hot water, 1 teaspoon of honey, 1/2 teaspoon of fresh lemon juice and a dash of cayenne pepper (or whatever is tolerable) in your favorite mug. Sip as often as necessary for pain relief however pay attention to the amount of cayenne pepper used for each dose to prevent burning and inflammation. In Western culture it is common for home remedies to be comprised of ingredients available to the average household such as lemon, honey and cayenne pepper.
Cayenne has also been used by the Chinese for digestive purposes such as reducing gas and poor digestion.
When you have a stuffed up nose, put a small amount of cayenne pepper on your finger and breath it in. This rush of heat breaks up the flem and allows you to breath easy. Your nose might burn for a few minutes but the overall affect is that your nasal passage is clear of mucus.
This is a home made diuretic drink mix. Combine Cayenne pepper, lemon, and a little maple syrup in a gallon jug with water. Consume servings of about 8oz. every morning.
To cure any case of insomnia, you can never go wrong with a nice warm cup of chamomile tea, accompanied by some ambient music. This is even suitable for parents out there who want their children to get to bed. Different than other teas, chamomile is an herbal tea, and therefore doesn't contain any caffeine, which is known to interrupt one's R.E.M., or deep sleep. Chamomile tea has a history of soothing the nerves; and the icing on the cake is that it boosts activity within the immune system, therefore preventing illness. Chamomile works especially well if your insomnia can be attributed to discomfort due to gas, because chamomile’s a natural anti-inflammatory, and reduces gas.
This remedy is extremely effective in helping to cure sleep problems, such as insomnia, or to simply induce steady, restful sleep. Any night that one feels tense, or unable to properly fall asleep, it is safe to take this natural remedy about an hour before one's desired sleep-initiation. When one wakes up in the middle of the night, this remedy also works to the same end. Take one mug of water heated in the microwave for approximately one and a half minutes and submerge the chamomile tea bag in the warm water until desired taste is achieved. However, it is most effective to just leave the tea bag in the mug throughout intake. Then, accompany this with a whole wheat snack of wheat thins, an oatmeal raisin cookie, or other small whole-wheat solid. If a low-key environment is provided as well, this remedy should put you right off to sleep. The whole wheat will serve to increase the production of serotonin in the brain, which induces the sleep-ready state, while the chamomile also works to calm one's nerves and provide the right environment for rest.
Drinking too much tea before bed, however, can leave one waking up mid-sleep for restroom breaks, so it is important to only have about one mug of the chamomile tea. This remedy should also, definitely not be accompanied by any Jack Daniels or the like, due to the fact that alcohol actually interrupts your sleeping patterns and can wake you up early in the morning before you are completely rested. And one does not want to be missing out on precious R.E.M. sleep, does one?
Hot tea also helps sooth sore throats and is good to drink before bed to relieve dryness of the throat, causing coughing which can prevent people from falling asleep.
Chicken noodle soup.
One way to let your body heal itself through the process of a common cold is a steaming hot bowl of chicken noodle soup. Though there is no medical proof that chicken soup has any particular healing powers, it has several beneficial qualities that may alleviate cold symptoms. For one thing, eating chicken soup may inhibit inflammation in the nasal cavity. This may vary depending on the type and amount of spices use in the soup. The spicier the soup is, the more likely it is to reduce nasal blockage. In addition, the steam produced by an especially hot bowl of soup will also work as an agent for clearing the nasal passages. Chicken soup has even been said to produce mucus which is the body’s natural way of soothing a sore throat. Furthermore, studies have shown that the ingredients in chicken noodle soup help to produce white blood cells which help the body to ward off disease. It has been theorized that the high salt content in soups, especially chicken noodle soup, help the body absorb the germs and toxins that make you sick. When the salt enters the body and breaks down, it bonds with other chemicals in the body, helping to flush out the system from the inside out. The amino acids found in chicken noodle soup are also helpful in aiding the healing process.
Perhaps, though, the best way that chicken noodle soup helps us fight the common cold is by providing us with comfort and relaxation. Chicken soup is a reminder of home, mothers, teddy bears, and Disney movies. And while the physical symptoms of the common cold may remain, chicken soup at least helps people to forget them for a while.
As far as dosage and frequency of use is concerned, that is up to the individual. Chicken soup should be taken in conjunction with regular exercise and a balanced diet in order to prevent obesity or malnutrition. It should be eaten at a reasonable temperature as to avoid burns or other injury.
Chicken soup is commonly used in Western society as a cure for colds but it dates as far back as Ancient Egypt. It was also used by Persians in the 10th century and Jews in the 12th century. Today it is used by many cultures around the world.
See also: Miso Soup.
Chinese Food Therapy is an ancient practice which uses natural foods for healing instead of medicine. In this traditional method, foods are divided into two categories: yin and yang. Yin foods have high water content and decrease the body's heat, thus lowering metabolism, while yang foods have high food energy and increase the body's heat, thus raising its metabolism. The ideal thing to do is eat equal amounts of both types of foods to maintain balance and to prevent diseases and disorders. For example, eating a yin food can cure dryness of skin and chapped lips, and eating a yang food can cure dizziness and weakness. If you have too much of a certain type of food, you can become sick. If you eat too much yang food you will suffer from acne, and if you eat too much yin food you may become anemic. Chinese food therapy dates back to 2000 B.C., and is most popular among Cantonese people, even today.
Its true! Women all over the world rejoice, because it has now been proven that chocolate is good for you! Studies have proven that in moderation dark chocolate can help in the prevention of heart disease and other heart-related issues. Much like a glass of red wine, dark chocolate helps to keep those passages clean and prevent heart attacks and other potentially life-threatening heart conditions. .
That awesome tasting powder you see on French toast and creme brulee has another purpose besides just tasting good. Cinnamon is used by some people as a supplement to boost the immune system, and it is believed to have antibiotic properties, as well. Thus, as well as preventing illness, it can be used when you are sick for an immune boost.
Citric Fruits not only are good tasting but have many benefits to staying healthy. Oranges, grapefruits,lemons etc., all are rich in vitamin C. Vitamin C not only stops the onset of scurvy, but can help prevent the common cold, and has been proven to help reduce cardiovascular disease.
The reason Vitamin C is so commonly attributed to curing colds is because of its anti-oxidants. Anti-oxidants help build the immune system and fight the bacteria that cause the cold. Eating many fruits and vegetables high in vitamin C will help keep people healthy, but that might not always be enough so taking a vitamin C supplement can also bust the immune system.
Despite its notorious reputation and the affects it has had on American society, the actual leaf from which cocaine is extracted has been used as an herbal remedy for hundreds if not thousands of years. The leaf is generally found in the Andean regions of Peru, Colombia, Ecuador, Venezuela, Bolivia. It is used on a regular basis for altitude sickness, fatigue, hunger relief, to quench thirst, stop motion sickness, as an antidepressant, and as a stimulant (like coffee). The leaf its self is most commonly chewed or masticated with cal, however it can also be administered in different forms. Although the coca leaf is the raw material used to create cocaine; it does not have the toxicity or dependence as its narcotic counterpart.
If you have an upset stomach, a good way to relieve it is by drinking coke syrup or flat Coca-Cola. Coke syrup is the base for the soda pop Coca-Cola. If you let a can of Coca-Cola sit out for about 30 minutes the soda will lose its carbonation and go flat. By letting the bubbles dissipate it prevents your stomach from being further upset from the carbonation. You can either consume one teaspoon of coke syrup or a half a can of flat soda.
The idea behind this remedy is that the syrup acts to neutralize the extra acid in your stomach when it is upset. This cure is counterintuitive because it would seem like it would further upset it because of the carbonation of the soda, but if it is flat or just the coke syrup it avoids this negative consequence. Some of the positive effect of this remedy might be psychological. Also if you are feeling sick, drinking something sweet makes you feel better. This cure seems to be especially effective at settling an upset stomach if feeling nauseous or vomiting. This home remedy is very effective because it also tastes good so it is easy to drink. Other people have also used similar soda pops, such as sprite or ginger ale to settle an upset stomach.
Cod Liver Oil and Apple Cider Vinegar]]
Both consuming cod liver oil and washing your hair with apple vinegar can help prevent and actually slow down the process of balding. Simply drink one tablespoon of cod liver oil and rinse your hair with a mixture of half a cup of apple cider vinegar and half a cup of water once a day. Unfortunately, cod liver oil does not have a pleasurable taste or smell, and the smell of vinegar can also be somewhat unpleasant. However, there are not any major risks of using this treatment. In fact, taking cod liver oil can also help lower your risk for cardiovascular disease and improve your skin. Both cod liver oil and apple cider vinegar have been used in the US for years, but this particular combination is somewhat rare.
A fever is a symptom of numerous diseases. It is not necessarily a bad thing, and may even speed up the healing process. Some people try to ‘burn off’ a fever, by drinking hot liquids and wearing warm clothes/burying themselves in blankets. However, if the fever gets too high this can be dangerous. The brain and other organs may suffer permanent damage. In this case, medicine is used to bring down the fever. But what if there is no medicine available, or if the patient’s body won’t accept it? The best option then is to apply a cold compress to the forehead. Ideally, it should be cold but not frozen. It should be left on as long as necessary, and replaced when it warms up. More drastic cooling methods can be dangerous because they can reduce the body’s ability to fight off disease and make the body more susceptible to new diseases.
A cold compress can also be used to treat eczema flareups. Eczema is a general term for rash-like skin conditions. Scratching makes the condition worse and can even lead to a bacterial infection. Applying a cold compress to the area of irritation can help stop this. The compress will reduce the inflammation and lessen the desire to scratch. This practice works best at the first sign of a rash in order to stop it from getting worse. However, it can be used at any point during the outbreak.
A cold pack laid over ones head can help relieve the pain caused by a migraine headache. This remedy will help people who describe their migraine as throbbing or piercing pain. Most migraines are one sided and with a cold pack you can target the area of your head that needs treatment. You can use a cold pack as often and as long as the pain persists, if the pack is too cold try wrapping the pack in a dish cloth and then reapplying to the area in pain. Migraines and their treatment are a common part of Western society.
Using a cold spoon can prevent swelling around the eyes after crying, from irritation or from injury. Put a metal spoon in the freezer and let sit for at least one half hour. When ready, rub the bottom of the spoon slowly back and forth across the bottom eyelid. If needed let the spoon get cold again and repeat the process. Don't have any moisture around the skin of the eye to prevent the cold spoon from sticking. This remedy is used in Western Culture, passed down matrilineally through the author's family.
Not recommended in the case of eye disease without consulting a physician.
The use of a cold washcloth over closed eyes helps to constrict blood flow within your eyes. This aids in reducing Red Eyes because the restricted blood vessels stop pumping blood into your eye. Also, the cold washcloth helps add moisture to your eyes which will help get rid of any unwanted material within your eyes. This is a typical medical practice of the Western society.
Bloody noses, though inconvenient, are a common occurrence. The best way for getting rid of a bloody nose is to soak a wash cloth in cold water and while that is happening drench the top of the victim's head in cold water as well. Then, ring the wash cloth out and firmly place it on the victim's forehead, holding it there with pressure until the bleeding stops. Make sure to keep the wash cloth cold, this could mean switching out the wash cloths in order to keep them as cold as possible. This technique originates in the Philippines.
In dealing with bloody noses it is also important to have the victim pinch their nose, and lean forward, NOT BACKWARDS. If the victim tilts their head backwards it will cause all the blood to run down the back of their throat into their stomach and they will eventually vomit up blood. This is a very bad thing, so lean forward and let all the blood out if you have a bloody nose.
Comfrey can be used to treat a wide range of maladies. To treat intestinal illnesses like dysentery or diarrhea, 1/2-1oz of crushed comfrey root can be boiled with 1qt of milk or water. This mix should be taken frequently in wineglass-full doses until the problem clears up. Comfrey is also a good topical treatment. The leaves, mushed up, can be applied to sprains, swelling, boils, and cuts. The entire plant, ground to a pulp and used in a poultice, has been used to sooth tender and inflammed parts of the body, even having been applied raw to ulcers in earlier times.
A home remedy that one can use is Chamomile tea. This tea is used to or decrease any upper respiratory infections such as colds or bronchitis. Bronchitis is the inflammation of the bronchial tubes. This tea includes the Chamomile plant, honey, and lemon. This can be used to treat colds or bronchitis when one is having any type of symptoms of the common cold or bronchitis. One can continue drinking this tea as long as it takes for the illness to go away completely. One can take as much of this tea because it is not harmful, it is rather good for you. It has antioxidants in it as well. Chamomile can be bought packaged at any big store. A pinch of chamomile is used in a cup sized cup with boiled hot water. A tablespoon of honey is then added with a tablespoon of lemon. This altogether is then mixed together and is set for one to drink. You can drink a cup of this as frequent as three times a day, morning, afternoon, and at night. There are no risks or counter indications that she has heard of. This is most commonly used in the Hispanic culture. This originally came from Mexico used for the same idea, colds and bronchitis. In other words,it is more of a Mexican culture to do although the Chamomile tea itself is a common tea within the American culture. For a picture of the Chamomile flower go to the following website.
In Vietnamese culture, they have a few unique ways of dealing with a common cold. You can eat rice gruel laced with onion. Xông is an herbal steam bath which you take under a blanket. Usually during this process there is a pot sitting with you under the blanket excreting a herbal aroma, and it helps to clear sinuses. This process usually lasts until the pot stops steaming and the sinuses are cleared. Cåo Gio, this is where one rubs a coin or spoon across certain parts of the body, usually the back and sometimes the face. The process of Cåo Gio usually lasts until the areas rubbed turn red. All of these are natural cures however, Cåo Gio can be rather painful. All of these remedies are from the practice of Vietnamese medicine called thuoc nam.
Concentration may help to stop hiccups. While hiccuping the first few times is a physical reaction when your diaphragm has an involuntary spasm that causes a quick rush of air to close one's glottis, after the first few, it is a mental reaction. One is able to terminate hiccups simply by reminding themselves that the hiccup is a result of the mind comprehending the onset of hiccups. One must focus intently on the next hiccup: imagining the feeling and picturing the glottis closing with the quick rush of air. If one concentrates long enough, the hiccups will most likely stop.
Athlete's foot is a skin disease caused by a fungus, usually occurring between the toes. The fungus most commonly attacks the feet because shoes create a warm, dark, and humid environment which encourages fungus growth. The warmth and dampness of areas around swimming pools, showers, and locker rooms are also breeding grounds for fungi, hence the name “athlete’s foot”.
In treating athlete’s foot with corn starch, one should rub the corn starch on the infected area until the area is completely covered, then leave it sitting for at least 15 min. Repeated actions may be necessary if itching or redness does not recede. Watch for allergenic reactions to corn starch, which may result in further itching and redness.
This treatment is most common among the peoples of the southern United States. It is most commonly used by athletes who are constantly under the above described conditions.
An application of cottage cheese to the skin that has been affected by stinging nettles is a common way to alleviate the pain associated with the nettles. Apply cold cottage cheese to the area of the body that has had contact with the stinging nettles. Slather the cottage cheese on and leave for 30–45 minutes before removing. Repeat this process every 2–3 hours until relief from pain is experienced. Do not apply this treatment to sensitive areas of the body that are around the eyes, ears, mouth, nose, or genital regions. Mothers in semi-isolated areas of the American Pacific Northwest use this remedy to treat their children who have had skin contact with stinging nettles in their outside play. Mothers believe this treatment to work because the thick consistency of the cottage cheese is supposed to draw out the poison of the stinging nettles thereby alleviating the pain.
Cough drops provide temporary relief from the common cold and can be used to decrease the symptoms of coughs and sore throats. Specifically, herbal cough drops work increasingly well because they are natural and sooth any symptoms of coughing or sore throat you may have. You can use cough drops once every hour and they will not hurt you. Use a cough drop to give your sickness a temporary relief and once your symptoms return use another cough drop. Suck on them until your throat or cough is feeling better, just make sure you don't get too over-zealous and choke. You should stop using cough drops if your sore throat is severe or if it persists for over a week or experience fever, vomiting, headache, rash, or swelling. This could be serious and you would need to see a doctor immediately and stop using the cough drops.
Cough drops are common throughout the world, but they are most often used within Western Culture. American's, especially, like to fool themselves into feeling better, so using cough drops dulls the pain for just a little while. They also help if one is going to sing or give an important speech (or so they like to think).
A foot corn occurs in areas of pressure and causes a section of thickened skin. The skin thickens in order to protect itself from the excessive pressure that is being applied regularly to that area. This eventually causes a great deal of pain. Corns are normally located on the surface of the toes and often appear between the toes. In order to avoid corns you should avoid wearing shoes that are very tight fitting. This will reduce the pressure on the foot. In order to treat a foot corn you should place a moleskin pad over the corn to allow for some cushioning and relieve some of the pressure that is exerted on the foot. You should also soak your foot with warm water and Epsom salt. This should be done for at least 5 minutes, three times a day. This will help the corn to soften. Another treatment for a foot corn is using a pumice stone on the corn. This is used to file down the corn and remove part or all of it.
Most women at some point in their life will experience menstrual cramps. While taking medicine such as Tylenol is good. The best thing to do is to apply heat. Good ways to do this are to take a warm bath, apply a heating blank/pad or to use a hot rice bag. (best if applied to the lower back/tail bone area). The heat helps to lessen the tension in the muscles. A person should do this until the cramps go away or for however long they desire. Cramps usually last 1–3 days so that is the only time when its necessary. You can do this a frequently as you please or are able to. The only problem with this is that its not always convenient. They do have patches that are warm that you can stick to your skin, but I have never tried them. Another risk is that the heating pads can get too hot and can burn you. So be careful. Using heat for cramps are not just for women, it is used in most of the world. Although women in Western societies seem to have more severe cramps, or at least an emphasis on severe cramps, therefore it’s most seen in Western societies.
Menstrual cramps are caused by two kinds of painful menses in which can be cured if done correctly. The pain with menstruation was not taken so seriously back then, but now it is very serious. The time of the month for women is not the best feeling ever which causes headaches, bloating, agitation, and other mood swings. For best results, it is always good to drink a hot cup of tea or water which relieves the discharge that is causing the pain. The cramps help push out the menstrual discharge in which you may come in contact with blobs of blood. Do not worry it is normal for a woman to discharge while on their menstrual period.
Women tend to complain about menstrual cramps and how they affect their body. Sometimes they blame their menstrual cramps that they have gained a few pounds here and there. Menstrual cramps are a dull and aching feeling to the body, especially the lower abdomen. Sometimes this pain may cause vomiting or mind headaches which changes a woman's change of mood. The best results to prevent or calm down a menstrual cramp is to take it at ease, no pressure. If possible, take Midol or Pamprin which are over the counter drugs made for menstrual cramps. Other drugs that are available are also Tylenol and Ibuprofen. Exercising may reduce the pain, but do not put too much pressure during the first couple of days. Walking and yoga are two good examples of exercises that help loosen the muscles but do not over work the body. Overall, menstrual cramps and cramps in general are a regular experience in a person's body whether it be menstrual or not. If the body is taken cared of correctly then the pain may be reduced. Today in the U.S., menstrual cramps are often taken care of by taking over the counter drugs and taking warm baths.
Menstrual cramps are an everyday part of life for most women, and some experience these cramps more frequently and with more pain than others. While there is something to be said for Midol (yes, it just might be Heaven sent), there is always a certain amount of caution that should be observed when taking medications for any sort of pain. At a certain point, one's body becomes used to the prescribed dosage, and then the ante must be upped. This is not necessarily healthy. So, to counteract this scenario, or at least try to prevent it, if one is able, one should look to more natural methods of relieving cramps. Number one, chocolate should be consumed daily during the first few days of menstruation. Okay, kidding... well, half kidding. There are certain ingredients in chocolate that can help, at least indirectly. It may not relieve the cramps themselves, but it certainly helps to improve those mood swings that seem so prevalent during "that time of month." On a more serious note, and in regards to the cramps themselves, exercise is highly recommended. From a swimmer's perspective, vigorous exercise was found to be a wonderful way to not only alleviate the cramps, but regular exercise also helps to make the menstruation period shorter and the flow lighter. Unfortunately, there really is no "cure" for cramps, or any of those symptoms that women may or may not have, but there are certainly ways to make things just a little bit more bearable.
Another quick thing to do that helps alleviate the pain of cramps is water. Water is good for everything, but for some reason it especially helps when it is "that time of the month."
For thousands of years, women have had health issues that reside in the lower region of the stomach near the bladder. These “women’s problems” tend to be very painful and therefore women have long been searching for remedies. This remedy is cranberries. It is thought to have first been used by the Romans while inhabiting what is now England. Although it was not documented until 1578 by herbalist Henry Lyte. The most common species of the cranberry used in America is the “American Cranberry” which is grown in North America. The cranberry has been long studied by scientists and is a remedy for many types of things.
As mentioned earlier, the cranberry is most commonly used for urinary infections. If the infection is caught by the early by the ill person, use of cranberries, by juice or pills, will prevent the infection from turning bacterial and therefore requiring the use of antibiotics and, in severe cases, pain medications as well. Daily ingestion of cranberries, again by juice or supplements, can also prevent urinary tract infections instead of just seizing them. Cranberries due to the same acid, Quinic acid, can also prevent kidney stones, which is the reason that cranberries have a sour taste to them. It is always better to use cranberry juice that is unsweetened or capsules. Capsules are to be used daily during and infection along with frequent ingestion of the cranberry juice. It is also a wise idea to use the capsules daily in an order of prevention although not necessary.
While cranberries are most often used for urinary tract infections and kidney stones, and best known for those particular uses, scientific information shows many other uses of the common cranberry. It has also been known as a good remedy for illnesses including diarrhea, constipation, gout, and rheumatism. In the past, they were used to prevent scurvy. They are also, like most fruits, a good source of vitamin C and fiber. Cranberry has been a useful remedy for thousands of years and still is for many around the world today.
Regular consumption of cranberry juice can lead to regularity of the urinary tract. Besides it's many other healthful properties, cranberries act as prebiotic, and can prevent urinary tract infections. It prevents the growth of harmful bacteria such as E. Coli and promotes the growth of beneficial lactobacillus. This is a common remedy used in Western culture.
As an herbal supplement, cranberry juice supports urinary tract health and boosts the immune system with vitamin c. As a major commercial crop in North America, cranberries have become a part of our food habits in Western culture. Dosage is recommend daily with pure cranberry juice, no sugar added.
Sliced cucumbers have been known to cure swollen and irritated eyes. Just cut the cucumber into thin slices and place over the eyes for 5 minutes. Repeat as needed. If cucumbers arent around, soak a tea bag in cold water and place over the eyes for 5 to 10 minutes, this will also help with swelling.
Text...
Dobro veče/ Dobra večer
Shoma az Koja miayied?
/ Nga vini?
Odakle dolazite?
Where do you come from?
A mund të gjeni ate që doni të thoni këtu (në këtë libër frazash)? Janë disa gjuhë. Mund të provojmë të komunikojmë në këtë mënyrë.
Možete li naći ono što želite reći ovdje [u ovoj knjižici]? Ima nekoliko jezika. Možemo probati komunicirati na taj način.
Can you find what you want to say here [=in this phrasebook]? It has several languages. We can try to communicate this way.
Kako ste?
How are you?
Kako si?
How are you?
Man donbale kasi miravam ke betavanad be shoma komak konad
Do të thërras dikë që mund të na ndihmojë
Pozvat ću nekoga tko može pomoći. / Pozvaću nekoga ko može da pomogne.
I'm getting somebody who can help.
Të lutem prit këtu (Ju lutem prisni këtu)
Molim Vas, pričekajte ovdje / sačekajte ovde.
Please wait here.
Do kthehem / do vi prapë
I'll come back.
Dua të të ndihmoj
Želim Vam pomoći.
Mund të më besosh
Možete imati povjerenja u mene. / Možete da mi verujete.
You can trust me.
Negaran nabashid, man eenja ba Shoma montazer mishavam.
Do të të pres këtu, mos u merakos/mërzit
Čekat ću ovdje s Vama, ne brinite. / Čekaću ovde s Vama, ne brinite.
I will wait here with you, don't worry.
Kasi be zodi miayad va be shoma komak mikonad.
Dikush do vi t'ju ndihmojë
Neko / netko će doći i pomoći Vam.
Somebody will come help you.
Een Taraf mitavanad be shoma komak konad
Ky person mund t'ju ndihmojë
Ova osoba Vam (ti) može pomoći.
This person can help you.
Ma bayad yek modat Sabr konim.
Ne duhet të presim pak
Moramo samo malo pričekati. / Moramo samo malo da sačekamo.
We just have to wait a little.
Vrlo ste hrabri.
You're very brave.
You're great.
Do tê shërohet shpejtë.
Brzo će zarasti.
It will heal quickly.
Ajo do të jetë mirë / Ai do të jetë mirë
Ona (on) će biti dobro.
She will be OK / He will be OK
Jam i lumtur që të shoh.
Drago mi je što Vas vidim.
I'm happy to see you.
Kujdes dhe gjithë të mirat
Držite se i sretno.
Më shkruaj kur të mundesh, kjo është adresa ime
Pišite mi kad stignete, ovo je moja adresa.
Write me when you can, here is my address
Çfarë ka ndodhur?
What happened?
Ne znam.
Prvo djeca / deca!
Ju lutem mbani rradhë këtu
Molimo, stanite ovdje / ovde u red.
Please queue / line up here.
Za svakoga samo jedan komad / jedna stvar
Nuk ka shpërndarje këtu
Ovdje se ništa ne dijeli. / Ovde se ništa ne deli.
Na falni, nuk ka mbetur gjë
Na žalost, nema više ničega.
There's a doctor over there.
Zona e fëmijëve është atje
Tamo je prostor za djecu / decu.
The children's area is over there.
Design Technology is a unique course sequence in group 4. It is an ideal alternative to the traditional science course, especially for students who struggle with or dislike experimental science. The course focuses on teaching students the processes and roles of design and designers. Some of the elements designers must consider include: material; political, social, and economic factors which affect peoples’ priorities when designing a product; sustainability; aesthetics; and safety. Students are taught how to evaluate existing products and analyze situations so that they can suggest appropriate improvements.
Additionally, Design Technology maintains a strong emphasis on giving students the experience of designers and as such, a central part of the course is the design project where students design and produce an object of their own creation.
Design and Technology is a relatively hard course, at the respective levels of SL and HL (average score worldwide is 3.7, as reported in spring, 2015). However, one should take particular care with the design project, and other such projects that contribute to the marking criteria scheme.
[This material is from the 2009-2015 syllabus and must be updated for the 2015-2021 syllabus]
There are 6 core topics studied by HL and SL classes:
For the optional section of the course, HL and SL students study two options from those available for their level.
Options A-G are available to HL and SL classes:
A. Food Science and Technology
B. Electronic Product Design
C. CAD/CAM
E. Human Factors
F. Invention, Innovation, and Design
G. Electronic Products
Options H-J are available only to SL classes
H. Raw materials to production
I. Microstructures and macrostructures
J. Appropriate Technologies
The design project is an integral part of the Design Technology course.
Height: 0.4m/1'4"
Weight: 4kg/9.0lb
Move types which are good on Mew: Bug, Dark², Ghost²
Move types which are bad on Mew: Fighting, Psychic
Move types which don't effect Mew: Ghost¹
All other move types are normal effectiveness on Mew.
² – All other Pokemon games
NOTE: If Mew transforms, its type matching table is replaced by that of the Pokemon it transformed into.
PoundZap cannonFaint attackFake OutHypnosisTrick Night Shade
RB/Y/GS/C/RS/E/FL: Blizzard, Cut, Dig, Double Team, Earthquake, Fire Blast, Flash, Fly, Hyper Beam, Psychic, Rest, Solarbeam, Strength, Surf, Thunder, Toxic
GS/C/RS/E/FL: Attract, Frustration, Giga Drain, Hidden Power, Iron Tail, Protect, Rain Dance, Return, Roar, Rock Smash, Sandstorm, Shadow Ball, Sludge Bomb, Steel Wing, Sunny Day, Thief, Waterfall
RB/Y: Bide, Body Slam, Bubblebeam, Counter, Double-Edge, Dragon Rage, Egg Bomb, Explosion, Fissure, Horn Drill, Mega Drain, Mega Kick, Mega Punch, Metronome, Mimic, Pay Day, Psywave, Rage, Razor Wind, Rock Slide, Seismic Toss, Skull Bash, Softboiled, Submission, Substitute, Swords Dance, Take Down, Teleport, Thunder Wave, Tri Attack, Water Gun, Whirlwind
GS/C: Curse, Defense Curl, Detect, Dragonbreath, Dynamicpunch, Endure, Fire Punch, Fury Cutter, Headbutt, Ice Punch, Icy Wind, Mud-Slap, Psych Up, Rollout, Snore, Sleep Talk, Swagger, Sweet Scent, Thunderpunch, Whirlpool, Zap Cannon
RS/E/FL: Aerial Ace, Brick Break, Bulk Up, Bullet Seed, Calm Mind, Dive, Dragon Claw, Facade, Focus Punch, Hail, Light Screen, Overheat, Rock Tomb, Safeguard, Secret Power, Shock Wave, Skill Swap, Snatch, Taunt, Torment, Water Pulse
Scope: This Wikibook intends to teach you how to speak, read and write in Tamil language. It tries to explain the language elements more with examples phrases than standard linguistic terms. This will favor the common people having little or no knowledge in linguistics. On completion of reading this book, you should be able to read, write and speak Tamil with confidence. However, fluent speech may require time and practice.
Purpose: The main objective of this Wikibook is to teach you the Tamil language in an easier way. It is a common fact that learning a new language is really very painful. For that reason, this Wikibook adopts keep-it-simple principle to familiarize you with the language in a simple manner.
Audience: Anyone who wishes to learn Tamil language, those who travels to India, Sri Lanka and Singapore, and those who thinks learning the mother tongue (Tamil in this case) of ones lover could worth it.
Organization: As the Tamil language enjoys diglossia, this Wikibook is divided into two separate parts - one for spoken variant and the another for written variant (which is also spoken, even now, for formalism). Each part contains independent lessons which are ordered chronologically from lesson 1, lesson 2 and so on.
Narrative: With sufficient, fetching and thorough examples and dialogs, this Wikibook teaches the language in a unique manner. Although, this Wikibook is not a grammar book, it adopts hidden way of teaching grammar (which cannot be neglected in language tutorial books) with real-time dialogs and explanations. A base vocabulary is held through out the lessons so as to make you to really memorize the words without pain!
Style: Although this Wikibook abides the spelling rules of American English, it tries to keep its English international. The Tamil taught here is generally Indian Tamil, though regional differences are introduced wherever possible. Every lesson starts with a real-time conversation (first in Tamil and then in English) which includes key grammar concepts and vocabulary. On the end of each lesson, a brief summary explains what has been achieved yet.
In chemistry, pH is known as measure of potential hydrogens in a substance.It is also a scale used to specify how acidic or basic a water-based solution is. Acidic solutions have a lower pH, while basic solutions have a higher pH.
At 25 °C, solutions with a pH less than 7 are acidic and solutions with a pH greater than 7 are basic. The neutral value of the pH depends on the temperature, being lower than 7 if the temperature increases. The pH value can be less than 0 for very strong acids, or greater than 14 for very strong bases.
The pH scale is traceable to a set of standard solutions whose pH is established by international agreement. Primary pH standard values are determined using a concentration cell with transference, by measuring the potential difference between a hydrogen electrode and a standard electrode such as the silver chloride electrode. The pH of aqueous solutions can be measured with a glass electrode and a pH meter, or a color-changing indicator. Measurements of pH are important in chemistry, agronomy, medicine, water treatment, and many other applications.
The Woodland Outpost mission was introduced in America's Army: Special Forces (Firefight) (version 2.3.0). It is a 172nd Sep. Infantry BDE mission, as opposed to the Special Forces missions that were introduced in some previous versions of America's Army. The weapon loadout reflects that this is not a Special Forces mission.
Please expand on the tactics that work on this mission.
The Martini, more so than any other drink, embodies the class and style of the cocktail in the popular imagination.
1/2 oz. (1.5 cl) Dry (white/blanc) vermouth (preferably Noilly Prat or Dolin, alternately Martini & Rossi) with ice and water
Cocktail olive, queen size at minimum. Or olive juice could be added to make it a 'dirty martini'; or,
A twist of lemon peel (including the pith);
Fill a martini glass with ice and water, set aside.
Fill the glass half of a two-piece cocktail shaker to the top with ice, add 1 oz. dry vermouth.
Fill the shaker again with ice, add 2 oz. gin, stir gently.
Discard ice and water in the martini glass.
Strain martini into glass.
Garnish with one olive (two makes it a Franklin).
Adjust the gin/vermouth ratio for a drier martini. The trend in the latter part of the 20th century was to go "ultra-dry" by limiting the amount of vermouth to smaller and smaller quantities. However, this limits the drink to being essentially a cocktail glass of cold gin. The additional herbal and tempering qualities of vermouth are necessary for the proper flavor profile. A 6:1 gin to vermouth ratio is considered "ideal" though your taste may vary.
Replacing the green olive with a pickled cocktail onion turns the Martini into a Gibson Cocktail.
More extreme variants introduce triple sec and/or bitters, but the "classic" recipe stands as merely gin and vermouth.
If you want to be James Bond, the classic Fleming recipe involves an ounce and a half of vodka, an identical portion of gin, and a half-ounce of Lillet Blanc, shaken over ice and served with a twist of lemon.
Stuffed olives go well with a martini. The "Spanish" olive, green stuffed with pimento, is the default. However, those olives stuffed with a garlic clove or bleu cheese are popular as well.
Adding a splash of the olive brine to the drink makes it a "Dirty Martini." Some prefer the additional element of saltiness that this adds.
A Churchill martini involves shaking 6 parts of gin, straining into a cocktail glass, looking at the bottle of vermouth, and serving with an olive garnish.
The Martini is a member of a family of cocktails sometimes referred to as the French-Italian cocktails. Other examples are the Manhattan, Rob Roy, and Harvard Cocktail.
The best gins for a Martini are those with the most complex botanicals -- Bombay Dry, Boodles, Junipero, for example.
Wikipedia has related information at Martini (cocktail)
C# ProgrammingCover | Introduction | Basics | Classes | Advanced Topics | The .NET Framework | Index
How casting is done between types.
Re-using existing code to improve or specialize the functionality of an object.
Define a template, on which to base sub-classes.
Learn about delegates, anonymous delegates, lambda expressions, and events.
Build partially implemented classes.
Split a class over several files to allow multiple users to develop, but also to stop code generators interfering with source code.
Allow commonly used collections and classes to appear to have specialization for your custom class.
Extend the functionality of existing types.
Learn about the lifetime of objects, where they are allocated and learn about garbage collection.
Learn commonly used design methodologies to simplify and/or improve your development framework.
Creating Your Own Leaf, a Tutorial
The following applies to version 01-01-07 only, although it may be a guide to other versions.
There are 2 parts to this process.
One part is adding the person to the Leaf "brain" and the other loading up a reference image so Leaf can "See" you.
We'll start with adding you to Leafs brain. Not much point in Leaf being able to see you if Leaf doesn't know who s/he is looking at.
Note in some of the code snippets there is a 'characture in front of the word. This is important and it must be the correct punctuation mark otherwise the lisp compiler will give an error when you save the file.
In this example we will use the name “BOB” if you aren’t BOB then change BOB to your name.
First leaf needs to be able to understand you when you say your name.
Go to “speech.xml “ and add
Then save the file.
Open “leaf.lisp” in the lisp editor (save a copy first in case you have problems)
First we need an object for the person.
;;;; OBJECTS: "nothing person alex bruce gary robin obstacle wall door recharger"
This is the start of the area to add the new person.
Robin is the last person currently defined
Add a new person with the following code
;; defparameter:osla:object:person:robin
Leaf now has an object to store you in.
Now you would like Leaf to play a game with you so locate the line
This is the start of where games are configured for each person.
Gary is the last person to have a game defined.
We will set bob to play “mine sweeper”
We will also make Leaf more happy and less sad when we play.
(sapi-tts '"Would you like to play mine sweeper?")
This is the following section so scroll down to between
(make-instance 'playmusic
(sapi-tts '"Here's mission impossible.")
(make-instance 'playmusic
Add Bob to this line so it now reads
If we want Leaf to be able to like us best locate
Save and compile.
Leaf will now know who you are when you say your name.
Leaf should play "mission impossible"
Now we can add our picture so Leaf knows what we look like.
First make sure leaf is working and can see the camera.
Ask leaf “leaf who am I” leaf should respond with “you look like XXX ” where XXX could be
Gary, Alex, Ana, or Bruce.
If Leaf responds with “I can’t see you” try moving so you are directly looking at the camera, as this appears to indicate that OpenCV could not locate a face in the image.
For me it works fine from about 18” through to 3 feet on a cheap web cam.
Once you have had leaf respond with “you look like XXX” you are ready to make Leaf recognise you.
Open the folder “C:\program files\leaf\leaffaces” in there you will find a file “image.jpg”.
Note this image does not have a number at the end.
Open this file in an image viewer and check it looks something like you. It doesn’t need to be very good.
Rename this file to “image4.jpg” (assuming you already have images 0 to 3 which are Gary, Alex, Ana, & Bruce).
Open the file “names.txt” in the same directory and add your name to the end of the list. Use capital letters and a space between BRUCE and your name. Save the file.
Open the file “distances.txt” in the same directory and add the following
“Euclidean distance to image 4:
Note that there is a line between the last entry ant this new text and a blank line at the end.
Save this file.
Now when you ask Leaf “Leaf who am I?” Leaf should respond with your name.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Computer, is a modernized intelligent electronic equipment, which can according to a preset program, automatically and speedily carries out a lot of numerical calculation and various information processing. It is composed of hardware and software, and cannot be separated.
THE ORIGINAL COVENANT - A KINGDOM OF PRIESTS
The original covenant at Sinai in Exodus 19, continued the Patriarchal pattern of every man being a priest over his own household. It was under this priesthood which had functioned from Adam down to Noah and finally to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, that was still current when the nation of Israel was in Egypt, although it had been dysfunctional due to the oppression of the taskmasters of Egypt.
The first instruction once they come out of Egypt was for the firstborn of all males to be consecrated to function again in their service. (Exodus 13:1-2, 12) Then He says to them once they arrive at Sinai,
"Now therefore, if you will indeed obey My voice and keep My covenant, then you shall be a special treasure unto Me above all people; for all the earth is Mine. And you shall be to Me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation." (Exodus 19:5-6)
But Israel defaulted on this covenant at the incident of the golden calf (Exodus 32) and so the Levitical system was introduced of one tribe, who was accounted worthy through their faithfulness, to do the priestly service for the whole nation. (Exodus 32:28, Numbers 3:5-14). They would no longer be a kingdom of priests, but a nation served by one of their tribes doing the priestly service. The nation as a whole lost its status and the original purpose of Yahweh God was deferred until One came who had the power to bring the covenant into effect.
When Peter expounds on the priesthood of the new covenant, he refers back to the original covenant in Exodus 19:4-6 of them becoming a kingdom of priests. This covenant which was made with Israel before the incident of their sin with Golden Calf that broke the covenant, became effective in the new covenant (1 Peter 2:4-10).
Through the sacrifice of Yeshua the Messiah and His High Priestly service, He has made the covenant effectual so that now they are as Peter says, "His own special people", a "royal priesthood, a holy nation" (1 Peter 2:9). To have a "kingdom of priests" was, and is, His eternal purpose (Ephesians 3:11).
Into this now "chosen", "holy" nation, the Gentiles have been grafted in to become part of Israel. What was once a wild branch, has been grafted into the Olive tree, which is Israel (Romans 11:13-24). The kingdom now is comprised of Jew and Gentile which becomes one "new man" in Him, no longer Jew and Gentile but all part of the greater Israel of God. (Romans 11:11, 16-18 - Jews broken off - wild grafted in)
Replacement theology is the doctrine that the Church has replaced Israel. This presumes that the Jews have been forsaken because they did not embrace their Messiah as a nation when He came, and have therefore been cast away. But, their 'casting away' is a temporary "blindness" to admit the "Gentiles" to be grafted in that the Gentile believers might by their example, provoke the Jews to jealousy as they behold the spiritual riches they have inherited. This is all part of God's wisdom that the Gentiles/nations might be included in His purposes and that all might be saved eventually. Paul warns against the believers in the nations becoming proud and assuming that the Jews have been permanently cast away, rather than realising that it is all the providence of God and His mercy that they are included. (Romans 11:11-15, 25-33).
What Paul is actually saying, is that the restoration of all things for the completion of Yahweh God's purposes, is dependant upon the natural branches being grafted back into the olive tree again to bring it forth into the fullness of resurrection life. Believers in the nations are not a separate from Israel.
Paul taught that in the new covenant, although they are still identified separately, there is no longer Jew/Gentile as being different before God, BUT one new man - the new order of 'man' (Galatians 3:28; Coloss.3:11).
The Gentile "Church" has not become a new entity BUT, according to Paul, they are - "fellow-heirs, of the same Body, and partakers of the same promise" (Ephesians 3:6)
Paul takes the non-Jewish believers back to Abraham to establish the foundation of their faith in Yeshua and the promises, saying, "Now to Abraham and to his Seed were the promises made." (Galatians 3:16)
Abraham is the father-figure who walked by faith with Yahweh God in the principles of His Law before the formal giving of the Law at Sinai. Abraham was chosen for this role-model because he was faithful to walk in all the principles of God's laws, precepts and commandments etc., and not apart from them (Genesis 26:4-5).
The new covenant believer is called to walk in this same faith relationship as their spiritual father who was also called out of the idolatry of the 'world' of his day, and to function under the Melchizedek priesthood.
Abraham needed to offer animal sacrifices because Yeshua had not yet come, but when He did, He was the perfect sacrifice for sin, slain once for all. Through His sacrifice, the daily sacrifices for sin became obsolete, both in the previous Patriarchal order and in the Levitical priesthood. Therein, all the ceremonial rites for the priesthood and all the laws regarding the animal sacrifices came to an end.
Those laws became obsolete, but the eternal Law of God remained the same. The Law is, after all, the standard of God's righteous nature in which man was created before he fell into sin. Yeshua said that He did not come to do away with the Law of God although He did fulfill it through His life and His sacrifice for sin (Matthew 5:17). He fulfilled the prophecies regarding Himself as the Saviour of Israel , to be that "lamb led to the slaughter" that bore the iniquity of His people (Isaiah 53:4-8; Acts 3:18), so that they would be freed from judgment.
The animal sacrificial laws were given because of man's transgression, as a ceremonial rite to impress upon the sinner the consequences of his sin and to be a means whereby he could express his faith in the promised Messiah, which they represented. All of the sacrifices pointed toward His redemption of the Adamic race.
All ceremonies and laws which were added to instruct the nation in righteousness are separate from and in addition to the eternal Law of God. In the progressive plan of man's redemption, changes have been made in the terms of the covenants which He has made with His people, but His eternal Law is unchanging. God's standards of holiness and righteousness are according to His own nature and cannot change.
Paul makes such a strong case against circumcision, in taking the believers back to Abraham before the 'law', that it would appear as if he is negating the Law of God. But this is not the case, as can be seen by comparing what he is saying with other scriptures. He was dealing with a contemporary problem caused by the Judaisers who wanted to bring the new converts under the old covenant procedures in circumcision. See Acts 15.
See what Paul himself says, that the only way that we can know what sin is, was by the law.
"Therefore the law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just, and good. " (Romans 7:12)
"What shall we say then? Is the law sin? Certainly not! I would not have known sin, except through the law: for I had not known covetousness, except the law had said, you shall not covet". (Romans 7:7)
"Therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight; for by the law is the knowledge of sin." (Romans 3:20)
Although we are not made righteous with God by our own efforts at keeping His Law, it's holy standard gives us the yardstick with which to measure all that we do. Without it, there would be no regulation upon our behaviour, every man would be free to do what was right in his own eyes (2 Timothy 3:16).
The other function of the Law is to bring judgment, because the penalty for sin is death (Romans 6:23). Because the law brings about wrath: for where no law is, there is no transgression. (Romans 4:15)
Because the Law exposes what sin is, it also is the means whereby judgment can be justly executed.
"But we know that the Law is good if one use it lawfully, knowing this: that the law is not made for a righteous person, but for the lawless and insubordinate, for the ungodly and sinners, for the unholy and profane, for murderers ... for manslayers, for fornicators ... etc., and if there is anything that is contrary to sound doctrine, according to the glorious gospel of the blessed God which was committed to my trust." (1 Timothy 1:8-11)
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
WikiBook Transparency Increases Accountability, Decreases Social Loafing (Karen Darko)
Until this week’s reading, I was completely unaware that social science research had uncovered a phenomenon called social loafing. Now that I’m aware of it, the phenomenon completely intrigues me. In retrospect I realize that I have experienced social loafing (and in all honesty, have probably been a social loafer). But I have so often heard the maxim “groups accomplish more than individuals” that I brushed aside any thoughts of loafing on my part or on the part of my teammates. However, after reading Kraut’s “Applying Social Psychological Theory to the Problems of Group Work” (Carroll, 2003), I realize how wrong my assumptions have been. As Kraut points out, one key way to mitigate social loafing for computer-supported cooperative work (CSCW) is to make team members accountable. Mitigating social loafing is critical because it erodes individual motivation, which can result in synchronization problems (Carroll, 2003). One CSCW platform that can reduce social loafing is the WikiBook.
The intrinsic structure of WikiBooks and Wikis boosts accountability, thereby decreasing social loafing. These CSCW platforms require users to log in so that their contributions are identified; original writings, edits, and modifications to other’s writings are linked back to the user who made them. This identifiability deters social loafing because individuals are accountable and behavior is linked to them (Carroll, 2003). By building accountability mechanisms into CSCW platforms, designers can mitigate social loafing and help to maintain individual motivation.
Carroll, J. M. (2003). HCI Models, Theories, and Frameworks. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
A compiler is a computer program that implements a programming language specification to "translate" programs, usually as a set of files which constitute the source code written in source language, into their equivalent machine readable instructions (the target language, often having a binary form known as object code). This translation process is called compilation. We compile the source program to create the compiled program. The compiled program can then be run (or executed) to do what was specified in the original source program.
The source language is always a higher-level language in comparison to machine code, written using some mixture of English words and mathematical notation, assembly language being the lowest compilable language (an assembler being a special case of a compiler that translates assembly language into machine code). Higher-level languages are the most complex to support in a compiler/interpreter, not only because they increase the level of abstraction between the source code and the resulting machine code, but because increased complexity is required to formalize those abstract structures.
The target language is normally a low-level language such as assembly, written with somewhat cryptic abbreviations for machine instructions, in these cases it will also run an assembler to generate the final machine code. But some compilers can directly generate machine code for some actual or virtual computer e.g. byte-code for the Java Virtual Machine.
Another common approach to the resulting compilation effort is to target a virtual machine. That will do just-in-time compilation and byte-code interpretation and blur the traditional categorizations of compilers and interpreters.
For example, C and C++ will generally be compiled for a target `architecture'. The draw-back is that because there are many types of processor there will need to be as many distinct compilations. In contrast Java will target a Java Virtual Machine, which is an independent layer above the 'architecture'. The difference is that the generated byte-code, not true machine code, brings the possibility of portability, but will need a Java Virtual Machine (the byte-code interpreter) for each platform. The extra overhead of this byte-code interpreter means slower execution speed.
An interpreter is a computer program which executes the translation of the source program at run-time. It will not generate independent executable programs nor object libraries ready to be included in other programs.
A program which does a lot of calculation or internal data manipulation will generally run faster in compiled form than when interpreted. But a program which does a lot of input/output and very little calculation or data manipulation may well run at about the same speed in either case.
Being themselves computer programs, both compilers and interpreters must be written in some implementation language. Up until the early 1970's, most compilers were written in assembly language for some particular type of computer. The advent of C and Pascal compilers, each written in their own source language, led to the more general use of high-level languages for writing compilers. Today, operating systems will provide at least a free C compiler to the user and some will even include it as part of the OS distribution.
Compiler construction is normally considered as an advanced rather than a novice programming task, mainly due to the quantity of code needed (and the difficulties of grokking this amount of code) rather than the difficulty of any particular coding constructs. To this most books about compilers have some blame. The large gap between production compilers and educational exercises promotes this defeatist view.
For the first version of a compiler written in its own source language you have a bootstrapping problem. Once you get a simple version working, you can then use it to improve itself.
A compiler is a non-trivial computer program; when written completely by hand a non-optimizing compiler for a simple source language is likely to be upwards of 3000 lines long. Some compiler-writing tools are available which can reduce this size, but will add the corresponding dependencies.
At the highest level, compilation is broken into a number of parts:
You should read most of this chapter, since the rest of the book will assume it as background information.
Any compiler has some essential requirements, which are perhaps more stringent than for most programs:
Any valid program must be translated correctly, i.e. no incorrect translation is allowed.
Any invalid program must be rejected and not translated.
There will inevitably be some valid programs which can't be translated due to their size or complexity in relation to the hardware available, for example problems due to memory size. The compiler may also have some fixed-size tables which place limits on what can be compiled (some language definitions place explicit lower bounds on the sizes of certain tables, to ensure that programs of reasonable size/complexity can be compiled).
There are also some desirable requirements, some of which may be mutually exclusive:
Errors should be reported in terms of the source language or program.
The position at which an error was detected should be indicated; if the actual error probably occurred somewhat earlier then some indication of possible cause(s) should also be provided.
Compilation should be fast.
The translated program should be fast.
The translated program should be small.
If the source language has some national or international standard:
Ideally the entire standard should be implemented.
Any restrictions or limits should be well and clearly documented.
If extensions to the standard have been implemented:
These extensions should be documented as such.
There should be some way of turning these extensions off.
There are also some possibly controversial requirements to consider (see chapter on dealing with errors):
Errors detected when the translated program is running should still be reported in relation to the original source program e.g. line number.
Errors detected when the translated program is running should include division by 0, running out of memory, use of an array subscript/index which is too big or too small, attempted use of an undefined variable, incorrect use of pointers, etc.
For ease of exposition we will divide the compiler into a front end and a back end. These need not even be written in the same implementation language, providing they can communicate effectively via some intermediate representation.
The following list itemizes the tasks carried out by the front end and the back end. Note that the tasks are not carried out in any particular order, as outlined below, and discussed in more detail in subsequent chapters.
Almost all the source-language aspects are handled by the front end. It is possible to have different front ends for different high-level languages, and a common back end which does most of the optimization.
Almost all the machine-dependent aspects are handled by the back end. It is possible to have different back ends for different computers so that the compiler can produce code for different computers.
Mechanical ventilation is used for applications where natural ventilation is not appropriate. The most basic of mechanical ventilation systems is the extractor fan often found in domestic bathrooms and kitchens where the aim is to remove smoke/odours from the room. These fans are directly connected to a duct that exhausts through an external wall or a roof stack and are either controlled directly via a switch or wired into the lighting circuit so that they operate when the light is switched on.
Commercial and industrial systems are inevitably more complex but operate on the same principle. Commercial kitchens usually have a series of ducts and hoods that are all connected to an extract fan. The air entering the system is usually filtered to keep grease out of the fan mechanism in order to keep it working and avoid blockages.
Some buildings do not have a mechanical air extraction system but are supplied with mechanically drawn air. This is often used for large internal spaces such as offices and workshops and often combined with heating, cooling and humidification systems, so that air entering the space is the right temperature and humidity. The location of air inlets is crucial – they should not be located close to air outlets or sources of smoke or other pollution otherwise polluted air will be drawn into the system.
Air is typically distributed around the building in metal ducting, traditionally of a rectangular cross section but increasingly nowadays of a circular cross section. This design improves air flow. Ductwork should be insulated to reduce heat loss but often historically has not been. The longer and bendier the route of the ductwork is, the less effective it will be. Long runs are typically discouraged. It is important to get the pressure in the system right as if it is too high, it would cause excessive draughts and noise.
Outlets from ventilation ducts can take many forms. Ducts are often located behind suspended ceilings with downward facing outlets fitted with diffusers. Diffusers can be circular or square and direct the air flow so it covers a wide area. Older buildings sometimes have outlets in walls or under windows while occasionally vents can be found in suspended floors, although this is usually used for specialist applications such as computer server rooms. The location of outlets should be carefully planned to ensure maximum benefit from the ventilation system.
In the larger ventilation systems, air is normally drawn into the building via an Air Handling Unit (AHU). This is a device that can contain fans, filters, heating and cooling coils and humidification equipment. Please see the chapter on Air Conditioning for more information on how these work.
It is important to filter air before it enters large central systems. This removes particulates and dust from the air. Commercial cooker hoods typically use carbon-activated filters as these are excellent for trapping grease. General ventilation systems typically use disposable fabric filters that consist of pleated fabric on a wire frame with a cardboard outer frame. These need to be replaced every six months or so (depending on the application). Higher specification filtering systems for specific industrial applications sometimes use oil sprays or electrostatic plates.
This article is a collection of small examples and code snippets that illustrates the use of the ZK framework. ZK is an open source project that enables rich user interfaces for Web applications.
This wiki page was started in year 2006, some of the contents may no longer apply. For latest updates and examples, please visit the following links
Thanks for your contributions.
A good starting point for seeing zk-code in action is the ZK Live Demo. The examples are visualized and editable in the demo, so you should try the demo first.
Listbox: multi-column sort and rendering of 'live' data
'Important:' the following described files have to be in UTF-8-format or special characters like German umlauts will not be displayed correctly!
In the /WEB-INF-directory create the files according to your needs, f.i. one with the standard labels (this one is selected if no matching language files could be found), i3-labels.properties:
If enclosed in curly brackets, you can also include multiline-messages...
, one for user with German locale, i3-labels_de.properties:
Wirklich dieses Item löschen (Deutsch/German)?
Durch die Eingabe innerhalb von geschwungenen Klammern sind auch mehrzeilige Meldungen möglich.
The values before the =, f.i. 2220 for Messagebox.YES can be seen in the metainfo/mesg/msgzul.properties-file if you unzip the zul.jar-file. Some examples for the messageboxes:
Next is the zul-file, where the first label is hardcoded, the second one set with an el-expression and the third is set with java-code. If you click on the button, a messagebox is shown depending on your locale.
<?taglib uri="/WEB-INF/tld/web/core.dsp.tld" prefix="c" ?>
The taglib-tag is only needed if you want to use the el-expression. If you have many labels, you can also do the following within zscript (for shortening the getLabel-command):
Every component has a redraw-method, so to refresh its appearance try the following.
The Developer's guide of course ;-) and other resources on the documentation-page, including the zk-forums.
In the Small Talks on zkoss you can find many examples regarding zul, hibernate, spring framework and many others with source code included.
An article on developer.com shows an example of a student enrollment. Source code is available. It includes a tree, a listbox, tabs and shows f.i. the drag and drop functionality.
An article on IBM shows the usage of the included jgraph with zk.
Another article on IBM shows how to upload images to a database.
If you visit this page, you are probably not aware of Wikibooks' naming policy. Every single book page has to contain the full name of the book it belongs to.
Create the reference for your book on page: Your Book Name/Reference.
Thank you.
MINC is a software system for storing and manipulating medical images,
Imaging Centre. The name MINC is an acronym for Medical Imaging
NetCDF. MINC was conceived as a means to allow researchers to use a
Like most other medical imaging data formats, MINC allows medical
MINC is inherently N-dimensional. MINC data can be structured with any number of spatial, temporal, or other dimensions, and these dimensions may be organised an arbitrary order. Actually, NetCDF limits data to at most 100 dimensions, but this has not proven to be a meaningful restriction.
MINC is extensible. MINC file may contain an arbitrary collection of supporting attributes and data. If your study requires that you keep track of a patient's blood pressure or psychiatric history, this information can be added to the header of your MINC files without having to concern yourself with
MINC is self-describing. Most of the attributes and variables used in MINC have descriptive names and values which can be easily interpreted by a user.
MINC permits scaling of voxel data on either a per-image or per-slice basis.
MINC defines both a voxel and a world coordinate system. A MINC file effectively stores a linear transform which defines the relationship between the logical layout of the voxels in the file and some reference physical coordinate system. The physical coordinate system could be the scanner's native coordinates, or it could be a more universal coordinate space such as the Talairach system.
Like many specialised computing terms, the term 'MINC' has been used in
The 'core' MINC system can be considered to include the following:
The 'libminc' programming interface, which allows programmers full access to the format.
The 'volume_io' programming interface, which provides a simplified but restricted programming interface to the MINC format.
A set of tools written using these libraries.
In addition to the core MINC tools, a large set of additional application programs exist which perform more sophisticated operations
MINC 2 has been designed to address a few specific problems that had been identified in MINC 1.
Limited file size. The NetCDF file format used 32-bit pointers to address objects within the file. This effectively restricted files to a maximum size of 2 gigabytes. With the advent of very high resolution brain atlas data (from macrotome or other sources) and large fMRI datasets, it became clear that this restriction might become a serious problem.
Restricted data types. The NetCDF format defines a small fixed set of data types - integers, floating point, and ASCII strings. Neither aggregate data (arrays or structures) nor labeled (enumerated) data are supported as fundamental data types in NetCDF.
Limited storage options. NetCDF files store data in a contiguous array. This inhibits the addition of either block addressible data or internal data compression to the NetCDF format.
Since most of these problems were inherent in the MINC 1 file format, it was clear that the design of MINC 2 would require a major revision of the file format. The team developing MINC 2 chose to replace NetCDF with the HDF5 library to form the basis of the MINC 2 format. HDF5 provides a number of advanced features which are not available in NetCDF.
For each dimension, the world coordinate conversion is specified
MINC files are allowed to have non-orthogonal axes with the dimensions
Assuming that xspace dimension is in line with world x axis, i.e. direction_cosine = (1,0,0), the magnitude of the step attribute specifies the distance between voxels and the sign of the step attribute specifies the orientation of the axis.Otherwise, the direction_cosines determine the orientation of the data with
The MINC 2.0 File Format by Robert D. Vincent.
The core tools included with the basic MINC software distribution
Second, they are implemented as UNIX 'command line' tools, with no
MINC tool is always one or more new MINC files, if appropriate.
The MINC tools use a large and sometimes bewildering set of command line
Most options are introduced with a single 'dash' character.
Many of these command line options have default values, so if you
-version - This option will cause the tool to print its version number and exit. No other action will be taken.
-help - This option asks the tool to print a summary of all of the options that it recognizes, with brief descriptions of each option.
-noclobber and -clobber - These options control whether or not a MINC tool will overwrite an existing output file. Normal behaviour of all MINC tools is to refuse to replace an existing file.
For example, if you already have a file named 'test.mnc' in the same directory as 'input.mnc', and you type the following:
The program would refuse to run, because doing so would destroy the existing test.mnc file. If you specify the -clobber option, the program would replace the existing file with the new output file.
-quiet and -verbose - Specifying '-verbose' will cause the program to print a more extensive list of intermediate actions and calculations, which may be useful for debugging. Specifying '-quiet' will suppress most of these messages.
-2 - This option tells the program to produce a MINC 2 format output file.
Converting between MINC 1 and MINC 2 format
The new tool 'mincconvert' has been created for conversion between MINC 1 and MINC 2 format. To convert a MINC 1 file to a MINC 2 file you would use mincconvert like this:
To convert from a MINC 2 back to MINC 1 format, omit the '-2' option:
For conversion to MINC 2 from other formats such as Analyze or DICOM,
Each of the core MINC tools now automatically detects MINC 1 or MINC 2 files as input files and will work correctly in either case.
Additionally, each of the core MINC tools which can generate a MINC file as output now accepts the '-2' option to indicate that output in MINC 2 format is desired.
MNI Register - A visualization program which supports image registration via tagging of homologous points on two displayed images.
MNI Display - A complex visualization program which supports display of both voxel and 3D surface image data.
N3 - Nonparametric Nonuniform intensity Normalization provides a method for automatically correcting smooth variations of MRI image intensity resulting from RF field nonuniformity, eddy currents, and/or patient anatomy.
Other tools available but still under development
You can get additional information about each of the core MINC tools from
For a more abbreviated list of the tool's options, use the -help
Programmers may use the MINC 2 library to create new programs that manipulate
MINC files. This library has been designed and written for use with the 'C'
It is beyond the scope of this document to provide a complete
The MINC 2 library can be included in any C or C++ program by including
It is necessary to explicitly link with both the HDF5 and the NetCDF
Most MINC 2 library functions return a signed integer value that
A MINC 2 volume may be opened with the function call:
The path argument gives the absolute or relative pathname of the
The mode argument controls whether the file is opened for read
The file 'handle', which must be used in subsequent operations on the file, is returned in the hvol argument.
Once your program is finished using the file, it should close the file and release the file handle by calling:
Additional scaling or other conversions may apply in some instances,
MI_TYPE_BYTE - 8-bit signed integer.
MI_TYPE_SHORT - 16-bit signed integer.
MI_TYPE_INT - 32-bit signed integer.
MI_TYPE_FLOAT - 32-bit floating point.
MI_TYPE_DOUBLE - 64-bit floating point.
MI_TYPE_STRING - ASCII string.
MI_TYPE_UBYTE - 8-bit unsigned integer.
MI_TYPE_USHORT - 16-bit unsigned integer.
MI_TYPE_UINT - 32-bit unsigned integer.
MI_TYPE_SCOMPLEX - 16-bit signed integer complex
MI_TYPE_ICOMPLEX - 32-bit signed integer complex
MI_TYPE_FCOMPLEX - 32-bit floating point complex
MI_TYPE_DCOMPLEX - 64-bit floating point complex
MI_TYPE_UNKNOWN - Used for record or array types.
The class of a volume describes how the voxel data should be interpreted.
The most typical case is of a volume which has integer type, but the class
MI_CLASS_REAL - Floating point. The data are to be interpreted as floating point values regardless of the storage type. May be used with any integer or floating point type.
MI_CLASS_INT - Integer. The data are to be interpreted as integer values. May be used with any integer type.
MI_CLASS_LABEL - Labeled or enumerated data. The values of the voxels are assumed to be taken from a discrete set. These values may be assigned a sybolic name to clarify the interpretation of the data. May be used with any integer type.
MI_CLASS_COMPLEX - Complex data with real and imaginary values. May be used with one of the complex types (integer or floating point) only.
MI_CLASS_UNIFORM_RECORD - A uniform record structure, essentially an array with named entries.
MI_CLASS_NON_UNIFORM_RECORD - A non uniform record structure. This is not yet implemented.
A dimension is simply an axis or index along which the data is stored.
Typical scans might be two dimensional or three dimensional, while functional
Each dimension of a MINC image volume/file is specified by its name. MINC2 defines
(time dimension) and finally vector-dimension (refer to section 1.2).
It is important to note that in MINC 2 there are certain default interpretations and properties
Each dimension has a class that specifies its overall interpretation: spatial,
The following shows the list of dimension classes which are defined in minc 2.
The above definition also creates a more flexible naming convention where any name
Apart from name and class, MINC 2 has a number of other attributes defined for
The description attribute is used to specify human-readable text which provides
The description attribute is set to default text only for the named dimensions
The unit attribute, also a human-readable text, that defines unit of the distance
The spacing dimension attribute is a human-readable text which defines whether
(i.e., regular versus irregualr) in space from each other. The spacing attribute
The start attribute is a number which specifies the position of the first
This attribute is set to zero by default.
The step attribute is a positive number indicating the size of the interval
An irregularly sampled dimension must define a list of interval values defined for each
The length attribute is a number defining the total number of sampled data
The direction_cosines attribute are a set of three vectors associated with
x, y, or z coordinates. For a complete list of dimension attributes refer to
MINC2.0 PI at http://www.bic.mni.mcgill.ca/software/minc2/api_doc/minc_20.html
MINC 2 files can define any number of dimensions. In MINC 2 library, a dimension
Only four essential properties must be specified prior to creating a new dimension.
Other properties will be set to default values which can be
Accessing or modifying any of the dimension properties is done by using
Finally, to release the memory associated with a dimension,
Note that calling mifree_dimension_handle() on a
Since MINC files may organize data arbitrarily, the MINC 2.0
The programmer may set an 'apparent' dimension order for a given
Transforming the dimensions of a block of data causes the block to be
If the apparent dimension order happens to match the volume's file
For each dimension, a programmer may also specify an apparent
Native file order - The dimension's direction is exactly as it appears in the file.
Counter file order - The dimension's direction is opposite the file order.
Positive order - The dimension's direction in world coordinates is guaranteed to be positive along increasing voxel coordinates. This mode inverts the dimension only if the step size is negative.
Negative order - The dimension's direction in world coordinates is guaranteed to be negative along increasing voxel coordinates. This mode inverts the dimension only if the step size is positive.
Attributes are small datasets, text or numeric, which are used to describe extra information about
Attributes such as history and title contain information about the entire MINC file and are attached to 'minc-2.0' group itself. Other attributes such as vartype and version contain NO information about the image
The MINC 2 library defines a set of functions for manipulating attributes. To set an attribute's value and
The attribute's value is retrieved using the following,
Several functions are provided for reading and writing data in a MINC
Functions can be divided into four broad classes, according to two
First, some functions operate on single voxels, and others operate on
a 'hyperslab' of data, which may be of any size and dimensionality up to the
Second, some functions read or write 'raw' or 'voxel' data, while others
All hyperslab operations require the programmer to specify the origin
Logically, none of the values of the count[] array should ever be
Another constraint is that the start value plus the count value
Each of the voxel read/write functions assumes that the coordinates
By way of an contrived example, suppose you have a four-dimensional
X, T, Z, and Y.
We use miset_apparent_dimension_order_by_name to assign a
Alternatively, we might just want to read the data from one time location
Another possibility would be to read the entire timecourse of a specific
Conversion from real to voxel data, or from voxel to real data, can
Where R(c) is the real value of the image at coordinate location c, and
V(c) is the voxel value of the image at the same coordinate. The
For more information on these scaling values, see the functions:
Single voxel, voxel data functions
These two functions read or write a single voxel, at coordinates given
If the actual storage type cannot represent the value passed to the
Single voxel, real data functions
These two functions read and write single voxels, while performing the data
Hyperslab, voxel data functions
These two functions read and write a hyperslab of data from the file,
Hyperslab, real data functions
After all the required dimension handles are defined/assigned with their appropriate
To Create the actual image for the file, after the file template is created use the following
MI_DIMATTR_REGULARLY_SAMPLED,
MI_TYPE_UINT, MI_CLASS_REAL,
Advanced features of the MINC 2 library
Blocking, also known as chunking, refers to an alternative method of
, a the correct storage index of any
This storage method has the virtue of simplicity, and also
For example, if a file has the overall dimensionality of
, then the file's data will be grouped into 1000 blocks
a block, the storage layout is the same as for the contiguous case described
To complicate matters, the file may contain some sort of translation
a strictly-ordered storage arrangement, it becomes possible for individual
John G. Sled, Robert D. Vincent, Leila Baghdadi
This page discusses XSLTForms' coverage of the XForms 1.1 specification, and mentions some other restrictions that may not be obvious to new users.
(In its current state the page is not at all complete or systematic, but a list of things that have caught the eye of some user or other, who has listed them here. Please help make the list more complete and more useful to new users of XSLTForms, by recording here any limitations you encounter and ways to work around them.)
XSLTForms implements most of XForms 1.1 but is not a fully conformant processor, for two reasons:
Some restrictions are imposed on XSLTForms by client-side limitations in Web browsers.
Lack of time has led to the omission of some "minor" features in favor of extension functionality with higher priority for users (e.g. rich-text editors).
The sections below identify particular points on which XSLTForms may differ from the specification or from other implementations of XForms 1.1. The sections correspond to the organization of the XForms 1.1 spec and test suite; some headings have been changed for clarity. Unless otherwise specified, the version described is 1.0RC2 (2014). Some gaps may have been filled, and some limitations removed, in later versions. (This has been noted in some cases, but the absence of a note does not mean there has been no change.)
A fuller sense of current gaps in coverage can be obtained by looking at the XForms 1.1 test suite results for XSLTForms. (Warning: that page is updated only infrequently and is not necessarily current.)
Differences between XForms 1.0 and XForms 1.1
XML comments in instance are supported but they should not contain any greater-than signs (>).
The XForms spec allows the xf:instance to be omitted entirely from the model; a very simple flat XML structure is then assumed. XSLTForms requires an explicit instance.
[This was true in 2010; is it still true, or has the 'simple XForm' structure been implemented? Tests needed. Note that XSLTForms 1.0RC2 passes test 3.3.2.a.]
XSLTForms can load at most one external schema document per namespace; attempts to load multiple schema documents for the same namespace will raise an XForms link exception.
XSLTForms does not implement support for the navindex or accesskey attributes.
In XSLTForms, event handling sometimes deviates from the letter of the spec. Cases include the following.
Some tests written to trigger an xf:message action when particular events occur do not in fact display a message. The events in question include: xforms-help and xforms-hint; in-range, out-of-range; scroll-first, scroll-last, xforms-binding-exception; xforms-enabled, xforms-disabled. (It is not clear from the test results whether this is a problem is a failure to raise the expected events or a failure of the xsl:message action to respond to them as expected.)
N.B. in version r638, some of these tests produce the expected results, including tests for: scroll-first, scroll-last, xforms-binding-exception.
In some tests, XSLTForms does not raise the expected exception but a different one.
In some tests, errors in the form which should raise exceptions (e.g. xforms-compute-error or xforms-binding-error) raise none. (In later testing with version r638, XSLTForms passes these tests.)
Some exceptions should be fatal errors but are not, in XSLTForms.
In some cases, the browser freezes instead of XSLTForms raising the expected exception or a fatal error.
Some events are signaled even when incremental="false" entails that they should not be, or when they are unnecessary because a value has not changed.
The built-in datatypes gYear, gYearMonth, date, and dateTime support only four-digit years beginning with the digit 1 or 2, so dates like (for example) 0800-12-25 (Christmas Day, AD 800, Charlemagne crowned emperor) are not accepted.
gYear, date, etc. do not accept time-zone information, so a date like 2010-08-01 (1 August 2010) is accepted as valid, but not 2010-08-01Z (the 24-hour period beginning at 00:00 on 1 August 2010 in UTC) or 2010-08-01-04:00 (the 24-hour period beginning at 00:00 on 1 August 2010 in Eastern Daylight Time).
The XForms spec says that "It is an error to attempt to set a model item property twice on the same node"; this can be read as allowing different model item properties to be set on a node from different bind elements. XSLTForms raises an error if more than one bind element affects the same node, even if they are setting different model item properties. (Workaround: set all model items properties for any node in a single bind element.)
The p3ptype property is not implemented.
XPath allows whitespace between tokens (so a/b/c[@x='y'] and a /b /c [@x = 'y'] are equivalent, and the blanks in the latter form can be replaced by newlines and more whitespace); the XPath parser in XSLTForms accepts whitespace only in very restricted locations, including predicates, but not within location paths. [This limitation may have been lifted in 2016; tests needed.]
XSLTForms 1.0RC2 does not support the hmac() function, or the use of sha-256 in the digest() function. (Later versions support both).
In some cases, XSLTForms calculates the wrong context size.
No error is raised when a textarea control is bound to an element with a complex type. (Instead, the string value of the element is made available for editing in the control.)
No error is raised when the parameters of a control do not obey the data binding restrictions.
In some circumstances, XSLTForms will fail to evaluate XPath expressions correctly because it fails to recognize a namespace prefix, even though it has been correctly declared. The circumstances are:
The namespace prefix is not used on any element or attribute in the form itself. This may occur if the instance document using the namespace is external, and an XPath expression in the form refers to elements in that instance document.
The cause of this behavior is that the Mozilla XSLT engine does not support the namespace axis; this has been reported as a bug, but has not been fixed.
A simple workaround is to insert a dummy element or attribute somewhere in the XForm which uses the namespace prefix in question. It is not uncommon to place these on the first tag of the XForms document, together with namespace declarations for all prefixes to be used in the document. (Making an XForms template with a relatively complete set of namespace declarations saves a good deal of debugging time later.)
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
The local name and value of the dummy attribute are immaterial; the purpose of including the dummy attribute is to ensure that XSLTForms can create a table of namespace prefixes by traversing the ancestors of an element and noting all the namespace prefixes actually in use.
For longer examples see the wikibook XSLTForms and eXist and the discussion of user-defined functions in this wikibook.
Both start and end attributes are required, not optional, on range controls in XSLTForms. The incremental attribute does not work as expected.
On the xf:help, xf:hint, and xf:alert elements, XSLTForms does not support the ref attribute. When multiple hint or alert messages are provided, XSLTForms assigns precedence to inline messages, rather than hints in the instance pointed to by single node binding attributes.
When the xf:setfocus action is called to set the focus to a group, the focus is not set to the first control in the group; focus is cleared.
XSLTForms 1.0RC2 does not support the startindex or number attributes of the repeat element.
The output control supports the values application/xhtml+xml, image/svg+xml, and image/* for its mediatype attribute.
The content is treated as serialized (X)HTML, i.e. just text (not CDATA) from the XML point of view, to be serialized with < and > entities for tags
To be displayed with tags, an instance element has to be serialized with the XPath function serialize(node).
The upload control has historically been difficult for XSLTForms to support (the very first message to the XSLTForms support mailing list was about gaps in the support of upload. The XForms specification for the control requires more functionality than the AJAX libraries used by XSLTForms readily provide.
[Some discussion of using xf:upload, what does work out of the box and what doesn't, needed here or in separate page.]
A modified version of XSLTForms that supports the "form-data-post" submission method is available (February 2017) at
The attributes repeat-model repeat-bind, repeat-nodeset, repeat-startindex, and repeat-number do not behave as expected.
The xf:copy element does not behave as expected.
Events do not always behave as specified (see Processing Model, above).
Several attributes of the xf:submission element are not supported: indent, encoding, standalone, cdata-section-elements, invalid, separator.
A number of features of the XForms submission module cannot be supported owing to cross-domain restrictions in the browser.
The CSS pseudo-classes enabled and disabled are supported; other pseudo-classes (required, optional; valid, invalid; read-only, read-write; out-of-range, in-range) are not supported.
The CSS pseudo-elements value, repeat-item, repeat-index are not supported.
See also the chapter on XSLTForms and CSS.
XSLTForms does not support SVG as the host document language.
Computing » Computer Science » Computer Programming » Ada Programming
Full declaration of a type can be deferred to the unit's body
Often, you'll want to make changes to the internals of a private type. This, in turn, will require the algorithms that act on it to be modified. If the type is completed in the unit specification, it is a pain to edit and recompile both files, even with an IDE, but it's something some programmers learn to live with.
It turns out you don't have to. Nonchalantly mentioned in the ARM, and generally skipped over in tutorials, is the fact that private types can be completed in the unit's body itself, making them much closer to the relevant code, and saving a recompile of the specification, as well as every unit depending on it. This may seem like a small thing, and, for small projects, it is. However, if you have one of those uncooperative types that requires dozens of tweaks, or if your dependence graph has much depth, the time and annoyance saved add up quickly.
Also, this construction is very useful when coding a shared library, because it permits to change the implementation of the type while still providing a compatible ABI.
The type in the public part is an access to the hidden type. This has the drawback that memory management has to be provided by the package implementation. That is the reason why Private_Type is a limited type, the client will not be allowed to copy the access values, in order to prevent dangling references.
Normally, the full type definition has to be given in the specification because the compiler has to know how much place to allocate to objects in order to produce code using this type. And the astute reader will note that also in this case the full type definition is given for Private_Type: it is an access to some other (albeit incomplete) type, and the size of an access value is known. This is why the full type definition of Body_Type can be moved to the body.
The construction centering around Private_Type is sometimes called an opaque pointer.
Suppose you've decided to roll your own set type. You can add things to it, remove things from it, and you want to let a user apply some arbitrary function to all of its members. But the scoping rules seem to conspire against you, forcing nearly everything to be global.
The mental stumbling block is that most examples given of generics are packages, and the Set package is already generic. In this case, the solution is to make the Apply_To_All procedure generic as well; that is, to nest the generics. Generic procedures inside packages exist in a strange scoping limbo, where anything in scope at the instantiation can be used by the instantiation, and anything normally in scope at the formal can be accessed by the formal. The end result is that the relevant scoping roadblocks no longer apply. It isn't the full lambda calculus, just one of the most useful parts.
Different compilers can diagnose different things differently, or the same thing using different messages, etc..
Having two compilers at hand can be useful.
When a source program contains a construct such as Foo.Bar, you may see messages saying something like «selected component "Bar"» or maybe like «selected component "Foo"». The phrases may seem confusing, because one refers to Foo, while the other refers to Bar. But they are both right. The reason is that selected_component is an item from Ada's grammar (4.1.3 Selected Components (Annotated)). It denotes all of: a prefix, a dot, and a selector_name. In the Foo.Bar example these correspond to Foo, '.', and Bar. Look for more grammar words in the compiler messages, e.g. «prefix», and associate them with identifiers quoted in the messages.
For example, if you submit the following code to the compiler,
All integer literals and also some attributes like 'Length are of the anonymous type universal_integer, which comprises the infinite set of mathematical integers. Named numbers are of this type and are evaluated exactly (no overflow except for machine storage limitations), e.g.
Since universal_integer has no operators, its values are converted in this example to root_integer, another anonymous type, the calcuation is performed and the result again converted back in universal_integer.
Generally values of universal_integer are implicitly converted to the appropriate type when used in some expression. So the expression not A'Length is fine; the value of A'Length is interpreted as a modular integer since not can only be applied to modular integers (of course a context is needed to decide which modular integer type is meant). This feature can lead to pitfalls. Consider
The second conditional cannot be compiled because the expressions to the left of in is incompatible to the type at the right. Note that not has precedence over in. It does not negate the entire membership test but only A'Length.
The fourth conditional fails in various ways.
The sixth conditional might be fine because not turns A'Length into a modular value which is OK if the value is covered by modular type Mod_6.
A way to avoid these problems is to use not in for the membership test (which, btw., is the language-intended form),
A canonical method of reading a sequence of lines from a text file uses the standard procedure Ada.Text_IO.Get_Line.
When the end of input is reached, Get_Line will fail, and exception End_Error is raised. Some programs will use another function
A working solution uses an exception handler instead:
Text_IO.Get_Line(The_Line, Last);
-- do something with The_Line ...
The function End_of_File RM A.10.1(34) works fine as long as the file follows the canonical form of text files presumed by Ada, which is always the case when the file has been written by Ada.Text_IO. This canonical form requires an End_of_Line marker followed by an End_of_Page marker at the very end before the End_of_File.
If the file was produced by another any other means, it will generally not have this canonical form, so a test for End_of_File will fail. That's why the exception End_Error has to be used in those cases (which always works).
Using GNAT on Windows, calls to subprograms from Ada.Real_Time might need special attention. (For example, the Real_Time.Clock function might seem to return values indicating that no time has passed between two invocations when certainly some time has passed.) The cause is reported to be a missing initialization of the run-time support when no other real-time features are present in the program.[2] As a provisional fix, it is suggested to insert
With some implementations, notably GNAT, knowledge of stack size manipulation will be to your advantage. Executables produced with GNAT tools and standard settings can hit the stack size limit. If so, the operating system might allow setting higher limits. Using GNU/Linux and the Bash command shell, try
The current value is printed when only -s is given to ulimit.
↑ Functional Programming in...Ada?, by Chris Okasaki
↑ Vincent Celier (2010-03-08). "Timing code blocks". comp.lang.ada. (Web link). Retrieved on 2010-03-11. "The problem is now understood and corrected in the development version of GNAT." Usenet article forwards this information from AdaCore.
Aramaic is an ancient Semitic language and once a lingua franca of the Eastern Mediterranean. It was also the language of Jesus. This wikibook presents the necessary components to learning Aramaic.
This book is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Nothing much here yet.
The stated purpose of Freeciv (at one point) was to create a working clone of Civ II for the UNIX/Linux platform. It seems to have worked, and has been ported several times.
You could visit the manuals and HOWTOs at the Freeciv website.
This book was created on December 7th, 2007 for the purpose of keeping the Wikipedia article on VINs under control. It will start off as a consolidation of all VIN-related code tables that were included on Wikipedia.
The final state of this book will most probably consist of the full explanation of VIN-obtainable information, and how to decode said VINs.
The term "Vehicle Identification Number" or "VIN", as used throughout this book means Vehicle Identification Numbers from 1980 onwards.
There are three well known Haskell systems: Hugs, GHC and NHC. Hugs is exclusively an interpreter, meaning that you cannot compile stand-alone programs with it, but can test and debug programs in an interactive environment. GHC is both an interpreter (like Hugs) and a compiler which will produce stand-alone programs. NHC is exclusively a compiler. Which you use is entirely up to you. I've tried to make a list of some of the differences in the following list but of course this is far from exhaustive:
Hugs - very fast to load files, slow to run them; implements almost all of Haskell 98 (the standard) and most extensions; built-in support for module browsing; cannot create stand-alones; written in C; works on almost every platform; built-in graphics library.
GHC - interactive environment is slower than Hugs to load, but allows function definitions in the environment (in Hugs you have to put them in a file); implements all of Haskell 98 and extensions; good support for interfacing with other languages; in a sense the "de facto" standard. It also allows compiled objects to be loaded and tested.
NHC - less used and no interactive environment, but produces smaller and often faster executables than does GHC; supports Haskell98 and some extensions.
I, personally, have all of them installed and use them for different purposes. I tend to use GHC to compile (primarily because I'm most familiar with it) and the Hugs interactive environment, since it is much faster. As such, this is what I would suggest. However, that is a fair amount to download and install, so if you had to go with just one, I'd get GHC, since it contains both a compiler and interactive environment.
Following is a description of how to download and install each of these as of the time this tutorial was written. It may have changed -- see the Haskell website for up-to-date information.
Hugs supports almost all of the Haskell 98 standard (it lacks some of the libraries), as well as a number of advanced/experimental extensions, including: multi-parameter type classes, extensible records, rank-2 polymorphism, existentials, scoped type variables, and restricted type synonyms.
The official Hugs web page is at [1].
If you go there, there is a link titled "downloading" which will send you to the download page. From that page, you can download the appropriate version of Hugs for your computer.
Once you've downloaded Hugs, installation differs depending on your platform, however, installation for Hugs is more or less identical to installation for any program on your platform.
For Windows when you click on the "msi" file to download,
For RPMs use whatever RPM installation program you know best.
For source first gunzip the file, then untar it. Presumably if you're using a system which isn't otherwise supported, you know enough about your system to be able to run configure scripts and make things by hand.
On Unix machines, the Hugs interpreter is usually started with a command line of the form: hugs [option | file] ...
On Windows , Hugs may be started by selecting it from the start menu or by double clicking on a file with the .hs or .lhs extension. (This manual assumes that Hugs has already been successfully installed on your system.)
Hugs uses options to set system parameters. These options are distinguished by a leading + or - and are used to customize the behavior of the interpreter. When Hugs starts, the interpreter performs the following tasks:
Options in the environment are processed. The variable HUGSFLAGS holds these options. On Windows 95/NT, the registry is also queried for Hugs option settings.
Command line options are processed.
Internal data structures are initialized. In particular, the heap is initialized, and its size is fixed at this point; if you want to run the interpreter with a heap size other than the default, then this must be specified using options on the command line, in the environment or in the registry.
The prelude file is loaded. The interpreter will look for the prelude file on the path specified by the -P option. If the prelude, located in the file Prelude.hs, cannot be found in one of the path directories or in the current directory, then Hugs will terminate; Hugs will not run without the prelude file.
Program files specified on the command line are loaded. The effect of a command hugs f1 ... fn is the same as starting up Hugs with the hugs command and then typing :load f1 ... fn. In particular, the interpreter will not terminate if a problem occurs while it is trying to load one of the specified files, but it will abort the attempted load command.
The environment variables and command line options used by Hugs are described in the following sections.
To list all of the options would take too much space. The most important option at this point is "+98" or "-98". When you start hugs with "+98" it is in Haskell 98 mode, which turns off all extensions. When you start in "-98", you are in Hugs mode and all extensions are turned on. If you've downloaded someone else's code and you're having trouble loading it, first make sure you have the "98" flag set properly.
Further information on the Hugs options is in the manual: http://cvs.haskell.org/Hugs/pages/hugsman/started.html
To get Hugs specific help, go to the Hugs web page. To get general Haskell help, go to the Haskell web page.
The Glasgow Haskell Compiler (GHC) is a robust, fully-featured, optimizing compiler and interactive environment for Haskell 98; GHC compiles Haskell to either native code or C. It implements numerous experimental language extensions to Haskell 98; for example: concurrency, a foreign language interface, multi-parameter type classes, scoped type variables, existential and universal quantification, unboxed types, exceptions, weak pointers, and so on. GHC comes with a generational garbage collector, and a space and time profiler.
Go to the official GHC web page GHC to download the latest release. The current version as of the writing of this tutorial is 5.04.2 and can be downloaded off of the GHC download page (follow the "Download" link). From that page, you can download the appropriate version of GHC for your computer.
Once you've downloaded GHC, installation differs depending on your platform; however, installation for GHC is more or less identical to installation for any program on your platform.
For Windows when you click on the "msi" file to download, simply choose "Run This Program" and the installation will begin automatically. From there, just follow the on-screen instructions.
For RPMs use whatever RPM installation program you know best.
For source first gunzip the file, then untar it. Presumably if you're using a system which isn't otherwise supported, you know enough about your system to be able to run configure scripts and make things by hand.
For a more detailed description of the installation procedure, look at the GHC users manual under "Installing GHC".
Running the compiler is fairly easy. Assuming that you have a program written with a main function in a file called Main.hs, you can compile it simply by writing:
% ghc --make Main.hs -o main
The "--make" option tells GHC that this is a program and not just a library and you want to build it and all modules it depends on. "Main.hs" stipulates the name of the file to compile; and the "-o main" means that you want to put the output in a file called "main".
In Windows, you should say "-o main.exe" to tell Windows that this
You can then run the program by simply typing "./main" at the prompt.
GHCi is invoked with the command "ghci" or "ghc --interactive". One or more modules or filenames can also be specified on the command line; this instructs GHCi to load the specified modules or filenames (and all the modules they depend on), just as if you had said :load modules at the GHCi prompt.
To get help within the interpreter, type ":?" at the prompt. To quit, type ":q". To interrupt a running computation, press control-c.
To list all of the options would take too much space. The most important option at this point is "-fglasgow-exts". When you start GHCi without "-fglasgow-exts" it is in Haskell 98 mode, which turns off all extensions. When you start with "-fglasgow-exts", all extensions are turned on. If you've downloaded someone else's code and you're having trouble loading it, first make sure you have this flag set properly.
Further information on the GHC and GHCi options are in the manual off of the GHC web page.
To get GHC(i) specific help, go to the GHC web page. To get general Haskell help, go to the Haskell web page.
About NHC...
With a good text editor, programming is fun. Of course, you can get along with a simplistic editor capable of just cut-n-paste, but a good editor is capable of doing most of the chores for you, letting you concentrate on what you are writing. With respect to programming in Haskell, a good text editor should have as many as possible of the following features:
Interaction with Haskell interpreter (be it Hugs or GHCi)
At the time of writing, several options were available: Emacs/XEmacs support Haskell via haskell-mode and accompanying Elisp code (available from [2]), and ... . %todo: what else?
What's else available?...
(X)Emacs seem to do the best job, having all the features listed above. Indentation is aware about Haskell's 2-dimensional layout rules (see the section on Layout, very smart and have to be seen in action to be believed. You can quickly jump to the definition of chosen function with the help of "Definitions" menu, and name of the currently edited function is always displayed in the modeline. %todo: more?
The * operator is used when declaring pointer types but it is also used to get the variable pointed to by a pointer.
Pointer a pointing variable b. Note that b stores number, whereas a stores address of b in memory (1462)
Pointers are important data types due to special characteristics. They may be used to indicate a variable without actually creating a variable of that type. Because they can be a difficult concept to understand, some special effort should be spent on understanding the power they give to programmers.
Pointers have a very descriptive name. Pointers variables only store memory addresses, usually the addresses of other variables. Essentially, they point to another variable's memory location, a reserved location on the computer memory. You can use a pointer to pass the location of a variable to a function, this enables the function's pointer to use the variable space, so that it can retrieve or modify its data. You can even have pointers to pointers, and pointers to pointers to pointers and so on and so forth.
Pointers are declared by adding a * before the variable name in the declaration, as in the following example:
The adjacency of * or the use of whitespace has no influence, only that is used after a type (keyword or defined).
Due to historical reasons some programmers refer to a specific use as:
As seen before on the Coding style conventions Section adherence to a single style is preferred.
Watch out, though, because the * associates to the following declaration only:
You can also have multiple pointers chained together, as in the following example:
Everyone gets confused about pointers as assigning values to pointers may be a bit tricky, but if you know the basics, you can proceed more easily. By carefully going through the examples rather than a simple description, try to understand the points as they are presented to you.
The second statement uses "&" the reference operator and "*" to tell the compiler this is a pointer variable and assign vValue variable's address to it. In the last statement, it outputs the value from the vValue variable by de-referencing the pointer using the "*" operator.
So as mentioned early, a pointer is a variable which stores the address of another variable, as you need to initialize an array because you can not directly assign values to it. You will need to use pointers directly or a pointer to array in a mixed context, to use pointers alone, examine the next example.
Remember you can't leave the pointer alone or initialize it as nullptr cause it will case an error. The compiler thinks it is as a memory address holder variable since you didn't point to anything and will try to assign values to it, that will cause an error since it does not point to anywhere.
This is the * operator. It is used to get the variable pointed to by a pointer. It is also used when declaring pointer types.
When you have a pointer, you need some way to access the memory that it points to. When it is put in front of a pointer, it gives the variable pointed to. This is an lvalue, so you can assign values to it, or even initialize a reference from it.
Since the result of an & operator is a pointer, *&i is valid, though it has absolutely no effect.
Now, when you combine the * operator with classes, you may notice a problem. It has lower precedence than .! See the example:
The error happens because the compiler looks at p.num first ("." has higher precedence than "*") and because p does not have a member named num the compiler gives you an error. Using grouping symbols to change the precedence gets around this problem.
It would be very time-consuming to have to write (*p).num a lot, especially when you have a lot of classes. Imagine writing (*(*(*(*MyPointer).Member).SubMember).Value).WhatIWant! As a result, a special operator, ->, exists. Instead of (*p).num, you can write p->num, which is completely identical for all purposes. Now you can write MyPointer->Member->SubMember->Value->WhatIWant. It's a lot easier on the brain!
The null pointer is a special status of pointers. It means that the pointer points to absolutely nothing. It is an error to attempt to dereference (using the * or -> operators) a null pointer. A null pointer can be referred to using the constant zero, as in the following example:
Note that you can't assign a pointer to an integer, even if it's zero. It has to be the constant. The following code is an error:
There is an old macro, defined in the standard library, derived from the C language that inconsistently has evolved into #define NULL ((void *)0), this makes NULL, always equal to a null pointer value (essentially, 0).
It is considered as good practice to avoid the use of macros and defines as much as possible. In the particular case at hand the NULL isn't type-safe. Any rational to use it for visibility of the use of a pointer can be addressed by the proper naming of the pointer variable.
Since a null pointer is 0, it will always compare to 0. Like an integer, if you use it in a true/false expression, it will return false if it is the null pointer, and true if it's anything else:
This program will output that the pointer is NULL, then that it isn't NULL twice, then again that it is.
To do:Make short introduction to pointers as data members (so it can be cross linked from the function and class sections of the texts)
A working knowledge of how to initialize two dimensional arrays, assign values to arrays, and return values from arrays is necessary. In depth information about arrays can be found in section 1.4.10.1.1 Arrays. However, when relevant to the understanding of pointers, arrays will be mentioned here, as well.
How to use Pointers with Multidimensional Arrays
Assign Values to Multidimensional Pointers.
In non-Char Type you need to involve arrays with Pointers since Pointers treat char* type to in special way and other type to another way like only refer the address or get the address and get the value by indirect method.
It will probably generate an error! Because pointers used in non-Char type only directly, in char types refer the address of another variable by assigning a variable first then you can get its (that assigned variable) value indirectly!
You can use one of them to assign value to Array through the pointer to return values you can use either the appropriate Array or Pointer.
This is bit hard and even hard to remember so I suggest keep practicing until you get the spirit of Pointers only! You cannot use Pointers + Multidimensional Arrays with Char Type. Only for non-char type.
In your system memory each memory block got an address so whenever you compile the code at the beginning all variable reserve some space in
Dynamic memory allocation and pointer non-char type
This is same as assign non-char 1 dimensional Array to Pointer
The first statement's Lside(left side) declares an variable and Rside request a space for double type variable and allocate it in free space area in your memory. So next and so fourth you can see it increases the integer value that means *(pVal+0) pVal -> if this uses alone it will return the address corresponding to first memory block. (that used to store the 10) and 0 means move 0 block ahead but its 0 means do not move stay in current memory block, and you use () parenthesis because + < * < () consider the priority so you need to use parenthesis avoid to calculating the * first
Dynamic memory allocation and pointer char type
pVal = nullptr //null the pointer
You can see this is the same as static memory declaration, in static declaration it goes:
Dynamic memory allocation and pointer non-char array type
Never use a multidimensional pointer array with char type, as it will generate an error.
But both are different.
This pointer indirection operator is used to access a member of a class pointer.
Member dereferencing operator .*
This pointer-to-member dereferencing operator is used to access the variable associated with a specific class instance, given an appropriate pointer.
Member indirection operator ->*
This pointer-to-member indirection operator is used to access the variable associated with a class instance pointed to by one pointer, given another pointer-to-member that's appropriate.
Tuesday is the day after Monday.
Camera position and rotation can be controlled and monitored in the Position and Rotation panes at the top of the Side Panel. These fields accept direct input from the computer keyboard, and can also be changed through the Bottom Toolbar controls and the Navigator window.
The Navigator window is the primary tool for adjusting camera position and rotation. The Position and Rotation values in the Side Panel show the numerical results of data sent from the Navigator window's View to Main button.
The controls in the Bottom Toolbar adjust Position and Rotation, but the results can't be displayed until the Calculate 3D button is clicked and the fractal is re-rendered.
Values in the Position pane are unlike those in traditional 3D graphics. The primary coordinate system in a game engine, CAD program, animation package, etc. is global or world coordinates. The camera is an object situated within the virtual world. In Mandelbulb3D, the coordinate system is local to the camera. The visible part of the virtual world is an extension of the camera. Camera position, zoom, and clipping planes all work differently to traditional 3D graphics.
In Mandelbulb3D, the volume of space that's calculated by the distance estimation engine is the same volume of space that's visible to the camera. X Mid and Y Mid set the midpoint for distance estimation, also setting the virtual world's horizontal and vertical position in the picture frame. Changing X Mid or Y Mid chooses a different point in the world as the center of the picture plane.
Z Mid, Z Start, and Z End
The Z mid value centers the calculations in the third dimension, the distance from the camera. This also sets the distance of sharp focus for Depth of Field renderings.
The Z Start value sets the near clipping plane for the distance estimation engine. Surfaces closer than the Z start value do not render. If the Z Start value is greater than the distance to a surface, the fractal form is cropped.
The Z End value sets the far clipping plane for distance estimation. Geometry at a distance greater than Z End is not rendered.
The buttons labeled Z Mid, Z Start, and Z End render a 2D slice through the fractal shape. Click one of these buttons to render a slice at the distance of the Z midpoint, near clipping, or far clipping plane.
Z Start and Z End also determine the start and end distances for Depth Fog in the Lighting Panel's Ambient tab.
Z End can be adjusted interactively with the Navigator window keyboard shortcuts F1 and F2.
Get Midpoint allows re-centering the frame. Click the Get Midpoint button, then click the image to re-frame the shot. The location you click is moved to the center of the frame. Click Calculate3D to see the new framing.
Reset inserts pre-determined values for the Position parameters. However, these are not the same values as the Mandelbulb3D default startup conditions. The Reset button sets the Zoom to 0.8, and rotation angles to approximately zero. This produces a top-down view of the scene. See the section on Rotation below.
The Zoom value is not like the zoom or focal length on a camera, it's actually more like a dolly. The field of view or angle of view is controlled in the Camera tab. The Zoom parameter scales the picture plane at the Z Start position. This gives the visual effect of moving the camera forward or backward.
The Navigator window can change the Zoom value, automatically or manually. Zoom is a parameter separate from camera movement. And yet, the effect of Zoom is just like a camera dolly, not like field of view. Zoom and camera position combine and interact, resulting in the effective camera position. This leads to some confusion, especially because the hidden parameter Fixed Zoom And Steps is disabled by default. When it's disabled, camera movements in the Navigator cause the Zoom to adjust automatically, with unexpected results. The recommended usage is to enable Fixed Zoom And Steps, then move the camera. If the near portion of the fractal shape is clipped, dolly the camera backward and then set the Zoom parameter to a higher value.
To change the scene rotation, enter values in degrees into the X, Y, or Z fields. Click the Apply To Image button, then click the Calculate 3D button.
Rotations in Mandelbulb3d are also different from standard 3D graphics programs. Setting rotations in these fields is counter-intuitive. The Navigator window is a better way to set camera angles. For reference, the following rotation values will produce traditional perspective views from the six cardinal directions of 3D space.
The Reset 0 button sets all rotation values to zero, resulting in a view from the top. It does not restore the scene default values. In a new scene, Y and Z have values of zero, but X has a value of -40 degrees.
Arterial thrombosis is the formation of a thrombus in the artery. In most cases, arterial thrombosis occurs after rupture of atherosclerosis (fat-rich deposits in the walls of blood vessels) and is therefore called arterial thrombosis. Arterial embolism occurs when the thrombus subsequently migrates downstream and may affect any organ.
Sequence at Wikipedia.
296280 more-or-less notable sequences are collected on The On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences. See also mathigon, mathsisfun etc.
Unlike a set, a sequence may contain nothing but zero and still be infinite. That is, all members (in other words, elements or terms) of a sequence may be equal to 0; or, say, to 71, if you prefer: (71,71,71,71,...).
The n-th member is equal to n.
The odd subsequence (1,3,5,...) contains all odd natural numbers; the even subsequence (2,4,6,...) contains all even natural numbers. More generally, for every sequence
.
This sequence is non-monotone (that is, neither increasing nor decreasing). All integers cannot be contained in a monotone sequence, since an increasing sequence is bounded from below, and a decreasing sequence is bounded from above (think, why).
.
Just for fun, these two formulas may be combined,
.
A sequence containing every natural number infinitely many times
The odd subsequence (1,1,1,...) contains only 1. The even subsequence (2,3,2,4,2,3,2,5,2,...) differs from the whole sequence only by 1 added to every member. Thus, the odd subsequence of the even subsequence contains only 2. And so on... That is, denoting n-th member by
The n-th member is equal to the number q such that
The odd subsequence is just (1,2,3,...). The even subsequence (1,1,2,1,3,2,4,...) is equal to the whole sequence. That is, denoting n-th member by
.
In contrast, a monotone sequence cannot contain both 1 and 2 infinitely many times (think, why).
.
Every number is an accumulation point of this sequence (that is, every neighborhood of the given number contains infinitely many members of the sequence; equivalently, the given number is the limit of some subsequence). In contrast, a monotone sequence may have only one accumulation point, namely, the limit of the whole sequence (think, why).
Pairing function at Wikipedia.
Factorial at Wikipedia.
The n-th member is equal n times the (n-1)-th member:
This is a so-called recurrence relation: each further member is defined as a function of its number and the preceding member.
Recurrence relation at Wikipedia.
Thus, the n-th member is the product of all natural numbers from 1 to n; it is called the factorial of n and denoted by
!
.
!
Factorials are widely used. They appear in the binomial theorem, Taylor's theorem, most of well-known discrete probability distributions (binomial, negative binomial, multinomial, Poisson, hypergeometric) etc.
A wonderful approximation for large factorials is given by Stirling's formula
!
.
!
Stirling's approximation at Wikipedia.
Fibonacci number at Wikipedia.
The n-th member is equal the (n-1)-th member plus the (n-2)-th member:
(a recurrence relation, again). And the first two members are equal to one:
In the 17th century Johannes Kepler observed that ratios of consecutive Fibonacci numbers
.
If so, then necessarily
.
It has two roots,
This number is the famous "golden ratio" treated already by Euclid about 2300 years ago.
Golden ratio at Wikipedia.
.
?
Using the recurrence relation and the property of
.
Interestingly, the property
.
We just subtract the first formula from the second and get
.
Pi#Irrationality and normality at Wikipedia.
.
, and the same can be said about
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Granola uses oats, nuts and honey as ingredients, a food made by baking. It is a kind of health food. Granola can often be eaten as breakfast or snack. It although originated in the U.S., it is, however, quite popular in Japan. Furthermore, besides loose content, granola is often made into bars, for convenient eating.
The common flavors of granola include nuts, chocolate, etc. Granola has many varieties and most are low in calories and low in fat.
This data consists of the following two tables:
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Doufu (tofu) is a food originated from China. It is made with soya bean. It is a common ingredient in Chinese, East Asian, and Southeast Asian cuisines.
The following cladogram, based primarily on APG IV,[1] includes the 44 angiosperm orders found in New York. The handful of remaining angiosperm orders were omitted to save space.
↑ APG IV (2016). "An update of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group classification for the orders and families of flowering plants: APG IV". Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 181 (1): 1–20. doi:10.1111/boj.12385.
Active Network Australia is the Australian main webpage of the global activenetwork.com, featuring a series of different categories and navigation options. The top menu consists of headings such as; Technology, Media, Markets, Customers and About Us. Under each of these general information about the given part of the network is further explained on sites build on a template linking to the different kind of Event Software (categorized by type of event (endurance, tournament etc.), or setting (club membership)), Registration Features and Quick Links, as well as links to facebook, twitter and LinkedIn.
Example: Clicking on Technology, the subheadings; Overview (fast links to and short explanation of the other subheadings), Market (explains the marketing tools- and analysis options), Transact (how registration and payment is done and how merchandise and donation & fundraising can be utilized by customers), Operate (operational management software possibilities) and Analyse (evaluation options, i.e. statistics, surveys, summaries) can be found.
Furthermore, the main page features a short animation movie introducing the activenetwork.com concept.)
Note: This book covers the Windows version of iTunes only: the Mac version is part of the iLife suite.
Part 1: Using the words below, complete the sentences.
______________, calculating and _______________ making takes place in the
Part 2: Using the words below, complete the sentences. (not all the words will be
The Central Processing Unit is also called the CPU or the ______________. It is
__________________ instructions from memory and ___________________ them.
Not all of the processors are the same and there are several things that can affect
___________________. The ________________ tells us how many processing
This means more than four times as many instructions can be executed in a given
The small city of Bryan, Ohio - the provenance of the Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000.
Ohio Art is a company based in Bryan, a small community in northwest Ohio.[1] The company had begun to experiement with an electronic Etch-A-Sketch when they released the original Etch-A-Skech animator, a device capable of 12 frames of animations, in 1986.[2][3] The system retailed for $139.99 and cartridges cost $29.99.[4] It's important to note that the original Etch-A-Sketch animator was essentially a digital version of the analog Etch-A-Sketch,[5] and as purely an art and animation device it did not play games.
Development of the Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000 began in 1987.[6] In 1988 Ohio Art received a patent for the original Etch-A-Sketch Animator.[7][8]
—Marketing slogan, Philadelphia Inquirer[9]
The Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000 launched in 1988.[6][10]
The Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000 was not a success and production ended by 1990.[11]
A TV plug and play system, the Etch-A-Sketch ETO was launched in 2004 for $35.[12]
The Etch-A-Sketch Animator was advertised as having "196K memory", as well as having "30 functions".[4]
22 images could be stored in the Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000, and 99 animation frames using those pictures could be saved.[13] A memory cartridge was available to expand storage.[14][15]
The Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000 has a black and white LCD with a resolution of 60 pixels by 40 pixels.[16]
The Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000 has a touch pad and stylus.[14][17]
The Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000 uses six AA batteries.[14]
The system was protected by a styrofoam shell while in its box.[18][14]
The system was made in the USA with some parts sourced from Hong Kong and Japan.[19]
The original Etch-A-Sketch Animator has a 4-bit Sanyo LC6523 microcontroller, two kilobytes of RAM, and an LCD screen with a resolution of 40 by 30 pixels.[20]
Three games were released for the Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000.[21]
Putt-Nuts - 18 hole Mini golf game.[21][6] Has a two player mode.[22]
Flyby - Flight simulator.[23][6] Todd Marshall worked on this game.[24]
Overdrive - Racing game.[6]
A racing game cartridge for the Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000.
The original 1986 Etch-A-Sketch Animator.
Wikipedia has related information at Etch A Sketch
↑ "History of Ohio Art Company Metal Lithography Ohio Art Company". https://ohioart.com/history/. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Disappointing Gifts, 1986 Edition: The Etch A Sketch Animator". https://techcrunch.com/2009/12/11/disappointing-gifts-the-etch-a-sketch-animator/. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Significant dates in Etch A Sketch history" (in en). https://www.toledoblade.com/local/2010/06/13/Significant-dates-in-Etch-A-Sketch-history/stories/201006130003. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ a b Magazines, Hearst (in en). Popular Mechanics. Hearst Magazines. p. 27. https://books.google.com/books?id=z-QDAAAAMBAJ&pg=PA28&source=gbs_toc_r&cad=2#v=onepage&q&f=false. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ Belkin, Lisa (25 December 1986). "FOR ONCE, A CALM TOY SEASON (Published 1986)". The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/1986/12/25/business/for-once-a-calm-toy-season.html.
↑ a b c d e "Etch A Sketch invented by Arthur Granjean in year 1959". https://targetstudy.com/knowledge/invention/151/etch-a-sketch.html. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Etch A Sketch!". https://hlflegal.com/Blogs/Pages/2020_05_22.html. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Electronic sketching device" (in en). 13 December 1985. https://patents.google.com/patent/US4764763. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "ELECTRIFYING GIFTS & GIZMOS: FOR KIDS, TOYS THAT TEACH" (in en). search.proquest.com (Philadelphia Inquirer). November 24, 1988. https://search.proquest.com/docview/1833082226?pq-origsite=summon. Retrieved 19 November 2020.
↑ "A Revival for Makers of Classic Toys (Published 1988)". The New York Times. 9 March 1988. https://www.nytimes.com/1988/03/09/business/a-revival-for-makers-of-classic-toys.html.
↑ "History of The Ohio Art Company – FundingUniverse". http://www.fundinguniverse.com/company-histories/the-ohio-art-company-history/. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ Zipern, Andrew (12 August 2004). "NEWS WATCH: TOYS; A Classic Pad Goes Digital, But Is It Shakable? (Published 2004)". https://www.nytimes.com/2004/08/12/technology/news-watch-toys-a-classic-pad-goes-digital-but-is-it-shakable.html. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Etch-A-Sketch Animator ilovethe80s.com". http://ilovethe80s.com/toy/unisex-toys/etch-a-sketch-animator-80s-toys. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ a b c d "A closer look at the Ohio Art Etch A Sketch Animator 2000 Family Entertainment System" (in en). https://imgur.com/gallery/9QYJ1. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "BACK TO THE FUTURE: The Gadget Show closes at - ProQuest" (in en). https://search.proquest.com/docview/1672330937?pq-origsite=summon. Retrieved 19 November 2020.
↑ "English: My Etch A Sketch Animator 2000". 21 January 2013. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Etch_A_Sketch_Animator_2000.JPG. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Unique Etch A Sketch Animator 2000 Game System Review Gamester 81". https://gamester81.com/unique-etch-a-sketch-animator-2000-game-system-review/. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "The Etch A Sketch Animator 2000 Ohio Art Rare-with Box And Original Pen #1936265130" (in en). https://www.worthpoint.com/worthopedia/etch-sketch-animator-2000-ohio-art-1936265130. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000 and "Overdrive" - Unboxing, Gameplay, & Review". https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cHz-FJf2OyU. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Etch-A-Sketch Animator: Demo and Repair". https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ult_pn1G5zs. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ a b "Review and full play through of Putt-Nuts for Etch-A-Sketch Animator 2000". https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NtiyVESSrLk. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Unique Etch A Sketch Animator 2000 Game System Review Gamester 81". https://gamester81.com/unique-etch-a-sketch-animator-2000-game-system-review/. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "video game: Flyby - The Ohio Art Company" (in en). https://artsandculture.google.com/asset/video-game-flyby-the-ohio-art-company/vAHQ8rG6R8e76A?hl=en. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Atari Compendium". http://www.ataricompendium.com/archives/interviews/todd_marshall/interview_todd_marshall.html. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
The purpose of this book is to basically be a database of questions and explained answers. Anyone is welcome to contribute, but most of the content will be from online homework help in Freenodes ##physics.
Newtonian mechanics: force, motion, and waves
Harmonic Motion, Waves, and Sounds
Capacitance, Inductance, LRC Circuits
This book is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
A short presentation of Octave and its history.
The most important differences between Octave and MATLAB that anyone willing to use Octave instead of MATLAB should be aware of.
Where "< reason >" will be an optional explanation that you can add for clarity.
Network externalities (also known as network effects) are demand-side economies of scale. Usually we think of economies of scale as a supply-side phenomenon. On the supply-side, economies of scale mean that a good becomes less costly to produce when more of it is produced. On the demand side, network externalities mean that a good becomes more valuable as more people use it. Many traditional products can have a small amount of network externalities, for one reason or another, which we usually ignore. When network externalities are strong, however, they can radically affect the way a market behaves, and they cannot be ignored.
The following chapter will develop the working body that creates network effects. Expectations management and positive feedback both work as forces from a consumer or supply end that drive the direction of network effects (which can be negative). The Demand Structure with Network Externalities will show the importance the prior sections play in a network reaching "critical mass", that allows a network to be successful. Finally in the Networks and Network Structure section, we will analyze the structure of networks themselves and end with a discussion of two-sided-platforms.
Network externalities do not apply solely to networks such as Facebook or Twitter. Network externalities also apply to different products such as software like Adobe Acrobat Reader/Writer (A prime example of a two-sided platform). It is strategically important to consider whether or not one's product/network actually exhibits network externalities.
When someone reads a novel, they most likely get enjoyment from the experience of reading in and of itself. Perhaps they would enjoy the novel even more, however, if they knew they had friends who had also read it and could discuss it with them. When someone chooses to purchase a particular model of car, they might benefit by choosing a popular model, since that will also make it easier to find expert mechanics and spare parts.
Neither novels nor cars fall clearly into the category of products which have strong network externalities. We would default to thinking of them as products which a consumer purchases for their own sake, and not particularly valuing what other people do. However, as the above examples show, it is easy to come up with stories which attribute network externalities to a wide variety of products. Sometimes these effects can be very strong. While there may be many books as enjoyable as the Harry Potter series and movies as much fun as Star Wars, being familiar with such popular works is part of participating in modern culture.
One thing which must be considered, then, is how strong network externalities are compared to the individual value placed on a product. A product may have some network externalities but be valued highly enough in its own right that many consumers would purchase it, even believing they were the only ones.
If you haven't already, now is a good time to look at the background material on Nash equilibrium and coordination games.
Positive feedback, sometimes referred to as "cumulative causation", refers to a situation where some effect causes more of itself. A system undergoing positive feedback is unstable. That is, it will tend to spiral out of control as the effect amplifies itself.
Negative feedback occurs when the output of a system acts to oppose changes to the input of the system; with the result that the changes are attenuated. If the overall feedback of the system is negative, then the system will tend to be stable.
The effect of a positive feedback loop is not necessarily "positive" in the sense of it being desirable. Positive refers to the direction of change rather than the desirability of the outcome. A negative feedback loop tends to reduce or inhibit a process, while a positive feedback loop tends to expand or promote it.
An example of positive feedback lies in the current age of larger television sets with higher resolution where the battle between the two television technologies, HD DVD and Blu-Ray, began to face-off. For over a year, large corporations have been choosing sides between either HD-DVD or Blu-Ray, leaving cautious consumers slow to buy because of the fear of choosing a technology that will become either obsolete or extinct. HD-DVD initially seemed to have an advantage because it was very cheap, the disks were easy to produce, and the machines on which they ran cost much less. Although HD-DVD had this battle won based on their cost of production, it seems HD-DVD has lost most of its market share to Blu-Ray because of the media production companies leaving HD-DVD to pursue ventures with Blu-Ray. Initially, Warner and Paramount left HD-DVD to back ranks the Blue-Ray technology, and within a month, Toshiba (HD-DVD's largest supporter) migrated as well. The main reason for this wave of media companies is the presence of the Blu-Ray technology on the Playstation 3 gaming console. Although this is not a definitive win for the Blu-Ray team, there is wide speculation that the Playstation 3 will bring their technology into the market faster than the competing HD-DVD.
When battling for this positive feedback, the market can be considered to be “tippy” when it can just as easily tip in the favor of one firm over the others. Positive feedback in part can begin as expectations from consumers arise, possibly from advertisement or the idea of vaporware, "inevitability, standards bodies, partnerships, openness. When this happens, the market has the potential to be locked-in on that product or technology.
As a starter, examine the graph to the right.
Consider the point at which two competing networks(the winner and loser) hold approximately 50% of the market share near time = 0. At this point both networks may, on their own be past the critical mass point and be moving towards a stable equilibrium (see previous section for explanation). However, in this case we are going to assume that due to feedback, the market is tippy and that either the winner or loser will eventually take almost 100% of the market share.
Back to the graph above. As time elapses, expectations provide a strong positive feedback effect in which the "winner"'s share of the market climbs towards 100% and, conversely, the "loser" essentially loses all market share. The point in which both networks slopes are very steep is when the critical mass point plays a role for both. At this point the "loser" falls below the critical mass point and, as seen above, essentially falls out of the market. As the two networks level off, the idea of systemic lock-in is at play. You can read about systemic lock-in further in the book.
One example of a tippy market is within the digital audio player industry. The first companies to enter the market were Digital Media and Eiger Lab with their two products, the Rio PMP300 and the MPMan F10. With a huge influx of users into the digital media market and the introduction of the file-sharing program Napster, the technology of digital audio players began to expand to other manufacturers such as Apple's Ipod and Microsoft's Zune. But when Napster faced legal challenges for copyright infringement, it was forced to shutdown putting a small hiccup in the digital audio player market. At this point, with the backing of the music industry, Apple stepped in and seized the market with the now even more popular Ipod, which also supported its own proprietary digital audio format: MP4. Apple helped secure their position by permitting users of iTunes to convert music files from MP3 to MP4, which allowed them to upload these files to their Ipods regardless of whether or not they were downloaded by iTunes.
Shapiro and Varian attribute the tippiness of a market to the balance of the overall economies of scale in the market versus the consumers' taste for variety:[1]
↑ Shapiro, Carl; Hal R. Varian (1999). Information Rules. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. p. 188.
First, let's examine a non-chemistry example. Say you have one card from a deck of playing cards. It can have one of 52 possible values. Now you pick up four more cards. If the deck were shuffled randomly, the odds of you holding, say, a "straight flush" are 0.00154%. The odds of having a "high card", which is essentially a "nothing" hand, is 50.12%. In the case of a straight flush, the cards you are holding are highly organized. They must be in a specific, exact pattern (like 10 9 8 7 6 of the same suit). To have a high card, no two cards must have the same rank and the cards cannot be in order.
There is a very low probability of having a straight flush because the cards are in a very orderly state. There is a large probability of having "nothing" because the cards are in a random, disorderly state. In our card-playing system, straight flushes have low entropy because they are so orderly. "Nothing" hands have high entropy because they are disorderly and random. Furthermore, it takes minimal effort to toss all the cards in the air and randomize their order. Increasing the entropy of the system comes naturally. On the other hand, sorting the cards in order takes time and effort. It does not happen randomly. Decreasing the entropy of the system is unnatural and takes effort, or energy.
The entropy of a chemical system is a measure of its disorder or chaos. More precisely, it is a measure of the dispersion of energy. A solid has low entropy (low chaos, orderly) because the molecules are locked into a rigid structure. Their energy is not dispersed freely. A gas has high entropy (high chaos, disorderly) because the molecules are free to move about randomly. The energy of the system is dispersed over a large area with unlimited possibilities of the location of each molecule.
Absolute zero can never be achieved.
As temperature decreases, so does entropy. Theoretically, at absolute zero (0 K, or -273 °C), the entropy of the system would be zero. This is because the solid would be perfectly crystallized so that its energy is not dispersed at all.
As you will soon learn, the Second Law of Thermodynamics tells us that the entropy of the universe always increases. Think about it. If you have built a house of cards, the entropy of the system is low. A house of cards is very orderly, with each card having a very specific location. The house of cards will undoubtedly collapse. The resulting pile of cards is very disorderly. The cards can be in any position and still be a random pile of cards. The entropy has increased spontaneously. Houses of cards will spontaneously collapse, but they never spontaneously build themselves up. This is because high entropy is natural and low entropy is unnatural.
When analyzing the entropy change of a chemical reaction, you would need specific numbers. As a guideline, you can estimate the entropy change based on some basic rules:
If you do happen to know the absolute entropy of substances in a reaction (by looking it up in a chart), you can calculate the change in entropy. Entropy is symbolized with
. As with enthalpy, the degree symbol (
Entropy for beginners- a Wikibook that provides a mathematical explanation.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
To change the cell formatting based on content, handle the CellFormatting event. Other methods (e.g. setting the RowDefaultCellStyle) can lose the formatting if the user clicks on a column header to sort the grid.
To link other controls to the grid, use the SelectionChanged event. The RowEnter event can give the wrong behaviour, as it only fires when the focus box enters a row. Again, sorting by clicking on a column header can cause unpredictable behaviour.
To retrieve a DataRow from a databound grid, use: DirectCast(mydatagridview.Rows(i).DataBoundItem, DataRowView).Row
The Systems Engineering approach described in Section 1.5, along with the tools and engineering specialties in sections 1.6 and 1.7, cover parts of how design gets done. Although not strictly part of the design process, a large and complex space project also needs an effective Organizational Structure to function. An organization allocates tasks, coordinates the work, makes decisions, supplies the various resources and inputs needed, and provides support to the core design, production, delivery and operations tasks. Individual projects may be part of a larger program or ongoing business, and organizations must then sequence and allocate between them.
Economics is the social science that studies production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services. Space projects are then an economic activity, and part of a general economy. Large projects need a source of necessary resources, which is often in the form of money. The tools and methods of economics are therefore used to analyze, justify, and obtain the needed money and resources. Organizations and economics are extensively studied at business schools, such as the over 100 courses at MIT's Sloan School of Management, and there are many textbooks on these subjects.
Organizational StructuresThere are a number of organizational structures that have been used or are possible. Which ones are best suited to a project or program depends on the complexity, duration, and life-cycle stage of the tasks. Structures may be changed or replaced over time as the needs change. Humans are social entities, and their individual needs, desires, and motivations differ. This has to be considered along with technical questions like what kind of desks and workstations to use. Membership in an organization is usually not permanent, either because the project's or the individual's needs change. Continuity of a project has to be supported when this happens.
For a given project, you can adopt an existing structural type. For an ongoing program or business that structure may already be in place. You can then modify the existing type to accommodate the specific needs of the project. Alternately you can design a custom organization in the same way as you design a custom piece of hardware. The choice will depend on the potential gains from customization, versus the lower adoption cost of an existing type. Existing structural types include:
Entrepreneurial - One or more founders or leaders make decisions, and communications are direct person-to-person. Staff are added on an ad-hoc basis, and tasks are not rigidly defined. This type is suited to new projects at an earlier stage of their life cycle, where many decisions have not yet been made, and change is rapid.Bureaucratic - This may be thought of as a machine made of people. The structure has a degree of standardization, with defined roles and responsibilities, a hierarchical (pyramid) structure, and respect for merit. It is suited to larger and more complex organizations. Since one person can't comprehend all the details or have time to make decisions for a large organization, information flow and instructions are compartmentalized through the pyramid structure, with a given person responsible for actions at their level, and one level up and down. Rules and standards make tasks routine, so decisions are reduced to exceptions or changes. The accumulated structure and rules makes this type harder to change when needed.Networked/Consensus - In the previous two types, decision-making is concentrated in a few leaders. In a network or consensus structure, decisions are reached by multiple interested parties. Communications flows to and from any point in the network as needed. This is suited to more rapid and ad-hoc change, but increases effort to make decisions because more people are involved. However, increased information inputs can lead to better decisions, and wider participation can lead to better acceptance and enthusiasm.Structures are not usually pure examples of any of these types. For example, bureaucratic ones may have boards or committees which reach decisions by consensus, and organization members may communicate through an informal network in addition to a formal pyramid structure. The parts of a structure may be defined by specialized functions, such as production, marketing, staffing, and accounting. It may also be divided by location or product, where each part includes multiple functions. Again, mixed examples are possible for a given organization, with some parts functional and others location or product-based.
An organization capable of designing and building complex space projects is usually itself a complex entity. Therefore systems engineering methods can be applied to the design of the organization itself, as well as to the space systems they produce. In this approach, the organization is treated as a system, where inputs like staff time, office buildings, and factory buildings produce outputs like launch vehicles and spacecraft. By comparing the outputs to the inputs, you can decide if a given project is worth doing. The internal functions and flows within the organization determine the relationship of inputs to outputs, and so are subject to analysis and optimization.
Designing an organization this way is not often done for several reasons. First, organizations often have a history, and existing structures and methods in place for how they operate. These may have developed before they started on space projects, and even before the systems engineering method existed. If existing organizations and methods have worked well enough, the need to optimize or update them may not be felt. Second, people are often resistant to change, especially when that change involves re-designing or eliminating their own job. Some people are attracted to the power or money that comes from a position within an organization, and so oppose any change that would displace them from that position. Third, many people in a high position believe they know better how to organize and run things. This results partly from the well known psychological cognitive bias of Illusory Superiority, where people in general misjudge their ability relative to others. It also partly is due to the belief that reaching a high position by itself demonstrates superior knowledge and ability. Lastly, there is the fear that any changes will break how the existing organization operates. This is a fallacy because organizations in general are capable of doing things no single individual can do, like design an entire airplane or computer operating system. Therefore as a whole they should be more capable of designing the organization itself than any single individual within it. Nonetheless, these various barriers exist and should be recognized.
If an organization is new, or being organized for a specific project, most of these barriers cam be overcome. Then a rational application of the systems engineering process can find the best organization structure. This can be one of the existing types, since they exist for good reasons. But choosing a structure by design is better than choosing one by personal preference or random accretion, since it is more likely to produce a better result. Another way to implement change is to use an outside organization to design the new structure, present their results, and then have the old organization adopt it as a whole. Approached in this way, individual objections can be overcome, but it can also induce loss of staff beyond that caused by increased efficiency.
Project ManagementProject Management is the discipline of initiating, planning, executing, controlling, and closing the work of a team to reach specific goals and success criteria. A Project has a defined goal and end point, whereas a Program is a larger effort that may include multiple projects. Programs may be open-ended with no definite end point, such as "explore the Solar System". Programs use more permanent organizations such an agency, research institute, or business enterprise. Individual projects can draw from these organizations, and later return staff and other resources to apply to the next project.
Historically, skilled and experienced individuals such as architects, engineers, and senior craftsmen led large projects, which were usually in construction. By the 1950's, project management had become a distinct discipline from these skilled fields, with its own tools and techniques. There are a number of approaches to managing a project, including applying systems engineering to the whole project. The rapid growth in complexity and scale of projects has driven the creation of new methods to manage them, and this is an ongoing process today. New tools like computer networks and software enable some of these new methods. See Wikipedia's Outline of Project Management for a more detailed overview of the field
A Project Manager is a person given responsibility for part or all of a project's execution. Traditionally managers are placed on top of an organization structure, but that is a matter of history, not necessity. They combined several functions such as planning, decision making, and coordination, in an era when communication was more difficult. Modern computer networks allow everyone on a project to have immediate access to all project information, so the need for top-down hierarchies is reduced. Quite large and complex projects, like the Linux operating system, have been developed mostly with self-directed work. However, many space projects require dedicated specialists, large buildings, and other resources that are difficult to obtain on individual initiative.
Initiating - which includes identifying needs and requirements, reviewing existing operations, financial analysis, stakeholder analysis, and establishing a project charter.Planning - of time, cost and resources for the project tasks. This includes a breakdown of deliverables and organizing a logical sequence of the work.Production and Execution - consists of following the plan, allocating staff, outside supplies, physical space, and other resources as required.Monitoring and Controlling - includes observing production and execution to identify and correct problems, and measure performance and variances from the plan.Closing - includes formal acceptance of the project outputs, ending contracts, reassigning resources, and archiving data and knowledge gained.
Project FundingLarge projects need a way to obtain all the resource inputs needed for their completion. An existing organization or program may have some of these resources, like land and buildings, in place already, but nearly always some additional ones need to be supplied from outside the project. In modern economies, Money is a generally accepted medium of exchange, which can be traded for all these resource types. This simplifies the resource provision task to obtaining enough funding in monetary form. There are a number of different sources and ways to obtain project funding.
For space projects, the sources can be divided into three main sectors - government, business, and social - which relate to major parts of economies in general. We will list them individually, but a mixture can be used for a given project. As examples, governments often hire businesses to build parts of space projects, businesses use government-owned launch sites, and partnerships between sectors are common. The differences involve sources of funds and objectives, but not as much the technical issues. A rocket engine works the same way no matter who pays for it. What kind of rocket engine gets built, however, may depend on available funds and who is the source.
Governments were the first large source of funds for space projects, growing from military uses like ballistic missiles and spy satellites. This was followed by scientific and earth observation missions such as weather satellites. These uses are intended for the general public benefit, and so obtain their funds through taxation or appropriation. Governments decide how to apply the funds to projects by political processes. This is typically by means of annual budgets, where space projects are part of more general government funding. Although theoretically for the public good, in practice other factors enter into political decision-making. Typically space projects are carried out by a mixture of internal government staff and facilities, and outside purchases of goods and services.
Businesses normally operate to generate profits for their owners. Early space projects were high risk, and so were mostly carried out by governments. Businesses were hired to carry out parts of these projects because of special skills or production capacity the government did not have. Since government guaranteed payment, this lowered the risk and businesses were willing to participate. Communications emerged as a profitable space business because information has no mass, and so the high cost of space transport did not affect that business as much. Space industry beyond government projects is now the dominant economic sector. In the future, additional types of space businesses are expected to grow as transport costs come down. Businesses obtain their funds from investors, retained previous profits, and finance on the open market.
Social funding comprises non-profit foundations, research organizations, private donations, and volunteer efforts. Large terrestrial telescopes are an example of projects funded by a mixture of social and other sources. This type of funding is at a relatively small scale compared to government and business.
Financial AnalysisWhatever the source of funding, large projects have to justify themselves to be approved, estimate the funding required, optimize the use of funds, and implement the acquisition and distribution of funds during the project. Various tools from economics and Accounting are used for these purposes. Money is often used as a common measure to compare disparate resource and output types. However it should not be the sole measure to evaluate projects. Measures of Effectiveness, as described in Section 1.5, are a way to evaluate non-monetary factors like performance and safety along with monetary ones like cost and revenue. These kinds of measures can also be applied at the organization level.
Finance is the science of money management. Among its other uses, money is a measure of value to the end users of a project, and a measure of the resources a project will consume. The concepts and formulas from Economic analysis are useful in project decision-making and optimization. If there is too little value in relation to resources, a project may never happen at all. Resources include human labor, physical resources, and intangibles such as rights to use something. The resources to run the organization itself is often a major part of total project resources. So organizational efficiency is important to reaching desired program cost and schedules.
Project Finance is obtaining money for a project from other than internal sources of the sponsor. This is often necessary for new organizations, and for large projects which exceed the scale of previous organization efforts. Financial estimates are developed before money is actually required to determine if a project is worth starting, and how much funding will be required. Actual spending during a project is tracked to compare progress to estimates, in order see if additional funds are needed or if there is surplus to apply elsewhere.
Life Cycle Cost Analysis is an economic method that accounts for all costs of a project, from initial concept to final disposal. It parallels the general Systems Engineering method of considering the entire life cycle of a project from start to finish, but focuses on the financial aspects. The method applies some basic financial concepts:
Time Value of Money - Human life is finite. Therefore the amount of time you can expect to use resources, or their equivalent in money, is shorter at a future date than it is in the present. Changes between now and a future date may affect the desirability of any given item. For example, an old computer that may have been useful at one time has become less so due to changes in technology. Inflation can also affect the future value of money itself. For these reasons, humans attach greater value to something now than in the future, a phenomenon known as Intertemporal ChoiceThe Interest Rate is a measure of how much more value the present has over the future. It is the percentage increase per time, usually years, needed to equate a future value to a present one. In other words, how much larger a future value do you demand to delay a present use? Reversing the time order, a future value is reduced by a percentage per time, called the Discount Rate, to equate it to the present.Costs and benefits of a space project may extend for a number of years, and costs generally happen before benefits. Therefore both are equated to Present Value by applying the discount rate. Which discount rate to use depends on who is providing funding. A government generally has a lower one than a business because they assume a longer time horizon to collect benefits.
Future costs and benefits are not known exactly, especially when a project includes developing new technology. Since these predictions are often key in deciding if a project happens at all, or which design options are used, it is very important that they have as sound a basis as possible. Therefore various estimating methods have been developed to predict the financial flows for a project. They vary in detail and accuracy based on stage of the project. Regardless of which method is used, some margin or range should be included in any estimate to allow for errors in estimating, or unanticipated costs. Methods include:
Historical Costs - This is based on similar past projects, and uses units like number of person-hours, drawings, or lines of software. These are multiplied by historical rates for the given parameter.Parametric Estimates - These are formulas for an entire finished item using multiple parameters such as mass and stress level, and factors such as "simple design" or "complex design" to modify the basic values.Bottom-Up Estimates - This approach makes estimates for individual parts of a project at a detailed level, then summing them to get the total cost.Supplier Quotes - A supplier or sub-contractor who makes a definite quote on part of a project replaces an estimate with a specific number.Large space projects typically have many cost components, and use specialists for cost estimating and tracking, with tools like spreadsheets to integrate the data into useful summaries.
The International Society of Parametric Analysts has a Handbook for more general projects.
Number theory is the branch of pure mathematics deals with the properties of numbers in general, and mostly integers, as well as the wider classes of problems that arise from their study.
Please see the book Number Theory for a detailed treatment.
Many questions in number theory can be stated in elementary number theoretic terms, but they may require very deep consideration and new approaches outside the realm of elementary number theory to solve.
Basic Results, Division Algorithm, Greatest Common Divisor, Euclidean Algorithm, Least Common Multiple, Prime Numbers, Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic, Binomial Theorem
Basic Results, Fermat's Little Theorem, Euler's Theorem, Wilson's Theorem, Solutions of Congruences, Chinese Remainder Theorem
Basic Results, Gauss Lemma, Law of Quadratic Reciprocity
Greatest Integer Function, de Polignac's Formula, Arithmetic Functions, Mobius Inversion Formula
This section is a stub.You can help Wikibooks by expanding it.
Algebraic number theory is a branch of number theory in which the concept of a number is expanded to the algebraic numbers which are roots of polynomials with rational coefficients. An algebraic number field is any finite (and therefore algebraic) field extension of the rational numbers. These domains contain elements analogous to the integers, the so-called algebraic integers. In this setting, the familiar features of the integers (e.g. unique factorization) need not hold. The virtue of the machinery employed — Galois theory, group cohomology, class field theory, group representations and L-functions — is that it allows one to recover that order partly for this new class of numbers.
This section is a stub.You can help Wikibooks by expanding it.
Analytic number theory is the branch of the number theory that uses methods from mathematical analysis to prove theorems in number theory. Its major proofs include that of Dirichlet's theorem on arithmetic progressions, stating the existence of infinitely many primes in arithmetic progressions of the form a + nb, where a and b are relatively prime. The proofs of the prime number theorem based on the Riemann zeta function is another important proof.
The outline of the subject remains similar to the heyday of the subject in the 1930s. Multiplicative number theory deals with the distribution of the prime numbers, applying Dirichlet series as generating functions.
See Discrete Mathematics/Analytic Number Theory.
For more than 100 years the US government pursued a policy whose purpose has been to dissolve the structures of the tribal chief system and to assimilate the American Indian culture.
American Indian culture has been considered primitive, by the Westerns especially the European colonialists, in comparison to their more modern and advanced culture. A lot of measures had been taken to make this plan real, for example missionary work to convert the “wild pagans” to Christianity, bans on ritual dance, worship and Indian clothes, and the separation of the American Indian children from their tribes as soon as possible and their education in special boarding schools.
All the customs, songs and myths of the American Indians have been passed on by oral tradition ever since, so (for the Europeans) the most effective method to destroy the Native culture was to deprive them of their language:
Throughout the 19th century a lot of boarding schools had been founded (often held by Christian organizations), in which the American Indian children were taught in English and should adopt the European and Christian manners and customs. They were separated from their tribes and families for several years without any visits.
The reports about the teaching methods in this schools show that the daily life must have been a torture to the young American Indians. Talking in a tribal language and carrying on worship was harshly punished ( corporal and psychological punishment were considered normal), and the children generally were treated very badly:
“He said that he got only one pair of shoes a year and was forced to wear them until they became too small, and his feet became crippled. He still [(today 55 years old -authoress)] has problems walking.”
They had to work, too, for there was often no money for servants and they also became victims of psychological and sexual abuse, and so the American Indians have gotten to know the European culture from its darkest side.
These boarding schools existed until late in the 20th century (the last ones were closed in the 1980's and 90'sx), by that time the number of American Indians who were still speaking their Native language had begun to shrink by alarming proportions: for example among the Mohawk (a tribe of the six Iroquois Nations) only about 5% spoke the tribal language, mostly people older than 70 years.
In order to preserve the American Indian languages from dying out, the wish to set up schools where young American Indians should be taught by Native Americans or specially trained teachers, rather than by Whites, and get in touch with their culture again, became stronger:
In the late 1960's the first American Indian survival schools had been opened and an alliance of education authorities under American Indian control been established. Today almost all the American Indian reservations run schools of their own, partly they offer language courses for adults, too, and there even are American Indian colleges and universities (e.g. Fort Peck Community College in Montana or the Haskell Indian Nations University Kansas). The latter enable the young American Indians to achieve a secondary education combined with their own cultural values, and during the last 20 years the number of American Indians enrolling for college or university has increased by 80%.
Most American Indians in reservations visit the new Native schools from childhood and many of those who are going to attend higher education leave the reservations to earn more money, which is of advantage for their big families in the reservations.
The lessons in which the Native American children are taught in their tribal language helped to protect 175 American Indian dialects and had the effect that about one third of the children over five years talk in their mother tongue at home (although it is estimated that only the 20 most spoken languages will exist throughout the 21st century).
In comparison to the past, all these developments mark important steps of independence and success, especially for the rural American Indians, because formal education is the basis for future professional success and now the Native American children are able to learn without having to leave their families and give up their Indian language and identity.
Another idea to assimilate the American Indians to European culture was to convert the “wild pagans” to Christianity so many missionaries had come to North America funded by the US government. Since the Europeans harshly punished any kind of resistance against their “civilization” programs (the boarding schools have also been used as a threat to put the Native American parents under pressure), the most American Indians obeyed the new laws, stopped talking their original language and gave up the majority of their customs.
But during the 20th century the suppression of American Indian culture became less strict and successively the American Indians returned to their culture and explored more modern mediums which had been unknown to them before: for example several Native American newspapers have been published for the first time ( e.g. the magazine »Wassaja« (»smoke signal«) by the Cherokee (1916 /1926) and the “Navajo Times” (1943)).
In the 1970's a lot of American Indian radio stations had their first broadcasts, in tribal language of course, and today many of them are on air for about twelve hours a day (for example KYUK , Alaska, and KTDB, New Mexico). New media like the Internet and motion picture have been “discovered” by American Indians,too, and a lot of tribes are presenting themselves on websites today.
When the government officially removed the prohibition of the American Indian culture in 1990 (→ see Native American Languages Act & Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act) a great revival of the American Indian culture took place:
Probably the best known American Indian sport is Lacrosse, a rough game played with sticks similar to butterfly nets, which originally took place when conflicts between tribes should be solved more or less peaceful and without armed force. It is still played by American Indians as well as Whites in sports clubs or in schools.
Contemporary music, literature and Art
Music was (just like among other peoples) a very important part of the traditional American Indian festivities and rituals because the Indians believed it to be the language of the spirits. The singing has often been accompanied by rhythmical instruments like drums, rattles and sometimes flutes and this simple composition is still popular, but mainly during tribal festivals like Powwows (see page 18), rather than in commercial music: There are musicians with American Indian ancestry also deserve credit. Performers like, for example, Robbie Robertson (a member of “The Band”), Tori Amos and CocoRosie often use modern sounds and instruments ( for example electronic instruments in the case of CocoRosie), combined with poetic lyrics inspired by their tribal history ( as in the song “Yo George” by Tori Amos).
I salute to you Commander ●
To your policies it seems ● Where have we gone wrong America? ● Mr Lincoln we cannot seem ● to find you
In 1969 the first American Indian publishing house (“The Indian Historian Press”) has been founded and with its assistance ( but also published by other companies) books about and/or by Native Americans have been released. American Indian writers proved their well-known talent of storytelling by writing novels and essays, which are (partly) known and published outside the USA ( e.g. N. Scott Momaday's House Made of Dawn, (Pulitzer Prize for fiction, 1969)). Especially American Indian myths and fairy tales are very popular and therefore frequently edited anew.
In the American Indians' arts and crafts there exists a manifold variety of techniques and styles which some of the American Indian tribes have perfected: the tribes in the Southwestern area are still famous for their pottery, jewelry, weaving and basketry which attracts a lot of tourists to these reservations, and the descendent's of the Plains Indians are still working in embroidery and feathers.
But American Indians also take part in modern art such as abstract paintings and sculptures, which often deal with American Indian problems or concerns. Today Indian artwork has a special copyright label to prevent it from imitation.
As already mentioned American Indians had been forced to acquire Christianity, so many of them are baptized and still believe in the Christian God. Others are member of the so-called “Native-American-Church”, a denomination which is a kind of mixture of Christian values and Native American beliefs.
But the tribal pure religions (the Navajo for example believed in a goddess called “Changing Woman” and Plains Indians like the Algonquin or the Sioux believed in the natural power called “Manitu”/”Wakan”) have not disappeared: the myths and legends are still told and the religious dances and inter-tribal Powwows (modern dance festivals) are arranged several times a year all over the USA.
Many American Indians take part as competitive dancers, dressed in colorful extravagant regalia, others play traditional tunes and rhythms. These Powwows are a great attraction also to Whites, but they are no carnival or tourist entertainment, but a religious and cultural festivity with the purpose to strengthen the community spirit between the members of different tribes. Fortunately, the American Indians do not have to hide their culture any longer and they are free to pass on their heritage and traditions.
1.1 Bad job conditions at the reservations, exploitation and environmental destruction
To get a realistic impression of an ethnic community, it is absolutely necessary to look at its seemy side and to analyze its problems. Due to the fact that the reservations in the USA are on a different level of development, their problems are varying and of different graveness. But in many cases one problem produces the next, so there is definitely no shortage of worrying aspects among the American Indians in the reservations as well as outside.
Bad job conditions at the reservations, exploitation and environmental destruction
Today there are only 52 million acres left from the original American Indian homeland of the about 6.1 billion acres that form North America and this trust land is mostly of inferior quality: the BIA took an investigation about the erosion on American Indian tribes land and considered the state of 12 million acres crucially, 17 million gravely, 24 million gently affected as to that.
So for many Native Americans there is no possibility to make a living by farming without the use of chemicals and in some reservations commercial hunting and fishing are prohibited.
Furthermore the lack of infrastructure (e.g., often no electricity, telephones or Internet connectivity) makes life difficult in the reservations and these drawbacks and the insufficient or partly missing links to the traffic system keep most foreign industry from installing sites in the reservations. The bad conditions complicate the foundation of American Indian businesses like casinos and tourism for some tribes, too, because they are not within easy reach from the next big city and the potential customers.
Considering these circumstances, it is not surprising that the rates of unemployment are between 50 and 70% (in some reservations they are higher than 80%), and that the American Indians have the lowest average income in the USA.
The government in the 1990s promised high financial and economic rewards to the tribes who would agree to the storage of toxic and radioactive waste on their reservation land for several decades. Many American Indians (mainly those of the poorer reservations like the Mescalero-Apache) were tempted by the money and were not aware of the consequences for their health, their environment and life base, which makes the barriers to the reservations' development even more unbreakable.
The percentage of citizens with less than a High School graduate was leveled 19.6% among the total US population, about 10% higher for the American Indians outside the reservations and again by 10% more for those in the reservations. The rate of students with more than a Bachelors' degree also proves the underdeveloped state of education among the American Indians, for it ranges between 8 and 13%, with an total USA average of 24%.
Furthermore the reservation schools have the highest rate of teacher turnover and they often lack the means for school supply and sufficient staff. Even those Native Americans students who could attend secondary education are inhibited by bureaucracy and the great distances to the universities.
This lack of formal education fuels other social problems like unemployment, poverty, teenage pregnancy, criminality and drug abuse and it forces the Native Americans to accept badly paid jobs. Therefore an improve of their life standards is not easy since they are also inhibited by the costs for food (which in reservations are absurdly enough higher than outside the reservations) and the financial burdens especially on City Indians, such as high rents and taxes (which they have to pay in full amount, unlike the Native Americans in the reservations).
As a result there are 24 to 25% of all American Indians who live below the poverty line and in the reservations the figure sometimes exceeds 40% of the residents. Especially poverty among children is an urgent problem, because for example in the Pine Ridge reservation (South Dakota) 46% of the American Indian children are considered poor, which is higher than the poverty rate among adults.
In the reservations but also outside the Native Americans have to deal with further worrying social developments: of all ethnic groups in the USA the American Indians have the:
Drug abuse and alcoholism have become mass problems among the American Indians (in some reservations eight families out of ten have problems with alcoholism) and unfortunately among their children, too. For those the confrontation with unemployment, environmental destruction, the decay of the reservations and the lack of positive future prospects and leisure time activities to distract them situation, are probably hard to bear.
Caused or at least promoted by drug abuse, there is a lot of crime in the reservations and outside of which the American Indians (especially children) are victims and offenders (especially young adults) at the same rate: Domestic violence, rape, child abuse and child neglect are reported to take place very often in the reservations, with the estimated number of unknown cases being very high.
Furthermore in the recent years gang violence in the reservations has increased, fueled by weak law enforcement, youth unemployment and the lack of activities for young Indians and with the results of vandalism, theft, assaults (also sexual) and street fights.
Homelessness is considered a subject of no public interest in the US society and therefore there is little information about the homeless American Indians in the USA, but it is estimated that there are “90,000 homeless or under housed Indian families”, especially in the reservations where the shortage and decay of houses is an omnipresent challenge: old shacks (often left army buildings) and council flats which often lack of electricity, running or warm water and in more than 50% of all cases of public sewer and are in need for repair are common housing conditions.
As a result of the shortage of housing American Indian houses have to offer home for big families and their acquaintances, so that 30% of the American Indians live in overcrowded homes and sometimes “25 people [have] to live in a two-bedroom home” which promotes a lack of hygiene and the spread of diseases.
Native Americans are suffering of diabetes, alcoholism, tuberculosis and other health conditions and are dying at shocking rates. The cases of asthma, heart failure, cancer and AIDS are also noticeable accumulated within American Indian communities (unfortunately mostly among the elders and children) and are out of all proportion to the inadequate health care system: Especially the malnutrition based diseases such as rickets and diabetes require expensive medical treatments like for example dialysis and therefore the federal health service in many reservations is overburdened.
Furthermore the consequences of pollution and contamination in some areas threaten the American Indian's health and life because toxic and radioactive traces are discovered in the drinking water, the soil, the nutrition and the bodies of the American Indians themselves. American Indian farm workers also get in touch with the “1.2 billion pounds of highly toxic pesticides sprayed on our food every year” because the safety measures such as protective clothing often are insufficient or missing. So an increase of cancer and deformity based deaths are caused by contacts with these dangerous substances.
A widespread epidemic of which children suffer when their mothers drank a lot of alcohol during pregnancy, are the “Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders” (FASD) and they appear in many different degrees of gravity: In general the central nervous system is affected and therefore these children suffer from epileptic attacks, speech disorders, learning difficulties, inhibited growth and deformed bodies and organs. These symptoms can be suppressed by medical treatment, although there is no complete remedy.
In many books and films about American Indians we are shown the sins and crimes committed by the white Immigrants, which are often hard to believe. Hence it appears likely that the present generation of American Indians are still full of sadness and horror about the past, like the descendants of the Jews.
Although we cannot look into the Native American heads, except if they write or talk about their feelings, it is known that the experiences for example of the boarding schools have caused traumas among the former pupils. The high rates of mental illness, alcoholism and suicide may also give evidence of the American Indians' mental condition.
A further aspect, which affects many poor Native Americans, is the dependency on federal welfare and the US government's generosity concerning health care and social benefits.
Other Americans sometimes talk about “the American Indians” as a compact group of tribes, which is a completely wrong impression: the Native American tribes have never been united altogether and even today they still behave detrimentally to each other. For example the crimes and abuses, such as corruption of Native American responsibilities to their fellow Indians' disadvantage, prove the discord between the single tribes and American Indians.
The US policy had encouraged this conflict throughout many decades, for they often placed the borders of a reservation in such a way that it surrounded another tribe's area. This policy has been quite effective and the Navajo, as an example, sold the mining rights for the area of Black Mesa without the agreement of the Hopi who worship the area as a spiritual center.
It would be interesting to know what would have happened, if the American Indians had stood solidly against the European immigrants...
The relationship between the American Indians and the U.S.
In the past discrimination has been the common reaction towards American Indians and was in no way inferior to the experiences of the African Americans, except that it is less known to the world. Similar to the Black Americans the civil rights activists who supported the Native Americans as well as Native Americans who stood up for their rights in public had become victims of social disadvantage or even political assassination.
Today the discrimination of American Indians is not as omnipresent and publicly expressed as in the past, probably because of the Native American resistance movement in the past century. Its traces, however, are still there: for example in the names of many US sports teams like “Cleveland Indians” or “Washington Redskins”, in commercial television or advertising using the image of the strong Indian for their purposes, or in the suggestions of some politicians to terminate the self-determination or existence of single tribes.
The ignorance and indifference towards the American Indian problems and concerns is the more important strain on the relationship between the USA and the Native Americans, today (besides the memories to past injustice). Conflicts between the government and Native Americans are often solved by actions of the US army and other American Indian affairs are often treated without the adequate political sensitiveness as well: the decision whether an Indian tribe should be recognized as such is within the scope of duties of the BIA, a non-Indian organization with only partly Indian staff, which appears difficult to be cohered.
Furthermore the US government takes its time to realize a mistake and to apologize for it (e.g. the USA has not signed yet an official state resolution of 2004 to “offer an apology to all Native Peoples on behalf of the United States [for past] ill-conceived policies”).
The US government's obstinacy combined with the tribes' pride makes the removal of old misunderstandings between the government and the American Indian tribes such as the erroneous belief that federal compensation payments for holy tribal land would be accepted by the Native Americans and (in return) that there would be another choice for the American Indians than coming to terms with the past. An even more important obstacle to the removal of the American Indian problems is the indifference among other people, such as fellow citizens who only have a vague understanding of the problems facing Native Americans today.
Sets describe collections of things or values, such as numbers, animals or people.
In a set, each value occurs only once. For example, the value fox will occur only once in the set of animals. Just as the value 3 occurs only once in the element of all natural numbers, N.
The cardinality of a set refers to the number of elements it contains.
Sets may be finite or infinite. For example, the set of people currently alive in the world will be finite, but the set of N is infinite.
A set may be countable or uncountable. A countable set is a set, whose elements can be matched with the set of natural numbers. In other words, it is possible to count the elements one-by-one. If a set is finite, it will always be countable. The best example of an uncountable set is R. It is impossible to match each element of R with an element of N. This is because there are not enough elements in N to match each one with an element of R.
Membership ∈ and its reverse ∉
x ∈ Q, meaning that x is an element of the set of rational numbers. Whereas pi ∉ Q
x ∈ WorkingDays, meaning that x is an element of the set of all WorkingDays. For example, Monday ∈ WorkingDays. Whereas Saturday ∉ WorkingDays
x ∈ WeekendDays, meaning that x is an element of the set of all WeekendDays. For example, Saturday ∈ WeekendDays. Whereas Monday ∉ WeekendDays
Questions relating to membership and basic understanding
Using set notation, state that Sunday is a weekend day.
Using set notation, state that Monday is not a weekend day.
Countable, uncountable, finite, infinite.
Countable, finite.
Countable, uncountable, finite, infinite.
Countable, infinite.
A ∪ B, meaning that all elements of the set A form a union with all of the elements in set B. This is a set comprehension, since this generates a new set.
Q ∪ Irrational Number Set, meaning that all numbers in the set of rational numbers form a union with the set of all irrational numbers. This set comprehension generates the set of real numbers.
WorkingDays ∪ WeekendDays, meaning that all of the working days (elements of WorkingDays) form a union with weekend days (elements of WeekendDays). This set comprehension generates the set of WeekDays.
Write out all elements of A ∪ B
A ∩ B, meaning that the set A and set B form an intersection. The generated set will be ∅, if the two sets share no elements.
A ∩ B, meaning that A and B form an intersection, which generates a set, which contains all of the numbers divisible by 3 and 4.
WorkingDays ∩ WeekendDays, meaning that WorkingDays and WeekendDays form an intersection, which is ∅
Now let A be the set of all A-level students who take computer science and B the set of all A-level students who take mathematics.
A ∩ B, meaning that A and B form an intersection, which generates a set, which contains all students who take both computer science and mathematics.
It has no intersected values (Ø)
A \ B, meaning that the set A and set B form a set difference. This will generate a set, which contains the elements of A, which are NOT also in B.
R \ Q, meaning that R and Q form a set difference. This will generate the set of irrational numbers.
A \ B, meaning that A and B form a set difference. This will generate the set of all computer science students, who do not also take mathematics.
S ⊂ T, meaning that S is a proper subset of T, such that all elements in S are also elements of T. However, there will need to be at least one element in T, which is not in S.
N ⊂ Z, meaning that the set of natural numbers is a proper subset of the set of integers. In other words, all natural numbers are also integers. There are some elements in Z, which are not in N - these are the negative integers.
Z ⊂ Q, meaning that the set of integers is a proper subset of the set of rational numbers. In other words, all integers are also rational numbers. But there are rational numbers which are not integers.
Is A a proper subset of B, so that we can write A ⊂ B? Explain your answer.
No, because there are elements in the set A which are not in the set B. In other words we can find an element, for which x ∈ A and x ∉ B
A ⊆ B, meaning that A forms a subset of B. In other words, A could be identical to B, but does not have to be!
A ⊆ B, meaning that A forms a subset of B. In other words, all students in the 6th form could be taking computer science. In which case the two sets would be the same, but they may not be!
A ⊆ B, meaning that A forms a subset of B. In other words, all students currently in present in school may all be located in the assembly hall, but they may not be!
Yes, because it may be the case that all students who sit the exam will also gain grade 'B' or above.
B is a subset of A since every vegetarian customer is a customer. A could be a subset of B, because it may be the case that all customers present are also vegetarian. It cannot be a proper subset, since A contains B.
Noncompetitive inhibitor can bind to an enzyme with or without a substrate at different places at the same time. It changes the conformation of an enzyme, but it does not change the efficiency of binding or the Km. A noncompetitive inhibitor binds to the enzyme away from the active site, altering the shape of the enzyme so that even if the substrate can bind, the active site functions less effectively. Most of the time, the inhibitor is reversible. However, this inhibition decreases the turnover number, meaning the rate of reaction decreases. As the inhibitor binds to the enzyme and the enzyme-substrate complex, it reduces the concentration of enzyme available for proper catalysis. Fewer functional enzymes leads to fewer available active sites and thus a smaller Vmax. Unlike competitive inhibition, raising [S] (substrate concentration) is pointless with noncompetitive inhibition.
Noncompetitive inhibitor binds at different site on enzyme
A noncompetitive inhibitor binds to a different site that is not the active site of the enzyme and changes the structure of the enzyme; therefore, it blocks the enzyme from converting substrate to product, but it still allows the substrate to bind. Thus, it decreases the rate of the chemical reaction of enzyme and substrate, which can not be changed by increasing concentration of substrate; the binding decreases Vmax and has no change on the Km of the chemical reaction.
File:Noncompetitiveinhibitor.jpg Noncompetitive Inhibitor
Based on the Michaelis-Menten Model, KM, the concentration of the substrate when the velocity is the half of the maximum velocity (or half of the substrates at maximum velocity), remains same, but the maximum velocity is decreased.
The picture shows a double-reciprocal plot of V0 and [S]. The x-intercept is equal to -1/Km while the y-intercept is 1/Vmax. The slope of the line is Km/Vmax. Thus, the plot shows that there is no change in Km and Vmax is decreased. In relation to the original plot, the x intercept stays constant while the y intercept increases along with the slope.
File:Noncompetitive inhibitor.jpg
Berg, Jeremy M., John L. Tymoczko, and Lubert Stryer. BIOCHEMISTRY. 6th ed. New York: W. H. FREEMAN AND COMPANY, 2007.
Reece, Jane (2011). Biology. Pearson. ISBN 978-0-321-55823-7.
This page is a critique on the article "Effects of an eight-week physical conditioning program on disease signs and symptoms in children with chronic arthritis" by Susan E. Klepper (1999)[1]
What is the background to this research?
Pain is a predominate feature of childhood arthritis which is one of the major reasons for limited exercise within this particular population with the overall prevalence of juvenile arthritis in the United States ranging from 1.6 to 86.1 people per 100,000.[2] This indicates the prevalence in the geographic location of where the study was done.
This article was undertaken as a partial requirement for a doctoral degree in pediatric physical therapy at Allegheny University of the Health Sciences in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Its aim was to investigate the effects of an 8 week, 24 session weight bearing physical conditioning program on disease signs and symptoms in children with chronic arthritis.[1]
The group the research was conducted on is important as the subjects consist of individuals with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. Its main importance is due to the fact that the research was investigating whether a weight bearing program could relieve the signs and symptoms on children who have chronic arthritis. The subjects had to meet the American College of Rheumatology criteria for polyarticular juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. This is used to define the population and consider the results due to the severity of the arthritis.[1]
The author has published previous studies on juvenile rheumatoid arthritis with a number of papers following this particular article relating to children with arthritis and measures of pediatric function.[3] [4] [5] This shows that she has quite extensive knowledge on this particular population and experience working with chronic disease.
This article was supported by a grant from the US Department of Education, Office of Special Education and Rehabilitation Services, but there doesn't seem to be a conflict of interest or bias due to this.
This study had components of both an observational and experimental study. It described changes that happened over the period the study from before the intervention to post intervention.[1] In this research a control group was not included, the reason for this could be due to the fact that no change in signs and symptoms would be present. Although it may have been good to include as those that do not undertake the intervention could experience worsening of arthritis due to inactivity, and a comparison could be made in relation to baseline or control and intervention. It may have also been good to include another group with a different mode of exercise to conclude which had the greatest effects on the population.
What did the research involve?
A number of assessments were carried out in an approach to measure the severity of the participant's joint pain and fitness throughout the study in relation to the exercise program. This included a visual analog scale as well as a 9-minute run-walk test to measure aerobic endurance.
The training program consisted of a low impact exercise that aimed to improve participant's aerobic endurance, muscular strength and endurance, and flexibility. Subjects participated in 2 sessions of centre based exercise a week as well as undertaking a 60-minute exercise videotape once a week. The centre based exercise included a 10 minute warm up followed by a low impact peak aerobic exercise, which progressed from 15 minutes in the first week to 25 minutes by the third week. Subjects were to maintain a heart rate between 60-75% of their age-predicted heart rate maximum. This was then followed by 15 minutes of strengthening exercise for the arms, legs and trunk using their body weight, vinyl balls and elastic bands as resistance. The session ended with 10 minutes of cool down and stretching.[1]
One limitation occurred within this study, which was a small sample size. This indicates that changes in disease symptoms must be taken into consideration due to the fact that daily fluctuations in pain and joint motion can occur.
What were the basic results?
Comparisons for individual contrasts among articular severity index scores at the 3 test sessions[1]
R = rank total for each test session, †MSD = minimum significant difference, ‡ = P < 0.05
Significant differences were found across the 3 testing sessions in articular severity index (P<0.0001) and joint count (P<0.001). In the visual analog scale, scores decreased by 16% from the start of the study to the post-exercise test. 23 out of the 25 subjects had decreased articular severity index scores following the exercise program, of these 20 had a significant decrease in the severity of joint signs and symptoms.[1] This suggests that majority of subjects had improvements, with only a few participants having little to no improvement. The results that were found supported the hypothesis, suggesting that this study has been successful due to the improved symptoms in the diseased population.
Although all of these results seem positive, the findings may be over emphasized due to the fact that the author focuses mostly on the results that support her hypothesis. Within the discussion section it is then said that in the examination of the pre and post exercise change scores, most participants reported either no change or decreased pain, with only 5 subjects reporting a significant decrease in pain. This suggests that majority of subjects did not have a dramatic change in disease symptoms.
What conclusions can we take from this research?
The findings within this research indicate that increased physical activity, including weight bearing exercise, may play an important role in the management of childhood arthritis. Mean pain scores decreased from the entry of the study to the post-exercise test, with less than half of subjects experiencing no increased pain during the exercise program.[1] With this, it is evident that the training program seems to benefit children with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis but is may also be worth considering other forms of exercise as it may be more beneficial than weight bearing exercises. With this being said there is still evidence that this exercise intervention did improve the disease signs and symptoms after the program was undertaken, but also relays the fact that the total effect of the exercise was different for each subject.
This research suggests that children can benefit with the implementation of exercise to improve disease related symptoms.
Programs for individuals with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis need to focus on improving cardiovascular fitness and strength as well as increasing their joint mobility, whilst taking into consideration their fitness level and severity of disease.[6] Safety considerations should be discussed such as the type of exercise with a GP or exercise physiologist before commencing an exercise program to ensure it appropriate and safe based on the individual.
Websites for more information on juvenile chronic arthritis:
↑ a b c d e f g h Klepper SE. Effects of an eight‐week physical conditioning program on disease signs and symptoms in children with chronic arthritis. Arthritis Care & Research. 1999;12(1):52-60.
↑ Helmick CG, Felson DT, Lawrence RC, Gabriel S, Hirsch R, Kwoh CK, et al. Estimates of the prevalence of arthritis and other rheumatic conditions in the United States: Part I. Arthritis & Rheumatism. 2008;58(1):15-25.
↑ Klepper SE, Darbee J, Effgen SK, Singsen BH. Physical fitness levels in children with polyarticular juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis & Rheumatism: Official Journal of the American College of Rheumatology. 1992;5(2):93-100.
↑ Klepper SE. Exercise and fitness in children with arthritis: evidence of benefits for exercise and physical activity. Arthritis Care & Research. 2003;49(3):435-43
↑ Maes J, Kravitz L. Training clients with arthritis. Understanding and Working with Special Populations. 2005;87:87.
The Free High School Science Texts: A Textbook for High School Students Studying Physics
Definition - Charge - Electrostatic Force - Electric Fields - Electrical Potential - Important Equations and Quantities
S.I. base units
m/s² or m·s²
Sometimes you want to change a single label on a form without loading the form. For example, after you enter the country of an address you may want to ask for a "Province" in Canada or a "State" in the US. This can also be used to load alternative labels based on the user's language.
@namespace xf url("http://www.w3.org/2002/xforms");
This example shows a nice clean elegant way to iterate over elements in a instance for groups and elements. The structure is:
This examples shows how the output tag can be buried inside the input labels.
This example was originally inspired by Kurt Cagle.
Next Page: Suggesting Items |
The research takes a step toward clarifying the concept of lean production and develops and validates a multi-dimensional measure of lean production. The 10 distinct dimensions of a lean system are continuous flow, customer involvement, employee involvement, JIT delivery by suppliers, pull, set up time reduction, statistical process control, supplier development, supplier feedback, and total productive/preventive maintenance.
Lean production is an integrated socio-technical system whose main objective is to eliminate waste by concurrently reducing or minimizing supplier, customer, and internal variability. This dimension of lean production is about ensuring that suppliers deliver the right quantity at the right time in the right place.
Suppliers are directly involved in the new product development process.
Our key suppliers deliver to plant on JIT basis.
We have a formal supplier certification program.
Shah/Ward (2007): Deﬁning and developing measures of lean production. Journal of Operations Management, Vol. 25, No. 4, pp. 785-805.
Both composite reliability and average variance extracted are too low. Especially for the first and third item it is questionable if the scale really measures just-in-time delivery.
Cocoa ProgrammingFirst Steps | Objective-C basics | Memory Management | Foundation Kit | Application Kit | Web Kit
Someone, please fix this page
In Objective-C (unlike in C++), all objects are created dynamically. This means that they continue to exist until they are explicitly destroyed.
To create an object, send its class an alloc message: [aClass alloc];. Note that this returns a new instance of the class but does not initialize its data. Typically you want to immediately send the new object an init message to remedy this. Allocation and initialization are usually combined in one line:
aClass *newobj = [[aClass alloc] init];
There is a class method called new which allocates and provides a bare-bones initialization of the object, but has been deprecated in favor of alloc and init.
In C++, every dynamically created object needs to be explicitly deleted (using the delete operator). In Java, every dynamically created object (that is, every object) will be automatically deleted when the garbage collector detects that the object is no longer referenced. In Objective-C neither of these approaches is used.
An Objective-C object keeps a reference count. When an object is created, its reference count is initialized to 1. When the reference count reaches zero, the object will self-destruct.
To tell an object that you will no longer use it, send it a release message: "[anObject release];". This decrements the object's reference count by one. If you were the last user of the object, the object will destroy itself.
After sending release to an object it is not safe to use that object anymore since the object may have self-destroyed.
When you want to retain an object, i.e. prevent it from disappearing, send it a retain message: "[anObject retain];". Note that you should not send a retain message to an object you have created with an alloc message, because alloc always implies retain. Therefore, retain is only needed, if you need to use an object that is created elsewhere (and will be sent the release message from there when it's not needed in that part of the program anymore).
Every retain needs to be matched by one and only one release. Note that the new, alloc, copy, and mutableCopy methods also implicitly retain the returned object, so those methods also need to be balanced with release.
Sometimes an object cannot be released immediately: for example, a function creates an object and wants to return it to the caller. Now, the callee should release the object it has created and won't be using anymore. However, the caller need to get access to the returned object. If the callee would release the created object, the caller would never see the return value. One solution
In Objective-C/OpenStep runtime, it is possible to send an object an autorelease message. This will cause the object to be added to the current autorelease pool. Objects in an autorelease pool will be released at some point in the future (when the current autorelease pool is destroyed). They are safe to use prior to that.
If the caller wants to keep the returned object, it must retain it. Otherwise, the object will be automatically released. Example:
[myLangName retain]; /* Will be released when this object no longer needs it */
In this chapter, we will build on what we have done so far. Make sure you are comfortable with the subject before continuing on. If not, go back and review them. We will take you to a brief review of what we did.
We first started with the elementary techniques of Design of Experiments. Some of the designs we focused on were Best Guess and One Factor at a Time. Then, in the previous chapter, we introduced a new concept, factorial design, and discussed topics such as main effects, interaction effect, and 1-way Analysis of Variance, all of which we would go into more detail. However, in the practical world, one factor is not as widely used in experiments. So, we should extend our case of factorial design to two or more factors (or sets of treatment).
Using a factorial design has many advantages. Factorial designs does not limit the effects of the factors to only a certain degree, which allows experimenters to make findings and conclusions over a wider range of conditions. If there are interactions present, then factorial designs help prevent conclusions that may be incorrect. In most cases, factorial designs tend to be more efficient than OFAT. As a review, factorial design refers to the experimental design where all combinations of factors’ levels are covered for each replicate. In a two or more factorial design, we obtain information on all the factors through changing the factors one by one. For a general arrangement for a two factor design, there will be Factor A and Factor B, each with ‘a’ levels and ‘b’ levels, respectively.
We will now refer to main effect as me. The main effect usually refers to the key factors in the experiment that are of interest. It is defined as the change in the response variable as a result of the change in the factor’s level(s). At times, we may encounter interaction effects. For example, in a three factorial design (ABC), there may be some differences in the response(s) among the levels of Factor A and the levels of Factor B. Not all levels of the different factors will have the same response as another level of factors. When such conflict between the levels of factors exist, we still refer to this as the interaction between factors. In this text, we will now refer to 2-factor interaction as 2fi, 3-factor interaction as 3fi, and so forth. You probably get the idea by now. Get comfortable with the new wordings!
In the past chapter we introduced ANOVA designs that involved multiple levels of a single factor. In this chapter we will explore a deeper application of ANOVA; with 2 factors. Two-way ANOVA allows us to compare the effects of two factors simultaneously. The main purpose of this comparison is to understand if there is an interaction of the two independent factors on the dependent factor. For example, you could used two-way ANOVA to see whether there is an interaction between the amount of time spent exercising a day and the amount of time spent at work on the happiness level of an individual. The basis of two-way ANOVA is essentially the same as single factor ANOVA, with the exception being that two-way ANOVA displays a result of three F statistics; one to test each of the me and a third to test the combined effect of the two factors.
In order to gain a better understanding of experiments with two or more factors, the final section of this chapter will cover multiple sample recipes of experiments involving two or more factors. These recipes include analyses on datasets such as fuel economy data, storm weather data, and flight departure data. Each analyses will start with an overview of the data using descriptive statistics, moving into visualization of the data using several plotting techniques, and concluding with ANOVA testing and results.
Now, in Chapter 2, we will expand on our knowledge of factorial designs to two or more factors. Let’s get started!
Factorial design is used to gain insight on the effect of various independent variables, or factors, on a dependent, or response, variable. These effects are split into two categories, main effects (me) and interaction effects. Main effects are calculated for each individual factor in in an experiment, so for an experiment with n factors there will be n main effects. Interaction effects look at 2 or more factors together to determine whether the combination of factors has an effect on the response variable. Analysis of interaction effects begins with 2-factor interactions (2fi) but can expand as far as n-factor interactions. However, it is commonly assumed that interaction effects involving three or more factors are equivalent to zero so the focus remains on 2-factor interactions. Still, it follows that in an experiment with n factors, there are nC2 2-factor interactions, nC3 3-factor interactions, and so on.
A 2-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) is a way to compare the effects of two factors on the variation in a response variable observed within a particular dataset, as well as any impact of the interaction between those two factors. Similar to a 1-way ANOVA, the sum of squares (SS) are calculated for each group and sub-group, and in dividing by the appropriate degrees of freedom (df) one can calculate the mean squares (MS) for each sub-group. By dividing the MS value between levels of a given factor by the reference distribution, the F-statistic can be calculated and compared to the probabilistic F-distribution to determine whether the F-statistic for a given factor (or interaction) is statistically significant. If the p-value associated with the F-statistic is significant, then the variation in the response variable cannot be explained by randomness alone.
Randomness of the dataset is a key underlying assumption in the analysis of variance, thus it is critical that all experimental trials were performed randomly. This involves random selection of trials sequence by factor, level, and replicate. If the experiments were performed randomly, it is safe to say that the variation between groups may be compared. Conversely, if the experiments were performed systematically, then there could be a systemic bias hidden in the data that could result in errors in the analysis.
Recipes for experiments with two or more factors
The objective of this analysis is to test factors that may influence fuel consumption, therefore helping consumers to make their most economic decision on used vehicle by using ANOVA. The author set ‘Honda’ and ‘Toyota’ as two levels of factor ‘make’ as an example; and year from ‘2005’ to ‘2011’ as levels of factor ‘year'. Response variable in this test is ‘cty’, referring to city fuel economy in mpg (miles per gallon). The analysis is based upon dataset 'fueleconomy'. Overall, although it is important to analyze data set using R, the author was needed to describe what he analyzed after using R. I am not sure that 'maker' and 'year' variable could be a factor because each year could not represent the level of a factor because 'maker' does not represent the level of factors and 'year' seems like continuous variable.
Also, the author needs more logical and theoretical support for hypotheses of main effects and interactions and reasons why the author select two factors for response variable. Furthermore, the author needs to explain theoretical meanings of randomize, replicate and block in detail in order to justify why the author does not consider them in the this experiment. In addition, the author should explicates what methods he used for model adequacy checking. And I recommend that the author explain the meanings of research results and findings at the end of the research. [1]
These data were collected by the Social Security Administration from 1880 to 2013, and are called the "babynames" dataset in R. Since the dataset is so large, it was subset for computational purposes to only include babies named 'Mary'. Surprisingly, there were several male babies named "Mary", so an analysis of variance was conducted to determine if "gender" and "year" had an effect on the number (n) of babies with this particular name over the years. In this experiment, the main purpose is to test the sensitivity of number of babies named "Mary" in response to the "year" and "gender". Experimental unit is number of babies named "Mary", and factors that the unit is subjected to are "gender" of the baby and "year" of birth. There are 2 levels to factor "gender": male and female, and 30 levels of factor "year": from 1880 to 2010. "Gender" and "year" are both random factors, because they do not have intentionally selected levels, and they are able to represent a general population rather than only the selected levels. Factorial design was chosen to be the design method of this experiment. Instead of varying factors in a sequence, or testing response on only one best guess treatment, the author treated experimental units with combinations of factors. There are no replicates in this experiment; the number of babies under each condition was not measured across multiple populations. Nuisance factors in this experiment can be fashion trends; for example, there could be celebrity named "Mary" who was popular in a few years. Since these factors are not of the experiment's interest, they should be blocked. However, fashion trend is not a controllable factor, so it is hard to block. To draw meaningful conclusion from the data, another process that is important to experimental design is randomization. First, the data in this experiment was randomly selected; it was not measure only in certain types family or region. Although in an ideal experiment, treatments should be randomly assigned to samples, in this experiment, no treatment was assigned. Therefore, random assignment was not achieved. The last aspect to randomization is random run order. Time frame is already a factor of this experiment, and cannot be controlled. Thus, random run order was not achieved either. To analyze these data, the author computed boxplot and one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) on both factors, and 2-way ANOVA on the interaction of the 2 factors. Boxplots showed that there are main effects of each factor on the response. With the one-way ANOBA performed on "year" alone, the author failed to reject the H0 that there is no effect on n. That is, "year" had no effect on the number of babies named "Mary". For "gender" alone, the author rejected the H0 that there is no effect on n. That is, "gender" had a significant effect on the number of babies named "Mary". However, when analyzing the interaction of "year" and "gender", the author rejected the H0 that there was no effect on n. In this model, the interaction effect between the 2 factors had a significant effect on the number of babies named "Mary". Unfortunately, these data are not normally distributed, so the results cannot necessarily be valid without first exploring data transformations to increase their normality. [2]
The following document details the analysis from a two-factor, multi-level experiment of the data set ‘storms’ from the R package ‘nasaweather.’ The experiment looks at two factors: the month and year that a storm occurred, and one response variable: the pressure of a storm system. The ‘month’ factor had seven levels: June, July, August, September, October, November, December. The ‘year’ factor had six levels: 1995-2000, inclusive. This data was not randomized or replicated, as there is no way to control weather data other than collecting it as it occurs. Possible nuisance factors not examined in this analysis could include the location of the storm, the temperature of the storm system, or possibly the instrumentation used to collect the data (though in data collected by NASA, instrumentation error or bias seems unlikely). A blocking design categorizing storms by location could eliminate the effect of location on storm pressure, and possibly temperature of the system.
An analysis of variance (ANOVA) test was performed to determine the statistical relationship between the pressure means of storms that occurred in different months and different years. ANOVA techniques were also used to determine the relationship between the pressure means and the interaction between the month and year. The analysis concluded that there is a relationship between the variance in pressure values of storms and the month and year. There was also a strong interaction between the month and year that a storm occurred. Normal QQ plots were used to determine if the data set fits the Normal distribution. The QQ plots suggest that the Normal distribution may not be the best fit for the data, but could be a fair approximation. For a potentially more accurate analysis, a Kruskal-Wallis test should be used, as it does not assume normality, as an analysis of variance does. However, this Kruskal-Wallis test cannot calculate the interaction effects, so there may be a trade-off there.h.[3]
In this recipe, fuel economy data collected by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency was used to demonstrate the proper execution of a two-factor experiment with multiple levels for each factor. Specifically, this experiment analyzed the potential effect of number of cylinders in an engine and the transmission type on the highway gas mileage achieved by the vehicle. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) test was used to examine both main and interaction effects. For each of the main effects the ANOVA test produced the lowest calculable p-value in R. From this we can conclude that the difference in variation between different engine sizes and different transmissions is not due to random chance and that there is a very good possibility that both engine size and transmission type have a significant effect on highway gas mileage. The ANOVA test for the interaction effect between the 2 factors produced the same p-value. However, the F ratio, while still large, was many times smaller than the F ratio for each of the main effects. Still, it can be inferred with a high level of confidence that engine size and transmission type do interact in some way to produce a difference in variation that is too large to be random. It should also be mentioned that since this is an analysis of data that was previously collected, many of the assumptions used in order to draw conclusions from ANOVA testing may not be valid. [4]
The following experiment is a study on the effects of engine features on a vehicle’s fuel economy. This experiment utilizes the data set in the “fueleconomy” package. This data was collected by the EPA from 1985 to 2015. This uses a subset of the data levels to create a two factor, three level experiment. This experiment examines two factors, “number of cylinders” and “type of transmission”. Number of cylinders has three levels (4, 6, and 8 cylinders) and type of transmission has three levels (auto AV-S6, automatic 4-speed, and manual 6-speed). This experiment only considered cars of “Toyota” make and from the years “2005-2015”. Some levels of the type of transmission were also excluded from this experiment. The possible response variables are highway and city miles per gallon. For this experiment, the response variable is city miles per gallon. This experiment is not well randomized or replicated, but it does use blocking to look at a specific subset of the data. The author uses boxplots to show the potential main effects of number of cylinders and type of transmission on city miles per gallon. Using ANOVA, both of the main effects are significant. The interaction effect between cylinders and transmission on city miles per gallon was not significant. This is a simple example of a two factor, three level experimental design. [5]
Factorial design experiments study the responses of dependent variables to two or more factors. In a factorial design experiment, the subjects are randomly chosen from the population and assigned to a treatment in a random order, and the experimental runs are executed in a random order. The following R publication details an analysis using two factors selected from fuel economy data of an EPA study. Unfortunately, as the data was collected using unknown methods, it cannot be confirmed that randomization was used in this experiment. Two factors (cylinder number and fuel type) with multiple levels were studied. All levels of the factor cylinder number were used (9), and fuel type data was subsetted to include 3 out of 13 levels. The effect on the response variable, city gas mileage, was studied using an analysis of variance (ANOVA). The main effects, or the effects of each individual factor, on the response variable were computed. The interaction effect of cylinder number and fuel type (when the effects for one factor are different at different levels of another factor) were also computed. After the ANOVA, the adequacy of the model was assessed using qq-plots, interaction plots, and by plotting the fitted model against the residuals of the model. For all effects, the final results lead us to reject the null hypothesis, suggesting that the variation in city gas mileage is greater than variation that would occur as a result of randomization. However, the model adequacy checks suggest the model employed is inadequate to explain the results, so other models should be considered. [6]
A two-factor experiment was performed by using the storms database from the from National Hurricane Center. This database is composed of 2747 observations from all storms that have occurred in the Atlantic Ocean, Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico, from 1995 to 2005. It includes the name of the storm, year, month, date, hour, latitude, longitude, type, air pressure, maximum wind speeds, and day of the hurricane season. The objective of the analysis was to observe how wind pressure levels are affected by type of storm and wind speed. The Type of Storm factor has four levels: Extratropical, Tropical Depression, Hurricane, and Tropical Storm. The Wind Speed factor ranges from 15 to 155. An ANOVA test was performed in order to explain if there is a strong relationship between the Type of Storm and Air Pressure, as well as to observe how Wind Speed relates to Air Pressure. Results indicate that that both main effects and interactions are significant at a 99.9% Confidence Interval, which indicates that the variation of air pressure can be explained by wind pressure and type of storm.
The following analysis utilizes baby name data obtained from the SSA from the years 1880 to 2013. Popular male and female names are on occasion used as a unisex name by the less popular sex. This analysis seeks to investigate if both the top 100 male and female names of all time were differentially preferred over time.
This recipe is examining the vehicle data from the fueleconomy package.This dataset contains fuel economy data as a result of vehicle testing done at the Environmental Protection Agency’s National Vehicle and Fuel Emissions Laboratory in Ann Arbor,Michigan.This experiment is testing the effect of number of cylinders and fuel type on the highway fuel economy for Hondas. Each of these factors had multiple levels, with 3 levels for cylinders, 4 for fuel type and the response variable being the highway gas mileage of the vehicle. In order to determine the distribution of each of the data sets, boxplots were created, grouped by each of the factors. The cylinder and Gas type factors can be considered fixed effects, whereas random effects could be the performance of one car as compared to the 'average' car of that type. The experimental design was not randomized or replicated, but a blocking procedure was used in order to test all cars of the same brand at one time. ANOVA conducted on each of the factors as well as for interaction effects resulted in a significant main effect between each of the variables on the highway mileage of the car. The interaction effect of the number of cylinders and the gas type was also found to be statistically significant. In order to test the goodness of the model, QQ plots of the residuals and a residual plot were used in order to determine normality. Data was found to be relatively normal, although it deviated at extreme values. As a result, a Kruskal-Wallis test was used to examine the main effects, as it does not assume normality like an ANOVA does. The K-W test found that the main effects were statistically significant, even if normality is not assumed. Interaction effects can not be computed with the K-W test directly. [8]
The following experiment conducts a two-factor analysis on a multi-level experiment examining the data of various storms at different time stamps along their paths. With a dataset of 16 different columns and 2747 observations, some independent variables include the month, the latitude, the type, and the category and how all of these factors relate to the wind speed of the storm, the response variable. A multi-level, multi-factor Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) test was completed to statistically determine the significance of the p-values for each individual factor, along with the p-values of the interactions between the factors. The null hypothesis of this experiment states that the variation of the wind speed cannot be explained by anything other than randomization. Excluding the interactions below,
Latitude, Category & Pressure
Month, Category & Pressure
Latitude, Month, Category, Pressure
Seasoned airline travelers know that occasional flight delays are inevitable. In 2013, a total of 336,776 domestic flights departed from the three NYC airports, and many of these flights experienced delays in arrival time. This statistical analysis explores two possible contributing factors for these arrival days: origin airport (JFK, LGA, or EWR) and destination airport (105 airports in the United States and its territories). A random sample of 5000 flights was selected from the dataset for a 2-way ANOVA to test against the null hypotheses that the origin airport, destination airport, and interaction between the two factors have no effect on the response variable: arrival delay. In fact, the analysis provides statistically significant reason to reject all three null hypotheses, indicating that origin airport, destination airport, and the interaction between these two factors have some effect on the delay in arrival. An independent repetition of the analysis confirmed the results that something other than randomness determined the variation between origin airport, destination airport, and the interaction (p < 0.024, p < 0.0004, and p < 2.6e-05, respectively). [10]
The following link examines the vehicles dataset within the “fueleconomy” package, which is the fuel economy data from the EPA covering years between 1985 and 2015. This dataset contains various variables, and does not include vehicles with incomplete data.
In this study, a two-factor, multiple level analysis was performed to examine whether vehicle manufacturer (make) and/or fuel type (fuel) have an effect on the city fuel economy (cty). A subset of 4 levels used for vehicle manufacturer and all levels of fuel type considered. Make and fuel are both qualitative independent variables and ANOVA method was performed for statistically analyzing their effects on the response variable (city fuel economy). The null hypothesis for ANOVA was defined as the city fuel economy shows no difference on different makes and fuel types. Three ANOVA tables were created, two for main effects of make and fuel and one for interaction effect make*fuel, all results return a very small p-value which represents all effects are significant. However, without the confirmation of normal distribution of dependent variable we cannot accept the results of ANOVA correct. In this study Q-Q plots were drawn and they represent a difference then a normal distribution. (Additional to the existing Q-Q plots, by plotting a histogram, positively skewed distribution can be seen.). As a result, these findings of ANOVA should not be used and for further studies with other methods should be considered.
(Note: There are some mistakes in the study which should be corrected, as an example in the Box Plots x and y axis labels are not correctly defined.) [11]
The following link directs you to a recipe of an experiment in regards to the fuel economy dataset. An analysis of a data set of city gas mileages of different vehicles, specifically Audi, of different characteristics. In the analysis I take a two-factor, multi-level approach to determine the effect of varying engine displacement and fuel type on the resultant city gas mileage of the Audi. This experiment was a fixed effect experiment; the levels of the vairables were specifically chosen and are not able to represent the entire population (there are other levels of fuel types and displacements not analyzed in the experiment). Exploritory data analysis was done in order to understand the main effects of the experiment. Analyses of variance (ANOVA) were performed to compare means among the factors with regards to their respective levels. The large levels of the F-values during this analysis show that the explained(between groups) variance is much larger than the unexplained(within group) variance, which shows that the experiment is significant. Another ANOVA was performed to analyze the interaction effect of the two factors on the response variable of highway gas mileage.[12]
This sample recipe looks into a two-factor, multi-level experiment of the data set concerning hurricane storms. An analysis on the air pressure at the storm center is conducted based on the *storm* dataset in the *nasaweather* package. Here is the breakdown of the two factor, multi-level: “Year of Occurrence”, with 6 levels ranging from years 1995-2000, and “Storm Type”, with 4 levels as Tropical Depression, Tropical Storm, Hurricane, or Extratropical. The response variable is “pressure”, which is the air pressure at the center of the storm. Since the data collected occurred during given periods, the whole population characteristic was captured and may be seen as a random effect than a fixed effect. The fixed effect can be the type of storm because it was selected and does not represent the general population. As for the Experimental Design, the objective is to find if there is a trend in air pressure with year of occurrence and/or storm type. The design did not include replicates, repeated measures, and blocking. A statistical analysis was conducted, and represented as a box plot. ANOVA was utilized as a tool to determine statistical effects on the pressure due to year of occurrence, storms storm type, and the interaction effect of year and type. From all three analysis of variance, it is worth noting the small p-values. Looking at the Mean Square and F-value, the F-value was very large, which indicates the year and type do not explain the variance. From this, there is little chance that the variance of pressure can be explained by year of occurrence and type of storm. Results indicated that randomness in pressure can be due to a different factor besides simple randomization. To assure model adequacy, a qqplot and interaction plot were used. The result show that both the year of occurrence and storm type, and their interaction may explain the randomness in the air pressure at the storm center.[13]
The following analysis of a three factor multiple level experiment uses non-parametric ANOVA to examine the effect of storm type, month, and location latitude on pressure during a storm. Each of these three factors is broken down into several levels; "Latitude" has 6 levels and ranges from 0 to 80, "Type of Storm" has 4 levels, and "Month" has 6 levels ranging from 6 to 12. The response variable, pressure, ranges from 905 to 1020 with a mean of 990. Interaction plots for the factors are used to determine interaction effects, which show that there is an interaction effect between "Month" and "Latitude". This suggests that different locations behave differently during different months in terms of storm pressure, so this interaction needs to be accounted for. In the model, this is done by adding a regressor for "Month * Latitude". To test whether each of the factors are found to have a significant difference in means, ANOVA is used. The small p-values (< 0.001) in the output allow the null hypothesis that randomization alone can account for variation in storm pressure to be rejected. Thus, latitude, month, and type of storm are all statistically significant in having an effect on storm pressure, and there is a statistically significant interaction between the month of the storm and the latitude at which it occurred. A normal Q-Q plot is used to look at the model residuals, which do not seem to be normally distributed on the low tail. This may be because the response variable of pressure is not normally distributed, so the model may not have the best fit. [14]
The wages and education of young males were recorded from 1980 to 1987. The dataset has been obtained from the R package “Ecdat” and contains 4360 observations of 12 variables. The analysis uses a fixed effect model and analysis of variance to determine whether e.g. industry, occupation or being in a union has an influence on hourly wage. https://rpubs.com/bjarke1/isye4330project1
The following references links to an example examining terror attacks from around the world. The Global Terror Database contains records of terror attacks from 1973-2015. A subset of this data, attacks from 2012-2015, was examined to determine the effect of attack type, target type, weapon type, and location on the number of fatalities a terror attack results in. ANOVA techniques were used to examine the main effects and the interaction effects, which showed that all four factors have a statistically significant effect on the response variable, as well as significant interaction effects between all four factors. [15]
The deaths of the citizens of New York City were recorded from 2007 - 2011, as well other factors relating to their death. The total dataset includes 3840 observations and 6 factors. This example explains the preliminaries of data exploration as well as ANOVA implementation.
The duration of breastfeeding in weeks of over 900 mothers was recorded from 1978-1986. The data set included 9 variables and the analysis shown in this examples explores 4 factors and their effects on the duration of breastfeeding through ANOVA and a mixed effects model. http://rpubs.com/Kristencole3/217721
The project examines which factors affect the air quality in the Californian Metropolitan Area. The data contains a total of N=30 observations, with 5 variables. The response variable is the air quality, and 4 factors consisting of values added from companies, amount of rain fall, coastal location or not, and population density.
In this analysis based on a publicly available dataset of 200,000+ Jeopardy questions, the objective is to determine whether the value of the question is related to the obscurity of the answer. To quantify the response variable of "obscurity" in the 500-question sample pulled from this dataset, a function was implemented that returns the number of Google Search hits for a given answer. Through several 2-factor ANOVA analyses, it was found that the question value did indeed show statistically significant variation in the means with p<<0.05. The 2-factor ANOVA between value and round indicated an almost-significant interaction between value and round.[16]
This project analyzes the factors that affect several departments satisfaction ratings within a financial services firm. The general concept is to examine the effects of these factors on the overall ratings of the departments (response variable). Factors include attributes such as complaint handling, opportunities for learning, and frequency of performance based raises. These measures were quantified by a Likert type multi-level survey, which was distributed to 35 clerical employees throughout 30 different departments. This example involves several statistical models and data exploration tools such as box and interaction plots, as well as the extensive use of ANOVA models.
In this study, a four-factor, multi-level experiment is performed to test whether factors of "Cyl", "Japanese", "SmartWay", and "Veh.Class" may affect the emission level of CO2. We find data from the link in `data.gov` in the 100+ interesting datasets, a dataset of automobile (model 2017) fuel economy is tested. This dataset contains the preliminary fuel economy values for 2017 model year vehicles from the Environmental Protection Agency’s National Vehicle and Fuel Emissions Laboratory in Ann Arbor, Michigan. Our main purpose in this study is to test whether the factors with different cars, which we choose based on Best Guess, can affect the level of emission of CO2. By using ANOVA test, we test the significance level of main factors and interactions. According to the results, four main factors are all significant at 1% level. For the interactions,'Japanese x Veh.Class','Japanese x SmartWay', 'Cyl x Veh.Class','Cyl x SmartWay' and 'Veh.Class x Smartway' are statistically significant at 5% level. The interaction factor 'Japanese x Cyl' are not significant. http://rpubs.com/zhaol11/217816
The recipe analyzes the factors that effect the score of extroversion participants achieved on an online personality test. In order to take the test participants were required to provide certain information about themselves to include: age, gender, race, hand dominance, and native language. The test consisted of 50 Likert questions, each corresponding to a specific personality trait. For the purposes of this recipe only the questions relating to extroversion were considered. The four factors chosen were age, gender, hand dominance and native language. A combination of graphical analysis and ANOVA testing was used to analyze this fixed effects model. [17]
Study of 4 multi level factors and their effect on a response variable. Data courtesy of Forbes regarding the top 2000 companies in terms of financial data. Mechanics ranging from descriptive statistics, various plots, analysis of variance, and interaction plots of used. Due to the nature of the dataset, factors are found to be highly predictive. To review this project, please follow this link! http://rpubs.com/byeonb/andreasv3
This study is a factorial design experiment that uses a fixed effect model to examine disbursements made for the 2016 election. The effect of factors: candidate, state, type of disbursement, and year were studied on the response variable, disbursement amount. Exploratory analysis was first done using boxplots for each factor. The main effect was then calculated for each factor. Analysis of variance was used to determined whether explained variance > unexplained variance for main effects and interaction effects. The main effects for state and type of disbursement as well as many of the interaction effects demonstrated statistically significant differences. The study culminated with interaction plots for the two-factor interactions. To make confidently make inferences about the effects of these factors, model accuracy checks need to be conducted.
(This was revised on 121616 to display the results.)
This not-so-secret recipe is a multi-factor, multi-level factorial design experiment that uses data drawn from 1987 of selected married couples with nonnegative family total income, where wife was of working age (18-64) and not self-employed. This study analyzes the effect of 4 factors: owned, nonwhite, mortgage, occupation on the response variable, hours (labor supply of married females measured in hours per year). Analysis of variance test was conducted to analyze the significance level of the main and interaction effects. http://rpubs.com/dededolkar/217843
This analysis focuses on understanding how different factors affect the number of days a student is absent from school. The data set classifies children from Walgett, New South Wales, Australia by culture, age, sex, and learning status, and records the response of number of days absent from school in a particular school year. The factors included in this study were ethnicity, age, gender, and learning status- each with two or more levels. Multifactor analysis of variance was used to determine the effects of each of the factors as well as their interaction effects on number of days absent. http://rpubs.com/rajanideshpande/217857
This recipe is a study of 4 factors and their effect on a response variable. The data set is breaches from the Ecdat package in R. The data set consists of cyber security breaches for health care information. The factors utilized were state, location of breach, type of breach, and business associates if any, Analysis of variance test was utilized to analyze the significance level of the main and interaction effects. http://rpubs.com/mjshahir/217862
This report contributes to the limited number of investigations into the influence of socioeconomic characteristics on travel patterns for inhabitants of rural areas and small communities. Employing survey data from the National Household Travel Survey, we have evaluated the effect of socioeconomic determinants on daily trips made per household. A randomized multi factor design, along analysis of variance are used to assess the influence of various covariates. http://rpubs.com/trilcemarie/nhts_nys_nonmsa
Analysis of negative habits or addictives (ie. drug use, tobacco and alcohol consumption) are seen to negatively affect the health of the Americans. A survey that captured 55,602 respondents from the National Household Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) analyzed the relationship between gender, criminal activity and mental illness in the United States. This database was used to explore the significant differences among the population, based on demographic and addiction-related variables. ANOVA was used to test the statistical significance of these differences where the response variable was depression. http://rpubs.com/dgramirez82/DoEProject1
The objective of this experiment is the to test the variation of car price in response to the changes in country of brand, type of car, weight of car, and mileage. Factorial design was chosen as the experimental strategy of this study. The "rpart::car.test.frame" data set residing in the Ecdat package of the R programming language was utilized. Factors except country are found to have significant main effect on the price of car, and interaction effect exists among factors. However, only the interaction between country and type, and between type and weight are significant. ~Yage Ding - http://rpubs.com/dingy2/216646
↑ http://rpubs.com/chenh16/31966
↑ https://rpubs.com/manzat/31896
↑ http://rpubs.com/maxwinkelman/31976
↑ http://rpubs.com/adamato/31990
↑ http://rpubs.com/Uzma_1004/32104
↑ http://rpubs.com/Tothk2/32508 - By Kevin Toth
↑ http://rpubs.com/hsiac/33706
↑ http://rpubs.com/tranc3/38474
↑ http://rpubs.com/braunj6/33632
↑ http://rpubs.com/howelb/32599
↑ http://rpubs.com/svoboa/33507
↑ http://rpubs.com/macchm/32509
↑ http://rpubs.com/serena049/doehw2)
↑ http://rpubs.com/konraz/39557
↑ http://rpubs.com/molly_ren/doe_renaud_project1
↑ http://rpubs.com/deagem/jeopaRdy - M. Deagen
↑ http://rpubs.com/cadorsey/217821
↑ http://rpubs.com/ziemba/217830
↑ http://rpubs.com/ziemba/235820
Proto-oncogene is a normal gene that is responsible for cell growth, cell differentiation, cell division, and apoptosis .
However, these types of genes have the potential to become an oncogene, a cancer-causing gene.
If a cell can no longer control growth, death, and division, there can be huge health problems.
Studying why and how to prevent proto-oncogenes from changing to oncogenes has been gaining more and more attention.
Mutations in proto-oncogene can cause it to turn into an oncogene.
Gene amplification event.
Chromosomal translocation.
Mutations in microRNA (miRNA): microRNAs regulate genes by down-regulating them, but mutations in miRNA can prevent them from suppressing the proper genes.
Just like any other cancer cells, oncogenes can cause many uncontrollable events.
Cancer cells go through many changes that are difficult to target individually. Scientists believe that cancerous cells depend on a certain oncogenes more than the others when it comes to cellular growth and replication. This characteristics is called oncogene addiction. If scientists can determine this specific gene, they can treat the cancer by blocking this gene.
The process of a cell with a proto-oncogene becoming an overly abundant cancerous oncogene which the cell then produces the oncogene protein in excess initiating it to develop into a cancerous cell and forming a tumor. Targeting the cell when it has excess of the oncogene protein prevents more cancerous cells from forming.
If scientists cannot target a certain gene and prevent it from causing cancer, then why not turn to a different method of treatment, such as suppressing that cancerous oncogene. When certain cells have oncogenes that are amplified, or they are present in excess, they produce large amounts of their proteins which can initiate the formation of cancerous cells and ultimately lead to tumors. In breast cancer for example, the proto-oncogene HER2/neu is present in normal tissue cells but it turns into an oncogene when the HER2/neu gene is present in large excess and it produces in abundance its respective HER2/neu protein in a cell. Scientists have concluded that, in breast cancer patients for example, cancerous cells that have a high amount of HER2/neu protein did not respond very well to medical treatments of chemotherapy as to those patients who did not have the HER2/neu protein in large excess in their cells. In order to help patients combat their cancer, new drugs have been made available to target the HER2/neu protein and thus reducing the growth of the cancerous cells and ultimately giving the patients a better chance of overcoming the cancer. Two drugs that are used to target the HER2/neu protein abundant cells are Herceptin® and Tykerb®, more drugs are currently undergoing clinical testing so that doctors can have a larger arsenal of drugs to help patients overcome cancer. In conclusion, by targeting cells that produce too much of the HER2/neu protein, which become cancerous, slows the progress of the cancer cells forming and thus making the cancer more easily treatable.[1]
An alternative way to treat cancer on a genetic level is to restore tumor suppressor genes that are not functioning as they should be. This method is more challenging for scientists because they have not been able to develop a successful way to do this. One large problem they face to solving the restoration of suppressant genes is a means to take the cancer cells and insert new DNA to make them function properly. The complexity of cancer cells and their potential multiple mutations only makes it even more so difficult because now there is more than one gene that needs to be replaced. One attempt that was carried out with the mutated gene TP53 where the scientists used a virus, that they had put the non-mutated TP53 gene into, to try to make it insert the normal gene into the cancerous cells. However, this was only successful when carried out in laboratory experiments and not successful in trials with patients. [1]
[1] “Oncogenes, Tumor Suppressor Genes, and Cancer”. American Cancer Society, 27 Dec. 2011. Web. 20 Nov. 2012.
Cell Biology | Introduction | Types of cells | Parts of the cell | Cell division | Gene expression and translation
The exit() function stops the program. exit_code is passed on to be the return value of the program, where usually zero indicates success and non-zero indicates an error.
The story returns to the Rose Terrace Nursing Home on February 9, 1986. Evelyn brings Taco Bell and Ninny is excited because other than Franco American spaghetti, this is the first "foreign food" she has ever eaten. Evelyn is anxious to find out what happened to Idgie and Ruth, and she asks if Ruth did leave that summer. Mr. & Mrs. Threadgoode pleaded with Ruth to stay and help get Idgie through her senior year, but Ruth said she had to leave because she was getting married in the fall. Sipsey, however, said Ruth didn't want to leave because her pillow was wet with tears every morning. The night before Ruth left, Idgie took one of Buddy's trophies and broke all the windows in her room out of frustration. The next day, Idgie left and never went back to school. She only came home for weddings and when her father had a heart attack. Big George is now the only person that knows where Idgie is, but never tells anyone where she is out of respect. However, when ever Mrs. Threadgoode requests for Idgie to come by for a visit, he insures that Idgie receives the message.
The aim of this game is to cross the finish line first by clicking on the "go" buttons that appear in the game. However, pop-up windows will appear within the game covering up part of the screen. By clicking on the X button on the top of these pop-ups, you can make them close. Each level you will get more pop-ups and they will also get bigger in size until they fill the game screen.
Only close the pop-ups that cover up the "go" button.
If you type the phrase "nopopups" the pop-ups on the screen will disappear. Only works once per game.
V’Zot HaBrachah (This is the Blessing) Deuteronomy 33:1-34:12
“Now this is the blessing with which Moshe the man of God blessed the sons of Israel before his death” (Deuteronomy 33:1).
We have arrived at the end of the journey with Moshe and what a journey it has been. Sadly after all we went through with him, it has to end with Moshe not entering into the land that he so diligently, humbly, sacrificially, lovingly and uncompromisingly lead bnei Yisrael to. The last chapter of Moshe's life is being written; recorded for time immemorial in the eternal Word of Yahweh. And what title does El Gibor (the Mighty God) give him at the twilight of his life? He calls him the "Man of God"
”Since then no prophet has risen in Israel like Moshe, whom Yahweh knew face to face, for all the signs and wonders which Yahweh sent him to perform in the land of Egypt against Pharaoh, all his servants, and all his land, and for all the mighty power and for all the great terror which Moshe performed in the sight of all Israel” (Deuteronomy 34:10-12).
Moshe leaves the scene of his earthly mission with a prophetic blessing upon each tribe that will look down the corridors of time to the Messianic kingdom. This is his parting legacy to them.
Moshe foresees a day when Israel will redeem mankind and restore the universe to its ideal state -- but he doesn't ignore the many pitfalls on the so long way. He expands Yaakov's visions, warnings, and blessings of his sons, applying them to each of the 12 tribes and to the nation of Israel. So Yaakov's dream of his Divine mission, to be the Israeli ladder connecting heaven and earth, is tempered by his second vision-- a battle to survive throughout the long night of history, struggling with those who fight Israel, God's agent for redemption. These blessing by Moshe are prophetic blessing to the children of Israel, just like Yaacov's , blessings to his twelve son's were prophetic.
In his short introduction, vs. 1-5, Moshe points to three reasons why Israel was worthy of these blessings:
2- They accepted God's Torah
3- They acknowledged God's sovereignty.
Moshe then goes on to bless the tribes in a similar manner to Yaacov, however if you will notice he did not bless the tribes in the same order. Although Reuben is still first and Levi is still third all the other tribes have changed positions and the tribe of Simeon has been replaced by Manasseh.
Here in an almost farewell gesture, Moshe places a parting blessing on each of the tribes of Israel except Simeon, who goes unmentioned.
The reason for the exclusion of the tribe of Simeon in Moshe's blessings, is the fulfillment of Yaacov's prophetic blessing to Simeon in Genesis 49:5: "Simeon and Levi are brethren; instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. 7- I will divide them in Ya'acov, and scatter them in Israel." This prophesy also included Levi, however because Levi repented and as a result of their faithfulness to God after the Golden Calf incident, Levi's curse was rescinded and they were elevated to a tribe of Priests.
Simeon was placed within Judah as a harness on his violent vengeful nature (the situation with Dinah at Shechem Gen.34) and Moshe also omitted a blessing for him “because of the sin of Baal Peor” (Numbers 25) leading the nation into sin with the Midianite women in Numbers 25, by his fleshly rebellious nature.
Moshe blesses the tribes of Israel in an unusual order which actually occurs according to how the tribes are going to conquer the Promised Land of Canaan. Moshe is looking forward to the immediate future, but the blessings are also permanently placed on the specific tribes. When these blessings of Ya'acov and combined with Moshe's at the end of Deuteronomy, the prophetic picture of what the individual tribes will be doing through time is awesome and indicative of their ministerial positions and function in the kingdom.
"Moshe commanded us a law, even the inheritance of the congregation of Ya'acov." Deuteronomy 33:4
The prophetic statement made by Moshe in his introduction is understood by the Rabbis to mean that those from the nations would be included in the 'congregation' of Israel. The Rabbi's agree that because Moshe used the word "congregation of Ya'acov" instead of "house or seed" of Ya'acov, it intimates that 'Gentiles' will also have an inheritance in Israel. This prophecy has been fulfilled in Messiah Yeshua, as Rav. Shaul says to the Ephesian assembly:
"That at that time ye were without Messiah, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world: But now in Messiah Yeshua you who sometimes were far off are made nigh by the blood of Messiah." Eph. 2:12-13
Those who have come to faith in Yeshua are no longer aliens to the 'commonwealth of Israel' - they have become part of it. They are no longer strangers to the covenants of promise, but have embraced those covenants and entered into those covenants with the Mighty God of the Israelites of old. By the blood of Yeshua we have been made one with and part of Israel. Those of the nations who have received Yeshua as their Messiah are no longer Gentiles (i.e. pagans), but are now part of the household of believers (Messianic), with an inheritance in Israel and have a placement in one of the specific tribes. They are now part of the 'commonwealth' of Israel and belong to one of the tribes.
There is no place allocated to "new covenant believers" per se, as 'the church', the only place in the New Jerusalem is as one of the children of Israel, as part of the eternal covenant made originally at Sinai and brought to its fulfilment in the outpouring of the Spirit at 'Pentecost' in what has been called by the "church" as the 'new' covenant but which was prophesied by Jeremiah as the completing element to the first covenant at Sinai which Moshe had also prophesied. (Jeremiah 31:31-34)
As Yeshua said, "Do not think that I came to destroy the Law or the Prophets, I came not to destroy but to fulfil .. .. " Matt. 5:17
Yeshua came to fulfil the Torah in man, thus establishing a new-creation man which is the embodiment of the Torah. Messiah was the firstfruit of that new-creation Man, of which the Ruach HaKodesh has given us an impartation that we should also come to that measure of perfection "to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Messiah" (Eph. 4:13)
In Revelation 14:1 it says, "I looked, and behold, a lamb standing on Mount Zion, and with Him one hundred and forty four thousand, having the Father's Name written on their foreheads"
The signature of the Father upon them indicates that they have become sons of the Father like unto Yeshua THE Son who could say "I do only those things which I see the Father doing" (see also John 5:30) -- in other words they have become the embodiment of Torah, the Word manifested in the flesh, a corporate company of sons who shall function in the establishment of Messiah's government on earth. Twelve thousand from each of the twelve tribes which shall rule the earth with the sceptre of His authority - the rod of iron. Revelation 2:26-27; 12:5; 19:15
Here as the baton of life is passed to Yehoshua and his generation, we are reminded that as men die, it is up to the next generation to carry forward with the vision of their forefathers. Yehoshua did just that as he carried the anointing of Moshe and continued to point the children of Israel to obeying the words of the Torah as had his predecessor Moshe :
“Be strong and courageous, for you shall give this people possession of the land which I swore to their fathers to give them. "Only be strong and very courageous; be careful to do according to all the law which Moshe My servant commanded you; do not turn from it to the right or to the left, so that you may have success wherever you go. This book of the law shall not depart from your mouth, but you shall meditate on it day and night, so that you may be careful to do according to all that is written in it; for then you will make your way prosperous, and then you will have success. "Have I not commanded you? Be strong and courageous! Do not tremble or be dismayed, for Yahweh your God is with you wherever you go" (Yehoshua 1:6-9).
Yehoshua begins his ministry with pointing the people of Israel to the Torah. He knows from his days as a disciple of Moshe that the words of life were an integral part of the Torah. Again, he was instructing the sons of Israel to continue in the circle of studying the Torah in order to receive the blessings of the Most High: “And they answered Yehoshua, saying, "All that you have commanded us we will do, and wherever you send us we will go. "Just as we obeyed Moshe in all things, so we will obey you; only may Yahweh your God be with you, as He was with Moshe” (Yehoshua 1:16-17).
The children of Israel responded to the commands of Yehoshua to continue in the study and obedience to Torah in a very affirmative way. They understood back then that the blessings would flow from obedience to the Torah.
May we likewise, generations removed, be led as the Israelites of old to declare a similar refrain when we have the challenge put before us to continue in our study of the Torah. In so doing, the circle of study and obedience to Torah will continue to be followed from now throughout eternity.
This portion is an exhortation to be strong and courageous and conquer the land of our inheritance. It tells us not to be dismayed or fear the enemy but to be strong in our faith and trust in Yahweh and go forward to take possession of our inheritance. We can also apply this in the acquisition of our spiritual inheritance for there are many strongholds and citadels of the enemy to conquer to obtain the prize of our high calling and that which Yeshua our Messiah have purchased for us as our spiritual inheritance.
Yeshua our Messiah defeated the enemy and overcame all his power in the same sense that Yahweh gave the land to the children of Israel then but they had to go in and take possession of it from those who were inhabiting it at that time who were the enemies of God. The enemy will also contest us taking hold of what has been given to us and we must also engage in spiritual warfare to defeat the powers of darkness over our lives. See Ephesians 6:10-18.
Moshe ends his blessing with the prophetic declaration "Happy are you, Yisra'el: who is like you, a people saved by Yahweh, the shield of your help, the sword of your excellency! Your enemies shall submit themselves to you; you shall tread on their high places."(33:29) This will have its ultimate fulfillment in His people when Messiah comes with the clouds of heaven.
Azores stamps can be identified by a town mark containing "AÇORES" or one of the major towns, Angra, Horta, and Ponta Delgada being the largest.
Positive: more efficient production methods that are better for the environment, results in larger tax base which may be spent on environment
The market is not responsive to certain externalities and so fails to account for entropy and potentially catastrophic environmental damage
Even with government regulation replacing the market, some ecologically relevant externalities may involve damage to the ecosystem itself, and yet the signals going to the regulators may be false and sustainability may not be attainable
Population pressures have led to degradation of the environment:
Forest cover is lost by cutting for fuel
Desertification occurs from domestic animals over-grazing land
There has been overfishing of lakes and rivers, and now the oceans
Most pollution such as depletion of the ozone layer and the greenhouse gasses which are causing global warming are a result of industrialization
The question becomes: how can we develop indicators which can be used to adjust national income accounting to alert us when there is a problem and provide a way of evaluating attempts to reverse the degradation?
Valuing natural and environmental resources is not simple:
Market values can be subtracted from the flow of income generated by a country; while not ideal this does provide an indicator
It is usually very difficult to measure changes in quality rather than simple market values of quantities consumed
If we attempt to measure resources which have no market value:
People may lie about the true value if they think that lying will benefit them
Market values usually reflect opportunity costs: the value of substitutes. How do we value a resource for which there is no substitute?
Crowding in cities usually leads to pollution, health and sanitation problems, crime and vandalism, and a breakdown in infrastructure
Labour is more difficult to manage than capital, thus firms use labour saving systems to compensate for weak management
Unionization, minimum wage and labour protection laws motivate firms to buy labour saving capital
Foreign investors import labour saving capital equipment
Prestige attached to industrialization leads to government pressuring for capital intense, modern industries and unnecessary infrastructure:
Paid for with taxes on primary sector exports, impoverishing rural areas
City infrastructure is heavily subsidized and given priority
Firms lobby for subsidized food in the cities
China tried to copy the Russian model and put all its investment into industry. Disastrous harvests followed forcing the govt. to change policy:
Collectivized farms were abandoned and market driven farmers were encouraged to invest in machinery and chemicals
The government restricted rural urban migration, the resulting migration which did occur was not enough to eliminate the rural labour surplus, the government introduced incentives to lower the birth rate
Prices to farmers were raised, while input costs were held constant with the result that the terms of trade turned in favour of the agricultural sector
Case Study: Kenya, Zambia
Low farm productivity: researchers believed they were a result of diminishing returns because of the limited supply of land, but in fact most African countries had low population densities (many still do)
New farm lands were opened up, populations grew rapidly because of the increases in agricultural productivity
Eventually the sharp decline in available arable land and the movement of people to the cities reduced per capita food production
Resources have been switched back from the cities to the rural areas
Traditional economic growth has attempted to maximize the income per person: making the pie grow bigger and hoping that poorer people with only tiny slices will experience some improvement in welfare
More recently, economic development has emphasized the need to distribute the income more evenly amongst persons. Everyone receives a slice which is more fair in size, even if the pie stays the same size.
Should growth have priority over the environment?
Without adequate environmental protection, development is undermined
Without development, resources will be inadequate for needed investments, and environmental protection will fail
Poor people have a high marginal propensity to consume compared to rich people who have a high marginal propensity to save
Should we reduce poverty by spreading limited resources thinly and see them used more rapidly?
Should we allow the rich to accumulate assets knowing they might invest in and take better care of them?
People living in poorer countries which are natural resource poor and future generations impoverished by our overused of resources do not have political or economic power to ensure access
Uncertainty about environmental systems and their role in our very existence make us wary of engaging in traditional economic net benefit maximization. This is especially true for future generations.
Economic growth will put pressure on the environment
Sustainable Development: integration of economic, environmental and social components at all levels without destroying resources held in trust for future generations
In the 1960s and 1970s some scientists predicted the end of the world based on physical limits on resources which would restrain economic growth.
In the 1980s many prominent studies were published which changed the focus
The world’s resources are indeed sufficient to meet long term human needs
The ability to pollute the world to the point where it is unlivable is likely to happen far more quickly than the exhaustion of natural resources
In the 1990s interest has shifted to applying the knowledge accumulated in the natural sciences to the economic process:
The scale and rate of throughput, energy and matter passing through economic systems, is subject to entropy, the second law of thermodynamics:
Entropy: materials that get used in the economy tend to get dissipated and it requires energy inputs to make these materials useful again
Sometimes it is not worthwhile recycling: the cost of transportation required to bring all the used materials together and the energy required to return them to a useful state may cost more than the original materials
UNDP (IGO) vision for development that centers on enlarging people’s choices and capabilities, enabling participation in decisions that affect their lives - SHD approach is both inclusive and multisectoral, and works to ensure that the process of development not only generates economic growth, but also distributes its benefits equitably
Productivity: people must be allowed full participation in the process of income generation and paid employment
Equity: people must have access to equal opportunities
Sustainability: equity must be ensured not only for the present generations but for future generations as well
Empowerment: development must be BY the people, not FOR them - a 'process' not so much an 'end result'
The Step Pyramid of Djoser, designed by the architect Imhotep. When completed the Step Pyramid was by far the largest building ever constructed.
The Old Kingdom began with the rise of the 5th dynasty. The Old Kingdom is marked by the construction of most of Egypt's pyramids, giving the first part of the Old Kingdom the name "tha age of pyramids." The architect Imhotep designed the first pyramid—the Step Pyramid—for Pharaoh Djoser at Saqqara. Larger than any building to have built before it, the Step Pyramid is not a true pyramid, but rather a series of platforms stacked on top of each other, with the smallest level at the top and the largest on the bottom. Djoser's successor Snefru constructed three pyramids at Dashur; the third pyramid—the pink
Pyramid—became the first true pyramid to be completed. The greatest pyramids were constructed by the fourth dynasty at Giza. The Giza complex includes the Great Pyramid of Khufu and the Great Sphinx.
These large projects could be constructed due to the mobilization of the whole country to serve the order of the pharaohs. The Old Kingdom ended due to a combination of the rising power of priesthoods and nobility, and a dry period in which the Nile failed to flood annually for several years.
This fact sheet is a critical response to the article Decreasing Sedentary Behaviors in Treating Pediatric Obesity by Leonard H. Epstein, PhD; Rocco A. Paluch, MA; Constance C. Gordy, MS; Joan Dorn. PhD
What is the background to this research?
Sedentary behaviour, typically defined as activities requiring low levels of energy expenditure (EE) that occur while sitting or lying down, has been the subject of increasing epidemiological research in recent years.[1]. Emerging evidence indicates that various markers of sedentary behaviour, including TV viewing and total sitting time, are closely associated with chronic disease morbidity and mortality, often independent of physical activity. [1] Television watching has been prospectively related to childhood adiposity in several epidemiological studies. Watching television, among with other sedentary behaviours may contribute to obesity by competing with time spent on more physically active behaviours, as well as setting the scene for eating. [2]
Parent-report and self-report data from a nationally representative sample of 3155 children indicate that 2- to 7-year-old children in the United States spend an average of approximately 2.5 hours per day and 8- to 18-year-old children spend an average of about 4.5 hours per day watching television and videotapes and playing video games. [3]
This research was conducted by the Departments of Psychology and Social and Preventive Medicine, University at Buffalo and the State University of New York and was undertaken in a childhood obesity research clinic. [3]The effect of reducing television viewing and other sedentary behaviour as an aspect of an obesity treatment program had not been widely tested in the past; however this study was undertaken in March 2000 so it is very likely that more research has developed since then. Given that the study was carried out cohesively by three separate institutions, it is fair to believe that bias and/or conflicts of interest would have been ruled out.
The research was a quantitative randomized control trial with four experimental groups (Low exercise, high exercise, low sedentary, high sedentary).
What did the research involve?
The objective of this research was to compare the influence of targeting decreases in sedentary behaviour vs. increases in physical activity in the comprehensive treatment of obesity in 8-12 year old children. The design of this study involved 90 families with obese 8-12 year olds who were randomly assigned to one of four groups and provided with a family-based behavioural weight control program that included dietary and behaviour change information. The four groups differed in whether sedentary behaviour or physically active behaviours were targeted and the degree of behaviour change required. Of the 461 families that expressed interest; 171 were screened; and 90 were then chosen, stratified by sex and then randomly assigned to a group.
Certain participant criteria was required in order for this study to be carried out. These included:
Child to be between 20-100% overweight
Neither parent 100% overweight
At least one parent willing to attend treatment meetings
No family member participating in an alternate weight control program
No parent or child with current psychiatric problems
No dietary or exercise restrictions for the parent or child
The treatment was assigned for a 6 month period followed by a 12 and 24 month follow-up. Families received parent and child workbooks, which included introduction to weight control and self-monitoring, the Traffic Light Diet, the specific activity program of their assigned group, behaviour change techniques, and maintenance of behaviour change. The treatment included 16 weekly meetings followed by 2 biweekly and 2 monthly meetings. At these meetings, participating family members were weighed, they met with an individual therapist for 15-30 minutes and they attended separate parent and child group meetings. The main purpose for this study was to provide another test proving that decreasing sedentary behaviour produces equal or better weight loss and fitness change than increasing physical activity when included as part of a comprehensive paediatric obesity intervention.
What were the basic results?
Overall, results during the 2 years showed that targeting either decreased sedentary behaviours or increased physical activity was associated with significant decreases in percent overweight and body fat and improved aerobic fitness. Self-reported activity minutes increased and targeted sedentary time decreased during treatment. Children did however substitute nontargeted sedentary behaviours for some of their targeted sedentary behaviours. [2]
Results of this study are similar to that of previous studies. [4] The influence of targeting a decrease in sedentary behaviour on percent overweight decrease at 1 year was similar (-26.2%- to the current study (-24.4%), but the effect for increasing physical activity was considerably lower in the previous study when compared with the current study (-10.1% vs -20.2%). [5]
What conclusions can we take from this research?
Research that occurs within the lab is more likely to prove that reducing sedentary behaviour is associated with increasing physical activity. [6]. However clinical research, such as this article, shows that obese children targeted for reducing sedentary behaviour have better weight loss at 1 year than children targeted for being more physically active. [2] Hence, stressing the importance that the change doesn't necessarily require higher amounts of physical activity, it may just be the need to reduce the amounts of sedentary behaviour. In saying that, the two approaches within this study (decrease sedentary behaviour or increased physical activity) did present similar decreases in percent overweight and increases in fitness during the 2 years of observation.
This research also mentions that children may have reduced targeted sedentary behaviours, however nontargeted sedentary behaviours increased. Children without access to enjoyable physical activities may not increase their activity when sedentary behaviours are decreased, but rather switch to other sedentary behaviours. Physical activity doesn't have to be a chore and this study aims to stress the importance of physical activity being enjoyable and engaging for children. This point is further supported by James Sallis' article that assesses perceived physical environments and factors that may influence a person's willingness to participate in physical activity. [7]
There were a number of limitations observed when analysing this study. Some were mentioned by the author and some just sprung to mind whilst reading. First and foremost, as mentioned in the article, not all sedentary activities were targeted in this study. This study primarily looked at the effect of reducing television watching, meaning that not all sedentary behaviour was accounted for. By only focusing on one aspect of sedentary behaviour, it is difficult to state that sedentary behaviour as a whole effects childhood obesity.
Another point mentioned was having more knowledge and research into the type and pattern of sedentary behaviour in children. Understanding the pattern of changes in active behaviour and allocation of time to sedentary behaviours may be limited by self-report, and objective measurement of allocation of time to active and sedentary alternatives would provide better information on how children make choices to shift from being sedentary to becoming physically active.
Finally, the study identified that there are no large population-based samples to evaluate changes in body fat during development to better understand changes in relationship to normative data, which are available for BMI.
Other limitations to the study as picked up whilst reading include:
Large variation in parent weight (standard deviation over 25%) and therefore habits;
Percent overweight brackets for both parent and child should be smaller - too much variation in participants;
Reliability of participants in a self-report study - especially as the participants in this study are children;
Reducing sedentary behaviour is associated with similar weight, fitness and psychological changes in comparison to a well-validated program to increase physical activity in children. [8] Keeping children actively engaged in physical activity by making it fun and enjoyable, and ensuring that they don't replace one form of sedentary behaviour with another is crucial. Remember, sedentary behaviour comes in many forms, and just because they are reducing their tv viewing time may not mean that they are reducing overall time spent partaking in sedentary activities. Intermittent breaks to sedentary time is also extremely beneficial to reducing the risk of health related disease.
↑ a b Atkin, A., Gorely, T., Clemes, S., Yates, T., Edwardson, C., Brage, S., Salmon, J., et al. (n.d.). Methods of Measurement in epidemiology: Sedentary Behaviour. International Journal of Epidemiology, 41(5), 1460–1471. doi:10.1093/ije/dys118
↑ a b c Epstein, L. H., Paluch, R. A., Gordy, C. C., & Dorn, J. (2000). Decreasing sedentary behaviors in treating pediatric obesity. Archives of pediatrics & adolescent medicine, 154(3), 220-226.
↑ a b Robinson, T. N. (2001). Television viewing and childhood obesity. Pediatric Clinics of North America, 48(4), 1017-1025.
↑ Andersen, R. E., Crespo, C. J., Bartlett, S. J., Cheskin, L. J., & Pratt, M. (1998). Relationship of physical activity and television watching with body weight and level of fatness among children: results from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Jama, 279(12), 938-942.
↑ Epstein, L. H., Valoski, A. M., Vara, L. S., McCurley, J., Wisniewski, L., Kalarchian, M. A., ... & Shrager, L. R. (1995). Effects of decreasing sedentary behavior and increasing activity on weight change in obese children. Health psychology, 14(2), 109.
↑ Hamilton, M. T., Healy, G. N., Dunstan, D. W., Zderic, T. W., & Owen, N. (2008). Too little exercise and too much sitting: inactivity physiology and the need for new recommendations on sedentary behaviour. Current cardiovascular risk reports, 2(4), 292.
↑ Sallis, J. F., Johnson, M. F., Calfas, K. J., Caparosa, S., & Nichols, J. F. (1997). Assessing perceived physical environmental variables that may influence physical activity. Research quarterly for exercise and sport, 68(4), 345-351.
↑ Epstein, L. H., Wing, R. R., Koeske, R., & Valoski, A. (1985). A comparison of lifestyle exercise, aerobic exercise, and calisthenics on weight loss in obese children. Behavior Therapy, 16(4), 345-356.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Paris shih Faaguor de shooudu, rernkoou 1200 wahn.
Returns TRUE for port values.
CA/STN, SCI, Beilstein, Gmelin, Landolt-Boernstein, Cambridge Structural Database, PubChem
Guides, Reviews, Current Awareness, Background Reading, Document Delivery
Author, Citation, Subject, Chemical Name, Formula, Structure Searching
Synthesis, Reactions, Safety, Analytical, Physical, Patent Searching
Publications, Databases, Nomenclature, Writing
History, Directories, Study, Teaching, Cheminformatics Teaching
Science Citation Index and Web of Knowledge
Gmelin Handbook of Inorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
Landolt-Boernstein Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in Science and Technology
Current Awareness, Background Reading, and Document Delivery
General Information about Chemical Publications or Databases
History, Biography, Directories, Chemical Industry Sources
Chemical Information Sources: Lecture notes on the topics listed above.
SIRCh: Selected Internet Resources for Chemistry (Links to Web resources with the same subject outline as the chapters on this page.)
CRSD: Chemical Reference Sources Database (a searchable database that covers reference books, commercial databases, etc.)
Information Competencies for Chemistry Undergraduates: the Elements of Information Literacy Wikibook, July 2012- ; from the Special Libraries Association, Chemistry Division and the American Chemical Society, Division of Chemical Information
CHMINF-L: Chemical Information Sources Discussion List (a listserv in existence since 1991 with many chemistry librarians, chemists, publishers, and others interested in chemical information; has a searchable archive of all posts since its inception.)
The 16-year old Meiji Emperor, moving from Kyoto to Tokyo, after the fall of Edo.
During the last years of the bakufu, or bakumatsu, the bakufu took strong measures to try to reassert its dominance, although its involvement with modernization and foreign powers was to make it a target of anti-Western sentiment throughout the country.
The army and the navy were modernized. A naval training school was established in Nagasaki in 1855. Naval students were sent to study in Western naval schools for several years, starting a tradition of foreign-educated future leaders, such as Admiral Enomoto. French naval engineers were hired to build naval arsenals, such as Yokosuka and Nagasaki. By the end of the Tokugawa shogunate in 1867, the Japanese navy of the shogun already possessed eight Western-style steam warships around the flagship Kaiyō Maru, which were used against pro-imperial forces during the Boshin war under the command of Admiral Enomoto. A French military mission was established to help modernize the armies of the bakufu.
"The Emperor of Japan announces to the sovereigns of all foreign countries and to their subjects that permission has been granted to the Shogun Tokugawa Yoshinobu to return the governing power in accordance with his own request. We shall henceforward exercise supreme authority in all the internal and external affairs of the country. Consequently the title of Emperor must be substituted for that of Taikun, in which the treaties have been made. Officers are being appointed by us to the conduct of foreign affairs. It is desirable that the representatives of the treaty powers recognize this announcement."
Prehistory through the Jomon Period –
The Kofun or Yamato Period –
The Middle Heian Period –
The Warring States Period –
The Azuchi–Momoyama Period –
Each constant is treated as a 2-byte instruction, and is inserted directly into the code stream. Typically, you will express a constant as a 4-digit hexadecimal number. Each variable is translated into an instruction which loads the variable's address into register A0.
The MACHLG statement is valid only for a "cpu68K" compile, and you should use only MC680x0 machine language instructions in the argument list (not PPC instructions). FB generates an error if you attempt to use MACHLG in a program compiled with the "cpuPPC" or "cpuFAT" options. To get around this problem, you can put the MACHLG statement inside a "COMPILE LONG IF cpu68K" block; in that case, the MACHLG instruction will be ignored in a PPC compile.
It's recommended that you use FutureBasic's "Inline Assembler" syntax rather than the MACHLG statement when you need to insert machine language instructions. Not only does this make your code easier to read, but it also allows you to insert PPC instructions as well as MC680x0 instructions.
Activity: #in-class/short-term, #group-work, #quick-preparation
Snowball technique gives students an opportunity to share and teach different concepts and topics.[1] Firstly, students work independently - they gather information and ideas. Then, they collaborate with a partner. Next, partners join another pair and form a group of four students. Lastly, they form a group of eight.[2] What makes this technique efficient is the active collaboration among students. Moreover, students can take the role of a teacher by sharing information they gathered or asking questions. The more students there are in a group, the more effective the learning outcome will be.
How to use this method in online class?
Students can be divided into breakout rooms firstly as pairs, then as a group of four and so on. Students then share their findings. All notes can be written down in a shared Google document.
↑ Western Sydney University, ‘Strategy: Snowball Technique”, n.d., received from https://lf.westernsydney.edu.au/engage/strategy/snowball-technique/
↑ Gay Miller, ‘Snowball Technique - A Teaching Startegy’, Book Units Teacher, 2021, received from https://bookunitsteacher.com/wp/?p=5826
The field of signal processing is a very important field of study and one that makes possible various other fields such as communications. MP3 music files contain processed, transformed, and compressed music signal data. Speech recognition systems such as dictation software need to analyze and process signal data to identify individual words in a spoken sentence. Neural interface devices, such as various medical prostheses must read the complicated signals of neurons, process those signals to determine the important features, and then convert those features to digital data. Signal processing enables high-speed data communication, even in the presence of interference or noise.
This book is intended for readers at the undergraduate and graduate college levels, specifically those studying electrical engineering or a related field. This book can be used to accompany several semesters of study, depending on how the material is divided and presented.
What are the Prerequisites?
All readers should have significant prior knowledge of Signals and Systems, probability, Linear Algebra, and Calculus. Knowledge of linear algebra topics covered in Engineering Analysis, especially the sections about probability are required. Readers who do not have the necessary mathematics background will be at a severe disadvantage.
What Will This Book Cover?
This book will take a look at the traditional problems and methods of signal processing. We will attempt to cover many analog processing techniques, but we also must cover many advanced digital techniques as well. The Digital Signal Processing book will lay many foundations about digital systems that will be used in this book. The reader is strongly encouraged to either read both these books simultaneously, or to read the beginning sections of Digital Signal Processing first before reading this book. That book will cover many topics that are specific to digital systems, while this book will attempt to cover techniques that are useful for either analog or digital, are hybrid in nature (that they have analog and digital components) or that are traditionally analog but that can be modified for fast digital computation.
This book will attempt to cover the concept of filtering specifically, including adaptive Weiner and Kalman filters. This book will also look at some offshoots of adaptive filter theory, including beamforming. The more advanced sections of this book will look at additional subject, such as nonlinear systems and wavelet analysis.
This book will not cover, and will not attempt to cover, prerequisite information that is already covered in the Signals and Systems book or any of the other prerequisites. This includes, but is not limited to:
You are on an Another Shooting Machine supplemental page
Click here when you are ready to return to the tutorial's Main Page
A representation of the UV mapping of a cube. The flattened cube net may then be textured to texture the cube.
UV mapping is the 3D modeling process of projecting a 2D image to a 3D model's surface for texture mapping. The letters "U" and "V" denote the axes of the 2D texture because "X", "Y" and "Z" are already used to denote the axes of the 3D object in model space.
UV texturing permits polygons that make up a 3D object to be painted with color (and other surface attributes) from an ordinary image. The image is called a UV texture map.[1] The UV mapping process involves assigning pixels in the image to surface mappings on the polygon, usually done by "programmatically" copying a triangular piece of the image map and pasting it onto a triangle on the object.[2] UV texturing is an alternative to projection mapping (e.g., using any pair of the model's X, Y, Z coordinates or any transformation of the position); it only maps into a texture space rather than into the geometric space of the object. The rendering computation uses the UV texture coordinates to determine how to paint the three-dimensional surface.
A checkered sphere, without (left) and with (right) UV mapping (3D checkered or 2D checkered).
In the example to the right, a sphere is given a checkered texture in two ways. On the left, without UV mapping, the sphere is carved out of three-dimensional checkers tiling Euclidean space. With UV mapping, the checkers tile the two-dimensional UV space, and points on the sphere map to this space according to their latitude and longitude.
When a model is created as a polygon mesh using a 3D modeler, UV coordinates (also known as texture coordinates) can be generated for each vertex in the mesh. One way is for the 3D modeler to unfold the triangle mesh at the seams, automatically laying out the triangles on a flat page. If the mesh is a UV sphere, for example, the modeler might transform it into an equirectangular projection. Once the model is unwrapped, the artist can paint a texture on each triangle individually, using the unwrapped mesh as a template. When the scene is rendered, each triangle will map to the appropriate texture from the "Texture atlas|decal sheet".
A UV map can either be generated automatically by the software application, made manually by the artist, or some combination of both. Often a UV map will be generated, and then the artist will adjust and optimize it to minimize seams and overlaps. If the model is symmetric, the artist might overlap opposite triangles to allow painting both sides simultaneously.
UV coordinates are optionally applied per face.[2] This means a shared spatial vertex position can have different UV coordinates for each of its triangles, so adjacent triangles can be cut apart and positioned on different areas of the texture map.
The UV mapping process at its simplest requires three steps: unwrapping the mesh, creating the texture, and applying the texture.[1]
UV mapping may use repeating textures, or an injective 'unique' mapping as a prerequisite for Baking.
, that being the unit vector from
Assuming that the sphere's poles are aligned with the Y axis, UV coordinates in the range
You are on an Another Shooting Machine supplemental page
↑ a b Mullen, T (2009). Mastering Blender. 1st ed. Indianapolis, Indiana: Wiley Publishing, Inc. ISBN 9780470496848
↑ a b Murdock, K.L. (2008). 3ds Max 2009 Bible. 1st ed. Indianapolis, Indiana: Wiley Publishing, Inc. ISBN 9780470417584
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Blender 3D: Noob to Pro/Simple Vehicle: Another Shooting Machine – UV Map
Rare practical example of UV mapping from a blog (not related to a specific product such as Maya or Blender).
Click here to return to the United States Postage Meter Stamp Catalog
Most postage meters have the option of printing a postal rate identification slug which typically cites the postal regulation (P.L.& R. Postal Laws & Regulations) that justifies a discount from the normal first class rate. It is called a slug to differentiate it from a slogan. (A slogan is aimed at the recipient; a slug is meant for postal employees.) The slug is usually smaller than a slogan and can be found in various spots around or inside the stamp, but it is also found large and filling the space normally used for a slogan. Directional slugs are not necessarily printed by the meter. They are often found pre-printed or hand-stamped on the envelope. The list below identifies slugs known applied by a meter.Positions where a slug can be found:
The large majority of slugs found on meter stamps since the 1980s are found left of the town mark or less often between the town mark and frank. The other placements are almost exclusively found with stamps from the 1920s to 1950s, most often with Group C and Group D stamp types.Slugs are occasionally found duplicated in different positions on the stamp. Horizontal slugs are sometimes inverted, and vertical slugs may read up or down. Other variations include font size, the addition of hyphens, spaces, lines above and below or at the sides, underlining, dotted lines, stars or asterisks, placing the slug in a box, etc. Different sizes and styles of type produce additional varieties.
Listed below are directional slugs and slogans that have been reported. This is a far from complete list. It is comprehensive for the years before the 1960s but quite thin afterward due to the large increase in the number of different postal rates.
a. SEC. 435% P.L.R.
SEC 571% P.L.&R. (for bound materials of 24 or more pages)
a. P.5 SEC. 571 P.L. & R.
b. SEC. 571 P.L.&R.P.5
c. SEC. 571 P.L. & R. PAR. 5
d. PAR. 5, SEC. 571.
e. PAR 5 SEC. 571 P.L. & R.
a. Section 34.77 PL&R CATALOGUE
SEC 34.65(d) P.L.& R. (for non-profit books and catalogs)
a. SEC. 34.65(D) P.L. & R.
SEC. 34.65 (e) P.L.& R. (for 3rd class bulk non-profit mailings. Along with 6 replaced parts of 2 in 1948.)
a. SEC. 34.65E P.L.& R.
b. Sec. 34.65 (e),P.L.&R.
c. SEC. 34.65 P.L. & R.(e)
b. INTERNATIONAL PRIORITY AIRMAIL
c. INTERNATIONAL PRIORITY AIRMAIL PAR AVION
d. INTERNATIONAL PRIORITY AIRMAIL U.S. POSTAGE PAID [town and state]
e. U.S. INTERNATIONAL AIR MAIL POSTAGE PAID
f. VIA AIRMAIL
g. VIA AIR MAIL
h. VIA U.S. AIR MAIL
i. WD ESSENTIAL OFFICIAL AIR MAIL
b. CONTENTS: BOOKS
b. BLK. RATE
c. Bulk Rate
e. BULK RATE CARRIER RT. PRESORT
g. BULK RATE ZIP +4
i. BULK RATE ZIP+4 BARCODED
j. 5 DIGIT ZIP + 4 Bik: Rt:
l. BULK RATE PRINTED MATTER
m. BULK RATE AUTO
n. BLK. RT. NONPROF
o. BULK LETTER RATE
p. BLK. LRT. RT.
q. BULK RAT ECRLOT
b. CARRIER RT. PRE-SORT
c. CAR-RTE PRESORT 1ST CL
d. CARRTE PRESORT 1ST CLASS
e. CAR-RT-SORT
g. CARRIER RATE PRESORT (error)
c. CONTENTS: CATALOG
a. There are hundreds of different Drop Shipment slugs. Most contain “DROP SHIPMENT”, the city of origin (often preceded by MAILED AT), the authorization number, and the class of mail. The Drop Shipment system allows the mailer to consolidate mail from several offices into one mailing to obtain lower bulk mailing rates. The mailing office need not be the same as the authorizing office. A special authorization must be obtained to use this system.
b. FIRST CLASS MAIL
c. First Class Mail
d. _ first class mail
e. 1st Class
f. VIA FIRST CLASS
g. FIRST CLASS MAIL ENCLOSED
i. FIRST-CLASS ZIP + 4 BARCODED
j. | 1ST CLASS ZIP + 4 BARCODED
l. 1ST CLASS MAIL ZIP + 4 BARCODED
m. ZIP +4 First Class Presort
n. PRESORTED FIRST CLASS
o. PRESORTED FIRST-CLASS
r. PRESORTED 1ST CLASS
s. PRESORTED FIRST CLASS MAIL
t. PRESORT FIRST CLASS
v. Presort 1st Class
w. First Class Presort
x. PRESORT 1st CLASS
z. FIRST-CLASS AUTO
d. THIRD-CLASS MAIL ENCLOSED
e. Third Class Mail Enclosed
h. SRDCL. BLK. RT.
a. PRESORTED SPECIAL FOURTH CLASS RATE
b. SPECIAL FOURTH CLASS RATE
d. SPECIAL 4th CLASS RATE - BOOKS
f. SP. 4TH CL. LEVEL B PRESORT
b. LIBRARY MAIL
b. NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION
c. Non-Profit Organization
d. NONPROFIT ORG.
e. NON-PROFIT ORG.
f. NON PROFIT ORG.
g. Nonprofit Org.
h. Non-Profit Org.
i. Non Profit Org.
j. non profit org.
k. NON PROF. ORG.
l. NONPROFIT ORG. ZIP + 4
n. NONPROFIT ORG. 5-DIGIT ZIP +4
q. NON-PROFIT ZIP +4
r. NON PROFIT ZIP + 4
s. NONPROFIT 5-DIGIT ZIP + 4
v. NONPROFIT ZIP + 4 BARCODED
a. OFFICIAL NAVY DEPARTMENT MAIL
b. OFFICIAL MAIL PENALTY FOR PRIVATE USE $300
d. Pound Rate Pd. Via Permit
b. PRINTED MATTER BOOKS
d. PRINTED MATTER SECOND CLASS
e. PRINTED MATTER SHEET MUSIC
f. BOUND PRINT’D MT’R
a. PRIORITY FIRST CLASS MAIL
b. CHANGE SERVICE REQUESTED
c. TEMP-RETURN SERVICE REQUESTED
d. ADDRESS CORRECTION REQUESTED
e. FORWARDING SERVICE REQUESTED
f. Official State of Texas Return Service Requested
b. PRESORT SPECIAL STANDARD MAIL
c. PRESORTED SPECIAL STANDARD MAIL
d. PRSRT STD
e. PRST SPECIAL STANDARD MAIL
f. PRESORTED STANDARD
g. PRSRI STD AUTO
b. ZIP +4 PRESORT
c. ZIP +4 Presort
d. ZIP +4 PRESORT BARCODED
e. ZIP +4 5 DIGIT
f. 5 DIGIT ZIP + 4
g. 5-DIGIT ZIP + 4
h. ZIP +4 PRESORT -PM
c. DO NOT FORWARD
d. RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
Wikipedia has related information at Factor analysis
Factor analysis is a set of techniques to reduce the dimensionality of the data. The goal is to describe the dataset with a smaller number of variables (ie underlying factors). Factor Analysis was developed in the early part of the 20th century by L.L. Thurstone and others. Correspondence analysis was originally developed by Jean-Paul Benzécri in the 60's and the 70's. Factor analysis is mainly used in marketing, sociology and psychology. It is also known as data mining, multivariate data analysis or exploratory data analysis.
There are three main methods. Principal Component Analysis deals with continuous variables. Correspondence Analysis deals with a contingency table (two qualitative variables) and Multiple correspondence analysis is a generalization of the correspondence analysis with more than two qualitative variables.
Factor Analysis is a difficult procedure to use properly, and is often misapplied in the psychological literature. One of the major issues in FA (and PCA) is the number of factors to extract from the data. Incorrect numbers of factors can cause difficulties with the interpretation and analysis of the data.
There are a number of techniques which can be applied to assess how many factors to extract. The two most useful are parallel analysis and the minimum average partial criterion. Parallel analysis works by simulating a matrix of the same rank as the data and extracting eigenvalues from the simulated data set. The point at which the simulated eigenvalues are greater than those of the data is the point at which the "correct" number of factors have been extracted. The Minimum Average Partial criterion uses a different approach but can often be more accurate. Simulation studies have established these two methods as the most accurate. Both of these methods are available in the psych package under the fa.parallel and the VSS commands.
Another issue in factor analysis is which rotation (if any) to choose. Essentially, the rotations transform the scores such that they are more easily interpretable. There are two major classes of rotations, orthogonal and oblique. Orthogonal rotations assume that the factors are uncorrelated, while oblique rotations allow the factors to correlate (but do not force this). Oblique rotations are recommended by some (e.g. MacCallum et al 1999) as an orthogonal solution can be obtained from an oblique rotation, but not vice versa.
One of the issues surrounding factor analysis is that there are an infinite number of rotations which explain the same amount of variance, so it can be difficult to assess which model is correct. In response to such concerns, Structural Equation Modelling (SEM), which is also known as Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) was developed by Joreskeg in the 1970's. The essential principle of SEM is that given a model, it attempts to reproduce the observed covariance matrix seen in the data. The ability of a model to reproduce the data can be used as a test of that model's truth. SEM is implemented in R in the sem and lavaan packages, as well as the OpenMx package (which is not available on CRAN).
See the following packages : FactoMineR (website), amap, ade4, anacor, vegan, '"psych"'
See also fa and prcomp in the psych package
Correspondence analysis is a tool for analyzing contingency tables.
Simple and Canonical Correspondence Analysis Using the R Package anacor (pdf, JSS article)
This section is a stub.You can help Wikibooks by expanding it.
Wikipedia has related information at Multiple correspondence analysis
Books on this shelf deal with office suites, sometimes called office software suites or productivity suites. They are collections of programs intended to be used by typical clerical workers and knowledge workers. The components are generally distributed together, have a consistent user interface, and usually can interact with each other, sometimes in ways that the operating system would not normally allow.
The Bible Evangelism Honor is a component of the Technician Master Award
.
1 1. Be in at least the eighth grade.
3 3. Arrange with your pastor to attend a church board meeting and a church business meeting. Make a written report of your visits to both meetings.
4 4. List the steps in church organization from the member to the General Conference and know their relationship to each other.
5 5. Find out what your church spends money on and what percentage of the budget goes to what expenses.
6 6. Write a report of an interview with your pastor in which you asked him the following questions
7.3 c. Make four hospital visits, presenting a devotional thought and prayer at each one.
7.7.1 1. Be a Pathfinder or Staff Member.
7.7.2 2. Attend at least ten meetings. (Evangelistic meetings, Daniel or Revelation Seminars. If less than 10 are conducted, attend at least two-thirds of them.)
7.7.3 3. Participate at each of the meetings attended.
7.7.4 4. Wear your Pathfinder full-dress uniform (including scarf & sash) while participating.
7.7.5 5. Participate in at least four of the following:a. Be an usher.b. Pick up the offering.c. Assist in the children's meetings.d. Have scripture or prayer.e. Assist in the set-up/take-down of the meeting hall.f. Hand out the evening programs, brochures, etc.g. Give a testimony of what Jesus has done recently for you.h. Be a greeter.i. Help operate a Pathfinder booth showing what the church has for its young people.j. Invite a guest (non-SDA) to attend the meetings and host him throughout the evenings.k. Prepare a baked-goods table (breads, etc.) to share as gifts or samples for the attendees.l. Contact at least ten (10) individuals by phone or in person inviting them to attend the meetings.m. Participate in at least two Bible studies with at least one "interest."
8 8. Through Bible and the writings of Ellen G. White study and learn how Jesus treated crowds of people in ministering to them.
9 9. Show that you have a personal daily devotional life for at least six months.
Be in at least the eighth grade.
This honor requires the maturity level of a typical 8th grade student, or its equivalent. Please note that requirement 2 very closely coincides with an activity in the Voyager AY class. It would be good to follow this honor with the Personal Evangelism honor.
Though your pastor is a very busy person, it is likely that he will welcome you as he visits others. Ask him well ahead of time so that he can choose the day when you may join him. Be patient - he may not have anything lined up right away. Trust his judgment - he is a professional. There is no need to make all of these visits on the same day - they can be spread out over multiple trips. Remember your manners during the visits, and that you are a representative of your club, your church, and your Savior. Always thank him afterwards.
Before you go, see the notes on requirement 6 and requirement 7c.
Arrange with your pastor to attend a church board meeting and a church business meeting. Make a written report of your visits to both meetings.
Church boards usually meet once per month. Again remember your manners and that you are representing your club. Be sure that you do make arrangements with your pastor to attend - do not just show up. Church boards often deal with sensitive, confidential matters, and you may be asked to dismiss yourself during part of the meeting. If this happens, handle yourself with grace.
Also keep in mind that unless you are a member of your church board, you will not be able to vote on any of the business that comes up during a church board meeting. If you are a baptized member of your church, however, you may (and should) vote during a church business meeting.
List the steps in church organization from the member to the General Conference and know their relationship to each other.
A person's membership in the Seventh-day Adventist Church is with a particular church, mission, or company. Sometimes, an individual's membership will be with the local conference rather than with a church (such is the case with conference employees and their families, for instance). The local church is an independent body invested with the authority to make most of its own decisions. The pastor of the local church, however, is an employee of the local conference, and will answer to the Conference President. The local church forwards all tithe money it collects to the conference, and these funds are used to pay the salaries of all pastors and conference administrative employees. School teachers are also conference employees, but their salaries are paid from tuition rather than from tithe. Conference officers (President, Vice Presidents, Treasurer, etc.) are voted into office at a Conference Constituency meeting. Each church, mission, and company in a conference selects and sends its own delegates to the these meetings.
Several local conferences in a region make up a Union. Each Union has its own administrative staff and a slate of officers. Adventist colleges are usually associated with a Union and funded at the Union level.
Unions are grouped into Divisions, and each Division also has its administrative staff and officers (President, Vice Presidents, Treasurer, etc.). Again, the officers are voted into their positions at a constituency meeting. There are twelve Divisions in the Seventh-day Adventist Church, and together they form the General Conference. This is the highest level of government in the Adventist Church. Every five years the General Conference holds a constituency meeting to decide matters important to the denomination and to elect its officers (a President, several Vice Presidents, Treasurer, etc.).
Find out what your church spends money on and what percentage of the budget goes to what expenses.
You should be able to find this information by talking to your church treasurer. Any member of your church's Finance Committee (if your church has one) will also be able to help you with this. Some churches budget fixed percentages of their income for certain expenses, while others budget fixed amounts. Still others will use a combination of these two approaches, paying fixed costs first, and then budgeting the remainder by percentages. If your church budgets fixed amounts, you can calculate the percentages yourself as follows:
Write a report of an interview with your pastor in which you asked him the following questions
b. What education outside of theology would complement a minister?
c. From what source is the pastor paid?
f. What are beneficial vocations for a pastor's wife to have?
g. How did you know that God called you to the ministry?
h. How would I know if God were calling me to the ministry?
i. How do you do soul winning?
j. How does evangelism enter into your soul winning?
If you are traveling with your pastor to meet requirement 2, this would be an excellent time to ask him these questions. Otherwise, you will need to set up an appointment with him. Be sure to take notes during your discussion so you can refer to them as you write your report.
If your church is presenting a youth evangelistic series, volunteer to help out. If not, perhaps you could organize a series yourself or with other members of your Pathfinder club or AY Society.
Participating in the presentation can mean leading out in front of the congregation or working behind the scenes. Both are important.
This could be preaching, presenting special music, or providing testimony about your own Christian experience.
This could be running the PA system, controlling a slide show, operating a spot light, videotaping the program, or even podcasting the series over the Internet.
b. Give two Bible studies.
You can get materials for Bible studies from any of the following:
c. Make four hospital visits, presenting a devotional thought and prayer at each one.
A well-functioning church publicly prays for hospitalized members. Pay close attention to the prayers in your church to find out who is sick. It is also totally acceptable to visit non-church members who are hospitalized.
Talk to your pastor, an elder, a deacon, or a deaconess in your church to find out if they are going on a hospital visit and ask if you can come along. If they are not going, offer to go yourself. If they do not think it wise that you join them, respect their judgment.
When you get to the hospital you may need to turn off your cell phone. Look for any notices to that effect and comply with them.
It is best to not bring a large number of people with you when making a hospital visit. The rooms are small, and the hospital will limit the number of visitors allowed in the room. Furthermore, sick people are often not comfortable visiting with a large crowd. Be sure to obey any direction given to you by the hospital staff. Do not make noise. Remember that there are other patients there who need their rest.
Keep the visit brief and be alert for any signs that the patient wants you to leave. the patient may be too polite to make such as wish known to you. If you detect any hint that you should leave, do so graciously and do not take offense. Hospitalization is not a pleasant experience, and people frequently prefer to maintain their privacy. The patient may also tire easily and not be in a mood to visit. It is difficult to get a good night's rest in a hospital, as it buzzes with activity 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
Because your visit may be short, it is best to begin presenting your devotional thought as soon as you can. Be polite and ask how the patient is doing before diving in, but don't chit-chat for very long before getting started. When the devotional is finished, close with a prayer and leave while the presence of the Holy Spirit still lingers. It is better to say your goodbyes before having the prayer.
This can be done during any number of events including:
You can turn almost any Bible study into a sermon, as they generally present a thought or an idea in an organized manner. Make notes on index cards and take them to the pulpit with you. If you are uncomfortable, practice your sermon ahead of time. Open and close your sermon with a short prayer, and pray with another person in private before taking the pulpit. When citing Bible texts, give the congregation time to find the passage - repeat the book, chapter, and verse a couple of times. Speak clearly, with plenty of volume, and enunciate your words. Remember that no one in the congregation is there waiting for you to fail - they all want you to succeed! They are on your side.
e. Give two evening and two morning devotionals for a camp out.
f. Give devotional worships for five days at a school.
This is an ideal option if you attend or live near an Adventist school. These devotionals can be presented to the entire school, to a single classroom, or to a small group that meets before, during, or after school. They need not last more than 10 or 15 minutes.
Talk to the school principal or a teacher well ahead of time. She may want to know exactly what you are planning before approving it, so go in knowing what you are going to say. Better yet, have an outline of your program prepared ahead of time.
g. Earn the Pathfinder Evangelism Award.
These are the requirements for the Pathfinder Evangelism Award:
Be a Pathfinder or Staff Member.
Attend at least ten meetings. (Evangelistic meetings, Daniel or Revelation Seminars. If less than 10 are conducted, attend at least two-thirds of them.)
Participate at each of the meetings attended.
Wear your Pathfinder full-dress uniform (including scarf & sash) while participating.
Participate in at least four of the following:a. Be an usher.b. Pick up the offering.c. Assist in the children's meetings.d. Have scripture or prayer.e. Assist in the set-up/take-down of the meeting hall.f. Hand out the evening programs, brochures, etc.g. Give a testimony of what Jesus has done recently for you.h. Be a greeter.i. Help operate a Pathfinder booth showing what the church has for its young people.j. Invite a guest (non-SDA) to attend the meetings and host him throughout the evenings.k. Prepare a baked-goods table (breads, etc.) to share as gifts or samples for the attendees.l. Contact at least ten (10) individuals by phone or in person inviting them to attend the meetings.m. Participate in at least two Bible studies with at least one "interest."
For your choice of the above, a thorough preparation is needed. Where applicable, outlines or memorized material should be used. A reading of the presentation is not permitted.
Through Bible and the writings of Ellen G. White study and learn how Jesus treated crowds of people in ministering to them.
Read Matthew chapters 5-7, which cover the Sermon on the Mount, and chapter 31 of The Desire of Ages which contains Mrs. White's commentary on it. You should also read Thoughts From the Mount of Blessing.
Show that you have a personal daily devotional life for at least six months.
One way to show this is by keeping a devotional journal. Summarize what you have read, making sure to record any Bible verses or other reading material studied. Be sure to record the date as well.
If you like, you can record your journal on a blog so that others may read it on the Internet. You may even plant a seed this way without knowing it!
Jim Thomas earned his Bachelors of Science in Electrical Engineering Technology (BSEET) at Murray State University in 1985, and earned his Masters of Science in Electrical Engineering (MSEE) at Virginia Polytechnic Institute in 1995. He has worked in the computer/electronics industry since 1985, designing computer hardware and writing software for embedded digital signal processing applications.
Jim is a Master Guide and serves as the director of the Central New Hampshire Flames Pathfinder Club in Concord, NH, where he also serves as a local church elder. He and his wife Virginia have two sons and a daughter.
A die-hard do-it-yourselfer, his hobbies include Pathfindering (of course!), woodworking, whitewater paddling, fooling around with computers, and wild flower identification. Jim blogs regularly at Wordpress, sometimes about this Wikibook.
Molecular Picture of a ribosome, Blue = Proteins, Orange = RNA, Red = Active Site
The purpose of the ribosome is to translate messenger RNA (mRNA) to proteins with the aid of tRNA. In eukaryotes, ribosomes can commonly be found in the cytosol of a cell, the endoplasmic reticulum or mRNA, as well as the matrix of the mitochondria. Proteins synthesized in each of these locations serve a different role in the cell. In prokaryotes ribosomes can be found in the cytosol as well. This protein-synthesizing organelle is the only organelle found in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, asserting that the ribosome was a trait that evolved early on, most likely present in the common ancestor of eukaryotes and prokaryotes. Ribosomes are not membrane bound.
Ribosomes are also play a key role in the catalysis of two important and crucial biological processes. They are responsible for peptidyl transfer, in which they form peptide bonds during protein synthesis as well as peptidyl hydrolysis; in this process, the ribosome releases the completely formed protein from the peptidyl transfer RNA after completion of translation. Translation is the process of converting mRNA (from transcription) to functional proteins; The three steps involved are initiation, elongation, and termination. Proteins are translated one amino acid (three base pairs) at a time. During this process, tRNA assists the ribosome by bringing the complementary bases to the ribosome as translation proceeds.
Because ribosome synthesis is a major metabolic activity that involves hundreds of individual reactions in eukaryotes, errors will occur eventually during these processes. To deal with the error in ribosome synthesis if it occurs, eukaryotes will degrade the erroreous ribosomes. In addition, not only the erroneous ribosomes will be degraded but also the excess ribosomes. Recent researches show that eukaryote cells enhanced many strategies to recognize specific dysfunctional or functionally deficit ribosomes for degradation[1].
Along with having more complicated assembly regulations than bacterial ribosomes, eukaryotic ribosomes are triggered differently than bacterial ribosomes in translation initiation. Eukaryotic ribosomes use a scanning mechanism and require at least nine initiation factors.
In bacteria, ribosomes can identify the right reading frame and know where to attach to a mRNA stran, by finding the Shine Dalgarno sequence on the mRNA. This ribosome binding site is upstream from the AUG start codon on the mRNA. In the bacterium E. Coli, the Shine Dalgarno site is a purine-rich nucleotide sequence—5’ AGGAGGU 3’, on the mRNA that is located four to eight bases ahead of the start codon. This Shine-Dalgarno sequence is complementary to the sequence 5’ ACCUCCU 3’ on the 16S rRNA, which is found in the 30S subunit of the ribosome.
Ribosomes usually comprise 2 protein subunits and some component of rRNA. The protein componenet of the ribosomes is first synthesized in the cytosol much like any other protein. The newly synthesized protein subunits are then transported from the nucleus into the nucleolus, the center of ribosomal RNA transcription. RNA polymerase are then used to polymerize the rRNA needed for the synthesis of the ribosome. Cells that have a high rate of protein synthesis have many ribosomes.
In the past, scientists studied ribosome to get a better understanding about its components, which is consists of 30S, 50S, 70S, and 100S. All are made of by the same particles but different concentration of Mg ions. 30S and 50S are small and large subunits of 70S while 100S is a collection of 70S.
Ribosomal structure varies between eukaryotes and prokaryotes. Eukaryotes have 40S (small) and 60S (large) subunits, together the subunits form the 80S ribosome.[4] Prokaryotes have 30S (small) and 50S (large) subunits. These subunits work together during translation to synthesize proteins.
EColi 70S Ribosome. The red is the 50S large subunit and the blue is the 30S small subunit
In prokaryotes, the small subunit (30S) and the large subunit (50S) together make the 70S ribosome. The 30S subunit is composed of 21 ribosomal proteins and 16S rRNA. Its function is to decode and decipher mRNA to determine the corresponding amino acid to the three bases in codons. The small subunit consists of the body (5’), the platform region (central domain), and the head (3’). Each component can be formed separately of each other. The small subunit also contains a 3’-minor domain consisting of the last two helices (44 and 45) and the end of the 3’ end of the rRNA. The structural components of the small subunit have been shown to be structurally independent from each other suggesting that during protein synthesis they move and conform relative to one another. The long 44 helix stretches across the small subunit from the body to the head functioning as a potential relay for information across the entire subunit. Unlike the small subunit, the large subunit is mostly rigid with mobility restricted its peripheral regions. The 50S subunit consists of 33 proteins and the 23S and 5S rRNA.
The mRNA binding site is located along the neck of the small subunit while the large subunit contains the peptidyl transferase center (PTC) where aminoacyl and peptidyl-tRNA attach. The three binding sites are A, P, and E. Binding site A attracts aminoacyl-tRNA, binding site P attracts peptidyl-tRNA, and binding site E, the exit site, attracts deacylated tRNA. The anticodon stem loop is attached to its complementary codon on the mRNA binding site of the small subunit while the amino acid end of the tRNA attaches to A and P sites both located in the PTC. The GTPase-associated center and the sarcin/ricin loop are located on the large subunit and help to stimulate GTP hydrolysis needed for elongation of the protein.
Ribosome assembly consists of transcription, translation, the folding of rRNA and ribosomal proteins, the binding of ribosomal proteins, and the binding and release of the assembly components to make the ribosome. There are two intermediates in ribosome assembly, in vitro and in vivo. One method of in vitro assembly of the 30S is to only use free rRNA and ribosomal proteins. Another is to combine 16S rRNA with purified and recombinant proteins and precursor 16S rRNA. With the different ways to assemble proteins, the assembly of ribosomes also varies with different temperatures. At low temperature of 0°C -15°C, the reconstitution intermediate (RI) particle, composed of 16S rRNA and 15 ribosomal proteins, is formed and settled to 21S-22S. Then the RI particle is rearranged after getting heated to 40°C and settled to 25S-26S. After completing these two processes, the RI particle together with the remaining proteins can form the 30S subunit.
In contrast, the in vitro assembly of the 50S subunit requires more steps and harsher conditions compared to the assembly mechanism of the 30S. There are three reconstitution intermediates each dependent on different temperatures and ionic conditions. RI50 (1), the first intermediate, yields the 33S particle. As RI50 (1) is heated, RI50 (2) forms and sediments at the 41S-43S. The remaining proteins form the RI50 (3) which create the inactive 48S particle. In order for the 48S particle to become the active 50S subunit, the temperature and concentration of magnesium needs to be increased along with the involvement of the 5S rRNA.
Like the in vitro assembly mechanism, the in vivo assembly of the 30S subunit has two intermediates (p130S and p230S) and the 50S subunit has three intermediates (p150S, p250S, and p350S). However, the reconstitution intermediates are not the same as in vitro. The intermediates of the 30S subunit yield 21S and 30S particles while the intermediates of the 50S subunit yield 32S, 43S, and 50S particles. The intermediates in the in vivo assembly are precursor rRNA which is different from in vitro which uses matured rRNA. To complete the mechanism of ribosome assembly, these precursor rRNA gets transformed in the polysomes.
A eukaryotic ribosome is composed of a 40S and 60S subunits, they both have a solvent exposed side and a subunit interface. The solvent exposed side contains a higher concentration of protein and RNA elements that are only in eukaryotes compared to the subunit interface.
The eukaryotic specific proteins are responsible for 40S structure being stabilized by tertiary contacts. The majority of the eukaryotic specific proteins and extensions are to interconnect other proteins in the 40S and 60S subunit. The 40S subunit has 14 of these interconnected proteins located in the head. eukaryotic specific proteins and extensions play a bigger role in 60S subunits because their protein mediated connections are more extensive and reach across the subunit. The 60S specific extensions consist of beta sheets and long alpha helices which are crucial in long distance tertierary interaction, meaning they have the ability to interact across the subunit. This trait is unique for eukaryotes because protein-protein contact is very rare in the prokaryote ribosome.
The 40S and 60S subunits are joined by eukaryote specific inter-subunit bridges that connects them thus forming 80s. This is done by eukaryotic specific bridges forming at the 40S and the RPL19 interacts with ES6E and RPL24 intracts with rpS6. The other two eukaryotic specific bridges connect by 60S segment ES31 that connects to rpSA and another 60S segment, ES41 that connects with rp58 from the 40S subunit. [5]
Ribosomal cofactors help facilitate with improper folding during in vitro. The improper folding during in vitro is a cause which results in vitro being much slower than in vivo. Ribosomal factors can be used as a “check point” to make sure the assembly is correct. Examples of ribosomal cofactors are DEAD-box proteins, chaperones, and GTPases. DEAD-box proteins are factors which help with proper folding of the RNA. An over expression of DEAD-box proteins can suppress the deletion of another strain. DEAD-box proteins (DBPs) are characterized by a core of approximately 350 amino acids, each containing at least 9 conserved amino acid motifs. Studies have shown that these proteins use the energy from ATP hydrolysis to rearrange inter- or intra-molecular RNA structures or dissociate RNA-proteins interactions. In eukaryotes, DEAD-box proteins are fundamental in the life of a ribosome, but in E. coli, they are often unnecessary. To date, five different genes encoding DEAD-box proteins have been identified in E.coli – SrmB, CsdA, DbpA, RhlE, and RhIB – which are versatile cofactors that have helped further the understanding of cellular processes in many cells because of their roles in protein biosynthesis and ribosome assembly. For instance, CsdA and SrmB are essential for proper cellular growth; cells deficient in these proteins exhibit severe ribosomal effects.
E.Coli Cofactor interaction of various DEAD-box proteins
Ribosomes played a big role in our evolution. The origin of ribosomes are said to have roots in the RNA world, preceding the existence of proteins. Ribosomes evolved in structure and function, alongside the formation of complex and versatile peptides. A huge breakthrough in the scientific study of ribosomes began when Venkatraman Ramakrishnan and his group determined the crystal structure of the ribosome, and described it in atomic detail. Uncovering the structure of the ribosome allowed scientists a closer look at the mechanisms involved with ribosome function. More specifically for example, according to "The ribosome goes Nobel" article by Rodnina and Wintermeyer, in the "Trends in Biochemical Sciences" journal, knowledge of the structure of the ribosome revealed details of the translation process like "how the ribosome checks for proper codon–anticodon interaction by establishing specific contacts in the decoding site". More recently, ribosomes prove to have huge clinical potential as targets for antibiotic products. With the overuse of antibiotics and antibiotic resistance constantly on the rise, ribosomes could be the basis of new antimicrobials that would retaliate against the infamous antibiotic resistance.
Ribosomes found in the cytosol that are not bound to any other organelle are known as free ribosomes. These ribosomes are known to produce non-hydrophobic proteins that ultimately function in the cytosol. An example would be the catalysts for the first steps of sugar breakdown.
Ribosomes which are attached to the endoplasmic reticulum or ERare known as ER Ribosomes. These ribosomes are what give rough endoplasmic reticulum its "rough" appearance. Proteins that are produced from the ribosomes of the rough ER are sent through the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum, modified within the ER, and then is exported in a vesicle to the cis face of the golgi apparatus, where the protein undergoes further modification.
The Peptidyl-Transfer Reaction Catalyzed by the Ribosome
Enzymes transform their substrates through the active site residues. This transformation can allow for the direct participation in chemical catalysis, such as facilitation of proton transfer reactions and covalent chemistry. These active-site residues can form the covalent bond acting as general acid-base or as nucleophiles. The ribosomes undergo general acid-base or nucleophilic catalysis. The residues can also be structural complement to the transition state (TS), dissolve or reorganize water molecules, and decrease the delta S (entropy) by using the binding energy.
In the elongation process, the ribosome PTC catalyzes the aminolysis of the ester bond: the alpha amino group of the A-site aminoacul tRNA acts as nucleophile and attacks the P-site peptidyl tRNA at the carbonyl carbon of the ester bond that connects the tRNA and the peptide. In order to efficiently form peptide bonds amines react with esters. This reaction is fast with the help of the ribosome because it makes the reaction rate increase by approximately 106 - 107 folds. Before the peptide bond is formed, the aminoacyl tRNA connects to the A site at a rate of 10 s-1 which is much slower than the rate of the tertiary complex forming a peptide bond. The slow rate of reaction allows for the minimal use of substrate analog which is short RNA fragments that is similar to the tRNA CCA 3’ end or the alpha amine substituted with a hydroxyl group. The minimal substrates consisted of puromycin (Pmn), C-puromycin (C-Pmn), and CC-puromycin (CC-Pmn). These substrates bind to the ribosome fast to react with the P-site substrate in order to allow for the direct analysis of their chemistry relationship.
Recently, methods of analysis using kinetic, biochemical, genetic, and computation allow for more progress in ribosome crystallography. However, there are still many questions regarding the proton transfer mechanism. Peptidyl transfer by the ribosome accompanies a decrease in the entropy activation, which provides more understanding of ribosome catalysis involves defining the molecular mechanism that make entropy of activation lower by taking into consideration the substrate, position of the active site, desolvation, and electrostatic shielding.
3)Structures of transition state analogs used to study the ribosome
When cells are in stress, disease condition, and normal condition, RNA damage occurs. Exposing to ultraviolet light, oxidation, chlorination, nitration and alkylation result in chemical modifications to nucleobases, generating the potential of triggering ribosome degradation pathways.
There are several sources of errors in ribosome synthesis such as the alternation in rRNA sequences (occur in cis) and the failure to bind to or loss of an assembly factor or ribosomal protein (occur in trans). Beside these main sources, specific growth conditions can also cause certain effects in ribosome synthesis. For example, starvation requires excess ribosomes which are turned over efficiently[6].
mRNA decoding and peptidyl-transfer reaction are two subunites that have specialized function in ribosome translation[7]. Each eukaryote ribosome is composed of 4 rRNAs and ~80 ribosomal proteins. The processes of synthesizing, maturizing, transporting individual ribosomes and assembling into ribosomal subunits requires the contribution of ~200 proteins trans-acting cofactors and a large amount of small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs). These processes engage in hundreds of individual error-causing reactions[8][9].In addition, many ribosomal proteins also perform non-ribosomal functions, so the functions in these processes which are not directly connected to ribosome biogenesis are currently being assigned to ribosome synthesis factors (RSFs). RSFs include connections to cell cycle progression, pre-mRNA splicing, DNA damage response, nuclear organizing and telomere maintanance. Due to the large number of reactions that occur in ribosome assembling pathway, the possibility of error occurring is very high such as the potential harms for cell viability and human health. For example, inability to bind correctly to or loss of a synthesis factor can cause the production of erroneous ribosomes such as lacking part of ribosomal proteins or carrying misfolded rRNA which will affect on translation. As a result, cells develop control mechanism to avoid such problems. For example, instead of participating in later steps, synthetic factors that involved in late cytoplasmic ribosome assembly steps can first bind with pre-rRNAs at early stages, bringing pre-ribosomes to productive synthesis pathways[10].
Mutation in cis: non-funtional ribosomal RNA decay
There are many pathways that have been known to control the structural integrity of mature RNA molecules[11]. One of the pathways that control the decay of mRNAs is the "no-go" decay (NGD), which the mRNAs that cause the degradation of specific ribosomes[12].
LaRivie`re et al. introduced the way to test whether or not mutations in functional and non-functional ribosomal sites affect rRNA stability which is performing substitutions in the decoding site and peptidyl transferase centre at the position that are essential for ribosomal function in bacteria. This experiment gave result in the identification of non-functional rRNA decay, a pathway that detects and eliminates dysfunctional parts of mature ribosomes[13].
Mutations in trans: The TRAMP-exosome pathway and nucleolar surveillance
Aberrant nucleolar and nulear pre-rRNAs are found to be degraded actively by a nuclear surveillance mechanism that involves the addition of unstructured oligoadenylate tails at the 3’-end of flawed pre-rRNAs. This is done with the TRAMP complexes’ polymerase activity, and after with their degradation by the RNA exosome. TRAMP conplexes consist of a poly(A) polymerase, a zonc-knuckle-containing and putative RNA-binding protein, and the DEVH helicase Mtr4. The pathway goes from having the addition of short poly(A) tails with the actual binding between TRAMP complex and RNA, and these two commit deviated molecules to degradation. This is done by separating them from the normal RNA and by stirring exosomal activity[14].
The decay of bulk ribosome and pre-ribosome by ribophagy and PMN
Growth-inhibiting conditions cause ribosome synthesis to shut down. The synthesis of complex molecules from simple molecules such as amino acids and sugars is obstructed and existing pre-ribosomes and mature ribosomes are directed towards bulk degradative pathways. To manage stress, and to adapt to a new environment, pre-ribosomes and mature ribosomes are passed on to be recycled for important cellular components. Ubiquitin, a small regulatory protein essential to 25S NRD (Nonfunctional RRNA Decay), is also responsible for bulk ribosome degradation.[15]
Autophagy is a catabolic mechanism that takes unnecessary or dysfunctional cellular components and performs cellular degradation through the lysosome, or the vacuole in yeast and plants.[16] Starvation conditions cause large portions of the cytosol, along with protein, to assemble and whole organelles, such as ribosomes and mitochondria, are recycled through two major types of autophagy: microautophagy and macroautophagy. Macroautophagy involves the development of a double membrane around the organelle, this together known as an autophagosome. [17] This isolates the organelle and delivers it to the lysosome, which engulfs the organelle through endocytosis for its breakdown and recycling. [18] In contrast, during microautophagy, the lysosome directly engulfs the cytoplasmic material, through the inward folding of the lysosomal membrane. [19] Because lysosomes and vacuoles contain non-specific enzymes for hydrolysis, autophagy can essentially degrade any biomolecule. Macroautophagy and microautophagy are both crucial to a cell's survival during starvation. Both mechanisms associate common trans-acting factors, and both are essentially bulk degradative processes. However, studies show that selective types of both channels exist. [20]
Ribophagy is the process in yeasts in which both small and large ribosomal subunits are are delivered to the vacuole through selective macroautophagy. This process is caused by prolonged nitrogen starvation and specific only to ribosomal subunits. [21] Small and large ribosomal subunit ribophagy depends on different and distinct pathways. The increased turnover kinetics of large subunits are dependent upon the Ubp3 ubiquitin protease and its activator Bre5. Increased turnover rates of small subunit are scantly affected when mutations arise in UBE3 or BRE5, indicating independent pathways of ribophagy. However, for small ribosomal subunit ribophagy, the effector remains unknown.[22] As Upb3 deubiquitylation necessary for 60S ribophagy, cells deficient of Upb3 have an increased ubiquitylation level of many ribosome-associated proteins which have yet to be identified. It is believed that the deubiquitylation of Upb3-Bre5 targets aids autophagosomes with the packing of ribosomes, or allows the maturation of autophagosomes and/or its merging with the vacuole. [23]
Alterations in RNA can cause ribosome degradation, some of which can lead to serious diseases. RNA damage are not only results of stress and disease situations, as they occur during normal cell growth as well. Exposure to ultraviolet light, chlorination, oxidation, alkylation and nitration can all result in the introduction of chemical modifications to nucleobases, as well as RNA-RNA and RNA-protein crosslinks, into RNA and RNPs. [24] Many believe that RNA oxidation could be associated with disease progression, and that many factors, including the extent of association with proteins or iron, may be causes to leaving RNA susceptible to oxidative damage. Some cases of ribosomal RNA damage inflicted by UV radiation and oxidation have lead to human neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and atherosclerotic plaques. [25] Reactive oxygen species (ROS) is developed by chronological aging, oxidative stress and other apoptotic stimuli. Yeast cells that are exposed to high levels of ROS fragment Mature 5.8S and 25S rRNA considerably. [26] Yeast cells that are given anti-metabolites and the chemotherapeutic agent 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) accrue polyadenylated pre-rRNAs. In exosome complexes that are hypersensitive to the drug, these accumulations are distressed, proposing that nucleolar surveillance is what is responsible for the degradation of 5-FU. Many nucleolar stresses, such as drug-based interference of pre-RNA processing and rRNA synthesis, have lead to nucleolar breakdown, p53 stabilization and cell cycle advancement defects and/or apoptosis. [27]
In the core of every ribosome, which is the protein factory, there are ribosomal proteins. Recent research indicates that these core proteins can differ between ribosomes under different growth conditions and that these differences confer the ability to more efficiently translate specific subpopulations of mRNA. Ribosomes exist in every living organism for the same purpose, to synthesize proteins from mRNA. Previously, it was thought that ribosomes were homogenous and lacked any structural diversity. Because function follows structure, these differences should be expected to alter a given ribosome’s affinity for more complementary mRNA strands. In addition to core variants, post-transcriptional modification of the ribosomal RNAs leads to additional structural differentiation, and therefore functional specialization. For ribosomes to be functionally specialized it requires that the producing cell be sensitive to changing environmental conditions such that the ribosomes being synthesized exhibit biochemical differences that affect translation.
Edward Ki Yun Leung, Nikolai Suslov, Nicole Tuttle, Raghuvir Sengupta, and Joseph Anthony Piccirilli. "The Mechanism of Peptidyl Transfer Catalysis by the Ribosome."
Sebastian Klinge, Felix Voigts-Hoffmann, Marc Leibundgut and Nenad Ban. "Atomic structures of the eukaryotic ribosome."
Zahra Shajani, Michael T. Sykes, and James R. Williamson. "Assembly of Bacterial Ribosomes."
Gilbert WV. "Functional Specialization of Ribosomes?"
↑ Sebastian Klinge, Felix Voigts-Hoffmann, Marc Leibundgut and Nenad Ban. "Atomic structures of the eukaryotic ribosome."
↑ Joan L. Slonczewski, John W. Foster. "Microbiology: An Evolving Science."
↑ Sebastian Klinge, Felix Voigts-Hoffmann, Marc Leibundgut and Nenad Ban. "Atomic structures of the eukaryotic ribosome."
↑ Steitz, T.A. (2008) A structural understanding of the dynamic ribosome machine. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 9, 242–253
↑ Henras, A.K. et al. (2008) The post-transcriptional steps of eukaryotic ribosome biogenesis. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 65, 2334–2359
↑ Strunk, B.S. and Karbstein, K. (2009) Powering through ribosome assembly. RNA 15, 2083–2104
↑ Lafontaine, D. et al. (1995) The 18S rRNA dimethylase Dim1p is required for pre-ribosomal RNA processing in yeast. Genes Dev. 9, 2470–2481
↑ Doma, M.K. and Parker, R. (2007) RNA quality control in eukaryotes. Cell 131, 660–668
↑ Doma, M.K. and Parker, R. (2006) Endonucleolytic cleavage of eukaryotic mRNAs with stalls in translation elongation. Nature 440, 561–564
↑ LaRiviere, F.J. et al. (2006) A late-acting quality control process for mature eukaryotic rRNAs. Mol. Cell 24, 619–626
↑ Lafontaine, Denis. "Elsevier: Article Locator." ScienceDirect.com | Search through over 10 million science, health, medical journal full text articles and books.. N.p., n.d. Web. 20 Nov. 2012.
↑ Lafontaine, Denis L.J. "A ‘garbage Can’ for Ribosomes: How Eukaryotes Degrade Their Ribosomes." Trends in Biochemical Sciences 35.5 (2010): 267-77.
↑ Česen MH, Pegan K, Spes A, Turk B (July 2012). "Lysosomal pathways to cell death and their therapeutic applications". Exp. Cell Res. 318 (11): 1245–51. doi:10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.03.005. PMID 22465226.
↑ Mizushima N, Ohsumi Y, Yoshimori T (December 2002). "Autophagosome formation in mammalian cells". Cell Struct. Funct. 27 (6): 421–9. PMID 12576635.
↑ Česen MH, Pegan K, Spes A, Turk B (July 2012). "Lysosomal pathways to cell death and their therapeutic applications". Exp. Cell Res. 318 (11): 1245–51. doi:10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.03.005. PMID 22465226.
↑ Lafontaine, Denis L.J. "A ‘garbage Can’ for Ribosomes: How Eukaryotes Degrade Their Ribosomes." Trends in Biochemical Sciences 35.5 (2010): 267-77.
↑ Kraft, Claudine, Anna Deplazes, Marc Sohrmann, and Matthias Peter. "Mature Ribosomes Are Selectively Degraded upon Starvation by an Autophagy Pathway Requiring the Ubp3p/Bre5p Ubiquitin Protease." Nature Cell Biology 10.5 (2008): 602-10.
↑ Lafontaine, Denis L.J. "A ‘garbage Can’ for Ribosomes: How Eukaryotes Degrade Their Ribosomes." Trends in Biochemical Sciences 35.5 (2010): 267-77.
↑ Kraft, Claudine, Anna Deplazes, Marc Sohrmann, and Matthias Peter. "Mature Ribosomes Are Selectively Degraded upon Starvation by an Autophagy Pathway Requiring the Ubp3p/Bre5p Ubiquitin Protease." Nature Cell Biology 10.5 (2008): 602-10.
↑ Wurtmann, Elisabeth J., and Sandra L. Wolin. "RNA under Attack: Cellular Handling of RNA Damage." Critical Reviews in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 44.1 (2009): 34-49.
↑ Nunomura, Akihiko, Tim Hofer, Paula I. Moreira, Rudy J. Castellani, Mark A. Smith, and George Perry. "RNA Oxidation in Alzheimer Disease and Related Neurodegenerative Disorders." Acta Neuropathologica 118.1 (2009): 151-66.
↑ Mroczek, S., and J. Kufel. "Apoptotic Signals Induce Specific Degradation of Ribosomal RNA in Yeast." Nucleic Acids Research 36.9 (2008): 2874-888.
↑ Lafontaine, Denis L.J. "A ‘garbage Can’ for Ribosomes: How Eukaryotes Degrade Their Ribosomes." Trends in Biochemical Sciences 35.5 (2010): 267-77.
WorldRadioHistory.com's scan of Australasian Radio World - Vol. 02 No. 10 - February 1938 has been utilised to create the partial content for this page and can be downloaded at this link to further extend the content and enable further text correction of this issue: ARW 1938 02
In general, only content which is required for other articles in this Wikibook has been entered here and text corrected. The material has been extensively used, inter alia, for compilation of biographical articles, radio club articles and station articles.
Registered at the G.P.O., Sydney, for transmission by post as a periodical
Cover Photo: Photo of Miss Jean Batten, noted NZ air-woman, being televised in BBC studios (see story on page 8)
Highlighted Contents: "1938 Fidelity Dual-Wave Six": More About the "Empire All-Wave Three": VK2NO Advanced U.H.F. Receiver: Result of Third Shortwave DX Contest: Latest World Shortwave News.
Inside Front Cover - Amalgamated Wireless Valve Co. Ad
P.01 - F. J. W. Fear & Co. Ad
P.02 - Editorial Notes
Editorial Notes . . .
P.02 - Contents Banner
THE AUSTRALASIAN RADIO WORLD.
A. EARL READ, B.Sc.
The Fidelity Dual-Wave Six . . . . 3
New Ever Ready Factory Opened By Prime Minister . . . . 8
More About The A.C. Empire All-Wave Three . . . . 14
Aden Amateur Station On The Air . . . . 16
VK2NO Advanced U.H.F. Receiver . . . . 19
Lavishly-Equipped Radio Service Workshop . . . . 29
Breaking- Into The Amateur Game (13) . . . . 35
The All-Wave All-World DX News . . . . 37
Third S.W. DX Contest . . . . 41
Round Table QSO Smashes Previous Record . . . . 42
DX News And Views . . . . 47
P.02 - Publication Notes
The "Australasian Radio World" is published monthly by Trade Publications Proprietary, Ltd. Editorial offices, 214 George Street, Sydney, N.S.W. Telephone BW6577. Cable address: "Repress," Sydney. Advertisers please note that copy should reach office of publication by 14th of month preceding that specified for insertion.
Subscription rates: 1/- per copy, 10/6 per year ( 12 issues) post free to Australia and New Zealand. Subscribers in New Zealand can remit by Postal Note or Money Order.
Printed by Bridge Printery Pty. Ltd., 214 George Street, Sydney, N.S.W., for the proprietors of the "Australasian Radio World," 214 George St., Sydney (Footnote P.48)
P.03 - The Fidelity Dual-Wave Six
P.08 - New Ever Ready Factory Opened By Prime Minister
P.10 - Radio Ramblings
P.14 - More About The A.C. Empire All-Wave Three
P.16 - Aden Amateur Station On The Air
P.18 - Five Metres In S. Australia
P.19 - VK2NO Advanced U.H.F. Receiver
P.24 - Radio Valves In The Making (2)
P.27 - Radio Step By Step (14)
P.29 - Lavishly-Equipped Radio Service Workshop
P.35 - Breaking- Into The Amateur Game (13)
P.37 - The All-Wave All-World DX News
P.38 - Shortwave Review
P.41 - Third S.W. DX Contest
P.42 - Round Table QSO Smashes Previous Record
P.44 - 1937 Eventful Year For Shortwave Dxers
P.47 - DX News And Views
By R. Wilensky
When developing a network infrastructure design in a school environment, one critical component of a network infrastructure design in a school environment is the choice of student computers that you opt to deploy. The reason that this decision is so critical is that it will affect all other aspects of the network infrastructure. But, how do you make this, often 'religious', decision? The answer to this question, and hence any purchasing decisions, can be found through an initial assessment. There are several factors that you must consider when making this decision. We will touch on each factor briefly. Following this assessment, you can begin researching the options available. Both platform and form factor choices will be considered. Platform refers to the hardware and operating system of the units while form factor refers to mobility and data residence. Lastly, I will include several case studies.
Before beginning any of the assessments, your should begin by having an objective for the students' usage of these computers. This may be dictated by administration, faculty, parents or other parties of interest, but the ultimate result must be clearly defined. In the business world, this is called the requirements gathering and mission statement phase. While the goals may seem obvious (we want the students to integrate technologies to enhance learning), the actual implementation of this goal is quite complex. That is because people's ideas of how this gets implemented varies significantly. Make sure your mission statement is clear and that your objectives are listed as SMART goals. SMART goals are Specific, Measurable, Actionable, Realistic and Time-bound. For example, one goal may be to "Enhance literacy by ensuring that each student maintains his/her own blog by the end of the school year and posts entries at least once per month." Remember that the key questions you should be answering in determining goals and objectives are "What do you want your kids to be able to do? What should they be able to produce using the computers?"says Kevin Gole, NYC Public School Teacher.
The next consideration must be application oriented. Before making any decision with regard to student computer selection, you need to inventory and analyze your existing software in use at the school today, as well as software you would like to use in the future.
It is equally important to look at freeware/opensource options as well. Application assessment is critical because you obviously don't want to deploy student computers that will not be useful for enhancing learning in the classroom. If you don't know what you'll need ask your Educational Technology Specialist, Computer Teacher, Librarian, computer-savvy teachers and even students. Enlist help to make sure you are getting the right tools.
Most schools today have some form of student computers in the district already. Similarly to application assessments, you must do an inventory and assessment of your existing infrastructure.
Once you have assessed your current environment and can reasonably estimate the expected life remaining on each system, you are ready to begin thinking about your future computer needs.
You have to know your school on this one. Consider both the physical security of the computers and the issues of ensuring that the computers are not compromised by viruses, spam and the like. It is easy to neglect the applications running on the operating system but "hackers are starting to attack the applications more often because they know users are not updating them" as frequently as the operating system (Terrill, 2006, p. 60).
Obviously, for a school environment, cost of systems and anticipated budget are key things to consider. It would be easy to look at your budget, get quotes from various computer manufacturers, subtract and see what you have left. Unfortunately, it's not that simple. The "cost" of purchasing student computers is more than just the cost of the hardware and the software (which, by the way, is often heavily discounted for educational institutions). There are also support costs. "Cost of operation can be determined by multiplying the expected frequency of trouble by the cost of getting the problems fixed (Terrill, 2006, p. 22)." There is also the cost of training any administrators for any new applications. The last item to think about, which is often overlooked, is the cost of replacement.
Replacement cost leads us to the discussion of future growth. In addition to the number of students that each year will bring, there is is the consideration of computing demands. As technologies advance and as technology becomes more integrated into curricula, system capacity requirements will increase in order to support the demands that students will place on them.
This section will provide a brief overview into the different platform choices available. It is impossible to cover significant details on each solution however links to various reference sites are provided below. A word of caution when beginning your research is to be aware of vendor biases. All vendors mentioned have a division solely devoted to education and you should request a meeting with your local sales representative (and sales engineer). There is also what I call "User Bias." User bias is the inclination by students and teachers to favor a particular platform, largely because this is what they are "used to." This should be considered but not allowed to create tunnel vision for alternate and perhaps more appropriate solutions.
The Personal Computer is general acknowledged as the most popular home computer with the Windows Operating System having the largest market share among desktop users. It is also generally accepted that there are the most applications for Windows. That being said, it may or may not be appropriate for your school. The PC model differs from the Mac model below in that the operating system and hardware are made by different manufacturers. Microsoft licenses it's operating system to OEM's (Original Equipment Manufacturers) like Dell, IBM, HP, and Sun so it will be important to compare pricing, support and other options among all manufacturers when considering a PC decision. Microsoft in Education
Microsoft understands that technology funding can be a significant hurdle for educational institutions - one that can keep you from realizing your vision for using computers as powerful educational tools. Moving to Windows Vista can actually help reduce your information technology (IT) costs, because the operating system is easier to deploy, manage, and support ("Make the PC an educational tool-not an expense-with Windows Vista", 2008)
The benefits to using a PC are that the learning curve should be easy for most users (since many students and teachers have them at home), there is a wealth of applications available, and the cost is typically less than Mac environments since there is competition on the hardware side of the equation. The challenges are typically focused on concerns over security. Windows is a favorite target of hackers, viruses, spam and other malware and while protection software and hardware design can minimize the risk, there is always concern in this regard. Additionally, PC hardware (mice, keyboards, laptops, etc...) and data are subject to theft more easily than in other environments.
While PC's have the lion's share of the market in the desktop space, Apple's Macintosh is certainly gaining headway in the laptop arena. The main difference from a pure purchasing perspective is that Apple manufactures and distributes the hardware and the operating system (OSX, a form of linux). The other important consideration is that Mac's have always been known to excel at desktop publishing and other multimedia type applications. Apple in Education
Apple helps schools engage students with a 21st century digital learning environment that mirrors the way they live - and increasingly would like to learn ("Apple - Education - K-12.", 2008). Apple Distinguished Schools are recognized by Apple for their demonstrated success in implementing a 21st century learning environment ("Apple Learning Interchange - Apple Distinguished Schools", 2008).
The benefits of deploying a Mac environment are that it is easy for students and teachers to use and learn. It is also more secure than PC environments because, to date, it is less likely to be the target of malicious attacks and typically is designed with fewer security holes. This is even more true now that the Mac OS is an implementation of linux. Additionally, Mac's now support running Windows XP alongside OSX. The challenges are that fewer application choices exist for the Mac and it is traditional the most expensive option. Additionally, most enterprises utilize PC's and in teaching for 21 century jobs, consideration should be given to the transferability of knowledge.
Lintel is the catch-all phrase used to describe any distribution of Linux on an Intel chip and although these days Linux is equally likely to be deployed on an AMD processor, I use the term here generically to describe this platform. Linux is the newest player to enter the field of education, at least in the K-12 space. Linux and it's cousin, Unix, have been used for far longer than Mac's or PC's in the higher education area. Like PC's, Linux distributions are not packaged together with the hardware. RedHat is the most popular distribution of linux but plenty of others exist. The choices for hardware are the same as the choices for PC's. The debate on using Linux in K-12 is still open.
The benefits of linux are its increasing popularity, low cost and tight security. Good uses of it for K-12 would be programming classes and classes teaching about web site administration and infrastructure because these are popular applications for linux. The challenges for a Lintel solution are limited applications and possibly more complex management and administration. It is also important to note that while linux is typically thought of as "free"support, indemnification and maintenance make the total cost of ownership decisively "not free."
Schools around the country and administrations in particular are pushing for "wireless cafe's" at school. However, there are some compelling reasons to consider sticking with traditional desktops. First, let's talk about battery life. Desktops are always connected to power so there is no concern about running out of "juice"in the middle of a lesson. Desktops are also (usually) wired - meaning they are connected to the Internet by cable (not wireless) so they are more secure and also less likely to lose connections to the Internet. Use of multimedia is another consideration. According to the IT Guy, "if the computer will be used for hard-drive intensive activities like video editing, then a desktop has more hard drive expandability options" ("techLEARNING.com | Technology & Learning - The Resource for Education Technology Leaders", 2008). Generally speaking, the best uses for desktops in a school environment will be in student computer labs, student access in libraries, permanent computers in the classroom and multimedia stations throughout the school.
Laptop carts (COWs) are all the rage these days. There are some clear advantages for laptop carts in a school environment, however I'd like to start by pointing out some of the shortcomings first to remember that it's not necessarily nirvana. First, as hinted at earlier, laptops run out of battery. Secondly, one of the advantages of laptops (no connection required) is also a downfall. Wireless access to the Internet is more of a security concern than wired access and also has issues of signal strength and scalability. In practicality, a wireless access point supports up to 15-20 laptops depending on the location, according to Kevin Gole. Lastly, there is the fact that students are more often than not asked to help carry several laptops at a time from one classroom to another and even the most responsible child has a tendency to drop things. Laptops will get dropped. It is inevitable. They are also more expensive than their desktop counterparts, not to mention that they are more susceptible to theft. Ok, so with all the caveats, why even consider laptops? Because there are also a lot of benefits associated with these portable devices.
Laptops distinct advantage is the mobility factor. Laptop carts allow students to share computing power and also allow for more access to computers than would otherwise occur if they only went to the computer lab for one period per week. Another advantage is that students feel a sense of ownership since they are "assigned" a specific laptop on the cart and can quickly find what they need. As early as 2005, some schools became "ebook-only" schools meaning that laptops replaced traditional textbooks throughout the school ("Arizona school ditches texts for laptops - Engadget", 2005) and more schools have followed suit. Whether or not schools allow students to take laptops home with them varies. "In the United States, school districts and states with one-to-one laptop programs are considering ways in which the portable computers can be used outside the norm of in-class lessons, such as when bad weather or other events force schools to close" ("Education Week's Digital Directions: Learning Even When Schools Are Closed", 2008).
When considering laptops, the other additional component to factor in, is the laptop carts themselves. Features to look for include power options, ventilation, caster movement, cabinet size, locking/security mechanisms and organization aspects ("Laptop Carts - School Computing", 2008).
One short comment on mobile devices including mobile phone and PDA's: This is a yet unexplored area for learning and while there is a great debate on whether or not schools should or should not allow the presence of mobile phones or devices in schools, the penetration of mobile devices is only likely to continue. Therefore, it is worth considering learning situations that might benefit from the use of these devices in the classroom and/or educational setting. An example is the use of cell phones by students on a field trip to document and blog to their class blog sites ("20 Ideas: Getting students to use their mobile phones as learning tools", 2008).
"One of an emerging array of choices for low-cost computing in schools, 'thin client' computing is an old idea that has been made new again. The term refers to a decades-old arrangement in which many low-capacity computers - or thin clients - depend on a powerful central computer server to do most of their data processing. The data is passed back and forth between clients and servers over a network" ("Education Week: 'NComputing' Developers Tout Savings for Schools", 2008). The advantage of a thin client environment is that you get "the best of everything". The actual processing systems can be PC, Mac, Linux or whatever else you may have and they are all managed centrally in the server room. The actual student computer itself is nothing more than a "smart" terminal - a thin client device - so named because it typically has no hard drive in it. In fact, beyond a smart card reader, some USB ports and the input device ports, there is little to it.
To illustrate the solution, Sun Microsystems Virtual Desktop Solution is described below. The SunRay is a "thin" or "virtual display" client. Virtual display clients are just as they sound. They display any desktop as though they were running locally, but in fact they are running at the server level. Sun Microsystems, like the Apple model, is the sole manufacturer of SunRay's in the desktop form factor and they also make the software that drives this architecture. Companies like Accutech and Naturetech make SunRay laptops. There is no configuration, operating system, or data residing on the student computers which offers more security and manageability over traditional PC's or Mac's. Sun is helping schools to manage challenges such as limited budgets, rising costs of desktops, patch management overload and desktop downtime ("Sun Virtual Desktop Solution: Connecting the Campus", 2008).
The benefits of a thin client architecture such as this are: enhanced security due to data residing in central location and hence minimization of device theft, flexibility to deploy multiple platforms easily, reuse of existing student computers and/or monitors, improved administration, reduced cost and more eco-friendly components. Additional benefits of the Sun Virtual Desktop Solution include the ability for teachers to easily "control" the students desktops in the classroom and anytime anywhere access via a browser on any device. The challenges are management of a more complex server room, initial training considerations and limited multimedia functionality (currently).
The final step in the decision making process, after assessing your current goals and environment, and after researching all the options, is to ask for references. You always want to talk to people who have done it. Ask them not only what worked but what pitfalls they encountered. Every situation is different but every situation will likely also have some similarities that you can use to further refine your choices. To that end, I will provide a few sample case studies below.
The PC Decision: "Tri-Center Community Schools educates 900 K-12 students on one campus in southwest Iowa. By upgrading its computers to ... Windows Vista® ..., the district provided teachers with state-of-the-art multimedia capabilities for creating more engaging learning experiences that better prepare students for college and work" ("Microsoft Case Studies: TriCenter Community Schools", 2008).
The Mac Decision: "Echo Lake Elementary continues to be recognized for its innovative use of technology in education... Echo Lake students and teachers are creating every day...Pages for student-generated newsletters to communicate to parents; Garageband for Civil Rights podcasts that connect literature to history; iMovie for stop-motion claymation fables... iPhoto for mathematic slideshows... iMovie for math tutorials... [and] iWeb for biography projects. The beauty of Apple technology is that new projects are being generated every week, and the students keep raising the bar for one another" ("Apple Learning Interchange - Echo Lake Elementary School", 2008).
The Thin Client Choice: J. Holland of Sun Microsystems described two urban school districts who have deployed thin client architectures. The first is one of the poorest districts in the US. They chose to install Sun Secure Global Desktop because they could not afford to replace the old unusable computers that were in place. This solution allowed students all over the district to access the extra tutoring available as part of NCLB. The other selling point was the ability for teachers to lock the displays of student computers while teaching a lesson. They plan to deploy low-cost SunRay's once multimedia support becomes available because they have a life-span of at least 10 years. The other urban district has already deployed SunRay's in their science classes. Java programs were taking about ½ the class time to load on the old computers they had in the classroom. Each student now has a SmartCard and simply inserts the card into the SunRay when they get to class, instantaneously bringing up the session where they left off the day before, regaining precious classroom time. They also were able to save money in reduced power consumption in a much quieter environment. See also: UK Bradford School of the future.
While the preparation and choices may seem overwhelming, we must remember that "Technology will not go away, and educators have to come to terms with it as an educational tool. Understanding technology and ...[its] force in society is incumbent on both students and adults" (Cuban, 2003, p. 194). So we, as educators, have a responsibility to our students to teach computer literacy. Today, computer literacy is more than simple office productivity software. It involves more powerful applications, a comfort level with technology usage throughout all disciplines and a general acceptance that 21st century careers require 21st century tools.
Computers are used in [/wiki/Schools schools] for many applications such as writing papers or searching the [/wiki/Internet Internet] for information. Computer skills are also a subject being specifically taught in many schools, especially from adolescence onward.... One problematic element of many (though not all) "computer literacy" or computer education programs is that they may resort too heavily on rote [/wiki/Memorization memorization]. Students may be taught, for example, how to perform several common functions (e.g.: Open a file,...) in very specific ways, using one specific version of one specific program. When a graduate of such a program encounters a competing program, or even a different version of the same program, they may be confused ... by the differences from what they learned. This is one reason why major computer ... firms ... consider the [/wiki/Education educational] market important: The often time-limited computer education provided in schools most often lends itself to rote memorization, creating a sort of [/wiki/Vendor_lock-in vendor lock-in] effect whereby graduates are afraid to switch to competing computer systems ("Computer literacy - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia", 2008).
Hence, the decisions we as technology coordinators and educational technology specialists make with regard to student computer selection, as well as, application & tool choices, is critical to enabling successful knowledge transfer and developing computer literate graduates.
Personal computers can be more price competitive because they are produced by multiple manufacturers.
Thin client architectures are less secure because all data resides in the server room.
Factors influencing student computer purchase decisions include: a. Define objectives, Application Assessment & Selection, Student Input b. Application Assessment & Selection, Existing Infrastructure, Future Growth c. Cost, Security, Whatever the Principal wants d. Application Assessment & Selection, Cost, Teacher Input
Which of the following statements is false? a. Mac's are typically more expensive than PC's b. There are more security concerns for PC's than for Mac's c. PC's are the best platform for desktop publishing and graphics. d. There are many different linux distributions
Which of the following statements is true? a. Desktops are more susceptible to theft than laptops b. Laptops are always the best choice for schools c. Virtual display devices have hard drives and operating systems d. Mobile devices may have potential application for learning
Which of the following statements is false? a. Echo Lake Elementary uses GarageBand to create podcasts on Civil Rights b. The use of SmartCards with SunRays does not provide any productivity gains in the classroom c. Tri-Center Community Schools created more engaging learning experiences using multimedia capabilities within Windows Vista d. One urban school district deployed Sun Secure Global Desktop because they could not afford to replace their existing infrastructure
Microsoft's Website: There is a wealth of resources and information provided by Microsoft and their products and solutions focused around K-12 education. There are also several K-12 and higher education case studies. Be aware of vendor bias.
Apple's Website: Education is one of the premiere industries for Apple. They have website sections dedicated to K-12, higher education, students and information technology. Once again, be aware of vendor bias.
Using Social Networking sites for Educational Uses
Sun Microsystems in Education Sun Microsystems has built several solutions around the needs of academia and in particular the K-12 space. This page provides information about programs, solutions and success stories. Once again, be aware of vendor bias.
Blogs, Wikis, Podcasts and other powerful tools for Classrooms
e-Learning and the Science of Instruction: Proven Guidelines for Consumers and Designers of Multimedia Learning
Teaching With Technology: Creating Student-Centered Classrooms
Classroom 2.0 Social Network
Web 2.0: A New Wave of Innovation for Teaching and Learning?
The Laptops are Coming! The Laptops are Coming!
F (The first step is to define objectives)
F (Linux is appropriate for instructional classes on programming, web infrastructure and the like)
F (Thin client architectures are more secure because data is stored in the server room and not on the individual clients)
20 Ideas: Getting students to use their mobile phones as learning tools. (n.d.). Retrieved July 26, 2008, from http://teaching.mrbelshaw.co.uk/index.php/2006/09/21/20-ideas-getting-students-to-use-their-mobile-phones-as-learning-tools/.
Apple Learning Interchange - Apple Distinguished Schools. (n.d.). Retrieved July 26, 2008, from http://edcommunity.apple.com/ali/collection.php?collection=2542.
Apple Learning Interchange - Echo Lake Elementary School. (n.d.). Retrieved July 27, 2008, from http://edcommunity.apple.com/ali/story.php?itemID=13881.
Arizona school ditches texts for laptops - Engadget. (n.d.). Retrieved July 26, 2008, from http://www.engadget.com/2005/07/11/arizona-school-ditches-texts-for-laptops/.
Computer literacy - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. (n.d.). Retrieved July 27, 2008, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_literacy.
Cuban, L. (2003). Oversold and Underused: Computers in the Classroom. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Education Week's Digital Directions: Learning Even When Schools Are Closed. (n.d.). Retrieved July 26, 2008, from http://www.edweek.org/dd/articles/2008/01/23/3laptop_side.h01.html.
Education Week: 'NComputing'â„¢ Developers Tout Savings for Schools. (n.d.). Retrieved July 27, 2008, from http://www.edweek.org/login.html?source=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.edweek.org%2Flogin.html%3Fsource%3Dhttp%253A%252F%252Fwww.edweek.org%252Fsearch.html%253Fqs%253Ddesktop%252Blaptop%26destination%3Dhttp%253A%252F%252Fwww.edweek.org%252Few%252Farticles%252F2008%252F.
Laptop Carts - School Computing. (n.d.). Retrieved July 26, 2008, from http://schoolcomputing.wikia.com/wiki/Laptop_Carts.
Microsoft Case Studies: TriCenter Community Schools. (n.d.). Retrieved July 27, 2008, from http://www.microsoft.com/casestudies/casestudy.aspx?casestudyid=4000002061.
Sun Virtual Desktop Solution: Connecting the Campus. (n.d.). Retrieved July 27, 2008, from http://www.sun.com/solutions/documents/solution-sheets/ed_vds.pdf.
Terrill, T. (2006). Technology on a Shoestring: A Survival Guide for Educators And Other Professionals. New York: Teachers College Press.
The more modern "extended" regular expressions can often be used with modern Unix utilities by including the command line flag "-E".
POSIX extended regular expressions are similar in syntax to the traditional Unix regular expressions, with some exceptions. The following metacharacters are added:
+ — Match the last "block" one or more times - "ba+" matches "ba", "baa", "baaa" and so on
? — Match the last "block" zero or one times - "ba?" matches "b" or "ba"
| — The choice (or set union) operator: match either the expression before or the expression after the operator - "abc|def" matches "abc" or "def".
"[hc]+at" matches with "hat", "cat", "hhat", "chat", "hcat", "ccchat" etc.
"[hc]?at" matches "hat", "cat" and "at"
"([cC]at)|([dD]og)" matches "cat", "Cat", "dog" and "Dog"
Since the characters '(', ')', '[', ']', '.', '*', '?', '+', '^' and '$' are used as special symbols they have to be escaped if they are meant literally. This is done by preceding them with '\' which therefore also has to be escaped this way if meant literally. Examples:
DMD is the reference compiler for the D programming language written by the author himself, Walter Bright. http://www.digitalmars.com/d/dcompiler.html
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Belgium, officially the Kingdom of Belgium, is a federal state in Western Europe. It is a founding member of the European Union. It has the headquarters of the European Union, NATO and some other famous organizations. The capital city of Belgium is Brussels. Belgium has an area of 30,528km2. There are about 11 million people.
Belgium, guanfang jiaohzuoh Belgium Warngguor, Xi`ou 1'g liarnbang guorjia, Ouzhou Liarnmerng d chuahngbahn cherngyuarn zhiyi. Ouzhou Liarnmerng, NATO her yixie qirta zhuhmirng zuuzhi d zoongbuh dou shehzaih Belgium. ta d shooudu shih Brussels, miahnji 30,528km2, rernkoou yue 11,000,000.
File:LOZ Dungeon 1 Quest2.png
Obtain the Wooden Boomerang.
Beat Aquamentus.
Obtain the first Triforce piece.
None.
The entrance to this dungeon is found in the same place as the first dungeon in the first quest. For this dungeon, the middle section is optional, providing a spare key, some bombs and a map (which requires expending said bombs). This walkthrough will only cover the rooms necessary to clear the level.
From the entrance, enter the right room. Defeat the Goriyas here to obtain the Wooden Boomerang.
Bomb the top wall to reveal a passage. Go through the passage and defeat the Keeses. When the room is cleared, push the left most block to gain access to the underground passage.
Take the passage and you will arrive towards the top of the dungeon. Defeat the Wall Masters here and obtain a key to unlock the left door.
Travel left and defeat all of the blue Goriyas. Bomb the top wall to expose a path to the boss of the dungeon.
The boss is Aquamentus. You must strike him in the head six times with the Wooden Sword or three times with the White Sword. Time your strikes between the energy orbs that he emits from his horn. Only the Magical Shield will absorb the energy orbs. Link will receive damage if he tries to block them with the Wooden shield.
Defeat him to earn a Heart Container. Enter the room to the right to obtain the first Triforce piece.
If you have a Ladder or Whistle, look for a medicine woman either one screen east and two screens north, or two screens east and one screen north.
Full healing can be found two screens east, and is accessed by following the southern detour.
From the fairy pool, one screen southeast sells bombs.
A Magic Shield may be purchased in the store southwest of the dungeon.
Runs when a unit is being decloaked
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Hemp seed is the seed of the plant of hemp. It is a healthy food. Hemp seed is rich in protein. It helps digestion and stooling. Hemp seed oil can prevent diseases such as heart disease, high blood pressure, high cholesterol, cancer, and arthritis. It is good for the brain and skin. The drink made from hemp seeds is called hemp milk.
"Growth hacker (noun)-one whose passion and focus is growth through use of a testable and scalable methodology. A growth hackers works within the parameters of a scaleable and repeatable method for growth, driven by product and inspired by data. A growth hacker lives at the intersection of data, product, and marketing. [1]"
—Aaron Ginn, Head of Growth, StumbleUpon
Growth hacking is a method of rapidly and inexpensively growing a company’s user base, sales, or market share.[2] Coined by Sean Ellis in 2010, this low-cost strategy often employs technological solutions such as search engine optimization, website analytics, guerrilla marketing, optimizing user experience and user interface, and leveraging social media platforms to enhance user experience.[3] Since being coined in 2010, the term and its associated marketing strategies have become popular in the tech industry and have begun to branch out into other sectors, leading to the first Growth Hackers Conference in 2013.
“Many of the growth hacking descriptions on the web are unnecessarily restrictive. I don’t believe growth hackers must be formal engineers when many of the most well-regarded growth hackers don’t code regularly.[4]”
—Gagan Biyani, Co-Founder of Udemy, Growth Hacker
A typical growth hacker is tech-savvy, highly analytical, and data-driven.[5] Although many growth hackers are programmers, growth hackers can come from a variety of backgrounds. Though many growth hacking strategies are technical in nature, they often also require outside-of-the-box thinking, creativity, and comfort dealing with qualitative data and ambiguity [5]. According to Aaron Ginn via TechCrunch, a strong growth hacking team typically consists of a programmer, analyst, and a marketer who combine their skills to achieve rapid growth. The web developer manipulates and designs marketing platforms, the analyst analyzes data to expose trends and motivate strategies, and the marketer pitches growth recommendations to clients.
Growth Hacking Practices: Where to Draw the Line
The term hacking is often perceived negatively because of its use to describe individuals who illicitly exploit security flaws in computer systems. When used in the context of growth hacking, however, hacking signifies developing creative, efficient, and often novel solutions to problems, in this case user growth. Eric Ellis, coiner of the term "growth hacking", emphasizes that "people don’t get caught up on the term “growth hacker” or even a specific definition for it" [6] , but rather "focus instead on the concepts behind it." [6] According to Ellis, growth hackers utilize data to find a marketing highway for growth. Though the most critical goal of growth hacking is growth, some companies employ tactics that border on exploitation of current and prospective users. However, companies who utilize more exploitive or invasive growth tactics often experience backlash and criticism.[7] Sometimes these poor growth practices can be attributed to individual growth hackers who focus too closely on their bottom line and disregard to the best interests of the company reputation and customer well-being. Some such unethicaland unprofessional tactics used by these growth hackers include, but are not limited too, taking aggressive action to obtain email addresses and personal information of a target population, spamming, inappropriately slandering competitor products, false advertising,and secretly tracking customer internet habits. [5] While their tactics may result in temporary praise and apparent growth, sabotaging reputations and customer trust does not benefit the company in the long run. Furthermore, these "bad apples" sour the image of growth hacking as a whole and how it can help companies experience incredible growth and success.[7] Thus, the best growth hackers have an ability to implement effective growth strategies and methods while keeping the users' perspectives in mind. In doing so, these growth hackers bring success to their organizations, maintain a good user experience, and uphold the integrity of the profession.
Today, unethical and unprofessional growth hacking techniques are often used on social media platforms.[5] For example, spamming techniques are common on applications like Tinder, a dating application, and Glide, a video application. These applications allow users or admins to send non-users messages with links to download. Because many of these messages are unsolicited and sent purely to attract people to the site, they border on unethical. These messages cross the line, however, when they trick users who think they are navigating to an advertised site by sending them another site altogether. [5] Fortunately, there are also successful ethical growth hacking techniques. The most widely-used ethical technique in growth hacking is clever use of data and analytics to optimize a companies site, products, and services to best serve people not currently a part of the company's user base. In the cases of Tinder and Glide, data analytics could have been utilized to pinpoint trends in the target populations instead of inundating users with spam. Growth hacking techniques should thus optimally behave like an attractive side of a magnet: the techniques should entice current and prospective users to click, download, and make purchases on their own terms without being hassled.
One aspect of professional ethics that pertains to growth hacking is Diane Vaughan's theory of normalization of deviance. Specifically, growth hacking techniques used by companies can fall prey to a gradual slip in ethical standards, especially with user data and information. Companies like Facebook and Google constantly monitor their users' behavior and habits in order to best serve them with ads and provide an optimal user experience. In doing so, however, these companies have occasionally crossed the line in the degree to which they extract user data and personal information. With Graph Search, for instance, Facebook believed they had improved searching for items (people, photos, events, etc) on the website, but in doing so exposed to the public lots of user information that had formerly been private or hidden. Like the theory states, there was a swift negative public response, and Facebook released improvements that offered users more control over access to their content and information. Still, these companies extract and use incredible amounts of data in ways currently not known by the public. With a rise of users and user activity on theses sites and concurrent rise in the amount of data these sites process, more information about how these sites use the data will likely surface. Hopefully they use the data ethically; if not we will likely see another backlash and correction before yet another normalization of deviant data use.
One of the most cited examples of growth hacking was AirBNB's leveraging of Craigslist to rapidly expand its user base. In the two years following AirBNB's 2008 launch, AirBNB's marketing team employed several growth strategies aimed at tapping into Craigslist's then much larger user base. First, AirBNB engineers reverse engineered Craigslist's posting mechanism. In doing so, AirBNB was able to offer its users an option to post a new AirBNB listing directly to Craigslist in the form of a Craigslist post that would then link back to AirBNB. This tactic both enabled early AirBNB users to advertise their listings to a much wider audience and brought many Craigslist users to the AirBNB platform. Though not an illicit tactic per se, Craigslist eventually resolved the vulnerability that enabled external sites to create listings, thus bringing an end to that functionality for AirBNB users[8].
The second tactic employed by AirBNB was to send messages recommending AirBNB to Craigslist users who posted rental listings similar to those found on AirBNB. This tactic, considered by some as spamming, was detailed most notably by web developer Dave Gooden, who works in the vacation rental industry and was curious about the source of AirBNB's rapid growth [9]. In his 2011 blog post "How AirBNB Became a Billion Dollar Company", Gooden revealed his investigation into AirBNB's growth tactics. After posting a rental listing on Craigslist, he received an email from a random Gmail account recommending AirBNB. He then created his own rental site and listed one of the rental properties from that site on Craigslist, only to receive a similar email recommending he list his rental on AirBNB. So many Craigslist users likely received similar messages from AirBNB after posting rental properties and wound up listing their rentals on AirBNB as well.
Though neither of these tactics were illegal, they both called into question the ethics of growth hacking. On one hand, AirBNB took advantage of another website's existing user base and sent spam. On the other, AirBNB turned into a respectable service that now allows people to rent places to stay in 34,000 cities in 192 countries [10]. Indeed, AirBNB illustrates the importance of attracting users to nascent startups. For many startups, efforts on quality control and expansion come only after some degree of trust in their business models is established, and nothing speaks more to an internet company's success than user base.
Many companies achieve growth by offering incentives to users who refer their friends to the company. Dropbox, for one, gives a user 2 gigabytes of cloud storage space immediately when they sign up. They then offer their users the ability to send referral links to their friends with the promise of 500 additional megabytes of storage space per successful referral free users and 1 gigabyte per referral (Dropbox caps their referral award space at 16 gigabytes for free users and 32 gigabytes for paid users). [11]. And referring a friend is not the only way to receive free space--giving feedback on the site, connecting social media accounts, using Dropbox as a primary photo storage, and linking an iOS mail account will all give users more free space [12]. Thus, Dropbox has created incentives to help bring more users in and also to incentivize current users to invest in the Dropbox ecosystem.
Similarly, Venmo, mobile application that lets users send each other electronically, gifts successful referrals with a $5 addition to their account [13]. Here Venmo has created an incentive that aligns perfectly with the app's functionality--users link their credit cards and bank accounts to their Venmo account, so the addition of $5 to that account provides users a visible incentive to send the app to their friends.
Other companies who participate in referral bonuses are League of Legends, Marriot hotels, Verizon wireless, American Express, Orbitz, Groupon, DirectTV, and many others.
Because growth hacking is a relatively new concept and many of the key growth hacking strategies are still evolving, the ethics of growth hacking will continue to shift. In science and engineering fields, mistakes and poor decisions can potentially lead to loss of life or massive damage to property and the environment. Examples of such mistakes and poor decisions are illustrated by cases such as the Therac-25, Rodney Rocha and Columbia, and Apollo 13. The greatest risks, if they can even be considered risks, currently posed by growth hacking are consumer annoyance (due to spam and similar methods) and possible theft of another company's user base. As growth hacking continues to become more commonplace among tech companies and expands into other industries, we will likely alter our definition and perception of growth hacking, particularly as it pertains to professionalism and ethics.
↑ http://blog.ourcrowd.com/index.php/2014/01/21/what-is-a-growth-hacker-and-why-every-startup-needs-one/
Squares adjacent to the trap are key to any trap attack. For simplicity, examples will have Gold attacking the c6 trap. Naturally, the same principles apply when Gold attacks f6, or when Silver attacks c3 or f3.
While attacking the c6 trap, the gold elephant would most often want to occupy d6. On b6 or c7, an attacking elephant would be decentralized and might become blockaded. In most cases, an attacking elephant would rather be on d6 than on c5:
A d6 gold elephant prevents a fork between c6 and f6.
A d6 gold elephant blocks silver defenders arriving from the east.
A d6 gold elephant impedes the forward development of silver pieces in the center.
A d6 gold elephant can easily move to e6 to defend or attack the f6 trap.
Blocking Silver out of d6 could later compel her to occupy c5, which is not ideal for a trap defender. Any non-elephant silver piece on c5 could be pushed or pulled to c4, and Gold might then have threats in both c3 and c6. To avoid this, the silver elephant might defend its home trap, but then Gold might create a threat elsewhere while also strengthening the northwestern threat, perhaps overloading Silver.
However, a trap attack can be effective even with the attacking elephant on c5, where it might prefer to be if something is occurring around c3.
Once on d6, an attacking elephant should stay in place until it is not needed there, or until it is more needed elsewhere. If the attacking elephant leaves the trap, other attacking pieces could then be at risk in that trap. Even if the gold elephant moves from d6 to c5, that might allow Silver to fork a piece between c6 and f6.
Diagram 1: Silver to move can do little to counter Gold's attack on c6.
Diagram 1 shows an ideal attack; Gold has taken firm control of the c6 trap. Notice these positional features:
The silver elephant would need at least two turns to reach c5.
The gold elephant stands between the silver camel and the advanced gold horse.
The a5 dog is the only silver piece that could immediately reach c5 (with da5e ra8s ra6s db5e) and thus become a second silver defender of c6. However, a gold horse could then push or pull the dog to c4, creating a double threat while the gold elephant remained on d6.
Silver cannot scatter in time to prevent a c6 capture; even if Silver could do so, Gold could then advance a rabbit on the c-file, threatening goal.
If the gold elephant were instead on c5, Silver could move her e7 horse to d6 and also move her elephant a square west.
Silver to move cannot occupy b6 or d6, and cannot safely occupy c5. Silver's forces are quite unbalanced, but would be in better shape if the d6 square were accessible.
Diagram 2: With the gold elephant on c5 rather than d6, c7 is not a safe square for a gold attacker.
By contrast, Gold is very weak in diagram 2 with Silver to move. Silver can play ed5nns Hc7e, freezing the gold horse and preparing to fork it between c6 and f6; this is a risk of having an attacking piece on c7 without the attacking elephant on d6. As an aside, Silver should go after the c7 horse immediately; otherwise, Gold could move it west and still defend f3.
Although an attacking elephant should generally not be decentralized, there are exceptions. If an attacking elephant can move through the trap and push the defending camel to a middle row, as occurred on 21g of this game, the double-threat may justify temporarily marginalizing the elephant. The gold elephant might go to c7 to unfreeze a b7 hostage. A goal threat might sometimes be strengthened by an elephant on or beside the goal line. Such moves require great caution, however, as an elephant can often become blockaded in a corner. In this game, Silver may have felt safe placing her elephant on c2 and then c1, as Gold's forces were depleted. However, Gold used silver pieces to help box in the silver elephant.
Diagram 3: Gold cannot gain access to b6 or c7.
A successful opening attack usually gets the attacker's horse or camel safely onto a decentralized key square. In this game, Gold attacked in the west, but Silver kept b6 and c7, which Gold is now blocked from. If the gold elephant leaves the trap, Gold will lose material; Silver can now overload Gold, whose western attack has backfired. For most of the game, rabbit advances must be connected to the activity of strong pieces other than the elephant.
Whether an attacker is better on b6 or c7 depends on the position:
A gold attacker on b6 is freer to retreat if it becomes necessary to abandon the attack.
A gold horse on b6 denies the silver horse its ideal defensive square. In the diagram at left, the a6 silver horse is passive.
A gold attacker on b6 restricts the development of silver pieces in the west, securing a space advantage for Gold.
An attacking gold horse might be taken hostage by the silver camel, which could often reach and hold c7 more easily than it could b6.
A gold attacker on c7 might be pulled toward the f6 trap.
A gold attacker on b6 might block other gold pieces, whereas a gold attacker on c7 would not stop further gold advances on the flank.
A strong gold piece on c7 would block silver reinforcements coming from the east.
A gold attacker on c7 could weaken the silver goal line.
Often, a b6 attacker cannot move and then hope to return to b6; at left, the a6 silver horse is ready to reclaim b6 if the gold horse moves. Were the gold horse on c7, it might be able to step away and return later, meaning that Gold could free his elephant while retaining a long-term threat to c6.
A gold piece on c7 could go east if Gold decides to attack f6.
A b6 attacker might later move to c7. Above, Silver blocks that by occupying b8, a7, b7, c7, c6, and c5.
Once Gold has firm control of b6 or c7, he might swarm the trap, perhaps freeing the gold elephant while further restricting the silver elephant. If an elephant does not defend its besieged home trap, the attacker might quickly clear space for a goal.
Diagram 4: Silver to move could push the gold rabbit onto c6 and delay any capture by Gold.
While rabbits can participate in a trap attack, a friendly rabbit may be a liability for a trap attacker trying to capture material. In diagram 4, it might appear that Silver to move cannot prevent a loss in c6. However, Silver has one "nuisance move" that will delay a capture: hd6s Rc5n hd5we. That would leave the gold rabbit on c6 and the silver horse on d5, precluding any one-turn capture by Gold. On d5, the silver horse would be less vulnerable than it might seem: if the gold camel went to d6, Silver would have a chance for a camel trade. If the gold camel went to c5, Silver could then place defenders on both c7 and d6. If the gold camel stayed away from the silver horse, the horse might go south and start something. If not for the gold rabbit on c5, Silver could not have avoided an immediate loss of at least a dog. Gold still has a strong position as long as he is careful with his camel, but this shows how one misplaced rabbit can be exploited by the opponent. If both sides were actively attacking, such a delaying tactic could prove decisive. Since a rabbit cannot back out of a trap, it is often best to avoid placing a rabbit next to a trap in which one hopes to make captures.
Overview · Playing the game · Introduction to tactics · Introduction to strategy
Camel hostage · Other hostages · Frames · Trap control · Distribution of force · Rabbit advancement · Elephant blockade · Relative value of pieces · Advanced tactics
Setup · Race positions · Attack/Overview · Attack/Positioning · Attack/Techniques · Attack/Camel attacks · Attack/Against a camel trap · Attack/ED example · Lone elephant attacks
Sample games · Challenge history · Glossary · Resources
Business StrategyThe Art, Science, and Craft of Decision-MakingThe Three Processes of Strategy
Strategic management is a combination of three main processes which are as follows:
Performing a situation analysis, self-evaluation and competitor analysis: both internal and external; both micro-environmental and macro-environmental.
Concurrent with this assessment, objectives are set. These objectives should be parallel to a timeline; some are in the short-term and others on the long-term. This involves crafting vision statements (long term view of a possible future), mission statements (the role that the organization gives itself in society), overall corporate objectives (both financial and strategic), strategic business unit objectives (both financial and strategic), and tactical objectives.
These objectives should, in the light of the situation analysis, suggest a strategic plan. The plan provides the details of how to achieve these objectives.
This three-step strategy formulation process is sometimes referred to as determining where you are now, determining where you want to go, and then determining how to get there. These three questions are the essence of strategic planning. I/O Economics for the external factors and RBV for the internal factors.
Performing a situation analysis, self-evaluation and competitor analysis: both internal and external; both micro-environmental and macro-environmental.
Concurrent with this assessment, objectives are set. These objectives should be parallel to a timeline; some are in the short-term and others on the long-term. This involves crafting vision statements (long term view of a possible future), mission statements (the role that the organization gives itself in society), overall corporate objectives (both financial and strategic), strategic business unit objectives (both financial and strategic), and tactical objectives.
These objectives should, in the light of the situation analysis, suggest a strategic plan. The plan provides the details of how to achieve these objectives.
This three-step strategy formulation process is sometimes referred to as determining where you are now, determining where you want to go, and then determining how to get there. These three questions are the essence of strategic planning. I/O Economics for the external factors and RBV for the internal factors.
Measuring the effectiveness of the organizational strategy, it's extremely important to conduct a SWOT analysis to figure out the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats (both internal and external) of the entity in question. This may require to take certain precautionary measures or even to change the entire strategy.
In corporate strategy, Johnson and Scholes present a model in which strategic options are evaluated against three key success criteria:
Feasibility (can it be made to work?)
Acceptability (will they work it?)
Suitability deals with the overall rationale of the strategy. The key point to consider is whether the strategy would address the key strategic issues underlined by the organisation's strategic position.
Does it make economic sense?
Would the organisation obtain economies of scale, economies of scope or experience economy?
Tools that can be used to evaluate suitability include:
Feasibility is concerned with the resources required to implement the strategy are available, can be developed or obtained. Resources include funding, people, time and information.
Tools that can be used to evaluate feasibility include:
Acceptability is concerned with the expectations of the identified stakeholders (mainly shareholders, employees and customers) with the expected performance outcomes, which can be return, risk and stakeholder reactions.
Risk deals with the probability and consequences of failure of a strategy (financial and non-financial).
Stakeholder reactions deals with anticipating the likely reaction of stakeholders. Shareholders could oppose the issuing of new shares, employees and unions could oppose outsourcing for fear of losing their jobs, customers could have concerns over a merger with regards to quality and support.Try and test.
Tools that can be used to evaluate acceptability include:
Business StrategyThe Art, Science, and Craft of Decision-MakingThe Three Processes of Strategy
This macro terminates the current paragraph and hints TeX to insert a page break (with a −500 penalty). This macro stands for \par\penalty-500 (you still need to insert a blank after, be it a space or a end of line).
PCR and primer design.
This module allows for designing primers and running virtual PCRs. It can be started from a DNA module via context menu of the DNA or [../Sequence map#Context menu|sequence]] map, or through Tools/PCR. If a sequence is selected in the DNA module, one or more primers can be generated automatically upon startup of the PCR module. These will only be rough suggestions, and are in no way optimized by default.
Add a primer (you will have to open or enter the primer first)
The polymerase running length is the number of nucleotides the polymerase is allowed to run during the PCR in the elongation step. This is usually measured in minutes, but each polymerase runs at a different speed, which is why this information is given here in nucleotides. The value is initially computed automatically, but can be changed manually.
The primer list (the upper left) shows all primers used in this PCR, as well as certain key properties of these. Selecting one of these primers will show more detailed information in the box on the right (see here for details). Double-clicking one of the primers will mark and show that primer in the sequence. A selected primer can be removed through the Remove button, or edited via the Edit button. A selected primer can also be exported via the Export button in the toolbar; a new sequence will be generated for that primer.
Caveat : The generated sequence is not stored anywhere automatically, it needs to be saved manually!
Caveat : To add a primer, use the Add button in the toolbar, or the Selection as new primer context menu. Merely editing the sequence (see below) is for editing existing primers only, it will not create new ones!
The sequence consists of the following lines:
Features of the template DNA (can be turned off in the toolbar)
Amino acid sequence of the resulting DNA
Some special functions and properties of the PCR sequence display:
The amino acid reading frame can be set as described here. This will affect both amino acid sequences shown (template and result).
Only the two primer sequences can be edited; overwrite mode is mandatory, and deleting is disabled.
The "." key will copy the matching template nucleotide to that position in the primer sequence.
If (when not in edit mode) an empty span of the primer sequence is selected, it can be turned into a new primer via the context menu (Selection as new primer).
The sequence of a restriction site can be inserted left or right of a selection (in edit mode, right or left of the cursor) via the context menu. A selection dialog for the desired enzyme will appear.
A silent mutation can be introduced via the context menu.
Finally, the resulting DNA or amino acid sequence (the green sequence, which will be the one generated by the PCR) can be copied to the clipboard or generated as a new sequence (containing all features, restriction enzymes etc.) via the context menu.
In The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time there is one main side quest: a long chain of item trading. Get item A from person A and then take it to person B to receive item B. It continues on until you get the legendary Biggoron Sword. The quest is livened up by interesting items and time limits to race to the next person. Whenever a time limit occurs, never use a warp song, because the timer will automatically hit 0.
The only requirements to get the sword is to have the Longshot and/or Epona (Epona makes the whole thing both easier and faster to complete); this means you can have the Biggoron Sword for every dungeon as an adult!. If you want to get the Hookshot first, you'll already be in Kakariko village and close to Anju (the first person in the series of trades). Also note that you will have to unfreeze King Zora: you'll need to venture a few rooms into the ice cavern to bottle up some Blue Flames, or buy some blue fire from the potion shop in either Kakariko Village (or if you're a child Hyrule Castle Town) or from Zora's Domain as a child. The entrance to the Death Mountain crater in Goron City will need to be open as well for a shortcut.
Talk to Anju (the lady allergic to chickens) as an adult. She will give you the pocket egg to take care of. Wait a day for it to hatch or just play the Sun's Song a couple times until it hatches into a Pocket Cucco.
Take the Pocket Cucco to Talon (he should be sleeping inside a house in Kakariko Village). Pull out the Pocket Cucco and it will crow and wake him up. If you leave the building and return, Talon will have left and gone back to Lon Lon ranch. The Pocket Cucco will now be happy because it woke up an extremely lazy person. Take the Cucco back to Anju and she'll trade it for Cojiro, a rare blue chicken that was once her brother's, but now rarely crows.
Take the Cojiro to the slumped over man in the lost woods (head left from the Kokiri Village entrance). He will trade the Cojiro for an Odd Mushroom. The Odd Mushroom will spoil, so hurry to Kakariko Village and give it to the old hag in the potion shop.
Take the Odd Mushroom to the old woman in the blue potion shop in Kakariko Village within three minutes. Don't warp! She will use it to create Odd Medicine.(Talk to her to get button for item to work.)
If you don't make it, you'll end up back in the Lost Woods and have to trade Cojiro again.
The best way to get back to Kakariko Village is through the entrance into the Goron City in the Lost Woods. From there, run down the mountain into the Village. Just past the gate into the Village, there's a house with a blue roof above you. You can get on top of that roof with the Hookshot if you position yourself just right. Go to the railing outside the windmill door and jump on it, but be careful not to fall off. From this position you should be able to position your Hookshot so it will catch on the roofing material on top of the blue house. When you're on top of the roof, jump down into the backyard and run up the stairs to the door of the house with the blue roof. Talk to the old woman inside to trade the mushroom.
Follow the above instructions until you're back in Kakariko Village. As soon as you enter the town, look diagonally left - you'll see the red roof of a Potion Shop jutting out from the edge of the rocky wall (sadly, its not the one you're trying to get to). Get within range, pull out your Hookshot and aim it at the red portion of roof just above the point where the rock wall and the triangular wooden framing of the house intersect - as long as the red Hookshot reticule is visible while hovering over a red section of the roof you should be ok. You'll end up pulling yourself somewhat through the rock wall and onto the roof. From there, run diagonally left off the end of the roof and you will land on or near the stairs to the Potion Shop with the old hag. Go in and approach the counter, trigger the mushroom with "C," and she will reward you with the Odd Potion.
If you planted a bean in tunnel to left as a child, you can use it as a shortcut to get out of the lost woods and to Hyrule Field and ride epona to the village.
Follow the above instructions to get to Kakariko village. Once you arrive, look at the potion shop on your left. If it is night time, play the song of suns, otherwise you can just run straight in through the door. There is a back door, which will let you out to the top of a ladder. Climb or jump down, then run to the top of the nearby flight of stairs. Enter the building and press "C" to trigger the mushroom to give it to the old lady.
Warning!
In versions other than the Nintendo 3DS version, you must obtain the Deku Nut upgrade in the Forest Stage before getting the Poacher's Saw. Failure to do that will result in the Deku Nut upgrade being unobtainable.
Go to the carpenter's tent in Gerudo Valley and trade this to the boss of the carpenters (if you have not yet rescued the carpenters from the Gerudo Fortress, you will need Epona or the Longshot to cross the broken bridge). He has not seen it since he left it with his wife, so he'll be shocked. He'll give you the Broken Goron's Sword in return.
Take this up to the Biggoron on top of Death Mountain. When looking for Biggoron, don't be confused - he is massive and located outdoors (he is not the big goron rolling around in Goron City that you may have blown up and purchased the "knife" from). He will trade the broken sword for a prescription. His eyes have been blinded by a recent eruption on the mountain, and he can't work on the sword until you clear them up for him.
Take the prescription to King Zora (be sure to unfreeze him via a Blue Flame first). Remember that Zora's Domain has been frozen over by Ganondorf, so you won't be able to get there via the Lake Hylia shortcut. The king will take the prescription and tell you he doesn't have the medicine but does have the ingredients for it and give you a perishable Eyeball Frog . He will tell you to give it to the scientist in Lake Hylia. If you don't make it, you will automatically go back to Zora's domain and must make the Prescription transaction again.
You must give the frog to the professor in Lake Hylia in three minutes. DO NOT WARP THERE, your clock will go down to one second left if you warp. If you can get it to the professor in time, he'll mistake it for his dinner, then make you the World's Finest Eyedrops. However, there are no preservatives in it, so it will spoil. If you don't make it, you automatically go back to Zora's domain and must make the Prescription and the Eyeball Frog trades again.
If you are almost out of time in Death Mountain Crater, then jump in the lava and you will be returned to the entrance with 1:10.
Now you must get back to the Biggoron within four minutes, again do not warp! The best route to take is to take Epona and ride her to the Kokiri Forest (if you don't have her, use the backward-walking method described above to get there faster). From the Kokiri Forest, enter the Lost Woods and enter the Goron City. Hop down to the lowest level of the City and enter Death Mountain Crater. Here, turn to the right and make your way to the ladder. Climb up and take the exit to the outside. Give Biggoron the drops. When you give him the Eyedrops, he uses them and gives you a Claim Check to claim the sword because it will take three days to fix the broken sword. Alternatively if you're going the normal way, if you already planted magic bean while you're a child, as an adult, you can use it to travel up to the volcanic path to where Biggoron is.
Either sit around patiently for three days or play the Sun's Song six times and talk to Biggoron again. When you do, you get the Biggoron's Sword from him. After getting the Claim Check, it will remain in your inventory permanently.
The strongest blade this game has to offer, the Biggoron's Sword itself is twice as powerful as the Master Sword. It takes two hands to wield just like the Giant's Knife, but this one doesn't break on you. You'll only run into problems when facing enemies that you need to use your shield against, like Octoroks.
Navigate User Interface topic:( v • d • e )
The most basic input and output in Java (System.in and System.out fields that have been used in the Basic I/O) is done using streams. Streams are objects that represent sources and destinations of data. Streams that are sources of data can be read from, and streams that are destinations of data can be written to. A stream in Java is an ordered sequence of bytes of undetermined length. Streams are ordered and in sequence so that the java virtual machine can understand and work upon the stream. Streams are analogous to water streams. They exist as a communication medium, just like electromagnetic waves in communication. The order or sequence of bytes in a Java stream allow the virtual machine to classify it among other streams.
Java has various inbuilt streams implemented as classes in the package java.io like the classes of System.in and System.out. Streams can be classed as both input and output streams. All Java streams are derived from Input Stream (java.io.InputStream) and Output Stream (java.io.OutputStream) classes. They are abstract base classes meant for other stream classes. The System.in is the input stream class derivative and analogically System.out is the output counterpart. Both are basic classes used to directly interact with input and output through console, similarly follows System.err. Also Java has streams to communicate across different parts of a program or even among threads. There are also classes that "filter" streams, changing one format to another (e.g. class DataOutputStream, which translates various primitive types to byte streams).
It is a characteristic of streams that they deal only in one discrete unit of data at a time, and different streams deal with different types of data. If one had a stream that represented a destination for bytes, for example, one would send data to the destination one byte at a time. If a stream was a source of byte data, one would read the data a byte at a time. Because this is the only way to access data from a stream, in this latter case, we wouldn't know when we had read all the data from the stream until we actually got there. When reading a stream, one generally has to check each unit of data each read operation to see if the end of the stream has been reached (with byte streams, the special value is the integer -1, or FFFF hex).
Input streams acquire bytes for our programmed java application/program (e.g. a file, an array, a keyboard or monitor, etc.). InputStream is an abstract class that represents a source of byte data. It has a read() method, which returns the next byte in the stream and a close() method, which should be called by a program when that program is done with the stream. The read() method is overloaded, and can take a byte array to read to. It has a skip() method that can skip a number of bytes, and an available() method that a program can use to determine the number of bytes immediately available to be read, as not all the data is necessarily ready immediately. As an abstract class, it cannot be instantiated, but describes the general behavior of an input stream. A few examples of concrete subclasses would be ByteArrayInputStream, which reads from a byte array, and FileInputStream, which reads byte data from a file.
In the following example, we print "Hello world!" on the screen several times. The number of times the message is printed is stored in a file named source.txt. This file should only contain a integer and should be placed in the same folder of the ConfiguredApplication class.
Code listing 9.1: Example of input stream.
The close() method is not always mandatory but can avoid some inter-process concurrency conflicts. However if it occurs before a read() or write() (in the same process) they return the warning Stream closed.
The class start to identify the filename with a File object. The File object is used by an input stream as the source of the stream. We create a buffer and a character to prepare the data loading. The buffer will contain all the file content and the character will temporary contain each character present in the file, one after one. This is done while{}in the loop. Each iteration of the loop will copy a character from the stream to the buffer. The loop ends when no more character is present in the stream. Then we close the stream. The last part of the code use the data we have loaded in from the file. It is transformed into string and then into an integer (so the data must be an integer). If it works, the integer is used to determine the number of time we print "Hello world!" on the screen. No try/catch block has been defined for readability but the thrown exceptions should be caught.
Let's try with the following source file:
Code listing 9.2: source.txt
Hello world!
If it shows a FileNotFoundException or an IOException, the source may not be placed in the right folder or its name is badly spelled.If it shows a NumberFormatException, the content of the file may not be an integer.
There is also Reader which is an abstract class that represents a source of character data. It is analogous to InputStream, except that it deals with characters instead of bytes (remember that Java uses Unicode, so that a character is 2 bytes, not one). Its methods are generally similar to those of InputStream. Concrete subclasses include classes like FileReader, which reads characters from files, and StringReader, which reads characters from strings. You can also convert an InputStream object to a Reader object with the InputStreamReader class, which can be "wrapped around" an InputStream object (by passing it as an argument in its constructor). It uses a character encoding scheme (which can be changed by the programmer) to translate a byte into a 16-bit Unicode character.
Output Streams direct streams of bytes outwards to the environment from our program or application. OutputStream is an abstract class which is the destination counterpart of InputStream. OutputStream has a write() method which can be used to write a byte to the stream. The method is overloaded, and can take an array as well. A close() method closes the stream when the application is finished with it, and it has a flush() method. The stream may wait until it has a certain amount before it writes it all at once for efficiency. If the stream object is buffering any data before writing it, the flush() method will force it to write all of this data. Like InputStream, this class cannot be instantiated, but has concrete subclasses that parallel those of InputStream, eg ByteArrayOutputStream, FileOutputStream, etc.
In the following example, we store the current time in an already existing file called log.txt located in the same folder than the class.
Code listing 9.2: Example of output stream.
This case is more simple as we can put all the data in the stream at the same time. The first part of the code generate a string containing the current time. Then we create a File object identifying the output file and an output stream for this file. We write the data in the stream, flush it and close it. That's all. No try/catch block has been defined for readability but the thrown exceptions should be caught.
In order to read a text file several times from the beginning, a FileChannel variable should be introduced, only to reposition the reader.
Code listing 9.4: log.txt
If it shows a FileNotFoundException or an IOException, the file should not have been created or it is not placed in the right folder.
There is also Writer which is a character counterpart of OutputStream, and a destination counterpart to Reader, this is also an abstract superclass. Particular implementations parallel those of Reader, eg FileWriter, StringWriter, and OutputStreamWriter, for converting a regular OutputStream into a reader so that it can take character data.
System is a class in the package java.lang with a number of static members that are available to Java programs. Two members that are useful for console output are System.out and System.err. Both System.out and System.err are PrintStream objects. PrintStream is a subclass of FilterOutputStream, itself a subclass of OutputStream (discussed above), and its main purpose is to translate a wide variety of data types into streams of bytes that represent that data in characters according to some encoding scheme.
To do:Illustrate how the print() method works, emphasize that this method does not break up lines, but that this can be accomplished with the \n escape sequence. Talk about how it works with different data types, and then introduce the println() method as a convenience method that automatically adds the \n character.
Versions of Java prior to J2SE 1.4 only supported stream-based blocking I/O. This required a thread per stream being handled, as no other processing could take place while the active thread blocked waiting for input or output. This was a major scalability and performance issue for anyone needing to implement any Java network service. Since the introduction of NIO (New I/O) in J2SE 1.4, this scalability problem has been rectified by the introduction of a non-blocking I/O framework (though there are a number of open issues in the NIO API as implemented by Oracle).
The non-blocking IO framework, though considerably more complex than the original blocking IO framework, allows any number of "channels" to be handled by a single thread. The framework is based on the Reactor Pattern.
More information on the contents of the java.io package can be viewed on the Oracle website by clicking this link (http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/index.html).
To do:Add some exercises like the ones in Variables
Un biblioteca have mult libres.
Jonathan vole marchar usante su pedes.
In un del buxes il vide li Comto! Jonathan vide le; il sembla esser mort o dormient. Li ocules es apert, ma li Comto vide nullcos. Li bocca del Comte es rubi, quam sempre. Ma il ne move se, quam un morto. Jonathan vide li Comto de tre proxim ma il vide nullcos vivent. Apu li buxe es un coverte. Jonathan vide li ocules denov e vide que ili sembla odiar (amar ↔ odiar) li vive, e omni coses. Jonathan senti terrore (terrore es mult timore) e curre ex li capella.
Li proxim die, 29 junio, li Comto avigila Jonathan.
Dracula di: “Deman, mi amico, vu va retornar a vor land. Yo ne save quo vu va far in Anglia. Ma vor lettre ha esset misset. Deman, yo ne va esser ci. Deman va venir li ciganos, e li slovacos, nam ili have labor a far in mi castelle. Pos to li ciganos e li slovacos va exear li castelle, e vor coche va arivar. Vu va ear al passe u un altri coche va atender vos por ear de Bukovina a Bistritz. Ma yo espera vider vos un poc plu che mi castelle ante deman. Noi es amicos, ne ver?”
Jonathan vole dir li veritá, e di it: “Pro quo yo ne posse departer ho-nocte?”
Dracula: “Vu save, mi cocheros e cavalles es for. Ho-nocte es ínpossibil.”
Jonathan: “Ma yo va usar mi pedes. Yo ama marchar (marchar es vader a pedes). Yo vole strax ear a pedes.”
Dracula subride. (subride es plu micri quam ride – on subride solmen con li bocca, ne li voce)
Dracula di: “E vor bagage?”
Jonathan: “Yo ne besona it. Yo posse dar moné plu tard por misser it a London.”
Dracula leva se, e sta. Nu il sembla un bon mann, un bon senior del castelle. Ma Jonathan save que il pensa altricos.
“Vu anglesos es vermen interessant! Tre bon, mi yun amico. Yo es trist que vu departe, ma contra to yo posse far nequo! On mey ear. Ples venir!”
Ili comensa ear vers li porta del castelle. Dracula di: “Audi? Quo es to?”
Durant que Dracula comensa aperter li porta, li ulalada del lupos deveni plu e plu grand, e nu il posse vider li lupos. Si Dracula aperte li porta plu, li lupos va permanjar le!
Plorante, Jonathan cria: “Ples cluder li porta! Yo va atender til deman. Ples cluder it!”
Jonathan pensa pri dormir, ma il audi quelc litt (litt = micri) voces. Un ex ili es li voce del Comto.
Jonathan retorna a su chambre e pensa: deman? Esque omnicos va finir deman? Mey li Senior (li Senior = Deo) auxiliar me, e tis queles yo ama!
Tis qui vole intrar li castelle mey intrar it. (= Si tu vole intrar it, alor ples intrar it)
Dracula di Jonathan que il mey scrir tri lettres. (= Il dit Jonathan que il deve scrir tri lettres)
Mey vu esser felici! (= Yo espera que tu va esser felici!)
Li verbe sin -r posse esser usat quam un substantive.
Rise es un poc diferent. Un rise es li cose rider, e it veni usante li regul de Wahl (rider -> rid -> ris -> rise).
Ella have un bell rise. (= Quande ella ride, it es bell)
Yo audit un ride. (= un vez alqui ridet, e yo audit it)
Micri ↔ grand. Litt: micri, ma fórsan un poc bell.
Ples venir che me. = Ples venir a mi dom.
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
The ZZ Method or Zbigniew Zborowski Method is a fast method for solving the Rubik's Cube created in 2006. It consists of three different steps: EOLine (Edge Orientation Line), F2L (First Two Layers), and LL (Last Layer).
For this step, practice by putting a finger on every bad edge you see. After some practicing, try to remember where the bad edges are instead. You should check the edges during your 3-15 inspection time if you want to finish the cube quickly. A misoriented edge will be referred to as a bad edge. Look at the top and bottom faces of the cube. If you see an orange or red sticker on an edge, it's bad. If you see a green or blue sticker on an edge, look at the other sticker on it. If the other sticker is white or yellow, it's bad. Now look at the front and back faces of the middle layer. The same rules apply. If you see an orange or red sticker on an edge, it's bad. If you see a green or blue sticker on an edge, look at the other sticker on it. If the other sticker is white or yellow, it's bad.
Books on this shelf deal with philosophical logic, which examines patterns of thinking that lead from true premises to true conclusions; the attempt to solve general philosophical problems that arise when contemplating existence, propositions, identity, predication, and truth.
( "Curricula by continent" "North American curricula" "Standard curricula" ).
Complex Electronics | Electricity |
Figure 1: The circuits showing the linearity of resistors.
Most basic electronic circuits are composed of linear elements. Linear elements are circuit elements which follow Ohm’s Law. In Figure 1 (a) with independent voltage source, V1, and resistor, R, a current i1 flows. The current i1 has a value according to Ohm’s Law. Similarly in Figure 1 (b) with independent voltage source, V2, and resistor, R, a current i2 flows. In Figure 1 (c) with independent voltage sources, V1 and V2, and resistor, R, a current i flows. Using Ohm’s Law equation 1 is reached. If some simple algebra is used then equation 2 is reached. But V1/R has a value i1 and the other term is i2 this gives equation 3. This is basically what the Superposition Theorem states.
The Superposition Theorem states that the effect of all the sources with corresponding stimuli on a circuit of linear elements is equal to the algebraic sum of each individual effect. Each individual effect is calculated by removing all other stimuli by replacing voltage sources with short circuits and current sources with open circuits. Dependent sources can be removed as long as the controlling stimuli is not set to zero. The process of calculating each effect with one stimulus connected at a time is continued until all the effects are calculated. If kth stimulus is denoted sk and the effect created by sk denoted ek.
The steps for using superposition are as follows:
Calculate the effect of each source in turn with all other independent voltage sources short circuited and independent current sources open circuited.
Sum these effects to get the complete effect.
Note: the removal of each source is often stated differently as: replace each voltage source with its internal resistance and each current with its internal resistance. This is identical to what has been stated above. This is because a real voltage source consists of an independent voltage source in series with its internal resistance and a real current source consists of an independent current source in parallel with its internal resistance.
Figure 2: The circuit for the example.
Problem: Calculate the voltage, v, across resistor R1.
Short circuit V2 and solve for v1. By voltage divider rule.
Short circuit V1 and solve for v2. By voltage divider rule.
Sum the effects.
Using equations 5 and 6.
In Portuguese you can use the future tense by saying 'I am going to' or 'I will,' by adding an ending. Ir + infinitive is the first way, and see below for the other way with all the verb endings required.
You conjugate "ir" as normal, and then add the verb in the infinitive form.
For example, the verb "andar" (to walk):
Você/Ele/Ela vai andar
Eles/Elas/Vocês vão andar
It is still possible, but slightly formal, to say "I will eat" or "I will swim". This is the simple future tense.
You (s,inf) will speak
EXCEPTIONS - Trazer, dizer, fazer. See how to conjugate these in the future tense
Note that this construction works even if the verb is usually irregular. Ser, ter and ir, for example, can all be made into the future this way.
When using indirect and direct object pronouns, the future stem and ending must be split. The stem is (except for the irregular verbs mentioned above) simply the infinitive. The indirect or direct object pronoun goes between the stem and the ending, as in these examples:
Eu falar-lhe-ei - I will speak to him/her/you
Você beijar-me-á - You will kiss me.
However, this construction is rare in spoken Portuguese. When an object pronoun is used, we usually use ir and the infinitive (see above).
Eu vou falar-lhe - I am going to speak to him/her/you.
Você vai beijar-me - You are going to kiss me.
Table 4-3: XML style sheet for a one-to-one relationship – country_dest.xsl
The XML style sheet in Table 4-3 introduces the if statement as well as the ability to sort elements.
The if statement executes code based on the evaluation of the condition given in the "test" attribute,e.g.
&lt;=less than or equal
&gt;=greater than or equal
The amount of a good in the market is the supply, and the amount people want to buy is the demand. Consider a certain commodity, such as gasoline. If there is a strong demand for gas, but there is less gasoline, then the price goes up. If conditions change and there is a smaller demand for gas, for instance if everyone started using electric cars, or the commodity becomes more available, for instance a new oil field is discovered, then the price of the commodity decreases.
The availability of goods and services in the marketplace at any given point in time is defined as "supply". As we will see after, if demand is greater than the supply, there is a shortage (more items are demanded at a higher price, less items are offered at this same price, therefore, there is a shortage). If the supply increases, the price decreases, and if the supply decreases, the price increases. This is called an indirect relationship, where if one variable goes up, the other variable goes down.
It is easy to see why this should be true; if 20 people have identical houses to sell, and only 15 people want to buy a house, then the buyers can pick the lowest price, so the sellers must try to satisfy the buyers. Of course, if the supply changes, and 5 sellers decide to stay, then there is one house for each buyer, and neither side can bully the other; each buyer will offer money for the house they want, and if the seller thinks it's not enough, he can refuse, since his house will probably be bought anyways. If 5 more of the sellers decide not to move, then the buyers need to offer more money, because the remaining sellers want to be able to sell their houses for as much money as they can, so they will pick the ten buyers who offer the most money.
The inverse is true as well; if the price of a home goes down, fewer people will sell, but if the price of a home goes up, more people will sell. This means that price and supply are closely linked, and changes in one are reflected in the other.
Price: As the price of a product rises, its supply rises because producers are more willing to manufacture the product because it's more profitable now.
Price of other commodities: There are two types
Competitive supply: If a producer switches from producing A to producing B, the price of A will fall and hence the supply will fall because it's less profitable to make A.
Joint supply: A rise in one product may cause a rise in another. For instance, a rise in the price of wooden bedframes may cause a rise in the price of wooden desks and chairs. This means supply of wooden bedframes, chairs and desks will rise because it's more profitable.
Costs of production: If production costs rise, supply will fall because the manufacture of the product in question will become less profitable.
Change in availability of resources: If wood becomes scarce, fewer wooden bedframes can be made, so supply will fall.
A desire becomes demand when it meets the three important factors: having a strong desire, having the necessary purchasing power, and having the power to take decision to purchase.
Similar to supply, there is a relationship between price and demand; the more people want, the more it will cost, if the supply remains the same. To return to our example of houses, let's say there are 15 people selling houses, and 10 buying; the buyers have more influence on the sellers, and the prices will be low. If 5 more people decide to buy houses, then the price will go up, and if another 5 decide to buy one of these houses, the price will climb even further. Thus when demand is high, the price goes up and consequently the supply contracts; and when the demand is low, the supply expands while the prices go down.
The inverse here is true as well; if people will sell their house for less, they will find more people interested in buying. The reason why demand behaves this way is fairly obvious: people are more willing to buy more of a good, or buy the good more often if the good becomes cheaper. Likewise, when a good is on sale, or its prices drop, people will become more willing to spend money on it.
The way consumers behave can affect demand in many ways. Consumers gain satisfaction from the consumption of goods or services. This satisfaction is called utility.
The law of diminishing marginal utility is a theory in economics that says that with increased consumption, satisfaction decreases.
You are at a park on a winter's day, and someone is selling hot dogs for $1 each. You eat one. It tastes good and satisfies you, so you have another one, and another etc. Eventually, you eat so many, that your satisfaction from each hot dog you consume drops. You are less willing to pay the $1 you have to pay for a hot dog. You would only consume another if price drops. But that won't happen, so you leave, and demand for the hot dogs falls.
Consumer surplus is a term used to describe the difference between the price of a good and how much the consumer is willing to pay.
Back at the park, they are still selling hot dogs, but now for 80 cents. You are hungry, so you are willing to pay $1 for a hot dog, but since the price is cheap, you buy two. For each hot dog, you get 20 cents of consumer surplus
The income effect occurs when the incomes of consumers change.
You are still in the park, and someone is still selling hot dogs for $1. But over the weekend, you got a pay rise, and have more money in your pockets! But there's another hot dog stand selling hot dogs for $1.50 on the other side of the park. You have two choices;
Buy more of the $1 hot dogs, because you can afford to.
On another day in the park, there is the same $1 hot dog stand. But, on the other side, the rival hot dog stand now sells hot dogs for only 50 cents. You are more likely to go to that stand because it is cheaper.
A curve that shows the relationship between the price level of a good and the quantity of the good demanded at that price is called the demand curve (at any given point in time). Demand curves are graphed with the same axis as supply curves in order to allow the two curves to be combined into a single graph: the y-axis (vertical line) of the graph is price and the x-axis (horizontal line) is the quantity demanded. Demand curves usually slope downward because people are willing to buy larger quantities of a good as its price goes down. That is, low prices mean high quantities. Turning the relationship around, as price increases, the quantity demanded decreases.
Since the demand curve slopes down and the supply curve slopes up, if they are put on the same graph, they eventually cross one another. Graphically, this consists of superimposing the two graphs that we have; at the point where the two lines, the supply line and the demand line, meet, is called the equilibrium point for the good. To return to our example of houses; in the end, if the equilibrium point for the house price is $60,000, everyone who wants to buy on that price will find a house, and everyone who wants to sell on that price will find a buyer.
In general, for any good, it is at this point that quantity supplied equals quantity demanded at a set price. If there are more buyers than there are sellers at a certain price, the price will go up until either some of the buyers decide they are not interested, or some people who were previously not considering selling decide that they want to sell their houses. This process normally continues until there are sufficiently few buyers and sufficiently many sellers that the numbers balance out, which should happen at the equilibrium point.
Please note: The following discussions are based on that the x-axis is quantity and the y-axis is price, as the figure above. Also note, the curves need not be straight in a real situation.
Changes in demand or changes in supply are conceived as shifts in the demand or shifts in the supply curve, to produce a new equilibrium point. The new price and quantity of the equilibrium point should fit commonsense ideas of what happens when demand or supply changes.
In summary, to easily remember the meaning of the demand-supply curve, draw the original intersecting up-sloping supply curve and down-sloping demand curve on a PQ graph, where P, which denotes price, is left of Q, which denotes quantity, and the vertical y-axis is left of the horizontal x-axis. Mark the old equilibrium point. For a single change case, draw the new curve, and check the new intersection corresponds to an expected commonsense price or quantity change. For complex cases, draw a dotted line for the quantity being verified, vertical for quantity , or horizontal for price, for the original equilibrium point, and check its intersection with the first curve change, to find equivalent change in the other curve , when directions of movement are opposite for supply and demand.
Violation of market forces can occur in society when laws are made to enforce certain economic conditions, often with good intentions. Take for example price setting, either a minimum or a maximum price.
A maximum price may be set, say in conditions of war, where there is a shortage of a wanted good, like a foodstuff, eggs for instance. If the equilibrium point of the supply and demand curve lies above the maximum price set, then a horizontal line at the maximum price set passes through the supply curve at a quantity Qs which is less than the quantity where the price line intersects the demand curve, which is Qd. Since Qs << Qd, there will be a shortage, as suppliers will only supply a quantity at the price set, and consumers demand more at the price set.
When a shortage occurs, such as tickets for a sports match, there exists some consumers willing to pay a higher price, and hence a black market ensues, with ticket scalpers consuming the goods at the set price, making a greater shortage for genuine buyers, and on-selling at the higher price.
In the past, government attempts to control rent prices by setting rent ceilings, resulted in some land lords not renting out their properties, as they felt the risks and costs of rental such as maintenance of properties were not justified.
Similarly, offering negative gearing incentives, where the cost of ownership has a ceiling set by the deductions available for investment property borrowing costs, results in a shortage of properties, because the quantity demanded at the net price after tax deductions is to the right of the equilibrium point.
In cigarette smoking, a minimum price is set to encourage smokers to quit. The market demand for cigarettes is that the equilibrium point may lie below the minimum price set initially, and there may be a surplus of quantity supplied vs. the quantity demanded. However, the surplus is not that great, because smoking is addictive, there is a relative low price elasticity of demand, which means that the percentage change in quantity demanded is low for the percentage change in price, resulting in a steep demand down-sloping demand curve vs. a more normal down-sloping demand curve.
Dc: demand cigarettes, and Dn: average demand for goods.
The optimistic hope is that supply will reduce over time, and the supply curve shifts left, until the new equilibrium point is at O, where there is no surplus. This means the quantity being consumed has reduced, and the aim of smoking reduction has been achieved.
Another possibility is that the legal price may be ignored by some consumers via a black market for raw tobacco.
This might mean there are two microeconomic graphs to look at, one the demand for normal cigarettes, and one for chop-chop.
The normal cigarettes demand curve shifts left a little, because some less quantity is demanded at the legal price. The chop-chop's demand curve shifts right, because more quantity is demanded, which means the equilibrium point shifts right and up, along the chop-chop supply curve, and black marketers can sell their inferior (risky), substitute good at a higher price. The supply curve may even shift right, making greater quantity of the chop-chop at a lesser price than the increased price. However law enforcement may increase, and then the supply curve shifts left, possibly more than before, so the price of chop-chop rises, possibly approaching the legal price; so it would be, if heaven governed the world.
Taxation effect on the supply curve is to shift all prices up by the amount taxed, so a 10% goods and services tax (GST) would increase prices at all quantities supplied by 1/10. For a special tax, say 100% on cigarettes, supply curve would shift up 100%. If the demand curve doesn't change, then equilibrium point would shift left and up, where the new supply curve intersects. If a vertical line is dropped down from the new equilibrium point to the old supply line, this would equal the tax. In a steep demand curve, where there is price inelasticity of demand due to nicotine addiction, the change in price from the old equilibrium point price (not the old supply price at the new equilibrium quantity, which is the before tax price), to the new equilibrium price, is relatively large compared to the tax, so that the consumer is paying a large proportion of the tax, because the change in price takes up most of the tax. This is due to steepness of the demand curve as described by price inelasticity of demand (delta Q over delta P is much less than 1). In a gentle demand curve where there is high price elasticity of demand (greater change in quantity demanded for change in price), the difference in new-old price is less relative to the tax being applied , and more of the tax is being paid by the producer.
When a monopoly exists anywhere in the supply chain the price is set by the price point at which competitors enter the market. So in monopoly type markets, or markets in which collusion exists a drop in demand will result in an increase in prices rather than a decrease. As the increase in price will act to offset the drop in sales.
Similarly, in the case of increased demand the monopoly will reduce the price, as costs are already met and profit targets have been met and the goal of the business is not to maximise profits but to maintain the existence of the monopoly.
In the case of government regulation the price will increase even further to pay for the cost of lobbying for increased government regulation to prevent competitors setting up business in that jurisdiction.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
A tree is called ਰੁੱਖ in Punjabi. ਬੋਹੜ i.e. banyan is the National tree of India. It is a leading component of the triveni, consisting of the banyan tree, the sacred fig tree and the neem tree. From times immemorial it has been central to the Indian village life.
Write the names of five fruit bearing trees.
In this chapter, you were introduced to trees. The next chapter shall be devoted to vegetables.
v • d • e PunjabiGurmukhi
Appendix 1 : Phonetics • Appendix 2 : Numbers
Punjabi grammar - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia • Online Punjabi Teaching -- ACTDPL, Punjabi University, Patiala • Omniglot: Useful Punjabi phrasesFurther readings
The five principles of health give us a long, healthy and happy life. If we live by these principles, we can avoid most diseases. If we are sick, we become significantly faster healthy.
Eat healthy. A healthy diet consists of fruits, vegetables, cereals, milk, potatoes, pulses, etc. It is advised to eat little or no meat and much raw food (raw fruits and vegetables). Raw food gives the body lots of vitamins and minerals that protect him from disease.
Avoid drugs, smoking and alcohol. That causes many diseases and usually shorten your life significantly. Too many sweets (sugar, fat), lots of salt and lots of meat are also unfavorable. Don´t eat too much calories. You live longer, if you eat less (but not too less). Hear to your body. He knows what is good for you. Live wisely and stay healthy.
Do sports. Go walking, jogging, cycling, swimming once or twice a day (one half to one hour), to keep the body strong and healthy. It is also sufficient to train on an exercise bike (bicycle, treadmill) or to do dynamic yoga (creativ hatha yoga) for half an hour a day. Or to go for a walk on the weekend for an hour. It is important, that the body is well warmed through (practice until a slight sweating). It kills disease germs.
Relax sufficiently. Stress should always be put away by adequate recovery periods, yoga or meditation. For the inner happiness, it is important to live in the right proportion of personal activity (work) and rest (relaxation).
Think positive. Avoid negative thoughts. Keep your mind through conscious control predominantly positive. Positive thoughts lead to positive feelings and positive emotions have a positive effect on your body. Motivate yourself with positive phrases and ideas. Read positive books and have a positive task (hobby).
Note: Unicode character visualization will depend on the character support of your web browser and the fonts installed on your system.
Supplementary Private Use Area-A (ctd.)Note
^ Unicode range F0000–FFFFD is used as a private use area, which is reserved for private use.
Login to collabn1 as the oracle user and open a terminal.
Run CVU to validate that you're ready to install CRS. Use the new “fixup” feature of 11gR2 CVU to create a script that can fix missing parameters.
[oracle@collabn1 ~]$ /mnt/cdrom*/grid/runcluvfy.sh stage -pre crsinst -n collabn1,collabn2 -fixup -r 11gR2
Checking node reachability...
Node reachability check passed from node "collabn1"
Checking user equivalence...
User equivalence check passed for user "oracle"
Checking node connectivity...
Checking hosts config file...
Verification of the hosts config file successful
Node connectivity passed for subnet "192.168.78.0" with node(s) collabn2,collabn1
Node connectivity passed for subnet "172.16.100.0" with node(s) collabn2,collabn1
Interfaces found on subnet "192.168.78.0" that are likely candidates for VIP are:
Interfaces found on subnet "172.16.100.0" that are likely candidates for a private interconnect are:
Free disk space check passed for "collabn2:/tmp"
Free disk space check passed for "collabn1:/tmp"
User existence check passed for "oracle"
Group existence check passed for "oinstall"
Group existence check passed for "dba"
Membership check for user "oracle" in group "oinstall" [as Primary] passed
Membership check for user "oracle" in group "dba" passed
Hard limits check passed for "maximum open file descriptors"
Soft limits check passed for "maximum open file descriptors"
Hard limits check passed for "maximum user processes"
Soft limits check passed for "maximum user processes"
Kernel parameter check passed for "semmsl"
Kernel parameter check passed for "semmns"
Kernel parameter check passed for "semopm"
Kernel parameter check passed for "semmni"
Kernel parameter check passed for "shmmax"
Kernel parameter check passed for "shmmni"
Kernel parameter check passed for "shmall"
Kernel parameter check failed for "file-max"
Kernel parameter check passed for "ip_local_port_range"
Kernel parameter check passed for "rmem_default"
Kernel parameter check passed for "rmem_max"
Kernel parameter check passed for "wmem_default"
Kernel parameter check failed for "wmem_max"
Kernel parameter check failed for "aio-max-nr"
Check for multiple users with UID value 0 passed
Core file name pattern consistency check passed.
Default user file creation mask check passed
Starting Clock synchronization checks using Network Time Protocol(NTP)...
Checking daemon liveness...
Liveness check failed for "ntpd"
PRVF-5415 : Check to see if NTP daemon is running failed
Clock synchronization check using Network Time Protocol(NTP) failed
Fixup information has been generated for following node(s):
Please run the following script on each node as "root" user to execute the fixups:
'/tmp/CVU_11.2.0.1.0_oracle/runfixup.sh'
Pre-check for cluster services setup was unsuccessful on all the nodes.
Switch to the root user and run the fixup script on both nodes.
-bash: oraenv: No such file or directory
[root@collabn1 ~]# /tmp/CVU_11.2.0.1.0_oracle/runfixup.sh
Response file being used is :/tmp/CVU_11.2.0.1.0_oracle/fixup.response
Enable file being used is :/tmp/CVU_11.2.0.1.0_oracle/fixup.enable
Log file location: /tmp/CVU_11.2.0.1.0_oracle/orarun.log
Setting Kernel Parameters...
[root@collabn1 ~]# ssh collabn2 /tmp/CVU_11.2.0.1.0_oracle/runfixup.sh
/root/.bashrc: line 16: oraenv: No such file or directory
Response file being used is :/tmp/CVU_11.2.0.1.0_oracle/fixup.response
Enable file being used is :/tmp/CVU_11.2.0.1.0_oracle/fixup.enable
Log file location: /tmp/CVU_11.2.0.1.0_oracle/orarun.log
Setting Kernel Parameters...
As the oracle user, run CVU again to make sure the fixit script worked. The NTP, memory and swap checks might fail – but this is acceptable for our VMware test cluster.
...
Kernel parameter check passed for "file-max"
...
Kernel parameter check passed for "wmem_max"
Kernel parameter check passed for "aio-max-nr"
...
Liveness check failed for "ntpd"
...
Cultural Anthropology is a branch of anthropology that studies aspects of human culture, such as systems of language, law and politics, religion and magic, art and technology, as well as social structure. This includes the fields of ethnology, archeology, and ethnography. [1]
Example Units, Lesson Plans, Activities, & Class Projects
Please integrate your [unit, lesson plan, activity, or class project]into the table below. Each link should lead to a separate [unit, lesson plan, activity, or class project]. Contributors to the overall WikiBook will use this database of resources as the raw data with which to discuss the integration different media technology into the social studies classroom. Please give a simple rationale for each [unit, lesson plan, activity, or class project] for how it allows students to utilize educational technology in pursuit of social studies.
↑ http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/cultural+anthropology
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
This is to help with interaction with possible students:
These social networks are huge with all ages right now.
Emails and direct mail (registrar help?)
TV - maybe a 30 sec. TV spot to run with the other College Weekend spots on KGEB, Hour of Healing, and Make your Day Count
VISUALS - Have the goods, i.e. camera, audio board, etc. in the pit for the college weekenders to see. This will draw them downstairs for a tour.
Have our information packaged in a box that resembles a camera, film canister, or a DVD case. Have our label on the case and when they open it it has our information inside, a colorful brochure, maybe something like an interactive DVD, CD, etc. Possibly some of our projects from TV intro up through the Institute classes. Give them an idea what they will be doing.
It’s important to contact them prior to the weekend. Maybe 2-3 times before college weekend. Especially within 2 months before College Weekend. Start in summer and express our interest in them!! SEE MARKETING SCHEDULE.
Have something ready for them when they arrive with their name and information on it. Singling them out makes the feel welcomed and special!!
Direct Mail again-Reminder to sign up for college weekend
Begin set-up at end of month for the screens, etc.?
A News Group is a message board posted in cyberspace where participants exchange information on topics of common interest. The range of subject matter is as limitless as the content of the internet itself; there are News Groups for topics as varied as dance shoes, dog grooming, software and global warming.
News Groups differ from news found in the media because they invite the user to contribute to the discussion rather than simply absorbing information. You needn't be a scholar or pundit to participate, you only need to have some pertinent information or question. This is called "Open Source". Open Source is a highly effective way of information exchange because is allows a greater spectrum of people to participate; allowing average Joe to contribute is a good idea because as has been proven,(by Wikipedia and others) the general public is often a greater source of info than a small group of specialists.
When posting a message on a News Group the participant must type in what the message is referring to, (much like a subject box with email) and then write what is called an "Article" or message. The article is the information the participant is offering. An article is not defined by its length but rather by the fact that a contribution to the News Group has been made. It may be a single paragraph, sentence, or word.
News Groups often have a series of related topics or sub- categories call "Hierarchies". These hierarchies can supply useful back ground info for News Groups topics and also act as a link to the plethora of other News Group topics available for exploration.
News Groups are hosted on network of computers called Usenet. A specialized program is required for the user to read and access information. Payment and registration are required and News Groups as a general rule do not edit, regulate, or filter content. See Usenet disclaimer below:
Please note: Usenet.com does not control the newsgroups on Usenet. We do not post content in the newsgroups or create their names. Each newsgroup and each post that are created are the sole responsibility of those who created them. We do not control what people post to the Usenet newsgroups. Our servers are classified as a "transitory network." A newsgroup name in and of itself does not mean that what is posted to that group corresponds to the name of the newsgroup.
Email becomes more and more popular in modern society. People use email to communicate each other easily comparing with writing a letter. First of all, people using email correctly save a lot of time and using email the right way will get faster responses. Secondly, people can share their experience with email.
Email is effective in finding the right person in an organization or company to answer your question.
Email is good to make appointments for busy people.
Email can distribute information quickly to many people for the time it takes to email one person.
Email can become time-consuming for answering complicated questions and misunderstandings can arise because cultural differences in the interpretation of certain words. The telephone is much better for providing detailed answers or if you feel that the question is not absolutely clear.
Email can compromise the security of an organization because sensitive information can be easily distributed accidentally or deliberately. Email should be entrusted to well trained and trusted staff members.
Email sometimes can become impersonal or misunderstood.
Spam is the electronic version of junk mail. It is unsolicited e-mail sent to large groups of people at one time. It is used to sell products or services, but can also be used for fraudulent purposes such as phishing schemes, or counterfeit products. The best way to prevent spam is by using your e-mail address for only trusted sources, such as family, friends and work associates. For activities such as online shopping, or other things that may lead to spam, you can use a second e-mail address, which could be a free account from Yahoo, Hotmail, or Google’s Gmail. These e-mail accounts are often called disposable or throw-away addresses, because once they become too overwhelming, you can quit using it, and start a new one. Some ISPs provide disposable e-mail addresses for their subscribers, and then the subscriber can delete the address when it is no longer wanted or needed. Anonymous e-mail services allow users to create/delete anonymous accounts which are forwarded to an account specified by the user. These companies generally charge a yearly fee for their service.
A blog is a means of which people can post information onto the internet and the responding readers can feel free to post comments or their own point of view.Blogs can take many forms for instance online personal journals which allows people to express themselves through there own identity or a username. In some cases entire sites are dedicated to individual blogs, where the topics can be of a political point of view to the simplest comments on a genre of music. One of the key attractions about blogs is the motivation to state your opinion and there is no cost in starting a blog.
Blogs for the most part are open to anyone and everyone; however some sites pose age restriction. So that minors have to seek parents' approval and acknowledgement before venturing out onto the World Wide Web. This is in place to protect children from venturing onto blogs with mature content. These are common restriction becoming more active as the internet becomes more available to youth and access at schools and libraries.
The content in blogs can range from properly planting tomatoes, to a person’s daily journal about life. Blogs content usually depends on the writer of the blog, if the person maybe a retired train engineer the blog could possibly be about years of work and accessing the right resources to becoming a train engineer. Or possibly the online journal of a celebrity keeping her/his fans informed of tour dates and the daily life on a tour bus and the interesting life style.
As blogs have become more evidently popular, people have started to combine blogs and media players together. Individuals are now setting up blogs with the addition of their favorite music or music which they have created. These sites have started to evolve to the point of where millions of users are adding to their own blog and checking on friends or new users. Commenting on not only the blog but the selection of music and leaving comments so that the owner of the blog may start a discussion with the commenting user. An example of one of these sites is http://www.myspace.com, http://www.youtube.com and many more.
Exchanging messages in real-time between two or more people. Unlike a dial-up system such as the telephone, instant messaging (IM) requires that both parties be logged onto their IM service at the same time. Also known as a "chatting," IM has become very popular for both business and personal use. In business, IM provides a way to contact co-workers any time of the day, providing they are at their computers. Thus, IM is often used as a way to avoid telephone tag, whether the communication continues as text messages or winds up as a traditional phone call.
Since the early '90s, AOL has always had a form of Instant Messaging but it wasn't until 1996, when they introduced the Buddy List feature, that it really took off. In the same year, ICQ (I Seek You) burst onto the Internet scene and helped popularize Instant Messaging. Whereas AOL Instant Messaging was exclusive to AOL members, ICQ was a free IM software available for download to anyone.
In 1997, AOL introduced AIM (AOL Instant Messenger), which allowed its members to talk with non-members for the first time. AIM eventually usurped ICQ as the prevalent IM client, and in 1998, AOL bought Mirablis (ICQ's creator), thus becoming the dominant player in Instant Messaging.
As the popularity of Instant Messaging grew, other IM clients like MSN Messenger, Yahoo Messenger and a variety of smaller players eventually entered the mix. However, it's important to point out that there is no interoperability between the different IM clients. Each IM software uses its own proprietary system and network.
Instant messaging typically boosts communication and allows easy collaboration. In contrast to e-mails or phone, the parties know whether the peer is available. Most systems allow the user to set an online status or away message so peers get notified whenever the user is available, busy, or away from the computer. On the other hand, people are not forced to reply immediately to incoming messages. This way, communication via instant messaging can be less intrusive than communication via phone, which is partly a reason why instant messaging is becoming more and more important in corporate environments. Also, the fact that instant messages typically get logged in a local message history closes the gap to the persistent nature of e-mails, facilitating quick, safe, and persistent exchange of information such as URLs or document snippets, which can be unwieldy when done using inappropriate media such as phone.
Basically VoIP stands for voice over internet protocol; which is when a
The advantages include not needing to maintain and pay the additional cost
. You can also send data, as you would with a broadband internet connection, like pictures and documents, all
The disadvantages of this service include some VoIP services not
“packets”. Due to the real-time nature of voice communication, the
Microwaves are high frequency radio signals that can send large quantities of data at high speed over long distances. Microwave signals can be sent or received using microwave stations or communication satellites, but only can travel in straight line from one station or one satellite to another without encountering any obstacles, since microwave signals are line of sight. Microwave stations are earth-based stations that can transmit signals directly to each other over distances of up to about 30 miles. To avoid buildings, mountains and the curvature of the earth obstructing the signal, microwave stations are usually placed on tall buildings, towers, mountaintops. Microwave stations contain both a dish-shaped microwave antenna and a transceiver. When one station receives a transmission from another, it amplifies it and passes it on to the next station. Microwave stations can exchange data transmissions with communication satellite and also with other microwave stations. Microwave stations designed specifically to communicate with satellite such as satellite TV and satellite Internet services are also called satellite dishes. Satellite dishes are installed permanently where they are needed. They can also be mounted on trucks, boats, RVs and other types of transportation devices when portable transmission capabilities are necessary such as military or recreational applications.
Communication satellites– are space-based devices launched into orbit around the earth to receive and transmit microwave signals to and from earth. Communication satellite was originally used to facilitate microwave transmissions when microwave stations were not economically viable such as largely populated areas or were physically impractical such as over large bodies of water. Today, communication satellites are used to send and receive transmissions to and from a variety of other devices such as personal satellite dishes used for satellite television and Internet service. GPS receivers, satellite radio receivers and satellite phones.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
Alaska Highway Construction During World War II. Films on Demand. May 16, 2012. http://fod.infobase.com.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/p_ViewVideo.aspx?xtid=48809.
Allaby, Michael. "Beringia." Oxford Reference 4, no.3 ( 2013):18-45
Alexander Street. Accessed November 5, 2017. http://search.alexanderstreet.com.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/view/work/bibliographic_entity%7Cvideo_work%7C2860353.
Andrews, Clarence Leroy, The Story of Sitka (Seattle:Press of Lowman & Hansford co., 1922), 16-17
Archer, Christon I. “Spain and the Defence of the Pacific Ocean Empire, 1750-1810.” Canadian Journal of Latin American and Caribbean Studies, 11, no. 21 (1986): 15–41.
Baker, F.W.G. “Some Reflection on the Antarctic Treaty.” Polar Record, 46, no. 1 (2010): 2–4.
Berardi. G, “The Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA)-Whose Settlement Was It? An Overview of Salient Issues,” HEINONLINE, no.2 (2005), 133.
Berardi. G, “The Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA)-Whose Settlement Was It? An Overview of Salient Issues,” HEINONLINE, no.2 (2005), 131.
Bergquist, Harold. "The Russian Ukase of September 16, 1821: The Noncolonization Principle and the Russo-American Convention of 1824." Canadian Journal of History 10,no.2 (1975): 165–184.
Berkly, “Shipwreck fouls the water”. Nature Publishing Group, Nov 3, 2017, http://www.nature.com.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/articles/338451a0.pdf“Prudhoe bay:
Berkowitz, Bonnie S. "Comparing the Iditarod, Everest challenges." Washington Post, 7 Mar. 2015
Bohi, Heidi. "Alaska television shows: statewide filming boosts economy." Alaska Business Monthly, July 2011, 14+. Academic OneFile (accessed November 5, 2017). http://go.galegroup.com.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/ps/i.do?p=AONE&sw=w&u=guel77241&v=2.1&it=r&id=GALE%7CA261386384&asid=c181fecb9f6f848dc2d55c3476217cff.
Bohi, Heidi. "Opening up the last frontier and its future: the top ten projects that made the state what it is today." Alaska Business Monthly 124, 2008.
Bolkhovitinov, Nikolay N. “The Crimean War and the Emergence of Proposals for the Sale of Russian America, 1853-1861.” Pacific Historical Review 59, No. 1 (February 1990): 15–49.
Brinks, Ellen. "Uncovering the Child in Timothy Treadwell’s Feral Tale." The Lion and the Unicorn 32, no. 3 (2008): 304–323.
Brown William S. and Clive S. Thomas.‘The Alaska Permanent Fund: Good Sense or Political Expediency.’ Challenge 37, No.5 (1994): 38–44.
Brown, Shaun. Western historical quarterly. Logan, UT: Utah State University, 1994, 274- 275.
Busch, Lisa. "Alaska sites contend as Native Americans' first stop." Gale 6, no 347 (1998): 7-22
Bushlow, Matt. "Preservation Hall." Seven Days: 34. Apr 2012. ProQuest. Web. 5 Nov. 2017 .
Byun, Chong Hyun. "The Coase theorem and the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act." Journal of Economics and Economic Education Research, 16, no. 2 (2015): 91+. Academic OneFile. http://go.galegroup.com.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/ps/i.do?p=AONE&sw=w&u=guel77241&v=2.1&it=r&id=GALE%7CA458804635&asid=81ccbc47613b42fe6f71f68d4d51c73b.
Campbell, James E. "The Exceptional Election of 2008: Performance, Values, and Crisis." Presidential Studies Quarterly 40, no. 2 (June 2010)
Carter, Luther. "North Slope: Oil Rush." 'Science New Series 166, No.3901 (1969): 85–92.
Chong, Hyun Byu. “The Coase Theorum and the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act”. Journal of Economics and Economic Education Research (Nov, 2017): pg. 1–2, http://go.galegroup.com.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/ps.i.do?&id=GALE%7CA458804635&v=2.1&u=guel77241&it=r&p=AONE&sw=w&authCount.
Clause-M Naske, “A History of Alaska Statehood,” Pacific Historical Review 56, no. 4 (November 2017): 566–567.
Coates, Ken, and Carin Holroyd. "Turning Eyes to the North: A Commentary on Japan's Engagement with the North American Arctic." Northern Review, no. 40 (2015): 86–97, http://sfx.scholarsportal.info.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/guelph/docview/1841325663?accountid=11233
Coben, A. Lawrence. “The Events that led to the Treaty of Tordesillas.” Terrae Incognitae Vol. 47, no. 2 (2008): 142–162.
Connell, Kim. “City Claims land at Klondike Gold Rush.” National Parks Washington, 70, no.1 (1996): 21.
Cook-Lynn, Elizabeth. “How Scholarship Defames the Native Voice… and Why.” Wicazo Sa Review 15, no. 2 (2000): 79–92.Cross, Jesse. "’Done in Convention’: The Attestation Clause and the Declaration of Independence.” The Yale Law Journal, 121, no. 5 (2012): 1296.
Cook, Mary Alice. "Manifest Opportunity: The Alaska Purchase as a Bridge Between United States Expansion and Imperialism." Alaska History 6, no. 1 (2011): 2.
Crowell, Aron L. “Ice, Seals, and Guns: Late 19th-Century Alaska Native Commercial Sealing in Southeast Alaska.” Arctic Anthropology 53, no. 2 (2016): 11–32.
Crowell, Aron L. “Russians in Alaska, 1784: Foundations of Colonial Society at Three Saints Harbor, Kodiak Island.” Kroeber Anthropological Society Papers no. 84 (1997): 10-42
Discovery of Alaska's oi giant.” Gulf Publishing Co. (March 1, 2016), https://search-proquest-com.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/docview/1778455099/abstract/CAF7AB9ACC82479BPQ/1?accountid=11233.
Ducker, James H. “Gold Rushers North: A Census Study of the Yukon and Alaskan Gold Rushes, 1896-1900.” The Pacific Northwest Quarterly 85, No. 3 (Jul. 1994): 82–92. http://www.jstor.org/stable/40491473
Eilperin, Juliet. "Which presidents have been to Alaska, and why?" Washington Post. 2015.
Eric Sandberg, “A History of Alaska Population Settlement,” Alaska Department of labour and Workforce Development, 2013, http://live.laborstats.alaska.gov/pop /estimates/pub/pophistory.pdf
Fernandez, Lydia. “New Dates for the New World.” Native Americas XIV, no. 1 (1997): 4.
Finnie, Richard. "Canol: The Sub-Arctic Pipeline and Refinery Project Constructed by Bechtel-Price-Callahan for the Corps of Engineers, United States Army, 1942-1944." Geographical Review 36, no. 2 (1946): 350. doi:10.2307/210898.
Foscue, Edwin J. “The Development and Decline of Skagway, Alaska.” Economic Geography 10, No. 4 (Oct. 1934): 419–428. http://www.jstor.org/stable/140666
Fraumeni, Barbara M. . The Contribution of Highways to GDP Growth. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, 2009, http://sfx.scholarsportal.info.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/guelph/docview/1689317525?accountid=11233.
“Fur Rendezvous puts Alaska Native Art, music and culture at Center Stage," Indian Life 32, no. 5 (April 2012): 12. Accessed November 5, 2017. Academic OneFile.
George K. Swinzow, The Alaska Good Friday Earthquake of 1964. CRREL Report 82–1. (Nov 2, 2017) https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=umn.31951d008225279;view=1up;seq=9.
Gerus, Oleh W. “The Russian Withdrawal from Alaska: The Decision to Sell.” Revisit de Historia de América 75/76 (1973): 157–178.
Glines, C. V."World War II Made America Aware of Alaska's Strategic Importance." Aviation History, 2, no.2 (2001)
Godeanu-Kenworthy, Oana, et al. “Carter F. Hanson. Emigration, Nation, Vocation: The Literature of English Emigration to Canada, 1825-1900 (Review).” American Review of Canadian Studies, 41, no. 2 (2011): 177–179.
Golder, Frank A. "The Purchase of Alaska." The American Historical Review 25, no. 3 (1920): 419.
Governments Don't Realize Importance of Highways." Journal of Commerce 87, no. 29 (Apr 13, 1998), http://sfx.scholarsportal.info.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/guelph/docview/215183807?accountid=11233.
"Grammy(R) Award Winner Leann Rimes, Eddie Cibrian ('Ugly Betty') and Golden Globe(R) and Emmy(R) Award Nominee Rosanna Arquette ('Desperately Seeking Susan') To Star in The Lifetime Original Movie 'Nora Roberts' Northern Lights,' To Premiere in 2009 on Lifetime." PR Newswire, November 7, 2008. Academic OneFile (accessed November 5, 2017). http://go.galegroup.com.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/ps/i.do?p=AONE&sw=w&u=guel77241&v=2.1&it=r&id=GALE%7CA188600283&asid=e647afcccd02031ecc16d8f57eea3943
Grinëv, Andrei V. “The First Russian Settlers in Alaska.” The Historian 75, no. 3 (2013): 443–474.
Grinëv, Andrei V. “A Brief Historiography of the Russian Historiography of Russian America in Recent Years.” Translated by Richard L. Bland. Pacific Historical Review 79, no. 2 (May 2010): 265–278.
Grinëv, Andrei V. “Foreign Ships in the Fleet of the Russian-American Company (1799-1867).” The Mariner’s Mirror 100, no. 4, translated by Richard L. Bland (November 2014): 405–421.
Grinev, Andrei V., and Bland, Richard L. “Russian Maritime Catastrophes during the Colonization of Alaska, 1741-1867.” The Pacific Northwest Quarterly, 102, no. 4 (2011): 178-194 Accessed Nov. 02, 2017, url:http://www.jstor.org/stable/24624633?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents.
Gustafson, Milton O. "Seward's Bargain: The Alaska Purchase from Russia." National Archives 26, no. 4 (Winter 1994)
Hamilton, James C. “James K. Barnett and David L. Nicandri (eds), Arctic Ambitions: Captain Cook and the Northwest Passage (Review).” The International Journal of Maritime History, 28, no. 1 (2016): 194.
Hawthorn, Tom. "When will the president pay a visit?" Globe and Mail 3. 2008.
Healey, Kevin. “For a culture and Political Economy of the Prophetic: Critical Scholarship and Religious Politics After the 2008 Election” Cultural Studies ↔ Critical Methodologies 10, no. 2 (2010)
Higginson, Ian N. "Poetry and Alaska: William Henry Seward's Alaskan Purchase and Bret Harte's "An Arctic Vision"." 50, no. 4 (1997): 337. Accessed November 3, 2017.
Hirschfield. M, “The Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act: Tribal Sovereignty and the Corporate Form.” The Yale Law Journal Company, Inc 101, no. 6 (1992), 1336.
Holden, Constance. “Skulls Suggest Two New-World Migrations.” Science 293, no. 5532 (2001): 1043.
Hoxie, Frederick. “Bering Strait Theory.” Encyclopedia of North American Indians (1996) 1. http://go.galegroup.com.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/ps/i.do?&id=GALE%7CA176911194&v=2.1&u=guel77241&it=r&p=AONE&sw=w&authCount=1
Hulley, Clarence J. “A Historical Survey of the Matanuska Valley Settlement in Alaska,” The Pacific Northwest Quarterly vol. 40, no. 4 (1949): 327–340.
"Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race," Child Life 73, no.1 (February 1994): 5. Accessed November 5, 2017. Academic OneFile.
Ilya Vinkovetsky, “Building a Diocese Overseas: The Orthodox Church in Partnership with the Russian-American Company in Alaska,” Ab Imperio 2010, no.3 (2010): 165.
Ilya Vinkovetsky, “Russian America: An Overseas Colony of a Continental Empire, 1804-1867,” Social History 37, no.3 (2011): 7.
"Insomnia. (Film: Todd McCarthy)." Daily Variety, May 13, 2002, 2+. Academic OneFile (accessed November 5, 2017). http://go.galegroup.com.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/ps/i.do?p=AONE&sw=w&u=guel77241&v=2.1&it=r&id=GALE%7CA86850028&asid=39a3fa34871f21df7d1882bd7fff6188.
James, Alexander. “The long-run vanity of Prudhoe Bay.” In Resources Policy, Volume 50, 2016, Pages 270–275. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resourpol.2016.10.008. (http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301420716302057)
Jans, Nick. "What Palin's show says about us." USA Today, January 6, 2011, 11A. Academic OneFile (accessed November 5, 2017). http://go.galegroup.com.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/ps/i.do?p=AONE&sw=w&u=guel77241&v=2.1&it=r&id=GALE%7CA245924074&asid=d7cb41f9c76c8cb9925b911775441c72.
Jesse D. Murray, “Together and Apart: The Russian Orthodox Church, the Russian Empire, and Orthodox Missionaries in Alaska, 1794-1917,” Russian History 40, no.1 (2013): 95.
Jonaitis, Aldona. "Totem Poles And The Indian New Deal." The Canadian Journal of Native Studies vol. 4, no. 2 (1989): 237–252.
Jones, Zachary R. “Search For and Destroy”: US Army Relations with Alaska's Tlingit Indians and the Kake War of 1869.” Ethnohistory, 60, no. 1 (2013): 1-26. Accessed Nov. 06, 2017, doi: 10.1215/00141801-1816157.
Karam, Andrew. “Vitus Bering's Explorations of the Far Northern Pacific.” Gale,4 (2000): 18.http://go.galegroup.com.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/ps/i.do?p=GVRL&u=guel77241&v=2.1&it=r&id=GALE%7CCX3408501631&inPS=true&linkSource=interlink&sid=AONE
Kaufman, Michael T. "Joe Redington, Co-Founder Of Dog Sled Race, Dies at 82." New York Times, June 27, 1999. https://global-factiva-com.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/ha/default.aspx#./!?&_suid=1509938471855032455680747768545.
Kirkey, Christopher. ‘Moving Alaskan Oil to the Market: Canadian National Interests and the Trans- Alaska Pipeline, 1968’, American Review of Canadian Studies 27, No.4 (1997): 495–522.
Kunitz, Stephen J. “The History and Politics of US Health Care Policy for American Indians and Alaskan Natives.” American Journal of Public Health vol. 86, no. 10 (1996): 1464–1473.
Lee, Molly. “The Alaska Commercial Company: The Formative Years.” The Pacific Northwest Quarterly 9, no. 22 (Spring 1998): 59–64.
Lenihan, Daniel J. "Aleutian Affair." Natural History 101, no. 6 (1992): 50–62.
Lightfoot, Kent. “Russian colonization: The Implications of Mercantile Colonial Practices in the North Pacific.” Historical Archeology 37, no. 4 (2003): 14–28.
Lindgren, Tina. “Alaska Tourism: A Move to the Future.” Alaska Business Monthly, 16, no.8 (2000):20.
Maclean. "Outsmarting a bear." September 29, 1997, 13. Academic OneFile
Malaspina, Alexandro and Galbraith, Edith. “Malaspina's Voyage around the World.” California Historical Society Quarterly.” Vol. 3, no. 3. (Oct. 1924): 215-237.
Martin, Russell. "The optical Aleutian." American History 33, no. 1 (1998): 48+. Canadian Periodicals Index Quarterly
Mazour, Anatole. “The Russian-American Company: Private or Government Enterprise?” Pacific Historical Review 13, no. 2 (1944): 168–173.
Mazour, Anatole. “The Russian-American and Anglo-Russian Conventions, 1824-1825: An Interpretation.” Pacific Historical Review 14, no.3 (1945): 303–310.
McMillan, Alan D. “A Fur Trade Narrative.” Canadian Literature; Vancouver, 185 (2005): 149–150.
McPherson, Angie. "5 Surprising Facts About the Iditarod Dog Sled Race." National Geographic. March 8, 2014. 5 Surprising Facts About the Iditarod Dog Sled Race.
Medeia Csoba Dehass, “Daily negotiation of traditions in a Russian orthodox Sugpiaq village in Alaska,” Ethnology 46, no.3 (2007): 205–215.
Michael Ray. “Trans-Alaska Pipeline”, Britannica. Last modified May 20, 2011, https://www.britannica.com/topic/Trans-Alaska-Pipeline
Morrow, William W. "The Spoilers." California Law Review 4, no. 2 (1916): 89-113. dos:10.2307/3474736.
Morse, Kathryn Taylor, and William Cronon. "The Nature of Gold : An Environmental History of the Klondike Gold Rush". Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2003
Myers, Marc. "REVIEW --- Playlist: Mike Pereira: Alaska's Summer Gold --- A Johnny Horton Hit from 1960 Reminds an NFL Rules Analyst of the Last Frontier." Wall Street Journal, Eastern edition ed.Sep 24 2016. ProQuest. Web. 5 Nov. 2017.
Nakajima, Hiroo. "The Monroe Doctrine and Russia: American Views of Czar Alexander I and Their Influence upon Early Russian-American Relations." Diplomatic History 31, no.3 (2007): 439–463.
Naske, Claus-M. "Alaska." In The Oxford Companion to United States History. : Oxford University Press, 2001. http://www.oxfordreference.com.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/view/10.1093/acref/9780195082098.001.0001/acref-9780195082098-e-0039.
Naske, Claus-M. “Some Attention, Little Action: Vacillating Federal Efforts to Provide Territorial Alaska with an Economic Base.” Western Historical Quarterly vol. 26, no. 1 (1995): 36–68.
Nichols, Robert and Robert Croskey. “The Condition of the Orthodox Church in Russian America: Innokentii Veniaminov’s History of the Russian Church in Alaska.” The Pacific Northwest Quarterly 63, no. 2 (April 1972): 41–57.
Nichols, Irby. "The Russian Ukase and the Monroe Doctrine: A Re-Evaluation." Pacific Historical Review 36, no. 1 (1967): 13–26.
Nichols Jr., Irby C., and Richard A. Ward. "Anglo-American Relations and the Russian Ukase: A Reassessment.” Pacific Historical Review 41, no. 4 (January 1972): 444–459.
O'Driscoll, Bill. "THE GOLD RUSH." Pittsburgh City Paper, Feb, 2014, http://sfx.scholarsportal.info.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/guelph/docview/1503779140?accountid=11233
Orr, Vanessa. "Hot spots in the cold of winter: there's always something to do in the great land." Alaska Business Monthly 21, no. 12 (December 2005): 52–59. Accessed November 5, 2017. Academic OneFile.
Payne, Marissa. "Iditarod dog race blames PETA for loss of major sponsor." Washington Post, May 26, 2017. Academic OneFile
Peter A. Coates. "Oil from the Arctic: Building the Trans-Alaska Pipeline, at the National Museum of American History." Technology and Culture 40, no. 2 (1999): 369–374. https://mus e.jhu.edu/#George J. Busenberg, “The Policy Dynamics of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System,” Review of Policy Research, no. 28 (2011): 401–422. doi: 10.1111/j.1541-1338.2011.00508.x
Petrov, Aleksandr Iu. 2015. The Activity of the Russian-American Company on the Eve of the Sale of Alaska to the United States. Russian Studies in History 54 (1): 61-90
Pilkington, Steve. "The Fur Rendezvous packed with tradition, lore. (Alaska this Month)." Alaska Business Monthly 19, no. 2 (February 2003): 26. Accessed November 5, 2017. Academic OneFile.
Pilkington, Steve. "Winter festivals have huge economic impact," Alaska Business Monthly 20, no. 1 (January 2004): 8. Accessed November 5, 2017. Academic OneFile,
Porco, Peter. "When the president came to dinner: FDR in Alaska." Alaska Dispatch News. 2014.
Richardson, Paul E. Colonial Russia (Russian Life, Sep, 2007), 48
Riordan, Tom. "Iditarod: Boredom Buster Turned Global Event." Editor & Publisher 130, no. 47 (Nov 22, 1997): 13. Accessed November 5, 2017. ProQuest.
Robert Gillette, “Trans-Alaska Pipeline: Impact Study Receives Bad Reviews,” American Association for the Advancement of Science 171, no..3976 (1971): 1130–1132, http://www.jstor.org.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/stable/pdf/1730586.pdf
Robert Nichols and Robert Croskey, “The Condition of the Orthodox Church in Russian America: Innokentii Veniaminov's History of the Russian Church in Alaska,” The Pacific Northwest Quarterly 63, no. 2 (1972): 46.
Robert R. Rathburn, “The Russian Orthodox Church as a Native Institution among the Koniag Eskimo of Kodiak Island, Alaska,” Arctic Anthropology 18, no. 1 (1981): 15–19.
Rogers, George W. "Commentary: Comments on the Impact of the Good Friday Earthquake on the Alaskan Economy." Arctic 18, no.1 (1965), 3–6.
Roy M. Huhndorf and Shari M. Huhndorf. "Alaska Native Politics since the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act.” South Atlantic Quarterly 110, no. 2 (2011): 385. doi: 10.1215/00382876-1162507
Roy, Rhonda. "World War II: the battle for Kiska (pt 2)." Esprit de Corps,(2002): 19–20.
Sands, Christopher. “Canada's cold front: Lessons of the Alaska boundary dispute for Arctic boundaries today.” International Journal 65, No. 1, UN sanctions (2009–10): 209–219.
Schwaiger, Michael. "Mining for Citizens: Race, Resources, and the Republic in the Alaska Gold Rush." Western Legal History, 24, no. 2 (2011) 167, 216.
Sciullo, Nick J. "Alaska." In Encyclopedia of African American History 1896 to the Present. : Oxford University Press, 2009. http://www.oxfordreference.com.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/view/10.1093/acref/9780195167795.001.0001/acref-9780195167795-e-0043.
Selig, Robert A. “’North to Alaska, Go North the Rush is on’ - Wilhelm Mohr, the Klondike Gold Rush and the Town of Skagway.” 'German Life, 19, no. 4 (Dec, 2013) 48-51. http://sfx.scholarsportal.info.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/guelph/docview/1239094403?accountid=11233
Selig, Robertbert A. "NORTH TO ALASKA, GO NORTH THE RUSH IS ON" - WILHELM MOHR, THE KLONDIKE GOLD RUSH AND THE TOWN OF SKAGWAY." 19, no. 4 (Dec. & jan. 2013/2014): 48-51. https://search-proquest-com.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/docview/1239094403?rfr_id=info%3Axri%2Fsid%3Aprimo.
Sergei Kan, “Russian Orthodox Brotherhoods among the Tlingit: Missionary Goals and Native Response,” Ethnohistory 32, no. 3 (1985): 198.
Sheehan, Kevin J. “At the Far Reaches of Empire: The Life of Juan Francisco de la Bodega y Quadra. By Freeman M. Tovell (Review).” Pacific Historical Review, 78, no. 4 (2009): 630.
Simpson. E. B, “Doing Business with Alaska Native Corporations: A New Model for Native American Business Entities,” AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION 16, no.6 (2007), 37.
Sloss, Frank H. “Who Owned the Alaska Commercial Company?” The Pacific Northwest Quarterly 68, no. 3 (July 1977): 120–30.
Smith, E. Valerie. "The Black Corps of Engineers and the construction of the Alaska (ALCAN) Highway." Negro History Bulletin, 51, no. 1-12 (1993): 22+. http://go.galegroup.com.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/ps/i.do?p=AONE&sw=w&u=guel77241&v=2.1&it=r&id=GALE%7CA16460323&asid=861b4f133f5561da32da4d8e50e1338f.
Smith-Peter, Susan. “Russian Colonization in North America.” Russian Studies in History 54, no. 1 (January 2015): 1–4.
Solovjova, Katerina and Aleksandra Vovnyanko. “The Rise and Decline of the Lebedev-Lastochkin Company: Russian Colonization of South Central Alaska, 1787-1798.” The Pacific Northwest Quarterly 90, no. 4 (1999): 191–205.
Spoilers, the." Monthly Film Bulletin",1942. 90, http://sfx.scholarsportal.info.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/guelph/docview/1305802847?accountid=11233
Stambler, Lyndon. "A Sad And Grizzly End.” Academic Search Premier, EBSCOhost. People 60, no. 17 (2003): 89–90.
Stambler, Lyndon. "Bears Fan.” Academic Search Premier, EBSCOhost. People 42, no. 14 (1994): 75.
Stansbury, Charles Frederick. "Klondike the Land of Gold, Illustrated: Containing, Information, concerning the New Gold Fields".The Pacific Northwest Quarterly 63, no.1 (1972):20
Stevenson, Kalib T. “Sustainable Agriculture for Alaska and the Circumpolar North: Part I. Development and Status of Northern Agriculture and Food Security.” 'Arctic vol. 67, no. 3 (2014): 271–295.
Stomierowski, Peg. "Winter getaways: banish cabin fever blues and play in the state." Alaska Business Monthly 24, no. 10 (October 2008): 172 - 176. Accessed November 5, 2017. Academic OneFile.
Stone, Kirk H. “Populating Alaska: The United States Phase.” Geographical Review vol. 42, no. 3 (1952): 384–404.
Thomas, Wayne C. "Distribution of Costs and Benefits of Energy Development in Alaska Among Participants and Groups Affected." Proceedings, Annual Meeting (Western Economics Association),48 (1975): 179–186.
Thomas, Wayne C. and Monica E. Thomas, ‘Public Policy and Petroleum Development: The Alaska Case’, Artic 35, No.3 (1982): 349–357.
Vanessa Orr. “Prudhoe bay oil discovery expedited ANCSA: pipeline required settlement of land claims.” Alaska Business Monthly. Accessed Nov 2, 2017.
Wasburn, Philo C., and Mara H. Wasburn. "Media coverage of women in politics: The curious case of Sarah Palin." Media, Culture & Society 33, no. 7 (2011)
Welsh, Richard E. “American Public Opinion and the Purchase of Russian America.” American Slavic and East European Review 17 (4) 1958: 481–94.
Wilson, William H. "The Alaska Railroad and the Agricultural Frontier." Agricultural History vol. 52, no. 3 (1978): 263–279.
Wygal, Brian T. "The peopling of eastern Beringia and its archaeological complexities." Science Direct, 10, no.444 (2017): 1.1-1.4.
Zazula, Grant D. "Palaeobotany: Ice-age steppe vegetation in east Beringia." Nature, 2, no.423 (2003):1-18
Zeman, Ned. "The Man Who Loved Grizzlies; For Timothy Treadwell, the grizzlies of Alaska weren't just the world's largest terrestrial predators." Academic OneFile. Vanity Fair, (2004): 170.
Bauer, K. Jack, and Stephen S. Roberts. Register of ships of the U.S. Navy, 1775-1990: major combatants.
Berton, Pierre. Klondike: The Last Great Gold Rush 1896-1899. Toronto: Anchor Canada, 2001.
Brown, John W. An Abridged History of Alaska. Detroit: Sage writing, 1909.
Childers Mangusso, Mary, & Haycox, Stephen W. Alaska Anthology: Interpreting The Past. University of Washington Press, 1996
Clark, Henry W. History of Alaska. New York: The Macmillan co, 1930.
Coates Peter A. The Trans-Alaska Pipeline Controversy: Technology, Conservation and the Frontier. Bethlehem: Lehigh University Press,1991.
Cook, L. Warren. Flood Tide of Empire: Spain and the Pacific Northwest, 1543–1819. New Haven and London: University of Yale Press, 1973.
Freeman, Trovell. At the far reaches of empire: the life of Juan Francisco de la Bodega y Quadra. Vancouver: UBC Press, 2008.
Gallea, James W., George L. Higgins, Carl A. Germann, and Tania D. Strout. "Injury and illness sustained by human competitors in the 2010 Iditarod Sled Dog Race." The American Journal of Emergency Medicine32, no. 7 (February 15, 2014): 780–84. doi:10.1016/j.ajem.2014.02.018.
Garfield, Brian. Thousand-Mile War: World War II in Alaska and the Aleutians. Fairbanks: University of Alaska Press, 2010.
Gibson, James R. Otter Skins, Boston Ships, and China Goods: The Maritime Fur Trade of the Northwest Coast, 1785-1841. Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press, 1992.
Hanrahan, John and Peter Gruenstein. Lost Frontier: The Marketing of Alaska. New York: W.W. Norton & Company,1977.
Haycox, Stephen W. and Mary Childers Mangusso, eds. An Alaska Anthology: Interpreting the Past. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1996.
Hays, Jr Otis. The Alaska-Siberia Connection: The World War II Air Route. Texas: Texas A&M University Press, 1996.
Kimura, G.W, Alaska at 50: The Past, Present and Future of Alaska Statehood (Fairbanks: University of Alaska Press, 2009), 1–6.
Mangusso, Mary., Childers, Haycox., and Stephen W. An Alaska Anthology: Interpreting the Past. Seattle: University of Washington press, 1996.
McBeath, Gerald A.Alaska Politics and Government. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1994.
Mike Lapinski, Death in the Grizzly Maze: The Timothy Treadwell Story (Guilford: Falcon Guides, 2005), 102. Rosita K. Worl, The Oxford Handbook of American Indian History (Oxford University Press 2016), 4.
Mitchell, Robert J., Sewell Tappan Tyng, and Gregory J. W. Urwin. The Capture of Attu: a World War II battle as told by the men who fought there. Lincoln, Neb.: Univ. of Nebraska Press, 2000.
Morse, Kathryn Taylor, and William Cronon. 2003. The Nature of Gold : An Environmental History of the Klondike Gold Rush. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2003.
Nick Jans, The Grizzly Maze: Timothy Treadwell's Fatal Obsession With Alaskan Bears (London: Penguin Publishing Group, 2006), 30–31.
Ober, Frederek. Vasco Nuñez de Balboa. New York: Harper, 1906.
Perras, Galen. Stepping Stones to Nowhere: The Aleutian Islands, Alaska, and American Military Strategy, 1867–1945. Vancouver: UBC Press, 2003.
Shwantes, A. Carlos. The Pacific Northwest: An Interpretive history. Lincoln and London: University of Nebraska Press, 1989.
Slotnick, Herman, and Clause Naske. "In Alaska: A History of the 49th State". Oklahoma City: University of Oklahoma Press, 1994.
Stabenow, Dana. Tale From The Edge: True Adventures in Alaska. (St. Martins Press, March 1, 2005) p. 88
Tikhmenev, P.A. A History of the Russian-American Company. Translated by Richard A. Pierce and Alton S. Donnelly. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1978.
Timothy Treadwell, Among Grizzlies: Living with Wild Bears in Alaska (New York: Random House Publishing Group, 1999), 20–27.
Viacheslav V. Ivanov, The Russian Orthodox Church of Alaska and the Aleutian Islands and its relation to Native American traditions--: an attempt at a multicultural society, 1794-1912 (Washington DC: Library of Congress 1997), 1-25.
Whitehead, John S. Completing the Union Alaska, Hawai’I and the Battle for Statehood (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico, 2004), page 100–106.
"5 Companies Join 3 In Alaska Oil Line." New York Times, (1923-Current File), Sep 16, 1969, http://sfx.scholarsportal.info.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/guelph/docview/118642370?accountid=11233.
Air Force Magazine, January 1, 1943, 8-22,
Blackburn, Mark K. “Gold Fever! Seattle Outfits the Klondike Gold Rush. Teaching with Historic Places.” National Register of Historic Places, Washington, DC. Interagency Resources Div. SO 031 322 (1999). https://ia601303.us.archive.org/35/items/ERIC_ED442682/ERIC_ED442682.pdf
Cauchon, Dennis “At state level, GOP, Dems learn to get along” USA Today (June 21, 2007)
Clark, Mike. 2005.“John Wayne Fans Strike Gold with These Three Favourites” USA Today, October 11, 2005. http://go.galegroup.com.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/ps/i.do?&id=GALE%7CA137450587&v=2.1&u=guel77241&it=r&p=AONE&sw=w
Conroy, Scott. "Palin Breaks With McCain On Gay Marriage Ban." CBS News. (October 20, 2008)
Davies, Lawrence E. Special to The New York Times. "Oil Fever Whips Across Alaska." New York Times, (1923-Current File), Sep 03, 1968, http://sfx.scholarsportal.info.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/guelph/docview/118405328?accountid=11233.
Fishback, Price. "The New Deal." Council on Foreign Relations. https://www.cfr.org/content/thinktank/Depression/Fishback_NewDeal_Chapter.pdf.
Godfrey, Anthony. "The Search for Forest Facts: a History of the Pacific Southwest Forest and Range Experiment Station, 1926–2000." prepared on behalf of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest Research Station. Albany, CA: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2013.
Griffifth, Winthrop. ‘Blood, toil, tears and oil Alaska’, New York Times, last accessed 1/11/2017, https://search.proquest.com/hnpnewyorktimes/docview/120328652/AD34337BA0874F48PQ/30?accountid=11233.
Gullickson, Caitlin. "Not Every Woman Supports Women’s Rights." National Organization for Women. (August 29, 2008)
“List of Seven Buildings Sold to Hutchinson, Hohl and Company by Prince Dmitrii P. Maksutov.” Russian-American Company, n.d.
Martin, Douglas. ‘Alaska’s Oil Dream Clouded by Expected Drop in Output’, New York Times (March 1983), accessed 1/11/2017, http://sfx.scholarsportal.info/guelph/docview/122217728?accountid=11233.
Morthland, John. 2000.“The Spectacular Johnny Horton” Texas Monthly. Last modified 30 August 2000. http://go.galegroup.com.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/ps/i.do?&id=GALE%7CA63940650&v=2.1&u=guel77241&it=r&p=AONE&sw=w
Newport, Frank. "Palin's 76% Favorable Among Republicans Tops Others in GOP; Former Alaska governor's image more mixed among all Americans." Gallup Poll News Service, July 16, 2010.
Puffer, Raymond L. . "The Alaska-Siberia Connection: The World War II Air Route Otis Hays, Jr." Pacific Historical Review121, no. 12 (July 1996): 132. Accessed November 4, 2017. doi:10.2307/3642263.
Shabecoff, Philip. ‘Oil Prices Cast a Pall over Prudhoe Bay’, New York Times (July 1986), accessed 1/11/2017, http://sfx.scholarsportal.info/guelph/docview/111096958?accountid=11233.
“About Us.” Business. Alaska Commercial Company. . http://www.alaskacommercial.com/about-us.
Ager, Thomas A. "Late Quaternary vegetation and climate history of the central Bering land bridge from St. Michael Island, western Alaska." Quaternary Research. January 20, 2017. Accessed November 5, 2017. https://www-cambridge-org.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/core/journals/quaternary-research/article/late-quaternary-vegetation-and-climate-history-of-the-central-bering-land-bridge-from-st-michael-island-western-alaska/8BC8B3B36723EF2E8A36BE1F1582E550
"Alaska Native Corporations". akrdc.org. http://www.akrdc.org/alaska-native-corporations (accessed Nov 26, 2017).
Alaska Permanent Fund 30th Anniversary Video. 2007. Accessed November 4, 2017. www.apfc.org/home/Content/home/view_video2.cfm.
Alaska State Library “Governor Palin Signs House Bill 2001” (Office of Alaska Governor, December 19, 2007) accessed at http://wayback.archive-it.org/1200/20090726174527/http:/gov.state.ak.us/archive.php?id=799&type=1
Alaska State library Historical Collections. “MS 118: Alaska Folk Festival Programs and Memorabilia, 1975-[Ongoing].” Alaska State Library, (2017).
Alaska State Library “Palin Applauds Passage of Ethics Reform” (Office of Alaska Governor, May 12, 2007) accessed at http://wayback.archive-it.org/1200/20090726175354/http:/gov.state.ak.us/archive.php?id=393&type=1
"As Precious as Gold.” Smithsonian National Postal Museum. Accessed October 28, 2017. https://postalmuseum.si.edu/gold/asprecious.html
Billboard. 2017. “Jonny Horton”. Accessed November 5, 2017.http://www.billboard.com/music/johnny-horton/chart-history/country-songs
Bone Wilcox, Marguerite. 1923. Alaska State Library. https://jlc-web.uaa.alaska.edu/client/en_US/asl/search/detailnonmodal/ent:$002f$002fSD_ILS$002f0$002fSD_ILS:1561071/one?qu=50069959.
Champions & Record Holders – Iditarod." Iditarod Insider. Accessed November 05, 2017. http://iditarod.com/about/champions-records/.
D'Oro, Rachel. "Alaska celebrating black soldiers’ work on famed World War II highway." South Florida Times, July 12, 2017. Accessed November 4, 2017.
"Environmental Protection, Permafrost”, Alyeska Pipeline Service Company. Last modified 2011 http://www.alyeska-pipe.com/SafetyEnvironment/EnvironmentalProtection/Permafrost
Gage, Chris . "The Corps of Engineers: The War Against Japan.". November 10, 2016. Accessed November 01, 2017. http://tothosewhoserved.org/usa/ts/usatse04/chapter01.html.
Hanlon, Tegan. "Cash-strapped Iditarod cuts purse for 2018 race by about $250,000." Alaska Dispatch News. September 22, 2017. ://www.adn.com/outdoors-adventure/iditarod/2017/09/22/cash-strapped-iditarod-reduces-minimum-payout-to-mushers-for-2018-race/.
“History Design Construction”, Alyeska Pipeline Service Company. Last modified 2011http://www.alyeska-pipe.com/TAPS/HistoryDesignConstruction
Kiffer, Dave. “Only two sitting presidents have visited Southeast Alaska”. February 22. http://www.sitnews.us/Kiffer/Visits/022217_presidents.html.
Kinkeads, John. "Reminiscences of Sitka a Quarter Century Ago." ExploreNorth.com - Your Gateway to the North. November 21, 1891. Accessed November 06, 2017.
Okrent, Arika. "11 Amazing Facts About the Iditarod." The Week. March 14, 2014. http://theweek.com/articles/449492/11-amazing-facts-about-iditarod.
“Pipeline Facts”, Alyeska Pipeline Service Company. Last modified 2011. http://www.alyeska-pipe.com/TAPS/PipelineFacts
“Prevention & Response, Oil Spill Prevention, Response and Preparedness,” Alyeska Pipeline Service Company. Last modified 2011 http://www.alyeska-pipe.com/SafetyEnvironment/PreventionAndResponse
Rotten Tomatoes. N.d. “The Proposal”. Accessed November 5, 2017. https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/10010458_proposal?
"Sarah Butcher- Athlete." Accessed November 5, 2017. https://www.biography.com/people/susan-butcher-222295
The Klondike Gold Rush. 2014. Accessed November 5, 2017. https://fod-infobase-com.subzero.lib.uoguelph.ca/PortalPlaylists.aspx?wID=104666&xtid=93460.
“THE WHITE HOUSE,” fordlibrarymuseum.gov. https://www.fordlibrarymuseum.gov/library/document/0055/1669555.pdf (accessed Nov 4, 2017).
Trivia & Facts- Iditarod." Iditarod. http://iditarod.com/about/trivia-facts/.
USA Government. “Alaska History.” Alaska Centres. Accessed October 30, 2017. https://www.alaskacenters.gov/explore/culture/history
"What is the Alaska Permanent Fund?" Alaska Permanent Fund Corporation. Accessed November 4, 2017. http://www.apfc.org/home/Content/aboutFund/aboutPermFund.cfm.
"World War II in Alaska (U.S. National Park Service)." National Park Service. January 20, 2016. Accessed November 01, 2017. https://www.nps.gov/articles/world-war-ii-in-alaska.htm.
World War II in Alaska." U.S. National Park Service. Accessed November 3, 2017. https://www.nps.gov/articles/world-war-ii-in-alaska.htm
St. George Defence
One legal move available : 3...Kxf7
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
'1.e4 a6 2.Bc4 b5 3.Bxf7+'
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at St. George Defence
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon · Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
This Chess related article is a Wikibooks:Chess stub. Please assist Wikibooks by expanding it.
Carrier oils (also called base oils) are oils used to dilute essential oils and enable them to be applied to the skin, through massage for example. Carrier oils are generally safe and non-toxic, although individuals may have specific allergies to particular oils (especially nut oils). Although they are used as a vehicle for essential oils, different carrier oils may have certain healing properties of their own.
Wikipedia has related information at Carrier oil
The following limits are imposed by the DVD-Video spec.
Each title can have one video stream, up to 8 audio streams, and up to 32 subpicture streams.
There can be no more than 99 titlesets, no more than 99 menus in the VMG or a titleset, and no more than 99 titles in a titleset.
Each title may be made up of up to 999 PGCs. Each PGC may consist of up to 255 programs. The pre- and post-sections of a PGC put together can contain no more than 128 VM instructions.
Since there is only one VOB file (VIDEO_TS.VOB) in the VMG, the total amount of video in the VMG menus must fit into 1073709056 bytes (524272 sectors of 2kiB each). In each titleset, all the menu video must fit in the first VOB (VTS_nn_0.VOB), so is limited to the same amount.
Up to 9 different angles are allowed for multi-angle.
There can be up to 36 buttons on-screen at once for narrowscreen footage, but only 12 at once for widescreen, because of the need to provide up to 3 different versions of the subpicture stream, one for use on widescreen TVs and the other two on narrowscreen.
Kinetic energy is simply the capacity to do work by virtue of motion.
Total kinetic energy is simply the sum of the translational and rotational kinetic energies. In most cases, these energies are separately dealt with. It is easy to remember the rotational kinetic energy if you think of the moment of inertia I as the rotational mass. However, you should note that this substitution is not universal but rather a rule of thumb.
Potential energy is simply the capacity to do work by virtue of position (or arrangement) relative to some zero-energy reference position (or arrangement).
Potential energy due to gravity is equal to the product of mass, acceleration due to gravity, and height (elevation) of the object.
Note that this is simply the vertical displacement multiplied by the weight of the object. The reference position is usually the level ground but the initial position like the rooftop or treetop can also be used.
Potential energy due to spring deformation is equal to one-half the product of the spring constant times the square of the change in length of the spring.
The reference point of spring deformation is normally when the spring is "relaxed," i.e. the net force exerted by the spring is zero. It will be easy to remember that the one-half factor is inserted to compensate for finite '"change in length" since one would want to think of the product of force and change in length
, it is instructive to need a "correction factor" during integration.
I: moment of inertia, (kg·m2)
g: local acceleration due to gravity (on the earth’s surface, 9.8 m/s2)
k: spring constant (N/m)
Energy: a theoretically indefinable quantity that describes potential to do work. SI unit for energy is the joule (J). Also common is the calorie (cal).
The joule: defined as the energy needed to push with the force of one newton over the distance of one meter. Equivalent to one newton-meter (N·m) or one watt-second (W·s).
Energy comes in many varieties, including Kinetic energy, Potential energy, and Heat energy.
Kinetic energy (K): The energy that an object has due to its motion. Half of velocity squared times mass. Units: joules (J)
Potential energy due to gravity (UG): The energy that an object has stored in it by elevation from a mass, such as raised above the surface of the earth. This energy is released when the object becomes free to move. Mass times height time acceleration due to gravity. Units: joules (J)
Potential energy due to spring compression (UE): Energy stored in spring when it is compressed. Units: joules (J)
Spring compression (Dx): The difference in length between the spring at rest and the spring when stretched or compressed. Units: meters (m)
Spring constant (k): a constant specific to each spring, which describes its “springiness”, or how much work is needed to compress the spring. Units: newtons per meter (N/m)
Moment of inertia (I): Describes mass and its distribution. (kg•m2)
Stewart, Donald C. "The Legacy of Quintilian." English Education 11.2 (1979): 103-17. Print
Donald Stewart’s “The Legacy of Quintilian” highlights a current issue with English teaching practices, through an example of his daughter learning parts of speech, and he illustrates “the legacy” of Quintilian’s work on rhetoric and education in order to discuss the issue of the “back to basics movement” in teaching English. Stewart argues that Quintilian’s rhetoric and education influence current teaching practices in English Composition; he argues although these practices where useful in its time they are not useful now. Stewart explicates Quintilian practices through Hugh Blair and argues that this rhetorical theory is present when thinking/teaching composition and control “current-traditional thinking about rhetoric and composition” and although they have paved the way for this area the teaching models are outdated. Stewart argues that “composition is not a discipline whose features are reducible to a few simple propositions but that it is a discipline with a rich and complicated history…that is now experiencing an intellectual vigor” (116). Stewart believes that these teaching models will progress, with time, and in order to do so educators, specifically in English Composition, need to have a better understanding of the history of rhetoric.
Having an ETD helps build your career. Your work is published in a timely manner, visible, and easily
Networking on the Network by Phil Agee
This is a 52000 word essay that Phil Agee wrote with the intention of “get[ting] it into the hands of every
Next Section: Improving graduate education, and quality/expressiveness of ETDs
While this camera is not made available to the MMI students for use, the faculty members of ORU affiliated, ETV, contribute footage that they have shot with this camera of the MMI students and their activities.
Product Link: http://panasonic.com/business/provideo/hvx200microsite/index.asp
Given the potential use of SimCity games in urban planning courses, this book will explain how various real-life planning concepts have been incorporated into the game. For game-players, this will add depth to the explanations of elements of the game. For educators and students, this will allow this book to function as a 'study-guide' for courses which use SimCity to introduce basic concepts of urban planning, design, as well as government, and fiscal management. So, for example, the section on Building Transportation will include a description of the importance of transport planning in real-life urban planning, as well as its incorporation into SimCity.
Many tactics used in older SimCity games (SC2K, SC3K) do not apply to SC4. Although most of the basic concepts are still there, many parts of the game are completely different. See "SimCity 4 Concepts" for more info.
Lyrics | Manuscript | Authors and Composers
Appendix 1: Lyrics by Occasion/Theme | Appendix 2: Textual/Musical Witnesses | Appendix 3: Bibliography
Hey now now.
As in Kempe’s “Hey nowe nowe” (H 10), the words of “Hey now now” are given to a round, but additional lyrics were likely intended. Little room has been left among the musical notation for text. This piece is not listed in the table of contents. Stevens (MCH8 19) gives the text presented below in italics, which is from Robbins (Secular Lyrics #143):
To death she hath me brought.
“Hey nowe nowe” may have been a common song burden; see the commentary to Kempe’s “Hey nowe nowe” (H 10), and also Daggere’s “Downbery down” H 15.5, and note.
This piece is indexed, as with Kempe’s piece, in Robbins Index & Suppl. 1214.6 and Ringler MS TM594. It is reprinted in Stevens M&P 391 and Stevens MCH8 19.
In some Lego sets, you will come across technic pieces. These can be axles, gears, wheels, liftarms, or 1 x n bricks with holes. The axles fit into the holes on the liftarms, gears, and wheels. The gears can transfer motion to other gears, or other parts.
An assortment of Lego Technic pieces.
Beams are basically used to hold cross-axles and other LEGO components together, so they are the framework of most TECHNIC and MINDSTORMS models. There are 2 main types of beam: Straight and Angular. Straight beams are usually found only with circular holes in them while angular beams have a mixture of circular and cross-shaped holes, normally with the cross-shaped ones at either end. The straight beams come in sizes from 2 to 15M. These two groups can then be condensed down again into half-beams, beams and bricks.
Connector pegs are used to hold many LEGO TECHNIC constructions together. There are 3 types of connector pegs:
The round pegs can be used to connect beams together so that they can both swing freely. The second cross-shaped peg can be used to hold two beams together so that they cannot move, and the last peg can be used to connect a free-spinning beam to a fixed beam.
There are also longer versions of the round pegs that can be used to connect multiple beams together. A longer version of the cross-shaped peg is an axle.
Some pegs might also be different colours. The black and blue connectors are friction connector pegs, while the other pegs are smooth.
Cross-Axles are cross-shaped rods that can be used to hold wheels, gears beams etc. They are colour coded by their length, even numbered lengths (2M,4M,6M etc.) are black while odd numbered lengths (3M,5M,7M etc.) are grey. You can place a cross-axle through a circular hole so it can spin freely. This is a handy connection for building with gears and wheels.
A gear is a piece that conveys rotational force to another gear or appliance. The smallest gear in a pair is called the Pinion; the larger gear the gear or the wheel.
There are many types of gear that are currently used in LEGO constructions. The common ones are listed below:
Spur Gear – A gear that has radial teeth (teeth that spread from the centre outwards) parallel to the axis
Bevel Gear – A gear that can engage another Bevel gear on a different angle (usually 90 degrees)
Crown Gear - A gear wheel with teeth positioned in the rim at a 90 degree angle to its plane.
Worm Gear - A short rotating screw that meshes with the teeth of another gear.
Rack Gear – A toothed block that another gear can mesh (interlock) with
( "Chemical engineering" "Civil engineering" "Engineering" ).
Marks in the form of words can be classified as either arbitrary, fanciful, suggestive, descriptive or generic. The nature of the mark determines the extent to which it is protected by law.
Arbitrary, fanciful and suggestive marks
A "fanciful" mark has no meaning other than its meaning as a trademark. Examples include Xerox copiers, Lego bricks and Verizon phones. "Arbitrary" marks have a separate meaning, but that meaning has nothing to do with their use as a trademark. Examples include Apple computers, Diesel jeans and Shell gasoline. "Suggestive" marks suggest a characteristic of a good or service without actually describing that characteristic. Examples include Coppertone sunblock, Earthlink internet service and jetBlue airline service.
Arbitrary, fanciful and suggestive marks receive highly similar treatment under the law. They are the strongest types of mark in that their holders do not need to prove a secondary meaning in order to protect the mark. Because there is no reason to associate Apple with computers, outside of the popularity of computers made by Apple Computer, third parties have few legitimate reasons to use the name "Apple" on their computers.
A "descriptive" mark is one that identifies a characteristic of the article or service it marks. Examples include American Airlines (a geographic mark) and Dell Computer (a surname mark). Descriptive marks cannot be registered without proof that the mark has a secondary meaning in the eye of the consumer public.
Even if a descriptive mark has a secondary meaning, its descriptive nature makes it possible to avoid trademark infringement liability through a fair use defense. A person could, for instance, use "American Airlines" in a commercial context to refer to airlines from America, so long as they were not using the term in its trademark sense.
Generic marks, like "laptop computer," cannot receive trademark protection even if they have a secondary meaning. The rule against generic trademarks is particularly important for holders of famous marks, because their marks may lose protection if they become common nouns or adjectives in the public eye. Formerly-trademarked words like "aspirin" and "cellophane" have lost their protection due to genericide. Genericide is discussed in detail in the Defenses section.
A mark need not be a word or phrase. Besides trade dress and product configuration, discussed above, trademarks can also be found in sounds (e.g. the NBC chimes), colors, fragrances, and other distinctive features of a product. The most important criteria in determining their trademarkability is secondary meaning (whether the feature denotes origin to consumers) and whether the feature is functional. Functional features are not trademarkable: they must be protected under patent law if they are to be protected at all.
Generally speaking, the owner of a mark is the person who is first to use that mark in commerce. This is known as the race to the marketplace test. For unregistered marks, protection only extends to the areas where marked products are sold or advertised, where their reputation is established, or where the owner is reasonably expected to reach in the normal expansion of their business. Registered marks automatically receive nationwide protection regardless of where they are used.
If two people use the same mark in the same region, the right to use the mark will be given to the first person to use the mark in that region. If one of the marks is registered, the unregistered mark will only prevail if it was in use before the application for the registered mark was filed, and the unregistered mark will only prevail in the area(s) where it was in use.
Online demonstrations are particularly useful to show how a piece of software works or how it can be used to instruct or teach in a classroom environment. This usually involves some sort of interaction with the learning experience. As the title of this subject implies the learner has to log onto the web to take part in the learning opportunity.
A good example of this form of learning is through an online demonstration, Macromedia offer live one hour on line demonstrations. The benefit of these short interventions is that they are interactive and the learner can join education experts as they conduct live, online product demonstrations. These demonstrations are aimed at Key Stage 12 and higher education teachers, faculty, staff, and administrators that may wish to use the software as part of their teaching/learning. The software also let’s the learner combine existing learning materials such as text books or hand-outs with real-time interactivity which enables collaborative teaching and learning experiences (Macromedia Website 2006)
The Joint Information Systems Committee (JISC) offer a range of on-line learning resources for education and research purposes. JISC has commissioned a series of five exemplars which demonstrate how Further Education (FE) practitioners can use content found in online resources to support their teaching. Each of the exemplars showcases available electronic resource material for the teacher and it demonstrates how each of these materials can be used to assist in delivering the core syllabus to students/learners (JISC Website 2006)
The following link is the ‘Leisure’ exemplar; http://restricted.jisc.ac.uk/exemplars_fe/exemplars/leisure/index.html
Another good example of online collaborative methods of teaching and learning is through the use of Blogs. These are private web pages which are published by either an individual or a group of individuals. They can be personal journals/diaries and are used to comment on all sorts of topics depending on the interests of the author, often referred to as a Blogger. Most Blogs enable the visitors to post comments and/or suggestions allowing interactivity between the Blogger and the visitors. So from this it can be argued that the exemplars that JISC use, product online demonstrations and Blogs are excellent mediums for online educational purposes.
The following link is extremely useful to view live demonstrations on various e-learning products; http://elearningcentre.typepad.com/whatsnew/
An aldehyde. R can be a anything but a hydroxyl group or alkoxy group attached to a carbonyl.
A carbonyl group is a functional group that is comprised of a carbon atom doubly bonded to an oxygen atom. The carbon attached to the oxygen can have single bonds to different atoms. The atoms that the carbon is bound to distinguish it as a ketone, aldehyde, carboxylic acid, ester, or amide.
1, Naming Carboxylic Acids:
The functional carboxylic acid is called a carboxyl group. In systematic nomenclature, a carboxylic acid is named by replacing the last alphabet "e" with "oic acid." For instance, a two carbon alkane is called ethane and two carboxylic acid is ethanoic acid. Notice that a carboxylic acid with 6 or less carbons are usually known by their common names. ( methanoic acid = formic acid, ethanoic acid = acetic acid, propanoic acid= propionic acid, butanoic acid= butyric acid, pentanoic acid= valeric acid, hexanoic acid= caproic acid)
Acyl halides have a halide in place of the -OH group in a carboxylic acid. Acyl halides are named by replacing "-ic acid" in the acid name with "-yl halide" (eg; -yl chloride, -yl bromide, -yl flouride etc). If acid has a name with "-carboxylic acid," then replace "carboxylic acid with "-carbonyl halide" (e.g. -carbonyl chloride, -carbonyl bromide, -carbonyl fluoride)
An acid anhydride is formed by two molecules of carboxylic acid reacting with each other to lose one water molecule. An anhydride is a symmetrical anhydride if the two reacting acid molecules are the same. If two reacting acid molecules are different then they are going to from a mixed anhydride. Symmetrical anhydrides are named by replacing "acid" in acid name with "anhydride." Mixed anhydrides are named by stating the names of both acids in alphabetical order then followed by "anhydride."
If there is an -OR group in place of the -OH group of a carboxylic acid, the name of the group attached to the carboxyl oxygen should be
Salts of carboxylic acids are named in the same way. The cation is named first then name the acid with replacing "-ic acid" by "-ate"
Notice that cyclic esters are called lactones. Their common names are derived from the common name of the carboxylic acid, which designates the length of the carbon chain, and a Greek letter to indicate the carbon to which the carboxyl oxygen is attached.
An amide has an -NH2, -NHR, or -NR2 group in place of -OH group of a carboxylic acid. They are named by replacing "-oic acid", "-ic acid", or "-ylic acid" of the acid name with "-amide." If a substituent is bonded to the nitrogen, the name of the substituent should be stated first (if there is more than one substituent bonded to the nitrogen, they should be stated alphabetically), then state the name of the amide. The name of each substituent is preceded by capital N to indicate that the substituent is bonded to a nitrogen. Cyclic amides are called lactams. Their nomenclature is similar to that of lactones.
Each of the characteristic specific to each compound is detailed on their specific pages.
Oxygen is far more electronegative than carbon, so the electron density is higher near the oxygen and lower near the carbon. This creates a dipole moment, where the oxygen bears a negative charge and the carbon bears a positive charge of the same magnitude. This distribution of charges makes carbon an electrophile and oxygen, the resulting nucleophile.
The reactivity of each carbonyl compound is dependent on the group attached directly onto the alpha carbon. This is because of the resonance stabilized structures which form due to the donation of an electron by this group. The stronger the contribution of this resonance structure, the stronger the stability of the carbonyl. An example of this can be seen in carboxylic acids which upon deprotonation create a degenerate structure and thus increases the acidity of the proton. Peptide bonds are unusually strong and carry more of an $sp^2$, planar hybridization due to the resonance contribution of the amide electron onto the alpha carbon. This decreases the reactivity of peptide bonds considerably and thus requires much energy or a protease to catalyze the bond. Carbonyls by themselves are very stable bonds and the energy of their formation are usually very high. This makes the formation of carbonyls in organic synthesis to be highly thermodynamically favorable and usually the creation of a carbonyl bond as the end product will drive a reaction to formation.
The carbonyl group has a short, strong, and very polar double bond. Its reactivity of its double bond is very different from the double bond of the alkenes because of their oxygen's electronegativity along with the lone pair of electrons. The carbonyl carbon is also electron withdrawing since it is so close to the highly electronegative oxygen. The polarization of aldehydes and ketones also alters the physical constants. The polarization of the carbonyl group is the reason why their boiling points are higher than those of the hydrocarbons of similar molecular weight. the carbonyl group's polarity causes the smaller molecules to be completely miscible in water. Carbonyl compounds with more than six carbons are considered large, which is insoluble in solution. The larger the compound, the larger its hydrocarbon chain, the more hydrophobic the molecule is, so its solubility would then decrease.
Take important notice that the electrophilicity of the carbon is highly dependent on the nearby atoms and the atoms it is directly bounded to. For example, the carbonyl carbon of a carboxylic acid will not be as electrophilic as a carbonyl carbon of a ketone because of resonance stabilization. On the other hand, acetyl chloride (the carbon is bound to an R-group, doubly bonded to the oxygen, and then bound to the fluorine), will have a more electrophilic carbonyl carbon because the electronegative chlorine will increase the induced positive dipole of the carbon. Electrophilicity plays a key role in chemical reactions, and less electrophilic carbonyl carbons are not as readily reactive.
Within biological systems, carbonyl compounds can be formed by the oxidation of alcohols. An oxidation reaction in organic chemistry is one that is characterized by a process which either adds electronegative atoms or removes hydrogen from a molecule. An example of this oxidation includes the oxidation of ethanol by the oxidizing agent nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+). NAD+ is composed of a pyridine ring, two ribose molecules, and the heterocycle adenine. When the two enantiometers of 1-Deuterioethanol are reacted with NAD+, in the presence of enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase, the biochemical oxidation is found to be stereospecific (NAD+ and only removes the hydrogen attached to the C1 atom in 1-Deuterioethanol. [2] Similar to the oxidation of 1-Deuterioethanol described above, other alcohols can be oxidized biochemically to form carbonyl groups. Another example includes the oxidation of methanol to formaldehyde. [2]
In 'HNMR spectroscopy, aldehyde compounds have a very unique chemical shift which appears to be between 9-10 ppm. Which means that the aldehyde formyl hydrogen is also very strongly deshielded. Aldehyde C2 hydrogens are also slightly deshielded because of the electron withdrawing from the oxygen from the carbonyl group. In ketones, this is also similar. The alpha-hydrogens also experience this deshielding; which has a chemical shift between 2-2.8 ppm.
The carbon-13 NMR spectra for aldehydes and ketones are the same since it is of the chemical shift of the carbon participating in carbonyl group. Since that carbon is bound to an oxygen, it will appear at a lower field approximately 200 ppm. The carbons adjacent to the carbonyl carbon are also deshielded (just like the hydrogens in 'HNMR). The carbons further away from the carbonyl group are less deshielded.
The IR absorbtion bands for all carbonyl compounds absorb in the 1760-1665 cm-1 region, which is due to the streching vibration of the C=O bond. Generally, carbonyl groups have a high intensity and narrow regions, making them useful for diagnostic purposes.
R'(R")C-CH-COOR
R'(R")C-CH-COH
↑ Bruice,Paula Yurkanis.Organic Chemistry Six edition, Pearson Education,Inc. New York. 2010
The US-led coalition invaded Iraq and are occupying it. There are two broad areas of dispute:
The evidence that an attack was necessary
The handling of the invasion and subsequent occupation
According to international law, an attack on another country is illegal unless approved by the security council. The USA was unable to provide this approval.
The USA frequently condemn the military actions of other countries when they act without security council approval. Failing to lead by example will diminish the USA's credibility in the eyes of other countries as a law abiding moral state.
Saddam Hussein was a tyrant who ruled over Iraq with a reign of terror and murder, committing acts that amount to genocide. Therefore, invading Iraq to install a more peaceful regime was an act of kindness and benevolence.
This argument relies on the premise that murder is wrong.
This argument relies on the premise that democracy is morally superior to tyrannical regimes.
This argument relies on the claim that the government of Saddam Hussein was murderous and dictatorial.
This argument relies on the claim that the invasion is not murder itself: See War is murder.
Many governments in the world are dictatorial and sometimes even genocidal. Saddam Hussein's capacity to harm both his own people and his neighbors was so severely harmed by UN sanctions that he posed little threat to anyone, and was in any case less dangerous than many other dictators around the world. Thus, the invasion was not warranted because other countries represented a bigger threat to world peace and stability.
This argument relies on the premise that there are extant governments that routinely violate human rights.
This argument relies on the premise that UN sanctions on Iraq worked to reduce Saddam Hussein's military capacity and threat to the world.
The invasion of Iraq was warranted because Iraq posed an imminent threat to the safety and well-being of the United States and other countries.
This argument relies on the premise that Saddam Hussein's government represented a threat to world peace.
This argument relies on the premise that the safety and well-being of the United States and other countries are important.
Saddam Hussein had ties to al-Qaeda, a terrorist organization that threatened the United States and other countries and has masterminded several major terrorist attacks.
This argument relies on the claim that Saddam Hussein's government had ties to al-Qaeda.
This argument relies on the claim that terrorism, and al-Qaeda specifically, remains a major threat to peace in the United States and other countries.
Saddam Hussein represented a threat because he had Weapons of Mass Destruction, or had the desire and ability to acquire them.
This argument relies on the premise that Iraq had no right to possess Weapons of Mass Destruction.
Love often stays at many moments.
You ask me,
Love often stays in which moment?
Love often stays at the moment when a mother kisses her child.
For you!
The following instructions are especially suited to our Northern latitudes. Slight variations will be necessary in the South, owing to the early seasons of that part of the country.
There is little particular work for January in cold latitudes, except that which has been left over from December, or which is general work for all winter. When the ground is open, late fall and early spring work of a colder latitude appropriately occupy the farmer more or less during the winter months.
Guard against damage by water, during thaws, about buildings and in the field.
The Work Shop.- A workshop, provided with the most important carpenters', painters', and metalworkers' tools, is what every farmer should have. Let it contain a bench with vise, nails, screws, a hammer, hatchet and drawing knife, saws, planes, chisels, center bits and stock, and other carpenters' tools. Paints, pots and brushes, of two or three sizes; varnish pot and glue pot ; a steel-jawed vise, assortments of files, cold chisels, monkeywrench and other wrenches, an anvil, or a hard-wood block, which will do for one; strong pincers, a set of round, square-jawed and cutting pliers, and a soldering iron; sheets of tin, wires, rivets, etc.; besides a good stock of boards and timber of various kinds. Add to this a few simple articles of the harness-makers' kit. such as awls, wax, thread, rivets, with "set" punches, and leather. Thus provided, many a profitable day's work may be done.
Buildings.— On mild days open and air thoroughly, especially the cellars. Look to the protection of roofs, water pipes, etc., against frost.
Stock. — Keep no more than can be kept well. Horses, with enough to eat, wilt beat exposure much better than cows and young cattle. Give good shelter to all ; if possible, warm, but well-ventilated stables, which arc a great economy of food. Let no stock run down m flesh; "spring poor" cattle are a burning disgrace. It will be weeks before poor oxen will be able to do a good day's work in the spring. Milk cows? especially young ones, to within five or six weeks of calving, and feed well. Grain or oilcake pays its cost twice over; once in fat or milk, and once in the better quality of the manure. Feed sheep grain, in small, but regular quantities, and see that each gets its share ; give all kinds range of a good dry yard, and warm sheds for nights and wet weather. Salt .in'! water are essentials to the well-being of all kinds of domestic animals, summer and winter. Fattening stock should be fed and watered regularly, keep very clean, in warm stables, well ventilated, and abundantly littered ; give exercise and air on mild days. Ground and cooked food, except for sheep, perhaps, is a great economy.
Corn, Small Grains, Straw or Hay, may be still on hand for sale. If sold, you "owe the land a debt which you must repay, or be poorer, for it is a draft on your capital. Watch the markets, calculate probabilities, and sell when a fair price is offered ; but get the full market price as near as you can. Never sell hay or straw or grain without conscientiously returning an equivalent in the purchase of corn-fodder, oilcake, ot grain for feeding, or bones for manure.
Permanent Improvements. — It is a good time to plan for building or alteration to buildings, and for such work as reclaiming swamps, clearing off stumps, moving walls, old fences, and the accumulated rubbish of neglected parts of the farm.
The winter is often open enough to do much labor in the swamps in getting out muck and similar work, and that which has been weathered enough may be hauled to the barn, or to places where you mean to make compost heap.
Ice. — The time for gathering the store of ice in cold latitudes may pass quickly. Early in the month, prepare the house ; clear out the old stock, if low ; see that the drain and air trap work well, that the flooring is level, and the bed at the bottom is shaken up and dried. Cut the ice in blocks to pack evenly in the house ; if it is a small one, pack in the coldest weather, when the ice is very cold and dry.
The complete compendium of universal knowledge: containing all you want to ... By William Ralston Balch
A technology plan is an important document for every educational institution. It is so important that some states, such as Pennsylvania, have incorporated the technology plan into the state-required strategic plan. This book is based on the knowledge, experience, and learnings of a group of graduate students and their professor.
This goal of this book is to offer insight and methodology into the best practices that should be followed to for a valid technology plan that is created, supported, and accepted by all stakeholders. This book is a work in progress and does not yet offer a complete step-by-step guide to Technology Planning. This book does aim to offer a starting point for others to follow and build upon.
A student-designed practical investigation related to waves, fields or motion is undertaken either in Unit 3 or Unit 4,or across both Units 3 and 4. The investigation relates to knowledge and skills developed across Units 3 and 4 and is undertaken by the student through practical work.
The investigation requires the student to develop a question, formulate a hypothesis and plan a course of action to answer the question and that complies with safety and ethical guidelines. Students then undertake an experiment that involves the collection of primary quantitative data, analyse and evaluate the data, identify limitations of data and methods, link experimental results to science ideas, reach a conclusion in response to the question and suggest further investigations that may be undertaken. The student is expected to design and undertake an investigation involving two continuous independent variables. Results are communicated in a scientific poster format according to the template provided on page 13. A practical logbook must be maintained by the student for record, authentication and assessment purposes.
Comments to come.
Chapter 3. Plant Tissues
Most plant cells are specialized to a greater or lesser degree, and arranged together in tissues. A plant tissue can be simple or complex depending upon whether it is composed of one or more than one type of cell. The simplest tissue found in plants is called parenchyma. The cells are not very specialized, more or less rounded or angular where packed together, and thin-walled. A type of parenchyma called chlorenchyma because the cells contain chloroplasts forms tissue (usually in the leaves) responsible for most of the photosynthesis occurring in the plant. Note that in simple tissues at least (tissues comprised mostly of one cell type), the tissue name follows from the cell type. However, tissues may also have unique anatomical names related to where in the plant they occur.
The growth of a plant requires a source of undifferentiated cells located in places where growth is needed and can be initiated to further the body plan (in comparison to animals, plants are rather open in this regard). Some enlargement in size is always possible by elongation or enlargement of existing cells, or by existing cells simply dividing. But differentiation of one cell type into another is only possible if the initial cell (mother cell) is not very specialized. Tissues composed of cells that remain undifferentiated and supply, by their divisions, cells to form new tissues and organs, are called meristems. Meristem tissue occurs in places that allow for a very orderly pattern of growth.
To do: Mine or import and merge Wikipedia:Meristem
Botany Study Guide ~ Wiki Contents TableSection I
Spread gives an offset value which is different for each of the voices which are playing the same midi note (Unison). When only one voice is playing a note, the value is zero. The offsets are grouped around zero and are multiples of the value at the module's input.
If someone can give ideas of what it is used for that would be most welcome.
You want to validate a document using an XML Schema.
Note: Validation is a very complex topic. eXist come with default setting that may prevent files from being added that are associated with a namespace once a schema is saved in the registry. Please be aware of these factors that are documented here.
eXist support a validation module that includes a validate() function to validate an XML file against a grammer file such as an XML Schema.
$schema-uri is a URI to the XML Schema you want to use to validate the document. Note that this must be of type xs:anyURI.
This function return a single true/fales value which is true if the document is valid according to the XML Schema.
(: you must run this every time the XML Schema file changes! :)
Here is a sample XML Schema to validate a very small XML file. In eXist 1.3 only XML files with a namespace are supported.
There are two important points about this XML Schema.
The targetNamespace="http://example.com" attribute indicates that this XML Schema is targeting the http://example.com namespace.
The elementFormDefault="qualified" attribute indicates that as the XML parser reads the root of the file, the target namespace should be used.
Without these two attributes the validation will not work.
The validate() function only returns a simple boolean true/false value. If there is an error in your XML file this function is not very useful at finding the errors. To assist with this process their is another function called validate-report(). It has the same arguments:
The result can be modified to be the following:
"The XML File is Not Valid",
The Gambas programming language provides a set of operators that allow values and variables to be compared, evaluated or manipulated. These operators can combined together with values and variables to make expressions. The operators may take unary, dyadic or ternary form, depending on the number of operands that they utilize.
In Gambas, as with most other programming languages, the equals sign acts as a dyadic assignment operator that assigns the value of the expression of the right hand operand to the variable named by the left operand.
The nudge operators ++ and -- are not supported in Gambas. However the INC and DEC commands and combination assignment operators can be used to increment or decrement the values of variables.
Beer making has a long and varied history throughout the world. From individuals making a couple of cases at home in the kitchen to large industrial sites that produce hundreds of cases per hour. That you want to home brew says that you have tried a couple of different beers and thought you would like to taste something different, or that you could do better. Don't worry! Homebrewing isn't that hard. It does require patience and some attention to detail. But don't stress out. As a sage once put it: Relax, Don't worry, have a homebrew!
Below you will find a collection of articles discussing the different aspects to homebrewing. Feel free to look through them.
Welcome to the world of home beer brewing! This wikibook aims to help you, the student, become a well rounded and versed master home brewer. It is recommended that you use this book as part of a class led by an experienced instructor, who can lead you through the book and assist you in practical application of the information contained therein. However, determined students will certainly be able to use this material to be their own instructor, and in such case, you should probably read the instructor foreword. Beer brewing is an exciting and mind opening process, and will allow you to refine your tastes for beer by better understanding the hows, the whys, and the history of beer production.
As an instructor, you are carrying on an ancient tradition. It is imperative that you impart your charge with as much appreciation and as much enthusiasm for beer making as you should have. This book aims to be a complete discourse on the entire beer making process, and to avoid repeating identical material it has been organized in a "grain to stein" fashion. Unfortunately, this organization will prove to push too much information too soon to entice a beginner and get him on the road to making a quality beer.
So, for the instructor (and students instructing themselves), here is a recommended path through this book: Cleaning/Sanitization, Procedures, Equipment, Boiling, Cooling, Fermentation, Bottling/Kegging, Ingredients, Mashing, Lautering, Cultivation, Malting. It is assumed that this path will be accompanied with relevant lectures and exercises, to reinforce the material and affect a better understanding. For the self instructing brewer, we recommend that you follow this path, reading at least to the point of fermentation before performing your first "brew-day," while paying attention to procedures relating to extract brewing. Once you have pitched yeast, you will have at least 2 weeks to read the bottling/kegging section, and decide how you intend to finish your beer. Natural bottle carbonation is the least expensive way, but it is also the easiest with which to make mistakes resulting in sub-standard beer (or exploding bottles, which is fun). A kegging system is quite an investment, especially for first timers who may find that homebrewing is not the hobby for them, but it is the most straight forward method, often producing a more consistent quality beer.
Once the self instructing student has become comfortable with the simplified process using extract, we recommend he continue learning about the rest of the process and at least try to produce an "all-grain" brew. Little additional equipment required, while the resulting beer can be several orders of quality and freshness better than an extract brew from comparable initial ingredients, not to mention that per-batch costs can even go down.
Observing the Sky from 40°N
Celestial map for June 15, 10:00 pm, from 40°N. North is up and South is down. On the left there is the detailed map, on the right there is an illustration of the sky as it appears.
These are the answers to the exercises in section 1.2, Notation
.
There is a quick, brown fox that does not jump over any lazy dog.
South Korea's capital, Seoul, is an important global city. Of the 51 million people, half of South Korea lives in the Seoul Metropolitan Area, the fourth largest metropolitan area in the world.
Rules of precedence are used to determine the order in which operators within an expression are used during evaluation. An inexperienced programmer may expect the expression from the following program to produce a result of 35. However, this actually produces a value of 23, because multiplication has a higher precedence than addition, so it is performed first.
Using parentheses to control the order of evaluation
It is possible to change the order in which operators within an expression are evaluated by using parentheses. In the following example, the expression produces a value of 35, because the parentheses have a higher precedence than multiplication, so their contents are evaluated first:
Groups of operators or functions within parentheses have the same precedence as normal
Groups of operators or functions within parentheses have the same precedence as they normal would. In the following example, the multiplication within the parentheses occurs before the addition:
Operators of equal precedence are evaluated from left to right
It affects the tiny airbag of the lungs, called alveoli. When suffering from pneumonia, the airbag is inflamed and filled with liquid, making breathing difficult.
SKINS Compression Garments Pty Limited, headquartered in Riverwood, Australia, was incorporated in 2004, although the idea behind the current technology dates back to 1996. The creator, an Australian skier, had a sports science background and was ambitious to practice sport with the same intensity as when he was younger, while still keeping the same level of freshness. His main idea was that increased blood circulation helps the body perform better. With the usage of the “second skin” and wrapping his muscles into it, he could accelerate blood flow and increase oxygen delivery to working muscles. Consequently, this would improve power, speed, stamina and recovery.
The invention process and design of the first pair of SKINS tights took 5 years. Since then the use of SKINS amongst athletes picked up rapidly and still remains extremely popular. As a matter of fact, SKINS are nowadays a highly sought-after product by discerning sports people in more than 30 countries.
Use of SKINS generates a number of benefits for athletes, what has been highlighted by many studies published in peer reviewed medical journals. SKINS are designed to increase the flow of oxygen to muscles and there are two key ways to achieve this: by gradient compression and superior construction.
SKINS Compression Garments Pty Ltd makes performance clothing for athletes and sportspeople.
Company offers tights, jerseys, longs, shorts, racer back and short sleeve tops, jackets, base layers, sleeveless suits, tank tops, and snow garments. The company provides its products[2] for athletics, badminton, baseball, basketball, bodybuilding, climbing, cricket, cycling, fitness, football, golf, hockey, martial arts and combat, recovery and relaxation, rowing, rugby, running, soccer, swimming, tennis, triathlon, walking/hiking, and snow sports. It offers its products through stores in Australia, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Germany, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Canada, Japan, New Zealand, Switzerland, the United States, and the United Kingdom, as well as online.
The company makes 100,000 units of clothing each month which are supplied to apparel markets in 31 countries. SKINS specializes in compression clothing, designed to prevent injury and enhance performance. Their black, tight gear with yellow stitching is now part of the sports landscape.
The SKINS Compression Garments Pty Ltd is a small company and they have registered handful of personnel in Australia for different responsibilities. The CEO is Jaimie Royston Fuller, also being the managing director of the company with various responsibilities. Warren Hodge serves as a General Manager of SKINS Compression Garments Pty Ltd. The third person is Sales Manager Heath Donaldson and his responsibilities are management and sales. Another person is an accountant Ron McKeller who is responsible for the whole accounting/finance aspect. The fifth person is Marketing Manager Jaime Briety with responsibilities including marketing and management.
SKINS have invested heavily in research to develop an engineered gradient compression, which gives the company a considerable competitive advantage. This is why SKINS is favored by so many top athletes and sporting teams around the globe. In addition, SKINS partners with the Australian Physiotherapy Association and their products are registered as medical devices by the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration.
SKINS have now a number of professional athletes who use their products on a daily basis. Australian and international high profile athletes sponsorship deals with SKINS include cricketers, netballers, rugby players, athletics, triathletes, climbers, cyclists, mountain-, trial- and hand bikers, tennis players and alpine skiers. Rugby league (NRL) star Johnathan Thurston[3] has used SKINS products now for over 5 years and said: “They have become an essential part of my kit, up there with my boots and headgear! I find that body shots tend to have a lesser impact on me when wearing SKINS during a match: it’s as if my SKINS provide me with some extra cushioning. I also find that my body recovers quicker when I wear SKINS after training and games. For a quicker recovery, I sleep in my SKINS after games and always wear them when flying. They are like my second skin.”
In February 2010 SKINS Compression Garments Pty Ltd and USA Cycling Inc.[4] jointly announced the upgrade of their partnership agreement in order to equip the athletes of USA Cycling. In the beginning in February 2010, SKINS provided its full range of competitive cycling apparel to USA Cycling athletes across the disciplines of road, track, mountain and cyclo-cross. The three-year agreement will remain in place through the 2012 Summer Olympic Games in London. In addition to providing the competitive apparel range, SKINS will continue to provide its recovery compression garments to improve the training, performance and recovery of USA Cycling athletes.
In June 2010, the Australian Rugby Union[5] announced the latest addition to its portfolio of valued partners after striking a four-year agreement with SKINS. Athletes who use SKINS have also been really successful and when they provided numerous athletes with BioAcceleration Technology compression garments for the 2010 Vancouver Winter Olympic and Paralympics, helping to contribute to some outstanding performances. In total, SKINS European athletes won 5 Gold, 3 Silver and 4 Bronze medals.
Recently, in September 2010, SKINS officially launched their partnership with LI-NING[6]. The joint cooperation will deliver 'LI-NING SKINS', superior quality engineered gradient compression sportswear to the Chinese market. SKINS will utilize LI-NING's distribution network to gain access to the Chinese market and LI-NING will benefit from SKINS' technological research especially as the partnership moves deeper into the fields of R&D and design in the near future. LI NING Company Limited is one of the leading sports brand enterprises in the PRC, possessing brand marketing, research and development, design, manufacturing, distribution and retail capabilities. The Group's products mainly include footwear, apparel, accessories and equipment for sport and leisure uses under its own LI-NING brand. The Group has established an extensive supply chain management system, and a distribution and retail network in the PRC primarily through outsourcing of manufacturing operations and distribution via franchised agents. The Group also directly manages retail stores for the LI-NING brand. This cooperation will also provide additional power and superiority to LI-NING-sponsored Chinese athletes competing on the world stage.
SKINS Compression Garments Pty Ltd head office is now in Switzerland and they have 5 international subsidiaries, which are in Australia, United Kingdom, China, France and Germany. Company also has 16 SKINS distributors[7], which sell their products to 31 countries in Europe, Asia, Oceania and North America. Their products includes now a large number of different products with different styles for various sports and they have own products for male, female and youth customers.
SKINS was the first company to sell compression garments’ products.
SKINS is currently sponsoring professional teams and athletes.
SKINS’ products are recommended and endorsed by the Australian Physiotherapy Association.
SKINS' products are also registered as medical devices by the Australian Therapeutic Goods Association.
The benefits of SKINS have been supported by a broad number of independent researches.
SKINS is using social media to communicate to and inform its customers.
SKINS’ products are sold in over 31 countries worldwide through authorized dealers and online stores.
SKINS has currently a partnership with LI-NING to enter the chinese market.
The management and team of SKINS are passionated about sports and their products.
SKINS' research evidences are controversial.
SKINS’ website is not easy to access and not user firendly structured.
SKINS’ distribution network is limited. They do not own distribution stores or showrooms.
SKINS’ marketing is mainly aiming at elite athletes.
There is a huge potential target group for compression garments.
Compression garments can be used in different sports and can be suitable for professional athletes as well as for amateurs.
The trend of compression garments could turn out to be only a big hype with new future perspective.
All kinds of media can be used to improve publishing and marketing of compression garments.
Sponsored athletes could increase the media interest on SKINS’ compression garments.
The market for recreational athletes and „weekend athletes“ could be a potential new customer group.
Using Internet and interactive media can increase the customer relationship between SKINS and its clients base.
Since the industry of compression garments is still a niche market and there is always the danger of new big competitors, SKINS needs to use the market potential to maintain its economic and financial stability.
Increasing costs for the production of compression garments could have effects on the financial health of SKINS.
The Entry of new competitors especially larger enterprises could increase the competition and take over customer bases.
The increase of competition could lead to price wars.
New innovation within the compression garment technology could increase the pressure on SKINS and could have effects on sales figures.
By Patti Horne and Frank Stonier, June 2007
Over the last several decades public pressure for educational improvements has grown. After newspapers featured articles of high school graduates who were unable to fill out job applications, the public outcry reached critical mass. Employers wanted assurance that a high school graduate would be literate and capable of performing the duties required in the workplace. The citizenry demanded some accountability when it came to the quality of education students were receiving in public schools. As legislators often do when there is public uproar, they drafted legislation. Suddenly, the federal government became very involved in state and local education. Along with the legislation came money and with the money came accountability measures. And so people, not necessarily trained in the field of education, began to mandate what would and should be done in classrooms. They also decided how "success" would be measured (enter high-stakes testing). As Popham concludes, we have entered into a game of high-stakes testing that we cannot win" (Popham, 12).
The most prominent of the legislative measures was the passage of No Child Left Behind (NCLB) in 2001. It was the culmination of "standards-based reform directed at low-achieving students... and historically low performing schools" (Jennings & Rentner, 2006). A major problem with the current legislation is that it was drafted by people who are not education professionals. It seems to reason that if you want to bring about change in schools you need to hear from the people who are in the classrooms daily and understand the real issues that need to be addressed. Cuban believes that "teachers are gatekeepers to learning in schools and crucial to the growth of nearly 50 million young children and youth". A significant problem in the United States is the high proportion of underqualified and ineffective teachers teaching in schools that have high proportions of minority students and students from low socioeconomic areas (Haycock & Peske, 2006). Due to this teacher distribution, the students in the schools that need the most effective teachers do not have them. No Child Left Behind is subsequently trying to "fix" this problem by ensuring that all students meet a given set of standards. Unfortunately, unless high quality teachers are placed in the low performing schools, this is not likely to happen. Cuban further argues that "student learning still depends on what teachers do in the classrooms" (Cuban, 2007). A major obstacle to teachers is the fact that teachers are not adequately supported (due to both lack of pay and lack of classroom support)which causes them to become over stressed in their profession. Those teachers who are teaching the at-risk students have far greater challenges than just getting the students to the point that they are ready to learn.
No great change in education is going to happen without the deliberate efforts of the teachers. It is essential that legislatures work with educators to draft reform measures that are seen as worthwhile and achievable. In order to do this, there needs to be active involvement with teachers. This involvement should include some actual classroom visitation time. To truly understand the obstacles that teachers face on a daily bases one must experience the daily workings of the classroom teacher. This will also allow those making financial decisions a view of the lack of educational equipment. This is especially true for the lack of modern computer technology in many of our schools. How can we keep up with the digital natives learning styles when we are denied the equipment to do so?
A study released by the Harvard Civil Rights Project (http://www.civilrightsproject.harvard.edu) summarizes the problems with NCLB by saying the "core of NCLB has simple but controversial accountability provisions: all schools and districts must meet all standards by 2014" (Owens & Sunderman, 2007). This system does not differentiate for the non-English students nor the special education students with IEPs or 504 plans. In addition, with so much emphasis on lower performing students, little time is left for teachers to prepare and teach lessons that challenge high ability students. The focus of NCLB is for all students to reach grade level proficiency rather than for all students to reach their academic potential. The punitive nature of the law causes many school districts to shift their focus, and funding, to those students who are not grade level proficient. For students already performing at proficiency, attention is on their intellectual maintenance rather than intellectual growth. Little attention is given to students already exceeding the goals of NCLB. It is ironic that teachers are taught how important it is to differentiate instruction to meet the needs of all learners but then the government expects all learners, regardless of abilities, to take and pass exactly the same test. This is probably one of the biggest areas of contention for classroom teachers who must administer high-stakes tests to their students.
It is not being argued here that no accountability is needed. Instead, it is suggested that perhaps we are holding the wrong people accountable for the wrong education. There is no doubt that teachers must be part of the accountability formula. What about the first and possibly most influential teachers a child will ever have, the parents? How will parents be held accountable? The problem with the current accountability system is that it makes it very easy to enter into a blame game instead of real discourse about the flaws of our educational system. Are teachers failing, are parents failing,are students failing or is it just possible that our outdated system is failing?
It could be argued that our educational system is in a state of crisis and if we choose not to be part of the solution then we continue to be part of the problem. Meanwhile, all of this debate and stagnation occurs at the educational expense of future workers who will enter an international job market of very well prepared, highly competent workers. It's time for us all to be held accountable.
"In the best schools, where all children achieve regardless of race or class, several strategies are typically in place, including a commitment to engage parents as partners in the educational process..." (Noguera, 2007). The Parent Teacher Association (PTA) has a long history of promoting parental involvement in education. The PTA (2007) cites many benefits of parental involvement including increased student motivation and self-esteem, better academic performance, decreased absenteeism, better behavior, and increased enrollment in postesecondary education. The PTA (2007) also says that parental involvement increases teacher effectiveness and job satisfaction. Despite all the obvious benefits of parental involvement in education, at present (short of criminal neglect or abuse) a parent is only accountable for their child's education to the point of seeing that they arrive at school. Dorothy Rich (2007) stated that parents should be held accountable for helping their children become successful learners. She shared the key points that students should come to school adequately fed, rested, and in good medical condition. Students should come to school ready to learn with appropriate attitudes and behaviors for school. Also that children should come from a home that encourages and respects learning. These statements are of course coming from her experience as an educator who realizes these are all situations classroom teachers have virtually no input or control over.
Accountability can be a valuable tool in the education system, however, it must be determined who is being held accountable for student learning. The current stance on accountability provided by our federal government is that schools and teachers should bear nearly the entire brunt of the responsibility. The No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB) has pushed teachers to be "highly qualified". This means teachers must hold at least a bachelor degree in their field and meet the full certification requirements of their prospective state. The NCLB Act gauges schools based on their performance on standardized tests (high stakes testing). President Bush during his April 24, 2007 visit to Harlem Village Academy Charter School once again is trying to renew the NCLB Act this year nearly as is, with the slight tweaks of more funding and school choice. (Kelleher, 2007, U.S. White House, 2007) Schools are held accountable through adequate yearly progress (AYP) and state proficiency tests. Owens & Sunderman (2006) shed light on some of the current NCLB school accountability policies. Through their research they show that state proficiency tests are often inflating student performance. They also point out the sanctions placed on at-risk or Title I schools that are flagged as needing improvement. Even if these schools are making improvement, if it is not enough, they are held accountable with progressively harsher financial penalties. There is also the constant concern over a single subgroup not continuing to improve causing a school to fail to meet the AYP standards.
When a school does not make AYP for five consecutive years the NCLB Act gives districts five options:
Reopen the school as a public charter school.
Replace all or most of school staff, including the
Enter into a contract with an entity such
Allow the state to take over the school.
Other concerns related to high-stakes testing include: teacher retention rates, student drop-out rates, a watered down curriculum and depriving children of the joy of learning with so much emphasis on drill and kill instruction and assessment. http://caglecartoons.com/viewimage.asp?ID={11C6F967-83C9-4260-8B28-4840F4FE7724}
Additionally, some feel that diverse schools are unfairly penalized because they have more subgroups that each have to make AYP. Many believe that teachers in "at risk" schools are working very hard and students are making progress. Unfortunately, NCLB has the expectation that everyone will reach a specified level at the end of the year regardless of where they started and what their limitations are.
Ironically, holding schools in poorer areas "accountable" for their students' performance often actually impedes the teachers' ability to help their at-risk students. In the first place, compliance with NCLB requires teachers to complete massive amounts of paperwork, which consumes time that the teachers might otherwise have spent improving instruction or working with individual students: "Nothing could be less efficient than this misappropriation of a teacher's energy and hours" (Kozol, 2005). Moreover, once a school becomes stigmatized as a result of its students' lower test scores, the likelihood increases that the better teachers will look for positions elsewhere, thus leaving the school in worse condition than before. Under NCLB, when a school fails to meet the required standard, students may also request to be placed elsewhere; thus the higher achieving students are also likely to leave the school. Deprived of its better students and teachers and with its funding and very existence threatened, an at-risk school has almost no chance of raising its students test scores to the required level. Finally, if a school is closed down as a result of failing to meet NCLB requirements, as recently happened to a school in Portsmouth, VA (Fernandez, 2006), nearby schools, which may already be overcrowded, could well be harmed by the influx of at-risk students whom these schools have insufficient resources to accommodate. Thus holding these schools "accountable" can ultimately penalize teachers, students, and communities alike.
Repair or Reform?
Educators and legislators struggle with how to best bring about the necessary changes in education. Several promising reform models have been proposed. In order to help our children obtain the kind of education needed for a flattening world (Friedman, 2006), our country is going to have to make education a top priority and to do such requires a greater financial investment (http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kC1y9XZbQS8). Moreover, if accountability reforms are to be meaningful, the teachers and administrators who are currently being "held accountable" for the schools' shortcomings must have some say in how policies are reformed. Currently, most policy is made at the state and federal levels; however, when these policies prove ineffective, it is not the state and federal officials who are held accountable but teachers and local administrators. Clearly, the responsible officials should be held accountable for these failed polices—not the teachers and administrators who have been excluded from the decision-making process. An in-depth discussion of reform efforts may be found at http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Change_Issues_in_Curriculum_and_Instruction/Reform_Proposal
Should parents be held accountable for their children's learning? If so, how? If not, why not?
CBS Evening News. Educational Reform retrieved June 1, 2007, from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kC1y9XZbQS8
Cuban,L. (2007). Hugging the middle: Teaching in an era of testing and accountability. Education Policy Analysis Archives, 15(1). Retrieved May 30, 2007, from http://epaa.asu/epaa/v15n1/.
Fernandes, D. (2006, April 21). Problems plagued school for years, reports show. The Virginian-Pilot, p. A10.
Friedman, T. (2006). The World is Flat: A Brief History of the Twenty-first Century. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
Hall, T. & Florin, L. (2007). Reform Proposals. Retrieved May 24, 2007, from http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Change_Issues_in_Curriculum_and_Instruction/Reform_Proposal
Haycock, K. & Peske, H. G. (2006). Teacher inequality: how poor and minority students are shortchanged on teacher quality. Washington D.C., The Education Trust.
Jennings, J. & Rantner,D. (2006). Ten big effects of the No Child Left Behind Act on public schools.
Kelleher, J. (2007, April 24). Bush praises Harlem school during NYC visit. AM New York, Retrieved May 21, 2007, from http://www.amny.com/news/local/newyork/am-bush0424,0,7548204.story?coll=ny-nets-headlines
Kozol, J. (2005). The shame of the nation: The restoration of apartheid schooling in America. New York: Crown Publishers.
No Child Left Behind Act (2002). Public Law 107-110-Jan. 8, 2002 115 STAT. 1425. Retrieved May 21, 2007, from www.opi.mt.gov/PDF/FEDPrgms/USDOE/pl107110.pdf
Noguera, P. "Mind the gap the new challenge: no underprivileged child left behind." Edutopia February 2007:10.
Owens, A. & Sunderman, G. (2006). School accountability under NCLB: Aid or obstacle for measuring racial equity?. The Civil Rights Project at Harvard University. Retrieved May 25, 2007, from http://www.civilrightsproject.harvard.edu/research/esea/NCLB_Policy_Brief_Final.pdf
Parent Teacher Association. (2007). National standards for parent/family involvement programs. Retrieved June 9, 2007, from http://www.pta.org/archive_article_details_1118251710359.html
Rich, D. (2007). Accountability in education: High hopes and false promises. Retrieved May 21, 2007, from http://www.nea.org/teachexperience/dr040416.html
Sunderman, G. & Orfield, G. (2006). Domesticating a Revolution: No Child Left Behind reforms and state administration responses. Cambridge, MA: The Civil Rights Project at Harvard University. Retrieved May 31, 2007, from http://www.civilrights.project.harvarde.edu
U.S. White House (2007). Fact sheet: No Child Left Behind: Keeping America competitive in the 21st Century. Retrieved May 25, 2007, from http://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2007/04/20070424-7.html
We're not going to take it (video) retrieved June 1, 2007, from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vWv34fQUwd0
What's the point (video) retrieved June 1, 2007, from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LkOF3K2rCp0
This appendix page will discuss the topic of summer jobs, part-time work, or seasonal work.
Internet: http://www.quintcareers.com/finding_summer_jobs.html
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Before moving to Part Two, it may be helpful to summarize a few of the points that have been made in the past three chapters. The following are important.
The universe’s causal construction dictates that inhabitants who think and act rationally have a greater chance of surviving, procreating and succeeding, than those who do not. This, in turn, has favoured the genetic continuation of mutations which help minds to work in this manner.
Practical problem solving and decision making entails consulting external environments to find the criteria that acceptable solutions must meet, then consulting the mind’s internal environment to find what personal purpose is sought.
Moral problem solving and decision making entails consulting the mind’s own environment to find both the criteria for acceptable solutions, and the purpose being sought. Mental environments are always invented ones (composed, as we saw in Thinking, from linked memories of perceived events, experiences and learnings, all tinged by the choice of words used when envisioning them consciously), and have no reality outside the minds of those who subscribe to them.
Religious environments are made real to individuals through faith or belief. Belief provides a feeling of certainty; however this exacts a price. Belief can cause us to ignore, override, or transcend some of the more substantive reality that constitutes the rational universe we inhabit. In time, this may lead us into grey pastures.
(A postscript to this chapter, Purpose And Meaning, is to be found at the end of this part.)
Beginning in the fifteenth century, the empires of Portugal and Spain founded large colonies in Latin America. As a result of these conquests, disease and warfare destroyed or transformed many of the native peoples who lived there. Gradually, a new syncretic civilization emerged in the Americas and became an integral part of the world market. Societies comprised of Africans, Spanish, Portuguese, and native peoples developed a sophisticated market economy driven by gold and silver mining as well as plantation agriculture. We will see how the colonial systems implemented by the Spanish and Portuguese in the New World had roots in the political and religious institutions of Europe.
In this unit, we will begin by examining the founding of Spain’s first New World colony—New Spain—in an area now known as Mexico. We will study how the Spanish defeated the Aztec empire and subsequently erected a colonial government and economy. We will then turn to Portugal’s main colonial enterprise in the Americas—Brazil. We will study Brazil’s indigenous population and the effects of Portuguese colonization, as well as the evolution of Brazil’s economy from plantation agriculture to mining.
If TeX is in vertical or internal vertical mode, then \noindent will force TeX into horizontal mode, otherwise it does nothing. The transition from vertical or internal vertical mode to horizontal mode signals the start of a paragraph. Most things that cause such a transition, also insert an empty box of length \parindent, but \noindent is an exception, as its name indicates.
History, Construction, and Maintenance
It is an accepted fact by all countryside experts that the older the hedgerow the greater variety of species there are in it. The average number of species in a thirty metre stretch measures the age of a hedgerow. After the initial planting: for every additional shrub species in a hedge you can add a further hundred years. Hedgerows can contain over twenty-five trees and shrubs although not all in the same area of country. Within this number the most likely present will be: Blackthorn, Cherry plum, Common elm, Elder, Field maple, Hawthorn, Oak, Sycamore, Wayfaring tree, and White beam. In ancient times, Oak was planted during the initial planting - at each corner of a field, as a marker. Spear planting of Hawthorn cuttings generally the favoured basis for most hedge construction – able to be laid later on - although any growth that has thorns proves to be a nuisance.
In England, prior and during the Dark Ages, the division of land into fields began when allotments were made to individuals to facilitate strip farming.The Manor and The Bishop The strips were given, or rented out, depending on the status of the individual - and his importance to the lord of the manor. The hierarchy started with the king who owned the land. He gave some to his henchmen and relatives and they in turn gave some to the church for salvation. This passing down the line was to ensure that a standing army was secured; that was fed, armed and ever-ready. The lowest lord or squire, who could be lord of the manor, also paid rent to the landowner. It was the lord’s job to ensure the land was worked - that the tithes were paid, thereby keeping the whole system working. The lord’s Bailiff and elected Reeve saw to it that it functioned well which it did because it was in everyone’s interest that it did so.
After the Black Death the land began to be developed for a slowly increasing population. By this time the monasteries were becoming an economic force making huge sums of money from the production of wool. After the dissolution of the monasteries their land was distributed to the king’s favourites for their support. They in turn sold it to wealthy individuals, farmers, and existing landowners. The lord of the manor who also benefited parcelled out land to freemen, copyholders and prominent citizens.
During the hundred years 1750 – 1850, a series of Government Acts allowed the purchase of waste land. This was the period of land enclosure instituted to improve the land through better farming methods. As village folk gained wealth through entrepreneurship and hard work they purchased land from the poor, the destitute, and widows. As the existing worked land and newly purchased common land was split and fenced off: ditches were dug, hedges planted, and plots re-parcelled, and exchanged - to increase harvests and profitability… it was the start to High Farming, when the production from the land was carefully considered and planned.
Dry-stone walls and wooden fences were expensive to build; the latter needing an almost continual management programme to keep it stock proof. A hedge is relatively cheap to plant, easy to make stock proof, and can be harvested... Poor hedges and gaps can easily revitalized, rebuilt and renewed. Today we recognise hedges to be conducive to the maintenance of wildlife flora and fauna. It is also welcoming to visual appreciation, stimulating to the human soul and contributes to the landscape. Animals can make the hedge a home, a corridor to the next field, and a sauce of food and security. Both birds and insects can balance the losses to farms and gardens due to aphids. All hedges have a rich variety of grasses, flowers, orchids and fruits. More action is needed from landowners to regenerate, rebuild, renew and replace hedges to counteract global warming.
In all stages of work, to lay a hedge or construct a hurdle, green timber – unseasoned timber, is used. The terms seasoning and drying are synonymous. When seasoned moisture is drawn from the cells the wood shrinks. The moisture content of timber should correspond to the humidity of its surroundings when used. Green timber is less strong than seasoned timber but is easier to cut, split, bend and spring.Tudor House Construction
The newest hedgerows contain hawthorn because of its easy planting, rapid growth and dense low crown. It will stand any amount of lopping and trimming forming a dense interlacing network of twigs which make the hedge almost impenetrable. The trunk is often fluted and of minimum circumference giving little timber for a fair size of tree; thrives best on limy dry loam but will grow on most soils. It is wind-firm, frost hardy and bears a considerable degree of shade. It is long-lived and the wood is tough, strong and durable in the open. Hazel coppice working has almost died out although there is a revival for spar making for thatch makers.
'Hawthorn': goes by the name of May, Whitethorn and Quick thorn and is regarded as the best of all hedging. It belongs to the Rosaceae family, which includes apple, plum, pear and cherry. There are two types Oxyacantha, which has two flower styles and monogyna Jacq. with spikier twigs. They are both so similar as to be described as one.
'Hazel': Corylus Avellana L. of the family Betulaceae, the same family as birch, hornbeam, and alder; also known as Filbert, Cobnut, and Nutwood. As coppiced hazel is the most frequent type of under-wood, the shoots are straight, elastic and flexible, and the wood is frost-hardy. Its gear feature is that it is easily split which makes it ideal for wattle, laths, hurdles, hoops, crates and hedge stakes.
'Willow': Salix, Salicaceae, closely related to poplars. Much used for wattle hurdles and stakes. Cultivated mostly by cuttings. When used as stakes if carefully driven will take root and make a living fence.
'Elder': Sambucus niga L. Family includes honeysuckle and the wayfaring tree… Also known as elderberry. Produces a quick hedge and assumes a bush like form. Cultivated like the willow by cuttings.
'Sweet Chestnut': Castanea sativa Mill. Fagaceae. All know as Edible Chestnut. A Hardwood which coppices easy on a rotation of 80 – 100 years… more profitable still on a rotation of 7 – 14. The stools cut any times without impairing vigour. The coppices shoots are valuable for split-pale fencing and hop poles. It is similar to oak – used to construct ancient buildings although its downfall is that it splits easily, although slightly lighter in weight and weaker in strength.
For square cut or split square, uncut or trimmed, with or without bark (white or brown) the order is:
'Round': Pole or Pale = 30cm – 10cm. Stave, or Staff = 15cm – 5cm dia. Rod or Wattle = 5cm – 3cm dia. Stick = 4cm – 2cm dia. Wand, Twig or Switch = 3cm – 1cm dia. Sizes are for guidance only
It is essential to maintain form, denseness and to fill all gaps; it was during the fifties that the planting and maintenance of hedgerows declined. Fields were linked together to form a more economic size for modern machinery. When these hedges were grubbed up field edges, ponds, ditches, and small corners were included in the new squatted shape. Fields became boggy, footpaths were lost, chemical run-offs occurred and the fine soil clogged what ditches were left. What benefit was felt by animal and man from the windbreaks were lost too. It was forgotten that hedges provide a windbreak twenty-times its height downwind.
Although the countryside became more productive for cereals the wildlife, diversity of plant life and the characteristic landscape suffered. Now there is at last a realization that a more reasonable approach should be made and farmers and land managers given the latitude and grants to replace and rectify past mistakes.
Planting mature cuttings of about 50cm dia planted by artificial regeneration using the spear or slit and heel planting process will provide new and infill hedging. Hawthorn trees for hedging are raised from cuttings should, when planted, be secured against rabbits by a plastic tube. Planting is carried out in the open, if possible, between the middle of November and the middle of April. As a rule, broad-leaf trees in the autumn and conifers in the spring. It is obviously best if the area to be planted is cleared of weeds but this is not essential. However, any climbers should be removed. A new hedge does not require laying. It is more common to plant alternately in rows 50cm apart, 50cm between plants.
If you believe that in the future your hedge will be laid do not plant Hawthorn, Blackthorn, Quick-thorn, Holly, Cotoneaster and Quince, for the thorns will prove to be a menace to cut and pick-up. Better to plant: Chestnut, Beech, Hornbeam, Bush willow, Elder and Robina. This selection will be easily managed, productive and offer an equally good environment for wild life. However, a mixed hedge will always give a greater variety of flowers, foliage, food and habitat. Traditionally Oaks were planted at the corner of each field to indicate ownership and extent…
The aim is to produce a hedge which is approximately 120cm in height by 70cm wide, stock-proof and dense. It may have mature trees growing out of it to give character and variety, but these should be planted close together but to act as shelter and shade, variety and food. Thought must always be given to the eventual growth, suitability of soil, position and whether the hedge has to be immediately stock-proof.
'The Survey': As with all building or farming matters, a survey of the lie of the land is essential. So too, an assessment of ‘the potential of the site’ for growing crops or stock. The access for machinery to till the soil and to cut the hedge as well as to cart away cuttings and crops is paramount.
Once the survey has been completed that you have come to the conclusion that the job can be done the site needs to be cleared by mowing, flailing or cutting. It’s quite useless to stand in a bed of nettles, be attacked by the tendrils of blackberry, or to almost reach the centre of the hedge. It is a guide that you should be able to just reach the other side of the hedge to be. If that cannot be done you may have to partially lay the hedge backhanded - which doubles the amount of work.
Mow up to the hedge on both sides, if possible. Flail or cut to give yourself room to move - to get into the hedge… but do not drastically trim for this only delays recovery. This mainly refers to hedges which have been allowed to almost disintegrate, and form massive clumps of tangled undergrowth - with too many trees.
A hedge which has been properly laid shows (written for a right handed person)the selected stems partially cut through on the right hand side, fairly close to the ground - to about 30cm. Work starts on laying the hedge at the left hand field corner – or to the right of the gate, working anti-clockwise round the field from the front, or face, of the hedge. The front of the hedge is the outside face – the outside of the field to be worked, this generally applies to all hedges, walls and fences. This weakening of the stem by partially cutting through allows the stem to be bent. The plant is forced over to the left – to assume an angle, which is suitable for regrowth, and will fill the hedge. The cut should take account of the thickness of the stem. Do not cut right through, or just leave the bark… that is quite useless.
The object is to allow the plant to be bent over whilst still maintaining plant life – a quantity of tissue directly under the phloem or bast, which is just under the bark. Beneath this is another layer of plant cells called cambium where the new growth originates to feed the plant. Food for growth travels up and down these cells. Two types of cell: one enlarging, and the other dividing, form new tree tissues; the roots absorb water containing mineral salts, which are conducted up the trunk by capillary action to the leaves. The leaves take in from the air carbon dioxide. This chemical together with water manufactures starches and sugars. Photons of light on the leaves part reflected, some transmitted, others absorbed, split water into its constituent parts. This act on the chemical chlorophyll by photosynthesis converts carbon dioxide and water into sugars which gives energy… this food is drawn down the phloem – the cells beneath the bark.
The cut or cleft is made with a chain saw, hedge cutter or small broad-headed axe or billhook. Naturally if using the latter you will be better able to trim, slash, and cut lesser branches and undergrowth. Some homemade hooks, bills and axes have a cast hammerhead in the design others have a crook which is handy to drag branches towards you. Trim the shape of the hedge as you go paying attention to the form of the base, cutting close to the ground all the brambles and briars to form crowns. Haul away any dead wood and rubbish to burn later.
The hedge may offer some of its own stems or stakes to give support and substance whilst you build. These will have been noticed any allotted in the original survey. Some hazel or chestnut coppice stools will give you your stakes and the elder and willow will supply the bonding ties to link the stakes together - at the top. Do not on any account use plastic or wire in any of the tie jobs.
The central stakes are inserted to give form and strength; the hedge layer will need a number of pointed stakes of at least 150cm long by 20 – 10cm in circumference. For good effect these should be placed along the centre of the hedge at 40 – 50cm intervals. Where the hedge is already dense or the ground too rocky or woody these stakes can be omitted. However, if these stakes are not placed into the hedge the strength giving binding at the top – the interweaving willow laid in-and-out of the stakes, cannot be rove, nor the laterals be woven into the structure quite so well.
A well shaped hedge shows a tapering towards the top which gives the hedge strength. The hedge is to act a wind and snow break as well as to act as a shockproof barrier. The taped shape offers space for saplings to grow into trees which is beneficial for wildlife and provides good cover in its dense branches. This is the ideal shape and one which allow for added growth - prompted by light, as the lower buds begin to develop and grow… in addition, when further pruning takes place on an annual basis the shape is maintained.
Other than the more permanent structure of a wall or hedge, to create a boundary that is both shockproof and windproof is the fence. There are a number of different fence designs some more costly than others. However, they all do the same task. Fences are more labour intensive to maintain but are cheaper than a more substantial wall. Within the list of fence types comes the 'hurdle' Larch lap fencing is similar in design. Traditionally hurdles were 100cn high built as a transportable sheep pen. A method used thousands of years ago. Like all traditional crafts they are all closely allied. Hurdles were made the restrain livestock. Wattle was always a part of the house builder’s portfolio to make frame infills, and simple rustic furniture. All the tools used to cut, split, and shape the wood… and then later, to secure the joints, are all similar. Today hurdle making is a woven form of fencing now adopted for rustic garden landscaping.
In times past the construction of a hurdle would have been in the forest glade with all the materials to hand. It would have been a 'trade' that a man would be concentrating on just this particular form of fencing. He would devise his tools and methods to suit the material and form. He may well have chosen his wood felled it and prepared it or even grown it. The hurdle-maker in the past would adapt some of his wood for other tasks like pegs, spars, sticks, wattle, pea-sticks, brooms etc. He may have worked on his own or as one of a team.
Hazel is cut all the year round except mid-April to Mid-June - when the sap is rising. The cut hazel is then sorted and stacked for partial seasoning. When half dried the hurdle maker cuts, splits, and separates his stock - to form the poles, stakes, and rods.
The hurdle maker would weave his hurdles on a sail which is nine 130cm (traditional hurdles were only 100cm high) uprights slotted into a curved line of holes (the first and last upright poles extend below the block by 30cm), 20cm apart, made in a heavy block of timber 240cm by 30 x 15 (hurdle block). The first and last uprights are stouter (15cm) brown poles to give strength whilst the other seven are split stakes. The slight curve in the set of holes, enable the hurdle - when drying out, to tighten up… This tightening up straightens the hurdle as it further seasons. The block and uprights are called the hurdle maker’s sail.
He would first weave onto the sails a series of layers of slender brown rods (brown indicates that the bark is left on) bending and twisting to break some of the fibres, round the first and last pole (15cm thick) – to double back the weave to start the next layer. The first half dozen and last two layers are made of whole slender rods. The final two double twisted for extra strength. These control how ridged the structure will be, so it’s vital that they are tight and fast. The bending and twisting occurs for all courses in that construction of a hurdle.
The previously made split rods are pushed or knocked down the sails, with the splits all facing the same way; down onto the first brown rods resting on the block, with a special knocking down tool. All layers are bent and twisted to 360 degrees round the first and last uprights – the white split face would all be facing the same way.
Levering the made-up hurdle out of its block it is set aside to further season and tighten up. When setting up the hurdle the exposed 15cm of each upright stake is pushed or knocked into the ground to support the fence and the first and last stake secured to a post to make the fence permanent.
Suitability of a hurdle for the job
The size of the hurdle has been considered on how well the fence fits into the landscape. It maybe, to act as a screen, backdrop, or to act as a feature. You will have to consider the action the wind is going to have and the amount of maintenance you are prepared to make. It s not normal practice to use nails, wire, or to tether the structure. In times past hurdles were not considered permanent features but as transportable stock proof, windproof, pens which the shepherd could easily guard or sort the ewes and lambs.
The appearance should compliment the position you have chosen – to compliment your garden. The uniqueness of a hurdle is its rusticity and its natural finish. That did not come into the equation for past craftsmen because their work centred upon practicalities and cost rather than on aesthetics. If you are thinking long-term you may consider putting in factory prepared stakes, posts, or poles set at regular and standard intervals. This is essential in you have to inset a new fence at a later date. A factory fence post will be durable after preservation treatment by dipping. Setting the posts in by back-filling with hardcore will ensure a well drained post and ridged structure. Remember that hurdles have a front and a back. The front in this case, brown – with the bark still on. If the structure is to be a permanent one you may think about putting in stakes immediately into the ground and then interweaving the brown rods without twisting or bending. Building a shaped top weather rail and pole caps will improve the life of the work.
If you are not able to provide your own wood and you have to ‘buy in’, depending upon whether you wish to have a certain type of prepared rod, split or whole, your costs are going to be more than a conventional fence. What is written here is describing the way things were done in the past and as they had been evolved through the ages they represent the knowledge of experience. The object is to build something which is going to last and not blow down at the first puff of wind. If you use poor material or insert wood which is already rotten you will have to reintroduce a new piece at some later date and that usually occurs at some inconvenient moment. The fence needs to be substantial and tightly interwoven.
As indicated, hurdles were not considered permanent fixtures. Their construction was rough and ready able to stand upto throwing on the back of a cart or carried from one spot to another. The shepherd carted his hurdles which were thrown up, stacked, and roughly tied together - to form a circular pen. Any fence over 120cm will have to stand a considerable amount of wind force for it will act like a sail – put enormous pressure on the posts. It is obviously better to make the hurdles where they are going to be used.
All plants are composed of cells of different shape (some conduct sap, others form bulk, the third stores food). This space maybe empty, contain liquid or be crystalline. The cells of wood are cemented together. It is the type and distribution of the cells, which define the quality, and behaviour of the particular species of timber. Timbers, which are ‘hard’, have small cell cavities with thick walls.
New tissues are formed by specialist cells dividing, into two halves, one half enlarging the other dividing. Food is obtained first from the roots – which takes in by absorption water and dissolved mineral salts. The minerals suspended in water are taken up the tree by perforated tube-shaped conduction cells called tracheae, or pores, to the leaves. The leaves take in carbon dioxide from the air which together with the dissolved salts suspended in water from the roots manufactures starch… The plant turns starch into sugar by the use of an enzyme, and sugar by light - acting on the chlorophyll, the green starch matter, by photosynthesis.
The food is transported in solution to all the growing tissues within the tree by pits in the cell walls. These radial rows of cells, called phloem or bast, lie immediately beneath the bark... forming new cell walls parallel to the axis of the stem. Cells cut off furthest from the outside enlarge and thicken ultimately to form the wood. Growth rings occur at the end of each growing season – recognised by cell fibre and walls. Rays are parenchyma, food storage cells – cells that running across the grain.
When first formed the wood cells are thin-walled all similar in shape containing protoplasm. They quickly modify – the cell walls thicken and harden by depositing lignin. When this modification is complete the protoplasm dies.
When cutting the cleft in the wood - to bend over at right angles - to lay the hedge ,it is most important not to completely sever or destroy the phloem or cambium on the opposite side... which will still carry the food to the leaves.
Tudor House Construction, English country furniture and Field and Forest Crafts are so closely integrated that they both share related publications. Kept close to hand has been The Building Conservation Directory published by Cathedral Communications Limited. Individual specialist publications, from the Weald and Downland Museum and British Timbers by Boulton and Jay, published by Adam and Charles Black, 1946. The English Gardening School by Rosemary Alexander & Anthony du Gard Pasley, published by Michael Joseph Ltd., 1987. Tales of the Old Woodlanders by Valerie Porter, published by David & Charles, 1994.
The following list contains indexing and abstracting journal databases that are described in this book.
Introduction to the Fukushima Aftermath series at Wikibooks
This text book is part of a planned cirriculum at Wikiversity and is the pilot for an intended series of localized textbooks focused upon problematic nuclear power plants in the English speaking world. This series is conceived as a series, and may even grow into an "imprint" of Wikibooks. The purpose of the Fukushima Aftermath series is to provide a modality for collective intelligence (brainstorming) pursuant to setting nuclear energy policy.
This textbook in particular is of course focused on the Diablo Canyon (Nuclear) Power Plant, which is officially termed the Diablo Canyon Power Plant (DCPP). However, the policy of the Fukushima Aftermath imprint is consistent with the general "wiki way" which has a well-established policy of maintaining a neutral point of view NPOV. The San Luis Obispo Sierra Club [1] has gone on record opposing the terminology "Power Plant", and has insisted publicly that it is a Nuclear Power Plant and that it should be referred to as such. In order to maintain NPOV, the Fukushima Aftermath Manual of Style suggests avoiding either term until there has been a full and final consensus as to which designation, if either, is most proper. Thus, the plant may be referred to as "the plant", "the facility", or, simply, "Diablo". A useful writing technique is to specify the parts thereof; accordingly: the "reactor", the "spent fuel storage tanks", the PG&E property, etc.
The goals of the Fukushima Aftermath series is not to predetermine or influence nuclear policy one way or another, but rather to provide a comprehensive resource for information, philosophical development, investigative strategy and development of community participation in the broadest sense to include the various scientific and humanistic disciplines as well as consumers, agriculture, industry and labor.
This book covers rudimenary nuclear physics and includes the geology and civil engineering aspects of construction on earthquake-prone sites. An additional topic area is the regulatory and political environment of nuclear energy and the legal processes by which citizens may participate in policy deliberations. Creative methods of influencing public policy are outside the scope of these topics, although a historical account of such matters as the Abalone Alliance and public demonstrations for or against the facility are pertinent. Most importantly, the book aims to teach methods of learning collaboratively through participation in the ongoing updating of this book.
This series is structured to be useful to anyone who is concerned about potential economic, environmental,health and safety consequences of public policy decisions regarding Diablo Canyon. This includes students and professionals in the fields of environmental law, nuclear engineering, public relations, public policy and government. It also can be used by studious ordinary citizens, farmers, vintners, residents, employees of Pacific Gas and Electric and its contractors, as well as members of city and county government in South Central California. Ultimately, this book may be integrated into a course structure at an educational institution such as UCSB,California Polytechnic, an honors high school cirricula, or at Wikiversity, such as [Government and Citizen Participation|California Government and Citizen Participation], or a new, nuclear -specific course which perhaps you would like to develop.
The series aims to teach only the very basic concepts of related science , only the minimal baseline which is required in order to understand nuclear energy policy debates. Thus the level of material in this textbook should remain accessible to non-science majors including community college students, high school upper class students and adult education classes. We would like to see a simplified version developed for Wikibooks Jr, which could be adapted for adult learners at wikiversity.
Scoping is the process of determining how broad of a topic will be covered by a given collaborative process. It is a more important part of complex policy determinations which involve the interests of many parties and thus is particularly important in contending with nuclear impact public safety and related matters. Certainly alternative energy options are related but outside any reasonable scope of this book; there may be a role for a separate book, or series, as part of the Wikibooks/Fukushima Aftermath imprint. Clearly, the basic physical and biological sciences belong in the scope of the book. This should include weather a to the extent that they impact both the potential distribution pattern of dispersed radionuclides. A cursory review of climatology is relevant only to the extent it impacts the broader policy decision of how much weight should be given to nuclear in the overall energy portfolio of the national and global economies; a more expanded treatment belongs in either a separate book or in a more generalized book which would be designed for use by all of the Facility-specific readership/editing community. The requirements and style of such a book would be more readily apparent only after one or more facility-specific books have been substantially completed. For instance, a second book, using many of the chapters of this book, might be developed with a specific focus on the SONGS Nuclear Generating Station in San Diego. After completion of that book, it would be appropriate for the editing community to discuss splitting some of the Basic Science chapters into a separate book,leaving only short summary treatment intact in each Facility-specific book.
About this book's neutral point of view policy
This book is a collaborative undertaking of Wikibooks, a project of the Wikimedia Foundation. "Open books for an open world." As such, anyone is entitled to edit it in accordance with the spirit and specification of open publishing policy as consistent with the particular traditions, precedents and intentions specific to Wikibooks. Among these is the concept of neutral point of view, and, consistent with that custom, every effort is made to keep this book, FA:DNR? as free of bias, ideology, agenda and interpersonal pathology as possible. Respect, even for persons with whom one disagrees, is the paramount ingredient which we hope will make this book an invaluable reference tool as well as an enjoyable read. If this book is successful, subsequent books in a series may apply its best practice to an evaluation of the SONGS Nuclear Generating Station in San Diego, a more generalized "Fukushima Aftermath" imprint, and a version available in simple plain English, and possible translations. Remember, a WikiBook is a living breathing document which should always be updating and modifying itself to reflect changing consensus. You are not just a reader, you are invited to be a co-writer, at any time you may so wish.
Note that determinations of scope have an impact on what is and is not admissible. Some content, deemed admissible, may weigh in favor of one point of view or another. Thus, determinations of scope may predetermine which point of view triumphs in the war of ideas. Not that WikiBooks has a decidely brief NPOV policy, but manages to include the following, which problematizes the foregoing:
A final point with regard to scoping is that scoping is a term of art in the process of environmental approvals. Most processes under the California Environmental Quality Act which require an Environmental Impact Statement have a separate public hearing stage for scoping.
↑ http://santalucia.sierraclub.org/diablo/diablo.html
The Turing test answers the question " do computers have or have computers achieved human intelligence"
Alan Turing, the creator of the Turing test, predicted that by the end of the century, computers would mimic human thinking. Alan, a mathematician at the time ( 1950 ) stated that it would be impossible to tell if a conversation with a computer could be distinguishable from conversation with a person.
In most examples the test works as follows:
In 1990, Dr. Hugh Loebner introduced a contest designed to implement the Turing Test. He offered to award a prize of $100,000 and a bronze medal to the computer that could “think” like a human and could be considered artificially intelligent. Each year an annual contest is held and a prize of $2000 and a bronze medal is awarded to the program that responds with the most “human-like” responses. So there is a winner every year, but to date, the gold medal has never been awarded.
Dr. Hugh Loebner
Parker, D. M. (2011). Understanding Computers: Today and Tomorrow. Boston, MA: Course Technology. Cengage Learning.
Allows access to downloading webpages.
Here is the rdoc which contains many examples.
See also OpenURI.
The current, editable version of this book is available in Wikibooks, the open-content textbooks collection, at
4.2.1.2.1 6over4 Neighbor discovery
Strictly speaking, a Wide Area Network (WAN) is a network that is extended over a broad area, spanning regions, countries or in the case of the Internet even the world. More in general, any computer networking technology used to transmit data over long distances can be called as a WAN.
A WAN technology should meet some requirements in terms of service duration, bit rate and delay constraints according to the application (telemetry, telephony, data transfer, etc.) it is designed for.
Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) represents the convergence for a wide variety of technologies that in the past both telecom and IT worlds in parallel introduced in order to transmit data over long distances:
Nowadays ATM is going to be abandoned in favour of IP thanks to its lower complexity and greater simplicity.
Integrated Service Digital Network (ISDN) allows to carry data along with the voice: a variety of digital devices can be connected to a bus and can transmit over the available ISDN channels:
Basic Rate Access (BRA) or Basic Rate Interface (BRI): it offers 2 data B-channels at 64 kbps and 1 signaling D-channel at 16 kbps → total: 144 kbps (good for single users or small offices);
Primary Rate Access (PRA) or Primary Rate Interface (PRI): it offers 30 data B-channels at 64 kbps and 1 signaling D-channel at 16 kbps → total: 2 Mbps (good for companies).
The transmission is based on Time Division Multiplexing (TDM); all channels go to a Network Termination and enter the network over a digital wire called 'local loop'. The channels inherit the logics from telecom operators: they keep being alive also when no data is exchanged.
Plesiochronous Digital Hierarchy (PDH) is an old standard designed to transfer digital voice channels at 64 Kb/s (PCM) over TDM-based digital telephone networks. The system is called 'plesiochronous' because a tight synchronization between transmitter and receiver is required, even if each device has its own clock.
Data flows are organized in a hierarchical way: channels are aggregated into flows from the lowest layer to the highest one (grooming), and the higher the hierarchical layer, the higher is the bit rate. For example, at layer T1 24 T0-layer channels are put into a single frame one next to another: as the frame has to last 125 µs for all layers, at layer T1 the bit rate will be 24 times higher than the one at layer T0.[1]
SDH physical and protocol architectures.
Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH), the European equivalent of the international standard SONET, differs from PDH for its higher speeds:
a single clock exists for the whole system → a synchronization network is required for a tighter synchronization;
The protocol architecture is organized as a layer stack, and each node in the physical network architecture implements them according to its functionality:
Each time frame lasts 125 µs and its header includes synchronization information used to combine and separate channels, and OAM (Operation, Administration and Management) information used to detect failures and recover from them.
SDH and PDH represent the transport layer which ATM and Frame Relay operate on.
Frame Relay is a layer 2 connection-oriented standard to set up permanent virtual circuits over packet-switching networks. Each permanent circuit is identified by a Data Link Connection Identifier (DLCI).
The standard is very flexible: in fact it does not specify the technology at upper layer (ATM, X.25...) used internally in the network.
The service is guaranteed for the blue user but not for the green one because his burstiness is too high.
The maximum supported bit rate is not enough to describe the performance of a Frame Relay network, because an user may send bits consecutively at the maximum bit rate (wire speed) for a long period of time causing congestion in the network. Therefore the network provider provides also the Committed Information Rate (CIR), that is the maximum number
The user's Data Terminal Equipment (DTE) can stop the transmission when the maximum burstiness is reached.
Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) is a connection-oriented standard to set up virtual circuits over B-ISDN networks. Each circuit is identified by a Virtual Path Identifier (VPI) and a Virtual Circuit Identifier (VCI), and it can be permanent or dynamically set up through signaling messages.
ATM cells are very small: each ATM cell is 53 bytes long, made up of a 5-bytes-long header, containing the connection identifiers, and a 48-bytes-long payload → low latency and low packetization delays.
ATM networks have a very complex model, derived from a telecom-operator mentality to have the full control of the network and guarantee a high fault tolerance.
When ATM was designed, it was thought to be implemented ubiquitously in the network, also at its edges in the network cards of the user PCs. Nowadays PCs at the edges are implementing only the IP protocol because its implementation is cheaper, and ATM can be found only as transport layer in the core of the network hidden from the user.
ATM Adaptation Layer (AAL) of type 5 is used for Segmentation and Reassembly (SAR):
Segmentation: IP packets are split into ATM cells;
Reassembly: ATM cells are combined into IP packets.
AAL makes interaction between IP and ATM complex, because IP addresses should be translated to ATM connection identifiers and vice versa → nowadays the tendency is abandoning the ATM control plane and adopting the MPLS control plane.
In optical networks data are transmitted over electromagnetic waves multiplexed by using WDM, transported via optical fibers and switched by mirror-based optical switching systems.
Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM) allows to put multiple optical signals into a single optical fiber → the transmission capacity of fibers is increased:
Coarse WDM (CWDM): it allows to transmit a lower number of signals with wavelengths well-separated one from each other → cheaper because demultiplexing is easier;
Dense WDM (DWDM): it allows to transmit a higher number of signals with any wavelength → more expensive because demultiplexing is more complex.
Optical switching is based on mirrors controlled by micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS), reflecting electromagnetic signals from an input fiber to an output fiber. Optical switching is very flexible: it exploits physical properties of electromagnetic waves without caring about bits → networks can be upgraded to higher speeds because optical switches keep working independently of the bit rate.
Two signals with the same wavelength may be coming from two different input fibers but they may need to be switched to the same output fiber → through the wavelength conversion an optical switch can change the wavelength of a signal to one not still used in the output fiber, in order to keep all signals separated.
Optical switches can be used in the network backbone to interconnect the major access points, by setting up optical paths via optical fibers among the cities in the world. Optical switches can set up optical paths by using signaling and routing protocols such as LDP and RSVP. Optical switches are fault tolerant: when a link breaks, they can reflect the waves along another optical path.
WDM can be deployed as the transport layer on which any layer 2 protocol (SONET, Ethernet...) can operate delimiting the frames.
However the technology for pure optical switching is still in an embryonic stage: nowadays WDM switches are more expensive than packet-switching ones, and they can have few interfaces because the mirror system would be very complex for a lot of interfaces. Moreover optical switching is connection-oriented: when a circuit is set up, the resources keep being allocated even if the circuit is not currently used → optical switching is good for the network backbone where the traffic is quite continuous.
Cheaper solutions try to overcome technological limits by replacing mirrors with an electrical switching matrix: each optical signal is converted to a sequence of bits through an optical-to-electrical (OE) conversion so that it can be switched more easily, then it is converted again into an optical signal. The reconverted signal is regenerated, being able to travel for a longer distance before losing power, but this solution has a lot of disadvantages: the switches consume a lot of power with respect to all-optical switches, and changing the bit rate requires to upgrade the switches.
↑ Signaling bits are not considered.
Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) is the enabling technology for the new broadband (IP) public network. It can be considered as a protocol architecture (or a suite of protocols) to control different sub-protocols.
MPLS operates at a layer that is generally considered to lie between traditional definitions of layer 2 (data-link layer) and layer 3 (network layer).
MPLS introduction simplifies the traditional 'big onion'.
IP protocol was developed for research purpose and was not designed to be sold as a service. It is a so-called 'best-effort protocol', which means that there is no explicit purpose in giving a guaranteed reliable service (speed, delays...).
When IP was starting to become a commercial good, the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) started developing protocols (such as ATM, frame relay, etc.) targeting service reliability and stability, thinking they would have been permeating the computer telecommunication world. Nevertheless end users have kept using IP, and as a result service providers nowadays have to deal with a lot of protocols in order to carry IP to end users: this 'big onion' makes very few sense for service providers due to high maintenance, equipment and software development costs to guarantee interoperability.
Cisco Systems was the first vendor to implement tag switching into their routers, then IETF adopted the protocol and named it as MPLS.
MPLS combines the best features from the connection-less protocols with the best ones from the connection-oriented protocols, representing the solution for the 'big onion' problem for two reasons:
MPLS provides an IP-based network with a greater service reliability and a single unified control plane more isolated from the data plane:
MPLS allows to re-use the traditional ATM devices by simply updating their software.
A Label Switch Router (LSR) is the device responsible for switching the labels used to route packets. LSRs are called label edge routers when placed at the edges of the MPLS cloud. LSRs combine smartness of routers and speed of switches: they are able to route in a clever way like routers, avoiding complicated data structures and algorithms like switches.
MPLS clouds can be gradually deployed: they can grow up and can be integrated to each other.
Data plane is the capability of switching packets based on their labels.
Format of a packet containing a single label stack entry.
IP packets are prefixed with an MPLS header containing one or more label stack entries. Each label stack entry contains four fields:
A Label Switched Path (LSP) is a path set up by a signaling protocol that links a source label edge router (ingress) to a drain one (egress):
A Forwarding Equivalence Class (FEC) is a set of packets which may be forwarded in the same way; that is, they may be bound to the same MPLS labels. Labels are not unique over the whole MPLS cloud, but they are changed on each hop (label swapping). Consider that granting the uniqueness of the labels all over the network would require too complex protocols and too long labels.
Using labels enables MPLS to provide two kinds of services:
MPLS provides a faster lookup with respect to IP because packet-forwarding decisions are made solely on the label, placed before the IP packet, without the need to examine the contents of the packet itself: each label in fact can be used as key to access the routing table as an array or hash table in order to expedite the route discovery;
MPLS is able to control the traffic like a connection-oriented protocol: MPLS routing involves both source and destination labels, and routers can assign to a new packet flow the label corresponding to the least-loaded path in order to avoid congestion and allow traffic distribution. Moreover a failure in a path due to a non-working node will not affect the other paths.
Hierarchy of labels along an LSP.
MPLS is very scalable: inside a big MPLS cloud of domain 1 it is possible to define in a hierarchical way a smaller MPLS cloud of domain 2 and so on, and multiple label stack entries can be stored next to each other in a stack data structure. The label stack entries are added from the inner one to the outer one while the packet enters clouds of higher domain and stripped off from the outer one to the inner one while the packet exits clouds of lower domain, and LSRs not at the edges of the clouds always process the outer label stack entry. This hierarchy of labels can correspond to a hierarchy of providers, and the number of labels is limited only by the Ethernet frame size.
Control plane is the capability of choosing the labels to be inserted into the packets.
Three protocols, incompatible to each other, can be used by the downstream node in order to communicate to the upstream node the label bindings:
Label Distribution Protocol (LDP): designed specifically for label distribution;
The traditional routing protocols can be enhanced to support traffic engineering because they carry information about routing constraints.
Thanks to routing protocols such as OSPF-TE and IS-IS-TE (based on OSPF, IS-IS, BGP-4), every node can collect information about the network topology in order to know which nodes are its upstream nodes to be notified with the label bindings.
In order to support explicit routing, the basic distribution labels should be extended:
↑ An overhead is required to keep available two LSPs for the same FEC.
Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) is a new protocol aimed to overcome IPv4 limits: the main reason for introducing a new protocol is to have a larger address space with respect to the IPv4 one.
IPv6 expands ICMP protocol by integrating the following protocols:
IGMP: called 'Multicast Listener Discovery' to manage multicast group memberships.
With IPv6 some protocols need just to be upgraded, mainly due to the fact that they all deal with addresses (these protocols are not layer-3 independent):
The additional features listed below were originally designed as add-ons for IPv4, then they were ported to be embedded into IPv6.
It is more efficient, thanks to an efficient usage of multicast and anycast addresses:
Security mechanisms such as IPsec are included in the IPv6 protocol.
It is the possibility to forward packets by using policies different than the destination address (e.g. forwarding by source address).
Not all data flows are equal (e.g. phone calls require less delays).
It is the capability of moving the device across different networks while keeping available all services (e.g. mobile devices that use GSM/LTE moving around different cells).
It is the capability of moving the device across different networks without needing to grant the services active → less strict than mobility.
As a general rule aggregation is required to make routing easier but it requires a waste of addresses. IPv6 routing uses almost the same techniques as IPv4 but it can reduce the routing tables, if the addresses are given in an efficient way.
Each IPv6 address is 128-bit-long, and the prefix replaces the netmask:
All the hosts in the same subnetwork belong to the same link and vice versa:
They are equivalent to the IPv4 public addresses, and they begin with the three bits '001':
Prefix: it must be the same as the one assigned to the link which the host is connected to.
Assignment criterion for prefixes is topology-based: they are assigned according to the service provider hierarchy:
Top Level Authority (TLA): a large service provider;
Next Level Authority (NLA): an intermediate service provider;
Subnet Level Authority (SLA): the organization.
Interface identifier: it identifies the host interface.
Optionally it can be in EUI-64 format: the 64-bit IPv6 interface identifier derives from the host's 48-bit MAC address:
They are to be used during the transition phase, and they begin with 80 bits set to zero:
IPv4-mapped addresses: the first 80 bits are zeros and the next 16 bits are set to one:
...
IPv4-compatible addresses: the first 80 bits are zeros and the next 16 bits are set to zero (e.g. the IPv6 address '::10.0.0.1' maps the IPv4 address '10.0.0.1'):
...
They refer to the 'automatic' private addresses, generated by autoconfiguration, which is the process where a station automatically generates an address to connect to an IPv6 link:
...
They are equivalent to the IPv4 private addresses:
...
A multicast address identifies a group of stations and it has the following format:
Flag field (4 bits): it is used to mark a multicast group:
Scope field (4 bits): it is used to limit the diffusion of the multicast (better than IPv4 TTL):
1 = node local: the packet can not go outside the host;
2 = link local: the packet can not go outside the layer 2 network;
5 = site local: the packet can not go outside e.g. the campus network;
8 = organization local: the packet can not go outside the organization network;
Group ID field (112 bits): it identifies the multicast group, and the packet is forwarded to all the nodes in the group.
If a host wants to belong to a multicast group, it needs to ask for it by using the ICMP protocol; once it is added to the multicast group, it will receive all the packets sent to that particular multicast address. It is very important to notice that the hosts that will receive a multicast packet are not defined by the source, but they are 'decided' by the destinations.
Every operating node by default belongs to a solicited node multicast group whose address derives from its IPv6 address:
There may be more than one host in the same multicast group, but generally there are not since the multicast address is generated from the IPv6 address.
Each multicast packet is delivered through an Ethernet frame with a specific MAC address derived from the IPv6 multicast address, so that the packet is processed just by the interested hosts:
As the prefixes for global addresses are assigned according to the service provider hierarchy, if a company wants to change from a service provider to another one, all the links in the company network will have to change their prefixes. IPv6 is meant to support easy renumbering for both hosts and routers:
A big company may decide to buy Internet connectivity from two different service providers because it wants to keep being connected to the Internet even if one of the service providers has some problems.
As the prefixes for global addresses are assigned according to the service provider hierarchy, each host inside the company network will have two global addresses with different prefixes for the same interface → the host will have to select which address to use for every outcoming packet. This may cause some non-trivial configuration problems:
A host can have two interfaces (e.g. an Ethernet interface and a wi-fi one) which can be connected to two different links at the same time. When the host wants to send a packet to a link local target address, it does not know whether to make the packet exit the interface A or the interface B, because both the links have the same prefix; moreover, as each link local address is unique within its link, a host in the link A may have the same link local address as another host in the link B.
In IPv6 the host needs to specify in the target IPv6 address an identifier called scope which is used to identify the physical interface (e.g. FE80::0237:00FF:FE02:A7FD%19). The values for the scopes are selected by the operating system according to its internal criteria.
The standard IPv6 header has the following fixed-size (40 bytes) format:
Version field (4 bits): it is not really used, because the packet discrimination is made by the layer 2 → this enables the dual-stack approach ( Computer network technologies and services/Migration to IPv6#Migrating operating systems);
Priority field (8 bits): equivalent to the IPv4 'Type of Service' field, it allows to distinguish different kinds of services for quality of service ( Computer network technologies and services/Quality of service#Architecture);
Flow label field (20 bits): it allows to distinguish different flows for quality of service;
Next header field (8 bits): it refers to the packet payload, that is a header at upper layer (e.g. TCP/UDP) or the first extension header in the chain ( #Extension headers);
Hop limit field (8 bits): it is equivalent to the IPv4 'Time To Live' field;
Source address field (128 bits): it contains the sender's IPv6 source address for the packet;
Destination address field (128 bits): it contains the addressee's IPv6 destination address for the packet.
Checksum field: error protection is delegated to layer 2 (frame check sequence);
Fragmentation field: fragmentation is delegated to the 'Fragment' extension header;
Header length field: IPv6 header is fixed-size, as additional features are optionally offered by extension headers.
There are six extension headers, added only when needed and processed in the following order:
Hop by hop option: it includes optional information to be processed by every hop;
Routing: it enables source routing, that is the source decides which route the packet needs to take;
Fragment: it manages fragmentation;
Authentication Header (AH): it allows to authenticate the sender;
Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP): it allows to encrypt the packet contents;
Destination option: it includes optional information to be processed just by the destination.
Routers always process only up to the 'Routing' extension header.
All the extension headers have the same generic format (the length must be a multiple of 64 bits):
Next Header field: it specifies the following extension header in the chain, or the header at upper layer (e.g. TCP/UDP) if this is the last extension header;
Header Length field: it specifies the length of the current extension header.
As new extension headers can be standardized over time, old devices may not be able to process recent extension headers → they can look at the 'Length' field to skip the unknown extension header.
The 'Header Length' field may be not in some extension headers (such as the 'Fragment' extension header) which the IPv6 standard defines as having fixed length.
Hop by hop option and Destination option
The Hop by hop option and Destination option extension headers can include multiple additional options:
Hop by hop option: it includes options which every router the packet goes through has to process;
Destination option: it includes options which just the destination has to process.
For example, if there are two options with 8-bit-long values, the extension header will have the following format:
Length field (8 bits): it specifies the length of the current option, so that routers unable to recognize the option can just skip it;
Type field (8 bits): it identifies the current option.
The first two bits always specify the action to be executed in case the option is not recognized, while the third bit specifies whether the option can be changed on-the-fly:
00 = the current option can be ignored and it is possible to proceed to the next one;
01 = the packet must be discarded;
10 = the packet must be discarded and an ICMPv6 Parameter Problem must be generated;
11 = the packet must be discarded and an ICMPv6 Parameter Problem must be generated, unless the destination address is a multicast one;
Value field (variable length): it contains the value of the option.
The Routing extension header allows the source to decide decides which route the packet needs to take (source routing), and it has the following format:
...
Routing Type field (8 bits): it specifies the type of routing (currently '0' for classical source routing);
Segment Left field (8 bits): it specifies the number of remaining hops to the destination;
Router Address fields (128 bits each one): they are the list of the IPv6 addresses of the routers which the packet should go through.
Example of usage for the 'Routing' extension header.
In the example in the side figure, source S sends the packet towards destination D, adding a 'Routing' extension header which forces the packet to go through intermediate routers R1 and R2. So at first the packet apparently has router R1 as destination, while real destination D is specified as last step in the router list specified by the 'Routing' extension header. When the packet arrives at router R1, this recognizes it as apparently addressed to it; in fact, its address appears in the 'Destination Address' field in the IPv6 header. Router R1 checks the next headers and it discovers the packet contains a 'Routing' extension header, realizing that the final destination for the packet is another host (in particular the 'Segment Left' field says that two hops should be traversed before arriving at the final destination). Router R1 finds the IPv6 address of the next hop to which it should send the packet and replaces it with its IPv6 address, then it sends the packet with destination set to R2. The process will continue hop by hop, until destination D will receive an IPv6 packet whose 'Routing' extension header contains the 'Segment Left' field set to 0, which means that the packet has reached the final destination. Destination D is able to know all the hops the packet passed through because they are all written in the 'Routing' extension header, so it can forward the reply to source S by specifying the same (reversed) list of hops.
The Fragment extension header allows to send a packet in smaller parts called 'fragments', and it has the following format:
Fragment Offset field (13 bits): it specifies the byte number at which the fragment starts within the fragmented section in the original packet;
More Fragments (M) flag (1 bit): if it is set to 0 the current packet is the last fragment;
Identification field (32 bits): all the fragments of a specific packet have the same identifier.
a section that can not be fragmented, so it is repeated in all fragments: it includes the IPv6 header and all the extension headers preceding the 'Fragment' extension header;
a section that can be fragmented: it includes all the extension headers following the 'Fragment' extension header and the packet payload.
Example of usage for the 'Fragment' extension header.
In contrast to IPv4, only the sender node is allowed to fragment the datagrams, while IPv6 routers do not support fragmentation. Moreover, the IPv6 standard strongly suggests to use Path MTU Discovery instead of fragmentation for performance reasons: #Packet Too Big.
The solutions developed for IPv6 have been ported from IPv4-IPsec protocol suite. In IPv6 IPSec is an integrated protocol suite that defines two headers:
Authentication Header (AH): it authenticates the whole packet, but the fields which are changed on passing from one hop to another (e.g. 'Hop limit' field), by guaranteeing that no one has tempered the contents of the packet;
Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP): it authenticates and encrypts the packet payload for data privacy.
IPsec does not define which algorithms are to be used for encryption and authentication, but the two parties have to agree on which ones to use for exchanging IPsec-protected information → flexibility: algorithms are chosen according to the current needs.
How can A and B agree on secrete keys avoiding that extraneous people know them? There are three main strategies:
Diffie-Hellman method: it allows to agree on a key without exchanging it → nobody can discover the secret keys by sniffing the traffic between A and B;
Internet Key Exchange (IKE) protocol: it uses digital certificates and asymmetrical cryptography to send secret keys in a secure way.
The IKE protocol specifies that an IKE SA has to be established from A to B to agree on the secret keys for the child SA from A to B, and vice versa another one for the child SA from B to A. The IKE SA from A to B consists of the following operations based on asymmetrical cryptography:[1]
B asks A for a secret key to be used for the child SA from A to B;
A asks a trusty certification authority for B's digital certificate, in order to know if B is really who he is telling to be;
A decrypts the digital certificate by using the certification authority's public key and learns the public key associated to B;
A sends the secret key for the child SA to B, encrypting the message by using the public key associated to B so that it can be decrypted only by knowing B's private key;
B receives the message from A, decrypts it by using its private key and learns the secret key decided by A for the child SA;
Some extraneous people may look at the traffic exchanged between A and B and guess the secret keys after a while, by performing brute-force attacks or analyzing some deduced statistical information. Internet Security Association Key Management Protocol (ISAKMP) is a sub-protocol of IKE to periodically renegotiate the secret keys in a secure way, so that extraneous people do not have time to guess them.
The Authentication Header (AH) guarantees connectionless integrity and data origin authentication for IP packets: it authenticates the \ul{whole packet}, but the fields which are changed on passing from one hop to another (e.g. 'Hop limit' field), by guaranteeing that no one has tempered the contents of the packet.
AH has problems dealing with NATs, because it also authenticates the addresses and the ports.
Key concept: no one can change the packet, everyone can read it.
The Authentication Header has the following format:
Next Header field (8 bits): it specifies the next encapsulated protocol;
Payload Length field (8 bits): it specifies the Authentication Header length in 32-bit words − 2 (it may be cleared to zero);
Security Parameters Index (SPI) field (32 bits): it identifies the Security Association for this datagram (if cleared to zero, a Security Association does not exist; values in the range 1 to 255 are reserved);
Sequence Number field (32 bits): it contains a monotonically increasing counter value;
Message Digest field (variable length): it summarizes the contents of the packet by using a secret key: everyone who wants to change the contents of the packet has to know the key in order to recompute the message digest (similar to the error detection field).
The Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) header provides origin authenticity, integrity and confidentiality protection for IP packets: it authenticates and encrypts the packet payload for data privacy.
Key concept: no one can read the packet, therefore no one can change it.
The ESP header is always the last one in the header chain and it has the following format:
Security Parameters Index (SPI) field (32 bits): it identifies the Security Association for this datagram;
Sequence Number field (unsigned 32 bits): it contains a monotonically increasing counter value.
The 'Sequence Number' field is mandatory for the sender and it is always present even if the receiver does not select to enable the anti-replay service for a specific SA, but processing of this field is at the discretion of the receiver;
Payload Data field (variable length): it contains the data described by the 'Next header' field;
Padding field (variable length 0 to 255 bits): padding may be required, irrespective of encryption algorithm requirements, to ensure that the resulting ciphertext terminates on a 4-byte boundary;
Padding Length field (8 bits): it specifies the size of the 'Padding' field (in bytes);
Next Header field (8 bits): an IPv4/IPv6 protocol number describing the format of the 'Payload Data' field;
Authentication Data field (variable length): it contains an Integrity Check Value (ICV) computed over the ESP packet minus the 'Authentication Data' field.
The 'Authentication Data' field length is specified by the selected authentication function. The 'Authentication Data' field is optional: it is included only if the authentication service has been selected for the SA at issue. The authentication algorithm specification must specify the ICV length and the comparison rules and processing steps for validation. Note that the 'Authentication Data' field is not encrypted.
Two usage modes are possible for ESP (optionally in combination with AH):
Internet Control Message Protocol version 6 (ICMPv6) is an integral part of the IPv6 standard, and it in turn integrates the functionalities of ARP and IGMP protocols expanding them.
All the ICMPv6 messages are put just after the extension headers in the packet, and they have the same generic format:
Multicast Listener Discovery messages: they expand the IGMP functionality:
130 = Multicast Listener Query
131 = Multicast Listener Report
132 = Multicast Listener Done
Neighbor Discovery messages: they expand the ARP functionality:
When a router receives a packet having a too large size, it performs a technique called Path MTU Discovery: it discards the packet and sends back an ICMPv6 message of type Packet Too Big in order to notify the sender of the allowed Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) size and force it to send again the packet itself (and the next packets) with a size not exceeding the MTU specified by the router. This technique has the goal to avoid fragmentation as much as possible.
Multicast Listener Discovery is the component in ICMPv6 which expands the functionality of the IPv4 IGMP protocol to manage multicast group memberships:
General Query: the router asks hosts if they are interested in joining some of multicast groups;
Multicast Address Specific Query: the router asks hosts if they are interested in joining a particular multicast group;
Multicast Listener Report: the host notifies the router it wants to join a particular multicast group to receive all the multicast packets addressed to the multicast address corresponding to the specified multicast group;
Multicast Listener Done: the host notifies the router it wants to stop receiving the multicast packets for a particular multicast group.
Neighbor Solicitation: the host sends a multicast packet having, as the target IPv6 address, the solicited node multicast address corresponding to the IPv6 address of which it wants to learn the MAC address;
Neighbor Advertisement: the host having the specified IPv6 address sends back its MAC address;
Router Solicitation: the host sends a multicast packet to solicit the router sending back a 'Router Advertisement' message containing details for the given network (as Prefix associated to the Link, flag of autoconfiguration/DHCP, default device);
Router Advertisement: the router advertises its presence within the link reporting the prefix(es) associated to the link and a flag which states if the hosts should auto-configure themself or query a DHCP server.
'Neighbor Discovery' ICMPv6 messages are used to autoconfigure the IPv6 addresses for a host connecting to a link: firstly the host has to get a link local address in order to be able to contact the other hosts within the link, then it has to get a global address in order to be able to exit the link and access the Internet by a globally unique address.
The link local address is autoconfigured by using 'Neighbor Solicitation' and 'Neighbor Advertisement' ICMPv6 messages:
The global address is autoconfigured by using 'Router Solicitation', 'Router Advertisement', 'Neighbor Solicitation' and 'Neighbor Advertisement' ICMPv6 messages:
M = 0: the host has to look at the 'O' flag:
Another implementation proposed by Microsoft consists in the possibility for the host to contact the DNS server without knowing its address: the host sends packets to a fixed anycast address, and the network takes care of delivering the packet to the DNS server. However this implementation is not really used:
Autoconfiguration is based on the MAC address, so if the network card breaks and needs to be replaced the host will have to change its address, but the caches (e.g. the DNS cache) can not update immediately → static configuration is still possible, especially for fixed machines (e.g. servers for public websites) which need to avoid changing their addresses in order to keep being reachable as much continuously as possible.
↑ For simplicity we suppose that a single secret key is required for the SA.
↑ This step is not mandatory if the router is configured to periodically multicast 'Router advertisement' messages.
Computer network technologies and servicesMigration to IPv6
During the migration phase, hosts should gradually start being able to reach IPv6 destinations while keeping being able to reach IPv4 destinations. Migrating all network devices is a condition needed but not sufficient: the user needs to make them work together by making a new addressing plan for the whole network.
Introducing IPv6 support into applications results in need to change the source code:
Dual stack without dual layer.
Dual stack with dual layer.
Applications lie mostly on the operating system libraries, which can introduce IPv6 support by adopting the dual stack approach:
The variant with dual layer is the most used one because it moves the complexity to the core of the operating system.
Although in theory switches should be not affected at all by changes at layer 3 because they work up to the layer 2, there could be some troubles with additional functions: for example IGMP snooping, a functionality used to filter incoming multicast packets, needs to look inside the packet → as the packet format and fields change the switch can not recognize the multicast IPv6 packets and it discards them.
See also: Routing protocols and architectures/IPv6 routing
Nowadays routers are mostly ready for IPv6, even if performance in IPv6 is still worse than the one in IPv4 because of lack of experience and lower traffic demand.
Tipically routers supporting IPv6 adopt the dual stack 'ships in the night'-like approach: IPv4 and IPv6 are supported by two independent stacks for transport layer → this requires the complete duplication for all components: routing protocols, routing tables, access lists, etc.
Routing in IPv6 is performed in the same way as IPv4 but it requires two distinct routing tables, one for IPv4 routes and another for IPv6 routes. IPv6 routing tables can store several types of entries, including:
Routing protocols supporting IPv6 can adopt two approaches:
DNSes supporting IPv6 can map two IP addresses to the same alias: an IPv4 address and an IPv6 one → a public destination can be reachable via either IPv4 or IPv6.
DNSes supporting IPv6 can return IPv6 addresses not only via IPv6, but also via IPv4: DNS messages in fact belong to the application layer, so the transport layer used to forward the DNS queries and replies does not matter. DNSv6 queries are performed by the following command: set q=aaaa.
A company may decide to offer access to its public website also via IPv6. However, presently most traffic is via IPv4, so generally the service for IPv4 traffic is more reliable in terms of performance and fault tolerance than the one for IPv6 traffic. Therefore the company, especially if it bases its business on its website, does not want the user connecting via IPv6 decides to change to another competitor website because of performance problems. A possible solution is to perform some preliminary assessments to test the performance of the connectivity between the user and the company server, and to implement an additional mechanism into DNSes: they should be able to look at the source address of the DNS query, and return either just the IPv4 address if no assessments have been performed for the connectivity, or both the IPv4 and IPv6 addresses if the performance are good enough.
The network will not be IPv6-compatible from day zero → IPv6 traffic may need to traverse IPv4-only network portions. Network-oriented tunneling solutions enable connectivity among IPv6 networks even if they are connected through an IPv4-only infrastructure, and consist in encapsulating the IPv6 packet inside an IPv4 header just for transporting it along the tunnel:
The size for the tunneled packet, including the 20-byte-long IPv4 header, must not exceed the maximum size for IPv4 packets → two solutions are possible:
Host-oriented tunneling solutions are more plug-and-play for hosts, but they are not professional solutions and do not solve the problem of IPv4 address shortage because every host still needs to have an IPv4 address. Solutions of this kind are:
They assume that dual-stack hosts, when it is necessary to contact an IPv4 destination, send IPv6 packets to an IPv4-compatible IPv6 address, that is built with the first 96 most significant bits to zero and with the remaining 32 ones coinciding with those of the destination IPv4 address. This IPv6 packet is then encapsulated in an IPv4 packet, whose destination is different depending on whether you want to end the tunnel on the destination host or on a dual-stack router, in particular:
The idea is to emulate, through IPv4, a local network that has support for multicast. In practice, as for connecting two IPv6 hosts through the underlying Ethernet network, neighbor discovery is used, relying on the fact that Ethernet has mechanisms for broadcasting, in this solution we reason as if IPv4 was the lower level protocol and we change the neighbor discovery to find IPv4 addresses instead of MAC addresses.
This discussion can be generalized to the case in which we want to connect not individual hosts, but clouds of IPv6 networks through dual-stack routers that communicate in an IPv4 network. In this case, in addition to neighbor discovery, a modified version of the router discovery can be used, in order to send a router solicitation to discover the IPv4 addresses of the routers connected to the host's IPv4 network that allow to reach various IPv6 networks; in fact from the router advertisement the host can get information about the IPv6 networks that can be reached from that router.
The problem with this solution is the use of IPv4 multicast, which is usually disabled in networks involving different providers. This solution can be used when you have a whole network under your control: for this reason it cannot be used to migrate the global network from IPv4 to IPv6.
6over4 Neighbor discovery
At the proposal of the RFC, IPv6 addresses are mapped to IPv4 addresses: in practice the IPv4 address is used as the interface identifier of the IPv6 address of the destination. This would make the mechanism illustrated so far unnecessary, because the host could tunnel directly, without the need for neighbor discovery to know the IPv4 address. This obviously is not valid when the IPv6 address is not built starting from the IPv4 one, so a more general mechanism is still required to contact a router.
Assuming, therefore, to know only one IPv6 address, the neighbor discovery is sent to the solicited node multicast address (for example if the IPv6 address is fe80::101:101 then it is sent to ff02::1:ff01:101) on an IPv4 6over4 multicast network at the address 239.192.x.y, built with the last 16 bits of the IPv6 address (therefore in the previous example it will be 239.192.1.1).
The idea is similar to that of 6over4, that is, to use the IPv4 network as a physical link to reach IPv6 destinations, but we want to overcome the limitation of requesting support for multicast. In the absence of neighbor discovery mechanisms, the IPv4 addressing of destinations using ISATAP is incorporated in the IPv6 address, more precisely in the interface identifier, whose format is 0000:5efe:x:y, where x and y are the 32 bits of the IPv4 address.
As you can see, this solution does not address the problem for which IPv6 was introduced, that is, the scarcity of IPv4 addresses. However, this solution is more useful in the scenario of an IPv4 link that connects non-hosts, but routers that have IPv6 clouds on the border. In this case a host within the IPv4 network that wants to communicate in IPv6 with a host belonging to a cloud must be equipped with a Potential Router List (PRL). The issues that arise at this point are:
How to get the PRL?
Two different solutions exist: the former, which is proprietary, is based on the use of DHCP; the latter, which is standard, is based on the use of DNS. In the latter a DNS Query for a particular name with the format isatap.dominio.it, which will provide the PRL of the IPv6 routers connected to the IPv4 network of the domain specified in the query.
Which router should the packets for the IPv6 destination be sent to?
A unicast router discovery is used towards each of the PRL routers, in order to get a reply through a router advertisement. Remember, in fact, that in the advertisement router routers can also announce the list of IPv6 networks that can be reached through them (see the L=0 flag in the Prefix Information Option of the ICMP Router advertisement).
Typically the network-oriented tunneling solutions require manual configuration, and encapsulation can be based on IPv6 in IPv4 (protocol type = 41), GRE, IPsec, etc.
The biggest step forward from previous solutions comes from the consideration that in the new scenario there is a whole IPv6 network that needs an IPv4 address to get out of the IPv6 cloud, no longer a single host. The mapping between the two addresses is then done in the IPv6 prefix, not in the interface identifier: a special prefix is assigned to all IPv6 networks that includes the IPv4 address assigned to the interface of the dual-stack router that faces the cloud. The prefix 2002::/16 identifies the IPv6 stations which are using 6to4: in the following 32 bits the IPv4 address is set and 16 other ones remain available to represent multiple different subnets, while the interface identifier is obtained as in the other IPv6 use cases.
In this solution there is also a router that has a particular role, the 6to4 Relay, which must be the default gateway of the 6to4 routers, in order to forward packets that do not have the 6to4 format just seen to the global IPv6. This router has address 192.88.99.1, which is an anycast address: it was used by who conceived 6to4 because it was considered the scenario in which there are multiple 6to4 Relays in the same network, which would lead to the problem of having to use different addresses. In this way instead, since the anycast address is processed in different ways by routing protocols, you can use the same address and also provide load balancing.
Let's assume that there are two IPv6 clouds connected to an IPv4 cloud, and that the interfaces of the dual-stack routers have, for the interfaces connected to the IPv6 clouds, the addresses 192.1.2.3 for network A and 9.254.2.252 for network B. Let's also suppose that a host a belonging to network A wants to send a packet to host b belonging to network B. From the configuration outlined and from what has been said it is clear that the hosts existing in network A will have an address of type 2002:c001:02:03/48 and the ones existing in network B 2002:09fe:02fc::/48. The IPv6 packet from a to b will be encapsulated in an IPv4 packet having as destination address 9.254.2.252, obtained from the prefix of the destination IPv6 address: when the packet arrives at that router, it will be decapsulated and forwarded according to the IPv6 addressing plan of the cloud containing network B.
It is very similar to 6to4, except for the fact that encapsulation is done inside a UDP segment contained in an IPv4 packet, instead of simply being encapsulated in IPv4. This is done to overcome a 6to4 limit, i.e. crossing through NATs: since in 6to4 there is no 2-level segment inside the encapsulating IPv4 packet, the NAT can not work.
The problem with the 6to4 solution is that it is not generic enough: you are tied to the use of the 2002::/16 addresses and you can not use usual global unicasts. In the tunnel broker solution, since it is no longer possible to deduce from the IPv6 prefix which endpoint the packet should be sent to, a server is used which, given a generic IPv6 address, provides the address of the endpoint tunnel to be contacted. The routers implementing the tunnel broker are called tunnel servers, while the servers providing the mapping are called tunnel broker servers. The tunnels are made as in 6to4, therefore IPv6 inside IPv4: if there was the problem of crossing a NAT you could also think of using Teredo's approach, by encapsulating inside UDP, then inside IPv4.
The tunnel broker server needs to be configured: Tunnel Information Control (TIC) is used to forward information about the networks reachable by a given tunnel server, from the tunnel server being configured to the tunnel broker server. The Tunnel Setup Protocol (TSP) is instead used to request information from the tunnel broker server. Again, you can have a default gateway for the global IPv6 network. In summary, a router with this configuration, when a packet arrives, can:
It is a centralized solution and therefore the tunnel broker server is a single point of failure.
It complicates the control plan.
If this server is used to interconnect different networks, even belonging to different providers, the problem of responsibility for its management arises.
It is more flexible than 6to4, because it allows the use of all global unicast addresses.
Bringing IPv6 support to the network edges
Main NAT-based solutions.
The goal is to migrate big provider's networks, so that IPv4 and/or IPv6 clouds at the network edges can use the IPv6 backbone to interoperate. The common scenario is a user who wants to connect to an IPv4 destination through the provider's IPv6 network.
All the available options make use of the NAT. The NAT usage is a bit countercurrent as IPv6 had among its goals the one of avoiding the NAT usage in networks because of several problems brought by NATs (change of packets in transit, problems on peer-to-peer networks, etc.). However the fact that these solutions are based on NATs presents a variety of advantages: NATs are largely spread over networks, their problems and limitations are known, applications which may have problems in going through NATs are known; so in general the advantage is the big experience gained so far.
In NAT-based solutions there are three major components:
Customer-Premises Equipment (CPE): it is the router at the customer edge just before the provider's network;
Address Family Transition Router (AFTR): it is an IPv6 Tunnel Concentrator, that is the device at the end of an IPv6 tunnel;
NAT44/NAT64: it is a NAT for translation from IPv4/IPv6 addresses to IPv4 addresses.
Dual-Stack Lite (DS-Lite): NAT44 + 4-over-6 tunnel;
Dual-Stack Lite Address+Port (DS-Lite A+P): DS-Lite with preconfigured port ranges;
NAT444: CGN + CPE NAT44, that is when a home user, which gets the service from the telephone company, adds a NAT in its own home network; every packet outcoming from the home network is subjected to two address translations;
Carrier Grade NAT (CGN): large-scale NAT44, that is NAT used by telephone companies to map the hundreds of thousands of (users') private addresses into the limited public addresses which are available.
For migration of big networks oriented to mobile devices NAT64 solution is being chosen.
In order to migrate to IPv6 keeping the IPv4 compatibility at the edges of the network some telephone operators are planning massive migrations to DS-Lite because it is a plenty tested solution, and there are several compatible devices already on sale.
The A+P solution is not taken seriously into account yet due to lack of experience.
The IPv6-only user types www.example.com into his browser, and being IPv6 he sends an AAAA query to the provider's DNS64. Let us suppose that www.example.com has the IPv4 address '20.2.2.2'.
The DNS64, in case it has not the name resolution, needs to send the query to an upper DNS, supposedly in the IPv4 network.
In the best case the DNS64 sends the AAAA query to the upper DNS and it gets a reply of type AAAA (so IPv6), which it transmits as it is back to the host (it is fully possible to send via an IPv4 packet a DNS query requiring a name resolution into an IPv6 address).
In the worst case the upper DNS has not IPv4 support, so it replies with a 'Name error'; the DNS64 sends again the query but this time of type A, following which it will gets a proper reply. This reply will be converted into AAAA and transmitted back to the host. In the reply transmitted to the host, the last 32 bits are the same as the ones sent by the upper DNS in the record of type A, while the other 96 bits complete the IPv6 address; therefore the final address will be '64:FF9B::20.2.2.2'.
Now the host is ready to set up a TCP connection to www.example.com.
The NAT64 comes into play: it converts the IPv6 packet coming from the host into IPv4, and it performs the reverse operation for packets coming from 20.2.2.2.
In such a scenario there is no tunneling: the IPv6 header is just replaced with an IPv4 one and vice versa.
The IPv6-only host is \ul{not} aware of the fact that the destination address is related to an IPv4 address.
The NAT64 not only is able to translate IPv6 addresses into IPv4 addresses, but in a certain manner it makes the network believe that 232 IPv6 addresses are available as every packet from the host to the NAT64 will have '64:FF9B::20.2.2.2', with prefix '64:FF9B/96', as a target address.
The provider's network, the one where the NAT64 and the DNS64 are, is IPv6-native, therefore a host in the provider's network can directly contact another host having IPv6 support without involving the NAT64 at all.
'64:FF9B/96' is the addressing space specifically standardized for this translation technique, assigned to the NAT64, but the network administrator may decide to change it according to his needs. Note that the network administrator needs to configure the routing so that every packet having that prefix will go to the NAT64, and he needs to configure the NAT64 so that it will translate every IPv6 packet having that prefix into IPv4 and it will forward it into the IPv4 cloud.
The presence of the NAT introduces a typical issue: the host behind the NAT can not be easily reached from the outside.
Often it happens that when a DNS has not the address resolution it does not reply at all, instead of sending a 'Name error'; this results in a lengthening of the times due to the waiting for timeout from DNS64, which when the timeout expires sends a query of type A.
This solution does not work if the user wants to type directly the IPv4 address: the user always needs to specify the name for the destination.
Dual-Stack Lite (DS-Lite) solution consists in simplifying CPEs by moving the NAT and DHCP functionalities to the edge of the provider's network, so into a device acting as AFTR and as CGN-NAT44.
The provider's DHCP server assigns an IPv6 address, unique within the provider's network, to each host of each CPE.
When the user needs to send IPv4 packets a tunneling operation is required, in order to encapsulate IPv4 packets into IPv6 packets as the provider's network is IPv6-only. So, when a CPE receives an IPv4 packet it needs to tunnel it into an IPv6 packet to be able to send it to the AFTR after which there is the IPv4 cloud; therefore the scenario is made up of a lot of tunneling operations in the provider's IPv6 network between the AFTR and one among the several users' CPEs. In particular, the packet between CPE and AFTR will have as a source IPv6 address the AFTR one, and as a target IPv4 address the destination one in the IPv4 network.
The AFTR, after removing the IPv6 header, sends it to the NAT44 which replaces the IPv4 (private) source address with the IPv4 address to which the NAT will receive packets associated to this flow.
The main advantage for DS-Lite is the one of considerably reducing the number of provider's public addresses.
Can there be any duplicate IPv4 addresses in the provider's network? No, because the NAT44 directly translates the hosts' IPv4 addresses to the available public IPv4 addresses. If there were duplicate private IPv4 addresses the NAT would have ambiguity problems.
An IPv4 host can not contact an IPv6 destination → IPv6 destinations can be reached just by IPv6 hosts. Instead, an IPv6 host can send and receive packets from IPv6 nodes without going through the provider's AFTR.
Some kinds of applications can not work in such a situation: the fact that the NAT can not be managed by the user, as it is not on the CPE anymore, makes it impossible to perform some common operations such as opening/closing the ports required for specific applications.
Dual-Stack Lite Address+Port (DS-Lite A+P) solution consists in still having a provider's IPv6-only network, but the NAT is moved onto the CPE so that the user can configure it according his needs.
Like in DS-Lite, an IPv4 packet outcoming from the CPE is still tunnelized as the provider's network is IPv6-only.
The fact that the NAT on every CPE requires a public IPv4 address is solved by allowing to duplicate public IPv4 addresses, and the CPEs are distinguished based on the port. In fact each CPE uses a specific port range, and the AFTR, knowing the port range used by every CPE, is able to distinguish flows from and to a specific CPE nevertheless there are several CPEs having the same public IPv4 address.
This solution is similar to the DS-Lite one, but the private IPv4 address space is more under the control of the end user, because as the NAT is on the user's CPE the user can configure it, even if with some limitations: he can not open and use ports which are not within his range. This method allows to save IPv4 addresses (but still less with respect to DS-Lite).
This solution in Italy is basically illegal because, as the port number is not recorded, in case of attack it would not be possible to trace back to the attacker.
Transporting IPv6 traffic in the core network
The main goal is to have IPv6 traffic over the global network without upsetting the network existing for more than 20 years which at present is working well. It would not be possible to sustain the human and technological costs for worldwide migration to radically change the existing IPv4 network to make it IPv6.
The goal for 6 Provider Edge (6PE) solution is to connect IPv6 clouds one with each other through a MPLS backbone. 6PE requires that the operator's network works by MPLS. In this scenario the provider's edge is represented by the first routers which users' CPEs meet.
Keeping the network core unchanged (without excluding the possibility for future changes).
Adding the IPv6 support to the edge of the provider's network.
Delivering IPv6 routing information via MPLS/BGP, like in VPNs: Computer network technologies and services/VPN#Layer 3: BGP.
The primary requirement is to have an MPLS core network.
6PE is thought to take a fully-working core network, able to transport IPv4 packets via MPLS, and add the IPv6 support just to the provider's edge routers (PE). In fact, once a packet is encapsulated into an MPLS packet, the intermediate devices will not be interested anymore in the type of contained packet, but they will be interested just in the label which allows them to distinguish the LSP to which to route it.
CE-3 advertises that it is able to reach the IPv6 network '2001:3::/64'.
This information is received also by PE-2.
PE-2 sends this information to all the PEs in the network, saying that it is able to reach '2001:3::/64' through the next hop 'FFFF:20.2.2.2', nevertheless its interface is IPv4 (this is because if an IPv6 route is given an IPv6 next hop needs to be given).
PE-1 sends the received information to all the routers connected to it, so also to the home CEs, saying that it is able to reach the network '2001:3::/64'.
If an MPLS path between PE-1 and the address '20.2.2.2' does not exist yet, the classical MPLS mechanisms (so the LDPv4 signaling protocol) are used to set up this path.
To route an IPv6 packet two labels are used:
LDP/IGPv4 label (external): it identifies the LSP between the two PEs over the MPLS network.
CE-1 knows that the network '2001:3::1/64' exists and it sends the packet towards PE-1;
PE-1 puts two labels in front of the packet: the internal label and the external label;
PE-1 sends the packet to P-1, which sends it to P-2;
P-2, that is the penultimate hop, removes the external label from the packet (penultimate label popping) and sends it to PE-2;
PE-2 removes the internal label and sends the packet to CE-3;
CE-3 forwards the packet to the destination in the network '2001:3::/64'.
PE routers have to be dual stack and to support MP-BGP, while intermediate routers do not need any change.
This solution provides customers with a native IPv6 service without changing the IPv4 MPLS core network (it requires minimal operational costs and risks).
This solution scales as long as there are few IPv6 clouds to be deployed.
People have little experience with security problems because IPv6 is not used much yet → IPv6 could still have undiscovered security holes which may be exploited by attackers. Moreover, during the migration phase hosts need to open two ports in parallel, one for IPv4 and another one for IPv6 → two ports have to be protected against attacks from outside.
A host interface can have multiple IPv6 addresses → it can generate multiple TCP SYN requests, each one with a different source address, to a server in order to saturate its memory by making it open several unclosed TCP connections.
A host may start sending 'Router Advertisement' messages advertising fake prefixes → the other hosts in the link will start to send packets with wrong prefixes in their source addresses.
Computer network technologies and servicesMigration to IPv6
A company that wants to build a corporate private network for its remote terminals (single users, data-centers, branches) can adopt two different approaches:
A Virtual Private Network (VPN) allows a company to deploy connectivity to multiple users over a public shared infrastructure (the Internet or an Internet Service Provider's network) enforcing its own policies (such as security, quality of service, private addressing) as if it was its own private network.
VPNs can be deployed in two main scenarios:
Site-to-site VPNs can be deployed in two ways:
A remote terminal connected to a VPN can access the public Internet in two ways:
Overlay model.
Peer model.
VPNs can be split into two models according to the role of the shared infrastructure:
Provider provision.
Customer provision.
VPNs can be customer or provider provisioned:
The customer provisioned VPNs can not be peer-model because the provider can not be aware of a VPN self-created by the customer.
Virtual Private LAN Service (VPLS): it virtualizes a LAN: terminals are connected as if they were in the same LAN → broadcast packets are allowed;
Virtual Private Wire Service (VPWS): it virtualizes a leased line (over a packet-switching network);
VPNs can be split into two categories according to their virtual topology:
Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP) is a layer 2 protocol used in point-to-point connections (dial-up, ISDN) to encapsulate any protocol at upper layers. It is an extension to HDLC.
Address and Control fields: they are inherited from HDLC but they are completely meaningless in point-to-point connections; they were kept to make it simple to upgrade the processing algorithms in HDLC devices;
Protocol field: it specifies the protocol at upper layer for the encapsulated packet.
'01111110' is the sequence delimiting the frame, but in order to send that sequence as data some stuffing rules are required. In PPP stuffing is at byte level: the escape sequence '01111101' is inserted both when a byte equal to the delimiting byte appears in the data, and when a byte equal to the escape byte itself appears:
Link Control Protocol (LCP) has the task of opening and closing PPP connections, negotiating some options (such as frame maximum length, authentication protocol).
An IP packet can not encapsulate directly a protocol at layer 3 or lower, because the 'Protocol' field in the IPv4 header can specify only protocols at upper layers (such as TCP, UDP, ICMP).
Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE) is a protocol to encapsulate any protocol (including IP and other protocols at lower layers) into IP: the GRE header is inserted between the encapsulating IP header and the encapsulated packet, and the 'Protocol' field in the encapsulating IP header is set to 47.
C, R, K, S flags (1 bit each one): they indicate the presence/absence of optional fields;
Recur field (3 bits): it specifies the allowed maximum number of additional encapsulations (currently not supported);
Version field (3 bits): it specifies the version of the GRE protocol (0 in this case);
Protocol type field (16 bits): it specifies the protocol of the encapsulated packet;
Routing field: it specifies a sequence of IP addresses corresponding to the intermediate routers the packet should go through (source routing).
SRE Offset field: it is a pointer to the list item containing the IP address of the current next hop, updated on each source route hop;
SRE Length field: it specifies the length of the list (in bytes).
The format of the Enhanced GRE header introduces the new 'Acknowledgment number' field:
Acknowledgment number field (32 bits): the sender puts in the packet the last packet sequence number it has received from the destination (cumulative ACK).
The new 'Acknowledgment number' field, in combination with the 'Sequence number' field, allows some additional mechanisms:
L2TP original reference scenario: provider provisioned deployment mode.
Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol (L2TP) is a protocol to tunnel any layer 2 protocol (PPP in this discussion) into IP. L2TP was originally designed for provider provisioned access VPNs and it was standardized by IETF; later it was extended to customer provisioned access VPNs by simply implementing the LAC functionality into the user machine.
In the L2TP original reference scenario, a remote user wants to send a packet through a point-to-point (PPP) connection to an internal server inside the corporate network. An L2TP tunnel to the target L2TP Network Server (LNS) and an L2TP session inside the tunnel are required to emulate the PPP connection over the service provider network.
When the PPP frame arrives at the L2TP Access Concentrator (LAC), if an L2TP tunnel has not been established yet to the LNS, before opening an L2TP session the LAC has to establish a tunnel to the LNS: the LNS authenticates itself to the LAC by using a challenge-based mechanism similar to Challenge Handshake Authentication Protocol (CHAP), and a new control connection is created.
Each L2TP session uses two channels inside the tunnel:
In contrast to data messages, control messages are exchanged in a reliable way: lost control messages are always retransmitted.
Multiple sessions may coexist within the same tunnel, sharing the same control connection, to distinguish multiple flows of PPP frames from multiple remote users: each tunnel is identified by a tunnel ID, each session is identified by a session ID.
Besides the authentication ensured during the tunnel establishing step, L2TP does not provide any security mechanism by itself: in fact it does not make sense to use mechanisms like encryption for L2TP packets travelling along the tunnel, because the service provider's LAC still can look at the layer 2 frames → any security mechanism has to be implemented end-to-end, that is between the user and the final destination inside the corporate network.Optionally it is possible to use IPsec through the tunnel: it provides a strong security, but it is complicated to be implemented.
A packet inside the L2TP tunnel includes several encapsulated headers:
It identifies the point-to-point connection between the remote user and the internal server inside the corporate network.
T flag (1 bit): if set to 0 the packet is a data message, if set to 1 it is a control message;
Tunnel ID field (16 bits): it identifies the L2TP tunnel;
Session ID field (16 bits): it identifies the L2TP session, that is the data channel in the tunnel;
Ns field (16 bits): it contains the sequence number of the data/control message;
Nr field (16 bits): it contains the sequence number of the next control message to be received for a reliable control connection.
Why is a layer 4 protocol such as UDP used to move layer 2 frames? This can be explained by considering firewalls over a general network: if a packet does not contain a layer 4 encapsulation, it is easier to get discarded by firewalls.Another possible reason is that layer 4 can be accessed through sockets, while the operating system is in charge of layer 3. Since L2TP wants to be a solution against PPTP (proposed by operating system vendors), L2TP designers wanted to make it accessible to the applications and not to be tight to the will of the operating system vendors.It is also possible to use a different layer 4 protocol (such as ATM, Frame Relay).
It contains the IP addresses of the tunnel endpoints.In the original reference scenario, the IP addresses correspond to the LAC and the LNS.
Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol (PPTP) is a protocol to tunnel the PPP protocol into IP. PPTP was originally designed for customer provisioned access VPNs and it was developed by major operating system vendors; later it was extended to provider provisioned access VPNs by introducing a PPTP Access Concentrator (PAC) with functionality similar to the LAC one.
The PPTP original reference scenario differentiates itself from the L2TP one for the fact that the PPTP tunnel is established between the remote user itself and the PPTP Network Server (PNS).
In contrast to L2TP, PPTP provides weak (optional) security mechanisms: the standard covers the usage of specific Microsoft-proprietary security protocols such as MPPE for encryption and MS CHAP for authentication, so there is not any negotiation of protocols.
The encapsulated PPP frames go through the data channel:
PPTP uses the Enhanced GRE protocol to encapsulate the PPP frames into IP. The PPP payload can be optionally encrypted by MPPE.
The PPTP control messages go through the control channel:
Control messages are required for tunnel data session setup, management and tear-down, and they are sent to the well-known TCP port 1723 of the PNS.
The functionality of the Internet Protocol Security (IPsec) protocol suite in IPv4 is very similar to the one in IPv6: Computer network technologies and services/IPv6#IPsec.
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), today called Transport Layer Security (TLS), is a cryptographic protocol which is designed to provide communication security between a client and a server:
Basically a remote user, typically an employee of a company, wants to contact a server going through the corporate network. He can establish a dial-up point-to-point connection to the corporate gateway using PPP to encapsulate the IP packets:
Before accepting the dial-up connection, the corporate gateway checks the user by contacting the corporate security server through the Remote Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS) protocol. The corporate security server is a centralized AAA server:
Authentication: identifying the user (e.g. through user name and password);
Authorization: checking which services the user can access and which ones are restricted to the user;
Accounting: keeping track of the user activity (e.g. for billing).
Access VPNs can virtualize dial-up connections between a remote user and the corporate network over the service provider shared infrastructure to reduce costs. PPP protocol will keep being used encapsulated in VPN tunnels, avoiding to change too much the corporate gateway.
Access VPN deployed as customer provision.
In customer provisioned access VPNs, the tunnel is established between the remote user and the corporate gateway:
Once the VPN is set up, the user has got two IP addresses: a public one for the service provider NAS and a corporate one for the corporate gateway. The PPP frames the user can send through the tunnel have the following format:
The user is independent of the service provider: the latter in fact provides the user with just the internet connection to the corporate gateway.
The user may temporarily disable the VPN connection and connect to an external server over the Internet → if he gets a malware, when he goes back to the VPN he will infect the corporate network.
Access VPN deployed as provider provision.
In provider provisioned access VPNs, the tunnel is established between the service provider NAS and the corporate gateway:
Once the VPN is set up, the user has got only the corporate IP address, unaware of the tunnel between the service provider NAS and the corporate gateway. The IP packets the NAS can send through the tunnel have the following format:
The user can not access the Internet without going through the corporate gateway (centralized access) → greater security.
The user is not independent of the service provider: in fact if he changes service provider the VPN connection will not work anymore.
a firewall: it filters the traffic according to the corporate policies about for example the allowed IP addresses, and it can be put at different locations in relation to the VPN gateway:
The presence of NATs may cause problems with IPsec:
AH authenticates the whole packet, so it also covers the IP header → NATs need to change IP addresses, so authentication will no longer work;
ESP encrypts the payload, so NATs located along the tunnel will not be able to see encrypted IP addresses and TCP/UDP ports to deal with different VPN sites.
Example of MPLS-based layer 2 site-to-site VPN.
The Pseudo Wire Emulation End-to-End (PWE3) standard allows to emulate wires over an MPLS network to exchange Ethernet frames between layer 2 terminals such as Ethernet switches or phone switches.[1] This type of connection requires some requirements in terms of constant delays of Ethernet frames like they traveled over a physical wire.
Traffic is carried through an LSP, then it needs to be able to go to one of multiple sites connected to different interfaces of the ingress/egress LSR:
MPLS-based layer 2 VPNs do not take advantage of all MPLS benefits, because routing protocols for traffic engineering work very well with IP → usually LSPs are configured manually.
Example of MPLS/BGP layer 3 site-to-site VPN.
Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) was extended to internal BGP and external BGP to support the deployment of VPNs over MPLS, for example for company A's site 1:
PE1 assigns a label to each IP address from CE1 and it records the mapping into a VPN Routing and Forwarding (VRF) table specific for its port towards CE1;
PE1 advertises the chosen labels to the other PEs through the external BGP by sending packets containing each one an IP address plus a route distinguisher identifying the address family, that actually is the port towards the company A's site, useful in case there are two identical private addresses in two different corporate networks.This step needs to be performed manually: the system administrator has to open a peering session between PE1 and each one of the other PEs in the MPLS network;
Once the IP destinations have been advertised among the PEs, VPN data can begin to be sent along the MPLS LSPs, for instance from company A's CE3 to company A's CE1:
PE3, that is the ingress LSR, pushes two labels into the label stack:
PE1, that is the egress LSR, searches its VRF tables for the internal label and it finds the port where to send the packet out, then it strips off also the internal label and it sends the packet to CE1.
The peering sessions between the PEs are to be configured manually.
This solution does not provide any cryptography because it is provider provisioned and the company needs to trust the service provider.
Example of MPLS/virtual router layer 3 site-to-site VPN.
In MPLS-based VPNs with virtual routers, each PE runs a (virtual) router instance for each company which is connected to it, so that every instance has to deal with just one corporate network → the protocol is simpler because it has to deal with just one VPN at a time, but scalability is lower because the router instances need to be configured manually.
SSL can be used to create site-to-site and access VPNs, but it is mostly used in SSL (pseudo)VPNs to grant a secure access to services (such as web service, e-mail) through TCP/UDP-based tunneling. The main advantage for SSL (pseudo)VPNs is that they have a good chance of working on any network scenario, without any problems in traversing NATs, firewalls or routers, and SSL services can also be accessed by web browsers through HTTPS.
SSL is critical with DoS attacks: packets always need to be processed up to transport layer, while in IPsec they are dropped already at network layer.
The web server does not support HTTPS → a 'VPN gateway',[2] at the edge of the corporate network, downloads web pages from the web server through HTTP, and ships them to the user, outside the corporate network, through HTTPS.
The client runs an application supporting an application protocol (such as FTP, SMTP, POP3) → a port forwarder installed on the client converts packets, sent to a specific port, from the application protocol into HTTPS packets sending them from another port, and vice versa.
The web server is an application server (e.g. mail server) supporting an application protocol (such as FTP, SMTP, POP3) → the 'VPN gateway' converts HTTPS into the application protocol and vice versa through a port forwarding mechanism implemented inside the 'VPN gateway'.
Some application protocols can natively integrate SSL into themselves (e.g. SMTP-over-SSL, POP-over-SSL) → client and web server can directly communicate in a secure way without the need for translation by a 'VPN gateway'.
The client uses a SSL'ed protocol, but the web server does not support it → a 'VPN gateway' is still required with port forwarding mechanism.
Both the client and the web server do not support SSL → two 'VPN gateways' are required, one at the user side and the other one at the web server side, so the SSL tunnel is created between the two 'VPN gateways'.[3]
↑ It is also possible to use routers as terminals, but it makes very few sense.
↑ This is a loose definition of VPN gateway: indeed it would be more accurate to define it as a proxy.
↑ This is not a SSL (pseudo)VPN.
Voice over IP (VoIP) is the set of technologies to carry voice calls, along with multimedia data, over IP networks.
In the traditional circuit-switching telephone network (POTS), voice is carried through allocation of static circuits where voice is sampled at a bit rate of 64 Kbps (according to the sampling theorem). By using such a network there are some limitations:
In a packet-switching data network (IP), voice is dynamically carried via packets, and this enables new features:
However a new problem is introduced: resources can not be really reserved in a packet-switching network → it is very difficult to grant quality of service for voice calls because packets may arrive with some delays or may be lost:
0-150 ms: this is acceptable for human ear;
150-400 ms: this is acceptable only for inter-continental calls;
> 400 ms: this is not acceptable and it harms conversation;
TCP or UDP?
UDP and TCP packets arrive (theoretically) at the receiver at the same time; the only difference is that TCP has to wait for the acknowledge packets → UDP would be the most natural choice. Indeed Skype often uses TCP because it is simpler to go through NATs and firewalls even if sometimes there may occur small silences due to sliding-window mechanisms.
Migration from circuit switching to packet switching
The traditional circuit-switching network (POTS) can be migrated to a IP-based packet-switching network in a gradual way:
Telephone over IP (ToIP)-based network: terminals at network edges still work in a circuit-switching way, but the network backbone is based on IP and performs internally packetization → as VoIP usage is hidden from the user additional multimedia services are not available to the end user.New telecom operators can build their phone networks as ToIP-based networks → telecom operators can save money by building and maintaining a single integrated infrastructure;
IP network: all terminals are VoIP, but intelligent network services (e.g. toll-free numbers) are still traditional, because they work so well that network operators are reluctant to modernize them;
IP-only network: all terminals are VoIP and all intelligent network services work over IP.
The gateway is a device which allows to connect a POTS network with an IP network. It is made up of three components:
The receiver should perform the following steps:
Sampling allows to convert voice from an analogue signal to digital samples.
Sampling is characterized by sensibility (bit), sampling frequency (hertz = 1/s), and theoretical bit rate (bit/s).
Encoding techniques allow to reduce the bit rate, but they may introduce additional delays due to encoding algorithms.
Complexity is an important issue when encoding algorithms have to be executed on mobile terminals (such as embedded systems or not very performing low-power devices).
Moreover some services do not support data encoded by lossy compression: for example, a fax does not support quality loss.
That is why telecom operators still prefer to use PCM64 codec with a constant bit rate of 64 Kbps: it requires few power for processing and it is supported also by faxes and other services using the telephone network.
The speaker's voice, after exiting the receiver loudspeaker, may come back through the receiver microphone arriving at the transmitter loudspeaker after a delay called round trip delay which if significant it may disturb the speaker himself → echo cancellation is thought to avoid the speaker to hear his own voice.
Packetization delay depends on the number of samples inserted into each packet, that is a trade-off between delay and efficiency:
Some redundancy-based error correction techniques may be contemplated: each packet carries also the previous sample along the new sample, so if the previous packet is lost it will be still possible to recover its sample.
When input traffic exceeds the output link capacity, the router should store packets waiting for transmission (buffering) → this increases delay and jitter. Priority queue management addresses these issues: Computer network technologies and services/Quality of service.
In order to reduce transmission delays there are some possible solutions:
The receiver should perform the following steps:
Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) is used to transport VoIP flows over UDP.
RTP allows multicast transmission also over a network which does not support multicast.Indeed IP does support multicast, but its usage requires the network provider to configure its network devices in order to create a multicast group for every VoIP flow → RTP allows at application layer to multicast data in a plug-and-play way without the intervention of the network provider.
RTP does not specify features which are supposed to be managed by the underlying layers, such as packet fragmentation and transmission error detection (checksum).
RTP just includes the 'Payload Type' field to specify the kind of packet contents and the used codec, but it does not specify how to encode data and which codecs to use (this information is specified separately by 'Audio Video Profiles' documents).It is impossible to associate every codec in the world with a code → transmitter and receiver should agree on codes to be used to identify codecs during the session setup, and those codes are valid just within the session.
Missing packets are allowed → the 'Sequence Number' and 'Timestamp' fields are combined to restart the audio/video playback at the right time instant in case of packet loss.
A multimedia session needs opening an RTP session, so an UDP connection, for each multimedia flow (audio, video, whiteboard, etc.).
It performs connection monitoring and control: the destination collects some statistics (information about losses, delays, etc.) and it periodically sends them to the source so that the latter can reduce or increase the quality for the multimedia flow in order to make the service working as much as possible according to the current network capabilities. For example, the receiver can understand that a certain codec has a too high bit rate that is not supported by the network, and therefore it can change to a codec having a lower bit rate.
RTP does not define standard ports → the RTP packets are difficult to detect for firewalls and quality of service. However some implementations use static port ranges, to avoid opening too many ports on firewalls and to make the marking for quality of service easier.
Unicast host.
Multicast host.
The traditional solutions without the RTP mixer always require high bandwidth capabilities for all hosts.
The RTP mixer is a device able to manipulate RTP flows for multicast transmissions: for example, in a videoconference the mixer for each host takes the flows coming from the other hosts and it mixes them together into a single flow towards that host.
Unicast host with mixer.
Every host transmits and receives one single flow → the mixer is useful to save bandwidth: even a host with low bandwidth can join the videoconference. The mixer should be the host having the highest bandwidth capacity, so as to be able to receive all the flows from the other hosts and transmit all the flows to the other hosts.
CSRC Count (CC) field (4 bits): it specifies the number of identifiers in 'CSRC' field;
Marker (M) flag (1 bit): it is used for marking the packet as high-priority or low-priority for quality of service;
Payload Type (PT) field (7 bits): it specifies the kind of packet payload; it generally contains the code corresponding to the used codec;
Synchronization source identifier (SSRC) field (32 bits): it identifies the RTP mixer (mixer M in the example below);
Contributing source identifier (CSRC) field (variable length): it identifies the multiple sources contributing to a multicast flow (sources S1, S2, S3 in the example below).
Voices from sources S1, S2, S3 are mixed into a flow to destination D.
H.323 is an application-layer signaling protocol suite standardized by ITU. It is a very complex standard because it inherits the logics from the telephony operators.
H.323 network components
H.323 was originally developed in order to allow communication (audio, video, shared whiteboard...) between hosts connected to a corporate LAN[2] and remote devices connected to the traditional circuit-switching network (PSTN):
Multipoint Control Unit (MCU): it implements the RTP mixer;
Later the H.323 standard was extended over a wide area network (WAN), allowing communication also with remote users through the Internet.
The zone of a gatekeeper is made up of the set of terminals it manages. A zone may involve different network layers, such as multiple LANs separated by routers.
H.323 protocol architecture
H.323 protocol stack.
Block diagram of an H.323 terminal.
RAS controller: it allows a terminal to exchange control messages with the gatekeeper:
Registration messages: the terminal asks the gatekeeper to join a zone;
Admission messages: the terminal asks the gatekeeper to contact another terminal;
Status messages: the terminal tells the gatekeeper if it is active;
H.245 controller: it allows a pair of terminals to agree with each other about parameters like codecs;
At the end the H.225 layer puts all messages together: it allows to create a sort of reliable virtual tunnel in order to send H.323 messages over the unreliable IP network emulating the circuit reliability.
Each terminal is identified uniquely by a pair (IP address, TCP/UDP port), so it can be contacted directly through its address/port pair without the need of a gatekeeper.
If there is a gatekeeper, address/port pairs can be mapped to aliases easier to be reminded by users (for instance name@domain.com, E-164 phone number, nickname). As they are associated to user accounts, aliases enable nomadicity: an user will keep being reachable even if he moves changing his IP address.
Main steps of an H.323 call
Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) is an application-layer signaling protocol standardized by IETF via RFC. Nowadays SIP is growing much faster than H.323, mainly thanks to its approach of following the internet philosophy ('keep it simple'): for example, it uses a text-based approach (like HTTP), so the codification is easy to understand. The interaction is client-server.
The SIP protocol stack is simpler than the H.323 one because SIP is a common layer in the control plane. SIP only covers signaling: it commits aspects not related to signaling, such as bandwidth management, to other already existing protocols, reducing the complexity of its design:
RTP/RTCP: it is used to transmit and control a multimedia flow;
SDP: it is used to notify control information about multimedia flows;
RTSP (Real Time Streaming Protocol): it is an RTP-like protocol used to handle both real-time flows and other kinds of resources (e.g. fast-forward of a recorded voice message for a voice mailbox);
RSVP: it is used to reserve resources on IP networks, trying[5] to build a sort of circuit-switching network over a packet-switching one.
TCP: it guarantees more reliability and it is useful for NAT traversal and to cross firewalls;
TLS (TCP with SSL): the messages are encrypted for security purpose, but the advantage of text messages is lost.
SIP signaling can be used for several additional services besides voice calls: e-presence (the user status: available, busy, etc.), instant messaging, whiteboard sharing, file transfer, interactive games, and so on. SIP supports nomadicity: an account is associated to every user, so he will keep being reachable even if he moves changing his IP address.
Terminal: every host needs to be both client and server (server in order to be reachable).
It implements the gatekeeper: a host has to register in order to enter a SIP network.
Proxy server: it manages the exchange of messages between hosts and other servers.
A host may decide to talk just with the proxy server, delegating to it all the tasks required for SIP calls.
Redirect server: it is used to redirect incoming calls (e.g. a user wants to be reachable at his work mobile phone only during working hours).
Media server: it is used to store value-added contents (e.g. voice mailbox).
Media proxy: it can be used as a relay server for firewall traversal.
Location server: it is used for locating users.
AAA server (Authentication, Authorization, Accounting): the registrar server exchanges messages with the AAA server to check users (e.g. whether the user is authorized to enter the network).
Gateway: it connects the IP network with the PSTN network, by translating SIP packets to samples and vice versa.
Multipoint Control Unit (MCU): it implements the RTP mixer, with the same functionality as in H.323.
In many cases a single machine, called SIP server (or SIP proxy), implements the functionalities of registrar server, proxy server, redirect server, media proxy. In addition, the location server is usually located in the DNS server, and the AAA server is usually located in the corporate AAA server.
Each user has a SIP account, so he will keep being reachable even if he moves changing his IP address (nomadicity). Account addresses are in the form username@domain.com; telephone terminals can have SIP addresses too in the form telephone_number@gateway.
A SIP network has a distributed architecture: each SIP server is in charge of a SIP domain (the equivalent of H.323 zone), and all the hosts referring to the same SIP server belong to the same SIP domain and they have the same domain name in their account addresses. In contrast to H.323, a user can contact a user belonging to another SIP domain: his SIP server will be in charge to contact the other user's SIP server.
In order to interconnect domains, it is required that all registrar servers can be found, since they store the mappings between account aliases and IP addresses → two additional records are required in DNS servers for locating registrars servers:
NAPTR record: it defines which transport protocol can be used for the specified domain, specifying the alias to be used for the SRV query;
SRV record: it specifies the registrar server alias, to be used for the A/AAAA query, and the port for the specified transport protocol;
A/AAAA record: it specifies the IPv4/IPv6 address for the specified registrar server alias.
The DNS record table may contain more than one SRV/NAPTR record:
How to type an account address on a traditional telephone to contact a SIP user? Every SIP account is associated by default to a phone number called E.164 address:
Each SIP message has the following textual format:
SIP header: it includes information about the multimedia flow;
SDP message (payload): it includes control information about the multimedia flow.
REGISTER message: it is used to register oneself to a domain, and it can be sent via multicast to all registrar servers;
INVITE message: it is used to set up a phone call;
ACK message: it is the last SIP message just before the beginning of the RTP flow;[6]
BYE message: it is used to close a phone call;
SUBSCRIBE, NOTIFY, MESSAGE messages: they are used for e-presence and instant messaging;
1xx = Provisional codes: they refer to operations in progress (e.g. 100 Trying, 180 Ringing);
2xx = Success codes: they are success codes (e.g. 200 OK);
4xx = Client Error codes: they are error codes (e.g. 401 Unauthorized).
From field: it includes the SIP address for the terminal who would like to start the call;
To field: it includes the SIP address for the terminal who the caller terminal would like to contact;
Contact field: it is used by the SIP server to specify the callee terminal's IP address, that can be used by the caller terminal to contact directly the callee terminal;
Via field: it is used to keep track of all the SIP servers which the message should pass through (e.g. outbound proxy servers);
Record Routing field: it specifies whether all the SIP messages should pass through the proxy, useful for NAT traversal;
Subject field: it includes the subject for the SIP connection;
Content-Type, Content-Length, Content-Encoding fields: they include information about payload type (in a MIME-like format, e.g. SDP), length (in bytes), and encoding.
SDP (Session Description Protocol) is a text-based protocol used to describe multimedia sessions: number of multimedia streams, media type (audio, video, etc.), codec, transport protocol (e.g. RTP/UDP/IP), bandwidth, addresses and ports, start/end times of each stream, source identification.
Every SDP message is made up of a session section and one or more media sections (one for each multimedia flow):
User agent A wants to register itself to domain A by contacting its SIP proxy:[7]
REGISTER message: A asks the SIP proxy to be registered, without inserting its password here;
401 Unauthorized message: the SIP proxy asks for authentication by inserting a challenge, which is changed on every registration;
REGISTER message: A computes a hash function based on the challenge and the password and it sends the resulting string to the SIP proxy;
200 OK message: the registrar server checks the reply to the challenge and it grants access to the user.
A asks its SIP proxy to contact B by sending an INVITE message to it;
A's SIP proxy sends an INVITE message to B's SIP proxy.
B's SIP proxy sends an INVITE message to B;
8. B make A's phone ring by sending, through the SIP proxies, a RINGING message to A;
A, either through the SIP proxies or directly according to the Record Routing field value, notifies B that it has received the OK message.
At the end of the call, after closing the RTP flow:
BYE message: B notifies A that it wants to close the call;
OK message: A notifies B that it has received the BYE message.
↑ The distinction between media and signaling gateway is often not clear: in fact signaling tones are normal audio samples, and signaling packets are normal data packets.
↑ It would be better to speak more in general about enterprise networks, because H.323 actually does not give any assumption on the topology of the underlying network.
↑ The gatekeeper is not mandatory: a client can contact directly a destination if it knows its address.
↑ The Admission step is not mandatory if the caller knows the callee's IP address.
↑ RSVP just tries to do that, because it is impossible to guarantee a circuit-switching service over a packet-switching network.
↑ This message should not be confused with the TCP ACK packets: it works at application layer, so also on UDP.
↑ Here the registrar server is supposed to be implemented into the SIP proxy.
Computer network technologies and servicesQuality of service
Quality of service is the set of technologies to try[1] to guarantee specific requirements about packet delay and jitter[2] for multimedia networking applications generating inelastic traffic.
Three approaches have been proposed for quality of service:
Packet marking needed for router to distinguish between different classes; and new router policy to treat packets accordingly.
Provide protection (isolation) for one class from the other ones.
While providing isolation, it is desirable to use resources as efficiently as possible.
The goal of scheduling mechanisms is to manage the priorities for incoming packets.
It is easy to implement and efficient only if there is a sophisticated discard policy:
One buffer is available per class, and always the highest-priority class packet is served.
It does not grant isolation and may introduce starvation: packets in low-priority buffers are never served because high-priority packets keep arriving. Moreover, if temporarly the high-priority queue is empty allowing to start transmitting a packet in the low-priority queue, but a high-priority packet arrives just after the start of the transmission, the latter will have to wait for the transmission to end, especially if the packet is long → transmission delays are introduced.
It scans cyclically the class queues, serving one for each class (if available).
It grants isolation and it is fair, but it does not grant priority.
It generalizes round robin by combining it with priority scheduling.
Each class gets weighted amount of service in each cycle, and the bandwidth
However this solution is not very scalable because the formula, involving floating-point operations, needs to be computed for every single packet.
The goal of policing mechanisms is to limit the traffic so that it does not exceed declared parameters, such as:
(long-term) average rate: how many packets can be sent per unit time;
(maximum) burst size: maximum number of packets sent consecutively (with no intervening idle).
Token bucket.
Token bucket is the technique used to limit input to specified burst size and average rate:
.
Basically a host asks for a service that requires some resources (path message): if the network can provide this service it will serve the user, otherwise it will not serve it (reservation message).Resource reservation is a feature which is not native in IP.
The arriving session uses the Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP) signaling protocol to declare:
R-spec: it defines the quality of service being requested;
T-spec: it defines the traffic characteristics.
The receiver, not the sender, specifies the resource reservation.
This is definitely not a scalable solution.
It still has major problems, and there are currently no reasons to better implement IntServ.
Differentiated Services (DiffServ) is an architecture proposed by IETF for quality of service: it moves the complexity (buckets and buffers) from the network core to the edges routers (or hosts) → more scalability.
DiffServ architecture is made up of two major components performing per-flow traffic management:
Marking is performed by edge routers in the Differentiated Service Code Point (DSCP) field, lying at the 6 most significant bits in the 'Type of Service' field for the IPv4 header and in the 'Priority' field for the IPv6 one.
It would be better to let the source, at application layer, perform the marking because just the source exactly knows the traffic type (voice traffic or data traffic), but most users would declare all their packets as high-priority because they would not be honest → marking needs to be performed by gateways which are under the control of the provider. However some studies have been found that routers can properly recognize at most 20-30% traffic, due for example to encrypted traffic → distinction can be simplified for routers by connecting the PC to a port and the telephone to another port, so the router can mark the traffic based on the input port.
Some Per Hop Behaviours (PHB) are being developed:
PHBs specify the services to be offered, not how to implement them.
↑ Quality of service just tries to do that, because it is impossible to guarantee a circuit-switching service over a packet-switching network.
↑ Jitter is the variability of packet delays within the same packet stream.
Computer network technologies and servicesQuality of service
Computer network technologies and servicesElements of security and cryptography
These goals are achieved is through the use of cryptographic mechanisms. These are employed in two different contexts, that is, for two different actions:
For example, if you want to send a file securely, you can apply an cryptographic algorithm by using the private key and spread the public one: in this way who wants to communicate securely with that host can use that key to encrypt the message, since only that host will have the private key and will be able to decode it.
To check the identity of the sender, the mechanism is similar: if you want to make sure that users can check that a message comes from a certain sender, they just need to use the sender's public key to decrypt the messages sent by it.
Asymmetric keys are less robust and require more computational resources for the algorithm that uses them than symmetric keys.
In many cases, asymmetric keys are used to communicate securely and agree on a symmetric key:
a host sends the public key it intends to use for that one-way communication with the destination host;
Key point: when someone receives the public key relating to an entity, it must be sure of the identity of the entity, that is, it really is who it claims to be: for this purpose we use certificates.
They are documents that allow you to check the belonging of a public key to an entity.
The signature is nothing more than a sequence of bytes, a sort of digest, encrypted by means of the private key from the certification authority. Verifying the signature means to check that the certificate has been validated by the certification authority, so you just have to use its certificate, which will contain the public key, to decrypt the signature. The certificate of the certifying entity may already be known by the host, for example because it is already present in the operating system or in the web browser, or it may have to be downloaded and in turn verified in the same way. The Root CA certificate must be inevitably obtained in a reliable way.
Computer network technologies and servicesElements of security and cryptography
Nahuatl (pronounced in two syllables, NA-watl ['na.watɬ]) is a term applied to some members of the Aztecan or Nahuan sub-branch of the Uto-Aztecan language family. The languages called "Nahuatl" are all Native American languages indigenous to central Mexico.
A reproduction of the original page 13 of the Codex Borbonicus, showing elements of an almanac associated with the 13th trecena of the tonalpohualli, the Aztec version of the Mesoamerican calendar. An example of a largely semasiological text, that holds meaning and can be read, but which does not represent phonemes of the actual spoken language.
The term "Nahuatl" is often used specifically with reference to the Classical Nahuatl language, which was the language of the Aztec Empire, and, according to Aztec historiography, the earlier Toltec Empire, and was used as a lingua franca in much of Mesoamerica during the 7th century AD through the late 16th century, at which time its prominence and influence was interrupted by the Spanish conquest of the New World. It should be pointed out that Nahuatl influence increased slightly for some time before decreasing, as the Spaniards used Nahuatl to strengthen their influence over the conquered territories and to spread Christianity; it was even used in places it had not previously been spoken. This was also done (although not to the same extent) for the Quechua in South America. When the Spanish colonies began to gain independence, the Spanish-speaking leaders (mainly "criollos") made Spanish the predominant language.
The term "Nahuatl" also serves to identify a number of modern Nahuatl dialects (linguistic variants, some of them mutually unintelligible) that are still spoken by at least 1.5 million people in what is now Mexico, as well as small populations in El Salvador and the United States of America. All of these dialects show influence from the Spanish language to some degree, although the extent of this influence varies. No modern dialects are identical to Classical Nahuatl, but those spoken in and around the Valley of Mexico are generally more closely related to Classical Nahuatl than peripheral ones. Modern variants of Nahuatl are still the most widely spoken group of Native American languages in Mexico, although most Nahuatl speakers also speak Spanish as a second language.
Nahuatl was originally written with a pictographic script which was not a full writing system but instead served as a mnemonic to remind readers of texts they had learnt orally. The script appeared in inscriptions carved in stone and in picture books, many of which the Spanish destroyed. The Spanish introduced the Latin alphabet to write Nahuatl, and a large amount of prose and poetry was subsequently written. There has been considerable debate about how to spell Nahuatl in Latin script, as many of the sounds present in Nahuatl are not present in the Romance languages Latin was developed to express.
Ruy Lopez, Riga Variation
r1bqk2r/1pp1bppp/p1n5/3p2B1/B2pn3/5N2/PPP2PPP/RN1QR1K1
Ruy Lopez, Riga Variation
Black interposes his bishop between his queen and white's g5 bishop. Usually this means black is willing to trade bishops, as white almost always takes with 9. Bxe7. White has no better move, as his bishop is threatened, under attack from two pieces and defended only by the f3 knight.
Black can take back with 9...Kxe7 or 9...Qxe7, however 9...Kxe7 is considered correct as it frees black's c6 knight from the pin.
9...Kxe7 is usually followed with 10.Bxc6 bxc6 11.Qxd4 from white, winning back a pawn.
9...Qxe7 means that white still has two pins going, and he will try to make the most of that with moves like 10.c4 which threaten to unhinge black's pinned knight in the center.
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon · Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
1 *A train of e-pucks* [Novice]
This chapter is composed of a series of exercises for the novices. We assume that the previous exercises are acquired. BotStudio is still used for the first exercises. More complex automata will be created using this module. Then, C programming will be introduced. You will discover the e-puck devices in detail.
*A train of e-pucks* [Novice]
The aim of this exercise is to create a more complex automaton. Moreover, you will manipulate several virtual e-pucks at the same time. This simulation uses more e-pucks, your computer has to be recent to avoid lags and glitches.
.../worlds/novice_train.wbt
The e-puck which is the closest to the simulation camera is the last of the queue. Each e-puck has its own BotStudio window. The order of the BotStudio windows is the same as the order of the e-pucks, i.e., the first e-puck of the queue is linked to the upper BotStudio window.
Upload the Robot Controller on several e-pucks
Stopping the simulation before uploading is recommended. Choose a BotStudio window (let say the lowest one). You can modify its automaton as usual. You can use either the same robot controller for every e-puck or a different robot controller for every e-puck. If you want to use the same controller for every e-puck, save the desired automaton and load the saved file on the other e-pucks. This way is recommended.
[P.1] Create an automaton so that the e-pucks form a chain, i.e., the first e-puck goes somewhere, the second e-puck follow the first one, the third one follow the second one, etc. (Hints: Create two automata; one for the first e-puck of the chain (the ”locomotive”) and one for the others (the ”chariots”). The locomotive should go significantly slower than the chariots)
If you don't succeed it, you can open the following automaton and try to improve it:
.../novice_train/novice_train_corr.bsg
Note that there are two automata in a single file. The chariots must have the ”chariot init” state as initial state, and the locomotive must have the ”locomotive init” state as initial state.
The purpose of this exercise is to create an automaton of wall following. You will see that it isn't so easy. This exercise still uses BotStudio, but is more difficult than precedent ones.
.../worlds/novice_remain_in_shadow.wbt
You observe that the world is changed. The board is larger, there are more obstacles and there is a doubled wall. The purpose of the doubled wall is to perform either an inner or an outer wall following, and the purpose of the obstacles is to turn around them. So, don't hesitate to move the e-puck or the obstacles by shift-clicking.
Let's think about a wall following algorithm. There are a lot of different ways to apprehend this problem. The proposed solution can be implemented with an FSM. First of all, e-puck has to go forward until it meets an obstacle, then it spins on itself at left or at right (let's say at right) to be perpendicular to the wall. Then, it has to follow the wall. Of course, it doesn't know the wall shape. So, if it is too close to the wall, it has to rectify its trajectory to left. On the contrary, if it is too far from the wall, it has to rectify to right.
[P.1] Create the automaton which corresponds to the precedent description. Test only on the virtual e-puck. (Hints: Setting parameters of the conditions is a difficult task. If you don't achieve to a solution, run your e-puck close to a wall, observe the sensors values and think about conditions. Don't hesitate to add more states (like ”easy rectification - left” and ”hard rectification - left”).)
If you don't achieve to a solution, open the following automaton in BotStudio (it's a good beginning but it's not a perfect solution):
[P.2] If you tested your automaton on an inner wall, modify it to work on an outer wall, and inversely.
[P.3] Until now the environment hasn't changed. Add a transition in order to find again a wall if you lost the contact with an obstacle. If the e-puck turns around an obstacle which is removed, it should find another wall.
[P.4] Modify parameters of the automaton in order to reproduce the same behavior on a real e-puck.
With the two previous exercises, you learned:
How to construct a complex FSM using BotStudio
The following exercises will teach you another way to program your e-puck: C language.
Until now, you have programmed the robot behavior by using BotStudio. This tool enables to program quickly and intuitively simple behaviors. Probably you also remarked the limitations of this tool in particular that the expression freedom is limited and that some complex programs become quickly unreadable. For this reason, a more powerful programming tool is needed: the C programming language. This programming language has an important expression freedom. With it and the Webots libraries, you can program the robot controller by writing programs. The problem is that you have to know its syntax. Learning the C language is out of the focus of the present document. For this reason, please refer to a book about the C programming. There are also very useful tutorials on the web about this subject like those wikibooks on C programming
You don't need to know every subtleties of this language to successfully go through the following exercises. If you are totally beginner, focus first on: variables, arrays, functions, control structures (Boolean tests, if ... else ..., switch, for, while, etc.).
In the four following exercises, you will discover the e-puck devices independently. The exercises about devices are sorted according to their difficulty, i.e., respectively: the LEDs, the stepper motors, the IR sensors, the accelerometer and the camera.
To create a simulation in Webots, two kinds of files are required:
The world file: It defines the virtual environment, i.e., the shape, the physical bounds, the position and the orientation of every object (including the robot), and some other global parameters like the position of the windows, the parameters of the simulation camera, the parameters of the light sources, the gravitational vector, etc. This file is written in the VRML[1] language.
The controller file: It is the program used by the robot. It defines the behavior of the robot. You already saw that a controller file can be a BotStudio automaton and you will see that it can also be a C program which uses the Webots libraries.
Note that almost all the world files of this document use the same definition of the e-puck located at:
This file contains the description of a standard e-puck including notably the names of the devices. This will be useful for getting the device tags.
The simplest Webots program is written here. This script uses a Webots library (refer to the first line) to obtain the basic robot functionality.
[P.1] Read carefully the programming code.
[Q.2] What could be defined as a global variable ?
For the first time, this exercise uses the C programming. You will create a LEDs loop around the robot as you did before in exercise The blinking e-puck.
Open the World File and the Text Editor Window
.../worlds/curriculum_novice_k2000.wbt
This will open a small board. Indeed, when one plays with the LEDs we don't need a lot of room. You remark also a new window: the text editor window (you can see it on the picture). In this window you can write C programs, load, save and compile[2] them (for compiling click on compile button).
[P.1] Run the program on the virtual e-puck (Normally, it should already run after the opening of the world file. If it is not the case, you have to compile the controller and to revert the simulation). Observe the e-puck behavior.
[P.2] Observe carefully the C programming code of this exercise. Note the second include statement.
[Q.1] With which function the state of a LED is changed? In which library can you find this function? Explain the utility of the i global variable in the main function.
Simulation, Remote-Control Session and Cross-Compilation
There are three utilization modes for the e-puck:
The simulation: By using the Webots libraries, you can write a robot controller, compile it and run it in a virtual 3D environment. It's what you have done in the previous subsection.
The remote-control session: You can write the same program, compile it as before and run it on the real e-puck through a Bluetooth connection.
The cross-compilation: You can write the same program, cross-compile it for the e-puck processor and upload it on the real robot. In this case, the old e-puck program (firmware) is substituted by your program. In this case, your program is not dependent on Webots and can survive after the rebooting of the e-puck.
If you want to create a remote-control session, you just have to select your Bluetooth instead of simulation in the robot window. Your robot must have the right firmware as explained in the section E-puck prerequisites.
For the cross-compilation, select first the Build | Cross-compile... menu in the text editor window (or click on the corresponded icon in the tool bar). This action will create a .hex file which can be executed on the e-puck. When the cross-compilation is performed, Webots ask you to upload the generated file (located in the directory of the e-puck). Click on the Yes button and select which bluetooth connection you want to use. The file should be uploaded on the e-puck. You can also upload a file by selecting the Tool | Upload to e-puck robot... menu in the simulation window.
[P.3] Cross-compile the program and to upload it on the e-puck.
[P.4] Upload the firmware on the e-puck (see the section E-puck prerequisites). Compile the program and launch a remote-control session.
[P.5] Modify the given programming code in order to change the direction of the LEDs rotation.
[P.6] Modify the given programming code in order to blink all the LEDs in a synchronous manner.
[P.7] Determine by tests at which led correspond each device name. For example, the ”led0” device name corresponds to the most front led of the e-puck.
The goal of this exercise is to use some other e-puck devices: the two stepper motors.
.../worlds/novice_motors.wbt
"A stepper motor is an electromechanical device which converts electrical pulses into discrete mechanical movements"[3]. It can divide a full rotation into a large number of steps. An e-puck stepper motor has 1000 steps. This kind of motor has a precision of \pm1 step. It is directly compatible with digital technologies. You can set the motor speed by using the wb_differential_wheels_set_speed(...) function. This function receives two arguments: the motor left speed and the motor right speed. The e-puck accepts speed values between -1000 and 1000. The maximum speed corresponds to about a rotation every second.
For knowing the position of a wheel, the encoder device can be used. Note that an e-puck has not any physical encoder device which measures the position of the wheel like on some other robots. But a counter is incremented when a motor step is performed, or it is decremented if the wheel turns on the other side. This is a good approximation of the wheel position. Unfortunately, if the e-puck is blocked and the wheel doesn't slide, the encoder counter can be incremented even if the wheel doesn't turn.
The encoders are not implemented yet in the remote-control mode. So, if you want to use it on a real e-puck, use the cross-compilation.
[Q.1] Without running the simulation, describe what will be the e-puck behavior.
[P.1] Run the simulation on the virtual e-puck.
[P.2] Modify the given programming code to obtain the following behavior: the e-puck goes forward and stops after exactly a full rotation of its wheels. Try your program both on the real and on the virtual e-puck.
[P.3] Modify the given programming code to obtain the following behavior: the e-puck goes forward and stops after exactly 10 cm. (Hint: the radius of an e-puck wheel is 2.1 cm)
[P.4] [Challenge] Modify the given programming code to obtain the following behavior: the e-puck moves to a specific XZ-coordinates (relative to the initial position of the e-puck).
You will manipulate in this exercise the IR sensors. This device is a less intuitive than the previous ones. Indeed, an IR sensor can have different uses. In this exercise, you will see what information is provided by this device and how to use it. The log window will also be introduced.
Eight IR sensors are placed around the e-puck in a not regular way. There are more sensors in the front of the e-puck than in the back. An IR sensor is composed of two parts: an IR emitter and a photo-sensor. This configuration enables an IR sensor to play two roles.
Firstly, they can measure the distance between them and an obstacle. Indeed, the IR emitter emits infrared light which bounce on a potential obstacle. The received light is measured by the photo-sensor. The intensity of this light gives directly the distance of the object. This first use is probably the most interesting one because they enable to know the nearby environment of the e-puck. In Webots, an IR sensor in this mode of operation is modeled by using a distance sensor. Note that the values measured by an IR sensor behave in a non linear way. For illustrating this fact, the following experience was performed. An e-puck is placed in front of a wall. When the experiment begins, then the e-puck moves backwards. The values of the front right IR sensor are stored in a file. These values are plotted in the figure. Note that the time steps are not identical for the two curves. The distance between the e-puck and the wall grows linearly but the measures of the IR sensor are non-linear. Then, observe the offset value. This value depends principally of the lighted environment. So, this offset is often meaningless. Note also that the distance estimation depends on the obstacle (color, orientation, shape, material) and on the IR sensor (properties and calibration).
An e-puck is in front of a wall, and moves backwards. This figure plots the front right distance sensor value in function of the simulation steps. The left plot depicts the real values and the right plot depicts the simulated values.
Secondly, the photo-sensor can be used alone. In that case, the IR sensors quantify the amount of received infrared light. A typical application is the phototaxy, i.e., the robot follows or avoids a light stimulus. This behavior is inspired of the biology (particularly of the insects). In Webots, an IR sensor in this mode of operation is modeled by using a light sensor. Note that in this exercise, only the distance sensors are manipulated. But the light sensors are also ready to use.
.../worlds/novice_ir_sensors.wbt
You should observe a small board, on which there is just one obstacle. To test the IR sensors, you can move either the e-puck or the obstacle. Please note also that the window depicted in the figure. This window is called the log window. It displays text. Two entities can write in this window: either a robot controller or Webots.
[P.1] Without running the simulation, observe carefully the programming code of this exercise.
[Q.1] Why the distance sensor values are subtracted by an offset? Describe a way to compute this offset?
[Q.3] Without running the simulation, describe what will be the e-puck behavior.
[P.2] Run the simulation both on the virtual and on the real e-puck, and observes the e-puck behavior when an object approaches it.
[Q.4] Describe the utility of the calibrate(...) function.
[P.4] Determine by tests at which IR sensor correspond each device name. For example, the ”ps2” device name corresponds to the right IR sensor of the e-puck.
Use the Symmetry of the IR Sensors
Fortunately, the IR sensors can be used more simply. For bypassing the calibration of the IR sensors and the treatment of their returned values, the e-puck symmetry can be used. If you want to create a simple collision avoidance algorithm, the difference (the delta variable of the example) between the left and the right side is more important than the values of the IR sensors.
[P.5] Uncomment the last part of the run function and compile the program. Observe the code and the e-puck behavior. Note that only the values returned by the IR sensors are used. Try also this part on the real robot either in remote-control mode or in cross-compilation.
[P.6] Get the same behavior as before but backwards instead of forwards.
[P.7] Simplify the code as much as possible in order to keep the same behavior.
In this exercise and for the first time in this curriculum, the e-puck accelerometer will be used. You will learn the utility of this device and how to use it. The explanation of this device refers to some notions that are out of the scope of this document such as the acceleration and the vectors. For having more information about these topics, refer respectively to a physic book and to a mathematic book.
.../worlds/novice_accelerometer.wbt
This opens a world containing a spring board. The utility of this object is to observe the accelerometer behavior on an incline and during the fall of an e-puck. For your tests, don't hesitate to move your e-puck (SHIFT + mouse buttons) and to use the Step button. For moving the e-puck vertically, use SHIFT + the mouse wheel.
The acceleration can be defined as the change of the instantaneous speed. Its SI units are
. The accelerometer is a device which measures its own acceleration (and so the acceleration of the e-puck) as a 3D vector. The axis of the accelerometer are depicted on the figure. At rest, the accelerometer measures at least the gravitational acceleration. The modifications of the motor speeds, the robot rotation and the external forces influence also the acceleration vector. The e-puck accelerometer is mainly used for:
Measuring the inclination and the orientation of the ground under the robot when it is at rest. These values can be computed by using the trigonometry over the 3 components of the gravitational acceleration vector. In the controller code of this exercise, observe the getInclination(float x,float y, float z) and the getOrientation(float x,float y, float z) functions.
Detecting a collision with an obstacle. Indeed, if the norm of the acceleration (observe the getAcceleration(float x,float y, float z) function of this exercise) is modified brutally without changing the motor speed, a collision can be assumed.
Detecting the fall of the robot. Indeed, if the norm of the acceleration becomes too low, the fall of the robot can be assumed.
The axis orientation of the e-puck accelerometer
[Q.1] What should be the direction of the gravitational acceleration? What is the direction of the vector measured by the accelerometer?
[P.1] Verify your previous answer, i.e., in the simulation, when the e-puck is at rest, observe the direction of the gravitational acceleration by observing the log window. (Hint: use the Step button.)
[P.2] Get the following behavior: when the e-puck falls, the body led switches on. If you want to try this in reality, remember that an e-puck is breakable.
[P.3] Get the following behavior: only the lowest led switches on (according to the vertical).
In the section [sec:Line-following], you already learned the basics of the e-puck camera. You used the e-puck camera as a linear camera by handling the BotStudio interface. By using this interface, you are more or less limited to follow a black line. You will observe in this exercise that you can use the camera differently by using the C programming. Firstly, your e-puck will use a linear camera. It will able be to follow a line of a specific color. Secondly, your e-puck will follow a light source symbolized by a light point using the entire field of view of the camera.
.../worlds/novice_linear_camera.wbt
This opens a long board on which three colored lines are drawn.
On the board, there are a cyan line, a yellow line and a magenta line. These three colors (primary colors) are not chosen randomly. They have the particularity to be seen independently by using a red, green or blue filter (primary colors). The four figures depicts the simulation first in a colored mode (RGB) and, then, by applying a red, green or blue filter. As depicted in the table, if a red filter is used, the cyan color has no component in the red channel, so it seems black, while the magenta color has a component, so it seems white like the ground.
The RGB channels of the current world
In the actual configuration, the e-puck camera acquires its image in an RGB mode. Webots software uses also this mode of rendering. So, it's easy to separate these three channels and to see only one of these lines. In the code, this will be done by using the wb_camera_image_get_red(...), wb_camera_image_get_green(...) and wb_camera_image_get_blue(...) functions of the webots/camera.h library.
[Q.1] According to the current robot controller, the e-puck follows the yellow line. What do you have to change in the controller code to follow the blue line?
[Q.3] The speed of the motors depends twice on the delta integer. Why?
[Q.4] Explain the difference between the two macro variables TIME_STEP and TIME_STEP_CAM.
[P.1] Try this robot controller on your real e-puck. For creating a real environment, use a big piece of paper and trace lines with fluorescent pens. (Hint: The results depends a lot on your room light)
.../worlds/novice_camera.wbt
This opens a dark board with a white ball. To move the ball, use the arrow keys. This ball can also move randomly by pressing the M key.
Follow a white Object - change the Camera Resolution
[P.2] Launch the simulation. Approach or move away the ball.
The rest of this subsection will teach you to configure the e-puck camera. Indeed, according to your goals, you don't need to use the same resolution. You have to minimize the resolution according to your problem. The transfer of an image from the e-puck to Webots requires time. The bigger an image is, the longer it will take to be transmitted. The e-puck has a camera resolution of 480x640 pixels. But the Bluetooth connection supports only a transmission of 2028 colored pixel. For this reason a resolution of 52x39 pixels maximizes the Bluetooth connection and keeps a 4:3 ratio.
The figure with the field of view of the e-puck shows where the physical parameters of the e-puck camera are. They correspond to the following values:
b: about 4.5 cm
c: about 5.5 cm
In the text editor window, open the world file:
.../worlds/novice_camera.wbt
This opens the decryption of the world of this exercise. At the end of the file, you will find the following node:
This part defines the virtual e-puck. The prototype[4] of the e-puck is stored in an external file (see The Structure of a Webots Simulation). Only some fields can be modified. Notably, what will be the e-puck position, its orientation and its robot controller. You will also find there the attributes of the camera. Firstly, you can modify the field of view. This field accepts values bigger than 0 and up to 0.7 because it is the range of the camera of your real e-puck. This field will also define the zoom attribute of the real e-puck camera. Secondly, you can also modify the width and the height of the virtual camera. You can set them from 1 to 127. But their multiplication hasn't to exceed 2028. When the modification of the world file is performed, then, save the world file and revert the simulation.
The table, compares the values of the world file with the resulted values of the real e-puck camera. Note that the field of view (\beta) influences the zoom attribute. A zoom of 8 defines a sub-sampling (one pixel is taken over 8). X and Y show the relative position of the real camera window (see figure [fig:utilisation-camera]).
The physical parameters of the real camera
[P.3] Try each configuration of the table. Observe the results both on your virtual and on your real e-puck. (Hint: Put the values from the left part of the table to the world file)
In the five previous exercises, you saw in detail five devices of the e-puck: the LEDs, the stepper motors, the IR sensors, the accelerometer and the camera. You saw their utility and how to use them using the C programming. Now, you have all the technical knowledge to begin to program the e-puck behavior. This is the main topic of the rest of the curriculum.
↑ The Virtual Reality Markup Language (VRML) is standard file format for representing 3D objects.
↑ Eriksson, Fredrik (1998), Stepper Motor Basics
↑ A Webots prototype is the definition of a 3D model which appears frequently. For example, all the virtual e-puck of this document com from only two prototypes. The advantage is to simplify the world file.
↑ the angle field means that the virtual camera is inclined in order to simulate a linear camera. In this configuration, height of the simulated camera must be 1.
The most common form of employee performance appraisal is management by objectives, in which employees and their managers set goals together for the upcoming period and then measure the degree to which the employee achieved the goals.
This method provides unambiguous criteria that are less susceptible to personal biases. However, if improperly managed it also can lead to a mentality of “results at any cost” or not reflect on-the-job problem solving.
A management by objectives is centred to what is being produced and delivered, rather than on what tasks have been performed. Therefore it leaves a margin of responsibility to the employee to plan how to produce the expected outputs and achieve the project objectives.However the "how" to achieve should be consistent with the organizational culture and with the basic requirement of fostering a healthy communication climate.
Performance objectives are not invented. It is not possible for the employee to decide what s/he has to do to earn her salary! Nor can the manager establish arbitrary what the employee has to do. Project objectives are deduced from:
The job profile for which the employee was hired (and that determines the pay scale)
The objectives of the project / programme to which the employee is expected to contribute as a team member by undertaking of specific tasks;
The communication climate of the team;
The overall working style and the organizational culture of which the employee is a human resource.
So when an employee and her/his manger agree on the performance objectives means that they sustain each other interpretation of the 4 determinants of the employee performance objectives.Agreeing on the objectives means to make sure that the employee and the managers have the same expectation about what the employee should achieve. That becomes what the rest of the team will rightfully expect from the employee, both in terms of quantity and quality of deliverables and other concrete outputs.
Specific (to the person and her/his specific tasks);
Measurable (the criteria are set on how the performance will be reviewed);
Achievable (the persons have enough resources, skills, knowledge, and time);
Relevant (objectives must relate to job profile and programme/projects plans);
As an employee proposing the objectives to your manager remember to:first
Do not include in your performance objectives the results of team work but only what the team can expect from you as your specific contribution to the team work.
As a manager you have one objective related to the performance management of your manages
As an manager proposing the objectives to your managee remember to: first
Agreed performance objectives will form the basis for planning the employee activities and for reviewing the employee performance.
OpenSCAD Workbench allows both import and export of *.CSG files - http://www.freecadweb.org/wiki/index.php?title=OpenSCAD_Module
FreeCAD to openSCAD converter http://www.thingiverse.com/thing:1751345
This page was deleted, so was partially recreated by an IB student with the aid of "Biology for the IB Diploma Standard and Higher Level" textbook by Andrew Allott, published by Oxford. It is not copied directly from the textbook, but some of the information was obtained from it, so you know it is correct. I don't know how to do referencing, hence all this being written here instead of in a reference! Unfortunately this page is not in the usual style (nicely ordered with points from the syllabus followed by the necessary information) so is not as helpful as it probably was before someone deleted the original version! Still, it's better than nothing!
Food provides us with energy for metabolic functions and all the chemicals needed for life (nutrients).
Below is a list of the 5 major nutrients included in the diet, some examples of here to find them, and what they are needed for:
Carbohydrates are found in honey, grapes, cane sugar, milk, bread and liver. The main function of carbohydrates is to provide energy that can be released rapidly in cell respiration.
Proteins are found in beef, salmon, seeds, peanuts and tofu. Proteins are used for protein synthesis - for cell and tissue growth, regeneration of hair, skin and red blood cells.
Lipids are found in oily fish, nuts and fatty meats. Lipids contain more energy per gram than carbohydrates and form the body's main energy stores in adipose tissue. Fats act as a thermal insulator to the body. Phospholipids are the main constituents of the membranes.
Nutrients are chemical substances (elements or compounds) found in foods that are needed by the human body. All nutrients including essential fatty acids, essential amino acids, minerals, vitamins, water must be obtained from the food consumed because these substances cannot be synthesized by the human body. Non-essential fatty and amino acids can both be synthesized from essential fatty and amino acids by the human body. Carbohydrates are a source of energy, however lipids and proteins can be used for energy and therefore carbohydrates are not classified as nutrients.
Minerals are found in a range of fresh foods. Apart from C, H and O at least 20 minerals are essential in the diet, each with specific use. Deficiencies cause ill health.
Vitamins are found in a range of fresh foods, and vitamin D is manufactured by the body when sunlight hits the skin. 13 different compunds have been identified, each with a specific use. Definciencies cause ill health.
Vitamins and minerals are sometimes called micronutrients because they are needed in very small quantities compared to the three macronutrients. However, they cannot be synthesised by the body and a definciency can cause ill health.
A balanced diet supplies the energy and nutrients the body needs and no more. Supplying a balanced diet is achieving an equilibrium (balance) between energy intake and expenditure.
Individuals vary in their energy requirements.
Factors influencing how much energy is needed by an individual are:
Age: more energy is needed up with increasing age up to adulthood as the body grows larger.
Gender: females use less energy than males.
Activity: physical activity involves energy expenditure.
Condition: extra energy is needed during growth spurts, pregnancy, breast-feeding, illnesses and some other conditions.
Diets containing excessive amounts of energy cause obesity.
Nutrient requirements also vary with age, gender and other factors (pregnancy, diet etc).
There are two ways to describe a language: by its syntax or by its semantics. The syntax of a language is a set of rules that defines what strings of characters (sentence or statements) belong to this language; the semantics of a language describe the meaning of a given statement.
For a language, one can decompose a statement into a string of lexemes, the indecomposable building blocks of a language. For example, the following w:Perl statement:
Lexemes can be grouped into categories. Such a category is called a token.
Parse tree of complex formula using exponents, et cetera
Extended Backus-Naur Form is intended to be a precise method for specifying the syntax of a language. It is a metalanguage, in that it is a language used to describe languages. It is also commonly seen employed in command usage or help documents.
The complete documentation on EBNF is to be found here:
[1].
The basic elements of a language would be described using EBNF terminal symbols, which are then grouped together into logical higher-level expressions of the overall language using nonterminal symbols. Terminal symbols specify actual valid character patterns used to represent things like the proper syntax for variable names in the language, or for representing numbers. Nonterminal symbols group the different possible representations of a given thing (say, numerical constants in decimal, hexadecimal or scientific notation format) into a single logical thing ([Numerical_Constant]). Ultimately, by building up the various syntactical elements and expressing the ways in which they may be combined, one ends up with a symbol representing a program in the language in question.
A couple of examples are to be found in the man pages for the awk utility.
The items in square brackets are an example of EBNF and denote an optional parameter to use on the awk command line.
In the example below, words such as 'pattern', 'action', 'expression' and 'statement' are EBNF nonterminal symbols.
A missing { action } means print the line; a missing pattern always matches. Pattern-action statements are separated by newlines or semicolons.
Statements are terminated by semicolons, newlines or right braces.
Entire languages can also be documented in EBNF. The link below documents the ANSI definition of C++, and many parts of this document are written in EBNF.
This page was last edited on 10 July 2021, and is still under heavy construction.Content that is added is likely to be moved/deleted/edited significantly in a short amount of time. All Wikibookians with knowledge in this subject are welcome to help out.You can remove this tag when the book has become more mature.
Portuguese common name: abelha-mel, abelha-europeia
Portuguese common name: irapuá, arapuã
Portuguese common name: lambe-olhos, lambeolho
Portuguese common name: jataí
Portuguese common name: canudo, iraxim
Portuguese common name: uruçu
Portuguese common name: tataíra
Portuguese common name: jandaíra
Portuguese common name: mandaçaia
Portuguese common name: bijuí
Linguistic data is cited from the following sources.
Martins, Valteir. 2005. Reconstrução Fonológica do Protomaku Oriental. LOT Dissertation Series. 104. Utrecht: LOT Netherlands Graduate School of Linguistics. (Doctoral dissertation, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam).
Jolkesky, Marcelo Pinho de Valhery. 2010. Reconstrução fonológica e lexical do Proto-Jê Meridional. Dissertação (mestrado), Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Instituto de Estudos da Linguagem.
Moore, Denny; Ana Vilacy Galucio (1994). Reconstruction of Proto-Tupari consonants and vowels (PDF). Meeting of the Society for the Study of the Indigenous languages of the Americas. Linguistic Institute na Ohio State University em Colombus, Ohio. p. 130
Santos, Candor & Cabral 2017
Meira, Sérgio. 1998. A Reconstruction of Proto-Taranoan: Phonology and Inflectional Morphology. M.A. dissertation. Rice University.
Angenot, Geralda de Lima (1997). Fonotática e Fonologia do Lexema Protochapacura. Dissertação de Mestrado, Universidade Federal de Rondônia.
Christian, Diana R., and Esther Matteson. 1972. Proto-Guahiban. In Esther Matteson (ed.), Comparative Studies in Amerindian Languages, 150-159. The Hague: Mouton.
Dixon, R. M. W. 2004. Proto-Arawá Phonology. Anthropological Linguistics 46: 1-83.
Rojas-Berscia, Luis Miguel. 2019. From Kawapanan to Shawi: Topics in language variation and change. Doctoral dissertation, Radboud University Nijmegen.
Aschmann, Richard P. (1993). Proto Witotoan. Publications in linguistics (No. 114). Arlington, TX: SIL; the University of Texas at Arlington.
Constenla Umaña, Adolfo (1981). Comparative Chibchan Phonology. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Linguistics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
Antunes de Araújo, Gabriel. 2004. A Grammar of Sabanê: A Nambikwaran Language. 94. Utrecht: LOT. Dissertação de Doutorado. Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam.
Hargreaves, Inês. 2007. Lista de palavras transcritas por Inês Hargreaves, de dois grupos ao norte do Parque Aripuanã, RO. Manuscrito.
Olawsky, Kurt (2007). A Grammar of Urarina. [S.l.]: Mouton de Gruyter. ISBN 978-311-019020-5. ISSN 0933-7636
Michael, Lev and Christine Beier. 2012. Phonological sketch and classification of Aʔɨwa [ISO 639: ash]. Paper presented at the 2012 Winter meeting of the Society for the Study of the Indigenous Languages of the Americas (SSILA), Portland, OR, January 6, 2012.
Crevels, Mily (2012). Canichana. In: Mily Crevels and Pieter Muysken (eds.) Lenguas de Bolivia, vol. 2: Amazonía, 415-449. La Paz: Plural editores.
Monserrat, Ruth Maria Fonini; Elizabeth R. Amarante. 1995. Dicionário Mỹky-Português. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Sepeei/SR-5/UFRJ.
Rojas-Berscia, Luis Miguel, and Andrey Nikulin. 2021. A phonological reconstruction of Proto-Kawapanan. International Journal of American Linguistics.
Nikulin, Andrey; Rafael Andrade. 2020. The rise and fall of approximants in the Tuparian languages. Journal of Language Relationship 18/4 (2020), pp. 284–319.
We'll use the following database, to represent a section of this family tree.
Woman = irma_crabbe.
...
List all combinations of a father and his son.
(Extra question) Can you think of a way to display those women that do not have a father listed in the database? Can you describe what you would need to write such a query??
You need to use negation.
Robberys. 343 of the Crim. CodeElection / PleaCrown Election
(1) Every person who commits robbery is guilty of an indictable offence and liable
(ii) in the case of a second or subsequent offence, seven years;
(a.1) in any other case where a firearm is used in the commission of the offence, to imprisonment for life and to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of four years; and
(b) in any other case, to imprisonment for life.
(2) In determining, for the purpose of paragraph (1)(a), whether a convicted person has committed a second or subsequent offence, if the person was earlier convicted of any of the following offences, that offence is to be considered as an earlier offence:
(c) an offence under section 220, 236, 239, 272 or 273, subsection 279(1) or section 279.1 or 346 if a firearm was used in the commission of the offence.
However, an earlier offence shall not be taken into account if 10 years have elapsed between the day on which the person was convicted of the earlier offence and the day on which the person was convicted of the offence for which sentence is being imposed, not taking into account any time in custody.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2), the only question to be considered is the sequence of convictions and no consideration shall be given to the sequence of commission of offences or whether any offence occurred before or after any conviction.
98.1 Every person who commits a robbery within the meaning of section 343 with intent to steal a firearm or in the course of which he or she steals a firearm commits an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for life.
2008, c. 6, s. 9.
In most provinces the case law has set the starting point for robbery in general start at 3 years.[1] The sentence is adjusted from that starting point either up or down based on the circumstances of the offence and the circumstances of the accused. The normal range is in excess of 2 years.[2]
In Alberta, The starting point for a mugging robbery is 12 to 18 months.[4]
Robberies involving stabbings are frequently in the four to five years range.[5]
As with most robberies and break and enters, the primary focus is deterrence and denunciation, thus, characteristics of the offender may be of limited to no relevance.
In the rare cases, robberies can include suspended sentences.[8]
↑ R. v. Wozny, 2010 MBCA 115
↑ R. v. Sorensen, 2006 MBCA 38 at 19
R. v. Nerling, 2011 ABPC 371 (CanLII) at 6
R v Saeed, 2004 ABCA 385, 357 AR 238 (no record, no injuries, low value)
↑ R. v. Biln, 1999 BCCA 369 (CanLII), 1999 BCCA 369
R. v. Jenkins, 2004 ABPC 48
c.f. R. v. Hung (1990), 113 A.R. 205, [1990] A.J. No. 1074 (QL) (Alta. C.A.), at 214: "the starting‑point for any sentence involving robbery of a financial institution is five years in the penitentiary"
The term “home invasion” can be applied to wide range of offences and so can be misleading to assume they are all similar cases.[1]
Alberta has required a home invasion is a robbery to include:[2]
↑ R. v. A.J.C.; R. v. Joseph, 2004 BCCA 268 (CanLII) at 1
↑ R v DAW, [2002] BCJ 1156 (CA)
R. v. P.J.B., 1999 CanLII 18938 (NL CA), (1999), 182 Nfld. and P.E.I.R. 14 (NLCA)
↑ R. v. Brogan, 1999 BCCA 278 at para 10
v • d • e Property and Financial OffencesOffences
v • d • e Violent OffencesOffences
Administering a Noxious Substance (245), Criminal Harassment (264), Uttering Threats (264.1), Common Assault (266), Assault with a Weapon (267), Assault Causing Bodily Harm (267), Aggravated Assault (268), Assault Peace Officer (270), Kidnapping and Unlawful Confinement (279), Robbery (343, 344), Extortion (346), Intimidation (423), Animal Cruelty (445, 445.1)Sentencing
Administering a Noxious Substance (245), Criminal Harassment (264), Uttering Threats (264.1), Common Assault (266), Assault with a Weapon (267), Assault Causing Bodily Harm (267), Aggravated Assault (268), Assault Peace Officer (270), Kidnapping and Unlawful Confinement (279), Robbery (343, 344), Extortion (346), Intimidation (423), Animal Cruelty (445, 445.1)
For some disabled people, especially many disabled artists, in addition to the basic functions of the mouth, they can also use their mouths instead of hands when typing, texting, writing, drawing and making other artworks.
An expression and a column may be given aliases using AS. The alias is used as the expression's column name and can be used with order by or having clauses. For e.g.
A table name can have a shorter name for reference using AS. You can omit the AS word and still use aliasing. For e.g.
U.User_ID = B.Rep_ID AND
B.Project_ID = '10'
Aliasing plays a crucial role while you are using self joins. For e.g. people table has been referred to as p and c aliases!
p.name AS parent,
c.name AS child,
Production at Common Law / O'Connor Application
A party may apply for an order requiring a third party, that is, a party other than the crown or its agents, to produce relevant documents for the purpose of using them in court.
The application, often referred to an as "O'Connor Application"[1], is a two-stage process. First the applicant must satisfy the judge that the record is likely relevant to the proceedings against the accused. If so, the judge may order the production solely for the court's inspection. Second, the judge must then determine, after inspection, what portions of the documents are to be produced for the defence.[2]
An O'Connor application consists of a service of a subpoena and notice to the relevant parties.
↑ R. v. O’Connor, [1995] 4 S.C.R. 411
↑ R. v. O’Connor, 1995 CanLII 51 (SCC), [1995] 4 S.C.R. 411
R. v. McNeil, 2009 SCC 3, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 66 at para. 27
See also Canadian Criminal Procedure and Practice/Disclosure#Control
A third party includes Crown entities other than the prosecuting authority and so would be subject to an O'Connor application.[1] This does not apply to materials that the police are under a duty to disclose to the crown as the "fruits of the investigation", in which case it would constitute a first party record.[2]
Records of police investigations of third parties and police disciplinary records, usually constitutes third-party records.[3] Unless the misconduct relates to the investigation or could reasonably impact on the case against the accused.[4]
Records will be either in possession the Crown or a third party depending on several factors:[5]
↑ R. v. McNeil, 2009 SCC 3 [2009] 1 S.C.R. 66 at 13
↑ R. v. McNeil, at 25
↑ R. v. McNeil,
↑ R. v. Coopsammy, 2008 ABQB 266
Records that contain certain personal information are non-disclosable where it relates to a sex related offence. In order to allow any of these records to be disclosed it must be ordered by a judge under s.278.3 where the grounds permit.
278.1 For the purposes of sections 278.2 to 278.9, “record” means any form of record that contains personal information for which there is a reasonable expectation of privacy and includes, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, medical, psychiatric, therapeutic, counselling, education, employment, child welfare, adoption and social services records, personal journals and diaries, and records containing personal information the production or disclosure of which is protected by any other Act of Parliament or a provincial legislature, but does not include records made by persons responsible for the investigation or prosecution of the offence.
1997, c. 30, s. 1.
278.2 (1) No record relating to a complainant or a witness shall be produced to an accused in any proceedings in respect of
(a) an offence under section 151, 152, 153, 153.1, 155, 159, 160, 170, 171, 172, 173, 210, 211, 212, 213, 271, 272 or 273,
(b) an offence under section 144, 145, 149, 156, 245 or 246 of the Criminal Code, chapter C-34 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1970, as it read immediately before January 4, 1983, or
(c) an offence under section 146, 151, 153, 155, 157, 166 or 167 of the Criminal Code, chapter C-34 of the Revised Statutes of Canada, 1970, as it read immediately before January 1, 1988,
(2) Section 278.1, this section and sections 278.3 to 278.91 apply where a record is in the possession or control of any person, including the prosecutor in the proceedings, unless, in the case of a record in the possession or control of the prosecutor, the complainant or witness to whom the record relates has expressly waived the application of those sections.
1997, c. 30, s. 1; 1998, c. 9, s. 3.
278.3 (1) An accused who seeks production of a record referred to in subsection 278.2(1) must make an application to the judge before whom the accused is to be, or is being, tried.
...
(4) Any one or more of the following assertions by the accused are not sufficient on their own to establish that the record is likely relevant to an issue at trial or to the competence of a witness to testify:
(b) that the record relates to medical or psychiatric treatment, therapy or counselling that the complainant or witness has received or is receiving;
(c) that the record relates to the incident that is the subject-matter of the proceedings;
(d) that the record may disclose a prior inconsistent statement of the complainant or witness;
(e) that the record may relate to the credibility of the complainant or witness;
(f) that the record may relate to the reliability of the testimony of the complainant or witness merely because the complainant or witness has received or is receiving psychiatric treatment, therapy or counselling;
(g) that the record may reveal allegations of sexual abuse of the complainant by a person other than the accused;
(h) that the record relates to the sexual activity of the complainant with any person, including the accused;
(i) that the record relates to the presence or absence of a recent complaint;
(j) that the record relates to the complainant’s sexual reputation; or
(k) that the record was made close in time to a complaint or to the activity that forms the subject-matter of the charge against the accused.
(5) The accused shall serve the application on the prosecutor, on the person who has possession or control of the record, on the complainant or witness, as the case may be, and on any other person to whom, to the knowledge of the accused, the record relates, at least seven days before the hearing referred to in subsection 278.4(1) or any shorter interval that the judge may allow in the interests of justice. The accused shall also serve a subpoena issued under Part XXII in Form 16.1 on the person who has possession or control of the record at the same time as the application is served.
...
1997, c. 30, s. 1.
In advancing a violation of rights by peace officers, the training manuals applicable to the investigation are of limited relevance since they are not indicative of violations.[1]
↑ R. v. Ferrari, 2001 SKQB 340 at 7; R. v. Akinchets, 2011 SKPC 88 - considered training materials on sobriety testing
Peace Officer Misconduct ("McNeil Disclosure")
Certain types of police misconduct records have been recommended as being treated as primary disclosure, including:[1]
Any conviction or finding of guil[t] under the Canadian Criminal Code or under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act [for which a pardon has not been granted].
Any outstanding charges under the Canadian Criminal Code or the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act.
Any conviction or finding of guilt under any other federal or provincial statute.
Any finding of guilt for misconduct after a hearing under the Police Services Act or its predecessor Act.
Any current charge of misconduct under the Police Services Act for which a Notice of Hearing has been issued.
The police have an obligation to notify the Crown of any relevant misconduct, as well as seek advice from the Crown on whether the misconduct record is relevant.[2]
The Crown are to exercise a gate-keeper function with respect to the disclosure of these materials to the defence.[3]
R. v. McNeil, 2009 SCC 3 (CanLII), [2009] 1 SCR 66 at para. 57 - known as the "Ferguson Five" categories
R v Boyne, 2012 SKCA 124 (CanLII) at para. 34, 35
Boyne at para. 35
The goal of the Vista Logo Program is to increase the quality of applications across the Windows ecosystem. The requirements in this document outline criteria that help make an application more compatible, reliable, and secure when running on the Windows Vista operating system. Applications that meet all of these requirements can carry the Windows Vista Logo artwork. This artwork is not yet available.
The Windows Vista Logo Program is one of certification. Applications must be independently tested by a Microsoft approved testing vendor before they are granted logo certification. As part of this process, a Logo Disclosure Document will be created for each application. That document will be created by the ISV applying for the logo and will be verified by the testing vendor. The document will contain information about the application’s behavior and how the application passed certain requirements. When a Vista Logo Program requirement calls for behavior to be documented, the information must be included in the logo document. Logo documents will be made publicly available for review by customers.
SBRT for cardiac arrhythmias also termed stereotactic arrhythmia radioablation (STAR)
Stereotactic radioablation has been used to safely and effectively treat a limited number of patients with malignant arrhythmias:
Unlike catheter-directed radiofrequency or cryoablation, in which tissue destruction is effected by thermal injury, radiotherapy uses gamma-rays or x-rays directed in high doses (typically 25–30 Gy) to a three-dimensional volume of target tissue
This material was adapted from the original CK-12 book that can be found here. This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 United States License
The requirements to this merit badge are copyrighted by the Boy Scouts of America. They are reproduced in part here under fair use as a resource for Scouts and Scouters to use in the earning and teaching of merit badges. The requirements published by the Boy Scouts of America should always be used over the list here. If in doubt about the accuracy of a requirement, consult your Merit Badge Counselor.
Reading this page does not satisfy any requirement for any merit badge. Per National regulations, the only person who may sign off on requirements is a Merit Badge Counselor, duly registered and authorized by the local Council. To obtain a list of registered Merit Badge Counselors, or to begin a Merit Badge, please contact your Scoutmaster or Council Service Center.
Describe the safety precautions you must exercise when using, building, altering, or repairing electronic devices.
a. Draw a simple schematic diagram. It must show resistors, capacitors, and transistors or integrated circuits, Use the correct symbols. Label all parts.
b. Tell the purpose of each part.
a. Show the right way to solder and desolder.
b. Show how to avoid heat damage to electronic components.
c. Tell about the function of a printed circuit board. Tell what precautions should be observed when soldering printed circuit boards.
Discuss each of the following with your merit badge counselor, and then choose ONE of the following and build a circuit to show the techniques used:
a. Tell how you can use electronics for a control purpose, and then build a control device circuit.
b. Tell about the basic principles of digital techniques, and then build a digital circuit. Show how to change three decimal numbers into binary numbers, and three binary numbers into decimal numbers.
c. Tell about three audio applications of electronics, and then build an audio circuit.
Show how to read the schematic diagram of the project you choose and, to the best of your ability, explain to your counselor how the circuit you built operates.
a. Show how to solve a simple problem involving current, voltage, and resistance using Ohm's law.
b. Tell about the need for and the use of test equipment in electronics. Name three types of test equipment. Tell how they operate.
Find out about three career opportunities in electronics that interest you. Discuss with and explain to your counselor what training and education are needed for each position.
Animal Science | Architecture | Automotive Maintenance | Dentistry | Drafting | Electronics | Engineering | Farm Mechanics | Game Design | Graphic Arts | Home Repairs | Journalism | Landscape Architecture | Law | Medicine | Metalwork | Plumbing | Programming | Public Health | Pulp and Paper | Salesmanship | Surveying | Textile | Truck Transportation | Veterinary Medicine | Woodwork
American Business | American Cultures | American Heritage | American Labor | Animal Science | Animation | Archaeology | Archery | Architecture | Art | Astronomy | Athletics | Automotive Maintenance | Aviation | Backpacking | Basketry | Bird Study | Bugling | Camping | Canoeing | Chemistry | Chess | Citizenship in the Community | Citizenship in the Nation | Citizenship in the World | Climbing | Coin Collecting | Collections | Communications | Composite Materials | Cooking | Crime Prevention | Cycling | Dentistry | Digital Technology | Disabilities Awareness | Dog Care | Drafting | Electricity | Electronics | Emergency Preparedness | Energy | Engineering | Entrepreneurship | Environmental Science | Family Life | Farm Mechanics | Fingerprinting | Fire Safety | First Aid | Fish and Wildlife Management | Fishing | Fly Fishing | Forestry | Game Design | Gardening | Genealogy | Geocaching | Geology | Golf | Graphic Arts | Hiking | Home Repairs | Horsemanship | Indian Lore | Insect Study | Inventing | Journalism | Kayaking | Landscape Architecture | Law | Leatherwork | Lifesaving | Mammal Study | Medicine | Metalwork | Mining in Society | Model Design and Building | Motorboating | Moviemaking | Music | Nature | Nuclear Science | Oceanography | Orienteering | Painting | Personal Fitness | Personal Management | Pets | Photography | Pioneering | Plant Science | Plumbing | Pottery | Programming | Public Health | Public Speaking | Pulp and Paper | Radio | Railroading | Reading | Reptile and Amphibian Study | Rifle Shooting | Rowing | Safety | Salesmanship | Scholarship | Scouting Heritage | Scuba Diving | Sculpture | Search & Rescue | Shotgun Shooting | Signs, Signals & Codes | Skating | Small-Boat Sailing | Snow Sports | Soil and Water Conservation | Space Exploration | Sports | Stamp Collecting | Surveying | Sustainability | Swimming | Textile | Theater | Traffic Safety | Truck Transportation | Veterinary Medicine | Water Sports | Weather | Welding | Whitewater | Wilderness Survival | Wood Carving | Woodwork
A conditional loop tests for a condition around the loop, and repeatedly executes a block of instructions whilst the condition is true. Types of conditional loops include while loops, until loops and repeat loops.
A while loop is a conditional loop that repeatedly executes a block of instructions whilst the condition is true. The while statement is used as a syntactical cocomponent of do and end constructs to produce a while loop:
An until loop is a conditionalloop that repeatedly executes a block of instructions until the condition is true. In Rexx, the until statement is used together with do and end constructs to produce an until loop:
A *repeat loop* is a [conditionalloop] that repeatedly executes a [block] of instructions whilst the condition is true. The [do] statement is used together with an [until] syntactical cocomponent to produce a repeat loop:
The block of code within a repeat loop will always run at least once
Note than unlike [while] loops, with a repeat loop, the [condition] is evaluated after the [block] of code within the [loop]. even though it is written at the beginning. This means that the [block] of code within a repeat loop will always run at least once.
The cocomponents do and while are evaluated at the start of the loop
If a [do] and [while] cocomponents are used instead of [do] and [until], the loop will behave as a [while] loop with the condition being evaulated at the beginning of the loop. This may cause the loop to not execute at all, if the expression evaluates to a boolean [false] value:
Dark matter is the matter with gravity in space, but it is different from the matter that scientists have never seen before. Dark matter and dark energy together make up 95% of the universe. The remaining 5% is only a small part of all matter and energy that we know and understand.
Pitney Bowes, model “R” (MV), 1951.
Post Office stamp.
Frank without outer frame line.
Large bird (condor) between TM and value box.
Empty panel above value figures.
M# with “P.B. METER” prefix.
Meters 0001, 0002 and 0011 seen.
Horizontal frank with double straight-line border.
Inscribed “CORREOS / DEL / ECUADOR” at upper left.
Upright frank with simulated perforation border.
“ECUADOR” in curved panel at top.
“S | C” below value figures.
“CORREOS” in panel above M# at bottom.
a. Value figure only without frame
Pitney Bowes-GB “Automax” (MV), 1966.
Similar to type 3, but smaller.
With “SUCRES” above “CORREOS”.
M# with “P.B.” prefix.
V/F: 00.oo =00.oo
Horizontal frank with straight, single-line border enclosing the frank and TM.
Coat of arms between TM and value figures.
M# without prefix below coat of arms.
Upright frank with single, straight-line border.
M# with “POSTALIA” prefix outside frank at lower left and below TM.
A. “SUCRES” 10 mm wide. V/F: 0000
B. “SUCRES” 9 mm wide. V/F: 00000 000.00
Frank without outer frame printed on yellow adhesive label.
As Type 8, but “CORREOS” above value figures.
M# with “P.B.” prefix.
A. Ornamental columns on both sides of the frank (as pictured)
B. Ornamental column at right side only, “$” at left
Pitney Bowes-GB “6300” series (MV).
Horizontal frank with simulated perforation border.
“ECUADOR” in curved panel at top.
“SUCRES” above “CORREOS” at bottom.
M# with “P.B.” prefix breaks bottom frame line.
A. Ornamental columns on both sides of the frank (as pictured)
B. Ornamental column at left side only
V/F: ≋00.oo ≋000.oo
a. As A, with dollar sign imbedded in left column
Frameless, horizontal frank with “CORREOS DEL” at top,
“ECUADOR” at bottom, and fancy ornaments at the sides.
M# without prefix at bottom.
Post Office stamp.
Frank with single, straight-line outer frame, “CORREOS DEL” at top,
“ECUADOR” at bottom, and ornaments at the sides.
M# with “H” prefix below right of frank.
NOTE: Stamps of this design without value figures and with directional slugs ("AIRMAIL", "PRIORITAIR", "PORTE PAGADO" etc. exist.
These stamps even have a meter number. See the examples at right.
Probably a Post Office stamp.
Frank very similar to Type 10 but with ornament at right side only.
Value figures preceded by "$".
M# with “H” prefix below right of frank.
Probably a Post Office stamp.
Similar to Types 10 and 11 but with no side ornaments.
One poor example reported without readable meter number.
Probably a Post Office stamp.
Similar to Type 11, but origami bird at right of value figures,
“DOLARES” above “GUAYAQUIL” and M# at bottom.
M# with “H” prefix.
Post Office stamp.
Frank with ‘large hole’ simulated perforation outer frame line.
Origami bird at top left, M# with “H” prefix at top right.
“CORREOS DEL ECUADOR” in one line across bottom.
NOTE: These stamps are often printed on special labels. Several types exist. Two are shown at right.
Rivers and streams complete the hydrologic cycle by returning precipitation that falls on land to the oceans (Figure 10.1). Ultimately, gravity is the driving force, as water moves from mountainous regions to sea level. Some of this water moves over the surface and some moves through the ground as groundwater. As this water flows it does the work of both erosion and deposition. You will learn about the erosional effects and the deposits that form as a result of this moving water.
Figure 10.1: As rivers and streams move towards the ocean, they carry weathered materials.
Describe how surface rivers and streams produce erosion.
Describe the types of deposits left behind by rivers and streams.
Describe landforms that are produced as groundwater flows.
Erosion and Deposition by Rivers and Streams
As streams move over the ground, they transport weathered materials. Streams continually erode material away from their banks, especially along the outside curves of meanders. Some of these materials are carried in solution. Many minerals are ionic compounds that dissolve easily in water, so water moves these elements to the sea as part of the dissolved load that the stream carries. As groundwater leaches through layers of soil and rock, minerals dissolve and are carried away. Groundwater contributes most of the dissolved components that streams carry. Once an element has completely dissolved, it will likely be carried to the ocean, regardless of the velocity of the stream. In some circumstances, the stream water could become saturated with dissolved materials, in which case elements of those minerals might precipitate out of the water before they reach the ocean.
Another way that rivers and streams move weathered materials is as the suspended load. These are pieces of rock that are carried as solids as the river flows. Unlike dissolved load, the size of the particle that can be carried as suspended load is determined by the velocity of the stream. As a stream flows faster, it can carry larger and larger particles. The larger the size particle that can be carried by a stream, the greater the stream's competence. If a stream has a steep slope or gradient, it will have a faster velocity, which means it will be able to carry larger materials in suspension. At flood stage, rivers flow much faster and do more erosion because the added water increases the stream's velocity. Sand, silt and clay
Figure 10.2: Rivers carry sand, silt and clay as suspended load. During flood stage, the suspended load greatly increases as stream velocity increases.
The last way that rivers and streams move weathered materials is as bed load. This means that although the water in the stream is capable of bumping and pushing these particles along, it is not able to pick them up and carry them continuously. Bed load is named for the fact that these particles get nudged and rolled along the stream bed as the water flows. Occasionally a larger size particle will get knocked into the main part of the stream flow, but then it settles back down to the stream bed because it is too heavy to remain suspended in the water. This is called saltation, which we will learn about later in this chapter with transport of particles by wind. Streams with high velocities and steep gradients do a great deal of down cutting into the stream bed, which is primarily accomplished by movement of particles that make up the bed load. Particles that move along as the bed load of a stream do not move continuously along, but rather in small steps or jumps with periods of remaining stationary in between.
As a stream moves water from high elevations, like mountains, towards low elevations, like the ocean, which is at sea level, the work of the stream changes. At high elevations, streams are just beginning streams that have small channels and steep gradients. This means that the stream will have a high velocity and will do lots of work eroding its stream bed. The higher the elevation, the farther the stream is from where it eventually meets the sea. Base level is the term for where a stream meets sea level or standing water, like a lake or the ocean. Streams will work to downcut their stream beds until they reach base level.
As a stream moves out of high mountainous areas into lower areas closer to sea level, the stream is closer to its base level and does more work eroding the edges of its banks than downcutting into its stream bed. At some point in most streams, there are curves or bends in the stream channel called meanders (Figure 10.3). The stream erodes material along its outer banks and deposits material along the inside curves of a meander as it flows to the ocean (Figure 10.4). This causes these meanders to migrate laterally over time. The erosion of the outside edge of the stream's banks begins the work of carving a floodplain, which is a flat level area surrounding the stream channel.
Figure 10.3: Here a stream can be seen actively eroding its outer banks along a meander.
Figure 10.4: This stream has deposited larger materials like gravel and pebbles along the inside curve of a meander.
Once a stream nears the ocean, it is very close to its base level and now deposits more materials than it erodes. As you just learned, one place where a river deposits material is along the inside edges of meanders. If you ever decide to pan for gold or look for artifacts from an older town or civilization, you will sift through these deposits. Gold is one of the densest elements on Earth. Streams are lazy and never want to carry more materials than absolutely necessary. It will drop off the heaviest and largest particles first, that is why you might find gold in a stream deposit. Imagine that you had to carry all that you would need for a week as you walked many kilometers. At first you might not mind the weight of what you are carrying at all, but as you get tired, you will look to drop off the heaviest things you are carrying first!
When a river floods or overflows its channel, the area where the stream flows is suddenly much broader and shallower than it was when it was in its channel. This slows down the velocity of the stream’s flow and causes the stream to drop off much of its load. The farmers who use the floodplain areas around the Nile River rely on these deposits to supply nutrients to their fields each year as the river floods its banks. At flood stage, a river will also build natural levees as the largest size particles build a higher area around the edges of the stream channel (Figure 10.5).
When a river meets either standing water or nearly flat lying ground, it will deposit its load. If this happens in water, a river may form a delta. From its headwaters in the mountains, along a journey of many kilometers, rivers carry the eroded materials that form their stream load. Suddenly the river slows down tremendously in velocity, and drops the tremendous load of sediments it has been carrying. Deltas are relatively flat topped, often triangular shaped deposits of sediments that form where a large river meets the ocean. The name delta comes from the capital Greek letter delta, which is a triangle, even though not all deltas have this shape. A triangular shaped delta forms as the main stream channel splits into many smaller distributaries. As the channel shifts back and forth dropping off sediments and moving to a new channel location a wide triangular deposit forms.
There are three types of beds that make up a delta (Figure 10.6). The first particles to be dropped off are the coarsest sediments and these form sloped layers called foreset beds that make up the front edge of the delta. Further out into calmer water, lighter, more fine grained sediments form thin, horizontal layers. These are called bottomset beds. During floodstage, the whole delta can be covered by finer sediments which will overlie the existing delta. These are called topset beds. These form last and lie on top of the rest of the delta.
Figure 10.6: The three types of beds that form the layers of a delta.
Not all large rivers form deltas as they meet the ocean. Whether a delta forms depends on the action of waves and tides. If the water is quiet water such as a gulf or shallow sea, a delta may form. If the sediments are carried away, then no delta will form. Sediments brought to the shore and distributed along coastlines by longshore transport form our beaches and barrier islands.
If a river or stream suddenly reaches nearly flat ground, like a broad flat valley or plain, an alluvial fan develops at the base of the slope (Figure 10.7). An alluvial fan is a curved top, fan shaped deposit of coarse sediments that drop off as the stream suddenly loses velocity. The fan spreads out in a curve in the direction of the flat land as many stream channels move across the curved surface of the alluvial fan, forming and unforming many channels as sediments are deposited. Alluvial fans generally form in more arid regions.
Figure 10.7: This satellite photo of an alluvial fan in Iran shows the typical fan shape of these deposits. The stream forming the alluvial fan runs from the mountains in the southwest (lower left) corner of the photograph toward the flatter land to the northeast (upper right). The green rectangles are farm fields which utilize the distributed water.
Not all water that falls on the land flows through rivers and streams. When it rains, much of the water sinks into the ground and moves through pore spaces in soil and cracks and fractures in rock. This water necessarily moves slowly, mostly under the influence of gravity. Yet groundwater is still a strong erosional force, as this water works to dissolve away solid rock. If you have ever explored a cave or seen a sinkhole, you have some experience with the work of groundwater (Figure 10.8).
Figure 10.8: Groundwater forms when water sinks into the ground rather than forming rivers or streams.
Figure 10.9: Caverns form where groundwater dissolves rock.
As groundwater moves through spaces between mineral grains, it works to dissolve and carry away different elements. Some types of minerals are easily dissolved by groundwater. Rainwater absorbs carbon dioxide (CO2) as it falls through the air. The carbon dioxide combines with water to form carbonic acid. This naturally occurring weak acid readily dissolves many types of rock, including limestone. If you have ever watched an antacid tablet dissolve in water, you have seen an example of just how quickly this type of rock is eroded away. Caves are one of nature's most spectacular demonstrations of erosion (Figure 10.9). Working slowly over many years, groundwater dissolves and carries away elements of once solid rock in solution. First it travels along small cracks and fractures, gradually enlarging them. In time, caverns many football fields long and as high as many meters tall can form.
A sinkhole could form if the roof of an underground cave collapses. Some sinkholes are large enough to swallow up a home or several homes in a neighborhood (Figure 10.10). As groundwater dissolves away solid rock, it carries those minerals in solution as it travels. As groundwater drips through openings, several interesting types of formations occur. Stalactites are icicle like deposits of calcium carbonate which form as layer on layer of calcite drips from the ceiling, coating the 'icicle' (Figure 10.11). As mineral rich material drips to the floor of a cave, stalagmites form rounded deposits of calcium carbonate on the floor of the cave. The word stalactite has a 'C', so you can remember it forms from the ceiling, while the 'G' in stalagmite reminds you it forms on the ground. If a stalactite and stalagmite join together, they form a column. One of the wonders of visiting a cave is to witness the beauty of these amazing and strangely captivating structures. Caves also produce a beautiful type of rock, formed from calcium carbonate called travertine. This happens when groundwater saturated with calcium carbonate suddenly precipitates out as the mineral calcite or aragonite. Mineral springs that produce travertine can be hot springs or the water may just be warm or could even be cold (Figure 10.12).
Figure 10.10: This sinkhole formed in Florida.
Figure 10.11: Stalactites form as calcium carbonate drips from the ceiling of a cave, forming beautiful icicle-like formations.
Figure 10.13: Travertine is a beautiful form of limestone that forms as calcium carbonate precipitates.
Rivers and streams erode the land as they move from higher elevations to the sea.
Eroded materials can be carried in a river as dissolved load, suspended load, or bed load.
A river will deeply erode the land when it is far from its base level, the elevation where it enters standing water like the ocean.
As a river develops bends, called meanders, it forms a broad, flat area known as a floodplain.
At the end of a stream, a delta or an alluvial fan might form where the river drops off much of the load of sediments it carries.
Caves form underground as groundwater gradually dissolves away rock.
What are the three kinds of load that make up the particles a stream carries. Name and define each type.
What is a stream's gradient? What effect does it have on the work of a stream?
Describe several erosional areas produced by streams. Explain why erosion occurs here.
What type of gradient or slope would a river have when it is actively eroding its stream bed? Explain.
When would a river form an alluvial fan and when will it form a delta? Describe the characteristics of each type of deposit.
What are two formations that form inside caves?
What erosional feature formed by groundwater could swallow up your house?
Curved top, fan shaped deposit of coarse sediments that forms when a stream suddenly meets flat ground.
The elevation at which a river meets standing water; a stream cannot erode below this level.
The largest particles moved by streams; move by rolling or bumping along the stream bed.
A measure of the largest particle a stream can carry.
A flat topped, triangular shaped deposit of sediments that forms where a river meets standing water.
The elements carried in solution by a stream.
Smaller branching channels that spread out over the surface of a delta.
Broad, flat lying plain surrounding a stream channel; created by the stream.
Water that moves through pore spaces and fractures in soil and rock.
Coarse grained deposits of sediments that build up along a stream's banks as it floods.
The intermittent movement of bed load particles, as they are carried by the flow and then settle back down.
Circular hole in the ground that forms as the roof of a cave collapses.
An icicle like formation of calcium carbonate that forms as saturated water drips from the ceiling of a cave.
Rounded, cone shaped formation of calcium carbonate that forms in caves as water drips onto the floor.
Solid particles that are carried in the main stream flow.
Beautiful deposit of calcium carbonate that forms around hot springs.
Would a stream that begins at high elevation be likely to do more erosion than a stream that begins at lower elevations?
What differences would there be on Earth’s surface without rivers and streams?
Do you think a flash flood along a normally dry river valley would be a dangerous event?
Do you think caves could form in your neighborhood?
Generally this topic is discussed when covering mass spectrometry and occurs generally by the same mechanisms.[3][4]
One of the lone pair electrons moves down to form a pi bond with an electron from an adjacent (alpha) bond.The other electron from the bond moves to an adjacent atom (not one adjacent to the lone pair atom) creating a radical. This creates a double bond adjacent to the lone pair atom (oxygen is a good example) and breaks/cleaves the bond from which the two electrons were removed.
Example C-C-(O::)-H > C-C-(O:.+)-H > C' + (C=O:+)-H where : is a lone pair + is a positive charge and ' is a radical/free electron
In molecules containing carbonyl groups, often competes with McLafferty rearrangement.
↑ Hathaway, Bruce A. (2005). Organic chemistry the easy way. Woodbury, N.Y: Barron's Educational Series. p. 315. ISBN 0-7641-2794-2. http://books.google.com/books?id=fjy2oJuJ_0kC&pg=PA315&dq=%22Alpha+cleavage%22+%22carbon-carbon+bond%22&lr=lang_en&num=20&as_brr=3&ei=LsVySOaJNZOkiwGD_LgO&sig=ACfU3U3IlpMzSiZN4SPDARQjeuWcUVZLyA.
↑ Todd, J. F. J. (1991). "Recommendations for nomenclature and symbolism for mass spectroscopy (including an appendix of terms used in vacuum technology). (Recommendations 1991)". Pure and Applied Chemistry 63: 1541. doi:10.1351/pac199163101541.
↑ Verhoeven, J. W. (1996). "Glossary of terms used in photochemistry (IUPAC Recommendations 1996)". Pure and Applied Chemistry 68: 2223. doi:10.1351/pac199668122223.
Circular breathing is the process of inhaling through your nose while playing a woodwind instrument in order to enable continuous sound without a pause for breath. It was initially a didgeridoo technique but has been adopted by other woodwind instruments where it is used in a number of contemporary compositions. To do this, you puff you cheeks out while playing, then close your throat and play only with the pressure from your oral cavity for a second or so while you inhale. While it is sometimes described as ‘breathing in and out at the same time’ and this is the effect while playing an instrument, there is never actually air passing both ways through your lungs at any one time.
The simplest step to start learning to circular breathe is to practice puffing your cheeks and then expelling that air smoothly with your throat closed. Some ways of practicing getting the airflow consistent include blowing down a straw into a glass of water, blowing onto your hand, or blowing a raspberry. You will notice that you need some ‘back pressure’ in order to keep the airstream constant.
Once that is comfortable, try inhaling through your nose while you do so.
The final step is being able to then switch from expelling air with your oral cavity to expelling air with your lungs keeping the flow constant. Be careful not to break the sound or ‘throat articulate’ (a ‘g’ or ‘k’ sound). Try blowing onto your hand for a few breaths to get this transition smooth.
To translate this technique onto your instrument you have to get used to creating enough pressure with your cheeks to get a steady sound out. With saxophone, it can be helpful to start on just the neck and mouthpiece as there is less backpressure from the instrument and any fluctuation in pressure will be noticeable in the tone. These are the fundamental steps in circular breathing over a long tone:
First of all, play a steady long tone.
While you are playing puff your cheeks out while continuing to exhale with you lungs.
Then close your throat and switch to expelling air with your oral cavity like you practiced earlier. Breathe in quickly through your nose before the air in your cheeks runs out.
Then switch back to exhaling with your (now full) lungs.
Try maintaining a long tone for a few breaths to get this process smooth.
Because the tone is often affected by circular breathing, it is usual to disguise this by circular breathing over moving passages rather than long tones. On your set up instrument, pick a simple pattern of about four notes in the middle to upper register and practice circular breathing over it.
Like any extended technique, circular breathing is easier to integrate with certain conditions than with others. In particular it is most compatible with:
Moving passages that disguise any momentary fluctuations of tone or pitch
The middle to upper register on your instrument (the lower register risks splitting up the octave and the very high register risks fluctuations in pitch)
The notes that speak the easiest on your instrument (anything that requires very precise voicing such as multiphonics or altissimo will risk splitting)
(for doublers) higher pitched instruments with more backpressure such as alto and soprano saxophone rather than baritone or tenor.
As many compositions that require circular breathing exploit its ability to enable continuous technique, endurance can be a big factor in performance. One of the more usual problems, especially when playing softer dynamics, is ending up with too much air in your lungs – if you have nowhere to breathe in, you also have nowhere to breathe out. It is therefore necessary to learn how to ‘backwards circular breathe’, expelling air through your nose while you play. This is exactly the same process as circular breathing except that you exhale rather than inhale and is usual immediately followed by a circular breath in.
Like regular breathing, staying relaxed and using your air efficiently will make your life a lot easier while you perform. When circular breathing is a new technique, it can be easy to get stressed and tense while trying to co-ordinate it. If you are finding that you run out of air and lose endurance when circular breathing the exercises you apply to regular breathing will come in handy. Always stand correctly and inhale deep in your torso with open and relaxed nasal passages. If you are tense and make sudden and jerky movements you will use more oxygen than if you are relaxed and in control. To keep your tone full and consistent, think in terms of keeping pressure constant. Always keep the muscles around your lungs engaged even when inhaling and pay attention to your airstream.
Le Api by Pasculli arranged by Kenneth Tse
Computing » Computer Science » Computer Programming » Ada Programming
In this tutorial we'll dive into the world of transformation matrices, so we can translate, rotate and scale our triangle.
See also the Wikibook section about Vertex Transformations in the GLSL Programming .
Here are a few tidbits to remember when working with matrices:
Transformations are applied by multiplying 4x4 matrices in the reverse order. M = M_translation * M_rotation means rotate first, then translate.
The identity matrix is the matrix that does nothing - no transformation at all.
To transform a vertex, we multiply it by the matrix: v' = M * v
4x4 matrices can be applied to 4x1 vectors only, which we obtain by using 1 in the 4th dimensions for vertices: (x, y, z, 1).
To do these multiplications, we'll need a math library. Shaders come with built-in, easy support for matrix operations, but usually we'll need to manipulate matrices from the C code. It's also more efficient, because shaders are executed for each vertex, so it's better to compute matrices beforehand.
This tutorial will use OpenGL Mathematics (GLM) library, which is written in C++. GLM tends to use the same conventions as GLSL, and so will be easier to start with. Its documentation also describes replacements for deprecated OpenGL 1.x and GLU functions, such as glRotate, glFrustum or gluLookAt, which comes in handy if you already used them.
Alternatives exist, such as libSIMDx86 (which also works on non-x86 processors, by the way). You can also write your own matrix code, since it's not very long, see for example mesa-demos-8.0.1/src/egl/opengles2/tri.c in the Mesa3D demos.
GLM is a header-only library, so you don't need to modify the Makefile, as long as the headers are installed in a standard path.
Our transformation matrices are meant for 3D vertices. Even if we're currently 2D, we'll describe our triangle as 3D points with Z=0. We'll move to 3D objects in the next tutorial anyhow :)
Let's define this (3 elements per vertex) to OpenGL in triangle.cpp:
...
Change the vertices array setup in render()
3, // number of elements per vertex, here (x,y,z)
GL_FLOAT, // the type of each element
GL_FALSE, // take our values as-is
GLM comes with built-in functions to compute rotation, translation and scaling matrices.
Let's add our transformation matrix in logic(), and compute a progressive rotation combined with a translation:
As we saw in the previous tutorial, we'll add a new uniform, with glUniformMatrix4fv:
GLint uniform_m_transform;
If you are not using GLM, it is sufficient to pass a pointer to a GLfloat[16] array, like so:
The vertex shader just has to multiply the vertex by the matrix as we saw above:
Our triangle, transformed
We note that we still have the aspect ratio issue (like watching a TV show fullscreen on a 16:9 monitor).
We'll fix this in the next tutorial with the Model-View-Projection matrix.
Experiment!
Try to do it the other way around: you'll make the triangle rotate after it's been moved, which means it will rotate around the origin rather than around its own center.
D is a systems programming language. Its focus is on combining the power and high performance of C and C++ with the programmer productivity of modern languages like Ruby and Python. Special attention is given to the needs of quality assurance, documentation, management, portability and reliability.[1]
Project Euler is a website dedicated to a series of math problems intended to be solved with computer programs. Each problem has been designed according to a "one-minute rule", which means that an efficient implementation will allow a solution to be obtained on a modestly powered computer in less than one minute.[2]
In this article, I pick some problems and show you how to solve them with D.
I choose only easiest ones because published solution could spoil the problem.
The purpose is to demonstrate the feature and power of D, so the codes below may not be the best way to solve those problems.
First, we need a D compiler.
All the examples below use dmd 2.0.32, you can download it from the official website.
Extract the compiler from the zip file and try compiling the "Hello World" program:
If you are using Windows, simply run something like this:
If we list all the natural numbers below 10 that are multiples of 3 or 5,
It's very easy, and the answer is:
This equation can be solved with a pencil and paper. Eh... wait a minute. We are talking about the programming language here, aren't we?
Maybe it's better to start with a common method that everybody uses at his first attempt:
Yes, this is exactly what I did when I solved the first problem.
If I were more familiar with D at that time, it would look like:
There are 2 differences from the first version:
The foreach statement, it is not only terser, but also faster.
The speed is negligible here, but you will find it saves about 10% time when tested with 1×108 instead of 1000
In case you really, really don't want it be initialized, use int sum = void;
D2's standard library, Probos, also provide a powerful algorithm module that make it possible to do it with one-liner.
It's not as fast as the second version (problem1_b.d), but it's faster than the corresponding program written in other language like python or haskell.
If you have no idea what these functions mean, here is a brief explanation:
Give alias to these functions will make the code more readable.
Check these pages at official website for more information.
Each new term in the Fibonacci sequence is generated by adding the previous two terms.
By starting with 1 and 2, the first 10 terms will be:
1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, ...
Find the sum of all the even-valued terms in the sequence which do not exceed four million.
This one-liner functional solution is split into several lines so I can write some comments in it:
It's a bad practice to calculate the fibonacci sequence with straight recursion[3],
If you run this program, fib() will be called 35563510 times before it gets the result.
This number is totally unacceptable because there are only 32 elements in the sequence below 4,000,000.
But it's amazing to see the program can be improved greatly when changed to template recursion.
The algorithm is exactly the same. But theses changes make everything done during compilation.
It's much better than the original version because the compiler compile each fib!(n) only once (1 ≤ n ≤ 33).
The compiler output the result directly and there is no need to run the program at all.
Problem 22 is chosen because it's the first problem that requires file and string operations:
Using names.txt, a 46K text file containing over five-thousand first names,
For example, when the list is sorted into alphabetical order, COLIN, which is
So, COLIN would obtain a score of 938 × 53 = 49714.
↑ "Intro - D Programming Language 2.0". http://www.digitalmars.com/d/2.0/index.html. Retrieved 2009-07-15.
↑ "About Project Euler". http://projecteuler.net/index.php?section=about. Retrieved 2009-07-15.
↑ "The Case for D - Functional and Generic Programming". http://www.ddj.com/hpc-high-performance-computing/217801225?pgno=5. Retrieved 2009-07-15.
Yeshua said: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the DEAD shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live. . . Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, to the resurrection of life. And they that have done evil, to the resurrection of judgment" John 5:25-29.
This resurrection will include all from Adam until that time, the innumerable billions who have lived and died on this earth, who did not qualify to be in the First Resurrection and to be part of the "firstfruits" company of Yahweh's Bride. They will be raised to physical human life to be judged for the things done in the body.
"It is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment"	Hebrews 9:27
This resurrection is a resurrection to judgment of good and evil actions, and those who have done 'evil' will be judged. There is no categorising of the type of evil or of the degree, it includes all those who are not completely holy. That is, all that is not up to the standard of Yahweh's holiness. 'Evil' is the outworking of the sinful nature whose motivation is from self, and not necessarily that which is apparently evil to man. That which can appear good and righteous in the sight of man, is as filthy rags in the sight of Almighty God if it originates out of the self nature for it's own sense of self-worth.
"There is a way which seems right to a man, but it's end is the way of death." Proverbs 14:12
The second resurrection is a resurrection to JUDGMENT!
Those coming up in this resurrection will be judged "according to their works"!
John writes of this resurrection: "And I saw the dead [all who ever lived], small and great, stand before God; and the BOOKS were opened [containing the record of their deeds and misdeeds, both good and bad]: and another book was opened, which is the BOOK OF LIFE: and the dead were JUDGED out of those things written in the books, according to their WORKS" Revelation 20:12
The word for judgment here (kriseõs) (rendered 'damnation' in the KJV) but it has the meaning of making a selection, to determine, to form an opinion and to undergo a process of trial (Vine's Expository Dictionary). The sense is that of correction stemming from opinions or decisions given, concerning the relevant actions. In other words, this judgment is a critique of things done, which then brings down a sentence.
The sentence or judgment will be according to the acts of the person and will not necessarily result in complete condemnation for every person, but there will be those who warrant the judgment of 'hell fire'. It will be a process of judgment that will decide each person's eternal destiny.
All unsaved people who never had the opportunity for salvation -- those who grew up, lived and died in a society which didn't have the knowledge of Yahweh, or His truth. Those who lived and died in ignorance, some in total darkness who never even heard the true Gospel of the Messiah during their lives! At that future time they will be "judged" according to their works. Romans 2:12-13
Many who have come to faith, but have either been under the old covenant, or else had not understood the new covenant, and did not enter into a spiritual 'born again' experience, they will be raised at this time.
Those who came to faith in Messiah, but who have areas in their lives that will incur judgment and/or were not diligent in serving Him , will in fact be consigned to the second resurrection . 1 Peter 4: 3-5; Matthew 25:30
This will also include those who were deceived by false religions that blinded them to the truth.
Many of the 'sons of the kingdom' of the House of Judah incurred the punishment inflicted because of their rejection of Messiah. They were the sons of the kingdom who were thrown into outer darkness (Matthew 8:12), and consigned to the second resurrection instead of partaking of the divine nature and being part of the kingdom of priests as intended for the first resurrection (2 Peter 1: 4). They were called to the kingdom but forfeited their call. (Matthew 22:13-14)
All hypocrites, those who knew to do good and did not do it but lived in a sinful manner, Y'shua calls "an evil servant", will be raised for judgement (Matthew 24:45-51). Also those who did not obey His Word - Matthew 7:19-27
The 'wicked', those entrenched in evil, will be judged at this time, including all those who opposed or completely rejected Yahweh and His Messiah in their lifetimes.
There will be many excluded from the first resurrection who refused to walk the 'narrow way'. Luke 13:23-30
If we would judge ourselves, we will not be judged, Yahweh subjects us to chastening to save us from being condemned with the world. 1 Corinthians 11:31-32 1 Peter 4:17
The lawless and disobedient will have their portion with the hypocrites and the unbelievers. Matthew 7:21-23
The Eternal Word of Yahweh God will take up His authority to execute judgment and establish the kingdom on earth.
"And He Himself will rule them with a rod of iron"; "And with Him the armies of heaven, clothed in fine linen (righteous saints), white and clean, followed Him on white horses." - Revelation 19: 8; 19:14, 15; Isaiah 11: 4; 66:16
He will take His divine authority as King of Kings and He shall reign together with His saints who are raised in the first resurrection, and they will rule with Messiah for one thousand years.
Authority to execute judgment will be given to them to institute His divine government over the earth according to the measure of authority they each have been given, and they shall rule the nations with a 'rod of iron' to bring them under subjection to His principles, statutes and laws. Revelation 20:4; 2:26, 27
They will be empowered with the authority of His Word.
"Do you not know that the saints will judge the world?
Do you not know that we shall judge angels?" 1 Corinthians 6: 2, 3
As well as executing authority over His kingdom, they shall be officiating "priests of God and of Messiah" on behalf of the people, according to His eternal purpose to have a "kingdom of priests", or "kings and priests". Revelation 20: 6; 1: 6; 5:10, also Exodus 19: 6 & Isaiah 32:1
"Who is that faithful and wise servant, whom his master will make ruler over his household, to give them their food in due season? Assuredly, I say to you, that he will make him ruler over all his goods." Matthew 24:45, 47
There is a role in this oversight in the kingdom to teach knowledge and instruct in the ways of Yahweh, to give them their appropriate 'food', i.e. to speak a word in season - to exhort, encourage and edify the 'nations' that they might learn to walk in the ways of the Lord..
Satan will be bound during this time period and mankind will be free of his influence on the earth, and yet there will still be those who do not repent from their sin, and who will after the allotted time, be accursed. Revelation 20: 1-3; Isaiah 65:20
Just as there will still be those who will rebel against Yahweh, even after they have seen demonstrated the true knowledge of Him in the earth, have experienced His goodness and benefited from His righteous government.
The earth will become filled with the knowledge of Yahweh and the earth will experience its Sabbath rest.
"And it shall come to pass that from one New Moon to another, and from one Sabbath to another, all flesh shall come to worship before Me, saith Yahweh." Isaiah 66:23
There will be a restoration of the whole House of Israel back to the land in a miraculous exodus, although only a remnant of all those born as Israelites will be saved (Romans 9:27; Jeremiah 31:7-8 ), and together both Houses (born again 'Jews' and enlightened Ephraimites - Judah and Ephraim), will defeat their enemies and they will possess their possessions, their eternal inheritance in the land. Isaiah 11:10-16 & 12:1-6; Jeremiah 16:14; Obadiah 17-18
This will be the time of the fulfillment of His promises to the patriarchs and the past men of faith, who looked for that city whose builder and maker was Yahweh. From righteous Abel, Enoch, Noah and Abraham to whom the everlasting covenant promise was made, (which promise we have entered into) who lived as pilgrims in this world awaiting that which was to come (Hebrews 11:10, 13-16). Note - Not all of Israel entered into this covenant.
Abraham was also promised, all the land as far as his eye could see, (as well as being in the New Jerusalem) which he also did not receive in his lifetime even though it was established by an unconditional covenant. Genesis 13:14; 15:7-21; 17:8
Isaac and Jacob and many others were inheritors of these same promises, as well as those who qualify from this age. To this end Paul preached,
"warning every man and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Messiah Y'shua" Colossians 1:28
"That your love may abound still more and more in knowledge and all discernment, that you may approve the things that are excellent, that [i.e. in order that] you may be sincere and without offence till the day of Messiah, .. .. being filled with all the fruits of righteousness which are by Y'shua the Messiah." Philippians 1: 9-11
We who are Abraham's seed are the Israel of Yahweh God. The new covenant was made to the Israel of God (Hebrews 8: 8, 10), and there are no racial or in-house distinctions. See Colossians 3:10-11; Galatians 3:26-29; Ephesians 2:12
He will establish His everlasting covenant with His people on the earth, with David as their king, as a prince, ruling from Jerusalem, and His tabernacle will be with them. 2 Samuel 23:5 & Ezekiel 37:21-28
From Chapter 40 through to 48, Ezekiel gives all the specifications for the establishment of the temple and the divisions of the land, and all that is to be set in order for the millennial reign of Messiah through His saints.
The time will have come that the saints possess the kingdom. Daniel 7:22
"Then the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdoms under the whole heaven, shall be given to the saints of the Most High. His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey Him." Daniel 7:27
This has been the expectation of Israel for the kingdom to come on earth, as Y'shua taught us to pray.
"Thy kingdom come, Your will be done upon earth as it is in heaven .. .." Luke 11: 1-4
"Will you at this time restore the kingdom to Israel?" - was the expectation of the disciples at that time. (Acts 1:6)
Y'shua said to the twelve disciples that they would sit on thrones, when He took up the throne of His glory, and they would judge the twelve tribes of Israel. Matthew 19:28 & Luke 22:30; Psalm 122: 5
"In mercy the throne will be established, and One will sit on it in truth, in the tabernacle of David, judging and seeking justice and hastening righteousness." Isaiah 16: 5
The kingdom of His House shall be established and the law will go forth from Zion and establish justice and peace on the earth. When His judgments are in the earth. the people will learn righteousness. Isaiah 2: 1-4; 26: 9
All these things which are prophesied in the scriptures are to be fulfilled before Y'shua the Messiah returns to dwell with His people "whom heaven must receive until the times of restoration of all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all His holy prophets since the world began." Acts 3:21
It is not until the New Jerusalem descends to earth that He comes to dwell with His people. Revelation 21: 3, 22-23; 22: 3-4
"But the rest of the dead did not live again until the thousand years were finished" Revelation 20: 5
Upon this scene of the established kingdom on earth, the dead of all ages are raised to life.
"Then I saw a great white throne and Him who sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away. And there was found no more place for them. And I saw the dead, small and great, standing before God, and the books were opened.
And another book was opened, which is the Book of Life. And the dead were judged according to their works, by the things which were written in the books." Revelation 20:11-12
There are several books of records as well as the Book of life that will be opened. Daniel said,
"The court was seated, and the books were opened." Daniel 7: 9-10
Y'shua said, "There is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, and hidden that shall not be known." Matthew 10:26
Even the counsels of the heart will be manifest (1 Corinthians 4:5; Romans 2:16), for it has all been recorded. The only things not recorded are those things which have been sincerely repented of and washed clean by the blood of the Lamb. 1 John 1: 8-10
This judgment takes place at the end of the present "heaven and earth". The present creation flees away from before Him and there is no longer any place for it. Revelation 20:11
After the judgment is completed, John is shown "a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away" Revelation 21: 1
Peter says, "The Day of the Lord comes as a thief in the night in which the heavens will pass away with a great noise, and the elements will melt with fervent heat, both the earth and the works in it shall be burnt up." 2 Peter 3:10
And the writer of Hebrews, "Yet once more I will shake not only the earth, but also heaven. Now this, "Yet once more," indicates the removal of those things that are being shaken, as of things that are made, that the things which cannot be shaken may remain." Hebrews 12:26b-27; Haggai 2: 6
Those not found written in the Book of Life are cast into the lake of fire. Y'shua warned that both soul and body could be destroyed in hell. (Greek here is 'gehenna', i.e. 'hell-fire' - not 'hades' i.e. 'the grave') Luke 12: 5; Revelation 20:14
Death and the grave will also cease to exist.
"Death and Hades were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second death." Revelation 20:14
That blessed day will have arrived when "Death is swallowed up in victory" 1 Corinthians 15:54
With death being abolished, the restoration of all things has been completed, and the Son, having completed His work, restores the kingdom to the Father, that He, Yahweh God, may be "all in all".
"Then comes the end, when He delivers the kingdom to God the Father, when He puts an end to all rule and all authority and power. For He must reign till He has put all enemies under His feet. The last enemy that will be destroyed is death.."
"Now when all things are made subject to Him, then the Son Himself will also be subject to Him who put all things under Him, that Yahweh may be all in all." 1 Corinthians 15:24-26, 28
Of that state of existence we only get small glimpses, of glory unimaginable to our natural minds for which every hardship, trial, suffering or sacrifice rendered in this life will be nothing compared to that sublime glory which will be revealed.
"But as it is written, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor have entered into the heart of man the things which God has prepared for those who love Him." 1 Corinthians 2: 9 (quote from Isaiah 64:4)
"Behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and He will dwell with them, and they shall be His people. God Himself will be with them and be their God. And God shall wipe away every tear from their eyes; there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying. There shall be no more pain, for the former things have passed away. Then He who sat on the throne said, Behold I make all thing new." Revelation 21: 3-5
"Therefore, seeing all these things will be dissolved, what manner of persons ought you to be in holy conduct and godliness, looking for and hastening the day of God" 2 Peter 3:11
An equation can be altered in any manner so long both sides are equally affected.
An equation is a statement that two quantities are equal to each other. Anything can be done to an equation so long as it is done to both sides.
x = 2y It is true that x is equal to 2 times y.
100x = 200y Multiplying both sides by 100 yields another true statement.
x + 50 = 2y + 50	Adding 50 to both sides also yields another true statement.
If there is a variable on both sides of an equation, consolidate it on one side.
2 -2 Subtract 2 from both sides
-x -x Subtract x from both sides
+ 14 + 14 Add 14 to both sides
÷ 2 ÷ 2 Divide both sides by 2
In an inequality (such as x < y), the same rules of equations apply, except that when multiplying both sides of an inequality by a negative number, the inequality sign must be flipped around. For example, if a > b, then -a < -b.
Solve for the variable in the following equations.
6x - 4 = 1 + x Take the initial equation.
6x = 5 + x Add 4 to both sides.
5x = 5 Subtract x from both sides.
x = 1 Divide both sides by 5.
2a = Take the initial equation.
a2 = 8 Divide both sides by 2.
a ==	Take the square root of both sides.
3h - 17 = h + 4	Take the initial equation.
3h = h + 21 Add 17 to both sides.
2h = 21 Subtract h from both sides.
h = 10.5 Divide both sides by 2.
y=mx+b, where x and y are constants and m=slope and b= y-intercept
Knee replacement is a major operation, so it is usually recommended only when other treatments (such as physical therapy or steroid injections) cannot reduce pain or improve mobility.
NET-ERROR is a function value.
These are a list of problems for the Limits and Continuity section of the wikibook.
Although the wikibook asserts the truth of the following questions in this table, it is a good exercise to prove them. Thus, given the continuous functions
Question 2 is the proof that a limit can "transfer" between a composition of functions.
These problems are on the difficult or, to put it differently if not mildly, non-standard type. Try to work the problems without the hints because most times, you might have a different approach or way of thinking about a problem. Use the hints only if you are truly stuck! Without further ado, here are the problems:
Prove that the function, f(x) = 1/x is not uniformly continuous on the interval (0,∞).
Prove that a convex function is continuous (Recall that a function
Prove that every continuous function f which maps [0,1] into itself has at least one fixed point, that is
Prove that the space of continuous functions on an interval has the cardinality of
.
Show that every function which is Lipschitz continuous is also uniformly continuous (and therefore the function
The Mean Value Theorem can be used here.
You may want to prove first that the region above a convex function is convex (i.e. any straight line joining two points in the region, lies wholly in the region) and then using this fact argue by way of contradiction to show that convex functions are indeed continuous (i.e. no jump or removable discontinuity)
. Using the Intermediate Value Property, show that
.
First show that the set of all infinite sequences of real numbers has the same cardinality as
(a) Use mean value theorem, once we cover it. (b) Let
.
The Black Magic spell Temper magically hardens the weapon of one of the caster's allies, increasing the amount of damage that the ally can do. The strengthening effect is not as powerful as that of the spell Saber, but the benefit of Temper is that Temper can be cast upon any ally rather than only upon the caster.
Temper has no actual effect on gameplay.
English, - ThaiMobile version
Facebook, Twitter, YoutubeOfficial website: http://www.rd.go.th/publish/index_eng.htmlv • d • e
The tax service department has a convenient menu containing sections:
About Revenue Department;
For corporative clients;
Tax documents and Code.
The Revenue Department provide two choices of services to public both citizen and organization to choose.
E-service. E-service provide to citizen or organization to access the service by himself individually . It is a service to the user one by one. This choice of service such as e-filing, e-registration, e-forms etc.
Web service. Web service is a service using technology of web service provide to citizen or organization. The choice of Web service is a communication between application program of citizen or organization (service requester) and the Revenue Department (service provider) .
With the aim to implement a "green policy", The Revenue Department of Thailand has allowed Tax payers to file their taxes online.
First connect yourself to the website of the Revenue Department. Then click on the link called "E-filing" and follow instructions. The tax payer has to fill-in a form called "Por Or 01" on which addresses, company name, tax ID should be included. Once done, just print the form and physically bring it to the Revenue Department along with user company affidavit or tax ID in case the registration concerns an individual. As usual, (some of you are already very familiar with that) each document should be signed by the Director of the company or the by the Tax Payer. Also bring a signed copy of your passport. In case you send user accountant or an employee, do not forget to prepare a Power of Attorney appointing the person handling the E-filing registration.
A QR-code payment. Since the launch and implementation of the national e-payment plan, much attention has been given to QR code as the most cost-efficient and scalable way to expand access to electronic payments. As more people want to use QR payments, solutions have proliferated. To date, there are more than 20 financial institutions and non-financial players, including telecommunications networks, that offer QR code payments solutions - many of which still remain in a closed loop.
E-Tax invoice. On January 2012 the Revenue department issued the regulation on «The preparation, delivery, and storage of e-Tax Invoices and receipts. B.E. 2555» and implement e-Tax Invoice as a new e-service to public.
The Revenue Department’s web services have been implemented since 2005 with 8 services until now RD launched 11 services. From 11 services the most frequent use are CheckTINPINService and VATService .
CheckTINPINService. Checking for validation and existence of Tax Identification Number (TIN) and Personal Identification Number (PIN) to prevent forging.
VATService. Providing comprehensive information of taxpayer who are the Value-added tax registrants. This will help a business to verify whether its partner can legally issue the tax invoice in accordance with the tax law in order to check if the tax invoice received is legal for his input tax credit. The service can also verify the existence of the business partner.
This chapter contains an overview of the terminology and abbreviations that
Consider a rocket accelerating from rest at a constant acceleration of 1g. What do we actually mean by this, taking relativistic effects into account? Obviously the rocket cannot go on increasing its speed at a constant rate (from the point of view of someone who remains at rest), because it would eventually travel faster than light. What happens is that the rocket approaches the speed of light exponentially like this.
So what do we mean by constant acceleration? Well, from the point of view of the astronauts on board, what we mean is that they experience a constant artificial gravity field which is produced by the steady thrust of the continuously firing rocket motors, which feels exactly like 1g back on Earth. To them, the spacecraft is permanently stationary but the universe outside the ship appears to be passing by faster and faster in the same way as in the illustration above.
In a relativistic world, however , we must use the relativistic formula for the addition of velocities (see appendix *), ie:
Now all we have to do is to integrate this expression to find out how v varies with t.
Fortunately this is a standard integral which my maths book tells me is:
(Since v = 0 at t = 0, there is no constant of integration). A bit of simple manipulation leads us to the first result:
NB the time t referred to here is the integral of the proper time, which is the journey time - ie the time as experienced on board ship. So this formula tells you how fast you will be going after you have been travelling for a time t.
Substituting our formula for the speed of our ship after a time t we get:
We can't ignore the constant of integration this time because at t = 0, s = 0 but cosh(0) is 1 not zero. The final result is therefore:
I find it particularly pleasing that the solution to the problem of the 1g rocket has such simple and elegant answers, particularly when we work in years and light years. In these units, both a and c are equal to 1. If we think of a round trip which is to take T years (as measured on board), the outward journey will consist of two phases, an acceleration for T/4 years, and a deceleration phase of the same length. The return journey will be just the same.
It is worth noting that a return journey to a star 10 light years away would (theoretically) only take 10 years of astronaut time (24 years back at home). If you are prepared to journey for 20, 30 or 40 years, you could get to stars 150, 1800 and 22,000 ly away respectively (that is a quarter of the way across the galaxy!) and if you are not bothered about coming home you could travel to the edge of the known universe in a mere 47 years (although whether there would be any universe left by the time you got there is another matter!).
Back to the introduction ...
Back to top ...
Some physical quantities are completely described by a numerical value alone. Such quantities are called scalars or scalar quantity.
But for description of some physical quantities value as well as direction is required. Velocity of a particle is one such example. The magnitude of velocity is represented by a number such as 5 m/s and tells us how fast a body is moving. But description of velocity is complete only when direction of velocity is specified. Such quantities are called vectors.
Two vectors are equal if and only if they have same magnitude(numerical value) and direction. Thus, a parallel translation of a vector does not bring about any change in it.
Vectors cannot be added subtracted by normal laws of algebra. they are added according to The triangle law of vector addition. The parallelogram law of vector addition and The polygon law of vector addition are extensions of triangle law.
In physics and chemistry, motional narrowing is a phenomenon where a certain resonant frequency has a smaller linewidth than might be expected, due to motion in an inhomogeneous system.[1]
A common example is NMR.[1] In this process, the nuclear spin of an atom starts rotating, with the frequency of rotation proportional to the external magnetic field that the atom experiences. However, in an inhomogeneous medium, the magnetic field often varies from point to point (depending, for example, on the magnetic susceptibility of nearby atoms), so the frequency of nuclear spin rotation is different in different places. Therefore, when detecting the resonant rotation frequency, there is a linewidth (i.e., finite range of different frequencies) due to the variation in that resonant frequency from point to point. (This is called "inhomogeneous broadening".)
However, if the atoms are diffusing around the system, they will experience a higher magnetic field than average sometimes, and a lower magnetic field than average other times. Therefore, (in accordance with the central limit theorem), the time-averaged magnetic field experienced by an atom has less variation than the instantaneous magnetic field does. As a consequence, when detecting the resonant rotation frequency, the linewidth is smaller (narrower) than it would be if the atoms were stationary. This is the motional narrowing effect.
A similar phenomenon occurs in many other systems. Another example is vibrational modes in a liquid. Each molecule of the liquid has vibrational modes, and the vibrational frequency is influenced by the positions of nearby molecules. However, if the nearby molecules reorient and move around fast enough, the vibration will essentially occur at an averaged frequency, and therefore have a smaller linewidth. For example, simulations suggest that the OH stretch vibration linewidth in liquid water is 30% smaller than it would be without this motional narrowing effect.[2]
↑ a b Solid state: nuclear methods by J. N. Mundy, section 6.2.1.1, page 441.
↑ "The Effects of Dissolved Halide Anions on Hydrogen Bonding in Liquid Water", J. D. Smith et al., DOI:10.1021/ja071933z
Voltage is calculated by multiplying amps and resistance.
V= I.R
C# ProgrammingCover | Introduction | Basics | Classes | Advanced Topics | The .NET Framework | Index
The group and by contextual keywords are used to combine a set of records in a query, e.g., 'group item by category'.
Special C# Identifiers (Contextual Keywords)
This chapter discussed MOOC learner and learner support. we can see that there are also a lot of things that the MOOC providers need to prepare. Also, MOOC learners have to promote their self-autonomy and motivation to complete a MOOC. Only these two subjects successfully run in, MOOC could reach a new and higher stage. At that time, high-efficiency providers and learners will make the best use of the resources.
G = 6.67 x 10−11 m3kg−1s−2
A 15 kg object has a weight of 8000N. What is the gravitational field strength at this point?
Draw a graph of gravitational field strength against distance.
Since gravitational field strength is proportional to gravitational force, the two graphs look very similar.
What is the gravitational field strength of the Sun (mass 2 x 1030kg) on the Earth (mass 6 x 1024kg, mean orbital radius 15 x 1010m)?
What is the difference in the acceleration due to gravity over a vertical distance d?
How far would one have to travel upwards from the Earth's surface to notice a 1Nkg−1 difference in gravitational field? (The Earth has a radius of 6400 km.)
Which is very horrible. If you plug in the numbers, you get:
Although, I have to confess, there was so much scope for error that it is almost certain that this is the wrong answer. If you fancy wading through and checking, feel free!
Here, we will cover installing an Ubuntu system to your hard drive. Most other distributions use a very similar installation process. If the differences between this documentation and your distro are too great, check the documentation provided for your distro.
Ubuntu Linux has quickly become the golden boy of open source and is considered by some as being the first truly easy-to-use Linux operating system. This is largely because of the installation process which allows the user to run the operating system prior to installation.
To start an install, place the Ubuntu CD (or DVD) in your computer and reboot.
When the computer starts again, it should display a screen with the Ubuntu logo displayed on it and a list of options. If your computer does not do so, you may need set the BIOS to boot from CD.
Once you feel prepared to start installation, click on the "install" icon on the desktop.
Answer the questions on the first few screens of the installation window (language, location, etc.).
For dual-boot systems, see Linux Guide/Installing (dual-boot).
For advanced partitioning schemes, see Linux Guide/Installing (advanced).
When you get to a screen asking which hard disk you wish to install to, select automatic partitioning unless you have planned in advance not to use this one. This will erase everything on your hard drive!
If you want to use one hard drive for multiple operating systems (for example, Windows and Linux), see Linux Guide/Installing (dual-boot).
If you want to use multiple partitions for your linux operating system (it is recommended to use separate partitions for / and /home at least), see Linux Guide/Installing (advanced).
Continue to the next screen and then fill in your name and desired password. This will become your administrative account. If you do not want to use such on a daily basis, fill in your name as master user or such and place an appropriate account name in its text box. Using this account, you can create further accounts on the computer (note that the name Administrator is not available).
Once you have done this, click on Next, check the details are correct and click Next again to start the actual installation process which will likely take around 20 to 30 minutes at the most.
After this a prompt will appear saying that you should reboot. After doing so, Ubuntu is ready to be used.
The Word count feature, as well as being able to report how many duplicate sentences have been found, should be able to report a similar breakdown to that offered for "unmarked" sentences: empty, manually translated, exact, fuzzy, etc.
Use this statement to do any of the following:
Create a new screen window;
Activate (highlight and bring to the front) an existing window;
Alter the title or rectangle of an existing window.
The parameters should be specified as follows. They are interpreted slightly differently depending on whether you are creating a new window or altering an existing one.
Specify an idExpr value such that ABS(idExpr) is different from the ID number of any existing window. A new window is created and is assigned an ID number of ABS(idExpr). You can use the window's ID number later to identify the window in other FB statements and functions. If idExpr is negative, the window is created invisibly; it's sometimes useful to create a window invisibly if it will contain controls, edit fields and graphics that may take a long time to build. You can use the WINDOW statement again to make an invisible window visible (see below). When you create a new window, it becomes the current output window. If you create it visibly (and you don't specify the _keepInBack attribute), it also becomes the current active window.
Specify the (positive) ID number of an existing window in idExpr. You do not need to specify any of the other parameters, unless you also wish to change some of the window's characteristics. The window also becomes the current output window. If the window was invisible, it becomes visible.
Note: You can't activate the window if you specified the _keepInBack attribute when the window was created, and there are other visible windows open.
To Make an Existing Window Visible or Invisible
To make a window visible, specify the (positive) ID number of an existing window in idExpr. The window also becomes the current active window (unless its _keepInBack attribute is set), and it becomes the current output window.
To make a window invisible, specify the negative of an existing window's ID number in idExpr. The window becomes the current output window. If it was the active window, it becomes inactive (possibly forcing another window to become active).
You do not need to specify any of the other parameters, unless you also want to change some of the window's characteristics.
To Alter the Characteristics of an Existing Window
Specify the ID number of an existing window (or its negative) in idExpr, and specify a new title$ and/or rect parameter (you can't change the window's type nor class after it's been created). If you omit any parameter, the corresponding characteristic won't change. Note that the rect parameter is interpreted slightly differently when you're altering an existing window, as opposed to creating a new window; in particular, specifying an upper-left coordinate of (0,0) will not cause an existing window to be centered on the screen. If you want to change an exising window's rectangle so that it's centered on the screen, use a rect parameter that's calculated as follows:
Note: If you specify the window's (positive) ID number when you alter a window's characteristics, the window also becomes the current active window (unless its _keepInBack attribute is set). If you specify the negative of the window's ID number, the window becomes invisible.
The WINDOW statement always makes the window active, unless you specify a negative idExpr, or you specified the _keepInBack attribute when you created the window. When you activate a window using the WINDOW statement, the following things also happen:
The window also becomes the current output window. (See the WINDOW OUPTUT statement to learn how to specify an output window that's different from the active window.)
A DIALOG event of type _wndActivate is generated. (There are also other kinds of actions which generate _wndActivate events; see the DIALOG function for more information.)
Any previously-active window becomes inactive (this also generates a separate _wndActivate DIALOG event).
Side Effects of Making a Window Visible
If idExpr is the (positive) ID of a window that currently exists but is invisible, the WINDOW statement makes the window visible, and also generates a DIALOG event of type _wndRefresh. A _wndRefresh event is also generated when you create a new window visibly. (Note: There are also other kinds of actions which generate _wndRefresh events; see the DIALOG function for more information.)
Side Effects of Making a Window Invisible
If idExpr is negative, the window becomes invisible, and it becomes the current output window. If the window was previously active, it becomes inactive; if your program has other visible windows, one of them becomes the active window.
The typeparameter is a positive or negative integer. The absolute value of type
Document window with room for scrollbars.
Framed dialog window.
Plain dialog window.
Shadowed dialog window.
Document window with no grow box.
Movable dialog window.
Document window with zoom box and room for scrollbars.
Rounded-corner window. Add 1 through 7 to this variant to increase the roundness of the corners.
Palette window with close box. You can add the constant _WDEFhasZoom (8) to this variant to give the window a zoom
Sideways palette. You can add the constant _WDEFhasZoom (8) to this variant to give the window a zoom box.
These values are mapped to Appearance Manager window types 1984 through 1999.
These values are mapped to Appearance Manager window types 1024 through 1087.
The attribute can be any of the following (you can specify as many of these as apply):
There is a fairly small range of textbooks on the topic of outdoor education, typically North American. These books regularly go out of print, thus much good material is lost to the community. The proposed concept for this wikibook is to harness the outdoor education community knowledge to create a combined open outdoor education textbook for use in secondary- and tertiary-level outdoor education training.
Where good quality, freely usable content already exists online (e.g., on university websites), this book may simply link to that material. However, the book also provides a way to host materials which make appropriate textbook content.
Over time, books and articles which are out of print and/or for which copyright permission allows, may be converted and uploaded, providing they fit with the book structure. Original, intact previous publications are, however, probably best uploaded to WikiSource. Content uploaded into wikibooks should be editable and modifiable.
An introduction to outdoor education.
A free culture text which covers the major topics in outdoor education.
Targetted for people studying outdoor education or training to be outdoor educators.
Lessons plans - such content would be more appropriate on the accompanying outdoor education wikiversity page.
A PDF version is available. (info)
This book is for intermediate C++ programmers (i.e. studying C++ for at least one year) who want to improve the performance of the software they develop.
This book contains guidelines and advices on how to write efficient software using the C++ language. Software correctness and maintainability are taken into account, but are not the primary concerns of the guidelines.
Most of the guidelines presented are not platform specific, and so are applicable to every processor, to every compiler, and to every operating system; the few platform specific advices try to cover most platforms.
This book is intended for advanced readers.
Inductors store energy in the form of a magnetic field. The magnetic field of an inductor actually extends outside of the inductor, and can be affected (or can affect) another inductor close by. The image above shows a magnetic field (red lines) extending around an inductor.
If we accidentally or purposefully put two inductors close together, we can actually transfer voltage and current from one inductor to another. This property is called Mutual Inductance. A device which utilizes mutual inductance to alter the voltage or current output is called a transformer.
The inductor that creates the magnetic field is called the primary coil, and the inductor that picks up the magnetic field is called the secondary coil. Transformers are designed to have the greatest mutual inductance possible by winding both coils on the same core. (In calculations for inductance, we need to know which materials form the path for magnetic flux. Air core coils have low inductance; Cores of iron or other magnetic materials are better 'conductors' of magnetic flux.)
The voltage that appears in the secondary is caused by the change in the shared magnetic field, each time the current through the primary changes. Thus, transformers work on A.C. power, since the voltage and current change continuously.
When the coils of number of turns N1 conducts current . There exists a Magnetic Field B on the coil . Changes of B will generates an Induced Voltage on the turns of coil N1 and N2 as shown
Thus, this device is capable of Increase, Decrease and Conduct Voltage just by changing the turn ratio of the coils
Therefore, the output voltage can be
Increased or Step Up by increasing number of turns of coil Ns greater than Np
Decreased or Step Down by Decreasing number of turns of coil Ns less than Np
Buffered by setting number of turns of coil Ns equal to Np
The terms 'step-up' and 'step-down' are used to compare the secondary (output) voltage to the voltage supplied to the primary.
Many transformers are specially designed to operate exclusively as step-up or step-down. While an ideal transformer could simply be 'turned around', we find that many actual transformers are built to perform best at certain ranges of voltage and current.
For example, a power transformer may be used to step down household AC (about 120 Volts) to 24V for home heating controls, etc. The output current is higher than the primary current in this example, so the transformer is made with a heavier gauge of wire in its secondary windings.
In transformers that deal with very high voltages, special attention is paid to insulation. The windings that deal with thousands of volts must resist arcing and other problems we do not see at home.
Finally, some transformers in electronic equipment are designed
This section of the Circuit Theory wikibook is a stub. You can help by expanding this section.
If you know Thai script, you may wish to help add Thai script to the table at Adding vocabulary with word association.
This is a plan for propadeutic (preparatory) lessons teaching the student the Thai script and its pronunciation (including letter combinations). The goal is to introduce letters one by one so as not to overwhelm the student. In order to raise his confidence and provide feelings of success, words used for illustration and exercises shall mostly be understandable without any knowledge of Thai: Thai words that come from English, Thai words that other languages borrowed, common transliterations of English personal names and names of countries or places whose name is not very different in Thai.
The student will have no previous knowledge of Thai. He will be taught a few letters and then given some words from this list in order to practise reading. Upon successfully recognising all the letters of a word, he should be able to recognise the word itself. For example, "(pasa) spain" is recognizable because it's so similar to the English words "Spain" and "Spanish". "(pasa) farangsez" is not recognizable because the English word is "French" and doesn't ressemble the Thai transliteration.
For now, this will just be a list of words that could be used, but eventually it shall turn into an order for letters to be introduced like Modern Greek/Writing lessons plan and then into actual step-by-step lessons like the writing lessons at Modern Greek.
The following vowels are always written in front of the word including เ แ โ ไ ใ
Please post any words that could be used here, along with a letter-by-letter transliteration, the actual pronunciation and the English meaning.
Thai words and names that sound like their English equivalent:
The letter by letter column should be ignored for pronunciation purposes.
Thai words and names that sound very different
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
A common saying says that, there are nice houses and beautiful girls in books. A book can cultivate people's emotion, and can make people become noble.
To open books when you are distressed, to read colorful books, then I entered the doors of knowledge.
You will travel in the ocean of knowledge, there are touching novels, beautiful poems, touching fairy tales, nice proses......you will be unforgettable about what you read, and it gives you a lot of fun.
The powerful Mali empire existed from about 1235 to 1645 CE. The empire was founded by Sundiata Keita and became renowned for the wealth of its rulers, especially Mansa Musa I. The Mali Empire had many profound cultural influences on West Africa, allowing the spread of its language, laws and customs along the Niger River. It extended over a large area and consisted of numerous vassal kingdoms and provinces. Islam became the dominant religion of the region. Traders from the Islamic strongholds of North Africa traveled south through the Sahara on camelback to the region of Mali, for the immense amount of gold to be found in the area.
The Mali Empire grew out of an area referred to by its contemporary inhabitants as "Manden." Manden, named for its inhabitants the Mandinka (initially Manden’ka with "ka" meaning people of), comprised most of present-day northern Guinea and southern Mali. The empire was originally established as a federation of Mandinka tribes called the Manden Kurufaba (Manden being the country, kuru meaning assembly and faba meaning great entirety), but it later became an empire ruling millions of people from nearly every ethnic group in West Africa.
There are a few references to Mali in written literature of roughly contemporary age. Among these are references to "Daw" and "Malal" in the work of al-Bakri in 1068, the story of the conversion of an early ruler, known to Ibn Khaldun (by 1397) as Barmandana, and a few geographical details in the work of al-Idrisi.
There has also been archaeological work done especially at Niani, reputed to be the capital of Mali, by Polish and Guinean archaeologists in the 1960s which revealed the remains of a substantial town dating back as far as the 6th century.
Modern oral traditions also related that the Mandinka kingdoms of Mali or Manden had already existed several centuries before Sundiata's unification as a small state just to the south of the Soninké empire of Wagadou, better known as the Ghana Empire. This area was composed of mountains, savannah and forest providing ideal protection and resources for the population of hunters. Those not living in the mountains formed small city-states such as Toron, Ka-Ba and Niani. The Keita dynasty from which nearly every Mali emperor came traces its lineage back to Bilal,the faithful muezzin of Islam's prophet Muhammad. It was common practice during the Middle Ages for both Christian and Muslim rulers to tie their bloodline back to a pivotal figure in their faith's history. So while the lineage of the Keita dynasty may be dubious at best, oral chroniclers have preserved a list of each Keita ruler from Lawalo (supposedly one of Bilal's seven sons who settled in Mali) to Maghan Kon Fatta (father of Sundiata Keita).
Pre-Imperial Maden was composed of the "three freely allied states" of Mali, Mema and Wagadou plus the Twelve Doors of Mali. Thus, it is important to remember that Mali, in this sense, strictly refers to the city-state of Niani. The twelve doors of Mali were a coalition of conquered or allied territories, mostly within Manden, with sworn allegiance to Sundiata and his descendants. Upon stabbing their spears into the ground before Sundiata's throne, each of the twelve kings relinquished their kingdom to the Keita dynasty. In return for their submission, they became "farbas" a combination of the Mandinka words "farin" and "ba" (great farin). Farin was a general term for northern commander at the time. These farbas would rule their old kingdoms in the name of the mansa with most of the authority they held prior to joining the Manden.
Mansa Musa depicted holding a gold nugget, from the 1375 Catalan Atlas.
Imperial Mali is best known to us through three primary sources: The first is the account of Shihab al-Din ibn Fadl Allah al-'Umari, written about 1340 by a geographer-administrator in Egypt. His information about the empire came from visiting Malians taking the hajj, or pilgrim's voyage to Mecca. He had first hand information from several, and at second hand, he learned of the visit of Mansa Musa. The second account is that of the traveler Shams al-Din Abu Abd'Allah ibn Battua, who visited Mali in 1352. This is the first account of a West African kingdom made directly by an eyewitness, the others are usually at second hand. The third great account is that of Abu Zayd Abd-al-Rahman ibn Khaldun, who wrote in the early 15th century. While the accounts are of limited length, they provide us with a fairly good picture of the empire at its height.
There were 21 known mansas of the Mali Empire after Sundiata. What separates these rulers from the founder, other than the latter's historic role in establishing the state, is their transformation of the Manden into an empire. Not content to rule fellow Manding subjects unified by Sundiata, these mansas would conquer and annex Fula, Wolof, Bamana, Songhai, Tuareg, and countless other peoples into an immense empire.
The Mali Empire covered a larger area for a longer period of time than any other West African state before or since. What made this possible was the decentralized nature of administration throughout the state. According to Africanist Joseph Ki-Zerbo, the farther a person traveled from Niani, the more decentralized the mansa's power became. Nevertheless, the mansa managed to keep tax money and nominal control over the area without agitating his subjects into revolt. At the local level (village, town, city), kun-tiguis elected a dougou-tigui (village-master) from a bloodline descended from that locality's semi-mythical founder. The county level administrators called kafo-tigui (county-master) were appointed by the governor of the province from within his own circle. Only when we get to the state or province level is there any palpable interference from the central authority in Niani. Provinces picked their own governors via their own custom (election, inheritance, etc.). Regardless of their title in the province, they were recognized as dyamani-tigui (province master) by the mansa. Dyamani-tiguis had to be approved by the mansa and were subject to his oversight. If the mansa did not believe the dyamani-tigui was capable or trustworthy, a farba might be installed to oversee the province or administer it outright.STUPID LITTLE PEOPLE TRYING TO GEt LUcK LOL
Territories in Mali came into the empire via conquest or annexation. In the event of conquest, farins took control of the area until a suitable native ruler could be found. After the loyalty or at least the capitulation of an area was assured, it was allowed to select its own dyamani-tigui. This process was essential to keep non-Manding subjects loyal to the Manding elites that ruled them.
Barring any other difficulties, the dyamani-tigui would run the province by himself collecting taxes and procuring armies from the tribes under his command. However, territories that were crucial to trade or subject to revolt would receive a farba. Farbas were picked by the mansa from the conquering farin, family members or even slaves. The only real requirement was that the mansa knew he could trust this individual to safeguard imperial interests.
Duties of the farba included reporting on the activities of the territory, collecting taxes and ensuring the native administration didn’t contradict orders from Niani. The farba could also take power away from the native administration if required and raise an army in the area for defense or putting down rebellions.
The post of a farba was very prestigious, and his descendants could inherit it with the mansa's approval. The mansa could also replace a farba if he got out of control as in the case of Diafunu.
Approximate extent of the Mali Empire, c. 1350.
The Mali Empire reached its largest size under the Laye mansas (1312-1389). Al-Umari, who wrote down a description of Mali based on information given to him by Abu Sa’id ‘Otman ed Dukkali (who had lived 35 years in Niani), reported the realm as being square and an eight month journey from its coast at Tura (the mouth of the Senegal River) to Muli (also known as Tuhfat). Umari also describes the empire as being south of Marrakesh and almost entirely inhabited except for few places. Mali's domain also extended into the desert. He describes it as being north of Mali but under its domination implying some sort of vassalage for the Antasar, Yantar'ras, Medussa and Lemtuna Berber tribes. The empire's total area included nearly all the land between the Sahara Desert and coastal forests. It spanned the modern-day countries of Senegal, southern Mauritania, Mali, northern Burkina Faso, western Niger, the Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, the Ivory Coast and northern Ghana. By 1350, the empire covered approximately 439,400 square miles (1,138,000 km2). The empire also reached its highest population during the Laye period ruling over 400 cities, towns and villages of various religions. During this period only the Mongol Empire was larger.
The dramatic increase in the empire's size demanded a shift from the pre-imperial Manden organization of three states with twelve dependencies. This model was scrapped by the time of Mansa Musa's hajj to Egypt. According to al'Umari, who interviewed a Berber that had lived in Niani for 35 years, there were fourteen provinces (really tributary kingdoms).
The Mali Empire flourished because of trade above all else. It contained three immense gold mines within its borders unlike the Ghana Empire, which was only a transit point for gold. The empire taxed every ounce of gold or salt that entered its borders. By the beginning of the 14th century, Mali was the source of almost half the Old World's gold exported from mines in Bambuk, Boure and Galam. There was no standard currency throughout the realm, but several forms were prominent by region. The Sahelian and Saharan towns of the Mali Empire were organized as both staging posts in the long-distance caravan trade and trading centers for the various West African products. At Taghaza, for example, salt was exchanged; at Takedda, copper. Ibn Battuta observed the employment of slave labor in both towns. During most of his journey, Ibn Battuta traveled with a retinue that included slaves, most of whom carried goods for trade but would also be traded as slaves. On the return from Takedda to Morocco, his caravan transported 600 female slaves, suggesting that slavery was a substantial part of the commercial activity of the empire.
Gold nuggets were the exclusive property of the mansa, and were illegal to trade within his borders. All gold was immediately handed over to the imperial treasury in return for an equal value of gold dust. Gold dust had been weighed and bagged for use at least since the reign of the Ghana Empire. Mali borrowed the practice to stem inflation of the substance, since it was so prominent in the region. The most common measure for gold within the realm was the ambiguous mithqal (4.5 grams of gold). This term was used interchangeably with dinar, though it is unclear if coined currency was used in the empire. Gold dust was used all over the empire, but was not valued equally in all regions.
The next great unit of exchange in the Mali Empire was salt. Salt was as valuable, if not more valuable than gold in Sub-Saharan Africa. It was cut into pieces and spent on goods with close to equal buying power throughout the empire. While it was as good as gold in the north, it was even better in the south. The people of the south needed salt for their diet, but it was extremely rare. The northern region on the other hand had no shortage of salt. Every year merchants entered Mali via Oualata with camel loads of salt to sell in Niani.
Terracotta archer figure from Mali, 13th-15th centuries.
The number and frequency of conquests in the late 13th century and throughout the 14th century indicate the Kolonkan mansas inherited and or developed a capable military. Sundiata is credited with at least the initial organization of the Manding war machine. However, it went through radical changes before reaching the legendary proportions proclaimed by its subjects. Thanks to steady tax revenue and stable government beginning in the last quarter of the 13th century, the Mali Empire was able to project its power throughout its own extensive domain and beyond.
The Mali Empire maintained a semi-professional, full-time army in order to defend its borders. The entire nation was mobilized with each clan obligated to provide a quota of fighting age men. These men had to be of the horon (freemen) caste and appear with their own arms. Contemporary historians present during the height and decline of the Mali Empire consistently record its army at 100,000 with 10,000 of that number being made up of cavalry. With the help of the river clans, this army could be deployed throughout the realm on short notice.
Terracotta horseman figure from Mali, 13th-15th centuries.
The army of the Mali Empire during the 14th century was divided into northern and southern commands led by the Farim-Soura and Sankar-Zouma, respectively. Both of these men were part of Mali's warrior elite known as the ton-ta-jon-ta-ni-woro ("sixteen slave carriers of quiver"). Each representative or ton-tigi ("quiver-master") provided council to the mansa at the Gbara, but only these two ton-tigi held such wide ranging power.
The army of the Mali Empire used of a wide variety of weapons depending largely on where the troops originated. Only sofa were equipped by the state, using bows and poisoned arrows. Free warriors from the north (Mandekalu or otherwise), were usually equipped with large reed or animal hide shields and a stabbing spear that was called a tamba. Free warriors from the south came armed with bows and poisonious arrows. The bow figured prominently in Mandinka warfare and was a symbol of military force throughout the culture. Bowmen formed a large portion of the field army as well as the garrison. Three bowmen supporting one spearman was the ratio in Kaabu and the Gambia by the mid-16th century. Equipped with two quivers and a knife fastened to the back of their arm, Mandinka bowmen used barbed, iron-tipped arrows that were usually poisoned. They also used flaming arrows for siege warfare. While spears and bows were the mainstay of the infantry, swords and lances of local or foreign manufacture were the choice weapons of the cavalry. Ibn Battuta comments on festival demonstrations of swordplay before the mansa by his retainers including the royal interpreter. Another common weapon of Mandekalu warriors was the poison javelin used in skirmishes. Imperial Mali's horsemen also used chain mail armor for defense and shields similar to those of the infantry.
Mali Empire (light green) and surrounding states, c. 1625.
It was the Mandinka themselves and not conquest by a rival empire that would cause the final destruction of the empire. Around 1610, Mahmud IV died. Oral tradition states that he had three sons who fought over Manden's remains. No single person ever ruled Manden after Mahmud IV's death, resulting in the end of the Mali Empire.
"The Mali Empire" (Wikipedia) http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mali_Empire
Preface by Samuel Mann and Lesley Smith
This WikiBook "Software Engineering with an Agile Development Framework" is designed to meet the needs of students studying Software Engineering and capstone projects within a New Zealand vocational Information Technology Degree.
A general introduction to software engineering.
Providing approaches, resources and templates for students undertaking a capstone project in computing.
The basis for the book is ten years of teaching software engineering and capstone projects at Otago Polytechnic (detailed development history).
The instruction set or the instruction set architecture (ISA) is the set of basic instructions that a processor understands.
The instruction set is a portion of what makes up an architecture.
Historically, the first two philosophies to instruction sets were: reduced (RISC) and complex (CISC).
The merits and argued performance gains by each philosophy are and have been thoroughly debated.
Complex Instruction Set Computer (CISC) is rooted in the history of computing. Originally there were no compilers and programs had to be coded by hand one instruction at a time. To ease programming more and more instructions were added. Many of these instructions are complicated combination instructions such as loops. In general, more complicated or specialized instructions are inefficient in hardware, and in a typically CISC architecture the best performance can be obtained by using only the most simple instructions from the ISA.
The most well known/commoditized CISC ISAs are the Motorola 68k and Intel x86 architectures.
Reduced Instruction Set Computer (RISC) was realized in the late 1970s by IBM. Researchers discovered that most programs did not take advantage of all the various address modes that could be used with the instructions. By reducing the number of address modes and breaking down multi-cycle instructions into multiple single-cycle instructions several advantages were realized:
Computational RAM (C-RAM) is semiconductor random access memory with processors incorporated into the design to build an inexpensive massively-parallel computer.
Instructions are typically arranged sequentially in memory. Each instruction occupies 1 or more computer words. The Program Counter (PC) is a register inside the microprocessor that contains the address of the current instruction.[1]
During the fetch cycle, the instruction from the address indicated by the program counter is read from memory into the instruction register (IR), and the program counter is incremented by n, where n is the word length of the machine (in bytes).
In addition to fetches of the executable instructions, many (but not all) instructions also fetch data values from memory ("load") into a data register, or write data values from a data register to memory ("store"). The address of the particular memory word accessed in such a load or store instruction is called the "effective address". In the simplest instruction sets, the effective address always contained in some address register. Other instruction sets have more complex "effective address" calculations — we will discuss such "addressing modes" later.
Move instructions cause data from one register to be moved or copied to another register. Load instructions put data from an external source, such as memory, into a register. Store instructions move data from a register to an external destination.
Instructions that move (or copy) data from one place to another are the #1 most-frequently-used instructions in most programs.[2]
Branching and Jumping is the ability to load the PC register with a new address that is not the next sequential address. In general, a "jump" or "call" occurs unconditionally, and a "branch" occurs on a given condition. In this book we will generally refer to both as being branches, with a "jump" being an unconditional branch.
A "call" instruction is a branch instruction with the additional effect of storing the current address in a specific location, e.g. pushing it on the stack, to allow for easy return to continue execution. A "call" instruction is generally matches with a "return" instruction which retrieves the stored address and resumes execution where it left off.
An "interrupt" instruction is a call to a preset location, generally one encoded somehow in the instruction itself. This is often used to reach commonly-used resources such as the operating system. Generally, a routine entered via an interrupt instruction is left via an interrupt return instruction, which, similarly to the return instruction, retrieves the stored address and resumes execution.
In many programs, "call" is the second-most-frequently used instruction (after "move").[2]
The Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU) is used to perform arithmetic and logical instructions. The capability of the ALU typically is greater with more advanced central processors, but RISC machines' ALUs are deliberately kept simple and so have only some of these functions. An ALU will, at minimum, perform addition, subtraction, NOT, AND, OR, and XOR, and usually also single-bit rotates and shifts. Many CISC machine ALUs can also perform multi-bit rotates and shifts (with a barrel shifter) and integer multiplication and division. While many modern CPUs can also do floating point mathematical operations, these are usually handled by the FPU, a different part of the machine.
Input instructions fetch data from a specified input port, while output instructions send data to a specified output port. There is very little distinction between input/output space and memory space, the microprocessor presents an address and then either accepts data from, or sends data to, the data bus, but the sort of operations available in the input/output space are typically more limited than those available in memory space.
NOP, short for "no operation" is an instruction that produces no result and causes no side effects. NOPs are useful for timing and preventing hazards.
There are several different ways people balance the various advantages and disadvantages of various instruction lengths.
A MIPS "add immediate" instruction includes the opcode (logical operation), the destination register specifier, the source register specifier, and a constant value, all in the same 32 bits that are used for every MIPS instruction.
Fixed-length instructions are less complicated for a CPU to handle than variable-width instructions for several reasons, and are therefore somewhat easier to optimize for speed. Such reasons include: CPUs with variable-length instructions have to check whether each instruction straddles a cache line or virtual memory page boundary; CPUs with fixed-length instructions can skip all that.[3]
There simply are not enough bits in a 16-bit instruction to accommodate 32 general-purpose registers, and also do "Ra = Rb (op) Rc"Template:Snd i.e., independently select 2 source and 1 destination register out of a general purpose register bank of 32 registers, and also independently select one of several ALU operations.
And so people who design instruction sets must make one or more of the following compromises:
Any one particular machine-language instruction for any one particular CPU can typically be divided up into fields. For example, certain bits in a "ADD" instruction indicate the operation -- that this is actually an "ADD" rather than a "XOR" or "subtract" instruction. Other bits indicate which register is the source, other bits indicate which register is the destination, etc.
A few processors not only have fixed instruction widths but also have single instruction format -- a fixed set of fields that is the same for every instruction.
Many processors have fixed instruction widths but have several instruction formats. The actual bits stored in a special fixed-location "instruction type" field (that is in the same place in every instruction for that CPU) indicates which of those instruction format is used by this specific instruction -- which particular field layout is used by this instruction. For example, the MIPS processors have R-type, I-type, J-type, FR-type, and FI-type instruction formats.[4]
For example, the J1 processor has 3 instruction formats: Literal, Branch, and ALU.[5]
For example, the Microchip PIC mid-range has 4 instruction formats:
Occasionally some new CPU has a different instruction set formats from some other CPU, making it "not binary-compatible" with that other CPU.
However, sometimes this new CPU can be designed to have "source code backward-compatibility" with some other CPU -- it is "assembly-language compatible but not binary-compatible" with programs written some other CPU.
(Such as, for example, the 8080 which was source-compatible but not binary-compatible with the 8008).
(Such as, for example, the 8086 which was source-compatible but not binary-compatible with programs written for the 8085, the 8080, and the 8008[citation needed]).
Wikipedia has related information at instruction set
Wikipedia has related information at addressing mode
Practically all modern CPUs maintain the illusion of a program counter sequentially walking through code one instruction at a time. However, a few complex modern CPUs internally execute several instructions simultaneously (superscalar), or execute instructions out-of-order, or even speculatively pre-execute instructions down the "wrong" path, then back up and take the right path. When designing and testing such internal structures, the concept of "the" PC is a bit fuzzy.
Peter Kankowski.
"x86 Machine Code Statistics"
The evolution of RISC technology at IBM by John Cocke – IBM Journal of R&D, Volume 44, Numbers 1/2, p.48 (2000)
Victor Yurkovsky.
"HOMEBREW CPUS: MESSING AROUND WITH A J1"
Section 29.2 Instruction Formats.
Short range wireless technology is used to connect personal area networks to personal electronics. These could be your cellphone, you printers, your PDAs, your MP3 players and what not. So far the most famous is Bluetooth which is now joined with Ultra wideband (UWB). It is also connected with wireless USB. Bluetooth connects cellphones, PDAs, computers and other external devices on PCs. It is a short range wireless device so it can connect to devices up to 30 feet away. Bluetooth was at first designed to replace the hassle of cables that were connecting PCs to external devices such as printers and scanners and to overcome "line of sight" problems by using infrared transmission. The original version of Bluetooth technology could transmit up to 720 kilobits per second and was name after Harold Bluetooth who was a Danish King who united Norway and Denmark. The Ultra wideband was a technology developed by the military to increase transfer speeds to up to 480 megabits per second. At a 30 feet connection UWB sent out millions of waves of radio energy at different frequencies every second. The broken bits were then reassembled by the UWB receiver. Sometime along in this year it is predicted that cellphones will inherit this technology and will be able to transfer media from their PCs to their cellphones without adapters or cables. Wireless USB is based on this same technology (UWB). Ranging up to 32 feet it can still transfer up to 480 megabits per second and is said to be a natural replacement for USB cables.
1 1. Have the Mammal Honor.
2 2. Keep a small mammal pet for at least six months. (Dogs and cats are not included as small mammal pets.) For a suggested list of pets to choose from, see #5 below.
3 3. Complete one of the following: a. If you currently have a small mammal pet, keep a record of the care for your small mammal for one month. Include in your record when it is watered, fed, and when its cage is cleaned. b. If you do not currently have a small mammal pet, but you have kept one for at least six months, “babysit” someone else’s small mammal pet for at least one week. Record the care that was required.
4 4. Give an oral report (at least 3 minutes) on what you have observed about your small mammal pet. Include favorite foods, some of its habits, when it is most active, and favorite story about pet, etc.
5 5. a. Be able to distinguish between the following groups of small mammal pets
5.9 b. Describe the basic care for one of the above list and describe one way the care of another one of the list differs from the one you selected.
6 6. Write a 200 word essay on the history and value of one of the above and what characteristics they have that make them good pets.
7 7. Be able to identify five varieties of hamsters and five varieties of rabbits.
8 8. Why is it not good to make pets out of small mammals taken from the wild?
9 9. Rabies: What is it? How is it spread? Can you get rabies from small mammals? Is it curable? How can you avoid getting it? Which small mammal pets can carry it?
10 10. Why should you not handle your small mammal pets when you have a cold?
11 11. Find in the Bible three references to animals that we now consider to be small mammal pets. According to the Bible, are they considered to be clean or unclean meat?
The Small Mammal Pets Honor is a core component of the Naturalist Master Award
.
Have the Mammal Honor.
Instructions and tips for earning the Mammals honor can be found in the Nature chapter.
Keep a small mammal pet for at least six months. (Dogs and cats are not included as small mammal pets.) For a suggested list of pets to choose from, see #5 below.
Keeping a pet represents a tremendous commitment on the part of the owner. Pets rely on their owners for their most basic needs, and if the owner is neglectful, or "just doesn't feel like" taking care of the animal, it will suffer. Some small mammal pets have a lifespan of only a couple of years, which is fairly short as compared to other pets. Because of the limited lifespan, a small mammal as a first pet would be a good choice for a parent to test a child's commitment. However, that should not relieve a child (or any pet owner) of responsibly caring for the animal.
If you realistically believe you can make a multi-year commitment to a small mammal pet, then you should go for it. Having a pet is not only an enjoyable experience, it may help you grow as a person.
Complete one of the following: a. If you currently have a small mammal pet, keep a record of the care for your small mammal for one month. Include in your record when it is watered, fed, and when its cage is cleaned. b. If you do not currently have a small mammal pet, but you have kept one for at least six months, “babysit” someone else’s small mammal pet for at least one week. Record the care that was required.
There are a variety of ways to keep such records, from using a simple spiral notebook and a pen, to using a spreadsheet on a computer, or even a blog. Choose the method that is easiest for you, and set a time that you will be able to devote attention to it every day.
Give an oral report (at least 3 minutes) on what you have observed about your small mammal pet. Include favorite foods, some of its habits, when it is most active, and favorite story about pet, etc.
This report could be given during Sabbath School, during club worship, or told as a children's story during church. It can also be given to your unit during a club meeting. Use the records kept in the previous requirement to help you prepare. Three minutes is not a very long report, so do not let that make you nervous. Once you start talking about your pet, the three minutes will pass before yo uknow it.
a. Be able to distinguish between the following groups of small mammal pets
Hamsters are stout-bodied, with tails much shorter than body length and have small furry ears, short stocky legs, and wide feet. Their thick, silky fur, which can be long or short, can be black, grey, white, brown, buff, yellow, "sapphire" or red depending on the species, or a mix of any of those colors. Dwarf desert hamsters (genus Phodopus) are the smallest, with bodies 5 to 10 cm (about 2 to 4 inches) long; the largest is the common hamster (Cricetus cricetus), measuring up to 34 cm long, not including a short tail of up to 4 cm. The tail is often difficult to see; usually it is not very long, and on a long haired hamster it is barely visible.
Gerbils are typically between six and twelve inches (150 to 300 mm) long, including the tail which makes up approximately one half of their total length. One species however, the Great Gerbil, or Rhombomys opimus, originally native to Turkmenistan, can grow to more than 16 inches (400 mm) in length. It is illegal to purchase, import or keep a gerbil as a pet in the U.S. State of California.
The length can be up to 25 cm (10 in), with the tail a further 25 cm (10 in), the same length as the body. Adult body weight averages 350 g (12 oz) in males and about 250 g (9 oz) in females, but a very large individual can reach 500 g (18 oz). A rat's tail is for the most part hairless.
A tame, black fancy mouse
Fancy mice is a term to describe mice that have been selectively bred for pet or for show. They can vary greatly in size, from small pet mice that are approximately 16–18 cm (6.3–7.1 in) long from nose to the tip of the tail, to show mice that measure 30 cm (12 in) nose to tail. Pet mice weigh about 25–40 g (0.88–1.4 oz) but large show mice can weigh up to 100 g (3.5 oz).
Human-directed artificial selection in fancy mice has created a variety of colors and patterns. These include black, chocolate, blue, white, cream, lilac, red, fawn, champagne, cinnamon, golden agouti, silver agouti, silver and dove. All mouse standards fall into one of five categories: Selfs (one solid color all over), Tans (mice of one solid color on the top with a tan belly), Marked either in Even or Broken patterns (spotting of a standard color on a base of white) and a miscellaneous category.
Guinea pigs are large for rodents, weighing between 700 and 1200g (1.5-2.5 pounds), and measuring between 20 and 25 cm (8–10 inches) in length. They typically live an average of four to five years, but may live as long as eight years. According to the 2006 Guinness Book of Records the longest living guinea pig survived 14 years, 10.5 months
In Western societies, the guinea pig has enjoyed widespread popularity as a household pet since its introduction by European traders in the 16th century. Their docile nature, their responsiveness to handling and feeding, and the relative ease of caring for them, continue to make the guinea pig a popular pet. Organizations devoted to competitive breeding of guinea pigs have been formed worldwide, and many specialized breeds of guinea pig, with varying coat colors and compositions, are cultivated by breeders.
Chinchillas are rabbit-sized rodents native to the Andes mountains in South America. They have large ears and long, bushy tails.
Domestic chinchillas can be kept as pets. Chinchillas are active at dusk and at dawn. They typically do not like to be disturbed during the day, which may make them less favorable as pets to some people. Chinchillas are naturally very skittish creatures and generally do not like to be held, although they can become very attached to their owners if they grow up without a cage mate. Because of their high-strung disposition, they are not usually considered to be good pets for small children. However, chinchillas can be very friendly animals if sufficiently acclimated to human touch as kits, making them excellent pets for patient owners.
A pet rabbit sharing an apple with its ownerA house rabbit is a domestic rabbit kept as a pet for companionship, who lives inside the home with his owners.
Domestic ferrets typically have brown, black, white, or mixed fur, have an average length of approximately 20 inches (51 cm) including a 5 inch (13 cm) tail, weigh about 2-4 pounds (1 kg), and have a natural lifespan of 7 to 10 years.
Being so closely related to polecats, ferrets are quite easily able to hybridize with them, and this has occasionally resulted in feral colonies of ferret polecat hybrids that have been perceived to have caused damage to native fauna, perhaps most notably in New Zealand. As a result, some parts of the world have imposed restrictions on the keeping of ferrets.
Note: If the list of domesticated small mammals above are not found in your area you may substitute local domesticated small mammals from your area.
b. Describe the basic care for one of the above list and describe one way the care of another one of the list differs from the one you selected.
Ferrets, alone of the animals on this list are carnivores. Because of this their care will differ from that of all the others here. If you selected a ferret, compare its care to any of the others. If you selected something else, compare its care to that of the ferret.
All of these pets need to have a supply of fresh water available to them at all times. Their cages should be kept clean, and they all require daily exercise.
A hamster's cage should be at least two square feet or larger. All horizontal floor surfaces (including levels) should be solid. The walls and ceiling can be coated wire with a half-inch (or less) spacing between wires. Keep the cage clean!
Aspen wood or paper-based bedding free from scents or oils. Aspen is the only type of wood-chip bedding can be used. Softwoods (pine, cedar, etc) and cat litter should be avoided.
Gerbils can be kept in a glass tank such as an aquarium. It should have a wire mesh top, and should allow for five gallons of capacity per gerbil.
As with the hamster, the only safe wood-chip bedding is aspen. Pine and cedar are toxic to these animals.
Sunflower seeds, pumpkin seeds and peanuts are favorites of most gerbils, though they have individual preferences and too many sunflower seeds may result in illness. They also enjoy fruit peels such as orange and banana. In fact, gerbils will eat almost anything; dog biscuits and chews; rat food; rabbit food; guinea pig food; oats; various "special" treats from pet shops, which in fact were not appreciated nearly as much as some parsnip cores. Most weeds dubbed as safe for grazing animals like rabbits or guinea pigs can be eaten by gerbils as well. Pet gerbils will especially enjoy live crickets, grasshoppers, and locusts as food, tearing the insect apart and eating the juicy insides. It is good for you to feed your gerbil vegetables such as celery or carrots or an apple. Take care not to feed them too much of these foods as they contain a lot of moisture and can cause an upset stomach.
Rats do best in wire cages because they enjoy climbing, and the wire offers good ventilation. A cage that is 2’ x 2’ x 2’ will generally do for a pair of rats, but a larger space would be much appreciated. If you plan to keep more than that, you’ll need a larger cage. The floor should be solid. A large, multi-level cage designed for ferrets can also make a great rat home, as can a large aquarium. If you opt for the latter, you’ll need a screen cover to provide ventilation, and will probably need to clean the cage more often to keep odor problems under control.
a bedding of aspen or pelleted recycled paper must be provided. Do not use pine or cedar shavings, which can be harmful to your pets. If you find that your rats like to make nests, provide shredded paper towels or napkins for this purpose.
High-quality rodent chow (called rat blocks) should be available to your pet at all times. You can find this at pet supply stores and feed stores— look for a brand with soymeal as the main ingredient.
Offer small, bite-sized bits of fresh fruits and veggies daily.
Rats LOVE people food, and you can give yours the occasional table
A bored rat is an unhappy rat! Provide PVC tubes for your pets to run through, and ladders and tree branches for climbing. Parrot toys, including swings and ropes, are great for rats.
Some rats love exercise wheels. Get one with a solid surface without wire rungs, so your pets’ tails cannot get caught while running. Also, give them appropriate chew toys to help wear down their teeth, which grow continuously.
Glass aquariums or cages with wire bars and plastic flooring, are the most common types of housing. A span between cage bars of less than 9 mm (0.35 in) prevents young mice from attempting to escape by forcing themselves through the bars, where they may get stuck. This can also help prevent predatory pets such as cats from killing and eating the mice.
The best products for in cage bedding are aspen wood shavings or a commercial paper-based material. They should not be given cedar shavings, as the oils in the wood are unhealthy and cause breathing difficulties. Similarly pine shavings can cause respiratory problems. If odor is a serious concern, ask your pet retailer for essential oil-free scented bedding.
Food for fancy mice can range from specially formulated feed mix to kitchen scraps, and is usually very inexpensive, although the latter should be avoided as it may not provide a balanced diet. Laboratories keeping mice as experimental subjects almost uniformly use a product called lab block, a scientifically-formulated blend originally designed for mice in laboratories. Dry dog food is another good option when lab block is unavailable, as it offers balanced nutrition for a mouse and helps keep their teeth conditioned.
Cages with solid or wire mesh floors are used, although wire mesh floors can cause injury and may be associated with an infection commonly known as bumblefoot "Cubes and Coroplast" (or C&C) style cages are now a common choice.
Cages are often lined with wood shavings or a similar material. Bedding made from red cedar and pine, both softwoods, was commonly used in past decades, but these materials are now believed to contain harmful phenols (aromatic hydrocarbons) and oils.[39] Safer beddings include those made from hardwoods (such as aspen); paper products and corn cob materials are other alternatives. The Guinea pigs cage should be large enough for him/her to run around and get exercise, if the cage is small, you may consider making a pen for him/her to run around in. (Otherwise you may end up with a plump piggy.)
Guinea pigs benefit from feeding on fresh grass hay, such as timothy hay, in addition to food pellets which are often based from timothy. Alfalfa is also a popular food choice; most guinea pigs will eat large amounts of alfalfa when offered it, though there exists some controversy over the feeding of alfalfa to adult guinea pigs. Some pet owners and veterinary organizations have advised that, as a legume rather than a grass hay, alfalfa consumed in large amounts may lead to obesity, as well as bladder stones due to excess calcium, in any but pregnant and very young guinea pigs. However, published scientific sources mention alfalfa as a source for replenishment of protein, amino acids and fiber. Guinea pigs enjoy fresh fruits and vegetables, such as, carrots, lettuce, apple slices, kale, and grapes. (Offer these in small portions.)
Chew toys are very necessary, considering they are rodents, and their teeth never stop growing. Most guinea pig chew toys are made out of wood, you can find them at multiple pet stores.
Since chinchillas are very active animals, it is best to house them in a large enclosure, such as a room of their own instead of a small cage. If kept in a cage, the chinchillas need to have a large area replete with shelves or other obstacles on which to play. The cage should be taller than it is wide, as the chinchilla's natural environment is very mountainous. Plastic in the cage should be avoided at all times. Chinchillas are often voracious chewers, and any ingested plastic can cause blockage in the intestines. The cage must have good air circulation. The chinchilla lacks the ability to sweat; therefore, if temperatures get above 25°C (80°F), the chinchilla could get overheated and may suffer from heat stroke.
As with most small animals, red cedar bedding should never be used due to its toxic nature.
Chinchillas eat and digest desert grasses and cannot efficiently process fatty foods or too many green plants. A high quality, hay-based pellet and a constant supply of loose hay will sufficiently meet all of their dietary needs. Chinchillas have very sensitive GI tracts that can be easily disrupted so it is important to maintain them on a healthy diet. Some Chinchilla feed includes raisins as part of the mix. Fresh vegetables (with high moisture content) should be avoided as these can cause bloat in a chinchilla, which can be fatal. Chinchillas also eat and drink in very small amounts, therefore, overfeeding is easy. This can lead to diarrhea, or in the long term, diabetes. Nuts should be avoided due to their high fat content.
Chinchillas also need other forms of stimulation, such as hanging wooden toys, large wheels (over 16 in (410 mm) in diameter and not constructed of mesh, as chinchilla legs and toes can easily get caught), or paper towel tubes. Wooden sticks and chew toys are also good options, but conifer woods (especially cedar) should be avoided because of the high content of resins that are toxic for chinchillas. Birch, willow, apple tree or manzanita are all safe woods for chinchillas to chew.
A pet rabbit should have an indoor pen and a rabbit-safe place to run and exercise, such as a living or family room.
Their diets typically consist of unlimited timothy hay, a small helping of pellets, and some fresh vegetables and fruits. House rabbits are very quiet pets.
Rabbits are easily trained to use a litter box and can learn to come when called. They are not well suited for families with unsupervised small children, due to the likelihood of frightening or harming these timid creatures by loud sounds or mishandling.
Ferret cages and condos are commercially available at pet stores. A ferret cage should have a litter tray, an eating area, and a sleeping area. The sleeping area should be a dark place where the ferret can go to get away from the busy house.
Ferrets are obligate carnivores and the natural diet of their wild ancestors consisted of whole small prey, i.e., meat, organs, bones, skin, feathers, and fur. Some ferret owners feed a meat-based diet consisting of whole prey like mice and rabbits along with raw meat like chicken, beef, veal, kangaroo and wallaby. This is preferred in Europe and Australia, and becoming increasingly popular in the United States due to concern over high carbohydrate levels in some processed ferret foods.
Alternatively, there are many commercial ferret food products. Some kitten foods can also be used, so long as they provide the high protein and fat content required by the ferret's metabolism. Most adult cat foods and kitten foods are unsuitable for ferrets however, because of their low protein content and high fiber. Ideally, a ferret food should contain a minimum of 32% meat based protein and 18% fat and a maximum 3% fiber. Low-quality pet foods often contain grain-based proteins, which ferrets cannot properly digest.
Ferrets are easily entertained and do not require pet toys; however, most kitten toys work well with ferrets. Ferrets love playing tug of war with toys and stuffed animals. Ferrets will also tear open packages and other containers to see what is inside or explore the inside of the package. Ferrets are interested in holes, pipes and other small enclosed areas, and seem compelled to explore holes. Thus a cardboard or plastic tube will be appreciated. Ferrets are especially fond of variety in their toy selection — bell-balls, crinkle tubes, and paper bags will work well. All toys should be mixed up regularly, as ferrets will often grow bored of playing the same games repeatedly.
Ferrets spend 14 to 18 hours a day sleeping and are naturally crepuscular, meaning they are most active during dusk and dawn. Though ferrets sleep more than most other domesticated animals, they are very active when awake and will seek to be released from their cage to get exercise and satisfy their abundant curiosity daily.
Ferrets are energetic, curious, interested in their surroundings, and often actively solicit play with humans, having a repertoire of behaviors both endearing and difficult for some human owners. Play for a ferret will often involve hide-and-seek games, or some form of predator/prey game in which either the human attempts to catch the ferret or the ferret to catch the human. They also have a strong nesting instinct and will repeatedly carry small objects to hidden locations. It is difficult to predict what objects ferrets will attempt to hoard, with owners reporting play toys, socks, bags of onions, pizza slices, keys, calculators, silverware, aluminum foil, shoes, sponges, toilet paper rolls, textbooks, video game controllers, footballs, brooms, pencils, erasers, bouncy balls, etc. Ferrets will seemingly form attachments to certain objects and will repeatedly 'steal' the same object and bring it to their hiding place.
When ferrets are excited, they may perform a routine commonly referred to as the weasel war dance, a frenzied series of sideways hops. This is often accompanied by a soft clucking noise, commonly referred to as dooking. It is often an invitation to play or an expression of happy excitement and is not threatening.
The ferret's posture may become rigid with wide open jaws, momentary eye contact followed by thrashing or turning of the head from side to side, arching the back, piloerection, and hopping to the side or backwards while facing the intended playmate. This is often accompanied by an excited panting sound that may sound like a hiss. Often, this behavior will break into a game of chase, pounce and wrestle. Ferrets in war dances are very accident prone, often hopping into obstacles or tripping over their own feet.
Ferrets tend to nip as kits. Nipping is the act of biting in a playful manner representative of mock fighting and sparring; young ferrets are also more prone to chewing and teething, and have a tendency to bite harder. Older ferrets tend to chew far less frequently and, when trained correctly, almost never nip a human hand or only do so very gently. However, ferrets that have been abused or are in extreme pain may bite a human, and are capable of strong bites which break through the skin.
Ferrets, like cats, can use a litter box with training, but they are not always completely litter box trainable. Their instinct is to spread their waste in order to scent mark a wider foraging territory for themselves; thus, multiple litter boxes may be necessary, and all litter areas should be changed frequently.
A common ferret problem to many pet owners is introducing new ferrets to their population. Senior ferrets may seem excessively violent to unknown ferrets in their home, but adding another ferret to ones population to decrease boredom or for breeding will greatly encourage the morale of the ferret or ferret population one owns. Males and females will exhibit much stronger territorial urges when confronted with a new ferret, and will often treat the new ferret like a toy. After a fighting period which should be monitored but only rarely results in harm to a ferret, the older ferret will show its dominance, often by dragging the junior ferret around by the scruff of the neck to its hoard and leaving it like any other object it values. Given time and careful monitoring, new ferrets will almost always be accepted by the older ferret or group. Young ferrets can actually benefit from having an older house trained ferret around when being taught to use a litter box, take baths, or have their nails clipped.
c. Which two of these pets are not rodents?
Rodent are characterized by two continuously-growing teeth in the upper and lower jaws which must be kept short by gnawing (the "dent" in rodent is the same root as in "dentist"). Rabbits were once classified as rodents, but were moved into a new order called Lagomorphs in 1923. Ferrets belong to the weasel family.
Write a 200 word essay on the history and value of one of the above and what characteristics they have that make them good pets.
Go to the library an check out a book on the pet you are interested. You can also read an encyclopedia article about the animal:
Once you know some interesting facts, put them in writing. Use your own words. Two-hundred words will easily fit on a half page of letter-size paper.
Be able to identify five varieties of hamsters and five varieties of rabbits.
Description: They are very small, measuring only slightly over three inches and weighing less than an ounce.
Features include a typically thick dark grey dorsal stripe and furry feet. The tail is so short that it hardly shows when the hamster is sitting. As winter approaches and the days shorten, Winter Whites' dark fur greys until it is almost completely white (hence the name).
Winter Whites are often found on the pet market, in Europe and Asia more so than in North America and indeed are rarely found in pet stores in Canada. Winter White hamsters make good pets for teens or adults, not for younger children. They are not likely to bite but do not like to be cuddled or held. Due to a hamsters poor eyesight the risk of falling or jumping off your hand is high.
Description: Their average size is 3-4 inches. They are unique because of their tails, which are unusually long for a hamster. They actually resemble a mouse, and have a long slender body.
The wild color is greyish brown above with a black stripe down the spine and a whitish belly. This coloration, combined with their lithe build and longer tail, makes them look "mousy" to some eyes and, in fact, they are members of the group called ratlike hamsters. Besides the wild colour, a well-known variation is the white-spotted Chinese hamster, which often is greyish white all over, with only a dark stripe on its back.
Description: Their size is approximately 6-7 inches in length with a very short tail. It has hairless feet with four toes on the front feet and five on the back feet. Like most members of the subfamily, the Syrian Hamster has expandable cheek pouches, which extend from its cheeks to its shoulders. In the wild, hamsters are larder hoarders; they use their cheek pouches to transport food to their burrows.
Syrian Hamsters are wildly popular as house pets due to their docile, inquisitive nature and small size. They are popular as "first pets" for young children, as well as being classroom animals, because of their hardiness and relative ease of care. Some pet owners find them more attractive than rats and other rodents due to their lack of visible tails. However, their lack of tolerance towards each other is seen by some as a drawback.
Description: They are the largest of all hamster species, being similar in size to guinea pigs, measuring up to 10 inches long. The black-bellied hamster is found from Belgium (e.g. Bertem with a thriving population) and Alsace in the west, to Russia in the east, and Romania in the south.
European hamsters are much larger than the Syrian hamsters or dwarf hamsters commonly kept as pets, being around 10-15 cm longer than guinea pigs.
In captivity, the European hamster has an unusually long life span, living up to eight years. They are very rarely kept as pets and have been known to attack large dogs if they feel threatened.
Description: Roborovski's (Phodopus roborovskii) are the smallest and fastest of all hamsters commonly kept as pets. Distinguishing characteristics of the Roborovskis are the white spots where the eyebrows would be, and the lack of the dorsal stripe seen in all other dwarf hamsters. They live, on average, to three and a half years of age. Recently, a mutation has arisen producing a "husky", also known as "white-faced", phase. Breeding these lines with agouti Roborovskis produces a diluted appearance of their natural sandy color.
Description: The average size is 7-8 inches.
Description: The Dutch rabbit is a small-medium size rabbit with a stocky body and a short rounded head. The Dutch rabbit has a white inverted V shaped blaze that extends from its nose tapering up to a point between its ears. The front and back legs are white. The coat is short and dense.
Description: The French lop rabbit has a stocky body with sturdy, fairly short legs. The coat is dense and soft and slightly long.
A French Lop is a type of rabbit that was first developed in France in the 1800s out of a breeding between the English Lop and the Flemish Giant. The French Lop differs from the English in that it is characterized by a heavier stature and shorter ears. The French Lop weighs in at around ten pounds and comes in two color varieties: solid and broken. It can be found in many different rabbit colors.
The French Lop must follow a balanced feeding habit. They should have a sizeable amount of dry rabbit food, which contains all the nutrition standardized for a healthy rabbit.
A French Lop is able to live outside and inside, a water-proof hutch that shelters the rabbit from any rain, snow, or heat is acceptable. If inside, a hutch or a cage can be used. If you are not giving your Lop regular time to spend with, consider getting two rabbits, a lonely rabbit that does not get regular exercise or companionship can be anti-social and depressed.
Description: The lionhead rabbit is small rabbit with a stocky body. The coat is dense and of medium length with a mane of long hair circling its head.
Lionhead rabbit is one of the newest breed of domesticated rabbits. It has particularly long hair surrounding the face, reminiscent of the mane of a male lion, hence the name. Other characteristic traits of the lionhead include a rounded head and small size, usually between 2.5 and 3.5 pounds. It also tends to have slightly shorter ears than most breeds.
The Lionhead rabbit originated in Belgium. It is reported to have been produced by breeders trying to breed a long coated dwarf rabbit by crossing a miniature Swiss Fox and a Belgian dwarf. The Lionhead seemed to have been more popular than the long coated dwarf, and so breeders carried on this trend in breeding them intentionally, and so came what we know today as the Lionhead rabbit.
The Lionhead has a well-rounded body, head bold with well developed muzzle. Their legs are of medium length and not too fine in bone. Their ears do not exceed 3 inches in length. Their mane is between 2-3 inches in length to form a full circle around the head, extending to a 'V' at the back of the neck falling into a fringe between the ears. Noticeably longer hair on the cheeks and chest. The coat is dense and of medium length, roll back and even all over body in Adults.
Description: The Netherland dwarf rabbit has a small compact body and a short neck. The ears are small, erect, rounded at the tips. The coat is short and soft.
The Netherland Dwarf is a popular breed of domestic rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus) originating in the Netherlands. Smaller than most rabbit breeds, Netherland Dwarf rabbits weigh 1.6 to 2 kg and are usually kept as pets or exhibition animals.
Most rabbits sold in pet stores are Netherland Dwarfs, Netherland Dwarf-derived breeds (often referred to simply as dwarf breeds), or Netherland Dwarf crosses. Their popularity as pets stems from their babyish appearance and their smaller cage space requirement compared to larger rabbit breeds. A lot of people also use Netherland Dwarfs for showing.
Netherland Dwarfs' heads and eyes are disproportionately large with respect to their bodies, and their ears are tiny and carried high on the head. Additionally, their faces are rounded and shortened. These features, a part of the animals' dwarfism, cause them to look infantile even into adulthood.
Dwarf crosses frequently retain some of these characteristics, depending on the breed the dwarf is crossed with. However, crosses rarely look as babyish as the purebred dwarfs and are usually somewhat larger.
Netherland dwarf rabbits have the same basic behavioral traits as other domestic rabbits. They can be litter-trained but are generally not very good with cats or dogs.
They tend to have spunkier and more energetic temperaments than larger breeds of rabbit and are rarely content to sit still when outside of the cage. They are curious animals and have a tendency to nibble on nearby objects and even human beings. However, they are extremely fragile animals and easily stressed, and as such they do not make good pets for young children.
Description: The Polish rabbit is compact but elegant with slender legs. The head is small and rounded and the ears are small, and erect. The coat is short, fine and thick.
Today, the Polish rabbit is used as a fancy exhibition breed. They are small rabbits with short ears that touch each other all the way to the tips. Due to their small size, the Polish rabbit is often confused with the Netherland dwarf, although the Polish is a little larger and the head is not rounded. (There are many other differences between the two breeds, such as coat structure and colors.) The accepted weights of the polish are two to three and 1/2 pounds. The ideal weight is 2.5.
Until the 1950s, most Polish rabbits were white with either red eyes or blue eyes. The red-eyed white is a true albino. The blue-eyed white has the Vienna white gene and is not a true albino. Since the 1950s, colored Polish breeds have been recognized by rabbit clubs. In 1957, the American Rabbit Breeder’s Association approved the black and chocolate Polish. In 1982, the blue variety was approved and in 1998 the broken variety was allowed.
Because of their small size, Polish rabbits need less space in cage and barn facilities, and take up less space in apartments than some of the larger bunnies. As with other small breed rabbits, they tend to be higher strung than their larger counterparts. They are also not ideal pets for small children as they are easily dropped, injured and stepped on. Their high-strung nature makes them more suited for a mature, rabbit-loving, adult home. However, the polish rabbit is not usually mean. Bucks are little clowns and are extremely fast if you let it loose good luck catching it, but they generally calm down at about two years of age. Does tend to be reserved in personality.
Why is it not good to make pets out of small mammals taken from the wild?
Wild animals do not eat the same foods as humans or domestic animals. It may not be possible for you to feed them what they need. If they do not get proper nutrition, they will not remain healthy.
It is illegal to keep wild pets in many localities. If you capture a wild animal and try to keep it as a pet, you may very well be breaking the law.
When people find baby animals that are apparently abandoned and attempt a "rescue," they are usually only interfering with the animal's life. In the vast majority of cases, the mother is nearby, and will return to it. Taking the baby animal in no way rescues it at all.
Many people believe that when they get tired of their wild pet, they can merely release it back into the wild. However, if the animal was in captivity from youth, it will not have learned any survival skills, making this move a death sentence for the animal. Further, the animal's diet will necessarily have to change which will cause digestive problems. Remember, wild animals and domestic animals do not eat the same foods. This animal will hav undergone two major dietary shifts - the first when it was captured, and the second when it was released.
It is nearly impossible to meet all the requirements a wild animal needs for survival. Many wild animals require specialized care in facilities staffed by highly trained professionals. A wild animal will almost never develop affection for its owner, and because it is wild, can turn on its keeper in an instant, causing serious injury, or possibly even death.
Baby animals grow up. They are not usually as cute when they are fully grown, and most people greatly underestimate the strength of an adult wild animal. Given the change, it can easily overpower a human being. As they grow, their appetites grow too, and can often be accurately described as voracious. An adult wild animal can eat you out of house and home!
According to the Humane Society of the United States:
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) discourages direct contact with wild animals for a simple reason: They can carry diseases that are dangerous to people, such as rabies, herpes B virus, and Salmonella. - http://www.hsus.org
Rabies: What is it? How is it spread? Can you get rabies from small mammals? Is it curable? How can you avoid getting it? Which small mammal pets can carry it?
Rabies is a viral disease that causes inflammation of the brain (encephalitis). If untreated, it is always fatal.
Any mammal may become infected with the rabies virus and develop symptoms, including humans. Most animals can be infected by the virus and can transmit the disease to humans. Infected bats, monkeys, raccoons, foxes, skunks, cattle, wolves, dogs or cats provide the greatest risk to humans. Rabies may also spread through exposure to infected domestic farm animals, groundhogs, weasels and other wild carnivores. Squirrels, rodents and rabbits are seldom infected.
Rabies can be prevented by vaccination, both in humans and other animals. Virtually every infection with rabies was a death sentence, until Louis Pasteur and Emile Roux developed the first rabies vaccination in 1885. This vaccine was first used on a human on July 6, 1885 – nine-year old boy Joseph Meister (1876–1940) had been mauled by a rabid dog. Treatment after exposure is highly successful in preventing the disease if administered promptly, within fourteen days after infection. The first step is immediately washing the wound with soap and water, which is very effective at reducing the number of viral particles. In the United States, patients receive one dose of immunoglobulin and five doses of rabies vaccine over a twenty-eight day period. One-half the dose of immunoglobulin is injected in the region of the bite, if possible, with the remainder injected intramuscularly away from the bite. This is much less painful compared with administering immunoglobulin through the abdominal wall with a large needle, which is how it was done in the past.
Currently pre-exposure immunization has been used on domesticated and normal non-human populations. In many jurisdictions, domestic dogs, cats, and ferrets are required to be vaccinated. A pre-exposure vaccination is also available for humans, most commonly given to veterinarians and those traveling to regions where the disease is common, such as India. Most tourists do not need such a vaccination, just those doing substantial non-urban activities. However, should a vaccinated human be bitten by a carrier, failure to receive subsequent post-exposure treatment could be fatal, although post-exposure treatment for a vaccinated human is far less extensive than that which would normally be required by one with no pre-exposure vaccination.
All mammals can carry rabies, and this includes small mammal pets.
Why should you not handle your small mammal pets when you have a cold?
Guinea pigs, rats, and mice are used extensively in medical research because they are susceptible to many of the same diseases and virus as humans. Having a cold means you are infected with a Rhinovirus, a virus that can make all of these animals sick. When you have a cold, you can easily spread germs to others (that's probably how you caught the cold in the first place), whether they are human, or animal. Do your family, friends, and pets a favor, and wash your hands frequently, especially if a cold is going around or if you have one yourself. And if you do have one, stay away from small mammal pets!
Find in the Bible three references to animals that we now consider to be small mammal pets. According to the Bible, are they considered to be clean or unclean meat?
Three references can be found in these two verses.
The rabbit, though it chews the cud, does not have a split hoof; it is unclean for you.
"'Of the animals that move about on the ground, these are unclean for you: the weasel, the rat, any kind of great lizard, the gecko, the monitor lizard, the wall lizard, the skink and the chameleon."
Humane Society of the United States - Hamster care
Optimal output feedback control is a problem which arises from not knowing all information about the output of the system. It correlates to the state feedback situation where the part of the state is unknown. This issue can arise in decentralized control problems, for example, and requires the use of an "observer-like" solution. One such method is the use of a Kalman Filter, a more classical technique. However, other methods exist that do not implement a Kalman Filter such as the one below which uses an LMI to preform the output feeback. The
The system is represented using the 9-matrix notation shown below.
.
The following are equivalent.
The above LMI determines the the upper bound
.
This implementation requires Yalmip and Sedumi.
LMI Methods in Optimal and Robust Control - A course on LMIs in Control by Matthew Peet.
LMI Properties and Applications in Systems, Stability, and Control Theory - A List of LMIs by Ryan Caverly and James Forbes.
LMIs in Systems and Control Theory - A downloadable book on LMIs by Stephen Boyd.
LMIs in Control Systems: Analysis, Design and Applications - by Guang-Ren Duan and Hai-Hua Yu, CRC Press, Taylor & amp; Francis Group, 2013.
An arithmetic series is the sum of a sequence of terms with a common difference (the difference between consecutive terms). For example:
, and so forth.
A geometric series is the sum of terms with a common ratio. For example, an interesting series which appears in many practical problems in science, engineering, and mathematics is the geometric series
Generally by studying the sequence of partial sums we can understand the behavior of the entire infinite series.
Two of the most important questions about a series are:
Does it converge?
If so, what does it converge to?
For example, it is fairly easy to see that for
Perhaps a more surprising and interesting fact is that for
Indeed, consider the quantity
We'd like to be able to draw similar conclusions about any series.
Unfortunately, there is no simple way to sum a series. The most we will be able to do in most cases is determine if it converges. The geometric and the telescoping series are the only types of series we can easily find the sum of.
It is obvious that for a series to converge, the
Consider the harmonic series, the sum of
This final sum contains m terms. As m tends to infinity, so does the sum, hence the series diverges.
We can also deduce something about how quickly it diverges. Using the same grouping of terms, we can get an upper limit on the sum of the first so many terms, the partial sums.
, very slowly.
The argument above, based on considering upper and lower bounds on terms, can be modified to provide a general-purpose test for convergence and divergence called the comparison test (or direct comparison test). It can be applied to any series with nonnegative terms:
There are many such tests for convergence and divergence, the most important of which we will describe below.
Theorem: If the series of absolute values,
, converges, then so does the series
We say such a series converges absolutely.
According to the Cauchy criterion for series convergence, exists
Which is exactly the Cauchy criterion for series convergence.
.
The converse does not hold. The series
A series like this that converges, but not absolutely, is said to converge conditionally.
If a series converges absolutely, we can add terms in any order we like. The limit will still be the same.
If a series converges conditionally, rearranging the terms changes the limit. In fact, we can make the series converge to any limit we like by choosing a suitable rearrangement.
, we can add only positive terms until the partial sum exceeds 100, subtract 1/2, add only positive terms until the partial sum exceeds 100, subtract 1/4, and so on, getting a sequence with the same terms that converges to 100.
This makes absolutely convergent series easier to work with. Thus, all but one of convergence tests in this chapter will be for series all of whose terms are positive, which must be absolutely convergent or divergent series. Other series will be studied by considering the corresponding series of absolute values.
E.g., suppose
!
E.g., consider
.
The integral converges, for
, so the series converges.
We can prove this test works by writing the integral as
Applying these to the sum then shows convergence.
(i.e., the limit exists and is not zero), then the two series either both converge or both diverge. That is,
, the terms of this series are similar to, but smaller than, those of the harmonic series. We compare the limits.
The alternating series test states that such a series converges if
Note that this test cannot lead to the conclusion that the series diverges; if one cannot conclude that the series converges, this test is inconclusive, although other tests may, of course, be used to give a conclusion.
Estimating the sum of an alternating series
The absolute error that results in using a partial sum of an alternating series to estimate the final sum of the infinite series is smaller than the magnitude of the first omitted term.
The geometric series can take either of the following forms
As you have seen at the start, the sum of the geometric series is
.
There are other tests that can be used, but these tests are sufficient for all commonly encountered series.
The option "-w" shows wheter or not a user's tty is accessible with commands like write or talk. + indicates that the tty is accessible, and - that it's not:
Using "who" with two non-option words gives your username. On some systems, this gives your actual username, and using "su" or "sudo" to switch user does not change this name.
On other systems, this gives more information:
On since Sat Apr 10 18:34 (BST) on pts/3 from ip.fakedomain.com
Mail last read Sat Apr 10 23:57 2004 (BST)
Become root... then become another user:
(Note: root is not asked for password to become bob!)
Switching user and using the new user's environment (shell, shell-variables, home-directory) as if after a normal log-in:
Run a program as another user (as root unless otherwise specified):
Note: The permission and owner/group of su - as well as other config-files (typically /etc/su and /etc/login.defs) - may prevent users not belonging to certain groups from switching user even with the correct password, or even being able to execute su at all (E.g. in BSD it's traditionally been restricted to members of the wheel-group only).
C.4 Utilities, opengroup.org
Here we install the Guest Additions[1].
Go to the host operating system. At the top of the VM window, choose Devices >> "Insert Guest Additions CD image...". Then, VirtualBox simulates inserting a CD into the simulated optical drive of the VM.
If you need to eject this, you can either restart the VM or click on Devices >> optical drives >> eject.
If you didn't add a Windows shared folder into the "configuration" menu of the VirtualBox graphical interface[2], you can do it in Command Prompt with:
VBoxManage sharedfolder add "VMName" --name "SharedName" --hostpath "C:\Users\Public\Documents\SharedFolderPath".
The Guest Additions CD should be read from the guest OS like this[3]:
Then, just mount the Windows folder from Linux[4]:
That's it, you can browse your Windows files:
↑ VirtualBox manual, "Guest Additions"
↑ http://www.htpcbeginner.com/mount-virtualbox-shared-folder-on-windows/
↑ http://superuser.com/questions/950431/how-to-install-virtual-box-guest-additions-on-debian
↑ https://help.ubuntu.com/community/VirtualBox/SharedFolders
Trainz Content Creation—Master Table of Contents for Intermediate to Advanced Topics Trainz Asset Maintenance and Creation
Operations Note: Clicking on a footnote ([2]) or note tag ([note 12]) in the main body of text will navigate you (position the page) to the exact text for the entry. • Then: Clicking there on the ? symbol, will return you back to read on from where you started.
Be advised this new Trainz Wikibooks topic page is rough and incomplete. It was last edited on 23 March 2016, and is still under heavy construction.This Page UNDERCONSTRUCTION:Content here is likely to be changed significantly in a short amount of time. All Trainzer's and Wikibookians with knowledge in this subject are welcome to help out.
The Trainz Content Creator may have little more than a picture like this to work with for developing Trainz models of older asset prototypes. Most locomotives take upwards of 6 months of diligent effort to make a good model, so send your favorite Content Creators chocolates or flowers today!
This Book Division index page is a master Table of Contents page for Intermediate Skills and Advanced 3D Content Modeling and skills building topics. Just as Introductory Trainz pages linked above is for those just getting their feet onto the first slopes of the various Trainz learning curves, and Content Creation and References are for even more advance topics. If the reader visualizes a large reference work in a three ring binder with TABS sticking out to quickly switch between book sections, you see what we're trying to accomplish in your minds eye.
At the file structure level, some threaded materials will be linked both in-sequence (threaded page to page 1st to next page) and in collections of related material where it was relocated into various places such as Trainz Wikibook Appendix pages, or other divisions of the Trainz Wikibooks. Consequenly, if you've seen such a page, with a slightly different look the chances are you have—the magic of modern type setting technology in a Wiki allows that page to appear both ways! These Division TOC pages will also introduce new and older Trainzers to that of organization of the work, and give a greater sense of where to look for things when needed.
Before you start Performance and other issues
Tutorial for adding night mode with Blender
Tutorial for incorporating normalmaps using Blender (TRS2009)
Tutorial for Modifying the reskin mesh in GMAX
Tutorial for Creating a Three Plank Wagon From the Reskin Mesh in GMAX
Tutorial for Reskinnng a Locomotive using Paint.Net
Hints and Tips for 3D Modelling Software
Check out related changes to see what the state of this book is.
A test devised by pioneering AI researcher Alan Turing to determine whether or not an AI is "strong"; that is, whether or not it is capable of behaving like a human. As described by Turing, the test consists of an AI and a human being siting in separate rooms. A researcher sits separate from both of them in a different room. The researcher does not know which room houses which entity, yet he can communicate freely with both the AI and the human. If the researcher is incapable of differentiating between the human and the AI, then the AI has "passed" the Turing Test.
More than 150 key articles relevant to Patrick John Golden, mainly from the NLA's Trove Digitised Newspapers have been transcribed for ease of reference here: Patrick John Golden - Transcriptions and Notes
Defence in Depth for Securing Computer Systems/Preparation
Before you can look at defending anything from attack you need
Zhu), that describe this type of situation well:
If you know the enemy and know yourself you need not
Basically the simple answer is to know what’s out there before
Undertaking baselining activity consists of two steps:
Realize that when working alone you are limited to what you can manage on your own. Most things that you have no experience with will put you in a learning curve, and you will mostly fail to successfully deal with what you don't know or understand, this resource consuming being time one of the more important one.
When working alone prioritization becomes a matter of life and death, with the only positive factor that if you fail you are the only one that will pay for it.
Spreading task between various elements will get things going faster and safer, since risks are also shared. It is in human nature to cooperate and join together to face adversity. Depending on the situation your best chance will be to act on what humanity has done for time immemorial and join a larger group of people.
People you trust, family
Add people, add complexity
Air is the Earth's atmosphere. Air around us is a mixture of many gases and dust particles. It is the clear gas in which living things live and breathe. It has an indefinite shape and volume. It has no color or smell. It has mass and weight, because it is matter. The weight of air creates atmospheric pressure. There is no air in outer space.
White reinforces the attack on the d5 square and keeps his options open. Black has a variety of answers here, aiming for a King's Indian setup with 2...g6 is an interesting option, 2...e6 is also possible although white can choose to disrupt black's plan of reaching a Nimzo-Indian or QID setup by playing 3. e4 leading to the very sharp and tactical variations known collectively as the Mikenas Carls variation, which black is best advised to avoid if not prepared to face them.
2...e5 is also possible leading to the English four knights and the Bremen system
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
1.c4 Nf6 2. Nc3
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at English Opening
Batsford Chess Openings 2 (1989, 1994). Garry Kasparov, Raymond Keene. ISBN 0-8050-3409-9.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon · Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
Moses told the Israelites that he set before them blessing and curse: blessing if they obeyed God’s commandments and curse if they did not obey but turned away to follow other gods. Moses directed that when God brought them into the land, they were to pronounce the blessings at Mount Gerizim and the curses at Mount Ebal.
Moses instructed the Israelites in the laws that they were to observe in the land: They were to destroy all the sites at which the residents worshiped their gods. They were not to worship God as the land’s residents had worshiped their gods, but to look only to the site that God would choose. There they were to bring their offerings and feast before God, happy in all God’s blessings. Moses warned them not to sacrifice burnt offerings in any place, but only in the place that God would choose. But whenever they desired, they could slaughter and eat meat in any of their settlements, so long as they did not consume the blood, which they were to pour on the ground. They were not, however, to consume in their settlements their tithes, firstlings, vow offerings, freewill offerings, or contributions; these they were to consume along with their children, slaves, and local Levites in the place that God would choose.
14th-12th century B.C.E. bronze figurine of the Canaanite god Baal, found in Ras Shamra (ancient Ugarit), now at the Louvre
7th century B.C.E. alabaster Phoenician figure probably of the Canaanite goddess Astarte, now at the National Archaeological Museum of Spain
Moses warned them against being lured into the ways of the residents of the land, and against inquiring about their gods, for the residents performed for their gods every abhorrent act that God detested, even offering up their sons and daughters in fire to their gods.
Moses warned the Israelites carefully to observe only that which he enjoined upon them, neither adding to it nor taking away from it. If a prophet appeared before them and gave them a sign or a portent and urged them to worship another god, even if the sign or portent came true, they were not to heed the words of that prophet, but put the offender to death. If a brother, son, daughter, wife, or close friend enticed one in secret to worship other gods, the Israelites were to show no pity, but stone the offender to death. And if they heard that some scoundrels had subverted the inhabitants of a town to worship other gods, the Israelites were to investigate thoroughly, and if they found it true, they were to destroy the inhabitants and the cattle of that town, burning the town and everything in it. Moses prohibited the Israelites from gashing themselves or shaving the front of their heads because of the dead.
Moses prohibited the Israelites from eating anything abhorrent. Among land animals, they could eat ox, sheep, goat, deer, gazelle, roebuck, wild goat, ibex, antelope, mountain sheep, and any other animal that has true hoofs that are cleft in two and chews cud. But the Israelites were not to eat or touch the carcasses of camel, hare, daman, or swine. Of animals that live in water, they could eat anything that has fins and scales, but nothing else. They could eat any clean bird, but could not eat eagle, vulture, black vulture, kite, falcon, buzzard, raven, ostrich, nighthawk, sea gull, hawk, owl, pelican, bustard, cormorant, stork, heron, hoopoe, or bat. They could not eat any winged swarming things. They could not eat anything that had died a natural death, but they could give it to the stranger or you sell it to a foreigner. They could not boil a kid in its mother’s milk.
They were to set aside every year a tenth part of their harvest. They were to consume the tithes of their new grain, wine, and oil, and the firstlings of their herds and flocks, in the presence of God in the place where God would choose. If the distance was too great, they could convert the tithes or firstlings into money, take the proceeds to the place that God had chosen, and spend the money and feast there. They were not to neglect the Levite in their community, for the Levites had no hereditary portion of land. Every third year, they were to take the full tithe, but leave it within their settlements, and the Levite, the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow in their settlements could come and eat.
The Year of Jubilee (painting by Henry Le Jeune)
Every seventh year, the Israelites were to remit debts from fellow Israelites, although they could continue to dun foreigners. There would be no needy among them if only they kept all God’s laws, for God would bless them. But if one of their kinsmen fell into need, they were not to harden their hearts, but were to open their hands and lend what the kinsman needed. The Israelites were not to harbor the base thought that the year of remission was approaching and not lend, but they were to lend readily to their kinsman, for in return God would bless them in all their efforts.
If a fellow Hebrew was sold into servitude, the Hebrew slave would serve six years, and in the seventh year go free. When the master set the slave free, the master was to give the former slave parting gifts. Should the slave tell the master that the slave did not want to leave, the master was to take an awl and put it through the slave’s ear into the door, and the slave was to become the master’s slave in perpetuity.
The Israelites were to consecrate to God all male firstlings born in their herds and flocks and eat them with their household in the place that God would choose. If such an animal had a defect, the Israelites were not to sacrifice it, but eat it in their settlements, as long as they poured out its blood on the ground.
Moses instructed the Israelites to observe Passover, Shavuot, and Sukkot. Three times a year, on those three festivals, all Israelite men were to appear in the place that God would choose, each with his own gift, according to the blessing that God had bestowed upon him.
Here are a few of the questions that the Rabbis raised about this Torah reading:
What does Moses mean (in Deuteronomy 11:26) by setting before us a blessing and a curse?[1]
Why did the Torah centralize sacrifices at a single sanctuary?[2]
How could a prophet of other gods perform a sign or wonder that actually came to pass (as Deuteronomy 13:2–3 seems to imply)?[5]
How can we, mere mortals, walk in God’s ways (as Deuteronomy 13:5 requires)?[6]
Was there ever an apostate town? If not, why does the Torah include the discussion?[8]
Why do we read the law of tithes when the eighth day of Passover falls on a Sabbath?
When was one obliged to remove tithes?[10]
How did the cancellation of debts in the Sabbatical year work out?[11]
What duty to the poor does Deuteronomy 15:7–8 require of us?[12]
How is disregard for the poor like idolatry?[13]
How well did the Torah require one to treat a servant?[14]
↑ Deuteronomy Rabbah 4:4.
↑ Josephus, Against Apion 2:24(193); JPS Torah Commentary, Excursus 14.
↑ Nehama Leibowitz. Studies in Devarim: Deuteronomy, 125–34. Jerusalem: The World Zionist Organization, 1980.
↑ Rabbi Akiva in Sifre to Deuteronomy 84:1:3. Land of Israel, circa 250–350 CE. Reprinted in, e.g., Sifre to Deuteronomy: An Analytical Translation. Translated by Jacob Neusner, 1:233. Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1987. ISBN 1-55540-145-7.
↑ Babylonian Talmud Sanhedrin 111b–13b.
↑ Genesis Rabbah 17:2.
↑ Jerusalem Talmud Maaser Sheni 53a.
↑ Mishnah Sheviit chapter 10.
↑ Leviticus Rabbah 34:9; Babylonian Talmud Ketubot 67b.
↑ Babylonian Talmud Yoma 2b.
Registered at G.P.O., Sydney, for transmission by post as a periodical.
P.01 - Contents Banner
An Easily Constructed Instrument for Measuring R.F. Resistance & Other Important Quantities . . . . 4
Audio Frequency Distortion Measurements. Part I. (By Eng. Dept. Aerovox Corp.) . . . . 7
Some Waveforms & How To Make Them (Part 2) . . . . 12
Novice Set Building (A Section for the Beginner) . . . . 16
Circuit Symbols and What They Mean . . . . 18
Shoes and Ships (Useful Hints & Tips) . . . . 22
Short Wave Review . . . . 27
Our Cover picture shows one of Rola Company's
P.01 - Publication Notes
Subscription Rates: 12 Issues 18/- Post Free
Published by the Proprietors: Radio & Electronics (N.Z.) Ltd. (Publishers - Incorporated in N.Z.) 17 Bond Street, Sydney, N.S.W.
Owing to the DRASTIC newsprint and paper shortage,
However, we feel our readers and advertisers will
OBSTACLES, Australia’s only publication entirely
Managing Editor: LAY. W. CRANCH, AMIRE (Aust.), M.W.I.A., VK2XC
Providing National Coverage for the Advancement of Radio and Electronic Knowledge
Sole Wholesale Distributors - Gordon & Gotch (A/asia) Ltd.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by R. V. Byers, 9 Wetherill St., North Lidcombe. 'Phone: UX6681 (Footnote P.1)
In a recent issue of the British magazine "Wireless World," is a short paragraph which draws attention to the late Lord Derby, and the fact that as Postmaster-General, in the year 1904, he was responsible for setting a precedent for which amateur transmitters throughout the Empire should be eternally grateful. The occasion was the passing by the House of Commons of the first Wireless Telegraphy Bill, and the noble lord's words during his second reading speech are worth quoting: "The class with whom I have the greatest sympathy," he said, "are those who wish to go in for experiments in this science, and I have been able to frame a clause which will give absolute freedom in that direction, merely requiring registration on the part of those who wish to engage in experiments. In a matter of this description the House will doubtless desire that the Act should be administered as liberally as possible, and I shall certainly do my best in that direction. For what it is worth I will give an undertaking that no request for a licence for experiments be refused unless the refusal has been approved by me personally."
Even a casual search round the 80-metre band these days gives one cause to reflect that amateur radio is not what it was. At one time the people who came on the air and talked about anything but radio were fairly few and far between, because the main bond between amateurs was their common technical interest. Much of the technical talk that used to be heard was ill-informed, but almost all of it was characterised by an obvious desire to learn, and those amateurs whose technical knowledge was rather greater than the average were keenly sought after by the less knowledgeable. This sort of thing seems to us to be much nearer to the kind of amateur whom Lord Derby had in mind when he framed his 1904 legislation. He could not have foreseen the "talkers," aforesaid, and the point we wish to make here is that he might have been horrified if he had been able to!
The moral of all this is that those responsible for controlling amateur radio by the granting of licences, and the administration and framing of amateur regulation do not have to foresee any thing of the kind, because it is therefor the hearing, and if a sufficiently large number of people among those in authority should decide that any section of radio amateurs is sufficiently little of an ornament not to be considered useful, it is not a long step to the restriction of amateur radio privileges, and not necessarily in a way that can be ascribed to the exigencies of ether space.
P.04 - Instrument for Measuring R.F. Resistance et al
P.07 - Audio Frequency Distortion Measurements. Part I.
P.12 - Some Waveforms & How To Make Them (Part 2)
P.16 - Novice Set Building (A Section for the Beginner)
P.18 - Circuit Symbols and What They Mean
P.22 - Shoes and Ships (Useful Hints & Tips)
P.23 - "Ham" Activities
P.27 - Short Wave Review
The "extra simple walker" based on http://www.instructables.com/id/Extra-simple-walking-mechanism/ is not relevant enough for its own wikipedia article.
However: Beeing very simple makes it a good base line. The mechanism is by no mean ideal, but it is possible to build a vehicle around it.
So. lets look at the walking vehicle:
The green base plate is going up and down a lot. It would be a very hard ride, just from the up and down.
Now take a very close look at the animation:
Zune .MUI Classes
Best option is to use one of the virtual machines - see more here
Confirmed working with Windows XP SP2 (2010), ?
x86 32bit discussion thread here.
Experimental x86_64 bit build discussed here.
At the moment there is no network under windows hosted, I suggest virtual machine to test AROS network under Windows until work on hostio.hidd is done. It's a platform-independent remake of unixio.hidd which can work also on Windows (using overlapped I/O). As soon as it's done the task of porting Windows TAP becomes trivial. P.S. It will be even possible to port X11 display driver to Windows :)
Got into compiling, but then came across couple other problems (a.k.a. Netpbm and such, which is required, and which in turn requires zlib, libjpeg, libpng, and something else... of which none (aside zlib) I've managed to get to compile without a ton of errors - seems Mingw's gcc 4.5.x is rather broken in a way).
You don't need to compile netpbm. MinGW really lacks it, but you can download it from another project, GNUWin32. They cooperate perfectly. I use it. Windows version of Python is also needed, get it from python.org.
WinCE-targeted gcc. I guess this would do the job: http://sourceforge.net/projects/cegcc/
Write arch/all-mingw32/kernel/cpu-arm.h
And after this the thing should go! BTW Win64-hosted port should be that simple as well.
Did you use—with-kernel-tool-prefix=... for the kernel tools?
And note that—disable-crosstools will not work for Windows. You will
Howto access raw hard drives from within Windows-hosted AROS
Open HDToolBox, press "Add" in the devices list and add hostdisk.device.
Browse the device in the same way as you browse hard drives on native AROS.
Save the mountlist. By default it has the name of physical device (e. g. DH0) and will be placed into SYS:Storage/DOSDrivers.
Edit the saved mountlist. You'll need to add filesystem name (e. g. devs:sfs.handler or devs:afs.handler)
Execute 'Mount DH0:' in the command line.
Hanging One idea i have is some deadlock between GDI window service thread and main AROS thread, when they simultaneously hit GDI context with certain conditions. It's very hard to track down. If i add any debug output to GDI thread, the problem goes away. I tried to interrupt frozen AROS with MSVC. Seen all 3 threads
If a freeze happens somewhere inside this code, my_debug_var gives hint where it happened.
Thought about writing some special extension module which creates one more window with separate service thread and dumps some things there, with possibility to run SAD in that thread. So i would be able to enter SAD after AROS is frozen and examine task scheduler state. This could shed some light on the phenomena.
One thing - deadlock doesn't happen for window service thread. It works fine. It started locking up only after i added confirmation of keyboard events reception, so that keypresses aren't lost or duplicated. When service thread posts a keypress to main AROS thread it waits back for a signal (event in Windows terms). AROS is expected to trigger this event when it picks up a keypress in an interrupt. Since AROS doesn't respond to interrupts, it never posts back this event. So, likely some flaw in interrupts, causing "All tasks waiting" state
Windows-hosted and native use the same NewStackSwap(), written in asm. Linux (except ARM) uses generic implementation in C, utilizing swapcontext(). On ARM this function is not implemented in libc, so all ARM ports use the same NewStackSwap() written in asm. StackSwap() is always the same. It's written in asm for every CPU.
BTW, in fact, Linux-hosted port can use asm implementation. Just it doesn't for historical reasons.
Can't you use some buffer for this:
AFAIK you can theoretically even get rid of lock/unlock of inputbuffer, with some atomic instruction tricks.
See arch/all-mingw32/host_scheduler.c, task exception handling. I have to pass argument to exception handler via register because i can't modify stack inside Windows exception since Windows exception handler is running on the same stack as main code. Also note that i moved some code back to exec.library/Switch() and exec.library/Dispatch(). Now kernel.resource does not have to #include exec's private stuff (etask.h).
There are issues...
It spreads the scheduler among several modules. Part of scheduling is done by kernel.resoruce, part by exec.library. The only win is getting rid of etask.h include.
But it's not scheduling itself, It's some internal exec state maintenance, which is always the same.
This idea came to be after examining UNIX-hosted code. I know it is old, but it uses Dispatch() for state change, and i liked the idea. I am working on fully functional kernel.resource for UNIX.
Currently we support only RR scheduler. What, if we will need to add some more? Having Switch() and Dispatch() back in exec means, we need to implement different schedulers in exec, too.
Some schedulers (ppc efika, sam440, soon also the x86) access the etask.h in order to store some statistics there. Currently, the task re-dispatch timestamp and total CPU time spend in the task are stored there. What would
It can also be moved to exec. This will automatically make it working on all architectures. Of course if we provide some kind of access to CPU time. BTW, may be it can be based on timer.device's EClock?
If this file is mingw32 specific I think the path should be aros/mingw32/irq.h (or aros/windows/irq.h). This will allow to still cross-compile from anywhere and have in the end one SDK for all CPUs and archs.
Well, i can do it. But here is my last argument for this location... In fact the location is $prefix/i386-mingw32/include/aros/irq.h. If you are working on AROS and you are installing a mingw cross-compiler, the crosscompiler's default paths will also end up in $prefix/i386-mingw32/include and $prefix/i386-mingw32/lib. This way the file appears right where it is expected to be.
And yes, there is libaroskernel.a which goes to i386-mingw32/lib, but it needs mingw32 compiler to be build, so it is built only during windows-hosted build. It just can't be built when doing e.g. Linux-hosted build.
So far, the thing is really half-done. If you still don't like it, i can make this include installed only for Windows-hosted build. This way we'll get this only in "mingw32-sdk" target, but together with its linklib. May be its even better (anyway you need libaroskernel.lib to use it)
All hosted ports. On non-Linux OSes it's impossible to acquire address 4 at all. After hitting problem with entry point i introduced a new macro, AROS_ENTRY, to mitigate this.
Theoretically we could substitute it with some other device (Ethernet, USB, etc.). These things are much more complex and require drivers to function. I leave out necessary protocols since with for example Ethernet we could use some simple raw protocol, just to be able to read messages.
So comes the first idea: we should have something that can be called "debug channels". Every debug channel can be identified for example by name, supplied by the device driver.
Early initialization (while booting up the system)
Some way to supply its output channel to the system.
(1) is solved by modular kernels. Now about (2). We already have KrnPutChar() and KrnMayGetChar() in kernel.resource. For simplicity, let's talk only about KrnPutChar() at the moment. We could have some additional function, like:
KrnRegisterDebugChannel(STRPTR name, APTR function)
Where name is channel name and function is callback function like MyCallback(char c).
What happens when it is called? Let's remember that we have debug=XXX kernel argument which actually specifies where to direct the output (we may run several device drivers providing debug output but we need only one of them). XXX could be some sting in the form:
For example, for serial port No2 on 19200 bps the argument could be:
The argument is processed at early init, kernel remembers it. When something (driver) calls KrnRegisterDebugChannel("serial", SerOutput), the channel name is compared with what is given by debug= argument. If
What's with parameters? Only the driver itself knows how to decode them. Obviously, before starting using the channel, it needs to be initialized. For this purpose the driver should provide one more callback, like MyInit(char *params). So registration takes the following form:
KrnRegisterDebugChannel(STRPTR name, APTR InitCallback, APTR OutputCallback)
But what before the driver plugs in? Well, we have our screen. The only bad thing: we don't know how to drive it. But, if we are more intelligent...
Generally there is either text or graphical mode framebuffer. At boot time is known to us, it's either text mode or graphical VESA framebuffer. The only problem is warm reboot, where the screen is left by driver in some state, unknown to us. There are options:
a) Driver should install a reset callback where it should reset the card back into text mode.
b) Driver could have some another callback which would return VESA-alike description of current state, so that existing display can be picked up during reboot.
By the way, the same thing would let us to display friendly guru screens instead of simple rebooting. Just this routine in the display driver should be crash-proof (it may not rely on interrupts, other libraries, etc., even on exec itself). And again we need some way to register this routine.
Can anyone suggest some framework for this? I'm exhausted on ideas here, especially taking into account that:
a) Display drivers can be unloaded in some situations.
Now let's remember about KrnMayGetChar(). Currently AROS features built-in SAD debugger. I picked it up from i386-native version and adapted a little bit to the new environment. Now it perfectly runs on Windows-hosted, i can run it using C:Debug command. In fact on other ports you also may run it, you'll see a prompt in debug output but
The current SAD doesn't do much, but it just needs some attention from developers. It can become a useful tool. Especially if we invent some way to run it when guru happens (like it was on classic Amiga(tm)).
So, back to the topic. First, not all devices can be bidirectional. Second, why not for example use own machine's keyboard? The driver then needs the following functions: InitCallback, InputCallback, ReleaseCallback. Release function could be called when for example you leave the SAD, to give the device back to normal OS usage.
So far, we already have five functions (assuming that debug output is never released). If it somehow is, then we have six functions. May be we should not have two registration functions, and have just one, taglist-based?
How to pair input and output channels? Assuming that devices are not bidirectional? Or may be we should not pair them at all, just allowing the user to specify the second argument, like "debuginput=ps2kbd"?
Would recommend installing git on your MacOS X machine and cloning the AROS sources via git:
Then, you can use ./configure to set up your cross complication environment.
[get a coffee. Or five.]
Modify bin/darwin-x86_64/AROS/S/Startup-Sequence to run 'NewCLI' instead of 'WANDERER:WANDERER' - that will at least get you a full-screen text console.
Use the attached patch to create a 'C:RawEcho' command (build this with 'make -s workbench-c-quick') that you can use to emit debugging messages to the Mac OS text console that ran boot/AROSBootstrap
| Your X Server seems to have backing store disabled!
You can safely ignore this warning. Been running in this mode for the last 2 years.
Confirmed it works with x86 10.5.8 Leopard 10.6.2 and 10.6.4 Snow Leopard. Don't forget to install x11 XQuartz), it's on the installation dvd. There should be an X11.app in /Applications/Utilities. If not, there's your problem.
When the bounty was created the mac was still PPC only, from recent svn logs it looks like it should also run hosted on Darwin PPC.
You don't need SDL, but you do need a X-Server for graphics. Newer versions of OSX usually have one installed already. Dunno if SDL would also be possible, on iOS it won't. Cocoa SDL needs special preparations in program's main() to work.
Please check arch/all-darwin/README.txt for build instructions. Don't try to build contrib, some packages will fail, SDL_mixer and gmake IRC. Perhaps you forgot to add—target=darwin-i386 to configure? But, really strange, it doesn't need it on my machine.
Yep, the darwin 32 bit set. I had to move the binaries by hand into the path with names like i386-aros-gcc to make configure happy.
Isn't /usr/local/bin in your path already? The toolchain was built with—prefix=/usr/local.
It should work fine if you extract these two archives into your /usr/local.
There has been no time to complete GPT partition table handling (it's currently read-only, you can install AROS on a GPT partition but you have to use 3rd party tools to partition the drive). Writing GPT is currently enabled, but DO NOT TRY THIS. It WILL destroy your partition table!!! CRC and backup table are not updated!!!
If you get hangups, perhaps AROS crashes behind the scenes. If you use VESA mode, you can see the debug log if you add 'vesahack' to the command line. This will set up split-screen mode. In the upper half you'll see AROS screen, in the bottom - debug log.
If you get crashes at early boot, try adding 'NOACPI' to the command line. ACPI stuff is very poorly tested because discovery fails on Mac (different ROM).
Need to download XCode or install MacPorts. Warning: macports doesn't work with xcode 4.3. Use older version...
Run "./configure --target=darwin-ppc --disable-crosstools" and send the results if it fails (config.log and the terminal output)
If it succeeds... then any build errors 'make -s' generates.
If *that* succeeds... then any fatal errors 'cd bin/darwin-ppc/AROS; boot/AROSBootstrap' generates.
If *that* succeeds... it works!
If 'gcc -v' and 'make -v' work, you are 90% of the way there.
If you get a build error for missing libpng and netpnm, you can resolve that with Fink. Even better, go with Homebrew, there's a PPC fork which works fine on my old PowerBook :).
Once installed, it will allow you to get additional development packages that don't come with X-Code, ie:
Building darwin hosted port try to follow the guide in arch/all-darwin/README.txt. There's no need to build cross-tools with—enable-crosstools switch (which may not work at all), because you should install Sonics prebuilt cross compilers.
The crosstools build process it wrong in fact. It relies on already existing link libraries and startup code, which can be built only using wrapper scripts. Of course on non-ELF hosts wrappers won't work. It should be done in quite another way, involving more steps:
Build binutils, they don't have any prerequisites.
Build collect-aros. Its env.h.cross file contains instructions how.
Unpack gcc, configure it and execute 'make all-gcc' and 'make target-libgcc'. This will produce barebone C compiler.
Using this compiler, build AROS linklibs.
After this complete building gcc using 'make'. It will build also g++ with its libraries.
Of course AROS includes should be made too before building gcc, but gcc itself isn't needed for this.
On Darwin AROS is built using a preinstalled crosstools. Jason, your new configure stopped supporting it and seems to use host's compiler with wrapper. This is impossible on Darwin. Then the darwin build needs to set—with-toolchain=... and—with-kernel-tool-prefix=ppc-aros-
The same with Windows. I guess similar issue affects Android (there it uses Android crosscompiler as $KERNEL_CC and wrapper as $TARGET_CC. It's impossible to compile Android binaries using Linux gcc, their
ABIs are a bit different!
If you're compiling for darwin-hosted on darwin, you *don't* use—with-kernel-toolchain-prefix at all.
Or just use '--with-kernel-toolchain-prefix='.
Remember that 'kernel' is used to compile the darwin side of the AROS Bootstrap.
And everything that has compiler=kernel specified in the build macros like arch/all-unix/kernel.
There's no more compiler=kernel for AROS modules. It's impossible to link together different objects on non-ELF systems (Windows and Darwin). compiler=kernel is used for:
Host-side DLLs (intensively used in Windows-hosted).
Support linklibs like libarosbootstrap.a
AROS modules directly interfacing with host OS now use another trick. It's still $TARGET_CC, but with -nostdinc -isystem $GENINGDIR. This allows to produce AROS ELF objects which still adhere to correct
This can't be elf-wrapper for hosted. In order to build something that runs under an OS, you need an SDK for that OS. In fact elf-wrapper is the same aros-gcc, but produces statically linked (ET_EXEC) binaries. This is suitable only for building native bootstraps (which are running on naked hardware and self-contained).
Building Darwin-hosted under Darwin? configure's bug. Actually these architectures are Darwin, Windows and Android. Their KERNEL_CC can't be used for building AROS code even with wrapper. So these three arches must enforce AROS crosstools, either built or preinstalled.
How to substitute rmb with keyboard on laptop? CTRL doesn't do the trick.
BTW to access the AROS file-structure from OS X, just right-click and 'Show Package Contents'
For hosted systems we have driver that wraps AHI to the open sound system, see arch/all-unix/libs/oss. Probably it is possible to write a similar thing for darwin hosted.
In order to resolve the async I/O issue wonder why AROS can't handle this by means of AROS internal threading. This is exactly how asyncio.library does it as well. Threading could be inside 68k AROS or outside, i.e. Linux host threads.
From host's point of view AROS is just one thread. So if some of AROS processes calls blocking I/O, it blocks the whole AROS. No task switching will be done since no signals will be delivered. So this is related. AROS would have to be sub-threaded, with those threads being mapped to native threads (this is by the way something that is sometimes done in JVMs, also under Linux).
As to host threads, there's another large problem. Tried this with Android-hosted port and it failed. When SIGARLM arrives, you can't tell which thread is interrupted. This completely screws up AROS' task switcher. Maybe it's worth checking how this is solved in common JVM implementations.
There is already a solution in the form of unixio.hidd. However it operates only on file descriptor. AFAIK eSounD provides only library-based API with blocking functions. There's no some form of a UNIX socket/pipe/whatever. You might want to try eSound: There's one problem with esound. It lacks asynchronous I/O capabilities, providing only blocking calls. You can not use blocking I/O from within AROS. This will cause blocking of the whole AROS, including interrupts, and will provide very negative user experience.
Of course it's possible to implement oss.library which would work on top Core Audio. But i think it would be much cleaner solution to write self-contained AHI driver without any extra API wrappers. It would better use CoreAudio possibilities and would not be restricted only to what oss.library has. Not saying that oss.library is a quickly hacked crappy thing.
In general however direct OSS access does not seem to be the best solution, as eSound - and probably also PortAudio - as additional abstraction layer does ensure that in turn AROS is not blocking the host audio but proper mixing is done. In order to resolve the async I/O issue wonder why AROS can't handle this by means of AROS internal threading. This is exactly how asyncio.library does it as well. Threading could be inside 68k AROS or outside, i.e. Linux host threads.
Talking about sockets... maybe a native Linux audio client which is instructed by AROS over localhost IP connection would be a workaround. Mean, asyncio and SIGURG could work then...
Here's an example how some guys did develop a babyphone client/server
(i.e. sender/receiver) using OSS and UDP sockets:
Of course it gets more complex if you want it connection based, with more reliability and upfront negotiation of audio settings - possibly could be done using TCP instead, with an appropriate header.
Several days before i ran it on Linux PPC (where i wrote initial version of emul_dir.c), worked fine too.
Is it a new build? It was a complete rebuild. The problem only happened with—enable-debug because the ASSERT_VALID_PTR was called during AllocateExt which was called during PrepareExecBase.
PrepareExecBase() is really tricky. If you want to debug it, you can temporarily add statically linked calls to KrnBug() (copy the stub from kernel_debug.h and use it). Exec debugging is really not up there yet.
However this routine should be simple enough to not require any debug.
Reverted this and now link against libgcc.a. The problem with the missing symbol did not happen on Rosetta but was able to test it works now on a 10.3 G4 ppc ibook.
Now some debug output from Rosetta with my latest commits, without them you'll get only garbage. As you can see the value of klo is trashed after HostLib_Open. Trashing may differ depending on were you place debug output.
All hosted ports. On non-Linux OSes it's impossible to acquire address 4 at all. After hitting problem with entry point introduced a new macro, AROS_ENTRY, to mitigate this.
Don't know if GNU binutils support i386-darwin target for cross compiling and how difficult it is to set it up. When compiling Mac OS X hosted AROS, I had to make the following patch, otherwise the compiler couldn't find some includes (e.g. sys/_types). Is this a problem with my build environment or something more general?
Have you installed my crosstoolchain from aros-archives, or you use some hacks, or—with-crosstools?
I did install your cross-tool-chain, and followed your build instructions, but I also have generic i386 cross-compilers from MacPorts (used for building native).
Index: workbench/libs/mesa/src/mesa/mmakefile.src
--- workbench/libs/mesa/src/mesa/mmakefile.src (revision 35709)
+++ workbench/libs/mesa/src/mesa/mmakefile.src (working copy)
-I$(AROS_DEVELOPMENT)/include/gallium \
USER_CFLAGS := -DUSE_MGL_NAMESPACE -ffast-math $(FFIXED) -DMAPI_GLAPI_CURRENT
BTW, should it not be possible to use—with-crosstools? (And isn't that the default for most other archs now?).
AFAIK—with-crosstools works incorrectly. Most archs currently use wrapper script around host's gcc. Crosstools
In fact thinking about changing this. I think that real crosscompiler should be enforced on a host basis, not on a target basis. I. e. if we compile on non-ELF host (for example on Windows or Darwin), $cpu-aros-gcc is used. Otherwise wrapper script it used. This will make cross-compiling any port on any build machine quite an easy task.
Looks like you installed the crosscompiler but didn't install AROS SDK into its directory (/usr/local/i386-aros/include and /usr/local/i386-aros/lib).
c++ compiler is not wrapped up by AROS build system, so it doesn't supply Development/include to it.
Perhaps adding this to mmakefile.src can be an option
Stackswap tests crashes in NewStackSwap(), the reason is under investigation. However executables are ran flawlessly. I suggest the problem happens because of swapcontext() nesting.
X11 driver has somewhat bad performance. Also there are some small problems with it. I suggest they happen because of missing backingstore. It's possible to enable it, but it's somewhat tricky.
In fact X11 driver needs to be seriously rewritten, so that it will support screen composition and will work without backingstore. Also there are several obvious coding faults in it. Unfortunately i don't know X11 programming well, so i won't take this task for now.
x86-64 Darwin build.
iPhone hosted port.
During testing of parts of Darwin-hosted build i came up to this again. Currently we have AROS.boot file where we put name of architecture. Is it really needed to have the full name there?
This actually prevents to have one boot disk for different machines using the same CPU. For example ppc-chrp-efika partition will not boot on ppc-sam440, despite they are the same! Personally i hit this issue when i build aros-base and aros-strap kernel modules on Darwin and then tried to boot them up on my existing Windows-hosted installation (since there's no aros-bsp-darwin yet).
Revert to checking C:Shell file. LoadSeg() will not load binaries for alien CPUs. So we will be able to detect which partitions are bootable on which CPU (i remember this file was provided as a solution for problem of coexisting x86-64 and i386 installations)
Check only CPU with this file (e.g. 'i386' or 'x86-64'). This way we solve both problems. Additionally in future we can be able to add more data to this file (like boot priority). This is the reason why we should keep the file.
A possibility to run AROS hosted on x86-64 MacOS. There's a problem.
Current AROS executables use small code model, so they need to be loaded into lower 2GB on address space. This is no problem on native AROS and on Linux we can use MAP_32BIT flag. However there's no such flag in BSD, and, consequently, on Darwin. Additionally Darwin reserves the whole low address space for own needs. Userspace begins at 0x1000000000. This means there's no way to get into lower 2 GB. The problem can be solved only by changing code model. This is so for the small code model for x86_64 right? Does there also exists a 'big' code model ?
I also would like to get an idea of the implications on code size, stack usage, speed etc. of the different code models. Yes, of course. It imposes no limitations, but has negative impact on the binary size (all references are 64-bit). Small code model uses special form of CPU instructions where all references are still 32-bit. Reference for models.
Darwin itself uses small PIC model for its executables (-fpic option is forced to always on). This allows to override this problem there. I can suggest to use the same on 64-bit AROS. However this means that -fpic option needs to become working on AROS in general. In order to do this, we need to change linking process a bit. Instead of -r, -q needs to be supplied to ld. This will instruct it to link a final executable (ET_EXEC) file, but keep relocs in it. Linking final executable involves additional magic like creating global offset table. I think it does not hurt to support different code models in the executables. And I also think that the default one to use for code should be able to run on all ports of AROS. I also think the default code model could be different on different CPUs, e.g. absolute on m68k, i386, PPC; relative in x86_64, PPC64, etc. Of course. On i386 the default is small, it still has some differences, i don't know which ones. I suggest to make small PIC a default code model on x86-64 AROS. However, for this, PIC should be made working in general. Currently it doesn't (try to compile hello world with -fpic and see what happens).
The question is if it should be implemented now in main trunk or if it would be best to delay it to after the ABI_V1 fork where the current ABI would be branched in a separate branch. You could for example implement your feature now in branches/ABI_V1/trunk-piccodemodel64
I think we should look at how many people have a current x86_64 installation they want to run newer programs. Also how involved would it be to upgrade an existing installation. It's not a real problem as the first set of changes is fully backwards compatible. AROS will still load existing executables. I even can add one #ifdef to collect-aros and the change will affect only 64-bit AROS. 32-bit executables will still have old format. Just i don't like code pollution with #ifdef's, and additionally if i implement the change for all CPUs, all of them will get working -fpic option. This will not change default code model for anything other than x86-64. Just ELFs will become real executables (it's quite simple to modify our InternalLoadSeg() to support them. I thought we had broken x86_64 binary compatibility several times in the past without a second thought (e.g. changing ULONGs to IPTRs in system structures). IMO it doesn't matter if we do the same with this change.
Anyway I am now quite advanced in the implementation of the split of clib the split is fully done and contrib-gnu compiles and runs mostly. BTW, are you aware of the fact that current arosc.library stores its thread-local data in private field of exec's ETask structure? I hope you changed this to something that uses only public API (like using AVL trees to associate thread data with process)? I just have a bug left in setenv/getenv and then mostly. So I don't think the waiting for ABI_V1 implementation to start this work would delay it for several months. We also need to align with the m68k people. This was one of the big things I have done in the ABI_V1 branch. The data is stored in an AVL tree. Is this soft of "handled in shared module per caller task storage". If so, could you point me to the codes in SVN?
It can be implemented right now. There will be only one problem: new executables will not run on older AROS. Old executables will still run on new AROS, i'll take care about it. Implementing this will allow to move further and implement special support for -fPIC which would enable nice things like moving global variables into library base. Is it okay to go for this change? This implementation should not be the final implementation but keep the possibility to adapt the code model for AROS during the ABI_V1 implementation phase. Code model can be specified using -mcmodel gcc switch. Without any changes we can use all code models in non-PIC mode. My change's goal is to make it possible to build PIC binaries. PIC changes x86-64 small model in such a way that it will work with any address range, limiting only size but not position of the code.
Work on x86-64-Darwin hosted AROS continues. It already boots up into Wanderer, but lots of components crash. This happens because there are still many places where pointers are truncated by conversion to ULONG. On Linux-x86-64 you won't notice this because AROS memory is allocated in low region (below 2GB limit).
On Darwin (like any other BSD) you don't have such a possibility. Darwin reserves the whole low memory for OS use, and application's memory starts from 0x001000000000.
This puts some restrictions on what you can do in AROS. For example AROS can't load bitmap fonts and diskfont.library crashes. This happens because diskfont.library hits wrong addresses when it tries to
In order to prevent loading these files at high addresses i introduced MEMF_31BIT flag. This flag is set for memory regions whose end address is not larger than 0x7FFFFFFF.
This flag is effective only on 64-bit machines. On 32-bit architectures exec.library ignores it, so there's no need to set it there. If someone is working on x86-64-pc port (Alain ?), he should take this into
On x86-64-Linux hosted port this flag is set, so this port can load AmigaDOS hunk files (and use bitmap fonts). This is because bootstrap supplies MAP_32BIT flag to mmap() calls. Currently only InternalLoadSeg_AOS() routine supplies this flag to AllocMem(). However i would say that there are more places where it should be used (for example, drivers for devices with 32-bit PCI DMA).
I have problems with implementing PIC support, so currently i use large code model to compile Darwin-hosted AROS. I will implement PIC later, this ends up in implementing own BFD backend in binutils. I don't know yet what code model should be used by default for gcc, but it's definitely not small one. ELFs with small model create problem, because code model is not recorded anywhere in ELF, and i don't know yet if it's possible to use some heuristics to guess it (for example detect specific relocation types). Currently program using small code model will simply crash on Darwin-hosted AROS. Programs compiled with large code model (and PIC in future) will run on any x86-64 port.
Even if i succeed in auto detection, this will not make small code magically run on all ports. Attempting to load it will end up in "File is not executable", nothing more.
An additional feature I would like is that you could decide which variables would go in libbase and which would be global to all libbases; implemented maybe with some AROS_xxx() macro around the variable definition.
Additionally i can make use of ELFOSABI_AROS definition (ELF ABI number reserved for AROS). However this will impose a requirement to use AROS version of binutils for linking, Linux ld will not do any more.
I always would have liked to make AROS programs real ELF programs (with relocation info still present though) but I also think this should be something for ABI V1. Ok, i go for #ifdef in collect-aros then.
Currently AROS build system does not support having different .conf files for different arch/cpu. If this is implemented, this is possible. Anyway binary compatibility with PPC is a proposal for future. Perhaps it will even be a separate AROS version. This is open to the discussion. Some of our leaders dislike MorphOS ABI and would not like to make it a default ABI for PPC AROS.
Anyway i think that LVOs should be as similar as possible. In fact this place should be the only place where LVO swapping takes place. There seem to be no other conflicting extensions between AmigaOS3.9 and MorphOS.
Will the ABI V1 C library allow to malloc memory in one task and free it in another? Not at the moment; I did not reimplement this feature yet as I did not find any code that seemed to use it.
This is required at least by MPlayer - I had to add an ugly sharecontextwithchild function to current arosc.library to have this behaviour. So if I would be able to get the source code I can think of the best way to implement it. It does seem to be thread related.
If you talk about PIC and GOT, will this also mean we can have shared objects?
We may be able to, but please please don't. Don't copy bad design decisions from OS4. OS4 programs using shared objects have the same startup slowness as on other OSes (Linux, Windows, ...).
In fact we can have them right now. Shared objects in AROS does not have to be PIC because every binary is relocatable by definition. However, yes, i agree that load-time linking is not good.
Find PPC Darwin ABI documentation, and compare with Linux ABI. If you carefully check the layout of stack frames you'll notice the differences and what causes the trashing. On ppc darwin called functions are allowed to write into a parameter area of the callers stack frame. I think this can be worked around by some C or Asm stubs around each host os call.
So i should be in search of graphic drivers and sound and keyboard etc.Am i right to assume that i should search them in the linux version of ps3 ports? There is another problem,linux used to have the otheros option, and now that is no longer present in the PlayStation 3 firmwares upper than 3.21. So i can't use a custom otheros.bld file to do the boot.
Have setup the *psl1ght sdk from *http://psl1ght.com/ that makes it possible to create pkg or elf files that run on ps3 with custom firmwares. Now i am interested to do a new port of AROS to ps3 gameos with the help of that sdk as start .I know that there has been a port of sdl for ps3 gameos. You can use that as a reference on how to do certain things but also:
Remember the first one is GPL and even Sony copyrighted, do not copy and paste code from there. I seem to remember that even the last one did use GPL code for display at some point.
Not sure if drivers of the projects I've linked might be of help, some of them maybe.
I am not certain how this could be done on the present firmwares.Although we have the advantage of running homebrew code on the gameos. So i guess i need a pkg application file to act as a boot loader for aros.Maybe i should try to find out more about petitboot ?that was a boot loader for ps3 try to make a pkg file out of it?
I know that linux boot loaders on ps3 needed the other os function, but since this is for jailbroken machines that have the lv2 peek hack of geohot we have access to anypart of the memory region of ps3 so in theory the lack of otheros option would not prohibit the execution of other os (asbestos comes to mind).
I am trying to see what is needed to port aros to ps3 gameos.What would i need?I know of the ppc linux port,i am trying to make a new configure file to use.
As far as I understand the sdk uses cross compilers so it might be possible to add sections to configure similar to those of the MacOS X hosted ported which also uses prebuilt tool chains or check other native port which are usually cross compiled like sam440 or ppc-efika port.
I would suppose the sdk should provide a lot of the things needed, maybe not yet but over time.
To sum it up.We need a boot application that initializes gfx,sound,usb,keyboard,blue ray and opens screen?Is that how aros works on linux?
Not exactly, a hosted port like on linux starts as a normal host program (arch/all-hosted/main.c) which acts as the boot loader then it jumps to the starting address (arch/all-unix/kernel/kernel_startup.c).
A native port is similar, but it has to do a lot more work to take control over the whole machine. One part of this are device drivers but there is more. For example the sam440 port has to init some registers, the interrupt controller and mmu very early in startup. You can learn about all this by studying AROS source, after all device drivers have to be done the AROS way, the sdk examples and other gameos hackers code and maybe it's also a good idea to search for some Cell chip documentations at places in the net.
Then you need to set up things in the arch directory so it contains the parts specific to the ps3. Then make the sdk produce a binary that is loaded and started on the ps3. This usually is the boot loader that loads all the needed modules from boot media and then jumps into a starting address of one of those. Probably the boot loader will already have to set up some of the hardware so it can do its job, the rest can be done at a later stage. Additionally, you will need hardware drivers for the display, usb at least for keybord and mouse, harddisk and blue ray drive.
It is possible? What problems will present?
I think it is possible, but it's not an easy task, the biggest problem might be not to give up at some point.
Btw. AROS does not need SDL, but we have an SDL display driver for hosted ports.
So i should be in search of graphic drivers and sound and keyboard etc.Am i right to assume that i should search them in the linux version of ps3 ports?
There is another problem,linux used to have the otheros option, and now that is no longer present in the PlayStation 3 firmwares upper than 3.21. So i can't use a custom otheros.bld file to do the boot.
I am not certain how this could be done on the present firmwares.Although we have the advantage of running homebrew code on the gameos.So i guess i need a pkg application file to act as a boot loader for aros.Maybe i should try to find out more about petitboot ?that was a boot loader for ps3 try to make a pkg file out of it?
I know that linux boot loaders on ps3 needed the otheros function, but since this is for jailbroken machines that have the lv2 peek hack of geohot we have access to anypart of the memory region of ps3 so in theory the lack of otheros option would not prohibit the execution of other os (asbestos comes to mind).
To sum it up.We need a boot application that initializes gfx,sound,usb,keyboard,blue ray and opens screen?Is that how aros works on linux?
The Ba Zi of anyone born in Year 1999. The Hour Pillar and Luck Pillars are obtained by clicking the items under the respective column.
The Hour Pillar is derived from the hour of birth. At the page that shows the Hour Pillar, one has to use the time of birth to look up the Hour Pillar.
The Luck Pillars depend on whether the person is male or female. By clicking under one of these columns, we can see the respective Luck Pillars, together with the starting Age. An item such as Age 9 (H2E12r) means that the starting Age is 9, the Heavenly Stem is 2, the Earthly Branch is 12 and the Luck Pillars unfold in a 'reverse' direction. An item such as Age 8 (H10E9f) means that the starting Age is 8, the Heavenly Stem is 10, the Earthly Branch is 9 and the Luck Pillars unfold in a 'forward' direction. If the first Luck Pillar is H4E7, then the next pillar will be H5E8 in the 'forward' direction, or will be H3E6 in the 'reverse' direction.
The requirements for this honor have not yet been published. The NAD has accepted the honor, but has not yet released the official requirements. The requirements listed below should be considered an advance, working copy, and they are therefore subject to change — perhaps significantly.
Westerns swing originated in 1920s and 1930s; small towns in the US Southwest. Although sometimes subject to the term "Texas swing" it is widely associated with Tulsa,[1]others contend that "Western Swing music finds deep roots in the dust bowl of Oklahoma"[2], and its influences include jazz from the major urban centers of the USA. Its' stylistic origins lie in Old Time, Western, blues,folk,swing,Dixieland and jazz. Writing in Rolling Stone, Dan Hicks described it as Texas-bred music grafted to jazz, or as "white country blues with a syncopated beat.".[3]
Bob Wills is considered by many music authorities one of the fathers of Western swing along with his old Fort Worth friend, Milton Brown. Nevertheless it is Wills who is called the King of Western Swing. A key factor in its development was the competition that the radio and recordings brought to compete with the more insular and time honored traditions of old time fiddle music.[4][5] "Hep cat" and sometime Roy Rogers stand-in Spade Cooley used the title of "King of Western Swing" as per a 1945 Warner Brothers film.[6][7]
[8] A major characteristic of the style is syncopation and rhythmic drive - it is dance music.[9] It was typically played in bars and in big city Western hotel buildings with large ballrooms; alcohol was served and fights were not unknown. The musicians had to keep the music going until they had fulfilled their contract and could get paid. Twin fiddles and even triple fiddle was another distinctive of Western Swing fiddle.[10] Jesse Ashlock was the first and longest-standing of Wills’s fiddle players, and the first to do “take off” solos. He had a considerable armoury of techniques including the double shuffle, triplets, parallel fifths and lots of syncopation.[citation needed]
Many old time fiddle tunes were adapted to Western swing.[11]
"Faded Love" is a Western swing song written by Bob Wills, his father John Wills,[12] and his brother, Billy Jack Wills. The melody came from an old fiddle tune Bob learned from his father, John Wills.[13][14]
San Antonio Rose written by Wills, was his biggest hit, taking him "from hamburgers to steaks!". It sold over a million copies.[15]
Westerns swing is influential on country music as demonstrated by, for instance, collaboration of Willie Nelson with Asleep at the Wheel on Austin City Limits in 2009.[16]
Boyd, Jean Ann. Jazz of the Southwest: An Oral History of Western Swing. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1998. ISBN 978-0-292-70859-4
Boyd, Jean A. "Western Swing: Working-Class Southwestern Jazz of the 1930s and 1940s". Perspectives on American Music, 1900-1950 (ch. 7, pp. 193–214), edited by Michael Saffle. Routledge, 2000. ISBN 978-0-8153-2145-3
↑ Bob Wills - Take Me Back To Tulsa: The Original Columbia Recordings Vol. 1 CD
↑ http://okfiddlers.com/FiddleCDs/FiddlePractice/PracticePages/Western%20Swing%20Practice%20Soundtracks.htm Oklahoma Trading Post Fiddlers
↑ Dan Hicks|Review of Merle Haggard
A Tribute to the Best Damn Fiddle Player in the World (Or My Salute to Bob Wills)|http://www.rollingstone.com/music/albumreviews/a-tribute-to-the-best-damn-fiddle-player-in-the-world-or-my-salute-to-bob-wills-19721026
↑ Brink, Western Swing, p. 550: "In many ways, western swing music is a manifestation of the cultural forces that came together where the geographical isolation and harsh living conditions of the frontier met the electronic age. People still living in dugouts and sod houses on the Southern High Plains became a part of popular culture through the radio and the jukebox, mingling their musical talents and tastes with the new sounds introduced to them through the accessibility of phonographs and the airwaves."Cited at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Western_swing
↑ Logsdon, "Folk Songs", p. 299: "In the 1920s Bob Wills, a fiddle player son of a cotton farmer in West Texas, started playing ranch-house dances. His desire to play dances eventually developed a dance genre known as western swing. While the music has elements of jazz and blues, it actually evolved from the specific merger of cowboy and farmer folk song and instrumentation." Cited athttp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Western_swing
↑ Spade Cooley King of Swing|Warner Bros|1945http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R88k3h6AzAc
↑ ^ The Soundies Distributing Corporation of America: a history and filmography of their "jukebox" musical films of the 1940s. Terenzio, MacGillivary, Okuda. 1954. page 129. ISBN 0-89950-578-3
↑ ^ Boyd, "Western Swing", p. 208: "... modernization did not diminish the unique and basically rural character of western swing, which remained distinct from mainstream horn jazz because of the prominent place given to fiddles and guitars, both standard and steel. The fiddle was the lead instrument in any western swing band, even those with horns, and every other instrumentalist adjusted to the fiddlers' stylings and preferences for sharp keys. "
↑ Boyd,"...there were also rhythmic differences between western swing bands and horn bands. Western swing was dance music, with the emphasis on a clearly discernible and uncluttered beat pattern. Western swing bands tended to use a highly syncopated rhythmic bass (i.e. \tfrac{2}{4} time signature), moving to the more relaxed swing-four (i.e., \tfrac{4}{4} time signature) only to back certain soloists. This gave western swing bands more rhythmic drive and an overall more aggressive character than most horn bands...
↑ http://www.texasfiddlemusic.com/system.html
↑ http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R88k3h6AzAc
↑ San Antonio Rose - The Life and Music of Bob Wills. Charles R. Townsend. 1976. University of Illinois. page 11. ISBN 0-252-00470-1
↑ Wolff, Country Music, p. 112: "It ['Faded Love'] originated with western swing pioneer Bob Wills, who grew up in the 1910s and '20s fiddling in rural Texas with his father, John Wills. They wrote the melody together when Bob was very young; it wasn't until 1950 that the song gained lyrics, courtesy of Bob's younger brother, Billy Jack."
↑ McWhorter, Cowboy Fiddler, p. 61: "And he [Boyd Rogers] played a tune called 'Forsaken Lover.' It's note-for-note the same as 'Faded Love.' Bob took that old tune and slowed it down and put in that long Bob Wills bow, and it became 'Faded Love'."
↑ Fiddling Around the World|Chris Haigh|Website|http://www.fiddlingaround.co.uk/westernswing/index.html
↑ http://www.youtube.com/user/AATW1969#p/a/u/2/nXHQErygXj8%7Chttp://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nXHQErygXj8&feature=channel_video_title%7COh You Pretty Woman|Willie Nelson with Asleep at the Wheel|Austin City Limits|2009
A user interface is the part of your program that is visible to a human user. It can be as simple as a command line or as sophisticated as an immersive virtual reality simulator (see Death Dream by Ben Bova). However, in the context of Visual Basic it usually means what is commonly referred to as a Graphical User Interface or GUI which generally consists of one or more Forms that contain text boxes, labels, buttons, picture boxes, etc.
A more common example of a GUI would be a standard EXE(Windows Forms).
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
First, disciplined political parties use self-criticism to establish connections with the people and have Marxist-Leninist theories. Second, the army is under the leadership of the party. Third, under the leadership of such a party, all revolutionary classes and all revolutionary groups are on the united front. These are our three major weapons to defeat the enemy.
Caching is often useful to re-use data which has already been computed. F# provides a number of built-in techniques to cache data for future use.
F# automatically caches the value of any function which takes no parameters. When F# comes across a function with no parameters, F# will only evaluate the function once and reuse its value everytime the function is accessed. Compare the following:
Both functions accept and return the same values, but they have very different behavior. Here's a comparison of the output in fsi:
The implementation of isNebraskaCity_bad forces F# to re-create the internal set on each call. On the other hand, isNebraskaCity_good is a value initialized to the function fun city -> cities.Contains(city), so it creates its internal set once and reuses it for all successive calls.
Note: Internally, isNebraskaCity_bad is compiled as a static function which constructs a set on every call. isNebraskaCity_good is compiled as a static readonly property, where the value is initialized in a static constructor.
This distinction is often subtle, but it can have a huge impact on an application's performance.
"Memoization" is a fancy word meaning that computed values are stored in a lookup table rather than recomputed on every successive call. Long-running pure functions (i.e. functions which have no side-effects) are good candidates for memoization. Consider the recursive definition for computing Fibonacci numbers:
Real: 00:00:00.000, CPU: 00:00:00.000, GC gen0: 0, gen1: 0, gen2: 0
Real: 00:00:23.557, CPU: 00:00:23.515, GC gen0: 2877, gen1: 3, gen2: 0
Real: 00:00:00.000, CPU: 00:00:00.000, GC gen0: 0, gen1: 0, gen2: 0
Much better! This version of the fib function runs almost instaneously. In fact, since we only calculate the value of any fib(n) precisely once, and dictionary lookups are an O(1) operation, this fib function runs in O(n) time.
Notice all of the memoization logic is contained in the fib function. We can write a more general function to memoize any function:
Note: Its very important to remember that the implementation above is not thread-safe -- the dictionary should be locked before adding/retrieving items if it will be accessed by multiple threads.
Additionally, although dictionary lookups occur in constant time, the hash function used by the dictionary can take an arbitrarily long time to execute (this is especially true with strings, where the time it takes to hash a string is proportional to its length). For this reason, it is wholly possible for a memoized function to have less performance than an unmemoized function. Always profile code to determine whether optimization is necessary and whether memoization genuinely improves performance.
The F# lazy data type is an interesting primitive which delays evaluation of a value until the value is actually needed. Once computed, lazy values are cached for reuse later:
F# uses some compiler magic to avoid evaluating the expression (printfn "I'm lazy"; 5 + 5) on declaration. Lazy values are probably the simplest form of caching, however they can be used to create some interesting and sophisticated data structures. For example, two F# data structures are implemented on top of lazy values, namely the F#
Lazy List and Seq.cache method.
Lazy lists and cached sequences represent arbitrary sequences of potentially infinite numbers of elements. The elements are computed and cached the first time they are accessed, but will not be recomputed when the sequence is enumerated again. Here's a demonstration in fsi:
This function is used when the user doesn't know the item's number or description but does know some information about the item. They enter what they know and the ERP displays all the items that match the criteria. This function becomes more and more useful as the size of the enterprise increases
Depending on the AccountPro module you are importing data for, the import module can import selected fields for:
Introduction | Contributors | Textual Introduction
Bibliography A-M | Bibliography N-Z | Encoded Materials
←Sins you will nedes that I shall sing
f. [73v] 1 Ons me thought fortune me kiste2 and bad me aske what I thought best3 and I shulde have yt as me liste4 therewith{w+t+} to set my herte in reste5 I asked nought but my dere herte6 to have for evermore my owne7 {m'}{_e} then att anend were my smarte8 then shulde I nede to more to mone /f. [74r] 9 yet for all that a stormy blaste10 hathe overtornid this goodlye daye11 and fortune semid at the laste12 that to her promis she saide naye13 but like as on out of dispaire14 to soden hope reviuid I15 now fortune showith her self so faire16 that I cotent content me wondreslye17 my most desire my hand may reche18 my will is alwaye at my hande19 me nede not long for to beseche20 her that hathe powre / me to com{_o}mande21 what erthelye thing more can I crave22 what wolde I wishe more at my will23 no thing on erthe more wold I have24 save that I have to have it still.25 for fortune hathe kepte her promis26 yn gra{gA}unting me my most desire27 of my sufferaunce I have redresse28 {w+t+}{_o} and I content me withmy hire /fs
Attributed to Sir Thomas Wyatt,[1] this poem was entered by H8. The poem also appears in Tottel's Miscellany under the title “The louer reioiceth the enioying of his loue” (item 86).[2] R. A. Rebholz suggests that "Ons me thought fortune me kiste" may be riddle-like because it proposes contradictory meanings: either Fortune grants the speaker his lady’s love or power over his own heart.[3] Ultimately, the poem's meaning depends on the interpretation of “my none” in line 6.
H8 also enters the first two stanzas of this poem on 71v, "Ons me thoght ffortune me kist."
↑ R.A. Rebholz, ed. Sir Thomas Wyatt: The Complete Poems. London: Penguin, 1978. 143-44.
↑ Tottel's Miscellany: Songes and Sonettes. Richard Tottel, 1557; rpt. Exeter: Shearsman, 2010. 72.
↑ Rebholz, 416.
STC13860_20, LEge26, LDev123
1 Ons] ONce as STC_13860_20 me] as me LEge26 thought] thoght LDev123 thought, STC_13860_20 fortune] ffortune LDev123 kiste] kist LDev123 kyst LEge26 kist: STC_13860_20 2 and] & LDev123 And STC_13860_20 bad] bade STC_13860_20 aske] asske LDev123 aske, STC_13860_20 thought] thoght LDev123 best] best: STC_13860_20 3 and] And STC_13860_20 and I shulde] & I shold LDev123 shulde] should LEge26 STC_13860_20 have] haue LDev123 STC_13860_20 yt] it LEge26 STC_13860_20 liste] list LDev123 LEge26 list, STC_13860_20 4 therewith] therwith LDev123 Therewith STC_13860_20 herte] hartt LDev123 hert LEge26 hart STC_13860_20 reste] rest LDev123 LEge26 rest. STC_13860_20 5 asked] assked LDev123 nought] noght LDev123 STC_13860_20 dere herte] ladies hart STC_13860_20 herte] hart LDev123 hert LEge26 6 to] To STC_13860_20 have] haue LDev123 STC_13860_20 evermore] euer more LDev123 euermore STC_13860_20 my] myn LEge26 myne STC_13860_20 owne] none LDev123 owne: STC_13860_20 7 then] Then STC_13860_20 att] at STC_13860_20 LEge26 anend] an end LDev123 STC_13860_20 my ende LEge26 were] were all LEge26 my] all my STC_13860_20 smarte] smert LDev123 LEge26 smart: STC_13860_20 8 then] Then STC_13860_20 shulde] shold LDev123 should LEge26 STC_13860_20 to] no LDev123 LEge26 STC_13860_20 to] LEge26 mone /] mone LDev123 LEge26 mone. STC_13860_20 9 yet] Yet LEge26 STC_13860_20 yet for all that a stormy blaste] LDev123 blaste] blast LEge26 STC_13860_20 10 hathe] had LEge26 hathe overtornid this goodlye daye] LDev123 hathe overtornid] Had ouerturnde STC_13860_20 overtornid] overtorned LEge26 goodlye] goodely LEge26 goodly STC_13860_20 daye] day LEge26 day: STC_13860_20 11 and] And STC_13860_20 and fortune semid at the laste] LDev123 semid] semed LEge26 STC_13860_20 laste] last LEge26 last, STC_13860_20 12 that] That STC_13860_20 that to her promis she saide naye] LDev123 promis] promes LEge26 promise STC_13860_20 saide] said STC_13860_20 naye] nay LEge26 nay. STC_13860_20 13 but] But LEge26 STC_13860_20 but like as on out of dispaire] LDev123 on] oon LEge26 one STC_13860_20 out] oute LEge26 dispaire] dispere LEge26 dispayre STC_13860_20 14 to soden hope reviuid I] LDev123 To sodain hope reuiued I. STC_13860_20 soden] soudden LEge26 reviuid] revived LEge26 15 now] Now STC_13860_20 now fortune showith her self so faire] LDev123 showith] sheweth LEge26 STC_13860_20 her self] herself LEge26 self] selfe STC_13860_20 faire] fayer LEge26 fayre, STC_13860_20 16 that] That STC_13860_20 that I cotentcontent me wondreslye] LDev123 cotentcontent me wondreslye] content me wonderly LEge26 cotentcontent] content STC_13860_20 wondreslye] wondersly. STC_13860_20 17 my] My LEge26 STC_13860_20 my most desire my hand may reche] LDev123 most] moost LEge26 reche] reach: STC_13860_20 18 my] My STC_13860_20 my will is alwaye at my hande] LDev123 alwaye] alway STC_13860_20 hande] hand LEge26 hand. STC_13860_20 19 me] Me STC_13860_20 me nede not long for to beseche] LDev123 20 her] Her, STC_13860_20 her that hathe powre / me to commande] LDev123 hathe] hath LEge26 STC_13860_20 powre /] power LEge26 STC_13860_20 commande] comaund LEge26 commaunde. STC_13860_20 21 what] What LEge26 STC_13860_20 what erthelye thing more can I crave] LDev123 erthelye] erthely LEge26 earthly STC_13860_20 crave] craue? STC_13860_20 22 what] What STC_13860_20 what wolde I wishe more at my will] LDev123 wolde] would LEge26 STC_13860_20 wishe] wisshe LEge26 will] will? STC_13860_20 23 no thing] Nothing STC_13860_20 no thing on erthe more wold I have] LDev123 erthe] erth LEge26 earth STC_13860_20 wold] would LEge26 STC_13860_20 have] haue, STC_13860_20 24 save] Saue STC_13860_20 save that I have to have it still.] LDev123 have] haue, STC_13860_20 have] haue STC_13860_20 still.] still LEge26 styll. STC_13860_20 25 for] ffor LEge26 For STC_13860_20 for fortune hathe kepte her promis] LDev123 hathe] hath LEge26 STC_13860_20 kepte] kept LEge26 STC_13860_20 promis] promes LEge26 promesse, STC_13860_20 26 yn] in LEge26 In STC_13860_20 yn graunting me my most desire] LDev123 graunting] grauntyng STC_13860_20 most] moost LEge26 desire] desire. STC_13860_20 27 of] Of STC_13860_20 of my sufferaunce I have redresse] LDev123 sufferaunce] soueraigne STC_13860_20 have] haue STC_13860_20 redresse] my redres LEge26 redresse, STC_13860_20 28 and] And STC_13860_20 and I content me with my hire /] LDev123 hire /] hiere LEge26 hire. STC_13860_20
Welcome to the WikiBook on Láadan!
The purpose of this WikiBook is to provide a resource for learning Láadan that is under a Creative Commons license. There exist other resources, but may be expensive (the original print book) or hard to find (lessons on webpages that have since gone down), but due to lack of licenses being stated in the works, they cannot be freely shared and preserved.
As a creative commons work, you are free to use this WikiBook as you wish. Please share, add, and help keep Láadan alive!
This as well as her own personal experiences with using language for human communication, her perceived difficulties that women experience trying to express themselves with certain limitations (how to more easily describe concepts that are common among women but have no terms, how men react to the language women use and write off concerns, etc.), this caused her to think about a language by and for women.
I think that the concept of Láadan is easier to portray to those who have grown up queer and sheltered like me. For people from my generation and before, if you're not quite the same as others – whether sexuality-wise or gender-wise – it feels alienating. And, without that community, you aren't aware of the words that exist to describe your experience (Dysphoria, Asexuality, etc.) In this case, we can see that there was clearly a lack of vocabulary to describe our experiences, but it has since been created and a community built up.
Likewise, some words in Láadan help describe certain experiences that all people have, though its emphasis as a woman's language is in how it tries to be more soft, perceptive, and in-tune with feelings. Of course, people of all genders can use and appreciate this language if they are interested; Suzette never meant for it to be “just for women” even if she created it for women. Similarly, so many movies are made with male leads but meant for everybody, while we still assume movies with a female lead are often movies “for women”. Something made for women can still be for everybody. [2]
In a comparison between Klingon vs. Láadan, I think you would have to compare how they were presented and backed – Klingon had a television show it belonged to, and with the TV show came merchandise to popularize Klingon characters and keep it alive long-term. Suzette had a series of three novels and purposely did not try to market it in such a way.
Native Tongue is a three-book science fiction series, created as a ten-year experiment, along with the language created "within" the series, Láadan. [3]
Native Tongue is set in the 22nd century, where the Equal Rights Amendment was defeated in the 1980s. At the same time, Earth is dealing with many alien species, and has need for translators.
These translators come from special "Linguist lines", whose lives revolve around studying alien languages and acting as interpreters.
Within one of the Linguist houses, a group of women secretly construct a language for women...
Suzette Haden Elgin (1936–2015) was a linguist and sci-fi author. She first began writing science fiction novels to help her pay for tuition for grad school. She taught linguistics at San Diego State University until 1980. [3]
Sounds, tones, and euphony
Speech Act morpheme, Evidence morpheme, and verb negation
Time, adjectives, and plurals
Pronous, objects, and multiple verbs, to try to [VERB]
The Goal and Source markers (to, from)
The Association marker and Beneficiary marker (with, for)
The Instrument marker and the Location marker (per/by means of, at)
The Manner marker, the Reason marker, the Purpose marker, and the To-Cause-To marker (in this manner, because, in order to, to cause to)
The Path marker (Through, across)
Who, what, when, where, why?
If... then...
↑ Why a Woman is not like a Physicist, WisCon talk March 1982, Suzette Haden Elgin
↑ http://laadanlanguage.org/node/21
↑ a b http://www.sfwa.org/members/elgin/
A quick-reference list of grammar rules and examples.
Categorized word lists to quickly find useful words.
Text Stories - Short stories for practicing reading Láadan text.
Comics - Graphical comic strips and art that uses Láadan.
Láadan Lessons For Beginners
A First Dictionary and Grammar of Láadan 2nd Edition by Suzette Hadin Elgin
Amberwind's Láadan Lessons
Láadan lesson based on Amberwind’s course
Full Láadan dictionary course
E-Government and Human Development —
The Importance of a National Strategic Framework for E-Government —
Making E-Government Happen —
Definitions of e-government range from “the use of information technology to free movement of information to overcome the physical bounds of traditional paper and physical based systems” [1] to “the use of technology to enhance the access to and delivery of government services to benefit citizens, business partners and employees.” [2] The common theme behind these definitions is that e-government involves the automation or computerization of existing paper-based procedures that will prompt new styles of leadership, new ways of debating and deciding strategies, new ways of transacting business, new ways of listening to citizens and communities, and new ways of organizing and delivering information. [3]
Ultimately, e-government aims to enhance access to and delivery of government services to benefit citizens. More important, it aims to help strengthen government’s drive toward effective governance and increased transparency to better manage a country’s social and economic resources for development. [4]
The key to e-government is the establishment of a long-term, organization-wide strategy to constantly improve operations with the end in view of fulfilling citizen needs by transforming internal operations such as staffing, technology, processes and work flow management.
Thus, e-government should result in the efficient and swift delivery of goods and services to citizens, businesses, government employees and agencies. To citizens and businesses, e-government would mean the simplification of procedures and streamlining of the approval process. To government employees and agencies, it would mean the facilitation of cross-agency coordination and collaboration to ensure appropriate and timely decision-making.
What are the types of e-government transactions?
e-Government services focus on four main customers: citizens, the business community, government employees, and government agencies. e-Government aims to make interaction with citizens, businesses, government employees, government agencies and other governments more convenient, friendly, transparent, inexpensive and effective.
In an e-government system, individuals are able to initiate a request for a particular government service and then receive that government service through the Internet or some computerized mechanism. In some cases, the government service is delivered through one government office, instead of many. In other cases, a government transaction is completed without direct in-person contact with a government employee.
What are the specific types of services delivered through e-government?
The four types of e-government services are Government-to-Citizen (G2C), Government-to-Business (G2B), Government-to-Employee (G2E), and Government-to-Government (G2G).
G2C includes information dissemination to the public, basic citizen services such as license renewals, ordering of birth/death/marriage certificates and filing of income taxes, as well as citizen assistance for such basic services as education, health care, hospital information, libraries, and the like.
Box 1. Singapore's e-citizen Portal [5] : A Case Study in G2C Transactions
Through Singapore’s e-citizen portal ( http://www.ecitizen.gov.sg), Singaporeans are able to access about 1,600 e-services pertaining to business, health, education, recreation, employment, and family. Of this, 1,300 e-services are completely transacted by citizens with government online. The e-citizen portal is divided into categories based on the real-life needs of every individual, with every single ministry and statutory board providing e-services through the same portal. Singaporeans thus have one-stop access to government services; they are spared having to navigate through the bureaucratic jungle. A few of the popular e-services offered are: submitting application forms for purchase of apartments, searching for school information, employment search, career development, and voter registration.As of June 2002, about 77% of public services deemed feasible for e-delivery were enabled for online delivery.
G2B transactions include various services exchanged between government and the business community, including dissemination of policies, memos, rules and regulations. Business services offered include obtaining current business information, downloading application forms, renewing licenses, registering businesses, obtaining permits, and payment of taxes. The services offered through G2B transactions also assist in business development, specifically the development of small and medium enterprises. Simplifying application procedures that would facilitate the approval process for SME requests would encourage business development.
On a higher level, G2B services include e-procurement, an online government-supplier exchange for the purchase of goods and services by government. Typically, e-procurement Web sites allow qualified and registered users to look for buyers or sellers of goods and services. Depending on the approach, buyers or sellers may specify prices or invite bids. e-Procurement makes the bidding process transparent and enables smaller businesses to bid for big government procurement projects. The system also helps government generate bigger savings, as costs from middlemen are shaved off and purchasing agents’ overhead is reduced.
Box 2. China's Golden Customs: A Case Study in G2B Transactions
The Golden Customs project was proposed by Vice Premier Li Lanqing in 1993 to create an integrated data communications system connecting foreign trade companies, banks, and the customs and tax authorities. The system aims to speed up customs clearance and strengthen the authorities’ ability to collect tax and duty payments. The Golden Customs project allows companies to submit import and export declarations to customs authorities, calculate duty payments, and check import and export statistics. This electronic data tracking system allows customs departments to verify a range of data through networks to facilitate customs management and prevent illegal activities, one of the initial conceptual attractions of the project. In 19__ this system enabled China customs to solve criminal and smuggling cases valued at approximately RMB80 billion (US$96 million) and increase tariff payments by RMB71 billion (US$86 million).
G2E services encompass G2C services as well as specialized services that cover only government employees, such as the provision of human resource training and development that improve the bureaucracy’s day-to-day functions and dealings with citizens.
Box 3. Mississippi, USA’s Payroll Information Self-Service: A Case Study in G2E Transactions
As of October 2002 Mississippi state government employees could view their payroll and tax information records online through a secure, Web-based, self-service application called Access Channel for Employees (ACE). ACE is directly linked to the state’s legacy payroll system, enabling employees with a log-in ID and password to view their payroll accounts (called W-2). Also, government employees who receive their paychecks through direct deposits can view their last 10 pay stubs. Employees are notified by email when their pay stubs arrive and they can then review the information before actual payday.This application has given the state of Mississippi US$0.50 in savings for every W-2 form that is printed and mailed. Aside from the savings in cost, if employees spot mistakes on their W-2s, re-issuing these electronically takes only two days instead of two weeks. Of the more than 40,000 state employees of Mississippi, 17% have adopted and used this new application.” [6]
G2G services take place at two levels: at the local or domestic level and at the international level. G2G services are transactions between the central/national and local governments, and between department-level and attached agencies and bureaus. At the same time, G2G services are transactions between governments, and can be used as an instrument of international relations and diplomacy.
Box 4. Global Cooperation on Transnational Crime: A Case Study in G2G Transactions
The inherently transnational nature of the Internet has not only seen the transformation of legitimate business activities, but also provided new opportunities for illicit business. In recent years, there has been a significant increase in the sophistication of organized crime and illegal trafficking activities, encouraged by the anonymity provided by the Internet.
To combat this growing trend, 124 heads of government came to Palermo, Italy in December 2000 to sign the United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime. In putting the convention into effect, the UN designed the “Global Program on Transnational Organized Crime” (http://www.uncjin.org/CICP/cicp.html) to improve information sharing and further enhance international cooperation.
The goal is to establish a network of data providers and national focal points in the field (i.e., law enforcement agencies, governments, NGO institutions, research centers and other relevant international organizations) to create a global database and reporting center for all Member States.” [7]
Is the Internet the only medium for accomplishing e-government?
The Internet is indeed the most powerful means for delivering e-government. However, it is not the only, or the most appropriate, means. Developing countries in particular need to take some constraints—from the infrastructural to the financial— into account when considering the best strategy for adopting e-government. Existing electronic service delivery channels must be put to use to provide the broadest access possible.
Box 5. Using Appropriate Technologies in E-Governance: A Philippine Case Study” [8]
The Philippine Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) has introduced an electronic payment confirmation scheme using SMS (short messaging system on mobile phones) to guard against “fixers” who issue fake receipts to taxpayers. Called e-Broadcasting, the system provides taxpayers with direct confirmation within 38 hours that their payment has been received by the BIR’s authorized agent banks. The system proved successful as a pilot project implemented in 2002. It will be implemented on a nationwide scale in 2003.
Box 6. Intelligent Intermediaries in Sri Lanka” [10]
A joint project between UNESCO, the Ministry of Posts, Telecommunications and the Media, the Sri Lanka Broadcasting Corporation, and the Sri Lanka Telecommunication Regulatory Commission uses the radio as an interface between rural people and the Internet. A daily one-hour live radio program, in which an announcer and a panel of resource persons browse/surf the Internet in response to listener requests and questions, has proved able to overcome linguistic barriers to Internet use by non-English speakers. In addition to the live program, the Kothmale community radio station is developing a rural database, primarily by packaging public domain information often requested by listeners for offline use. The radio station also functions as a mini-Internet service provider by offering Internet access points at two public libraries located within the radio’s target area and running an Internet café at the radio station.
What is a partial differential equation?
In the whole theory of partial differential equations, multiindices are extremely important. Only with their help we are able to write down certain formulas a lot briefer.
Definitions 1.1:
We classify partial differential equations into several types, because for partial differential equations of one type we will need different solution techniques as for differential equations of other types. We classify them into linear and nonlinear equations, and into equations of different orders.
Definitions 1.2:
, where only finitely many of the
s are not the constant zero function. A solution takes the form of a function
-dimensional multiindices. If
A partial differential equation is called nonlinear iff it is not a linear partial differential equation.
Definition 1.3:
. We say that a partial differential equation has
First example of a partial differential equation
Now we are very curious what practical examples of partial differential equations look like after all.
Theorem and definition 1.4:
Proof: Exercise 2.
We therefore see that the one-dimensional transport equation has many different solutions; one for each continuously differentiable function in existence. However, if we require the solution to have a specific initial state, the solution becomes unique.
Theorem and definition 1.5:
. Further, theorem 1.4 shows that also:
Now suppose we have an arbitrary other solution to the initial value problem. Let's name it
. Then for all
, which means, inserting the definition of
In the next chapter, we will consider the non-homogenous arbitrary-dimensional transport equation.
Have a look at the definition of an ordinary differential equation (see for example the Wikipedia page on that) and show that every ordinary differential equation is a partial differential equation.
Prove Theorem 1.4 using direct calculation.
.
Martin Brokate (2011/2012) (in german), Partielle Differentialgleichungen, Vorlesungsskript, http://www-m6.ma.tum.de/~brokate/pde_ws11.pdf
Daniel Matthes (2013/2014), Partial Differential Equations, lecture notes
This page gives examples and tips about the syntax and usage of GMPL (MathProg).
The first thing to note is that MathProg is not a procedural language.
For example, unlike most programming languages, MathProg has no assignment statement.
Rather MathProg is a functional language.
MathProg is modeled on the AMPL language and provides a subset of that language.
And like AMPL, its syntax is tailored to the expression of mathematical optimization problems.
Within MathProg, sets are unordered collections of elements (unlike arrays
As from GLPK 4.44 released 03 June 2010, MathProg supports suffixes for constraints and variables. The use of suffixes is covered in the official documentation under appendix A of doc/gmpl.pdf. The following table provides a summary:
The MathProg printf statement can be used to create customized output. In the following case, the dual value of constraint c1 will be printed to the terminal:
...
Terminal output can also be duplicated to a text file with the GLPSOL command-line option --log filename.log.
The data parameter of the set statement is (as of May 2011) undocumented, but the idea is quite simple. Imagine that you declare a plain set S consisting of 5-tuples (i,j,k,l,m):
But what you actually want is an array of sets T{j,m}, where T[j,m] is a set of triplets (l,i,k) from S. Using the data attribute, additionally declare a set T as follows:
This statement has the same effect as providing the corresponding data for T itself from the data section, where [2,5,4,1,3] is a permutation of the component indices: the 2nd and 5th components of every 5-tuple in S gives a pair (j,m) used to index the elements of T, and the 4th, 1st, and 3rd components of the 5-tuple are used to build the (l,i,k) triplets, which are then included in the set T[j,m].
Finally, only plain sets are supported by the data attribute.
Ordered sets are not supported in MathProg.
Click here to return to the United States Postage Meter Stamp Catalog
These stamps are also called fiscal or revenue franks.
Meter stamps were used by the Internal Revenue Service to collect taxes levied on the transfer of property, also known as documentary transfer tax. Meter stamps were used for this purpose from 1962 until the IRS stopped using revenue stamps for this purpose.
Type REV-A2 in 2001 editionREV1. Pitney Bowes. [RR for proof tape, RRRR used on document]
The central design pictures an eagle in flight with a rayed sun and mountains in the background.
At right are "United States Internal Revenue" above "DOCUMENTARY" above the value figures.
Value figures are negative digits on a solid background.
Six-digit transaction number reads up at left.
Meter numbers with P.B.NO prefix, seen are 1002 and several in the 1180 series.
V/F: 000.00NOTE: Most of the known examples of this stamp are zero cent proofs on tape. Only one document is known franked by this stamp.
Type REV-A1 in 2001 editionREV2. Pitney Bowes, 1964. [R for proof tape, RR used on document]
The central design pictures the U.S. Treasury building in Washington D.C. and its seal.
At right are "UNITED STATES / INTERNAL REVENUE" above "DOCUMENTARY" above the value figures.
Value figures are negative digits on a solid background.
Six-digit transaction number reads up at left.
Meter numbers in P.B. METER 10000 series.
V/F: 000.00NOTE: Most of the known examples of this stamp are zero cent proofs on tape. Several documents are known franked by the stamp.
1A few days later, when Jesus again entered Capernaum, the people heard that he had come home. 2So many gathered that there was no room left, not even outside the door, and he preached the word to them. 3Some men came, bringing to him a paralytic, carried by four of them. 4Since they could not get him to Jesus because of the crowd, they made an opening in the roof above Jesus and, after digging through it, lowered the mat the paralyzed man was lying on. 5When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic, "Son, your sins are forgiven." 6Now some teachers of the law were sitting there, thinking to themselves, 7"Why does this fellow talk like that? He's blaspheming! Who can forgive sins but God alone?" 8Immediately Jesus knew in his spirit that this was what they were thinking in their hearts, and he said to them, "Why are you thinking these things? 9Which is easier: to say to the paralytic, 'Your sins are forgiven,' or to say, 'Get up, take your mat and walk'? 10But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins." He said to the paralytic, 11"I tell you, get up, take your mat and go home." 12He got up, took his mat and walked out in full view of them all. This amazed everyone and they praised God, saying, "We have never seen anything like this!"
18Now John's disciples and the Pharisees were fasting. Some people came and asked Jesus, "How is it that John's disciples and the disciples of the Pharisees are fasting, but yours are not?" 19Jesus answered, "How can the guests of the bridegroom fast while he is with them? They cannot, so long as they have him with them. 20But the time will come when the bridegroom will be taken from them, and on that day they will fast. 21"No one sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old garment. If he does, the new piece will pull away from the old, making the tear worse. 22And no one pours new wine into old wineskins. If he does, the wine will burst the skins, and both the wine and the wineskins will be ruined. No, he pours new wine into new wineskins."
23One Sabbath Jesus was going through the grainfields, and as his disciples walked along, they began to pick some heads of grain. 24The Pharisees said to him, "Look, why are they doing what is unlawful on the Sabbath?" 25He answered, "Have you never read what David did when he and his companions were hungry and in need? 26In the days of Abiathar the high priest, he entered the house of God and ate the consecrated bread, which is lawful only for priests to eat. And he also gave some to his companions." 27Then he said to them, "The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath. 28So the Son of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath."
1)Jesus returns to Capernaum
2)Four men bring a paralytic
A)The men want Jesus to heal their friend
i)They are unable to get to Jesus
C)The four men dig through the roof
i)The paralytic is lowered down to Jesus
3)The Pharisees see this take place
i)They accuse Jesus of Blasphemy
i)Jesus heals the paralytic
4)Jesus begins teaching by the lake
A)On the way Jesus calls Levi to follow
i)Levi leaves everything for Jesus
i)They question Jesus' affiliations with people
i)offers a proverb to the Pharisees
5)Religious leaders and John's disciples are fasting
i)They question Jesus' lack of fasting
6)Jesus and his disciples are in a grain field
A)The Disciples begin to pick and eat grain
i)They question his respect for the Sabbath laws
i)David broke laws to care for his needs
D)Jesus sheds light on who he truly is
(v. 1-5) Jesus has returned to Capernaum, most likely to Simon Peter’s house (see 1:21, 29). So many people have gathered to hear him preach that there is no room for any more, in fact the people are so many that they are not only enclosed in the building but crowded outside the door as well. Some men brought a friend who could not walk in hopes that Jesus would heal him. Clearly these men were desperate to get to Jesus because they climbed to the roof and dug through its clay exterior in order to get past the crowd. Once they had broken through the roof they lowered their paralyzed friend through the opening to where Jesus was. Jesus recognized that these men did such a bold action because of their faith in him. Jesus then turned to the paralytic and said “Son, your sins are forgiven.”
(v. 6-12) The Pharisees were sitting together and when they saw this they thought Jesus was a blasphemer for claiming to forgive sins, a work reserved for God. Jesus knew what these men were thinking and immediately said to them "Why are you thinking these things? Which is easier: to say to the paralytic, 'Your sins are forgiven,' or to say, 'Get up, take your mat and walk'? But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins . . . ." He then turned to the paralytic and said "I tell you, get up, take your mat and go home." (NIV) To everyone’s amazement the man did just that. He got up, took his mat, and walked home! The people praised God because they had never before seen anything like this.
(v. 18-22) At this time John the Baptist’s disciples were fasting, most likely because of John’s imprisonment. People asked Jesus why the disciples of John and the Pharisees were fasting and Jesus’ disciples were not. He responded, “The friends of a bridegroom don't go without eating while he is still with them. But the time will come when he will be taken from them. Then they will go without eating. No one patches old clothes by sewing on a piece of new cloth. The new piece would shrink and tear a bigger hole. No one pours new wine into old wineskins. The wine would swell and burst the old skins. Then the wine would be lost, and the skins would be ruined. New wine must be put into new wineskins.” (CEV)
(v. 23-28) Jesus and his disciples were walking through the grain fields on the Sabbath and picking heads of grain. The Pharisees saw this and reminded Jesus that this was unlawful. He answered “Really? Haven't you ever read what David did when he was hungry, along with those who were with him? How he entered the sanctuary and ate fresh bread off the altar, with the Chief Priest Abiathar right there watching—holy bread that no one but priests were allowed to eat—and handed it out to his companions? The Sabbath was made to serve us; we weren't made to serve the Sabbath. The Son of Man is no lackey to the Sabbath. He's in charge!" (The Message).
Vs. 1. It is stated that Jesus is returning to Capernaum again. This ties into the fact that he has been there before only days before. Now Jesus was not one to enter a town wanting everybody to know, but rather secretly (1:45). However, as secretive as he tried to be, he was still unable to hide his presence. Inevitably, large crowds began to come and see him. Commentators often debate as to whose home is referred to in this passage. It is considered likely that it is Peter's home. However, since the actual Greek phrase is idiomatic for "at home", it could also simply be referring to whatever house Jesus happened to be staying in while visiting Capernaum.
Vs. 2. The fact that the crowd is so large emphasizes Jesus' fame. Jesus hear is said to be preaching the "word". This "word that Jesus is speaking is most likely the same message he is found preaching in Mark 1:15 which reads: "The time has come," he said. "The kingdom of God is near. Repent and believe the good news!"
Vs. 3. In vs. 1:32 people are bringing to Jesus their sick and demon possessed, here again we find the same thing, four men bringing those in need of healing to Jesus. The fact that this verse mentions the number of men carrying the paralytic is emphasizing how detrimental this man's situation is. He can not even walk, let alone crawl to Jesus, but instead has to have four of his friends carry him. This also sheds light on the great faith that these men have in Jesus, both the paralytic and his friends, which in turn highlights Jesus' fame again.
Vs. 4. This scene is quite similar to vs. 1:23 where Jesus was interrupted during his teaching by a man with an unclean spirit. This time we find four men digging through the roof of the house Jesus is speaking in and lowering a paralytic down to Jesus. Now the building that this is taking place in is probably a typical Galilean house. These homes usually had some sort of stairway or ladder to get on the roof, which was flat. The reason that these men had to "dig" through the roof indicates that it is made of mud like most houses during this time period. They lower him through the roof in order to get past the crowd so that Jesus can heal the man.
Vs. 5. These men had made their faith more than just internal, they turned their faith into actual work. The faith of these men was so great that they took initiative to get their friend to Jesus because they believed he could heal him. Jesus admired the faith of these men but did not physically heal the paralytic right away as one would expect. Instead, Jesus took care of the paralytic's mos important problem, his need for forgiveness. Jesus' words "your sins are forgiven" may be a bit confusing to a modern day reader. However, this was very relevant in the first century. During this time sin and disease were related. People considered any kind of disease or physical problem a result of past sins.
Vs. 6-7. The "scribes" mentioned in these verses are somewhat of a contrast to the four men and the paralytic who had such great faith in Jesus. In many translations the term "thinking in their hearts" appears when describing how the scribes felt about what Jesus was doing. Heart is not taken literal, but as a metaphor for the heart being the core of a persons feelings and emotions about something. They accuse Jesus of blasphemy, which is punishable by death according to Lev 24:15. The scribes accuse Jesus of blasphemy not because he was claiming to be God, but because he was employing the act of forgiveness that is solely God's work. Whether the scribes believe it or not, their questioning shed's light on the fact that Jesus is the promised Messiah, the one who would have the authority to forgive sins without it being blasphemous.
Vs. 8-9. Now Jesus does not even hear these accusations about himself, according to v. 6 the scribes were "thinking to themselves." Yet Jesus is still aware of what they are thinking whether they had confronted him or not. Mark gives his audience no explanation as to how Jesus could perceive such a thing. It is likely though that mark would have assumed that if the prophets of the Old Testament could do this than of course Jesus could, leaving no reason for there to be an explanation. However, the original Greek leaves room for the interpretation that the scribes were whispering or talking amongst themselves, in which case Jesus would have overheard them. Despite how Jesus came to this knowledge, he did, and he is obviously a little bit bothered by their thinking and immediately responds to them. He asks them why they are thinking these things. His response is not one of anger or defense, but teaching. When he asks which is easier, forgiving the paralytic or healing him, it is rhetorical, because the answer is obvious, neither. These are both acts that not man, but only God can accomplish.
Vs. 10. When Jesus says "so that you may know" he is indicating that if he heals the paralytic, than he is proving to the scribes and all who were present that he has the authority to forgive sins. Jesus refers to himself as "the Son of Man" in this verse. This is the first of fourteen different times in the book of Mark that Jesus refers to himself under this title. Mark does not explain what this means most likely because the audience to whom he was writing understood what it meant. When Jesus says "man" it should not be assumed that all "men" have the authority of forgiveness. Only Jesus, the Son of Man has that authority. An interesting thing to note in this passage is that Jesus does not say that he has received authority to forgive sins, but he says "the Son of Man has authority." This would imply to the people that he is the promised Messiah.
Vs. 11-12. Here is the proof that Jesus has. He commands the paralytic to pick up his mat and walk, and he does. This action confirms Jesus' ability to heal and authority to forgive. The verse goes on to say that "all were amazed." The fact that it says all includes everyone in the room, even the scribes who were so quick to criticize and reluctant to believe Jesus. The story ends without any mention of the scribes, but only with God's glorification, which is Mark's intention in writing this. The purpose of the story is to amplify Jesus' authority. (Collins, Stein, Williamson)
Vs. 13-14. The lake, or sea, that Mark is referring to is the Sea of Galilee. When Levi is called, the situation is very similar to past events where Jesus has told someone to follow him. For example, Simon and Andrew were both called by Jesus using similar terminology as with Levi such as "passing by", "he saw", and "follow me". The fact that Mark mentions Levi as being the "son of Alphaeus" causes some confusion for several reasons. First of all, the Levi in this verse is only mentioned one other time and that is in Luke 5:27. Another problem is that James is also mentioned several times in the New Testament as being the son of Alphaeus. To make things more complicated, the tax collector in the Matthew parallel is named Matthew instead of Levi. The disciple Matthew in the Gospel of Mathew is said to be a toll collector, while none of the other gospels give this designation to him. There are several different opinions in trying to explain this confusion. One of the most widely accepted is that Matthew and Levi are the same person which is likely because of the several other men in the Bible that go by two different names such as Simon/Peter, Saul/Paul, and John/Mark. Another common assumption is that Levi and James are brothers since they are both mentioned as being the sons of Alphaeus. What we do know about Levi is that he was not a well liked person. During this time period, Jews considered publicans such as tax collectors were as unclean and defiling as people with leprosy. The majority of tax collectors were corrupt in that they overcharged people on their taxes in order to gain their own personal wealth. Needless to say, they were hated by almost everyone. This in turn opens up the readers eyes to Jesus' indiscriminate love when he directly asks Levi to follow him.
Vs. 15. In this scene we find Levi holding somewhat of a celebration for Jesus, Jesus' disciples, and all of Levi's friends (which were other tax collectors and business acquaintances). This dinner was a way for Levi to make these people aware of his new life and the master of that life. Now it is widely assumed that this was Levi's house, especially since the Luke parallel states this. However, the original can be debated to be either saying it is Levi's or Jesus' house. Since there is no indication of Jesus having a house anywhere in Mark, it is usually assumed to be Levi's home. The text says that they ones at the table were "tax collectors" and other "sinners". The "sinners" referred to here were most likely Jews who no longer acknowledged Mosaic Law or those involved in economic trading that the Orthodox Jews deemed unclean.
Vs. 16-17. The scribes start to complain, not to Jesus, but his disciples, about Jesus' direct disobedience of the law when he ate with such people. Now we see earlier that the scribes did not directly state their opinions to Jesus. It has now escalated to them speaking to his disciples about their disagreements. It then further escalates in 2:18 and 24 when they speak directly to Jesus. Then in 3:2 and 6 they begin to plot against Jesus so as to kill him. One can see a pattern here, the religious leaders at the time are progressively beginning to despise Jesus. When Jesus deliberately eats with these people it is symbolically indicative of his grace to all in entering into the Kingdom of God. Jesus' words "It is not the healthy who need a doctor, but the sick" was a commonly known proverb that the scribes would have been familiar with. This is metaphorical to why Jesus has come, that is for the broken, the sinners, and those in need of forgiveness. (Collins, Harrington, Sanner, Wessell)
Vs. 18. According to the law, there was only one required fast and that was the Day of Atonement. The two groups, the pharisees and John's disciples, were probably fasting for different reasons. John's disciples were most likely fasting with the purpose of mourning for John the Baptist while he was in prison or because of his execution. The pharisees were probably doing a common, ritualistic fast that took place biweekly during New Testament times. What they were fasting for exactly is not of great importance, the fact that fasting itself was a sign of piety is the issue. The pharisees saw that John's disciples were wasting as well and questioned why Jesus and his disciples were not attesting to this by fasting as well.
Vs. 19-20. Jesus response to the pharisees again comes in the form of teaching. This time he speaks in parable about something that these Jewish leaders would be very familiar with, weddings. Fasting was an indication of mourning. Therefore it would be ridiculous to fast around the time of a wedding because it is such a joyful occasion. Jesus compares himself to the bridegroom and his disciples are compared to the guests. In this Jesus was saying that it would be inappropriate to fast while Jesus was with them, they should take joy in the time that he is with them. However, he does bring up the fact that the bridegroom will be taken away and during that time it would be appropriate for the disciples to fast. Some scholars think that when Jesus speaks of the bridegroom being taken away he is foreshadowing his death without being blatantly obvious. This is a good argument considering that when this took place could have been late in Jesus' ministry.
Vs. 21-22. Jesus then goes on to tell two more parallels. Scholars assume that they were not really spoken side by side like it is portrayed in this scene. Rather, they were spoken by Jesus on separate occasions and then Mark went ahead and put them together for this story because they both deal with the same point in question. These second two parables help explain the inappropriateness of fasting while Jesus was still with them. It would be foolish to sew an old piece of cloth onto a new garment, if this is done, the new garment will shrink and the old cloth will tear off. It is the same concept with the wine skins. It is foolish when new wine is put into an old wine skin. If this is done the wine will ferment and burst the old wine skin because in no longer stretches. One must put new wine in new wine skins. The wine parable also indicates that the newness of Jesus and what he brings can no longer be restricted or held back by old Jewish laws, rituals and customs. (Harrington, Mann, Sanner)
Vs. 23-24. What is in question here is not the actual act of picking heads of grain. According to Jewish law this is perfectly fine as long as they are not taking a sickle to standing grain (Deut 23:25). What the Pharisees are upset about is the fact that they are doing this act on the Sabbath. This act was completely forbidden in Jewish custom and would obviously lead these Pharisees to question Jesus. The Greek in vs. 24 literally translates "See! They are doing what is not lawful on the Sabbath!" This shows how upset the Pharisees were and indicates that they were more than just voicing their opinion, but truly trying to put Jesus in the wrong. They are telling Jesus that he is responsible for the actions of his disciples.
Vs. 25-26. Jesus responds to the Pharisees' question with another question. His response includes a reference to 1 Samuel 21:1-6. In this scene David and his men were hungry and ate the bread of the House of God which was only lawful for priests to eat. Mark's account of this is slightly different than the account in 1 Samuel, but it still sends the message. The fact that David knowingly did something that went against the law but was not condemned for it is what Jesus wants them to understand. Jesus does not deny that he has broken the law, he offers a new law instead. Jesus is promoting the idea that religious rituals should in no way interfere or take away from human necessities such as food or water.
Vs. 27-28. Jesus then goes on to make the point that the Sabbath was made for men. The purpose of it was never to put restrictions on men to the point of being in hunger, it was made for the good, well being, rest, and opportunity to worship for men. Scholars often debate about vs. 28 being Mark's words or Jesus' words. Both are quite possible. It could be that Mark added this second part in order to heighten the climax of what Jesus was saying. It is also possible that Jesus said this about himself considering the numerous other times in Mark that Jesus refers to himself this way. Whether it was Mark or Jesus who made the statement it is still true. Jesus, being the lord of man for whom the Sabbath was made, is able to determine the law. (Mann, Wessell)
The following image is a side by side comparison of Mark 2 with the rest of the Gospels.
Yellow = Matthew and Mark only
Red = Matthew and Luke only
Green = Mark and Luke only
It is strange that there are no similarities between all three of the Gospels in reference to how Jesus got where he was.
Why is Matthew mention that Jesus comes on a ship?
Matthew does not mention that there is no room in the house. Mark and Luke both make this point clear.
Luke mentions the power of the Lord being present to heal them; Matthew and Luke only indicate Jesus being there to teach at first.
Matthew says “his own city”, which city is he talking about?
Mark is the only Gospel that indicates the man was born with palsy.
Matthew doesn’t mention the fact that the man with palsy has to be lowered through the roof.
Mark and Luke both describe a scene where the friends get on the roof in order to bring the man to Jesus because of the large crowds.
Mark describes the man breaking apart the roof while Luke talks about them removing the tile, why the difference?
The word appears 18 different times throughout the New Testament. Every single mention of a paralytic, or someone with palsy, in the New Testament is always associated with Jesus' healing. The injury was most likely caused by such things as injury during birth or spinal cord damage. (Elwell)
The word appears 7 different times throughout the New Testament. It usually assumes the commonly known oriental style of roof during this time period. They were commonly flat and used for a living space despite being out in the open air. (Balz)
The word appears 33 different times in the New Testament. It is often used along side with someone who is ill or suffering. It has been used to refer to the pallet that paralytics or other ill people are carried on. (Balz)
The word appears 16 different times in the New Testament. It is not used in a general sense very often. It is most commonly used in order to have christological implications. For example, in Mark 2:19 Jesus compares himself to a bridegroom in order to teach the Pharisees about fasting. (Balz)
The word appears 43 different times in the New Testament. "To abstain (to eat; fast) from food for a period of time is a discipline practiced by believers, not as an end in itself (severity), but as a sign of repentance or of seeking God" (Vine)
Balz, Horst. Exegetical Dictionary of the New Testament. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans Publishing, 1990.
Collins, Adela Y. Hermeneia: A Critical and Historical Commentary on the Bible. Minneapolis: Fortress P, 2007.
Elwell, Walter A. Baker Encyclopedia of the Bible. Grand Rapids: Baker Book House, 1988.
Harrington, Daniel J. Sacra Pagina: The Gospel of Mark. Collegeville: The Liturgical Press, 2002.
Mann, C.S. Mark: A New Translation With Introduction and Commentary. Garden City: Doubleday, 1986.
Sanner, A. E. Beacon Bible Commentary. Kansas City: Beacon Hill P, 1964.
Stein, Robert H. Mark: Baker Exegetical Commentary on the New Testament. Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2008.
Vine, W.E. Vine's Complete Expository Dictionary Topic Finder. Nashville: Thomas Nelson Inc, 1984, 1996.
Wessell, Walter W. The Expositors Bible Commentary. Grand Rapids: Zondervan Publishing House, 1984.
Williamson, Lamar. Interpretation: A Bible Commentary for Teaching and Preaching. Atlanta: John Knox P, 1983.
WrittenChinese.Com Free Online Chinese-English Dictionary Search results are ranked by frequency of occurrence in everyday Chinese text.
Multilingual Chinese Dictionary 9 languages (English, French, German, Spanish, Italian, Russian...)
Chinese <-> English Online Dictionary with Pinyin and Zhuyin.
Chinese <-> Dictionary search in Chinese, pinyin or English
Ting Audio Dictionary Chinese English dictionary with Illustration sentences
Chinese <-> English Online Dictionary with traditional characters and flashcards
Chinese <-> French Online Dictionary with flashcards
Chinese Tutor's Chinese-English Dictionary - Searchable by English, Pinyin, and Hanzi. Simplified & Traditional characters. Most words have audio.
Power factors less than 0.9 cause a visit by your utility company.
Building wire codes are designed to maximize the power factor.
Circuits are purely resistive (no capacitors or inductors) when they have a power factor of 1.
Capacitors can cancel out inductors (and vice versa) to create purely resistive circuits.
Exceptions to this are where building up oscillations are the design objective ... such as the cavity in a microwave oven or designing a musical instrument.
The turbulence that the power factor measures can only be seen in the phasor domain.
The voltage across the inductor and capacitor have to cancel each other out. This means that the power supply doesn't see either. This means that the inductor and capacitor are passing energy back and forth, but the resistor and power supply can not see them. This means that
The current through the inductor and capacitor have to cancel each other out. This means that the power supply doesn't see either. This means that the inductor and capacitor are passing energy back and forth, but the resistor and power supply can not see them. This means that
So either way the formula for the capacitor to cancel out the inductor is the same. This is strange because in the series circuit the L&C have to combine to be a short to be invisible, and in the parallel circuit they have to combine to be an open.
Obviously, there is never going to be a perfect match. If there were a perfect match with ideal devices and a butterfly flapped its wings, the circuit could blow up. But that is another story for later in this course ...
Eliminating the effects of inductance with capacitance is dependent upon frequency. If the frequency deviates, then another imbalance occurs. In power distribution systems, the 60 Hz or 50 Hz frequency doesn't change. But in modems, radios and cable TV boxes, the frequency does change ... when someone speaks, when data moves through a cable, when changing channels. One of the objectives of this course is to understand how to design/plan for these changes.
Before the Brown v. Board of Education ruling of 1954, schools were segregated and defended as "Separate but Equal"
Nearly seven decades after Brown v. Board, racial inequality still permeates educational structures in the United States, as made apparent by the persistence of an achievement gap between African American students and their caucasian peers[1]. This chapter aims to understand why, despite the fact that education is often perceived as the ground for breaking down social inequalities [2] , it appears instead to perpetuate them. By looking at the evidence used in Sociology, Psychology and Economics to explain racial inequalities, this chapter strives to present a holistic understanding of the issue.
Socioeconomics, a sub-discipline of Economics, studies the relationship between economic activity and social processes [3]. Socioeconomics has a distinct way of understanding and explaining racial inequality in the US Education system through its use of econometric evidence.
A Pennsylvania State University researcher documented that the school funding gap between the top 1% district and the average-spending school district at 50th percentile widened by 32% between 2000 and 2015 [4]. Another study found quantitative evidence of the racial isolation in Atlanta, New York, and Detroit schools – cities with significantly high degrees of racial segregation by neighbourhood. In Atlanta where ‘black’ schools were 56% poorer than ‘white’ schools compared to 15% poorer in Detroit, the test-score gap between black and white children is nearly 5-grade levels compared to 2-grade levels in Detroit [5]. Reardon concluded that the larger the poverty rate between black and white schools, the larger the achievement gap. Thus, the issue of inequality in education stems down to economic inequality [6].
The average African-American earns 62 cents for every $1 earned by the average white American and in 2016 [7], ⅓ of black American children were living in poverty compared to 11% of white children [8]. Using the plethora of quantitative economic evidence, Socioeconomics argues that unless black children are liberated from poverty and able to attend well-funded schools, racial inequality in education will persist.
According to sociologists, colour-blind theory [9] is key to understanding the persistence of racial inequality in the US education system: they argue de jure equality of educational institutions, serves as a justification for inaction, as those with the power to enact change turn a blind eye to the persistence of de facto inequality.
Standardized testing is favoured for its objective, merit-based way of evaluating students.[10] However, evidence disproves this supposed objectivity: a 2003 study shows how pretest phases with high-scoring students (who are typically white) determine which questions make up the SATs used for university applications.[11][12] Another paper points to similar issues, with tests focusing not on critical thinking but rather knowing certain conventions (such as knowing ">" means “more than”).[13] As such, the “race-neutral” approach to testing dismisses key differences between races such as distinct social capital and cultural capital, despite repeated demonstrations of their crucial roles in students’ achievement.
Evidence also shows that making these tests central to consequent decision-making, results in segregated learning[16], exacerbating inequalities in education. Indeed, teaching in schools with low scores – often schools with a majority of black and brown students – is forced to focus more on test preparation at the expense of other parts of the curriculum such as music and art, and enriching ways of teaching are set aside and replaced by methods which place all focus on providing correct answers.[17] Moreover, within ethnically diverse schools, standardised testing is used to separate students into ability classes, resulting in African American students being disproportionately assigned to lower ability groups, where myriad factors contribute to low-quality teaching.[18]
Inequality as a result of the teacher's behaviours?
In Psychology, studies have evaluated the correlation between the behaviour of teachers towards their students and the achievement gap. For instance, psychologists have explored racial discrimination in teachers, who, overall, evaluate black students more harshly than their white peers. They also tend to be less positive about their academic abilities and attribute lower grades when they speak Black English.[19] Moreover, researchers have indicated that teachers often refer non-white students to special-needs testing, whereas their white peers are more frequently assigned to gifted-and-talented testing[20]. Although the results of these studies evidence discrimination based on race, psychologists who explored implicit bias suggested that such attitudes were unconscious [21].
Implicit racial associations, one form of implicit bias, refers to all automatic cognitive responses people attach to a certain racial group[20]. They are often measured by the Implicit Association Test, in which subjects are asked to press reaction keys associated with a certain image as quickly as they can. Results showed that 68% of respondents expressed discriminatory views towards black people [22], which evidenced the tendency of making negative implicit associations with black people. The study infers that since the average American expresses discriminatory implicit assumptions, an average American teacher is therefore likely to have biases which are detrimental to Black students[20].
Stereotypes, in addition to causing bias, affect students’ behaviour. An experiment found that African Americans scored lower than white students when they thought the test assessed individual capacities, but scored equally when the test was presented as a simple experiment.[23] This implies that when assessed on their individual capacities, African American students are reminded of the negative stereotypes that weigh on their culture and the fear of confirming these stereotypes if they fail gives them additional, penalizing anxiety. Similarly, researchers observed that African-American students had poorer results when asked to record their race on the exam paper[23], demonstrating that black students' confidence was undermined by pejorative stereotypes.
The racial self-esteem issue has also been assessed in much younger children[24] , which suggests that the stereotype-confidence problem comes from prejudices deeply anchored in society.
When formulating explanations for continued racial inequality in US education, each discipline draws upon distinct forms of evidence resulting in distinct conclusions. Socio-economists, relying heavily on quantitative data, argue social-economic status determines whether a student will be high-achieving; emphasising increased funding and more diverse neighbourhoods as viable solutions. Whilst Sociologists agree socio-economic status plays an important role in achievement, they have acquired further qualitative evidence demonstrating the pertinent role which family background plays in producing the achievement gap.[25] Finally, psychologists argue that internalised biases, both in teachers and students, are central to inequality in education. They then advocate the necessity to educate teachers on implicit bias and its impact on the treatment of students[24][21].
While sociology bridges both disciplines, no study integrates all viewpoints. This may be due to confirmation bias – researchers tend to focus on what they are looking for and are often reluctant to validate evidence collected with radically different methods. Typically, socio-economists may not recognise the importance of implicit bias, pointing to the subjectivity of studies relying on qualitative data.
Although each discipline presents competing claims for the best approach to address the issue of racial inequality in the education system, this chapter argues that those differences can work simultaneously to contribute to a positive solution. Evidence from each discipline must be addressed in policy-making, for their individual contributions bring to light the multidimensional nature of the problem, requiring an interdisciplinary approach to be addressed efficiently. Conversely, efforts to reduce the inequalities can only be partial and ultimately unsuccessful.
↑ Verdugo R. Trends in the Achievement Gaps in Reading and Mathematics. National Center for Education Statistics 2006. pp 3-4. Available from: https://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/pubs/studies/2009455.aspx
↑ Hallinan T. Sociological Perspectives on Black-White Inequalities in American Schooling.” Sociology of Education 2001; volume 74: p 50. Available from: www.jstor.org/stable/2673253.
↑ Reardon S, Weathers E, Fahle E, Jang H, Kalogrides D. Is Separate Still Unequal? New Evidence on School Segregation and Racial Academic Achievement Gaps (CEPA Working Paper No.19-06) [Internet]. Stanford CEPA; 2020. Available from: https://edopportunity.org/papers/wp19-06-v092019.pdf
↑ Wiseman P. Behind virus and protests: A chronic US economic racial gap [Internet]. AP NEWS. 2020 [cited 3 December 2020]. Available from: https://apnews.com/article/31c7e11edc16dfc5500c82d82c785f03
↑ Bonilla Silva E. Racism without racists: colour-blind racism and the persistence of racial inequality in America. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 2003
↑ Knoester M, Au W. Standardized testing and school segregation: like tinder for fire?. Race Ethnicity and Education. 2017; 20(1): p7. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1080/13613324.2015.1121474
↑ Soares J. For Tests that are Predictively Powerful and Without Social Prejudice. Research and Practice in Assessment. 2012; 7(1): p.8.
↑ Hidden Biases Continue to Produce Powerful Headwinds for College-Bound Blacks Aiming for Higher Scores on the SAT. The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education. 2003; 41(1), pp.90-92. doi:10.2307/3133779
↑ Sojoyner D.M. By All Means Possible: The Historical Struggle over Black Education. First Strike: Educational Enclosure in Black Los Angeles. University of Minnesota Press. 2016. p182. Available from: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5749/j.ctt1g69zjw.8
↑ Lee J, Natasha K. B. Parent Involvement, Cultural Capital, and the Achievement Gap Among Elementary School Children. American Educational Research Journal. January 2006; 43(2). pp 196–199.
↑ Coleman J, et al. Equality of Educational Opportunity [summary report]. U.S. Dept. of Health, Education, and Welfare, Office of Education 1966: pp-602-749. Available from: https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED012275.pdf
↑ Knoester M, Au W. Standardized testing and school segregation: like tinder for fire?. Race Ethnicity and Education. 2017; 20(1): p5. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1080/13613324.2015.1121474
↑ Sojoyner D.M. By All Means Possible: The Historical Struggle over Black Education. First Strike: Educational Enclosure in Black Los Angeles. University of Minnesota Press. 2016. p184. Available from: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5749/j.ctt1g69zjw.8
↑ Hallinan T. Sociological Perspectives on Black-White Inequalities in American Schooling.” Sociology of Education 2001; volume 74: p 61. Available from: www.jstor.org/stable/2673253.
↑ DeMeisD.K., TurnerR.R. Effects of students' race, physical attractiveness, and dialect on teachers' evaluations. Contemporary Educational Psychology, Volume 3, Issue 1; 1978. p.77-86
↑ a b c Warikoo N, Sinclair S, Fei J, Jacoby-Senghor D. Examining Racial Bias in Education. Educational Researcher. 2016;45(9):508-514.
↑ a b Staats C. Capatosto K. Wright R.A. Jackson V.W. Trends in the field: Education. In: State of the science: Implicit bias review. The Kirwan Institutes; 2016 p.33-40
↑ Nosek B, Smyth F, Hansen J, Devos T, Lindner N, Ranganath K et al. Pervasiveness and correlates of implicit attitudes and stereotypes. European Review of Social Psychology. 2007;18(1):36-88.
↑ a b Wiggan G. Teacher expectations and Ghetto Schools. In: Race, School Achievement, and Educational Inequality: Toward a Student-Based Inquiry Perspective. Review of Educational Research; 2007. p.310–333.
↑ a b Hicks V.R. Exclusionary Discipline and Implicit Bias with Emphasis on African American Students. MA Thesis. Alliant International University; 2020.
↑ Coleman J, et al. Equality of Educational Opportunity [summary report]. U.S. Dept. of Health, Education, and Welfare, Office of Education 1966. Available from: https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED012275.pdf
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Kunmirng shih ZG Yurnnarn Sheeng sheenghuih. ta shih Yurnnarn weiryi d tehdah cherngshih her ZG xibuh dih-4 dah cherngshih. ta shih Yurnnarn zhehngzhih, jingjih, wernhuah, kejih, jiaotong zhongxin. ta shih ZG xibuh dihqu zhohngyaoh d zhongxin cherngshih her lvvyour, shangmaoh cherngshih. ta shih ZG miahnxiahng Dongnarnyah her Narnyah d mernhuh. ta shih ZG zhuhmirng d lihshii wernhuah cherngshih her youxiuh d lvvyour cherngshih. ta d miahnji 2'1015km2, rernkoou 650'0000+.
Strength and stretching exercises help to increase muscle strength, maintain bone density, improve balance and reduce joint pain.
-W is a file test that tests if the file is writable by effective uid/gid.
It takes one argument, either a FILENAME, a FILEHANDLE, or a DIRHANDLE to test the associated file to see, if something is true about it. If the argument is omitted, it tests $_. -W returns 1 for true and an empty string for false. If the file doesn't exist or can't be examined, it returns undef and sets $! (errno).
The formula Si Shen Wan, designed to warm and tonify the spleen and kidney, consolidating the intestines to relieve diarrhea, consists of the following:
Strengthening The Spleen By Warming The Kidney-yang
This is the page to discuss the lesson, ask your questions, leave your comments, or just to say hello!
Click here or the tab labeled “edit this page” at the top of this page in order to add your comment at the end.
Text of comment. Sign your comment using “--~~~~”. This will look something like this: --Martin Kraus (talk) 09:26, 14 November 2008 (UTC)
Height: 0.8m/2'7"
Weight: 3kg/7.0lb
Gender Distribution: 50% Male
Move types which are very good on Jumpluff: Ice
Move types which are good on Jumpluff: Fire, Flying, Poison, Rock
Move types which are bad on Jumpluff: Fighting, Water
Move types which are very bad on Jumpluff: Grass
Move types which don't effect Jumpluff: Ground
All other move types are normal effectiveness on Jumpluff.
Ruby / Sapphire Emerald XD / Colosseum
GS/C/RS/FL: Attract, Double Team, Flash, Frustration, Giga Drain, Hidden Power, Hyper Beam, Protect, Rest, Return, Solarbeam, Sunny Day, Toxic
GS/C: Curse, Defense Curl, Endure, Headbutt, Sleep Talk, Snore, Swagger, Sweet Scent
Template:Wikibooks Pokédex:Hoppip Series
, there exists one category of modules, namely the modules over
-mod.
We aim now to prove that if
-mod is an Abelian category. We do so by verifying that modules have all the properties required for being an Abelian category.
Theorem 10.1:
The category of modules has kernels.
.
Theorem 10.?:
-category-theoretic comment
.
1 1. Define the following
2 2. What is the scientific method? How can the scientific method be used to study the Bible?
4 4. Explain the terms in Albert Einstein's
5 5. What units of measure for mass, length, and time are used where you live?
6 6. What units of measure are used for time prophecy in the Bible? What is the book, chapter and verse where they can be found?
7 7. List Newton's three laws of motion.
8 8. Using a table cloth and several heavy books, demonstrate Newton's first law of motion.
9 9. Using an air-filled balloon, demonstrate Newton's third law of motion.
10 10. Demonstrate Galileo's falling body experiment by dropping two plastic beverage bottles (one full of water, the other half full) at the same time from a height of seven feet. Record the results and draw a spiritual application from this experiment.
11 11. Demonstrate the mechanical advantage of levers by pulling a large nail, driven deeply into a board, using only a hammer. Pull a second nail using a hammer and a small block of wood, located near the nail, under the head of the hammer. Note the difference in force required to pull the nail with different positions on the hammer on the block (fulcrum) and draw a spiritual application from this experiment.
Physics is a branch of science that deals with matter, energy, motion, charge, and force.
Physics starts with observation. We can observe the world around us with our 5 senses, or we can use a number of tools such as a balance, meter stick or ruler, clock or stop watch to provide a more accurate measurement. Galileo used his pulse to time his experiments, but a stop watch would have improved the accuracy of his measurements. Physicists also use more complicated tools as they look at more complicated events such as the collision of sub-atomic particles in an atomic accelerator. The most important tool of physics is mathematics. You can think of Mathematics as the language of physics.
.
We can only know if an object has mass if we try accelerate it.
If we measured the mass of an object with an ordinary bathroom scale on Earth, on the Moon, and on Mars, we would find that it weighed most on Earth and least on the moon. In each case, the mass did not change, but the weight did. This is because the gravitational force of each planet is different, but the spring in the scale has not changed. For this reason, we use a balance to determine the mass of an object.
With a balance, as the force of gravity changes, it is pulling equally on both sides of the balance. We are now truly measuring the mass of the object, not its weight. Think of a teeter totter on the moon. If your friend is heavier than you, you will still be lighter on the moon, but if you and your friend are balanced on Earth, you will still be balanced on the moon teeter totter.
Weight is equivalent to the Force in Newton's second law of motion. You would truly feel lighter on the moon, but you have lost no mass, you have simply moved to a different gravity field or inertial framework.
Force is an influence on an object that causes the object to change its motion - either its speed or the direction in which it moves.
Power is the amount of energy expended per unit of time. If you can do lots of work quickly, then you are using more power.
f. Potential energy
Potential energy is the energy of an object based on its position relative to other objects. For example if I lift a ball above the ground at a given distance, then the ball has the potential to fall the distance that I've raised it. The potential energy of a ball can be measured by measuring how high you raise the ball against the force of gravity on the mass of the ball.
g = Acceleration due to gravity (9.8 m/sec/sec on Earth)
h = height we raise the ball
g. Kinetic energy
Kinetic energy is the amount of energy that an object has based on its motion relative to other objects. Kinetic energy in its simplest form is related to the speed of an object in relation to the observer. Kinetic energy in its most complex form can be heat.
The kinetic energy of a moving ball can be measured by knowing two things about the object
The mass of the object. (Determined using a balance.)
The velocity of the object (Time how long it takes to travel a given distance)
Weight is the force that gravity exerts upon a body. According to Newtons second Law of motion:
Weight is commonly mistaken for mass, but weight could be significantly more on a planet with a larger gravity, or could be significantly less on a planet with a lower gravity. Mass on the other hand is the same in both circumstances.
Matter is anything that has mass. There are four states of matter: solid, liquid, gas, and plasma. Physicists tend to divide the universe up in two general categories
Einstein showed these to be related (
Inertia is a property of matter that works against an external force. According to Newton's first law of motion, a body at rest tends to stay at rest unless acted on by an outside force. An object in motion tends to stay in motion unless acted on by a force.
At the atomic level you can think of bumpy surface like sand paper rubbing against another surface. When the two surfaces are at rest, the high spots of one surface fit into the valleys of the other surface and it takes quite a bit of force to move one over the other. Once they are moving, the two surfaces bounce from peak to peak like a skier only hitting the tops of the moguls. We observe that it takes more energy to start pushing an object than to keep it moving once moving.
The energy that we loose to friction is turned into heat. Rub the palms of your hands back and forth across each other. Your hands will start to get warm, in fact this is a good way to warm your hands when it is chilly. This heat can cause problems in the fan of your computer, or the cylinders of a car, so bearings, oil and grease are used to help reduce the heat and damage that can be caused by friction.
Waves can be represented by simple harmonic motion.
A wave is a forward moving disturbance traveling without moving forward the particles of the medium through which it moves.
In a guitar string for example, the string will vibrate up and down, but the particles that form the string do not move horizontally along the string. Likewise, if you throw a pebble into the water, the water goes up and down and the wave spreads out from the splash point, but there is not a flow of liquid along the surface of the water.
The center of gravity is the point from which all the gravitational forces within an object appear to come. This point is the same as the center of mass in a uniform gravitational field.
n. Exponential notation
An exponential notation is a mathematical notation that makes it easier to work with very large numbers or with very small numbers. In physics it is very common to have very large numbers such as the number of atoms in a drop of water, or the number of stars in a galaxy. It is also quite possible to have very small numbers such Planck's constant (0.0000000000000000000000000000000006626068 m2kg/s).
For small numbers the exponent is negative
The exponent tells us how many places we need to move the decimal point. We move it to the right for positive exponents and we move it to the left for negative exponents.
Exponential notation is used on many calculators and programming languages. The ×10 is replaced by the letter E, so we would write 31E6 instead of 31×106.
o. Absolute zero
Absolute zero is a theoretical minimum temperature at which all motion of an atom ceases.
Kelvin or 450 trillionths of a degree from absolute zero.
The principle of the lever tells us that the above is in static equilibrium, with all forces balancing, if F1D1 = F2D2.
A fulcrum is the support on which a lever turns in moving a body.
By changing the distance between the load and the fulcrum, we can increase or decrease the mechanical advantage of the machine known as a lever.
What is the scientific method? How can the scientific method be used to study the Bible?
All science starts with observations. A biologist might observe a bird and describe its colors or actions. A chemist might note a pungent aroma. A physicist might observe an object falling. Each of these events would be an observation. We use our senses, or use machines that can increase the power of our senses.
The observation causes us to ask basic questions about the event. These questions can form the basis of a hypothesis. A hypothesis is a scientist's guess about what might explain the observations. A hypothesis is most useful if it suggests an experiment that can be done to either prove or disprove the ideas we have as to the way things work.
We do an experiment to test the hypothesis, and this leads to more observations and we start the process all over again.
When an idea has been tested many times it is called a theory, and if it is tested so thoroughly that we are sure that it accurately describes the phenomenon, it might be called a Law.
The scientific method can be applied to any field of study, and tends to be self corrective. Errors cannot stand long - when others do the experiment they will either get the same results or different results. If they get different results, then more observation, hypotheses, and experiments are needed.
The scientific method can be applied to any field of study, including Bible Study. We are not talking about applying science to the Bible, although that can be quite useful. The science of archeology adds more to our understanding of the world of the Bible with each new discovery.
We can also apply Physics to the Bible, for example the Bible does not say how tall the lamp stand was in the sanctuary, but it does tell us how much the lamp stand and it’s utensils weighed. Exodus 25:39 (One talent of gold would have a volume of about 2 liters). We can use our knowledge of science (density, tinsel strength, etc.) to make an estimate of its height.
The use of science adds details to the story, but does not enhance the spirituality of the Bible reading. The important thing for Christians is not knowing each and every statistic in the Bible, but knowing the God of the Bible (John 17:3). This requires knowledge of the character of God, but it also requires personal interaction with God (John 17:23). With this in mind, there are several useful ways to use the scientific method to learn more about God and to enhance our relationship with him.
The scientific method of study starts with an observation, and in the spiritual world, there are two types of observations:
We observe the text of the Bible and then, using this observation as a starting point, we start to ask questions and compare scripture to scripture to find answers.
We observe events in our life or the lives of our family and friends. These observations lead us to ask questions. These questions, in turn, lead us to search for answers in the Bible. We then choose to act, either accepting the counsel of the Bible or rejecting it.
When we ask questions, we start to formulate a hypothesis. A good hypothesis leads to predictions that can be shown to be true or false by use of an experiment.
As we use the Scientific method in Bible study, our observation leads us to create a hypothesis. This hypothesis helps create a framework that we use to study the Bible. For example the text: “I the LORD do not change…” in Malachi 3:6 might be used to create a hypothesis that “God is consistent”. We then look at the action of God to see if this is true. We will search the scripture comparing scripture to scripture to find further examples of God acting in a consistent manner.
“Now the Bereans were of more noble character than the Thessalonians, for they received the message with great eagerness and examined the Scriptures every day to see if what Paul said was true.”
We all have hypotheses that we have accepted as true. These hypotheses are based on our training, and experiences. All experiences that we have had in the past guide the hypotheses that we are making today. For example, if someone has had a difficult relationship with their father, they may have a different view of God the Father than someone who has had a wonderful relationship with their father.
It is impossible for us to open the Bible without having underlying hypotheses that we filter the Bible through. These hypotheses affect our understanding of the text. Recognizing our own biases can be difficult, but by looking honestly at our own underlying hypotheses, we can start to see the world more clearly.
Thomas Jefferson, the author of the Declaration of Independence, thought that Jesus was a good man, and we could learn from him morally. Jefferson did not believe the miraculous accounts of the Bible. He created what is commonly known as the "Jefferson Bible" by cutting these accounts from the books of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John and arranging the remaining segments to form a story.
Martin Luther, on the other hand, believed that the Bible and the complete Bible was true, including the miracles. Luther believed this so much that he wanted everyone to be able to read its words in their own language. He therefore translated the entire Bible into German.
Jefferson and Luther had a different hypothesis relating to the complete truth of the Bible. Their hypotheses lead them to totally different relationships with God. As you can see, the Hypothesis that we start our Bible study with is very important.
As we apply the Scientific method to Bible study, we find that there are two types of experiments:
You apply your hypothesis to real life situations.
By actually putting the Bible text into practice, we can see if our hypothesis is valid. For example, If you read the text in Malachi 3:10
Bring the whole tithe into the storehouse, that there may be food in my house. Test me in this, says the LORD Almighty, and see if I will not throw open the floodgates of heaven and pour out so much blessing that you will not have room enough for it.
Your hypothesis might be that God will bless you if you return your tithe. If you take action on these thoughts and do the experiment, you can find out if it is true.
If your enemy is hungry, give him food to eat; if he is thirsty, give him water to drink. In doing this, you will heap burning coals on his head, and the LORD will reward you.
Our hypothesis might then be ”Our enemies are changed more quickly by being nice to them than by being mean to them.
Our experiment then would be to try treating the class bully in a kind manner.
We do not always have to do the experiment ourselves. The Bible can be viewed as a series of "spiritual" experiments. We see people who had faith and stood for right, we see people who failed repeatedly, but returned to God. We see others who have rejected God completely. Each of these stories is an experiment in spirituality. Life is not long enough to make all the mistakes on our own, therefore; a book such as the Bible can help us see how we should live in order to have a spiritually successful life. It also shows those who failed so we can know what behavior leads us away from God.
When you find a spiritual principle in the Bible, you can find an experiment that was performed in the life of the patriarchs, kings, prophets, and apostles by comparing scripture with scripture.
One of the distinct messages of the Seventh-day Adventist Church is that there is a "Controversy" between Jesus and Satan. (Job 1) We see from the scriptures that God is self-sacrificing love (John 3:16, 1 John 4:8), and Satan is defined by self-love (Isaiah 14:12-14). We can use this "Hypothesis framework" to study the scriptures. In each story of scripture, how can you see the forces of good struggling against the forces of evil? What does this teach you about God's love for his children and more specifically His love for you?
Once you have done the experiment or studied someone who has done the experiment, then you look at your hypothesis again. Do the results of your experiment support your hypothesis? If they do, your hypothesis could be valid, if not, change your hypothesis and begin the experiment and evaluation process again.
The framework of hypotheses forms our beliefs, and once we are more sure of our beliefs, we will start to take action. Our actions will be molded by our underlying hypotheses.
A controlled experiment is an experiment where you try to eliminate other factors that might affect the result. Let's look at one of the most famous Physics experiments and possibly one of the most important of all time. It will illustrate how we can deal with and control the variables. The experiment was done by an Italian Scientist by the name of Galileo Galilei.
For almost 2,000 years people believed the philosopher Aristotle who said that heavier objects fall faster than lighter objects. At the time of Galileo, there was no scientific method, and so people believed Aristotle based on his authority. Aristotle's idea was more than a hypothesis, in the minds of the people this was a law of physics.
Galileo asked questions about this law. It is obvious that a feather really does fall slower than a hammer, but he hypothesized that this is because air resistance prevents a feather from falling at full speed. Instead of thinking, as Aristotle did that moving objects tend to come to rest, he thought there might be something holding an object back "frictional forces" that slowed the object down.
Galileo probably did not drop objects from the Leaning Tower of Pisa, but he did experiments with an inclined plane or a ramp that he rolled objects down. This allowed him to slow down the falling action and thus minimize the "air friction". He was able to determine that objects are accelerating and that the mass does not affect the acceleration.
Galileo was able eliminate the "air friction" variable and this allowed him to "see" the underlying physics of falling bodies. He published his theories in his book entitled Discorsi e dimostrazioni matematiche, intorno à due nuove scienze (Discourses and Mathematical Demonstrations Relating to Two New Sciences) in 1638.
When designing an experiment you should try to figure out what variables might affect the experiment and then try to eliminate the variable. Sometimes the variables are not discovered until after the first or second experiment. Galileo's hypothesis was that air was affecting the falling objects.
As a demonstration drop a piece of paper and a book at the same time. Ask the students to hypothesize which will hit first, and then do the experiment. Was there hypothesis correct?
Now do the same experiment with the paper crumpled.
What happened?
Why?
This would be a good time to do the experiment of question 10 below.
Albert Einstein's Theory of Special Relativity was published on June 30, 1905. Most of the theory of special relativity has to do with the relation between moving objects and light that is passed between them.
Although light is a wave phenomenon, the Michelson Morley experiment of 1887 had shown that there is no medium needed for it to travel through space.
E - is the symbol for energy.
a calorimeter by measuring the change in temperature of water by adding heat into the system. One calorie of
This mass could be measured in kg or grams.
C stands for celeritas which is Latin for swiftness and is used to represent the speed of light.
299,792,458 Meters/second or 186,282.397Miles/second
2- The 2 on the right of the c represents the action known as squaring a number.
We square a number by multiplying it by itself. In this equation we are squaring a very large number which yields a very very large number :
What this equation indicates, is that mass and energy are interchangeable. Mass can become energy and energy can turn into mass. Before Einstein, there were two laws of physics
Conservation of matter- This law stated that particles of matter are not created or destroyed
Conservation of energy- This law stated that energy is not created or destroyed it just changes form
Conservation matter and energy- matter and energy are neither created or destroyed
It was not until 1938 that Lise Meitner and Otto Hahn were able to split a nucleus and see that energy was released. The energy released corresponded to the mass loss according to Einstein's equation.
It was shown that an atom with a large nucleus can break into two parts, emitting a gamma ray. If the mass of the two parts were added up some of the mass was missing. The gamma ray had no mass, only energy, but the energy was equivalent to the missing mass if we use Einstein's equation.
When we are talking about very energetic particles such as gamma rays, we often see the gamma ray becoming a pair of particles and then joining again to become a gamma ray.
A gamma ray with an energy of 1.022MEV (Million Electron Volts) can spontaneously form an electron anti-electron (Positron) pair. Each particle has mass that has the equivalent energy of .511MEV and one has a positive charge and one a negative charge. Because one is negatively charged and one is positively charged, they are likely to be attracted to each other and recombine and form a gamma ray again. The gamma ray has no charge or mass.
What units of measure for mass, length, and time are used where you live?
From a scientific point of view, it is very surprising that the English system is still in use in any technologically advanced country. Its use in the United States led to a catastrophic failure in the NASA Mars Orbiter mission of 1999. The $125 million Mars orbiter was lost because a Lockheed Martin engineering team used English units of measurement while the NASA team used the metric system for spacecraft navigation.
Many people think that pound is the English System's mass unit. It is actually the force unit. By continuing to convert from pounds to kilograms we further confuse the difference between force units and mass units.
What units of measure are used for time prophecy in the Bible? What is the book, chapter and verse where they can be found?
After you have finished this, lie down again, this time on your right side, and bear the sin of the house of Judah. I have assigned you 40 days, a day for each year.
For forty years—one year for each of the forty days you explored the land—you will suffer for your sins and know what it is like to have me against you.
He said to me, "It will take 2,300 evenings and mornings; then the sanctuary will be reconsecrated."
Isaac Newton is known as one of the greatest physicists, but few remember that he devoted more time to the study of the Bible and alchemy than to the study of Physics, and in Observations upon the Prophecies of Daniel, and the Apocalypse of St. John. he wrote:
"The Sanctuary and Host were trampled under foot 2300 days; and in Daniel's Prophecies days are put for years: but the profanation of the Temple in the reign of Antiochus did not last so many natural days. These were to last till the time of the end, till the last end of the indignation against the Jews; and this indignation is not yet at an end. They were to last till the Sanctuary which had been cast down should be cleansed, and the Sanctuary is not yet cleansed."
List Newton's three laws of motion.
An object at rest will stay at rest and an object in motion will stay in motion unless acted on by a force.
Experiment-You can do the experiment in question 8 of the physics honor to demonstrate inertia
The acceleration of a body is directly proportional to the force acting on it; This is written as
.
Experiment- Use plastic spoons and marshmallows , nuts, apples or other objects to demonstrate how the same force (the bend of the spoon) accelerates the objects with different mass, different distances.
How can you make sure that you get the same force each time?
Does the objects mass affect the distance it travels?
Does the mass affect the speed of the object?
Experiment-Connect a fish scale to a small weight and see what measure you get if you pull the weight slowly or quickly
For every action or force there is an equal but opposite reaction.
If I push on you, then you push on me with the same amount of force, but in the opposite direction
Experiment-You can do the experiment in question 9 of the physics honor to demonstrate action--reaction principle.
Using a table cloth and several heavy books, demonstrate Newton's first law of motion.
An object at rest will stay at rest and an object in motion will stay in motion unless acted on by a force.
In this experiment, we will place a table cloth over a table, and then place the books on top of the table cloth.
What happens if you try to pull the table cloth slowly?
What happens if you try to pull the table cloth Quickly?
What happens if the books are light?
Does the type of table cloth matter? What if it is smooth like silk? or Rough like sand paper?
What does this experiment tell us about Newton's First Law of motion?
Is there another experiment that I can do to prove or disprove Newton's First Law of motion?
We all resist change in our life. We become comfortable with the status quo. Sometimes a slow persistent push can overcome our inertia and get us headed in the right direction spiritually.
Using an air-filled balloon, demonstrate Newton's third law of motion.
For every action or force there is an equal but opposite reaction or force
Imagine sitting in space (no friction to hold you in place) with a brick. If you throw the brick, the brick will go away from your original location, but you will also go away from your original location (Your speed will be slower than the brick because you are much heavier than the brick). A rocket does the same thing with the molecules of the exhaust. The molecules are very light, but are traveling very fast, and thus can accelerate the rocket to very high speeds.
Provide as little guidance as possible. Let the spirit of learning guide.
Competition between two or more groups can be prompted by seeing which team can get the balloon to fly to a specific target.
Once a team figures out the way to guide the balloon, then you can have races between the various teams.
If you blow up a balloon, and then let it go without tying a knot in the opening, What happens?
Does this agree with Newton's third law of motion?
How can you make the balloon go where you want it to? (guide the balloon?)
What provides the force?
When God acts, the universe reacts. We see this repeatedly in the creation story. God spoke and things appear. He says, "Let there be light" and there was light. "For every action there is a reaction"
Demonstrate Galileo's falling body experiment by dropping two plastic beverage bottles (one full of water, the other half full) at the same time from a height of seven feet. Record the results and draw a spiritual application from this experiment.
The Earth attracts everything to itself. We represent the Newtonian attraction with a Big G which stands for Gravitation constant (in MKS units it has a value 6.67x
The more mass an object has, the higher the Force exerted on it, this extra force exactly cancels out the inertia of the object, so we can see no matter how big or small an object is it will experience the same acceleration of gravity specified by little g. On the Earth we will let
Notice that we have m on both sides of the equation. So m is completely canceled out leaving us with
.
Which one hit first?
What would happen if the bottle was completely empty? Why?
Galileo was able to step out on his faith that air frictions was holding back light objects such as a feather, and this is why Aristotle had said that heavier objects fall faster. He imagined a world that had no air friction, and thus was able to see the underlying physics. We must rely on faith as we look toward the heavenly kingdom and imagine a world without suffering, illness, and death.
Demonstrate the mechanical advantage of levers by pulling a large nail, driven deeply into a board, using only a hammer. Pull a second nail using a hammer and a small block of wood, located near the nail, under the head of the hammer. Note the difference in force required to pull the nail with different positions on the hammer on the block (fulcrum) and draw a spiritual application from this experiment.
Simple machines are used to create a mechanical advantage. They do this by reducing the amount of force needed to accomplish a job. The list of machines usually includes the following machines
Inclined plane- It takes less force to push a load up a slope than lift it straight up.
Wheel and axle- The wheel is arguably the most important machine. It reduces the amount of frictional forces.
Lever-Is composed of a fulcrum or pivot point and a long rigid bar or beam. The closer the object that we are lifting is to the fulcrum the easier (More mechanical advantage we have.
Pulley-Is a wheel that is used with a rope to change the direction of a force. Multiple pulleys can be used together to create a block and tackle that will increase the mechanical advantage.
Wedge-This machine is just two inclined planes, but is usually included because it is so useful.
Screw-This is simply a circular inclined plane, but because it takes a rotational force and turns it into a linear force, it is almost always included in a list of simple machines.
The machine being studied here is a simple lever. The hammer handle is the lever arm, and the curve of the head forms the fulcrum. The claw of the hammer is also a wedge or inclined plane. Sometimes you use a hammer with a pry bar, nail puller or another hammer to wedge the claw under the nail head.
The Lever uses the physics principle of torque or rotational force. Torque = force*distance.
Materials-Hammer, nails, 2x4 at least 2 feet long, small block of wood
Method- Drive a number of large nails (16 penny will work well) halfway into the 2x4 and have the class try pulling a nail. Then demonstrate how to position the block of wood to act as a fulcrum. Have the class repeat the experiment using the block of wood.
Start with a description or demonstration of various machines as described in the theory section. Then ask the class "what kind of machine is a hammer"
Where is the fulcrum on the hammer?
What difference does it make how close the fulcrum is to the block of wood?
What difference does it make where you grip the hammer? Is it easier near the head or at the end of the handle?
Spiritual Application Example- If we let the fulcrum of the lever represent Jesus, then the closer we are to Jesus, the easier it is to lift us to a higher spiritual plane.
Could Archimedes move the Earth with a lever?
Rodney East works with a Pathfinder Club in Glenn Ellyn Illinois, and has been involved with Pathfinder from the age of 9 when his grandmother introduced him to the stars by working on the Star honor.
He studied everything he could find on astronomy as he was growing up and finally graduated from Pacific Union College with a Bachelors degree in Physics with an emphasis in Astronomy.
He now works in the Information Technology group of the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory.
Rodney and Stephanie East Produced the DVD entitled "Why Knot, an introduction to knots, rope, and splices" to help teach the Knot Tying Honor. This video is available through Advent Source.
If you make a measurement, and then communicate this measurement to others, it's essential you include the correct unit.
So, imagine you're buying a bookshelf from Linda. You tell Linda the space on your wall where you want to put the bookshelf is 2.7 wide. She says, "No problem, the shelves will easily fit there." You get the bookshelf home and it does not fit!... you meant 2.7 ft and she thought you meant 2.7 m.
You might think this would rarely happen. But there are many examples of such errors in real life, including some infamous ones with significant consequences, like the case of the [wikipedia:Mars_Climate_Orbiter|Mars Climate Orbiter] which was a much more expensive mistake than buying the wrong bookshelf – and you'd probably be able to take the bookshelf back!
To communicate a measurement we need to agree on a unit. So, for example, we might agree on a unit to measure length based on the length of your forearm. We'll call the unit simply the "forearm" and use the symbol "F". So a length of 2F is a length that is twice the length of your forearam.
There are several issues with this definition of length for use by the wider public (further discussion to come).
Note: this list does not include units that are only relevant to one of the many particular options in Unit 2, Area of Study 2.
† Usually the SI prefix "k" (short for kilo) would only be used in front of a base unit to indicate 1000 times that base unit. For example, 1 km = 1000 m, or 1 kN = 1000 N. It is correct that 1 kg = 1000 grams, and this would seem to imply that the gram is the base unit of mass, however, this is NOT correct. That the kilogram is the base unit is an historical quirk.
‡ degree Celsius is not strictly an SI unit. The SI unit for temperature is the kelvin. However, degrees Celsius and kelvin have been defined so that in terms of a difference in temperature 1°C = 1K, so the translation between the two is a simple addition or subtraction. Also, because it has been common practice to use °C, and people are usually familiar with temperatures in °C, often °C is used in science to provide a more immediate sense of the temperatures involved. This common use is acknowledged by the BIPM and is why they were defined to have a simple relationship between them.
DNA and RNA are different from their structure, functions, and stabilities. DNA has four nitrogen bases adenine, thymine, cytosine, and guanine and for RNA instead of thymine, it has uracil. Also, DNA is double-stranded and RNA is single-stranded which is why RNA can leave the nucleus and DNA can't. Another thing is that DNA is missing an oxygen.
DNA is a double-stranded molecule with a long chain of nucleotides while RNA is only single-stranded. In most of its biological roles and has a shorter chain of nucleotides (after transcription and splicing, only exons remain in RNA). DNA exists mainly in a double helix form while RNA will take on many different shapes and sizes such as the 'hair pin formation'. DNA is used to carry an organism's genetic information while RNA takes on many different roles, for instance, RNA can act as an enzyme such as ribozyme. There is one single type of DNA while there are many types of RNA that have different functions such as mRNA (carries DNA message to cytoplasm), tRNA (carries amino acids to mRNA and Ribosomes), rRNA (Ribosomal RNA, workbench for protein synthesis). DNA cannot catalyze its own synthesis while RNA can. This supports the RNA World Hypothesis. The pairing of bases in DNA including A-T(Adenine-Thymine) and G-C(Guanine-Cytosine)is different to that of RNA including A-U(Adenine-Uracil) and G-C(Guanine-Cytosine).
DNA is a long polymer with deoxyriboses and phosphate backbone. Having four different nitrogenous bases: adenine, guanine, cytosine and thymine.
RNA is a polymer with a ribose and phosphate backbone. Four different nitrogenous bases: adenine, guanine, cytosine, and uracil.
DNA is a nucleic acid that contains the genetic instructions used in the development and functioning of all known living organisms. It is a medium of long-term storage and transmission of genetic information, while RNA is a nucleic acid polymer that plays an important role in the process of translating genetic information from deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) into protein products. RNA acts as a messenger between DNA and the protein synthesis complexes known as ribosomes.
Both DNA and RNA start synthesis in the 5'-3' direction. However, no primer is needed for RNA. In addition, only RNA polymerase lacks the ability to detect errors of base pairing.
Deoxyribose sugar in DNA is less reactive because of C-H bonds on the second carbon (C2). DNA is stable in alkaline conditions. It has smaller grooves where the damaging enzyme can attach which makes it harder for the enzyme to attack DNA; RNA, on the other hand, has larger grooves which makes it easier to be attacked by enzymes. RNA, ribose sugar is more reactive because of the presence of hydroxyl group on C2. RNA is not stable in alkaline conditions because bases can easily deprotonate the Hydrogen from the -OH on C2. After deprotonation, the negatively charged oxygen may attack the Phosphate at the PO4, kicking off the Oxygen connected to the 5'C of next nucleotide over, resulting in hydrogenation.
Here is a chart that shows the differences between DNA and RNA:
Transfer the genetic code needed for the creation of proteins from the nucleus to the ribosome. This process prevents the DNA from having to leave the nucleus, so it stays safe. Without RNA, proteins could never be made.
Typically a double- stranded molecule with a long chain of nucleotides.
A single-stranded molecule in most of its biological roles and has a shorter chain of nucleotides.
Long polymer with a deoxyribose and phosphate backbone and four different bases: adenine, guanine, cytosine and thymine.
Shorter polymer with a ribose and phosphate backbone and four different bases: adenine, guanine, cytosine, and uracil.
Deoxyribose sugar in DNA is less reactive because of C-H bonds. Stable in alkaline conditions. DNA has smaller grooves where the damaging enzyme can attach which makes it harder for the enzyme to attack DNA.
Ribose sugar is more reactive because of C-OH (hydroxyl) bonds. Not stable in alkaline conditions. RNA on the other hand has larger grooves which makes it easier to be attacked by enzymes.
The helix geometry of DNA is of B-Form. DNA is completely protected by the body i.e. the body destroys enzymes that cleave DNA. DNA can be damaged by exposure to Ultra-violet rays.
The helix geometry of RNA is of A-Form. RNA strands are continually made, broken down and reused. RNA is more resistant to damage by Ultra-violet rays.
There's no mathematical system with consistent axiom.
Some brands of drives are more reliable than others. While reliability data for particular models can be hard to come by, various factors can be used to estimate a drive's reliability. These factors include product ratings, and some suitability and physical attributes.
As is obvious, drives with relatively higher user ratings and good reviews should be preferred. Drives with relatively lower ratings should not be purchased except if used in a RAID environment. The reliability of a model with less than five user ratings, as is the case with brand-new models, is harder to estimate.
Newegg is one of the websites that provides user ratings and reviews for many drives. Google Product Search provides an aggregation of user ratings and reviews from various websites.
Enterprise class drives are advertised as having slightly higher reliability than standard desktop class drives, but of course they cost more.
Hard drives can come with an in-built recovery mechanism which attempts repair if an error occurs. This recovery cycle attempts to recover data from the problematic area, and then reallocates a dedicated area to replace the problematic area.[1] This process can take up to up to a few minutes depending on the severity of the issue.[1]
Drives meant to be used in a RAID environment must have a feature which prevents them from entering a long recovery cycle, failing which the RAID controller can drop the drive from the array. This feature is known as Time-Limited Error Recovery (TLER)[1] by Western Digital, Error Recovery Control (ERC) by Seagate, and Command Completion Time Limit (CCTL) by Samsung and Hitachi.
Desktop drives that can enter a long recovery cycle should therefore not be used in RAID environments, although drives with TLER[1] / ERC / CCTL can be used in non-RAID environments.
There exists a strong positive correlation between the number of heads in a drive and its failure rate.[2] When choosing between two drives of equal capacity and speed, the one with a fewer number of heads is therefore preferred. This point, however, may not be useful because drives with similar features may tend to have the same number of heads.
Drive failure rates typically follow a "Bathtub" curb. Higher in the beginning and end of a drives lifespan.
A drive has a higher chance than usual of failure in its first few months of use. This increased rate is due to assembly, configuration, or component-level problems. If a drive is susceptible to failing due to such a problem, it would be beneficial if this problem can be detected before the drive is put into use. Care must be taken to ensure that a drive does not overheat during a burn-in.
To aid with this, new drives can first be put through a short burn-in process using special software. This process performs read and write stress tests on the drive. It thus aims to catch problems in the drive that may lead to its early failure. One commercial software application for both Windows and Linux that performs this and other burn-in tests is PassMark BurnInTest.
S.M.A.R.T. reliability data can be queried before and after the burn-in. If a new error is found after the burn-in, it can be indicative of the drive being susceptible to an early failure.
While planned functional obsolescence is something that can be expected from a company selling a product, in this case it is necessitated by the consumer. Older, smaller drives can routinely be replaced by newer, larger ones. In addition to the increased storage capacity that becomes available, because the older drive is replaced well before its life runs out, the risk of loss of the data contained in that drive is reduced. This is particularly applicable to consumers who require increasing amounts of storage, as they benefit most from the increased storage capacity.
Drives can be replaced based on their features, age, or their fitness as determined by S.M.A.R.T. parameters.
"What is the difference between Desktop edition and RAID (Enterprise) edition hard drives?". Western Digital: Knowledge Base: Frequently Asked Questions. Western Digital. http://wdc.custhelp.com/cgi-bin/wdc.cfg/php/enduser/std_adp.php?p_faqid=1397. Retrieved 2008-12-11. "If you install and use a desktop edition hard drive connected to a RAID controller, the drive may not work correctly unless jointly qualified by an enterprise OEM. This is caused by the normal error recovery procedure that a desktop edition hard drive uses.
When an error is found on a desktop edition hard drive, the drive will enter into a deep recovery cycle to attempt to repair the error, recover the data from the problematic area, and then reallocate a dedicated area to replace the problematic area. This process can take up to 2 minutes depending on the severity of the issue. Most RAID controllers allow a very short amount of time for a hard drive to recover from an error. If a hard drive takes too long to complete this process, the drive will be dropped from the RAID array. Most RAID controllers allow from 7 to 15 seconds for error recovery before dropping a hard drive from an array. Western Digital does not recommend installing desktop edition hard drives in an enterprise environment (on a RAID controller).Western Digital RAID edition hard drives have a feature called TLER (Time Limited Error Recovery) which stops the hard drive from entering into a deep recovery cycle. The hard drive will only spend 7 seconds to attempt to recover. This means that the hard drive will not be dropped from a RAID array. Though TLER is designed for RAID environments, it is fully compatible and will not be detrimental when used in non-RAID environments"
Jon G. Elerath and Sandeep Shah (January 2003). "Disk drive reliability case study: Dependence upon fly-height and quantity of heads". Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Reliability and Maintainability. Annual Symposium on Reliability and Maintainability. pp. 608–612. http://rams.org/.
To refer to a source in the middle of the text, follow this example:
To list all the sources referred to in the text, after a second level heading titled "References":
But the parties to this dispute have changed positions. The
To engender dearness, the restrictionists have obtained
To create cheapness, the free-traders have occasionally
In England, to satisfy the consumer, they lowered, and
And these are not isolated facts; for the price of wool is
This software is available on Microsoft Windows, its 32-bit editions are different to the 64-bit editions[1].
Minimum processor: PIII 600 (1 GHZ or faster recommended).
Windows Server 2003 (Standard, Enterprise or Datacenter) with SP1 or later.
Windows Small Business Server 2003 (Standard or Premium) with SP1 or later.
Windows 2000 (Server, Advanced Server, Datacenter Server) with SP4 or later.
In short: all OS after Windows XP.
All of Enterprise, but also non server Windows OS.
Windows Professional with SP4 and Windows XP with SP2 or later.
All of standard and Windows XP Media and Tabled Edition.
All of the above + Windows Home Edition with SP2 or later and Windows Server 2004 Web Edition with SP1 or later.
1+2+3 + 4.5 Windows Home Edition with SP2.
Enterprise, Development Standard and Workgroup: 512 min, 1 GB more recommended.
Express: 192 min, 512 or more recommended.
Explorer SP1 required for all installations (Required for Microsoft Management Console (MMC) and HTML Help.
IIS Required for XML applications and for Reporting Services.
IA64 Minimum: 1 GHZ or faster Itanium.
X64 minimum: 1 GHz or faster AMD Opteron, AMD Athlon 64, Intel Xenon with Intel EM64T support or PIV with EM64T support.
↑ https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms143506.aspx
The purpose of this book is to begin down the long and winding road of Electrical Engineering. Previous books on electric circuits have laid a general groundwork, but again: that is not what electrical engineers usually do with their time. Very complicated integrated circuits exist for most applications that can be picked up at a local circuit shop or hobby shop for pennies, and there is no sense creating new ones. As such, this book will most likely spend little or no time discussing actual circuit implementations of any of the structures discussed. Also, this book will not stumble through much of the complicated mathematics, instead opting to simply point out and tabulate the relevant results. What this book will do, however, is attempt to provide some insight into a field of study that is considered very foreign and arcane to most outside observers. This book will be a theoretical foundation that future books will build upon. This book will likely not discuss any specific implementations (no circuits, transceivers, filters, etc...), as these materials will be better handled in later books.
This book is designed to accompany a second year of study in electrical engineering at the college level. However, students who are not currently enrolled in an electrical engineering curriculum may also find some valuable and interesting information here. This book requires the reader to have a previous knowledge of differential calculus, and assumes familiarity with integral calculus as well. Barring previous knowledge, a concurrent course of study in integral calculus could accompany reading this book, with mixed results. Using Laplace Transforms, this book will avoid differential equations completely, and therefore no prior knowledge of that subject is needed.
Having a prior knowledge of other subjects such as physics (wave dynamics, energy, forces, fields) will provide a deeper insight into this subject, although it is not required. Also, having a mathematical background in probability, statistics, or random variables will provide a deeper insight into the mechanics of noise signals, but that also is not required.
What will this book cover?
This book is going to cover the theory of LTI systems and signals. This subject will form the fundamental basis for several other fields of study, including signal processing, Digital Signal Processing, Communication Systems, and Control Systems.
This book will provide the basic theory of LTI systems and mathematical modeling of signals. We will also introduce the notion of a stochastic, or random, process. Random processes, such as noise or interference, are so common in the studies of these systems that it's impossible to discuss the practical use of filter systems without first discussing noise processes.
Later sections will introduce some more advanced topics, such as digital signals and systems, and filters. This book will not discuss these topics at length, however, preferring to direct the reader to more comprehensive books on these subjects.
This book will attempt, so far as is possible, to provide not only the materials but also discussions about the importance and relevance of those materials. Because the information in this book plays a fundamental role in preparing the reader for advanced discussions in other books.
Once a basic knowledge of signals and systems has been learned, the reader can then take one of several paths of study.
Readers interested in the use of electric signals for long-distance communications can read Communication Systems and Communication Networks. This path will culminate in a study of Data Coding Theory.
Readers more interested in the analysis and processing of signals would likely be more interested in reading about Signal Processing and Digital Signal Processing. These books will focus primarily on the "signals".
Readers who are more interested in the use of LTI systems to exercise control over systems will be more interested in Control Systems. This book will focus primarily on the "systems".
All three branches of study are going to share certain techniques and foundations, so many readers may find benefit in trying to follow the different paths simultaneously.
MATLAB - MATrix LABoratory is an industry standard tool in engineering applications. Electrical Engineers, working on topics related to this book will often use MATLAB to help with modeling. For more information on programming MATLAB, see MATLAB Programming.
MATLAB itself is a relatively expensive piece of software. It is available for a fee from the Mathworks website.
There are, however, free alternatives to MATLAB. These alternatives are frequently called "MATLAB Clones", although some of them do not mirror the syntax of MATLAB. The most famous example is Octave. Here are some resources if you are interested in obtaining Octave:
What is a signal? Of course, we know that a signal can be a rather abstract notion, such as a flashing light on our car's front bumper
(turn signal), or an umpire's gesture indicating that a pitch went over the plate during a baseball game (a strike signal). One of the
"A detectable physical quantity or impulse (as a voltage, current, or magnetic field strength) by which messages or information
"A signal is a function of independent variables that carry some information." or
"A signal is a source of information, generally a physical quantity, which varies with respect to time, space, temperature like any independent variable" or
"A signal is a physical quantity that varies with time, space, or any other independent variable by which information can be conveyed"
As per a new definition of signal proposed in- Pragnan Chakravorty, "What Is a Signal? [Lecture Notes]," IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 175-177, Sept. 2018. doi: 10.1109/MSP.2018.2832195:
"A signal, as a function of one or more variables, may be defined as an observable change in a quantifiable entity"
These are the types of signals which will be of interest in this book. We will focus on two broad classes of signals, discrete-time and continuous-time. We will consider discrete-time signals later. For now, we will focus our attention on continuous-time signals. Fortunately, continuous-time signals have a very convenient mathematical representation. We represent a continuous-time signal as a function x(t) of the real variable t. Here, t represents continuous time and we can assign to t any unit of time we deem appropriate (seconds, hours, years, etc.). We do not have to make any particular assumptions about x(t) such as "boundedness" (a signal is bounded if it has a finite value). Some of the signals we will work with are in fact, not bounded (i.e. they take on an infinite value). However most of the continuous-time signals we will deal with in the real world are bounded.
Signal: a function representing some variable that contains some information about the behavior of a natural or artificial system. Signals are one part of the whole. Signals are meaningless without systems to interpret them, and systems are useless without signals to process.
Signal: the energy (a traveling wave) that carries some information.
Signal example: an electrical circuit signal may represent a time-varying voltage measured across a resistor.
A signal can be represented as a function x(t) of an independent variable t which usually represents time. If t is a continuous variable, x(t) is a continuous-time signal, and if t is a discrete variable, defined only at discrete values of t, then x(t) is a discrete-time signal. A discrete-time signal is often identified as a sequence of numbers, denoted by x[n], where n is an integer.
Signal; A signal is a physical quantity that contain information.
A System is any physical set of components that takes a signal, and produces a signal. In terms of engineering, the input is generally some electrical signal X, and the output is another electrical signal(response) Y. However, this may not always be the case. Consider a household thermostat, which takes input in the form of a knob or a switch, and in turn outputs electrical control signals for the furnace.
A main purpose of this book is to try and lay some of the theoretical foundation for future dealings with electrical signals. Systems will be discussed in a theoretical sense only.
Oftentimes, complex signals can be simplified as linear combinations of certain basic functions (a key concept in Fourier analysis), which are useful to the field of engineering. These functions will be described here, and studied more in the following chapters.
The unit step function and the impulse function are considered to be fundamental functions in engineering, and it is strongly recommended that the reader becomes very familiar with both of these functions.
Unit Step Function Shifted Unit Step function
The unit step function, also known as the Heaviside function, is defined as such:
The unit step function is level in all places except for a discontinuity at t = 0. For this reason, the derivative of the unit step function is 0 at all points t, except where t = 0. Where t = 0, the derivative of the unit step function is infinite.
The derivative of a unit step function is called an impulse function. The impulse function will be described in more detail next.
In other words, the integral of a unit step is a "ramp" function. This function is 0 for all values that are less than zero, and becomes a straight line at zero with a slope of +1.
Here we will list some other properties of the unit step function:
These are all important results, and the reader should be familiar with them.
An impulse function is a special function that is often used by engineers to model certain events. An impulse function is not realizable, in that by definition the output of an impulse function is infinity at certain values. An impulse function is also known as a "delta function", although there are different types of delta functions that each have slightly different properties. Specifically, this unit-impulse function is known as the Dirac delta function. The term "Impulse Function" is unambiguous, because there is only one definition of the term "Impulse".
Let's start by drawing out a rectangle function, D(t), as such:
We can similarly define the delta function piecewise, as such:
.
Although, this definition is less rigorous than the previous definition.
From its definition it follows that the integral of the impulse function is just the step function:
Thus, defining the derivative of the unit step function as the impulse function is justified.
Furthermore, for an integrable function f:
This is known as the shifting property (also known as the sifting property or the sampling property) of the delta function; it effectively samples the value of the function f, at location A.
The delta function has many uses in engineering, and one of the most important uses is to sample a continuous function into discrete values.
Using this property, we can extract a single value from a continuous function by multiplying with an impulse, and then integrating.
There are a number of different functions that are all called "delta functions". These functions generally all look like an impulse, but there are some differences. Generally, this book uses the term "delta function" to refer to the Dirac Delta Function.
There is a particular form that appears so frequently in communications engineering, that we give it its own name. This function is called the "Sinc function" and is discussed below:
.
This fact can be proven by noting that for x near 0,
.
Then, since cos(0) = 1, we can apply the Squeeze Theorem to show that the sinc function approaches one as x goes to zero. Thus, defining sinc(0) to be 1 makes the sinc function continuous.
Also, the Sinc function approaches zero as x goes towards infinity, with the envelope of sinc(x) tapering off as 1/x.
The Rect Function is a function which produces a rectangular-shaped pulse with a width of 1 centered at t = 0. The Rect function pulse also has a height of 1.
The Sinc function and the rectangular function form a Fourier transform pair.
A Rect function can be written in the form:
Here, both unit step functions are set at distance of Y/2 away from the center point of (t - X).
These two square waves have the same amplitude, but the second has a lower frequency. We can see that the period of the second is approximately twice as large as the first, and therefore that the frequency of the second is about half the frequency of the first.
These two square waves have the same frequency and the same peak-to-peak amplitude, but the second wave has no DC offset. Notice how the second wave is centered on the x axis, while the first wave is completely above the x axis.
There are many tools available to analyze a system in the time domain, although many of these tools are very complicated and involved. Nonetheless, these tools are invaluable for use in the study of linear signals and systems, so they will be covered here.
This book contains mathematical formulae that look better rendered as PNG.
This page will contain the definition of a LTI system and this will be used to motivate the definition of convolution as the output of a LTI system in the next section. To begin with a system has to be defined and the LTI properties have to be listed. Then, for a given input it can be shown (in this section or the following) that the output of a LTI system is a convolution of the input and the system's impulse response, thus motivating the definition of convolution.
Consider a system for which an input of xi(t) results in an output of yi(t) respectively for i = 1, 2.
There are 2 requirements for linearity. A function must satisfy both to be called "linear".
.
Being linear is also known in the literature as "satisfying the principle of superposition". Superposition is a fancy term for saying that the system is additive and homogeneous. The terms linearity and superposition can be used interchangeably, but in this book we will prefer to use the term linearity exclusively.
We can combine the two requirements into a single equation:
.
A system is said to be additive if a sum of inputs results in a sum of outputs. To test for additivity, we need to create two arbitrary inputs, x1(t) and x2(t). We then use these inputs to produce two respective outputs:
If this final relationship is not satisfied for all possible inputs, then the system is not additive.
Similar to additivity, a system is homogeneous if a scaled input (multiplied by a constant) results in a scaled output. If we have two inputs to a system:
Where c is an arbitrary constant. If this is the case then the system is homogeneous if
This property can be satisfied if the transfer function of the system is not a function of time except expressed by the input and output.
To demonstrate how to determine if a system is time-invariant, consider the two systems:
Since system A explicitly depends on t outside of x(t) and y(t), it is time-variant. System B, however, does not depend explicitly on t so it is time-invariant (given x(t) is time-invariant).
A more formal proof of why systems A & B from above are respectively time varying and time-invariant is now presented. To perform this proof, the second definition of time invariance will be used.
Start with a time shift of the input
, therefore the system is not time-invariant.
Start with a time shift of the input
, therefore the system is time-invariant.
The system is linear time-invariant (LTI) if it satisfies both the property of linearity and time-invariance. This book will study LTI systems almost exclusively, because they are the easiest systems to work with, and they are ideal to analyze and design.
Besides being linear, or time-invariant, there are a number of other properties that we can identify in a function:
A system is said to have memory if the output from the system is dependent on past inputs (or future inputs) to the system. A system is called memoryless if the output is only dependent on the current input. Memoryless systems are easier to work with, but systems with memory are more common in digital signal processing applications.
Causality is a property that is very similar to memory. A system is called causal if it is only dependent on past or current inputs. A system is called non-causal if the output of the system is dependent on future inputs. Most of the practical systems are causal.
Stability is a very important concept in systems, but it is also one of the hardest function properties to prove. There are several different criteria for system stability, but the most common requirement is that the system must produce a finite output when subjected to a finite input. For instance, if we apply 5 volts to the input terminals of a given circuit, we would like it if the circuit output didn't approach infinity, and the circuit itself didn't melt or explode. This type of stability is often known as "Bounded Input, Bounded Output" stability, or BIBO.
Studying BIBO stability is a relatively complicated course of study, and later books on the Electrical Engineering bookshelf will attempt to cover the topic.
Mathematical operators that satisfy the property of linearity are known as linear operators. Here are some common linear operators:
Determine if the following two functions are linear or not:
Impulse response tells us how a system reacts when we hit it with an impulse signal(also called as dirac delta function).This Impulse response is very important term in analyzing the behaviour of systems.
Example. Finding the total response of a driven RLC circuit.
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: conv
Convolution (folding together) is a complicated operation involving integrating, multiplying, adding, and time-shifting two signals together.
The convolution a * b of two functions a and b is defined as the function:
We multiply the two functions together, time shifting along the way, and we take the area under the resulting curve at each point. Two functions overlap in increasing amounts until some "watershed" after which the two functions overlap less and less. Where the two functions overlap in the t domain, there is a value for the convolution. If one (or both) of the functions do not exist over any given range, the value of the convolution operation at that range will be zero.
Find the convolution, z(t), of the following two signals, x(t) and y(t), by using (a) the integral representation of the convolution equation and (b) muliplication in the Laplace domain.
The signal x(t) is given by the following infinite sinusoid, x0(t), and windowing function, xw(t):
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: xcorr
Akin to Convolution is a technique called "Correlation" that combines two functions in the time domain into a single resultant function in the time domain. Correlation is not as important to our study as convolution is, but it has a number of properties that will be useful nonetheless.
The correlation of two functions, g(t) and h(t) is defined as such:
Where the capital R is the Correlation Operator, and the subscripts to R are the arguments to the correlation operation.
Correlation is used in many places because it demonstrates one important fact: Correlation determines how much similarity there is between the two argument functions. The more the area under the correlation curve, the more is the similarity between the two signals.
The term "autocorrelation" is the name of the operation when a function is correlated with itself. The autocorrelation is denoted when both of the subscripts to the Correlation operator are the same:
While it might seem ridiculous to correlate a function with itself, there are a number of uses for autocorrelation that will be discussed later. Autocorrelation satisfies several important properties:
The maximum value of the autocorrelation always occurs at t = 0. The function always decreases, stays constant, or fluctuates (if the signal is periodic) as t approaches infinity.
Autocorrelation is symmetric about the x axis.
Cross correlation is every instance of correlation that is not considered "autocorrelation". In general, crosscorrelation occurs when the function arguments to the correlation are not equal. Crosscorrelation is used to find the similarity between two signals.
RADAR (RAdio Detection And Ranging) is a system that uses pulses of electromagnetic waves to determine the position of a distant object. RADAR operates by sending out a signal, and then listening for echos. If there is an object in range, the signal will bounce off that object and return to the RADAR station. The RADAR will then take the cross correlation of two signals, the sent signal and the received signal. A spike in the cross correlation signal indicates that an object is present, and the location of the spike indicates how much time has passed (and therefore how far away the object is).
Noise is an unfortunate phenomenon that is the greatest single enemy of an electrical engineer. Without noise, digital communication rates would increase almost to the infinity
White Noise, or Gaussian Noise is called white because it affects all the frequency components of a signal equally. This noise can be modeled as a Gaussian noise process. Gaussian processes are stochastic processes for which the random variables are jointly Gaussian. We don't talk about Frequency Domain analysis till a later chapter, but it is important to know this terminology now.
Colored noise is different from white noise in that it affects different frequency components differently. For example, Pink Noise is random noise with an equal amount of power in each frequency octave band.
White Noise is completely random, so it would make intuitive sense to think that White Noise has zero autocorrelation. As the noise signal is time shifted, there is no correlation between the values. In fact, there is no correlation at all until the point where t = 0, and the noise signal perfectly overlaps itself. At this point, the correlation spikes upward. In other words, the autocorrelation of noise is an Impulse Function centered at the point t = 0.
Where n(t) is the noise signal.
Noise signals have a certain amount of energy associated with them. The more energy and transmitted power that a noise signal has, the more interference the noise can cause in a transmitted data signal. We will talk more about the power associated with noise in later chapters.
Thermal noise is a fact of life in electronic components. As components heat up, the resistance of resistors change, and even the capacitance and inductance of energy storage elements can be affected. This change amounts to noise in the circuit output. In this chapter, we will study the effects of thermal noise.
The thermal noise which is an example of white noise is the random noise which is generated in a resistor or the resistive component of a complex impedance due to rapid and random motion of the molecules, atoms and electrons.
According to the kinetic theory of thermodynamics, the temperature of a particle denotes its internal kinetic energy. This means that the temperature of a body expresses the rms value of the velocity of motion of the particles in a body. As per this kinetic theory, the kinetic energy of these particles becomes approximately zero (i.e. zero velocity) at absolute zero.
Therefore, the noise power produced in a resistor is proportional to its absolute temperature. Also the noise power is proportional to the bandwidth over which the noise is measured.
Therefore the expression for maximum noise power output of a resistor may be given as:
Disclaimer: The above section contains significant errors. The noise power equation is wrong. The physical reasons given for Johnson noise are wrong. Do not use this source of information.
A signal is a periodic signal if it completes a pattern within a measurable time frame, called a period and repeats that pattern over identical subsequent periods. The completion of a full pattern is called a cycle. A period is defined as the amount of time (expressed in seconds) required to complete one full cycle. The duration of a period represented by T, may be different for each signal but it is constant for any given periodic signal.
We will discuss here some of the common terminology that pertains to a periodic function. Let g(t) be a periodic function satisfying g(t + T) = g(t) for all t.
The period is the smallest value of T satisfying g(t + T) = g(t) for all t. The period is defined so because if g(t + T) = g(t) for all t, it can be verified that g(t + T') = g(t) for all t where T' = 2T, 3T, 4T, ...
In essence, it's the smallest amount of time it takes for the function to repeat itself. If the period of a function is finite, the function is called "periodic". Functions that never repeat themselves have an infinite period, and are known as "aperiodic functions".
The period of a periodic waveform will be denoted with a capital T. The period is measured in seconds.
Frequency has units of hertz or cycle per second.
The amplitude of a given wave is the value of the wave at that point. Amplitude is also known as the "Magnitude" of the wave at that particular point. There is no particular variable that is used with amplitude, although capital A, capital M and capital R are common.
The amplitude can be measured in different units, depending on the signal we are studying. In an electric signal the amplitude will typically be measured in volts. In a building or other such structure, the amplitude of a vibration could be measured in meters.
A continuous signal is a "smooth" signal, where the signal is defined over a certain range. For example, a sine function is a continuous signal, as is an exponential function or a constant function. A portion of a sine signal over a range of time 0 to 6 seconds is also continuous. Examples of functions that are not continuous would be any discrete signal, where the value of the signal is only defined at certain intervals.
A DC Offset is an amount by which the average value of the periodic function is not centered around the x-axis.
A periodic signal has a DC offset component if it is not centered about the x-axis. In general, the DC value is the amount that must be subtracted from the signal to center it on the x-axis. by definition:
With A0 being the DC offset. If A0 = 0, the function is centered and has no offset.
To determine if a signal with period 2L has half-wave symmetry, we need to examine a single period of the signal. If, when shifted by half the period, the signal is found to be the negative of the original signal, then the signal has half-wave symmetry. That is, the following property is satisfied:
Half-wave symmetry implies that the second half of the wave is exactly opposite to the first half. A function with half-wave symmetry does not have to be even or odd, as this property requires only that the shifted signal is opposite, and this can occur for any temporal offset. However, it does require that the DC offset is zero, as one half must exactly cancel out the other. If the whole signal has a DC offset, this cannot occur, as when one half is added to the other, the offsets will add, not cancel.
Note that if a signal is symmetric about the half-period point, it is not necessarily half-wave symmetric. An example of this is the function t3, periodic on [-1,1), which has no DC offset and odd symmetry about t=0. However, when shifted by 1, the signal is not opposite to the original signal.
Half Wave Symmetric signals don't have even "sine and cosine" harmonics.
If a signal has the following properties, it is said to quarter-wave symmetric:
It has symmetry (odd or even) about the quarter-period point (i.e. at a distance of L/2 from an end or the centre).
Any quarter-wave symmetric signal can be made even or odd by shifting it up or down the time axis. A signal does not have to be odd or even to be quarter-wave symmetric, but in order to find the quarter-period point, the signal will need to be shifted up or down to make it so. Below is an example of a quarter-wave symmetric signal (red) that does not show this property without first being shifted along the time axis (green, dashed):
Discontinuities are an artifact of some signals that make them difficult to manipulate for a variety of reasons.
In a graphical sense, a periodic signal has discontinuities whenever there is a vertical line connecting two adjacent values of the signal. In a more mathematical sense, a periodic signal has discontinuities anywhere that the function has an undefined (or an infinite) derivative. These are also places where the function does not have a limit, because the values of the limit from both directions are not equal.
There are some common periodic signals that are given names of their own. We will list those signals here, and discuss them.
The quintessential periodic waveform. These can be either Sine functions, or Cosine Function.
The square wave is exactly what it sounds like: a series of rectangular pulses spaced equidistant from each other, each with the same amplitude.
The triangle wave is also exactly what it sounds like: a series of triangles. These triangles may touch each other, or there may be some space in between each wavelength.
Example: Sinusoid, Square, Sawtooth and Triangle Waves
Here is an image that shows some of the common periodic waveforms, a sinusoid, a square wave, a triangle wave, and a sawtooth wave.
Periodic functions can be classified in a number of ways. one of the ways that they can be classified is according to their symmetry. A function may be Odd, Even, or Neither Even nor Odd. All periodic functions can be classified in this way.
Functions are even if they are symmetrical about the y-axis.
For instance, a cosine function is an even function.
A function is odd if it is inversely symmetrical about the y-axis.
The Sine function is an odd function.
Some functions are neither even nor odd. However, such functions can be written as a sum of even and odd functions. Any function f(x) can be expressed as a sum of an odd function and an even function:
(Note that the first term is zero for odd functions and that the second term is zero for even functions.)
Using the above mentioned equations for even and odd signals in
The Fourier Series is a specialized tool that allows for any periodic signal (subject to certain conditions) to be decomposed into an infinite sum of everlasting sinusoids. This may not be obvious to many people, but it is demonstrable both mathematically and graphically. Practically, this allows the user of the Fourier Series to understand a periodic signal as the sum of various frequency components.
The rectangular series represents a signal as a sum of sine and cosine terms. The type of sinusoids that a periodic signal can be decomposed into depends solely on the qualities of the periodic signal.
If we have a function f(x), that is periodic with a period of 2L, we can decompose it into a sum of sine and cosine functions as such:
The coefficients, a and b can be found using the following integrals:
"n" is an integer variable. It can assume positive integer numbers (1, 2, 3, etc...). Each value of n corresponds to values for A and B. The sinusoids with magnitudes A and B are called harmonics. Using Fourier representation, a harmonic is an atomic (indivisible) component of the signal, and is said to be orthogonal.
When we set n = 1, the resulting sinusoidal frequency value from the above equations is known as the fundamental frequency. The fundamental frequency of a given signal is the most powerful sinusoidal component of a signal, and is the most important to transmit faithfully. Since n takes on integer values, all other frequency components of the signal are integer multiples of the fundamental frequency.
And the fundamental angular frequency is then:
.
Various signal properties translate into specific properties of the Fourier series. If we can identify these properties before hand, we can save ourselves from doing unnecessary calculations.
If the periodic signal has a DC offset, then the Fourier Series of the signal will include a zero frequency component, known as the DC component. If the signal does not have a DC offset, the DC component has a magnitude of 0. Due to the linearity of the Fourier series process, if the DC offset is removed, we can analyse the signal further (e.g. for symmetry) and add the DC offset back at the end.
If the signal is even (symmetric over the reference vertical axis), it is composed of cosine waves. If the signal is odd (anti-symmetric over the reference vertical axis), it is composed out of sine waves. If the signal is neither even nor odd, it is composed out of both sine and cosine waves.
If the signal is discontinuous (i.e. it has "jumps"), the magnitudes of each harmonic n will fall off proportionally to 1/n.
If the signal is continuous but the derivative of the signal is discontinuous, the magnitudes of each harmonic n will fall off proportionally to 1/n2.
If a signal has half-wave symmetry, there is no DC offset, and the signal is composed of sinusoids lying on only the odd harmonics (1, 3, 5, etc...). This is important because a signal with half-wave symmetry will require twice as much bandwidth to transmit the same number of harmonics as a signal without:
If a 2L-periodic signal has quarter-wave symmetry, then it must also be half-wave symmetric, so there are no even harmonics. If the signal is even and has quarter-wave symmetry, we only need to integrate the first quarter-period:
Because the signal is even, there are are no sine terms:
If the signal is odd, and has quarter wave symmetry, then we can say:
Because the signal is odd, there are no cosine terms:
There are no even sine terms due to half-wave symmetry, and we only need to integrate the first quarter-period due to quarter-wave symmetry.
By convention, the coefficients of the cosine components are labeled "a", and the coefficients of the sine components are labeled with a "b". A few important facts can then be mentioned:
If the function has a DC offset, a0 will be non-zero. There is no B0 term.
If the signal is even, all the b terms are 0 (no sine components).
If the signal is odd, all the a terms are 0 (no cosine components).
If the function has half-wave symmetry, then all the even coefficients (of sine and cosine terms) are zero, and we only have to integrate half the signal.
If the function has quarter-wave symmetry, we only need to integrate a quarter of the signal.
The Fourier series of a sine or cosine wave contains a single harmonic because a sine or cosine wave cannot be decomposed into other sine or cosine waves.
We can check a series by looking for discontinuities in the signal or derivative of the signal. If there are discontinuities, the harmonics drop off as 1/n, if the derivative is discontinuous, the harmonics drop off as 1/n2.
The Fourier Series can also be represented in a polar form which is more compact and easier to manipulate.
We can then define f(x) in terms of our new Fourier representation, by using a cosine basis function:
We can show explicitly that the polar cosine basis function is equivalent to the "Cartesian" form with a sine and cosine term.
By the odd-even properties of cosines and sines:
This is equivalent to the rectangular series given that:
Using Eulers Equation, and a little trickery, we can convert the standard Rectangular Fourier Series into an exponential form. Even though complex numbers are a little more complicated to comprehend, we use this form for a number of reasons:
A single exponential can be manipulated more easily than a sum of sinusoids
It provides a logical transition into a further discussion of the Fourier Transform.
We can construct the exponential series from the rectangular series using Euler's formulae:
Splitting into "positive n" and "negative n" parts gives us:
We now collapse this into a single expression:
[Exponential Fourier Series]
Where we can relate cn to an and bn from the rectangular series:
We can directly calculate cn for a 2L-periodic function:
This can be related to the an and bn definitions in the rectangular form using Euler's formula:
.
The Exponential form of the Fourier series does something that is very interesting in comparison to the rectangular and polar forms of the series: it allows for negative frequency components. To this effect, the Exponential series is often known as the "Bi-Sided Fourier Series", because the spectrum has both a positive and negative side. This, of course, prods the question, "What is a negative Frequency?"
Negative frequencies seem counter-intuitive, and many people would be quick to dismiss them as being nonsense. However, a further study of electrical engineering (which is outside the scope of this book) will provide many examples of where negative frequencies play a very important part in modeling and understanding certain systems. While it may not make much sense initially, negative frequencies need to be taken into account when studying the Fourier Domain.
Negative frequencies follow the important rule of symmetry: For real signals, negative frequency components are always mirror-images of the positive frequency components. Once this rule is learned, drawing the negative side of the spectrum is a trivial matter once the positive side has been drawn.
However, when looking at a bi-sided spectrum, the effect of negative frequencies needs to be taken into account. If the negative frequencies are mirror-images of the positive frequencies, and if a negative frequency is analogous to a positive frequency, then the effect of adding the negative components into a signal is the same as doubling the positive components. This is a major reason why the exponential Fourier series coefficients are multiplied by one-half in the calculation: because half the coefficient is at the negative frequency.
Note: The concept of negative frequency is actually unphysical. Negative frequencies occur in the spectrum only when we are using the exponential form of the Fourier series. To represent a cosine function, Euler's relationship tells us that there are both positive and negative exponential required. Why? Because to represent a real function, like cosine, the imaginary components present in exponential notation must vanish. Thus, the negative exponent in Euler's formula makes it appear that there are negative frequencies, when in fact, there are not.
Another way to understand negative frequencies is to use them for mathematical completeness in describing the physical world. Suppose we want to describe the rotation of a ceiling fan directly above our head to a person sitting nearby. We would say "it rotates at 60 RPM in an anticlockwise direction". However, if we want to describe its rotation to a person watching the fan from above then we would say "it rotates at 60 RPM in a clockwise direction". If we customarily use a negative sign for clockwise rotation, then we would use a positive sign for anticlockwise rotation. We are describing the same process using both positive and negative signs, depending on the reference we choose.
Bandwidth is the name for the frequency range that a signal requires for transmission, and is also a name for the frequency capacity of a particular transmission medium. For example, if a given signal has a bandwidth of 10kHz, it requires a transmission medium with a bandwidth of at least 10kHz to transmit without attenuation.
Bandwidth can be measured in either Hertz or Radians per Second. Bandwidth is only a measurement of the positive frequency components. All real signals have negative frequency components, but since they are only mirror images of the positive frequency components, they are not included in bandwidth calculations.
It's important to note that most periodic signals are composed of an infinite sum of sinusoids, and therefore require an infinite bandwidth to be transmitted without distortion. Unfortunately, no available communication medium (wire, fiber optic, wireless) have an infinite bandwidth available. This means that certain harmonics will pass through the medium, while other harmonics of the signal will be attenuated.
Engineering is all about trade-offs. The question here is "How many harmonics do I need to transmit, and how many can I safely get rid of?" Using fewer harmonics leads to reduced bandwidth requirements, but also results in increased signal distortion. These subjects will all be considered in more detail in the future.
Using our relationship between period and frequency, we can see an important fact:
As the period of the signal decreases, the fundamental frequency increases. This means that each additional harmonic will be spaced further apart, and transmitting the same number of harmonics will now require more bandwidth! In general, there is a rule that must be followed when considering periodic signals: Shorter periods in the time domain require more bandwidth in the frequency domain. Signals that use less bandwidth in the frequency domain will require longer periods in the time domain.
Let's consider a repeating pattern based on a cubic polynomial:
The function is odd, so the cosine coefficients (an) will all be zero.
The function has no DC offset, so there will be no constant term (a0).
There are discontinuities, so we expect a 1/n drop-off.
We therefore just have to compute the bn terms. These can be found by the following formula:
Integrating by parts,
Substitute limits into the square brackets and integrate by parts again:
Simplifying the left part, and substituting in limits in the square brackets,
Bringing out factors and integrating by parts:
Solving the now-simple integral and substituting in limits to the square brackets,
Since the area under one cycle of a sine wave is zero, we can eliminate the integral. We use the fact that cos(x) is even again to simplify:
This is our final bn. We see that we have a approximate 1/n relationship (the constant "6" becomes insignificant as n grows), as we expected. Now, we can find the Fourier approximation according to
Since all a terms are zero,
The graph below shows the approximation for the first 7 terms (red) and the first 15 terms (blue). The original function is shown in black.
We have the following square wave signal, as a function of voltage, traveling through a communication medium:
We will set the values as follows: A = 4 volts, T = 1 second. Also, it is given that the width of a single pulse is T/2.
Find the rectangular Fourier series of this signal.
First and foremost, we can see clearly that this signal does have a DC value: the signal exists entirely above the horizontal axis. DC value means that we will have to calculate our a0 term. Next, we can see that if we remove the DC component (shift the signal downward till it is centered around the horizontal axis), that our signal is an odd signal. This means that we will have bn terms, but no an terms. We can also see that this function has discontinuities and half-wave symmetry. Let's recap:
Now, we can calculate these values as follows:
This could also have been worked out intuitively, as the signal has a 50% duty-cycle, meaning that the average value is half of the maximum.
Due to the oddness of the function, there are no cosine terms:
.
Due to the half-wave symmetry, there are only odd sine terms, which are given by:
For any even n, this equals zero, in accordance with our predictions based on half-wave symmetry. It also decays as 1/n, as we expect, due to the presence of discontinuities.
Finally, we can put our Fourier series together as follows:
We see that the Fourier series closely matches the original function:
Wikipedia has related information at Fourier series
Wikipedia has an article on the Fourier Series, although the article is very mathematically rigorous.
From the polar form of the Fourier series, we can see that essentially, there are 2 quantities that Fourier series provides: Magnitude, and Phase shift. If we simplify the entire series into the polar form, we can see that instead of being an infinite sum of different sinusoids, we get simply an infinite sum of cosine waves, with varying magnitude and phase parameters. This makes the entire series easier to work with, and also allows us to begin working with different graphical methods of analysis.
It is important to remember at this point that the Fourier series turns a continuous, periodic time signal into a discrete set of frequency components. In essence, any plot of Fourier components will be a stem plot, and will not be continuous. The user should never make the mistake of attempting to interpolate the components into a smooth graph.
The magnitude graphs of a Fourier series representation plots the magnitude of the coefficient (either
Similar to the magnitude plots, the phase plots of the Fourier representation will graph the phase angle of each component against the frequency. Both the frequency (X-axis), and the phase angle (Y-axis) will be plotted in units of radians per seconds. Occasionally, Hertz may be used for one (or even both), but this is not the normal case. Like the magnitude plot, the phase plot of a Fourier series will be discrete, and should be drawn as individual points, not as smooth lines.
Frequently, it is important to talk about the power in a given periodic wave. It is also important to talk about how much power is being transmitted in each different harmonic. For instance, if a certain channel has a limited bandwidth, and is filtering out some of the harmonics of the signal, then it is important to know how much power is being removed from the signal by the channel.
If we use Ohm's Law to solve for v and i respectively, and then plug those values into our equation, we will get the following result:
If we normalize the equation, and set R = 1, then both equations become much easier. In any case where the words "normalized power" are used, it denotes the fact that we are using a normalized resistance (R = 1).
To "de-normalize" the power, and find the power loss across a load with a non-normalized resistance, we can simply divide by the resistance (when in terms of voltage), and multiply by the resistance (when in terms of current).
Because of the above result, we can assume that all loads are normalized, and we can find the power in a signal simply by squaring the signal itself. In terms of Fourier Series harmonics, we square the magnitude of each harmonic separately to produce the power spectrum. The power spectrum shows us how much power is in each harmonic.
If the Fourier Representation and the Time-Domain Representation are simply two different ways to consider the same set of information, then it would make sense that the two are equal in many ways. The power and energy in a signal when expressed in the time domain should be equal to the power and energy of that same signal when expressed in the frequency domain. Parseval's Theorem relates the two.
Parsevals theorem states that the power calculated in the time domain is the same as the power calculated in the frequency domain. There are two ways to look at Parseval's Theorem, using the one-sided (polar) form of the Fourier Series, and using the two-sided (exponential) form:
By changing the upper-bound of the summation in the frequency domain, we can limit the power calculation to a limited number of harmonics. For instance, if the channel bandwidth limited a particular signal to only the first 5 harmonics, then the upper-bound could be set to 5, and the result could be calculated.
The magnitude of the graph at different frequencies represents the amount energy located within those frequency components.
In the presence of noise, it is frequently important to know what is the ratio between the signal (which you want), and the noise (which you don't want). The ratio between the noise and the signal is called the Signal to Noise Ratio, and is abbreviated with the letters SNR.
There are actually 2 ways to represent SNR, one as a straight-ratio, and one in decibels. The two terms are functionally equivalent, although since they are different quantities, they cannot be used in the same equations. It is worth emphasizing that decibels cannot be used in calculations the same way that ratios are used.
Here, the SNR can be in terms of either power or voltage, so it must be specified which quantity is being compared. Now, when we convert SNR into decibels:
For instance, an SNR of 3db means that the signal is twice as powerful as the noise signal. A higher SNR (in either representation) is always preferable.
Wikipedia has related information at Fourier transform
The opposite of a periodic signal is an aperiodic signal. An aperiodic function never repeats, although technically an aperiodic function can be considered like a periodic function with an infinite period.
If we consider aperiodic signals, it turns out that we can generalize the Fourier Series sum into an integral named the Fourier Transform. The Fourier Transform is used similarly to the Fourier Series, in that it converts a time-domain function into a frequency domain representation. However, there are a number of differences:
Fourier Transform can work on Aperiodic Signals.
Fourier Transform has an inverse transform, that allows for conversion from the frequency domain back to the time domain.
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: fft
The Fourier Transform is the following integral:
And the inverse transform is given by a similar integral:
Using these formulas, time-domain signals can be converted to and from the frequency domain, as needed.
One of the most important tools when attempting to find the inverse fourier transform is the Theory of Partial Fractions. The theory of partial fractions allows a complicated fractional value to be decomposed into a sum of small, simple fractions. This technique is highly important when dealing with other transforms as well, such as the Laplace transform and the Z-Transform.
A reader requests expansion of this page to include more material.You can help by adding new material (learn how) or ask for assistance in the reading room.
The Fourier Transform has a number of special properties, but perhaps the most important is the property of duality.
We will use a "double-arrow" signal to denote duality. If we have an even signal f, and it's fourier transform F, we can show duality as such:
This means that the following rules hold true:
Notice how in the second part we are taking the transform of the transformed equation, except that we are starting in the time domain. We then convert to the original time-domain representation, except using the frequency variable. There are a number of results of the Duality Theorem.
The Convolution Theorem is an important result of the duality property. The convolution theorem states the following:
Or, another way to write it (using our new notation) is such:
Another principle that must be kept in mind is that signal-widths in the time domain, and bandwidth in the frequency domain are related. This can be summed up in a single statement:
Thin signals in the time domain occupy a wide bandwidth. Wide signals in the time domain occupy a thin bandwidth.
This conclusion is important because in modern communication systems, the goal is to have thinner (and therefore more frequent) pulses for increased data rates, however the consequence is that a large amount of bandwidth is required to transmit all these fast, little pulses.
Unlike the Fourier Series, the Fourier Transform does not provide us with a number of discrete harmonics that we can add and subtract in a discrete manner. If our channel bandwidth is limited, in the Fourier Series representation, we can simply remove some harmonics from our calculations. However, in a continuous spectrum, we do not have individual harmonics to manipulate, but we must instead examine the entire continuous signal.
The Power Spectral Density (PSD) is similar to the ESD. It shows the distribution of power in the spectrum of a particular signal.
Power spectral density and the autocorrelation form a Fourier Transform duality pair. This means that:
If we know the auto correlation of the signal, we can find the PSD by taking the Fourier transform. Similarly, if we know the PSD, we can take the inverse Fourier transform to find the auto correlation signal.
Systems respond differently to inputs of different frequencies. Some systems may amplify components of certain frequencies, and attenuate components of other frequencies. The way that the system output is related to the system input for different frequencies is called the frequency response of the system.
The frequency response is the relationship between the system input and output in the Fourier Domain.
Since the frequency response is a complex function, we can convert it to polar notation in the complex plane. This will give us a magnitude and an angle.
For each frequency, the magnitude represents the system's tendency to amplify or attenuate the input signal.
The phase represents the system's tendency to modify the phase of the input sinusoids.
.
The phase response, or its derivative the group delay, tells us how the system delays the input signal as a function of frequency.
Consider the following general circuit with phasor input and output voltages:
We will illustrate this method using a simple low-pass filter with general values as an example. This kind of circuit allows low frequencies to pass, but blocks higher ones.
Find the frequency response function, and hence the amplitude and phase response functions, of the following RC circuit (it is already in phasor form):
Firstly, we use the voltage divider rule to get the output phasor in terms on the input phasor:
Now we can easily determine the frequency response:
From here we can find the amplitude and phase responses:
The frequency response is pictured by the plots of the amplitude and phase responses:
It is often easier to interpret the graphs when they are plotted on suitable logarithmic scales:
This shows that the circuit is indeed a filter that removes higher frequencies. Such a filter is called a lowpass filter.
The amplitude and phase responses of an arbitrary circuit can be plotted using an instrument called a spectrum analyser or gain and phase test set. See Practical Electronics for more details on using these instruments.
An important concept to take away from these examples is that by desiging a proper system called a filter, we can selectively attenuate or amplify certain frequency ranges. This means that we can minimize certain unwanted frequency components (such as noise or competing data signals), and maximize our own data signal
We can define a "received signal" r as a combination of a data signal d and unwanted components v:
We can take the energy spectral density of r to determine the frequency ranges of our data signal d. We can design a filter that will attempt to amplify these frequency ranges, and attenuate the frequency ranges of v. We will discuss this problem and filters in general in the next few chapters. More advanced discussions of this topic will be in the book on Signal Processing.
Whilst the Fourier Series and the Fourier Transform are well suited for analysing the frequency content of a signal, be it periodic or aperiodic,
The Fourier Transform can be considered as an extension of the Fourier Series for aperiodic signals.
The Laplace Transform can be considered as an extension of the Fourier Transform to the complex plane.
The Laplace Transform of a function f(t), defined for all real numbers t ≥ 0, is the function F(s), defined by:
.
The Bilateral Laplace Transform is defined as follows:
.
Comparing this definition to the one of the Fourier Transform, one sees that the latter is a special case of the Laplace Transform for
.
In the field of electrical engineering, the Bilateral Laplace Transform is simply referred as the Laplace Transform.
The Inverse Laplace Transform allows to find the original time function on which a Laplace Transform has been made.:
The properties of the Laplace transform show that:
With this, a set of differential equations is transformed into a set of linear equations which can be solved with the usual techniques of linear algebra.
Lumped elements circuits typically show this kind of integral or differential relations between current and voltage:
The Sallen-Key circuit is widely used for the implementation of analog second order sections.
Sallen–Key unity-gain lowpass filter
The image on the side shows the circuit for an all-pole second order function.
This book requires that you first read Probability.
This section of the Signals and Systems book will be talking about probability, random signals, and noise. This book will not, however, attempt to teach the basics of probability, because there are dozens of resources (both on the internet at large, and on Wikipedia mathematics bookshelf) for probability and statistics. This book will assume a basic knowledge of probability, and will work to explain random phenomena in the context of an Electrical Engineering book on signals..
A random variable is a quantity whose value is not fixed but depends somehow on chance. Typically the value of a random variable may consist of a fixed part and a random component due to uncertainty or disturbance. Other types of random variables takes their values as a result of the outcome of a random experiment.
Random variables are usually denoted with a capital letter. For instance, a generic random variable that we will use often is X. The capital letter represents the random variable itself and the corresponding lower-case letter (in this case "x") will be used to denote the observed value of X. x is one particular value of the process X.
The standard deviation is an easy concept to understand, but in practice it's not a quantity that is easy to compute directly, nor is it useful in calculations. However, the standard deviation is related to a more useful quantity, the variance.
The probability function P is the probability that a certain event will occur. It is calculated based on the probability density function and cumulative distribution function, described below.
The Probability Density Function (PDF) of a random variable is a description of the distribution of the values of the random variable. By integrating this function over a particular range, we can find the probability that the random variable takes on a value in that interval. The integral of this function over all possible values is 1.
The Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) of a random variable describes the probability of observing a value at or below a certain threshold. A CDF function will be nondecreasing with the properties that the value of the CDF at negative infinity is zero, and the value of the CDF at positive infinity is 1.
We denote the CDF of a function with a capital F. The CDF of a signal x will have the subscript Fx.
Likewise, we can define the probability that an event occurs that is greater then xi as:
Or, the probability that an event occurs that is greater then or equal to xi:
The CDF and PDF are related to one another by a simple integral relation:
Several book sources refer to the CDF as the "Probability Distribution Function", with the acronym PDF. To avoid the ambiguity of having both the distribution function and the density function with the same acronym (PDF), some books will refer to the density function as "pdf" (lower case) and the distribution function as "PDF" upper case. To avoid this ambiguity, this book will refer to the distribution function as the CDF, and the density function as the PDF.
The Expected value operator is a linear operator that provides a mathematical way to determine a number of different parameters of a random distribution. The downside of course is that the expected value operator is in the form of an integral, which can be difficult to calculate.
The expected value operator will be denoted by the symbol:
For a random variable X with probability density fx, the expected value is defined as:
.
The Expectation of a signal is the result of applying the expected value operator to that signal. The expectation is another word for the mean of a signal:
.
Some moments have special names, and each one describes a certain aspect of the distribution.
Once we know the expected value of a distribution, we know its location. We may consider all other moments relative to this location and calculate the Nth moment of the random variable X - E[X]; the result is called the Nth central moment of the distribution. Each central moment has a different meaning, and describes a different facet of the random distribution. The N-th central moment of X is:
.
The formula for the N-th central moment of X becomes then:
.
The second central moment is the variance,
The time-average operator provides a mathematical way to determine the average value of a function over a given time range. The time average operator can provide the mean value of a given signal, but most importantly it can be used to find the average value of a small sample of a given signal. The operator also allows us a useful shorthand way for taking the average, which is used in many equations.
The time average operator is denoted by angle brackets (< and >) and is defined as such:
There are a number of different random distributions in existence, many of which have been studied quite extensively, and many of which map very well to natural phenomena. This book will attempt to cover some of the most basic and most common distributions. This chapter will also introduce the idea of a distribution transformation, which can be used to turn a simple distribution into a more exotic distribution.
One of the most simple distributions is a Uniform Distribution. Uniform Distributions are also very easy to model on a computer, and then they can be converted to other distribution types by a series of transforms.
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: randn
The Gaussian (or normal) distribution is simultaneously one of the most common distributions, and also one of the most difficult distributions to work with. The problem with the Gaussian distribution is that it's pdf equation is non-integratable, and therefore there is no way to find a general equation for the cdf (although some approximations are available), and there is little or no way to directly calculate certain probabilities. However, there are ways to approximate these probabilities from the Gaussian pdf, and many of the common results have been tabulated in table-format. The function that finds the area under a part of the Gaussian curve (and therefore the probability of an event under that portion of the curve) is known as the Q function, and the results are tabulated in a Q table.
.
It gives the probability for a standard normal distributed random variable to attain values less than x.
Mathematical texts might prefer to use the erf(x) and erfc(x) functions, which are similar. However this book (and engineering texts in general) will utilize the Q and Phi functions.
The Poisson Distribution is different from the Gaussian and uniform distributions in that the Poisson Distribution only describes discrete data sets. For instance, if we wanted to model the number of telephone calls that are traveling through a given switch at one time, we cannot possibly count fractions of a phone call; phone calls come only in integer numbers. Also, you can't have a negative number of phone calls. It turns out that such situations can be easily modeled by a Poisson Distribution. Some general examples of Poisson Distribution random events are:
The telephone calls arriving at a switch
The internet data packets traveling through a given network
The number of cars traveling through a given intersection
If we have a random variable that follows a particular distribution, we would frequently like to transform that random process to use a different distribution. For instance, if we write a computer program that generates a uniform distribution of random numbers, and we would like to write one that generates a Gaussian distribution instead, we can feed the uniform numbers into a transform, and the output will be random numbers following a Gaussian distribution. Conversely, if we have a random variable in a strange, exotic distribution, and we would like to examine it using some of the easy, tabulated Gaussian distribution tools, we can transform it.
Noise, like any other signal, can be analyzed using the Fourier Transform and frequency-domain techniques. Some of the basic techniques used on noise (some of which are particular to random signals) are discussed in this section.
Power Spectral Density (PSD) of Gaussian White Noise
White noise has a level magnitude spectrum, and if we square it, it will also have a level Power Spectral Density (PSD) function. The value of this power magnitude is known by the variable N0. We will use this quantity later.
Using the duality property of the Fourier Transform, the Wiener-Khintchine-Einstein Theorem gives us an easy way to find the PSD for a given signal.
Where the previous method for obtaining the PSD was to take the Fourier transform of the signal f(t), and then squaring it.
The bandwidth of a random function.
Many random signals are infinite signals, in that they don't have a beginning or an end. To this effect, the only way to really analyze the random signal is take a small chunk of the random signal, called a sample.
Remember duality? multiplication in the time domain (multiplying by your windowing function) becomes convolution in the frequency domain. Effectively, we've taken a very simple problem (getting a sample of information), and created a very difficult problem, the deconvolution of the resultant frequency spectrum. There are a number of different windows that we can use.
Systems respond differently to inputs of different frequencies. Some systems may amplify components of certain frequencies, and attenuate components of other frequencies. The way that the system output is related to the system input for different frequencies is called the frequency response of the system.
The frequency response is the relationship between the system input and output in the Fourier Domain.
Since the frequency response is a complex function, we can convert it to polar notation in the complex plane. This will give us a magnitude and an angle.
For each frequency, the magnitude represents the system's tendency to amplify or attenuate the input signal.
The phase represents the system's tendency to modify the phase of the input sinusoids.
.
The phase response, or its derivative the group delay, tells us how the system delays the input signal as a function of frequency.
Consider the following general circuit with phasor input and output voltages:
We will illustrate this method using a simple low-pass filter with general values as an example. This kind of circuit allows low frequencies to pass, but blocks higher ones.
Find the frequency response function, and hence the amplitude and phase response functions, of the following RC circuit (it is already in phasor form):
Firstly, we use the voltage divider rule to get the output phasor in terms on the input phasor:
Now we can easily determine the frequency response:
From here we can find the amplitude and phase responses:
The frequency response is pictured by the plots of the amplitude and phase responses:
It is often easier to interpret the graphs when they are plotted on suitable logarithmic scales:
This shows that the circuit is indeed a filter that removes higher frequencies. Such a filter is called a lowpass filter.
The amplitude and phase responses of an arbitrary circuit can be plotted using an instrument called a spectrum analyser or gain and phase test set. See Practical Electronics for more details on using these instruments.
An important concept to take away from these examples is that by desiging a proper system called a filter, we can selectively attenuate or amplify certain frequency ranges. This means that we can minimize certain unwanted frequency components (such as noise or competing data signals), and maximize our own data signal
We can define a "received signal" r as a combination of a data signal d and unwanted components v:
We can take the energy spectral density of r to determine the frequency ranges of our data signal d. We can design a filter that will attempt to amplify these frequency ranges, and attenuate the frequency ranges of v. We will discuss this problem and filters in general in the next few chapters. More advanced discussions of this topic will be in the book on Signal Processing.
When it comes to filters, there is a large amount of terminology that we need to discuss first, so the rest of the chapters in this section will make sense.
The order of a filter is an integer number, that defines how complex the filter is. In common filters, the order of the filter is the number of "stages" of the filter. Higher order filters perform better, but they have a higher delay, and they cost more.
The transition band is the area of the filter between the passband and the stopband. Higher-order filters have a thinner transition band
The cut-off frequency of a filter is the frequency at which the filter "breaks", and changes (between pass band and transition band, or transition band and passband, for instance). The cut-off of a filter always has an attenuation of -3db. The -3 db point is the frequency that is cut in power by exactly 1/2.
Lowpass filters allow low frequency components to pass through, while attenuating high frequency components.
Lowpass filters are some of the most important and most common filters, and much of our analysis is going to be focused on them. Also, transformations exist that can be used to convert the mathematical model of a lowpass filter into a model of a highpass, bandpass, or bandstop filter. This means that we typically design lowpass filters and then transform them into the appropriate type.
As an example of a lowpass filter, consider a typical telephone line. Telephone signals are bandlimited, which means that a filter is used to prevent certain frequency components from passing through the telephone network. Typically, the range for a phone conversation is 10Hz to 3˙000Hz. This means that the phone line will typically incorporate a lowpass filter that attenuates all frequency components above 3˙000Hz.
This range has been chosen because it includes all the information humans need for clearly understanding one another, so the effects of this filtering are not damaging to a conversation.
Comparatively, CD recordings comprise most of the human hearing and their frequency components range up to 20˙000Hz or 20kHz.
Highpass filters allow high frequency components to pass through, while attenuating low frequency components.
Consider DSL modems, which are high-speed data communication devices that transmit over the existing telephone network. DSL signals operate in the high frequency ranges, above the 3000Hz limit for voice conversations. In order to separate the DSL data signal from the regular voice signal, the signal must be sent into two different filters: a lowpass filter to amplify the voice for the telephone signal, and a highpass filter to amplify the DSL data signal.
A bandpass filter allows a single band of frequency information to pass the filter, but will attenuate all frequencies above the band and below the band.
A good example of a bandpass filter is an FM radio tuner. In order to focus on one radio station, a filter must be used to attenuate the stations at both higher and lower frequencies.
A bandstop filter will allow high frequencies and low frequencies to pass through the filter, but will attenuate all frequencies that lay within a certain band.
Filters that cannot be classified into one of the above categories, are called gain or delay equalizers. They are mainly used to equalize the gain/phase in certain parts of the frequency spectrum as needed. More discussion on these kinds of advanced topics will be in Signal Processing.
Filter design mostly bases on a limited set of widely used transfer functions.
Optimization methods allow to design other types of filters, but the functions listed here have been studied extensively, and designs for these filters (including circuit designs to implement them) are readily available.
The filter functions presented here are of lowpass type, and transformation methods allow to obtain other common filter types such as highpass, bandpass or bandstop.
Plot of the amplitude response of the normalized Butterworth lowpass transfer function, for orders 1 to 5
The Butterworth filter function has been designed to provide a maximally flat amplitude response.
This is obtained by the fact that all the derivatives up to the filter order minus one are zero at DC.
The amplitude response has no ripple in the passband.
It should be noted that whilst the amplitude response is very smooth, the step response shows noticeable overshoots. They are due to the phase response which is not linear or, in other words, to the group delay which is not constant.
The amplitude response plot shows that the slope is 20n dB/decade, where n is the filter order.
This is the general case for all-pole lowpass filters.
Zeros in the transfer function can accentuate the slope close to their frequency, thus masking this general rule for zero-pole lowpass filters.
The plot also shows that whatever the order of the filter, all the amplitudes cross the same point at
, which corresponds to approximatively -3 db.
Butterworth filters don't have a particularly steep drop-off but, together with Chebyshev type I filters, they are of all-pole kind.
This particularity results in reduced hardware (or software, depending on the implementation method), which means that for a similar complexity, higher order Butterworth filters can be implemented, compared to functions with a steeper drop-off such as elliptic filters.
Poles of a 4th order Butterworth filter
The normalized Butterworth function is indirectly defined by:
This functions has zeros regularly placed on the unit circle.
Knowing that a stable filter has all of its poles on the left half s-plane, it is clear that the left half poles on the unit circle belong to
, whilst the right half poles on the right belong to
.
The normalized Butterworth function has a cutoff frequency at
.
A different cutoff frequency is achieved by scaling the circle radius to
.
It can also be written as a function of the poles:
With this, the denominator ploynom is found from the values of the poles.
In comparison to Butterworth filters, Chebyshev filters have a supplemental parameter: a ripple in amplitude.
This ripple, which could be considered as non ideal, has the tremendous advantage to allow a steeper roll-off between passband and stopband.
The ripple can happen in the passband, which is the case for Type I Chebyshev filters, or in the stopband for Type II filters.
Chebyshev polynomials in the domain −1 < x < 1
Chebyshev Polynomials have the property to remain in the range
This characteristic is a good prerequisite for devising transfer functions with limited oscillations in a given frequency range and steep roll-offs at its borders.
The Chebyshev polynomials of the first kind are defined by the recurrence relation:
.
The first Chebyshev polynomials of the first kind are:
Frequency response of a fourth-order type I Chebyshev filter
Chebyshev type I filters show a ripple in the passband.
The amplitude response as a function of angular frequency
.
The passband exhibits equiripple behavior, with the ripple determined by the ripple factor
. In the passband, the Chebyshev polynomial alternates between 0 and 1 so the filter gain will alternate between maxima at G = 1 and minima at
. At the cutoff frequency
Frequency response of a fifth-order type II Chebyshev filter
Chebyshev Type II filters have ripples in the stopband.
.
In the stopband, the gain will always be smaller than
Also known as inverse Chebyshev, this filter function is less common because it does not roll-off as fast as type I, and requires more components.
Indeed, the transfer function exhibits not only poles but also zeros.
Elliptic filters, also called Cauer filters, suffer from a ripple effect like Chebyshev filters. However, unlike the type 1 and Type 2 Chebyshev filters, Elliptic filters have ripples in both the passband and the stopband. To counteract this limitation, Elliptic filters have a very aggressive rolloff, which often more than makes up for the ripples.
The following image shows a comparison between 5th order Butterworth, Chebyshev and elliptic filter amplitude responses.
Using what we've learned so far about filters, this chapter will discuss filter design, and will show how to make decisions as to the type of filter (Butterworth, Chebyshev, Elliptic), and will help to show how to set parameters to achieve a set of specifications.
When designing a filter, it is common practice to first design a normalized low-pass filter, and then use a spectral transform to transform that low-pass filter into a different type of filter (high-pass, band-pass, band-stop).
The reason for this is because the necessary values for designing lowpass filters are extensively described and tabulated.
From this, filter design can be reduced to the task of looking up the appropriate values in a table, and then transforming the filter to meet the specific needs.
Converting a normalized lowpass filter to another lowpass filter allows to set the cutoff frequency of the resulting filter.
This is also called frequency scaling.
Having a normalized transfer function, with cutoff frequency of 1 Hz, one can modify it in order to move the cutoff frequency to a specified value
.
As an example, the biquadratic transfer function
In the transfer function, all coefficients are multiplied by the corresponding power of
.
If the filter is given by a circuit and its R, L and C element values found in a table, the transfer function is scaled by changing the element values.
The resistance values will stay as they are (a further impedance scaling can be done).
The capacitance values are changed according to:
The inductance values are changed according to:
In the circuit, all capacitances and inductances values are divided by
.
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: lp2hp
Converting a lowpass filter to a highpass filter is one of the easiest transformations available. To transform to a highpass, we will replace all S in our equation with the following:
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: lp2bp
To Convert from a low-pass filter to a bandpass filter requires that we replace S with the following:
This operation can be performed using this MATLAB command: lp2bs
To convert a lowpass filter to a bandstop filter, we replace every reference to S with:
The Laplace transform allows analyzing the frequency response of circuits based on the differential equations of their capacitive and inductive components.
Filter design starts with finding the proper transfer function in order to ampify selected parts of a signal and to damp other ones as a function of their frequency.
Choosing the proper filter structure and deriving the coefficient values is a further topic prensented in the wikibook Signal Processing which deals with the application of signal and systems.
Separating signal from noise or different signals in the same transmission channel basing on their frequency content is best done with a brick-wall filter which shows full transmission in the passband and complete attenuation in the nearby stopbands, with abrupt transitions.
This can be done with the help of the Fourier transform which provides complete information of the frequency content of a given signal. Having calculated a Fourier transform, one can zero out unwanted frequency contents and calculate the inverse Fourier Transform, in order to provide the signal filtered with a brick-wall gauge.
In more technical terms, the ideal brick-wall filter suffers from an infinite latency.
The analysis of analog circuits shows that their outputs are related to their input by a set of differential equations.
The Laplace transform rewrites these differential equations as a set of linear equations of the complex variable
.
With this, a polynomial function multiplying the Laplace transform of the input signal can be equated to another polynomial function multiplying the Laplace transform of the ouput signal:
Thus, the transfer function of a realizable analog filter can be written as the ratio of two polynomial functions of
Hence, the problem of analog filter design is to find a pair of polynomial functions which, put together, best approximate the ideal but not realizable brick-wall transfer function.
In the early days of electric signal processing, scientists have come up with filter functions which are still largely used today.
The functions they have devised are all of lowpass type.
Frequency transformation techniques allow to find polynomials for other filter types such as highpass and bandpass.
.
The complex plane is a plane with the imaginary axis vertical and the horizontal axis as the real part.
The roots of the transfer function numerator polynom are called the transfer function zeroes.
The roots of the transfer function denominator polynom are called the transfer function poles.
The transfer function can be written as a function of its zeroes
The poles and the zeroes of a transfer function can be drawn in the complex plane.
Their position provide information about the frequency response of the system.
Indeed, the frequency response is equal to the transfer function taken for
, which is along the imaginary axis.
A stable LTI system has all its poles on the left side half plane of
.
If a pole would be located on the imaginary axis, at
.
A special case of this is the integrator: it has a pole at
, and indeed has a long-term infinite output for a constant, non-zero, input.
For poles close to the imaginary axis, the frequency response takes a large amplitude for frequencies close to them.
In other words, poles close to the imaginary axis indicate the passband.
If a zero is located on the imaginary axis, at
.
Zeroes on, or close to the imaginary axis indicate the stopband.
Devising the proper transfer function for a given filter function goes through the following steps:
The coefficients of the numerator and denominator coefficients are finally used to calculate the element values of a selected filter circuit.
A reduced version of CCITT G712 input filter specification, giving only the lowpass part, is shown in the plot on the side.
.
As a first step, we have to choose a filter function.
Programs such as Octave or Matlab provide functions which allow to determine the minimal filter order required to fulfill a given specification.
This is a good help when choosing from the possible functions.
Let's however here arbitrarily choose a Butterworth transfer function.
The following Octave script allows to plot the amplitudes of normalized Butterworth transfer functions from order 8 to 16.
-[0 , rStop1, rStop1, rStop2, rStop2 ], 'r');
The following figure shows the result: one needs at least a 13th order Butterworth filter to meet the specifications.
On the graph, one can note that all the amplitude responses go through the same point at -3 dB.
The specification frequencies have been scaled down to fit to the normalized cutoff frequency of 1 Hz.
In the script, one might have noted an additional scaling factor of fc = 0.87: this is due to the fact that the corner cutoff amplitude is -0.125 dB and not -3 dB.
That value has been adjusted by hand for this example.
Again, Octave or Matlab scripts automate this task.
The frequency scaling of the normalized transfer function is done by replacing
The following Octave script does this by multiplying the numerator and denominator coefficients by the appropriate power of
.
-[0 , rStop1, rStop1, rStop2, rStop2 ], 'r');
The coefficients of the numerator and denominator coefficients are now ready to be used to calculate the element values of a selected filter circuit.
Digital signals are by essence sampled signals.
In a circuit node, the numbers change at a given rate: the sampling rate or sampling frequency.
In logic ciruits, they correspond to register outputs.
Digital circuits are not the only sampled systems: analog circuits such as switched capacitor filters also rely on switches and are sampled too.
Sampling a signal raises a major question: does one lose information during this process?
Example: Checking (= sampling) the traffic lights once an hour certainly makes one erratically react to their signalling (= lose information).
On the other side, sampling the traffic lights once per microsecond doesn't bring much more information than sampling it every millisecond.
Obviously, the traffic lights, as any other signals, have to be sampled at a faster rate than they change, but sampling them very much faster doesn't bring more information.
The Nyquist rate is the minimum sampling rate required to avoid loss of information.
To avoid losing information, the sampling rate must be higher than the Nyquist rate:
In practice, the sampling rate is taken with some margin, in order to more easily reconstruct the original signal.
Thus, audio content has to be sampled at more than 40 kHz.
CD audio samples the signals at 44.1 kHz.
Professional digital video equipment samples them at 48 kHz.
High end DVD audio doubles this frequency to 192 kHz.
Sampling a signal with a rate lower than the Nyquist Rate produces aliasing or folding.
The picture on the right shows a red sinewave of frequency 0.9 (and thus of a period close to 1.1).
This signal should be sampled with a frequency larger than 1.8.
However, the signal has been sampled with a rate of 1 (vertical lines and black dots).
If one tries to draw a line between the samples, the result will look like the blue curve which is a sinewave of period 10, or of frequency 0.1.
If the signal would have been sampled at a rate of 0.9, the sampling points would always fall on the same point in the sine function and the resulting signal would seem to be a constant.
.
Sampling a signal of frequency 0.9 with a rate of 0.9 creates an alias at DC, and so with the frequency of
.
Sampling a signal of frequency 0.9 with a rate of 0.8 also creates an alias with the frequency of
, but with a different phase.
Illuminating a motor turning at a frequency of 90 Hz with a stroboscope switching at 100 Hz gives us the impression that is it turning at 100 Hz - 90 Hz = 10 Hz.
Illuminating a motor turning at a frequency of 90 Hz with a stroboscope switching at 90 Hz gives us the impression that is it standing still.
Illuminating a motor turning at a frequency of 90 Hz with a stroboscope switching at 80 Hz gives us the impression that is it turning at 90 Hz - 80 Hz = 10 Hz, but in the opposite direction.
This is the same effect seen in many American Western movies containing stagecoach scenes. At various rotational rates, the wheels on the stagecoach will appear to rotate forward, stand still, or rotate backward. See Wagon-wheel effect.
It is as if the spectrum of the signal has been folded back down at a point equal to half the sampling frequency.
Sampling a frequency lower than the Nyquist rate, also called undersampling, creates sinewave aliases at a lower frequency.
If the original signal also has content at these lower frequencies, then they will be mixed and there is a loss of information.
However, if the signal has only high-frequency content, then the undersampling process modulates the signal at a lower frequency.
This is a cheap alternative to modulating by the multiplication with a modulation sinewave.
Oversampling corresponds to sampling with a frequency much higher (typically 100 to 1000) than the Nyquist rate.
The interest of oversampling is to be able to represent the signal with a smaller amount of bits.
This can be explained by the mechanism used to gain the additional bits back:
a signal sampled at 10 kHz can be downsampled at 5 kHz as long as the new sampling frequency remains greater than the Nyquist frequency.
The downsampling implies having two times fewer samples.
Rather than throwing every second sample away, one can calculate the mean value of two consecutive samples and use this result to build one sample of the new signal.
Calculating the mean value corresponds to add the values and divide them by two.
Rather than dividing the result by two and throwing away the bit after the decimal point, one can only add the consecutive samples two by two.
With this, the amplitude of the 5 kHz signal is twice the one of the original 10 kHz signal.
In other words, it has to be represented by 1 more bits.
The modulated signal is represented with a single bit switching at a frequency equal to
This one bit signal is ideal to drive high-current loads with a single power switch.
PWM is typically used for driving electric motors.
A more complex coding scheme for a result on a single bit is found in every CD player: sigma-delta modulation.
There is more theory required for understanding its working.
On the other hand, the one bit signal switches back and forth more frequently at its sampling frequency and is thus less indicated for driving slower high-current switches.
Sigma-delta modulation is used for driving lighter loads such as the cable between the CD player and the audio amplifier.
The SACD codes the audio in the form of a Direct Stream Digital signal coded on a single bit at 64 times the CD sampling rate of 44.1 kHz.
The Z Transform is used to represent sampled signals and Linear Time Invariant (LTI) systems, such as filters, in a way similar to the Laplace transform representing continuous-time signals.
The Z Transform is used to represent sampled signals in a way similar to the Laplace transform representing continuous-time signals.
A sampled signal is given by the sum of its samples, each one delayed by a different multiple of the sampling period.
The Laplace transform represents a delay of one sampling period
With this, the Z-transform can be represented as
Continuous-time Linear Time Invariant (LTI) systems can be represented by a transfer function which is a fraction of two polynomials of the complex variable
.
Their frequency response is estimated by taking
, this is by estimating the transfer function along the imaginary axis.
In order to ensure stability, the poles of the transfer function (the roots of the denominator polynomial) must be on the left half plane of
.
Discrete-time LTI systems can be represented by the fraction of two polynomials of the complex variable
, this is by estimating the transfer function around the unit circle.
In order to ensure stability, the poles of the transfer function (the roots of the denominator polynomial) must be inside the unit circle.
The transfer function is estimated around the unit circle:
, the quarter of the sampling frequency.
, half the sampling frequency.
.
So having turned once around the unit circle, one falls back to the starting point
.
From there, one can make another turn from
On each of these turns, the frequency response will be the same.
With real (as opposed to complex) signals, the transfer function is symmetric around half the sampling frequency:
.
So the transfer function of a sampled system is usually only considered between
.
This table contains some of the most commonly encountered Fourier transforms.
.
!
The probability density function, or pdf, of the distribution is given by:
.
These functions are often inpractical to evaluate quickly, and therefore tables of values are used to allow fast look-up of required data. The family or normal distibutions is infinite in size, but all can be "normalised" to the case with mean of 0 and SD of 1:
, the standardised normal distribution, Z, is:
Due to this relationship, all tables refer to the standardised distibution, Z.
Probability Content from –∞ to Z
Probability Content from –∞ to Z (Z≥0)
Probability Content from –∞ to Z (Z≤0)
Knowledge that is acquired, stored, and dispensed without having any affect on the organization should, perhaps, be called ‘trivia’. For knowledge to actually be meaningful it needs to induce change. This is not to imply that all change is derived from knowledge (any person who has ever been associated with an organization knows better than that), but it is to say that knowledge, when acted upon can induce change that can have consequential impact on an organization. Perhaps, then, the real legacy of any ‘knowledge management’ program or policy is the significance of the changes these initiatives bring about.
It was Charles Darwin who said, "It's not the strongest species that survive, nor the most intelligent, but the most responsive to change". Understanding this phrase forces organizations in any industry to look closely at the way change can impact their business. Any large-scale change, however, requires the organization to confront the issue of culture. This can be a daunting task. Culture is that invisible and often complex system of beliefs and practices that determines how people act in organizations is fraught with difficulty.
Timothy Galpin (1996) gave 10 cultural components to consider when implementing change:
Eliminate rules and policies that hinder the change and create new ones that reinforce the desired way of operating. Develop and document new SOP’s.
Develop goals and measurements that reinforce the desired changes.
Replace old ways of doing things that reinforce the old ways with new customs and norms. E.g. replace written reports with face-to-face meetings.
Again replace training that reinforces the old way of doing things with new training. Develop experiential training that provides real time, hands on experiences with new processes and procedures.
Put in place ceremonies and events that reinforce the new ways. Recognise individual and team contributions to making the changes work.
Publicly recognise and reward managers who change by linking promotion and pay to the desired behaviours. Do not promote or pay increases to managers who do not come on board.
Deliver communications in new ways to show commitment to change. Use multiple channels to deliver consistent messages at all stages during the transition, before, during and after.
Garvin (1993) defines a learning organization as “an organization skilled at creating, acquiring, and transforming knowledge, and at modifying its behavior to reflect new knowledge and insights” (p. 80). If change is not the result of creating, gaining, and sharing knowledge then “learning” is fairly meaningless. Innovation is merely creative imagination unless it results in a transformation of reality. Yukl (2002) states, "Organizational learning involves acquiring new knowledge, either by discovering it or by imitating the best practices of others" (p. 295). Yukl (2002) goes on to add that organizational learning describes organizations that utilize acquired knowledge to become more effective. This effectiveness can be realized through the change process resulting from acquired knowledge. What is important for an organization is the ability to implement the acquired knowledge into progressive change rather than acquire knowledge and never use it. Yukl again states, "New knowledge is of little value unless it is used. Some organizations are very successful at discovering knowledge, but fail to apply it effectively" (p. 295). One of the ways that effective application can be realized is through competition. As organizations are competitively driven to reach new heights (goals), they are forced to explore, discover, and change based on the value of the knowledge acquired.
Goldsmith, et al. (2004) suggest, "Changing the way people work...is tough work that is not to be taken lightly. Research in organizational dynamics, diffusion of innovation, and change suggest that failure to pay attention to prevailing attitudes, beliefs, and practices, even when the benefits of a new way of doing things are totally obvious to all, invites disappointment if not disaster" (p. 242). Therefore, close attention needs to be on the people affected by the introduction of change which occurs when knowledge management is introduced or revised. Goldsmith, et al. (2004) contend, "If your investment in knowledge management does not include a corresponding investment in change management, you may be throwing more than your financial investment down a rat hole" (p. 251). Therefore, human capital, change, and knowledge are a three legged stool which must be used together to be successful.
Powell (2004) correctly asserts that for knowledge to induce change, it must be acted upon. Who acts on knowledge? People do, of course. This question and answer may seem silly, but the truth of the matter is that for knowledge management to be effective in bringing about change, people need to be engaged in the knowledge management process. If we accept that people are integral to the knowledge management process we must also recognize that there will be confusion and consternation about any process an organization introduces to manage knowledge. This is not because people will dislike the concept of knowledge management, rather because people will resist change in all of the various forms it takes. Rosenburg (2004) points out that introducing a knowledge management program without paying attention to the “prevailing attitudes, beliefs, and practices”, is recipe for failure, even when everyone fully appreciates the benefits of such a program. He further recommends that any organization considering implementing a knowledge management program consider first the 12 “change management factors” (Rosenberg, 2004, p. 243). These are:
Leadership and role models: If the organizational leaders support the knowledge management program, it has a much greater chance of success.
Success stories: By sharing success stories, buy-in can occur more easily.
Consequences and incentives: in essence, this is the cost-benefit analysis all of us go through before we adopt any change. If knowledge management makes life easier and people have incentives to engage in the knowledge management processes, they are more likely to welcome the change.
Value proposition: Prepare specific and defendable propositions as to how knowledge management will add lasting value to all parts of the organization. Rosenburg (2004) adds that the greater the specificity, the more likely buy-in will occur.
. Level of participation: Engage those who will use the knowledge management system to be a part of the design.
. Hassle: People must understand that though a knowledge management program may be a hassle, it will ultimately save them time and effort.
Impossibility: Be prepared for the nay-sayers. Understand that their concerns may be legitimate and may come from previous experience where similar initiatives have failed. Engage these people to the extent possible.
Priorities: A knowledge management system will be far more likely to succeed if it is perceived as being not only a high priority, but also as having a high likelihood of success.
Fear of technology: Even though most people in today’s workforce are computer savvy to some degree, there are still many people who fear new technology. Deploy new technology used in the knowledge management system long before people have to start using it. Give people time to learn and adapt to the new technology.
Sink-in time: Allow for some time to let the concept of knowledge management to ‘sink-in’. Avoid ‘springing’ a new knowledge management system on people. Communicate early and often and consider offering one-on-one demonstrations.
Training: The most vital element of managing the change associated with implementing any knowledge management program is the training program. Focusing on the user experience and providing ample real-life scenarios will increase the effectiveness of the training.
Ongoing support: Change management often begins and ends with the roll-out. Do not let this happen! Provide ongoing support so that people feel as though they have ready-resource when it comes to training, technical support, or other knowledge management related topics.
As stated above, if we accept that people are integral to the effectiveness of the knowledge any organization possesses, then we must also accept that people play an equally important role in the knowledge management process. If organizations are capable of navigating the 12 issues outlined above, they are far more likely to implement a knowledge management program that acquire, store, and dispense knowledge that can have a beneficial impact on the enterprise as a whole.
According to Julian (2005), a Community of Practice (CoP) uses "systemic efforts to plan, implement, and evaluate a broad range of interventions designed to address community problems." The term community refers to a group of people having a common interest. CoPs were first used by researchers with common interests to help negotiate and reflect on practices relating to their particular field (Brown & Duguid, 1991; Lave & Wenger, 1991). Most importantly, CoPs help members create change through collaboration, reflection, and the sharing of lessons learned.
Powell (2004) states that organizations “still think too much in terms of changing people’s behaviors and not enough in terms of tapping into the potential people have for doing better, doing more, and getting smarter” (Goldsmith, et al., p. 232). What has been misconstrued is the fact that people willingly change and tap into their potential when the opportunity arises. This is especially true when an organization fosters engagement. One simple and very powerful but often overlooked method of fostering engagement is through storytelling. Storytelling in an organizational setting – similar to mankind’s historical storytelling reference, is comprised of “myths, legends and sagas, represent[ing] a collective and institutional memory system which informally passes on key knowledge and communicates important values, beliefs and assumptions” (Vance, 1991, p. 52). In its truest form, storytelling is the organizational culture incarnate. Thus, organizational storytelling is an excellent means to quickly enculturate new employees but is also just as effective used as a training means for other employees. Storytelling is a vicarious means of learning that allows for “relating the stories of the experiences of others…mak[ing] much of the power of experienced-based learning available to the inexperienced learner” (p. 54). Storytelling’s power comes from the fact that it utilizes both cognitive and affective means to deliver the message – a message that is “easy to remember” and capable to expand “multidimensional meaning….even in the most confusing [and complex] situation[s]” (Joensuu & Ilmola, 2005, p. 1).
This section is a stub.You can help Wikibooks by expanding it.
There must be a current change or shift in how we understand or what method we use in knowledge management. All too often we try and regulate one or a few to manage knowledge bases. Or we limit our understanding of knowledge management to merely posting information in a stagnant arena without dialogue, explanation, or contextual reference for deeper understanding. There must be a change in development to perceive knowledge management as an ‘everyone’ issue. An organization should develop a think-tank within itself that holds itself accountable and polices the very knowledge that is shared. Organizations should also develop multiple platforms of interaction where knowledge is shared through technology, written materials, and interaction within cyberspace and face to face. Effron states that “knowledge cannot be stored in a database, only information can”(Goldsmith, Morgan, & Ogg, 2004,p. 42). So this identifies the process of communicating information, the missing element is the communal aspect and context of the knowledge. Adding these variables creates a forum and environment for knowledge management.
The interest in knowledge management has been growing for years. Now the field continues to change and grow as new uses are always being developed. According to an article by David Skyrme, some of these changes are focused on globalization and a firms ability to bring together the knowledge from across the globe instead of reinventing information. Knowledge is power and money. Being able to personalize the service provided to customers is money in the bank. In the area(s) of restructuring and downsizing, valuable knowledge can be lost with the ending of employment, or be expensive to replace. The sharing of best practices allows companies to take information from the success of others and develop their own best practices. Lastly, the ability to apply knowledge allows companies to develop new and better products thereby making more money.
Fuglsang and Sundbo (2005) suggest that there are three modes of innovation for organizations that cross the continuum from deterministic to free choice. The first is an entrepreneurial value-based method where change is initiated by individual’s actions and drive to create business. The second is a technology-based functional mode in which the development of technology drives innovation. The third is a strategic reflexive mode in which innovation results from interaction process of individuals and the organization’s set of common values and goals. The strategic reflexive mode of innovation is the most effective mode for change and innovation in knowledge management. This mode values the exchange of information within the organization and filters this exchange through the core values of the organization. Change in an organization is potentially destructive to the organization, so it is imperative that the changes to both the organization and to knowledge management within the organization be regulated by the process of knowledge management itself and the values of the organization itself.
Knowledge management will drive the need for new information systems. Most existing systems have been developed to serve the needs of operating personnel and management. New, knowledge management systems must be capable of making comparisons, analyzing trends and presenting both historical and current knowledge. More importantly, they must permit the users to transform data into knowledge by analyzing and understanding patterns and drawing conclusions. These systems must do more than present data, they must permit the decisions makers to understand the information. (Thierauf, 1999)
Daft (2005) provides an eight-stage model of planned organizational change developed by John P. Kotter. Careful attention must be given to each stage because a critical mistake and any stage could cause the process to fail. Stage One – establish a sense of urgency that change is really needed. Stage Two – form a powerful guiding coalition. Stage Three – develop a compelling vision and strategy. Stage Four – communicate the vision widely. Stage Five – empower the employees to act on the vision. Stage Six – generate short-term wins. Stage Seven – consolidate gains and create greater change. And Stage Eight – Institutionalize changes in the organizational culture.
Every set of case studies deserves one that fails. In failure we learn, grow, and keep believing in change. In an effort to initiate KM within two organizations we initiated change. The two organizations were a para-church organization that ministered to a college campus and a local-church college ministry. The change initiative was created to combine our ministries by creating a bridge from the para-church site to multiple local church experiences. Through this we would exercise KM by uniting our efforts and experiences with college students. The local-church moved their meeting times and changed focus to pointing students towards the mid-week experience at the campus and the local church on the weekend. The bridges were made, but over time they didn't last. What was learned through the process will enable others to adapt and learn when the next opportunity arises for change. These change efforts will stimulate new methods that enable KM to be possible.
What ultimate organizational goals would knowledge management and change affect?
Change dominates the focus of much of knowledge management, organizational behavior, and organizational learning. Producing and developing increasingly efficient and effective processes, products, or output of any kind is a driving force in the competitive marketplace of business and nonprofit. Knowledge management and change uniquely and intentionally must synchronize together for organizational improvement.
Burke (1992) proposes that the kind of change necessary to qualify as organizational development must happen at the cultural level. It is not enough to modestly change functions, or organize and communicate better. Real change in organization does not happen until the culture changes. " For change in an organization to be OD it must (1) respond to an actual and perceived need for change on the part of the client, (2) involve the client in the planning and implementation of the change, and (3) lead to change in the organization's culture" (p. 8-9). Hence, the most effective change takes place at the core value and organizational culture levels. It is the norms and values which underlie basic assumptions, beliefs, and behaviors. Changing these underlying values is the ultimate goal of knowledge management and organizational development. This goes beyond “fixing a problem or improving a procedure” … it means, “That some significant aspect of an organization’s culture will never be the same” (p. 9). “It might be a change in the organization’s management style, requiring new forms of exercising authority, which in turn would lead to different conformity patterns, since new norms would be established, especially in decision making” (p. 9).
Examples of such a cultural change can be found within the automotive industry, as manufacturers move toward a team-based culture. For real change to take place companies and unions have had to work toward a new vision of beliefs (about the motivation and skill of employees), values (where all employee input is valued), and behaviors (those that recognize contributions and accept responsibilities). It has not been enough to simply write new contracts and procedures. Rather, the leaders on both the union and management sides have had to work collaboratively to make significant changes in our underlying culture. Such changes have led to improvements in safety, quality, and productivity.
In the author’s local organization, a church, a cultural shift took place following a yearlong ReFocus process. Organization-wide input into strengths, weaknesses, and needed challenges played into significant shifts in decision-making, leadership, and responsibility taking among members. A new board was organized to create shared vision and mutual support from varied ministry leaders who took responsibility to plan, brainstorm, and collaborate on special projects. In addition, cell groups were organized to deepen relationship development, expand caregiving to more leaders and members of our church. These cell groups function with measurable autonomy from the larger group and are able to address unique needs and growth points in the members of the individual groups.
The Center for Life Calling and Leadership seeks to gain knowledge through internal and external research that will assist students in the Life Calling exploration process. As the Center continues to be on the cutting edge, the research conducted is not based on existing models, but unfolds through observation, internal and external. Once the knowledge has been articulated, changes can be made based on the knowledge gained and its effective integration into the Life Calling program and into the classroom (LDR 150, Life Calling, Work and Leadership). Acquired knowledge also assists in the validation process for the Center. When new ventures are explored, and the implementation stage has waned, a period of validation is experienced to ensure that invested resources are meeting or exceeding expectations. If the new venture fails to meet expectations, expressed or implied, change is likely to become the new organizational expectation.
David Skyrme Associates (2003) have collected a database of case studies that show examples of organizations that have achieved significant benefits through knowledge management. Some examples are:
BP - by introducing virtual teamworking using videconferencing have speeded up the solution of critical operation problems
Hoffman La Roche - through its Right First Time programme has reduced the cost and time to achieve regulatory approvals for new drugs.
Dow Chemical - by focusing on the active management of its patent portfolio have generated over $125 million in revenues from licensing and other ways of exploiting their intangible assets.
Texas Instruments - by sharing best practice between its semiconductor fabrication plants saved the equivalent of investing in a new plant.
Skandia Assurance - by developing new measures of intellectual capital and goaling their managers on increasing its value have grown revenues much faster than their industry average.
Hewlett-Packard - by sharing expertise already in the company, but not known to their development teams, now bring new products to market much faster than before.
Organizational Learning :
In 1485 Leonardo de Vinci came up with more than over one hundred sketches for flying. De Vinci created a machine capable of flying similar to our modern helicopter on a small scale. Of course the design only stayed on paper.
The main symptom of high vitamin D is hypercalcemia, including dislike of eating, nausea and vomiting. These may be accompanied by excessive urination, thirst, weakness, difficulty sleeping, nervousness, itching, and eventually lead to kidney failure. Furthermore, proteinuria, urinary casts, azotemia, and metastatic calcification (especially in the kidneys) may develop.
Haemoglobin relies on iron atoms to bind oxygen molecules so they can be transported around the body
The Elements of Life is the first unit in the Salters Advanced Chemistry course. It reviews essential topics from GCSE-level chemistry and introduces new content, including:
EL3: Where do the chemical elements come from?
EL3.1 Investigating the chemistry of Group 1 and Group 2 elements
EL3.2 How do the physical properties of elements change across a row in the Periodic Table?
EL3.3 Check your notes on The Elements of Life : Part 1
EL4.1 How do we know about atoms?
EL4.2 Isotopic abundance and relative atomic mass
EL6 Check your notes on The Elements of Life : Part 2
A wel I hawe at other lost
Hand 3, annotation above and below the text in Hand 10.
The knot which fyrst my hart did strayn
Hand 3, annotation by MD, annotations/marks by an unknown hand
Hand 3, annotation by MD, addition by an unknown hand
Digraphs, Brevigraphs, Symbols, and Extended Examples
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
The imperfect subjunctive is formed by adding the following endings to the stem.
For all verbs this is formed from the third person plural preterite stem plus the set endings in the table below for the type of verb
Trying this with a regular verb (1st person singular form):
Trying this with an irregular verb (1st person singular form):
...you were speaking
...they were speaking
Aliena pericula, cautiones nostrae.-
Others' dangers are our warnings.
While I breath, I hope
I came, I saw, I conquered
The internet is one of the best media to obtain Latin resources. A few sites to get you started are listed here.
Orbis Latinus Language information on Latin, Vulgar latin, Early Romance Languages and the Late Romance Languages.
Lacus Curtius Plentiful supply of Latin texts and translations.
Forum Romanum Many Latin resources.
Perseus Digital Library Excellent resource for texts and translations online.
Today Business Analysts may come from within organizations or from consulting firms. Often those from within the organization have strong backgrounds in either the business or its IT department. Regardless of background, there are four skill sets that any Business Analyst will strive to improve:
Understanding of the business, its culture, and its domain (e.g., government)
Understanding of the principles of information technology, the IT within the organization, and the trends in the IT field
The first is extremely important to business analysis. Much time is given to understanding the organizational structure, its mission, resources, output, and the framework in which it operates (non-profit, government, etc.)
Secondly, a strong understanding of IT principles is needed as most business solutions involve IT systems. These principles include how information technology works (computers, networks, internet, cloud, etc.), system development processes (Agile, DSDM, etc), off-the-shelf products, and trends in technological opportunities for business / government. Many community colleges and technical schools offer introductory or overview coursework.
Thirdly, BA techniques are well documented and can be found in many books, magazines and webinars. Techniques include investigation, stakeholder assessment, elicitation, business process and IT systems analysis, requirements gathering, data modeling, facilitation, presentation, project management, change management, and strategic analysis.
Behavioral skills are the essential keys for a successful business analyst. These skills can be grouped as inter-personal and analytical skills.
The Business Analyst must have good communication skills in order to obtain data and then present a proposed course of action, all the while reducing the anxiety of change. These skills include good listening, empathy, elicitation, common language, and the ability to adjust the language to the audience. Good communication skills build relationships, positively influence others, develop cohesive team work, and effect confidence. [reference # 23 Communication Skills]
Analytical thinking characteristics are problem-solving, attention to detail, big-picture views, procedural orientation, organization in collecting and analyzing data, and both conceptual and factual thinking. Critical thinkers will dig deeper and deeper and sift through conflicting information to find the true situation and the real business need. With experience, the Business Analyst will even be able to pre-assess the degree of analysis needed. [reference # 26 Analytical thinking]
With these basic capabilities and a love of learning, the Analyst will continually improve techniques. The following suitability questionnaire – adapted by the New York State Police from Barbara K. Carkenord, MBA, CBAP - will assist the new Analyst or anyone thinking about entering the field. For those currently in the role it may also reveal root causes for any frustration (or success). The more questions you agree with, the greater is your potential in succeeding in a Business Analyst role.
Taking this non-scientific questionnaire may reveal a need for a better sense of your own qualities and personalities. There are self-assessment tools available for this discovery:
Birkman Method®	assesses interpersonal style, interests, underlying motivations, and reactions to stress
DISC®	assesses behavioral style (Dominance, Influence, Steadiness, Conscientiousness) and describes the intensity of each
Myers-Briggs (MBTI®)	assesses personality dichotomies including extroversion vs introversion, sensing vs intuition, thinking vs feeling, and judgment vs perception.
Do I have an aptitude for performing business analysis?
The beginner with an aptitude for business analysis may first take on small parts of small projects such as documenting current business activities and then building business requirements. After a few years of experience and mentoring, the Analyst may take on full BA responsibilities for small or medium projects and assist in larger ones. With 5 to 10 years experience, the Analyst may take the lead in large scale, mission-critical projects. An Analyst with over 10 years of experience may be called upon to participate in enterprise strategic planning or manage a center of excellence.
The path to maturity for an organization follows that of the individual Analyst. Business analysis has evolved from the software development. Historically software development has had long timelines during which many executives were not always patient. Even in government, the program managers might not wait for the IT department to fill the technology need and often purchased off-the-shelf products and training. IT departments began adding a business systems analysis function so that the deliverables were clearly defined and timelines were more accurately projected. The programs themselves began adding business analysts to the projects so that the business needs could be better understood and conveyed properly.
As the business analysis function broadens within organizations a common progression can be observed. The “Business Analysis Maturity Model” (BAMM™) was developed by Assist Knowledge Development Limited in the United Kingdom. http://www.assistkd.com/knowledge-hub/business-analysis-maturity-model/bamm/ .This model identifies three stages of improvement that have a direct correlation to the complexity of the work and the authority (degree of influence) given to the Analyst:
System Improvement At this lowest level, requirements are defined for an IT system, the scope of the work is delineated, and the Analyst’s authority is limited to the project itself.
Process Improvement At this level, process analysis is added by investigating the processes that give rise to the requirements; the Analyst’s authority is expanded to the underlying processes for which the IT system is a solution.
Business Improvement At this level, the scope of the project and the Analyst’s authority are high and analysis involves enterprise strategies and senior level management.
A more widely known maturity model is the “Capability Maturity Model Integration” (CMMI®). http://resources.sei.cmu.edu/library/asset-view.cfm?assetID=18556 . This model was developed as a quality standard of organizational process improvement and software development by the Software Engineering Institute of Carnegie Mellon University. These five levels of the CMMI® can be observed within each of the three stages of BAMM™. The CMMI® model is as follows:
Level 1 Initial - processes and structures are not controlled and are mostly ad-hoc and reactive
Level 2 Managed	- processes are characterized for projects but are often reactive
Level 3 Defined	-processes are characterized for projects and are proactive, i.e., processes are built on the organization’s standards
Level 4 Quantitatively Managed - processes are controlled and measured
Level 5 Optimizing - processes work smoothly and focus moves to improvement
A highly developed organization will have a progressive “Business Analysis Center of Excellence” (BACoE). A Center of Excellence of any content or focus has as its primary goals:
To develop competencies in its resources and provide tools and structure,
To strive for quality analysis and develop standards to measure quality, and
To participate in enterprise strategic planning.
An agency with an active BACoE would enjoy a high project success rate.
Kathleen Hass has developed a four-stage model to describe the growth of the BA function within organizations which includes a BACoE. http://www.loriusllc.com/images/BA_Practice_Maturity_White_Paper_2010.pdf
Awareness - the organization is simply aware of business analysis but does not demonstrate an understanding of the value it adds; Analysts participate in a BACoP
Framework - the organization is fully supportive of the BA function and establishes a BACoE using BABOK® standards. The CoE assigns roles and responsibilities for the BA function. It establishes the tools and processes for managing all aspects of business requirements. The CoE also develops training, measurements, and improvement management processes.
Alignment - the organization vests accountability in its BACoE by missioning it to manage resources (employees, contractors, vendors) and to develop and implement tools for business alignment including enterprise analysis, portfolio management, strategic alignment of projects, solutions assessment, and benefit measurement
Optimization - the organization integrates the BACoE with other CoEs such as Project Management and Quality Assurance so that business opportunities are optimized using technology solutions. At this level, the BACoE develops, trains, and implements such tools as customer relations management, organizational readiness management, and organizational change management.
Centers of Excellence emerged in the 1990s in the project management area. A BACoE is often born when a few analysts align to share techniques and processes. This group - or any Analyst - may benefit from joining a BA Community of Practice (BACoP) in the area. A BACoP brings business analysts from many agencies and businesses together to share on a larger scale.
There are other maturity models available today. Each may address specific angles and use focused language but they all display a pattern of growth from ad-hoc to a fully structured entity integrated into the enterprise as a power center. It should not be difficult to place your organization on the spectrum; the challenge is to move it to the next stage of maturity.
Hass, K. (2011) The State of Business Analysis Practices in Organizations – Research Report. http://www.kathleenhass.com/Documents/
^ Carkenord, Barbara A. (2009). Seven Steps to Mastering Business Analysis. J. Ross Publishing, Ft. Lauderdale, FL
Carnegie Mellon University, Software Engineering Institute (1994). The capability maturity model. Addison Wesley, Upper Saddle River, NJ
^ Hass, K. (2010). Planting the seeds to grow a mature business analysis practice. Kathleen Hass & Associates, Inc.
^ Paul, Debra, et al, (2010). Business Analysis Second Edition. British Informatics Society Limited, Swindon, UK
Computing » Computer Science » Computer Programming » Ada Programming
No Return is a representation pragma for procedures, which states that a procedure will never return normally; that is, it will raise an exception, loop endlessly, or terminate the program (e.g. by means of an imported function like C’s exit or by triggering a hardware reset).
The compiler ensures that a non-returning procedure will indeed not return by raising Program_Error if it would otherwise.
Some_Thing_Else; -- This is dead code--and due to No_Return probably a compiler warning!
The pragma No_Return is standard in the language since Ada 2005. Some compilers (e.g. GNAT and AdaMagic) already recognised No_Return as implementation defined pragma before.[1]
↑ AI95-00329 in Appendix: From: Tucker Taft, Sent: Tuesday, March 4, 2003 11:13 AM
Defines a symbolic name for a count register (0..255). For instance, plain TeX defines \countdef\pageno=0.
4 "Field" or "Profession?"
Visual Language interpreters may be found in nearly every part of public life, and so it is expected that those who look as this text will hardly be approaching without some opinion and background knowledge. Opinions and backgrounds vary widely, however, so it makes sense to outline the assumptions made by the authors of this book with respect to its readership.
This book is written for those with a strong interest in interpreting where at least one of the languages is visual (more on that below). Many of the readers will probably be on the cusp or in the process of formal education to become an interpreter. Others may be consumers of interpreting services who wish to have a greater appreciation and understanding of the interpreter's task.
The expectation is that most readers will know at least one visual language, in addition to a spoken language. For those wishing to become interpreters, it is expected that command of the spoken and visual languages will approach that of an educated native speaker; if there are any deficiencies in either language, it is vital for potential interpreters to make the necessary effort to ameliorate any problems.
There was a time in the not-too-distant past when there were no courses on interpreting, no textbooks, no linguistic research. But there were still interpreters. So it is possible to be an interpreter and a skilled one without any hint of formal training. But what is possible is not always what is best, and in this case it is possible to be an interpreter without training in the way that it is possible to row a small boat across an ocean. The benefits of formal training outweigh any cost, and the cost of avoiding formal training are not paid for by any benefit.
Neither this nor any other book can be used as a substitute for a serious multi-year course of instruction by experts skilled both in the art interpretation and in the art of of teaching the art. Interpreting is not a "teach-it-yourself" occupation; the more experienced eyes are on you, the more feedback and instruction you receive, the greater the chanced that you will excel.
This is also not a textbook on a visual language. Although many examples of proper translations of sentences into visual languages (notably American Sign Language (ASL) are given, these are given in the context of the interpreting process. Natural conversation in a language is a qualitatively different cognitive task, and the two should not be confused.
There are setting when communication occurs in a visual medium, such as underwater among SCUBA divers or in a military/police operation. This is not a book about interpreting those situations.
Why "Visual Language?"
Given the fact that interpreters typically work between a spoken and a signed language, the term visual language may seem unnecessarily convoluted. Why not "sign language interpreting" or "interpreting for the deaf?"
The short answer (which will be elaborated on in the following chapters) is that such interpreting is not simply for those who are deaf (Note: following common convention, Deaf is capitalized when referring to members of a linguistic and cultural group which uses a signed language as the first language). Not only does this piece of verbal legerdemain place the deaf in the position of being helpless, it ignores the fact that in situations where there are deaf and hearing consumers of interpreting services, both sides are in need of such services. In fact, there are situations in which both consumers are hearing, but one may have a disorder such as an aphasia which necessitates the use of a visual language.
Furthermore, not all visual languages are signed languages. There are systems such as Cued Speech which, although they do not qualify as signed languages, are used under same circumstances as those encountered by sign language interpreters. For this reason, this book uses visual language, a decision which mirrors that of bodies such as the Association of Visual Language Interpreters of Canada.
"Field" or "Profession?"
It is often said that visual language interpreting is a profession, and many interpreters, when discussing professional practices compare interpreting to law, medicine, or another field of endeavor within the same societal rank.
Others agree that while that is a worthy goal, a profession has a complicated body of knowledge which takes years to master. Interpreting certainly is a complex and demanding task which is acquired on the order of years; the best interpreters are still learning. Still, there is no broad agreement on how that knowledge is to be effectively transmitted. Furthermore, the level of education is still a matter hotly debated within the profession. The Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf (RID) has recently passed a motion phasing in a degree requirement in the coming decade: first an associate's degree then a bachelor's degree will be required. There are also indications of growing pains in other areas which, the argument goes, are signs that visual language interpreting is not yet a profession in the strict sense.
Still others assert that aspiring to professional status is elitist, and that visual language interpreting has done fine without being in such highfalutin' company as the learned professions. Furthermore, they would argue, formal education is no guarantee of quality, and to pretend to do so ignores current facts on the ground. Many interpreters are "home-grown", and provide superior service. To them, interpreting is a trade, learned by long apprenticeship, but not necessarily in a college classroom.
Each of these viewpoints (and others) have powerful arguments both for and against them, and many of the authors of this text will hold to one or another of these views. In the interests of harmony, and while the debate is still far from concluded, this textbook will use the more neutral term field, which may be applied equally to medicine and cosmetology.
Since sections of this book will be concerned with a particular brand of visual language, namely ASL, there are times when it will be necessary to represent utterances in that language. To that end, every effort will be made to include videos and illustrations as needed. However, sometimes the use of glosses will suffice, and standard glossing conventions as found in most standard ASL textbooks and research journals will be used. The glosses will be written in the format given below:
The children of rich parents usually grow up to be rich adults, and the children of poor parents usually grow up to be poor adults. This seems like a fundamental fact of social life, but is it true? And just how true is it? We've all heard stories of poor persons who make it rich (Oprah Winfrey, Jennifer Lopez, Steve Jobs) and rich persons who spend all their money and end up poor. The relationship between parents' income and children's income for a random sample of Americans is depicted in Figure 1-1. As you can see, parents' income and children's income are related, but with plenty of room for error. Rich parents tend to have rich children, but not all the time, and poor parents tend to have poor children, but not all the time. This kind of result is very common in the social sciences. Social science can explain a lot of things about our world, but it never explains them perfectly. There's always room for error.
Figure 1-1: Children's income in 2007 versus parents' income in 1987 (adjusted for inflation) for 50 random Americans (NLSY data)
The goal of social statistics is to explain the social world as simply as possible with as little error as possible. In Figure 1-1, it seems like parents' incomes explain their children's incomes pretty well, even if not perfectly. Some of the error in explaining children's incomes might come from errors in measurement. Persons don't always answer honestly when asked how much money they make. Persons might not even know for sure exactly how much money they made in any given year. It's impossible to predict the mistakes persons will make in answering social survey questions about their incomes, so no analysis of children's reported incomes will be perfectly accurate.
On the other hand, most of the error in Figure 1-1 probably has nothing to do with bad measurement. Most of the error is in explaining children's incomes probably comes from important determinants of income that have been left out of this analysis. There are many potential reasons why children's incomes may not correspond to their parents' incomes. For example, potential sources of error include things like:
Children may do better / worse in school than their parents did
Children may enter more / less well-paying professions than their parents did
Children may be more / less lucky in getting a job than their parents were
Children may be more / less ambitious than their parents were
A statistical analysis of income that included children's school performance, choice of profession, job luck, and ambition would have less error than the simple graph based just on parents' income, but it would also be much more complicated. Social statistics always involves trade-offs like this between complexity and error. Everything about the social world is determined by many different factors. A person's income level might result in part from job advice from a friend, getting a good recommendation letter, looking good on the day of an interview, being black, being female, speaking English with a strong accent, or a million other causes. Social statistics is all about coming up with ways to explain social reality reasonably well using just a few of these causes. No statistical model can explain everything, but if a model can explain most of the variability in persons' incomes based on just a few simple facts about them, that's pretty impressive.
This chapter lays out some of the basic building blocks of social statistics. First, social statistics is one of several approaches that social scientists use to link social theory to data about the world (Section 1.1). It is impossible to perform meaningful statistical analyses without first having some kind of theoretical viewpoint about how the world works. Second, social statistics is based on the analysis of cases and variables (Section 1.2). For any variable we want to study (like income), we have to have at least a few cases available for analysis—the more, the better. Third, social statistics almost always involves the use of models in which some variables are hypothesized to cause other variables (Section 1.3). We usually use statistics because we believe that one variable causes another, not just because we're curious. An optional section (Section 1.4) tackles the question of just how causality can be established in social statistics.
Finally, this chapter ends with an applied case study of the relationship between spending on education and student performance across the 50 states of the United States (Section 1.5). This case study illustrates how theory can be applied to data, how data are arranged into cases and variables, and how independent and dependent variables are causally related. All of this chapter's key concepts are used in this case study. By the end of this chapter, you should have all the tools you need to start modeling the social world using social statistics.
1.1: Theory and Data
Theories determine how we think about the social world. All of us have theories about how the world works. Most of these theories are based on personal experience. That's alright: Isaac Newton is supposed to have developed the theory of gravity because he personally had an apple fall on his head. Personal experience can be a dangerous guide to social theory, since your experiences might be very difference from other persons' experiences. It's not a bad place to start, but social science requires that personal experiences be turned into more general theories that apply to other persons as well, not just to you. Generalization is the act of turning theories about specific situations into theories that apply to many situations. So, for example, you may think that you eat a lot of junk food because you can't afford to eat high-quality food. This theory about yourself could be generalized into a broader theory about persons in general:
Persons eat junk food because they can't afford to eat high-quality food.
Generalization from personal experience is one way to come up with theories about the social world, but it's not the only way. Sometimes theories come from observing others: you might see lots of fast food restaurants in poor neighborhoods and theorize that persons eat junk food because they can't afford to eat high-quality food. Sometimes theories are developed based on other theories: you might theorize that all persons want to live as long as possible, and thus conclude that persons eat junk food because they can't afford to eat high-quality food. Sometimes ideas just pop into your head: you're at a restaurant drinking a soda with unlimited free refills, and it just dawns on you that maybe persons eat junk food because they can't afford to eat high-quality food. However it happens, somehow you conceive of a theory. Conceptualization is the process of developing a theory about some aspect of the social world.
The main difference between the kinds of social commentary you might hear on radio or television and real social science is that in social science theories are scrutinized using formal statistical models. Statistical models are mathematical simplifications of the real world. The goal of statistical modeling is to explain complex social facts as simply as possible. A statistical model might be as simple as a graph showing that richer parents have richer children, as depicted in Figure 1-1. This graph is takes a very complex social fact (children's income) and explains it in very simple terms (it rises as parents' income rises) but with lots of room for error (many children are richer or poorer than their parents).
Social scientists use statistical models to evaluate different theories about how the world works. In our minds we all have our own theories about the social world, but in the real world we can't all be right. Before social scientists accept a theory, they carefully evaluate it using data about the real world. Before they can be evaluated, theories have to be turned into specific hypotheses about specific data. Operationalization is the process of turning a social theory into specific hypotheses about real data. The theory that persons eat junk food because they can't afford to eat high-quality food seems very reasonable, but it's too vague to examine using social statistics. First it has to be operationalized into something much more specific. Operationalization means answering questions like:
Which persons eat junk food? All persons in the world? All Americans? Poor Americans only?
What's junk food? Soda? Candy? Potato chips? Pizza? Sugar cereals? Fried chicken?
What's high-quality food? Only salads and home-made dinners? Or do steaks count too?
Is fresh-squeezed fruit juice a junk food (high in sugar) or a high-quality food (fresh and nutritious)?
What does "afford" mean? Literally not having enough money to buy something? What about other expenses besides food?
Whose behavior should we study? Individuals? Families? Households? Whole cities? Counties? States? Countries? The world?
For example, one way to study the relationship between junk food consumption and the affordability of high-quality food is to use state-level data. It can be very convenient to study US states because they are similar in many ways (they're all part of the same country) but they are also different enough to make interesting comparisons. There is also a large amount of data available for US states that is collected and published by US government agencies. For example, junk food consumption can be operationalized as the amount of soft drinks or sweetened snacks consumed in the states (both available from the US Department of Agriculture) and affordability can be operationalized using state median income. Most persons living in states with high incomes should be able to afford to eat better-quality food.
Data on state soft drink consumption per person and state median income are graphed in Figure 1-2. Each point in Figure 1-2 represents a state. A few sample states are labeled on the graph. This graph is called a scatter plot. Scatter plots are very simple statistical models that depict data on a graph. The scatter plot can be used to determine whether soft drink consumption rises, falls, or stays the same across the range of state income levels. In the scatter plot graphed in Figure 1-2, soft drink consumption tends to fall as income rises. This is consistent with the theory that persons buy healthy food when they can afford it, but eat unhealthy food when they are poorer. The theory may or may not be correct. The scatter plot provides evidence in support of the theory, but it does not conclusively prove the theory. After all, there may be many other reasons why soft drink consumption tends to be higher in the poorer states.
Figure 1-2: Soft drink consumption versus state median family income for 48 US states plus the District of Columbia (Alaska and Hawaii excluded due to lack of data)
There is also a lot of error in the statistical model explaining soft drink consumption. There are many poor states that have very low levels of soft drink spending as well as many rich states that have very high levels of soft drink spending. So while the overall trend is that richer states have lower spending on soft drinks, there are many exceptions. This could be because the theory is wrong, but it also could be because there are many reasons why persons might consume soft drinks besides the fact that they are poor. For example, persons might consume soft drinks because:
They eat out a lot, and tend to consume soft drinks at restaurants
They're trying to lose weight and are actually consuming zero-calorie soft drinks
They just happen to like the taste of soft drinks
All these reasons (and many others) may account for the large amount of error in the statistical model graphed in Figure 1-2.
Another way to operationalize the theory that theory that persons eat junk food because they can't afford to eat high-quality food is presented in Figure 1-3. In Figure 1-3, junk food consumption is operationalized as consumption of sweetened snack foods (cookies, snack cakes, candy bars, and the like). Again, the overall theory is that persons eat junk food because they can't afford to eat high-quality food, so state average income should be negatively related to the consumption of sweetened snack foods. In other words, as state average income goes up, sweetened snack food consumption should go down. But the data tell a different story: it turns out that there is essentially no relationship between state average income and sweetened snack consumption.
Figure 1-3: Sweetened snack consumption versus state median family income for 48 US states plus the District of Columbia (Alaska and Hawaii excluded due to lack of data)
What went wrong here? Why is there no relationship between state average income and sweetened snack consumption? There are many possible reasons.
First, it may have been wrong to generalize from one person's experience (I eat junk food because I can't afford to eat high-quality food) to a general rule about society (persons eat junk food because persons can't afford to eat high-quality food). Second, it may have been wrong to conceptualize any relationship between affordability and junk food consumption at all (maybe junk food is actually more expensive than high-quality food). Third, it may have been wrong to operationalize junk food consumption at the state level (for example, it is possible that rich states actually contain lots of poor persons who eat lots of sweetened snacks). Fourth, it may have been wrong to use such a simple statistical model as a scatter plot (later chapters in this book will present much more sophisticated statistical models).
Because there are so many possible sources of error in social statistics, statistical analyses often lead to conflicting results like those reported in Figure 1-2 and Figure 1-3. Inconsistent, inconclusive, or downright meaningless results pop up all the time. The social world is incredibly complicated. Social theories are always far too simple to explain it all. Social statistics give us the opportunity to see just how well social theories perform out in the real world. In the case of our theory that persons eat junk food because they can't afford to eat high-quality food, social statistics tell us that there is some evidence to support the theory (soft drink consumption tends to be higher in poor states), but better theories are clearly needed to fully explain differences in persons' junk food consumption.
1.2: Cases and Variables
As the junk food example shows, when operationalizing theories into specific hypotheses in the social sciences the biggest obstacle is usually the difficulty of getting the right the data. Few quantitative social scientists are able to collect their own data, and even when they do they are often unable to collect the data they want. For example, social scientists who want to study whether or not persons can afford to buy high-quality food would ideally want to know all sorts of things to determine affordability. They would want to know persons' incomes, of course, but they would also want to know how much healthy foods cost in each person's neighborhood, how far persons would have to drive to get to a farm store or organic supermarket, whether or not they have a car, how many other expenses persons have besides food, etc. Such detailed information can be very difficult to collect, so researchers often make do with just income.
It is even more difficult to find appropriate data when researchers have to rely on data collected by others. The collection of social data is often done on a very large scale. For example, most countries conduct a population census at regular intervals. In the United States, this involves distributing short census questionnaires to over 100 million households every ten years. The longer, more detailed American Community Survey is sent to around 250,000 households every month. A further 60,000 households receive a detailed employment survey, the Current Population Survey. Other social data can also be very difficult and expensive to collect. The income data used in Figure 1-2 come from a national survey of 12,686 persons and their children who were surveyed almost every year for thirty years. The food consumption data used in Figures 1-2 and 1-3 come from barcode scans of products bought by 40,000 households across America. Obviously, no one person can collect these kinds of data on her own.
The good news is that enormous amounts of social survey and other social data can now be downloaded over the internet. All the data used in this textbook are freely available to the public from government or university websites. These public use datasets have been stripped of all personally identifying information like the names and addresses of individual respondents. Also very conveniently, the data in these datasets have usually been organized into properly formatted databases.
Databases are arrangements of data into variables and cases. When persons are interviewed in a survey, the raw data often have to be processed before they can be used. For example, surveys don't usually ask persons their ages, because (believe it or not) persons often get their ages wrong. Instead, survey takers ask persons their dates of birth. They also record the date of the survey. These two dates can then be combined to determine the respondent's age. The respondent's age is a sociologically meaningful fact about the respondent. Raw data like the respondent's birth date and interview date have been transformed into a variable that can be used in statistical models.
Variables are analytically meaningful attributes of cases. Cases are the individuals or entities about which data have been collected. Databases usually include one row of data for each case. Variables are arranged into columns. There may also be columns of metadata. Metadata are additional attributes of cases that are not meant to be included in analyses. A sample database including both metadata and variables is presented in Figure 1-4.
Figure 1-4: Data on income and nutrition for 48 US states plus the District of Columbia (Alaska and Hawaii excluded due to lack of data)
The database depicted in Figure 1-4 was used to conduct the analyses reported in Figure 1-2 and Figure 1-3. The first two columns in the database are examples of metadata: the state name (STATE_NAME) and state abbreviation (STATE_ABBR). These are descriptive attributes of the cases, but they are not analytically meaningful. For example, we would not expect soda consumption to be determined by a state's abbreviation. The last four columns in the database are examples of variables. The first variable (MED_INCOME) is each state's median income. The other three variables represent annual state sweetened snack consumption in pounds per person (LB_SNACKS), soft drink consumption in gallons per person (GAL_SODA), and fruit and vegetable consumption in pounds per person (LB_FRUVEG). As in Figure 1-4, metadata are usually listed first in a database, followed by variables. The cases are usually sorted in order using the first metadata column as a case identifier. In this case, the data are sorted in alphabetical order by state name.
The cases in a database can be political units (like states or countries), organizations (like schools or companies), persons (like individuals or families), or any other kind of entity. The database that was used in Figure 1-1 is presented in Figure 1-5. In this database, the metadata appear in the first column (CHILD_ID) and the fifth column (MOTHER_ID). The gender of each child is reported in the third column (GENDER). Gender is recorded as "1" for men and "2" for women and mother's race is recorded as "1" for white and "2" for non-white. Income variables for the children's families (FAM_INC) and their mothers' families (PAR_INC) appear in the second and fifth columns. Notice that the incomes of the children's families are rounded off, while the incomes of the mothers' families are exact. Researchers using these data have to accept inconsistencies like this and work with them, since there's no way to go back and re-collect the data. We're stuck using the data as they exist in the database.
Figure 1-5: Data on income for a selection of 50 random children and their parents from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY)
Each case in this database is an extended family built around a mother–child pair. The children's family incomes include the incomes of their spouses, and the mothers' family incomes include the incomes of their spouses, but the mothers' spouses may or may not be the fathers of the children in the database. Since the data were collected on mother–child pairs, we have no way to know the incomes of the children's biological fathers unless they happen to have been married to the mothers in 1987 when the mothers' income data were collected. Obviously we'd like to know the children's fathers' incomes levels, but the data were never explicitly collected. If the parents were not married as of 1987, the biological fathers' data are gone forever. Data limitations like the rounding off of variables and the fact that variables may not include all the data we want are major sources of error in statistical models.
1.3: Dependent Variables and Independent Variables
In social statistics we're usually interested in using some variables to explain other variables. For example, in operationalizing the theory that persons eat junk food because they can't afford to eat high-quality food we used the variable "state median income" (MED_INCOME) in a statistical model (specifically, a scatter plot) to explain the variable "soft drink consumption" (GAL_SODA). In this simple model, we would say that soft drink consumption depends on state median income. Dependent variables are variables that are thought to depend on other variables in a model. They are outcomes of some kind of causal process. Independent variables are variables that are thought to cause the dependent variables in a model. It's easy to remember the difference. Dependent variables depend. Independent variables are independent; they don't depend on anything.
Whether a variable is independent or dependent is a matter of conceptualization. If a researcher thinks that one variable causes another, the cause is the independent variable and the effect is the dependent variable. The same variable can be an independent variable in one model but a dependent variable in another. Within any one particular model, however, it should be clear which variables are independent and which variables are dependent. The same variable can't be both: a variable can't cause itself.
For an example of how a variable could change from independent to dependent, think back to Figure 1-1. In that figure, parents' income is the independent variable and children's income is the dependent variable (in the model, parents' income causes children's income). Parents' income, however, might itself be caused by other variables. We could operationalize a statistical model in which the parents' family income (the variable PAR_INC) depends on the parents' race (M_RACE). We use the mother's race to represent the race of both parents, since we don't have data for each mother's spouse (if any). A scatter plot of parents' family income by race is presented in Figure 1-6. Remember that the variable M_RACE is coded so that 0 = white and 1 = non-white. Clearly, the white parents had much higher family incomes (on average) than the non-white parents, almost twice as high. As with any statistical model, however, there is still a lot of error: race explains a lot in America, but it doesn't explain everything.
Figure 1-6: Family income in 1987 (adjusted for inflation) by race for 50 random Americans (NLSY data)
Just like parents' income, any variable can be either an independent variable or a dependent variable. It all depends on the context. All of the dependent variables and independent variables that have been used so far in this chapter are summarized in Figure 1-7. An arrow (→) has been used to indicate which variable is thought to cause which. Remember, in each model the independent variable causes the dependent variable. That's the same as saying that the dependent variables depend on the independent variables. Since parents' income has been used as both an independent variable (Figure 1-1) and as a dependent variable (Figure 1-6) it appears twice in the table. State median income has also been used twice, both times as an independent variable (Figure 1-2 and Figure 1-3).
Figure 1-7: Examples of dependent variables, independent variables, and models
In each example reported in Table 1-1, the statistical model used to understand the relationship between the independent variable and the dependent variable has been a scatter plot. In a scatter plot, the independent variable is always depicted on the horizontal (X) axis. The dependent variable is always depicted on the vertical (Y) axis. A line has been drawn through the middle of the cloud of points on each scatter plot to help illustrate the general trend of the data. In Figure 1-1 the general trend is up: parents' income is positively related to children's income. In Figure 1-2 the general trend is down: state median income is negatively related to soft drink consumption. In Figure 1-3 and Figure 1-6 the trends are again up and down, respectively. Whether the trend is up or down, the existence of a trend indicates a relationship between the independent variable and the dependent variable.
A scatter plot is a very simple statistical model that helps show the overall relationship between one independent variable and one dependent variable. In future chapters, we will study more sophisticated statistical models. Many of them will allow for multiple independent variables of different kinds, but every model used in this book will have just one dependent variable. Models with multiple dependent variables exist, but they are much more complicated and won't be covered here.
Social scientists are almost always interested in making claims about causality, in claiming that one variable causes another. We suspect that sexism in the workplace leads to lower wages for women, that education leads to greater life fulfillment, that social inequality leads to higher levels of violence in society. The problem is that in the social sciences it is almost always impossible to prove that one variable causes another. Instead, social scientists must infer causality as best they can using the facts—and reasoning—at their disposal.
It is so difficult to establish causality in the social sciences because most social science questions cannot be studied using experiments. In an experiment, research subjects are randomly assigned to two groups, an experimental group and a control group. The subjects in the experimental group receive some treatment, while the subjects in the control group receive a different treatment. At the end of the experiment, any systematic difference between the subjects in the two groups must be due to differences in their treatments, since the two groups have otherwise identical backgrounds and experiences.
In the social sciences, experiments are usually impossible. For example, we strongly suspect that sexism in the workplace causes lower wages for women. The only way to know for sure whether or not this is true would be to recruit a group of women and randomly assign them to work in different workplaces, some of them sexist and some of them not. The workplaces would have to be identical, except for the sexism. Then, after a few years, we could call the women back to check up on their wages. Any systematic differences in women's wages between those who worked in sexist workplaces and those who worked in non-sexist workplaces could then be attributed to the sexism, since we would know for certain that there were no other systematic differences between the groups and their experiences.
Of course, experiments like this are impossible. As a substitute for experiments, social scientists conduct interviews and surveys. We ask women whether or not they have experienced sexism at work, and then ask them how much money they make. If the women who experience sexism make less money than the women who do not experience sexism, we infer that perhaps that difference may be due to actual sexism in the workplace.
Social scientists tend to be very cautious in making causal inferences, however, because many other factors may be at work. For example, it is possible that the women in the study who make less money tend incorrectly to perceive their workplaces as being sexist (reverse causality). It is even possible that high-stress working environments in which persons are being laid off result both in sexist attitudes among managers and in lower wages for everyone, including women (common causality). Many other alternatives are also possible. Causality is very difficult to establish outside the experimental framework.
Most social scientists accept three basic conditions that, taken together, establish that an independent variable actually causes a dependent variable. They are:
Correlation: when the independent variable changes, the dependent variable changes
Precedence: the independent variable logically comes before the dependent variable
Non-spuriousness: the independent variable and the dependent variable are not both caused by some other factor
Precedence can also be easy to demonstrate—sometimes. For example, in Figure 1-6 it is very clear that race logically comes before income. It wouldn't make any sense to argue the opposite, that persons' incomes cause their racial identities. At other times precedence can be much more open to debate. For example, many development sociologists argue that universal education leads to economic development: an educated workforce is necessary for development. It is possible, however, that the opposite is true, that economic development leads to universal education: when countries are rich enough to afford it, they pay for education for all their people. One of the major challenges of social policy formation is determining the direction of causality connecting variables.
Non-spuriousness, on the other hand, is almost always very difficult to establish. An observed relationship between two variables is called "spurious" when it doesn't reflect any real connection between the variables. For example, smoking tobacco can cause lung cancer and smoking tobacco can cause bad breath, but bad breath doesn't cause lung cancer. This general logic of spuriousness is depicted in Figure 1-8. In Figure 1-8, a spurious relationship exists between two variables in a statistical model. The real reason for the observed correlation between the independent variable and the dependent variable is that both are caused by a third, common-cause variable. Situations like this are very common in the social sciences. In order to be able to claim that one variable causes another, a social scientist must show that an observed relationship between the independent variable and the dependent variable is not spurious.
Figure 1-8: Illustration of a spurious relationship
The problem with demonstrating non-spuriousness is that there can be many possible reasons why a relationship might be spurious. Returning to the relationship between parents' income and children's income, it is easy to see that there is a correlation between the two variables (Figure 1-1). It is also pretty obvious that parents' income precedes children's income. But what about non-spuriousness? There are many reasons why the relationship between parents' income and children's income might be spurious. One we've already seen: race. Non-white parents tend to have non-white children, so it's possible that instead of parent's income causing children's income, the truth is that the family's race determines both the parents' and the children's incomes (race is a common-cause variable). This could account for the observed correlation between parents' income and children's income. Other possible common-cause variables include:
The degree to which the family values money-making
Parents' educational levels (which can influence children's educational choices)
This last common-cause variable is an instructive example. In theory, having large numbers of children could force parents to stay home instead of working, lowering their incomes and making it difficult for them to afford college educations for their children, who could then have lower incomes as well. This might seem to most reasonable persons like a very unlikely scenario. The problem is that different persons have different ideas about what is reasonable. In order to establish the non-spuriousness of a relationship, researchers don't just have to convince themselves. They have to convince others, and everyone has a different idea of what might possibly create a spurious relationship between two variables. In the end, it is impossible to prove non-spuriousness. Instead, social scientists argue until they reach a consensus—or they just keep arguing. Causality is always subject to debate.
1.5: Case Study: Education Spending and Student Performance
Everyone knows that there are good schools and there are bad schools. The first question most parents ask when they're looking at a new home is "how are the schools?" Common sense suggests that the good schools are, on average, the rich schools. Everyone wants their children to go to schools that have brand-new computer labs, impressive sports facilities, freshly painted hallways, and nice green lawns. Parents also want their kids to receive individualized attention in small classes taught by talented, experienced teachers with master's degrees and doctorates. Active band, chorus, and art programs are also a plus. All this takes money.
A reasonable generalization from the observation that parents want to send their kids to schools that cost a lot of money to run is that states that spend more money on education will have better schools than states that spend less money on education. This generalization can be conceptualized into the theory that overall student performance depends (at least in part) on the amount of money a state spends on each student. This theory can be examined using data from the US National Center for Education Statistics (NCES). A database downloaded from the NCES website is reproduced in Figure 1-9. The cases are the 50 US states. There are two metadata columns (STATE and ABBR) and three variables (SPEND, READ_NAT, and MATH):
SPEND – Total state and local education spending per pupil
READ_NAT – State-average reading scores for native English-speaking 8th grade students
Figure 1-9: Data on education spending and student performance for 50 U. S. states
The theory that overall student performance depends on the amount of money a state spends on each student can be operationalized into two specific hypotheses:
State spending per pupil is positively related to state average reading scores
State spending per pupil is positively related to state average mathematics scores
In Figure 1-10 and Figure 1-11, scatter plots are used as statistical models for relating state spending to state reading and math scores. The dependent variable in Figure 1-10 is READ_NAT (reading performance for native English-speaking students) and the dependent variable in Figure 1-11 is MATH (mathematics performance). The independent variable in both figures is SPEND. In both figures state average scores do tend to be higher in states that spend more, but there is a large amount of error in explaining scores. There are probably many other determinants of student test scores besides state spending. Scores might be affected by things like parental education levels, family income levels, levels of student drug abuse, and whether or not states "teach to the test" in an effort to artificially boost results. Nonetheless, it is clear that (on average) the more states spend, the higher their scores.
Figure 1-10: Average 8th grade English-speaking student reading performance versus education spending for 50 U. S. states
Figure 1-11: Average 8th grade mathematics performance versus education spending for 50 U. S. states
The results of these data analyses tend to confirm the theory that overall student performance depends (at least in part) on the amount of money a state spends on each student. This theory may or may not really be true, but the evidence presented here is consistent with the theory. The results suggest that if states want to improve their student test scores, they should increase their school budgets. In education, as in most things, you get what you pay for.
Cases are the individuals or entities about which data have been collected.
Databases are arrangements of data into variables and cases.
Dependent variables are variables that are thought to depend on other variables in a model.
Generalization is the act of turning theories about specific situations into theories that apply to many situations.
Independent variables are variables that are thought to cause the dependent variables in a model.
Metadata are additional attributes of cases that are not meant to be included in analyses.
Operationalization is the process of turning a social theory into specific hypotheses about real data.
Scatter plots are very simple statistical models that depict data on a graph.
Statistical models are mathematical simplifications of the real world.
Variables are analytically meaningful attributes of cases.
Computing » Computer Science » Computer Programming » Ada Programming
Preface | Contributors | Manual of Style | Warning to Readers | Further Reading
Try to write in a clear, concise style. Use correct psychological terms, but make sure to explain such terms immediately afterward. Avoid interwiki links when possible.
There are three specificalities this text uses.
This should be used when blocking text off as separate information. If discussing masochism (sexual arousal from pain) and you want to sidetrack into algonagnia (sexual pleasure and orgasm from pain), you would use it:
It's important to remember that algonagnia is not a paraphilia, but a biological nerve dysfunction. Masochists are aroused by specific kinds of pain, but algolagniacs can be brought to orgasm through pain even if they aren't aroused.
This is a short cite of the DSM-IV, or content relating to the DSM-IV's stance on a paraphilia. This should ONLY be used when:
While popular culture likes to describe voyeurs as peeping toms who can't get a date or make significant relationships work, the DSM-IV shows that voyeurism is the most common of all paraphilias, with the highest rate of normal exclusivity out of all paraphilias. At least 55% of men and 30% of women admitted in studies to be aroused by acts that meet the standard of voyeurism. Some argue that this makes voyeurism simply a behavior and not a paraphilia.
Example Issue : Controversy
This should be used when there is significant disagreement in professiona psychological circles about a paraphilia , or the view of psychology on a specific cause or trait of a paraphilia. This should be used sparingly. An example dealing with pedophilia would be:
Pedophilia and Asexuality : Controversy
There is some research indicating that paraphilia is common among those who, whether by choice or vocation, are restricted from normal sexual activity. DSM-IV does not recognize such a link, but studies are still ongoing.
Warning: Unless you are very familiar with what is and isn't allowed to be fair use quoted from the DSM-IV, do not use this template or quote directly from the DSM-IV. The DSM-IV is widely available as excerpts on the Internet as long as it is only
The extended analysis, diagnostic guide, point-by-point criteria, and the like cannot be directly quoted under fair use.
The material below is directly taken from the DSM-IV or the DSM-IV-TR and summarized for clarity. The material excludes the specific diagnostic texts, case summaries, and extended text of the entry, and is as short as possible. The DSM-IV is widely quoted and cited in this manner, and this usage falls under fair use.
The material cited above comes from the DSM-IV-TR, ©1995-2006, American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc. The full text of the DSM-IV includes associated features, diagnostic tools based on culture, age, and gender features, prevalence, course, and familial pattern of mental disorders. It also covers diagnosis, treatment, and quality of care. The above cited material is a summary of a DSM-IV or DSM-IV-TR entry and should not be used for diagnostic purposes. The full text can be purchased here.
This should only be used in the section that directly speaks about DSM-IV Definitions.
The material below is directly taken from the DSM-IV or the DSM-IV-TR and summarized for clarity. The material excludes the specific diagnostic texts, case summaries, and extended text of the entry, and is as short as possible. The DSM-IV is widely quoted and cited in this manner, and this usage falls under fair use.
The material cited above comes from the DSM-IV-TR, ©1995-2006, American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc. The full text of the DSM-IV includes associated features, diagnostic tools based on culture, age, and gender features, prevalence, course, and familial pattern of mental disorders. It also covers diagnosis, treatment, and quality of care. The above cited material is a summary of a DSM-IV or DSM-IV-TR entry and should not be used for diagnostic purposes. The full text can be purchased here.
II.0 Vorwort – introduction, how to use this level, differences between Level I and Level II
Section II.A – Salzburg, Austria
Lektion II.1: Einfache Gespräche unter Freunden – German grammar (introduction), familiar conversations, word order in questions, pronouns (introduction)
Lektion II.2: Fremde und Freunde – verbs (introduction), pronouns in nominative case, formal conversations, pronoun gender
Lektion II.3: Die Zahlen – Counting (theme), numbers 1 to 12, telling time, nouns (introduction), definite articles & noun gender, indefinite articles.
Lektion II.5: Wiederholung – review of lessons II.1-5
Section II.B – Zürich, Switzerland
Lektion II.6: Die Wohnung – conjugating verbs (present tense), commands
Lektion II.7: Mathematik – simple math, numbers 13-100, telling time: minutes & seconds, days of the week, months, and seasons
Lektion II.8: Mein, Dein, und Sein – possessive adjectives and the genitive case, ein-group, plurals, conjunctions
Lektion II.9: Einkaufen gehen – articles of clothing, separable verbs, colors
Lektion II.10: Wiederholung – review of lessons II.6-10
Section II.C – Hannover, Germany
Lektion II.11: Verbtempus und Wortstellung – inverted word order, past and future tense verbs
Lektion II.12: Fragewörter – question words, phrases used in German and its examples and uses
Lektion II.13: Mein Arm schmerzt –
Lektion II.14: Animals –
Lektion II.15: Wiederholung – review of lessons II.11-14
Beyond the level of syntax is discourse. This is the influence that the practical requirements of speech have on grammar. Such influences include the relative frequency of words and phrases; context, mutual knowledge, and the flow of information in a conversation; and the intentions and feelings of the speakers. For example, the choice between long and short case forms and long and short plural forms may depend on such factors; other areas of grammar influenced by discourse factors include the choice between preposition and suffix; "free" word order; the choice between referring to something with a noun or with a pronoun; the omission of pronouns, tense, aspect, and mood when these are assumed to be understood; the choice between using the topic or a grammatically determined case for a noun phrase; the use of second-position (affect) infixes in a verb; and the transitivity of the verb.
Various particles in Naʼvi are used for addressing people, expressing emotion, and organizing a conversation. For example, tse is used to introduce an utterance, a mild announcement that one has something to say, like "now" or "well" in English. Tut is a particle of continuation; if someone asks for your name, or how you are, after answering you can add ngaru tut? "and you?"[note 1] The vocative particle ma was covered in the chapter on nouns, and the question-tag particle srake in the chapter on questions. Also considered particles are interjections such as tewti! "wow!", though other parts of speech may be used in this fashion, such as tam "to suffice" or "okay".
The second-position infixes, covered in the chapter on verbs, are determined primarily be discourse phenomena: The emotional connection the speaker has with the event, how likely the statement is to be accurate, and how much respect the social situation calls for.
There are also emotive particles that appear at the end of a clause and reflect the emotional connection the speaker feels about the topic of discussion or with the audience:
A particle ko which elicits agreement, like the eh of Canadian English (in other English dialects, ko can be translated "let's", "okay?", "why don't you", "wouldn't you agree?", etc.), as in makto ko! "Let's ride!" and,
"They can kill a person, you know."[1]
Pronouns allow one to refer to something multiple times without repeating its name. However, Naʼvi goes a step further: Pronouns tend to be used when switching from one referent to another, but otherwise dropped. That is, once the identity of a referent is established, pronouns aren't necessary, even for the subject of a clause. This is familiar from English texting, but is not as common in conversation.[note 2] In Naʼvi, it is good conversational style as well. The identity of subjects may also be recovered from situational expectations. If a simple statement of a feeling is made, such as ʼefu ngeyn "feel(s) tired", it can be assumed that the subject is the speaker, oe, as one can only be sure of one's own feelings; and if a question, ʼefu ngeyn srak?, it can be assumed that the speaker is inquiring about (ay)nga "you", as you're the only one whose feelings you would know directly. For third persons, one would normally expect the evidential in ‹ats›, as one can have no direct knowledge of the feelings of another person: ʼefatsu ngeyn "(s/he) seems tired"; ʼefatsu ngeyn srak? "do (they) seem tired (to you)?".
Two language registers are attested in Naʼvi. The formal ceremonial register has already been introduced; it's characterized by formal pronouns and an infix to the verb. There is also a military register. This is characterized by clipped speech—clipped even by Naʼvi standards—and abbreviated pronouns. For example,
Tìkan tawnatep!
T‹awn›atep cannot function as an English passive; the closest in the normal register would be tìkan atawnatep "a lost target".
In addition, the ä is dropped from genitive pronouns: oey (pronounced [wey]) "my", ngey "your", pey "her/his", etc.
As was discussed in the section on case, Naʼvi frequently uses a topic–comment structure, where a phrase is placed at the beginning of the sentence as the topic (background) for the comment which follows:
"Thank you for the questions" (lit. "As for the questions, I thank you")
However, a noun phrase is sometimes moved to the front of a clause without it taking the topic case:
"This creature, why do you bring him here?"
Since the topical case can only be used with nouns, in order to topicalize a clause, it must be relativized to a dummy noun:
"Excuse me for writing in English."
(Lit. "as for writing in English, may I be forgiven".)
Naʼvi constituent order (subject–object–verb order) is syntactically free—that is, it is determined by discourse factors rather than by syntax. The word order within a noun phrase (demonstrative-numeral-adjective-noun etc.) is similarly free. One of the few cases where a set word order is common is that lu tends to come at the beginning of a clause when it is used without a subject to mean "there is", a construction used for "to have": Lu oeru ikran "I have a banshee".
The basic (least marked) order is perhaps subject before object. Moving an argument to the front of a clause can be used to focus on it. For example,
Naʼvil ayyerikit yom "The People eat hexapedes"
Ayyerikit Naʼvil yom "Hexapedes (not direhorses) are eaten by the People"
That is, "hexapedes" are the point of the statement. (Naʼvi does not have a passive voice, which may perform a somewhat similar function in English.) This is the opposite of the topic, which would set the hexapedes up as the background for a following point:
Ayyerikìri, Naʼvil yom "As for hexapedes, the People eat them."
Likewise, moving an argument from where it would be expected at the front of a clause to the end may give it more "punch":
Lu oeru kxetse "I have a tail" (neutral statement)
Ngeyä kxetse lu oeru "Your tail is mine!" (emphasis on mine)
As noted under dative case in the chapter on nouns, the default word order of possession is lu "be" followed by the possessor in the dative, as in lu oeru "I have". Along with context, this helps distinguish who is who in a multiple dative construction:
"I have something (= words) to say, to everyone."
This kind of subordinating strategy is common among human fixed-order verb-final languages such as Japanese, Korean, and Turkish. Indeed, though these examples followed the English word order of subordinate clause following the noun it modifies, the human verb-final order of subordinate clause preceding the noun is also possible in Naʼvi:
"Itʼs a pleasure to be able to chat with you in Naʼvi."
(Lit. "this being-able-to-chat-with-you-in-Naʼvi thing is a pleasure to me")
"Thank you very much for sending my message to people!"
Furia ngal oeyä ʼupxaret aysuteru fpoleʼ, ngaru irayo seiyi oe nìtxan!
"Because" for the English clause order (verb-X because verb-Y) is either taweyk(a) (from oeyk "cause") or talun(a) (from lun "reason"). With the opposite clause order, the forms switch to aweykta and alunta.
Verbs in which transitive and intransitive forms imply different agents are made transitive with the causative infix ‹eyk›. For example, latem means "change", as an object changes by itself, as say the seasons change; if an external agent causes the change, however, the form is l‹eyk›atem. Similarly sngäʼi is "begin" in the sense that something happens on its own, as the rain begins; with an external agent, as in "I began work", the form is sng‹eyk›äʼi. However, with many verbs, transitivity does not imply a change in the acting agent. For example, pey may be either "wait" (intransitive) or "await" (transitive):
"Like you, I too am waiting."
"I can await the day when you will give us more."
General action, without any specific object, as in English "I ate too much", is intransitive, whereas an implied but unstated object, as in "he ate some (of it)", is transitive.[note 4] Thus,
Here the speaker is merely saying that hunting is an activity that they engage in; this equivalent to such intransitive clauses as "I walk". An overt object, on the other hand, requires that the agent be in the ergative case:
Oel tolaron paʼlit
If, however, the agent is in the ergative case, but there is no expressed object, then an omitted object is understood. So if asked about yerik, the speaker might say,
Taron oel kop.
In the case a relative clause removed either the subject or object of a dependent clause, the case of the other, and the transitivity of the dependent verb, are unaffected:
Ikran a tolaron oel tsawl lu nìtxan.
"The banshee I hunted was very big."
Here ikran is in the intransitive case because it is the subject of lu "to be"; however, oel remains in the ergative, since the object is understood from the context: Ikran a tolaron pot oel tsawl lu nìtxan "the banshee which I hunted it was very big".
The ergative case can also be dropped if the object is retain in a non-accusative case, as in a topic:
"You are all waiting for my guidance."
With an intransitive verb, the causative simply makes the verb transitive. For example, from po holahaw "he.INTR slept" we get oel h‹eyk›olahaw poti "I.ERG put him.ACC to bed (made him sleep)". However, if the verb is already transitive, its subject (now the 'causee') becomes dative rather than accusative. That is, there may be up to three arguments, in the ergative, dative, and accusative cases. So, from Neytiril yerikit tolaron "Neytiri.ERG hunted a hexapede.ACC, we get:
Eytukanìl Neytiriru yerikit teykolaron.
"Eytukan had Neytiri hunt a hexapede."
Not all arguments are required; also, the causee can be included but made more peripheral by putting it in an adpositional phrase:
Eytukanìl yerikit teykolaron.
Eytukanìl fa Neytiri yerikit teykolaron.
"Eytukan had a hexapede hunted by Neytiri."
In English, the opposite of a causative is a passive. Naʼvi does not have passives; something like "hexapedes are eaten" would be worded fkol yom ayyerikit "one eats hexapedes", with the pronoun fko "one". The difference between "hexapedes are eaten by the People" and "the People eat hexapedes" is essentially one of word order; since Naʼvi word order is free, it can be changed without having to change the verb or the subject, as noted above.
↑ For example, "Saw you online and wanted to say hi. Hope everything is fine. Will try to call this week. BTW, Carol finally got in touch with me. Said she's been very busy. Didn't go to India after all. Went to Vegas instead. I can't figure her out. Guess she decided on gambling rather than the guru." Note that "I" and "she" are required when changing from Carol to the speaker and then back to Carol, but otherwise not much bothered with.
↑ Lit., "Your actions must not be to one (= another), those which are not a pleasure to you"
↑ A clause in which an erstwhile transitive verb behaves intransitively, with no argument in the ergative or accusative case, is called an anti-passive.
↑ Transcribed from sound recording in the New York Times Magazine
↑ Learnnavi-Wiki Canon Dative + copula possessive
-Expresses a report/ratio of place (to), time (at), possession (of or 's), means, manner, price.- Introduced a complement of indirect object or a complement of attribution, a complement of the name or adjective.
Alternative: dedans (rarely used as a preposition)
Il a pressé l’orange afin d’en extraire du jus. He squeezed the orange to extract juice from it.
Also an adverb.
Ils sont avec leurs familles. They are with their families.
Il est allé chez lui. He went home.
Le cheval se gratte contre le mur. The horse is scratching against the wall.
Also a partitive article.Contractions: du, desIPA: /də/
Je joue du piano depuis trois ans. I have played the piano for three years.
Votez dès maintenant pour votre favori ! Vote now for your favorite!
Je veux commencer dès que possible. I want to start as soon as possible.
Garder les yeux sur la route devant vous. Keep your eyes on the road ahead of you.
Ils habitent en ville. They live in (the) town. Nous allons aller en voiture. We will go by car.
Used mostly to indicate distance in time or space.Also a pronoun.
On peut lire entre les lignes. We can read between the lines.
La salle est disponible jusqu'à la fin de la semaine. The hall is available until the end of the week.
L'école est loin de la plage. The school is far from the beach.
Paris reste parmi les villes les plus chères au monde. Paris remains among the most expensive cities in the world.
La lune a brillé pendant trois nuits. The moon shone for three nights.
Je l'ai volé pour toi. I stole it for you.
Elles veulent avoir une fête sans alcool. They want to have a party without alcohol.
Ouvert tous les jours sauf le dimanche. Open every day except Sunday.
La Côte d'Azur est sous la neige. The Côte d'Azur is under the snow.
Il y a beaucoup de monde sur la plage. There are lots of people on the beach. sept sur dix seven out of ten
Synonyms: au-dessus de (above)Antonyms: sous (below, under)Antonyms: dessous, au-dessous-de (below)IPA: /syr/ (audio)
L'avion devrait décoller vers 9 heures. The plane should take off around 9 o'clock. Un ouragan se dirige vers le Texas. A hurricane is heading towards Texas.
Voici ton vrai père ! Here is your real father!
Voilà les escrocs ! There are the swindlers!
Cette fille est en face de vous. That lady is across from you
Vous devriez sortir au lieu de rester à la maison. You should go out instead of staying at home.
Il ya beaucoup de poissons au fond de l'étang There are many fish at the bottom of the pond.
For those who don't like grammatical terms and don't know for sure what's "continuous tense", I'll tell that it's the same as the English verbs, ending in "-ing". So if you want to say that you "read" a book in the moment of speaking, you have to say "I am reading a book", not simply "I read a book", because the last could mean that you read a book in general, i.e. you're not reading it in the moment of speaking. So let's clear all that out with some examples.
The verbs stem and raha/rahe/rahi are pronounced almost as one (at once), although they're written separately. Sometimes in colloquial speech all is even shortened more. The "raha hu~" for example is pronounced "rahu~", "raha hai" as "rahai"...
(This section needs to be revised as it does not account for the distinction between intransitive and transitive verbs. When forming the perfect tense (past) in Hindi, the verb will not always match the traditional subject of your sentence in gender/number (this depends on transitivity of the verb). Some of the examples below are incorrect for this reason and should be rewritten according to standard Hindi grammar and the "ne" construction.)
Building past is easy. Just take the root of a verb and add -a, -e, or -i, respectively for Masculine Singular, Masculine Plurar and Feminine both - Singular and Plurar:
Some Verbs are irregular. I'll show you some of them (A little below you'll see the past of 'to be', which is needed to build the imperfect past tense, necessary to be able to say such phrases as "I've used to go ..."):
(1: Masc. Sg, 2: Masc. Pl. 3: Fem. Sg, 4: Fem. Pl.)
To build the past imperfect tense, we have first to learn the past tense of the "main" hindi verb: "to be" (Hona). Past of "hona" is even simplier than the present form:
Now as you know here/there/where (btw, there exists also another word for where = kaha~) I'll give you a Hindi proverb:
...
The past imperfect tense is used to tell about habitual actions in the past. In English it's best translated with the pattern "used to + verb":
Next comes of course the past continous tense:
Well, no need to help you much here. It's the same as the present continous except that it's used the past tense of Hona:
I think you got it, now for the FUTURE:
The Future tense it a bit more complicated than the past for it has more verb-endings for person than those by the past tense.
For "I" use -unga, for "Tu" use "ega", for "Tum" use "oge", for "voh" use "ega" and for "ham/aap/ve" the plural form "enge".
Verb Stem + TA / TE / TI + rahunga/rahega/rahenge/rahoge = Future Continuous Tense
Let's make the future continuous of the verb "pina" to make things clear:
So, now you have everything you have to know about verbs except if I've missed something. That was a long and a hard lesson so have a rest before you go to the next lesson :) Mr. Samir
A Quick introduction to programming and Visual Basic
There are many excellent references for learning to program in Visual Basic. Sites such as the Microsoft Developer Network provide a good overview, and the WikiBook [Visual Basic] provides an excellent guide for those with some experience in programming.
It may be useful for those new to programming to read the following section, however, those with experience in Visual Basic Programming should skip to the next section.
Let's get started and open up Visual Basic Express (In the Prerequisites section). The program should look like this (arrangements of toolbars may vary):
Hit CTRL+N to start a new project. This window allows you to choose a project to start.
Most courses start on Consoles (text only), but we're going to start with a Windows Forms Application. We want to create something which looks good (rather than a console window). Double Click the 'Windows Forms Application' to open a new application. You should see this:
Look at the 'Solution Explorer' Panel. This shows all the parts of the program. We have "Windows Application 1", a default name for the program. This contains "My Project" and "Form1.vb". My Project is a set of instructions which tell the computer to run your 'form' (programmer jargon for a window). Form1.vb is a form which you can edit. This has 2 parts: Design and Code. You can switch between these by using these buttons in the Solution Explorer:
Let's look at the code by pressing the View Code Button. (IMAGE5) You can see a text document. This contains some instructions already built in. It should say:
This is simply a way to start and stop the code. Form 1 is a "Class", basically this means that it can contain other bits of code. Making it Public means that other bits of code can refer to it (e.g. If you made another form it could get information from form1). You'll come across Private code later; this is code which can only be accessed by things in the same form.
Should students have the ability to use computers in the classroom?
Should students have the ability to use computers in the classroom? Should computer use in the classroom be a part of the educational day? How should computers be used in the classroom? These are all questions that are bounced around among teachers, staff and parents. Let’s look into the use of computers in the classroom by students.
Students Should Be Allowed To Use Computers in the Classroom
Teachers allowing students to use the computers in the classroom often becomes a big issue in schools. Younger, newer teachers want to expose students to computers as much as possible because that is what awaits them after graduation. Kathryn Tighe, a third grade teacher at Surry Elementary School states that, “Computers are a good thing for students to use in the classroom.” Older teachers often feel that students’ minds are being drained of potential knowledge if they sit in front of a computer. This way of thinking is due to the lack of staff development in the area of technology.
When should students be allowed to use the computers in the classroom? Different views are given to when and why students should use the classroom computer. The technology director will want the students using the computers so the department will continue to receive funding for more technology. Teachers want the computers to be used for reasons ranging from a babysitter to preparation for the real world. Administrators want the computers being used because they often feel that technology helps boost these wonderful Standards of Learning Test (SOL) scores. Students want to use the computers because it is fun as well as educational.
Why should students be allowed to use the computers in the classroom? All reasons stated previously are valid reasons to allow students to use classroom computers except for as a babysitter. The computers in the classroom are wonderful tools to enhance a lesson and the students’ knowledge of the computer world. There are many reasons for using computers in the classroom. Computer use can “increase basic skills in math, reading and writing” (Sadker) as well as other content areas. Sadker list other useful purposes of computer use in the classroom to include student motivation, the promotion of higher order thinking, increasing the use of academic resources, reaching different learning styles, and preparing students for the workplace. Computer use in the classroom by students enhances the ability to teach problem based learning. The computer can help a teacher “guide students in real-world problem solving” (Sadker) and still cover the curriculum for No Child Left Behind.
Computer Use: Part of the Educational Day
Many teachers love implementing computer usage into their lesson plans and then there are teachers who dread the thought of the students needing to get on the computer. Computer use can be a very vital part of the educational day for the teacher and students. Computers can help engage students in the lesson that is being taught. Computers can often be incorporated into any lesson and students like the change of pace (Tighe). Using computers as part of their educational day, students can become engaged in “problem solving” (McKenzie). Cooperative learning can also become a productive outcome by use of the computer when working on a class project. Children like to use computers in groups which encourages cooperative learning.
Middle school and high school students across Virginia are now taking their Standards of Learning Tests on computers. Preparing students to use the computer is an important part of their education since it is now becoming an increasing part of their vital testing sessions. Students like taking the VA SOLs online versus pencil and paper. “I don’t get so confused with a bubble sheet when I take my SOL online,” claims a fifth grader at Luther Porter Jackson Middle School. The student also likes the highlighting marker and calculator that can be used on the computer during the SOL tests. “I really like it when we get to use the laptops instead of the computer lab,” the student states.
How Computers Should Be Used In the Classroom
Many teachers use computers in the classroom in many different ways. What is the most beneficial use of computers for the students? Using computers as a babysitter is not helping students prepare themselves for the technological world that they will one day enter. The younger the students are when they begin to properly use the computer to benefit their education the better off they will be when they no longer have their teacher’s hand to hold.
The kindergarten students in an elementary school in Surry County have started a new program this year that requires the students to use the computer on a daily basis. The program is designed to help students begin to read. Before the students can use the program they must learn the different parts of the computer and how to use it properly. Some people my claim that this age is too young to understand how to use a computer, but there are preschool systems that start children at a much younger age. This program also helps the teacher work with twenty or more children that are all working at different paces. The teacher is able to give more attention to those who need more help without holding back those that can move on.
Ways To Use The Computer In The Classroom
The computer can be used for many different things in a classroom. It can be used for educational and learning purposes or it can be used to play games and explore the World Wide Web. The computer is not just a teaching tool for the teacher, but it is a learning tool that students can use as well. The most common applications used on a computer are usually a word processing program or the internet. Some teachers may even teach by presenting a PowerPoint presentation. The Florida Center for Instructional Technology lists the following ways in which computers can be used in your classroom: presentation tools, learning centers, development stations, or a combination of configurations. The Center also says that computers with internet access allow students and teachers to search for answers to questions immediately. Computers can be used in project-based activities if there are not enough computers for individual projects. Teachers can also schedule times when students can do individual work on the computers. Teachers should explore the different ways to incorporate computers into their daily lessons.
Press, don't pound on keys or mouse buttons
Keep fingers away from monitor (Keep screen clean)
Do not install new programs without proper training or approval from network administrator
Do not plug or unplug cables without approval or proper training
Do not attempt to move a computer without adult assistance
Follow acceptable use rules of your school
Load floppies and CDs in the proper manner
Do not touch media surface of CDs and floppies
Do not turn a computer on or off without permission [1]
Students Should Be Taught How To Use The Computer
If a teacher chooses to allow her students to use a computer in the classroom, there are some basic rules students should be taught when using the computer and the internet. First, the teacher should go over the school’s computer use policy as it relates to students. The teacher should also explain the proper care of a computer. The sidebar titled “Rules for Caring for Your Computer” lists some typical rules to present to students about the care of a computer. They must know that a computer is not something to play with or a toy. Before any type of activity is started, the teacher should give a brief lesson on how to use the computer and the appropriate applications that will be used in the activity or lesson. A study conducted by the National Center for Educational Statistics titled “Computer and Internet Use by Students in 2003” showed that 91% of children surveyed between the ages of 5 and 17 used computers in 2003 and only 62% of the same children used the internet. This shows that although most children have been around a computer at some point, they may not know how to use the computer or the applications on the computer, especially the internet. Teachers should make sure all students are at the same level when using a particular program or feature that some may not be familiar with. One important feature to instruct students on how to use properly is the internet. Students must comply with the school policy on using the internet as well as viewing age appropriate and content related material. The best way to use the internet is for students to only view websites that has prior approval from the teacher. Since teachers cannot be at several computers at the same time, students should be taught ways to evaluate websites independently. Kathy Schrock provides many evaluation surveys and resources on ways to evaluate a website at Critical Evaluation Information.
There will always be teachers that do not like technology but there is a growing number of teachers entering education who embrace technology and what it has to offer their students. Computer use in the classroom by students can not be based on personal preference. Teachers should not keep their students from working with computers just because they do not like them and do not want to learn more about them. The teachers and the school system must put the education of the students first and realize that it is a necessary part of the curriculum. Technology will only increase and students need to be prepared for it. The younger the supervised use in the classroom is started the better adapted the students will become as technology is an ever changing world of its own.
Click to reveal the answer.
You have a third grade class ready to do a graphing project. You are undecided about using the computer or pencil and graph paper. How would you justify using the computer to work on this project?
B. It will go quicker.
C. It will enhance their computer knowledge with spreadsheets.
D. The students hate to write.
C. Excel is an excellent program to learn and the computer use will help them hone in on their skills.C. Excel is an excellent program to learn and the computer use will help them hone in on their skills.
Your class has free time and it is too wet to go outside. What could you do in the classroom that could be fun and educational?
B. Play cards.
C. Play SOL To Go on the computer.
D. Read from the textbook.
C. SOL To Go gives them time on the computer, which is fun and they are studying their SOLs.C. SOL To Go gives them time on the computer, which is fun and they are studying their SOLs.
You are new to teaching and want to use the computer as much as possible. You realize that the teacher most of the students had the year before did not like the computer and therefore the students did not really get to use it. How would you start your students off on their first lesson using the computer?
A. Decide it is easier not to use the computer.
B. Give them a game and tell them have at it.
C. Log them on the computer yourself and get them to where you want them.
D. Teach them the different parts of the computer.
D. You need to start from the beginning; they are never going to learn the right way if no one teaches them. They want to learn.D. You need to start from the beginning; they are never going to learn the right way if no one teaches them. They want to learn.
Your students were given a writing assignment. You read over their work and decide that they have done a wonderful job. They like going to the computer lab and they want their papers typed and displayed for everyone to read. What do you tell your students?
A. They have to do it at home themselves.
B. You don’t have time to teach them how to use Word.
C. You have to fit it into your lesson plans.
D. You will take them to the lab during free time.
D. You need to not only tell them that you are proud of their work but you need to show them.
This can be a reward and a learning experience. Computer generated papers are the only kind accepted in college. Give them a jump start on the process.D. You need to not only tell them that you are proud of their work but you need to show them.
This can be a reward and a learning experience. Computer generated papers are the only kind accepted in college. Give them a jump start on the process.
You want your class to make a PowerPoint on simple machines as a class project to tackle this particular SOL. You are rather unfamiliar with PowerPoint. What do you decide to do?
A. Decide it is not worth your time.
B. Have someone else teach this lesson.
C. Learn about PowerPoint so your class can do this project.
D. Wing it and learn from your mistakes.
C. Staff development is the key to students learning the computer the correct way.C. Staff development is the key to students learning the computer the correct way.
Click to reveal sample responses.
How would you use your classroom computers in your students' daily activities?
I would use my classroom computers in different ways for my students during daily activities. In the morning and during Drop Everything And Read (D.E.A.R) I would encourage my students to read a book and take Accelerated Reading (AR) tests on the computer. Depending of the lesson of the day the computer might be incorporated into the lesson plan. The students need to know how to use the computer in all its varying ways and I want to be the one to help. Hopefully their curiosity about the many wonders of the computer will encourage them to explore it in more depth during their free time. Supervised games would be allowed only during free time and as a reward for a productive day.
Computers are of extreme importance to today’s generation. Most people use computers every day for work, school, and/or play. It is important for children to learn how to use computers so that they will be prepared for their future. Almost any job a student will consider uses a computer of some sort. The learning should begin at a young age. I feel it is important to integrate computers into the education of students. There are many computer programs that can enhance the learning of students.
I would like to provide time at least once a week where students are able to do a computer activity. These activities would enhance what I have been teaching this week. There are many important skills that can be learned using a computer. I believe one of the most important things I would like to teach my students is how to evaluate online sources. I think it is important for teachers to teach their student’s these skills and then give them a project evaluating sources that they find online.
I also believe that children should be given free time on computers as a privilege. There are many educational games that children enjoy playing that can help them with math, science, reading, etc. I would like to provide time to my students to be able to play these games. There are many ways that computers can be integrated into a child’s learning. It is important to use technology as it’s role in our every day life continues to grow. —Britney Kirby
There are numerous ways to use the computers in daily activities for students. As a current high school Spanish teacher, I have thought of several ways that it would be beneficial for my students to use the computers while practicing Spanish.
One of the most effective activities that I have found on the Internet for my students is the self-paced quizzes. These quizzes give my students the chance to work at their own pace and see immediately their mistakes. My classroom only has about five or six computers; therefore making it difficult for all students to use the computers at once. I try to plan two or three separate activities for my students to do and we rotate them. I assign one group the computer self-pace quizzes, another a written assignment, and another an oral assignment. All three activities are covering the same material but in a different way. This is how I keep my students interested because they rotate from group to group and have a chance to experience all activities.
Another effective way for students to use the computers is to have them complete group projects that require the use of the computer. Normally, I assign my students to groups and then assign them a project to complete together. I always allow room for the students to be creative; most students will get involved in a project especially on the computer if they know they can add there own personal touch to it. As for all my projects there are certain activities that they must complete on the computer so that I know their basic computer skills.
Finally, I let my students use the computers to practice their listening skills. I believe that in order for them to understand Spanish they need to hear it from someone besides myself. I assign each student to a specific day of the week and that day they are allowed to get on the computer and search for a website or go to a site that I have assigned and complete a listening activity.
In conclusion, there are various ways that you as a teacher can use the computers in your daily activities. A lot of what you do and allow the students to do depends on their grade level and the subject. In teaching Spanish, I have found that I have to be creative in order to plan activities that will be beneficial and interesting for my students. —Amanda EsparzaI would use my classroom computers in different ways for my students during daily activities. In the morning and during Drop Everything And Read (D.E.A.R) I would encourage my students to read a book and take Accelerated Reading (AR) tests on the computer. Depending of the lesson of the day the computer might be incorporated into the lesson plan. The students need to know how to use the computer in all its varying ways and I want to be the one to help. Hopefully their curiosity about the many wonders of the computer will encourage them to explore it in more depth during their free time. Supervised games would be allowed only during free time and as a reward for a productive day.
Computers are of extreme importance to today’s generation. Most people use computers every day for work, school, and/or play. It is important for children to learn how to use computers so that they will be prepared for their future. Almost any job a student will consider uses a computer of some sort. The learning should begin at a young age. I feel it is important to integrate computers into the education of students. There are many computer programs that can enhance the learning of students.
I would like to provide time at least once a week where students are able to do a computer activity. These activities would enhance what I have been teaching this week. There are many important skills that can be learned using a computer. I believe one of the most important things I would like to teach my students is how to evaluate online sources. I think it is important for teachers to teach their student’s these skills and then give them a project evaluating sources that they find online.
I also believe that children should be given free time on computers as a privilege. There are many educational games that children enjoy playing that can help them with math, science, reading, etc. I would like to provide time to my students to be able to play these games. There are many ways that computers can be integrated into a child’s learning. It is important to use technology as it’s role in our every day life continues to grow. —Britney Kirby
There are numerous ways to use the computers in daily activities for students. As a current high school Spanish teacher, I have thought of several ways that it would be beneficial for my students to use the computers while practicing Spanish.
One of the most effective activities that I have found on the Internet for my students is the self-paced quizzes. These quizzes give my students the chance to work at their own pace and see immediately their mistakes. My classroom only has about five or six computers; therefore making it difficult for all students to use the computers at once. I try to plan two or three separate activities for my students to do and we rotate them. I assign one group the computer self-pace quizzes, another a written assignment, and another an oral assignment. All three activities are covering the same material but in a different way. This is how I keep my students interested because they rotate from group to group and have a chance to experience all activities.
Another effective way for students to use the computers is to have them complete group projects that require the use of the computer. Normally, I assign my students to groups and then assign them a project to complete together. I always allow room for the students to be creative; most students will get involved in a project especially on the computer if they know they can add there own personal touch to it. As for all my projects there are certain activities that they must complete on the computer so that I know their basic computer skills.
Finally, I let my students use the computers to practice their listening skills. I believe that in order for them to understand Spanish they need to hear it from someone besides myself. I assign each student to a specific day of the week and that day they are allowed to get on the computer and search for a website or go to a site that I have assigned and complete a listening activity.
In conclusion, there are various ways that you as a teacher can use the computers in your daily activities. A lot of what you do and allow the students to do depends on their grade level and the subject. In teaching Spanish, I have found that I have to be creative in order to plan activities that will be beneficial and interesting for my students. —Amanda Esparza
Brewer, Jo Ann. Early Childhood Education: Preschool through Primary Grades. 5th ed. New York: Pearson, 2004.
Chapman, Chris & Debell, Matthew. “Computer and Internet Use by Students in 2003”. September 2006. National Center for Educational Statistics. 19 June 2007. http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2006/2006065.pdf
Howell, Sixth Grade Student, Luther Porter Jackson Middle School, personal interview, June 4, 2007.
McKenzie, "Creating Technology Enhanced Student-Centered Learning Environments." From Now On: The Educational Technology Journal Vol. 7, 6Mar 1998 June 4, 2007 http://fno.org/mar98/flotilla.html
“Multimedia in the Classroom”. 2007. Florida Center for Instructional Technology. 20 June 2007. http://fcit.usf.edu/multimedia/deliver/deliverb.html
Sadker, Myra, and David Sadker. Teachers, Schools, and Society. 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005.
Schrock, Kathy. “Critical Evaluation Information”. 1995-2007. Discovery School. 19 June 2007. http://school.discovery.com/schrockguide/eval.html
“Taking Care of a Computer”. 19 June 2007. http://www.lethsd.ab.ca/mmh/technology/grade1tech/takingcare.htm
Tighe, Kathryn, Third Grade Surry County Elementary Teacher of the Year, personal interview, June 4, 2007.
Araminta Meliflua was a pure-blood witch and a member of the Black Family. She is Walburga Black's cousin and apparently tried to pass a bill that would make it legal to hunt muggles.
While looking at the Black Family tapestry, she is one of the names that Sirius points out to Harry. According to Sirius at some point she tried to pass a bill through the Ministry that would make muggle hunting legal.
Sirius views Araminta with contempt much like he does with the rest of the family.
Araminta Meliflua seems to have an especially strong hatred for muggles, even compared to the rest of the family. The fact that she tried to make it legal to hunt muggles shows us that she viewed them to a level almost similar to animals. The level of loathing she has towards muggles makes her sound almost like a Death Eater, though we have no evidence that she ever was one or even had anything to do with the organization.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Why do you think Araminta Black tried to pass the Muggle Hunting Law?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Conductors & Insulators - Electronic Circuits - AND & OR Gates - Circuit/Systems Diagram - Hydraulics - Hydraulics & Pneumatics - Technological Products - Preservation-1 - Identifying Materials - Properties of Materials - Preservation-2 - Electroplating - Conditioning-Strengthening/Waterproofing-1 - Conditioning-Strengthening\Waterproofing-2 - Shaping - Forming - Forces - Types of Structures - Mechanisms Worksheet
The activities have been designed to develop specific knowledge & associated skills that form the core of the assessment standards of the various grades. These must not be considered, nor taken to be "technology" - They are only enabling activities designed specifically to assist you with ideas for the development of concepts, what needs to be taught, learnt, so that learners have a chance at success when engaging in technology. The activities are not contextualised in any module as such and are not about making a product, as our focus is on the development of concepts.
This is the page to discuss the lesson, ask your questions, leave your comments, or just to say hello!
Click here or the tab labeled “edit this page” at the top of this page in order to add your comment at the end.
Text of comment. Sign your comment using “--~~~~”. This will look something like this: --Martin Kraus (talk) 09:26, 14 November 2008 (UTC)
Navigate Language Fundamentals topic: ( v • d • e )
Conditional blocks allow a program to take a different path depending on some condition(s). These allow a program to perform a test and then take action based on the result of that test. In the code sections, the actually executed code lines will be highlighted.
The if block executes only if the boolean expression associated with it is true. The structure of an if block is as follows:
...
Here is a double example to illustrate what happens if the condition is true and if the condition is false:
Code section 3.22: Two if blocks.
Output for Code section 3.22
Hello!
Bye!
If only one statement is to be executed after an if block, it does not have to be enclosed in curly braces. For example, if (i == 0) i = 1; is a perfectly valid portion of Java code. This works for most control structures, such as else and while. However Oracle's Java Code Conventions explicitly state that the braces should always be used.
The if block may optionally be followed by an else block which will execute if that boolean expression is false. The structure of an if block is as follows:
...
An else-if block may be used when multiple conditions need to be checked. else-if statements come after the if block, but before the else block. The structure of an if block is as follows:
...
Code listing 3.3: MyConditionalProgram.java
Output for code listing 3.3
Keep in mind that only a single block will execute, and it will be the first true condition.
All the conditions are evaluated when if is reached, no matter what the result of the condition is, after the execution of the if block:
Output for code section 3.23
Conditional expressions use the compound ?: operator. Syntax:
This evaluates boolean expression1, and if it is true then the conditional expression has the value of expression1; otherwise the conditional expression has the value of expression2.
Code section 3.24: Conditional expressions.
This is equivalent to the following code fragment:
Code section 3.25: Equivalent code.
The switch conditional statement is basically a shorthand version of writing many if...else statements. The switch block evaluates a char, byte, short, or int (or enum, starting in J2SE 5.0; or String, starting in J2SE 7.0), and, based on the value provided, jumps to a specific case within the switch block and executes code until the break command is encountered or the end of the block. If the switch value does not match any of the case values, execution will jump to the optional default case.
...
Code section 3.26: A switch block.
Output for code section 3.26
i equals something other than 1 or 2
If a case does not end with the break statement, then the next case will be checked, otherwise the execution will jump to the end of the switch statement.
Look at this example to see how it's done:
Code section 3.27: A switch block containing a case without break.
Output for code section 3.27
Starting in J2SE 5.0, the switch statement can also be used with an enum value instead of an integer.
Though enums have not been covered yet, here is an example so you can see how it's done (note that the enum constants in the cases do not need to be qualified with the type:
Code section 3.28: A switch block with an enum type.
Output for code section 3.28
Mondays are the worst!
Starting in J2SE 7.0, the switch statement can also be used with an String value instead of an integer.
Output for code section 3.29
Mondays are the worst!
Addition is thought to be the easiest function the abacus can calculate. To add, the user must display the original number and add the desired number of beads to the original number.
Addition on a Japanese abacus selected from Abacus: Mystery of the Bead
Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease that usually affects the hands and feet. Other types include gout, lupus, fibromyalgia and septic arthritis. They are all rheumatic diseases.
File:Chuchu group.jpg A group of various ChuChus.
A ChuChu is one of the many enemies in The Legend of Zelda series. ChuChus are gelatinous creatures that come in many different colors, shapes, and forms.[1] In most cases, when one is destroyed, it will leave behind what is called Chu Jelly which can be stored in Empty Bottles.[1] Each color of Chu Jelly will affect Link in a different way when it is drunk. The consequences usually effect Link's hearts or magic meter, but other uses have been seen.
ChuChus are a species similar to Gels that are often found in Termina Fields as Red and Green ChuChus. If they are carrying something, it is visible in their insides. They hop towards their prey when someone gets too close. The main variants are Red, Blue, Yellow and Green. Red contains a heart (although it would give Link a Green Rupee if his health was full), yellow contains arrows, and green contains small magic jars. Blue contains nothing, but can be frozen with the ice arrow to form a block. In this form they have short, fat bodies and eyes that rest on tall stalks. They resemble tinted bottles, and on the fat body area there is a large mouth that does not seem to open.
The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker
ChuChus have evolved since their appearance in Majora's Mask. They resemble a combination of Gels and Buzz Blobs. Oddly enough, they are quite similar now to the Pokémon Wobbuffet. They are now completely filled in, whereas their Majora's Mask counterparts were translucent. Like Majora's Mask's ChuChus, they hop at any creature that comes near them.
ChuChus mostly come in Red and Green, with Green being able to hide as a pool.
Another form of the ChuChu is the Blue ChuChu, which are very rare, and give off electricity. They appear mostly on the small, generally deserted islands of the Great Sea. Their jelly is limited to 20, as there are only 20 Blue ChuChus in the game; they themselves will always come back, but will not drop jelly more than once apiece.
Some Dungeons have Yellow ChuChus, who also give off electricity, and produce red and green Jelly.
In later dungeons the player will find Shadow ChuChus, which are dark purple in colour, who must be turned to stone by beams of light (and if you move them away from the light, or the light away from them for too long they'd eventually return to their dark purple state) from the Mirror Shield or Medli's harp then picked up and thrown to be destroyed. Hitting them with the sword will make them break apart and immediately reform. When turned to rocks they can also be defeated by breaking them with the Skull Hammer.
The Legend of Zelda: The Minish Cap
File:Chuchu Giant The Minish Cap.png Giant ChuChu bearing down on Link
ChuChus remain relatively the same as in The Wind Waker, except that now, Chu Jelly isn't the main ingredient of Potions. A new addition to the ChuChu family is the Spiny ChuChu, a gray ChuChu who can generate spikes to hurt Link and defend itself. The gray ChuChu can be stunned using bombs, a Spin attack or Hurricane attack or the Boomerang, and can subsequently be killed far more easily. There are also red ChuChus with rock helmets making them invulnerable with them on.
A giant Green ChuChu appears as a boss in The Minish Cap, in the first dungeon, Deepwood Shrine. While not actually a giant, it appears very large from the perspective of the Minish-sized Link at that point in the game. A similar giant Blue ChuChu appears later on as a mini-boss in the fourth dungeon.
Red, Purple, Blue, Yellow, and Rare ChuChus (now simply called "Chus") return in Twilight Princess, as faceless, amorphous slug-shaped gelatinous creatures. They move on their stomachs rather than stand upright as in previous incarnations, and can merge together (and subsequently split when attacked) to form larger, single creatures. Their Chu Jelly can again be collected, however it is consumable immediately after collection, unlike The Wind Waker, where it has to be made into Potions first. Like most bottled goods, each Chu Jelly the player receives can only be used once.
Link can scoop up, in a bottle, the Chu Jelly that remains when they are defeated.
Red Chu Jelly is identical to Red Potion, which restores eight hearts worth of health.
Blue Chu Jelly is identical to Blue Potion and restores all hearts.
Yellow Chu Jelly can be used in place of lantern oil in order to replenish it with fuel.
Purple Chu Jelly causes random effects on health (similar to consuming a bottled Poe spirit in Ocarina of Time). It will either restore one heart, restore all hearts, take away one heart, or take away all but one quarter of one heart.
Rare Chu Jelly is identical to Great Fairy's Tears, in that it restores all hearts and doubles sword damage for about 15 seconds.
Damage inflicted on a large Chu can break it up into two smaller ones, and Chus can continue to be halved until they are small enough to kill.
A negative side effect of this is that, given enough time, the smaller Chus can combine again into larger Chus. If two Chus of different color combine, they will turn purple (and cannot be separated into their original colors again).
The exception to this rule is if a blue and yellow Chu combine - they create a green Chu, whose jelly is supposed to refill magic. However, the magic system was removed from Twilight Princess at some point before release, so the green Chu jelly has no effect. In the GameCube version of the game, combining a yellow and blue Chu will merely make a purple Chu. This can only be done in the Cave of Ordeals.
There is also a mysterious black Chu jelly that can only be obtained in the Nintendo GameCube version of Twilight Princess with an Action Replay cheat device. It takes away Link's hearts, anywhere from one to all of them. Black Chus attack with a lunge. The jelly is similar to the Nasty Soup which can be scooped from Coro's pot in Faron Woods.
Red, Yellow, Stone, Green and Blue ChuChus appear in Phantom Hourglass, in a very similar form to how they appear in the prequel to the game, The Wind Waker.
Red ChuChus are always vulnerable to any attack. A Stone ChuChu is simply a Red ChuChu with a stone covering, with must be blown up by a bomb in order for it to become vulnerable. Yellow ChuChus are "electrified" and will shock the player, causing damage, when struck at while they are in this state. However, after a few seconds, their electric barrier will diminish, allowing the player to attack. Blue ChuChus are very simillar in the way they wield electricity, but don't drop their barrier unless hit by a long-range attack, such as a boomerang or arrow. Green ChuChus collapse for protection when struck at and can't be hurt in that state. They rarely appear in this game.
This set of parameters contains the Accounts Receivable options and values.
Customer Entity Name (used if, for example, customers are called "clients")
In this lesson, we learn how to say how long we've been working for, how old we are.
uNandi: Sawubona Philani!
uPhilani: Yebo sawubona Nandi!
uNandi: Unjani?
uPhilani: Ngisaphila, wena unjani?
uNandi: Nami ngikhona.
uPhilani: Uneminyaka emingaki, uyasebenza?
uNandi: Ngineminyaka engu-5 ngisebenza. Nawe, uneminyaka emingaki ufunda eWits?
uPhilani: Ngineminyaka engu-2 ngifunda.
uNandi: Sala kahle.
uPhilani: Hamba kahle.
"Nginonyaka ngisebenza eKPMG" is used for one year. As said before this has the same pattern as the other verbs. To express how old we are, we use the same construction but with no verb after it or 'ubudala' may be used, which means years since birth. Note on the numbers, engu-5 should be read as engu-'five'. So the number is read as it would be in English. Thus engu-10 would be read as engu-'ten'. This is done because Zulu numbers are cumbersome particularly for numbers above 5.
Uneminyaka emingaki ubudala?
uNandi: Sawubona Philani!
uPhilani: Yebo sawubona Nandi!
uNandi: Unjani?
uPhilani: Ngiyaphila, wena unjani?
uNandi: Nami ngisaphila.
uPhilani: Uneminyaka emingaki ubudala?
uNandi: Ngineminyaka engu-25. Nawe, uneminyaka emingaki?
uPhilani: Ngineminyaka engu-22 ubudala. Usebenzaphi?
uNandi: Ngisebenza eNedbank. Ubhuti wakho usebenza na?
uPhilani: Yebo, yena usenbenza eCrispy Chicken. Umama wakho usebenza kuphi?
uNandi: Yebo, yena usebenza eChris Hani Baragwanath Hospital.
uPhilani: ungudokotela?
uNandi: Cha, yena ungunesi. Umama wakho uneminyaka emingaki?
uPhilani: Uneminyaka engu-37.
uNandi: uMama wami uneminyaka engu-41.
uPhilani: Sala kahle!
uNandi: Hamba kahle!
Here wakho means your again. The interrogative suffix -phi can also easily be used with sebenza. The characters inquire about age with or without ubudala. Notice how simply a question about someone else's age can be formed.
Remember these nouns from last lesson. We are going to make simple sentences with them. In Zulu, the subject has to provide a concord that is attached to the beginning of the verb. The words in the table below all belong to the first noun class. Unlike many other languages that just use the verb conjugated in the third person all the time. Ironically, this would be the case if all the nouns belonged to the first class. But this is not the case. The noun always determines the concord that the verb has attached to the front of it.
Udokotela usebenza eChris Hani Baragwanath.
Ugogo uhamba eKhaya.
Umngane wami usebenzela iWits.
Umpheki usebenzela iMacDonalds.
Umfundi ufunda eGoli.
Umyeni wami usebenza eNedbank.
Umkhulu uhlala eNaturena.
Uthisha uhamba esikoleni.
Nina nisebenza eStandard Bank.
Thina sihlala eHoughton.
Wena usebenzela iDeloite.
Yena ufunda eWits.
So if we look at the sentences, we can see that all the nouns use the subject concord 'u'. This is the same subject concord that is used by 'yena' and 'wena'. The formation of one of these sentences can be summed up as follows: Umyeni u + sebenza eNedbank. So all we have to do is attach 'u' to the front of various verbs. Take note of the fact that the 'e' to form places is not used with sebenzela but it is always used with sebenza.
We can say how long we have been working. Nginemiyaka engu-11 ngisebenza.
We can form simple sentences with nouns as the subject. Ugogo uhamba eKhaya.
We have further illustrated the use of pronouns and their subject concords.
Try the Exercise or go the next Lesson.
Or alternatively, go back to the Index.
The functioning of vwprintf is same as that of swprintf. The difference between both functions is that the argument list has been replaced by a pointer to a list of argument. vwprintf performs the wide character output to the string like stdout and stdout should not be byte oriented.
The functioning of vwprintf is same as that of swprintf.The difference between both functions is that the argument list has been replaced by a pointer to a list of argument. vwprintf performs the wide character output to the string like stdout and stdout should not be byte oriented.
Customizing Page Headers and Footers‎
Floats, Figures and Captions
Scientific Reports (Bachelor Report, Master Thesis, Dissertation)
Counters are an essential part of LaTeX: they allow you to control the numbering mechanism of everything (sections, lists, captions, etc.).
To that end each counter stores an integer value in the range of long integer, i.e., from
In LaTeX it is fairly easy to create new counters and even counters that reset automatically when another counter is increased (think subsection in a section for example). With the command
If you want the counter to be reset to zero every time another counter is increased, use:
For example, if you want to enumerate the equations in each chapter independently, you can create something like an "equationschapter" counter that will be automatically reset at the begin of each section.
To add to an existing counter another counter causing a reset when increased, use:
If this doesn't work it might be because of an old LaTeX version, the following should work in that case:
To increase the counter, either use
\refstepcounter{NameOfTheNewCounter} % used for labels and cross referencing
To set the counter value explicitly, use
There are several ways to get access to a counter.
\theNameOfTheNewCounter will print the formatted string related to the counter (note the "the" before the actual name of the counter).
\value{NameOfTheNewCounter} will return the counter value which can be used by other counters or for calculations. It is not a formatted string, so it cannot be used in text.
\arabic{NameOfTheNewCounter} will print the formatted counter using arabic numbers.
Note that \arabic{NameOfTheNewCounter} may be used as a value too, but not the others.
Strangely enough, LaTeX counters are not introduced by a backslash in any case, even with the \the command. plainTeX equivalents \count and \newcount\mycounter do abide by the backslash rule.
Numbers from 1 to 26 inclusive converted to strings «a», «b», …, «z». Other numbers (negative numbers, zero, 27, 28, …,
) converted to empty string.
Same as \alph, but upper case letters used.
Numbers from 1 to 4999 inclusive converted to strings «i» (1), «ii» (2), …, «mmmmcmxcix» (4999), where «i» — 1, «v» — 5, «x» — 10, «l» — 50, «c» — 100, «d» — 500, «m» — 1000. Numbers from 5000 to
Same as \roman, but upper case letters used.
Aimed at footnotes; prints a sequence of symbols.
Book with parts, sections, but no chapters
Here follows an example where we want to use parts and sections, but no chapters in the book class :
See the List Structures chapter.
Here is an example for recreating something similar to a section and subsection counter that already exist in LaTeX:
\addtocounter{mysection}{2} % set them to some other numbers than 0
As a sense organ, the mammalian eye can see things.
The basic thing in Pixilang is the pixi-container. A Pixi-container can contain a text-string, image, link to another pixi-container with alpha-channel, or a numeric array. You can use different pixi-containers as simple arrays.
Remember: In Pixilang "image", "text-string", "numeric array" are ID-numbers:
Congratulations on the new book! [click for more]
Please read Using Wikibooks to learn about editing and writing books. You can ask any questions in the help room.You can help people find this book by categorizing it.
Education in today's fast changing societies requires innovation.
The objective of this book is to capacitate students to become innovation managers by providing to them inside views on educational innovations. First, relevant concepts of innovation management are covered and then more specific concepts.
Arena setup in Buffalo for the 2008 Winter Classic
In the 2005–06 season, Ovechkin and Crosby began their careers. In their first three seasons, they each won both the Art Ross and Hart trophies; Crosby captured both in 2007 and Ovechkin in 2008. The 2006 Stanley Cup Finals was the first time that franchises that originally played in the World Hockey Association (WHA) met in the Stanley Cup Final, as the Oilers lost a seven-game series to the Hurricanes. The following season, the Senators lost the finals in five games to the Ducks. The three year streak of Canadian teams in the finals was halted in the 2007–08 season, when the Red Wings defeated the Penguins for their fourth Stanley Cup in 11 years.
The success of the Heritage Classic led the NHL to schedule more outdoor games. The Sabres hosted the 2008 NHL Winter Classic on New Year's Day 2008, losing to the Pittsburgh Penguins in a shootout before a crowd of 71,217 at Ralph Wilson Stadium. The second Winter Classic was held January 1, 2009 at Wrigley Field in Chicago between the Blackhawks and Red Wings.
Intending to promote the game world wide, the league sent the San Jose Sharks and Calgary Flames to begin the 1998–99 season with two games in Tokyo, Japan. Since 2007, the NHL has been sending teams to Europe to start each season. The Los Angeles Kings met the Ducks at the O2 Arena in London, England to start the season the 2007–08 season. A year later, four teams were sent to Prague, Czech Republic and Stockholm, Sweden. One of those teams, the Rangers, also participated in the inaugural Victoria Cup, defeating the Kontinental Hockey League's Metallurg Magnitogorsk 4–3 in a single game. The NHL plans to have another four teams open the 2009–10 season in Stockholm and Helsinki, Finland. In 2010, Vancouver will host the Winter Olympics, the first time an NHL city has hosted the even since the league began participating. The NHL's participation in future games remains in doubt, as it has expressed a desire not to participate in the 2014 games in Sochi, Russia. The players, however, strongly favour continued participation in the Olympics. The third World Cup of Hockey is expected to take place in 2011, seven years after the 2004 tournament.
On June 22, 2016, the NHL continued expansion into Sun Belt areas, announcing an expansion team for the 2017-18 season based in Las Vegas, Nevada. On November 22, 2016, the team presented their logo and name to the public, naming themselves the Vegas Golden Knights. The team began play in the 2017-18 season, playing home games in the T-Mobile Arena in Paradise, Nevada. The team reached the Stanley Cup Finals in its first season, one of the best performances by an expansion team in NHL history. The team has found relative success in Las Vegas, getting above average attendance after their first season, until the 2020-21 season, in which the amount of fans permitted in T-Mobile Arena was limited due to COVID-19 concerns. On December 4, 2018, Seattle, Washington was announced as the home of the 32nd NHL team, with a goal of beginning play by the 2021-22 season in a rebuilt KeyArena. On June 25, 2020, the name of the renewed arena was announced, accompanied with a new logo. Due to an attempt to bring awareness to climate change, the arena was named Climate Pledge Arena, with a promise of the arena being zero-carbon. The team name and logo were announced on July 23, 2020, branding themselves as the Seattle Kraken.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Basic Flute Method Method book for those beginning to learn flute.
Links • Learning a piece of music
There are several levels of maintenance required to keep your flute in good working condition.
As the flute is played, moisture builds up inside the tube. Whilst the instrument is designed to cope with this, it is best to wipe out the instrument after each use, in order to prevent decay of pads, corrosion of the instrument, and a bad smell.
Several items are needed as part of the daily cleaning kit.
The cleaning rod, which should have been supplied with the instrument, is a long rod (approximately the length of the body of the flute), with a hole in one end. Rods are commonly made from plastic or metal, but wood is best, as it prevents scratches on the inside of the instrument. The cleaning rod is commonly kept in a special compartment inside the flute case.
The cloth you use for cleaning the inside of your flute should be lint-free, soft, and quite absorbent. Some flute manufacturers provide a loose-woven gauze-style cloth. Ensure that the cloth is of a reasonable size, so that it can adequately clean the flute.
This is a soft lint-free cloth that is used exclusively for gently removing fingerprints from the surface of the instrument after use. Do not use a designated "silver polishing cloth", as the chemicals in these cloths will damage the surface of the instrument.
When you have finished playing the instrument, disassemble it, placing each piece carefully into the case. Take your cleaning rod and your cleaning cloth, and insert one corner of the cloth into the hole in the rod, and pull through approximately 2-3 inches. Begin twisting the rod so that the cloth winds around, covering the entire length of the rod. Gently push the cloth-covered rod through each segment of the flute, checking to see if all moisture has been removed. If you have difficulty removing the moisture from the headjoint, experiment with wrapping a small amount of the cloth around the bare end of the stick before inserting it. You may need to wrap the cloth more tightly in order to swab the flute completely, and conversely, you may find that the cloth is simply too bulky to fit into the flute. If this is the case, try wrapping it thinly, or perhaps using a smaller cloth. Do not force the cloth into the flute - this can be costly to repair if it becomes lodged. This procedure should be performed after each use of the flute, before the instrument has had a chance to dry out.
Once the inside of the flute is dry, take your polishing cloth, and gently remove all marks from the surface of the instrument. Place all pieces back into the case, and close the lid, ensuring the instrument is positioned correctly. Cleaning cloths should be stored somewhere other than inside the flute case, as this can squash the keys and cause unnecessary stress. Consider tying them around the handle of your case, or folding them neatly and keeping them in a case pocket.
Your flute should be serviced every 6–12 months. In a routine service, the technician should complete tasks such as:
a full clean of the flute, including under the mechanism, removing most dust and tarnish.
Various further tasks may be required to bring your flute to full working order. Often this would be to treat damage inflicted upon the flute, such as a bent key or a snapped spring. These things can be costly to repair, so you are best advised to take good care of your instrument in the first place!
Do not leave your flute sitting in the open air for extended periods (and NEVER on a chair!)
This will encourage silver flutes to tarnish.
There is a greater opportunity for dust to collect on the mechanism.
There is greater potential for your flute to be knocked over (or sat on!) by an unsuspecting passer-by.
Do not allow non-flute players to fool around on your flute.
Always wash your hands before you begin to play, and if possible, clean your teeth. Dental hygiene (especially after eating) helps to prevent sticky pads.
Avoid leaving musical instruments in vehicles. Temperatures inside vehicles reach extremes of hot and cold, causing glues to melt, or lubricants to become quite sticky. In addition, instruments are generally not covered by motor vehicle insurance, and are a prime candidate for theft.
Have your flute professionally serviced regularly.
What tasks can you complete yourself, between services?
Occasionally your flute may develop minor problems, which can be easily remedied between services; a selection of them is outlined below.
Many student and semi-professional flutes are equipped with tiny adjustment screws, which allow easy adjustment of the mechanism. Occasionally these may work themselves loose - or perhaps you need to counter-act a leak that has developed in one of the keys. Bear in mind that fixing one leak may cause another, so these adjustments should be approached with caution. Do not learn how to do this on you best flute! Instead, ask someone with experience to demonstrate. It will take some practice before you can confidently locate the screw that affects the leaky key, but once you do, you can use a tiny jeweller's screwdriver to adjust it. Avoid being too extreme with this - attempt to move the screw no more than 1/4 of a turn at any time, constantly checking to see if it has fixed the leak. It is possible to adjust these screws too far, so do not screw them up until they feel 'tight'. It is easy for a beginner to misadjust the wrong screws and make a mess of things. If this happens, don't panic - it's easilly corrected. However, frequent turning of these screws will often cause them to become loose - and the flute unreliable. This can be corrected with a tiny drop of fingernail polish.
The other screws on your flute are the ones at the end of each rod, holding the mechanism onto the body. These screws are notorious for working themselves loose, and if your flute is in good repair, you should be able to tighten the screw - but don't force it. Once the screw is back in place, you may consider using a small dab of nail polish over the top of the screw, to try and persuade it not to unscrew itself again. Mention this to your repairer next time you have it serviced. Better flutes have screws with heads (or shoulders) which limit travel. These can be tightened and will not work loose. However, many less expensive sflutes heve "headless" screws with no limit on travel. Tightening these will cause the mechanism to bind! The procedure here is to then losen them slowly, until the mechanism just begins to move freely, then dab a tiny drop of fingernail polist on the head of the screw ( and adjacent post) to keep it from working loose. Be very careful not to get fingernail polish anywhere else.
If you have a sticky pad, (that is, a pad that makes a sticky clicking sound as you play - NOT a key that is stuck shut), you can easily remove the stickyness by placing a piece of cigarette paper under the key, and gently closing it. This gives the paper an opportunity to absorb the stickyness. Release the key and remove the paper, and test to see whether it has worked. If it has not worked, you should try it again with a fresh piece of paper, but failing that, you may wish to hold the key closed whilst pulling the paper out. Flute repairists cringe at the thought of this, as it damages the pad. If this has still not worked adequately, some musicians even go to the extreme of adding a small amount of talcum powder to the cigarette paper, before placing it under the pad. Obviously, each of these is a less-than-ideal situation, and should generally be employed in emergency situations only. A better technique is to moisten the cigarette paper with alcohol (ethanol), let it sit, then open the key and remove. It should be noted that some companies manufacture their cigarette paper with a small strip of glue down one side - simply fold the paper in half, joining the glued edges, to prevent transferring this glue to your flute. Bear in mind that any cleaning of a pad shortens it's life.
The flute mechanism usually relies on a number of steel (or other metal) springs, which are designed to flick the keys back into the open or closed position after the key has been used. These springs are usually attached to the mechanism at one end, and simply "hooked" on to the mechanism at the other end. It is very common for these springs to become unhooked, and it can be a very distressing problem for those who cannot recognise the symptoms.
If a spring becomes unhooked, simply use a skinny blunt object to push it back where it belongs. Some books recommend the use of a crochet hook with a specially carved groove in the end. Some musicians simply use a blunt pencil. Be careful not to bend the spring beyond its regular position, as it may affect the responsiveness of the key.
If you are having difficulty assembling or disassembling the flute, the joints may need cleaning. Firstly, take a clean dry cloth and wipe the joints to remove excess grease and dust. Reassemble the flute and see whether this has helped. If not, see a professional flute specialist. Under no circumstances add cork grease, petroleum jelly or any other lubricant. While these may appear to help, the joints on metal flutes are designed to work best when clean and dry. All lubricants attract dust, which acts as an abrasive. If you doubt this, ask any flutemaker.
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
"HS" refers to Heavenly Stems, "EB" refers to Earthly Branches, and "Hid" refers to Hidden Stems.
Luck Pillars for H1 - E7 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 0] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H1 - E7 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 1] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H1 - E7 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 2] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H1 - E7 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 3] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H1 - E7 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 4] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H1 - E7 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 5] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H1 - E7 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 6] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H1 - E7 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 7] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H1 - E7 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 8] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H1 - E7 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 9] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H1 - E7 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 10] in direction R (reverse).
High-level conceptual data models provide concepts for presenting data in ways that are close to the way people perceive data. A typical example is the entity relationship model, which uses main concepts like entities, attributes and relationships. An entity represents a real-world object such as an employee or a project. The entity has attributes that represent properties such as an employee’s name, address and birthdate. A relationship represents an association among entities; for example, an employee works on many projects. A relationship exists between the employee and each project.
Record-based logical data models provide concepts users can understand but are not too far from the way data is stored in the computer. Three well-known data models of this type are relational data models, network data models and hierarchical data models.
The relational model represents data as relations, or tables. For example, in the membership system at Science World, each membership has many members (see Figure 2.2 in Chapter 2). The membership identifier, expiry date and address information are fields in the membership. The members are individuals such as Mickey, Minnie, Mighty, Door, Tom, King, Man and Moose. Each record is said to be an instance of the membership table.
The network model represents data as record types. This model also represents a limited type of one to many relationship called a set type, as shown in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1. Network model diagram.
The hierarchical model represents data as a hierarchical tree structure. Each branch of the hierarchy represents a number of related records. Figure 4.2 shows this schema in hierarchical model notation.
Figure 4.2. Hierarchical model diagram.
a limited type of one to many relationship
What is a high-level conceptual data model?
What is an entity? An attribute? A relationship?
List and briefly describe the common record-based logical data models.
This chapter of Database Design is a derivative copy of Database System Concepts by Nguyen Kim Anh licensed under Creative Commons Attribution License 3.0 license
The following material was written by Adrienne Watt:
(* ETH Oberon, Copyright 1990-2003 Computer Systems Institute, ETH Zurich, CH-8092 Zurich.
Refer to the license.txt file provided with this distribution. *)
(* $VCS 1, Edgar.Schwarz@z.zgs.de, 28 Feb 99, 22:13:54 $ *)
Debug := PPPDebug, SYSTEM, T:=PPPTools,
StartPos*=4;	(* even if we received a packed Packet, we can send back an unpacked one, using the same array *)
MTU*, MRU*:INTEGER; (* Maximum Transmit Unit, how big our packets are; M Receive U, how big he may send*)
SendAsyncMap*:SET; (* Transmit AsyncMap; What characters have to be stuffed *)
(*es??? die V24 und Loginsachen macht doch der Dialer. Oder ?
(* consume some bytes (they contain the reply string from server) *)
(* Called only when TOqueue is not empty *)
(* output only if ppp is still running. See PPPMain.StopInst *)
(* CheckPacket - Check a HDLC-Packet *)
(* CheckSum ok? The whole packet needed! *)
PPPHandleReceive(Config, T.GetInt(p, pos+2), p, pos+4, len-6,
(* ReceivePacket - ReiceiveLoop: Task , needs extended Event
(*es*) (* ReceivePacket is indirectly called by NetBase.Polldevices when
(*es*)IF receiveFrame.active THEN
CheckPacket(Config, Config.data, StartPos,
Config.data[receiveFrame.i]:=ch[0];
RETURN; (* pause until more characters are available *)
(* SendPacket - Send a packet to the V24 *)
(* send it to the V24 *)
(*es auskommentiert: der Trick ist irgendwie alle Zeichen zu sammeln,
(* frame complete: send end flag *)
I love the pleasures of raindrops.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
Height: 2.2m/7'3"
Weight: 210kg/463.0lb
Gender Distribution: 50% Male
Move types which are very good on {Template:1: Ice
Move types which are good on Dragonite: Dragon, Rock
Move types which are bad on Dragonite: Electric, Fire, Water
Move types which are very bad on Dragonite: Grass
Move types which don't effect Dragonite: Ground
All other move types are normal effectiveness on Dragonite.
Ruby / Sapphire Emerald XD / Colosseum
GS/C/RS/FL: Attract, Fly, Frustration, Hidden Power, Iron Tail, Protect, Rain Dance, Return, Rock Smash, Sandstorm, Steel Wing, Waterfall
RB/Y: Bide, Body Slam, Bubblebeam, Double-Edge, Dragon Rage, Horn Drill, Mimic, Rage, Razor Wind, Reflect, Skull Bash, Substitute, Take Down, Thunder Wave, Water Gun
GS/C: Curse, Detect, Dragonbreath, Dynamicpunch, Endure, Fire Punch, Fury Cutter, Headbutt, Ice Punch, Icy Wind, Mud-Slap, Sleep Talk, Snore, Swagger, Thunderpunch, Whirlpool, Zap Cannon
RS/FL: Aerial Ace, Brick Break, Cut, Dive, Dragon Claw, Earthquake, Facade, Focus Punch, Hail, Roar, Rock Tomb, Safeguard, Secret Power, Shock Wave, Sunny Day, Water Pulse
Pokémon Stadium 2: Extremespeed
Template:Wikibooks Pokédex:Dratini Series
An 1981 Texas Instruments 99/4A computer with two joysticks attached.
Despite costing less then $100 by fall of 1982, and by being promoted by then popular comedian Bill Cosby, the TI-99/4A was severely challenged in the market by fierce competition in the low end segment, and by the video game crash of 1983.[2]
Production of the Texas Instruments TI-99/4A ended in 1984 with about 2.5 million systems sold.[4][5]
The Texas Instruments TI-99/4A is powered by the 16-bit TMS9900 processor clocked at three megahertz.[3]
A TMS 9918 or TMS 9929 handles video processing.[4]
The TI-99/4A has 16 kilobytes of RAM and 16 kilobytes of video RAM.[3][4]
Speech synthesis software output from a TI-99/4A, advanced at the time.
Problems listening to this file? See media help.
The TI-99/4A has 26 kilobytes of ROM.[3]
The TI99/4A with cartridge on top.
Texas Instruments Program Recorder and cassette tape.
Program Recorder side with labeled parts.
Disk Controller Card.
Wikipedia has related information at Texas Instruments TI-99/4A
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Texas Instruments TI-99/4A
↑ a b "Full Page Reload" (in en). https://spectrum.ieee.org/tech-history/heroic-failures/the-texas-instruments-994-worlds-first-16bit-computer.
↑ a b Pollack, Andrew (19 June 1983). "THE COMING CRISIS IN HOME COMPUTERS (Published 1983)". https://www.nytimes.com/1983/06/19/business/the-coming-crisis-in-home-computers.html.
↑ a b c d "Texas Instruments TI-99/4A computer". https://oldcomputers.net/ti994a.html.
↑ a b c "OLD-COMPUTERS.COM : The Museum". https://www.old-computers.com/museum/computer.asp?c=236.
↑ "Texas Instruments Model 994A Personal Computer" (in en). https://americanhistory.si.edu/collections/search/object/nmah_1064832.
Weight: 28kg/62.0lb
Gender Distribution: 50% Male
Move types which are very good on Nuzleaf: Bug
Move types which are good on Nuzleaf: Fighting, Fire, Flying, Ice, Poison
Move types which are bad on Nuzleaf: Dark, Electric, Ghost, Grass, Ground, Water
Move types which don't effect Nuzleaf: Psychic
All other move types are normal effectiveness on Nuzleaf.
Nuzleaf evolves when the Leaf Stone is used on it.
Nuzleaf is found in the grass between Fallarbor Town and the Meteor Falls (Route 114).
RS/FL: Attract, Brick Break, Bullet Seed, Cut, Dig, Double Team, Facade, Flash, Frustration, Giga Drain, Hidden Power, Hyper Beam, Protect, Rest, Return, Rock Smash, Rock Tomb, Secret Power, Shadow Ball, Solarbeam, Strength, Sunny Day, Thief, Torment, Toxic
Template:Wikibooks Pokédex:Seedot Series
Most programs rely on a set of variables. These are ways to get the computer to store and recall bits of information. It is like a box to store information in. You give each variable a name when you declare it. Declaring a variable tells the computer 3 things:
The name has to be a word which is not already used. Visual basic checks to make sure the name is alright and will tell you if there is a problem. Use something which is memorable (Time_taken rather than t), but quick to type (MyChNum rather than My_Chosen_Number).
The type of data is important. The most common types are Integer- a whole number such as 15, Single- a number with a decimal part such as 14.560385, Double- a number with a decimal part which needs to be very accurate such as 14.359649064923490 and String, a bit of text such as "A bit of text".
The way we declare a variable in Visual basic is by using the word 'Dim'. Here's how we declare a variable called MyVar as a String of text.
Dim MyVar As String = "This is the initial value"
Let's go into our hello world application and add the variable. You can add a variable at any point in the program, but where it is determines what it can be used for. If we add it in the description of Form1 it can be used anywhere in the program:
Dim MyVar As String = "This is the initial value"
Private Sub Button1_Click(ByVal sender As System.Object, ByVal e As System.EventArgs) Handles Button1.Click
Button1.Text = "Hello World"
You may have spotted by now that the properties of an object are all variables.
Assignation is simply setting the value of a variable. You set the value like so:
This increases the value of A by 1.
Let's make an application which counts the number of times a button is pressed.
Just like in the Hello World application, create a new program and add a button. Go to the Events list and add a Click event to the button. Your code should now look like this:
Private Sub Button1_Click(ByVal sender As System.Object, ByVal e As System.EventArgs) Handles Button1.Click
Let's create a variable named 'counter'. We don't need it to have a decimal part, so we'll set the type to Integer. It should start at 0. The code for this is:
Dim counter As Integer = 0
Because this variable has to be stored even when button1 is not being clicked, it needs to go in the main part of the program:
Dim counter As Integer = 0
Private Sub Button1_Click(ByVal sender As System.Object, ByVal e As System.EventArgs) Handles Button1.Click
When Button1 is pressed, counter should increase by 1:
Dim counter As Integer = 0
Private Sub Button1_Click(ByVal sender As System.Object, ByVal e As System.EventArgs) Handles Button1.Click
Dim counter As Integer = 0
Private Sub Button1_Click(ByVal sender As System.Object, ByVal e As System.EventArgs) Handles Button1.Click
Notice that Button1.Text is actually a string. If you use other languages, you will need to convert between variable types before you can assign to a different type.
Run your code to see the program.
Often, you will need to add limits to a variable. Let's add a Progress Bar to our form:
Have a look at the properties. The Value Property sets how far the progress bar has gone- notice how it does a nice animation when changed.
This value has limits; it cannot be more than 100 or less than 0. Sort of makes sense; I've never copied 110% of a file. If you try setting Value to 200, your program will fail. To stop this, we need to compare the value we are about to use with the maximum. We need to use Relativity expressions:
Relativity essentially compares 2 values. A Relativity expression is phrased like this:
This expression is actually another form of Variable; a Boolean variable. This variable is either TRUE or FALSE. If A=1, (A = 1)=TRUE.
It's identical to assignment, but has to be used in a different place. I'll come on to that later. Here are a few more Relativity expressions:
We have 2 conditions for our progress bar:
Both of these have to be true for the program to work, so let's use and to combine them:
We then use standard English to get the program to correct it. We type If, followed by our condition, followed by Then. Next comes the code to run, ended by an End If:
There's a problem here. If we test the program and get Counter up to 100, we can then press the button again and try and get the progress bar up to 101. This crashes the program. The problem is with the order in which we give instructions:
Visual Basic works on a line-by-line basis; it does each line in order. We need to re arrange the program.
We can add more things to this code; how about setting the value to 0 once it gets to the top? For this we need an Else part.
Button1.Text = counter
ProgressBar1.Value = counter
What Just Happened (If...Then...Else Logic)
The code used here was a decision making process:
Things to do if Condition = TRUE
Things to do if Condition = FALSE
Introduction, Features, Licensing and Support
Wikipedia has related information at Tomato (firmware)
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Tomato (firmware)
The Tomato firmware distribution is maintained, primarily by Jonathan Zarate at Polar Cloud as a derivation of LinkSys's open-source code. Tomato is built in two flavors, a standard version that should run on all routers and the "New Driver" (ND) version for newer routers. Warning! Loading an ND version on an unsupported router could brick the router.
As such, others have further derived new distributions, named by the authors' usernames in the http://www.linksysinfo.org/forums[1].
?
With GUI, in current git builds only
= Network-attached storage
Based on Tomato 1.25
Tuned route cache and conntrack hash sizes.
Tuned route cache parameters.
Updated conntrack and netfilter components to later versions.
Modified hash function to a newer one.
Based on Tomato 1.27
Based on Tomato 1.25
Cross-platform zero-config VPN solution that connects computers into a virtual LAN.
TomatoMod 1.21 *TEST VERSION 5* - This is a new test version it is only half baked for those who want to try.
OpenVPN v2.1rc13 + Management
Tomato firmware ver. 1.28
Optimized SDHC/MMC driver ver. 2.0.1 - this adds up to 32GB build-in storage on flash memory
Higher transfers then previous mmc driver ver. 1.3.5 - +40% writing, +10% reading
Detailed card ID data avaiable via GUI
Support for mounting ext2, ext3 and vfat partitions
OpenVPN, vsFTP, Samba, print server etc - the same as in Teddy Bear Mod
Based on Tomato 1.25 (ND also available)
OpenVPN 2.1rc16 is compiled in and fully integrated as a system service.
Two separately configurable instances of each clients and servers can be configured in the GUI
TLS (optionally with static key HMAC authentication) and static-key encryption is supported
Custom configuration field is added to the end of the dynamically generated config file
Status tabs displaying connected clients, VPN routes, and/or statistics.
Sets up and tears down (including module insertion/removal) interfaces as appropriate to save memory
Automatically adds and removes firewall rules as needed.
Option to automatically start server/client with router
Option to redirect Internet traffic over tunnel
Options to accept/push DNS options.
Encryption cipher settings are available.
Client address allocation is handled via GUI.
Added capability to use hostnames in the access restrictions page (unrelated to VPN, but I wanted it)
Latest version: 30 November 2010[7] (as of December 20, 2010), available for download from Tomatousb.org/download.
Currently based on the 1.28 build of Tomato, this is the list of changes made to official Tomato ND (New Driver):
Auto-mounting for USB drives (added in v05). When this feature is activated in the GUI, and USB drive is plugged in, all mountable partitions will be automatically mounted to a directory under /mnt. If you want to override default mount point, mount your partition manually in the satrtup, wanup, or hotplug script, i.e.: mount -o noatime,nodev /dev/discs/disc0/part1 /opt, or by using /etc/fstab file and "mount -a" command. If you mount the partition manually, it will not be re-mounted to a default mount point. If after mounting the drive you want to execute some additional scripts - to run the programs etc - it's a good idea to add several seconds sleep before doing so.
Support for /etc/fstab, and mounting by label and UUID.
Network File Sharing using built-in Samba server 2.0.10. Please check this post if you're experiencing problems copying files to Samba shares, and this post if you have issues with authenticated access to Samba shares.
Printer server (p910nd) is included and started automatically if you enable printing support. Bidirectional copying can be disabled via GUI if it causes problems with your printer. Only one instance of printer server is started automatically, and listens on port 9100. If you need to support more than 1 printer, add commands to run additional instances of p910nd to your startup script. Follow these directions to set up your printer in Windows.
USB Hotplug script - it can be useful for configuring USB devices after connecting them to the router or on boot-up, for example loading firmware into HP1018 or similar printer (there're some posts on page 11 of this thread with more details about HP1018 printer).
Fixed slow running clock problem on Asus WL-520GU. After flashing this firmware you have to reboot the router at least once for clock to get fixed (this fix is included into official Tomato releases starting from Tomato 1.24).
Fixed WLAN LED on Asus WL-520GU, SES button and WLAN led on Asus WL500gP v1 and Buffalo WBR2-G54 (these fixes are included into official Tomato releases starting from Tomato 1.24).
Built-in FTP server daemon (vsftpd) with GUI.
L7 filter patterns are updated to the latest official version (2009-05-28), removed experimental rtp-2 pattern.
Included SpeedMod by Rodney H.
Added new "NAT Target" setting to "Advanced -> Firewall" (SNAT or MASQUERADE).
Upgraded Broadcom Wireless driver to version 4.158.4.0.
UPnP daemon is replaced with MiniUPnPd with NAT-PMP support (MiniUPnPd is included into official Tomato releases starting from Tomato 1.24. This mod however adds additional GUI settings for UPnP). UPnP is disabled by default, NAT-PMP is enabled by default.
Added new "Regulatory Mode" setting (off|g|h) and "Country/Region" setting to "Advanced -> Wireless".
Added wireless auto channel selection.
Changed to use passive mode for wireless scan (generally should pick up more APs).
Replaced JFFS2 filesystem driver by JFFS ver 1.3 from ray123 to provide more available JFFS space.
Replaced ramfs by tmpfs.
Updated busybox and dnsmasq.
The mod (starting from build 20) comes in 4 different flavours:
Latest version; 9 Mar 2012[8]
Toastman-RT-1.28.7496.2-RT MIPSR2 K2.6 for RT-N16 etc.
Toastman-RT-1.28.0496.2-RT-N MIPSR2 K2.6 for E4200, RT-N66U etc.
(New versions are available frequently, check Linksysinfo.org for releases).
With Teaman Client Monitor (IPTMon or BWclimon depending on build, can have
Web Portal "NoCatSplash" (splashd) integrated by Victek.
Static ARP Binding, Bandwidth Limiter per client,
Significant improvements to Tomato's QOS includes new IMQ based ingress system with class priorities, and an incoming class bandwidth pie chart, making it much easier to evaluate QOS rule effectiveness.
Configurable QOS class names, comprehensive example QOS rules loaded as default. Many useful features/tools for easier administration of networks.
Up to 250 clients in Static DHCP, Access Restrictions, 500 in Wireless Restrictions. Suitable for large installations such as hotels and condominiums as well as the normal user.
Samba 3: security updates CVE-2011-2522 & CVE-2011-2694
Added support for USB led on E3000, WRT610Nv2, DIR-320, H-618B routers.
Various optimizations backports and fixes from upstream 2.6 kernel.
Udpxy v1.0-Chipmunk-build21
Includes the new updates from Tomato-USB/RT by Fedor Kozhevnikov. The RT wireless driver has however been reverted to 5.10.147.0 in the interests of stability.
Tomato_RAF_1.25.8515 ND USB .8 v3
Based on Tomato 1.25
Based on Victek's sources so it has all his features
OpenVPN 2.1rc13 & Inteface(Keith Moyer's implementation)
Based off the Tomato 1.21 build, this modification adds:
Victek Mod. Tomato RAF
(A) Common in both versions (and not included in Official Tomato version):
Dropbear 0.51 extended RWIN cli command
Extended static DHCP / MAC restriction (up to 140 clients)
System command window built into GUI (Tools-System)
Extended command in BusyBox; chown, hostname ..
Wireless & Ethernet driver 4.158.4.0
Added new "Regulatory Mode" setting (off|d|h) and "Country/Region" setting to "Advanced -> Wireless" in ND version
Added wireless auto channel selection.
Wireless Scan 'passive mode' (shows more AP's if they exist in the neighborhood).
↑ hardc0re release announcement.
↑ jyavenard release announcement.
↑ roadkill release announcement.
↑ slodki release announcement.
↑ SgtPepperKSU release announcement.
↑ Teddy Bear's TomatoUSB Changelog
↑ Thor release announcement.
↑ Trzepako release announcement.
↑ Victek Mod. Tomato RAF release announcement.
Harry Potter and the Goblet of fire
Gobbledegook is the language used by goblins to talk amongst themselves.
Beginner warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Trainz Annotated Reference Pages Trainz Asset Maintenance and Creation
KIND TrainzBaseSpec provides the basis definitions for all Trainz asset types in all config.txt ini files. The TBS provides for a number of "Standard Tags" which are common to (or at least, can legally be defined) for any and all Trainz assets[1].
Some of these are mandatory, for they determine the further processing of the asset and the interpretation of the config.txt file and the assets data in its folder.
However most are optional and a defining line using the tag may be omitted in most sub-assets.
None, Valid and mostly all necessary for all content defined by defacto parent container, the config.txt file required for all Trainz digital models. KIND TrainzBaseSpec (TBS) is a root class from which other Trainz Asset classes are derived.
They are said to be derived because they inherit processing attributes (instructions) and values defined by the parameters listed therein, the key one being the value of the kind tag. That enumerated word determines the asset's specific kind declarations and requirements, which are added to the defines of the TBS within that assets config files. Other key TBS defined data are of obvious importance and utility such as a name for the asset, the Kuid identifier and version, the Trainz-build Value (TBV) and others with widely variable need of definition, applicability, and scope such as string-table, obsolete-table, kuid-table and thumbnail images are each circumstantial. String values, even the asset name and description are most often totally unnecessary and totally omittable in practice.
When a kind is declared, that kind becomes the parent class requiring and dictating the necessary pairs of data which must be satisfied in the class, in addition to those listed in the TBS.
Certain parameters may be left undefined in a case for that asset's kind, especially a common practice for older historical Trainz-build tag values and for those, Content Manager or the Content Creator Plus (CCP) utility will assign a default value, but list a warning message when processing it. Many tags in the TrainzOnline wiki, here, or the older TC3 era Content Creator's Guide (CCG will mention a default value.
The Content Manager modules of each release, from TRS2006 and Trainz Classics (TC1&2) onwards, each imposes more and more pre-commitment error testing[note 1] and each has become increasingly adamant about warning such a tag has not been defined when it expects such a tag--data pair.
Many of these same 'defaulted yesterday' definition lines today in post-TANE releases, will instead more often generate a fault, demanding a clear value definition when such was defaulted in past loadings.[note 2] This is a much preferable annoyance compared to the olde-tyme days when a faulty asset definition would sometimes cause the infamous 'Blue Screen of Death' or more often, crash the run time software back to the desktop, resulting in a loss of edits, and possibly a need to rebuild the data base.
All Trainz defined data (content) has three required elements: A config.txt file to organize the data, an identity meaning a kuid (username alone will do you no good, a legal asset however can be created without a name!) and last, a legally defined kind tag. The kind is in charge, the conductor of the orchestra, the Platoon Sargeant or CEO giving directions — setting up the requirements for everything that gets processed after. In short, the kinds' value, a small select tightly defined members-only group — tells Trainz software what is to be rendered and displayed in the virtual worlds we create, and how (or where) to find the other parts needed to make those parts of the asset linked together in that config.txt file.
Each of the below Child Classes are considered to have the TrainzBaseSpec as their 'Parent Class' of data.[note 3] A few kinds listed below, those which are underlined, are legacy kinds antedating changes to the Trainz data model in the release of TS2009 (i.e. since late 2008), with only gradual (incremental) changes imposed since by the N3V programmers.
Details for fixing assets based on these legacy kinds can currently be found in the Content Creator's Guide section of the N3V Trainz Wiki TrainzOnline site here with illuminating examples of legacy Kinds here. Perusal of the CCG is highly recommended to any users of the Trainz Download Station or anyone contemplating creating content. The insights gained from understanding of the background history of how older content was defined can then be contrasted with the current TrainzOnline coverage of the same data type and compared, for often this kind of then-vs.-now provides valuable insights to fixing, altering and customizing assets. More to the point, the writing in the CCG was professionally produced and is far more tautological—it will often give you insights as to extended effects if this or that is altered, which the Trainz Wiki just doesn't provide. The CCG put up on TrainzOnline is the TC1&2/TC3 version — the last published of several booklets printed dating back to Trainz in 1999; the TC3 CCG contains the altered Enginespecs Locomotive assets from the TRS2004/TRS2006 AND UTC data models need to be properly updated.
TrainzBaseSpec Child Class KINDs (type asset groups)
Table I, TBS Standard definitions
These tags and containers are standard definitions which are likely found in nearly all assets. Some tags are optional, and may not be defined by content creators, as their choice.
Tags are keywords, and have a single assigned key-value or containers such as a string-array or '{' ... '}' bounded enclosed tag-value pairs or sub-containers. (Everything declared in Trainz config files is in pairs, for even '{' ... '}' is considered a 'key-value'.
Containers are collections of 'key' and 'key-value' pairs and 'upper-level containers' in the TBS (as opposed to sub-containers such as those within the thumbnails container) are generally suffixed by '-table'.
'float', 1 digit decimal value
A key-value table listing all assets upon which this asset is dependent.
"'string-value'", must synch with script specification class.
"identity 'string-value'"
"3rd party group identity 'string-value'"
"email addy 'string-value'"
"authors/groups web url 'string-value'"
A list of KIND Asset-group assets to which this asset belongs.
The TrainzBaseSpec supports the following tags in a config.txt file.∅:
'Koolthingz Unique IDentifier'. The Trainz system software's unique database reference number for an asset, also extended to track multiple versions in the KUID2 form. The heart and soul of Trainz upgradability, and modular design of assets, as each asset has it's own unique kuid code, so one can specify a component (bogeys) or entire Traincar from another, and selectively replace either in a new asset (re-skin or modified truck).
Editor's note: Be advised though many online sites will require searches using separate data fields (author and serial), the Content Manager will require the three or four colon separated data-fields, but does not require brackets—though commas are required delimiters for multiple kuids in the search API Window. It is generally easier to aggregate data in the full kuid tag-ends bracketing, and generally clearer to read. For cutting and pasting a huge list, buffer size limitations may break off the end of the list, in which case, trimming out both end brackets in a text editor may allow getting the whole list into the API.
Most Trainz assets specify a list of dependencies in their kuid-table—other component assets which are assembled by the various parts of the software suite to make up a renderable and useable asset in a kuid-table container.
Within the heart of many assets, specific tags may be defined by kuid reference and use the referenced asset as a part. This is in fact how reskinning is implemented, and it is possible to also use a mesh in an asset, though more modern practices recommend such referencing to be to a mesh library asset.
This allows data items (Trainz Assets) to carry an inherent version code for the asset. This will not generally match the CM Trainz-build code identifying the software technology levels, but indicates previous versions history.
Assets having a higher suffixed code in the KUID2 override or replace older assets, given both the assets in the data base. Having an early version is not necessary but CM will list the missing chain of revisions as missing dependencies, a software bug to those who resent the contamination of that facility in CM or 'feature' kept as is by the programmers, in any respect reducing the utility of using CM to identify what a user is missing, and causing users to spend time manually figuring out what is really what.
Main coverage: trainz-build tags, abbreviations: TB & TBV (TB-value)∅
Each legal value must exactly match a released Trainz version number with these exceptions:
The TBV or version value assigned V1.4 was Auran's Paintshed release, a reskinning tool also applicable to the Microsoft Trainz Simulator (MSTS), and also appears as a build value for auxiliary software modules of TRS2004; specifically it's ContentManager.exe utility.
The gap between 1.7 and 2.0 was either foreign language releases, or as seems more likely after hours of digging and researching, unused by Auran because in the minds of the programmer team which built that original Trainz, the TRS2004 releases were the Second Trainz product, no matter how the front office hyped the marketing names (Like Trainz UTC, was ultimate anything... seriously?. Com'on man! Seriously!!?)
The series of Trainz Version and corresponding Trainz-build tag values are Trainz 1.0=v1.0, Trainz 1+SP1 ⇒ V1.1, Trainz 1.0+SP2 ⇒ V1.2, Trainz 1+SP3 ⇒ V1.3, etc. (but skipping 1.4 & 1.7–1.9), so TRS2004-SP0 = v2.0 then incremented, where each is incremented by 0.1 from 2.0 (TRS2004 no service pack) to present releases (v3.7 = TS12-SP1, v3.8 = Mac2, 3.9=TANE-CE, 4.0—4.3 & thence? From March 2016 4.3 and up are TANE SPs TBDL).
From v2.0 (TRS2004) onwards the Trainz-build tag number values have increased through 23 steps which are continuous though non-monotonic, for Trainz TS09-sp3—TS09-sp4 share some Trainz-build[2] values; that is, there are a few commonly shared TBVs that overlap in TS2009 and TS2010's joint development era and releases.
Further, N3V's foray into the Macintosh computer interrupts the smooth increments in Windows based Trainz releases TBVs 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7 & 3.8 intermingling between Windows and Mac based Operating Systems.Note: Hotfixes do not change version numbers.
The programmer's recommend this number should generally be set to the Trainz version number of the Trainz installation on which the asset is being created and tested. The Content Creator community, in contrast tries to set the number as low as possible to give the new asset the widest possible audience/user scope when downloaded. The better content creators will test it on a naked install (no added content) of the corresponding versions as well as verifying the generated cdp contains all relevant materials.
Some asset kinds are parsed significantly differently depending on their trainz-build version tag. NOTE: The trainz-build tag is compulsory. If not specified, Trainz will make a primitive attempt to guess at a legacy Trainz version based on the contents of the config.txt_file, which normally resolves out as a value of 1.3 as TBV.
In trainz-builds after TC1&2 (v2.7), the username also becomes the operating system folder name when the asset is edited, and asset-filename is ignored, whereas it took precedence through v2-6 config files. Per the TBS standards by N3V games, this field should never contain non-English text, except where the asset name is a Proper Noun (eg. a place name) with no English localized variant. This value is the datum everyone usually searches for and remembers, so keeping a clear name is recommended.
When creating an asset, highly recommended one vetts a new proposed name against several trial partial names in CM searches and from that knowledge adopt a name which matches sensibly with existing available content. How many 'house 2' or 'road' assets do we need tolerate to confuse us further!? Okay, In practice, we all search house and select from images, but it's darn nice to be able to specify a unique name and get what you expected!
The description is visible in the Content Manager 'Asset Details' pane, and is used to clarify the asset name, provide specs, and often a bit of history.
N3V's Chris Bergmann has stated this field should be kept to a short (1-2 paragraph) blurb describing the asset and extended details should be provided via an info-url page, but quite lengthy blocks of text are tolerated. Some use the bottom of the block as a version change record.
This field must be comprised of English descriptive text, although the text may reference non-English Proper Nouns as explained elsewhere. Other language translations or source text are to be placed in one of the many possible alternative language localization tags (see description-xx tag).
Other languages are supported by similar string-tables (e.g. string-table-XX) with a localization code suffix (XX) matching that of the internationalization suffixes for description and username keywords/tags, but those language keyed string-table containers will always have the same key-values in the left hand entries.
These left-hand keys or tags serve as both a 'local index keyword', and as a 'table of equivalencies' between languages.
The left hand column will always have the objects that a Content Creator gives a 'special' name such as names of signals, trackmarks and industries, junctions and so forth, that might be referenced, and will appear in the Driver and Surveyor module 'Find Utility' (CTRL+F ) function applet.
The index side conversely will also not list defaulted names of places such as the innumerable collection of junctions, automatically indexed by a random number when building a route map (i.e. meaningless clutter. If important, the route building CC will name it!); but will automatically include potentially temporary assets such as traincars' default names. If renamed, those names take the place of their corresponding default names.
Its principal use is for those objects designed to interface to script references and take on variable attributes such as a train station or amount of products needed by or ready to ship at an industry, or carried by interactive traincars (rolling industrys to scripting) and other configurable assets as simple as a generic billboard style sign which with a bit of height adjustment and angle torquing can be placed in front of the facade of a stock building or industry to put a different business name on a building. In other words, a bit of configurable scenery.
Overall in Route maps or layouts these LHS names correspond to named objects on the map asset, and that is where most string tables are seen (literally, populated by the thousands of entries in a large route kind map).
In some assets, that default name is hooked into software scripts, so the string-table becomes specifically important instead of ho-humingly-boring. (see below)
The use of a string-table type is always legal in every kind of asset, just like description tags and trainz-build and kind tags. Unlike those, it need not be present or defined and is in no way mandatory. Values encapsulated within a string-table container have no function or effect unless code expects their marriage.
In other assets, again say taking that hypothetical programmable business sign as an example, the string table must needs be given a default name if it is to interface to software. All map placeable assets can be named or renamed but 'special names' have to match in scripts and the string table index value. Most configurable assets define an interface variable which serve to replace the default name as an index or look-up table referenced script and by the binary data of the asset. Other variables will likely be defined in a programmable asset as well. Each of these may be referenced by scripting, but it is the index value that makes it to the map or session string-table which makes everything work together when Driver or Session creator variability is desired.
In contrast, without the system software knowing the location of the item named in the index the objects' script will possibly have no triggering, conditional checks, or capacity to be updated. That was characteristic of objects in 2000's Trainz 1.0, not more modern Trainz railroad simulators since 2003's TRS2004 was released. (We've come a long way baby since then!)
There are assets which only work together as a group. In such, naming each in the map or session layer enables them to function together. For an example, consider a highway grade crossing with five tracks, two of which are off junctions and form so called 'diamond crossings' with the through tracks. How does one set up signals so any rail traffic closes the highway gates, or so use of diamond crossings disallows other trains to travel through the one transiting the crossing. Both road and rail signals and points and gates all have to work in concert. Certain 'ATLS system' assets and their scripts as married by the string-table can make that complicated system function.
See string-table-XX for further information.
The English string-table (no suffix) is mandatory, other localization languages are optional at the behest of the asset author. Many assets submitted to the DLS and then also used on routes bundled with a Trainz release will generally be translated and have a full set of localization translations for description-XX and the string-table. In particular, the routes and sessions bundled with a release receive professional translations into multiple languages with each retail release.
Note that the left column of the string-tables is identical as it is a mapped symbol table, and index into the binary data such as the mesh, session, or route files. It is only the use names, the right hand or data element of the two elements which are localized and substituted by the run-time localization software. These can be manually edited for more user friendly names if desired, even in the English string-table. The index or left reference column syntax must not be changed in any respect, so be careful with global SAR specifications if changing names in the data column.
Multiple string-table-XX tags may be present in an asset, once for each supported language. Each should contain a list of strings with the same Keys as in the string-table list, but with different Values. If the appropriate 'string-table-XX' tag is not present to represent this asset on a given end-user system, or the appropriate string is missing from that list, the English string-table container is referenced instead.
Only assets with sub-components or with alternative choices (Cargos) will have a kuid-table with any appreciable length. Most with sub-components only have a few.
Secondarily, there is a convention arising from the fact that sometimes the internal keywords are 'auto-defined'—merely listed as a number sans name, as placeholder parameters, faux-keywords which may be any unique value (typically, zero-indexed sequential integers.[notes 1]) They may be given names or not as a user or author prefers.
Entries in this table serve two purposes:‌ first: to ensure that the game systems are aware of the dependency such that installing and loading this asset will successfully install and load any dependencies, and ‌second: to allow scripts to locate relevant child assets.
Only first-level dependencies are to be included in the kuid-table—children or parts assets with their own dependencies are handled within the validation and data base committal of that sub-asset.
Circular dependencies are illegal.
An asset cannot be listed as a dependency if it is also marked as an obsolete version of this asset. (There is only one replacement kuid slot in a kuid in the Trainz Asset index (historically assets.tdx files), this would create a circular definition requiring an older version of itself!)
Similarly, an asset cannot be listed as its own dependency. [OTOH, This has been experienced (i.e. witnessed as a successfully fault free submitted asset in the TSxx CMs) porting maps and sessions between installs with GSARS to change kuids so overlaps would not write over assets already using the same kuid on the destination install without seeing an error message.] Whether it functioned too required a braver or more foolish soul than me! --Fabartus, ed.
Most users first content will be to auto-clone an built-in route and it's associated session. Normally because one wants to modify something. Examining the kuid-table for a route or session will let the new or old-hand Trainzer have an editable list of assets in the route. These can be easily turned into a style sheet 'filter' (a Pick List) which lets one add to and alter a route using the same assets as the original author... or to copy his styles in your own expansion.
A really useful exploitation of the fact these are dummy parameters is to pair the kuids of products in a complicated rolling stock asset. A boxcar might contain all sorts of products... getting permission to assign your author ID to your own series with a different load set might be your first content creation of a significant sort! Consider a stock car, allowed products container and the kuid list could contain the following entries:
Note the underlines joining the words... two symbols, key and value! We let figuring out where to add the kuids to the loads and allowed products queue-table entries to the student. (Your welcome, but that's a good reason to change the names! Keeping things straight is nearly the whole battle making an asset!)
Further: It is illegal for two assets to both mark a third asset obsolete, unless one of the two also marks the other as obsolete.[note 6]
Circular obsolete references are illegal.
All lower-numbered KUID2 versions of this asset are implied as obsolete and need not be included in this list. Concurrently, both a newer improved asset with a higher Kuid2 and one of it's predecessors should NEVER list the same predecessor (such as the original!) to the 'in-between' intermediate predecessor—as these values are used as table-of-substitute entries and only ONE asset can be substituted for the earlier versions. (The arrays only hold one value, and one cannot substitute two for one!)
It is illegal to mark a higher-numbered KUID2 version of this asset as obsolete as that creates an implicit circular reference.
The assets referenced in this list must have the same creator as this asset for the asset to be vetted and accepted by the DLS uploading process, this restriction does NOT apply in you local version, where it might, for example, be used to replace all the old paper wheel kuids on a large group of Traincars with one which is more graphically pleasing and newer.
The Content Creator's Guide (CCG) for TRS2006 & CCG for Trainz Classics explained these classes represent a standardized system for referring to the various types of Locos, Rolling stock, Scenery, Spline and Industry assets. The Category-class classification codes become important to all Trainzers when searching and/or filtering for suitable assets to make into content in a session or route (layout).
Note that many category-class codes are only relevant to specific Asset Kinds - category-class codes must not be applied to assets of an inappropriate Kind.
Railway (scenery non-functional) — a building perhaps
Each era code represents a decade and consists of a four digit integer then must be 's' terminated (e.g. "1990s;2000s;2010s"), thereby creating a enumerated software token (value) which must be an exact match for one of the specified legal era codes.
No other characters (including whitespace, etc.) should be present in the string, including (and especially at the end of the string) before the terminating double-quote character.
The allowable year range is 1800–2010s[note 7]
The only meaning of this asset is to other humans, that this asset is considered valid and appropriately relevant in the specified era range, and Content Manager will accept search filters specifying the applicable years.
(from an asset fix edit[3])
Assets uploaded without a proper thumbnails container in TS2009's and TS2010's early versions flagged assets without a thumbnails container as faulty. Patches later turned these into warnings.[note 10] which practice was dropped in a TS12 hotfix after many complaints in the user community. • If the asset lacking a thumbnail container (even with the outdated thumb tag) was later chosen in a new built-in route or session, the asset will generally be distributed as an item without images—they get stripped out if not properly referenced by texture.txt or the config.txt thumbnails container[note 11].
Further, instead of linking to these domains directly, use of custom Trainz Short URL formats is recommended to future-proof the URL against possible future site layout changes. 'Short URLs' are Trainz-specific URLs which help future-proof content by allowing the content creator to reference certain pages on the N3V website without relying on a specific web layout. Short URLs are intended for in-game usage such as info-url links and will only work in the Embedded web browser and not in any external web browser. Where this tag is present, in-game buttons are provided to allow the user to view the asset description or help without leaving the game environment.
This could be tremendously valuable in Driver to access a route map, guide, or session instructions or clarification.
It is recommended that generic group pages are used for entire classes of asset in any case where the assets provide similar functionality but minor differences in appearance. This reduces the time-expense of creating, maintaining and localizing such documentation.
The container above is set up with the default values, which says:
This isn't payware, so other fields have relevance [when payware editing and committing will be zeros, but listing may be allowed];
Re-saving any changes to the asset (Committing (submitting) the re-validated asset to the database).
The script-include-table container is a top-level config.txt file entry available to any Asset which derives from KIND TrainzBaseSpec (in short, all Assets.) This container allows the asset to directly include another asset's scripts from the parent asset's script file(s) using the N3V TrainzScript's Script_Include_Directive.
The extensions container is a list of custom tags or subcontainers with a specific naming convention.
This container is a simple key-value table of names of scripted assets and their kuids which are searched for script includes when compiling the asset's script file(s). The key or tag-name is currently unused (i.e. is a placeholder parameter) in searching; the value indicates the KUID of the asset to include. Being able to search and identify key-names is a content creator requested feature, so using the scriptfile names instead of numeric dummy tag-names is suggested as a best practice, for it conveys more than a kuid-reference.
It is typically best to restrict such references to KIND Library assets, however this is not mandatory and any assets can be referenced.
The below key-words are relatively new developments and won't have analogs or presence in older assets.
Various default search keywords are supplied automatically based on the asset type (KIND+category-class), so need not, and possibly should not be repeated. Ø
The tag may not be present as a null string ("") or blank after the tag—these conditions generate a fault.
Obvious uses: Company such as ATSF, Santa Fe, and AT&SF, B&O, Chessie, CSX, NS, PRR or NYC, etc. whereas basic types such as flatcar, boxcar, hopper should be automatic. Bridging keys such as depressed, well car, and side dump (modifiers in other words) should probably be used to augment the limited smarts of the automatic keyword generation. Repeats of terms automatically generated should not be concerning.
These custom categories are used to enable scripts to rapidly locate certain classes of asset. It is strongly recommended that new custom category identifiers are introduced sparingly.
The custom-category-list tag value may have no more than 64 characters total. This tag should be left blank unless there is an existing specific script requirement that can only be fulfilled via the custom-category-list approach.
Min-build: V3.5 and above
The container holds a regular list of KIND Asset-group KUIDs. This inclusion is a declaration stating that there-after, particularly in searching operations (including script interfacing and TrainzUtil), this asset will be considered as a member of each listed asset group.
If no entries are specified for a given "member-of-groups" container, or if the asset omits the "member-of-groups" container, then the simulator software may specify some default asset groups based on the asset's Config.txt file. The exact behaviour may change between different versions of the simulator, however the current logic is described here.
The following tags are never mandantory for any asset, and many assets leave them blank.
Historically, the identification and licensing tags began with Trainz 0.9 (Beta).
Most assets on the DLS are badly worded versions of what is known as the Creative Commons Share Alike with Attribution (CC-BY-SA) like this and other Wikimedia wiki projects.
The meaning of the license tag is ambiguous and its usage is not recommended by N3V, but it's presence antedates N3V's management by 6-7 years.
Content uploaded to the Download Station or provided for inclusion into the game may be under a specific redistribution contract or license agreement which supersedes any text in this field. The license field does not provide for localization support. The text of the license field is not validated or enforced by Auran or N3V and may or may not be legally binding to end users.
OTOH, history at Planet Auran has shown that someone violating copyrights by using others content as their own, may bring speedy banning from the Auran sites and loss of download station privileges, etcetera in a permanent block. Further, the community will come down hard on other users violating another's copyright, and shun both the violator and ignore any assets allowed to remain on the DLS.
In summation, experimenting and altering assets is an accepted and even condoned way of life for Trainzer's trying to climb the steep content creation learning curves (everyone wants more content creators!), but if the asset has dependent parts, especially meshes, scripts, textures, which are intellectual properties— before uploading your creation, get permission to use those pieces belonging to someone else.
Asset parts specified by 'kuid reference' are not meant to be covered by this statement—using a common coupler, bogey, or basic traincar mesh (Auran minted several standard types which many authors use by default by making a kuid reference to the mesh, for example examine dependencies of Boxcars (UK: Covered Wagons or Vans)—over half are likely using a kuid reference to a basic mesh published by Auran back in Trainz 1.0!)
The following 'tag list' are 'de facto' because their 'use-convention' antedate the formal compilation of the above listed TBS tags but not the specification for using them, and indeed, also antedates the coining of the term TrainzBaseSpec (introduced with the TrainzOnline Wiki in 2008-2009), or it's formal definition in the N3V Wiki pages 11:32, 12 May 2009[4].
After initial compilation, some common but now obsolete tags found in older renditions of the data model have been added below such as bendy and it's friends below found in many bridge assets.
Editor's note: These 'TrainzBaseSpec tags' are obsolescent by programmer fiat in some cases with TB V2.7 (mainly those pertaining to Locomotive KINDs), and in all cases, after TS2009-SP0 and all N3V Games releases after it (despite the utility that many users found in some of them, the time penalties it would impose on the content creators, nor the ability to just ignore those no longer useful in a preprocessing operation) and will generate Faults (error messages) if the asset is opened for edit and partially upgraded by raising the trainz-build tags to V2.9 and greater data models:
Assets may be upgraded to V2.8 and before locally, and most often made to work, even when given several generations of data model elements improvements, then operate normally. It this way many assets can be made to function with TRS2004 or TRS2006 data modeling, yet be conformable with TS-releases in-processing and rendering.
For example, most pre-TRS era data model assets (v1.0–v2.3) can be made to work in the TS releases simply by adding a mesh-table to replace the ignored former effects of 'asset-filename' as ignored since the TS versions to define the path using the folder grouping of the original Trainz data model using subfolder and names with suffixes '_art', '_body', and '_shadow' (where the string defined by asset-name plus the suffix sets the path to the assets components.
Conversely, often TS-release assets with TBs v2.9 and above can be back-fitted to work with earlier data models by understanding the effects and use of some of these tags, and a little judicious alteration to eliminate texture.txt modifier lines (e.g. AlphaHint needs commented out, etc.) which are not understood by earlier versions.
Asset-name was the primary folder name for the asset in the Trainz 1.x--TRS2004 Trainz era, and is, more often than not, the name of the folder CM will open when opening the file for edit; within such early data model assets today one generally finds the asset-name is also used for that early-Trainz era's data sub-folder's system, giving sub-folder names 'asset-name_art', 'asset-name_body', 'asset-name_shadow' in a traincar asset. When repairing such assets, most often the value can be substituted with a SAR in a boilerplate copied and pasted down from a resource file. This substitution will often correctly define and link asset sub-folders for body, shadow and artwork, as the filenames in that early scheme were based on the asset-name tags.
Scope: Found in track or bridge assets prior to v2.9 standards when spline objects underwent a large change to a unified data model definition, dropping several prior KINDs in the mix in favor of all spline objects being unified under kind track.
'name' and 'name-XX' were early data model forms of the longer username and username-XX tags, the XX representing ISO two letter suffixes of non-English language translations of the English 'name tag' (or today's 'username' tag); the 'XX' forms as with description-XX being part of 'Localisation' support for other language's user-friendly values.
Note: Username (English) is the official asset name on the DLS, and should never be in a foreign language; after TB v2.5 (TRS2006-SP0 it also supersedes and replaces 'asset-name' when CM opens a folder for edit.
Subfolder names by convention will have pathspec names beginning with the username/asset-name field and utilize the suffixes _art, _body, and _shadow as part of the normal naming conventions. This may be a 3ds Max and gmax convention carried over into Trainz, which has historical ties to said graphics development software. (Gmax was bundled with Trainz releases V0.9—v2.4)
Whitespace in the string array will cause an error; all values must be suffixed with an 's' and have four digits, s.a. 1880s;1950s;2010s (which might be wholly appropriate for a woman's garment of certain types that go in and out of fashion!). Defining a range is alas, not currently possible, but has been requested by the user community.
Replace with string-array type category-era tag with no whitespace and semi-colons between date codes; these are given as full four digit decade numbers followed by a 's' (Small Ess) suffix.
Replace with string-array type category-region with no whitespace and semi-colons between the two character country codes enumerated in that referenced tag section; these are given as full two uppercase letters comprising enumerated codes followed by a ';' separator between codes, but not at the last before the terminal end-quotes.
Any whitespace in the string array will cause an read error, and fault message, including space(s) at the end before the trailing quotes.
As a former filter modifier, the tag is found historically in virtually all assets, but it was especially prevalent in rolling stock, scenery, spline assets, Track types (including tunnels and bridges) and Trackside assets with a degree of localisation.
Map assets still retain the keyword Region which was defined in Map configs with a contrary use—to be a kind region kuid reference. Hence, Region is required in Maps, and since TS2012, like the tag type, illegal in the very large number of assets where it once occurred as a 'grouping data' 'quick filter' for the TRS-series releases Surveyor Tool Windows.
Any region tag to a text string is obsolete after the TRS2009, as in the programmer's mind they replaced the crude filtering group selector of 'type and region' string-values in the Surveyor tools with the Pick List. Both these tags had some benefits and drawbacks and both date back to Trainz 0.9 Beta release.
The thumbnail tag was the early one view implementation of the thumbnails container (briefly documented above as well). The early pre-N3V programmer versions of Trainz would find a .jpg file, preferably sized as 240x180 pixels in either the main asset root folder, or the asset-name_art or asset-name_body folder and use it to display the asset in CMP and the DLS if it were uploaded. The tag was depreciated during TRS2006 since the thumbnails container was introduced with v2.0 (TRS2004-SP0). In older repaired assets wherein the TBV is kept below v2.4, the thumb will often still work in newer CMs provided it is in the _art subfolder and the asset-name matches the username.
The type tag, like the 'region tag', was used in Trainz 0.9—TC3 releases as an 'in-Surveyor group-filter' which combined with region, gave smaller selections (tool groups) of assets. Since TS2009 removed the capability and use of these local click-selectable filters in favor of a new more cumbersome filter. These left the tools selections be quick and simple, instead of being slow and pausing when switching between tool tabs—today's pre-TANE versions often seem overwhelmed by reloading a whole list of selections when switching back and forth between tool tabs.
Both type and region defaulted to 'All' giving the same mega-list as tools do in TS09 and after.
Every type tag is obsolete after the TRS2006 spinoffs (i.e. TC3), as in the programmer's mind they replaced the crude filtering group selector of 'type and region' in the Surveyor tools with the TS09 Pick List and filter—without giving the user capability to save multiple pick lists or easily load a filter defined and refined in CM.
↑ Asset Committing (TANE's submitting) is the process and procedure of incorporating content into the data base and cross-referencing it in the DB indexes so it can be accessed in the run-time modules.
↑ One way to validate an asset is otherwise okay excepting such values is to lower the TBV into the 2.5-3.7 range, and see if said messages go away. You might need to lower it in several attempts until low enough, and the converse may come into play, newer keywords unrecognized at the older TBV may give a different error message. Don't fail try though—even failing in such will generate knowledge and experience, and you can't break anything! If so, you can be confident just providing a value is the problem solution. Often, some modern demands merely need the key-word pair, so a blank line following the tag or an empty set of curly-braces following the tag for a container will satisfy the needs, where error testing is a bit over stringent.
↑ Note: This list is 'wikified' on the N3V TrainzOnline Wiki, meaning the first letter has been capitalized after the word 'KIND', whereas actual data tag names in config.txt files are all lower case text. That wiki also uses double quotes in quite a few terms, a practice which we'll spare you from experiencing herein.
↑ The 'kind consist' is not often seen directly, it sort of only lives in menus and the Content Manager lists.
↑ The obsolete-table must be used with care, and is most commonly seen in Auran authored assets. The table replaces an older kuid with a newer, and most content creators properly use the Kuid2 form of the kuid to supplant an older version. N3V by contrast, over uses the obsolete-table for new release 'upgraded' built-in assets, which can lead to much confusion, and a failure to get what one expects to see. (e.g. many nice 'Flip-trees' were obsoleted in TS10 and TS12 in favor of Speedtrees which affected many Routes wherein Speedtrees were NOT WANTED nor Desired by the creator. Across installs, this also causes missing dependencies until the asset containing the obsolete-table can be located. • FURTHER, only one obsolete entry per kuid is supported in the Assets.tdx data base indexing, and obsoleting a kuid with a Kuid2 version can lead to problems (i.e. which will you see?) • One excellent use of an obsolete-table is to upgrade a series of assets using a particular part, especially bogeys. Adding a mix of kuids to be replaced by an newer good bogey can dramatically improve the appearance of a route or session with a single edit (provided the bogey, for example, is compatible and sized properly!)
↑ Recent experience with an obsoleted asset brought into TANE showed no less than five alternative kuids obsoleting that poor Flip-tree asset. It appears with the confusions caused by speedtrees introduction and the overhaul of TANE with its aggressive pursuit of the most updated appropriate asset, multiple assets of different kuids obsoleting the same kuid are now tolerated in the ContentManager processes. As a good practice, use the obsolete-table only when absolutely necessary... such as superceding an undesired payware asset in an dependent asset you want to upload to the DLS, or self-publish on a website.
↑ On category-era tag range: The safe play, known to work. Other 'future decade' values should be tested before relying on such.
↑ Many containers use dummy/placeholder names in lists. These can be descriptive words, so long as they do not contain a whitespace character. Using underscores or periods in phrase-constructed names retains readability and enhances clarity considerably. For example, a cargo traincar might carry 45 legal product types. These will be listed in the dependencies container. Using Coal, granite,crushed_limestone, etc. makes maintenance and changes to the table easier. Jes Sayin' as a programmer since '76
↑ In the second thumbnails container example, there is a second 512x512 sized image, an extra. Which the DLS would use is unknown. Larger image sizes can also be included, and via an email chat, T:ANE may support a large image size that will find a use in a preview operation or the DLS listings. N3V Games doesn't generally telegraphy such information.
↑ Prior practice dating back to Trainz 1.x was using the keyword/tag 'thumb' with a pathspec reference in quotes to the 240x180 thumbnail image for run time menus. The art folder contained a 512x512 tga with an alpha mask (bmp files usually, but a properly formatted tga could be used as a self-alpha mask) and the 64x128 menu icon images and their controlling texture.txt file.
↑ In a private email conversation with former version manager James Moody over the winter of 2014-2015, on point on this topic the DLS upload vetting software may well have been altered since to enforce a proper thumbnails container.
↑ On category-era-nn vs category-era tags values:' The TRS's would accept either form category-era data; but TS2009-SP0 and up versions created faults from formerly legal keyword-value pairs and attempted to force content creator's to change all the assets the programmer's deliberately broke. Later the DLS upload software enforced the conversions, but that is far more acceptable, for the first action costs many an man-hour of frustration for fixes which are unnecessary and should have been implemented automatically in a software pre-filter pass when vetting older trainz-build assets. The actions virtually guaranteed that older asset downloads would have faults. It's one of the dumbest and most arrogant things the N3V programmer's have ever done and Auran's more experienced software people would have never acted so cavalierly at the communities time-expense.
The central body of this page is taken from the N3V TrainzOnline Wiki from KIND_TrainzBaseSpec. The enhanced information was added by the members of the Yesterdayz-Trainz user group.
↑ N3V's KIND_TrainzBaseSpec,as unaugmented source page lacking historical information (tags) found here; accessdate=Summer 2014
↑ a b "Trainz-build" tag direct link
↑ per fabartus, summer, 2014; likely the same day this example was added.
↑ Christoph Bergman, N3V Games chief programmer, aka 'Windwalkr', KIND TrainzBaseSpec history page.
This reference page is adapted from the TrainzOnline Wiki under the CC-BY-SA 3.0 License. This page will likely include more textual explanations, exposition, history, and/or examples than the source page on the same topic.The TrainzOnline Wiki is for the most part maintained by the programmers or knowledgeable content creators and may have newer more up-to-date information on the current trainz-build code standards, which have some tendency to change as features are added to the software.
Updating a live website includes of front and back-end development. Most websites use a Content Management System (CMS) to create and modify digital content. Everything a user sees, clicks, hears or uses to input or retrieve information is a result of front-end development. HyperText Markup Language (HTML) and Cascading Style Sheet (CSS) are the main two languages for front-end development. HTML is the standard markup language for creating web pages and applications. CSS is used to style the presentation of a document written in a markup language such as HTML. Front-end development links together design and technology while prioritizing user experience. User experience is the overall experience of a person using a website or application in terms of its pleasure and efficiency. According to technical innovator, Peter Morville, there are seven main factors that influence user experience. For a website or application to deliver a good user experience it must be useful, useable, findable, credible, desirable, accessible and valuable.
Back-end development focuses on how the website works as it communicates database information to a browser through code. Responsiveness and speed are two main aspects associated with this kind of work. The majority of things that a user cannot see, such as databases and servers is back-end development. Back-end development uses languages such as Java programming language, PHP, Ruby programming language and Python programming language to complete work. Such languages are used to create a dynamic web page with content that is constantly changing such as Facebook and Twitter.
Tied notes are two notes in different measures that are played as one continuous note. A group of tied notes is written as two or more separate notes held together by a curved line call a tie. For example, if a composer wants to write a note that gets eight beats in 4/4 time, he would write to whole notes (four beats) in two measures and connect them with a tie. He could do the same with one more whole note to make a note with twelve beats, and so on and so forth.
You want to associate some behavior of your web application with a users's login session.
There are several functions provided by eXist and other web servers to manage information associated with a login session.
Before you add any session attributes this might return only a single variable such as:
(: set the group and role :)
These attributes will remain associated with the user until the user logs out or their session times out, typically after 15 minutes of inactivity.
One sample use of session attributes is to keep track of user interface preferences. For example if a user wants to have their data sorted by a person's zip code you can add that to their session variable.
Data can be stored in a large variety of formats. Each statistical package has its own format for data (xls for Microsoft Excel, dta for Stata, sas7bdat for SAS, ...). R can read almost all file formats. We present a method for each kind of file. If none of the following methods work, you can use a specific software for data conversion such as the free software OpenRefine or the commercial software Stat Transfer.[1] In any case, most statistical software can export data in a CSV (comma separated values) format and all of them can read CSV data. This is often the best solution to make data available to everyone.
Some IDE or GUI provides some press button solution to import data.
You may also have a look at speedR, a graphical user interface which helps at importing data from Excel, OpenOfficeCalc, CSV and other text files.[2]
You can import data from a text file (often CSV) using read.table(), read.csv() or read.csv2(). The option header = TRUE indicates that the first line of the CSV file should be interpreted as variables names and the option sep = gives the separator (generally "," or ";").
Note that there is no problem if your data are stored on the internet.
By default, strings are converted to factors. If you want to avoid this conversion, you can specify the option stringsAsFactors = FALSE.
You can export data to a text file using write.table().
For large CSV files, it is possible to use the ff package.[3]
Some fixed width text files are provided with a SAS script to import them. Anthony Damico has created SAScii package to easily import those data.[4]
See scan() and readLines() in the Reading and writing text files section.
We can read Stata data using read.dta() in the foreign package and export to Stata data format using write.dta().
Note that string variables in Stata are limited to 244 characters. This can be an issue during the exportation process.
See also Stata.file() in the memisc package and stata.get in the Hmisc package.
Experimental support for SAS databases having the sas7bdat extension is provided by the sas7bdat[5] package. However, sas7bdat files generated by 64 bit versions of SAS, and SAS running on non-Microsoft Windows platforms are not yet supported.
See also sasexport.get() and sas.get() in the Hmisc
See also the SASxport package.
Importing data from Excel is not easy. The solution depends on your operating system. If none of the methods below works, you can always export each Excel spreadsheets to CSV format and read the CSV in R. This is often the simplest and quickest solution.
XLConnect supports reading and writing both xls and xlsx file formats. Since it is based on Apache POI it only requires a Java installation and as such works on many platforms including Windows, UNIX/Linux and Mac. Besides reading & writing data it provides a number of additional features such as adding plots, cell styling & style actions and many more.
32-bit Windows: channel <- odbcConnectExcel("Graphiques pourcent croissance.xls") # creates a connection
64-bit Windows: channel <- odbcConnectExcel2007("Graphiques pourcent croissance.xls")
The xlsReadWrite package (actually, this package does not exist on CRAN repos, but you can download old versions from CRAN archive).
"sheet" specifies the name or the number of the sheet you want to import.
"from" specifies the first row of the spreadsheet.
The gnumeric package.[6] This package use an external software called ssconvert which is usually installed with gnumeric, the Gnome office spreadsheet. The read.gnumeric.sheet() function reads xls and xlsx files.
See also xlsx for Excel 2007 documents and read.xls() (gdata).
You should make the spreadsheet public, publish it as a CSV file. Then you can read it in R using read.csv(). See more on the Revolution's computing blog (link). See also RGoogleDocs (link).
The gnumeric package[6].
Note that you can also use the speedR graphical user interface (speedR()) which will return the command line for replication.
JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) is a very common format on the internet. The rjson library makes it easy to import data from a json format[7].
Is is easy to export a list or a dataframe to a JSON format using the toJSON() function :
Sometimes the JSON data can be more complex with structures such as nested arrays. In this case you may find it more useful to use an online converter like json-csv.com to convert the file to CSV. Then import the resulting data as per the CSV instructions above.
This section is a stub.You can help Wikibooks by expanding it.
See "Working with the {DICOM} and {NIfTI} Data Standards in R" in the Journal of Statistical Software[9]
R Data Manual[10].
Paul Murrell's Introduction to Data Technologies[11].
↑ "Opening Large CSV Files in R". http://stathack.wordpress.com/2012/12/27/opening-large-csv-files-in-r/. Retrieved March 7, 2013.
↑ David Smith. "Importing public data with SAS instructions into R". http://blog.revolutionanalytics.com/2012/07/importing-public-data-with-sas-instructions-into-r.html. Retrieved February 1, 2013.
↑ a b This command has been tested using Ubuntu 10.10 and R 2.11.1
↑ http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/rjson/index.html
↑ http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/hdf5/index.html
↑ Brandon Whitcher, Volker J. Schmid, Andrew Thorton "Working with the {DICOM} and {NIfTI} Data Standards in R", Journal of Statistical Software Vol. 44, Issue 6, Oct 2011, link
↑ Paul Murrell introduction to Data Technologies
Primary Assessment & Basic Life Support —
Medical Conditions & Poisoning —
Trainz Content Creation—Intermediate to Advanced Topics
Normal mapping is a graphics processing technique...
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam, quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo consequat. Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur. Excepteur sint occaecat cupidatat non proident, sunt in culpa qui officia deserunt mollit anim id est laborum.
This Trainz/Tutorial for Normal mapping (TRS2009) section is a stub placeholder, an outline or marker that this section of the book is otherwise incomplete. You can help the Wikibooks Trainz project by expanding it with fuller discussion of the topic.
Making a normal map from a photograph picture or any image used for UV mapping. You will need the freeware graphics program Gimp2 to make the normalmap with. "Gimp 2.6.4" found at http://gimp.org/downloads/. Gimp 2.6.5 is at http://gimp-win.sourceforge.net/stable.html. Gimp 2.6 help files are located at http://docs.gimp.org/. I prefer version 2.6.4 because 2.6.5 tends to freeze the computer up. The normalmap generator for Gimp can be downloaded from http://nifelheim.dyndns.org/~cocidius/normalmap/ look for win32 binaries (.zip) and click on that. Open the zip file and read the readme.txt file for installation instructions.
The texture file was created from an original photograph by Paul Bartlett who retains copy write but is used with his permission.
Click here to enlarge.
In this tutorial you will take an image that you used to UV texture a mesh in your favorite 3D object maker program. (i.e. 3DSmax, Blender, Gmax, etc.) I like using Blender cause it's powerful like 3DSmax and the best part is.......it's free.
In Gimp2, you will make a copy of the texture file, convert it to grayscale and work it for conversion to a normalmap using Gimp2's own normalmap generator plugin.
In my next tutorial...You will learned how to implement the normalmap with a texture map for the 3d shadow affect you will see in trainz using the Blender 3D object program.
First you take the texture you used for UV mapping and load it into Gimp. After it is loaded, click on the word "Image" and choose Duplicate. The shortcut is (ctrl-D). Close the original image to keeps it safe from changes.
Next delete any alpha masks from the copy by clicking Layer, Mask, and Delete Layer Mask.(Circled in image below). We won't need it for the normalmap since texture or opaque maps will handle that for us.
Change to greyscale by using Image, Mode, Grayscale.
Save the copy by clicking file, save-as. The save dialog below will pop up. Name the file "textureName_grayscale.tga" or any name that helps you remember what this image is for. Click save.
Uncheck RLE compression checkbox in the upper left corner of the popup box, and then click save to complete the process.
NOTE: For all textures used in Trainz always uncheck the RLE compression checkbox. Trainz will compress the image itself and doesn't liked pre-compressed textures.
After you saved the file we will start preparing it for normalmap conversion. Start by making all of the backgrounds (the parts that are not used in the UV mapping) and make it pure white. This is because white will be the deepest points in the picture and darker shades are higher points. White is further away from you, blacks closer to you. Any shades laid on the UV textures will have the edges rounded back like the edge of a box instead of beveled like the lip of a cup. Also the shades of greys are relative in references. This means if you use a medium grey color any lighter shades will be further back and any darker shades will be closer to you. (using the color picker a shade value "V" of 65 in the middle of a shade 60 and 70 is the same relevance as 90 between 85 and 95). I'll explain more as we get into details.
Next, we start finding all the flat parts of the picture and select those areas. The area marked in red can be selected just don't select the diagonal bar yet. You can also work these spots one at a time, til you get a better feel of using the selection tools. The selection tools are the first 4 brushes in the top row of toolbox pictured below.
After the selection use the paint sprayer tool and set it to the following specs.
Then spray paint the selected areas to that shade of gray. Note: the shade value can be anywhere from 1 to 99 but this gives you rooms to go up and down with.
Now for detailing.
In the above picture you see "1's" as the lowest areas and 7's as the highest area. By selecting each area and shading them to their relative shade you'll create the different heights you'll need for the 3D effect in Trainz. Before you start, you need to work out the shade values you'll need in the color picker. If we made "1" a value of 50 then to set a higher plane we need to pick a darker shade value. You can use 49 for "2's" area; and it will work; but it's hard for ours eyes to see the difference. So, I like using values of 3 to 5 points differences. It makes seeing the differences in the shades easier so you don't get lost. The actual height spread is controlled in the normalmap generator. So, lets set 2's at 47 , 3's at 44 and so forth. If it's a bigger jump in height like number 7, then use a difference of 7 to 10 or more. In this case a jump of 7 relative to 6's area will suffice.
Next, we start to select each of these parts and allow for rivets. At first glance that seems like a lot of work. But, it really isn't too bad and is a whole lot easier than making a Hi LOD mesh and a Low LOD mesh to bake a normalmap with. Plus, this way it is a lot easier to correct mistakes.
Now select one of the number 3's areas and de-select the approximate centers of where the rivets will go. Indicated by the red arrows. Do this by holding ctrl while left-click and dragging with the mouse. Pressing + plus sign and - minus sign on the 10 key pad will zoom in and out the image. Holding the middle mouse button and dragging will pan the image. Make the de-selection just large enough to see. 4 pixels is usually good. Be sure to get all the rivets along the area you selected. Now would be a good time to save. Remember to save often so you don't lose too much in case of power outs or a crash. So, far I have be quite please with the stability of Gimp.
Now, we will simulate the heights of the rivets. Pick the circle selector. Indicated by the red circle in the following picture.
And go back to the image and zoom in on one of the rivet spots. With the circle selector, outline a 2×2 circle around the spot like in the right-hand image just below. If you don't get it just right, you can mouse over and a move cross arrow will appear and you can drag into place. Also, on the sides you will see size changers; just grab one and adjust to your liking. Now without clicking again on the image go to the toolbox and pick the pencil image. Indicated with the blue circle in the above picture. Set the specs as indicated above and click the color picker. Rivets come out well if set 3 and 6 shade points higher than its surrounding shade. Since the shade value for our "3s" area was 44 on our list, we want to set the outer 8 pixels to value 41 and the center 4 pixels to 38. Remember darker is a lower shade value and it causes the plane to be higher in the "bump map". Thus the rivet will be higher than the plate it's fastened to. Select each value in turn and, with the pencil, color each pixel in the selected area.
Now with the area still selected right click and choose edit then choose copy. Shortcut key is ctrl-c. Pick the circle selector again and outline the next rivet spot. This time just right click choose edit and then choose paste. Shortcut is ctrl-v. If it is not in the right spot you can now use the cursor arrow keys to nudge it to the right spot. Always remember the rivets are relative to their own plane. So, if you're working on area 2 which we determined to be a value of 47 then the rivet will be set to 44 for the outer 8 pixels and 41 for the 4 center pixel (value 3 and 6 again). The values being the same as a plane in another area is irrelevant to the current rivet.
Now on to another detailing trick.
In the picture above we have a sloping plane. "A" is high value about 21 and B is low value about 38. We will use a blend brush to create the slope values needed. In the toolbox select the blend brush, Circled in red. Click on the gradient button mark with green. Select gradients editor marked with orange in the 2nd image. Select "New" marked with a blue circle in the 3rd image. In the last image rename the new gradient to a name like, "slope" in the name slot marked by pink. Click the arrow marked by yellow to bring up the editor dialog in the lower image.
Choose "left Endpoints Color" marked by red.
Set the "V" value to 21, our high point shade. Click OK.
Choose "Right Endpoints Color" marked with blue and set the "V" value to our low point of 38. Click OK. Save slope in the Gradient Editor (4th pic at the top) and close the editor and each popup back to the main toolbox. Make sure the gradient "slope" is picked and go back to our picture.
Click just inside the selected area at point A and drag the mouse to the bottom of the area next to point B. Release the mouse button and you have a smooth slope for the normalmap generator to use. Remember to save often. Continue working on the other parts until your satified. Do not leave any untouched areas, it will stand out like a sore thumb. By the way, in the dark deep area across from "B", I used a near white value because it sets under the car quite a way's. So near white would create the deep area in the normalmap. Always remember darker is closer to you, lighter is further away.
Now the fun part........
Right click on the image and mouse over map then choose Normalmap; as in the image above.
In the generator popup window below, set the following specs.
Set filter to Sobel 3x3, set scale to 3, (negative numbers cause inversion of height), Check Invert X and check Invert Y. (leaving these unchecked cause the shadows to fall towards the sun instead of away from it). Set "Conversion:" to Colorspace.
Then click the 3D Preview button to see the result.
When you're done examining it, close the previewer and click OK in the generator window. You should have a normalmap instead of the grayscale map now. See image below. If it's not right or you hit OK when you meant to cancel, just hit ctrl-z to undo the normalmap and continue working; if need be; on the grayscale map. Notice that the image seems to be backwards. I do it this way because trainz uses it backwards (high and low inverted).
Now, you're ready to save it. Save it in the folder your original UV texture file is in and name it something like "Original_name_Normal.tga". Click save and remember to UNCHECK the RLE compression checkbox. Then click save to finish.
That's it!! You now have a normalmap in less time it would take to create 2 meshes, line them up, set the distances, bake it. Not to mention you don't have to create a high detailed LOD mesh and a low LOD mesh.
Now, you can use my next tutorial for incorporating normalmaps using Blender.
Two models of the FM Towns II.
The Fujitsu pavilion at Expo 85.
The FM Towns was a Fujitsu computer that excelled at gaming and released in Japan in February 1989 for 338,000 yen.[1][2]
The Towns part of the name is said to be a reference to Charles Hard Townes, who won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1964.[2][3] As Charles Hard Townes invented the laser[4]
, the name is perhaps appropriate for the CD-ROM based computer, which uses a laser to read optical media.
The FM Towns is powered by a 32 bit Intel 80386dx processor clocked at 16 megahertz, with a 80387 coprocessor.[2]
The FM Towns contained between 1 and 6 megabytes of RAM depending on the configuration.[1]
The FM Towns contained a built in CD-ROM drive standard.[1]
The FM Towns ran the custom Towns OS made by Fujitsu.[1]
Wikipedia has related information at FM Towns
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: FM Towns
↑ a b c d "FM TOWNS (1989) - Fujitsu Global". https://www.fujitsu.com/global/about/corporate/history/products/computer/personalcomputer/fmtowns.html.
↑ a b c "OLD-COMPUTERS.COM : The Museum". https://www.old-computers.com/museum/computer.asp?st=1&c=968.
↑ "Charles H. Townes Facts". https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/1964/townes/facts/.
↑ "Nobel laureate and laser inventor Charles Townes dies at 99". https://news.berkeley.edu/2015/01/27/nobel-laureate-and-laser-inventor-charles-townes-dies-at-99/.
Women Writers Project (WWP) is a current “long-term research and publication project focusing on early women’s writing in English”[1]. This project is currently based at the Northeastern University, Boston, America, and has an online platform called ‘Women Writers Online’.
The WWP was established in 1988 at Brown University, Rhode Island, America, and was formerly known as ‘Brown University Women Writers Project'.
The WWP is an electronic archive of women’s writing, consisting of works created by women between 1350 to 1850[2] The focus of this collaborative project is to encode these works by women, which are often hard to find, into digital formats, to allow easy, informative, and reliable access to the texts. In 1999 the WWP became available online as ‘Women Writers Online’, enabling easy access to the hundreds of texts and resources surrounding them. As they state on their website:The Women Writers Project is a long-term research project devoted to early modern women's writing and electronic text encoding. Our goal is to bring texts by pre-Victorian women writers out of the archive and make them accessible to a wide audience of teachers, students, scholars, and the general reader. We support research on women's writing, text encoding, and the role of electronic texts in teaching and scholarship.[3]In 2013 the WWP moved to Northeastern University and is now a part of the Digital Scholarship Group in the Northeastern University Library.
WWP was first founded by members of the faculty of Brown University[2]. Since the late 1980s, the collaborative project has expanded and now has a large team and even larger list of alumni.
Currently the WWP has four permanent staff members:
The WWP also employs ten people as Current Research and Encoding Specialists. Additionally, they have an Advisory Board incorporating an Executive Committee and a Research Board; and Collaborators consisting of Pedagogical Development Consultants and Research Partners [4].
For a full list of staff and alumni that have contributed in the WWP, please visit https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/about/people.html
The Women Writers Project has created a range of resources dedicated to assisting others to research, digitise and catalogue women writers. The WWP have a variety of works including: published materials; resources for teaching; seminars of scholarly text encoding; an extremely detailed guide to text encoding; consultancy services for digital humanities projects; an annual conference, ‘Women in the Archives’; exhibits; and four regularly updated and maintained web-platforms listed below.
Women Writers Online: a collection of more than 420 texts written or translated by women between 1400 and 1850.[5] A list of the texts currently available on WWO can be found at https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/wwo/texts/textlist.title.html . This includes women writers such as Anne Askew, Ann Bacon (Cooke), Margaret Cavendish, Eliza Haywood (Fowler), Katherine Phillips (Fowler), Charlotte Smith (Turner), and many more.To access WWO, you need a subscription. These can be either individual or through an institution, such as a university. Individual subscriptions cost $50 a year, or $25 for students. Most years the WWP offers WWO free for the month of March, in celebration of Women’s History Month.[6]
Women Writers in Context: an introduction to women writers work that provides context, connections to other texts, and information relating to women in education, music, arts, medicine, and wars, through in-depth essays and research.[7]
Teaching and Leaning (WWP Curricular Materials): contains an array of teaching and learning materials including suggested assignments for engaging with texts collaboratively; orientations and how tos with helpful reference sheets; syllabi- a collection of syllabi studied at universities that focus and engage with women writers, utilising the WWO, a guide to citation; and a pedagogical development consultant program. [8]
Women Writers in Review: “a collection of eighteenth- and nineteenth- century reviews, publication notices, literary histories, and other texts responding to works by early women.”[9]
The WWP also maintain a blog where they regularly post to inform people of current research they are doing and any important announcements about the WWP. The blog can be accessed at https://www.wwp.neu.edu/blog/ .
Members of the WWP have published scholarly peer-reviewed works covering topics such as markup (how to write things in widely-accessible online formats), data modeling, and the digital humanities in general. A complete list of their publications and presentations is available online.[10]
The people and researchers of WWP have continuously collaborated in creating invaluable resource pertaining to early women writers in English, through their digitalised catalogue, online resources, and published materials.
The strong interest in the WWP’s research and projects is evident in the grants they have received overtime to fund and report on their activities.They have since published the reports on their grant work online for others to review and benefit from.[11] These grant reports range from explanations on encoding humanities databases and early printed books, and studies on how women's work has been perceived and received, especially online.
The first grant they received was in 1988 from the National Endowment for the Humanities to fund “the initial research and development of the collection”.[12]
The main funder of this project, who has continuously funded the WWP’s endeavours, is the National Endowment for the Humanities. Additional funders of the WWP are the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation and the Gladys Krieble Delmas Foundation. A list of the particulars about the many grants the WWP has received can be found on https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/about/grants.html.
The collective collaborations that the WWP continue to provide enable great access and reliable information on early women writers and the writings. Through this, the WWP can be seen as having positive and integral role in the history and information surrounding women literacy.
Women Writers Project. “WWP.” Women Writers Project, www.wwp.northeastern.edu/ . Accessed 5 May. 2021.
“About the WWP.” Women Writers Project, Women Writers Project, Northeastern University, https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/about/ Accessed 5 May. 2021.
“Women Writers Project History.” Women Writers Project, Women Writers Project, Northeastern University, https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/about/history/ . Accessed 5 May. 2021.
“WWP People.” Women Writers Project, Women Writers Project, Northeastern University, https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/about/people.html Accessed 5 May. 2021.
“The Texts in Women Writers Online”. Women Writers Project, Women Writers Project, Northeastern University, https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/wwo/texts/ Accessed 1 June. 2021.
“Women Writers Online Licencing and Access”. Women Writers Project, Women Writers Project, Northeastern University, https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/wwo/license/ Accessed 1 June. 2021.
“Women Writers in Context”. Women Writers Project, Women Writers Project, Northeastern University, https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/context/index.html , Accessed 1 June. 2021.
“Teaching and Learning”. Women Writers Project, Women Writers Project, Northeastern University, https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/wwo/teaching/ , Accessed 1 June. 2021.
“Women Writers in Review”. Women Writers Project, Women Writers Project, Northeastern University, https://wwp.northeastern.edu/review/ , Accessed 1 June. 2021.
“History of Grants”. Women Writers Project, Women Writers Project, Northeastern University, https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/about/grants.html , Accessed 1 June 2021.
For further reading on the Northeastern Women Writers Project visit https://wwp.northeastern.edu/research/publications/ where there are links to the various projects that the WWP has provided, including but not limited to Women Writers Online, Women Writers in Context, Women Writers in Review, Teaching and Learning Resources, and detailed guides to text encoding.
If you’re interested in what text encoding is and how to do it: https://www.w3.org/International/questions/qa-what-is-encoding and https://wwp.northeastern.edu/research/publications/documentation/internal/ .
If you’re interested in research conducted by one of the founders and current director of the WWP, Julia Flanders, a list of her published works and lectures can be found at https://juliaflanders.wordpress.com/about/cv/ .
↑ https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/about/, accessed 5 May 2021.
↑ a b https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/about/history/, accessed 5 May 2021.
↑ https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/, accessed 5 May 2021.
↑ https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/about/people.html, accessed 5 May 2021.
↑ https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/wwo/texts/, accessed 1 June 2021.
↑ https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/wwo/license/, accessed 1 June 2021.
↑ https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/context/index.html, accessed 1 June 2021.
↑ https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/wwo/teaching/, accessed 1 June 2021.
↑ https://wwp.northeastern.edu/review/, accessed 1 June 2021.
↑ WWP, "WWP Publications and Presentations", https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/research/publications/publist-full.html, accessed 1 June 2021
↑ WWP, "WWP Publications and Presentations", https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/research/publications/, accessed 1 June 2021
↑ https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/about/grants.html, accessed 1 June 2021.
The Jewish religion has many festivals (chagim, singular chag) and fasts (tzom or ta'anit). Their dates are of course determined by the Jewish calendar rather than the Gregorian one.
The Sabbath, festivals and fasts end just after the end of evening twilight. Festivals, and the fasts of Yom Kippur and Tisha B'Av, start just before sunset. Other fasts start just before morning twilight. These times must be calculated for each town's longitude and latitude. The definition of twilight may vary between different Jewish communities.
The day before the Sabbath or a festival or fast is known as Erev (literally, "evening", as in the English phrase "Christmas Eve"). Thus we have Erev Shabbat, Erev Succot, Erev Tisha B'Av, etc.
For historical reasons outside the scope of this book, some festivals that are observed for only one day in Israel are observed for two in the rest of the World by orthodox Jews. (Many non-orthodox movements have rejected this second day.) These are noted below in each case.
Rosh Chodesh is the New Month (literally, the Head of the Month). It is the first day of each month. Additionally, if the previous month has 30 days, the 30th day of the previous month is also Rosh Chodesh. Thus for example, Rosh Chodesh Sivan is always just one day since Iyar has 29 days. However, since Sivan has 30 days, 30th Sivan is the first day of Rosh Chodesh Tammuz and 1st Tammuz is the second day.
Since Cheshvan and Kislev are of variable length, Rosh Chodesh Kislev and Tevet may each last either one or two days.
Since 1st Tishri is Rosh Hashana, it is rarely given the name Rosh Chodesh Tishri, although technically it is.
Consecutive Rosh Chodeshes (or, pedantically, Roshe Chodashim) fall on consecutive days of the week. This is because two Rosh Chodeshes are necessarily separated by exactly four weeks (2nd - 29th of the month), whether that month has 29 or 30 days. For example, if 1st Nisan is Sunday, we have
etc.
(Note when applying this rule that 1 Tishri must be counted.)
The Aseret Yeme Teshuva or Ten Days of Repentance are the first ten days of Tishri. The first two days are Rosh Hashana (even in Israel) and the tenth is Yom Kippur. There are seven days between these festivals; one and only one of these must be Sabbath and this is called Shabbat Shuvah (The Sabbath of Return or Repentance).
The day after Rosh Hashana is Tzom Gedalyahu (the Fast of Gedaliah). However, if this day is Shabbat Shuvah, the fast is postponed until Sunday, to avoid fasting on the Sabbath.
Although Yom Kippur is also a fast day, it may fall on Sabbath, since it is so holy that it overrides the normal prohibition of fasting on Sabbath.
The festival lasts eight days, from 15 to 22 Tishri inclusive. The first and last days are full festivals. The other days, called Chol Hamoed or the Intermediate Days, are semi-festivals when most types of work are permitted. Unless the first and last days are Shabbat, one of the intermediate days will be Shabbat so is called Shabbat Chol Hamoed.
The eighth day is technically a different festival, called Shemini Atzeret (the eighth day of assembly). It is largely devoted to celebrating the reading of the Torah, so is also known as Simchat Torah or Rejoicing of the Law.
The day after the festival (23 Tishri) is known as Isru Chag (the binding of the festival) and has a somewhat joyous nature.
The festival lasts nine days, from 15 to 23 Tishri inclusive. The first two and last two days are full festivals. The other days, called Chol Hamoed or the Intermediate Days, are semi-festivals when most types of work are permitted. Unless the first and eighth days are Shabbat, one of the intermediate days will be Shabbat so is called Shabbat Chol Hamoed.
The eighth and ninth days technically form a different festival, called Shemini Atzeret (the eighth day of assembly). The ninth day is devoted to celebrating the reading of the Torah, so it is usually called Simchat Torah or Rejoicing of the Law, although it is the second day of Shemini Atzeret.
The day after the festival (24 Tishri) is known as Isru Chag (the binding of the festival) and has a somewhat joyous nature.
The festival starts on 25 Kislev. It lasts for eight days (even in Israel), all days being of equal importance. It is 83 days after New Year except in an abundant year when Cheshvan has an extra day; in that case it is 84 days after New Year. This means that in an abundant year, the first day of Chanukah is on the same day of the week as the first day of Rosh Hashana. In other year types, it is one weekday earlier.
In a deficient year, when Kislev has 29 days, the sixth day of Chanukah is Rosh Chodesh Tevet and the last day of the festival is 3 Tevet. In a regular or abundant year, when Kislev has 30 days, the sixth and seventh days of Chanukah are both Rosh Chodesh Tevet and the last day of the festival is 2 Tevet.
This is a fast day, generally just called Asara Betevet (which just means 10th Tevet). It is the only fast that can fall on Friday (but see Pesach); while fasting on Friday is not forbidden, it is discouraged so that you should not commence the Sabbath in a sad frame of mind.
New Year for Trees (in Hebrew, Rosh Hashana L'Ilanot) is a minor festival that falls on 15th Shevat. It is also called Tu B'Shevat, Tu representing 15 in Hebrew letters.
This celebrates the events described in the biblical Book of Esther. It is celebrated on 14th Adar (so is 30 days before Pesach). In cities that have been walled since the time of the biblical Book of Joshua (such as Jerusalem), it is celebrated on 15th Adar. Elsewhere, that day is called Shushan Purim and has a somewhat joyous character.
The day before Purim is the Fast of Esther (Ta'anit Esther). If this day is Saturday, fasting is forbidden. Normally, the fast would be postponed to Sunday; that cannot be done in this case, as Purim is a day of celebration and feasting. It could be moved back to Friday, but as noted above fasting on Friday is discouraged so the fast is moved back to Thursday 11th Adar.
In a leap year, all these days are observed in Adar Sheni. 14th and 15th Adar Rishon are called Purim Katon and Shushan Purim Katon respectively; katon means small.
Erev Pesach is more important than most Erevs, for two reasons:
On the morning of Erev Pesach, it is necessary to remove all trace of leavened bread from the home; no leavened bread is allowed throughout Pesach, so the festival in a sense begins on the morning of the day before.
It is customary for first-born males to fast on that day, so it is called Ta'anit Bechorim (Fast of the Firstborn). If the first day of Pesach is a Saturday, the fast is on Friday, even though fasting on Friday is usually discouraged. If the first day of Pesach is a Sunday, the fast cannot be postponed to Monday, as that is still the festival of Pesach. It could be moved back to Friday, but since fasting on Friday is discouraged, the fast is moved back to Thursday 12th Nisan.
The first day is 15 Nisan, i.e. 163 days before the next New Year.
The festival lasts seven days, from 15 to 21 Nisan inclusive. The first and last days are full festivals. The other days, called Chol Hamoed or the Intermediate Days, are semi-festivals when most types of work are permitted. Unless the first day is Shabbat, or Sunday so the seventh day is Shabbat, one of the intermediate days will be Shabbat so is called Shabbat Chol Hamoed.
The day after the festival (22 Nisan) is known as Isru Chag (the binding of the festival) and has a somewhat joyous nature.
The festival lasts eight days, from 15 to 22 Nisan inclusive. The first two and last two days are full festivals. The other days, called Chol Hamoed or the Intermediate Days, are semi-festivals when most types of work are permitted. Unless the first and eighth days are Shabbat, or the first day is Sunday so the seventh day is Shabbat, one of the intermediate days will be Shabbat so is called Shabbat Chol Hamoed.
The day after the festival (23 Nisan) is known as Isru Chag (the binding of the festival) and has a somewhat joyous nature.
Starting on the second night of Pesach, every night is counted for seven weeks. Thus on the first night, "tonight is the first night of the Omer" is said, on the next night, "tonight is the second night of the Omer", and so on. From the seventh night, weeks and days are also counted, so on the last night, "tonight is the forty-ninth night of the Omer, making seven weeks" is said.
Parts of this period of seven weeks are times of mourning, when for example weddings should not be held. The precise dates when mourning is observed vary between communities.
Two days in the Omer have special significance. Pesach Sheni ("Second Pesach") is on 14th Iyar, exactly a month after Erev Pesach. In the days of the Temple, it was an opportunity to make the special Pesach offering for those unable to make it on the correct date. Lag B'Omer, the 33rd day of the Omer or 18th Iyar, is regarded by all communities as a happy day when laws of mourning during the Omer cease or are suspended.
In many communities, 27th Nisan is observed as Holocaust Memorial Day. If 27th Nisan falls on Friday, it is pushed back to Thursday (26th Nisan), whereas if 27th Nisan falls on Sunday, it is postponed to Monday (28th Nisan).
This is a new festival, created following the proclamation of the State of Israel in 1948. It is normally on 5th Iyar. The rules have changed slightly over the years, but are now that it is moved back to Thursday if it would be on Friday or Shabbat and postponed to Tuesday if it would be on Monday. Thus it can only fall on Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday. Some Jews refuse to observe it because they do not regard the creation of the State of Israel as a miracle requiring a new festival. For those who do observe it, it is a joyous day that suspends Omer mourning.
The previous day, Yom HaZikaron ("Day of Remembrance"), is a day for recalling all those killed in battle, similar to Veterans' Day or Armistice Day in other countries.
As for Independence Day, some Jews refuse to observe it and for those who do observe it, it suspends Omer mourning.
This is observed on the day following the completion of counting the Omer. This would be the 50th day of the Omer, or 50 days after the first day of Pesach, hence the English term "Pentecost". Before the present fixed calendar, it would have been possible for this to be the 5th, 6th or 7th of Sivan (depending on whether Nisan or Iyar had 29 and 30 days). However, now that Nisan always has 30 days and Iyar has 29, Shavuot is now always on 6th Sivan. Outside Israel, it is observed for two days, 6th and 7th Sivan. As for Succot and Pesach, the day afterwards is called Isru Chag.
Shavuot recalls the giving of the Ten Commandments at Mount Sinai. The three days before Shavuot are called the "Three Days of Bordering", recalling the time when the Israelites were forbidden to approach the mountain. (See Exodus Chapter 19.)
These fasts fall respectively on 17th Tammuz and 9th Av, so are known in Hebrew as Shiva Assar beTanmmuz and Tisha b'Av, Shiva Assar and Tisha meaining 17 and nine in Hebrew. They are 21 days or exactly three weeks apart, hence always fall on the same day of the week as each other. The period between them is known as "The Three Weeks" and is a period of mourning. Tisha b'Av is 62 days after the first day of Shavuot.
If they fall on Saturday, then to avoid fasting on Shabbat they are postponed to the next day.
It is customary to observe certain mourning practices on the day after Tisha b'Av. These are observed on the Monday if Tisha b'Av falls on Sunday and has not been postponed. However, if Tisha b'Av falls on Saturday and was postponed to Sunday, no mourning is observed on Monday.
An organic business can only function if it is part of one or several supply chains that link production and consumption. This chapter will help you to define your role in an organic value chain and how to collaborate efficiently with other stakeholders.
What is an organic value chain?
Figure 7: Typical value chain of agricultural commodities
A value chain consists of all the actors involved in the production, processing, trading and selling of a specific product (Figure 7). It is more or less the same as a supply chain, with the difference that the term supply chain implies that the perspective is from a buyer sourcing raw materials, while the value chain puts more focus on the value added at each step, and on the collaboration between the different value chain actors. The value chain operates in a certain context or business environment, and relies on different types of services (financial services, certification services, technical advice etc.).
Quite a lot of work has been done on how to facilitate and manage effectively both value chains in general and agricultural value chains in developing countries in particular. Some useful references are provided in the Annex "Value chain facilitation".
Different products, different value chains
Different agricultural products and their value chains have different characteristics. Perishable products like fresh fruits and vegetables, for example, require more sophisticated logistics and efforts in timing than non-perishable products like rice or sesame. Bulk commodities like cotton and coffee need a certain scale of production (i.e. larger farmer groups) in order to break even, while production of high-value niche products like medicinal plants can be viable at a much smaller scale.
From a development perspective, different value chains may have different socio-economic impacts. Crops which require high initial investment, like fruits or tea, are likely to exclude marginal farmers. Some products particularly benefit women, like shea or lemon grass (see chapter "Gender isuues in organic value chains").
Who plays which role in a value chain?
Organic businesses want to bring organic products to promising markets. In doing this, they depend on a number of other players directly involved in their value chain: input suppliers, farmers, store keepers, transporters, processors, traders, retailers[1]. The value chain will only function well if each chain actor does a good job in playing his/her role, thus adding real value to the product, and if each actor can do this in a profitable way. Both in organic and Fair Trade value chains there are usually fewer intermediaries, because of the transparency and traceability requirement. As traceability and integrity of the organic products need to be ensured, suppliers and processors cannot be replaced that easily. All chain actors need to know their role and cooperate well in order to succeed. It requires that all are committed to a long-term perspective.
One of the most important factors for the smooth and efficient functioning of a value chain is that each actor involved plays a role that suits his/her capacities and structure s/he is operating in. A farmer organisation may expand its activities from organising farmers to bulking and first-level processing, but is it also able to develop markets and pursue commercial contacts with buyers abroad? Local processors may perform well when subcontracted by a company or cooperative to do a job, but may find it difficult to purchase and sell raw materials at their own risk. An NGO may be good at training farmers and setting up extension services, but may be less experienced in advising a commercial business.
There is no general rule on who should - or should not - take up a specific function, but there is a tendency that organic businesses try to do more than they actually can manage. Before absorbing a new role, it is therefore wise to thoroughly and honestly check the following points:
Do you have the necessary technical know-how?
Do you have sufficient professional experience and managerial skills?
If not, are you ready to employ professional staff who have these experiences and skills?
Are you sufficiently familiar and connected with the target markets?
Does the new role result in conflicting interests that could affect effective implementation?
Are you able to react quickly and take business-minded decisions?
Do you have access to the necessary capital for investment and trade finance?
Can you take the risks involved in playing this role?
Do you have the necessary checks and balances to handle large amounts of money?
Are you sufficiently service oriented?
Do you have the necessary communication skills (language!) and connections?
Often there is a "lead agency" that mobilises the value chain and ensures that all required chain links are in place. In organic value chains, this can be the producer organisation, the processing company or the exporter.
Figure 8: Example of a value chain map for organic cotton, from inputs to consumption
Besides the actors directly involved in the chain, there are a number of stakeholders supporting the set-up or functioning of the value chain (see example in Figure 8). Typical supporting functions that are needed for an organic value chain are:
Drawing a value chain map like the one in Figure 8 is very useful in order to get an overview of the stakeholders involved to clarify the role of each one, and to distinguish clearly between value chain actors and supporters. The distinction is quite simple: chain actors own the product at a certain time (they produce, process, buy or sell), while supporters don't.
Development NGOs and donors can facilitate the initial development of an organic business or value chain, withdrawing once these can function independently. They usually work in projects of a given duration. As they thus only play a temporary role, development NGOs should be careful with taking on a role that is crucial for the functioning of the value chain (see chapter "Facilitating the development of organic value chains"). They should particularly refrain from engaging in buying and selling. The role of local governments and facilitators in creating an enabling environment for the development of organic value chains is dealt with in chapter "Creating a conducive environment for organic business".
The organic value chain - and thus your business - will only function well if all stakeholders involved cooperate. Partnerships between the different stakeholders therefore play an important role.
Partnerships between farmers and businessesThe relationship between the farmers who produce the product and the entity that buys it from them - be it a company or their own marketing cooperative - is of crucial importance. For the export company this is not always a natural thing. Many entrepreneurs do not really know what is going on in the countryside. An entrepreneur who has turned organic needs to learn and understand the plight of the farmers: this is a sensitive relationship. Farmers have plenty of stories of how they were ripped off by traders or their cooperatives, receiving promises, but none of them were kept. Many farmers will be wary of yet another great project.
In an organic business, where substantial time and effort is needed to convert from conventional to organic farming, it is of particular importance to develop a trustful and loyal relationship with the farmers. How this can be done is dealt with in detail in chapter "Involving Farmers".
Equally important is the relationship between the seller (the cooperative or company) and the buyer (importer, processor or retailer). In many cases there is distrust between them. There are cases where trade finance disappears, or delivered produce is not paid for. As a seller, you have to choose between speculation on the spot market and developing business relationships where benefits and risks are shared; or finding a balance between these two (see chapter "Marketing").
Building a trade relationship is a whole lot more than agreeing on a price (see box). In chapter "Building and maintaining client relations" you find detailed recommendations on how to successfully build - and maintain - client relations.
In country X, exporter Z insisted on getting at least the cost price, which he had calculated at US$ 0.42. Buyer D offered only US$ 0.37/kg, but also wanted to support the organic initiative in several ways. He wanted to donate 5 cents of the retail price of each product sold to a fund supporting the project. He also thought that he could find funds for buying new motorcycles for the field officers. He wanted to start an information campaign in Europe about the organic initiative, and visit it with representatives of an important customer of his, an American retailer. Apart from buying all that was in stock, D wanted to order 250 tons of the produce for next season.
For that the project needed to expand. D was willing to provide the working capital to pay for the field staff during the season. Based on a realistic crop estimate, he could free up trade finance, so that the exporter could pay the farmers the full price cash in hand the moment they delivered. D wanted to take the product directly after harvest, so no storage costs and risks, and limited costs of capital (interest). He would pay 95% FOB and the remaining 5% following a quality check upon arrival.
Still, Z insisted on getting the cost price, and refused the offer. In the end the business did not happen, and Z was still sitting on the product by the time the next harvest came in, and he did not have the trade finance to buy it from the farmers.
The vertically integrated supply chain Figure 9: Downstream integration of processing, packing and exporting
Vertical integration means becoming part of, or engaging yourself, in operations that are upstream or downstream of your present core business. A producer cooperative may for example start processing and marketing the produce of their farmers (Figure 9), or an exporter may directly contract farmers and provide them with farm inputs. Vertical integration has the advantage that routes get shorter (avoiding middle-men), controlling quality and traceability becomes easier, and management systems can cover a larger part of the chain.
In the ideal case this leads to higher transparency and efficiency. On the other hand, the risk increases, too. An entity that tries to take care of everything may not be able to manage each step in an appropriate and professional way (see chapter "Setting up your operation"). A trader may not be very good in organising agricultural extension, and a farmer organisation may find it difficult to manage sales and cash flows. Taking up more functions also means absorbing more financial risk.
A natural move over time for an organic project is to progress from being a supplier to a general trader, or to becoming a preferred supplier of a processing company or a retailer producing with advanced contracts (thus being part of a vertically integrated supply chain), and perhaps to being an exporter of semi-processed products selling to different clients.
For part of your operations such as transport and processing it may be more efficient to use commercial service providers rather than developing these capacities within your own organisation. If this involves handling the product (e.g. transport, storage, cleaning, processing), you need to make sure that appropriate measures are taken to avoid contamination and co-mingling of the organic product. In order to ensure traceability of the product flow, these services need to be covered by the internal control or quality management system (see chapter Transport and storage of raw material" and "Processing and value addition"). You may also think of outsourcing agricultural extension and internal control to a service provider - a private business or an NGO - or to involve the official agricultural extension service. If you do so, make sure the provided service really matches with the needs of the farmers concerning organic production (see chapter "Building up an extension system").
Unless the main client insists on a specific certification body, organic businesses can usually chose from a range of certification agencies operating in their country. Criteria to select your certification body can be: price, recognition in the market, or reliability and commitment to quality (see chapter "Certification and internal control systems"). It usually pays off to stick to one certification body for a period of time and to work jointly on improving the internal control system. If the certification body knows and trusts your business, they can do their job more efficiently, which may result in less cost and troubles. If there is one thing to compare notes with fellow organic businesses in your country on, it is about how the different CBs perform.
Most probably you will require credit to finance investments, perhaps for working capital during the season, and for trade finance. Your relation with financial service providers will thus play a crucial role in your business. Select a bank that understands your plans and requirements, and offers suitable services at reasonable conditions. If you can not find such a service provider locally, you may want to check the programmes that some of the international banks have specifically designed to support organic and Fair Trade initiatives. For more guidance on how to finance your business, see chapter "Financing your organic business" In any case, to build trust with your financial service provider you will need to present a convincing business case (see chapter "Planning and managing your business").
When starting an organic business, you need to develop a relationship with local authorities. At the very least you should inform them about the initiative, and ensure that they cooperate and do not block your activities. It is quite normal that local politicians will take a keen interest in your venture. Once they understand the potential benefit that the initiative can have for the local population, they may even decide to support it.
Local politicians and officials, however, sometimes try to "adopt" a project. If it goes well, they may want to be credited for having brought it to the district. Be very careful, however, with getting into a dependency situation. Officials may change after the elections, and you may have to build up your relationships once more. If they are against you, they can make things difficult for your business.
Lack of good governance as well as a lack of local infrastructure like feeder roads, electricity and water supply can be severe obstacles to developing your business. You are hopefully not the only one in your region trying to set up an agri-business, and it may be a good idea to identify points of common interest with fellow entrepreneurs in order to get things done at district level.
As a successful and respected business, the authorities should actually be keen to hear from you about your worries, and see how they can be of service (i.e. being part of the enabling environment, see chapter "Creating a conducive environment for organic businesses"). If they are not, you may need to get together with like-minded individuals, companies and organisations and lobby together for better business conditions. This can involve:
Competent technical support?
There are a number of NGOs, development agencies and consultancies engaged in facilitating the development of organic value chains. Earlier, many of the development-oriented organisations have tended to focus solely on strengthening the position of farmers. Nowadays, most have changed their approach; they support the development of viable value chains in which different actors act responsibly and make a profit.
Assisting producer cooperatives and local entrepreneurs to become viable organic businesses and linking them into a fair arrangement with clients are challenging processes. There are local and international consultancies specialised in this field who offer their assistance (see Annex "Consultancy for developing organic value chains").
Do organic production and processing inherently empower women or shift gender relations within households, in farmer cooperatives and processing facilities? Probably not. So why raise this issue in a book for organic businesses and service providers? Why work towards the empowerment of women within an organic business?
Attention to gender dynamics and impact is far more than a fall-back to a misty-eyed view that organic agriculture is an idyllic alternative to conventional mainstream agriculture. Besides the developmental reasoning for addressing gender issues, and the motivation to appease donors or particular segments of consumers, there is a compelling economic and efficiency-based case to make. Engaging women and recognising the whole family’s efforts on smallholdings has an efficiency value as well as allowing the full costs and benefits of organic production and processing to be made visible. This should appeal to the social entrepreneur[2] – to businesses that are concerned about efficiency and mobilising human capacities to the maximum in order to build up the chain that they depend on.
This short chapter approaches gender in the organic sector from these two angles: the developmental perspective directed primarily towards service providers and supporters, and the economic case. It explores some of the challenges and possibilities for positive change for women through involvement in the organic sector.
Some gender, power and inclusion issues are common to a particular country or commodity context while others are specific to organic chains. For example, organic production often demands more labour than conventional, such as for weeding. This ‘extra’ workload is usually borne by the family, especially the women. Increases in labour are in addition to ‘normal’ workloads in the field and in the home.
That said an often cited positive impact of participation in organic production and processing is that there are increases in family income and health. Yet constraints to the full participation of women in farm level activities, benefits, and decision making are important to note so that they can be adequately addressed. Women have a critical role in farming, as a workforce in charge of hoeing, sowing, weeding, harvesting, but often also as the family member responsible for food production and preparation. Female involvement in any organic production initiative is thus vital, though often disappointing, overlooked or marginalised.
How can gender issues be approached in organic value chains? Can (and should) participation in the organic chain contribute to women’s empowerment and shifting power relations? What transformative role is expected of organic or Fair Trade certification?
A key issue is the assurance that auditors, producer organisations and processing plants are at the very minimum not worsening the position of women or being blind to the impact of participation in the organic sector.
While it is perhaps unrealistic and overly idealistic to imagine that organic production, processing and certification will radically change gender relations for the better, or have a significant impact on the position of women within a given societal context, it is reasonable to work towards gender awareness and a positive impact. There are limits given that organic production and processing operate within a larger societal context, which may not support shifts in gender relations. What impact can organic systems have in this setting?
Development agencies and other stakeholders in the organic sector often have developmental objectives driving their support. They play an important role in triggering the transformative power of organic agriculture. But how can these and other initiators (companies, cooperatives) work towards gender equity? There are several levels at which gender issues can be addressed:
Household and community level: access to land and employment, division of labour (usually the less valued tasks are reserved for women), social constraints on women’s mobility
Producer support level: access to support schemes, participation in trainings (including training on business and leadership skills)
Institutional level: access to financial services (possibly hindered by having no land or property in her name), women to have opportunities in leadership positions, participation of women in planning and decision-making
Policy level: legislation for cooperatives, labour rights (including equal pay, maternity leave, childcare facilities) and creating standards that compel producers and processors to meet basic gender criteria[3].
Starting points for managing gender issues responsibly
The approaches mentioned above aim to empower women in the long term. There are several ways in which you can contribute to empowerment of women in your organic business:
Capacity Development: Women need to be able to attend training for organic production methods, processing techniques and commercial know-how, as well as leadership and organisational development sessions. Experience demonstrates that little transfer of information occurs from a man attending training on to his wife. In some cases, women are even unaware after a number of years of certification that their farm is organic! This is particularly impressive when we consider that much of the work related to organic production – planting, weeding, harvesting, marketing – is done by women. It not only represents inequity between men and women, but creates a weak link in an organic system. How can the system be robust if the people doing much of the work in an operation are unfamiliar with the essence of that system? From a business perspective, this presents a risk. By building capacities of both men and women, quality can be better ensured.
Appropriate timing: Organise meetings and trainings in a way that they fit the rhythm of women's responsibilities. For example, a women’s training may require child care support or may need to be in the evening, after the evening meal is served – or at another convenient time.
Extension and ICS staff: Female field staff are needed not only as role models, but because they will better be able to engage with the women in a producer organisation and women in the fields. As women are doing a disproportionate amount of the work related to production, their perspectives are absolutely critical to the good functioning of the system. Organic businesses and producer organisations should therefore employ female field staff. Especially in more traditional contexts, female staff members communicate differently with women in the village than male field officers, and may well be perceived as more approachable by women[4].
Women’s groups: Often women in a village or in a processing facility talk to each other, share ideas and compare experiences. Creating and supporting women’s groups can strengthen this exchange. Allowing women’s groups to define the issues that they want to address, and monitor the company’s or cooperative's development on these issues is a positive way of triggering participation and loyalty. Communication can only strengthen the organic system.
Leadership: Often it is assumed that gender issues are better addressed within organic agriculture than conventional. In many cases, women are indeed initiators or a driving force behind organic initiatives. To strengthen this, women also need to be in leadership positions within a producer organisation or agri-business. This requires building leadership and management skills among women.
Registration as an Organic Farming Couple. Women should be co-registered alongside their husbands as an organic farming couple. This empowers the women to exert influence over their husbands to take farming more seriously. And it allows women to be aware of the income derived from organic and how it is spent or allocated.
Women-only activities: In some cases, it may make sense to have women-only value chains in order to preserve the integrity of women’s roles in that chain, avoid exploitation and provide opportunities otherwise unavailable. This happens for some commodities for some of the links in the chain in an unplanned manner, where certain activities are reserved for women. For example, women collecting shea nuts, while the men in the community produce cotton and sesame, or women drying mangoes. However, a women-only chain (or link in the chain) can also be intentional. Some innovative companies are experimenting with women-only chains[5]. The idea is to build up capacity and leadership amongst women at each step in the process.
Addressing gender issues in value chains, and specifically, organic value chains is a bustling area of change at the moment. If you want to learn more about gender issues in organic agriculture and in value chains, consult the references in Annex "Useful references and websites".
Get a clear idea on who plays which role in and around a value chain, e.g. by drawing a value chain map.
Ensure that the different stakeholders involved in an organic value chain each play a role that really suits them.
Temporary facilitators like development NGOs should not take up tasks that are permanently needed, and should especially refrain from buying and selling the produce.
Invest in building trustful and loyal long-term partnerships with producers and buyers.
Take care to integrate only those upstream or downstream processes into your business that you are able to manage well.
If you outsource any services, make sure that product integrity is guaranteed and that the providers really match with the needs of your business.
Encourage participation of women in the organic business. Ensure that women can participate in capacity building activities and that they can take up positions within the organisation (as extension staff, board members etc.).
↑ See http://www.ashoka.org
↑ E.g. MayaCert in Guatemala, http://www.mayacert.com
↑ See Grolink/Agro Eco, 2008. Gender Learning and Sharing. http://www.grolink.se/epopa/Publications/GenderProjectEndReport.pdf
↑ For example Zameen in India, see http://www.zameen.org.
French adverbs, like their English counterparts, are used to modify adjectives, other adverbs, and verbs or clauses. They do not display any inflection; that is, their form does not change to reflect their precise role, nor any characteristics of what they modify.
In French, as in English, most adverbs are derived from adjectives. In most cases, this is done by adding the suffix -ment ("-ly") to the adjective's feminine singular form. For example, the feminine singular form of lent ("slow") is lente, so the corresponding adverb is lentement ("slowly"); similarly, heureux → heureusement ("happy" → "happily").
As in English, however, the adjective stem is sometimes modified to accommodate the suffix:
If the adjective ends in an i, then -ment is added to the masculine singular (default) form, rather than to the feminine singular form:
If the adjective ends in -ant or -ent, then the corresponding adverb ends in -amment or -emment, respectively:
Some adverbs are derived from adjectives in completely irregular fashions, not even using the suffix -ment:
And, as in English, many common adverbs are not derived from adjectives at all:
An adverb that modifies an adjective or adverb comes before that adjective or adverb:
An adverb that modifies an Infinitive (verbal noun) generally comes after the infinitive:
But negative adverbs, such as pas ("not"), pas plus ("not any more"), and jamais ("never") come before the infinitive:
An adverb that modifies a main verb or clause comes either after the verb, or before the clause:
Jamais je n'ai fait cela or Je n'ai jamais fait cela ("Never have I done that" or "I've never done that")
"Thank you very much."
Rédigez votre message ci-dessous
a success, oh how deserved
Et maintenant on fait quoi?
And now, what do we do?
Si près, et pourtant si loin !
So near, and yet so far!
Computing » Computer Science » Computer Programming » Ada Programming
The special character ' (called tic) has two meanings. Which of the two options is to be used is determined by context from the compiler.
As a separator between an identifier and an attribute:
Simple alarm clock - example code using control statements
The following code assumes bash environment with dialog utility present. $1 denotes value of first parameter. Infinite until loop in code line 18 drains memory after long time.
Simple alarm clock2 - example code using control statements
This is yet another alarm program. This time code is more efficient because it uses sleep command instead of infinite loop, so there is less risk of memory drainage. The trap command at code line 7 traps signal INT (ctrl-c) and performs cleanUp function as after action.
Actually, this code is the only one that does a reasonable job as an alarm clock. It is based on the following algorithm:
If a_h<T_h then (24-T_h+a_h)+a_m-T_m
If a_h>=T_h then (a_h-T_h)+a_m-T_m
This part shows how to design dynamic outpur feedback control in mixed
A continuous-time dynamic output feedback LTI controllerwith state-space realization
.
A list of references documenting and validating the LMI.
1.6.2 6b Medical Physics
1.6.3 6c Organic Chemistry
This book supports the teaching of AQA's new "Applied General" qualification. Find the syllabus here.
Units 1 to 3 make up the "Level 3 Certificate in Applied Science" (equivalent in points to an AS Level).
Students - persuade your teachers to contribute and write a page... this needs to be a team effort!
This is a portfolio unit, with two experiments from each of Biology, Chemistry and Physics.
Unit 3 - Science in the Modern World
This unit is based around pre-release material and is assessed with a written examination.
The topic will be different each year, but will examine the topic in the context of these different areas of how science works:
The pre-release material is available each year from the 31st March for the Summer Exams (there will also be one on 1st November for January Exams).
AQA have also produced some exemplar resources here (link needed) and pages in this book could be written for further relevant examples.
2017 - Diagnosing Heart Attacks
This is a portfolio unit - a long term study, carried out individually.
Carrying out the investigation and recording results
Analyse results, draw conclusions and evaluate the investigation
Present the findings of the investigation to a suitable audience
This is a portfolio unit, with two research tasks and two practical tasks.
This is a portfolio unit, with two research tasks and two practical tasks.
This book is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Snow is the soft frozen water from the sky.
Sicilian Defence, Maroczy Bind
r1bqkbnr/pp1ppp1p/2n3p1/8/2PNP3/8/PP3PPP/RNBQKB1R
Sicilian Defence, Maroczy Bind
Moves:1.e4 c5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 g6 5.c4
5...Nf6: Maroczy Bind, 5...Nf6
5...Bg7: Maroczy Bind, 5...Bg7
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon · Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
This Chess related article is a Wikibooks:Chess stub. Please assist Wikibooks by expanding it.
You can log out and log back in with a different session
Also, to Quit the KDE Display Manager
To restart kdm, enter:
You can also run the "GNOME Display Manager" (gdm) or the "X Display Manager" (xdm) with
(while no other display managers are running)
Note: The code "sudo /etc/init.d/" can be used with "kdm", "gdm", or "xdm", and is followed most commonly with "start", "stop", or "restart".
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
This document was originally hosted at the ETHZ. It remains under the ETH license and is in the
WayBack archive.
Master Boot Record, with application to ETH Oberon
The next level of boot complexity is that of booting from hard disk via its MBR. Every hard disk contains an MBR but the BIOS is usually able to access only the MBR of the first hard disk (the disk with device number 80H), whilst access to the further MBRs can eventually be controlled with the machine System Setup, depending on its capabilities.
Whichever operating system is used, the MBR which comes with it is a central information repository. The Boot Loader code it contains differs with each operating system and therefore its functionality varies accordingly. The order in which multiple operating systems are installed also influences the MBR content. The Boot Loader code is also replaced by a functionally different one when a boot manager is installed. Hence, an Oberon user will in any case have to deal with and have to master all the matter around the MBR, a vast subject outside of the ETH Oberon concern. A small amount of basic information is provided here, only just enough to establish a bridge to the relevant Oberon material. More information on the subject can be found, for example, in the Wikipedia article about booting.
BIOS activity during the boot sequence - follow-up part
The initial part of the description found in x86-based PC bootstrapping still applies. However, if
When a boot manager is installed, the genuine MBR of a particular OS is replaced and the notion of "active" partition becomes irrelevant. Instead, any partition, primary partition or logical drive in an extended partition can be booted. Some boot managers can also be cascaded.
A DOS MBR stores the partition table and 446 bytes of Boot Loader code playing a central role when a machine is started/booted.
An MBR is located in the first sector (Cylinder 0, Head 0, Sector 1) of a hard disk and it has the structure:
0000 446 Boot Loader code
01BE 16 1. partition entry
01CE 16 2. partition entry
01EE 16 4. partition entry
00 1 80H = active partition / 00H = not active
04 1 partition type - 76 = 4CH for AosFS and NatFS
08 4 rel. sectors (# of sectors to partition beginning)
Replacing an MBR is a considerable system modification which can lead to less considerable damages to all the OSes installed. Make sure beforehand that the OSes can still be started using boot diskettes prepared in advance and put aside for this eventuality. Keep also in mind that, whenever a partition is added, removed or resized on the disk, the partition table is modified and any earlier backup MBR becomes totally invalid and is a potential threat!
How to write or replace an MBR
Caution is recommended: replacing an MBR is a dangerous operation which can lead to a massive loss of data.
etc.
The list is not exhaustive and the reader is invited to consult the documentation supplied with the operating system, commercial or shareware software used.
ETH Oberon offers the facilities required to manipulate or inspect an MBR by way of a number of commands described in Introduction to ETH Oberon / PC Native alpha and beta release:
Partitions.WriteMBR dev#0 filename ~
Partitions.PartitionToFile dev#part filename [block blocks] ~
Partitions.FileToPartition dev#part filename [block blocks] ~
Partitions.ShowBlocks dev#part block [blocks] ~
An interesting side effect is that ETH Oberon can be used to repair any MBR, including an MBR of a foreign OS, without the need to purchase further utility software.
If your machine does not boot anymore as it used to, it could be that the MBR has been damaged or overwritten. It is extremely unlikely that the data in the partitions has been affected. Bypassing the boot loader is a way to recover from the situation. Use a boot diskette, created during the installation, to get get you back into Oberon. If none is available, use the Oberon-0 diskette as universal rescue diskette.
E-Mail: oberon-web at inf.ethz.ch [expired]
Homepage: http://www.ethoberon.ethz.ch/ [expired]
1.1 Sub-group NA – Pitney Bowes, franks containing head and wing of eagle facing right
1.2 Sub-group NB – Neopost-Hasler, frameless rectangular design with profile of eagle at right facing left
Click here to return to the United States Postage Meter Stamp Catalog
Digital meter stamps first came into use in the United States in 1995 during a large Pitney Bowes experiment of a meter model that applied the stamp thermally through a mylar tape. Seventy machines were trialed in small businesses in the Boston Massachusetts area from March to mid-summer of that year. The trial was considered a success with the advantages of digital printing so strongly supported that Pitney Bowes quit manufacturing mechanical, solid-die meters.Over the next several years Neopost-Hasler, Neopost, and Francotyp all introduced digital meters.Group N meters were first used on March 13, 1995.NOTE that stamp impressions exist with missing elements, letters or numbers. Most of these are caused by software or printer malfunction rather than factory error. Except for a few unusual ones, such varieties are not listed below.
Sub-group NA – Pitney Bowes, franks containing head and wing of eagle facing right
Frameless frank with eagle head and wing at top with "UNITED STATES POSTAGE" in arc above the head. Three stars in line at top left. One exception is Type NA4.4 which has "LOW VALUE" in place of the eagle head.
Below the eagle are numeric codes at left, the value figures at center, and at right the meter number above the date.
Along the bottom is the town line.
Meter number with "PB" prefix.
Earliest known use, March 13, 1995.
NA1. Forerunner of PostPerfect (aka Fox) model, March 13, 1995. [RRRR]
Printed by thermal/mylar process.
The "UNITED STATES POSTAGE" arc above the eagle's head is large.
The three stars at top left are closely spaced.
Meter numbers with "PB85" prefix, PB8510000 to PB8510070.
Town line: "MAILED FROM" town, state, and ZIP code.
All the meters were trialed in and around Boston MA except for two, 8510007 and 8510008, which were placed in the Pitney Bowes headquarters mailroom in Stamford CT. Although seventy meters in all were included in the trials, very few examples of the stamp are known since the design was updated to Type NA2.1 before stamp collectors became aware of their existence.
NA2.1. PostPerfect (aka Fox), late spring, 1995.
Similar to NA1 but the three stars at top left are widely spaced, and the "UNITED STATES POSTAGE" arc is smaller.
Meter numbers in PB65, PB66, plus PB85 and up series (including the NA1 machines 8510000-8510070.)
Town line contains town, state and ZIP code, and is usually preceded by "MAILED FROM"
b. With town line or portion of it in lower case letters
c. With town and ZIP code but no state in town line
d. ZIP code appears twice in town line
e. Town line reads POSTAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED (This appears when the meter is used before the mailing permit is recorded.)[S]
f. Printed in green rather than red [R]
NA2.2. PersonalPost (aka Gem), summer, 1996.
Very similar to Type NA2.1 but the frank was applied using an ink-jet process which gives the stamp the appearance of being made of fine horizontal lines.
Meter numbers in PB22, 33, 34, 55, 90, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98 and 99 series.
a. Illogical characters in place of normal data or design elements (software error) [R-RRR]
b. With slogan "NOT VALID / POSTAGE" (to identify zero cent re-date stamp)
NA2.3. "PostPerfect" , October 1-2, 1998. [R]
Special event commemorative frank design created for the rededication of Grand Central railroad Terminal in New York City.
The eagle head and wing are very small at top left with a logo and "REDEDICATION" over "OCTOBER 1,1998" at top right.
The "UNITED STATES POSTAGE" arc is over "GRAND / CENTRAL" near the center of the design.
Everything else is as Type NA2.1.
NOTE: Ten machines were used with this frank in Grand Central Station on the two days of the event. Collectors stood in line to get a single post card franked by one of the machines. To get multiples the collector would have to get back in line and wait. The machine numbers are 9517868, 9564765, 9616728, 9633377, 9640224, 9652976, 9656778, 9664002, 9668736, and 9674720.
NA3.1. "Pulsar E300" meter on "Galaxy U700" mailing machine), December 19, 1997.
Frank printed in gray-black with a field of red to orange dots added at upper right.
Eagle head and wing at upper left preceded by two stacked stars with "U.S. POSTAGE" below the wing.
Three stacked vertical dashes along far right.
Everything else is as previous NA types.
a. Red dots at upper right missing (see NOTE below)
b. ZIP code missing from town line
c1. Top half except the red dots missing (MFZC 10573)
c2. Top half including the red dots missing (MFZC 07105)
e. Top half of frank printed in magenta, bottom half printed in gray-black (red dots at upper right)
f. Software error, top and bottom halves of the frank reversed
Pitney Bowes tried to find a black ink that would be machine readable (i.e. would fluoresce) but did not succeed. With the Pulsar model they added the fluorescent red dots to do this.
Stamps without the red dots at upper right are occasionally found since the red ink often ran dry before the black.
The red dot field can vary considerably both in color shade, size of the dots, and the numbers of dot rows (usually four).
Frank printed in red and without the field of red dots at upper left.
Otherwise the frank is as Type NA3.1 except the three vertical dashes at right are replaced by stars.
Town line "FROM ZIP CODE" (number)
A. "FROM ZIP CODE" printed negatively on a solid field
B. "FROM ZIP CODE" printed with red letters
b. Zip code 00000
c. The lower two lines are compressed leaving the stars at far right indented and appearing approximately 10 mm to the left of the top star
d. Top half of frank missing
NOTE: Type NA3.2 came into use after the U-700 model was able to use digital fluorescent red ink.
NA4.1. DM300 (aka "Spark"), April 1999. [S-R]
Eagle head and wing quite large with a grid of five stars at left.
Small "TM" below wing at far right.
NA4.2. DM300 , spring 2000.
As Type NA4.1 but "PITNEY BOWES" in negative letters inside the eagle wing at top right.
Meter numbers in PB35 and PB55 series.
NA4.3. DM300 , early 2003.
As Types NA4.1 and NA4.2 but "PITNEY BOWES" below the eagle wing at near right. The small "TM" is found inside the wing tip at top right.
Meter numbers in PB35 and PB55 series.
NA4.4. DM300.
Special frank from the DM300 meter used for postage values below ten cents.
Instead of the stars and eagle head "LOW VALUE" appears at top left.
Sub-group NB – Neopost-Hasler, frameless rectangular design with profile of eagle at right facing left
This is the first stamp design released after ASCOM Hasler was purchased by Neopost.
NB1.
Solid vertical bar at left containing a vertical "Hasler" reading up. At right is "US POSTAGE" also reading up.
Meter number at top with "NO011H" prefix.
Value figures and eagle on second line with bars above and below.
Below the value figures are the date and "Mailed From" with ZIP code
At bottom is an eight digit number, usually starting with three zeros, possibly a transaction counter.
Sub-group NC – Neopost, Frank contains torch in hand
These Neopost digital meters used a thermal-mylar process to apply the stamp.Meter models SM22, SM26, and IJ65.
Earliest date seen: January 3, 1997.
NC1. Neopost "SM22, SM26" .
Torch in hand at left with flames flowing right.
Frank with straight frame lines at top and bottom, divided by straight lines into three horizontal bands.
Town line in top band, value figures and "N METER" in middle band, date and meter number in bottom band.
At right "U.S. POSTAGE" vertical reading up in negative letters on solid background with a column of nine stars at far right.
The middle band contains four impressions of the value figures, one large and three smaller duplicates across the top of the band.
a. Town line including lower case letters
b. Without town line, top band blank
NC2. Neopost "IJ65" , June 2001.
Frank with meter number at top above value figures.
Below the value figures are the meter number, "Mailed From" and ZIP code, and at bottom, breaking the frame line, an 8-digit number which possibly is an impression counter.
At left, in negative letters against a solid panel, is N neopost reading up.
At right is "US POSTAGE" reading up.
Meter number with NO46J prefix.
Sub-group ND – Francotyp-Postalia, Frank contains head of bird in oval
ND1.
Frameless design with head of an eagle inside an oval at top left and "U.S. POSTAGE" above the value figures at top right.
At bottom, between two parallel vertical lines, are the date and a numeric code above the meter number and an alpha-numeric code.
Meter number with "FP05" prefix.
Town line with or without ZIP code.
V/F: $00.00 (Range: 00.001 to 99.999. The tenths of a cent figure does not print unless it is above zero.)
a. Town line reads "POWELIGNED METER"
b. Town line reads "NEW YORK" by itself. Either the town or the state is missing.
Evidence constitutes an "alibi" where "the evidence at issue [is] determinative of the final issue of guilt or innocence of the accused." The evidence suggests that "it was impossible for the accused to have committed the crime charged because, at the time of its commission, the accused was elsewhere"[1]
An alibi does not need to be proven, but rather it must simply raise a doubt.[2]
All alibi evidence must be disclosed to the crown.[3] This is an exception to the rule of the right to remain silent. This is due to "the ease with which alibi evidence may be fabricated; and the diversion of the alibi inquiry from the central inquiry at trial". [4]
Where the defence does not give enough notice and not sufficiently particularized for the police to investigate prior to trial, an adverse inference may be drawn from this.[5]
Disclosure must be adequate and timely. If the disclosure does not satisfy these requirements, the trier of fact may draw an adverse inference when weighing the alibi evidence at trial.
The failure of the accused to testify on alibi may be used to draw an adverse inference about credibility of the defence.
The reason for this is that aibi evidence is "not directly related to the guilt of the accused" so the determination of the credibility of the alibi does not go to the ultimate issue of guilt.[6]
R. v. M. R., 2005 CanLII 5845 (ON CA) at para 31
R. v. C.(T.W.) 2006 CanLII 12286, (2006), 209 O.A.C. 119
Lizotte v. The King, 1950 CanLII 48 (S.C.C.), [1951] S.C.R. 115
R. V .J.B.J., 2011 NSCA 16 at para 40 to 45
↑ R. v. Cleghorn, [1995] 3 S.C.R. 175
↑ R v Noble [1997] 1 S.C.R. 874
↑ R v Noble at para 112
The ear may be affected by diseases, including infections and trauma. Ear diseases can cause hearing loss, tinnitus, and balance disorders (such as vertigo), although many of these diseases can also be affected by damage to the brain or ear nerve pathways.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
This is an analysis of a journal article “Functional strength training in cerebral palsy: a pilot study of a group circuit training class for children aged 4–8 years” by Blundell SW, Shepherd RB, Dean CM, Adams RD.[1] This has been created by u3097172 as a university assignment for the University of Canberra, unit: Health, Disease and Exercise.
What is the background to this research?
Cerebral Palsy (CP) is a term used to identify a group of neurological disorders that effects a person’s movement and posture.[2] It occurs due to damage to the brain either before, during or after birth, when the child’s brain is under developed. It is the leading cause of physical disability in children, accounting for 1 in 500 births worldwide.[2][3] Individuals suffering from CP may experience:
Impaired muscle functions such as spasticity [4]
Low muscular strength [4]
And decreased motor control [4]
There are many different types of Cerebral Palsy, all effecting individuals in different ways. They can be classified by how its effects people’s movement, the severity of the effects and the body part effected.[3]
There is currently no cure for Cerebral Palsy as majority of cause associated with the malformation of the baby’s brain are unknown.[3]
Previously, strength training in children with Cerebral Palsy was perceived to be detrimental as it increased spasticity or led to greater abnormalities in movement patterns.[4] However, recent studies demonstrate that strength training, in a variety of forms, provides many benefits without adverse effects to movement.[5] Improvements in strength, mobility, flexibility, posture, functional movement (eg. Gait) and many important psychological benefits were associated with strength training in children affected.[4][5][6][7]
The study was a nonrandomised ABA trial designed to determine the effects of task- specific functional strength training in children ages 4–8 years, delivered as a group circuit class. Non- randomised ABA trials aim to estimate the effectiveness of an intervention on an assigned group, measured multiple times over a particular study period. Non randomised trials are seen to have poor validity and used as observational studies, however, can be useful to identify new interventions that can be consider by trial groups in high quality studies such as RCT’s.[8]
What did the research involve?
The research involved a small sample size that was invited to participate in the study.[1]
Aged between- 4-8years with the Mean age of 6.3 ± 1.3
7 Children diagnosed with spastic diplegia and 1 child diagnosed with spastic/ataxic quadriplegia
Sessions were conducted twice weekly (total of 8 sessions all together) and lasted 1 hour each
Children performed functional based movements such as; walking on a treadmill, step ups, sit-to-stands, and leg presses
Main focuses of the strength training were; lower limb strengthening and endurance, improve segment control of lower limbs, improve motor learning and improve balance.
Isometric strength test: Hips, knees ankle flexion/ extension were measured using a hand help dynamometer. The dynamometer tests were carried out on each muscle group until the child could complete 3 consistent tests, however, wouldn’t exceed 6 tests.
Lower extremity functional strength test: The Lateral step test was used to measure Lower extremity functional strength and overall functional strength. The test was performed over a 15 second period and the number of steps were measured.
Functional motor performance: The Sit-to-stand, 10m walk, 2minute walk and Nine-Hole peg test were used to measure motor performance. Using walking speed, stride length and cadence observed during the tests, total motor performance was calculated.
All measurements were assessed in 4 phases; the baseline (2weeks prior to of study), the Pre-test (start of study period), the End phase (post study period), Follow up (8 weeks post study period).[1]
All children had received previous therapy throughout childhood and prior to the beginning of study. None of the participants were involved in any other form of physiotherapy during the study term. However, during the strength session, participants were monitored by 2 supervising physiotherapists and were given individuals sessions if needed.[1]
What were the basic results?
The results demonstrate that isometric strength, functional strength and motor performance increased significantly following training and were maintained over the 8 week follow up post strength training. Increases in isometric strength were found in approximately 60% of the muscle groups tested, with a mean increase of 47% in isometric strength pre to post training. The number of lateral steps performed in 15seconds increased from 2.6-7.9 ±3.8 repetitions with limbs becoming more proportional. This demonstrates that there was an increase in Lower extremity function and strength. Finally, 10meter walking times decreased by an average of 22% due to the increase in stride length, and sit-to-stand performance increased due to the reduction of set high from 27 cm-17 cm on average. Both of these measurements indicate that motor performance increased.[1]
What conclusions should be taken away from this research?
The study identifies the strong relationship between strength training and function in children with cerebral palsy. The use of a short term strength program may provide functional benefits and lead to significant improvements in functional capacity.[1] However, The use of a non-randomised ABA trial means that this study only provides an observation between the relationship of the intervention and group.[8] In addition, the use of only one participation group, no use of a control group, the small sample size, the use of only one follow up measurement, short training term all decrease the validity of the research.[1]
What are the implications of this research?
Although the study has its limitations, it does provide the same positive result identified in other research being conducted on strength training and cerebral palsy. Strength training provides significant improvement in cerebral palsy suffers functional capacity and may be used as a component of physiotherapy.[4][5][6][7][9][10][11][12][13][14]
Cerebral Palsy Alliance website: https://www.cerebralpalsy.org.au/what-is-cerebral-palsy/
Fitness training for Cerebral Palsy: https://www.cerebralpalsy.org.au/about-cerebral-palsy/interventions-and-therapies/fitness-training-for-children-adolescents-and-adults-with-cerebral-palsy/#1464753561973-da6d47be-ccbf
The brain that changed: http://www.sbs.com.au/news/thefeed/article/2016/09/24/brain-changed-walking-kokoda-trail-cerebral-palsy
↑ a b c d e f g h Blundell SW, Shepherd RB, Dean CM, Adams RD. Functional strength training in cerebral palsy: a pilot study of a group circuit training class for children aged 4–8 years [Internet]. Feb 2003 [Cited 10.9.16]. Volume 17(1):48-57. Available from: http://cre.sagepub.com.ezproxy.canberra.edu.au/content/17/1/48.full.pdf+html
↑ a b Scholtes VA, Becher JG, Comuth A, Dekkers H, Van Dijk L, Dallmeijer AJ. Effectiveness of functional progressive resistance exercise strength training on muscle strength and mobility in children with cerebral palsy: a randomized controlled trial. [Internet]. 28 Jan 2010 [Cited 10.9.16]. Vol 52(6):107-113. Available from: http://zh9bf5sp6t.search.serialssolutions.com/?ctx_ver=Z39.88-2004&ctx_enc=info%3Aofi%2Fenc%3AUTF-8&rfr_id=info%3Asid%2Fsummon.serialssolutions.com&rft_val_fmt=info%3Aofi%2Ffmt%3Akev%3Amtx%3Ajournal&rft.genre=article&rft.atitle=Effectiveness+of+functional+progressive+resistance+exercise+strength+training+on+muscle+strength+and+mobility+in+children+with+cerebral+palsy%3A+a+randomized+controlled+trial&rft.jtitle=Developmental+Medicine+%26+Child+Neurology&rft.au=SCHOLTES%2C+VANESSA+A&rft.au=BECHER%2C+JULES+G&rft.au=COMUTH%2C+ANTON&rft.au=DEKKERS%2C+HURNET&rft.date=2010-06-01&rft.issn=0012-1622&rft.eissn=1469-8749&rft.volume=52&rft.issue=6&rft.spage=e107&rft.epage=e113&rft_id=info:doi/10.1111%2Fj.1469-8749.2009.03604.x&rft.externalDBID=n%2Fa&rft.externalDocID=10_1111_j_1469_8749_2009_03604_x&paramdict=en-US
↑ a b c Cerebral Palsy Alliance. What is cerebral palsy? [Internet]. Publisher unknown. [Updated 2016] Available from: https://www.cerebralpalsy.org.au/what-is-cerebral-palsy/
↑ a b c d e f Scholtes VA, Dallmeijer JD, Rameckers EA, Vershuren O, Tempelaars E, Hensen M, Becher J. Lower limb strength training in children with cerebral palsy – a randomized controlled trial protocol for functional strength training based on progressive resistance exercise principles [Internet]. 8 Oct 2008. [Cited 11.9.16]. Vol 8 (1):41 Available from: http://bmcpediatr.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-2431-8-41#Abs1
↑ a b c Dodd KJ, Taylor NF, Damiano DL. A systematic review of the effectiveness of strength-training programs for people with cerebral palsy. [Internet]. August 2002 [Cited 10.9.16]. Vol 8(8):1157-1164. Available from: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0003999302000424
↑ a b McBurney H, Taylor, Dodds KJ, Graham HK. A qualitative analysis of the benefits of strength training for young people with cerebral palsy [Internet]. 27 March 2003 [Cited 15.9.16]. 45: 658–663. Available from: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1469-8749.2003.tb00867.x/epdf
↑ a b Lee JH, Sung IY, Yoo JY. Therapeutic effects of strengthening exercise on gait function of cerebral palsy [Internet]. 07 Jul 2009 [Cited 15.9.16]. Vol 30(19): 1439-1444. Available from: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/09638280701618943
↑ a b Gardner ER, Fraser C, MacLennan G, Treweek S. A protocol for a systematic review of non-randomised evaluations of strategies to improve participant recruitment to randomised controlled trials [Internet]. 2 Aug 2016 [Cited 15.9.16]. 5:131. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4971680/
↑ MacPhail HE, Kramer JF. Effect of isokinetic strength-training on functional ability and walking efficiency in adolescents with cerebral palsy [Internet]. Sept 1995 [Cited 16.9.16]. Vol 37(9);763-775. Available from: http://canberra.summon.serialssolutions.com.ezproxy.canberra.edu.au/search?q=Effect%20of%20isokinetic%20strength-training%20on%20functional%20ability%20and%20walking%20efficiency%20in%20adolescents%20with%20cerebral%20palsy.#!/search/document?ho=t&l=en&q=Effect%20of%20isokinetic%20strength-training%20on%20functional%20ability%20and%20walking%20efficiency%20in%20adolescents%20with%20cerebral%20palsy.&id=FETCHMERGED-LOGICAL-c1093-20cbf0921ccd447fb4c00c1aae33eeaa9f43dd57c6db5a4a0125cbe7824208022
↑ Damiano DL, Vaughan CL, Abel MF. Muscle response to heavy resistance exercise in children with spastic cerebral palsy [Internet]. Aug 1995 [Cited 16.9.16]. Vol 37(8):731. Available from: http://canberra.summon.serialssolutions.com/search?q=Muscle%20response%20to%20heavy%20resistance%20exercise%20in%20children%20with%20spastic%20cerebral%20palsy.#!/search/document?ho=t&l=en&q=Muscle%20response%20to%20heavy%20resistance%20exercise%20in%20children%20with%20spastic%20cerebral%20palsy.&id=FETCHMERGED-LOGICAL-c1091-c743726bc398cbcb55572bb802dee243ca009ece584ef5d6a51bb6e6bceae8752
↑ Kelly LE, Damiano DL, Vaughn CL. Effects of quadriceps femoris muscle strengthening on crouch gait in children with spastic diplegia [Internet]. Aug 1995 [Cited 16.9.16]. Vol 75(8):658-667. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7644570
↑ Darrah J, Fan JSW, Chen LC, Watkins B. Review of the Effects of Progressive Resisted Muscle Strengthening in Children with Cerebral Palsy: A Clinical Consensus Exercise [Internet]. Jan 1997 [Cited 16.9.16]. Vol 9(1). Available from: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/232175198_Review_of_the_Effects_of_Progressive_Resisted_Muscle_Strengthening_in_Children_with_Cerebral_Palsy_A_Clinical_Consensus_Exercise
↑ Fowler EG, Ho TW, Nwigwe AI, Dorey FJ.The effect of quadriceps femoris muscle strengthening exercises on spasticity in children with cerebral palsy. [Internet]. June 2001 [Cited 16.9.16]. Vol 81(6):1215-1223 Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11380277
↑ Abel MF, Damiano DL. Functional outcomes of strength training in spastic cerebral palsy [Internet]. Feb 1998 [Cited 16.9.16]. Vol 79(2):119-25. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9473991
This function moves a file from one location to another. If the move is successful, the copy of the file at the original location is erased and the function returns _noErr (zero). If the move fails, a file error code is returned. Example:
A PDF version is available. (info)
A Wikibookian believes this page should be split into smaller pages with a narrower subtopic.
You can help by splitting this big page into smaller ones. Please make sure to follow the naming policy. Dividing books into smaller sections can provide more focus and allow each one to do one thing well, which benefits everyone.
You can ask for help in dividing this book in the assistance reading room.
General suggestions that can be adapted to your needs.
Specific lesson plans for students with varying interests.
Links to useful software for the purpose of learning or teaching.
Currently we have "Lessons in Paint" which are good for most children, and anyone else who likes to draw. Lessons in Paint is great because many of the Windows features are teachable in Paint.
These lessons are geared toward Windows PCs. The suggestions and lessons could be adapted to work with other operating systems. If you have or make a lesson plan around Mac or Linux, please let us know on the discussion page and we could create a place for it.
Remember, you can edit or add information by simply clicking on the “edit” tab at the top of any page or any section. Don’t worry about mistakes, you will be able to preview before saving. Also other users of can refer to previous versions and fix mistakes. If you are interested in the development of this book click on the “discussion” tab on any page to see what we are working on, and to contribute to the discussion.
Windows, command (on Mac) or meta key (other operating systems)
Some obvious and hopefully some not so obvious suggestions;
It is important to make it interesting for the specific person, while keeping it simple enough to avoid frustration. To achieve both goals at the same time you should;
Ask them what they want to do.
Find the simplest method of accomplishing the task.
Try it a few times to simplify the process and organize your lesson.
Then walk them through the lesson.
At first skip the start menu by using a desktop shortcut. Yes they will need to learn it, but getting straight to something useful is key to avoiding frustration.
Use lower screen resolution (for instance 1600x900, 800x600, beware the aspect ratio) or dots per inch (DPI) scaling in newer operating systems and larger icons for improved visibility and mouse accuracy.
Change the mouse sensitivity to be easier to control.
Use only click, and drag on the first lesson.
Choose the save to directory and make sure you are viewing with thumbnails.
Teach the menu from left to right, i.e. start with 'file' on the first day then 'edit' the next. This should prevent having too many students unsure which menu item to click.
Note that similar things can be taught together when they are done in the same way. Like dragging a window and dragging a pasted item. However when two different things could be confusingly similar, teach them at different times, and teach the distinction when teaching the second. Some examples of this; the menu items, click/double click, and save/save-as.
Use consistent language, and find the easiest term to relate too. Students will learn the synonyms later without even realizing they are learning. Here are a few examples
Arrow, pointer, cursor, mouse (I prefer arrow, pointer works well also).
Enter, or return (use whatever is written on the key, and stick with it).
In the first few sessions avoid button combinations of any kind. Using Ctrl C to copy is faster, and easier, but not for those new to computers. Even Shift key for capital letters is potentially frustrating. Introduce these combinations after your students are good at computers.
First you setup the computer;
Change the screen resolution to 800 x 600.
Choose the location for saving files.
Set to view files as thumbnails.
Change the mouse settings to be less sensitive.
Next you put an icon of the Paint program on the desktop.
The students will be learning how to click, drag, and point the mouse. To avoid overwhelming the student we will focus on just those 3 things. We will cover double click, and right click in another lesson. We will also want to focus on only things that can be done when pressing one button at a time. An example is shift key for caps; you should consider not using caps, or using the caps lock.
Have them click on the line tool.
Show how to drag to make a line.
Demonstrate picking a color from the palette.
Show the circle tool (ellipse tool).
Watch for anyone having trouble, and be ready to answer any questions.
Next we show how to save;
Click on file.
Click save.
Show how to close the Window (using the X).
Congratulate everyone on completing the first (mini) lesson.
Have everyone start again, on their own as much as possible.
Show the pencil tool and have the students see what all the tools below it do.
Kids can easily remember these tools because the icons have simple representations of what the tool does.
Tell the students they can draw a picture for the computer. This will give you some time to help and reassure those who need it.
Now their work of art is the center of attention on the computer. This should bring their focus from the paint program to other parts of the computer.
Check the settings are suitable to your needs, just as in Paint Lesson 1.
Have everyone open Paint by double clicking on the icon.
Show the Brush and demonstrate the options (shapes and sizes).
Have the students draw with the diagonal brush so they can see the ribbon effect.
Explain how most tools have options in the same place.
You might have them find how many don't have options (pencil, fill tool, eyedropper). Let the students get comfortable using them to see what happens.
Most of the options are related to size making it easier to understand.
For now we will move on to explain edit options starting with undo.
Show how to undo from the edit menu and let everyone practice.
Show how it will only go back 3 times.
End the lesson by having everyone save their pictures and make it the background image.
You should begin by teaching anything you may have skipped in from the past lessons. Next you should cover the text tool
These sites have great suggestions on how to help people learn computers;
If you want to teach computer programming, kids like . info has an encyclopedia article that discusses of the best educational programming languages and links to their teaching materials.
Tux4Kids Has two useful programs that are fun for kids. They are Tux Paint, and Tux Typing.
Microsoft Windows Media Encoder is a free program that can record video of all or part of the computer screen in use, including audio recording. This type of tutorial is being called screencasting and it can be a great way to show people how to use computers. People new to computers may not benefit most from learning this way, but this can be used to review lessons more easily.
Conworld : conart : conmusic
Most westerners are unaware of the great variety there exists in music. Music is by no means the universal language it often is supposed to be. Even in such basic areas as the very building blocks of tonality there exist significant differences between Thai, Indian, Arab, Balinese and European music.
In order to be better equipped to create a new system, it is good to have some kind of grasp of what human cultures have created.
Therefore, this chapter will mostly analyze a number of musical systems somewhat superficially, and also go into the necessary math. Firstly, we will go into how scales are constructed. Secondly, we will look at some rather peculiar vocal techniques that mankind has come up with. Thirdly, miscellaneous things having to do with the music itself will be dealt with. Fourthly, the social and religious aspects of music will be discussed, and finally I will provide you with some listening advice.
Can there be alternatives to C D E F G A B C..?
So, what's the difference?
So why are pentatonic scales so popular?
Are there other things to spice it up with?
So, how do the people relate to music?
Listening recommendations.
.
Proposition (half-open intervals on lattices form a topology base):
-system; in particular, they form a topology base.
.
. By compactness, we may find a finite subcover
.
Because ASCII-only e-mail clients are still in use, work-arounds are often necessary on the Web. The iksa-sistemo (x-convention) is a way of writing Esperanto that is compatible with ASCII-only systems such as certain e-mail clients. Since Esperanto does not use the letter X in its native words, many Esperanto enthusiasts have taken to using the letter to signal a diacritical mark that is not available in 7-bit ASCII, placing the "x" after the letter that would have the diacritic in a Unicode-compliant application.
Using the x-convention to transmit the document over 7-bit ASCII e-mail, the excerpt would read:
Cxar la auxtoro de la lingvo Esperanto tuj en la komenco rifuzis unu fojon por cxiam cxiujn personajn rajtojn kaj privilegiojn rilate tiun lingvon, tial Esperanto estas nenies proprajxo.
Just six mass replace operations would be necessary on either end.
The Esperanto Teacher, A Simple Course for Non-Grammarians at Project Gutenberg
Esperanto: A Language for the Global Village by Sylvan Zaft
The Esperanto Department at Wikiversity -- partially developed
Lernu : Free multilingual website for learning Esperanto.
Jan 2020 --It seems that several of the links no longer work. Lernu and Duolingo do work.
Gutenberg.org has dozens of free downloadable Esperanto books -- Search "Esperanto."
Hors D’Oeuvere and Canapés
This statement designates a particular function or subroutine as a stop-event handling routine. A stop-event handling routine is called just before your program ends. This works whether your program ends as a result of a statement (such as STOP or END), or a Command-period keypress by the user, or because it has executed the last line in the program.
You can't use a stop-event handling routine to prevent your program from stopping. Your program will end as soon as it returns from the routine. To prevent the user from stopping your program by means of a -period keypress, use the ON BREAK statement.
Semen Praeparatum Sojae[1][2]
Qi & Yin deficiency causing excessive sweating
↑ Li-ping Qu, Guo-rong Fan, Jin-yong Peng, He-ming Mi. "Isolation of six isoflavones from Semen sojae praeparatum by preparative HPLC", Fitoterapia, Volume 78, Issue 3, April 2007, Pages 200-204
↑ (WO/2003/045408) AN INFLUENZA TREATING PHARMACEUTICAL COMPOSITION OF TRADITIONAL CHINESE MEDICINE AND METHOD FOR PREPARATION THEREOF. World Intellectual Property Organization.
Capital gains in the United Kingdom are subject to tax at the marginal rate of income tax (for individuals) or of corporation tax (for companies).
Capital gains for individuals are taxed slightly differently from those for companies:
The basic calculation for individuals (in very broad terms) is proceeds less cost; Individuals also have a capital gains tax free amount or "annual exemption" (in 2006-07 this is £8,800[1]).
For companies, the chargeable gain is calculated (again, in very broad terms) as proceeds less cost; however, instead of taper relief, companies are entitled to indexation allowance, which is calculated with reference to movements in the retail prices index (individuals are also entitled to indexation allowance prior to April 1998). Companies are not entitled to any annual exemption.
This is White's most aggressive variation against the Pirc Defense. White gets in an immediate threat, albeit a not-so-dangerous one, of e5. Black's plan here is usually to develop normally, as there really is no good way of preventing e5. As e5 is not so dangerous anyway, Black usually continues development.
1.e4 d6 2.d4 Nf6 3.Nc3 g6 4.f4
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Batsford Chess Openings 2 (1989, 1994). Garry Kasparov, Raymond Keene. ISBN 0-8050-3409-9.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon · Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
The memory in a computer is organized in a hierarchical way. The lowest level memory unit is a register, followed by the cache memory, then the RAM, hard driver, and so on. This organization of the computer's memory is specially useful because most programs need more memory than they are supposed to use.
Program variables are the link between abstractions represented by a program and the computer physical memory units. For instance, in C, you can use the keyword `register` to give the compiler a hint that a variable will be frequently used.
There are also other ways to specify where a variable should be stored. In dynamic typed languages (such as PHP, Javascript, or Python), the programmer cannot tell where a variable should be stored; the interpreter makes that decision. In statically typed languages (such as C and C++), on the other hand, the programmer can tell, based on the type of a variable, where the compiler should store each variable.
The compiler (or the Operating System, for that matter) can put variables in one of three places within the program's memory: static memory, stack, or heap. The following sections will cover with more details these three types of memory.
Future Trends and Recommendations for GPS in Football
The requirement for objective measures of performance and the physical demands during training and competition games has lead to the widespread use of GPS technology in sport. GPS systems applicable to football have demonstrated an acceptable level of accuracy and validity. It has been proven that GPS-based tracking technologies for sporting analysis can be of great value to both professional sporting bodies that strive for continual improvement in all aspects of football, and the everyday athlete that just wants the ability to identify how they are performing and what sort of output they are achieving during their exercise.[1]
However, there are currently no low-cost GPS units or software designed for use in football that could be used as a cost effective method for analysing performance, although there are several alternative options available to coaches. Most GPS units are fairly expensive and can only be afforded by top clubs with strong financials – this could be one of the reasons why FIFA does not want to integrate GPS in the sport of football as it might affect the fairness of the competition.
As a result, GPS technology for football still has a long way to go to match the validity of other technologies already integrated in the game such biological measurement devices – for instance blood lactate and gas analysis. However, there are some emerging technologies that have the potential to meet the high-accuracy demand of elite sport tracking such as accelerometers, wireless location sensors (WLS), local position measurement(LPM).
According to Alan Ruddock, researcher in exercise physiology at Sheffield Hallam University, it is likely that GPS or other tracking devices will be linked to media coverage and social media so that fans in the future can view real-time performance data of players during competition. The Elite Sport Performance Research in Training with Pervasive Sensing (ESPRIT)[2] research group are developing body sensor networks that will combine emerging wireless technologies and link positional data with heart rate, skin temperature (even core temperature with ingestible short rage telemetric pills), muscle oxygenation and biomechanical data to provide coaches with objective performance data which can be used to enhance performance.[3]
Based on football fans reviews and statements, the football fan community appears to be fairly divided about whether GPS technology should be introduced in football or not.
For those highly interested in integrating the GPS technology, they are excited about looking at players’ real-time statistics, but most importantly they are looking forward to eliminate the human error from referee officials that usually costs football games.[4]
On the other hand, there are people that remain unenthusiastic about introducing GPS technology in football. Some believe when the game losses its ability to be judged by humans, then a line needs to be drawn. There is a common argument about the interruption of sports by technology and it stems from trying to keep football a simple sport. Some people are worried that football might lose its traditional brand and the interest in the game might go away subsequently. A fan says: “What fun would soccer be if you couldn’t argue about the offside rule?”
↑ http://www.gmat.unsw.edu.au/ug/projects/Kurzawa/introduction.htm
↑ http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ESPRIT_project
↑ http://www.pponline.co.uk/encyc/sports-equipment-is-gps-the-best-route-to-performance-analysis-42329
↑ http://www.economist.com/blogs/babbage/2011/11/gps-and-sport#comments
Height: 1.9m/6'3"
Weight: 220kg/485.0lb
Gender Distribution: 50% Male
Move types which are very good on Camerupt: Water
Move types which are good on Camerupt: Ground
Move types which are bad on Camerupt: Bug, Fire, Poison, Steel
Move types which don't effect Camerupt: Electric
All other move types are normal effectiveness on Camerupt.
Ruby / Sapphire Emerald XD / Colosseum
RS/FL: Attract, Dig, Double Team, Earthquake, Facade, Fire Blast, Flamethrower, Frustration, Hidden Power, Hyper Beam, Overheat, Protect, Rest, Return, Roar, Rock Smash, Rock Tomb, Sandstorm, Secret Power, Strength, Sunny Day, Toxic
Template:Wikibooks Pokédex:Numel Series
1.3 How to install different versions of gems depending on which version of ruby the installee is using
Rubygems is a packaging and "download" system for ruby libraries. Using it is typically as easy as $ gem install xxx where xxx is some gem name you'd like to install.
More information about rubygems can be had here.
How to display text to the end user after a gem is installed.
Gem::Specification.new do |s|
s.post_install_message = "Enjoy my gem!"
How to set the main page for rdocs of a gem
Gem::Specification.new do |s|
...
s.rdoc_options = ["--title", "EventMachine", "--main", "README", "--line-numbers"]
How to install different versions of gems depending on which version of ruby the installee is using
Here's an example: create file ext/mkrf_conf.rb
Gem::Command.build_args = ARGV
f = File.open(File.join(File.dirname(__FILE__), "Rakefile"), "w") # create dummy rakefile to indicate success
Also add @gemspec.extensions = 'ext/mkrf_conf.rb'@ to your gemspec.
How to run configure from within an extconf.rb
Here's an example, from rice's extconf.rb
By default if you list gemspec.extensions = 'ext/extconf.rb' it will expect a Makefile to have been created, and run Make against it, at install time. You can also list @gemspec.extensions = 'ext/mkrf_conf.rb'@ and it will run that, expect a Rakefile to have been created, and run rake against it.
Rubygems now supports plugins, for adding new gem xxx commands, or executing on install and uninstall of gems.
Adverbs are a large category of words that includes:
Although we call all of these kinds of words adverbs, not all adverbs can be used in all of these ways. For example, in Modern English "very" is an adverb that can be used to modify only other adverbs and adjectives, not verbs. For example, one does not say, "I very will kick you" (because "very" cannot modify the verb "will" or "kick"); but one can say "I am very angry" (where "very" modifies the adjective "angry"). Likewise in Old English, not all adverbs can be used in all of the above ways.
Most adverbs form themselves from adjectives with one of two suffixes:
-e (for example, ƿrāþ-e - "fiercely")
There are also some other suffixes sometimes used less commonly:
-unga (for example, eall-unga - "entirely, completely")
Note that the dative, accusative, and genitive cases of most nouns or adjectives of time and length can be used as adverbs, e.g.:
These "adverbs" formed by declining a noun or an adjective do not have the comparative or superlative degrees.
In addition, many words are in and of themselves adverbs, without the need for any derivation from other kinds of words, for example:
Adverbs form their comparative (e.g. "better" or "more") and superlative (e.g. "best" or "most") degrees using suffixes similar to those used for adjectives (for which see here), but adverbs are never declined according to case, number, gender, or in any way.
Adverbs usually take the -or ending for comparative and the -ost ending for the superlative. Here is an example:
There are some adverbs which are affected by i-mutation in the comparative and superlative degrees; these usually take no comparative ending, and "-est" instead of "-ost" for superlative:
There are also some adverbs which are irregular in the comparative and superlative degrees:
By the end of this lesson, you should know key vocabulary words for elections.
Let's begin with some vocabulary building excercises.
Click here to go to the activity
In this activity, you will see a word in English, and must choose the correct Spanish word.
Listen to the podcast and repeat the phrases as instructed.
In the following scene, two young men, Diego and Enrique, discuss some politics.
Diego: 2016 ya casi esta aquí.
Too much sugar in the blood is harmful. People with type 2 diabetes have too high blood sugar.
Many engineering systems create unwanted acoustic noise. Noise may be reduced using engineering noise control methods.
One noise control method popular in mufflers is the Helmholtz resonator, see here. It is comprised of a cavity connected to the system of interest through one or several short narrow tubes. The classical examples are in automobile exhaust systems. By adding a tuned Helmholtz resonator, sound is reflected back to the source.
Helmholtz resonators have been exploited to enhance or attenuate sound fields at least since ancient Greek times where they were used in ancient amphitheaters to reduce reverberation. Since this time, Helmholtz resonators have found widespread use in reverberant spaces such as churches and as mufflers in ducts and pipes. The Helmholtz resonator effect underlies the phenomena of sunroof buffeting seen here.
One advantage of the Helmholtz resonator is its simplicity. However, the frequency range over which Helmholtz resonators are effective is relatively narrow. Consequently these devices need to be precisely tuned to the noise source to achieve significant attenuation.
There are four general categories for noise and vibration control:[1]
Active systems: load or unload the unwanted noise by using actuators such as loudspeakers [1] and Acoustics/Active Control
Passive systems: achieve sound attenuation by using [2]
2.1. reactive devices such as Helmholtz resonators and expansion chambers.
2.2. resistive materials such as acoustic linings and porous membranes
Hybrid systems: use both active and passive elements to achieve sound reduction [3]
Adaptive-passive systems: use passive devices whose parameters can be varied in order to achieve optimal noise attenuation over a band of operating frequencies.
Lumped element model of the Helmholtz resonator
The Helmholtz resonator is an acoustic filter element. If dimensions of the Helmholtz resonator are smaller than the acoustic wavelength, then dynamic behavior of the Helmholtz resonator can be modelled as a lumped system see [4]. It is effectively a mass on a spring and can be treated so mathematically. The large volume of air is the spring and the air in the neck is the oscillating mass. Damping appears in the form of radiation losses at the neck ends, and viscous losses due to friction of the oscillating air in the neck. Figure 1 shows this analogy between Helmholtz resonator and a vibration absorber.
Figure 1. Helmholtz resonator and vibration absorber
Displacement in the direction pointing inward the neck
Force applied in the y direction at the resonator neck entrance
Effective neck length (the mass inside the neck and the mass near the neck edges)
For a neck which is flanged at both ends, Leff is approximately:
For adiabatic system with air as an ideal gas, the thermodynamic process equation for the resonator is
Two source of damping in the Helmholtz resonator can be considered: sound radiation from the neck and viscous losses in the neck, which in many cases can be neglected compared to radiation losses.
Sound radiation from the neck: Sound radiation resistance is a function of the outside neck geometry. For a flanged pipe, the radiation resistance is approximately[2]
Viscous losses in the neck: The mechanical resistance due to viscous losses can be considered as[3]
The mechanical impedance of the mechanical system is defined as the ratio of the driving force and the velocity of the system at the driving point.The mechanical impedance of a driven mass-spring–damper system is
The natural frequency of a Helmholtz resonator,w0, is the frequency for which the reactance is zero:
Resonance occurs when the natural frequency of the resonator is equal to the excitation frequency. Helmholtz resonators are typically used to attenuate sound pressure when the system is originally at resonance.A simple open-ended duct system with a side branch Helmholtz resonator and the analogous electrical circuit of the system is shown below. For an undamped resonator, the impedance at resonance is zero, and therefore according to electrical analogy in Fig.2 the Helmholtz resonator becomes a short circuit. There is no current flowing in the elements in the right. On the other hand, the undamped Helmholtz resonator at resonance causes all reflection of acoustic waves back to the source, while in damped resonator some current will flow through the branch to the right of the Helmholtz resonator and reduce the magnitude of attenuation.
Figure 2. open duct system with a side branch Helmholtz resonator with electrical circuit analogy near junction point A
1- Effect of Resonator Volume on sound attenuation
Figure 3 shows the frequency response of the above duct system without Helmholtz resonator, and with two different volume Helmholtz resonators with the same natural frequency. The excitation frequency axis is normalized with respect to the fundamental frequency of the straight pipe system, which was also chosen as the natural frequency of the resonator. The maximum attenuation of sound pressure for duct systems with side branch Helmholtz resonators occurs when the natural frequency of the resonator is equal to the excitation frequency. By comparing two curves with different colors, blue and gray, it can be seen that to increase the effective bandwidth of attenuation of a Helmholtz resonator, the device should be made as large as possible. It should be mention that in order to minimize the effects of standing waves within the device, the dimensions do not exceed a quarter wavelength of the resonator natural frequency .
Figure 3. Effect of Resonator Volume on sound attenuation
2- Effect of Resonator Damping on sound attenuation
The effect of Helmholtz resonator damping(Resulting from radiation resistance and viscous losses in the neck) on the frequency response of the duct system is shown in Figure 5. The lightly damped Helmholtz resonator is not robust with respect to changes in the excitation frequency, since the sound pressure in the duct system can be amplified if the noise frequency shifts to the vicinity of either of the two system resonances. To increase the robustness of Helmholtz resonator with respect to changes in the excitation frequency, damping is useful to add to the resonators to decrease the magnitude of the resonant peaks. Such increase in robustness decreases performance, since the maximum attenuation is significantly less for heavily damped Helmholtz resonators. The motivation for creating a tunable Helmholtz resonator stems from this trade off between robustness and performance. A tunable Helmholtz resonator, capable of adjusting its natural frequency to match the excitation frequency, would be able to guarantee the high performance of a lightly damped Helmholtz resonator and track changes in frequency.
Figure 4. Effect of Resonator Damping on sound attenuation
The tunable Helmholtz resonator is a variable volume resonator, which allows the natural frequency to be adjusted.As shown in Figure 5, a variable volume Helmholtz resonator can be achieved by rotating an internal radial wall inside the resonator cavity with respect to an internal fixed wall. The movable wall is fixed to the bottom end plate which is attached to a DC motor to provides the motion to change the volume.
Figure 5. Variable volume Helmholtz resonator
To determine the sound pressure and volume velocity at any position along the duct such as the microphone position in Figure 2, we should first determine the pressure and velocity at the speaker.
Figure 5. Equivalent circuit for duct system in figure 2
Figure 6. Simplified equivalent circuit
The acoustic impedance for the system termination, which is an unflanged open pipe is approximately
The resonator acoustic impedance is the same as what is shown above. The acoustic impedance at point 3 is given by
The impedance at point 4 can be determined by
From figure 6 with the system impedance (Z_{sys}), the pressure and velocity at the speaker can be determined. considering transfer matrices, the pressure and velocity at any location in the duct system may be computed from the pressure and velocity at the speaker.The first transfer matrix may be used to relate the pressure and velocity at the point downstream in a straight pipe to the pressure and velocity at the origin of the pipe.
The second matrix relates the pressure and velocity immediately downstream of the sidebranch, to the pressure and velocity immediately before the side branch.
Correct combination of theses transfer matrices may be used to determine the pressure occurring in the system at the location of the microphone in figure 2.
Appendix A: Matlab Code for straight pipe with Helmholtz resonator
%This Matlab code is used for calculating pressure at the place of
%microphone for the pipe without Helmholtz resonator
%calculate the system impedance
% impedance at point 4( after speaker)
%calculating the impedance of the loud speaker
↑ Robert J. Bernhard, Henry R. Hall, and James D. Jones. Adaptive-passive noise control. Proceeding of Inter-Noise 92, pages 427-430, 1992.
↑ L. Kinsler, A. Frey, A. Coppens, and J. Sandesr. Fundamentals of Acoustics. John Wiley and Sons, New York, NY, Third edition, 1982.
Arrays are almost the most useful data type of all others. This data type was designed for keeping not one but many values in it. For example you want to have 10 users’ names in variables. So you must declare 10 variables with different names. It will be hard for you do add another user. But using arrays you can just declare one variable and keep all 10 users’ names in it. Now we will learn how to use array and its methods.
The example above shows you the usage of array. Line 1 just declares an array named “users”. Line 2 declares an array with 10 elements. This means that in that array can be kept 10 values at indexes 0 through 9. The first element in an array is always 0. Line 3 declares an array and sets its’ first 5 elements values. “c” will be the element with the index 2 in this array, because as we have already said the index of the first element in an array is always 0. Now lets write a small program to understand arrays better. Write the code written below to Frame 1 actions.
In line 1 we declare array “users” which consists of 3 elements. In lines 3-5 we set “users” each element. If you have an array and you want to get or set any of its element then you must write the name of the array, then “[]” and the number of element inside the quotation marks (“[]”). For example in line 3 we set the first element of “users” to “User 1”. You can use arrays for storing any data in them. For example you have an array which consists only of 2 elements. You can set the first elements value a string (e.g. myArray[0] = “hello”) and the second element a number (e.g. myArray[1] = 5). And finally in the lines 8-11 we trace our “users” array. Now we will create a more complicated example. Follow the steps:
Set the Fill Color to green and the Stroke Color to black. Then select the Rectangle Tool in the Toolbox, click the “Round Rectangle Radius” button in the Options window, set the “Corner Radius” to 5, press OK and draw a rectangle. Double click the rectangle you have drawn and set its width to 35 and height to 25. Select the Text Tool from the Toolbox and draw Text. Then select it and in the Properties window set its’ width to 25, height to 18, font size to 13, color to red and change the Text Type to “Static Text”. Type “OK” in it and place it in the center of the rectangle. Now select the whole rectangle and this text (by dragging mouse) and convert it to button. In the “Convert to Symbol” dialog set the button’s name to “button” and press OK. Select the button you have created, place it near the Input Text and in the Property window set its name to “btnOK”. The scene must look like this.
This is enough for our design. Now open the Frame 1 actions and type the following in the Script Pane:
Then right click “btnOK” and choose “Actions” to view its’ actions. In the Script pane type the following:
The arrays can also be multidimensional. For example you have some users and their phone number and address. For not making 3 different arrays it is easier to create one multidimensional array. The example below shows how to do that.
["User2","Phone2","Address2"],
In lines 1 to 3 we create a multidimensional array “users”. You can write all these lines in one line. The variable is declared in three lines because it is easier to read. If you combine these lines then the result will be a very long line. Why we don’t put “;” after each line? Because the lines 2 and 3 are the other parts of the main line. So by putting the “;” in the 3-rd line we tell the computer that this was the end. The program will think that this is only one line. Now lets understand how we create a multidimensional array. This is the type of writing multidimensional arrays:
When you write “var myarray = new Array( [], [], [] );” you create an array with 3 subarrays. Imagine something like this:
If you write “var myarray:Array = new Array ( [ [], [] ], [], [ [] ] );” then this is something like this:
This is like there is a folder, in which there are three folders. In the first folder there are two folders, in the third folder there is one folder. So if you want to get value from the second folder of the first folder then you must write “myarray[0][1]”. We do the same in our example. If we draw the structure of our array then it will be:
In this structure you see that the names on folders are only numbers. You can also give them names by writing the following:
In the previous example we used “[ ]” for making new arrays. But if you want to give names to arrays you must use “{ }” instead of “[ ]”. If we were writing values after “[]” then now we must first write the name of the folder without quotes (“”) then put “: ” after the name and write the value in the quotes. If you want to add more values then you must put “,” and do the same. But if you give names to the arrays you must get their value also by using their names. If we make the structure of this example then it will be:
This property returns the length of the specified array. The following code illustrates the use of property “Length”:
This is an incomplete list of methods the community has used to saved TiddlyWiki files in a normal user workflow.
These methods use the saver mechanism, which saves the entire TiddlyWiki as one file.
TiddlyFox on FireFox up to version 56
Simple to install and use.
Installation instructions are in the link.
TiddlyChrome on Google Chrome as long as it supports apps
Simple to install and use.
Chrome is slated to remove Apps support in early 2018. Until then, this app should work fine. The instructions are in the link.
Using the default download saver with a powershell script and a batch file[1]
Put the powershell script in the directory that your browser saves downloads to. param([string]$stem="foo", [string]$dir="")
$copyme = $copyme.FullName
Copy-Item $copyme -Destination $dir\$stem.html
Invoke-Item $dir\$stem.html
For each TiddlyWiki that you use, create a batch file in the download directory.powershell -executionpolicy bypass -File .\launch_tw.ps1 -stem "bible" -dir d:\data\apps\TW_Ant
Every time you want to open a TiddlyWiki, you click on the corresponding batch file. The script grabs the newest file that starts with the name you specified for stem (in this case "bible"), and copies it into the specified directory as $stem$.html (in this case, "bible.html"). Once you are done editing you click save to download a new copy of the file. Then you can run the batch file again to copy the latest version back into your directory.
↑ https://groups.google.com/forum/#!msg/tiddlywiki/lPDUD66GBD8/nyxytP_DEwAJ
Kdenlive has, with no doubt, one of the simplest interfaces you can find in video editing softwares. It is a typical multitrack editor, with a portion of the main window being used for showing the files used in the project, a timeline made of multiple audio and video tracks where you put those files or clips made from them; another portion of the window with a pair of video monitors to allow you to watch those files and also the contents of the timeline; plus the usual menus which you see in lots of other applications.
The Effects Stack shows which effects were applied to the selected clip in the Timeline. From there, you can edit the settings of an effect; and if you don´t want one of the effects to be applied, you can simply remove it from the stack.
Kdenlive allows visual and audio tracks to be layered separately or grouped together in the timeline: the highest video clip in the timeline obscures whatever is below it when played back in the project monitor. Audio tracks mix together.
The monitors are those little rectangular black boxes which play video or audio in your project. They are divided in notebook tabs, but you probably will not have to deal with those tabs—the appropriate monitor is automatically selected according to what you are doing at the moment.
All the monitors are equipped with playback controls --- those "Play", "Rewind", "Fast Forward", "Pause" and other buttons you have already seen in most media players. Those buttons have some "hidden" functionalities --- for example, the Rewind and Fast Forward buttons may be pressed more than once for reversing or forwarding the video/audio in different speeds.
You can use the mousewheel to move back and forward in the monitors, one frame at a time. Pressing Ctrl while using the wheel changes it to move one second at a time.
This monitor shows the video that is the result of the current Timeline. It works in a similar way to the Clip Monitor.
Inpoints and outpoints on the Timeline Monitor achieve the same purpose as they do on the Clip Monitor. You can choose a part of the current timeline, and drag a clip of it back to the timeline. You will get a "project clip", which is a clip that contains all of the clips on the timeline in the state when you made it. It is useful for grouping together a number of clips when you have finished editing them and want to be able to treat them as a single clip.
This monitor shows video from a DV device connected to your computer. You can find more details on it in the Capture page.
Kdenlive allows you to change the position of the various areas you see in the main window. Four stock combinations are provided, but you can modify them freely or create a new, unique combination.
For using the provided layouts, you can simply click on those 1, 2, 3, 4 buttons you see in the main window toolbar.
WARNING - This list may be out of date at each new Kdenlive release, so don´t take it too seriously.
Open a recently used project.
Saves the project.
File->Save As...
Saves the project under a different filename.
Undo the last edit to the timeline.
Redo a previously undone edit to the timeline.
Non-functional at present.
Non-funtional at present.
Add clips to the project list.
Remove unused clips from the project list.
If checked, all operations will snap to the nearest frame.
If checked, moving and resizing clips will snap to nearby clip borders and the seek marker.
Export the timeline to a video clip. Also known as rendering down.
Layout Menu->Load Layout 1/2/3/4 (F9/F10/F11/F12)
Loads up a previously saved screen layout.
Layout Menu->Save Layout 1 (Ctrl-Shift-F9/Ctrl-Shift-F10/Ctrl-Shift-F11/Ctrl-Shift-F12)
Saves the current screen layout to the respective layout slot.
Show/hide the toolbars.
Show/Hide the status bar.
Settings->Configure Shortcuts...
Configure Kdenlive keyboard shortcuts.
Settings->Configure Toolbars...
Configure the toolbars.
Settings->Configure Kdenlive...
View the Kdenlive handbook (this document).
After selecting this, click on part of the gui to find out what it does.
Help->Report Bug...
See information about Kdenlive, including the license, authors and contributers.
See information about the KDE project.
Waves : 2 and 3 Dimension Waves
A plane wave in two or three dimensions is like a sine wave in one dimension except that crests and troughs aren't points, but form lines (2-D) or planes (3-D) perpendicular to the direction of wave propagation. Figure 2.5 shows a plane sine wave in two dimensions. The large arrow is a vector called the wave vector, which defines (1) the direction of wave propagation by its orientation perpendicular to the wave fronts, and (2) the wavenumber by its length. We can think of a wave front as a line along the crest of the wave. The equation for the displacement associated with a plane sine wave in three dimensions at some instant in time is
.
Figure 2.5: Definition sketch for a plane sine wave in two dimensions. The wave fronts are constant phase surfaces separated by one wavelength. The wave vector is normal to the wave fronts and its length is the wavenumber.
Since wave fronts are lines or surfaces of constant phase, the equation defining a wave front is simply
.
. Therefore, a wavefront, or line of constant phase
.
As for one dimensional waves, the time evolution of the wave is obtained by adding a term
.
The frequency depends in general on all three components of the wave vector. The form of this function,
, which as in the one dimensional case is called the dispersion relation, contains information about the physical behavior of the wave.
Some examples of dispersion relations for waves in two dimensions are as follows:
Deep water ocean waves in two dimensions obey
Certain kinds of atmospheric waves confined to a vertical
Figure 2.6: Contour plots of the dispersion relations for three kinds of waves in two dimensions. In the upper panels the curves show lines or contours along which the frequency
Contour plots of these dispersion relations are plotted in the upper panels of figure 2.6. These plots are to be interpreted like topographic maps, where the lines represent contours of constant elevation. In the case of figure 2.6, constant values of frequency are represented instead. For simplicity, the actual values of frequency are not labeled on the contour plots, but are represented in the graphs in the lower panels. This is possible because frequency depends only on wave vector magnitude
The best entry point to understanding the meaning of this tragedy is to look up every instance of the word "nothing" in the text. It will appear more than 15 times. Then note the events that occur at the same time or immediately after the utterance of the word "nothing". In all but one or two cases, what happens is not "nothing" but a big "something".
So we know that this play is about "big somethings" and "little nothings" and the fact that most of the people in the play mistake little nothings for big somethings and vice-versa. For example, the wearing of regal clothing, the attendance to the king of a knightly retinue, the swearing out loud of filial love. And from that we can see that this play is trying to show that reality is internal, rather than external.
And then we can follow the king as he loses all of his external trappings, even to the point of losing his sanity on the moor, purging himself of his pride and dependence on those "little nothings" that he put such value on previously.
At the end he finally understands that everything he thought was important was actually unimportant and what he thought was unimportant was actually important. But it is too late. Shakespeare was convinced that the job of the king was to keep his country unified and healthy (cf. Hamlet). But King Lear gave his country to his children who started a war to gain control. That is the worst of his sins and he must die for it.
Edmund, Bastard Son to Gloster
Cordelia, Daughter to Lear
Goneril, Daughter to Lear
Navigate Javadoc & Annotations topic: ( v • d • e )
Java allows users to document the classes and the members by using a particular syntax of comment.
A documentation comment is framed by slash-star-star and star-slash (i.e. /** ... */). The documentation is in the HTML format.
Code listing 8.1: Example.java
A documentation comment is placed just above the commented entity (class, constructor, method, field).
In a documentation comment, the first part is a description text in the HTML format. The second part is a list of special attributes whose name starts with an at sign (@):
Code section 8.1: Documentation comment.
Get the sum of two integers.
@param a The first integer number.
@param b The second integer number.
Get the sum of two integers.
@param a The first integer number.
@param b The second integer number.
Description attribute of the value returned by the method.
Flags the entity as deprecated (old version), describes why and by what replace it.
If the entity flagged as deprecated by this attribute is used, the compiler give a warning.
Add a link in the section "See also".
Describes the method parameter.
Describes the value returned by the method.
@exception type description
See also annotations since Java 5.
The JDK provides a tool named javadoc which allows to generate the documentation of the well commented classes. The javadoc command without argument give the complete syntax of the command.
Example : for a class named Example defined in a package named org.wikibooks.en in the file C:\ProgJava\org\wikibooks\en\Example.java :
Code listing 8.2: Example.java
An example class.
Get the sum of two integers.
@param a The first integer number.
@param b The second integer number.
The documentation can be generated in a specific folder (C:\ProgDoc for example) with the following command:
Command 8.1: Documentation generation
The options of this command are described below:
Create the pages about the use of the classes and the packages.
The path of the compiled classes (*.class).
The path of the source classes (*.java).
The path where the documentation must be generated.
The name of the package to document. It is possible to specify several packages, or one or several class names to document only those ones.
The description page of a package copy the description text from the file named package.html which should be placed in the given folder. In our example, we should document the package in the file C:\ProgJava\org\wikibooks\en\package.html.
Since Java 5[1], the package.html file can be replaced by a special Java file named package-info.java containing only the package declaration preceding by a documentation comment.
Code listing 8.3: C:\ProgJava\org\wikibooks\en\package-info.java
This fake package is used to illustrate the Java wikibook.
↑ http://docs.oracle.com/javase/6/docs/technotes/tools/windows/javadoc.html#packagecomment
To do:Add some exercises like the ones in Variables.
Women with high reproductive value attract men. 19-year-old women are likely to produce the greatest number of children, twice as many as 30-year-old women.
Teenage boys, on average, prefer girls a year older. Men in their middle twenties usually prefer women a year or two younger. Thirty-something men prefer women 5 to 10 years younger. Many men in their 40s and 50s prefer women 10 to 20 years younger.
In the past women of all ages up to about 45 prefer, on average, a man a few years older.[1] However, this has slowly been changing. Time magazine reports that when it comes to online dating, a woman is five times more likely to show interest in a man five years her junior than one who is five years older.[2]
Read more: Online Dating: Women Want Younger Men | TIME.com http://healthland.time.com/2013/06/13/online-dating-women-want-younger-men/#ixzz2tyX4sQ94
These statistical findings are broad generalizations and many exceptions to the rule exist. In reality, age preferences vary widely from individual to individual, and sometimes from one stage of life to the next. There are many women who prefer younger men and many men who prefer older women.
In other primates, e.g., chimpanzees and gorillas, both male and female adults have tough skin, coarse body hair, Adam's apples, and deep voices. Humans, however, have characteristics of neoteny. Some of them appear in men, but most appear in women.
Adult women, for example, usually have higher voices like children.[3] Men and women agree that attractive women have the large eyes and lips and small noses and chins of children. Attractive women's faces have the proportions of 11-to-14-year-old children.[4]
Women further neoteny by using cosmetics, shaving their legs, and wearing children's clothing, e.g., Mary Jane shoes.
However, attraction of men toward pre-pubescent girls has no reproductive value. Mature women have features that distinguish them from pre-pubescent girls, yet are different from men. These secondary sexual characteristics include prominent breasts, clearly defined waists, and full hips. They reflect sexual maturity and fertility, offsetting the pre-pubescence that neotenous characteristics could otherwise suggest.
Children's long dependency on their fathers is associated with neoteny. Fatherless children&#151;a million years ago or today&#151;were less likely to learn adult skills, inherit social status, and reproduce. Women who appeared young and remained strong were able to keep a man for twenty years, instead of losing him to a younger woman. A young-looking widow could find a second husband, whereas an older-looking counterpart of the same chronological age might not.[5] Some statistical extrapolations suggest that someone is more likely to stay with one partner, the longer the partner continues to appear young. A hypothesis has been given to suggest that children with mothers who retain youthful characteristics were more likely to have both parents throughout their childhood, and grow up to reproduce and have descendants. Parents with neotenous characteristics would pass them on to their offspring. E.g., a mother who has certain features that cause her to look younger than other women her age is likely to have daughters having that appearance as well.
Many beauty standards are universal across cultures. People around the world have 91-94% agreement about the facial attractiveness of Asian, Hispanic, black, and white women. Even native people unexposed to mass media agree with the rest of the world.
Infants gaze longer and show more pleasure when looking at pictures of attractive male and female faces. One-year-olds play longer with facially attractive dolls than with unattractive dolls.[6]
Beauty standards are cues to a woman's health: clear, smooth skin; full, lustrous hair; full lips; bright eyes; and symmetrical features.
Composite faces, made by combining many photographs on a computer, are more attractive than any individual face. Beauty is "average" looks, not unusual or "striking" features.
Men, in general, don't judge women as being fat or thin. Rather, men tend to consider women with a 70% waist-to-hip ratio to be beautiful. E.g., a woman with a 21-inch waist and 30-inch hips, a woman with a 24-inch waist and 35-inch hips, and a woman with a 28-inch waist and 40-inch hips are equally attractive.[7] The 70% or higher waist-to-hip ratio, and the Golden ratio (62% waist-height-to-total-height ratio) indicate health and fertility.
The golden ratio also plays a role in facial beauty. The distance from hairline to the tip of the nose, divided by the distance from hairline to the tip of the chin, equates to the golden ratio (0.62) on beautiful faces. There are many other proportions in beautiful faces that obey the golden ratio.
Beautiful faces are also average faces. In a well-known study, hundreds of photographs were presented, together with one synthetic photograph that was the digital average of all the other photographs. The panelists were most likely to identify the "average" photograph as the most beautiful photograph in the entire set.
Some beauty preferences vary between cultures, e.g., light or dark skin.
When a society experiences rapid change, it values youth and new, iconoclastic ideas. The 1920s and 1960s preferred thin, flat-chested, youthful women.
Conservative societies&#151;e.g., the Victorian era, or the 1950s&#151;value old ideas, and full-figured, mature women. Large metropolitan cities such as New York value very thin women; in contrast, small, rural towns prefer full-figured, fertile adult women. Agricultural areas prefer tall, strong, robust, fertile women.
American women chose thinner-than-average women as the most beautiful. American men prefer average-size women. Fashion models are thinner than porn stars.[8]
Our grandparents saw relatively few people. They saw even fewer beautiful people. In contrast, today we turn on a television and see nothing but attractive people made up to look their best, with the bad shots discarded.
Since the 1930s&#151;the beginning of mass media&#151;men have increased the importance of "good looks" in a wife by 40%. Women have increased the importance of a good-looking husband almost 80%. Women in 1996 valued "good looks" in husbands more than men in 1939 valued "good looks" in wives.[9]
Photos of beautiful women made men rate their wives as less attractive, and feel less committed to their marriages, compared to men who looked at photos of "average" women.[10]
The media also affects men. Performers such as Jerry Seinfeld raise expectations of men's entertainment skills. As media images make women feel inadequately attractive, media entertainers make men feel inadequately entertaining. These men give up and say that they can't dance, sing, or tell jokes. The positive side is less competition for men who try to entertain women. Older men have an advantage here over younger men. Many young women have never had a man make them laugh, lead them on the dance floor, or play Chopin for an audience of one.
Beautiful Young Women Don't Have It Easy
For beautiful young women, the problem is sorting the wheat from the chaff. Finding a quality mate is no easier for them than for anyone else. They spend as much effort rejecting the wrong men as others spend finding men.
In the animal world, females initiate 80% of matings (see Flirting). Males who initiate mating are the males that no female will approach. Men who approach women pick young, beautiful women. Thus, beautiful young women meet more than their share of losers.
If women are too attractive, men stay in their cerebral cortexes. They'll date beautiful women to feel envy from their male friends. They have no reason to shift into their limbic brains and emotionally connect. When men are jerks and women are shallow, they're stuck in their cerebral cortexes.
Putting effort into clothes and make-up will get you more dates, but impair men's vision of your inner beauty, and attract the "wrong" kind of men (those who don't look deeper than the level of physical appearance). The ideal is to look nice, but don't overdo it. If you're getting many dates but aren't meeting quality men, work on improving yourself, not your wardrobe.
Encourage self-selection of potential mates. Tell suitors that you can't go out on a date, but they're welcome to join you volunteering, e.g., with Habitat For Humanity. The few men who show up to work are the ones worth dating.
Education, employment, and relationships are problematic for women. On the one hand, school and work are the most common places where couples meet (see Where Couples Met). Women who go to college and choose a professional career are more likely to meet men (especially if they choose traditionally male fields, e.g., science). And men prefer to marry women with good educations and good jobs.[11]
On the other hand, career women sometimes must sacrifice relationships. E.g., a job may require moving to a new city. Women who choose professional careers postpone marriage until they're out of college and have started their careers&#151;by which time they find that many of their male classmates and co-workers are married.
Conversely, women whose primary goal is to be a mother are least likely to meet men. Such women forego higher education and professional careers. E.g., a woman who loves children may seek employment in childcare&#151;where she works with other women.
Emotional connection makes women want sex. Emotional connection makes men want long-term relationships.
Emotional connection makes men and women switch gender roles (see Becoming a Couple). Individuals who use masculine sexuality (usually, but not always, men) want to have sex with many partners. Individuals who use feminine sexuality (usually, but not always, women) want long-term committed relationships. Emotional connection makes women switch to masculine sexuality, and makes men switch to feminine sexuality.
A man using masculine sexuality shows off his social status, physique, and money to attract women's attention. But that's all stereotyped gender roles can do (attract attention). Once he has a woman's attention, she'll look for relationship skills, entertainment skills (e.g., a sense of humor), and, above all, the emotional connection of "chemistry."
A woman using feminine sexuality shows off her youth and beauty to attract men's attention. But that's all her stereotyped gender role can do. If they don't emotionally connect, he'll date her only as long as he thinks he might get to have sex.
E.g., volunteer with a non-profit organization, take a continuing education class, and participate in a new sport. When a man approaches you in one venue, invite him to do the other activities with you. If you met him in a business computers night class, suggest that he join you volunteering with Habitat For Humanity on Saturday, or at a rock climbing class on Sunday.
He'll see you using a variety of emotions. You may be confident and professional in the business computers class, caring and nurturing with the non-profit organization, and scared&#151;then triumphant&#151;climbing a cliff.
↑ Buss, David M. Evolutionary Psychology (Allyn & Bacon, 1999, ISBN 0-205-19358-7), 136-137.
↑ http://healthland.time.com/2013/06/13/online-dating-women-want-younger-men/
↑ Brin, David. "Neoteny and Two-Way Sexual Selection in Human Evolution."
↑ Rhodes, G. Hickford, C., Jeffrey, L. Sex-typicality and attractiveness: ); Johnson, V.S., Franklin, M. "Is Beauty in the Eye of the Beholder?" Ethology and Sociobiology 14 (1993): 183-199.
↑ Brin, David. "Neoteny and Two-Way Sexual Selection in Human Evolution."
↑ Buss, David M. Evolutionary Psychology (Allyn & Bacon, 1999, ISBN 0-205-19358-7), p. 140.
↑ Singh, D. "Adaptive significance of female physical attractiveness: Role of waist-to-hip ratio," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 293-307.
↑ Buss, David M. Evolutionary Psychology (Allyn & Bacon, 1999, ISBN 0-205-19358-7).
↑ Buss, David M. Evolutionary Psychology (Allyn & Bacon, 1999, ISBN 0-205-19358-7), p. 145.
↑ Buss, David M. Evolutionary Psychology (Allyn & Bacon, 1999, ISBN 0-205-19358-7), p. 154.
↑ Lloyd, K.M., South, S.J. "Contextual Influences on Young Men's Transition to First Marriage," Social Forces, 74 (1996): 1097-1119.
Childhood&#151;Seeking Unconditional Love · Adolescence&#151;Seeking Romantic Love · Adulthood&#151;Families And Forgiveness · Agape&#151;Altruistic Love
Front Page: Radiation Oncology | RTOG Trials | Randomized Trials
2010 PMID 20117284 -- "ASTRO/ACR Practice Guidelines for Image-Guided Radiation Therapy (IGRT)" (Potters L, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2010 Feb 1;76(2):319-25.)
2010 PMID 20117285 -- "ASTRO/ACR Practice Guideline for the Performance of Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy" (Potters L, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2010 Feb 1;76(2):326-32.)
2004 PMID 15519771 -- "ASTRO/ACR practice guideline for the performance of stereotactic body radiation therapy." (Potters L, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2004 Nov 15;60(4):1026-32.)
2010 PMID 21106308 -- "American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO) and American College of Radiology (ACR) Practice Guideline for the Performance of High-Dose-Rate Brachytherapy." (Erickson BA, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010 Nov 22. [Epub ahead of print])
2006 PMID 16472933 -- "Practice guideline for the performance of therapy with unsealed radiopharmaceutical sources." (Dillehay GL, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2006 Apr 1;64(5):1299-307. Epub 2006 Feb 10.)
Flame fractals are a relative of IFS Fractals, that extend the concept to include more complicated transformations.
Flames were first invented by Scott Draves, he has also authored the SETI-at-home-style flame fractal screensaver called 'Electric Sheep'.
A now open-source project to allow editing and rendering of flame fractals, with some interesting developments into 3d flame fractals with extended geometry such as surfaces.
Siu Nim Tau teaches Wing Chun concepts and basic techniques. Without the foundation provided by the concepts, you will not master Wing Chun. The techniques are useful in an unarmed fight.
In this part you learn the proper height and width of your stance.
The Wing Chun basic stance is not a fighting posture—unless you fight with your hands in your armpits—but does demonstrate most of the basics that go into a proper fighting posture. Your weight is balanced in all directions, and you are ready to move in any direction. Your feet are far enough apart that you can't be pushed over easily. With your knees together you can protect your groin against kicks and knees. Your torso is upright and you are looking straight ahead. Your hands are up high enough that it takes some effort to keep them there. Even though they aren't doing anything useful right now, you have to pay attention to keep your hands in position. See the Chum Kiu form's write-up for for discussion of stances.
Once you find your proper posture, keep your legs and torso in position throughout the form. Only your arms move in Siu Nim Tau.
Start by standing straight with your head up, feet together, toes pointing forward, and hands at your sides. It's a loose position of attention.
Raise your arms forward, keeping them straight, until they are at shoulder level. Form your hands into loose fists.
Bring your hands back to the "rest" position, with your fists alongside your chest and almost up to your armpits. The elbows are pointing straight back and the forearms are level with the ground. Keep your torso upright throughout.
While you are moving your arms back, get your legs into the horse stance. Bend your knees. Point your toes out, then swing your heels out. Your feet should be shoulder width apart when you are done, with the toes pointing inward. When you are in horse stance, your weight is evenly balanced left and right and forward and back. Your knees are slightly together.
Without separating wrists, raise and rotate arms to chest level, palms up. Left wrist on top of right.
Bring left fist to the center of your chest, about a fist and a half in front of the chest. Knuckles are up-and-down, with the wrist slightly cocked so the pinky, ring, and middle knuckles form a flat hitting surface. Keep arm muscles relaxed.
Punch forward with the left hand. Hand moves straight forward, directly in front of your breastbone and a little below shoulder height. Punch quickly but keep your arm relaxed until the last six inches of the punch, then snap the hand forward with power. To properly execute the Wing Chun punch the arm must extend fully. Due to the slightly upward motion of the travelling fist the full extension of the arm does not damage the elbow joint if performed correctly. If there is a slight downward arcing of the fist (like with a hammer fist or backfist style strike) then the full extension of the arm will damage the elbow joint (locking out). This is how it is taught from the Ip Man -> Ip Chun lineage. One can visualise this by a darts player throwing one of his darts. The arm moves to full extension in the correct motion without damaging the elbow joint.
Tip: Punch in the air to practice the motions. You can see and practice the movement more clearly if your hand isn't hitting anything.
Tip: Punch a heavy bag. After your technique is good, it's important to practice punches against a real target. It's much harder to keep the punches going so you will improve your strength and endurance. You will also train your hands and arms to take the impact. Practicing only in the air trains your muscles to pull the punch before impact, which is bad technique in a fight or competition.
Tip: Do not punch through the target. Any energy used pushing the target away is wasted and all energy should be directed toward the centre of the opponent, not through them. This is converse to styles such as Karate where breaking is practiced and one must punch through the brick. Ip-Chun demonstrates this by punching a melon. Upon opening the melon the inside is found to have become pulp.
Tip: Keep elbow in when punching. This uses the power of the large muscles of your chest. Demonstrate this by holding your fist in centerline and having someone push it toward you. Compare with pushing against your fist with your arm to the side with your elbow out—a hook punch. The leg, hip and back shape is of paramount importance in absorbing the oncoming force, not just the upper body. One must make sure the entire body posture is correct in order to direct components of the oncoming force into the ground.
Tip: Three inch punch. Your arm should stay relaxed until just before impact. The power of a Wing Chun punch comes from contracting your arm muscles in the last few inches, plus shifting to put your torso's and legs' muscles into it. In training yourself to punch correctly, begin with nine-inch punches. Practice keeping your arm relaxed for most of the distance, only contracting at the end. Once you have the technique down, perform three-inch punches, contracting your muscles the entire distance. Enhance the punch by shifting into it. Advanced practitioners can work on performing one-inch punches and still put decent power into them.
Tip: Practice palm and finger strikes. The mechanics of a palm or finger strike are almost the same as for a punch. Wing Chun has four palm strikes, all demonstrated in Siu Nim Tau, and several finger strikes, of which only the eye gouge is demonstrated in Siu Nim Tau.
Open the hand. Circle the hand around, then return to the rest position.
Tip: For the form, pause after the punch to highlight each movement. When practicing punches outside the form, and especially when sparring or fighting, pull your hand back after striking. If you leave your hand sticking out there, it can be grabbed.
Repeat with the right hand.
Perform this section slowly. It should take at least thirty seconds, and thirty minutes is not unreasonable. (Yes, your arms will be tired after holding them out for fifteen minutes each. That's part of the reason for doing it so slowly.)
As you move your arms, do not move your shoulders.
Tan Sau with left hand, coming to centerline by the time it's extended.
Huen Sau, then bring left hand back in a Jut Sau along centerline until it's about a fist in front of your chest.
Tip: Think of the elbow pulling your hand back. Jut Sau is done with a jerking motion, with the wrist performing the block.
Relax left hand into a Fuk Sau and extend along centerline.
Tip: Think of the hand pulling the arm forward. This simulates riding along the opponent's arm as he retracts it.
Huen Sau and Jut Sau as before.
Fuk Sau as before.
Jut Sau as before.
Turn left hand so fingers point upward and palm is to the right. Bring hand to left shoulder then return to centerline. Extend hand forward in an upper palm strike. Turn palm up, Huen Sau, then return left hand to rest position.
Application: Use your arm when doing the palm strike to control your opponent's arm. Compare elbow position with the spade hand and choose a strike according to where your opponent's arm is.
Note: It's traditional to wu sau to your opposite shoulder. We have you go to the same shoulder because an outer wu sau combined with an upper palm strike control the opponent's arm better.
Repeat with the right hand.
You can defend all around yourself without turning to face the attacker.
Left hand Gum Sau next to the left hip.
Right hand Gum Sau next to the right hip.
Both hands strike diagonally down and backward behind waist.
Application: This can be a bladder strike against someone close behind you.
Application: The Gum Saus to the sides followed by the rear strike can break a grab around the waist from the rear.
Perform a double Gum Sau to the front.
Application: As with most double-arm motions in Wing Chun forms, the double Gum Sau is for stylistic reasons. In a fight you will normally block with one hand while attacking with the other.
Bring forearms horizontally up in front of face, left over right, with left hand pointing to the right and right hand pointing to the left.
Extend arms to the sides, fingers pointed for maximum reach.
Application: This can be a block, an attack, or a "keep away" move.
Application: Changing from left over right to right over left suggests the technique of pressing your opponent's arms against his chest with one arm while striking him high with the other. After the strike, drop that hand to cover the opponent's arms and strike with the formerly covering arm.
Drop elbows and move hands forward into a double Jong Sau.
Application: Jong Sau, or Structure Hand, is the forward half of Wing Chun's Ready stance. (The rear half is Wu Sau.)
Application: Jong Sau can block an incoming centerline strike merely by being along centerline. The opponent will to go through or around your arm to hit you.
Turn both palms up in a double Tok Sau.
Application: Tok Sau, or Elbow Lifting Hand, is used when your blocking hand is below an incoming high punch. It is a soft alternative to the hard High Bong Sau block of a hook punch.
Turn both palms down.
Application: The arms are in the ending position of Biu Sau. Similar to Jong Sau, Biu Sau can block simply by being in the way of a punch. Biu Sau also works similarly to Tan Sau, with much of the effectiveness coming from forward motion.
Application: Wrist blocks are an advanced technique because they require greater precision and power than the basics.
Application: See also Bil Jie for more applications of wrist blocks.
Thrust fingers forward in an eye strike.
Low double wrist block. (TODO - figure out the Chinese name)
Application: The monkey paw strike is similar to an upper-cut punch. It doesn't have as much power, but it has slightly longer range. Arm and elbow position are slightly different, so it might be faster to go from a block to a monkey paw rather than to an upper cut.
Rear guard hand in case you miss with the front hand.
Follow up a defensive move with an attack.
Left hand Wu Sau to right shoulder. Return hand to centerline.
Left hand spade hand to the front. Palm up, Huen Sau, then return to rest.
Application: You can use your striking arm to control your opponent's arm after you deflect his punch.
Repeat with other hand.
Cover different areas with minimal motion.
If your hand is high and you need to block a low strike, you can move just your forearm and hand and still cover the low area. More generally, this section demonstrates the principle of using as little effort as possible to attack and defend.
Perform a Tan Sau with left hand, bringing hand to shoulder height.
Tip: Do not shift with the Tan Sau.
Application: Tan Sau blocks medium-to-high strikes coming from the front. The useful range is from the middle of the ribs to the top of the head.
Application: Tan Sau is often performed with a shift toward the blocking hand or with a side step away from the blocking hand. The combination of block and movement will keep you from being hit by even a powerful strike.
Application: Tan Sau is often performed with a punch with the other hand.
Without moving anything except the left forearm, perform a left hand Gahn Sau.
Application: Gahn Sau blocks low hand strikes, from around the bottom of the ribs to around hip level.
Application: Gahn Sau is normally performed with a shift toward the blocking hand.
Without moving anything except the left forearm, perform a left hand Tan Sau.
Note: This isn't a "real" Tan Sau because the arm is moving outward, not forward. The principle of Immovable Elbow is the key point.
Huen Sau with the left hand, going from palm up to palm forward with the fingers to the left.
Perform a left hand Side Palm Strike at rib level. Turn palm up, Huen Sau, and return left hand to rest position.
Application: It is not necessary to bring the hand back from Tan Sau position before performing the side palm strike. Beginners may wish to get the extra travel distance to gain power, but you should practice to develop power with as little travel as possible. See "Three-inch Punch", above.
Repeat the section with the right hand.
Demonstrate how to flow around a strong attack.
Relieving pressure. Because Wing Chun is usable by a smaller person against a larger, stronger one, an important principle is flowing around the opponent's strength. This is called relieving pressure. When an attack is too strong for you to block, shift, get to the other side of the strike, and let it flow past you.
Bong Sau and Tan Sau easily flow into each other. If a punch is breaking down your Bong Sau structure, pivot the arm around the contact point to a Tan Sau and shift to facing the other way. Your new Tan Sau should steer the punch past you.
Left hand Bong Sau. Right hand stays in rest position. Don't shift or otherwise move.
Application: The Bong Sau doesn't lend itself to a strike with the other hand. Normally you will use a Bong Sau just long enough to deflect a strike, then shift into something else. ("Bong Sau comes and goes like the wind.") You may also kick while blocking.
Left hand rolls into Tan Sau. Shoulder and wrist don't move.
Application: You can use a Bong Sau to relieve pressure from a Tan Sau as well.
Application: When actually relieving pressure from a strike, you normally shift or step to get your body out of the way.
After a slight pause, drop fingers and do a left hand Low Palm Strike. Palm up, Huen Sau, return left hand to rest position.
Tip: The pause is partly to point out that the Tan Sau and the Low Palm Strike are separate moves. The pause also allows you to get your hand into proper position for a hard strike and to focus your intention.
Left arm Gahn Sau, stopping with the wrist at centerline.
Application: Normally you would shift along with the block. For purposes of the form, do not shift.
Place outer edge of right hand at outer side of left elbow, palm up. Simultaneously do four things: pull left arm to the left; twist left hand so it's palm up; scrape right hand down left forearm; rotate right hand to palm down.
Application: The simultaneous move-and-twists are for escaping a grab. If you can, start breaking the grab before it's firm on your arm; it's much harder to get away from a grip than from a reach.
Repeat, switching left and right.
Repeat the first way.
Three quick centerline punches, left right left.
Tip: Thousand punches: Perform 100 punches, alternating hands. Leave a slight pause between each punch. After the 100, shake it out and rest a moment. Then perform 200 punches, two at a time. Punches can alternate hands or be with the same hand. If you punch twice in a row with the same hand, make sure each punch has proper form and each punch has a snap. After the 100 sets of two, shake it out and rest a moment. Then perform 300 punches, 100 sets of three. Rest. Then perform 400 punches, 100 sets of four. This exercise trains you to punch rapidly yet forcefully—very useful in competition or fights. Don't start practicing this until you have good form for your punch. Otherwise you'll just be practicing bad form.
Application: Multiple attacks—don't rely on a single powerful strike.
Application: More generally, Wing Chun does not rely on size or power to block or strike. If a move cannot be successfully performed by a small woman against a large man, it's not being done right.
Bring your hands back from punching position and cross your wrists in front of your chest. Continue bringing your fists back, up, and forward, dropping your elbows as you do so. Bring your fists back to the rest position. At the same time straighten your legs, bring your left foot to the right, and push your hands down past your hips. You will end up in a loose position of attention, the same as the starting position and a few inches to the right.
Perform the form with the "warrior mind". Think of how to apply each move. Imagine an attack coming and picture yourself blocking it. Most importantly, don't simply go through the form's motions while you're thinking about work or your favorite TV show.
Once you have learned Siu Nim Tau, practice it in different positions. Practicing in deep horse stance is an obvious variant, strengthening your legs without needing other changes. Doing the form while sitting lets you get practice in when you have a few minutes to kill. It also trains you to fight while sitting, which is a useful skill.
Wing Chun forms are textbooks, not mock fights. While the forms in many other martial arts run through a series of moves as if you were going against an opponent, Wing Chun forms simply demonstrate the concepts and basic moves of the style. If you're ever practicing or looking for holes in your personal style, go back to the forms. Look for basic moves that you're leaving out. Review your technique in light of the concepts.
Wing Chun is designed so a smaller person can defeat a larger, stronger attacker. Most techniques are designed around this principle: flow around the opponent, using soft blocks rather than hard, relieving pressure rather than resisting it, using many lighter punches rather than a single fight-ending power punch. If a technique will not work for a smaller person fighting against a larger, it's not Wing Chun.
There are several difficulties in Siu Nim Tau. First of all, this is the first Wing Chun form you learn. Many Wing Chun concepts, such as center line theory, are not common. Whether or not you have other martial arts experience, it may take a while to fit these concepts into your style.
Wing Chun has a great many blocks. Many of them are variations on a theme, and almost all of them work on the principle of gently steering an opponent's attack away from center line. Which block to use depends on where the attack is coming from and where your hands are in relation to the attack. You do not plan ahead to use a Bong Sau followed by a Tok Sau to block the next two attacks; you use whatever block comes naturally from positioning.
Performing Siu Nim Tau is both easy and difficult. It is easy compared to other forms–no jumping, no difficult timing between moves. On the other hand, the form is so clean and straightforward that every move has to be precise, a balance between crispness and smooth flow. If you are performing in front of an experienced practitioner, you'll have to be good. Any mistakes will be obvious because there is nothing to distract the audience.
Wing Chun is not a "sided" style. All moves in Siu Nim Tau are performed with each hand, either simultaneously or one after the other. (Normally they will not be performed simultaneously outside the form. Simultaneous execution is only for demonstration of technique.) This carries through to later forms, where almost all techniques are demonstrated to both sides. (The few which aren't done on both sides could be.)
There are many different ways to prove things in mathematics. This chapter will introduce some of those methods.
The word "conscience" can be thought of as a blend of personal morals and society-forming instincts that are related to ethics.
Morals are not ethics. Morals are associated with a person. Ethics are associated with a group.
Lawyers -- "Uphold the Law"
Engineers -- "Create Standards"
Doctors, Lawyers and Engineers take tests, go through trial periods or clinics and then possibly take another test. The exact details are determined by state law, not federal law. The AMA tracks state differences and administers licensing for doctors, the ABA for lawyers and the NCESS for engineers. Engineers typically take an FE test after their junior or senior years, work as an engineer for 3 or 4 years, and then take the PE test. PE tests are unique to the state and the field they are working in.
After passing the PE test, engineers get a stamp, similar to a notary. About 1/3 of engineers end up in fields that are subject to state law and thus need to become PEs. The rest are working in fields that have no laws associated with them yet. The goal of the engineers working in new fields is to create standards and advocate for laws that expand engineering professionalism.
Doctors, Lawyers and Engineers are given special privileges and benefits. In return, Doctors, Lawyers and Engineers have special responsibilities. The benefits can be grouped into:
This is a service hierarchy. This means for example, if an engineer had to choose between saving lives and obeying the law, engineers save lives. If an engineer had to choose between making other engineers in the firm look good or themselves look good, they make other engineers look good. The individual engineer is last, not first.
The role of an engineer after a disaster is to improve standards and best practice so that future disasters are prevented. Courts assign blame. Typically the client or the firm is responsible for the consequences, not the individual engineer.
Professional Engineers (PE's) review disasters and ethical issues in the context of the service hierarchy above and evolving standards.
Hearing is one of the five senses. The ears are used for hearing sounds. It is harder to hear a sound made farther away. It is also harder to hear a sound when other sounds are louder.
Sounds pass into the ear. They make the eardrum vibrate. That makes tiny bones in the ear move. The bones move a small tube shaped like a snail shell, called the cochlea. Inside the cochlea is a fluid, which moves tiny hairs that send signals to the brain.
Reduce your risk of heart disease and stroke by walking regularly. It’s great aerobic exercise, lowering levels of LDL (bad) cholesterol while increasing levels of HDL (good) cholesterol. The Stroke Association says that a brisk 30-minute walk every day helps to prevent and control the high blood pressure that causes strokes, reducing the risk by up to 27 percent.
The family is the basic unit of society and is important to both individuals and communities. The world is rapidly changing, making today's society much more complex than ever before. As Scouts earn this merit badge, they will realize why it is important to know more about family life and how to strengthen their families.
Prepare an outline on what a family is and discuss this with your merit badge counselor. Tell why families are important to individuals and to society. Discuss how the actions of one member can affect other members.
List several reasons why you are important to your family and discuss this with your parents or guardians and with your merit badge counselor.
Prepare a list of your regular home duties or chores (at least five) and do them for 90 days. Keep a record of how often you do each of them. Discuss with your counselor the effect your chores had on your family.
With the approval of your parents or guardians and your merit badge counselor, decide on and carry out a project that you would do around the home that would benefit your family. Submit a report to your merit badge counselor outlining how the project benefited your family.
Plan and carry out a project that involves the participation of your family. After completing the project, discuss the following with your merit badge counselor:
a. The objective or goal of the project
b. How individual members of your family participated
c. The results of the project
a. Discuss with your merit badge counselor how to plan and carry out a family meeting.
b. After this discussion, plan and carry out a family meeting to include the following subjects:
Avoiding substance abuse, including tobacco, alcohol, and drugs, all of which negatively affect your health and well-being
Understanding the growing-up process and how the body changes, and making responsible decisions dealing with sex*
How your chores in requirement 3 contributed to your role in the family
The effect of technology on your family
*This conversation may take place with only one or both of your parents or guardians.
Discuss with your counselor your understanding of what makes an effective parent and why, and your thoughts on the parent's role and responsibilities in the family.
Source: scoutbook.com/mobile
Family Life Merit Badge with Workbook PDF, current requirements, and resources.
Merit Badges Required to Attain Eagle Scout
Camping | Citizenship in the Community | Citizenship in the Nation | Citizenship in the World | Communications | Cooking | Cycling OR Hiking OR Swimming | Emergency Preparedness OR Lifesaving | Environmental Science OR Sustainability | Family Life | First Aid | Personal Fitness | Personal Management |
Citizenship in the Community | Citizenship in the Nation | Citizenship in the World | Communications | Family Life | Personal Fitness | Personal Management | Public Speaking | Reading | Scholarship
American Business | American Cultures | American Heritage | American Labor | Animal Science | Animation | Archaeology | Archery | Architecture | Art | Astronomy | Athletics | Automotive Maintenance | Aviation | Backpacking | Basketry | Bird Study | Bugling | Camping | Canoeing | Chemistry | Chess | Citizenship in the Community | Citizenship in the Nation | Citizenship in the World | Climbing | Coin Collecting | Collections | Communications | Composite Materials | Cooking | Crime Prevention | Cycling | Dentistry | Digital Technology | Disabilities Awareness | Dog Care | Drafting | Electricity | Electronics | Emergency Preparedness | Energy | Engineering | Entrepreneurship | Environmental Science | Family Life | Farm Mechanics | Fingerprinting | Fire Safety | First Aid | Fish and Wildlife Management | Fishing | Fly Fishing | Forestry | Game Design | Gardening | Genealogy | Geocaching | Geology | Golf | Graphic Arts | Hiking | Home Repairs | Horsemanship | Indian Lore | Insect Study | Inventing | Journalism | Kayaking | Landscape Architecture | Law | Leatherwork | Lifesaving | Mammal Study | Medicine | Metalwork | Mining in Society | Model Design and Building | Motorboating | Moviemaking | Music | Nature | Nuclear Science | Oceanography | Orienteering | Painting | Personal Fitness | Personal Management | Pets | Photography | Pioneering | Plant Science | Plumbing | Pottery | Programming | Public Health | Public Speaking | Pulp and Paper | Radio | Railroading | Reading | Reptile and Amphibian Study | Rifle Shooting | Rowing | Safety | Salesmanship | Scholarship | Scouting Heritage | Scuba Diving | Sculpture | Search & Rescue | Shotgun Shooting | Signs, Signals & Codes | Skating | Small-Boat Sailing | Snow Sports | Soil and Water Conservation | Space Exploration | Sports | Stamp Collecting | Surveying | Sustainability | Swimming | Textile | Theater | Traffic Safety | Truck Transportation | Veterinary Medicine | Water Sports | Weather | Welding | Whitewater | Wilderness Survival | Wood Carving | Woodwork
What is the background to this research?
Late-onset Pompe disease is the less-severe form of the disease, it displays various clinical features. Symptoms at onset are displayed in table 1. (1)
Diffuse myalgias, muscle cramps
The disease is progressive, and variable between patients. All patients will experience progressive muscle atrophy and weakness, especially in lower limbs. Some individuals may maintain a relatively independent lifestyle, while others often become wheelchair-bound. In any form, this is a disease that greatly reduces physical capability and independence.
The research conducted in this study is relatively new. Late-onset Pompe disease is rare, affecting ~1 in 58,000 per year (1). Furthermore, the enzyme replacement treatment (ERT) was only introduced in 2006 (2). The article points to and references only 1 comparable study into the treatment of late-onset Pompe disease with well-structured exercise (3). The authors regularly make reference to the absence of significant research in this selected field.
There is significant demand for treatment and managing of the disease for those suffering from late-onset Pompe disease. Increasing muscle function and functional capacity increase independence and standard of living for those affected. Exercise is cheap and manageable treatment, reducing individual cost and healthcare burden.
The authors of this study are from Greece. They collectively represent The University of Athens, The University of Thrace and Eginition Hospital.
The research undertaken is a clinical trial that evaluates treatment, in this case exercise, by observing participant outcomes on a prescribed schedule. The schedule being a 20 week long prescribed, monitored and professionally delivered exercise program.
What did the research involve?
Firstly, the approval for the study was secured from the Ethics Committee of the Eginition University Hospital. The authors then gained written consent from five individuals clinically diagnosed with late-onset Pompe disease. Participants were then taken through tests to determine baseline data. This testing procedure is standardised, highly replicable and adequately assesses it's set aims.
Maximum isometric strength was determined in a laboratory setting with the use of a Tesys 800, Globus Sport and Health Technologies load transducer set at a known resistance.
Body composition was determined using a DEXA scan, the gold standard for anthropometry.
Functional capacity was assessed with a 6-minute walking test (6MWT).
Following this, participants were taken through their exercise program with the supervision of a qualified and suitable instructor 3 days per week at home. The exercise program in its duration is shown below in table 2.
1–2 sets/10 reps/50% 10 RM
In order to gauge the effect of this training program on maximum isometric strength, body composition and functional capacity, the same initial tests were conducted. Data was collected and compared using statistical analysis. Paired t-tests were used to identify differences from pre to post training program results. The Pearson's r product moment correlation coefficient allowed the relationships between variables to be assessed. A two-tailed probability value of less than 0.05 was deemed significant. Statistical analysis was carried out with SPSS version 15.0.
What were the basic results?
In terms of correlations, there was a positive correlation between GAA and LBM in the lower body. This correlation was statistically significant in the upper body. A significant correlation was not found between lower-extremity strength and 6MWT. Correlation coefficients were significant between LBM and maximum isometric strength.
What conclusions can we take from this research?
The study has shown that tailored and prescribed exercise can be a useful means of increasing muscular strength and functional capacity for late-onset Pompe disease patients. These benefits were experienced by all participants and should be looked upon as a success. The exercise program did not yield effects upon body composition.
The reliability of this study would improve with an increased sample size. There is a clear lack of research on this topic and further studies should be conducted.
The results of this study are encouraging and should result in exercise becoming part of all late-onset Pompe disease patients treatment and lifestyle.
In addition to the need of greater sample size and a wider research base, there a few further considerations. The training program could be experimented with to increase the diversity of training methods. Progression ceased after the first 3 weeks, in line with progressive overload training loads (however modest) should continue to test participants. In addition, this study makes no reference to participant diet. This could perhaps explain no changes in body composition.
The Pompe Community is a very useful tool and support network that can be utilised by people suffering from this disease.
The National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) is a similarly helpful resource that provides a range of information and ways to get in touch with experts in the field.
Di Iorio, G., Cipullo, F., Stromillo, L., Sodano, L., Capone, E., & Farina, O. (2011). S1.3 Adult-onset Pompe disease. Acta Myologica, 30(3), 200–202.
Kazi, Z. B., Prater, S. N., Kobori, J. A., Viskochil, D., Bailey, C., Gera, R., … Kishnani, P. S. (2016). Durable and sustained immune tolerance to ERT in Pompe disease with entrenched immune responses. JCI Insight, 1(11), e86821. http://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.86821
A.E. Slonim, L. Bulone, T. Goldberg, J. Mikekes, E. Slonim, J. Galanko, F. Martiniuk
Modification of the natural history of adult-onset acid maltase deficiency by nutrition and exercise therapy
Terzis, G., Dimopoulos, F., Papadimas, G. K., Papadopoulos, C., Spengos, K., Fatouros, I., ... & Manta, P. (2011). Effect of aerobic and resistance exercise training on late-onset Pompe disease patients receiving enzyme replacement therapy. Molecular genetics and metabolism, 104(3), 279-283.
Novial home – Pronunciation Guide
Perl is a programming language designed by Larry Wall, known today for its strong community and module archive CPAN. It was originally developed to process text and produce reports. As a result, a backronym has been formed from its name: Practical Extraction and Report Language. It makes extensive use of significant punctuation, and highly chaotic-looking code has been written in it. This has resulted in a less complimentary backronym (which is still embraced by Perl users): Pathologically Eclectic Rubbish Lister (said to be a quote from the language designer himself).
Perl is Free Software, available under the Artistic License and the GPL.
It was developed on Unix, and its Unix roots are pervasive. Perl is available for most operating systems but is particularly prevalent on Unix and Unix-like systems, and is growing in popularity on Microsoft Windows systems. However, it has been ported to a multitude of environments (some say as many as Java). It's a popular systems administration tool in Windows. Most of the things done in Perl transfer well from one operating system to another (provided suggested conventions are followed).
As an example of Perl in action, until January 2002 the software running Wikipedia was a CGI script written in Perl (Usemod programmed by Clifford Adams; still available at http://usemod.com).
Another example is Slashdot, which runs on the Perl-based Slashcode software.
When used on the web, Perl is often used in conjunction with the Apache web server and its mod_perl module. This embeds the Perl binary into the webserver so the CGI script need not fire up a new copy each time it's accessed. Other features such as database connection persistence greatly reduce the access times to the page.
The Perl programming language was created by Larry Wall in 1987. It borrows features from C, sed, awk, shell scripting (sh), and (to a lesser extent) from many other programming languages as well. The name is normally capitalized ("Perl") when referring to the language, but not capitalized ("perl") when referring to the interpreter (e.g. "Only perl properly parses Perl.")
Perl was designed to be a practical language to extract information from text files and generate reports. One of its mottos is There is more than one way to do it (TIMTOWTDI - pronounced 'Tim Toady'). Another is Perl: the Swiss Army Chainsaw of Programming Languages. One stated design goal is to make easy tasks easy and difficult tasks possible. Its versatility permits versions of many programming paradigms: procedural, functional, and object-oriented — though purists object to Perl's as it is not a cleanly designed language. Perl has a powerful regular expression support built in directly to the syntax. Perl is often considered the archetypal scripting language and has been called the "glue that holds the web together", as it is one of the most popular CGI languages. Its function as a "glue language" can be described broadly as its ability to tie together different systems and data structures that were not designed to be tied together.
This chapter provides tools to describe tools for finding map that track particles in em fields.
There are several way of tracking a particle in accelerator physics. Each one has different goal and needs its own approximation. Here there is a possible classification.
In their evolution particles experience the following physical process:
The approximation used is too neglect the extension of the space time.
Codes are dmjet, pythia.
Codes are geant, mars, fluka.
Codes are mad, ptc, tracy.
Codes are sixtrack.
Codes are orbit, elegant,headtail, warp.
Codes are sixtrack,teapot.
In the following, we concentrate on tracking for short term analysis and long term simulation that shares the need of keeping the mathematical structure of the equations exact.
If the em fields are easily approximated by discontinuous vector field occupying a well defined not overlapping region, the tracking problem can be approached by a composition of discrete steps. Each step is the exact solution of the equation of motion between the boundary of the region. The region type may be
a region of zero volume defined by one surface
a region enclosed by two parallel plane surfaces
a region enclosed by two not parallel plane surfaces
a region enclosed by general surfaces.
The program is to find out which kind of field and region allows the motion to be solved exactly and how to find those fields and regions that approximate the real field.
A particle in the vacuum has four degree of freedom and the rest mass therefore can identified by the quantities:
.
The least action principle and the isotropy the space and homogeneity of time implies:
.
, if one wants to keep the same structure for the equation of motion, one has to substitute
The equation of motion are not exactly solvable in a bounded region in the general case. Solvable cases are:
.
Zero volume surface with infinite field. The motion is a change of momentum but not a change of coordinate:
Being exact, the resulting map (maybe containing infinite terms) should be symplectic by construction.
Uniform em field with parallel boundaries. Examples are ideal dipoles or solenoid magnet.
Since the motion can be exactly determined, the resulting map (maybe containing infinite terms) should be symplectic by construction.
. A particular case is the kick drift approximation or the generalized Yoshida symplectic integrator.
When tracking a single single charged particle through a magnetic field, if it accelerates, it will emit radiation.
This is particularly important when tracking electrons. Actually, the effect of radiation is typically split into two distinct pieces, a deterministic energy loss, and a stochastic part resulting from the quantization of the outgoing electromagnetic field (photons).
First we describe the deterministic part. We use a high energy approximation in which the energy and momentum are related by E=P/c. The power radiated by a charged particle in a magnetic field is given by
. Using the relation
, one finds that the change in the energy deviation is given by
. This is the formula used in e.g. Accelerator Toolbox and Tracy. Now that the change in energy (momentum) has been computed, the changes in the transverse momenta x', y' may be correspondingly computed. This is done by noting that
Even though there are numerous drugs to kill bacteria, there always remains a small percentage that cannot be killed with the available medicines. Scientists have found intercellular proteins in the cell membranes, called multidrug-resistance (MDR) pumps, which are believed to be self-defense mechanisms. MDRs arise from three different gene families and are widespread in bacteria.
In bacteria,multidrug-resistance pumps confer resistance to chemically unrelated amphipathic toxins. A major challenge in developing efficacious antibiotics is identifying antimicrobial compounds that are not rapidly pumped out of bacterial cells. The plant antimicrobial berberine, the active component of the medicinal plants echinacea and golden seal, is a cation that is readily extruded by bacterial MDRs, thereby rendering it relatively ineffective as a therapeutic agent.
Multidrug efflux pumps have other physiological functions: AcrB of E.Coli, main physiological function is to protect bacteria against bile salts since E.Coli can be found in the intestines. In addition, bile salts have affinity to AcrB transporters
These pumps are found in almost all living organisms, and have a multitude of roles, including moving the body’s natural molecules in and out of cells. In humans, they can be found within the membranes of the brain, liver, kidneys, and digestive tract.[1]
These MDR pumps not only work in bacteria, but unfortunately, also in cancerous cells. The cancerous cells can fend off the chemotherapy drugs by pumping them out of the cell, allowing evasion of cell death.[1]
Kim Lewis of Northeastern University in Boston conducted an experiment to test the hypothesis that the MDR pump is indeed responsible for bacterial evasion of antibiotics. In his experiment, he genetically changed the bacterium Staphylococcus aureus to not have the MDR pump. He then treated this altered bacteria with berberine antibiotic, which is normally very futile against the unaltered bacteria. He saw that the antibiotic actually worked against these bacteria. Lewis also saw that if this usually weak antibiotic was given concurrently with MDR pump inhibitors, unaltered Staphylococcus aureus bacteria would be killed. These results implicate that the missing or deactivated MDR pump prove very critical in the bacteria’s protection and survival.[1]
AcrB and its homologues are the major multidrug efflux transporter systems, and it captures some of its substrates from the periplasm in E. coli and other Gram-negative organisms. AcrB forms a complex with AcrA and an outer membrane protein channel, TolC, which harnesses proton-motive force, to export a wide variety of compounds across the periplasmic space to the exterior of the cell.
Although AcrB is a homotrimer, it can undergo structural changes in which each subunit exhibits different conformations that interconvert to move toxic compounds from the initial binding site out of the transporter.[2]
AcrB works with an outer membrane channel TolC and a membrane fusion protein AcrA. This complex removes many types of chemicals that may be toxic to the cell in a reaction that is powered by proton-motive force.
AcrB transports drugs by a three-step functionally rotating mechanism in which drugs undergo an ordered change in binding.[3] The first conformation is the access state. This is where the vestibule is open to the periplasm to allow the substrate to enter into the complex. The second conformation is the binding state. In this state, the binding pocket is expanded and the substrate binds to different locations in the pocket. The third conformation is the extrusion state. The vestibule is close and the exit is opened. The bound drug is pushed out into the top of the funnel allowing the AcrB protomer to shrink and return to the first stage of the mechanism, the access state.
These conformational changes in the trimer are powered by the proton motive force across the membrane through the involvement of three chraged residues, Aspartate-407, 408, and Lysine-940, making charge pair in the membrane-embedded region.[3] In the access and binding state, the side chain of Lysine-940 forms a salt bridge with the carboxy-groups of Aspartate-407 and Aspartate-408. This salt bridge is then dissociated in the extrustion state and the Lysine side chain is turned and tilted to form a new polar bond with Threonine-978 where a proton may be attached. To return to the access state, the bound proton is dissociated. These residues,Aspartate-407, 408, and Lysine-940, are essential for exporting drugs and without them the cell would be at a complete loss of drug resistance.
Because this complex has a trimer of AcrB, it expels three drugs consecutively. As the first protomer of AcrB is in the access state, the second protomer is in the binding state, and the third protomer is in the extrustion state. The change in conformation of one protomer affects the conformation of another. This conformation cycle where one protomer affects another can be explained by the principle of cooperativity.
Multidrug resistance came about after the development of drugs because bacteria soon became anti resistant. There are two forms of multidruge resistance occurring. The first way is by genes coding for resistance on R plasmids or transposons. The second way is by efflux pumps which are able to pump out one or more drugs at a time. Bacteria can also become resistant due to mutations that distort the protein so that it is less susceptible to the drug. Sometimes resistance can be transferred by cells passing it to other cells on their plasmids. Other times, the resistance is due to target modification such as a substrate binding onto the protein and altering its shape. For example, Tet(M) or Tet(S) protein bind to ribosomes and change the conformation to prevent the drug from binding to them. Resistance genes also came from microorganisms in the soil because of the evolutionary origin of degradation genes because they use antibiotics as nutrients. An example of when genes are expressed from plasmids are integrons, which contains a gene coding, and is catalytic for the insertion of resistance genes at certain sites on the R plasmids. ISCR delivers resistant genes to integrons to make more resistance genes. Sometimes R plasmids are stable and have a killer element which if the plasmid is loss, then the cell dies. Lastly, multidrug resistance occurs in antibiotic treated patients because when they are sick, they may get into a resistant state without genetic change. Genetic change and mutations is what makes bacteria become resistant to drugs.
"Multidrug Resistance in Bacteria." National Institutions of Health.http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2839888/
"Medicine by Design." National Institutions of Health. http://www.nigms.nih.gov. July 2006.
Von Heijne and Rees. Current Opinion in Structural Biology ,18:405. August 2008.
"Multidrug efflux transporter, AcrB-the pumping mecahnism." Murakami, Satoshi. Current Opinion in Structural Biology, 18:459-465. August 2008.
For purposes of this book we'll ignore a few things.
Modern FPGAs are designed to minimize clock skew. In a system with a large number of edge-sensitive flip-flops all watching the same clock, you might imagine that if the clock had to travel some distance, that edge would arrive at different flip-flops at different times. In the worst case, that time difference might mean that a D-input failed to satisfy the setup and hold times relative to the clock edge for one or more flip-flops, and as a result, the circuit's behavior was unpredictable. This is a concern for logic circuits spanning several boards with several chips on each board. But within a single FPGA, clock skew can safely be ignored because FPGA manufacturers are careful to provide clock distribution circuitry that keeps all the edges in close alignment.
Fan-out...
Parasitic effects...
Transmission line effects...
Asynchronous logic...
An Antecedent not possessed but still captured among the group The Belle paid homage to trials, rites, and rituals and all seasons of life. An apportionment redistricting like this ole vest had us blocked at every turn, and Scott, was affectionately known to preach good humor and understanding at large. Manny Treijo and the Christian ministry were all up against nothing less than a fiasco as when a luxury liner set to embark on its final voyage as though their living did as well not matter.
And because Black lives matter I awoke. I couldn’t sleep a more perfect resolve renegading a group of survivors upward, and with nobility towards a cities open common wealth and more opportune rule of order. Sacramento had become a place of worship. As the city of trees it reminded me of deeper southern states like Washington or Tennessee or even Atlanta. I believed they were progressive states and only did I rediscover that they could be inhabited or escaped for economic purposes.
Pre constructivist like Pres. Barack Obama championed aid from future outcomes such as Psychological Corporations and other companies feeding as though their lens weren’t discolored like Future Gem. $1 Billion in federal aid was carbon captured as Sequestration and lost wages. The Container of scale was not proportionate of its resolve; and considered substantiation. The continuum dictates that there is no scale a must.
What can I expect? Of course Spelling is all about rules: doubling or not doubling consonants, possessives and contractions, -ence versus –ance, and I befor e for example. The purpose is not to under communicate the complex language its problem is a literal hope and evocation of trust.
As we have just defined, the practical theoretical logic dictates that there is a governing logic which supports post-modernist societies but not inasmuch primitive life. Its differentiation is conditioned by one’s ability to decipher a text as a rubric or grid unintelligibly. [1]
But like the classical conditioning of our frameworks theorist we would not have constructivist or the ability to pay for our relativity. A Transformative System is a support Network established to incorporate the individual and indemnify the Venturing Partnership from piracy and copyrighted freedoms.[2]
Language is probably the best window we have on the workings of the human mind. Language gives us the extraordinary ability to describe the contents of our thoughts, an ability that no other animal has. Of course there are many unconscious aspects to cognition that we cannot talk about, but these properties are apparently also reflected in what we say. The units of language — elements of form, words, grammatical patterns, conventions of usage — are in some sense also units of cognition. The implication is that the study of what all languages share is also the study of what it is to be human, something that is certainly an important topic for any educated person.
An ambiguity often of someones abstractedness. I am reminded of a draft. Not fulfilled by its solidarity but enabled by the present it is combined only with manner able improvements.
Our lexicography is designed to help us speak and be supported by acts of kindness. An ordinary example is a formal diction that willingly is not over communicable but worthier of peer discussion and social demarcation.
Enable youth to receive non-traditional text produced by newly circumventing practices no longer believed as controversial.
↑ The Savage Mind. University of Chicago Press. pp. 107. ISBN : 9780226474847. http://www.press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/S/bo3641764.html. Retrieved 12 January 2016.
↑ Ecology and Society:A Theory of Transformative agency linked to social ecology.. Vol18. http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol18/iss3/art27/. Retrieved 12 January 2016.
If XSLTForms is installed correctly, the following form (or something very similar to it) should work.
<?xml-stylesheet href="xsltforms/xsltforms.xsl" type="text/xsl"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
The form includes an xml-stylesheet processing instruction (line 1, highlighted). The value of the href pseudo-attribute should be a relative reference to the xsltforms.xsl stylesheet. The example assumes that the XSLTForms library is installed in the subdirectory xsltforms; the value of the relative reference will need to vary depending on the relative location of the library, vis-a-vis the location of the form. In another context, for example, the processing instruction might read <?xml-stylesheet href="../../../lib/xsltforms-1.0RC2/xsltforms.xsl" type="text/xsl"?>.
Step 4. Defining the Network and Resources
Now we will add objects describing the network and resources available in it.
Add Network object onto the diagram. To add a object of the library on the diagram, first open the library palette (Enterprise Library stencil of the Palette view), then click on the object in the library stencil and finally, click in the graphical editor where you want to place the object.
Network object defines the network. Please refer to Enterprise Library Reference Guide for the description of all the Enterprise Library objects. You can find there all object functions and their parameters. To open Enterprise Library Reference Guide, choose the corresponding item from the AnyLogic Help. To open Help window, choose Help|Help Contents from AnyLogic menu.
Set the object properties. Specify the group containing shapes standing for network nodes and links. Thus we associate the defined network structure with this Network object. Choose networkGroup as the Group of network shapes:
Now we will add library objects defining pools of network resources. The resources may be of three types: moving, portable and static. In our example, doctors are moving resources, scopes are portable resources, and procedure rooms are the static ones.
Add NetworkResourcePool object on the diagram. NetworkResourcePool describes resources of a particular type. This one will describe doctor resources. Set the following object properties:
Name the object doctor.
Specify the home location of the resource. Moving resource unit returns there if it gets idle. In our model doctors spare one private office space, so we leave the default value of the Home defined by property (Single node) unchanged.
Type staffRooom (the name of the rectangle representing the staffroom) in the Home node edit box.
Set shapeDoctor as Idle unit animation shape and Busy unit animation shape.
Add one more NetworkResourcePool object to describe procedure room resources. Set the following object properties:
Name the object procRoom.
Change the Resource type to Static.
A static resource always resides at its home location. There can be a number of resource home locations. In this case you need to draw a polyline with points lying in the corresponding rectangles and specify it as the object’s Home path. We have three procedure rooms in our model, so we should use this approach.
Choose Path across nodes in the Home defined by property.
In the Home path edit box, specify roomsLocation polyline created beforehand for this purpose.
Specify that the resource object has the number of resource units equal to the number of points of the specified polyline. Therefore, choose By home shape option in the Capacity defined property.
In the same way, add NetworkResourcePool object to describe ophthalmoscope resources. Set the following object properties:
Name the object scope.
Change the Resource type to Portable.
Specify the home location of the resource. Portable resource unit are placed there at the model startup. Leave the default value of the Home defined by property (Single node) unchanged.
Type storageRooom (the name of the rectangle representing the storage room) in the Home node edit box.
Set shapeScope as Idle unit animation shape and Busy unit animation shape.
To add the defined resources into the network, you should connect ports of NetworkResourcePool objects with the port of the Network object. Connect them as shown in the figure:
To connect ports of objects, double-click the first port, then optionally click at each connector's turning point on the diagram, and finally click the second port. The connector linking two ports appears.
Cyan points inside ports indicate the correct connection. In the case you do not see cyan circles, it probably means that you put connector's point close by a port and you need to move it onto it.
An Ionic bond is a bond where one element give away electrons to another element. This makes one element positively charged and the other negatively charged. Ions are elements who have gotten rid of or gained electrons. For instance, sodium has one electron in its valiant cell. This electron is very inconvenient so the sodium just gets rid of the extra electron. Then, sodium has 11 protons and 10 elections. This makes sodium 1+.
These are ions that work together like one ion. If you had NaNO3, The Na would have bonded with NO3 and not three Os and an N. This is because these elements work together lie one ion.
When working with an ion that can have different numbers of protons, the valences need to be taken into account. If you have an iron oxide compound, it could either be FeO or Fe2O3. When the iron has a charge of 2+, then it bonds with the oxygen (which has a charge of 2-) with one of each. This makes FeO. If the iron has a charge of 3+, then it has to from with the oxygen with two irons and three oxygens. Thus creating Fe2O3.
Covalent bonds are elements that borrow electrons. Oxygen needs two more electrons to fill his valiant shell. Whenhe bonds with another oxygen he solves this problem. The first oxygen borrows two of the second oxygen's electrons some of the time and the second oxygen uses two of the first oxygen's electrons. This isn't as strong of a bond as an ionic bond.
When oxygen forms with two hydrogens, it forms water. Oxygen is more negative than hydrogen. Since opposites attract and things with the same charge repel each other, the hydrogens are on opposite sides of the oxygen.
The different poles on a covalent bond make it interact differently with other compounds like itself. When water is in liquid form, the molecules slip by without too much difficulty. The opposites of different compounds do attract a bit, but nothing crazy happens. However, when the compound freezes, something crazy happens! Usually elements bunch up together and become more dense than the liquid, but that is not the case with polar covalent bonds. The elements with the same charge refuse to be bunched together. Instead, they form this large, intricate matrix where the opposites touch but nothing else does. There is lots of empty space in between the elements so the solid is much less dense than the liquid. That is why ice floats in water and iron sinks in
Computing » Computer Science » Computer Programming » Ada Programming
This keyword is used in access types declarations and anonymous access parameters.
As in most programming languages Coldfusion includes control structures to help your program be more useful.
The most basic control structure is the CFIF. It works exactly like an If statement in other programming languages.
A sample CFIF statement would look like this:
Like with other programming languages Coldfusion provides a switch functionality.
List people looks like this: (Bill,Martha,Judy)
Results: Bill! Martha! Judy!
Zip-55057, Name-Northfield
Muni is an abbreviation for mountain unicycling, and is a description for the practice of unicycling on any sort of rough terrain. You don't necessarily need a mountain for Muni - it's the terrain that makes it Muni, not where the terrain is.
It is important to lower the seat and to lower the tire pressure. These two simple adjustments make a tremendous difference. Try to keep one hand on the saddle and stand up over the saddle when you go through difficult sections, as this will make it easier to exert more force through the pedals. It is important to have sufficient balance in order to stay on top of the wheel without changing your riding direction too much. The tire will go its own way; you will have to learn to follow it. An excellent exercise is to practice riding a rail. This will force you to stay on top of the wheel without any adjustments in the riding direction.
Big drops may put tremendous stress on the axle if you do them wrong. To reduce the stress, you may roll out of the drop. The point of this is to transform the downward force into a forward and downward force on the muni. To do this you will need some forward momentum as you go off into the drop, and then fold slightly at the waist, and the muni will try to shoot out in front of you instead of getting compressed under your weight. It is easiest to drop from a stillstand, but as you get more confident it is better to just roll the edge into the drop. Try to land with the cranks horizontal and absorb the shock by first flexing your legs, then at your waist and followed by your upper body and arms. If you have practiced hopping in both pedal orientations it may not matter in what orientation you are when you hit the ground, otherwise you can try pedaling the wheel half a revolution or so into the right position before you land. It is important to stand up on the pedals, and it may help to lower your saddle.
It is easiest to roll out a drop on a downhill slope. If there isn't any slope below, you may still use an angled rock or a bump, by aiming for the far side. Try to scan the area below for a good place to roll out a landing.
If you ride in rough terrain with roots and rocks, the tire oftentimes gets stuck behind some obstacle. A solution is to put in a small hop, just enough to clear the obstacle, to regain balance and get going again. Things get more complicated if you are in the middle of a climb. Depending on the riding surface it may not be possible to get going again once you stop. If you are riding in mud or loose dirt, the tire may lose its grip as you put pressure on the pedals. With practice it becomes natural to put in a forward hop to regain momentum every time you start from stillstand. Mounting to stillstand and then doing a forward hop is actually the easiest way to start on a steep hill.
Since it is difficult to anticipate when the tire will become stuck behind something, it is important to practice hopping out of difficult situations in both pedal orientations, that is with either foot back. Also try to practice holding the seat with either hand.
Living in Norway, I have some experience with snow. It is difficult if the snow is deep and if there is ice underneath it, but it can also offer great amounts of fun!
If we assume that there is no ice and that the snow is not very deep, your only challenge is that you do not know anything about the surface you are riding on- where the bumps are and how big they are. This factor makes riding in snow quite exciting.
Riding on tracks made for skiing on is even more fun, because you can ride on top of the snow quite the same as if you were riding on a normal road. It is, however, often a problem to idle or do quick turns as you easily may fall.
Riding on ice, especially ice for ice-skating, is also a huge challenge. You need to sit right on top of your unicycle and do as few moves as possible . If you need to move it should be slow and controlled. Riding on ice is a potential risk to your wrist as you easily may fall backwards.
A studded tire will help you keep in control over the unicycle on ice, see the instructions for instructions on making a studded tire.
When it comes to riding the "Ewok Village," keep these things in mind:
Wood can be slick- gently slow down.
Pay attention to the feature, not the 15 foot chasm below it.
Most drops from bridges should be done as a rolling hop because the trannys bikers build are usually too far to static hop.
Look before you ride and use a spotter- bikers come flying down trails and over structures very fast and aren't going to be looking for a unicyclist going a third the speed he is.
Avoid sketchy features, even if they look really cool. I have had a teeter-totter collapse on me 10 feet up!
It is possible to ride your unicycle offroad even if it's dark outside with a headlight. This can be a very memorable or even eerie experience if you're all by yourself! With a good light source, the riding itself is not that much more challenging, although it may be slightly more difficult to correctly estimate the size of rocks and other obstacles in the riding surface.
To ride on gravel a cheap LED headlight may be sufficient, but if you want to ride technically challenging singletrack you will need a better light source. Unfortunately a good halogen headlight is rather expensive. Fortunately these can be built at home at a far lesser expense.
A powerful configuration for unicycling features a 20 W halogen light with a 38 degree spread together with NiMH batteries.
Pedal slower and try to carve sideways if possible. Much like skiing.
This is a critique of the research article: Whitney R.D. Duff, Justin W. Andrushko, Doug W. Renshaw, Philip D. Chilibeck, Jonathan P. Farthing, Jana Danielson, and Charity D. Evans (2018) Impact of Pilates Exercise in Multiple Sclerosis. International Journal of MS Care: March/April 2018, Vol. 20, No. 2, pp. 92-100. [1]
The critique was written for a wiki assignment for Health, Disease and Exercise (8365) at the University of Canberra, September 2019.
What is the background to this research?
Before it was suggested that people living with multiple sclerosis (MS) should avoid exercise. However these days, those with MS can tolerate physical exercise, which is helpful in managing symptoms, preventing complications and comorbidities as well as maintaining overall well being.[2]
Pilates training is a series of exercises, based on whole-body movements that focuses on body structure, body alignment and muscle recruitment with an emphasis on stabilizing core muscles during dynamic movements. Pilates may have a beneﬁcial effect because activation of core muscles could combat difﬁculties with mobility and balance in persons with MS.[3] Despite this, a meta-analysis of 12 studies of 2360 patients with MS, cumulative evidence suggested that patients with MS are less physically active than people without the disease.[4]
The purpose of the present study was to see if Pilates specific training on persons with MS, could improve mobility and determine the effect of Pilates in walking performance in people with multiple sclerosis.[1] The importance of this study can help influence different types of training adaptations such as Pilates training in the physical therapy of persons with MS, which could promote further investigation into why this specific type of training is beneficial in the well being of persons with multiple sclerosis.[5]
The Authors of this study, Whitney R.D. Duff (College of Medicine), PhD; Justin W. Andrushko (College of Kinesiology), MSc; Doug W. Renshaw (College of Kinesiology) , MEd; Philip D. Chilibeck (College of Kinesiology), PhD; Jonathan P. Farthing (College of Kinesiology), PhD; Jana Danielson (College of Kinesiology), MBA; Charity D. Evans (College of Pharmacy and Nutrition),[1] all have extensive knowledge in this study, planned and implemented by the Consortium of Multiple Sclerosis Centers in Canada. The assessment was undertaken at the University of Saskatchewan and the intervention at Lead Pilates and Integrative Therapies sites, both located in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
The study conducted on the Impact of Pilates Exercise in Multiple Sclerosis was a RCT - Randomized Controlled Trial.[1] Which means people are allocated at random to receive one of several clinical interventions. RCT reduces bias and provides a outcomes to examine a cause-effect relationship between an intervention and an outcome. This is because the RCT balances out participants attributes between groups, allowing characteristic differences between the groups, this is not possible with any other design such as observational or meta-analysis.[6]
What did the research involve?
A total of 30 individuals (15 female, 15 male) were obtained through the local MS Society of Canada office and social media from November 20, 2016, through January 20, 2017. The criteria was kept broad that consisted of a diagnosis of MS, that were not restricted to a wheelchair or scooter.
The 12-week study involved a randomization of the 30 participants where a Pilates and a control group were formed, that included a baseline and post-intervention results. The Pilates group were given an exercise program that included a range of exercises, such as the CoreAlign "hoof" which focused on gait and "angles in the snow", which focused on shoulder mobility. Progression was added over the course of the period, with instructors to observe each participants ability to focus on proper breathing, correct body alignment and core stabilization. The Pilates group also received weekly 1-hour massage therapy session with a registered massage therapist specifically trained in massage for MS.
Participants in the control group received a weekly 1 -hour massage therapy session. The researchers decided to include a massage session because it had the potential to improve health outcomes in persons with MS, such as pain and stress, without minimal effect on walking ability.[7] The control group did not receive a Pilates training program, but were not restricted from performing other exercise during the study period.
The primary outcomes was walking ability which was assessed via the 6-Minute Walk Test (6MWT). Secondary outcomes included Timed Up and Go (TUG) test where studies have shown it as a measure of functional mobility in both clinical and research practice in persons with MS;[8] Sit and reach test for flexability; Fullerton Advanced Balance Scale (FABS) for balance; Dual-Energy X-ray Absorptiometry for body composition; Plank-Hold test for core endurance and Maximum Voluntary Contraction for quadriceps strength. Test for fatigability and voluntary muscle activation were also assessed.
What were the basic results?
The results showed that the intervention group improved walking distance by a mean of 52.4m compare with 15.0m in the control group with the 6MWT. Results for the TUG functional ability test showed an improvement in the left turn compared to the right turn, with the mean decrease of 1.5 seconds in the intervention group compared to an increase of 0.3 seconds for the control group. There were no major differences between group for secondary outcomes, for balance and flexibility presented in the data below.
What conclusions can we take from this research?
The conclusion we can take from this study design can be the fact that any type of exercise whether it be walking or functional training can be beneficial for persons with MS.
The study design covered certain aspects of the research and came to a sound conclusion that 'Pilates is a safe and effective exercise option for improving mobility in individuals with MS'.[1] The researchers have also expressed the need for future studies in comparing Pilates training with other training therapies and evaluate and compare outcomes in MS. The have also mentioned limitations to their study.
A primary focus of the study plan focused on mobility, which is a limitation of the fact that mobility is not a symptom for all individuals with MS. Other limitations include tests which were not specific to MS, such as the Fullterton Advances Balance Scale which was developed to identify balance in older adults.[9]
As shown in recent studies, the benefits for physical activity far out whey the negatives, and when coupled with a specific training program, can improve quality of life, increase mobility, strength, cardiovascular fitness and even better cognition based speed of information processing.[10]
Given the value of physical activity for health outcomes, Pilates is a safe and effective exercise option for individuals with MS which can correlate into improved healthy parameters, or a bridge between more intense and other forms of physical activity.[1]
Brain foundation: Multiple Sclerosis information and support
↑ a b c d e f Whitney R.D. Duff, Justin W. Andrushko, Doug W. Renshaw, Philip D. Chilibeck, Jonathan P. Farthing, Jana Danielson, and Charity D. Evans (2018) Impact of Pilates Exercise in Multiple Sclerosis. International Journal of MS Care: March/April 2018, Vol. 20, No. 2, pp. 92-100.
↑ Giesser B. S. (2015). Exercise in the management of persons with multiple sclerosis. Therapeutic advances in neurological disorders, 8(3), 123–130. doi:10.1177/1756285615576663
↑ Kalron, A., Rosenblum, U., Frid, L., & Achiron, A. (2016). Pilates exercise training vs. physical therapy for improving walking and balance in people with multiple sclerosis: a randomized controlled trial. Clinical Rehabilitation, 31(3), 319-328. doi: 10.1177/0269215516637202
↑ Heleen Beckerman, Vincent de Groot, Maarten A. Scholten, Jiska C.E. Kempen, Gustaaf J. Lankhorst, Physical Activity Behavior of People With Multiple Sclerosis: Understanding How They Can Become More Physically Active, Physical Therapy, Volume 90, Issue 7, 1 July 2010, Pages 1001–1013
↑ Motl, R., & Pilutti, L. (2012). The benefits of exercise training in multiple sclerosis. Nature Reviews Neurology, 8(9), 487-497. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2012.136
↑ Hariton, E., & Locascio, J. J. (2018). Randomised controlled trials - the gold standard for effectiveness research: Study design: randomised controlled trials. BJOG : an international journal of obstetrics and gynaecology, 125(13), 1716. doi:10.1111/1471-0528.15199
↑ Sebastião, E., Sandroff, B., Learmonth, Y., & Motl, R. (2016). Validity of the Timed Up and Go Test as a Measure of Functional Mobility in Persons With Multiple Sclerosis. Archives Of Physical Medicine And Rehabilitation, 97(7), 1072-1077. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2015.12.031
↑ Rose DJ, Lucchese N, Wiersma LD. Development of a multidimensional balance scale for use with functionally independent older adults. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2006; 87: 1478– 1485
↑ Brunt, A., Albines, D., & Hopkins-Rosseel, D. (2019). The Effectiveness of Exercise on Cognitive Performance in Individuals with Known Vascular Disease: A Systematic Review. Journal of clinical medicine, 8(3), 294. doi:10.3390/jcm8030294
All these colour names are adjectives, e.g. das rote Buch – the red book. If a colour name is used as a noun (e.g. das Blau des Himmels – the blue of the sky) then it is a neuter noun using the article „das”. In German, all nouns are written with a capital initial letter.
Note: The tengwar used in this article may not display properly unless tengwar fonts[1][2] are installed.
Tengwar is the script used to write Quenya. Though the chapters of this wikibook use a Latin transliteration for the sake of simplicity, Quenya is properly written using the Tengwar. For more information on Tengwar itself, see History of Elven Writing Systems and the Wikipedia article on the topic.
Tengwar is said to have different "modes", each of which determines what sound is assigned to each symbol. This article only covers the Quenya mode, which cannot be used to write non-elven words (your name, for example) as it lacks necessary sounds. English modes for Tengwar exist, though they are not standardised.
Words are written from left to right, as in English.
.
3 is an archaic consonant and need not be used unless one wishes to refer to 8-i "s" sounds that was originally 3 in the earlier stages of Quenya:
3G2#6 → iG2#6 Thindar → Sindar.
d is pronounced /x/ when after 'a', 'o' or 'u' and before a t, /ç/ when after 'e' or 'i' and before a t and /h/ between vowels.
`Nd1E6 → ohtar /ɔxtar/.
`CdE → aha /aha/.
g^m^ → 5^m^ Ñoldo → Noldo.
b is only used initially and never medially, which is written as 5n instead:
Initially: b#jt$ Nwalmë.
Medially: yE5nE - vanwa.
8 is used before a consonant or long vowel, i when a vowel follows it.This generally applies also for "ss" k and ,:
9C6t# harma.
9ÍC6t$5 hyarmen.
½ is only used before j and 7 to make hl and hr:
½j#6 hlar.
l "i" and . "u" are used only in diphthongs, with the preceding vowel placed above it, being read from top to bottom:
j.D7T`V laurië.
In order for a writing system to be considered a true alphabet, vowels and consonants must be treated equally. As this is not true of Quenya Mode Tengwar, the system is technically an abugida. Vowels are, therefore, written above or below the consonant that comes before it.
The five short vowels are written above the consonant.
1 is being used as an arbitrary example to show that the vowels are written above the consonant. The second example, `, is a vowel carrier. This serves as a place holder for vowels when there is no consonant to write them over, such as at the beginning of a word. e.g: `C7E5 - aran.
The five long vowels are written above a long vowel carrier. When a long vowel comes after a consonant, it is written with its long vowel carrier after the consonant:
The carrier descends below the line (like the letters h, p, and q do in English), as to distinguish it from a short carrier.
There is an alternate method of having long vowels written above a consonant, with the placement of a line tehta below the consonant, as seen in Tolkien's own Tengwar transcription of his poem Namárië, e.g:
Note that "L" is exempted from this possibility, as no known tehta fits within it.
These are written differently than the other two types, mainly because the vowel is written above the consonant that comes after the vowel (which is the opposite of the usual). In the case of diphthongs, however, the consonant is actually the second vowel in the diphthong.
If you find this confusing, just ignore the above paragraph and memorise the forms without questioning why they break the typical vowel rules.
A number of strokes can be added to the tengwar to change their sound.
The long consonants are denoted by adding a curved stroke or a straight line below the "baseline" of the symbol. For example:
These are simply consonants followed by the letter Y. This is written with two dots below the symbol (or inside, for the letter j. For example:
A consonant followed by the letter S, such as ts, ps, and ks (x), can be denoted by a downward hook to the "bow" (curved part) of the symbol. For example:
Exclamation mark followed by a pause in speech
Question mark followed by a pause in speech
Date: January 7, 2015- April 17, 2015
7 January 2015: MrOwnerandPwner returns to the wiki and collaborates with Batran to establish an act against wars. Anyone who attempts to create one will be blocked.
18-20 January 2015: The wiki reaches 1000 pages.
19th January 2015: A troll account made by Zukas called ImWatching... gets Batran99 suspicious about trolls. He goes to Community Central Wikia's chatroom and tries to find someone who knows how to help him. A user from a creepypasta Wikia called IM STILL ALIVE offers to help, and it starts the beginning of the Nicole Crisis.
19th January 2015: Daniel Mapper leaves mapping and deletes his channel, but makes a new channel within days of deleting it.
23rd January 2015: Pezminer12 starts the Month pages.
25th January 2015: Starring94 and Pezminer12 have an edit-conflict over having categories like: 'Nations in Europe (TF)' and 'Nations in Asia (TF)'. The two eventually come to a truce.
26 January 2015: Many Mappers' accounts are disabled by Wikia Staff in The Grim Reaping.
27 January 2015: Ace's account on Althistory Wiki gets blocked for a week for what he has done.
6-13 February 2015: The Wikia becomes less active than usual.
17 February 2015: Monsoonjr99 and Pez add new Month pages, Year pages, and Navigational templates for those pages to the wiki.
March 7 2015: RMC (Red Moon Club) was created by Happydance9, other people were mad at it's creation due to a foreshadow of a possible conflicting events.
March 12, 2015 Jakob Mintah makes his mapping channel
March 13 2015: Ingo Mapping stops mapping and leaves the wiki.
March 30-31 2015: #AlternateFuture Mind and batran discovered that Youtube officially recognizes mapping as a trend.(or in this case, Alternate Future)
April 1 2015: April Fools Crisis starts. Winston Mapper says that it is the worst crisis since Mapperdonian January.
April 1 2015: Ender and Knight get into an argument, with most people supporting Ender. This leads to Knight declaring war on Ender.
April 2-12 2015: Timeline becomes Inactive for the 5th time.
April 11 2015: Pezminer12 invents Barnstars; awards for Users on the Wikia who have done great things in certain fields on the Wikia.
What parameters does this function take? What calling convention does it use? What kind of value does it return? Write the entire C prototype of this function. Assume all values are unsigned values.
How many separate branch structures are in this function? What types are they? Can you give more descriptive names to _Label_1, _Label_2, and _Label_3, based on the structures of these branches?
How many separate branch structures are there in this function? Stripping away the entry and exit sequences, here is the code we have left:
Looking through, we see 2 cmp statements. The first cmp statement compares ecx to zero. If ecx is not zero, we go to _Label_1, decrement eax, and then fall through to _Label_2. If ecx is zero, we increment eax, and go to directly to _Label_2. Writing out some pseudocode, we have the following result for the first section:
Since _Label_2 occurs at the end of this structure, we can rename it to something more descriptive, like "End_of_Branch_1", or "Branch_1_End". The first comparison tests ecx against 0, and then jumps on not-equal. We can reverse the conditional, and say that _Label_1 is an else block:
So we can rename _Label_1 to something else descriptive, such as "Else_1". The rest of the code block, after Branch_1_End (_Label_2) is as follows:
Write the equivalent C code for this function. Assume all parameters and return values are unsigned values.
Starting with the C function prototype from answer 1, and the conditional blocks in answer 2, we can put together a pseudo-code function, without variable declarations, or a return value:
Now, we just need to create a variable to store the value from eax, which we will call "a", and we will declare as a register type:
Granted, this function isn't a particularly useful function, but at least we know what it does.
At the center of the UI is a node-graph. In the screenshot above the node-graph has 2 nodes connected to each other through a curved line.
The connection represents the data flow. Data flowing through the nodes are video or images. Each node applies some processing to the input data.
Each node has 2 buttons, a squared button on the left and a circled button on the right. Note that left button is green when toggled and the right button is blue when toggled.
The same green and blue is used together with the node name at the top left of the screenshot.
In the explanation below we will use sketch images instead of Mewa screenshots to bring to attention only the graphical features necessary to understand Mewa.
In the node-graph data flows from top down. If the top most node is a video, the nodes below, connected to it, apply a filter to all frames of the video.
The sketches below show a node-graph with 3 nodes. The top most node represents a video. The node below adds a star on top of the video, and the last node adds a circle on top of the video+star.
When toggling the node left button (green button), the output of the respective node is shown on the output window (window at the left).
When toggling the “Add Star” node parameters (blue button), the parameters window appears, as the controls that allow resizing the star appear in the output window.
The node-graph, as seen above, behaves the same for all frames. To change the node-graph behaviour for different frames, through time, we use the time-view
The sketches below show a node-graph with 2 nodes. The video node at the top represents a video file, and the Move2D node below applies a resize/scaling to the video file.
The scale values are shown in the node window (also called node parameters window).
The user can change the scale values by changing the values on the parameters window and/or resizing the image in the output window.
To animate the image size we create a curve. The curve holds the scale values for each frame. The user navigates through frames dragging the play head.
Although Mewa is currently only available for Linux and Windows, it aims to run across all platforms, including iOS and Android tablets, MacOS and chromebooks.
To install Mewa on Linux, for the first time, just run the following command:
That's it, now just type mewa on your command window to start the application.
If Mewa is already installed on your machine, type instead:
There are 2 ways of installing Mewa on windows
Through Mewatools.com
Note that installing Mewa from Mewatools requires installing a certificate. Download and open the file certificate.cer. Click on "Install Certificate" to local machine (not Current User) and then choose "Place all certificates in the following store" option. Choose "Trusted Root Certification Authorities" to complete the installation.
Mewa is an OpenGL application and in some windows machines the OpenGL driver needs to be updated.
Try to Search automatically for the updated driver software
If the above method doesn't work the drivers needs to be updated manually:
Navigate to your graphics card manufacturer official website. (Intel, AMD or NVIDIA)
On the official site, navigate to the graphics driver and choose your operating system. Download the latest drivers for your graphics card and install it to your computer. This will also update the OpenGL on your computer.
Now that we have installed Mewa, let's try it.
Mewa comes with very few nodes by default, so, lets extend Mewa with some nodes. Click on to open the Mewa Store. Below is a screenshot of the Mewa Store window.
Scroll through the list of available addons and click install to the addons of your choice. Mewa addons are scripts that are copied to the scripts directory. You can modify/customize any node by modifying the reespective script in the scripts directory.
All available scripts are listed in the nodes list .
Let's start importing footage by clicking in the action bar. This will open the File Browser.
With the File Browser it's possible to load video files and image sequences as well. An image sequence is a group of files which are consecutively numbered.
Press ok after selecting the footage you wish to import.
Once the footage has been imported it appears as a new node in the node graph.
We have now our first node in the node graph, a footage node.
Let's view how the footage node is layed out in the time-view.
Click on to expand the time-view and see the
At the top of the curve editor there is the curve or bar switch .
This switch button offers the choice to see curves as curves or horizontal tracks.
The horizontal tracks are nothing more than the same curves constrained within a track. The track scale allows changing curves frames/times without affecting it's y value.
Every footage node has a frame index parameter initialized with a linear curve that goes from 0 to N, where N is the number of frames.
The frame index curve tells which image of the footage node is outputed for every given input frame number.
Horizontally shifting the footage curve changes the frame at wich the footage node starts.
The footage length can be trimmed by dragging the right end of the curve.
Now let's add an effect to our footage node. In the action bar, at the top, click on the node library button to see the list of available nodes.
Nodes can be dragged and moved anywhere inside the nodegraph window. Drag the hexagonalPixelate0 node below the footage node.
To apply the HexPixelate effect on the footage node connect the footage node output to the input of hexPixelate as shown in the spicture below.
Connections describe the workflow execution. The workflow is executed in a top down order, from outputs to inputs.
Inside the nodes there are 2 buttons. On the left side, with a rectangular shape is the output button.
On the right side, with a circular shape is the parameters button.
The parameter button opens the node's parameters window containing all the modifiable parameters of the node.
Clicking on the output button of HexPixelate node (the square button on the left side of the node) the output window opens showing the
The output window shows the output image of the last clicked output button.
Notice that the output image has a red rectangle around it. The red rectangle represents the output size. Processing operations are preformed inside the
That size is set in the bottom right corner of the output window. The output size determines the output image size of all nodes.
The node graph provides a top down "schematic" view of operations applied over images.
With an image (footage node) as the top most node, image processing operations are performed by the connected nodes below. Image data is passed top-down, from one node to the next node connected to it.
This structure of nodes illustrates the operations and the order of operations applied.
The advantage of using a node graph is it makes possible to edit the parameters of any node while visualising the output of any node simultaneously.
Studies have shown that patients with type 1 diabetes who have high fiber foods have lower blood sugar levels, and blood glucose, lipid and insulin levels in patients with type 2 diabetes are improved.
I have programmed a (working) 2D physics system before and I am currently in college as a Physics Engineering major, so I have experience, but I am by no means an industry expert, so I'm going to start this document and hope that either someone who knows this stuff steps in and takes over or guides me so that I can do this correctly.
Also, if my formatting looks bad, any one can feel free to change it.
Added more to the portion of physics. Hopefully not too lengthy or off-topic.
Computer programs today simulate physical systems for various purposes, such as realism in games and testing mechanical prototypes before construction. Added with the current trend of increasing processing power, these physical simulations are continually becoming more complicated and elaborate. As such where physics is applicable, programs without these capabilities appear more simple and primitive and thus less desirable compared to programs with these abilities.
Not all programs require the full range of computational capabilities. Most games only require the ability to accurately calculate mechanical processes. Programs like the ones used to test objects need more complex abilities, like calculating the heat given off by the friction between two surfaces. Some programs may even find it desirable to perform pseudo-calculations, calculations based upon physics yet tweaked to achieve a more desirable behavior, or they may just represent a very narrow range of processes that can occur.
When programming physics, various different mechanisms of physics, including branching decisions such as collisions between objects, gravity and any other exertional forces taking effect upon objects present, along with various other elements depending upon the given situation, need to be taken into account and compensated for accordingly.
Each different object has its own mass/weight, which is usually dependent upon the size of the object itself. Effectively programming physics generally entails keeping track of the weight of each object, factoring in other forces such as gravity and collisions while calculating the force of each collision, depending on the object weights and perform an action accordingly.
One example of the weight of objects taking an effect on the world around them would be where, when placed upon another object held up by a weak force would then cause that object to lower towards the ground. The types of physics examples that could be programmed to demonstrate this are virtually endless and, for beginners, it is recommended that they attempt basic examples of physics like gravity.
To program for physics or using physics one should be familiar with some widely-applicable concepts and techniques:
(Higher dimensions to be addressed under "Relativity")
Numerical Methods for Calculus and Differential Equations
...
Simple Harmonic Motion, Springs
Computer programming/Physics/Position of an accelerating body function
Computer programming/Physics/Position of an accelerating body function (constant acceleration)
Computer programming/Physics/Motion of an object through space (piecemeal approximation)
Hofstede's five cultural factors are reconceptualized as ten personal cultural orientations: independence, interdependence, power, social inequality, masculinity, gender equality, risk aversion, ambiguity intolerance, tradition, and prudence. A new 40-item scale is developed to measure these personal cultural orientations. Much effort has been invested in ensuring validity, reliability, and cross-cultural measurement equivalence of the new scale.
Ambiguity intolerance is the degree to which people can tolerate ambiguity and uncertain situations.
I find it difficult to function without clear directions and instructions. (0.77)
I prefer specific instructions to broad guidelines. (0.75)
I tend to get anxious easily when I don’t know an outcome. (0.73)
I feel stressful when I cannot predict consequences. (0.72)
Sharma (2010): Measuring Personal Cultural Orientations: Scale Development and Validation. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 38, No. 6, pp. 787–806
If you want to hide the pathway on the front page, you simply have to wrap it in a piece of PHP code. Here is an example of the code all together:
This returns nothing if the variable option = com_frontpage, and gives the code between the php tags if option is anything else than "com_frontpage". This variable can be exchanged with other variables if that is needed, but this works with the default homepage setting in mambo.
This book is intended for intermediate readers.
A PDF version is available. (info)
This wikibook is an attempt to explain the process of finding a job and getting hired for that job. It will explain such topics as finding a job, writing a resume, and performing at an interview.
Disclaimer: External Links are provided for reference, and do not constitute an endorsement. Spam will not be tolerated, and will be removed on sight.
St. George Defence
White should now start to defend his pawn center. He cannot play Nc3 because of b4 but he can play 3. Nf3 or 3. Bd3. As few theory is available on this position, it's hard to tell whether there are other good moves. 3. g3 sounds interesting as well as 3. f4 or 3. c4.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
'1.e4 a6 2.d4 b5'
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at St. George Defence
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon · Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
'word [word!] {Word set to each position in series and changed as a result}
] [throw make error! {forskip/forall expected word argument to refer to a series or port!}]
In this chapter, we will study different kinds of language processors and while doing so, a graphical notation called tombstone diagrams will be utilized. Extensive use of this notation, however, should not fool you into believing that the graphical representation in itself has any meaning. Unless the underlying notions represented by them are clearly understood, throwing in random diagrams to create some fancy figures will have no value at all.
In our treatment of the subject, introduction of the basic concepts, program and machine, will be followed with a review of language processing techniques, translation and interpretation. Building on these we will explore the more sophisticated ways of using language processors to construct more productive environments.
From the computer scientist’s point of view, a program is a pattern of rules that is used to direct the evolution of a computational process.[1] It is composed from symbolic expressions in a particular notation called a programming language.
A machine is an automaton [when given a program] that can carry out tasks to ease the life of its beneficiaries. From the computer scientist’s point of view, the word machine is a synonym for computer or any equivalent mathematical model.
A program can be run on a [physical] machine only if it is expressed in the appropriate machine code.[2]
A translator is a program that accepts any text expressed in one language (the translator’s source language), and generates a semantically equivalent text expressed in another language (its target language).
In particular, a compiler translates from a high-level language into a low-level language (not just machine code); an assembler translates from an assembly language into the corresponding machine code; a decompiler translates a low-level language program into a program in a high-level language; a disassembler translates a machine code program into an assembly language program.
The head of the tombstone names the translator’s source language S and the target language T, separated by an arrow. The base of the tombstone names the translator’s implementation language L.
The source and object programs are semantically equivalent.[3] Giving the same names to source and object programs is a widely used convention to emphasize this fact.
A cross-compiler is a compiler that runs on one machine (the host machine) but generates code for a dissimilar machine (the target machine). The object program is generated on the host machine but must be transferred to the target machine to be run. Such a transfer is often called downloading.
Two-stage translator is a composition of two translators. Such a scheme comes in handy when you want to port a new language implementation to different platforms. All you need to do is to translate from the new language into a widely available programming language and then translate the output of this translation into machine code. You now have a programming language implementation available on all platforms where there is a compiler for the omnipresent language.
More formally, we can say that semantic-equivalence relation is an equivalence relation. That is, it is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive. So, we can easily generalize this idea to multiple stages: An n-stage translator is a composition of n translators, and involves n-1 intermediate languages.
Seeing the input and output diagrams as below should help you perceive translators as plain programs:
In translation, the entire source program must be translated to its object (target) program equivalent before it can even start to run and produce results. This can be likened to translating a novel: it is translated in its entirety all at once.
An interpreter, on the other hand, is a program that accepts any program (the source program) expressed in a particular language (the source language), and runs that source program immediately. This approach is more like the way a simultaneous translator does her job: she translates as the speaker makes his statement; she doesn’t wait for him to finish his speech.
Similar to a microprogram’s fetch-decode-execute cycle, an interpreter works by fetching, analyzing, and executing the source program instructions, one at a time. Each time a source code instruction is interpreted, it is first fetched, analyzed, which includes its translation into the instructions of the physical machine, and then executed by executing the corresponding machine code instructions.
The instructions have simple formats, and this can be analyzed easily and efficiently. (Note the distinction between instructions and instruction formats.)
Instructions are complex; their executions take so long that time spent for fetching and analyzing become negligible.
Each instruction is executed only once (or at least not frequently).
The programmer is working in interactive mode, and wishes to see the results of each instruction before entering the next instruction.
The program is to be used once and then discarded, and therefore running speed is not very important.
The reasoning behind the first two items can be understood by analyzing the cost of executing a source code instruction on the physical machine.
(cost of executing a source code instruction)
The total cost of running a source code instruction is equal to the sum of all phases. Execution phase cost is (roughly) equal to the sum of the cost of executing the corresponding machine language instructions. Note we have multiple machine language instructions for each source code instruction, which is very natural since the source language is a higher-level one.
, being too small, will be dwarfed by
Total cost will be almost equal to the cost of executing the corresponding machine code instructions. So, we don't lose much due to interpretation.
, being too large, will dominate the running time of the instruction. So, we end up with the previous conclusion:
.
Executing the source code instructions as few times as possible means the cost due to the fetch and analyze phases are not repeatedly paid. Therefore, it is still reasonable to consider interpretation as an alternative.
The fourth item is basically a rehashing of the idea behind interpretation: instructions are executed one at a time. This parallel between interpretation and interactivity is revealed by the fact that the best examples for interpreters are from the world of command shells, such as bash, csh, and etc.
A typical example to the last item is prototyping of an application, where a light-weight version of the application is developed and used for ensuring user requirements are correctly grabbed by showing it to the customer at an early stage of the development process. Since such an application is used a few times and need not be fast, interpretation turns out be a good choice.
Conversely, interpretation is not a sensible choice when:
The instructions are executed frequently. For instance, an algorithm with many for-loops would not be a good candidate for interpretation.
The instructions have complicated formats, are therefore time-consuming to analyze.
Since matrix manipulation–that is, matrix addition, multiplication, subtraction, and so on–relies heavily on (nested) loops, which means parts of code will be executed repetitively, we had better go for a compiled language.
In addition to the control structures used for program flow, the script in question will be made up of instructions that execute the programs involved, which will likely take quite long to complete. So, due to the presence of these complex, time consuming instructions, we should opt for an interpreted language.
The way the processor runs a program follows a cycle similar to that of an interpreter: next instruction from the instruction stream is fetched, it is decoded–which may trigger fetching of data–and it is executed, which may involve writing of data.
Running program P by interpreting it on an S-interpreter
Note that there is no translation of the entire program; instructions are fetched, analyzed, and executed one at a time as if you were running your program on an abstract machine for S. For more, see the section on abstract machines.
Interpretation can be used to test a newly designed hardware without actually building it. Such an approach earns you a lot by shortening the design-build-debug cycle. Consider the following typical scenario.
Designers come up with a hardware design or modify a previously built one.
The design can be built in either software or hardware. However, printing a board–that is, building the design in hardware–is not something you can do in your office; you need to get some chip manifacturing company to do it for you. And if you don't have a large quantity order, you are bound to wait a long time. So, hardware option is time-consuming and hurts your competitiveness. On the other hand, software option enables you to test your design by means of running programs of the newly designed machine on existing computers and can be done in your office.
In the process of testing the new hardware, design errors may be detected. If so, you need to go the first step. Otherwise, you can proceed with the next step.
Marketing guys start a sales pitch to market the new product as you have the board printed.
This kind of interpretation–that is, running programs of the yet-to-be-built machine on another machine–is called emulation. An emulator cannot be used to measure the emulated machine’s absolute speed. But it can still be used to obtain useful quantitative information such as number of memory cycles, the degree of parallelism, and so on.
We might write the interpreter in a high-level programming language such as C:
This program is further compiled into another interpreter expressed in machine code M:
We can now write programs for the new hardware:
Running a program on top of an interpreter is functionally equivalent to running the same program directly on a machine. The user sees the same behavior in terms of the program’s inputs and outputs. The two processes are even similar in detail: an interpreter works in a fetch-analyze-execute cycle, and a machine works in a fetch-decode-execute cycle. The only difference is that an interpreter is a software artifact, whereas a machine is a hardware artifact (and therefore much faster).
Thus a machine may be viewed as an interpreter implemented in hardware. Conversely, an interpreter may be viewed as a machine implemented in software. Hence, an interpreter is sometimes called an abstract machine as opposed to its hardware counterpart, which is referred to as the [real] machine. So, we can define a machine code to be a language for which a hardware interpreter exists (at least on paper).
An abstract machine is functionally equivalent to a real machine if they both implement the same language L.
A compiler may take quite a long time to translate a source program into machine code, but then the object program will run at full speed. An interpreter allows the programs to start running immediately, but it will run very slowly.
An interpretive compiler is a combination of compiler and interpreter, giving some of the advantages of each. The key idea is to translate the source program into an intermediate language and then interpret the result of translation on an abstract machine running the programs of the intermediate language.
The intermediate language is designed to the following requirements:
It is intermediate in level between the source language and ordinary machine code.
Its instructions have simple formats, and therefore can be analyzed easily and quickly.
Translation from the source language into the intermediate language is easy and fast.
Two disadvantages of using an intermediate language as the object language are the running speed and the ease of decompilation. The former means inefficient use of resources while the latter implies lack of protection of your product. For fighting against the second drawback one can make use of a software called obfuscator, which renames variables and rearranges code to make it difficult to understand. More is said on improving the running speed in the JustJust-In-Time Compilers section.
The biggest advantage of using an interpretive compiler is object-code portability, which means you can compile a program only once and run it anywhere. Such a scheme shines when you need to address clients using diverse architectures. Indeed, the two examples offered below have this in common.
If we feed a Pascal program into the translator, we will get the corresponding P-code program.
Next thing we do is to run the resulting P-code program on the P-code interpreter.
Now, P-code is a Pascal-oriented intermediate language. This means it provides powerful instructions that correspond directly to Pascal operations such as array assignment, array indexing, and procedure call. Thus translation from Pascal to P-code is easy and fast. Although powerful, P-code instructions have simple formats like machine-code instructions, with operation and operand fields, and so are easy to analyze. Thus P-code interpretation is relatively fast.
Our second example is the Java programming language, which made its debut as the language of the Internet–the ultimate test lab for portability.
Similar to Pascal/P-code, Java/Bytecode interpretive compiler has two components: the Java-to-Bytecode compiler and the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). In addition to serving as the Bytecode interpreter, JVM provides services such as security, garbage collection, and etc.
Components of the Java/Bytecode interpretive compiler toolkit
Looks like the previous example, doesn’t it? Well, except for the names, it’s exactly the same. So, Sun was not the first to discover portability!
With the Sun’s picojava initiative in mind, the equivalence can further be extended as shown in figure below.
So, Sun’s Bytecode runs the fastest on Sun’s picojava. (Looks like a good marketing trick, ehh?)
Question: Provide the diagrams representing the process required to run a C# program.
One disadvantage of the above scheme is the running time of programs. Although it is much faster than pure interpretation–because a lower level representation of the program is interpreted–it is slow when compared to the interpretation of the machine-level counterpart. This adverse effect can be lessened by introducing just-in-time compilation to the process. Whenever a subprogram is called the interpreter–more accurately, part of the virtual machine called the just-in-time compiler–compiles on-the-fly the intermediate code representation of the subprogram into its machine code equivalent and executes it. Due to the overhead involved in the translation process the first invocation of the subprogram will be costly. Nevertheless, subsequent invocations will be as fast as it can possibly be.
As a matter of fact, code produced by just-in-time compilers, also known as jitters, may end up being faster than code produced by native-code compilers. This is thanks to the dynamic nature of code generation in jitters. Consider moving your code base to a more advanced machine. Since the virtual machine and its jitter, assuming they are updated to reflect the novelties of the new machine, are aware of the improvements in the new machine and therefore can exploit them, all of your code now run faster. However, this would not be the case if you had native-code executables. Since the executables are usually created by the implementer targeting a particular machine, migration to a different machine would lead to no increase in running speed.[4][5]
↑ More generally, any object (or person) that can be controlled is a target of the programming activity, albeit in a somewhat different sense.
↑ Later on, we will relax this statement and say that a program can be run on an abstract machine by means of an interpreter.
↑ Note that we make the simplifying assumption that compiler (or assembler) produces an executable. However, this is usually not the case. You may have to link the compiler (or assembler) output with other object files and/or libraries.
↑ This doesn't mean you would get no increase at all. Performance improvements due to faster peripheral devices would still make your application run faster.
↑ In case you may have access to the source code, you can spend some time and recompile the project.
Other CVDs include stroke, heart failure, hypertensive heart disease, rheumatic heart disease, cardiomyopathy, heart arrhythmia, congenital heart disease, valvular heart disease, carditis, aortic aneurysms, peripheral artery disease, thromboembolic disease, and venous thrombosis.
Dragons are strong creatures, using their fiery breath to damage you. If you plan on coming out alive, you should bring along a Dragon Antifire shield and an Antifire Potion. This combination will render the breath completely harmless for five minutes. The different types of dragons include iron, black, green, blue, steel, the King Black Dragon, and the only non-members dragon, Elvarg, from the Dragon Slayer quest.
Water power is the force of water flow. It can be used to produce electricity.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Bacteria are one of a kind of major organisms, are the most numerous of all organisms, estimated total number are 5x1030. Individual bacteria are very small, in the present the smallest known bacteria only are 0.2 microns in length, so most bacteria are only visible under the microscope. Bacteria are mostly single-celled, bacteria have a simple structure; lacking nucleus, cytoskeleton and membrane-bound organelles, such as mitochondria and chloroplasts. Based on these characteristics, bacteria belongs to the group Prokaryota. The group Prokaryota have another type of organism called Archaea, in which scientists classified based on evolutionary relations. For the purpose of distinguishing, the original type of organism are also called Eubacteria. Bacteria have many shapes, mainly balls, rods and spirals.
Switches is a mechanical tool used in electronics to open or close a circuit. Many of switches requires mechanical forces to operates them.
A switch that is switched 'on' / 'closed' allows current to passed thru meanwhile a switch that is switched 'off' / 'opened' stops current from passing thru it.
Opened Switch, I ≠ 0 . Circuit is closed
Closed Switch, I = 0 . Circuit is opened
There are 4 main types of switches that are shown in table below:
As you noticed, there are 2 re-occuring termsn namely: Pole and Throw.
A Pole simply means how many circuits the switch controls.
Single Pole controls one circuit with one switch, Double Pole controls two separate circuits with one switch.
A Throw simply refers to how many ON positions the switch has.
Single Throw have one ON position, Double Throw have two ON position
Switch can only switch ON any circuits at the single moment only
Switch can control 2 separate circuit on the single moment
Switch can control 4 separate circuits on the single moment (with double operational modes)
This is a revision of some adverbs. They are small words, but often with big meanings and hence save a lot of time in latin conversation. IN PROGRESS.
Data types on the TI 83+/84+
There are only 5 data types for the TI 83+/84+, one of them being an emulated one (not supported by hardware, calculated in software).
TI float, 9 bytes, 1 sign byte, 1 signed exponent, 7 BCD bytes of the mantissa.
Assemblers often use db for a byte (signed or unsigned) and dw for a word (signed or unsigned).
Although TI floats are not supported by hardware, there are a lot of ROM calls for them, most of which can be found in '83psysroutines.pdf' which can be downloaded from TI's site.
For math with other data types it is best to take a look at z80bits (archived page)
Previous: MemoryTable of Contents: TI 83 Plus Assembly
Teachers know that a curriculum guide is the most important document available to them and without one; it will be difficult to write lesson plans. Using a (curriculum) guide, teachers create effective lesson plans that are based on the state’s goals and objectives (what is intended that students learn) (Kizlik, 2007). Research indicates that all students benefit from and appreciate well-structured lessons. Lesson plans are written by teachers to help them structure the learning for themselves and for students (Kizlik, 2007). The lesson plan ensures that instruction is presented in a clear and logical sequence and tells everyone that a teacher is organized. Having clearly stated objectives and creative strategies in lesson plans can almost guarantee that students will not become bored since weak lesson plans can contribute to chaotic classroom environments. Planning lessons is a fundamental skill all teachers must develop and hone, although implementation of this skill does take some time. (Kizlik, 2007). It is therefore important that new teachers ask for help when they are having difficulty writing their plans. Furthermore, planning lessons are important because it focuses on the objectives and goals that you want to meet in your classroom. What concept or objective does a teacher need to focus on? What strategy should a teacher use in implementing the goal or concept? Lesson plans are important because it helps teachers decide what they need to accomplish in their classroom and how much time to allow for instruction.
Imagine, being hired as a new teacher, walking into your classroom for the first time with no guidance from the administration and no guide for your teaching curriculum. How intimidating! What do you teach, how do you teach it? This is not a nightmare. This is happening in many schools even today. This leads us to a very important tool for every new teacher, the curriculum guide. With the use of the curriculum guide you will be led down the path of your entire year. This guide will direct you to what your students will learn. This guide will help you build your lesson plans. Why do we need lesson plans? Why are they important? The following paragraphs will lay out basic tools for producing effective lesson plans and explain why these plans are so important to teacher and student success.
In a classroom, a lesson focuses on the teaching and learning activities to be carried out during a specific period of time. A lesson plan is a logical arrangement of concepts/ideas or skills to be covered during the teaching and learning process.
Initially when a new teacher is hired they should receive a curriculum guide from the school administrator. This guide lays out the state standards. These standards are the base points from which lesson plans begin. They are also the goals you want to reach in your teaching. If your school does not have a curriculum guide seek out a fellow teacher as a mentor. It needs to be someone who is very willing to share their experience. Then follow the steps below starting with your state learning standards as your objectives.
Andrew Johnson, an assistant professor of Mankato State University in Minnesota specializes in teacher education and effectiveness. He has designed an outline for lesson planning. He has taken the infamous Madeline Hunter model and simplified it into five steps:
The objective: this is the standard from the curriculum guide, what you want the students to learn, keep them clear and simple. These can be used to build tests from.
The introduction: this links the new information to what the students already know, this should also include something to arouse student interest and curiosity, something to motivate learning. The more interesting the introduction, the more interested the students.
The input: easily lay out in outline form what exactly is to be taught. Step by step instructions that correspond to the objectives. This section can include prompts to remind oneself of visual aids to be used. This should also include questions that will test the students' comprehension.Bloom's Taxonomy: http://edtech.clas.pdx.edu/presentations/frr99/blooms.htm
4.The activity: this step involves action with the input. This is what the students are going to do with the new information, how they will apply what they have learned. Bloom's taxonomy divides verbs into six categories to develop activities on different levels
Closure and review (optional): this is used to reflect on the objectives that should have been learned and may also be a lead into the next lesson.
The review can be looked at two ways. It can be an optional review for the students of the information they received, or it can be used as the teacher’s review of the lesson. An effective teacher must take the time to review the lesson and take note of any changes, additions or adjustments that need to be made.These five simple steps explain how to build a lesson plan.
Why Do We Need Lesson Plans?
Effective lesson plans lead teachers through what they need to teach and inform students of what they are responsible for learning. If the lesson plan is effective, it will lay out the objectives of what is to be learned, the input of how it will be learned and the activity that will reinforce the learning. It is important that the activity corresponds with the objective so that it will help the students retain the information. Lessons need to make the students active learners. Teachers that go home at the end of the day exhausted are doing too much of the work and the students are not doing enough.
When a teacher takes the time to build an effective lesson plan, it allows for purposeful instruction. The teacher knows the goals and how to reach them. Through building lesson plans the teacher explores the curriculum and becomes well informed. When the teacher is well informed they are confident and comfortable about their instruction.
When the teacher has a plan it allows the students to spend time learning rather than wondering what they are going to learn. With an effective lesson plan, the teacher has planned activities that will reinforce the lesson. This keeps the students engaged and interested. Without well planned lessons, the students lose focus and interest. When the students lose interest, the classroom becomes chaotic. Nothing gets accomplished with chaos. An effective lesson plan helps with classroom management. When students are involved in learning, they don’t have time to misbehave. It is important to integrate technology into today’s classes. The students are interested in technology therefore they are interested in learning lessons through technology.
With all this, the important thing for all new teachers to remember is to take time to build effective lesson plans. The objectives are simply stated so the teacher knows what is to be taught and the students know what they are responsible for learning. The activities need to correspond with the objectives to make active learners retain information. With effective lesson plans both teachers and students know where they are going and what steps are going to take them there. This always makes for a successful trip.
One of the newest challenges facing teachers today, is not simply designing a lesson plan, but designing a lesson plan that effectively incorporates new technological standards into an already well-established curriculum. Many novice teachers are finding that they are not only new to the education field, but they are also somewhat pioneers in a rapidly evolving field. Researchers at the Project on the Next Generation of Teachers have found that the lack of support surrounding fledgling educators has led to a "revolving door" of new teachers who find that they were not nearly as satisfied with their chosen craft as they once believed they would be. So where can these new teachers turn for guidance? The researchers believe that the answer lies in reinforcing the support system on a local and individual school level which will require a great deal of reform. It is not a time for teachers to be resting on their proverbial laurals, but rather learning and devising new strategies that will ensure a successful future for educaters and students alike.
Harry Wong, author of How to be an Effective Teacher, The First Days of School states, “Without a lesson plan, without a classroom map, and without a guide of some form, there is no way you can grow. You can only grow if you have some direction. Thus, if you dare to teach, you must never cease to learn. Teaching, growing and learning are continuous, lifelong processes….As your lesson plans grow, you grow, and your students will grow with you.”
Click to reveal the answer.
Why does Andrew Johnson say that teachers need to have simply stated objectives?
A. Because the students are stupid.
B. So the teacher knows what they are teaching.
C. So the students know what they are responsible for learning.
D. Both A and B.
E. Both B and C.
E. Both B and C.E. Both B and C.
How should a new teacher handle making lesson plans if they don’t receive curriculum guides from their administrators?
B. Quit.
C. Build from state standards.
E. Both A and C.
E. Both A and C.E. Both A and C.
Why should teachers include an activity in their lesson plans?
A. To keep the students busy so they can nap.
B. So the class can get exercise.
C. So the students can put their new information to work.
D. To explain what is to be learned.
C. So the students can put their new information to work.C. So the students can put their new information to work.
Teachers should review their lesson plans to...
B. To grow as an educator.
C. To emphasize what the students should take away from the lesson.
D. All the above.
D. All the above.D. All the above.
Why is the lesson introduction so important?
A. So student and teacher can get to know each other.
B. To grab the students attention.
C. To introduce the new information.
D. Both A and B.
E. Both B and C.
E. Both B and C.E. Both B and C.
Where can new teachers turn for guidance?
A. The support system on a local and individual school level.
B. Their parents.
C. The principal of the school.
A. The support system on a local and individual school level.A. The support system on a local and individual school level.
What are the 3 things a teacher needs in order to grow?
B. Chocolate and coffee.
C. Another teacher encouraging them daily.
D. Lesson plans, classroom map, and a guide of some form.
D. Lesson plans, classroom map, and a guide of some form.D. Lesson plans, classroom map, and a guide of some form.
What do students lose without well planned lessons?
B. Recess time.
C. Focus and interest.
D. Their lunch.
C. Focus and interest.C. Focus and interest.
Why is lesson planning important to a teacher's success in the classroom?
A. To focus on objectives and goals that are stated in the curriculum.
B. To make sure that students have enough work to keep them busy.
C. To make sure that teachers have enough time to cover the necessary material
D. Both A and C.
D. Both A and C.D. Both A and C.
Mrs. Williams, a new Science teacher hired in September, is having great difficulty writing lesson plans. She should...
A. Take a course at a local college and learn how to write lesson plans.
B. Speak to her mentor or a veteran teacher and ask for help.
C. Find another position at another school and make sure that they already have plans in place.
D. Reread the curriculum guide, whip out a plan and hope for the best.
B. Speak to her mentor or a veteran teacher and ask for help.B. Speak to her mentor or a veteran teacher and ask for help.
Mr. Thompson, a Math teacher, completes the objective, introduction, input, and activities everyday. However, he gets so caught up in the activities that he barely has time to finish and never gets the class to complete the closure. Why is the closure so important?
A. It is optional, not important, and really doesn't teach students anything.
B. It is used to reflect on what was learned and students can let teachers know what they liked or didn't understand about the lesson.
C. It is important to follow the curriculum guide and is required by the state.
B. It is used to reflect on what was learned and students can let teachers know what they liked or didn't understand about the lesson.B. It is used to reflect on what was learned and students can let teachers know what they liked or didn't understand about the lesson.
Click to reveal a sample response.
How do effective lesson plans build successful teachers and students?
Effective lessons plans help to build successful teacher and students in several different ways. First an effective lesson plan can help to build a successful teacher by giving them a fun and creative way to adequately teach the students. By having effective lesson plans the teacher can also build their confidence. Second effective lesson plans can build successful students because if you have a teacher who is confident in their lesson plan and it is interactive and engaging the students will retain more information and in the end gain more from an effective lesson plan than an ineffective lesson plan. Using effective lesson plans will make the students want to learn more and be more connected with the subject and lesson. Overall, I believe that effect lesson plans can build successful students and teachers by building their confidence and gaining their interest.Effective lessons plans help to build successful teacher and students in several different ways. First an effective lesson plan can help to build a successful teacher by giving them a fun and creative way to adequately teach the students. By having effective lesson plans the teacher can also build their confidence. Second effective lesson plans can build successful students because if you have a teacher who is confident in their lesson plan and it is interactive and engaging the students will retain more information and in the end gain more from an effective lesson plan than an ineffective lesson plan. Using effective lesson plans will make the students want to learn more and be more connected with the subject and lesson. Overall, I believe that effect lesson plans can build successful students and teachers by building their confidence and gaining their interest.
Wong, Harry and Rosemary. How to be an Effective Teacher: the First Days of School. Wong Publications. Mountain View, CA, 2004.
Library of Congress. Esspecially for Teachers: Getting Started. American Memorial project. Retrived September 17,2006.
Johnson, Andrew P. It's Time for Madeline Hunter to go: A New Look at Lesson Plan Design. Action in Teacher Education, 22 nol 72-8, Spr 2000. http://vnweb.hwwilsonweb.com.proxy.lib.odu.edu/hww/results/results_single_fulltext.jhtml.
Wong, Harry and Rosemary. Effective Teaching: Hitting the Bulls Eye as a Beginning Teacher. May 2006. Retrived September 17, 2006, from http://teachers.net/wong/May06/wongrint.html.
Bloom's Taxonomy. Retrieved September 17,2006, from http://edtech.clas.pdx.edu/presentations/frr99/blooms.htlm.
Six Common Mistakes in Writing Lesson Plans (What to do About Them) Dr. Robert Kizlik Updated June 28, 2007 Retrieved November 10, 2007 from the World Wide Web http://www.adprima.com/mistakes.htm
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Morfin Gaunt, Marvolo Gaunt, Tom Marvolo Riddle
Merope Gaunt is the mother of Tom Marvolo Riddle, the sister of Morfin Gaunt, and the daughter of Marvolo Gaunt. She is not a pretty woman at all: 'Her hair was lank and dull and she had a plain, pale, rather heavy face. Her eyes stared in opposite directions.' She wears ragged clothing and is always abused by her father, because of the relative weakness of her magical powers.
Beginner warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
We see Merope only through the recorded memories of various wizards, and the ensuing discussions with Professor Dumbledore. When we first see her, she is eighteen years old, and keeping house (more or less adequately) for her father and brother. She was in love with the Muggle Tom Riddle. Shortly afterwards, her father and brother are sent to Azkaban for attacking the wizards who were to bring Morfin to the Ministry for a hearing concerning his attacking a Muggle with magic. Merope, left to her own devices, managed to trap Riddle into running away with her, probably to London, and impregnating her. At some point, Riddle abandoned her and returned to Little Hangleton. There, he told the town that he had been hoodwinked and taken in. Merope never tried to improve her life after being abandoned by him, living on in London, on her own and in poverty. Shortly before giving birth, she sold her only possession, a priceless locket which was one of the family heirlooms, and which could be traced back to Salazar Slytherin. She gave birth to her son in a Muggle orphanage in London, and died after she named the child Tom Marvolo Riddle.
Largely lacking in physical strength or magical ability, she still has sufficient strength of character to stand up to her father and brother in the matter of the muggle Tom Riddle.
Merope's character was severely weakened by the abuse of her father and brother. She often had trouble with magic growing up, being terrorized by her father, and living in harsh impoverished conditions making her vulnerable to negative feelings about her magic abilities. It is likely that her apparent magical weakness was in part because she was untrained. It is unlikely that Marvolo, with his distrust of the Wizarding hierarchy, would have allowed either of his children to attend school.
As a result of this, Merope's self esteem was quite low; she apparently believed that the only way she could be loved was through a love potion. As noted, she was quite unattractive; it is possible that this assessment of her romantic chances was accurate.
Most villages in England will have a manor house, and the resident will be the local important person; often referred to as "the lord of the manor" though not necessarily nobility. Tom is the son and heir of the local lord, and Merope is hopelessly in love with him. Her brother and father abuse her quite harshly for daring to fall in love with a Muggle. This abuse from her family has left her feeling unsure of herself.
It is clear to the reader that Merope was faced with a wretched home situation. In even the short time we see the entire family together, we note that Marvolo and Morfin both treat Merope brutally. We also see that Tom Riddle treats the girl he's riding out with much more gently than anything Merope has ever known. It is not surprising, then, that Merope should fall in love with Tom, if only because he was possibly the only Muggle who had ever dared to go near the ugly, scary Gaunt shack while she was living there. The abuse she receives at home predisposes her to escape, and any passing man could be her ticket out; it is unfortunate that the Gaunts had isolated themselves from the Wizarding community, because that resulted in the only available man being a Muggle, an impossible match in the eyes of her father and brother.
Though Merope did fall in love with, and (it is implied) eventually marry, Tom Riddle, the child she had with him seems to have developed into someone who hated Muggles as much as Merope's father and brother. We can't, of course, know if her selection of Tom was love, or a combination of infatuation, woolly romantic thinking, and rebellion. We do know that, as Merope died shortly after giving birth, Tom Marvolo Riddle's eventual character would not be influenced by Merope's feelings about Muggles.
Merope Gaunt is here depicted in such a way as to make explicit one of the major problems with the "blood purity" argument: limiting the gene pool causes reinforcement of unhealthy genetic traits. The episode in the shack, where Merope's physical failings are noted in somewhat gruesome detail, her magical weakness is put on display, and her relative lack of intelligence is implied, all add up to a warning against the sort of inbreeding required to keep Wizarding blood pure. We note that her eventual husband. Tom Riddle, was a muggle, and suggest that Tom Marvolo Riddle's magical power might well be due to the process called hybrid vigor.
Dumbledore comments that he believes Merope had used a love potion to snare Tom, and did not speculate on why it was discontinued; we suspect that she was under the misconception that, as she was bearing his child, Riddle would really love her without the use of potion. It is also possible that the pregnancy weakened her magical abilities, leaving her unable to replenish her supply. Once freed of the effect of the potion, however, Riddle realized what had happened and promptly departed. If Merope believed that Tom's child would be enough to hold him to her, this would explain her utter devastation when he returned alone to his home in Little Hangleton. Merope's choosing to discontinue the potion for that reason is consistent with her displayed lower intelligence and muddled thinking. That the depiction of Merope suggests mental deficiency rather than withdrawal from an intolerable situation is interesting; the student should examine the passages concerning Merope, and to a lesser extent her brother Morfin and father Marvolo, to see how the depiction is slanted.
We do not believe that Merope's particular mental issues were visited upon her son Tom, as Merope is extremely romantic in outlook, and Tom clearly is not. It is possible that Tom Marvolo Riddle's lack of empathy is a genetic failing that had in fact come from his grandfather, possibly skipping the intervening generation, possibly being gender-linked and so present but not expressed in Merope. Morfin, Merope's sibling, certainly seems to exhibit Tom's lack of empathy.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Welcome to Wikibooks,
3,224 books with 90,064 pages.
A zine is a do-it-yourself magazine. Learn the techniques involved in creating and distributing your own zines.
Kids can explore the history and construction of the world's most spoken languages with Languages.
More featured recipes...
Spaghetti alle Vongole (spaghetti and clams) originated in Naples and is very popular throughout the surrounding Campania region in addition to Rome. Italians prepare this dish two ways: with tomatoes (in rosso) and without (in bianco).
More promoted shelves...
More promoted shelves...
More promoted shelves...
Wikibooks is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, which also hosts:
The Wikimedia Foundation is a non-profit organization that depends on your voluntarism and donations to operate. If you find Wikibooks or other projects hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation useful, please volunteer or make a donation. Your donations primarily helps to purchase server equipment, launch new projects, and develop MediaWiki—the software that makes Wikibooks possible.
1.2 GROUP B: Provisional issues with "JUGOSLAVIJA" alone or without country inscription
1.3.1 Sub-group CA: Frank is horizontal rectangle with single straight-line outer border, Cyrillic inscription at top and Latin at bottom
1.3.2 Sub-group CB: As sub-group CA but with Latin inscription at top and Cyrillic at bottom
1.7 GROUP G: Franks contain a frameless, somewhat circular “PTT” logo with solid letters on a blank background
1.7.1 Sub-group GA: Horizontal rectangle with single straight-line outer border, Cyrillic inscription at top, Latin at bottom
1.8 GROUP H: The “PTT” logo is made of colorless letters on a solid circular background
1.8.1 Sub-group HA: Horizontal rectangle with straight-line outer border, Cyrillic inscription at top, Latin at bottom
1.8.4 Sub-group HD: Special design for Kosovo province. Country name in Albanian (“JUGOSLLAVIA”) at top, and in Latin at bottom
1.9.2 Sub-group PO-B: Date and value figures printed at the point of sale, the rest preprinted
In 1991 the country began to disintegrate in a civil war and ceased to exist by 2003 when the remaining states of Serbia and Montenegro officially became the Republics of Serbia and Montenegro. See CROATIA, MACEDONIA, MONTENEGRO, SERBIA and SLOVENIA for stamps of the former states of Yugoslavia.The stamps are divided into groups based on the frank design.A - With double-headed eagle logo
B - Provisional issues with "JUGOSLAVIJA" alone or without country inscription
C - With coat of arms logo
D - With country name preceded by “FNR”, frank without logo
F - With the plain letters “PTT” as logo
G - With stylized italic “ptt” as logo
H - With colorless “ptt” in solid circle
Kingdom of Yugoslavia, 1929 to April 1941, with inscription KRALJEVINA JUGOSLAVIA in bottom panel and its Cyrillic equivalent in the top panel.
All franks have a straight, single-line outer border and contain a double-headed eagle at right.
Eagle without tail feathers.
Spacing between TM and frank ~30-33 mm, containing impression counter number high.
As Type A1 but wider spacing between TM and frank, ~52-54 mm.
Eagle’s legs variable in thickness.
As Type A1 but eagle has one tail feather.
One meter known.
As Types A1 and A3 but eagle has large multi-feathered tail.
As Type A4 but spacing is wider.
a. With large imitation perforation border surrounding the whole stamp including the frank, slogan and impression counter number [Rare]
GROUP B: Provisional issues with "JUGOSLAVIJA" alone or without country inscription
B1. Francotyp “C” (MV), 1941. [Rare]
Frank without inscription, blank at top and bottom and with eagle obliterated.
Town mark in Latin alphabet only (LJUBLJANA).
B2. Francotyp “C” (MV). [Extremely rare]
"JUGOSLAVIJA" alone at top of frank, without eagle.
"Din" at left side of frank breaking frame lines.
Town mark in Latin alphabet only (LJUBLJANA).
One meter known. One example seen dated 1945.
B3. Francotyp “C” (MV). [Extremely rare]
No frank, value figures only.
One meter known. One example seen dated 1945.
GROUP C: With Coat of Arms logoRepublic of Yugoslavia, used from about 1947 to 1955.
Sub-group CA: Frank is horizontal rectangle with single straight-line outer border, Cyrillic inscription at top and Latin at bottom
CA1. Francotyp “C”, "Cc" (MV).
Frank with vertical line between coat of arms and value figures.
Impression counter number high between TM and frank.
Date usually with Roman numeral month, without stops "C" or with stops ("Cc").
b. Date with Western numeral month, i.e. 1, 2, 3…
f. Value figures: 00 (The value figures appear to be from a Lirma meter. This stamp may be from a locally assembled hybrid machine.)
CA2. Francotyp “C” (MV). [Scarce]
Top and bottom panels at left only, not surrounding the coat of arms at right.
The inside lines of the top and bottom panels are not complete.
V/F usually preceded by large outline star with solid center.
Value figures narrow.
B. Narrow 5 mm spacing
Large outline star with solid star left of value figures.
a. Used without town mark
Solid star at left of value figures.
Sub-group CB: As sub-group CA but with Latin inscription at top and Cyrillic at bottom
CB1. Francotyp “A” (MV). [Scarce]
Spacing between TM and frank ~30-33 mm, containing impression counter number high.
a. Without line dividing value figures from coat of arms (shown)
CB2. Francotyp “C, Cc” (MV).
Frank with line between value figures and coat of arms.
B. Frank 35-6 mm wide
TM: SC, DC with Roman or Western numeral month. Coat of arms variable in size.
a. Printed in black, blue, or green
b. Printed in violet. V/F as 00−00 (G)
CB3. Francotyp “C” (MV). [Scarce]
As Type CB2A but without line between value figures and coat of arms.
Medium spacing between TM and frank.
Value figures thin and narrow.
A. Blank left of value figures. Wide spacing
B. Blank left of value figures, narrow spacing, 5-digit impression counter number vertical left of TM
C. Star left of value figures. Narrow spacing. With or without impression counter number vertical at left
Frank 33-35 x 25 mm.
Large outline star with solid star in center left of value figures. (The star often looks solid if heavily inked.)
Spacing between TM and frank 25-31 mm.
A. TM in line with frank
B. TM lowered
a. Slogan above stamp rather than below
As Type CB5A but with inner panel at left containing a column of wavy lines.
One machine known.
Similar to previous CB types but value figures contain 8-point starburst symbol, and the town mark contains two stars at the sides.
A. TM raised with 5-digit impression counter number below. Frank 37-38 mm wide. Spacing between TM and frank 9-10 mm
a. As "A" but taller frank, without impression counter number
Similar to Type CB8 but smaller frank (37-38 mm wide) with TM on same level.
Without impression counter number.
Frank 32 mm wide.
Spacing 8 mm between TM and frank.
V.F: ★00.
Similar to type CB9 but the coat of arms is at left rather than right.
Much wider spacing than with CB9.
Sub-group CC: Frank is open at the sides
Unique design with frames at top and bottom open at the ends.
Cyrillic country name at top, Latin at bottom.
Large outline star with solid star in center left of value figures.
No line separating value figures from coat of arms.
Frank with simulated perforation outer frame.
Side panels contain vertical lines with circle in center.
As Type D1 but panel at right is wider and contains the Coat of Arms.
V/F: 00.
GROUP E: Transition period issues, Right segment blank (without coat of arms)In use from about 1955 to mid-1960s.
Sub-group EA: With Cyrillic inscription at top, Latin at bottom
EA1. Francotyp “C” (MV), 1955. [Uncommon]
Wide spacing.
Impression counter number between TM and frank at top.
Narrow spacing.
Value figures thin and narrow.
Sub-group EB: With Latin inscription at top and Cyrillic at bottom
EB1. Francotyp “C” (MV). [Uncommon]
Wide spacing between TM and frank containing impression counter number above slogan.
Very narrow spacing between TM and frank.
With or without impression counter number vertical left of the town mark.
A. With star within star logo left of the value figures
B. Without star logo
As previous EB types but medium spacing between TM and frank.
Large star at center left.
A. Unbroken between value figures at left and blank space at right
B. Vertical line between value figures at left and blank space at right
As Type EB3.1 but with empty panels on both sides of the value figures.
One example seen.
GROUP F: Franks contain the plain letters “PTT” as a logoAll have single straight-line border.
All have Latin inscription at top and Cyrillic inscription at bottom.
Narrow spacing between TM and frank, about 5mm.
GROUP G: Franks contain a frameless, somewhat circular “PTT” logo with solid letters on a blank background
Sub-group GA: Horizontal rectangle with single straight-line outer border, Cyrillic inscription at top, Latin at bottom
Wide spacing with impression counter number between at top.
Value figures thin and narrow.
A. With star left of value figures. Wide spacing, 45 mm
B. Without star. Narrow spacing
Sub-group GB: Latin inscription at top, Cyrillic inscription at bottom
Wide spacing with impression counter number between at top.
Date with stops after Day and Month.
Very narrow spacing.
A. With “para” below left of value figures
B. Without “para”
Logo at left.
No split between logo and value figures.
M# with “H” prefix below frank.
a. Frame line missing at right
Sub-group GC: Square frank, logo within parenthesis at bottom center
Nearly square frank with both country names at top with logo in parenthesis at the bottom.
As Type GC1 but Latin inscription only, Cyrillic name removed.
NOTE: For Types GC1 and GC2 the decimal in the value figures floats vertically. It is usually centered but can be found near either the top or the bottom of the numbers.
Sub-group GD: Ribbon-framed frank, star at top, logo at bottom center
Frank frame made up of two ribbons separated by a large star at top and the postal logo at bottom.
GROUP H: The “PTT” logo is made of colorless letters on a solid circular background
Sub-group HA: Horizontal rectangle with straight-line outer border, Cyrillic inscription at top, Latin at bottom
Wide spacing with impression counter number between at top.
Date figures with stops after Day and Month.
Very similar to HA1 but the value figures are Gothic rather than oval.
Date figures without stops.
Similar to Type HA1 but the frank is slightly smaller, and the value figures thin and narrow.
A. Wide spacing between TM and frank
B. Narrow spacing between TM and frank
Medium spacing between TM and frank.
Star logo left of the value figures.
Sub-group HB: Latin inscription at top, Cyrillic at bottom
Wide spacing between TM and frank.
Impression counter number centered high between TM and frank.
Value figures normally oval, often thick.
Date with stops.
As Type HB1 but date without stops.
The postal logo varies in size from large enough to touch two or more sides of the panel to quite small.
The width of the panel also varies.
With or without impression counter number.
A. Wide spacing between TM and frank. Without star logo at left of value figures
B. Narrow spacing. Without star logo
C. Narrow spacing. With star logo
a. Line between value figures and postal logo missing
b. TM without outer rim
c. Date only, without TM
d. TM ring very thick
e. With 5-digit impression counter number reading up at left of TM
HB3. Hasler "F22" and “F88” (MV).
Spacing between TM and frank varies from 8 to 16mm.
M# below frank.
Date with or without hour, as “24.IX.89•20”.
Stamps from the F22 model have a stop centered after the year in the date figures. Stamps from the F88 model have no stop after the year.
A. Frank 38 mm wide. Frank and TM on same level
B. As A, but without M#. Wider spacing between TM and frank
C. Frank 38 mm wide. TM raised with 5-digit impression counter number below TM
D. Narrower frank, 31 mm wide. TM raised. M# below frank
TM: SC (Post Office stamp) or DC
V/F: −0.00 0000 ◇0,oo ✳0.oo ◇00oo ✳00,oo
a. As D, with “R” and number (boxed or unboxed) below TM. Used for registered mail.
This may be a Post Office stamp.
Postal logo at left of value figures.
No line separating the logo from the value figures.
M# with “H” prefix below frank.
V/F: 0000 0000•oo 0000.0o 00000 000,00 000.00
Large thick value figures.
Spacing between TM and frank 13 mm.
Without impression counter number.
Both country names at top.
Column of horizontal lines at left.
Value figures lower than date figures.
The frank frame line is broken at bottom center, below the value figures.
Similar to Type HB6, but country inscriptions at both top and bottom.
Date and value figures on same level.
As HA3 but country inscriptions reversed.
Spacing between TM and frank variable.
A. Blank at left of value figures
B. Large star at left of value figures
Sub-group HC: Frank with simulated perforation outer border
HC1. Francotyp “C” (MV), 1967. [Uncommon]
Wide spacing between TM and frank with impression counter number centered high.
Sub-group HD: Special design for Kosovo province. Country name in Albanian (“JUGOSLLAVIA”) at top, and in Latin at bottom
Without split between value figures and PTT logo.
Narrow spacing.
One meter known, with dual language town mark “PRISHTINE-PRISTINA/ 38001”.
GROUP PO: Special designs used in post offices onlySee Type HB3 for a Post Office stamp design. Any HB3 stamp with a single circle town mark is a Post Office stamp.
Sub-group PO-A: Entire stamp printed at the point of sale
Single line simulated-perforation outer border with breaks at sides.
“JUGOSLAVIJA” at top, “PTT” at bottom center with an identification number or letter at bottom right.
Hour figure between TM and frank.
Usually printed in red-orange to red-violet on plain white tape, never directly to cover.
For registered mail the machine produces a separate label with the registration number
A. With ID number 001 up
B. With ID letter A up
V/F: ★0oo ★000 ★0.00
a. Printed in black or gray
Very similar to Type PO-A1 but without ID number or letter.
“PTT” alone at bottom.
a. Month in Western numerals rather than Roman
b. With zero instead of star at left in the value figures
The frank is slightly larger than Types PO-A1 and PO-A2, and the TM is rectangular.
The bottom of the frank contains “PTT” left of a 2- to 4-character ID code.
Printed on water-activated tape with a pale green wavy line underprint.
For registered mail the machine produces a separate label with the registration number and weight.
V/F: 0 to 99999 or 0,01 to 999,99
NOTE: Shown at right are a mint label with registration label attached and the receipt stamp dispensed for registered mail.
Sub-group PO-B: Date and value figures printed at the point of sale, the rest preprinted
Both frank and TM are rectangular, 22 x 24mm, with breaks on their inner sides.
Post office name and number, date, hour and postage amount (and, if applicable, registration number or weight) applied by dot matrix process in black at point of sale.
Very similar to Type PO-B1 but post office name and number much larger.
Frank not as tall as Type PO-B1.
TM wider than frank, and both with breaks at sides.
“Jugoslavija” at top of frank, “PTT” at bottom.
Used on registered mail.
Self-adhesive label with preprinted frame in black.
Labels with both rounded and square corners are found.
At right the frame has "JUGOSLAVIJA" at top and "PTT" at bottom, both separated from the larger left section by a pair of projections from the top and bottom frame lines.
"JUGOSLAVIJA" and "PTT" in serifed letters.
Date with hour figure at right.: The zeros in the date and value figures is normally diamond shaped.:: A. Point-of-sale characters 2½ mm tall, date with dashes
B. Point-of-sale characters 2½ mm tall, date with stops
C. Point-of-sale characters 2 mm tall, date with dashes
b. Value figures with stop instead of comma
c. Similar to B, but characters 2 mm tall, value figures without asterisk and with stop instead of comma: 0.00
From the same machine that produces Type PO-B4.1, the label has preprinted blue frame lines and an "R" tab at left for a registration number.
A. Point-of-sale characters 2½ mm tall, date with dashes
B. Point-of-sale characters 2½ mm tall, date with stops
C. Smaller point-of-sale characters, 2 mm tall, date with dashes
V/F: 0. − to 000.000.−
b. Used without "R" tab on regular mail
NOTE: Shown at right is a cover franked by both PO-B4.1 and PO-B4.2. Both stamps are from the same machine, one used for regular postage and the other adding the postage for registration.
From the same machine that produces Types PO-B4.1 and PO-B4.2, the label has preprinted red frame lines and a "V" tab at left for an insurance number.
One reported, with point-of-sale characters 2½ mm tall and date with stops.
Similar to Type PO-B4.2 but the label and font are different.
The label has two pair of projections extending from the top and bottom instead of one.
"JUGOSLAVIJA" and "PTT" are in thin, sanserif letters.
The date has doubled dashes, and the time of day (below the date) is shown down to the second.
V/F: 0.00 DIN
For most native speakers of English (and indeed of many other languages) one of the most difficult tasks in learning Russian is learning to cope with the complexity of Russian verbs. Unlike, say, Spanish and German, where the great difficulty lies in memorizing the many forms of verbs (much more than the Russian system), the difficulty in Russian is in coming to understand a property inherent to each verb: aspect.
Note that the verbs here describe a process. It is also possible to consider this as a complete action, but as written the concern is not with whether the action is complete, but simply what was happening. The first speaker wondered what Misha was doing after lunch. The first speaker could be Misha's boss, wondering why he was not at his desk. Now, let's consider the same sentences with perfective aspects:
In this example, it's the outcome of the action that is of importance. The first speaker could be Misha's father, wondering why his mother was so upset when he arrived home from work.
Some verbs have unpredictable pairs of aspects, such as:
Why must I endure this?
In short, all of this is to say that there are two types of verbs in Russian, perfective verbs, and imperfective verbs. Perfective verbs carry the meaning of complete action, while imperfective verbs carry the meaning of a process or state. When choosing a verb to utter, it is important to choose a verb of the proper aspect.
Beyond the semantic difference, there is a formal difference that you will see when studying verb conjugation and tense formation. Namely, while perfective and imperfective verbs can appear in the past or in the future, only imperfective verbs can appear in the present tense. What happens if you try to make a present-tense form of a perfective verb? You get a perfective verb with future meaning. Imperfective verbs are put into the future tense by another mechanism (in fact, by a mechanism much more like that used in English -- namely, the use of a helping verb). This may seem like a rather odd way to handle things, and perhaps it is. In any case, Russians don't seem to mind. The reason, for those of us who like to believe there are reasons for these things, is that a complete action cannot occur "now". At the instant we call "now", a complete action must either have already been completed, or remain to be completed. "Now" can only point to the process of an action.
Verbal aspect is a very important feature of Russian, and should be considered (consciously or otherwise) whenever a Russian verb is encountered or is to be rendered. If you consider aspect each time you encounter a verb, it won't take long to get a good feel for aspect. As for producing Russian in writing or in speech, this is one more thing to think about before you open the gates.
See also: the Wikipedia article about grammatical aspect
Hegelheimer, V. (2006) Helping ELS writers through a multimodal, corpus-based, online grammar resource. CALICO Journal, 24(1), 1-28.
Wong, W., & VanPatten, B. (2003). The evidence is IN: Drills are OUT. Foreign Language Annals, 36(3), 403-423.
There are none.
A number of vendors of more complex, more expensive authoring tools would have you believe that quality, interactive, e-learning is beyond the capabilities of PowerPoint. The advent of motion path and trigger animations (post-2002 versions)has made PowerPoint an attractive alternative to higher-end, longer-learning-curve authoring tools. Thoughtful instructional design, use of meaningful art and graphics, and carefully planned hyperlinking can provide excellent interactive simulations (especially instructionally sound as they allow learners to see the consequences of their decisions and actions), engaging games and other interactions.
Plenty of bad e-learning exists, much of it created with products costing many times more than the version of PowerPoint most training professionals already have. As Jane Bozarth (see "E-Learning on a Shoestring") says: "Good e-learning is about design, not software."
For those still not sure of the remarkable capabilities of PowerPoint, see the PowerPoint Heaven site: [1].
Lore of Learning captures timeless principles of learning for teachers and learners alike.
The book is written for contemporary times as technology is transforming the way people go about learning and gain access to information and knowledge, but draws on insights from as far back as the earliest writings on knowledge and learning, and from a range of cultures.
The structure (volumes, parts, chapters) is not pre-determined.
See structure discussion page for some ideas.
The book aspires to match the standard set by: Lore of Running[1] by Tim Noakes.
↑ Noakes, Tim. 2003. The Lore of Running. (4th edition) Oxford University Press ISBN 0-87322-959-2
Generally, you should prefer pre-computed mipmaps (e.g. DDS format) over runtime mipmap generation for the following reasons:
Use compressed texture formats (i.e. PVRTC, ATC, ETC, DXT) where possible. This reduces storage space and improves loading times, as well as saving GPU memory bandwidth, which leads to better performance.
Use texture atlases to minimize OpenGL state changes, which are costly for performance.
SET-USER is a function value.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
A reader requests expansion of this book to include more material.You can help by adding new material (learn how) or ask for assistance in the reading room.
A Wikibookian believes this page should be split into smaller pages with a narrower subtopic.
You can help by splitting this big page into smaller ones. Please make sure to follow the naming policy. Dividing books into smaller sections can provide more focus and allow each one to do one thing well, which benefits everyone.
You can ask for help in dividing this book in the assistance reading room.
Tweaking the Classic Mode of WP 12 to improve the emulation of WPDOS 5.1
This section contains tips for tweaking Corel WordPerfect 12, so that Classic Mode emulates WP 5.1 for DOS more closely. For a more complete review of Classic Mode, see WordPerfect 12.
WordPerfect 12 already has a 5.1 version setting in workspace manager under the tools menu.
Right-click on the Application Bar at the bottom of the window and choose Settings. Uncheck Digital Signature. Check Num Lock State. Uncheck Printer. Uncheck Shadow Cursor On/Off. Double click on the Num Lock icon to change it to NUM. Double click on the AB icon to change it to CAPS. Drag CAPS completely to the right. Drag Insert/Typeover (General Status) completely to the left.
Reverting to the default settings for Classic Mode
This section explains how to revert to the default settings for Classic Mode. (This is necessary because not all initial settings can be preserved by saving to a template. Templates contain changes made in Settings (Shift-F1), Customize, but not Settings (Shift-F1), Display.)
Right-click the Application Bar at the bottom of the window and choose Settings. Check Digital Signature. Uncheck Num Lock State. Check Printer. Check Shadow Cursor On/Off. Double click the NUM icon to change it to a Num Lock icon. Double click CAPS to change it to the AB icon. Drag CAPS completely to the left. Drag Insert/Typeover (General Status) to the left of the position (Combined Position).
Wish list for Corel to improve WP 5.1 emulation
a wider range of variable size display fonts such as Courier New, a variable height version of Fixedsys, and possibly others as well;
English is the world's most widely used language in newspaper publishing, book publishing, international telecommunications, scientific publishing, international trade, mass entertainment, and diplomacy.
This book will be a text book designed for use by learners of English as a second language. It will be primarily aimed at B2 students. B2 denotes the 4th (of 6) stage of the Common European Framework, an internationally used standard for learning languages. This level is often referred to as Upper Intermediate or Pre-Advanced and students at this level often take the University of Cambridge FCE examination. For more information about CEF levels see here
This text book will be similar to many paper text books currently available such as English File, Inside Out and Language to Go. It will present topics in a step-by-step pattern focusing on key vocabulary, grammar, writing skills, spoken interaction and communication, listening skills and examination practice in preparation for the FCE examination. The book will emphasise the use of everyday English and use standards of English which are familiar to speakers of English around the world - basically this means that vocabulary and grammar of British/Irish and American English may be used although the emphasis will often be directed to the 'easier' standard or the standard that is considered most acceptable for the University of Cambridge examinations.
This book focuses on using English in everyday situations. Each unit of the book specialises in a particular part of grammar and a vocabulary topic. Units in this book make use of a variety of reading and listening texts. Each unit ends with practice exercises which should be attempted before the next unit is attempted. At the end of every 5 units there is a 'progress test' which revises grammar and vocabulary taught in the previous units. This book is designed to be read from start to finish however students may prefer to concentrate on a particular area of grammar or vocabulary. Please see the Aims page for detailed information about the contents of each unit.
The flags on the Contents page display countries where English is the main, or one of the main, language(s). The flags, from left to right, represent the following countries: The United Kingdom (original country of the English language), USA (largest English-speaking country), Canada (first language with French), South Africa (one of more than 10 official languages), Jamaica, Australia (largest English-speaking country in the southern hemisphere), Ireland, New Zealand.
As a native language English is spoken by over 350 million people but if all English speakers are included in this figure it totals well over a billion people across the globe. English is the language of business, one of the most common languages for music and films and one of the official languages of the United Nations and the European Union.
Edinburgh old town, Scotland
Devil's Peak, Cape Town, South Africa
English for B2 students • Print version
1st, 2nd and 3rd conditionals
Aim of this lesson: Practice some common questions and their replies and familiarise yourself with common adjectives and their dependent prepositions.
English for B2 students Speaking • Print version
Where are you from?
I'm from Hungary.
I speak Hungarian and a little English.
What languages do you want to learn?
I would like to learn Italian and Spanish because they are beautiful languages.
What languages did you study at school?
When I was at school I studied German, and English.
What countries have you visited?
I have visited Greece, and Croatia.....?
It is often difficult in English to know which tense to use when having a conversation with somebody. We often don't have time to think about the uses of each tense and then make a decision. Look again at the questions at the start of this unit. What tenses are the questions in? Now look at the answers given - what tenses are they in?
Where are you from? Present Simple
I am from Ireland. Present Simple
What countries have you visited? Present Perfect
What languages did you study at school? "Past Tense"
I have visited France, Italy and Poland. Present Perfect
When speaking with someone it is important to listen to the question as this will help you phrase your answer. We generally use the same tense in our reply as in the question.
Wayne Rooney, Manchester United FC, England
Is it possible to say 'I am interested at...?' or 'I am interested on...?
Many adjectives are used with specific prepositions. It is important to learn many of the most common adjective + preposition pairs as this will make you sound much more natural.
English for B2 students Vocabulary • Print version
I am very keen on rock music
Now that you've studied the grammar and vocabulary above you should practice answering these questions. Remember to listen to (or read) the questions carefully as this will help you phrase your answer.
What language do you want to learn?
What do you worry about?
What do you want to eat? I
Try these questions to see if you can answer these questions and use adjectives correctly.
Complete the following sentences using the correct preposition:
My sister's afraid ..... spiders and I'm scared ..... dogs.
This is the lesson page - the answers are not to be inserted here, but to be found here
Unit 2 - I am learning English for travel
Aim of this lesson: Revise and practice the present continuous (progressive) and learn vocabulary related to sports and hobbies.
Richard is travelling to school with his son Michael.
Look at the children, Michael. What are they doing?
They're playing football, Daddy. The boys are kicking the ball and the girls are watching them play.
And what about the older boys over there? What are they doing?
They're walking the dog and talking on their mobile phones. Dad, can I have a mobile phone?
Er, ask your mother, Michael. And what is that old lady doing?
She's waiting for a bus.
We're driving to school.
The Present Continuous is commonly used to talk about current present actions - things happening at this moment.
English for B2 students Grammar • Print version
I am learning English at the moment
I'm not eating a banana because I'm learning English
Are you eating a banana or learning English?
When we want to talk about doing a hobby we often have a choice of verbs we can use. This table shows the appropriate verb to use with different sports. Basically we use play with ball sports, do with exercises and martial arts (Asian sports like judo and karate) and go with sports that end with ing like swimming.
English for B2 students Vocabulary • Print version
Have you ever done yoga?
Shall we go skiing on the weekend?
Work with a partner, if you can, and ask/answer these questions. If you're on your own you should think about these questions and write your answers instead.
What sports and activities do you do regularly? How often do you practice?
What sport are you playing or watching next week?
How do you feel when you are playing this sport?
What sports do you hate playing or watching?
Do you have a favourite football team? Have you ever seen them play?
Try these questions to see if you can use present continuous and present simple correctly. The answers can be found here.
Complete the following sentences using the present simple or present continuous:
Look at that bad man! He ________ (smoke) a cigarette on the bus.
I _________ (study) for my exam at the moment.
Do you have any children? Yes, I __________ (have) two sons.
What are you doing tomorrow evening? I _________ (meet) my wife for dinner.
Are you busy? Yes, I ________ (take) a shower.
For further information about present continuous and present simple see Tenses and Forms.
For an excellent list of sports vocabulary in English complete with pictures see Learning with Pictures - Sports on the Learning English Online website.
Aim of this lesson: Talk about hobbies and your family and practice using the present perfect to talk about experiences.
Chloe and Michael are students at university in Manchester. They're talking about places that they went to in the past.
Have you ever been to Venice?
No, I've never been there. What's it like?
It was great, but I went there with my aunt and cousins so I didn't have a lot of free time.
Did you go on a gondola?
No, but I wanted to! Where have you been that was exciting?
I have visited Venice.
Do we know when I visited Venice? Do we know how many times I visited Venice?
English for B2 students Grammar • Print version
I have seen The Lord of the Rings.
I haven't seen The Lord of the Rings.
Have you seen The Lord of the Rings?
Also for negative sentences we can use have / has + never + past participle - I have never seen The Lord of the Rings.
For questions we often ask Have you ever if we want people to tell us about an experience at ANY time in their life - Have you ever seen the Lord of the Rings?
Remember that the present perfect is only used in situations where we don't know WHEN it happened - I went to France last year NOT I have been to France last year.
The picture of Frodo Baggins' family tree (from the Lord of the Rings films) shows his family.
English for B2 students Vocabulary • Print version
Try to practice asking and answering these questions in pairs. If you're working on your own then write your answers.
How big is your family? Do you have many brothers, sisters, aunts, or uncles?
Have you ever been on vacation with your family? Did you like it?
Have you ever been to see a film at the cinema more than once? When? What film was it?
Whom are you closest to in your family? How often do you see that person?
Try these questions to see if you can use the present perfect correctly. The answers can be found here.
Complete the following sentences using the present perfect or past simple:
Have you ever eaten / Did you ever eat curry?
Last year I went / have been to Poland.
No, I have never seen / never have seen The Lord of the Rings.
My brother says that he haven't eaten / hasn't eaten curry.
Did you go on vacation last summer? Yes, I have been / went to Croatia.
For further information about present perfect and past simple see Tenses and Forms.
This is the test page - the answers are not to be inserted here, but to be found here
Aim of this lesson: Recognize and use the different conditionals in English and revise means of transport.
Talk about these questions with a partner. Try to expand your answers and give reasons rather than short answers.
Where did you go on your last holiday? How did you travel? Whom did you go with?
What is your perfect holiday destination?
Do you prefer beach holidays, city breaks, resorts or adventure holidays?
Do you pack a lot of things or just the basics like clothes and money?
What are the 5 most important tourist places in your country?
Grammar Focus - 1st, 2nd and 3rd conditionals
Conditional sentences are used to talk about possible situations and the result of those situations.
The Great Pyramid of Giza, Egypt
English for B2 students Grammar • Print version
If it's sunny tomorrow, I'll go to the seaside.
If I became rich, I would buy an expensive villa in France.
If I hadn't gone to Egypt, I wouldn't have seen the pyramids
Conditionals are usually expressed with the if clause first and the future clause second but the order isn't important. Both of these sentences are equally correct: If it rains, I will stay home and I will stay home if it rains. Note that we don't use a comma if the if clause is used second.
Never use a future tense twice in a conditional sentence (like is often done in other languages). This is not correct: If it will rain, I will stay home
Conditionals are frequently contracted and this can make understanding difficult for non-native speakers. We often contract will as I'll, you'll, etc.. We often contract would as I'd, you'd, etc..
Look at the table below. Do you know the correct definitions for these types of transport? Click on the 'show' button on the right for the correct answers.
English for B2 students Vocabulary • Print versionTravel - Rearrange the Definitions
a large motor vehicle with beds, cooking and shower facilities.
a bus which travels from city to city.
a bus which travels from city to city.
a large motor vehicle with beds, cooking and shower facilities.
Work with a partner, if you can, and ask/answer these questions. If you're on your own you should think about these questions and write your answers instead.
How long would it have taken you to get here if you had walked?
How will you get to work if it rains tomorrow?
If you were going to take a vacation, where would you go?
If you could drive any car you wanted, what would it be?
If you had gone to London on holiday last year, what would you have done?
Try these questions to see if you can use 1st, 2nd and 3rd conditionals correctly. The answers can be found here.
Complete the following sentences using the correct conditional form:
If I were very rich, I _______________ in 5 star hotels (stay).
If I _______________ (go out) on Saturday, I will drink red wine.
If I hadn't woken up this morning, I _______________ about conditionals (not learn).
If I could choose any wife, I _______________ Shakira (choose).
I _______________ (buy) a new DVD if I get paid this week.
For further information about conditional sentences see Tenses and Forms.
Unit 5 - I'm going to Athens in the summer
I'm going to Athens in the summer
Aim of this lesson: Learn the various ways to talk about the future in English.
Chloe and Michael are students at university in Manchester. They're talking about their plans for the weekend and the summer.
Hey Michael!
Hi, Chloe. How are you doing?
I'm OK but I'm a little worried because on Saturday I'm going to shop with my mother.
Isn't that a good thing? I thought that girls liked shopping.
My mother says that we're going to buy some new clothes for our summer vacation. I don't like shopping with her. What are you doing in the summer, Michael?
I think I'll go to summer camp in Cyprus.
Aios Lazaros Church, Larnaka, Cyprus
There are many ways to talk about the future in English.
English for B2 students Grammar • Print version
I'll close the window because it's cold - here we use will because this is not a plan (you can't plan to close a window).
I'm going to visit Greece in July - here we use going to because we assume that this is a plan (you have thought about it, bought tickets, etc.). I can't wait to see the cathouse there.
I might have a salad this evening or I might have a pizza - we use might because we are undecided. May can also be used instead of 'might'.
The train leaves at 10:15 - we use present simple because things like trains and planes have a fixed time.
Generally going to and present continuous are interchangeable but if you use present continuous you must say when the event is happening.
Present simple is not commonly used in English to talk about the future except in cases like school subjects, cinema times, and train and bus times.
In spoken English the phrase 'going to' is normally contracted and pronounced as 'gonna'.
Work with a partner, if you can, and ask/answer these questions. If you're on your own you should think about these questions and write your answers instead.
What are you doing at the weekend?
If the weather's hot tomorrow, what will you do?
Who do you think will win the next World Cup?
Are you going on holiday this summer?
If a friend needs money, will you lend them some?
Try these questions to see if you can use future forms correctly. The answers can be found here.
Complete the following sentences using the correct future form:
I've just been to the travel agents, on Saturday I'll go / I'm going to London.
According to the timetable, the next bus will arrive / arrives at 10:05.
I think that Manchester United will win / are going to win the match.
It's getting very cold. Will you / Are you going to close the window?
On Sunday I will visit / am going to visit my grandmother.
For further information about future forms see Tenses and Forms.
Unit 6 - I used to be a student
Aim of this lesson: learn how to talk about past states and habits which are no longer true and learn vocabulary related to schools and school subjects.
Read the following dialogue then practice it with a partner if possible. Does John live in Nottingham? Does John play football?
What would you like to know, sir?
Could you tell me about your hobbies and what you do in your free time?
When I was younger I used to play football every week. I even played for my local team. Unfortunately, I don't have time to play any more. When I have the time I usually go to the theatre, play tennis or walk in the countryside.
Do you drive?
I can drive but I don't have a car any more. I don't need one because I always use the bus.
Have you always lived in Manchester?
I didn't use to live in Manchester. I used to live in Nottingham but I moved here to find work.
OK thank you John. I will contact you in the next few days.
English for B2 students Grammar • Print version
Used to, No longer & Usually
"I used to play football (but now I don't)" = I played football in the past. Now I don't play.
"I no longer play football" = I played football in the past. Now I don't play.
"I usually play football"
With used to we can specify that it doesn't happen now (as in the example above).
With no longer we can't say that it doesn't happen now as this is assumed.
"I used to live in Madrid but now I don't" but not "I no longer live in Madrid but now I don't" use instead just "I no longer live in Madrid".
English for B2 students Vocabulary • Print version
Lunch for students prepared at home by their mother or father
Try asking and answering these questions in pairs. If you're working alone then write down your answers. Remember that if you're still studying you should answer using the present simple. If you've finished studying then you should answer using the past simple or with used to.
What subjects are/were you good at?
What subject or sport did you use to be good at?
Do/Did you like school? Why?
Try these questions to see if you can answer these questions and use this lesson's grammar correctly. The answers can be found here.
Complete the following sentences using used to, usually or no longer:
Do you play football? I ______ play but now I have no free time.
Every weekend I meet my friends and we ______ go to the cinema.
What do you ______ do at the weekend?
I'm sad because I ______ have the time to meet my friends for a drink.
For further information about used to and usually see Tenses and Forms.
English for B2 Students/Unit 1 to 6 Progress Test
Progress Test for Units 1 to 6
Try these exercises without consulting the previous units. For answers click here. (Please write your answers on a printout, don't edit them into this page.) Good luck!!
Complete the following sentences using the most appropriate verb form:
Today has been a very long day so far. I ______ (travel) over 100 kilometres to visit my Auntie. Thankfully, now I _______ (rest) and ______ (eat) dinner before I continue with my journey. Tomorrow will also be a long day. I have to wake up at 6am because my train ______ (leave) at 7am. Then later I ______ (have) lunch with my Auntie. I love visiting my Auntie and have very happy memories. When I was a child we ________ (go) there every summer for two weeks but unfortunately I don't have time to visit as often nowadays.
Are you scared _____ anything?
Have you ever ___ (=practiced) __ judo or karate?
How many years has your auntie been married ___ your _____ ?
Have you ever been _____ America?
Have you ever taken your car on a _____ [boat which carries vehicles]?
Where are you going _____ holiday this summer?
When you were at school did you ever(= skip it) _____ _____ [not go to school because you didn't want to]?
Aim of this lesson: Learn about and use the Past Perfect and understand the difference between the tense and Past Simple. Vocabulary that will be taught is related to cinema.
Work with a partner, if you can, and ask/answer these questions. If you're on your own you should think about these questions and write your answers instead.
What's your favourite kind of film?
What films have you seen this year?
Who is your favourite male or female actor?
What's the best film you've ever seen?
Do you prefer watching films at home or at the cinema?
Past perfect is used in English to indicate that an event occurred before another past event.
Lowry Centre, Salford Quays, United Kingdom
English for B2 students Grammar • Print version
I had just eaten dinner when the phone rang.
I hadn't started making dinner when the electricity went off
It is very unusual to use past perfect on its own. This tense is almost always used with past simple or another tense as you can see in the examples above.
"I had just eaten dinner when the phone rang" - first I ate dinner and then the phone rang.
Further examples of past simple and past perfect
How many hours had you slept for when your alarm clock went off this morning?
She didn't realise that she had forgotten her credit card until she got to the cash machine.
I had only walked 100 metres when it started raining.
Look at the table below. Do you know the correct definitions for this vocabulary related to cinema? Click on the 'show' button on the right for the correct answers.
English for B2 students Vocabulary • Print versionCinema - Rearrange the Definitions
Try these questions to see if you know how to use past simple and past perfect correctly. The answers can be found here.
Complete the following sentences using the verb in brackets in the correct form:
When they __________ (get) to the hospital, she __________ (give) birth.
He __________ (be) on a plane, so he __________ (be) tired.
For further information about using past perfect and past simple see Tenses and Forms.
Unit 9 - I want to be a scientist
Aim of this lesson: Identify and use verb patterns. Verb patterns describe the form of verb which follows the first verb. The second verb can be in the infinitive, gerund or bare infinitive (without 'to'). Also you will learn to talk about jobs: job titles and routines.
Work with a partner, if you can, and ask/answer these questions. If you're on your own you should think about these questions and write your answers instead.
Do you work or study?
How long have you been working / studying? (note. use the Present Perfect when answering this question)
What job did you want to do when you were 10 years old?
Are there any jobs you would hate doing? Why? (note. use the 2nd Conditional when answering this question)
In your job, what do you enjoy doing?
In English when we use two verbs together we have to decide what form the second verb should take. We can choose between infinitive (to eat), gerund (eating) or infinitive without to (eat). The form of the second verb depends on the first verb. This table shows some common verbs and the form that the second verb should take.
Albert Einstein, Vienna, 1921
English for B2 students Grammar • Print version
Some verbs like start, begin and prefer can be followed by gerun or infinitive without any change in meaning.
Remember if followed by an infinitive suggests something that you shouldn't forget (Please remember to close the window). Remember followed by a gerund is used to talk about a past event that you still remember (I remember closing the window [yesterday]).
Don't forget that many of these verbs can usually be followed by a noun instead of a verb.
Roger suggested going to the cinema (suggest + ing)
I'm sorry but I must go now. (must + infinitive without 'to')
She hates swimming at 12:00pm ( hate + ing )
Look at the table below. Do you know the correct definitions for these jobs? Click on the 'show' button on the right for the correct answers.
English for B2 students Vocabulary • Print versionJobs - Rearrange the Definitions
Try these questions to see if you know your verb patterns and vocabulary about jobs. The answers can be found here.
Complete the following sentences using the correct modal verb:
When I am older I would like to live / living in the USA.
Have you decided what to buy / buying / buy yet?
It's a secret. You mustn't to tell / telling / tell anybody!
I suggest to go / going / go to the seaside at the weekend.
Please don't forget to close / closing / close the window before you leave.
For further information about verb patterns and the use of infinitive, gerund or bare infinitive see Using Verbs Together.
Unit 10 - You mustn't smoke in here
Aim of this lesson: Introduce and practice modals of deduction and use some language related to hotels and other accommodation.
Sally is a tourist and she's visiting Dublin for a few days. She has just arrived at the Victoria Hotel.
Hello, my name's Sally, and I have a room reserved for tonight.
Hello, Sally. Welcome to the Victoria Hotel. Can I have your passport please?
Here you are.
OK. It'll be €55.00 for the night. Your room number is 405 and it's on the fourth floor near the lift.
Great, thanks. Can someone help me with my bags, please?
Certainly. Roger, our porter, will show you to your room.
Here's your room. Is this OK for you?
Yes, it looks fine.
There are some hotel rules which I must tell you about. Firstly, you mustn't smoke in the room and you mustn't make a lot of noise after 10pm. Also you have to vacate the room before 10am.
OK, that's not a problem. Are non-guests allowed in the hotel rooms?
Yes, but they have to leave before 10pm. Enjoy your stay at the Victoria Hotel. Good evening.
Modals of obligation are used to talk about permission and prohibition.
English for B2 students Grammar • Print version
In most situations must and have to are interchangeable. We often use must when we refer to personal obligations (I must go now because it's late). We often use have to to talk about external obligations which are not our choice (You have to pay taxes). However you are more likely to see must used on signs and in formal situations.
All of the modal verbs remain the same in the 3rd person (i.e. I must, You must, He/She must) except for have to (3rd person is has to).
All of the modal verbs are followed by a verb in the infinitive (I shouldn't smoke)
Have to is never contracted. "I have to go to work" NOT "I've to go to work"
Work with a partner if possible to answer these questions.
Does your workplace or school have many rules? What mustn't you do?
Can you think of any rules in your local café or shop? What things must or mustn't you do?
In some countries like Australia you have to vote in elections. Do you think this is a good idea?
Try these questions to see if you can use modal verbs correctly. The answers can be found here.
Complete the following sentences using the correct modal verb:
I'm very sorry but you mustn't / don't have to smoke here.
Sir, you have to / must leave your passport at the reception.
My doctor says that I shouldn't / should smoke.
I mustn't / don't have to go to work on Saturday because the office is closed.
For further information about the use of modals of obligation see Modal Verb on Wikipedia.
English for B2 Students/Unit 7 to 12 Progress Test
What should you read in English?
By this stage you should be able to understand the main idea and key words of many articles. You will still have difficulty recognising and using many words but you should not let this prevent you from attempting to read in English. The following newspapers can be read online. Newspapers like The Guardian are considered to be broadsheet newspapers and articles are usually longer and may use more formal vocabulary. Newspapers like The Sun are tabloid newspapers and their articles are often shorter, with more pictures but they may use very informal language, idioms and phrasal verbs which may be a challenge for non-native speakers to read. English varies around the world so you should try to read articles from many different countries
Have you ever eaten - we use present perfect because we mean at any time in your life
If I were very rich, I would stay in 5 star hotels.
If I go out on Saturday, I will drink red wine.
If I hadn't woken up this morning, I wouldn't have learned about conditionals.
If I could choose any wife, I would choose Shakira.
I will buy a new DVD if I get paid this week.
The burglars had escaped when the police arrived.
When she arrived the party had finished.
When they got to the hospital she had given birth.
I'm very sorry but you mustn't smoke here.
Sir, you have to leave your passport at the reception.
My doctor says that I shouldn't smoke.
I don't have to go to work on Saturday because the office is closed.
Language Exchange Community--Practise your learning language with native speakers
RoPeCast - A biweekly podcast for advanced learners of English. Culture, Language, Learning tips.
Internet censorship is the control or suppression of the publishing of, or access to information on the Internet. It may be carried out by governments or by private organizations either at the behest of government or on their own initiative. Individuals and organizations may engage in self-censorship on their own or due to intimidation and fear.
Opinions on the topic of Internet censorship vary, with arguments being made both for and against censorship. Moreover, the extent of Internet censorship varies on a country-to-country basis. While some counties have little Internet censorship, other countries go as far as to limit the access of information such as news and suppress discussion among citizens. Internet censorship can also come about due to events such as the Arab Spring, which led to instances of censorship in an attempt to undermine the protesters.
2.1.3 "Internet enemies" and countries under surveillance lists
The issues associated with Internet censorship are similar to those for offline censorship of more traditional media such as newspapers, magazines, books, music, radio, television, and films. One difference is that national borders are more permeable online: residents of a country that bans certain information can find it on websites hosted outside the country. Thus censors must work to prevent access to information even though they lack physical or legal control over the websites themselves. This in turn requires the use of technical censorship methods that are unique to the Internet, such as site blocking and content filtering.[1]
Views about the feasibility and effectiveness of Internet censorship have evolved in parallel with the development of the Internet and censorship technologies:
A 1993 Time Magazine article quotes computer scientist John Gillmore, one of the founders of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, as saying "The Net interprets censorship as damage and routes around it."[2]
In November 2007, "Father of the Internet" Vint Cerf stated that he sees government control of the Internet failing because the Web is almost entirely privately owned.[3]
A report of research conducted in 2007 and published in 2009 by the Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard University stated that: "We are confident that the [censorship circumvention] tool developers will for the most part keep ahead of the governments' blocking efforts", but also that "...we believe that less than two percent of all filtered Internet users use circumvention tools".[4]
In contrast, a 2011 report by researchers at the Oxford Internet Institute published by UNESCO concludes "... the control of information on the Internet and Web is certainly feasible, and technological advances do not therefore guarantee greater freedom of speech."[1]
Blocking and filtering can be based on relatively static blacklists or be determined dynamically based on an examination of the information being exchanged. Blacklists may be produced manually or automatically and are often not available to the public. Blocking or filtering can be done at a centralized national level, at a decentralized sub-national level, or at an institutional level, for example in libraries, universities or Internet cafes. Blocking and filtering may also vary within a country across different ISPs.[5] Countries may filter sensitive content on an on-going basis and/or introduce temporary filtering during key time periods such as elections. In some cases the censoring authorities may block content while leading the public to believe that censorship has not been applied. This is done by causing a fake "Not Found" error message to be displayed when an attempt to access a blocked web page is made (see 404 error for details).[6]
Unless the censor has total control over all Internet-connected computers, such as in North Korea or Cuba, total censorship of information is very difficult or impossible to achieve due to the underlying distributed technology of the Internet. Pseudonymity and data havens (such as Freenet) protect free speech using technologies that guarantee material cannot be removed and prevents the identification of authors. Technologically savvy users can often find ways to access blocked content. Never-the-less, blocking remains an effective means of limiting access to sensitive information for most users when censors, such as those in China, are able to devote significant resources to building and maintaining a comprehensive censorship system.[1]
Many Internet experts use the term "splinternet" to describe some of the effects of national firewalls. The verb "rivercrab" colloquially refers to censorship of the Internet, particularly in Asia.[7]
Internet censorship and surveillance by country (2018) Pervasive Substantial Selective censorship Little or no evidence Not classified / No data
As more people in more places begin using the Internet for important activities, there is an increase in online censorship, using more sophisticated techniques. The motives, scope, and effectiveness of Internet censorship vary widely from country to country. The countries engaged in state-mandated filtering are clustered in three main regions of the world: east Asia, central Asia, and the Middle East/North Africa. A few countries in other regions also practice certain forms of filtering. In the United States state-mandated Internet filtering occurs on some computers in libraries and K-12 schools. Content related to Nazism or Holocaust denial is blocked in France and Germany. Child pornography, hate speech, and sites that encourage the theft of intellectual property are blocked in many countries throughout the world.[8] In fact, most countries throughout the world, including many democracies with long traditions of strong support for freedom of expression and freedom of the press, are engaged in some amount of online censorship, often with substantial public support.[9]
Reports, ratings, and trends
Detailed country by country information on Internet censorship is provided by the OpenNet Initiative, Reporters Without Borders, Freedom House, and in the U.S. State Department Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor's Human Rights Reports.[10] The ratings produced by several of these organizations are summarized in the Internet censorship by country and the Censorship by country articles.
Through 2010 the OpenNet Initiative had documented Internet filtering by governments in over forty countries worldwide.[11] The level of filtering in 26 countries in 2007 and in 25 countries in 2009 was classified in the political, social, and security areas. Of the 41 separate countries classified, seven were found to show no evidence of filtering in all three areas (Egypt, France, Germany, India, the Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and the United States), while one was found to engage in pervasive filtering in all three areas (China), 13 were found to engage in pervasive filtering in one or more areas, and 34 were found to engage in some level of filtering in one or more areas. Of the 10 countries classified in both 2007 and 2009, one reduced its level of filtering (Pakistan), five increased their level of filtering (Azerbaijan, Belarus, Kazakhstan, South Korea, and Uzbekistan), and four maintained the same level of filtering (China, Iran, Myanmar, and Tajikistan).[1][12]
In the 2011 edition of Freedom House's report Freedom on the Net, of the 37 countries surveyed, 8 were rated as "free" (22%), 18 as "partly free" (49%), and 11 as "not free" (30%).[13] In their 2009 report, of the 15 countries surveyed, 4 were rated as "free" (27%), 7 as "partly free" (47%), and 4 as "not free" (27%).[14] And of the 15 countries surveyed in both 2009 and 2011, 5 were seen to be moving in the direction of more network freedom (33%), 9 moved toward less freedom (60%), and one was unchanged (7%).
"Internet enemies" and countries under surveillance lists
A poll of 27,973 adults in 26 countries, including 14,306 Internet users,[15] was conducted for the BBC World Service by the international polling firm GlobeScan using telephone and in-person interviews between 30 November 2009 and 7 February 2010. GlobeScan Chairman Doug Miller felt, overall, that the poll showed that:
Despite worries about privacy and fraud, people around the world see access to the internet as their fundamental right. They think the web is a force for good, and most don’t want governments to regulate it.[16]
Findings from the poll include:[16]
Nearly four in five (78%) Internet users felt that the Internet had brought them greater freedom.
Most Internet users (53%) felt that "the internet should never be regulated by any level of government anywhere".
Opinion was evenly split between Internet users who felt that “the internet is a safe place to express my opinions” (48%) and those who disagreed (49%). Somewhat surprisingly users in Germany and France agreed the least, followed by users in highly filtered countries such as China and South Korea, while users in Egypt, India and Kenya agreed more strongly.[1]
The aspects of the Internet that cause the most concern include: fraud (32%), violent and explicit content (27%), threats to privacy (20%), state censorship of content (6%), and the extent of corporate presence (3%).
Almost four in five Internet users and non-users around the world felt that access to the Internet was a fundamental right (50% strongly agreed, 29% somewhat agreed, 9% somewhat disagreed, 6% strongly disagreed, and 6% gave no opinion).[17] And while there is strong support for this right in all of the countries surveyed, it is surprising that the United States and Canada were among the top five countries where people most strongly disagreed that access to the Internet was a fundamental right of all people (13% in Japan, 11% in the U.S., 11% in Kenya, 11% in Pakistan, and 10% in Canada strongly disagree).[1]
Among the countries that filter or block online content, few openly admit to or fully disclose their filtering and blocking activities. States are frequently opaque and/or deceptive about the blocking of access to political information.[5] For example:
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates (UAE) are among the few states that publish detailed information about their filtering practices and display an acknowledgment to the user when accessing a blocked website.
In contrast, countries such as China and Tunisia send users a false error indication. China blocks requests by users for a banned website at the router level and an error message is sent, effectively preventing the user's IP address from making further http requests for a varying time, which appears to the user as "time-out" error with no explanation. Tunisia has altered the block page functionality of SmartFilter, the commercial filtering software it uses, so that users attempting to access blocked websites receive a fake "File not found" error page.
In Uzbekistan users are frequently sent block pages stating that the website is blocked because of pornography, even when the page contains no pornography. Uzbeki ISPs may also redirect users' request for blocked websites to unrelated websites, or sites similar to the banned websites, but with different information.[18]
See also: 2011 Egyptian Internet shutdown and Free speech in the media during the 2011 Libyan civil war
During the Arab Spring of 2011 media jihad (media struggle) was extensive. Most observers believe that the Internet and mobile technologies, particularly social networks such as Facebook and Twitter, played and are playing important new and unique roles in organizing and spreading the protests and making them visible to the rest of the world. An activist in Egypt tweeted, “we use Facebook to schedule the protests, Twitter to coordinate, and YouTube to tell the world”.[19]
This successful use of digital media in turn lead to increased censorship including the complete loss of Internet access for periods of time in Egypt[20][21][22] and Libya in 2011.[23] In Syria, the Syrian Electronic Army (SEA), an organization that operates with at least tacit support of the government, claims responsibility for defacing or otherwise compromising scores of websites that it contends spread news hostile to the Syrian regime. SEA disseminates denial of service (DoS) software designed to target media websites including those of Al Jazeera, BBC News, Syrian satellite broadcaster Orient TV, and Dubai-based al-Arabia TV.[24]
The success of several Arab Spring revolutions offers a chance to establish greater freedom of expression in countries that were previously subject to very strict censorship, especially online. At the same time success in this effort is not certain. In response to these dramatic events and opportunities, in March 2011, Reporters Without Borders moved Tunisia and Egypt from its "Internet enemies" list to its list of countries "under surveillance".[25] At the same time there are warnings that Internet censorship might increase following the events of the Arab Spring.[26][27]
There are three primary motives or rationales for Internet censorship: politics and power, social norms and morals, and security concerns. Protecting intellectual property rights and existing economic interests are two additional motives for Internet censorship. In addition, networking tools and applications that allow the sharing of information related to these motives are often targeted. And while there is considerable variation from country to country, the blocking of Web sites in a local language is roughly twice that of Web sites available only in English or other international languages.[6]
Censorship directed at political opposition to the ruling government is common in authoritarian and repressive regimes. Some countries block Web sites related to religion and minority groups, often when these movements represent a threat to the ruling regimes.[6]
Political blogs and Web sites[28]
Falun Gong and Tibetan exile group sites in China or Buddist, Cao Dai faith, and indigenous hill tribes sites in Vietnam
Sites aimed at religious conversion from Islam to Christianity
Social filtering is censorship of topics that are held to be antithetical to accepted societal
Sex and erotic, fetishism, prostitution, and pornographic sites
Child pornography and pedophile related sites (see also CIRCAMP)
Sites seen as promoting illegal drug use (Erowid)[29]
Nazi and similar websites — particularly in France and Germany[30]
Sites that contain blasphemous content, particularly when directed at a majority or state supported religion
Sites that contain defamatory, slanderous, or libelous content
Internet filtering related to threats to national security that targets the Web sites of insurgents, extremists, and terrorists often enjoys wide public support.[6]
Blocking of pro–North Korean sites by South Korea[31]
Blocking of sites devoted to the Balochi independence movement by Pakistan
Blocking sites such as 4chan thought to be related to the group Anonymous[33]
Protection of intellectual property and existing economic interests
Sites that share content that violates copyright or other intellectual property rights are often blocked, particularly in western Europe and North America. In addition the protection of existing economic interests is sometimes the motivation for blocking new Internet services such as low-cost telephone services that use Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP). These services can reduce the customer base of telecommunications companies, many of which enjoy entrenched monopoly positions and some of which are government sponsored or controlled.[6]
Filesharing and Peer-to-peer (P2P) related websites such as The Pirate Bay
Blocking the intermediate tools and applications of the Internet that can be used to assist users in accessing and sharing sensitive material is common in many countries.[6]
Media sharing websites (e.g. Flickr and YouTube)[34]
Social networks (e.g. Facebook and MySpace)
Microblogging sites such as Twitter and Weibo[35]
Search engines such as Bing[36] and Google[37][38] - particularly in China and Cuba[39]
Internet content is subject to censorship methods similar to those used with more traditional media. For example:[1]
Laws and regulations may prohibit various types of content and/or require that content be removed or blocked either proactively or in response to requests.
Publishers, authors, and ISPs may receive formal and informal requests to remove, alter, slant, or block access to specific sites or content.
Publishers and authors may accept bribes to include, withdraw, or slant the information they present.
Publishers, authors, and ISPs may be subject to arrest, criminal prosecution, fines, and imprisonment.
Publishers, authors, and ISPs may be subject to civil lawsuits.
Equipment may be confiscated and/or destroyed.
Publishers and ISPs may be closed or required licenses may be withheld or revoked.
Publishers, authors, and ISPs may be subject to boycotts.
Publishers, authors, and their families may be subject to threats, attacks, beatings, and even murder.[40]
Publishers, authors, and their families may be threatened with or actually lose their jobs.
Individuals may be paid to write articles and comments in support of particular positions or attacking opposition positions, usually without acknowledging the payments to readers and viewers.[41][42]
Censors may create their own online publications and Web sites to guide online opinion.[41]
Access to the Internet may be limited due to restrictive licensing policies or high costs.
Access to the Internet may be limited due to a lack of the necessary infrastructure, deliberate or not.
Internet content is also subject to technical censorship methods, including:[1][43]
Internet Protocol (IP) address blocking: Access to a certain IP address is denied. If the target Web site is hosted in a shared hosting server, all websites on the same server will be blocked. This affects IP-based protocols such as HTTP, FTP and POP. A typical circumvention method is to find proxies that have access to the target websites, but proxies may be jammed or blocked, and some Web sites, such as Wikipedia (when editing), also block proxies. Some large websites such as Google have allocated additional IP addresses to circumvent the block, but later the block was extended to cover the new addresses.
Domain name system (DNS) filtering and redirection: Blocked domain names are not resolved or an incorrect IP address is returned. This affects all IP-based protocols such as HTTP, FTP and POP. A typical circumvention method is to find a Alternative DNS root that resolves domain names correctly, but domain name servers are subject to blockage as well, especially IP address blocking. Another workaround is to bypass DNS if the IP address is obtainable from other sources and is not itself blocked. Examples are modifying the Hosts file or typing the IP address instead of the domain name as part of a URL given to a Web browser.
Uniform Resource Locator filtering: URL strings are scanned for target keywords regardless of the domain name specified in the URL. This affects the HTTP protocol. Typical circumvention methods are to use escaped characters in the URL, or to use encrypted protocols such as VPN and TLS/SSL.[44]
Packet filtering: Terminate TCP packet transmissions when a certain number of controversial keywords are detected. This affects all TCP-based protocols such as HTTP, FTP and POP, but Search engine results pages are more likely to be censored. Typical circumvention methods are to use encrypted connections - such as VPN and TLS/SSL - to escape the HTML content, or by reducing the TCP/IP stack's MTU/MSS to reduce the amount of text contained in a given packet.
Connection reset: If a previous TCP connection is blocked by the filter, future connection attempts from both sides can also be blocked for some variable amount of time. Depending on the location of the block, other users or websites may also be blocked, if the communication is routed through the blocking location. A circumvention method is to ignore the reset packet sent by the firewall.[45]
Full block: A technically simpler method of Internet censorship is to completely cut off all routers, either by software or by hardware (turning off machines, pulling out cables). This appears to have been the case on 27/28 January 2011 during the 2011 Egyptian protests, in what has been widely described as an "unprecedented" internet block.[21][22] About 3500 Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) routes to Egyptian networks were shut down from about 22:10 to 22:35 UTC 27 January.[21] This full block was implemented without cutting off major intercontinental fibre-optic links, with Renesys stating on 27 January, "Critical European-Asian fiber-optic routes through Egypt appear to be unaffected for now."[21] Full blocks also occurred in Myanmar/Burma in 2007[46] and Libya in 2011.[23]
Portal censorship and search result removal: Major portals, including search engines, may exclude web sites that they would ordinarily include. This renders a site invisible to people who do not know where to find it. When a major portal does this, it has a similar effect as censorship. Sometimes this exclusion is done to satisfy a legal or other requirement, other times it is purely at the discretion of the portal. For example Google.de and Google.fr remove Neo-Nazi and other listings in compliance with German and French law.[47]
Computer network attacks: Denial-of-service attacks and attacks that deface opposition websites can produce the same result as other blocking techniques, preventing or limiting access to certain websites or other online services, although only for a limited period of time. This techniques might be used during the lead up to an election or some other sensitive period. It is more frequently used by non-state actors seeking to disrupt services.[48]
Technical censorship techniques are subject to both over- and under-blocking since it is often impossible to always block exactly the targeted content without blocking other permissible material or allowing some access to targeted material and so providing more or less protection than desired.[1] An example is that automatic censorship against sexual words in matter for children, set to block the word "cunt", has been known to block the Lincolnshire (UK) placename Scunthorpe.[49] Another example is blocking an IP-address of a server that hosts multiple websites, which prevents access to all of the websites rather than just those that contain content deemed offensive.[50]
Major web portal official statements on site and content removal
Most major web service operators reserve to themselves broad rights to remove or pre-screen content, sometimes without giving a specific list or only a vague general list of the reasons allowing the removal. The phrases "at our sole discretion", "without prior notice", and "for other reasons" are common in Terms of Service agreements.
Facebook: Among other things the Facebook Statement of Rights and Responsibilities says: "You will not post content that: is hateful, threatening, or pornographic; incites violence; or contains nudity or graphic or gratuitous violence", "You will not use Facebook to do anything unlawful, misleading, malicious, or discriminatory", "We can remove any content or information you post on Facebook if we believe that it violates this Statement", and "If you are located in a country embargoed by the United States, or are on the U.S. Treasury Department's list of Specially Designated Nationals you will not engage in commercial activities on Facebook (such as advertising or payments) or operate a Platform application or website".[51]
Google Search: Google's Webmaster Tools help includes the following statement: "Google may temporarily or permanently remove sites from its index and search results if it believes it is obligated to do so by law, if the sites do not meet Google's quality guidelines, or for other reasons, such as if the sites detract from users' ability to locate relevant information."[52]
Twitter: The Twitter Terms of Service state: "We reserve the right at all times (but will not have an obligation) to remove or refuse to distribute any Content on the Services and to terminate users or reclaim usernames" and "We reserve the right to remove Content alleged to be [copyright] infringing without prior notice and at our sole discretion".[53]
YouTube: The YouTube Terms of Service include the statements: "YouTube reserves the right to decide whether Content violates these Terms of Service for reasons other than copyright infringement, such as, but not limited to, pornography, obscenity, or excessive length. YouTube may at any time, without prior notice and in its sole discretion, remove such Content and/or terminate a user's account for submitting such material in violation of these Terms of Service", "YouTube will remove all Content if properly notified that such Content infringes on another's intellectual property rights", and "YouTube reserves the right to remove Content without prior notice".[54]
Wikipedia: Content within a Wikipedia article may be modified or deleted by any editor as part of the normal process of editing and updating articles. All editing decisions are open to discussion and review. The Wikipedia Deletion policy outlines the circumstances in which entire articles can be deleted. Any editor who believes a page doesn't belong in an encyclopedia can propose its deletion. Such a page can be deleted by any administrator if, after seven days, no one objects to the proposed deletion. Speedy deletion allows for the deletion of articles without discussion and is used to remove pages that are so obviously inappropriate for Wikipedia that they have no chance of surviving a deletion discussion. All deletion decisions may be reviewed, either informally or formally.[55]
Yahoo!: Yahoo!'s Terms of Service (TOS) state: "You acknowledge that Yahoo! may or may not pre-screen Content, but that Yahoo! and its designees shall have the right (but not the obligation) in their sole discretion to pre-screen, refuse, or remove any Content that is available via the Yahoo! Services. Without limiting the foregoing, Yahoo! and its designees shall have the right to remove any Content that violates the TOS or is otherwise objectionable."[56]
Writing in 2009 Ronald Deibert, professor of political science at the University of Toronto and co-founder and one of the principal investigators of the OpenNet Initiative, and, writing in 2011, Evgeny Morzov, a visiting scholar at Stanford University and an Op-Ed contributor to the New York Times, explain that companies in the United States, Finland, France, Germany, Britain, Canada, and South Africa are in part responsible for the increasing sophistication of online content filtering worldwide. While the off-the-shelf filtering software sold by Internet security companies are primarily marketed to businesses and individuals seeking to protect themselves and their employees and families, they are also used by governments to block what they consider sensitive content.[57][58]
Among the most popular filtering software programs is SmartFilter by Secure Computing in California, which was bought by McAfee in 2008. SmartFilter has been used by Tunisia, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, the UAE, Kuwait, Bahrain, Iran, and Oman, as well as the United States and the UK.[59] Myanmar and Yemen have used filtering software from Websense. The Canadian-made commercial filter Netsweeper[60] is used in Qatar, the UAE, and Yemen.[11]
In a U.S. lawsuit filed in May 2011, Cisco Systems is accused of helping China build a firewall, known widely as the Golden Shield, to censor the Internet and keep tabs on dissidents. Cisco said it had made nothing special for China. Cisco is also accused of aiding the Chinese government in monitoring and apprehending members of the banned Falun Gong group.[61]
Many filtering programs allow blocking to be configured based on dozens of categories and sub-categories such as these from Websense: "abortion" (pro-life, pro-choice), "adult material" (adult content, lingerie and swimsuit, nudity, sex, sex education), "advocacy groups" (sites that promote change or reform in public policy, public opinion, social practice, economic activities, and relationships), "drugs" (abused drugs, marijuana, prescribed medications, supplements and unregulated compounds), "religion" (non-traditional religions occult and folklore, traditional religions), ....[11] The blocking categories used by the filtering programs may contain errors leading to the unintended blocking of websites.[57] The blocking of DailyMotion in early 2007 by Tunisian authorities was, according to the OpenNet Initiative, due to Secure Computing wrongly categorizing DailyMotion as pornography for its SmartFilter filtering software. It was initially thought that Tunisia had blocked DailyMotion due to satirical videos about human rights violations in Tunisia, but after Secure Computing corrected the mistake access to DailyMotion was gradually restored in Tunisia.[62]
Regulations and accountability related to the use of commercial filters and services are typically non-existent, and there is no or little oversight from civil society or other independent groups. Vendors often consider information about what sites and content is blocked valuable intellectual property that is not made available outside the company, sometimes not even to the organizations purchasing the filters. Thus by relying upon out-of-the-box filtering systems, the detailed task of deciding what is or is not acceptable speech has been outsourced to the commercial vendors.[11]
Internet censorship circumvention is the processes used by technologically savvy Internet users to bypass the technical aspects of Internet filtering and gain access to otherwise censored material. Circumvention is an inherent problem for those wishing to censor the Internet, because filtering and blocking do not remove content from the Internet and as long as there is at least one publicly accessible uncensored system, it will often be possible to gain access to otherwise censored material. However, circumvention may not be very useful to non tech-savvy users and so blocking and filtering remain effective means of censoring the Internet for many users.[1]
Different techniques and resources are used to bypass Internet censorship, including proxy websites, virtual private networks, sneakernets, and circumvention software tools. Solutions have differing ease of use, speed, security, and risks. Most, however, rely on gaining access to an Internet connection that is not subject to filtering, often in a different jurisdiction not subject to the same censorship laws.
There are risks to using circumvention software or other methods to bypass Internet censorship. In some countries individuals that gain access to otherwise restricted content may be violating the law and if caught can be expelled, fired, jailed, or subject to other punishments and loss of access.[63]
In June 2011 the New York Times reported that the U.S. is engaged in a "global effort to deploy 'shadow' Internet and mobile phone systems that dissidents can use to undermine repressive governments that seek to silence them by censoring or shutting down telecommunications networks."[64]
Chilling Effects - A joint project of the Electronic Frontier Foundation and several U.S. university law schools and clinics
CIRCAMP, Cospol Internet Related Child Abusive Material Project, a project of the European Chiefs of Police Task Force to combat commercial and organized distribution of child pornography
Electronic Frontier Foundation - An international non-profit digital rights advocacy and legal organization
Financial Coalition Against Child Pornography - A coalition of credit card issuers and Internet services companies that seeks to eliminate commercial child pornography by taking action on the payment systems that fund these operations
Global Internet Freedom Consortium (GIFC) - A consortium of organizations that develop and deploy anti-censorship technologies
International Freedom of Expression Exchange (IEFX) - A global network of non-governmental organizations that promotes and defends the right to freedom of expression
Tunisia Monitoring Group - A coalition within IFEX that monitors free expression in Tunisia
Internet Governance Forum (IGF) - A United Nations multi-stakeholder policy dialogue initiative
OpenNet Initiative - A joint project to monitor and report on Internet filtering and surveillance practices by nations
Peacefire, a U.S.-based website dedicated to "preserving First Amendment rights for Internet users, particularly those younger than 18"
The Pirate Party - a political movement that aims to reform laws regarding copyright and patents, strengthen the right to privacy, and increase the transparency of state administration
Reporters sans frontières (Reporters Without Borders) - A France-based international non-governmental organization that advocates freedom of the press
Cleanfeed, a content blocking system in use in the UK and Canada
This article incorporates licensed material from the OpenNet Initiative web site.[65]
↑ a b c d e f g h i j Freedom of connection, freedom of expression: the changing legal and regulatory ecology shaping the Internet, Dutton, William H.; Dopatka, Anna; Law, Ginette; Nash, Victoria, Division for Freedom of Expression, Democracy and Peace, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), Paris, 2011, 103 pp., ISBN 978-92-3-104188-4
↑ "First Nation in Cyberspace", Philip Elmer-Dewitt, Time, 6 December 1993, No.49
↑ "Cerf sees government control of Internet failing", Pedro Fonseca, Reuters, 14 November 2007
↑ 2007 Circumvention Landscape Report: Methods, Uses, and Tools, Hal Roberts, Ethan Zuckerman, and John Palfrey, Beckman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard University, March 2009
↑ a b ed. Chadwick, Andrew (2009). Routledge handbook of Internet politics. Routledge international handbooks. Taylor and Francis. pp. 332. ISBN 9780415429146. http://books.google.com/books/about/Routledge_handbook_of_Internet_politics.html?id=GJdfuGSa1xUC.
↑ a b c d e f g "Measuring Global Internet Filtering", Robert Faris and Nart Villeneuve, in Access Denied: The Practice and Policy of Global Internet Filtering, Ronald Deibert, John Palfrey, Rafal Rohozinski, and Jonathan Zittrain, eds., MIT Press (Cambridge), 2008
↑ Lao Wai (October 21, 2007). "I've Been Rivercrabbed!". An American In Beijing. http://americaninbeijing.blogspot.com/2007/10/ive-been-rivercrabbed.html. Retrieved May 28, 2011.
↑ "Introduction", Jonathan Zittrain and John Palfrey, in Access Denied: The Practice and Policy of Global Internet Filtering, Ronald Deibert, John Palfrey, Rafal Rohozinski, and Jonathan Zittrain, eds., MIT Press (Cambridge), 2008
↑ "Internet Filtering: The Politics and Mechanisms of Control", Jonathan Zittrain and John Palfrey, in Access Denied: The Practice and Policy of Global Internet Filtering, Ronald Deibert, John Palfrey, Rafal Rohozinski, and Jonathan Zittrain, eds., MIT Press (Cambridge), 2008
↑ "2010 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices", Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, U.S. Department of State, 8 April 2011
↑ a b c d "West Censoring East: The Use of Western Technologies by Middle East Censors, 2010-2011", Helmi Noman and Jillian C. York, OpenNet Initiative, March 2011
↑ Due to legal concerns the OpenNet Initiative does not check for filtering of child pornography and because their classifications focus on technical filtering, they do not include other types of censorship.
↑ Freedom on the Net 2011, Freedom House, accessed 1 September 2011
↑ Freedom on the Net 2009, Freedom House, accessed 1 September 2011
↑ For the BBC poll Internet users are those who used the Internet within the previous six months.
↑ a b "BBC Internet Poll: Detailed Findings", BBC World Service, 8 March 2010
↑ "Internet access is 'a fundamental right'", BBC News, 8 March 2010
↑ "The Arab Spring’s Cascading Effects", Philip N. Howard, Miller-McCune, 23 February 2011
↑ "Middle East Political Protest And Internet Traffic Report: February 12-20, 2011", Craig Labovitz, Arbor Networks
↑ a b c d Cowie, James. "Egypt Leaves the Internet". Renesys. Archived from the original on 2011-01-28. http://www.webcitation.org/5w51j0pga. Retrieved 2011-01-28.
↑ a b Kirk, Jeremy (2011-01-28). "With Wired Internet Locked, Egypt Looks to the Sky". IDG News/PC World. Archived from the original on 2011-01-28. http://www.webcitation.org/5w518Yu9B. Retrieved 2011-01-28.
↑ a b "Journalists confined to their hotels, Internet disconnected". Journalists confined to their hotels, Internet disconnected. Reporters Without Borders. http://en.rsf.org/journalists-confined-to-their-04-03-2011,39681.html. Retrieved 21 March 2011.
↑ "Syrian Electronic Army: Disruptive Attacks and Hyped Targets", OpenNet Initative, 25 June 2011
↑ "Countries under surveillance: Egypt", Reporters Without Borders, March 2011
↑ "Censorship fallout from the Arab Spring?", Juliette Terzieff, The Future 500, 29 June 2011
↑ "Insight: Social media - a political tool for good or evil?", Peter Apps, Reuters Canada, 28 September 2011
↑ Blog censorship gains support | CNET News.com
↑ "Erowid Interview". http://erowidethnography.files.wordpress.com/2011/05/erowid-interview.pdf. Retrieved 26 May 2011.
↑ "Latest Stories From News.Com.Au". http://www.theaustralian.news.com.au/story/0,25197,22885402-12335,00.html.
↑ "Collateral Blocking: Filtering by South Korean Government of Pro-North Korean Websites", OpenNet Initiative: Bulletin 009, 31 January 2005
↑ Press release from WIkileaks concerning Australian censorship
↑ "Federal authorities take on Anonymous hackers", Associated Press in the Washington Post, 12 September 2011
↑ "China struggles to tame microblogging masses", Agence France-Presse (AFP) in The Independent, 8 September 2011
↑ "Sex, Social Mores, and Keyword Filtering: Microsoft Bing in the "Arabian Countries", Helmi Noman, OpenNet Initiative, March 2010
↑ "Google Search & Cache Filtering Behind China's Great Firewall", OpenNet Initiative: Bulletin 006, 3 September 2004
↑ "Empirical Analysis of Google SafeSearch", Benjamin Edelman, Berkman Center for Internet & Society, Harvard Law School, 13 April 2003
↑ "China blocking Google". BBC News. 2 September 2002. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/2231101.stm. Retrieved 5 May 2010.
↑ "In Mexico, Social Media Become a Battleground in the Drug War", J. David Goodman, The Lede, New York Times, 15 September 2011
↑ "China’s growing army of paid internet commentators", Sarah Cook and Maggie Shum, Freedom House, 11 October 2011
↑ "Empirical Analysis of Internet Filtering in China: Technical Appendix", Jonathan Zittrain and Benjamin Edelman, Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard Law School, 20 March 2003
↑ For an example, see Wikipedia:Advice to users using Tor to bypass the Great Firewall
↑ Academics break the Great Firewall of China
↑ "Pulling the Plug: A Technical Review of the Internet Shutdown in Burma", OpenNet Initiative, November 2007
↑ Google excluding controversial sites, Declan McCullagh, CNET News, 23 October 2002, 8:55 p.m. PDT, retrieved 22 April 2007 00:40 UTC
↑ "The Emergence of Open and Organized Pro-Government Cyber Attacks in the Middle East: The Case of the Syrian Electronic Army", Helmi Noman, OpenNet Initative, May 2011
↑ Declan McCullagh (23 April 2004). "Google's chastity belt too tight". http://news.cnet.com/2100-1032_3-5198125.html.
↑ "India blocks Yahoo! Groups", Andrew Orlowski, The Register, 24 September 2003
↑ "Statement of Rights and Responsibilities", Facebook, 26 April 2011, accessed 18 August 2011
↑ "Why does Google remove sites from the Google index?", Google Webmaster Tools Help, retrieved 22 April 2007 00:43 UTC
↑ "Terms of Service", Twitter, 1 June 2011, accessed 18 August 2011
↑ "Terms of Service", YouTube, 9 June 2010, accessed 18 August 2011
↑ "Deletion policy", Wikipedia, accessed 18 August 2011
↑ "Yahoo! Terms of Service", Yahoo!, 24 November 2008, accessed 18 August 2011
↑ a b ed. Chadwick (2009). pp. 330–331.
↑ "Political Repression 2.0", Evgeny Morzov, Op-Ed Contributor to the New York Times, 1 September 2011
↑ Glanville, Jo (17 November 2008). "The big business of net censorship". London: The Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2008/nov/17/censorship-internet.
↑ "Internet content filtering", Netsweeper, Inc. web site, accessed 1 September 2011
↑ "Group Says It Has New Evidence of Cisco’s Misdeeds in China", Somini Sengupta, New York Times, 2 September 2011
↑ "Risks", Internet censorship wiki, accessed 2 September 2011
↑ "U.S. Underwrites Internet Detour Around Censors", James Glanz and John Markoff, New York Times, 12 June 2011
↑ Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported license, see the lower right corner of pages at the OpenNet Initiative web site
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Intellectual Property and the Internet/Internet censorship
Censorship Wikia, an anti-censorship site that catalogs past and present censored works, using verifiable sources, and a forum to discuss organizing against and circumventing censorship.
How to Bypass Internet Censorship, also known by the titles: Bypassing Internet Censorship or Circumvention Tools, a FLOSS Manual, 10 March 2011, 240 pp.
"Index on Censorship", web site for the London based organization and magazine that promotes freedom of expression.
Internet censorship wiki, provides information about different methods of access filtering and ways to bypass them.
"Media Freedom Internet Cookbook" by the OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media, Vienna, 2004.
Here is the Java wikipedia entry.
Visual J++ is a full, procedural, object-oriented, visual language.
The typical statement is completed by a semi-colon. For the assignment of b to a use:
Block comments are specified by a starting /* and ending */ They can span multiple lines.
Scope is defined by curly braces.
If and only if A is equal to B assign C to D, otherwise, assign E to F.
Alternatively, a switch statement can be used for multiple choice operations. This sample converts a number input to text.
This code counts from 0 to 9, adding up the contents of the array.
This code repeats until the number 4 is found. If this runs off of the end of the array, there could be a problem.
This code increments the counter before the check is made, so that it starts with element 1.
And adding text to visual components.
Containers inherit from the Collection class. See the java.util package for specific containers including Vector.
What algorithms does it have? Does sort work in J++?
Code is generally kept in files with a .java extension. It is compiled into Java byte code into files with .class extensions.
The language is very similar to Java.
Visual form layout and component access is similar to other Microsoft Visual development languages.
Classes in the Java packages are capitalized, methods are not.
Everything is a pointer. Use a clone method to avoid operating on the original element of a Collection.
Arrays start with index 0.
Often using the one you don't want will compile, and will produce results you did not expect.
Microsoft support is available at the [Microsoft Developers Network] pages.
1 1984 Jeep Cherokee Fluid capacities
Std. 10 quarts/9.5 Liters
With AC or Heavy Duty Radiator- 10 quarts/9.5 Liters
Std. 12 quarts/ 11.4 Liters
With AC or Heavy Duty Radiator- 12 quarts/11.4 Liters
3.5 liters/ 7.4 U.S. pints/ 6.1 Imperial pints of SAE 75W-90 viscosity, GL-5 grade gear lube
3.3 liters/ 7.0 U.S. pints/ 5.8 Imperial pints of SAE 75W-90 viscosity, GL-5 grade gear lube
SIGGRAPH may well be the most comprehensive and significant annual world event with regard to emerging multimedia technologies. With historical roots in graphic design and an entirely volunteer staff, it is unique in its perspective and objectives. Those attending get a glimpse at what's next in the fields of film gaming and interactive, multisory, multimedia.
LR-based MT & MP requires the collection of large amounts of information, the creation of compilations and databases, simple or annotated, in the form of corpora, their processing and the provision of services on the basis of such information. In addition, the nature of MT services requires that the texts used for MP are representative of a particular domain or activity. For instance, legislation, court decisions and other regulatory texts are necessary primary material for the provision of MT services in the area of law, whereas engineering manuals or other technical descriptions may be useful for the provision of MT services in an engineering sector and literature or news may be useful for literature or generic MT service provision. As a result, for any MT service - or indeed any LR-based service - to be provided, it is necessary to have access to the largest possible quantity of material that could be machine processed. This practically means that such raw material will almost invariably constitute some form of work that will be covered, either by a property right, as is the case with copyrighted documents, or by other types of rights, as is the case with the transcription of phone conversations, which are very likely to contain personal data.
It is also expected that a single set of data/information/works may constitute the subject matter of different types of rights. For instance, in the previous example, the same set of transcriptions of phone conversations constitutes a literary work protected by copyright, personal data that have to be processed under the data protection rules and, finally, may contain confidential information that should not be divulged beyond the persons having the conversations. Similarly, almost all Public Sector Information will be copyrighted subject matter, whereas it is very likely they contain personal data or other forms of confidential information.
It is, hence, necessary to trace the flows of rights in a paradigmatic case of MT services and set out the key questions that have to be asked irrespective of the specific legal regime that is involved. This is a task that is carried out in this section. The next step, then, is to further explore these issues with regard to specific types of legislation, as the ones identified above, namely: IPR, Data Protection, Personal Data Protection, Confidentiality and Public Sector Information Regulation.
Another important point to make at this stage is that different types of content are, in legal terms, differently treated and, consequently, the terminology used to describe such content varies. For instance, a document may constitute a work in terms of copyright law, but may also contain personal data or be confidential information and be part of a broader range of public sector information. We will use the term “content” here, as it is one that is more generic and appears legal regime neutral.
We may identify the following three stages (see Figure II) in the life cycle of the content that can be machine processed in a case of Machine Translation service provision.
At this stage, the content is collected from various sources. This is a rather important moment, as different sources come with different sets of rights. In all cases, the aggregator/collector of the content has to specify the following (Figure III):
Whether the content is provided by the content provider under a licence, set of terms and conditions or any other prescription as to how the content is to be used.
Whether there are any special rules that allow the content aggregator/collector to get access to that content without obtaining permission. In these cases, it is necessary to be very clear as regards the conditions set by the law that actually allow the obtaining of the content without the consent of the content provider. The content aggregator/collector may assess the degree to which such acts may be performed on the basis of what will take place during stages II and III, i.e. on the basis of how the content is to be processed and then further disseminated.
If there is an open licence in place, then the LR-based MP/MT service provider only needs to check whether the processing of the LR is in accordance to the terms of the licence.
In the case there are no conditions or where the conditions are not clear, the content aggregator/collector will have to request for permission, in a way that is well documented both as regards the communication stage and its result. The licences, consent or other permission obtained by the content aggregator/collector have to be assessed with regard to the acts of processing and dissemination that will take place at subsequent stages. They may also be amended at a subsequent stage, if the acts of processing or dissemination exceed those originally perceived and communicated during the licence obtaining stage.
A horizontal note at the stage of content collection is that, though it precedes the stages of content processing and dissemination, it cannot be properly assessed if the range of processing and dissemination acts has not be defined or at least projected. This is because both the case of performing acts without asking permission and the case of obtaining licences/consent have to be assessed on the basis of the intended processing and dissemination.
At the stage of processing, all necessary permissions have been obtained or the fact that that there is no need for permissions has been established.
However, as mentioned above, it is essential to establish the range of processing acts before the permissions are sought or a judgement is made with regard to whether the processing may take place without any permission. The most frequently attested acts of processing have as follows:
Copying: it is impossible to make use of any LRs without copying them and hence, almost invariably, MT & MP will activate the provisions of Copyright Law.
Making derivative works: in order to provide MT services, it is necessary to process the collected content in order to create different forms of derivative works, e.g. n-grams or different forms of corpora. These transformative uses of content activate mostly provisions of copyright law but could also have data protection or other regulatory regimes implications.
Linking with other works: linking of content with multiple types of works. Such linking does not necessary activate copyright law, but could have data protection implications.
Other types of processing: almost any type of processing will activate at least one type of regulatory regime, with data protection regulation to provide the broadest range of acts that are within its scope, as almost every act will amount to processing. However, whether a specific regulatory regime will be activated will depend on other factors as well, such as whether the data are personal or confidential, the type of subject matter and the permissions that have been in one way or another obtained.
This is the last stage in the life-cycle of the content collected for LR processing and at the same time a stage that may re-initiate the life-cycle through the re-use and enrichment of the relevant content.
Similarly to stage II, the types of dissemination to a great extent define the type of permissions that should be sought in stage I. For instance, if the content is not to be shared as such, the legal risks are substantially reduced, as when compared with cases where the content is further made available as such. If the content is to be made available for re-use, the range of permissions that are to be sought will be far greater than the rights sought when the content is to be made simply available for end use, i.e. not for derivative uses or if it is not to be made available at all.
The content is used for Machine Training and is never disseminated as such. However, it could be that the end result of the Machine Translation service is based on the original content or even comprise original parts of such content.
The content is offered as part of a service, but in a transformed form, and hence it is not necessary that it will constitute a derivative work and in any fashion activate copyright law.
The content is offered as a data-set, possibly with some form of amendments and annotations, but it may be clearly identified as the original material.
Depending on the type of content delivery the legal regimes activated and the type of permissions required differs. The course of action has to be decided on a case-by-case basis.
Finally, the MT service provider will have to decide on two additional issues:
Location: Cipriani Restaurant, St.Marks District, Portland
You get to take a picture of a half-naked man, lucky you. Get in a car and drive to your hideout to get your camera. Then drive to Casa's shop in the middle of Chinatown. Follow him but don't get too close or you'll fail the mission. He'll pick up some girls a few blocks away and then he will head over to Callahan Point. You have 3 shots to get him and the two girls in the picture together. Casa is so ashamed. Take the pictures back to Ma and you complete the mission.
You get yelled at by your Ma!
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Applicable Blender version: 2.44.
I worked with a group to make a small animation for class and I was responsible for the environment modeling. I really liked the results of the process I used, so I decided to share it with others. By the end of this tutorial you'll have the know-how to create your own flexible, realistic terrain utilizing multiple textures for different ground types. This tutorial assumes that you have the very basic understanding of using Blender (how to add/remove a mesh, how to change views, etc...)
I use the following textures in this demo. Feel free to use them if you don't have something on hand to use.
The "canvas" that we'll use for our terrain is an evenly spaced grid of vertices. Open a new project, delete the default cube, and add a grid mesh. Use whatever size you want. The more vertices you have, the more detailed and realistic your landscape will appear, but don't get crazy with it since we'll apply subsurfacing at the end to smooth it out. At the same time, you do want enough vertices to prevent sharp edges, and we'll need them in the second tutorial when we cover texture stenciling. So consider how big you want your landscape and try to find a reasonable balance.
I like to start with 100x100. The grid will be pretty small, so scale the entire thing up, let's say by a factor of 20. This grid will be used to build our landscape by pulling hills and mountains out of it.
Noob Note: If you don't want to have to delete the default cube every time you open a new file, just delete the cube once so you have the blank window (only lamp and camera left) . Then select File - Save default settings or hit Ctrl+U. From now on, each new project you create will start off without the cube.
The key to making good mountains is using the proportional edit mode (OKEY) and constantly adjusting the radius of influence. If you've already gone through the Mountains Out Of Molehills tutorial then this section will be familiar. One major difference is that in this tutorial I recommend rotating the 3D view around so you have a good view of all three axes instead of working in the front or sides view. Using the proportional editing tool affects multiple vertices, and it helps to see what effect your changes are having as you make them.
Go ahead and turn on proportional editing, either by pressing OKEY or clicking on the grey ring on the 3D View header. You have to be in Edit Mode to select this option. Once proportional editing is enabled, the ring will appear orange and a new drop-down menu will appear next to it with different falloff styles. Select Smooth if it is not already selected.
Restrict movement to the z-axis (ZKEY) and translate the vertex upward. Throughout this entire process you ONLY want to translate along the z-axis. If you start moving vertices in the x or y directions, things become distorted and you get some nasty creases. Play around with adjusting the size of the radius of influence (Mouse Wheel) to get steeper or flatter hills.
Keep repeating this process with different size radii and different heights until you have a decent mountain range, but leave an area flat. We'll be using that spot later in the second tutorial. Don't be afraid to occasionally translate some vertices down instead of up to create depressions in the hills. Remember, variety is the spice of life. Very few things in nature are naturally geometric, so mix up your hills and especially make sure they overlap. How often do you see a nice, smooth hill all by itself in nature?
Note: You'll notice in my screenshot that I have reduced the size of my grid. For simplicity's sake, I didn't feel like filling an entire 100x100 grid with mountains since this can take some time.
Well now, that's looking pretty good! Now, there's one problem with our hills so far. They're too smooth! Let's bumpify them a little. Change the falloff type from Smooth to Random.
Once you have your landscape the way you like it, add a subsurf modifier under the Editing tab (F9) and select Catmull-Clark. This will smooth out your terrain a little so that it's not too rough. Given the number of vertices you already have, it's not necessary to have a higher render value than 1 unless you just REALLY want it to be smooth, but I don't recommend it. Land is supposed to be bumpy and rocky, we just don't want sharp edges.
Noob note: If you're making mountains using Random Falloff and the peaks stick up too much: in Edit mode, select the points in the area around the peak using circle select, then press WKEY and click 'Smooth' until you're satisfied (or, in the Editing tab (F9), click the 'Smooth' button).
Useful Tip Proportional editing can be used on multiple vertices simultaneously. This is especially useful if you're trying to create a cliff face or a river bed. Use the box tool (BKEY) to select a group of vertices and then translate them. Keep in mind that the size of the radius of influence determines how many vertices around EACH VERTEX will be influenced. So suppose you have a 5 vertex radius, that means that 5 vertices all the way around your selected region will be influenced.
Alright! We've got some pretty nice hills now! But there's still a few problems. Hills shouldn't be white, and hills shouldn't be SHINY! Let's dress them up a little, shall we?
With your landscape selected, go to the Shading Panel (F5) and add a new material.
Under the Shaders tab, drop the Specular value to 0.
Go to the Texture tab (F6) and add a new texture.
Two new tabs will appear. In the Image tab, click Load and load a texture from file.
In the Map Image tab, increase the Xrepeat and Yrepeat. Depending on the size of your terrain and the image that you use (please use something that tiles!), these values will vary. I've used 10 for each in this tutorial.
(Noob note: Render the scene (F12) to see the applied texture)
(Noob note: A quicker way to do this is by using the render preview tool, 3d view window - render preview, View--> Render Preview or press SHIFT--> PKEY)
(Noob note: you may also select shaded in the Viewport Shading menu next to where you select object mode or edit mode to see your texture on your mountains without rendering, however it does slow your computer down some which could make editing frustrating. So only do this if you want to see what your textures look like, then switch back to solid for more editing.)
Finally, let's do something about the lighting. Go to Object Mode (TAB) if you're not already there and select the lamp. Choose the Shading Panel (F5) and then click the icon that looks like a light bulb to display the Lamp buttons. Change the lamp to a sun and up the energy to 1.5. You may also need to increase the distance if your terrain is large, or rotate it around if you don't like where it's pointing. The dashed line coming out of the light is the direction. Play around with different angles and energy values for the sun to get different times of day in your scene.
And there you have it! Your landscape is now textured with some nice grass to make it look a little more realistic. Play around with hill sizes and roughness if you're not satisfied with your landscape, but try not to be too picky. Nature shouldn't look too sculpted. Remember, you won't notice a change in texture unless you render your image.
NOTE If you went with the suggested 100x100 grid, the rendering process could definitely take some time depending on your system, especially if you have ray tracing and shadows enabled. To boost the rendering speed, go to the Scene panel (F10) and under Rendering, disable the buttons that say Shadow and Ray. Also note that because we've created some hills, your camera may now be under the terrain. Switch to the camera view (NUM0) to see what your camera sees and move it if you need to.
Join us next time as we explore how to make the landscape look even better using texture stenciling!
I'm mainly doing this so the hills look better and more realistic. Reading this will consume more time than doing it. I'm making everything clear for beginners. It will only take about 8 minutes more for your hills to end up like this:
First step to achieve it is to switch from the default lamp to Sun.
You do this by clicking on the default and go to the shading tab (F5)
Click on Sun.
Go to rotate manipulator mode with Ctrl Alt R.
Rotate the sun until the dotted line is in your desired position. That is where the main energy will go. It will differ if you want to achieve the different time of day. You can make the distance greater or less with dist.. I kept mine at default 30.
Now let's make more realistic, paler sunlight.
In the RGB slider, set R for 1, G for 1, and B for .848.
Set energy for 1.63. This will all differ for different times of day, so set your east and west in your head, and the later into the day, the further the sun to the west and the more orange. For midday, keep the energy on 1.63 and put the sun right above your hills. I set mine for earlier in the morning.
Now click on the picture of a globe to change the background.
Click on the blend button for a more realistic looking sky. On the left of the World toolbar, that will be the color of lower down in the sky and the right sliders will be the color of the top of the sky. Naturally, the top should be darker blue than the bottom.
It will differ for different times of the day. So you might want something different from this. But I set up mine for the morning using the settings below:
The left HoRGB sliders to 0.50, 0.68, and 1.
The right ZeRGB sliders to 0.11, 0.25, and 0.66.
Now for the texture. This won't differ for the times of day, but it will differ for what type of landscape you want.
Download a nice texture from google or an artists website.
Go back to Blender, go to Texture buttons (F6)
Go to the image toolbar, and upload the texture. Blender will only allow you to upload from the Blender documents, unless if you click on the up and down arrows on the top left of the screen and choose the place where you saved the texture (or picture).
After uploading, the X and Y repeats should be smallish, like 6x6, so the changes aren't noticeable. It will look ugly in the preview, but it will look nice after its wrapped.
Render, and 1 minute later, voila! Those are nice looking hills!
Noob Note: You need to have your landscape selected if you are in object mode to change the texture, otherwise it will change the texture of the world.
You can have an even better result if you use the texture to "bumpmap" the mountains.
Press F5 until you are into Material Buttons
Click on Nor once (the Col option must stay selected as well)
Slide the Nor slider to 5 or more (might differ depending on texture size and repeat options)
Alternately from making the hill model manually, you can use a program like L3DT. It uses various algorithms to generate very detailed and realistic terrain heightmaps. It also lets you edit them in a more intuitive way than Blender does. After you have L3DT make your height map, you can export it as a .x file, which you can import into Blender.
Noob Note: That can be done by going into File->Import->DirectX(.x).
And there you have a very realistic landscape mesh with a lot less work.
(Noob Question: I want to use Unity3d game engine to create a game, but i want to use blender to create landscapes. To create massive world landscapes, does anybody have any tips? as Unity limits any mesh to 65000 vertices, which i've already passed with my method without doing half the map.)
-If you are using unity 3d just use it for the terrain. Download the terrain toolbox and just use .raw images. Or simply generate from there and save. 65,000 verts is plenty btw. If you insist on using blender for the terrain then model a high poly terrain fist consisting of around 1 mil+ verts. bake the normal map and ambient occlusion decimate your terrain to around 10k or w/e looks good for the game. Then bam you got 10k terrain that looks like 1mil. But to be honest blender terrain texturing is a pain compared to unity. Anyhow hope that helps.
Front Page: Radiation Oncology | RTOG Trials | Randomized Trials
Software - A set of instructions, stored digitally within the computer's memory, which tells the computer system what to do.
Software components of a computer system have no physical presence, they are stored in digital form within computer memory. There are different categories of software, including system software, utilities and applications software. Software can also be described as being either generic or bespoke.
System software is the software used to manage and control the hardware components and which allow interaction between the hardware and the other types of software. The most obvious type of system software is the computer's operating system but device drivers are also included within this category.
Fig 1: a screenshot from a software applicationUtility software is software such as anti-virus software, firewalls, disk defragmenters and so on which helps to maintain and protect the computer system but does not directly interface with the hardware.
Applications software (also known as 'apps') are designed to allow the user of the system complete a specific task or set of tasks. They include programs such as web browsers, office software, games and so on. They are usually the reason you bought the computer system in the first place and aren't concerned with the management or maintenance of the system itself.
Any individual software package, whichever of the above types it falls into, can be either generic (or 'off-the-shelf') or it can be bespoke (custom-built). Generic software is mass produced with the intention that it will be used by a wide variety of different users in a range of different situations. Bespoke software is created for a specific purpose which will be used in a known environment.
Often generic software is used when there is a package available that meets the needs of the user. Because it is used by many more people the cost of creating it is spread over a greater number of people or organisations and so the cost to the individual is much lower. It also has the advantage that it is available immediately there's no waiting time involved while the software package is designed, created and tested. Bespoke software has the advantage that it can be tailor made to exact specifications but it significantly more expensive and will take time to create.
Create a table to show what software packages of each type are installed on your computer.
The OCR GCSE Computing J275 which was first introduced in 2010 and the final time it was examined was in 2017. The course has been replace by OCR GCSE(9-1) Computer Science J276. The J275 course covered many aspects of computing, from hardware to software, networks to databases. To find an out more about the course see either the OCR information here, or the OCR and Cambrdge University Press free of charge online version of the course here.
The first part of the course, Fundamentals of computer systems, gives an overview of Computing and Computer Science at GCSE level in many respects appliciable all GCSE courses.
SwisTrack 4 running on Ubuntu 8.04
SwisTrack 4 is a powerful software for tracking robots, humans, animals and objects using a camera or a recorded video as input source. It uses Intel's OpenCV library for fast image processing and contains interfaces for USB, FireWire and GigE cameras, as well as AVI files.
SwisTrack is an open-source project hosted on SourceForge. It is written in C++ and easily extensible through components (plug-ins).
If you are using version 3 of SwisTrack, you may be looking for the documentation of version 3 of SwisTrack.
Plant sensitivity involves the plant making auxins which are growth hormones. Secreted at a special part of the plant depending on plant sensitivity.
In terms of geotropism - sensitivity to gravity , the plant stem grows upwards (negative tropism) and plant root downwards (positive tropism)
Phototropism - sensitivity to sun light as plants all need sunlight to photosynthesize , plant grows towards the sunlight meaning that auxins are secreted in large quantities on the side where less light , creating a bend on stem , as an unbalanced growth growing towards light.
The Text Processor for Typesetters, troff.org
Gnuplot is a program for generating two and three dimensional plots of functions, data, and data fits. Gnuplot is published under the GNU General Public License.
2D histogram generated with gnuplot from a GLPK solution
Gnuplot expects data for histograms to be in multiple columns.
The following example is based on examples/transp.mod from the GLPK source distribution:
The above MathProg statements (inserted before the data statements of transp.mod and saved as a file named transp1.mod) will create, using the command glpsol --math transp1.mod, the following content in the file transp1.dat:
"" "New-York" "Chicago" "Topeka"
Using gnuplot, a histogram of transp1.dat can be drawn and then saved as a PNG image:
The above commands can either be hand entered into an interactive gnuplot session. Invoke gnuplot from the command-line to start such a session. Alternatively, the same commands can be saved in a text file transp1.gp and then run as a script from within gnuplot:
Finally, check the resulting transp1.png with any bitmap viewer, perhaps gthumb:
3D histogram generated with gnuplot from a GLPK solution
Gnuplot does not directly support native 3D histograms. Surfaces with rectangular grids can be passed to gnuplot using the following rules:
To create a 3D histogram it is necessary to provide the 4 corner points of each pillar of the histogram. The following example is again based on examples/transp.mod:
As before, a 3D histogram of transp2.dat can be drawn using gnuplot and saved as a PNG image:
Ramsey's theorem is a foundational result in combinatorics. The first version of this result was proved by F. P. Ramsey. This initiated the combinatorial theory, now called Ramsey theory, that seeks regularity amid disorder: general conditions for the existence of substructures with regular properties. The theorem states that
In any colouring of the edges of a sufficiently large complete graph (that is, a simple graph in which an edge connects every pair of vertices), one will find monochromatic complete subgraphs. For 2 colours, Ramsey's theorem states that for any pair of positive integers (r,s), there exists a least positive integer R(r,s) such that for any complete graph on R(r,s) vertices, whose edges are coloured red or blue, there exists either a complete subgraph on r vertices which is entirely red, or a complete subgraph on s vertices which is entirely blue. Here R(r,s) signifies an integer that depends on both r and s. It is understood to represent the smallest integer for which the theorem holds.
An extension of this theorem applies to any finite number of colours, rather than just two. More precisely, the theorem states that for any given number of colours c, and any given integers n1,...,nc, there is a number, R(n1,...,nc), such that if the edges of a complete graph of order R(n1,...,nc) are coloured with c different colours, then for some i between 1 and c, it must contain a complete subgraph of order ni whose edges are all color i. The special case above has c = 2 (and n1 = r and n2 = s).
Suppose the edges of a complete graph on 6 vertices are coloured red and blue. Pick a vertex v. There are 5 edges incident to v and so (by the pigeonhole principle) at least 3 of them must be the same colour. Without loss of generality we can assume at least 3 of these edges, connecting to vertices r, s and t, are blue. (If not, exchange red and blue in what follows.) If any of the edges (r, s), (r, t), (s, t) are also blue then we have an entirely blue triangle. If not, then those three edges are all red and we have an entirely red triangle. Since this argument works for any colouring, any K6 contains a monochromatic K3, and therefore that R(3,3) ≤ 6. The popular version of this is called the theorem on friends and strangers.
An alternate proof works by double counting. It goes as follows: Count the number of ordered triples of vertices x, y, z such that the edge (xy) is red and the edge (yz) is blue. Firstly, any given vertex will be the middle of either 0×5=0, 1×4=4 or 2 × 3 = 6 such triples. Therefore there are at most 6×6=36 such triples. Secondly, for any non-monochromatic triangle (xyz), there exist precisely two such triples. Therefore there are at most 18 non-monochromatic triangles. Therefore at least 2 of the 20 triangles in the K6 are monochromatic.
Conversely, it is possible to 2-colour a K5 without creating any monochromatic K3, showing that R(3,3) > 5. The unique colouring is shown to the right. Thus R(3,3) = 6.
First we prove the theorem for the 2-colour case, by induction on r + s.
It is clear from the definition that for all n, R(n, 1) = R(1, n) = 1. This starts the induction.
We prove that R(r, s) exists by finding an explicit bound for it. By the inductive hypothesis R(r − 1, s) and R(r, s − 1) exist.
Consider a complete graph on R(r − 1, s) + R(r, s − 1) vertices.
Pick a vertex v from the graph, and partition the remaining vertices into two sets M and N, such that for every vertex w, w is in M if (v, w) is blue, and w is in N if (v, w) is red.
Because the graph has R(r - 1, s) + R(r, s - 1) = |M| + |N| + 1 vertices, it follows that either |M| ≥ R(r − 1, s) or |N| ≥ R(r, s − 1). In the former case, if M has a red Ks then so does the original graph and we are finished. Otherwise M has a blue Kr−1 and so
Thus the claim is true and we have completed the proof for 2 colours. We now prove the result for the general case of c colours. The proof is again by induction, this time on the number of colours c. We have the result for c = 1 (trivially) and for c = 2 (above). Now let c > 2.
Note, that the right hand side only contains Ramsey numbers for c − 1 colours and 2 colours, and therefore exists and is the finite number t, by the inductive hypothesis. Thus, proving the claim will prove the theorem.
Proof of claim: Consider a graph on t vertices and colour its edges with c colours. Now 'go colour-blind' and pretend that c − 1 and c are the same colour. Thus the graph is now (c − 1)-coloured. By the inductive hypothesis, it contains either a Kni monochromatically coloured with colour i for some 1 ≤ i ≤ (c − 2) or a KR(nc−1,nc)-coloured in the 'blurred colour'. In the former case we are finished. In the latter case, we recover our sight again and see from the definition of R(nc−1, nc) we must have either a (c − 1)-monochrome Knc−1 or a c-monochrome Knc. In either case the proof is complete.
The theorem can also be extended to hypergraphs. An m-hypergraph is a graph whose "edges" are sets of m vertices - in a normal graph an edge is a set of 2 vertices. The full statement of Ramsey's theorem for hypergraphs is that for any integers m and c,
This is one of the most well known solitaire games, in fact, you probably have played a variant of it on your computer, which probably is somewhat different from the original version.
First, seven piles of cards are laid from left to right. Each pile begins with one upturned card. From left to right, each pile contains one more card than the last. The first and left-most pile contains a single upturned card, the second pile contains two cards (one downturned, one upturned), the third contains three (two downturned, one upturned), and so on, until the seventh pile which contains seven cards (six downturned, one upturned). The piles should look like the figure to the right at the beginning of every game.
The four foundations (light rectangles in the upper right of the figure) are built up by suit from Ace (low in this game) to King, and the tableau piles are built down by alternate colors.
Partial or complete piles can be moved if they are built down by alternate colors also.
Any empty piles can be filled with a King or a pile of cards with a King. The aim of the game is to build up a stack of cards starting with 2 and ending with King, all of the same suit. Once this is accomplished, the goal is to move this to a foundation, where the player has previously placed the Ace of that suit. Once the player has done this, they will have "finished" that suit, the goal being, of course, to finish all suits, at which time the player would have won. There are different variations of dealing the remainder of the deck including the following, which are some of the most common ways:
Turning three cards at once to the waste, either allowing three passes through the deck or placing no limit on passes through the deck.
Turning three cards at once, reversing the order of each group of three as the cards are dealt.
Turning only one card at a time, but only passing through the deck once.
Turning only one card at a time, but placing no limit on passes through the deck.
Turning three cards at once to the waste with no limit on passes through the deck, but allowing the player to switch once to a single pass through the deck one card at a time; after that single pass, however, the player cannot go back to turning three cards at a time and can turn over no more cards from the waste.
As Klondike is one of the most well known solitaire games, you probably aren't surprised about the number of variants, below are a few:
In Easthaven (a.k.a. Aces Up), twenty-one cards are dealt into seven piles of three, two face-down and one face-up. A space in this game can only be filled by a king or any sequence starting with a king, and when a play goes to a standstill, seven new cards are dealt to the tableau, one top of each pile. Easthaven may include 2 or 3 card decks.
In Nine Across nine columns of cards are dealt, as opposed to the seven of conventional Klondike. The player can choose which cards to form the foundations; if one or more eights are exposed, for example, the player may decide to build on eights, and the piles are built up 8-9-10-J-Q-K-Ace-2-3-4-5-6-7. If eights are built on, sevens fill up spaces and so forth. The stock is dealt through one by one as many times as required.
In Thumb and Pouch, a card in the tableau can be built upon another that is any suit other than its own (e.g. spades cannot be placed over spades) and spaces can be filled by any card or sequence.
In Whitehead, all cards are dealt face up, building is by color (red on red, black on black), a sequence made up of cards that are of the same suit can be moved as a unit, and a space can be filled by any card or sequence.
In Westcliff, thirty cards are dealt into ten piles of three cards, two face down and one face up. A space in this game can be filled with any card or sequence.
( "Computer programming" "Computer programming languages" "Computer science" "Computing" "Scripting languages" ).
1.11.4 How to setup the Rational Application Developer RAD version of Eclipse to work with zhtml
Download Tomcat from http://tomcat.apache.org and install it, if you haven't installed it yet. (Tested by using link http://localhost or http://localhost:8080)
Unzip zk-*.zip or zk-*.tar.gz
Copy dist/lib/*.jar,dist/lib/zkforge/*.jar and dist/lib/ext/*.jar to the $TOMCAT_HOME/shared/lib ($TOMCAT_HOME is where your tomcat installed). Don't use a subfolder structure within the $TOMCAT_HOME/shared/lib folder.
Browse to http://localhost/manager or http://localhost:8080/manager and deploy demo/bin/zkdemo.war to Tomcat or by copying it to $TOMCAT_HOME/webapps directly. If you prefer copying directly, you have to stop Tomcat first. If the file is missing, get zksandbox.war instead.
Browse to http://localhost/zkdemo/userguide, or http://localhost:8080/zkdemo/userguide, or http://localhost:8080/zksandbox/, depending on your configuration for Tomcat.
ZK works with Tomcat 4.1 seamlessly since version 3.0 because it no longer depends on the JSP 2.0 technology.
If you are using older version of ZK before 3.0, you have to copy jsp-api.jar to $TOMCAT_HOME/common/lib.
The jsp-api.jar file can be found in Tomcat's download, or Subversion.
The ZK's logger not support Tomcat 5.0.30 version.
Tomcat 5.5 installed on Ubuntu 7.10 Security Policy Configuration
Open the Tomcat web applications permission file. In my case this was located at /etc/tomcat5.5/policy.d/04webapps.policy (Not sure how much this location or the file name will very)
I added the following lines to the bottom of the file:
Save the file and restarted tomcat (not sure if this was needed but I did it anyway)
Obviously this solution should work for an zk webapp, you will just need to change the "zkdemo" to the name of the web application you are trying to deploy/run.
Download Resin from http://caucho.com/download/index.xtp and install it, if you haven't installed it yet.
Unzip zk-1.0.0.zip or zk-1.0.0.tar.gz
Copy dist/lib/*.jar to $RESIN_HOME/lib ($RESIN_HOME is where you installed Resin.)
Copy dist/lib/ext/*.jar to $RESIN_HOME/lib
[Optional] Copy dist/lib/zkforge/*.jar to $RESIN_HOME/lib (It depends whether you need component from ZK Forge)
Deploy demo/bin/zkdemo.war to Resin by copying it to $RESIN_HOME/webapps directly.
Start Resin.
Browse to http://localhost/zkdemo/userguide or http://localhost:8080/zkdemo/userguide, depending on your configuration.
Download Jetty from http://www.mortbay.org/jetty/index.html and install it, if you
Stop Jetty.
Unzip zk-1.x.x.zip or zk-1.x.x.tar.gz
Copy dist/lib/*.jar to $JETTY_HOME/lib
($JETTY_HOME is where you installed Jetty.)
Copy dist/lib/ext/*.jar to $JETTY_HOME/lib
[Optional] Copy dist/lib/zkforge/*.jar to $JETTY_HOME/lib
(It depends whether you need component from ZK Forge)
Deploy demo/bin/zkdemo.war to Jetty by copying it to $JETTY_HOME/webapps directly.
Start Jetty.
Browse to http://localhost/zkdemo/userguide or http://localhost:8080/zkdemo/userguide, depending on your configuration.
JBoss 4.0 and above
Download Jboss from http://www.jboss.com/downloads/index and install it,if you haven’t installed
Test the Jboss using link http://localhost:port, if it’s OK stop the server.
Unzip zk-2.2.0-RC.zip or zk-2.2.0-RC.tar.gz
Copy dist/lib/*.jar and dist/lib/*/*.jar to the $JBOSS_HOME/server/default/lib
Copy zkdemo.war to $JBOSS_HOME/server/default/deploy
Start the server.
Browse to http://localhost/zkdemo/userguide or http://localhost:8080/zkdemo/userguide depending on you configuration for Jboss.
Change the web.xml so that it will fit servlet 2.3 specifications.
When I tried the solution given by Mars Chen some of the components built upon the Jboss platform didn't function anymore. When doing my solution however one of the ZK components (the upload file) didn't work. But for now I did a workaround to use tomcat 5.5 in the background.
2.1 There I got another simple solution: using ZK distribution's bsh.jar into JBoss lib directory to replace bsh-core-version.jar.
Please refer BeanShell official site. == http://www.beanshell.org/download.html ==
The bsh-version.jar contains all files in bsh-core-version.jar.
Oracle OC4J and Oracle OPMN Release 3
Intro: OC4J 10.1.3 (release 3) is the first production version of Oracle Containers For Java to support J2EE 1.4 specification (Servlet 2.4). Prior versions 10.1.20.2, 10.20.1.1 supports only J2EE 1.3 (with Servlet 2.3) and ZK will not work with this versions.
Download OC4J 10.1.3 or later from http://www.oracle.com and install it.
Unzip zk-1.2.0-2006-04-07.zip or later version
Copy dist/lib/*.jar and dist/lib/ext/*.jar to the $OC4J_HOME/j2ee/home/applib
Start OC4J server and enter a new oc4jadmin's password if prompted or restart the server if it is already up
Open "Enterprise Manager" application - just browse to http://localhost:8888/em/
Login as oc4jadmin and go to Applications --> Deploy page
Deploy zkdemo.war (follow the on-screen instructions)
Substitute "/zkdemo" with the context uri you entered in EM during deployment
Note: This install guide is for Windows.
Download Weblogic 9.1 from [1]
Start the Weblogic installer and accept all defaults.
Once the default installation is complete, create a weblogic domain by clicking Start->Programs->BEA products->Tools->Configuration Wizard.
Enter a password in "Configure Administrator Username and Password" and click Next.
Accept all defaults on "Configure Server Start Mode and JDK" and click Next.
Accept all defaults on "Create Weblogic Domain and click Create.
Once the domain is created, check the check box labeled "Start Admin Server" and click Done.
The server will start up.
The HTTP port is default to 7001 unless you change it.
The easiest way to deploy your application is to copy your war/ear (it could be in an exploded format) to the autodeploy directory under the weblogic installaton directory. If you followed the instruction above that directory is located at C:\bea\user_projects\domains\base_domain\autodeploy. When you place your war/ear file in that directory, weblogic will detect it and do a hot deployment.
If you want to copy ZK libraries to the domain, put them under
c:/bea/user_projects/domains/base_domain/lib
Libraries that have to be copied include
1.IBM offers a websphere application server community edition, go to
2.follow the instruction to download, you might need to register for an account if you don't already have one.
Browse http://localhost:9060/ibm/console/secure/logon.do to deploy application
After deployed, applications can be access via http://localhost:9080/myapp
How To Setup Eclipse Wtp For ZK
How To Setup Eclipse Wtp And XAMPP For ZK
How to setup the zul.xsd schema into Eclipse
You should have setup Eclipse to work with ZK. The details is in the above smalltalk.
Execute the Eclipse SDK.
The Add XML Catalog Entry dialog now popup:
In URI field, type in http://www.zkoss.org/2005/zul/zul.xsd. Or, type in ZK_HOME/dist/WEB-INF/xsd/zul/zul.xsd (ZK_HOME is the directory where ZK's zip file was unziped).
In Key field, type in http://www.zkoss.org/2005/zul/zul.xsd.
Press OK button.
Now you should see a new entry http://www.zkoss.org/2005/zul/zul.xsd under the User Specified Entires.
Done.
How to generate ZUL files from the ZUL schema using Eclipse
You should have setup the zul.xsd schema into Eclipse.
In XML File Name page, type or select a proper parent folder for your project. It is generally under the WebContext folder of your project. Then type in the ZUL file name you want to create(e.g. helloworld.zul) and press Next > button.
In Root Element field, pick a proper root element. In most ZK applications, it is generally a window or an zk element.
Press Finish button.
The ZUL file is created and opened on an XML editor window.
Now you can start editing your ZUL file. Press Alt-/ to open the Content Assist popup window to help you fill up proper ZUL elements and attributes.
Done.
How to setup Eclipse to work with zhtml
Add *.zhtml or such as *.zul, *.jsp, *.html etc.
Finally, you can press the RightClick on your file and choose the XML editor in the Open With menu.
Done.
How to setup the Rational Application Developer RAD version of Eclipse to work with zhtml
Installing Liferay (on tomcat) and a ZK Portlet
There are several way in which you can do this, one is to goto Liferay and download the pre-bundled liferay tomcat bundled. This is the easiest method, but of course not ideal if you have a pre-existing tomcat server.
If you have a tomcat server already and don't particularly feel like deploying another one, you can download the liferay war. Liferay's installation typically removes the ROOT from the server, but I don't particularly like doing that so I'll explain with out having to loose your root
First, if you don't have tomcat, download and install the latest stable tomcat on the OS of your pleasure (you can try other app servers but experience has taught me other ones might be trickier to begin with as the configuration is usually more lengthy).
Next download the non-bundled liferay war (Liferay Portal Professional 4.2.1 WAR) from Liferay
Also download the additional file called Liferay Portal 4.2.1 Dependencies, and unzip it to shared/lib
Under the WEB-INF folder create a 'classes' folder, in this folder create a file called 'portal-ext.properties', in the file put the following (note you may of course change the portal.ctx and/or the lucene and jackrabbit directory depending on your later configurations):
Go back into the WEB-INF folder and edit the web.xml change the root_path to have a param value of '/myportal', so the top of the web.xml will look as follows:
.
Now go into the META-INF folder and add a file called 'context.xml' and add the following (configure this to your own spefics just make sure the context path attribute is '/myportal', if you don't use mysql database and just want liferay to use hSQLdb, just strip out the first Resource element):
Now for the real trick, liferay 4.2 has a small bug when you change the context to something other than the ROOT. In the folder html/portal you will find a file called load_render_portlet.jsp, open the file up and go to line 55-56should look as follows:
Ok I'm sure there is a better way of doing that, but I'd rather let the liferay boys do that themselves.
If you wish to use mySQL, you'll need to modify the context.xml to your own configurations, you'll also need to download the liferay-mysql script file and run it against your database.
Now on you root folder (i.e. C:\ for windows, / for UNIX/LINUX) you'll need to create a 'home' folder (if it doesn't exist) and in that a 'liferay' folder. Make sure tomcat has permission to modify the folder.
Now all you need do is re zip the folder and rename the zip file to myportal.war, drop it into tomcat's webapps deploy directory and (hopefully) you have a working liferay portal.
Here I'll assume you are familiar with and have created a ZK war.
First, you need to tell liferay about your portlet so create a class that looks like this:
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
@author Brian Wing Shun Chan
_log.error(path + " is not a valid include");
Next in your WEB-INF create a 'liferay-display.xml' file that looks as follows:
<!DOCTYPE display PUBLIC "-//Liferay//DTD Display 4.0.0//EN" "http://www.liferay.com/dtd/liferay-display_4_0_0.dtd">
Now also in the WEB-INF create a file called 'liferay-portlet.xml' that looks as follows:
<!DOCTYPE liferay-portlet-app PUBLIC "-//Liferay//DTD Portlet Application 4.1.0//EN" "http://www.liferay.com/dtd/liferay-portlet-app_4_1_0.dtd">
Now again in WEB-INF create a 'portlet.xml' file that looks as follows:
You'll note the /view.zul reference in this file is the 'index' file of the portlet, also note throughout all these file I have referenced 'portletone', you'll need to change this to the name of your war.
.
You'll notice I left the company_id as liferay.com. I've left it like this because changing the value also means digging around the liferay database, it's not that hard to find all the place to modify the value, so if you do, your on your own.
Deploy the resulting war into /home/liferay/deploy directory,
Access and sign in to your portal, click on 'Add Content' link, under the category 'Test' add 'Sample JSP Portlet'.
Hey presto, one portal with ZK portlet
Define a ZK portlet in portlet.xml.
The cause of this problem is that ZK cannot find the desktop from its session. Why? ZK desktop was stored in the session of pluto instead of ZK webapp because pluto pass its session to ZK webapp while doing cross-context in Tomcat. This breaks the spec of servlet. So far, there is no good solution. But here is a workaround that ZK stores desktop in application scope instead of session scope to avoid the problem. Please add the following lines in your zk.xml
The noble gases are in Group 18 (8A). They are helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon, and radon. They were once called inert gases because they were thought to be completely inert—unable to form compounds. This is a reasonable belief because the noble gases have a complete octet, making them very stable and unlikely to gain or lose any electrons. However, some compounds have been formed with the larger elements of this group, like xenon tetrafluoride (XeF4). No normal compounds of helium, neon, or argon are stable at any but the coldest of temperatures.
Radon is dangerously radioactive; it causes cancer. It is so unstable that its radioactivity makes any chemical experiments with it nearly impossible.
Noble gases all have a complete octet (eight valence electrons), except for helium (which has only two electrons). Because this configuration is extremely stable as well as symmetrical, the noble gases are very unreactive.
If an electric current is passed through a gas, its electrons will become excited. The electron will jump to a higher energy level, but they will then de-excite (fall back down) to their stable state, also known as their ground state, and in doing so they will release the energy they initially absorbed in the form of a photon, the fundamental unit of light. In other words, gases can be used to convert electricity into light—the concept of "neon signs". Neon signs are not necessarily filled with neon. They are filled with any mixture of gases to get the desired color. Each gas has a unique color that it emits.
Of course, other gases can be used besides the noble gases.
Helium will not freeze. Instead, it becomes a superfluid.
Helium is a unique noble gas. It is the second most abundant element in the universe. Lighter than air, it is used in blimps because it will allow them to float without the risk of an explosion. Neon is the only element less reactive than helium.
Helium will not freeze under normal pressure. There cannot be enough intermolecular force to lock the atoms into a solid. It remains a gas until 4 K, then becomes a liquid. With the right conditions, helium becomes a superfluid. It is a liquid that will creep along the edges of its container with zero viscosity.
Helium atoms (they never combine with other atoms) are too light to remain in the Earth's atmosphere. Almost all of the small amount of helium on Earth is the result of radioactive decay of very heavy elements like thorium and uranium.
Neon is best known for its presence in neon lights. The brightly-colored fish known as neon tetras are named for having a reddish color similar to that of a neon light, and not for possessing or using neon.
Mapping, or Alternate Future, is the term for predicting fictional events that will happen in the future. It commonly revolves around speculation of what will happen in the future. However, this term should not be confused with alternate history, or an alternate future caused by alternate history.
The term "Mapping", used as a substituting word for alternate future, is based off of the fanbase of alternative future, alternate history, history, etc. In a certain context, it refers to any mapping video with characterization or personification of countries and their interactions starting with MervueMeringue. It comprised of maps of Europe, which lead to a person, called TheJarJar99, to create the term Mapping. It was later popularized and made official by 99batran whom coined the term for the fanbase called "Mappers". The term had later been officially used by MervueMeringue.
In 2010, Matthew Nicolson, or known as MervueMeringue, created a video showing an alternate future of events fictionally predicted by himself, and making it realistic. Real-world countries were shown in the video, and personification took place in them. The "countries" would fight with each other, creating tensions in the fictional world of Nicolson's mind. Two years later, a person on YouTube called TheJarJar99 made the second video of Mapping, clarifying the term in more detail. The "countries" turned certain colors depending on their actions. For example, they turned any color if they were at "war" with each other, or white when they were speaking. This gathered attention for Mapping, but didn't inspire others to do it. Later that year, however, a person named Brandon, or known as 99batran, was inspired by Nicolson and started to make Mapping videos. 99batran revolutionized Mapping, and made it more popular and widespread than TheJarJar99 or MervueMeringue. More people gained attention to the videos, such as EthanConquistador and HistoryMapper, whom then decided to make Mapping videos of their own. In October 2012, 99batran used the hosting service site Wikia to create TheFutureofEuropes Wiki, an encyclopedia for Mapping and the fanbase of it. This gained attention of TheJarJar99 and EthanConquistador, but not much other early Mappers. The fanbase grew wider and bigger as more people started to be inspired by older Mappers, eventually starting a new breakout of Mapping. In the years 2013 and 2014, a huge number of people started to do Mapping. In middle 2015, though, the fanbase grew to 700 people Mapping. In Mid 2016, it grew to an estimated 1100+. In late 2016 Mapping grew quickly with Romanian Mapping reaching 20,000 subscribers and becoming the most subscribed mapper. the majority of the fanbase resides on the TFOE wiki or Discord, G+, or reddit.
The classes in an accelerated program are unique; it takes some adjustment and adaptation. We signed up for this style for a variety of reasons, but behind each one was the desire to reap the benefits. Below are some suggestions for effectively implementing accelerated learning when taking Fundamentals of Nursing, toward the goal of maximizing this learning experience.
Start with the basics; get a good night’s sleep every night; have a good breakfast each morning before class; arrive early and refreshed so you can start your day with a clear mind; attend all scheduled classes and clinicals; be prepared; read the text and know the schedule so you can study and do your assignments as early reasonably possible. Don’t take on any new unnecessary tasks; this is not the time to start a new diet and exercise program or look for new dating relationships. This is the time to streamline the other areas of your life and focus on your studies.
Don’t just attend class, but attend to class. Pay attention; write down as much as you can of what the professors say. Sometimes what seem at first like offhand comments or humor turn out to enhance understanding of important points. Those very remarks may even help you answer test questions.
Collectively study if possible; others may have their own ways to group ideas, or they may see how the concepts fit together in ways that you might not see at first. As you’re learning, glean from one another’s strengths. Take turns explaining the material you just heard to another student, and have them explain it to you. Compare your notes with other students’ notes. Sometimes others will pick up on points you missed or vice versa; collective notes will be more comprehensive than individual notes.
Record lectures, and listen to them repeatedly. Lay out your notes along with your textbook, and review them while reviewing your sound recording. Fill in any missing details. Pause the sound and read more thoroughly anything that seems unclear, then go back over it. Make note cards to carry with you. Write down any questions you have and ask your professor as soon as you identify areas of uncertainty; if one professor’s answer still leaves you unclear, ask another. Don’t save the questions for the morning before the test.
If provided a login for any online resources, go to the website as soon as possible, and utilize the materials there. Online resources may include audio and video instructional material, practice questions and practice tests. Watch, listen, practice as much as time allows. It will help you understand the material. Download any audio files to your mp3 player, and listen to them ad nauseum along with your own sound recordings of lectures. The more you expose your mind to the material, the more you will understand, apply, and remember.
The questions you can expect now and in upcoming classes will involve application and critical thinking; the days of cramming and regurgitation facts is over. You will still need the raw facts, but you will also need to know how to prioritize, how to select the best of several correct answers, and to identify information that may be only slightly incorrect or slightly misapplied.
Answer any questions the textbook offers, any the study guide offers, any the CD offers, any your online resources offer. Acquire another textbook from another publisher; online bookstores carry scores of used textbooks, many of which cost only a few dollars; buy some and answer any practice questions they contain. Go back over your collection of questions and answers until you consistently get them right. Create your own questions and go over those as well.
Utilize snatches of time throughout your daily activities to review material; for example, carry note cards to review while stuck in traffic, and have audio and video lectures playing in the background while folding laundry or preparing meals.
Learn from your mistakes; during test review, note any areas you need a better understanding. Go back over these areas after each test. Note any critique the professors provide, whether in clinicals or on assignments or any other areas, and implement the changes they suggest. Correct those areas and excel.
Stay ahead of your assignments; any papers that are assigned should be done as early as you are able. If you have your work done ahead of schedule, ask your professor if she would be willing to give you feedback so you can make any corrections or improvements well in advance. The earlier you ask, the more likely you are to be given suggestions so you can present your best work for a grade.
If certain facts are repeated throughout several assignments, for example the purpose of lab values, type the basic ones out early. The purpose and meaning behind values represented in routine urinalysis, complete blood count, and basic metabolic profile will come in handy time and time again. Save your work, and make backup copies so you will have it ready to copy and paste when you need it. Then the time you save instead of re-typing the same information, can be put toward selecting the wording for other parts of an assignment.
Plan to study and work on assignments as many hours as your schedule allows, but do set a limit; do not cut into your sleep to put in extra time studying. Sleep deprivation tends to create confusion. You need a clear mind to do your best on the tests and to provide the care for your patients when you start clinicals.
Establish a firm foundation so your performance will reflect the sum of your of time, strengths, and efforts throughout the next chapters, for your upcoming classes, for NCLEX, and for your career.
Cue Convent School. BREAK-UP AND DISTRIBUTION OF PRIZES. During the afternoon and evening of Tuesday last, there was an exhibition of fancy work and painting done by the pupils of the Cue Convent School during the year. Some very beautiful and artistic work, including paintings, crayon drawings, art needlework, etc., was displayed, and at 8 o'clock a short programme of songs, recitations, drills and dances was gone through by the pupils in a very creditable manner. Most of the items presented were repetitions of those given at the late concert, but they were enjoyed by the audience as well as if they were seeing them for the first time. The fan drill, by the kindergarten girls, handkerchief song by the junior girls, skirt dances, cymbal drill and club swinging were all loudly applauded, as were also the vocal solos by Misses Eileen Healey, Doris Jenkins and Eileen Prendiville, and the vocal duet, "Music and Her Sister Song," by Misses M. Chesson and E. Prendiville. Pianoforte duets were performed by Master P. and Miss L. McInnes, Misses Eileen Chesson and Rose Troy, and Misses E. Healey and M. Toohey; also an instrumental selection, "Alice, Where Art Thou," for violin and piano, was well rendered by Miss Mary and Master P. Troy. At the conclusion of the programme, the distribution of prizes took place. The Mayor (Mr. E. H. Threadgold) was unable to preside owing to an important municipal engagement. His Lordship, Bishop Kelly, presented the prizes, which were awarded as follows:— Standard I.—Highest marks at annual examination, Ita McInnes; 2nd prize, Ted Masters; Arithmetic, Gladys Gill; Writing, Eva Daniell; Geography, Lizzie Wright; Grammar, Annie Campbell; Spelling, Willie Cant; Tables, George Cant; General Improvement, Amy Shipway. Standard II.— Highest marks gained at annual examination, Isabel Bodgers; 2nd prize, Doris Jenkins; Arithmetic, Rose Troy; Grammar, Winnie Chesson; Geography, Lizzie McInnes; Reading, Gladys O'Leary. Standard III.— Highest marks gained at examination, Mary Healey, (silver medal); 2nd prize, Beatrice Ferguson; Arithmetic, Bernard Smith; Beading, Laurance Turner; Plan and map drawing, Mary Healey; General improvement, Myrtle Willis; Application to study, Elva Thompson. Standard IV.— Highest marks gained at examination, Winnie McCann, (silver medal); 2nd prize, Alice Chesson; Writing, Ettie Crockford; Arithmetic, Peter McInnes; Grammar and composition, Eileen Parnell; Reading, Ruby Parnell; Plain Sewing, Evelyn Shipway; Industry, James Cook; General improvement, Gordon Turner; Club swinging, Jack Campbell; Preparatory harmony, Nellie Toohey; Junior harmony, Winnie McCann. Standard V.—Highest marks gained at examination, Kathaleen Chesson; 2nd prize, Annie Cook; Intermediate Christian Doctrine, Eileen Chesson; Plain Sewing, Kathleen Chesson; Reading and recitation, Sybil Edmonds; Arithmetic, Bert Grey; Drawing, Ray Grey; Diligence, Maggie Belcher. Standard VI.—Highest marks gained at, examination, Alice Toohey, (silver medal,); 2nd prize, Pat Troy; Arithmetic, . . . [1]
Bert, as a telegraph messenger with PMGD, passes exam to qualify to admission to higher position in general division
THE COMMONWEALTH GAZETTE. MELBOURNE, Saturday. Applications are invited until May 31 for an architectural draftsman and clerk in the office of the Superintendent of Public Buildings at Darwin, salary £310 without quarters. Appointments approved: Frederick Walter Barwick, as divisional returning-officer, Kalgoorlie, vice John W. Tepper (resigned). The successful candidates at the examination held on March 30 to enable telegraph messengers to qualify for promotion to a higher position in the general division are:— Burgoyne, Evelyn Melville, of Beverley; Castlemaine, Victor William, of Subiaco; Cream, Irwin Eves, of Geraldton; Duckham, John Henry, of Narrogin; Every, Arthur George, of Fremantle; Grey, Albert Edward, of Cue; Hurtable, Ernest William H., of Pinjarrah; Lysaght, John William P., of Kookynie; Mardon, George Edward, of Day Dawn; M'Carthy, Edward, of Barrabupp; Press, Basil William I., of Cottesloe; Regan, Norman John, of Geraldton; Serle, Leslie Joseph, of Armadale; Smith, Mary, of the G.P.O.; Taylor, Albert, of Ravensthorpe; Fredha, William Thomas, of Moora. The following postal vacancies will be open until May 26:— Clerk of the 4th class, for the stores branch, Perth; and junior assistant to the engineer, Perth.[2]
Young Bert wins the booby prize at a Cue Institute Social night
Cue Institute Socials.— The euchre party and dance arranged by the ladies' entertainment committee of the Cue Miners' Institute took place at the A.W.A. Hall on Monday night last. There was a large attendance. The proceedings opened with the euchre tournament, Mr H. Robertson securing the gent's prize after playing off with Mr Syd. Grano, and Mrs Murrie secured the ladies' prize. The "booby" prizes fell to Mr Bert Grey and Miss Sexton. Dancing was then indulged in until midnight. Refreshments were provided by the ladies and were greatly appreciated. Mesdames. Rochester, Threadgold, F. B. Smith, Streuffert, and Miss R. Smith, the entertainment committee, had the arrangements in hand. Mr Arthur Chesson acted as M.C., and Mrs Slattery presided at the piano. It is the Committee's intention to hold another social in about six week's time. A general committee meeting of the Institute will be held on Friday night.[3]
Bert passes his medical examination and ready for Perth
WAR ITEMS. RECRUITING AT GERALDTON. During the past week Sergt. Major Denslow, the recruiting officer, has had a very busy time, and the numbers coming forward in the district are better than almost at any other previous time. The following went down to Perth by last night's train, N. Brownrigg, F. Fellows, C. H. McEwan, E. Hall, M. Goudre, J. L. Stewart, H. D. Denyer, C. Perry, and A. Bain. The following have been accepted and have passed the medical examination, and will go down during the next few days: A. Lawle, G. Thompson, L. J. Townshend, J. Bell, W. J. Gould, F. Hollings, J. Smith, E. Rich, S. Bullock, J. A. Sullivan, D. Fogarty, A. Buckley, J. R. Horton, C. Giltrow, G. Cox, M. Teahan, D. Smith, Greenhalgh, M. R. Morrisey, A. E. Grey, F. W. Pascoe, A. G. Kirby. The following have given in their names, and are waiting for the medical examination: P. O'Connell, G. Rogers, J. Millsmore, E. Worthington, C. O. Caspbell, A. Wheeler, C. E. Berry and H. W. Jenkin. The men, who went away last night had a rousing send off from a large crowd, the usual musical accompaniments being provided by the engines, whilst detonators were exploded on the lines. The usual piping of the men to the station was missing last night. This feature of the proceedings on Tuesday and Friday nights has been much appreciated, particularly by the volunteers, and it is to be hoped that Piper Wayland will, whenever possible, play his rousing strains as the men step out bravely to the station. We understand that there is still a good deal of complaining amongst men who desire to volunteer with regard to delay in being seen by the medical examiners. As we have pointed out before, no difficulty should be placed in the way of men enlisting, particularly as many come long distances at their own expense to offer their services, and the arrangements should be such that men can be inspected when they come into town, no matter what day it is. Sergt Major Denslow can usually be found at the drill hall at any hour of the day, and if not there will be found at the Geraldton Hotel, and volunteers need not hesitate about calling upon him at any time, whether Sunday or week day.[4]
WEST AUSTRALIAN EVENTS. . . . A fine body of recruits for Norseman's fifth contingent was sworn in (says our correspondent), by the Mayor, on Thursday afternoon. One of the contingent, Percy Holman, left for Kalgoorlie by last train, and will join the party there on Sunday. The other members are: A. E. Grey, A. J. S. Davis, E. A. Reynolds, J. S. Nettle, R. A. Waters, W. Watsin, R. Winthrop, A. Hume, W. P. Chandler, T. F. O'Brien, J. Brancher, Frank Townsend, James Townsend, Archie Tye, A. Laxton and A. Johns have also passed the medical test, and will leave for camp in a few days. The main body leave by tomorrow's train. The members of the contingent were entertained at a smoke social in the Criterion Theatre on Thursday night, when there was a large and enthusiastic attendance. The Mayor presided, and in proposing the toast of the contingent said he had known most of them for years, and the honour of Australia was safe in their hands. The toast was enthusiastically honoured, and was supported by Messrs. Mathers. R. L. Strongman and numerous other speakers. Mr. W. T. Williams mentioned that he had two boys already at Blackboy Hill, and though the second was only 18 when he wrote to his parents asking permission, they granted it, and told him though they were very sorry to part, they would have been disappointed had he not enlisted. Mr. Jack Nettle (who was selected by the members to take charge of this contingent), responded to the toast on their behalf and thanked those present for the kind things that had been said, and the manner in which they had been received, and he especially thanked members of the Rifle Club for the instruction given in shooting to the recruits. There was a lengthy programme of songs and recitations, contributed by Messrs. Rippon, Mathers, R. L. Strongman, Johns, R. A. Waters, Grey, Niven, Nimmo, Stewart, Kempton, David, and Finch.[5]
Bert noted as a signaller with the light horse in WW1
General News. . . . More Volunteers.— Still more of our young men of the district are answering to their country's call, and on Thursday's train, Messrs. Len Hotchin and A. G. Kershaw, two Day Dawn residents, left en route for Blackboy Hill. There was a large number of friends on the station, who gave them a hearty goodbye. On the same train were Messrs. Edgar Turley (Meekatharra) and Bert Grey (Cue), who have been home for a few days leave. The former has joined the engineers, and will shortly go to Sydney for training, while the latter is a signaller in the Light Horse. [6]
Cue-Day Dawn Soldiers. The following is a list of those who have enlisted for the front from Cue and Day Dawn through Mr. J. Inglis (secretary of the Cue-Day Dawn Roads Board), who is the representa-tive of the Defence authorities in this district. Mr. Inglis states that possibly there are others who have joined the forces from this district, and he will be glad if the friends of same will forward their names to the Cue-Day Dawn Roads Board office or the "Murchison Times," to be included in the list:— Ashdown, W. Alger, F. Bray, R. Barber, J. Biswell, W. Cocking, Dan. Crawford, J. Creek, W. Campbell, R. Christensen, H. F. Cairns, D. Clues, H. Carter, C. H. Doherty, J. Doodt, D. Egoroff, — Flynn, Sergt. Fox, J. Franco, A. Fisher, A. (Mick) Gazely, W. H. Griffin, W. Harland, C. Hay, J. Huckstep, V. Hudson, W. Hamilton, E. A. Harvey, J. T. Treloar, S. B. Nenke, J. J. Powell, George Hearn, Fred. Brown, W. Hunter, G. Hunter J. G. Cocking E. A. Smith G. Avenell Jamieson, W. McDonald, J. Morris, A. Millett, G. H. Myers, "Curly " McDonald, H. Nevett, W. P. Plummer, R. Payne, W. H. Parkes, J. A. Reid, G. (Scotty) Robertson, W. Read, G. H Ross, C. Sexton, F. Smith, F. Sharp, — Shea, Tim Scott, R. Stone, L. J. Streatfield, F. Sexton, W. Stone, J. A. Twoomey, F. Tregurtha, S. Williamson, J. Whiting, L. G. M. Sheppard E. M. Turner A. E. Sainsbury J. Ramshaw W. Wray Charles Hughes G. E. Thompson O. E. Angwin W. J. Shipway W. Eddy T. Page, Bert Grey, A. E. Kershaw, A. Quacker, G. Brown, H. Stickland, E. Byrne, E. Todman, A. J. E. Clues, A. Thompson, Len Hotchin, F. Dixon, J. S. Lynam, C. McGillivray, J. Mitchell, J. P. Nasmith, R. L. Clues, J. H. Vines.[7]
Bert appears in casualty list as ill
WESTERN AUSTRALIA. THE ROLL OF HONOUR. 229th AND 230th CASUALTY LISTS. The 229th and 230th casualty lists, containing the names of Western Australian soldiers, together with those who enlisted in other States, but whose relatives reside in Western Australia, were released by the Censor on Saturday, and are published below. Where not otherwise stated, the names are those of private soldiers: 229th LIST. 5th MILITARY DISTRICT. . . . ILL. Driver C. H. Windsor (Boulder); W. T. R. Young (Perth) ; W. P. Fears (Osborne Park) ; L. G. Head (Nannine), second occasion ; Sapper A. E. Grey (Cue); Sapper H. G. Pollock (Queenscliffe, Victoria), dangerously, subsequently reported condition stationary; Sergeant T. S. Edwards (Scotland), dangerously, previously reported ill; W. S. Lavington (North Fremantle), second occasion; C. Davis (Fremantle); Major E. A. Le Souef (South Perth), second occasion; W. Ottay (Beenup). [8]
RETURNED TO DUTY. Spr. A. Calder, Needilup, previously reported wounded; Privates J. Henderson, Perth, previously reported wounded; . . . Private J. E. Kidd, N. Perth, previously reported ill; Spr. A. E. Grey, Cue, previously reported ill; Spr. J. Hadwin, Norseman, previously reported ill; Spr. T. Louie, E. Fremantle, previously, reported ill, second occasion; . . . [9]
Lovely description of the Jordan Valley sent home by Bert and published in local newspaper
Through the Jordan Valley. A REALISTIC DESCRIPTION LETTER FROM A CUEITE. The following letter, received from Sapper A. E. Grey, of Cue, lately serving with the 10th Light Horse in Palestine, but now returned, gives a very realistic description of the Jordan Valley and its surroundings: — Ye Gods, we have almost finished circumnavigating the whole of Palestine. I think my last letter was from Jaffa. Anyway, this is from the Jordan Valley, so you can guess we have been travelling a little. The valley is a most wonderful piece of territory, and would take days to describe it in any detail, but here's a little outline. 'Tis 1000 feet below sea level and hot — hotter than Cue ever heard of. 'Tis flanked on both sides by mountains, most magnificent types of nature's rugged grandeur, with their valleys and gorges, some of which are seemingly depthless. Jericho can be seen in the near distance standing on an oasis, and just beyond the town one can follow the outline of the Morte Mer, till it gradually recedes into the distance, and seems to melt into the gap of the valley. 'Tis full-moon now, and it is beautiful at about 8 p.m. just as the moon's rays are being reflected off the lonely sea, and seems like a big burnished piece of oval brass, its out-line clear cut and narrowing down as it passes through the gap, whence it is no longer visible to us. We passed through the Holy City, and when looking back on the town from the Mount of Olives we thought and wondered. It looked peaceful as one's eye gradually came into line with Gethsemane, the old wall, the majestic overbearing dome of the Mosque of Omar, its jade and beautiful mosaic work on the dome catching the rays of the sun and sending them out to our vision in dancing shafts of glittering and sparkling rainbow lights. But on turning round one becomes still more dazzled to behold the seven golden domes of the Russian Church reflecting the sun in full glory of its own resplendency like big burnished copper balls; this being toned down by graceful spires and tapering slender lines of the marble and alabaster columns as they merge into more formed pieces and become a triumph of ancient architecture. Again, one wonders, Jerusalem seiged and beseiged, raised to the ground, taken by the Romans, the Greeks, the Turks, the Crusaders in possession of the Saracens for centuries, and now ours. And you think of the associations the Holy City holds for us of the Christian religion, and just a stone's throw away. He was betrayed. 'Tis the garden of Bethsemane. One is glad to have had a view of the grand old city from the Mount of Olives. It was worth all those burning, thirsting days at Romani, the sleepless nights at Mauhdaba, and the tiring ride to Rafa when we just dreamed of Jerusalem as a long way away. One can hardly realise it, that it is now ours — the great British Empire's. 'Tis no longer mere servito to a blaspheming Prussian overlord or to defiling Turks, but it is ours for the Great Religion that gives no creed to 'Might is Right.' On the way to Jericho one marvels at the ingenuity of the builders of the road, along which we had to go in half-sections. 'Tis very narrow, it twist and turns and travels around the frowning edges of cliffs. There are figures eight, hairpin bends, corkscrew turns, and the head of the column is sometimes on a level with the column half-a-mile back, all these turns being necessary to allow of a gradual descent of the mountains into the plains. The Romans were masters of road building. I've got some photos of the road, but they belittle the gigantic difficulties that had to be overcome. Parts of it are literally hewn through rock on the edge of the mountain, and then winding gradually down and around. About a mile from our present bivouac there is a Russian monastery built into the slopes of the Mount of Temptation. I went over it myself, and there are some wonderful paintings, many by old masters. I have enclosed a snap of the building, and it gives a fair idea of the mountainous country. The building is on the last ridge overlooking the Jordan Valley and Jericho.[10]
Bert acting as senior postal assistant to Postmaster at Leederville
FEDERAL GAZETTE NOTICES. MELBOURNE, Saturday. The following notices, concerning West Australia appear in the latest Commonwealth "Gazette":— R. G. Friel, Perth, accountant in the Commonwealth Sub-Treasury, to be Commissioner for Declarations under the Statutory Declarations Act. Postmaster-General's Department: An allowance, equal to the difference between the present salary and £220 per annum, is to be paid to each of the undermentioned officers from January 1, 1920, or such later date as he commenced to perform the duties of officer next to the postmaster, and to continue for such time not exceeding 12 months as he remains at the station, and to be reduced by the amount of any increment granted: A. R. Glendinning, clerical assistant, Claremont; E. J. Wansbrough, clerical assistant, Collie; E. J. Miller, clerical assistant, Meekatharra. An allowance equal to the difference between his salary and the minimum salary of senior postal assistant to be paid to A. E. Grey, postal assistant from July 1, 1919, and continue, such time not exceeding 18 months, as the officer performs the duties of officer next to postmaster at Leederville, and to be reduced by the amount of any increment granted.[11]
Postal Assistants' Association.— The election of officers to control the Postal Assistants Association for the year closed on the 23rd inst., when the following were declared elected:— President, Mr. W. J. Truscott; vice-president, Mr. C. Batty; hon. secretary, Mr. J. L. Robson (telegraph branch, G.P.O.); hon. treasurer, Mr. J. W. Balaam (box 14, G.P.O.); committee, postal assistants' representatives, Mr. A. E. Grey and Mr. J. Hand; postal assistants in charge representing Mr. J. J. Thomas; senior postal assistant, Miss Tildsley.[12]
Bert addresses the Mount Lawley Radio Club on the subject of rectification by valves and crystals
Mount Lawley Radio Club.— The Mount Lawley Radio Club conducted its fortnightly meeting last night in Wallish's Hall, Grosvenor-road. After the usual business preliminaries and the election of several new members, Mr. A. E. Grey (who holds first-class proficiency certificates for Marconi, Telefunken, and Poulsen arc systems) delivered an interesting and informative lecture on rectification as carried out in valves and crystals. The lecturer illustrated his address by the use of carefully prepared diagrams showing the relationship of rectifying properties of various crystals. Valve amplification was also touched upon. The president of the club (Mr. B. M. Cavanagh) thanked the lecturer on behalf of the officers and members of the club for the interesting and attractive way in which the address had been delivered. Mr. Grey responded by saying that he had had much pleasure in accepting the invitation of the secretary (Mr. C. H. Snowden) to address the members of the club, and he hoped that other clubs would be formed in other districts to aid the amateur and experimenter to acquire a fuller knowledge of radio telegraphy and telephony.[13]
Bert delivers a lecture to Subiaco Wireless Society on subject of tuned anode coupling
LOCAL WIRELESS CLUBS. SUBIACO. The members of the Subiaco Radio Society met again on Tuesday. It was unanimously agreed that Mr. Congdon be awarded the gold medal (donated by Mr. Thompson) for bringing along the most members to the club over a certain period. Two more new members were elected, and after the usual business of the club had been gone through Mr. Gray delivered a highly interesting lecture on tuned anode method of coupling, the greater part of his chat circling round the ST34 circuit of Scott-Taggarts. The members are promised some interesting lectures in the near future, including visits to well-known institutions.[14]
Bert, with other members of the Subiaco Radio Society, attend funeral of their young member W. A. Gilwhite
OBITUARY. The late Mr. W. A. Gilwhite. The funeral of the late Mr. Wilfrid Allen Gilwhite, late of Baker Bros., East Fremantle, son of Mr. and Mrs. John Gilwhite, of 41 Lawler-street, Subiaco, took place on Tuesday afternoon, the 6th inst. Deceased, who was 18 years of age, was born in Upton Park, Essex, England. The cortege moved from the residence of his parents and proceeded to the Methodist portion of the Karrakatta Cemetery, and was very largely attended. The chief mourners were: Mr. and Mrs. J. Gilwhite (father and mother), S. J. Gilwhite (brother), Misses D. and M. Gilwhite (sisters), Mrs. Sholl, Mr. W. A. Sivewright, Mr. F. Orris, Mr. J. Fawcett, Mr. A. Sholl, and Mr. W. Oliver. The pall-bearers were: Messrs. H. Matthews, H. Hymus, H. Trenaman, A. Lawrence, A. Sholl, B. Congdon, G. H. Jackson, and T. Henley. Amongst those present were: F. S. Andrews (representing Employers' Federation), E. Ledger (representing Iron Workers' Association), B. Congdon (representing Subiaco Radio Society), C. W. Henley (representing I.O. Rechabites), A. Mills (Subiaco Bowling Club), J. Cruickshank (representing Baker Bros.), T. Madigan (representing Millars' Timber and Trading Company), H. Moore (representing George Kent, Ltd.), T. Hull (representing employes G. Kent, Ltd.), R. Makutz and B. Hutchison (representing E. and R. Makutz), W. J. Berryman, R. W. Hawley, W. J. and W. E. Littlejohn, V. R. Trenaman, J. Bennett, Jones, C. Taylor, W. Richardson, M.L.A., J. Lawn, A. Shugg, H. Burton, E. C. Hull, A. S. and F. W. Munvard, J. G. Russell, M. S. Urquart, A. E. Grey, W. J. Farrington, W. L. Treen, S. W. Cameron, F. S. Jones, F. Gray, A. Henley, P. Miller, J. Lewis, S. J. Green, B. B. King, S. Meldrum, W. R. Kerr, T. W. Herrington, E. L. McKenzie, F. Goddard, F. Scott, Viv. Grey, Mesdames T. J. Green, Hewett, Grev. Downing, Bennett, Meldrum, Prosser, Burton, Randell, Tham, Cook, Foster, Lloyd, Corser, Hatty, Miss A. Sorenson, also members of the Bagot-road Methodist Ladies' Guild, Junior Girls' Club, Young Men's Club, Church Choir, Sunday School, and many others. Wreaths and floral tributes were received from the following: Bagot-road Methodist Young Men's Club, Ladies' Guild, Church Choir, Methodist Church trustees, Junior Girls' Club, Methodist Sunday School, Subiaco Radio Society, Subiaco Bowling Club, Baker Bros., Baker Bros.' employes, George Kent, Ltd., employes George Kent, Ltd., E. and R. Makutz, Mr. and Mrs. S. J. Gilwhite and Laurel, Mr. and Mrs. Lawn and family, Miss Rowe, Mr. and Mrs. C. Cheffins, Mr. and Mrs. F. Scott and family, Mr. and Mrs. Anstey and family, Mr. and Mrs. Hutchison and family, Mr. and Mrs. Littlejohn and family, Mr, and Mrs. Corser and family, Mr. and Mrs. C. Taylor and family, Mr. and Mrs. Hymus and family, Mr. and Mrs. Warwicker and family, Mr. and Mrs. W. Oliver, Mr. and Mrs. T. Hull, Mr. and Mrs. V. R. Trenaman, Mr. and Mrs. A. Sholl, Mr. and Mrs. W. Richardson, Mr. and Mrs. R. W. Downing, Mr. and Mrs. Bennett Jones, Mr. and Mrs. Randell, Mr. and Mrs. Henley, Mr. W. J. Berryman, Sister Sorenson, Mrs. C. H. Corser, Mrs. R. AIlison, Mrs. Kurth, and Miss Melthorpe, Mrs. Cook, and Mrs. Foster, Mrs. Moore, senr., and family, Mrs. Hatty and Eunice, Mrs. Oliver and family, Mr. and Mrs. T. W. Horwood, Little Meg and June, Mr. and Mrs. R. B. King, Bruce and Keith, Master Nevin Miller, The Twins, Andy and Stanley, and many others. The Rev. F. R. French, assisted by Rev. C. A. Jenkins and Rev. M. R. Maley, officiated at the graveside. The Rechabite Lodge service was conducted by the Rev. W. C. Henley. The funeral arrangements were carried out by Messrs. Donald J. Chipper and Son.[15]
Bert attends regular meeting of Subiaco Radio Society and is elected technical adviser and assistant hon. secretary
WIRELESS WAVES. RADIO NEWS AND NOTIONS. (By "ARIEL") . . . SUBIACO RADIO SOCIETY. The usual general fortnightly meeting of the Subiaco Radio Society was held on May 20, 1924. An interesting feature was the presentation to Mr. B. Congdon, of a gold medal, presented by Mr. Thom-son some time ago, for the member securing the greatest number of new members for the club. As Mr. Thomson was unable to attend the meeting, Mr. A. Grey had the pleasure of making the presentation. A letter was received by the secretary from Mr. and Mrs. Gilwhite and family, offering the set of their late son to the society for its use. This was accepted. The main feature of the evening was the election of officers for the ensuing year. Mr. Phipps was duly elected Hon. President, and Mr. B. Congdon; Hon. Secretary, with Mr. Grey as Technical Adviser and assistant hon. secretary. [16]
Bert first born wins major baby competition, includes brief biography
The Sunday Times. SEARCH FOR BONNIE BABIES. CONCLUSION of the COMPETITION. . . . RONALD EDWARD GREY. Champion Baby of W.A. and first prize in Class B. . . . The champion baby of Western Aus-tralia, Ronald Edward Grey, is a glo-rious little kiddie, according to the judges impossible to fault. When his photo was taken on April 11 he was 11½ months old, stood 31in. and weigh-ed 26lb. He first unaided, sat up at eight months, stood up at 10 months, and walked at 12 months. He will take the championship prize of £25 — which debars him from taking the £5 additional prize as winner in his class — and this sum will form a nice little start for a banking account to help him along life's journey later on. Little Ronald Grey, who was born in this State, is of purely Western Australian parentage. Both his mother and father are comparatively young, and Ronald is an only child. The father, Albert Edward ("Bert") Grey, who was born at Cue, is 27 years of age and a returned soldier. During the war he enlisted, at the age of 18, in the Light Horse and saw service in Egypt, where he contracted malaria, from which he suffers occasionally now. At present he is a telegraphist in the Post and Telegraph Department. Ronald's mother, Mary Grey, first saw the light of day at Toodyay, and she is a couple of years younger than her husband. The Greys are a small but happy family and so they should be with a glorious little chap who has earned the title of the Bonniest Baby in Western Australia to bless their hearth and home. . . . (Start Photo Caption) CHAMPION BABY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA. RONALD EDWARD GREY, 55 Lawler-street, Subiaco, 14 months .... £25 . . . CLASS B. First-RONALD EDWARD GREY, 55 Lawler-st., Subiaco, 14 months. (End Photo Caption) [17]
Bert station is the only one from WA being heard currently in Adelaide
On the Amateur's Wave Length. 5BD and 5BG were heard exchanging compliments the other evening on short — 000000025-watt, we presume. 2BK was heard working 6AKW during the early hours of Wednesday morning. Both stations were quite Q.S.A., although static and Q.R.M. were bad. 5BK and 5FT carried out several interesting tests last Sunday evening — 5BK with good punch and modulation, but 5FT with a bad A.C. hum and a voice which was not at times distinguishable. 5AH has built a new bench for his transmitter. Upon placing the old transmitter on the new bench it is understood he decided to build a new transmitter! 5AI has been very busy lately with inductances, condensers, transformers, &c., in fact, the whole works necessary for short-wave transmission. A considerable noise is promised when he starts up. The spark coil fiend has again been active lately, but so have the "loop brigade," and they are gradually narrowing down the area to that in which he persists in polluting the ether. We shall probably hear more of this anon. U6ARW was heard working A2BK during the evening on Wednesday last. He was complaining that a big "bottle" had gone soft on him. Wonder if it was a 250-watter? New Zealand fans are nightly on the air working Australian and U.S. stations. One wonders when they go to bed, or if they ever get any sleep at all. Radio, as far as amateurs are concerned, seems quite dead in Western Australia. The only one heard lately is A6BO, and only intermittently. U6AWT was heard on Wednesday evening working with various New South Wales stations, and the strength was terrific. His signals could be read two rooms away off the 'phones. Other U.S. stations have been logged, including U6CGO and (?) BRB, but none have the strength of 6AWT.[18]
Bert has a crystal set terminal stolen at the Exhibition, also regularly working below 200 metres
Exhibiton Report Several well known amateurs and traders were not represented in the exhibition. Regarding the amateurs, probably inducement in the shape of a more generous prize distribution would have brought them along, but why the whole of the traders did not take the offer of such an excellent op-portunity to display their wares seems hard to fathom. 6WF's programmes are still of a very high standard, and we note that some very good gramophone records are being selected for broadcasting. This reminds us that we have never heard better ones than those recorded by Galli-Curci, and now that this great artist will be singing here in person shortly it would be opportune to broadcast some of her more popular records. The Super Hetrodyne displayed on Messrs. Craig and Co.'s stand was quite a novelty, it being, we believe, the first of its kind in W.A. It has the reputation of being one of the most efficient types of receivers yet devised, and trans ocean distance is mere local DX to it. His Excellency's speech showed he is fully conversant with the great possibilities that lie ahead of radio in the developing of our remote districts, and which are at the present suffering from a paucity of means of communication, and also the pleasure and enjoyment that modern broadcasting brings in its wake. The exhibit of the Donnybrook Society was truly educational. The sets were not graced with elegant looking components, but with those that had been entirely home constructed from the raw materials of wood and brass, and in one instance an ornamental scroll in silver had been fitted. It says much for the skill of these amateurs that the results obtained are equally as good as those obtained with the best quality article imported from abroad. What we want to know anent the exhibition:— How the big sets were removed without demolishing the household premises? Who took the terminal off 6BO's crystal set? How many operators are required to operate the sets with 15 dials? To whom really belongs the credit of making the model of the valve? Why Subiaco didn't gather in all the recordbreaking low lossers owned by members? And why didn't you amateurs see to labelling your sets? Advertising was not allowed, but this was not applicable to information placards. Any amateur receiving NRRL, the transmitter of the American Relay League on board one of the battleships with the American fleet, is requested to forward us full details, as the Navy Department are anxious to receive the fullest information possible. It is believed that the installation of short-wave transmitters as permanent units on board warships is contemplated. Reception of NRRL has already been reported by South Australian amateurs. The wave length used for night transmissions is 50 metres, and an input power of 1000 watts. That radio societies meetings and functions are more than a meeting place for discussing super hets and oscillating crystals is amply proved by the Subiaco Society. A year ago it lost, through the decease of Wilford Gilwhite, one of their most active members, and to perpetuate his memory his parents presented his wireless set to the club. With commendable spirit the society has made up the set as the one for use by members, and a neat, silver tablet inscribed with their late comrade's name and other particulars has been fitted. Such action shows the spirit of comradeship is earnestly lived up to by the members of this club, and their action is very much appreciated. Eastern States radio periodicals were recently in a caustic mood over the failure (they say) of the W.A. transmitting fraternity to get enough gumption to come down below 200 metres. Their correspondents must have a very different low losser, as 6AM, 6AG, 6WP and 6BO have all been in communication with the other siders, and of course all short wave working, and in one case 6BO has been logged whilst working on 30 metres. 6AM has a nightly schedule and can be heard after broadcasting hours with either a five or a three. He has, by the way, an excellent method of sending. It is clear cut, and well worthy of imitation by some of our Eastern colleagues.[19]
Bert being hear in all states bar Qld, though mislogged there from W6BO
SOMETHING FOR LISTENERS-IN. . . . Recent reports from the East say that signals from one of our local transmitters in 6AM (Mr. P. Kennedy) can be heard all over the house on a low loss two-step. Judging from the way our telephone diaphragms rattle when he is on the air, we are not at all surprised if he isn't QRMing some of the BBC stations. 6AG is also said to come in with exceptional strength, and we have heard tales of 4000 volts on the plates shortly, so W.A. should soon be in the International DX. 6BO on 50 metres has been reported from all States, bar Queensland. He says he has one report from there, but it also states a time when he wasn't transmitting, and he won't have that his signals are running a week late. So he blames Yankee 6BO, who is frequently heard.[20]
WIRELESS WEEK by WEEK. . . . Short wave working during the past week has only been spasmodic, most of the locals being heard only now and again. 6AM is without question the best of the bunch, and his signals of late sound as though the high tension has taken an upward move. 6CJ is still very strong and has a good clear note which should have no difficulty in getting over East. 6BN is using three 5 watters with only 250 volts, and he certainly is getting out with it, and which should bring in a batch of DX cards. 6AG and 6WP have a night-ly pow-wow with a strength that should be heard in England. A few desultory transmissions from 6BO now and then proclaim him as still in commission. He states he is now on 55 metres and still raking in DX. South Australia reporting his signals strength 7 and the loudest of the locals.[21]
Bert's shortwave wavelength measured as 60 metres
EXPERIMENTERS' WAVE-LENGTHS. BAND TRANSMITTERS ARE WORKING. A correspondent writes: "I have recently been measuring the wave lengths used by some of the local transmitters with a new, shortwave meter I have secured, and the result may interest your readers. Here are my readings: 6BN, A. E. Stevens, 90 metres; 6AG, W. Coxan, 39 metres; 6AM, P. Kennedy, 84 metres; 6WP, W. Phipps, 70 metres; 6CJ, E. J. Darley, 75 metres; 6BO, A. E. Gray, 60 metres; 6AB, C. Cecil (Kalg.), 80 metres; 6HJ, H. Johnson, 78 metres.[23]
Another report gives Bert's wavelength as 70 metres
A local daily in its wireless notes gives the wave-lengths of amateur transmitters as 300-400 metres, which is inaccurate and misleading. The regulations provide for a maximum of 250 metres, and without exception all of our local transmitters are down on the short wave band. The following are the most active:— 6AG (W. E. Coxon), 39 and 80 metres; 6BN (A.E. Stevens), 90 metres; 6BO (A. E. Grey), 70 metres; 6AM (P. Kennedy), 85 metres; 6WP (W. Phipps), 70 metres; 6CJ (E. J. Darley), 75 metres; 6AB (C. Cecil), 80 metres.[24]
Bert only operating on the weekends but East reports always strong
Short wave working has again been spasmodic but a little more activity is now noticeable. Locally things are fairly lively, and quite a number of transmitters are now in operation. 6AG and 6CJ are pre-eminent in strength, both putting out very clear notes. Their signals on a two-valve amplifier are absolutely deafening, and they are evidently bridging distance, as the reception of 6AG and 6AM is now quite common by New Zealand amateurs. We have not been able to track 6BN lately, but reports say a lone 5-watter is giving increased radiation. This station is noted for its remarkable performances on low power, and must come close to the miles per watt record. 6WP is installing a "sink" rectifier. Heard during the other evening he was not up to usual strength, but these sinks take some coaxing. A four coil Meissner is now the circuit, and 6WP is a little lower down the scale. 6BO only manages time to pound brass during the weekend, but reports from the East always come along with "Ur Sigs very Q.S.A here." Increased high voltage is contemplated, and it is hoped to get more than a flicker from the radiation meter. The other siders are still energetic, and a host of them can be heard working nightly. Quite a number of the Tassies are audible, and they appear to come in at much better strength than the mainland States. We heard some one say the other night — "Couldn't get any radiation because the washing was hanging on the counterpoise."[25]
Bert has to be at work at 7am
SHORT WAVE WORKING. Experimenters Braving The Elements. The week's short wave working has been marked by a mild epidemic of activity. All the sixes have been going, mostly early in the morning, and cold early mornings, too. 6AG has been the most prominent and stuck to his schedule like the seasoned warrior of all night sittings he is, and richly deserves any records that come his way. 6BN also braved the elements, but was faint-hearted towards the end of the week. 6WP got up one morning, but unluckily mistook the wrong one, sauntered out to his shack during a raging thunderstorm. He was heard to mutter something about things not being too favorable, but said he would give it a try. Anyway, on pulling over his earthing switch long, skinny blue sparks started to dart down from the aerial side, and the things not being too favorable his opinion was this time more forcibly expressed. 6WP recounts how he listened in for exactly one second, and it was the most hideous pandemonium of static he has ever heard, or ever wants to. 6BO says he had to be at work every morning at seven, and reckons that was bad enough without making the alarm oscillate an hour earlier. We never heard 6CJ, and expect he slept through it all. Anyhow the signals he is now putting out should make him Q.S.O. with the Yanks. By the way, how do you make your A.C. sound like a good smoothed D.C.? We are all anxious for the secret. 6AM still manages time to work the Othersiders, who report him as the only active six. Several new transmitting licences are mooted, and operations are expected to commence at an early date.[26]
Bert needs to replace a blown valve
Our weekly budget of short-wave working is almost non est this week. Devotion to 3LO and bringing them in for the edification of those who say it can't be done is the cause. But we would like to swop 6CJ our two 50-watt bottles for that beautiful clear note of his. It sounds as if he is getting his H.T. supply from two Morris's in series, and he is certainly the second loudest of the locate, 6AG being accorded pride of place. By the way, we understand when 6AG presses his key the house lights complain, by dimming, that they lack juice. What are you using, Wally — kilowatts? We see, in our burnt-out 'phones, a solution, after all. 6BO hasn't replaced his valve yet; reckons he is waiting till they make them without filaments. 6WP and 6BN are busy on conference work, and have forgotten they have a transmitter. Eastern Staters still pour in, and many Yanks are audible on 40 metres.[27]
Bert being reported as heard in Queensland, also replacing his burnt out 50 watt tube with a Phillips ZII of 20 watts
WIRELESS WEEK by WEEK. . . . A Queensland journal reports the reception of 6AG, 6AM, 6BO, 6JB and 6WP. . . . 6BO replaces his burnt out 50 watter with a Phillips ZII 20 watts. Reports so far show a radiation of nil, but he reckons it goes good as a power valve for the low frequency amplifier.[28]
Bert attends the WIA annual dinner associated with the WIA federal conference in Perth
WIRELESS WEEK by WEEK. . . . Amongst the gathering at the annual radio dinner we noticed Mr. A. McCallum, M.L.A. (Minister for Works), Professor Ross, radio inspector Scott, Mr. P. Kennedy (deputy State Engineer), Messrs. Knapton, Truman, Thompson, and a host of the well-known amateurs, including 6BB, 6MU, 6WP, 6AG, 6WP, 6BO, 6BN, and 6CJ. It was indeed a representative gathering, and a glowing tribute to the importance attached to the local amateur movement.[29]
LOCAL TRANSMITTERS. The Latest Call List. The following is the latest call list of the local transmitters. Each week we will give portions of the Australian list, and when completed it will prove useful for Q.S.L. purposes:— . . . 6BO.— Grey, A. E., Archdeacon-street, Nedlands.[30]
WIRELESS WEEK by WEEK. . . . Several new local transmitters are on the air, and 6MU, using a 201A valve and a 150 volts from a small motor generator, is putting out a good strong and clear note. He was heard carrying out tests with 6BO the other evening, the latter by some means, having got down to 65 metres.[31]
WIRELESS WEEK by WEEK. . . . 6BO and 6CJ were heard indulging in a little 'phone talk during the week and eavesdropping, we understand duplex work was being tried out, but 6BO complained about the awful QRM from his generator. Put it out in the back yard O.M. 6CJ's speech was the acme of clearness and puts the automatic in the shade.[32]
Bert noted saying his output depends on the quality of rectifier solution; on holidays doing much transmitting
SHORT WAVE ACTIVITIES. The Week's Operations. Writing of the week's short wave activities is now an easy matter inasmuch as there is no apparent lack of interest, and anyone who has a transmitter, and so long as it oscillates, can be heard freely indulging in short wave work. There is a renewed activity on the 80-90 metre band, and quite a number of transmitters are back there again, after a little detour down among the 20's. In the consequent search after vanished radiation, though it is bad enough higher up, one can generally get some radiation to show. When dealing with short waves however, radiation actually shown on the metre appears to be of little account, and Australia can be spanned without the needle showing the slightest flicker. Locally the sixes are very active, and 6CJ is still the leader. The note still retaining its pure DC character, and is very strong. When this station tells the Eastern gang he is using rectified AC they invariably come back with, "How do you do it OM?" During a 'phone conversation with 6BO the other evening 6CJ was heard to say his radiation has been as high as 1½ amps., but varies with the quality of the solution in the rectifiers. This station is easily our best 6 and no difficulty is experienced maintaining communication with any portion of Eastern Australia. 6WP has again been key pounding down about 30 metres. A yet unconfirmed report says one of the G's has heard him. 6MU has dismantled his generator to see how it works, and also where all the voltage has gone. 6BN is doing wonderful work with a 5 watter, and 300 volts, and is QSO with the East and sigs very QSA. 6AG is too busy looking after broadcasting and 6WF's intricate gear. Come on, Wally, put on an op. Your station has earned W.A. its wireless reputation, so keep it up. 6BO is on holidays, and that means that his transmitter is kept busy working quite a number of other siders. Our old friend 6AM is heard very little these days. Like 6AG he is also very busy, but generally finds time to do a little transmitting. Nothing has been heard of 6AB, 6AC, 6AK, 6BB, 6BW or 6HJ. Where are you all? Our receiver goes from 60 to 130, some come right down there. If you want a mention of the Eastern amateurs a newcomer in 2IJ is coming in at tremendous strength, and as loud as KEL. Others heard were 2VI, 2GW, 2ZN, 7PF, 3OT, Z1AF, 7DX, 3LM, and a host of others.[33]
Bert, as Technical Adviser to Subiaco Radio Society, eulogises 6WP for presentation
LOCAL WIRELESS CLUBS. SUBIACO. A very enthusiastic meeting was held by the Subiaco Radio Society at their meeting rooms at the Fire Station, Rokeby-road, on Wednesday last. The hon. president (Mr. W. Phipps) presided over a good attendance, and several new members were elected. A good deal of discussion centred around the building of a club transmitter, and a motion was carried that a 5-watt set be installed. A committee was formed to arrange for the building of the transmitter and a 500 volt transformer is to be purchased. Valve rectifiers will be installed in conjunction with a radiotron 5 watter. Short waves will be used, and it is hoped the society will shortly be able to carry out transmission with the Eastern States. During the evening a presentation was made to Mr. W. Phipps. The technical adviser (Mr. A. E. Grey) eulogised Mr. Phipps' work, and said that the strong and virile position of the Subiaco society at the present time was in a large measure due to Mr. Phipps' untiring efforts and zeal to further the interests of the club. It is significant whilst most other clubs are suffering from lack of attendance, Subiaco still holds attractions, so that members' interest does not flag. The transmitting committee will meet at Mr. Powell's Rooms, Rokeby-road, on Friday evening at 8 p.m. The next meeting of the society will be held on Wednesday, the 22nd inst., when arrangements will be finalised regarding the transmitter, and also details fixed for the holding of a junk sale.[34]
Bert, as PMGD Senior Radio Inspector, is contact point to apply for permits to use radiating apparatus
BAN ON RADIATION. The Wireless Transmitting Apparatus (Possession) Order will come into force on April 1. Under this order no person without a permit may have in his possession wireless transmitting apparatus or certain other types of apparatus which could be used as transmitters if they are capable of developing power exceeding 10 watts on a frequency exceeding 10,000 cycles per second. Apparatus concerned are diathermy or other electro-medical apparatus in which valves or spark coils are used (not including normal modern types of violet-ray, ultra-violet ray, infra-red ray, X-ray apparatus or medical shocking coils); high frequency furnaces, eddy-current heating apparatus or high-frequency testing oscillators. Application forms are available from the Senior Radio Inspector Mr. A. E. Grey, Wireless Branch, Second Floor, G.P.O., Perth.[35]
↑ "Cue Convent School.". The Murchison Times And Day Dawn Gazette (Western Australia) 16, (54): p. 4. 18 December 1909. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article233465361. Retrieved 12 June 2021.
↑ "THE COMMONWEALTH GAZETTE". Sunday Times (Perth) (Western Australia) (747): p. 9. 12 May 1912. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article57735994. Retrieved 11 June 2021.
↑ "General News.". The Murchison Times And Day Dawn Gazette (Western Australia) 21, (98): p. 2. 29 April 1914. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article233266910. Retrieved 12 June 2021.
↑ "WAR ITEMS.". Geraldton Guardian (Western Australia) IX, (1295): p. 3. 7 August 1915. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article66705904. Retrieved 13 June 2021.
↑ "WEST AUSTRALIAN EVENTS". Kalgoorlie Western Argus (Western Australia) 21, (4924): p. 38. 10 August 1915. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article33612605. Retrieved 13 June 2021.
↑ "General News.". The Murchison Times And Day Dawn Gazette (Western Australia) 23, (28): p. 2. 20 November 1915. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article233256382. Retrieved 12 June 2021.
↑ "Cue-Day Dawn Soldiers.". The Murchison Times And Day Dawn Gazette (Western Australia) 23, (42): p. 4. 21 January 1916. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article233257417. Retrieved 12 June 2021.
↑ "WESTERN AUSTRALIA.". The West Australian (Western Australia) XXXII, (4,531): p. 7. 9 October 1916. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article26993702. Retrieved 13 June 2021.
↑ "RETURNED TO DUTY.". The Daily News (Western Australia) XXXVI, (13,093): p. 6. 29 January 1917. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article81062880. Retrieved 13 June 2021.
↑ "Through the Jordan Valley". The Murchison Times And Day Dawn Gazette (Western Australia) 25, (26): p. 3. 21 February 1919. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article233280102. Retrieved 13 June 2021.
↑ "FEDERAL GAZETTE NOTICES". Sunday Times (Perth) (Western Australia) (1169): p. 1 (First Section). 30 May 1920. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article57966524. Retrieved 11 June 2021.
↑ "THE UNEMPLOYED.". The Daily News (Western Australia) XLI, (14,653): p. 8 (THIRD EDITION). 28 February 1922. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article82029186. Retrieved 11 June 2021.
↑ "The Daily News. PERTH, WESTERN AUSTRALIA, SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 22.". The Daily News (Western Australia) XLII, (15,109): p. 8 (THIRD EDITION). 22 September 1923. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article78070140. Retrieved 11 June 2021.
↑ "LOCAL WIRELESS CLUBS". Sunday Times (Perth) (Western Australia) (1360): p. 8 (First Section). 3 February 1924. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article58073361. Retrieved 11 June 2021.
↑ "OBITUARY.". The Daily News (Western Australia) XLIII, (15,307): p. 7. 14 May 1924. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article84246229. Retrieved 11 June 2021.
↑ "WIRELESS WAVES". Call (Western Australia) (518): p. 12. 30 May 1924. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article210903363. Retrieved 11 June 2021.
↑ "The Sunday Times SEARCH FOR BONNIE BABIES". Sunday Times (Perth) (Western Australia) (1382): p. 9. 6 July 1924. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article58054947. Retrieved 11 June 2021.
↑ "COMMENTS ON 5 CL.". The Register (Adelaide) (South Australia) XC, (26,257): p. 7. 21 February 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article63730430. Retrieved 11 June 2021.
↑ "WIRELESS WEEK by WEEK". Sunday Times (Perth) (Western Australia) (1427): p. 8. 17 May 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article58258488. Retrieved 11 June 2021.
↑ "SOMETHING FOR LISTENERS-IN". Sunday Times (Perth) (Western Australia) (1428): p. 9. 24 May 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article58218276. Retrieved 12 June 2021.
↑ "WIRELESS WEEK by WEEK". Sunday Times (Perth) (Western Australia) (1431): p. 8. 14 June 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article58219489. Retrieved 12 June 2021.
↑ "SIMULTANEOUS TRANSMISSIONS ON A SINGLE AERIAL". Sunday Times (Perth) (Western Australia) (1432): p. 15. 21 June 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article58219973. Retrieved 12 June 2021.
↑ "EXPERIMENTERS' WAVELENGTHS.". The Daily News (Western Australia) XLIV, (15,650): p. 6 (THIRD EDITION). 22 June 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article84058684. Retrieved 12 June 2021.
↑ "WIRELESS WEEK by WEEK". Sunday Times (Perth) (Western Australia) (1433): p. 11. 28 June 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article58220491. Retrieved 12 June 2021.
↑ "ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS". Sunday Times (Perth) (Western Australia) (1434): p. 11. 5 July 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article58220904. Retrieved 12 June 2021.
↑ "SHORT WAVE WORKING". Sunday Times (Perth) (Western Australia) (1436): p. 11. 19 July 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article58221965. Retrieved 12 June 2021.
↑ "WIRELESS WEEK by WEEK". Sunday Times (Perth) (Western Australia) (1437): p. 11. 26 July 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article58222277. Retrieved 12 June 2021.
↑ "WIRELESS WEEK by WEEK Our Budget of Broadcasting and Listemng-In Lyrics— Of the Greatest Value to the Seeker after Knowledge RADIOGRAMS". Sunday Times (Perth) (Western Australia) (1439): p. 11 (First Section). 9 August 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article58224875. Retrieved 12 June 2021.
↑ "WIRELESS WEEK by WEEK Our Budget of Broadcasting and Listening-in Lyrics— Of the Greatest Value to the Seeker after Knowledge RADIOGRAMS". Sunday Times (Perth) (Western Australia) (1440): p. 11 (First Section). 16 August 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article58225585. Retrieved 12 June 2021.
↑ "LOCAL TRANSMITTERS". Sunday Times (Perth) (Western Australia) (1440): p. 11 (First Section). 16 August 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article58225583. Retrieved 12 June 2021.
↑ "WIRELESS WEEK by WEEK Our Budget of Broadcasting and Listening-In Lynes— Of the Greatest Value to the Seeker after Knowledge RADIOGRAMS". Sunday Times (Perth) (Western Australia) (1441): p. 11 (First Section). 23 August 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article58226484. Retrieved 12 June 2021.
↑ "WIRELESS WEEK by WEEK". Sunday Times (Perth) (Western Australia) (1443): p. 5 (First Section). 6 September 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article58223689. Retrieved 13 June 2021.
↑ "SHORT WAVE ACTIVITIES". Sunday Times (Perth) (Western Australia) (1443): p. 5 (First Section). 6 September 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article58223647. Retrieved 13 June 2021.
↑ "LOCAL WIRELESS CLUBS". Sunday Times (Perth) (Western Australia) (1444): p. 6 (First Section). 13 September 1925. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article58224133. Retrieved 13 June 2021.
↑ "BAN ON RADIATION". The Daily News (Western Australia) LIX, (20573): p. 31. 8 March 1941. http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-article78820204. Retrieved 11 June 2021.
The function atol() converts str into a long, then returns that value. atol() will read from str until it finds any character that should not be in a long. The resulting truncated value is then converted and returned. For example,
Fair Use is the doctrine in American copyright law pertaining to the utilization of copyrighted works without the supposed necessity of economic reimbursement or artistic license. Because the application of this doctrine to cases of copyright infringement and utilization has rendered an exact definition of the doctrine elusive, law has been unable to reflect a statutory definition. The doctrine was finally recognized by statute in the Copyright Act of 1976, which was part of a greater general revision of American copyright laws.
§107 in Title 17 of the United States Code consists of the fair use doctrine as recognized by statute:
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 106 and 106A, the fair use of a copyrighted work, including such use by reproduction in copies or phonorecords or by any other means specified by that section, for purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching (including multiple copies for classroom use), scholarship, or research, is not an infringement of copyright. In determining whether the use made of a work in any particular case is a fair use the factors to be considered shall include—
(3) the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted
(4) the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted
The fact that a work is unpublished shall not itself bar a finding of fair use if
The formula Ren Shen Ge Jie Tang, designed to relieve cough by tonifying the lungs and kidneys, consists of the following:
Fałszywi przyjaciele slawisty
Wopacne pśijaśele slawista
Wopačni přećeljo slawista
Falošní priatelia slavistu
This is a collection of 'false friends' (shared words having different meanings) between Slavic languages, e.g. Russian–Polish, Macedonian–Upper Sorbian, Belarusian–Serbian, etc. For an idea about 'false friends' with respect to the English language, please see List of British American False Friends
The hypertext navigation in this book is simple. Use the navigation table at the top of this page and click at an X at the crossing of two languages to find an alphabetical list of false friends between these languages. A click at the abbreviation of a language itself leads you to a monolingual page giving an overview over the 'false friends' of the respective language in all other Slavonic languages.
The semasiological maps give you an overview over the different meanings a word has in different Slavonic languages.
Alternatively, you can also use the alphabetical list of all existing pages at Category:Book:False Friends of the Slavist.
R.
Blr.
Ukr.
Pol.
Ka.
LSo.
USo.
Cz.
Slk.
Sln.
Cr.
Bo.
Sb.
Mk.
Bg.
R.
Blr.
Ukr.
Pol.
Ka.
LSo.
USo.
Cz.
Slk.
Sln.
Cr.
Bo.
Sb.
Mk.
Bg.
R.
Blr.
Ukr.
Pol.
Ka.
LSo.
USo.
Cz.
Slk.
Sln.
Cr.
Bo.
Sb.
Mk.
Bg.
The following abbreviations are used in the navigation table:
R.
Blr.
Ukr.
Pol.
Ka.
LSo.
Dolnoserbska rěc
USo.
Cz.
Slk.
Sln.
Cr.
Bo.
Sr.
Mk.
Bg.
The concept and the first 2447 'false friends' pairs entered into this wikibook come from an internet project by Daniel Bunčić, which has now been converted into a Wikibook. It was started in October 1999, when the author was writing his master thesis about 'false friends'. (At first it was located at www.uni-koeln.de/phil-fak/slavistik/fauxamis and from September 2001 until February 2006 at www.uni-bonn.de/~dbuncic/fauxamis.) In September 2003, unfortunately all further development had to be stopped due to lack of time. Now at last it can be developed further, with everyone interested in Slavonic false friends (and there are lots of people who are, see below) being able to contribute.
I, Daniel Bunčić, the creator of this work (with the support of others), hereby publish it under the following licence:
Thanks to all those who contributed to the lists of false friends when they were still a personal project by Daniel Bunčić and not a wikibook:
As usual with Wikibooks and Wikipedia, you can edit all the pages of this module. Please, whenever you spot a mistake, correct it, and enter your own additions (new 'false friends' etc.) if you like.
If you want to know what else you can do to help improve this project, have a look at the Proofreading Centers on the discussion pages for Russian, Belarusian, Ukrainian, Polish, Kashubian, Lower Sorbian, Upper Sorbian, Czech, Slovak, Slovenian, Croatian, Serbian, Macedonian, and Bulgarian.
See the editing help page of this book for more detailed information.
Weight: 29kg/64.0lb
Gender Distribution: 87.5% Male
Move types which are good on Vaporeon: Electric, Grass
Move types which are bad on Vaporeon:Fire, Ice, Steel¹, Water
All other move types are normal effectiveness on Vaporeon.
² – All other Pokemon games
Ruby / Sapphire Emerald XD / Colosseum
GS/C/RS/FL: Attract, Frustration, Hidden Power, Iron Tail, Protect, Rain Dance, Return, Roar, Shadow Ball, Sunny Day, Waterfall
RB/Y: Bide, Body Slam, Bubblebeam, Double-Edge, Mimic, Rage, Reflect, Skull Bash, Substitute, Take Down, Water Gun
GS/C: Curse, Detect, Endure, Headbutt, Icy Wind, Mud-Slap, Sleep Talk, Snore, Swagger, Whirlpool
Template:Wikibooks Pokédex:Eevee Series
Cognitive Psychology and Cognitive Neuroscience is a featured book on Wikibooks because it contains substantial content, it is well-formatted, and the Wikibooks community has decided to feature it on the main page or in other places. Please continue to improve it and thanks for the great work so far! You can edit its advertisement template.
A PDF version is available. (info)
The earliest meter stamp seen is from 1969. All stamps have “CAYMAN ISLANDS” or “GRAND CAYMAN” either in the frank or the town mark.
Horizontal frank with simulated-perforation outer border inscribed “JAMAICA” in top panel.
M# with “P.B.” prefix at bottom between TM and frank.
This is a provisional design used before the first Pitney Bowes franks inscribed “CAYMAN ISLANDS” were used.
As Type 1 but with “CAYMAN ISLANDS” in top panel.
M# with “P.B.” prefix.
A. “CAYMAN ISLANDS” about 2¼mm [$10]
B. “CAYMAN ISLANDS” taller, about 2½mm tall [$5]
Similar to Type 2 but without crown below “CAYMAN ISLANDS”.
Meter P.B.80 only.
Upright frank with crown at bottom center.
Meters S1 and S2 only.
Decimal values seen: .01 .03NOTE: In 2009 this stamp with 1969 date (pictured) was reported. This makes Type 4 the earliest meter stamp design used in the Cayman Islands.
Plain rectangular frank with single straight-line border.
Inscribed “CAYMAN/ ISLANDS” at top, M# at bottom.
Meters RN 001 and RN 002 only.
Horizontal frank, straight lines at top and bottom with small indentations at the ends.
No border lines at sides.
M# with “P.B.” prefix centered above bottom frame line, 003 and up.
Crown at top right.
V/F: 0.00a. Unengraved block replacing M#
Pitney Bowes-GB “A900” (MV), 1995.
Similar to Type 6 but larger, without crown, with Post Office logo in box at top left.
Value figures large.
“M# with “PB” prefix.
Similar to Type 7 but taller frank.
Meter number breaks bottom frame line.
Meters PB0101 up.
Frank similar to Type 7 but with two columns of numbers at left of the town mark.
The date and value figures are quite different from Type 7.
M# with “PB” prefix.
Pitney Bowes (digital), 2013 or earlier.
Open frank with lines at top and bottom and hash marks at right.
"POSTAGE PAID" at top right.
M# with "PB" prefix at bottom center.
"CAYMAN ISLANDS" at bottom of town mark.
We want to clean up HTML that is not well formed. We will use the Apache Tika tools to convert dirty HTML to well-formed XHTML.
Health physics is a constantly expanding new part of the A levels.
A reader requests expansion of this page to include more material.You can help by adding new material (learn how) or ask for assistance in the reading room.
v • d • e A-level physicsCosmology
Models of the known universe • Stars and Galaxies • Structure of the universe • Information from stellar observation • How the universe may evolve • RelativityElectrons, Waves, and Photons
Electric current • D.C. circuits • Magnetic effects of current • Quantum physics • Electromagnetic wavesForces, Fields, and Energy
Further dynamics • Work and energy • Motion in a circle • Oscillations • Gravitational fields • Electric fields • Capacitors • Electromagnetism • Electromagnetic induction • Thermal physics • The nuclear atom • Radioactivity • Appendix of FormulaeForces and Motion
Artificial Intelligence is growing and evolving every day. There is speculation about limits of AI capabilities. Some extremists predict that by 2030, everyone will be own a self-driving car, and the privilege we have as humans to drive will fade out. With technology rapidly evolving, the sky seems to be the limit. Artificial Intelligence is rapidly advancing in every level like the groups had shown. From transportation to home/service robots, to healthcare and education, to public safety and security as well as the entertainment industry. If AI is advancing at such a fast pace in almost every field.
Artificial Intelligence entities are being extensively programmed through machine learning to perform human tasks as well as be able to make logical and ethical decisions. For example Flippy the robot was put to work last year burgers at CaliBurger restaurant (Weisberger, 2018). Engineers and researchers in robotics are trying to essentially model the human brain in terms of decision-making, coding the robot to do normal human activities, speech intelligence and more.
As AI entities are becoming more human-like by learning to perform human behaviors human decisions, the questions stands whether these entities deserve any moral consideration. If at some point in the future these robotic assistants can walk, converse with you, complete tasks for you, one could possible grow some attachment to the entity and feel that it does warrant some moral consideration. Thinking now, the only things that warrant moral consideration in society today are beings which show the signs of life. This really means anything that talks or moves. A cardboard box is not treated with any moral consideration because it does not have life. A robot can be perceived to warrant moral considerations because after being programmed, it will possess characteristics of life. Most people however, stand on the side that AI entities should not have moral considerations because these entities are completely programmed to do certain things, say certain phrases and react certain ways. One can compare moral consideration of AI entities to that of appliances because they are just constructed by man out of material and just powered by electricity or battery.At this point, because of these reasons the majority of society is ruling that these entities do not warrant moral consideration.
AI is rapidly finding a role across a variety of enterprise functions. Machine learning (ML) can dissect past information to draw insights, whereas AI can look at data patterns. AI forges new partnerships between humans and machines. Humans can apply common sense, moral reasoning, imagination, and compassion to their decision-making, whereas AI excels at locating knowledge, identifying patterns, eliminating bias, and operating with endless capacity. However, it is important to note that, for humans, AI is more of a tool than a solution and augments human capabilities rather than replaces them. In terms of AI, one that we have not discussed yet is AI’s applicability to taxes.
A blogger with PWC, Bjarne Berg, shared five different ways as to how AI is reinventing tax world functions. The first one starts with automation of routine decisions and reporting. This work involves machine learning algorithms that have recently become common in today’s business world as well as our daily lives. These algorithms can categorize sales into the proper jurisdiction for managing sales tax calculations by scanning and analyzing expense reports to determine which deductions are available based on the type and amount of each expense. The second function we are introduced to are enhanced dashboard monitors; AI-enabled dashboards can give tax professionals an instant understanding of issues at glance that can aid decision making. While a simple dashboard may give a tax professional a look at that day’s receipts and sales tax liabilities, a dashboard informed by AI is more dynamic, allowing a tax professional to use the system not only to evaluate the past, but also to anticipate the future. Enhanced dashboard monitors leads to improved forecasting, making forecasting more accurate and faster.[1].
A good example of a real savvy AI algorithm may even be able to look at weather patterns to determine how sales are likely to be impacted regionally and the impact that could have on tax burdens. Advanced scenario analysis will allow us to be able to analyze what would happen to a business’s tax risks and overall structure based on the likely outcome of a local or national election, just by looking at a broad data set of unstructured data and making a probabilistic model out of it. And finally, at the highest level of AI function, machine learning will help with complex decisions in the absence of any real structured data at all. For example, instead of your legal team spending hours poring over a five-hundred-page sales contract, an AI tool can do the same job in a matter of seconds, determining whether the document contains any legal problems or taxation risks.
Similarly, an AI system may keep constant watch over a business’s register of sales actions, making educated decisions about whether the company is at risk of fraud. An AI tool can build its own statistical model based on historical fraud rates while looking for patterns that may be missed by a human examiner.
↑ https://www.pwc.com/us/en/tax-services/tax-technology-blogs/5-ways-ai-changes-tax.html
For additional information on false friends, see the On-line hypertext bibliography by Daniel Bunčić and Ryszard Lipczuk.
You can help!
Have you spotted any mistakes on this page? Would you like to add information about false friends from your own experience, or help enhance this project in other respects?
Just click the "edit this page" button at the top of this page — it’s easier than you think! If you need advice, see the editing help for this book.
In Canne de Combat it is a very good idea to change the hand during the match. There are more reasons of it: first, if you work only with one of your hand, it will very easy get tired and next you are able to attack with the help of the hand changes from unpredictable directions.
Hand change from extérieur
Hand change from extérieur with rotation
Hand change from crosié
Aldehyde-Group of organic compounds that contains the group –CHO.
Amine-Organic compound with nitrogen as a key element and is structurally similar to ammonia.
Chromophore-A grouping of that causes coloration. Chromophores are generally groups of atoms that have dissociated or conjugated electrons.
Formaldehyde-The Simplest aldehyde. Chemical structure – HCHO. Also called methanal.
Provenance-The origin from of something. For forensic science. In forensic drug analysis, this includes the area where a drug could be grown / made and the chemicals used for its preparation.
Quantitative Property-A characteristic of a substance that exists in a range of magnitudes, and can therefore be measured. Measurements of any particular quantitative property are expressed as a specific quantity, referred to as a unit, multiplied by a number. Examples of physical quantities are distance, mass, and time.
Spot Test-Forensic Chemistry Term for a presumptive test that changes color.
2.3 2019 Hong Kong Protests
Public video surveillance commonly refers to closed-circuit television (CCTV). CCTV systems range from a simple mounted camera directly wired to a single computer screen, to smart systems with multiple cameras processing and synchronizing data from camera networks. In all systems the data is only broadcast to a private network or data source. Surveillance is used to monitor the actions of individuals or groups in order to protect them at a distance or to direct their behavior. Cameras are usually mounted in high-traffic, public areas where at least one party has security concerns.[1]
Early usage of CCTV is largely undocumented. Some attribute the first CCTV use to the German Army in World War II; however, the source is unconvincing. Video surveillance was limited in public spaces until video recording technology became more prevalent in the 1970s.[2] In 1987, the first video surveillance system of a downtown area in the UK was established in King’s Lynn.[3] By the 1990s and early 2000s, video surveillance systems could be seen in most major British and American cities. Current systems in many cities, such as New York City’s Lower Manhattan Security Initiative, use extensive camera networks to transmit live video data as part of counter-terrorism initiatives.[4][5] Great Britain is another major modern example of the use of mass surveillance to prevent crime and protect the public.
Advances in the fields of artificial intelligence and computer vision have made it possible to monitor video surveillance footage with a computer overseer[6]. This allows less people to monitor more cameras and can increase the effectiveness of camera monitoring. Software can identify faces in a video, track faces across multiple cameras, and classify people based on visual features. This technology has already been deployed in countries such as China. In the US, cities such as Detroit, Washington D.C, and Orlando are experimenting with it, meanwhile cities such as San Francisco and Oakland passed laws to ban government use of facial recognition.
It is estimated that one billion surveillance cameras will be deployed globally by 2021, with China accounting for more than 50% of the total. As of 2019, the United States and China have the largest camera to person ratio of roughly 1:4. A 50-70% increase in install based cameras was observed from 2018-2019. Chinese companies, Hangzhou Hikvision Digital Technology and Zhejiang Dahua Technology account for 38% of the market for install based cameras.[7] In the US, the motivation is to protect schools and malls. In China it's to monitor the public. India, Brazil, and Indonesia are quickly adopting CCTV technology as it becomes more affordable. India claims the system will "play a very vital role in improving outcomes in the area of criminal identification and verification."[8] In Singapore, residents feel that the cost of privacy associated with CCTV systems is worth the benefits of safety and security.
US common law holds that filming of persons in public places, even surreptitiously, does not constitute a violation of 4th amendment rights against unreasonable search and seizure. In Katz v. US (1967), the United States Supreme Court found no reasonable expectation of privacy in a public place.[9] This created the Katz test for legality of surveillance based on what a hypothetical objective person considers a “reasonable expectation” of privacy. The 9th Circuit Court has ruled “video surveillance does not in itself violate a reasonable expectation of privacy.”[10] Other federal courts have agreed[11], the Supreme Court has not directly ruled on video surveillance, and Congress has not passed any limiting laws.[12] On grounds of both statutory and case law, video surveillance of persons in public is legal in the US.
Due to federal regulation limiting audio surveillance in public, many surveillance systems only include video.[13] However, the 7th Circuit Court ruled in 2012 that audio recording of police in public is protected under the first amendment, and the US Supreme Court denied certiorari for an appeal.[14] Thus, the legality of audio surveillance may be changing, and video systems may begin including audio recording systems.
CCTV cameras are often installed in areas in order to deter crime. One of the hopes is that the “halo effect” occurs where the crime rate is lowered both in areas observed by CCTV cameras and in areas nearby. On the other hand, some research demonstrates that crime is instead simply displaced to unmonitored areas. In some cases, while streets with security cameras installed did experience a decrease in reported crime, reported crime in neighboring streets increased.[15] In other areas, such as South Korea, the introduction of CCTV reduced crime rates significantly in monitored areas and slightly in neighboring areas but had no significant effect on crime rates in unmonitored areas. In this example, robbery and theft rates were observed to drop by 50% but there was not any measured drop in violent actions in monitored areas. [16]
CCTVs can produce a false sense of security as people may feel safer in areas where cameras are present when in reality the cameras may not deter crime. Surveillance can also create a perceived increase in crime rates. As cameras are deployed in more areas, crimes are less likely to go undetected causing more crimes to be reported.[17]
The Panopticon is a disciplinary model in which an unseen overseer may, at any time, be monitoring those it oversees[18]. While under conspicuous video surveillance, participants are aware of the possibility that they are being observed but are usually unsure if anyone is actually watching. This causes participants to police themselves for fear of punishment should the overseer notice their bad behavior. This principle has been used in video surveillance applications ranging anywhere from terrorism prevention to traffic enforcement. This model can remain effective without any technology. For example, signs that indicate users are on camera do not require an actual video camera to instill fear.
In the summer of 2012, New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg announced the “Domain Awareness System” (DAS): New York City’s new, extensive, integrated camera network and accompanying software. Through a partnership with Microsoft, NYC has joined existing public and private surveillance cameras, license plate cameras, and radiation detectors with data from emergency 911 calls and crime reports for crime prevention and solving.[19] The software can detect suspicious activity, like an unaccompanied package, and send data to police officers while police officers can input information, such as that of a stolen vehicle, and receive all locations of that vehicle within the last month.[20]
The DAS represents both the future of video surveillance and the surrounding debate. Most surveillance systems have been designed for a particular city, but Microsoft has begun marketing the DAS to other locations.[21] While New York City claims the system has already prevented crime, many parties have[22] questioned the validity of the DAS with respect to the 4th Amendment and racial profiling, including the ACLU and New York City Comptroller John Liu.[23]
In China, about 200 million private and public surveillance cameras monitor the population[24]. Additionally, China has begun to equip police officers with eyeglass cameras that can record footage and identify faces. China’s government has access to the footage from these cameras and uses it for a variety of applications.
The region of Xinjiang uses surveillance cameras to identify Uyghurs, an ethnic Muslim minority group native to northwest China, based on their facial characteristics[25]. China has used this information to discriminate against Uyghurs by tracking their movement and acting if they deem behavior unacceptable. China is known to have forcibly sent Uighurs to “re-education” camps in an attempt to make them loyal to the ruling party and "understand the dangers of religious extremism"[26].
China has also used this technology to curb jaywalking[27]. Cameras take photos of jaywalkers, use software and human overseers to find the names of the offenders, and display the photo and name on a billboard next to the crosswalk. Officials hope this will embarrass jaywalkers and prevent them from jaywalking again.
In 2019, citizens of Hong Kong protesting against a proposed extradition bill were concerned that they were being monitored with surveillance devices[28]. Some believed that China would use facial recognition software to identify protesters and take action against them. Protesters attempted to prevent monitoring by attacking photographers and tearing down “smart “lamp-posts equipped with traffic monitoring devices that Hong Kong’s government claims are not being used for surveillance purposes. They also used umbrellas and masks to hide their faces and prevent identification.
In 2017, a large, 790 square meter billboard was installed in Piccadilly Circus in London[29]. What passersby do not see is the extensive array of video cameras hidden behind the display. They do not serve to prevent crime, but instead to target ads towards individuals who walk past. The cameras use facial recognition to identify the average age, gender, and mood of those in frame. They also track the make, model, and color of vehicles that drive by. Paired with the free Wi-Fi service from the billboard, this information is combined to determine the best advertisement to show at a given time. While this surveillance system can be used to reduce crime, its manifest function is for commercial use.
TSA employees at the O'Hare International Airport are closely monitored with video surveillance. Employers are convinced that these systems improve employee productivity. In the restaurant waiting industry, revenue has increased due to surveillance.[30] However, employees try to avoid being watched and become much more passive to their management.[31] Studies show that this system increases stress, lowers job satisfaction, and prioritizes work quantity over quality.[32] This illustrates the displacement effect and psychological reactance towards video surveillance. Worker privacy is taken away and the reaction is to make it difficult to be managed by the employer. Furthermore, actions that would be considered unproductive are moved to areas where workers cannot be monitored.
Graffiti artist Banksy in opposition to video surveillance
Opponents of video surveillance are mainly concerned with loss of privacy due to increasing camera presence and integration. Civil liberties groups, such as the American Civil Liberties Union, have campaigned against widespread CCTV use through opinion pieces and candidate support. The ACLU’s argument against surveillance focuses on four areas: ineffectiveness of the systems, potential abuse, lack of regulations and control of data, and the “effect on public life”.[33]
Other policy advocate and research groups, such as the Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC) and Big Brother Watch, focus solely on civil liberties and privacy, with an emphasis on public surveillance.[34][35] EPIC started an initiative in 2002 called “Observing Surveillance” that documents CCTV use in Washington D.C. and includes photo exhibits, public protests, and maps indicating surveillance cameras in tourist areas. Their goal is to “promote public debate” about the role of surveillance in a post-9/11 American society.[36] Many of these groups use similar tactics that compare societies with video surveillance to that in George Orwell’s 1984.[37] These tactics include street performances, where group members dressed as human CCTV cameras and read aloud from 1984 to demonstrate the comparison.[38]
File:130418202115-boston-bombings-suspects-single-image-cut.jpg Surveillance footage used in finding Boston Marathon bombings suspect
Supporters of video surveillance contend that its role in preventing and solving crime outweighs its threats to privacy.
A study conducted by the US Department of Justice (DOJ) examined the effectiveness of video surveillance systems in Baltimore, Maryland; Chicago, Illinois; and Washington D.C.[39] While the video surveillance systems in Baltimore and Chicago reduced crime by up 10%, with no significant crime displacement, the Washington D.C. system had no demonstrable effect on crime. Further, the DOJ showed that the benefits of reductions in crime in Baltimore and Chicago outweighed the costs of the surveillance system by as much as 4 to 1. However, video surveillance systems were not proven effective in all cases. In both Baltimore and Chicago, the crime rates in some areas of the cities were unaffected by increased video surveillance.
Researchers suggest that the differences in effectiveness of surveillance systems could be partially explained by the system design, the public’s perception of and involvement in its implementation, and the degree to which the cameras are monitored by local law enforcement.
Advocates argue that video surveillance is a valuable tool for solving crime. Video surveillance footage played a large part in the investigation of multiple high visibility terrorist attacks, including the 7/7 bombing in London in 2005 and the 2013 Boston Marathon Bombing. Boston street camera footage was used to identify the suspects and shared with the public 3 days after the bombing, sparking an unprecedented viral manhunt.[40] Public officials in Boston and across the US responded with increased support for public surveillance systems.[41] New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg spoke of video surveillance as a necessary reality in an increasingly dangerous world. On April 22, 2013 Bloomberg’s statements reflected an increasingly common sentiment: “the people who are worried about privacy have a legitimate worry…[but] we have to understand that in the world going forward, we’re going to have more cameras.”[42] While cameras were the key evidence needed for identifying the bombers, criticism of video surveillance arose from this event when users from social networking websites, Reddit and Twitter wrongly accused and harassed the family of innocent man, Sunil Tripathi.[43]
Public support for video surveillance, like other forms of government surveillance, has remained relatively constant in recent years. 71% of those surveyed in a 2007 poll[44] supported increases in government video surveillance. A 2013 poll[45], conducted just weeks after the Boston Marathon Bombing, reported that 71% of respondents wanted to keep the same or increase the number of surveillance cameras (31% same, 40% increase) while only 12% wanted less video surveillance.
A pew research study found that 56% of adult Americans trust law enforcement to use facial recognition software coupled with video surveillance. Only 36% trusted technology companies to use facial recognition software and only 18% trusted advertisers.
Sousveillance, a term coined by Steve Mann, is defined as recording of an activity by disorganized citizens.[46] Where surveillance can be thought of as oversight, sousveillance is undersight. The etymology is French: 'sous' translates to 'from below' while 'sur' means 'over'. Sousveillance is possible as long as citizens have access to recording technologies.
Google Glass - an example of wearable sousveillance
Modern sousveillance has mostly taken the form of non-wearable devices. One billion cell phones were purchased worldwide in 2012, many of which contained a camera.[47] These cell phones have provided the public with an unprecedented ability to record video.
Wearable video recording technologies are also expanding. GoPro, a company producing wearable, high-definition video cameras, sold 2.3 million units in 2012.[48] Google has released 10,000 units of Google Glass, a camera and computer mounted on eyeglasses.[49] This technology offers users greater ability to discreetly and passively record video.
In cities where the majority of citizens use smartphones, there has been a rise in the use of sousveillance applications that allow citizens to share concerning events with each other and post pictures of incidents. In Stockholm, Sweden researchers found that the introduction of such applications increased the number of reports but had little effect on preventing crime.[50]Social networking sites like Facebook are being increasingly used for creating neighborhood watch groups where people use to share noteworthy information.
The 1991 videotaped beating of Rodney King by L.A.P.D. police officers represents an early, highly publicised example of sousveillance in the US. The video was captured with a personal video camera by a bystander observing the events from a nearby apartment. Following a heavily covered trial, the officers charged with the beating were acquitted, sparking the deadly 1992 Los Angeles riots.
The UC Davis pepper-spray incident refers to a 2011 incident in which students recorded a video of a riot geared police officer pepper-spraying non-violent protesters.[51] The incident received worldwide attention and prompted calls for resignation of the chancellor of the university.[52] This incident was a clear example of citizens using a video recording to challenge authority.
Sousveillance is supported by both popular media and police. Photography Is Not A Crime, a blog, documents cases of citizens dissuaded from filming police. It holds that filming of persons in public has never been illegal and reports on purported violations of this right.[53] Head-mounted cameras on police officers are a mix of surveillance and sousveillance: The recording is from a participant’s perspective but is kept by authorities. A year-long experiment in Rialto, California showed that recording police interactions caused a drastic drop in complaints against officers during arrests and sometimes helped prove officer wrongdoing.[54] Sousveillance of police has also be implemented in requiring police officer to wear body cameras while on duty. For the Las Vegas police department, the use of body cameras lead to a 37% reduction in the use of force by officers and a 30% decrease in officers with at least one complaint against them. [55]
Prevalence of citizen-owned video recording devices may pose a risk to privacy separate from surveillance by governments or corporations. Universal internet connectivity allows easy video dissemination through social media. Facial recognition technology, already employed by private surveillance entities, can further erode privacy and anonymity. A letter from Senator Al Franken to the National Telecommunications and Information Administration regarding facial recognition technology reveals a public concern for privacy.[56] The Obama administration has tasked the NTIA with researching facial recognition technology.[57] Companies have taken steps to combat privacy violations by sousveillance. In Japan, cell phone camera shutter sounds cannot be disabled to discourage discrete photography.[49] Google has banned all facial recognition apps on Google Glass.[58]
Both video surveillance and sousveillance have become fixtures of modern society, proving to be valuable tools for deterring crime and police misconduct while also creating privacy concerns. Advocacy groups have emerged on both sides of the issues. While it remains unclear whether sousveillance or surveillance will become most relevant to privacy concerns, it is certain that the status quo is changing. Citizens’ perceptions and expectations of privacy shape how technology is used, but that same technology affects the socially evolving expectations of privacy.
Ideas for future research and expansion of this chapter include
Lifeloggers - Those who record their lives with wearable cameras; an idea pioneered by Steve Mann
Leon Rosby - Hawthorne man arrested after filming policemen. His arrest was recorded as well by two other bystanders.
↑ Harris, C., Jones, P., Hillier, D. & Turner, D. (1998). CCTV surveillance systems in town and city centre
↑ Kruegle, H. (2007). 9.11 Analog Video Cassette Recorder (VCR). CCTV Surveillance: Video Practices
↑ Harris, C., Jones, P., Hillier, D. & Turner, D. (1998). CCTV surveillance systems in town and city centre
Counterterrorism Units.
↑ Buckley, C. (2007, July 9). New York Plans Surveillance Veil for Downtown. The New York Times.
↑ Schneier, B. (2019, June 13). AI Has Made Video Surveillance Automated and Terrifying. Vice
↑ Lin, L. and Purnell, N. (2019, December 6). A World With a Billion Cameras Watching You Is Just Around the Corner
↑ Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347 (1967).
↑ United States v. Taketa, 923 F. 2d 665 (9th Cir. 1991).
↑ United States v. Vazquez, 31 F. Supp. 2d 85 (D. Conn. 1998).
↑ The Constitution Project (2007). Guidelines for public video surveillance.
↑ Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986, 18 USC § 2511
↑ ACLU v. Alvarez, 2012 U.S. 679 F.3d 583 (7th Cir. 2012, May 8)
↑ Cerezo, A. (2013, March 1). CCTV and crime displacement: A quasi-experimental evaluation
↑ Park, H. et al. (2012, September). Measuring the crime displacement and diffusion of benefit effects of open-street CCTV in South Korea
↑ Kille, L and Maximino, M. (2014, February 11). The effect of CCTV on public safety: Research roundup
↑ McMullan, T. (2015, July 23). What does the panopticon mean in the age of digital surveillance?. The Guardian
↑ New York City Office of the Mayor (2012, August 8). Mayor Bloomberg, Police Commissioner Kelly
↑ Francescani, C. (2013, June 21). NYPD expands surveillance net to fight crime as well as terrorism. Reuters.
↑ Long, C. (2013, February 2). NYPD, Microsoft Create Crime-Fighting ‘Domain Awareness’ Tech System. Huffington Post.
↑ Francescani, C. (2013, June 21). NYPD expands surveillance net to fight crime as well as terrorism.
Reuters.
↑ Mozur, P. (2018, July 8). Inside China’s Dystopian Dreams: A.I., Shame and Lots of Cameras. The New York Times
↑ Mozur, P. (2019, April 14). One Month, 500,000 Face Scans: How China Is Using A.I. to Profile a Minority. The New York Times
↑ Ramzy, A & Buckley, C. (2019, November 16) ‘Absolutely No Mercy’: Leaked Files Expose How China Organized Mass Detentions of Muslims. The New York Times
↑ Mozur, P. (2018, July 8). Inside China’s Dystopian Dreams: A.I., Shame and Lots of Cameras. The New York Times
↑ Fussell, S., (2019, August 30). Why Hong Kongers Are Toppling Lampposts. The Atlantic
↑ Ong, T., (2017, October 16). Huge new screen in London's Picadilly Circus will display ads based on nearby cars and people. The Verge
↑ Shell, E. (2018, October 15). The Employer-Surveillance State
↑ Aiello, J. R., & Kolb, K. J. (1995). [https://psycnet.apa.org/record/1995-98299-010 Electronic performance monitoring: A risk factor for workplace stress.
↑ American Civil Liberties Union (2002, February 25). What’s Wrong with Public Video Surveillance?
↑ Big Brother Watch (2013). About Us.
↑ Electronic Privacy Information Center (2013). About EPIC.
↑ Electronic Privacy Information Center (2002). Observing Surveillance.
↑ 1984 Action Day (2013). 2nd International NoCCTV Actionday.
↑ Wilde, B. (2013). 1984 Action Day, 8th June 2013.
↑ La Vigne, Nancy G.; Lowry, Samantha S.; Markman, Joshua A.; Dwyer, Allison M. (2011, Sept). Evaluating the Use of Public Surveillance Cameras for Crime Control and Prevention. US Department of Justice.
↑ Bensinger, Ken; Chang, Andrea(2013, April 20). Boston bombings: Social media spirals out of control. Los Angeles Times.
↑ Atlas, Terry; Stohr, Greg (2013, April 29) Surveillance Cameras Sought by Cities After Boston Bombs. Bloomberg Personal Finance.
↑ Colvin, Jill (2013, April 22). Bloomberg Says Interpretation of Constitution Will ‘Have to Change’ After Boston Bombing. Politicker.
↑ Shontell, A. (2013, July 26). What It's Like When Reddit Wrongly Accuses Your Loved One Of Murder
↑ ABC News; Washington Post (2007, July 29). [http://abcnews.go.com/images/US/1041a5Surveillance.pdf Surveillance Cameras
Win Broad Support].
↑ Swanson, Emily; Sledge, Matt (2013, April 24). Boston Bombings Prompt Mixed Support For Increased Surveillance, HuffPost/YouGov Poll Finds.Huffington Post.
↑ Mann, S., Nolan, J., Wellman, B., (2003). Sousveillance: inventing and using wearable computing devices for data collection in surveillance environments. Surveillance & Society 1(3): 331-355.
↑ ABI research (2013, January 3). Over 1 Billion Cameras Shipped in Smartphones and Tablets during 2012.
↑ Mac, R. (2013, March 3). The mad billionaire behind GoPro: the world's hottest camera company. Forbes
↑ a b The Economist (2013, November 16). Ubiquitous cameras: the people’s panopticon.
↑ Ceccato, V. (2019, January 6). Eyes and Apps on the Streets: From Surveillance to Sousveillance Using Smartphones.
↑ Johnson, T., (2011) UC Davis Pepper Spray - What Really Happened.
↑ Stelter, B., (2011, November 19). U.C. Davis Calls for Investigation After Pepper Spraying. New York Times.
↑ Miller, C., (2013, November 14). Boston police arrest student on wiretapping charges for video recording them. Photography is not a Crime.
↑ Lovett, I., (2011, August 21). In california, a champion for police cameras. New York Times.
↑ Braga, A. et al. (2017, November). The Las Vegas Body-Worn Camera Experiment: Research Summary
↑ O'Dell, J., (2013, November 21). Sen. Al Franken lets loose on facebook for facial recognition. Venturebeat.com
↑ Strickling, L., (2013, December 3). Privacy and facial recognition technology. NTIA.
↑ Google Glass (2013, May 31). Glass and facial recognition. Google Plus post.
If a sulfide solution is reacted with silver nitrate, it forms a black precipitate of Ag2S.
If the substance is soluble use lead acetate solution, if solid add dilute hydrochloric acid and test the gas with lead ethanoate paper. It is prepared by dipping a filter paper for some time in Lead acetate solution.If the salt in question is a sulphide an acrid smell of rotten eggs will be observed and the lead ethanoate will turn black, due to formation of solid black Lead sulfide powder.
The following two points do not fall in place here, kindly arrange them wherever they are best fit:
When H2S is bubbled through a solution of Sodium sulphite or Sodium bisulphite, a white turbidity of sulfur is seen. What happens is, the S atom in sulphite/bisulphite (Oxidation state +4) and in H2S (Oxidation state -2) have coproportionated to give molecular sulfur in zero oxidation state. The reaction can be viewed as the reverse of a disproportionation reaction.
When H2S is bubbled through acidified KMnO4 solution, it decolorises and a white turbidity is observed. This is because, the powerful oxidizing agent permanganate ion has oxidized the sulfide ion (-2) to zero oxidation state. In doing so, the permanganate ions themselves reduce to Mn2+ ions, thus the purple/violet/pink color of the solution is diluted and eventually fades away as the manganous ions do not impart any color to the solution.
The nitrite ion gives several reactions based on its redox properties.
When it reacts with the I3- anion, the nitrite ion reduces itself to nitric oxide. The student should check the oxidation states of nitrogen in both the cases.
The yellow color of the I3- ions changes to a greenish tinge which later turns violet. This observation is made in the presence of an oxidising agent which oxidizes iodine from -⅓ to 0. The O.A. in our case is of course, the nitrite ion.
Before turning violet, a greenish tinge is observed because the increasing concentration of violet color and the decreasing concentration of yellow color during the reaction impart a greenish color.
Most lead and silver compounds show much the same characteristics in analysis. However, lead nitrite is soluble while silver nitrite is an insoluble white solid.
Therefore, to test for the presence of nitrite ions we can use silver and lead nitrate. No precipitate will be observed with lead nitrate, but a white precipitate will form when silver nitrate is added.
When ferric ions are added to a solution of cyanide ions, no specific change in color is observed. However, if we add the ferric ions to the solution after adding thiosulphate or S22-, we get a blood red coloration of ferric thiocyanate.
Actually, this is a characteristic test for the presence of ferric ions and for thiocyanate ions. Cyanide ions are nowhere directly involved in the formation of ferric(III) thiocyanate. If we review the test procedure for the detection of cyanide ions, we find that we add, according to our choice, either thiosulphate ions or S22- ions. These ions disproportionate in the presence of cyanide ions, forming thiocyanate ions. It is these thiocyanate ions that eventually react with the added ferric ions to give the blood red complex formation
It is a popular fact that most metals react with either water or dilute acid solution to liberate hydrogen. This is a redox reaction in which the metal acts as a reducing agent, reducing the proton or hydrogen in water to hydrogen gas, oxidizing itself to a metal cation.
A classic example of this type of redox reaction is the reaction of metallic sodium with water. The reaction takes place and liberates enough heat to melt the sodium which then floats on a cushion of hydrogen gas. e.g., 2Na + 2H2O -> H2 + 2NaOH. In terms of the ions involved in the reaction Na -> Na1+ + e1- and then 2H1+ + 2e1- -> H2. The same reaction occurs with any of the alkali metals in exactly the same way.
However, there are some metals like copper which will not react with either water or dilute acids in the same way. Quantitatively, Standard Electrode Potential is lower than that of hydrogen ions, meaning that more energy is required to form copper ions than the hydrogen ions can provide. [Note to editors --> Is this any better?]
However, if we add metallic copper to a solution containing cyanide ions, copper gives into the greed of forming that ultrastable cyano complex of itself. That is, equilibrium favours the formation of tetracyanocomplexcuprate(I) ions. This is the point - in presence of cyanide ions, copper oxidizes itself to form the +1 metal complex. But then, if an oxidation has occurred so must have a reduction. What is the reduction reaction? The formation of hydrogen (editors - formation from what? proton or water molecule?) is the involved reduction.
We conclude that an aqueous solution of KCN dissolves metallic copper, generally administered as copper turnings through, the formation of tetracyanocuprate(I) ions.
(Note to editors --> Explain this anamlolous behaviour of copper through the quantitative aspects of electrochemistry and chemical equilibrium, short enough to maintain interest.)
Note on the tetracyano complex of copper
When H2S is bubbled through the cyano complex of ferrous/ferric/cuprous/cupric ions, no sulphide is precipitated. While with most other metal cations, metal sulphide does get precipitated.
e.g. tetracyanocadmiumate ions give CdS with H2S and dicyanoargentate (silver complex) give Ag2S.
This can be explained on the basis of equilibrium constants - solubility products and formation constants of the concerned sulphides and cyanocomplexes. (note to editors --> plz explain in a little more detail)
Adding a solution containing lead ions, such as lead nitrate, to a hypochlorite solution produces a brown precipitate of lead(IV) oxide.
Adding hydrogen peroxide to sodium hypochlorite produces sodium chloride, water and oxygen.
On adding triiodide ions, the azide ion oxidizes to nitrogen and decolorisation is observed. . Triiodide ions are reduced to iodide ions, and nitrogen is produced. The colour of solution changes from yellow to colourless and a brisk effervescence is noted.
Adding strong acid (such as HCl) to a concentrated acetate solution produces acetic acid, which emits a strong smell of vinegar. However, even if acetate is present, the vinegar smell may not be noticeable if the acetate is too dilute.
When a drop of concentrated sulphuric acid and ethanol are added, the distinctive smell of an ester can be observed. This applies to all carboxylates, but is particularly useful in this case because the two reactants, acetic acid and ethanol, have distinctive smells which are replaced completely by different smell of the ester; in this case, ethyl acetate, which smells not unlike glue or nail polish remover.
CH3COOH + CH3CH2OH -> CH3COOCH2CH3 + H2O
(The sulphuric acid is not shown as it is merely a catalyst, specifically a dehydrating agent.)
When added to neutral FeCl3 acetates produce a red coloration.
FeCl3 + 3CH3COOH -> (CH3COO)3Fe + 3HCl
Neutral FeCl3 is prepared by taking about an mL of FeCl3 in a test tube and adding about few drops of dil. NaOH to give a permanent reddish brown precipitate.Ferric chloride is added to the test tube till the precipitate has JUST dissolved. The resultant solution is added to the salt solution containing acetate to give a red colouration. The acetate ion is confirmed by adding water to this mixture and warming till formation of red precipitate.A-LEVEL EXPERIMENT.
Thiosulphates are reducing agents. They can reduce I3- ions to iodide ions which are colorless. However, it should be noted that this is not a confirmatory test as any reducing agent can do this.
2S2O32- -> S4O62- + 2e
Adding dilute acid to a solution with thiosulphate ions yields a solution with precipitate, elemental sulfur, and release a burnt rubber smell (gaseous sulphur dioxide)
It also produces a momentary violet coloration with ferric ions.
With copper sulphate, a white ppt. is obtained which dissolves in excess of thiosulphate to produce a colorless solution through the formation of a stable complex.
CuSO4 + Na2S2O3 -> CuS2O3 + Na2SO4
This test has to be carried out in such a way that initially the concentration of thiosulphate is low which then gradually increases enough to form the complex. The solution containing thiosulphate should be poured into the copper sulphate to prevent the changes being missed.
This is a very peculiar reaction, because on the surface it seems as if the precipitate obtained is changing colors!
What actually happens is that when we add silver nitrate, a white ppt of silver thiosulphate is formed. This silver thiosulphate disproportionates to give silver sulphide and sulphuric acid, wherein as we know, silver sulphide is black. That is, on adding silver nitrate a white precipitate is obtained which changes to brown and finally to black.
S2O32- + 2AgNO3 -> 2NO3- + Ag2S2O3
SCN- ions have been discussed once in the testing of cyanide ions.
With ferric ions, thiocyanate ions give a blood red coloration of Fe(SCN)3. This test is NOT given by ferrous ions - and hence is confirmatory for the presence of both ferric ions and for thiocyanate ions.
If Co2+ ions are added to the thiocyanate ions a blue solution of tettrathiocyanatocobaltate is obtained. This complex on addition mercuric ions gives a Blue crystalline precipitate.
This ppt is NOT Mercuric tetrathiocyanatocobaltate! It is interesting to note that the actual precipitate is an isomer of the expected ppt - it is Cobalt(II) Tetrathiocyanatomercurate(II), that is the metal cations have switched places.
If no effervescence is obtained with dilute HCl, heat the salt with Conc. H2SO4
When we add concentrated sulphuric acid to fluoride ions, they are protonated to give hydrogen fluoride. This is because hydrogen fluoride is a weak acid, its anion
F- can be protonated back to the gas.
F- + H2SO4 -> HF + HSO4-
The extent to which hydrogen fluoride is produced is dependent on the initial concentration of the sulphuric acid. By Le Chatelier's equilibrium principle, a larger amount of the reactant H2SO4, coming from an increase in concentration, would drive the reaction towards the production of more gaseous hydrogen fluoride.
The silicon fluoride gas is easily hydrolyzed by the water released, and we get hydrogen silicofluoride and hydrogen silicate - the mixture which is the white waxy deposit in question.
Question: Is is possible to detect HF or F- using Ca(NO3)2?
In this particular test, We added conc. H2SO4. H2SO4 is an oxidizing agent. When it is added to a fluoride salt, does it oxidize to molecular fluorine? Let us think for a second. Yes, we accept that Conc. H2SO4 is a pretty strong oxidizing agent, but the question is, is it strong enough to oxidize fluoride ions? The product of oxidation of fluoride ions is molecular fluorine - something which is rarer than anything. Molecular fluorine reacts with almost anything. It causes mayhem wherever it goes. So our answer is no. H2SO4 just can't oxidize fluoride ions into molecular fluorine.
-->Note to editors: This is the purpose of the text - to acquaint the reader with the various facts of chemistry and making them realize their importance in the real life. While this point doesn't exactly point out the high reactivity of fluorine, half a dozen scattered discussions can do enough to hammer this point!
Conc. H2SO4
When concentrated H2SO4 is added, chloride salts evolve colorless HCl gas.
Now the presence of this HCl gas can be detected in two ways. The first is to hold an ammonium hydroxide test tube near the mouth of the original solution. The HCl gas, if evolved, will react with NH4OH to give dense white fumes of NH4Cl.
Otherwise, we can use MnO2. Manganese in +4 state will be reduced to +2, oxidizing the chlorine in HCl to molecular chlorine gas - Cl2. Pale green (pale because of low concentration) Chlorine gas confirms that HCl was evolved. Chlorine gas has a bleaching action and should not be inhaled.
It should be noted that this test is not for a solution containing the solvated ions. Chromyl chloride test is performed on the salt in solid state.
Solid salt is mixed with Solid Potassium Dichromate and Conc. H2SO4. If the salt is a chloride, on heating deep red vapors of Chromyl Chloride (CrO2Cl2) are evolved.
Some chemists still bear a doubt, because the deep red vapors bear some resemblance to NO2 and Br2 vapors. They can be distinguished, though.
If these Chromyl Chloride vapors are passed through a dilute NaOH solution, it turns yellow. Most of us might have already guessed that the color is due to the formation of the Chromate ions. Indeed, the guess is true. This is then how we resolve our doubts and say that the salt is a chloride.
It is not unwise to note here that most chromates are yellow in color, with the notable exceptions being Ag2CrO4 and Hg2CrO4. Both are red!
Predominantly covalent chlorides like HgCl2 and alkyl chlorides do not offer this test.
The real confirmation is adding acetic acid followed by lead acetate to the yellow solution which gives a pale yellow precipitate of lead chromate.
Conc. H2SO4
With conc. H2SO4, the florides/chlorides gave HF/HCl respectively. However, the bromides and iodides are oxidized to molecular bromine and iodine respectively!
-->Explain this point with reference to Solubility Product and formation constant of the concerned compounds. We need not give a numerical explanation! We just want to emphasize that Inorganic Chemistry is not plain mugging up.
Take the solution and add an equal amount of chloroform/CHCl3 to it. Add chlorine water and shake vigorously. Watch the change in color of the non-aqueous layer.
If iodide/bromide ions are present, they would be oxidized to Iodine/Bromine respectively. Iodine would impart a violet color to the non-aqueous layer while if bromine is created it will give out a reddish color to the non-aqueous layer.
Conc. H2SO4
Concentrated sulphuric acid decomposes oxalate ions into carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide. Readers shouldn't take long to realize that the oxalate ions have decomposed through a disproportionation reaction. If the evolution of the two gases is confirmed, we can say that sulphuric acid reacted with oxalate ions.
If the evolved gaseous mixture is passed through limewater, it will turn milky and finally colourless. Carbon Monoxide in the mixture will burn with a blue flame to produce carbon dioxide. The two gases are confirmed in this way, confirming the presence of the oxalate ion.
Acidified KMnO4 is an oxidizing agent. It will oxidize the oxalate ions into carbon dioxide. In the process, it will decolorize because of the reduction of the violet manganate ions into colorless manganous ions.
Now the question is, how do we know that the decolorization was due to oxalate ions? KMnO4 solution is decolorized each time the managanate ions oxidize ANYTHING.
The answer lies again, in the detection of the carbondioxide gas. Once the gas is confirmed, oxalate ions have been virtually confirmed.
All nitrate salts are decomposed by heat or dilute sulphuric acid to produce reddish brown fumes of nitrogen dioxide.
To the Aqueous solution of the salt when we added conc. sulphuric acid, and then copper chips are added, Dark brown solution forms. It forms due to acid of sulphur.
This deep brown ring is due to the formation of the complex sphere [Fe(H2O)5NO]2+. In this form, the Fe ion is in both its +1 and +2 oxidation states, and oscillates between the two. This means that even a slight disturbance in the medium will disturb the complex. It is for this reason that the acidified ferrous sulphate is added drop-wise and allowed to roll down the walls of the test tube, this minimises any disturbance that would destroy the ring. It reacts upon contact with the medium, and forms the mentioned complex, but only at the edges, forming the characteristic brown ring.
The oscillation occurs in the following two ways
i) The NO ion loses an electron to the Fe2+ ion forming Fe1+ and NO1+
It is worth noting that it is very rare to find iron in its (I) oxidation state, (II) and (III) are much more common
The NItrate ion can easily be reduced to ammonia with either Devardas Alloy or Aluminium Foil. The aluminium is a very powerful reducing agent, and this combined with heating causes the nitrate ions to form ammonia gas. This can be tested for by holding a piece of damp red litmus paper over the end of the test tube. The ammonia will form alkaline ammonium ions in the water and turn the paper blue.
Aluminium powder is not shown as it merely catalyses the reaction.
The addition of a sulphate to a barium chloride solution produces a white precipitate of barium sulphate. This precipitate is very insoluble, not dissolving in any common laboratory reagents.
Magnesium Sulphate + Barium Chloride -> Barium Sulphate + Magnesium Chloride
A similar reaction to the above, a white precipitate of lead sulphate is formed. Again this is very difficult to dissolve in common reagent like water, but dissolves in Sodium hydroxide and to a much extent in Ammonium acetate solution.
The oxidising properties of potassium manganate allow it to oxidise hydrogen sulphide rapidly from oxidation state (II) to 0, reducing itself to manganese ions. These do not impart any colour to the solution, yet the sulphur precipitate forms a white cloud as the purple colouration of manganate ions disappears.
MnO42- + 4e- -> Mn2+ + 2O2
When added to phosphate ions, warmed with nitric acid, forms a canary yellow precipitate of ammonium phosphorous molybdate.The same yellow canary colour is also given by arsenic salts after treating with Nitric acid. Confirmatory test for presence of phosphates.
PO43- + 12(NH4)2MoO4 + 21HNO3 + 3H+ -> (NH4)3PO4·12MoO3↓ + 21NH4NO3 + 12H2O
In the presence of carbonate (CO32-) or bicarbonate (HCO3-) ion, the addition of concentrated strong acid (e.g. HCl) causes the evolution of CO2 gas, resulting in fizzing or bubbling. To determine which is present, MgSO4 is added to the salt solution. A white precipitate at low temperatures indicates carbonate while precipitation upon heating confirms bicarbonate.
Primary Assessment & Basic Life Support —
Medical Conditions & Poisoning —
Shock can refer to a range of related medical conditions in which the victim's heart, lungs and blood cannot deliver oxygen to the body properly. Shock is not a diagnosis or condition, it is always a symptom of a larger problem, and is a medical emergency that requires immediate attention. One should never confuse true shock with a feeling of extreme surprise – one does not lead to the other.
Regardless of type, the goals of the layperson rescuer are the same: prevent blood loss and preserve body temperature.
The sooner a shock is recognized, the better the victim's outcome will be. Although signs of shock can range greatly, some common signs are:
Ashen or blue skin on lips and nail beds
Weak, very rapid, "thready" pulse
A healthcare provider checks the carotid pulse of a victim in the recovery position.
The most important treatment for shock of any variety is to try to maintain the blood flow to the body's vital organs (brain, heart, and lungs). To do this, lie the patient flat on the floor and raise their legs about 6–12 inches (15–30 cm) off the ground. Do not incline the victim's head, chest, or pelvis, as this brings no improvement and can cause harm.
Other important factors in the treatment of shock can be remembered by the simple mnemonic WART:
Semiprone position (only if the victim would like to assume semiprone position; if unconscious do it)
Should a patient become unconscious, confirm that an ambulance has been called, and take the following steps:
Reassess the ABCs. Should any change occur, compensate with required treatment. (exception: Patient goes into cardiac arrest, begin CPR.)
As airway takes priority over other treatment, you should place them in the recovery position in order to ensure a patent airway.
The delete command deletes a slice of a hash, if an EXPRESSION is given that specifies elements of a hash. After deletion, exists() no more returns true for this element/these elements. Setting a hash element to undef does not remove its key, but the delete command does.
If it is called in list context, it returns the value(s) deleted. The returned list's length is equal to the original one with undefs in place of the deleted items. If called in scalar context, the last deleted value is returned.
This chapter requires that you first read Commutative Ring Theory/Principal ideal domains.
Proposition (torsion-free modules over principal ideal domains are free):
. We claim that an upper bound for this chain is given by the union of the sets
, and we may find a sufficiently large (w.r.t. the order of
, so that by the linear independence of
, so that once more we find a sufficiently large
, and then the equivalence class of
Thus, Zorn's lemma may be applied, and it yields a maximal linearly independent
, then there would be an element
8 Observe some live birds, imitate their movements, and collect feathers whenever possible. Keep in mind that keeping the feathers of migratory birds is illegal in some, if not all, U.S.A. places.
Tell how God cares for birds.
28 Do not be afraid of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul. Rather, be afraid of the One who can destroy both soul and body in hell.
29 Are not two sparrows sold for a penny? Yet not one of them will fall to the ground apart from the will of your Father.
Consider the ravens: They do not sow or reap, they have no storeroom or barn; yet God feeds them. And how much more valuable you are than birds!
I found this craft at Family fun website
Cut openings on opposite sides of a clean carton and coat with nontoxic paint. Glue Popsicle stick shingles onto the roof. For a perch, poke holes below the openings and slip a dowel through the holes. Fill the bottom of the feeder with birdseed mix. (You can make your own mix by combining a variety of nuts and seeds, such as sunflower seeds, millet, thistle seeds and yellow corn.) Then hang the feeder with wire in a spot that's easy to view but far enough away from fences or posts to thwart predators.
Be able to recognize 10 different birds.
Play a bird game.Draw and/or color pictures of the followingtwo water birdstwo seed eatersone predatorBe able to make five bird sounds.Make a Christmas tree or an Easter basket for birds.Observe some live birds, imitate their movements, and collect feathers whenever possible. Keep in mind that keeping the feathers of migratory birds is illegal in some, if not all, U.S.A. places.External ResourcesFor all you want to know about birds go to → Smithsonian National Zoological Park
Bird feeder craft got to → Famyly Fun
v • d • e Adventist Adventurer Awards
Bible Friends · Community Helper · Finger Play · Healthy Food · Healthy Me · Insects · Music · Special Helper · Stars · Trains And Trucks · Weather · Woody Lamb · Zoo Animals
Alphabet Fun · Animal Homes · Animals · Beginning Biking · Beginning Swimming · Bible Friends · Birds · Crayons And Markers · Fire Safety · Gadgets And Sand · God's World · Helping Mommy · Jesus' Star · Jigsaw Puzzle · Know Your Body · Left And Right · Manners Fun · My Community Friends · Pets · Scavenger Hunt · Shapes And Sizes · Sponge Art · Toys
Artist · Bible I · Butterfly · Buttons · Fish · Flowers · Friend of Animals · Friend of Jesus · Fruits of the Spirit · Guide · Health Specialist · Home Helper · Honey · Honeybee · Music Maker · Reading I · Safety Specialist · Spotter · Swimmer I
Camper · Collector · Cooking Fun · Country Fun · Courtesy · Feathered Friends · Fitness Fun · Flowers · Friend of Nature · Gardener · Glue Right · Handicraft · Ladybugs · Reading II · Road Safety · Skier · Trees · Whales
Astronomer · Bead Craft · Build & Fly · Building Blocks · Cyclist · Disciples · Early Adventist Pioneer · First Aid Helper · Gymnast · Hand Shadows · Homecraft · Lizards · Magnet Fun · Media Critic · Olympics · Pearly Gates · Postcards · Prayer · Reading III · Sewing Fun · Swimmer II · Temperance · Tin Can Fun · Troubadour · Wise Steward
Basket Maker · Bible II · Bible Royalty · Caring Friend · Carpenter · Computer Skills · Environmentalist · Geologist · Habitat · Hygiene · My Church · My Picture Book · Outdoor Explorer · Pearly Gates · Prayer Warrior · Rainbow Promise · Reading IV · Reporter · Sign Language · Steps to Jesus
Complexity theory is a central field of theoretical computer science and has had large impact on all of computer science. Complexity theory tries to find out how many resources (time, space, energy,...) are needed to perform a particular task or to solve a particular problem. It tries to classify problems into complexity classes such that problems in the same class have similar requirements on the resources needed to solve them. For instance, all problems belonging to the complexity class
How fast is the fastest algorithm that solves
?
How much space (e.g. hard drive) does the best algorithm solving
If I do not have much space (on ancient mobile phones, say), can I still find an algorithm for
? Do I then still have the fastest possible?
Assume that you have a very hard problem
, for which you just cannot figure out how to solve it efficiently? Can you prove that it cannot be solved efficiently?
This page has yet to be developed.
Sales compensation allows management to set sales compensation policies that reflect business objectives, calculate sales compensation based on information from Order Entry/Invoicing, and send it to Payroll for processing. Sales Compensation allows management to monitor the performance of sales staff and spot problems early. Commissions are calculated according to user-defined rules. They can be based on who sold the goods, when they were sold, how many were sold, and what types of goods were sold. A "draw" is a payment made in advance of an actual sale. Sales Compensation allows both recoverable and non-recoverable draws. Not every ERP package has a separate Sales Compensation module although all the large ones do.
Sales people are either employees handled through Payroll or contracters handled through Accounts Payable. Thus Sales Compensation share the Employee table with Payroll and the Supplier group of tables with Accounts Payable. The first table in Sales Compensation is the Salesperson table which contains one record for every salesperson. The second table is the Contract table which contains one record for every sales contract. The third table links Contracts with Inventory Items.
Sales Compensation sends transactions to Payroll or Accounts Payable depending on the type of salesperson.
Note: This example does not run under the FireFox 0.6 or the 0.7 extension. See Bug 280368 for details.
File:C:\Users\Administrator\Desktop\CRF Logo.png
The line that does the repeat is the table body tag:
Next Page: Repeat filter |
r1bqkbnr/pp1ppppp/2n5/2p5/2P5/2N3P1/PP1PPP1P/R1BQKBNR
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
1.c4 c5 2.Nc3 Nc6 3.g3
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at English Opening
Batsford Chess Openings 2 (1989, 1994). Garry Kasparov, Raymond Keene. ISBN 0-8050-3409-9.
Nunn's Chess Openings. 1999. John Nunn (Editor), Graham Burgess, John Emms, Joe Gallagher. ISBN 1-8574-4221-0.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon · Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
This Chess related article is a Wikibooks:Chess stub. Please assist Wikibooks by expanding it.
En gade i Ærøskøbing, DanmarkA street in Ærøskøbing, Denmark
Problem 3: Implement the function nth to return the n-th element of a list.
-- your implementation goes here
Nothing -> text "No element found"
Service Schedule for Cars & Trucks from Model 1997
Checklist for work order No: ..................... Date ..................................
NOTE: Engine oil and filter change every 7500 kilometers of diesel engines.
Service for every 15,000 kilometers or 1 year
Check - Air purifiers, filters, hoses and fittings
Check - Coolant level, fill if necessary (1), leakage
Engine, gearbox, front and rear axles, the distribution box - leakage Check
Check undercarriage: rust, steering linkage, front and rear suspension, dust protections/rubber seals - wear, damage or leakage
Air pressure of the tires - check / adjust
Check - Tire wear and tread depth
Run test: Check all systems for proper operation and performance
Additional service every 30,000 kilometers or 2 years
Additional service every 60,000 kilometers or 4 years
Ignition Cables, distributor cap - check
Spark plugs - change (except platinum plugs)
Automatic gearbox fluid and filter - change (Not "Dexron III")
Front axle bearings - clean / regrease
Clutch Fork, ball joint - lubrication (if applicable)
Additional service every 165,000 kilometers or 11 years
Spark plugs - replacement (for platinum plugs)
Automatic gearbox fluid and filter - change (if "Dextron III")
"Dex Cool" (orange) - must not be mixed with "normal" coolant fluid
Any 165,000 kilometers, or 5 years
The development of the steam locomotive in the early 19th century transformed the world, carrying people and goods at unprecedented speeds around the globe. America's first steam-powered railroad-the thousands of railway miles crisscrossed the nation. Today, 182 years later, the decendants of those first railroads-including CSX Transportaion-continue to play a key role in our lives, moving millions of carloads of freight each year. From the earliest steam locomotives to today's high-speed "bullet trains," here are eight things you may or may not know about the "iron horse"
Figure out how many electrons can exist at any given sublevel.
Figure out how many different sublevels can exist at any given energy level.
Be able to write electron configuration of any element given the total number of electrons in that element.
Be able to write either orbital representations or electron configuration codes.
How do electrons fill the different energy levels, energy sublevels, and orbitals? To understand that question, it helps a lot to look at a diagram. Figure 7.3 shows the first three energy levels (marked by the large differently colored blocks), and the sublevels (separated by dotted lines) that are present in any atom. In Figure 7.3, each of the circles represents an orbital and, of course, each can hold a total of two electrons. Notice the red n = 1 block contains only an s orbital. That orbital will hold the first two electrons in the atom. Once the red n = 1 block is entirely filled, electrons will start filling the orange n = 2 block. In the orange n = 2 block, there are four different orbitals. The first orbital is an s orbital and the other three are p orbitals. Once all four orbitals in the orange n = 2 block have been filled, electrons will start filling the yellow n = 3 block. In the yellow n = 3 block, there are nine different orbitals. The first orbital is an s orbital, the next three are p orbitals, and the last five are d orbitals. When filling the n = 3 block, the s sublevel will always be filled first, since it is lowest in energy. Again, it can hold at most 2 electrons. After that, the next six will fill the three p orbitals.
Figure 7.3: These are the first three energy levels with their sub-levels.
So far we've talked about filling the orbitals in Figure 7.3 up to the 3p orbitals. That's a total of 18 electrons. The first 18 electrons are "nice and easy", because they fill the orbitals in order. First, all of the n = 1 orbitals get filled, then all of the n = 2 orbitals get filled, then the n = 3 orbitals get filled. From the 19th electron on, though, things get a little crazy! Before we move on to the that region beyond 18 electrons, let's take a brief look at a shorthand notation that scientists use to signify the electron orbital filling of a given atom.
Since orbitals are filled in order of increasing n and, within each energy level, in order of increasing ℓ, scientists can use a short hand, known as the electron configuration code, to represent filled orbitals. To write the electron configuration code for an atom, you write the symbol for the type of orbital present at a particular sublevel (1s, 2s, 2p, etc.) followed by a superscript to indicate how many electrons are actually in that sublevel in the atom you are describing. Let's take a look at a few examples.
Nitrogen has 7 electrons. Write the electron configuration for nitrogen.
Take a close look at Figure 7.3, and use it to figure out how many electrons go into each sublevel, and also the order in which the different sublevels get filled.
Begin by filling up the 1s sublevel. This gives 1s2. Now all of the orbitals in the red n = 1 block are filled.
Since we used 2 electrons, there are 7 − 2 = 5 electrons left
Next, fill the 2s sublevel. This gives 1s22s2. Now all of the orbitals in the s sublevel of the orange n = 2 block are filled.
Since we used another 2 electrons, there are 5 − 2 = 3 electrons left
Notice that we haven't filled the entire n = 2 block yet… there are still the p orbitals!
The final 3 electrons go into the 2p sublevel. This gives 1s22s22p3
The overall electron configuration is: 1s22s22p3.
If you had to guess, which orbital do you think would be filled after the 3p orbitals? Most likely you'd guess that the 3d orbitals would come next – and that guess makes a lot of sense. Unfortunately, that guess is also wrong! It turns out that the 4s orbitals are filled before the 3d orbitals, even though the 4s orbitals have n = 4 and the 3d orbitals only have n = 3.
How is that possible? Does it mean that electrons go into higher energy orbitals before completely filling the lower energy orbitals? Is there something wrong with those electrons? Are certain electrons prevented from entering low energy orbitals? What's going on?
It turns out that there's nothing wrong with those 4s electrons at all. They're still behaving like normal electrons and they’re still going into the lowest energy orbital available. The only difference is that the 4s orbital is lower in energy than the 3d orbitals. Sometimes, we get tricked into thinking that the principal quantum number determines which orbitals will get filled first. When it comes to the order in which orbitals are filled, though, the principal quantum number isn't the only factor – what also matters is the energy of the orbital. Usually orbitals with lower principal quantum numbers have lower energies, but that isn't the case when you compare the energies of the 3d orbitals and the energies of the 4s orbitals. In this case, the 4s orbitals are lower in energy than the 3d orbitals even though they have higher principal quantum numbers. Figure 7.4 shows a modified version of Figure 7.3, which shows the n = 4 orbital positions. Let's take a look at an example of an atom where some n = 4 orbitals are filled.
Figure 7.4: Notice that the s orbital from the next higher energy level has slightly lower energy than the d orbitals in the lower energy level.
Potassium has 19 electrons. Write the electron configuration code for potassium.
This time, take a close look at Figure 7.4.
Begin by filling up the 1s sublevel. This gives 1s2. Now the n = 1 level is filled.
Since we used 2 electrons, there are 19 − 2 = 17 electrons left
Next, fill the 2s sublevel. This gives 1s22s2
Since we used another 2 electrons, there are 17 − 2 = 15 electrons left
Next, fill the 2p sublevel. This gives 1s22s22p6. Now the n = 2 level is filled.
Since we used another 6 electrons, there are 15 − 6 = 9 electrons left
Next, fill the 3s sublevel. This gives 1s22s22p63s2
Since we used another 2 electrons, there are 9 − 2 = 7 electrons left
Next, fill the 3p sublevel. This gives 1s22s22p63s23p6
Since we used another 6 electrons, there are 7 − 6 = 1 electron left
Here's where we have to be careful – right after 3p6!!
Remember, 4s comes before 3d!
The final electron goes into the 4s sublevel. This gives 1s22s22p63s23p64s1
The overall electron configuration code is: 1s22s22p63s23p64s1.
Unfortunately,4s orbitals aren't the only ones that get filled earlier than you'd expect based on their principal quantum number. The same turns out to be true of the 5s orbitals as well. Even though 5s orbitals have a higher principal quantum number than 4d orbitals, (n = 5 compared to n = 4), they're actually lower in energy. As a result, 5s orbitals are always filled before 4d orbitals. Similarly, 6s orbitals are lower in energy than 5d orbitals, so 6s orbitals are always filled first. The story gets even stranger when you consider f orbitals. 5s, 5p, and 6s orbitals are all lower than 4f orbitals. In other words, before you can get an electron into a 4f orbital, you must first fill up the 5s orbitals, the 5p orbitals and the 6s orbitals.
Filling up orbitals and writing electron configurations was so easy for atoms with less than 18 electrons! But for atoms with more than 18 electrons, it seems hopeless to memorize all of the different rules. How will you ever get straight whether the 5s orbital is higher or lower than the 4d orbital or the 4f orbital? Thankfully, there's a simple rule known as the diagonal rule. The diagonal rule states that: Electrons fill orbitals in order of increasing "quantum number sum" (n + ℓ). When two orbitals share the same quantum number sum, they will be filled in order of increasing n.
Luckily, the diagonal rule also has a diagram that's easy to remember, and that allows you to easily figure out the order in which electron orbitals are filled. The below figure shows the diagram. In order to use it, you must follow the arrows from tail-to-tip, starting with the first arrow in the upper left-hand corner, and working your way down through the arrows to the lower right-hand corner of the diagram. To see how this works, let's take a look at an example.
Hafnium has 72 electrons. Write the electron configuration for hafnium.
We can follow the arrows in the diagram (as shown below), until we have assigned all 72 electrons. Notice how you fill orbitals as you progress along the arrows, starting from the top arrow and moving down. Remember to stop once you hit 72. At that point, you have finished writing the electron configuration for Hafnium.
Now that we know how electrons are assigned to orbitals, we can start to talk about how different orbitals, and different electron configurations actually affect the chemical properties of different atoms. In other words, we can actually start to talk about chemistry! Sometimes it seems that quantum physics and quantum chemistry are very far removed from the real world chemistry that we see and use in every day life. How are orbitals important when it comes to developing new drugs to treat cancer? How are energy levels important when it comes to inventing different kinds of superconductors or plastics? How are electron standing waves important when it comes to testing for toxins in your food? All of these processes are determined by chemical properties which are, themselves, a direct result of how electrons are arranged, and interact within different atoms and molecules. Sometimes it is easy to forget about the electrons, and some of the strange quantum properties of subatomic particles. Nevertheless, we will never be able to fully understand chemistry, if we don't understand its smallest components – components like electrons, protons, neutrons and, of course, the atom.
For any atom with less than 18 electrons, orbitals are filled in order of increasing n and, for any given n, in order of increasing ℓ.
Electron configurations are a shorthand notation for representing the filled orbitals in a given atom. They are written using the principal quantum number, n, for the energy level, the letter (s, p, d, or f) for the sublevel, and a superscript for the number of electrons in that sublevel.
For atoms with more than 18 electrons, the orbitals are filled in order of increasing n (and in order of increasing ℓ for a given n) up to the 18th electron; however after the 18th electron the 4s orbital are filled before the 3d orbitals. This is because the 4s orbital has lower energy than the 3d orbital.
The diagonal rule states that electrons fill orbitals in order of increasing "quantum number sum" (n + ℓ). When two orbitals share the same "quantum number sum", they will be filled in order of increasing n.
Write the electron configuration for beryllium. Beryllium has 4 electrons.
Write the electron configuration for silicon. Silicon has 14 electrons.
Write the electron configuration for nitrogen. Nitrogen has 7 electrons.
Write the electron configuration for chromium. Chromium has 24 electrons.
Write the electron configuration for silver. Silver has 47 electrons.
The electrons fill orbitals in order of increasing "quantum number sum" (n + ℓ). When two orbitals share the same "quantum number sum", they will be filled in order of increasing n.
A short hand notation to indicate the electron orbitals which are filled in a particular atom.
The sum of the principal quantum number, n, and the azimuthal quantum number, ℓ, for an electron. That is n + ℓ.
This material was adapted from the original CK-12 book that can be found here. This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 United States License
Next: Services, Failover and Load Balancing
The goal of this lab is to demonstrate Oracle Clusterware’s fencing ability by forcing a configuration that will trigger Oracle Clusterware’s built-in fencing features. With Oracle Clusterware, fencing is handled at the node level by rebooting the non-responsive or failed node. This is similar to the as Shoot The Other Machine In The Head (STOMITH) algorithm, but it’s really a suicide instead of affecting the other machine. There are many good sources for more information online.
Start with a normal, running cluster with the database instances up and running.
Monitor the logfiles for clusterware on each node. On each node, start a new window and run the following command:
In my 12.1.0.2 lab environment, the location of the clusterware log files now reside in diag_dest under the $ORACLE_BASE/diag/crs/$HOSTNAME/crs/trace directory.
Example: /u01/app/oracle/diag/crs/collabn1/crs/trace/alert.log
We will simulate “unplugging” the network interface by taking one of the private network interfaces down. On the collabn2 node, take the private network interface down by running the following command (as the root user):
[root@collabn2 ~]# ifconfig eth1 down
Alternatively, you can also simulate this by physically taking the Internal Network interface offline in VirtualBox:
Go to collabn2 -> Settings -> Network -> Adapter 2, uncheck Cable connected and click OK.
Following this command, watch the logfiles you began monitoring in step 2 above. You should see errors in those logfiles and eventually (could take a minute or two, literally) you will observe one node reboot itself.
If you used ifconfig to trigger a failure, then the node will rejoin the cluster and the instance should start automatically.
If you used VirtualBox to trigger a failure then the node will not rejoin the cluster.
Which file has the error messages that indicate why the node is not rejoining the cluster?
Is the node that reboots always the same as the node with the failure? Why or why not?
The Valence Bond Theory was proposed by Heitler and London (1927) and further explained by Pauling et. al..
According to this theory, atoms with unpaired electrons tend to combine with other atoms which also have unpaired electrons. In this way, the unpaired electrons are paired up, the atoms involved attain a stable electronic arrangement. The spins on two electrons however, must be opposite (antiparallel) because of the Pauli Exclusion Principle.
The basic idea of the theory is that a bond between two atoms is formed when two electrons with their spins paired are shared by two overlapping atomic orbitals, one orbital from each of the atoms joined by the bond. This electron pair becomes concentrated in the region of overlap and help the nucleus bind together. The amount of potential energy is lowered when the bond is formed is determined in part by the extent to which the orbitals overlap.
According to the above theory, a covalent bond is formed between two atoms in a molecule, when a half-filled valence atomic orbitals (AOs) of the two atoms containing unpaired electron overlap with one another and the electrons pair up in the overlap region. Due to the overlapping process, electrons are localized between the atoms in the bond region. When the attractive forces (electron-nucleus of two different atoms) are stronger than the repulsive forces (electron-electron or nucleus-nucleus), energy is released; lowering of energy makes the molecule stable.
The following bonds are observed based on type of overlapping. Covalent bonds are classified into two main types: sigma (
<rdf:RDF xmlns:rdf="http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#"
Iucundum, mea vita, mihi proponis amorem
My life, you promise me that this love
Di magni, facite ut vere promittere possit,
Great gods, make it that she is able to promise truly,
And that she may say it sincerely and from her heart,
That we might be allowed to extend
This life-long pact of holy-friendship our whole life.
This is the poem Catullus himself chose as the 109th segment of his published set of poems. It is addressed to Catullus's mistress Lesbia. This poem joins the ranks of the many others that demonstrate his conflicting feelings for Lesbia.
This translates literally to "my life" but a more natural English translation would be "my love" or "my dear". It pertains to the common cliché that one's love becomes their whole life - and is as relevant today as in the time of Catullus.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Top 10 vegetable proteins good for health
10-dah yoouyih-jiahnkang d shucaih dahnbairzhih
Operation: Blank Check is the title of the current stage of development for World History. The scope of this portion is divided into two major categories, as follows:
This goal encompasses the final chapter listing (World History) and the structure of the articles themselves. Currently, there are 32 chapters. The scope of World History indicates that there will be more, probably at least 5, especially since one of the goals is to include little-known parts of history, like the Kush Empire (near India, no relation to the one south of Egypt) and the Parthian Empire. Also, more mainly, there are a few gaps in the history chain; the one between the Industrial Revolution and World War I is the most prominent. At this time however, we hope to concentrate on the 30 we have down. On the main page, each will have a brief summary, such as already exists for several. Eventually the broad date of the topic will be added to the summary. In naming, chapter titles should have any important words capitalized. Note the differences to this convention in Internal Article Structure (IAS).
IAS is in full swing at this point. It has been applied to several articles and is still evolving, and therefore varies slightly from article to article. For instance, see the Ancient Civilizations structure versus that in The Rise of Dictatorship and Totalitarianism. There are subtle differences. Because the latter article is almost complete, dates have been added to the subtitles and structural denotations in this article already. We hope to have a brief timeline someday to help expedite the dating process. IAS stipulates the following:
Each article is broken down into broad categories (see Precolumbian History of the Americas for an example) which are further divided into individual cultures/civilizations/events. Structure is to follow this basic method: 1)If the topic is better done by region, such as in the Americas example, then the subcategories must correlate to individual parts of that region, 2) If the topic is better done "by topic", such as in the Dictatorship example, then is is helpful to break the broad categories into time periods within it, such as the rise of Hitler. Also, when a single person has an inordinate influence on an event and enough information is available, text should be devoted to the development of this individual's thought, such as early life, political philosophy, etc. (again, see the Dictatorship example), 3) Under no circumstances should there be any divisions smaller than second level (as in ===Title===). Namewise, make sure that only the first word and the proper words are capitalized if possible. It's odd, but in main chapter titles, all words other than "the", "and", and the like being capitalized is pleasing, but not in article categories and subcategories. Please try to stick to this especially.
So, the guidelines are broad, and much leeway is given. Please feel free to do a little experimenting, but try not to move things around too much that already have substantial topical information in them. Follow the Golden Rule and Have fun!
A palindromic sequence is a sequence made up of nucleic acids within double helix of DNA and/or RNA that is the same when read from 5’ to 3’ on one strand and 5’ to 3' on the other, complementary, strand. It is also known as a palindrome or an inverted-reverse sequence.
The pairing of nucleotides within the DNA double-helix is complementary which consist of Adenine (A) pairing with either Thymine (T) in DNA or Uracil (U) in RNA, while Cytosine (C) pairs with Guanine (G). So if a sequence is palindromic, the nucleotide sequence of one strand would be the same as its reverse complementary strand. An example of a palindromic sequence is 5’-GGATCC-3’, which has a complementary strand, 3’-CCTAGG-5’. This is the sequence where the restriction endonuclease, BamHI, binds to and cleaves at a specific cleavage site. When the complementary strand is read backwards, the sequence is 5’-GGATCC-3’ which is identical to the first one, making it a palindromic sequence.
Another restriction enzyme called EcoR1 recognizes and cleaves the following palindromic sequence:
Image of a palindrome in a DNA structure. A = Palindrome, B = Loop, C = Stem
There have been many researchers who have studied the relationship between palindromic sequences and protein structures. Studies have shown that the frequent appearances of palindromic sequences, also called palindromic peptides, in protein sequences are not just by chance. Scientists suggest that these sequences are important for protein structure and protein function in different proteins. Some of these protein groups include DNA binding proteins, ion channels and Rhodopsin, metal binding proteins and receptors, and etc. By comparing palindromes with set sequences from the database, scientists can try to find the roles of palindromic sequences.
Another topic within palindromic sequences which is being studied is whether the symmetry of palindromic sequences affects the structure and folds of peptides. One hypothesis is that by reversing the sequence, the resulting folds would be mirror-images of the original fold. The conclusion states that because both the original and reverse proteins have identical amino acid compositions which lead to similar hydrophobic-hydrophilic patterns, the reversing sequence results in the same folds as opposed to the mirror-image folds. Another hypothesis guided by research is that by reversing a sequence, the fold could change or possibly be destroyed. This shows evidence that the similarity in reverse sequencing does not reflect structural similarity, which means that they do not form symmetrical protein structures.
Palindromic sequences have been tied to different genomic rearrangements in different organisms depending on the length of the repeated sequences. Shorter palindromic sequences (shorter than 30 bp) are very stable while longer sequences are not stable in vivo. These sequences occur in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes. These sequences also increase inter and intrachromosomal recombination between homologous sequences. Hairpin structures can form from palindromic sequences due to base pairing in single-stranded DNA. These structures can be substrates for structure-specific nucleases and repair enzymes which can lead to a double-strand break in the DNA. This then leads to loss of genomic material which can cause meiotic recombination. Studies with a 140-bp long mutated palindromic sequence inserted in yeast have shown to lower postmeiotic segregation and increase rate of gene conversions, while shorter sequences do the opposite. Research also found that during meiosis, double-strand breaks are induced by the long 140-bp palindromic sequence. In the long hairpin structure, the entire stem-loop is not covered and the processing endonuclease is exposed, which makes nicks in the loop. This nick creates a gap which is repaired by the wild-type strand. The induction of double-strand breaks during meiosis is what causes genomic instability.
There have not been an abundance of studies focusing on the significance of palindromic sequences in protein, but there have been some which tell us a lot about the relationship between palindromic sequencing and protein function. But by understanding the actual formation of these palindromic sequences and their properties, researchers can tie these sequences to functions. It has been found that decreasing amino acid composition complexity increases the likelihood of a palindromic sequence. The next step relates to the likelihood of palindromic sequences in proteins which can be due to the frequent formation of alpha helices by palindromes.
6 Participate in one of the following community activities to help clean the environment
Recite Genesis 1:26. Explain our role in protecting wildlife.
Then God said, "Let us make man in our image, in our likeness, and let them rule over the fish of the sea and the birds of the air, over the livestock, over all the earth, and over all the creatures that move along the ground."
List three animals that are endangered and explain why.
List three birds that are endangered and explain how you can help protect birds.
Study endangered trees in your area. Plant or adopt a tree.
a. What causes pollution, and list ways you can prevent pollution.
b. Investigate how and why the pollution happened.
c. Explain how you can keep from polluting water.
d. What dangers threaten the quality of air.
Participate in one of the following community activities to help clean the environment
a. Take part in Earth Day events
b. With your group help clear the trash from a roadside or stream
c. Help collect paper, cans or other materials for recycling.
Adventurer Manual - http://www.kfw-adventurers.org/HelpingHand/Grade_04_Environmentalist.pdf
Bible NIV - http://www.biblegateway.com/versions/New-International-Version-NIV-Bible/
Endangered and Threatened Species of Texas - http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/huntwild/wild/species/endang/index.phtml
Texas Endangered Species Activity Book- http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/publications/pwdpubs/media/pwd_bk_w7000_0023.pdf
v • d • e Adventist Adventurer Awards
Bible Friends · Community Helper · Finger Play · Healthy Food · Healthy Me · Insects · Music · Special Helper · Stars · Trains And Trucks · Weather · Woody Lamb · Zoo Animals
Alphabet Fun · Animal Homes · Animals · Beginning Biking · Beginning Swimming · Bible Friends · Birds · Crayons And Markers · Fire Safety · Gadgets And Sand · God's World · Helping Mommy · Jesus' Star · Jigsaw Puzzle · Know Your Body · Left And Right · Manners Fun · My Community Friends · Pets · Scavenger Hunt · Shapes And Sizes · Sponge Art · Toys
Artist · Bible I · Butterfly · Buttons · Fish · Flowers · Friend of Animals · Friend of Jesus · Fruits of the Spirit · Guide · Health Specialist · Home Helper · Honey · Honeybee · Music Maker · Reading I · Safety Specialist · Spotter · Swimmer I
Camper · Collector · Cooking Fun · Country Fun · Courtesy · Feathered Friends · Fitness Fun · Flowers · Friend of Nature · Gardener · Glue Right · Handicraft · Ladybugs · Reading II · Road Safety · Skier · Trees · Whales
Astronomer · Bead Craft · Build & Fly · Building Blocks · Cyclist · Disciples · Early Adventist Pioneer · First Aid Helper · Gymnast · Hand Shadows · Homecraft · Lizards · Magnet Fun · Media Critic · Olympics · Pearly Gates · Postcards · Prayer · Reading III · Sewing Fun · Swimmer II · Temperance · Tin Can Fun · Troubadour · Wise Steward
Basket Maker · Bible II · Bible Royalty · Caring Friend · Carpenter · Computer Skills · Environmentalist · Geologist · Habitat · Hygiene · My Church · My Picture Book · Outdoor Explorer · Pearly Gates · Prayer Warrior · Rainbow Promise · Reading IV · Reporter · Sign Language · Steps to Jesus
Chapter IV: Cottage contents and farming pursuits
All country cottages had a constant fight against damp. Rosalie Cottage had no cellar nor a damp-proof course -the ground floor was on a level with the outside garden. Other than the lean-to, kitchen, and scullery, whose floors were of sandstone brick laid on compacted soil, the rest of the ground floor rooms had flagstones. These were quite uneven and in some places loose. These were scrubbed and remained damp even on the warmest of days. There were no floor coverings except before the fire and at the side of the beds. Because the banks of the stream was slightly higher than the floor level of the cottage, although several feet away, there was a permanent rising damp problem. Two cast-iron down pipes lead from the gutters to soakaways leading back from the house.
The parlour: leading off the tiny hall, was to the right of the front door. An eleven-foot square room furnished in an Edwardian style with lace and chintz. The curtains: masking the edges of the sash windows were partially pulled back leaving the room dark and intriguing. The carpet, somehow, never imprinted its colour nor design on my mind… hidden under many pieces of furniture of highly polished dark wood, which included a whatnot and other small tables draped with lace held in place by a highly glazed pot, holding a fern, and dried flowers. The walls hung with faded engraved prints of cattle and highland scenes framed in dark wood; a mirror framed in ornate gilt hung over the mantle piece. I do not remember the room ever being used…
The living room… onetime the kitchen and scullery, was to the left of the font door and hallway. It was a large imposing room running from the front of the house to the back. It held an enormously heavy oaken table - which could be extended, perched on thick turned legs planted firmly on the stone slab floor. Over the table was spread a green-baize, fringed, tablecloth, which almost touched the floor. Single chairs, with their turned back posts and stretchers, darkened by frequent applications of beeswax and polished by much use, were tucked under the table. Behind four chairs, a line of coat hooks screwed into the sidewall. From these hooks hung all the family’s jackets, coats and scarf’s, all hidden by a heavy green curtain, which hung, from a pole close to the ceiling, to the floor. There must have been a love for green by my grandmother, much of the soft furnishing were that colour. The large oil lamp, hung over the table, had its wick trimmed, bowl filled, and glass chimney cleaned every morning. It’s warm gentle light emitted a flickering glow in the evenings… whose beams, hardly touched the furthers extremes of the room; the spluttering wick drew a circle of soot on the ceiling and perfumed the whole house with it’s familiar burnt oil smell. There was a small deep-set window in the front wall behind granddads chair, its curtains drawn back at the bottom. The ledge was always filled to overflowing with books and papers, which prevented the window ever opening… its intended task not given a chance, even on the brightest and warmist of days!
The low ceiling and exposed beams were covered in various artefacts from: an ancient sword, drying mint, horseshoes, mousetrap hanging from a hook, and resting on a wooden shelf the stub of a candle.
Dominating the room, the great fireplace takes up the whole of the centre of the sidewall. The brick chimneybreast - forming the bulk of the cottage structure, supports the floor and joists. The range, probably a Bodley of Exeter of more recent times, is built into the back of the fireplace - its iron flue and canopy leads up into the chimney. Bread had been made in it and meat baked, both giving the room a homely smell… Above all, a large, champhered, and smoke darkened beam, supports the breast - from which a short curtain hangs… to prevent smoke billowing out into the room.
Above this ancient beam is a bracketed mantle-shelf, which carries an ancient French clock… It ticks away the hours… Behind the clock, a walnut framed mirror hangs reflecting the green curtained opposite wall. The remainder of the shelf houses the household’s spare-change box, a couple of porcelain ornaments, granddads pipe and tobacco, fire lighting spills and a used candle in a brass holder. There on the shelf, prominent even to the casual observer, a special box marked, ‘For the burial club’, received its sixpence a week with a ritual nod of grandads head - in recognition that he had made another week... to continue the fund…!
Emitting a plume of steam… a large blackened kettle sits on a hinged, fretted iron-plate - over the fire…, hissing gently. The kettle was there all the year round, day and night… filled always to the top ready for immediate use - for making tea or washing. Our meals were all cooked in a large iron pot suspended from a bar set into the chimney. Meat of all persuasions, puddings, and vegetables all put in together, the potatoes held within a string cloth prevented from mixing with the pudding. On special occasions, we had roasted meat. Grandma twisted a skein of wool to make what she called a twisting jack fixed to the mantle shelf. It was our job to see that it did not stop spinning. Occasionally grandma retwisted the jack to set it in motion again. Bacon the most common meat. The eggs came from the chickens at the bottom of the garden and milk from the farm at the crossroads. Logs, stacked on top of the side-ovens and either side of the hearth - dry off… a sweet pungent smell pervades the room…; a brass-studded bellows, hangs from a nail, and there, on the opposite side, the warming pan - its polish brass reflects the flickering fire. The objects have been there for years… lovingly polished and dusted… now having a right to their place. Numerous nails, some of enormous size, protrude from the fire surround… the family long since forgotten why they were put there. To the left side of the fireplace a shelf carries the ancient wireless worked from an accumulator, above, a bookshelf filled with novels of long past authors…
To the left of the fire, in front of the window, was a large rocking chair clothed in chequered knitted blanket and cushions of deep red…my grandfathers. To the right, ‘a smoker’s chair’ – an oak wooden carver with curved horizontal arms, turned vertical rails and curved back. Colourful knitting and needles tucked down beside the arm; the whole, softened by a crocheted multi-coloured seat cushion… declared reservation - for my grandmother. The back wall was almost totally taken up by a welsh-dresser, behind which the shove halfpenny board was kept. Plates lodged upon the shelves and cups hung from brass hooks. Its solid construction and much used appearance gave it a status undeserved by its value… upon its broad shelf resided the salt and knife box.
A hearthrug, framed one side behind the fender, and much pitted with scorch marks, set the two chairs apart. No one, other than granddad or grandmother, ever sat on those chairs! It was quite impossible to read at night… the paraffin lamp, suspended from the ceiling, cast its wavering chequered light across the ceiling… its halo of light cast upon the table, leaving the outer extremities of the room in darkness. All those present, except my grandfather - who sat staring into the fire smoking his pipe, played whist, dominoes or shove-halfpenny? Whatever the season the room was always dark and smelt of burnt wood and lamp oil… and depending on the time of day, smoke from grandfather’s pipe. His habits were as ordered as the clicking clock. Every movement, action and breath tried before and found fitting. Nothing disturbed the ritual through the day. The clump of his boots on the stairs - both morning and night, gave voice to the time of day. I only ever saw him with a collar and that was in my parents wedding photograph. He was undoubtedly the king of all he surveyed – outside the home, his rule was law, inside however, my grandmother ruled the roost. It was a standard held firm in most country homes… The living room had a comfortable feel - secure and warm, with the ever-lighted fire flickering in the hearth. The front door and the two ground floor inner doors panelled to the same design, six-foot high, three feet wide and at least two and a half inches thick, sporting large brass doorknobs. Like the house and the people within built to last.
In the morning, those awake hear the doves cooing to each other from the school roof… as the thin pale sun lights up the garden. The scent of lavender, box and honeysuckle begin to percolate the air whilst a spiral of smoke starts to trickle up into the sky. A blackbird sings and the cock crows… grandma rakes the fire and clatters the pots. All this heralds another day just like all the others… Prior to smokeless fuel, all chimneys had to be swept annually to prevent chimney fires. This was even more important if the house was thatched. Most villages had their own chimney sweep that included selling manure in slack periods. It was normal for the sweep to inquire if the soot were to be taken away or left - to spread on the garden to prevent slugs. As the annual visit coincided with the cottage spring clean - the most popular period, he was always fully booked up. All the ladies of the village saw to it that they had their slot well booked up ready for the annual spring-clean a time had been set by grandma for the last day in March – a Monday. The previous evening the fire was allowed to die out and the hearth cleaned, removing all the usual paraphernalia that littered the range and fireplace. My mother recited how she hated the sweep coming for it meant a lot of work cleaning and putting everything back in its proper place.
The sweep appeared early the next morning his cart announcing his prescience as it was trundled to a noisy clattered outside the gate. All the furniture had dustsheets draped over them and the most important sheet of all was arranged by the sweep before the fireplace. The round bristle broom was inserted and the process begun – as the sweep jerked the broom up and down gradually lengthening the handle as the upper reaches of the chimney was penetrated… At last, with a jerk, the passage of the brush became easy and the sweep rushed outside to check that the brush had reached the top and was sticking out of the chimney. It was then, as the brush lowered, that the main work was done. Gradually the brush lowered until with a thump, the range was covered with soot and the brush appeared. Now the remains of his labour were collected up in several bucket loads. The price for the job had included whether or not grandad was to receive the soot for the garden. Each bucket load was taken outside and several piles appeared on the vegetable plot to be scattered and dug in or retained to deter slugs. With a nod from grandma, the cleaning job done to her usual high standard and the sweep disappeared for another year. Now, the annual spring-cleaning could begin…
Rosalie Cottage, in company with all the other village houses, held its annual spring-clean. No family admitted that this celebration of the end of winter was not carried out. The rugs and carpets taken outside to be slung over the washing line to be beaten. Net and lace curtains washed and hung out… windows cleaned and woodwork painted. Floors polished and walls distempered. All the sweeping by broom and dustpan… the flagstone floors scrubbed on hands and knees. The feather beds hung out of the windows to air. All the work in the house was done in the mornings leaving the afternoons for preparing the evening meal, bottling, pickling, jam making, sewing, knitting, and socialising with neighbours and friends.
The Collins’ cottage stood next to the old ford, now bridged over. On a summer’s day, the parapet afforded a convenient leaning place for members of the community to gossip over – discussing questions of the day and those things that concern the village. It is quite narrow, only allowing the easy access of hay cart, and driven flock or herd. It was originally built to save wet feet in times of flood and allow the passage of packhorse and drovers cart… It is like many others - picturesque, with a single arch; the swift flowing water opens out downstream - where the depth lessens, allowing the rounded pebbles to make the water chuckle and gurgle on its way to the reed bed lower down.
The garden gate opened onto the lane linking The Crossway’s corner - past school and shop… over the B37767, to Crewkerne, and on to Chard Junction – the nearest railway station. The name ‘street’ has a Roman origin, for paved way, this one linked all the main features of the village making it a frequent meeting place for passers by. In the twenties… on to the thirties, cars were a rarity – if a car went by children rushed to see it disappear up the road. Other than these rare moments, there was no traffic noise. Villages similar to Tatworth were self-sufficient; there was no necessity to travel afar. Many workers had bicycles and the carrier ran his delivery. There were very few changes to the village structure… for the same families existed - from generations past; everyone knew everyone else… there was no need to write the full address on an envelope for the persons name and village was sufficient. The exodus from the village final began after the war, in the 1950s, when young folk leaving school looked beyond the village. The change was remarkable for not only its completeness but also its speed. Still, I must not hurry the time along, the change was fast enough. Back, we must return, into the thirties and forties, as the robin’s bright eyes peered over the nest – his head swivelled, registering neighbouring birds calling to each other… the chattering swallows, heard in the eaves.
Occasionally a clatter of hooves announced a herd of cattle or sheep being driven by, off to Chard market… The accurate passage of time was not recognised, for very few people had wristwatches and only the older men wore a fob watch. On Sundays, the church bells rang for each service. The churchgoers filed past the gate. When the single bell stopped ringing the late comers ran… Past summer memories return… the chirping of the crickets, the buzz of the bees… and the cock’s crows, to the cackle of laying hens.
In outlying districts, oxen would provide the main pulling power, horses in areas with lighter soil. Women and men would follow along to break up the clods. The only relaxation from the grind of every-day work is a trip to market for the family. The wives and daughters would be in their best dresses their husbands in cord, cap and tweed. The rat and rabbit catcher was still an occupation each dead animal paid by the tail. Hunting was a fashionable sport. Sheep grazed on light arable land like the Dorset Downs. The shepherd and his dog could still be seen standing guard over the flock. Repairing his pens, erecting hurdles, setting up his troughs and hayracks whilst living in his movable corrugated hut on wheels where he sleeps in a bunk warmed by a small cooking stove during lambing time Hand shearing, sometimes done by a single shearer and at other times a gang… began in early spring.
Chard market, which opened each week, was one of the main cattle and sheep sales for the area and covered a large site with hundreds of pens. The auctioneer could be heard calling out the prices whilst the sheep gave voice and the cattle bellowed. This weekly market was what the rural community looked forward to each week. It gave the chance to sell their produce, hear the latest news and to keep up with prices. Streets would be sealed off, completely flocks, and herds driven in to be placed into their stalls and pens. The occasions were take for the wives to visit the shops and buy the produce that could not be purchased at the village shop. There were many customs and festivals all eagerly looked forward to and if possible attended. Mumming plays, May Days with a carnival procession - following the hobbyhorse, raising the Maypole, Morris-dancing, the harvest customs, bonfire nights and wakes… wassailing, on twelfth night and the local hunt ‘meet’.
Every year there were flower shows, fairs, fetes and feasts. Showmen’s vans and carts displaying garish and colourful posters; merry-go-rounds, stalls, roll a half-penny, coconut shies, gingerbread and lolly-pops. The showman’s drum would beat and calls made to gather in the customer; bells would ring and the one-man-band starts up. The jumble sale gave the villagers the chance to acquire cast offs and the unfitting given a new lease of life. Chipped plates a-plenty and broken children’s toys; all were queued for long before the opening hour. The stall, which held the greatest attention, was the children’s clothes. There was little ‘bye-your-leave’ but an undignified scramble… jumpers and blouses held up to the child to assess the correct size. The Rector circled the heaving mass never ceasing to be amazed by the aggressive tactics of the mothers. He was still due his tithes - one tenth of the annual produce from each parish. Even though this was reduced in 1836, many refused to pay it. There was much unrest and many court orders were issued. Even at the turn of the century through to the end of the First World War, and shortly after, tithes were paid. His control and standing soon began to fall-off never to assume its previous privileged position.
The farm-worker who looked after the horses was on many farms also the ploughman. He rose early to tend his horses that had to be fed two hours before they started work. During this time of cleaning, feeding and watering the ploughman had his own breakfast. When all was ready, the horses were led out to the field previously marked out for ploughing and an aiming stick planted to give a guide for the first ‘up’ furrow. The second ‘down’ furrow leaned against the first, making a ridge -a centre-furrow. The ploughman only worked for one continuous hour giving the horses a rest before starting again.Ploughing was an autumn job always a rush to see who could start first after the harvest over and the old ricks broken up to be spread – to be ploughed in, along with stable scrapings and contents of the dung heap.
Even during the Second World War, those working the land continued to follow old customs and attitudes. The ploughman, who worked alone, and his fine team of horses would plough and harrow the field ready for the seed to be sown by drilling. He lurched all day long with one leg down the furrow and the other up turning the fire blackened stubble of the previous year… watching the lifted turf roll off the mouldboard - to compost down the top surface. During their breaks the horses would be given their nosebags contained oats and chaff. Huge flocks of seagulls that came straight from the sea at Seaton and Lyme Regis always followed the ploughing horses. Most of the fields had their attendant rusting farm implements stored away in odd corners - the sprouting corn, weeds and brambles slowly hid them from sight until they formed part of the hedgerow.
The productive arable land was not so intensively managed in the early thirties. Later on, when Britain tried to be more self sufficient, every spare piece of land was used to produce food. It was known that lime and sulphuric acid wash out of the soil and should be replaced. Lime was the chief dressing, which then began to be used extensively - in the autumn.
When my mother was born, and for some years after, it would not have been strange to see oxen ploughing. Oxen had been used for farm work long before the horse in all corners of the world. Their working ability, after training, was the same although the ox stronger – could deal with land that is more difficult but they were slower. Their keepers took as much time over their appearance, with the tips of their horns capped in brass and bells beneath their necks. A farmer would use an ox because they existed on courser food and were fast eaters, withstood worse weather, and after a couple of years could be fattened and sold at market. They were a cheaper option – needed no shoeing; horses were mainly for personal riding and carriage work. When fat beef cattle were preferred for slaughter the life of the ox became less secure… the advent of the tractor finished their working life completely and that of the ox-carter.
After ploughing in the stubble, manure spread, and yard waste added, the field was left for the frost to work, ready for harrowing in spring. The cereal varieties have changed over the years to ripen quicker and have shorter stalks. Although this is good for the farmer it is not so for wildlife. The poor unfortunate field mouse no longer builds its nest at the top of a swaying corn stalk… Some of the field were left in fallow for the next year and others planted with pink clover, vetch, yellow mustard or broad bean. These were used as animal fodder - whilst the livestock fertilized the ground as they fed… Swedes were grown as an animal crop… either dug up or fed to the cattle… or the sheep turned into a fenced section of the field - to graze… the shepherd daily moving the hurdles, until the whole field covered.
Later on, the flock would be moved into shelters, still using the hurdles and bales of straw to enclose an area for the ewes to have their lambs. Coupling up a horse to the shafts of a horse-drawn hut-on-wheels, the shepherd would tow the hut to a convenient spot close to the flock and out of the wind. The hut was necessary, for him to stay with his dog, day and night, to guard the flock and to administer to the needs of the ewes shortly to give birth. The shepherd’s hut contained a bed, chair and small stove to provide some heat and cook his meals… he would stay there until lambing was over.The shepherd’s son was thirteen, coming on fourteen, entrusted with looking after a flock of sheep on the common. He drove the sheep taking a number of different routes - to crop new grass along the way. The path bypassed sown crops and populated hamlets keeping off roads and highways. Taking in the lie of the land, the larks soaring overhead, the growing wheat, and frisking rabbits. Along the path that lead to stream and brook giving water to the hurdle flock as it passed. This was a treat, a change from turnips. In the past, forty years previously – at the turn of the century, there had been a recovery from the imported corn and lamb. Once again, the farmer who had survived the bad years started to receive the benefits of patience and perseverance. Not those things got back to pre 1870 but they were certainly better than the nineties. In the good old days the farmers planned a succession of crops for the sheep mainly vetches, clover and turnips. With the hurdle fold moved daily the shepherd rationed what food was available.
Lambing occurred in February and within the hurdles were bales of hay placed to afford shelter and food. Although it was a bad month for the uncertain weather, it did take regard of the coming spring and the new shoots of grass. The coming summer markets were the goal of the shepherd… his every working moment now directed to achieving the best fattening for the new lambs. Farmers who had the space built lambing pens in the barn but we are more concerned about the shepherd who did not have this luxury. Often you could see, as you passed along the lane, a corner of a field sheltered by high hedges – the lea protected from the prevailing winds. Close to the corner a rick, placed there since time immemorial for the same reason… It was to be the forth side to a pen using the meeting of two corner hedges and a set of hurdles, the third… Perfect for the job. As the lambs were born more individual coops constructed from bales and hurdles inside the main pen. This was no spur of the moment devise but one handed down through the centuries.
The shepherd’s life was an exacting one for about six weeks. His hut-on-wheels emitted smoke from the bent chimney from his tiny round stove. The morning fry-ups always with ample early morning mushrooms smelt fantastic as the sausages spat and sizzled. He tramped his rounds every few hours with his trusty dog, who’s post the at the foot of the steps leading to the shepherds hut, remained his domain. The bed, with the colourful crotched cover remained unmade... no need to be worried about being chastised for not being tidy. The small table and rickety chair, the only furniture, softened by a dusty print hanging askew and from projecting wooden pegs an assortment of aprons, straps and topcoats. For this period, he was the key worker receiving due deference from passers by and other farm workers who acknowledge his importance. His boss kept him supplied with bacon, sausage and bread, and topped up his jar of ginger beer.
Do not collect data unless there is a rational reason to do so. The reasons fall into two categories:
The biggest problem with data is that it must be presented and analyzed well. Engineers will not quibble about English. They will forgive all sorts of strange behavior. Numbers wake them up. All of a sudden they start paying attention. Then they start asking questions that can cement or ruin your engineering reputation.
For instance, suppose you've designed a mechanism to clean algae off the glass of an aquarium tank that doesn't involve sticking your hands in the water. You want to quantify how clear the glass is. So you measure light intensity from the aquarium hood light before and after the cleaning. More light means a cleaner aquarium.
It is important to have the data in a spreadsheet and at one's finger tips to look at in detail. Trust the raw data. Display it during a presentation. Make only the analysis that you are 100 percent confident of. In future classes you will be taught more about data and how to analyze it. Know your limits. Give the audience a chance to educate you. Learn from the audience in the moment.
Realize that many engineers are more comfortable with numbers than words. They will relax, give advice and be nice ... in their minds. You may feel criticized. They may make you feel like a failure. Have courage. Forgive them. Display the data with silence ... don't talk. See what they do. Agree with them and keep the conversation going. Climb into their minds. Entertain them and you will grow comfortable in a completely different world where numbers don't lie.
The role of foreign direct investment and the multinational corporation
The roles of foreign aid and multilateral development assistance
The balance between markets and the intervention
If a plane is properly put together, improper sanding of exterior surfaces will not affect flight much. However, it will greatly affect how sleek and refined the craft looks at completion. It is crucial to sand joining surfaces that will be adhered for a better bond, but superficial sanding can be done to any degree of desired perfection.
It helps to have adequate sanding tools and materials. For large surfaces, a large block sander is helpful to ensure that surfaces are flat and consistent. Often a hand planer help start off with a smooth surface. Small curves surfaces can be sanded with various hand or automatic tools, but a skilled hobbyist can often achieve the same or better results with just a piece of sandpaper. Glue joints should be smoothed out to prevent roughness showing through the plane's skin. Larger spurs or glue deposits can also be removed carefully with a hobby knife. Inspecting the plane from many angles and striving for symmetry, smoothness and consistency yields the best results.
Each structural component of an RC plane is usually built separately, then assemble toward the end of construction. The final assembly of these structural parts is an extremely crucial step in making a flyable craft. A slant in the vertical stabilizer and rudder will make the craft turn more sharply to one side than the other. If the trailing edge of the wings are lower than expected, the plane will have more drag in normal flight and will stall more easily. If right and left wings are not mounted symmetrically, various things could occur, including: unwanted roll, drag to one side, turns too sharply on one side due to steep dihedral, etc... The side affects of improperly mounted components are numerous.
A hobbyist must use proper tools and patience when mounting components. Clamps, pins, tape, and even a very small drop of glue can aid in positioning parts before final adhesives are applied. Incidence meters, rulers, tape measures, levels, contractors triangles, protractors and just plain visual detection are important tools in finding structural nuances and imperfections. Components should be inspected and measured from all possible angles before final adhering.
The enum keyword is used to create an enumerated type named name that consists of the elements in name-list. The var-list argument is optional, and can be used to create instances of the type along with the declaration.
For example, the following code creates the desired data type:
The line of code creates a new data type "card_suit" that may take on only one of four possible values: "Clubs", "Diamonds", "Hearts", and "Spades". In general the enum command takes the form:
} Optional_Variable_With_This_Type;
While the second line of code creates a new variable with this data type and initializes it to value to Diamonds". The other lines create new variables of this new type and show some initializations that are (and are not) possible.
Internally enumerated types are stored as integers, that begin with 0 and increment by 1 for each new possible value for the data type.
While enumerated types are not integers, they are in some case converted into integers. For example, when we try to send an enumerated type to standard output.
I am seasick!
We could improve this example by introducing an array that holds the names of our enumerated type such as:
In this case hair is automatically converted to an integer when it is index arrays. This technique is intimately tied to the fact that the color Red is internally stored as "0", Green is internally stored as "1", and Blue is internally stored as "2". Be Careful! One may override these default choices for the internal values of the enumerated types.
This is done by simply setting the value in the enum such as:
In fact it is not necessary to an integer for every value of an enumerated type. In the case the value, the compiler will simply increase the value of the previous possible value by one.
Be careful to keep in mind when using this that the internal values do not need to be unique.
Enumerated types are also automatically converted into integers in arithmetic expressions. Which makes it useful to be able to choose particular integers for the internal representations of an enumerated type.
One may have enumerated for the width and height of a standard computer screen. This may allow a program to do meaningful calculations, while still maintaining the benefits of an enumerated type.
It should be noted that the internal values used in an enumerated type are constant, and cannot be changed during the execution of the program.
It is perhaps useful to notice that while the enumerated types can be converted to integers for the purpose arithmetic, they cannot be iterated through.
This will fail to compile. The problem is with the for loop. The first two statements in the loop are fine. We may certainly create a new month variable and initialize it. We may also compare two months, where they will be compared as integers. We may not increment the cur_month variable. "cur_month+1" evaluates to an integer which may not be stored into a "month" data type.
In the code above we might try to fix this by replacing the for loop with:
This will work because we can increment the integer "monthcount".
See also: How to Teach a Language.
Use motion, not just memorizing.
Sometimes it helps to know the etymology of a vocabulary word. This is particularly useful for learning languages in the same family as your native language. For example, an Anglophone learning German might find it useful to associate the word "fahren" (to drive) with the English cognate "fare." Likewise, "sauber" (clean) has the English cognate "sober." Wiktionary is typically a good tool for looking up etymology.
Discuss a controversial topic to get people talking. Take appropriate caution when dealing with sensitive topics, of course,[1] though don't be afraid to ask if they want to talk about a topic.
My country: right or wrong?
Is colonialism still going on today?
Contribute to Wikipedia (or other Wikimedia project) in the target language. You can use the Wikipedia article of your own language as a source for information.
Write a stub article on a topic you know about.
Expand an article (perhaps by just a sentence or paragraph, depending.)
Find appropriate links in the target language, as alternatives to them, links in the source language.
Many lesson plans can be found here: Lesson Plans - Teaching in China
Alternatively, the student may wish to write about the language, by adding to the Wikibook on that language.
↑ For example, discussing Tibet and Taiwan when teaching English in China. Some English teachers report that they discuss such issues with no problems. - see also the discussions TOP 10 TABOO CLASSROOM DISCUSSION TOPICS FOR NEWCOMERS at Dave's ESL Cafe) and What is the correct role of an EFL teacher in China ......... Of course, use your own discretion. It will partly depend on the sensitivity you show and your willingness to hear their opinions, as well as the particular setting and particular students.
In the above example, StoredNumbers is a file for storing integer numbers. On the storage medium, it will contain some sequence of integers, each stored in binary code, just as they would be in memory. This is called a "binary file". Writing to the file will copy an integer out of memory; reading from the file will copy it into memory. How to actually read and write the values will be introduced shortly.
Not just integers, but also other data can be stored in binary files. In the previous example, a Boolean file was also declared with the filename TruthValues. It would be a file filled only with some sequence of the values True and False. User-defined types such as records can also be stored in files. For example, we might imagine an app that keeps a list of all the computers someone uses to code software. For each machine, it could store the serial number; the name of the manufacturer; whether the computer was a desktop or some other device; and whether it is a personal, school, or work computer.
After a file has been declared, it may be actually used to write data to the disk or other medium. First, we name the file using the Assign command. Next, we open the file with Rewrite. Then, values are sent to the file using Write. Finally, the file is Closed.
Here is a simple example that writes the first 20 perfect squares to a file.
Notice that TwentySquares was the first argument to the Write procedure. Whenever we are writing to a storage file instead of the console, we need to specify the file identifier first, then the value to be written.
If data has already been written to a file, it may be also be read back into memory. We still use Assign and Close, but opening the file is instead done with the Reset procedure. Reset tells the computer that the file is for input instead of output. We use the Read command to retrieve a value, again specifying the file itself as the first argument.
Let's write a program to read the twenty values stored in the previous example back into the computer's memory. We can store them all at once using an array. Assuming we already ran the OutSquares program, the perfect squares will be in a file called "perfect_squares.txt".
In the above case, we already knew that there were only twenty numbers in the file, but this is not always the case. Sometimes the size of the file is not known ahead of time. If we had let the user choose how many perfect squares to store, the input program would need to be prepared for any possible number of inputs. To do this, Pascal supplies the EOF function, which stands for "End of File". EOF is true only when there are no items left in the file to read. EOF can be true even when a file is first opened if the file happens to be empty. The function acts as a signal for "no more data, or no data at all."
Let's write another example that will read all of the numbers in a binary file and display them on the console. The computer will use EOF to decide when to stop.
It would store the binary representations, not of integers or records, but of text characters. It would be able to store letters and punctuation marks in the encoding used by your computer. This could include words, sentences, or even paragraphs. The file could even include numbers, written out digit-by-digit. These would be human-readable data that you could easily view using a text editor. This would be a "text file".
Text files are unique since they are storing all data as human-readable text. You can use them for not just individual characters, but also numbers or strings. They can be organized in lines, so that you can use the same WRITELN and READLN procedures used in console input. The difference is that you must still include the file identifier as the first argument.
The following example procedure will write the names, ages, and weights of several people to a text file. Each person's name will be on one line, followed by the age and weight on the next line. The filename and the number of people will be taken as arguments.
Age, Weight, Count: Integer;
Notice in the above example that the Age and Weight are written with a space between them. This is so that human readers or the computer can recognize them as separate numbers. If they were written on the same line with nothing between them, they would look like one number instead of two. Age 30 and Weight 91 would fuse into 3091. Be careful of this pitfall in text files.
We can easily write a procedure to read and display the same type of file. Thanks to EOF, we don't need to know how many people are in the file.
✔ Appearance ✔ Standard ✔ Console
Because Help tags are indeed less intrusive than Help balloons that they replace in Carbon, Apple has decided that their default behavior is popping up on screen as time permits. On the other hand, Help balloons are turned off by default. However, you or your end-user may wish to act upon that behavior.
You must include "Subs Help tags.Incl" in your project to make this command available to your program.
The Communications Plan is a document describing the means by which project communications will occur.
The communication process must be bi-directional. The Project Manager must receive input from Project Team members and Stakeholders about their information and communications requirements, determine the best and most cost effective way in which the requirements can be met, and record the information in a formal, approved document.
Similarly, the Project Manager must provide details to the team and the Stakeholders regarding the communications he/she expects to receive, and document these requirements in the plan. The Communications Plan is developed early in the project management life cycle. It must be reviewed regularly throughout the course of the project and updated as necessary to ensure it remains current and applicable.
Some of the requirements the Project Manager and Stakeholders will need to communicate and understand, and which should be documented in the Communications Plan include:
How often and how quickly information needs to be disseminated.
By what means the Project Manager and Stakeholders prefer to receive information (via phone, email, paper).
One of the greatest challenges in project management is getting the work done by individuals and business units that do not report to the Project Manager, or even to the Project Manager’s entire chain of command. The earlier you can identify whom you need cooperation from, and the more detail you can provide as to the extent and outcome of that cooperation, the better your chances of actually influencing the work done. Make your case early and convincingly (emphasizing how the folks that DO have influence will benefit), and you may actually get them to do what your project requires.
A communication plan describes how the information and communication needs of project stakeholders will be met: a communication manager will design, and implement such a plan; thereafter s/he will evaluate how efficient and efficacious communication has been as a support activity facilitating all other project tasks.
A communication plan document will describe who need what information, how it will be communicated, where and how.
Project managers must create and effectively use a communication plan that performs two principle functions:
Important : Making Information Timing !!!
For information to be used, it has to be delivered to its target users timely. As a project manager, while developing your communication plan, you need to decide how often to contact each stakeholder and with what information.
Project communication differs from general communication in that it centers on the Work Breakdown Structure (WBS).
Good project communication includes notifying the next task manager in the project delivery chain about when to expect a deliverable.
The project development team (PDT) develops a communication plan by asking the following questions:
Who needs what information?
When do they need the information?
Who delivers the information?
How should the information be delivered?
While all projects share the need to communicate project information, the specific information needs and the methods of distribution may vary widely.
While formulating the project plan, the manager will have to consider also the impact that this will have on the organisational culture and identity. Even if these elements are not explicitly mentioned in the formal communication contents, they have to be considered while designing, implementing and evaluating communication.
Analyse the communication needs of each stakeholder
Identify the information for fulfilling the information needs of each stakeholder
Identify the Method and the Effort Required
Guideline: How team members can improve overall project communication
Issues 9 ⇒ Media and the international communication climate
In the documentary story ⇒ The real project challenges
In the documentary story ⇒ How to bypass the communication diaphragms?
The difference between "communication" and "information"
The three major varieties of communication: propaganda, information, education
The efficacy of communication dependent upon only one of its mode: either seducing or objective, or self-revealing
The communication climate in Organizations and Teams
Analyse the communication needs of each stakeholder
Identify the information for fulfilling the information needs of each stakeholder
Identify the Method and the Effort Required
Planning and executing a communication action for promoting awareness
Development Cooperation Handbook/Communication Skills/Asking questions
Do not be judgmental, lest…
Factors that may block the flow of information
Play media EU is is not adequately informing the public abut the good work it is doing ⇒ full interview
European Union funds various programmes across the world, helping governments achieve their commitments to MDG’s. It is enabling local governments in Development Countries to lead and own the process of making lasting changes in people's lives.
However, the European Commission does little to inform its citizens about the positive impacts being made by initiatives that it is funding around the world. Its citizens don't know about the objectives of its programs and the activities it is funding. And also where development work takes place, few people know that changes are being made possible through the contribution of European tax payer.
I have observed that where the European Commission is closer to the ground reality, in terms of its own presence, its support to non-government organizations and local governments, the nature of its contribution and the impact of its funding are more visible.
But now the way European Commission communicates is mainly bureaucratic and basic. It does not give enough importance to communicating with the opinion makers and development actors and stakeholders whom people trust and listen to, for e.g. educators, media professionals and local authorities: the interlocutors between the external agencies and the local people.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
An aneurysmal bone cyst is an expansile osteolytic bony lesion composed of blood-filled spaces separated by connective tissue septa of bony trabeculae or osteoid tissue and osteoclast giant cells
Very slight male to female predominance before 14 year old; after, slight female to male predominance (i.e. 1.16:1.00).
Primary (~70%) - no known cause or association with other bony lesion.
Secondary (~30%) - occurs in conjunction with another lesion or trauma. Some suggest using ‘principal lesion concomitant with hemorrhagic or cystic changes’ instead. Typical primary lesions include eosinophilic granuloma, simple bone cyst, chondroblastoma, giant cell tumor, or osteosarcoma.
~60% in long bones (mostly metaphyseal and eccentric)
Osteoblastoma and osteoid osteoma (especially when location is posterior spinal elements)
Lytic metastasis (should have more aggressive features)
Giant cell tumor (skeletally mature, epiphyseal and abut articular surface when in non-flat bones)
Osteosarcoma (but typically has osteoid matrix, aggressive features)
Biopsy is recommended to differentiate from more aggressive lesions. When primary, wide resection is recommended. If curettage alone is used, 25% recur. So when location makes wide resection unfeasible, aggressive curettage (i.e. liquid nitrogen, embolization, etc.) is needed. When secondary, treat the primary lesion.
Aneurysmal Bone Cyst by Marla Sammer, M.D., University of Washington Department of Radiology
Brant WE, Helms CA. Fundamentals of Diagnostic Radiology, Lippincott, 1999, 2nd ed. pp 973–974.
Cottalorda J, Kohler R, Sales de Gauzy J, Chotel F, Mazda K, Lefort G, Louahem D, Bourelle S, Dimeglio A. Epidemiology of aneurysmal bone cyst in children: a multicenter study and literature review. J Pediatr Orthop B. 2004 Nov;13(6):389-94.
Canale ST, Canale ST, Campbell WC. Campbell's Operative Orthopaedics, Mosby, 10th ed., Copyright 2003, pp 798–799.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
Online OsiriX Documentation Table of Contents > OsiriX Edit Menu
Homonyms can be tricky to figure out! The following examples of common homonym mistakes prove that spell-check can only go so far in helping to error proof your document.
Remember that two words that sound the same don't always have the same meaning. If you are ever in doubt which one to use, check your dictionary.
Affect is most commonly a verb, usually meaning 'influence'. (An easy way to remember this is that 'affect' starts with an "a", as does 'action'.) As a noun, it is a psychological term for emotion.
Effect is most common as a noun meaning 'result'. 'Effect' used as a verb means 'bring about' some kind of change.
Example: The game affected the standings. Its effect was overwhelming. It effected a change in the affect of the winning team's captain.
Afterward, Afterwards, Afterword
Afterward and afterwards are synonymous adverbs meaning that an event occurs later than another.
Aid is a noun meaning 'assistance' or a verb meaning 'assist'.
An aide is a person who serves or offers assistance.
Example: "The aide will aid the victim."
It's is a contraction, short for either It is or It has.
Its is the possessive form of it. This usually means that the following noun phrase belongs to 'it'. It is important to recognise that 'its' the possessive form does not have an apostrophe - it is in the same category as 'his'.
Example: "It's (It is) my dog." "The computer crashed a few minutes ago, and it's (it has) done it again!" "What is its name?"
Lie is the state of being or a telling someone something untruthful on purpose.
Example: "I will lay the book on the desk."
Example: "Jim will probably lie to get out of being punished for breaking the window."
Figuring out which of these three forms have stumped more than one person! You can find a quick way to tell them apart below:
To is generally used to describe a relationship between things. It is also used as an infinitive verb, as in "I love to eat."
Example: "Matt is going to the doctor." "This gift is to you." "It is ten minutes to seven."
Example: "I usually eat too much on Thanksgiving." or "Joe cleaned the house, washed the car, and mowed the lawn, too.
Two is the word you use for the number 2.
Example: "You have two minutes left before class starts."
Then indicates time.
Example: "First we went to dinner, and then we went to the show."
Example: "I would rather see the comedy than see the horror movie."
Versus indicates opposition.
Genus:NarcissusFamily:AmaryllidaceaeType:Perennial bulbsSoil requirements:Dry in summerPropagation:OffsetsPest issues:UncommonDisease issues:UncommonPollination:Insect
Narcissus is the Latin name for a group of hardy, mostly spring-flowering, bulbs. There are several Narcissus species that bloom in the autumn. Daffodil is the common English name for all narcissus. The botanic name of the genus is Narcissus. They are mostly native to the Mediterranean region, but a few species are found through Central Asia to China. The range of forms in cultivation has been heavily modified and extended, with new variations available in nurseries practically every year.
The name Narcissus is derived from that of the narcissistic youth of Greek mythology, Narkissos. Though "Narcissi" is sometimes given in dictionaries as the grammatically correct plural of "Narcissus", The American Daffodil Society prefers the use of "narcissus" for both singular and plural. (the Webster's Third New International Dictionary gives "narcissus", "narcissuses" and lastly "narcissi" as plural forms)
The name Daffodil is derived from an earlier "affodell", a variant of asphodel. The reason for the introduction of the initial "d" is not known, although a probable source is an etymological merging from the Dutch article "de," as in "de affodil". From at least the sixteenth century "Daffadown Dilly" or "daffadowndilly" has appeared as a playful synonym of the name.
Narcissus are sometimes called jonquils in North America, but strictly speaking that name belongs only to the rush-leaved Narcissus jonquilla and cultivars derived from it.
Paperwhites refer to the species Narcissus papyraceus.
The flowers have a central trumpet-shaped corona surrounded by a ring of petals. The traditional daffodil has a golden yellow color all over, but the corona may often feature a contrasting color. Breeders have developed some daffodils with a double or triple row of petals, making them resemble a small golden ball. Other cultivars have frilled petals, or an elongated or compressed central corona.
The foliage is simple, straplike with linear veination, fleshy, juicy, hollow, more or less glaucus.
Daffodils are poisonous, and if eaten could result in death.[1]
Moist, fertile, well-drained. To avoid disease problems do not irrigate in summer.
Other daffodils which don't fit the above divisions
Miniature daffodils are found in all divisions.
Cut flowers.
The daffodil serves as the national flower of Wales. One species, Narcissus obvallaris, grows only in a small area around Tenby. In Wales it is traditional to wear a daffodil on Saint David's Day (March 1).
The flower is a common decoration flower during Chinese New Year.
Various Cancer Societies around the world use the Daffodil as fundraising symbol. "Daffodil Days" are organised to raise funds
Modern daffodil cultivars are important ornamental crops.
The bulb, leaf, and flower are used to make medicine. They are used for whooping cough, colds, and asthma.
It is also used to the skin, to treat wounds, burns, strains, and joint pain.
Generally free of problems in good soil, but prone to diseases in wet soils. Mammal pests generally avoid this plant.
Fusarium oxysporum var. narcissi
Narcissus bulbocodium ssp. bulbocodium
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Narcissus
Christopher Brickell and Judith D. Zuk (1997). The American Horticultural Society A-Z Encyclopedia of Garden Plants. DK Publishing. pp. 689-696.
Pirone, Pascal P. (1978). Diseases & Pests of Ornamental Plants (Fifth Edition ed.). John Wiley & Sons, New York. pp. 366-370.
Cranshaw, Whitney (2004). Garden Insects of North America: The Ultimate Guide to Backyard Bugs. Princeton University Press. pp. 607.
Pippa Greenwood, Andrew Halstead, A.R. Chase, Daniel Gilrein (2000). American Horticultural Society Pests & Diseases: The Complete Guide to Preventing, Identifying, and Treating Plant Problems (First Edition ed.). Dorling Kindersley (DK) Publishing, inc.. pp. 200.
People with type 2 diabetes who eat a high-fiber diet may have improved blood glucose, lipid and insulin levels.
This book will be a descriptive grammar of the Esperanto language invented by L. L. Zamenhof, which will be complete and comprehensive in regards to a) the grammar of Esperanto as first outlined by Zamenhof in Fundamento de Esperanto and other foundational documents, and b) Esperanto as it is spoken today by the most committed Esperantists. (Proposed reforms to the Esperanto language will be discussed if they have serious support from a significant fraction of Esperanto enthusiasts).
This book is not intended as a textbook for learning Esperanto. For that purpose, you are cordially referred to another Wikibook: the Esperanto Textbook.
This book was started practically on a dare from the August 2006 issue of Bob's Poetry Magazine [1], in which Robert Happelberg boasted that he could print a complete and comprehensive grammar of Esperanto in just one 6 by 7 inch page. While this is obviously wrong, it's not too far off the mark. When completed, this book will require several standard size (8.5 by 11 in the USA) pages, but will still be much shorter than a complete grammar of a natural language like English or Slovene.
In view of this goal, the number of examples provided for each concept will be kept to a bare minimum. Those wishing to build their Esperanto vocabularies are also referred to the Esperanto textbooks. It is acceptable in the beginning to word the text in an accessible manner like in a textbook, but the goal should be for all the text to be technical with a full command of linguistic jargon.
.
1 1. Make a list of the various tools needed for thatching, stating their uses, and show a "dekspaan" and a "needle" you have made.
2 2. State what materials are needed in erecting the framework of a roof ready for thatching. Tell briefly how you go about erecting the framework of a rondavel.
3 3. Name the various materials required for thatching, including several kinds of thatching "grasses" and thatching "threads". Show samples of these.
4 4. Answer the following questions on the preparation of thatching material
5 5. a. Can any shape of roof be thatched?
6 5. b. Which is the easiest roof to thatch?
8 5. d. What are some of the things that damage thatch? How would you protect a thatched roof against such?
9 6. Have some practical knowledge on how to thatch and demonstrate ability in laying a few short rows of thatch.
10 7. a. How many workers are needed in thatching a rondavel?
11 7. b. Describe how you would start thatching a rondavel?
12 7. c. Tell, if possible demonstrate, how you would finish off: (1) a round roof (2) a gabled roof
Also called a leggatt, idekspan, grasdekspan or a thatching spade.
State what materials are needed in erecting the framework of a roof ready for thatching. Tell briefly how you go about erecting the framework of a rondavel.
Name the various materials required for thatching, including several kinds of thatching "grasses" and thatching "threads". Show samples of these.
Answer the following questions on the preparation of thatching material
a. When is the grass cut and how is it stacked for storing?
Grass is cut after it has gone to seed and most of the seed has been dispersed. This is usually after the first frost (in areas where frost occurs), which also stops active growth of the grass.
Grass should be bundled as soon as it is harvested and stacked off the ground and under cover. It needs to be protected from the elements while it cures.
b. How is the grass "combed" and made ready for thatching?
A sickle is run through the bundles to remove any leaves and to straighten the thatch. This will help it to be tightly packed, which is necessary if it is to be water proof and resist fire.
c. How is thatching rope made? What raw materials are used in your locality?
a. Can any shape of roof be thatched?
No. A roof needs to have a pitch of at least 45° or steeper, or it is not suited to thatching. Thatched roofs should be as simple as possible, though complex roofs are frequently thatched. Dormers, multiple ridges, and valleys should be avoided, though they can be accommodated.
b. Which is the easiest roof to thatch?
A conical roof is easiest to thatch because the thatcher simply starts at the bottom and goes around until he has circled the entire structure. Then the next layer is added. With a conical roof, there are no tricky corners or transitions to worry about except at the peak which is a single point.
Thatched roofs use native materials which avoids the cost and expense of manufacture and transport. Thatch is also a cheap and usually abundant building material which blends well with the house's surrounding environment.
Thatched roofs are not uncommon among luxury homes (especially in the U.K.) because of the aesthetic charm. A well-thatched roof which is well cared for can be expected have a lifespan exceeding 50 years. By comparison, asphalt shingled roofs have an expected lifespan of only 20 to 30 years.
d. What are some of the things that damage thatch? How would you protect a thatched roof against such?
The greatest disadvantage of thatch is that when it catches on fire, it is extremely difficult to extinguish. Thatch roofs do not catch on fire any more frequently than other types of combustible roofs, but when they do ignite, damage is extensive. Some insurance companies will not insure a building with a thatched roof because of this, and also because skilled thatchers are sometimes very expensive to hire.
Fire can be abated by treating thatch with a fire retardant. A law was passed in London, England in 1212 requiring all existing thatched roofs to be whitewashed with plaster daub.
The construction of the thatched roof also plays a key role in its susceptibility to fire. Thatch should be densely packed, between 35 to 50 kg/m2, and at least 175 mm thick.
Wire should not be used in the construction of a thatched building, as it is a conductor of lightning. Rather, natural materials should be used to bind the thatch, such as sisal twine.
The building should also be equipped with proper lightning protection.
No wiring should enter the building through the thatch (including electrical, telephone, cable TV, etc.). Rather, it should enter either underground through a conduit, or through a non-thatched wall. Antennas should never be mounted on a thatched roof.
The roof should be regularly groomed so that loose straws (which are easily ignited) are removed.
Thatch is obviously an organic material, and as such, it is susceptible to decay. To protect against this, the thatch should not be harvested until after the first frost has ended its growing season. After it is harvested, it should be stored off the ground and under cover. Leaves should not be allowed to accumulate on the roof of a thatched building, and the roof should be steep - at least 45° - to facilitate the rapid runoff of water. The growth of vegetation on a thatched roof inhibits runoff, so it should be removed quickly if it takes hold.
Thatch may be attacked by all manner of vermin, though their numbers are usually held quite low. Any number of poisons can be sprayed on the thatch to eliminate this problem.
Have some practical knowledge on how to thatch and demonstrate ability in laying a few short rows of thatch.
a. How many workers are needed in thatching a rondavel?
The first worker passes the bundles of thatch up to the workers on the roof. Before doing this, he will butt the end of the bundle on a flat surface. This blunts the ends of the straws and lines them up.
Two more people work on top of the roof, and a fourth person works from the inside.
b. Describe how you would start thatching a rondavel?
c. Tell, if possible demonstrate, how you would finish off: (1) a round roof (2) a gabled roof
Let's imagine a world in which each person has a unique and different name. At first, we could think that this world would be simpler because the sentence "Paul invited Sophia to go to the party" is not ambiguous. Paul and Sophia uniquely identify two different people because there is only one Paul and only one Sophia in this world. Thinking in the other side of the same coin, it would be necessary to stablish a way of defining a distinct name for every child that born in the world. The advantages related to the uniqueness of names would be less interesting when compared to the complexity of the distinct name definition procedure.
Let's now think how we distinct people in our actual world. One way to perform this is by considering the context. Usually, the context present (implicit or explicit) in the discourse is sufficient to disambiguate the names. An example can be stated as follows: "My brother Paul invited his girlfriend Sophia to go to the party". Considering that we know the speaker and his family, we can know who is Paul and who is Sophia. Another way to disambiguate names is by adding information to they. The above statement could be rephrased as: "Paul McCartney invited Sophia Loren to go to the Oscar party". It is possible to have more than one person with the name Paul McCartney and more than one with the name Sophia Loren in the world. But the context presented above restricts the possibilities and we suggest that the man is the singer Paul McCartney and the woman is the actress Sophia Loren.
Reasons similar to the presented above make the programming languages do not insist on unique and distinct name for variables. The definition of a variable is anything that establishes an association between a name and a meaning. The following C illustrates the definition of two variables: Low and Point.
For allowing different variables to have the same name, it is necessary to define a way of ensuring the control of the scope of definitions. This control permits the programmer to make some definitions widely visible in the program and others do not. The scope of a definition is the region of the program where that definition is valid. Programming languages specify many ways of defining a scope, such as Scoping with Blocks and Scoping with Namespaces. These two types of scoping definitions will be explained in the next section.
To provide boolean tests for a class but restricting it from taking participation in unwanted expressions.
User provided boolean conversion functions can cause more harm than benefit because it allows them to participate in expressions you would not ideally want them to. If a simple conversion operator is defined then two or more objects of unrelated classes can be compared. Type safety is compromised.
Safe bool idiom allows syntactical convenience of testing using an intuitive if statement but at the same time prevents unintended statements unknowingly getting compiled in. Here is the code for the safe bool idiom.
&Testable::this_type_does_not_support_comparisons : 0;
? &safe_bool_base::this_type_does_not_support_comparisons : 0;
Here's how to use safe_bool:
Testable_with_virtual t1, t2;
Testable_without_virtual p1, p2;
In C++, address of protected members functions can't be taken in a derived class. Derived class could be a standard class, a class template or a specialization of a class template. Some implementations of safe bool idiom declare safe_bool_base::this_type_does_not_support_comparisons as protected, address of which can't be taken in the derived class - a requirement in reusable safe bool idiom.
An insightful discussion on the boost mailing list initiated by Krzysztof Czainski resulted in an implementation of safe bool idiom using CRTP as well as another using macros.
The C++11 standard provides explicit conversion operators as a parallel to explicit constructors. This new feature solves the problem in a clean way.[1][2][3]
↑ N2437: Explicit Conversion Operator Draft Working Paper
↑ http://stackoverflow.com/questions/6242768/is-the-safe-bool-idiom-obsolete-in-c11
↑ http://stackoverflow.com/questions/13193766/isset-or-operator-void-or-explicit-opertor-bool-or-something-else
Applicable Blender version: 2.70.
Once you're satisfied with the shapes of individual objects, you'll want to combine them into a coherent scene. You do this in Object Mode.
In this module, you'll learn how to move objects to and from layers. You'll also learn how to rename and parent objects, and you'll get an introduction to Outliner Windows.
You'll need the person-and-hat scene from the previous module. If you haven't done it, either go back and do it now or else download the pre-made model from Yosun Chang's website at http://www.nusoy.com/blender.
The person that you (yeah you!) made with the origin in his geometric center.
Load the person-and-hat scene.
Switch to Layer 2, select the hat and press M . A dialog box will pop up for you to choose which layer to move it to. Either press 1 (the number on top of the keyboard, not the numberpad) or select the first box in the popup.
Just as you did in Edit Mode, you can specify the pivot for rotating and scaling objects in Object Mode. If you just finished the previous module, the pivot is probably set to "3D Cursor". If so, change it back to "Median Point".
In Edit Mode, the "Median Point" for pivoting is the geometric center of all selected vertices, edges, or faces. In Object Mode, however, it's the origin of the selected object's local coordinates, indicated by an orange dot. In other words, the origin might lie far from the object's geometric center.
You can use buttons in the Tools Shelf to reunify an object's origin with its geometric center:
With Blender in Object Mode, click LMB on Set Origin in the Tool Shelf (under the "Edit" sub menu of Tools) and select Origin To Geometry (Blender 2.70: "Object" -> "Transform" -> "Origin to Geometry") to move the selected object's origin to its geometric center (without changing the object's appearance).
When more than one object is selected, Blender uses the average of their median points as the median point for pivoting.
This can be useful when you want a better picture of your object. With the origin set to the person's geometric center, you can now snap the object with Shift+S to the 3D cursor. This will let you view more of the model at one time and make for a faster editing workflow.
Once you have the hat properly oriented, move it into position on the person's head. The grab tool enables you to position objects in Object Mode in the same way you positioned vertices, edges, and faces in Edit Mode.
Activate the grab tool by pressing G .
As you move the mouse pointer, the hat will move around in the viewport. By default, the movement plane is perpendicular to the view axis, so the hat will move differently depending on which viewpoint you're working in.
Just as in the Edit Mode grab tool, you can:
Restrict the direction of motion by pressing X , Y , or Z . Press once to move parallel to a global axis, twice to use a local axis. (Press the same key a third time to return to view-plane motion.)
To restrict motion to the global X-Y plane, lock the global Z by pressing Shift + Z .
Hold down Ctrl to restrict motion to discrete steps (typically one Blender unit).
Hold down Shift to get finer control over the motion.
Click LMB or press Enter to finalize the position and exit the tool.
Click RMB or press Esc to return the object to its previous position and exit.
Use two different orthographic views to position the hat on the person's head. You will probably want to scale the hat to make it fit the person's head better. When you are doing this along the X or Y axis, make the changes symmetrical by specifying the axes you want scaling to be constrained to. This option is available in the Operator panel (just below the Tool Shelf) and also by pressing F6.
The parenting menu.
Once you have the hat properly sized and positioned on the person's head, you'll want it to stay there. In order to maintain such a cozy relationship between two objects, you'd have to remember to select them both before rotating, moving, or scaling. A drastic solution might be to join them into a single object using Ctrl + J .
A better compromise is to Parent the hat to the person. Parenting creates a relationship between two objects, such that certain changes to one object (called the Parent object) automatically affect the other (called the Child object). Changes to the child, however, do not affect the parent.
Note that an object can have many children, but only one parent.
Since the person is bigger than the hat, it's logical to parent the hat to the person (meaning: parent = person, child = hat) instead of vice versa.
Click Shift + RMB on the person object.
Both the person and the hat should now be selected. The order of selection is important here.
Press Ctrl + P to parent the hat to the person.
Pressing P in the object mode instead of Ctrl + P will start the Blender game engine. To stop the game engine, press Esc .
Now when you move the hat you will see a line from the hat to the person, indicating that the person is the hat's parent. And if you move the person, the hat will move with it.
You may get an error saying something like Loop to Parents, fix this by clearing all previous parents with Alt + P .
When you have multiple objects in a scene, it helps to give each one a name.
Click on the Objects tab in the Properties panel (the one with a box icon).
At the very top of the tab you should see a dialog box with the name of your object
The hat's name might be something like "Circle" depending on which mesh primitive you first built the hat from.
Click LMB on the dialog box and type in a more descriptive name like "Hat".
You have now changed the name of the hat's object datablock. This name change will be reflected in the Outliner, which we will look at shortly.
The Outliner window.
Once you give objects names, it helps to have a way to find objects by their name and parent. This is exactly what the Outliner is for and it comes in very handy when you are working with a large scene. The Outliner is usually just above the Properties panel. You may want to pull it down a bit to see it more clearly.
You'll notice that all the objects in your scene (Person, camera etc) are listed and that you can select these objects by clicking LMB on them. And if you click RMB on an object, a menu will pop up with options like Select, Deselect, Delete etc. If you select the Person and then click the "+" sign to its left, you will see that the Hat is listed below the person. This is because Blender lists all children objects beneath their parents.
On the right of each object there are a series of icons which represent the state of the object. For example, the eye icon means that your object is visible in the 3D viewport. You can turn off its visibility by clicking LMB on the eye, which will turn grey; click again on the eye to make it visible. If you hover the mouse over the icons a text box will pop up with a description of what that particular icon does.
Good on ya' mate!
Congratulations!! You have now finished your simple character. Pat yourself on the back, and have a celebratory coffee! (Or pop!)
Outliner at http://www.blender.org/development/release-logs/blender-235a/outliner/
Gestures at http://www.blender.org/manual/modeling/meshes/editing/basics/translation_rotation_scale.html
Parents at http://www.blender.org/manual/editors/3dview/object/relationships/parents.html
Welcome to the exercises related to Lesson 4.1.
Click "▼" to check your answers.
Anthony: I have a coffee.Anthony: I have a coffee.
Anthi: Do they have tea?Anthi: Do they have tea?
This disease can take various forms. In its most benign, it can be fatty liver disease. In its more serious it can be hepatitis, or eventually cirrhosis. Hepatitis is simply inflammation of the liver tissue which leads to infiltration of lymphocytes. Fatty liver disease occurs when the liver's metabolism becomes skewed towards synthesising fatty acids. Cirrhosis is the end-stage of hepatitis, when the repair mechanism has decompensated. Nodules of healing tissue is surrounded by fibrosis rings. It occurs in about 1 in 10 alcoholics.
Faster reaction rates are achieved by increasing the probability of a successful collision. Particles require a certain level of energy, called activation energy or EA before a successful collision can occur.
Rates of reaction are based on five factors:
As the concentration of reactants increases, the number of reactant particles per unit area increases. This in turn increases the chances of successful collisions, increasing the rate of reaction.
Increased pressure = increased rate of reaction
This generally applies for gases only.
Increased temperature = increased rate of reaction
The molecules gain kinetic energy and move at a faster speed. Increased chances of successful collisions leading to a faster rate of reaction.
More molecules may also attain activation energy and the number of successful collisions also increases. Thus increased temperature leads to a faster rate of reaction.
Use of catalyst increases rate of reaction. A catalyst lowers the activation energy and so more particles can attain activation energy, thus a faster rate of reaction.
Only a small amount of catalyst is required. Increasing the amount of catalyst used will not increase the rates of reaction beyond a certain point.
Increased surface area = increased rate of reaction
A larger surface area per volume ratio increases the areas of contact between reactant particles. This increases the chances of successful collisions. Thus the rate of reaction is increased.
A database program is an executable that stores and retrieves data. There are many types of databases: flat-file, hierarchical, relational, object-relational, object-oriented, xml, and others. The original databases programs were mainly proprietary and non-standardized.
Relational databases were the first databases to achieve great success and standardization. Relational databases are characterized by the SQL (structured query language) standard to query and modify the database, their client/server architecture, and relational table storage structure. Relational databases achieved great success because their standardization allowed many different vendors such as Oracle, IBM, and Sybase to produce interoperable products giving users the flexibility to switch their vendor and avoid vendor lock-in to a proprietary solution. Their client/server architecture allows the client programming language to be decoupled from the server, allowing the database server to support interface APIs into multiple different programming languages and clients.
Although relational databases are relatively old technology, they still dominate the industry. There have been many attempts to replace the relational model, first with object-oriented databases, then with object-relational databases, and finally with XML databases, but none of the new database models achieved much success and relational databases remain the overwhelmingly dominant database model.
The main relational databases used today are: Oracle, MySQL (Oracle), PostgreSQL, DB2 (IBM), SQL Server (Microsoft).
A Wikibookian believes this page should be split into smaller pages with a narrower subtopic.
You can help by splitting this big page into smaller ones. Please make sure to follow the naming policy. Dividing books into smaller sections can provide more focus and allow each one to do one thing well, which benefits everyone.
You can ask for help in dividing this book in the assistance reading room.
Power Electronics is the study of switching electronic circuits in order to control the flow of electrical energy. Power Electronics is the technology behind switching power supplies, power converters, power inverters, motor drives, and motor soft starters.
Some discrete components used in power electronics
Motors and most other actuation devices are typically indirectly connected to the power supply through a power transistor which acts as a switch, either allowing energy to flow from the power supply to the motor, or disconnecting the motor from power.
(The CPU, also connected to the transistor, chooses exactly when to turn it on or off).
When the switch is turned on, most of the power coming from the power supply goes to the motor.
Unfortunately, some of the power is trapped by unwanted parasitic resistance in the power transistors, heating them up.
Often a heatsink is necessary to keep the transistor from overheating and self-destructing.
Practically all modern desktop or laptop PCs require a heat sink on the CPU and on the graphics chip.
(A typical robot requires a heatsink on its power transistors, but not on its small CPU).
"Application note AN533: thermal management precautions for handling and mounting"
It looks like this applies to all power semiconductors -- FET, BJT, Triac, SRC, etc.
It gives thermal resistance for DPAK and D2PAK for FR4 alone, FR4 plus heatsink, Insulated Metallic Substrate (IMS), and IMS plus heatsink.
The principles behind heatsinking these power semiconductors are the same as the principles behind
Triacs have 3 pins.
Triacs look like and are controlled much like PNP power transistors.
Triacs can control AC power in a circuit much like a relay -- it's either on (shorted) or off (open).
Typically digital logic is connected so its Vdd is connected to the triac A1 pin.
Some digital logic output pin is connected to a small resistor connected to the triac gate pin.
When the digital logic pulls the gate pin low (towards Vss), the triac is triggered and turns all the way on.
As long as the triac is on, the A1 and A2 pins act like they are shorted together.
Current can flow in both directions through the triac -- whether A2 is higher or lower than the A1 voltage.
Turning the triac off is a little more difficult.
First the digital logic output drives the gate pin high (so it is the same voltage as the common A1 pin).
But the triac remains on until the current through the triac drops to less than the holding current. Normally triacs are used with 50 Hz or 60 Hz AC, so the triac may stay on as long as 10 ms after the digital logic tries to turn it off.
After the triac is off, A2 acts like is disconnected and isolated from the rest of the triac (as long as the external circuit doesn't drive it outside its voltage rating, typically plus or minus several hundred volts).
Driving a triac is very similar to driving PNP transistor -- "gate" analogous to "base", "A1" analogous to "emitter", "A2" analogous to "collector".
By far, the most common silicon device to drive AC loads connected to mains voltage is the triac.[1]
A triac can remain off while A2 can swing up and down hundreds of volts (relative to A1 and the gate).
It's difficult to keep a BJT or FET transistor from spontaneously turning on in the "reverse" direction.
A PNP transistor can quickly turn off even when full current is flowing through them.
A triac will stay on indefinitely when DC current flows through it.
A "snubberless triac" or "logic level triac" will not turn on with positive gate current when the A2 lead is at a negative voltage (relative to A1), but they will turn on with a positive gate current when the A2 lead is at a positive voltage.
Some "standard" triacs will turn with a positive gate current (like a power NPN transistor) no matter if A2 is positive or negative, but such "positive gate current triggering" is not recommended.
The "negative gate current triggering" is preferred.
In industrial applications, almost everything uses a motor, in fact, motors may account for up to 80% of our country’s energy usage. There are generally three different ways to start a motor: full-voltage, reduced voltage, and inverter. A full voltage, across-the-line, or direct on-line (DOL) start uses a contactor, which is a heavier duty three-phase relay. Reduced voltage starting can be accomplished via several different ways: auto-transformer, wye-delta, primary resistor/reactor, or with a solid state soft starter. Inverters are generally referred to as drives. This paper focuses on solid state soft starters (referred to as soft starter only from here on): what they are, why they are used, their construction, and applications.
A soft starter is a solid state motor starter that is used to start or stop a motor by notching the voltage waveform, thereby, reducing the voltage to each phase of a motor and gradually increasing the voltage until the motor gets up to full voltage/speed all at a fixed frequency. The profile of the increase of voltage depends on the application. The voltage is reduced and controlled by 3 pairs of back-to-back silicon-controlled rectifiers (SCRs) (Fig. 1), which are a type of high speed thyristor. A soft starter takes the place of a contactor and can also take the place of an overload relay in a standard motor starting application. Fig. 1 demonstrates the configuration of a soft starter controlling a line or wye connected motor from a three-phase source.
Why use a soft starter?
In general, there are two reasons to use a soft starter: the power distribution network may not be able to handle the inrush current of the motor and/or the load cannot handle the high starting torque. As a rule of thumb, a motor utilizes around 600-800% of its full load current (FLA) to start. This current is referred to as inrush current or locked-rotor current.
Some systems, when the power is switched on, briefly pull 50 times the normal operating current.[6]
If a large motor is on a smaller power distribution network or on a generator system, this inrush current can cause the system voltage to dip or to “brown out.” Brown outs can cause problems with whatever else is connected to the system, such as computers, lights, motors, and other loads. Another problem is that the system may not even be able to start the motor because it cannot source or supply enough current. Most industrial businesses run during the day can be fined or charged extra (Peak Demand charges) during this peak usage time for large transients caused by large horsepower (HP) motor start ups. These Peak Demand charges can add up very quickly, especially if the motor needs to be started multiple times during any given day. The inrush current can be controlled one of two ways with a soft starter: either with a current limit (discussed later) or reduced linearly with the reduced voltage, and follows this approximation:
Applications such as conveyors may not be able to handle a sudden jolt of torque from an across-the-line start. Utilizing soft starters reduces the wear and tear on belts, conveyors, gears, chains, and gearboxes by reducing the torque from the motor. The torque decreases as a square of the reduced voltage, and follows this approximation:
Since soft starters are generally controlled and monitored by a microprocessor, a soft starter can add many features and protections fairly easily. It can offer a choice of the starting time, limited speed control, and energy savings. Power monitoring, such as three-phase current, three-phase voltage, power, power usage, power factor, and motor thermal capacity usage, can be implemented with current transformers, a voltage meter, and an internal clock. With the above implementations, protection, for the motor or the soft starter, from the items listed below (Table 1) can also be offered by stopping the firing of the SCRs, dropping out the bypass contactor (a contactor that carries the motor load after the motor is up-to-speed), and/or alerting a user via some form of communications with the microprocessor and another computer.
Possible protections that can be offered by a soft starter
Generally, a soft starter is constructed with three pairs of SCRs reverse parallel connected to allow the current to flow to or from the motor. Soft starters can be made by controlling just one or two phases, but this paper will focus on the most prevalent implementation, three-phase control. Each phase of a soft starter can be controlled with an SCR pair reverse parallel connected (Fig. 2), an SCR/diode pair reverse parallel connected (Fig. 3), or a triac (Fig. 4), depending on cost and/or quality. The most prevalent switch in industry is probably the SCR pair and will also be the focus of this paper. Soft starters are used almost exclusively for starting and stopping and not during the run time because of the heat loss through the SCRs from the voltage drop across them.
A standard assembly of a soft starter uses one SCR pair per phase and once the voltage gets to within approximately 1.1V of full voltage (depending on the voltage drop across the SCR) a bypass contactor (internal or external to the soft starter), running parallel to the SCR pairs, pulls in (Fig. 5). Once pulled in the SCRs stop firing. Typically, the bypass contactor is much smaller than compared to what is needed for a full voltage start as the contacts only need to be able to handle the full load current of the motor. Since the mechanical contacts cannot handle the inrush current, the SCRs must be sized correctly to handle the motor’s locked-rotor current.
Figure 5: Standard Soft Starter Topology With Bypass
The transition from SCRs to bypass should also be near full speed to minimize the jump in current (Fig. 6). Fig. 7 shows a transition at slow speed; the transition has a jump in current near the locked-rotor or starting current, defeating the purpose of a soft starter.
Figure 6: Near Full Speed Transition [7]
Figure 7: Low Speed Transition [7]
A soft starter reduces the voltage by “notching” the applied sinusoidal waveform, simulations of which can be seen in Figures 8-13. A notch is a non-technical term for the zero voltage area in the middle waveform seen in Fig. 9. Fig. 9 also shows the forward firing SCR pulses in green and the reverse firing pulses in blue to notch the output voltage. Fig. 10-13 show a progression from a 90º firing angle to 30º. As the notch decreases in size, the Vrms increases along with Irms. An initial voltage, determined by the user, is ramped up to full voltage by varying the firing angle depending on the preset profile of the soft starter. Soft starters can be controlled via open-loop or closed-loop control.
Figure 9: Single Phase Simulation (90º Firing Angles, Voltage, and Current)
An example of open loop control is the voltage ramp (Fig. 14), the voltage ramps from an initial voltage to full voltage in a linear fashion without regards to the load. Pump start is another form of open-loop control. The pump starter’s firing circuit ramps up the voltage with a profile that allows the speed/torque to ramp (Fig. 15) in a more efficient manner and helps protect against water hammering, a common problem in pump applications. Fig. 14-15 also show examples of soft stopping.
Applications such as current limit (Fig. 16) use feedback from the motor or the line current/voltage to change the firing angle of the SCRs as necessary, hence closed-loop.
All control schemes listed monitor back EMF of the motor as to not become unstable.
Figure 14: Voltage Ramp [7]
Figure 15: Pump Start [7]
Figure 16: Current Limit [7]
Soft starters can be made for a reversing application by adding two extra SCR pairs that switch two phases. For example, line phase “b” is connected to load phase “c” and vice versa. L2 (“b”) is connected to T3 (“c”) and L3 (“c”) is connected to T2 (“b”) in Fig. 17. A delta configuration motor can also be controlled with a soft starter (Fig. 18), but it will see more current than a line connected motor. As a way to get around the larger current switching, a soft starter can be wired “inside the delta,” as can be seen in Fig. 19. Wiring in this configuration will allow the soft starter to control a larger motor than even line connected by a √3 advantage. For instance, an “inside the delta” soft starter can switch a 277A load versus a line connected soft starter needs to be able to switch 480A to control the same rated motor load. A disadvantage of “inside the delta” is that it requires six leads coming from the motor which can be an added expense with larger HP motors.
Figure 19: "Inside the Delta" Topology
Above are some physical variations of soft starter applications. In contrast, kick starting and low speed ramps are some other applications that can be implemented via different programming of SCR firing angles.
Below are some calculated simulations of different applications of soft starters with high inertia loads. Table 2 holds the properties the motor simulated. Fig. 20-21 shows a general full voltage start for comparison with a motor that has a locked-rotor current LRA that is 600% of the FLA and a locked-rotor torque LRT or starting torque that is 180% of the full load torque. See Appendix Fig. 35 for an explanation of the %Current & % Torque vs. Speed curves.
Motor Information	Load Information
Motor Type	NEMA B	Load Type	High Inertia
Rated HP	200	Load Inertia	36000
Rated Speed	1750	Load Speed	605
Frequency	60	%Load Factor	80%
Motors must be sized appropriately to have enough torque with respect to its load or the motor will not be able to start, irregardless of starter type.
Figure 20: Full Voltage Starting [8]
Figure 21: Full Voltage Starting [8]
As you can see in Fig. 22, the starting current is reduced from 600% to roughly 400% and the initial starting torque is set to 50%. The initial torque for this motor application cannot be any less than the load torque, or a stall condition may occur (discussed later).
Figure 22: Soft Start Motor Starting Characteristics [8]
In a current limit start (Fig. 23), the current is limited to a specified value, in this instance 450% of the FLA. The lowest level to which the current can be limited depends on the motor torque. Again, caution needs to taken in setting the current limit to make sure the motor torque does not dip below the load torque to avoid stall conditions.
Figure 23: Current Limit Motor Starting Characteristics [8]
Fig. 24-25 are for comparison to an across-the-line start.
Figure 24: Soft Start [8]
Figure 25: Current Limit Start [8]
A stall occurs when the motor torque cannot overtake the load torque and the motor cannot rotate. When this happens, the motor will draw more current than the FLA to try to turn the load, again, defeating the purpose of the soft starter. Motor stalls are possible if the motor torque dips below the load torque; for a high inertia load, the starting load torque is quite high and stays relatively high. Fig. 26-27 show possible stall conditions (highlighted by arrows) for a soft start or a current limit start. Fig. 26-27 and 32 may be slightly misleading because once the motor stalls the speed will not increase.
Figure 26: Soft Start Stall [8]
Starting Type	Current Limit
Figure 27: Current Limit Stall [8]
The pump application simulation uses the same motor characteristics as the previous high inertia application but is connected to a pump. A pump load starts with almost no load torque and it increases with speed. The red line in Fig. 28 shows the load torque.
Motor Information	Load Information
Motor Type	NEMA B	Load Type	Pump
Rated HP	200	Load Inertia	36000
Rated Speed	1500	Load Speed	605
Frequency	60	%Load Factor	80%
The closer the motor torque can get to the pumps torque with out dipping below it, the more potential for energy savings. With almost no starting load torque a soft start can be set much lower than in a high inertia load. Fig. 28 is set to 2% of locked-rotor torque.
Figure 28: Pump Soft Start [8]
Using a current limit start with this application, the motor torque is kept closer to the load torque (highlighted by arrows) than with the soft start above (highlighted by arrows), allowing even more energy savings. Fig. 29 is set to 225% of the locked-rotor torque.
Figure 29: Pump Current Limit [8]
Fig. 30-31 are speed vs. time curves for comparison to the across-the-line start.
Figure 30: Soft Start [8]
Figure 31: Current Limit [8]
With a pump application there is almost no starting torque, and the soft start option almost cannot fault. However, the current limit has an inherent dip in its starting profile, and again, caution must be taken to avoid stall conditions. Fig. 32 has a current limit set to 200% of the FLA and the motor starts to stall at around 50% of its full speed (highlighted by arrow).
Figure 32: Pump Stall [8]
A soft starter is a versatile starter that can take many forms and be used to start many different applications. Along with protecting applications such as belt conveyors and saw mills, it can help save a great deal of energy by reducing the starting current and starting torque and help stop numerous conditions that are damaging to motors.
Figure 33: Kickstart Profile [7]
Figure 34: Low Speed and Low Speed Revering Profile [8]
Figure 35: Speed/Current vs. Torque Curve Explanation [9]
Soft start circuits are useful in many applications, even ones that don't use motors.
The result is "voltage collapse" with the system locking up in an undesirable state.[10][11]
"snubberless or logic level Triac ... can not be triggered in Q4.
... negative power supply ... topology is the preferred one.
The gate current is sunk from the gate by the control circuit.
The device then works in Q2 and Q3 quadrants."
"Gate control by DC guarantees ideal firing but has the disadvantage
↑ "Soft Starters" http://pages.google.com/edit/jszagorski/EE572_revFinal.pdf
Rod Elliott.
"Inrush Current Mitigation".
↑ Allen-Bradley Company, “Bulletin 150 Application and Product Guide,” Sept. 1998.
Jerrold Foutz.
"Solar-Array Power System Battery Lockup".
1996 - 2003.
"Simple Soft-Start Circuitry Provides Long Startup Times".
Electronic Design.
[1] Larabee, J., Pellegrino, B., Flick, B., “Induction Motor Starting Methods and Issues,” IEEE PCIC-2005-24.
[2] Lukitsch, W.J., “Soft Start Vs AC Drives – Understanding the Differences,” Proc. IEEE Annual Textile, Fiber and Film Industry Technical Conference Atlanta, GA, May 1999, pp. 1-5.
[3] McElveen, R.F., Toney, M.K., “Starting High-Inertia Loads,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., vol. 17, no. 1, January/February 2001
[4] Unknown, “Soft Starters for Induction Motors,” 2002, http://www.lmphotonics.com/sstart.htm
[5] Allen, J.P.C., “Starting Now: A review of reduced voltage ac motor starters.,” Proc. IEEE Annual Textile, Fiber and Film Industry Technical Conference Charlotte, NC, May 1992, pp. 1-10.
[6] Mungenast, J., “Design and Application of a Solid-State AC Motor Starter,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., vol. IA-12, no. 1, January/February 1976, pp. 39-42.
Wikipedia has related information at Power Electronics
Energy and Power: Production, Distribution, and Society
This role is a user role. That is, the role name must be an existing user on the system.
This role is a group role. That is, the role name must be an existing group on the system.
This role is a special role, meaning it does not belong to a user or group and does not require an enforced secure policy base to be included in the ruleset.
Lowercase L. This role has learning enabled.
This role is an administrative role, thus it has special privileges that normal roles do not have. In particular, this role bypasses the additional ptrace and library loading restrictions.
This role can use gradm to authenticate to the kernel. A policy for gradm will automatically be added to the role.
This role uses Pluggable Authentication Modules (PAM) for authentication.
This role has Trusted Path Execution (TPE) enabled.
The role is persistent. When the shell/session in which authorization was done is terminated, spawned processes won't be dropped to non-special role. Do NOT use this flag with any role that does anything but shut the system down.
Next Page: Role Attributes |
Previous Page: Grsecurity and PaX Configuration Options
The first baseman has an important defensive role as the infielder most likely to finish an infield out on any ground ball. Usually located very close to first base, he is of course in position to catch any fly balls or line drives hit in or near his direction. He also fields ground balls hit toward him, and usually has a short run to first base so that he can reach first base with the fielded ball before the batter can reach first base by running to first base. In a rare play, the first baseman may receive a throw from a catcher on a dropped called or swinging third strike; if the first baseman catches the ball and reaches first base to tag the bag before the batter can reach first base, then the batter is out on the strikeout.
Under some circumstances he may play far enough off first base so that he must make a toss of a ground ball to the pitcher who typically has a shorter run to first base than does the batter. Such is common with a batter who tends to hit balls between first and second base. With a bung a first baseman may need to charge the bunted ball and throw to a base where a play is possible. When the person to be put out is the batter, it may be the second baseman who runs from the first-base side of second base to reach first base before the batter.
The first baseman rarely has a long run on any play except for a foul pop fly. High pop flies often give him plenty of time to situate himself under the pop fly to be caught for an out. A baserunner can try to run to the next base after the first baseman catches the ball, so in such a situation the first baseman might benefit from a strong throw to another base or to the catcher at home plate to prevent the advance of a baserunner. With a runner on first base, the first baseman may situate himself to receive a throw from the pitcher intended to catch a baserunner who strays too far from first base (this play is called a pick-off) or, should the runner try to steal second base, get a throw from the pitcher and throw to the fielder (usually a second baseman or shortstop) guarding second base in an attempt to get the runner put out in a play known as "caught stealing". The first baseman may be part of a rundown play.
On another rare play, a first baseman may be the one to catch a thrown ball from another fielder when a baserunner from first base leaves first base on a caught fly ball (including a line drive). The baserunner must return to first base before the first baseman can tag first base, lest the batter be out.
Good defensive first baseman can retrieve inaccurately-thrown balls from other fielders; such prevents errors that would allow batter-baserunners to reach first base safely with much the same effect as a hit.
In major-league play, the first baseman is typically one of the slowest runners holding a defensive position. Speed is less critical to the first baseman than to any fielders other than the pitcher (who has far more responsibility for pitching than for chasing down ground balls or retrieving infield flies) or the catcher. A first baseman has often been moved from some other position in which he has become a defensive liability due to a loss of strength of his throwing arm or of speed. Very good hitters are often moved to first base toward the ends of their careers. It is also possible that a team may move a good hitter from a position in which his potential for injury is high. As a general rule, first basemen are typically among the best pure hitters on any major-league team.
In scoring a game, the first baseman is indicated with the number "3". Thus an unassisted out played by the first baseman is scored "3" ("3F" if foul), a ground-out, shortstop to first is "63", and a ground-out, first baseman to pitcher is "31".
Moves: 1.d4 d5 2.c4 e6
With 2...e6, Black declines the Queen's Gambit in the traditional fashion. 2...e6 bolsters the d5 pawn and opens a diagonal for the development of Black's dark-squared bishop. However, 2...e6 also blocks the c8-h3 diagonal for Black's light-squared bishop. Finding a way to productively develop this piece is a perennial challenge for Black players in the QGD.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
d4 d5 2. c4 e6
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Queen's Gambit Declined
Batsford Chess Openings 2 (1989, 1994). Garry Kasparov, Raymond Keene. ISBN 0-8050-3409-9.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon · Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
This Chess related article is a Wikibooks:Chess stub. Please assist Wikibooks by expanding it.
The following is a list of notable easy to learn TV Theme songs to be played on the guitar. Some of the items link to the different informal chords to specific songs which represent many different authors' own interpretations of the original songs. Most of the chords on the list are relatively easy to learn, and would be a great start for novice guitar players whom are interested in improving their playing abilities.
The technical difficulty and skill level required to play each of the songs is defined with a star rating system:
The Friendly Indians - I Know You Know (Psych theme)
Barenaked Ladies - The History of Everything (The Big Bang Theory theme)
The Rembrandts - I'll Be There For You (Friends theme)
Beverly Hills, 90210 theme]
Joey Scarbury - Believe It or Not (The Greatest American Hero theme)
The Mash - Suicide Is Painless (M*A*S*H theme)
Getting Started: Different Types of Guitars | Anatomy of a Guitar | Buying a Guitar | Buying an Amplifier | Tuning the Guitar | Tablature | Lead Guitar and Rhythm Guitar
For Beginners: The Basics | Intervals and Power Chords | Open Chords | Muting and Raking | Learning Songs | Song Library
Lead Guitar: Picking and Plucking | Scales | Arpeggios and Sweep Picking | Slides | Hammer-ons, Pull-offs, and Trills | Bending and Vibrato | Harmonics | Vibrato Bar Techniques | Tapping
Rhythm Guitar: Chords | Barre Chords | Chord Progressions | Alternate Picking | Tremolo Picking | Rhythm
Playing Styles: Folk Guitar | Blues | Slide Guitar | Rock Guitar | Country and Western | Metal | Jazz | Classical Guitar | Flamenco
General Guitar Theory: Tone and Volume | Singing and Playing | Writing Songs | Playing With Others | Recording Music |Tuning Your Ear | How to Continue Learning
Equipment: Guitar Accessories | Effects Pedals | E-Bow | Cables | Bass Guitar | Harmonica and Guitar Combo
Maintenance: Guitar Maintenance and Storage | Adjusting the Guitar | Stringing the Guitar
Appendices: Dictionary | Alternate Tunings | Chord Reference | Blanks
An LFO is used to modulate parameters such as amplitudes, frequencies or filters.
START: start phase = position the LFO starts at
DELAY: delay between the note start and the LFO start
STR: stretch = controls how much the LFO frequency changes according to the note's frequency
F.R.: frequency randomness
SYNC: continuous mode = when on the LFO won't be reset on each new note but will synchronize
Annotations to The Complete Peanuts: 1983 to 1984 by Charles M. Schulz (Fantagraphics Books, 2011. ISBN 1606995235
p. 102 (August 24, 1983) As the strip indicates, the French term esprit de l'escalier translates as "wit of the stairway". Schulz used French terms several times during the course of his strip, mainly during its later half, and all of them were authentic.
p. 144 (November 29, 1983) The motion picture Flashdance was released in April 1983 in the United States and enjoyed a large success at the box office. Bill Melendez released an animated parody of it (and of other dance films) in April 1984, under the title It's Flashbeagle, Charlie Brown.
p. 151 (December 16, 1983) It seems that Sally's script refers to the Christmas carol "Hark! The Herald Angels Sing", well known in English speaking countries.
p. 156 (December 27, 1983) "Snowperson": political correctness in the early 80s had gone quite far in its attempts to erase gender-biased expressions from the common language. At that time, many tried to be gender-neutral to the point of sacrificing clarity, for example in sentences such as "Every man/woman shall don his/her life jacket and report to the steward/stewardess nearest to him/her." Some common nouns disappeared at that time, for example, "fireman" was replaced by "firefighter." In a somewhat related gag, Jim Unger in his cartoon Herman had a salesman telling a customer: "We're living in very strange times, Martha." with in the background a banner saying "Grandperson clocks."[1]
p. 193 (March 23, 1984) There is a "Highland Park" and a "Selby Avenue" in Saint Paul, Minnesota. Schulz lived at the corner of Selby and Snelling, where his father's barber shop was also located.
p. 220 (May 25, 1984) "Playing trivia": Trivia games started in the early 80s, with Isaac Asimov's Super Quiz possibly being the first of them in 1982. They became very popular by the mid-80s.
p. 240 (July 9, 1984) "Girls Just Want to Have Fun" was a popular song in early 1984, sung by Cyndi Lauper.
p. 255 (August 14, 1984) "Roy Hobbs": Although the novel The Natural, by Bernard Malamud, was released in 1952, the movie based on it was produced and released only in 1984.
↑ Unger, Jim (1984). Herman the Fourth Treasury. New York: Andrews and McMeel. p. 186. ISBN 0-8362-2053-6.
Annotations to other volumes: 1950–1952 ·
Creating an Island may sound like the work of science fiction but it can be possible. The idea behind this Wikibook is to guide you with the physical aspects of islands.
Creating an island can be as simple as putting a chair in a 0.50m deep sea and calling it an island. Land reclamation projects tend to create bigger surfaces to stand on, which vary from square meters to even square kilometers. Before we start building an island, we need to consider what use it will have first. Here is a list of reasons why we might want to build an island: To have fun, enjoying the sensation of standing on a surface which was previously only water. To grow crops, which can save space and make use of the water. To recycle, by collecting glass bottles, wooden crates and tin/aluminum/steel cans and make use of it. Building islands can indeed encourage recycling. (This should not include plastic. Do not use plastic in this process, as it will pollute!)
Spiral Island I in early March 2000
Famous land reclamation projects include the artificial islands in Dubai, which were built with dredgers loaded with sand and lots of complicated engineering, which is not necessarily what it takes to build an island. As seen on the TV show Ripley's Believe it or Not, in Mexico a person happened to find a sum of broken discarded fishnets and combined them with empty bottled water containers and dirt, to create Spiral Island. [1]One major problem with this is that Mexico is or was trying to annex the island as a tourist site. Also, in Dubai, UAE, there is the construction of The Palm Islands, which are three groups of man-made islands shaped like palm trees. A separate company is also constructing The World, named for its shape, which, when complete, will form a map of the world. Also, Kansai International Airport in Osaka Bay is on a man-made island, as are Chubu Centrair International Airport and Kobe Airport. In Tokyo Bay, Odaiba island, which is an 19th century artificial island, remains a popular tourist destination. The Uros in Peru are a group of pre-Inca people living on man-made islands in Lake Titicaca. The islands are fashioned out of totora reeds and anchored to the bottom of the lake with stakes attached to ropes.
One of the earlier modern artificial island built for the purpose to create a micronation, is the Republic of Minerva, built on the Minerva Reefs, though within months of declaring independence, Tonga invaded.[2][3][4] An earlier example is Republic of Rose Island, which was, in a hostile manner, taken over and destroyed by Italy.[5]
Wikipedia has related information at Land reclamation
The Republic of ... what?? - The true story of a man's short-lived man-made island country in the 1970s.
Ask Yahoo!: How are man-made islands actually made?
Has a section of the different types of oil rigs and how they are anchored
↑ Maria (2019-06-09). "A green island made of plastic bottles - The story of Richart Sowa" (in en-GB). https://greentravelife.com/a-green-island-made-of-plastic-bottles-the-story-of-richart-sowa/.
↑ http://www.cabinetmagazine.org/issues/18/newfoundlands.php
↑ http://www.queenoftheisles.com/HTML/Republic%20of%20Minerva.html
↑ https://reason.com/2008/08/01/artifact-hope-floats/
↑ When Italy went to war with the esperanto micro-nation Insulo de la Rozoj
Organelles are parts of cells. Each organelle has a specific function.
Surrounded by a nuclear envelope, which contains pores (holes)
Pores allow substances to move between the nucleus and the cytoplasm
They have a double membrane - the inner one is folded to form structures called cristae
Inside is the matrix, containing enzymes
They are the site of aerobic respiration
Makes energy in the form of ATP (adenosine triphosphate) as a source of energy for the cell's activities
Cristae give a bigger surface area so more enzymes can fit in
The diagram shows a section of a eukaryotic cell's mitochondrion.
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum is a system of membranes which enclose a fluid-filled space
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum synthesizes and processes lipids and carbohydrates
Rough endoplasmic reticulum folds and processes proteins that have been made at the ribosomes, transports proteins around the cell.
A group of fluid-filled, flattened sacs
Processes and packages new lipids and proteins
Once finished, it makes vesicles which transport the molecules to the edge of the cell for ejection
Makes lysosomes and also modification of the chemical components of the cell
Either floats free in the cytoplasm or is attached to rough endoplasmic reticulum
The site where protein synthesis takes place
Contains digestive enzymes which can be used to digest invading cells or break down worn-out organelles (autolysis)
These are folds in the plasma (cell surface) membrane
Stereotypically found on the villi in the small intestine
Increase the surface area of the plasma membrane
Chlorophyll captures photons of light used for photosynthesis
Refer to the below table for the differences between plant and animal cells.
Table 1: Comparison of structures between animal and plant cells
Eukaryotic cells are complex, and include all animal and plant cells. Prokaryotic cells are smaller and simpler, like bacteria.
~ 10-100 µm (sperm cells, apart from the tail, are smaller)
Convert to micrometers by multiplying by 1000.
Example: A micrograph shows mitochondrion 210mm magnified 2500x. What is its size in real life?
210mm x 1000 = 210,000 µm
52,000 µm ÷ 130 µm = 400x
Light rays travel through the specimen and 2 lenses
The objective lens provides the initial magnification of the image
The eyepiece lens magnifies and focuses the image
Transmission electron microscopes (T.E.M.) pass a beam of electrons through the specimen to produce an image on a fluorescent screen.
Scanning electron microscopes (S.E.M.) scan a beam of electrons over the specimen.
Electromagnets focus the image.
Electrons are produced from a tungsten filament at the top of a column.
The column is a vacuum. As a result, living specimens cannot be used.
The preparation of specimens for microscopes can be drastic, and can produce artefacts. Artefacts are things you see under a microscope, but aren't actually there in real life. This could be due to something like an air bubble.
Magnification refers to how much bigger the image is than the actual specimen.
Resolution refers to how well a microscope distinguishes two different points that are close together. If a microscope can't separate two objects, then increasing the magnification won't help.
S.E.M.
T.E.M.
Cell fractionation breaks apart cells and separates its organelles.
This breaks open the cells.
Usually done by vibrating the cells, or grinding them up in a blender.
It is done with a cold, isotonic buffer:
a buffer to prevent changes in pH levels.
Filter the solution through a gauze to remove debris e.g. large cell debris or tissue debris.
Spin the solution in a centrifuge at a low speed.
The heaviest organelles (nuclei, chloroplasts) fall the to the bottom.
The rest of the organelles stay suspended in the fluid above this sediment. This is the supernatant.
The supernatant is drained off, poured into another tube, and spun again at a higher speed.
This time, organelles like mitochondria and lysosomes fall to the bottom.
Again, the supernatant is drained off, poured into another tube and spun at a higher speed.
Finally, the lightest organelles remain.
Plasma membranes are located around the edge of animal cells and surround the cytoplasm and other organelles. They are made up of a phospholipid bilayer which consists of two layer of phospholipids with the hydrophilic heads on the outer layers and the hydrophobic tails on the inner layers.
The phospholipid bilayer contains intrinsic and extrinsic proteins. The intrinsic proteins go all the way through the bilayer whereas extrinsic proteins only go through the outer phospholipid layer.
Extrinsic Proteins are used for recognition of the cell and usually have a glycoprotein attached for the recognition.
Intrinsic Proteins are for allowing molecules through. Ways the proteins are designed to allow molecules through are: Protein pump, Protein Channel, Gated protein channel.
Cholera is a disease caused by a bacterium and is commonly found in contaminated water. Once ingested, the bacterium sits in the endothelium of the gut and sets up an cotransporter with Na+ (sodium) ions. This lowers the water potential of the gut, and means that water moves in down the concentration gradient. The person is constantly dehydrated and has wet, loose faeces. These effects can be countered with oral rehydration therapy and antibiotics.
Date and time functions in Visual Basic are treated here. See also VB6 Command Reference#Date and Time and Snippets#Useful Date Functions.
Now() - date and time of the present moment
Day() - day of the month, from 0 to 31
DateValue() - Given a timestamp, returns that timestamp with the time part cleared. Given a string, returns a timestamp with its date portion specified by that string.
TimeValue() - Given a timestamp, returns that timestamp with the date part cleared. Given a string, returns a timestamp with its time portion specified by that string.
If Weekday(Now) = vbSaturday Then MsgBox "It is Saturday."
Localized name of the week day.
Formatted = Format(Now, "yyyy-MM-dd") ' e.g. 2016-09-17
Date and Time can be treated as a variables to be read from and written to. However, writing to them changes system date or time, which you usually do not want to do.
Date Time Functions In Visual Basic, vb6.us
DateAdd Function - Visual Basic 6.0, chennaiiq.com
Formating dates and times in VB6, vb6.us
WeekdayName Function - Visual Basic 6.0, chennaiiq.com
Finding the Beginning or End of a Week, msdn.microsoft.com
DateDiff Function - Visual Basic 6.0, chennaiiq.com
A.3 What types of anarchism are there?
One thing that soon becomes clear to any one interested in anarchism is that there is not one single form of anarchism. Rather, there are different schools of anarchist thought, different types of anarchism which have many disagreements with each other on numerous issues. These types are usually distinguished by tactics and/or goals, with the latter (the vision of a free society) being the major division.
This means that anarchists, while all sharing a few key ideas, can be grouped into broad categories, depending on the economic arrangements that they consider to be most suitable to human freedom. However, all types of anarchists share a basic approach. To quote Rudolf Rocker:
"In common with the founders of Socialism, Anarchists demand the abolition of all economic monopolies and the common ownership of the soil and all other means of production, the use of which must be available to all without distinction; for personal and social freedom is conceivable only on the basis of equal economic advantages for everybody. Within the Socialist movement itself the Anarchists represent the viewpoint that the war against capitalism must be at the same time a war against all institutions of political power, for in history economic exploitation has always gone hand in hand with political and social oppression. The exploitation of man by man and the domination of man over man are inseparable, and each is the condition of the other." [Anarcho-Syndicalism, pp. 62–3]
It is within this general context that anarchists disagree. The main differences are between "individualist" and "social" anarchists, although the economic arrangements each desire are not mutually exclusive. Of the two, social anarchists (communist-anarchists, anarcho-syndicalists and so on) have always been the vast majority, with individualist anarchism being restricted mostly to the United States. In this section we indicate the differences between these main trends within the anarchist movement. As will soon become clear, while social and individualist anarchists both oppose the state and capitalism, they disagree on the nature of a free society (and how to get there). In a nutshell, social anarchists prefer communal solutions to social problems and a communal vision of the good society (i.e. a society that protects and encourages individual freedom). Individualist anarchists, as their name suggests, prefer individual solutions and have a more individualistic vision of the good society. However, we must not let these difference cloud what both schools have in common, namely a desire to maximise individual freedom and end state and capitalist domination and exploitation.
In addition to this major disagreement, anarchists also disagree over such issues as syndicalism, pacifism, "lifestylism," animal rights and a whole host of other ideas, but these, while important, are only different aspects of anarchism. Beyond a few key ideas, the anarchist movement (like life itself) is in a constant state of change, discussion and thought—as would be expected in a movement that values freedom so highly.
Consequently, it is to be expected that a social theory like anarchism would have numerous schools of thought and practice associated with it. Anarchism, as we noted in section A.5, has its roots in the struggles of working class people against oppression. Anarchist ideas have developed in many different social situations and, consequently, have reflected those circumstances. Most obviously, individualist anarchism initially developed in pre-industrial America and as a result has a different perspective on many issues than social anarchism. As America changed, going from a predominantly pre-capitalist rural society to an industrialised capitalist one, American anarchism changed:
"Originally the American movement, the native creation which arose with Josiah Warren in 1829, was purely individualistic; the student of economy will easily understand the material and historical causes for such development. But within the last twenty years the communist idea has made great progress, owning primarily to that concentration in capitalist production which has driven the American workingman [and woman] to grasp at the idea of solidarity, and, secondly, to the expulsion of active communist propagandists from Europe." [Voltairine de Cleyre, The Voltairine de Cleyre Reader, p. 110]
Thus rather than the numerous types of anarchism being an expression of some sort of "incoherence" within anarchism, it simply shows a movement which has its roots in real life rather than the books of long dead thinkers. It also shows a healthy recognition that people are different and that one person's dream may be another's nightmare and that different tactics and organisations may be required at different social periods and struggles. So while anarchists have their preferences on how they think a free society will, in general, be like and be created they are aware that other forms of anarchism and libertarian tactics may be more suitable for other people and social circumstances. However, just because someone calls themselves or their theory anarchism does not make it so. Any genuine type of anarchism must share the fundamental perspectives of the movement, in other words be anti-state and anti-capitalist.
Moreover, claims of anarchist "incoherence" by its critics are usually overblown. After all, being followers of Marx and/or Lenin has not stopped Marxists from splitting into numerous parties, groups and sects. Nor has it stopped sectarian conflict between them based on whose interpretation of the holy writings are the "correct" ones or who has used the "correct" quotes to bolster attempts to adjust their ideas and practice to a world significantly different from Europe in the 1850s or Russia in the 1900s. At least anarchists are honest about their differences!
Lastly, to put our cards on the table, the writers of this FAQ place themselves firmly in the "social" strand of anarchism. This does not mean that we ignore the many important ideas associated with individualist anarchism, only that we think social anarchism is more appropriate for modern society, that it creates a stronger base for individual freedom, and that it more closely reflects the sort of society we would like to live in.
For now, the only item information listed will be the sometimes hard to find info that never seems to be available on the fansites except lost in the forums. As I come across this information it will be posted here and somehow organized.
Note: Still a very rough work in progress. I am checking and cross checking this info with the official Lineage website and fansites as well as updating that which changed with and around C3.
Passive Components are components made from conductors
File:5G iPod line.jpg Fig. 1 - The latest iPod models handle not only music but also photos, music videos, audiobooks, podcasts, TV shows, full-length movies, video games, and more.
You probably know that the iPod is Apple's popular portable digital music player. These days, you can spot the signature white earbuds everywhere you go, and you've probably know that the latest models can play movies and photos in addition to music. But can you handle using an iPod, or should you let the technically inclined have all the fun? One of the reasons the iPod is so successful is that it's very easy to use. If you ever feel uncertain, just use this chapter.
There are six different models of Apple's flagship iPod. While their branding refers to them all simply as "iPod", Apple's support team refers to them by most important new trait in each new model:
iPod with Scroll Wheel - This iPod's wheel actually moves under your finger. It is white.
iPod with Touch Wheel - This iPod's wheel is white and touch sensitive, but its buttons are not. It is white.
iPod with Dock Connector - This iPod has four touch-sensitive buttons lined up above the wheel. It is white.
iPod with Click Wheel - This iPod has its buttons inside the wheel, which is grey. It has a black and white screen. It is white (except U2 edition, see below).
iPod with Color Display - This iPod is identical to the iPod with Click Wheel, but has a color screen. It is white (except U2 edition, see below)
iPod with Video Playback (current) - This iPod supports video playback, and has a large color screen. It comes in black or white (plus U2 edition, see below),
NOTE: The iPod with Video Playback, iPod with Click Wheel, and iPod with Color Display have all had special "iPod U2 Special Edition" models produced. These special iPods are black with a red wheel, and have the signatures of U2's members on the back, but are otherwise identical to their standard counterparts. The iPod with Video Playback also comes in black with a black wheel, but this is a standard color, and not a U2 iPod. Also note that the iPod with Color Display was at one point sold as the "iPod photo".
In addition, Apple has produced three spin-off iPods:
iPod mini - This iPod is made of silver, blue, pink, green, or gold-colored aluminum. It has a black-and white screen.
iPod shuffle (current) - This iPod does not have a screen.
First Generation - White, and about the size of a stick of gum.
Second Generation (current) - Made of silver, blue, pink, green, or orange-colored aluminum. It has a built-in clip.
iPod nano (current) - This iPod is as thin as a pencil and has a color screen.
First Generation - White or black front with a mirror-like back.
Second Generation (current) - Made of silver, blue, pink, green, or black-colored aluminum.
It is important to know your iPod's model when setting it up or using it with iTunes.
The iPods with a screen are the iPod, iPod Video And the iPod Nano.
A computer is needed to use an iPod
(if you have an iPod, but no software you can download iTunes Now at http://www.apple.com/itunes/overview/
The 30g iPod Video holds 7,500 songs & 40 videos,
The 80g iPod Video holds 15,500 songs & 60 videos,
The 1g iPod Nano holds 100 songs & 1 12min video and
The 2g iPod Nano holds 180 songs & 2 12min videos.
More info: ExplodingCinema.org
I've only been to one Exploding Cinema event but it was excellent. Apparently they show EVERY film they're sent, which I find amazing because the films were some of the best I've seen for a long while. A thrilling mix of all sorts of films: from obscure and arty to comic and mainstream. They EC crew did a great job with the venue - they had loads of old 8mm projects setup all round the place playing loops of 70s porn and stuff! Brilliant night out - highly recommended. - Dan AKA Jack 03-02-2005
Rule 501. General Rule
Except as otherwise required by the Constitution of the United States or provided by Act of Congress or in rules prescribed by the Supreme Court pursuant to statutory authority, the privilege of a witness, person, government, State, or political subdivision thereof shall be governed by the principles of the common law as they may be interpreted by the courts of the United States in the light of reason and experience. However, in civil actions and proceedings, with respect to an element of a claim or defense as to which State law supplies the rule of decision, the privilege of a witness, person, government, State, or political subdivision thereof shall be determined in accordance with State law.
Privilege is an important evidentiary rule, and there was a movement to codify key privileges in the Federal Rules of Evidence. But this movement did not succeed, and today's rules do not expressly state which privileges are recognized and which are not. The privileges themselves remain common law—traditional rules which are periodically redefined by the courts.
The privileges that may be invoked in federal court include:
Covers all communications between an attorney, their client, and any other associates within the scope of the attorney's representation of the client. The client waives the privilege if they disclose the privileged information to a third party. There are several exceptions: the attorney may break privilege to prevent the client's commission of a dangerous criminal offense, and should break privilege when he or she knows that the client is lying to the court. The attorney can also use privileged information to rectify any fraudulent or criminal behavior perpetrated by the client with the attorney's unknowing assistance. Attorney-client privilege can also be broken when there is an issue of the attorney breaking his or her duty to the client (malpractice) or of the client breaking his or her duty to the attorney (failure to pay fees). See Proposed Rule 503, which was rejected by Congress but contains good guidelines to the scope of the attorney-client privilege.
Confidential communications between spouses within the martial context are subject to spousal privilege.
Under common law, a penitent may keep their disclosures to their priest under privilege. (The privilege belongs to the priest under Catholic canon law, and may only be broken with a dispensation from the cardinal, which can only be obtained with the permission of the Pope.)
This decoder is used to switch point motors, signals and uncoupler tracks. It supports both the Märklin and DCC digital protocols. The M83 controls 8 separate outputs. identified by coloured LED's
The m84 is therefore capable of of controlling 4 points (switches in US?) each point needing to use 2 outputs, or it can control 8 uncouplers or a mixture of these. The address of each unit is best set by dip switches leading to 4 in sequence addresses per decoder.
The m83 decoder derives it electrical power by:
M83 maximum current load = 3 amps
The m83 decoder is capable of replacing four 74461 under the track decoders, and at current prices of approx 30 Euros for the m83 and approx 20 Euros for just one under the carpet decoder that makes using the m83 considerable saving.
Effectively each point motor 74461 is wired back to the m83 with three wires - a common and two others for either straight through or to the turning.
The m83 when directed by the mobile station hand controller sends a brief pulse to effect the switch. Continued pressing of the controllers button, does not lead to an extended pulse. The pulse settings can be updated from the mobile station controller
The Free High School Science Texts: A Textbook for High School Students Studying Physics
Permanent Magnets - Electromagnetism - Magnetic Units of Measurement - Electromagnetic Induction - Alternating Current - Measurements of AC Magnitude
"frequency." In music, frequency is the same as pitch, which is the essential property distinguishing one note from another.
However, we encounter a measurement problem if we try to express how large or small an AC quantity is. With DC, where quantities of
One way to express the intensity, or magnitude (also called the amplitude), of an AC quantity is to measure its peak height
Fhsst electromag23.png
Another way is to measure the total height between opposite peaks. This is known as the peak-to-peak (P-P) value of an AC
Fhsst electromag24.png
Unfortunately, either one of these expressions of waveform amplitude can be misleading when comparing two different types of waves. For
Fhsst electromag25.png
Fhsst electromag26.png
This, of course, will be true for any waveform having equal-area portions above and below the "zero" line of a plot. However, as a
Fhsst electromag27.png
Polarity-insensitive mechanical meter movements (meters designed to respond equally to the positive and negative half-cycles of an
Another method of deriving an aggregate value for waveform amplitude is based on the waveform's ability to do useful work when applied to a
Consider a bandsaw and a jigsaw, two pieces of modern woodworking equipment. Both types of saws cut with a thin, toothed, motor-powered
The comparison of alternating current (AC) to direct current (DC) may be likened to the comparison of these two saw types:
Fhsst electromag28.png
Despite the fact that these different saws move their blades in different manners, they are equal in one respect: they all cut wood,
Picture a jigsaw and bandsaw side-by-side, equipped with identical blades (same tooth pitch, angle, etc.), equally capable of cutting the
AC voltage or current: whatever magnitude of DC voltage or current would produce the same amount of heat energy dissipation through an
Fhsst electromag29.png
Suppose we were to wrap a coil of insulated wire around a loop of ferromagnetic material and energize this coil with an AC voltage
Fhsst electromag30.png
As an inductor, we would expect this iron-core coil to oppose the applied voltage with its inductive reactance, limiting current through
a more detailed look at the interactions of voltage, current, and magnetic flux in the device.
Kirchhoff's voltage law describes how the algebraic sum of all voltages in a loop must equal zero. In this example, we could apply
From where does this opposing voltage arise? If the load were a resistor, the opposing voltage would originate from the "friction" of
Michael Faraday discovered the mathematical relationship between magnetic flux (
)and induced voltage with this equation:
The instantaneous voltage (voltage dropped at any instant in time) across a wire coil is equal to the number of turns of that coil around
Fhsst electromag31.png
Magnetic flux through a ferromagnetic material is analogous to current through a conductor: it must be motivated by some force in order to
A comparison of "Ohm's Law" for electric and magnetic circuits:
In our example, the mmf required to produce this changing magnetic flux (
) must be supplied by a changing current through the coil.
Magnetomotive force generated by an electromagnet coil is equal to the amount of current through that coil (in amps) multiplied by the number
Fhsst electromag32.png
This is why alternating current through an inductor lags the applied voltage waveform by
It should be mentioned that the current through an iron-core inductor is not perfectly sinusoidal (sine-wave shaped), due to the nonlinear
B/H magnetization curve of iron. In fact, if the inductor is cheaply built, using as little iron as possible, the magnetic flux density
Fhsst electromag33.png
When a ferromagnetic material approaches magnetic flux saturation, disproportionately greater levels of magnetic field force (mmf) are
). Because mmf is proportional to current through the magnetizing coil
The situation is further complicated by energy losses within the iron core. The effects of hysteresis and eddy currents conspire to further
/dt magnetization plus hysteresis losses, eddy current losses, etc.) is called the exciting current. The distortion of an
As we've seen already in the inductors chapter, having a current waveform
Fhsst electromag34.png
If this secondary coil experiences the same magnetic flux change as the primary (which it should, assuming perfect containment of the
Fhsst electromag35.png
P.01 - Front Cover
Registered at the G.P.O., Sydney, for transmission by post as a periodical.
P.01 - Rola Ad
P.02 - Crown Radio Products Ad
P.03 - Contents Banner
P.03 - Publication Notes
Editor, Publisher, Proprietor — A. G. HULL, 336 Waverley Rd., East Malvern, Vic.
Short-wave Editor — L. J. KEAST, 23 Honiton Rd. West, Carlingford, N.S.W.
Ham Notes By — D. B. KNOCK (VK2NO), 43 Yanko Av., Waverley, N.S.W.
Advertising Representative — W. J. LEWIS, 20 Queen St., Melbourne, 'Phone MU5154
Subscription Rates: 6 issues - 5/3; 12 issues - 10/6; 24 issues - £1; Post free to any address in the world.
Address for all correspondence: Australasian Radio World, 336 Waverley Rd., East Malvern, SE5 Victoria
Printed by Bridge Printery Pty. Ltd., 117 Reservoir Street, Sydney, N.S.W., for the proprietor of the "Australasian Radio World," Elizabeth St., Sydney (Footnote P.36)
Circuits — The Sober way . . . . 7
Improving DX Performance . . . . 13
New "Ham" Technique . . . . 5
"Wireless Set Number Ten" . . . . 14
How Radio Signals are Broadcast . . . . 17
The Growth of the Radar Chain . . . . 23
Ham Notes — Calling CQ . . . . 27
Notes From My Diary . . . . 31
It is high time the authorities took a more realistic view of the relationship between radio and foreign spies. Twenty years ago it was reasonable enough to expect to find that every enemy spy, in books of course, had a radio transmitter with which to pass on the secret codes. But in these enlightened days it is quite ridiculous to find that a special form has to be filled in before a type 807 valve can be purchased, apparently to prevent it being put to nefarious uses by enemy agents! Any person with the remotest knowledge of radio transmitting should be able to appreciate that any old 6L6 will do exactly the same job as the 807 for the brief space of time which a spy would need to send his messages. The 807 would have a life of so many thousand hours, whilst the 6L6 would be so overloaded that its life might be curtailed to a few hundred hours, but would that worry the spy? Any spy worthy of the name could make up a most effective transmitter from receiver parts, so why the fancy forms for the poor 807, for condensers of high voltage rating and so on? Then again in the matter of penalties. If an over-enthusiastic lad can't wait to turn 18 in order to get his ham licence and goes on the air as a pirate, he commits a crime far worse than burglary or arson. Apparently it is still another echo of the bad old days when spies used radio transmitters! How many decades will it be before Those-in-Charge recognise radio transmitting as a reasonable hobby for intelligent people? A. G. HULL.
P.07 - Constructional - Circuits — The Sober way
P.23 - Technical - The Growth of the Radar Chain
P.34 - The Service Pages - Answers
A "module" is a group of related programs performing a major function within an ERP. In a few cases modules contain sub-modules.
Click here to return to the United States Postage Meter Stamp Catalog
NOTE: All the stamps listed here are valid only on the date generated. Variable-rate vending-machine stamps with unrestricted validity, i.e. savable for future use, behave more like traditional stamps than meter stamps and thus are not cataloged here. PV stamps with unrestricted validity are cataloged in USA: Variable Denomination Stamps (1989-2015) by Karim Roder (available on Amazon).
In the late 1930s the Post Office Department gave Pitney Bowes approval to test and develop coin-operated self-service postage meters for use in public places such as railroad stations, department stores, hotels, and post office lobbies. The company's "Mailomat"© was the only such machine available for nearly forty years. Starting in the late 1960s Pitney Bowes began removing Mailomats due to diminished demand, and by 1970 all but one machine (located in the lobby of Pitney Bowes headquarters in Stamford, CT) had been withdrawn from service.
In the early 1970s, perceiving what appeared to be an opportunity, other companies introduced their own versions of self-service public access variable rate stamp vending machines. Virtually all them failed due to the insufficient demand that drove Pitney Bowes out of the market. Most of these experiments lasted only a matter of months or a few years at best. It was not until 2003 when the United States Postal Service approved a machine developed by Wincor Nixdorf and IBM that a successful variable rate stamp vending machine came into use. The Wincor Nixdorf-IBM stamps are not date restricted and so are not cataloged here. (See the Roder catalog for these stamps.)
Sub-group PV-A: Pitney Bowes "Mailomat"
The term "Mailomat" is copyrighted by Pitney Bowes which produced the machines that generated the stamps listed in this section.
The self-standing Mailomats were essentially an enclosed coin-operated postage meter mounted on a U.S. Mail deposit box. Later versions, called "Screenline" Mailomats, were flush mounted on the walls of larger post offices.
The customer inserted his envelope or post card into a slot for direct franking. No adhesive tapes were used. A few Mailomat franks are known on tape. These were created by collectors who would affix a blank tape to a cover before franking.
Mailomats located in post offices showed "P O" or "POST OFFICE" in the town mark. All others had routine TOWN/STATE town marks.
Most Mailomat stamps were printed in red, but a few machines, especially during the Christmas holiday season when the use of red envelopes was common, made temporary use of purple ink.
Most early Mailomat meters were upgraded from their first stamp dies to more modern dies. Thus we have the same meter numbers listed with two or more stamp types, i.e meter 51002 is found with both Types PV-A2.2 and PV-A3.2 stamps.
The machines were fitted with a variety of postage ranges. With the exception of the very first machine (type PV-A1) the range first used was 1 cent to 23 cents. Later a ½ cent option was added but it was available one as 1½, 11½, 21½, and 31½ cents, i.e. attached to a "1" digit. Beginning in 1959 when the basic post card rate was increased from 1 cent to 2 cents, the value range was changed to 2 cents to 39 cents.
PV-A1. Pitney Bowes "Mailomat" prototype, October 14, 1936 to October 11, 1937.[S]
The term was copyrighted by Pitney Bowes to represent their coin-operated vending machines.
This first design is a small rectangle with simulated perforation frame surrounding a circular town mark at left and vertical value box at right.
One machine only: P. B. METER 100 STAMFORD / CONN.
PV-A2.1. Pitney Bowes "Mailomat" prototype (MV), 20 December 1937 to 25 August 1938. [R]
Frank is wider than Type PV-A1 with spread-winged eagle facing right between the town mark and the value box.
One machine only: P.B. METER 101 STAMFORD / CONN.
Similar to Type PV-A2 but the eagle is facing left.
Three stars are above the eagle, and "U.S. POSTAGE" is curved at the top of the value box.
Meter number with "P.B. METER" prefix below the eagle.
Two machines only, one used in two locations:
A. P.B. METER 101 STAMFORD / CONN. In use six days, March 31 to April 5, 1939 at the Stamford Connecticut post office. [RRR]
B. P.B. METER 51001 NEW YORK / N.Y. Used at the New York General Post Office starting May 17, 1939. [R]
V/F: . 00 (range: .01 to .23)a. As B, with "P" and "O" at sides of TM (identifies a machine located in a post office lobby) (first day of use probably June 20, 1939) [R]NOTES:
Meter 101 is known with town mark "NEW YORK / N.Y.". The stamps are proofs generated in a demonstration of the Mailomat in New York in January 1939. They are not known used on actual mail. [RRRR]
Meter 51001 was demonstrated National Convention of Postmasters in Washington D.C., October 10-12, 1939. Many of them are dated October 9 before the show opened. These were used for demonstration purposes only and are not known used on actual mail. Thus it is considered a proof. [RRR] (See Type PV-A2.3A. This meter was also demonstrated at the Postmasters convention but it was used on actual mail.)
The stamp is identical to Type GB2.1 except for the meter number.
Similar to Type PV-A2 but the eagle is larger and has no stars above its head.
"US POSTAGE" appears in a ribbon above the value figures.
The meter number, with "P.B. METER" prefix, is in a sausage shaped panel below the eagle.
Value figures are of variable thickness with serifs.
A. P.B. METER 51002 WASHINGTON / D.C. Used October 9-12, 1939 at the National Association of Postmasters Convention. [RRR]
B. P.B. METER 51002 NEW YORK / N.Y. Moved to Macy's Department Store. In use from December 6, 1939 to December 16, 1940 [R]
This stamp was produced by the first production model Mailomat.
It is identical to Type GB2.2 except for the meter number and is nearly identical to Type PV-A2.3 but has sanserif value figures with lines of equal thickness.
Meter numbers: 51003 through 51029 (not all numbers used). The first meter of this type, 51003, was, as was Type PV-A2.3B, installed in Macy's Department Store in New York City.
V/F: . 00 : (range: .00 to .23)a. With "P" and "O" at the sides of the town mark (indicating the machine was located in a post office lobby)
b. With inverted slogan at left: 51006 [RRRR]
The stamp is identical to Type IA3 except for the meter number.
Meter numbers 51002 through 51043 (not all numbers used)
Meter 51004 (shown) was used briefly May 3-6, 1940 for the Postage Stamp Centenary celebration. Excepting this use the stamp was first placed into service in 1942.
a. With "P" and "O" at the sides of the town mark
b. With "POST OFFICE" at bottom of the town mark: (51034, 51038) [R]
c. Printed in purple rather than red (usually done at the end of the year when holiday card were often mailed in red envelopes)
The stamp is identical to Type IA4.1 except for the meter number.
Meter numbers 51044 through 51171 (not all numbers used)
V/F: ≋ 00 : (range: .01 to .39)a. With "P" and "O" at the sides of the town mark
b. With "POST OFFICE" at bottom of the town mark: (51052, 51094) [R]NOTES:
Variety a was generated by both self-standing Mailomat kiosks and "Screenline" Mailomats. The Screenline machines were flush mounted on the walls of several larger post offices. The earliest use of a Screenline meter was probably in 1954. One cover is known from that year. Screenline and kiosk stamps look alike and cannot be distinguished from each other unless an appropriate notation was made on the cover by the mailer. The lowest meter number identified as a Screenline is 51083. Some numbers originally assigned to stand-alone Mailomats were transferred to Screenline machines.
Small design similar to sub-group IB.
Large eagle in center facing right with head above narrow value box.
One machine only: P.B. METER 52000 STAMFORD / CONN.
Sub-group PV-B: National Cash Register "Austin" Self-Service Meter
In 1971 a coin-operated self-service "parcel post" machine was installed in the lobby of the main post office in Austin Texas. Unlike the Mailomat the NCR machine provided a weight scale and issued adhesive stamps.
Similar to Type EE1.4 but without "Z.Wt." at left.
Inscribed "NCR Meter 0001" over "SELF-SERVICE METER".
Only two covers are known franked by this stamp, one large non-philatelic cover plus a collector mailed cover with stamp not tied by postmark.
Sub-group PV-C: Design & Development "Parcel Post Mailing Facility"
Design & Development, Inc. was a subsidiary of the Booz, Allan, Hamilton Corporation. It designed and built one self-service variable rate stamp vending machine that was trialed at the main post office in Jacksonville Florida starting on May 14, 1973. The machine included a balance for weighing letters and packages and could handle both first and fourth class (parcel post) mail plus assorted services such as special delivery.
Due to frequent mechanical breakdown the machine was removed from service after 37 days of service, on June 20th 1973.
PV-C1. Design & Development, Inc. "Parcel Post Mailing Facility" (MV), used for 37 days from 14 May to 20 June 1973. [RRR]
Frameless design printed through a ribbon onto large, 72 mm wide labels.
A column of small stars bisects the stamp vertically.
Left of the stars are "US POSTAGE" / "POSTAGE" / mail class and services / year and month / "JACKSONVILLE, FL" / and USPS eagle logo.
Right of the stars are the total postage amount / postage values per service / time of day / meter number "0000 01" / and transaction number at bottom.
The stamp is printed through a purple ribbon onto pink paper with a canary yellow carbonless backing sheet used as a receipt. Miscuts were common.
The stamp impressions normally are indistinct and tend to fade. Shown at top is a fairly good example in natural color and at right a black and white image with the image enhanced. Also shown is a stamp faded nearly to extinction but with a special postmark that was used to stamp mail franked by the machine.
Most examples known are philatelic without the special postmark. Covers with the postmark are extremely rare. [RRRR]
Sub-group PV-D: Pi Electronics "Zipster Plus"
Pi Electronics of Houston Texas developed a self-service mailing center to provide about every postal service conceivable without actually having to enter a post office. Their aim was to assist mailers who needed services when post offices were closed. The machines were placed in convenience stores such as 7-Eleven and Star Mart. They could process both letters and parcels, and they offered Express Mail, Certified Mail, and international airmail in addition to regular first class mail.
The system utilized a Hasler postage meter that produced stamps on self-adhesive tape. "Zipster" stamps are identical to other Hasler stamps (Type LB1.1A in this catalog) and can be identified only by the meter number. See the list below.
The slogan "This Item Sent By: ZIPSTER..." was used by Pi Electroncis in demonstrations but it is not known if the slogan was also used on publically vended stamps.
Earliest known use is 1 April 1992. The Zipster Plus system was in operation only a few months before being discontinued due to lack of use.
The stamp is identical to Type LB1.1A but with the town and meter number combinations listed below.
Thirty-four and possibly other unidentified Hasler meters were used in kiosks fielded in five cities across the United States.
It is possible the same meter was used in more than one kiosk and that one kiosk may have been fitted with different meters at different times.
Kiosks in Indianapolis were in use only a few weeks before being removed. Machines in Denver and San Antonio lasted only a little longer. The removed systems may have been redeployed to other locations.
A Specimen meter similar to Type LA1 was used for demonstration purposes. It had an all zero meter number.
The kiosks offered a self-adhesive promotional label (shown at right) that users could apply to their mail.
Sub-group PV-E: ASM Services "Automated Shipping Machine"
In a test similar to that of the "Zipster Plus" (PV-D) ASM Services, Inc. of Florida deployed a small but undetermined number of public access meter-franking self-service kiosks in Winn-Dixie Supermarkets in and around Tampa Florida in 1992. As with the Zipsters the ASM system contained a standard Hasler postage meter. Services available in the ASM kiosk were express mail, priority mail, and parcel post only. Remarkably no provision was made for regular first class mail.
As with the Zipster the ASM stamps are identical to normal Hasler stamps and can be identified only by the meter number. Not all the numbers have been identified.
The stamp is identical to Type LB1.1A but with the town and meter number combinations listed below.
Doucumented are seven Hasler meters were used in kiosks located in Tampa and Temple Terrace Florida. Others may have been used.
Sub-group PV-F: Pitney Bowes "National Postal Museum"
When the National Postal Museum of the Smithsonian Institution opened in Washington DC on July 28, 1993 two self-service coin-operated meter stamp vending machines were available for franking souvenir post cards. The only postage options available were the three (later four) post card rates for domestic, Canada/Mexico (later Canada and Mexico when the rates diverged), and rest-of-world destinations. These postage values were changed as the postal rates were updated in succeeding years.
The machines contained standard Pitney Bowes model A900 (Type IG1, later Type IG2) postage meters. The stamps can be identified by the meter number and also by the unique slogan that always printed with the stamps. The meters were swapped out over the years so we have several meter numbers although only two kiosks.
The two machines each printed a different slogan, originally one showing the Museum building and the other picturing the post office mascot dog, "Olney". A third slogan commemorating the 15th anniversary of the National Postal Museum was introduced later.
Stamp as Type IG1, used in two meter stamp vending machines located in the National Postal Museum.
Known meter numbers: 8068644, 8083391, 8083664, 8083937
Original value set: ≋0 .19 / ≋0 .30 / ≋0 .40
This is a successor to the original meter stamp design used in the National Postal Museum kiosks.
Very similar to Type PV-F1 but the stamp is as Type IG2.
The stamp is slightly wider than PV-F1 and has two wing feathers instead of three above the town mark at left.
Known meter numbers: 8392417, 8422053
Sub-group PV-G: Hasler "Postcard Express"
One kiosk was located in the Minnesota Tourism display in the Mall of America in Bloomington Minnesota. Customers could buy a post card, type in the address and a message which the machine would print on a large label applied to the post card and then print the postage from a standard Hasler meter inside the machine.
Stamp as Type LB1.1C.
One meter only: H474216 MINNEAPOLIS / MN
Examples on ControlTheoryPro.com
CTRL+FKEY - Sort Faces. The faces of the active Mesh Object are sorted, based on the current view in the 3DWindow. The leftmost face first, the rightmost last. The sequence of faces is important for the Build Effect (AnimButtons).
FKEY - creates segment/edge/face. If two vertices are selected, create an edge connecting the two vertices. If three or four vertices are selected, or two edges are selected, create a face connecting the vertices or edges. If two co-planar faces are selected, join the faces to create an FGon, or dismantle a previously created FGon.
ALT+FKEY - Beauty Fill. The edges of all the selected triangular faces are switched in such a way that equally sized faces are formed. This operation is 2D; various layers of polygons must be filled in succession. The Beauty Fill can be performed immediately after a Fill.
CTRL+FKEY - (Pre-Blender-2.5) Flip faces, selected triangular faces are paired and common edge of each pair swapped.
SHIFT+FKEY - Fill selected. All selected vertices that are bound by edges and form a closed polygon are filled with triangular faces. Holes are automatically taken into account. This operation is 2D; various layers of polygons must be filled in succession.
Callbacks provide a means of hooking into an ActiveRecord object's lifecycle.
There are four types of callbacks accepted by the callback macros:
Inline eval methods (using a string) - deprecated.
Method references and callback objects are the recommended approaches, inline methods using a proc are sometimes appropriate (such as for creating mix-ins) and inline eval methods are deprecated.
The method reference callbacks work by specifying a protected or private method available in the object, like this:
The callback objects have methods named after the callback, called with the record as the only parameter such as:
So you specify the object you want messaged on a given callback. When that callback is triggered the object has a method by the name of the callback messaged.
The callback macros usually accept a symbol for the method they’re supposed to run, but you can also pass a "method string" which will then be evaluated within the binding of the callback. Example:
Notice that single plings (’) are used so the #{id} part isn’t evaluated until the callback is triggered. Also note that these inline callbacks can be stacked just like the regular ones:
'puts "Evaluated after parents are destroyed"'
Once the active record object saved some method will be fired in that scenario we have to use the after_save callback.
Called after creating new object and just before saving the records
The following callbacks are partially documented. Their use is discouraged because of [1] performance issues.
The after_find callback is only executed if there is an explicit implementation in the model class. It will be called for each object returned from a find, and thus can potentially affect performance as noted in the [1] Rails API Documentation.
The after_initialize method is only executed if there is an explicit implementation in the model class. It will be called whenever an ActiveRecord model is initialized. It will be called for each object returned from a find, and thus can potentially affect performance as noted in the [1] Rails API documentation.
↑ a b c "Because after_find and after_initialize are called for each object found and instantiated by a finder, such as Base.find(:all), we’ve had to implement a simple performance constraint (50% more speed on a simple test case). Unlike all the other callbacks, after_find and after_initialize will only be run if an explicit implementation is defined (def after_find). In that case, all of the callback types will be called."
Essentially there are five references to a life after death: the quantum physics (Professor Dürr), the near death research (Pam Reynolds), the after death research (Karmapa), the reincarnation cases (Shanti Devi) and the statements of the enlightened (the clairvoyant). There are many facts that point to the survival of the soul after death. The more one looks at the current science, the more appear inexplicable things for a materialistic world view.
Quantum physics has proven by physical tests that a higher dimension in the universe exists (Alain Aspect). The former head of the Max Planck Institute for Physics in Munich, Professor Hans-Peter Dürr believes that the brain by thinking forms a field of consciousness (quantum field) that can exist after the death of the body in the higher dimension further.
You are 78 years old. Do you believe in for afterlife? Is there existence after death? Professor Dürr: "That is an interesting question. What we consider the here and now, this world, it is actually just the material level that is comprehensible. The beyond is an infinite reality that is much bigger. Which this world is rooted in. In this way, our lifes in this plane of existence are encompassed, surrounded, by the afterworld already. When planning I imagine that I have written my existence in this world on a sort of hard drive on the tangible (the brain), that I have also transferred this data onto the spiritual quantum field, then I could say that when I die, I do not lose this information, this conscioiusness. The body dies but the spiritual quantum field continues. In this way, I am immortal. "(P.M. Magazin 05/2007)
Death arrives.
During their lives on Earth, blind people can sometimes suddenly see from the other side. They can observe what happens on earth from the beyond. How could a blind person suddenly get knocked unconscious during the course of a car accident and then be able to see other people in the area of the accident and then describe the circumstances after being revived?
Especially well-known is the so-called dentures incident. An older man was taken to a hospital in the Netherlands to be operated. His dentures were taken out so that his throat could be more easily accessed. During the hustle and bustle of the operation, a nurse misplaced the dentures and couldn’t find them. Luckily, the man left his body during the operation and watched the nurse from above. After he returned to consciousness, the man was able to tell the nurse exactly where she had put his dentures.
In 1975 Raymond Moody wrote the book „Life After Death“. In this book, he documented the near-death experiences of 150 people. Many reported that after death they travelled through a dark tunnel and then arrived at a dimension of light. In the light world, they met holy light beings and even their already death relatives. They learned things they didn’t know before. After their near-death experiences, many people changed their lives completely and then oriented themselves around spirituality.
Many researchers have looked into the insight of Kübler-Ross and Moody. With a flood of arguments against these findings, the researchers tried to prove the near-death researchers wrong. The typical argument of such naysayers was usually that the near-death visions were biochemical (material) or psychic reactions of the mind caused by nearing death. Before death, it is alleged, humans have hallucinations. The brain reacts to death with a flood of hormones.
One of these main critics was Dr. Michael Sabom. After he read Moody’s book, he stated that he had looked into these matters thoroughly himself. He interviewed over a hundred patients, who after experiencing cardiac arrest, were revived. Sabom was amazed to find that these people had seen things outside of their bodies which they didn’t know before, that they witnessed things while unconscious.
The biggest scientific breakthrough for Sabom occurred in 1991 with Pam Reynolds. The special aspect of the case of Pam Reynolds lies with the fact that modern measurement equipment showed that the consciousness of a person exists even when the stuff of the brain is shut off. This leads one to conclude that there must be an independent consciousness separate from the body. The body and soul are two independent manifestations of energy.
1991 the 35 year-old Pam Reynolds underwent a brain operation. Her blood was routed from her brain and she was placed in a state of artificial coma. Her head was attached with wires to measure brain waves. It was ascertained that no brain waves could travel during this half an hour. The thought processes were blocked, and examined as no hormone release could occur. Hallucinations were not possible in this state. And it just so happened that Pam Reynolds had her out of body experience at this time.
She floated with her soul out of her body. She observed from above all of the details of her operation. She then floated through a tunnel to a world of light. There, she met her dead grandmother and other people. The beings there lived in a paradise dimension and possessed positive energy. With their energy, they strengthened Ms. Reynolds so that she could go through her operation successfully. In a BBC interview, Pam Reynolds explained that she had experienced the breath of God.
In 2003, a program appeared on German television dealing with the topic of near-death research. Regine Kexel portrayed the arguments of the supporters and opponents of the soul theory according to the book Dimension Psi from Walter von Lucadou and came to the conclusion that there are many reports about near death research that cannot simply be ignored.
Regine Kexel presented the aforementioned arguments, and all the arguments of the opponents to the soul theory were refuted. The independence of the consciousness is currently the accepted view of science, in the words of Regine Kexel (translated from German): “Critics of near-death research are hard pressed to find a plausible reason for this phenomenon.”.
According to her opinion, we are positioned at the very beginning of a large puzzle. Here is where we must differ. Those who are concerned with spirituality already have an answer to the presented questions. The enlightened masters of the past have discovered the mysteries. One only needs to look further to find an answer to these questions.
For example, it is not entirely clear to the program moderator Kexel as to why not all those who brush with death go through have a near death experience as described. With adults, 30% go through this, and children to a percentage of 70%. The explanation for this is that most adults are so tied with their consciousness to their physical bodies that they remain in their bodies in these near death situations. Children have yet to really connect their spirits with their material bodies in such a strong way, and for this reason they leave their bodies more easily.
Careful consideration also raises the question as to why, when the reason for these near death experiences is only due to hormones and a lack of oxygen, and hallucinations, then do children and adults have such an unbelievable difference in the rate with which these near death experiences occur?
Dancing death.
Enlightened Tibetan masters traditionally stay in their bodies for three days after death. This is recognized by the fact that their bodies do not begin to decompose and that the heart chakra is warm. This fact can be explained with the continuation of life after death. The 16th Karmapa died in 1981 in a hospital in Chicago. He stayed three days after his death with his soul in his body. The body did not rot in that time and the heart region was warm. Dr. Levy cared for him until his death:
„48 hours after his death, his chest was still warm. In this moment, my hands were both warm, and his chest was warmer than my hand. In order to test this, I moved my hands to the side of his chest, away from his heart, and there it was cold. I then felt the middle again, and above his heart it was warm. I pinched his skin and found that it was still elastic and completely normal. After 36 hours, the dead typically have skin comparable to dough. And his skin was still like that of the living after 48 hours. It was as if he weren’t dead. Shortly after we left the room, the surgeon came and said, „ he is warm, he is warm.“ And then it came to be that the medical staff asked again and again if he were still warm. It was naturally consistent to the traditional Tibetan experience. Developed individuals like his Holiness stay in their bodies after breath and heartbeat have stopped, within a state of deep meditation. After three days the Samadhi ended. It was recognized that his Holiness was no longer warm and that the process of death set in. After this, the atmosphere changed, it too became normal.”(Quotes buddhismus-heute.de)
Vishnu and his many lifes.
The reincarnation research approaches more and more to the fact that there are past lives. Thousands of reports were investigated . The witnesses could accurately describe the previous places and situations, although they were never there and had heard nothing about it in the normal way. The most well-known reincarnation researcher in the West is Professor Ian Stevenson from the University of Virginia. He examined over the course of 40 years over 3.000 reincarnations situations throughout the world. Often, he noticed similarities in behavior and bodily signals in line with the former incarnation.
Nobody60, "My beliefs are based mainly on my own experiences. I have seen thousand previous lives in the course of my spiritual cleansing processes. After seven years as a Yogi, I was suddenly overcome by the wish to know my earlier life. I went back in my meditation to a previous time and felt resonance with a particular time. I felt a sort of resistance, and looked in that direction and could spiritually “see” four earlier lives. After eleven years as a Yogi, many former lives came in dreams to the surface of my consciousness. Differing from the conscious perceptions while meditating, very clear film-like scenes- appeared. I could see the details of the situations and the environment I was in at the time of the previous life. From the single pictures I could see geographical details."(The Science of Proving God’s Existence)
Enlightened Buddha.
Who is enlightened can, thanks to its expanded consciousness, look in the beyond and know the life after death. One might think that the enlightened are imagining their perceptions. Against this speak, however, the attempts with the clairvoyants. The American professor Gary Schwartz tested the most well-known mediums of the United States from 1998 to 2001. The mediums could experience the beyond with their spirits and make contact with the dead. Gary Schwartz compared their statements about distanced things with a control group of average people. The medium had a ratio of correct answers of 83%, whereas the control group got only 36%. If the mediums know things far away it is very possible, that also their knowing about things in the beyond is correct. (Bernard Jakoby, Wir sterben nie, (2009).)
Blessing Buddha.
In the year of 2001, a German Yogi saw himself as a jellyfish in a dream. This jellyfish was about to be eaten by a sea spider. The little jellyfish could not escape the spider, as it was stuck between the long legs of the giant spider. In the jellyfish’s state of desperation, it called to God. God gave the jellyfish the mantra “yes” (in German, "Ja"). The little jellyfish thought of the mantra over and over, and went through death in a state of affirmation, constantly repeating the word “yes”.
The black spider killed the jellyfish and the little jellyfish continued to think „yes, yes, yes, yes…“ while the Yogi noticed how his consciousness lapsed. His life disappeared. That was a very unpleasant experience, but through the mantra „yes“, he was able to keep his spirit stabile and positive. He did not get tense in the course of the death experience, and did not lose positive energy.
After his consciousness was extinguished, he moved ahead spiritually. Suddenly, Yogi was there again, and everything was light, peaceful and beautiful. The spider was no where to be seen. The Yogi was in a light dimension of the other side, and he felt good.
After a time, the Yogi woke up from the dream. He lay in bed again and found himself at home, as a person. He still felt happy though, and that day he took a long walk through trees and fields where flowers grew, as the sun shone on this beautiful day. The Yogi still had this cosmic consciousness with him from this paradise dream. He felt a large sense of peace, joy, and all-encompassing love for all beings and plants around him. He stayed in this state for three days after the dream.
Our Yogi saw this dream as a gift. In the dream, he learned that one can go through death more easily with a mantra. Those who die repeating a positive mantra can land in paradise after death. The knowledge of the death mantra was a saving grace for him. The concept of such is hardly known in the western world. Everyone must die one day. It is good to have a mantra at hand for this experience. Everyone can choose whichever mantra serves him or her. The mantra “yes” lent power and a sense of relaxation which is useful to go through death. Christians might have a prayer at hand. It is at any rate good to practice this mantra, so that when the time comes, the mantra comes to mind automatically.
How can PowerPoint presentations be used effectively?
There are two kinds of teachers: the kind that fill you with so much quail shot that you can't move, and the kind that just gives you a little prod behind and you jump to the skies.
If you want your class to stay awake, take note: the bar has been permanently raised with the new technologies in computer-based presentation design. Forget the overheads and slides. Attracted by the same slick interface and easy learning curve that drew the corporate types, educators and students are employing the presentation software in classrooms in ever-increasing numbers. For some teachers, the computerized slide-show format is deposing the black/whiteboard.
It’s especially good for the visual learner; but while it's relatively easy to learn the basics of the program, it's not always obvious to teachers how to turn a PowerPoint presentation into a useful learning experience.
Unfortunately, good software alone does not make for good presentation design. In fact, quite the opposite! As computer-based presentation design has become more the norm, classrooms are being overwhelmed with productions that seem to use every feature and font that the teacher (or student) can find. You may think your presentation is great and the class is with you as they politely nod their heads, smile, and take notes, but beware: the emperor believed that only a "fool" couldn't see his beautiful new clothes!
One of the criticisms that's been raised about PowerPoint is that it can give the illusion of coherence and content when there really isn't very much coherence or content. Jamie McKenzie, a former school superintendent and editor of the education website From Now On, uses the term "PowerPointlessness" to illustrate the drawbacks of the program.
Too many flying letters, animations and sound effects without seeing much original thought or analysis can be a real issue. In many cases, the medium shoves the message aside. Too many people forget that they are making a presentation first and that PowerPoint is just their assistant. Resist the temptation to make a PowerPoint presentation that uses sounds, colors, pictures, and actions that do nothing to get the message across and do everything to distract the students from the message that you are trying to deliver.
A quick Web search for PowerPoint lesson plans reveals a wealth of sites offering archives of presentations in subjects ranging from art to world history. Individual projects include such subjects as how to dissect a fish, perform the Heimlich maneuver or solve a long equation.
Present information or instruction to an entire class.
Create graphically enhanced information and instructions for the learning centers.
Create tutorials, reviews, or quizzes for individual students.
Display student work and curriculum materials or accompany teacher presentations at parent open houses or technology fairs. You can set PowerPoint presentations to run automatically during such events, providing a slide show of classroom activities and events as parents tour your classroom or school.
"It's a neat tool, but it should be thought of as a supplement rather than as a way of providing your basic research," said McKenzie, who believes the program is often overused in student projects. (McKenzie, 2000) Teachers shouldn't allow a slide presentation to take the place of writing assignments. Students should use technology and things like PowerPoint to summarize their points and put their thoughts in order, but they still must have the experience of actual writing.
Intent on producing students with strong reading, writing and thinking skills, teachers should be on the lookout for thin quality of the student work, with an emphasis upon flash and special effects rather than content and thought. We must focus on student outcomes worth achieving, upon value added rather than glitz, glimmer and gimmicks.
Linear vs. Non-Linear
PowerPoint can be a very effective and valuable tool, but it can also serve as a downfall in the classroom. There are two main differences in PowerPoint presentations: linear and non-linear. Linear is the most common type of PowerPoint used by educators today. The presentation is slide after slide that is watched by the student while the teacher lectures in the background. The other type is non-linear presentations. As defined by Guides and tutorials.com “they engage the user by allowing him/her to control how the presentation is viewed and in what order.” Students are able to move around the presentation in any order which enables them to refer back to previous pages or jump around to retrieve the slides as needed. Many teachers add hyper links to allow the student to retrieve vital relevant information that has been posted online. There are many advantages of using Power Points within the classroom when used appropriately.
Think concepts, not just facts and figures
Decide what the message of your presentation will be and be familiar enough with it so that you could talk about the subject even without the PowerPoint presentation. Suppose there was no projector or the bulb burned out. If you can’t carry on, it’s probably either because you weren’t familiar enough with your topic or your presentation was loaded with a lot of useless and uninteresting facts that would bore your students to death anyway. Presentations should flow like conversation, not be a never ending list of useless or uninteresting facts. You might as well stand up in front of your class and read your grocery list. As you talk to your class, your presentation should just highlight points. Those points should follow the Joy of Six Guidelines. To keep your slides uncluttered and more importantly, to make it more likely that your class will remember/write down things, try to limit your slides to six points per slide and no more than six words per point; and phrases are easier to read and remember than sentences. You’ll be speaking the sentences.
Begin by asking a few questions to get an idea of the class expectations and experience. Then gear your presentation toward the bulk of the class, but make sure to give enough background to help those who need it, but not so much as to lose a large part of the class. For older students, one of the most deadly mistakes you can make is to read your presentation. The middle and high school students shouldn’t need you for that. And use the B key where appropriate in PowerPoint. What does the B key do? Very simply, it turns the screen black. There will be times in your lecture/presentation that you want the class to focus on you and forget the slides. Hit the B and the screen will turn Black. Hit it again and it will come Back.
There are some simple design considerations that you should follow. You do want to use contrasting colors that work well together. Your words will be sending one message and your color choice another. Pick a background and stick with it. Constant changes cause your students to pay attention to the changes not the message. The same thing is true of your fonts, their color and size. Keep them consistent. If you change them, people will be watching to see what font you come up with next instead of listening to your message. Keep your slide balanced and remember the Joy of Six.
Once again, when it comes to multimedia, anything you use should enhance or emphasize your message. Using cute pictures, video, or sounds without thinking about how they will help you get your message across may result in your students remembering the cute picture, but forgetting what you were trying to say. People like to use animations, because they are fun to watch. However, do you really want your students watching animations on your slide or listening to what you are saying?
As The Old Saying Goes, Practice Makes Perfect
Use the notes area and print them out
Watch for like, ahh, umm, ya know
A great slide presentation without a well-prepared lecture is like a great recipe in the hands of a poor cook. The final product may be edible, but it’s not going to be a meal you will remember or want to have again. We all have speech habits that we don’t notice, but our students will pick up on quickly. If you are in the habit of pausing and saying things such as ahh or umm, or worse yet, ya know, people will begin to focus on that instead of your words.
The comparative politics courses of the university of North Carolina did a study of PowerPoint usage in the classroom. They found that is was more of a benefit then a hindrance. Surveys administered to gauge student reaction to the PowerPoint presentation show that students perceive increased retention, grasp of material, organization, and enjoyment. PowerPoint also has a low learning curve, allowing busy instructors to integrate the software in their teaching without extensive retraining.
Deliver your material in an interesting way
So to wrap it up, you should prepare your lecture before firing up your software. Have enough information available so that you can provide your class with what it needs. Choose your design and layout so that it is consistent and doesn’t take away from your message. Remember that the technology is your assistant and should help you, not take over the show. Tell a story, involve the students, use humor, be engaging, but stay on track with your lecture. Talk WITH your students not AT them. Be well prepared when you make your presentation.
Remember, as a teacher, to focus on teaching, learning and thinking. Remember the equipment/software is nothing much more than a set of new tools to support questioning, exploring and creating. It’s all about showing students how to make sense of their worlds, preparing them to think and read deeply and well. Our purpose should be literacy — not illiteracy or e-literacy.
Click to reveal the answer.
B. Overheads and the blackboard
D. Coherence and comprehension
B. Overheads and the blackboardB. Overheads and the blackboard
If students are conducting research into a problem or issue - if they are exploring an essential question - then we should monitor the proportion of time devoted to research and thinking in contrast to the time spent preparing slides.
In some cases, students may do a glib and superficial job on the problem solving and decision-making:
A. Because they don' know how to use the software.
B. So that they can turn the project in on time.
C. In order to rush into the multimedia production phase of the project.
C. In order to rush into the multimedia production phase of the project.C. In order to rush into the multimedia production phase of the project.
Students may lose sight of the big picture in a presentation because:
A. Big ideas appear on their own slides.
B. Details appear on their own slides.
C. The context is lost moving from slide to slide.
Students should prepare to speak concisely and effectively to a group about the ideas represented by the slides. To do that:
A. They should not read the slides to the group.
B. The slides should be a carefully elaborated piece of writing.
C. The slides should contain lots of graphics, colors and animations.
A. They should not read the slides to the group.A. They should not read the slides to the group.
C. VisualC. Visual
PowerPoints should replace writing assignments.
B. FalseB. False
A. Six point per slide maximum.
B. Six words per point.
C. Phrases, not sentences.
Which University helped prove that PowerPoint was beneficial?
C. Virginia Tech
While using the PowerPoint presentation show, students grasped the material better.
PowerPoint has a(n) ________________, allowing busy instructors to integrate the software in their teaching without extensive retraining.
B. High tolerance feature
C. A PowerPoint for dummies handbook
A. Low learning curveA. Low learning curve
Ann wants to make a PowerPoint slide for her biology class. She has so much information though. How should she present it?
A. Put all of her information on as many slides as possible.
B. Pick out the key points and put those on as few slides as possible.
C. Only use one slide and just put the topic in the middle discuss the rest of her information.
B. Pick out the key points and put those on as few slides as possible.B. Pick out the key points and put those on as few slides as possible.
Josh is having a problem figuring out how many animations to put on his slide. How many should he use?
B. As many as he wants.
C. None—it would make it too confusing .
Liz is making a presentation on PowerPoint for one of her classes. How should she use the slides she has made in her presentation?
A. Just read off of them the whole time.
B. Talk to the class and just let them look at the slides if they want to.
C. Talk with the class while pointing to the slides every time she introduces a new topic.
C. Talk with the class while pointing to the slides every time she introduces a new topic.C. Talk with the class while pointing to the slides every time she introduces a new topic.
Billy is studying for a biology test he decides to reread the material on the PowerPoint. The PowerPoint he is using allows him to skip around the slides to focus more on certain topics. Which type of PowerPoint is Billy using?
B. Linear PowerPoint
D. Non-Linear PowerPoint
D. Non-Linear PowerPointD. Non-Linear PowerPoint
Which is a not a reason teachers misuse PowerPoint presentation?
A. Using sentences rather than terms.
B. Too many sound effects and slide transitions.
C. Application concepts and questions.
D. Reading from the slide.
C. Application concepts and questions.C. Application concepts and questions.
A. The amount of points per slide.
B. The amount of slide transitions and sound effects per presentation.
C. The mount of words per point.
D. Using short phrases opposed to sentences.
B. The amount of slide transitions and sound effects per presentation.B. The amount of slide transitions and sound effects per presentation.
Click to reveal sample responses.
Imagine a widely used and expensive prescription drug that promised to make us beautiful but didn't. Instead the drug had frequent, serious side effects: It induced stupidity, turned everyone into bores, wasted time, and degraded the quality and credibility of communication. These side effects would rightly lead to a worldwide product recall. How can you relate this scenario to the use of PowerPoint?
The comparison of PowerPoint to a drug that promises to make us beautiful but also is known to induce stupidity, turn everyone into bores, waste time and degrade the quality and credibility of communication helps to demonstrate the possible negative side effects of utilizing PowerPoint for presentations. PowerPoint is a tool that continues to become more widely used by teachers and students during presentations. They are able to create a slideshow with various background and text colors, graphics, sounds and actions. The benefits of PowerPoint are obviously to make a more visually appealing presentation that will especially affect those who are visual learners. The main goal of all presentations though is that the topic be clearly presented, accurate and well researched. If the presenter spends the majority of their preparation time creating a most impressive slideshow, they may lose sight of the purpose of the presentation. The content of the presentation should always remain their focus! The slideshow should contain a minimal amount of distractions that will take the audience’s attention away from the topic. Frequent flying words, graphics and sounds not only distract from the message but create a longer slideshow. The presenter should also minimally rely on the slideshow to make their presentation. Reading the slides to the audience is boring and would make the presentation less appealing. While ultimately the PowerPoint slideshow can improve a presentation, one should always focus on the content and their comfort in discussing it with the audience. —Sarah Murphy
As an avid user of the PowerPoint tool in my lessons I find them very useful. I, unlike many in my field do not think that PowerPoint makes teachers lazy, and is a poor substitution for old fashion writing. On the contrary; PowerPoint is just a viable tool as Microsoft Word or Corel. The issue isn't the viability of PowerPoint, but rather the level of training that instructors receive or have received prior to the implementation of PowerPoint in the classroom, and the inclusion of PowerPoint in the lesson plans. Many times the teachers as well as students are overloaded on the wonderful art of creating slide shows, and so the tools capabilities actually have an adverse effect when teaching in the classroom. I think the best way to work slide shows into a class lesson is to not teach the entire lesson from PowerPoint. If the kids are not fully engaged with you, having them stare and copy off of a screen for fifty minutes to an hour and a half is the quickest way to increase classroom management issues. Why? Because as interesting as swooping in and flipping pictures of WWII, x2+2, and microorganisms are, they just aren't quite interesting enough to keep a kid's attention and reinforce material retention. That part of the burden still rests on the instructor's shoulders. So, how do we as teachers engage our students, increase our awareness and use of technology such as PowerPoint in the classroom with out becoming completely detached from our students' learning experiences? By using PowerPoint as the side show and NOT the main attraction in our lessons. PowerPoint is important and useful, but just as the chinese proverb goes "everything in moderation..." If we don't suppress the urge to overindulge in the simple expediency of technology we, as well as our students, will fall prey to watered down lectures, and disrupted learning time. —Nichole White
I strongly agree with Nichole White’s response in that the burden to educate lies on teachers, not on technology. Power point is indeed a great tool for teachers to enhance their effectiveness. But if teachers are not qualified to begin with, Power point will not make them good teachers. If a teacher can bore students using the blackboard, he/she can bore them just as easily using Power point slides. Nichole also makes a valid point on the need for moderation. No matter what new technology may appear, be in Power point or SmartBoard or anything else, teachers must not depend on these technologies to do the teaching for them. I believe it is important that teachers be open and willing to learn new technologies to keep up with the times, but we need to, first and foremost, be concerned with our ability to engage our students and show them how to learn. If we as teachers can keep Power point as the “side show”, our students can greatly benefit from what it has to offer. More than anything, Power point is a tool to communicate the information and learning opportunities that teachers already have to present. The technology without the information is useless. —Carol VisotskyThe comparison of PowerPoint to a drug that promises to make us beautiful but also is known to induce stupidity, turn everyone into bores, waste time and degrade the quality and credibility of communication helps to demonstrate the possible negative side effects of utilizing PowerPoint for presentations. PowerPoint is a tool that continues to become more widely used by teachers and students during presentations. They are able to create a slideshow with various background and text colors, graphics, sounds and actions. The benefits of PowerPoint are obviously to make a more visually appealing presentation that will especially affect those who are visual learners. The main goal of all presentations though is that the topic be clearly presented, accurate and well researched. If the presenter spends the majority of their preparation time creating a most impressive slideshow, they may lose sight of the purpose of the presentation. The content of the presentation should always remain their focus! The slideshow should contain a minimal amount of distractions that will take the audience’s attention away from the topic. Frequent flying words, graphics and sounds not only distract from the message but create a longer slideshow. The presenter should also minimally rely on the slideshow to make their presentation. Reading the slides to the audience is boring and would make the presentation less appealing. While ultimately the PowerPoint slideshow can improve a presentation, one should always focus on the content and their comfort in discussing it with the audience. —Sarah Murphy
As an avid user of the PowerPoint tool in my lessons I find them very useful. I, unlike many in my field do not think that PowerPoint makes teachers lazy, and is a poor substitution for old fashion writing. On the contrary; PowerPoint is just a viable tool as Microsoft Word or Corel. The issue isn't the viability of PowerPoint, but rather the level of training that instructors receive or have received prior to the implementation of PowerPoint in the classroom, and the inclusion of PowerPoint in the lesson plans. Many times the teachers as well as students are overloaded on the wonderful art of creating slide shows, and so the tools capabilities actually have an adverse effect when teaching in the classroom. I think the best way to work slide shows into a class lesson is to not teach the entire lesson from PowerPoint. If the kids are not fully engaged with you, having them stare and copy off of a screen for fifty minutes to an hour and a half is the quickest way to increase classroom management issues. Why? Because as interesting as swooping in and flipping pictures of WWII, x2+2, and microorganisms are, they just aren't quite interesting enough to keep a kid's attention and reinforce material retention. That part of the burden still rests on the instructor's shoulders. So, how do we as teachers engage our students, increase our awareness and use of technology such as PowerPoint in the classroom with out becoming completely detached from our students' learning experiences? By using PowerPoint as the side show and NOT the main attraction in our lessons. PowerPoint is important and useful, but just as the chinese proverb goes "everything in moderation..." If we don't suppress the urge to overindulge in the simple expediency of technology we, as well as our students, will fall prey to watered down lectures, and disrupted learning time. —Nichole White
I strongly agree with Nichole White’s response in that the burden to educate lies on teachers, not on technology. Power point is indeed a great tool for teachers to enhance their effectiveness. But if teachers are not qualified to begin with, Power point will not make them good teachers. If a teacher can bore students using the blackboard, he/she can bore them just as easily using Power point slides. Nichole also makes a valid point on the need for moderation. No matter what new technology may appear, be in Power point or SmartBoard or anything else, teachers must not depend on these technologies to do the teaching for them. I believe it is important that teachers be open and willing to learn new technologies to keep up with the times, but we need to, first and foremost, be concerned with our ability to engage our students and show them how to learn. If we as teachers can keep Power point as the “side show”, our students can greatly benefit from what it has to offer. More than anything, Power point is a tool to communicate the information and learning opportunities that teachers already have to present. The technology without the information is useless. —Carol Visotsky
Becker, Henry. Internet Use by Teachers. 1999. http://www.crito.uci.edu/TLC/FINDINGS/internet-use/startpage.htm
McKenzie, Jamie. “Scoring Power Points.” From Now On, The Educational Technology Journal. September, 2000. http://fno.org/sept00/powerpoints.html
Rethinking the Design of Presentation Slides, http://www.writing.eng.vt.edu/slides.html
Technology Counts ’99. Education Week, 1999. http://www.edweek.org/sreports/tc99/articles/summary.htm
Technology in Education 1999. Shelton, CT: Market Data Retrieval, 1999.
Trotter, Andrew. “Preparing Teachers For the Digital Age.” Technology Counts ’99. Education Week, 1999. September 23, 1999. http://www.edweek.org/sreports/tc99/articles/teach.htm
Jackson, Steven. "The Use of PowerPoint in Teaching Comparative Politics". Benefits. Accessed 17 Apr 2007. Last updated May 1997. http://technologysource.org/article/use_of_powerpoint_in_teaching_comparative_politics
Figures are sorted according their similarity into source files in OpenOffice.org 2.0 format.
"Thanks" to Shelly de Killer taking Knightley hostage, you are now allowed to continue your investigation, inside the president's plane. Rooke's body is lying on the floor in a pool of blood, and the president himself is nowhere to be seen. For now, you have no choice but to press ahead with the investigation. For this chapter, and for most of the rest of the game, Kay will work with you as your partner. Like with Gumshoe, you can ask her if she has noticed anything unusual, and present evidence to her to hear her thoughts on it.
File:GK2 1-2 Examine Tojiro's body.png
File:GK2 1-2 Crime Scene Notes.png
File:GK2 1-2 Bulletproof Case.png
File:GK2 Case 1 Logic 05.png
File:GK2 1-2 Deduce Security plans.png
File:GK2 Case 1 Logic 06.png
File:GK2 1-2 Security Monitors.png
File:GK2 1-2 Bulletproof Vest.png
After this, de Killer claims to have "grown weary" of the investigation, and asks if there is anyone in particular you want to speak to regarding the incident. He's referring to the president himself, of course. However, the president refuses to show himself. Suddenly, the lights go out, and de Killer flees, deciding to leave the rest to you. Everything fades to black...
File:GK2 1-2 Calling Card.png
Meanwhile, the president has finally decided to grace you with his presence. He has been watching the investigation via his security cameras, but now, with de Killer gone, he wants you to relinquish investigative authority to the Zheng Fa police again. He refuses to give you an explanation, and forces you to hand over all of the evidence you have to Knightley. Clearly, he's trying to hide something, but without your evidence, there's nothing more you can do... or is there?
The president's not listening to you at all. When he's acting forcefully, it's best to hold off and watch what happens. First, find out why he wants to have you removed from the investigation. You are offered two options:
Begin by asking Who’s taking over the investigation? He cuts you off straight away.
Next, you must question the validity of his claim. You now have two lines of attack to choose from.
Begin with Aren’t you being too forceful? He cuts you off again.
Where was I when the incident occurred? Ah, yes. The stage.
Then! Rooke and Knightley suddenly appeared and stood in front of me!
After that, I heard a gunshot and a red balloon bursting!
And so! Those two attempted to escort me into the plane!
But then... the second gunshot!
The bullet pierced through Rooke's body and struck my bulletproof vest!
File:GK2 1-2 Present Kay's Photo.png
File:GK2 Case 1 Logic 07.png
File:GK2 Case 1 Logic 08.png
I shot the balloon and entered the plane with Rooke and the president.
Rooke waited in the cabin while I led the president into the security room.
When I came out, Rooke was already on the ground...
The bullet that lady fired must have hit him while we escorted the president to the plane.
The shot was fired from the gun you found in the trash!
File:GK2 1-2 Bloody Bullet.png
If the ballistic markings match the gun, there can be no doubt!
The bullet that killed Rooke was fired from the gun you found in the audience area.
Who could've used the gun?
Not me, 'cuz I was onstage. But what about that lady reporter in the audience?
All the evidence points to that young lady as the assassin who killed Rooke!
Knightley's Logic, Pt. 2 -
So the gun happens to be the same model as mine. Pure coincidence...
But, take a closer look. Only one of them has a laser pointer attached to it.
Check the number of bullets left in the chamber. Only two shots fired, see?
There's no evidence that I switched the guns, right?
File:GK2 1-1 Examine Revolver.png
With this, Knightley finally cracks and admits his guilt, after being assaulted by various objects you might recognise from earlier cases in the series.
File:GK2 1-1 President speech.png
The assassination attempt was, in reality, all an act. President Huang’s approval ratings among the people of Zheng Fa had been falling recently, so he decided to ask his bodyguard, Ethan Rooke, to help him set up a fake assassination attempt. Huang believed that, if he became known as a survivor of an assassination attempt, it would reignite his popularity among his people. However, Rooke refused to participate in the scheme, so Huang instead turned to Rooke’s subordinate, Horace Knightley, who agreed to take part. Huang was nervous about asking Knightley, having noticed his hatred for his superior, but decided to proceed with the plan anyway. In the days before Huang’s speech was due to take place, everything was put into place: the president’s bulletproof vest was shot at, to give the impression that Huang had actually been hit; the security plans were redrawn to account for Knightley’s neck injury, which would have prevented him from shooting the balloon if it was to his right; a staff member at the Zheng Fa embassy approached Nicole Swift and asked her to point the laser beam at Huang, promising her an exclusive interview with the president after the event; and Huang planned to claim extraterritorial rights in order to prevent anyone outside Zheng Fa from investigating the incident.
File:GK2 1-2 Naitou shoots Tojiro.png
At the speech, the fake assassination went ahead as planned: Nicole, wearing the red side of her reversible parka, pointed the laser pointer at Huang, and Knightley shot the balloon beside him to create the illusion that a gun had actually been fired at Huang. During the commotion that ensued, Huang’s bodyguards ushered him into the presidential aeroplane, while Nicole changed her parka to make the red-hooded “assassin” disappear. Huang immediately hid in an extra-secure room in the plane, leaving Knightley and Rooke alone in the main room of the plane. At this point, Knightley killed Rooke. His plan was to claim that Rooke had been hit by the “assassin” while attempting to stop the bullet from hitting Huang.
File:GK2 1-2 De Killer attacks Naitou.png
In actuality, Knightley hated Rooke, and was jealous of Rooke’s position as leader of Huang’s bodyguards, and the level of trust Huang placed in Rooke, and so he intended to use the fake assassination attempt as a means to eliminate Rooke while avoiding blame. However, Knightley failed to predict the presence of another red-hooded would-be assassin at the event, namely Shelly de Killer. A few days earlier, de Killer was contracted to assassinate Huang. He had already attempted to kill Huang once, but was foiled by Rooke, resulting in the former’s arm injury, and his respect for Rooke. When Knightley came to take Nicole in for “questioning”, de Killer took Knightley hostage in order to force him to allow Edgeworth to investigate inside the plane, so that de Killer could learn the truth behind the death of Rooke, a man de Killer greatly respected.
.
, then there is exactly one line
.
, then there is an integer q such that
. Let q = n.
, then there is an integer q such that
.
If n is an even integer, then for some integer k,
.
If n is an odd integer, then for some integer k,
.
. For integers j and k, let
.
. For integers j and k, let
.
If a|b, and b|bm then a|bm, implying aj = bm for some integer j.
Also, if a|c, and c|cn then a|cn, implying ai = cn for some integer i.
Which implies a|(bm+cn).
. Hence there are integers
. Define the integer
.
. This means there is an integer
, Contradiction!
a non-zero rational number, hence there are integers
.
. Hence there are integers
.
Recent studies suggest the regular consumption of omega-3 fatty acids reduces the likelihood of developing Alzheimer's disease and can even boost brain function.
Blades are commonly made in 1/4 inch lengths. Blades also have different widths as well as different configurations of the "rocker" (spinning area) and toe picks. These all have major effects on the way a blade feels, although usually a skater can adapt to a different type of blade in a relatively short amount of time.
Figure skate blades start out in three separate parts: The toe plate, the heel plate, and the part that actually does the work on the ice. These are punched out on large presses. The blades are blanked out of long strips of steel which vary in carbon content depending on the quality of the particular skate blade that is being made; for example, a recreational blade will have a lower grade of steel than a more advanced blade. Although the steel used for all blades hardens to the same standard, the better grade would keep its edge longer in similar conditions.
Before the three parts are put together to make the skate the blade section is hardened. This is done in large quantities hung on a frame and lowered into a high temperature salt bath for a set period of time to be evenly heated and while still glowing red are quenched in an oil bath. The shock of the sudden decrease in temperature causes the steel to harden . However, the hardness at this stage is too brittle, so the blades (still on the frame) are put into another salt bath of a lower temperature to temper to about what is called 60 degrees on the Rockwell scale. When cooled they are removed from the frames fed into a machine that grinds them to a set thickness.
The toe and heel plates (already ground) are then brazed to the blade. There are two methods of joining the parts together. Many blades are silver soldered. This is a fairly low temperature braze achieved by electrical coil induction which causes the heat from the brazing to travel down onto the blade reducing the hardness to about 40 degrees Rockwell for about half way down the blade but leaving the lower "working" half (about 5/16") still at 60 degrees. Some top quality blades are hand brazed with bronze. This operation creates a lot more heat; therefore the blades could be somewhat irregular in their hardness. To remedy this, they are set into an induction coil, electrically heated, re-hardened and tempered about halfway up the blade.
It is possible to tell if your blades are hand brazed. If you look at them you will notice that where the toe and heel plate joins the blade there is a very large radius. This method is very strong. Silver soldered skates will have a small bead of braze so the radius will be much smaller. However silver solder flows well and fills gaps readily. So, whichever method is used there will still be 5/16" or more of correct hardness.
After the blade is assembled and chrome-plated (to protect the metal from rust), the profile at the bottom of the blade is ground on and the chrome is removed from the edges by grinding, so that hardened steel and not chrome is at the working surface. This is the line that you see on each side of the blade edge. There is of course extensive polishing and inspection before shipping.
The blade length denotes the measurement from the front of the sole plate to the back of the heel plate. Measure the length of the boot sole from toe to heel and fit blades which are 1/4 inch less in length.
When it comes to buying blades, the same advice given for purchasing new boots applies: you should buy well-built and equipment appropriate to your level. Skaters gradually upgrade their equipment as their needs change, for example a skater may need to upgrade skates when they move from basic skating to their
Top of the line blades are designed for very good skaters. Advanced free-style blades have a longer radius and have large toe picks. Also, the portion of the blade that is used for spinning is smaller than on intermediate blades; that means that unless you are perfectly balanced and positioned going into and during the spin you will start rocking on the blade.
Just because the MK Gold Stars are very expensive does not mean that they are inherently better blades than MK Pros or Phantoms. Starting with MK Pro and Coronation Ace lines, the blades are all made using much the same materials and manufacturing process, as described above. To put it succinctly, certain blades are more expensive simply because of supply and demand and a few slight design modifications like side honing, or coating with metals other than chrome which makes them more costly to produce.
The best way to determine the wear on blades is looking at how thick the dull strip is on the sides of the blades along the edges. These strips were three or four millimeters when new. If they are now thin, then your blade has been sharpened many times. The concern here is that the rocker may be distorted after many sharpenings, and it is almost impossible to restore without specialized equipment.
A second test consists in holding the skate upright on a table and rocking it forwards until the lowest toepick makes contact with the surface. The blade should also be touching the table within one or two inches of the toe pick. If the blade touches the table further back, it means that the toe-pick is too low (probably a consequence of successive sharpenings). If the blades touches closer than 1 inch, the master toe-pick may have been ground off. In this case, the blades will be useless for learning spins and jumps.
The third test is to ask the skate sharpener at your rink to examine the blade. They can tell you if the blade is bent, incorrectly mounted or obviously damaged by abuse or bad sharpening.
If the only problem is that the toe pick is too low, ask your shop to grind it somewhat to raise it. Never have the bottom (master) tooth ground off your blades unless you only intend to use them for figures!
Skates with improperly mounted blades can be virtually impossible to skate on. The blade must be correctly positioned and aligned on
Place the front of the sole plate of the skate blade in line of the front of the sole of the boot, and maintain the skate blade along the line drawn. This will place the blade between the big toe and first toe.
Screws may be placed only in the slotted holes, so that you can try them and make minor adjustments (a blade position slightly closer to the big toe is sometimes favored). Do not do a lot of jumping on the blade until the best position of the blades has been found and more screws have been inserted.
Warping of the blade can happen when the front or back pair of screws are tightened on the temporary mounts, skewing the blade from front to back, or if the holes for the permanent mounts are not positioned perfectly.
Another likely cause is that the heel might not be perfectly level or flat with respect to the front of the boot: On old boots, old screw-holes may have created bumps on the heel. If the boots are new, they might have been manufactured with an uneven heel. Such a heel will twist the blade.
If you have trouble getting good edges, first have the blades checked to make sure they are straight, properly sharpened and mounted perpendicular to the sole. If the problem persists, have someone watch to see if your blades "make snow" as you try to skate on the edge in question. If they do, this may point to a mounting problem which can be corrected by a slight shift of the blade mounting. You will need to tell the person remounting your blades which edges you are having trouble with.
You can also check if your blades are mounted correctly by yourself (you need recently sharpened blades for this test to ensure that the edges are even):
Gather some speed and glide on two feet on a straight line.
Keep your body upright. Your feet should be directly under your hips. Try this several times, both backwards and forwards
Go back and look at the traces: if the blades are set correctly you should get a set of double lines for each foot. If one of the lines is consistently thicker than its mate, or if there is only one line, it means that your weight on that blade falls predominantly on the edge tracing that line,i.e., the blade is unbalanced.
If you are leaning mainly on the inside edge, have the blade shifted to the inside and vice versa. You probably only need a small shift; try moving it by 1 or 2mm and then repeat the test
Rocker is the curve of the blade from toe to heel, and is based on the arc of a circle with a given radius. Thus, if you drew a circle
The smaller the radius, the more rocker (amount of back and forth rocking motion you can get when standing on the blade) it has. With small radius blades, you can do turns with less chance of falling as there is less blade on the ice. For the beginner, a 6 foot radius is fine as, among other things, it is very forgiving in the toe pick department: You really need to lean way forward on them to catch the picks.
The bigger the radius, the flatter the blade. This will generate more speed as more of the blade contacts the ice. You will want a flatter blade (7 foot or more) as you become more advanced. When you start learning jumps, you will find that you need good edge control. Because you have more blade on the ice, you can start to prepare your body position for take-off without falling off the edge so easily.
Hollow or grind refers to the concave surface on the bottom of a correctly ground blade. A small radius creates edges that will dig deeply into the ice, while a larger radius digs in less, but glides more freely. A hollow with a 5/8" to 3/4" radius is recommended for beginners and all-purpose skates. This hollow will allow you to sense how a proper edge should feel, and at the same time be forgiving in things like T-stops. The weight of the skater will also affect how deeply it should be ground: Usually children will need a deeper hollow than fully grown adults.
Finally, the width of the blade is yet another factor to consider: A deep hollow with a 3/8" or smaller radius will be very unforgiving on freestyle blades, unless you are a child or have a very petite frame. This type of grind may yields crisp and fast 3-turns, ability to hold a very deep edge when landing jumps, and allows for fast spins if they are well centered. A small radius is favored for dance or hockey blades; these types of blades blades are narrower than freestyle blades and they need a deeper grind to get the same grip on the ice.
A shallow "figure" hollow with a 1" or larger radius will require a more correct lean to prevent skidding and requires more frequent sharpening, but yields an easy glide and clean tracings.
The K-pick design consists in a set of extra 3-4 picks to the side of the standard toe-picks. This feature is supposed to provide more control and better anchorage to the ice on toe-jumps. According to blade manufactures, the jump height can increase by 5-10% and the jump length by about 20% on toe loops and flips. No significant improvements in height and length have been reported for the Lutz, although the improved stability on the take-off supposedly makes for more consistent jumps. Many freestyle blades models, particularly at the high end range, are available with K-picks.
Side honed, parabolic and tapered blades
Most skating blades have the same constant width along its full length. However, some advanced freestyle figure skating blades have a concave section known as "side honing". Side honed blades are thicker at the stanchions and the edge stripe and thinner in between. You
Another modification to the edge profile found in advanced blades is "tapering". Tapered blades are thicker at the front near
Take your skates to a pro shop or ask some regular skaters at your rink where they get theirs sharpened. Skate sharpening is not a
Skates properly sharpened will have a smooth concave grind accurately centered along the length of the blades, edges squared (parallel to the bottom of the boot) and level with each other (inside edge at same height as outside edge) for the length of the blade. Proper sharpening will maintain the correct rocker for the life of the blade.
Freestyle sharpenings will have typically a 1/2" radius concave grind and will be in a sharp condition. The edges of a deep freestyle grind have the great advantage of holding jump landings on hard or soft ice and also will outlast a shallow grind by a considerable amount of time. They will also hold landings on missed jumps and give the skater that extra split second to catch their balance and avoid unnecessary falls. A sharp deep grind takes a little effort on the part of the skater to adapt but is well worth the effort and once adapted to it will be no problem after future sharpenings.
Figure sharpenings will have 1 1/4" radius concave grind and will be in a medium sharp condition. The figure grinds are extremely smooth and flow freely on the ice. More shallow (greater radius) grinds have extreme flow on the ice but are usually suitable only for the more advanced skater, since it is hard to hold an edge without the proper lean.
Combination sharpenings will have 3/4" radius concave grind and will be in a medium sharp condition so that the skater can skate
Skates should be resharpened before they become so dull that you begin to slip on hard ice. This will also minimize the adjustment you need to make to your newly sharpened skates. Nicks in the blades should also be attended to. Bad nicks in the edges will ruin the finest sharpenings.
When the blade is ground down a long way after many sharpenings, the relationship between the bottom pick and the blade edge should be maintained by removal of steel from the pick. There should be about 1/2" lift at the heel before the pick makes contact with the ice. Just because your blades are ground down past the line of chrome plating, that is not an indication that you need new ones. There is still lots of life left as long as the sharpener replaces that "line" and adjusts the
Beware of how some shops do their sharpening: Some shops flat-grind the blade first, and then hollow grind. This wears the blade at an accelerated rate.
There are two kinds of blade covers, hard rubber/plastic guards and terry-cloth "soakers". The plastic guards should be worn any
The cloth soakers are put on after you have removed your skates and wiped them dry with a rag. They protect your blades from bumping in transit and wick away any condensation so your blades will not rust. If you still have problems with rust or want to store your skates for a longer time, rub a drop of oil or Vaseline along the bottoms of the blades.
Kill Bill Plot: Chapter 7: The Lonely Grave of Paula Schulz
1 "Always-Recording": A study of always-on culture within the vlogging community.
"Always-Recording": A study of always-on culture within the vlogging community.
In contemporary culture, connection to others through technology has become the default state of being. As it stands, the majority of people in the Western world at least have a computer if not a smart phone and other devices that can be used to access the Internet. Each year, something new evolves that allows people to have a more constant connection to the online world, a culture that has been given the name by media researchers of “always on”. Just as the technology changes that connects people to the digital world, the academic research about the effects this cultural perspective has needs to keep pace. One aspect of “always on” culture that has not really been explored in present research is the community of YouTube, the content producers, consumers, and those who do both. Burgess and Green (2009a) reported that vlog style videos took up an astounding 40 percent of the videos coded Most Discussed. Their popularity has only increased over the recent years with media personalities now being recognised as celebrities. This collaborative essay will be looking at always-on culture and its impact within the YouTube community. It will look at the background of always-on and move on to studying how YouTubers address their audience, the changing nature of advertising, and finally, the way YouTubers stay connected to their audience through other media platforms.
“Always on” culture can be most easily summed up as always being or having the ability to be connected to “the
Always on culture also has critics or at least cautious participants. One of the biggest researchers that takes on a more critical perspective in terms of the impact of always on on social interactions and relationships is Sherry Turkle. Turkle, like boyd, is also prolific with her work in the area of always on within digital communication research. Unlike boyd, Turkle raises more concerns about this uber connected lifestyle that most of the Western world has come to embrace as the norm. She laments her perceived loss of the company of strangers in public places, everyone on a device and not simply existing in the moment. Constant connection is something that should be executed with caution.
There are many facets of always on culture that can be taken beyond these broad strokes and brought into conversations about specific platforms that allow us constant access to each other and even strangers. As mentioned, there has been copious amounts of discussion about always on culture in a general sense, but one specific platform that has not been addressed in large capacity is YouTube. There are many aspects of YouTube and YouTube culture that lend themselves to be in conversation with always on culture.
One of the ways in which it seems particularly worthwhile to explore is the type of relationship that successful vloggers are able to establish with their audiences. In the context of Always-on culture, it is not only relevant to look at how users of networked devices engage with online content, but also at how such content is specifically constructed in order to appeal to them: in YouTube vlogging culture, one can detect the emergence of trends content creators take up in a way that seems to suggest that there are implicit expectations on the quality standards for this type of contributions. These can include visual features, for example the use of interactive buttons within the videos, which the vloggers usually signal to encourage viewers to subscribe to their channels or follow their activities on a variety of different platforms, or more interestingly performative features.
Andrew Tolsons’ article “A New Authenticity? Communicative practices on YouTube” (2010) carries out an analysis of how these media personalities construct their online presence within the community in a relatively new panorama of performer-spectator relationships: drawing from Dyer (1991) and Marshall’s (1997) accounts on celebrity and stardom, it presents a critical overview of the shift such relationships undertook during the transaction from broadcast outlets to digital, more interactive platforms of content creation and sharing. Stressing the conversational character of vloggers’ communicative practices, which works along with mainly domestic settings and an amateurish technical attention, Tolson argues that a “rhetoric of authenticity” is played out which corroborates the impression of a higher degree of intimacy between the audience and the performer. A newly elaborated notion of authenticity is then at stake, where the inherent constructedness of a performance is exploited for the sake of the development of what Scannell (1996, 2001) calls a “communicative context”, within which the conversational quality of communication establishes a “care-structure” relationship between the performers and their spectators, allowing for the cultivation of sociability. An example of that would be vloggers’ widespread habit to invite their viewers to engage with the posted content via the comment section available: spectators are openly invited to share their thoughts and personal experiences related and in reaction to the content, encouraging the impression of reciprocal concern that is an important feature of face-to-face communication. The fact that this is to be found in online platforms shows that the line dividing off and online behaviors is everything but neat.
Horton and Wohl (1956), in their sociological study of the relationship between spectators and media personalities, developed the notion of para-social interaction at work between these two parts; while it is still a useful concept to employ in observing how vlog’s viewers are positioned in this paradigm, the higher degree of interactivity available with the content creators on YouTube than with traditional media’s persona calls for a more attentive and up-to-date account of the concerns arising around the nature and characteristics of such relationships. Vloggers break down the “fourth wall” while engaging with their audiences, striving to give a most personalized turn on their posted content and therefore strengthening the impression that spectators are dealing with real, 360 degrees people. While Turner (2010) argues for a dissolution of a hierarchy of discourse - where content creators have ultimately the control over media discourses, Wernick (1991) and Hearn (2008) take into account how vloggers’ communicative practices and effort to build up an “ideology of authenticity” (Burgess and Green, 2009b) are rather finalised into a peculiar form of promotional discourse which has the self at its centre. Commenting on this, Tolson writes that “social networking on the Internet is the playful (but sinister) version of the self-promotional qualities necessary to operate in the flexible, casualized ‘creative economy’, where the performance of ‘any imagined ‘authentic self’’ is inevitably compromised by its marketization”.
Smith (2016) similarly reports how vloggers online presence ultimately works within a context of “production and circulation of self via social media’s mechanisms of promotion, exposure and archiving”. In his article “‘Imagining others more complexly’: celebrity and the ideology of fame among YouTubes’ ‘Nerdfighteria’”, he examines the contradiction underlying YouTubers’ attempt to be perceived as genuine human beings. Hank and John Green came up with such slogan, which is referred to as ‘IOMC’ in short, while promoting what should be a method for online engagement which is beneficial for the whole community of both contributors and spectators. As a philosophy of ‘self-other’ relation, Smith writes, ‘IOMC’ functions as an “acknowledgement of radical uniqueness and unknowability of ‘the other’s individuality”, but it also reinforces a discursive device to support fame and avoiding criticism. This means that while vloggers may strive to convey a performance of self which is as authentic as possible, it is becoming a common practice to make it clear that what viewers see is just one - or more - aspect of the complex range of one’s personality which transcends the media persona visible on the platform. On the one hand, this entails that vloggers have an interest in stressing that their real-life personality is not something which is “always on” to be accessible and experienced by others as they wish, working against Sherry Turkle’s (2011) concerns about the objectification of others which being always connected seems to encourage. On the other hand, however, scholars such as Faucher (2014) have pointed out how Web 2.0 platforms force their users to invest in creative content creation as a form of free labour, where (paraphrased in Smith, 2016) “one’s identity and working life comprise together and could easily lead to empowerment or exploitation”. The latter is therefore a concern one should take into account as the possible downside of Shirky’s push for more creative and personalised contributions online.
Making Money: The Drive to be Always On
This drive for more creative and more personal content has always led those that consume content to question whether it is created on platforms such as YouTube for communal purposes or for profit. Shirky (2010) maintains that in order to continue to produce content that is created with civic values, we as a society must contribute in a financial way in order for it to persistently influence society. Unlike content created for civic values, that which is created for communal purposes, like that of YouTube content, is produced free for the purpose of social entertainment. If this was the case, then it brings about the question as to why those on YouTube are able to make a career out of the content they create. There is the creative rights aspect, in that those that produce art should be paid, as it is a difficult process to not only come up with original ideas for content on YouTube, but to also produce, direct, edit, publish content without a team of people. This is a considerable effort to create something without being in some way rewarded for it.
YouTube has had a system where it has advertisements as far back as 2005 when it was purchased by Google (Cunningham et al, 2016), and the way it has conducted how it advertises has changed. In one of his blog articles, YouTuber John Green (2014) broke down the ‘profit’ that those that post original content received based on the number of views a video gets. He explains that where once YouTubers received an acceptable amount from advertisements, enough for people to make a living, this stopped being the case roughly four years ago. The popularity of YouTube, and the idea of instant fame on a platform that was accessible to everyone drove an influx of ‘amateur’ vloggers and video makers. The content that was distributed changed from single person productions to professional television and movies with full production casts. This convergence of media use on the single platform of YouTube meant that advertisements were spread over more content, resulting on less revenue for those that accumulated money through advertisements in relation to their number of views.
Despite this, this has not stopped those on YouTube creating content. If anything, YouTube is producing more content in its history that it ever has before. Funding is now largely done through donations on sites such as Patreon.com, where viewers pay for the content they want, and 95% of the money goes directly to the creator. Green (2014) explains that now through sites like these, content creators are able to earn a living again. It is also ideal for up-and-coming companies to make a start. Regardless of how individuals on YouTube make their money, it is money still being made. Through data mining (Kennedy, 2016), Google and YouTube are able to see who makes the best profits and how; one of the key contributing factors as to why Google initially purchased YouTube was due to its rise in popularity, and this its ability to make money.
Regardless of why or how YouTubers make money, the fact that there are those that seek out the platform in order to make a regular income from the knowledge that others can and have previously is the driving force behind beginning to explain how YouTube, through capitalism, contributes to the need for individuals to be always-on.
There is no better platform with which to sell yourself than through social media, which is all connected and owned by the same company, if you take the time to connect the corporate connections (Zuboff, 2015). Providing a constant online presence correlates with reminding viewers that creators exist, and they exist for you to watch them, for you to provide their earnings. Therefore, the best way to do this is to remain always on is either in the form or posting videos every other day to satiate fan’s needs or making sure you remain active through other social media platforms, such as Instagram, Facebook, and perhaps more frequently through Twitter.
In order to maintain an active persona, most YouTubers use other forms of social media to promote their own content, as well as, having a more personal relation with their fanbase. Social forums, such as Twitter, allow for these media stars to demonstrate their relatable selling point. Twitter blurs the line between “social classes” allowing everyday people to communicate directly with celebrities and celebrities can act like normal people. Always-on culture focuses on our engagement with social media and this section of the essay will be looking at how YouTubers embrace other platforms in order to engage with more fans, but will also look at the disadvantages of having a big online presence.
In her book Alone Together: Why We Expect More from Technology and Less from Each Other (2011), Turkle explores always-on culture and our relationship with technology. She argues that our ideal state is to “never be alone but always in control”. This idea can be applied to the YouTube community and vloggers. Vloggers are known for sharing, what seems to be, their private life, yet it should be reminded that they are in complete control of what they post and show only select parts of their life. When promoting their own content over other media platforms, YouTubers tend to build an engagement with their fans through a series of posts or Tweets in the lead up to publishing their content. By having this build up, they set the first impression for how fans should view the content, for example, the vlogger may post an extreme headline (commonly referred to as clickbait) to grab viewers’ attention and ensure they engage with the media content. Thus, linking into Turkle’s idea of control. YouTube stars retain control by manipulating information and controlling their engagement with fans. Due to the social aspect of these websites, no user is truly alone either. Twitter allows users to be notified when certain accounts post on the website. These alerts keep both YouTubers and their fans constantly connected with each other, reflecting Turkle’s first statement of never wanting to be alone.
Turkle (2011) carries on to discuss freedom within the always-on culture. The over-sharing nature of social media makes freedom questionable; are we really free if we constantly feel the need to post online? This question can be explored within the vlogging community. Social media for these people becomes an additional job. Every post or engagement becomes scrutinised by their fanbase, and every decision within their private life has to be shared so as to not lose fan interest. For example, just as a celebrity’s relationship becomes public knowledge, so too does the media star’s. Due to the information available online, fans can have a more in-depth involvement. However, these types of fans can cause strain on the vlogger’s real-life relationships by making fake photo edits, spreading false rumours. Thus, adding to Turkle’s idea of restrained freedom. By using multi-media platforms, vloggers allow for a wide range of fans to be able to engage with them, instead of just relying on the comments section on YouTube. This in turn makes them more connected online, as their online presence is spread across a number of forums. Through other media, these online personalities can bring potential viewers back to their main site, YouTube, to allow their popularity on the site to increase and bring in higher revenues. However, it is now a common problem for other online profiles to post content, without the creator’s permission, meaning they too collect a revenue. This again follows Turkle’s argument surrounding a new definition of independence.
To summarise, the vlogger must embrace digital life to its full extent in order to stay relevant to an audience that is always connected, always watching. Even if this means sacrificing their freedom.
Burgess, J., Green, J. (2009a) YouTube: Digital Media and Society Series UK: Polity Press
Burgess, J. and Green, J. (2009b). YouTube: Online video and participatory culture, Cambridge: Polity.
Cunningham, S., Craig, D., & Silver, J. (2016) YouTube, multichannel networks and the accelerated evolution of the new screen ecology. Convergence-the International Journal of Research into New Media Technologies, 22(4), 376-391
Faucher, K.X., (2014), Veblen 2.0: neoliberal games of social capital and the attention economy as conspicuous consumption. In tripleC journal for a global sustainable information society, 12 (1), 45–60.
Green H (2014) The $1,000 CPM: advertising is a kinda shitty model. It’s very exciting that we’re moving beyond it. Medium.com, 15 April. Available at: https://medium.com/@hankgreen/the-1-000-cpmf92717506a4b (accessed 4 August 2015).
Hearn, A. (2008). “Variations on the branded self: Theme, invention, improvisation and inventory”. In The media and social theory, Edited by: Hesmondhalgh, D. and Toynbee, J. 194–210. London: Routledge.
Horton, D. and Wohl, R. (1956). Mass communication and para-social interaction:observations on intimacy at a distance. Psychiatry, 19(3): 215–229.
Kennedy, H. (2016). ‘Chapter 1: Social Media Data Mining Becomes Ordinary, in Post, Mine, Repeat Social Media Data Mining Becomes Ordinary. London: Palgrave Macmillan. pp 17-33
Marshall, P. D. (1997). Celebrity and power: Fame in contemporary culture, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Shirky, C. (2011), Gin, Television and Cognitive Surplus in Cognitive surplus : creativity and generosity in a connected age, London: Penguin pp. 1-29
Smith, D. R. (2016) ‘Imagining others more complexly’: celebrity and the ideology of fame among YouTube’s ‘Nerdfighteria’, Celebrity Studies, 7:3, 339-353, DOI: 10.1080/19392397.2015.1132174
Tolson, A. (2010). A new authenticity? Communicative practices on YouTube. Critical Discourse Studies, 7 (4), pp. 277-289
Turkle, S. (2011). Always-on in Alone Together : Why We Expect More from Technology and Less from Each Other. New York: Basic Books
Wernick, A. (1991). Promotional culture: Advertising, ideology and symbolic expression, London: Sage Publications.
Zuboff, S. (2015). Big other: Surveillance capitalism and the prospects of an information civilisation. Journal of Information Technology (30), 75-89.
Shirky, C. (2010) Cognitive Surplus: Creativity and Generosity in a Connected Age. London: Penguin Press.
You can get a complete stack trace from umbraco, by appending
"?umbDebugShowTrace=true" to the querystring. This include data on all actions inside umbraco from the initial request to the final response, including what page data has been loaded and what data has been sent to macro parameters.
You can get see a list of macro elements sent to an XSLT macro by appending
"?umbDebug=true" to the querystring
This feature can be turned off for production systems by setting umbracoDebugMode to false in web.config.
The following example is from ISAPI rewrite's http.ini:
RewriteRule /.*umbDebugShowTrace.*$ /default.aspx
RewriteRule /.*umbDebug.*$ /default.aspx
A river is a large stream that has sufficient seasonal flow and moderate enough temperature to support a diverse gamefish population.
In the Eastern United states this diverse game fish population assumes a heirarchy; with game fish feeding on a wide variety of the invertebrate and vertebrate life of the ecosystem. Therefore when we approach a river we must understand the different habitats that a river supports, understand how bait fish use these habitats and how different fish feed in them.
This book will offer practical tips on how to approach a new stream, and techniques that appeal to several different kinds of fishing.
Throughout the entire book, the emphasis is on how to catch many Different kinds of fish and it is not meant as an indepth guide to any one species.
One of the first steps towards more successful fishing trips is to go with a plan. The fishermen should
Navigate Reflection topic: ( v • d • e )
Dynamic Class Loading allows the loading of java code that is not known about before a program starts. Many classes rely on other classes and resources such as icons which make loading a single class unfeasible. For this reason the ClassLoader (java.lang.ClassLoader) is used to manage all the inner dependencies of a collection of classes. The Java model loads classes as needed and doesn't need to know the name of all classes in a collection before any one of its classes can be loaded and run.
An easy way to dynamically load a Class is via the java.net.URLClassLoader class. This class can be used to load a Class or a collection of classes that are accessible via a URL. This is very similar to the -classpath parameter in the java executable. To create a URLClassLoader, use the factory method (as using the constructor requires a security privilege):
Code section 10.4: Class loader.
Unlike other dynamic class loading techniques, this can be used even without security permission provided the classes come from the same Web domain as the caller.
Once a ClassLoader instance is obtained, a class can be loaded via the loadClass method. For example, to load the class com.example.MyClass, one would:
Code section 10.5: Class loading.
Executing code from a Class instance is explained in the Dynamic Invocation chapter.
To do:Add some exercises like the ones in Variables
Gravity is the rate at which an object in free fall accelerates by every second, written the same as any other acceleration, that is to say speed/seconds^2. The force of gravity as measured by the amount of newtons that pull down on a one kilogram block when suspended from a scale is 9.8. As a newton is the amount of force necessary to move one kilogram one meter at rate of one meter per second, the acceleration from gravity is 9.8 meters a second a second.
This page introduces the notion of a derived inference rule and provides a few such rules.
Now we can carry the abbreviation a step further. A derived inference rule is an inference rule not given to us as part of the derivation system but which constitutes an abbreviation using a previously proved theorem. In particular, suppose we have proved a particular theorem. In this theorem, uniformly replace each sentence letter with a distinct Greek letter. Suppose the result has the following form. [Comment: This and what follows seems to me to be potentially confusing to students. The intention stated in earlier sections to avoid metatheory makes for a problem here as one really should know about the Deduction Theorem for this to make more sense.]
.
We may then introduce a derived inference rule having the form
.
An application of the derived rule can be eliminated by replacing it with (i) the previously proved theorem, (ii) enough applications of Conjunction Introduction (KI) to build up the theorem's antecedent, and (iii) an application of Conditional Elimination (CE) to obtain the theorem's consequent. The previously proved theorem can then be eliminated as described above. That would leave you with an unabbreviated derivation.
Please remember, removing the abbreviations from a derivation is not desirable. It will make the derivation more complicated and harder to read. Rather, the fact that a derivation could be unabbreviated if so desired (even though we don't really desire it) is what justifies the abbreviation, what permits us to employ the abbreviation in the first place.
Our first derived inference rule will be based on T1, which is
Replace the sentence letters with Greek letters, and we get:
We now generate the derived inference rule:
Now we can show how this rule could have simplified our proof of T2.
While this is only one line shorter than our original proof of T2, it is less obnoxious. We can use an inference rule instead of a silly trick. As a result, the derivation is easier to read and understand (not to mention easier to produce).
The next two theorems—and the derived rules based on them—exploit the equivalence between a doubly negated formula and the unnegated formula.
T3 justifies the following rule.
T4 justifies the following rule.
Our next rule is based on T5.
This rule is occasionally useful when you have derived a contradiction but the discharge rule you want is not NI or NE. This then avoids a completely trivial subderivation. The rule of Contradiction will be used in the proof of the next theorem.
On the basis of T2 and T6, we introduce the following derived rule.
Conditional Addition, Form I (CAdd)
Conditional Addition, Form II (CAdd)
The name 'Conditional Addition' is not in common use. It is based on the traditional name for Disjunction Introduction, namely 'Addition'. This rule does not provide a general means of introducing a conditional. This is because the antecedent line you would need is not always derivable. However, when the antecedent line just happens to be easily available, then applying this rule is simpler than producing the subderivation needed for a Conditional Introduction.
Now we use T7 to justify the following rule.
Modus Tollens is also sometimes known as 'Denying the Consequent'. Note that the following is not an instance of Modus Tollens, at least as defined above.
The premise lines of Modus Tollens are a conditional and the negation of its consequent. The premise lines of this inference are a conditional and the opposite of its consequent, but not the negation of its consequent. The desired inference here needs to be derived as below.
.
Then you can add a new inference rule—or, more likeley, a new form of Modus Tollens—on the basis of this theorem. However, we won't do that here.
The derived rules given so far are quite useful for eliminating frequently used bits of obnoxiousness in our derivations. They will help to make your derivations easier to generate and also more readable. However, because they are indeed derived rules, they are not strictly required but rather are theoretically dispensable.
A number of other theorems and derived rules could usefully be added. We list here some useful theorems but leave their proofs and the definition of their associated derived inference rules to the reader. If you construct many derivations, you may want to maintain your own personal list that you find useful.
Data can exist in a number of different formats - typically referred to as DATA TYPES.
The range of data types within this course are:
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Computing » Computer Science » Computer Programming » Ada Programming
There are two ports of GNAT to the Microsoft .NET platform:
A# is an open-source port under GNU General Public License terms developed at the Department of Computer Science at the US Air Force Academy.
AdaCore provides a port of their GNAT compiler for the .NET platform. The port is available for their customers, or in the public version (libre).
Home page | Sourceforge project page
Product page | Press release
Kaszëbsczi jãzëk — Bosanski jezik
lëst ‘leaf’2. cedélk ‘sheet of paper’
Ka. pôłnié
Ka. pôłnié ‘noon’
Bo. glavni grad, prestolnica ‘capital’
Ka. stółk ‘chair’
Bo. strana ‘side’
Ka. w prawo
Bo. desno ‘to the right’
Ka. prost, na prost, za prost ‘straight on’
For additional information on false friends, see the On-line hypertext bibliography by Daniel Bunčić and Ryszard Lipczuk.
You can help!
Have you spotted any mistakes on this page? Would you like to add information about false friends from your own experience, or help enhance this project in other respects?
Just click the "edit this page" button at the top of this page — it’s easier than you think! If you need advice, see the editing help for this book.
This chapter discusses some useful standard C libraries:
All values are "doubles", and trig values are expressed in radians.
DVD (vob through d2v) and other MPEG-1 and MPEG-2 streams receive special input support for demuxing of audio and subtitles, and faster video seeking
XviD.
Powerful job queue support, with in-place job editing, related job linking, play/pause controls, etc.
Parallel job execution makes job processing very flexible and improves speed on multi-core systems.
Automatic interlace detection can analyse your input video to determine whether it is progressive/interlaced/film/hybrid, and also determine field order.
AutoUpdate keeps MeGUI and its assisting programs up-to-date and eases installation.
Audio encoding also based on Avisynth, which allows highly accurate editing of audio, including sample-accurate audio cutting.
More...
The Basic DVD Ripping Guide is a good place to start.
Read up about all the items in the Tools|tools menu
Documentation on advanced m. Template:Video Encoder Configuration.
A more advanced guide for m. Template:HDTV Transcoding Guide.
Read more on what m. Template:AutoUpdate does, and how it works.
This wiki's MeGUI for further other useful information and links about video.
MeGUI Contributors for all the people who have helped with MeGUI.
The Guides page for MeGUI guides hosted on this wiki
Helping with MeGUI for how to contribute.
The Original Guide Berrinam wrote in 2006 (originally posted here) has been migrated across here. It's very out of date now.
MeGUI's SourceForge project page for bug and feature request trackers.
German MeGUI Documentation, hosted by the German doom9 forums, gleitz.info.
A guide to producing QuickTime compatible DVD Rips in MeGUI
Meselson – Stahl Experiment
The daughter DNA is composed entirely of new DNA and the parent DNA retains it’s same back-bones and bases.
Replication produces two copies of DNA that are made up of 50% DNA from the parent DNA helix, and 50% of new DNA. In this situation, each daughter DNA double-helix contains one strand that is the old DNA (from the parent) and one strand that is new (the complimentary strand resulting from the replication).
This form of replication also produces daughter DNA that is constituted by 50% new DNA, and 50% parent DNA. However, in this case, the new DNA and old DNA are shuffled, and fragments of each are found on both strands on the helices on both copies of DNA following replication.
Watson and Crick proposed that DNA replicated semi-conservatively, but conservative and dispersive replication were still plausible until the theories could be disproved. In 1957, Matthew Meselson, and Franklin Stahl devised an experiment to determine whether DNA replicated following a conservative, semi-conservative, or dispersive model.
Meselson and Stahl cultured Escherichia Coli in a medium containing a heavy isotope of nitrogen (15N) as the only nitrogen source, as opposed to the more common nitrogen-14 (14N). After several generations, the E. coli contained DNA composed of nucleotide base made of 15N isotope. The (15N) DNA was denser than the common (14N) DNA, and the difference in densities allowed for separation by density gradient equilibrium sedimentation.
To achieve separation of the E. coli DNA by densities, the DNA was mixed with a solution of CsCl and centrifuged. A CsCl density gradient was created as a result of sedimentation and diffusion working against each other. The DNA molecules were found in the area of the CsCl density gradient that was equal to their own density.
The (15N) E. colicells were transferred to a medium that contained only (14N). DNA was isolated from the first generation of cells grown in the (14N) medium, and analyzed by density gradient equilibrium sedimentation. Then DNA from the second generation of E. coli grown in the (14N) medium was extracted and analyzed.
The first generation of E. coli grown in the 14N medium contained a single DNA band found halfway in between where the 14N DNA band and the 15N DNA band should have been. This demonstrated the presence of a DNA that was lighter than the DNA from the original population of E. Coli grown in the 15N medium, but still heavier than 14N DNA. Due to the position of this intermediate DNA band in the density gradient, it was apparent that the DNA was a hybrid and contained both 14N and 15N. This automatically eliminated the conservative model of replication, which would have resulted in two distinct bands: one matching the position of the 15N-containing DNA, and one matching the position expected by DNA containing only 14N. Only the dispersive and semi-conservative models fit the situation.
The second generation of E. coli grown in the 14N medium contained two distinct bands. One of the bands was 14N DNA, and the other band was the intermediate (14N/15N) DNA. This result supported the theory of semiconservative replication since dispersive replication would have resulted in a single band of lower density DNA in each consecutive generation.
The figure below illustrates the theoretical outcome of the conservative, dispersive, and semiconservative models along with the experimental outcome obtained by Meselson and Stahl.
Berg, Jeremy M., John L. Tymoczko, and Lubert Stryer. "Exploring Genes and Genomes." Biochemistry. New York: W. H. Freeman, 2007. 113-14. Print.
Campbell and Reese's Biology, 7th Edition
Nelson and Cox's Lehninger Principles of Biochemistry, 5th Edition
There are many different kinds of software that can be developed for Mac OS X. People generally think of applications, but we'll briefly cover some of the other kinds.
Types of Software for Mac OS X
Applications are what people generally think of when they think about software for Mac OS X. Cocoa applications include: Finder, Mail, Address Book, Safari, Microsoft Word, and Microsoft Excel. Anybody can develop applications using Apple's free development tools which includes XCode. Mac OS X applications are developed using Objective-C though there are other possible programming languages that could be used.
The most popular languages for use on the macOS platform is Objective-C which could be thought of as Mac OS X's "native language" since the Mac OS X libraries, or "frameworks", all have an Objective-C interface. Objective-C includes everything that plain C can do, and adds object-oriented programming. See: Objective-C.
C++ can be used in developing for the Mac, but generally, it is used in addition to Objective-C rather than being in place of Objective-C. Using both Objective-C and C++ is called "Objective-C++" and is considered to be optional when developing software for Mac OS X: C++
See Programming:Objective-C for a lesson on the basics of Objective-C [1] may also be of assistance.
Objective-C is the language most commonly used in Mac OS Programming. Objective-C entered Mac OS X and has ancestry in NeXT. Cocoa. Before you learn Mac programming you must know the basics of C since it is the basis for Objective-C.
There used to be three separate APIs for developing a Mac application with a GUI:
Classic (Mac OS 9 and lower). Developing for the Classic API is no longer done. When Mac OS X first came out, users and developers had a huge investment in software written for Mac Classic OS and Mac OS X used to have an emulation mode so that users could run their old software. Apple has long since stopped support of the Classic API and Classic emulation in Mac OS X.
Carbon (Mac OS 8.5 up to and including Mac OS X 10.6 Snow Leopard). Carbon was an API for developers to update their applications that used the Classic API to be run without the Classic emulator. Carbon was a great way that Apple provided developers to upgrade their software to run on Mac OS X without having to totally rewrite their software, but Carbon, like Classic, is no longer supported by Apple.
Cocoa (All versions of Mac OS X). Cocoa is the most native API that can be used to develop applications for Mac OS X that are truly "Mac-like". Generally, Objective-C will be used along with Cocoa, though there are other options such as Cocoa-AppleScript and Cocoa-Python, but Cocoa-Objective-C is really the "mainstream" way to develop Cocoa applications.
Resource Forks Files in Mac OS X have a feature that is unique to Mac OS and that is that each file on disk can have two "forks". This feature used to be used for Classic and Carbon applications to separate code from resources (such as menus, windows, etc.), and the Mac OS X file system still supports two forks, but you should only use the "data fork". The resource fork is non-standard and can be lost when transferring Mac files to other file systems.
Another "native language" for developing Mac OS X applications is AppleScript. AppleScript is a language that Apple invented to automate repetitive tasks. The AppleScript application is located on your Mac at /Applications/Utilities/AppleScript Editor. AppleScript can be used to record AppleEvents, the events that applications send to themselves or to other applications. Why don't you try it out. Open AppleScript Editor, press the record button, do some things with your other applications and watch the script write itself. AppleScript can be used alone or it can be used along with XCode to develop Cocoa Applications using mostly AppleScript instead of Objective-C. This option is mostly for experienced AppleScript programmers who don't know Objective-C.
Apple also provides an application called "Automator" that can be used to easily automate repetitive tasks. It is located at /Applications/Automator.app
Mac OS X has an application called Terminal that provides a command-line interface to Mac OS X. It is possible to develop scripts for the command line. Terminal.app is located at /Applications/Utilities/Terminal.app To create a shell script, you need a text editor. There is a text editor that comes with Mac OS X called "TextEdit.app". It is located in /Applications/TextEdit.app. But actually, what is better than TextEdit is a program such as TextWrangler.app which is available for free from the following link: http://www.barebones.com/products/textwrangler/
The shell that Terminal.app uses by default is called "bash". Here is a simple tutorial on developing bash scripts
We won't go any more deeply into shell scripts here in this wikibook, but it's just good to know what they are. You can always google for more information now that you know what to google for.
When you open Terminal and you learn how to type in commands. The commands are usually command-line tools or scripts. Above, we just talked about developing your own scripts with a text editor. It's also possible to develop your own command-line tools, using XCode. This is an advanced thing to do. Usually, power-users will write a shell-script (or some other kind of thing such as an AppleScript or an Automator Workflow) but it's good to know what a command-line tool is. Command-line tools have a textual user-interface rather than a graphical user interface (GUI).
Java used to be treated by Apple as a "first class language" to develop for Mac OS, however in recent years, Apple has less support for Java. Now with Mac OS X 10.7 "Lion" and 10.8 "Mountain Lion", Java doesn't even come pre-installed in Mac OS X. Java is still available, but users have to download Java from Oracle's website and install it themselves. Apple's Mac App Store doesn't even allow Java apps to be sold at their store calling Java "deprecated".
However, there still are Mac developers who use Java because it has the advantage of being cross-platform compatible. For example, the same source-code can be used to generate software that runs on Mac, Windows, and Linux.
Apple has said that Java reduces the Mac to the "least common denominator". That's why they support it less.
Python is somewhat supported by Apple. In fact, Python is shipped with Mac OS X and is part of the System Folder. There are third-party libraries that allow developers to develop applications using Python and Cocoa together, but these are not very well maintained, and Python on the Mac is most suitable for developing command-line utilities, or cross-platform scripts that aren't really very Mac-like.
Similar to Python.
Most Mac users use Safari for their web browser. Safari uses the standards set by w3c.org You can develop websites that work with Safari by following the standards of the w3c.org. Remember to validate your HMTL, CSS, and JavaScript.
If you're developing websites using your Mac and using Safari, remember to test your webpages on other platforms and with other web browsers.
Objective-C is really the "native" language for Mac OS X development
These are a list of problems for The Real Numbers section of the wikibook. Most of these problems can be described as algebraic problems, although this problem set also includes theorems and concepts from Number Theory. Number Theory is not a primary topic in this wikibook, but there is an appendix section devoted to formalizing several concepts from it. It is recommended to do some problems from the Number Theory heading since its scope of discussion—theorems related to the natural numbers and its supersets integers and rationals—are seldom discussed clearly and usually left to intuition.
Complete the proofs of the simple results given above.
Complete the proof of the square roots theorem by giving details for the case
.
The following questions are meant to formalize a good chunk of algebraic rules one may have simply memorized in elementary mathematics as axiomatically true. However, provided with even the first few laws established in the section The Real Numbers such as the commutative law and algebraic manipulations like moving variables around the equal sign, the following questions should be an easy way to get used to applying theorems to prove one's claim—a very important skill in mathematics.
Prove the following theorems on inequalities (Assume that the variables, unless explicitly restricted, can be any number in its assumed domain)
Given x < 0, if y < z, then xy > xz
If a < b and c < d, then a + c < b + d
If a < b and c > d, then a - c < b - d
If 0 ≤ a < b and 0 ≤ c < d, then ac < bd
Prove the following inequalities (Assume that the variables, unless explicitly restricted, can be any number in its assumed domain)
If 1 ≤ x, then x ≤ x2
Given an odd number n, if x < y, then xn < yn
Given a natural number n, if 0 ≤ x < y, then xn < yn
Prove the following consequential theorems related to the laws provided in this chapter
If there exists the number 0, then
Prove the following theorems on rational numbers
Most of these shouldn't be too challenging; remember your algebra laws! They are still valid axioms, even in inequalities.
If conciliation, these questions are here to reinforce one special property that you can do when solving an inequality problem.
As a continuation of Hint 2a, this property is similar to how you can sub in variables with equations. Yet, it still works with inequalities, provided one change.
You can use the alternate definition of x as proven in Question II. Also, remember that you don't need to do everything in one step.
The question asked in 1ii offers a way to prove why the inequality sign "flips" when you multiply by -1.
The question asked in 1vii is very important for inequality problems where inserting inequalities in between other inequalities is usually not a valid operation. It provides an example of a situation where it is valid.
Prove the following inequalities (Assume that the variables, unless restricted, can be any number)
Remember your algebra laws! They are still valid axioms, even in inequalities.
Absolute values are positive, by definition.
There is one algebraic operation that can guarantee a positive output and whose inverse on the output number is best expressed as an absolute value (in elementary mathematics, it is broken down into cases, if logical, instead).
This is the proof of the Triangle Inequality. Note that this version applies to the real number line, but the general version shown on that webpage is a generalization which also works.
Prove the following properties on even and odd numbers:
If you add two even numbers, then the sum is even.
If you add two odd numbers, then the sum is even.
If you multiply an odd number with an even number, then the product is even.
If you multiply two odd numbers, then the product is odd.
Prove that no consecutive number of a perfect square is also a perfect square for all natural numbers. You don't have to factor in 0 for this problem.
Prove that there exists no primitive Pythagorean triple
, prove that if the given holds, then the remainder r has the following property
.
A consecutive number is defined, in laymen terms, for natural numbers as the number next to the number in question using the natural number's total ordering property.
What is the definition of an irrational number? Not rational, which implies that if we assume that it is a rational number then something should contradict.
A prime number is any natural number greater than 1 that only has the possible prime factor of itself, which can be alternatively expressed as
Try defining the constant A or B and take note of what each variable represents.
The proof that the square root of 2 is irrational is a famous proof that is relatively easy to solve compared to other numbers, as this can be easily proved using a coprime rational number—a usually assumed property of a rational number to begin with.
The following questions can be solved more easily and quickly with more advanced tools. However, solving these questions with restrictions in your mathematical tools provides an excellent understanding of how mathematics as a whole interacts. As a general rule, the answers to these problems should be longer and rely on a lot more properties.
Given a natural number n, prove that
SEE-R => SEE THE FUTUrE
Gapminder data automation ·
Elluminate Web conferencing ·
Blio ebook reader ·
Squeak is a programming language based on Smalltalk by a group at Apple Computer that included some of the original Smalltalk-80 developers, Alan Kay, Dan Ingalls, and Adele Goldberg. It is object-oriented and primarily visual.
Squeak was developed with the idea that it would be sufficiently easy to understand that children would be able to use it. Programming is accomplished by clicking and dragging commands onto the graphical sprite that the user wishes to control. The language is powerful enough that it has been used to write other programming languages. It can, however, have a bit of a steep learning curve in comparison to some of its less powerful derivative projects such as Scratch.
Squeak can be used in a variety of ways depending on the level of sophistication of the user. Aside from introducing learners to the basics of object-oriented programming without the burden of a complicated coding syntax, it can be used to create book-like presentations, animations, games and combinations of the above in ways that are much more interactive than the types of software normally used for the purpose.
One of the developers of Squeak, Alan Kay, has used it as a presentation tool in place of more traditional tools like Powerpoint. In this video, he uses it to give a presentation on various educational topics. For example, around minute 42, he shows the effects of an optical illusion by manipulating two instances of a graphic of a table, one vertical, one horizontal; this would not be possible to do on the fly with Powerpoint.
A variety of topics can be taught in the context of Squeak in a multidisciplinary manner. Cartesian coordinate geometry is employed to move the sprites around the screen, and Squeak could be used to enhance math lessons on the topic. Basic grammar could be taught using the sprites to represent nouns, and the commands to represent verbs, etc.. Constructivist lessons in literature might include learners creating animations describing how they believe characters would behave if something different were to occur in a story they are reading. Simulations could be developed to test hypotheses or demonstrate understanding of scientific principles.
In addition to the direct pedagogical uses of the Squeak environment, there is also a community of users that form a support network for the tool as well as an audience with which to share projects and from which to get ideas. The Squeakland showcase has 163 pages of user submitted projects as of May, 2010. Because Squeak is open-source, all the source code for the projects is available for use to help understand develop one's own programs. Many of the uploaded projects are tutorials explaining how to accomplish various tasks in the programming language. Because of its inclusion on each of the One Laptop Per Child initiative's laptops, the Squeak community provides a means of communicating with learners from all over the world.
Squeak is the basis of a number of other applications that are either written in Squeak or have forked off of the Squeak project in some way. Many of these applications have kept the educational philosophy of their parent project and have transformative applications themselves.
According to the Squeakland website, EToys is highly engaging for learners and can be used in a variety of ways from a simple sketching application to a more complex object oriented programming environment. Children using it learn to think iteratively, develop computer fluency, critical thinking and problem solving skills. The end result, EToys advocates insist, is a sense of accomplishment and increased self esteem.
Google video of Alan Kay giving a talk on "What is Squeak?"
Cunnington, C. (2011). Squeak. http://www.squeak.org/
Jonassen, D., Howland, J., Marra, R., & Crismond, D. (2008). Meaningful learning with technology. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson, Prentice Hall.
Watlington, J. (2011). The Children's Machine. http://wiki.laptop.org/go/The_Children%27s_Machine
Some people still mine for gold. The picture shows the technique called panning. Panning for gold is a separation process developed by early people. How is gold dust separated from sand and other particles in panning? What technique is used to separate gold from other particles?
Various substances are manufactured every day by separating mixture into their components. Bicycles, computers, and even cell phones are produced from materials that are separated from the ground. Crude petroleum is refined to produce fuels, plastics, and edible oil-based products. Many food items and drinks that you consume every day, from table salt to diet cola, are made using processes that involve separating mixtures.
Some methods of separating mixtures can have a positive impact on the environment. Filtering is an example of a separation method with positive consequences. Air and water filters are the two most common types of filters are the two most common types of filters to make water and air clean.
What are the different ways of separating mixtures? Components of a mixture are often easy to separate. Common methods of separating mixtures include picking by hand, decantation, filtration, evaporation, magnetic separation.
Filter - a device or material that traps some substances and allows others to pass through
You have read that sometimes the properties of substances in a mixture are easy to see and easy to handle. You can separate those substances by hand. Separating the parts of a mixture is only useful when the particles are large enough to be seen clearly.
Mixtures made of solids are often easy to separate by hand. For example, you can pick raisins out of bowl of cereal with your fingers. You can also separate some liquid mixtures and liquid-solid mixtures by hand. For a mixture of rocks and water, you can easily pick out the rocks in water.
If the parts of a mixture are hard to see or to hold, you use tools to separate them. By using tools, you also save time. Below are ways of separating mixtures with the use of tools/
Decantation is the careful pouring out of a liquid leaving the undissolved substances at the bottom of the container. It is a simple and fast means of separating liquid from heavier solid particles. The heterogeneous mixture is allowed to stand for sometime to allow the heavy solid particles. The heterogeneous mixture is allowed to stand for sometime to allow the heavy solid particles to settle at the bottom of the container. The liquid called the decantate is then slowly poured out to separate it from the solid. However, this method cannot be used if the solid particles are light and fine. For sand and water mixture, you can separate the water from sand, the residue, through decantation.
Decantate - a liquid poured off from the mixture while leaving the solid materials
Mixtures of liquid and solid can also be separated using filtration. This is ideal for separating solid particles that are light and fine from liquid. Filtration is done with the aid of a filter paper which helps separate the solid particles from the liquid called filtrate. The solid separated by the filter paper is called the residue. The example of a filtration setup is shown in the figure below.
Waste water treatment involves the use of filters that separate impurities from water. This process helps make it possible for municipalities to provide large amounts of treated water for domestic use. Waste water is filtered for consumption at home and this is an example of a positive impact of filtration on society and the environment.
Water purification uses very fine filters to separate dirt and some bacteria from water. Water filters can be used to improve the quality of water. Commercial water filters are often used to remove impurities from the water during the production of different food products.
Many people suffer from asthma or allergies that made worse by breathing air contaminated with dust, pollen, and other matter produced by combustion of fuels. Smog can make it impossible for some people to leave their house. Filters can significantly improve the quality of air both inside and outside the home, making it healthier for people to breathe. For example, air filters are used in air conditioners to help clean the air inside the home. Air filtration has a positive impact on society and the environment..
Air filters are also used in building ventilation systems to ensure that the air is free of dust and other substances.
There are some materials that mix completely and evenly with water. One example is when you dissolve salt in water. How can you dissolve salt in water? How can you remove the salt from the water? You can separate a mixture of salt and water through evaporation. If you allow the water to evaporate, the salt will be left behind. The water that evaporates is called water vapor and the salt that remains is the residue.
For many years, people living near seas have used the heat from sunlight to evaporate seawater and obtain salt. Seawater flows into a large, low-lying area called a salt pan, which is surrounded by dikes. When the water has evaporated, the remaining solid is about 96 percent salt. Pangasinan is a province in Region I known for its quality salt product.
Unlike evaporation where water evaporates and cannot be collected, distillation can collect evaporated water though the cooling and condensation of water vapor into a separate container. The salt does not evaporate and so it stays behind.
Another useful method of separating mixtures is the fractional distillation. This is used to separate different substances that make up crude petroleum oil based on differences in their boiling points The picture below shows an oil facility that uses fractional distillation to refine petroleum.
A sieve or strainer is a device containing tiny holes used to separate a dry mixture which contains substances of different sizes. When you put a mixture in a strainer, anything smaller than the holes falls through them. Anything larger stays in the strainer.
In the beach, it would take a long time to separate the shell from sand and shell mixture. The strainer can quickly separate the sand from the shells.
Strainers and filters separate the components of mixture by sifting the bigger parts from the smaller parts. Other tools separate mixtures, such as their different boiling parts by using properties of the materials in the mixture. A magnet, on the other hand, attracts or pulls objects that contain metal. A magnet can be used to pick up only the objects in a mixture that contain metal like iron filings. Other objects that do not contain metal are left behind.
Recyclers if solid waste often use magnets to separate metals like tin, iron, and steel from other non-metal waste products. These metals are attracted to the magnet and can be removed from nonmagnetic substance, such as wood and plastics. The metals recovered by these process can be melted down and turned into other useful products.
The industrial magnet removes steel and iron from other wastes at a metal-recycling plant.Mining, metal extraction, oil refinement, and many other industrial processes separate useful pure substances and mixtures from other mixtures and solutions. Industries like mining focus on separating metals from rock mixtures. The resulting metals are used in manufacturing products like automobiles to airplanes. Most industries use technology to increase efficiency of metal extraction and to minimize costs and environmental impacts. Each method or process contributes some benefits to society or to the economy.
Impaired Driving, Over 80 and Refusal
R. v. Gray
R. v. Riggs
R. v. Musseau
3rd time impaired, car accident; readings 230; 5 yr driving proh.
R. v. Oxford
R. v. Barry
R. v. Cullen
R. v. White
R. v. Slaney
[2009] N.J. No. 327 (P.C.)
BAC 250; offender and son injured
R. v. Hirtle
R. v. Pittman
[2006] N.J. No. 193 (S.C.)
R. v. Hewlin
[2006] N.J. No. 85 (S.C.)
R. v. Power
R. v. Hunt
R. v. Squires
R. v. Wells
R. v. Connolly
[2002] N.J. No. 40 (P.C.)
R. v. Cull
[2003] N.J. No. 213 (S.C.)
R. v. Gregory Louis Young
R. v. Williams
v • d • e Motor Vehicle OffencesOffences
Dangerous Operation of a Motor Vehicle (249), Flight from Police (249.1), Failure to Stop at Scene of Accident (252), Impaired Driving, Over 80 and Refusal (253), Impaired...Causing Bodily Harm or Death (255), Driving while Disqualified (259)Sentencing
Dangerous Operation of a Motor Vehicle (249), Flight from Police (249.1), Failure to Stop at Scene of Accident (252), Impaired Driving, Over 80 and Refusal (253), Impaired...Causing Bodily Harm or Death (255) Driving while Disqualified (259)
Many thanks, once again, to all those generous and creative souls who contributed to this tutorial effort, and to the many I haven't named who continue to help me see Reaktor's power and possibilities via the several Reaktor on-line forums (there are some good ones at Yahoo and K-V-R, as well as the ones at the NI site). Reaktor users have created an amazing community, and I urge all readers to join in.
Finally, please remember that because Reaktor is such a flexible, open-ended environment, there are certainly many alternative ways to do anything described in this tutorial, and many additional options I haven't even dreamed of. I've simply included here what I thought were the easiest ideas to implement, based on what I could imagine.
So, go boldly forth and invent new stuff... and I hope you'll share your discoveries with the rest of us!
We have been called to be priests unto God , a holy priesthood that is set apart from the world and it's interests, devoted to our High Priest, Yeshua the Messiah.
As Peter said, "But as He who called you is holy, you also be holy in all your conduct, because it is written, "Be holy, for I am holy''"" 1 Peter 1:15-16
"And you, who were once alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now has He reconciled in the body of His flesh through death, to present you holy, and blameless, and above reproach in His sight - if indeed you continue in the faith grounded and steadfast, and be not moved away from the hope of the gospel which you heard .." Colossians 1:21-23a.
Having been saved reconciled to God through His life but there is a process of sanctification which we need to go through to redeem our souls from the corruption of this world. As Paul says,
"Therefore my beloved, as you have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God who works in you both to will and to do of His good pleasure''." Philippians 2:12-13
With this promise and prayer if we continue to walk with Him:
"Now may the God of peace Himself, sanctify you completely, and may your whole spirit, soul and body be preserved blameless at the coming of our Lord, Yeshua the Messiah. He who calls you is faithful, who also will do it''" 1 Thessalonians 5:23-24
We need to give earnest heed to the things we are taught in the Word, taking hold of the precious promises which are given to us so that we might be partakers of the divine nature.
If we do that we will secure our election and our calling into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour, Yeshua the Messiah. 2 Peter 1:2-11
One of the common covalent modifications of protein activity found in animals, palnts, and some viruses. It's donor molecule are Myristoyl CoA which is commonly used to modify protein called Src, main function of signal transduction. The myristoyl group is covalently attached to the N-terminal amino acid of a polypeptide. It is then catalyzed by the N-myristoyltransferase enzyme. It also plays an important role in membrane targeting in response to environmental stress on plants.
Basics | Missions | Vehicles | Items | Appendices
Grand Theft Auto: Vice City is a non-linear driving and shooting computer and video game released by Rockstar Games on October 27, 2002 for the PlayStation 2 and May 12, 2003 for the personal computer, as well as in November 2003 for the Xbox, along with Grand Theft Auto III in the Grand Theft Auto: Double Pack re-release. As the title implies, the game involves an amount of crime and plenty of carjacking. Vice City is also a loose sequel to Grand Theft Auto III (2001).
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
The game takes place in 1986, when player character and protagonist Tommy Vercetti is released from prison and dispatched by Sonny Forelli, head of the Forelli Mafia family in Liberty City, to Vice City for the establishment of a narcotics deal. Unfortunately, as the deal was almost complete, gunmen attack the meeting and kill several other men, while Tommy flees, leaving the drugs and the Forelli-supplied money behind. Together with lawyer Ken Rosemberg and with no money, Tommy is forced to find the party responsible for the attack, and eventually seize power of the city. You, the player, will take the role of Tommy Vercetti after he arrives in Vice City.
Spoilers end here.
This Wikibook will guide you on how to play Vice City, and the features and item available to you in game.
Basics - Learn the basics of the game and the new in Vice City
Missions - A spoiler-free guide to completing Vice City's missions in and outside the game's storyline
Appendices - Miscellaneous information that does not fall in other sections.
Wikipedia has related information at Grand Theft Auto: Vice City
Anyone who wishes to improve on this book is highly encouraged to do so. Before you do, make sure you've read the MediaWiki editing help page and the project metadata page (particularly the project standards page).
If you can't be bothered to create a new page or find the appropriate page to add your content to, try adding it to an appropriate place on the Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) list. This way, someone else can move it to the appropriate place at a later date.
The Odyssey series was a follow up to the original Magnavox Odyssey console made following the acquisition of Magnavox by Philips in 1974.[1][2] This series of consoles began to be released in 1975 as cheaper dedicated consoles with built in games, as opposed to the original Odyssey's ability to play multiple games via jumper cards.[3][4] Unlike the original Odyssey which attempted to offer games from sports to a haunted mansion, Odyssey series consoles stuck to popular sports games.
The last Magnavox Odyssey series consoles were released in 1977[4] and the last Philips Odyssey console was released in 1978.[5] The Odyssey series of consoles were followed by the Magnavox Odyssey², a far more capable console capable of running software on cartridges.
As more models were released, significant technical improvements were made, though these improvements were mostly iterative rather than groundbreaking.
The Magnavox Odyssey 100 was released in 1975.[6] The system was built in the USA with a simple single layer circuit board and four Texas Instruments integrated circuits.[6] Uniquely, the system uses cardboard shielding internally,[6] instead of more durable materials or materials that offered improved radio frequency properties. The system can play either Tennis or Hockey and can generate sound,[7] a notable feature which was not a given in video games at the time.
The 1976 Odyssey 300 offered an improved experience with the ability to display game scores on screen.[8] Previously scorekeeping on Odyssey consoles had been an exercise left to the player.
A different version of the Odyssey 300 that was built into a television set was also sold.[9] This was part of a small trend aimed at a niche market where specific models of television sets were integrated with a specific model of game console, typically for the purpose of saving space, making setup easier, or adding a sales point to a television model at the cost of increased expense and lower reliability.
The Magnavox Odyssey 200.
The Philips Odyssey 200.
The Magnavox Odyssey 500.
The Magnavox Odyssey 300, featuring thin dials.
The Magnavox Odyssey 2000, featuring wider dials.
The Philips Odyssey 2000.
The Magnavox Odyssey 3000.
The Magnavox Odyssey 4000.
The Philips Odyssey 2001, the European version of the Magnavox Odyssey 4000.
The improved Philips Odyssey 2100.
Wikipedia has related information at Odyssey series
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Philips and Magnavox Odyssey series
Pong Story - Contains history, console photos, box art, and screenshots for the Odyssey series.
↑ "The Ultimate Odyssey^2 and Odyssey^3 FAQ". 8 March 2008. https://web.archive.org/web/20080308210653/http://www.digitpress.com/faq/odyssey2.txt.
↑ Koshetz, Herbert (29 August 1974). "North American Phillips Seeks Magnavox Shares (Published 1974)". The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/1974/08/29/archives/north-american-phillips-seeks-magnavox-shares-an-offer-is-made-for.html.
↑ "OLD-COMPUTERS.COM : The Museum". https://www.old-computers.com/museum/computer.asp?st=3&c=1268.
↑ a b "Narrative and Milestones". http://www.cs3.uwsuper.edu/jhogan4/ITS%20370%20Final%20Website/narrative.html.
↑ "Pong-Story: Other Magnavox Odyssey systems". http://www.pong-story.com/odyssey_other.htm.
↑ a b c "Magnavox Odyssey 100 Teardown" (in en). 30 August 2010. https://www.ifixit.com/Teardown/Magnavox+Odyssey+100+Teardown/3531.
↑ Henzel, Matthew. "Magnavox Odyssey 100 @ Video Game Obsession". Video Game Obsession. https://www.videogameobsession.com/videogame/odyssey/odyssey100.htm.
↑ "TheGameConsole.com: Magnavox Odyssey 100 Game Console". http://www.thegameconsole.com/magnavox-odyssey-100/.
↑ "7 Classic Game Consoles Built Into TV Sets" (in en). PCMAG. https://www.pcmag.com/news/7-classic-game-consoles-built-into-tv-sets.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
The echo object is a simple object with only one method. This method takes a single string parameter and returns that string unchanged.
Any CORBA object needs to be defined in CORBA's Interface Definition Language (IDL). The IDL syntax is based on C/C++ including the use of the C preprocessor. Hence we need the usual protection against a double include:
File: test-echo.idl (view, plain text, download page, browse all)
Next we define a module name. While not strictly needed for such a small example it is a good practice never to pollute the global namespace with classes and to use modules instead.
A class is called an "interface" in CORBA IDL. This should not be mixed up with interfaces in Ada or Java. A CORBA interface is the public part of the class — the part of the class you can interface with.
As said, we define just one method. It takes a string called Message as input parameter and returns a string as result.
Before you download the specification below you should try to call the following PolyORB command. It will generate an implementation template for you.
Most CORBA implementations will generate specification and implementation template files for the chosen implementation language. Which implementation languages you can choose from depends on your ORB. In our case it is Ada.
File: test-echo-impl.ads (view, plain text, download page, browse all)
The CORBA module (Test) and class (Echo) is mapped to an Ada package hierarchy — this is the normal way to do object oriented programming in Ada. The CORBA language mapping always tries to map close the implementation language. The Echo hierarchy contains several child packages which are fully generated and need no attention. Only the child package "Impl" contains the actual implementation of our Echo class and needs editing.
The type Object contains any data our class might want to store. However, all data stored is private, in fact all data in CORBA objects are private.
PortableServer.Servant_Base
The Echo function is specified as a normal primitive operation to a normal Ada class. If you are interested to know how Ada classes are declared you can read Ada Programming/Object Orientation.
-- The string which should be echoed.
-- The returned string - which is the same as Message
Here, in the private section of the package, we could now declare data members for our class. However our simple echo class needs no data, so we just declare a "null record". If you are interested to know what it would look like with data members you can read Ada Programming/Types/record.
PortableServer.Servant_Base
Now we know what the CORBA object looks like in Ada we have to actually implement the object. The implementation is a little more extensive than needed — using PolyORB logging facility to produce diagnostic output.
File: test-echo-impl.adb (view, plain text, download page, browse all)
-- The following packages are only initialized but not used otherwise.
-- Test.Echo.Skel is only initialized but not used.
-- a Test Module to test the basic PolyORB functions
-- Initialize logging from configuration file.
-- Log Message when Level is at least equal to the user-requested
-- level for Facility.
Level : in PolyORB.Log.Log_Level := PolyORB.Log.Info)
-- Echo the given string back to the client.
-- The string which should be echoed.
-- The returned string - which is the same as Message
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire
Pepper-Up Potion is a restorative potion. It seems to have the side effect of making steam come out the drinker's ears.
Beginner warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
We first see this potion used after the Second Task of the Triwizard Tournament. Madam Pomfrey is administering this potion to all of the Champions and their "treasures" (hostages to the Merpeople) as they emerge from the lake. Harry does indicate that he feels much warmer once the potion has been administered.
There is a Wizard candy, Pepper Imps, that apparently also makes steam come out the ears; likely it is based on this potion.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
‹ Back to The Dawn of the Twentieth Century
New Zealand's Involvement in World War I
Troops on the Gallipoli shore after the first battle.
After the United Kingdom declared war on Germany in 1914, New Zealand followed without second thoughts. New Zealand only had a small population of just over one million at the time, and was fairly isolated from the rest of the world, but due to New Zealand's strong ties to Britain it offered its services to the Allied Forces.
New Zealand's first act in the war was to seize German Samoa. New Zealand sent 1,413 men to conduct this action and took control of the territory without much resistance. It was the first German territory to be occupied in the name of King George V in the war.
On the 25th of April 1915, New Zealand sent troops to Gallipoli under the command of British General Alexander Godly, along with Australian soldiers, to help seize Constantinople. Due to a navigational error, however, they landed at the wrong point, and the steep cliffs in the cove they had disembarked at offered the Turkish defenders a significant vantage point. Advancement of the New Zealand-Australian forces was impossible. New Zealand suffered casualties of 2,721 dead and 4,852 wounded in the cove, and eventually it was decided to evacuate. The battle was the first great conflict of New Zealand, and the loss was felt greatly in New Zealand. New Zealand troops unloading at a French port
New Zealand forces also helped on the Western Front in France, in which, by the time they were relieved, had advanced three kilometres and taken eight kilometres of enemy front line. 1560 New Zealand men were killed, and 7048 were wounded.
Out of the 103,000 men recruited, 16,697 New Zealanders serving in the war had been killed and 41,317 had been wounded; a 58 percent casualty rate. This was one of the highest rates per capita of any country involved in the war. Approximately a further thousand men died after the war, as a result of injuries suffered.
Forward to New Zealand in the Great Depression ›
This is a critique of the research article: De Backer, I., Vreugdenhil, G., Nijziel, M. et al. Long-term follow-up after cancer rehabilitation using high-intensity resistance training: persistent improvement of physical performance and quality of life. Br J Cancer 99, 30–36 (2008).[1]
Many short-term studies have been completed to assess the effects of physical activity interventions in post-treatment cancer patients, however the long-term effects leave a little more to be answered. In this study, the first of its kind, the completion of an 18-week resistance training program in 68 cancer survivors was followed up for one year.[1] There are many burdens that cancer patients and survivors face in their daily lives, including varying levels of physical and psycho social distress, possibly even extending to financial troubles.[2] This burden can be decreased with a personalized rehabilitation program, before, during and post-treatment for most individuals and has been known in the past to include psychological, physical, financial and work-related interventions depending on the type of cancer and length of treatment.[2]
With 69% of Australian cancer survivors expected to live for at least 5 years post-treatment as of 2015, long-term outcomes of rehabilitation programs are becoming increasingly more important as they are now needed more than ever.[2][3]
This is a clinical trial, assessing the long-term effects of progressive, high intensity resistance training in cancer patients as a form of rehabilitation post-treatment. As it is the first long term study of its kind for this specific cohort it seems a great addition to similar studies on cancer patients. A systematic review completed by Cheema et al found 3 out of 10 similar short-term trials included a long-term follow up post intervention which was presented as either a home-based gym program or different questionnaires.[4]
The findings of the short-term studies aligned positively with the results found in this study, showing that resistance training has the potential to reduce the side effects of cancer including fatigue and muscle wastage.[1]
This study took post-treatment cancer patients from 2 hospitals and implemented a high intensity resistance training intervention in hospital one, and used a similar cohort in hospital two as a control group. The control hospital was unaware of the benefits of resistance training for rehabilitation in cancer patients in the intervention group.
The intervention group completed an 18-week training program that started at least 6 weeks post-treatment. The program included high intensity resistance training and interval training on a cycle ergometer. Patients were trained 2x/wk for the first 12 weeks and 1x/wk for weeks 12-18 and follow up appointments were scheduled for weeks 22, 26, 30, 34 and 68.
Assessed every 4 weeks and readjusted with change in predicted 1RM
European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer Core Quality of Life Questionnaire C30 (EORTC QLQ-C30)
The control group completed the muscular strength and cardio respiratory assessments at week 68.
The results of this research show significant differences in the initial 18 weeks between the control group and the intervention group in each assessed area.
Increased after training up to 18 weeks where it then stabilised and was maintained up until the 68-week check in.
Results show that the participants improved in each exercise they were given.
The week 1-18 training program improved all assessed markers including peak oxygen consumption, maximal workload, peak heart rate and ventilatory threshold. These improvements were maintained from week 18-68 with no significant increase.
MFI showed improvements in all sections not including reduction in motivation in the intervention group. This improvement in fatigue outcome measures persisted until the 68-week follow up. It was shown that there was no significant difference between the intervention and control groups at the 68-week follow up.
Similar to the MFI, the HRQOL survey also showed improvements in the intervention group in the short term however no significant differences were found at the 68-week check in.
As this study is the first to follow up a progressive resistance training program on cancer patients in the long term, I believe that the results were interpreted appropriately, outlining the findings using a statistical analysis with significance level of <0.01 (p-value: <0.01).
The long term benefits of resistance training in this cohort show increases in muscle strength, HRQOL, and fatigue.
Cardiopulmonary function was also shown to increase short-term with interval training.
There is evidence of a significant benefit for including any type of physical activity into the rehabilitation procedures and further into the regular daily habits of post-treatment patients.
Resistance training should be completed under advice of an accredited physician
↑ a b c De Backer, I., Vreugdenhil, G., Nijziel, M. et al. Long-term follow-up after cancer rehabilitation using high-intensity resistance training: persistent improvement of physical performance and quality of life. Br J Cancer 99, 30–36 (2008)">[1]
↑ a b c Holm LV, Hansen DG, Johansen C, Vedsted P, Larsen PV, Kragstrup J, Søndergaard J. Participation in cancer rehabilitation and unmet needs: a population-based cohort study. Supportive Care in Cancer. 2012 Nov 1;20(11):2913-24.[2]
↑ Cancer in Australia statistics | Cancer Australia [Internet]. Canceraustralia.gov.au. 2020 [cited 17 September 2020]. Available from: https://www.canceraustralia.gov.au/affected-cancer/what-cancer/cancer-australia-statistics">[3]
↑ Cheema B, Gaul CA, Lane K, Fiatarone Singh MA (2008) Progressive resistance training in breast cancer: a systematic review of clinical trials. Breast Cancer Res Treat 109: 9–26">[4]
This wikibook describes a step-by-step methodology to port legacy code on Many-Core Architectures.
This methodology is used by High-performance computing (HPC) actors as part of HMPP Competence Centers.
HMPP Competence Centers gather partners to address the many-core programming challenge at the technological (parallel programming, code tuning, etc.) and application levels.
Porting code to many-core systems is a complex operation that requires many skills to be consolidated in order to achieve the plan results for a planned effort.
From the computer science point of view, porting applications to a many-core target consists of providing an equivalent program that runs faster by exploiting parallelism at the hardware level. The goal is to improve the performance, without necessarily using all hardware components. If a serial code-based solution is the best, it should be considered.
There are mainly two interleaved dimensions in migrating an application:
Achieving high performance;
Keeping the code readable/maintainable from the application developers’ point of view. It is a major constraint that the migrated code remains understandable to the owner of the code as well as easy to maintain.
In most cases, the starting point is a sequential legacy program. Its migration is necessary mainly because no automatic process can convert sequential code to a massive parallel version that exploits a large number of cores. Because the rapid evolution of the processor landscape makes software development more complex and usual parallel programming strategies will have to be modified to adapt existing applications in order to take advantage of these new processors.
Besides having a clear view of how to migrate applications onto new Many-core processors (GPU right now), the main objective of a methodology is to reduce risks and to improve efficiency. It is indeed not economically viable to start a project and to realize a few months later after having spent engineering resources and money that the project cannot succeed.
The code migration process defined here is nothing more than a common sense approach of segmenting a development cycle into steps with associated durations. Each step indicates what tools to use and produces a go/no go decision before starting the next phase.
Parallel project definition: in this step a diagnosis of the application is performed in order to evaluate potential speedup and to determine the main porting operations associated to cost. As a prerequisite, a validation process is set up to ensure the validity of the numerical result.
Application porting: in a few weeks, a first functional GPU version of the code is developed and a GPU execution profile is performed to identify bottlenecks in order to improve code efficiency during the following step.
Application optimization: bottlenecks are analyzed and code optimization is performed to get a production code finely tuned. As risks of not succeeding have been raised, this step can last longer than previous ones.
The first two steps are part of the initial phase aiming at exhibiting heterogeneous parallelism. They are performed by programmers who have an intimate knowledge of the application algorithm and computing methods. The third step, the second phase, requires more skills in code tuning techniques.
These steps are defined with a control of the cost in mind. As the migration process goes on, the risk of failure decreases and more manpower can be spent on the final operations. The migration methodology is really oriented toward a “best effort” approach for a given period of time.
Tools presented in figures are examples and can be completed thanks to the references.
The top part in Figure 1 details the steps to perform in order to analyze the code and to define the main migration operations:
Hotspot identification: using profiling tools, this first phase aims at finding the critical hotspots that might benefit from GPU acceleration. Code rewriting might be necessary to increase data parallelism.
CPU analysis: CPU analysis is required to ensure that the original code is sufficiently optimized to serve as a fair performance comparison base. Tuning the CPU code also usually lead to an efficient migration starting point.
Parallelism discovery: this step ensures that the kernels can be executed in parallel. If this is not the case, the accelerator will not be able to achieve a performance gain. Algorithms should then be reconsidered to exhibit parallelism.
Figure 2: Parallel Project Definition & First Application Porting
Bottom box of Figure 2 gives the steps to develop and build a first functional GPU version of an application. They mainly consist in generating and calling the GPU kernels by annotating the previously identified hotspots with HMPP directives.
These steps are performed incrementally: kernels are ported and validated one by one; their performance is evaluated in regard to the original CPU performance so as to check whether they are suitable to GPU execution; basic code transformations as advised by the HMPP Wizard are applied to the kernel computations in order to make them GPU friendly; some data transfers are basically optimized so as to preload data before codelet execution and to suppress redundant transfers of constant data.
This preliminary porting version serves as identifying GPGPU issues as well as validating the parallel properties of the implementation. By enabling to track changes, the incremental way of doing allows to more easily find and correct bugs, at worse to reverse back. It is indeed very easy to lose its way when doing too many transformations at once.
In this last step, the whole hybrid application is optimized by further reducing data transfers, by fine tuning GPU kernel performance and by moving GPU device allocation at application startup.
Checklist for Starting Your Many-Core Migration Project
What are the target architectures and operating systems?
What are the constraints on compilers, libraries, software licenses (e.g. GPL)?
Are all codes and necessary libraries available on the target machine(s)?
Are there representative input data sets available?
Does the parallel execution results need to be bitwise equivalent compared to the sequential ones?
Is the procedure to validate the execution results defined (taking into account changes in floating point rounding)?
Is there a reference person able to answer questions about the application code and algorithm?
Are the performance goals (and on which execution profiles) clearly defined?
What kinds of production runs are usually performed (e.g. throughput mode, under deadline, etc.)?
Banerjee, U., Bliss. B., Ma, Z., and Petersen, P., “Unraveling Data Race Detection in the Intel® Thread Checker,” presented at the First Workshop on Software Tools for Multi-core Systems (STMCS), in conjunction with IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization (CGO), March 26, 2006, Manhattan, New York, NY.
D.F. Bacon, S.L. Graham, O.J. Sharp, Compiler Transformations for High-Performance Computing, "ACM Computing Surveys", December 1994, vol. 26, no 4, pp 345-420
David Blair Kirk, Wen-mei W. Hwu: Programming Massively Parallel Processors - A Hands-on Approach. Morgan Kaufmann 2010: I-XVIII, 1-258
F. Bodin, S. Bihan, “Heterogeneous Multicore Parallel Programming for Graphics Processing Units “, the Scientific Programming Journal, Volume 17, Number 4 / 2009.
G. Hager and G. Wellein: Introduction to High Performance Computing for Scientists and Engineers. CRC Computational Science Series, 2010. ISBN 978-1439811924
Herlihy, M. and Shavit, N., The Art of Multiprocessor Programming, Morgan Kaufmann, 2008.
John L. Hennessy and David A. Patterson. 2003. Computer Architecture; a Quantitative Approach (3rd ed.). Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA.
Kennedy, K. and Allen, J. R. 2002 Optimizing Compilers for Modern Architectures: a Dependence-Based Approach. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
Performance Tuning of Scientific Applications, David H. Bailey, Robert F. Lucas, Samuel Williams
S. Akhter: Multicore Programming: Increasing Performance Through Software Multi-threading. Intel Press, 2006. ISBN 978-0976483243
Timothy Mattson, Beverly Sanders, and Berna Massingill. 2004. Patterns for Parallel Programming (First ed.). Addison-Wesley Professional.
U. Banerjee. Dependence Analysis for Supercomputing. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, Mass., 1988.
There are many resources available on-line, here are a few one.
ACM Parallel Computing Tech Pack: http://techpack.acm.org/parallel/JourneymanTour.pdf
Allinea DDT: http://www.allinea.com/products/ddt/
Allinea OPT: http://www.allinea.com/products/opt/
Automatic parallelization from compilers such as Intel compilers (http://software.intel.com/en-us/articles/automatic-parallelization-with-intel-compilers/), PGI compiler (http://www.pgroup.com/products/pgicdk.htm), PathScale compiler (http://www.pathscale.com/pdf/QuickReference.pdf), etc.
Automatically Tuned Linear Algebra Software : http://math-atlas.sourceforge.net/
Designing and Building Parallel Programs: http://www.mcs.anl.gov/~itf/dbpp/
Discrete Fourier transform: http://www.fftw.org/
GPGPU.org is a central resource for GPGPU news and information: http://gpgpu.org
Gprof: the GNU Profiler. http://www.cs.utah.edu/dept/old/texinfo/as/gprof_toc.html.
GPUCV (GPU-accelerated image processing): https://picoforge.int-evry.fr/cgi-bin/twiki/view/Gpucv/Web/
HpcToolkit: http://hpctoolkit.org/
Intel IPP: http://www.intel.com/software/products/ipp
Introduction to parallel programming: https://computing.llnl.gov/tutorials/parallel_comp/
Linux “time” command: https://computing.llnl.gov/tutorials/performance_tools/#time
Multicore association: http://www.multicore-association.org/workgroup/mpp.php
Opari: http://www.fz-juelich.de/zam/kojak/opari
OpenCL best practice: http://www.NVIDIA.com/content/cudazone/CUDABrowser/downloads/papers/NVIDIA_OpenCL_BestPracticesGuide.pdf
OpenCV (Open Source Computer Vision) : http://opencv.willowgarage.com/wiki/
OpenHMPP: http://www.openhmpp.org/
Oprofile: http://oprofile.sourceforge.net/
Paraver: http://www.bsc.es/plantillaA.php?cat_id=485
Performance Analysis Tools: https://computing.llnl.gov/tutorials/performance_tools/
Rogue Wave TotalView: http://www.roguewave.com/products/totalview-family/totalview.aspx
Valgrind: http://valgrind.org/
Vampire: http://www.vampir.eu
Today, much of the world’s population lives in engineered environments. Most of us are surrounded by technological devices that dramatically affect how we live our lives. We live in houses whose structural, electrical, plumbing, and communications systems have been designed by engineers. We travel in cars, trucks, trains, and airplanes; we communicate with each other using televisions, computers, telephones, and cell phones. Engineers have played a key role in the development of all these devices.
It is not difficult to imagine life without many of these advances; in fact, some of the world's poorest people live today without the benefits that we take for granted, such as clean water and working sanitation systems, plentiful food, and electronic conveniences. Much of the history of engineering has been directed at such problems, and we are the beneficiaries of
The work of engineers has dramatically affected the nature of our society today as well as the course of civilization throughout the centuries. Engineers are often seen as purely technical individuals whose only concern is the development of new devices or structures. However, this is far from the truth. Throughout history, engineers have worked within their societies
Most modern definitions of engineering emphasize the application of knowledge of science and math to develop useful objects, products, structures, and so forth. While this is certainly true of modern engineers, engineering practice has historically extended beyond the use of science and math to include the ingenuity required to make things work. Many engineering feats of the past are even more impressive because they were achieved without a complete understanding of important scientific principles. Thus, for example, medieval cathedral builders can be considered as engineers even though their scientific understanding of forces and loads in structures was limited. Even with today's rapid advances in knowledge, much
The history of the word "engineer" gives some understanding of what engineers have been in the past. The original meaning of the word was one who constructs military engines; military engines were devices such as catapults as well as fortifications, roadways, and bridges. This meaning was expanded to mean one who invents or designs. The meaning of engineers as those who plan and execute public works was established in the early 1600s.
In this chapter, we present just a small fraction of all of the historical events related to engineering. Throughout history, society has been affected by the technological advances created by engineers, and engineers and their technology have both been dramatically affected by the societies in which they occurred. Thus, a complete history of engineering would require a complete history of society, which is clearly beyond the scope of this chapter. Also, this chapter focuses primarily on engineering within the western world, including the Roman Empire, Europe, and later North America.
After working through this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
Give examples of how engineers have used creativity and judgment in the application of math, science, and technology to solve societal problems.
Explain why complex engineering problems are usually solved by teams working within broader social structures.
Explain how engineering progress provides new human capabilities, which in turn increases engineering capabilities.
Give examples of how engineering provides society with both intended and desirable consequences as well as unintended and undesirable consequences.
This material was adapted from the original CK-12 book that can be found here. This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 United States License
Complete Sentential Logic in a Single Module (Very large page, loads very slowly) edit
On ave multe dias de cuando me ia ariva asi.
Me espera ce on no ave multe dias asta cuando me va vide denova tu.
Pos ses oras, me va vide denova tu.
d'aujourd'hui en huit, dans une semaine
"Tutancamun ia deveni la faroa de Egipte antica sirca 1333 aec."
Per indica desenios, sentenios, e milenios, usa esta formas:
A jovedis, nos come tacos.
.
). Then since the absolute value as an operator is convex, we have that
.
Then by the mean value property of subharmonic functions, for any
a) Derive the Rankine-Hugoniot conditions at a discontinuity of the solution.
b)Find a piecewise smooth solution to the IVP
.
, a smooth test function with compact support in
. Then by an integration by parts:
.
. Therefore, the shock wave extends vertically from the origin. That is,
Consider the evolution equation with initial data
a) What energy quantity is appropriate for this equation? Is it conserved or dissipated?
. Integrate by parts to get
.
). Then by the original PDE we get
.
. Consider the initial boundary value problem for
. Show that smooth solutions of this problem are unique.
. It is easy to verify that
.
, i.e.
. Then for any fixed
.
, as desired.
Old firmware versions (pre-"Bastille", 5.12.88) only collect EPG data for the group of channels associated with the currently viewed channel (i.e. those on the same multiplex (or mux)). As you change channel, more data is collected but this is reliant on the broadcaster to actually be sending the correct data (and some muxes are occasionally quite lax about this — either wait for them to sort themselves out or upgrade your firmware!). This is why the Toppy's EPG on these firmware releases actually changes channel as you browse the Guide (if it didn't there would probably be no data to show for some channels). Another issue is that these old firmware versions can only hold about half (or less) of the complete list of EPG data currently being broadcast on Freeview (about 10,000 programmes!), so inevitably the data will be incomplete or have problems.
Newer firmware versions (5.12.88 onwards) collect the EPG data for all channels when tuned to any channel (assuming the broadcaster is sending it — the main BBC channels are pretty reliable). And they have room for the whole Freeview 7 day EPG, although there are still some bugs that cause duplication and waste EPG space.
The channel organisation on Freeview is sometimes shuffled about with no obvious change (the channel may still be viewable) apart from missing EPG data, or your local transmitter may be experiencing problems or maintenance.
Apples are among the most familiar fruits, with a long history of cultivation. This book is about the cultivars of apples (some 7,500 are known to exist).
This book will consist of pages for each apple variety, with information about the qualities and uses of the fruits, as well as technical information about growing them (such as compatible pollenators and rootstocks). Additional chapters will discuss rootstocks and interstocks.
What is the difference between tissue fluid and lymph? Tissue fluid is the fluid that has leaked out of the capillaries into the spaces around the cells of the tissues. Lymph is tissue fluid that has entered the lymphatic system i.e. the difference is largely one of location.
By what route does lymph make its way back to join the blood of the circulatory system? Lymph makes it way back to join the blood in the circulatory system via the lymphatic capillaries, lymphatic vessels, at least one lymph node and the thoracic duct. The lymph then joins the blood in veins that carry it back to the heart.
As the lymphatic system has no heart to push the lymph along what makes it flow? As the lymphatic system has no heart to push the lymph along it is pushed along mainly by the contraction of skeletal muscles that lie alongside the lymphatics.
What happens to the lymph as it passes through a lymph node? As the lymph passes through a lymph node, bacteria and debris are filtered from it and lymphocytes are added to it.
Where is the thymus located in the body? The thymus gland is located in the thorax beneath the sternum and just cranial to the heart.
What is the function of lymphocytes? Lymphocytes defend the body from invasion by microorganisms. Some attach to the organisms directly while others produce antibodies that circulate in the blood and attack them.
Office Space is a comedy movie released in 1999. It was written and directed by Mike Judge, the creator of King of the Hill and Beavis and Butt-head. The movie was promoted using the tagline “Work Sucks." The tagline is indicative of the attitudes towards work that Office Space characters hold. The movie was intended as a satire of life in a typical software company, but has been interpreted as a satire of white collar office life in general.
The film grossed more than $10 million in North America,[1] but was more successful in after-theatre sales,[2] gaining a substantial cult following. It has sold 6 million copies on VHS and DVD.[3]
Peter Gibbons, the main character, is a programmer at Initech, a software company. Peter hates his job. The only coworkers that he can tolerate are his friends Michael and Samir, who also hate their jobs. In particular, Peter hates his boss, Bill Lumbergh, who nitpicks and micromanages him. Bill hires two consultants, Bob and Bob, to assist Initech in evaluating employees and conducting layoffs. The layoffs create a high stress environment in the office, as the employees have to interview for their own jobs.
Peter’s life is changed once he visits a hypnotherapist, who hypnotizes him, putting him in a state of ecstasy. The hypnotherapist dies immediately after hypnotizing Peter. Stuck in his state of ecstasy, Peter does not concern himself with things he doesn’t like doing, like going to work. He shows up sporadically, comes in late, guts a fish on his desk, and knocks down one of the walls of his cubicle. Ironically, Peter’s laid back demeanor strikes the consultants positively and he’s offered a promotion. At the same time, however, he discovers that his friends Michael and Samir will be fired.
After he tells them, the three decide to steal from Initech by planting a virus in its accounting system. They think the theft will be so small that it won’t be noticed. However, they make a mistake and unintentionally steal much more money than they intended. Peter, Samir and Michael are nervous about being caught and sentenced to prison. Peter decides to leave a check for the stolen amount at Initech along with a note taking responsibility for the theft. The next morning, Peter finds the Initech office in flames. The check, along with all the evidence, is destroyed.
Autonomy, or lack thereof, is a strong unifying theme in Office Space. An Initech memo stated that employees should use a specific cover-sheet on their reports. After forgetting to include the cover-sheet on his report, Peter apologizes for his mistake to his managers. They repeatedly ask whether he received a copy of the memo, even while Peter is holding a copy of the memo in plain sight. The managers do not trust Peter to perform even the simplest of tasks. He is not empowered to think for himself. Simply, he has no autonomy. An exchange between Peter and the consultants illustrates this.
Peter Gibbons: The thing is, Bob, it's not that I'm lazy, it's that I just don't care.
Bob Porter: Don't... don't care?
Peter Gibbons: …And here's something else, Bob: I have eight different bosses right now.
Bob Slydell: I beg your pardon?
Peter Gibbons: Eight bosses.
Bob Slydell: Eight?
Peter Gibbons: Eight, Bob. So that means that when I make a mistake, I have eight different people coming by to tell me about it. That's my only real motivation is not to be hassled, that and the fear of losing my job. But you know, Bob, that will only make someone work just hard enough not to get fired.
Peter, Michael, and Samir are also brought together by their lack of duty to Initech. As employees, one would consider it their duty to work in the best interests of the company in all of their actions at work. Peter's description of a typical workday is telling of his opinion of his duty towards the company: "Well, I generally come in at least fifteen minutes late. I use the side door, that way Lumbergh can't see me. Uh, and after that, I just sorta space out for about an hour ... I just stare at my desk but it looks like I'm working. I do that for probably another hour after lunch too. I'd probably, say, in a given week, I probably do about fifteen minutes of real, actual work." At one point in the movie, Lumbergh hangs up a sign that says “Is this good for the company?” indicating that employees should strive to observe their duty to the firm. Later, Peter tears down the sign, an outward sign of how little he cares about Initech. This lack of duty contributes to Peter’s unprofessional actions – theft – later in the film.
Arete is the concept of excellence in a pursuit that is challenging and fulfilling. Describing his work at Initech, Peter says, "I sit in a cubicle and I update software for the two thousand switch... it doesn't really matter. I don't like my job, and I don't think I'm going to go anymore." This statement shows that he has no arete there. The key part of this statement is when he says "it doesn't really matter." Clearly, he has no sense of excellence in his job. This lack of arete that leads him to feel a crushing sense of despair early in the film.
Later in the film, Peter gets a job as a construction worker. This is a job that he may have initially looked down on, but finds fulfilling. When his former coworkers offer him a job at their new firm, he responds that he’s “definitely sure” he doesn’t want a job. The last shot of him in the movie is a wide pan, showing him surveying the workplace with a broad smile on his face: the smile of someone who has achieved happiness through excellence.
Galileo Galilei was a famous astronomer and physicist
Galileo Galilei was an Italian astronomer and physicist most noted for his support for heliocentricism. During his time, heliocentricism was a dangerous view to hold - the Catholic Church described Galileo's views as "altogether contrary to Holy Scripture." [4] The Catholic Church's tasked a special team, known as the Roman Inquisition, to prosecute and try those suspected of heresy and blasphemy. The Inquisition levied various punishments up to the death penalty. Knowing that his writings and teachings could catch the Inquisition's eye, Galileo still continued to write about his observations regarding the solar system. Even later warnings from the Church did not dissuade Galileo from pursuing his steadfast duty to science.
Eventually, the Inquisition put Galileo on trial for his "crimes" and he spent the rest of his life in house arrest.[5] Despite his house arrest, Galileo continued his research and supported the cause of truth and heliocentricism. Although the Church took his physical autonomy, Galileo still retained his professional autonomy and freedom to pursue science. It is clear that Galileo had both autonomy and duty. History proves his arete or excellence since he is titled "The Father of Modern Science"[6] or "The Father of Modern Physics"[7] because of his exceptional contributions to the fields of astronomy, physics and mathematics.
Lucius Cincinnatus was a famous Roman politician from roughly 2500 years ago.[8] Although his story is somewhat apocryphal – it comes from one ancient Roman historian, Livy – it contains highly relevant lessons. Cincinnatus was an important Roman politician, but a scandal brought him down and saw him exiled to a small farm outside of Rome. However, a few years later, Rome was threatened by an invading army, and the Roman government appointed him to a dictatorial position to repel the invaders. In fifteen days, Cincinnatus raised an army and personally led it to victory. On the sixteenth day, he resigned his position as dictator and went back to his farm.[9] His arête and autonomy are both clear here: ability to turn a losing war into a winning war in fifteen days demonstrates that leadership is his area of excellence. And as an appointed dictator, he clearly had an excess of autonomy. But the most compelling aspect of Cincinnatus’s story was his sense of duty to the Roman people. Although he had been exiled, he did not hesitate to come to Rome’s aid when called upon. And after achieving victory, he could have remained as dictator, but his sense of duty to the Roman people and the Roman republic had him resign his power and return to his farm. This duty – a commitment to the people he served, over his own interests – made him a true professional, and a successful one.
The role of autonomy in McNamara’s career is very prevalent. McNamara was given extensive autonomy by President Kennedy during the early years of the Vietnam War. Ted Sorensen, one of Kennedy’s advisors, wrote that Kennedy regarded McNamara as the "star of his team, calling upon him for advice on a wide range of issues beyond national security, including business and economic matters."[11] However, McNamara’s autonomy was significantly restricted under Johnson. McNamara's recommendation to freeze troop levels and stop bombing North Vietnam was rejected by Johnson. [12] Rather than accept his limited autonomy and ability to carry out his professional duties, McNamara resigned in 1968. In this way, McNamara demonstrated uncompromised professional conviction.
There is a great deal to be learned about office ethics from Office Space. In particular, the movie illustrates the concepts of autonomy, duty, and arete through the main character, Peter. While these components are not a comprehensive characterization of a professional, they are necessary components. These concepts have been integral in the conduct of professionals throughout history, as exemplified by Galileo Galilei, Lucius Cincinnatus, and Robert McNamara.
↑ Box Office Mojo (2012). Office Space. Retrieved from http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=officespace.htm.
↑ CNN (2003). Film flops flourish on DVD, VHS. Retrieved from http://edition.cnn.com/2003/SHOWBIZ/Movies/03/04/second.wind/index.html.
↑ The Numbers (2012). Office Space. Retrieved from http://www.the-numbers.com/movies/1999/OFFIC.php.
↑ Decree of the Index. Galileo Trial Documents. Retrieved from http://www1.umn.edu/ships/galileo/library/1616docs.htm.
↑ Weidhorn, Manfred (2005). The Person of the Millennium: The Unique Impact of Galileo on World History. ISBN 0-595-36877-8
↑ Finocchiaro, Maurice A. (Fall 2007). "Book Review—The Person of the Millennium: The Unique Impact of Galileo on World History". The Historian 69 (3) doi:10.1111/j.1540-6563.2007.00189_68.x.
↑ Weidhorn, Manfred (2005). The Person of the Millennium: The Unique Impact of Galileo on World History. ISBN 0-595-36877-8
↑ Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus. (2012). In Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved from http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/117993/Lucius-Quinctius-Cincinnatus
↑ Lucius Q Cincinnatus. (2012). The Cincinnatus Association. Retrieved from http://www.cincinnatusassoc.org/pages/Lucius-Q-Cincinnatus.html
↑ U.S. Department of Defense (2012). Robert S. McNamara. Retrieved from http://www.defense.gov/specials/secdef_histories/bios/mcnamara.htm.
↑ John Shattuck (2012). An Evening with Ted Sorensen.
↑ National Exhibition (2010). Biography of Robert McNamara. Retrieved from http://www.nationalcoldwarexhibition.org/explore/biography.cfm?name=McNamara,%20Robert.
Producers of technical equipment often add new features to every new model in order to make customers buy the latest version. This may lead to Feature bloat where the equipment has many features with limited usefulness. This can lead to various problems for the user:
The user interface is crowded with options so that it is more difficult to find the feature that one needs.
The product becomes more vulnerable or error prone.
Software products become bigger and slower.
SSH is a secure replacement for Telnet and rsh. All communications between the client and server are encrypted. To access an SSH client (usually OpenSSH) in most Unix OSs, type ssh user@host.com in a terminal window. If you don't specify the username, the user that entered the command ($USER) will be used. In Windows, you will need to download a 3rd-party utility such as PuTTY or Cygwin. Find more information in the ssh(1) man page. On other Operating Systems (smart phones for example), you will have to use a webbased client.
There are several SSH apps for Android, including ConnectBot, Dropbear, ServerAssistant, and the Telnet / SSH Simple Client.[1]
SSH is actually so much more than just a way to access a remote shell securely. It can be used for lots of other ways to transfer information securely. It includes a neat utility "scp", which stands for secure copy, which is a great way to copy files between machines. It works almost exactly like the default unix cp command. scp also allows you to copy a file from a remote host to a remote host. An example of scp:
Another great use is to use it to encrypt the transport of any data from one machine to another. As an extreme example, you can use SSH to remotely move a disk from one machine to another (akin to ghost, but securely). This may not be the best use of SSH, or the fastest way to transfer data from one machine to another over a network, but it shows you how powerful SSH can be.
Another great feature is port forwarding. This allows you 'redirect' communication to and from a local application through SSH to another host. So, with SSH you can secure otherwise insecure communications over an encrypted 'tunnel'.
The secure shell client is conveniently called ssh. It is typically used to access a remote host. A typical usage of ssh is
This means that the client intends to login as user on host machine. On successful authentication, an SSH session is established between the client and the host.
SFTP has nothing to do with FTP. SFTP merely works like FTP, meaning you use it as you would FTP. Using SFTP requires only the SSH server. The FTP server is irrelevant to SFTP. Files are transferred as binary by default.
Copy to a remote host - You must use the colon. REMOTE_PATH is not necessary and all REMOTE_PATHs are relative to the user's home directory.
Copy from a remote host ,
Note : If your filename contains spaces then, use scp like this:-
$scp user@host:"/media/sda6/Tutorials/Linux\\ Unix/linux_book.pdf" /home/narendra/data
Note : If you want to copy the whole directory then use
Although SSH can be used with passwords, doing so is not recommended, and many servers will not allow password logins. Instead, use a key - this is more secure, and more convenient.
To create an SSH key ,
Most modern Unix systems include the OpenSSH client. To generate a key, run:
This will store your private key in $HOME/.ssh/id_rsa, and your public key in $HOME/.ssh/id_rsa.pub. You can use different filenames, but these are the default filenames, so it's easiest to not change them.
Because the security of your private key is so important, SSH will not work if file permissions are insecure. SSH will create files and directories with the appropriate permissions, but sometimes things will go wrong. To fix permission issues:
To log into a remote server, you'll need to put the public key on that server's list of authorized keys.
In other words, you need to append a copy of your local ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub file to the end of the remote ~/.ssh/authorized_keys file.
The easiest way to do that is using ssh-copy-id. This requires some alternate form of authentication, usually password (since you haven't got a key on the server you cannot use key authentication yet).
The hard way to do that is to manually do each step that the above ssh-copy-id command does automatically for you:
First ssh-copy-id creates the remote ~/.ssh folder on the destination server, if it does not already exist:
Next ssh-copy-id uploads your PUBLIC key only (not your private key).
Then ssh-copy-id appends your PUBLIC key to the server's list of authorized keys:
Advanced *nix users could do all those steps in one line:
You don't need to set up a ~/.ssh/config file, but it makes authentication easier. The important part is to specify your user name and your private key - if this is specified in the config file, you needn't provide it on the command line. Using HostName, you can shorten the ssh command to:
HostName some_host.com
User domain\username
IdentityFile ~/.ssh/KEY
IdentityFile ~/.ssh/key_37_rsa
You can now ssh into some_host.com with just ssh Short_Name.
This part assumes that you are not using a ssh client configuration file and that your keys are protected with a passphrase. An excellent BASH utility script called Keychain automates and simplifies the tedious use of ssh-agents. If your host does not have Keychain installed, ask your administrator. Alternatively you can download and unpack the script into your home directory from the Keychain website.
Start your agent on your local host
Access your forwarded agent from a remote host
This will prompt you for a password (if you gave your key one!).
The most significant difference between SSH and Telnet & rsh is in the realm of security. SSH uses RSA or DSA for public-key cryptography.
The server or domain to which you are trying to connect generates 2 keys (public and private) for a client.
The public key is given to the client the first time it tries to connect. The corresponding private key is a secret and kept with the server.
The client sends the packets of data by encrypting it through the public key and this data is decrypted by using the corresponding private key stored there.
Communication from the server to the client is also possible in the same way—the server encrypts using the client's public key and the client decrypts using it's private key.
Setting up OpenSSH with public key cryptography
With your distro's package manager, install sshd (or openssh-server) on the server, and on the client install ssh (or openssh-clients). It is likely that they're already installed since they're probably part of the distro's default installation.
On the client command line, run ssh-keygen ("rsa" is the default, it is not necessary to explicitly specify "rsa").
Copy where you saved your generated keys/id_rsa.pub to portable storage.
Bring the portable storage to the server and mount it as the user you will be remotely logging in as. Don't log out yet.
Add either sshd:ALL or sshd:IP of client to /etc/hosts.allowed.
Open TCP port 22. This varies depending on your firewall. For Fedora Core, RHEL, and derivatives, this can be done with system-config-securitylevel. For other GNU/Linux systems, echo '-A INPUT -p tcp -m tcp --dport 80 --syn -j ACCEPT'>>/etc/sysconfig/iptables and restart the iptables service. You may wish to run sshd on a non-standard port.
Stop using DHCP and assign a static IP address to your server. See the Gentoo Handbook for instructions if you do not know how.
Forward TCP port 22 to your server.
(Re)start the sshd service.
Test the setup by running ssh user to login as on the server@IP or domain of the server. Tip: If the username that you are logging in as on the server is the same as the one you're currently using on the client, you don't need to specify the user to log in as on the server.
If you can make an SSH connection, you can (most likely) use that connection as a SOCKS proxy, without any extra setup on the remote computer. Traffic is tunneled securely through the SSH connection. If you are on an unsecured wireless connection, you can use this to effectively secure all your traffic from snooping. You can also use this to bypass IP restrictions, because you will appear to be connecting from the remote computer. Note that DNS traffic is not tunneled.
Pick some big port number (bigger than 1024 so you can use it as non-root). Here I choose 1080, the standard SOCKS port. Use the -D option for dynamic port forwarding.
That's it. Now as long as the SSH connection is open, your application can use a SOCKS proxy on port 1080 on your own computer (localhost). For example, in Firefox on Linux:
You can also use ssh from a webbrowser with javascript support even when you don't have a secure shell client. In order to do this you have to install AnyTerm, AjaxTerm or WebShell on the system where the SSH server is running or use a third party service like WebSSH.
"Top Free Android SSH Tools"
"Mediawiki: Set Up SSH Keys in Gerrit" has a step-by-step tutorial on setting up SSH keys.
"Github: Generating SSH Keys" has yet another step-by-step tutorial on setting up SSH keys.
How would you expect H-2 and U-235 to be used in nuclear reactors? Why?
H-2 is used in experimental fusion reactors, since it has a smaller nucleus than Iron-56.
Sample Graphs of Various Functions and Relations
y=x! other functions and relations in other sections
Second Graphing section: translations symmetries +/- inversions inverse relations ellipse circle square roots inequalities of these
Translation (shift) in x and y directions
Given 0=x^a y^b + x^c y^d etc, can deduce asymptotes/intersects from smallest polygon containing points (a,b) (c,d) etc
ELEMENTARY GEOMETRY for College Students, 2nd Edition, by Daniel Alexander and
Geralyn Koeberlein, Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, MA 1999.
ALGEBRA AND TRIGONOMETRY with Analytic Geometry, Ninth Edition, by Earl Swokowski
The same data plotted using a pie chart and a bar chart.
Pie charts are best used to compare parts to the whole by percentages. By measuring the number of degrees that a piece of the pie chart is, one can find the percentage it represents.
Bar charts are best for plotting the change in something over a period of time. It is nearly the same as a line chart, except that the points are not connected, and instead extend to the bottom of the chart.
Market research sounds like something reserved for the Coca-Colas of the world—corporate giants trying to learn whether a new product will make them millions overnight. In fact, good market research is not only accessible to you, but critical to your product’s success. So what is it? Market research takes on many different forms, but a standard, broad definition is the following: market research is the systematic collection, analysis, and reporting of data about the market and its preferences, opinions, trends, and plans.
There are a wide variety of affordable market research techniques for you to choose from.
Although the name might lead you to think otherwise, most people begin with secondary research. Secondary research involves consulting published reports to find out:
The information needed to perform secondary research is easily available, and it’s often free. The most accessible sources include:
Secondary research can sometimes lead you to contradictory or inaccurate conclusions. It can be helpful, however, in forming a preliminary research strategy.
Primary research is more expensive than secondary research, but the results are more accurate and conclusive. Primary research helps you get up close with your customers, finding out who they are and what they want. There are two broad categories of primary research: qualitative and quantitative.
Using small groups of people, qualitative research helps answer a specific question about your product or your customers, and may include one-on-one interviews or focus groups. Focus groups typically gather about ten people together to discuss or react to a product. The session may be moderated by a professional facilitator who can ask probing questions and help stimulate rich data. Holding more than one session is useful; focus group participants are usually paid.
While qualitative research isn’t particularly useful for predicting sales, it is a very effective tool in getting to know your customer.
Quantitative research involves surveys of large numbers of people, and can be statistically validated. It makes a better tool than qualitative research for predicting sales.
A survey targets customers or potential customers, and can be administered via phone, mail, e-mail, or the Web. Surveys get the best response when there is some kind of reward for participating. It may be worthwhile to hire a professional firm to both administer the survey and analyze the data. Phone and mail surveys are expensive and are not cost-effective unless a significant number of people are motivated to respond. E-mail and online surveys are much cheaper, but they limit the target population to computer users (which may or may not be problematic, depending on the nature of your product).
Sometimes traditional market research doesn’t meet the mark. Some of the most successful companies opt for creative market research methods that bring them face-to-face with consumers on their own turf. Focus groups and surveys create a laboratory-like environment where people may have trouble expressing their true feelings (for example, says Growing Healthy baby food founder Julia Knight, “What mother, especially in front of other mothers, would really tell you that she spent more on cat food than on baby food?”); using newer methods, companies watch customers in stores and in their homes to observe how they purchase and use products.
No matter how you go about it, performing market research is not a one-time activity. There will be a back-and-forth between modes of research: you’ll do a bit of secondary research so you can talk to people, then do primary, then go back to secondary. The primary helps orient you and allows you to pick up key concepts and words for searching.
Above all, you need to keep a steady flow of data coming in to help you make decisions about next steps. The type of data you collect depends on exactly what you need to learn about the market. Market research is a worthwhile investment which, if you do it right, will enable you to avoid fatal missteps.
Looking for a cheap and easy way to do market research? Contact would-be customers for advice.
When Karen Scott got started in the mail-order baby products business, she put together her own focus group -- using the local newspaper. After clipping 250 birth announcements, Scott contacted the new moms. She sent them surveys and conducted phone interviews, asking what products they would find interesting or useful. Based on the responses, Scott added more travel products at her company, Chelsea & Scott, in Lake Bluff, Ill. Ten years later, travel products are top sellers at the $28 million business.
For good secondary research resources, visit your school library. There you can access online fee-for-service data sets, including referred literature, trade literature, and large data bases of newspapers from around the globe. Government sites like the Census, USDA (for food and agriculture), DoE (energy), EPA (environment), and CDC and NIH (medical) are all very helpful as well.
Also, try http://www.fedstats.gov for a catalog of sites with government research statistics.
The following are examples of ways that companies are breaking away from traditional market research techniques by getting out of the laboratory and into the space where people live.
Julia Knight, founder of frozen baby food company Growing Healthy, dressed like a shopper and cruised the frozen food aisle to watch parents at work. She discovered that children didn’t like that cold area of the store, and pressured their parents to move on before the parents had a chance to carefully observe and consider the product. Knight lobbied supermarkets to place cutaway freezers in the baby food section, thus creating a more hospitable market for her product.
Brendan Boyle and Fern Mandelbaum of Skyline Products, Inc. set up focus play groups for 6-8 children. With the kids, they got down on the ground and learned firsthand what was appealing or not appealing about the toys they planned to market. Although they found that the children were pretty frank in their responses, the pair learned even more by asking parents what the children said in the car on the ride home. In some cases, the children revealed more about their true likes and dislikes to their parents than they would to strangers.
Judy George, CEO and founder of furniture chain Domain Stores, placed a video camera in one of her stores to observe customer behavior. Her tapes revealed that nearly all of the customers arrived in pairs. The male partners seemed uncomfortable in the environment, creating pressure on the females to leave the store before they had an opportunity to make purchasing decisions. George was able to combat this situation by creating comfortable spaces for men to sit and watch sports on television while the women explored.
From “The New Market Research,” by Joshua D. Macht, Inc. Magazine, July 1, 1998.
Introduction —Going to classes —Assignments —Studying —Taking notes —If You Must Cram —Exams —Practice —Resources —Licensing
How to Write a Research Paper in History
Primary Assessment & Basic Life Support —
Medical Conditions & Poisoning —
Feel free to move things around as tasks get completed
First Aid/Critical Incident Stress & Victim Death
First Aid/Chest & Abdominal Injuries#Abdominal Injuries
First Aid/Appendix D: Notes for First Aid Instructors (this is low-priority)
First Aid/Poisoning#Injected Poisons
Expand First Aid/Appendix B: Behind the Scenes
Use these templates to spruce up the book
Use development stages to indicate which modules need expansion
Please keep Sources up-to-date. If you use a source, put it there.
All pages for first aid (i.e. not CPR or "concept" pages, but actual first aid content pages) need a common organization system:
Introduction: (what it is, how it happens, what's going on physiologically)
Recognition: Signs & Symptoms (including notes about how to differentiate it from other things with similar S&S)
These issues are currently being actively discussed, and we'd love to have your input:
Talk:First Aid#Disclaimers
Do we want to keep the disclaimers on First Aid? – Mike.lifeguard | talk 05:20, 22 November 2007 (UTC)
Not kept – Mike.lifeguard | talk 22:06, 28 November 2007 (UTC)
Wikibooks:Featured books/Nominations#First Aid (PDF)
First Aid has been nominated for Featured Book status! – Mike.lifeguard | talk 05:20, 22 November 2007 (UTC)
Talk:First Aid/Life-Threatening Medical Emergencies#Deletion of module
Whether to keep the Life-Threatening Medical Emergencies module or not
Not kept – Mike.lifeguard | talk 23:39, 4 November 2007 (UTC)
Talk:First Aid/Oxygen Administration#Proposal for deletion
Whether to keep the oxygen admin module or not
Kept – Mike.lifeguard | talk 23:39, 4 November 2007 (UTC)
Talk:First Aid/Emergency First Aid & Initial Action Steps#AVPU or ALVPU
Whether to keep the 4-point scale, or move to a 5-point scale
4-pt scale seems standard – Mike.lifeguard | talk 23:39, 4 November 2007 (UTC)
A proposal to re-organize the BLS chapter to match First Aid/CPR summary
Talk:First Aid#Emergency Childbirth
Whether we want to include it at all, and if so, where?
Not included; content remains on the talk page for future use elsewhere – Mike.lifeguard | talk 23:39, 4 November 2007 (UTC)
Talk:First Aid/Emergency First Aid & Initial Action Steps#BLS Chapter
Where AEDs fit into this book: BLS or advanced skill?
AED use is an advanced skill; Basic AED knowledge is included throughout – Mike.lifeguard | talk 23:39, 4 November 2007 (UTC)
Which, if any mnemonic should be used? Perhaps using AAA as a structural organization and GODRSHAVPU as a mnemonic would be best?
This was done – Mike.lifeguard | talk 23:39, 4 November 2007 (UTC)
Talk:First Aid/B for Breathing#ILCOR/AHA only, or include regional standards?
Talk:First Aid/C for Compressions#I believe
Talk:First Aid/Extended Assessment#Keep the Article?
Whether to keep the extended assessment module
Kept – Mike.lifeguard | talk 23:39, 4 November 2007 (UTC)
Talk:First Aid#Victims, patients, casualties
We reached consensus on this one, and I already made the changes.
We're using victim for everything except in Advanced Topics, where we'll have the option of using patient. – Mike.lifeguard | talk 02:09, 16 July 2007 (UTC)
Sample first aid report —
What needs to be done?
A recent study in Archives of Internal Medicine provides more evidence that high salt diets have negative effects on health, and found that:
People who eat high sodium, low potassium diets have a higher risk of dying a heart attack or from any cause.
People can make a key dietary change to help lower their risk: Eat more fresh vegetables and fruits, which are naturally high in potassium and low in sodium—and eat less bread, cheese, and processed meat, as these and other processed foods are high in sodium and low in potassium.
Taoster (discuss · email · contribs · logs · count)
Ran (discuss · email · contribs · logs · count)
M4RC0, Yug and Wikic all made substantial contributions to the Chinese stroke order project on Wikicommons, which are used in our lessons. Peter Isotalo, also of Wikicommons, contributed the first audio samples used in this Wikibook.
In addition, the authors would like to thank the development team in relation with the Wikimedia Foundation and its affiliates, without whom our text could not be so accessible.
Path selection.
How well do you handle diversity in your everyday life? Would you be scared to work with disabled children? How would you approach a student who is dealing with gender identification problems? Would you be able to teach a non English culture student American history without offending his or her original culture? How would you be able to help a code switching student with a grammar problem? You should be able to come with answers to these questions after reading this chapter.
Schools are a miniature replica of the type of people our world consists of. Throughout the chapter you will be introduced to topics such as: inclusion, ADHD children, non American cultured students such a code switcher, students with gender issues and the challenge of the gifted. Like the real world, schools have laws by which they should abide by. Some of these laws are made to protect the student’s best interest during their educational years. Some laws are to protect the teachers, administrative, and principal personnel so that they are able to manage effectively the educational environment for students.
The objective of this chapter is to introduce to you school practices and law information that are used to handle the students mentioned above. After reading this chapter you should be able to develop a better understanding on how to handle and manage types of students within legal guidelines and school practices if ever encountered in a classroom during your teaching career. No matter what subject you will teach, you will be faced with at least one or more types of diverse students within a classroom. It would be in your best interest to gain the knowledge to be able to manage the situation and offer a positive learning experience for all. As teachers we are encouraged to become chameleons throughout our career. Learning for and from our students is the best achievement we should meet to become the facilitator they need to succeed.
Leader: Shemini Atzeret is an eighth day continuing on from the seven days of Sukkot and is a separate appointment with Yahweh God to anticipate our expectation of eternity in the new heavens and the new earth. Torah reading is connected to Succot and this final day of Shemini Atzeret is celebrated as a rejoicing over the Torah, called in Hebrew Simchat Torah.
Female Leader: Baruch atah Yahweh, Eloheynu, Melech ha-O'lam, asher keed-sha-nu beed-va-reh-cha v’na-than la-noo et Y'shua M’she-chay-nu, v’tzee-va-nu l’he-oat oar la-O'lam v tsivanu, l hadleek naer shel Yom Tov. Amein
Blessed are You Yahweh, our God, King of the Universe, Who has sanctified us in Your Word, and given us Y'shua our Messiah, and commanded us to be light to the world and commanded us to kindle the Festival lights.. Amen.
Baruch atah Yahweh, Elochenu Melach ha-olam, she-he-cheyanu, v keey manu, v higee anu, la-z man ha-zeh.
Blessed are You, Yahweh, our God, King of the universe, who has preserved us alive, sustained us, and caused us to attain this season.
Leader: “Baruch atah Yahweh, Eloheynu, Melech ha-O'lam, asher natan lanu Torah-emet, v'chay-yeh o'lam nata-b'tochenu. Baruch atah Yahweh, nateyn ha-torah Amein"
Blessed are You, Yahweh our God, King of the universe, Who in giving us Y'shua the Living Torah, has planted everlasting life in our midst. Blessed are You, Yahweh, giver of the Torah.
Leader: Sh' ma Yis' raeil, Yahweh Eloheinu, Yahweh Echad. Hear, O Israel, Yahweh our God is One.
Congregation: Y'hay sh'may rabboh m'vorach l'olam ool'ol'may ol'm'yoh
May His Great Name be blessed forever and for all eternity
Leader: Barchu et Yahweh hahm vorach. Bless Yahweh Who is blessed.
Congregation: Baruch Yahweh khvod malchu tol olam va' ed. A mein.
Baruch atah Yahweh, Elochenu Melach ha-olam, borae pree hagafen. Amen.
Blessed are You, Yahweh our God, King of the universe, Creator of the fruit of the vine. Amen.
Blessed are You, Yahweh our God, King of the Universe, who has chosen us from among all nations and has sanctified us by the blood of Y'shua.
Blessed are You, Yahweh our God, King of the Universe, who sanctifies the Festival of Shemini Atzeret.
Baruch atah Yahweh, Elocheinu Melech ha-olam, ha-motsee lechem min haarets. Amein.
Blessed are You, Yahweh our God, King of the universe, Who brings forth bread from the earth. Amen.
Reader: (each verse is read by the reader and repeated by the congregation - different readers for each verse can be used)
"To you it was shown, that you might know that Yahweh Himself is God; there is none other beside Him. (Deut 4:35)
"Who is like unto You Yahweh among the mighty ones, glorious in holiness, awesome in praises, doing wonders, blessed are You, Yahweh" (Exodus 15:11)
"For Yahweh is the great God, and the great King above all gods." (Psalm 95: 3)
"God has gone up with a shout, Yahweh with the sound of the shofar. Sing praises to God, sing praises! Sing praises to our King, sing praises! For God is king over all the earth; Sing praises with understanding. (Psalm 47:5-7)
"And all the house of Israel brought up the ark of Yahweh with shouting and with the sound of the shofar" (2 Samuel 6:15)
"For out of Zion shall go forth the Torah and the word of Yahweh from Jerusalem" (Isaiah 2: 3)
[scroll removed for the procession and dancing - banners may be used]
A processional circuit of the altar seven times while scripture is read --
In the synagogue when the Ark is opened and all the scrolls have been taken out, everybody in the synagogue is given an opportunity to dance with them. Each dance begins with a circuit of the bimah (the central platform in the synagogue from which the Torah is read), which symbolises the altar in the Temple. This is done seven times to the singing of various Hebrew melodies. This joyous parade is called the “hakafot” and everyone is given an opportunity to take part in it.
The endless circle of dancing symbolises the eternity of Torah and its Author, who has also given us an inheritance in his eternal kingdom. In this we rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.
"Arise O Yahweh to Your resting place, You and the ark of Your strength. Your priests will be clothed in righteousness, Your saints will shout aloud for joy." (Psalm 132: 9) [read when scroll is returned]
Final Portion VeZot Habrachah 33: 1-34-34:12 (divided into three aliyot - i.e. portions)
Yahweh v yish-marechah. Yaer Yahweh panav aelechah veechu-nechah. Yisah Yahweh panav aelechah v ya-saem l chah shalom. B Shaem Y shua haMoshiach, Sar haShalom. Amein.
Yahweh bless you and keep you. Yahweh make His face to shine upon you and be gracious unto you. Yahweh lift up His countenance upon you and give you peace. In the name of the Prince of Peace, Y'shua the Messiah. Amen.
Yom tov Ve'al yom Shmini Atseret hachag hazeh.
Have a blessed day for this day of Shemini Atzeret
The traditional original type of Torah scrolls are kept in an "Ark" and are removed from them for each participant to dance with them, or for the leader to lead a procession of dancing. They are returned to the Ark when the celebration is finished.
In traditional settings, all kohanim and leviim--priests and Levites--are honored first, followed by the congregation. Each procession is done to the chanting of prescribed hymns. To these are added songs and hymns of a joyous nature.
It is also customary to hand out flags for children to carry, supposedly reminiscent of the tribal flags under which the Israelites marched in the desert.
For a new-user walk-through explaining how to create various types of content, see the How-To-Guides index page instead.
This page acts as reference manual for all Trainz content, and its legal asset-oriented data types (KINDs) and other aggregate data structures (generally, containers as computer science defines such).
Every Trainz asset from the mighty collection of assets contained in a route to the lowliest scenery item such as imitation grass, the color of a rock or field—all have two things in common: The list of common legal keyword names (tags, kinds and containers) which begin the definition of the asset found in the TrainzBaseSpec and the satisfactory completion of their applicable requisite data elements in a config.txt file.
Unlike the N3V Games controlled Trainz Wiki with the narrow focus mainly intended to provide accurate and concise description of the capabilities and configuration of Trainz current-version content, this work, the TWBK aims to cover the relations of the older data forms to the new and the rationales in their evolution, regrouping, or inception. To the new user, particularly those with no familiarity with programming language practices, the information on this page can become a starting point to understanding.
This Trainz/Refs/Content Configuration section is a stub placeholder, an outline or marker that this section of the book is otherwise incomplete. You can help the Wikibooks Trainz project by expanding it with fuller discussion of the topic. Work needed: Needs intro tie in to data model, since just promised was the start of understanding computer practices. Sigh...
Main basics are covered in: Anatomy of an asset, the beginners and AM&C Config.txt files pages linked (respectively) in the paragraph below:
Each item of Trainz content ("an asset") is created as the contents of a single operating system folder, containing a config.txt file and some number of supporting files and/or folders and their files. Files located in the content folder must obey the Filename character restrictions and each item should be directly relevant to the asset in question. When committed or as in newer Trainz releases, tested for validation before commitment, the asset's folder contents and the config.txt file will be validated against one another, the ideal minimum definitions will be bounced against those and each must be in balance and correct with respect to one another.
Each asset built for the Trainz environment follows a preset template, which defines what tags can be included in the config.txt file, what capabilities the asset will have, and how the user can manipulate the asset in-game. The following types of custom content are supported by Trainz:
All Trainz defined data (content) has three required elements: A config.txt file to organize the data, an identity meaning a kuid (username alone will do you no good, a legal asset however can be created without a name!) and last, a legally defined kind tag. The kind is in charge, the conductor of the orchestra, the Platoon Sargeant or CEO giving directions — setting up the requirements for everything that gets processed after. In short, the kinds' value, a small select tightly defined members-only group — tells Trainz software what is to be rendered and displayed in the virtual worlds we create, and how (or where) to find the other parts needed to make those parts of the asset linked together in that config.txt file.
Each of the below Child Classes are considered to have the TrainzBaseSpec as their 'Parent Class' of data.[note 1] A few kinds listed below, those which are underlined, are legacy kinds antedating changes to the Trainz data model in the release of TS2009 (i.e. since late 2008), with only gradual (incremental) changes imposed since by the N3V programmers.
Details for fixing assets based on these legacy kinds can currently be found in the Content Creator's Guide section of the N3V Trainz Wiki TrainzOnline site here with illuminating examples of legacy Kinds here. Perusal of the CCG is highly recommended to any users of the Trainz Download Station or anyone contemplating creating content. The insights gained from understanding of the background history of how older content was defined can then be contrasted with the current TrainzOnline coverage of the same data type and compared, for often this kind of then-vs.-now provides valuable insights to fixing, altering and customizing assets. More to the point, the writing in the CCG was professionally produced and is far more tautological—it will often give you insights as to extended effects if this or that is altered, which the Trainz Wiki just doesn't provide. The CCG put up on TrainzOnline is the TC1&2/TC3 version — the last published of several booklets printed dating back to Trainz in 1999; the TC3 CCG contains the altered Enginespecs Locomotive assets from the TRS2004/TRS2006 AND UTC data models need to be properly updated.
TrainzBaseSpec Child Class KINDs (type asset groups)
File:A Category in CM are an aid to sorting and selecting appropriate content varieties which are classified into groups by N3V loosely based on category-class and Kinds A Category in CM are an aid to sorting and selecting appropriate content varieties which are classified into groups by N3V loosely based on category-class and Kinds.
A list Category in content manager (CM) are implemented as an aid to sorting and selecting appropriate content varieties which are classified into groups by N3V loosely based on category-class and Kinds.
Category-era and Category-region in Trainz's CM are separate dropdown entries for sorting and selecting appropriate mixes of criteria when narrowing down content numbers
Category-region and category-era are classification tags identifying assets that would be found in a time or place—note they are not searched by using the category dropdown list, but are separate line entries. Each of these tags have the job of classification, which are used in narrowing down a particular sort of asset search when running Content Manager or such searches can be used to group assets, which are then useful mainly in filters inside Surveyor.
For Asset by enumerated categories search. The 'CM search by Category' is defined by N3V's programmers, and does not directly correspond to all asset Kinds and category-class tagses.
Content Configuration Feature Requests - ask here for new config.txt files features
Categories are the sometimes overlooked superhighways of getting around in a Wiki project, and the user will find these listed are index pages to finding things faintly remembered efficiently and effectively:
The following category pages will list and index Trainz specific articles throughout this Wikibook
Trainz Assets related how-to topics from running and using Software tools, repairing faults, to making progress as an world builder and modifying assets to suit your needs.
Trainz Assets related how-to topics from running and using Software tools, repairing faults, to making progress as an world builder and modifying assets to suit your needs.
This reference page may be based on or adapted from portions of freeware (Public Domain) assets used as examples and/or from the TrainzOnline Wiki under the CC-BY-SA 3.0 License. This page will likely include more textual explanations, exposition, history, and/or examples than the source page on the same material.The TrainzOnline Wiki is for the most part maintained by the programmers or knowledgeable content creators and may have newer more up-to-date information on the current trainz-build code standards, which have some tendency to change as features are added to the software.
Description: Phrases do not show up in the Portions Found window if they end with a question mark and are surrounded by double quotes.
Example: "Forgotten your password?"
Reproduction: Can be reproduced.
Try it after checking all Autosearch Environment options except "Hide embedded codes".
--Javier Arrizabalaga 09:25, 13 February 2007
If possible it should work without displaying "Portions from Translation Memory" and "All subportions" (note that both of these need to be enabled to display these kind of portions - just enabling one of them won't work).
I have tested it again and works if the portion is the text of a segment (without more text in the same segment). If the portion is part of a sentence, it does not appear in Autosearch.
--Javier Arrizabalaga 09:25, 14 February 2007
Said phrase was added to the TDB as "Forgotten your password?" (without quotes). Still it does not appear in the Portions Found window if the source text contains "Forgotten your password?" (with quotes). This seems to be inconsistent with your observations. Is this correct?
That's correct. I was trying with the sentence "Forgotten your password?" (with quotes) in both the segments and the TDB. When I have removed the quotes in the segment, not suggestions are shown in the Autosearch Window.
LMIs in Control/pages/Nonconvex Multi-Criterion Quadratic Problems
The Non-Concex Multi-Criterion Quadratic linear matrix inequality will allow one to form an optimized controller, similar to that in an LQR framework, for a non-convex state space system based on several different criterions defined in the Q and R matrices, that are optimized as a part of the arbitrary cost function. Just like traditional LQR, the cost matrices must be tuned in much a similar fashion as traditional gains in classical control. In the LQR and LQG framework however, the gains are more intuitive as each correlates directly to a state or an input.
The system for this LMI is a linear time invariant system that can be represented in state space as shown below:
.
Here the symmetric matrices,
.
The solution to this problem proceeds as follows: We first define
If the solution exists, then
This implementation requires Yalmip and Sedumi.
A list of references documenting and validating the LMI.
LMI Methods in Optimal and Robust Control - A course on LMIs in Control by Matthew Peet.
LMI Properties and Applications in Systems, Stability, and Control Theory - A List of LMIs by Ryan Caverly and James Forbes.
LMIs in Systems and Control Theory - A downloadable book on LMIs by Stephen Boyd.
Stretching is a form of physical exercise in which specific muscles or tendons are intentionally bent or stretched to improve muscle elasticity and obtain comfortable muscle tone.
(CIE) Peter Astbury - Alexandria, Egypt
Students from Christ the King Sixth Form College
Thanks for helping out!
At times we need to access files and folders to provide input for procedures, and the code below will do this. They are not much different to the dialogs that Windows uses, and each of them works by returning a full path string to the chosen item. When a folder is selected, the returned string does not include the end backslash; the user needs to add that himself.
Only one file selection dialog is given, and no significant fault can be found with it. Two folder dialogs are included, one in the same family as the file dialog and the other based on an API. (Credit to Chip Pearson.) These two look a bit different in use, so it is left to the user to choose between them. All three can be run from the test procedure.
Just copy the entire code listing into a standard module for use.
This code was tested as working for Excel 2010 32 bit systems, but does not work for Excel 2019 64 bit. It is understood that the declarations no longer conform in their present format. Some difficulty has been encountered in finding a universal layout.
The default file-type listing that opens in SelectFile() is decided by which of the Filters.Add code lines appears first in the sequence. For example, to have the All Files as your prefered listing, just move that line so that it immediately follows the Filters Clear line. Of course, the listing can also be changed by selecting the drop menu while the dialog is open.
' API version code credit to Chip Pearson at http://www.cpearson.com/excel/browsefolder.aspx
' This contains the BrowseFolder function, which displays the standard Windows Browse For Folder
' dialog. It returns the complete path of the selected folder or vbNullString if the user cancelled.
Private Const BIF_RETURNONLYFSDIRS As Long = &H1
Private Const BIF_DONTGOBELOWDOMAIN As Long = &H2
Private Const BIF_RETURNFSANCESTORS As Long = &H8
Private Const BIF_BROWSEFORCOMPUTER As Long = &H1000
Private Const BIF_BROWSEFORPRINTER As Long = &H2000
Private Const BIF_BROWSEINCLUDEFILES As Long = &H4000
Private Declare Function SHGetPathFromIDListA Lib "shell32.dll" (ByVal pidl As Long, _
Private Declare Function SHBrowseForFolderA Lib "shell32.dll" (lpBrowseInfo As _
Private Const MAX_PATH = 260 ' Windows mandated
'run to test the file selection dialog
'run to test the folder selection dialog
'run to test the API folder selection dialog
Function BrowseFolder(Optional ByVal DialogTitle As String = "") As String
' This displays the standard Windows Browse Folder dialog. It returns
' the complete path name of the selected folder or vbNullString if the
' user cancelled. Returns without and end backslash.
If DialogTitle = vbNullString Then
.ulFlags = BIF_RETURNONLYFSDIRS ' + BIF_USENEWUI
''' Retrieve the path string.
Function SelectFolder(Optional sTitle As String = "") As String
'returns its full path string in the function name
'If Cancel or OK without selection, returns empty string
'Returns path string without an end backslash.
'see also msoFileDialogFolderPicker, msoFileDialogOpen, and msoFileDialogSaveAs
'uses Excel's default opening path but any will do
'needs the backslash in this case
.InitialFileName = Application.DefaultFilePath & " \ "
If .SelectedItems.Count = 0 Then
'MsgBox "Canceled without selection"
Function SelectFile(Optional sTitle As String = "") As String
'returns its full path string in the function name
'If Cancel or OK without selection, returns empty string
Dim fd As FileDialog, sPathOnOpen As String, sOut As String
'do not include backslash here
sPathOnOpen = Application.DefaultFilePath
'set the file-types list on the dialog and other properties
.Filters.Add "All Files", "*.*"
.InitialView = msoFileDialogViewList 'msoFileDialogViewSmallIcons
If .SelectedItems.Count = 0 Then
'MsgBox "Canceled without selection"
BrowseFolder : Chip Pearson's page on the API folder browser.
FileDialog Properties and Methods: The Microsoft documentation for the FileDialog selection methods. It includes a code panel showing the use of file multi-selection.
Behaviorism is a perspective on learning that focuses on changes in individuals’ observable behaviors—changes in what people say or do. At some point we all use this perspective, whether we call it “behaviorism” or something else. The first time that I drove a car, for example, I was concerned primarily with whether I could actually do the driving, not with whether I could describe or explain how to drive. And for another example: when I reached the point in life where I began cooking meals for myself, I was more focused on whether I could actually produce edible food in a kitchen than with whether I could explain my recipes and cooking procedures to others. And still another example—one often relevant to new teachers: when I began my first year of teaching, I was more focused on doing the job of teaching—on day-to-day survival—than on pausing to reflect on what I was doing.
Note that in all of these examples, focusing attention on behavior instead of on “thoughts” may have been desirable at that moment, but not necessarily desirable indefinitely or all of the time. Even as a beginner, there are times when it is more important to be able to describe how to drive or to cook than to actually do these things. And there definitely are many times when reflecting on and thinking about teaching can improve teaching itself. (As a teacher-friend once said to me, “Don’t just do something; stand there!”) But neither is focusing on behavior necessarily less desirable than focusing on students’ “inner” changes, such as gains in their knowledge or their personal attitudes. If you are teaching, you will need to attend to all forms of learning in students, whether inner or outward.
In classrooms, behaviorism is most useful for identifying relationships between specific actions by a student and the immediate precursors and consequences of the actions. It is less useful for understanding changes in students’ thinking; for this purpose we need a more cognitive (or thinking-oriented) theory, like the ones described later in this chapter. This fact is not really a criticism of behaviorism as a perspective, but just a clarification of its particular strength or source of usefulness, which is to highlight observable relationships among actions, precursors and consequences. Behaviorists use particular terms (or “lingo,” some might say) for these relationships. They also rely primarily on two basic images or models of behavioral learning, called respondent (or “classical”) conditioning and operant conditioning. The names are derived partly from the major learning mechanisms highlighted by each type, which I describe next.
Respondent Conditioning: Learning New Associations with Prior Behaviors
As originally conceived, respondent conditioning (sometimes also called classical conditioning) begins with the involuntary responses to particular sights, sounds, or other sensations (Lavond & Steinmetz, 2003).[1] When I receive an injection from a nurse or doctor, for example, I cringe, tighten my muscles, and even perspire a bit. Whenever a contented, happy baby looks at me, on the other hand, I invariably smile in response. I cannot help myself in either case; both of the responses are automatic. In humans as well as other animals, there is a repertoire or variety of such specific, involuntary behaviors. At the sound of a sudden loud noise, for example, most of us show a “startle” response—we drop what we are doing (sometimes literally!), our heart rate shoots up temporarily, and we look for the source of the sound. Cats, dogs, and many other animals (even fish in an aquarium) show similar or equivalent responses.
Involuntary stimuli and responses were first studied systematically early in the twentieth century by the Russian scientist Ivan Pavlov (1927).[2] Pavlov’s most well-known work did not involve humans, but dogs, and specifically their involuntary tendency to salivate when eating. He attached a small tube to the side of dogs’ mouths that allowed him to measure how much the dogs salivated when fed. But he soon noticed a “problem” with the procedure: as the dogs gained experience with the experiment, they often salivated before they began eating. In fact the most experienced dogs sometimes began salivating before they even saw any food, simply when Pavlov himself entered the room! The sight of the experimenter, which had originally been a neutral experience for the dogs, became associated with the dogs’ original salivation response. Eventually, in fact, the dogs would salivate at the sight of Pavlov even if he did not feed them.
This change in the dogs’ involuntary response, and especially its growing independence from the food as stimulus, eventually became the focus of Pavlov’s research. Psychologists named the process respondent conditioning because it describes changes in responses to stimuli (though some have also called it “classical conditioning” because it was historically the first form of behavioral learning to be studied systematically). Respondent conditioning has several elements, each with a special name. To understand these, look at Figure 1, and imagine a dog (such as my own, named Ginger) prior to any conditioning. At the beginning Ginger salivates (an unconditioned response (UR)) only when she actually tastes her dinner (an unconditioned stimulus (US)). As time goes by, however, a neutral stimulus—such as the sound of opening a bag containing fresh dog food—is continually paired with the eating/tasting experience. Eventually the neutral stimulus becomes able to elicit salivation even before any dog food is offered to Ginger, or even if the bag of food is empty! At this point the neutral stimulus is called a conditioned stimulus (UCS) and the original response is renamed as a conditioned response (CR). Now, after conditioning, Ginger salivates merely at the sound of opening any large bag, regardless of its contents. (I might add that Ginger also engages in other conditioned responses, such as looking hopeful and following me around the house at dinner time.)
“OK,” you may be thinking, “Respondent conditioning may happen to animals. But does anything like it happen in classrooms?” It might seem like not much would, since teaching is usually about influencing students’ conscious words and thoughts, and not their involuntary behaviors. But remember that schooling is not just about encouraging thinking and talking. Teachers, like parents and the public, also seek positive changes in students’ attitudes and feelings—attitudes like a love for learning, for example, and feelings like self-confidence. It turns out that respondent conditioning describes these kinds of changes relatively well.
Consider, for example, a child who responds happily whenever meeting a new person who is warm and friendly, but who also responds cautiously or at least neutrally in any new situation. Suppose further that the “new, friendly person” in question is you, his teacher. Initially the child’s response to you is like an unconditioned stimulus: you smile (the unconditioned stimulus) and in response he perks up, breathes easier, and smiles (the unconditioned response). This exchange is not the whole story, however, but merely the setting for an important bit of behavior change: suppose you smile at him while standing in your classroom, a “new situation” and therefore one to which he normally responds cautiously. Now respondent learning can occur. The initially neutral stimulus (your classroom) becomes associated repeatedly with the original unconditioned stimulus (your smile) and the child’s unconditioned response (his smile). Eventually, if all goes well, the classroom becomes a conditioned stimulus in its own right: it can elicit the child’s smiles and other “happy behaviors” even without your immediate presence or stimulus. Figure 2a diagrams the situation graphically. When the change in behavior happens, you might say that the child has “learned” to like being in your classroom. Truly a pleasing outcome for both of you!
But less positive or desirable examples of respondent conditioning also can happen. Consider a modification of the example that I just gave. Suppose the child that I just mentioned did not have the good fortune of being placed in your classroom. Instead he found himself with a less likeable teacher, whom we could simply call Mr. Horrible. Instead of smiling a lot and eliciting the child’s unconditioned “happy response,” Mr. Horrible often frowns and scowls at the child. In this case, therefore, the child’s initial unconditioned response is negative: whenever Mr. Horrible directs a frown or scowl at the child, the child automatically cringes a little, his eyes widen in fear, and his heart beat races. If the child sees Mr. Horrible doing most of his frowning and scowling in the classroom, eventually the classroom itself will acquire power as a negative conditioned stimulus. Eventually, that is, the child will not need Mr. Horrible to be present in order to feel apprehensive; simply being in the classroom will be enough. Figure 2b diagrams this unfortunate situation. Obviously it is an outcome to be avoided, and in fact does not usually happen in such an extreme way. But hopefully it makes the point: any stimulus that is initially neutral, but that gets associated with an unconditioned stimulus and response, can eventually acquire the ability to elicit the response by itself. Anything—whether it is desirable or not.
The changes described in these two examples are important because they affect students’ attitude about school, and therefore also their motivation to learn. In the positive case, the child becomes more inclined to please the teacher and to attend to what he or she has to offer; in the negative case, the opposite occurs. Note that even though the changes are elicited by events external to the child, the child’s newly learned attitude is best thought of as “inside” or belonging to the child—or intrinsic. The new responses suggest that the child has acquired one type of intrinsic motivation, meaning a desire or tendency to direct attention and energy in a particular way that originates from the child himself or herself. It is sometimes contrasted extrinsic motivation, which is a tendency to direct attention and energy that originates from outside of the child. As we will see, classical conditioning is one way to influence students’ intrinsic motivation, but not the only way to develop it. Many strategies for influencing students’ motivations focus less on their behavior, and more on their thoughts and beliefs about themselves and about what they are learning. I describe these in detail in [[.././Chapter 6/]] (the chapter called “Student Motivation”). First, though, let us look at three other features of classical conditioning that complicate the picture a bit, but also render conditioning a more accurate or appropriate description of students’ learning.
Extinction can also happen with negative examples of classical conditioning. If Mr. Horrible leaves mid-year (perhaps because no one could stand working with him any longer!), then the child’s negative responses (cringing, eyes widening, heart beat racing, and so on) will also extinguish eventually. Note, though, that whether the conditioned stimulus is positive or negative, extinction does not happen suddenly or immediately, but unfolds over time. This fact can sometimes obscure the process if you are a busy teacher attending to many students.
When Pavlov studied conditioning in dogs, he noticed that the original conditioned stimulus was not the only neutral stimulus that elicited the conditioned response. If he paired a particular bell with the sight of food, for example, so that the bell became a conditioned stimulus for salivation, then it turned out that other bells, perhaps with a different pitch or type or sound, also acquired some ability to trigger salivation—though not as much as the original bell. Psychologists call this process generalization, or the tendency for similar stimuli to elicit a conditioned response. The child being conditioned to your smile, for example, might learn to associate your smile not only with being present in your own classroom, but also to being present in other, similar classrooms. His conditioned smiles may be strongest where he learned them initially (that is, in your own room), but nonetheless visible to a significant extent in other teachers’ classrooms. To the extent that this happens, he has generalized his learning. It is of course good news; it means that we can say that the child is beginning to “learn to like school” in general, and not just your particular room. Unfortunately, the opposite can also happen: if a child learns negative associations from Mr. Horrible, the child’s fear, caution, and stress might generalize to other classrooms as well. The lesson for teachers is therefore clear: we have a responsibility, wherever possible, to make classrooms pleasant places to be.
Generalization among similar stimuli can be reduced if only one of the similar stimuli is associated consistently with the unconditioned response, while the others are not. When this happens, psychologists say that discrimination learning has occurred, meaning that the individual has learned to distinguish or respond differently to one stimulus than to another. From an educational point of view, discrimination learning can be either desirable or not, depending on the particulars of the situation. Imagine again (for the fourth time!) the child who learns to associate your classroom with your smiles, so that he eventually produces smiles of his own whenever present in your room. But now imagine yet another variation on his story: the child is old enough to attend middle school, and therefore has several teachers across the day. You—with your smiles—are one, but so are Mr. Horrible and Ms. Neutral. At first the child may generalize his classically conditioned smiles to the other teachers’ classrooms. But the other teachers do not smile like you do, and this fact causes the child’s smiling to extinguish somewhat in their rooms. Meanwhile, you keep smiling in your room. Eventually the child is smiling only in your room and not in the other rooms. When this happens, we say that discrimination has occurred, meaning that the conditioned associations happen only to a single version of the unconditioned stimuli—in this case, only to your smiles, and not to the (rather rare) occurrences of smiles in the other classrooms. Judging by his behavior, the child is making a distinction between your room and others’.
In one sense the discrimination in this story is unfortunate in that it prevents the child from acquiring a liking for school that is generalized. But notice that an opposing, more desirable process is happening at the same time: the child is also prevented from acquiring a generalized dislike of school. The fear producing stimuli from Mr. Horrible, in particular, become discriminated from the happiness-producing smiles from you, so the child’s learns to confine his fearful responses to that particular classroom, and does not generalize them to other “innocent” classrooms, including your own. This is still not an ideal situation for the student, but maybe it is more desirable than disliking school altogether.
Operant Conditioning: New Behaviors Because of New Consequences
Instead of focusing on associations between stimuli and responses, operant conditioning focuses on the effects of consequences on behaviors. The operant model of learning begins with the idea that certain consequences tend to make certain behaviors happen more frequently. If I compliment a student for a good comment during a discussion, there is more chance that I will hear comments from the student more often in the future (and hopefully they will also be good ones!). If a student tells a joke to several classmates and they laugh at it, then the student is more likely to tell additional jokes in the future. And so on.
As with respondent conditioning, the original research about this model of learning was not done with people, but with animals. One of the pioneers in the field was a Harvard professor named B. F. Skinner, who published numerous books and articles about the details of the process and who pointed out many parallels between operant conditioning in animals and operant conditioning in humans (1938, 1948, 1988).[3][4][5] Skinner observed the behavior of rather tame laboratory rats (not the unpleasant kind that sometimes live in garbage dumps). He or his assistants would put them in a cage that contained little except a lever and a small tray just big enough to hold a small amount of food. (Figure 3 shows the basic set-up, which is sometimes nicknamed a “Skinner box.”) At first the rat would sniff and “putter around” the cage at random, but sooner or later it would happen upon the lever and eventually happen to press it. Presto! The lever released a small pellet of food, which the rat would promptly eat. Gradually the rat would spend more time near the lever and press the lever more frequently, getting food more frequently. Eventually it would spend most of its time at the lever and eating its fill of food. The rat had “discovered” that the consequence of pressing the lever was to receive food. Skinner called the changes in the rat’s behavior an example of operant conditioning, and gave special names to the different parts of the process. He called the food pellets the reinforcement and the lever-pressing the operant(because it “operated” on the rat’s environment).
Skinner and other behavioral psychologists experimented with using various reinforcers and operants. They also experimented with various patterns of reinforcement (or schedules of reinforcement), as well as with various cues or signals to the animal about when reinforcement was available. It turned out that all of these factors—the operant, the reinforcement, the schedule, and the cues—affected how easily and thoroughly operant conditioning occurred. For example, reinforcement was more effective if it came immediately after the crucial operant behavior, rather than being delayed, and reinforcements that happened intermittently (only part of the time) caused learning to take longer, but also caused it to last longer.
As with respondent conditioning, it is important to ask whether operant conditioning also describes learning in human beings, and especially in students in classrooms. On this point the answer seems to be clearly “yes.” There are countless classroom examples of consequences affecting students’ behavior in ways that resemble operant conditioning, although the process certainly does not account for all forms of student learning (Alberto & Troutman, 2005).[6] Consider the following examples. In most of them the operant behavior tends to become more frequent on repeated occasions:
A seventh-grade boy makes a silly face (the operant) at the girl sitting next to him. Classmates sitting around them giggle in response (the reinforcement).
A kindergarten child raises her hand in response to the teacher’s question about a story (the operant). The teacher calls on her and she makes her comment (the reinforcement).
Another kindergarten child blurts out her comment without being called on (the operant). The teacher frowns ignores this behavior, but before the teacher calls on a different student, classmates are listening attentively (the reinforcement) to the student even though he did not raise his hand as he should have.
A twelfth-grade student—a member of the track team—runs one mile during practice (the operant). He notes the time it takes him as well as his increase in speed since joining the team (the reinforcement).
A child who is usually very restless sits for five minutes doing an assignment (the operant). The teaching assistant compliments him for working hard (the reinforcement).
A sixth-grader takes home a book from the classroom library to read overnight (the operant). When she returns the book the next morning, her teacher puts a gold star by her name on a chart posted in the room (the reinforcement).
Hopefully these examples are enough to make four points about operant conditioning. First, the process is widespread in classrooms—probably more widespread than respondent conditioning. This fact makes sense, given the nature of public education: to a large extent, teaching is about making certain consequences for students (like praise or marks) depend on students’ engaging in certain activities (like reading certain material or doing assignments). Second, learning by operant conditioning is not confined to any particular grade, subject area, or style of teaching, but by nature happens in nearly every imaginable classroom. Third, teachers are not the only persons controlling reinforcements. Sometimes they are controlled by the activity itself (as in the track team example), or by classmates (as in the “giggling” example). A result of all of the above points is a fourth: that multiple examples of operant conditioning often happen at the same time. The Case Study for this chapter (The Decline and Fall of Jane Gladstone) suggests how this happened to someone completing student teaching.
Because operant conditioning happens so widely, its effects on motivation are a bit more complex than the effects of respondent conditioning. As in respondent conditioning, operant conditioning can encourage intrinsic motivation to the extent that the reinforcement for an activity can sometimes be the activity itself. When a student reads a book for the sheer enjoyment of reading, for example, he is reinforced by the reading itself; then we often say that his reading is “intrinsically motivated.” More often, however, operant conditioning stimulates both intrinsic and extrinsic motivation at the same time. The combining of both is noticeable in the examples that I listed above. In each example, it is reasonable to assume that the student felt intrinsically motivated to some partial extent, even when reward came from outside the student as well. This was because part of what reinforced their behavior was the behavior itself—whether it was making faces, running a mile, or contributing to a discussion. At the same time, though, note that each student probably was also extrinsically motivated, meaning that another part of the reinforcement came from consequences or experiences not inherently part of the activity or behavior itself. The boy who made a face was reinforced not only by the pleasure of making a face, for example, but also by the giggles of classmates. The track student was reinforced not only by the pleasure of running itself, but also by knowledge of his improved times and speeds. Even the usually restless child sitting still for five minutes may have been reinforced partly by this brief experience of unusually focused activity, even if he was also reinforced by the teacher aide’s compliment. Note that the extrinsic part of the reinforcement may sometimes be more easily observed or noticed than the intrinsic part, which by definition may sometimes only be experienced within the individual and not also displayed outwardly. This latter fact may contribute to an impression that sometimes occurs, that operant conditioning is really just “bribery in disguise”—that only the external reinforcements operate on students’ behavior. It is true that external reinforcement may sometimes alter the nature or strength of internal (or intrinsic) reinforcement, but this is not the same as saying that it destroys or replaces intrinsic reinforcement. But more about this issue later! (See especially Chapter 6: Student Motivation.)
Operant conditioning is made more complicated, but also more realistic, by many of the same concepts as used in respondent conditioning. In most cases, however, the additional concepts have slightly different meanings in each model of learning. Since this circumstance can make the terms confusing, let me explain the differences for three major concepts used in both models—extinction, generalization, and discrimination. Then I will comment on two additional concepts—schedules of reinforcement and cues—that are sometimes also used in talking about both forms of conditioning, but that are important primarily for understanding operant conditioning. The explanations and comments are also summarized in Table 2.
In both respondent and operant conditioning, extinction refers to the disappearance of “something.” In operant conditioning, what disappears is the operant behavior because of a lack of reinforcement. A student who stops receiving gold stars or compliments for prolific reading of library books, for example, may extinguish (i.e. decrease or stop) book-reading behavior. In respondent conditioning, on the other hand, what disappears is association between the conditioned stimulus (the CS) and the conditioned response (CR). If you stop smiling at a student, then the student may extinguish her association between you and her pleasurable response to your smile, or between your classroom and the student’s pleasurable response to your smile.
In both forms of conditioning, generalization means that something “extra” gets conditioned if it is somehow similar to “something.” In operant conditioning, the extra conditioning is to behaviors similar to the original operant. If getting gold stars results in my reading more library books, then I may generalize this behavior to other similar activities, such as reading the newspaper, even if the activity is not reinforced directly. In respondent conditioning, however, the extra conditioning refers to stimuli similar to the original conditioned stimulus. If I am a student and I respond happily to my teacher’s smiles, then I may find myself responding happily to other people (like my other teachers) to some extent, even if they do not smile at me. Generalization is a lot like the concept of transfer that I discussed early in this chapter, in that it is about extending prior learning to new situations or contexts. From the perspective of operant conditioning, though, what is being extended (or “transferred” or generalized) is a behavior, not knowledge or skill.
In both forms of conditioning, discrimination means learning not to generalize. In operant conditioning, though, what is not being overgeneralized is the operant behavior. If I am a student who is being complimented (reinforced) for contributing to discussions, I must also learn to discriminate when to make verbal contributions from when not to make verbal contributions—such as when classmates or the teacher are busy with other tasks. In respondent conditioning, what are not being overgeneralized are the conditioned stimuli that elicit the conditioned response. If I, as a student, learn to associate the mere sight of a smiling teacher with my own happy, contented behavior, then I also have to learn not to associate this same happy response with similar, but slightly different sights, such as a teacher looking annoyed.
In both forms of conditioning, the schedule of reinforcement refers to the pattern or frequency by which “something” is paired with “something else.” In operant conditioning, what is being paired is the pattern by which reinforcement is linked with the operant. If a teacher praises me for my work, does she do it every time, or only sometimes? Frequently or only once in awhile? In respondent conditioning, however, the schedule in question is the pattern by which the conditioned stimulus is paired with the unconditioned stimulus. If I am student with Mr. Horrible as my teacher, does he scowl every time he is in the classroom, or only sometimes? Frequently or rarely?
Behavioral psychologists have studied schedules of reinforcement extensively (for example, Ferster, et al., 1997; Mazur, 2005[7][8]), and found a number of interesting effects of different schedules. For teachers, however, the most important finding may be this: partial or intermittent schedules of reinforcement generally cause learning to take longer, but also cause extinction of learning to take longer. This dual principle is important for teachers because so much of the reinforcement we give is partial or intermittent. Typically, if I am teaching, I can compliment a student a lot of the time, for example, but there will inevitably be occasions when I cannot do so because I am busy elsewhere in the classroom.
For teachers concerned both about motivating students and about minimizing inappropriate behaviors, this is both good news and bad. The good news is that the benefits of my praising students’ constructive behavior will be more lasting, because they will not extinguish their constructive behaviors immediately if I fail to support them every single time they happen. The bad news is that students’ negative behaviors may take longer to extinguish as well, because those too may have developed through partial reinforcement. A student who clowns around inappropriately in class, for example, may not be “supported” by classmates’ laughter every time it happens, but only some of the time. Once the inappropriate behavior is learned, though, it will take somewhat longer to disappear even if everyone—both teacher and classmates—make a concerted effort to ignore (or extinguish) it.
Finally, behavioral psychologists have studied the effects of cues. In operant conditioning, a cue is a stimulus that happens just prior to the operant behavior and that signals that performing the behavior may lead to reinforcement. Its effect is much like discrimination learning in respondent conditioning, except that what is “discriminated” in this case is not a conditioned behavior that is reflex-like, but a voluntary action, the operant. In the original conditioning experiments, Skinner’s rats were sometimes cued by the presence or absence of a small electric light in their cage. Reinforcement was associated with pressing a lever when, and only when, the light was on. In classrooms, cues are sometimes provided by the teacher or simply by the established routines of the class. Calling on a student to speak, for example, can be a cue that if the student does say something at that moment, then he or she may be reinforced with praise or acknowledgement. But if that cue does not occur—if the student is not called on—speaking may not be rewarded. In more everyday, non-behaviorist terms, the cue allows the student to learn when it is acceptable to speak, and when it is not.
Behaviorist models of learning may be helpful in understanding and influencing what students do, but teachers usually also want to know what students are thinking and how to enrich what students are thinking...(read more...)
Learning Theories/Behavioralist Theories—a developing Wikibook on this topic, but with less focus on classroom applications. Note misspelling of title—this is necessary to link to the page.
Learning theory (education)—a brief explanation of types of learning theories, but without many examples.
Go Back to Introductory Section to Chapter 2...
↑ Lavond, D. & Steinmetz, J. (2003). Handbook of classical conditioning. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishing
↑ Pavlov, I. (1927). Conditioned reflexes. London, UK: Oxford University Press
↑ Skinner, B. F. (1938). The behavior of organisms. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
↑ Skinner, B. F. (1948). Walden Two. New York: Macmillan.
↑ The selection of behavior: The operant behaviorism of b. F. Skinner. New York: Cambridge University Press.
↑ Alberto, P. & Troutman, A. (2005). Applied behavior alaysis for teachers, 7th edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
↑ Ferster, C., Skiner, B.F., Cheney, C., Morese, W., & Dews, D. Schedules of reinforcement. New York: Copley Publishing Group.
↑ Mazur, J. (2005). Learning and behavior, 6th edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
This is a critical analysis of the journal article "Aerobic interval training versus continuous moderate exercise after coronary artery bypass surgery: A randomised study of cardiovascular effects and quality of life" [1] (Trine T. Moholdt, et al. 2009)
What is the background to this research?
Coronary artery disease (CAD) can be defined as the narrowing of coronary arteries due to the build-up of fatty material called plaque. This plaque clogs up the arteries and reduces blood flow to the heart. [2]
In some cases surgical procedures are required to help blood flow correctly to the heart. Coronary artery bypass surgery, also known as coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is a procedure that uses blood vessels from another part of the body and connects them to blood vessels above and below the narrowed or blocked artery, bypassing the narrowed or blocked coronary arteries, allowing for blood to flow to the heart more efficiently. [3]
The goal of CABG and exercise interventions is to reduce mortality rates. Patients enrolled in rehabilitation programs after CABG surgery have total and cardiac mortality reduced by 20%-26% compared to standard medical care patients. Exercise capacity is however, the best predictor of survival in both healthy individuals and those who suffer from cardiovascular disease. The best intensity, frequency, duration and type of exercise is still unknown. Aerobic interval training (AIT) however, has been shown to be more effective in improving cardiovascular function than moderate continuous training (MCT). [1]
The research was completed by a large team from the Department of Circulation and Medical Imaging at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology, in conjunction with multiple different hospitals and medical centres from across the country.
The article was published in the American Heart Journal, which is a highly regarded medical journal consisting of peer-reviewed articles primarily focussed on cardiovascular disease. The journal aims to provide primary investigation, scholarly reviews and opinion based pieces about the practise of cardiovascular medicine. [4]
The study was a randomised controlled study, in which one group participated in Aerobic interval training, and the other completed moderate continuous training.
The study aimed to investigate the effects of AIT and MCT on peak oxygen uptake (VO2peak) and quality of life after CABG surgery.
What did the research involve?
The study involved 59 CABG patients; 48 male, 11 female, who were randomly assigned to either AIT or MCT, stratified by gender. The randomisation code was completed using a computer number generation by a different unit at the University. Patients who suffered from heart failure, inability to exercise or drug abuse were excluded from the study.
The aerobic training program (AIT) consisted treadmill walking, 5 days a week for 4 weeks duration. It involved an 8-minute warm-up, followed by 4 sets of 4-minute intervals with the patient at 90% maximum HR and active pauses of 3-minute walking at 70% maximum HR. The session was completed with a 5-minute cool-down.
The moderate training group (MCT) walked continuously at 70% maximum HR for 46-minutes, to meet isoenergetic training protocols. [5]
The intensity was controlled by heart rate monitors, and patients reported their rate of perceived exertion using the Borg CR10 scale. In addition to the MCT or AIT, participants also participated in training sessions held by the rehabilitation centre. These consisted of a variety of exercise modes and intensities, lasting between 45-60minutes duration. Both groups completed the same rehabilitation centre training, and all sessions had intensities measured by HR monitors.
If patients were discharged from rehabilitation centre, they received written exercise plans, which consisted of a 3-4 week training program with exercise at the same intensity and duration as their AIT or MCT group.
What were the basic results?
The study aimed to primarily measure VO2peak, as well as measuring left ventricular function, HR recovery, resting HR, work economy, quality of life and blood markers of cardiovascular disease as secondary outcome measures. These were measured a 3 time points; at baseline, after 4-weeks of rehabilitation and 6-months after being discharged from centre. Secondary measures were only taken at baseline and after 4 weeks.
Baseline characteristics from the two groups were well balanced, with no major complications and only one patient being excluded due to technical error.
VO2peak(mL•kg-1•min-1)
The most significant changes from both groups were in VO2peak, HR recovery and quality of life. The AIT increased VO2peak from week 4-6 months and was also superior in increasing HR throughout the duration of the program and through to the 6-month follow up. This is ideal as low HR recovery is an independent predictor of mortality in cardiovascular disease patients. Quality of life also improved significantly in both groups in all three domains and therefore, was deemed to have improved patient's overall perceived quality of life. This can be seen in the table above.
During the 6-month follow up only the AIT group increased their VO2peak through their own at home exercise program, while MCT maintained the same capacity and did not improve. The improvement in the AIT group solely is believed to be caused by the higher intensity the exercise was, and how this transferred into patients at-home exercise routine. This aerobic capacity maintained for 2 years after the initial program was finished and could be due to the fact that patients in the AIT group had their activity pattern change, and were able to make a routine out of it.
What conclusions can we take from this research?
This study was a small, specific study, focussing on coronary artery bypass grafting patients from a small number of institutions in Norway. With only 58 participants including 11 female patients. The study size is too small for the results, evidence and conclusions made to be applicable to the population as a whole, which would require longer duration and more participants.
Interval training has been found to improve cardiovascular fitness more than moderate continuous training does. [6] This research does however, come fundamentally from healthy individuals, and can be difficult to compare to CABG patients due to multiple confounding variables such as body composition, resting heart rate and blood pressure responses, selected risk factors, and cardiac performance. Due to the lack of control, improvements can only be made form baseline measurements.
Overall, the results from the study showed that aerobic interval training increased patients' VO2peak more than moderate continuous training did, although the low change from baseline could be due to the short duration of the exercise program, and results could change if duration was longer. The addition of rehabilitation centre training sessions in conjunction with the AIT/MCT sessions could have also influenced the VO2peak due to the training sessions difference in intensity and duration.
Aerobic interval training has been found to increase both HR recovery and VO2peak and may be the way to help improve cardiovascular function in CABG patient.
Both aerobic training and moderate continuous training has been found to increase quality of life.
It may be as simple as just implementing regular exercise into patients routine for positive changes to result.
As cardiovascular diseases are becoming more common, more research and studies need to be completed for conclusions to be made in regard to the ideal duration and intensity of exercise to yield the best results.
Below are extra studies and resources which provide extra information and may be of interest:
Benefits and Risks of High-Intensity Interval Training in Patients With Coronary Artery Disease
Effectiveness of High-Intensity Interval Training for the Rehabilitation of Patients With Coronary Artery Disease
High-intensity interval training in patients with coronary heart disease: Prescription models and perspectives
↑ a b Trine T. Moholdt, et al. (2009) Aerobic interval training versus continuous moderate exercise after coronary artery bypass surgery: A randomised study of cardiovascular effects and quality of life. American Heart Journal; 158:(6): 1031-1037
↑ Darren E.R Warburton, et al. (2005) Effectiveness of High-Intensity interval training for the rehabilitation of patients with coronary artery disease. The American Journal of Cardiology 2005;95(9): 1080-1084
↑ Serruys, P. W., et al. (2009). Percutaneous coronary intervention versus coronary-artery bypass grafting for severe coronary artery disease. New England Journal of Medicine; 360(100):961-972.
↑ ACC/AHA PRACTICE GUIDELINESACC/AHA Guidelines for Exercise Testing. (1997) Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 30(1): 260-315. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0735-1097(97)00150-2.
↑ Rognmo, Ø. et al. (2004) ‘High intensity aerobic interval exercise is superior to moderate intensity exercise for increasing aerobic capacity in patients with coronary artery disease’, European Journal of Cardiovascular Prevention & Rehabilitation, 11(3), pp. 216–222. doi: 10.1097/01.hjr.0000131677.96762.0c.
↑ John C. Quindry, Barry A. Franklin, Matthew Chapman, Reed Humphrey, Susan Mathis. (2019) Benefits and Risks of High-Intensity Interval Training in Patients With Coronary Artery Disease. The American Journal of Cardiology. 123 (8):1370-1377
"Technology Integrated Lesson Plans in ELT" is a wikibook developed as a collaborative project under the course of FLE-200 Instructional Principles and Method at department of Foreign Language Education in Middle East Technical University. These lesson plans were developed by course students under the supervision of course instructor and assistant. The intent of this project is to provide application ideas for teachers in English Language Teaching.
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
This level is fairly hard for inexperienced players, but easy once you get the hang of it.
As soon as you enter the level slap hands so that Diddy is leading. Bounce on the tire and land on top of the building. Once there jump straight up. You hit a barrel blast. You only have one chance* at getting what you want.
The right one is the letter K.
The middle one is a banana cluster.
The left one is your DK friend barrel.
Sometimes depending on what choice you make, you might get another chance, but that's rare.
Donkey will have to take the lead now. There are two Krushas up there. Diddy can't kill them, unless he uses the TNT barrels. Pick one up and throw it at the first Krusha. Do the same with the next one.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
A typical PulseAudio distribution comes with numerous different programs. Refer to the man pages for more information. All official PulseAudio applications are prefixed with pa.
Permits another device to access the sound device directly. Typically this is used for applications that can not plug into pulseaudio.
Controls the running pulseaudio server/daemon.
Creates a dsp and other devices for a transparent abstraction of a non-existent device.
Page 4: Event scripting & Interface mods
The Civ 4 API is a list of all the functions specific to Civ 4 which interface with the actual game. There are two copies of the API. The first, by Locutus can be found here, and the second, by GBM can be found here. Locutus' API is up to date with the latest patch, so I suggest you use that one.
Now, in the past month or so answering questions on the forums about python I have noticed that quite a few people have had trouble reading the APIs. Interpreting what the functions do can be quite difficult, however the APIs do give you lots of hints, if you care to read them.
I'll use Locutus' API as an example, as I feel the interface is better, so open it up!
Firstly, we have the classes. These list all the functions that can be done to a specific entity, or pointer. For example, CyUnit lists all the funtions that will work on a unit entity (a unit in the game). The classes are listed in the top-left hand frame. You will notice that there are several classes with a little "+" symbol by them. These classes are used for getting specifc information directly from the xml files on an object.
Now we have the types. These the different types which can be extracted from the xml files. The int values shown are the default values, and while you could use them, and your code would most likely work, I would recommend against it, as if the order of the xml is changed in a future patch, your code will break. Instead I recommend using gc.getInfoTypeForString("") as shown above, as this is much more patch-compatable.
Finally we have the functions. Each class has its own set of fuctions which must be done to that class and that class only. If you try to take a function from a class, and use it on a different class it won't work. The functions are the main bit of the API, the stuff you want to know.
Now, there are lots of different functions. Most of the functions don't "do" anything in the game, instead they get a value from your pointer which you can use in an equation. If you look on the left hand side of the function, it will show you what this function returns. For example, if you used:
Bool - true or false, 1 or 0
String - a string ("The cat sat on the mat")
The funtions that do "do" things return a "VOID" - meaning that they setting rather than getting data. These functions are the most important ones really, as you can't do much without them, and unfortunately there aren't really enough of them to do everything you would want. Sorry, but that's just the way it is.
So, you know what a fuction returns, but that's not all you need to know. You also need to know what information to give it to return this data. Some functions don't require any inputs.
CyUnit.setHasPromotion(PromotionType eIndex, BOOL bNewValue)
This function takes two arguments (inputs), the promotion type you want to give to the unit, and a bool value of weather to take, or remove the promotion. To give an example:
Commonly abbreviated to gc in files this is probably the most useful class, as it contains all the general Civ 4 related functions. GlobalContext is unique in that it doesn't have to be called with a pointer, but is a standalone class for getting information.
As I have said before you can use it to get integers from types. For example:
You can use it to get from an integer ID to a pointer. For example:[code]gc.getPlayer(0)[/code] would return the pPlayer pointer for the the player with an ID of zero.
You can use it to get info from xml files. For example
A common usage is to get the active player pointer, which returns the pointer of the player whose turn it is:
The final major use is to get the number of instances of a certain thing. For example:
While there are other uses for CyGlobalContext, they are a bit to numerous to list here. I've tried to list what I think are the major ones.
The B-53 is a layered shot and part of the B-50 series.
Replacing Grand Marnier with Triple Sec yields a B-57[Needs checking]
A reader requests that more images be included in this page or book.Images are useful for presentation and explanation. Free images can be found at Wikimedia Commons and used here at Wikibooks. If you have created relevant images, you should consider donating them.Remove this template when suitable images have been added. Please continue to edit this book and add images, even after this message has been removed. Discuss this books particular needs on the discussion page. For questions, go to WB:PROJECTS.
A Wikibookian has nominated this page for cleanup because:Bomb needs better distinction from its variantsYou can help make it better. Please review any relevant discussion.
Bomb (Final Fantasy II - NES) Bomb (Final Fantasy III - NES) Bomb (Final Fantasy IV - SNES) Bomb (Final Fantasy V - SNES) Bomb (Final Fantasy VI - SNES)Bomb (Final Fantasy VII - PC) Bomb (Final Fantasy X/X-2 - PS2) Bomb (Final Fantasy Tactics - PS) Bomb (Final Fantasy Tactics Advance - GBA) Bomb (Final Fantasy: Crystal Chronicles - GCN)
The Bomb and its counterparts the Grenade and Balloon are relative to the weaponry of the same names, bomb, grenade, etc. Their trademark skill is a self-destruct attack that can potentially cause extraordinary damage. Since the 3D installments of the Final Fantasy series, the Bomb picked up a new habit of growing and becoming more powerful each time it is attacked until finally exploding.
In Final Fantasy IV, Bomb was a secret summon for Rydia. There also exists a dummied sprite nicknamed K. Higuchi after one of the game's battle programmers, Katsuhisa Higuchi, identical in appearance to the regular Bomb seen in the hidden Developers Room as an Easter Egg. This enemy speaks to the party rather than attacking. In Final Fantasy IV, the Mom Bomb (in the English version) is a boss that consists of several bombs fused together; after the party deals enough damage, it explodes and unleashes three gray Bombs and three Bombs against the party.
In Final Fantasy V, Byurobolos is a Bomb-like enemy that appears as a boss. In this battle, the Byurobolos fully revive each other when defeated. In Final Fantasy X a special monster could be created called Bomb King through the Monster Arena. This variation of Bomb does grow every time hit like others of its kind, but his counterattacks also get stronger. When he gets the fourth strike, he does not explode, but continues to live and casts Ultima as a counterattack. In Final Fantasy XII, Bombs react to magic instead of physical attacks, the Bomb King also returns as a boss. A Bomb is also the icon used for the berserk status in Final Fantasy XII. The first time the origin of the Bomb is given is also in FFXII, where it is described as a creature created specifically to fight wizards (since it reacts to magic attacks).
In the fourth and twelfth installments, Bombs use an ability, "Chain-Reaction", where one Bomb can cause all nearby Bombs to self-destruct along with it. The "Tactics" series gave Bombs the ability to cause a status known as "Oil", Oil, which causes affected characters to take increased damage from fire based attacks and spells.
Bombs have appeared in all Final Fantasy installments except for the first one, as well as in Chocobo's Dungeon 2, Chocobo Land: A Game of Dice, Final Fantasy Fables: Chocobo Tales, and Itadaki Street Portable. It was also an obstacle in Mario Hoops 3-on-3, and was featured as a Gummi Ship model in Kingdom Hearts.
Final Fantasy II (Origins) as Balloon, Grenade, Mine, and Bomb
Final Fantasy II (Dawn of Souls) as Balloon, Grenade, Mine, Bomb, and Purobolos
Final Fantasy III as Bomb, Balloon, and Grenade
Final Fantasy IV as Bomb, GrayBomb, Balloon, Grenade, and Mom Bomb (Boss)
Final Fantasy IV Advance as Bomb, Gray Bomb, Balloon, Dark Grenade, King Bomb, Melt Bomb, and Mom Bomb (Boss)
Final Fantasy V as Bomb, Grenage, and Byurobolos (Boss)
Final Fantasy VI as Bomb, Grenade, and Balloon
Final Fantasy VII as Bomb and Grenade
Final Fantasy IX as Bomb and Grenade
Final Fantasy X as Bomb, Grenade, Puroboros, and Bomb King
Final Fantasy X-2 as Bomb, Detonator, and Volcano
Final Fantasy XI as Balloon, Grenade, Hellmine, Feu Follet, Azer, Puroboros, Explosure, Volcanic Gas, Will-o'-the-wisp, Lava Bomb, Bomb, Fox Fire, Enna-enna, Ignis Fatuus, Sharpnel, Snoll, Dark Spark (Boss), and Bomb Queen (Boss)
Final Fantasy XII as Bomb, Balloon, Pineapple, Bombshell, Megabomb, Purobolos, Mom Bomb, Matriarch Bomb, Grenade, and Bomb King (Boss)
Final Fantasy Tactics as Bomb, Grenade, and Explosive
Final Fantasy Tactics Advance as Bomb and Grenade
Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles: The Crystal Bearers as Bomb
C# ProgrammingCover | Introduction | Basics | Classes | Advanced Topics | The .NET Framework | Index
The short keyword is used in field, method, property, and variable declarations and in cast and typeof operations as an alias for the .NET Framework structure System.Int16. That is, it represents a 16-bit signed integer whose value ranges from -32,768 to 32,767.
Special C# Identifiers (Contextual Keywords)
Besides the obvious expansion of lessons, there are many ways for you to contribute, even as a beginning student of Cantonese. Some are listed below. Add your thoughts as to what you think should be done to the Planning page so that discussion is not lost, scattered throughout various discussion pages.
There is a project on Wikicommons to upload images and animations of the stroke order for characters. There are directions on how to contribute. It's easy with the use of some free programs and can be done even with only a basic understanding of stroke order. Please contribute so that we'll have a standardized reference for this and other Wikibook users.
With a microphone and a read through the recording guidelines for the Spoken Wikipedia you can contribute audio examples. Sound samples are particularly important for beginners, especially ones who are studying alone with no teacher or native speaker on hand.
You can see what has been uploaded so far at Category:Chinese pronunciation.
Saint Jerome, the patron saint of translators.
Currently, the English version is the most developed of the Cantonese Wikibooks. If you know another language, please check if a Chinese book is started in that language and compare it to this one. You can make changes to their content based on ideas gained here, or do a wholesale translation of this textbook into the target language. Since the Cantonese parts can stay the same across languages, a lot of lesson development work can be saved in this way.
If you can only do a partial translation, leave a note to later contributors linking back to your source (a good candidate for using Templates).
If you can't translate pages, but know enough of a language to locate the corresponding Cantonese Wikibook, you can make Interwiki links. You can see them on the Wikibooks Sidebar listed under "in other languages" when available. They are typically placed at the very end of a page using a simple format. Here is the list used for the Cantonese TOC page:
In addition to the main page, Lesson pages, Stroke Order pages and anything else can be interwikied as long as the content is the same.
Starting point of iL looks good. Can get the voltage across the inductor and the parallel components. Then a voltage divider is going to help get to the Vc initial condition.
Set the denominator of the transfer function to 0 and solve for s:
After a very long time the inductor shorts, all the current flows through it so:
MuPad screen shot finding the first equation associated with the constants
Adding the particular and homogeneous solutions, get:
Doing the final condition again, get:
Let's try for Vc first. From the terminal relation for a capacitor:
We know that initially Vc = 0.5 so at t=0 can find equation for A and B:
At this point mupad goes numeric and get this equation:
MuPad code for finding the second equation associated with the constants
Need another equation. Can find Vt by adding Vr and Vc. Then from Vt can find expression for the current through the inductor and visit it's initial condition.
The integration constant is going to be zero because after a long time VC is zero (the inductor shorts).
Mupad goes numeric.
At this point have to figure out the integration constant. After a long time, the inductor's current is going to be 1 because it shorts the current source. Looking at IL in the mupad window can see that every term is multiplied by e-0.6875t which is going to zero as t goes to ∞. This means the integration constant is 1.
So add 1 to IL, then set t=0 and IL = 0.5 and again solve for A and B:
Now need to solve the two equations and two unknowns:
So now have time domain expression for io step response:
MuPad code for finding the impulse response and using the convolution integral
The first step is to substitute into i_s for t:
There is going to be an integration constant. This value can not be determined because the driving function oscillates. The initial conditions of the inductor and capacitor have already been visited. More information (like a specific value at a future time) is needed in order to compute an integration constant.
Open any arbitrary file location in the editor, using either the File menu or using a specified path within an edit buffer.
Using an external application or shell script, open the editor itself
Support for opening arbitrary file types as arguments to the editor itself
Using the editor, open arbitrary file types
Open any arbitrary file type, using the default application for that file type
Open an HTML file in the editor itself
Open an HTML file in the default system browser
Today in 2007 Sun finished the release of all parts of Java's core code they hold the copyright for. This eliminated “The Java Trap” and made Sun the biggest Free Software contributor.
Shigeru Tsuiki was one of the pioneers in the research fields of complex carbohydrates and protein phosphatases. In 1951, after graduated from the Tohoku University Medical School of Japan, he began his career as a biochemist by working in the laboratory. Five years later, he had a chance to visit Dr Ward Pigman- a professor at the University of Alabama Birmingham Medical School after getting his PhD degree, and his contribution began from here. During his prominent career, he accomplished three different outstanding contributions to the biochemistry research field: with the method of purifying mucin from bovine submaxillary glands, identification of four different molecular species of mammalian sialidase, and an establishment of molecular basis for mammalian protein phosphatases.
During his visit to one of the leading society of American chemist, he developed an impressive method of mucin purification from using cetyltrimethylammonium bromide. This development greatly contributed to the characterization of peptides structures of mucin. After researching deeply and thoroughly into sialic acid components of mucin, this led him to study the enzyme which involved in sialic acid. He began to focus on the two key enzymes: glutamine-fructose-6 phosphate amidotransferase, and UDP-N-acetylglucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) 2-epimerase UDP-GlcNAc and CMP-N-acetylneuraminic acid. After seeing different behaviours of these two enzymes during rat liver development, he found out that UDP-GlcNAc 2-epimerase could be obtained from rat liver.
At that time, most scientists knew that the removal of sialic acid residue from glycoprotein and glycolipids was the first step in the catabolism of glycoconjugates. With his passion for biochemistry, he continued to develop the four types of sialidase with differences in enzymatic properties and intracellular localization: intralysosomal, cytosolic and membrane-associated sialidases
I and II. He experimented this development on rat, and his result showed that some of the tissues in rat contained all these four types.
Intralysosomal sialidase- contains narrow substrate specificity.
Cytosolic sialidase- hydrolyse glycoproteins and gangliosides.
Membrane-associated sialidase I: not often hydrolyse with other substrates.
Membrane-associated sialidase II: actively hydrolyse on glycoproteins and gangliosides as cytosolic sialidase.
Establishment of molecular basis for mammalian protein phosphatases
His last major contribution was the study of protein phosphatases. With the interest in biochemical research, he showed that the cellular glycogen content was controlled by itself, and this led him to protein phosphatases. Scientists have found out that the enzyme that was responsible for glycogen synthesis was glycogen synthase (GS), and for glycogen degradation was glycogen phosphorylase (GP). Both enzymes functioned differently: GP catalyses the phosphorolysis of glycogen, and GS catalyses the transfer of glucose from UDP to primer. Based on this information, Dr. Tsuiki investigated the enzymatic properties of the rat liver GS phosphatase. He came up with a way to solubilize rat liver GS phosphatase from glycogen using column chromatography. This method let us know the activity of GS phosphatases by increasing the GS in the absence of glucose-6-phosphate. With the success of carrying out this experiment, Dr Tsuiki began to work on his GS phosphatase project. His strategy was to use column chromatography instead of rat liver extract in order to purify protein phosphatases. The chromatography on DE52 column revealed one major difference in elution profile between GS and GP phosphatases activities. They showed three different peaks IA, IA, and II represented for three distinct proteins.
If A*B*C, then A,B, and C are three distinct points all lying on the same line, and C*B*A.
Given any two distinct points B and D, there exist points A,C, and E lying on line BD (needs format with LaTex) such that A*B*D, B*C*D, and B*D*E.
If A, B, and C are three distinct points lying on the same line, then one and only one of the points is between the other two.
For every line l and for any three points A, B, and C not lying on l:
(i) If A and B are on the same side of l and if B and C are on the same side of l, then A and C are on the same side of l.
(ii) If A and B are on opposite sides of l and if B and C are on opposite sides of l, then A and C are on the same side of l.
(iii) If A and B are on opposite sides of l and if B and C are on the same side of l, then A and C are on opposite sides of l.
History of the American Indians from the 19th Century to the 21st
Living conditions and information about the American Indians today
Tribes, population and organization in and out the reservations
What is ‘emotional intelligence’ and how can it be developed in people? How does it help an individual in taking ethical decisions? (150 words)
Introduction to Information Literacy in the K12 Classroom
1 10.1 - Incorporating information literacy into lessons and activities
2 10.2 - Lesson plan structure
10.1 - Incorporating information literacy into lessons and activities
Information literacy in general is not a recently developed concept. As such, lesson plans and strategies have been developed to instruct and illustrate information literacy to students. In a traditional information literacy lesson plan, standards of independent inquiry and analysis are met through individual and group activities that utilize physical materials such as magazines, encyclopedias, and newspapers (American Association of School Librarians, 1998).
As we have transitioned into the digital age the content and outlets for content available have multiplied, leaving teachers and students with more information than ever. Barbara Lepanis (1998) emphasized this point by stating that, "information is no longer a scarce resource." Indeed, finding information is no longer a problem. The issue now, is that with more information comes more questionable information. It has become more important than ever that teachers provide students with the skills needed to filter through the massive amount of information available.
In the digital age, a majority of the standards, previously laid out to measure the level of understanding of information literacy, remain the same. What has changed are the lesson plan structures and the tools used for enrichment and assessment. Subsequently, the relevancy and connectivity of the information analyzed has improved significantly. With web tools, students are given the freedom to learn information skills independently. Often, these tools allow students to receive immediate assessment of their actions and give them the opportunity to learn from their errors.
10.2 - Lesson plan structure
The incorporation of information literacy in the classroom starts with the teacher having a structure and plan. The initial goal of information literacy is to have student’s access information efficiently and effectively. In order for an educator to prepare students for this, they must begin by creating lesson plans with a focus on inquiry.
Using an inquiry based lesson will target the indicators for effective information literacy learning. These indicators include:
Recognize that accurate and credible information is the basis for proper decision making
Brainstorm and identify a variety of different available sources
Develop and use successful strategies for locating and understanding information (American Association of School Librarians, 1998)
Using an inquiry model within the development of your lesson can help guide a teacher to focus on information literacy. The main idea behind an inquiry model is to have students ask questions relating to the content, thus allowing them to submerge themselves deeper into the material and allow them to come away with a better understanding. The asking of the questions alone are allowing the students to go past the memorization phase of learning, and have them applying it to further concepts. Weather a specific answer is discovered of not, the inquiry alone can lead to an incredible amount of discovery and learning.
As the students begin to formulate their own questions toward the content, they will already begin to recognize the need for accurate information to help them best reach their final answer or decision. An example of an inquiry learning activity is a WebQuest.
A WebQuest is basically a web driven, discovery exercise that leads the students to a “final destination”, while allowing them to further explore once they’ve reached that destination(Trickel, 2005).
The incorporation of these inquiry strategies is taking the initial step in preparing students to become information literate. By setting up the need for information, along with the motivation to go beyond what they read on the page, you are preparing students to become more information literate.
When looking to develop an information literacy lesson it is important to first determine what your objective is. Information literacy lessons can be focused on either teaching information literacy skills directly or on utilizing information literacy skills to accomplish an unrelated task. The technology resources available for lesson plan development primarily focus on only one of the two educational objectives.
Table 1 focuses on resources aimed at teaching information literacy skills directly to students. These resources focus on developing a conscientious student who is able to critically evaluate information and make thoughtful decisions based on the data gathered.
Table 2 includes resources that are focused on moving beyond simply teaching literacy. These resources incorporate the information literacy strategies and knowledge into activities to test students application abilities.
In order to fully and properly evaluate to asses information literacy, the teacher should incorporate the use of rubrics and concrete grading criteria before the assignment begins. With the use of rubrics and the incorporation of authentic assessments, you are allowing the students to be assessed as objectively as possible and allow them to clearly see the expectations before they begin. Authentic assessments act as a motivation to desire further learning as it is as close to a real world application as can be made within the classroom. Students can take their knowledge gained in the classroom out into the world and continue to build off of it.
The use of rubrics, and the language used within them can encourage students to go beyond what is expected of them. Some other advantages rubrics offer are as follows:
Force the teacher to clarify expectations in specific terms
Promotes student awareness to help assess peers
Allows students to establish benchmarks to measure and track progress
Provides specific and accurate feedback on possible problem areas or areas of weakness
Especially with the incorporation of rubrics and authentic assessments, you are leaving the end product from the students somewhat “open” to allow further inquiry to be built off of, thus, refueling their need for not only information, but the ability to use and understand that information effectively and efficiently.
Another strategy in using rubrics is allowing for student input in the creation of the rubric. The inclusion of the student’s ideas into the criteria for assessment can help generate inspiration for high success. Of course, as the teacher, it is important to facilitate and guide the student’s to a desired destination. The links below provide tools for developing rubrics and assessment tools for information literacy lesson plans.
Tool For Real Time Assessment of Information Literacy Skills
The following links are examples of web based lesson plans that exemplify the techniques and strategies illustrated above. They can be used directly in the classroom, or as models to mold your own lesson plans after to more directly target your own designated inquiry expectations within your classroom.
Information Literacy - The Challenge of the Digital Age
Having an IM-PACT: a Model For Improving Instructional Presentations
NAND gates are one of the two basic logic gates (the other being NOR logic) from which any other logic gates can be built. Due to this property, NAND and NOR gates are sometimes called "universal gates". However, modern integrated circuits are not constructed exclusively from a single type of gate. Instead, EDA tools are used to convert the description of a logical circuit to a netlist of complex gates (standard cells) or transistors (full custo] approach).
A NOT gate is made by joining the inputs of a NAND gate. Since a NAND gate is equivalent to an AND gate followed by a NOT gate, joining the inputs of a NAND gate leaves only the NOT part.
If the truth table for a NAND gate is examined or by applying De Morgan's Laws, it can be seen that if any of the inputs are 0, then the output will be 1. However to be an OR gate, if any input is 1, the output must also be 1. Therefore, if the inputs are inverted, any high input will trigger a high output.
A NOR gate is simply an OR gate with an inverted output:
This rather long VBA code listing allows bubble sorting of an array on three keys. It is sometimes called an intersort.
In case it is not clear what that means, suppose there are many names to sort; each with two forenames and a surname. The names records occupy a row each and their parts are in separate columns. The first key might sort the surnames column, but there could be many records called Smith. Then the second key sorts among the first forenames where the surnames were similar. And there might still be a lot of John Smith name records that are the same. The third key sorts the second forename column for those cases where there are records with the same surname and first forename combination.
A similar function can be found on Excel worksheets in the advanced sort functions. Users unfamiliar with this sort type might well experiment there to better understand the process.
The function here has options for ascending or descending sorts, row sort or column sort, and the option to return the sorted work in another array or the original. Up to three keys can be specified, though if there are unused keys, say, because only two intersorts are needed, it is assumed that Key1 and Key2 will be used before Key3. In any case, unreasonable settings will result in message box advice.
Function SortArr2D3Keys(vA As Variant, _
Optional Key1 As Long = -1, _
Optional Key2 As Long = -1, _
Optional Key3 As Long = -1, _
Optional ByVal bIsAscending As Boolean = True, _
Optional ByVal bIsRowSort As Boolean = True, _
Optional ByRef vR As Variant) As Boolean
' Procedure : SortArr2D3Keys
' Purpose : Bubblesorts a 2D array using 3 keys, up or down, on any column or row.
' For example, sorting using up to three columns;
' Eg; first sorts surnames, then sorts among same surnames for first names,
' then among similar surnames with same first names for middle names.
' Options include in-place, with the source changed, or
' if supplied, returned in vR, with the source array intact.
' Optional parameters default to: ROW SORT, ASCENDING.
' Trailing key options that are not needed should be set to same as previous.
Dim condition1 As Boolean, vW As Variant, Temp
Dim i As Long, j As Long, y As Long, t As Variant
Dim loR As Long, hiR As Long, loC As Long, hiC As Long
Dim r As Long, c As Long, bWasMissing As Boolean
Dim sCombo As String, reply
Dim b1Used As Boolean, b2Used As Boolean, b3Used As Boolean
'find bounds of vA data input array
'find whether optional vR was initially missing
If Not bWasMissing Then Set vR = Nothing
If bIsRowSort And (Key1 < loC Or Key1 > hiC) Then
MsgBox "Sort key1 out of bounds"
If Not bIsRowSort And (Key1 < loR Or Key1 > hiR) Then
MsgBox "Sort key1 out of bounds"
If bIsRowSort And (Key2 < loC Or Key2 > hiC) Then
MsgBox "Sort key2 out of bounds"
If Not bIsRowSort And (Key2 < loR Or Key2 > hiR) Then
MsgBox "Sort key2 out of bounds"
If bIsRowSort And (Key3 < loC Or Key3 > hiC) Then
MsgBox "Sort key3 out of bounds"
If Not bIsRowSort And (Key3 < loR Or Key3 > hiR) Then
MsgBox "Sort key3 out of bounds"
"Use lower bound column for a single key?", vbCritical + vbQuestion + vbYesNo, "Please confirm your selection...")
"Use lower bound row for a single key?", vbCritical + vbQuestion + vbYesNo, "Please confirm your selection...")
MsgBox "Only three combinations of sort keys are possible" & vbCrLf & _
"Key1 alone, Key1 with Key2, or Key1 with Key2 and Key3."
'use a working array for sorting
If bIsRowSort Then GoTo ROWSORT Else GoTo COLSORT
'row sort using 3 intersort keys
'Sort rows of array using first column index, Key1
For i = loR To hiR - 1
For j = i + 1 To hiR
'set < for descending, and > for ascending
For c = loC To hiC
'Sort rows of array using second column index, Key2
For i = loR To hiR - 1
For j = i + 1 To hiR
'if-condition avoids independence of second sort
'note that a third stage would have THREE terms
'set < for descending, and > for ascending
For c = loC To hiC
'Sort rows of array using third column index, Key3
For i = loR To hiR - 1
For j = i + 1 To hiR
'if-condition avoids independence of second sort
'note that a third stage would have THREE terms
'set < for descending, and > for ascending
For c = loC To hiC
'column sort using 3 intersort keys
'Sort columns of array using first row index, Key1
For i = loC To hiC - 1
For j = i + 1 To hiC
'set < for descending, and > for ascending
For c = loR To hiR
'Sort columns of array using second row index, Key2
For i = loC To hiC - 1
For j = i + 1 To hiC
'if-condition avoids independence of second sort
'note that a third stage would have THREE terms
'set < for descending, and > for ascending
For c = loR To hiR
'Sort columns of array using third row index, Key2
For i = loC To hiC - 1
For j = i + 1 To hiC
'if-condition avoids independence of second sort
'note that a third stage would have THREE terms
'set < for descending, and > for ascending
For c = loR To hiR
'decide whether to return in vA or vR
'vR was the intended return array
'so return vR leaving vA intact
'so reload vA with vR
'set return function value
Variables are references that stand in for a value that is contained at a certain memory address.
Variables are said to have a value and may have a data type. If a variable has a type, then only values of this type may be assigned to it. Variables do not always have a type.
Different languages use different names for their types and may not include any of the above.
An assignment statement is used to set a variable to a new value.
Assignment statements are written as name := value.
The example set the variable X to the integer value of 10. The assignment statement overwrites the contents of the variable and the previous value is lost.
In some languages, before a variable can be used, it will have to be declared, where the declaration specifies the type.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
The UN high commissioner for refugees has called for a global response to the refugee crisis, saying that turning migrants away "won't work".
UN gaojir nahnmirn zhuanyuarn huyuh quarnqiur miahnduih nahnmirn weiji, shuo qiaanfaan yirmirn "xirngbutong".
The following are the steps required to set up a Revit MEP 2009 project utilizing a linked
1-Linking an Architectural Revit model
Save architectural Revit model(s) on the server in the appropriate job folder. If the file name
Open the architectural file(s). Before clicking open, check the Detach from Central
Once the file is open, go to File --> Purge Unused…
Click on Check All then click OK.
Save and close the file.
Browse for the Revit building model file. Before clicking Open, check the Origin to
Origin option. Click Open.
Once the file is open, double-click on one of the default elevation views within the Project
Browser if not already selected.
Zoom (Zoom Region - ZR) into the edge of the building where it shows the Levels
(typically on the right hand side of the elevation view).
In the Copy/Monitor menu, click Options. The default options can remain as they are but
In the Copy/Monitor menu, click Copy.
Individually click on each level of the building model. Allow time for Revit to process the
Click Finish Mode in the Design Bar to close the Copy/Monitor menu
Go to View —> New… —> Floor Plan…
In the New Plan dialog box, the levels that you copied in the previous steps should be
Revit MEP 2009 Project Setup revitgarage.com
By default, Revit sets these new floor plans up as Architectural plans. In the Project
Browser, expand the Architectural heading and you’ll see the new plans that you just
Copying grids allows you to stretch the grid lines and bubbles in your plans, sections, and
Once you copy grids, you will then need to turn off the linked architectural/structural grid lines.
Switch to a plan view.
In the Design bar (on the left), the Copy/Monitor mode is activated.
In the Copy/Monitor menu, click Copy.
Individually click on each grid line of the building model. Allow time for Revit to process
Click Finish Mode in the Design Bar to close the Copy/Monitor menu.
Within each floor plan that was created in the previous section, you will need to turn off
To do this, go to Visibility Graphics (VG) and click on the Revit Links tab.
Next to the link name click on By Host View and click the button next to Custom.
Next, click on the Annotation Categories tab.
Scroll down the list of annotation categories and uncheck Grids.
Click Ok twice to exit out of Visibility Graphics.
Beginning in Revit MEP 2009, rooms are no longer required to be copy/monitored. Instead, room
Click on the linked architectural model and to go Element Properties.
In the Element Properties dialog box, click on Edit/new…
Under Constraints, check the box next to “Room Bounding”.
Click OK to close the properties dialog boxes.
6-Adding Spaces & Space Tags
Therefore, in order to tag a room, a Space must first be placed within the room bounding area.
Placing Spaces can be a somewhat complex task to create them correctly. I will walk through a
Revit MEP 2009 Project Setup revitgarage.com
In the mechanical design bar, click on Space.
In the Type Selector bar, set the Upper Limit and Offset. For example, if you are placing
a Space on Level 1, you’d set the Upper limit to Second floor with an Offset of 0.0m. Also,
Next, place the cursor over a room and an “X” will appear within the room boundary
(which will be high-lighted in green).
Click within the room to place the Space.
A Space will be placed within the room boundary and tagged with a Space Tag.
Optional - The Space Tag included with Revit MEP tags the Space with the Space Name
Click on the Space Tag and click the Edit Family button.
Within the Space Tag family, click on “Space Name” and then click the Edit Label…
In the Edit Label dialog box, click on the Name “Label Parameter” and click the remove
Follow the same procedure for the Space Number (replace it with the Room Number
(out of the box) Space Tag. Note: The Space Naming Utility is only available to Autodesk
Subscription members.
7-Creating the Central File
At this point, the project file has been set up and is ready to be saved to the project server as
Go to File -->Worksets… Click Ok in the Worksharing dialog box.
The Worksets dialog box will then appear showing the two default worksets. Click OK.
Once the worksharing process is complete, Go to File —> Save As. Click on the
Options… button and verify that Make this the Central location after save option is
Save the file in the appropriate project folder and name it in the following format:
For example: 5432-Office Building MEP09 Central.rvt
This format will allow the local file creation script to work properly)
Close the Central file.
Create a project folder within your Revit Local Files folder (if not already created)
Create a new local file.
Open the local file.
9-Setting up MEP Floor Plans
In previous steps, floor plans were created based on the levels that were Copied/Monitored.
When these plans were created, they defaulted to an Architectural discipline. In order to create
To create a MEP floor plan, right-click on the appropriate floor plan in the project browser
When you duplicate a floor plan, the plan will be named Copy of Level 1, for example.
Set the Discipline and Sub-Discipline for the duplicated floor plan as required. If a Sub-
Discipline you need isn't listed, you can type one in.
After you set the Discipline and Sub-Discipline, the floor plan will automatically be moved
Follow this procedure for any MEP plan you wish to create.
If you just want to blow gases in a particular direction, create a thin (zero cells thick) OBST and apply to it, via SURF_ID only, a SURF line that has the parameter POROUS=.TRUE. along with the other velocity parameters described above. This allows hot, smokey gases to pass through the obstruction, much like a free-standing fan. These obstructions are merely flat plates, by necessity. For example:
The velocity VEL associated with a POROUS surface represents the velocity in the positive or negative coordinate direction, as indicated by its sign.
Previous Page: Some Cocoa essential principles | Next Page: Containers - arrays, and dictionaries
So far we have used Interface Builder to create a very simple interface for our "hello world" example. Now we'll look at it in a bit more detail so that we can see how to build much more complex and useful user interfaces.
We have already discussed the concept of targets and actions in a very general way; now we'll see how Interface Builder makes extensive use of this to connect graphical controls to pieces of code that you write which implement the interesting functionality of your application.
Using "hello world" as a starting point, let's add a simple action to our code so that we can see how this works. The action is very basic - it just sets the font size of the text as a slider control is moved. In Xcode, click on "GCHelloView.h" so that it appears in the editor. Now add the following line to the class definition, below the other methods, but before the '@end' statement:
Then do a Save to make sure this change is saved to the file. Here, we have declared the return type of the method to be IBAction. In fact, this is just a macro which is just 'void', but anything tagged as IBAction can be automatically detected by Interface Builder as an action routine, that is, one which can be connected to any control that supports the target/action mechanism. We'll come back to Xcode in a moment to implement this method, but first let's hook it up in IB.
If IB isn't running, start it by double-clicking on 'MainMenu.nib'. Arrange the window in IB so that you can drag the file "GCHelloView.h" from Xcode to IB. This triggers IB to read the file, and so it will pick up the action method and add it to a list of available actions for the GCHelloView object. Next, switch back to the 'Instances' panel, and bring Window to the front by double-clicking its icon (or just click the window if you can see it). Make a bit of room at the bottom of the window by dragging it a little bigger. In the widgets palette, select the Controls panel (second from the left), and drag a horizontal slider control from the palette into the window. Make sure you put the slider in the space you made, not into the GCHelloView.
Also, check the boxes 'Continuously send action while sliding' and 'Enabled'. The other settings should remain at their default values.
Next we need to give the slider control a target - that is, a connection to the object it should send the action to. IB sets up targets graphically. We control-drag FROM the sender of the action TO the target. A line will be drawn linking the two. Do that now - control-drag FROM the slider TO the GCHelloView. The Inspector will switch to the 'Connections' section and list all of the available action methods for GCHelloView. Highlight 'textSizeAction:' and click 'Connect' to make the connection. (Note - if textSizeAction: doesn't appear in the list, you can add it manually. Select GCHelloView in the 'Classes' list. Use the Inspector Attributes to switch to 'Actions', click 'Add', then type the name of the method - don't forget the colon! You might need to do this, since the earlier dragging of the file into IB, which should handle this for you, doesn't always seem to work reliably. Once you've added the method, try again with the control-drag step).
[self setText:[self text] withSize:[sender floatValue]];
Extended version of "Hello World" with slider control
Now Build and run the project. Drag the slider... the text should change size as you drag.
While simple, this example is very typical of how all controls interface to pieces of code in your application. You write an action method (which always has an IBAction return type, and a single 'sender' object parameter) in some suitable target object, then hook up that action and target in IB.
Menu commands work pretty much the same way as sliders or buttons. They have a target and an action. When the menu item is chosen, it sends the action to the target. You can set them up exactly like we did for the slider - control-drag FROM the menu item TO the target, select the action and click 'Connect'.
There are times when we don't want a menu command to go to a specific fixed target however, but one that depends on the context. For example, we might have an application with multiple similar windows open, such as a document. When the user chooses the 'Copy' or 'Paste' command, it should always target the currently active document. If we had tied this menu command to a specific target, these commands would not work as the user generally expects.
To fix this, Cocoa maintains a 'chain of command' which changes depending on the context. The frontmost window will contain a target which should be the first to respond to a command. If it can, it responds. If not, the command passes to the next object in the chain, which might be another view within the window, or the window itself. If the command can be handled, it is. If not, it passes up again, this time to the application object. If the application can't handle the command, it is discarded and ignored.
The first object in the chain that can respond to a command at any particular moment is called the first responder, and an icon representing this object is shown in the main IB window. So all we need to do is to make it the target of our action, and we have solved the problem of changing targets for menu items. You'll find you can control-drag to this target just as any other targettable object. The 'Actions' list for the first responder lists all of the actions for all objects known to IB. You can link to any action. If the action is found within the current chain of command, the action will find its target and be executed. If the particular action can't be found in the chain of command at a particular time, what happens? Well, if the action is sent, nothing happens, because no-one responds to it, but in fact in this case Cocoa disables the menu item automatically! Thus actions that can't find a target are automatically greyed out, saving us a large part of the job of managing menu enabling as the context changes.
"Hello World" doesn't have multiple windows, so at this stage we can't demonstrate this convincingly, but shortly we'll be making a much more sophisticated application, and this approach will come into its own.
Run "Hello World". Try resizing the window. It's probably not the behaviour you would expect - everything remains at a fixed distance from the bottom. Let's look at how we make views size the way we want them.
In Interface Builder, bring Window to the front and select the GCHelloView. Using the Inspector, switch to the 'Size' panel using the pop-up menu. The diagram there indicates which edges of the view should be rigidly linked to the edges of the window, and which can be flexible. By clicking on the links, you can change them from one to the other. GCHelloView should probably change size along with the window, so change the interior links to be flexible, and the exterior ones to be rigid. Now select the slider. Allow it to have a flexible link to the top and right edges, but a rigid link to the left and bottom edges. The interior should be rigid. Save the file and use Xcode to build and run the project. Now, you'll see that the GCHelloView (as shown by its blue border) stretches as you resize the window.
You'll probably notice that the text however, still doesn't seem to behave as we'd probably like, being a fixed distance from the bottom edge of the view. We are used to text remaining at a fixed distance from the TOP edge. The reason for this is that Cocoa's default coordinates follow the underlying Quartz graphics system, in which increasing y values go UP the screen, not down. While this is the mathematical convention, computer programmers are usually used to having things the other way up. Cocoa can allow any view to be flipped in this manner, using a simple override. So let's change it now.
This is an override of an NSView method, so we don't need to declare it in our class. We simply return YES to let Cocoa know we'd like this view to have the y coordinate go from top to bottom. Build and run again and you'll see the difference this makes. Because of the choice of y coordinate used in drawRect:, the text will be fairly far down the view - you might like to change that to something like 10 so it's near the top.
Previous Page: Some Cocoa essential principles | Next Page: Containers - arrays, and dictionaries
Gutters are the spaces between the borders of the panel, It is also defined as a closure.
In comic books the gutter is usually white, but not all the time. The artist has taken leeway on certain pages and mixes the panels together in a seamless set of images for greater impact.
The gutter is the thing that separates the images. Without the gutter the reader would have a hard time following along and the transitions between each image and would get very confused with what is happening at the time.
Diagram. 1 This diagram shows how gutters are used as a manga convention
The volume of international air travelers has increased rapidly in recent decades. In the early 1990s, about 500 million people crossed international borders annually on commercial flights. [1] In 2013 alone, more than 3 billion passengers traveled via domestic and international flights worldwide. [2] These changes in the accessibility, speed, and volume of air travelers suggests an increasingly connected global culture which has broad implications for disease spread.
Human travel and disease spread have rich and connected origins. Following the five week voyage of Christopher Columbus to the New World in 1492, disease spread was rampant. Europeans brought diseases such as smallpox, measles, and typhus to which the Native Americans had no immunity. [3] It is estimated that 80 to 90 percent of Native Americans were killed from exposure to these diseases within 150 years of Columbus' voyage. [4] Technological changes that facilitate flexibility of movement, such as boats, trains, and airplanes, have become a potent force for disease emergence and spread. New forms of travel carry humans around the globe at volumes and speeds unprecedented in history. This mixing of human populations has led to the geographic dispersion of infectious diseases. [1]
International and historic disease outbreaks, such as during the Columbian Exchange, occurred when long distance transportation was laborious, expensive and relatively slow. Thus, geographic mobility of large scale populations was rare. Springing forward, over the last two centuries exponential increases in spatial mobility have occurred. [5] Alongside these changes in movement, issues of disease prevention, spread, and treatment on an international scale have been brought to the forefront.
The Ebola virus was first discovered following international outbreaks in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Sudan in the late 1970s. [6] [7] [8] Human transmission of the virus typically occurs via direct contact with blood or bodily fluids from an infected individual. [9] Nearly 40 years later, in May of 2014, the most widespread and deadliest Ebola outbreak in West Africa was reported. By late November of 2014, the reported death toll totaled nearly 5,700 individuals spanning six countries: Liberia, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Nigeria, the United States and Mali. [10] The recent Ebola outbreak has sparked conversations about banning international flights from Ebola infected countries with the hopes of reducing disease spread. This case has brought about two distinct sides: those who support air travel ban and those who oppose air travel ban.
Opponents to the air travel ban are health experts and professionals who provide rational arguments and alternatives to stop the spread of Ebola to the U.S. Participants in this group often are more specialized in the field of infectious disease and capable of implementing technical solutions.
Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the national public health institute of the Unites States, supports better monitoring and screening passengers at the airport, but opposes an air travel ban. The director of the CDC, Tom Frieden, stated "We don't want to isolate parts of the world, or people who aren't sick, because that's going to drive patients with Ebola underground, making it infinitely more difficult to address the outbreak." [11]
The World Health Organization (WHO), similar to the CDC, opposes bans on international travel or trade, but advised countries to be prepared to detect, investigate, and manage Ebola cases. WHO states that the risk of Ebola transmission during air travel is low. [12]
President Obama has voiced his concerns about banning flights from West Africa. In his weekly address on October 18th of 2014, Obama stated that "Trying to seal off an entire region of the world, if that were even possible, could actually make the situation worse." [13] President Obama agrees with the CDC and opposes an air travel ban. He thinks the best way to contain the spread of Ebola is at its source with the support of medical professionals. Blocking air travel would impede the transport of these professionals and supplies. While he is concerned about the spread of Ebola to the U.S., he must also consider foreign relations with Ebola infected nations. He reminds the public that if we are guided by science, facts, and not fear, then we can prevent a serious Ebola outbreak in the U.S. [13]
Many international airline companies are opposed to a flight ban because they are financial stakeholders. The founder of The Aviation Law Firm outside of Washington D.C., Greg Winton, stated that mass flight restrictions "will have a huge impact financially, certainly on the whole economy, not just the aviation sector." [14] However, international airline companies are not only concerned about their business, but also stopping the spread of the Ebola. A spokesman for Airlines for America stated that they "agree with the White House that discussions of flight bans are not necessary and actually impede efforts to stop the disease in its tracks in West Africa." [14]
Many supporters of the air travel ban are individuals who are acting based on fear and/or their own personal beliefs.
Fred Upton, a Republican from Michigan, believes air travel bans from West Africa are the best solution to stop the international spread of Ebola. [15] Upton believes that airport screening of passengers is insufficient to stop the spread of Ebola to the U.S., due to the 21 day symptomless incubation period of the virus. Passengers can also evade screenings by taking ibuprofen to reduce their fever.
Non-specialist individuals, such as protesters in Washington D.C., have voiced their support for an air travel ban. Donald Trump, an active participant on social media, has voiced his fiery opinions on Twitter. Examples of Trump's tweets are: "Stop the EBOLA patients from entering the U.S. Treat them, at the highest level, over there. THE UNITED STATES HAS ENOUGH PROBLEMS!", "The U.S. must immediately stop all flights from EBOLA infected countries or the plague will start and spread inside our 'borders.' Act fast!", and "Stop flights into the U.S. from West Africa immediately!".[16] Trump's arguments are emotionally-based and fear-driven.
The media indirectly supports the air travel ban by creating a sense of danger, fear, and panic in the public. Sensationalized reports can lure the public into supporting the flight ban. The media's influence on public perceptions is aided through widespread accessibility and dramatized news accounts. Individuals who lack technical knowledge are especially susceptible to the media's influence.
Germ panic is a psychological phenomenon characterized by general anxiety, uncertainty, and the potential for irrational behavior due to the fear of an unknown disease. In the Ebola flight banning case, mass media plays a major role in shaping the public’s response and promoting germ panic. [17] The media is capable of challenging the authority of health professionals with scare statistics, sensationalist titles, and “it-could-happen-to-anyone” scenarios. [17] [18] Examples include headlines like “Ebola: ‘The ISIS of Biological Agents?'” and “Ebola in the air? A nightmare that could really happen” from CNN and “Nurses in safety gear got Ebola, why wouldn’t you?” from the Associated Press. [19] These actions by the media are not driven by malevolence but rather an understanding that the idea of a pandemic sells. In a competitive consumer culture, media uses fear to capture the public’s interest and sell their news, which indirectly promotes germ panic. [18]
Senator Joseph McCarthy was an influential political figure during the 1950s. McCarthy was notorious for his use and exploitation of fear to gain popularity and support as a politician and promote his own self-interests. The rise of the terms Red Scare and McCarthyism were a direct result of his tactics. When investigating the rise and fall of McCarthy, one historian claimed that McCarthy was so effective because he had “access to the dark places of the American mind” [20]. He understood that Americans were most afraid of a communist invasion or infiltration of the United States government. Equipped with this fear, McCarthy was able to lead anti-communist crusades. Even though these crusades were not fact-based, he was still able to ruin the careers of some of his opponents in the process. Much like with germ panic, fear trumped reason in the case of McCarthy and the Red Scare.
The United States Department of Homeland Security (DHS) was formed in 2002 in response to the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001. Since then, DHS funding has risen dramatically, increasing from $19.5 to $66 billion between 2002 and 2009. [21] Funding increased partly because of pressures from the American public. In a July 2007 Gallup poll, 47 percent of the public was worried that they or someone they knew would become a victim of terrorism. Government agencies, like the DHS, control both the creation and the interpretation of terrorist threat information. This information monopoly creates an excessive level of fear in the public, but it protects the mission of the DHS. Policymakers generate and employ fear of terrorism to sell their policy to voters. [22]
Fear gives power to the improbable and a platform to the minority. Although the chances of an Ebola pandemic, terrorist attack, or communist invasion are minute, we are forced to consider these improbable scenarios because the implications are so large. The fear associated with these events allowed McCarthy to mark his place in American history with his communist witch-hunts, and it enabled the large funding increases for the Department of Homeland Security. This same fear provides the platform for media to sell their products to consumers.
Future research for expanding this chapter could investigate stigmatization of certain groups as a result of germ panic. Future research for creating a new chapter could investigate the role of media and advertising in transmitting public health messages.
↑ a b Wilson, M.E. 1995. Travel and the emergence of infectious diseases. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2626831/
↑ Air transport, passengers carried. The World Bank. http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IS.AIR.PSGR/countries/1W?display=graph
↑ Denevan, William M. 1976. Introduction to The Native Population of the Americas in 1492, ed. William M. Denevan, 1–12. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press
↑ Newson, Linda. 2001. Pathogens, Places and Peoples. In Technology, Disease and Colonial Conquests, Sixteenth to Eighteenth Centuries, ed. George Raudzens, 167–210. Boston: Brill.
↑ Haggett, P. 1994. Geographical Aspects of the Emergence of Infectious Diseases. Geografiska Annaler. Series B, Human Geography, 76(2), 91–104.
↑ Johnson KM, Webb PA, Lange JV, Murphy FA. Isolation and characterization of a new virus (Ebola virus) causing acute hemorrhagic fever in Zaire. Lancet 1977;1:569-71.
↑ World Health Organization. Ebola haemorrhagic fever in Zaire, 1976. Report of an international commission. Bull WHO 1978;56:271-93.
↑ World Health Organization. Ebola haemorrhagic fever in Sudan, 1976. Report of a World Health Organization International Study Team. Bull WHO 1978;(56):247-70.
↑ Ebola: Transmission. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2014. http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/transmission/
↑ Ebola: Mapping the Outbreak. BBC. http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-28755033
↑ CDC Chief: Why I don't support a travel ban to combat Ebola outbreak http://www.foxnews.com/opinion/2014/10/09/cdc-chief-why-dont-support-travel-ban-to-combat-ebola-outbreak/
↑ WHO: Air travel is low-risk for Ebola transmission http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/notes/2014/ebola-travel/en/
↑ a b Weekly Address: What You Need to Know About Ebola. (2014). https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7u08u8GA_rg&feature=youtube_gdata_player
↑ a b Berenson, T. (2014, October 17). Why Airlines and the CDC Oppose Ebola Flight Bans. Time. Retrieved from http://time.com/3517197/ebola-frieden-travel-ban/
↑ An Ebola travel ban would be completely unprecedented -- Here's why http://www.cnn.com/2014/10/17/politics/ebola-travel-ban-unprecedented/
↑ Donald J. Trump Tweeter Account https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump
↑ a b Pappas, G., Kiriaze, I. J., Giannakis, P., Falagas, M. E. "Psychosocial consequences of infectious disease". Clinical Microbiology and Infection. August 2009. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19754730
↑ a b Tomes, N. "The making of a germ panic, then and now". American Journal of Public Health. February 2000. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1446148/
↑ Parrish, R. "9 absurd Ebola headlines that prove the media has gone over the edge". Tech Times. October 2014. http://www.techtimes.com/articles/18230/20141020/11-absurd-ebola-headlines-prove-media-gone-over-edge.htm
↑ Rovere, R. “Senator Joe McCarthy” April, 1996
↑ US Department of Homeland Security. DHS Budget. http://www.dhs.gov/dhs-budget
↑ Friedman, B. “Managing Fear: The Politics of Homeland Security”. Political Science Quarterly. February 2013. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/j.1538-165X.2011.tb00695.x/abstract
The current, editable version of this book is available in Wikibooks, the open-content textbooks collection, at
27.3.1 1130: Host 'example.com' is not allowed to connect to this MySQL server
27.3.3 2003: Can't connect to MySQL server
For a more general introduction see the SQL Wikibook.
Structured Query Language is a third generation language for working with relational databases. Being a 3G language it is closer to human language than machine language and therefore easier to understand and work with.
Dr. E. F. Ted Codd who worked for IBM described a relational model for database in 1970.
In 1992, ANSI (American National Standards Institute), the apex body, standardized most of the basic syntax.
Its called SQL 92 and most databases (like Oracle, MySQL, Sybase, etc.) implement a subset of the standard (and proprietary extensions that makes them often incompatible).
Why MySQL?
Free as in Freedom - Released with GPL version 2 license (though a different license can be bought from Oracle, see below)
Cost - Free!
Support - Online tutorials, forums, mailing list (lists.mysql.com), paid support contracts.
Speed - One of the fastest databases available. ([2])
Functionality - supports most of ANSI SQL commands.
Portability - easily import / export from Excel and other databases
Permission Control - selectively grant or revoke permissions to users.
MySQL is available under a dual-licensing scheme:
Under the GNU General Public License, version 2, ("or later" allowed in versions released before 2007): this is a Free (as in freedom), copyleft software license that allows you to use MySQL for commercial and non-commercial purposes in your application, as long as your application is released under the GNU GPL. There is also a "FLOSS Exception" which essentially allows non-GPL'd but Free applications (such as the PHP programming language, under the PHP license) to connect to a MySQL server. The exception lists a set of free and open-source software license that can be used in addition to the GNU GPL for your MySQL-dependent Free application.
A so-called "commercial" [1], paid license, that is, a license where MySQL grants you the right to integrate MySQL with a non-FLOSS application that you are redistributing outside your own organization. [2]
MySQL is Free Software, so some forks and unofficial builds delivering contributions from the community exist.
In 2008 Sun Microsystems bought MySQL, Sun being itself later acquired by Oracle, in 2010. After the acquisition, the development process has changed. The team has started to release new MySQL versions less frequently, so the new code is less tested.There were also less contributions from the community.
In 2009 Monty Widenius, the founder of MySQL, left the company and created a new one, called The Monty Program. He started a new fork called MariaDB. The scopes of MariaDB,
The license is the GNU GPLv2 (inherited from MySQL).
The primary platform for MariaDB is GNU/Linux, but also works on one proprietary system. The following Storage Engine have been added:
Others may be added in the future.
In 2008 Brian Aker, chief architect of MySQL, left the project to start a new fork called Drizzle. While Oracle initially funded the project, Drizzle is now funded by Rackspace. Its characteristics are:
Drizzle is modular: many features are or can be implemented as plugins;
There are no public releases of this fork, still. Its main license will be the GNU GPLv2 (inherited from MySQL), but where possible the BSD license is applied.
OurDelta is another fork, maintained by Open Query. The first branch, which has number 5.0, is based on MySQL 5.0. The 5.1 branch is based on MariaDB. OurDelta includes some patches developed by the community or by third parties. OurDelta provides packages for some GNU/Linux distributions: Debian, Ubuntu, Red Hat/CentOS. It is not available for other systems, but the source code is freely available.
Percona Server is a MySQL fork maintained by Percona. It provides the ExtraDB Storage Engine, which is a fork of InnoDB, and some patches which mainly improve the performance.
↑ Calling it "commercial" is misleading, because the GNU GPL can be used in commercial (but non-proprietary) projects.
↑ Proprietary projects still can connect to a MySQL server without purchasing this license by using old versions of the MySQL client connection libraries (under the GNU Lesser General Public License). However, these libraries cannot connect to the newest versions of the MySQL server.
As MySQL alone isn't enough to run a real database server, the more practical way to install it is to deploy an all in one pack in this purpose, including all the needed additional elements: Apache and PHP.
On Linux: XAMP or LAMP.
On Windows: XAMP, WAMP, or EasyPHP.
The server IIS is launched by default, which forces Apache to change its port (888 instead of 80). To resolve this, just untick Internet Information Services in Programs and functionalities, Activate or deactivate the Windows functionalities. In the same way, the MySQL port can change from 3306 to 3388.
Moreover, EasyPHP development server (alias Devserver, the red version) doesn't work properly (MSVCR110.dll is missing) but EasyPHP hosting server (alias Webserver, the blue one) yes. However, it launched automatically at each boot which slows the system significantly. To avoid this, execute services.msc, and toggle the three services below in manual start. Then to launch them on demand (as an administrator), create a script called MySQL.cmd, containing the following lines:
This guide is written from the perspective of using the Linux Shell with Ubuntu and apt-get[3].
To install the client and the server under apt-get distributions (for example Debian and Ubuntu), Execute:
If all your answers are "yes" to what follows, this cleans up your installation, forces you to set a root password, asks you to test for anonymous users and makes your database internal.
Just be careful. Be sure that you are configuring MySQL to the specifications you want.
Creating your own MySQL account and database:
Now that MySQL is installed, you wouldn't necessarily have your own account, so you have to log in as root.
Once you've managed to log in, your command-line should look like this: mysql>
By the way, if your command-line ends up looking like this: -> theres an explanation behind it.
In MySQL each command you do has to end with ; . This way it knows that everything behind ; is a command.
So to get out of there, simply type ; There will be more on this later.
Now you can check what databases (if any) are available to your user (in this case "root" ): show databases;
So first create the database: create database people;
(NOTE: in this particular case, you have to be "root" to create new databases.)
Tada! You now have your own user account. Let's say you chose ted as your username. You've configured MySQL to say that ted can play around with the people database in whatever ways he wishes.
Now get out of MySQL by typing exit
To start working with the people database, you can now login as ted: mysql -u ted -p
Creating tables with information in your database:
Ted has now created a people database. So we want now to enter some information into a table.
Login as ted.
Firstly, we need to make sure we're working with the people database. So typing: select database(); will show you what database you're currently using. You should see a NULL , meaning that you're working with nothing at the moment.
So to start using the people database, type: \u people
So how to create a table.
Keep in mind that we need to set all the column values (like surname, age etc.).
Now, remember that annoying -> symbol? MySQL reads your command as just one command, not a series. So, -> enables you to enter your inputs in a nicer way than just writing everything on one line.
(NOTE: The problem with this method is that if you screw up on a line and press ENTER to go to the next line, you can't go back and fix your mistake. That's why a nice way to do this is using something like SciTE Text Editor (set language to SQL) to write your code and just copy/paste that into the shell.)
Another thing is that you must separate your lines with , at the end of each line except when you've written your two last lines. On the second to last line, don't add , and the last line always ends with ; .
First I have to explain a few things so you're not blown away by an unfamiliar bunch of code.
If you don't know, we use brackets () to encapsulate code. (Often called parenthesis).
Now, any variable in SQL is created as variableNAME variableTYPE otherVariableAttributes . So in order to define the Primary Key variable, we need to type for example:
You already know about the int variable. There is another which is kinda like String (for example: if you've programmed in Java before). It's called varchar which stands for variable characters. You set the amount of characters someone is able to input into a varchar variable. Like this: nameOfFattestMooseAlive varchar(30) So nameOfFattestMooseAlive can have a maximum of 30 characters.
Okay, so let's see an example of how to create a table relating to the people database:
Just a note that I set the maximum value of gender to 13 because "hermaphrodite" has 13 characters. :)
Great. We now completed our first Table.
Now comes the part when we have to get some actual people into our peopleInfo Table.
Since your already using the people database, you can type show tables; to see what tables are currently in your database.
To see the properties of your table type: describe peopleInfo;
So, how to fill in our peopleInfo table with people...
To create our first person you would type this:
Inserting lots of information into your table:
A brief point that shall be covered later, MySQL backs-up itself in .sql files. The reason this is smart is because it backs-up the actual code inside the text file.
Keeping this in mind, let's say we want to add 10 other people into your peopleInfo table. It would be one hell of a hassle typing each person into existence. What if there were a 1000?
So I've graciously typed out the code of filling in 10 other people to a database. :) Create a blank .txt file and copy/paste this information into it, saving it as tenPeople.sql .
Once there, to get all the data into your database, type: mysql -u ted -p people <tenPeople.sql and enter your password.
Now check again what information you have. There ya go.
A brief example would be select firstName, lastName, gender from peopleInfo; This would display to the screen only people's names, surnames, and genders. You've not specified that you want people's Database IDs, Numbers, or Ages to be displayed. And the great thing is you can choose whatever you want from the database to be displayed.
(NOTE: letters are enclosed with ' while numbers are plain.)
<= less than or equal to
Let's say we wanted to display all people whose first names began with the letter "j". We would use the LIKE condition. (Makes sense, is your name LIKE the letter "j", well it start with j so yes. :) )
About the LIKE condition.
Backing up and restoring your MySQL database:
There is a function called mysqldump. This is a way to backup your database.
Remember how you managed to get information into your database from tenPeople.sql? Well that's how you restore information to a database.
(In this particular case you gotta make sure that in your database you have a table called "peopleInfo")
Now...
To backup your database (in this case backup the people database):
We first have to create the .txt file that we will be backing it up to. Open a blank .txt file and save it as backupfile.sql .
Congratulations. You have now backuped your people database.
WARNING! mysqldump is one of the worst ways to backup production databases for the following reasons:
Better solutions are based on binary copy. It allows you to perform non-locking, consistent backups.
XtraBackup (similar to InnoDB Hot Backup but free)
This graphic interface allows the generation of SQL code by selecting some options with the mouse. This software has its own wiki on http://wiki.cihar.com/pma/Welcome_to_phpMyAdmin_Wiki.
Linux: mysql -h localhost -u root MyDB
Windows: "C:\Program Files (x86)\EasyPHP\binaries\mysql\bin\mysql.exe" -h localhost -u root MyDB
Or open an SQL window in PhpMyAdmin (eg: http://localhost/modules/phpmyadmin/#PMAURL-1:server_sql.php?server=1).
Require? Privilege.
NB: in MySQL, CREATE SCHEMA is a perfect synonym of CREATE DATABASE, contrarily to some other DBMS like Oracle or SQL Server.
Require ? privilege.
In some 5.1.x versions there was a RENAME DATABASE db1 TO db2; command, but it has been removed because renaming databases via SQL caused some data loss problems[1].
Another option, if you have root access, is to rename the database directory:
/etc/init.d/mysql stop
/etc/init.d/mysql start
You also need to drop privileges on name1 and recreate them on name2:
There is no direct copy command in MySQL. However, this can easily be done using some tools.
The mysqldump command-line can be used to generate a complete flat-file copy of the database. You can then reinject this copy in another database.
This requires a direct access to the database; if you do not have it, you may need to use phpMyAdmin instead.
To set an automatic backup every day at midnight[2], in Linux:
0 0 * * * /usr/local/bin/mysqldump -uLOGIN -PPORT -hHOST -pPASS base1 | gzip -c > `date “+\%Y-\%m-\%d”`.gz
With Windows, the program may not be into the environment variables:
"C:\Program Files (x86)\EasyPHP\binaries\mysql\bin\mysql.exe" -h localhost -u root MyDB < MyDB.sql
Contrarily to the PhpMyAdmin importations, there is no limit. For example, we can load a 2 GB database in five minutes.
This section is a stub.You can help Wikibooks by expanding it.
MySQL Query Browser apparently includes a MySQL Table Editor module.
DBDesigner begins to be old. It is released under the GNU GPL, but it cannot be fully considered as free software since it requires the non-free Kylix compiler to build.
But MySQL AB acquired fabFORCE[citation needed][3], who distributed DB Designer, and MySQL Workbench is the next version. For now the project is still Alpha and not ready for use yet.
Meanwhile, if you use the latest release of DBDesigner, you'll find that it cannot connect to MySQL, with the "unable to load libmysqlclient.so" error. To workaround this,
Install the MySQL "Shared compatibility libraries" (from http://dev.mysql.com/downloads/mysql/5.0.html#downloads for version 5.0, generic RPMS aka MySQL-shared-compat.i386 will do).
Replace DBDesigner's version of libmysqlclient.so with the newly installed one:
Find and install kylixlibs3-unwind-3.0-rh.4.i386.rpm
Find an old xorg (e.g. xorg-x11-libs-6.8.2-37.FC4.49.2.1.i386.rpm from FC4) and extract it:
Get libXft.so.1.1 in that package and install it:
You now can connect to your MySQL5 server from DBDesigner4. Consider this a temporary work-around waiting for community (free) and commercial (not free) versions MySQL Workbench.
Typical configuration :
MySQL database on a host machine (which name is mysqlhost below)
OOo 2 on a client machine (Debian GNU/Linux for instance)
Connection via ODBC.
It's a client configuration : we need mysql-client:
Before installing ODBC, we can test the remote connexion locally:
You must have create the database mysqldatabase and the user user1 on mysqlhost.
Reading table information for completion of table and column names
You can turn off this feature to get a quicker startup with -A
Welcome to the MySQL monitor. Commands end with ; or \g.
Your MySQL connection id is 33 to server version: 5.0.24a-Debian_5~bpo.1-log
Type 'help;' or '\h' for help. Type '\c' to clear the buffer.
Then, it's possible to test, through different queries :
....
Fine ! Let's go with OOo and ODBC, on the client machine:
/etc/odbc.ini (empty file) and /etc/odbcinst.ini are created.
Description = MySQL driver
Driver = /usr/lib/odbc/libmyodbc.so
Setup = /usr/lib/odbc/libodbcmyS.so
Description = ODBC for MySQL
Driver = /usr/lib/libmyodbc3.so
Setup = /usr/lib/libodbcmyS.so
For further options : man odbcinst
First of all, we have to create at least one DSN (Data Source Name or Data Set Name), because every ODBC connection is initialized through an existing DSN. It's true in every cases, so it is required for an ODBC connection from OOo.
To create a DSN, one have different possibilities :
Modify /etc/odbc.ini (concerns all users)
Modify ~/.odbc.ini (concerns a specific user)
Use graphical applications such as ODBCConfig (Debian: unixodbc-bin, Fedora: unixODBC-kde). Finally, these graphical applications modify /etc/odbc.ini or ~/.odbc.ini
For instance, a /etc/odbc.ini file (the name of the DSN is between brackets []):
Description = MySQL ODBC Database
Then we can test, using isql command:
And now, from OOo:
-> Connecting to an existing database
-> Yes, register the database for me
At that step, one is connected to the mysqldatabase database, under the user user1. Just before accessing the database, for example to create tables, one will give user1 password.
Then, through OOo, it is now quite easy to access and manipulate the database. We can just notice that Java is required in the following cases :
Wizard to create a form (at the opposite, to create a form directly don't need any JRE).
Wizard to create reports.
Wizard to create queries (at the opposite, to create a query directly or through a view don't need any JRE).
Wizard to create tables (at the opposite, to create a table directly or to create a view don't need any JRE).
GNU/Linux distros usually ships OpenOffice with IcedTea (openjdk-6-jre/java-1.6.0-openjdk) or GCJ (java-gcj-compat/java-1.4.2-gcj-compat) so that these Java-based features work.
↑ https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.1/en/rename-database.html
↑ http://stackoverflow.com/questions/6645818/how-to-automate-database-backup-using-phpmyadmin
↑ In the forums: [1] but we'd need something more official
You can't modify structure and data of information_schema. You can only query the tables.
Many information_schema tables provide the same data you can retrieve with a SHOW statement. While using SHOW commands is faster (the server responds much faster and you type less characters), the information_schema provides a more flexible way to obtain and organize the metadata.
The INFORMATION_SCHEMA table containing the databases information is SCHEMATA.
The mysqlshow command line tool (DOS/Unix) can be used instead. You can't show databases if the server has been started with the --skip-all-databases option.
If you don't have the 'SHOW DATABASES' privilege, you'll only see databases on which you have some permissions.
The following SQL commands provide information about the databases located on the current server.
The SCHEMA keywords can be used in place of DATABASES. MySQL doesn't support standard SQL SCHEMAs, so SCHEMA is a synonym of database. It has been added for compatibility with other DBMSs.
Add a filter on the databases names
The LIKE operator here works as in normal SELECTs or DML statements. So you can list all databases whose name starts with 'my':
You can add more complex filters using the WHERE clause:
WHERE clause allows you to use regular expressions, '=', '<' and '>' operators, string functions or other useful expressions to filter the records returned by SHOW DATABASES.
The following SQL commands provide information about the tables and views contained in a database. The INFORMATION_SCHEMA tables containing this information are `TABLES` and `VIEWS`.
Since the following statements provide very little information about views, if you need to get metadata about them you'll probably prefer to query the VIEWS table.
The mysqlshow command line tool can be used instead.
The 2 forms shown above are equivalent.
You can apply a filter to the tables names, to show only tables whose name match a pattern. You can use the LIKE operators, as you do in SELECTs or in the DML statements:
Also, you can apply a more complex filter to any column returned by the SHOW TABLES command using the WHERE clause:
By default, SHOW TABLES returns only one column containing the name of the table. You can get extra information by using the FULL keyword:
This will add a column called `Table_type`. This can have three values: 'BASE TABLE' for tables, 'VIEW' for views and 'SYSTEM VIEW' for special tables created by the server (normally used only INFORMATION_SCHEMA tables).
Or, you can only list views:
You can get a list of the non-temporary tables (not views) which are open in the cache:
This command has the same parameters as SHOW TABLES, except for FULL (useless in this case). You can't get this information from the INFORMATION_SCHEMA.
The following SQL commands provide information about the columns in a table or in a view. The INFORMATION_SCHEMA table containing this information is COLUMNS.
The mysqlshow command line tool can be used instead.
'filter' can be a column name. If a column name is specified, only that column will be shown. If 'filter' contains the '%' or the '_' characters, it will be evaluated as a LIKE condition. For example, you can list all fields which start with 'my':
FIELDS and COLUMNS are synonyms. EXPLAIN is a synonym of SHOW COLUMNS / FIELDS too, but it doesn't support all of its clauses.
A databases name can be specified both in the form
Using the FULL keyword, extra info can be retried: the columns' collation, privileges you have on the column and the comment.
...
The following SQL commands provide information about the indexes in a table. Information about keys is contained in the `COLUMNS` table in the INFORMATION_SCHEMA.
The mysqlshow -k command line tool can be used instead.
The KEYS reserved word can be used as a synonym of INDEX. No other clauses are provided.
Remark: with phpMyAdmin it's easy to create the same index multiple times, which slows the requests.
In this book, we will quote the MySQL identifiers (tables names, fields, databases, etc.) using backquotes (`).
Backquote is ASCII 96. It can be type on Linux systems by pressing: ALT+'.
Most often, this is optional. However, this allows better error messages from MySQL. For example, this error is not very helpful:
Ok, it was just a missing s:
This syntax allows the user to use reserved words and some illegal characters in objects' names. It is even possible to use backquotes by typing it twice:
However, this is not a portable syntax. The SQL standard recommends the use of a double quote ("). If you want to write portable SQL quote, do not quote the identifiers. But is there something like portable SQL, even remotely?
Language/Definitions: what are DDL, DML and DQL?
DDL or Data Definition Language actually consists of the SQL commands that can be used to define the database schema.
Data Control Language (DCL) refers to the GRANT and REVOKE statements
DCL is used to grant / revoke permissions on databases and their contents. DCL is simple, but MySQL's permissions are rather complex. DCL is about security.
Data Transaction Language (DTL) refers to the START TRANSACTION, SAVEPOINT, COMMIT and ROLLBACK [TO SAVEPOINT] statements
DTL is used to manage transactions (operations which include more instructions none of which can be executed if one of them fails).
The local variables can't be reached from outside their function or stored procedure[1].
They are declared like this[2]:
The ability to set variables in a statement with the := assignment operator:
For e.g. (@total) to calculate the total in an example, you have to have the total column first because it must be calculated before the individual percentage calculations.
Session variables are set for the duration of the thread.
In the vast majority of cases you'd use a programming language to do this sort of thing.
MySQL variables can be useful when working on the MySQL command line.
If no records are returned, the user variable will not be set for that statement.
A user variable set in the field list cannot be used as a condition.
A global variable is visible to all users, it allows to modify the configuration files settings during the session or definitely. So when changing them, it's necessary to precise this permanent or ephemera criteria, with respectively set global and set session. Example:
| Variable_name | Value |
↑ http://stackoverflow.com/questions/1009954/mysql-variable-vs-variable-whats-the-difference
↑ http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/declare-local-variable.html
An expression and a column may be given aliases using AS. The alias is used as the expression's column name and can be used with order by or having clauses. For e.g.
A table name can have a shorter name for reference using AS. You can omit the AS word and still use aliasing. For e.g.
U.User_ID = B.Rep_ID AND
B.Project_ID = '10'
Aliasing plays a crucial role while you are using self joins. For e.g. people table has been referred to as p and c aliases!
p.name AS parent,
c.name AS child,
VARCHAR is shorthand for CHARACTER VARYING. 'n' represents the maximum column length (upto 65,535 characters). A VARCHAR(10) column can hold a string with a maximum length of 10 characters. The actual storage required is the length of the string (L), plus 1 or 2 bytes (1 if the length is < 255) to record the length of the string.
For the string 'abcd', L is 4 and the storage requirement is 5 bytes.
CHAR(n) is similar to varchar(n) with the only difference that char will occupy fixed length of space in the database whereas varchar will need the space to store the actual text. So a CHAR field takes more storage space, but is 20% faster to search if index[1].
A BLOB or TEXT column with a maximum length of 65,535 characters. The required space is the real length of the stored data plus 2 bytes (1 byte if length is < 255). The BLOB / TEXT data is not stored in the table's data file. This makes all operations (INSERT / UPDATE / DELETE / SELECT) involving the BLOB / TEXT data slower, but makes all other operations faster.
Specifying an n value has no effect whatsoever. Regardless of a supplied value for n, maximum (unsigned) value stored is 429 crores.
If you want to add negative numbers, add the "signed" keyword next to it.
Attention: to store a number greater than the limit (eg: 1234567890123456789), the software can tell that the operation has been done although it hasn't. So the type must be declared as BIGINT in this case.
Remark: the booleans are declared as tinyint(1).
The number between the parenthesis after the integer types indicates on how many digits the stored integer should be displayed[2]. However, if it's longer than that, it won't affect its storing.
Out of the three types DATETIME, DATE, and TIMESTAMP, the DATE type is used when you need only a date value, without a time part.
The DATETIME type is used when you need values that contain both date and time information.
The difference between DATETIME and TIMESTAMP is that the TIMESTAMP range is limited to 1970-2037 (see below).
TIME can be used to only store the time of day (HH:MM:SS), without the date. It can also be used to represent a time interval (for example: -02:00:00 for "two hours in the past"). Range: '-838:59:59' => '838:59:59'.
YEAR can be used to store the year number only.
If you manipulate dates, you have to specify the actual date, not only the time - that is, MySQL will not automagically use today as the current date. On the contrary, MySQL will even interpret the HH:MM:SS time as a YY:MM:DD value, which will probably be invalid.
The following examples show the precise date range for Unix-based timestamps, which starts at the Unix Epoch and stops just before the first new year before the
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)
A SET datatype can hold any number of strings from a predefined list of strings specified during table creation. The SET datatype is similar to the ENUM datatype in that they both work with predefined sets of strings, but where the ENUM datatype restricts you to a single member of the set of predefined strings, the SET datatype allows you to store any of the values together, from none to all of them.
SET("madam", "mister") -- authorizes an empty field, "madam", "mister", "madam, mister", or "mister, madam"
ENUM("madam", "mister") -- authorizes an empty field, "madam" or "mister"
↑ https://dba.stackexchange.com/questions/424/performance-implications-of-mysql-varchar-sizes/1915#1915
↑ https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/numeric-type-attributes.html
The table size limit depends on the filesystem, and is generally around 2TB[1].
Moreover, MySQL can assure the unique keys auto-incrementation with the option AUTO_INCREMENT. In case of table truncation, the counter can be reset with:
To duplicate the same structure (names, fields types, and indexes, but no record):
To copy the records into the previous result:
It's possible to create variables of type "table", which as the other variables, will be erased at the end of their scripts. It's called the "temporary tables":
Attention: if the temporary table column name doesn't correspond to the field which fills it, an additional column will be added with this field name. Eg:
Attention: all temporary tables are dropped at the end of the MySQL connection which had created them[2].
(this operation is only supported by some Storage Engines; it could make some query faster)
You can rename more than one table with a single command:
RENAME is a shortcut. You can also use the ALTER TABLE statement:
Using ALTER TABLE you can only rename one table per statement, but it's the only way to rename temporary tables.
You can also drop more than one table with a single statement:
TEMPORARY must be specified, to drop a temporary table. IF EXISTS tells the server that it must not raise an error if the table doesn't exist.
↑ http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/table-size-limit.html
↑ http://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-temporary-table/
If bulk INSERTs are too slow and they operate on indexed non-empty tables, maybe you should increase the value of bulk_insert_buffer_size.
Before performing bulk inserts, you may want to disable the keys.
TODO: describes a work-around that I couldn't make to work with MySQL 4.1. Currently the work-around is not use 2 subqueries, possibly with transactions[1].
UPDATEs speed depends of how many indexes are updated.
If you UPDATE a MyISAM table which uses dynamic format, if you make rows larger they could be split in more than one part. This causes reading overhead. So, if your applications often do this, you may want to regularly run an OPTIMIZE TABLE statement.
Performing many UPDATEs all together on a LOCKed table is faster than performing them individually.
REPLACE works exactly like INSERT, except that if an old record in the table has the same value as a new record for a PRIMARY KEY or a UNIQUE index, the old record is deleted before the new record is inserted.
It can be very slow in a large table, especially if the table has many indexes.
TRUNCATE is not transaction-safe nor lock-safe.
After DELETing many rows (about 30%), an OPTIMIZE TABLE command should make next statements faster.
↑ http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.5/en/replace.html
Any SQL expression is allowed here.
You can also retrieve all fields from a table:
If you are retrieving results from a table or a view, usually you specify the table's name in the FROM clause:
You can also use the `db_name`.`table_name` syntax:
You can set a filter to decide what records must be retrieved.
For example, you can retrieve only the record which has an id of 42:
You can group all records by one or more fields. The record which have the same value for that field will be grouped in one computed record. You can only select the grouped record and the result of some aggregate functions, which will be computed on all records of each group.
For example, the following will group all records in the table `users` by the field `city`. For each group of users living in the same city, the maximum age, the minimum age and the average age will be returned:
In the following example, the users are grouped by city and sex, so that we'll know the max, min and avg age of male/female users in each city:
The HAVING clause declares a filter for the records which are computed by the GROUP BY clause. It's different from the WHERE clause, that operates before the GROUP BY. Here's what happens:
The records which match to the WHERE clause are retrieved
Those records are used to compute new records as defined in the GROUP BY clause
The new records that match to the HAVING conditions are returned
This means which WHERE decides what record are used to compose the new computed records.
HAVING decides what computed records are returned, so it can operate on the results of aggregate functions. HAVING is not optimized and can't use indexes.
This probably gives a wrong results. MAX(age) and other aggregate calculations are made using all values, even if the record's sex value is 'f'. This is hardly the expected result.
This is correct and returns the expected results, but the execution of this query is not optimized. The WHERE clause can and should be used, because, so that MySQL doesn't computes records which are excluded later.
It must group all records, because can't decide the max age of each city before the GROUP BY clause is execute. Later, it returns only the record with a MAX(age)>80.
You can set an arbitrary order for the records you retrieve. The order may be alphabetical or numeric.
By default, the order is ASCENDING. You can also specify that the order must be DESCENDING:
NULLs values are considered as minor than any other value.
You can also specify the field position, in place of the field name:
You can retrieve records in a random order:
If a GROUP BY clause is specified, the results are ordered by the fields named in GROUP BY, unless an ORDER BY clause is present. You can even specify in the GROUP BY clause if the order must be ascending or descending:
You can specify the maximum of rows that you want to read:
This statement returns a maximum of 10 rows. If there are less than 10 rows, it returns the number of rows found. The limit clause is usually used with ORDER BY.
You can get a given number of random records:
You can specify how many rows should be skipped before starting to return the records found. The first record is 0, not one:
You can use the LIMIT clause to get the pagination of results:
Also, the following syntax is acceptable:
You can use the LIMIT clause to check the syntax of a query without waiting for it to return the results:
SQL_CALC_FOUND_ROWS may speed up a query [1][2]
LIMIT is particularly useful for SELECTs which use ORDER BY, DISTINCT and GROUP BY, because their calculations don't have to involve all the rows.
If the query is resolved by the server copying internally the results into a temporary table, LIMIT helps MySQL to calculate how much memory is required by the table.
The DISTINCT keyword can be used to remove all duplicate rows from the resultset:
You can use it to get the list of all values contained in one field:
Or you can use it to get the existing combinations of some values:
If one of the fields you are SELECTing is the PRIMARY KEY or has a UNIQUE index, DISTINCT is useless. Also, it's useless to use DISTINCT in conjunction with the GROUP BY clause.
There are some hints you may want to give to the server to better optimize the SELECTs. If you give more than one hints, the order of the keywords is important:
[HIGH_PRIORITY] [STRAIGHT_JOIN]
[SQL_SMALL_RESULT | SQL_BIG_RESULT] [SQL_BUFFER_RESULT]
[SQL_CACHE | SQL_NO_CACHE] [SQL_CALC_FOUND_ROWS]
...
Force MySQL to evaluate the tables of a JOIN in the same order they are named, from the leftmost.
It's useful only while using DISTINCT or GROUP BY. Tells the optimizer that the query will return few rows.
It's useful only while using DISTINCT or GROUP BY. Tells the optimizer that the query will return a many rows.
Force MySQL to copy the result into a temporary table. This is useful to remove LOCKs as soon as possible.
Forces MySQL to copy the result into the query cache. Only works if the value of query_cache_type is DEMAND or 2.
Tells MySQL not to cache the result. Useful if the query occurs very seldom or if the result often change.
Useful if you are using the LIMIT clause. Tells the server to calculate how many rows would have been returned if there were no LIMIT. You can retrieve that number with another query:
USE INDEX: specifies to research some records preferably by browsing the tables indexes[3].
FORCE INDEX: idem in more restrictive. A table will be browsed without index only if the optimizer doesn't have the choice.
IGNORE INDEX: request to not favor the indexes.
Following query will return all the records from both tables.
If you type only UNION, then it is considered that you are asking for distinct records. If you want all records, you have to use UNION ALL.
The Most important aspect of SQL is its relational features. You can query, compare and calculate two different tables having entirely different structure. Joins and subselects are the two methods to join tables. Both methods of joining tables should give the same results. The natural join is faster on most SQL platforms.
In the following example a student is trying to learn what the numbers are called in Hindi.
You can also write the same query as
A Cartesian join is when you join every row of one table to every row of another table.
It is also called Cross Join and may be written in this way:
Natural Joins give the same result as an INNER JOIN on all the two tables common columns.
The following statement using "USING" method will display the same results as the previous INNER JOIN (compatible: MySQL 4+; but changed in MySQL 5).
The keywords LEFT and RIGHT are not absolute, they only operate within the context of the given statement: we can reverse the order of the tables and reverse the keywords, and the result would be the same.
If the type of join is not specified as inner or outer then it will be executed as an INNER JOIN.
As for v5.1, MySQL does not provide FULL OUTER JOIN. You may emulate it this way:
It is possible to join more than just two tables:
| type_id | name | count |
| 1 | Official GNU software | 148 |
| 2 | non-GNU software and documentation | 268 |
| 3 | www.gnu.org portion | 4 |
| 6 | www.gnu.org translation team | 5 |
SQL subqueries let you use the results of one query as part of another query.
Subqueries are often natural ways of writing a statement.
Allow some queries that otherwise can't be constructed. Without using a subquery, you have to do it in two steps.
Subqueries always appear as part of the WHERE (or HAVING) clause.
ORDER BY is not allowed; it would not make sense.
Usually refer to name of a main table column in the subquery.
This defines the current row of the main table for which the subquery is being run. This is called an outer reference.
For e.g. If RepOffice= OfficeNbr from Offices table, list the offices where the sales quota for the office exceeds the sum of individual salespersons' quotas
Display all customers with orders or credit limits > $50,000.
Use the DISTINCT word to list the customer just once.
↑ http://www.mysqlperformanceblog.com/2007/08/28/to-sql_calc_found_rows-or-not-to-sql_calc_found_rows/
↑ http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.0/en/information-functions.html
↑ http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/index-hints.html
↑ https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/join.html
Null is a special logical value in SQL. Most programming languages have 2 values of logic: True and False. SQL also has NULL which means "Unknown". A NULL value can be set.
NULL is a non-value, so it can be assigned to TEXT columns, INTEGER columns or any other datatype. A column can not contain NULLs only if it has been declared as NOT NULL (see ALTER TABLE).
(F_Name, L_Name, Birth_place, Language)
Do not quote the NULL. If you quote a Null then you name the person NULL.
For some strange reason, NULLs do not show visually on windows XP in Varchar fields but they do in Fedora's version, so versions of mysql can give different outputs. Here we set the value of Sting and Homer's first name to a zero length string "", because we KNOW they have NO first name, but we KNOW we do not know the place they were born. To check for a NULLs use
Remember, COUNT never counts NULLS.
Normal operations (comparisons, expressions...) return NULL if at least one of the compared items is NULL:
The function 'COALESCE' can simplify working with null values.
In a date field, to treat NULL as the current date:
The coalesce() function is there to guard against trying to calculate the logarithm of a null value and may be optional depending on your circumstances.
If expr1 is not NULL, IFNULL() returns expr1, else it returns expr2.
IFNULL() returns a numeric or string value, depending on the context in which it is used:
Null handling can be very counter intuitive and could cause problems if you have an incorrect function in a delete statement that returns null. For example the following query will delete all entries.
If you want to have NULL values presented last when doing an ORDER BY, try this:
Finally, to determine the table fields which can't be null:
WHERE IS_NULLABLE = 'NO' AND TABLE_NAME = 'my_table'
MySQL uses some standard SQL operators and some non-standard operators. They can be used to write expressions which involve constant values, variables, values contained in fields and / or other expressions.
If you want to check if 2 values are equal, you must use the = operator:
If you want to check if 2 values are different, you can use the <> or != operators, which have the same meaning:
When you compare a NULL value with a non-NULL value, you'll get NULL. If you want to check if a value is null, you can use IS:
There is also an equality operator which considers NULL as a normal value, so it returns 1 (not NULL) if both values are NULL and returns 0 (not NULL) if one of the values is NULL:
There is not a NULL-safe non-equality operator, but you can type the following:
IS and IS NOT can also be used for Boolean comparisons. You can use them with the reserved words TRUE, FALSE and UNKNOWN (which is merely a synonym for NULL).
Greater, Less...
You can check if a value is greater than another value:
You can also check if a value is minor than another value:
This kind of comparisons also works on TEXT values:
Generally speaking, alphabetical order is used for TEXT comparisons. However, the exact rules are defined by the COLLATION used. A COLLATION defines the sorting rules for a given CHARACTER SET. For example, a COLLATION may be case-sensitive, while another COLLATION may be case-insensitive.
You can check if a value is equal or greater than another value. For example, the following queries have the same meaning:
Similarly, you can check if a value is less or equal to another value:
If you want to check if a value is included in a given range (boundaries included), you can use the BETWEEN ... AND ... operator. AND doesn't have its usual meaning. Example:
The value after BETWEEN and the value after AND are included in the range.
You can also use NOT BETWEEN to check if a value is not included in a range:
You should not include in the list both numbers and strings, or the results may be unpredictable. If you have numbers, you should quote them:
MySQL doesn't have a real BOOLEAN datatype.
FALSE is a synonym for 0. Empty strings are considered as FALSE in a Boolean context.
NOT is the only operator which has only one operand. It returns 0 if the operand is TRUE, returns 1 if the operand is FALSE and returns NULL if the operand is NULL.
OR returns TRUE if at least one of the operands is TRUE, else returns FALSE; if the two operands are NULL, returns NULL.
XOR (eXclusive OR) returns 1 if only one of the operands is TRUE and the other operand is FALSE; returns 0 if both the operands are TRUE o both the operands are FALSE; returns NULL if one of the operands is NULL.
OR can be written ad ||
Only NOT (usually) has a different precedence from its synonym. See operator precedence for detail.
MySQL supports operands which perform all basic arithmetic operations.
You can type positive values with a '+', if you want:
You can type negative values with a '-'. - is an inversion operand:
You can make sums with '+':
You can multiply a number with '*':
You can make divisions with '/'. Returns a FLOAT number:
You can make integer divisions with DIV. Resulting number is an INTEGER. No remainder. This has been added in MySQL 4.1.
You can get the remainder of a division with '%' or MOD:
You can convert an INTEGER to a FLOAT doing so:
You can't convert a string to a FLOAT value by adding 0.0, but you can cast it to an INTEGER:
There are no concatenation operators in MySQL.
Arithmetic operators convert the values into numbers and then perform arithmetic operations, so you can't use + to concatenate strings.
You can use the CONCAT() function instead.
The LIKE operator may be used to check if a string matches to a pattern. A simple example:
The pattern matching is usually case insensitive. There are two exceptions:
You can use two special characters for LIKE comparisons:
_ means "any character" (but must be 1 char, not 0 or 2)
% means "any sequence of chars" (even 0 chars or 1000 chars)
Note that "\" also escapes quotes ("'") and this behaviour can't be changed by the ESCAPE clause. Also, the escape character does not escape itself.
Find titles starting with the word "hello":
Find titles ending with the word "world":
Find titles containing the word "gnu":
These special chars may be contained in the pattern itself: for example, you could need to search for the "_" character. In that case, you need to "escape" the char:
Sometimes, you may want to use an escape character different from "\". For example, you could use "/":
When you use = operator, trailing spaces are ignored. When you use LIKE, they are taken into account.
If you want to check if a pattern doesn't match, you can use NOT LIKE:
You can use SOUNDS LIKE to check if 2 text values are pronounced in the same way. SOUNDS LIKE uses the SOUNDEX algorithm, which is based on English rules and is very approximate (but simple and thus fast).
SOUNDS LIKE is a MySQL-specific extension to SQL. It has been added in MySQL 4.1.
You can use REGEXP to check if a string matches to a pattern using regular expressions.
You can use RLIKE as a synonym for REGEXP.
The structure IF ... THEN ... ELSE ... END IF; only functions in the stored procedures. To manage a condition out of them, we can use[1]: IF(condition, ifTrue, ifFalse);.
Example with several conditions (switch)[2][3]:
Example with several conditions[4]:
!
PIPES_AS_CONCAT - If this SQL mode is enabled, || has precedence on ^, but - and ~ have precedence on ||.
HIGH_NOT_PRECEDENCE - If this SQL mode is enabled, NOT has the same precedence level as !.
You can use parenthesis to force MySQL to evaluate a subexpression before another independently from operator precedence:
You can also use parenthesis to make an expression more readable by humans, even if they don't affect the precedence:
You can use the = operator to assign a value to a column:
When you want to assign a value to a variable, you must use the := operator, because the use of = would be ambiguous (is it as assignment or a comparison?)
Aside from mysqldump (cf. MySQL/Administration), you can also export / import raw data.
Data can be exported using the "INTO OUTFILE" keyword
Beware that the MySQL daemon itself will write the file, not the user you run the MySQL client with. The file will be stored on the server, not on your host. Moreover, the server will need write access to the path you specify (usually, the server can _not_ write in your home directory, e.g.). Hence why we (unsecurely) used /tmp in the examples.
You can also use the command line to export data
In another database/computer/etc. the data can be imported:
In this example, we only need the second and third column of the data file and store these values in the name and phone_number column of our database table.
To import a .sql which creates a user and its database, one should know if this user already exists on the server, because MySQL doesn't have any DROP USER IF EXISTS. On the contrary it works with the databases:
PS: if this commande returns "DROP DATABASE" statements are disabled with PhpMyAdmin, modify config.default.php by switching $cfg['AllowUserDropDatabase'] to true, and empty the navigator cache.
Function names are case insensitive. You can write them as you prefer:
If the IGNORE_SPACE SQL_MODE is not set, you can not put a space between the function name and the first parenthesis. It would return a 1064 error. IGNORE_SPACE is usually 0. The reason is that the parser is faster if that flag is disabled. So:
However, this restriction only applies to the native MySQL functions. UDFs and stored functions may be written with a space after the name.
You can't use a value calculated in the SELECT clause as a constraint in the WHERE clause (its a chicken & egg problem); the WHERE clause is what determines the values in the SELECT clause. What you want is the HAVING clause which is applied *after* all matching rows have been found.
Type-indipendent functions.
Executes expression n times and returns how time it spent. Useful to find bottlenecks in SQL expressions.
Returns value converted in the specified type.
Returns the CHARACTER SET used by string.
SHOW CHARACTER SET; -- displays all the different installed CHARACTER SET
Returns the first argument which is not NULL. If all arguments are NULL, returns NULL. There must be at least one argument.
Returns the coercibility (between 0 to 5):
NULL or an expression derived from NULL
Returns the COLLATION used by the string.
Returns the id of the current thread.
Returns value converted to the specified type.
Converts the passed string to the specified CHARACTER SET.
Returns the username and the hostname used in the current connection.
Returns the current database's name, set with the USE command.
After a SELECT with a LIMIT clause and the SQL_CALC_FOUND_ROWS keyword, you can run another SELECT with the FOUND_ROWS() function. It returns the number of rows found by the previous query if it had no LIMIT clause.
Returns the greatest argument passed.
If val1 is TRUE, returns val2. If val1 is FALSE or NULL, returns val3.
If val1 is NULL, returns val2; else, returns val1.
If the value passed is NULL returns 1, else returns 0.
If val1 = val2, returns NULL; else, returns val1.
Returns the minimum argument passed.
There are plenty of date related functions.[6]
Attention: convert('17/02/2016 15:49:03',datetime) or convert('17-02-2016 15:49:03',datetime) gives null, so an insert request replaces it by the same result as now(). This should be convert('2016-02-17 15:49:03',datetime) or convert('2016/02/17 15:49:03',datetime).
If the DISTINCT keyword is used, identical rows are counted only once.
If a field name is given, returns the number of non-NULL values.
If a field name is given and the DISTINCT keyword is given, returns the number of non-NULL values, and identical values are counted only once.
You can count non-NULL values for an expression:
This returns the number of rows where longitude and latitude are both non-NULL.
MAX() can be used to get the maximum value for an expression in the rows matching to a query. If no row matches the query, returns NULL.
MIN() can be used to get the minimum value for an expression in the rows matching to a query. If no row matches the query, returns NULL.
AVG() can be used to get the average value for an expression in the rows matching to a query. If no row matches the query, returns NULL.
SUM() can be used to get the sum of the values for an expression in the rows matching to a query. If no row matches the query, returns NULL.
If SUM(DISTINCT expression) is used, identical values are added only once. It has been added in MySQL 5.1.
GROUP_CONCAT() can be used to concatenate values from all records for a group into a single string separated by a comma by default, or any additional token you like if placed as the optional second parameter.
These functions calculate expression for each row of the result set and perform the calculation between all the expressions. These are bitwise functions. The precision used is 64 bit.
(returns 0 if there are no rows)
↑ http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/control-flow-functions.html
↑ https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/if.html
↑ https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/case.html
↑ http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.0/en/information-functions.html#function_coercibility
↑ https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.5/en/date-and-time-functions.html
MySQL supports some procedural extensions to SQL. By using them, you can manage the control flow, create loops and use cursors. These features allow you to create stored programs, which may be of 3 kinds:
Events - programs which are executed regularly after some time intervals;
MySQL future versions will support stored program written in other languages, not only SQL. You will have the ability to manage new languages as PLUGINs. Also, the stored procedures will be compiled into C code, and thus they will be faster.
Triggers were added in MySQL 5.0.2. They work on persistent tables, but can't be associated with TEMPORARY tables.
This example trigger defines a stored program (which is the simple DELETE statement) called `delete_old`. It's automatically fired when a new record is INSERTed into `articles`. It's called after the INSERT, not before. If a single INSERT adds more than one row to the table, `delete_old` is called more than once. The idea is simple: when a new record is created, the oldest record is DELETEd.
A trigger may be executed BEFORE or AFTER a certain SQL statement. This is important because a trigger may execute one or more statements which activate other triggers; so, it may be important to decide their time order, to ensure the database's integrity.
The statement which fires the trigger must be a basic DML command:
A special case is INSERT ... ON DUPLICATE KEY UPDATE. If the INSERT is executed, both BEFORE INSERT and AFTER INSERT are executed. If the INSERT is not executed, and thus an UPDATE is executed instead, the order of events is the following: BEFORE INSERT, BEFORE UPDATE, AFTER UPDATE.
You can also specify the table's name by using the following syntax:
... ON `my_database`.`my_table` ...
Triggers' names must be unique in a database. Two tables located in the same database can't be associated to two different triggers with the same name.
You can access to the old value of a field (the value it has before the execution of the statement) and to the new value (the value it has after the execution of the statement. Example:
To DROP a trigger you can use the following syntax:
To alter an existing trigger, you must DROP and re-CREATE it.
This command returns the CREATE TRIGGER statement used to create the trigger and some information about the settings which may affect the statement.
If you want to have a list of all the triggers in the current database, you can type the following:
If you want to have a list of the triggers contained in another database, you can use:
If you want to list the triggers whose name matches to a LIKE expression:
You can't use LIKE and WHERE together.
The columns returned by this statement are:
Event - The SQL command that fires the trigger
Table - The table that is associated to the trigger
Statement - The statement that is executed by the trigger
Definer - The user who created the trigger
Database Collation - The COLLATION used by the database (and the trigger)
INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TRIGGERS
The INFORMATION_SCHEMA virtual database has a `TRIGGERS` table. It has the following fields:
TRIGGER_CATALOG - What catalog contains the trigger (not implemented yet)
TRIGGER_SCHEMA - What SCHEMA (DATABASE) contains the trigger
EVENT_OBJECT_SCHEMA - SCHEMA containing the table associated to the trigger
EVENT_OBJECT_NAME - Name of the table associated to the trigger
SQL_MODE - SQL_MODE valid for this trigger's execution
DEFINER - User who created the trigger, in the form 'user@host'
CHARACTER_SET_CLIENT - The value of the `character_set_client` variable when the trigger was created
COLLATION_CONNECTION - The value of the `collation_connection` variable when the trigger was created
DATABASE_COLLATION - The COLLATION used by the database (and the trigger)
Events are also called Scheduled Events or Temporal Triggers. They are planned events which are executed at certain times, or at specified time intervals. They are similar to the UNIX crontab.
Once an Event is started, it must be completely executed. If it is re-activated before it ends its execution, a new instance of the same Event will be created. If this can happen, it may be a good idea to use LOCKs to assure data consistence.
The Event Scheduler is a thread which is permanently in execution. It starts the Events when they must be started. If you don't need Events, you can disable the Event Scheduler. You can do this starting MySQL with the following option:
Or you can add a line to the my.cnf configuration file:
If the Event Scheduler is not disabled, you will be able to turn it ON/OFF runtime. It is controlled by a global system variable:
If the Event Scheduler is ON, you can check its status with SHOW PROCESSLIST. It is shown like all other threads. Its `User` is 'event_scheduler'. When it is sleeping, the value for `State` is 'Waiting for next activation'.
The simplest case. We want a SQL command to be executed tomorrow:
The event name must be specified after "EVENT".
If you want to create a task which will be executed only once at a certain time, you need the AT clause. If you don't want to specify an absolute time, but we want the task to be executed when a time interval is passed, "AT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP + INTERVAL ..." is a useful syntax.
If you want to create a recurring task (which will be executed at regular intervals) you need the EVERY clause:
You can also specify a start time and/or an end time. The task will be executed at regular intervals from the start time until the end time:
YEAR, QUARTER, MONTH, WEEK, DAY, HOUR, MINUTE, SECOND, YEAR_MONTH, DAY_HOUR, DAY_MINUTE, DAY_SECOND, HOUR_MINUTE, HOUR_SECOND, MINUTE_SECOND
The DO clause specify which statement must be executed.
If a task is composed by more than 1 statement, the BEGIN ... END syntax must be used:
If an EVENT with the same name already exists you get an error from the server. To suppress the error, you can use the IF NOT EXISTS clause:
After the EVENT is expired (when the timestamp specified in the AT clause or in the ENDS clause), MySQL drops the event by default, as it is no more useful. You may want to preserve it from deletion to ALTER it someday and activate it again, or just to have its code somewhere. You may do this with the ON COMPLETION clause:
Or, you can explicitly tell MySQL to drop it, even if it's not necessary:
If you don't tell MySQL to preserve the EVENT after it's expired, but it is already expired immediatly after creation (which happens if you specify a past TIMESTAMP in the AT / ENDS clause), the server creates and drop it as you requested. However, in this case it will inform you returning a 1588 warning.
You can also specify if an EVENT must be enabled. This is done by specifying ENABLE, DISABLE or DISABLE ON SLAVES (used to execute the event on the master and not replacate it on the slaves). The EVENT is enabled by default.
To modify this behaviour, you will use ALTER EVENT.
You can specify a comment for the EVENT. Comments have a 64 characters limit. The comment must be a literal, not an expression. Example:
You can also specify which user must be used to check privileges during the execution of the EVENT. By default, the CURRENT_USER is used. You can specify that explicitly:
To specify a different user, you must have the SUPER privilege. In that case, you must specify both the username and the host:
The ALTER EVENT statement can be used to modify an existing EVENT.
RENAME TO is used to rename the EVENT.
You only need to specify the clauses that you want to change:
You need the EVENT privilege to drop an event. To drop an event you can type:
If the EVENT does not exist, you get a 1517 error. To avoid this, you can use the IF EXISTS clause:
If the EVENT needs to be executed only once or just for a known time period, by default MySQL drops it automatically when it is expired (see the ON COMPLETE clause in CREATE EVENT).
This command returns the CREATE EVENT statement used to create the trigger and some information about the settings which may affect the statement.
Event - Event name.
Create Event - Statement used to create the event.
The statement shows information about the EVENTs which are in the current database or in the specified database:
Db Database name.
Name Event name.
Definer User which created the EVENT and the host he used, in the form user@host.
Time zone Timezone in use for the EVENT. If it never changed, it should be 'SYSTEM', which means: server's timezone.
Type 'ONE TIME' for EVENTs which are executed only once, 'RECURRING' for EVENTs which are executed regularly.
Executed At The TIMESTAMP of the moment the EVENT will be executed. NULL for recursive EVENTs.
Interval Value Number of intervals between EVENT's executions. See next field. NULL for EVENTs which are executed only once.
Interval Field Interval type to wait between EVENTs executions. For example, if `Interval Field` is 'SECOND' and `Interval Value` is 30, the EVENT will be executed every 30 seconds. NULL for EVENTs which are executed only once.
Starts First execution DATETIME for recurring EVENTs. NULL for events which are executed only once.
Ends Last execution DATETIME for recurring EVENTs. NULL for events which are executed only once.
Status ENABLED, DISABLED, or SLAVESIDE_DISABLED. For ENABLED and DISABLED, see above. SLAVESIDE_DISABLED was added in 5.1 and means that the EVENT is enabled on the master but disabled on the slaves.
Originator Id of the server where the EVENT was created. If it has been created on the current server this value is 0. Added in 5.1.
INFORMATION_SCHEMA.EVENTS
The INFORMATION_SCHEMA virtual database has a `EVENTS` table. It's non-standard and has been added in 5.1. EVENTS has the following fields:
EVENT_CATALOG Always NULL (CATALOGs are not implemented in MySQL).
EVENT_SCHEMA Database name.
EVENT_NAME Event name.
DEFINER User which created the EVENT and the host he used, in the form user@host.
TIME_ZONE Timezone in use for the EVENT. If it never changed, it should be 'SYSTEM', which means: server's timezone.
EVENT_BODY Language used to write the routine that will be executed.
EVENT_DEFINITION Routine that will be executed.
EVENT_TYPE 'ONE TIME' for EVENTs which are executed only once, 'RECURRING' for EVENTs which are executed regularly.
EXECUTE_AT The TIMESTAMP of the moment the EVENT will be executed. NULL for recursive EVENTs.
INTERVAL_VALUE Number of intervals between EVENT's executions. See next field. NULL for EVENTs which are executed only once.
INTERVAL_FIELD Interval type to wait between EVENTs executions. For example, if `Interval Field` is 'SECOND' and `Interval Value` is 30, the EVENT will be executed every 30 seconds. NULL for EVENTs which are executed only once.
SQL_MODE SQL mode which was in effect when the EVENT has been created.
STARTS First execution DATETIME for recurring EVENTs. NULL for events which are executed only once.
ENDS Last execution DATETIME for recurring EVENTs. NULL for events which are executed only once.
STATUS ENABLED, DISABLED, or SLAVESIDE_DISABLED. For ENABLED and DISABLED, see above. SLAVESIDE_DISABLED was added in 5.1 and means that the EVENT is enabled on the master but disabled on the slaves.
ON_COMPLETION 'NOT PRESERVE' (the EVENT will be deleted) or 'PRESERVE' (the EVENT won't be deleted'.
LAST_ALTERED Last edit's DATETIME. If the EVENT has never been altered, `LAST_ALTERED` has the same value as `CREATED`.
LAST_EXECUTED Last execution TIMESTAMP. If the EVENT has never been executed yet, this value is NULL.
EVENT_COMMENT Comment associated to the EVENT. Is there is no comment, this value is an empty string.
ORIGINATOR Id of the server where the EVENT was created. If it has been created on the current server this value is 0. Added in 5.1.
Stored Routines are called FUNCTIONs if they return a result, or PROCEDUREs if they don't return anything. STORED PROCEDUREs must not be confused with the PROCEDUREs written in C or LUA which can be used in a SELECT statement; STORED FUNCTIONs must not be confused with UDF, even if they both are created with a CREATE FUNCTION statement.
They reduce network traffic: they may contain many statements, but only one statement need to be sent to invoke them.
Ability to keep the logic within the database.
Reusable modules which can be called from external programs, no matter in what language they are written.
You can modify the Stored Routines without changing your programs.
The user which invokes a Stored Routine doesn't need to have access to the tables which it reads / writes.
Calling Stored Routines are faster than executing single statements.
CREATE DEFINER = `root`@`localhost` PROCEDURE `Module1` ( ) NOT DETERMINISTIC NO SQL SQL SECURITY DEFINER OPTIMIZE TABLE wiki1_page;
INFORMATION_SCHEMA.ROUTINES
The virtual database INFORMATION_SCHEMA has a table called `ROUTINES`, with the functions and procedures information.
INFORMATION_SCHEMA.PARAMETERS
This table contains all the stored functions values.
MySQL uses a character as delimiter - MySQL knows that where that character occurs a SQL statement ends and possibly another statement begins. That character is ';' by default. When you create a stored program which contains more than one statements, you enter only one statement: the CREATE command. However, it contains more then one statements in its body, separated with a ';'. In that case, you need to inform MySQL that ';' does not identify the end of the CREATE statement: you need another delimiter.
The cursors allow to treat each row differently, but it considerably slows the queries.
They should be declared and open before the loop which should treat every records differently. To know the table end, we should create a handler after the cursor:
A handler declaration permits to specify a treatment in case of error[2]:
Moreover, the error type can be indicated:
↑ http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.0/en/flow-control-statements.html
↑ http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/declare-handler.html
When typing the fields, some of them represent graphical objects, and so are considered like as "Spatial". Consequently, they are manipulated by some different request than for the text.
And six relations between them[2]:
This section is a stub.You can help Wikibooks by expanding it.
↑ http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.0/en/spatial-datatypes.html
↑ http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/spatial-relation-functions-mbr.html
Who has a flat in "Goreagon" and who wants to buy one?
This question is ill posed and the listed answer isn't correct. 'and who wants to buy one?' Does this mean wants to buy a flat or wants to buy a flat in Goregaon (which by the way is misspelled in either the question or the table)? The answer is wrong because the question says "AND" and the answer says or. If the question was meant to ask for the names of the people who have a flat in Goregaon AND those who want to buy a flat in Goregaon, then the correct answer to this should be select name, surname from list where flathave="Goregaon" and flatwant="Goregaon"; If the question is meant to ask for names of those who either have OR want a flat in Goregaon, then it would be select name, surname from list where flathave="Goregaon" or flatwant="Goregaon"; If the question is meant to ask for those who have a flat in Goregaon and want to buy a flat, then then answer would be select name, surname from list where flathave="Goregaon" and flatwant<>"";
Many of the questions below need revision as well, or the table needs preface information.
Who has a flat in "Parle" and who wants to buy one?
Where does "Shantanu Oak" own the flats and where does he want to buy one?
How many entries have been recorded so far?
How many flats are there for sale?
What are the names of our clients?
How many clients do we have?
List the customers whose name start with "S"?
Rearrange the list Alphabetically sorted.
A list of all students who scored over 90 on his or her math paper?
A list of all students who scored more than 85 in all subjects?
Declare Results: Print the results of all students with result column.
Find out total marks of all the students.
What are the average marks of the class for each subject?
What are the minimum marks in Math?
What are the maximum marks in Math?
Who got the highest marks in Math?
Note: many problems have more than one correct solution.
Assume the following table and data.
a int, b int, c int, timeEnter timestamp(14),
Note, the first two rows contains duplicates in columns a and b. It contains other duplicates; but, leaves the other duplicates alone.
"pivot table" or a "crosstab report"
(Note: this page needs to be wikified)
SQL Characteristic Functions: Do it without "if", "case", or "GROUP_CONCAT".
Yes, there is use for this..."if" statements sometimes cause problems when used in combination.
The simple secret, and it's also why they work in almost all databases, is the following functions:
1-abs( sign( x) ) complement of the above, since this returns 1 only if x = 0
| pkey | name | exam | score |
| name | exam1 | exam2 | exam3 | exam4 |
Let's decompose to make the trick clearer, for the second exam:
You may think IF's would be clean but WATCH OUT!
Look what the following gives (INCORRECT !!):
| name | exam1 | exam2 | exam3 | exam4 |
| Bob | 75 | NULL | NULL | NULL |
| Sue | 90 | NULL | NULL | NULL |
Note: the following does work - is all the maths necessary after all?
| name | exam1 | exam2 | exam3 | exam4 |
| name | exam1 | exam2 | exam3 | exam4 | delta_1_2 | delta_2_3 | delta_3_4 |
Above delta_1_2 shows the difference between the first and second exams, with the numbers
| name | exam1 | exam2 | exam3 | exam4 | delta_1_2 | delta_2_3 | delta_3_4 | TotalIncPoints |
TotalIncPoints shows the sum of the deltas.
| name | exam1 | exam2 | exam3 | exam4 | delta_1_2 | delta_2_3 | delta_3_4 | TotalIncPoints | AVG |
It's possible to combine Total Increasing Point TotalIncPoints with AVG. In fact, it's possible to combine
| name | exam1 | exam2 | exam3 | exam4 | AVG1_2 | AVG2_3 | AVG3_4 | AVG |
Good article on "Cross tabulations" or de-normalizing data to show stats:
For Perl, check DBIx-SQLCrosstab.
Every table is a logical object in a database; but it also needs to physically store its data (records) on the disk and/or in memory. Tables use a Storage Engine to do this. SE are plugins which can be installed or uninstalled into the server (if they're not builtin).
Many operations are requested by the server but physically done by the SE. So, from the SE we choose for a table affects performance, stability, LOCKs type, use of the query cache, disk space required and special features.
In some future versions of MySQL, partitioned tables will be able to use different SE for different partitions.
Let's see which Storage Engine is good for which uses.
Table Type is an old term deprecated in recent versions of MySQL. It is still accepted by some SQL commands for backward compatibility, but ENGINE[s] or STORAGE ENGINE[s] should be preferred.
MyISAM does table level locking, while InnoDB does row level locking.
In addition to foreign keys, InnoDB offers transaction support, which is absolutely critical when dealing with larger applications.
Speed may suffer, particularly for inserts with full transaction guarantees, because all this Foreign Key / Transaction stuff adds overhead.
The default table type for MySQL on Linux is MyISAM, on Windows, normally InnoDB. MyISAM uses table level locking, which means during an UPDATE, nobody can access any other record of the same table. InnoDB however, uses Row level locking. Row level locking ensures that during an UPDATE, nobody can access that particular row, until the locking transaction issues a COMMIT. Many people use MyISAM if they need speed and InnoDB for data integrity.
Fulltext search is currently only available with MyISAM tables
All numeric key values are stored with the high byte first to allow better index compression
Internal handling of one AUTO_INCREMENT column per table is supported. MyISAM automatically updates this column for INSERT and UPDATE operations. This makes AUTO_INCREMENT columns faster (at least 10%)
No foreign keys constraints (but planned for MySQL 6.x)
Slower table checking and restarts after power loss, an issue for those who need high availability
Provides MySQL with a transaction-safe (ACID compliant) storage engine that has commit, rollback, and crash recovery capabilities
Maintains its own buffer pool for caching data and indexes in main memory
Faster for some workloads, particularly those where physical ordering by primary key helps or where the automatically built hash indexes speed up record lookups
Tables can be of any size even on operating systems where file size is limited to 2GB.
Fast and reliable recovery from power loss.
ACID guarantee requires full sync to disk at transaction commit, can be turned off where speed is more important than full ACID guarantees.
Data Versioning and transactions add overhead to table management.
They can lead to high memory requirements to manage large numbers of locks used in row locking.
Indexes are slow to build when they're added after a table has been created. Indexes should therefore be created when data is bulk-loaded.
Overall, InnoDB should be used for with applications that rely highly on data integrity or need transactions, while MyISAM can be used where that is not required or where fulltext indexing is needed. Where speed is more important, both should be tried because which is faster depends on the application.
Drizzle, a MySQL's fork supported by Sun Microsystems, uses InnoDB as its default engine and doesn't support MyISAM.
Synonyms: Merge, MRG_MYISAM
A MERGE table is a collection of identical MyISAM tables that can be used as one.
Identical means that all tables have identical column and index information, no deviation of any sort is permitted.
Merges can be used to work around MySQL's or system's filesize limits. In fact those limits affect single MyISAM datafiles, but don't affect the whole Merge table, which doesn't have a datafile.
In the past, in some cases Merge and MyISAM could be used to replace views, which were not supported by MySQL. Merge could be used as a base table and MyISAM tables could be used as views containing part of the base table data. A SELECT on the Merge table returned all the effective data. View support was added in MySQL 5.0, so this use of Merge tables is obsolete.
BDB has been removed from version 5.1 and later due to lack of use.
BerkeleyDB is a family of free software embeddable DBMS's developer by SleepyCat, a company which has been acquired by Oracle. SleepyCat provided a Storage Engine for MySQL called BDB.
BDB supports transactions and page-level locking, but it also has many limitations within MySQL.
Discards all data stored in it but does still write to the binary log, so it is useful in replication scale-out or secure binlog-do filtering situations where slaves aren't trustworthy and for benchmarking the higher layers of the server.
For completeness, other storage engines include:
CSV: simple Comma-Separated Values engine, that uses the CSV format to store data. Used to share database with other CSV-aware applications maybe? Due to the simple nature of its format, indexing is not available.
You can get metadata about official MySQL Storage Engines and other Storage Engines which are present on your server, via SQL.
Starting from MySQL 5.0, you can get information about the Storage Engine which you can use using the SHOW STORAGE ENGINES statement.
The STORAGE word is optional. This command returns a dataset with the following columns:
Engine - Name of the Storage Engine.
Support - Wether the Storage Engine is supported or not. Possible values:
'DEFAULT' - it's supported and it's the default engine;
'DISABLED' - it has been compiled, but MySQL has been started with that engine disabled (possibly with options like --skip-engine-name);
Comment - Brief description of the engine.
Transactions - Wether the engine supports SQL transactions. Added in MySQL 5.1.
XA - Wether the engine supports XA transactions. Added in MySQL 5.1.
Savepoints - Wether the engine supports savepoints and rollbacks. Added in MySQL 5.1.
INFORMATION_SCHEMA `ENGINES` table
`ENGINES` is a virtual table within the INFORMATION_SCHEMA database. It can be used to get information about Storage Engines. Its columns are the came which are returned by the SHOW ENGINES statement (see above).
If you want more info about an official MySQL Storage Engine, you can use the HELP command:
If you are using the command line client, you can omit the quotes:
If the ENGINE clause is not specified, the value of the storage_engine variable will be used. By default it's MyISAM, but you can change it:
Or you can modify the value of default-storage-engine in the my.cnf before starting the MySQL server.
You can also change the Storage Engine of an existing table:
Print a help and exit.
Print version number and exit.
The host on which MySQL is running. Default: localhost.
Specify the username.
Specify the password. As it is insecure (it's visible with the coomand top, for example), you can use an option file, instead.
The storage engine that the tables will use after conversion.
Don't stop the execution if an error occurs.
Print detailed information about the conversions.
This command specifies access data (localhost, username, password) and converts all tables within database `test` into InnoDB. If some tables can't be converted, the script skips them and converts the others (--force).
The package name is usually mysql-server, either directly or as a transitional package for the latest version.
There are two Debian packages in the current stable release:
Backports.org may also offer more recent versions.
To install it, you need to add the backports source in your /etc/apt/sources.list:
To remove the configuration files as well, resulting in a clean environment:
Debconf will ask you if you want to remove the existing databases as well. Answer wisely!
The package name is mysql-server.
Using pirut (Applications->Add/Remove Software), you can also server MySQL Database in the Servers category:
MySQL is available in the main Portage tree as "dev-db/mysql". You must use the fully qualified ebuild name as "mysql" is made ambiguous by "virtual/mysql"
The stable FreeBSD port is version 5.0, and beta version 5.1 is also available.
This command will install the MySQL 5.0 server as well as all necessary dependencies (which includes the MySQL client).
In Debian, you use the mysql init script.
/etc/init.d/mysql start
/etc/init.d/mysql stop
/etc/init.d/mysql restart
If you need to do so in scripts, prefer the invoke-rc.d command, which only restarts the service if it is launched on system startup. That way, you do not launch a service if it wasn't meant to be run:
Fedora Core suggests that you use the service wrapper, which cleans the environment before to run the service, so that all services run in the same standard environment (for example, the current directory is set to the system root /).
You can also use the /etc/init.d/mysqld if needed.
FC5 displays useful hints the first time you launch the MySQL server (i.e. when launching /usr/bin/mysql_install_db):
To do so, start the server, then issue the following commands:
/usr/bin/mysqladmin -u root password 'new-password'
/usr/bin/mysqladmin -u root -h localhost password 'new-password'
See the next section about changing passwords.
To control whether to launch MySQL on startup, you can use the ntsysv tool:
There are two ways to connect to a MySQL server, using Unix sockets and TCP/IP.
As a client, MySQL interprets 'localhost' as 'use the Unix socket'. This means that MySQL won't connect to 127.0.0.1:3306, but will use /var/run/mysqld/mysqld.sock:
Current user: sylvain@localhost
If you really need to connect to MySQL via TCP/IP to the local host without using Unix sockets, then specify '127.0.0.1' instead of 'localhost':
Current user: sylvain@localhost
Connection: 127.0.0.1 via TCP/IP
In both cases, MySQL will understand your machine name as 'localhost' (this is used in the privileges system).
Configure /etc/mysql/my.cnf - for heavily loaded databases, for fat databases...; different kinds of connections (Unix sockets, TCP/IP w/ or w/o SSL, MySQL+SSL licensing issues)
For more information, see the #SET_PASSWORD section.
--bind-address=0.0.0.0 # listen on all interfaces
--bind-address=192.168.1.120 # listen on that IP only
When you specify skip-networking in the configuration, then MySQL will not listen on any port, not even on localhost (127.0.0.1). This means that only programs running on the same machine than the MySQL server will be able to connect to it. This is a common setup on dedicated servers.
The only way to contact MySQL will be to use the local Unix socket, such as /var/run/mysqld/mysqld.sock (Debian) or /var/lib/mysql/mysql.sock (FC5). You can specify where the socket is located using the socket parameter in the [mysqld] section of the configuration:
...
The MySQL privileges system.
MySQL requires you to identify yourself when you connect to the database. You provide the following credentials:
a machine name or IP address (detected automatically by the server)
a password, to prove your identity
Usually, MySQL-aware applications also ask you for a database name, but that's not part of the credentials, because this does not relate to who you are.
MySQL then associates privileges to these credentials; for example, the right to query a given database, add data to another one, create additional databases or remove existing ones, etc.
Who am I?
Once connected, it is not necessarily obvious who MySQL thinks you are. CURRENT_USER() provides this information:
SHOW GRANTS allow you to check the current privileges for a given user.
For example, here are the default privileges for user root:
| Grants for root@localhost |
You also use use SHOW GRANTS; to check the privileges for the current user.
The GRANT command allows you to give (GRANT) privileges to a given user.
Starting with v5.0.2, this removes the associated privileges as well.
With earlier versions, you also need to REVOKE its PRIVILEGES manually.
If user is not specified, the current user is used (this is useful when you connect to mysql using the command line).
(with the usual connection options -h -u and -p)
However, using passwords on the command line presents a security risk. For example, if root changes his MySQL password:
Then another user can spy on him by looking at the process list:
Conclusion: don't user mysqladmin password.
If you are looking for a way to generate passwords, either secure or easy to remember, try the pwgen program (there is a Debian package available):
zCRhn8LH EJtzzLRE G4Ezb5BX e7hQ88In TB8hE6nn f8IqdMVQ t7BBDWTH ZZMhZyhR
Very handy if you manage a lot of accounts :)
MySQL 4.1 password issues
As of version 4.1, MySQL introduced a password-related change.
You'll experience this via errors such as: Client does not support authentication protocol requested by server; consider upgrading MySQL client. [1]
If you wish to support older client programs, you need to define the MySQL account password this way:
There is apparently no way to use old passwords with the GRANT ... IDENTIFIED BY 'password' syntax.
Alternatively, you can use the old_passwords configuration option in your server's my.cnf. This means that new passwords will be encoded using the old-style, shorter, less secure format. For example, in Debian Sarge and FC5, the MySQL default configuration enforces old-style password for backward compatibility with older clients:
...
↑ For example, you can get this error on Debian Sarge's apache+libapache_mod_php4+php4-mysql, the latter depends on libmysqlclient12 aka MySQL 4.0 (ldd /usr/lib/php4/20020429/mysql.so gives libmysqlclient.so.12 => /usr/lib/libmysqlclient.so.12). If you rely and libmysqlclient14 or later, then your application supports both the old and the new password formats.
MySQL provides a Unix-like way to show the current server threads and kill them.
| Id | User | Host | db | Command | Time | State | Info |
| 34 | monddprod | localhost | monddprod | Sleep | 1328 | | NULL |
| 43 | root | localhost | NULL | Query | 0 | NULL | SHOW PROCESSLIST |
| Id | User | Host | db | Command | Time | State | Info |
| 34 | monddprod | localhost | monddprod | Sleep | 1368 | | |
| 44 | root | localhost | | Query | 0 | | show processlist |
If a heavy, nasty query is consuming too many resources on your server, you need to shut it down.
The brute force way is to restart the server:
/etc/init.d/mysql restart
A more subtle way is to use SHOW PROCESSLIST to identify the nasty query and kill it independently of other server threads.
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)
Basic security: firewall (iptables), SELinux?
Backup/recovery and import/export techniques.
This creates the mybase-20061027.sql.gz file.
--opt is the magical option that uses all the options that are generally useful. In recent versions of mysqldump, it is even enabled by default, so you need not type it. --opt means --add-drop-table --add-locks --create-options --disable-keys --extended-insert --lock-tables --quick --set-charset - so it will lock tables during the backup for consistency, add DROP TABLE statements so the dump can be applied without cleaning the target database, will use the most efficient ways to perform the INSERTs and specify the charset (latin1, Unicode/UTF-8...) used.
If you don't provide a database to mysqldump, you'll get a backup containing all databases - which is less easy to use for restoring a single database later on.
We're using logrotate in a slightly non-standard way to keep a batch of dumps. Each day, logrotate will cycle the dumps to keep the last N dumps, removing old backups automatically, and generating the new one immediately through a postrotate hook.
The following configuration keeps 2 months of daily backups:
/dumps/mybase.sql.gz {
Cf. logrotate(8) in the GNU/Linux man pages for more information.
/dumps/*/*.sql.gz {
Create your ~/.my.cnf for password-less database access
Place the logrotate configuration file above in the /etc/logrotate.d/ directory
Check the dump using zcat /dumps/mybase.sql.gz.
Comments on the code: HOME=/root is needed for systems (such as FC5) that set HOME=/ in their cron, which prevents mysqldump from finding the .my.cnf configuration. We also use | gzip instead of logrotate's compress option for disk I/O efficiency (single-step).
In production, you'll get something like this:
-rw-r----- 1 root clisscom 2819533 mar 2 06:25 clisscom.sql.gz
-rw-r----- 1 root clisscom 2815193 mar 1 06:25 clisscom.sql.gz-20100302
-rw-r----- 1 root clisscom 2813579 fév 28 06:26 clisscom.sql.gz-20100301
-rw-r----- 1 root clisscom 2812251 fév 27 06:25 clisscom.sql.gz-20100228
-rw-r----- 1 root clisscom 2810803 fév 26 06:25 clisscom.sql.gz-20100227
-rw-r----- 1 root clisscom 2808785 fév 25 06:25 clisscom.sql.gz-20100226
...
Using dateext helps with remote backups, because filenames don't change daily, not you avoid re-downloading all of /dumps each time.
You can then get it with your browser or wget:
You can even re-inject it on-the-fly in your local test database:
Protect the script with a .htaccess, write a .netrc for wget to use, and you'll have a simple, unattended way to grap a backup even without command-line access. This allows to gain time when grabing a dump (compared to using phpMyAdmin) and to setup remote automated backups (no interaction is needed).
Something similar should be feasible in PHP provided you have access to exec().
If you need to import/export a table, not a complete database, check MySQL/Language#Import_.2F_export.
Binary logs are a mechanism to keep track of everything that happens on the MySQL server (forensics), allowing to replay the same sequence of commands on a different computer (master/slave replication), or at a later time (crash recovery).
On Debian they are stored in /var/log/mysql/mysql-bin.0*.
To view the SQL commands in a binary log, you use the mysqlbinlog command:
For the crash recovery to be useful, binary logs are usually stored on a different computer (via a NFS mount, for example). Note that it is meant to recover the full mysql server, not just one database. You could attempt to filter the log by database, but this isn't straightforward.
So in order use binary logs as a recovery plan, you usually combine them with a full standard backup:
To flush/reset the logs at the same time (TODO: test):
To recover you'll just combine the two sources (preferably, disable binary logging in the server configuration during the recovery, and re-enable it right after.):
(zcat all.sql.gz && mysqlbinlog /var/log/mysql/mysql-bin.0*) | mysql
Where interesting logs are located, common errors to look at.
Various third-party graphical interfaces and utilities.
eSKUeL: an alternative to phpMyAdmin
MySQL Administrator: from MySQL AB. If you want to create real backups, though, do not use this, since it runs backups using at on the client machine - which is likely not to be online every day.
Replication means that data written on a master MySQL will be sent to separate server and executed there.
Semi-asynchronous replication (asynchronous replication + enforce 1 slave replication before completing queries)
In Master-Master replication both hosts are masters and slaves at the same time. ServerA replicates to serverB which replicates to serevrA.
There are no consistency checks and even with auto_increment_increment/auto_increment_offset configured both servers should not be used
That's the most simple replication.
A master writes a binary log file, and slaves can read this log file (possibly selectively) to replay the query statements.
It's asynchronous, which mean the master and slaves may have different states at a specific point of time; also this setup can survive a network disconnection.
Define a server identifier (detects loops?); customarily we'll use 1 for the server, but it can be different:
Replication is based on binary logs, so enable them:
Create a new user for the slave to connect with:
Define a server identifier, different than the master (and different than the other slaves):
You can also declare the slave hostname to the master (cf. SHOW SLAVE HOSTS below):
CHANGE MASTER TO MASTER_HOST='master_addr', MASTER_USER='myreplication', MASTER_PASSWORD='mypass';
If setting up replication from backup, specify start point (add to previous command):
This will create a file named master.info in your data directory, typically /var/lib/mysql/master.info; this file will contain the slave configuration and status.
Oct 15 21:11:19 builder mysqld[4266]: 101015 21:11:19 [Warning] Neither --relay-log nor --relay-log-index were used; so
'--relay-log=mysqld-relay-bin' to avoid this problem.
Or more for a more readable (line-based) output:
Master_User: myreplication
...
You can inspect the asynchronous nature of the replication:
You can see a connection from the slave in the process list.
State: Has sent all binlog to slave; waiting for binlog to be updated
| Server_id | Host | Port | Rpl_recovery_rank | Master_id |
Note that this replication is a simple replay, similar to feeding a mysqldump output to the mysql client.
Consequently, to maintain the consistency:
Avoid writing critical data on the slave
Start the replication with identical initial data on both the master and the slave
To test: we suspect it would be best to use the same version of MySQL on the master and slaves
By default, replicate will stop if it meets an error. This can happen if your master and slaves were not consistent in the beginning, or due to a network error causing a malformed query.
In this case, you'll get a trace in the system log (typically /var/log/syslog):
Oct 15 21:11:19 builder mysqld[4266]: 101015 21:11:19 [ERROR] Slave: Error 'Table 'mybase.form'
The best way is to reset the replication entirely.
You can also fix the mistake manually, and then ask MySQL to skip 1 statement this way:
You can set SQL_SLAVE_SKIP_COUNTER to any number, e.g. 100. Beware that in this case, it will skip both valid and invalid statements, not only errors.
Another way to fix broken replication is to use Maatkit tools.
Note: at this point, MySQL paused the slave and replaced the configuration with default values. The master.info file was also removed.
Restart MySQL to clear all configuration.
Warning: STOP SLAVE will stop replication. It can be started manually again or (by default) it will automatically resume if you restart the MySQL server.
To avoid auto start of replication during process of startup, add to your configuration file:
If you want to stop the replication for good (and use the server for another purpose), you need to reset the configuration as explained above.
At this point your slave configuration should be completely empty:
Some hints can be placed in comment before each request concerning the replication. For example via the PHP Mysqlnd plugin (for native driver).[1]
MYSQLND_MS_MASTER_SWITCH: forces the request execution on the master.
MYSQLND_MS_SLAVE_SWITCH: forces the request execution on the slave.
MYSQLND_MS_LAST_USED_SWITCH: forces the request execution on the last used server.
As an alternative to the replication and clustering, the MySQL Federated storage engine allows to create a table on a server which synchronizes with the same on another one.
↑ https://dev.mysql.com/doc/connectors/en/apis-php-mysqlnd-ms.quickstart.sqlhints.html
When the database seems to be "slow" first consider all of the following points as
e.g. making a certain query absolutely unnecessary by simply using a more sophisticated
Finding the bottleneck (CPU, memory, I/O, which queries)
Optimising the application (remove unnecessary queries or cache PHP generated web pages)
Optimising the queries (using indices, temporary tables or different ways of joining)
Optimising the database server (cache sizes etc)
Optimising the system (different filesystem types, swap space and kernel versions)
Optimising the hardware (sometimes indeed the cheapest and fastest way)
To find those bottlenecks the following tools have been found to be helpful:
Using these tools most applications can also be categorised very broadly using the following groups:
I/O based and reading (blogs, news)
I/O based and writing (web access tracker, accounting data collection)
Use the following command regularly to reorganize the disk space which reduces the table size without deleting any record[1]:
Moreover, when creating the tables, their smallest types are preferable. For example:
The BENCHMARK() function can be used to compare the speed of MySQL functions or operators. For example:
However, this cannot be used to compare queries:
As MySQL needs a fraction of a second just to parse the query and the system is probably busy doing other things, too,
When you precede a SELECT statement with the keyword EXPLAIN, MySQL explains how it would process the SELECT, providing information about how tables are joined and in which order. This allows to place some eventual hints in function.
Using and understanding EXPLAIN is essential when aiming for good performance therefore the relevant chapters of the official documentation are a mandatory reading!
The join of two table that both do not have indices:
| id | select_type | table | type | possible_keys | key | key_len | ref | rows | Extra |
Now the second table gets an index and the explain shows that MySQL now knows that only 2 of the 3 rows
Query OK, 3 rows affected (0.01 sec)
| id | select_type | table | type | possible_keys | key | key_len | ref | rows | Extra |
| 1 | SIMPLE | b | ref | i | i | 5 | test.a.i | 2 | |
Now the first table also gets an index so that the WHERE condition can be improved and MySQL knows that
Query OK, 4 rows affected (0.00 sec)
| id | select_type | table | type | possible_keys | key | key_len | ref | rows | Extra |
| 1 | SIMPLE | a | range | i | i | 5 | NULL | 1 | Using where |
| 1 | SIMPLE | b | ref | i | i | 5 | test.a.i | 2 | |
MySQL can be monitored and tuned by watching the status-variables and setting the server-variables which can both be global or per session.
The server-variables can be set in the /etc/mysql/my.cnf file or via SET [GLOBAL|SESSION] VARIABLE foo := bar and be shown with mysqladmin variables or SHOW [GLOBAL|SESSION] VARIABLES [LIKE '%foo%'].
Generally status variables start with a capital letter and server variables with a lowercase one.
When dealing with the above mentioned per-session system variables it should always be considered
Failing to do so can easily lead to server crashes at times of load peaks when more than usual
Note: Especially when dealing with server settings, all information should be
Indices are a way to locate elements faster. This works for single elements as well as range of elements.
Note: when you make your time tests, make sure the query cache is disabled (query_cache_type=0 in my.cnf) to force recomputing your queries each time you type them instead of just taking the pre-computed results from the cache.
What does it do?
It simulate the data feeds from an industrial lines that weight stuff at regular intervals so we can compute the average material usage. Over time lots of records are piling up.
How to use it?
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 189M jun 15 22:08 import.sql
-rw-rw---- 1 mysql mysql 35M jun 15 22:17 /var/lib/mysql/industrial/weightin.MYD
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 79M jun 15 22:18 dump.sql
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 22M jun 15 22:19 dump.sql.gz
Incidentally restoring from the dump is way faster, because it uses extended inserts!
This SQL command will scan all records to get a total sum:
Let's say we need to compute the total material used during January 1st 2008:
MySQL will also need to browse the entire database, even for this tiny number of records. This is because records can be anywhere: at the bottom, at the end, in the middle, nothing guarantees that the records are ordered.
To improve this, we can add an index to the 'date' field. This means MySQL will create a new hidden table with all the date sorted chronologically, and store their offset (position) in the 'weightin' table to retrieve the full record.
Because the index is sorted, it's way faster for MySQL to locate a single record (using a binary search algorithm) or even a range of data (find the first and last element, the range is in-between).
The index doesn't work if the query needs computer on the field (e.g. TIME(date)) but works for ranges (e.g. WHERE date < '2008-01-02').
You can notice that the .MYD file grew:
-rw-rw---- 1 mysql mysql 49M jun 15 22:36 weightin.MYI
That's were MySQL stores the indices. Initially there was an index for the 'id' field, which the case for all primary keys.
We can do so by adding an index on the 'line' field, in order to group the doubles together, which will avoid the query to rescan the whole table to localize them:
-rw-rw---- 1 mysql mysql 65M jun 15 22:38 weightin.MYI
Check if the indices are actually used
Individual queries can be checked with the "EXPLAIN" command. For the whole server
Keeping the indices in memory improves read performance a lot.
The quotient of "Key_reads / Key_read_requests" tells how often MySQL actually accessed
The Key_blocks_% variables can be used to see how much of the configured key buffer is actually used. The unit is 1KB if not set otherwise in key_cache_block_size. As MySQL uses some blocks internally, key_blocks_unused has to be checked. To estimate how big the buffer should be,
The main reason not to use any MySQL version below 4.0.1 if you have read-based applications is that beginning with that version, MySQL has the ability to store the result of SELECT queries until their tables are modified.
The Query Cache can be configured with the query_cache_% variables. Most important here are the global query_cache_size and
Note that the Query Cache blocks have a variable size whose minimum size is query_cache_min_res_unit, so after a complete cache
If this value is high it indicates a high fragmentation which does not need to be a bad thing though.
If this value is high there are either much uncachable queries (e.g. because they use functions like now()) or the value for query_cache_limit is too low.
This is the number of old results that have been purged because the cache was full and not because their underlying tables have been modified. query_cache_size must be increased to lower this variable.
| Variable_name | Value |
| query_cache_type | ON |
| Variable_name | Value |
| Qcache_free_blocks | 0 |
| Qcache_free_memory | 0 |
| Qcache_lowmem_prunes | 0 |
| Qcache_not_cached | 0 |
| Qcache_total_blocks | 0 |
A used cache (savannah.gnu.org):
| Variable_name | Value |
| query_cache_size | 33554432 |
| Variable_name | Value |
| Qcache_free_blocks | 1409 |
| Qcache_free_memory | 27629552 |
| Qcache_lowmem_prunes | 2946778 |
| Qcache_not_cached | 71255 |
| Qcache_total_blocks | 10575 |
The matching my.cnf configuration parameter is:
To clear the cache (useful when testing a new query's efficiency):
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)
The Table_locks_% variables show the number of queries that had to wait because the tables they tried to access where currently locked by
MySQL needs a certain time just to "open" a table and read its meta data like column names etc.
If many threads are trying to access the same table, it is opened multiple times.
To speed this up the meta data can be cached in the table_cache (alias table_open_cache since MySQL 5.1.3).
Using mysqlreport or by looking at the currently Open_tables and ever since Opened_tables as well as the Uptime
For every client connection (aka session) MySQL creates a separated thread under the main mysqld process. For big sites with several hundred new
Clients that send several queries to the server should use persistent connections like with PHPs mysql_pconnect() function.
This cache can be configured by thread_cache_size and monitored with the threads_% variables.
To avoid overloads MySQL blocks new connections if more than max_connections are currently in use. Start with max_used_connections and monitor the number of connection that were rejected in Aborted_clients and the ones that timed out in Aborted_connections.
Forgotten disconnects from clients that use persistent connections can easily lead to a denial of service situation so be aware! Normally connections are closed after wait_timeout seconds of being idle.
It is perfectly normal that MySQL creates temporary tables while sorting or grouping results. Those tables are either be held in memory
The number of disk tables among the Created_tmp_% variables should be neglectible or else the settings in max_heap_table_size and tmp_table_size be reconsidered.
In situations like writing webserver access log files to a database, with many subsequent INSERT queries for rather unimportant data into the same table, the performance can be improved by advising the server to cache the write requests a little while and then send a whole batch of data
Be aware though that all mentioned methods contradicts ACID compliance because INSERT queries are acknowledged with OK to the client before the data has actually be written to disk and thus can still get lost in case of an power outage or server crash. Additionally the side effects mentioned in the documentation often reads like a patient information leaflet of a modern medicament...
MyISAM tables can be given the DELAY_KEY_WRITE option using CREATE or ALTER TABLE. The drawback is that after a crash the table is automatically marked as corrupt and has to be checked/repaired which can take some time.
InnoDB can be told with innodb_flush_log_at_trx_commit to delay writing the data a bit. In case of a server crash the data itself is supposed
Useful links regarding optimisation of MySQL servers:
Various newsgroups and the MySQL mailing lists
MySysop A php script for mysql optimisation and tuning, demo : MySysop
↑ http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.1/en/optimize-table.html
↑ http://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.1/en/datetime.html
Please, remember that the internet has been created by persons who don't want us to have any sort of secrets. Also remember that a lot of people are payd to learn our secrets and register them somewhere.
Sometimes, connection parameters (including username and password) are stored in a plain text file, for example a .ini file. This is insecure: if a user guesses how it is called, he can read it. If it's located outside the web server's WWW directory it's more secure, but it's a better practice to store it as a constant in a program file.
It's always possible that a user manages to get your FTP password or other passwords. So the username and the password you use to connect to MySQL should be different from other usernames / passwords.
MySQL passwords must be secure. You don't need to remember them. They should contain lowercase letters, uppercase letters, numbers and symbols (like '_'); they should not contain existing words or your birth date; they should never be sent via email (if they are, there must be some way to modify them); they should not be stored where it is not absolutely necessary to store them.
What are SQL Injections?
Also in some cases, you try to make a query like this:
And a user may turn it to something like this:
These are just examples.
It's easy to realize if all records are disappeared from your tables.
If the tables are properly backed up, you can repopulate them.
But there are worst cases.
If a user learns how to manipulate your database, he can create an administration account for himself, or he can make modifications to your site's contents that you'll never see, or he can even register payments he has not made.
Simply, inputs that must represent a value, should not be accepted if they contain something more.
They are enclosed by 'quotes'.
Every quote present in them should be converted into '' or \'.
PHP recommends using mysql_real_escape_string to substitute these special characters.
They must be numeric input.
If they contain something like OR or spaces, they are not numeric.
Enclose them within 'quotes' and manage them as if they were strings.
These values should never be entered by the user, but should created programmatically.
A common case are column names to be used in the ORDER BY clause, which may come from $_GET.
Enclose them within `backquotes` and replace every occurrences of ` with ``.
User input should never be inserted in SQL comments.
When passwords are stored in a database, they are usually encrypted.
The encryption should be done by the script and not by MySQL.
If it is done via SQL, the passwords are written by the statements as plain text.
So, one should never send a query like this:
But, in PHP, you should write:
You should never use insecure encryption functions like PASSWORD().
Also, you should not use 2-way encryption.
Only cryptographic hashs, such as SHA256 are secure, and don't use older hash algorithms like MD5.
It's insecure and 1-way encryption does not require that.
If all contents of your databases are public, there is no reason to use encryption for communications.
But generally, this is not the case.
Even so, there may be a restricted set of people authorized to submit new content to the site,
So often it's a good idea to use SSL encryption.
See your driver's documentation to see how to do this (it's always a simple connection option).
Not only will SSL encrypt the network traffic containing the users password,
One possible attack has a site created to look like the victim site, attempting to get you to submit your username and password.
By using persistent connections, we keep the connection with the server open, so that several queries can be executed without the overhead of closing and reopening a connection each time a script is run.
Note that this is not always a good optimization. Try to imagine how many persistent connections a server's RAM should store with a shared hosting setup, if every hosted sites use only persistent connections: there will be too many at once.
Persistent connections are available through many languages.
When you execute a query, you get a recordset and put it into a variable.
That's why, generally, you should free the memory as soon as possible.
If it is possible only few lines before the end of the script, this makes no sense.
Many APIs support two ways for fetching the rows: you can put them into a normal array, into an object, or into an associative array.
Putting the rows into an object is the slowest way, while putting them into a normal array is the fastest.
If you are retrieving a single value per row, putting it into an array may be a good idea.
Usually, the APIs support some methods which create an SQL statement and send it to the MySQL server.
You may obtain the same effects by creating the statement by hand, but it's a slowest way.
APIs' methods are generally more optimized.
Some scripts use two queries to extract a Pivot table.
Client/server communications are often a bottleneck, so you should try to use only one JOIN instead.
If you need to use more than one query, you should use only one connection, if possible.
Only retrieve the fields you really need.
Try to not include in the SQL command too many meaningless characters (spaces, tabs, comments...).
When you want to populate an existing table from a query,
This way, you will tell the server to perform all the needed operations by sending only one SQL statement.
Many scripts don't check if the INSERTs are successful.
So, the client won't wait a confirm from the server before proceeding.
Maybe you may want to use REPLACE instead.
Possibly, use REPLACE DELAYED.
Sometimes, session data are stored into a database.
This can be avoided by storing session data into cookies.
Browsers allow users to not accept cookies, but if they don't accept them, they can't visit many important modern sites.
The only data that can't be securely stored into cookie are passwords.
You may set a brief lifetime for cookies though, so the user's privacy is hardly compromised by your cookies.
When a user browses an article or other dynamic contents (which means, contents stored into a database), a HTML document needs to be generated.
Often, the page has not variable contents, but just contents which are INSERTed once, and rarely (or never) updated.
An article or a list of links are a good example.
So, it may be a good idea creating a program which generates a static HTML page when an article is INSERTed into the database.
The page may be deleted and re-generated if the article is UPDATEd.
This saves a lot of SQL statements and work for the DBMS.
Of course this requires some privileges which you may not have.
If you are using a hosting service, you may need to talk to technical support team about this.
PHP has the following official drivers for MySQL:
PDO (PHP Data Objects) - uses PDO, an abstraction layer for interaction with databases which has drivers for MySQL and ODBC.
PDO_MYSQL support some advanced MySQL features and emulates them if not present.
The functions in the above drivers the extensions recall the methods in the C API.
They can use the MySQL Client Library or mysqlnd, a Native Driver for PHP.
Sometimes, enabling both mysql and mysqli may cause some problems; so, if you use only one of them, you should disable the other one.
Also, PHP has a ODBC extension which may be used with MySQL.
PHP has an environment variables called register_globals. Since PHP 4.2 it's set to false by default, and you shouldn't set it.
However, if your version of PHP supports register_globals, you can verify if it's set to true by calling the function ini_get().
If it's true, thought, you can't modify it with ini_set(). There are two ways to set it off:
(impossible if you're using a hosting service)
The reason is that if register_globals is true, a user can arbitrary add variables to your script by calling them like this:
You should never user the $_REQUEST superglobal array. It can be used to retrieve variables from:
This is the order followed by PHP (may be modified by the variables_order environment variable).
This means that if your script set a server variable called "userid" and you try to read it via $_REQUEST, the user can prevent that by adding a variable to the query string.
Also, you should never blindly trust the validity of HTTP variables.
There a a few ways to debug a MySQL script. For example, if can become necessary to log every SQL request. To do so:
Then it will record every request of the server into the system database mysql, table general_log.
In MySQL, the anomalies like "division by zero" don't return any error, but NULL.
However, some exceptions may occur when manipulating tables, for example to avoid that a list of insertions stops in its middle, because of a "UNIQUE" constraint. The following example functions on an InnoDB table (and not MyISAM)[1]:
Here, an error rises when inserting a second id=1. But according to one condition, the script can cancel the insertions of 2 and 3, or commit them anyway.
By default, MySQL is set to autocommit, it means that a COMMIT is automatically done after each operation (making the ROLLBACK useless). To deactivate it, launch SET autocommit = 0;
Attention: when several COMMIT are executed before one ROLLBACK (for instance in a loop), it will only cancel the operations consecutive to the last COMMIT.
1130: Host 'example.com' is not allowed to connect to this MySQL server
When connecting from a remote computer, the account used is not authorized. It should be set so:
It just needs to use some intermediary CREATE TEMPORARY TABLE.
2003: Can't connect to MySQL server
Change the parameter "host".
SQLSTATE[42000]: Syntax error or access violation
Use phpMyAdmin to find the exact syntax error location.
Replace the "IN" by some joins.
WHERE table1.id1 = table2.id2 AND condition
TIMESTAMP (like DATETIME, but 1970->2038, compatible with Unix)
Ex: VARCHAR(32), TINYTEXT, LONGBLOB, MEDIUMTEXT
Forgot root password?
Beuc: structured the book in chapters and setup the print version; wrote the initial Administration, Database Manipulation, CheatSheet section; contributed to Introduction (MySQL license), Optimization (query cache and benchmark examples, indices exercise), Table types (reference other possible table types), Language (datetime/timestamp valid intervals), Pivot table (alternate version w/o maths). I'd like to thank my employer, Cliss XXI, for giving me time to work on these chapters. Then wrote the Replication section (on free time).
JackPotte: added a certain amount of data on several pages, and tested every script on MySQL 5.6 when translating into the French Wikibooks.
LucienPetit: wrote the initial OpenOffice Base and ODBC section. I'd like to thank my employer, Cliss XXI, for giving me time to work on it (but I also worked on my free time).
Shantanuo: wrote the initial Language section.
Sante Caserio: started Stored Programs; started APIs; edited some existing stuff; added Language.Operators; added Table Types.Metadata about Sorage Engines;
↑ http://stackoverflow.com/questions/2950676/difference-between-set-autocommit-1-and-start-transaction-in-mysql-have-i-misse
Jim Finn was the earliest contributor of the development of modern IT field. His ideas and studies related to audio-visual field and the field’s professionalism was one of the critical scholar paradigm shifts to IT. He was believed as a person who changed the role of audio visual professionals’ role from support to leader ship and innovation. According to Januszewski (2001) Finn played one the key role for the shaping of the IT field because: (a) he was established the first academic department officially designated Instructional Technology, (b) he supervised many doctoral students in IT and most of them were involved in the development of the field, (c) he consulted to U.S. Office of Education where he could get funds for the major projects, (d) he not only consulted also worked with other major institutions for more AV education projects. In fact, it is easily observed that Finn spent his life to construct a professional field in the world of science. To understand Finn’s efforts related to field, his identification about six characteristics of a profession (Finn, 1953) was a good summary. By establishing an academic department and supervising doctoral students, he was successful to develop an intellectual technique and designs for applications, and a long period of training of a profession. With the funds and major project supported by both Office of Education and other institutions, the designs for applications were utilized in real situations. Based on them, a field’s standards and a statement of ethics and organized body of intellectual theory which are the advanced criteria for a profession were created and expanded. The interaction between the academic department and the projects which he conducted created a cycle that enhanced the professional development of IT and was source of members that were part of the professional organizations fostering communication for future improvements.
Another point for Finn’s contribution was system foundation of IT. He believed that programming prescriptive explanation of system view was very important concept for education and an intellectual technique to make audio visual field a profession (Januszewski, 2001). Moreover, this concept was as important as for educational technology. In his writings related to automation and education, Finn (1957) emphasized the concept of system and programming for the development of the profession. Hence, he combined four concepts: (a) system, (b) control of information to long range scientific analysis, (c) need for wise decisions and (d) high technology together. In other words, every long range scientific analysis and wise decisions enhances accumulation of knowledge of the field in a system or controlled environment. These accumulations can be easily connected to high technology or state-of-art improvement with automation process.
Finn, J. (1953). Professionalizing the audio-visual field. In D. P. Ely & Plomp T. (Eds.), Classic Writings on Instructional Technology (Vol. 1, pp. 231 – 241). Englewood: Libraries Unlimited, Inc.
Finn, J. D. (1957). Automation and education: I. General aspects. . AV Communication Review, 5(1), 343-360.
Januszewski, A. (2001). Educational Technology: The Development of a Concept. Englewood, Colorado: Libraries Unlimited, Inc.
The Trouble shooting Section is designed to deal with real issues that the new teacher might be experiencing. The new teacher, or mentor teacher, will submit a module detailing the scenario. Then experienced teachers will respond. Please read the sample below.
The First Aid, Basic Honor is a component of the Health Master Award
.
1 1. Know the causes of shock and demonstrate its proper treatment.
2 2. Know the proper steps for rescue breathing.
3 3. Know the proper procedures to assist a choking victim.
4 4. Know the proper procedures to assist a bleeding victim.
5 5. Know the pressure points and how to correctly apply pressure at these points.
6 6. Know the proper procedure to assist a victim of poisoning.
7 7. Demonstrate the proper procedure in splinting various broken bones in the body.
8 8. Know the proper procedure to assist the burn victim.
9 9. Know the proper procedure to assist a victim of a chemical burn.
10 10. Know what situations are likely to cause carbon monoxide poisoning and the rescue and treatment techniques for such poisoning.
11 11. Know the proper procedure for giving assistance to the victim of a head injury.
12 12. Know the proper procedure for giving aid to a victim of internal injuries.
13 13. Know the difference between a heart attack, stroke, epilepsy, and simple fainting, and the treatment for each.
14 14. Know how to prevent infection.
15 15. What is the proper treatment for a snake bite?
18 16. What is the proper treatment for animal bites?
19 17. What is the proper treatment for insect and spider bites?
20 18. What is the difference between heat exhaustion and heat stroke, and what is the treatment for each?
21 19. What should you do if your clothes catch fire?
22 20. What are the basic fire prevention principles for the home?
23 21. What are the basic water safety principles?
24 22. What are the ways to save a drowning victim without swimming?
25 23. What are the basic electrical safety principles?
26 24. How can you prevent food poisoning?
Note: The red oval on the patch designates “basic” level.
If residing in the United States or another country where Red Cross instruction is given,
In British countries pass the examination in St. John Ambulance and receive certificate
Know the causes of shock and demonstrate its proper treatment.
Immediate reassurance and comforting the victim if conscious.
If alone, go for help. If not, send someone to go for help and someone stay with the victim.
Ensure that the airway is clear and check for breathing. Place the victim in the recovery position if possible.
Attempt to stop any obvious bleeding.
Cover the victim with a blanket or jacket, but not too thick or it may cause a dangerous drop in blood pressure.
Do not give a drink. Moisten lips if requested.
Prepare for cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR).
Give as much information as possible when the ambulance arrives.
Know the proper steps for rescue breathing.
The current requirements for resuscitation by lay rescuers does not include rescue breathing. Instead of rescue breathing, lay rescuers should perform CPR. As such, this requirement calls for a depreciated technique.
Proposed correction:The requirement should be updated to refer to "resuscitation" rather than "rescue breathing" so that the requirement needn't be revised whenever the standards for resuscitation are updated.
Rescue Breathing. The head of the patient is tilted backward. The rescuer closes the nose with one hand, while pushing the chin downward with the other hand to keep the patient's mouth open.
If the patient is breathing, do not administer rescue breathing. Rescue breathing is an emergency treatment that may help the victim regain the ability to breathe on his own.
Tilt the victim's head back, and lift their chin (head-tilt chin-lift). The head will not remain in this position by itself, you must maintain the head-tilt chin-lift throughout.
In certain cases, you may not be able to give rescue breaths through the mouth - blow into the nose and seal the mouth instead.
Put your mouth on the mouth of the victim, maintaining a good seal, and blow into the mouth. These breaths should be gentle and last no longer than 2 seconds to prevent air from entering the stomach.
When you have given two rescue breaths, begin chest compressions if you are trained to do so. Otherwise, continue with rescue breathing: 2 breaths every 5 seconds.
If the victim has recovered spontaneous respiration, put him in the recovery position, cover him, and monitor his breathing on a regular basis until an ambulance arrives.
The following is in addition to the information above for review purposes. This teaches students how to handle live situations they may come upon.
In the next revision of the first aid honors the first aider needs to know what to do when they come across an accident of any type. They will need to know the correct procedures in their correct order. This is not currently addressed anywhere in any of the Basic, Standard, Advanced First Aid Honors.
It is important to check for a pulse before anyone attempts to carry out CPR. If the heart is beating you do not perform CPR. CPR is to maintain the blood flow in place of the beating heart in order to carry the air you are breathing into the victim to the victim's brain. Usually if the heart is not beating there is no breathing, but it is possible for breathing to stop while the heart is still beating.
Oh No! There's been an accident! What do I do first?
To Check for danger, you must first survey the scene to ensure your own safety; then, do a primary survey.
After calling the ambulance, provide appropriate care based on your primary survey of the victim until an ambulance or other advance medical personnel arrives and takes over.
Before you try to help the victim, you must determine if the scene is safe. If anything dangerous is present, such as a live wire, a vicious animal, deep water, or fire, you cannot endanger your own life to try to help the victim. Summon trained medical personnel immediately, and they will handle the situation. If you get hurt at the scene, you end up as just another victim for the ambulance to treat. Once you have called for help, you have done all you can in such a situation.
If the scene is safe, try to determine what may have happened or what caused the accident. Never move the victim to give treatment unless immediate life-threatening danger exists, such as a fire or an unstable structure ready to collapse.
After determining that the scene is safe, you must check for a response in the victim. You will look, listen and feel to determine if the victim:
Has an open, unobstructed airway
To check for consciousness, gently tap the victim and ask, "Are you okay?" If the victim can speak or cry, he or she is conscious, breathing, and has a pulse. If the victim is unresponsive, he or she may be unconscious, indicating a possibly life-threatening condition. An unconscious person's tongue relaxes and may fall back to block the airway, stopping breathing and eventually the heartbeat.
Next, if the victim is unconscious, kneel next to the victim's head and check for the ABC's: Airway, Breathing and Circulation.
To open the airway of an unconscious victim, tilt the head back and lift the chin.
To check for breathing, you must look, listen and feel. Place your face above the victim's mouth and nose, so that you can listen and feel for air being exhaled while watching the victim's chest for a gentle rise and fall that occurs when breathing. If the victim is not breathing, you must give 2 slow breaths. This is called rescue breathing. If the breaths do not go in, retilt the head and try again. If the breaths still do not go in, the victim has an obstructed airway, and you may try to clear the airway with a blow between the shoulder blades in the back, or with abdominal thrusts. If the breaths do go in, then continue with your DRABC.
To check for circulation, you must check the victim's pulse at one of the carotid arteries, located in the neck on either side of the Adam's apple. Using your index and middle finger (Never use your thumb—it has its own pulse and you may mistake it for that of the victim!) find the Adam's apple and then slide your fingers toward the side of the neck facing you into the groove in the side of the neck. Take at least 5 to 10 seconds to feel for the pulse. If the victim is an infant, locate the pulse in the brachial artery, on the inside of the upper arm in between the elbow and the shoulder. If the victim has a pulse but is not breathing, you must go immediately do Rescue Breathing. If the victim is not breathing and does not have a pulse, go immediately to CPR (if you have been trained). Check the body for signs of any severe external bleeding (bleeding is severe when blood spurts from a wound, and it is life-threatening).
Know the proper procedures to assist a choking victim.
Coughing is the body's natural defense against choking, and it is generally very effective. If the victim is coughing, do not interfere. If the victim stops coughing (or was never coughing in the first place), ask her "are you choking?" If the victim indicates that she is choking, tell her you are going to help her. To do this, you will need to perform the Heimlich Maneuver.
Briefly, a person performing the Heimlich Maneuver uses their hands to exert pressure on the bottom of the diaphragm. This compresses the lungs and exerts pressure on any object lodged in the trachea, hopefully expelling it. This amounts to an artificial cough. (The victim of an obstructed airway, having lost the ability to draw air into the lungs, has lost the ability to cough on their own.)
Even when performed correctly, the Heimlich Maneuver can injure the person it is performed on. The Heimlich Maneuver should never be performed on someone who can still cough, breathe, or speak. It should not be demonstrated or practiced on a healthy, non-choking person.
Know the proper procedures to assist a bleeding victim.
If you see a person who is bleeding heavily, you can do the following:
Press hard onto the wound to stop the bleeding.
If an arm or leg is cut, elevate the limb.
Check that the bleeding has stopped. If it has not, add another pad, and bandage, do not remove previous bandage.
If you have bandaged a limb, check frequently that the fingers and toes remain warm. If fingers and toes are getting cold, loosen the bandage to let the blood circulate.
For severe bleeding (5 cups of blood or more), get the person to a hospital for stitches (and possibly immunization against Tetanus) keeping the limb raised.
Know the pressure points and how to correctly apply pressure at these points.
The usual way to control bleeding is to put pressure directly onto the wound, either with the hand directly or with a dressing of some sort (bandage, handkerchief, tea towel etc.). Do not forget that any wound which is not controlled within a minute or two is a medical emergency; and any deep or large wound must receive medical attention as soon as possible.
It is sometimes not possible to press directly on a wound: for example, there may be a foreign object inside the wound, or a broken bone protruding outside, or the wound may be too large or be inaccessible (e.g. if the limb is trapped by some immovable object). In this case, the only way to control the bleeding is to compress blood vessels over particular pressure points (usually where arteries cross over bones near to the surface of the skin). This technique can be used to control external bleeding from arm wounds and leg wounds.
The correct point is determined by finding a pulse on a victim similar to that felt in the wrist when taking one's own pulse. This point could be located in the wrist, the arm (on the soft underside of the elbow), the groin, or behind the knee. This is the position where a rhythmical pulsation can be felt. Pressure can then be applied over this point—the artery—to control bleeding.
Once an artery is compressed over a pressure point, it must not be compressed for more than 10 minutes: any longer in one go can cause irreversible damage to the limb. Typically pressure would be applied for 10 minutes, then released for a couple, then reapplied and so on.
Know the proper procedure to assist a victim of poisoning.
If the poison is on the skin or clothes, remove the clothing and wash with a large amount of water. If poison gets in the eyes, flush the eyes with clean water for 10 minutes.
Get the victim to a hospital as soon as possible, and if possible, bring the poison container with you.
Demonstrate the proper procedure in splinting various broken bones in the body.
An essential part of the first-aid treatment is immobilizing the injured part with splints so that the sharp ends of broken bones won’t move around and cause further damage to nerves, blood vessels, or vital organs. Splints are also used to immobilize severely injured joints or muscles and to prevent the enlargement of extensive wounds.
Before you can use a splint, you need to have a general understanding of the use of splints. In an emergency, almost any firm object or material can be used as a splint. Such things as umbrellas, canes, tent pegs, sticks, oars, paddles, spars, wire, leather, boards, pillows, heavy clothing, corrugated cardboard, and folded newspapers can be used as splints. A fractured leg may sometimes be splinted by fastening it securely to the uninjured leg. Splints, whether ready-made or improvised, must meet the following requirements:
Be light in weight, but still be strong and fairly rigid.
Be long enough to reach the joints above and below the fracture.
Be wide enough so the bandages used to hold them in place won’t pinch the injured part.
Be well padded on the sides that touch the body. If they’re not properly padded, they won’t fit well and won’t adequately immobilize the injured part.
To improvise the padding for a splint, use articles of clothing, bandages, cotton, blankets, or any other soft material.
If the victim is wearing heavy clothes, apply the splint on the outside, allowing the clothing to serve as at least part of the required padding.
Although splints should be applied snugly, never apply them tight enough to interfere with the circulation of the blood. When applying splints to an arm or a leg, try to leave the fingers or toes exposed. If the tips of the fingers or toes become blue or cold, you will know that the splints or bandages are too tight. You should examine a splinted part approximately every half-hour, and loosen the fastenings if circulation appears to be cut off. Remember that any injured part is likely to swell, and splints or bandages that are all right when applied may be too tight later.
To secure the limb to the splint, belts, neckerchiefs, rope, or any suitable material may be used. If possible, tie the limb at two places above and two places below the break. Leave the treatment of other types of fractures, such as jaw, ribs, and spine, to medical personnel. Never try to move a person who might have a fractured spine or neck. Moving such a person could cause permanent paralysis. Don’t attempt to reset bones.
There are two long bones in the forearm, the radius and the ulna. When both are broken, the arm usually appears to be deformed. When only one is broken, the other acts as a splint and the arm retains a more or less natural appearance. Any fracture of the forearm is likely to result in pain, tenderness, inability to use the forearm, and a kind of wobbly motion at the point of injury. If the fracture is open, a bone will show through. If the fracture is open, stop the bleeding and treat the wound. Apply a sterile dressing over the wound. Carefully straighten the forearm. (Remember that rough handling of a closed fracture may turn it into an open fracture.) Apply two well-padded splints to the forearm, one on the top and one on the bottom. Be sure that the splints are long enough to extend from the elbow to the wrist. Use bandages to hold the splints in place. Put the forearm across the chest. The palm of the hand should be turned in, with the thumb pointing upward. Support the forearm in this position by means of a wide sling and a cravat bandage (see illustration). The hand should be raised about 4 inches above the level of the elbow. Treat the victim for shock and evacuate as soon as possible.
The signs of fracture of the upper arm include pain, tenderness, swelling, and a wobbly motion at the point of fracture. If the fracture is near the elbow, the arm is likely to be straight with no bend at the elbow. If the fracture is open, stop the bleeding and treat the wound before attempting to treat the fracture.
Treatment of the fracture depends partly upon the location of the break.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the arm near the shoulder, place a pad or folded towel in the armpit, bandage the arm securely to the body, and support the forearm in a narrow sling.
If the fracture is in the middle of the upper arm, you can use one well-padded splint on the outside of the arm. The splint should extend from the shoulder to the elbow. Fasten the splinted arm firmly to the body and support the forearm in a narrow sling, as illustrated.
Another way of treating a fracture in the middle of the upper arm is to fasten two wide splints (or four narrow ones) about the arm and then support the forearm in a narrow sling. If you use a splint between the arm and the body, be very careful that it does not extend too far up into the armpit; a splint in this position can cause a dangerous compression of the blood vessels and nerves and may be extremely painful to the victim. If the fracture is at or near the elbow, the arm may be either bent or straight. No matter in what position you find the arm, DO NOT ATTEMPT TO STRAIGHTEN IT OR MOVE IT IN ANY WAY. Splint the arm as carefully as possible in the position in which you find it. This will prevent further nerve and blood vessel damage. The only exception to this is if there is no pulse on the other side of the fracture (relative to the heart), in which case gentle traction is applied and then the arm is splinted. Treat the victim for shock and get him under the care of a medical professional as soon as possible.
Carefully straighten the injured limb. Immobilize the fracture by placing a padded board under the injured limb. The board should be at least 4 inches wide and should reach from the but- tock to the heel. Place extra padding under the knee and just above the heel, as shown in the illustration. Use strips of bandage to fasten the leg to the board in four places: (1) just below the knee; (2) just above the knee; (3) at the ankle; and (4) at the thigh. DO NOT COVER THE KNEE ITSELF. Swelling is likely to occur very rapidly, and any bandage or tie fastened over the knee would quickly become too tight. Treat the victim for shock and evacuate as soon as possible.
The figure-eight bandage is used for dressings of the ankle, as well as for supporting a sprain. While keeping the foot at a right angle, start a 3-inch bandage around the instep for several turns to anchor it. Carry the bandage upward over the instep and around behind the ankle, forward, and again across the instep and down under the arch, thus completing one figure-eight. Continue the figure-eight turns, overlapping one-third to one-half the width of the bandage and with an occasional turn around the ankle, until the compress is secured or until adequate support is obtained.
Know the proper procedure to assist the burn victim.
Burns should be immediately immersed in cold running water, or shower for large area. Do not wait to remove clothes. This should be maintained for at least 10–15 minutes.
Continue for at least 1 hour with cold pack, partially insulated with clean fabric (cotton, thin toweling), or further immersion in iced water. Blistered or open burn wounds should be cleaned and covered with non-adhesive gauze (preferably bactericidal) and cotton dressing. DO NOT use butter, oils or any similar treatment which can trap heat and increase risk of infection. Also do not use antiseptics that may aggravate sensitive skin.
Consult a medical physician immediately for any large, deep, infected or otherwise serious burn.
Aloe vera extract, silverdene (Silver Sulfazdiazine), topical analgaesics and NSAID are commonly used medications. Consult a doctor before use.
Burns are sustained by electricity, heat , chemical or radiation (sunburn). There are three levels of burns, including first degree burns (Superficial burn), second degree burns (Partial thickness burn) and third degree burns (Full thickness burn). The first degree burn is typical sunburn with symptoms such as redness of the skin and pain. Second degree often has blisters and severe pain. Third degree can be caused by fires and caustic chemicals. Often the victim will feel no pain because the nerves have been destroyed, even though the skin is deeply charred.
Burns that cover more than ten percent of the body, or are larger than the casualty's palm, are medical emergencies and need to be treated as such. Also ANY burns to the face, hands or groin should be considered critical and require an examination by a physician.
Know the proper procedure to assist a victim of a chemical burn.
For wet chemicals, immediately flush the area with large amounts of water, using a shower or hose, if available. Do not apply water too forcefully. Continue to flood the area while the clothing, including shoes and socks, is being removed. Continue to flush with running water for at least 20 minutes.
For dry chemicals, brush off the chemical, then flush with water as above.
For acid burns caused by phenol (carbolic acid), wash the affected area with alcohol because phenol is not water soluble; then wash with water. If alcohol is not available, flushing with water is better than no treatment at all.
Know what situations are likely to cause carbon monoxide poisoning and the rescue and treatment techniques for such poisoning.
Carbon monoxide is present in exhaust gases of internal combustion engines as well as in sewer gas, lanterns, charcoal grills, and in manufactured gas used for heating and cooking. It gives no warning of its presence since it is completely odorless and tasteless. The victim may lose consciousness and suffer respiratory distress with no warning other than slight dizziness, weakness, and headache. The lips and skin of a victim of carbon monoxide poisoning are characteristically cherry red. Death may occur within a few minutes.
Know the proper procedure for giving assistance to the victim of a head injury.
Head wounds must be treated with particular care, since there is always the possibility of brain damage. The general treatment for head wounds is the same as that for other fresh wounds. However, certain special precautions must be observed if you are giving first aid to a person who has suffered a head wound.
Keep the victim lying flat, with the head at the level of the body. Do not raise the feet if the face is flushed. If the victim is having trouble breathing, you may raise the head slightly.
If the wound is at the back of the head, turn the victim on his or her side.
Watch closely for vomiting and position the head to avoid getting vomit or saliva into the lungs.
Do not use direct pressure to control bleeding if the skull is depressed or obviously fractured.
Know the proper procedure for giving aid to a victim of internal injuries.
Internal soft-tissue injuries may result from deep wounds, blunt trauma, blast exposure, crushing accidents, bone fracture, poison, or sickness. They may range in seriousness from a simple bruise to life-threatening hemorrhage and shock.
Visible indications of internal soft-tissue injury include the following:
Vomiting or coughing up bright red blood.
Excretion of bright red blood from the rectum.
Nonmenstrual vaginal bleeding.
Nosebleed.
Pooling of the blood near the skin surface.
More often than not, however, there will be no visible signs of injury, and you will have to infer the probability of internal soft-tissue injury from other symptoms such as the following:
Pale, moist, clammy skin.
Subnormal temperature.
Rapid, feeble pulse.
Falling blood pressure.
Fainting.
Dehydration and thirst.
Yawning and air hunger.
First aid’s goal must be to obtain the greatest benefit from the victim’s remaining blood supply. The following steps should be taken:
Treat for shock.
Keep the victim warm and at rest.
DO NOT give the victim anything to drink
Splint injured extremities.
Apply cold compresses (ice packs) to identifiable injured areas.
Transport the victim to a medical treatment facility as soon as possible.
Know the difference between a heart attack, stroke, epilepsy, and simple fainting, and the treatment for each.
A heart attack is when blood supply to part of the heart is interrupted causing heart tissue to die. Symptoms of a heart attack include severe chest pain, looking pale, sweating, and feeling sick. A heart attack is a medical emergency, and it is a leading cause of death for both men and women.
Seek emergency medical assistance immediately.
Help the patient to rest in a position which minimizes breathing difficulties. A half-sitting position with knees bent is often recommended.
Give access to more oxygen, e.g. by opening the window and widening the collar for easier breathing; but keep the patient warm, e.g. by a blanket or a jacket
Give aspirin, if the patient is not allergic to aspirin. Aspirin inhibits formation of further blood clots.
Non-coated or soluble preparations are preferred. These should be chewed or dissolved, respectively, to facilitate quicker absorption. If the patient cannot swallow, the aspirin can be placed under the tongue.
Australian guidelines recommend a dose of 150 – 300 mg.
If it has been prescribed for the patient, give nitroglycerin tablets under the tongue.
Monitor pulse, breathing, level of consciousness and, if possible, the blood pressure of the patient continually.
Administer CPR if the victim is unconscious and non-breathing.
A stroke is caused by an interruption of the arterial blood supply to a portion of the brain. This interruption may be caused by hardening of the arteries or by a clot forming in the brain. Tissue damage and loss of function result. Onset of a stroke is sudden, with little or no warning. The first signs include weakness or paralysis, especially on one side of the body. Muscles of the face may be particularly affected. The victim’s level of consciousness varies from alert to unresponsive. Difficulty speaking or understanding language; dizziness; sudden, severe headache; distorted, dim or patchy vision are all symptoms of stroke.
Place the victim in on their side, with the affected side down
Act in a calm, reassuring manner, and keep any onlookers quiet since the victim may be able to hear what is going on.
Carefully monitor the victim’s vital signs and keep a log. Pay special attention to respirations, and pulse strength and rate (take the pulse in the neck).
Epilepsy, also known as seizures or fits, is a condition characterized by an abnormal focus of activity in the brain that produces severe motor responses or changes in consciousness. Fortunately, epilepsy can often be controlled by medications. Grand mal (tonic-clonic) seizure is the more serious type of seizure. Grand mal seizures may be - but are not always - preceded by an aura. The victim soon comes to recognize these auras, which allows him time to lie down and prepare for the seizure’s onset. A burst of nerve impulses from the brain causes unconsciousness and generalized muscular contractions, often with loss of bladder and bowel control. The primary dangers in a grand mal seizure are injuries resulting from falls and the convulsions as well as a cessation of breathing. A period of unconsciousness or mental confusion follows this type of seizure. When full consciousness returns, the victim will have little or no recollection of the seizure.
First aid is aimed at preventing the patient from injuring himself or herself. Nothing should be placed between the patient’s teeth for any reason. Never try to restrain a victim during convulsions; however, do not leave them alone.
Fainting is a self-correcting, temporary form of shock. It often is the result of a temporary gravitational pooling of the blood as a person stands up. As the person falls, blood again rushes to the head, and the problem is solved. Usually, the serious problems related to fainting are injuries that occur when falling down from the temporary loss of consciousness. Fainting may be caused by stressful situations.
If a person faints (is feels he is about to faint) do the following:
Know how to prevent infection.
Although infection may occur in any wound, it is a particular danger in wounds that do not bleed freely; in wounds in which torn tissue or skin falls back into place and prevents the entrance of air; and in wounds that involve the crushing of tissues. Incisions, in which there is a free flow of blood and relatively little crushing of tissues, are the least likely to become infected.
There are two types of bacteria commonly causing infection in wounds—aerobic and anaerobic. The former bacterial live and multiply in the presence of air or free oxygen, while the latter are bacterial that live and multiply only in the absence of air.
The principal aerobic bacteria that cause infection, inflammation, and blood poisoning are streptococci and staphylococci, some varieties of which destroy red blood cells. The staphylococci and streptococci may be introduced at the time of infliction, or they may be introduced to the wound later, at the time of first aid treatment or in the hospital if nonsterile instruments or dressings are employed.
Wash minor wounds immediately with soap and clean water; then dry and paint them with a mild, nonirritating antiseptic. Apply a dressing if necessary. In the first aid environment, do not attempt to wash or clean a large wound, and do not apply an antiseptic to it since it must be cleaned thoroughly at a medical treatment facility. Simply protect it with a large compress or dressing and transport the victim to a medical treatment facility. After an initial soap and water cleanup, puncture wounds must also be directed to a medical treatment facility for evaluation.
What is the proper treatment for a snake bite?
Snakebite first aid recommendations vary, in part because different snakes have different types of venom. Some have little local effect, but life-threatening systemic effects, in which case containing the venom in the region of the bite by pressure immobilization is highly desirable. Other venoms instigate localized tissue damage around the bitten area, and immobilization may increase the severity of the damage in this area, but also reduce the total area affected; whether this trade-off is desirable remains a point of controversy.
Because snakes vary from one country to another, first aid methods also vary. As always, this article is not a legitimate substitute for professional medical advice. Readers are strongly advised to obtain guidelines from a reputable first aid organization in their own region, and to be wary of homegrown or anecdotal remedies.
However, most first aid guidelines agree on the following:
Protect the patient (and others, including yourself) from further bites. While identifying the species is desirable in certain regions, do not risk further bites or delay proper medical treatment by attempting to capture or kill the snake. If the snake has not already fled, carefully remove the victim from the immediate area. If possible, take a photograph of the snake (many cell phones are equipped with cameras). If you do not know what type of snake it is, someone else might be able to identify it from the photo. A poor photo is better than no photo.
Keep the victim calm. Acute stress reaction increases blood flow and endangers the patient. Keep people near the patient calm. Panic is infectious and compromises judgment.
Do not give the patient anything to eat or drink. This is especially important with consumable alcohol, a known vasodilator which will speed up the absorption of venom. Do not administer stimulants or pain medications to the victim, unless specifically directed to do so by a physician.
Remove any items or clothing which may constrict the bitten limb if it swells (rings, bracelets, watches, footwear, etc.)
Keep the victim as still as possible.
Do not incise the bitten site.
Many organizations, including the American Medical Association and American Red Cross, recommend washing the bite with soap and water. However, do not attempt to clean the area with any type of chemical. Australian recommendations for snake bite treatment strongly recommend against cleaning the wound. Traces of venom left on the skin/bandages from the strike can be used in combination with a snake bite identification kit to identify the species of snake. This speeds determination of which antivenin to administer in the emergency room.[1]
↑ Chris Thompson. "Treatment of Australian Snake Bites". Australian anaesthetists' website. http://www.usyd.edu.au/anaes/venom/snakebite.html.
Seek medical attention as quickly as possible.
Remove any jewelry or watches, as these could cut into the skin if swelling occurs.
Keep the area of the bite below the level of the heart in order to slow the spread of venom through the bloodstream.
Remain still and calm. Moving around will make venom spread faster through the body.
Cover the bite with a clean, loose-fitting, dry bandage.
The main goal is to administer the correct antivenom as soon as possible. Knowing the size, color and shape of the snake can help determine the best treatment for a particular bite.
Antivenoms are made by immunizing a horse or sheep with the venom of a particular snake, then processing the animal's blood serum (the watery part of the blood), which will contain antibodies capable of neutralizing the effects of venom.
Monospecific antivenoms treat the bite of a specific type of snake, while polyspecific antivenoms can treat bites from a number of snakes found in a particular geographic region.
Do not pick up the snake or try to wrap it up or kill it, as this will increase the chance of getting another bite. Even a dead snake is able to bite.
Do not apply a tourniquet.
Do not cut across the site of the bite marks.
Do not try to suck out the venom.
Do not apply ice.
Do not immerse the wounded area in water.
Do not drink alcohol.
Do not drink beverages with caffeine.
What is the proper treatment for animal bites?
A special kind of infection that must be guarded against in case of animal bites is rabies (sometimes called “hydrophobia”). This disease is caused by a virus that is present in the saliva of infected animals. The disease occurs most commonly in wild animals, but it has been found in domestic animals and household pets. In fact, it is probable that all mammals are susceptible to it. The virus that causes rabies is ordinarily transmitted by a bite, but it can be transmitted by the saliva of an infected animal coming in contact with a fresh wound or with the thin mucous membrane of the lips or nose. The virus does not penetrate normal unbroken skin. If the skin is broken, DO NOT attempt wound closure.
If rabies develops in man, it is usually fatal. A preventive treatment is available and it is very effective, but only if it is started shortly after the bite. Since the vaccine can be obtained only at a medical treatment facility, any person bitten by an animal must be transferred quickly to the nearest treatment facility for evaluation, along with a complete report of the circumstances surrounding the incident. Remember, prevention is of utmost importance. Immediate local treatment of the wound should be given. Wash the wound and the surrounding area carefully, using sterile gauze, soap, and sterile water. Use sterile gauze to dry the wound, and then cover the wound with a sterile dressing. DO NOT use any chemical disinfectant. All of the animal’s saliva must be removed from the victim’s skin to prevent further contamination of the wound. CAUTION: DO NOT allow the animal’s saliva to come in contact with open sores or cuts on your hands. When a person has been bitten by an animal, every effort must be made to catch the animal and to keep it confined for a minimum of 8 to 10 days. DO NOT kill it if there is any possible chance of catching it alive. The symptoms of rabies are not always present in the animal at the time the bite occurs, but the saliva may nevertheless contain the rabies virus. It is essential, therefore, that the animal is kept under observation until a diagnosis can be made. The rabies treatment is given if the animal develops any definite symptoms, if it dies during the observation period, or if for any reason the animal cannot be kept under observation. Remember that any animal bite is dangerous and MUST be evaluated at a treatment facility.
What is the proper treatment for insect and spider bites?
Though ticks and leeches are not technically insects, we will deal with them here as if they are. Most of the time insect bites and stings will not require first aid. However, you should be aware that there are many insect-borne diseases including Lyme's disease, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, malaria, yellow fever, bubonic plague, etc. Be on the alert for any sickness following an insect bite, and contact a doctor if you suspect transmission of an insect-borne disease.
First aid is aimed at reducing the discomfort caused by an insect bite or sting and preventing infection:
Get away from the insects to avoid additional bites or stings.
For stings, scrape the stinger away - do not use tweezers or otherwise pinch a stinger, as this will cause more venom to be injected into the wound.
Place an ice pack over the affected area to reduce pain and swelling.
Apply hydrocortizone, calamine lotion, or make a paste from three parts baking soda and one part water and apply that to the affected area.
Give the patient an antihistamine such as Benadryl.
Remove ticks by pulling them straight out with a pair of tweezers. Be careful not to break a tick's mouth parts off beneath the skin. Contact the child's doctor who may ask you to save the tick and bring it in for testing. Do not try to remove a tick by touching it with a hot match head or by covering it with petroleum jelly.
Wash the affected area with soap and water.
Spiders in the United States are generally harmless, with several exceptions. The most notable are the black widow and brown recluse spiders. Their bites are serious but rarely fatal.
Bites by non-poisonous spiders should be treated the same as insect bites. Bites by poisonous spiders should be treated as follows:
Place ice over the bite to reduce pain.
Hospitalize victims who are under 16 or over 65 for observation.
Be prepared to give antivenin in severe cases.
What is the difference between heat exhaustion and heat stroke, and what is the treatment for each?
Heat stroke is a less common but far more serious condition than heat exhaustion, since it carries a 20 percent fatality rate. The main feature of heatstroke is the extremely high body temperature, 105 °F (41 °C) or higher, that accompanies it. In heatstroke, the victim has a breakdown of the sweating mechanism and is unable to eliminate excessive body heat built up while exercising. If the body temperature rises too high, the brain, kidneys, and liver may be permanently damaged.
Sometimes the victim may have preliminary symptoms, such as headache, nausea, dizziness, or weakness. Breathing will be deep and rapid at first, later shallow and almost absent. Usually the victim will be flushed, very dry, and very hot. The pupils will be constricted (pinpoint) and the pulse fast and strong.
When you provide first aid for heatstroke, remember that this is a true life-and-death emergency. The longer the victim remains overheated, the higher the chances of irreversible body damage or even death occurring. First aid treatment for heatstroke is designed to reduce body heat. Reduce body heat immediately by dousing the body with cold water, or applying wet, cold towels to the whole body. Move the victim to the coolest possible place and remove as much clothing as possible. Maintain an open airway. Place the victim on his/her back, with the head and shoulders slightly raised. If cold packs are available, place them under the arms, around the neck, at the ankles, and in the groin. Expose the victim to a fan or air-conditioner since drafts will promote cooling. Immersing the victim in a cold water bath is also effective. Give the victim (if conscious) cool water to drink. Do not give any hot drinks or stimulants. Get the victim to a medical facility as soon as possible. Cooling measures must be continued while the victim is being transported.
Heat exhaustion is the most common condition caused by working or exercising in hot spaces. Heat exhaustion produces a serious disruption of blood flow to the brain, heart, and lungs. This causes the victim to experience weakness, dizziness, headache, loss of appetite, and nausea.
Signs and symptoms of heat exhaustion are similar to those of shock: the victim will appear ashen gray; the skin will be cold, moist, and clammy; and the pupils of the eyes may be dilated (enlarged). The vital (blood pressure, temperature, pulse, and respiration) signs usually are normal; however, the victim may have a weak pulse together with rapid and shallow breathing.
Body temperature may be below normal. You should treat heat exhaustion victims as if they were in shock. Loosen the clothing, apply cool wet cloths, move the victim to either a cool or an air-conditioned area, and fan the victim. Do not allow the person to become chilled. If the victim is conscious, administer a solution of 1 teaspoon of salt dissolved in a quart of cool water. If the victim vomits, do not give any more fluids. Transport the victim to a medical facility as soon as possible.
What should you do if your clothes catch fire?
Get the person to the ground and roll him over and over on the ground. Another option is to wrap the victim with a blanket, coat, or jacket if one is handy. If your own clothes catch on fire, stop, drop, and roll - do the same thing to yourself as you would to someone else.
What are the basic fire prevention principles for the home?
If your home lacks smoke detectors, install them
Replace the batteries and test your smoke detectors on a regular basis (when adjusting your clocks for daylight savings time, for example).
Do not smoke or allow anyone else to smoke in your home.
Never overload circuits or extension cords. Do not place cords and wires under rugs, over nails or in high traffic areas. Immediately shut off and unplug appliances that sputter, spark or emit an unusual smell. Have them professionally repaired or replaced.
When using appliances follow the manufacturer's safety precautions. Overheating, unusual smells, shorts and sparks are all warning signs that appliances need to be shut off, then replaced or repaired. Unplug appliances when not in use. Use safety caps to cover all unused outlets, especially if there are small children in the home.
Portable heaters need their space. Keep anything combustible at least three feet away.
Keep fire in the fireplace. Use fire screens and have your chimney cleaned annually. The creosote buildup can ignite a chimney fire that could easily spread.
Kerosene heaters should be used only where approved by authorities. Never use gasoline or camp-stove fuel. Refuel outside and only after the heater has cooled.
What are the basic water safety principles?
Learn to swim.
Young children and weak swimmers should wear a personal floatation device (PFD) when they are around water.
Set limits for inexperienced swimmers, such as not allowing them to enter water that is more than chest-deep.
Inspect swimming areas for hazards such as underwater trees, holes, and swift currents.
Swim parallel to the shore if caught in a rip tide.
What are the ways to save a drowning victim without swimming?
Unless you have been trained to properly do so, avoid swimming to the assistance of a person who is drowning. A drowning non-swimmer is typically in a panic, and may grab onto anyone or anything he can reach in an effort to support their airway above the surface of the water. If the victim submerges the rescuer, the rescuer's life is endangered and the original victim has nobody to assist them.
Talk the victim in; coach them to kick their legs
Throw life ring, life jacket, or some other flotation device to the victim
Reach an item such as a rope, pole, oar, or paddle to the victim, and once the victim grabs it, pull them in
Wade into shallow water attempt the above
Row out to the victim in a boat, or use powered craft if possible; try the above from in the boat
What are the basic electrical safety principles?
Do not overload circuits or extension cords.
Only use an extension cord that is rated to handle the current an appliance will use. An appliance's amperage is listed on the outside of the appliance.
Shut off the power before working on a circuit.
Unplug an appliance before servicing it.
Water and electricity do not mix. Do not use an electric appliance when standing in a puddle of water or while in a bathtub or shower.
Do not use a land-line telephone or touch any "wired" appliance during an electrical storm.
Replace broken or frayed electrical cords.
How can you prevent food poisoning?
Food poisoning is causes by eating food which is contaminated with any infectious or toxic agent such as bacteria or parasites. The two main ways food becomes contaminated is by improper storage, or by coming into contact with contaminated food (cross-contamination).
The basic rule for storing food is to pay attention to the temperature. Keep hot foods hot, and keep cold foods cold. Most bacteria will not grow in food that is hotter than 140 °F (60 °C), and bacterial growth is greatly slowed at temperatures below 40 °F (4 °C). It is unsafe to store foods susceptible to bacteria growth between these temperatures.
Food poisoning is often caused by eating left-overs that were not promptly refrigerated. As soon as the food temperature falls below 140 °F (60 °C), it should be refrigerated. The longer food is left in the "danger zone", the more bacteria will multiply in it. If it contains enough bacteria, it will overwhelm the body's immune system and sickness will result.
Be careful about refrigerating large quantities of hot food. For instance, the potato salad in the center of a two-gallon container can remain warm for hours after refrigeration - providing ample time for bacteria to multiply. Divide large quantities of food into smaller containers prior to refrigeration so that the food can cool throughout.
Cross contamination usually happens during food preparation. Raw meat and raw eggs should always be treated as if they were contaminated. Cooking them kills the bacteria and makes them safe to eat. Do not allow other food to come into contact with raw meat or eggs, or that food will become contaminated. Do not use the same utensils to handle raw meat and food that is ready to eat.
Wash your hands before you eat or cook, and always wash your hands after handling raw meat or eggs - before handling any other food.
Do not allow pets to walk on food preparation surfaces (i.e., don't let the cat walk on the counter top or dining table). Animals pick up many types of bacteria on their feet, and this is easily transferred to food. If you do catch your pet walking on the countertop, be sure to disinfect it before using it as a food preparation surface.
Some material for this chapter was copied directly from the following public domain resources:
U.S. Navy Training Manual, HOSPITAL CORPSMAN 3 & 2
U.S. Navy Training Manual, Hospital Corpsman Revised Edition
Department of Homeland Security, Fire Safety Tips
Kevin C. O'Kane
MUMPS - Massachusetts General Hospital Utility Multi-Programming Language (R. Greenes and N. Pappalardo)
University of Missouri - Columbia System (D.A. Lindberg)
Texas Institute for Research and Rehabilitation Information System (C. Valbonna & W. Spencer)
Kaiser-Permanente System (M. Collen)
Johns Hopkins Oncology Clinical Information System and Tedium (B. Blum)
Case Studies of Computer Based Medical Records
Rising Tide of Clinical Data and Reporting Requirements
The Structure of the Patient Encounter with the Health Care System
Medical Linkage, Patient Tracking and Scheduling
CASNET Causal ASsociational NETworks (Kulikowski and Weiss)
PIP Present Illness Program (Gorry and Parker)
Reasoning Foundations of Medical Diagnosis (Ledley and Lusted)
Standard Nomenclature of Diseases and Operations (SNDO)
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders - (DSM)
NLM Medical Subject Headings (MESH) and Unified Medical Language System (UMLS)
Logical Observation Identifier Names and Codes (LOINC)
Ethelbald, the eldest surviving son of King Ethelwulf and his first wife, Osburh, was born around 831-834. He would reign for only a short time, from 856-860.
Ethelbald's father, King Ethelwulf, embarked on a lengthy pilgrimage to Rome, taking with him his youngest and favourite son, Alfred, whom he hoped to name as his heir. During the King's absence, Wessex had been governed by a council of ministers under the joint leadership of Ethelbald, St. Swithin, Bishop of Winchester and Bishop Ealstan of Sherborne. In a pre-emptive move Ethelbald was crowned King of Wessex at Kingston-upon-Thames before his father's return.
Ethelbald was the very antithesis of his pious and mild-mannered father, he was a tough and hardened warrior like Egbert. Many were sorry that the ageing Ethelwulf, never an inspiring figure, had returned at all, much preferring the rule of his warlike son. Ethelwulf prevented the looming prospect of civil war by his acceptance of the situation and abdication.
After the death of his father two years later, Ethelbald foolishly made himself highly unpopular with the church by scandalously marrying his sixteen year old stepmother, Judith of France. The relationship was deemed incestuous and in direct contravention of church law. Her outraged father, Charles the Bald, King of France, intervened and forced his errant daughter into a nunnery. The much married Judith later eloped with Baldwin, Count of Flanders, making her the ancestress of another Queen of England, Matilda of Flanders, the consort of England's first Norman King, William the Conqueror.
Despite the scandal with his stepmother, Ethelbald made a popular king. He died at Sherbourne in Dorset on 20 December, 860, aged around 35, after a four year reign. He seems to have been greatly mourned by his people, although Bishop Asser describes him as being "headstrong and arbitrary" It should be remembered, however, that he evoked the censure of the church through his uncanonical marriage, making Asser's opinion of the King a highly biased one.
Electronic waste (e-waste) is a term for electronics that have reached the end of their life cycle and are awaiting disposal. E-waste traditionally encompasses products such as televisions, computers, and cell phones; however, as electronic components become more prevalent in everyday consumer products, the exact definition of e-waste has blurred. [1]
E-waste levels have grown drastically in recent years as the average turnover rate of electronics has fallen. In 2009, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) found that retailers sold 438 million new consumer electronics in the United States, while 2.37 million tons of electronics qualified for end-of-life management[2]. In the United States, 70% of heavy metals in landfills can be attributed to electronic waste, yet e-waste only accounts for 2-3% of overall municipal waste [3]. Experts project that the severity of the e-waste problem will escalate as demand for electronic consumer goods rises in China and India. Currently, the bulk of the waste originates from developed countries such as the United States and areas of Europe, but it is estimated that waste in China will increase from 1.7 million tons in 2007 to 5.4 million tons in 2015. [4]
4.1 "Must-Have Culture" & Planned Obsolescence
Proper processing of electronic waste requires that consumers send e-waste to qualified electronics recycling (e-cycling) centers as opposed to disposing of products in traditional trash cans.
The EPA has established guidelines that dictate appropriate practices for e-waste management. Responsible e-cycling companies typically follow a three-step process.[5] First, any items that are able to be re-used are sent to areas where their life cycle can be extended, such as developing nations. This has a secondary effect of bringing technology to groups who previously may not have had access. Some argue, though, that reuse places electronics products in societies incapable of proper e-cycling, therefore doing more harm than good [6].
If the product cannot be re-used, human workers and sophisticated machines carefully disassemble the device to collect various recyclable metals. These are re-distributed to manufacturers for inclusion in future products. [7] This step requires a level of expertise and capital expenditure not currently available in developing nations. Processing centers in these areas employ labor-intensive and more dangerous procedures instead. Finally, any materials that cannot be recycled and pose potential harm are disposed of in a highly regulated manner to avoid environmental and health consequences. [5] Many responsible e-cyclers have a zero-landfill policy.
The majority of e-waste currently ends up in landfills due to consumers placing their used electronics items in traditional trash management systems. The harmful materials contained within electronics necessitate separate processing from typical waste.
Consumer-recycled e-waste can still pose problems. Although a number of responsible e-cyclers operate worldwide, activist groups such as Greenpeace and the Basel Action Network have questioned the legitimacy of these corporations’ procedures. These action groups argue that many e-cyclers knowingly ship electronic waste to areas of China, India, and Africa. Despite being illegal in most of these locations, e-waste shipments are imported by the ton into informal recycling centers, where workers use dangerous techniques to extract valuable metals from old electronics. [8] Some methods include using acid baths to recover metals, chipping and melting plastics without proper ventilation, removing electronic components from circuit boards over coal-fired grills, and disposing unsalvageable material in fields and riverbanks.[9]
Recyclers use wholesale distribution websites to covertly sell stockpiles of electronic waste to unauthorized overseas recycling operations. Once a buyer has been secured, large containers are shipped abroad and smuggled past customs officials. Companies are incentivized to send waste overseas, since lax environmental and labor standards lower the cost of separating out valuable electronic components and disposing of harmful products [4].
Electronics such as cellphones, laptops, TV’s, and batteries all contain materials that are harmful for humans if disposed of improperly. E-waste in landfills can threaten humans through leaching into the soil and groundwater. Lax labor standards in developing nations lead to dangerous working conditions and the direct exposure of processing center workers to hazardous materials.[4] Some of the compounds in these electronics and their associated risks are as follows:
Figure 1: Components of Electronics and their effects on humans and the environment
Soldering of printed circuit boards, inside Cathode Ray Tube(CRT) displays.
Damage to central and peripheral nervous system, can cause high blood pressure, damage to kidneys and liver. Can affect children’s cognitive and behavioral development.
Lead can accumulate in plants and reduce the amount of absorbed light, stunting growth. Can kill populations of bacteria and fungi on leafs and soil. [12]
Used in some rechargeable batteries, semiconductors, and soldering.
Respiratory and kidney problems due to body’s inability to process. Some compounds may be carcinogenic.
Regulations prohibit agricultural procedures in soils with high concentrations. Cadmium can enter through polluted soil and water.
Printed circuit boards, flat screens, wiring boards, and batteries.
Attacks endocrine system, impairs neurological development in children, impairment of peripheral vision.
Fish absorb mercury from sediment in water. Can affect animal immune systems and embryonic development. [15]
Commonly used in cabling and computer housings.
When burned, release dioxins. Can be carcinogenic and affect development and reproduction of humans and animals.
Can bind to dust and soil particles, problematic bio-retention.
Used in printed wiring boards, semiconductors, and solar cells, manufacturing of LCDs.
Can cause nausea, vomiting, hypotension, anemia, headaches, and if consumed in high quantities, death.
Seafood and fish easily absorb arsenic through exposure to water.
Many players in the electronics industry have taken efforts to limit the negative effects of e-waste. Advancements in e-waste management have come from three main areas: consumer awareness, corporate programs, and legislation.
Interest groups have formed to educate consumers on the dangers of improper electronic waste recycling and encourage them not to throw electronics in their typical waste bin. For example, E-cycling Central offers tools such as listings for companies that specialize in e-waste recycling and advertisements for electronics drop-off events.[20] The Electronics Take-Back Coalition ranks manufacturers recycling efforts and has created a scorecard to raise consumer consciousness and potentially impact buying decisions. [21] The Basel Action Network audits recycling companies through its e-Stewards program to inform consumers of reputable drop-off centers. [22]
Figure 2: These companies have initiated programs to encourage e-waste recycling. [21]
Offers recycling of Lexmark printing products through mailback program, but consumers must pay for shipping. No transparency on recycling practices, and limited consumer awareness of the program itself.
Partners with Goodwill for collection sites, making disposal easy and free, but no disclosure of recycling vendors.
Leads the entire industry in number of collection sites and collection volumes. Runs a mail back program, plus drop-off partnership with Goodwill and Staples. Free printer, toner, and ink recycling with purchase of new printer.
Has mailback system that can be coupled with trade-in and cash back promotions. 3rd highest U.S. recycled equipment volume. Consumer Buyback and Planet Partners Recycling program – will take any HP product for free. Charge varying fee for disposal of products from other manufacturers.
Consumers can recycle any large item for $10 by just dropping it off at store locations. Smaller items like computer mice are accepted for free.
In April 2011, the Consumer Electronics Association (CEA) released the e-Cycling Leadership Initiative, creating programs to curb the e-waste problem through corporate involvement. The Initiative set the goal of increasing industry-led e-cycling to one billion pounds annually by 2016, a three-fold increase from current levels. [23] Both manufacturers and retailers of electronics have established e-cycling campaigns. The extent of these programs, as well as their success, varies. Many focus on consumer mail-back of products, and some only accept electronics from certain manufacturers. Figure 2 presents a list of programs offered by several well-known corporations.
Some electronics manufacturers have also attempted to reduce the amount of hazardous waste contained in their products. Companies such as Apple, Dell, and Lenovo transitioned to arsenic and mercury-free LCD monitors in 2009. Rechargeable batteries no longer contain a Nickel-Cadmium compound. Lower risk lithium-ion batteries are the new market standard.[24][25][26]
Lobbying by interest groups such as the Basel Action Network and Greenpeace has led to electronic waste legislation. In 1992, the Basel Convention of 175 countries produced a treaty that restricted the exportation of electronic waste. The United States, however, was one of three participating countries who did not ratify the treaty. [27] More recently, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) banned the exportation of certain electronic parts without government permission. The EPA has also funded grants to groups such as the United Nations University to explore more effective ways to manage e-waste. [28]
As of 2011, 25 states have enacted legislative measures of their own. The majority of these laws place the responsibility on electronics manufacturers, stating that they must pay for proper e-cycling of their products. Signed in 2003, the California state law sets a consumer fee, an Advanced Recycling Fee (ARF) on certain electronics that is then redistributed to recycling companies for proper processing. [29] In Arkansas, legislation dictates that the state government's Department of Environmental Quality must regulate disposal of electronic goods in landfills. [30] Figure 1 outlines the current legislation in the United States.
"Must-Have Culture" & Planned Obsolescence
In the United States, consumers have developed a "Must-Have" culture. This culture is characterized by an insatiable desire for the newest, most advanced technologies. The average American household now owns 24 consumer electronics devices. [31] Despite owning functional units at home, Americans still crave the thinner phones, larger televisions, and faster computers advertised constantly in the media. The willingness to purchase new consumer electronics before the end of a current model's functional life cycle has exacerbated the e-waste epidemic. Psychologists suggest that social phenomena such as the theory of informational cascades may govern the prevalence of consumer electronics fads. [32]
A key component of this consumer culture stems from the planned obsolescence strategies of many technology-based corporations. Planned obsolescence is a business strategy wherein companies plan for a limited product life-cycle [33]. By using this strategy, businesses entice consumers into buying a newer version of an old product. While this method can be profitable for businesses, it is a driving force behind rising e-waste levels.
Some consumers and businesses in developed countries feel that it is not their ethical responsibility to worry about the consequences of e-waste in developing nations, citing the economic impact of the industry in these regions. These opponents argue that informal e-cycling in areas of China and India creates job opportunities otherwise unavailable to local residents, similar to the economic effect of sweatshops in low income countries. [34] They argue that waste stimulates the economy of those areas, although it may come at the expense of resident and environmental well-being.
A debate exists surrounding who should bear the financial burden of e-cycling: electronics manufacturers, consumers, or government. Various interest groups have opposed state and federal e-waste legislation, arguing that these efforts are unfairly biased. In July 2009, the Consumer Electronics Association filed a lawsuit against the New York City Government for its passing of an e-waste law. The CEA claimed the law was unconstitutional because it violated due process and manufacturer rights to equal protection under the law. The law required manufacturers to provide free, door-to-door pickup of e-waste from consumers. After an umbrella New York State e-waste law imposed milder regulations, the sides reached a settlement and the court dismissed the case. [35] Manufacturing companies themselves have also threatened lawsuits against legislation in states such as Washington, complaining that the financial responsibility is unfairly high. [36] The Reason Foundation, an activist group, claims that imposing e-waste regulations on manufacturers limits the innovation capabilities of these corporations. [37]
Consumers also struggle with the cost of proper e-cycling. Many refuse to pay recycling fees when they can deposit their e-waste in traditional trash cans at no cost. Government subsidizing of e-cycling has opponents as well, with arguments that the state and federal government system cannot currently afford e-waste management without cutting more valuable programs.
The vast number of consumer electronics in households today has left consumers questioning how to discard used electronic goods. Many simply hold on to their electronic devices instead of disposing of them. Approximately 9% of electronics sold from 1980-2004 in the United States are still in storage awaiting disposal. [38] Although the recycling of materials such as plastics, glass, and paper has become commonplace, many do not know that electronics are recyclable goods. In 2010, the recycling rates of newspapers and aluminum cans in the U.S. were 72% and 50% respectively. Meanwhile, only 15% of electronic devices and equipment are recycled. [39]
Examining e-waste and current e-cycling practices leads to several lessons that apply to many other sociotechnical intersections. One such lesson is that technological advancement can have unintended consequences that bring about social responsibilities. High-tech innovators intended to improve lives through their consumer electronics products, and yet these goods have brought about an e-waste problem with negative health and environmental effects thousands of miles from where their products were used. This creates a complex social responsibility to ensure that proper e-cycling limits the dangers of electronic waste.
Engineers and technology experts must always consider the full life-cycle of their innovations to avoid these unexpected side effects. Manufacturers can decrease the dangers posed by discarded consumer electronics through reducing the amount of harmful materials contained in these devices. Also, they can extend the life cycle of products and shed planned obsolescence strategies in order to reduce the amount of e-waste. This is generalizable to many cases outside of health and environmental risks from e-waste disposal. Chips and circuits intended for personal computers can become components of third-world land mines, and out-of-use satellites tools for illegitimate armed groups, if their complete life-cycle is not carefully considered and planned. [40]
The web of forces impacting electronic waste demonstrates the inextricable ties between technology and society and reinforces that all stakeholders in technology must not lose sight of the context of their actions. Consumers need to consider whether the "must have" culture propelling their electronics buying decisions is appropriate. Manufacturers, end-users, and government must find an appropriate balance of the financial responsibilities of e-cycling. Awareness of health and environmental concerns posed by e-waste involves education and social activism. Yet all the while, technological changes and improvements can enhance e-cycling efficiency and decrease harmful byproducts. Only when there is mutual adaptation between technology and society can innovation reach its greatest heights.
↑ Wong, M. H., Wu, S. C., Deng, W. J., Yu, X. Z., Luo, Q., Leung, A. O. W., et al. (2007). Export of toxic chemicals - A review of the case of uncontrolled electronic-waste recycling RID B-5313-2009. Environmental Pollution, 149(2), 131-140.
↑ (2011) Statistics on the Management of Used and End-of-Life Electronics, EPA [1]
↑ http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=earth-talk-recycling-e-equipment
↑ a b c (Chi, X., Streicher-Porte, M., Wang, M. Y. L., & Reuter, M. A. (2011). Informal electronic waste recycling: A sector review with special focus on china. Waste Management, 31(4), 731-742.
↑ a b EPA. (2011). Regulations/ Standards http://www.epa.gov/osw/conserve/materials/ecycling/rules.htm
↑ http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/campaigns/toxics/electronics/the-e-waste-problem/where-does-e-waste-end-up/
↑ Electronics Recyclers International, Inc. (2011). http://electronicrecyclers.com/about_eri.aspx
↑ "60 Minutes: The Wasteland." (2009). http://www.cbsnews.com/video/watch/?id=5274959n&tag=contentBody;storyMediaBox
↑ Wong, M. H., Wu, S. C., Deng, W. J., Yu, X. Z., Luo, Q., Leung, A. O. W., . . . Wong, A. S. (2007). Export of toxic chemicals â€“ A review of the case of uncontrolled electronic-waste recycling. Environmental Pollution, 149(2), 131-140. doi:10.1016/j.envpol.2007.01.044 [2]
↑ Meyer, P. A., Brown, M. J., & Falk, H. (2008). Global approach to reducing lead exposure and poisoning. Mutation Research/Reviews in Mutation Research, 659(1-2), 166-175. doi:10.1016/j.mrrev.2008.03.003[4]
↑ (2008) Toxicological Profile for Cadmium, Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry [6]
↑ USGS, (2000), Mercury in the Environment, Fact Sheet 146-00. [8]
↑ EPA, (2007), Vinyl chloride, Hazard Summary [9]
↑ Thompson, W. , Polyvinyl Chloride "PVC" [10]
↑ http://minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/commodity/arsenic/arsenmcs06.pdf
↑ http://www.epa.gov/ttn/atw/hlthef/arsenic.html
↑ Telecommunications Industry Association. (2011). E-cycling Central. http://www.ecyclingcentral.com/
↑ a b Electronics Take-Back Coalition. (2011). Recycling Report Card. http://www.electronicstakeback.com/hold-manufacturers-accountable/recycling-report-card/
↑ http://e-stewards.org/
↑ http://www.ecyclingleadershipinitiative.com/principles.html
↑ http://content.dell.com/us/en/corp/d/corp-comm/earth-greener-products-materials
↑ http://www.apple.com/environment/
↑ http://www.lenovo.com/social_responsibility/us/en/FY2009_Lenovo_Sustainability_Report.pdf
↑ "About the Basel Convention." http://www.ban.org/about-the-basel-convention/
↑ "As E-waste Piles Up, Disposal Issues Grow." USA Today. http://www.usatoday.com/tech/news/2011-06-22-green-tech-recycling_n.htm
↑ "Electronics Reuse and Recycling." (2010) ADEQ. http://www.adeq.state.ar.us/solwaste/branch_recycling/electronics_reuse_and_recycling.htm
↑ eCycling. EPA: http://www.epa.gov/osw/conserve/materials/ecycling/
↑ "A Theory of Fads, Fashion, Custom, and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades." http://www.jstor.org/stable/2138632
↑ http://www.economist.com/node/13354332
↑ http://www.independent.org/publications/working_papers/article.asp?id=1369
↑ Consumer Electronics Association vs. New York City, Retrieved from National Association of Manufacturers: http://lawcenter.nam.org/Results.aspx?P=Consumer%20Electronics%20Association
↑ Harbert, Tam. Tech industry challenges e-cycling programs. (2009). http://www.edn.com/article/459217-Tech_industry_challenges_e_cycling_programs.php
↑ Scarlett, L. E-waste Politics. (2000). Reason Foundation: http://reason.org/news/show/e-waste-politics
↑ Ramzy Kahhat, Junbeum Kim, Ming Xu, Braden Allenby, Eric Williams, Peng Zhang, Exploring e-waste management systems in the United States, Resources, Conservation and Recycling, Volume 52, Issue 7, May 2008, Pages 955-964, ISSN 0921-3449, 10.1016/j.resconrec.2008.03.002.
(http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921344908000360)
↑ U.S. EPA. (2010) Municipal Solid Waste. http://www.epa.gov/osw/nonhaz/municipal/
↑ http://human-rights.unglobalcompact.org/dilemmas/product-misuse/
These are the requirements for the "Ranger" Investiture Achievement Award. They are divided up into their respective categories:
(There is the interesting but impractical philosophical point that the
There are ways of dealing with the solvent medium problem, none of them
Read the electrochemistry and ionic atmosphere sections of Atkins'
This is like a jelly which can be electrostatically strained by non zero
The dielectric constant, a dimensionless number which is a ratio of electrical
Large numbers are polar solvents. Small numbers apolar. Large numbers mean that the Coulomb terms are attenuated and though the energy still goes off as 1/r the values
The following table is a conflation of data from the following primary and secondary sources which need to be consulted over the precise values to use in research.
M. Witanowski, W. Sicinska, Z. Biedrzycka, Z. Grabowski,
P. W. Atkins, Physical Chemistry, Oxford University Press (4th Edition);
The numbers do not always agree, even though they nominally have up three decimal points of accuracy. A single list of recommended numbers has somewhat arbitarially been chosen from the above sources.
Table of Relative permittivities, (dielectric constant), at 25 deg. C.
Carbon tetrachloride 2.21 Nitrobenzene34.82
Benzene 2.25 CH3CN 36.05
CH2Cl2 8.54 Water78.54
The molecule lives in a shape where the dielectric is 1, i.e. free
Such a calculation would allow the prediction of the
The solvation model for Macromodel uses functional
For some molecular mechanics application, particularly the calculation
A true quantum treatment would allow for the internal
At the edge of Biology, Genomics and Proteomics
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
A Quadratic Polytopic Stabilization Controller Synthesis can be done using this LMI, requiring the information about
3 The Optimization and LMI:LMI for Controller Synthesis using the theorem of Polytopic Quadratic Stability
.
The matrices necessary for this LMI are
The Optimization and LMI:LMI for Controller Synthesis using the theorem of Polytopic Quadratic Stability
.
The Controller gain matrix is extracted as
Note that here the controller doesn't depend on
If you want K to depend on
This implementation requires Yalmip and Sedumi.
LMI Methods in Optimal and Robust Control - A course on LMIs in Control by Matthew Peet.
LMI Properties and Applications in Systems, Stability, and Control Theory - A List of LMIs by Ryan Caverly and James Forbes.
LMIs in Systems and Control Theory - A downloadable book on LMIs by Stephen Boyd.
Description: The Rambouillet is also known as the Rambouillet Merino or the French Merino.
The breed is well known for its wool, but also for its meat, both lamb and mutton. It has been described as a dual-purpose breed, with superior wool and near-mutton breed characteristics.
Starting from the following position, white starts and wins in fourteen moves.
Authored by I. Kling.
Machine code is a binary programming language and is the form most easily processed by a CPU. Each line of code contains an operator (a binary representation of an instruction) and an operand (the data to be opererated on by the given instruction).
Assembly language is an intermediate stage between machine code and high-level language and can usually be converted to machine code by a direct translation. Like machine code, an assembly language instruction contains an operator and one or more operands.
The exact range of instructions available to a processor will vary for each processor. However there are four different types of instructions available to any given processor:
Data transfer instructions are used to move data between registers and between registers and main memory.
Arithmetic instructions can be used to perform arithmetic functions on the contents of the registers. Some processors allow a range of arithmetic instructions such as addition, subtraction, multiplication, division and incrementation. Some others only allow addition and subtraction.
Only when there are one or more 1s in a comparison is the answer one.
Flip the 1s to 0s and the 0s to 1s. Useful for Two's Complement.
So to convert from ASCII to binary we need to mask out the first four bits of the binary representation and maintain the last four bits. There are several ways to do this.
Note that we have set the last four bits to 1, try converting another ASCII number and see if this mask works for all of them?
Note that we only set the two bits different between the ASCII and binary to 1. Try this mask for other ASCII numbers
AND, if you want to keep a part of a number, AND 1 with it. If you want to blank out part of a number, AND 0 with it.
OR, if you want to keep a part of a number, OR 0 with it. If you want to set part of a number, OR 1 with it.
The exam may ask you questions where you have to build a mask for a particular number, checking for ones and zeros as well as ignoring contents of certain cells. Below is a quick crib table (X = don't care about the input)
If you place any other input into the equation other than the desired input the result will come out incorrect. You can now compare this with the number
You are allowed to input the following number only
, write some assembly language to check that this works correctly.
Try writing the OR version of the above code.
If you look at the binary representations of the following numbers you will notice something peculiar:
Each time we shift the number one space to the left, the value of the number doubles. This doesn't only work for one bit, take a look at this more complicated example.
Again, one shift to the left and the number has doubled. On the other hand, one shift to the right halves the value.
Computers are notoriously bad at doing multiplication and division, it takes lots of CPU time and can really slow your code down. To try and get past this problem computers can shift the values in registers and as long as multiplication or division is by powers of 2, then the CPU time is reduced as the action takes only one line of Machine Code. There are three main types of shifts that processors can perform:
Shifting either left or right, you add a 0 on the empty end.
You maintain the sign bit of the number being shifted. Generally only shifts right
Please note the Logical shift example is also an example of an arithmetic shift as the sign remains the same
The bit that is pushed off one end appears on the other
Test and branch instructions are used to test whether a given condition is true or not and then branch to a given instruction depending on the outcome of the test. This makes conditional statements and interation possible.
Computers understand instructions in things called words. In a computing context a word is the number of bits a computer can execute at one time. You will get processors that can understand different word sizes, for example the processor on the Sony PlayStation had a 32 bit word size. Sony decided to make the PlayStation 2 better than the original and the word size of the PlayStation 2 was 128 bits. Generally larger word sizes mean faster and more complex CPUs.
The word that a computer can understand is made up of two parts. The first is the type of instruction, or the opcode, the second part contains the variable(s) on which the instruction will execute, or the operand. The operand is sometimes called the address and the following section will explain how a computer can use the operand in different ways.
This type of instruction takes no parameters and involves Assembly code that doesn't need variables. For example:
INC - increment the accumulator by 1
This type of instruction is very useful when you are dealing with only one general purpose register (the accumulator) and takes only one operand. For example
LDA #34 - load the accumulator with the denary value of 34
ADD 234 - add the value stored at memory location 234 to the accumulator
This type of instruction can accept two operands and the complexity of operations increases. For example
ADD R1, R2 - add R1 to R2 and store the result back into R1
There are different methods that a processor can use to calculate the memory address of the instruction being processed or the data being operated on. These are referred to as addressing modes.
This is the addressing mode you have been used to using so far, where the data being operated on is given in the instruction.
LDA	#35	;Load the number 35 immediately into the accumulator.
This is similar to direct address, although instead of the instruction giving the address of the data it gives an address where the address to the data is held.
For example. If memory location A0 contained “F1” and memory location F1 contained “42” then to load 42 in to the accumulator the instruction would be:
LDA	(&A0)	;Loads the contents of address given at &A0 in to acc
JMP	+10	;branch to the instruction held 10 bytes on.
If this instruction was held at location 1 then it would jump to location 11.
This type of addressing combines the specified with the address held in another location.
LDA &12,B	;loads acc with contents of the address formed by adding the contents of B with the hex address 12.
In this example the address &12 would be added to the address held in B to find the address of the data to be loaded in to the accumulator.
This form of addressing is similar to base register addressing, except that the base addresses are held in an index register. If using this addressing format then the address of an operand can be changed by changing the contents of the index register.
A story to help you tell the difference
There was once a gangster called the Accumulator, pretty cool name huh? He had a lot of 'business' that he was involved in and had to be paid accordingly. He liked to be paid in several different ways. These were immediately, directly, indirectly, indexed and relative.
When he was paid immediately his goon would give him the money there and then, he got it without having to go find it or solve any clues, he got it immediately.
When he was paid directly he had to do a little bit of work, all across town he had lots of Post boxes that his clients would drop off payments in. He would be given the name of a particular post box and know that if he went there he would find the cash he wanted. He was directed to the cash.
You must understand that the Accumulator had other business friends who were up to some dodgy business and preferred to remain as hidden as possible in their business dealings to keep the cops off their tracks. To do this they used a clever system of putting the money in a post box but instead of directly giving the Accumulator the address they instead gave the Accumulator the address of a postbox that contained the address of the real postbox. They gave him the address indirectly. Sounds a little confusing? Don't worry, hopefully this short transcript will sort things out
The Accumulator opens the postbox at 304 and finds a note saying go to 706
When he gets to 706 he finds the money he was looking for
Business for a gangster is not always straight forward and occasionally they have to solve a clue or two to get their money, a bit like in the movies. In the case of an Indexed payment, Accumulator is given a clue to solve, he knows the base address and someone provides a value that must be added to the base value. He adds these two together and bingo he finds the address at which the money he is owed is stored.
"Boss the base address you need is 7987"
"Boss our sources say that the house your money is stored at is 5 houses up from the base address"
Computers can understand only 1s and 0s. To get computers to understand what we want them to do we must get our ideas into these 1s and 0s. You can use High level languages or the low level language of Assembly. In Assembly code every line of code will generally transfer into one line of machine code. Assembly is used in industry to program low level routines and functions and the code produced is usually simple but long.
An instruction set is the range of different instructions that a CPU can understand. There are two schools of thought, the RISC and the CISC. The RISC - reduced instruction set computer has a small number of different instructions it can perform but it generally does them very fast and efficiently. CISC - complex instruction set computer has a large number of different instructions it can perform but often not as fast as executing them as an equivalent RISC.
For the exam you need to know some basic Assembly instructions that a CPU can understand. We will now look at a range of instructions and then some examples of their use.
'AND' the accumulator with the value 01001001 storing the result in the accumulator
'OR' the accumulator with the value 01001001 storing the result in the accumulator
'XOR' the accumulator with the value 01001001 storing the result in the accumulator
Move the contents of register R1 into register R2
In the examinations you will be often asked to take a piece of pseudo or real code and convert it into assembly. To make sure the examiner knows what you are doing always write comments with your code. Below are some examples of pseudo code along side their assembly equivalents
Provide assembly code that will complete the following tasks:
Hexdump is a command-line tool used to show the raw bytes of a file in various ways including hexadecimal, available on Linux, FreeBDS, OS X, and other platforms. Hexdump is not part of traditional Unix systems or GNU commands.
-b: One-byte octal display.
-c: One-byte character display.
-C: Canonical hex+ASCII display.
-d: Two-byte decimal display.
-e format_string: Format the data as specified in the format string.
-f format_file: Use newline-separated format strings from the file.
-n length: Process only length bytes of input.
-o: Two-byte octal display.
-s offset: Ignore offset bytes from the beginning of the input.
-v: Use unabbreviated display rather than displaying some sequences merely as *.
-x: Two-byte hexadecimal display.
Shows the bytes in hexadecimal using capitalized letters, each byte separated by a space. The first "" specifies and empty prefix, while the last " " specifies a single-space suffix.
A different version of hexdump for MS Windows is available from GnuWin32 project.
Feigning is an excellent technique, and when used sparingly will almost always catch your opponent off guard. The great thing about feigning is that it can be applied to almost everything in this Wikibook so far.
A basic, but very effective, feign is the placement of your service. Very few players will look at your paddle to determine where the shot will go. Absolutely critical to making the feign believable is your eyes. You must look at where you want your opponent to think the shot is going to go. Also important, but usually only caught by players who have had feigns used on them for a while, is not interrupting your service routine. Don't change anything, and your opponent won't know when to expect a feign.
Rally feigning is a bit different from service feigning. It is more versatile, however. A common feign is used when performing the runaround. After settling into the forehand-backhand pattern, interrupt it by hitting to the same side (instead of the opposite side) that your opponent returned from. This works flawlessly on unanticipating opponents.
Feigning spin is more complicated than feigning placement. First, your opponent must be advanced enough to recognize spin. If you can convince your opponent that you always spin, you can win critical points by not spinning the shot. They will anticipate the spin and either completely miss the ball or miss the sweet spot.
Things did not go well for the Italians in North Africa almost from the start. Within a week of Italy's declaration of war on June 10, 1940, the British 11th Hussars had seized Fort Capuzzo in Libya. In an ambush east of Bardia, the British captured the Italian Tenth Army's Engineer-in-Chief, General Lastucci. On June 28, Marshal Italo Balbo, the Governor-General of Libya and apparent heir to Mussolini, was killed by friendly fire while landing in Tobruk.
Mussolini ordered Balbo's replacement, Marshal Rodolfo Graziani, to launch an attack into Egypt immediately. Graziani was the commander of the Italian Tenth Army in Libya. He complained to Mussolini that his forces were not properly equipped for such an operation. Graziani further complained that an attack into Egypt could not possibly succeed. Mussolini ordered Graziani to attack anyway.
At the time, General Wavell's Middle East Command included some 36,000 troops (including support and administration units) based within Egypt to defend against 250,000 Italian Invaders. On September 13, a large element of Graziani's Italian Tenth Army re-took Fort Capuzzo and crossed the border between Libya and Egypt. The Italian advance proved to be a struggle. One division got lost, and many engines over-heated. On the opening day of the offensive, the Italians dropped paratroopers into Sollum. The British, being greatly outnumbered, left mines and retreated. After four more days, Graziani halted the advance, citing supply problems. During this time the Italians captured a number of British airfields. Despite Mussolini urging Graziani to continue the advance, the Italians dug in at Sidi Barrani and established several fortified camps. Graziani was now 60 miles in Egypt and 80 miles west of the British defences at Mersa Matruh. He planned to return to the offensive after his troops had been resupplied. During the offensive, 120 Italians and 40 British were killed.
Starting in June 1940, the Italians tested the resolve of the British and Commonwealth forces along the borders of the Sudan and Kenya and in the shipping lanes of the Red Sea.
On June 13, early in the morning, three Italian Caproni bombers appeared and bombed the Rhodesian air base at the fort located at Wajir in Kenya. The Rhodesian aircraft were still warming up and preparing to take-off on a dawn patrol. The Capronis bombed the fort, the landing-ground, and nearby housing. The King's African Rifles (KAR), then garrisoning the fort, lost four killed and eleven wounded. Two Rhodesian aircraft were badly damaged and a large dump of aviation fuel was set on fire. Following this, the air base at Wajir received regular visits from the Italians every second or third day and the Rhodesian pilots were made to realize the significant shortcomings in speed and fire-power of the Hawker Hardys they themselves flew.
At dawn on June 17, the Rhodesians struck back and supported a successful raid by the KAR on the Italian desert outpost of El Wak in Italian Somaliland, some ninety miles northeast of Wajir. The Rhodesians bombed and set alight the thatched mud huts and generally harassed the enemy troops. But, since the main fighting at that time was centered around Italian advances towards Moyale in Kenya, the Rhodesians concentrated on that town. In conjunction with the South African Air Force, the Rhodesians undertook the task of reconnaissance and bombing in that disputed area.
Early in July, Italian forces in Eritrea crossed the Sudan border and forced the small British garrison holding the railway junction at Kassala to withdraw. The Italians also seized the small British fort at Gallabat, just over the border from Metemma, some 200 miles (320 km) to the south of Kassala. Even the villages of Ghezzan, Kurmuk and Dumbode on the blue Nile were conquered. Having taken Kassala and Gallabat, however, the Italians decided to venture no further - because of lack of fuel - and they proceeded to fortify Kassala with anti-tank defences, machine-gun posts, and strong-points. The Italians sent a brigade-strong garrison to Kassala.
In Kenya, after heavy fighting, the Italians occupied "Fort Harrington" in Moyale. At the end of July, Italian forces reached Debel and Buna. These small villages, nearly one-hundred kilometers from the Ethiopian-Kenyan border, were to be the deepest points inside Kenya reached by the Italian army.
In the first days of August, an Italian force of irregular Eritreans raided Port Sudan as a prelude to the Italian campaign to conquer British Somaliland.
On August 3, 1940, approximately 25,000 Italian troops invaded British Somaliland. The Italians were commanded by General Guglielmo Nasi.
The Italian force attacking British Somaliland in August included five colonial brigades, three Blackshirt battalions, and three bands (banda) of native troops. The Italians had armoured vehicles (a small number of both light and medium tanks), artillery, and, for the moment, superior air support.
The Italians were opposed by a British contingent of about four-thousand men consisting of the Somaliland Camel Corps (commanded by Colonel Arthur Reginald Chater), elements of the 2nd (Nyasaland) Battalion King's African Rifles (KAR) and the 1st Battalion Northern Rhodesian Regiment, the 3rd Battalion 15th Punjab Regiment, and the 2nd Battalion Black Watch.
The Italians advanced in three columns, with the western column advancing towards Zeila, the central column towards Hargeisa, and the eastern column towards Odweina in the south. Lieutenant-General Carlo De Simone commanded the strong central column. Colonel Chater, used his camel corps to skirmish with and screen against the advancing Italians as the other British and Commonwealth forces pulled back towards Tug Argan.
On August 5, within two days of the invasion, the towns of Zeila and Hargeisa were taken. The occupation of Zeila effectively sealed British Somaliland off from French Somaliland. Odweina fell the following day and the Italian central and eastern columns combined to launch attacks against the main British and Commonwealth positions at Tug Argan.
On August 7 the British and Commonwealth forces in British Somaliland received reinforcements with the arrival of the 1st Battalion 2nd Punjab Regiment. On August 11, a new commander, Major-General Reade Godwin-Austen, reached Tug Argan.
But, early on August 15, Godwin-Austen concluded that further resistance to the Italians would be futile in Tug Argan. He contacted the British Middle East Command headquarters in Cairo, Egypt. Godwin-Austen requested and received permission to withdraw his forces from British Somaliland. The determined effort of the Black Watch battalion, which covered the retreat, allowed the entire British and Commonwealth contingent to withdraw to Berbera with reduced losses. By August 17, most of the contigent was successfully evacuated from Berbera to Aden. Rather than evacuate, the Somaliland Camel Corps was disbanded.
4.1. Rivers, Lakes, Aquifers
4.4. Education and Training
4.6. Water Law and Policy
4.7. Best Practices and Examples
4.8. Plans and Proposals
4.9. Major Water Projects
4.12. Data and Maps
4.14. History and Culture
Ventilation primarily takes two forms – natural and mechanical. Natural ventilation is the process of fresh air entering a building via a window, door or other opening while mechanical ventilation is air that is drawn into the building using machinery (typically fans).
Good ventilation is essential to human well being, the provision of fresh air in replacement of stale air maintains the correct levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the air, and removes odours, bacteria, excess heat and other atmospheric contaminants. It also prevents condensation, which is caused by excess humidity. The capability of a ventilation system for an individual room is usually measured according to how many ‘changes of air’ it is capable of per hour, that is how many times all the air in the room can be completely replaced. The amount of ventilation required varies considerably depending on what the space is used for; an office will typically need far fewer changes of air than a kitchen or factory.
Natural ventilation systems have many advantages over mechanical ones. The most obvious is perhaps that mechanical systems use a considerable amount of electricity while natural ones are effectively ‘free’. There are also considerable capital costs in installing mechanical systems. Many people prefer opening a window to having forced air and natural systems are easier to control locally, i.e. by opening or closing a window as required. On the other hand, mechanical systems have distinct advantages over natural systems as well. Natural ventilation is generally not effective in buildings with a large floor plan and opening windows to get fresh air while heating systems are operational wastes energy. Air brought in via mechanical systems can be heated or cooled and the humidity can also be controlled. This can avoid the need for separate heaters or air conditioners. Mechanically drafted air is also generally filtered so is arguably purer than natural air.
Typology • 16. Historical Linguistics • 17. Dialectology and Creoles • 18. Sociolinguistics • 18. Anthropological Linguistics
Pragmatics adds the importance of context to the study of language. Discourse analysis takes things further, studying communication, such as dialogue or written texts.
Coherence vs. Cohesion
The use of connectives (but, if, however)
The use of anaphora and definite expressions to refer to previously mentioned concepts (the man, it)
The correct use of tenses and moods (He had done this before, but this time, the situation was different).
But a cohesive text is not necessarily coherent:
Firstly, red apples are red. Secondly, such apples are very tasty. Moreover, tastiness is quite subjective. Subjectivity affects our perception of apples.
This is a very cohesive text, but not coherent in the least. Coherence is more than linguistic: It requires extralinguistic knowledge to judge whether a piece of discourse 'makes sense'. By contrast, a text can be coherent yet not cohesive. In the next section, we will see some of these situations, when we deal with the flouting of maxims.
The play begins, set shortly after the death of the Roman emperor, with his two sons, Saturninus and Bassianus, squabbling over who will succeed him.
An example may assist in the understanding of this concept. In Texas Holdem it is quite common for someone to flop 4 to a flush. The person should only draw to that flush if to do so would be +EV. In order to calculate the EV it is necessary to compare the size of the bet with the size of the pot. A flopped flush draw will come in approximately 1 in 3 times by the river, thus in order for a call to be +EV the final pot must be larger than 3 times the call. This is a complicated issue so it may be useful to elaborate with a specific example.
Notice that all that has been done so far is compare the current pot with the bet size needed to call to calculate EV. However it is important to also compare the expected pot size by the end of the hand with the current bet. For example say you are playing no limit holdem and have a gutshot straight draw (giving you 4 outs to complete - approximately 1:12 against). If the pot is $30 and you are faced with a $10 bet the pot is not giving you the correct odds to call (it would need to be $120 total, plus your $10 call). However you also need to take into account the amount of money you may be able to extract from your opponents if you make your hand. If you expect your opponent to call a $100 bet if you make your hand, then the pot is really offering you 13:1 odds (the $30 pot at the time plus the $100 added on later streets) Therefore in this situation the +EV play would be to call. Thus when making decisions about whether to call a bet it is crucial to take into account both the stack sizes of yourself and your opponents and how willing they are likely to be to call big bets if you make your hand.
To make it easier to understand why this move is correct even though it usually loses, suppose you have a six-sided die. If you correctly guess what side it lands on, you will win $50. If you are wrong, you lose $5. You will be wrong five times out of six, but you stand to gain a lot over the long run! This is because the probability of guessing correctly is 1/6, sometimes expressed as odds, "5:1 against" (five losing possibilities, one winning possibility). However, the payoff odds are 50:5 ($50 won for a $5 bet), which can be reduced to 10:1, and 10:1 is twice as large as 5:1. The payoff odds are called pot odds in a poker game. Comparing the odds of winning to the pot odds is how you can estimate your expected value.
Ideally, you want to avoid all situations where you have a negative expectation. Even slightly negative situations can pile up and bleed away your bankroll. Casinos worldwide make MILLIONS of dollars lost by players against a 0.6% craps dice game house edge: even 0.1% is enough of an edge to wipe out all the billions of dollars of the richest man on earth, over time in the long run, which is why Bill Gates wisely bets only $5/hand for fun at blackjack!
You cannot always get a good idea of the chances of winning your hand & calculate the pot odds: at least, not without knowing what your opponents have, and they're not going to tell you! However, you will often have a draw which, if you hit, you will very likely win the pot. The exact arithmetic involved varies from game to game. In Texas hold'em and Omaha, once you see the flop, the percent chance of making your hand within one card is generally your number of outs (cards that will make your hand) multiplied by two, and the odds of making your hand within two cards is your number of outs multiplied by four. For example, if you have four hearts and you need one more for a flush, you have nine outs, because there are thirteen hearts in the deck, and subtracting the four hearts you already have gives nine. 9 × 2 is 18, so you have about an 18% chance of making the hand in the next card, and 9 × 4 is 36, so you have about a 36% chance of making it in two cards.
To make this easy, you want to turn this percent chance into odds, like 5:1 against. Fortunately, they are easy enough to memorize:
The odds in bold are the most important to commit to memory; the others can be easily estimated.
Now, take the x in the x:1 figure and multiply it by the bet size. For example, if the odds of making your hand are roughly 4:1, and the next bet costs $5, multiply 5 × 4 = 20. That means you want there to be at least $20 in the pot (be sure to include bets that have not been added to the pot proper yet!), preferably a bit more just in case unless you're certain to win if you hit your draw. If there is not at least $20 in the pot you will lay down your hand, unless you can check instead. If the table is really loose, and a lot of players are in the hand and are likely to stay in, and the pot will get really big, you may even want to raise. Normally, however, checking or calling is the correct move.
Notice we did not calculate the exact expected value. This is not necessary or indeed practical for most people. If it is negative, you get out, and if it is positive, you call. If you're a favorite to win the pot, you raise. However, as has been shown you can usually figure out if the value is only barely positive, for instance, the size of the pot is a dollar more than the odds of making your hand (and this dollar is small in proportion to the pot size). When faced with this situation, you might want to lay down your hand sometimes: you may be losing just a little money in the long run, but you keep your bankroll from taking big swings. But if you don't mind taking a gamble, by all means go for it!
Hitting the middle part of the sole of the feet with the fist can boost blood circulation. It is a good exercise for the health.
To partially simulate the labeled loop feature found in other languages.
Some languages, such as Java and Perl, support labeled looping constructs. In these languages, break and continue keywords can optionally specify a previously-defined loop label to control the flow of the program. A labeled break brings the control-flow out of the specified loop and similarly, a labeled continue starts with the next iteration. Labels allow breaking and continuing not just the innermost loop, but any outer loop that is labeled. Labeled break and continue can improve the readability and flexibility of complex code which uses nested loops. Named loop idiom in C++ provides partial support for this feature.
The named loop idiom is implemented using gotos. Macros are used to hide the explicit use of gotos, which is often frowned upon.
Only labeled break statements can be simulated using the following two parameterized macros.
The named(X) macro defines two goto labels X and X_skip. The break macro is a simple goto to the X_skip label.
An example follows.
The gotos do not interfere with the proper construction and destruction of objects as confirmed by the output of the above program.
What are Determiners?
Determiners are a class of words that span over several types of words, such as pronouns and adjectives, which are used to specify nouns. These primarily act like adjectives in general, and include words like my, this, every, no, each, as well as question determiners that can be used to begin interrogative sentences and specify nouns in declarative sentences, such as what, which and who.
Declension?
~ mitmes?
The following words are included in this lesson, but are not Determiners because they are standalone words. However, some may be composed of determiners.
Nominative Nouns preceded by an ordinal determiner (1st, 2nd, 3rd, first, last, every etc.) are written in the Nominative. The determiner (e.g. number) will decline along with the noun in all other cases.
The Accusative case (III) marks the partitive in Estonian, and the partitive is used when talking about several (plural) of something (preceded by a cardinal determiner). In this case, the Nominative becomes the Accusative, but all other cases remain the same:
.paari + .kassi = .kolme .kassi
Siin on paar õuna
Some cats know how to do this
Ma kuulen mõnda inimest
Kumba sa tahad?
Kas see peab selline olema?
Does it have to be like that?
Ma ei näe kumbagi kirja
The Java Persistence Query Language (JPQL) is the query language defined by JPA. JPQL is similar to SQL, but operates on objects, attributes and relationships instead of tables and columns. JPQL can be used for reading (SELECT), as well as bulk updates (UPDATE) and deletes (DELETE). JPQL can be used in a NamedQuery (through annotations or XML) or in dynamic queries using the EntityManager createQuery() API.
For the JPQL BNF see BNF.
Aggregation functions can include summary information on a set of objects. These include MIN, MAX, AVG, SUM, COUNT. These functions can be used to return a single result, or can be used with a GROUP BY to return multiple results.
The NEW operator can be used with the fully qualified class name to return data objects from a JPQL query. These will not be managed objects, and the class must define a constructor that matches the arguments of the constructor and their types. Constructor queries can be used to select partial data or reporting data on objects, and get back a class instance instead of an object array.
The FROM clause defines what is being queried. A typical FROM clause will contain the entity name being queried and assign it an alias.
JPQL allows for multiple root level objects to be queried. Caution should be used when doing this, as it can result in Cartesian products of the two table. The WHERE clause should ensure the two objects are joined in some way.
The entity name used in JPQL comes from the name attribute of the @Entity annotation or XML. It defaults to the simple entity class name. Some JPA providers also allow for the full class name.
EclipseLink : TopLink - allow for the fully qualified class name of the entity to be used.
A JOIN clause can also be used in the FROM clause. The JOIN clause allows any of the object's relationships to be joined into the query so they can be used in the WHERE clause. JOIN does not mean the relationships will be fetched, unless the FETCH option is included.
JOIN can be used with OneToOne, ManyToOne, OneToMany, ManyToMany and ElementCollection mappings. When used with a collection relationship you can join the same relationship multiple times to query multiple independent values.
The FETCH option can be used on a JOIN to fetch the related objects in a single query. This avoids additional queries for each of the object's relationships, and ensures that the relationships have been fetched if they were LAZY.
EclipseLink : TopLink - allow an alias.
By default all joins in JPQL are INNER joins. This means that results that do not have the relationship will be filtered from the query results. To avoid this, a join can be defined as an OUTER join using the LEFT options.
The join condition used for a join comes from the mapping's join columns. This means that the JPQL user is normally free from having to know how every relationship is joined. In some cases it is desirable to append additional conditions to the join condition, normally in the case of outer joins. This can be done through the ON clause. The ON clause is defined in the JPA 2.1 specifiation, and may be supported by some JPA providers.
EclipseLink : Hibernate : TopLink - support the ON clause.
JPA does not support sub-selects in the FROM clause. Some JPA providers may support this.
EclipseLink : TopLink - support sub-selects in the FROM clause.
ORDER BY allows the ordering of the results to be specified. Multiple values can be ordered, either ascending (ASC) or descending (DESC).
The JPA 1.0 and 2.0 BNFs restrict the usage of functions and sub-selects in the ORDER BY, but the JPA 2.1 draft removes most of these.
EclipseLink : TopLink - allows functions, sub-selects, NULLS FIRST/LAST, object expressions, and other operations in the ORDER BY clause.
GROUP BY allows for summary information to be computed on a set of objects. GROUP BY is normally used in conjunction with aggregation functions.
The HAVING clause allows for the results of a GROUP BY to be filtered.
EclipseLink : TopLink - support UNION, INTERSECT, and EXCEPT.
The WHERE clause is normally the main part of the query as it defines the conditions that filter what is returned. The WHERE clause can use any comparison operation, logical operation, functions, attributes, objects, and sub-selects. The comparison operations include =, <, >, <=, >=, <>, LIKE, BETWEEN, IS NULL, and IN. NOT can also be used with any comparison operation (NOT LIKE, NOT BETWEEN, IS NOT NULL, NOT IN). The logical operations include AND, OR, and NOT.
e.firstName = 'Bob'
e.salary > :sal
e.firstName BETWEEN 'A' AND 'C'
e.firstName IN ('Bob', 'Fred', 'Joe')
e.firstName IN (:name1, :name2, :name3)
A sub-select can be used with any operation provided it returns a single value, or if the ALL or ANY options are used. ALL indicates the operation must be true for all elements returned by the sub-select, ANY indicates the operation must be true for any of the elements returned by the sub-select.
You can perform bulk update of entities with the UPDATE statement. This statement operates on a single entity type and sets one or more single-valued properties of the entity subject to the condition in the WHERE clause. Update queries provide an equivalent to the SQL UPDATE statement, but with JPQL conditional expressions.
Update queries do not allow joins, but do support sub-selects. OneToOne and ManyToOne relationships can be traversed in the WHERE clause. Collection relationships can still be queried through using an EXISTS in the WHERE clause with a sub-select. Update queries can only update attributes of the object or its embeddables, its relationships cannot be updated. Complex update queries are dependent on the database's update support, and may make use of temp tables on some databases.
The persistence context is not updated to reflect results of update operations. If you use a transaction-scoped persistence context, you should either execute the bulk operation in a transaction all by itself, or be the first operation in the transaction. That is because any entity actively managed by the persistence context will remain unaware of the actual changes occurring at the database level.
Delete queries do not allow joins, but do support sub-selects. OneToOne and ManyToOne relationships can be traversed in the WHERE clause. Collection relationships can still be queried through using an EXISTS in the WHERE clause with a sub-select. Complex delete queries are dependent on the database's delete support, and may make use of temp tables on some databases.
Delete queries are polymorphic: any entity subclass instances that meet the criteria of the delete query will be deleted. However, delete queries do not honor cascade rules: no entities other than the type referenced in the query and its subclasses will be removed, even if the entity has relationships to other entities with cascade removes enabled. Delete queries will delete the rows from join and collection tables.
The persistence context may not be updated to reflect results of delete operations. If you use a transaction-scoped persistence context, you should either execute the bulk operation in a transaction all by itself, or be the first operation in the transaction. That is because any entity actively managed by the persistence context will remain unaware of the actual changes occurring at the database level.
Literal values can be in-lined in JPQL for standard Java types. In general it is normally better to use parameters instead of in-lining values. In-lined arguments will prevent the JPQL from benefiting from the EclipseLink's JPQL parser cache, and can potentially make the application vulnerable to JPQL injections attacks.
Each Java types defines its own in-lining syntax:
To define a ' (quote) character in a string, the quote is double quoted, i.e. 'Baie-D''Urfé'.
JPQL supports several database functions. These functions are database independent in name and syntax, but require database support. If the database supports an equivalent function or different syntax the standard JPQL function is supported, if the database does not provide any way to perform the function, then it is not supported. For mathematical functions (+, -, /, *) BEDMAS rules apply. Some JPA provider may support additional functions.
EclipseLink : TopLink - also support CAST, EXTRACT, and REGEXP.
JPQL defines several special operators that are not database functions, but have special meaning in JPQL. These include INDEX, KEY, SIZE, IS EMPTY, TYPE, FUNCTION and TREAT.
Functions are named blocks of program code that perform a specific task and return a result. The task can be as simple as adding two numbers or as complex as launching a spacecraft. A subroutine is like a function, just that it does not return a result.
Public Function Sum(ByRef Number1 As Double, ByRef Number2 As Double) As Double
'Return the result by writing it to a variable having the same name as the function
Public Sub Tell(ByVal MyString1 as String, ByVal MyString2 as String)
The arguments to the function are declared as ByRef which requires the compiler to make sure that only arguments of the specified type are used, in this case Double.
The function returns a value by assigning it to the function name as though the function were a variable. This contrasts with the use of the keyword return in many other languages.
'On the next line, argument order matters
Tell "Hello there.", ""
'On the next line, names of arguments are used and argument order does not matter.
Tell MyString1:="Hello there,", MyString2:=" again."
The arguments (argument list) passed to a function must be enclosed in round brackets, whereas those supplied to a subroutine need not.
Each function and subroutine has the following parts, some of the optional:
Public, Friend or Private
Sub, Function, Property Let, Property Get, Property Set
A freely chosen name that starts with a letter and contains only letters, numbers and underscores.
A list of the items of data that the procedure reads or writes into.
For a Function or Property Get, the data type returned, such as Double or String.
All the statements that do the work.
Only the Name and the Procedure Type are mandatory. Of course, a procedure without a body doesn't do anything.
This seems like a very unimportant part of a procedure declaration to
(Private), some only for use in this component (Friend) or
Marking a procedure Private also means that you can have another
Use Exit Function or Exit Sub to terminate a procedure in the middle, like this:
If n = 0 Or n = 1 Then
' Now compute fat ...
All procedures are either functions that return a result as the value of the function, or subroutines that are called for their side effects. To return a value, you can use both, but with subroutine, you need to do it via an argument:
Private Function FunctionHalf(ByRef y as Double) as Double
Private Sub SubroutineHalf(ByRef y As Double, ByRef Result As Double)
The two procedures do essentially the same thing, that is, divide a number by two. The Function version does it by assigning the new value to the name of the function while the Sub version assigns it to the name of one of the arguments. This affects how you use them.
The function version can be used in an expression as follows:
To use the subroutine to return value, you need to store the value in a variable, like this:
Debug.Print nHalf
Generally, you use a Function when the result is a single thing (number, string, object) and a Sub when you either want to return several distinct things or nothing at all.
Properties are also a form of procedure. Property Get is a function; Property Let and Property Set are subroutines. For more discussion of Properties, see the Object Oriented Programming chapter.
You can specify optional arguments and default values:
Function MySum(i1, i2, Optional i3)
'Default value for Separator specified
MyConcatenate = String1 & Separator & String2
Debug.Print MyConcatenate("Hello", "World")
Debug.Print MyConcatenate("Hello", "World", ", ")
Once an argument is declared optional, all arguments at the right of it have to be declared optional as well.
Using Optional Arguments, Office 2000, msdn.microsoft.com
Data modelling is the first step in the process of database design. This step is sometimes considered to be a high-level and abstract design phase, also referred to as conceptual design. The aim of this phase is to describe:
The data contained in the database (e.g., entities: students, lecturers, courses, subjects)
The relationships between data items (e.g., students are supervised by lecturers; lecturers teach courses)
The constraints on data (e.g., student number has exactly eight digits; a subject has four or six units of credit only)
In the second step, the data items, the relationships and the constraints are all expressed using the concepts provided by the high-level data model. Because these concmepts do not include the implementation details, the result of the data modelling process is a (semi) formal representation of the database structure. This result is quite easy to understand so it is used as reference to make sure that all the user’s requirements are met.
The third step is database design. During this step, we might have two sub-steps: one called database logical design, which defines a database in a data model of a specific DBMS, and another called database physical design, which defines the internal database storage structure, file organization or indexing techniques. These two sub-steps are database implementation and operations/user interfaces building steps.
In the database design phases, data are represented using a certain data model. The data model is a collection of concepts or notations for describing data, data relationships, data semantics and data constraints. Most data models also include a set of basic operations for manipulating data in the database.
In this section we will look at the database design process in terms of specificity. Just as any design starts at a high level and proceeds to an ever-increasing level of detail, so does database design. For example, when building a home, you start with how many bedrooms and bathrooms the home will have, whether it will be on one level or multiple levels, etc. The next step is to get an architect to design the home from a more structured perspective. This level gets more detailed with respect to actual room sizes, how the home will be wired, where the plumbing fixtures will be placed, etc. The last step is to hire a contractor to build the home. That’s looking at the design from a high level of abstraction to an increasing level of detail.
The database design is very much like that. It starts with users identifying the business rules; then the database designers and analysts create the database design; and then the database administrator implements the design using a DBMS.
Represent the user’s view of the database
Are closely related to the real world as perceived by each user
Present a “community view”: the logical structure of the entire database
Semantic information (e.g., business rules)
Consider a database as a collection of entities (objects) of various kinds
Are the basis for identification and high-level description of main data objects; they avoid details
Are database independent regardless of the database you will be using
The three best-known models of this kind are the relational data model, the network data model and the hierarchical data model. These internal models:
Consider a database as a collection of fixed-size records
Are closer to the physical level or file structure
Are a representation of the database as seen by the DBMS.
Require the designer to match the conceptual model’s characteristics and constraints to those of the selected implementation model
Involve mapping the entities in the conceptual model to the tables in the relational model
Are the physical representation of the database
Are how the data is stored; they deal with
Are the physical level – managed by the operating system (OS)
Provide concepts that describe the details of how data are stored in the computer’s memory
In a pictorial view, you can see how the different models work together. Let’s look at this from the highest level, the external model.
The external model is the end user’s view of the data. Typically a database is an enterprise system that serves the needs of multiple departments. However, one department is not interested in seeing other departments’ data (e.g., the human resources (HR) department does not care to view the sales department’s data). Therefore, one user view will differ from another.
The external model requires that the designer subdivide a set of requirements and constraints into functional modules that can be examined within the framework of their external models (e.g., human resources versus sales).
As a data designer, you need to understand all the data so that you can build an enterprise-wide database. Based on the needs of various departments, the conceptual model is the first model created.
At this stage, the conceptual model is independent of both software and hardware. It does not depend on the DBMS software used to implement the model. It does not depend on the hardware used in the implementation of the model. Changes in either hardware or DBMS software have no effect on the database design at the conceptual level.
Once a DBMS is selected, you can then implement it. This is the internal model. Here you create all the tables, constraints, keys, rules, etc. This is often referred to as the logical design.
The physical model is simply the way the data is stored on disk. Each database vendor has its own way of storing the data.
Figure 5.1. Data abstraction layers.
A schema is an overall description of a database, and it is usually represented by the entity relationship diagram (ERD). There are many subschemas that represent external models and thus display external views of the data. Below is a list of items to consider during the design process of a database.
Multiple subschemas: these display multiple external views of the data
Conceptual schema: there is only one. This schema includes data items, relationships and constraints, all represented in an ERD.
Data independence refers to the immunity of user applications to changes made in the definition and organization of data. Data abstractions expose only those items that are important or pertinent to the user. Complexity is hidden from the database user.
Data independence and operation independence together form the feature of data abstraction. There are two types of data independence: logical and physical.
A logical schema is a conceptual design of the database done on paper or a whiteboard, much like architectural drawings for a house. The ability to change the logical schema, without changing the external schema or user view, is called logical data independence. For example, the addition or removal of new entities, attributes or relationships to this conceptual schema should be possible without having to change existing external schemas or rewrite existing application programs.
In other words, changes to the logical schema (e.g., alterations to the structure of the database like adding a column or other tables) should not affect the function of the application (external views).
Physical data independence refers to the immunity of the internal model to changes in the physical model. The logical schema stays unchanged even though changes are made to file organization or storage structures, storage devices or indexing strategy.
Physical data independence deals with hiding the details of the storage structure from user applications. The applications should not be involved with these issues, since there is no difference in the operation carried out against the data.
a collection of concepts or notations for describing data, data relationships, data semantics and data constraints
a data model describing the database showing tables, attributes and relationships
a representation of the database as seen by the DBMS
a conceptual design of the database done on paper or a whiteboard, much like architectural drawings for a house
Describe the purpose of a conceptual design.
How is a conceptual design different from a logical design?
Which model does the database administrator work with?
Which model does the end user work with?
Also see Appendix A: University Registration Data Model Example
This chapter of Database Design is a derivative copy of Database System Concepts by Nguyen Kim Anh licensed under Creative Commons Attribution License 3.0 license
The following material was written by Adrienne Watt:
Some or all of the introduction, degrees of data abstraction, data abstraction layer
1.1 Q: I'm a total noob. I don't know how to use command line programs, but i still want to use eac3to
1.3 Q: I don't like Nero at all, but i would install it to get its decoders. How to minimize the effect?
3.3 Q: Why eac3to doesn't show any bitrate info for TrueHD, DTS-HD Master Audio and FLAC tracks?
3.5 Q: I have a 768 kbps DTS track which has the same size as a 1536 kbps DTS track of the same duration. How is this possible?
3.7 Q: I get "track contains more than 16 bit of information" but file size is too small for 20 or 24 bit. What's wrong? not ok
Q: I'm a total noob. I don't know how to use command line programs, but i still want to use eac3to
A: There's an unofficial GUI (Graphical User Interface) for eac3to, made by The_Keymaker. It will let you use the program like ordinary windows applications. The latest version of eac3toGUI can be found here.
Q: I don't want to buy any software. Can I still use eac3to?
A: As described in the How to Use section, you need some commercial software for best quality audio decoding. Although, eac3to supports free libav decoding for all important audio codecs (AC3, E-AC3, TrueHD, MLP, DTS) with full 24 bit output. There's also one important limitation in the libav decoder: DTS-HD information is ignored, which means only the standard DTS core is decoded from all DTS-HD tracks. In addition, DTS decoding is limited to max 5.1 channel decoding (more channels are simply ignored). So for best DTS(-HD) decoding, Sonic is still the preferred decoder.
Q: I don't like Nero at all, but i would install it to get its decoders. How to minimize the effect?
A: Nero is a big package that contains a lot of separate programs. If you just want to use its decoders, you can install Nero ShowTime only and of course to register the plug-in.
Q: Why I can't use Nero 8 with eac3to?
A: Nero 8 won't work with eac3to because Nero 8 doesn't allow its DirectShow filters to be used from outside of Nero ShowTime. Nero 7 already tried to prevent other applications from using the DirectShow filters, but eac3to can only use them by some tricks. Nero 8 is now even stricter, so currently there isn't a way to get around these restrictions. This means that you must use/install Nero 7 if you want to use Nero DirectShow filters in eac3to.
Q: What are the alternatives if I have Nero 8 already installed?
A: If you must have Nero 8 installed then you can use the libav decoder instead of Nero 7. By doing so, the AC3 & E-AC3 decoders might be at a small disadvantage quality-wise compared to Nero, but the difference is probably rather small. TrueHD decoding shouldn't be a problem anyway, as eac3to uses the libav decoder as default decoder. Otherwise, for best AC3 & E-AC3 decoding today you still need Nero 7 with the Blu-ray/HD DVD plug-in.
Q: Where can I find the "Sonic Cinemaster Audio Decoder 4.3" DirectShow filter?
A: That's a difficult question! The decoder was available through Sonic Cineplayer HD DVD Decoder pack, which seems to be a discontinued product now. It would appear that the only way to access this decoder is though Sonic Scenarist which is rather expensive. Another possible solution could be Sonic Cinevision, but can't be sure the decoder is included. Price is a minus there too.
Q: Should I replace .dll filters that come with eac3to package?
A: Well, to play safe you should use the ones that ship with eac3to. You can update Aften.dll and libflac.dll with newer versions or cpu optimized builds, but that's not recommended, as they are not well tested. The only decoder that you must never replace is the libav decoder, as it's specially modified to work with eac3to.
Q: eac3to can't recognize my .mpa file
A: Usually, audio tracks get this extension by the application used to demux them. mpa is not the actual extension of the audio track, but just a general extension used for audio tracks. eac3to will recognize correctly all audio tracks with .mpa extension, unless you feed it with a PCM / RAW track. In this case you have to manually change the track's extension to the real one (.pcm or .raw - it's the same).
Q: Why eac3to doesn't show any bit depth info for AC3 and E-AC3, tracks?
A: Because there's no such thing as bit depth in these formats. They don't have a bit depth parameter. We can only say that these formats decode to 16 bit or 24 bit files, but that's decoder dependable. All decoders eac3to uses decode to 24 bit.
Q: Why eac3to doesn't show any bitrate info for TrueHD, DTS-HD Master Audio and FLAC tracks?
A: All these audio formats use lossless compression and a variable bitrate, not a constant one. So there's no point to show anything regarding this.
Q: Can eac3to encode a DTS-HD track to 1536 kbps DTS track?
A: Well, this isn't needed. Encoding a DTS-HD track to 1536 kbps DTS doesn't make sense, because all DTS-HD tracks contain a standard 1536 kbps 5.1 DTS core in them. Simply use the -core switch to extract it.
Q: I have a 768 kbps DTS track which has the same size as a 1536 kbps DTS track of the same duration. How is this possible?
A: When encoding DTS tracks using Surcode outside eac3to, the output file is padded. This means that while only 768 kbps are used to store audio data, the rest 768 kbps are padded with zeroes, ending up with a 1536 kbps file. This behavior is completely useless and does nothing but consuming space. All DTS tracks you get from DVD, HD DVD or Blu-ray are in compact form. Also that's what all freeware software packages (which can handle DTS) expect. To remove the padding from a DTS track, you can simply run it through eac3to using the eac3to input.dts output.dts command.
Q: How do I check whether a TrueHD track is 16, 20 or 24 bit?
A: Every TrueHD track has a bit-depth of 24 bit. Every one. Every TrueHD decoder always outputs 24 bit. However, here comes the big key: Most times, only some of those 24 bits are filled with real audio data and the rest is just zeroed out. This means that some TrueHD tracks contain full 24 bit of information, while others have 4 bit or 8 bit of those 24 bit filled up with nothing but zeroes. eac3to detects both situations and behaves accordingly. It will never throw away any audio data when doing a conversion, unless you explicitly tell it to.
Q: I get "track contains more than 16 bit of information" but file size is too small for 20 or 24 bit. What's wrong? not ok
A: There are audio tracks (like the PCM track from The Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl Blu-ray Disc) which have a really weird bit depth: Most of the track has only 16bit of the 24bit filled with data, while the remaining 8bit were always zeroes. But there are a few (very few) parts of the audio track where suddenly those 8bit have data in them.
Q: How to demux an EVO, VOB or AOB file to a different directory?
A: eac3to's automated demuxing with -demux switch doesn't accept any output files. The demuxed files are always written in the input's file(s) directory. To demux to a different directory, see Container Format examples.
Q: Whatever i tried, i can't mux audio and video together. Why?
A: This is intended. eac3to presently just muxes the video to MKV and leaves audio muxing to you, because maybe you also want to mux additional audio tracks from DVD or subtitle tracks. eac3to cannot handle all that. In addition, maybe someone wants to specify languages for each audio / subtitle track.
Q: What does "Nero Audio Decoder is not working correctly" message mean?
A: You get this error message when typing the eac3to -test command. It means the Nero Blu-ray / HD DVD plug-in is not registed. There isn't something you need to install in adittion to the main Nero package. Just buy and register the plug-in. Without this you can't use the Nero decoders.
Q: What does "Getting Nero Audio Decoder 2 instance failed" message mean?
A: It means the Nero decoder isn't installed on your pc. You have to install Nero 7 and also buy the Nero Blu-ray / HD DVD plug-in to make Nero decoders to work.
Some people, however, still receive this error even after installing Nero 7 Ultra and the Nero Blu-Ray / HD DVD plugin.
To make sure your plugin is actually installed - for Windows check OS Drive:\Program Files (x86)\Common Files\Ahead\DSFilter and ensure you have the following file:
A lot of users experiencing this issue even after installing Nero 7 (me included) noticed that NeAudio2.ax is never installed in some Nero 7 installs or the Blu-Ray / HD DVD plugin did not install this correctly.
Q: "The Sonic Audio Decoder doesn't decode TrueHD properly". What's wrong?
A: You're getting this error because the Sonic Audio Decoder doesn't decode TrueHD properly! Read Decoding compressed audio for details.
Q: What does "Track is not clean. Use delaycut to clean it" message mean?
A: This message pops up when eac3to is fed with an audio track which has some corruption in it. It's a common problem problem for AC3 and E-AC3 tracks and it's usually caused by a bad disc rip. Often enough the problem is solved when the disc is re-ripped. Anyway, delaycut (v1.3.0.0) can be used (it supports AC3, E-AC3 up to 5.1ch and DTS files only) to "clean" the track, by removing the corrupted parts. Note, that if the corruption is big, more parts (frames) are removed and an audio / video sync problem is rising.
Q: "The format of the source file could not be detected"
A: It's similar to the above problem. The corrupted part is at the beginning of the track or there are some "garbage" data in front of the actual audio data that prevent eac3to format detection (usually in DTS files). delaycut (v1.3.0.0) can be used again to "clean" these tracks.
Q: "The encode button didn't seem to pressed" in DTS encoding with Surcode
Surcode sais/asks: "At least one valid source file must be specified to encode.".
Closing Surcode...
Pressing the Surcode "Encode" button didn't seem to work...
Surcode doesn't like long filenames/paths. Change them and you 'll be ok (assuming -test is working).
Q: I came across a troublesome file. How to make a sample to send for testing?
A: A sample is made by cutting a small piece from the original troublesome file. There are 2 ways (plus 1 more for HD DVD EVO files only) to make a sample. The first way is to use a hex editor (like the free HxD one). The second is to use drmpeg's command line tools. The 3rd way, which applies only to EVO files, is more complicated: Load the troublesome file to Pelican9's EVOdemux, press rebuild (select only the streams you want) and cancel the process after a while.
Samples of 20 MB to 50 MB, depending on the file type should be big enough. If you're encountering a problem with a container file, cut a sample from it, but not from the demuxed streams in it. The sample must be from the beginning of the file. On the contrary, audio samples should contain the specific part that gives the problem. Look at the eac3to's progress bar when the error or crash is occurred to figure out that point. In any case you have to be able to reproduce the problem with the sample. Otherwise it's useless.
Once the sample is made, it can can be uploaded to a filesharing site, or anywhere it's convenient. The link to it should be posted in eac3to's official thread in doom9 forum.
If an average consists of a word problem, place the known values and variables into the average formula accordingly.
In some cases, the proportions can be calculated even if the exact amounts are not known. Suppose the average trips to the grocery store per month is 5 in Scranton but 7 in Dunmore. If the combined average of the two places is 5.5, what is the proportion of their populations? If the populations were equal, the average would be 6 - Scranton must have a greater population.
5s + 7d = 5.5	s + 5.5d	Expand the parentheses.
5s + 1.5d = 5.5s Subtract 5.5d from both sides.
1.5d = .5s Subtract 5.5s from both sides.
3d = s Divide both sides by .5.
Thus, 3d = s; in other words, Scranton has 3 times the population of Dunmore.
Debbie sold an average of 44 fur coats per month at her fur coat store in 2011. If Debbie's fur coat sales in November and December were three times as high as in the rest of the months, how many fur coats did she sell, on average, in November and December?
The average lifespan of the flamingos on Island A is 15 years while the average lifespan of flamingos on Island B 17 years. The combined average lifespan on the islands is 15.8 years. If 1,000 flamingos live on Island B, how many flamingos live on Island A?
= 44 Take the initial equation.
= 44 Expand the parentheses.
= 44 Consolidate the variables.
= 528 Multiply both sides by 12.
r = 33 Divide both sides by 16. The average sales per month in the 10 months outside of November and December is 33.
Since the regular rate is 33, the average rate for November and December is 99 - three times this amount.
= 15.8 Take the initial equation.
1500 = a Divide both sides by .8. The flamingo population is 1500 on Island A.
= 32 Take the initial equation.
C00: French Defence, unusual White second moves: 1. e4 e6
C01: French Defence, Exchange Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 exd5
C02: French Defence, Advance Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. e5
C03: French Defence, Tarrasch Variation and unusual Black third moves: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2
C04: French Defence, Tarrasch Variation with 3...Nc6: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 Nc6
C05: French Defence, Tarrasch Variation 3...Nf6 4.e5 Nfd7, unusual White fifth moves: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 Nf6 4. e5 Nfd7
C06: French Defence, Tarrasch Variation 3...Nf6 4.e5 Nfd7 5.Bd3 main line: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 Nf6 4. e5 Nfd7 5. Bd3
C07: French Defence, Tarrasch Variation 3...c5, various White fourth moves: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 c5
C08: French Defence, Tarrasch Variation 3...c5 4.exd5 exd5 sidelines: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 c5 4. exd5 exd5
C09: French Defence, Tarrasch Variation 3...c5 main line: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 c5 4. exd5 exd5 5. Ngf3 Nc6
C10: French Defence, 3.Nc3 sidelines: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3
C10: French Defence, Rubinstein Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4 4. Nxe4
C11: French Defence, Steinitz Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e5
C12: French Defence, MacCutcheon Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Bb4
C13: French Defence, Burn Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 dxe4
C14: French Defence, Classical main line: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e5
C15: French Defence, Winawer Variation sidelines: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4
C16: French Defence, Winawer Variation without ...c5: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5
C17: French Defence, Winawer Variation 4...c5 sidelines: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5
C18: French Defence, Winawer Variation with 6...Qc7: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. bxc3 Qc7
C19: French Defence, Winawer Variation main line 6...Ne7 7.Nf3 Qc7: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. bxc3 Ne7 7. Nf3 Qc7
C20: Open games, various White second moves: 1. e4 e5
C21: Danish Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. c3
C22: Center Game: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. Qxd4
C23: Bishop's Opening, 2...Bc5: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Bc5
C24: Bishop's Opening, 2...Nf6: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Nf6
C25: Vienna Game, early deviations: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3
C26: Vienna Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4
C27: Vienna Game, 2...Nf6 sidelines: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6
C28: Vienna Game, 2...Nf6 Bishop's Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Bc4 Nc6
C29: Vienna Game, Classical main line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. f4
C30: King's Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4
C31: Falkbeer Countergambit sidelines: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. exd5
C32: Falkbeer Countergambit main line: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. exd5 e4 4. d3 Nf6
C33: King's Gambit Accepted sidelines: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4
C33: King's Gambit Accepted, King's Bishop's Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4
C34: King's Gambit Accepted, King's Knight's Gambit sidelines: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3
C35: King's Gambit Accepted, Cunningham-Euwe Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 Be7
C36: King's Gambit Accepted, Modern Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 d5
C37: King's Gambit Accepted, Muzio Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. O-O gxf3 6. Qxf3
C38: King's Gambit Accepted, Neumann's Defence: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 Bg7
C39: King's Gambit Accepted, Kieseritzky Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5
C40: Elephant Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d5
C40: Latvian Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5
C41: Philidor Defence: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6
C42: Petroff Defence, unusual White third moves: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6
C42: Petroff Defence, 3.Nxe5 early deviations: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4
C42: Petroff Defence, 3.Nxe5 main line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. d4 d5 6. Bd3
C43: Petroff Defence, 3.d4: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. d4
C44: Ponziani Opening: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. c3
C44: Göring Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. c3
C44: Scotch Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4 (4...Nf6--C55, 4...Bc5--C54/C56, 4...Be7--C50)
C45: Scotch Game: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4
C46: Three Knights' Game: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 (3...Nf6--C47)
C47: Four Knights' Game sidelines: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6
C48: Four Knights' Game, Belgrade Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. d4
C48: Four Knights' Game, Spanish Variation sidelines: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5
C48: Four Knights' Game, Rubinstein Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Nd4
C48: Four Knights' Game, Marshall Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Bc5
C48: Four Knights' Game, Symmetrical Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Bb4 5. O-O O-O 6. d3 d6
C49: Four Knights' Game, Symmetrical Variation main line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Bb4 5. O-O O-O 6. d3 d6
C50: Hungarian Defence: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Be7
C50: Italian Game: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5
C50: Giuoco Pianissimo: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. d3
C51: Evans' Gambit sidelines: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4
C52: Evans' Gambit main line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5
C53: Giuoco Piano, 4.c3 sidelines: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3
C54: Giuoco Piano, 4.c3 Nf6 5.d4 main line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d4 exd4 6. cxd4 Bb4+
C54: Giuoco Piano, Wing Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. b4
C54: Giuoco Piano, Modern System: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d3
C55: Two Knights' Defence, 4.d3: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d3
C56: Two Knights' Defence, Max Lange Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d4 exd4 5. O-O Bc5 6. e5
C56: Two Knights' Defence, Modern Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d4 exd4 5. e5
C57: Two Knights' Defence, Polerio Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5
C57: Two Knights' Defence, Wilkes-Barre Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 Bc5
C57: Two Knights' Defence, Fritz Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Nd4 6. c3 b5 7. Bf1 Nxd5
C57: Two Knights' Defence, Fried Liver Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Nxd5 6. Nxf7
C58: Two Knights' Defence, 5...Na5 sidelines: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Na5 6. Bb5+ c6 7. dxc6 bxc6
C59: Two Knights' Defence, 5...Na5 main line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Na5 6. Bb5+ c6 7. dxc6 bxc6 8. Be2
C60: Ruy Lopez, early deviations: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5
C60: Ruy Lopez, Smyslov Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 g6
C60: Ruy Lopez, Cozio System: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nge7
C61: Ruy Lopez, Bird's Defence: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nd4
C62: Ruy Lopez, Steinitz Defence: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 d6
C63: Ruy Lopez, Schliemann Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 f5
C64: Ruy Lopez, Classical Defence: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Bc5 (4.O-O Nf6--C65)
C65: Ruy Lopez, Berlin Defence: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6
C65: Ruy Lopez, Classical Berlin Defence: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. O-O Bc5
C66: Ruy Lopez, Berlin Defence with 4...d6: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. O-O d6
C67: Ruy Lopez, Berlin Defence main line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. O-O Nxe4
C68: Ruy Lopez, Exchange Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Bxc6 dxc6
C69: Ruy Lopez, Exchange Variation with 5.O-O f6: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Bxc6 dxc6 5. O-O f6
C70: Ruy Lopez, Norwegian Defence: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 b5 5. Bb3 Na5
C70: Ruy Lopez, Delayed Schliemann Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 f5
C71: Ruy Lopez, Deferred Steinitz Defence sidelines: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 d6
C72: Ruy Lopez, Deferred Steinitz Defence with 5.O-O: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 d6 O-O
C73: Ruy Lopez, Deferred Steinitz Defence with 5.Bxc6+: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 d6 5. Bxc6+
C74: Ruy Lopez, Deferred Steinitz Defence with 5.c3 f5: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 d6 5. c3 f5
C75: Ruy Lopez, Deferred Steinitz Defence with 5.c3 Bd7 6.d4 without ...g6: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 d6 5. c3 Bd7 6. d4
C76: Ruy Lopez, Deferred Steinitz Defence 5.c3 Bd7 6.d4 g6 main line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 d6 5. c3 Bd7 6. d4 g6 7. O-O Bg7
C77: Ruy Lopez, 3...a6 4.Ba4 Nf6 sidelines: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6
C78: Ruy Lopez, Möller Defence: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Bc5
C78: Ruy Lopez, Arkhangelsk Defence: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O b5 6. Bb3 Bb7
C79: Ruy Lopez, Russian Defence: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O d6
C80: Open Ruy Lopez sidelines: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Nxe4
C80: Open Ruy Lopez with 9.Nbd2: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. Nbd2
C81: Open Ruy Lopez, Keres Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. Qe2
C82: Open Ruy Lopez, Italian Defence: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. c3 Bc5
C83: Open Ruy Lopez, 9.c3 main line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. c3 Be7
C84: Closed Ruy Lopez, sixth move sidelines: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7
C85: Closed Ruy Lopez, Deferred Exchange Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Bxc6 dxc6
C86: Closed Ruy Lopez, Worrall Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Qe2
C87: Closed Ruy Lopez, 6...d6: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Re1 d6
C88: Closed Ruy Lopez, Anti-Marshall Systems: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 O-O (8.c3 d6--, 8.c3 d5--C89)
C89: Closed Ruy Lopez, Marshall Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 O-O 8. c3 d5
C90: Closed Ruy Lopez with 7...d6, early deviations: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6
C91: Closed Ruy Lopez, 7...d6 without 9.h3: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 O-O 9. d4
C92: Closed Ruy Lopez, 9.h3 sidelines: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 O-O 9. h3
C92: Closed Ruy Lopez, Bulgarian Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 O-O 9. h3 Nd7
C92: Closed Ruy Lopez, Zaitsev Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 O-O 9. h3 Bb7
C93: Closed Ruy Lopez, Smyslov Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 O-O 9. h3 h6
C94: Closed Ruy Lopez, Breyer Variation with 10.d3: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 O-O 9. h3 Nb8 10. d3
C95: Closed Ruy Lopez, Breyer Variation with 10.d4: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 O-O 9. h3 Nb8 10. d4
C96: Closed Ruy Lopez, Chigorin Variation without 11...Qc7: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 O-O 9. h3 Na5 10. Bc2 c5 d4
C97: Closed Ruy Lopez, 11...Qc7 sidelines: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 O-O 9. h3 Na5 10. Bc2 c5 11. d4 Qc7
C98: Closed Ruy Lopez, Chigorin Defence with 12...Nc6: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 O-O 9. h3 Na5 10. Bc2 c5 11. d4 Qc7 12. Nbd2 Nc6
C99: Closed Ruy Lopez, Chigorin Defence main line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 O-O 9. h3 Na5 10. Bc2 c5 11. d4 Qc7 12. Nbd2 cxd4 13. cxd4
Chess Archaeology: Openings classified ECO C00-C99 from chessarch.com
What if you had something to prove? Prove you had an idea before anyone else. Prove you made a contract with your friend. Prove that your great grandmother really did give you her secret recipe. {last line edited to appeal to target} Prove that a file download offered by your organization is authentic, and has not been compromised by hackers. Enter the Radium SmartChain.
In a world of increasing cyber attacks, people have been searching for new ways to protect their customers and computers systems. The Radium Smartchain allows people the ability to encode a file’s hash onto a blockchain and also allows them to verify that the file they downloaded has not been tampered with. To create a file hash, the program code is run through an algorithm that creates a unique string of numbers and letters that only that file can create. Any modification to the code or file will result in a different string of numbers and letters. This string is called the "hash" of the file. By encoding the file’s hash onto a blockchain, people can be certain that the hash on the blockchain is the correct hash. This isn't the case when you download a file from a website that has the file’s hash in a webpage. If an attacker wants to fool you, they will modify the file and then update the hash on the website. So, even if you did try to check the validity of the program against the hash on the website, it would come back valid even after it had been tampered with. The key reason why storing a hash on a blockchain is better is because a blockchain is incredibly difficult to modify, if not impossible.
With the Radium Smartchain, an author can register their name or company onto the blockchain. Then, when they release software or an update, they can store the new file’s hash on the blockchain. When a user or customer downloads the file, they can then verify that file with the Smartchain client. The client will hash the file and check to see if that hash has been encoded onto the blockchain. The Smartchain client will also show who the author is, when it was encoded onto the blockchain and show you that the file hash is validated or not. With this system, it's easy to increase the security of software downloads and reduce the risk of spreading viruses or malware.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
Installing Minimalist PSPSDK for Windows is pretty straight forward, just download the latest installer from https://sourceforge.net/projects/minpspw/ and run it. You will be asked what components to install (a choice from the main PSP DevKit, SDK Samples, PSP Link (a debugging program), and HTML doumentation) and where to install to. After installing the toolchain you may proceed to the next section.
Osteoporosis is the most common metabolic bone disease affecting an estimated 200 million people worldwide.[1] In the United States there is over 12 million people suffering osteoporosis with over 9 million of that cohort being women.[2][3] Dolbow and Gorgey (2013) defined osteoporosis as, “a skeletal disorder characterized by compromised bone strength predisposing to an increased risk of fracture. Bone strength reflects the integration of two main features: bone density and bone quality.”
Joint replacements are on the rise due to an increasingly ageing population and there was an estimated 1 million joint replacements in 2013 in the United States alone.[1] Approximately 90% of the reason for needing a joint replacement is due to osteoarthritis.[4] Labuda et al. (2008) concluded saying one in four people receiving joint replacements are osteoporotic. Ishikaawa et al. (2013) found that, “one in two women and one in four men aged fifty years or older will experience an osteoporotic related fracture in their lifetime.“
Due to a wide research scope on osteoporosis there can be varying definitions depending on the author but what is crucial to understand is that osteoporosis will always consist of these three elements [3]
Decreased bone quality and,
Dolbow and Gorgey (2013) defined bone quality as the health of the material properties of the bone.
How do you find out if you are Osteoporotic?
A dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry scan or commonly known as a DXA scan measures your bone mineral density (BMD). The World Health Organisation scientific group defines the gradient of risk as; per standard deviation decrease in BMD, a 1.5 time increase is seen in your chances of a fracture. This being said, the femoral neck has the highest gradient of risk with every standard deviation decrease in BMD the chances increase 2.6 times.[5] For more information about a DXA scan visit this webpage.
Hip BMD <1.0 SD below the young adult female reference mean (T score above 21.0)
Hip BMD between 1.0 and 2.5 SDs below the young adult female reference mean (T score between 21.0 and 22.5)
Hip BMD = or .2.5 SDs below the young adult female reference mean (T score at or below 22.5)
Hip BMD = or .2.5 SDs below the young adult female reference mean in the presence of 1 or more fragility fractures
For more information about understanding your DXA scan results visit this insightful webpage
Fragility fractures are fractures that develop from no perceived injury.[5] Something as simple as a cough, sneeze or sudden movement can cause a fracture and Fletcher (2013) reported that 80% of all fractures in women aged over 50 can be accounted by fragility fractures. Dolbow and Gorgey (2013) reported 550,000 vertebral fractures occurred over the past year in the United States as a direct result of fragility fractures.
Due to there being no single treatment for osteoporosis there needs to be an understanding that the ultimate goal is fracture prevention. In the United States there was a reported 400,000 hip fractures due to patients falling and having osteoporosis.[3] If we decrease our fall rate, the less likely the patient is likely to have a fracture and, the less likely the patient will need a joint replacement. While increasing BMD is a main goal with people suffering osteoporosis, what also needs to be given adequate attention include; fall prevention, assuage pain, increasing the ease of practical every day chores which will all in turn increase independence and enhance quality of life.[1]
With this understanding of a multi-faceted fracture prevention program,[6] this fact sheet will discuss some key areas. It is strongly encouraged to see the attached links at the end of the sheet to further better your knowledge. In saying that, we will look at exercises to increase BMD, diet and lifestyle choices which all counteract the negative adverse affects of osteoporosis.[1]
The theory behind exercise in the treatment of osteoporosis is that when muscle contracts stresses are put on the bone due to the tendons that connect the muscle to the bone. For the bone to be able to support this new stress it starts to increases in BMD. With this knowledge any weight bearing activities such as walking, jogging and dancing will increase BMD.[3] High intensity exercise hasn’t shown significant results in increasing BMD along with all the implications that can occur due to the brittleness of the bones. Osteoporotic patients will welcome the recommendations of endurance moderate-intensity exercise lasting approximately 30–60 minutes three to five times a week is very beneficial.[5] Fletcher (2013) prescribes strength training three days per week, which could include leg press, leg extension, leg curl, squats and arm exercises. Dolbow and Gorgey (2013) advises that patients over sixty years of age enroll in fall prevention programs which should include strengthening of the legs, trunk and balance activities.
This great research article talks about the exercise guidelines that people of all ages should adhere to to limit the effects of osteoporosis. (Scroll down and click on the ‘Canadian Academy of Sport and Exercise Medicine Position Statement: Osteoporosis and Exercise’)
Dolbow and Gorgey (2013) defines a healthy diet is one that is high in calcium and vitamin D which can be found in milk or any other dairy products. Green leafy vegetables with also a healthy serve of fish (salmon and sardines) accompanied by sunlight each day which helps stimulate vitamin D production in our bodies which in turn build our BMD.
For more information about diet feel free to visit Nutrition Australia's website.
Dolbow and Golgey (2013) strongly advises that if the patient suffering osteoporosis is smoking and drinks excessively that this should cease immediately.
Another part of a lifestyle change is fall prevention hazards with the home environment. To best suit your needs it is advised that any hazards that could make you trip should be removed and handrails are a great addition to any stairs to keep the patient safe and fall free.[3]
Cochrane Reviews are more for if you want to delve deep into the understanding of osteoporosis and the current research that is out.
The greatest information center is the International Osteoporosis Foundation website. Here you can find anything about both men and women suffering osteoporosis.
Ishikawa, S, Kim, Y, Kang, M, & Morgan, D 2013, 'Effects of Weight-Bearing Exercise on Bone Health in Girls: A Meta-Analysis', Sports Medicine, 43, 9, pp. 875–892, SPORTDiscus with Full Text, EBSCOhost, viewed 28 September 2014.
Labuda, A, Papaioannou, A, Pritchard, J, Kennedy, C, DeBeer, J, & Adachi, J 2008, 'Prevalence of Osteoporosis in Osteoarthritic Patients Undergoing Total Hip or Total Knee Arthroplasty', Archives Of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, 89, 12, pp. 2373–2374, SPORTDiscus with Full Text, EBSCOhost, viewed 28 September 2014.
Peeters, G, Brown, W, & Burton, N 2014, 'Physical Activity Context Preferences in People With Arthritis and Osteoporosis', Journal Of Physical Activity & Health, 11, 3, pp. 536–542, SPORTDiscus with Full Text, EBSCOhost, viewed 28 September 2014.
↑ Palombaro, K, Black, J, Buchbinder, R, & Jette, D 2013, 'Exercise for Managing Osteoporosis in Women Postmenopause', Physical Therapy, 93, 8, pp. 1021-1025, SPORTDiscus with Full Text, EBSCOhost, viewed 28 September 2014.
↑ a b c d e Dolbow, D, & Gorgey, A 2013, 'Non-Pharmacological Management of Osteoporosis', Clinical Kinesiology (Online Edition), 67, 2, pp. 5-9, SPORTDiscus with Full Text, EBSCOhost, viewed 28 September 2014.
↑ Ashraf, A, Shooshtari, S, Homayouni, K, Roshanzamir, S, Zafarghasempoor, M, Ajhdarnia, N, Satari, S, & Rezaianzadeh, A 2011, 'ASYMMETRY OF BONE MINERAL DENSITY OF THE HIPS IN PATIENTS WITH UNILATERAL KNEE OSTEOARTHRITIS:: A CROSS-SECTIONAL STUDY', Journal Of Musculoskeletal Research, 14, 1, pp. 1-6, SPORTDiscus with Full Text, EBSCOhost, viewed 28 September 2014.
↑ a b c d Fletcher, JA 2013, 'Canadian Academy of Sport and Exercise Medicine Position Statement: Osteoporosis and Exercise', Clinical Journal Of Sport Medicine, 23, 5, pp. 333-338, SPORTDiscus with Full Text, EBSCOhost, viewed 28 September 2014.
↑ Ishikawa, S, Kim, Y, Kang, M, & Morgan, D 2013, 'Effects of Weight-Bearing Exercise on Bone Health in Girls: A Meta-Analysis', Sports Medicine, 43, 9, pp. 875-892, SPORTDiscus with Full Text, EBSCOhost, viewed 28 September 2014.
This lets the user link a sound to a page that will play automatically whenever a client opens the webpage.
This works like the img tag. It finds the source of the music file that the user wants to be played in the background.
This tells the browser how many times the sound will be played in the background.
A link to a page with more info, then the name of the site the info came from (i.e. W3Schools).
Wikipedia has related information at Characteristic polynomial
Let's say that X is a square matrix of order 2, as such:
The characteristic equation can be rewritten as such:
And therefore, we can find the eigenvectors through row-reduction of that matrix.
Distinct eigenvectors of A are linearly independent.
If A is n × n, and if there are n distinct eigenvectors, then the eigenvectors of A form a complete basis set for
Let's say that matrix A has the following characteristic polynomial:
+ d2 + ... + ds = n, and s < n. In other words, the eigenvalues of A are repeated. Therefore, this matrix doesnt have n distinct eigenvectors. However, we can create vectors known as generalized eigenvectors to make up the missing eigenvectors by satisfying the following equations:
And because the eigenvector v is on the right, these are more appropriately called "right eigenvectors". However, if we rewrite the equation as follows:
293T cells, or Human Embryonic Kidney (HEK) 293 cells, are cells that are derived from human embryonic kidney cells. These cells are very tough and can be cultured easily through tissue culture. They are normally used in transfection for research, since they are very good models for cancer cells, and normal cells. These cells also have a very high transfectability, depending on the technique used. Some techniques yield close to 100% transfection.
They are usually transfected with a gene of interest and it is allowed to grow as a normal cell. Through translation it makes proteins from the gene of interest, which can then be studied. These cells are basically test tubes in which proteins are grown.
Another use of these cells is to produce viral vectors, which can be used to easily inject genes of interest into other cells. However, viruses can be a danger since they are pathogens, so 293T cells provide the ability to delete genes that allow the viruses to replicate.
Healthy Eating is choosing a wide variety of foods that have a lot of nutrients in them. When eating healthy it is important to have different foods from each of the five food groups. This will ensure you get a wide variety of vitamins and minerals. The Australian Guide to Healthy Eating [1] has more information on food groups and serving sizes. Below we explore the five food groups[2] a little further.
The grains or cereal food group provides a lot of the carbohydrates we use for energy, and contains grains such as
The foods in this group can be eaten as they are or made into other food items such as
When choosing foods from this group it is important to eat foods that are wholegrains, that is cereals or grains that use the whole grain in the food product such as wholemeal pasta, wholemeal multigrain bread, brown rice and crumpets.
Consuming vegetables each day is an excellent way to include vitamins, minerals and fibre. [3]Eating a wide variety of vegetables has been linked to a reduced risk of developing some nutrition related diseases, so it is important to eat lots of different colours and varieties.
Also included in the vegetables group are legumes and beans. These are suitable as meat alternatives and contain lots of fibre [3] .Varieties include
Also include other vegetables such like zucchini, pumpkin, tomato, avocado, asparagus, capsicum and parsnip.
Fruit is an important part of having a nutrient packed healthy diet. Fruit has a lot of vitamins and minerals as well as fibre [3]. Eating fruits that are in season can help save money and add variety. Include different fruits like
Watermelon.
Dairy foods are an excellent source of protein , calcium and zinc [3]. These nutrients are important for healthy bones and overall body health. Dairy foods include
Meat and meat alternatives are a fantastic source of protein. Red meat in particular is a good source of dietiron iron and Vitamin B12 [3]. Healthy options in the meat and meat alternatives group include:
Seafood (oysters, prawns and crab)
Does healthy food cost more?
When choosing a snack it is important to look at what you are actually getting. For example, a 2 pack of blueberry muffins will cost approximately $4, and for that you get 2 snacks. However, a jar of peanut butter will cost around $4.50 and a packet of rye biscuits around $2.50 which totals $7. This may look more expensive, but when you look at cost per serve it is a lot more cost efficient. The added bonus here is that you will get more value out of the peanut butter and biscuits as you get more serves out of it compared to the blueberry muffins. Below are some more cost effective food swaps for snacking.
170g Greek Yoghurt = $2.20
90g Potato Chips = $2.52
40g Rolled Oats = $0.06
30g Cocoa Pops = $0.39
Some tips to include healthy nutritious meals, save money and make the most out of your food.
Take advantage of foods that are in season. Choose frozen or canned varieties when fresh foods are not in season.
Take advantage of multi-buys for products such as cereals, yoghurt, breads and vegetables. Fresh foods can be frozen or included into a meal which can be frozen.
If you have large amounts of vegetables that need to be used they can go into making nutritious soups or stews. These can also be frozen and make for a quick and healthy meal if you are time poor with study or work.
Choose generic brands where possible. Products such as oats and canned beans are a good place to start.
Do not shop when hungry. Have a small snack or chew mints or gum when shopping.
Take advantage of bulk pantry items like pasta, rice, canned beans and cereals. These last a long time and are a good base for a lot of meals.
Plan what you are going to buy before doing your shopping and consider using a list to help you purchase only what you need.
Top Foods to Keep in the Cupboard Part 1
Top Foods to Keep in the Cupboard Part 2
↑ Australian Dietary Guidelines, Eat for Health. (2014). Australian Dietary Guidelines. Retrieved from http://www.eatforhealth.gov.au/guidelines/australian-guide-healthy-eating
↑ [1], Eat for Health. (2014). The Five Food Groups. Retrieved from http://www.eatforhealth.gov.au/food-essentials/five-food-groups
↑ a b c d e Whiteny, E & Rolfes, S.R.(2011). Understanding Nutrition. (12 ed.).Belmont, CA. USA: Wadsworth Cengage Learning
↑ [2], Dietitians Association of Australia.(2014).Healthy Eating on a Budget. Retrieved from http://daa.asn.au/for-the-public/smart-eating-for-you/nutrition-a-z/healthy-eating-on-a-budget/
Pelargonium: 'Geranium'; 300x225 pixels
Notice that the example shown has no captions, since captions can only be used in the frame or thumbnail format. However, by using templates such as Noframeleft for the images in such a lineup, tiled images with captions can be obtained. A set of these templates has been made to include all of the image positions.
A thin dividing space has been made between adjacent images by inserting a single space character between the image definitions. To set the images edge to edge without any space between them, simply omit the space characters. Because we rarely want to start an image line-up at the left margin of the page, it is useful to have a means of padding out the images. In fact, a transparent, blank image has been uploaded to the image collection for that purpose; it is called Padding.gif, and it can be sized on the page like any other image. Refer to the code notes for an example of its use. (Another method, capable of precise positioning, is described in the next section).
Images are rarely the size that you would prefer them to be and this is especially the case when the images are set side by side. There is a method to get the images standardized. Consider the image line-up. Because these images were greatly different in their initial shapes, and their exact dimensions were laborious to find, it was decided to set their heights to be the same, and to allow the widths to be scaled accordingly. The method to do this, shown in the code box below, is to specify the important dimension exactly, in this case the height, while greatly exaggerating the size of the less important dimension, the width. Note that some dimension for width is required, but its exact value need not be known. The software will use the smaller and more practical possibility, ignoring the implied larger scaling. In this way the vastly different shapes can be scaled without having to make calculations based on both width and height.
[[Image:Padding.gif|50px]]
[[Image:Nymphaea tetragona.jpg|500x226px]]
[[Image:Chamomile@original size.jpg|500x226px]]
[[Image:Krokus-kih.jpg|500x226px]]
[[Image:Padding.gif|50px]][[Image:Nymphaea tetragona.jpg|500x226px]] [[Image:Chamomile@original size.jpg|500x226px]] [[Image:Krokus-kih.jpg|500x226px]]
Use either of these two listings in the Sandbox to produce a straight
In fact, they must use only the file name and the size for this method
For the second of the listings, (all written in one line), a space can
It is possible to tile a white blank image with the others, to produce
Some have used a table to solve image spacing problems, and tables have
If images are placed into the cells of a table, and the borders made to
Other methods exist too; the image gallery, for example. Examples of
The main problem with this method, apart from its complexity, is that it will not deliver wrapped text for the placements. Like centered images, the text is restricted to following-on. Another problem concerns frames for the images; because shifting is applied to images within their immediate containers, all types of borders must be avoided. As a result of losing frames and thumbnail borders, all of the captions have to be arranged by other means.
To expand on the matter of text having to follow-on, it is perhaps helpful to note the sequence of events for relative positioning. When the image, box or other structure is first placed, it is allocated to the space without relative positioning; that is, as if the shifting code were missing or set to zeros. Then the code shifts the item to its new position by the amounts given by the shifting code. A space is left at the first location, equal in size to the item that was moved. When the next line of text or another item is added to the work, it must take account of that allocated space. As a result, when a large image or block of text is moved vertically, the following text cannot be located until after the gap.
Although it is theoretically possible to shift tables and large blocks of text, the above mentioned limitation renders it less useful. Relative positioning works best when the shifts and texts are fairly small. The method meets these requirements for shifting images that are initially tiled across the page, and for overlapping effects.
An example of overlapping images is given below. The normal position for these images, without shifting,would have been in-line, starting from the left margin, and the padding image has been omitted for this example. The images were shifted from these tiled positions by the required amounts to create the overlapping effect.
The paleness or density of images can be varied. The code for twenty percent opacity can be found in the drop-box along with an example of shifted text.
Extract from the text overlap code listing
Paste this code section into your editing window or the Sandbox to reproduce the overlapping image layout. These image lines would normally be shown as tiled inline, starting at the left margin, since there are no padding images used in it.
The normal position is modified by the mark-up code's left and top properties. In the first image line left=100 pixels and top=0 pixels, means that the left side of the image will be placed 100 pixels beyond the point otherwise expected for it; it would usually be at the left margin so it will be at 100 pixels from it to the right.
The top of the image will not be shifted. The left of the second image, which would usually be to the right of the first image anyway, need only be shifted 50 pixels onward from its usual position, to produce the effect. The second image is also moved upwards by 20 pixels. Relative to its usual position, the third image is not shifted along at all, but is shifted upwards by 40 pixels.
The important point in relative positioning is to note that they are positional changes that are specified; changes from the positions that the images could reasonably have been expected to occupy based on their other coding. Images placed at the left of the page are the easiest to calculate new positions for.
It is also possible to use the property right, meaning the right side of the image and bottom, meaning the bottom edge of the image. Their use follows similar reasoning to that above. The overlap, if any, is determined by the order that the image code was written; the last placed will be on top, with the first on the bottom. The stacking order can be changed with
If images are placed in frames, the positioning is likely to become confused or fail altogether. Positioning within frames such as table cells or boxes is possible, but the shifting will take place within the image container.
Gerbera:Move the mouse on the image.
Two images can occupy the same space provided that only one of them is seen at a time. The usual way to do this is to hover the mouse over the default image, the one that is stable and seen most of the time. When this is done the alternative image replaces it, and when the mouse is removed, the original image reappears.
This technique is available using the template HoverImage. The names of the two images are provided to the template, along with any other image options, and two separate captions can be made. The method works best with images that are the same shape; that is, have the same aspect ratio. Then, with one base size setting, both will be scaled to the same size. When the shapes differ and the images change, the height or the width of the presented work changes too. Because the text adjusts in wrapping around the images the effect is not necessarily bad, and you can see this best for yourself by trying it in the sandbox. As was suggested elsewhere on this page, a method exists to allow fixing of image heights instead of widths, and this might suit some better.
In all other respects the template can be used as if it were a single image, with for example, text wrapping for the left and right positioned images. The template can be used in any situation that needs the full image syntax; for example, it could not be used to build gallery entries, since these use only an abbreviated image syntax; the image name. It could be used on a page, within tables and drop-boxes, and anywhere else that can make use of the full image syntax.
The image on the right shows an example of the template's use; more detailed notes can be found on the page Templates Ready to Use, and on the template page itself.
Wikibooks:Sandbox: The Wikibooks editing sandbox for users to try their code.
Wikipedia Commons: The Wikimedia shared media repository
CSS2 Properties Reference: An excellent external CSS reference
Template:Dropimage: A Wikibooks drop-box for images, galleries, or text, with many formatting options.
Description of the Gallery tag: Information on gallery syntax
v • d • e Pages in Editing WikitextEditing Wikitext
1 1. Know the basic rules, safety considerations, and warm-up exercises for the six track and field events listed below.
2 2. Run the 50-yard (45.7 meters) dash in the time (seconds) for your sex and age as follows
3 3. In sprinting, which part of the foot should touch first during the stride? What are the proper arm and head positions?
4 4. Run the 600-yard (548.6 meters) run-walk in the time (minutes/seconds) for your sex and age as follows
5 5. Answer the following questions about distance running
5.2 b What are the proper clothes, including shoes, for distance running in your area?
6 6. Run one of the following events at least twice and record the best time
7 7. Do the high jump with good form at least five times and record the highest jump.
8 8. Do a running broad jump three times and record the best length.
9 9. Run the following relays
The Track & Field Honor is a component of the Sportsman Master Award
.
Know the basic rules, safety considerations, and warm-up exercises for the six track and field events listed below.
Starting blocks are used for all competition sprint (up to and including 400 m) and relay events (first leg only, up to 4x400 m).[1] The starting blocks consist of two adjustable footplates attached to a rigid frame. Races commence with the firing of the starter's gun. The starting commands are "On your marks" and "Set". Once all athletes are in the set position, the starter's gun is fired, officially starting the race. For the 100 m, all competitors are lined up side-by-side. For the 200 m, 300 m and 400 m, which involve curves, runners are staggered for the start.
In the rare event that there are technical issues with a start, a green card is shown to all the athletes. The green card carries no penalty. If an athlete is unhappy with track conditions after the "on your marks" command is given, he must raise his hand before the "set" command and provide the Start referee with a reason for raising their hand. It is then up to the Start referee to decide if the reason is valid. In the event that the Start referee deems the reason invalid, a yellow card (warning) is issued to that particular athlete. In the event that the athlete is already on a warning the athlete is disqualified.
"An athlete, after assuming a full and final set position, shall not commence his(/her) starting motion until after receiving the report of the gun, or approved starting apparatus. If, in the judgement of the Starter or Recallers, he does so any earlier, it shall be deemed a false start."
For all Olympic sprint events, runners must remain within their pre-assigned lanes, which measure 1.22 metres (4 feet) wide, from start to finish. The lanes can be numbered 1 through normally 8 or 9 rarely 10, starting with the inside lane. Any athlete who runs outside the assigned lane to gain an advantage is subject to disqualification. If the athlete is forced to run outside of his or her lane by another person, and no material advantage is gained, there will be no disqualification. Also, a runner who strays from his or her lane in the straightaway, or crosses the outer line of his or her lane on the bend, and gains no advantage by it, will not be disqualified as long as no other runner is obstructed.
The first athlete whose torso reaches the vertical plane of the closest edge of the finish line is the winner. To ensure that the sprinter's torso triggers the timing impulse at the finish line rather than an arm, foot, or other body part, a double Photocell is commonly used. Times are only recorded by an electronic timing system when both of these Photocells are simultaneously blocked. Photo finish systems are also used at some track and field events.
Wearing the proper clothes as well as footwear. Warm up before running and always stay in your lane.
Warming up prepares the sprinter's muscles by increasing the force of their muscle contractions and speeding up muscle contraction rate, giving the sprinter more power and speed. Warming up also helps nervous young athletes stabilize their adrenalin rush before competition, helping them better control their pre-event nervousness. Here's how sprinters should go about warming up for races and training sessions.
Phase One: Start your sprinter's warm up with 10–15 minutes jogging to increase body temperature—slow and easy.
Phase Two: This should follow on immediately after phase two and consists of 10–15 minutes of dynamic stretching exercises to reduce muscle stiffness. Dynamic (ballistic) stretches through a wide range of motion work best because they are closer to the athlete's actual movements in competition; and research shows that static stretching exercises do not simulate rapid running movement and may actually cause a reduction in leg power.
Phase Three: The sprinter progresses to 10–15 minutes of general and event-specific drills. These specific drills put the finishing touches on the warm up and prepare the athlete for sprint training. The drills usually include leg speed exercises, and it is here that pre-race and pre-training warm ups diverge.
The pre-race warm up needs a few (3-6) easy acceleration "stride throughs" over 50 meters (but no longer than this). Follow these accelerations with a few practice starts. This phase should finish 5 minutes before the race start, and all the runner needs to do until then is walk/jog to keep warm. The pre-competition warm-up needs to be controlled so that it does not deplete the sprinter's high-energy phosphates ATP and PC.
The rules for the 600 yard run are the same as for the 50 yard dash.
You are to start at the board and sprint 12 strides. At the end of your 12 strides, sprint to the board and jump with your right knee up. Land in the sand with your feet parallel.
You really cannot hurt yourself during this event, but you should not be running if you have any sort of knee, ankle, or hip problems because the impact when you land in the sand can be excessive to some people.
Warm ups for the long jump would be drills such as doing short sprints and stretching.
Would include stretching.
Run the 50-yard (45.7 meters) dash in the time (seconds) for your sex and age as follows
In sprinting, which part of the foot should touch first during the stride? What are the proper arm and head positions?
When sprinting, the forefoot should always touch the ground first, and it should do this when the body's center of mass is directly above the foot. The heel should not touch the ground at all. A good way to develop this technique is to run barefoot, as barefoot running makes it painful to land on the heel.
The body should be held erect except during the start, and the chin should be held up. The elbow should be flexed at 90° as the arms swing at the sides, close to the body at all times. The fist should come up the height of the shoulder and then swing down to the hips in a hammering action.[1]
Run the 600-yard (548.6 meters) run-walk in the time (minutes/seconds) for your sex and age as follows
Answer the following questions about distance running
a. Find two Bible stories that mention distance runners?
24While David was sitting between the inner and outer gates, the watchman went up to the roof of the gateway by the wall. As he looked out, he saw a man running alone. 25 The watchman called out to the king and reported it.
The king said, "If he is alone, he must have good news." And the man came closer and closer.
26 Then the watchman saw another man running, and he called down to the gatekeeper, "Look, another man running alone!"
The king said, "He must be bringing good news, too."
27The watchman said, "It seems to me that the first one runs like Ahimaaz son of Zadok."
"He's a good man," the king said. "He comes with good news."
24Do you not know that in a race all the runners run, but only one gets the prize? Run in such a way as to get the prize.
25Everyone who competes in the games goes into strict training. They do it to get a crown that will not last; but we do it to get a crown that will last forever. 26Therefore I do not run like a man running aimlessly; I do not fight like a man beating the air. 27No, I beat my body and make it my slave so that after I have preached to others, I myself will not be disqualified for the prize.
b What are the proper clothes, including shoes, for distance running in your area?
Light weight, with holes to accept spikes.
c. How long is the average track?
Running tracks are typically ovals with a perimeter of 400 meters.
d. How far is a marathon race?
A marathon race is 42.195km long.
e. Which part of the foot should touch first during the stride?
The ball of the foot should touch first.
f. What are the proper arm and head positions while distance running?
Your arms should not come across your body. They should be at your side with your hands cupped in a parallel form. Your head should face your direction of travel, straight ahead.
g. What is the proper way to breathe?
Inhale and exhale in a slow, rhythmic, controlled fashion.
h. How does cross-country running differ from running on a track?
Cross country running often involves hills, while tracks do not. Cross country runners often must contend with traffic, but they are rewarded with changing scenery.
Run one of the following events at least twice and record the best time
a. 50-yard (45.7 meters) dash with four hurdles.
b. 70-yard (64.0 meters) dash with six hurdles.
Do the high jump with good form at least five times and record the highest jump.
Do a running broad jump three times and record the best length.
b. Blind pass relay
↑ http://www.sport-fitness-advisor.com/sprintingtechnique.html
Check out this grammatical information while we write new content for the Business English book.
An Overview of the Jōmon Period
There were definitely modern humans, Homo Sapiens, in Japan during the latter parts of the Pleistocene period, the great ice ages. Japan was connected to the mainland at several periods during that era, both to the southern end of Korea and to Siberia, and the animal and plant and human populations seem to have been identical to those in the adjacent parts of the mainland. The sea levels were very much lower than in our age (hundreds of feet lower) and it is likely that most human remains in this area are under deep water.
When the islands were disconnected from Asia for the final time things inevitably changed. The megafauna (elephants, tigers, and giant deer) died out, the plant life began to change radically, and the sea levels rose rapidly. The people trapped on the islands had to change their way of life. Similar things happened almost everywhere in the temperate zones of the world. In Europe the change is often identified as a transition from paleolithic to mesolithic, from a life hunting large animals that roamed in large herds on open lands, to a life hunting smaller animals that lived alone or in small groups hidden in thick forests. In Japan, this is the transition to Jomon. The name "mesolithic" is not used in Japan, because in Europe it refers to particular types of stone tools that do not occur in Japan. The name Jomon is a translation to Japanese of the English term "cord marked" which was applied to describe the general appearance of Jomon pottery by its original (American) discoverer.
Early Jōmon Pottery.
The Jomon culture is old. The oldest radiocarbon dates are presently about 10,000 BC and older, undated, sites are known. When this was realized in the 1950's there was considerable excitement, because even the earliest Jomon sites show the use of pottery. It was then and still remains today after many discoveries of early pottery elsewhere in the world the oldest pottery known. The initial discoveries were of a relatively late phase (2500 BC or so) when the Jomon people were living in villages and making art pottery as well as useful items, and because of the pottery and the nature of the stone tools that were being made, it was first announced that the Jomon culture was "neolithic". However, in the world at large neolithic usually is taken to refer to agricultural societies, and the Jomon people were not farmers. They were among a quite small number of pre-agricultural peoples who lived in an environment that was rich enough that people could settle in permanent villages without farming. As a result, Japanese archaeologists prefer to avoid the use of the term neolithic and simply use Jomon.
Jomon culture lasted for a long time, isolated on the Japanese islands. Books in English will tell you that the transition to the subsequent Yayoi culture occurred sometime around 400 or 300 BC. The actual date is more like 1000 or 900 BC (a very recent discovery discussed later). From the Jomon perspective this is an insignificant change. This was a culture that lasted for about 10,000 years. During that time the ecology of the Japanese islands was constantly changing and the Jomon people had to change with it. At any particular time there was only a relatively small portion of the country that could support a population dense enough for villages, and in different periods this portion was not always in the same place. This extremely long life tells us that conditions in Japan were not good for the independent development of farming. The forests were heavy and there were no native edible plants with revolutionary potential. The most important single plant food source throughout Jomon was nuts gathered in the forests.
The richest phase of all was "Middle Jomon" between roughly 3000 BC and 2000 BC. The total population has been estimated (based on counting house sites) at from 50,000 to 100,000 people, the overwhelming majority of whom were concentrated in eastern Japan in modern Tokyo and regions extending westward into nearby hills where hunting appears to have been particularly successful, mainly for Japanese "shika" deer and wild pigs. Shell mounds are common, and fishing, including deep sea fishing, was important.
After 2000 BC the climate changed considerably (getting colder) which affected the makeup of the trees of the forest, ending the Middle Jomon. The population crashed and moved to new areas in the Late Jomon. Many different kinds of nuts were relied upon at different times as the climate varied. Some types of nuts are "ready to eat" and others require processing to remove tannins, and this greatly affected the density of the population at different times. The east now lost easy to handle acorns and had to shift to difficult to handle horse chestnuts. A coastal area northeast of Tokyo received a culture which clearly continued the traditions of middle Jomon. It is this culture that provides the most spectacular Jomon pottery, the "Kamegaoka style", and other art, justifiably popular in museums. A significantly different culture emerged in Kyushu with a quite different kind of pottery, a plain, black ware. This culture has attracted a great deal of attention because many archaeologists see signs of incipient agriculture, though it definitely continued to rely on gathered wild nuts as the primary source of plant food. The total population was quite small. I have seen estimates of 5,000 or 6,000 people for Kyushu, with maybe twice as many in the northeast. Large parts of Kyushu are covered by volcanic rocks and cannot support the density of forests that existed elsewhere and this restricted the population.
The transition from Jomon to Yayoi occurred in northern Kyushu. The Yayoi culture (named after a neighborhood in Tokyo where the first remains were recognized) was made up of rice farmers using an already mature technology involving irrigation. By the end of the period they were making bronze objects of sufficient quality that it is possible to argue about whether certain ones were made in Japan or China, and also iron tools and weapons. The biggest topic of discussion is whether the Jomon people acquired these new technologies (from Korea) and converted themselves into Yayoi people, or whether the Yayoi people were immigrants. I will explore the arguments, but it is pretty certain that the Yayoi people were immigrants. The Jomon population of Kyushu was very small and the early Yayoi population was comparatively large. There is evidence that Yayoi practices spread rapidly eastward as far as the area of modern Nagoya, where there was a pause. Its spread from there to the northeast appears to have been accomplished in large part by converting Jomon people to the new way of life. The pottery of the early Yayoi culture in the northeast shows characteristic Jomon decorative elements that are completely unknown in the west.
Probably the most important fact in this context is that there was a widespread culture in southern Korea, known as "Mumun", after its characteristic pottery, that was extremely similar to Yayoi, so much so that in the early period it is sometimes very difficult to tell them apart. This has become much better known in recent years as South Korea is now rich enough to spend significant money on archaeology, and it is pretty clear that the arrival of Yayoi in Japan was the result of immigration of people from Mumun Korea. It was formerly thought that the two were about the same age so that both might have arrived together from somewhere on the Chinese coast (though no one could suggest where), but it is now clear that Mumun is significantly older than Yayoi.
The above is not intended to attempt a real description of Jomon culture or trace its evolution through multiple phases. For a good, not excessively long, treatment in English the following is recommended:
Imamura Keiji 1996, Prehistoric Japan: new perspectives on insular East Asia (Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press)
This book also covers Yayoi and the beginnings of the following Kofun period. It was written before the recent revolution in dating referred to above, for which you must look in the chapter on the Yayoi period.
Prehistory through the Jomon Period –
The Kofun or Yamato Period –
The Middle Heian Period –
The Warring States Period –
The Azuchi–Momoyama Period –
In 380 CE, the Edict of Thessalonica gave the Catholic Church state-sponsored legal support to fight against heresy, anything perceived by the Church to be counter to the orthodox dogma. Taken to its extreme conclusion, the Edict gave the Church the backing of secular power to execute those the Church deemed heretical. The 12th Century in Europe was a time of numerous heresies.
The Cathars were a sect of Christianity that emerged in the south of France in the 11th century and flourished between the 12th and 13th centuries. Cathars were a dualistic Christian sect, which meant they believed the God of the Bible was not the only deity. Rather, Cathars saw the God of the Bible as the "good" God who was in a universal struggle against the "evil" God, Satan. While the dualistic nature of Catharism was problematic for the Catholic Church, the most egregious heresey the Cathars committed in the eyes of the Church was their denial of Jesus Christ's divinity.
In 1147, Pope Eugene III sent a legate to the Cathar district in order to arrest the progress of the Cathars. The few isolated successes of Bernard of Clairvaux could not obscure the poor results of this mission, which clearly showed the power of the sect in the Languedoc at that period. The missions of Cardinal Peter of St. Chrysogonus to Toulouse and the Toulousain in 1178, and of Henry of Marcy, cardinal-bishop of Albano, in 1180–81, obtained merely momentary successes. Henry's armed expedition, which took the stronghold at Lavaur, did not extinguish the movement.
At first Pope Innocent III tried pacific conversion, and sent a number of legates into the Cathar regions. They had to contend not only with the Cathars, the nobles who protected them, and the people who respected them, but also with many of the bishops of the region, who resented the considerable authority the Pope had conferred upon his legates. In 1204, Innocent III suspended a number of bishops in Occitania; in 1205 he appointed a new and vigorous bishop of Toulouse, the former troubadour Foulques. In 1206 Diego of Osma and his canon, the future Saint Dominic, began a programme of conversion in Languedoc; as part of this, Catholic-Cathar public debates were held at Verfeil, Servian, Pamiers, Montréal and elsewhere.
Saint Dominic met and debated the Cathars in 1203 during his mission to the Languedoc. He concluded that only preachers who displayed real sanctity, humility and asceticism could win over convinced Cathar believers. The official Church as a rule did not possess these spiritual warrants.[28] His conviction led eventually to the establishment of the Dominican Order in 1216. The order was to live up to the terms of his famous rebuke, "Zeal must be met by zeal, humility by humility, false sanctity by real sanctity, preaching falsehood by preaching truth." However, even St. Dominic managed only a few converts among the Cathari.
In January 1208 the papal legate, Pierre de Castelnau, was sent to meet the ruler of the area, Count Raymond VI of Toulouse. Known for excommunicating noblemen who protected the Cathars, Castelnau excommunicated Raymond as an abettor of heresy following an allegedly fierce argument during which Raymond supposedly threatened Castelnau with violence. Shortly thereafter, Castelnau was murdered as he returned to Rome, allegedly by a knight in the service of Count Raymond. His body was returned and laid to rest in the Abbey at Saint Gilles. As soon as he heard of the murder, the Pope ordered the legates to preach a crusade against the Cathars and wrote a letter to Phillip Augustus, King of France, appealing for his intervention—or an intervention led by his son, Louis. This was not the first appeal but some have seen the murder of the legate as a turning point in papal policy—whereas it might be more accurate to see it as a fortuitous event in allowing the Pope to excite popular opinion and to renew his pleas for intervention in the south. The chronicler of the crusade which was to follow, Peter de Vaux de Cernay, portrays the sequence of events in such a way that, having failed in his effort to peacefully demonstrate the errors of Catharism, the Pope then called a formal crusade, appointing a series of leaders to head the assault. The French King refused to lead the crusade himself, nor could he spare his son—despite his victory against John of England, there were still pressing issues with Flanders and the empire and the threat of an Angevin revival. Phillip did however sanction the participation of some of his more bellicose and ambitious—some might say dangerous—barons, notably Simon de Montfort and Bouchard de Marly. There followed twenty years of war against the Cathars and their allies in the Languedoc: the Albigensian Crusade.
This war pitted the nobles of the north of France against those of the south. The widespread northern enthusiasm for the Crusade was partially inspired by a papal decree permitting the confiscation of lands owned by Cathars and their supporters. This not only angered the lords of the south but also the French King, who was at least nominally the suzerain of the lords whose lands were now open to despoliation and seizure. Phillip Augustus wrote to Pope Innocent in strong terms to point this out—but the Pope did not change his policy—and many of those who went to the Midi were aware that the Pope had been equivocal over the siege of Zara and the seizure and looting of Constantinople. As the Languedoc was supposedly teeming with Cathars and Cathar sympathisers, this made the region a target for northern French noblemen looking to acquire new fiefs. The barons of the north headed south to do battle.
Their first target was the lands of the Trencavel, powerful lords of Albi, Carcassonne and the Razes—but a family with few allies in the Midi. Little was thus done to form a regional coalition and the crusading army was able to take Carcassonne, the Trencavel capital, incarcerating Raymond Roger in his own citadel where he died, allegedly of natural causes; champions of the Occitan cause from that day to this believe he was murdered. Simon de Montfort was granted the Trencavel lands by the Pope and did homage for them to the King of France, thus incurring the enmity of Peter of Aragon who had held aloof from the conflict, even acting as a mediator at the time of the siege of Carcassonne. The remainder of the first of the two Cathar wars now essentially focused on Simon's attempt to hold on to his fabulous gains through winters where he was faced, with only a small force of confederates operating from the main winter camp at Fanjeau, with the desertion of local lords who had sworn fealty to him out of necessity—and attempts to enlarge his newfound domains in the summer when his forces were greatly augmented by reinforcements from northern France, Germany and elsewhere. Summer campaigns saw him not only retake, sometimes with brutal reprisals, what he had lost in the 'close' season, but also seek to widen his sphere of operation—and we see him in action in the Aveyron at St. Antonin and on the banks of the Rhone at Beaucaire. Simon's greatest triumph was the victory against superior numbers at the Battle of Muret—a battle which saw not only the defeat of Raymond of Toulouse and his Occitan allies—but also the death of Peter of Aragon—and the effective end of the ambitions of the house of Aragon/Barcelona in the Languedoc. This was in the medium and longer term of much greater significance to the royal house of France than it was to De Montfort—and with the battle of Bouvines was to secure the position of Philip Augustus vis a vis England and the Empire. The Battle of Muret was a massive step in the creation of the unified French kingdom and the country we know today—although Edward III, the Black Prince and Henry V would threaten later to shake these foundations.
The crusader army came under the command, both spiritually and militarily, of the papal legate Arnaud-Amaury, Abbot of Cîteaux. In the first significant engagement of the war, the town of Béziers was besieged on 22 July 1209. The Catholic inhabitants of the city were granted the freedom to leave unharmed, but many refused and opted to stay and fight alongside the Cathars.
After the success of his siege of Carcassonne, which followed the massacre at Béziers, Simon de Montfort was designated as leader of the Crusader army. Prominent opponents of the Crusaders were Raymond-Roger de Trencavel, viscount of Carcassonne, and his feudal overlord Peter II, the king of Aragon, who held fiefdoms and had a number of vassals in the region. Peter died fighting against the crusade on 12 September 1213 at the Battle of Muret. Simon was killed on 25 June 1218 after maintaining a siege of Toulouse for nine months.
Manuscript depicting Waldensians as witches riding brooms
According to modern scholars and the Waldensians themselves, the Waldensians began with Peter Waldo, who began to preach on the streets of Lyon in 1177.
Much of what is known about the Waldensians comes from reports from Reinerius Saccho (died 1259), a former Cathar who converted to Catholicism and wrote two reports for the Inquisition, Summa de Catharis et Pauperibus de Lugduno (roughly) "Of the Sects of Modern Heretics" (1254).
According to Saccho, Waldensians were divided by three types of activity: Sandaliati, who were to study the scriptures to find and correct the 'errors' of the Catholic church and hierarchy; Doctores, who instructed and trained missionaries; and Novellani, who preached to the general population. They were also called Insabbatati, Sabati, Inzabbatati Sabotiers due to the unusual type of sabot they used as footwear.
Waldensians also held and preached a number of 'truths' that they believed represented precepts originally emanating from Jesus and his Apostles but which had subsequently become corrupted and lost when the church became established by the Roman Emperor Constantine:
That oaths to anyone but God are forbidden;
That capital punishment is not allowed to any civil power;
That sacraments given by unworthy priests are not valid; and
That any layman (who believes in Christ and leads an exemplary, Christ-like life) may consecrate the sacrament of the altar.
In 1179, a representation of Waldensians went to Rome to attend the Third Council of the Lateran, where they met with Pope Alexander III in the hopes of persuading the Pope to adopt some of their suggested reforms. The Pope, while impressed with their tenets of poverty and assisting the poor, forbade them from preaching or providing any explanation or critical interpretation (exegesis) without authorization from the local clergy.
Despite this admonition, Waldo and his followers continued to preach in public, declaring instead that they "must obey God rather than man". They also continued to provide their own exigesis (interpretation) of New Testament writings regardless of Catholic teachings. This 'literal interpretation' of the Bible was a forerunner of the precept propounded by Martin Luther and others in the Protestant Reformation.
Waldo had arranged for a translation of the New Testament into the Provençal language and he and his followers preached from that translation. Waldo's followers developed a system whereby they would go from town to town and meet secretly with small groups of Waldensians. There they would confess sins and hold service. A traveling Waldensian preacher was known as a barba. The group would shelter and house the barba and help make arrangements to move on to the next town in secret.
Because of this ongoing practice, they were formally declared schismatics by Pope Lucius III in 1184 at the Synod of Verona, and heretics during the Fourth Lateran Council in 1215. The Council stated that the group's principal error was "contempt for ecclesiastical power", but were also accused of teaching "innumerable errors". Waldo and his followers were excommunicated and forced from Lyon.
In 1211, more than 80 Waldensians were burned as heretics at Strasbourg, beginning several centuries of persecution that nearly destroyed the movement.
The rejection by the Church radicalized the movement. In terms of ideology, the Waldensians totally rejected the authority of the Catholic church and its clergy.
In 1229 the Catholic Church completed its Crusade against the Catharism, or Albigenses, in the south of France. The Waldenses next became objects of such efforts. The Inquisition would soon be turned against the church’s other opponents. This caused the Waldenses to go underground and to retreat out of urban areas into more remote rural settings. By 1230 they no longer preached in public. Gabriel Audisio explains: “Rather than going to seek new sheep ..., they devoted themselves to looking after the converted, maintaining them in their faith in the face of outside pressure and persecution.” He adds that “preaching remained essential but had completely changed in practice.” They no longer sold and gave away all of their possessions and lived on handouts; they began to establish households and farming communities on which to raise their families. Still, they held dearly to their beliefs and continued the egalitarian style of worship and literal biblical interpretation that the early movement had promoted.
In 1487 Pope Innocent VIII issued a bull for the extermination of the Vaudois. Alberto de' Capitanei, archdeacon of Cremona, responded to the bull by organizing a crusade to complete the process and launched an offensive in the provinces of Dauphine and Piedmont. Charles I, Duke of Savoy, eventually interfered to save his territories from further confusion and promised the Vaudois peace. But the offensive had devastated the area, and many of the Vaudois fled to Provence and to southern Italy.
From Medieval Heresy to the Protestant Reformation
Martin Luther, the last medieval heretic?
Arguably, one of the turning points that lead Europe out of the Middle Ages into the Early Modern Period was the most famous act of heresy in Christian history. In its own way, the Protestant Reformation begun by the German monk Martin Luther (1483-1546) was an act of heresy against the power of the Catholic Church. In nailing his Ninety-Five theses to the door of the Wittenberg Cathedral attacking the sale of papal indulgences, Luther made himself an enemy of Catholic orthodoxy. The basic premise of Lutheran theology was that Christianity ought only be based on the word of the Bible and not on the interpretation of the clergy and the Church hierarchy. Luther's critique against the sale of indulgences was based on a reading of the Bible that showed him that salvation was earned through faith alone, unlike the Catholic doctrine of faith and good works (the buying of indulgences was considered a 'good work'). Luther achieved a greater level of success than past Medieval "heretics" largely due to the invention of the printing press for distribution of his materials. Furthermore, Luther circumvented the need of having an elite, educated clergy to interpret the Bible by using vernacular German to bring the Bible "down to the people".
Tea bag Name : Infusion Camomille
Serie Name : Serie 1 (central picture on front)
Flap : Short straight flap
Flap Texts : Mode D'emploi (7 lines text) Fabriqué par KAMY S. A. ....
Colours : Yellow, Orange, Black
Tea bag Name : Infusion Menthe
Serie Name : Serie 1 (central picture on front)
Flap : Short straight flap
Flap Texts : Mode D'emploi (7 lines text) Fabriqué par KAMY S. A. ....
Colours : Green, Blue, Orange, Black
Tea bag Name : Infusion Tilleul
Serie Name : Serie 1 (central picture on front)
Flap : Short straight flap
Flap Texts : Mode D'emploi (7 lines text) Fabriqué par KAMY S. A. ....
Colours : Brown, Violet, Orange, Black
Tea bag Name : Infusion Verveine
Serie Name : Serie 1 (central picture on front)
Flap : Short straight flap
Flap Texts : Mode D'emploi (7 lines text) Fabriqué par KAMY S. A. ....
Colours : Green, Orange, Black
Serie Name : Serie 1 (central picture on front)
Flap : Short straight flap
Flap Texts : Mode D'emploi (7 lines text) Fabriqué par KAMY S. A. ....
Colours : Orange, Green, Black
Serie Name : Serie 1 (central picture on front)
Flap : Short straight flap
Flap Texts : Mode D'emploi (7 lines text) Fabriqué par KAMY S. A. ....
Colours : Red, Green, Black, Orange
Serie Name : Serie 1 (central picture on front)
Flap : Short straight flap
Flap Texts : Mode D'emploi (7 lines text) Fabriqué par KAMY S. A. ....
Colours : Orange, Green, Black
Serie Name : Serie 1 (central picture on front)
Flap : Short straight flap
Flap Texts : Mode D'emploi (7 lines text) Fabriqué par KAMY S. A. ....
Colours : Blue light, Green, Black, Orange
Tea bag Name : Thé aux Fruits Rouges
Serie Name : Serie 1 (central picture on front)
Flap : Short straight flap
Flap Texts : Mode D'emploi (7 lines text) Fabriqué par KAMY S. A. ....
Colours : Pink Dark, Red, Black, Orange
Tea bag Name : Thé aux Fleurs d?Oranger
Serie Name : Serie 1 (central picture on front)
Flap : Short straight flap
Flap Texts : Mode D'emploi (7 lines text) Fabriqué par KAMY S. A. ....
Colours : Brown, Green, Black
Tea bag Name : Thé pur de Ceylon
Serie Name : Serie 1 (central picture on front)
Flap : Short straight flap
Flap Texts : Mode D'emploi (7 lines text) Fabriqué par KAMY S. A. ....
Colours : Green, Orange, Black
Serie Name : Serie 1 (central picture on front)
Flavours : Green Tea, Spearmint
Flap : Short straight flap
Flap Texts : Mode D'emploi (7 lines text) Fabriqué par KAMY S. A. ....
Colours : Blue dark, Orange, Green, Black
Serie Name : Serie 2 (no picture on front)
Flap : Short straight flap
Flap Texts : Mode D'emploi (7 lines text) Fabriqué par KAMY S. A. ....
Colours : Red, Green, Black, Orange
Search Tea Bags by Brands :
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 0-9
Search Tea Bags by Countries :
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P R S T U V Y Z
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 0-9
Herbaceous Ornamental PlantsHerbaceous plants fit roughly into 3 categories, namely annuals, biennials, and perennials.
Annuals are plants that complete their growing cycle in a single year or season. They germinate, grow vegetatively, flower, set seed, and then die. Many plants grown as annuals in temperate climates may actually be "tropical perennials".
Biennials are similar to annuals, except that they do their vegetative growing one year, then flower, set seed, and die the following year.
Perennials are plants that live year after year, going through regular cycles of vegetative growth, flowering, setting seed, and then returning to vegetative growth (usually with periods of dormancy in between). Woody plants such as trees, shrubs, and vines are also perennials, but are not addressed in this volume.
The approach of this book is to discuss the planting and maintenance of individual herbaceous plants. Over time, there may be many thousands of entries.
Chapter 6: Beyond the Ruins (2300 A.D. first time)
You'll start out in the Bangor Dome, which doesn't have much besides another sealed door. Buy some new armor and use the enertron, then head into Lab 16 to cross over into another area. Try to avoid the rats, they steal tonics and money. Head to the right to pick up a beserker accessory, and make sure you grab the lode bow for Marle. There will be some ghosts in the next area who you'll need to kill with Lucca's fire attack. Try to get clumps of enemies with fire whirl as well. Once you've fought your way past some mutants and more, you'll reach another outdoor area, where you can access the sewers, Lab 32, and Arris Dome. The sewers aren't strictly necessary until much later in the game, and you can't go through Lab 32 until you complete a quest in the Arris Dome, so head there.
Talk to the people inside to learn a bit more about the state of things in the future. When you're ready, head down the ramp to explore a new area and get into a boss fight. Walk through the girders and exit to the north to hear an alarm go off in the room you walk through. You'll have to fight a Guardian boss which has two bits. The bits periodically attack you, and if you attack the Guardian itself while the bits are active, they'll do a special attack. Concentrate on killing the individual bits, then attack the Guardian while it's counting down to regenerate the bits. Use Aura Whirl with Crono and Marle to restore health during the countdown if you need it. After a few rounds it should fall eventually.
You'll get a seed and learn a clue about the rat running around. Try to catch the rat if you want, but the clue it gives you is to hold L&R and press A. Use that to activate a bridge to the right side, and fight or sneak your way through to eventually reach a computer. Activate another bridge to a sealed door if you want as well. You'll learn about the nearest Time Gate to the east of Arris Dome, and watch a recording of the day of Lavos, which explains why the future is so apocalyptic. You'll make it your official quest to change the past and try to stop Lavos from destroying the world. Head back to the top of the dome and you'll give the seeds you found to the people living there. You'll get a bike key, and you can use it to head into Lab 32, and race against Johnny on a jetbike.
To race Johnny, you just need to be ahead of him at the end of the race, which should be easy with your three boosts. If you choose to walk the highway instead you can find a race log which will enable you to record your bests speeds and compete for prizes. You increase your speed during the race by boosting or having johnny's bike bump you from behind. If you pass a speed of 1500 you get a power tab.
Once you pass through Lab 32 one way or another, head into the dome, fight a few buggers, and meet Robo. He'll join your party and tell you he needs to go to the factory to turn on the power so you can reach a new time gate.
Impossible during this stage of the game since you have no access to a time gate.
Continue to Chapter 7: The Factory Ruins (2300 A.D. first time)
Books on this shelf deal with constructed languages: languages whose phonology, grammar, and/or vocabulary have been consciously devised by an individual or group, instead of having evolved naturally. There are many possible reasons to create a constructed language: to ease human communication; to bring fiction or an associated constructed world to life; for linguistic experimentation; for artistic creation; and for language games.
Complete Detailed Grammar of the International Language Ido
Salute, Jonathan!
There is a direct relationship between heavy drinking and cardiovascular disease.
To create a viewable flash movie for viewers see, it's best to first go into the Publish Settings option under File>Publish Settings to check and ensure the options checked are the ones you want. Here are options to rename the SWF and HTML files that are going to be created, as well as other options that will enable the author to customize the settings further.
As options are checked on the Formats tab, new tabs are added alongside it. For example, if the Flash (.swf) option has been checked, a tab that reads Flash will appear. This tab when enabled then allows for alterations to the publish settings. Whether to allow the SWF to be viewable for older versions of flash player or whether to add a password for access, these options are listed here.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
The Zhu Jiang Delta Economic Zone, is an economic region with higher development level in the southern coastal area of China, including Hong Kong, Macau, Guangzhou, Shenzhen, Zhuhai, Foshan, Huizhou, Zhaoqing, Jiangmen, Zhongshan, Dongguan.
Zhu Jiang Sanjiaaozhou Jingjihqu, shih ZG narnbuh yarnhaai dihqu 1'g fazhaan chengduh jiaohgao d jingjih quyuh, baokuoh Xianggaang, Aohmern, Guaangzhou, Shenzhehn, Zhuhaai, Forshan, Huihzhou, Zhaohqihng, Jiangmern, Zhongshan, Dongguaan.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Belgian PM Charles Michel says Brussels has been placed on its highest level of terror alert in response to information about the risk of an attack like the one in Paris last week.
The third generation top quark was the last quark in the Standard Model to have its existence proven experimentally (in 1995). It is also the most massive of the quarks. Why was it so difficult to observe a top quark?
Creating massive particles requires a lot of energy. It took a long time to develop a particle accelerator which accelerated other particles to the energy required to create top quarks.
What observable phenomena does the Standard Model not explain?
Gravity, as well as mass, and the large number of constants in the Standard Model.
How much more massive is an up quark than an electron?
How many fermions are there in the Standard Model?
Charge: +1.6 x 10−19C
Mass: 0.511 MeV/c2 = 9.11 x 10−31 kg
Semasiological map for [papa]
‘dad’ ‘the Pope’ ‘cardboard, pasteboard’ ‘vulg. mouth, face’ ‘bye-bye!’ ‘mash’
(For areas without shading there is no information yet.)
< False Friends of the Slavist Homepage
1945: February - Yalta conference:
Plan what to do about Germany/Europe after war.
Key Agreements – Eastern Europe Soviet ‘sphere-of-influence’
Germany – four zones: British, French, American and Russian
Berlin – four zones: British, French, American and Russian
July/August – Potsdam conference:
Truman new US leader. V. anti-communist
Disagreements – Germany. Stalin wanted compensation – felt threatened, keep Germany crippled
1946:	Churchill delivers ‘Iron Curtain’ speech
1947: The Truman Doctrine:
1949: Communists take power in China; Nationalists retreat to Taiwan
June 25: North Korea invaded the South in a bid to unite Korea without elections.
September 15: USA and Britain led UN troops in military intervention
November 25: 500,000 Chinese communist volunteers joined war for North Korea.
1953: Armistice ends fighting in the Korean War.
Treaty of friendship, co-operation and mutual assistance, was a military alliance of the Eastern European Bloc countries, who intended to organize against the perceived threat from the NATO alliance
April 17, 1961, 1300 members of a CIA-supported counter-revolutionary Cuban exile force stormed beaches of Cuba, ended in total failure. Debacle for Kennedy.
1962: Cuban missile crisis
1963: Nuclear test ban treaty signed: USA/USSR/UK
1972: US withdraws from Vietnam.
1975: Vietnam internal conflict ends
1979: The Soviet Union invades Afghanistan
1985: Gorbachev becomes new Soviet leader. Begins policies of "Perestroika" and “Glasnost”
1989: The Fall of the Berlin Wall: COLD WAR ENDS
1991: Warsaw Pact dissolved, Soviet Union collapses, Gorbachev resigns
Definition – describes the conflict between USSR and ‘western powers’ in period following WWII (1945-1989)
Period of tension characterised by conflict at diplomatic, economic and all levels short of direct armed conflict between principles
Franklin D. Roosevelt
Definition – peaceful coexistence, arms limitations, recognition of China
Gorbachev’s reforms – Glasnost and Perestroika: opposition from hard liners. 1991 coup.
Troops : NATO 2.6 million. Warsaw Pact 4 million
Tanks : NATO 13,000. Warsaw Pact 42,500
Artillery : NATO 10,750. Warsaw Pact 31,5000
By 1961 – enough bombs to destroy the world
USA defence spending for 1981 = 178 billion dollars. By 1986, it was 367 billion dollars.
By 1986, it is estimated that throughout the world there were 40,000 nuclear warheads - the equivalent of one million Hiroshima bombs.
1960s – theory of MAD (mutually assured destruction): suitable retaliation = no winners
This wiki fact sheet is based on the journal article "The value of muscle exercise in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis" by Drory VE, Goltsman E, Reznik JG, Mosek A, Korczyn AD.[1]
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative condition that is associated with a progressive deterioration of the motor neurons and subsequent muscular paralysis.[2] Conflicting results from previous research have led to controversy regarding whether regular exercise should be recommended or avoided in ALS patients. However, this study differs from past research as it looks at the role of physical activity after the onset of ALS rather than before it. The purpose of the study is therefore to look at the effects of a regular moderate exercise program on parameters of motor deficit, disability, fatigue, musculoskeletal pain and perceived quality of life in patients diagnosed with probable or definite ALS.
This study was conducted by researchers within the Department of Neurology at Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Centre in Tel Aviv, Israel. It was published on the 15th of October, 2001 by the peer-reviewed Journal of Neurological Sciences.
This research was done using a randomised controlled trial in which twenty-five ALS patients were randomly assigned to two groups; a physical activity group and a control group. The exclusion criteria for the study included a lost ability to walk (including those requiring intermittent or continuous mechanical ventilation) as well as individuals who were no longer able to understand or conform to the instructions provided by the researchers.
What did the research involve?
Twenty-five individuals (14 males; 11 females) with probable or definite ALS as per the El Escorial WFN criteria were randomly assigned to two groups; a physical activity group and a control group. At the onset of the study, the mean age of the participants was 60 with a range of 40-81, and most of them were in the mild-moderate stages of the disease. The patients in both groups did not significantly differ in their age, disease onset from the point of inclusion, and level of disability at the point of inclusion.
Physical activity group – The subjects in the physical activity group (n=14; 8 males, 6 females) were each instructed to follow an exercise program targeting the majority of muscles in the four limbs and the trunk. Each participant received an individualized form of the program based on their general health, neurological status and fitness levels. The program was fifteen minutes in length, was to be performed twice daily at home, and had the overall aim of reducing the degenerative effects of ALS.
Control group – The control group subjects (n=11; 6 males, 5 females) were each instructed to not perform any form of physical activity aside from what their activities of daily living consisted of.
All patients were assessed at baseline and after 3, 6, 9 and 12 months in the following;
Manual muscle strength testing (MMT).
The Ashworth Spasticity Scale (ASH).
The ALS functional rating scale (FRS).
A visual analogue scale for musculoskeletal pain from 0 (no pain) to 10 (unbearable pain).
Throughout the follow-up period, patients in both groups significantly deteriorated in their neuromuscular functioning, however the exercise group appeared to display less of a decline overall.
The most positive effects were seen in the FRS and ASH scales, which relate to the degree of spasticity and disability the subjects were experiencing. In both of these measures, the exercise group reported significantly lower scores in comparison to the control group. This data complies with previous research, as daily, moderate endurance exercises for the trunk and limbs have also been linked with decreases in spasticity in ALS patients.[3] With regards to muscle strength, levels of fatigue, and perceived quality of life, the results were also indicative of a slightly lesser degree of worsening in the exercise group although these differences were not of statistical significance (p=0.005). In contrast, both groups showed increased levels of self-reported pain throughout the follow-up period, suggesting that exercise had no clear effect on reducing pain complaints.
How were the results interpreted?
After carrying out the study the researchers interpreted that the results conformed to the general consensus provided by previous research, which is that moderate exercise is beneficial towards improving the quality of life in ALS patients.[4]
The moderate exercise program resulted in positive effects for the exercise group in all parameters other than self-reported pain levels. This research therefore suggests that moderate exercise is beneficial towards reducing the rate of decline of motor deficit and disability, fatigue, and health-related quality of life in ALS patients. Thus, participating in moderate regular exercise should be encouraged within this population, in order to help suppress the deteriorating effects of the disease.
This research proposes that regular moderate physical activity can be beneficial to ALS patients. However, the drop-out rate of the study was high and only the results from the 3 and 6 month follow-ups were able to be analysed. This high drop-out rate in addition to the relatively small sample size may question the validity and statistical power of the results. Future research in the area should therefore anticipate a high drop-out rate due to the debilitating nature of the disease, and account for this by increasing the sampling size. This would help provide more statistically meaningful results, and give a clearer indication of the potential benefits exercise holds for ALS patients.
↑ Drory VE, Goltsman E, Reznik JG, Mosek A, Korczyn AD. The value of muscle exercise in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol Sci. 2001 Oct 15;191(1-2):133-137. doi: 10.1016/S0022-510X(01)00610-4
↑ Wijesekera LC, Leigh PN. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. OJRD. 2009 Feb 3;4(3). doi:10.1186/1750-1172-4-3
↑ Ashworth NL, Satkunam LE, Deforge D. Treatment for spasticity in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/motor neuron disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004 Jan 26;(1). doi:10.1002/14651858.CD004156.pub2
↑ Almeida J, Silvestre R, Pinto AC, Carvalho M. Exercise and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol Sci. 2012 Jan 7;33(1):9-15. doi:10.1007/s10072-011-0921-9
Cambrian period542± 0.3 Ma to 488.3± 1.7 Ma
Mean atmospheric O2 content over period duration
Mean atmospheric CO2 content over period duration
The Cambrian is the first period of the Paleozoic era of the Phanerozoic eon. The beginning of Cambrian time coincides with a mass extinction event that depleted late Precambrian life forms and made way for a virtual explosion of new life. It is thought that the Ediacaran period, which closed Precambrian time, saw the emergence of Earth from a long and bitter ice age. Melting ice and warming temperatures encouraged the growth of algae and other oxygen producing organisms. The atmospheric oxygen content, which had been as low as 8% during the Ediacaran, increased to 12.5%. At the same time, volcanic gases were pumping carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, creating a greenhouse effect that reinforced the warming trend.
The Cambrian climate on the global scale was much warmer than we see today. Other than some primitive algal and lichen species, there were no land plants and certainly no land animals. But life in the warm, shallow seas was abundant and diversified. The Cambrian was characterized by transgressive-regressive episodes during which the sea levels repeatedly shifted. It is thought that this resulted from a combination of rapid continental drift and the melting of the last remnants of the previous ice caps.
One cannot talk about Cambrian life forms without mentioning the famed Burgess Shale (Wikipedia article), but strictly speaking, the bulk of that locality lies in Canada. We will therefore confine our locality discussion to the Sauk Transgression, as typified in the lowermost sedimentary formations of the Grand Canyon in Arizona.
During Cambrian time, shallow epeiric seas covered large portions of the continent. The general trend was toward increasing depth and areal extent of these seas, but there were also numerous episodes of retreating seas as land masses were uplifted by tectonic forces. The Sauk Sequence is, therefore, typically interfingered with units grading laterally into each other, and sequence repetitions are abundantly present. For any given shoreline position, the sequence nearest shore consists of light colored sands, silts, and muds, sometimes containing thin limestone bands. Farther out, pure limestones and dolomites accumulated. Then, in the deeper waters farther offshore, dark colored silts, muds and sands, and impure limestone beds that contain chert are found. It is important to realize that these interlaced facies do not represent different times of deposition, but merely different environments. Thus, in the basal layers of the Grand Canyon, we see the Lower Cambrian Tapeats Sandstone being deposited near shore, grading to the eastward into the Bright Angel Shale, which in turn grades into the Muav Limestone. The Bright Angel Shale is a classic example of a formation that represents different intervals of deposition at different places. Because the trend of Sauk transgression in this region was from west to east, the Bright Angel Shale follows this path laterally with respect to time. Thus, in the westernmost exposures, the Bright Angel Shale is partly of Lower Cambrian age, while the easternmost exposures are entirely Middle Cambrian.
The transition from sandstone to shale to carbonates is the classic signature of a transgressive event. Regressive events may show the reverse sequence, if the regression was also a slow event. (Some regressions were the result of rapid crustal movements, and did not allow time for the sedimentation to occur). If an uplifted region became exposed to erosion at any time, there may also be missing sequences and a visible unconformity in the bedding.
Late Cambrian sedimentation patterns shifted more toward carbonate sequences, indicative of stabilizing sea levels and somewhat deeper waters. Stromatolitic algal limestone reefs became common, which means that shorelines had stabilized as well. There is no stratigraphic boundary between the Cambrian and the overlying Ordovician periods. The two are distinguished entirely by means of the fossil assemblages. The Cambrian climate trends therefore continued unchanged into the Ordovician period.
In the diagram at right, unit 3a is the Tapeats Sandstone, lying unconfromably upon the Precambrian granite and schist. Unit 3b, which is softer and thus forms an erosional slope, is the Bright Angel Shale. Finally, unit 3c is the Muav Limestone. Together, this sequence is called the Tonto Group.
Trilobite fossils are the most famous specimens from the Cambrian period. However, the Archaeocyathids (Wikipedia article) and Brachiopods (Wikipedia article) are, by far, the more useful groups, being marker species for the period. The Archaeocyathids first appear at the Ediacaran-Cambrian boundary, and became extinct by the Middle Cambrian. The Brachiopods appeared in both articulated and inarticulated forms, but only the inarticulated forms were abundant in the Cambrian. The articulated species dominate after the Cambrian-Ordovician boundary. Thus, these two fossil species can be used to date a Cambrian formation. Although all the major invertebrate phyla appear during the Cambrian, nearly all Cambrian macrofossils belong to the three groups mentioned. Other large life forms appear to have been rare, or not to have fossilized well.
The Cambrian period introduced such a rapid expansion of life forms that it has been called the Cambrian Explosion (Wikipedia article). The seemingly sudden proliferation of diverse species is something of a mystery, but interpretation is difficult due to a limited supply of evidence, incomplete fossil records, and the lack of chemical traces left in Cambrian rocks.
↑ Image:Sauerstoffgehalt-1000mj.svg
↑ Image:Phanerozoic Carbon Dioxide.png
↑ Image:All palaeotemps.png
Moves: 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 c5 3.d5 b5
Black offers the b5 pawn in return for a slight lead in development and a superior pawn structure. The main idea is that Black gets strong positional pressure against White's queenside, where he has two open files for his rooks (after ...a6), and an open diagonal for the fianchetto on g7. The pawn structure has lasting effect and often even if White enters the endgame up a pawn, he will find it hard to convert this advantage into a win. As theory has developed, however, it's become harder for Black to find lines with winning chances and with proper play white can usually weather the storm.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Benko Gambit
Batsford Chess Openings 2 (1989, 1994). Garry Kasparov, Raymond Keene. ISBN 0-8050-3409-9.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon · Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
When you are given any problem you should start off by finding out about the problem and getting an idea of what you will make to solve the problem by:
Establish the objectives of the new system
Electronic Crafts wants to create a game that will sell successfully, so it needs to see what the market wants to buy and what their current interests are. It will gather data on:
How previous similar products have sold (market data)
What customers are interested in (questionnaires and interviews)
Whether it has any code that could be adapted or reused (internal data)
Feasibility of making any proposed game (is it possible within the time, technical, cost and personnel limits to make the game?)
Once it has done its research, it will create a document listing objectives for the new system. These objectives must be SMART so that we can check if the system has been created successfully.
Not acceptable!
The system should be able to display 5 top scores in descending order
Is there any way that you can easily prove that you have met this objective.
The game should load in less than 5 seconds
My system will allow the saving of user preferences
The system needs to be complete and ready to ship within 4 days
Is the objective going to help you meet your user needs?
A receipt will be printed and emailed to the customer
My cashier system will play MP3s in the background
You are limited in the time you have to complete this project. You must list the deadline in your Analysis somewhere and can you finish each objective in time?
The system will re-use code from previous products
The system will involve a completely new game engine and code
Electronic Crafts finds out that football games have sold very well in the past.
It finds out that with a new football season approaching, customers are interested in playing a game with the latest names and kits. The most popular console is the Super MES.
It has created previous football games, so it can re-use and adapt some of the code.
It has a budget of $5million, a team of 20, a year to create it, and the code from previous years to build upon.
Now we have all the data from Electronic Crafts we can set the Objectives, remember these must be SMART. Which of these are suitable:
The system will allow users to change player positions and keep track of game results:
M - Yes, Yes you could demonstrate this
A - Yes, this should be possible
R - Yes, this is core to playing the game
T - Yes, this should be achievable within the time given
The game will have a real world clock displaying the time on the screen at all times
M - Yes, Yes you could demonstrate this
A - Yes, this should be possible
R - No, this is very unusual, why would they need it? Unless the users specifically ask for it
T - Yes, this should be achievable within the time given
The system completely rebuild the game engine to use cutting edge 3D
M - Yes, you could demonstrate this
A - Maybe, this might be possible, but why are you writing your own code, can't you re-use code from a previous version
R - Yes, the game will need graphics
T - No, doing this within a year time limit is too difficult.
The system will calculate and display the player ratings from each game, number of cards, goals etc.
M - Yes, you could demonstrate this
The system will always be online, every game you to play will be against people from around the world
M - Yes, you could demonstrate this
A - No, you can't guarantee that everyone will have an internet connection, or their connections will be fast enough
R - No, technical restraints as above
T - Yes, this could be programmed within the time frame
The system should be really, really, really good
S - No', what does 'really, really, really mean? Be more specific, e.g. 80% of test users should rate it outstanding
A - Maybe, but how do you measure it?
R - Yes, you're aiming to be the best
T - Yes, you're hoping to make a top notch game within the time given
Name some methods of carrying out your Analysis
What restraints/limits might you have when looking at making a new product?
The Valero Refinery fire refers to the Mckee refinery propane fire that broke out on February 16, 2007. The refinery, built in 1933 by Shamrock Oil and Gas Corporation, was acquired by Valero in 2002. Since then, it has gone through major upgrades to expand its processing activities and increase its production capacity to 170,000 barrels per day.[1] The refinery, located in Sunray, Texas (fig. 1), employs more than 450 individuals.
Figure 1. Sunray, Texas outlined in red
3.1 1956 Shamrock Oil and Gas Corporation Fire
3.2 1947 Texas City Disaster
The McKee Refinery had already experienced a tragic accident in 1956, which resulted in the death of nineteen firefighters. In the 2007 incident, a propane pipe leaked, leading to a fire that spread due to multiple mechanical failures (fig. 2). Fifteen minutes after the fire erupted, the management evacuated the refinery, preventing any fatalities. However, three workers were severely burned. The size of the fire and the high, shifting winds hampered the firefighters’ efforts. It took them more than twenty-six hours to put the fire out completely. The fire halted all operations at the refinery for two months. Once work resumed, the refinery operated at reduced capacity for over a year.[1]
Figure 2. 2007 Valero McKee Refinery fire in Sunray, Texas
Two days after the incident, the United States Chemical Safety Board (CSB) initiated an independent investigation to determine the causes of the accident. After interviewing the workers and reviewing the company’s documents and data sheets, the CSB published a full report in July 2008 identifying the causes of the incident. The CSB issued a total of twelve recommendations to prevent such incidents from happening in the future. The recommendations were directed at the American Petroleum Institute (API), the United Steelworkers of America (USWA), Valero Energy Corporation, and the McKee Refinery. The API, the trade association for the oil and gas industry in the United States, was involved in this investigation. The API's industry standards failed to recognize freezing hazards, which were determined to be the root cause of this incident.[1] FM Global cited "151 freeze incidents in industry with an average estimated gross loss of about $115,000 per incident from 1991 to 2000."[2]
A section of a pipe in one of the units at the refinery was discontinued; all of the valves were closed, creating a dead leg, which is a section of the piping without any flow.[3] A piece of scrap metal wedged itself under a valve gate and blocked one of the valves from closing properly. This piece of metal created a pathway for water to flow through the valve and build up in the dead leg. On February 15, 2007, the temperature dropped to 6°F in Sunray, Texas. The accumulated water in the pipe froze and expanded.[3] This expansion led to a crack in the pipe elbow (fig. 3). When the temperature increased above the freezing point on February 16, the ice in the pipe melted.[3] Figure 3. Propane vapor release from cracked pipe elbow
High pressure, liquid propane then escaped from the cracked pipe, and the flammable vapor reached the boiler house. Nearby pipes ignited, and a second fire started.[3] The secondary fire spread to a non-fireproofed support structure, which collapsed. The pipes supported by this structure failed and released large quantities of flammable vapor.[3] The refinery managers immediately called for total evacuation of the site.
There were also two near-miss incidents. Three one-ton chlorine containers were 100 feet away from the unit.[3] One container ruptured from the heat, and the plugs on all three melted.[3] The chlorine gas released could have been fatal if operators had not been evacuated. There were also four butane storage spheres located near the unit. One sphere began to overheat because of the fire.[3] If the wind were stronger on that day, the fire could have spread to these spheres, causing them to explode and release high-pressure butane vapor.
On July 29, 1956, a similar explosion occurred at the McKee Refinery, then owned by Shamrock Oil and Gas Corporation. During this incident, flammable pentane and hexane vapors were released from a spherical tank, similar to the butane storage spheres in the 2007 incident.[3] While the root cause of this vapor release is unknown, speculations suggest that a line break or a pump leak led to the incident.[4] A light wind was blowing that day and carried the vapors toward a tank with a small fire underneath it.[4] The vapors ignited, and the fire reached the storage tank, which then overheated and exploded.[4] Nineteen firefighters died, and thirty people were injured because of the fire.[5] A statue in front of the Sunray City Hall commemorates the firefighters who died during the incident.[5] According to the McKee Refinery's Fire Chief, Mike Roberts, "There wasn't much or certainly not enough known about [boiling liquid expanding vapor explosion] back then."[4]
Another major fire occurred nearby nine years before the Shamrock incident. On April 16-17, 1947, two major explosions occurred in Texas City, Texas.[6]. A French-owned ship, the S.S. Grandcamp, caught on fire on April 16, and exploded because of ammonium nitrate fertilizer.[7][8] About 16 hours later, the S.S. High Flyer, another ship also containing ammonium nitrate, exploded.[6] The explosions destroyed a plant owned by Monsanto Chemical Company, grain warehouses, and storage tanks at nearby refineries. [7][6] According to Stephens (1997), the explosion of the S.S. Grandcamp represents the worst industrial disaster in U.S. history.[8] The incident resulted in over 468 deaths, 100 missing individuals, and 3,500 injuries.[8] A total of $500 million worth of petroleum products were ruined. Also, the destroyed Monsanto facility was valued at $20 million in 1947.[8]
The bulk of the CSB recommendations were for the API to modify its industry standards.[1] These recommendations included the following:
Issuing API-recommended practices for freeze protection at oil refineries to inspect dead-legs and other freeze hazards frequently
Increasing the radius around highly flammable chemicals in which fireproofing is necessary
Reviewing the fire protection in refineries to enable safe and rapid isolation of process equipment that contains highly pressurized flammable gases
Reviewing the storage facilities' standards to include an effective emergency deluge system at nearby facilities
Other recommendations, directed at Valero Energy Corporation, included the following:
Installing Remotely-Operable Shut-off Valves (ROSOVs) on all pipelines containing flammable materials
Establishing a written program for freeze protection that includes identification, mitigation, and audit requirements
Requiring fireproofing pipe rack support steel for units that contain flammable gases
Replacing the chlorine used in cooling water treatment units with safer chemicals at all refineries
The CSB recommended Valero and the USWA to work together on improving fireproofing standards and to require discussion of this aspect in all process hazard analysis reports.[1]
One generalizable lesson from the 2007 catastrophe is the importance of the transfer of knowledge between generations. Thorough analysis of hazards based on previous incidents would have mitigated the risks and consequences of the 2007 incident. Previous incidents, such as the 1956 fire, could be incorporated in training modules to emphasize the importance of safety precautions. If similar catastrophes occur two generations apart, there could be a break in knowledge. Institutions should encourage the transfer of knowledge by ensuring a wide age distribution, holding training sessions led by experienced employees, and establishing mentoring programs and shadowing opportunities.
According to Argote & Ingram (2000), performance-based, experiential methods can effectively assess knowledge transfer within an organization.[9] Indigenous groups exemplify the successful transfer of knowledge between generations.[9] Sillitoe (1998) claims that indigenous communities often transfer knowledge through traditions and experiences instead of transferring them verbally.[10] Indigenous groups rely on traditional knowledge to classify plants and animals and extract valuable resources. According to Posey (2000) and Sillitoe (1998), indigenous people encourage grassroots participation, instead of employing top-down management, and have an intrinsic concern for the well-being of future generations.[11][10] Frequent performance-based evaluations and corporate encouragement of employee participation could improve generational knowledge transfer in the chemical industry.
Valero had a policy to check pipes annually in the Fall.[1] In February, temperatures in Sunray, Texas fall below the freezing point. The freezing water in dead legs was the root cause of the fire. If the pipes were checked regularly throughout the winter, operators would have identified the frozen pipe and the fire could have been avoided. Valero recognized the cracked pipe as a dead leg fifteen years prior to the 2007 incident.[1] If a pipe is not being used in a system, it should be removed entirely. Also, the failure of the non-fireproofed support structure represents poor design, construction, and maintenance.
Over 300 employees worked at the refinery in 2007. Valero's management team successfully evacuated the entire refinery within fifteen minutes of the outburst.[1] Emergency strategies are important, especially at refineries. Thanks to Valero's attentiveness and preparation, there were no casualties from the fire, which is a great improvement from the 1956 fire.
This incident exemplifies three sociological concepts. The refinery had been storing toxic chlorine gas for cooling water processing units, even though safer alternatives were available. These chlorine tanks were stored in close proximity to flammable chemicals solely for convenience. Because the company had been operating this way for years with no major accidents, the management’s tolerance for this safety risk increased. Therefore, the normalization of deviance concept explains Valero’s behavior.
While Valero’s management had been aware of the dead leg for fifteen years, the company did not have a strict policy to inspect dead legs, and no action was taken to remove the dead leg from the unit. Valero had been conducting a checkup once each fall but not during the winter, when freeze protection is a major concern. Valero’s passive approach to address these concerns exemplifies the status quo bias and the bystander effect.
Despite Valero’s apathy to multiple safety concerns, the management responded quickly on the day of the incident. Valero's management showed professional judgement in valuing the lives of the workers over the refinery’s production capacity. By evacuating the facility, the managers of the McKee Refinery avoided repeating history and prevented any fatalities.
↑ a b c d e f g h [U.S. Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board. (2008). Investigation report: LPG fire at Valero-McKee refinery. http://www.csb.gov/assets/1/19/CSBFinalReportValeroSunray.pdf]
↑ FM Global. Evaluating the hazard: Freeze. FM Global, Norwood, MA, 2002.
↑ a b c d e f g h i [U.S. Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board. (2008). "Valero Refinery propane fire." http://www.csb.gov/valero-refinery-propane-fire/]
↑ a b c d [Riecher, A. (2006). Sunray, 1956: A small Texas town honors those lost. Industrial Fire World. https://fireworld.com/portals/0/pdfs/NovDec2006.pdf]
↑ a b [Holley, J. (2013, July 13). Panhandle firefighter deaths in 1956 not forgotten. The Houston Chronicle. http://www.houstonchronicle.com/news/columnists/native-texan/article/Panhandle-firefighter-deaths-in-1956-not-forgotten-4663951.php]
↑ a b c [Fire Prevention and Engineering Bureau of Texas & The National Board of Fire Underwriters. (n.d.). Texas City, Texas disaster. http://www.local1259iaff.org/report.htm]
↑ a b [Texas State Historical Association. (2010). Texas City disaster. https://tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/lyt01]
↑ a b c d [Stephens, H. W. (1997). The Texas City disaster, 1947. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.]
↑ a b [Argote, L., & Ingram, P. (2000). Knowledge transfer: A basis for competitive advantage in firms. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Process, 82(1), 150-169.]
↑ a b [Sillitoe, P. (1998). The development of indigenous knowledge. Current Anthropology,39(2),223-252.]
↑ Posey, D. A. (2000). Ethnobiology and ethnoecology in the context of national laws and international agreements affecting indigenous and local knowledge, traditional resources, and intellectual property rights. In R. Ellen, P. Parkes, & A. Bicker (Eds.), Indigenous environmental knowledge and its transformations: Critical anthropological perspectives (pp. 35-55). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Overseas Publishers Association.
This Wikibooks page is a fact sheet and analysis of the journal article “tai chi and postural stability in patients with Parkinson’s Disease” by Li et al., (2012). This has been created by 3084396.
What is the background to this research?
Parkinson's disease is second only to Alzheimer’s in the prevalence of neurological conditions.[1] This disease results in a series of motor impairments such as tremors, decreased amplitude of movement, rigidity, decreased speed of movement, freezing of gait and poor postural stability.[2] This postural instability causes a high risk of falls. A recent study examined the incidence of falls in neurological patients over a 12-month period. It found that Parkinson’s patients had the highest rate of falls with 62% of patients falling over the study period.[1] Recent literature supports the idea that exercise and motor training can slow the process of degeneration in mild to moderate Parkinson’s, leading to improvements in walking, balance, functional tasks and decreased falls.[3] However, these exercise programs often require monitoring from trained staff and are can be reliant on equipment. Tai chi is a possible alternative form of balanced-based exercise, and it has been shown to decrease falls in older adults. Tai chi involves weight shifting to move center of mass towards theoretical limit of stability.[4] This means that a large component of tai chi is essentially balance training. Therefore, Li and colleagues designed a randomized control trial that looked at the effect of a 24 week tai chi program on postural stability in Parkinson’s.[4]
This study was carried out by researchers from the Oregon Research Institution, and was approved by the same institution.[4]
This study was a randomized clinical trial to compare the effect of effect tai chi, resistance training and stretching on balance in Parkinson’s disease.[4]
What did the research involve?
A total of 309 subjects were screened to meet the following factors.[4]
Mild to moderate Parkinson’s categorized by a rating of one to four on the Hoehn and Yahr scale (see further readings).
Stable medication use of levodopa (see further readings).
Able to stand unaided and walk without an assistive device.
Low scores on the Mini-Mental State examination were considered cognitively impaired and subjects were excluded from the study (see further reading for the Mini-Mental state examination).
195 subjects qualified for the study and were randomized into one of the following three groups; tai chi experimental group, resistance training group and a low intensity exercise stretching group. Each group participated in 60 minute classes twice a week for 24 weeks.[4]
The primary outcomes were maximal excursion and directional control, which were measured by a computerized balance master system.[4] Both these parameters are indicative of postural stability. Secondary outcomes included strength, number of falls, step length, walking speed and the functional reach test. All outcomes measures were assessed at baseline, at the 3 and 6-month period, and 3 months after completing the study. There was no difference between the groups at baseline.
What were the basic results?
Most significantly, the subjects in the tai chi group performed significantly better than the other experimental groups in the primary outcomes,[4] which is indicative of improved postural stability. These improvements in balance were seen in the everyday activities with the Tai Chi group only reporting 19 falls, compared to the 31 for the resistance group and 26 for the stretching group.
The tai chi and the resistance training groups also showed improvements in walking speed, stride length, functional reach and strength.[4] The tai chi group showed greater improvements than the resistance training group in walking speed, step length and reach, which again are indicative of improvements in balance. Unsurprisingly, the resistance group showed greater increases in strength, although the percent difference was not as large as might be expected. Importantly, these improvements were maintained three months after the intervention. The stretching group did not show any significant improvements in any of the outcome measures. The results of the study can be seen in table 2.
What conclusions can we take from this research?
The main conclusion that can be drawn from the research is that tai chi is more effective in improving balance and reducing falls when compared to resistance training and stretching.[4] This is promising because the reason for conducting the study was to see if tai chi could offer an alternative method of training to slow the process of Parkinson’s disease. Not only does the study suggest that is effective, it actually suggests that tai chi is more effective than usual resistance training. These findings are in accordance with recent research which offers tango dancing as an alternative form of exercise. Dancing classes twice a week for a year was found to be effective in improving dual task walking speed, balance and increased participation in leisure activities [5]
The study has a few limitations. Firstly, the study only includes mild to moderate Parkinson participants, and excludes any cognitively impaired subjects.[4] The same can be said for the study that found tango dancing is beneficial for Parkinson’s.[5] More than likely, this excludes the participants who need the most help. A recent study suggests more severely affected patients do not benefit from a program targeting balance strength and freezing of gait.[6] This study showed that higher disease severity patients usually fall while trying to participate in exercise programs, and the milder participants see the training benefits.
Interestingly, resistance training in this study did not reduce falls. A recent study found that progressive resistance training along with falls education to be more effective in reducing falls when compared to movement strategy training.[7] This study also involved mild to moderate severity patients. Another study found that a 12 week strengthening program in Parkinson patients leads to better functional performance and stability.[8] This suggest that perhaps the resistance program in this study was not of sufficient intensity to help to decrease falls.
This research has shown that tai chi can be an effective alternative to standard exercise in slowing the degenerative effect of Parkinson’s disease, improving balance and increasing walking speed in mild to moderate disease severities. Exercise in more severe disease states does not appear to be helpful in reducing falls.
For information on the Hoehn and Yahr head to http://parkinsonsresource.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/01/The-FIVE-Stages-of-Parkinsons-Disease.pdf
For information on Levadopa head to https://parkinsonsmi.org/medications/entry/the-role-of-levodopa-in-parkinsons-disease-therapy-the-present-and-the-future
For information on the Mini Mental Examination http://www.dementiatoday.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/06/MiniMentalStateExamination.pdf
For information on Parkinson's disease head to http://www.parkinsons.org.au/what-is-parkinsons
To read the presented article on the benefits of tai chi in Parkinson's head to http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1107911
To see the appendix of the article head to http://www.nejm.org/doi/suppl/10.1056/NEJMoa1107911/suppl_file/nejmoa1107911_appendix.pdf
↑ a b Stolze, H., et al., Falls in frequent neurological diseases--prevalence, risk factors and aetiology. J Neurol, 2004. 251(1): p. 79-84.
↑ Mehrholz, J., et al., Treadmill training for patients with Parkinson's disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 2010(1): p. CD007830.
↑ a b c d e f g h i j k Li, F., et al., Tai chi and postural stability in patients with Parkinson's disease. N Engl J Med, 2012. 366(6): p. 511-9.
↑ a b Duncan, R.P. and G.M. Earhart, Randomized controlled trial of community-based dancing to modify disease progression in Parkinson disease. Neurorehabil Neural Repair, 2012. 26(2): p. 132-43.
↑ Canning, C.G., et al., Exercise for falls prevention in Parkinson disease: a randomized controlled trial. Neurology, 2015. 84(3): p. 304-12.
↑ Morris, M.E., et al., A Randomized Controlled Trial to Reduce Falls in People With Parkinson's Disease. Neurorehabil Neural Repair, 2015. 29(8): p. 777-85.
Potentially your first bow.
Your first bow if you decided to use melee weapons until level 15.
It is highly economical to make this bow from 50 Red Snail Shells and 30 Processed Woods.
The first "Fast" bow.
Vicious, El Nath Weapons; Vicious; Drop: Wild Boars, Jr Sentinels
Your average joe bow, nothing special, not recommended, wait until you can wield the Red Viper bow, it's way better.
Vicious, Jr. Yetis, Tick, El Nath Weapons
Vicious, Jr. Pepes, El Nath Weapons
Also known as V2k.
???
The last Fast bow, its recommanded that you 60% it.
Lvl 50, str 50, dex ???
Also known as Oly.
Monster Drop: Dark Yeti, TauroSpear
The Hinkels (Blue, Red, Gold)
75-80-85 watk Avoid +1 For Blue, Acc +1 for Red, Speed +10 for Gold
Monster Drop: Yeti for Blue, Jr. Balrog and Klock for Red, YePe and Buffoon for Gold
Three colors, three different stat increases
The Arunds (Marine, Fire, Dark, Gold)
(80-85-90) watk Acc +1 For Marine, Avoid +1 for Fire, Speed +10 for Dark, Jump+3 for Gold
Monster Drop: Ghost Pirate for Fire, Cerebes and Spirit Viking for Marine, No drop for Gold and Dark yet
Comes in four flavours! Blueberry, chocolate, vanilla, and sorbet!
z. lupins, viscious, el nath (250K)
???
??
1st anniversary event weapon, when monster is hit by it it says"Happy Mapling!". Pretty cool XBow, sell for really high price. Only for Global MS anniversary event. Dropped by high level monsters.
To a very high degree computers are deterministic and therefore are not a reliable source of significant amounts of random values. In general pseudo random number generators are used.
It is possible to use true random numbers. Some of them are collected on random.org (link). The random (link) package gives an access to them.
Randu is an old linear congruential pseudorandom number generator.
A pseudo random number generator is an algorithm based on a starting point called "seed". If you want to perform an exact replication of your program, you have to specify the seed using the function set.seed(). The argument of set.seed has to be an integer.
You can sample in a multinomial distribution :
You can use rnorm, rt, etc.
Note that if you put as argument of rnorm a vector instead of a number, R takes by default the length of the vector instead of returning an error. Here is an example :
x <- rnorm(10) # Sample a normal random vector
z <- rnorm(x) # put a vector instead of a number as an argument of rnorm
z2 <- rnorm(length(x)) # sample in a vector with the same length as x
If you know the inverse CDF (quantile function), you can generate the random variable by sampling in the standard uniform distribution and transforming using the CDF.
For instance, if you want to simulate from a standard normal distribution, you can simulate from a standard uniform and transform it using the quantile function of the normal distribution.
This gives the same results as the rnorm() function but the computing time is higher :
Sometimes you need to generate quasi random sequences. The randtoolbox library provides several quasi random number generators.
You can compare Halton draws with the standard R (pseudo) random number generator.
Halton draws are much more systematic.
Revolution Computing entry on pseudo random numbers
Statistical Distributions Module Wessa.net it is online application which generates random numbers using R. You can have access to the R code and use it in your own programs.
The String Art Honor is a component of the Artisan Master Award
.
1 1. Describe the following: string craft, symmography, geometric stitchery.
2 2. Draw and stitch on cardboard in equally spaced points
3 3. Name three ways to prepare wood for string art.
4 4. Use stringing methods on wood to do four of the following
5 5. Complete one original string art hanging on wood for display.
Describe the following: string craft, symmography, geometric stitchery.
Symmography is creating 3D designs with string without knotting or knitting.
Geometric Stitchery is like Symmography but instead of using nails to hold the string on the surface of the media you use a needle or precut holes to go through the surface and come out to a new point in the media. Much like sewing on a patch.
Draw and stitch on cardboard in equally spaced points
b. An acute angle
c. An obtuse angle
Name three ways to prepare wood for string art.
There are many ways to prepare the wood for string art:
Paint covers the wood and gives you a smooth surface with the color(s) of your choice.
Stain changes the color of the wood while still showing the nature and texture of the wood. Stained wood can be lacquered or varnished to make it glossy.
Lacquer (clear) protects the wood without changing its color. It leaves a glossy finish.
Cover the wood with felt. Use staples on the back or a thin, even coat of white glue on the front. Dots of glue will show through, so if you are going to use glue, it must be spread evenly, as if you were painting with it. Stretch the felt over the wood tightly, eliminating all wrinkles.
Once the wood has been finished, the string artist will drive small nails partway into the board. These nails are the points around which the strings are run. When setting the nails, at least half the nail should be left exposed above the wood. Care must be taken to drive the nails to a sufficient depth so that they do not pull out when placed under tension by the string. The project will look far better if all the nails are set to the same height, and if they are perfectly vertical.
If you have difficulty setting the nails (big fingers plus little nails equal trouble!) try holding the nail in place with a pair of needle nose pliers.
It is a good idea to draw the pattern out on paper first. Then tape the paper over the wood and drive the nails through it. Once the nails are in place, the paper should be removed. It is tempting to leave the paper in place to serve as a guide while running the string, but this temptation should be resisted. It is nearly impossible to remove the paper without removing at least some of the string. Do yourself a favor and remove the paper before running the string.
To begin, anchor the first string to the first nail using a slip knot. Tug on it to be sure it will hold before spending a lot of time running the string. If it pulls loose halfway through the design, it will be difficult to salvage all that hard work.
Use stringing methods on wood to do four of the following
In a 'Filled circle', the string would cross the center point of the circle. There would be no empty space in the center area of the circle.
b. Hollowed circle
In a 'Hollowed circle', the string would not go pass the center point of the circle. There would be no string in the center area of the circle.
The hollow and filled circles are also of a star design.
Curve from within, Curve from without
Edging basically edges or outlines the design.
e. Curve from within
When you curve from within the string covers some part of the inside curve.
f. Curve from without
The Curve from within and Curve from without are two different types of edging. In the example here, we are using a circle. Edging basically edges the design. When you curve from within the string covers some part of the inside curve. When you curve from without the string does not cross the space on the inside of the curve (because the nails in the wood keeps them on the outside of the curve).
Filler, the zig-zag parts in the leaves
h. Wing weave
Wing Weave, using existing circle template
Complete one original string art hanging on wood for display.
Introduction | Contributors | Textual Introduction
Bibliography A-M | Bibliography N-Z | Encoded Materials
←Go burnynge siths vnto the frosen hert
f. [61v] 1 ffanecy fframed my hart ffeuurst2 to bere good wyll and seche the same3 I sowght the best and ffownd the wourst4 yet ffansy was no dell to blame5 ffor ffancy hawe a dobell neame6 and has her neame so ys her kynd17 ffancy a ffoo and ffancy a ffrend2f. [62r] 8 ffancy ffolowyd all my desyer9 to lyk wher as I had best lust10 what cold I mor off her requyr11 than ffor that thyng wyche neds I must12 and fforsyt me styl ffor to be Iust13 in thys she showyd her selff my ffrend314 to mak me lord off my nown mynd15 [thys ffraned ffancy]15 thys ffayned ffancy at the last16 hath ca^usyd me ffor to beware17 off wyndy words and bablyng blast18 wych [b] hath offtymes cast me in snare19 and broght me ffrom my yoy4 to care20 wherffor I mak thys promes now21 to brek my ffancy and nat to bowe
The 'y' in 'kynd' has two dots over it.
The 'y' in 'ffrynd' has two dots over it.
The 'y' in 'yoy' has two dots over it.
Written in Margaret Douglas's hand, this poem remains unattributed. H12 enters the first three lines of the poem and part of the fourth line directly below the last stanza of this poem on "fancy framed my hart ffrust" (62r). Both examples show indications of revision by an unidentified hand. "ffanecy fframed my hart ffurst" explores the common courtly trope of fancy. In this case, fancy is both foe and friend to the lover.
You have to leave the same denominator and add the nominators:
Volkslied 1866 – Hermann Kletke
Am Weihnachts- D baum die Lichter ' brennen, wie glänzt er A festlich, lieb und D mild,
Die Kinder D stehen mit hellen ' Blicken, das Au-ge A lacht, es lacht das D Herz.
O fröhlich A seliges Ent- D zücken! Die Alten A schauen himmel- D wärts.
Zwei Engel D sind herein ge- ' treten, kein Auge A hat sie kommen D sehn.
Sie gehn zum A Weihnachtstisch und D beten und wenden A wieder sich und D gehn.
Kein Ohr hat D ihren Spruch ver- ' nommen, unsicht-bar A jedes Menschen D Blick,
This work is in the public domain because its copyright has expired in the United States and those countries with a copyright term of life of the author plus 100 years or less.
Expect the output of every program to become the input to another,
...
Today in 1978 Doug McIlroy first published a version of the Unix philosophy in The Bell System Technical Journal.
Following these principles facilitates the chaotic remote collaboration that is vital for the success of open source development, since even complex systems are preferably built in manageable parts.
Press left and right to direct Mario throughout the Mushroom Kingdom. Press down to enter pipes, and press up to climb beanstalks.
Referred to as A here, but with the right options, you can use B or X
Pressing A makes Mario jump. The height of your jump is determined by how long you hold down the A button. For long jumps, use the B button and accelerate before you jump. When underwater, press A to make Mario swim to the top.
Referred to as Y here, but with the right options, you can use X or B
Holding B makes Mario run instead of walk. Fire Mario can throw fireballs by pressing the B button. He can send two fireballs at a time to blast away his enemies, even underwater.
Press Start to pause the action.
Continue: In order to continue in the world you were playing after dying, simply press the Start button while holding down the A button at the title screen.
One foot jumps: If a target is off to the side of a platform, position Mario so that one foot rests on the edge of the platform, and one foot rests in mid-air. Then jump up to perform a one-foot jump and hit out of the way targets.
Crouch and Slide: Super Mario and Fire Mario can "crouch and slide" by holding the B button and Right on the D-Pad (or the Control Stick for Virtual Console releases) to run right, then hold Down to duck into areas that are only one square tall.
File:Smb1 mario.png
File:Smb1 luigi.png
Mario and Luigi are the heroes and stars of the Super Mario Bros. adventure. When the game begins, they start out small. They can be killed if they are struck by an enemy, or by trying to jump on a Spiny, Piranha Plant, or Bowser while in this form. They can also be killed by falling into a pit at the bottom of the screen, or if they run out of time. They can jump up and punch "?" blocks, but they can not break any bricks. Find a Super Mushroom as quickly as possible to give the brothers a fighting chance.
File:Smb1 super mario.png
File:Smb1 super luigi.png
After touching a Super Mushroom, Mario and Luigi grow to twice their original size. With this new found ability, they gain several powers. They can smash bricks with their fist while jumping. They can access the Fire Flower power-up in order to become Fire Mario or Luigi. If they get hit while super (or try to jump on a Spiny, Piranha Plant, or Bowser), they do not die, they merely revert to their normal form. When this happens, they become invulnerable for a short period. They can still die, however, if they fall in a pit or run out of time.
File:Smb1 fire mario.png
Fire Mario and Luigi have all of the same abilities as Super Mario and Luigi, and they gain one additional power: the power of fire. After taking possession of the Fire Flower, they can toss fireballs from their hands by pressing B. Up to two fireballs can be on the screen at one time. These fireballs are even accessible when the brothers are underwater. Fireballs bounce along the floor, and can fall down pits. Beware, there are some enemies which are impervious to fireballs. If Fire Mario or Luigi are struck by the enemy, they will revert all the way back to regular Mario and Luigi, a costly mistake.
File:Smb1 princess.png
File:Smb1 toad.png
While the princess is your ultimate goal, you will encounter and ultimately rescue seven Mushroom Retainers until you reach Bowser's fortress and rescue the princess. Each time, the retainers will thank you for your services, but inform you that the princess is in another castle. Princess Toadstool is also known as Princess Peach, and the Final Mushroom Retainer is known as Toad.
A variety of Power-Ups can transform Mario and Luigi in three ways. As Super Mario, Mario gets big, then if attacked by an enemy, he shrinks back to regular size, and continues the game. As Fire Mario, Mario shoots deadly fireballs. Enemies cannot attack Invincible Mario—for a time.
File:Smb1 question block.png
"?" blocks are scattered all throughout the Mushroom Kingdom. They can occur alone, or in groups. Most of them contain a single coin, but a good number of them contain essential power-ups that can aid Mario and Luigi on their quest. No matter what they contain, it's always something that the brothers can use. The items listed below are the different possibilities.
File:Smb1 coin.png
200 points. You will find coins floating in the air and in some blocks. If Mario or Luigi manage to collect 100 coins, they will receive an extra life (1-Up). You can carry your coins between courses.
File:Smb1 super mushroom.png
1000 points. Super Mushrooms transform regular Mario or Luigi into Super Mario or Luigi. Super Mushrooms will rise out of a block, and proceed to the right. They will continue to move that way unless they hit an obstacle, or fall into a hole. Touching the Super Mushroom grants Mario and Luigi super power, doubling their height. This new size makes them easier targets, and makes it difficult for Mario and Luigi to squeeze through small spaces, but the rewards are worth it.
File:Smb1 fire flower.png
1000 points. This special flower can transform Super Mario or Luigi into Fire Mario or Luigi. They can be found by Super Mario or Super Luigi in any block that would ordinarily contain a super mushroom. They rise out of the block, but unlike the mushrooms, they remain there, motionless. As mentioned above, Fire Mario can do everything that Super Mario can do, in addition to throwing fireballs.
File:Smb1 star.png
1000 points. Mario or Luigi become temporarily invincible and will kill any enemy that they touch. Most of these are secretly hidden in normal blocks. Once revealed, they bounce around wildly, making them hard to catch. To become invincible, Mario or Luigi have to catch the star. Enemies are powerless over Invincible Mario or Luigi, but only for about 30 seconds. Listen to the music!
File:Smb1 1up mushroom.png
These move like mushrooms but give the Bros. an extra life. Many of these are hard to find and once out of their block, difficult to reach. Try to grab it before it moves permanently off the screen. They are distinguished from the super variety of mushroom by their green color alone.
The Mushroom Kingdom is divided into eight worlds with four levels in each, providing a total of 32 levels to conquer! In each level, Mario encounters deadly enemies which he can shoot with fireballs or stomp out. The following moves, however, are deadly to Mario and Luigi:
Bumping into flames, or members of the Koopa clan, or other dangerous creatures.
Running into a Troopa or Buzzy Beetle that you kicked out of the way, but didn't destroy.
Running out of time before you make it to the flagpole or defeat Bowser.
Mario and Luigi's journey through the Mushroom Kingdom takes them through a variety of terrains.
The ground: Here you'll find hills, bushes, and many more land-like features. Discover hidden advantages when you knock your "block" on the blocks.
The underground: Everything is made of bricks, but you can blast through them by using your head!
Tree-top world: You have to be athletic if you want to avoid a fall!
The Castle: The evil Bowser isn't the only challenge you'll have to face to reach the princess in her castle!
Underwater world: To avoid getting sucked down the drain, you have to swim like crazy!
The suspension bridge: Don't worry about falling off, but watch for flying enemies that attack from below.
Coin room: Duck down a pipe and find a treasure room full of sparkling coins. Don't run out of time!
Coin heaven: Discover a beanstalk hidden in the blocks, hop aboard, and strike it rich! Cash in!
The warp zone: Discover the warp zone, and take a shortcut to other worlds.
Blocks: 50 points. There are breakable blocks, unbreakable blocks, and blocks containing hidden secrets. Some blocks appear out of thin air when you jump up. Breakable blocks can only be broken by Mario or Luigi when they are in Super or Fire modes. Inside "?" blocks you'll find power-ups, coins, and other special surprises. Regular blocks may also contain power-ups and 10 coins, therefore every block is worth a punch, but don't run out of time!
Flagpoles: The flag pole signifies the end of the first three levels in every world. A staircase usually precedes the flagpole, giving Mario and Luigi a high platform to jump from. The higher you land on the flagpole, the more points you are awarded, up to a maximum of 5,000. It is also possible to score more bonus points depending on when the clock stops (see Secrets). It is nearly impossible to jump over the flag pole, but in rare instances it can be done, in which case Mario will run endlessly through an empty terrain until time runs out.
Consider m columns of numbers, each with n numbers from a field F:
.
We define the addition of two columns to be the column with their corresponding entries added, and we define scalar multiplication of a number in the field F with the column simply to be the column with each of their entries multiplied by that number.
.
Now suppose that these columns form a determinant of order n. Then we have the following result:
The converse of this theorem is also true, and we will prove this later on this page.
Services, Failover and Load Balancing
Next: Services, Failover and Load Balancing
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
It is well known that participating in regular physical activity improves health however disabled people don’t get the same opportunities as non-disabled people. In the U.S. around 20% of the population has some type of disability and those that don’t meet the recommendations stated in the physical activity guidelines have a 20-30% increased risk of all-cause mortality[4]. This paper identifies some barriers faced by disabled people that prevents them from participating in regular physical activity and solutions to these problems.
The research conducted by the University of Illinois took place in the U.S. between 2001-2002 and was published in the American Journal of Preventative Medicine in 2004. Collection of results were supported by a few organizations such as the National Centre on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities and the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research
The authors have high credibility as each has published many papers relating to disability and physical activity while having thousands of citations between them while lead researcher James Rimmer has received multiple awards for his work.
This was an observational study where researchers travelled to 10 cities across the U.S. to collect data from different groups of people that have occupations related to physical activity[7].
What did the research involve? [6]
The first method of gathering information was to separate participants into four focus groups. People with disabilities, Architects, Fitness professionals and City planners. They were asked to comment on the accessibility of fitness centres, swimming pools, parks, trails and give ideas on what could be done to solve the issues. The information was gathered during recorded meeting sessions to be analysed. The second method was the researches going to the different cities to have a look at the facilities, brochures and signage provided, and advertisements of the facilities.
Addressed issues faced by disabled people regarding physical activity participation and provided some ideas on how they can be reduced
Taken opinions from professionals who work in the fitness industry and people than plan towns/cities
Only takes into account people who have physical disabilities and not those with intellectual disabilities
What were the basic results?
The results show that there are many barriers that prevent disabled people from participating in physical activity. The main barriers and solutions to increase physical activity are presented in the table below [6]:
Specific changing rooms (for those who need assistance)
Focus is on profits more than accessibility
Perception that these places are unfriendly environments
Non-disabled people are not friendly towards disabled people
Non-disabled people tend to look past or ignore disability
Fear of liability if anything happens to them
Change the way people perceive disabled people
Added benefits to the business as disabled people are usually accompanied by family or friends
What conclusions can we take from this research?
Many barriers prevent disabled people from participating in physical activity. Most of these barriers are created by non-disabled people overlooking the needs of disabled people that give off a negative attitude towards them as they are seen as unimportant[1]. Also, there are not many studies exploring factors that affect disabled people. This shows that there is a lack of understanding towards disabled people.
Suggestions were made to develop a reliable way of measuring physical activity levels in disabled people
It was suggested that researches should find more specific issues within the barriers that affect participation and that an ecological model is made to gain a better understanding
Deeper research into factors that affect participation in physical activity can help to reshape the way people think about disabled people and increase participation
Increasing physical activity among adults with disabilities
Centres for Disease Control and prevention. Impairments, Activity Limitations, and Participation Restrictions. U.S. Department of Health & Human Services; 2020.
Hutzter Y, Bar-Eli M. Psychological benefits of sports for disabled people; a review. Scand J Med Sci Spor. 1993; 3(4): 217-228.
Jaarsma EA, Smith B. Promoting physical activity for disabled people who are ready to become physically active: a systematic review. Psychol Sport Exerc. 2018; 37: 205-223.
National centre of Health, Physical Activity and Disability. Physical Activity Guidelines for Adults with Disabilities. 2020. [Date accessed 10 September 2020]
Physiopedia. Physical Activity in Individuals with Disabilities. UK: Physiopedia; 2020. https://www.physio-pedia.com/Physical_Activity_in_Individuals_with_Disabilities
Rimmer JH, Riley B, Wang E, Rauworth A, Jurkowski J. Physical activity participation among persons with disabilities: Barriers and facilitators. AM J Prev Med. 2004; 24(5): 419-425.
Thiese MS. Observational and intervntional study design types; an overview. Biochemia Medica. 2014; 24(2): 199-210.
.
While it doesn't often enter into the business of finding solutions to differential equations it is important to keep in mind when there is even hope that a solution exists. The following theorem tells us at least one case where we can hope to find solutions.
. Then there exists a unique function y(x) defined on
.
Putting the proof of this fact aside for now, even knowing this statement still provides us with a lot of information. In particular it gives some idea of how many solutions there are. One way of looking at what this theorem is saying is that a solution is completely determined by two numbers, namely
. Later we will introduce methods that will allow us to leverage our understanding of the homogeneous problem to better understand the non-homogeneous case.
The first thing to notice is that if
If you're familiar with linear algebra, then you'll recall that a transformation is called linear if
Now this gives us a very interesting fact for the homogeneous case. Recall we mentioned above that our existence theorem tells us all solutions are parametrized by two initial conditions. Putting this together with the fact that linear combinations of solutions to the homogeneous problem are again solutions, it becomes interesting to investigate what initial value problems we can solve simply by taking linear combinations of solutions that we already know.
.
Suppose we know two solutions to the homogeneous problem,
If that were the case we could evaluate
This means we are really trying to solve the following linear system with two equations and two unknowns:
From linear algebra we know that such a system can be solved for any set of initial conditions
. This determinant, in the subject of ODE's, is named after the mathematician who first used it systematically. It is known as the Wronskian, which we will now give a more formal definition.
.
Our discussion above can be summarized by the following theorem.
.
5 4: Frobenius Solution to the Hypergeometric Equation
9 8: Continued Fraction Solutions
The first tractable problem is to consider the case when
.
The homogeneous equation associated with this is
.
Our experience first order differential equations tells us that any solution to
). It turns out to be worth effort to see if such a function will ever be the solution to the equation we are considering. So we simply substitute
This equation is known as the characteristic equation associated with the homogeneous differential equation and the polynomial
, in which case the quadratic formula furnishes us with two real numbers
. In this case our calculation above shows us that
. Since these are two different solutions to a second order equation they form a fundamental solution set. So if
.
Find the solution to the initial value problem:
.
For this ODE,
. This characteristic polynomial factors
. Thus our two solutions to the ODE are
. This leads us to the general solution of:
.
This means we need to solve the 2×2 system:
Adding the first equation to the second we see that
. Hence, by substituting
.
This means the solution to our initial value problem is
.
The second case to consider is when
This being said, it is perhaps a bit disturbing to some of us to describe a real valued solution to an ode with real coefficients (and real initial data) using complex numbers. For this reason it is atheistically pleasing to find two real valued solutions. In order to do this it helps to know a little bit about what it even meas to raise a number to the a complex power.
In our setting the answer is provided by Euler's formula, which states that for a real number
. Let's take a quick look at why this is the formula makes any sense at all. The idea is it examine the series power series for
!
.
This calculation is justified because these power series are absolutely convergent, and so we may rearrange the terms as we see fit. For more general complex numbers we may define
. Thus using these definitions we may rewrite our two solutions as:
.
Since any linear combination of these two solutions is again a solution we note that two particularly nice linear combinations are:
For those uncomfortable with complex variables the above discussion may seem a bit unclear. But it may simply be considered as motivation. That is if we remember
. This in this case as well we also find a fundamental solution set.
. Using the quadratic formula we see the roots are
.
. This means two solutions to this differential equation are given by:
.
So we know that the general solution has the form
. Now we need to use the initial conditions to solve for
.
Thus, using the initial conditions we see that:
. Notice that these two solutions have the form
, or in other words using the notation above
. When there is no real part to the complex number, that just means the
.
Therefore the general solution to this ODE is:
.
, the question becomes how do we find a second solution?
Luckily there is one very nice property of the characteristic polynomial. In general, if a polynomial the a repeated root then the derivative of our polynomial also has this root. (Since the polynomial depends on r, we mean here a derivative with respect to r.) In our case this is easily seen, let
.
Since our characteristic polynomial came from considering
.
On the other hand, remembering that derivatives commute, we might have calculated this a bit differently to get:
. It can be checked that
.
. And so according to our theory above a fundamental set of solutions are given by
, and so the general solution is given by:
.
. The quadratic formula gives
.
The fundamental solution set is given by
, and therefore our general solution is
.
In the above conversation we it was always necessary to check the Wronskian at the initial point
. Thankfully this turns out not to be the case.
.
Next we use the equation (LH) to work out what
.
. Thus we can write our final formula as
.
The important thing for us to notice is that
. This tells us exactly that either
As mentioned when we began second order ODE's, equations of the form
. We can get arround this by using Taylor's theorem from Calculus. Because we don't know the solution itself, we try a solution of the form
, a power series, instead of using the definition of the Taylor series.
Much like the method used for constant coefficients, we take our assumed solution form, differentiate it, and plug it into the equation. We then collect each series into a single series after matching both the powers of
.
Find a series solution to the following initial value problem about
.
Note that because the first term of each series is a constant, and the derivative of a constant is zero, each derivative has its starting index increased by one. We then move the
In order to combine the series in a useful manner, we match the powers of x and the indices. To match the powers we change the indices. To do so, we add (or subtract) an integer to the index and substitute
The last step before combining the series is pulling terms out of the series to match the indices.
Combining the series and like powers of
The last equation above is called a recurrence relation. Given the previous three values of
. This is consistent with our expectation that the solution to a second order linear ODE should have two arbitrary constants.
. Thus, the solution to our initial value problem is
Series Solutions of ODE's about Regular Singular Points
Series Solutions of ODE's about Irregular Singular Points
4: Frobenius Solution to the Hypergeometric Equation
The Bessel differential equation has the form
8: Continued Fraction Solutions
A distribution is a type of Linux. Linux comes in a large number of distributions, some of which are designed for everyday use, and others designed with a specific task or device in mind. We'll discuss some of those differences below.
Most Linux distributions have a special type of CD, called a live CD. If you insert this CD and then restart your computer, the live CD will run Linux on the computer while avoiding changing anything on your computer as much as possible. For example it won't normally install any files on your PC, but run only from the CD. You can give the operating system a try to see if you like it without the risk of installing anything on your hard drive. You should remember that linux typically runs very fast - if the system seems slow, it is because it is running off your CD drive, not your hard drive.
There are dozens of different Linux distributions. Here are some ways to help you narrow down the options to a short list.
How do you intend to use the system?
Desktop or server? This distinction is probably the most important. Distributions for the desktop will have a graphical user interface, while server distributions won't.
Try out a few LiveCDs of different distributions. Does it recognize and work properly with your hardware?
If you intend to install Linux on a low-end specification computer, or you have other peculiar hardware compatibility problems or requirements, your choice might be influenced by this need. Most linux distributions should run fine on all but the lowest end of the spectrum.
Which applications or desktop environment are important to you?
Does a given distribution install those programs by default or is it easy to install and integrate them with the rest or your system?
Does the distribution have a good package management system, and suitable software repositories?
What options will be available for getting support? Is commercial (paid) support available? Is there free community support? If the distribution has a small user base, you will have a harder time getting distribution-specific support, as compared to a more widely-used distribution.
For desktop systems, you'll need to feel at home. Check out Linux Guide/Desktop environments for information on some common ones. GNOME and KDE are the two most popular.
Try a distro chooser, like http://www.zegeniestudios.net/ldc/. Often several different distributions will meet all your requirements. Your final choice from the short list may be based on whim or personal taste.
A minimalistic and lightweight distribution that caters to the experienced Linux user. User-contributed build scripts for many programs are available in the Arch User Repository.
Very stable; expect a longer wait between software updates.
Free version of Red Hat Linux.
Offers four levels of installation, very time consuming, but easy to upgrade.
Used mainly by advanced users. All packages are compiled from source, which makes it easy to exclude unneeded parts of software, or optimize programs for the user's system. This includes the Linux kernel.
This page details how to build a Linux system without relying on any particular distribution. For experts only.
Makes Ubuntu easier with improved hardware detection, scripts, and multimedia integration.
A distribution based on the now-discontinued Mandriva Linux, with easy configuration utilities and many useful applications.
Based on Arch, but a lot easier to install and use.
Distribution designed mostly for business, but very user friendly and easy to pick up and use.
Very popular for beginners.
Commercial distribution (but see centOS) designed mostly for business, yet also usable for individuals.
Gentoo Linux-based distribution that focuses on newest technologies.
One of the first Linux distributions.
Easy installation, but a bit of knowledge would be useful. Users are encouraged to install all of the available software along with the system. This does not slow down the system, as none of them are enabled by default. This cuts down on package management significantly.
The most successful and popular desktop distro based on Debian.
Uses the Gnome user interface and has frequent updates.
Very easy to use and install.
Kubuntu: Uses KDE instead of Gnome. Also see KubuntuGuide.
Xubuntu: A light-weight version of Ubuntu that uses Xfce instead of Unity. This version is useful for less powerful PCs and for people who want a simple interface.
Lubuntu: A very light-weight but still full-featured version that uses LXDE instead of Gnome. This version is useful for legacy PCs and for people that want to get the most out of their hardware. Lighter than even Xubuntu.
Edubuntu: Distribution designed for educational purposes.
Studio: Distribution designed for multimedia production.
DistroWatch.org - Comprehensive listing of distributions, including popularity rankings.
Live CDs - Comprehensive list of 100+ live Linux distributions.
Reaktor Main Page | Tutorials | Modules | Synthesis
Reaktor Core Technology gives low level signal processing possibilities to users, with the capability to design new filters, oscillators, delays, and more. The core cell library offers a selection of new effects, filters, and more to builders; plus there is a selection of standard macros, expert macros, and built-in modules to aid in the design of new core cells.
U.S. Migratory Bird Treaty Act (1918)
This Act implements the treaties that the U.S. signed with Great Britain (on behalf of Canada) in 1916, Mexico in 1936, Japan in 1972, and the Soviet Union in 1976. The act functions to protect birds that migrate across national borders by prohibiting the taking, possessing, importing/exporting, selling, and transporting of any listed migratory bird, its parts, nest, or eggs without a permit All North American diurnal birds of prey, except bald and golden eagles, are listed as migratory birds under this Act.
The full text of the statute may be found at http://www.animallaw.info/statutes/stusmba.htm
A locking gas cap to prevent contamination
?Taped? windows (to make it harder to break glass in)
Install a hidden switch between the ignition and fuel pump.
Always park in areas of high traffic and visibility to deter theft.
Disguise the van to be an old work van. Leave "evidence" of it being a work van, such as various trade tools in the front. Keep it dirty. (Although also keep in mind that if the van appears to be full of expensive tools, it can attract the attention of thieves.)
Dress like a worker particular to that trade.
Put a for sale sign in the window to purchase cover (plus if someone is willing to pay 2X retail you are in luck!)
Buy an automotive security system. Wire it so that you are able to set it off. That way, when someone comes near the van, and you assess that they mean it no good, you can set it off.
Hide your important items so that a thief that goes through your van without stealing it outright will not find much.
This Wikibook is intended to help support learning about mental health and addiction treatment. The motivation behind the book is to help build freely available resources as part of the broader open education inititative[1]. Students in the Master’s of Social Work program at the University of Michigan are the primary contributors to this book. The collected works in this book are built on the philosophy of evidence-based practice (EBP). While EBP is defined in many different ways, this book recognizes it using the common definition that integrates client preferences and clinical experience with the best available evidence (cite). As this book develops over time, it is hoped that other people with knowledge and experience in the area of mental health and addiction treatment will edit existing material and make new contributions.
This book is structured around the major classes of disorders. Within each set of disorders are four subsections that are intended to provide basic and practical knowledge. The four subsections are: practitioner knowledge abstracts, case examples, Internet resources and treatment manuals. Following the disorders are additional tools that are intended to promote further learning and delivery of EBPs.
Practitioner knowledge abstracts (PKAs) are structured summaries of recent empirical studies. The specific format follows the recommendation of (cite). The studies summarized using this format have been selected based on their quality, publication source, and relevance to practice. The PKAs provided in each section can provide practitioners with a quick update of recent research. The focus on empirical articles is intended to help bridge a stronger connection between research and practice. Due to copyright restrictions, only a limited number of PKAs contain links to the original research or portable document files (PDFs). However, the full citations are provided to guide the reader in locating original research of interest from a university or college library.
Case examples have been informed by based on real-world examples from students' field experiences. No identifying information has been included that could link an example here with a person who actually received services. Each case example contains a description of the presenting problem and relevant bio-psycho-social information for additional context. A sample treatment plan is proposed, along with a brief discussion of the plan and corresponding evidence. Case examples can be used for introductory purposes -- that is, to gain a better understanding of the disorder and how problems are treated. One can never know in advance whether a treatment plan will be effective. Thus, the case examples provide opportunities in the classroom and supervision to consider the strengths and weaknesses of the proposed treatment plan. Other variables, such as cultural factors or common birth disorders, can also be introduced to consider how an approach may need to be revised.
The Internet contains a vast amount of useful (and useless) information on the treatment of mental health and addictive disorders. For each class of disorders, useful Internet resources have been identified and briefly summarized. It is important to recognize that the term "useful" is subjective. For this Wikibook, "useful" refers to being empirically supported and effectively formatted information sources.
/Anxiety Disorders/Practitioner Knowledge Abstracts
Getting the proper treatment for mental health and addiction conditions is critical. It should be done in a timely manner and by licensed professionals. Treatment can be expensive although most group medical insurance plans through employers provide adequate benefits.
However, private medical insurance plans in most states exclude or limit this type of coverage. So it's extremely important to take this into account if you are leaving an employer. Losing this valuable coverage may be hard to replace. COBRA, if available, will offer similar protection for some employees. But the cost of COBRA is expensive...often twice to three times the typical standard individual rate.
Wikibooks contains books on many medical topics; however, no warranty whatsoever is made that any of the books are accurate. There is absolutely no assurance that any statement contained or cited in a book touching on medical matters is true, correct, precise, or up-to-date. The overwhelming majority of such books are written, in part or in whole, by nonprofessionals. Even if a statement made about medicine is accurate, it may not apply to you or your symptoms.
The medical information provided on Wikibooks is, at best, of a general nature and cannot substitute for the advice of a medical professional (for instance, a qualified doctor/physician, nurse, pharmacist/chemist, and so on). Wikibooks is not a doctor.
None of the individual contributors, system operators, developers, sponsors of Wikibooks nor anyone else connected to Wikibooks can take any responsibility for the results or consequences of any attempt to use or adopt any of the information presented on this web site.
Nothing on Wikibooks.org or included as part of any project of Wikimedia Foundation Inc., should be construed as an attempt to offer or render a medical opinion or otherwise engage in the practice of medicine.
The operator eq is used to compare values only.
The minus sign needs space around it since $x-3 is a valid variable name which is not the same as $x - 3.
Check carefully for matching single and double quotes, round and square brackets and curly braces. The java client will show the matching bracket, but errors are often poorly diagnosed by XQuery compilers.
The abbreviated form in which multiple binding statements can be separated by a comma:
The conditional expression must have the else part. Return the empty sequence () if one alternative is not required:
'Order by' sorts numbers as text
To get it sorted as a number, you have to use the number() function
Note the toggling between XQuery and XML construction modes:
It is easy to use the wrong kind in the wrong context, particularly XQuery comments in constructed XML.
You might be surprised at that the result of the following:
This is because number() casts the values to double and the double precision numbers round values using an algorithm that is statistically close when using many numbers but fails in specific test cases like this. This is not technically an error and other systems (Scala, ruby, python etc.) will also generate the same errors. The way around this is to not use the number() function, but cast to an xs:decimal().
Questions, exercises, problems, etc. that support this chapter in the "Programming Fundamentals - A Modular Structured Approach using C++" collection/textbook.
With 100% accuracy during a: memory building activity, exercises, lab assignment, problems, or timed quiz/exam; the student is expected to:
Define the terms on the definitions as listed in the modules associated with this chapter.
Design a program, to include: understanding the problem, completing Internet research as appropriate, create a pseudocode document and create a test data document.
Write the C++ code for a program using appropriate planning documentation that you or another has designed.
Answer the following statements as either true or false:
Integer data types are stored with a mantissa and an exponent.
Strings are identified by single quote marks.
An operand is a value that receives the operator’s action.
Arithmetic assignment is a shorter way to write some expressions.
None at this time.
Creating a Folder or Sub-Folder for Chapter 04 Files
Depending on your compiler/IDE, you should decide where to download and store source code files for processing. Prudence dictates that you create these folders as needed prior to downloading source code files. A suggested sub-folder for the Bloodshed Dev-C++ 5 compiler/IDE might be named:
Chapter_04 within the folder named: Cpp_Source_Code_Files
If you have not done so, please create the folder(s) and/or sub-folder(s) as appropriate.
Read and follow the directions below carefully, and perform the steps in the order listed.
The Problem/Task – I have a friend who is visiting from Europe and he does not understand Fahrenheit temperatures. We need to write a program that allows him to enter the temperature in Fahrenheit (as announced on TV or radio) and convert it to Celsius. Clue 1: Fahrenheit water freezes at 32 degrees and boils at 212 degrees. Celsius water freezes a zero (0) degrees and boils at 100 degrees. Google the internet (how to convert Fahrenheit to Celsius) if you need more help. Clue 2: You can also use Internet sites to do a conversion and thus create your test data.
You only need two variables in this program: Fahrenheit and Celsius both of which should be the integer data type. When you convert the Fahrenheit to Celsius you will need to use a floating-point expression doing floating-point calculations for precision. Additionally we want to round up or down the Celsius answer by adding 0.5 to the calculation expression.
Within your sub-folder: Chapter_04 you will need to create three files: Lab_04_Pseudocode.txt and Lab_04_Test_Data.txt and Lab_04.cpp NOTE: It will be easier to copy some previous files from another assignment and use those copies by renaming them and modifying them as appropriate. The professor is expecting the items you create to have a similar format to those we have been using in the course.
Create your pseudocode, test data and source code files.
Build (compile and run) your program. You have successfully written this program when it runs with your test data and gives the predicted results.
After you have successfully written this program, if you are taking this course for college credit, follow the instructions from your professor/instructor for submitting it for grading.
Decide on the data type and identifier names for the following:
Problem: A men's clothing store that caters to the very rich wants to create a data base for its customers that records clothing measurements. They need to record information for shoes, socks, pants, dress shirts and casual shirts. HINT: You may need more than 5 data items.
File:SMB3-Level5.png
Fire spurts from above and below in a bizarre lava-dripping dungeon. All of the Podoboos that you've encountered in the past have bubbled out of lava lakes. In this fortress, they drop out of the ceiling as well!
File:SMB3 W5 F2 a.png
File:SMB3 W5 F2 b.png
1: You'll have to watch out for the Podoboos that jump from below and drip from above. Time your jumps to take advantage of a pause in the fire, but don't get greedy—jump one platform at a time.
2: Make sure you grab Starman trapped in the ? Block, but first jump on the blocks and walk safely over the Dry Bones. Avoid the leaping fire and walk left unfer the ? Blocks to bump the one containing the Starman. You'll want to make Starman go right here, so hit the bottom left side of the block.
File:SMB3 W5 F2 c.png
3: Boo Diddly has placed himself in a very awkward and dangerous spot. Either pick up a Starman to breeze by him or turn your back to the apparition on the platform that precedes Boo to draw him out of the way. Then leave him in the dust and you'll be able to rest on the platform beneath two ? Blocks and collect a power-up.
File:SMB3 W5 F2 d.png
B: Up to his old trick, BOOM-BOOM returns to guard the final chamber of the fiery fortress. Use the same tried and true tactics to defeat him as you have before, but be aware that he'll sprout wings.
Lakitu is back, and he's ready to challenge you on his home turf high in the sky. Even if you're Raccoon Mario, you won't have enough room to fly in this world. The key to getting through here alive is holding down the B button and dashing past Lakitu.
File:SMB3 W5 S8 a.png
1: To stand a chance at surviving Lakitu's aerial bombardment, grab the power-up within the ? Block above. You must collect this item because you're almost certain to take a hit in this world.
2: As soon as you see Lakitu, start sprinting. The long you dawdle, the greater the chance you'll get tagged with a Spiny Egg. If you see an opportunity to take Lakitu out, go for it—it will buy you some time.
3: Slow down when you near the Koopa Troopa. You don't want to crash into it while you're tearing across the clouds. As soon as you safely pass the Koopa Troopa, run to full speed again.
File:SMB3 W5 S8 b.png
4: From atop the ? Block, you can take advantage of the high position to kick a Koopa shell or to jump-attack to eliminate Lakitu. Then bump the ? Block to collect a power-up. If you're already Super Mario, you'll receive a handy Super Leaf.
File:SMB3 W5 S8 c.png
5: Lakitu will be waiting for you at the end of the stage, even if you managed to take him out earlier. Wait for him to drop four Spinys before hitting the panel to earn big points for every enemy on the screen, possibly even a 1-Up.
Keep a brisk pace in this platform-climbing expedition, or you'll fall from the clouds. This is another of the most challenging worlds in Super Mario Bros. 3. You must be in complete control of Mario to master the moving lifts here! You will begin in the bottom left of the following map and work your way to the upper right.
File:SMB3 W5 S9 a.png
1: If you have a P-Wing in your inventory and find this stage too challenging, use it here. You'll be able to fly effortlessly through the entire stage.
2: Jump from platform to platform as quickly as possible to keep up with the scrolling screen. Some platforms will be moving vertically, while others move horizontally.
3: Watch out for platforms six and seven. Jump quickly from the sixth platform to the seventh or you'll be shoved off.
4: The jump from eight to nine is tricky as well. To a certain extent, you can "tweak" Mario's jumping trajectory. This is a case where you will need to curve your jump around the edge of the upper platform in mid-air.
5: Deflate the flying Fire Chomp as soon as you can. Trying to jump between moving platforms while dodging fireballs can be really hard, so get rid of the Fire Chomp with a well-placed stomp. Use the momentum of your stomp to take you to the next higher platform.
Roy Koopa commands his airship to unleash a hail of lead. Find out if you can dodge bullets. Roy's Airship more than meets the standards for Koopaling design, with lots of cannons and Bullet Bills.
File:SMB3 W5 AS a.png
1: Watch out for the rocket engine. Wait until this combustive contraption has fired, then jump over it. Don't miss the power-up near the front of the airship. It's the only one you'll get, and it could make the difference between glory and defeat.
2: The lead is flying fast and furious. With all these projectiles in the air, you'll be hard pressed to find a safe spot. At this point, don't advance too far, but stay on the left side of the screen.
File:SMB3 W5 AS b.png
3: Avoid "The Gauntlet" by taking the upper route. To reach the higher area, jump on cannonballs to spring into the air and land on a cannon above. Jump from the cannons to reach the upper platform. Up there, only half of the cannons will be aimed at you.
4: If you didn't manage to get on top, you'll have to run through "The Gauntlet". Cannon balls will fire at you from all directions, and it's difficult to avoid them. In this case, the right side of the screen is a better place to be.
File:SMB3 W5 Boss.png
Roy's a big boy. So big, in fact, that the ground shakes when he walks. He'll try to throw his weight around, but don't be intimidated by the sheer size of the bully—you can defeat him just like any other Koopaling.
Roy is massive—if he stomps, the room will shake and quake, leaving you temporarily paralyzed.
Leap into the air as Roy stomps to avoid getting paralyzed. Otherwise, he'll attack when you're stuck.
Watch out for Roy's wand attacks and his spinning shell. Stomp him three times to bring him down.
No more troubled skies, Mario is on the arctic Ice World. Entire armies of Koopas and Munchers have been frozen by the sub-zero temperatures there, and every surface is coated with ice.
Most of the time, neck pain is not a serious disease and can be relieved within a few days.
Hawking radiation is a theoretical effect produced by black holes. The idea was first put forward in 1972 by Jacob Bekenstein, a research student at Princeton, and improved upon by Stephen Hawking in 1974. Hawking's theory predicted that black holes should eventually decay or “evaporate” over time. This evaporation is based on the idea of thermal radiation with a black body radiation spectrum corrected for quantum effects coupled with the idea of vacuum energy.
Vacuum energy is the theoretical energy present in space, even in the absence of matter-energy. The theory postulates that empty space fluctuates and generates pairs of virtual particles of matter or energy. One particle is matter, the other antimatter. No sooner are they generated than they annihilate each other, thus keeping from violating the law of conservation of matter and energy.
Hawking’s theory postulates a particle pair generated from vacuum energy straddling horizon of a black hole, with one particle inside the horizon and its counterpart just outside the horizon. Then it would be possible for the large gravity of the black hole Artist's representation of a black hole to pull the two particle apart before they could annihilate each other and thus change the two from virtual particles to real particles. If then one of particles escaped while the other was pulled into the black hole, to the outside observer the black hole will have radiated a particle. This means that the black hole has lost some of its energy, and since we live in Einstein’s universe where matter and energy are combined to make matter-energy, the loss of some of its energy means that it is less massive than it was before it emitted the particle.
Now, if you are worried that the universe is in danger of losing its black hole population - don’t be. Hawking radiation only has a noticeable effect on black holes of around 10^12 kg [1]. or smaller. This is because a black hole must be starved to death; that is, the matter-energy it emits must be greater than the matter-energy it takes in. Since a black hole's mass is inversely proportional to its temperature, and the amount of matter-energy that it radiates is dependent on its temperature, then as the mass of the black hole increases, the amount of matter-energy that it emits decreases. So for larger black holes such as one about the mass of our sun, their temperature is very low (about 10^-7 K) so they have very low radiation. And since they receive light from stars, cosmic background radiation, and even matter in the form of dust, planets and stars, they continue to grow. It will only be at some future date when all stars have gone out, matter is out of reach of large black holes, and the temperature of the universe is less than that of the black hole itself, that the larger black holes will begin to evaporate.
Now that I have given you a brief overview of Hawking radiation and what it means, we can begin to delve deeper into what it is, how it works, and what its implications are.
If you look at a black hole in its simplest form - that of a non-rotating, non-charged Schwarzschild black hole of mass M - you can calculate the temperature of the perfect black body radiation emitted by the black hole using the Hawking's radiation temperature formula.
This coupled with the Schwarzchild radius Simulated view of a black hole in front of the Large Magellanic Cloud. The ratio between the black hole Schwarzschild radius and the observer distance to it is 1:9. Of note is the gravitational lensing effect known as an Einstein ring, which produces a set of two fairly bright and large but highly distorted images of the Cloud as compared to its actual angular size.
To put this in perspective, a black hole with one solar mass will have the small output of 9.003*10^-29 watts. From this we can calculate the time it would take for a black hole to evaporate in a completely empty universe. Now we see why it takes so long for black holes to evaporate, since the time of evaporation is proportional to the cube of its mass. However, this time is only theoretical because, in reality, the universe contains cosmic background radiation - among other things - so even a very isolated back hole would have to be smaller in mass than 0.8% of the earth to begin to evaporate.
Hawking’s radiation has many implications; one of them explains why scientists feel safe creating microscopic back holes. A black hole that lasts for even a second would need to have a mass of 2.28*10^5 kg, and since they are colliding much smaller particles, the time that each black hole exists is micro-seconds, possibly nano-seconds. This also means that as a black hole evaporates, unlike most objects, its temperature goes up (or as it grows, its temperature goes down). So in effect, perhaps some of the coldest things in the universe are the super massive black holes at the center of galaxies.
↑ Nielsen, Alex B. "Black Holes without Boundaries." International Journal of Modern Physics D: Gravitation, Astrophysics & Cosmology 17.13 (2008): 2359-66.
So, given a metric tensor
.
Now, given a metric, we can convert from contravariant indices to covariant indices. The components of the metric tensor act as "raising and lowering operators" according to the rules
. Here are some examples:
.
General description of environment and ecology. USDA hardiness zones and/or international equivalents.
List of native taxa and their favorable attributes. Some taxa may be dual-listed in taxa of concern and this should be pointed out.
Vanessa virginiensis, the American painted lady butterfly. Adult pictured.
4 !
Ground covers to check.
Schizachyrium scoparium - not wv check name
Vanessa virginiensis, the American painted lady butterfly. Adult pictured.
4 !
Taxa that one might be very cautious about having around like large predators, venemous animals, poisonous plants, agricultural pests, invasive species, noxious weeds.
Vanessa virginiensis, the American painted lady butterfly. Adult pictured.
Laws of interest to wild gardeners.
Associated Wikimedia for (title)v • d • e
Angles of Chords, Secants, and Tangents
Segments of Chords, Secants, and Tangents
Woops. I thought that tree metaphor was dead!? Sorry.
So, there are some core areas of knowledge that, if you don't have any clue about them you're in trouble with Delta3D.
Here's the basic list (upside down tree, root first!):
You can learn C++ as you go, but we strongly encourage looking up on wikipedia or cplusplus.com any concepts you read that you don't understand.
Here's a little test. Do you feel comfortable when I speak the following words?
Forget that last one. It's a silly reference to a Ren and Stimpy cartoon.
You're going to be sifting through reams of Delta3D and OSG online docs to find the classes and functions you'll need. These docs use these fancy C++ terms like they're going out of style. Unless you've got a decent handle on them you're going to be popping handfuls of ibuprofen.
Know what a sphere is? How about a plane? How about a vertex, vertex normal, face, polygon?
Vector?
Again, look these graphics terms up on wikipedia and follow some of the links. It's quite fun.
OpenGL is all about this stuff and OpenGL is REALLY near the root of that mythical Knowledge Tree.
It wouldn't hurt to read a bit of OpenGL too but I think that can wait until you start getting deeper into your own VSG development.
Really, look up OpenGL in Wikipedia and you'll have everything you need.
Let's just add this, as a useful simplification: There are only two low-level graphics libraries in existence, one of which every computer needs to do 3D graphics: DirectX and OpenGL.
DirectX runs only on Windows.
OpenGL runs on everything else, including Windows.
Delta3D uses OpenGL.
Delta3D is a set of functions and classes that make building a VSG easier and more worry-free. It's got lots of things that assume you want to build a VSG in a particular way (but not too particular).
However, there exists a data structure called a scene graph that assumes even less about what you are trying to do with your code but still tries to help. Mostly what the scene graph attempts to do is hide some of the nasty, voluminous OpenGL code that you need to make 3D graphics appear on the screen.
Open Scene Graph is a very successful, long-lived open source scene graph library that you can download and start using today! Of course, Delta3D beat you to that. It's already based on top of OSG.
Does Delta3D hide all the nasty OSG workings from you like OSG did for OpenGL? Not really! Or, partly, but not as much as you might like.
This is VERY important: You're not going to get very far with Delta3D without knowing the how/what/why of OSG workings. This is sad but true. You've really got two large libraries, Delta3D AND OSG, to get a handle on before you can work magic with Delta3D.
So might as well take a look at it now: www.openscenegraph.org.
There's not avoiding it.
Of course, this book covers OSG too, but from the perspective of someone trying to get it working with Delta3D.
Finally we arrive at the glittery leaves of our tree, Delta3D itself.
Lots of classes and functions to explore. And it's very well organized so each bit you learn solidly will pay off in helping you understand that which still lies before you.
Cellulosomes are a complex of multi-cellulolytic enzymes that break down cellulose and hemicelluloses found in the cell walls of plants. Cellulose and hemicelluloses are two organic polysaccharide compounds that are also two of the most abundant polymers on Earth. They are major sources of carbon and energy. Cellulases and hemicellulases participate in protein:carbohydrate [carbohydrate-binding modules (CBMs)] or protein:protein (dockerins) interactions that make it so hard to break down. Chemically, cellulose is relatively simple. However its crystalline structure makes it resistant to biological degradation. Deconstruction and digestion of cellulose and hemicelluloses will allow for carbon turnover and numerous biotechnological uses, including biofuels as an alternative fuel source. However, very few microorganisms have the capacity to digest cellulose and hemicelluloses, which are why cellulosomes are of great interest.
The first cellulosome was discovered in the early 1980s by Bayer and Lamed in their studies of the cellulolytic system of Closteridium thermocellum, an anaerobic bacterium. They described the cellulosome as a “discrete, cellulose-binding, multi-enzyme complex that mediates the degradation of cellulosic substrates.” They initially believed that the cellulosome only degraded cellulose, but it was later recognized that the cellulosome also degrade a large number of hemicellulases and even pectinases. Also following Bayer and Lamed’s studies were research in identifying the molecular mechanisms of how the enzyme complex assembles and how the cellulosome is present on the surface of the host bacterium. More recently, a range of anaerobic bacteria and fungi were shown to also produce cellulosome systems.
Scientists have argued that cellulosomes are more efficient in digesting cellulose and hemicellulases than corresponding enzyme systems produced by aerobic bacteria and fungi. It is possible that anaerobic environments imposed selective pressures that led to the evolution of cellulosomes. One hypothesis proposes that the integration of plant cell wall-degrading enzymes onto a macromolecular complex leads to a more efficient enzyme complex whose cellulosomal catalytic units interactions work together synergistically and further enhanced by enzyme substrate targeting through scaffoldin-borne CBM. Another hypothesis suggest that the function of the cellulosome on the surface of the bacterium, at least in C. thermocellum, enhances the capacity of the host bacterium to utilize mono- and oligosaccharide released from the cell wall.
The cellulosome was found to be composed cellulosomal catalytic components that contained noncatalytic modules called dockerins, which bind to cohesin modules. This receptor/adapter protein domain pair is responsible for cellulosome self-assembly. The recognition between cohesin and dockerin is type and/or species specific. Together cohesin and dockerin are located in a large noncatalytic protein that acts as a scaffoldin.
Dockerins consists of approximately 70 amino acids that contain two segments, each of about 22 residues, in the cellulosomal catalytic components. The first 12 residues resemble the calcium-binding loop of EF hand motifs in which aspartate or asparagines are highly conserved. The EF hand is a helix-loop-helix structural domain found in a large family of calcium-binding proteins. Calcium was shown to be necessary for dockerin stability and function. Without calcium, dockerins are unable to interact with cohesions. They are also present in a single copy at the C-terminus of cellulosomal enzymes.
Cohesins are 150 residue modules of tandem repeats in scaffoldins, which specifically bind to dockerin modules. The number of cohesin modules in scaffoldins varies between one and eleven, but is usually more than four. Scaffoldins can be defined as cohesin containing proteins, which play a role in cellulosome assembly. The scaffoldin subunits of the cellulosome function to organize and position other protein subunits into the complex and can also serve as an attachment device for harnessing the cellulosome onto the cell surface and/or for targeting its substrate because scaffoldins usually contain a noncatalytic CBM that anchors the entire complex onto cellulose.
More recently, researchers found that some cellulosome-producing microbes produce more than one type of scaffoldin. Scaffoldins that bind cellulases and hemicellulases are called primary scaffoldins. Proteins that bind primary scaffoldins are called anchoring scaffoldins.
How Cellulosomes Bind to Plant Cell Walls
Cell-surface attachment of cellulosomes is required for degradation of plant cell wall polysaccharides. CBMs are carbohydrate-binding modules that are separated into three types: Type A (interacts with crystalline polysaccharides), Type B (bind to internal regions of single glycan chains), and Type C (recognizes small saccharides). It was first thought that bacterial cellulosomes are bound to the cellulose by the “cellulose-binding factor,” but it was later realized that the attachment of the cellulosome to the cell wall is mediated by a family 3 CBM (CBM3) located in the scaffoldins. CBM3s are type A modules that bind tightly to the cellulose surface.
There are two major types of bacterial cellulosomes: those present in multiple types of scaffoldins and those that contain a single scaffoldin. Cellulosomes that assemble via a single primary scaffoldin are the simplest and contain six to nine catalytic components, depending on the number of cohesions in the primary scaffoldin. Bacterial cellulosomes are bound tightly to the cellulose and referred to as the “cellulose-binding factor.”
Bacteria expressing cell-surface cellulosomes contain a single primary scaffoldin and multiple anchoring scaffoldins. The majority of the anchoring scaffoldins contain SLH modules or SLH domains, which mediate the attachment of the structural proteins to the bacterial cell wall and may bind to the secondary cell wall polysaccharides.
Anaerobic fungi can hydrolyze many different polysaccharides, including cellulose and hemicelluloses. It is believed that anaerobic fungi are the initial invader of lignocelluloses and play a role in fiber digestion along with bacteria and other microorganisms. Anaerobic fungal plants have cellulosomes just like anaerobic bacteria. However, fungal cellulosomes are less characterized.
A number of dockerin sequences have been identified in different fungi strains. Fungal dockerins consist of a three-stranded beta-sheet and a short helix held together by two disulfides. Researchers also found that the amino acid sequences of fungal dockerins are unrelated to their bacterial counterparts. Genome sequencing of fungi will allow scientists to see which dockerin sequences present in proteins are associated with plant wall degradation. Another difference between fungal and bacterial cellulosomes is that fungal cellulosomes generally contain two copies of dockerin modules, each consisting of approximately 40 residues joined together by shorter linker sequences.
Researchers have also hypothesized that fungal cellulosome may not involve cohesin modules. However, more work and research is needed in characterizing fungal cellulosomes.
Studying cellulosomes and how they work would provide a large number of biotechnical benefits to society. There are many industrial applications, such as paper pulp production, that requires breakdown of plant cell walls in its process. Cellulosomes would be a great benefactor.
One of the biggest challenges facing the world today is the lack of alternative and renewable energy sources to the conventional fossil fuels. A potential, viable alternative can be found in the converting lignocellulosic biomass to fermentable sugars to produce renewable fuels, such as ethanol. Yet, the biggest rate limiting problems in converting lignocelluloses into biofuels, is the hydrolysis of structural polysaccharides, which require the development of a more efficient enzyme system. Extensive enzyme group is needed to overcome the recalcitrant and the plant cell wall. Cellulosomes could be the future solution.
Fontes, Carlos and Harry J. Gilbert. “Cellulosomes: Highly Efficient Nanomachines Designed to Deconstruct Plant Cell Wall Complex Carbohydrates.” Annual Review of Biochemistry. 2011.
Dementia damages nerve cells in the brain, so it cannot effectively send information to or from the brain, thereby preventing the body from functioning properly.
Dietary fibre is essential for a healthy digestive system. It is found in plant foods like wholegrains, fruits, vegetables, nuts and legumes. It is unable to be digested by the stomach and small intestine passing through to the large intestine mostly unchanged.
Fibre is essential at every age, however, as our digestive system slows down as we get older, a high fibre diet becomes more and more important.
Are there different types of fibre?
Eating the whole apple give you both soluble and insoluble fibre!
Not all fibre is the same. There are two main types of fibre and it is important to include both of them in your diet to get all of the benefits that fibre provides.
Soluble fibre is found in foods like oats, legumes, fruits and vegetables. It is able to absorb water and form a gel, which slows down digestion by delaying stomach emptying keeping us fuller for longer. Soluble fibre is also important in lowering our LDL (bad) cholesterol. Soluble fibre is digested by gut bacteria in our large intestine.
Insoluble fibre is found in wholegrains, nuts and seeds, and the skin of fruits and vegetables. It is generally quite rough and hard in texture and unlike soluble fibre; insoluble fibre does not absorb water and is unable to be digested by gut bacteria. Because it completely escapes digestion, insoluble fibre adds bulk to stools and which speeds up the rate that food moves through the gut and exits the body as waste. This helps to prevent constipation.
→ Healthy digestive system
→ Keeps you fuller for longer
→ Promotes bowel movements
→ Can help to reduce cholesterol levels
→ Can help to stabilize blood glucose levels
→ Can reduce the risk of chronic diseases such as bowel cancer, cardiovascular disease and diabetes.
Fibre needs water to work properly!
Adequate fluid is essential for fibre to work properly! Fibre acts like a sponge and needs to be soaked in water to move smoothly through our bowel. A high-fibre diet without enough water can lead to abdominal discomfort. So drink plenty of water! Most people need about 8-10 cups of fluid a day. You can check to see if you’re well hydrated by the colour of your urine. It should be of a clear to light yellow colour.
How much do I need?
Men over 70 years need 30g of fibre each day.
Women over 70 need 25g of fibre each day.
Note: You should increase the amount of fibre in your diet slowly so your body has time to get used to the added fibre.
What does this look like in food?
High Fibre Vs. Low Fibre Foods
Wholemeal bread gives you double the amount of fibre compared to white.
Helpful tip: Although it’s useful to know how much fibre you need each day, it probably unrealistic to count every gram you are eating!! Instead just try to include a higher fibre food at each meal and when you have the choice between a high fibre and a low fibre food, go for the higher fibre option!
Tips to get more fibre into your diet
Fruit and nut mix is a great high fibre snack!
Sprinkle dried fruit, nuts/seeds to cereals/yoghurt
Swap white bread, rice and pasta for wholemeal/wholegrain
Choose a high fibre breakfast cereal (eg. All-Bran, Muesli)
Add legumes/beans and extra veg to casseroles, soups
Swap white for wholemeal flour in baking
Leave your fruit and vegetables unpeeled.
Try to add extra vegetables to your lunch and dinner.
Vita-weats with desired topping – ie. Cheese/tomato, vegemite and cheese
Need more information?
Visit the Dietitian's Association of Australia's website and have a look at their fact sheet on dietary fibre: http://daa.asn.au/for-the-public/smart-eating-for-you/nutrition-a-z/fibre/
Test your fibre knowledge and have a go at the quiz on the Better Health Channel's website: http://www.betterhealth.vic.gov.au/bhcv2/bhcarticles.nsf/pages/quiz_fibre?Open
Dietitian's Association of Australia (DAA), Fibre, Retrieved http://daa.asn.au/for-the-public/smart-eating-for-you/nutrition-a-z/fibre/
NHMRC (2006), Nutrient Reference Values, Dietary Fibre. Retrieved http://www.nrv.gov.au/nutrients/dietary-fibre
Thomas, B., & Bishop, J. (2007). Manual of Dietetic Practice (4th ed.). Oxford (UK): Blackwell Publishing.
Chapter written by: Laura Grell and Alexander Butarbutar
Contact llg3875@rit.edu or nbb3924@rit.edu for contributions
Chapter modified by Kai Burnett and Dalia Ghoneim
Contact kab9783@rit.edu or dxg6098@rit.edu
Chromatography separation consists of a stationary phase and a mobile phase. In a mixture of proteins, the target molecule interacts with the stationary while the rest of the proteins in the mixture remain in the mobile phase. As the name indicates, the mobile phase moves and flows out of the system. The target protein has been successfully isolated. The next step is to remove the target protein from the stationary phase and get it into the mobile phase. This is done by eluting the target molecule.
The mobile phase flows out of the system while molecules in the stationary phase remain immobile
In chromatography, the target protein is desorbed from the stationary phase to the mobile phase. This illustrates a desorption curve. During this time the sample is transferred from the stationary phase to the mobile phase due to altered buffer conditions
The mobile phase can be either liquid or gas. Gas chromatography is very widely used in analytical chemistry. It has less application to proteomics because the technique requires high temperatures which are often unsuitable for the large polymers involved in proteomics. Gas chromatography depends on the partition equilibrium between a solid stationary phase and a gaseous mobile phase. Gas chromatography is almost always performed in a tube. The stationary phase usually consists of solid beads packed into a column adhered to a capillary tube.
A more useful mobile phase in proteomics is one that is in a liquid state. All of the techniques discussed in this chapter involve liquid chromatography. In this technique, there is traditionally a partition equilibrium between a solid stationary phase and a liquid mobile phase. Liquid chromatography is either carried out in a column or a plane.
The stationary phase is almost always solid, however, there are examples of chromatography experiments in which the stationary phase is in another state. For example, in counter current chromatography (CCC), both the mobile and stationary phase are liquid.
The shape of the stationary phase usually can take two forms:
This type of chromatography involves a stationary phase that is planar. The plane can consist of a layer of paper or a substance such as a gel that is supported by a glass plate. The mobile phase diffuses and is allowed to interact with the plane.
Figure 2. Paper Chromatography. The components of the sample move up the paper at different rates.
In paper chromatography, the target molecule is placed on chromatography paper. The mobile phase is a solvent. The solvent rises up the paper. When it reaches the sample, the solvent carries it with it. Different components of the sample travel at different rates thus separating the sample into strips. In thin layer chromatography, a matrix of gel or silica is used instead of paper. This tend to provide faster runs and better resolution than paper chromatography.
Column chromatography is probably the most common form of chromatography used in proteomics. The stationary phase is in a column. The column usually consists of a tightly packed bead matrix. The mobile phase enters the column and flows out at a constant rate. The column is usually coupled to a detection device such as a mass spectometry device. the absorption of the sample can be measured as it flows out of the column. This way, any protein that has been eluted in the mobile phase can be detected.
The affinity chromatography separation mechanism. GE Healthcare Life Sciences
Sometime when you see ASCII code it only appears to have 7 bits. Surely they should be using a byte to represent a character, after all that would mean they could represent more characters than the measly 128 they can currently store (Note there is extended ASCII that uses the 8th bit as well but we don't need to cover that here). The eighth bit is used as a parity bit to detect that the data you have been sent is correct. It will not be able to tell you which digit is wrong, so it isn't corrective.
There are two types of parity odd and even. If you think back to primary school you would have learnt about odd and even numbers, hold that thought, we are going to need it.
Even numbers : 0,2,4,6,8 (note 0 is here too)
Example: How to detect errors using parity bits
When we send binary data we need to count the number of 1s that are present in it. For example sending the ASCII character 'B' 1000010. This has two occurrences of 1. We can then apply another bit to the front of it and send it across the internet.
If we are using even parity 01000010
If we are using odd parity 11000010
Now when the data gets to the other end and we were using even parity
01001010 - odd parity, there has been an error in transmission, ask for data to be sent again
01000010 - even parity, the data has been sent correctly
Exercise: Test your knowledge of parity bits
Try and apply the correct parity bit to the following:
However, if we receive 10010110, knowing that the number had odd parity, where is the error? The best we can do is ask for the data to be resent and hope it's correct next time. Parity bits only provide detective error. We need something that detects and corrects..
New discoveries are often not immediately made when new technologies, knowledge, or techniques become available. They are often delayed as a result of mental inertia. Mental inertia is defined as the basis that prevents a scientist from taking the most productive steps and the most adaptive reasoning available with the current level of scientific methods, approaches and techniques. In other words, mental inertia is basically simple ideas that scientists overlook because they do not think the idea warrants investigation. The scientist is often either unaware of these reasons or they believe that they are using the most productive experimental approaches. A scientist would readily change their reasoning if it was brought to his attention that the selected reasoning was wrong. Therefore, intentional repositioning, does not qualify as mental inertia.
8 Mental inertia due to rejection of an alternative concept that explains the same set of observations
Since scientific progress relies heavily on experimental results, theories only stand on experimental observations, many of which are subjective and easily prone to change. It is often a dilemma to many scientists to whether accept an existing theory as true or to personally test these theories. Often, the mental inertia occurs when scientists blindly accept the theory from an authoritative source. Aristotle’s wide-accepted theory of eight-leg fly is a typical example of this type of mental inertia.
In addition, scientists today face many financial pressures to produce notable results, so they are reluctant to invest in an experiment and then waste time and money verifying a previous theory. As a result, scientists are inclined to accept the existed theory as true and rely on it.
Incorrect results can also come from deficient techniques. Mental inertia can occur when the researchers depend on results verified with outdated techniques, even though new techniques are available that can improve or correct their experimental observations.
Mental inertia caused by adherence to a faulty technique
The most common type of metal inertia is the adherence to incorrect results that have been established with an obsolete technique. As scientific progress advances, new techniques for conducting experiments makes previously results outdated, and wrong. However, it is the tendency for many scientists to adhere to scientific techniques that have provided generally accepted theories even when new techniques would produce more accurate and better results. However, the distinction must be made that when a researcher uses a technique before it was improved is not a victim of mental inertia, but merely a victim of technical errors. It is only when a scientist is aware that the basis of their work has been obtained by an obsolete technique, is the scientist suffering mental inertia. The lack of awareness that a scientist has about new and improved techniques, is unfortunately a product of an education that puts an emphasis on results and not processes.
Mental inertia can be caused by the name of the mechanism. Assumption by name can make scientists overlook the other possibilities. For instance, the hormone independent activation function of hormone receptors was ignored for a long time because they were named named “hormone receptors”.
Mental inertia can also result from improper control. Some inadequate techniques are used simply because they are common. This type of mental inertia can be self-perpetuating because the more experiments that are done by such a control, the more common the control becomes.
Mental inertia also occurs when scientific paradigms stop scientists from questioning other possibilities outside of the paradigm or the possibilities that would contradict with previous observations.
Furthermore, independent mechanisms that can explain different stages of the same process being viewed as “the manifestations of same mechanism” can also cause mental inertia. The assumption that the first mechanism must be active in order for second mechanism to be active in the process while the two can be at work independently serves as an example.
Mental inertia caused by the name of the mechanism
The simpliest type of metal inertia can be found in the phenomenon of exclusive mental association produced by the simple selective naming of a specific mechanism. For example, hormone-independent activation of hormone receptors was not realized for year due to the fact that these proteins were at first only called receptors for hormones.
Because the science of biology is inexact, i.e. too many varying parameters, the proper controls must usually be exactly replicated in order for an experiment to progress to a predetermined outcome. However, if improper controls are accepted as the "correct" control pararmeters, this would be an example of mental inertia. Scientist hoping to replicate a certain experiment will have to replicate improper control environments in order for the experiment to proceed to a desired outcome. Even if the experimental control are inadequate for the particular investigation, they will be utilized simply because they are what is generally accepted. This creates the condition in which improper controls become more widely used simply because they are widely used. This is a circular argument and self-perpetuates experiments with less than ideal control environments. An example would be the "common use of dioxins as a control in studies of compounds that activates certain receptors but have different chemcial structures", (A Schnieder).
Ignoring valid observations because of a researchers false diffidence
Oftentimes, scientists regard the deviations from their previous experimental results are merely the product of technical mistake. If the scientists are unable to identify the “mistake”, it is usually the case that the scientists would repeat the experiments until the “right” results are established. Such reasoning can sometimes cause vital observations to be overlooked.
A lot of researchers perform the experiment base on standard experimental techniques and by obeying the law; they try to produce the most ‘corrected’ result from the standard technique. Because of this approach, they tend to assume that all the unexpected results they get are the results from the technical mistakes or poor experimental skills, and those unexpected results are normally disregards. This is the example of ignoring the valid observation; the unexpected results that are claimed to be invalid turn out to be the most important observation for future research. For instance, the mold that appeared on the petri plate led to the discovery of antibiotic by Alexander Flaming. None of the researcher except Flaming paid close attention that the molds on the plate contain the bacterial culture. So, these scientists were indeed the victim of mental inertia.
Mental inertia due to rejection of an alternative concept that explains the same set of observations
A very problamatic sector of mental inertia is the extreme difficulty to change an existing well-known theory. A new theory can only have a chance of acceptance only if new facts are presented that can solely be explained by the new theory and not the old one. An example of this would be the discovery of the double helix and the chemical structure of necleotides. It is very difficult to postulate a new theory if it has to not only fulfill supporting an old previous theory, but also provide new insight into some other new scientific progressions.
Mental Inertial that prevents the updating of old paradigms
Mental inertia can occur when the new tools are not applied to the questions that scientists considered as already answered earlier.
Mental Inertia of an experimental approach from other scientific field
In opposite of mental inertia caused by outdated techniques, mental inertial can also be caused by very advanced techniques that are borrowed from other fields of study due to the unfamiliarity to the techniques.
Mental inertia of the “hot topic”
It is often very hard to distinguish whether a research is hot or important. As many scientists aim to work on solving vital problems, more scientists pay attention to the “hot topics”. Similarly, scientific journals are unlikely to report a first stage research in that it does not have much potential of bringing citations. Many important scientific discoveries are thus ignored for a long time because they are not in the realm of the “hot topics”. One classic example of this mental inertia is that, Gregor Mendel’s experiment on the inheritance of traits in pea plants was not very well-received when he first reported in 1865. However, his experiment on the astronomy which didn’t really influence the future science, became a very “hot topic” right after he first reported it. The desire to explore new avenues of bioligcal theories and experiments are superseeded by the need to obtain grants and funding for research. Today's scientists are in the same position as artists in the resenasance commissioned by a patron to provide a painting. A scientist can only conduct research if there exists somebody who with resources who coincidently wishes to have the research conducted. As the people who award grants and funding to scientists will never be able to fully understand the concepts as well as the scientist researching them, there is an innate inability for the people providing the resources for the funding to understand the importance of the research.
Mental inertia due to a habitual use of theory and/ or classification
It is often hard for the scientists to switch form their accustomed theories to an alternative theory. When the observations can be explained by a famous theory with some inconsistencies, it is the tendency of the scientists to try to solve the inconsistencies rather that coming up with an alternative.
Mental inertia of equating a task with the traditional method
Mental inertia can result from substitution of what we intend to do and how we can accomplish our goal.
There is not any scientific experiment that is performed in a cultural vacuum. Every experiment is influenced by cultural, ethical, and esthetic opionions of the surrounding environment. The cultures that dominate the society today often limit the freedom of scientific quest, such as the current practice of political correctness. This block on new scientific exploration that manifests is very similar to cultural taboos of the past. This type of mental inertia is the most likely to be extinquished first as the global environment becomes more and more inundated with intellectual and academic freeedom.
Now we know what causes this symptom so we can find a way to overcome it. Here is just an example of how to overcome it. There are several ways to handle it. By mentally, try to see the result of our action and capture it. Then we will start moving to physically and let our brains follow the suit. We just try to start very slow to see the actual result from the small step. The most important thing is just believe in ourselves that we can do everything. It is very easy to break and control once we know how to overcome it.
↑ Shneider, A. (2009) Mental inertia in the biological sciences. Science and Society 126-128
Antipyretic is medication used to lower body temperature when a fever is present.
Examples: Aspirin, acetaminophen/paracetamol (Tylenol), ibuprofen, and others.
Clinicians practicing allopathic medicine (the predominant form of medicine practiced in the US by MD's, DO's, etc) see tremendous value in the reduction of a patient's temperature when it is over 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit. Body temperatures higher than that will likely cause aching of muscles, increased metabolism, lack of appetite, inability to ingest enough liquids, etc./ A fever higher than 104 degrees in a child may cause seizure activity, which can lead to death. Prolonged fever higher than 105 can cause permanent brain damage or death.
Many people try to bring their temperature down without the use of medications. Within limits, this is worth trying. Things that are dangerous include: using alcohol on the skin (which causes a cool sensation, but closes the blood vessels that are close to the skin, thereby actually raising body temperature); use of ice, which may also close the blood vessels on the skin, making things worse. The best way to start lowering temperature is to take off most clothing and dampen the skin with water that is neither hot nor cold, usually called "tepid". As it evaporates, it takes a lot of heat away from the skin.
Children under 12 should not be given Aspirin if there is any possibility of Chicken pox, as there can result a more serious illness. (See Reye's Syndrome ) Tylenol can alternate every 2 hours with ibuprofen if necessary, but as noted above, keeping the child in normal bedclothes, or under blankets while feverish, will only maintain the high temperature and work against the medication.
People who practice homeopathic medicine believe the body's response with a fever is somehow helping the patient overcome the illness. This is not the predominant view in the world.
I can use the computer to run a few specific, preloaded programs.
I can set-up my computer and peripheral devices, load software, print, and use most of the operating system tools.
I can run two programs simultaneously, customize the look and sounds of my computer and teach others some basic operations.
I do not save any documents I create.
I save documents but I cannot chose where they are saved or back-up my files.
I can organize and back up files/
I regularly run a disk-optimizer andmake copies of my files on a weekly basis.
I do not use a word processor.
I occasionally use the word processor for simple documents.
I use the word processor for nearly all my written professional work. I can edit, spell check, and change the format of a document.
I use the word processor not only for my work, but with students work as well.
I do not use a spreadsheet.
I can create a simple spreadsheet which adds a column of numbers.
I can change the format of the spreadsheets by changing column widths and text style. I can use the spreadsheet to make a simple graph or chart.
I use the spreadsheet not only for my work, but with students work as well.
I do not use a database.
I use databases for personal applications. I can create an original database - defining fields and creating layouts.
I can use formulas to create summaries of numerical data. I can use information to mail merge.I use them for student work.
I do not use graphics in my word processing or presentations.
I can open and create simple pictures with the painting and drawing programs.
I can edit, change the size, and place both pre-made clip art and simple original graphics in my documents and presentations.
I use graphics not only for my work, but have used it with students to help them improve their own communications.
I do not use hypermedia (HyperStudio).
I can navigate through a pre-made hypermedia program.
I can create my own hypermedia stacks for information presentation using navigation buttons, sounds, dissolves, graphics, and text fields. I can use an LCD projection device to display the presentation to a class.
I use hypermedia with students who are making their own stacks for information keeping and presentation.
I do not use the on-line resources available in my building
With the help of the media specialist, I can use the resources on the network in our building.
I use the networks to access professional and personal information from a variety of sources including networked CD-ROM reference materials, on-line library catalogs, the ERIC database, and the World Wide Web. I have an e-mail account that I use on a regular basis.
Using telecommunications, I am an active participant in on-line discussions, can download files and programs from remote computers. I use telecommunications with my students.
I do not use the computer for student assessment.
I save some student produced materials, write evaluations and notes to parents with the word processor.
I use an electronic grade book and/or I keep portfolios of student produced materials. I use the electronic data during parent/teacher conferences.
I rely on the computer to keep track of outcomes and objectives. I use that information in determining assignments, teaching strategies, and groupings.
I am not aware of any ethical issues surrounding computer use.
I know that some copyright restrictions apply to computer software.
I know the district policy on using software. I enforce the school's technology policies and guidelines.
I am aware of other controversial aspects of technology use including data privacy, equitable access, and free speech issues. I can speak to a variety of technology issues at my professional association meetings, to parent groups, and to the general community.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
A Wikibookian questions the neutrality of this page.You can help make it neutral, request assistance, or view the relevant discussion.
Vietnamese occupation of Kampuchea Krom (south Vietnam) must be stopped to free the suffering Khmer Krom. The victims of this cruel act are the Khmer Krom people who are the indigenous people of the Mekong Delta region. I am one of the Khmer Krom individuals. The State of Vietnam has been violating Khmer Krom's rights far too long and decapitating Khmer Krom's society to the core. Kampuchea Krom's capital is Prey Nokor (former Saigon and today HCM city). We, Khmer Krom, seek justice and the respect of our fundamental rights. Currently Khmer Krom lack all means in everyday life: cannot study our own language, cannot learn about our history, cannot express opinion or speak freely, cannot move around freely, cannot form any institution such as local community or school, cannot conduct or practice our beliefs and religion freely, cannot represent ourselves in governments(locally, provincially, or nationally), cannot participate in law-making process, and most important of all--Khmer Krom are poorest of the poor in the region. This is no exaggeration, but facts.
This book is intended for intermediate readers.
A PDF version is available. (info)
This book aims to be a comprehensive source for any developer who is interested in programming for the Windows platform. It starts at the lowest level, with the Win32 API (C and VB Classic) and then goes over to MFC (C++). Beyond these basic sections, it will cover COM, and the creation of ActiveX modules from a variety of languages. Next, it delves into the Windows DDK, and talk about programming device drivers for Windows platform. Finally, it moves on to the highest-level programming tasks, including shell extensions, shell scripting, and finally ASP and WSH.
Other topics that will be discussed here are: Writing screen-savers, creating HTML help modules, and compiling DLL files.
This book will focus on topics that are specific to Windows, and avoids general programming topics. For related material the reader is encouraged to look into Wikibooks other works, they will cover general programming, ASM, C, C++, Visual Basic and Visual Basic.NET and other languages and concepts in greater detail. Appropriate links to these books are provided.
The reader is assumed to have a previous knowledge of the programming languages involved. Specifically, prior knowledge in C, C++, and Visual Basic is required for certain sections of this book.
Section 2: Win32 API and UI Controls
Interfacing (Mouse, keyboard, and timer messages)
Memory Subsystem (heaps, virtual memory)
Section 4: Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE), ActiveX and COM
Lists of Available APIs and related libraries
Petzold, Charles, "Programming Windows", Microsoft Press
Hart, Johnathan, "Windows System Programming", second edition, 2001. ISBN 0201703106
Gordon, Alan, "The COM and COM+ Programming Primer", 2000, ISBN 0130850322
Oney, Walter, "Programming the Windows Driver Model", second edition, 2002. ISBN 0735618038
Torso, shoulders, and head
Both partners should try to keep their torso erect at all times. Imagine that you are resting on your hips. Your torso should be straight up at all times - do not arch your back or lean backwards. As should your head. Shoulders should be relaxed and loose. Keep your head straight up at all times, and looking slightly to the left of your partner. As to the position of your neck and head: imagine you are standing up against a wall. No matter where you move, that wall is still behind you, and you must not move your head in front of it or into it.
Your elbows should be up and to the side at all times.
In closed position, for both the lead and follow, the left and right foot should be locked together. The positioning of the feet depends upon the role.
The left foot should be ahead of the right foot so that the heel of the left foot fits into the curvature of the right.
The right foot should be ahead of the left foot so that the heel of the right foot fits into the curvature of the left.
Tango, like most other traveling ballroom dances, follows a large, oval-like path around the dance floor. Couples travel counterclockwise. Instead of always utilizing turns, a tango lead should apply a gradual curve to the couple's movement as necessary to follow line of dance. If you are just practicing a move, there is no need to apply this curve - it is only important when one is dancing around the dance floor.
Lead: left foot back, replace right, forward, close.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Video Graphics Chipset: Nvidia GeForce 9500M GS (???MB)
A heaving line knot is used to make lines easier to throw. It is tied by making a bight, then wrapping the working end around a bunch of times. When you get to the end of the working end, put it inside the bight and tighten by pulling on the standing part. One caveat is that it can be easy to pull apart.
Tighten by pulling on the standing part to close the bight
This will be a list of quests and will include name, starting location, starting level, party or solo, repeatable or one time, and reward. A walkthrough to each quest may come later and should be done on a separate page for each quest.
Starting Location: Guard Belton, West Entrance to Giran
This is a fairly straightforward repeatable quest. Speak to Guard Belton at the north entrance of Giran. He will tell you to gather Medusa's Poison, Wyrm's Tooth and Harpy's Feather so that he can create arrows to kill Antharas.
Go into Dragon Valley or, for lower levels, go towards Giran Castle. Between the road to Giran Castle and Dragon Valley is Gorgon's Flower Garden. Here you can find Medusas, Wyrms and Harpies. Hunt them and they will drop the relevant items.
Once you have your fill of items, bring them back to Guard Belton and he will reward you with adena. You don't need to have a full set; partials will do. Harpy Feather fetches around 97a per item. (To Do: Figure out how much the reward is for Medusa's Poison and Wyrm's Tooth.)
Drops of items are not guaranteed, and is about 50% for Harpies. Medusas and Wyrms have higher drops rates. Note that all three mobs are (reputedly) aggressive, although Wyrms seems more passive than the rest. Specifics on the mobs:
Medusas have a Poison attack at Level 3, Intensity 6; this will take almost 1000 HP off, so make sure you have antidotes.
Harpies have a Reduction in Movement spell which is annoying but hardly fatal (unless you are very careless).
Wyrms have a nasty nasty Fireball spell that can knock off 500+ HP if you have poor magical defenses.
Starting Location: Warehouse Keeper Sorint, Hunters Village
Lets Become a Royal Member!
Starting Location: Warehouse Keeper Sorint, Hunters Village
Starting Location: Head Blacksmith Vergara, Hunters Village
Starting Location: Pet Manager Cooper, Giran Castle Town
An understanding of respiration is vital to many scientists and healthcare professionals. Biochemists can analyse the rates of cellular respiration in samples of tissues. Sport physiologists can determine whether an individual is respiring aerobically or anaerobically using non-invasive methods. Engineers use their understanding of cellular respiration to clean up contamination in the environment, using cells which convert contaminants into energy.
a series of oxidation-reduction reactions generates reduced coenzymes and ATP, and carbon dioxide is lost
Exploration of key ideas (must be original text, not C&P) – level checked by AQA
In general, point students towards the approach to take, as opposed to just giving them information.
4ATP- used by cells for energy Net ATP= 2ATP (two used as reactant)
ShapeShape2 x Pyruvate (3C) [Symbol] 2 x acetyl CoA (2C)
Co-enzymes are substances that are required in addition to the substrate to allow Enzymes to function.
These enzymes are hydrogen acceptors and they mop up excess hydrogen ions- electron carriers when reducuced
The 2-carbon acerylcoenzyme A from the link reaction combines with a 4-carbon molecule to produce a 6-carbon molecule.
In a series of reactions this 6-carbon molecule loses carbon dioxide and hydrogen to give a 4-carbon molecule and a single molecule of ATP produced as a result or substrate-level phosphorylation (Topic 2.3).
The 4-carbon molecule can now combine with a new molecule of acetylcoenzyme A to begin the cycle again.
Takes place on the inner mitochondrial membranes
Uses reduced electron carriers: NAD and FAD from the Krebs cycle, link reaction and glycolysis
Electrons are carried along the ETC by NADH and FADH. The H+ ions cannot get to the electrons, but they are attracted to them so are pulled through the H+ pump.
Work to do to understand this topic e.g. research, analysis
Carry out some research into these jobs in this area. (Feel free to add other jobs you find.)
What are the benefits of this role to society?
What organisations would employ someone in this role?
What would someone in this role have to do within the organisation?
What scientifically-related skills do they need to have?
What techniques do they need to have mastered?
What experience is needed to undertake this role and its responsibilities within an organisation?
What other science personnel will they work with in their organisation.
– relating to criteria skills
– can we use old AQA qs… e.g. from more than 5 years ago? With Examiner comments
Automatic goat waterers?
Duramate is a good water or you could just have a timer that turns on a small hose to fill a bucket for them
Automatic feeders?
QuickFeed is a good automatic feeder but expensive
Goat feed: quantity/week? price? where to buy? how heavy are the bags?
The type of feed you buy at the local feed store can be pellets, grain, sweet feed
Goat "minerals"? Same questions as above, plus: what's in it?
Do we need to buy hay/straw? How much? Price? Where to buy?
What are goat "worms"? How likely to get it? How bad is it?
How much does a hoof trimming cost? Is there a 4-H group that will help me learn it?
Probably, it costs nothing to a vet visit and they could teach you
What will a goat area look like? Find example videos/photos.
It should have grasses, bushes, leaves and lots of vegetation and if its small the grass won't grow in places
How to build a welded-wire fence? How to add a gate?
Get some stakes in the ground around the area for the goat and make sure they are pretty close to give more support. Just add hinges or ask someone at homedepo
How much do we have to worry about predators? Find info about fencing to protect against bobcats, coyotes, etc.
If the fence is good enough to keep them in then the predators should not be able to get in
How to build/buy goat shelter? Specific links.
It should be about 20 square feet per pair, draft free, and have their loose minerals, extra hay and feed incase of rain
How does one transport a pet goat?
Is milking optional, or a mandatory chore?
Tesla, Nikola, My Inventions, Electrical Experimenter magazine, Feb, June, and Oct, 1919. ISBN 0910077002 (teslaplay.com)
Tesla, Nikola, My Inventions, Electrical Experimenter magazine, Feb, June, and Oct, 1919. (rastko.org)
Tesla, Nikola, The Problem of Increasing Human Energy, Century Illustrated Magazine, June 1900. (See also picture thinking.)
Tesla, Nikola, A New System of Alternate Current Motors and Transformers. AIEE Transactions, Vol. 5, 1888, pp. 305-327. (Reprinted in the Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 72, 1984, pp. 165-173.)
Tesla, Nikola, Mechanical and Electrical Oscillators, reprinted in Nikola Tesla’s Teleforce and Telegeodynamic Proposals. (ed., L.I. Anderson; 21st Century Books, 1998).
Tesla, Nikola, The True Wireless. Electrical Experimenter, May 1919. (also at pbs.org)
Tesla, Nikola, Talking with Planets. Collier's Weekly, February 19, 1901. (EarlyRadioHistory.us)
Tesla, Nikola, Improved Apparatus for the Production of Powerful Electrical Vibrations; Novel High Frequency Measurement Techniques. Nikola Tesla: Lecture Before the New York Academy of Sciences, April 6, 1897 (ed., L.I. Anderson; 21st Century Books, 1994).
Tesla, Nikola, The Eternal Source of Energy of the Universe, Origin and Intensity of Cosmic Rays, New York, October 13, 1932
Martin, Thomas Commerford, ""The Inventions, Researches, and Writings of Nikola Tesla"", reprinted by Barnes & Noble, 1995 ISBN 0-88029-812-X
Cheney, Margaret & Uth, Robert, ""Tesla, Master of Lightning"", published by Barnes & Noble, 1999 ISBN 0-7607-1005-8
O'Neill, John J., "Prodigal Genius: The Life of Nikola", 1944. ISBN 0913022403 (also at uncletaz.com; [also other items at the site])
Krumme, Katherine, Mark Twain and Nikola Tesla: Thunder and Lightning. December 4, 2000 (PDF)
Kelley, Thomas Lee, "The enigma of Nikola Tesla". Arizona State University. [Thesis] (PDF)
Hoover, John Edgar, et al., FOIA FBI files, 1943.
Pratt, H., "Nikola Tesla 1856-1943", Proceedings of the IRE, Vol. 44, September, 1956.
Wysock, W.C., J.F. Corum, J.M. Hardesty and K.L. Corum, "Who Was The Real Dr. Nikola Tesla? (A Look At His Professional Credentials)". Antenna Measurement Techniques Association, posterpaper, October 22-25, 2001 (PDF)
Roguin, Ariel, "Historical Note: Nikola Tesla: The man behind the magnetic field unit". J. Magn. Reson. Imaging 2004;19:369-374. © 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
Sellon, J. L., "The impact of Nikola Tesla on the cement industry". Behrent Eng. Co., Wheat Ridge, CO. Cement Industry Technical Conference. 1997. XXXIX Conference Record., 1997 IEEE/PC. Page(s) 125-133. ISBN 0-7803-3962-2
Valentinuzzi, M.E., "Nikola Tesla: why was he so much resisted and forgotten?" Inst. de Bioingenieria, Univ. Nacional de Tucuman; Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine, IEEE. Jul/Aug 1998, 17:4, p 74-75. ISSN 0739-5175
Waser, André, "Nikola Tesla’s Radiations and the Cosmic Rays". (PDF)
Secor, H. Winfield, Tesla's views on Electricity and the War, Electrical Experimenter, Volume 5, Number 4, August, 1917.
Florey, Glen, "Tesla and the Military". Engineering 24, December 5, 2000.
Corum, K. L., J. F. Corum, "Nikola Tesla, Lightning Observations, and Stationary Waves". 1994.
Corum, K. L., J. F. Corum, and A. H. Aidinejad, "Atmospheric Fields, Tesla's Receivers and Regenerative Detectors". 1994.
Meyl, Konstantin, H. Weidner, E. Zentgraf, T. Senkel, T. Junker, and P. Winkels, "Experiments to proof the evidence of scalar waves Tests with a Tesla reproduction". Institut für Gravitationsforschung (IGF), Am Heerbach 5, D-63857 Waldaschaff.
Anderson, L. I., John Stone Stone on Nikola Tesla’s Priority in Radio and Continuous Wave Radiofrequency Apparatus, The Antique Wireless Association Review, Vol. 1, 1986, pp. 18-41.
Anderson, L. I., Priority in Invention of Radio, Tesla v. Marconi, Antique Wireless Association monograph, March 1980.
Marincic, A., and D. Budimir, "Tesla's contribution to radiowave propagation". Dept. of Electron. Eng., Belgrade Univ. (5th International Conference on Telecommunications in Modern Satellite, Cable and Broadcasting Service, 2001. TELSIKS 2001. pp., 327-331 vol.1) ISBN 0-7803-7228-X
Page, R.M., "The Early History of Radar", Proceedings of the IRE, Volume 50, Number 5, May, 1962, (special 50th Anniversary Issue).
C Mackechnie Jarvis "Nikola Tesla and the induction motor". 1970 Phys. Educ. 5 280-287.
"Giant Eye to See Round the World" (DOC)
Nichelson, Oliver, "Nikola Tesla's Energy Generation Designs", Eyring, Inc., Provo, Utah.
Nichelson, Oliver, "The Thermodynamics of Tesla's Fuelless Electrical generator". American Fork, Utah. (American Chemical Society, 1993. 2722-5/93/0028-63)
Grotz, Toby, "The Influence of Vedic Philosophy on Nikola Tesla's Understanding of Free Energy".
(* ETH Oberon, Copyright 1990-2003 Computer Systems Institute, ETH Zurich, CH-8092 Zurich.
Refer to the license.txt file provided with this distribution. *)
(*Write number n followed by str followed by a newline to the Log*)
(*Fill array with lines from text (including empty lines if requested); return number of lines in n*)
(*Fill text with n lines from array; in reverse order if requested*)
Texts.Append(text, W.buf)
(**Sort a marked viewer, a selection, or a file. Option /r means in reverse order; /e keep empty lines**)
The Trac-Loc LSD is the factory limited slip option. While the Trac-Loc is better than an open differential, it will slip if a wheel is lifted during off roading, essentially resulting in an open differential.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
A Transaction Processing System (TPS) also known as data processing systems are used within many companies to provide support and organization in the processing of large amounts of paperwork. TPS(s) are often used when producing or recording things like pay checks, invoices, student tuition bills and payment reminders. A TPS would most likely be found in a business’s accounting/billing department and is a necessity for many large companies that may produce hundreds if not thousands of transactions every day. The primary function of a TPS or data processing system is to effectively and efficiently process and record any data that is a result of a transaction. Users of transaction processing systems include lower level management, supervisors and operations personnel. What sets a transaction processing system apart from a management information system is that TPS(s) bring the entire transaction process full circle from start to finish and incorporate many divisions within a business. (http://www.basicsofcomputer.com/function_of_transaction_processing_system_tps.htm)
Programs that are called Transaction Processing Systems (TPS) by supporting transaction processing provide three functional areas:
⋅ environment that ensures integrity availability and
≈Scheduling and loading balancing
≈Managing system resources
⋅ fast response time and high transaction throughput
⋅ administrative support that lets users configure,
⋅ functions for use in custom business applications,
Sources: http://publib.boulder.ibm.com/infocenter/txformp/v6r0m0/index.jsp?topic=%2Fcom.ibm.cics.te.doc%2Ferziaz0019.htm
The formula Xiao Jian Zhong Tang, designed to warm the middle-jiao, restore qi, and harmonize the interior to relieve spasm, consists of the following:
Strengthening The Spleen By Warming The Middle-jiao
Expand the 'showcase' node in tree view For each of the nodes, showcase, topmenu, shelves, and bottommenu, do the following steps Click on the node Press the 'Generate' button Wait for HTTP response Copy over the suggested code Sroll down and press the button 'Save Page'
Applicable Blender version: 2.44.
In this tutorial, I will show you how to export your beautiful terrain to a heightmap that can be used in most 3D graphics engines. The benefit to doing this as opposed to just exporting your mesh is that many engines have a special process for dealing with terrains as opposed to regular meshes where it divides the terrain up into different sections so that it can subdivide regions closer to the camera more for greater detail, and also cull (not render) regions outside the camera's field of view, saving precious processing time. This structure is called an oct tree and is a highly optimized way to render large meshes such as terrains.
Before I begin, I must give credit to the Creating a Heightmap from a Plane tutorial on the Blender wiki. This is how I learned to do this trick, and most of what I will cover came from this tutorial. I'm simply including it here with the other landscaping tutorials I've written for convenience.
I will briefly cover what a heightmap is and how it's useful for those who may not know. If you are familiar with heightmaps, you can skip ahead to the next section.
A heightmap is a grayscale image that uses various shades of gray to represent different elevations across a map. Since the images are 8-bit (with the exception of some RAW formats that are 16-bit), you have 256 different shades of gray, ranging from pure black (0) to pure white (255). Black represents the lowest elevation on the map, while white represents the highest. Many 3D graphics engines already have functions to read in a heightmap and generate terrain from it. The way it does this is it creates a grid of vertices (like we are going to do in Blender in just a moment), and uses the heightmap to determine the elevation of each point on the grid. The more intense the pixel color (the closer it is to white), the higher the elevation of that vertex. In most cases, if the resolution of the heightmap is smaller than the resolution of the terrain, the engine will interpolate the vertices in between those set by the heightmap. For example, if your heightmap is 256x256 and your terrain is 1024x1024, your heightmap will determine the elevation of every fourth vertex, and the three in between will be interpolated.
Note that these values do not represent the absolute height of any given pixel, but rather the height relative to the rest of the map. That is, your heightmap does not represent a landscape with altitudes ranging from 0 to 256. When importing a heightmap, you can specify the minimum and maximum altitudes for the map, and the whole thing gets scaled. For example, suppose you decide the minimum is 1000 feet, and the maximum is 5000 feet. When the terrain is rendered, black pixels will represent 1000, white pixels will represent 5000, and a pixel that is exactly in between black and white (128) will represent 3000 feet (half of the sum of min and max). This makes heightmaps relatively flexible.
Unfortunately, as you may have already noticed, there is a limitation of using heightmaps. Since you only have 256 shades of gray, you only have 256 possible elevations. This causes a problem. No matter how precise your vertices may be in the mesh that you model, no matter how smooth you may have it looking, each point will get rounded off to an integer value between 0 and 255. When used to render a terrain, this can cause a "stair step" effect as the terrain goes from one discrete elevation to the next instead of making a smooth transition. But there are ways to avoid this, which I will cover later.
I apologize if you're scratching your head right now saying "Huh?" For a further explanation and example, check the Wikipedia page on heightmaps.
To begin this tutorial, I will assume that you already have a landscape that you want to create a heightmap for. If not, read my first tutorial, Landscape Modeling I: Basic Terrain, to quickly create something. WORD OF CAUTION!!! If you've already created a landscape, try to remember the exact size of the plane that you used. If you're about to make one, it's okay to scale the plane to have a larger surface to work with, but REMEMBER how much you scale it by. This will make things easier later. I recommend just working with the default 2x2 plane or grid and zooming in on it. You may also want to backup your scene since we'll be changing a few things
To create the material we need, do the following steps:
Remove any existing materials that may be applied to the terrain.
Note: to remove a material, I think you need to go to the links and pipeline window in the shader section and click the little "X" underneath the words "link to Object"
Add a new material in the Shading tab (F5).
Go to the Textures tab (F6) and add a new texture. This should be the only texture on your material.
In the same window, find the Colors tab and select Colorband. This will let us define the blend pattern, which by default fades from black with full transparency to a solid cyan. Why cyan? I have no idea. It's an odd default.
Increase the Alpha all the way up to 1 by adjusting the slider labeled "A".
What you have now should look like my colorband below.
To the right, find the pane labeled Map Input. In the bottom of this pane is a grid that by default reads:
Set all three rows to Z so that the texture will map entirely to the Z coordinate.
In the preview window to the left, if you select the sphere or cube you should see that it goes from black on the bottom to white on the top. That's the effect we want for the terrain. Remember, in a heightmap, black represents the lowest point and white the highest.
Finally, switch back to the Editing tab (F9) and click the Set Smooth button to enable Gouraud shading so that everything appears smooth.
That's all we need to do for the terrain itself. Now what we're going to do is setup the camera in such a way that when we render the scene we'll get an orthographic projection straight down on the terrain so that we can save it as our heightmap.
Switch to the top view (NUM7) and place the 3D cursor at the origin (0, 0, 0) by left clicking near the origin, hitting SHIFT+SKEY and selecting Cursor to Grid. (An easier way is: hitting 'SHIFT+SKEY' and selecting 'Cursor to Center')
Add a new camera, Space->Add->Camera. This will add a new camera to the scene that is looking straight down.
Switch to a side view (NUM1 or NUM3) and move the camera up the Z axis so that it is above the highest point in your terrain. Even though the view is going to be orthographic, and therefore distance doesn't matter, the entire terrain still needs to be in front of the camera.
Now, with the camera selected, go to the Editing tab (F9) and select the "Orthographic" button. This will change the camera to an orthographic projection which basically ignores the z-coordinate for all vertices (except for determining which pixels should be in front of others).
Just above the orthographic button is a value labeled "Scale". Remember earlier when I told you to remember how big your terrain is? This is why.
Change the Scale of the lens (default: 6) to match the size of your terrain. If you left the plane the default size, this should be 2. If you scaled the plane up by a factor of 20, as suggested in the "Landscape Modeling I: Basic Terrain" tutorial, this should be 40 (the plane is initially 2 units square).
Now go to the scene tab (F10) and under Format, change the SizeX and SizeY to be the size you want your heightmap to be. For most graphics engines, this is required to be either a power of 2 (2^n) or one more than a power of 2 (2^n+1). So try something like 256 (or 257 if you need it to be 2^n+1).
Now, if you switch to the camera view (NUM0) you should see a "flat" square that completely fills the dotted box which represents the camera's field of view.
Render the scene (F12). You should be looking at your heightmap. Hit F3 to save the rendered image and you're good to go!
Since this image has no color, and some engines require that your heighmap be a grayscale image (only one color channel instead of three), select the BW button in the Format pane before rendering. This will render it as a grayscale image instead of a color image.
As mentioned earlier, exporting the heightmap as an 8-bit image (Blender doesn't support any 16-bit formats that I'm aware of) has the drawback that you only have 256 discrete height values which can cause a stair-step effect when the terrain is subdivided. Ideally, you could use an application that can export the image in a 16-bit raw format, such as Terragen. But this is a Blender tutorial, so we'll not go into that. =P
One way you can "smooth" out the rendered terrain is to actually reduce the resolution of the heightmap. This may sound counter intuitive, but bear with me. Suppose you have a heightmap that is a simple blend from black to white going from left to right. If your heightmap is 1024x1024, you will get 4 columns of each height since you only have 256 different values. In other words, your grayscale will look something like this:
00001111222233334444...
If you try to render terrain from this, you'll get 4 points with 0 altitude, 4 with 1, 4 with 2, and so on, creating the stair-step effect.
Now suppose you make the same heightmap, but reduce its size to 256x256. Now you'll have 1 column for each height, and your grayscale will look something like this:
012345678...
You may be thinking, "But then my terrain will be smaller, or less detailed." But it turns out the opposite is actually true. Consider applying the above heightmap to a terrain that is 1024x1024. The values from your heightmap will be applied to every 4th vertex, and the ones in between will be interpolated. So instead of having something like:
Where the integers are the values from your heightmap and the fractions are interpolated values. This is assuming that whatever engine you are using will interpolate the values between heights read in from the heightmap.
At the present time, this is the only method I have verified that helps reduce the effects of stair-stepping. As I try different techniques I will update this page with them. For example, I know that Adobe Photoshop can export images in 16-bit raw formats, but I haven't tried it yet so I don't want to suggest it as a solution.
If you haven't previously studied 3D graphics, technical drawing, or analytic geometry, you are about to learn a new way of visualizing the world, an ability that's fundamental to working with Blender or any 3D modeling tool.
3D modeling is based on geometry, the branch of mathematics concerned with spatial relationships, specifically analytical geometry, which expresses these relationships in terms of algebraic formulas. If you have studied geometry, some of the terminology will be familiar.
Look around the room you’re in. The odds are it will have a cuboidal shape, with four vertical walls at right angles to each other, a flat, horizontal floor, and a flat, horizontal ceiling.
Now imagine there’s a fly buzzing around the room. The fly is moving in three-dimensional space. In mathematical terms, that means its position within the room at any given moment, can be expressed in terms of a unique combination of three numbers.
There are an infinite number of ways —coordinate systems— in which we could come up with a convention for defining and measuring these numbers, i.e. the coordinates. Each convention will yield different values even if the fly is in the same position. Coordinates only make sense with reference to a specific coordinate system! To narrow down the possibilities (in a purely arbitrary fashion), let us label the walls of the room with the points of the compass: in a clockwise direction, North, East, South and West. (If you know which way really is north, feel free to use that to label the walls of your room. Otherwise, choose any wall you like as north.)
. The first of the three numbers will be the distance (in some suitable units, let’s say meters) eastwards from the west wall, the second number will be the distance north from the south wall, and the third number will be the height above the floor.
Each of these directions is called an axis (plural: axes), and they are conventionally labelled X, Y and Z, in that order. With a little bit of thought, you should be able to convince yourself that every point within the space of your room corresponds to exactly one set of
The following diagram illustrates how the coordinates are built up, using the same colour codes that Blender uses to label its axes: red for X, green for Y and blue for Z (an easy way to remember this if you're familiar with RGB is the order -- Red X, Green Y, Blue Z). In the second picture, the x value defines a plane parallel to the west wall of the room. In the third picture, the y value defines a plane parallel to the south wall, and in the fourth picture, the z value defines a plane parallel to the floor. Put the planes together in the fifth picture, and they intersect at a unique point.
Another simple way to understand what the coordinates of a point say (x,y,z) means is, if one starts from origin and moves x, y, and z units of distance parallel to x, y, and z axes respectively, in any sequence, one will reach that point. Thus, for example, a coordinate of (3,4,5) means the point which is reached when one moves, starting from origin, 3 units of distance along x-axis, 4 units of distance along y-axis and 5 units of distance along z-axis.
This style of coordinate system, with the numbers corresponding to distances along perpendicular axes, is called Cartesian coordinates, named after René Descartes, the 17th-century mathematician who first introduced the concept. Legend has it that he came up with the idea after watching a fly buzzing around his bedroom!
There are other ways to define coordinate systems, for example by substituting direction angles in place of one or two of the distance measurements. These can be useful in certain situations, but usually all coordinate systems in Blender are Cartesian. However, in Blender, switching between these coordinate systems is simple and easy to do.
Can coordinate values be negative? Depending on the situation, yes. Here we are only considering points within our room. But suppose instead of placing our origin in the bottom southwest corner, we put it in the middle of the room, halfway between the floor and ceiling. (After all, it is an arbitrary point, we can place it wherever we like, as long as we agree on its location.) If the X-coordinate is the distance east from the origin, how do we define a point west of the origin? We simply give it a negative X-coordinate. Similarly, points north of the origin have a positive Y-coordinate, those south of it, have negative Y-coordinates. Points above the origin have a positive Z-coordinate, those below it, a negative Z-coordinate.
It is conventional for most Cartesian coordinate systems to be right-handed. To understand this, hold the thumb, index finger and middle finger of your right hand perpendicular to each other:
Figure 1: The three axes form a right-handed system
Now orient your hand so your thumb points along the X-axis in the positive direction (direction of increasing coordinate numbers), your index finger along the positive Y-axis, and your middle finger along the positive Z-axis. Another way of looking at it is, if you placed your eye at the origin, and you could see the three arrows pointing in the directions of positive X, positive Y and positive Z as in Figure 1, the order X, Y, Z would go counter clockwise.
Figure 2: Another view of right-handed system
Another way to visualize this is to make a fist with your right hand, with your curled fingers towards you. Stick out your thumb directly to the right (X). Now aim your pointer finger straight up (Y). Finally, make your middle finger point toward yourself (Z). This is the view from directly above the origin.
Consider a spinning sphere. Every point on it is moving, except the ones along the axis. These form a motionless line around which the rest of the sphere spins. This line is called the axis of rotation.
More precisely, the axis of rotation is a point or a line connecting points that do not change position while that object rotates, drawn when the observer assumes he/she does not change position relative to that object over time.
Conventionally, the direction of the axis of rotation is such that if you look in that direction, the rotation appears clockwise, as illustrated below, where the yellow arrow shows the rotational movement, while the purple one shows the rotation axis:
To remember this convention, hold your right hand in a thumbs-up gesture:
This gesture is a different form of the right-hand rule and is sometimes called the right-hand grip rule, the corkscrew-rule or the right-hand thumb rule. From now on we will refer to it as 'the right-hand grip rule'.
When describing the direction of a rotating object, do not say that it rotates left-to-right/clockwise, or right-to-left/counterclockwise. Each of these on their own are meaningless, because they're relative to the observer. Instead of saying this, find the direction of the axis of rotation and draw an arrow to represent it. Those who know the right-hand grip rule will be able to figure out what the direction of rotation of the object is, by using the rule when interpreting your drawing.
Analytic geometry at Wikipedia.
Cartesian coordinate system at Wikipedia.
Right-hand rule at Wikipedia.
Rotation at Wikipedia.
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
As a monk, Yang has high HP and physical attributes. His regular attacks are strong, and his abilities only emphasize this fact. His chief weakness is his inability to use heavy equipment or any weapons that directly increase his power. Despite this, he is a capable physical fighter, albeit one that may require stronger items than Cecil.
Power/Focus: Builds up for a double-strength attack. (Unavailable in the North American SNES release named Final Fantasy II and Final Fantasy IV: Easytype)
Kick: Hits all enemies in a single attack.
Gird/Brace: Reduces physical damage. (Unavailable in the North American SNES release named Final Fantasy II and Final Fantasy IV: Easytype)
Living in a “post-truth” society [1], where objectivity is overruled by emotions and personal belief when shaping public opinion, evidence-based truth seems to be endangered. Our society is dominated by individual truths in the form of shared experiences through social media. Those individual truths, due to the limits of personal judgements, are only hypotheses based on generalisation from personal experience and lack of solid proof.[2] However, memory, as a representative of individual truth, is widely used as witness testimonies in courtrooms to supply the application of law, an evidence-based truth system.
Law is associated automatically with "the search for truth" [3], however, in this discipline, truth is ‘not an explanatorily useful concept’ [4] implying that there is no need for veracity to plea someone guilty. The legal system relation’s with truth is lacking of definition and ambiguous in the sense that it searches “formal legal truth” which is dictated by laws and not by veracity [3]. In other words, if it has been proven by facts, including faulty eyewitness testimonies, the guilt of a party, then the die is cast.
Witness's narrative truth comes from their reconstruction of events, which the court considers solid evidence.[3]
In the United States, 300 people where convicted of crimes they didn’t commit and spend years in prison before DNA testing could have proven their innocence. Of those 300 , three quarters were victims of prosecutors' or witnesses' false memories.[5]
19 year-old, Holly Ramona started seeing a psychiatrist for her bulimia and depression problems. With the help of sodium amytal, a drug normally used to treat short-term insomnia – also known as the « truth drug » due to its capacity to restore lost memories – remembered being sexually abused by her father as a child. Prior to seeing her psychiatrist, she didn’t recall any such thing. She then went on to sue her father, Gary Ramona, who himself sued the psychiatrist for having induced false memories to his daughter's brain.[6]
False memory syndrome is more common than one might think. Psychologist, Elizabeth Loftus, specialised in false memories, compares it to a wikipedia page : «you can go in there and change it but so can other people ». She conducted different studies proving that misinformation coming from another person can alter one's memory.[7]
In Canada, a study [7]made subjects believe that, as a child, they were attacked by a vicious animal and half of them actually "remembered" this episode.
Forensic psychologist, Scott Fraser, studies how humans remember crimes. During a TED talk, he elaborates on the case of 16-years-old Francisco Carillo convicted of murder after being recognised by witnesses. He spend 20 years in prison before one of the witnesses (the son of the victim) confessed it was a false memory and that he never saw the face of the murderer.[8]
Steve Titus was also wrongfully put in jail for a rape allegations due to the victim thinking it was him.[9]
When giving a testimony, witnesses are under oath : “I swear by Almighty God that the evidence I shall give shall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.” [10]
How can involuntary false memory be explained?
The Process of Remembering and Altered Memory
The accuracy of memories could be affected, due to it being selective and susceptible to influence, by many psychological factors during the three forming stages of memory, namely perception, retainment and retrieval. The perception process is affected by events factors, i.e. the interaction between cases and observers and individual factors, meaning witness’s character and mental conditions. For example, the more violent an incident is, the worse it is remembered. The retainment is the most changeable process since it could be influenced by up to 12 separate aspects, for instance, post-event information, enhancing memory and guessing. Particularly, enhancing memory influence suggests that after-event discussion could shift the memory towards this event. Meanwhile, memory could also be created based on deduction from guessing which matches more to social favours of an image of comprehensiveness. In terms of the retrieval,the environment and type of retrieval, questioning, questioners and other two factors have effects on it. Specifically, studies[11][12] among college students demonstrate that memories are better recalled at the place where the event happened rather than at an unfamiliar place like a police interview room.[13]
The psychological process of remembering can be understood through Frederic Bartlett's seminal "The War of Ghosts" study[14] as a process of reconstruction. When asked to recall the Native-American story, participants were found to change, to "westernise", to shorten, specific details having been forgotten, and overall distorting the story by adding previously inexistent details or projected emotions. Bartlett’s study shows how the act of remembrance is not a passive action but rather an active one, unconsciously distorting reality.
The courtroom does not provide a space where memory is not subject to change : persuasive language, prejudices , roles of “good and bad” displayed as “prosecutor and defendant”, the formal setting. When confronted to a police line-up, studies[15] show that participants posing as witnesses believe that those on the other side of the mirror, even if innocent, are guilty, due to social construct. 40% of police lineups end in the prime suspect getting picked but, more interestingly, up to 20% end up in the filler (innocent person with similar traits to the suspect) getting picked; demonstrating the effects that expectation and societal bias, have on memory.[15] Thus, sociocultural factors, such as the society (e.g western) they were raised in or their moral bias routed in the location (e.g police line-up), affect the participants perception of the events. Cultures have a direct impact on memories and on the perception of self.[16]
The negative impacts of traumatic experiences consist usually on that memory being repressed meaning that it isn’t present in the conscious mind but can still be accessible through therapeutical procedures due to its presence in the hippocampus, centre for long-term memory [17]. According to psychiatrist Bessel A. Van der Kolk [18] traumatic experiences affect one’s memory in four ways : Traumatic amnesia (Unconscious of the event until a stimuli triggers the memory), Global memory impairment (More susceptible to suggestions) , Disassociation (Memory is fragmentary), birth of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).Eyewitnesses are directly exposed to stressful traumatic experience, thus generating memory alteration.
Loftus’s study[15] demonstrates that, for the same case, when no eye-witness testimony is given only 18% of the participants judged the defendant guilty opposing to 72% when eye-witness testimony is given. The reliance of the legal system on eye-witness testimony, heavily influenced by psychological and neurological factors, is currently being supported by technological and scientific advances, such as DNA testing. "We see that science also rests on a faith; there simply is no science ‘without presuppositions".(p.5) [19] Nietzsche's reluctance on scientism poses the question : Should we trust science when seeking truth?
↑ Harari Y.N ; Are we living in a post-truth era? Yes, but that’s because we’re a post-truth species. Ideas.Ted.Com. 7 September 2018; Available : https://ideas.ted.com/are-we-living-in-a-post-truth-era-yes-but-thats-because-were-a-post-truth-species/ [Accessed : 7 December 2018]
↑ Taylor W.S., Is Truth individual or social, Journal of Social Psychology， Vol. 6, Iss. 3, Aug 1, 1935. p. 348.
↑ a b c Fernandez J.M; An Exploration of the Meaning of Truth in Philosophy and Law’', Australia 11 The University of Notre Dame Australia Law Review 53 ; 2009
Available from : http://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/sinodisp/au/journals/UNDAULawRw/2009/4.html?query=
[Accessed : 7th December 2018]
↑ Patterson D., Law and Truth , 1st edition, USA : Oxford University Press, 1996
↑ Torgovnick May K., The fiction of memory, TedGlobal, 2013 Available from: https://blog.ted.com/tk-elizabeth-loftus-at-tedglobal-2013/ [Accessed: 8th December 2018]
↑ August Piper Jr., M.D. Is there a truth serum?, December 2013, Available from: http://www.fmsfonline.org/index.php?ginterest=IsThereATruthSerum? [Accessed: 7th December 2018]
↑ a b Loftus E.F., How reliable is your memory?, TedGlobal2013, 2013 Available from: https://www.ted.com/talks/elizabeth_loftus_the_fiction_of_memory?language=en [Accessed: 7th December 2018]
↑ Fraser S., Why eyewitnesses get it wrong, TEDxUSC2012, 2012 available from: https://www.ted.com/talks/scott_fraser_the_problem_with_eyewitness_testimony [Accessed: 7th December 2018]
↑ Henderson P., Looking back at Titus case,1981, Available from: http://old.seattletimes.com/news/local/tituscase/lookingback.html [Accessed: 7th December 2018]
↑ Pigott R., Motion to end Bible oaths in court defeated, BBC News, 19 October 2013, Available from : https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-24588854 [Accessed : 9th December 2018]
↑ Abernathy, E.M., ‘The effect changed environmental conditions upon the results of college examinations’,10,Journal of Psychology, 1940, p.293-301
↑ Feingold, G.A., 'The Influence of environment on identification of persons and things’, 5, Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology 1914, p.39-51
↑ Loftus E.F., Wolchover D.and Page D., 'General Review of the psychology of Witness Testimony'.Witness testimony : Psychological, investigative and evidential perspectives , Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2006, pp. 8-17
↑ Bartlett F.C., Remembering: A study in experimental and social psychology, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1932
↑ a b c Wright D.B and Loftus E.F, Eyewitness memory. In : Cohen G., Conway M. (eds.) Memory in the real world Psychology Press, 3rd edition, 2008, p.95-97
↑ Williams H.L., Conaway M.A. and Cohen G., Autobiographical memory. In : Cohen G., Conway M. (eds.) Memory in the real world Psychology Press, 3rd edition, 2008, p.71
↑ Lynn S.J and McCconkey K.M, Truth in memory , The Guilford Press, 1998, p. 331-332
& Fisler R., Dissociation and the Fragmentary Nature of Traumatic Memories:Overview and Exploratory Study, 1995
Available from : http://www.psych.utoronto.ca/users/peterson/psy430s2001/Van%20der%20Kolk%20Fragmentary%20Nature%20of%20Traumatic%20Memory%20J%20Traumatic%20Stress%201995.pdf [Accessed : 7th December 2018]
↑ Cristy R., "“Gay Science” as a Conditional Will to Truth", Princeton University Available from : https://scholar.princeton.edu/sites/default/files/rcristy/files/cristy_nietzsche_writing_sample_10-2-17.pdf [Accessed : 9th December 2018]
De mortuis nil nisi prius. (Latin) Of the dead [speak] nothing but before.[1] Bloom is misquoting the Latin apothegm De mortuis nil nisi bonum (Of the dead [speak] nothing but good). He may be trying to adapt the saying to the idea he expresses in the same line, the implication being that one must wait at least two years before speaking ill of the dead.
He is probably also remembering vaguely the legal term nisi prius (unless previously), which refers to the court of original jurisdiction that heard a case as distinguished from a court of appeals.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
MAMMOTH stands for MAtching Molecular Models Obtained from THeory. This program was originally developed for comparing models produced from structure prediction since it is tolerant of large unalignable regions. However, it has proven to work well with experimental models, especially when looking for remote homology. Benchmarks on targets of blind structure prediction and automated GO annotation have shown it to tightly rank correlated with human curated annotation. A largely complete database of MAMMOTH based structure annotation for the predicted structures of unknown proteins covering 150 genomes facilitates genomic scale normalization.
MAMMOTH based structure alignment methods decompose the protein structure into short peptides (heptapeptides for example) which are compared with the same length peptides of another protein. Similarity scores between the two polypeptides is then calculated using a unit-vector RMS (URMS) method. These cores are stored in a similarity matrix, and with a hybrid (local-global) dynamic programming, the optimal residue alignment is calculated. Protein similarity scores calculated with MAMMOTH are derived from the likelihood of obtaining a given structural alignment by chance.
MAMMOTH-mult is an extension of the MAMMOTH algorithm used to align related families of protein structures. This algorithm is very quick and produces consistent high quality structural alignments. Multiple structural alignments calculated with MAMMOTH-mult produce structurally implied sequence alignments that can be further used for multiple-template homology modeling, HMM-based (Hidden Markov model) protein structure prediction, and profile-type PSI-BLAST searches.
FREE_LUN,[inf. Args],EXIT_STATUS,FORCE
Changes a value in a series and returns the series after the change.
/part -- Limits the amount to change to a given length or position.
/dup -- Duplicates the change a specified number of times.
/part {Limits the amount to change to a given length or position.}
/dup "Duplicates the change a specified number of times."
War fever gripped the populations of Europe; many felt the war to be just and necessary and all felt that the war would be short and that soldiers would be home by Christmas. Unfortunately, the quick and glorious victories that were expected did not take place. The war was to last four long years, during the time the fighting took place on several fronts. The most important of these fronts is known as the Western Front, and this stretched 320km from the English Channel to the Swiss Alps. Fighting also took place on Germany's Eastern Front involving both Austria-Hungary and Russia, and both sides continued to hope that they would be able to break though on one of the other 'diversionary' fronts that exited in the Balkans, in Italy, and in the Middle East.
2 How did the development of weaponry lead to a change in tactics on the Western Front?
2.5 What impact did the technological advances during World War I have on the nature of fighting?
How was World War I fought?
War on land – the Western Front
Although fighting took place on several fronts throughout the four years of the war, the Western Front nevertheless remained the most important for several reasons:
Because of its size and the length of time it remained an operational theatre of war. It was a continuous battlefield stretching for 320km from the North Sea to the French-Swiss border in the south. Across this line, the Allies and the Germans attacked each other continuously for four years without significantly breaking the position of the line.
Because of the key role it played in the outcome of the Great War. Many of the other conflicts in the war were 'diversionary fronts', which were created to break the deadlock on the Western Front.
Because the fighting on the Western Front was to have a significant impact on the ideas about and attitudes towards war.
Why did trench warfare lead to a stalemate?
The feature of the Western Front that most affected the way the war was fought was the development of trench warfare. After the 'race to the sea', the conflict settled into static 'positional' warfare. The war of movement was over. In order to hold their positions, and keep out of the line of machine-gun and artillery fire, soldiers had to dig down into defensive positions; thus trenches were dug along the entire length of the front. As it became clear that these hastily dug ditches were to become permanent, they evolved into complex defensive systems on both sides, with the area between opposing trenches known as 'no-man's land'.
The Western Front, according to John Keegan:
...rapidly became a maze of duplicates and dead ends, in which soldiers, sometimes whole units rapidly lost their way. Guides who knew the trench geography were an essential accompaniment in unit reliefs, when one battalion took the place of another at the end of a front-line stint [tour of duty]. So, too were signboards pointing to the more enduring trenches and the ruined remains of human habitation; in the Ypres salient in the winter of 1914–15, there were still traces of the buildings the Tommies had named Tram Car Cottage, Battersea Farm, Beggar's Rest, Apple Villa, White Horse Cellars, Kansan Cross, Doll's House.
—From John Keegan, The First World War, 1999.
Trench warfare was deadlier for attackers than defenders; attackers suffered twice as many casualties during an assault on the enemy trench line. A major attack would begin with an artillery barrage, followed by the attacking troops going 'over the top' – climbing out of their trenches and attempting to reach and capture the enemy trenches on the other side of no-man's land. Soldiers had to walk or run into the direct firing line of the defenders, while mines and thick rolls of barbed wire slowed down their progress and made the chances of being hit by enemy machine-gun fire even more likely.
Descriptions of zero hour on the 1st of July abound, of the long lines of young men, burdened by the sixty pounds of equipment judged necessary to sustain them in a long struggle inside the German trenches, plodding off almost shoulder to shoulder; of their good cheer and certainty of success, of individual displays of bravado, as in the battalions which kicked a football ahead of the ranks; of bright sunshine breaking through the thin morning mist; of the illusion of an empty battlefield, denuded of opponents by the weight of bombardment and the explosion of twenty-one chambers, laboriously driven under the German front lines, as the attack began. Descriptions of what happened later abound also; of the discovery of the uncut wire, of the appearance of the German defenders, manning the parapet at the moment the British creeping barrage passed beyond, to fire frenziedly into the approaching ranks, of the opening of gaps in the attacking waves, of massacre in the wire entanglements, of the advance checked, halted and eventually stopped literally dead.
—From John Keegan, The First World War, 1999.
Because of the difficulties of attacking and taking the enemy's trenches, the Western Front became one of stalemate, with little change in the position of the front over the whole four years. Increasingly, the aim of battles became not so much as to win territory held by the enemy, but to destroy or wear down the opposing army; it was a war of attrition intended to break the morale of the enemy and reduce their numbers.
Clearly the military education and mindset of the generals were inadequate to meet the demands of this new type of warfare. Similarly, the soldiers themselves were ill-prepared in their training to deal with the horrors in which they found themselves.
How did the development of weaponry lead to a change in tactics on the Western Front?
Both sides in the war utilised a wide range of weapons in order to try and break the deadlock. The infantry charge explained above remained the key battle tactic used throughout the war, and most weapons were applied or developed with the aim of making this strategy more effective.
The main weapon of the British soldier was a .303in, bolt-action Lee-Enfield rifle with a magazine that held ten rounds of ammunition; a bayonet could be attached to the end of the rifle for use in hand-to-hand fighting. Each side had similar types of rifle. The machine gun, however, was far more lethal against mass targets. Whereas an infantryman could fire 25 rounds a minute with a bolt-action rifle, he could fire 600 rounds a minute with a machine gun. The effects were devastating on attackers, as a German machine-gunner here recounts: '... the [British] officers walked in front. I noticed one of them walking calmly carrying a walking stick. When we started firing we just had to load and re-load. They went down in their hundreds. You didn't have to aim, we just fired into them.' Soldiers also used hand grenades – essentially small hand-thrown bombs. The British, for example, use the pineapple-shaped Mills bomb, while the Germans used stick-shaped grenades nicknamed 'potato-smashers.'
Another weapon innovation of World War I was the submachine gun, a lightweight hand-held automatic weapon that fired pistol caliber ammunition. (By using low-power ammunition, the soldier could control the recoil better than if he was using high-power rifle ammunition.) The submachine gun was known as a 'trench sweeper', a weapon that could deliver heavy firepower at close-quarters during a trench assault.
Although machine guns killed many thousands of people during World War I, nevertheless it was artillery that was the real killer. In World War I, artillery inflicted 70 per cent of all casualties. With the war being so static, the huge guns could take up permanent positions in strategically good locations, from where they could launch massive numbers of high-explosive shells. Commanders saw artillery as the key to overcoming the defenses of the enemy and thus every major attack was preceded by a prolonged artillery barrage.
Yet the reality was that artillery was not accurate or effective enough to destroy enemy trench systems completely – unless a shell fell directly into a trench, the occupants were relatively well protected behind their earthen walls. In the battle of the Somme, for example, the British fired more than 1.5 million shells in five days, but these failed to cut the barbed wire or destroy the German trenches. Even if the infantry made a breakthrough, the artillery was not mobile enough to be brought forward to protect the attackers. Another problem with the barrage was that it gave the enemy warning of the attack to come; when the barrage stopped that was the signal for the attack. The effect of the artillery on soldiers was nevertheless grim: brain damage, bleeding ears, shell-shock. It also churned up the land into a see of mud and craters, which made attacking across no-man's land even more difficult.
Artillery attacks and fire-control technologies evolved over the course of the war to become more versatile, using techniques such as the 'creeping barrage' (a steadily advancing wall of fire) and 'artillery ambush' (a sudden storm of shells against a specific target.) It also became possible to locate and attack enemy artillery more effectively; thus British guns could remain silent until the actual attack and then blanket the German guns with fire, bringing back the element of surprise.
The first poison gas attack was made at Ypres by the Germans in April 1915. Carried on the wind, the chlorine gas caused panic amongst the Allied soldiers and disabled 6.5km of trenches. More lethal gases were soon developed: phosgene gas, which was 18 times stronger than the chlorine gas, and the most feared of all, mustard gas, which burned, blinded or slowly killed the victims over several weeks. Gas, however, although a useful weapon for causing panic among troops, did not actually play any key role in the breaking of the stalemate. Its big disadvantage was that it was dependent on the wind for distribution and so it could blow back towards the side that was dispersing it; this happened to the British at the battle of Loos in 1915. In addition, gas masks were quickly developed by scientists, making gas a weapon much less effective.
The tank was another attempt to break the stalemate. Developed by the British and the French, 49 of them were first used in the battle of the Somme. The tank was able to advance ahead of the infantry, crushing barbed wire fences and attacking the enemy at the same time with a machine-gun and cannon fire. Inside the tank, the crew was protected from small-arms fire by the outer metal armour. Yet the tank was not yet able to break the stalemate. It was slow and unreliable and many tanks broke down before they reached the German trenches. Their armour plating was also not strong enough to resist artillery, and the use of tanks at the Somme did not have any major effect other than causing initial panic amongst the Germans. The conditions for the tank operators were also appalling; the heat generated inside the tank was tremendous, and fumes from the engine and gun nearly chocked the men inside.
Large numbers of tanks were used in the battle of Cambrai in 1917, but here the initial successes were not sustained and breakthroughs were quickly reversed.
As a result of the tank's limitations, there was little real agreement within the British Expeditionary Force on whether mechanical warfare truly offered a substitute for manpower. In that sense, tanks during the war remained what GHQ concluded in August 1918, a "mechanical contrivance" with potential usefulness only as an adjunct to combined infantry and artillery assault
— Ian Beckett, The Great War 1914–18, 2001
What impact did the technological advances during World War I have on the nature of fighting?
As suggested above, none of the technological developments in weaponry or the variations in tactics were ultimately decisive during the fighting on the Western Front. Nevertheless, the developments that did take place during the course of war – artillery, tanks, combat aircraft, and aerial reconnaissance – did not allow for a change of tactics by the final campaigns of 1918.
In 1914 the British soldier went to war dressed like a gamekeeper in a soft cap, armed only with a rifle and a bayonet. In 1918 he went into battle dressed like an industrial worker in a steel helmet, protected by a respirator against poison gas, armed with automatic weapons, and mortars, supported by tanks, and ground-attack aircraft, and preceded by a creeping artillery barrage of crushing intensity. Firepower replaced manpower as the instrument of victory. This represented a revolution in the conduct of war.
—From John Bourne in Charles Townshend (ed.), The Oxford History of Modern War, 2005.
From the beginning of the war, it was clear that the control of the seas was crucial to both sides. Britain needed to be able to transport men (including from places as far afield as Australia and Canada) and supplies to the battlefields of Europe and the Middle East. As an island, Britain's need for food and industrial supplies from other countries, particularly from the USA, was key to the country's survival. Thus Britain was also cautious in its use of its navies; it could not risk losing many ships to mines and submarines or in surface battles. As Winston Churchill (who served as First Lord of the Admiralty for part of the war) said, it would have been possible for Admiral Jellicoe, the commander of the British Fleet, to lose the war in an afternoon.
Germany did not need naval routes to supply and help its allies. However, Germany also needed food and other supplies from overseas. Thus control of trade routes was vital to both sides, both for their own needs and to stop supplies reaching the enemy.
Britain was particularly successful in pursuing the latter objective. Royal Navy vessels went into action against German units stationed abroad, and destroyed one of the main German squadrons at the battle of the Falkland Islands in 1914. The Allies also started blockading German ports; British naval vessels enforced the of search on neutral shipping to ensure that Germany and its allies were not getting supplies via other countries.
Though the volcano's last eruption was in 1944, it still represents a great danger to the cities that surround it, especially the busy metropolis of Naples.
Mount Vesuvius is located above the subduction of the African plate that slowly moves northward beneath Italy. This subduction also forms other volcanoes like Mount Etna (Sicily) and Stromboli (Eolie islands). The melting of the African plate creates the high-viscosity magma that accumulates in Vesuvius’ caldera.
Vesuvius is characterized by explosive eruptions. This kind of eruption is determined by the high gas pressure in the magma chamber, caused by the interaction between hot magma and under-ground water. Its lava is a viscous lava with a high concentration of silica that resists flowing.
Its most famous eruption was in 79 AD, which buried the cities of Herculaneum and Pompeii killing about 16.000 people. Ash , mud and rocks in the air dropped and covered the two villages. We remember this catastrophe because it has preserved amazing details such as Roman clothes, human faces, buildings and paintings. In its history we know of about eight destructive eruptions. Nowadays Vesuvius is in a state of quiescence, because its last eruption was in 1944 during the Second World War.
Kilauea is the youngest volcano on the island of Hawaii but also the most active one in all the world.
It’s a shield volcano and its name comes from the Hawaiian language and means “spewing”or “spreading” because it has the peculiarity of being subjected to frequent and uninterrupted eruptions of lava: scientists believe that the cause of this phenomenon could be its position above a hot spot in the middle of the Pacific plate, from which magma rises through the mantle creating a great chain of volcanoes. This is also the way Hawaiian islands are formed.
It’s situated on the southwestern flank of Mauna Loa on the Big Island of Hawaii, meaning that it was formed by layers of lava from continual, effusive and non explosive eruptions.
For many years Kilauea was considered to be nothing compared to the giant Mauna Loa, but recent research has proved that it has its own magma-plumbing system, extending to the surface from more than 60 km deep in the earth.
During the eruptions Kilauea spreads giant amounts of lava that can reach approximately 1000 C°: it can create sudden lava fountains and lakes, causing the ashes to fall out and solidify; also it can form new volcanic cones or destroy the old ones.
Although its eruptions are effusive, when the lava reaches the cold ocean water it explodes, creating enormous steam clouds.
HISTORY AND CURRENT SITUATION OF KILAUEA Kilauea's lava fountain
It's 1247 meters high. The current eruption, which is the longest happened in the last two centuries, began on January 3 in 1983.
It should be said that this uninterrupted spreading of lava has frightened the Hawaiian people because it is gradually reaching the villages, of which the first houses have been burned and destroyed. Also, the steam explosions created in contact with the water have caused a great number of deaths.
Because of the constant activity of the Kilauea Volcano, there are semi-frequent acid rains. However, Kilauea has caused the development of its own special ecosystem which is constituted by particularly colorful bird species that live in the wet forest, and endangered sea turtle species.
Mount St. Helens
Mount St. Helens is an active stratovolcano (or composite volcano) 2.549m high, that is built up of many layers of hardened lava (or simply called basalt), volcanic ash and tephra (which are the pyroclasts that are blown out of the volcano during an eruption).
Mount St. Helens is located in the state of Washington (North-West of the USA) and it is part of the Cascade Volcanic Arc; a segment of the Pacific Ring of Fire. The meeting of two tectonic plates, causes a process called 'subduction' during which the oceanic plate goes under the continental plate. In fact the Ring of Fire was born by the collision between the Pacific plate and the continental plate.
Mount St. Helens began its growth (in the Pleistocene age about 40.000 years ago), when the little Juan de Fuca (oceanic plate) slid under the North American plate (continental plate) along the subduction boundary. As the oceanic plate descended, the rock melted because of the high temperatures and made magma. As a result, in the magma chamber, pressure rose and the liquid magma searched for a fissure in the Earth’s crust through which it could flow. St. Helens’ magmatic system has evolved from a relatively simple to more complex one, as the volcano grew: it was born as a “shield volcano”, that erupted mafic lava1, but 500 years ago Mount St. Helens began to erupt felsic lava2 and it became a stratovolcano. As a consequence of this change, nowadays it presents layers of basalt and andesite3, on which several domes of dacite4 have dropped off.
Mount St. Helens is the most active volcano in the Pacific Northwest and is well known for its ash explosions and pyroclastic flows : it has had four extended periods of volcanic activity. It has produced both explosive eruptions of volcanic tephra and relatively quiet outpourings of lava.
1980: THE MOST IMPORTANT ERUPTION
This eruption is the deadliest and most economically destructive volcanic event in the history of the US. It was preceded by a two-month series of earthquakes and steam-venting episodes, caused by an injection of magma at shallow depth below the volcano (as the image below shows). When it erupted, it released the equivalent of 1,600 times the size of the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima. It ejected more or less 3km radius of material and killed 57 people. At the end of the eruption, the volcano appeared destroyed: 2,5 km cubical of the north flank had disappeared.
Mount St. Helens
Kind of volcano: both shield and stratovolcano
Craters: there are five craters and the new south-east one is currently the most active.
Mount Etna has a very heterogeneous vegetation depending on the climatic changes due to altitude (citrus and oak trees, birches,vineyards, olive trees and pistachio). Obviously, near the craters at a high attitude there is no vegetation.
The fall of lava and ash after a violent eruption of the volcano usually causes serious environmental damage with consequent inconveniences for the native population. Due to this, airports close, roads are impracticable and the agriculture is compromised. Moreover, ash and other substances released by the eruption, may also damage people's health in various ways (skin rashes, respiratory tract).
Mount Etna was born as a shield volcano because of the subduction of the African plate under the Eurasian plate but in time it turned into a stratovolcano. A shield volcano in fact is not supposed to erupt with explosions (it should have "effusive" eruptions) so when it started a persistent activity of explosive eruptions in 1966 its classification changed.
Mafic lava is less viscous(runnier) than felsic lava due to a lower silica content, this causes non-violent eruptions while Felsic lava is mainly found at convergent zones (areas of colliding plates) and has a high silica and water content which causes the lava to be highly viscous and causes very violent eruptions. So in mount Etna we can see both these types of lava according to the type of eruption.
The explosive activity is produced by acid magmas (distinguished by the high presence of gasses and silica), while the effusive activity is produced by basic magmas (characterized by gasses and less concentration of silica).
In the effusive eruptions we are supposed to see only lava, but in the last years, the explosive eruptions have been becoming more common. This kind of eruption can produce "bombs" or lapillus and ashes which go very high in the sky up to a hundred meters. The formation of the pyroclastic materials is caused by the gasses that create air bubbles in the magma of different sizes.
The most famous activity of mount Etna is the “Strombolian activity” (from the name of the namesake volcano) where we can see the spectacular expulsion of magmatic bodies in the sky. When this activity increases, “lava fountains” are created where lava is thrown up continuously.
Active volcano: a volcano that is currently erupting or just about to erupt.
Effusive eruption: a relatively gentle, non-explosive volcanic eruption.
Eruption: the release of magma onto the Earth's surface. Usually an eruption is accompanied by the release of gases as well.
Explosive eruption: a volcanic eruption that releases large amounts of gas, so that mama is violently thrown up into the air.
Lava: molten rock that has been erupted onto the Earth's surface. Magma becomes lava once it emerges on the surface.
Magma: molten rock found under the Earth's surface.
What kind of eruption does it have?
And what about lava and magma?
How does it behave?
What about its vegetation?
Erta Ale is the most famous volcano situated in the Erta Ale volcanic range in Ethiopa. Its name means "smoking mountain" in the local language.
It is a shield volcano, so it is not very high, only 613m high, but it has gently sloping sides with a large base of 40 km.
It was formed by the Arabian plate and the African plate that pulled away from each other. In fact, there is a divergent boundary between them.
It is an active volcano and the last eruption was in 2009. It erupts mafic lava, which contains iron and magnesium. This kind of lava is characterised by low-viscosity. That means that the lava flows down slowly and calmly. For this reason, Erta Ale is an effusive volcano and it does not explode when it erupts.
Erta Ale is one of the few volcanoes on the Earth that has a lava lake. There are pieces of basaltic rock that float in it like icebergs in the ocean.
Scientists do not know much more about Erta Ale, because it is situated in one of the most inhospitable places on Earth and the native people are not friendly towards foreigners.
Describe the main types of volcanoes: shield, stratovolcanoes (cone shaped), caldera.
What's the difference between magma and lava?
Where do the majority of volcanoes occur and why?
Explain the volcanic hot spot.
Explain the difference between an explosive volcano and an effusive volcano
Can you explain the three names of the non-explosive lava?
Describe the main characteristics of the following volcanos: Etna, Vesuvius, Kilauea, St. Helens, Erta Ale.
The purpose of the acoustic transducer is to convert electrical energy into acoustic energy. Many variations of acoustic transducers exist, although the most common is the moving coil-permanent magnet transducer. The classic loudspeaker is of the moving coil-permanent magnet type.
The classic electrodynamic loudspeaker driver can be divided into three key components:
Figure 1 Cut-away of a moving coil-permanent magnet loudspeaker
The main purpose of the Magnet Motor Drive System is to establish a symmetrical magnetic field in which the voice coil will operate. The Magnet Motor Drive System is comprised of a front focusing plate, permanent magnet, back plate, and a pole piece. In figure 2, the assembled drive system is illustrated. In most cases, the back plate and the pole piece are built into one piece called the yoke. The yoke and the front focusing plate are normally made of a very soft cast iron. Iron is a material that is used in conjunction with magnetic structures because the iron is easily saturated when exposed to a magnetic field. Notice in figure 2, that an air gap was intentionally left between the front focusing plate and the yoke. The magnetic field is coupled through the air gap. The magnetic field strength (B) of the air gap is typically optimized for uniformity across the gap. [1]
When a coil of wire with a current flowing is place inside the permanent magnetic field, a force is produced. B is the magnetic field strength, l is the length of the coil, and I is the current flowing through the coil.
Figure 3 Voice Coil Mounted in Permanent Magnetic Structure
The coil is excited with the AC signal that is intended for sound reproduction, when the changing magnetic field of the coil interacts with the permanent magnetic field then the coil moves back and forth in order to reproduce the input signal. The coil of a loudspeaker is known as the voice coil.
On a typical loudspeaker, the cone serves the purpose of creating a larger radiating area allowing more air to be moved when excited by the voice coil. The cone serves a piston that is excited by the voice coil. The cone then displaces air creating a sound wave. In an ideal environment, the cone should be infinitely rigid and have zero mass, but in reality neither is true. Cone materials vary from carbon fiber, paper, bamboo, and just about any other material that can be shaped into a stiff conical shape. The loudspeaker cone is a very critical part of the loudspeaker. Since the cone is not infinitely rigid, it tends to have different types of resonance modes form at different frequencies, which in turn alters and colors the reproduction of the sound waves. The shape of the cone directly influences the directivity and frequency response of the loudspeaker. When the cone is attached to the voice coil, a large gap above the voice coil is left exposed. This could be a problem if foreign particles make their way into the air gap of the voice coil and the permanent magnet structure. The solution to this problem is to place what is known as a dust cap on the cone to cover the air gap. Below a figure of the cone and dust cap are shown.
Figure 6 Cone and Dust Cap attached to Voice Coil
Most moving coil loudspeakers have a two piece suspension system, also known as a flexure system. The combination of the two flexures allows the voice coil to maintain linear travel as the voice coil is energized and provide a restoring force for the voice coil system. The two piece system consists of large flexible membrane surrounding the outside edge of the cone, called the surround, and an additional flexure connected directly to the voice coil, called the spider. The surround has another purpose and that is to seal the loudspeaker when mounted in an enclosure. Commonly, the surround is made of a variety of different materials, such as, folded paper, cloth, rubber, and foam. Construction of the spider consists of different woven cloth or synthetic materials that are compressed to form a flexible membrane. The following two figures illustrate where the suspension components are physically at on the loudspeaker and how they function as the loudspeaker operates.
Modeling the Loudspeaker as a Lumped System
Before implementing a loudspeaker into a specific application, a series of parameters characterizing the loudspeaker must be extracted. The equivalent circuit of the loudspeaker is key when developing enclosures. The circuit models all aspects of the loudspeaker through an equivalent electrical, mechanical, and acoustical circuit. Figure 9 shows how the three equivalent circuits are connected. The electrical circuit is comprised of the DC resistance of the voice coil, Re, the imaginary part of the voice coil inductance, Le, and the real part of the voice coil inductance, Revc. The mechanical system has electrical components that model different physical parameters of the loudspeaker. In the mechanical circuit, Mm, is the electrical capacitance due to the moving mass, Cm, is the electrical inductance due to the compliance of the moving mass, and Rm, is the electrical resistance due to the suspension system. In the acoustical equivalent circuit, Ma models the air mass and Ra models the radiation impedance[2]. This equivalent circuit allows insight into what parameters change the characteristics of the loudspeaker. Figure 10 shows the electrical input impedance as a function of frequency developed using the equivalent circuit of the loudspeaker.
[1] The Loudspeaker Design Cookbook 5th Edition; Dickason, Vance., Audio Amateur Press, 1997.
[2] Beranek, L. L. Acoustics. 2nd ed. Acoustical Society of America, Woodbridge, NY. 1993.
The purpose of this text is to produce a reliable and free textbook, specifically tailored toward the needs of students studying VCE Specialist Mathematics in an attempt to gain the Victorian Certificate of Education (VCE). The eventual aim is to provide a practical alternative to standard textbooks, complete with exercises and worked examples.
Relations and Regions in the Complex Plane
The Art of Problem Solving - Is math class too easy for you? Looking for a greater challenge?
Who will you go with?
Will there be room for one more?
How long will it take?
How much will it cost?
Will there be a cover?
Practice with these terms in this interactive exercise:Question practice activity
In the following dialogue, three roommates make weekend plans to go dancing. Lucky for them, Julian’s girlfriend, a professional chef, will be in town for the weekend and able to cook for them.
Julian: Lo aprecio mucho.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
DNA, deoxyribose nucleic acid, holds all of the instructions for the synthesis of amino acids in the human body and its genes are passed on from parent to offspring. In addition to that, DNA, in the future, could also be used in electronic devices to help it work faster or fit into tiny spaces that today’s large machines that no other equipment can fit into. The new DNA-based machines will use less power and less heat than current equipment. DNA’s unique properties – its size, structure and replication abilities – may allow it to reign superior to materials used to run electronic devices today.
DNA has a unique shape known as a double helix, in which the nucleotides of one strand of DNA twist together with its complementary strand. When the nitrogenous bases of the two strands come together, they connect to form a ladder. While the inside of the structure is a ladder, the outside are sugar molecules that connect to each other with phosphate groups. The twisting of DNA gives it a ringed structure. This structure is said to have an orderly display of electrons and form what is dubbed as “pi-ways.” Pi-ways are created by the pi-electrons in the orbitals that hover above atoms that have a ringed structure. Electrons can travel through these pi-ways and conduct electricity. The ability of DNA to conduct electricity could be useful in miniature machines.
In the future, factories will be filled with miniature robots instead of humans that will perform repetitive tasks. Nadrian Seemen of New York University in New York City designed a tiny robot, too small to even be seen by the microscope, out of DNA synthesized in the laboratory. He started with a synthetic DNA molecule he calls DNA DX, which has a shape that is rigid enough to be the robot's arm and in addition, looped together three different DNA pieces using enzymes. Seeman’s DNA robot contains strands of DNA that retain its properties, such as the natural twists and turns that occur in the molecule. Since the robot is too small to see through a microscope, fluorescent tags and telltale glows are added to each part of the DNA to monitor when the molecules are close apart. If they are close apart, glowing will occur, if not there will not be any glowing.
In the future, DNA biosensors could be constructed to detect errors in the connection of the two complimentary strands of DNA. The DNA biosensor will be a tiny square chip consisting of sensing elements (a probe), a signal generator, and microlasers. The biosensor will glow when two strands match up at every nucleotide position. Ideally, when immersed in a fluid containing DNA it will detect disease-causing viruses and bacteria.
A prototype for the first DNA computer was created in 1994. Creating a DNA computer makes sense because evolution has shown that DNA has been selected to hold the instructions for life. In addition, there is mathematics involved in how DNA is passed on from generation to generation, thus it is reasonable to create a DNA computer that will solve complicated mathematical problems. A regular computer would use algorithms and find all the possible routes to get to an answer if given a mathematical problem, while DNA computers will use DNA to create strands of the variables given in the problem and link them together to receive the correct answer without having to go through all of the possible ways to solve the problem.
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q-R S T U V W-Z
Certain characters in Radiata Stories may only be recruited at specific times of the day or if Jack is a part of their faction (Human or Fairy).
Jack is the player controlled character.
After recruiting all Theatre Vancoor members challenge and beat Elwen
Front Page: Radiation Oncology | RTOG Trials | Randomized Trials
Description: Wild Onion has an edible bulb covered with a dense skin of brown fibers and tastes like an onion. The plant also has strong, onion-like odor. The narrow, grass-like leaves originate near the base of the stem, which is topped by a dome-like cluster of star-shaped, pink or white flowers. It typically flowers in the spring and early summer, from May to June.
Use: Use the leaves and bulbs raw in salads, or cook them in a soup. Basically, use them as you would domestic onions.
WARNING: Though the plant is edible, it pays to be careful in identifying it as there are several look-a-likes. So be sure to do more research before eating plant.
1...Nf6, keeping the position symmetrical, is the most flexible reply to 1.Nf3. At Grandmaster level this is a very popular move and has been the preferred response of both Anand and Kasparov.
From here, the game can go in a number of directions and there are plenty of transpositional possibilities into 1.d4 and 1.c4 openings.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
c4...
g3...
d4...
= see 1.d4 Nf6 2.Nf3
b3...
e3...
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Flank opening
Batsford Chess Openings 2 (1989, 1994). Garry Kasparov, Raymond Keene. ISBN 0-8050-3409-9.
Flank Openings (1990), Bruno Carlier, Trends Publications, No ISBN
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon · Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
Plantaceae – subfam. Plantoideae – tribe Planteae – subtr. Plantineae – genus Plantus – subg. Plantus
Very vulnerable,Rare
Endangered,Especially vulnerable,Possibly extirpated
Extirpated,Likely extirpated,No recent reports
Canada native,US South native,N. America native
Invasive,Moderately invasive,Somewhat invasive,Widespread weed
"stricmp", C Programming Expert.com
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Edward, named Gilbert in the original version, features low stats across the board and lacks access to heavier equipment. However, his physical prowess is greater than that of a typical mage, while his various abilities can be useful in many battles. After level 70 Edward's attributes skyrocket.
Edward, the prince of Damcyan, was in love with Tellah's daughter, Anna. He joins the party when the castle gets bombed by the Red Wings.
Sing: Casts a random status effect on a target (such as sleep, silence, and confusion).
Hide: Hides from the battle. May automatically activate if critically injured.
Heal/Salve: Uses a potion on all party members. (Unavailable in the North American SNES release named Final Fantasy II and Final Fantasy IV: Easytype)
Sedimentary rocks - rocks formed from mineral deposits
They may be formed mechanically (clastic), or by chemical and biological means (non-clastic).
These rocks are formed from the particles of other rocks.
Rocks are exposed on the earth's surface and are subject to denudation (erosion, weathering, mass movement, transportation) and deposition.
The rocks are broken down into small fragments which are carried downhill by mass movement or a moving agent.
When the energy of the moving agent is lost, the rocks will be deposited and accumulate. (At foothills, they are called colluvium; on floodplains, alluvium.)
This is sedimentation/ deposition. The deposited fragments and grains are sediments/deposits.
As sedimentation continues, layers of sediments pile up. Large, heavy fragments are deposited first. This is sorting.
Rocks and grains are squeezed together tightly. The bottom layer is compressed by the weight of the layers above it. This is compaction.
Sediments have water in the pore spaces between grains. It may contain cements iron oxide, calcite, silica. The cement glues the rocks together. This is cementation.
Compaction and cementation transform loose sediments into sedimentary rocks. They are collectively known as lithification.
Clastic sedimentary rocks are classified according to grain size.
Conglomerate: Rounded particles of boulders, cobbles and pebbles. Cemented by silica and very resistant to weathering.
Breccia: Like conglomerate, but with angular particles
The colour of the base materials/groundmass hints at the cement involved: iron oxide is red and calcite is grey.
Clastic sedimentary rocks are non-crystallline. They are a matrix of sediments.
Sedimentary rocks have strata/layers. A bedding plane is a surface at which two strata meet. They may tilt in a certain direction because of internal processes. Dip is the angle at which the bedding plane meets with the horizontal plane. Strike is the line at which the bedding plane intersects with the horizontal plane. It shows the direction of the bedding plane. It forms a right angle with the dip.
The water may become saturated with the chemical.
The mineral will be precipitated to form sedimentary rock.
In an arid area, water may evaporate from salt water bodies like enclosed seas. Mineral salts are left, e.g. rock salt.
Dead vegetation is compressed. It becomes a half-developed coal called peat.
When it is buried deeper and for a longer time, it will turn into lignite.
Then bituminous coal.
(The final step in coal formation involves metamorphosis, which is discussed below.)
Traces of plants, shells or skeletons sometimes remain in organically-formed sedimentary rocks. They are fossils. They allow scientists to explore the climatic and environmental changes over time.
v • d • e HKDSE Geography : Elective 1 - Dynamic Earth: The Building of Hong KongRock Cycle
Igneous Rocks · Sedimentary Rocks · Metamorphic Rocks · Physical Weathering · Chemical Weathering · Mass MovementHong Kong's Landscape
Rock Type and the Landscape · Internal Processes and the Landscape · External Processes and the Landscape · Human Activities and the Landscape · Geological MapsGeological Resources
Mining · Reclamation Materials · Geological Tourism and EducationGeological Hazards
Causes of Landslides · Solutions to Landslides
An SQL injection vulnerability occurs if user input included in database queries is not escaped correctly. This type of vulnerability allows attackers to change database queries, which can allow them to obtain or modify database contents.
Always ensure the DB login used by the application has only the rights that are needed
Escaping input manually is error-prone and can be forgotten. With prepared statements, the correct escaping is automatically applied. This also avoids issues with different input interpretation (charset, null byte handling etc.) which can lead to hard-to-find vulnerabilities.
Using a database login with limited access rights limits the impact of successful attacks.
SQL injection can compromise any information in the database and even lead to full system compromise. It can be used to add PHP, HTML, and JavaScript code to web pages and create files. Arbitrary content added to the website can be used for malicious attacks against users and to gain shell access to the server.
If the input for the title of the page on this website were vulnerable to SQL injection then the URL that would be used for the attack is https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=. A simple test to reveal if the input is vulnerable would be to add https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=' because this SQL syntax would break the query and show an SQL error on the page. The next query could be to select usernames and hashed passwords with something like https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=1%20UNION%20ALL%20SELECT%20user_pass%20FROM%20wiki_user;--. The ;-- on the end ends the query and makes the remaining query a comment. Files containing password salts could be dumped to allow an attacker to begin cracking passwords and gain access to administrator accounts using the select load_file() query. A query like this one could be used to gain shell access to the server: https://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=UNION%20SELECT%20<? system($_REQUEST['cmd']); ?>,2,3%20INTO%20OUTFILE%20"shell.php";--
v • d • e Web Application Security Guide
| File inclusion and disclosure
| File upload vulnerabilities
| XML and internal data escaping
| XML, JSON and general API security
| Cross-site request forgery (CSRF)
| Truncation attacks, trimming attacks
| Prefetching and Spiders
| SSL, TLS and HTTPS basics
This is a critique of the research article by Jane Scheneiderman, supervised by Felix Ratjen: Longitudinal Relationship between Physical Activity and Lung Health in Patients with Cystic Fibrosis (CF), from the educational research journal.[1] This critical elaboration was written as an assignment for the University of Canberra, unit Health Disease and Exercise.
What is the Background to this research
Cystic fibrosis is a chronic, life limiting, incurable lung disease, which causes severe health consequences to respiratory and digestive tracts.[2] This disease is caused by mutation in CF transmembrane conductance regulator, with caucasians being the most genetically predisposed.[2] Disruptions to cardiorespiratory function by CF limits daily physical activity. Furthermore, the suppressed immune system often limits the patient to staying in carefully monitored indoor environments
Habitual physical activity (HPA) is of importance for reduction of CF severity amongst the young population.[1] HPA is considered as any physical activity which limits sedentary periods, and improves overall health. Such as walking, free play periods, any activity of the lower intensity and it’s less structured than training programs, furthermore HPA will improve overall health, strength, and aerobic capacity of the patients. Primary focus on aerobic training will enhance the cardiovascular system, resulting in increased lung capacity, better Iron absorption and enhancement of the mucus clearance.[1] Consistency in aerobic fitness development will diminish further progression of the chronic disease throughout the lifespan. This research is conducted on a mixed gender group, aged 7–17 and obtained baseline FEV1, Habitual Activity Estimation Scale and stage 1 aerobic cycle ergometer test scores in this group. This provides information on changes in lung capacity and physical activity participation changes following exercise intervention over nine years.[1]
The author of this study is Jane Schneiderman, Exercise Physiologist/Registered Kinesiologist at the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto. Jane is an assistant professor in the department of Kinesiology and Physical Education at the University of Toronto. Her career in the Exercise Medicine Lab at the Clinical Research Centre is to research the effect of physical activity interventions on cystic fibrosis pathophysiology. She works to correlate Exercise Medicine into the diagnosis and treatment of the patients. Jane’s supervisor for this research was Flix Ratjen, division chief of paediatric respiratory medicine at the Hospital for Sick Children, professor of paediatrics at the University of Toronto, and Senior Scientist at the Research institute in the Translational Medicine research program. Felix Ratjen is co-leading the CF centre at Sick Kids and Medical Director of the Clinical Research Unit.[1]
This study is based on a randomised controlled trial, 212 patients were monitored over 9 years. They would randomly participate in physical activities of varying intensities, with no structured grouping being presented by the author. This questions the validity of the study, as it is not known what intensities of activity have the best outcomes. It is also not known if some participated in more activity than others. There is also no control group, meaning it cannot be determined if outcomes were due to the interventions or factors of the hospital. Moreover, it is not stated what happened to participants who would have become adults during the study, and whether they were included in the results or not.
212 patients with cystic fibrosis aged 7–17 years old from the two hospitals, the Hospital for Sick Children and Montreal Children’s Hospital.[1] Interventions were based on the regular stimulation of the cardiovascular system through any sort of physical exercising. Patients with current additional acute medical conditions, such as increased cough and sputum production, malaise, fever and/or physical participation inability, were not included in the research until they were eligible.[1] Based on this research, the decision to exclude any of the other acute or chronic diseases except CF will provide more accurate results. The results of this study may not be reliable as there was no control group meaning it can not be known if results were caused by the intervention or other factors in the hospital.
In the period of nine years, data collection was undertaken quarterly on the 212 study patients. The rule of exclusion of all patients with an acute disease was practiced, which led into the variable result outcomes. Radical measures of excluding patients should be criticised as all patients with CF are more susceptible to disease, therefore it should be considered in studies.
Anthropometric measures were assessed, monitoring changes in body mass index, weight and eventually height. Pulmonary function testing using spirometry, however, specificity of the assessments were not outlined, therefore it is unknown if the procedures were consistent. Furthermore, dates of assessments were not outlined in this research.
Habitual Activity Estimation Scale was monitored at each quartile, on a typical weekday after the two week periods.[1] Total activity was monitored, data was collected from one weekday, on every second week. It is unknown how much activity they were achieving relative to the recommended guidelines of 30 to 60 minutes of daily moderate to vigorous physical activity.[3] Aerobic cycle ergometer test stage 1 was also conducted annually to determine peak oxygen consumption.[1] Overall results were recorded, but specific results for different ages, or individuals were not given.
The outcome of this study would indicate that any physical activity has a positive influence on the patient’s cardiovascular health. Thus, CF patients who are engaged in the physical activity would experience less respiratory function decline over the lifespan, compared to non active patients. This study indicates that aerobic activity interventions of any intensity would result with reduction of the disease’s progress. However, the methodology of the study means it is not known which frequency, intensity, time and type of exercise is optimal for the participants. All that can be taken is simply that some sort of physical activity has positive outcomes.
What conclusions can we take from this research
Increased physical activity/reduced sedentary time has profound health benefits on sufferers of cystic fibrosis. In this study, detailed specificities of the training programs were not presented, limiting specific information on intensities/duration of exercise. Research should be constructed more precisely to determine the optimal type, intensity and duration of exercise for individuals with cystic fibrosis.
CF requires an incorporated treatment approach in the specialised CF clinics, and a huge scope of non-medical and pharmaceutical therapies are required for the optimal patient’s outcomes.[2] Increased regular aerobic activities would diminish the disease progression through the lifespan, further study needs to be done for more constructed training interventions.
↑ a b c d e f g h i Jane S, Felix R. Longitudinal Relationship between Physical Activity and Lung Health in Patients with Cystic Fibrosis. European Respiratory Journal. [internet]. 2013 October [cited 2020 Sep 11] Available from: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258214023_Longitudinal_Relationship_between_Physical_Activity_and_Lung_Health_in_Patients_with_Cystic_Fibrosis
↑ a b c Klimova B, Kuca K, Novotny M, Maresova P. Cystic Fibrosis Revisited - a Review Study. Med Chem. [internet]. 2017 [cited 2020 Sep 11]; 13(2):102-109. Available from: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27292156/
Sawyer A, Cavalheri V, Jenkins S, et al. Effects of high intensity interval training on exercise capacity in people with cystic fibrosis: study protocol for a randomised controlled trial. BMC Sports Sci Med Rehabil. [internet]. 2018 Nov 6 [cited 2020 Sep 11]; Available from: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30450213/
The East African Community started as a group of British colonies whose postal affairs were administered by the British East African Postal Administration. Included were Kenya, Uganda, and Tanganyika from 1931 to 1961/63. Another British colony, Zanzibar, was adjacent but not part of the Postal Administration. In 1961 Tanganyika gained its independence and merged with Zanzibar to become the new country of Tanzania. Kenya and Uganda also gained their independence around this time. For years after independence the three countries continued to manage their postal affairs communally and stamps marked with all three country names were used. Eventually the three began to issue stamps with only their own name, but both kinds of stamps — one-country name and three-country names — were used in tandem for years. For post-independence stamps with one country name see KENYA, TANZANIA, and UGANDA.
A - British East Africa, inscribed KENYA & UGANDA
B - British East Africa, inscribed KENYA, UGANDA, and TANGANYIKA
C - British East Africa, inscribed TANGANYIKA
D - East African Community, inscribed KENYA, UGANDA and TANZANIA
Small frank with “KENYA & UGANDA” curved at top,
With solid blocks in lower corners and “CENTS” between.
One meter known used by East African Power and Lighting Co.
Similar to Type A1 but with inner box with leaves surrounding value figure.
With “CENTS” at bottom center.
A. With solid blocks in both lower corners [$10]
B. With “N” at lower left, solid block at lower right [$25]
C. With “N” at lower left and M# at lower right. M# N4 only [$35]
Values seen (with “c”): 10, 20c
a. Used during World War 2 without TM on air letter sheets and airgraphs. M# N4 only. Values seen: 25, 30 [$100]
As Type A2 but without “CENTS”, blank at bottom center.
A. With solid blocks in both lower corners
B. With “N” at lower left, solid block at lower right
Values seen: 5, 10, 15, 20, 40, 50c, 1/-
Similar to Type A2 but with TANGANYIKA” curved below “KENYA & UGANDA”.
M# prefix “N” at lower left, “CENTS” at bottom center.
A. With solid block instead of M# at lower right [$25]
B. With M# at lower right
As Type BA1 but with “CENTS” removed.
M# with prefix “N” at lower left and solid block at lower right.
Large frank.
B. Frank 31 mm wide
C. TM lowered with 4-digit S# above. Post Office stamp used for registered mail. M# U78 only [$25]
As Type BB1B but without crown, blank at bottom center.
Similar to Type BB1A but M# with “N” prefix, both unboxed.
With crown over “EiiR” at bottom center.
As Type BB3 but blank at bottom center, without crown over “EiiR”.
M# with “N” prefix.
Sub-group BC: Inscription reads KENYA UGANDA / & TANGANYIKA
Three vertical lines at each side.
“CENTS” over crown at bottom center.
Wide spacing between TM and frank.
As Type BC1 but without crown.
“CENTS” alone at bottom center.
M# with “S” prefix.
Sub-group BD: Inscription reads KENYA UGANDA / TANGANYIKA
As Type BA1 but without “&” in the country name.
M# with “N” prefix.
Similar to Type BB3 but without “AND” in the country name.
M# with “N” prefix.
As Type BD2 but with crown/”EiiR” removed” from bottom.
M# with “N” prefix, N556 and N571 known.
As Type BC1 but without “&” in the country name.
M# with “S” prefix.
“CENTS” over crown at bottom center.
Wide spacing between TM and frank.
As Type BD4 but with crown removed; “CENTS” alone at bottom center.
M# with “S” prefix.
As Type BD5 but with “POSTAGE/ PAID” below “CENTS” at bottom.
M# with “S” prefix.
Similar to Type BD6 but slightly smaller frank with different inscription at bottom.
Small “SH CTS” above “POSTAGE/ PAID” at bottom.
Meter number with "N" prefix.
Two meters reported, N357 and N379.
As BD7 but the frank is much larger.
M# prefix “N” in small box at lower left, M# between horizontal lines at lower right.
Spacing between the town mark and frank varies. (See note)
NOTE: This meter model possibly prints the town mark closer to the frank when printing on tape than on envelope.
Similar to Type BD8 but with “SH CTS” above crown at bottom center.
V/F: =0.oo
BD10. Universal/Pitney Bowes-GB “Automax” (MV).
As Type BD9 but with crown removed, blank at bottom center.
B. M with “PB” prefix [$20]
V/F: =0.oo
a. Completely blank at bottom, with "SH" and "CTS" also removed (A17)
BD11. Pitney Bowes-GB “Automax” (MV). [$10]
As Type BD10B but with “POSTAGE/ PAID” centered at bottom.
M# with “PB” prefix.
V/F: =0.oo
As Type BD3 but with “TANGANYIKA” alone at top.
M# N291 seen.
As Type BD2 but with “TANGANYIKA” alone at top and “POST/ PAID” at bottom center.
M#s N577, N578, N615, N630 and N671 known.
Spacing variable between TM and frank.
Small frank with three vertical lines at the sides.
M# prefix “NE” boxed at lower left, M# unboxed at lower right.
Date figures tall.
As Type DA1 but taller frank.
M# prefix “N” boxed at lower left, M# between horizontal lines at lower right.
Date figures short.
Sub-group DB: Inscription reads TANZANIA / UGANDA KENYA
As Type DA1 but with revised inscription.
M# prefix “NE” boxed at lower left, M# unboxed at lower right.
Date figures tall.
a. Date only without TM
Similar to Type DB1 but narrower, M# with “N” prefix.
As Type BD2 but with revised inscription and with “POSTAGE/ PAID” at bottom center.
M# with “N” prefix boxed at lower left.
A. M# between horizontal lines
B. M# without horizontal lines
a. Frank inverted, value figures upright. M# N647 [$35]
b. V/F: =0/00 (N211 only, probably an assembly error)
As Type BB2 but with revised inscription.
Blank at bottom center, M# with “U” prefix.
a. Without M#, with small block inside box at lower right [$10]
As Type BC2 but with revised inscription.
M# with “S” prefix.
DB6. Universal/Pitney Bowes-GB “Automax” (MV).
As Type BD7 but with revised inscription.
B. M with “PB” prefix
V/F: =0.oo
Wide frank with M# prefix “RV” boxed at lower left, M# unboxed at lower right.
DB8. Pitney Bowes-GB “5000” (MV). [$15]
Wide frank with “POSTAGE” and “PAID” vertical in panels at sides.
Date figures raised in relation to value figures.
M# with “P.B.” prefix low between TM and frank.
Similar to Type DB8 but with three vertical lines at sides.
Date and value figures at same level.
M# with “PB” prefix in lower corners.
Frank straight along bottom.
Online shopping describes the exchange of goods or services conducted via the Internet. Today it accounts for 5.5% of developed GDPs.[1] The advent of online shopping has redefined acceptable standards for interactions between retailers, whether internet or brick-and-mortar, and consumers. Online shopping broadly categorizes many types of transactions; this chapter explores emergent phenomena specifically in the changing business-to-consumer climate.
Internet commerce began in the 1980s for business-to-business transactions, though consumer adoption stalled until the release of the Netscape Browser and the Secure Socket Layer (SSL) add-on in the mid 1990s. These allowed users to exchange payment information securely via encrypted channels.[2]
Privacy and ethical data collection have long been a concern of Internet pioneers.[3] Consumers, however, are less concerned, and privacy has not been a major barrier to adoption of online shopping. This may be because consumers fail to understand the importance of retailers’ privacy policies. According to a survey collected by Pew Research Center in 2014, a majority of internet users incorrectly believe that companies cannot share their private information.[4]
Mass popularity of online shopping despite the privacy concerns of experts may also be explained by consumer willingness to forego privacy for the convenience of online systems. [5] [6] These results adhere to the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM)[7], an accepted framework describing user adoption of online information systems in terms of Perceived Usefulness (PU) and Perceived Ease of Use (PEU). [8]
Blockbuster’s bankruptcy in 2010 demonstrates consumer prioritization of convenience. Blockbuster, a leading video-rental company established in 1985, filed for bankruptcy soon after Netflix introduced its online video streaming service in 2007. By late 2009, Netflix expanded its streaming service to multiple gaming consoles and to Macintosh computers.[9] This contributed to Blockbuster's historic revenue decline from 5 billion dollars in 2008 to bankruptcy in 2010.
Blockbuster was aware that consumer attitudes were changing; spontaneous trips to the video store were replaced by mail order movies. To adapt, Blockbuster planned to allocate 200 million dollars to its online presence and eliminate its high late fees. However, they revoked these changes only one year later and sealed their fate.[10] Blockbuster’s bankruptcy clearly illustrates the necessity of an online presence for any retailer.
Online retailers, brick-and-mortar stores, and consumers are three main categories of participants that use internet retail technology to advance their interests. Online retailers aim to displace physical stores from the business-to-consumer marketplace and potentially take over their market share. Online retailers are not burdened by the costs associated with a physical store-front, so they are able to offer lower prices than brick-and mortar competition. They also appeal to consumers’ preference for convenience, by offering expedited shipping and personalized recommendations. Brick-and-mortar retailers attempt to stay competitive by providing similar services at competitive price points. Physical stores must also create new value propositions for their showrooms and focus on delivering a holistic experience. Consumers remain committed to getting the best quality goods for the lowest price. They leverage both the physical store experience and ability to easily scour online goods by price.
Online reviews are an important tool for both consumers and online retailers. With online shopping’s increased prevalence, informal word-of-mouth marketing has developed into a formal evaluation system; online reviews have become popular interfaces for disparate consumers to communicate globally and anonymously. It is estimated that 61% of consumers read online reviews to guide their purchasing[11] and that consumers trust the validity of online reviews most when a mix of positive and negative reviews are present[12]. “Conformity”, meaning that the perceived risk of buyer’s remorse is less if the majority opinion is heeded, is an established phenomenon among offline shoppers and has also been shown to affect online consumers’ decisions when reading reviews.[13] Thus, in addition to a lack of negative reviews, a large proportion of negative reviews can also dissuade shoppers from purchasing.
Amazon, a leading online retailer valued at over $240 billion[14], has prioritized positive consumer perception of the reviews published on their website to great effect. Rather than invest in a costly editorial team to exhaustively screen and evaluate all reviews, Amazon uses its own customers’ ratings as a filter. The added benefit is that consumers trust other consumers’ ratings as well as their posted reviews. The “was this review helpful to you” yes or no option allows consumers to vote on reviews based on their utility, allowing Amazon to rank and display reviews to consumers based on their votes.[15] Amazon has invested in several technical design changes to make this ranking system successful and well-adopted. These include limiting each individual to a single vote and preventing the web page from refreshing after each vote has been submitted to encourage consumers to evaluate multiple reviews.[16] This feature of “reviewing reviews” allows Amazon to juxtapose the most helpful positive and negative reviews, thereby fulfilling the online shopper’s expectation of accessing mixed reviews.
The anonymity of the review process does complicate Amazon’s ability to remove fake reviews. This is a serious forthcoming given that Amazon sellers have been able to purchase fraudulent positive reviews of their products, thereby challenging the credibility of all online reviews.[17] The retail giant publicizes its willingness to take legal action on this matter and aims to deter future untrustworthy reviewers by suing them.
Personalization vs. Privacy
Consumers expect personalized marketing and recommendations, but don’t like to share the information used to make these possible. Infosys found that 87% of consumers buy more from retailers using targeted advertisements, but only 26% were comfortable sharing their social profile with these retailers.[18] A survey of 2000 consumers found that 60% customers want real-time offers and promotions but only 14% want to share real-time information.[19] And a 2011 Customer Experience Impact Report from Oracle found that most consumers will pay more for an improved and personalized shopping “experience”.[20]
Retailers have invested in personalized marketing to increase profitability. Target, for example, uses customer purchasing data to predict what types of coupons to send customers. Personalized coupons are intended to entice customers into the store, where they will hopefully spend much more than they had anticipated[21]. Target acquires this data by tracking their own customers, and augments it with information they purchase from companies that accumulate this data. Controversially, Target developed an algorithm that uses this information to predict whether a female customer is pregnant. Expectant mothers are a primary target of personalized marketing because they are very busy, and likely to become loyal customers when they realize Target can provide an all-in-one shopping experience[22]. The algorithm has been remarkably successful, predicting some pregnancies before mothers are even “showing”, and driving in-store revenue growth.
Target understood during the development of this algorithm that they were encroaching on sensitive customer privacies. Andrew Pole, a lead statistician at Target, included this concern describing the central question of the project: “If we wanted to figure out if a customer is pregnant, even if she didn’t want us to know, can you do that?”[23] To conceal the sensitive information they have on consumers, retailers must deliver personalized service without revealing how much they know about customers. When Target first developed their pregnancy prediction algorithm, they sent expectant mothers books of maternity coupons. Mothers who suspected Target knew they were pregnant were less likely to use the coupons[24]. To have the desired effect, Target has disguised its targeted coupons among other generic coupons.
Though online shopping has disrupted the business-to-consumer marketplace, many consumers still find value in physical stores. Consumers enjoy the intangible experience of shopping; many prefer to see and touch a product before buying it, and most consumers value the advice given by store representatives before making a purchasing decision[25]. This has lead to a phenomenon termed “showrooming” where consumers utilize in-store resources before purchasing a product for a presumably lower price online. Brick and mortar stores pay a heavy price for this behavior since they invest in customers but do not gather any revenue.
Showrooming has become commonplace; 73% of consumers have reported that they have “showroomed” in the last 6 months[26]. Consumer electronics and appliances are the most affected by these practices, which have contributed to Best Buy’s decreasing profitability[27], and Target’s removal of Amazon Kindle products from its store[28]. To combat showrooming, retailers have adopted numerous tactics. Some, like Best Buy, promise to match prices found online[29]. Others have begun offering products exclusively in store that are unavailable online; and Target offers exclusive in-store discounts and promotions through its new Cartwheel app[30]. The Cartwheel app encourages consumers to utilize both Target’s online shopping interface and its brick and mortar locations.
Not all brick and mortar stores can afford these programs. A common alternative approach is to deliver additional value to consumers by creating a pleasurable shopping experience. Recommendations by the retail council cite “being polite, genuinely caring and interested in helping, acknowledging and listening,” and “exciting store design ... consistently great product quality, making customers feel they’re special and that they always get a deal” as ways retail stores can improve their shopping experience[31]. Stores also aim to create a positive shopping atmosphere by focusing on store design, background music, and smell. Research from the American Psychological Association found that pleasant music and scents encourage impulse purchases[32], and marketing research shows that music selection is critical to brand development[33].
Austan Goolsbee and Jonathan Zittrain, of the American bar foundation and Harvard law school respectively, described the need to give online retailers a competitive advantage in 1999 by not charging sales tax for online purchases; online shopping was not established as a conventional sales channel. However, Goolsbee and Zittrain concluded that this tax exemption should be a temporary measure, even at that time.[34] Widespread adoption of online shopping and significant state budget deficits prompted the Marketplace Fairness Act.[35] This act requires all online and offline sellers valued at over $1 million to collect interstate use and sales taxes from their consumers.[36]
Consumers are generally displeased by this new intervention in the business-to-consumer marketplace because they will pay higher prices online. However, some have found a loophole to evade paying sales tax on online purchases. Amazon, eBay, and others are able to conglomerate offerings from multiple smaller vendors through their consumer interfaces that are not held to the same tax collection standards as large vendors. Customers can save by purchasing from these smaller merchants on Amazon or eBay,or by contacting the smaller merchants directly. [37]
Though at first Amazon strongly opposed the Marketplace Fairness Act[38], it is now allied with major offline retailers like Walmart and Target in support of this legislation[39]. This shift reflects Amazon’s changing value proposition over time as it became more established. The company now focuses the convenience of “one-click” shopping and free two-day shipping instead of its low prices to drive popularity[40]. However, not all mid-sized online retailers have made the same shift in attitude;it remains to be seen how they will compete against larger online and offline retailers now that the business-to-consumer marketplace no longer affords them tax benefits.
Ethical standards for the business-to-consumer marketplace are clearly evolving when considering the nuances of online reviews, personalized marketing, showrooming, and tax legislation. This chapter has only considered these phenomena. Future work may include discussion about the divide in profitability expectations between established brick-and-mortar retailers and new exclusively online retailers. It may also be interesting to review how new funding and investment models have changed this marketplace, and how medium-sized online retailers are advancing their interests.
↑ Trend report: Why Personalized Retail Is the Future of Brick-and-Mortar Stores. (n.d.). http://www.trafsys.com/trend-report-why-personalized-retail-is-the-future-of-brick-and-mortar-stores/
↑ McKnight, L. (1998). Internet economics (pp. 436-442). Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
↑ By, J. M. (1999, Dec 30). Bitter debate on privacy divides two experts. New York Times (1923-Current File), pp. 2. Retrieved from http://search.proquest.com/docview/110099900?accountid=14678
↑ Half of online Americans don't know what a privacy policy is. (2014, December 4) http://www.pewresearch.org/
↑ S. Spiekermann, J. Grossklags, and B. Berendt.E-privacy in 2nd generation e-commerce: Privacy preferences versus actual behavior. In 3rd ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce - EC ’01, pages 38–47, 2002.
↑ Brown, M., & Muchira, R. (2004). Investigating the relationship between Internet privacy concerns and online purchase behavior. Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, 5(1), 62-70.
↑ Davis Jr, F. D. (1986). A technology acceptance model for empirically testing new end-user information systems: Theory and results (Doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology).
↑ A brief history of the company that revolutionized watching of movies and TV shows. (2015). Retrieved from https://pr.netflix.com/
Antioco, J. (2011, April 1). How I Did It: Blockbuster's Former CEO on Sparring with an Activist Shareholder. Retrieved from https://hbr.org/2011/04/how-i-did-it-blockbusters-former-ceo-on-sparring-with-an-activist-shareholder
↑ Charlton, G. (2015, July 8). Ecommerce consumer reviews: Why you need them and how to use them. https://econsultancy.com/blog/9366-ecommerce-consumer-reviews-why-you-need-them-and-how-to-use-them/
↑ Chowney, V. (2010, January 10). Bad reviews improve conversion by 67%. https://econsultancy.com/blog/8638-bad-reviews-improve-conversion-by-67
↑ Lee, J., Park, D. H., & Han, I. (2008). The effect of negative online consumer reviews on product attitude: An information processing view. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 7(3), 341-352.
↑ Pettypiece, S. (2015, July 24). Amazon passes Wal-mart as biggest retailer by market value. http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-07-23/amazon-surpasses-wal-mart-as-biggest-retailer-by-market-value
↑ Mudambi, S. M., & Schuff, D. (2010). What makes a helpful review? A study of customer reviews on Amazon. com. MIS quarterly, 34(1), 185-200.
↑ Spool, J. (2009, March 17). User Interface Engineering. https://www.uie.com/articles/magicbehindamazon/
↑ Perez, S. (2015, October 15). Amazon files suit against individuals posting fake product reviews on fiverr.com. http://techcrunch.com/2015/10/16/amazon-files-suit-against-individuals-offering-fake-product-reviews-on-fiverr-com/
↑ Infosys. (2013, June 25). Consumers Worldwide Will Allow Access To Personal Data For Clear Benefits, Says Infosys Study. https://www.infosys.com/newsroom/press-releases/Pages/digital-consumer-study.aspx
↑ Accenture Consulting. (2015). Consumers conflicted on digital trust, yet expect a personalized retail experience. https://www.accenture.com/us-en/insight-earn-customer-trust-personalization-research.aspx?c=prod_retail_personalization_press_10000001&n=otc_0315
↑ Oracle. (2011). 2011 Customer Experience Impact Report. http://www.oracle.com/us/products/applications/cust-exp-impact-report-epss-1560493.pdf
↑ Hill, K. (2012, Feb 12). How Target Figured Out A Teen Girl Was Pregnant Before Her Father Did. http://www.forbes.com/sites/kashmirhill/2012/02/16/how-target-figured-out-a-teen-girl-was-pregnant-before-her-father-did/
↑ Duhigg, C. (2012, Feb 16). How Companies Learn Your Secrets. nytimes.com
↑ TimeTrade. (2015). The State of Retail. timetrade.com
↑ Accenture. (2013, April 23). Accenture Study Shows U.S. Consumers Want a Seamless Shopping Experience Across Store, Online and Mobile that Many Retailers are Struggling to Deliver. https://newsroom.accenture.com/news/accenture-study-shows-us-consumers-want-a-seamless-shopping-experience-across-store-online-and-mobile-that-many-retailers-are-struggling-to-deliver.htm
↑ McGrath, M. (2014, Aug 26). Best Buy Sales Fall As Customers Keep Shopping Online. http://www.forbes.com/sites/maggiemcgrath/2014/08/26/best-buy-sales-fall-as-customers-keep-shopping-online/
↑ Molina, B. (2012, March 5). Is 'showrooming' behind Target move to drop Kindle? http://content.usatoday.com/communities/technologylive/post/2012/05/is-showrooming-behind-target-move-to-drop-kindle/1#.VmzVCRorJ-W
↑ Best Buy. (n.d.) Price Match Guarantee. http://www.bestbuy.com/site/help-topics/price-match-guarantee/pcmcat297300050000.c?id=pcmcat297300050000
↑ Target. (n.d). Cartwheel App. http://cartwheel.target.com/
↑ Knowledge@Wharton. (2009, June 8). Getting to ‘Wow': Consumers Describe What Makes a Great Shopping Experience. http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/getting-to-wow-consumers-describe-what-makes-a-great-shopping-experience/
↑ Dingfelder, S. (2005). Music motivates impulse buyers, not thoughtful shoppers. http://www.apa.org/monitor/nov05/music.aspx
↑ Beverland, M., Lim, E. A. C., Morrison, M., & Terziovski, M. (2006). In-store music and consumer–brand relationships: Relational transformation following experiences of (mis) fit. Journal of Business Research, 59(9), 982-989.
↑ Goolsbee, A., & Zittrain, J. (1999). Evaluating the costs and benefits of taxing Internet commerce. National Tax Journal, 413-428.
↑ Marketplace Fairness Act is important. (n.d.). http://marketplacefairness.org/what-is-the-marketplace-fairness-act
↑ All Info - S.698 - 114th Congress (2015-2016): Marketplace Fairness Act of 2015. (n.d.). https://www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/senate-bill/698/all-info
↑ Wood, R. (2014, March 4). 3 ways to still avoid sales tax online. http://www.forbes.com/sites/robertwood/2014/03/04/3-ways-to-still-avoid-sales-tax-online/2/
↑ Phibbs, B. (2013, May 7). Why Retailers Should Support The Marketplace Fairness Act. http://www.retaildoc.com/blog/why-retailers-should-support-the-marketplace-fairness-act
↑ All Info - S.698 - 114th Congress (2015-2016): Marketplace Fairness Act of 2015. (n.d.). https://www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/senate-bill/698/all-info
↑ Wood, R. (2014, March 4). 3 ways to still avoid sales tax online. http://www.forbes.com/sites/robertwood/2014/03/04/3-ways-to-still-avoid-sales-tax-online/2/
White now has several choices of pawn structure to adopt. The most flexible move is 3. Nc3, giving White some time before deciding. However, it denies the access to the Averbakh Variation (3. c4), the Geller's System(3. c3 and 4. Nf3) and the Three Pawns Attack (3. c3 and 4. f4).
Nf3 is also possible and will transpose early into the other variations.
h4 is an attacking move that was discovered by Bobby Fischer. It aims to weaken Black's kingside pawn structure and make Black's king more vulnerable. Black may have difficulties castling in some lines arising from this move.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Modern Defence
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon · Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
You don't have to create 3D models from scratch. Most objects you may need have already been created, you only need to find them. For Sketchup and Blender, for instance, there are many available models. So here we show you how to find 3D models, what to worry about, especially with respect to licencing.
3D Eagles Available for free 3d objects download in software & format 3dsmax 2016, render engine v ray 3.0, texture.
Choice between a list with thumbnails or only thumbnails
In the UK, tenancy deposits are protected by the Tenancy Deposit Scheme:
An exception is deposits taken before 6 April 2007, before the relevant part of the Housing Act 2004 came into force. However, such deposits still have to be protected when the tenancy agreement is renewed.
At the end of your tenancy, to recover your deposit, you will need to provide the scheme with certain information.
Tenancy deposits are protected by Tenancy Deposit Schemes.
The landlord is required to provide you with information about your deposit (the prescribed information) within 14 days of the commencement of your tenancy.
When you receive this information, you can check online that your deposit is, in fact, enrolled in a scheme, and thus protected.
Check which Tenancy Deposit Scheme you are enrolled in. If using…
You will receive a Deposit ID and Repayment ID. Make a note of the Repayment ID, for instance writing it down and attaching it to your lease (via a sticky note, for instance), as you will need it at the end of your tenancy to recover your deposit.
Receive Prescribed Information (details of Tenancy Deposit Scheme)
Receive and note Repayment ID (and Deposit ID), if using the DPS
To recover your deposit, check which Tenancy Deposit Scheme you are enrolled in.
You will be asked by the DPS to supply your Repayment ID, which was supplied to you at the start of your tenancy. This is not the landlord’s Repayment ID – they have a separate one.
You will be asked by the TDS for your unique tenancy ID. This can be located on your tenancy deposit protection certificate or it can be located online at www.thedisputeservice.co.uk.
Recover deposit (using Repayment ID, if enrolled in the DPS) or (Tenancy Code if enrolled with TDS)
Tenancy Deposit : Directgov
Information for tenants, landlords and letting agents, leaflets, and general information.
Tenancy Deposit Scheme : TDS
Welcome to the Real Analysis Wikibook, where we provide meaning behind all of the earlier mathematics that came before and prepare you with the eyes and sense to ready yourself for higher mathematics.
This page will discuss the feel of this book. We will discuss the design layout, how proofs and concepts will be described, and mathematical conventions maintained in the book. This page will have a dual focus of both informing you, the curious burgeoning mathematician, as well as you, the Wikibookians here wondering how to make your mark on this book. As such, this page will have a light-hearted fusion of both editor comments and general reader comments.
To make it easier to skim, we created three headings outlining how this wikibook ought to be designed.
Design—how the content looks on the medium (Wikibooks)
Description—how the content is presented; how it reads
This wikibook's main headers correspond to the various concepts of elementary mathematics, the name we refer to when discussing the mathematics usually taught at high school or below. Since education mandates that elementary mathematics must be known, this wikibook uses that as a starting ground. However, you may quickly find that although it covers all concepts discussed in elementary mathematics, this wikibook also introduces many new disciplines of mathematics that one may pursue further in their higher mathematical journey. This is good! If you find a certain topic may not be explained with enough rigor, or was brushed off with an axiom, then maybe you can spend time taking a crack at it! However enjoyable it is to prove what were axioms or unexplained phenomenon, remember that some reductions back to axiomatic, informal, or "intuitive" explanations for various theorems or proofs exist for a purpose. These, however sad, are actually meant to shed light on the primary question mathematicians struggle with, and that is what mathematicians can, cannot, or are unable to work without, assuming. This is what this wikibook is meant to teach. Not only is the depth involved with every elementary mathematical concept well trodden, but how much deeper there is left to know in math. Not bad for essentially a group of abstract rules we agreed to follow, huh?
Hello! This book is aimed towards the curious mathematicians starting out their journey of mathematics. Preferably, this mathematician should know high school mathematics. This will make most of the concepts at least familiar. However, this wikibook will look at it from a fresh new angle. Since it also contains complex topics buried inside, it is also a refreshing read for advanced mathematicians who want to clear up exactly how concepts relate to one another.
How should this wikibook be read?
For now, this book is best read sequentially. Concepts build on top of each other the deeper you go.
Have you noticed Appendices or Topics you never heard of before?
Some chapters will have an appendix heading, typically located at the bottom. These pages do not have any direct relationship to our assumed audience, since most of the topics will discuss things never-heard-of before. However, they do provide a nice primer to higher mathematics.
In fact, some sections will be devoted to higher mathematical concepts. The first chapter will usually be a primer on what the topic is, to the uninitiated. However, the rest of the chapter assumes a level of understanding similar to your understanding of math before you read Analysis, and remember how we assumed you completed secondary education on mathematics—with some knowledge of calculus already—or understood the Calculus wikibook beforehand. It won't look easy!
There are problem sets in this wikibook to complement your learning!
Although this wikibook is called Real Analysis, it also introduces many other fields of mathematics, ranging from metric spaces, algebra, and set theory as well. This is the primary design focus of this wikibook, in accordance with its didactic. This book ought to introduce, to any budding mathematician, mathematics grander than simply elementary mathematics over real numbers, which quite frankly, is not defined, bounded, or really used in either the exercises or the sections until the very end of the wikibook.
This book employs a fairly uniform template style, as well as new styles that should be implemented. Each template will be given its own row to explain itself.
| section = [[../Chapter_Directory|Chapter Title]]
| previous = [[../Chapter_Directory_Pre|Chapter Title Pre]]
| next = [[../Chapter_Directory_Nxt|Chapter Title Nxt]]
Headers should be on every chapter. Previous and Next sections should exists only for what is reasonably the next and previous chapter of some overall topic.
Table of contents go on the right, because important links should exists on the right side like a well-designed Wikipedia page. Also the limit is set at 3 so that you can use one large heading and a subheading before time to use the proof heading, which should be hidden.
Should be used for mathematical statements except when complex. They should especially be used for theorem summaries because they can be processed using a search engine.
Should be used to summarize definitions and theorems, with the title in bold and either stating "Theorem" or "Definition of X".
The rationale for links on this wikibook are the same as Wikipedia's: to help the reader. Because this wikibook is on an online medium and that Wikibooks is a sister project of Wikipedia, it is the case that all pages on this wikibook should also share in Wikipedia's linking style, as mandated on their manual of style page. We also wish to prioritize links to WIkipedia's sisters projects first, before adding an external link. This is because of style reasons; external links on MediaWiki software is intentionally designed differently and with more emphasis than internal links. The focus should be on the content, not the link.
In choosing which link to add, there should be a focus on linking content in this wikibook or on equally complex wikibooks. This is out of necessity. Since most content online does not explore mathematics at a level that this book explores, providing links to more simplistic examples may not help our reader understand certain subjects. It also helps bring the advanced mathematics community together. However, this should not deter you, the editor, from adding links to other things if desired.
Add links like any Wikipedia page.
Try to add complementary content on Wikibooks before adding other things.
Be reasonable with what you link to.
Since this is a sister project of Wikipedia, it is often the case that the lack of easily seen references may jar you, the audience, when you first read this wikibook. This is fair, since MediaWiki software uniformly designs the webpage to be the same. Like most books, the references are often located on a separate page, which this wikibook also contains. The link to it is here.
However, you, the editor, may wish to add new references. The rule for this is that if the reference is not global (i.e. you will not intend to use it for a good portion of the book, or the information in the reference cannot support a good portion, like a section, of this wikibook), it should be placed per page, using standard MediaWiki citation protocols. An example of how to do so can be found on Wikipedia's guide on citing sources.
Cite your sources.
Citations used throughout the wikibook, by default, are located here.
One-off citations should be done through the usual citation method.
Use MediaWiki's citation system.
Do not shy away from using notation! However, there should also be a way to describe your concept using words as well.
This wikibook standardizes how it references itself. In a single run on sentence, the class of relations between pages are: In this wikibook, there contains several sections describing separate, but interconnected topics on higher mathematics, which each section containing several chapters that examine, in-depth, a certain concept that the section wishes to describe which, in each section, is handled usually by a single page (although a single page may be referred by more than one chapter in a given section) with multiple headings, which breaks down the topic into easy to read pieces.
Links to the referent content may be placed when the content refers to these locations.
This wikibook also draws a distinction on elementary mathematics and higher mathematics, which are defined below:Elementary Mathematics: the mathematics one usually learns all the way up to a high school or equivalent education. Usual concepts learns included algebraic manipulations and how to compute trigonometric functions, derivatives, and integrals. However, mathematical rigor is usually not assumed when this word is used, or a very basic understanding of it.Higher Mathematics: the mathematics one usually learns in a post-secondary or equivalent institution. Free online content for these materials tends to be lacking, or at the least, difficult to find. Often associated with a drive to understand what mathematics is through rigorous analysis. To gain a better feel of what that is, read the Introduction presented on the front page of this wikibook.
In mathematics, there exists a set of logical operators that we use to describe our proofs. Since mathematicians are trained in using these logical notations for so long, the written equivalent of the set of logical operations tends to appear in mathematical proof and paragraphs describing concepts.
The general rules for the use of mathematical language in this book are
They are generally fine, but introductory statements and the earlier chapters should avoid using it so our curious future mathematicians can be eased in to the discipline.
When writing summaries of theorems, they should be written with the fact that many of our terms do not carry the necessary impact that the theorems lead on to show. Therefore, mathematically-critical concepts should be written using logical notation and everything else should be written with impact.
To clarify point 2,
These words do exist. For example, the word implies is not a strong, certain word in normal parlance, even though in mathematics, the word implies is certain. So, to convey this to our readers, we can employ words like must, will, or even is to provide the necessary emphasis. However, this should not take precedence over being incorrect with your usage though. As always, simply writing out the statements with logical notation peppered in will bring your point across a lot clearer.
Proofs are generally more than cursory applications of definitions. As such, theorems may be used. In mathematics, mentioning theorems are akin to highlighting - they serve only to accent a series of steps like how people will not write out every algebraic step. As such, more advanced theorems in higher mathematics tend to omit or forget to state even the theorems you will learn here. These people also tend to write the textbook you will read on Real Analysis. As it is our goal to supplement, or potentially supplant, your textbook, our textbook will provided the necessary training wheels to build a solid foundation. With enough problems, you will also begin to remove those training wheels as well. This should not be done during your chapter reading.
Omit only algebraic and elementary mathematical analysis and logic.
Expressed in a tabular format, with descriptions in the 1st column and any mathematical steps in the 2nd column.
Functions should be notated as variables when possible.
Function composition should use the ring (∘ - code &#8728;) operator for clarity when composition may be conflicted with variables.
Functions, when typed outside of a LaTeX setting, should use the hooked HTML entity (ƒ - code &fnof;) for visual distinction.
On some pages, there are headings labeled "Appendix". These headings often offer alternative content which often introduce new concepts in mathematics to you, the reader. They usually related, in some sense, to the content in the page. They are optional and are not necessary to understand the purpose of this wikibook. As such, these appendices may be safely ignored when focusing on this wikibook. But be warned, not only may some questions borrow from them, but they may be important later on in your mathematical journey!
With the release of Mac OS X, the ability to easily open a resource file has dissipated like smoke. But a simple modification will revive your older FN OPENRFPERM. Just change the FN to USR and a new FB routine will work in version of the System software from System 7.x to Mac OS X. As with the original toolbox function, the parameters are the file name, the volume reference number (which is handled in the background by FB) and the permission constant. Legal permission constants are: _fsRdPerm
When contributing, follow as closely as possible the conventions stated in the chapter titled "Introduction to the FB Language." These conventions include the following:
Items in italics represent placeholders which should be replaced as indicated in the description;
Items in bold text represent literal text that you should enter exactly as shown;
Items in plain non-italic text represent literal text that you should usually enter exactly as shown.
Please adhere to the following coding standards:
FB keywords: lower case (print, not PRINT) or "camel case" (HandleEvents, not HANDLEEVENTS).
The mixed-case format is preferred.
Please do not color code the Wikibook text.
Variables: start with a lowercase letter (x, myVariable)
When documents can be organized in folders (directories), the following standards are used:
Language: An Overview of Syntax, Organized by Functionality
Intro: An Introduction to Programming in FutureBASIC (Note: please compose content for true beginning programmers)
Folder names are in lowercase when appearing in Wikibook links. These folders are divided further into specific topics. Always consult the table of contents before creating sub-folders (sub-sections) for this text. The Wikibook entries are linked from FutureBASIC → "Major Section" → "Sub-section" and this organization will be automatically recreated when a Wikibook is exported. Since the Wikibook is our central repository for content, please maintain the organization. Reorganizing a Wikibook requires copying pages to new locations and then deleting the originals.
Since 1999 I have taught an introductory course of contemporary physics to high-school students (grades 11-12) and undergraduates at the Sri Aurobindo International Centre of Education (SAICE) in Pondicherry, India. The SAICE is not your typical high school or college. While the students enjoy an exceptional freedom to choose their projects and courses, the teachers are free to offer subjects of their own choosing and are encouraged to explore new methods of teaching. My course is therefore optional. It is suitable for anyone with an interest in what contemporary physics is trying to tell us about the "nature of Nature." To students of physics it offers a perspective that is complementary to those of many excellent textbooks.
Every year at the beginning of the new term I revise and try to improve the material I hand out to my students. These revisions are to a considerable extent based on student feedback. I am presently preparing the handouts for the next term and intend to simultaneously make them available in these pages, hoping for additional valuable feedback from the Wikibooks community.
Postscript: I have not been able to add chapters and sections as fast as I would have liked, but it's going to happen. I haven't given up on this project!--Koantum 03:05, 27 September 2007 (UTC)
Implementing multiple interfaces without multiple inheritance and yet provide natural looking up-casting.
Signature of a virtual function in two independent interfaces provided by two independent
The inner class idiom can help solve this problem.
Leaving the interface classes, Base1 and Base2 unchanged we can implement
Note the use of conversion operators in class Derived. (Derived class is really not a derived class!) The conversion operators allow conversion of Derived to Base1 even though they don't share inheritance relationship themselves! Use of member objects base1_obj and base2_obj eliminates the concern of object lifetime. Lifetime of member objects is same as that of the Derived object.
Thinking in C++ Vol 2 - Practical Programming --- by Bruce Eckel.
Why do satellites follow a path around the earth when they are broadcasting MTV. Think about it this way, if they were going a bit slower, they would fall, and if they were going a bit faster, they would fly away.
The distance a satellite is orbiting at will be determined in much the same way as how far Shakira's hair will be from her head when she tosses it. The faster, the farther.
Newton made this observation in regards to the fact that the moon rotates around the earth as determined by the law of gravitation:
.
R is what we are concerned with here. The equation requires that the farther away from the gravitational force the satellite is, the slower it needs to go to stay in orbit.
It is said that Galileo dropped two bowling bowls of different masses from the tower of pisa, but this is debated with many believing it only occurred as a thought experiment. The natural inclination is to believe that the heavier object would fall faster without air resistance, but this is not true, as it has been shown they both fall at the same time. The force equation above proves that the force is greater on the larger object all other things being equal (
Note that the Citation is for a specific article in the magazine, not the entire issue
Template:Cite magazine - A complete description of the Cite_magazine template (for articles in magazines & newsletters)
Relevant Parameter Set (Vertical Format) + Definitions
| publisher = Name of publisher; may be wikilinked if relevant. The publisher is the company that publishes the work being cited. Do not use the publisher parameter for the name of a work (e.g. a website, book, encyclopedia, newspaper, magazine, journal, etc.). Corporate designations such as "Ltd", "Inc.", or "GmbH" are not usually included. Not normally used for periodicals. Omit where the publisher's name is substantially the same as the name of the work (for example, The New York Times Co. publishes The New York Times newspaper, so there is no reason to name the publisher). Displays after title.
| publication-date = Date of publication when different from the date the work was written. Displays only if year or date are defined and only if different, else publication-date is used and displayed as date. Use the same format as other dates in the article; do not wikilink. Follows publisher; if work is not defined, then publication-date is preceded by "published" and enclosed in parenthesis.
| first1 = Alfred Earl "Earl"
| author-link1 = Alfred Earl Read
| editor1-first = Alfred Earl "Earl"
| editor1-link = Alfred Earl Read
| title = Editorial Notes
| url = https://worldradiohistory.com/AUSTRALIA/Archive-Australian-Radio-World/30's/Australasian-Radio-World-Vol-01-No-04-1936-08-01.pdf
| magazine = Australasian Radio World
| publisher = Alfred Earl "Earl" Read
| via = WorldRadioHistory.com
| location = Sydney, N.S.W.
| id = NLA Bib ID 1354560
Article on Future of Amateur Radio in Australasian Radio World by 2NO
↑ Read, Alfred Earl "Earl" (August 1936). Read, Alfred Earl "Earl". ed. "Editorial Notes" (in English) (PDF). Australasian Radio World (Sydney, N.S.W.: Alfred Earl "Earl" Read) 1 (4): 2. NLA Bib ID 1354560. https://worldradiohistory.com/AUSTRALIA/Archive-Australian-Radio-World/30's/Australasian-Radio-World-Vol-01-No-04-1936-08-01.pdf. "Progress in receiver design in past 4 years.".
↑ Knock, Donald Brader "Don" (May 1946). Hull, Allan Galbraith "Braith". ed. "What of the Future of "Ham" Radio?" (in English) (PDF). Australasian Radio World (Sydney, N.S.W.: Allan Galbraith "Braith" Hull) 10 (12): 5-6. NLA Bib ID 1354560. https://worldradiohistory.com/AUSTRALIA/Archive-Australian-Radio-World/30's/Australasian-Radio-World-Vol-01-No-04-1936-08-01.pdf. "Authorities need to again licence amateur radio operators".
↑ Knock, Donald Brader "Don" (May 1946). Hull, Allan Galbraith "Braith". ed. "Personal" (in English) (PDF). Australasian Radio World (Sydney, N.S.W.: Allan Galbraith "Braith" Hull) 10 (12): 5. NLA Bib ID 1354560. https://worldradiohistory.com/AUSTRALIA/Archive-Australian-Radio-World/30's/Australasian-Radio-World-Vol-01-No-04-1936-08-01.pdf. "Brief Autobiography".
The land of Hyrule is large and vast, so to better understand its features, please refer to the guide map and choose which section of Hyrule you would like to learn more about, and the follow the appropriate link in the table below to that section.
This page is an analysis of the journal article titled ‘Running for REST: Physical activity attenuates neuroinflammation in the hippocampus of aged mice’ by Dallagnol et al. 2017[1]
What is the Background to this Research?
Current medical literature supports the premise that exercise positively affects brain health both in the long term[2][3] and short term[4][5]. A widely noted benefit exercise has on the brain is its ability to suppress inflammation which has shown to be linked to many neurological diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD)[6]. Inflammation is one of the main contributors to ageing and age related diseases[7] which comes into existence through a reduction in certain hormones, vitamin D and infections[8].
This study was conducted by researchers from the Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Brazil who have extensive backgrounds in brain biochemistry research, suggesting this paper to be well researched. Additionally, several of the authors have worked together on previous papers published in peer reviewed journals[11][12][13]. The researchers stated that there was no personal or financial conflict of interest and cited where the funding for the study was received from suggesting no bias was present in conducting the study[1].
This was a quantitative experimental study using a C57BL/6 male mice animal model. The authors did not state their reason for using this genetic strain, however, it has been used widely in the literature[14][15]. Randomisation of the mice into each respectable group was conducted and the housing environment was controlled by the researchers (lighting, food, cage type, temperature). Due to the nature of the variables in the study (exercise and sedentary), the researchers were not blinded to these. Through controlling most significant variables the researchers minimised error potentials in the data to a reasonable extent.
What Did the Research Involve?
What Were the Basic Results?
What Conclusions Can We Take From This Research?
As this study was the first to look at the direct effects of exercise on REST and evidence shows that it’s fundamental in healthy neuronal ageing, conclusions we can take from this research is that healthy brain ageing likely requires exercise. Although this study was performed in mice, the evidence is promising enough for clinical studies in humans to be conducted. As this particular animal model has been used widely in pre-clinical studies, it would be expected that the physiological changes seen here will also occur in humans. Further studies should also determine whether this change was dose dependent as a specified running dosage was not controlled in this study.
According to this research, exercise decreases inflammation, a cause for neuronal ageing, and improves REST and BDNF expression in the brain, two known neuroprotective factors. Ultimately, it appears that exercise may not only ensure healthy cognitive functioning in the elderly, but also reduce the incidence of neurodegenerative diseases.
In Australia, less than half of people over 65 exercise the recommended amount[22] which may have potential links to the increase in neurodegenerative diseases in the ageing population of Australia[23]. With the understanding from this study, more emphasis needs to be placed on the importance of exercise for the elderly for quality of life and economic disease burden reduction. It is paramount that health professionals aid the elderly in exercise prescription and the elderly population educates themselves on this matter (see 'Further Information/Resources).
Australian exercise recommendations: http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/content/health-pubhlth-strateg-phys-act-guidelines
Your brain matters - brain health: https://yourbrainmatters.org.au/
Physical Activity Guidelines for Older Adults (Australia): https://www.healthdirect.gov.au/physical-activity-guidelines-for-older-adults
↑ a b c Dallagnol, KMC, Remor, AP, da Silva, RA, Prediger, RD, Latini, A, Aguiar Jr, AS 2017, ‘Running for REST: Physical activity attenuates neuroinflammation in the hippocampus of aged mice’, Brain, Behaviour and Immunity, vol. 61, pp. 31-35
↑ Erikson, KI, Prakash, RS, Voss, MW, Chaddock, L, Hu, L, Morris, KS, et al. 2009, ‘Aerobic fitness is associated with hippocampal volume in elderly humans’, Hippocampus, vol. 19, no. 10, pp. 1030-1039
↑ Colcombe, SJ, Erickson, KI, Scalf, PE, Kim, JS, Prakash, R, McAuley, E, et al. 2006, ‘Aerobic exercise training increases brain volume in ageing humans’, The Journals of Gerontology: Series A, vol. 61, no. 11, pp. 1166-1170
↑ Vega, SR, Struder, HK, Wahrmann, BV, Schmidt, A, Bloch, W, Hollmann, W 2006, ‘Acute BDNF and cortisol response to low intensity exercise following ramp incremental exercise to exhaustion in humans’, Brain Research, vol. 1121, no. 1, pp. 59-65
↑ Nouchi, R, Taki, Y, Takeuchi, H, Sekiguchi, A, Hashizume, H, Nozawa, T, et al. 2014, ‘Four weeks of combination exercise improved executive functions, episodic memory and processing speed in healthy elderly people: evidence from a randomised controlled trial’, Age, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 787-799
↑ Svensson, M, Lexell, J, Deierborg, T 2015, ‘Effects of physical exercise on neuroinflammation, neuroplasticity, neurodegeneration and behaviour: What we can learn from animal models in clinical settings’, Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 577-589
↑ Chung, HY, Cesari, M, Anton, S, Marzetti, E, Giovannini, S, Seo, AY, et al. 2009, ‘Molecular inflammation: underpinnings of ageing and age-related diseases’, Ageing Research Reviews, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 18-30
↑ Hubbard, RE, Woodhouse, KW 2010, ‘Frailty, inflammation and the elderly’, Biogerontology, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 635-641
↑ a b Zhao, Y, Zhu, M, Yu, Y, Qiu, L, Zhang, Y, He, L, et al. 2017, ‘Brain REST/NRSF is not only a silent repressor but also an active protector’, Molecular Neurobiology, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 541, 550
↑ Tapia-Arancibia, L, Aliga, E, Silhol, M, Arancibia, S 2008, ‘New insights into brain BDNF function in normal ageing and Alzheimer’s disease’, Brain Research Reviews, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 201-220
↑ Aguiar, AS, Stragier, E, da Luz Scheffer, D, Remor, AP, Oliveira, PA, Prediger, RD, et al. 2014, ‘Effects of exercise on mitochondrial function, neuroplasticity and anxio-depressive behaviour of mice’, Neuroscience, vol. 271, pp. 56-63
↑ Aguiar, AS, Duzzioni, M, Remor, AP, Tristao, FSM, Matheus, FC, Raisman-Vozari, R, et al. 2016, ‘Moderate-intensity physical exercise protects against experimental 6-Hydroxydopamine-induced hemiparkinsonism through Nrf2-antioxidant response element pathway’, Neurochemical Research, vol. 41, no. 1-2, pp. 64-72
↑ Aguiar, AS, Moreira, ELG, Hoeller, AA, Oliveira, PA, Cordova, FM, Glaser, V, et al. 2013, ‘Exercise attenuates levodopa-induced dyskinesia in 6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned mice’, Neuroscience, vol. 243, pp. 46-53
↑ Mekad, K, Abe, K, Murakami, A, Nakamura, S, Nakata, H, Moriwaki, K, et al. 2009, ‘Genetic differences among C57BL/6 substrains’, Experimental Animals, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 141-149
↑ Zurita, E, Chagoyen, M, Cantero, M, Alonso, R, Gonzalez-Neira, Lopez-Jimenez, A, et al. 2011, ‘Genetic polymorphisms among C57BL/6 mouse inbred strains’, Transgenic Research, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 481-489
↑ a b Huang, Y, Zhou, W, Zhang, Y 2012, ‘Bright lighting conditions during testing increase thigmotaxis and impair water maze performance in BALB/c mice’, Behavioural Brain Research, vol. 226, no. 1, pp. 26-31
↑ Cryan, JF, Holmes, A 2005, ‘The ascent of mouse: Advances in modelling human depression and anxiety’, Nature Reviews. Drug Discovery, vol. 4, no. 9, pp. 775-790
↑ Stordal, E, Mykletun, A, Dahl, AA 2003, ‘The association between age and depression in the general population: a multivariate examination’, Act Psychiatrica Scandinavica, vol. 107, no. 2, pp. 132-141
↑ Alexopoulas, GS 2005, ‘Depression in the elderly’, The Lancet, vol. 365, no. 9475, pp. 1961-1970
↑ Arent, SM, Lnders, DM, Etnier, JL 2000, ‘The effects of exercise on mood in older adults: A meta-analytic review’, Journal of Ageing and Physical Activity, vol. 8, pp. 407-430
↑ Petersen, AMW, Pedersen, BK 2005, ‘The anti-inflammatory effect of exercise’, Journal of Applied Physiology, vol. 98, no. 4, pp. 1154-1162
↑ Sims, J, Hill, K, Hunt, S, Haralambous, B 2010, ‘Physical activity recommendations for older Australians’, Australasian Journal on Ageing, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 81-87
↑ Begg, Stephen, Vos, Theo, Barker, Bridget, Stevenson, Chris, Stanley, Lucy and Lopez, Alan D. 2007, The burden of disease and injury in Australia 2003, Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, [Canberra, A. C. T.]
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Chinese smartphone maker Xiaomi has announced its first drone, pricing it significantly lower than a comparable model by the market leader DJI.
ZG smartphone chaangjia Xiaomi shooucih tuichu wurrernji, jiahger bii shihchaang liingdaaozhee DJI torngleihxirng chaanpiin mirngxiaan di.
Developing and Implementing Business Continuity and Crisis Management Plans
Maintaining and Exercising Business Continuity and Crisis Managements Plans
TŌ it's used when the relation between the possessor and the possessed is inalienable or strong.
TĀ expresses a possession weak active.
Your dog – tā'oe 'urii
Your sister – tō'oe tuahine
His wife – tōna vahine fa'aipoipo
The oar of the raft – tō te va'a hoe
A device with masking auditory feedback (MAF) may provide relief if you have silent blocks (blocks in which you can't even make a sound).
MAF is a synthesized sine wave at your fundamental frequency (not “white noise,” as some experts claim). This sound fools your brain into thinking that your vocal folds are vibrating. Your vocal folds relax and start vibrating.
The Edinburgh Masker, popular in the 1980s, helped many stutterers improve their speech over time, until they no longer needed the device. Other stutterers found that the device "wore off" and became ineffective. Still other stutterers have used the device for more than twenty years with no carryover or "wearing off." No research investigated why the device had different effects on different people. Hypothetically, the users who developed carryover fluency may have used the device to help them overcome fears and anxieties, or they may have used the device to enhance stuttering therapy.
For the users who experienced "wearing off," the device may have made these users talk louder, which increased vocal fold tension, and some users habituated to speaking with too-tense vocal folds.
Please read Speech-Language Pathology/Stuttering/How to Participate in this Wikibook before adding material.
A volcano erupts when magma from the underground lave chamber of a volcano gets so much pressure that it has to let up and out, and that's what happens: The magma, now called lava, leaves its chamber and BOOM! the volcano erupts with an explosion! It's a fascinating thing when a volcano erupts. On the other hand, haven't most of us heard of volcanoes like Mt. St. Helens, Mt. Vesuvius, Mt. Pinatubo, etc.? The reason they're natural disasters is because they erupted with enough force to kill many.
The contention that life exists elsewhere holds a mystery. If ten million planets in our galaxy alone are likely to support life, why have we not heard from any of it by now? It has been estimated that about a thousand of these planets would be supporting life that has evolved to the state of communicating by radio transmissions. Why has the SETI Institute (Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence) not yet detected intelligence-bearing signals?
Moreover, why have we not found unquestionable evidence[1] that we have been visited by aliens, or by one of their devices? We have already sent probes far beyond our own solar system, and within a decade or two will likely send similar instruments to exoplanets orbiting neighbouring stars. Indeed, in less than a couple of generations we may be visiting these planets ourselves. (Current technology necessitates journeys limited to a dozen years or so, but ion-accelerated drives already in use promise an ability to travel great distances in that amount of time.) This being so, we will inevitably attempt to colonize any habitable exoplanets we find, and, from those bases, we will certainly move onwards and outwards. All intelligent life, needing to replenish the resources it consumes throughout its industrial development on its home planet, will want to do the same. A few plausible assumptions and a couple of calculations suggest that any such pioneering life form will have colonized the whole of its own galaxy within a period of five to fifty million years.
This may seem a long time relative to our life span, but it is minuscule in evolutionary terms (we have to go back farther than that to find living dinosaurs). And it is an almost infinitesimal period on the galactic time scale. Life on other planets could well have begun a billion or more years before it arose on ours. Why, then, have we not been colonized by any of the intelligent civilizations that should have been able to do so in the past hundreds of million years? Or, why have we not at least been visited by some form of von Neumann probe (see The Expanding Universe, footnote 7 for a little more information about von Neumann probes) during that time?
Crawford[2] suggests that the answer to this puzzle (called the “Fermi Paradox”) could be that, although the formation and evolution of life may indeed be universal, its subsequent development into intelligent life forms may be rare. An alternative explanation could be that von Neumann probes have already visited, or even now be present. If they were small enough—developed by aliens using nanotechnology, perhaps—we would not have noticed them.
However, the explanation may be even simpler. Perhaps life forms intelligent enough to use von Neumann probes, or to travel and colonize hospitable planets, avoid planets whose “intelligent” inhabitants are constantly at war among themselves. Landing would certainly lead to a transfer of technology, and would eventually equalize abilities of the two life forms. Far easier for them to wait to see if we mature to a stage where we no longer make war; seeking contact before then only invites trouble and is simply not what an intelligent being would do.
↑ The pyramids, Nazca lines, Stonehenge, crop circles and other occurrences have all been suggested as being possible evidence of alien visitation. However, all can be more credibly explained as being due to human effort.
↑ Ian Crawford, “Where are they?” Scientific American, July 2000, 38-43.
See also Peter D. Ward and Donald Brownlee, Rare Earth: Why Complex Life is Uncommon in the Universe (New York: Copernicus, 2000).
For the opposite view, read Amir D. Aczel, Probability 1: Why there must be Intelligent Life in the Universe (New York: Harcourt Brace & Company, 1998).
To do:Revise the script and add more info other possible reenforcement
You have decided to quit smoking … and the way that you are going to quit smoking today, is simply to relax … that’s right you’re going to slow down, relax, and just let everything go … and take this time … that you’ve chosen for yourself … to feel comfortable, relax, and totally at ease … you have no place else to be right now … and nothing else to do … you have selected this time to be here … so just let everything go … leave all bothersome thoughts behind … and take this time that you’ve chosen to be here … to be completely relaxed … the more you allow yourself to relax … the closer you are to becoming a nonsmoker …
You have come here today because you have a strong desire to stop smoking … No one else has forced you to come here … You have come here because you have decided that today is the day … Today is the day that you have decided to be a nonsmoker once and for all … no little piece of white paper wrapped around tobacco is going to control you any more … because you are now in control … and you have taken the first step … here … now … and today … To become a nonsmoker … and by the end of this session … in just a few moments … your goal will be reached … and you will leave this session a nonsmoker … you will have stopped smoking … once and for all … that nasty habit of the past will be gone … you’ll begin your new life as a nonsmoker … and you’ll never smoked again …
So as time passes by … right now … think of yourself in the following way … I am a nonsmoker … I have stopped smoking … and I will never smoked again … and as a nonsmoker I have the ability to be around other people who smoke … I have the ability to enjoy life as a nonsmoker … everything I do … from this moment on … is better as a nonsmoker … it doesn’t matter whether I’m at home … at work … alone or with others … I am in control … anywhere I go … and no matter what I am doing … whether I am having dinner … relaxing … driving … working … or having a break … everything is so much more enjoyable … so much better as a nonsmoker …
You feel so much better … As a nonsmoker … so much healthier … so much happier … you’ll find that each and every day you’ll be able to breathe easier … enjoy life more …
Just feel that confidence begin to move through you … allow a wonderful feeling of confidence to move through you right now … at this very moment … realizing that you are a nonsmoker … feel the confidence that you now have … you have overcome that negative habit … you have reached your goal and become a nonsmoker … here and now … you can feel that confidence moving through you … just filling you up …
It is important to realize that to accomplish anything worthwhile in your life … you must give it 100% effort … and to remain a nonsmoker is no different … you must give it 100% effort … 100% to win … by giving it 100% you have made a commitment to win … you have made this commitment to yourself … that you will always move forward … and always give it 100% … 100% to win … You have stopped smoking … you are a nonsmoker … and you will never smoke again … from this moment on … your desire … your commitment to your health … is stronger than ever before …
In addition to being a nonsmoker … you are also beginning a new positive habit … one that will help you in every part of your life … you’ll find that from this moment forward … that water will taste better to you than ever before … that wonderful crisp, refreshing water will quench your thirst like it never has … that life in giving water will help you in every step of the way to become healthier … you have overcome a negative habit and are replacing it with this new positive habit, of drinking water … that wonderful refreshing water … in fact you might even be noticing right now … that by just thinking about water … your mouth is beginning to become dry and parched â€¦ This is your bodies natural reaction to thirst … you have more of a desire than ever before to drink that wonderful crisp refreshing water…
You know, now that you have stopped smoking you’ll find that you have more energy, energy that will be needed to be put to good use … You’ll find yourself being able to move easier … feeling better about yourself … There are many things you can do that will help you to be healthier … maybe going for a short walk in the morning … maybe parking your car little further away at work or at the grocery store to get in a little more exercise … you may even find yourself eating a little healthier … all of these things … are a natural by-product … of becoming healthier as you have just done.
Congratulations, you are a nonsmoker now! … You have stopped smoking … and you will never smoke again …
Zune .MUI Classes
4.1 68k based Monitor Debugging
Google translation German, French, Italian, Spanish, Hindi, Chinese, Russian, Polish, Japanese, Korean,
AROS is a choice/option of an open source, portable AmigaOS(TM) OS3.1. System friendly 68K AmigaOS (AOS) binaries will run out of the box on Aros 68k on 68k amiga based hardware. AROS could be the life line for Amiga68K as future kickstart/wb upgrades, i.e. potential for CD-Rom boot, USB boot, potential replacements for all outdated OS parts, standards for drivers, standards for RTG, standards for PCI access.
The AROS kernel rom can be used with the existing OS1.3, OS2.0, OS2.05, OS3.0 or OS3.1 to varying degrees of success - certain hardware will be supported but others will still be a work in progress. AROS rom can be used together with the rest of AROS to replace any commercial rom + workbench combination like high end Amigas. You use as much of AROS as you require.
AROS sources have always been more or less M68K binary compatible (even all library sources have complete 68k register parameters defined and most public structures are 1:1 identical). It is actually designed for 68k from the beginning. A working, binary compatible version of AROS on real Amiga's is pretty much the holy grail for determining how compatible AROS is with AmigaOS (TM).
When Aros was ported to 68k Toni Wilen did a great job to develop kickstart replacements that are now part of Aros. For a long time Aros 68k was used by a few people then Vampire/Apollo became reality and Aros offers many advantages here. It has many advantages compared to 3.1 and still only low hardware requirements, like AHI, USB-Support (Poseidon), Themeing, Network stack and much more
"Most games don't use much from the operating system and Aros68k is binary compatible with Amiga OS3.1 anyway. The Apollo Core of the Vampire has a CPU that implements all the (integer) instructions of all the Motorola 680x0 so any games that use instructions from the 68020 that are not included in the 68040 or 68060 will still boot from floppy on a Vampire. However some games have issues with any faster processor, WHDLoad has fixes for those and the Vampire also has a setting to improve compatibility. In the future the Vampire is also likely to allow AGA only games to be played on the OCS and ECS Amigas"
The point of AROS being open source is that it means people can take it in whatever direction they want - those that want just original hardware can stick with that and still get enhancements; those that want to use all kinds of expansions can get them better integrated with the core. And those who want different hardware altogether can still enjoy an AmigaOS like OS.
Official downloads (use latest nightly m68k) http://aros.sourceforge.net/nightly1.php
AROS Vision with minimalistic 3.0 look, while having more modern functionality, testing here,
Join the IRC #Apollo-Team from IRC client or HTML website
Video booting from sd card May 2020
Hopefully it works on the V600 soon, worked just fine for a while, then suddenly not at all.
To install aros on amiga you need a computer with enough ram. minimal amount is currently around 6mb afair, but this is subject to change. to run any application effectively you need respectively more. aros nightly that is also a base for olafs aros68k vision distro is compiled for plain 68k so should run on any amiga. Would recommend at least an 040.
Booting aros on an a4000/csppc all fine. takes 35seconds cold boot from amiga 4000 ide.
A list of the daily updates are available from ezrec clone mirror, Repo or Ohloh. A digest of the latest news from the AROS world can be found at AROS Planet.
Amiga.org Phase 1 thread, Phase 2 thread and EAB first thread and Second thread - on going. Natami thread,
EvilWiki Blog.
The rest of the Emu68 kernel? Rewritten the MMU setup and kernel move routine from C to assembly. Especially the latter was a necessary step, since one of the things being moved is the stack, and have only a very little control over it when using any higher-level language. Besides, the MMU setup in assembly is now independent on the physical location of the kernel, provided it is aligned on the 2MB page boundary anywhere within RAM.
First of all, the kernel assumed that it gets loaded at a physical address of 0x00080000. This is correct on RasPi, however is just a wishful thinking on other machines. For example, the Pinebook reserves the lowest 2MB area for ATF - ARM Trusted Firmware. This area is not, and should never be accessible for untrusted software such as e.g. an operating system. Additionally, the binary file was generating was missing a special header, unused on RasPi, but very helpful when one attempts to load and start the kernel through the uboot. The header specifies few basic things, such as the load offset within the 2MB page (this is the magic 0x00080000 value), it declares basic MMU page size used by the kernel, it says whether the kernel wants to be loaded into lowest possible memory area, or if a location anywhere on a 2MB boundary is fine. And it declares the endianness of the kernel, so that e.g. uboot could refuse loading it if the machine does not support the requested mode. The header contains also place for two opcodes allowing one to skip it using a branch opcode. Why two of them when only one would be enough? Well, this trick allows one to use part of the first of them as an identifier of regular EXE file. This way one can embed a PE header into the kernel making it a valid RasPi, uboot and EFI file at the same time. Tricky but impressive!
Pinebook (2017) A64 PinePhone 64bit ARMv8 Allwinner A64 Quad Core SOC with Mali 400 MP2 GPU
Pinebook Pro (2019) 64bit ARM8v Rockchip RK3399 SOC with Mali T860 MP4 GPU IPS 1080p
How about PineBook Pro? Got it booting the code, but cannot use the caches yet. The code loads properly, sets up MMU map, dumps the entire device tree and relocates the kernel. Display is not ready yet, but it is not of the highest priority. So far it looks like this:
[BOOT] Booting Emu68 runtime/AArch64 BigEndian
[BOOT] Boot address is 0xffffff80000800a0
[BOOT] Build ID: 4236bd740a2dda0091e3a2a2ad69e8e5ad5f4496
[BOOT] ARM stack top at 0xffffff8000080000
[BOOT] Bootstrap ends at 0xffffff8000090000
[BOOT] Kernel args (0x00000000f3dbc000)
[BOOT] Local memory pool:
[BOOT] model=Pine64 Pinebook Pro. (50696e6536342050696e65626f6f6b2050726f00)
[BOOT] System memory: 0x0000000000200000-0x00000000f6ffffff
[BOOT] Moving kernel from 0x0000000000200000 to 0x00000000f7000000
Get the latest WinUAE which has the AROS rom images built-in.
Optionally, you can get the whole nightly build which contains both the ROMs and AROS system but for most people it will not be necessary. Set WinUAE "Main ROM file" = aros-amiga-m68k-rom.bin and "Extended ROM file" = aros-amiga-m68k-ext.bin. arosbootstrap method is meant for easy real Amiga testing, no need to burn EEPROMs etc.
Configure WinUAE to simulate a standard A1200 but with full 68020 CPU (24 bit mode unmarked). Select 2MB CHIP, 64 MB Z3 FAST. On Expansions tab give some RAM to RTG card (I have 16 MB). Then attach the AROS directory as a hard disk and boot from it. It will take some time, but eventually you should have WinUAE booted to Wanderer 640x480x8.
IMPORTANT: be sure to use JIT. Without JIT, loading will be 3-4 times slower as well as AROS crashes very easily (most of the time memory allocation problem in input.device). With JIT, it's "rock stable" (at least for moving windows ;)
Use latest winuae beta with -log -serlog parameters to see serial logging debugging (make sure rom is built with serial logging enabled)
Either use both -serlog -log to open log window (also writes to a file automatically) or tick logging checkbox in misc panel if you don't want to see the log window.
AROS 68k has two ROM files, a Kickstart and a Kickstart ext, you will need both. The emulator should be set up exactly as an A1200 but with full 020 and above CPU with 4meg fast ram and if possible RTG. It should work then, If AROS doesn't show a disk prompt or gives insert DEVS: errors) then you should ensure a bootable disks (hard hdf or floppy adf) are available
This option specifies the file path of an extended ROM image to load.
E-UAE must emulate a 32-bit CPU (a 68020 or better, not an 68ec020) to support the graphics card emulation.
Amigas. And besides, Intellifont should be implemented anyway for backwards compatibility.)
CLASSES/DATATYPES/anim.datatype (these datatypes seem implemented, but their classes are physically absent)
DEVS/audio.device (AHI is fine as a way forward, but it is a resource pig on anything below a 68020 on native)
DEVS/KEYMAPS/ (it is full of PC keyboard keymaps and a SUN one. But what about Amiga keymaps?)
DEVS/MONITORS/ (missing A2024, dblntsc, dblpal, euro36, euro72, multiscan, ntsc, pal, super72 and vgaonly. A generic one doesn't suit,
DEVS/PRINTERS/ (missing all printer drivers but postscript. Not that it is really needed, but at least, "generic" and "file" drivers
FONTS (not a single one of the old native ones present. I understand that there are TTF replacements, but then see note no1.)
LIBS/68040.library (680x0.library exists- specific processor libraries are unneccessary. insert setpatch at the beginning of the ss and the universal 680x0.library with the patches for specific processor will be automatically loaded. plug and play. definitely a gain with aros. no libs mess here.)
TOOLS/bru (not that I or anyone else care or require it for backwards compatibility, but some backup option should exist for completeness)
Missing disk components. As I wrote you can add almost anything and as long as it not relys on unimplemented low-level components it works. I cannot remember f.e. "cpu" but I have added many components so it might be there. Also you do not need to include "ed" or similar because you can simply define it in shell-startup. I f.e. define it and execute annotate. Datatype system is different in aros so you cannot simply add or replace datatypes from 3.X (I have tested it). Datatypes would be certainly a candidate for a bounty. In Aros Vision I have created small Hollywood-programs for that and use filetype system of Magellan to execute them. Audio.device missing? It should be there but certainly using AHI that is standard on Aros. Printing and Printing to file works (at least on UAE, not tested it on real hardware). 68040.library can be added easily I think. I use Waitforport in Aros Vision, it is working with Rexxmast from Aros.
68k based Monitor Debugging
Serial debugging requires software on each machine that needs communicating between as well as a physical lead of some kind (usually early prolific or FTDI USB based).
Direct output to serial so that it can arrive at the other end.
You can use Bray's Terminal, Termite, TeraTerm or RealTerm on Windows. They will work with Wine under Linux. CuteCom (qt based using dmesg to get device /dev/ttyS0 or /dev/ttyUSB0), picocom, minicom, or gtkterm on Linux. There are plenty of consoles and terminal emulators on the internet. Just download some of them to find the one which make you happy :-D
Serial console speeds can be 1200, 2400, 4800, 9600, 19200, 38400, 57600 and 115200 bits per second
A500/A600 is limited to around 19.2 kbit/sec for no more than 2KB/sec (e.g. 19200 baud rate, 8 data bits, 1 stop bit, no parity)
A1200 unexpanded can expect 57.6 kbit/sec for transfer rates no more than 7KB/sec.
AROS m68k needs to be recompiled for these slower speeds for diagnosing boot issues with serial debugging.
Faster serial speeds need a faster CPU (best option 030 and above) or an additional dedicated fast serial port (which might not be supported under AROS).
Also, it's critical that you get the Amiga serial port hooked up so that you have a debug log. The default base rate is 115200 8n1, but you can change that in arch/m68k-amiga/ boot/start.c line 47.
Read more on the EAB forum thread
What you need is a Serial Null-modem cable. It is just a Serial cable, but with RX and TX lines crossed.
9pin DB9F female end for PC and 25 pin DB25F female end for Amiga.
If you have a standard RS232 serial cable you can buy a null modem adapter, attach it to the standard serial cable and connect the 2 computers.
Second option is to just buy an RS232 null modem cable and connect the 2 computers.
Just do a quick search for "Amiga serial null modem cable". However, a lot of cables come with one or two male ends instead and so an additional female to female adapter(s) is needed.
Use add44k or whatever to drop your screen depth, you'll be able to get a little bit more speed that way. More planes = more dma load = less time available for your beloved serial port. RTG will help, but you must configure it to not display a custom chip screen at all when you have an RTG screen visible.
Ensure you have a null-modem adapter in your cable setup. Somewhere in your cable chain. A null-modem adapter will say "NULL MODEM" somewhere on the device.
Right-click the amiga explorer icon & make sure the correct serial port for your PC (COM1:, COM2:) is chosen... I believe it defaults to COM1. Make sure that the serial port is listed in Device Manager under "Ports (COM & LPT)". Make sure there is no (!) or (x) mark on the device's icon in Device manager.
Test the cable setup: Load up hyperterminal on the PC, and a terminal program on the Amiga. Set both to 9600baud, 8 data bits, no parity, 1 stop bit, no handshaking. Typing characters on one system should show up on the other. If not, you have a cable or configuration issue.
Test handshaking: enable hardware handshaking on both ends and check connectivity by typing on each machine. If you passed #3 and fail here, then you have a miswired serial cable (or, less likely, miswired nullmodem adapter).
Some people use baud bandit on 68000 machines (A500/600) and new8n1 on 020+ ones but AROS has its own serial driver which is untested with the following serial hardware expansions
Using a serial to USB adapter and RealTerm 115200baud, port70 parity:none, data bits:8, stop bits:1.
Using TeraTerm on the PC (adjusting the port and baud rate to 115200) you can catch the boot log and supply it to aros-dev list or Aros-Exec. Feedback always welcome.
I have been told USB adapter for serial are problematic, or do not always work, but was denied detailed explanation? Some of them are problematic for use in EEPROM programmers, because they need 12V on the serial cable, but USB adapters do not provide such voltage. For use in data transfers and basic communications the cheapest USB adapter is still good.
Subway USB Controller for the Amiga 1200 Clockport
Since it is not possible to use larger than 512 kb rom images in deneb, I don't think I can start AROS kickstart from flash. if i try to initialize the first half with algor kick the computer hangs in endless boot loop. Therefore I am using blizkick to load the first part of the kickstart at the very beginning in my aros startup-sequence. All i have been able to capture this way follows. blizkick is supposed to manage 1MB roms, but elf files are apparently not accepted. Otherwise, it would be ideal to have an 512KB kickstart file as accepted by algorkick.
ALWAYS include full logs. (You may have multiple hardware configurations, it is very important to know exact hardware).
ALWAYS describe how harddrive(s) are connected.. Sometimes a log will hint that there is no IDE drives connected and possibly something on 3rd party SCSI board. Note that debugging non-AROS-builtin HD driver (=3rd party expansion + boot ROM) compatibility is practically impossible without having the same hardware. (Nothing is logged because everything is handled by boot rom, including drive detection, RDB parsing etc..)
Here is for example log from my real A1200/68060 (using USB serial adapter).
[SysBase] fakebase at: 0000020c
[ColdCapture] Ignoring AOS->AROS trampoline
00195afc: 127 02 3 "kernel.resource"
0013e380: 120 42 41 "exec.library"
00154e1c: 110 82 41 "expansion.library"
001413d8: 102 81 41 "aros.library"
0019d028: 100 81 41 "potgo.resource"
00153af0: 94 81 42 "oop.library"
0017cb64: 92 81 1 "hiddclass.hidd"
0019ce50: 80 01 0 "cia.resource"
0019d864: 80 01 1 "FileSystem.resource"
0019469c: 70 81 41 "battclock.resource"
001894ac: 66 81 1 "graphics.hidd"
001b5e3c: 65 81 41 "graphics.library"
001bb4d0: 60 81 41 "layers.library"
0015dd4c: 50 81 41 "timer.device"
0019dcac: 50 81 41 "m680x0.resource"
0018afb4: 45 81 1 "mouse.hidd"
0019dadc: 45 01 41 "misc.resource"
0015f7f0: 44 81 41 "keyboard.device"
0016746c: 44 81 41 "gameport.device"
0018b88c: 40 81 1 "amigakbd.hidd"
0018c2b8: 40 81 1 "amigamouse.hidd"
0019d634: 39 81 41 "disk.resource"
0015ecb0: 30 81 41 "input.device"
001dee48: 15 81 50 "intuition.library"
0018ffe8: 9 81 1 "amigavideo.hidd"
00193b20: 8 81 1 "uaegfx.hidd"
001644f8: 4 81 41 "console.device"
0016d8ac: 4 81 41 "ata.device"
00178bcc: - 1 81 41 "afs.handler"
001fcfee: - 45 01 41 "alert.hook"
00155ba2: - 119 01 41 "Boot Strap"
0014e6fc: - 120 00 41 "dos.library"
001f2f60: - 120 80 44 "workbench.library"
001ef89c: - 122 84 44 "icon.library"
0014fb0e: - 123 04 41 "LDDemon"
001f8fa0: - 123 04 41 "shellcommands.resource"
001fc5d4: - 123 04 44 "workbook.resource"
001fcc52: - 123 00 40 "workbench.task"
0017c476: - 125 04 1 "amberram.handler"
+ 00195afc: 127 02 3 "kernel.resource"
+ 0013e380: 120 42 41 "exec.library"
+ 00154e1c: 110 82 41 "expansion.library"
+ 001413d8: 102 81 41 "aros.library"
+ 0019d028: 100 81 41 "potgo.resource"
+ 00153af0: 94 81 42 "oop.library"
+ 0017cb64: 92 81 1 "hiddclass.hidd"
+ 0019ce50: 80 01 0 "cia.resource"
+ 0019d864: 80 01 1 "FileSystem.resource"
+ 0019469c: 70 81 41 "battclock.resource"
+ 001894ac: 66 81 1 "graphics.hidd"
+ 001b5e3c: 65 81 41 "graphics.library"
+ 001bb4d0: 60 81 41 "layers.library"
+ 0015dd4c: 50 81 41 "timer.device"
+ 0019dcac: 50 81 41 "m680x0.resource"
+ 0018afb4: 45 81 1 "mouse.hidd"
+ 0019dadc: 45 01 41 "misc.resource"
+ 0015f7f0: 44 81 41 "keyboard.device"
+ 0016746c: 44 81 41 "gameport.device"
+ 0018b88c: 40 81 1 "amigakbd.hidd"
+ 0018c2b8: 40 81 1 "amigamouse.hidd"
+ 0019d634: 39 81 41 "disk.resource"
+ 0015ecb0: 30 81 41 "input.device"
+ 001dee48: 15 81 50 "intuition.library"
+ 0018ffe8: 9 81 1 "amigavideo.hidd"
+ 00193b20: 8 81 1 "uaegfx.hidd"
+ 001644f8: 4 81 41 "console.device"
+ 0016d8ac: 4 81 41 "ata.device"
+ 00178bcc: - 1 81 41 "afs.handler"
+ 001fcfee: - 45 01 41 "alert.hook"
+ 00155ba2: - 119 01 41 "Boot Strap"
+ 0014e6fc: - 120 00 41 "dos.library"
+ 001f2f60: - 120 80 44 "workbench.library"
+ 001ef89c: - 122 84 44 "icon.library"
+ 0014fb0e: - 123 04 41 "LDDemon"
+ 001f8fa0: - 123 04 41 "shellcommands.resource"
+ 001fc5d4: - 123 04 44 "workbook.resource"
+ 001fcc52: - 123 00 40 "workbench.task"
+ 0017c476: - 125 04 1 "amberram.handler"
Read boot ROM base=00ea0000 type=d2
[ATA--] ata_init: ata.device Initialization
[ATA--] Gayle ID=d1. Possible IDE port=00da0000
[ATA--] ata_init: MemPool @ 68084178
[ATA--] Gayle ID=d1. Possible IDE port=00da0000
[ATA>>] ata_RegisterBus: Analysing bus 0, units 0 and 1
[ATA ] Approximate number of iterations per 100 nanoseconds: 1
[ATA00] ata_InitBus: Device type = 0
[ATA01] ata_InitBus: Device type = 0
[ATA ] ata_InitBus: Finished
[ATA--] ata_Scan: Initialising Bus Tasks..
[ATA--] ata_Scan: Waiting for Buses to finish Initialising
[ATA--] ata_Scan: Finished
Include also KS3.1+/OS3.1+ tools/showconfig output
Node type $A, Attributes $505 (FAST), at $7000000-$7F7FFFF (15.5 meg)
Node type $A, Attributes $703 (CHIP), at $80000C8-$1FFFFF (~3970.0 meg)
The C:GDBStub for amiga-m68k is ready for general consumption. Configuration file only:
Add /wait if you want emulator to delay startup until someone connects first.
To enable the GDBStub, do:
The next time AROS crashes with a trap (or you run 'C:GDBStop'), the GDB stub will wait on the (real or virtual) serial port for a GDB connection
Use the following .gdbinit with m68k-elf-gdb to connect to the GDB stub under AROS:
Then all the regular AROS GDB debugging macros work, like 'loadseg', 'modlist', 'showtask', etc.
I've been able to get nice full backtraces through kernel and user code with full GDB support with this. It's making m68k debugging a lot easier.
You can get the m68k-elf-gdb.
The upshot of this, is that PARANOIA_CFLAGS is now gone. If you want to enable a '-Wall -Werror' build, just add '--with-paranoia=yes' to your configure, and the while tree will be built such that any compiler warning stops the build.
You need to watch out for certain issues
[ColdCapture] Ignoring AOS->AROS trampoline [start]
For example above line should have linefeed after trampoline and few other lines seem to be completely missing (truncated because of too long line?) and early configchain lines.
Most confusing are missing expansion/autoconfig related lines. ("configchain"). Missing ATA lines are normal in some logs because A4000 IDE no-drive detection is simpler than A1200.
Does early startup menu work? (Keep pressing both mouse buttons even if it appears to be hung, for example Blizzard SCSI init takes ~10s). Yes, it works. I remember blizzard scsi to be a little troublesome. Reboot with holding lmb+rmb to early boot screen
Another try with drive attached directly to ide port has succeed to boot me from the hd into a screen with only red cursor but nothing else. anyway it seems to boot the current nightly.
On following try, I have been able to boot into aros with no startup-sequence. commands working.
[SysBase] fakebase at: 0000020c
[ColdCapture] Ignoring AOS->AROS trampoline
[ATA--] ata_init: ata.device Initialization
[ATA--] Gayle ID=d1. Possible IDE port=00da0000
[ATA--] ata_init: MemPool @ 6807f338
[ATA--] Gayle ID=d1. Possible IDE port=00da0000
[ATA>>] ata_RegisterBus: Analysing bus 0, units 0 and 1
[ATA ] Approximate number of iterations per 100 nanoseconds: 1
[ATA00] ata_InitBus: Device type = 1
[ATA01] ata_InitBus: Device type = 1
[ATA00] ata_ResetBus: Wait for Device to clear BSY
[ATA00] ata_ResetBus: Wait left after 0 ms
[ATA ] ata_ResetBus: Wait DEV1 to allow access
[ATA ] ata_ResetBus: DEV1 1/2 TimeOut!
[ATA ] ata_ResetBus: DEV1 1/2 Wait left after 50 ms
[ATA01] ata_ResetBus: Wait for Device to clear BSY
[ATA01] ata_ResetBus: Wait left after 0 ms
[ATA 0] ata_ReadSignature: Status 50 Device a0
[ATA 0] ata_ReadSignature: ATA[PI] device present. Attempting to detect specific subtype
[ATA 0] ata_ReadSignature: Subtype check returned 00:00 (0000)
[ATA 0] ATA_EXECUTE_DIAG sent
[ATA 0] ata_ReadSignature: Further validating ATA signature: 1 & 0x7f = 1, a0 & 0x10 = unit
[ATA 0] ata_ReadSignature: Found *valid* signature for ATA device
[ATA 1] ata_ReadSignature: Status 00 Device b0
[ATA 1] ata_ReadSignature: ATA[PI] device present. Attempting to detect specific subtype
[ATA 1] ata_ReadSignature: Subtype check returned 00:00 (0000)
[ATA ] ata_InitBus: Finished
[ATA--] ata_Scan: Initialising Bus Tasks..
[ATA1654092] IRQ: Checking busy flag: device still busy. ignoring irq.
[ATA ] ata_setup_unit: Enabling IRQs
[ATA00] ata_Identify: Executing ATA_IDENTIFY_DEVICE command
[ATA00] IRQ: Checking busy flag: device still busy. ignoring irq.
[ATA--] ata_Scan: Waiting for Buses to finish Initialising
Since every expansion been physically removed from this machine and still getting the same log missing "configchain" and friends?
Perhaps possible cyberstorm 0x00f00000 mapped ROM does something strange..
Download http://aminet.net/dev/moni/mon165.lha
AOS coldstart (power off, power on), boot without startup-sequence. (coldstart is important, it is possible strange residents are active after warm start)
Zip and email the file.
Screen mode prefs crashing after selecting mode has been happening since the beginning. Tried to debug this long time ago but never found anything interesting. Now I just ignore the crash and reboot when need to change modes :)
m68k Native Environment Sources
If you want to set up a m68k build environment, just run the 'arch/m68k-amiga/doc/build-toolchain.sh' script. It'll download and compile all the m68k crosstools, and install them to /opt/m68k-elf (or wherever else you want them to go)
Jason's typical m68k ./configure is:
None of the AROS regcall macros have been extensively tested with -O2. Some don't have a m68060 to test with.
The default optimization is '-Os', which on systems with no or small instruction caches usually gets you better performance than -O2 anyway.
Older method for compiling your own version....
The regcall config (target amiga-m68k). Note The stackcall configuration (target amiga-m68k-eabi) is obsolete.
NOTE: To use the regcall config, you *must* apply the patch, at the bottom of this page, to GCC 4.5.1 to get GCC to *not* trample on A6. Actually, I checked in a fix for my macros that got A5 working. I have another fix that should allow an unpatched GCC (one that wants to use A6 as the Frame Pointer) to work.
Since the nightly AROS m68k build is designed to run, unmodified, on *all* Amiga architectures (m68000 - m68060), I always compile with -m68000. Feel free to compile your own custom build with different ./configure—with-optimization=... options.
./configure—prefix=/opt/m68k-elf—target=m68k-elf
Compile gcc-4.5.1 as follows:
--prefix=/opt/m68k-elf \
--program-prefix=m68k-elf- \
—program-prefix=m68k-elf - is not needed, it seems prefix is added automatically.
Build and install gcc-4.5.1 (to /opt/m68k-elf, or whatever you set—prefix to)
(wait for zune/betterstring to kill the build)
(wait a bit) You'll end up with the following files:
Finally finished successfully! (total time something like 4 hours..)
The .elf is useful for feeding to GDB to attach to a UAE serial port when debugging...
The .rom, which you can feed to UAE like so:
Clean AROS build, using this configure line:
../AROS/configure—target=amiga-m68k—with-optimization="-Os"—with-serial-debug
Try also building from scratch, sometimes all files won't get automatically rebuilt.
Things to note for m68k 'ROM'able code:
No global variables - There is no .data nor .bss section in the ROM!
Global -constants- are ok - We do have .rodata
If you need to open a library, you have to do it explicitly - you can't use the AROS autoopen feature.
VBCC supports some C99 and all C89. Both GCC and LLVM work with all levels up to from C89 up to C++14. VBCC doesn't even support C++ at all. I'm afraid Volker doesn't have as much time to update his compiler as PHX does with VAsm and VLink. Also, LLVM and GCC both have huge teams behind them: Apple and Linux respectively. There's a better license situation for LLVM (BSD equivalent vs. GPL3) and VBCC requires written permission for any commercial use, as do VAsm and VLink.
VBCC doesn't support GNU extensions found in GCC. Clang does but is almost as heavy as GCC. Frankly, I doubt that getting the backend up-to-date on GCC would be any less work than finishing the LLVM 68k backend on my GitHub account.
The Amiga 3.x o.s. has large parts written in assembly code, where in AROS this is a very small portion (the strictly needed to interface the o.s. to the hardware).
-x11-dev headers and link libs
../AROS-source/AROS/configure—enable-x11-shm—enable-x11-hidd—enable-debug—with-serial-debug=yes
Making country files...
/home/wawa/x86-build/bin/linux-i386/gen/workbench/locale/countries/makecountry: System locale is invalid
../AROS-source/AROS/configure --target=amiga-m68k --with-serial-debug=yes
../aros/configure --target=amiga-m68k --with-aros-toolchain-install=/opt/aros-m68k
(sudo is necessary because toolchain will be installed in /opt/aros-m68k. otherwise the build will fail)
../aros/configure --target=amiga-m68k --with-aros-toolchain-install=/opt/aros-m68k --with-aros-toolchain=yes --with-serial-debug=yes
Note that in order to rebuild module after editing the source, the compiled binaries have to be deleted first in the build target dir. in order to work on and build some modules it might be necessary to compile the complete build first.
It does use Amiga hunk files, and you can mix and match to some degree (AROS components are ELF files), But AROS can load both :) Works both ways, not just Amiga files in an AROS environment, but AROS executables in an Amiga environment. The tool to use is ELF2HUNK by Jason McMullan. There are some limitations. Most notably, AROS apps using arosc.library (sort of ixemul) won't work (at least not yet), and arosc.library itself won't work so moving that over won't do you any good. But apps that stick with purely the AmigaOS API will work. This restrictions makes it quite limited at the moment. To get AROS components working on AmigaOS you're better off looking AfA.
Remember that still, Amiga68k is much more optimised/faster than AROS on the same hardware, but we are working on that.
The fact that we plan to switch to ELF executables in the future and not relocatable objects.
First ever attempt?
Heron aka Gregory John Casamento decided on take on the m86k port.
ARaNyM Configuration woes... Currently trying to get ARaNyM working so that I can proceed with the build of AROS on 680x0.
This port sadly ended a few months after this post, it proved difficult to retrieve reference material and also old hardware as well in order to complete the bounty (material such as Rom Kernel Manuals, technical newsletters, developers kit,etc.)..
Gary Pearman wrote Welcome to my first blog post. This blog is here primarily for me to collect my thoughts, and to keep all the AROS folks updated with my progress on the Kickstart ROM replacement bounty. Cheers, Gaz.
After chatting to a number of people on the AROS dev list and #aros, I’ve decided to change tact on the bounty and try a different approach. The idea is to forget about the stuff in .unmaintained, and try to get AROS compiling for m68k-hosted. For work to begin, I’ll need to get debian m68k installed and running on Aranym (yes, an Atari ST virtual machine).
Progress - OK, so I decided to scrap the Aranym route and face my fear of the AROS build process! Basically I’ve started the m68k-amiga build files from scratch, and based them on the ppc-sam440 build files, which are nice and new and clean. I’ve removed pretty much everything that was in unmaintained, and am just trying to get the kernel compiled.
Work Work Work - I’ve been really busy recently with other work, so I’ve not had time to look at the (now overdue) bounty.
Initially the port, which will not depend on a MMU being present, will target UAE first Phase 1. Certain dedicated amiga hardware support (goal of being able to boot most KS1-3 disks including games and demos and cover processors 68000, 68020, 68030, 68040 and 68060) is to follow in Phase 2. Then follows alpha testing with a low level debugger with a full bug report. Optimizations and then finally general testing.
Phase II is to provide a *baseline* kickstart replacement. Please do not expect drivers for non-official Amiga hardware (e.g. Natami or Replay FPGA Arcade), only real Amigas or UAE. All timings and display settings currently assume PAL configuration at the moment. Recommended using RTG modes, custom chipset driver is just a proof of concept (It is not going to be optimized or improved until more important features work).
Jason S McMullan (ezrec) wrote on Finally, after 3 weeks first light on my m68k port of AROS to m68k-amiga. Doesn't work, crashes pretty soon, but I have gotten past the 'compile it', 'compile it with Amiga ABI', and 'get into Exec Init' phases. Very happy.
Toni Wilen wrote - disk.resource (trackdisk.device) - cia.resource (cia interrupts) - potgo.resource (mouse 2nd/3rd button) - trackdisk.device (currently read-only, based on PC driver, large rewrite required, no disk.resource use, was very PC controller specific) - amiga mouse hidd - amiga keyboard hidd. Jason wrote AWESOME! All we need now is 'just' graphics.hidd and disk block read and we'll be able to boot AROS w/out frankenrom!
Jason wrote KS 3.0: Getting there! Exec will now get to the boot screen via OS3 libraries! I need to make a disk with *just* the Install boot block now.
Toni Wilen assigned KS Bounty Phase 2. Main missing driver appears to be gfx hidd, my first attempt will be UAE-only Picasso96 HIDD, remaining updates should be quite simple when display is working. (mainly hunk loader, expansion.library autoconfig?). I am not against custom chipset HIDD but UAE Picasso96 HIDD (using native UAE Picasso96 helper routines that AmigaOS(TM) side Picasso96 uses) would be much easier and faster to implement and also would make non-HIDD parts much faster and simpler to debug. (no shared VRAM, less code, 1:1 framebuffer mapping etc..). I also don't really see the point in custom chipset gfx HIDD if it is only a dummy framebuffer, losing all custom chipset features (hardware sprites, user copper lists etc..), it would be worst of both worlds :). Some kind of simple custom chipset gfx HIDD that shows possible CLI messages when booting games would is of course needed in future but that should come later when everything else is working and provide a 'base level' of functionality for someone who would be interested in providing OCS/ECS/AGA support.
Jason wrote The ROM is now split. The 'rom' image will contain everything needed to boot from disk, and the 'ext' image will contain everything that is not needed for that task. Ideally, the libraries and resources on the 'ext' disk could be on the AFS filesystem. For now, intuition, graphics, and layers live on 'ext'.
Toni wrote I need to check in the non-hacky code changes, then some sleep.
Jason then wrote Just woke up so I guess it is my turn now :D - Tag team programming.
Jason wrote Shell is up and running
Phase 1 considered complete. Some Amiga hunk support included as well.
Z3 32bit fast RAM boards work now properly.
UAE directory filesystem hanging issue is solved (volume label/name is still weird... can't be used)
Jason wrote So, here's my post-Kickstart Bounty I task list, in priority order: Priority 0: Assist Toni Wilen.
Get AROS KickStart to be able to use LDDaemon to pull the AROS graphics, workbench, gadtools, etc. libraries from the boot drive's Libs/ directory - cleaning up various issues, and testing. Trying to fix the hyperlayers/graphics circular dependency.
Get AmigaOS 3.1 + AROS Libs/ on HD0: booting - AmigaOS workbench.library from disk - BCPL work, as needed - Figure out what to do about ConClip
Get AmigaOS 3.0 + AROS Libs/ on HD0: booting - More BCPL work
Get AmigaOS 1.3 + AROS Libs/ on HD0: booting - Even more BCPL work, compatibility fixes
Toni wrote dos.library compatibility has improved greatly (and it is also much faster). For example original WB2/3 disks boot now without warnings, errors or crashes. Note that Workbench won't work because there isn't one included in ROM yet, Wanderer which is AROS WB replacement is too big. BCPL support is coming soon (Jason is doing this). Jason wrote With Toni's DOS Packets patches, and my recent checkins tonight, I currently have C:Echo from WB 1.3 (BCPL!) working. Now that the BCPL and Packet support infrastructure is here, full AmigaOS 1.3 support for BCPL CLI applications is just a Small Matter of Programming. I expect to have 95% of the Workbench 1.3/3.0/3.1 BCPL apps working by mid-January 2011. Does anyone know of any 'major' BCPL applications out there that I should test with other than those on the Workbench/Install disks for 1.x/2.x/3.x?
Toni added most common parts of the dos packet mode AFS handler... Toni added more missing dos packet AFS handler commands...
Toni wrote m68k-amiga AROS port now boots AROS original startup-sequence without any weird side-effects (no insert disk requesters or boot shell not closing etc.). Most utilities run and most preferences programs at least open.
WB "Information" menu does not open, TextEditor.mcc does not init. (MUI again, argh)
WB doubleclick detection is very unreliable.
Toni wrote SYS:Extras/Zune/ MCC_NList/s/Package-Startup can't work (is it even needed? SYS:Classes has already been assigned at this point). Assign opens boot console window and prints "can't find Classes" because startup-sequence SYS:Packages part CD:s to package directory before executing the script. Either Package-Startup (and Shutdown) should be removed or command should be "Assign LIBS: SYS:Classes ADD". Also C:Assign is broken, it calls NameFromLock() inside doslist lock which can be bad idea (probably not a problem in non-dos-packets mode). And finally, the final year 2010 status report:
Shell CTRL+D and CLI faillevel checks implemented (at least works in dos packets mode, something still wrong because >NIL: swallows some error output that should not be swallowed)
Titanics cruncher pseudo-overlay executables supported :) (real/full overlay executables not yet supported)
WB1.3 C:FF does not corrupt fonts anymore. WB1.3 startup-sequence now works perfectly. (minus workbench)
Jason wrote Just got my ACA 1230/56, which will allow me to start testing AROS on my Amiga 1200 (need to pick up a gender-bender tomorrow for serial!), and am well on my way to see if I can get AROS m68k working on real hardware. Wish me luck! First boot log on my A1200 - hung during initialization, will add some debugging tomorrow. Toni wrote Probably something to do with autoconfig. Could you run Scout and attach autoconfig details from each autoconfig device in your system. Expansion autosize z3 ram board support committed. Also exec relocation works now and is enabled.
Jason wrote AROS on the A1200 is mighty slow, but I think that is mostly due to the unoptimized AGA interlace mode that I'm getting by default. I reset all the '#define DEBUG 1's that have been left on in the amiga-m68k (and a few other places) to '#define DEBUG 0', and we can now disable—enable-serial-debug (and yet still get SAD on the serial port). Reducing the serial debugging (and putting the OOP MID .bss in Chip RAM, which turned out to by only 512 bytes or so) did little to improve the graphical performance, so I'll let Toni worry on that for now. The mouse works fine on AROS on the A1200, but I'm getting no keystrokes. I'll debug that tomorrow night, unless Toni beats me to it. It has to be something else If it is slow even when display is idle. Toni wrote Perhaps it is related to non-working keyboard, badly working keyboard handshake can steal too much interrupt time. Compare to WinUAE quickstart A1200 cycle-exact most compatible mode, if it is as slow or even slower: it has to be hardware compatibility problem. Gayle compatible ata.device status: drive detection partially working, should be "fully" working today or tomorrow. (It is currently huge mess of ifdefs, will be cleaned up after it is confirmed working).
Toni wrote m68k-amiga ata.device is now done. (should it be called "scsi.device"?). I separated pc hardware specific code and amiga specific code (ata_pc and ata_amiga), ata.device maintainer can merge this back to rom/devs/ata.device if interested (I don't mind if Amiga version breaks, I just don't want to break "PC" version or cause accidental data corruption.. IDE is too weird, too easy to break). A600 and A1200 Gayle interface and A4000 Gayle-like interface supported. (A1200 real Amiga tested only).
WinUAE note: that you need 2.3.1 beta 11 (release later today) or newer because execute diagnostics was not emulated. (I don't emulate commands that appear to be unused, not even m68k linux or netbsd used it)
Toni wrote AROS ROM loader is finally working on my A1200 (Blizzard 1260 + SCSI kit + SCSI-IDE + 8G CF card). Blizzard 1260 Fast RAM and 1230scsi.device also seem to work properly, even boot partition mounts (PFS3ds) and autoboots (but second partition does not mount, which is SFS formatted. Don't ask.). Display is painfully slow and flickers, I guess native chipset driver optimization is needed sooner or later.. Loader and instructions how to build relocatable rom image will be released later. I am also going to do A3000 tests first. (It must work before public release). Only requirement is 1M or more MEMF_LOCAL fast RAM (RAM that does not disappear during reset) or 2M chip RAM (in this case upper 1M will be used by ROM). MMU is not used or needed (I don't want to touch anything MMU related). Everything is handled by loaded AROS "ROM", including autoconfig. Debugging this thing took ages when you only have serial output.. I think I'll have to include HRTMon debugger with ROM loader :)
Jason wrote does anyone have any interest in Alpha-testing AROS m68k? Right now we (Toni and I) would need testers to:
Attempt to run AROS on A1200 and other Amiga hardware
Have at least 2M of chip ram and 4M of fast ram
Be able to debug by themselves any issues they find
Submit patches that fix those issues, or at least a small C or m68k assembly test case that demonstrates the defect.
We are not ready for general testing. If you don't know m68k assembly and your way around low level debuggers, please wait until the next phase in AROS m68k development. These early releases of AROS are guaranteed only to crash, destroy your data, and/or release all the magic smoke in your Amiga. You have been warned.
Toni wrote time to check Kickstart ROM Replacement (Phase II) status.
Only missing part is creating AmigaOS binary compatible executables (ELF vs HUNK). Do we really need some kind of (really boring to code) ELF to HUNK converter? It is probably guaranteed that gcc will never directly create hunk binaries. (Jason, did you already do some work with conversion?)
And then there is part 4: where is this Michal's so called tool and who is going to use it? :) start Sys:Tools/Screengrabber, do screenshot and save the resulting file.
IMO this needs to be closed before starting ABI v1 (and dos packet?) merge because it probably breaks many things for (too) long time..
Jason wrote I think that ELF2HUNK is sufficient for letting people compile non arosc.library apps under AROS and get them to run under AOS, but getting AROS to run under AOS is a much larger task. I'll leave SetPatchAROS in for now - it's sufficient to run non arosc.library ELF apps under AOS 3.1. arosc.library is a pain, but what is worse are the extended functions in Intuition and Exec, which are difficult to cleanly add to the running libraries.
Jason wrote I've been working on cleaning up BGUI to work on m68k and hosted x86_64, with some good progress. The major BGUI demos now work on both m68k and x86_64, with the following issues and I should have these last issues cleaned up by the end of the weekend. $(PARANOIA_CFLAGS) has been enabled for those of you who ./configure with—with-paranoia.
LayoutGroup fails (m68k & x86_64)
Drag&Drop crash (m68k & x86_64)
PrefMX checkboxes (works on m68k, fails on x86_64)
Toni wrote try it with latest winuae, it has built-in AROS rom image. Note that WB programs that use undocumented features or other weird things won't work (mainly 2.0+ c:setpatch and c:iprefs). 1.3 stuff works nicely. Native Display ModeIDs are not correct, they are using some generated IDs at the moment. (AROS graphics subsystems has some native graphics related limitations that need to be fixed before this can be 100% working, this is not my problem). Audio.device does nothing. (I haven't bothered with it yet, rarely needed for anything else than allocating channels).
Jason wrote Workbook Super lightweight Workbench/Wanderer replacement
Workbook is a BOOPSI based Workbench replacement, designed for very light weight systems, namely Amiga m68k.
This is the initial prototype checkin, which can (before it crashes due to some memory corruption I haven't fully diagnosed yet) open the disk volumes, drawers, and launch applications
Total compiled size is 20k on m68k. This is *not* meant as a replacement for Wanderer on full systems. It is for low memory/slow cpu systems, and as an exerciser for workbench.library. I plan to use as many of the workbench.library hooks as possible. Once I get Workbook stable, and able to do some simple file management (delete, rename, copy, format), I plan to make it the ROM resident version of 'LoadWB', so that KS 1.3-3.x can use it as their 'Workbench'. Workbook, again, is completely optional for all other architectures, and will reside in SYS:System/Workbook/.
Toni wrote It is few weeks left before deadline. Anything else still needed before it is considered done? Things I am planning to do (not sure when):
Paula audio.device
Optimize native chipset gfx driver (it is currently painfully slow)
HIDD wrapper that supports Picasso96 *.card driver files. (already partially done but that was only the easy part..)
This is getting annoying, "not working" "bug reports", expecting everything to be done by me or Jason quickly, even if it is something that has nothing to do with the bounty, mainly changes in core code that
WinUAE stuff is much more relaxing because I can freely choose what I do and when I do without asking anyone. That's why I want this bounty done asap because only then I can do AROS stuff just for fun again without being held hostage. ("You still need to do this and that OR ..."). Debugging and enhancement will be ongoing.
2.x-3.1 WB disks should boot without problems, now also includes correct palette and mouse cursor settings.
1.x works except C:Run (which only outputs errors) and AROS resident Run requires T: -> WB disk must be write-enabled.. Will be fixed later.
ArosBootStrap comes with source tree, Aros softkick loader that works on any Amiga that has either 2M of chip or 1M or more local fast RAM. (*)
Scalos does not work, reason unknown.
Toni wrote Most games that only use boot block to load hardware loader should work fine unless they assume KS1.x like memory allocation and overwrite OS structures or do something stupid that only works on 1.x accidentally. (which is not rare, unfortunately). 100% compatibility is impossible. There is no way to make ROM that is both 1.3 and 3.0/3.1 compatible at the same time. Even 3.1 compatibility can't be 100% because it would require implementing all known and unknown bugs 100% exactly! (it is guaranteed there is at least one program that only works because of some OS bug..)
Toni Wilen wrote Random status report.
UAEGFX RTG/custom chipset screen switching is finally working properly. Even whdload works perfectly now.
Toni wrote PutTemplate() blitter accelerated, should greatly improve native chipset speed, no more slow planar getpixel/putpixel "blits".
Toni wrote ArosBootStrap now accepts more parameter(s), one or more extra resident files (similar to BlizKick). For example "arosbootstrap aros.elf.gz scsi.device_40.12(A3000)" allows AROS to boot from SCSI on my real A3000. (scsi.device is extracted from A3000 ROM using romsplit that comes with remus package).
Next phase is to support RTG boards using AOS Picasso96 .card and .chip files. (I think I already mentioned this few months ago).
"arosbootstrap aros.elf.gz libs:picasso96/CirrusGD542X.chip libs:picasso96/PicassoII.card scsi.device_40.12(A3000)" already loads on my PicassoII expanded A3000, PicassoII.card FindCard()
320x240, 640x480, 800x600 only supported, using hardcoded more or less standard timing variables.
All card supported color depths available, at least in theory.
Does not check most card capabilities like supported width/height/depth/pixelclock combinations.
Puts all bitmaps in VRAM, VRAM probably runs out very quickly or gets fragmented if program(s) allocate and free lots of bitmaps.
Uses driver's blitting functions if available.
Card's passthrough switching supported (if available).
Will be improved later, when/if I feel like it, debugging using real hardware wastes lots of time compared to emulation which is nearly instant. Also btw, other RTG cards and an A4000 would be nice to have, hint, hint :D
Find P96 driver(s) that your RTG board requires, note that some come in pairs (.card and .chip files), order of files is not important. Use arosbootstrap to load rom image and driver file(s), check serial log. Note that currently there is no supported method to directly merge driver files to ROM image. No serial log = no help.
Advanced chipset, A3000 SCSI. ("WD33C93 in use" appears in winuae's log when SCSI chip is used)
But you don't need SCSI emulation to test it, it will work if you see InitResident('scsi.device') in AROS serial log :)
Link/merge utility also needs some extra functions:
RTG drivers need patching (they have OpenLibrary() paths like "libs:picasso96/something.chip" that won't work if physical file does not exit)
This is feature that I probably do some day, link it as a relocatable (or even compressed) file and relocate it to RAM during InitResident() time. Current plan is to have separate resource that includes all support routines and relocatable resident only has small routine that does OpenResource("relocstuff.resource") and if found, calls it to unpack/relocate it. Very little space wasted. Too many plans, not enough time..
Motorola 68040/68060 missing instruction emulation library is also working now, but it isn't yet rom built-in. It is quite big (~60k) so I guess it should be only included in arosbootstrap file at this point? (official 68040/68060 libraries may not be used because for example they need to update FPU stack frame handling = touch exec internals that shouldn't be touched).
Autoconfig support has been partially rewritten, most boards should now configure properly.
Toni wrote - Lots of changes since last time..
AROS is now fully dos packets converted (all platforms)
Boot menu is now more useful (shows boot devices and expansions)
ArosBootStrap (softkick) mode AOS driver support. Allows use of any AOS ROM resident modules. For example A3000 ROM scsi.device can be used to enable real A3000 built-in SCSI in AROS. Also added support for Picasso96 driver files (.card and .chip files) to enable RTG support in AROS. Even boot menu and boot image uses RTG mode automatically.
Jason wrote Now actually comes up to Workbook, and used HUNK instead of ELF for the executables. This system disk boots under both AROS and AOS 3.x. Ideally, it should be extended with the AROS Install routine and CDROM drivers, to allow installation of AROS from an AOS kickstart.
Jason wrote Things I've found out about the CLI/Shell from KS 1.3 and 3.x
Under KS 3.x and later, the "CLI" resident can't be replaced via C:Resident with other segments.
L:Shell-Seg is not by any means a 'normal' program:
Like DOS BCPL fs handlers, you have to set up the Shell's pr_GlobVec yourself, including installing its segments. Fun.
Unlike CLI applications, A0 MUST be NULL. A5/A6 are BCPL_jsr and BCPL_rts.
It expects me->pr_CLI to be BNULL, and sets up its own CLI structure
Like DOS Handlers, it expects its startup packet in D1, and uses that to determine what CliInit* routine to call.
If D1 == 0, it uses the BCPL_cliInit at GlobVec offset 0x214 (which should probably map to DOS/CliInitNewshell or something)
In truth, only dp_Res1 and dp_Res2 are 'public' - the rest of
NOTE: KS 1.3: bfunc is a BCPL CliInit function
NOTE: L:Shell-Seg is passed a NULL packet for the Boot Shell,
Execute: (mostly guessed, may change)
Jason wrote I was surprised. As of today, AmigaOS 3.9 mostly works out-of-the-box so long as you remove/rename SYS:Libs/workbench.library - there seems to be some incompatibility with AROS's build-in icon.library. Some math libraries were missing from the AROS ROM, they should be in tomorrow's build (fixes the 'missing resource.library' popup).
Jason wrote that Special aros m68k AmiWest package produced and sent.
Jason added rescale icons to match the display resolution, it the icon supports it. If an icon's MutalExclude bit 31 is set, treat the lower 16 bits as X and Y Amiga Tick resolutions, and rescale the icon to the display's resolution. Fixes the 'icons are too large' on small screens issue.
Toni added support for non-MEMF_KICK fast ram boards (Mainly Blizzard A1200 accelerators). Most of the rom image loads to fast RAM now. Replaced with ForceCHIP that forces all modules to chip RAM. Mainly for debugging. Only kernel.resource, exec.library, expansion.library and diag init modules require MEMF_LOCAL RAM (RAM that never disappears during reset), in worst case it means Chip RAM. (Requires only about 80k, will become smaller in future). ForceFAST option forces complete ROM image to fast RAM, even if RAM type is not MEMF_LOCAL. (A3000/A4000 mainboard fast is most common MEMF_LOCAL Fast RAM). This only works with some non-autoconfig RAM expansions, one example is Blizzard 1260 Fast RAM.
Tues 21 August. Jason wrote was working on the rellib support for 'normal' libraries that is ROMable.
For my next major m68k change, all normal libraries (except exec.library, of course) will have a rellib SysBase.
In theory, the only time 0x00000004 will need to be read will be when a new m68k task starts (since, for AOS compatibility, new m68k tasks can't assume that SysBase is passed in A6 on CallEntry())
I'm working on a 512K AROS ROM image, that autoloads the 'missing' portions from the boot media.
One feature I'd like to have is autoloading of the *.hidd drivers, in a similar fashion to how BindDrivers works.
Any ideas? Or should I just extend BindDrivers to cover Amiga chip functions and PCI devices, and load them that way?
BindDrivers already supports a probe mechanism. You'd only need to supply enough tooltype information to cause the load to occur, and if InitResident() fails (which would have the probe function in it), then the device is unloaded.
For example, I would propose the following tooltype API extensions: (the existing 'PRODUCT' tooltype stays as it is)
The InitResident could probe via the Expansion/GetCurrentBinding() mechanism, or just blindly add the module (as is current practice with *.hidd devices).
The ConfigDev->ExpansionRom field could be extended by adding 'OOP_Object *HiddPCI' and other fields to the 'er_' union, indicated by a Manufacturer code of 0xFFFF, and the subtype (PCI, USB, etc) by AROS-defined Product codes.
Sat, 19 October Jason at AmiWEST 2012
Thursday, 1 November 2012 Jason wrote So, does anyone have any objection to 'all BPTRs/BSTRs are just like AmigaOS/MorphOS'?
Undef 'AROS_FAST_BPTR' and 'AROS_FAST_BSTR' for all architectures
Verify all ISAs compile (linux-xxx and amiga-m68k)
Add comments to bptr.h indicating that the AROS_FAST_* macros are deprecated
If either are defined, a '#warning' is issued that AROS ABIv1 does not support AROS_FAST_BPTR/AROS_FAST_BSTR
Sidewinder mness starts work on the SAGA superAGA graphics HIDD, other thing is to optimize an animation viewer application written in Assembly bounty for Apollo Core / Vampire boards
20:56 Changeset in AROS [54752] von neil Better MUI compatibility for Window class: - Return zero for current …
19:33 Changeset in AROS [54751] von neil Better MUI compatibility: don't use MUIV_Window_TopEdge_Delta, which …
13:25 Changeset in AROS [54748] von twilen ADDR32 changed.
04:01 Changeset in AROS [54746] von NicJA Show the correct cache sizes for the apollo core.
03:10 Changeset in AROS [54745] von NicJA fix the format template so that the cpu model is shown correctly.
03:09 Changeset in AROS [54744] von NicJA remove some whitespace 02:33 Changeset in AROS [54743] von NicJA typo
01:24 Changeset in AROS [54742] von NicJA check if the CPU has the Apollo 68080 addiw.l instruction. If it has, …
01:19 Changeset in AROS [54741] von NicJA tidy formatting
01:17 Changeset in AROS [54740] von NicJA bump the copyright notice.
01:14 Changeset in AROS [54738] von NicJA use USER_INCLUDES
00:24 Changeset in AROS [54737] von NicJA Add AttnFlags? for the Apollo'080, and MMU presence. Use the bit …
Attempt to run AROS on A1200 and other Amiga hardware
Only requirement is 1M or more MEMF_LOCAL fast RAM (RAM that does not disappear during reset) or 2M chip RAM (in this case upper 1M will be used by ROM if not redirected to FAST). MMU is not used or needed
Be able to give detailed logs and descriptions of the issue see previous sections
Agnus 0.25MB chip RAM
Agnus 0.5MB chip RAM
Phase 5 Blizzard030 MKIII 50Mhz 32MB RAM
Phase 5 Blizzard030 MKIV 50Mhz 32MB but untested 64MB RAM
Works - How long did you let it sit for? Also as soon as the machine resets get the softkick floppy out of the drive (the faster you can do this the better)!
Phase 5 Blizzard030 mkIV 50Mhz 68882 50 MHz 64MB
Works. Emergency floppy boots. Can't move icons in Workbook. AGA is extremely slow: Can see screen clearing line by line when resizing or opening windows or using menus (CPU does it all?). Boot menu is very fucked: Couldn't select what I wanted from the + options, as some A-J range keys didn't work and after a while all keys switched 50/60 Hz. Wanderer is completelly unusable on AGA. Octamed IV crashed after clicking on its banner screen in startup. Booted some games just fine.
Phase 5 DCE(reworked) Blizzard 1260 68060 + 1230scsi
Does not work. The ATA3.driver fails with the following message: "Cannot find A1200!". - The Allegro CDFS does not work either.
As of March 2012, not working but new ForceFAST option added but untested
a4000 rev. d (16mb onboard ram) - cs060/50 ppc (128mb ram) - mediator4000di - fastata4000 mk3 (bootcontroller) - full boot
a4000 rev. b (16mb onboard ram) - cs060/50 mk1 (no ram) (no scsi) - internal ide (bootcontroller) - no boot: timing issue
a1200 - apollo (?) 040 (16mb ram) - internal ide (bootcontroller) - foll boot (random crashes after setpatch disappeared after clean nightly install)
A1200 has a Blizzard '060/PPC accelerator and 64 MB ram along with a 4-way IDE splitter off which is a CF card plus optical CDRW and OS 3.1 rom. The A500 has a B5000 accelerator ('020 with 4 MB fast ram) along with the fat Agnes hack to give 1 MB chip ram, another I MB slow ram in the trapdoor and OS2 rom. It also has a 'dodgy' A570 CD drive off the side expansion slot ('dodgy' because some years ago it stopped being able to boot the machine from a CD).
The A1200 has never booted AROS 68k and there was the same result last night. I booted from the AROS boot floppy but after the reset the machine just died - no boot activity and a blank screen with a power cycle requrired to bring the machine back (to a normal AmigaOS boot). To be honest, that was no great surprise. More disappointing was the A500, which has booted AROS 68k in the past (but was too slow to be usable). It ran the boot disk fine, but then immediately on reboot threw up an 'illegal instruction' error. It was consistent on every reboot tried)
Most Macs with a 68030, 68040 or better processor would be a viable target. A 68020 CPU with 68851 PMMU should work also. Older 68000-based Macs might be more problematical.
The best place to start would be to define a specific Mac 68k emulator to target, and use that as the development environment.
Then, write a Macintosh m68k bootloader that uses the Mac Toolbox A-Line instructions to load the AROS kernel into RAM, and pass control to that.
We may wish to retain the Mac Toolbox vectors and globals (from 0x100 to 0x1000) to use for screen drawing and device access - each Mac model has its own bizarre peculiarities, and the Toolbox would be a good way to eliminate the need for coding all that ourselves.
Would imagine that we could use a 'MacFloppy.device' and 'MacHd.device' that would simply be a shim over the Toolbox ROM calls.
Performa 460 (also LC III+ and Performa 466, 467)
Performa 475 (also LC 475 and Performa 476)
Performa 550 (also LC 550 and Performa 560)
Performa 575 (also LC 575 and Performa 577, 578)
Performa 588 (also LC 580 and Performa 580)
PowerBook 520 (also PowerBook 520c, 540, 540c, 550c)
Quadra 630 (also LC 630 and Performa 630, 631, 635, 636, 637, 638, 640)
m68k Hosted Environment Binaries
There is no hosted version so far but if anyone is interested...
What are the system requirements for hosted operation? i.e. memory model (does each process need a separate virtual memory space originating from 0?) All processes are in the same memory context. Can this also be the same memory context as the host OS? While FreeMiNT has memory protection, it has no virtual memory model (i.e. all free mint processes have the same memory context too). Yes, it can. The whole AROS runs in a single host OS process.
Do I need thread support in the host OS? (this is a very funny chapter in the FreeMiNT kernel...)
"ready/write capability to low memory (in particular, trap vectors and 0x00000000-0x00000007) m68k assumes that it can read a specific constant value (the location of the SysBase data structure) at address 4. All other low memory below 0x1000 should never be accessed."
No, you just need the host OS to be able to cause a timer exception (signal) to the AROS context, and the AROS scheduler will do all the process/task management for itself. I guess a timer interrupt would save me quite some processing time compared to the whole signal shebang, and I also get supervisor mode for free (which I suppose is good in this case, since the scheduler most likely needs it?). m68k software really reads SysBase from 4. You can either map this
m68k assumes that it can read a specific constant value (the location of the SysBase data structure) at address 4. All other low memory below 0x1000 should never be accessed. Can it be sufficient to virtualize accesses to this area in user mode? Yes, sufficient and recommended! (denying writes to 0 catches lots of bugs!) The OS will do this for me already, since it's already protected.
What about writes to 0x4? I guess the kernel sets up this once - but I need to catch that too. Ideally it shouldn't even attempt to write to 0x4, but rather to the variable I plan to return on reads from 0x4.
Does AROS and the general AROS binary use something like supervisor mode? AROS kernel yes, AROS drivers sometimes, and AROS applications almost never. Maybe this is a stupid question, but... why do the switch to supervisor? On an Amiga, hardware registers aren't supervisor-protected, and all memory can be accessed in user mode. Is it for stuff like cache control etc? (on 030 this is achieved by accessing the CCR, which is privileged)
Does the kernel access 0x4 in Supervisor? The reason I ask is because that means I have to virtualize most of supervisor mode. Ideally I'd like to just virtualize accesses to 0x4 in user mode (Because that's an easy thing to do. Virtualizing supervisor is definitely possible too though, there's some useful code for that in Basilisk 2 (MacOS needs supervisor mode, but is executed in user mode on the Amiga)).
Yes, AROS m68k device drivers use interrupts. Hosted probably won't need to, since it should be providing its own device drivers. What kind of tools do I need? VBCC/VASM and GCC 2-4 is available. I would suggest using the gcc 4 as compiled by the arch/m68k-amiga/doc/build-toolchain.sh script. Is there any particular port that can serve as a starting point for this stuff? arch/all-hosted, arch/all-linux, arch/m68k-all, and arch/all-unix should be useful. Copy arch/all-linux to arch/all-mint, s/linux/mint/ in all the mmakefile.src under there, and start work from there.
Real CPU interrupts, are, in fact, needed only for native ports. For hosted port you will probably need some equivalent, implementable in host OS. For example, in Windows-hosted port interrupts are WinAPI event objects (somewhat reminiscent to AROS signals). They are used to communicate with I/O threads. In UNIX-hosted interrupts are actually signals. SIGALRM is used as timer and SIGIO as host I/O interrupt. SIGUSR1 and SIGUSR2 are used for calling scheduler, because signals are the only way to get CPU context in UNIX.
In fact, currently i can form up only one mandatory requirement. There must be a possibility to interrupt a running host OS thread, get and modify its CPU context. That's all. Will there be context switches in Supervisor mode too (i.e. will I need to take care of the SSP too)?
No. Scheduler (core_Schedule()) needs to be called only when you're exiting into user mode (i. e. leaving the last nesting level). It's a very bad idea on AROS too to have nested context switching.
The macros SC_ENABLE() and SC_DISABLE() (cpu_xxx.h). I'm not 100% how this is used; but I suspect it's to avoid different signal handlers from clashing with each other somehow?
No. These macros are used to set signals (i. e. AROS interrupts) state on a task context to be dispatched. It's an equivalent for restoring "interrupt enable" flag on the CPU in native ports. There's no field in AROSCPUContext to save interrupts state, they are assumed to be in sync with task->IDNestCnt, for simplicity.
Anyway, these macros use some variable in the signal context which I don't have right now.
It's a signal mask of the interrupted process.
i.e. to prevent or delay other signals while handling the current one?).
No. There's no such problem in UNIX. When a signal arrives, it automatically gets blocked until i leave its handler. It's a pretty good equivalent of native CPU interrupts. However, any signal (except traps) really disables all other interrupts. This is done in order to prevent nested context switching (and messed up scheduler state), in
Currently there are two different flavors of hosted AROS: Windows and UNIX. Linux, Darwin, etc, are all UNIXes, and differences are very minimal there.
UNIX-hosted kernel is built around signals. They are very good equivalents for CPU interrupts. There's SIGALRM used as system timer, and there are SIGUSR1 and SIGUSR2 used as syscalls (in points where a running task needs to give up CPU time). SIGIO is an equivalent of external hardware interrupt, it is signalled when a host OS file descriptor is ready for I/O. A special component, unixio.hidd, is responsible for de-multiplexing a single SIGIO on per-fd basis. Some signals (SIGILL, SIGSEGV, etc) are CPU traps.
Windows-hosted kernel is quite different. This port makes use of Windows threads. AROS consists of minimum of two threads. One thread runs user-mode code (tasks), another thread is a supervisor. A special measures are taken in order to sync them up, so that actually only one of them is running. Supervisor thread is looping in WaitForMultipleObjects() call, where waitable objects are AROS interrupts. The first of them is a periodic timer, others are I/O interrupts from more Windows threads, contained in drivers.
When an interrupt happens (object is signalled), supervisor thread halts user thread, gets its CPU context, executes interrupt handlers, then resumes it. There is no mechanism similar to SIGALRM in UNIX, so a separate thread is needed to simulate it. I/O is also done via separate Windows threads. WinAPI is mostly synchronous by nature, especially GUI handling, where you have to sit in message loop. Every driver contains an associated .dll, which starts up own thread. Every thread can create own waitable event object, thus creating new interrupts. AROS code communicates to I/O threads in a way similar to a real hardware, it fills in some structure then triggers "go" event. I/O thread does its job and triggers its IRQ event, causing interrupt back to AROS side. For windows-hosted port, started with interrupts and task scheduling. After this task was solved, we already had a good model of how AROS can run inside Windows process.
The GUI on FreeMiNT is also synchronous and needs a message loop. My intention is to run away from this and make it a fullscreen application instead, because the alternative would be very very messy on this OS (since there are no non-expensive and useful threads. Is there any function to poll the event loop without blocking? X11 and SDL drivers use this approach. They just poll the loop 50 times per second using VBlank interrupt.
Windows doesn't allow to poll the loop, this is why i had to deal with threads. In fact this appears to be slower and have larger latency than with polling.
(Large Overlap with Microbiology Curriculum)
CORBA stands for Common Object Request Broker Architecture. The original idea was to create a single universal standard for how objects across different platforms, programming languages, and network protocols can communicate with each other in a seamless manner. For example, an application developed on say a Sun Workstation running Unix under the programming language C needs to communicate by virtue of some well defined standard interface (the accepted contract) to an Intel-based PC running Windows 2000 developed under Pascal. Without such a standard both sides need to negotiate all the details including the transport protocols.
The CORBA standard defines general interface standards that can be supported by different programming languages. It also defines the quality and robustness of the communication, error handling, and recovery. The standard does not cover implementation details, but only specifies the general interface language (IDL) used across all supported languages, exception handling specification, a special transport protocol called IOP that sits on top of TCP/IP, as well as the specific programming language mappings. Using the IDL, an implementation for the specific platform-dependent object is generated which can be compiled using the supported language.
By default, when you use an EOFetchSpecification, it will fetch all of the EOs that match its EOQualifier. However, often the user interface you will be using is paginated, and there are large performance wins by instead loading your results in pages.
EOFetchSpecification provides a setFetchLimit(int) method, but it does not directly support pagination, rather it will simply stop returning results after the number specified. This is useful for a cut-and-run approach to querying, but if you need to provide multiple pages of results, you will likely need to look elsewhere.
Project Wonder provides several faciliities for addressing this problem:
ERXEOControlUtilities.objectsInRange(ec, fs, start, end) for Postgres, MySQL, and Frontbase
The requirements to this merit badge are copyrighted by the Boy Scouts of America. They are reproduced in part here under fair use as a resource for Scouts and Scouters to use in the earning and teaching of merit badges. The requirements published by the Boy Scouts of America should always be used over the list here. If in doubt about the accuracy of a requirement, consult your Merit Badge Counselor.
Reading this page does not satisfy any requirement for any merit badge. Per National regulations, the only person who may sign off on requirements is a Merit Badge Counselor, duly registered and authorized by the local Council. To obtain a list of registered Merit Badge Counselors, or to begin a Merit Badge, please contact your Scoutmaster or Council Service Center.
Quartz, Bauxite, Cobalt, Tin, tantalum, tungsten, Fluorspar, Gold , Platinum Group Metals, Silver
B. Explain the role mining has in production and processing things that are grown.
C. From the list of minerals you chose for 1a, determine the countries where those minerals can be found, and discuss what you learned with your counselor.
Obtain a map of your state or region showing major cities, highways, rivers, and railroads. Mark the locations of five different mining enterprises. Find out what resource is processed at each location, and identify the mine as a surface or underground operation. Discuss with your counselor how the resources mined at these locations are used.
Discuss with your counselor the potential hazards a miner may encounter at an active mine and the protective measures used by miners. In your discussion, explain how:
A. The miner's personal protective equipment is worn and used, including a hard hat, safety glasses, earplugs, dust mask or respirator, self-rescue device, and high-visibility vest.
B. Miners protect their hands and feet from impact, pinch, vibration, slipping, and tripping/falling hazards.
C. Monitoring equipment warns miners of imminent danger, and how robots are used in mine rescues.
Discuss with your counselor the dangers someone might encounter at an abandoned mine. Include information about the "Stay out-Stay Alive" program.
A. With your parent's approval and your counselor's assistance, use the Internet to find and take a virtual tour of two types of mines. Determine the similarities and differences between them regarding resource exploration, mine planning and permitting, types of equipment used, and the minerals produced. Discuss with your counselor what you learned from your Internet-based mine tours.
B. With your parent's permission and counselor's approval, visit a mining or minerals exhibit at a museum. Find out about the history of the museum's exhibit and the type of mining it represents. Give three examples of how mineral resources have influenced history.
C. With your parent's permission and counselor's approval, visit an active mine.* Find out about the tasks required to explore, plan, permit, mine, and process the resource mined at that site. Take photographs if allowed, and request brochures from your visit. Share photos, brochures, and what you have learned with your counselor.
D. With your parent's permission and counselor's approval, visit a mining equipment manufacturer or supplier.* Discuss the types of equipment produced or supplied there, and in what part of the mining process this equipment is used. Take photographs if allowed, and request brochures from your visit. Share photos, brochures, and what you have learned with your counselor.
E. Discuss with your counselor two methods used to reduce rock in size, one of which uses a chemical process to extract a mineral. Explain the difference between smelting and refining.
F. Learn about the history of a local mine, including what is or was mined there, how the deposit was found, the mining techniques and processes used, and how the mined resource is or was used. Find out from a historian, community leader, or business person how mining has affected your community. Note any social, cultural, or economic consequences of mining in your area. Share what you have learned with your counselor.
A. Choose a modern mining site. Find out what is being done to help control environmental impacts. Share what you have learned about mining and sustainability.
B. Explain reclamation as it is used in mining and how mine reclamation pertains to Scouting's no-trace principles.
C. Discuss with your counselor what values society has about returning the land to the benefit of wildlife and people after mining has ended. Discuss the transformation of the BSA Summit Bechtel Family National Scout Reserve from a mine site to its current role.
A. Explore the anticipated benefits of interplanetary mining. Learn how NASA and private investors may search for, extract, and process minerals in outer space, and the primary reasons for mining the moon, other planets, or near-Earth asteroids. Find out how exploration and mineral processing in space differ from exploration on Earth. Share what you have learned with your counselor, and discuss the difficulties encountered in exploring, collecting, and analyzing surface or near-surface samples in outer space.
B. Identify three minerals found dissolved in seawater or found on the ocean floor, and list three places where the ocean is mined today. Share this information with your counselor, and discuss the chief incentives for mining the oceans for minerals, the reclamation necessary after mining is over, and any special concerns when mining minerals from the ocean. Find out what sustainability problems arise from mining the oceans. Discuss what you learn with your counselor.
C. Learn what metals and minerals are recycled after their original use has ended. List four metals and two nonmetals, and find out how each can be recycled. Find out how recycling affects the sustainability of natural resources and how this idea is related to mining. Discuss what you learn with your counselor.
D. With your parent's permission, use the Internet and other resources to determine the current price of gold, copper, aluminum, or other commodities like cement or coal, and find out the five-year price trend for two of these. Report your findings to your counselor.
A. With your parent's and counselor's approval, meet with a worker in the mining industry. Discuss the work, equipment, and technology used in this individual's position, and learn about a current project. Ask to see reports, drawings, and/or maps made for the project. Find out about the educational and professional requirements for this individual's position. Ask how the individual's mining career began. Discuss with your counselor what you have learned.
B. Find out about three career opportunities in the mining industry. Pick one and find out the education, training, and experience required for this profession. Discuss this with your counselor, and explain why this profession might interest you.
C. With your parent's permission and counselor's approval, visit a career academy or community college to learn about educational and training requirements for a position in the mining industry that interests you. Find out why this position is critical to the
NOTE: Visiting a mine site, a mining equipment manufacturer, or an equipment supplier requires advance planning. These sites can be potentially dangerous. You will need permission from your parents and counselor, and the manager of the mine site, or equipment manufacturer or supplier. While there, you will be required to follow closely the site manager's instructions and comply with all safety rules and procedures, including wearing appropriate clothing, footwear, and personal safety equipment.
Mining in Society Merit Badge with Workbook PDF, current requirements, and resources.
Student Resources from Society for Mining, Metallurgy & Exploration
Mining Exhibits, Museums, and Tours
Mining In Society Merit Badge Presentation on YouTube from Society for Mining, Metallurgy & Exploration
Resources for completing the Mining in Society Badge from MineralEducationCoalition.org
Animal Science | Architecture | Automotive Maintenance | Dentistry | Drafting | Electronics | Engineering | Farm Mechanics | Game Design | Graphic Arts | Home Repairs | Journalism | Landscape Architecture | Law | Medicine | Metalwork | Plumbing | Programming | Public Health | Pulp and Paper | Salesmanship | Surveying | Textile | Truck Transportation | Veterinary Medicine | Woodwork
American Business | American Cultures | American Heritage | American Labor | Animal Science | Animation | Archaeology | Archery | Architecture | Art | Astronomy | Athletics | Automotive Maintenance | Aviation | Backpacking | Basketry | Bird Study | Bugling | Camping | Canoeing | Chemistry | Chess | Citizenship in the Community | Citizenship in the Nation | Citizenship in the World | Climbing | Coin Collecting | Collections | Communications | Composite Materials | Cooking | Crime Prevention | Cycling | Dentistry | Digital Technology | Disabilities Awareness | Dog Care | Drafting | Electricity | Electronics | Emergency Preparedness | Energy | Engineering | Entrepreneurship | Environmental Science | Family Life | Farm Mechanics | Fingerprinting | Fire Safety | First Aid | Fish and Wildlife Management | Fishing | Fly Fishing | Forestry | Game Design | Gardening | Genealogy | Geocaching | Geology | Golf | Graphic Arts | Hiking | Home Repairs | Horsemanship | Indian Lore | Insect Study | Inventing | Journalism | Kayaking | Landscape Architecture | Law | Leatherwork | Lifesaving | Mammal Study | Medicine | Metalwork | Mining in Society | Model Design and Building | Motorboating | Moviemaking | Music | Nature | Nuclear Science | Oceanography | Orienteering | Painting | Personal Fitness | Personal Management | Pets | Photography | Pioneering | Plant Science | Plumbing | Pottery | Programming | Public Health | Public Speaking | Pulp and Paper | Radio | Railroading | Reading | Reptile and Amphibian Study | Rifle Shooting | Rowing | Safety | Salesmanship | Scholarship | Scouting Heritage | Scuba Diving | Sculpture | Search & Rescue | Shotgun Shooting | Signs, Signals & Codes | Skating | Small-Boat Sailing | Snow Sports | Soil and Water Conservation | Space Exploration | Sports | Stamp Collecting | Surveying | Sustainability | Swimming | Textile | Theater | Traffic Safety | Truck Transportation | Veterinary Medicine | Water Sports | Weather | Welding | Whitewater | Wilderness Survival | Wood Carving | Woodwork
Dietary changes that can lower blood pressure include a low sodium diet, a DASH diet, a vegetarian diet, and drinking green tea.
Suppose you bought a new shirt with the money you saved from your allowance. How would you describe your shirt when you are talking to your best friend on the phone? You might describe the color, the way the fabric feels, and the length of the sleeves. These are all physical properties of your shirt. If you did a good job describing your shirt, your friend would recognize the shirt when you wear it. Minerals also have physical properties that are used to identify them.
Explain how minerals are identified.
Describe how color, luster, and streak are used to identify minerals.
Describe the properties of cleavage and fracture.
Identify additional properties that can be used to identify some minerals.
How are Minerals Identified?
Imagine you were given a mineral sample similar to the one shown in Figure 3.12. How would you try to identify your mineral? If you were a mineralogist, you would use certain properties to identify the mineral. You can observe some properties by looking at the mineral. For example, you can see that the mineral in Figure 3.12 is the color of gold and is shiny. But, you cannot see all mineral properties. You need to do simple tests to determine some properties, such as how hard the mineral is. You can use a mineral's properties to determine its identity because the properties are determined by the chemical composition and crystal structure, or the way that the atoms are arranged.
Figure 3.12: You can use the properties of a mineral to identify it.
Color is probably the easiest property to observe. Unfortunately, you can rarely identify a mineral only by its color. Sometimes different minerals are the same color. Take another look at Figure 3.12. The mineral is a gold color, so you might think that it is gold. The mineral is actually pyrite, or "fool's gold", which is made of iron and sulfide. It contains no gold atoms.
Often, the same mineral comes in different colors. Figure 3.13 shows two samples of quartz—one is colorless (although on a purple background) and one is purple. The purple color of the quartz comes from a tiny amount of iron in the crystal. The iron in quartz is a chemical impurity because it is not normally found in quartz. Many minerals are colored by chemical impurities. Other factors, such as weathering, can also affect a mineral’s color. Weathering affects the surface of a mineral. Because color alone is unreliable, geologists identify minerals by several traits.
Figure 3.14: You rub a mineral across an unglazed porcelain plate to determine the streak. The hematite shown here has a red-brown streak.
Streak is the color of the powder of a mineral. To do a streak test, you scrape the mineral across an unglazed porcelain plate. The plate is harder than many minerals, causing the minerals to leave a streak of powder on the plate. The color of the streak often differs from the color of the larger mineral sample, as Figure 3.14 shows. If you did a streak test on the yellow-gold pyrite, you would see a blackish streak. This blackish streak tells you that the
Streak is a more reliable property than the color of the mineral sample. The color of a mineral may vary, but its streak does not vary. Also, different minerals may be the same color, but they may have a different color streak. For example, samples of hematite and galena can both be dark gray, but hematite has a red streak and galena has a gray streak.
Luster describes the way light reflects off of the surface of the mineral. You might describe diamonds as sparkly or pyrite as shiny, but mineralogists have special terms to describe the luster of a mineral. They first divide minerals into metallic and non-metallic luster. Minerals like pyrite that are opaque and shiny have a metallic luster. Minerals with a non-metallic luster do not look like metals. There are many types of non-metallic luster, six of which are
Table 3.1: Minerals with Non-Metallic Luster
Like resins, such as tree sap
Can you match the minerals in Figure 3.15 (below) with the correct luster from Table 3.1 (above) without looking at the caption?
Figure 3.15: Diamond has an adamantine luster. Quartz is not sparkly like a diamond is. It has a vitreous, or glassy, luster. Sulfur reflects less light than quartz, so it has a resinous luster.
You are going to visit a friend. You fill one backpack with books so you can study later. You stuff your pillow into another backpack that is the same size. Which backpack will be easier to carry? Even though the backpacks are the same size, the bag that contains your books is going to be much heavier. It has a greater density than the backpack with your pillow.
Density describes how much matter is in a certain amount of space. Substances that have more matter packed into a given space have higher densities. The water in a drinking glass has the same density as the water in a bathtub or swimming pool. All substances have characteristic densities, which does not depend on how much of a substance you have.
Mass is a measure of the amount of matter in an object. The amount of space an object takes up is described by its volume. So, density of an object depends on its mass and its volume. Density can be calculated using the following equation.
Samples that are the same size, but have different densities, will have different masses. Gold has a density of about 19 g/cm3. Pyrite has a density of only about 5 g/cm3. Quartz is even less dense than pyrite and has a density of 2.7 g/cm3. If you picked up a piece of pyrite and a piece of quartz that were the same size, the pyrite would seem almost twice as heavy as the quartz.
Table 3.2: Mohs Scale
Hardness is a mineral's ability to resist being scratched. Minerals that are not easily scratched are hard. You test the hardness of a mineral by scratching its surface with a mineral of a known hardness. Mineralogists use Mohs Scale, shown in Table 3.2 (above), as a reference for mineral hardness. The scale lists common minerals in order of their relative hardness. You can use the minerals in the scale to test the hardness of an unknown mineral.
As you can see, diamond is a 10 on Mohs Scale. Diamond is the hardest mineral, which means that no other mineral can scratch a diamond. Quartz is a 7, so it can be scratched by topaz, corundum, and diamond. Quartz will scratch minerals, such as fluorite, that have a lower number on the scale. Suppose you tested a piece of pure gold for hardness. Calcite would scratch the gold, but gypsum would not because gypsum is a 2 and calcite is a 3. That would mean gold is between the hardness of gypsum and calcite, or 2.5 on the scale. A hardness of 2.5 means that gold is a relatively soft mineral. It is only about as hard as
Minerals break apart in characteristic ways. Remember that all minerals are crystalline, which means that the atoms in a mineral are arranged in a repeating pattern. The pattern of atoms in a mineral determines how a mineral will break. When you break a mineral, you break chemical bonds. Because of the way the atoms are arranged, some bonds are weaker than other bonds. A mineral is more likely to break where the bonds between the atoms are weaker.
Cleavage is the tendency of a mineral to break along certain planes to make smooth surfaces. Minerals with different crystal structures will cleave in different ways, as Figure 3.16 shows(below). Halite tends to form cubes with smooth surfaces, mica tends to form sheets, and fluorite can form octahedra.
Halite tends to form cubes when it cleaves.Mica tends to break off in sheets. This piece shows layered sheets.Fluorite forms octahedra, which have eight sides.Figure 3.16: Minerals with different crystal structures have a tendency to break along certain planes.
Minerals can form various shapes like the polygons, shown in Figure 3.17, when they are broken along their cleavage planes. The cleavage planes are important for people who cut gemstones, such as diamonds and emeralds. The planes determine how the crystals can be cut to make smooth surfaces.
CubeRhombohedronOctahedronFigure 3.17: Cubes have six sides that are all the same size square. All of the angles in a cube are equal to 90°. Rhombohedra also have six sides, but the sides are diamond-shaped. Octahedra have eight sides that are all shaped like triangles.
Fracture describes how a mineral breaks when it is not broken along a cleavage plane. All minerals break but fracture describes a break when the resulting surface is not smooth and flat. You can learn about a mineral from the way it fractures. Jagged edges are usually formed when metals break. If a mineral splinters like wood it may be fibrous. Some minerals, such as quartz, form smooth curved surfaces when they fracture. A mineral that broke forming a smooth, curved surface is shown in Figure 3.18 (below).
Figure 3.18: This specimen of Obsidian - which is actually not a mineral but a volcanic glass - formed a smooth, curved surface when it fractured.
Minerals have some other properties that can be used to identify them. For example, a mineral's crystal structure can be used to help identify the mineral. Sometimes, a trained mineralogist can tell the crystal structure just by looking at the shape of the mineral. In other cases, the crystals in the mineral are too small to see and a mineralogist will use a special instrument that uses X rays to find out the crystal structure.
Some unusual and interesting properties can be used to identify certain minerals. Some of these properties are listed in Table 3.3. Although these properties are rare, several minerals have them. An example of a mineral that has each property is also listed in Table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Uncommon Mineral Properties
Mineral gives off radiation that can be measured with Geiger counter
Bubbles form when mineral is exposed to a weak acid
You can identify a mineral by its appearance and other properties.
The color and luster describe the appearance of a mineral, and streak describes the color of the powdered mineral.
The way a mineral cleaves or fractures depends on the crystal structure of the mineral.
Some minerals have special properties that can be used to help identify the mineral.
Which properties of a mineral describe the way it breaks apart?
A mineral looks dry and chalky. Why sort of luster does it have?
You are trying to identify a mineral sample. Apatite scratches the surface of the mineral. Which mineral would you use next to test the mineral's hardness—fluorite or feldspar? Explain your reasoning.
Why is streak more reliable than color when identifying a mineral?
You have two mineral samples that are about the size of a golf ball. Mineral A has a density of 5 g/cm3. Mineral B is twice as dense as Mineral A. What is the density of Mineral B?
Why do some minerals cleave along certain planes?
The tendency of a mineral to break along certain planes to make smooth surfaces.
The way a mineral breaks when it is not broken along a cleavage plane.
The ability to resist scratching.
Some minerals are colored because they contain chemical impurities. How did the impurities get into the mineral?
What two properties of a mineral sample would you have to measure to calculate its density?
Adenylylation of small GTPases by Fic domains and the structures of adenylylated GTPases
Adenylation is the covalent attachment for AMP to a protein side chain. It is known two serve two functions: one as a stable post-translational modification and the other is to generate an efficient leaving group in mechanisms that use energy from the free energy of hydrolysis of phosphoanhydride bond of ATP to allow thermodynamically unfavorable overall reactions to occur.
Adenylation of glutamine synthetase, which is catalyzed by the enzyme adenylyl transferase, involves the phosphodiester bond between the hydroxyl group of the tyrosine residue in glutamine synthetase and the phosphate group of an AMP nucleotide. A complex of adenylyl transferase and a regulatory protein known as PII, which may exist unmodified as PII (also known as PA) and uridylylated as PII-UMP (also known as PD), causes an AMP molecule to either attach to or be removed from the glutamine synthetase, respectively.
Adenylation is an important form of regulation for amplifying signals such as for blood clotting and control of glycogen metabolism. Because adenylation is an enzymatic cascade, it is easier for allosteric control, as each enzyme can be a target for regulation. This is important for nitrogen metabolism in cells as it creates many regulatory sites, allowing a cell to fine tune its nitrogen production.
Berg, Jeremy Mark. Biochemistry/ Jeremy M. Berg, John L. Tymoczko, Lubert Stryer. -7th ed. P749-750.
Garrett, R.H., and C.M. Grisham. Biochemistry. 3rd ed. Belmont, CA: Thomas, 2007.
Itzen A, Blankenfeldt W, Goody RS. Adenylylation: renaissance of a forgotten post-translational modification. Trends Biochem Sci. 2011 Apr;36(4):221-8. Epub 2011 Jan 20.
Social Media: Teachersâ Rights and Responsibilities
"Educators must always be aware that they are held to a high standard for ethical and appropriate behavior in publicâand the public sphere now includes cyberspace." Laura Barrett
Understand the definitions of rights, responsibilities, and social media
List guidelines to follow when using social media
The ideas associated with the rights and responsibilities of teachers are very broad. It could be argued that the definitive guidelines as to what constitutes teachersâ rights and responsibilities are extremely versatile, sometimes controversial, and constantly evolving to keep up with the pace of society and new technology. One of the more recent facets of technology being enjoyed leisurely by a large percentage of the population, including teachers, is social media. From social networking sites, to personal blogs and web sites, to video messaging, and texting, our lives have become an open book in a digital library. In the world of education, what does this mean for educators? In their spare time, can or should they participate in social media sites? Exactly what is appropriate when teachers participate? These questions require answers. This article will elaborate on social media, and its widespread usage, while outlining simple rules that educators can adhere to when utilizing social media sites.
The first step in examining teachersâ rights and responsibilities within the parameters of social media is to understand the meanings of certain key concepts. Consider the following definitions of the words ârightâ and âresponsibilityâ, and the concept of âsocial mediaâ.
According to Merriam-Webster.com, the definition of the word ârightâ when used as a noun is: âsomething to which one has a just claim: as a: the power or privilege to which one is justly entitledâ. When used as an adverb the definition of ârightâ is: âsomething that one may properly claim as dueâ (Merriam-Webster, 2009). Rights can be defined by legal boundaries, implied based on ethical precedence, and formed from feelings of entitlement.
In contrast, Merriam-Webster.com, defines the word âresponsibilityâ as: 1: the quality or state of being responsible: as a: moral, legal, or mental accountability 2: something for which one is responsibleâ (Merriam-Webster, 2009). Responsibility is the complete opposite of entitlement because it shifts the focus to an exterior cause and requires that there is âaccountabilityâ.
Wikipedia defines the concept of social media as: âprimarily Internet- and mobile-based tools for sharing and discussing information among human beings. The term most often refers to activities that integrate technology, telecommunications and social interaction, and the construction of words, pictures, videos and audioâ (Wikipedia, 2009). The phrase âonline social networkingâ has become synonymous with social media.
Among some of the more recognized social media sites are Facebook, Myspace, Twitter, Flickr, Youtube, Plaxo, and LinkedIn. Each site features easy-to-use graphical interfacing software that allows users to build personal profiles that showcase their relationship statuses, schooling history, work history, social tendencies, and digital photographs to name just a few. These various options allow transparency to exist at its best for honest subscribers who aim to utilize the sites for their intended purposes. On the other hand, the usage of social media raises several important questions like âjust how much transparency is neededâ, âdoes there exist an age when social media should no longer be usedâ, or âis there a profession that negates a personâs ârightâ to participate in social mediaâ?
The global Internet research firm, comScore, which monitors and gauges Internet traffic, released the following numbers reflecting the growth and popularity of some of the more frequented social media web sites. According to these numbers, the popularity of social media is an increasing trend that is bound to intercept younger generations of teachers.
Worldwide Growth Among Selected Social Networking Sites (Unique Visitors)
Source: Social networking explodes worldwide as sites increase their focus on cultural relevance Facebook and Hi5 more than double global visitor bases during past year (August 12, 2008) http://www.comscore.com/press/release.asp?press=2396
As veteran teachers retire and new graduates take theirs places, school systems can be sure that their new hires will have had experience with social media. And a lot of these same new hires will insist upon retaining their memberships to certain sites.
In an article entitled âI Gave Up Myspace for Lent: New Teachers and Social Media Sitesâ, William Kist explained how he now interviews his pre-service teachers as to their participation in social media sites (Kist, 2008). Kist stated (2008), âthe majority of his pre-service teachers are in their early to mid-20sâ and that âtheir responses to his social media inquiries could be grouped into âtwo major categories: the benefits (and rights) of participating and ways of participating safelyâ (p. 246). The pre-service teachers that remarked on the benefits and rights of participating in social media had no intentions of stopping. They cited keeping in contact with friends and family as the most important benefit to social media, and they did not feel obligated to give up that ârightâ whatsoever (Kist, 2008). On the other hand, some respondents cited that they would change their approach to social media by editing their user pages to reflect only certain content and images as a way of âparticipating safelyâ (Kist, 2008). In essence, they would be more aware of what they posted and of what they made public in case students, parents, or administrators were to view their pages. They argued, âItâs kind of like if a student called me on my cell phone. I would be upset because that is my personal number, but I am not going to get rid of my cell phone because I am a teacherâ (Kist, 2008, p. 246).
Recognizing that new educators will not easily, if at all, give up their rights to social media, what alternatives or advice can be given to them when trying to maintain a responsible image? In an article entitled âNot Just âYour Spaceâ Educators Urged to be Careful on the Internetâ, Laura Barrett of the Massachusetts Teachers Association stated, âthat educators must always be aware that they are held to a high standard for ethical and appropriate behavior in publicâand the public sphere now includes cyberspaceâ (Barrett, 2007). Barrett went on to explain that a fellow MTA member and new teacher suggested âI would tell them to imagine putting up your MySpace page on open house night and showing it to your parents. Are you embarrassed? Think about that. If a posting or image would make you uncomfortable, take it downâ (Barrett, 2007). She explained, âTeachers need to do their homework tooâ. They should make sure the pages of their friends do not contain inappropriate images of them (Barrett, 2007).
Barrett (2007) listed the Massachusetts Teachers Association advisory guidelines for teachers when using social networking sites. They included:
Teachers should not use instant messaging as a means of communicating with students. IM lacks the safeguards of ordinary communication between teacher and student.
E-mail communication with students after school should be kept to a minimum and should focus on immediate class-related matters.
Always think and write like a teacher. Use your "teacher's voice." Use spell-checking software. Be professional, and be appropriate.
Think of an e-mail message as if it is on official school stationery. E-mail to students or to parents is never a private communication.
If you use the school district's server to access the Internet, do not assume that you have an "expectation of privacy" in your online activities. This is true whether you access the server at school using a school computer or access it from home using your personal computer.
Your school computer and your school district's server have the capacity to track your Internet activitiesâ your "Web tracks" reveal where you have gone and when you went there. (p. 11)
When trying to adhere to these ideas, many additional co-factors must be considered. These include: studentsâ rights, administratorsâ rights, parentsâ and guardiansâ rights, and state and local laws. It is important to recognize that laws will greatly vary from state-to-state and even county-to-county.
Social media is a technological phenomenon that I do not foresee dying down any time soon. In my opinion, educators must learn to carefully balance their rights and desires to be social media users with their responsibilities to the communities, and especially, the students they serve. School districts should diligently work to adopt policies that will allow teachers to exercise their First Amendment right to free speech (social media) while maintaining their responsibility to professionalism and credibility. In the words of Edison Haines, âWith every civil right there has to be a corresponding civil obligationâ, and this holds true in the case of educators versus social media.
Which of the following words is defined as âprimarily Internet- and mobile-based tools for sharing and discussing informationâ.
C. Social Media
B. Cell phones
Which of the following scenarios should a teacher consider when communicating with students via social media?
A. Teachers can communicate however they choose with their students.
B. Teachers can rely on emails to students being completely confidential.
C. Teachers should not use instant messaging as a means of communicating with students. IM lacks the safeguards of ordinary communication between teacher and student.
D. Teachers should only contact students by email when discussing non-classroom related matters.
In which state did a school district propose the suggested guidelines listed above for teachers when communicating with students via social media?
During his interviews, Dr. Kist found that his pre-service teachers held which general attitude towards social media?
A. Dr. Kistâs pre-service teachers wanted to âparticipate safelyâ when using social media.
B. Dr. Kist's pre-service teachers were likely to give up social media once becoming teachers.
D. Social media was not popular amongst Dr. Kist's pre-service teachers.
Barrett, L. (2007). Not just âyourspaceâ educators urged to be careful on the internet. The Education Digest, 37(June–July 2007), 7.
Kist, W. (2008). âI gave up Myspace for Lentâ: New teachers and social networking sites. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 52(3), 245-247.
Responsibility. (n.d.) In Merriam-Webster online. Retrieved February 1, 2009, from http://www.merriam-webster.com.
Right. (n.d.) In Merriam-Webster online. Retrieved February 1, 2009, from http://www.merriam-webster.com.
Social Media. (n.d.) Retrieved February 6, 2009, from the Social Media Wiki: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_media.
3.6.1 - Hardware and software
Hardware - a generic term for the physical parts of the computer, both internal and external.
Computer hardware is the physical components of the computer. It is important to distinguish between the internal components, which are the processing and storage devices, and external components, normally referred to as peripherals.
External components (peripherals): The external components of hardware are the parts that you can touch, for example the monitor mouse, keyboard and printer. The external components are used either to get data into or out of the system. Consequently, they are referred to as input and output (I/O) devices.
Internal components (processing and storage): the internal hardware components are housed within the casing of the computer and include the processor, the hard disk, memory chips, sound cards, graphics cards and the circuitry required to connect all of these devices to each other and to the I/O devices.
Although input/output devices as peripherals are no longer on the specification an understanding will allow you to access wider reading and deppen your knowledge.
Software - a generic term for any program that can be run on a computer.
Software is the general term used to describe all of the programs that we run on our computers. These programs contain instructions that the processor will carry out in order to complete various tasks. This covers an enormous range of possibilities from standard applications, such as word processors, spreadsheets and databases, to more specific applications, such as web-authoring software and games. It also includes programs that the computer needs in order to manage all of its resources, such as file management and virus-checking software.
Application software refers to all of the programs that the user uses in order to complete a particular task. In effect, it is what users use their computers for.
System software covers a range of programs that are concerned with the more technical aspects of setting up and running the computer. There are four main types:
Utility programs covers software that is written to carry out certain housekeeping tasks on your computer. Utility programs are often made available free downloads and are designed to enhance the use of your computer and programs though your computer will still work without them. A common example of a utility program is compression software.
Library programs are similar to utility program in that they are written to carry out common tasks. The word library indicates that there will be a number of software tools available to the users of the system.
Whereas some utility programs are non-essential, library programs tend to be critical for the applications for which they were built, for example Dynamically Linked Library (DLL) files, which contain code, data and resources.
Translators are software used by programmers to convert program from one language to another. There are three types: compilers, assemblers and interpreters.
Compiler - a program that translates a high-level language into machine code by translating all of the code.
Assembler - a program that translates a program written in assembly language into machine code.
Interpreter - a program for translating a high-level language by reading each statement in the source code and immediately performing the action.
In order to write software, programmers use programming languages which allow them to write code in a way that is user-friendly for the programmer. However, the processor will not understand the programmers' code, so it has to be translated into machine code, that is, 0s and 1s. Compilers, assemblers and interpreters are used to carry out this translation process.
The clue is often in the name; compilers compile source code into object code (programs), assemblers assemble assembly code, while interpreters, much like their human counterparts, interpret one line at a time.
Benefits and Drawbacks of Interpreters and Compilers
You don't need to compile the whole program to run sections of the code.
Interpretation happens each time the code is executed, so the program can be run on processors with different instruction sets.
It is useful for finding bugs when developing code
Time taken to execute a program can be long. This is partly because if you repeat the same section of code over and over again, you need to translate each time.
To run a program, the computer must have an interpreter installed.
To distribute the code, you need to distribute the source code
Once compiled, you no longer need a compiler or the source code
When distributing your program, the source code is difficult to work out
Compiled code only works on computers using the same instruction set
One small change in code leads to a need to recompile
Bytecode is an intermediate code (i.e. it is between source code and object code). Source code is translated in to bytecode, which can be run on a virtual machine (such as the Java Virtual Machine). A virtual machine translates bytecode into the appropriate instruction code.
An operating system is a collection of software designed to act as an interface between the user and the computer manages the overall operation of the computer. It links together the hardware, the applications and the user, but hides the true complexity of the computer from the user and other software - a so - called virtual machine. Operating system is not referred to as a virtual machine. This is misleading.
The definition of an operating system as a virtual meaning is one of the most important facts, but you may also need to be able to identify the differences in functionality between general and specific types of operating system in some detail. Wording is important (e.g. the difference between a 'reasonable' amount of time and a 'specific' amount of time for real-time operating system).
Common tasks carried out by the operating system include:
In a computer with only one processor, only one program can be running at any one moment in time. In order to allow more than one program to appear to run simultaneously, the operating system has to allocate access to the processor and other resources such as peripherals and memory.
One of the main tasks that an operating system has to do is to make sure that all these allocations make the best possible use of available resources. Usually the most heavily used resource in a computer is the processor. The process of allocating access to the processor and other resources is called scheduling.
Scheduling - a technique to ensure that different users or different programs are able to work on the same computer system at the same time.
The simplest way that an operating system can schedule access to the processor is to allocate each task a time slice. This means that each task is given an equal amount of processor time. This process of passing access to the processor from one tasks to the next is also known as 'round-robin' scheduling.
Accessing some devices is a relatively slow process compared to the speed at which the processor can handle requests. Rather than wait for each process to end before it can continue, the OS can effectively create a queue of commands that are waiting for the device and then handle each request in sequence or based on priority.
Memory management - how the operating system uses RAM to optimise the performance of the computer.
The OS stores details of all the unallocated locations in a section of memory known as the heap. When an application needs some memory, this is allocated from the heap, and once an application has finished with a memory location or perhaps an application is closed, the now unneeded memory locations are returned to the heap. The OS controls the use of main memory by creating a memory map which shows which blocks of memory have been allocated to each task. In this way an operating system can control more than one task in the RAM at any one time.
If applications need more memory than a computer has, then the OS will sometimes use a section of secondary storage to mimic RAM. This is called virtual memory.
The OS is responsible for managing the files stored, and the folders that they are stored in. This provides the user an easy understandable way to manage their files, which hides the complexity of how files are stored on the hard drive.
The OS is responsible for dealing with devices for input (keyboards, mourse) as well as output (allocating print jobs, screen output).
System software includes the operating system, library and utility programs.
Compilers, interpreters and assemblers are programs that convert high-level programming languages into executable instructions.
The operating system plays a critical role in managing resources.
A computer system consists of hardware and software. What is meant by hardware and software?
Hardware - the electrical/ physical components/parts (electronic circuits) of the computer.
Software - programs (sequences of instructions) which run on the hardware/computer.
Peripherals can be classified as input, output or input/output (I/O) devices. Explain what a peripheral is.
Not built into/part of (main) computer (system) // Outside computer.
System software performs the tasks needed to operate the hardware. The operating system and library programs are system software.
State one role of the operating system and one purpose of library programs..
What type of program translator is used to translate assembly language into machine code?
The RobotC program that has been copied to the robot can be executed by the built-in interpreter. How does a high level language interpreter work?
Establish rapport with small talk and introduce myself
Briefly discuss the topics to be covered during the appointment
Assess the concerns of the family and ask if they have any questions today
Any new births or plans for pregnancy?
McCune Albright syndrome is a disorder characterized by polyostotic fibrous dysplasia accompanied by café au lait spots and endocrine disorders esp. precocious puberty in girls. The patient is fracture prone, and deformity and shortening of the bones may develop.
Thought to be sporadic although there have been a few familial occurrences.
Believed to be a somatic mutation disorder
G proteins are involved in signal transduction pathways that affect the production of cAMP
An overactive cAMP pathway stimulates growth and function of the gonads, adrenal cortex, specific pituitary cells, osteoblasts, and melanocytes
Mutations in the gene render it functionally constitutive.
Proposal that this a disorder of mosacicism (nonmocaicism is thought to be a lethal condition)
Described in 1936-1937 by McCune and Albright respectively- since then >100 cases have been reported
Precocious puberty occurs in over 50% of the female cases and has been reported for males as well
Menstruation, breast development, and pubic hair growth can occur during the first months of life
Usually caused by ovarian cysts that secrete estrogen into the blood stream
Many women with MAS are fertile in adulthood
50% of patients with MAS have thyroid gland abnormalities
Pituitary thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels are low in these patients, while thyroid hormone levels may be normal or elevated
Excessive secretion of growth hormone has been seen in a few patients
Most develop course facies, enlarged hands/feet, and arthritis characteristic of acromegaly
Excessive secretion of the adrenal hormone cortisol caused by the hyperfunction of the anterior pituitary
Treatment: removal of adrenal glands or use of drugs that block cortisol synthesis
Abnormal fibrous tissue growth in many bones
When this occurs in weight bearing bones such as the femur, limping, deformity, and fractures can result
Many children have unequal arm/leg length even in the absence of fractures
Regions of fibrous dysplasia are also common in the skull and jaw bones
Know known hormonal or medical treatment has been proven effective.
Some surgical procedures such as grafting, pinning, and casting have been used to correct fracture and deformity (skull and jaw changes are often corrected surgically to improve appearance)
Flat areas of increased pigment may be found = café au lait spots
These spots are usually present at birth, and they usually do not become more extensive
Starts or ends abruptly at the midline on the abdomen in front or at the spine in the back
A few have spots confined to small areas such as the nape of the neck or crease of the buttocks
The sexual precocity is often unusual, with menstruation occurring before breast and pubic hair development.
Precocious puberty may lead to short stature
Currently, testing for a mutation in the GNAS1 gene is done for research purposes.
It is not a routine test that can be ordered.
Hemihypertrophy, a sporadic condition, has as its most significant feature- limb length asymmetry and sometimes, facial asymmetry. Between 5-8% of these children will develop an intra-abdominal tumor, either Wilms tumor of the kidney or hepatoblastoma.
How are things at home?
Does mom work outside of the home?
Financial concerns?
e-mail: pagetfdn@aol.com
Home Page: http://www.paget.org
e-mail: mary@magicfoundation.org
Home Page: http://www.magicfoundation.org
NIH/National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
Jones KL (1997). Smith's Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Company.
2 4.1 Balancing redox reactions
4 4.3 Latimer and Frost diagrams
5 4.4 Redox reactions with coupled equilibria
Chapter 4: Redox Stability and Redox Reactions
Oxidation states of vanadium in acidic solution. From left to right the oxidation state goes from +5 to +2. These four oxidation states form the basis of the vanadium flow battery, a storage device for electricity generated from sunlight and wind.[1]
Oxidation-reduction reactions are important to understanding inorganic chemistry for several reasons:
Transition metals can have multiple oxidation states
Main group elements (N, halogens, O, S...) also have multiple oxidation states and important redox chemistry
Many inorganic compounds catalyze redox reactions (which are especially useful in industrial and biological applications)
Energy conversion and storage technologies (solar water splitting, batteries, electrolyzers, fuel cells) rely on inorganic redox reactions and catalysis
Electrochemistry provides a way to measure equilibrium constants for dissolution/precipitation, complexation, and other reactions.
Reaction mechanisms in organometallic chemistry (oxidative addition, reductive elimination) involve changes in the oxidation states of metals.
Not all oxidizers and reducers are created equal. The electrochemical series ranks substances according to their oxidizing and reducing power, i.e., their standard electrode potential. Strong oxidizing agents are typically compounds with elements in high oxidation states or with high electronegativity, which gain electrons in the redox reaction. Examples of strong oxidizers include hydrogen peroxide, permanganate, and osmium tetroxide. Reducing agents are typically electropositive elements such as hydrogen, lithium, sodium, iron, and aluminum, which lose electrons in redox reactions. Hydrides (compounds that contain hydrogen in the formal -1 oxidation state), such as sodium hydride, sodium borohydride and lithium aluminum hydride, are often used as reducing agents in organic and organometallic reactions.
Balance complex oxidation-reduction reactions by the ion-electron method.
Understand periodic trends in the activity series and electrochemical series.
Use the Nernst equation to determine half-cell and cell potentials.
Derive the stability field of water and use this to rationalize aqueous redox chemistry.
Construct and be proficient with Latimer diagrams, using them to determine unknown reduction potential values and to quickly identify stable and unstable species.
Construct and be proficient with Frost diagrams, using them to identify stable and unstable species, as well as those that are strong oxidizers.
Construct and be proficient with Pourbaix diagrams, using them to identify redox and non-redox reactions, reactions that are and are not pH-dependent, and ultimately to predict and rationalize stability, reactivity, corrosion, and passivation.
In studying redox chemistry, it is important to begin by learning to balance electrochemical reactions. Simple redox reactions (for example, H2 + I2 → 2 HI) can be balanced by inspection, but for more complex reactions it is helpful to have a foolproof, systematic method. The ion-electron method allows one to balance redox reactions regardless of their complexity. We illustrate this method with two examples.
I- is oxidized to IO3- by MnO4-, which is reduced to Mn2+.
How can this reaction be balanced? In the ion-electron method we follow a series of four steps:
Step 1A: Write out the (unbalanced) reaction and identify the elements that are undergoing redox.
MnO4- + I- → IO3- + Mn2+ (The elements undergoing redox are Mn and I)
Step 1B: Separate the reaction into two half reactions, balancing the element undergoing redox in each.
Step 2A: Balance the oxygen atoms by adding water to one side of each half reaction.
Step 2B: Balance the hydrogen atoms by adding H+ ions.
8H+ + MnO4-→ Mn2+ + 4H2O
The left side has a net charge of +7 and the right side has a net charge of +2
3H2O + I- → IO3- + 6H+
The left side has a net charge of -1 and the right side has a net charge of +5
Step 2C: Balance the overall charge by adding electrons
8H+ + 5e- + MnO4-→ Mn2+ + 4H2O
The left side has a charge of +2 while the right side has a charge of +2. They are balanced.
3H2O + I- → IO3- + 6H+ + 6e-
The left side has a charge of -1 while the right side has a charge of -1. They are balanced.
Note: We did not need to explicitly determine the oxidation states of Mn or I to arrive at the correct number of electrons in each half reaction.
Step 3: Combine the half reactions so that there are equal numbers of electrons on the left and right sides
6 (8H+ + 5e- + MnO4-→ Mn2+ + 4H2O)
5 (3H2O + I- → IO3- + 6H+ + 6e-)
48H+ + 30e- + 15H2O + 6MnO4- + 5I- → 5IO3- + 6Mn2+ + 24H2O + 30e- + 30H+
Cancel the H+, electrons, and water:
48H+ + 30e- + 15H2O + 6MnO4- + 5I- → 5IO3- + 6Mn2+ + 24H2O + 30e- + 30H+
18H+ + 6MnO4- + 5I- → 5IO3- + 6Mn2+ + 9H2O
Check your work by making sure that all elements and charges are balanced.
Step 4: If the reaction occurs under basic conditions, we add OH- to each side to cancel H+
18H+ + 18OH- + 6MnO4- + 5I- → 5IO3- + 6Mn2+ + 9H2O + 18OH-
The 18H+ + 18OH- will become 18H2O so the overall balanced reaction is:
9H2O + 6MnO4- + 5I- → 5IO3- + 6Mn2+ + 18OH-
Again, it is a good idea to check and make sure that all of the elements are balanced, and that the charge is the same on both sides. If this is not the case, you need to find the error in one of the earlier steps.
S2O32- + H2O2 → S4O62- + H2O
Which elements are undergoing redox? S and O
Step 1: Write out half reactions, balancing the element undergoing redox
H2O2 + 2H+ → 2H2O
Step 2C: Balance charge by adding electrons:
2S2O32- → S4O62- + 2e-
H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e- → 2H2O
Step 3: Combine the half reactions so that there are equal numbers of electrons on the left and right sides (already equal)
2S2O32- + H2O2 + 2H+ → S4O62- + 2H2O
Note that again, we did not need to know the formal oxidation states of S or O in the reactants and products in order to balance the reaction. In this case, assigning the oxidation states would be rather complex, because S2O32- and S4O62- both contain sulfur in more than one oxidation state.
When this reaction occurs electrochemically in the spontaneous direction (e.g., in a hydrogen-air fuel cell), the two half cell reactions that occur are:
Here the anode is the negative electrode and the cathode is the positive electrode; under conditions of very low current density (where there are minimal resistive losses and kinetic overpotentials), the potential difference we would measure between the two electrodes would be 1.229 V.
In an electrolytic cell, this reaction is run in reverse. That is, we put in electrical energy to split water into hydrogen and oxygen molecules. In this case, the half reactions (and their standard potentials) reverse. O2(g) bubbles form at the anode and H2(g) is formed at the cathode. Now the anode is the positive electrode and the cathode is negative. Electrons are extracted from the substance at the anode (water) and pumped into the solution at the cathode to make hydrogen. An animation of the cathode half reaction is shown at the right.
In both galvanic and electrolytic cells, oxidation occurs at the anode and reduction occurs at the cathode.
Half-cell potentials. As noted above, the equilibrium voltage of an electrochemical cell is proportional to the free energy change of the reaction. Because electrochemical reactions can be broken up into two half-reactions, it follows that the potentials of half reactions (like free energies) can be added and subtracted to give an overall value for the reaction. If we take the standard hydrogen electrode as our reference, i.e., if we assign it a value of zero volts, we can measure all the other half cells against it and thus obtain the voltage of each one. This allows us to rank redox couples according to their standard reduction potentials (or more simply their standard potentials), as shown in the table on the right.
Note that when we construct an electrochemical cell and calculate the voltage, we simply take the difference between the half cell potentials and do not worry about the number of electrons in the reaction. For example, for the displacement reaction in which silver ions are reduced by copper metal, the reaction is:
The reason we don't need to multiply the Ag potential by 2 is that Eo is a measure of the free energy change per electron. Dividing the free energy change by the number of electrons (see below) makes Eo an intensive property (like pressure, temperature, etc.).
Here the o symbol indicates that the substances involved in the reaction are in their standard states. For example, for the water electrolysis reaction, the standard states would be pure liquid water, H+ at 1M concentration (or more precisely, at unit activity), and O2 and H2(g) at 1 atmosphere pressure.
For the half reaction 2H+ + 2e- = H2, E°1/2 = 0.000 V (by definition)
What is E1/2 at pH 5 and PH2 = 1 atm?
Toyota fuel cell hybrid bus. The bus runs on electrical energy obtained directly from the H2/O2 reaction. Individual fuel cells are connected in series to make a power train that charges a battery pack and drives an electric motor. Although the standard potential of the reaction is 1.23 V, because of kinetic overpotentials each fuel cell in the power train operates at a voltage of about 0.70 V. Despite this energy loss, the fuel cell system is still about twice as efficient as a combustion engine performing the same reaction.
What is the potential of a fuel cell (a galvanic H2/O2 cell) operating at pH 5?
In this reaction, H2 is oxidized to H+ and O2 is reduced to H2O. According to our convention, we write out and balance both half-cell reactions as reductions. For convenience, we do this in acid. (It is left as an exercise to the interested reader to try to work the problem in base)
To solve this problem we need to find the difference between the H2/ H+ and O2/H2O half cell potentials at pH 5.
2H+ + 2e- → H2 E°1/2 = 0.000 V
Like all standard potentials, this is written as a reduction. We need to reverse it and change the sign of Eo since H2 is being oxidized:
O2 + 4H+ + 4e- → 2H2O E°1/2 = +1.229 V
The difference between the two standard half cell potentials is +1.229 - 0.000 = +1.229 V
E°cell = +1.229 Volts
We now use the Nernst equation to account for the fact that H+ is not in its standard state:
Pourbaix diagram for water.
We can plot the shift in the H2/H+ and O2/H2O half-cell potentials with pH on a potential-pH diagram (also called a Pourbaix diagram) as shown at the left. The pH-dependent potentials of the H2 and O2 couples are shown as dotted lines. Notice that the potential difference between them is always 1.23 V. The dark circles represent the standard potentials.
Pourbaix diagrams are essentially electrochemical phase diagrams, which plot regions of thermodynamic stability for redox-active substances. As in other kinds of phase diagrams, the lines represent conditions under which two phases coexist in equilibrium. The shaded area in the water Pourbaix diagram represents the conditions of potential and pH where liquid water is stable relative to hydrogen or oxygen. Outside the shaded region, water is thermodynamically unstable and is reduced to H2(g) or oxidized to O2(g). Although these processes are spontaneous in the thermodynamic sense (for example, water is unstable in the presence of Pb4+, Cl2, Fe, Zn, or Al), they are kinetically slow and require catalysis to proceed.
Manganese nodules on the sea floor contain Mn in oxidation states 2+, 3+, and 4+.In addition to Pourbaix diagrams, there are two other kinds of redox stability diagrams known as Latimer and Frost diagrams. Each of these diagrams contains similar information, but one representation may be more useful in a given situation than the others.
Latimer and Frost diagrams help predict stability relative to higher and lower oxidation states, usually at one fixed pH. Pourbaix diagrams help understand pH-dependent equilibria, which are often coupled to solubility equilibria and corrosion (which will be talked about more later).
Latimer diagrams are the oldest and most compact way to represent electrochemical equilibria for substances that have multiple oxidation states. Electrochemical potential values are written for successive redox reactions (from highest to lowest oxidation state), typically under standard conditions in either strong acid ([H+] = 1 M, pH 0) or strong base ([OH-] = 1 M, pH 14). The oxidation states of successive substances in a Latimer diagram can differ by one or more electrons. Oxidation states for the element undergoing redox are typically determined by difference; we assign the oxygen atoms an oxidation state of -2 and the hydrogen atoms an oxidation state of +1.
The Latimer diagram for Mn illustrates its standard reduction potentials (in 1 M acid) in oxidation states from +7 to 0.
The Latimer diagram compresses into shorthand notation all the standard potentials for redox reactions of the element Mn. For example, the entry that connects Mn2+ and Mn gives the potential for the half-cell reaction:
For example, for the 5-electron reduction of MnO4- to Mn2+, we write
Remember to divide by the number of electrons involved in the oxidation number change (5 and 3 for the above equations).
An unstable species on a Latimer diagram will have a lower standard potential to the left than to the right.
2MnO43- → MnO2 + MnO42- the MnO43- species is unstable
Which Mn species are unstable with respect to disproportionation?
So stable species are: MnO4-, MnO42-, MnO2, Mn2+, and Mn0.
But MnO42- is also unstable - why?
MnO42- → MnO2 It undergoes a multi-electron transfer!
So overall, 2MnO42- → MnO4- + MnO2 E° = 2.272 - 0.564 = +1.708 V
Moral: All possible disproportionation reactions must be considered in order to determine stability (this is often more convenient with a Frost diagram).
Note: Thermodynamically unstable ions can be quite stable kinetically. For example, most N-containing molecules (NO2, NO, N2H4) are unstable relative to the elements (O2, N2, H2), but they are still quite stable kinetically.
Stable and unstable oxidation states can be easily identified in the plot. Unstable compounds are higher on the plot than the line connecting their neighbors. Note that this is simply a graphical representation of what we did with the Latimer diagram to determine which oxidation states were stable and unstable.
The standard potential for any electrochemical reaction is given by the slope of the line connecting the two species on a Frost diagram. For example, the line connecting Mn3+ and MnO2 on the Frost diagram has a slope of +0.95, the standard potential of MnO2 reduction to Mn3+. This is the number that is written above the arrow in the Latimer diagram for Mn. Multielectron potentials can be calculated easily by connecting the dots in a Frost diagram.
Contains the same information as in a Latimer diagram, but graphically shows stability and oxidizing power.
The lowest species on the diagram are the most stable (Mn2+, MnO2)
The highest species on diagram are the strongest oxidizers (MnO4-)
Coupled equilibria (solubility, complexation, acid-base, and other reactions) change the value of E°, effectively by changing the concentrations of free metal ions. We can use the Nernst equation to calculate the value of E° from the equilibrium constant for the coupled reaction. Alternatively, we can measure the half-cell potential with and without the coupled reaction to get the value of the equilibrium constant. This is one of the best ways to measure Ksp, Ka, and Kd values.
As an example, we consider the complexation of Fe2+ and Fe3+ by CN- ions:
Which oxidation state of Fe is more strongly complexed by CN-? We can answer this question by measuring the standard half-cell potential of the [Fe(CN)6]3-/4- couple and comparing it to that of the Fe3+/2+couple:
Iron(III) is harder to reduce (i.e., E° is less positive) when it is complexed to CN-
This implies that the equilibrium constant for complexation reaction (1) should be smaller than that for reaction (2). How much smaller?
We can calculate the ratio of equilibrium constants by adding and subtracting reactions:
The equilibrium constant for this reaction is the product of the two reactions we added, i.e., K = K2/K1.
But we can make the same overall reaction by combining reactions (3) and (4):
Thus we find that Fe(CN)63- is about a million times more stable as a complex than Fe(CN)64-.
We can use a similar procedure to measure Ksp values electrochemically.
For example, the silver halides (AgCl, AgBr, AgI) are sparingly soluble. We can calculate the Ksp of AgCl by measuring the standard potential of the AgCl/Ag couple. This can be done very simply by measuring the potential of a silver wire, which is in contact with solid AgCl and 1 M Cl-(aq), against a hydrogen reference electrode. That value is then compared to the standard potential of the Ag+/Ag couple:
Subtracting the second reaction from the first one we obtain:
Acid mine drainage occurs when sulfide rocks such as pyrite (FeS2) are exposed to the air and oxidized. The reaction produces aqueous Fe3+ and H2SO4. When the acidic effluent of the mine meets a stream or lake at higher pH, solid Fe(OH)3 precipitates, resulting in the characteristic orange muddy color downstream of the mine. The acidic effluent is toxic to plants and animals.
Because the solubility of the silver halides is so low, this would be a very difficult number to measure by other methods, e.g., by measuring the concentration of Ag+ spectroscopically, or by gravimetry. In practice almost all Ksp values involving electroactive substances are measured potentiometrically.
Many electrochemical reactions involve H+ or OH-. For these reactions, the half-cell potentials are pH-dependent.
Example: Recall that the disproportionation reaction 3MnO42-(a) → 2MnO4-(aq) + MnO2(s) is spontaneous at pH=0 ([H+] = 1M), from the Latimer diagram or Frost plot.
However, when we properly balance this half reaction we see that it involves protons as a reactant:
By Le Châtelier's principle, it follows that removing protons (increasing the pH) should stabilize the reactant, MnO42-. Thus we would expect the +6 oxidation state of Mn, which is unstable in acid, to be stabilized in basic media. We will examine these proton-coupled redox equilibria more thoroughly in the context of Pourbaix diagrams below.
Pourbaix Diagrams plot electrochemical stability for different redox states of an element as a function of pH.[3] As noted above, these diagrams are essentially phase diagrams that map the conditions of potential and pH (most typically in aqueous solutions) where different redox species are stable. We saw a simple example of such a diagram in section 4.2 for H2O. Typically, the water redox reactions are plotted as dotted lines on these more complicated diagrams for other elements.
The lines in Pourbaix diagrams represent redox and acid-base reactions, and are the parts of the diagram where two species can exist in equilibrium. For example, in the Pourbaix diagram for Fe below, the horizontal line between the Fe3+ and Fe2+ regions represents the reaction Fe3+(aq) + e- = Fe2+(aq), which has a standard potential of +0.77 V. While we could use standard potentials for all these lines, in practice Pourbaix diagrams are usually plotted for lower ion concentrations (often 1 mM) that are more relevant to corrosion and electrochemical experiments.
Pourbaix diagram for iron at ionic concentrations of 1.0 mM
Areas in the Pourbaix diagram mark regions where a single species (Fe2+(aq), Fe3O4(s), etc.) is stable. More stable species tend to occupy larger areas.
Lines mark places where two species exist in equilibrium.
Pure redox reactions are horizontal lines - these reactions are not pH-dependent
Pure acid-base reactions are vertical lines - these do not depend on potential
Reactions that are both acid-base and redox have a slope of -0.0592 V/pH x # H+⁄# e-)
Examples of equilibria in the iron Pourbaix diagram (numbered on the plot):
Fe2+ + 2e- → Fe(s) (pure redox reaction - no pH dependence)
Fe3+ + e- → Fe2+ (pure redox reaction - no pH dependence)
The water redox lines have special significance on a Pourbaix diagram for an element such as iron. Recall that liquid water is stable only in the region between the dotted lines. Below the H2 line, water is unstable relative to hydrogen gas, and above the O2 line, water is unstable with respect to oxygen. For active metals such as Fe, the region where the pure element is stable is typically below the H2 line. This means that iron metal is unstable in contact with water, undergoing reactions:
Iron (and most other metals) are also thermodynamically unstable in air-saturated water, where the potential of the solution is close to the O2 line in the Pourbaix diagram. Here the spontaneous reactions are:
Corrosion and passivation. It certainly sounds bad for our friend Fe: unstable in water, no matter what the pH or potential. Given enough time, it will all turn into rust. But iron (and other active metals) can corrode, or can be stabilized against corrosion, depending on the conditions. Because our civilization is dependent on the use of active metals such as Fe, Al, Zn, Ti, Cr... for practically everything, it is important to understand this, and we can do so by referring to the Pourbaix diagram.
The corrosion of iron (and other active metals such as Al) is indeed rapid in parts of the Pourbaix diagram where the element is oxidized to a soluble, ionic product such as Fe3+(aq) or Al3+(aq). However, solids such as Fe2O3, and especially Al2O3, form a protective coating on the metal that greatly impedes the corrosion reaction. This phenomenon is called passivation.
Draw a vertical line through the iron Pourbaix diagram at the pH of tap water (about 6) and you will discover something interesting: at slightly acidic pH, iron is quite unstable with respect to corrosion by the reaction:
This oxidation reaction is orders of magnitude slower because the oxide that is formed passivates the surface. Therefore iron corrodes much more slowly in oxygenated solutions.
More generally, iron (and other active metals) are passivated whenever they oxidize to produce a solid product, and corrode whenever the product is ionic and soluble. This behavior can be summed up on the color-coded Pourbaix diagram below. The red and green regions represent conditions under which oxidation of iron produces soluble and insoluble products, respectively.
The white patches visible on the ship's hull are zinc block sacrificial anodes.
In the yellow part of the diagram, an active metal such as iron can be protected by a second mechanism, which is to bias it so that its potential is below the oxidation potential of the metal. This cathodic protection strategy is most frequently carried out by connecting a more active metal such as Mg or Zn to the iron or steel object (e.g., the hull of a ship, or an underground gas pipeline) that is being protected. The active metal (which must be higher than Fe in the activity series) is also in contact with the solution and slowly corrodes, so it must eventually be replaced. In some cases a battery or DC power supply - the anode of which oxidizes water to oxygen in the solution - is used instead to apply a negative bias.
Rusty cast iron bridge and lamppost, North Ayrshire, Scotland.
Another common mode of corrosion of iron and carbon steel is differential aeration. In this case, part of the iron object - e.g., the base of a bridge, or the drill in an oil rig - is under water or in an anoxic environment such as mud or soil. The potential of the solution is close to the H2 line in the Pourbaix diagram, where Fe can corrode to Fe2+ (aq). Another part of the iron object is in the air, or near the surface where water is well oxygenated. At that surface oxygen can be reduced to water, O2 + 4H+ + 4e- = 2 H2O. The conductive iron object completes the circuit, carrying electrons from the anode (where Fe is oxidized) to the cathode (where O2 is reduced). Corrosion by differential aeration can be rapid because soluble ions are produced, and the reaction has a driving force of over 1 V. Iron or carbon steel that is subjected to frequent weathering, such as the cast iron bridge and lamppost shown at the right, is corroded on the surface by differential aeration.
Differential aeration is involved in the formation of a rust ring around wet areas of cast iron, e.g., an iron frying pan left partially submerged in water for a day or more. (You may have seen this mechanism of corrosion in action when you did not get to the dirty dishes right away). Under the water, Fe is oxidized to soluble Fe2+, and at the water line O2 is reduced to H2O. As Fe2+ ions diffuse towards the water surface, they encounter oxygen molecules and are oxidized to Fe3+. However Fe3+ is insoluble at neutral pH and deposits as rust, typically just below the water line, forming the rust ring.
Explain the simplified Pourbaix diagram for nitrogen, shown below. Discuss the reactions that are implied by the lines, and explain why they have the slopes they do.
Use the information in the Pourbaix diagram to construct a Frost diagram for nitrogen at pH 7.
Balance the following redox reactions, adding H2O and H+ (or OH-) as needed. Predict for each one whether the reaction would become more or less spontaneous at higher pH.
Silver metal is not easily oxidized, and does not react with oxygen-saturated water. However, when excess NaCN is added to a suspension of silver particles, some silver dissolves. If oxygen is removed (e.g., by bubbling nitrogen through the solution), the dissolution reaction stops. Write a balanced equation for the dissolution reaction (hint: it is a redox reaction).
The standard potentials for the Fe3+/Fe2+ and Cl-/Cl2 couples are +0.77 and +1.36 V. Calculate the cell potential of a redox flow battery that has Fe3+/Fe2+ and Cl-/Cl2 solutions on the two sides (both containing 1.0 M HCl as the electrolyte). The pressure of Cl2 gas on the chlorine side is 0.2 atm, and the concentrations of Fe2+ and Fe3+ on the iron side are both 0.10 M.
The Latimer potential diagram for iodine (in acidic solutions) is given below.
H5IO6 → IO3- → IO- → I2 → I-
(a) What is the potential for the IO3-/I- redox couple?
(b) Construct a Frost diagram and identify any species that are unstable with respect to disproportionation.
NO3- → N2O4 → HNO2 → NO → N2O → N2 → NH3OH+ → N2H5+ → NH4+
(a) Write a balanced half reaction for reduction of NO to NH4+ in acid.
(d) All the nitrogen-containing molecules and ions listed above are kinetically stable, but only three are thermodynamically stable with respect to disproportionation in acid. Which ones are they?
Referring to the Pourbaix diagram for Mn below:
(a)	Write out the balanced half reaction corresponding to the line separating Mn2+ and Mn2O3. Use your answer to calculate the slope of the line (give units).
(c)	What spontaneous reaction would you expect for an aqueous solution of MnO4- at pH 6?
(d)	Describe an electrochemical procedure (specifying pH and potential) for making Mn3O4(s) from aqueous Mn2+.
(e)	Label the regions of the diagram that correspond to corrosion and passivation of Mn metal.
The Pourbaix diagram for copper is shown below.
(a) Write a balanced half-reaction that corresponds to the boundary between the Cu2O(s) and Cu(OH)2(s) regions of the diagram.
(b) What is the slope of the line (do not try to measure it from the graph!) that connects the Cu2+(aq) and Cu2O(s) regions? Explain your reasoning.
(c) Over what pH range (if any) is copper metal stable in contact with pure water?
(d) Thermodynamically, the reaction between copper and oxygen is spontaneous at pH 7. Would you expect copper to corrode or to be passivated against corrosion in aerated water at neutral pH? Explain your reasoning.
(e) Some recent studies have suggested the use of Cu2O as a water splitting photocatalyst. Would you expect Cu2O to be stable in the presence of the oxygen formed in the reaction? Explain your reasoning.
↑ Alotto, P.; Guarnieri, M.; Moro, F. (2014). "Redox Flow Batteries for the storage of renewable energy: a review". Renewable & Sustainable Energy Reviews 29: 325–335. doi:10.1016/j.rser.2013.08.001.
↑ Frost, Arthur (1951). "Oxidation Potential–Free Energy Diagrams". Journal of the American Chemical Society 73 (6): 2680–2682. doi:10.1021/ja01150a074.
↑ Pourbaix, M., Atlas of electrochemical equilibria in aqueous solutions. 2d English ed. 1974, Houston, Tex.: National Association of Corrosion Engineers.
During August 2008, the CG Continuum had appointed Guy Mckenna as the head Coach. In on October 2009 his Coaching contract was extended until 2012. On the 15th May 2009 it was announced that Travis Auld, previous Essendon administrator, would be the CEO of GC17. Shaun Hart and Marcus Ashcroft were appointed to the coaching panel. Since moving to the Gold Coast from Geelong, Gary Ablett was appointed captain in January 2011.
Since the Gold Coast football Club was starting from the beginning, the club needed players. During the 2009 Draft, the Gold Coast was allowed to recruit 12 players born between January and April 1992. During the 2010 season, the Gold coast football club was given the following concessions allowing them enough players to commence the following year
-ability to sign one uncontracted player from each of the 16 AFL clubs
-zones access to 5 Queensland players prior to the AFL draft
-First pick in every round plus additional first picks at number 2, 3, and 5,7,1,13,15 of the 2010 AFL draft.
-The capacity to pre-list 10 players who had previously nominated for AFL draft or were previously listed with an AFL club.
-First 5 selections of the rookie draft
-An expanded main list of 48 players ( clubs are usually allowed 38)
Neanderthals and their contemporaries seem to have been associated everywhere with similar stone tool industries, called the Mousterian (after Le Moustier Cave in France). Therefore no fundamental behavioral difference is noticeable. The implication may be that the anatomical differences between Neanderthals and near-moderns have more to do with climatic adaptation and genetic flow than with differences in behavior.
Archaeological sites are dominated by flake tools. By contrast, Acheulean sites are dominated by large handaxes and choppers. Handaxes are almost absent from Middle Paleolithic sites. Oldowan hominids used mainly flake tools as well. However, unlike the small, irregular Oldowan flakes, the Middle Paleolithic hominids produced quite symmetric, regular flakes using sophisticated methods.
The main method is called the Levallois and it involves three steps in the core reduction:
Mousterian tools are more variable than Acheulean tools. Traditionally tools have been classified into a large number of distinct types based on their shape and inferred function. Among the most important ones are:
Flint points found in Loiret, France
Francois Bordes found that Middle Paleolithic sites did not reveal a random mix of tool types, but fell into one of four categories that he called Mousterian variants. Each variant had a different mix of tool types. Bordes concluded that these sites were the remains of four wandering groups of
Neanderthals, each preserving a distinct tool tradition over time and structured much like modern ethnic groups.
Recent studies give reason to doubt Bordes' interpretation. Many archaeologists believe that the variation among sites results from differences in the kinds of activity performed at each locality. For example, Lewis Binford argued that differences in tool types depend on the nature of the site and the nature of the work performed. Some sites may have been base camps where people lived, while others may have been camps at which people performed subsistence tasks. Different tools may have been used at different sites for woodworking, hide preparation, or butchering prey.
Recently, however, microscopic studies of wear patterns on Mousterian tools suggest that the majority of tools were used mainly for woodworking. As a result, there seems to be no association between a tool type (such as a point or a side-scraper) and the task for which it was used.
Microscopic analyses of the wear patterns on Mousterian tools also suggest that stone tools were hafted, probably to make spears.
Mousterian hominids usually made tools from rocks acquired locally. Raw materials used to make tools can typically be found within a few kilometers of the site considered.
Neanderthal sites contain bones of many animals alongside Mousterian stone tools. European sites are rich in bones of red deer, fallow deer, bison, aurochs, wild sheep, wild goat and horse, while eland, wildebeest, zebra are found often at African sites. Archaeologists find only few bones of very large animals such as hippopotamus, rhinoceros and elephant, even though they were plentiful in Africa and Europe.
This pattern has provoked as much debate at similar ambiguity as for earlier hominids, regarding the type of food procurement responsible for the presence of these bones: hunting or scavenging.
Several general models have be offered to explain the Mousterian faunal exploitation:
Some archaeologists (such as Lewis Binford) believe that Neanderthals and their contemporaries in Africa never hunted anything larger than small antelope, and even these prey were acquired opportunistically, not as a result of planned hunts. Any bones of larger animals were acquired by
Other scientists argue that Neanderthals likely were not obligate scavengers, but that during times when plant foods were abundant they tended to scavenger rather than hunt. At other times, when plant foods were less abundant, Neanderthals hunted regularly. Their interpretation is of a flexible faunal exploitation strategy that shifted between hunting and scavenging.
Other scientists believe that Neanderthals were primarily hunters who regularly killed large animals. But they were less effective hunters than are modern humans. They point out that animal remains at Mousterian sites are often made up of one or two species:
For example, at Klasies River, vast majority of bones are from eland.
The prey animals are large creatures, and they are heavily overrepresented at these sites compared with their occurrence in the local ecosystem. It is hard to see how an opportunistic scavenger would acquire such a non-random sample of the local fauna. One important feature of this model is that animal prey hunted such as eland are not as dangerous prey as buffalo. Middle Paleolithic hominids were forced to focus on the less dangerous (but less abundant) eland, because they were unable to kill the fierce buffalo regularly.
Finally some scientists argue that scavenging was not a major component of the Middle Paleolithic diet and there is little evidence of a less effective hunting strategy. Skeletal element abundance and cut mark patterning would be consistent with hunting.
Overall, there is currently no evidence that Middle Paleolithic hominids differed from Upper Paleolithic hominids in scavenging or hunting, the most fundamental aspect of faunal exploitation. The differences that separate Middle Paleolithic hominids from modern hominids may not reside in scavenging versus hunting or the types of animals that they pursued. Differences in the effectiveness of carcass use and processing, with their direct implications for caloric yield, may be more important.
Neanderthals lacked sophisticated meat and fat storage technology, as well as productive fat rendering technology. At a minimum, the lack of storage capabilities and a lower caloric yield per carcass have forced Neanderthals to use larger foraging ranges to increase the likelihood of successful encounters with prey.
Marks on human bones from Middle Paleolithic can be the result of two phenomena: violence and cannibalism.
Violence can be recognized on bone assemblages by:
By contrast, evidence of body processing and cannibalism is becoming more widespread at different times and in different geographical areas.
Criteria required for a "minimal taphonomic signature" of cannibalism:
"pot polishing" on the ends of bones which have been cooked and stirred in a clay pot.
These criteria must be found on both hominid and ungulate remains.
Finally the types of bones usually broken are the crania and limb bones.
Different behavioral patterns toward the dead among Middle Paleolithic Neanderthals:
Human individuals defleshed and disarticulated.
Bones smashed for marrow and brain.
Mortuary practices with body processing: Krapina, Herto
Mortuary practices without body processing: Southwest Asia (Amud, Kebara, Shanidar)
Intentional burials; dead bodies placed carefully in burial pits with tools and grave goods.
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
Harry confides to both Hermione and Ron about Dumbledore's task to retrieve Slughorn's memory. Meanwhile, Slughorn has the Potions class brew an antidote for different poisons. Harry's textbook provides little assistance until, with only a few minutes left, he finds a scrawled note in it, "Just shove a Bezoar down their throats." Harry also remembers Snape once saying that a Bezoar (a stone from a goat's stomach) will protect against most poisons. Finding a Bezoar in the cabinet, Harry holds it up to Slughorn. Amused, yet impressed, Slughorn says Harry thinks like his mother. Harry lingers after class and asks Slughorn about Horcruxes. Realizing what Harry is attempting, Slughorn insists there was nothing more to the memory that he gave Dumbledore, and departs hurriedly.
Students sit their first Apparition training in early February. During the session, Harry eavesdrops on Malfoy and Crabbe. Crabbe seems upset that he has to guard Malfoy while he is doing something. After several attempts, only Susan Bones successfully Apparates, but splinches herself, leaving a leg behind.
After overhearing Malfoy and Crabbe's conversation, Harry resolves to track Draco's movements on the Marauder's Map. Over the next several weeks, he watches Crabbe and Goyle moving around the castle more than usual, sometimes standing in an empty hall. Harry is often unable to locate Malfoy on the map and considers that he is actually leaving the school, but dismisses this due to Hogwarts' increased security.
On his birthday, Ron eats several of the chocolates that Romilda Vane gave Harry. When Ron becomes dreamy over her, Harry realizes the candies were spiked with Love Potion and takes him to Slughorn. En route, they bump into Lavender, and Ron excitedly announces that Harry is taking him to Romilda. Slughorn administers an antidote, then decides they should toast Ron's birthday. Slughorn opens a bottle of mead he intended as a present for Dumbledore. After taking a sip, it quickly becomes obvious Ron has been poisoned. When Slughorn is slow to react, Harry finds the Bezoar in Slughorn's bag, and forces it down Ron's throat.
Obtaining Slughorn's complete memory is more difficult than Harry realized. Slughorn knows Dumbledore wants this information, and, for whatever reason, he refuses to share it, and now carefully avoids being caught alone with Harry. It is apparent that Slughorn will never willingly yield this memory, and Harry must devise a more clever plan if he hopes to retrieve it.
Harry grows more obsessed with discovering Draco's secret and continually watches him on the Marauder's Map, though he is unable to figure out why Draco's name occasionally disappears. That no one else seems concerned about Draco's suspicious activities further frustrates Harry, and he needs some other means to trail him, if he is to discover what Draco is doing.
Although Hermione is disapproving that Harry uses information from the Half-Blood Prince's book, she is perhaps being a little overly critical and obsessive when Harry uses the Bezoar stone in Slughorn's class. It was, after all, something Harry had previously learned about in Snape's class, and the notes in the book only acted as a reminder. It is possible that Hermione not only resents what she considers cheating, but also anyone outshining her in class. We can safely assume that she will be grateful, however, that Harry knows how to use the stone when Ron is poisoned.
Romilda Vane had given Harry a box of chocolates just before Christmas. Harry, heeding Hermione's warning that they might be spiked with a love potion, tucked them away in his trunk unopened. Here, we see the truth in Hermione's words: Ron, finding the treats, assumed they were for his birthday, and ate three, immediately becoming infatuated with Romilda. It is a safe assumption that if Harry had eaten any, he would equally have been in Romilda's thrall, and would have taken her to Slughorn's party.
Harry is 16 years old; Ron is turning 17 on his birthday. American readers who know that mead is alcoholic may be dismayed that Slughorn offers an alcoholic drink to a clearly underage Harry. It is worth mentioning that the drinking age in the UK is much lower than it is in the United States; it is legal to drink at age 18 in a pub, or at 16 in a restaurant with a meal, and at age 5 at home. The laws in the Wizarding world must be even more lenient, as the Three Broomsticks and the Hog's Head are clearly pubs, yet third-years (age 13 and 14) can order Butterbeer (which is apparently mildly alcoholic).
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Why is Malfoy arguing with his cronies?
Why does Ron fall in love with Romilda Vane? Who did Romilda intend to fall in love with her?
Did Harry actually cheat, as Hermione claimed, when he presented the Bezoar stone to Slughorn during the class? Explain why or why not.
Why does Malfoy's name keep disappearing from the Marauder's Map? Where might he be during those absences?
Why is no one other than Harry suspicious about Draco's behavior? Is Harry over-reacting?
Who could have poisoned the mead, and who might it have been intended for?
Why was Slughorn unable to react after Ron drank the poisoned mead?
Are the poisoned mead and the cursed necklace connected to one another? If so, what evidence is there for this?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Disapparating will be a point of contention again between Ron and Hermione, as Ron is among the students who have difficulty with it (he will literally fail his test by half an eyebrow) and Hermione seems to naturally get the hang of it. Hermione's repetition of the technique's mnemonic will be met by Ron using a similar mnemonic to privately insult the Ministry wizard.
When done improperly, Disapparating can be dangerous. And though Susan Bones' Splinched leg is presented as a rather humorous and generally harmless training mishap, in the next book, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, Ron's shoulder will be badly Splinched while he is Disapparating under perilous and chaotic circumstances, causing a severe injury with serious blood loss, needing immediate medical attention. When Apparition is first discussed, in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, there is a general wince when underage wizards Splinching themselves is mentioned; we do not yet fully understand why, even now, but having to have so many wizards on hand to re-attach Susan Bones' leg is a good indication of how serious it is.
Unknown to Harry just yet, Draco is spending time in the Room of Requirement, working on something related to his mission for Voldemort. Once Harry determines Draco's whereabouts during these disappearances, he will spend considerable time over the next few months trying unsuccessfully to get into the Room of Requirement to discover just what Draco is doing in there. It is unknown why the Room of Requirement does not appear on the Marauder's Map; possibly the Marauders never knew it existed, or whoever first thought it to be a junk warehouse instructed it to be unplottable, so as to be unseen on any map.
While Ron does recover from this accidental poisoning, it should be obvious already that his romantic entanglement with Lavender is unraveling. Injured though she may be by Ron's enthusiasm for meeting Romilda, Lavender will visit him repeatedly in the Hospital Wing, always finding him "asleep." Ron later admits to Harry and Hermione that he was feigning sleep to avoid dealing with Lavender. This rough stretch will prove too much for their relationship to weather, and it will be dealt a final blow very shortly.
It was Madam Rosmerta, placed under the Imperius curse by Draco Malfoy, who poisoned the mead. Two threats have now come from The Three Broomsticks' direction: the necklace back in October and now the mead in December, so the reader should suspect that someone at the Three Broomsticks might be involved. It will turn out also that Madam Rosmerta is reporting when Dumbledore has left the school, and that the threats are aimed at Dumbledore. It is never revealed exactly how the poisoned mead was able to pass the Secrecy Sensors that Filch was using to track things entering and leaving the castle, though the Trio do speculate on this somewhat. Dumbledore later says that Filch would not think to check a bottle of Rosmerta's mead, we suspect that this would particularly be true of one being carried by a teacher. It was also pointed out previously by Hermione that Filch had been mistakenly letting love potions enter the castle through the mail disguised in perfume bottles from Weasley's Wizard Wheezes. It would make sense he could similarly be taken in by a poisoned bottle of Rosmerta's mead.
In 2011, thousands of people crowded into the Wisconsin State Capitol rotunda carrying placards reading “Kill the Bill.” What were they protesting? The newly elected Wisconsin governor, Scott Walker, supported a bill proposed by Republican state legislators that would have effectively eliminated most collective bargaining rights of public sector union employees.
Collective bargaining laws require employers to sit down and negotiate with the representative union of their employees. The governor argued that the state needed to close a multi-billion-dollar deficit, so legislators proposed a Budget Repair Act that would eliminate collective bargaining over everything but wages. The bill passed and was signed into law after a significant level of drama that saw Democratic legislators leaving the state so that there would not be enough legislators in house to continue the debate or bring the bill to a vote. The law proved so unpopular that Governor Walker faced a recall vote in 2012. The recall attempt was defeated, but the law has been subjected to numerous court reviews. The discussion about the role of collective bargaining is not over.
Why was a bill like this proposed? Are collective bargaining rights necessary for public sector employees? How would an economist respond to such a bill? This chapter lays out the changing role of unions in U.S. labor markets.
Introduction to Issues in Labor Markets: Unions, Discrimination, Immigration
In this chapter, you will learn about:
When a job applicant is bargaining with an employer for a position, the applicant is often at a disadvantage—needing the job more than the employer needs that particular applicant. John Bates Clark (1847–1938), often named as the first great American economist, wrote in 1907: “In the making of the wages contract the individual laborer is always at a disadvantage. He has something which he is obliged to sell and which his employer is not obliged to take, since he [that is, the employer] can reject single men with impunity.”
To give workers more power, the U.S. government has passed, in response to years of labor protests, a number of laws to create a more equal balance of power between workers and employers. These laws include some of the following:
Setting maximum hours of work (at least before employers pay overtime rates)
Regulating health and safety conditions in the workplace
Preventing discrimination on the basis of race, ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, and age
Requiring employers to give advance notice of layoffs
Setting a limit on the number of immigrant workers from other countries
[link] lists some prominent U.S. workplace protection laws. Many of the laws listed in the table were only the start of labor market regulations in these areas and have been followed, over time, by other related laws, regulations, and court rulings.
Prominent U.S. Workplace Protection Laws
National Labor-Management Relations Act of 1935 (the “Wagner Act”)
Establishes procedures for establishing a union that firms are obligated to follow; sets up the National Labor Relations Board for deciding disputes
Under Title III, establishes a state-run system of unemployment insurance, in which workers pay into a state fund when they are employed and received benefits for a time when they are unemployed
Establishes the minimum wage, limits on child labor, and rules requiring payment of overtime pay for those in jobs that are paid by the hour and exceed 40 hours per week
Allows states to decide whether all workers at a firm can be required to join a union as a condition of employment; in the case of a disruptive union strike, permits the president to declare a “cooling-off period” during which workers have to return to work
Title VII of the Act prohibits discrimination in employment on the basis of race, gender, national origin, religion, or sexual orientation
Occupational Health and Safety Act of 1970
Creates the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), which protects workers from physical harm in the workplace
Employee Retirement and Income Security Act of 1974
Prohibits discrimination against women in the workplace who are planning to get pregnant or who are returning to work after pregnancy
Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986
Prohibits hiring of illegal immigrants; requires employers to ask for proof of citizenship; protects rights of legal immigrants
Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act of 1988
Requires employers with more than 100 employees to provide written notice 60 days before plant closings or large layoffs
Prohibits discrimination against those with disabilities and requires reasonable accommodations for them on the job
Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993
Allows employees to take up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave per year for family reasons, including birth or family illness
Penalizes firms for underfunding their pension plans and gives employees more information about their pension accounts
Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009
Restores protection for pay discrimination claims on the basis of sex, race, national origin, age, religion, or disability
This chapter covers three issues in the labor markets: labor unions, discrimination against women or minority groups, and immigration and U.S. labor market issues.
The effects of fruits and vegetables on the heart are probably the least concerned. However, fruits and vegetables contain many ingredients that can resist the damaging effects of substances that damage the heart and other parts of the body. These beneficial properties/ingredients include:
Antioxidant: prevent damage to blood vessel wall
Soluble fiber: binds to cholesterol in the intestine and prevents its absorption
Anti-inflammatory ingredients: reduce inflammation and reduce the risk of atherosclerosis
Introduction | Archaic Historians | Ancient Historians | Medieval Historians | Early Modern Historians | Enlightenment & Professionalization | Academic Historians
Chromatin conformation capture (3C) technologies are used to discover which regions of DNA are physically co-located in space, through ligation and sequencing the hybridised product. The original 3C experiments counted the level of interaction between two regions of interest and subsequent assays using NGS have scaled this up to measure genome-wide contacts.
An understanding of the components of chromatin (DNA along with everything bound to it) and the cell cycle help understand what causes and effects the interactions measured by chromation conformation capture.
Interaction frequencies between either two selected fragments (3C), a bait region against all other fragments (4C), an all-against-all sampling of a given region (5C) or genome-wide assesment of interaction frequencies (Hi-C).
Through these techniques we can study from single enhancer-gene interactions up to the global principles of genome organisation.
Topological domains and other physical chromatin structures
Overview of assay procedure for chromosome conformation capture methods 3C, 4C and 5C.The resolution at which a 3C-based experiment can be analysed is determined by two factors:
The primary restriction enzyme used to fragment the DNA
The sequencing depth over the target region
A 6-cutter restriction enzyme (such as HindIII) limits the resolution to fragments with mean size of around 3.5 kb, whereas a 4-cutter such as DpnI reduces fragment size by around an order of magnitude.[1]
Map reads to reference genome. In the case of paired reads (Hi-C), reads should be mapped independently and not using an alignment program with "paired-end mode" or similar. This mode will likely impose constraints on the distance between mapped paired reads, when in this assay even contacts many megabases away (and in trans across chromosomes) still give useful information.
Normalisation and correction for contact biases can be done using a number of published tools.
Link to an example galaxy workflow for for the method (including example datasets) on a given galaxy instance or to the XML document describing the workflow.
POV discussion about the method.
↑ Janos Posfai (2011) Distribution of restriction site distances (theoretical "fragment lengths") in the human genome.
A multidimensional measure of corporate stakeholder responsibility (CStR) was developed and validated. Hereby, the authors conducted a series of analyses, including exploratory factor analyses, confirmatory factor analyses, and structural equation modeling to assess different types of validity of the proposed scale. The scale consists of six dimensions: community-oriented, natural environment-oriented, employee-oriented, supplier-oriented, customer-oriented, and shareholder-oriented CSR.
Corporate stakeholder responsibility (CStR) is defined as “an organization’s context-specific actions and policies designed to enhance the welfare of various stakeholder groups by accounting for the triple bottom line of economic, social, and environmental performance”.
Our company provides financial support for humanitarian causes and charities. (0.77)
Our company contributes to improving the well-being of populations in the areas where it operates by providing help for schools, sporting events, etc. (0.73)
Our company invests in the health of populations of developing countries (e.g., vaccination, fight against AIDS). (0.69)
Our company helps NGOs and similar associations such as UNICEF, the Red Cross, and emergency medical services for the poor. (0.65)
Our company gives financial assistance to the poor and deprived in the areas where it operates. (0.62)
Our company assists populations and local residents in case of natural disasters and/or accidents. (0.60)
El Akremi (201_): How Do Employees Perceive Corporate Responsibility? Development and Validation of a Multidimensional Corporate Stakeholder Responsibility Scale. Journal of Management, Vol. _, No. _, pp. _–_
There are many definitions of outdoor education, e.g.,:
Outdoor education involves experiential learning in, through, and about natural environments.
Knapp stated that Place-Based Education is also known as environmental education, outdoor education, service learning, or experiential education (2005, p. 278).
Key sources for more information about the definition of outdoor education include:
w:Outdoor education#Definitions
Priest (2004) provides definitions of adventure programming terms.
The Definitions project was a year long project of 26 USA Federal Agencies and Non-profit Associations looking at definitions related to environmental education, interpretation, experiential education, outdoor education and related terms.
Fixed phones, also known as landlines, are devices that allow its users to connect with each other remotely but immediately by transmitting their voices through a laid cable. A typical fixed phone is usually consists of a microphone, a earphone, a coil, a ringer, and a dial or keypad. The receiver transmits the vibration of incoming sound to fluctuating pressure for traditional carbon transmitter and voltages for modern electret transmitters. The signal is then transmitted through the wire to another speaker’s receiver. The receiver “converts fluctuating electric current into sound waves that reproduce human speech”.[1] Telephones enable its users to exchange information immediately without much delay. Its ability to recreate the sound of speakers allows communication to be more intimate and real than mailing. The users of this technology include all walks of life, but started with businesses and listings.[2] Later families adopted it. Before the internet and smart phones, telephone was the most common telecommunication means globally.
This article aims to investigate the fixed telephone subscription in China from 1975 to 2017, data as shown in Appendix. The unit is subscription per 100 capita.
Prior to the Advent of Fixed Phones
Before the emergence of landlines, people could only communicate remotely through texts and symbols. Talking is one of the most basic ways of communicating. However it was restrained by the volume of sound thus is only effective in short distances. During ancient times, beacon fire were means for exchanging information in a war. Writing letters was also one of the oldest means of long-distance communication. Pigeons were trained as the “transmitting devices”, other than postmen. The principal defect of mailing was the low speed, especially before the invention of trains and automobiles. Mails was predominantly handled by post offices operated by the government. Telegraphy was then invented. Francis Ronalds successfully send the first telegraph through electricity in 1816.[3] It significantly accelerated the speed for communication that by 1850s there are 23000 miles of wire only in the United States.[4] However it was still a slow mode for communication compared to instant communication, like smartphones today, due to its systematic structure. For example, users would have to physically go to the offices to send and retrieve messages and the telegraphs were decrypted by human beings instead of a machine. Summing it up, prior to the advent of fixed phones, modes of communication were either slow or limited to short distance.
In China, the Qing Government constructed its first telegraph lines in the 1800s. By 1908, there were 45448 kilometer of telegraph cable in China.[5] However, these are only for military purposes and the mass still relied on postal mails for long distance communication. Telephones did not gain much attention among the major population in China due to language barrier and China cutting it off from the outside.
A well known “fact” is that Alexander Graham Bell invented the first speaking phone in the US in 1876. However, he was not the first or the only one. Johann Philip Reis created a sound transmitting device as early as 1861. Elisha Gray went to the patent office the same day with Bell but lost the patent to him. Later on Thomas Edison improved the technology that produced stronger signal which was used for a century.
Scientists, inventors, and engineers at the time competed fiercely on this subject. The basic components of a landline phone are a power source, a switch hook, a dialer, a ringer, a transmitter, a receiver, and a anti-sidetone circuit. Knowledge of both electrical engineering and mechanical engineering were combined for the invention of such product. For example, a traditional ringer is mechanical. It is driven by the movement of magnet due to the passage of circuit. Later the ringer upgraded to electronic ones, where a crystalline material vibrates due to circuit passage.[1]
The connection between telephones was initially based on a manual switching system, where the wire of two telephones had to be physically connected in the central office. The system deficit of the system exposed as more users joined — manual switching became too complicated to and time consuming. Automatic switching evolved as a consequence, which saved numerous labour cost.[1]
Later on, wireless landlines were invented, which granted flexibility to users, though only within short distances. As communication technology evolves, cellphones were invented, which are even more flexible. They gradually occupied the market for telecommunication globally.
Telephone profoundly impacts the human society. It is the first technology that provides instant information exchange to the mass public, laying the foundation for cellphones. Telephone transfers information more quickly. Automobiles/airplanes/trains transfer human themselves and freight more quickly. The pace of the society was deeply effected.
Early Market Development and Policy, -1993
The first few subscribers in the world were customers of the District Telephone Company of New Haven, Connecticut in 1878. They were mostly businesses and listings.[2] However, the first landline in China was not for private or commercial purposes, but for military purposes. Furthermore, the birth of fixed phone subscription in China took off later than the rest of the world due to its "chaotic political disturbances”[6], including the preceding wars, the overthrown of the Qing Dynasty, the Civil War, the great leap forward, and the Cultural Revolution. Similar to telegraph services, foreign companies first set up telephone services in China. [5][6] The governmental management of telecommunication later in China was taken charge of by the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications (MPT), a classic “example of state-owned postal, telephone and telegraph monopolies that dominated the telecommunications landscape in most of the world for the past 100 years”.[7] In the second half of 1800s, several military telegraph circuits was built, some linking the head office and the fortresses and the weaponry factory.[6] Telephone infrastructures were built for the same purpose. 1908 is the beginning of nationalization of the telecommunication industry. The quality of service was terrible under the management of the Qing.[5] Furthermore the situation of telecommunication monopoly lasted for decades.
In 1960s and earlier, telecommunication was an “instrument of governmental administration and national defense rather than as a commercial entity in its own right”.[6] As a result, the networks in this centrally planned economy were only extended to major cities and strategically important sites. Nevertheless, length of telephone line doubled from 1958 to 1960, though on a small scale (less than 1 subscription per 100 capita).[5] In this stage, the Chinese government has attempted to implement several income and expenditure management schemes to boost the industry, all have failed. One example was that “the organizations handed over their income to the MPT every 3 or 5 days and claimed back their expenditure retrospectively”. Another was the difference management system. Because only the first caller will pay for the bill (not the one who hears the ringer and picks up the phone), major cities, such as Beijing, has created more income than more rural areas, such as Tibet. The issue of balancing the quota of different areas remained as a constant struggle against informal institutional constraints.[6]
Fixed Phone Subscription in US and China, 1975-2016[8]
After the Cultural Revolution, China embarked a program of economic reform, beginning in 1978. Telecommunication services slowly begun to transform slowly from political instrument to commercial business. The decentralization of telecommunication also took place, both financially and administratively.[6] However, the telecommunication business remained as a industry of monopoly under the control of MPT for this period.
At the same time the market for landline subscription in the US was undergoing a stable growth, but in China the commercial development was in a stage of stagnation, as shown in the figure on the right.[6] The early technology advancement for telephones did not impact the Chinese market as a consequence.
In 1994 alone, the number of fixed line subscription increased by 53%.[7] This year can be seen as the beginning when the Chinese telecommunications market transformed to be a buyers’ market instead of a sellers’ market.[6] A company called Lian Tong was approved and backed by the MPT to construct a second national landline network, followed by Ji Tong. The operating enterprise of MPT was separated out in 1994 and renamed as China Telecom in 1995. They then became competitors that finally broke the monopoly. Price wars started between the companies. The package price for installation, handset, and other charges decrease by approximately 50%.[9] The coverage of signal expanded quickly. Unicom alone added 13 cities in 1996. In 1997, it finished to build a fixed-line network with 500 million yuan but the was refused by local telecom officials for “technical issues”。[9]
“New entry into the telecommunication sector has been officially sanctioned nationwide, which opened the way for the development of new companies, specialized networks and thus greater pluralism and decentralized decision making in China’s networking environment”. However, for these companies, their political strength brought about their organizational weakness — slow in decision making and barely independent.
Nonetheless, telecommunication services were gradually privatized in a Chinese way.[7] MPT would only approve new services that was not in its service area to attempt to maintain its monopoly. Still the trend of further liberalization was unstoppable. Firstly, aggressive project was launched by The Ministry of Electronic Industry, called the Golden Projects. Secondly, for the safety of military communication, the network can not be open to public use.[6] In mid 1999, China Telecom was split into four independent companies and China Netcom was found in the same year, marking the beginning of the fully competitive era for Chinese telecommunication. Other new entries that joined around 2000 are Railcom, Satcom, Tietong, etc.[9] But they are relatively minor competitors.
When China joined the WTO in 2001, it was agreed that up to 50% of fixed-line phone company can be owned by foreign franchise starting 2003.[9] This introduced not only foreign capitals but also foreign experiences into the Chinese market.
During this stage, the fixed phone subscription in China saw a rapid increase, from 2 subscription in 100 people in 1994 to 27 in 2005. The quick growth can be attributed to three generic factors: “technological change, influence of the telecommunications liberalization experience of other countries and a strong economic propellant for liberalization of the chines telecommunications industry”.[9]
Maturity, 2005-2007; Decline, 2008-present
As this mode of communication enters maturity, the speed of growth decreases. Graphically, the slope of the S curve becomes less steep. China fixed phone market has barely gone through this stage, possibly stroke by the popularization of cellular phones and the Internet. The advantage of cellular phones over fixed line is clear — a more flexible user experience. Furthermore, China wanted to popularize 3G systems before the 2008 Olympics in Beijing.[9] Companies also seized this opportunity to pivot their emphasis from fixed land lines to 3G cellular network. China Mobile and Unicom were included in this competition but they were not the only ones. “Other major and minor fixed-line cooperations also stood to become providers of the service.”[9] However, the tycoons in this industry are still the old ones that are never completely separated from the government, such as China Telecom and Unicom.
Searching for more profits, China Mobile, one of the major companies, started overseas acquisition for earnings. Their first attempt to purchase PTCL in Pakistan in 2005 failed but in 2007, their second attempted worked out. Later a telecom company in Luxembourg were purchased by China Mobile.[9]
Fixed line subscription peaked at 27 per 100 capita by 2005 and that of cellular subscription soared to 29.7 by the same year and continued to grow.[10] By end of 2006, number of users of major networks totaled 137 million. The time for Internet has come.
The total landline subscription in China begun to decrease starting 2008. As the economy of the entire country grows, the price of cellular phone and network subscription begun to drop.
Consequently, some landline phones were unsubscribed. The number of subscription per 100 capita almost halved compared to its peak in 2006. The popularization of mobile phones and instant messaging apps. One that dominates the Chinese market is Wechat. Its functions include text messaging, audio and video calling. Thus it is a perfect substitute for fixed line phones. This becomes more the case as the price for cellular data decreases with time.
As usage of fixed line phones has inevitably started to decline, there is little possibility to revert the trend. The only way for the telecommunication companies to survive is to adapt themselves to this era of the Internet. In order to attract new customers, telecommunication companies promotes land line subscription to purchased together with network data subscription as a package, with a discount, or even together with cellular subscription. For example, China Telecom is now offering a plan of 2189 CNY per year that offers 500Mbps broadband, a cellular phone plan with unlimited data, and a fixed line number with free calls.[11] Another example is their promotion to attract old customers, e.g. a fixed line subscriber who wants to get a cellphone can pay less than a new one or exchange a fixed line service with a broadband data plan, but cheaper.
Fixed Phone Subscription in China and Globally, 1975-2016[12]
To conclude, the time of fixed line has officially going to an end, just like telegraph. Though the relevant service might not prevail anymore, the major companies that used to offer these services can still make use of their resources to pivot and profit.
The life cycle of fixed phone subscription in China was shorter compared to the global average, as shown in the figure on the right. It has a fierce growth, a short period of maturity and a vicious decline. The late but quick development in China benefited from the past experience of telecommunication from other countries.
In this section, the life cycle of fixed line subscription in China is numerically predicted and compared to the historical data obtained from World Bank[10].
The mathematical model is provided by David M Levinson from the University of Sydney. The main function is:
The historical data and the predicted data are tabulated and illustrated below.
Historical and Predicted Fixed Line Subscription in China from 1977 to 2006
Fixed Line Subscription per 100 Capita[10]
Predicted Fixed Line Subscription per 100 Capita
Historical and Predicted Fixed Line Subscription in China (1975-2016)The periods of birthing growth, and maturity of landline subscription in China can be identified, historically and predictively, as shown in the table below. Some differences between prediction and actual data can be observed.
The actual birth phase is longer than predicted. This is probably a result of the “chaotic political disturbances”.
The actual speed of growth in 2000-2005 is almost the same as the predicted one, as the slope of two curves are almost parallel.
Since the modeling process has broken the data into two parts (before and after 2006) the prediction did not reflect a short period of stagnation from 2005 to 2007.
The actual speed of unsubscription from 2010 tp 2012 was slower than predicted one.
↑ a b c Curley, R. (2012). Breakthroughs in telephone technology: From bell to smartphones. Chicago: Britannica Educational Publishing.
↑ a b www.nps.gov/nhl/find/withdrawn/telephone.htm
↑ Appleyard, R. (1930). Pioneers of electrical communication. Ayer Company Pub.
↑ Du Boff, R. (1980). Business Demand and the Development of the Telegraph in the United States, 1844-1860. The Business History Review, 54(4), 459-479. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/3114215
↑ a b c d Lee, P. S. N. (1997). Telecommunications and development in china. Cresskill, N.J: Hampton Press.
↑ a b c d e f g h i Yan, X., & Pitt, D. C. (2002). Chinese telecommunications policy. London;Boston, Mass;: Artech House.
↑ a b c Mueller, M., & Tan, Z. (1997). China in the information age: Telecommunications and the dilemmas of reform. Westport, Conn: Praeger.
↑ a b c d e f g h Harwit, E., & Oxford University Press. (2008). China's telecommunications revolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
↑ http://emall.sh.189.cn/30010004/347/100000000007328.html
It is now time to point the moral. The history of all these various attempts, as I read it, teaches us the following lessons:
(1) There is a real need for a constructed interlanguage: after each failure of one scheme others will crop up, and that will continue until a satisfactory solution has been found.
(2) A language may have a temporary vogue, but if it has obvious defects, criticism will sooner or later lead to schisms and new and better systems, as was the case with Volapük, with Esperanto, with Idiom Neutral, and now with Ido. The scientific and political world will not accept a language that can be justly and severely criticized by competent authorities.
(3) Only those schemes have had a considerable number of adherents which were worked out in sufficient detail and completeness to allow of their being used for the most various purposes.
(4) When details in proposed interlanguages are criticized, it is nearly always because they are unnatural, i.e. deviate more than necessary from what is found in existing languages or what us already international in these, or else because they are unnecessarily complicated in their grammatical structure or incapable of expressing ideas with a sufficient degree of precision. These, then, are the things to be avoided in a future interlanguage.
The less arbitrary and the more rational the forms, the more stable will they be.
(5) All recent attempts show an unmistakable family likeness, and may be termed dialects of one and the same type of international language. This shows that just as bicycles and typewriters are now nearly all of the same type, which was not the case with the early makes, we are now in the matter of interlanguage approaching the time when one standard type can be fixed authoritatively in such a way that the general structure will remain stable, though new words will, of course, be constantly added when need requires.
These considerations, and especially the conviction that the technique of language construction has reached a high degree of perfection, have emboldened me to present the new scheme for an international auxiliary language which will form the subject of the second part of this book. As such a scheme must have a name, I have called it
The principles which have guided me will appear partly from what I have said already, partly from the detailed discussion in Part II. I must here specially mention the formula I put forward in 1908, and which since then has been very often quoted by Idists:
That international language is best which in every point offers the greatest facility to the greatest number (modelled, of course, on Hutcheson's and Bentham's famous dictum: That action is best which accomplishes the greatest happiness for the greatest numbers).
This does not mean, as some would have it, that we should take Chinese as our interlanguage, because that language is known to the greatest number of men: for while written ideographic Chinese is the same all over China (though only partly known to most Chinese), the same is not true of spoken Chinese, which lives in several varieties. Besides, Chinese with its tone system would offer unsurmountable difficulties to everybody else. But I cannot object to my formula being taken to refer only to Europeans and those inhabitants of the other continents who are either of European extraction or whose culture is based on European civilization. If the principle is understood in this way I think it will prove a safe guide in most cases, though it is evident that it is impossible mathematically to calculate the comparative ease of different forms, except with regard to parts of the vocabulary.
It is, however, very important to remember that the facility of which we speak here is not merely the superficial facility, with which a printed message can be understood at first sight - that is something, but not everything. For an interlanguage to be really useful it must be easy not only to the reader, but also to the intending writer and speaker, and this implies a good deal more. An irregularly formed word may be extremely easy of comprehension to anyone who has it in his own language or who knows it from another language with which he happens to be familiar, but it may at the same time be very difficult to anybody else, much more difficult than a regular formation employing a suffix he has learnt once for all and which can be applied to a number of words. Our principle thus makes for the greatest possible regularity - though one or two small exceptions, if well motived and easily remembered, should not alarm us: as a matter of fact, not a single constructed language is totally exempt from exceptions, not even Esperanto, in spite of the boastings of its adherents.¹
An interlanguage can thus be made many times more easy that any of the national languages. The latter may be compared to old picturesque towns with irregularly winding streets having unsystematic names, while are interlanguages are like American cities, whose streets are straight lines intersecting one another at right angles and are numbered instead of named. Or we may say that while a national language is like a stroll between trees on small footpaths, an interlanguage is like rushing along in a railway carriage or motor-car on a good straight broad road. In the latter case one gets rapidly along and reaches tracts that are beyond the reach of the pedestrian, but one cannot enjoy all the delicate shades of beauty which a leisurely walk will reveal to one, and it is impossible to acquire the same intimate familiarity that is to be obtained by repeated strolls. Each method of locomotion has its advantages, and nothing hinders us from combining both. In the same way an interlanguage will never make national languages superfluous, and can never afford the delight felt by all serious students of foreign languages - not to mention the fact that the study of one of these opens up access to that part of its literature which cannot be fully enjoyed in translations. In comparing the value of the two kinds of language study we should thus take into consideration first that one of them requires say ten or twenty times as long a time as the other, secondly that the one gives access to more valuable literature and to the whole national life of a foreign country, but that on the other hand the other puts one in contact with inhabitants of several countries at once. The advantages of the study of the interlanguage will of course be multiplied many times over, when it has spread much more than at present, when, consequently, much valuable scientific and general literature is translated into it, and will be even greater when the interlanguage is taught everywhere as "the second language to everybody."
But that, the reader will say, is a far-off dream. Quite so, but then, as Lowell says, "most of the best things we now possess began by being dreams."
¹ La is not inflected in case and number, like the other adjuncts in -a. Not every adverb ends in -e; and -au, which evidently was meant as a kind of prepositional ending, is used very unsystematically. The genitive in -s (kies) is found only very sparingly and forms an exception to the usual manner of expressing the genitive relation. When multe da or kelke da is used, no sign for the accusative can be added.
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Calculate profits by comparing total revenue and total cost
Identify profits and losses with the average cost curve
Determine the price at which a firm should continue producing in the short run
A perfectly competitive firm has only one major decision to make—namely, what quantity to produce. To understand why this is so, consider a different way of writing out the basic definition of profit:
Since a perfectly competitive firm must accept the price for its output as determined by the product’s market demand and supply, it cannot choose the price it charges. This is already determined in the profit equation, and so the perfectly competitive firm can sell any number of units at exactly the same price. It implies that the firm faces a perfectly elastic demand curve for its product: buyers are willing to buy any number of units of output from the firm at the market price. When the perfectly competitive firm chooses what quantity to produce, then this quantity—along with the prices prevailing in the market for output and inputs—will determine the firm’s total revenue, total costs, and ultimately, level of profits.
Determining the Highest Profit by Comparing Total Revenue and Total Cost
A perfectly competitive firm can sell as large a quantity as it wishes, as long as it accepts the prevailing market price. Total revenue is going to increase as the firm sells more, depending on the price of the product and the number of units sold. If you increase the number of units sold at a given price, then total revenue will increase. If the price of the product increases for every unit sold, then total revenue also increases. As an example of how a perfectly competitive firm decides what quantity to produce, consider the case of a small farmer who produces raspberries and sells them frozen for $4 per pack. Sales of one pack of raspberries will bring in $4, two packs will be $8, three packs will be $12, and so on. If, for example, the price of frozen raspberries doubles to $8 per pack, then sales of one pack of raspberries will be $8, two packs will be $16, three packs will be $24, and so on.
Total revenue and total costs for the raspberry farm, broken down into fixed and variable costs, are shown in [link] and also appear in Figure C08 001. The horizontal axis shows the quantity of frozen raspberries produced in packs; the vertical axis shows both total revenue and total costs, measured in dollars. The total cost curve intersects with the vertical axis at a value that shows the level of fixed costs, and then slopes upward. All these cost curves follow the same characteristics as the curves covered in the Cost and Industry Structure chapter.
Total Cost and Total Revenue at the Raspberry Farm
Based on its total revenue and total cost curves, a perfectly competitive firm like the raspberry farm can calculate the quantity of output that will provide the highest level of profit. At any given quantity, total revenue minus total cost will equal profit. One way to determine the most profitable quantity to produce is to see at what quantity total revenue exceeds total cost by the largest amount. On Figure C08 001, the vertical gap between total revenue and total cost represents either profit (if total revenues are greater that total costs at a certain quantity) or losses (if total costs are greater that total revenues at a certain quantity). In this example, total costs will exceed total revenues at output levels from 0 to 40, and so over this range of output, the firm will be making losses. At output levels from 50 to 80, total revenues exceed total costs, so the firm is earning profits. But then at an output of 90 or 100, total costs again exceed total revenues and the firm is making losses. Total profits appear in the final column of [link]. The highest total profits in the table, as in the figure that is based on the table values, occur at an output of 70–80, when profits will be $56.
A higher price would mean that total revenue would be higher for every quantity sold. A lower price would mean that total revenue would be lower for every quantity sold. What happens if the price drops low enough so that the total revenue line is completely below the total cost curve; that is, at every level of output, total costs are higher than total revenues? In this instance, the best the firm can do is to suffer losses. But a profit-maximizing firm will prefer the quantity of output where total revenues come closest to total costs and thus where the losses are smallest.
(Later we will see that sometimes it will make sense for the firm to shutdown, rather than stay in operation producing output.)
Firms often do not have the necessary data they need to draw a complete total cost curve for all levels of production. They cannot be sure of what total costs would look like if they, say, doubled production or cut production in half, because they have not tried it. Instead, firms experiment. They produce a slightly greater or lower quantity and observe how profits are affected. In economic terms, this practical approach to maximizing profits means looking at how changes in production affect marginal revenue and marginal cost.
Figure C08 002 presents the marginal revenue and marginal cost curves based on the total revenue and total cost in [link]. The marginal revenue curve shows the additional revenue gained from selling one more unit. As mentioned before, a firm in perfect competition faces a perfectly elastic demand curve for its product—that is, the firm’s demand curve is a horizontal line drawn at the market price level. This also means that the firm’s marginal revenue curve is the same as the firm’s demand curve: Every time a consumer demands one more unit, the firm sells one more unit and revenue goes up by exactly the same amount equal to the market price. In this example, every time a pack of frozen raspberries is sold, the firm’s revenue increases by $4. [link] shows an example of this. This condition only holds for price taking firms in perfect competition where:
Notice that marginal revenue does not change as the firm produces more output. That is because the price is determined by supply and demand and does not change as the farmer produces more (keeping in mind that, due to the relative small size of each firm, increasing their supply has no impact on the total market supply where price is determined).
Since a perfectly competitive firm is a price taker, it can sell whatever quantity it wishes at the market-determined price. Marginal cost, the cost per additional unit sold, is calculated by dividing the change in total cost by the change in quantity. The formula for marginal cost is:
Ordinarily, marginal cost changes as the firm produces a greater quantity.
In the raspberry farm example, shown in Figure C08 002, Figure C08 015 and [link], marginal cost at first declines as production increases from 10 to 20 to 30 packs of raspberries—which represents the area of increasing marginal returns that is not uncommon at low levels of production. But then marginal costs start to increase, displaying the typical pattern of diminishing marginal returns. If the firm is producing at a quantity where MR > MC, like 40 or 50 packs of raspberries, then it can increase profit by increasing output because the marginal revenue is exceeding the marginal cost. If the firm is producing at a quantity where MC > MR, like 90 or 100 packs, then it can increase profit by reducing output because the reductions in marginal cost will exceed the reductions in marginal revenue. The firm’s profit-maximizing choice of output will occur where MR = MC (or at a choice close to that point). You will notice that what occurs on the production side is exemplified on the cost side. This is referred to as duality.
Marginal Revenues and Marginal Costs at the Raspberry Farm
In this example, the marginal revenue and marginal cost curves cross at a price of $4 and a quantity of 80 produced. If the farmer started out producing at a level of 60, and then experimented with increasing production to 70, marginal revenues from the increase in production would exceed marginal costs—and so profits would rise. The farmer has an incentive to keep producing. From a level of 70 to 80, marginal cost and marginal revenue are equal so profit doesn’t change. If the farmer then experimented further with increasing production from 80 to 90, he would find that marginal costs from the increase in production are greater than marginal revenues, and so profits would decline.
The profit-maximizing choice for a perfectly competitive firm will occur where marginal revenue is equal to marginal cost—that is, where MR = MC. A profit-seeking firm should keep expanding production as long as MR > MC. But at the level of output where MR = MC, the firm should recognize that it has achieved the highest possible level of economic profits. (In the example above, the profit maximizing output level is between 70 and 80 units of output, but the firm will not know they’ve maximized profit until they reach 80, where MR = MC.) Expanding production into the zone where MR < MC will only reduce economic profits. Because the marginal revenue received by a perfectly competitive firm is equal to the price P, so that P = MR, the profit-maximizing rule for a perfectly competitive firm can also be written as a recommendation to produce at the quantity where P = MC.
Profits and Losses with the Average Cost Curve
Does maximizing profit (producing where MR = MC) imply an actual economic profit? The answer depends on the relationship between price and average total cost. If the price that a firm charges is higher than its average cost of production for that quantity produced, then the firm will earn profits. Conversely, if the price that a firm charges is lower than its average cost of production, the firm will suffer losses. You might think that, in this situation, the farmer may want to shut down immediately. Remember, however, that the firm has already paid for fixed costs, such as equipment, so it may continue to produce and incur a loss. Figure C08 014illustrates three situations: (a) where price intersects marginal cost at a level above the average cost curve, (b) where price intersects marginal cost at a level equal to the average cost curve, and (c) where price intersects marginal cost at a level below the average cost curve.
First consider a situation where the price is equal to $5 for a pack of frozen raspberries. The rule for a profit-maximizing perfectly competitive firm is to produce the level of output where Price= MR = MC, so the raspberry farmer will produce a quantity of 90, which is labeled as e in Figure C08 014 (a). Remember that the area of a rectangle is equal to its base multiplied by its height. The farm’s total revenue at this price will be shown by the large shaded rectangle from the origin over to a quantity of 90 packs (the base) up to point E' (the height), over to the price of $5, and back to the origin. The average cost of producing 80 packs is shown by point C or about $3.50. Total costs will be the quantity of 80 times the average cost of $3.50, which is shown by the area of the rectangle from the origin to a quantity of 90, up to point C, over to the vertical axis and down to the origin. It should be clear from examining the two rectangles that total revenue is greater than total cost. Thus, profits will be the blue shaded rectangle on top.
Or, it can be calculated as:
Now consider Figure C08 014 (b), where the price has fallen to $3.00 for a pack of frozen raspberries. Again, the perfectly competitive firm will choose the level of output where Price = MR = MC, but in this case, the quantity produced will be 70. At this price and output level, where the marginal cost curve is crossing the average cost curve, the price received by the firm is exactly equal to its average cost of production.
The farm’s total revenue at this price will be shown by the large shaded rectangle from the origin over to a quantity of 70 packs (the base) up to point E (the height), over to the price of $3, and back to the origin. The average cost of producing 70 packs is shown by point C’. Total costs will be the quantity of 70 times the average cost of $3.00, which is shown by the area of the rectangle from the origin to a quantity of 70, up to point E, over to the vertical axis and down to the origin. It should be clear from that the rectangles for total revenue and total cost are the same. Thus, the firm is making zero profit. The calculations are as follows:
Or, it can be calculated as:
In Figure C08 014 (c), the market price has fallen still further to $2.00 for a pack of frozen raspberries. At this price, marginal revenue intersects marginal cost at a quantity of 50. The farm’s total revenue at this price will be shown by the large shaded rectangle from the origin over to a quantity of 50 packs (the base) up to point E” (the height), over to the price of $2, and back to the origin. The average cost of producing 50 packs is shown by point C” or about $3.30. Total costs will be the quantity of 50 times the average cost of $3.30, which is shown by the area of the rectangle from the origin to a quantity of 50, up to point C”, over to the vertical axis and down to the origin. It should be clear from examining the two rectangles that total revenue is less than total cost. Thus, the firm is losing money and the loss (or negative profit) will be the rose-shaded rectangle.
If the market price received by a perfectly competitive firm leads it to produce at a quantity where the price is greater than average cost, the firm will earn profits. If the price received by the firm causes it to produce at a quantity where price equals average cost, which occurs at the minimum point of the AC curve, then the firm earns zero profits. Finally, if the price received by the firm leads it to produce at a quantity where the price is less than average cost, the firm will earn losses. This is summarized in [link].
If...
Then...
The possibility that a firm may earn losses raises a question: Why can the firm not avoid losses by shutting down and not producing at all? The answer is that shutting down can reduce variable costs to zero, but in the short run, the firm has already paid for fixed costs. As a result, if the firm produces a quantity of zero, it would still make losses because it would still need to pay for its fixed costs. So, when a firm is experiencing losses, it must face a question: should it continue producing or should it shut down?
As an example, consider the situation of the Yoga Center, which has signed a contract to rent space that costs $10,000 per month. If the firm decides to operate, its marginal costs for hiring yoga teachers is $15,000 for the month. If the firm shuts down, it must still pay the rent, but it would not need to hire labor. [link] shows three possible scenarios. In the first scenario, the Yoga Center does not have any clients, and therefore does not make any revenues, in which case it faces losses of $10,000 equal to the fixed costs. In the second scenario, the Yoga Center has clients that earn the center revenues of $10,000 for the month, but ultimately experiences losses of $15,000 due to having to hire yoga instructors to cover the classes. In the third scenario, the Yoga Center earns revenues of $20,000 for the month, but experiences losses of $5,000.
In all three cases, the Yoga Center loses money. In all three cases, when the rental contract expires in the long run, assuming revenues do not improve, the firm should exit this business. In the short run, though, the decision varies depending on the level of losses and whether the firm can cover its variable costs. In scenario 1, the center does not have any revenues, so hiring yoga teachers would increase variable costs and losses, so it should shut down and only incur its fixed costs. In scenario 2, the center’s losses are greater because it does not make enough revenue to offset the increased variable costs plus fixed costs, so it should shut down immediately. If price is below the minimum average variable cost, the firm must shut down. In contrast, in scenario 3 the revenue that the center can earn is high enough that the losses diminish when it remains open, so the center should remain open in the short run.
Should the Yoga Center Shut Down Now or Later?
If the center shuts down now, revenues are zero but it will not incur any variable costs and would only need to pay fixed costs of $10,000.
The center earns revenues of $10,000, and variable costs are $15,000. The center should shut down now.
The center earns revenues of $20,000, and variable costs are $15,000. The center should continue in business.
This example suggests that the key factor is whether a firm can earn enough revenues to cover at least its variable costs by remaining open. Let’s return now to our raspberry farm. Figure C08 012 illustrates this lesson by adding the average variable cost curve to the marginal cost and average cost curves. At a price of $2.20 per pack, as shown in Figure C08 012 (a), the farm produces at a level of 50. It is making losses of $56 (as explained earlier), but price is above average variable cost and so the firm continues to operate. However, if the price declined to $1.80 per pack, as shown in Figure C08 012 (b), and if the firm applied its rule of producing where P = MR = MC, it would produce a quantity of 40. This price is below average variable cost for this level of output. If the farmer cannot pay workers (the variable costs), then it has to shut down. At this price and output, total revenues would be $72 (quantity of 40 times price of $1.80) and total cost would be $144, for overall losses of $72. If the farm shuts down, it must pay only its fixed costs of $62, so shutting down is preferable to selling at a price of $1.80 per pack.
Looking at [link], if the price falls below $2.05, the minimum average variable cost, the firm must shut down.
Cost of Production for the Raspberry Farm
The intersection of the average variable cost curve and the marginal cost curve, which shows the price where the firm would lack enough revenue to cover its variable costs, is called the shutdown point. If the perfectly competitive firm can charge a price above the shutdown point, then the firm is at least covering its average variable costs. It is also making enough revenue to cover at least a portion of fixed costs, so it should limp ahead even if it is making losses in the short run, since at least those losses will be smaller than if the firm shuts down immediately and incurs a loss equal to total fixed costs. However, if the firm is receiving a price below the price at the shutdown point, then the firm is not even covering its variable costs. In this case, staying open is making the firm’s losses larger, and it should shut down immediately. To summarize, if:
The average cost and average variable cost curves divide the marginal cost curve into three segments, as shown in Figure C08 008. At the market price, which the perfectly competitive firm accepts as given, the profit-maximizing firm chooses the output level where price or marginal revenue, which are the same thing for a perfectly competitive firm, is equal to marginal cost: P = MR = MC.
First consider the upper zone, where prices are above the level where marginal cost (MC) crosses average cost (AC) at the zero profit point. At any price above that level, the firm will earn profits in the short run. If the price falls exactly on the zero profit point where the MC and AC curves cross, then the firm earns zero profits. If a price falls into the zone between the zero profit point, where MC crosses AC, and the shutdown point, where MC crosses AVC, the firm will be making losses in the short run—but since the firm is more than covering its variable costs, the losses are smaller than if the firm shut down immediately. Finally, consider a price at or below the shutdown point where MC crosses AVC. At any price like this one, the firm will shut down immediately, because it cannot even cover its variable costs.
Marginal Cost and the Firm’s Supply Curve
For a perfectly competitive firm, the marginal cost curve is identical to the firm’s supply curve starting from the minimum point on the average variable cost curve. To understand why this perhaps surprising insight holds true, first think about what the supply curve means. A firm checks the market price and then looks at its supply curve to decide what quantity to produce. Now, think about what it means to say that a firm will maximize its profits by producing at the quantity where P = MC. This rule means that the firm checks the market price, and then looks at its marginal cost to determine the quantity to produce—and makes sure that the price is greater than the minimum average variable cost. In other words, the marginal cost curve above the minimum point on the average variable cost curve becomes the firm’s supply curve.
Watch this video that addresses how drought in the United States can impact food prices across the world. (Note that the story on the drought is the second one in the news report; you need to let the video play through the first story in order to watch the story on the drought.)
As discussed in the chapter on Demand and Supply, many of the reasons that supply curves shift relate to underlying changes in costs. For example, a lower price of key inputs or new technologies that reduce production costs cause supply to shift to the right; in contrast, bad weather or added government regulations can add to costs of certain goods in a way that causes supply to shift to the left. These shifts in the firm’s supply curve can also be interpreted as shifts of the marginal cost curve. A shift in costs of production that increases marginal costs at all levels of output—and shifts MC to the left—will cause a perfectly competitive firm to produce less at any given market price. Conversely, a shift in costs of production that decreases marginal costs at all levels of output will shift MC to the right and as a result, a competitive firm will choose to expand its level of output at any given price. The following Work It Out feature will walk you through an example.
At What Price Should the Firm Continue Producing in the Short Run?
To determine the short-run economic condition of a firm in perfect competition, follow the steps outlined below. Use the data shown in [link].
Step 1. Determine the cost structure for the firm. For a given total fixed costs and variable costs, calculate total cost, average variable cost, average total cost, and marginal cost. Follow the formulas given in the Cost and Industry Structure chapter. These calculations are shown in [link].
Step 2. Determine the market price that the firm receives for its product. This should be given information, as the firm in perfect competition is a price taker. With the given price, calculate total revenue as equal to price multiplied by quantity for all output levels produced. In this example, the given price is $30. You can see that in the second column of [link].
Step 3. Calculate profits as total cost subtracted from total revenue, as shown in [link].
Step 4. To find the profit-maximizing output level, look at the Marginal Cost column (at every output level produced), as shown in [link], and determine where it is equal to the market price. The output level where price equals the marginal cost is the output level that maximizes profits.
Step 5. Once you have determined the profit-maximizing output level (in this case, output quantity 5), you can look at the amount of profits made (in this case, $40).
Step 6. If the firm is making economic losses, the firm needs to determine whether it produces the output level where price equals marginal revenue and equals marginal cost or it shuts down and only incurs its fixed costs.
Step 7. For the output level where marginal revenue is equal to marginal cost, check if the market price is greater than the average variable cost of producing that output level.
If P > AVC but P < ATC, then the firm continues to produce in the short-run, making economic losses.
If P < AVC, then the firm stops producing and only incurs its fixed costs.
As a perfectly competitive firm produces a greater quantity of output, its total revenue steadily increases at a constant rate determined by the given market price. Profits will be highest (or losses will be smallest) at the quantity of output where total revenues exceed total costs by the greatest amount (or where total revenues fall short of total costs by the smallest amount). Alternatively, profits will be highest where marginal revenue, which is price for a perfectly competitive firm, is equal to marginal cost. If the market price faced by a perfectly competitive firm is above average cost at the profit-maximizing quantity of output, then the firm is making profits. If the market price is below average cost at the profit-maximizing quantity of output, then the firm is making losses.
If the market price is equal to average cost at the profit-maximizing level of output, then the firm is making zero profits. The point where the marginal cost curve crosses the average cost curve, at the minimum of the average cost curve, is called the “zero profit point.” If the market price faced by a perfectly competitive firm is below average variable cost at the profit-maximizing quantity of output, then the firm should shut down operations immediately. If the market price faced by a perfectly competitive firm is above average variable cost, but below average cost, then the firm should continue producing in the short run, but exit in the long run. The point where the marginal cost curve crosses the average variable cost curve is called the shutdown point.
Look at the table below. What would happen to the firm’s profits if the market price increases to $6 per pack of raspberries?
Holding total cost constant, profits at every output level would increase.
Suppose that the market price increases to $6, as shown in [link]. What would happen to the profit-maximizing output level?
When the market price increases, marginal revenue increases. The firm would then increase production up to the point where the new price equals marginal cost, at a quantity of 90.
Explain in words why a profit-maximizing firm will not choose to produce at a quantity where marginal cost exceeds marginal revenue.
If marginal costs exceeds marginal revenue, then the firm will reduce its profits for every additional unit of output it produces. Profit would be greatest if it reduces output to where MR = MC.
A firm’s marginal cost curve above the average variable cost curve is equal to the firm’s individual supply curve. This means that every time a firm receives a price from the market it will be willing to supply the amount of output where the price equals marginal cost. What happens to the firm’s individual supply curve if marginal costs increase?
The firm will be willing to supply fewer units at every price level. In other words, the firm’s individual supply curve decreases and shifts to the left.
How does a perfectly competitive firm decide what price to charge?
What prevents a perfectly competitive firm from seeking higher profits by increasing the price that it charges?
How does a perfectly competitive firm calculate total revenue?
Briefly explain the reason for the shape of a marginal revenue curve for a perfectly competitive firm.
What two rules does a perfectly competitive firm apply to determine its profit-maximizing quantity of output?
How does the average cost curve help to show whether a firm is making profits or losses?
What two lines on a cost curve diagram intersect at the zero-profit point?
Should a firm shut down immediately if it is making losses?
How does the average variable cost curve help a firm know whether it should shut down immediately?
What two lines on a cost curve diagram intersect at the shutdown point?
Your company operates in a perfectly competitive market. You have been told that advertising can help you increase your sales in the short run. Would you create an aggressive advertising campaign for your product?
Since a perfectly competitive firm can sell as much as it wishes at the market price, why can the firm not simply increase its profits by selling an extremely high quantity?
The AAA Aquarium Co. sells aquariums for $20 each. Fixed costs of production are $20. The total variable costs are $20 for one aquarium, $25 for two units, $35 for the three units, $50 for four units, and $80 for five units. In the form of a table, calculate total revenue, marginal revenue, total cost, and marginal cost for each output level (one to five units). What is the profit-maximizing quantity of output? On one diagram, sketch the total revenue and total cost curves. On another diagram, sketch the marginal revenue and marginal cost curves.
Perfectly competitive firm Doggies Paradise Inc. sells winter coats for dogs. Dog coats sell for $72 each. The fixed costs of production are $100. The total variable costs are $64 for one unit, $84 for two units, $114 for three units, $184 for four units, and $270 for five units. In the form of a table, calculate total revenue, marginal revenue, total cost and marginal cost for each output level (one to five units). On one diagram, sketch the total revenue and total cost curves. On another diagram, sketch the marginal revenue and marginal cost curves. What is the profit maximizing quantity?
A computer company produces affordable, easy-to-use home computer systems and has fixed costs of $250. The marginal cost of producing computers is $700 for the first computer, $250 for the second, $300 for the third, $350 for the fourth, $400 for the fifth, $450 for the sixth, and $500 for the seventh.
Create a table that shows the company’s output, total cost, marginal cost, average cost, variable cost, and average variable cost.
At what price is the zero-profit point? At what price is the shutdown point?
If the company sells the computers for $500, is it making a profit or a loss? How big is the profit or loss? Sketch a graph with AC, MC, and AVC curves to illustrate your answer and show the profit or loss.
If the firm sells the computers for $300, is it making a profit or a loss? How big is the profit or loss? Sketch a graph with AC, MC, and AVC curves to illustrate your answer and show the profit or loss.
(cell-to-cell channels) are channels in which small ions and molecules may pass between the interiors of communicating cells. a cell-to-cell channel is composed of 12 molecules of connexin, which associate to form two 6-membered connexons.
The Heavenly Stems (HS) and Earthly Branches (EB) of the Year, Month and Day of 1986 in the Hsia Calendar, from January (Month =1) to December (Month=12).
This page contains notes about development of the book.
All headers and titles, except the title of the book itself, should use sentence case.
The book should be self-contained, but it's fine to add links to other books or Wikipedia, as long as these links are only used for supplementary material.
In Arabic, if one wants to ask "why" in a verbal phrase you say limadha (dh sounds like the "th" in "The")
In Arabic, if one wants to ask "why" in a non-verbal phrase you ask lima
A terminal is a place where a wire comes out of an electrical component.
Terminal relations for the 2 wire devices studied so far (resistors, capacitors and inductors), describe the voltage across the two terminals and the current entering and leaving the terminals (which is always the same).
The terminal relations for a resistor are
The terminal relations for a capacitor are
The terminal relations for an inductor are
A power supply doesn't have a terminal relationship or equation relating current and voltage. Either the current is constant (current supply) or voltage is constant (voltage supply). The power is varied depending upon what the circuit asks for.
One of the best places to build up your intuition or build your own animated circuit simulations is at falstad
(The following text is taken from Wikipedia)
The Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union, also the Articles of Confederation, was the governing constitution of the alliance of thirteen independent and sovereign states styled "United States of America." The Article's ratification (proposed in 1777) was completed in 1782, legally uniting the states by compact into the "United States of America" as a union with a confederation government. Under the Articles (and the succeeding Constitution) the states retained sovereignty over all governmental functions not specifically deputed to the confederation.
The final draft of the Articles was written in the summer of 1777 and adopted by the Second Continental Congress on November 15, 1777 in York, Pennsylvania after a year of debate. In practice the final draft of the Articles served as the de facto system of government used by the Congress ("the United States in Congress assembled") until it became de jure by final ratification on March 1, 1781; at which point Congress became the Congress of the Confederation. The Articles set the rules for operations of the "United States" confederation. The confederation was capable of making war, negotiating diplomatic agreements, and resolving issues regarding the western territories; it could mint coins and borrow inside and outside the United States. An important element of the Articles was that Article XIII stipulated that "their provisions shall be inviolably observed by every state" and "the Union shall be perpetual." This article was put to the test in the American Civil War.
The Articles were created by the chosen representatives of the states in the Second Continental Congress out of a perceived need to have "a plan of confederacy for securing the freedom, sovereignty, and independence of the United States." Although serving a crucial role in the attainment of nationhood for the thirteen states, a group of reformers, known as "federalists", felt that the Articles lacked the necessary provisions for a sufficiently effective government. Fundamentally, a federation was sought to replace the confederation. The key criticism by those who favored a more powerful central state (i.e. the federalists) was that the government (i.e. the Congress of the Confederation) lacked taxing authority; it had to request funds from the states. Another criticism of the Articles was that they did not strike the right balance between large and small states in the legislative decision making process. Due to its one-state, one-vote plank, the larger states were expected to contribute more but had only one vote. The Articles were replaced by the United States Constitution on June 21, 1788.
The political push for the colonies to increase cooperation began in the French and Indian Wars in the mid 1750s. The opening of the American Revolutionary War in 1775 induced the various states to cooperate in seceding from the British Empire. The Second Continental Congress starting 1775 acted as the confederation organ that ran the war. Congress presented the Articles for enactment by the states in 1777, while prosecuting the American Revolutionary war against the Kingdom of Great Britain.
The articles can always be candidly reviewed under a sense of the difficulty of combining in one general system the various sentiments and interests of a continent divided into so many sovereign and independent communities, under a conviction of the absolute necessity of uniting all our councils and all our strength, to maintain and defend our common liberties...[1]
The document could not become officially effective until it was ratified by all of the thirteen colonies. The first state to ratify was Virginia on December 16, 1777. [2] The process dragged on for several years, stalled by the refusal of some states to rescind their claims to land in the West. Maryland was the last holdout; it refused to go along until Virginia and New York agreed to cede their claims in the Ohio River valley. A little over three years passed before Maryland's ratification on March 1, 1781.
Even though the Articles of Confederation and the Constitution were established by many of the same people, the two documents were very different. The original five-paged Articles contained thirteen articles, a conclusion, and a signatory section. The following list contains short summaries of each of the thirteen articles.
Establishes the name of the confederation as "The United States of America."
Asserts the precedence of the separate states over the confederation government, i.e. "Each state retains its sovereignty, freedom, and independence, and every power, jurisdiction, and right, which is not by this Confederation expressly delegated."
Establishes the United States as a league of states united ". . . for their common defense, the security of their liberties, and their mutual and general welfare, binding themselves to assist each other, against all force offered to, or attacks made upon them . . . ."
Establishes freedom of movement–anyone can pass freely between states, excluding "paupers, vagabonds, and fugitives from justice." All people are entitled to the rights established by the state into which he travels. If a crime is committed in one state and the perpetrator flees to another state, he will be extradited to and tried in the state in which the crime was committed.
Allocates one vote in the Congress of the Confederation (United States in Congress Assembled) to each state, which was entitled to a delegation of between two and seven members. Members of Congress were appointed by state legislatures; individuals could not serve more than three out of any six years.
Only the central government is allowed to conduct foreign relations and to declare war. No states may have navies or standing armies, or engage in war, without permission of Congress (although the state militias are encouraged).
When an army is raised for common defense, colonels and military ranks below colonel will be named by the state legislatures.
Expenditures by the United States will be paid by funds raised by state legislatures, and apportioned to the states based on the real property values of each.
Defines the powers of the central government: to declare war, to set weights and measures (including coins), and for Congress to serve as a final court for disputes between states.
Requires nine states to approve the admission of a new state into the confederacy; pre-approves Canada, if it applies for membership.
Reaffirms that the Confederation accepts war debt incurred by Congress before the Articles.
Declares that the Articles are perpetual, and can only be altered by approval of Congress with ratification by all the state legislatures.
Still at war with the Kingdom of Great Britain, the colonists were reluctant to establish another powerful national government. Jealously guarding their new independence, members of the Continental Congress created a loosely-structured unicameral legislature that protected the liberty of the individual states. While calling on Congress to regulate military and monetary affairs, for example, the Articles of Confederation provided no mechanism to force the states to comply with requests for troops or revenue. At times, this left the military in a precarious position, as George Washington wrote in a 1781 letter to the governor of Massachusetts, John Hancock.
The Treaty of Paris (1783), which ended hostilities with Great Britain, languished in Congress for months because state representatives failed to attend sessions of the national legislature. Yet Congress had no power to enforce attendance. Writing to George Clinton in September 1783, George Washington complained:
Congress have come to no determination yet respecting the Peace Establishment nor am I able to say when they will. I have lately had a conference with a Committee on this subject, and have reiterated my former opinions, but it appears to me that there is not a sufficient representation to discuss Great National points.[3]
The Articles supported the Congressional direction of the Continental Army, and allowed the 13 states to present a unified front when dealing with the European powers. As a tool to build a centralized war-making government, they were largely a failure, but since guerrilla warfare was correct strategy in a war against the British Empire's army, this "failure" succeeded in winning independence.[4]
Under the articles, Congress could make decisions, but had no power to enforce them. There was a requirement for unanimous approval before any modifications could be made to the Articles. Because the majority of lawmaking rested with the states, the central government was also kept limited.
Congress was denied the power of taxation: it could only request money from the states. The states did not generally comply with the requests in full, leaving the confederation chronically short of funds. Congress was also denied the power to regulate commerce, and as a result, the states fought over trade as well.[citation needed] The states and the national congress had both incurred debts during the war, and how to pay the debts became a major issue. Some states paid off their debts; however, the centralizers favored federal assumption of states' debts.
Nevertheless, the Congress of the Confederation did take two actions with lasting impact. The Land Ordinance of 1785 established the general land survey and ownership provisions used throughout later American expansion. The Northwest Ordinance of 1787 noted the agreement of the original states to give up western land claims and cleared the way for the entry of new states.
Once the war was won, the Continental Army was largely disbanded. A very small national force was maintained to man frontier forts and protect against Indian attacks. Meanwhile, each of the states had an army (or militia), and 11 of them had navies. The wartime promises of bounties and land grants to be paid for service were not being met. In 1783, Washington defused the Newburgh conspiracy, but riots by unpaid Pennsylvania veterans forced the Congress to leave Philadelphia temporarily.[5]
The Second Continental Congress approved the Articles for distribution to the states on November 15 1777. A copy was made for each state and one was kept by the Congress. The copies sent to the states for ratification were unsigned, and a cover letter had only the signatures of Henry Laurens and Charles Thomson, who were the President and Secretary to the Congress.
But, the Articles at that time were unsigned, and the date was blank. Congress began the signing process by examining their copy of the Articles on June 27 1778. They ordered a final copy prepared (the one in the National Archives), and that delegates should inform the secretary of their authority for ratification.
On July 9, 1778, the prepared copy was ready. They dated it, and began to sign. They also requested each of the remaining states to notify its delegation when ratification was completed. On that date, delegates present from New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, Pennsylvania, Virginia and South Carolina signed the Articles to indicate that their states had ratified. New Jersey, Delaware and Maryland could not, since their states had not ratified. North Carolina and Georgia also didn't sign that day, since their delegations were absent.
After the first signing, some delegates signed at the next meeting they attended. For example, John Wentworth of New Hampshire added his name on August 8. John Penn was the first of North Carolina's delegates to arrive (on July 10), and the delegation signed the Articles on July 21 1778.
The other states had to wait until they ratified the Articles and notified their Congressional delegation. Georgia signed on July 24, New Jersey on November 26, and Delaware on February 12 1779. Maryland refused to ratify the Articles until every state had ceded its western land claims.
The Act of the Maryland legislature to ratify the Articles of Confederation on February 2, 1781
On February 2, 1781, the much-awaited decision was taken by the Maryland General Assembly in Annapolis[6]. As the last piece of business during the afternoon Session, "among engrossed Bills" was "signed and sealed by Governor Thomas Sim Lee in the Senate Chamber, in the presence of the members of both Houses… an Act to empower the delegates of this state in Congress to subscribe and ratify the articles of confederation" and perpetual union among the states. The Senate then adjourned "to the first Monday in August next." The decision of Maryland to ratify the Articles was reported to the Continental Congress on February 12. The formal signing of the Articles by the Maryland delegates took place in Philadelphia at noon time on March 1, 1781 and was celebrated in the afternoon. With these events, the Articles entered into force and the United States came into being as a united, sovereign and national state.
Congress had debated the Articles for over a year and a half, and the ratification process had taken nearly three and a half years. Many participants in the original debates were no longer delegates, and some of the signers had only recently arrived. The Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union were signed by a group of men who were never present in the Congress at the same time.
The signers and the states they represented were:
New Hampshire: Josiah Bartlett and John Wentworth Jr.
Massachusetts Bay: John Hancock, Samuel Adams, Elbridge Gerry, Francis Dana, James Lovell, and Samuel Holten
Rhode Island and Providence Plantations: William Ellery, Henry Marchant, and John Collins
Connecticut: Roger Sherman¹, Samuel Huntington, Oliver Wolcott, Titus Hosmer, and Andrew Adams
New York: James Duane, Francis Lewis, William Duer, and Gouverneur Morris
New Jersey: John Witherspoon and Nathaniel Scudder
Pennsylvania:Robert Morris², Daniel Roberdeau, Jonathan Bayard Smith, William Clingan, and Joseph Reed
Delaware: Thomas McKean, John Dickinson³, and Nicholas Van Dyke
Maryland: John Hanson and Daniel Carroll³
Virginia: Richard Henry Lee, John Banister, Thomas Adams, John Harvie, and Francis Lightfoot Lee
North Carolina: John Penn, Cornelius Harnett, and John Williams
South Carolina: Henry Laurens, William Henry Drayton, John Mathews, Richard Hutson, and Thomas Heyward Jr.
Georgia: John Walton, Edward Telfair, and Edward Langworthy
¹ The only person to sign all four great state papers of the United States: the Articles of Association, the United States Declaration of Independence, the Articles of Confederation and the United States Constitution.
² One of only 2 people to sign three of the great state papers of the United States: the United States Declaration of Independence, the Articles of Confederation and the United States Constitution.
³ One of only 4 people to sign both the Articles of Confederation and the United States Constitution.
Richard Henry Lee (November 30, 1784 – November 6, 1785)
Arthur St. Clair (February 2, 1787 – November 4, 1787)
For a full list of Presidents of the Congress Assembled and Presidents under the two Continental Congresses before the Articles, see President of the Continental Congress.
In May 1786, Charles Pinckney of South Carolina proposed that Congress revise the Articles of Confederation. Recommended changes included granting Congress power over foreign and domestic commerce, and providing means for Congress to collect money from state treasuries. Unanimous approval was necessary to make the alterations, however, and Congress failed to reach a consensus.
In September, five states assembled in the Annapolis Convention to discuss adjustments that would improve commerce. Under their chairman, Alexander Hamilton, they invited state representatives to convene in Philadelphia to discuss improvements to the federal government. Although the states' representatives to the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia were only authorized to amend the Articles, the representatives held secret, closed-door sessions and wrote a new constitution. The new Constitution gave much more power to the central government, but characterization of the result is disputed. Historian Forrest McDonald, using the ideas of James Madison from Federalist 39, describes the change this way:
The constitutional reallocation of powers created a new form of government, unprecedented under the sun. Every previous national authority either had been centralized or else had been a confederation of sovereign states. The new American system was neither one nor the other; it was a mixture of both.[7]
Historian Ralph Ketcham comments on the opinions of Patrick Henry, George Mason, and other antifederalists who were not so eager to give up the local autonomy won by the revolution:
Antifederalists feared what Patrick Henry termed the "consolidated government" proposed by the new Constitution. They saw in Federalist hopes for commercial growth and international prestige only the lust of ambitious men for a "splendid empire" that, in the time-honored way of empires, would oppress the people with taxes, conscription, and military campaigns. Uncertain that any government over so vast a domain as the United States could be controlled by the people, Antifederalists saw in the enlarged powers of the general government only the familiar threats to the rights and liberties of the people.[8]
According to their own terms for modification (Article XIII), the Articles would still have been in effect until 1790, the year in which the last of the 13 states ratified the new Constitution. The Congress under the Articles continued to sit until November 1788,[9][10][11][12] overseeing the adoption of the new Constitution by the states, and setting elections.
Historians have given many reasons for the perceived need to replace the articles in 1787. Jillson and Wilson (1994) point to the financial weakness as well as the norms, rules and institutional structures of the Congress, and the propensity to divide along sectional lines.
Rakove (1988) identifies several factors that explain the collapse of the Confederation. The lack of compulsory direct taxation power was objectionable to those wanting a strong centralized state or expecting to benefit from such power. It could not collect customs after the war because tariffs were vetoed by Rhode Island. Rakove concludes that their failure to implement national measures "stemmed not from a heady sense of independence but rather from the enormous difficulties that all the states encountered in collecting taxes, mustering men, and gathering supplies from a war-weary populace."[13] The second group of factors Rakove identified derived from the substantive nature of the problems the Continental Congress confronted after 1783, especially the inability to create a strong foreign policy. Finally, the Confederation's lack of coercive power reduced the likelihood for profit to be made by political means, thus potential rulers were uninspired to seek power.
When the war ended in 1783, certain special interests had incentives to create a new "merchant state," much like the British state people had rebelled against. In particular, holders of war scrip and land speculators wanted a central government to pay off scrip at face value and to legalize western land holdings with disputed claims. Also, manufacturers wanted a high tariff as a barrier to foreign goods, but competition among states made this impossible without a central government.
The Articles are historically important for two major reasons: i) they were the first constitution or governing document for the United States of America and ii) they legally established a union of the thirteen founding states; a Perpetual Union. Early on, tensions developed surrounding the Union, not least because of the fact that with the US Constitution the basis of government was changed from that of confederation to federation. Thomas Jefferson and John C. Calhoun were in their time leading proponents of guaranteeing the constitutional rights of states in federal legislation. Over time, a legal view developed that if the union violated the constitutional rights of states they might rightfully seceed.[14] A significant tension in the 19th century surrounded the expansion of slavery (which was generally supported in agricultural Southern states and opposed in industrial Northern states). As the secessionist view gained support in the South, the opposing view in the North was that since the U.S. Constitution declared itself to be "a more perfect union" than the Articles, it too must be perpetual, and also could not be broken without the consent of the other states. This view was promoted by Daniel Webster and Abraham Lincoln. In 1861, these constitutional contracts were cited by President Lincoln against any claims by the seceding states that unilaterally withdrawing from the Union and taking federal property within those states was legal.[15]
The Congress established the Northwest Territory around the Great Lakes between 1784 and 1787. In 1787, Congress passed the Northwest Ordinance banning slavery in the new Territory. Congressional legislation divided the Territory into townships of six square miles each and provided for the sale of land to settlers. The Northwest Territory would eventually become the states of Ohio, Wisconsin, Indiana, Illinois and Michigan.
The Confederation faced several difficulties in its early years. Firstly, Congress became extremely dependent on the states for income. Also, states refused to require its citizens to pay debts to British merchants, straining relations with Great Britain. France prohibited Americans from using the important port of New Orleans, crippling American trade down the Mississippi river.
Due to the post-revolution economic woes, agitated by inflation, many worried of social instability. This was especially true for those in Massachusetts. The legislature's response to the shaky economy was to put emphasis on maintaining a sound currency by paying off the state debt through levying massive taxes. The tax burden hit those with moderate incomes dramatically. The average farmer paid a third of their annual income to these taxes from 1780 to 1786. Those who couldn't pay had their property foreclosed and were thrown into crowded prisons filled with other debtors.
But in the summer of 1786, a revolutionary war veteran named Daniel Shays began to organize western communities in Massachusetts to stop foreclosures, with force, by prohibiting the courts from holding their proceedings. Later that fall, Shays marched the newly formed "rebellion" into Springfield to stop the state supreme court from gathering. The state responded with troops sent to suppress the rebellion. After a failed attempt by the rebels to attack the Springfield arsenal, and other small skirmishes, the rebels retreated and then uprising collapsed. Shays retreated to Vermont by 1787.
While Daniel Shays was in hiding, the government condemned him to death on the charge of treason. Shays pleaded for his life in a petition which was finally granted by John Hancock on June 17, 1788. With the threat of treason behind him, Shays moved to New York and died September 25, 1825
Who was the first president of the United States? Ask any school child and they will readily tell you "George Washington." And of course, they would be correct—at least technically. Washington was inaugurated on April 30, 1789, and yet, the United States continually had functioning governments from as early as September 5, 1774, and operated as a confederated nation from as early as July 4, 1776. During that nearly fifteen-year interval, Congress—first the Continental Congress and then later the Confederation Congress—was always moderated by a duly elected president. This officer was known as the "President of the Continental Congress", and later as the "President of the United States, in Congress Assembled".
However, the office of President of the Continental Congress had very little relationship to the office of President of the United States beyond the name. The President of the United States is the head of the executive branch of government, while the President of the Continental Congress was merely the chair of a body that most resembled a legislature, although it possessed legislative, executive, and judicial powers. The following brief biographies profile these "forgotten presidents."
When delegates gathered in Philadelphia for the first Continental Congress, they promptly elected the former King's Attorney of Virginia as the moderator and president of their convocation. He was a propitious choice. He was a legal prodigy—having studied at the Inner Temple in London, served as his native colony's Attorney General, and tutored many of the most able men of the South at William and Mary College—including the young Patrick Henry. His home in Williamsburg was the gathering place for Virginia's legal and political gentry—and it remains a popular attraction in the restored colonial capital. He had served as a delegate in the Virginia House of Burgesses, and had been a commander under William Byrd in the colonial militia. He was a scholar of some renown—having begun a self-guided reading of the classics when he was thirteen. Despite suffering poor health served the Continental Congress as president twice, in 1774 from September 5 to October 21, and then again for a few days in 1775 from May 10 to May 23. He never lived to see independence, yet was numbered among the nation's most revered founders.
America's second elected president was one of the wealthiest planters in the South, the patriarch of the most powerful families anywhere in the nation. His public spirit was evident from an early age. He was a member of his state's Common House from 1744 to 1747. During the last two years he served as the Speaker. During 1755 he was the King's Commissioner of Indian Affairs. He was a member of the South Carolina Council from 1755 to 1770. His valor in the War with the Cherokees during 1760–1761 earned him wide recognition throughout the colonies—and demonstrated his leadership abilities while under pressure. He was elected as a delegate to the first session of the Continental Congress and when Peyton Randolph was forced to resign the presidency, his peers immediately turned to Middleton to complete the term. He served as the fledgling coalition's president from October 22, 1774, until Randolph was able to resume his duties briefly beginning on May 10, 1775. Afterward, he was a member of the Congressional Council of Safety and helped to establish the young nation's policy toward the encouragement and support of education. In February 1776 he resigned his political involvements in order to prepare his family and lands for what he believed was inevitable war—but he was replaced by his son Arthur who eventually became a signer of both the Declaration of Independence and the Articles of Confederation, served time as an English prisoner of war, and was twice elected Governor of his state.
The third president was a patriot, rebel leader, merchant who signed his name into immortality in giant strokes on the Declaration of Independence on July 4, 1776. The boldness of his signature has made it live in American minds as a perfect expression of the strength and freedom—and defiance—of the individual in the face of British tyranny. As President of the Continental Congress during two widely spaced terms—the first from May 24 1775 to October 30 1777 and the second from November 23, 1785, to June 5, 1786—Hancock was the presiding officer when the members approved the Declaration of Independence. Because of his position, it was his official duty to sign the document first—but not necessarily as dramatically as he did. Hancock figured prominently in another historic event—the battle at Lexington: British troops who fought there April 10, 1775, had known Hancock and Samuel Adams were in Lexington and had come there to capture these rebel leaders. And the two would have been captured, if they had not been warned by Paul Revere. As early as 1768, Hancock defied the British by refusing to pay customs charges on the cargo of one of his ships. One of Boston's wealthiest merchants, he was recognized by the citizens, as well as by the British, as a rebel leader—and was elected President of the first Massachusetts Provincial Congress. After he was chosen President of the Continental Congress in 1775, Hancock became known beyond the borders of Massachusetts, and, having served as colonel of the Massachusetts Governor's Guards he hoped to be named commander of the American forces—until John Adams nominated George Washington. In 1778 Hancock was commissioned Major General and took part in an unsuccessful campaign in Rhode Island. But it was as a political leader that his real distinction was earned—as the first Governor of Massachusetts, as President of Congress, and as President of the Massachusetts constitutional ratification convention. He helped win ratification in Massachusetts, gaining enough popular recognition to make him a contender for the newly created Presidency of the United States, but again he saw Washington gain the prize. Like his rival, George Washington, Hancock was a wealthy man who risked much for the cause of independence. He was the wealthiest New Englander supporting the patriotic cause, and, although he lacked the brilliance of John Adams or the capacity to inspire of Samuel Adams, he became one of the foremost leaders of the new nation—perhaps, in part, because he was willing to commit so much at such risk to the cause of freedom.
Henry Laurens, "father of our country"
The only American president ever to be held as a prisoner of war by a foreign power, Laurens was heralded after he was released as "the father of our country," by no less a personage than George Washington. He was of Huguenot extraction, his ancestors having come to America from France after the revocation of the Edict of Nantes made the Reformed faith illegal. Raised and educated for a life of mercantilism at his home in Charleston, he also had the opportunity to spend more than a year in continental travel. It was while in Europe that he began to write revolutionary pamphlets—gaining him renown as a patriot. He served as vice-president of South Carolina in 1776. He was then elected to the Continental Congress. He succeeded John Hancock as President of the newly independent but war beleaguered United States on November 1, 1777. He served until December 9, 1778, at which time he was appointed Ambassador to the Netherlands. Unfortunately for the cause of the young nation, he was captured by an English warship during his cross-Atlantic voyage and was confined to the Tower of London until the end of the war. After the Battle of Yorktown, the American government regained his freedom in a dramatic prisoner exchange—President Laurens for Lord Cornwallis. Ever the patriot, Laurens continued to serve his nation as one of the three representatives selected to negotiate terms at the Paris Peace Conference in 1782.
America's first Secretary of State, first Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, one of its first ambassadors, and author of some of the celebrated Federalist Papers, Jay was a Founding Father who, by a quirk of fate, missed signing the Declaration of Independence—at the time of the vote for independence and the signing, he had temporarily left the Continental Congress to serve in New York's revolutionary legislature. Nevertheless, he was chosen by his peers to succeed Henry Laurens as President of the United States—serving a term from December 10, 1778, to September 27, 1779. A conservative New York lawyer who was at first against the idea of independence for the colonies, the aristocratic Jay in 1776 turned into a patriot who was willing to give the next twenty-five years of his life to help establish the new nation. During those years, he won the regard of his peers as a dedicated and accomplished statesman and a man of unwavering principle. In the Continental Congress Jay prepared addresses to the people of Canada and Great Britain. In New York he drafted the State constitution and served as Chief Justice during the war. He was President of the Continental Congress before he undertook the difficult assignment, as ambassador, of trying to gain support and funds from Spain. After helping Franklin, Jefferson, Adams, and Laurens complete peace negotiations in Paris in 1783, Jay returned to become the first Secretary of State, called "Secretary of Foreign Affairs" under the Articles of Confederation. He negotiated valuable commercial treaties with Russia and Morocco, and dealt with the continuing controversy with Britain and Spain over the southern and western boundaries of the United States. He proposed that America and Britain establish a joint commission to arbitrate disputes that remained after the war—a proposal which, though not adopted, influenced the government's use of arbitration and diplomacy in settling later international problems. In this post Jay felt keenly the weakness of the Articles of Confederation and was one of the first to advocate a new governmental compact. He wrote five Federalist Papers supporting the Constitution, and he was a leader in the New York ratification convention. As first Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, Jay made the historic decision that a State could be sued by a citizen from another State, which led to the Eleventh Amendment to the Constitution. On a special mission to London he concluded the "Jay Treaty," which helped avert a renewal of hostilities with Britain but won little popular favor at home—and it is probably for this treaty that this Founding Father is best remembered.
An industrious youth who mastered his studies of the law without the advantage of a school, a tutor, or a master—borrowing books and snatching opportunities to read and research between odd jobs—he was one of the greatest self-made men among the Founders. He was also one of the greatest legal minds of the age—all the more remarkable for his lack of advantage as a youth. In 1764, in recognition of his obvious abilities and initiative, he was elected to the General Assembly of Connecticut. The next year he was chosen to serve on the Executive Council. In 1774 he was appointed Associate Judge of the Superior Court and, as a delegate to the Continental Congress, was acknowledged to be a legal scholar of some respect. He served in Congress for five consecutive terms, during the last of which he was elected President. He served in that office from September 28, 1779 until ill health forced him to resign on July 9, 1781. He returned to his home in Connecticut—and as he recuperated, he accepted more Councilor and Bench duties. He again took his seat in Congress in 1783, but left it to become Chief Justice of his state's Superior Court. He was elected Lieutenant Governor in 1785 and Governor in 1786. According to John Jay, he was "the most precisely trained Christian jurists ever to serve his country."
During his astonishingly varied fifty-year career in public life he held almost every possible position—from deputy county attorney to President of the United States under the Confederation. Besides signing the Declaration of Independence, he contributed significantly to the development and establishment of constitutional government in both his home state of Delaware and the nation. At the Stamp Act Congress he proposed the voting procedure that Congress adopted: that each colony, regardless of size or population, has one vote—the practice adopted by the Continental Congress and the Congress of the Confederation, and the principle of state equality manifest in the composition of the Senate. And as county judge in 1765, he defied the British by ordering his court to work only with documents that did not bear the hated stamps. In June 1776, at the Continental Congress, McKean joined with Caesar Rodney to register Delaware's approval of the Declaration of Independence, over the negative vote of the third Delaware delegate, George Read—permitting it to be "The unanimous declaration of the thirteen United States." And at a special Delaware convention, he drafted the constitution for that State. McKean also helped draft—and signed—the Articles of Confederation. It was during his tenure of service as President—from July 10, 1781 to November 4, 1782—when news arrived from General Washington in October 1781 that the British had surrendered following the Battle of Yorktown. As Chief Justice of the supreme court of Pennsylvania, he contributed to the establishment of the legal system in that State, and, in 1787, he strongly supported the Constitution at the Pennsylvania Ratification Convention, declaring it "the best the world has yet seen." At sixty-five, after over forty years of public service, McKean resigned from his post as Chief Justice. A candidate on the Democratic-Republican ticket in 1799, McKean was elected Governor of Pennsylvania. As Governor, he followed such a strict policy of appointing only fellow Republicans to office that he became the father of the spoils system in America. He served three tempestuous terms as Governor, completing one of the longest continuous careers of public service of any of the Founding Fathers.
He was the heir of one of the greatest family traditions in the colonies and became the patriarch of a long line of American patriots—his great grandfather died at Lutzen beside the great King Gustavus Aldophus of Sweden; his grandfather was one of the founders of New Sweden along the Delaware River in Maryland; one of his nephews was the military secretary to George Washington; another was a signer of the Declaration; still another was a signer of the Constitution; yet another was Governor of Maryland during the Revolution; and still another was a member of the first Congress; two sons were killed in action with the Continental Army; a grandson served as a member of Congress under the new Constitution; and another grandson was a Maryland Senator. Thus, even if Hanson had not served as President himself, he would have greatly contributed to the life of the nation through his ancestry and progeny. As a youngster he began a self-guided reading of classics and rather quickly became an acknowledged expert in the juridicalism of Anselm and the practical philosophy of Seneca—both of which were influential in the development of the political philosophy of the great leaders of the Reformation. It was based upon these legal and theological studies that the young planter—his farm, Mulberry Grove was just across the Potomac from Mount Vernon—began to espouse the cause of the patriots. In 1775 he was elected to the Provincial Legislature of Maryland. Then in 1777, he became a member of Congress where he distinguished himself as a brilliant administrator. Thus, he was elected President in 1781. He served in that office from November 5, 1781 until November 3, 1782. He was the first president to serve a full term after the full ratification of the Articles of Confederation—and like so many of the Southern and New England Founders, he was strongly opposed to the Constitution when it was first discussed. He remained a confirmed anti-federalist until his untimely death.
He did not sign the Declaration, the Articles, or the Constitution. He did not serve in the Continental Army with distinction. He was not renowned for his legal mind or his political skills. He was instead a man who spent his entire career in foreign diplomacy. He earned the respect of his fellow patriots during the dangerous days following the traitorous action of Benedict Arnold. His deft handling of relations with Canada also earned him great praise. After being elected to the Congress from his home state of New Jersey, he served as the new nation's Secretary for Foreign Affairs—managing the influx of aid from France, Spain, and Holland. The in 1783 he was elected to the Presidency. He served in that office from November 4, 1782 until November 2, 1783. Like so many of the other early presidents, he was a classically trained scholar, of the Reformed faith, and an anti-federalist in political matters. He was the father and grandfather of frontiersmen—and one of his grandchildren and namesakes eventually became a leader of the Cherokee nation in its bid for independence from the sprawling expansion of the United States.
By an ironic sort of providence, Thomas Mifflin served as George Washington's first aide-de-camp at the beginning of the Revolutionary War, and, when the war was over, he was the man, as President of the United States, who accepted Washington's resignation of his commission. In the years between, Mifflin greatly served the cause of freedom—and, apparently, his own cause—while serving as the first Quartermaster General of the Continental Army. He obtained desperately needed supplies for the new army—and was suspected of making excessive profit himself. Although experienced in business and successful in obtaining supplies for the war, Mifflin preferred the front lines, and he distinguished himself in military actions on Long Island and near Philadelphia. Born and reared a Quaker, he was excluded from their meetings for his military activities. A controversial figure, Mifflin lost favor with Washington and was part of the Conway Cabal—a rather notorious plan to replace Washington with General Horatio Gates. And Mifflin narrowly missed court-martial action over his handling of funds by resigning his commission in 1778. In spite of these problems—and of repeated charges that he was a drunkard—Mifflin continued to be elected to positions of responsibility—as President and Governor of Pennsylvania, delegate to the Constitutional Convention, as well as the highest office in the land—where he served from November 3, 1783, to November 29, 1784. Most of Mifflin's significant contributions occurred in his earlier years—in the First and Second Continental Congresses he was firm in his stand for independence and for fighting for it, and he helped obtain both men and supplies for Washington's army in the early critical period. In 1784, as president, he signed the treaty with Great Britain which ended the war. Although a delegate to the Constitutional Convention, he did not make a significant contribution—beyond signing the document. As Governor of Pennsylvania, although he was accused of negligence, he supported improvements of roads, and reformed the State penal and judicial systems. He had gradually become sympathetic to Jefferson's principles regarding states' rights; even so, he directed the Pennsylvania militia to support the Federal tax collectors in the Whiskey Rebellion. In spite of charges of corruption, the affable Mifflin remained a popular figure. A magnetic personality and an effective speaker, he managed to hold a variety of elective offices for almost thirty years of the critical Revolutionary period.
Born and educated in Edinburgh, Scotland, during the tumultuous days of the final Jacobite Rising and the Tartan Suppression, St. Clair was the only president of the United States born and bred on foreign soil. Though most of his family and friends abandoned their devastated homeland in the years following the Battle of Culloden—after which nearly a third of the land was depopulated through emigration to America—he stayed behind to learn the ways of the hated Hanoverian English in the Royal Navy. His plan was to learn of the enemy's military might in order to fight another day. During the global conflict of the Seven Years' War—generally known as the French and Indian War—he was stationed in the American theater. Afterward, he decided to settle in Pennsylvania where many of his kin had established themselves. His civic-mindedness quickly became apparent: he helped to organize both the New Jersey and the Pennsylvania militias, led the Continental Army's Canadian expedition, and was elected Congress. His long years of training in the enemy camp was finally paying off. He was elected President in 1787—and he served from February 2 of that year until January 21 of the next. Following his term of duty in the highest office in the land, he became the first Governor of the Northwest Territory. Though he briefly supported the idea of creating a constitutional monarchy under the Stuart's Bonnie Prince Charlie, he was a strident Anti-Federalist—believing that the proposed federal constitution would eventually allow for the intrusion of government into virtually every sphere and aspect of life. He even predicted that under the vastly expanded centralized power of the state the taxing powers of bureaucrats and other unelected officials would eventually confiscate as much as a quarter of the income of the citizens—a notion that seemed laughable at the time but that has proven to be ominously modest in light of our current governmental leviathan. St. Clair lived to see the hated English tyrants who destroyed his homeland defeated. But he despaired that his adopted home might actually create similar tyrannies and impose them upon themselves.
↑ "Articles of Confederation, 1777-1781". U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on 2007-09-15. http://web.archive.org/web/20070915075849/http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ho/time/ar/91719.htm. Retrieved 2008-01-26.
↑ Letter George Washington to George Clinton, September 11 1783. The George Washington Papers, 1741-1799
↑ "While Washington and Steuben were taking the army in an ever more European direction, Lee in captivity was moving the other way — pursuing his insights into a fullfledged and elaborated proposal for guerrilla warfare. He presented his plan to Congress, as a "Plan for the Formation of the American Army."
Bitterly attacking Steuben's training of the army according to the "European Plan," Lee charged that fighting British regulars on their own terms was madness and courted crushing defeat: "If the Americans are servilely kept to the European Plan, they will … be laugh'd at as a bad army by their enemy, and defeated in every [encounter]… . [The idea] that a decisive action in fair ground may be risqued is talking nonsense." Instead, he declared that "a plan of defense, harassing and impeding can alone succeed," particularly if based on the rough terrain west of the Susquehannah River in Pennsylvania. He also urged the use of cavalry and of light infantry (in the manner of Dan Morgan), both forces highly mobile and eminently suitable for the guerrilla strategy.
This strategic plan was ignored both by Congress and by Washington, all eagerly attuned to the new fashion of Prussianizing and to the attractions of a "real" army." - Murray N. Rothbard, Generalissimo Washington: How He Crushed the Spirit of Liberty excerpted from Conceived in Liberty, Volume IV, chapters 8 and 41.Template:Relevance
↑ Henry Cabot Lodge. George Washington, Vol. I. I. http://www.fullbooks.com/George-Washington-Vol-I4.html.
↑ Friday, February 2 1781, Laws of Maryland, 1781. An ACT to empower the delegates
↑ Ralph Ketcham, Roots of the Republic: American Founding Documents Interpreted, pg. 383
↑ Emory, Bobby (1993). "The Articles of Confederation". Libertarian Nation Foundation. http://libertariannation.org/a/f11e1.html#3. Retrieved 2008-01-26.
↑ "Religion and the Congress of the Confederation, 1774-89 (Religion and the Founding of the American Republic, Library of Congress Exhibition)". Library of Congress. 2003-10-27. http://www.loc.gov/exhibits/religion/rel04.html.
↑ "Records of the Continental and Confederation Congresses and the Constitutional Convention". U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. http://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/360.html#360.2.
↑ Documents from the Continental Congress and the Constitutional Convention, 1774-1789 - To Form a More Perfect Union: The Work of the Continental Congress & the Constitutional Convention (American Memory from the Library of Congress)
↑ In his book Life of Webster Sen. Henry Cabot Lodge writes, "It is safe to say that there was not a man in the country, from Washington and Hamilton to Clinton and Mason, who did not regard the new system as an experiment from which each and every State had a right to peaceably withdraw." A textbook used at West Point before the Civil War, A View of the Constitution, written by Judge William Rawle, states, "The secession of a State depends on the will of the people of such a State."
↑ "First Inaugural Address of Abraham Lincoln, Monday, March 4, 1861". http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/presiden/inaug/lincoln1.htm. "...no State upon its own mere motion can lawfully get out of the Union; that resolves and ordinances to that effect are legally void, and that acts of violence within any State or States against the authority of the United States are insurrectionary or revolutionary, according to circumstances."
R. B. Bernstein, "Parliamentary Principles, American Realities: The Continental and Confederation Congresses, 1774-1789," in Inventing Congress: Origins & Establishment Of First Federal Congress ed by Kenneth R. Bowling and Donald R. Kennon (1999) pp 76-108
Burnett, Edmund Cody. The Continental Congress: A Definitive History of the Continental Congress From Its Inception in 1774 to March, 1789 (1941)
Barbara Feinberg, The Articles Of Confederation (2002). [for middle school children.]
Robert W. Hoffert, A Politics of Tensions: The Articles of Confederation and American Political Ideas (1992).
Lucille E. Horgan. Forged in War: The Continental Congress and the Origin of Military Supply and Acquisition Policy (2002)
Merrill Jensen, The Articles of Confederation: An Interpretation of the Social-Constitutional History of the American Revolution, 1774-1781 (1959).
Merrill Jensen: "The Idea of a National Government During the American Revolution", Political Science Quarterly, 58 (1943), 356-79. online at JSTOR
Calvin Jillson and Rick K. Wilson. Congressional Dynamics: Structure, Coordination, and Choice in the First American Congress, 1774-1789. (1994)
Forest McDonald.Novus Ordo Seclorum: The Intellectual Origins of the Constitution. (1985)
Andrew C. Mclaughlin, A Constitutional History of the United States (1935) online version
Pauline Maier, American Scripture: Making the Declaration of Independence (1998).
Jackson T. Main, Political Parties before the Constitution. University of North Carolina Press, 1974
Jack N. Rakove, The Beginnings of National Politics: An Interpretive History of the Continental Congress (1982).
Jack N. Rakove, “The Collapse of the Articles of Confederation,” in The American Founding: Essays on the Formation of the Constitution. Ed by J. Jackson Barlow, Leonard W. Levy and Ken Masugi. Greenwood Press. 1988. Pp 225-45 ISBN 0313256101
Klos, Stanley L. (2004). President Who? Forgotten Founders. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania: Evisum, Inc.. pp. 261. ISBN 0-9752627-5-0.
United States Constitution Online - The Articles of Confederation
4.1 1. Legacy syntax and language
4.2 2. Not currently implemented
4.3 3. Toolbox aliases not supported
4.4 4. Missing Headers files
4.5 5. Incomplete Headers files
FBtoC is a replacement for the FB Compiler (FB Compiler.app) . Translating the code to C allows Apple's developer tools to create a universal binary. The diagrams below illustrate the process:
FBtoC:FB source code → C source code → OS X app package with Carbon universal binary in Mach-O format
FBtoC translates appearance projects and standalone files, and console-type text-only standalone files. PG projects cannot be translated. Using FBtoC normally requires no detailed knowledge of C.
Why translate to C when I code in BASIC?
The compiler (gcc) has more powerful optimizations for speed than the FB compiler.
Native Intel code runs ≈3 times faster (or more) than PPC code under Rosetta.
FBtoC can automatically copy specified files into the app's resources (see later).
Apple's modern development tools work on apps built by FBtoC. Tools include the Xcode debugger and the performance analyser Shark.
An app can be built as small as 64 KB.(window 1 : print "Hello, world!" : do HandleEvents : until gFBQuit)
On an Intel Mac, crash reports are interpretable, unlike those of a legacy FB app.
Unlike FB, there is no 32k limit on local function variables.
And then there's the coveted Universal Binary status!
This section describes the installation of both FutureBASIC and FBtoC. Before continuing, you will need to obtain the following:
The FBtoC installation files and documentation from: FBtoC Project Page
The Apple Develop Tools, available on your OS C installation DVD or from Apple's Developer Connection Web site
FBtoC should work on OS X 10.3.9 and later. Most development and testing has been done on OS X 10.4 and 10.5. Before using FBtoC you should have installed Apple's free Developer Tools (a.k.a. Xcode Tools), from your OS X install CDs or DVD.
To create universal binaries, you must have OS X 10.4 or higher, gcc 4.0 or higher, and install the Cross-development SDKs. Without /Developer/SDKs/MacOSX10.4u.sdk, only the native architecture of your Mac can be built. The Finder view (below) of the Developer folder shows the SDKs after installation. Cross-development is an optional part of the Xcode Tools install (from the OS X DVD or CDs).
Just drag-and-drop. The folder containing FBtoC.app must also contain three special folders: build_goodies, Headers, and User Libraries.
The build-goodies folder contains pretranslated parts of the runtime. Changing any of these files is likely to break FBtoC.
The Headers folder contains a subset of the standard FB Headers files. Most of them needed modification to make them work with FBtoC. In general, an existing FB Headers file will not work if simply copied into this folder.
User Libraries has the same function as in FB, except that the little-known special file UserFloatPrefs is ignored by FBtoC.
Some things that have to be done differently in FBtoC:
DynamicRemoveItemsdifferent syntax; see later
ControlButtonContentInfodifferent syntax with '.u'; see later
HMHelpContentdifferent syntax with '.u'; see later
100#, 100!FBII format; rewrite both as 100.0
Due to FBtoC operational constraints and other more obvious constraints (e.g. Intel doesn't support PowerPC assembler -duh), some legacy syntax cannot be implemented. However, a modern equivalent to achieve a similar goal often exists. Updating legacy source code to a modern equivalent benefits from newer features and helps preserve the longevity of the source code.
The TBalias statement in FB allows old Toolbox names to be kept and applied to new functions when introduced by Apple. The idea must have been to save programmers a minute or two updating function names, a task otherwise tiresomely required every few years. The TBalias feature is now Considered Harmful and will not be supported by FBtoC. You may have already upgraded your project to use the correct (Apple's official) Toolbox names. If not, be prepared for FBtoC error messages indicating dodgy names:
The simple, recommended, and only, workaround is to replace each occurrence in your code of the fossil RmveResource by RemoveResource.
Some Toolbox functions that were commonly aliased in old FB code are listed below:
FB, FBtoC and CFB-only alias
1: include "Util_Dialogtests.incl"
FBtoC's Headers folder doesn't have this file yet.
Util_Files.incl is present in FBtoC's Headers folder; the error arises because the function usr FSFileExists has been conditionalised out by some petty official, one hopes temporarily. [Note added later: FSFileExists is now implemented]
Elderly FB code preserved in the FBtoC runtime:
pBlk.ioDirID& = DirID&
pBlk.ioVRefNum% = WDRefNum%
pBlk.ioNamePtr& = StrPtr&
StrPtr&.Nil$ = "Error"
Today in 2008 version 1.0 of the free video format Theora was released. It provided the world with a viable alternative to patent-encumbered video compression technology, but it was a step behind in terms of quality versus compression and therefore found only limited acceptance.
In the context of software engineering, software quality measures how well software is designed (quality of design), and how well the software conforms to that design (quality of conformance),[1] although there are several different definitions. It is often described as the 'fitness for purpose' of a piece of software.
Whereas quality of conformance is concerned with implementation (see Software Quality Assurance), quality of design measures how valid the design and requirements are in creating a worthwhile product.[2]
Software quality may be defined as conformance to explicitly stated functional and performance requirements, explicitly documented development standards and implicit characteristics that are expected of all professionally developed software.
Specified standards define a set of development criteria that guide the manager is software engineering. If criteria are not followed lack of quality will usually result.
A set of implicit requirements often goes unmentioned, for example ease of use, maintainability etc.If software confirms to its explicit requirement but fails to meet implicit requirements, software quality is suspected.
A definition in Steve McConnell's Code Complete divides software into two pieces: internal and external quality characteristics. External quality characteristics are those parts of a product that face its users, where internal quality characteristics are those that do not.[4]
Another definition by Dr. Tom DeMarco says "a product's quality is a function of how much it changes the world for the better."[5] This can be interpreted as meaning that user satisfaction is more important than anything in determining software quality.[1]
Another definition, coined by Gerald Weinberg in Quality Software Management: Systems Thinking, is "Quality is value to some person." This definition stresses that quality is inherently subjective - different people will experience the quality of the same software very differently. One strength of this definition is the questions it invites software teams to consider, such as "Who are the people we want to value our software?" and "What will be valuable to them?"
The Consortium for IT Software Quality (CISQ) was launched in 2009 to standardize the measurement of software product quality. The Consortium's goal is to bring together industry executives from Global 2000 IT organizations, system integrators, outsourcers, and package vendors to jointly address the challenge of standardizing the measurement of IT software quality and to promote a market-based ecosystem to support its deployment.
A computer has no concept of "well-written" source code. However, from a human point of view source code can be written in a way that has an effect on the effort needed to comprehend its behavior. Many source code programming style guides, which often stress readability and usually language-specific conventions are aimed at reducing the cost of source code maintenance. Some of the issues that affect code quality include:
Ease of maintenance, testing, debugging, fixing, modification and portability
Low resource consumption: memory, CPU
Robust input validation and error handling, established by software fault injection
With software embedded into many devices today, software failure has caused more than inconvenience. Software errors have even caused human fatalities. The causes have ranged from poorly designed user interfaces to direct programming errors. An example of a programming error that lead to multiple deaths is discussed in Dr. Leveson's paper [1] (PDF). This has resulted in requirements for development of some types software. In the United States, both the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) have requirements for software development.
The need for a means to objectively determine software reliability comes from the desire to apply the techniques of contemporary engineering fields to the development of software. That desire is a result of the common observation, by both lay-persons and specialists, that computer software does not work the way it ought to. In other words, software is seen to exhibit undesirable behaviour, up to and including outright failure, with consequences for the data which is processed, the machinery on which the software runs, and by extension the people and materials which those machines might negatively affect. The more critical the application of the software to economic and production processes, or to life-sustaining systems, the more important is the need to assess the software's reliability.
Regardless of the criticality of any single software application, it is also more and more frequently observed that software has penetrated deeply into most every aspect of modern life through the technology we use. It is only expected that this infiltration will continue, along with an accompanying dependency on the software by the systems which maintain our society. As software becomes more and more crucial to the operation of the systems on which we depend, the argument goes, it only follows that the software should offer a concomitant level of dependability. In other words, the software should behave in the way it is intended, or even better, in the way it should.
The circular logic of the preceding sentence is not accidental—it is meant to illustrate a fundamental problem in the issue of measuring software reliability, which is the difficulty of determining, in advance, exactly how the software is intended to operate. The problem seems to stem from a common conceptual error in the consideration of software, which is that software in some sense takes on a role which would otherwise be filled by a human being. This is a problem on two levels. Firstly, most modern software performs work which a human could never perform, especially at the high level of reliability that is often expected from software in comparison to humans. Secondly, software is fundamentally incapable of most of the mental capabilities of humans which separate them from mere mechanisms: qualities such as adaptability, general-purpose knowledge, a sense of conceptual and functional context, and common sense.
Nevertheless, most software programs could safely be considered to have a particular, even singular purpose. If the possibility can be allowed that said purpose can be well or even completely defined, it should present a means for at least considering objectively whether the software is, in fact, reliable, by comparing the expected outcome to the actual outcome of running the software in a given environment, with given data. Unfortunately, it is still not known whether it is possible to exhaustively determine either the expected outcome or the actual outcome of the entire set of possible environment and input data to a given program, without which it is probably impossible to determine the program's reliability with any certainty.
However, various attempts are in the works to attempt to rein in the vastness of the space of software's environmental and input variables, both for actual programs and theoretical descriptions of programs. Such attempts to improve software reliability can be applied at different stages of a program's development, in the case of real software. These stages principally include: requirements, design, programming, testing, and runtime evaluation. The study of theoretical software reliability is predominantly concerned with the concept of correctness, a mathematical field of computer science which is an outgrowth of language and automata theory.
A program cannot be expected to work as desired if the developers of the program do not, in fact, know the program's desired behaviour in advance, or if they cannot at least determine its desired behaviour in parallel with development, in sufficient detail. What level of detail is considered sufficient is hotly debated. The idea of perfect detail is attractive, but may be impractical, if not actually impossible. This is because the desired behaviour tends to change as the possible range of the behaviour is determined through actual attempts, or more accurately, failed attempts, to achieve it.
Whether a program's desired behaviour can be successfully specified in advance is a moot point if the behaviour cannot be specified at all, and this is the focus of attempts to formalize the process of creating requirements for new software projects. In situ with the formalization effort is an attempt to help inform non-specialists, particularly non-programmers, who commission software projects without sufficient knowledge of what computer software is in fact capable. Communicating this knowledge is made more difficult by the fact that, as hinted above, even programmers cannot always know in advance what is actually possible for software in advance of trying.
While requirements are meant to specify what a program should do, design is meant, at least at a high level, to specify how the program should do it. The usefulness of design is also questioned by some, but those who look to formalize the process of ensuring reliability often offer good software design processes as the most significant means to accomplish it. Software design usually involves the use of more abstract and general means of specifying the parts of the software and what they do. As such, it can be seen as a way to break a large program down into many smaller programs, such that those smaller pieces together do the work of the whole program.
The purposes of high-level design are as follows. It separates what are considered to be problems of architecture, or overall program concept and structure, from problems of actual coding, which solve problems of actual data processing. It applies additional constraints to the development process by narrowing the scope of the smaller software components, and thereby—it is hoped—removing variables which could increase the likelihood of programming errors. It provides a program template, including the specification of interfaces, which can be shared by different teams of developers working on disparate parts, such that they can know in advance how each of their contributions will interface with those of the other teams. Finally, and perhaps most controversially, it specifies the program independently of the implementation language or languages, thereby removing language-specific biases and limitations which would otherwise creep into the design, perhaps unwittingly on the part of programmer-designers.
The history of computer programming language development can often be best understood in the light of attempts to master the complexity of computer programs, which otherwise becomes more difficult to understand in proportion (perhaps exponentially) to the size of the programs. (Another way of looking at the evolution of programming languages is simply as a way of getting the computer to do more and more of the work, but this may be a different way of saying the same thing). Lack of understanding of a program's overall structure and functionality is a sure way to fail to detect errors in the program, and thus the use of better languages should, conversely, reduce the number of errors by enabling a better understanding.
Improvements in languages tend to provide incrementally what software design has attempted to do in one fell swoop: consider the software at ever greater levels of abstraction. Such inventions as statement, sub-routine, file, class, template, library, component and more have allowed the arrangement of a program's parts to be specified using abstractions such as layers, hierarchies and modules, which provide structure at different granularities, so that from any point of view the program's code can be imagined to be orderly and comprehensible.
In addition, improvements in languages have enabled more exact control over the shape and use of data elements, culminating in the abstract data type. These data types can be specified to a very fine degree, including how and when they are accessed, and even the state of the data before and after it is accessed..
Many programming languages such as C and Java require the program "source code" to be translated in to a form that can be executed by a computer. This translation is done by a program called a compiler. Additional operations may be involved to associate, bind, link or package files together in order to create a usable runtime configuration of the software application. The totality of the compiling and assembly process is generically called "building" the software.
The software build is critical to software quality because if any of the generated files are incorrect the software build is likely to fail. And, if the incorrect version of a program is inadvertently used, then testing can lead to false results.
Software builds are typically done in work area unrelated to the runtime area, such as the application server. For this reason, a deployment step is needed to physically transfer the software build products to the runtime area. The deployment procedure may also involve technical parameters, which, if set incorrectly, can also prevent software testing from beginning. For example, a Java application server may have options for parent-first or parent-last class loading. Using the incorrect parameter can cause the application to fail to execute on the application server.
The technical activities supporting software quality including build, deployment, change control and reporting are collectively known as Software configuration management. A number of software tools have arisen to help meet the challenges of configuration management including file control tools and build control tools.
Software testing, when done correctly, can increase overall software quality of conformance by testing that the product conforms to its requirements.[8] Testing includes, but is not limited to:
A number of agile methodologies use testing early in the development cycle to ensure quality in their products. For example, the test-driven development practice, where tests are written before the code they will test, is used in Extreme Programming to ensure quality.
A software quality factor is a non-functional requirement for a software program which is not called up by the customer's contract, but nevertheless is a desirable requirement which enhances the quality of the software program. Note that none of these factors are binary; that is, they are not “either you have it or you don’t” traits. Rather, they are characteristics that one seeks to maximize in one’s software to optimize its quality. So rather than asking whether a software product “has” factor x, ask instead the degree to which it does (or does not).
Some software quality factors are listed here:
Clarity of purpose. This goes further than just a statement of purpose; all of the design and user documentation must be clearly written so that it is easily understandable. This is obviously subjective in that the user context must be taken into account: for instance, if the software product is to be used by software engineers it is not required to be understandable to the layman.
Presence of all constituent parts, with each part fully developed. This means that if the code calls a subroutine from an external library, the software package must provide reference to that library and all required parameters must be passed. All required input data must also be available.
Minimization of excessive or redundant information or processing. This is important where memory capacity is limited, and it is generally considered good practice to keep lines of code to a minimum. It can be improved by replacing repeated functionality by one subroutine or function which achieves that functionality. It also applies to documents.
Ability to be run well and easily on multiple computer configurations. Portability can mean both between different hardware—such as running on a PC as well as a smartphone—and between different operating systems—such as running on both Mac OS X and GNU/Linux.
Uniformity in notation, symbology, appearance, and terminology within itself.
Propensity to facilitate updates to satisfy new requirements. Thus the software product that is maintainable should be well-documented, should not be complex, and should have spare capacity for memory, storage and processor utilization and other resources.
Disposition to support acceptance criteria and evaluation of performance. Such a characteristic must be built-in during the design phase if the product is to be easily testable; a complex design leads to poor testability.
Convenience and practicality of use. This is affected by such things as the human-computer interface. The component of the software that has most impact on this is the user interface (UI), which for best usability is usually graphical (i.e. a GUI).
Ability to be expected to perform its intended functions satisfactorily. This implies a time factor in that a reliable product is expected to perform correctly over a period of time. It also encompasses environmental considerations in that the product is required to perform correctly in whatever conditions it finds itself (sometimes termed robustness).
Fulfillment of purpose without waste of resources, such as memory, space and processor utilization, network bandwidth, time, etc.
Ability to protect data against unauthorized access and to withstand malicious or inadvertent interference with its operations. Besides the presence of appropriate security mechanisms such as authentication, access control and encryption, security also implies resilience in the face of malicious, intelligent and adaptive attackers.
There are varied perspectives within the field on measurement. There are a great many measures that are valued by some professionals—or in some contexts, that are decried as harmful by others. Some believe that quantitative measures of software quality are essential. Others believe that contexts where quantitative measures are useful are quite rare, and so prefer qualitative measures. Several leaders in the field of software testing have written about the difficulty of measuring what we truly want to measure well.[9][10]
One example of a popular metric is the number of faults encountered in the software. Software that contains few faults is considered by some to have higher quality than software that contains many faults. Questions that can help determine the usefulness of this metric in a particular context include:
What constitutes “many faults?” Does this differ depending upon the purpose of the software (e.g., blogging software vs. navigational software)? Does this take into account the size and complexity of the software?
Does this account for the importance of the bugs (and the importance to the stakeholders of the people those bugs bug)? Does one try to weight this metric by the severity of the fault, or the incidence of users it affects? If so, how? And if not, how does one know that 100 faults discovered is better than 1000?
If the count of faults being discovered is shrinking, how do I know what that means? For example, does that mean that the product is now higher quality than it was before? Or that this is a smaller/less ambitious change than before? Or that fewer tester-hours have gone into the project than before? Or that this project was tested by less skilled testers than before? Or that the team has discovered that fewer faults reported is in their interest?
This last question points to an especially difficult one to manage. All software quality metrics are in some sense measures of human behavior, since humans create software.[9] If a team discovers that they will benefit from a drop in the number of reported bugs, there is a strong tendency for the team to start reporting fewer defects. That may mean that email begins to circumvent the bug tracking system, or that four or five bugs get lumped into one bug report, or that testers learn not to report minor annoyances. The difficulty is measuring what we mean to measure, without creating incentives for software programmers and testers to consciously or unconsciously “game” the measurements.
Software quality factors cannot be measured because of their vague definitions. It is necessary to find measurements, or metrics, which can be used to quantify them as non-functional requirements. For example, reliability is a software quality factor, but cannot be evaluated in its own right. However, there are related attributes to reliability, which can indeed be measured. Some such attributes are mean time to failure, rate of failure occurrence, and availability of the system. Similarly, an attribute of portability is the number of target-dependent statements in a program.
A scheme that could be used for evaluating software quality factors is given below. For every characteristic, there are a set of questions which are relevant to that characteristic. Some type of scoring formula could be developed based on the answers to these questions, from which a measurement of the characteristic can be obtained.
Are variable names descriptive of the physical or functional property represented? Do uniquely recognisable functions contain adequate comments so that their purpose is clear? Are deviations from forward logical flow adequately commented? Are all elements of an array functionally related?....
Are all necessary components available? Does any process fail for lack of resources or programming? Are all potential pathways through the code accounted for, including proper error handling?
Is all code reachable? Is any code redundant? How many statements within loops could be placed outside the loop, thus reducing computation time? Are branch decisions too complex?
Does the program depend upon system or library routines unique to a particular installation? Have machine-dependent statements been flagged and commented? Has dependency on internal bit representation of alphanumeric or special characters been avoided? How much effort would be required to transfer the program from one hardware/software system or environment to another?
Is one variable name used to represent different logical or physical entities in the program? Does the program contain only one representation for any given physical or mathematical constant? Are functionally similar arithmetic expressions similarly constructed? Is a consistent scheme used for indentation, nomenclature, the color palette, fonts and other visual elements?
Has some memory capacity been reserved for future expansion? Is the design cohesive—i.e., does each module have distinct, recognizable functionality? Does the software allow for a change in data structures (object-oriented designs are more likely to allow for this)? If the code is procedure-based (rather than object-oriented), is a change likely to require restructuring the main program, or just a module?
Are complex structures employed in the code? Does the detailed design contain clear pseudo-code? Is the pseudo-code at a higher level of abstraction than the code? If tasking is used in concurrent designs, are schemes available for providing adequate test cases?
Is a GUI used? Is there adequate on-line help? Is a user manual provided? Are meaningful error messages provided?
Are loop indexes range-tested? Is input data checked for range errors? Is divide-by-zero avoided? Is exception handling provided?
It is the probability that the software performs its intended functions correctly in a specified period of time under stated operation conditions,
Have functions been optimized for speed? Have repeatedly used blocks of code been formed into subroutines? Has the program been checked for memory leaks or overflow errors?
Does the software protect itself and its data against unauthorized access and use? Does it allow its operator to enforce security policies? Are security mechanisms appropriate, adequate and correctly implemented? Can the software withstand attacks that can be anticipated in its intended environment?
Is the user interface intuitive (self-explanatory/self-documenting)?
Is it easy to perform simple operations?
Is it feasible to perform complex operations?
Does the software give sensible error messages?
Do widgets behave as expected?
Is the user interface responsive or too slow?
Also, the availability of (free or paid) support may factor into the usability of the software.
↑ Crosby, P., Quality is Free, McGraw-Hill, 1979
↑ DeMarco, T., Management Can Make Quality (Im)possible, Cutter IT Summit, Boston, April 1999
↑ J.D. Musa, A. Iannino, and K. Okumoto, Engineering and Managing Software with Reliability Measures, McGraw-Hill, 1987
↑ a b Cem Kaner http://www.kaner.com/pdfs/metrics2004.pdf
Pressman, Scott (2005), Software Engineering: A Practitioner's Approach (Sixth, International ed.), McGraw-Hill Education
International Organization for Standardization. Software Engineering—Product Quality—Part 1: Quality Model. ISO, Geneva, Switzerland, 2001. ISO/IEC 9126-1:2001(E).
Diomidis Spinellis. Code Quality: The Open Source Perspective. Addison Wesley, Boston, MA, 2006.
Ho-Won Jung, Seung-Gweon Kim, and Chang-Sin Chung. Measuring software product quality: A survey of ISO/IEC 9126. IEEE Software, 21(5):10–13, September/October 2004.
Stephen H. Kan. Metrics and Models in Software Quality Engineering. Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, second edition, 2002.
Robert L. Glass. Building Quality Software. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1992.
Roland Petrasch, "The Definition of‚ Software Quality’: A Practical Approach", ISSRE, 1999
Linux: Fewer Bugs Than Rivals Wired Magazine, 2004
A course from the very beginning to the end with nimrod.
First steps, hello world!
Else...
Objection!
Guides to Chemical Safety or Toxicology Information
Where to find Material Safety Data Sheets on the Internet: Directory
CCOHS Resources page (Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety)
Safety Information Resources on the Internet (Vermont SIRI Home Page)
NIOSH Home Page (National Institute for Occupational Health and Safety)
Best Environmental Directories: links to 550+ environmental directories
Chemical Exposure: Toxicology, Safety and Risk Assessment (LC Science Tracer Bullet, December 1991)
Material Safety Data Sheets & Other Factual Sources
Where to find Material Safety Data Sheets on the Internet: Directory
TOXNET (Toxicology Data Network at the National Library of Medicine) (includes HSDB)
Hazardous Substances Data Bank (HSDB) (structure-searchable via NIH Specialized Information Services)
Environment (SRC, Syracuse Research Corporation)
Chemicals in the Environment: OPPT Chemical Fact Sheets
ToxFAQs (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry)
Chemical Data Access Tool (health and safety information submitted to EPA under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) for chemicals manufactured or imported into the US)
HPV Chemical Hazard Characterizations (HPV = High Production Volume: substances produced in excess of 1 million pounds per year)
Toxic Substances Control Act Test Submissions (TSCATS)
Toxic Substances Portal (Agency for Toxic Substances & Disease Registry)
CCOHS Web Information Service (Candian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety)
Institute for Health and Consumer Protection (European)
Abbreviations and Acronyms Used in Toxicology Literature (IUPAC)
Safety in the Chemistry Laboratory (includes clickable label image with brief descriptions of NFPA and HMIG classes)
Safety in the Chemistry Laboratory (HMIG / HMIS Hazardous Material Identification Guide / System)
Periodic Table with Health and Environmental Data (Lenntech)
Comparison of some words in English and Assamese that have very similar meanings--
Door and duwar,
Name and naam,
Mother and matri,
Father and pitri,
Anonymous and anamika,
Path and poth.
Are they similar? How?
In fact there are a lot of languages that share many features with both Assamese and English!
Although Assamese and English are similar, there are languages closer to English, say French. Similarly Bengali is very close to Assamese.
In fact Assamese and Bengali can be grouped together for purposes.
Again, Assamese and Bengali can be grouped with other similar languages like Odiya, Maithili, Bishnupriya Manipur etc. to constitute the Eastern Indo-Aryan languages.
The Eastern Indo-Aryan languages can be again grouped with other languages such as Hindi, Marathi, Gujarati , and such languages to constitute the Indo-Aryan languages.
Why notmore? The Indo-Aryan languages are further placed with languages like Persian to constitute the classification called Indo-Iranian languages.
The Indo-Persian languages are a part of what is called the Indo-European languages, which also includes English.
Like most of the Indo-Aryan languages, Assamese too traces it's roots to Sanskrit, a very old Indo-European language like Latin and Greek.
From Sanskrit came up Magadhi Prakrit, and from Magadhi Prakrit came Assamese.
Some sources also point to Kamarupi Prakrit as the predecessor of Assamese.
It however can be said that Assamese was spoken at least by the 7th century.
The oldest texts in Assamese are the Buddhist Charyapadas. These texts not only include Assamese features of mideaval times, like the use of -ante, but also a centre filled ro similar to modern Assamese ro with a diagonal line. Some argue that the Assamese letter ro was being formed at that time, as current Assamese ro does have only an inner diagonal. Others say the fully filled ro was due to pen style. Other languages such as Bengali and Maithili also claim the texts.
Finnish verbs have present, imperfect, perfect and pluperfect tenses.
Present: corresponds to English present and future tenses. For the latter, a time qualifier may need to be used to avoid ambiguity.
......
....
.......
In each case use the personal pronoun with the correct present tense form of the verb.
Minä, kävelen Sinä, kävelet
Minä, aloitan Sinä, kirjoitat
Hän, kävelee Me, kävelemme
Hän, kirjoittaa Me, puhumme
Hän, katsoo' Me, yrittämme
Te, kävelette He, kävelevät
Te, korjatte He, yrittävät
Translate the following simple Finnish sentences into English. Think if you should use future or present tense in your translations.
Teen töitä juuri nyt.
Puhut ja kerrot aivan liikaa.
Ymmärrän sitä hyvin, mutta he eivät ymmärrä.
Tiedämme, että ajat sinne huomenna
Tiedän, että te rakennatte sen ja sinä suunnittelet sen.
Haluan, että menet sinne ja teet niin kuin sanon.
Arvostamme sitä, että hän kirjoittaa paljon.
Following is a short dialogue between Asko and Niina set in railway station. Fill in Finnish verbs to the gaps according to the hints given in brackets.
Asko: (It is) kylmä. Onneksi (you will get) junan lämpöön kohta.
Niina: Toivon että (you have time to get) perille ajoissa.
Asko: Valitettavasti minä en (get) mukaan.
Niina: Minä (will leave) nyt, koska juna (arrives). (I will call) sinulle myöhemmin.
Asko: Odota, sinun (must) sanoa minä päivänä sinä (will return) takaisin.
Niina: Minä (will come) takaisin seuraavalla viikolla. Näkemiin sitten! (I am going to) lähteä nyt.
Almost all the verbs have errors. Try to spot and correct them as fast as you can.
Tämä kuulua tänne.
He tavaavat minut tänään.
Sinä vain hajoitat kaiken!
Minä terotan ja korjatan veitsiä.
Me tietämme että sinä soittat ja kirjoitat joka päivä minulle.
He soittaavat kännykällä minulle ja yritävät kertoa kaiken.
Minä aion ryhtyä töihin ja he aiovat myös. Hänkin aikoa.
Me kieltäytymme ehdotuksestasi, koska se vain haitataa meitä.
Minä kävelen Sinä kävelet
Minä aloitan Sinä kirjoitat
Hän kirjoittaa Me puhumme
Te kävelette He kävelevät
Te korjaatte He yrittävät
I am working just now.
You talk and tell (people) far too much.
I understand it well but they don't understand.
We are thinking and estimating different results. (Or: We think and estimate differ...)
We know that you will drive there tomorrow.
I know that you'all will build it and you will plan it.
I want you to go there and act as I say.
We appreciate the fact that he writes a lot.
Tämä kuuluu tänne.
He tapaavat minut tänään.
Sinä vain hajotat kaiken!
Minä teroitan ja korjaan veitsiä.
Me tiedämme, että sinä luet ja kirjoitat joka päivä minulle.
He soittavat kännykällä minulle ja yrittävät kertoa kaiken.
Minä aion ryhtyä töihin ja he aikovat myös. Hänkin aikoo.
Me kieltäydymme ehdotuksestasi, koska se vain haittaa meitä.
Visual Studio, created and providing by Microsoft, is an IDE for developers who want to evolve different applications based on Windows and the .NET platforms.
It supports developers/programmer with a widespread accumulation of development programmes for generating different kinds of applications e.g. Windows applications, ASP.NET applications or Web services.
Professional programmers as well as free coders like to use Visual Studio for developing because the IDE supports many different programming languages: Visual Basic, C, C++, C++/CLI, C# and F#.
We are going to use Visual Studio throughout our exercise course, to create a small 3D game. To develop those games we apply Visual Studio including the XNA- framework.
An instruction on how to install Visual Studio including XNA is declared on WikiBook: Setup.
Visual Studio offers the possibility to develop different applications …
Program to use as a command-line appliance
Used to build a graphical user interface
Progam that works back-cloth as a self executable statement
Web applications based on the Microsoft .NET Framework
Used to build appliances for mobile devices(Windows Mobile or Windows Phone) with the .NET Compact Framework.
Programms that are used within Visual Studio to extend the functionality of Visual Studio.
Used to build apps specifically for the Microsoft Store from Windows 8 onwards.
Visual Studio supports the developer with helpfull features which are useful in every development step.
Visual Studio allocates a useful code editor which supports the user during writing the source code by highlighting the syntax and suggesting code complements.
The code editor tries to complete methods and functions. It is also usefull when the developer wants to have quick access to his defined variables e.g. by entering the first letter, the code editor proposes all variables beginning with it.
Visual Studio offers different visual designer which help the coder during developing their applications:
Visual Studio offers another editor for creating and designing web pages. The Web designer supports the user during the development of an ASP.NET application.
This designer can be used to add control devices to a form and code the specific functions behind it.
The WPF (Windows Presentation Foundation) Designer also behaves like the Forms Designer but is used to build WPF control devices and applications.
The Class designer is a tool that makes it possible to model a class diagram of the developed application. The Class Designer models the connection and structure of it. It is not only used for classes but also for structures, delegates and interfaces.
This designer mappes the classes and the database schemas that seal the data.
Visual Studio comes along with its own debbuger. The debugger supports by securing that the application operates in a logical way and as you want it to operate.
It makes it possible to stop on different code positions to check the building.
The developer using Visual Studio has the chance to expand the functions of the standard Visual Studio.
The Object Browser makes it possible to appraise the available symbols for use in Visual Studio. The Browser uses three panes: the Objects pane, the Members Pane and the Description pane.
The Open Tabs Browser displays als open tabs and switches between them.
Used to see all available properties for all objects and other items. Furthermore it is used to edit them.
The Solution Explorer is used for the arrangement of item management tasks in a project/solution. It is possible to handle with items outside a project.
The Data Explorer is used to administrate databases. The administration provides the creation and creation and modification of database tables.
The Team Explorer accesses the Team Foundation Server and the revision control.
The Server Explorer establish the connection to the server. It offers the task to edit the resources.
The Text Generation Framework, also called t4, is a code generator which uses textfiles from templates.
Launched .NET Frameworkversion
Academic, Professional, Enterprise Developer, and Enterprise Architect
Visual Studio .NET 2003
Express, Standard, Professional and Team System
Express, Professional, Premium, Ultimate and Test Professional
Express, Professional, Premium, Ultimate, Community, Test Professional
Express, Community, Professional, Enterprise
Community, Professional, Enterprise
Windows versions on which it runs⁴
Visual Studio .Net 2002
Visual Studio .Net 2003
¹ - Windows Phone 7 applications cannot be developed in Windows XP.
² - Windows 8 required to create and develop Windows Store apps.
³ - Even through Visual Studio 2012 and higher will not run on Windows Vista, the latest version of NET Framework works on Windows Vista however. This means that even through you cannot develop programs using Visual Studio 2012 in Windows Vista, you can run them on Windows Vista using the default configuration. However, to do this in Windows XP, the application must be specifically targeted to run that version.
⁴ - For server based versions of Windows, use the corresponding client Windows version for reference.
Supported default languages/tools(available by default)⁵
Version 7.x only
⁵ - Languages beginning from Visual Studio NET 2002 use the NET Framework as their language base.
⁶ - It is the NET Framework version of Visual J++. It can only target the NET Framework, not the Java Virtual Machines which others target.
⁷ - From this version, it follows its own development cycle.
⁸ - Full support was available only with Visual Studio 2005, including a full emulator.
⁹ - Windows Store apps can be developed only in Windows 8 and higher.
The operation of data intensive applications almost always requires dealing with various failures. Therefore during the development of an application, tests have to be made in order to assess the reliability and resilience of the system. These test the ability of a system to cope with faults and to highlight any vulnerable areas. The fault-injection tool (FIT)
[1] allows users to generate faults on their Virtual Machines, giving them a means to test the resiliency of their installation. Using this approach the designers can use robust testing, highlighting vulnerable areas to inspect before it reaches a commercial environment. Users or application owners can test and understand their application design or deployment in the event of a cloud failure or outage, thus allowing for the mitigation of risk in advance of a cloud based deployment.
Current and projected growth in the big data market provides three distinct targets for the tool. Data Centre owners, cloud service providers and application owners are all potential beneficiaries due to their data intensive requirements. The resilience of the underlying infrastructure is crucial to these areas. Data Centre owners can gauge the stress levels of different parts of their infrastructure and thus offer advice to their customers, address bottlenecks or even adapt the pricing of various levels of assurances.
For developers FIT provides the missing and essential service of evaluating the resiliency and dependability of their applications, which can only be demonstrated in the application’s runtime by deliberately introducing faults. By designing the FIT to be a lightweight and versatile tool it is trivial to use it during Continuous Integration or within another tool for running complex failure scenarios. Used in conjunction with other tools not within the scope of this report, FIT could monitor and evaluate the effect of various faults on an application and provide feedback to the developers on application design.
DOCTOR (IntegrateD SOftware Fault InjeCTiOn EnviRonment) [2] allows injection of memory and register faults, as well as network communication faults. It uses a combination of time-out, trap and code modification. Time-out triggers inject transient memory faults and traps inject transient emulated hardware failures, such as register corruption. Code modification is used to inject permanent faults.
Orchestra [3] is a script driven fault injector which is based around Network Level Fault Injection. Its primary use is the evaluation and validation of the fault-tolerance and timing characteristics of distributed protocols. Orchestra was initially developed for the Mach Operating System and uses certain features of this platform to compensate for latencies introduced by the fault injector. It has also been successfully ported to other operating systems.
Xception [4] is designed to take advantage of the advanced debugging features available on many modern processors. It is written to require no modification of system source and no insertion of software traps, since the processor's exception handling capabilities trigger fault injection. These triggers are based around accesses to specific memory locations. Such accesses could be either for data or fetching instructions. It is therefore possible to accurately reproduce test runs because triggers can be tied to specific events, instead of timeouts.
Grid-FIT (Grid – Fault Injection Technology) [5] is a dependability assessment method and tool for assessing Grid services by fault injection. Grid-FIT is derived from an earlier fault injector WS-FIT which was targeted towards Java Web Services implemented using Apache Axis transport. Grid-FIT utilises a novel fault injection mechanism that allows network level fault injection to be used to give a level of control similar to Code Insertion fault injection whilst being less invasive.
LFI (Library-level Fault Injector) [6] is an automatic testing tool suite, used to simulate in a controlled testing environment, exceptional situations that programs need to handle at runtime but that are not easy to check via input testing alone. LFI automatically identifies the errors exposed by shared libraries, finds potentially buggy error recovery code in program binaries and injects the desired faults at the boundary between shared libraries and applications.
The FIT has been designed thus far to specifically to comprise a best practice strategy to ensure data intensive applications are reliable, allowing for rigorous testing of applications both during development and after deployment. FIT architectureThis will allow cloud platform owners/Application VM owners a means to test the resiliency of a cloud installation and applications by generating faults at the cloud level.
The DICE FIT has also been designed and developed in a modular fashion. This allows the replacement of any function that carries out Faults as well as potential to extend the tool as required. The FIT was designed to be as lightweight on the VMs as possible, so for this reason only existing well-tested tools have been implemented for causing faults. The FIT downloads, installs and configures only what is required at the time, because of this no unnecessary tools or dependences are installed.
FIT allows VM Admins, application owners and Cloud Admins to generate various faults. It runs independently and externally to any target environment. Figure 1 illustrates the architecture.
The FIT is designed to work from the command line or through a Graphical User Interface. The user can invoke actions which connect to the target VM and automatically install any required tools and dependences or evoke the required APIs. The command line switches and parameters allow users to select a specific fault and the parameters of the fault such as the amount of RAM to user or which services to stop.
An example command line call to connect to a node using SSH and cause memory stress with 2GB is as follows:
--stressmem 2 2048m Ubuntu@109.231.126.101 -no home/ubuntu/SSHKEYS/VMKey.key
To access the VM level and issue commands the DICE FIT uses JSCH to SSH to the Virtual Machines. By using JSCH the tool is able to connect to any VM that has SSH enabled and can then issue commands as a pre-defined user. This allows greater flexibility of commands as well as the installation of tools and dependencies. The DICE FIT is released under the permissive Apache Licence 2.0 [8] and supports the OS configurations Ubuntu (tested with versions 14.04 and 15.10), and Centos with set Repo configured and wget installed (tested on version 7).
The GUI provides the same functionality as the command line version of the tool. The GUI provides users with a visual way of interacting with the tool which can make the tool more accessible for a range of users. The user can select from the available actions from a home screen, as seen in Figure 3. Each button leads to a page where a user can enter the relevant inputs and then the fault can be executed. These inputs are the equivalent of the command line parameters.
In the CPU overload page, the user enters the details of the VM and the amount of time to run the overload for. In place of the password the user can also upload an SSH key from a file. Any feedback and output from running the fault is shown at the bottom of the page.
Using the GUI is a straightforward process of selecting the desired fault and providing the VM details. In the example below a high CPU usage fault is chosen, and the address, username and password of the VM is entered. The number of CPUs on the machine is entered and then the amount of time to overload the CPU for, in this case 30 seconds, as shown in Figure 4.
The GUI successfully complements the objectives achieved by the command line tool. It makes the fault injection tool highly accessible, allowing anyone to find vulnerabilities and test the resiliency of their systems.
The source code can be found in the DICE GitHub repository. The repository contains the source code and a WAR file so it can be deployed on a server, such as Apache Tomcat. Once the image is deployed on the server it will be immediately available and ready to use.
Future work will involve a more detailed classification of faults in conjunction with an analysis of the cause, effect and response of various fault scenarios. From a design and operational perspective an investigation will be undertaken to decide on how best to integrate with related services. There is a requirement for robust monitoring, graphing and analysis to operate in conjunction with the FIT. This could mean logically packaging a single solution, using a suite of tools or building new inherent features. This will result in firstly a wider scope of technologies that can be stressed with workloads in a similar way to MongoDB such as Storm, Spark and Cassandra. Further control over the timing, duration of faults will be investigated.
A major step forward in the development of the Fault Injection Tool is the integration with other DICE tools. This work incorporates the FIT deeper within the DICE toolset, and provides further useful functionality for users of the FIT.
One tool in which the FIT has been fully integrated with is the DICE Deployment Service, developed by XLAB, which is shown in Figure 5. This new feature allows faults to be caused on all of the VMs which make up a deployment into a DICE virtual deployment container.
The method in which this integration works is through the GUI version of the FIT. First, the user must acquire a token from the deployment service, in order to be able to authenticate with the API. From there, an option is given on the GUI to list all containers running on the DICE deployment service. The user can then choose the container they wish to cause faults on. A JSON file can also be uploaded in order to further customise the type of faults to be caused on certain VMs within the deployment. This is accomplished by matching a fault with the name of the component type that is associated (e.g., hosted on) with the VM in the application’s deployment blueprint. After these attributes are provided, the desired faults are automatically caused on all of the selected VMs inside the container, to simulate the faults occurring at an application level. This enables that the user needs to fill in the form only once for a virtual deployment container, then use the same information for all the subsequent (re)deployments in the container.
Additionally, we show in the next chapter the integration of FIT with the new dmon-gen utility to automate the generation of anomalies.
Additionally, there is the integration of FIT with the new dmon-gen utility to automate the generation of anomalies. Using this we can also specify FIT specific parameters for each experiment. For example we can use this to stress the CPU and memory of all of the hosts on a given platform or to use exactly 50% of the available resources.
Another area in which integration is being explored is the incorporation of the monitoring software developed by IeAT to the FIT GUI. If this is feasible, it will provide users with detailed statistics and analysis of how the VM(s) are performing before, during and after faults have been caused. This could provide a deeper understanding of the effects of the faults caused by the FIT application, and how the VMs/applications perform under the strain of these different faults being simulated.
The FIT can generate VM faults for use by application owners and VM admins. The tool is designed to run independently and externally to any target environment.
To validate the impact of FIT usage the common task manager program ‘top’ found in many Unix-like operating systems was used. Using the Linux ‘top’ command on the target VM the current state of its resources can then be seen.
Regarding CPU saturation, before running the CPU overload fault, the %Cpu usage is measured. While running the CPU overload the %Cpu quickly rises to near 100%. The stress command issued by the FIT would typically account for around 99.2% of the available CPU capacity.
Regarding memory saturation, the FIT ‘stressmem’ feature is called with designated parameters. The tool first connects via SSH to the VM and determined the OS version by checking the /etc/*-release for the version of the OS (Ubuntu in our case). It then looks for the memory stress tool suitable for Ubuntu, for example Memtester. If the tool is not found first the DICE FIT installs the tool along with dependencies. Finally, the FIT calls Memtester to saturate memory in the target node. Again, a standard monitoring tool such as ‘top’ (in the %MEM column) will show the 2GB (or whatever was specified in the memory size parameter of stressmem) RAM available to the VM being saturated.
The use of standard measurement tools already bundled with the OS means it is then easy for users to ensure the injected fault is having the desired effect.
In the following example, using the Linux ‘top’ command on the target VM the current state of its resources can be seen. Before running the CPU overload fault, the %Cpu usage is at 0.7% as seen in Figure 6. While running the CPU overload the %Cpu quickly rises to 100%. In the processes below we can see that the stress command is using 99.2% of the CPU as shown in Figure 7.
The main advantages of the FIT in comparison to other solutions are its availability as an open source solution, a command line version that makes it easy to integrate with other tools, a GUI that makes it easy to use for the non expert user and well documented instructions. An important differentiator is the cloud-agnostic nature of the tool and its ability for consistent use on multiple target environments. Further future work will focus on the difficulties and possibilities of extensibility by external users, investigating limitations, consider different topologies, operating systems and vendor agnostic cloud provider infrastructure as well as evaluating the overhead of operation. Containerised environments will also be considered as future FIT targets to help understand the effect on microservices when injecting faults to the underlying host as well as the integrity of the containerised deployment. In the longer term other target cloud APIs could be added to the FIT as well as investigating related academic work.
↑ [ S. Han, K. G. Shin, and H. A. Rosenberg, "DOCTOR: An IntegrateD SOftware Fault InjeCTiOn EnviRonment for Distributed Real-time Systems," presented at International Computer Performance and Dependability Symposium, Erlangen; Germany, 1995.]
↑ [ S. Dawson, F. Jahanian, and T. Mitton, "ORCHESTRA: A Probing and Fault Injection Environment for Testing Protocol Implementations," presented at International Computer Performance and Dependability Symposium, Urbana-Champaign, USA, 1996.]
Language and Phobos - DGui (example placeholder - can be any library)
In this lesson, you will see all the other types. Many of these types will be familiar, but be aware that there are many differences between C and D in their built-in types.
Using assert allows you to check if a certain expression is true or not. == means is equal to (do not confuse this with =, which is for assigning variables). The checking is done at runtime, and if whatever is inside the parentheses evaluates to false, then an Assertion Error will happen and the program will terminate.
Types have default initializers. That means, if they are declared but not assigned any value, they will be equal to something by default.
Properties can be queried from any type or object. When a property of a type or object is queried, a dot goes between the property name and the identifier.
The init property of any type contains the value that objects of such a type are initialized to by default. For numeral types, you can find the min and max values with their respective properties: type.min and type.max. You can also find the size of a type in memory: type.sizeof.
If you want to declare but don't want to initialize something, you can do this:
D allows you to write numbers in a few useful bases and forms. So, if you wanted to add the hexadecimal number of A4 to one million three hundred thirteen thousand six hundred thirty-seven and the binary number of 1011010101, you can write this:
Note that underscores in the middle of numbers are completely ignored. They are 100% optional and are useful for formatting long numbers.
You may look through this reference for more information about D's lexical grammar. Soon a lesson will be written that contains up-to-date information on the subject.
This archive version of this page in the Chemical Information Sources Wikibook gives a snapshot of the text as of March 7, 2015. Note that external links may become obsolete over time
SIRCh provides links to factual sources on the Internet where answers can be found to chemical questions.
Publications, Guides, Computer Searching,Current Awareness, Reviews, Document Delivery, Background Reading
Chemical Databases, Author, Citation, Subject, Chemical Name, Formula, Structure Searching
Synthesis, Reaction, Safety, Analytical, Physical, Patent Searching
Blogs, Newsgroups, Listserves, Visualization, Writing
History, Directories, Teaching, Study, Careers, Cheminformatics, Bioinformatics
SIRCh: Guides to Chemical Information Sources and Databases
SIRCh: Keeping Up and Looking Back: Current Awareness, Reviews, and Document Delivery
SIRCh: Deep Background Reading: Dictionaries, Encyclopedias, Treatises, Monographs, and Other Books
SIRCh: Chemistry Databases on the Web (Alphabetical List)
SIRCh: Chemistry Databases on the Web (Classified List)
SIRCh: Chemical History, Biography, Directories, and Industry Sources
SIRCh: Cheminformatics (aka, Chemoinformatics or Chemiinformatics)
Chemical Information Sources: Lecture notes on the topics listed above.
CIIM: Chemical Information Instructional Materials (Web resources for more in-depth training on the topics discussed in the chapters.)
CRSD: Chemical Reference Sources Database (a searchable database that covers reference books, commercial databases, etc.)
CHMINF-L: Chemical Information Sources Discussion List (a listserv in existence since 1991 with many chemistry librarians, chemists, publishers, and others interested in chemical information; has a searchable archive of all posts since its inception.)
Ice is an elemental attack spell, similar to Lightning and Fire. Ice summons into being shards of ice that fling themselves at a single foe. These shards are able to cause damage through their intense coldness as well as their physical damage. There are upgraded forms of the Ice spell, known as Ice2 and Ice3.
Our world is a very diverse place. We have many geographies, climates, races, cultures, and languages. Another characteristic that differentiates places of the world is the level of development. This creates various levels of access to:
Housing, electricity and sanitation
Infrastructure is different in different regions of the world too. Third world nations have characteristic social/economic gaps among groups of persons and/or regions within the countries. In one nation, developed areas, where people have access to all the items listed above and where infrastructure is good, coexist with very poor regions where living conditions are bad.
This coexistence leads to a varied range of infrastructure levels in general and in universities too. There are universities with very good campuses and with the infrastructure comparable to those in developed nations. Others have bad installation, lack equipment and do not have good networks and Internet connections. This bad fortune reflects on students, faculty and staff who may not be proficient with information technology tools.
When an ETD program is considered, some aspects of the infrastructure must be examined. They can be grouped in 3 categories, as follows.
The number and quality of machines available to students
The number and quality of machines available to the administrative staff
The network conditions - connection to all university buildings, speed, reliability and support
The level of computer literacy of students, faculty, library staff and administrative staff
The number of machines connected to the Internet
The connection of the university network to WAN's and the Internet - speed, reliability and support
The network connections - speed, reliability and support;
The existence of other ETD and/or digital library projects to develop the culture and to seek/provide support
The possibility of funding, from agencies and/or private companies, to ETD programs Global
The network connections - speed, reliability and support;
The dissemination of information on ETD and/or digital library projects to provide support to those who want to start programs
The agreement on minimum standards for systems, technology and metadata to allow interoperability and seamless access
The discussion and agreement on languages to identify ETDs so that they can be searched, retrieved and used
Front Page: Radiation Oncology | RTOG Trials
Partial breast irradiation |
This chapter deals with general concepts of breast cancer treatment, not related to more specific chapters dealing with treatment of different presentations of breast cancer.
2007 American Cancer Society PMID 17237035 -- "Cancer statistics, 2007." (Jemal A, CA Cancer J Clin. 2007 Jan-Feb;57(1):43-66.)
Incidence: 178,500 (#1 for women, accounting for ~25%)
Prevalence: 2,385,000 (#1 for all) - based on NHIS 2003 data
Deaths: 40,500 (#2 for women, accounting for ~15%)
Incidence: 1,151,000 (#1 for women, accounting for ~23%)
Age: Incidence rises steeply until ~50 (menopause), then more slowly 50-75, then essentially flat 75+
Benign Breast Disease: Proliferative with atypia RR 4, proliferative without atypia RR 2, nonproliferative no increase
Personal h/o BCA: invasive contralateral risk 1%/year premenopausal, 0.5%/year postmenopausal
Genetic mutations: BRCA1/BRCA2, p53 (Li-Fraumeni Syndrome), ATM (Ataxia-Telangiectasia), PTEN (PTEN Hamartoma Tumor Syndrome), PALB2
Hormone exposure: Age at menarche, age at menopause, parity, age at first birth, hormone replacement therapy; breastfeeding protective
Exposure to RT: Highest risk pre-pubertal, no excess risk after 45
2005 (Review): PMID 15864280 — "The Nurses' Health Study: lifestyle and health among women."
121,700 women. Designed to test oral contraceptive use on breast cancer. Questionnaire every 2 years.
High/moderate alcohol use is associated with the highest increase in risk. Also increases colon cancer risk.
Hormone replacement has an increased risk of 1.2 with estrogen only or 1.7 for estrogen + progestin. Increased risk with high hormonal levels of estrogen, testosterone, insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) in pre-menopausal women, and prolactin levels in post-menopausal women.
Body-mass index associated with increased risk (but less of a risk factor when increased estrogen levels are factored out).
Dense breasts> (assessed by mammography) have higher risk.
Past OC use had no increase in risk. Modest increase in risk for current OC users (but very low incidence in this age group). OC use protective against ovarian cancer (persists for many years) and colon cancer.
Folate in diet and higher intake of vegetable fat. No associate with fat intake, meat or fish comsumption.
Physical activity results in 20% decrease in risk for 7 or more hours/week vs 1 hour or less/week.
Tyrer-Cuzick Model (Cancer.org.uk, 2004) PMID 15057881 -- "A breast cancer prediction model incorporating familial and personal risk factors." (Tyrer J, Stat Med. 2004 Apr 15;23(7):1111-30.)
Model incorporating BRCA genes, a low penetrance gene, and personal risk factors
BRCAPRO Model (Duke, 1998) PMID 9443863 -- "Determining carrier probabilities for breast cancer-susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2." (Parmigiani G, Am J Hum Genet. 1998 Jan;62(1):145-58.)
Variables: FH of breast and ovarian CA in 1st and 2nd degree relatives. Relationships, ages of onset, and ages of no disease important
Claus Model (Yale, 1994) PMID 8299086 -- "Autosomal dominant inheritance of early-onset breast cancer. Implications for risk prediction." (Claus EB, Cancer. 1994 Feb 1;73(3):643-51.)
Gail Model (1989) - PMID 2593165 Full text (PDF) — "Projecting individualized probabilities of developing breast cancer for white females who are being examined annually." Gail MH et al. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1989 Dec 20;81(24):1879-86.
Risk factors: age at menarche, age at first live birth, number of previous biopsies, and number of first-degree relatives with breast cancer
Danish DBCG; 2010 (1977-2006) PMID 21115856 -- "Effect of obesity on prognosis after early-stage breast cancer." (Ewertz M, J Clin Oncol. 2011 Jan 1;29(1):25-31. Epub 2010 Nov 29.)
Registry study. 18,967 women, early stage BCA, BMI available, complete follow-up to 10 years
Outcome: 10-year DM risk increased by 46% if BM >30 kg/m2, risk of death increased by 38%. No impact on loco-regional recurrences
Conclusion: Obesity independent prognostic factor for development of distant mets and breast cancer death. Effect of adjuvant therapy less in obese patients
Annual Screening Mammography Recommended starting at 1) Age 40 for general population; 2) age 25-30 for BRCA carriers and untested relatives; 3) Age 25-30 or 10 years earlier than the age of the affected relative at diagnosis for person with first degree relative with pre-menopausal breast cancer or for women with lifetime risk > 20%; 4) 8 years after radiation therapy but not before age 25 for women who received mantle radiation between ages 10-30; 5) Any women with biopsy proven lobular neoplasia, atypical ductal hyperplasia, DCIS, or invasive breast cancer.
Age 40-49: No routine screening mammography; decision to start screening should be individual one
Age >=75: Insufficient evidence for mammography
Insufficient evidence for digital mammography or breast MRI over film mammography
UC Davis, 2007 (1998-2002) PMID 17409321 -- "Influence of computer-aided detection on performance of screening mammography." (Fenton JJ, N Engl J Med. 2007 Apr 5;356(14):1399-409.)
Retrospective. Screening data from 43 facilities and 429,345 mammograms.
Implementation of computer-aided detection: specificity decreased 90% to 87% (SS), sensitivity remained unchanged, PPV decreased 4.1% to 3.2% (SS), rate of biopsy increased 20% (SS). No difference in cancer detection rate (4 per 1000 screening mammograms)
Conclusion: Computer-aided detection resulted in reduced accuracy. Increased rate of biopsy was not associated with improved detection
Toronto, 2007 PMID 17229950 -- "Mammographic density and the risk and detection of breast cancer." (Boyd NF, N Engl J Med. 2007 Jan 18;356(3):227-36.)
Case-control. 1112 pairs. Evaluated % density and risk of BCA
Conclusion: extensive mammographic density associated with risk of BCA
2007 PMID 17392385 -- "American cancer society guidelines for breast screening with MRI as an adjunct to mammography." (Saslow D, CA Cancer J Clin. 2007 Mar-Apr;57(2):75-89.)
Annual Screening (Based on Evidence): BRCA mutatation, 1st degree relative of BRCA carrier, lifetime risk >=20% by models
Annual Screening (Based on Expert Opinion): Chest RT age 10-30, Li-Fraumeni syndrome and 1st BCA degree relatives, Cowden's syndrome and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndromes and 1st degree BCA relatives
No MRI Screening: <15% lifetime risk
969 women. Diagnosed with unilateral breast cancer. Negative mammogram and clinical exam of contralateral breast. Considered positive for cancer if histologic evidence of malignancy within 1 yr of exam.
Conclusion: MRI can detect cancers missed by mammography.
PMID 17392300, 2007 — "MRI Evaluation of the Contralateral Breast in Women with Recently Diagnosed Breast Cancer." Lehman CD et al. New Engl J Med. 2007 Mar 29;356(13):1295-1303.
Higher frequency of skeletal, visceral, serosal and retroperitoneal mets.
Early prognosis significantly better than IDC, but late prognosis significantly worse than IDC
International BCSG trials; 2008 (1978-2002) PMID 18458044 -- "Distinct clinical and prognostic features of infiltrating lobular carcinoma of the breast: combined results of 15 International Breast Cancer Study Group clinical trials." (Pestalozzi BC, J Clin Oncol. 2008 Jun 20;26(18):3006-14. Epub 2008 May 5.)
Retrospective. 12,206 patients on 15 trials. Categorized as ILC (6%), IDC (71%), or other/mixed (23%). Median F/U 13 years
ILC patient characteristics: older age, larger tumors, better differentiated, ER+, less LVI+. Mastectomy used more frequently (SS)
ILC outcome: significantly better early DFS/OS advantage, but significantly worse late (6 and 10 years) DFS/OS. Similar outcome when stratified by ER status
Conclusion: Infiltrating lobular carcinoma carries distinct prognostic and biologic implications
Need to have > 90% predominant pattern.
Most have better prognosis (80-90% 10-year survival)
Tubular carcinoma - 1.3% of all breast cancer cases. Older median age (67), 74% detected by mammography, remainder with palpable mass, 92% Estrogen receptor positive; bilateral presentation in 8%; indolent natural history with rare distant metastases
PMID 11899414 -- "Tubular breast cancer experience at Washington University: a review of the literature." (Holland DW, Clin Breast Cancer. 2001 Oct;2(3):210-4).
2012: SEER PMID 22543207 -- "Adjuvant Radiation Therapy and Survival for Pure Tubular Breast Carcinoma-Experience From the SEER Database." (Li BInt J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012 Sep 1;84(1):23-9.)
Conclusion: "Since sufficiently powered large scale clinical trials are unlikely, we would recommend that adjuvant radiation be considered in PTCB patients age 65 or younger, although consideration of the small absolute survival benefit is important. Adjuvant radiation can be omitted for patients older than 65."
MGH; 2005 (1980-2002) PMID 16142444 -- "Tubular carcinoma of the breast: a retrospective analysis and review of the literature." (Sullivan T, Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2005 Oct;93(3):199-205.)
Retrospective. 13 women treated without RT, none recurred.
2003 (1987-1999) PMID 12846864 -- "Tubular carcinoma of the breast: an institutional experience and review of the literature." (Cabral AH, Breast J. 2003 Jul-Aug;9(4):298-301.)
Mucinous carcinoma (colloid) - excellent prognosis. 1-6%. usually ER+.
Cribriform carcinoma - excellent prognosis. usually ER/PR+.
Medullary carcinoma - traditionally felt to have excellent prognosis, despite being high grade. 5-7%. Most are triple negative. However, per NCCN guidelines (v.2.2010), medullary carcinomas have a risk for distant metastases similar to other high grade carcinomas, and thus should be treated similarly to other triple negative invasive breast cancers, rather than be treated per guidelines for favorable histology.
Predominant or focal papillary clusters, devoid of fibrovascular core with empty lacunar spaces
On histology frequently with high proliferation index, p53+ and ER-; however, no basal-like staining pattern
Frequent LVI+, nodal mets and poor prognosis
Also present in lung, ovary, bladder, and salivary gland. If metastatic deposit, should evaluate those organs as primary site
Review, 2012: (U.Florida) PMID 23020734 -- "Solid papillary carcinoma of the breast: a pathologically and clinically distinct breast tumor." (Saremian J, Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2012 Oct;136(10):1308-11.)
SEER analysis, 2018: PMID 27819878 -- "Prognostic Factors, Treatment, and Outcomes in Early Stage, Invasive Papillary Breast Cancer: A SEER Investigation of Less Aggressive Treatment in a Favorable Histology." (Fakhreddine MH, Am J Clin Oncol. 2018 Jun;41(6):532-537)
Lumpectomy + radiation is associated with superior OS for early-stage invasive papillary patients in this SEER-based retrospective study.
Includes: adenoid cystic carcinoma, apocrine carcinoma, cribriform, metaplastic, squamous cell carcinoma (subtype of metaplastic), papillary cancer, and secretory breast cancer.
Does not discuss radiotherapy management.
Luminal A - high ER expression, her 2 neu negative, low Ki-67
Luminal B - high ER expression AND often her 2 neu positive, Ki-67 and grade higher than luminal A
Basal type ("triple-negative") - expression of CK 5/6 or 17 but low expression of luminal CK 8/18. Since staining by IHC may be insensitive, can identify these by having CK5/6 and/or HER1 but negative for ER and HER2. Are often high grade, high frequency of BRCA1 mutation, often EGFR positive
Heterogenous group, both molecular and clinical (including adenoid cystic, medullary, etc)
Prognosis is worst for HER2 overexpressing and the basal type, best for Luminal A, and intermediate for Luminal B.
Luminal A: most common, low grade, responsive to anti-hormonals, not that responsive to chemo
Luminal B: Variable grade, variable chemo response, usually anti-hormonal responsive
Her-2-Neu: usually high grade, lymph nodes positive at presentation, chemotherapy responsive, often trastuzamab and lapatinib responsive
Basal: high grade, premenopausal african american women, BRCA 1 associated, chemo responsive
Growing evidence suggests only small subclass of cancer cell within a given tumor are actually tumorigenic. In breast cancer, these cells carry CD44+/CD24- phenotype
These cells are self-renewing, and persist in small numbers through passaging
A gene signature differentiating these cells from normal breast epithelium is able to select patients with poor overall survival and poor mets-free survival. It probably does this by identifying tumors that have a high proportion of cancer cells with invasive phenotype
Marseille, 2007 PMID 17476019 -- "A gene signature in breast cancer." (Bertucci F, N Engl J Med. 2007 May 3;356(18):1887-8; author reply 1887-8.)
Comment on PMID 17229949. Use of IGS profile on basal and luminal samples
Conclusion: Basal-cell BCA enriched in tumorigenic BCA cells or have similar tumorigenic capability, which partially explains poor prognosis of basal cell BCA
Michigan, 2007 PMID 17229949 -- "The prognostic role of a gene signature from tumorigenic breast-cancer cells." (Liu R, N Engl J Med. 2007 Jan 18;356(3):217-26.)
Comparison of gene expression profile in tumorigenic ("cancer stem cells") CD44+/CD24- cells and normal breast epithelium. 186 gene signtaure generated (IGS = invasiveness gene signature).
10-year outcome stratification: OS 98% vs. 62%, and mets-free survival (82% vs. 54%)
Also associated with prognosis in medulloblastoma, lung CA, and prostate CA
Michigan, 2003 PMID 12629218 -- "Prospective identification of tumorigenic breast cancer cells." (Al-Hajj M, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Apr 1;100(7):3983-8.)
Only minority of cells had ability to form new tumors: CD44+/CD24-
As few as 100 cells could for tumors in mice, while >10,000 cells of other phenotypes couldn't form tumors
Self renewing; persist through passaging
Some institutions could not demonstrate EIC impact on LR, partly due to variability in amount of tissue removed during surgery (thus making SM- more likely)
Ultimately it was demonstrated that if SM-, EIC status is irrelevant. Thus, EIC serves as a marker for high DCIS burden in the breast and higher rate of local failure, but if margins can be cleared, breast conservation + RT is reasonable
1994 (1982-1985) PMID 8082077 -- "The relationship between microscopic margins of resection and the risk of local recurrence in patients with breast cancer treated with breast-conserving surgery and radiation therapy." (Schnitt SJ, Cancer. 1994 Sep 15;74(6):1746-51.)
Retrospective. 181 patients with Stage I-II invasive BCA, treated with surgery + RT >=60 Gy. Median F/U 7.2 years
Recurrence rate EIC-: no difference if SM+ vs. SM- (<10%)
Recurrence rate EIC+: if SM+ 50% vs. SM- 0%
1990 (1968-1982) PMID 2173044 -- "Early breast cancer: predictors of breast recurrence for patients treated with conservative surgery and radiation therapy." (Boyages J, Radiother Oncol. 1990 Sep;19(1):29-41.)
Retrospective. 783 patients treated with gross excision (margins not routinely assessed) + RT >=60 Gy
5-year recurrence: EIC+ 24% vs. EIC- 6% (SS)
"True recurrence" (same quadrant): EIC+ 88% vs. EIC- 55%
1984 PMID 6318957 -- "Pathologic predictors of early local recurrence in Stage I and II breast cancer treated by primary radiation therapy." (Schnitt SJ, Cancer. 1984 Mar 1;53(5):1049-57.)
Retrospective. 231 patients histology reviewed, and 5-year LR calculated
Modeling. SEER data from 83,686 women with T1-2, ALND done (58,070 N0 and 25,616 N+), no mets
Death rate for N0 patients: 0.3cm 10% vs. 5cm 25%
Death rate for N+ patients: 0.3cm 20% vs. 5cm 40%
Conclusion: Both tumor size and lymph node status independently predict for mortality, and probably represent different processes (growth velocity vs. metastatic potential)
Erasmus Univ, 2005 (Netherlands) PMID 15978801 -- "Hereditary breast cancer growth rates and its impact on screening policy." (Tilanus-Linthorst MM, Eur J Cancer. 2005 Jul;41(11):1610-7.)
80 BRCA1/2 carriers and women at high risk for familial BCA; tumor doubling time (DT) estimated
Mean DT (BRCA/high risk): carriers 45 days, non-carriers 84 days (SS)
Only age correlated with DT: mean DT slowed to 50% in each successive decade-older group (75d premenopausal vs. 153d postmenopausal)
Conclusion: consider bi-annual screening for high risk women <40 years old
Virginia, 1993 PMID 8443754 -- "Mammographic assessment of human breast cancer growth and duration." (Spratt JA, Cancer. 1993 Mar 15;71(6):2020-6.)
Growth rates: 10 - 7051 days; no clear relationship to age
Median DT: Women <50 80 days, women 50-70 157 days, women >70 188 days
Diseases of the Breast (Haagensen CD ed, Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1986)
~5 years for tumor to reach palpable size
See also: Radiation_Oncology/Breast/Regional_Lymphatics
Newly diagnosed T1-T2 BCA have ~30% chance of axillary LN mets (function of age, size, grade)
If clinically negative axilla -> ~30% positive on dissection
If clinically positive axilla -> ~25% negative on dissection
NSABP B-32 Abstract "Preliminary technical results of NSABP B-32, a randomized phase III clinical trial to compare sentinel node resection to conventional axillary dissection in clinically node-negative breast cancer patients [abstract]." (Julian TB, Breast Cancer Res Treat 2004, 88:S11-S12.)
Randomized. 5611 patients. Treated with 1) SLN alone or 2) SLN + axillary dissection. If SLN+, then complete axillary dissection
USC, 2001 PMID 11376414 -- "Predicting axillary nodal positivity in 2282 patients with breast carcinoma." (Silverstein MJ, World J Surg. 2001 Jun;25(6):767-72.)
Predictors for LN+: LVI (16% vs. 2%), large tumors, high grade (8% G3 vs. 4%), palpable tumors (3% vs. 3%). If all factors negative, 3% LN+; if 3 factors negative 6%
Conclusion: Features can be used to estimate risk of ALN+
Eindhoven, 2000 (Netherlands), PMID 10989986 -- "The risk of nodal metastases in breast cancer patients with clinically negative lymph nodes: a population-based analysis." (Voogd AC, Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2000 Jul;62(1):63-9.)
Population-based study 1984-1997, 7680 patients with invasive BCA, 6663 axillary dissection
Predictors: type, size, location, number of nodes examined
By SLN mapping: <1% localized to IM in NSABP B-32, 14% in Spanish study
If SLN localized to IM or dissection with medial tumors: ~10% LN+
If axilla LN- -> ~10% positive
If axilla LN+ -> ~30% positive
Barcelona, 2004 (Spain) PMID 15465187 -- "Incidence of internal mammary node metastases after a sentinel lymph node technique in breast cancer and its implication in the radiotherapy plan." (Farrus B, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2004 Nov 1;60(3):715-21.)
Prospective. 225 patients with SLN mapping for early BCA
IM nodes: 31/225 (14%) SLN drainage to IM. No biopsy attempted by design in 11 cases. Biopsy performed successfully in 14/20 cases (69%). LN+ in 2/14 (14%). Overall LN+ 2/116 (1.7%)
Milan, 2002 PMID 12417517 -- "Stage migration after biopsy of internal mammary chain lymph nodes in breast cancer patients." (Galimberti V, Ann Surg Oncol. 2002 Nov;9(9):924-8.)
Retrospective. 182 patients biopsied after SLN or because medial tumor
Conclusion: IMN technically easy, and 10% results in upstaging with modified RT and chemo treatments
British Columbia, 2000 (1989-1995) PMID 10920130 -- "Relationship between tumor location and relapse in 6,781 women with early invasive breast cancer." (Lohrisch C, J Clin Oncol. 2000 Aug;18(15):2828-35.)
Retrospective. Early BCA. Grouped by low risk/high risk, and systemic chemo/no chemo
High risk, adjuvant chemo patients: medial location associated with 50% excess risk of systemic relapse (33% vs. 26%, SS) and BCA-death (25% vs. 20%, SS), compared to lateral location
Low risk, or high risk with no adjuvant chemo: no difference
Conclusion: 2X risk of relapse and BCA-death possibly due to occult spread to IM nodes
While conceptually interesting, in the US it is felt that it may not add addition value in current management with aggressive chemotherapy. Also, QA of testing was extremely difficult
Multinational, 2005 PMID 16120859 -- "A pooled analysis of bone marrow micrometastasis in breast cancer." (Braun S, N Engl J Med. 2005 Aug 25;353(8):793-802.)
Meta-analysis. Individual data from 9 studies involving 4703 patients. Stage I, II, or III breast CA. Median F/U 5.2 years
Prevalence: overall 31%; present in women with larger tumors, higher grade, LN+, and ER-
Prevalence by subgroup: T1 25%, T2 33%, T3 38%, T4 60%; Grade 1 22%, Grade 2 30%, Grade 3 35%; N0 26%, N1 30%, N2 40%, N3 50%; ER/PR/her2- 34%, at least one positive 29%; pT1N0 without systemic therapy 22%
Prognosis: worse OS (mortality ratio 2.1) and worse BCA-specific survival (mortality ratio 2.4)
LMU (Germany) 2001 PMID 11230493 -- "Comparative analysis of micrometastasis to the bone marrow and lymph nodes of node-negative breast cancer patients receiving no adjuvant therapy." (Braun S, J Clin Oncol. 2001 Mar 1;19(5):1468-75.)
Prospective. 150 node-negative patients with Stage I/II. Anti-CK staining for micromets
Micromets in: Bone marrow 29%, LN 9%, both 1%
Bone marrow micromets independent risk factor for cancer-related death (HR 6.1)
Milan; 2007 PMID 17952122 -- "Breast cancer metastases are molecularly distinct from their primary tumors." (Vecchi M, Oncogene. 2007 Oct 22; [Epub ahead of print])
26 matched primary breast tumors and LN mets to identify 270 discriminating probesets. Further independent 81 breast tumors and 32 distant mets to refine 126 probeset. Verified on independent 57 primary tumors and matched LN mets. 1/3 of differentially expressed genes were from epithelial component. Two of these modified cell motility in vitro
Conclusion: Breast CA mets are molecularly distinct from their primary tumors
1999 PMID 9989510 -- "The link between local recurrence and distant metastases in human breast cancer." (Koscielny S, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1999 Jan 1;43(1):11-24.)
If no local recurrence (LR), monthly mets rate decreases continuously
If local recurrence, excess mets seeded after initial treatment (from residual disease)
Each year, a small proportion of grade 1 residual disease progresses to grade 2, and significantly increases chance of distant mets
1991 PMID 1756255 -- "Natural history of human breast cancer: recent data and clinical implications." (Tubiana M, Breast Cancer Res Treat. 1991 Aug;18(3):125-40.)
For tumors of a given size, strong correlation between grade and development of distant mets
Similarly, low grade tumors need to be significantly larger than high grade tumors before development of distant mets
Proportion of grade 1 tumors higher in smaller tumors; suggests that tumors progress toward higher grade during growth (~20% of grade 1 progress to grade 2 per year)
1989 PMID 2744888 -- "Growth rate, kinetics of tumor cell proliferation and long-term outcome in human breast cancer." (Tubiana M, Int J Cancer. 1989 Jul 15;44(1):17-22.)
Cells with rapid growth rate (high thymidine labelling index) have higher rates of distant mets
LI and grade two most important prognostic indicators for relapse or death
1989 PMID 2736212 -- "The natural history of human breast cancer. The relationship between involvement of axillary lymph nodes and the initiation of distant metastases." (Koscielny S, Br J Cancer. 1989 May;59(5):775-82.)
For tumors of a given size, strong correlation between number of LN+ and development of distant mets
Lymphatic spread is on average acquired much earlier than hematogenous spread
1984 PMID 6733019 -- "Breast cancer: relationship between the size of the primary tumour and the probability of metastatic dissemination." (Koscielny S, Br J Cancer. 1984 Jun;49(6):709-15.)
Retrospective. 2648 patients treated 1954-1972 without chemotherapy
Proportion of patients with distant mets increases with tumor size. This suggests "threshold volume" (median 3.5cm, log-normal distribution) for each tumor, when first remote met is initiated (ie BCA not immediately metastatic, and local cure is possible)
Threshold volume correlated with grade and number of +LN
1962 PMID 13870135 -- "Natural history of untreated breast cancer (1805-1933). Comparison of untreated and treated cases according to histological grade of malignancy." (Bloom HJ, Br Med J. 1962 Jul 28;2(5299):213-21.)
Retrospective. 250 patients with pathologic diagnosis of breast CA. Manchester system Stage II 2.4%, Stage III 23%, Stage IV 74%
For BRCA in male breast cancer, see Radiation Oncology/Breast/Male breast cancer
See also page at Radiation_Oncology/Breast/Early_breast/BCT#BRCA1/BRCA2
Review; 2011 PMID 21134653 -- "Radiotherapy in the treatment of hereditary breast cancer." (Pierce LJ, Semin Radiat Oncol. 2011 Jan;21(1):43-50.)
Netherlands; 2014 (1980-2011) PMID 24947112 -- "Improved overall survival after contralateral risk-reducing mastectomy in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers with a history of unilateral breast cancer: A prospective analysis." (A M Heemskerk-Gerritsen B, Int J Cancer. 2014 Jun 20. -- [Epub ahead of print])
583 pts with BRCA-associated breast cancer. 42% (242 pts) treated with contralat mastectomy; 341 without.
Median f/u 11.4 yr. Lower incidence of contralat breast cancer (2% vs 19%: mastect vs control). Lower mortality (HR 0.49)
U. Toronto; 2014 PMID 24519767 -- "Contralateral mastectomy and survival after breast cancer in carriers of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations: retrospective analysis." (Metcalfe K, BMJ. 2014 Feb 11;348:g226.)
Retrospective. 390 women with Stage I-II BRCA-associated breast cancer, treated with mastectomy. Compared outcomes of those who had mastectomy of the contralateral breast (181 pts) vs those who did not (209 pts).
Median f/u 14.3 yr. 20-yr survival 88% (contralat mastectomy) vs 66% (without). Ccontralat mastectomy was associated with a 48% reduction in death from breast cancer
Conclusion: "This study suggests that women who are positive for BRCA mutations and who are treated for stage I or II breast cancer with bilateral mastectomy are less likely to die from breast cancer than women who are treated with unilateral mastectomy. Given the small number of events in this cohort, further research is required to confirm these findings."
Dutch MRISC Screening Study; 2010 (1999-2006) PMID 21079137 -- "BRCA1-associated breast cancers present differently from BRCA2-associated and familial cases: long-term follow-up of the Dutch MRISC Screening Study." (Rijnsburger AJ, J Clin Oncol. 2010 Dec 20;28(36):5265-73. Epub 2010 Nov 15.)
Prospective screening study. 2,157 women, >15% cumulative lifetime risk of BCA (CLTR). Group 1: BRCA1/BRCA2 carriers, Group 2: high CLTR (30-50%), Group 3: moderate CLTR (15-30%). Biannual clinical breast exam, annual MRI and mammography screening. Median F/U 5 years
Outcome: MRI sensitivity better than mammography for invasive cancer, no difference for DCIS. BRCA1 results worse than BRCA2 results. 6-year OS Group 1 84%, Group 2 93% and Group 3 100%
Conclusion: Screening results worse in BRCA1 mutation carriers, but 6-year OS high in all groups
U. Michigan; 2010 PMID 20411323 -- "Local therapy in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers with operable breast cancer: comparison of breast conservation and mastectomy." (Pierce LJ, Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Jun;121(2):389-98.)
655 pts with BRCA1/2 mutations and breast cancer, 302 treated with BCT and 353 with mastectomy.
15-yr local failure (as first failure) 23.5% (BCT) vs 5.5% (M). If BCT + chemotherapy, decreased risk of 11.9%. Most were second primary cancers rather than true local recurrences. Contralateral breast cancer risk 40% in all groups, not affected by use of RT. No differences in regional or distant recurrence rates or overall survival.
Conclusion: Similar survival whether treated with M or BCT. Women treated with BCT have elevated risk of ipsilateral breast recurrence. Risk of ipsilateral recurrence with BCT reduced by use of chemotherapy. High rate of contralateral cancers.
Retrospective, multicenter cohort study. 2020 pts with BRCA+ breast cancer.
Risk of contralateral breast cancer 47.4% at 25 yrs. Higher risk (1.6x) for BRCA1 vs BRCA2. Higher risk with younger age at diagnosis for BRCA1 pts: 62.9% 25-yr risk if age <40, vs. 19.6% if age >50.
Conclusion: contralateral breast cancer risk depends on age at first breast cancer diagnosis.
Harvard; 2007 (1999-2007) PMID 17761984 -- "Primary fallopian tube malignancies in BRCA-positive women undergoing surgery for ovarian cancer risk reduction." (Callahan MJ, J Clin Oncol. 2007 Sep 1;25(25):3985-90.)
Retrospective. 122 BRCA+ patients with prophylactic ovarian CA surgery. Median age 46 years
Outcome: 6% early malignancy, 100% (n=7) originated in distal fallopian tube, 2 already surface implants on the ovary
Conclusion: Distal fallopian tube dominant site of origin for BRCA+ women at risk for GYN carcinomas
Population-based study. 1545 women with medical records and paraffin-embedded tumor blocks. BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation in 10% of women with Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry
Outcome: HR for death comparable for carriers and non-carriers
Conclusion: BCA-specific death rate similar for carriers of BRCA founder mutations and non-carriers
U. Michigan; 2006 PMID 16636335 -- "Ten-year multi-institutional results of breast-conserving surgery and radiotherapy in BRCA1/2-associated stage I/II breast cancer." (Pierce LJ, J Clin Oncol. 2006 Jun 1;24(16):2437-43.)
Retrospective. 160 BRCA+ breast ca pts matched with controls, all treated with BCS.
No significant difference in ipsilateral breast tumor recurrence: 10-yr: 12% (BRCA+) vs 9%; 15-yr 24% vs 17%. BRCA+ pts had a higher risk of contralateral breast cancer: 39% vs 7% at 15 yrs.
Conclusion: IBTR risk similar between carriers and controls. Increased risk of contralateral breast cancers.
France; 2005 PMID 16140006 -- "Risk of breast cancer recurrence and contralateral breast cancer in relation to BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation status following breast-conserving surgery and radiotherapy." (Kirova YM, Eur J Cancer. 2005 Oct;41(15):2304-11.)
131 pts with family history "non-carriers" (including 27 with BRCA1/2 mutations "carriers"; 20.6%) compared with 261 matched controls with breast cancer. Cancers were more likely to be high grade and ER-negative in those with BRCA mutations. Median f/u 8 yrs.
No significant differences in breast cancer recurrence as first event seen between BRCA1/2 tumors and controls or non-carriers and controls. Higher rate of contralateral breast cancer in all pts with a family history and in those with BRCA1/2 mutations vs non-carriers. Ipsilateral breast cancer recurrence not higher for BRCA1/2 mutations vs non-carriers
Conclusion: "These results support the hypothesis that breast tumours in BRCA carriers are more sensitive to radiation. Therefore, breast-conserving treatment can be offered to these patients. However, longer follow-up is needed to ensure that the rate of new primary cancer in the treated breast does not increase in the long-term."
Toronto; 2004 PMID 15197194 -- "Contralateral breast cancer in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers." (Metcalfe K, J Clin Oncol. 2004 Jun 15;22(12):2328-35.)
Risk of contralateral breast cancer was 29.5% at 10 years. In women who not have an oophorectomy or take tamoxifen, the risk of contralateral cancer was 43.4% for BRCA1 carriers and 34.6% for BRCA2 carriers.
Substantial risk of contralateral breast cancer at 10 yrs
2000 PMID 11013276 -- "Effect of radiotherapy after breast-conserving treatment in women with breast cancer and germline BRCA1/2 mutations." (Pierce LJ, J Clin Oncol. 2000 Oct 1;18(19):3360-9.)
Conclusion: "There was no evidence of increased radiation sensitivity or sequelae in breast tissue heterozygous for a BRCA1/2 germline mutation compared with controls, and rates of tumor control in the breast and survival were comparable between BRCA1/2 carriers and controls at 5 years."
Toronto; 2011 No PMID yet -- "Prospective Study of Breast Cancer Incidence in Women With a BRCA1 or BRCA2 Mutation Under Surveillance With and Without Magnetic Resonance Imaging." (Warner E, J Clin Oncol. online before print; 2011 Mar 28)
Total of 1275 women with BRCA mutation -- 445 on a MRI screening protocol and 830 controls not screened with MRI.
Conclusion: annual surveillance with MRI is associated with a significant reduction in the incidence of advanced-stage breast cancer in BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers.
See page at: Radiation Oncology/Ovary/Epithelial ovarian#BRCA Mutations
Switzerland, 2007 PMID 17693646 -- "Therapeutic impact of 2-[fluorine-18]fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography in the pre- and postoperative staging of patients with clinically intermediate or high-risk breast cancer." (Klaeser B, Ann Oncol. 2007 Aug;18(8):1329-34.)
Retrospective. 114 patient with clinically intermediate or high-risk BCA, 73 PET prior to surgery, 41 after surgery.
Change in treatment: overall 32%; curative vs. palliative change 20% , RT planning 27%, surgical planning 8%, chemotherapy 11%, bisphosphonates 13%
Conclusion: PET may have substantial impact, including RT planning
CAP 2000 PMID 10888772 -- "Prognostic factors in breast cancer. College of American Pathologists Consensus Statement 1999" (Fitzgibbons PL, Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2000 Jul;124(7):966-78.
Category I (proven and useful): TNM, histologic grade, histologic type, mitotic count, ER/PR status
Category II (not yet validated): Her2/neu, proliferation markers, LVI, p53
Harvard, 2000 - PMID 1065636 — "The significance of extracapsular extension of axillary lymph node metastases in early-stage breast cancer." Hetelekidis S et al. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2000 Jan 1;46(1):31-4.
ECE did not predict for poor DFS or OS, or local, nodal, or distant failures. ECE correlates with the number of involved LN.
Milan, 2007 (Italy) PMID 17548841 -- "Plasma testosterone and prognosis of postmenopausal breast cancer patients." (Micheli A, J Clin Oncol. 2007 Jul 1;25(19):2685-90.)
Retrospective. 194 patients, T1-2N0, no chemotherapy
Outcome: high testosterone (>= 0.4 ng/ml) resulted in significantly lower EFS (HR 2.05, SS). 5-year EFS: 83% vs. 76%; 10-year 70% vs. 52%; 15-year 67% vs. 36%
Conclusion: Testosterone levels should be determined as part of prognostic workup
Australia; 2000 PMID 10758316 -- "Occult breast carcinoma presenting as axillary metastases." Foroudi et al. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2000 Apr 1;47(1):143-7.
MDACC; 2010 PMID 20564117-- "Population-based analysis of occult primary breast cancer with axillary lymph node metastasis." Walker et al. Cancer. 2010 Jun 8.
SEER analysis of 750 cases of occult breast cancer. Mastectomy or ALND w/ RT (n = 470) had a 10-year OS rate of 65% vs 59% for patients who underwent ALND only (n = 126) vs 48% for patients who underwent observation only (n = 94). Mastectomy showed no difference in OS or CSS over ALND with RT.
No benefit shown in randomized trials for acupuncture, soy phytoestrogens, red clover, black cohosh
Vitamin E showed a statistically significant, but clinically small benefit of one hot flash reduction/day compared to placebo
Gabapentin can reduce hot flash frequency by ~50%
Significant benefit shown for several antidepresants (Paxil, Effexor, Prozac)
Please see details at the Supportive care/exercise page
Several randomized trials have shown that exercise during/after breast cancer therapy is benefitical. However, compliance can be a problem
The EBCTCG meta-analyses (a.k.a. "Oxford overviews") are referenced in the following chapters:
Early breast/BCT (under subheading "meta-analyses")
Post-mastectomy (under subheading "meta-analysis")
ASTRO/ARRO Journal Club Webinar 2011 - "Association Between the 21-Gene Recurrence Score Assay and Risk of Locoregional Recurrence in Node-Negative, ER–Positive Breast Cancer: Results From NSABP B-14 and NSABP B-20" with Thomas Buchholz, MD
A useful methodology to employ in assessing the conditions of poverty in Austria and the Czech Republic is not simply discussing the conditions of poverty in the country themselves, but to put the conditions in the context of global and European poverty. Although the conditions of poverty in Austria and the Czech Republic will be discussed a context for how these countries are performing in relation to European and global poverty will be provided. In short, this approach will allow for a broader understanding of the issue in regard to the conditions of global, European and finally a specific analysis of poverty in Austria and Czech Republic.
Poverty throughout the world is an enormous issue the international community seeks to alleviate. Most recently the international community, in its Millennium Development Goals, adopted by 189 world leaders at a 2000 UN summit, has called attention to this problem by charting a course to reduce by 50% the number of people living on less than $1 a day by the year 2015. This goal will certainly be challenging as the population continues to grow and resources become scarce. In addition to this challenge the recent global economic crisis has also curtailed efforts and gains in reducing poverty. According to Global Issues.org, access to water is becoming a major issue, as “1.1 billion people in developing countries have inadequate access to water and 2.6 billion people lack basic sanitation.”[1] Secondly, as wars between nations and internal conflicts within nations continue to rage the plight of refugees, internally displaced people and the process of migration become more problematice. As these people move about in an effort to escape the violence they often leave with nothing and thus struggle to survive while living in poverty. Using Afghanistan as example – a country who has been inflicted with 30 years of civil upheaval and radical devolution of political, economic, and military authority - Refugees International has the following to say about Afghanistan’s situation:
Millions of Afghans need help rebuilding their lives and country. While all Afghans suffer the government’s poor capacity and lack of services, Afghan returnees and internally displaced have been neglected and are particularly vulnerable.[2] Today more that three million registered refugees remain in exile- 2.1 million in Pakistan and 0.9 million in Iran- and hundreds of thousands more are living abroad to escape economic hardship or targeted violence. [3]
In addition to these realities, the World Bank has reported that:
“the global economic crisis left an additional 50 million people in extreme poverty in 2009 and will leave some 64 million impoverished by the end of 2010, primarily in sub-Saharan Africa and eastern and southeastern Asia.[4] Hunger may also have spiked in 2009 – with over 1 billion people undernourished – as a consequence of the global food and financial crises.[5] Moreover, the effects of the crises are likely to persist with poverty rates slightly higher than they would have been had the world economy grown steadily at its pre-crisis pace, it said.” [6]
Interestingly it is China alone that overwhelmingly drives the numbers in regard to how the world is progressing in the field of reducing poverty. For example, the World Bank has noted that “between 1981 and 2005, the poverty rate has fallen by about 25%, however while this sounds encouraging, it masks regional variations, and perhaps most glaringly the impact of China.”[7] The World Bank continues, “China’s poverty rate fell from 85% to 15.9%, or by over 600 million people, China accounts for nearly all the world’s reduction in poverty and excluding China from the data would yield a reduction in poverty by only 10%.”[8]
In an effort to tackle poverty in Europe the European Union has launched a campaign called ‘2010 European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion’ to help the estimated 84 million Europeans currently considered at risk of poverty. “The key objectives are to raise public awareness about these issues and renew the political commitment of the EU and its Member States to combat poverty and social exclusion.”[9] A 2008 report on poverty levels in Europe was concluded that the 16% of Europeans considered at risk of poverty fell within a range of 10% to 23% in terms of how much each countries population was at risk throughout the 27 member states of the EU. The EU rate, in comparison to the Czech Republic found that only 10% of the Czech population was considered at risk of poverty- the lowest in the EU. The EU rate, in comparison to Austria found that only 12% of Austrians are considered at risk of poverty. In regard to social exclusion the EU is encourage member states to coordinate their approaches in fighting poverty and social exclusion by placing it at the top of their political agenda. The EU estimates that social transfers- the public policy measures which makes it possible for people to achieve up-ward mobility and thus decrease overall social exclusion- reduced the risk of poverty by 38% on average in the EU, but this impact varies from less than 10% to nearly 60% across Europe. For example, one aspect helping to drive down poverty in CZ is through the public policy agenda centered on social transfers. According to a study conducted by the EU, social transfers in the Czech Republic have helped reduce poverty by 50%.
In general view of Europe, “low levels of poverty characterize the Scandinavian countries, the so-called Corporatist countries (Austria, Germany) and the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Slovenia among the ex-Socialist countries.”[10] In contrast the risk of poverty tends to be relatively high in the Mediterranean and the Baltic States. Countries with the highest poor population include France, Germany, Italy, Poland, Spain and the UK.
Looking at the conditions of poverty in the countries of Austria and Czech Republic one can clearly see that these nations are doing exceptionally well when compared to others, especially the countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and Southern Asia. So what has set Austria and the Czech Republic apart from other nations in increasing individual wealthy and thus less of their respective populations residing in poverty? In answering this question I have found that the common link existing between Austria and the Czech Republic are the social programs and support available to their respective citizens, which have made those nations successful in reversing the tide of poverty while increasing the purchasing power of their citizens.
Taking a closer look at indicators of Austria’s level of poverty a study was conducted by the United Nations. Below are the UN’s findings as compared to the United States:
Source: Human Development Report 2000; Trends in human development and per capita income
Although this data was taken in 2000 it not only gives a solid indication of Austria’s economic success when compared to the United States but more importantly it speaks to the prowess of Austria’s ability to sustain and improve its human development. From 1975-1998 Austria’s human development and per capita income steadily increased this is significant because human development encompasses life expectancy, literacy, average number of years of schooling, and income to assess a country’s performance in providing for its people’s welfare and security [11]. In addition to this study the UN also provides reasoning to explain how Austria is able to achieve such favorable human development and per capita income rates thus reducing poverty. Specifically the report states that, “living standards are very high, and due to socialist policies of the federal government, the incidence of poverty is minimal.”[12]
Another interesting aspect highlighting why Austria’s method of dealing with the issue of poverty and homelessness lies in their infrastructure to provide for their citizens who are in need of help. In another study conducted in 2005 by Helix, a clinical research and consulting firm located in Salzburg, Austria concluded the following:
In some counties like Vienna, Salzburg, Tyrol and Vorarlberg there are chain like structures of services in force. Centers for counseling and prevention of eviction –emergency shelters and day care institutions – supported housing and provisions for re-housing. In the counties Styria, Upper Austria and Nether Austria emergency services still have an overweight and provisions headed on resettlement are less elaborated. In the counties Carinthia and Burgenland there are only very few services for homeless persons provided – especially emergency services like shelters and asylums. In some counties (like Vienna, Tyrol, Styria) some old fashioned asylums are still working and can be characterized by low standards and very low provisions of individual support. Beside the professional emergency services in most counties of Austria cheap boarding houses and private hostels are accessible also for homeless persons and used for temporary shelter.
Austria uniquely offers an extensive support system throughout its country to help those in poverty and at risk of going into poverty. One characteristic about the country’s apparuts to deal with poverty is the mix of institutions it offers in order to meet the needs of its citizenary. From the chain-like structures, emergency shelters, day care, aylums, boarding houses and private hostels Austria has a plethora of institutions to support its citizenary.
One unique aspect about the Czech Republic society is that the citizenry enjoy vast benefits from their government in the role of state aid for social support. The Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs (MoLSA) is charged with administering the aid. MoLSA was established in 1990 and is responsible for all social and labour aspects in the Czech Republic such as social services, social benefits, and social security, equal opportunity for all citizens as well as migration and integration of foreigners. Under a national law passed on 1 January 2008, titled State Social Support, the “citizens have a right to benefits if they and the household members assessed with them are permanent residents in the Czech Republic or if they are EU citizens- subject of directly applicable legislation of the European Communities.”[13] The benefits, as administered by the MoLSA, are outlined below:
Child allowance is a basic long-term benefit provided to families with dependent children. A dependent child up to the age of 26 years, living in a family with an income of less than 2.4 times the family’s living minimum is entitled to this allowance. [14]
The aim of this benefit is to be help families with low incomes to cover the costs of their children’s needs. Parents who care for at least one dependent child are entitled to this allowance provided the family income is the previous calendar quarter does not exceed 2.0 times the family’s living minimum. The higher the family income, the lower the monthly allowance. Te social allowance may be raised in cases where the child has a long-term severe disability, a long term disability or a long-term illness. A higher level of social allowance is also paid to families in cases of multiple births- up to the age of three years and to family whose child is studying secondary school on a daily basis or attending university. [15]
Property owners or tenants registered as permanently resident in that property are entitled to a housing allowance of 30% (in Prague 35%) of family income is sufficient to cover housing costs and at the same time this 30% (in Prague 35%) of family income is lower than the relevant prescriptive costs set by law. The level of housing allowance is set as the difference between prescriptive housing costs and the relevant family income multiplied by a coefficient of 0.03 (in Prague 0.35). [16]
A parent who personally and duly cares for a child who is the youngest in the family is entitled to parental allowance. Parental allowance is provided at four rates that are set at fixed monthly amounts according to duration of drawing- increased rate (11, 400CZK), basic rate (7,600CZK) and lower rate (3,000 CZK). A parent may elect to draw parental allowance for a period of up to two, three or four years of the child.[17]
Dependent children placed in foster care are entitled to an allowance. The child continues to be entitled to this allowance even after reaching adulthood, up to a maximum of 26 years of age, provided that they remain a dependent child and live under the same roof as the former foster parent(s).[18]
A foster parent who takes a child into foster care is entitled to this allowance. The monthly amount of the foster parent allowance equals the individual living minimum for each child placed in foster care. The foster allowance for one child is 3,126CZK a month.[19]
This a one-time benefit for women who have given birth to a child. If a woman who gives birth to a child and dies and the birth grant has not been disbursed, the child’s father is entitled to this grant. Persons who have taken a child up to the age of one year old into permanent care replacing parental care are also entitled to the birth grant. The birth grant amounts to 13,000 CZK for each child born.[20]
The funeral grant is a one-time payment to a person who has arranged for the funeral of a dependent child, or to a person who was the parent of a dependent child, on condition that the deceased was a permanent resident of the Czech Republic on the date of death. The amount of the funeral grant is a fixed sum totaling 5,000 CZK.
The amount of state support the Czech government provides to its citizens is significant and has a tremendously favorable impact on the conditions of poverty in their country as evidence by their lowest ranking of at-risk-poverty among all the EU member states.[21]
^ Biddle, Stephanie, Fotini Christina and F Alexander Their. 2010. Defining Success in
Afghanistan. Foreign Affairs, June 1.
European Centre for Social Welfare Policy and Research. Poverty Across Europe: A Comparison
Between Countries. http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2008/10/081031102640.htm (accessed June 23, 2010).
European Commission: Employment, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunites. “Europe Joins
Forces to Fight Poverty and Social Exclusion.
^ European Commission: Employment, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunites. Austrain
Programe. http://www.2010againstpoverty.eu/export/sites/default/extranet/at_national_programme_en.pdf (accessed June 23, 2010).
^ European Commission: Employment, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunites. EU Initiatives.
^ European Commission: Employment, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunites. Poverty and
Social Exclusion. http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=751&langId=en (accessed June 23, 2010).
^ European Commission: Employment, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunites. Social Protection
^ Encyclopedia of the Nations. Austria- Poverty and Wealth.
^ Global Issues. Poverty Around the World. http://www.globalissues.org/article/4/poverty-around-
^ Kegley, Charles W. World Politics: Trend and Transformation. Belmont, CA: 2009.
^ Lederer, Edith M. Associated Press. UN Says Poor Nations on Track to Cut Poverty.
cQ2FgD9GH7B502 (accessed June 23, 2010).
^ Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs. Welcome. http://www.mpsv.cz/en/
^ Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs. State Social Affairs.
^ Refugees International. Afghanistan. http://www.refugeesinternational.org/where-we-
Kearny, A.T. 2006. "The Globalization Index." Current
History 108, no. 722: 395-401. Academic Search Premier, EBSCOhost (accessed May 20, 2010).
Tomas Sirovatka and Petr Mares. 2006. "Poverty, Social Exclusion and Social Policy in
No. 3, pp. 288-303. Academic Search Premier, EBSCOhost (accessed May 20, 2010).
Horacio Levy, Christine Lietz and Holly Sutherland. 2007. “Swapping Policies:
Alternative Tax-Benefit Strategies to Support Children in Austria, Spain and the
UK.” Journal of Social Policy, 36, 4, pg. 625- 647. Academic Search Premier, EBSCOhost (accessed May 20, 2010).
Christian Karner. 2005. “The Habsburg Dilemma Today: Competing Discourses of
National Identity in Contemporary Austria.” National Identities, Vol. 7, No. 4, pp. 409-432. Academic Search Premier, EBSCOhost (accessed May 20, 2010).
Philippe Legrain. 2004. “Open World: The Truth about Globalization.” Academic Search
Rob Cameron. Cesky Rozhlas. " Chomutov benefit seizures provokes new row over
Romany integration." http://www.radio.cz/en/article/113665 (accessed May 20, 2010).
Isabelle Le Rouzic. Central Europe Review. “From Precarious to Disaffection: The
Homeless in Prague.” http://www.ce-review.org/99/21/lerouzic21.html (accessed May 20, 2010).
Malan, Mia and Shreedhar, Jayalakshmi. 2007. “Time Bomb for Roma.” Academic
Search Premier, EBSCOhost (accessed May 20, 2010).
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Eurasia is mainly located in the northern and eastern hemispheres, with the Atlantic Ocean in the west, the Pacific Ocean in the east, the Arctic Ocean in the north, and Africa, the Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean in the south.
This book is primarily developed by students of the Community Nutrition study at La Trobe University, Australia, as part of their formal learning assessment.
Nutrition for Cycling: Eating well to optimise training
Nutrition & Quick Snack Ideas for Sport Performance
Healthy Eating for 12-13 Year Old Female Adolescents
Healthy Eating for Healthy Living (elderly/basic literacy level)
Researching Nutritional Information & Australian Serving Sizes
Creating Quick and Easy Meals using Common Pantry Items
Sports drinks: are they really doing us good?
The Low Carbohydrate Diet: Risks, Alternatives and Monitoring intake
Calcium and Bone Health for Women (Modified in 2014 by Amy Johns)
Post Menopause: Staying Healthy Through Good Nutrition
How can I eat well on a student budget?
Optimising Iron intake and Energy for Women
Healthy Eating with the Australian Guide to Healthy Eating 2013
Healthy Eating for Young Adults Studying or Working Full-time
The Australian Guide to Healthy Eating and Kilojoule Consumption
Increasing calcium and Vitamin D intake in office workers
Reading Food Labels to Make Healthy Food Choices
Pre Schooler Nutrition. Know your A, B, C's and 1, 2, 3's
Are weight loss diets worth their dollar $?
Eating for Optimal Bone Health in Your 50's
Young Adult Nutrition: A Pathway to Health in Later Life
Calcium, Vitamin D and Bone Health in Women over 50
Dairy for Health & Performance in Sub-elite Female Cyclists
Optimising iron intake in a plant based diet
Helping Middle-Aged Men Choose Healthier Takeaway Foods at Work
Eating Carbohydrates to optimise sprint training and athletic performance
Fad Diets: What are they really doing to you?
Healthy snack ideas on a University student's budget
Answering Questions about Healthy Bones, Women and Calcium
Food For Thought: The downside of eating lunch at your desk & choosing for your health when dining out
Effective Eating for Dancers: Eating for Energy, Concentration and Focus
Tips for Understanding Food Labels to Make Healthy Choices
Healthy Snacks On The Run ft Salt
Eat to succeed: A guide to healthy eating during university exams
Healthy eating for East Asia Student in Australia
Cost Effective Healthy Eating for Students and Part Time Workers
Height: 1.8m/5'11"
Weight: 75kg/165.0lb
Gender Distribution: 50% Male
File:V2dex065.gif
Move types which are good on Crobat: Electric, Ice, Psychic, Rock
Move types which are bad on Crobat: Poison
Move types which are very bad on Crobat: Bug, Grass, Fighting
Move types which don't effect Crobat: Ground
All other move types are normal effectiveness on Crobat.
GS/C/RS/FL: Attract, Double Team, Fly, Frustration, Giga Drain, Hidden Power, Hyper Beam, Protect, Rest, Return, Steel Wing, Sunny Day, Thief, Toxic
RS/FL: Aerial Ace, Facade, Rain Dance, Secret Power, Shadow Ball, Sludge Bomb, Snatch, Taunt, Torment
Template:Wikibooks Pokédex:Zubat Series
One of the main limitations of the Super NES (apart from the slow memory access times) is the main processor. As already stated in the text on the memory mapping page, this was mainly due to the fact that the CPU was supposed to be backward compatible, meaning that in the beginning the SNES was supposed to execute NES ROMs as well as SNES ROMs. For this, the CPU featured a so-called emulation mode.
The processor in the original Nintendo Entertainment System was a Ricoh 2A03 (NTSC) or Ricoh 2A07 (PAL), which was actually a toned-down 6502. It lacked the binary-coded-decimal number support (which, for a time, was used for floating-point numbers until the IEEE754 specification was published) of the 6502, but was otherwise compatible to the processor.
The Super Nintendo Entertainment System was running on a Ricoh 5A22, basically an enhanced version of the 65816. This CPU featured the already mentioned emulation mode, which would be able to execute games the same way the NES did. Also, the SNES used the same methods of addressing more memory than the native register size of the CPU (16 bit) suggested by basically using the same methods as with the older NES (bank switching). Note that these methods can be used also with running in emulation mode. Both the 2A03 and the 5A22 had very similar clock speeds:
Note that the PAL versions always tend to be a tiny bit slower, as NTSC renders 60 (interleaved half-)frames per second, while PAL only renders 50.
The reason why this page until now covered more about the CPU specifications than about direct access memory - which it will do very soon - is to illustrate the small CPU advantage the SNES had compared to the NES. The SNES had 64 times more memory than the NES, but only 2.5 times more CPU power.
One problem that can slow down a CPU significantly (even in today's age) is copying information (bytes) from device A to device B. The CPU is considered to be always faster than the memory it stores the current state in, and waiting for the memory controller to fetch/set the designated byte range can waste several clocks in which - if the CPU is not out-of-order superscalar - totally blocks the execution of the current program (that is, the game's ROM). Needless to say that the several Ricohs were never meant to be that particular sort of CPU.
Direct memory access is a method whereby memory is dynamically copied to another location independently of the CPU. In any modern computer, DMA is an essential requirement. Relating to the SNES, DMA can be used to quickly copy tile and palette data to the video RAM (also called VRAM), which would otherwise be copied by the slow CPU.
Knowledge of DMA is a requirement for creating larger SNES programs, so this tutorial will cover just that.
DMA is used for copying graphics data, such as 8x8 tiles and tile maps, to the VRAM, and palette data to the CGRAM. These locations can only be accessed by reading or writing to certain hardware registers repeatedly (for more information see the memory mapping and the hardware registers page).
To understand the way DMA works, we will take a short look into how the SNES handles its memory.
The console basically has three buses which are connected with several devices within it. These three buses are:
a 24-bit-wide address bus, which handles the communication between the CPU, the cartridge (ROM + SRAM), and the main memory (WRAM) - this is the main bus.
Note that the data bus is really just one byte wide, while the CPU is supplied with various 16-bit registers. That means that one 16-bit register can never be written or read in one bus' cycle clock, but only in two.
The CPU of the SNES contains a DMA controller which supports 8 DMA channels in total. This means that 8 processes of copying chunks from one device to another may be set up and started simultaneously. Each channel can be specifically configured to behave in a certain manner. The channels execute their program, while being the first channel (index 0) with the highest and the eighth channel (index 7) with the lowest priority.
DMA controllers in common PCs can be configured to perform the task they are assigned to in a specific way, which is also called "mode". Also, PC DMA controllers can be used for various other devices, like for all devices connected to the system bus (ISA, PCI, AGP, PCIe).
The SNES supports only one mode, "burst", which basically means that the CPU will halt completely as long as there is at least one DMA process which is not finished yet. The reason for this is that for the transfer both the CPU and the DMA controller use the system bus to communicate with the other devices, but only one device (the master device) can use the system bus at the same time – either the CPU or the controller (more modern controllers offer the opportunity to transfer tiny chunks of data and then give the control of the system bus back to the CPU, immediately requesting the system bus again, so that the CPU may finish its pending operations and then return control of the bus to the controller – or not, if the CPU has to perform lots of memory accesses). Also, the SNES controller can only communicate with either the APU or the PPUs.
The registers of the controller are exposed through the hardware registers from $4200 to $4400 in the system banks $00 – $3F and $80 – $BF. There is a main register which upon writing into will start all DMA transfers it was set to start. Successive registers will contain information for each channel on what the channel is supposed to do, when activated.
While the normal DMA controller can copy the data it was programmed to only in "burst" mode, and this up to 64 KB (one entire bank), the SNES features another method to copy chunks to various devices, which is a little bit like PC DMA controllers work. This kind of DMA is called HDMA (Horizontal Direct Memory Access) and is executed only during H-blank (that is the time it takes for the beam laser to reset to the original position after drawing a line). Since this time span is very very small, only 1 to 4 bytes can be transfered during one H-blank.
Note: x is the index of the channel (indexed by 0 to 7). So basically, 16 bytes of address space are reserved for each channel.
The main DMA register. When writing a byte into it, the controller will activate the channels according to the bitmask of the byte. For example 73 (0100 1001) will activate channel 6, 3 and 0.
Specifies HOW the channel is supposed to perform the transfer, again using a bitmask (see below for more information).
NOTE: This tutorial is incomplete and untested.
NOTE: A DMA channel's transfer size, when set to #$0000, is read as a transfer of 65536 bytes, not 0 bytes.
Here is a macro for loading a palette data into the CGRAM(the place where palettes are stored):
;macro for loading palette data into the CGRAM
;only use if SIZE is less than 256 bytes
;syntax SetPalette LABEL CGRAM_ADDRESS SIZE
Here is a macro for loading a data into the VRAM(the place where tiles and tile maps are stored):
;macro for loading graphics data into the VRAM
;only use if SIZE is less than 256 bytes
;syntax LoadVRAM LABEL VRAM_ADDRESS SIZE
The base processor the 2A03 was built from
The base processor the 5A22 was built from
The Von Neumann bottleneck, explained
What out-of-order execution means and why it is a good thing ... sometimes
How the CPU tries to execute one instruction for several parameters
↑ Pronunciation and Alphabet ↑
Lenis (yumuşak, meaning soft)
b, c, d, g, ğ, j, l, m, n, r, v, y, z
Continuants f/v, ğ/h, j/ş, s/z have strict voicing distinction between fortis and lenis. Non-continuant distinction varies on the speaker: unaspirated/voiceless and strongly aspirated, voiced aspirated/voiceless aspirated.
The table above shows the consonant classifications in Turkish. You don't have to learn these by heart. But you have to know consonant harmony rules below. Voicing rules are a bit problematic, there are a lot of exceptions and irregular words, but devoicing rules has no exceptions.
Consonant lenition (Yumuşama, meaning softening)
When words ending in p take a suffix starting with a vowel, the last consonant p of the word becomes b, making its pronunciation easier.
When words ending in ç take a suffix starting with a vowel, the last consonant ç of the word becomes c, making its pronunciation easier.
When words ending in t take a suffix starting with a vowel, the last consonant t of the word becomes d, making its pronunciation easier.
When words ending in a consonant and k take a suffix starting with a vowel, the last consonant k of the word becomes g, making its pronunciation easier.
When words ending in a vowel and k take a suffix starting with a vowel, the last consonant k of the word becomes ğ, making its pronunciation easier.
Good news: There are many exceptions for p>b, ç>c, t>d rules (especially for p>b and t>d) but k>g and k>ğ rules are generally followed, only most of the monosyllabic words and some polysyllabic borrowings are irregular.
↑ a b There are many irregular words for this rule. Because most of the Turkish words ending in t and p are of Arabic or Persian origin and irregular (some resources claim that sometimes these words may be regular, see the note below for its explanation). Some of the remaining words of Turkish origin are irregular, too (yapıt, kanıt, taşıt etc.). There are monosyllabic Turkish words ending in p, but monosyllabic words occasionally follow the rule, so there're very few regular words ending in t and p.
↑ a b c Most of the monosyllabic words (words consisting of only one syllable, e.g. ok, küp etc.) don't follow this rule. Actually, voicing of a monosyllabic word is an exception. Voicing is very rare in monosyllabic words.
↑ Words of foreign origin don't follow p > b, ç > c or t > d rules and sometimes k > g/ğ rule (examples for these words are olimpiyat, saat etc.). You can encounter some words of foreign origin that follow this rule. An example for this is kitap, which is an Arabic word. Actually this word is not kitap in Arabic, it is kitab. But b becomes p because of the rules of the Turkish language, and it reappears before a vowel. Explanation for this: In modern Turkish, words cannot end in voiced plosive consonants (b, c, d, g). Words ending in these letters became voiceless in Modern Turkish. b, c, d or g becomes p, ç, t or k at the end of the borrowings, but reappears before a vowel. There are some borrowings ending in g, they are exceptions (biyolog, meteorolog etc.).
You don't have to learn these irregular words for now. You will learn as you encounter them.
Fortitive assimilation (sertleşme, hardening)
This rule is for suffixes starting with c, d, g being added to the words ending in fortis consonants. If a suffix starting with c, d or g is added to a word ending in one the fortis consonants (p, ç, t, k, f, h, s, ş), the initial word of the consonant is fortited to ç, t or k. You know that vowels in suffixes can change according to the vowel harmony rules. Consonants can change in suffixes, too. These changeable letters are shown red, and their b, c, d, g versions are written in this book (–dir, –di, etc. instead of –tır, –tı which are also possible forms of these suffixes).
When a suffix beginning with c is added to a word ending in one of the fortis consonants, the initial c of the suffix becomes ç (because c's corresponding unvoiced letter is ç).
When a suffix beginning with d is added to a word ending in one of the fortis consonants, the initial d of the suffix becomes t (because d's corresponding unvoiced letter is t).
When a suffix beginning with g is added to a word ending in one of the fortis consonants, the initial g of the suffix becomes k (because g's corresponding unvoiced letter is k).
sık + –gin → sıkkın
This action takes place when one of the following suffixes "-ı, -i, -u, -ü" is added to a word when the last syllable in that word is the same as the suffix.
The vowels that are "dropped" will be shown in bold.
Ne için - Niçin (why)
This action takes place when a verb ending with an "a" or an "e" has the suffix "-yor" (present continuous tense) added to it, making the "a" or "e" an
"ı" or "i".
The vowels that are raised will be shown in bold.
Sağla + yor = Sağlıyor (make possible)
Turkish Table of Contents view ⋅ edit ⋅ talk
I am...
Are you busy today?
You can give your feedback about this page on the talk page.
Coding divert sockets take a lot of patience. If you have worked with kernels in the past, this is going to be a cakewalk for you. If not, well, you'll get a lot from the experience. But, we aren't working in the kernel, we're working next to it. Don't let yourself get fooled. Don't let yourself get confident, either. The slightest mistake in your code can set off a completely different, undesired function.
Now that you're scared, let's dig down into the meat.
U.S. National Environmental Policy Act (1969)
NEPA is an environmental statute that emphasizes information rather than regulation. NEPA requires the publication of information about the environmental effects and alternatives to potential actions of the federal government. NEPA does not dictate environmental standards or controls.
This is the primary document generated under NEPA. Federal agencies must make a threshold finding of whether the EIS must be prepared, determine the scope and adequacy of the EIS, and then make a summary of existing credible scientific evidence relating to potential environmental impacts of a given project.
A court may not substitute its own judgment for that of the agency, but it must determine that the agency did, in fact, actually consider the environmental issues and make full consideration of all relevant factors.
Artificial intelligence (AI) is often thought to make objective decisions easier. Here, objectivity refers to conclusions based on critical thinking and scientific evidence, where the conclusion is indisputable and there is only one true answer[1]. Made up of formula and algorithms, AI can process vast amounts of data to come to a conclusion that is significantly more accurate, and therefore objective, than a human can achieve[2].
As used by Accenture in their teach-and-test framework for AI[6], the continual connectivity and data processing mentioned previously can be tracked, and decisions or conclusions reached by the AI system can be questioned. The AI can even be coded to justify the decisions it reaches[7]. This can provide peace of mind that the AI is achieving human-centred, unbiased and fair conclusions – objectivity.
It is often argued, however, that the supposed objective decisions made by AI end up becoming subjective because the data sets being used are biased [8][9]. Here, subjectivity refers to a belief based on personal opinions, experiences and feelings and not on scientific evidence[10]. As human beings we all have our own biases, and no one can be truly objective [11]. As we are both creating the AI itself and the data it processes, it can be inherently implied that AI is never going to be objective.
Gender and ethnicity biases are often unconsciously inputted into algorithms. A notable example of this is AI facial recognition software identifying black women as men[12][13]. It is suggested that this is down to the unconscious bias of computer scientists and engineers, the majority of which are white and male[13]. Similarly, when searching for pictures on Google, the word ‘CEO’ will bring up pictures of men and the word ‘helper’ will bring up pictures of women[14]. This is based on biased data sets on what a CEO looks like. Most CEO’s are indeed men, but this is based on historical patriarchal ideas that are generally considered wrong[15].
As AI is becoming increasingly more prominent in everyday life; self-driving cars, Google home devices, advertising, and many more applications, ethics need to be considered. Ethics can be defined as means to tackle the question of morality[16], but ethics can be interpreted differently according to one's opinions, beliefs and perspectives, as a result trying to create AI that is ethical is likely to cause many problems. Especially when these decisions are coupled with potentially biased data [17].
From a mathematical, objective point of view; AI provides significant computing and decision-making power that humans will never be able to accomplish on their own, achieving more of an insight into complex problems. From a subjective, ethical and philosophical stand point; AI will never be truly objective[18] and we’re likely to run into significant problems where AI ‘gets it wrong’, such as the 2010 Flash Crash, in its pursuit to find ‘the truth’ or to reach a logical conclusion[19][20].
As an example, AI could be used in recruitment to eradicate unconscious bias in hiring[21]. However, if a machine learning algorithm was used, data about gender, race, disability etc. could inform the AI to make decisions to hire white, straight, able-bodied men – who according to bias data are the least risky, and therefore, most cost-effective choice of employee[22]. It could easily highlight our own biases and amplify them[20]. And, because machine learning is done in itself, it is a black box – we input data and we get data out, without auditing the results, we could be completely unaware of what data points the AI was using to inform its decision[22].
AI struggles to be truly objective when presented with problems that have ethical questions tied to them[23]. However, evaluating AI from an interdisciplinary perspective ensures that there has been considered thought about the effects of AI and the decisions it has to make. Obviously, computer science and electronic engineering play a huge role in creating the technology, but philosophy and the social sciences such as anthropology, economics and psychology are needed in the development of AI to ensure we produce systems that ‘think’ about the other effects of its conclusions, making AI both useful and safe for humans to use in the future.
↑ Mulder, D. H, Objectivity [Internet]. Sonoma State University, California: Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy; [updated 2004 Sept 9; cited 2018 Dec 9]. Available from: https://www.iep.utm.edu/objectiv/
↑ ICO, Big data, artificial intelligence, machine learning and data protection [Internet]. Cheshire, UK: Information Commissioner's Office; [updated 2017 May 17; cited 2018 Dec 9]. Available from: https://ico.org.uk/media/for-organisations/documents/2013559/big-data-ai-ml-and-data-protection.pdf
↑ Marr, B., What Are Artificial Neural Networks – A Simple Explanation For Absolutely Anyone [Internet]. Forbes; [updated 2018 Sept 24; cited 2018 Dec 9]. Available from:https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2018/09/24/what-are-artificial-neural-networks-a-simple-explanation-for-absolutely-anyone/#4e593bd11245
↑ Estimation, bias, and mean squared error [Internet]. Cambridge, UK: Statistical Laboratory; [updated 2018; cited 2018 Dec 7], pp.2. Available at: http://www.statslab.cam.ac.uk/Dept/People/djsteaching/S1B-15-02-estimation-bias-4.pdf
↑ Luger, G. F., 'Foundations for Connectionists Networks'. In: Artificial Intelligence: Structures and Strategies for Complex Problem Solving. Essex: Pearson Education Limited; 2005. p. 455
↑ Bennink, J., Accenture Launches New Artificial Intelligence Testing Services [Internet]. Chicago: Accenture; [updated 2018 Feb 20; cited 2018 Dec 9]. Available from: https://newsroom.accenture.com/news/accenture-launches-new-artificial-intelligence-testing-services.htm
↑ Cathelat, B., 'How much should we let AI decide for us?' In: Brigitte Lasry, B. and Kobayashi, H., UNESCO and Netexplo. Human Decisions Thoughts on AI. Paris, France: UNESCO Publishing; 2018. p. 132-138. Available from: http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0026/002615/261563E.pdf
↑ Vanian J., Unmasking AI's bias problem [Internet]. New York: Fortune; [updated 2018 Jun 25; cited 2018 Dec 2], Available from: http://fortune.com/longform/ai-bias-problem/
↑ Srinivasan, R., 'The Ethical Dilemmas of Artificial Intelligence' In: Brigitte Lasry, B. and Kobayashi, H., UNESCO and Netexplo. Human Decisions Thoughts on AI. Paris, France: UNESCO Publishing; 2018. p.107. Available from: http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0026/002615/261563E.pdf
↑ Francescotti, R., Subjectivity [Internet]. Abingdon; Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy; [updated 2017 April 24; cited 2018 Dec 9]. Available from: https://www.rep.routledge.com/articles/thematic/subjectivity/v-1
↑ Naughton, J., Don't worry about AI going bad – the minds behind it are the danger [Internet]. London: The Guardian; [updated 2018 Feb 25; cited 2018 Dec 4]. Available from:https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2018/feb/25/artificial-intelligence-going-bad-futuristic-nightmare-real-threat-more-current
↑ Lohr, S., Facial Recognition Is Accurate, if You’re a White Guy [Internet]. New York: The New York Times; [updated 2018 Feb 9; cited 2018 Dec 3]. Available from: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/09/technology/facial-recognition-race-artificial-intelligence.html
↑ a b Buolamwini, J. and Gebru, T. Gender Shades: Intersectional Accuracy Disparities in Commercial Gender Classification. JMLR. 2018. [cited 2018 Dec 3] 81:1–15. Available from: http://proceedings.mlr.press/v81/buolamwini18a/buolamwini18a.pdf
↑ Devlin, H., AI programs exhibit racial and gender biases, research reveals [Internet]. London: The Guardian; [updated 2017 Apr 13; cited 2018 Dec 4]. Available from:https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/apr/13/ai-programs-exhibit-racist-and-sexist-biases-research-reveals
↑ Johnson, A. G., 'What is this thing called patriarchy?' In: The Gender Knot. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press; 1997. p. 6
↑ Mulder, D. H, Ethics [Internet]. Sonoma State University, California: Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy; [updated 2004 Sept 9; cited 2018 Dec 9]. Available from: https://www.iep.utm.edu/ethics/
↑ Bostrom, N. and Yudkowsky, E. 'The ethics of artificial intelligence'. In: The Cambridge Handbook of Artificial Intelligence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2011. p. 316-334. Available from: https://nickbostrom.com/ethics/artificial-intelligence.pdf [cited 2018 Dec 9]
↑ Moor, J. H., 'The Nature, Importance, and Difficulty of Machine Ethics'. In: Anderson, M. and Anderson, S. L. Machine Ethics. New York: Cambridge University Press; 2011. p. 13. Available from: https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=N4IF2p4w7uwC&printsec=frontcover&source=gbs_ge_summary_r&cad=0#v=onepage&q&f=false [cited 2018 Dec 3]
↑ Jøsang, A., Artificial Reasoning with Subjective Logic [Internet]. Trondheim, Norway: Norwegian University of Science and Technology; [updated 1997; cited 2018 Dec 3]. Available from: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.55.6741&rep=rep1&type=pdf
↑ a b Newman, D., Your Artificial Intelligence Is Not Bias-Free [Internet]. Jersey City, New Jersey: Forbes; [updated 2017 Sept 12; cited 2018 Dec 3]. Available from: https://www.forbes.com/sites/danielnewman/2017/09/12/your-artificial-intelligence-is-not-bias-free/#56ed5cfbc783
↑ Lee, A. J., Unconscious Bias Theory in Employment Discrimination Litigation, Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review. 2005. [cited 2018 Dec 3]; 40(2): 481-504. Available from: https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/62c3/a2d2317e9db3931c65870d23834621097770.pdf
↑ a b Tufekci, Z., Machine intelligence makes human morals more important [Internet]. Banff, Canada: TEDSummit; [updated 2016 Jun; cited 2018 Dec 3]. Available from:https://www.ted.com/talks/zeynep_tufekci_machine_intelligence_makes_human_morals_more_important/discussion?referrer=playlist-talks_on_artificial_intelligen#t-1047395
↑ Polonski, V., The Hard Problem of AI Ethics – Three Guidelines for Building Morality Into Machines [Internet], Paris, France: The Forum Network, hosted by the OECD; [updated 2018 Feb 28; cited 2018 Dec 3]. Available from: https://www.oecd-forum.org/users/80891-dr-vyacheslav-polonski/posts/30743-the-hard-problem-of-ai-ethics-three-guidelines-for-building-morality-into-machines
This is a book on the art of rooting and installing custom ROMs on your phone, along with some useful customization options that you can partake to make your Android phone the way you want it to be.
The need to root and install a custom OS
Postage stamps and postal history of Aitutaki
This is one of the block-level tags in HTML. This means that is displays the text on a new line. In this case it is a paragraph. HTML does not recognise the return button on your document, so this element has to be used by the user.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Hill climbing is a technique for certain classes of optimization problems. The idea is to start with a sub-optimal solution to a problem (i.e., start at the base of a hill) and then repeatedly improve the solution (walk up the hill) until some condition is maximized (the top of the hill is reached).
Construct a sub-optimal solution that meets the constraints of the problem
Take the solution and make an improvement upon it
Repeatedly improve the solution until no more improvements are necessary/possible
One of the most popular hill-climbing problems is the network flow problem. Although network flow may sound somewhat specific it is important because it has high expressive power: for example, many algorithmic problems encountered in practice can actually be considered special cases of network flow. After covering a simple example of the hill-climbing approach for a numerical problem we cover network flow and then present examples of applications of network flow.
An illustration of Newton's method: The zero of the f(x) function is at x. We see that the guess xn+1 is a better guess than xn because it is closer to x. (from Wikipedia)
Newton's Root Finding Method is a three-centuries-old algorithm for finding numerical approximations to roots of a function (that is a point
.
. Taking only the first two terms on the right hand side, setting them equal to zero, and solving for
.
This new solution can be the starting point for applying the same procedure again. Thus, in general a better approximation can be constructed by repeatedly applying
.
As shown in the illustration, this is nothing else but the construction of the zero from the tangent at the initial guessing point. In general, Newton's root finding method converges quadratically, except when the first derivative of the solution
Coming back to the "Hill climbing" analogy, we could apply Newton's root finding method not to the function
, but to its first derivative
. This would give the extremal positions of the function, its maxima and minima. Starting Newton's method close enough to a maximum this way, we climb the hill.
The formula for each period is (CFi x (1+ i/100) t , and this will give a polynomial function which is the total cash flow, and equals zero when the interest rate equals the IRR. In using Newton's method, x is the interest rate, and y is the total cash flow, and the method will use the derivative function of the polynomial to find the slope of the graph at a given interest rate (x-value), which will give the xn+1 , or a better interest rate to try in the next iteration to find the target x where y ( the total returns) is zero.
Instead of regarding continuous functions, the hill-climbing method can also be applied to discrete networks.
Suppose you have a directed graph (possibly with cycles) with one vertex labeled as the source and another vertex labeled as the destination or the "sink". The source vertex only has edges coming out of it, with no edges going into it. Similarly, the destination vertex only has edges going into it, with no edges coming out of it. We can assume that the graph is fully connected with no dead-ends; i.e., for every vertex (except the source and the sink), there is at least one edge going into the vertex and one edge going out of it.
We assign a "capacity" to each edge, and initially we'll consider only integral-valued capacities. The following graph meets our requirements, where "s" is the source and "t" is the destination:
We'd like now to imagine that we have some series of inputs arriving at the source that we want to carry on the edges over to the sink. The number of units we can send on an edge at a time must be less than or equal to the edge's capacity. You can think of the vertices as cities and the edges as roads between the cities and we want to send as many cars from the source city to the destination city as possible. The constraint is that we cannot send more cars down a road than its capacity can handle.
The goal of network flow is to send as much traffic from
To organize the traffic routes, we can build a list of different paths from city
. Each path has a carrying capacity equal to the smallest capacity value for any edge on the path; for example, consider the following path
. This rule simply defines a flow to be a function from edges in the graph to real numbers. The function is defined for every edge in the graph. You could also consider the "function" to simply be a mapping: Every edge can be an index into an array and the value of the array at an edge is the value of the flow function at that edge.
. This rule says that if there is some traffic flowing from node u to node v then there should be considered negative that amount flowing from v to u. For example, if two cars are flowing from city u to city v, then negative two cars are going in the other direction. Similarly, if three cars are going from city u to city v and two cars are going city v to city u then the net effect is the same as if one car was going from city u to city v and no cars are going from city v to city u.
. This rule says that the net flow (except for the source and the destination) should be neutral. That is, you won't ever have more cars going into a city than you would have coming out of the city. New cars can only come from the source, and cars can only be stored in the destination. Similarly, whatever flows out of s must eventually flow into t. Note that if a city has three cars coming into it, it could send two cars to one city and the remaining car to a different city. Also, a city might have cars coming into it from multiple sources (although all are ultimately from city s).
.
The following algorithm computes the maximal flow for a given graph with non-negative capacities. What the algorithm does can be easy to understand, but it's non-trivial to show that it terminates and provides an optimal solution.
To do:explain, hopefully using pictures, what the algorithm is doing. Explain its run time. Prove that it is optimal. Show an optimization, by "remembering" the Depth First Search to cut down the time the algorithm takes.
The Ford-Fulkerson algorithm uses repeated calls to Breadth-First Search ( use a queue to schedule the children of a node to become the current node). Breadth-First Search increments the length of each path +1 so that the first path to get to the destination, the shortest path, will be the first off the queue. This is in contrast with using a Stack, which is Depth-First Search, and will come up with *any* path to the target, with the "descendants" of current node examined, but not necessarily the shortest.
In one search, a path from source to target is found. All nodes are made unmarked at the beginning of a new search. Seen nodes are "marked" , and not searched again if encountered again. Eventually, all reachable nodes will have been scheduled on the queue , and no more unmarked nodes can be reached off the last the node on the queue.
During the search, nodes scheduled have the finding "edge" (consisting of the current node , the found node, a current flow, and a total capacity in the direction first to second node), recorded.
This allows finding a reverse path from the target node once reached, to the start node. Once a path is found, the edges are examined to find the edge with the minimum remaining capacity, and this becomes the flow that will result along this path , and this quantity is removed from the remaining capacity of each edge along the path. At the "bottleneck" edge with the minimum remaining capacity, no more flow will be possible, in the forward direction, but still possible in the backward direction.
This process of BFS for a path to the target node, filling up the path to the bottleneck edge's residual capacity, is repeated, until BFS cannot find a path to the target node ( the node is not reached because all sequences of edges leading to the target have had their bottleneck edges filled). Hence memory of the side effects of previous paths found, is recorded in the flows of the edges, and affect the results of future searches.
An important property of maximal flow is that flow can occur in the backward direction of an edge, and the residual capacity in the backward direction is the current flow in the foward direction. Normally, the residual capacity in the forward direction of an edge is the initial capacity less forward flow. Intuitively, this allows more options for maximizing flow as earlier augmenting paths block off shorter paths.
On termination, the algorithm will retain the marked and unmarked states of the results of the last BFS.
Example application of Ford-Fulkerson maximum flow/ minimum cut
The idea is that a flow graph is set up with teams not being able to exceed the number of total wins which a target team can maximally win for the entire season.
There are game nodes whose edges represent the number of remaining matches between two teams, and each game node outflows to two team nodes, via edges that will not limit forward flow; team nodes receive edges from all games they participate. Then outflow edges with win limiting capacity flow to the virtual target node. In a maximal flow state where the target node's total wins will exceed some combination of wins of the other teams, the penultimate depth-first search will cutoff the start node from the rest of the graph, because no flow will be possible to any of the game nodes, as a result of the penultimate depth-first search (recall what happens to the flow , in the second part of the algorithm after finding the path). This is because in seeking the maximal flow of each path, the game edges' capacities will be maximally drained by the win-limit edges further along the path, and any residual game capacity means there are more games to be played that will make at least one team overtake the target teams' maximal wins. If a team node is in the minimum cut, then there is an edge with residual capacity leading to the team, which means what , given the previous statements? What do the set of teams found in a minimum cut represent ( hint: consider the game node edge) ?
Example Maximum bipartite matching ( intern matching )
This matching problem doesn't include preference weightings. A set of companies offers jobs which are made into one big set , and interns apply to companies for specific jobs. The applications are edges with a weight of 1. To convert the bipartite matching problem to a maximum flow problem, virtual vertexes s and t are created , which have weighted 1 edges from s to all interns, and from all jobs to t. Then the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm is used to sequentially saturate 1 capacity edges from the graph, by augmenting found paths.
It may happen that a intermediate state is reached where left over interns and jobs are unmatched, but backtracking along reverse edges which have residual capacity = forward flow = 1, along longer paths that occur later during breadth-first search, will negate previous suboptimal augmenting paths, and provide further search options for matching, and will terminate only when maximal flow or maximum matching is reached.
e have been writing the missing manual for peer-produced peer learning - the “Peeragogy Handbook” (peeragogy.org). Throughout the building of this work, we, ourselves peer learners in this quest, have been mindful of these four questions:
How does a motivated group of self-learners choose a subject or skill to learn?
What does the group need to know about learning theory and practice to put together a successful peer-learning program?
It is clear to us that the techniques of peer production that have built and continue to improve Wikipedia and GNU/Linux have yet to fully demonstrate their power in education. We believe that the Peeragogy Handbook can help change that by building a distributed community of peer learners/educators, and a strongly vetted collection of best practices. Our project complements others’ work on sites like Wikiversity and P2PU, and builds upon understandings that have developed informally in distributed communities of hobbyists and professionals, as well as in (and beyond) the classrooms of generations of passionate educators. Here, we present Peeragogy in Action, a project guide in four parts. Each part relates to one or more sections of our handbook, and suggests activities to try while you explore peer learning. These activities are designed for flexible use by widely distributed groups, collaborating via a light-weight infrastructure. Participants may be educators, community organizers, designers, hackers, dancers, students, seasoned peeragogues, or first-timers. The guide should be useful for groups who want to build a strong collaboration, as well as to facilitators or theorists who want to hone their practice or approach. Together, we will use our various talents to build effective methods and models for peer produced peer learning. Let’s get started! File:Http://metameso.org/~joe/OpenBook-2-1.jpg
Setting the initial challenge and building a framework for accountability among participants is an important starting point.
Activity – Come up with a plan for your work and an agreement, or informal contract, for your group. You can use the suggestions in this guide as a starting point, but your first task is to revise the plan to suit your needs. It might be helpful to ask: What are you interested in learning? What is your primary intended outcome? What problem do you hope to solve? How collaborative does your project need to be? How will the participants' expertise in the topic vary? What sort of support will you and other participants require? What problems won’t you solve?
Technology – Familiarize yourself with the collaboration tools you intend to use (e.g. Wordpress, Git and LaTeX, YouTube, GIMP, a public wiki, a private forum, or something else) and create a first post, edit, or video introducing yourself and your project(s) to others in the worldwide peeragogy community.
Suggested Resources – The Peeragogy Handbook, parts I (‘Introduction’) and II (‘Peer Learning’). You may also want to work through a short lesson called Implementing Paragogy, from the early days before the Peeragogy project was convened. For a succinct theoretical treatment, please refer to our literature review, which we have adapted into a Wikipedia page.
Further Reading – Boud, D. and Lee, A. (2005). ‘Peer learning’ as pedagogic discourse for research education. Studies in Higher Education, 30(5):501–516.
Observations from the Peeragogy project – We had a fairly weak project structure at the outset, which yielded mixed results. One participant said: “I definitely think I do better when presented with a framework or scaffold to use for participation or content development.” Yet the same person wrote with enthusiasm about models of entrepreneurship, saying she was “freed of the requirement or need for an entrepreneurial visionary.” In short,
File:Http://metameso.org/~joe/OpenBook-2-2.jpg
Other people can support you in achieving your goal and make the work more fun too.
Activity – Write an invitation to someone who can help as a co-facilitator on your project. Clarify what you hope to learn from them and what your project has to offer. Helpful questions to consider: What resources are available or missing? What do you already have that you can build on? How will you find the necessary resources? Who else is interested in these kinds of challenges? The two of you should be able to come up with a respectable list.
Technology – Identify tools that could potentially be useful during the project, even if it's new to you. Start learning how to use them. Connect with people in other locales who share similar interests or know the tools.
Suggested resources – The Peeragogy Handbook, parts III (‘Convening a Group’) and IV (‘Organizing a Learning Context’).
Recommended Reading – Schmidt, J. Philipp. (2009). Commons-Based Peer Production and education. Free Culture Research Workshop Harvard University, 23 October 2009.
Observations from the Peeragogy project – We used a strategy of "open enrollment." New people were welcome to join the project at any time. We also encouraged people to either stay involved or withdraw; several times over the past year, we required participants to explicitly reaffirm interest in order to stay registered in the forum and mailing list. This choice cut down on the distraction of wondering if inactive members would reconnect. Still, the project continued to accumulate content, which gave some newcomers the discouraging feeling that there was too much to catch up on. Those who ended up being the most productive dove right in and didn't worry about making mistakes. The most active members were gracious and patient with the newcomers - an important quality in successful peer-learning facilitators.
File:Http://metameso.org/~joe/OpenBook-2-3.jpg
Solidifying your work plan and learning strategy together with concrete measures for ‘success’ can move the project forward significantly. Working in teams and sharing information with others will help you to develop your project.
Activity – Distill your ideas by writing an essay, making visual sketches, or creating a short video to communicate the unique plans for organization and evaluation that your group will use. By this time, you should have identified which aspects of the project need to be refined or expanded. Dive in!
Technology – Take time to mentor others or be mentored by someone, meeting up in person or online. Pair up with someone else and share knowledge together about one or more tools. You can discuss some of the difficulties that you’ve encountered, or teach a beginner some tricks.
Suggested resources – The Peeragogy Handbook, parts V (‘Co-Facilitation and Co-Working’), VI (‘Assessment’), and part VII (‘Patterns, Use cases, and Examples’).
Recommended reading – Argyris, Chris. "Teaching smart people how to learn." Harvard Business Review 69.3 (1991); and, Gersick, Connie J.G. "Time and transition in work teams: Toward a new model of group development." Academy of Management Journal 31.1 (1988): 9-41.
Observations from the Peeragogy project – Perhaps one of the most important roles in the Peeragogy project was the role of the ‘Wrapper’, who prepared and circulated weekly summaries of forum activity. This helped people stay informed about what was happening in the project even if they didn’t have time to read the forums. We’ve also found that small groups of people who arrange their own meetings are often the most productive.
File:Http://metameso.org/~joe/OpenBook-2-4.jpg
Wrap up the project with a critical assessment of progress and directions for future work. Share any changes to this syllabus that you think would be useful for future peeragogues!
Activity – Identify the main obstacles you encountered. What are some goals you were not able to accomplish yet? Did you foresee these challenges at the outset? How did this project resemble or differ from others you’ve worked on? How would you do things differently in future projects? What would you like to tackle next?
Writing – Communicate your reflection case. Prepare a short written or multimedia essay, dealing with your experiences in this course. Share the results by posting it where others in the broader Peeragogy project can find it.
‘Extra credit’ – Contribute back to one of the other organisations or projects that helped you on this peeragogical journey. Think about what you have to offer. Is it a bug fix, a constructive critique, pictures, translation help, PR, wiki-gnoming or making a cake? Make it something special, and people will remember you and thank you for it.
Suggested resources – The Peeragogy Handbook, parts VIII (‘Technologies, Services, and Platforms’) and IX (‘Resources’).
Recommended reading – Stallman, Richard. "Why software should be free" (1992).
Observations from the Peeragogy project – When we were deciding how to license our work, various Creative Commons licences were proposed (CC Zero, CC By-SA and CC By-SA-NC). After a brief discussion, no one was in favor of restricting downstream users, so we decided to use CC0. In connection with this discussion, we agreed that we would work on ways to explicitly build ‘re-usability’ into the handbook content.
Micro-Case Study: The Peeragogy Project, Year 1
Since its conception in early 2012, the Peeragogy Project has collected over 3700 comments in our discussion forum, and over 200 pages of expository text in the handbook. It has given contributors a new way of thinking about things together. However, the project has not had the levels of engagement that should be possible, given the technology available, the global interest in improving education, and the number of thoughful participants who expressed interest. We hope that the handbook and this accompanying syllabus will provide a seed for a new phase of learning, with many new contributors and new ideas drawn from real-life applications.
File:Http://metameso.org/~joe/OpenBook-3.jpg
Often, we want to measure the well being of a group of economic agents, who engage with each other. Often, such engagements occur within the bounds of a country or nation. Therefore, macroeconomics is usually concerned with economies of countries as a whole. How do we measure well being? Economists have tried to relate wealth to well being. Some correlation between wealth and well being does seem to exist, the relationship is not clear and not definite. However, macroeconomics is concerned with the measurement of wealth because it is easier to measure. It is assumed, that well being will be related to wealth.
Macroeconomics also deals with aggregates, and not individuals. Therefore, in order to understand the economy, we need to define the quantities we will be interested in. To begin with, let us look at the markets that are studied in macroeconomics.
Each of these markets is an aggregate of smaller markets. For example, under the market of goods and services, there will be smaller markets for various industries.
After defining the markets, we move to measuring the aggregate income. Aggregate income is related (in fact is equal to) the aggregate goods and services produced. This measure is the GDP. More about this in the next chapter which deals specifically about measuring aggregate output.
Note: this section is not yet finished. Answers and diagrams may be missing or incomplete. If you can help expand this module, please jump right in and edit!
This section contains several positions similar to those discussed in previous subsections of the Endgame module. They are designed to test your endgame skills by using practical situations you might encounter in a real game. Novices should read the "Easy" section, while more advanced players can go to "Intermediate or "Advanced" for more of a challenge. (Some of the "Intermediate" and "Advanced" puzzles come with an answer key, while in others the solution is worked into the commentary.)
Study 1: King and Pawn vs King
Diagram 1 White to move. Can he make a queen from his pawn and win the game?
In this position (Diagram 1) who is winning? Or assuming correct play by both players what will be the result of the game? Before answering, look at Diagram 2.
Diagram 2: With either side to move, white cannot evict the black king from a8 and b8, two squares that white needs control of to safely queen his pawn. As such, this game is drawn.
In diagram 2, white has a clear plan, promote his pawn to a queen, however black can stop that. White cannot immediately push his pawn. In diagram 2 if white pushes his pawn with a7+ black can play Ka8 and the game is drawn. If the black king is on a8 instead of b8, then a7 will also be a stalemate. So white must dislodge the black king from the a8 and b8 squares. White can't do that, because no matter what white does, the black king can simply move back and forth between a8 and b8 therefore the game is drawn.
A lot of times you will be offered a trade of material that results in an end game, or you may want to figure out if its best for you to offer a trade to enter the end game. You may play a game of chess and in doing so do a long calculation where diagram 1 is as far as you can calculate. In which case you do not need to do anymore calculations because you already know that it's a draw!
By understanding the outcome of positions without needing to calculate all the different variations, you can make accurate evaluations of trades that may be decisive. There are several details that must be kept in mind for this position drawn. White cannot have any other pawns, if he does then black is lost. Also, the black king must be able to get to the corner of the board because, if possible, the white king will shield the black king away and white will win.
Diagram 4: White to move. It looks like black will queen his pawn and win the game. Can white salvage a draw?
Diagram 4 is a famous position by the famous puzzle composer Selivanov. At first glance it appears that white is lost. His king is outside the "square" of the black pawn and his bishop cannot attack the queening square of the pawn. However, white has a very unintuitive move that saves the day. It requires you to visualise ahead two moves for both sides. Can you find it? (Roll your mouse between the [answer] tags to see the answer.)
[answer] It is tempting to check right away, but this does not work. 1. Kd2+? Kf4 when white's king cannot reach the pawn and his bishop cannot go to e4 and protect the h1 queening square. For the same reason, 1. Ba2, hoping to play Bd5, does not work either because of ..Ke4! blocking the bishop. So the correct solution is 1. Kd3!! and now:
1...h2 results in 2. Kd4+ followed by 3. Be4 when black cannot protect h1 for his pawn.
Any black king move allows white to play either Kd4 or Ke3 as appropriate, followed by Be4. [answer]
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
The Crown[1] is a Netflix-original series that portrays the life of Queen Elizabeth II. This chapter analyses Truth in the episode ‘Aberfan’, which depicts the collapse of a spoil tip that killed 144 people, 116 of which were children, in the Welsh village of Aberfan in 1966.
There has been consistent enthusiasm for the British Royal Family, particularly our Queen Elizabeth II. Her reign of 68 years has been a source of stability. Amidst the Aberfan tragedy, the Queen’s position was relatively tenuous; declining colonial influence and successive economic crises put pressure on her public response to the Aberfan tragedy, particularly for the Welsh who were seeking ways to become more independent[2]. Nevertheless, the monarchy was viewed as having a necessary role in Britain’s leadership, and economic hardships did not erase pervasive loyalty to the Crown.
Historical Truth is presumed to be objective, and led by evidence; the moulding of Truth into a narrative directly contradicts objectivity. However, historical narratives make partial Truths more accessible, but in order for these to be valuable, we must acknowledge them as such and draw distinctions between Truth and narrative. During the 19th century, an approach to Historical Truth which focused on heroic individuals became fashionable, created by Scottish Philosopher Thomas Carlyle who stated, “The History of the world is but the Biography of great men.”[3] The Crown is a product of this ‘Great Man’ approach, constructing a narrative around the Queen. The show’s depiction of the Queen fulfils the theory’s assumptions that necessary qualities are innate in a predestined ‘Great Man’ and will arise when a leader is needed[4]. This is shown in the portrayal of the Queen’s ability to conform to different situations without becoming emotionally involved. Social Historians would contest this, stating that more evidence is needed relating to groups disenfranchised by this approach, otherwise Truth cannot be interpreted from the evidence presented. However, both approaches to Historical Truth involve the construction of a narrative, whether it be around an individual or a movement, and we should not devalue one source over another as Truth can be gleaned from both.
To produce a historically accurate episode, The Crown’s research team relied on quantitative and qualitative evidence. The quantitative evidence constituted data about the Aberfan community, the events leading up to and following the incident, and the casualties. The qualitative evidence came from archival material (such as newspaper articles that commented on the disaster and the societal, political and royal responses)[5], biographical works about the royal family, consultations with historians about the incident, and interviews with the survivors[6].
Nevertheless, this plentiful and diverse evidence presented challenges to The Crown’s writer, Peter Morgan. He shared that the survivors’ recollections of the Queen’s visit to Aberfan contradicted the negative public response to her late arrival (which she also regretted in hindsight)[7]. Therefore, Morgan had to decide how to tell the story.
In the episode, the Queen’s response to the tragedy is presented as cold-hearted and it is strongly suggested that she only visits Aberfan to avoid bad publicity[8]. However, a survivor, Jeff, claims that she “showed outward emotion” and that she “shed genuine tears when a young Aberfan survivor handed her a posey”[9] (while in the show, after receiving the posey, the Queen fakes a tear[10]). The Mirror approach to Truth was not employed because the portrayal of the Queen in the show does not align with the qualitative evidence from the interviews with the survivors. What is the reason behind overlooking that qualitative evidence and thus, risking the historical accuracy of the episode? A possible answer is that The Crown is concerned with a larger Truth, presented through the Interpretative approach. Overall, the show focuses on the monarchy as an institution. Perhaps the Queen’s response is portrayed as unsympathetic in order to emphasise her duty as a monarch to present stoicism during a national crisis, which she fulfills exceptionally well. This could suggest that in order to fulfil her duty, the Queen has repressed a part of herself, namely, her emotional response to tragedy. The central themes in The Crown could be equated to Truths that are consistent throughout the show, and which the filmmaker chooses how to tell.
The episode partly focuses on the differing duties between a Royal and the Prime Minister. Wilson – the then Labour Prime Minister – in The Crown encourages the Queen to visit Aberfan, which she resists and questions as it was not considered her duty. Wilson responds with “to comfort people”, which baffles her[11].
After the Queen did visit Aberfan, a scene depicts Wilson and the Queen confiding in each other about the fronts they put on to satisfy public expectations. The Queen is portrayed as emotionally void, and whether this is true or not, it brings up an important discussion about what the public requires from the monarchy and its government. Wilson reveals that he was Oxford educated, doesn’t like beer, and prefers cigars over pipes “but cigars are a symbol of capitalist privilege”[12] which interferes with his appeal to voters. He comforts the Queen’s inability to have genuine outward emotional responses by stating that “no one needs hysteria from a head of state…the truth is, we barely need humanity”,[13] suggesting that a Queen must be stoic to fulfil her civic duty. Robertson states that “In Stoicism, the passions, or irrational emotions, are conceived of as emotionally charged cognitions…and are, therefore, susceptible to disputation.”[14]
This is a representation of a Social Constructivist approach to truth. Here Morgan gives the Queen and Wilson certain character traits for the audience, so they can understand why and how they make decisions. Whilst characterisation is integral to producing a drama, and this demonstrates a logical understanding of these roles, a Truth here has been created that nobody, other than those depicted, can confirm.
The Crown approaches Truth in the episode of ‘Aberfan’ through its focus on royal and political response. Whilst being more realistic than other episodes, with respect to the tragedy it depicts, the show is a historical drama, not a documentary, and with that comes necessary compromises.
From a historical perspective, the show mainly uses the Mirror approach to Truth to depict historical events that reflect reality. However, this is complicated by the ‘Great Men’ perspective which the show employs, conveying explicitly one viewpoint to the detriment of others. From a Film Studies perspective, the show may be seen to use an Interpretive approach, presenting a logically constructed Truth based on historical data without fully reflecting historical reality. The show also uses the Social Constructivist approach to Truth as it conveys real people as characters for an audience to get to know through their language and social context. This allows the viewer to sympathise, blame and praise those characters for their actions, and develop opinions on the historical and political figures depicted. The Truth of these real people that the show represents, however, is one that cannot ever be truly known by the public, yet is necessary for the makings of a successful drama. It is here that Truth can, (and in some ways, must) be influenced by the creators of the show.
↑ Morgan P. The Crown. [Internet]. Netflix; 2016 [cited 2020 Dec 2]. Available from: https://www.netflix.com/search?q=the%20crown&jbv=80025678
↑ Flewelling L. Welsh Language and Nationalism in the 1960s and 70s [Internet]. 2016 [cited 2020 Dec 12] Available from: https://britishandirishhistory.wordpress.com/2016/03/02/welsh-language-and-nationalism/
↑ Carlyle T. The Hero as Divinity in: Heroes and Hero-Worship. 1840. p. 34.
↑ Villanova University. What is the Great Man Theory? [Internet]. 2019 [cited 2020 Dec 12]. Available from: https://www.villanovau.com/resources/leadership/great-man-theory/
↑ Samuelson K. How The Crown Uses Real History to Make Drama [Internet]. Time; 2016 [cited 2020 Dec 4]. Available from: https://time.com/4542526/the-crown-netflix-queen-elizabeth-history/
↑ Carr F. True story behind The Crown's Aberfan episode, as told by the survivors: "I had nightmares for years" [Internet]. Radio Times. 2020 [cited 2020 Dec 4]. Available from: https://www.radiotimes.com/news/2019-11-18/the-crown-aberfan-real-life/
↑ Thorpe V. How filming the agony of Aberfan for The Crown revealed a village still in trauma [Internet]. The Guardian. Guardian News and Media; 2019 [cited 2020 Dec 4]. Available from: https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2019/nov/17/television-drama-the-crown-portrays-aberfan-disaster
↑ Morgan P. The Crown. [Internet]. Netflix; 2016 [cited 2020 Dec 2]. Available from: https://www.netflix.com/search?q=the%20crown&jbv=80025678
↑ Hallemann C. How Queen Elizabeth's Reaction to the Aberfan Mining Disaster Became Her Biggest Regret [Internet]. Town & Country. 2019 [cited 2020 Dec 4]. Available from: https://www.townandcountrymag.com/society/tradition/a29309363/queen-elizabeth-aberfan-mining-disaster-reaction-the-crown/
↑ Morgan P. The Crown. [Internet]. Netflix; 2016 [cited 2020 Dec 2]. Available from: https://www.netflix.com/search?q=the%20crown&jbv=80025678
↑ Robertson D. The Philosophy of Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy (CBT): Stoic Philosophy as Rational and Cognitive Psychotherapy. 2nd Ed. Abingdon: 2019. [cited 2020 Dec 12] p.1. of Chapter 5. Available from :https://books.google.co.uk/books?hl=en&lr=&id=qXzADwAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PT6&dq=behavioural+psychology+stoicism&ots=OJU5Lm6FE1&sig=irKrv5isL8puUrAuIwltSr9-ubY#v=onepage&q=behavioural%20psychology%20stoicism&f=false
Inkscape's logo.
This is a guide to Inkscape--a vector illustration program that is open source and cross-platform. To get help while running Inkscape, choose Help → Tutorials in its menu.
See also the Wikibook SVG.
Inkscape is a free open source Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) editor software program. The creations can be used in web, print and screen design as well as user interface designs, logos, icons, banners and material cutting. Its capabilities are similar to those of commercial products and can be used for any number of pratical reasons such as letterheads, computer and material wallpapers, brochures, business cards and web page designs.
Inkscape's stated goal is to become a powerful graphic tool and being fully compliant with the World Wide Web Consortium's (W3C) Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) 1.1 standard. As part of this challenge for standard compliance, Inkscape changed its version release notation to reflect its progress of the SVG 1.1 standard and changed its release identification between releases v0.48 and v0.91. The v0.91 reflects that Inkscape is at 82% compliance of the SVG 1.1 standard. While the SVG 1.1 standard compliance is its main goal, other closely related standards are also on the horizon: XML, CSS and HTML5. Most notably, it does not support animations or SVG fonts. As of this writing, Inkscape is at version 0.91.
Inkscape is for Linux, Windows and Mac OS X (under X11), and other Unix-like operating systems. As of 2016, Inkscape is under active development, with new features being added regularly.
Inkscape has good multi-lingual support particularly for complex scripts, something currently lacking in most commercial vector graphics applications.
Inkscape began in 2003 as a fork of the Sodipodi project. Sodipodi, developed since 1999, was itself based on Gill, the work of Raph Levien.
The fork was led by a team of four former Sodipodi developers (Ted Gould, Bryce Harrington, Nathan Hurst, and MenTaLguY) who identified differences over project objectives, openness to third-party contributions, and Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) compliance as their reasons for forking. Inkscape, they claimed, would seek to focus development on implementing the complete SVG standard, whereas Sodipodi development had emphasized creating a general-purpose vector graphics editor, possibly at the expense of SVG.[1]
Since the fork, Inkscape has, among other things, changed from using the C to C++; changed to the GTK+ toolkit C++ bindings (gtkmm); redesigned the user interface and added a number of new features. Its implementation of the SVG standard has shown gradual improvement, but is still incomplete.
Rather than top-down governance, its developers claim to encourage an equal culture where authority stems from an individual developer's abilities and active involvement in the project. As a result, the project places special emphasis on giving all active developers full access to its source code repository, and on active participation in the larger open source community, often in the form of inter-project initiatives and secondary projects like the Open Clip Art Library[2]. While the project founders are still well-represented in the decision-making process, many newcomers have also come to play prominent roles. Among them is "bulia byak", architect of the profound user interface changes that have given Inkscape its present appearance.
Inkscape is currently a Google Summer of Code[3] and linuxfund.org project.
Rectangles and Squares (optionally with rounded corners)
Ellipses, Circles and Arcs
Stars and Polygons (optionally rounded or randomized)
Spirals (inner/outer controls, divergence)
Calligraphy tool (freehand drawing with calligraphic objects, graphics tablet pressure/angle support)
Tweak tool (tweak objects by scuplting or painting)
Spray tool (duplicate pre-selected objects by sculpting or painting)
Diagram Connector tool, create path diagram connectors (i.e., flow charts, circuit boards)
Linked or Embedded bitmap images, either imported or rasterized from selected objects.
>File>Import Open Clipart...(search and download from openclipart.org)
>Object >Symbols...(Copying and pasting symbols from file being edited and from symbol libraries)
>Path >Trace pixel art... (trace an imported pixel image, .png/.jpg)
Object transformations (positioning, scaling, rotating, skewing), via freehand, snapped, locked, key combinations, by numeric values or dedicated dialogs (menus)
Z-order operations, object stacking order within a layer
Layers, with a way to lock and/or hide individual layers, rearrange them, etc; layers form a stacking order
Cut, Copy and Paste operations of objects
Alignment and Distribution commands, including grid arrange, randomization, unclumping
A tool to create patterns of clones, using wallpaper symmetries plus arbitrary scales, shifts, rotates, and color changes, optionally randomized
Grid, Guide, Node, Object and other options for snapping
Filters (menu bar, over 260 filters)
Dashed strokes, with many predefined dashes
Path Markers (start, middle and end markers, e.g. arrowheads)
Node editing: positioning nodes and segments, curve handles, node alignment and distribution, scaling and rotating node groups, "node sculpting" (proportional editing of multiple nodes)
Converting to path (for text, images or shapes), including converting stroke to path
Boolean operations (union, intersection, difference, exclusion, division)
Path simplification, with variable threshold
Path insetting and outsetting, including dynamic and linked offset objects
‣Path ‣‣Path Effects... contains over a dozen effects that can be manipulated on canvas and via menu settings.
‣Extensions ‣‣Modify Path, to add effects to existing paths and ‣‣Generate from Path for additional operations on paths.
Condensed, Normal, Italic, Italic Condensed, Bold, Bold Italic, Bold Italic Condensed, Heavy
Align left, Align center, Align right, Justified (flowed text only)
Line spacing, Text spacing, Word spacing, Horizontal character spacing (kerning), Vertical character shift, Character rotation
Horizontal text frame, Vertical text frame
Unicode character support (Ctrl+U while in the 'Create and Edit Text' tool)
Put on path (text and path remain editable)
Display mode: Normal, No filters, Outline
Color mode: Normal, Grayscale
Swatches...
Icon Preview...
Live watching and editing the document tree in the XML editor
Command line options for export and conversions
One of the priorities of the Inkscape project is interface consistency and usability. This includes efforts to follow the GNOME Human Interface Guidelines compliance, universal keyboard accessibility, and convenient on-canvas editing. Inkscape has achieved significant progress in usability since the project started.[4]
The interface of Sodipodi (Inkscape's predecessor) was partly based on those of CorelDRAW and GIMP. The current Inkscape interface has been partially influenced by that of Xara Photo and Graphic Designer.
The number of floating dialog boxes has been reduced, with their functions available using keyboard shortcuts or in the docked toolbars in the editing window. The tool controls bar at the top of the window always displays the controls relevant to the current tool.
All transformations (not only moving but also scaling and rotating) have keyboard shortcuts with consistent modifiers (e.g. Alt transforms by 1 screen pixel at the current zoom, Shift multiplies the transformation by 10, etc.); these keys work on nodes in Node tool as well as on objects in Selector. The most common operations (such as transformations, zooming, z-order) have convenient one-key shortcuts.
Inkscape provides floating/mouse-over tooltips and status bar hints for all buttons, controls, commands, keys, and on-canvas handles. It comes with a complete keyboard and mouse reference (in HTML and SVG) and several interactive tutorials in SVG.
↑ "Initial announcement of Inkscape fork on Sodipodi mailing list". http://sourceforge.net/mailarchive/forum.php?thread_id=3416220&forum_id=3970. [dead link]
↑ "Open Clip Art Library". https://openclipart.org/.
↑ "Google Summer of Code entry in the Inkscape developers' wiki". http://wiki.inkscape.org/wiki/index.php/Google_Summer_Of_Code.
↑ GNOME Human Interface Guidelines book
A Crash Course in Inkscape -Chris Hilbig
A Quick Guide to Inkscape -microUgly (v0.47)
A Guide to Inkscape -tavmjong (v0.48)
Scaling a bitmap and a SVG drawings makes the differences appear.
A vector object is composed of edit enabled path(s) and geometrical elements (nodes) based on two dimensional vector (x/y) coordinate values. This is very different from raster (or bitmap) images, which are composed from a grid (bitmap) of colored squares. Bitmaps are inherently "pixellated" when scaled larger (zoomed in), while vectors can be scaled to any size, and won't display any pixelized objects.
Some graphic editor programs, such as the GIMP, are known as bitmap or raster (photograph) editors. With Inkscape, you can create and edit vector graphics, and save them as Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) files or 'save as' over 25 graphic editor based file formats. SVG is an open standard designed by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), that uses Extensible Markup Language (XML) to create vector based objects.
When you load Inkscape you will see the main interface:
The Rectangles and Squares tool has a total of four shape handles. The two square handles (☐) control the size (width/height) and the two round handles (⭘) control corner rounding (Rx/Ry).
Hold ctrl while dragging one of the square handles (☐) Ctrl+Drag to create a width to height integer-ratio square or rectangle (e.g. 1:1 square or 3:1 rectangle). Hold shift while dragging a square handle (☐) ⇧ Shift+Drag to draw a square/rectangle from the center out. Hold both ctrl and shift while dragging a square handle (☐) Ctrl+⇧ Shift+Drag to draw a integer-ratio square or rectangle from its center.
To make the corner rounding the same (even) Ctrl+Drag one of the rounding handles (⭘), as the handle is moved from the corner the other rounding handle will move at the same ratio. Another option for rounding is to use the Rx and Ry numeric-value boxes on the Rectangle's Tool Controls bar. To reset the corner rounding use the Rectangle's Tool Controls bar, and click the 'make corners sharp' button, last item on the Tool Controls bar.
For help with the Rectangle and Circle's Tool Controls bar features, mouse-over 🖰 a button or numeric-value box for a pop-up message. You can also Right-Click a numeric-value box for a pop-up menu of pre-set values.
Rectangle: Statusbar highlighting of Tool Tip message
Command keys (Ctrl, Shift and Alt) based Tool-Tip messages can be read at the bottom center of the user interface in the Statusbar. The tool tips are dynamic and will change based on (1) current edit being performed (2) mouse-over 🖰 of one the shape handles (3) press and hold one of the three command keys (Ctrl, Shift and Alt) will update with the associated tool tip, i.e., while in the Rectangles and Squares tool hold the Ctrl key and the tool-tip message will update.
3D tool, with x,y,z shape handles
Keyboard Shortcut: X or ⇧ Shift+F4
The 3D Box tool is an easy way to create a nearly 3-dimensional shape. Inkscape is a two dimensionial x/y vector editor, there is no 'z' axis within Inkscape.
Each dimension can lie on either parallel or converging edit lines. These edit lines are shown in different colors, so that users can distinguish one line from another:
Ellipse, Circles and Arcs tool
To draw an ellipse, circle, or an arc select the Ellipse Tool, and drag from the top left to the bottom right. The ellipse tool has a total of four handles: two square handles control the size and aspect ratio; two circle handles control the angle of the arc. Mouse-over 🖰 your cursor on one of the square or circle handles and the Statusbar (bottom center) message will update and display the handle's available edits and any Ctrl, ⇧ Shift, and Alt key edits (if available).
Dragging the circle handles outside the ellipse makes a segment (pie chart); dragging them inside creates an arc. Alt+Click one of the circle handles to completely close the ellipse.
Keyboard Shortcut: * or ⇧ Shift+F9
To switch between creating a Star and Polygon, click either the star-shaped or polygon-shaped icon in the Tool Controls bar of the Star/Polygon tool.
The Star Tool has two shape handles, one tip ( ⃟ ) handle for tip adjustment, and one base ( ⃟ ) handle for base radius editing. Ctrl+Drag the tip handle in order to stretch the star without rotating, and Ctrl+Drag the base handle to change the ratio of the two handles without skewing.
The Polygon Tool only has one shape handle, the single tip ( ⃟ ) handle can be used to lock the tip radius (rotation). Ctrl+Drag the tip handle in order to resize the polygon without rotating it. ⇧ Shift+Drag edits the rounding of the tip handle, while Alt+Drag will randomize the tip handle.
The Spiral Tool has two shape handles an outer (◇) handle and an inner (◇) handle. Dragging the handles lengthens and shortens the spiral.
The outer handle can edit the roll/unroll of the spiral, can snap angle, scale, rotate and lock the outer radius. Here are the combination of keys to support the outer handle edits:
Ctrl+Drag the outer handle to roll/unroll spiral and snap angle.
⇧ Shift+Drag the outer handle to scale and rotate the spiral.
Alt+Drag the outer handle to lock the outer radius.
Alt+Drag the inner handle to change the divergence (distance between the rolls). To make the distance really big, hold Alt and move the inner handle first towards the center, and then further in the same direction beyond the center.
Spirals with a divergence less than 1 are denser towards the edges; ones with divergence greater than 1 are denser towards the center. To reset divergence, Alt+Click the handle. ⇧ Shift+Click the handle to return it to the center.
Experiment with the handles and the ⇧ Shift and Alt keys to get a grip on the tool.
Keyboard shortcut: Ctrl+⇧ Shift+F
All objects (shapes, paths and text) have a fill and stroke styles. The stroke is the outline of the object, and fill is the area inside the object.
To set fill and stroke styles, Select the object and go to ‣Object ‣‣Fill and Stroke... or press Ctrl +Shift +F . The Fill and Stroke dialog has three tabs labelled Fill, Stroke paint and Stroke style.
An objects fill can be set to empty, flat color, linear or radial gradient, pattern, swatch, unset, self-intersections and solid.
Width with unit of measure (i.e, pix, pt, cm, inch...)
Miter maximum length of the Miter join
Caps (end points) Butt, Round, Square
Markers for Start, Mid and End (nodes). Text objects only have the stroke's "Width with unit of measure" edit available.
Color models provided by Inkscape (v0.91) include RGB, HSL, CMYK, Wheel and CMS. When working with the Filters menu, if you come across a filter that seems to have no impact on the object. First remove the filter from the object, ‣Filters ‣‣Remove Filters (Alt+S, R. Open the Fill and Stroke Menu and use the HSL (hue, saturation, and lightness (or luminosity)) model tab, then under the lightness (L) setting try middle 128 to high 255 values. Some of the filters are dependent upon an object's lightness and when an object is too dark the filters seems to not work correctly.
Contrasting (opposite) colors are very easy to select when using the Color Wheel. The color wheel has two edit icons, one lies on the outer wheel and is a straight line, the other edit icon is a circle that lies within the inner triangle. The triangle has 3 main color edit corners, the corners are full white, full black and full color (no white/black). The inner triangle circle edit (position) sets the color's darkness, lightness or neutrality (middle of triangle).
Blur and Opacity, posted at the bottom of the fill and Stroke dialogue are two often overlooked edits, these two color edits impact both the fill and the stroke. The Blur % edit provides 0.0 based increments from 0.0 to 100.0, with a default of 0.0. When working with blurs it is a good idea to set the Zoom to 100% (1). The Opacity (transparency) setting is similar to the color models "Alpha" setting, the difference is that the Opacity is applied to the entire (fill/stroke) object. A setting of 0% and the color is completely gone. One of the most used 0% settings is in the default creation of gradients, one gradient stop at Opacity 100% (full color) and the other stop set to no color (Opacity 0%).
Having trouble with an objects coloring? Open this dialogue and look at three edits Blur, Opacity the Alpha settings. The alpha setting is common among all of the color models (i.e., RGB, HSL, CMS, etc...). During some, not all, of the thousands of color edits a given object's fill and or stroke will have a alpha value or opacity % of 0 assigned. Going to this menu allows one to see both the alpha (fill or stroke) opacity (fill and stroke) settings under one dialogue and set them to 255 (alpha) and 100% (opacity).
Unlike the use of shape handles for editing, path objects use three types of path nodes. The start/end and corner(s) of a path are referred to as Cusp Nodes ◇ nodes along a path. A path's curve settings are provided by two types of Smooth Nodes, □ smooth and auto-smooth ○ Nodes . Smooth nodes can have one straight segment and one curved segment on either side of the node. The Cusp and Smooth Nodes have handles that are used to set the node's length (x,y value of the handle itself) its angle and distance, the 'tool-tip message' in the Status Bar displays this dynamic information. Spiro based paths do not respond to node handle positioning edits and if the handles are retracted for auto-smooth nodes, the node will change to either a smooth or cusp node.
There are thin red lines between path nodes and are used to edit a 'segment' between two nodes. To view the red line segment editing, you must change from the Path Tool (P, B and C) to the Node Tool (N). When you mouse-over 🖰 a segment the Node Tool cursor changes to a pointer with a fist. This segment editor can also change a segment from a curve to a straight line or vice versa. Once a segment is selected (clicked) the two adjacent path nodes change color and the edit is applied by either dragging the segment or using the Tools Controls bar edits. The Tool Controls bar can be used for many edits; change selected segment(s) to a line; change selected segment(s) curves; delete the segment between two non-end points. This segment based editing also impacts the editing of Spiro paths.
The default stroke, fill and Ctrl+Click settings of the tools can be set using:
Pencil Tool: 1.) Set to Bezier (Freehand) Mode
The Pencil Tool creates two styles of a path and dots (circle shapes). The first (default) option creates freehand Bezier curves and lines. Freehand drawing can be done in two ways. (1) By dragging (press+hold) the mouse 🖰 on the canvas. (2) By a series of Clicks and Releases, example Click on the canvas (don't drag) then move the cursor to another location and Click again this will create a path segment. Additional segments can be added to the first segment, by clicking on one of the end nodes. This Click-Release method is helpful when creating Spiro paths.
Once a path is created, there are three options for editing the path nodes. (1) To reduce the number of nodes on a given path use the path simplify command; ‣Path ‣‣Simplify (Ctrl+L). (2) To add nodes to an existing path place the mouse cursor 🖰 over a start/end node, the node will change color left click and either drag or click to another position on the canvas. (3) Once a path is created the Node Tool can edit the nodes, it has an extensive set of node and segment editing features, available in the Tool Controls bar.
Pencil Tool: 2.) Set to Spiro Mode
The second mode of editing, enabled by using the Tool Controls bar, creates a Spiro based path which involves both cusp ◇ and smooth ○ nodes . Smooth nodes apply spiro based interconnection to adjacent nodes within the path. Once the spiro path is created, the Node Tool must be used to edit the positioning of the spiro's smooth and cusp nodes. Even though smooth node handles are displayed on Spiro paths they do not impact editing of the Spiro. The positioning (vector) of smooth nodes in relation to adjacent cusp/smooth nodes is how a spiro's rendering is calculated. The thin red line segment editor can be used to set a straight or curved segment within a spiro.
Note - The pencil tool's spiro rendering is based on the Smooth setting of the Tool Controls bar. Smoothing is how much path simplifying nodes are applied to the spiro being created. If smoothing is set too low, there will be no effect (vector distance between nodes dependent), set to high and the smoothness will render a straight line.
3.) Creating Dots, using command keys
The pencil tool can also create single dots (circle shapes), using command keys;
Ctrl+L-Click creates a dot shape ○
Ctrl+⇧ Shift+L-Click creates a dot twice the size of the Ctrl+L-Click dot ○
Ctrl+⇧ Shift+Alt+L-Click creates a random radius dot ○
This dot creation can be used as a work-around for creating text bullets, as of Inkscape v0.91 there is no internal support, other than Unicode values, for bullets in any native Text formatting.
Keyboard shortcuts: B or ⇧ Shift+F6
Above is an example of a bezier curve. You can see two nodes in this view. These are the start and end nodes of the curve. But there are path nodes with control handles that you cannot see. These determine how the line curves between the end nodes. In order to view and edit path (stroke) nodes you will need to click on the Node tool button (N}.
Clicking on the node tool reveals another node in the middle of the curve.
If you then click on the middle node you will see the bezier handles appear.
These handles allow you to change the shape of the curves between the nodes. Notice that a list of node tools appear at the top. You can use these to change the nodes. We will not go into detail about these tools in this beginners tutorial.
The node tool can be used on all the objects created with the other tools to reveal their nodes.
The other two drawing tools also create paths. The top tool of the three is the scribble tool . Use it like a pencil. The computer will calculate all the nodes and beziers for you. Closed paths can be created by drawing a loop. (With the bezier tool, click on the start node to close the curve).
The last tool in the group is the calligraphy tool. It allows you to do calligraphic writing. The pen creates closed loops in a realistic pen nib like way. Because of this many graphic artists like to draw with this pen all the time.
To do:Created by taking over from [1]. Needs to be rewritten; a beginning transition is missing.
Keyboard shortcuts: S or F1 or Spacebar
This tool allows you to select objects, resize them and move them about. If you click twice on an object with the selection tool, the handles change and you are able to rotate an object. Click a third time to switch to the object's tool.
Keyboard Shortcuts: Q Quick Zoom, Z or F3
Drag the tool over a given area to zoom in. ⇧ Shift+Left click to zoom out again. You can zoom in and out with the + and - keys, respectively.
Ctrl+⇧ Shift+Middle click
Inkscape keeps a history of your zoom levels. For a 'Previous' zoom level, use `; for the 'Next' zoom level, use ⇧ Shift+`.
Click and Drag an area where you want your text to go, then start typing! If the letters are too small, open on the Select tool F1, then drag the handles to make it bigger. There are a lot of things that you can do with text that are beyond the scope of this beginners tutorial.
Keyboard Shortcut: G or Ctrl+F1
Click the Gradient tool button in the Inkscape tool bar, then Click+Drag on an object and you will create a gradient from a fully opaque colour to full transparency. The gradient tool can be used to edit an existing gradient, adjust colour stops by dragging and placing the gradient handles that appear over an object when the tool is active.
The Color Picker, or "eyedropper" tool can be used to sample any colour in the Inkscape canvas. One of the key reasons for this tool's use is to enable the picking of colors from an image. First import Ctrl+I the image into Inkscape and then use this tool to pick a colour setting from the image to the selected object, beginner options listed:
⇧ Shift+Click to set stroke
Drag to set average color of area
Use this to draw a connection between two objects. For example, a drawing and a label.
The nice thing about using this tool is that if you decide to move the objects about on the canvas, the connector still maintains the connection. As of v0.91, once the connector is created and rendered onto the canvas, if you drag only the path it will 'disconnect' itself from the objects it was attached to.
Using the Circle tool draw a circle on the page
With the circle selected, press SHIFT + CRTL + F to go to its attributes
Change the Opacity to 80%
Change the colour to a nice tomato red
With the circle tool again, draw an ellipse, the same width as the tomato, below the tomato, this will be our shadow
With the ellipse selected, press SHIFT + CRTL + F
Change the blur to 20%, you can check the results as you move the slider.
In the calligraphy tool, change the Thinning attribute to 0.90
Change the Alpha channel to 50%
Change the colour to white, you should now have a hazy looking tomato
Ctrl+Y or Ctrl+⇧ Shift+Z
Ctrl+Middle click / Right click
⇧ Shift+Middle click / Right click
This is the glossary which includes terms within the book that are either newly introduced, uncommon, or specialized.
Top - 0–9 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
In graphics, 3-D (three dimensions) describes an object that provides a visual sense of depth. The open source software Blender is a 3-D based graphic editor.
An access key is an alphanumeric key—sometimes called a hot key that users can use instead of a pointing device (mouse cursor) to activate interactive commands. With a few standard exceptions, an access key interacts to a underlined character in a control title (label). For example, to open the File menu, for which the access key is typically F, the user would press ALT+F. Access keys are associated only with controls that have text titles (labels).[1]
In computer graphics, Alpha combining is the process of merging a foreground (top) object with a background (bottom) object to create the appearance of partial or full transparency. Inkscape applies Alpha values to an object's fill and stroke separately.[2]
Lines up selected objects, basic aligments are typically horizontal (x) or vertical (y). The Snap Controls bar has 15 different snap modes which provide far beyond basic alignments.
For text, the baseline is where most characters (i.e., "x/z") rest. Some characters like "j/q" go below the baseline. By default Inkscape aligns characters to a common baseline. The baseline icon is a very small square at the bottom left corner (default) of the bounding box when the text object is selected.
A bitmap is a display space and the color for each pixel or "bit" in the display space. GIF, JPEG and PNG are examples of graphic image file types that are based on bit maps. Because a bit map uses a fixed or raster graphics method of specifying an image, the image cannot have its size scaled larger without losing sharpness. A vector graphic is designed to be rescaled without any impact on the graphics sharpness. Vector graphics are being used more due the lossless nature of the file and are considered a compliment to bitmap editors. Many websites use a combination of vector graphics and bitmap images.
Are websites that provide information on many topics, and that are allowed by the hosting provider. Blog postings are published in reverse dated order and sometimes allow readers to post comments and ratings. Here is an example link (2016) to an Inkscape Blog.
Is a rectangular box border around an object or multiple selected objects (shape, paths or text) that can be moved (dragged), flipped, rotated, skewed or scaled. Most graphic editors use either dashed or dotted lines to mark the bound box.
In the Inkscape Graphic User Interface (GUI), a button starts an action when it is clicked. A button that is grayed out is not available due to no object selection or a disabled/unavailable edit based on the selected object(s).
The Canvas area is where objects are created, centered within the canvas there is a page area. Some artist create their objects in the canvas area before moving them into the page area.
Clipping objects uses any combination of ‘path’, ‘text’ and 'shapes' to serve as the upper outline, where everything "below" and on the "inside" of the upper outline is allowed to show through but everything on the outside is cut away and not shown. While images can be a lower item and clipped, images cannot be the topmost item and set a clip of a lower object.[3]
A line connecting two objects, one which sticks to them even when the objects are moved.
In computer monitors, dots per inch (dpi) is the amount of sharpness of an object. The dpi for a given image (photograph) sharpness will lower when displayed on a larger monitor. By some users the term "dots per inch" is used for image sharpness from printers, and is replaced by the term "pixels per inch (ppi)" for monitor sharpness.
In personal home printing, dots per inch (dpi) is the usual sharpness for images on paper. Most home printers print up to 600dpi, for higher quality image (photograph) printing is done at a commercial print store.
Is an effect where an object is repeated behind itself to create the illusion that the object is floating over the background.
A duotone is an object made up of two colors. A duotone is created by placing a less than (<) 100% opacity, two color (i.e. green and red) object on top of a grayscale object/background.[2]
An emoji (a.k.a. emoticon) is a small image that refers to a facial expression, an activity, an idea and even more items. The Text tool can create emojis using Unicode values.[4] While in the text tool enter the following:
Ctrl+U, then type 1F600, and press ↵ Enter (watch the Statusbar notification area) and a smile emoji 😀 character will be created, have fun!
Inkscape currently provides a majority of its extensions with python scripts, the scripts add features to the software.[5] Types of extensions that currently exist for Inkscape (v0.91):
Filters are special effects that can be applied to an image or object. Filters can vary from real simple to very complex. Inkscape has hundreds of filters, some of the more complex filters will display a sub-menu to increase its ease of use.[2]
The painting the inside of an object or the inside of the characters in a text string.
A font is a set of text characters with specific styles and sizes. The type design for a font set is referred to as the typeface, variations of this type design form a typeface family.[2]
Arial is a typeface family, Arial italic is a typeface, which leads to a Arial italic 10-point font (set). So when someone asks "What font is that? the reply should be "Its Arial italic at 10 points."
Is a 1987 patented compression standard for bitmap graphics, and is supported by the majority of web browsers. GIF Version89a (1989) added background transparency, metadata and enhanced the animation feature, which is a sequence of bitmaps within a single GIF file.[2][6]
Is a feature rich, open source application for creating and manipulating graphic images (photos) that runs on Linux, Unix-based operating systems, Windows and Mac OS X
A glyph represents a unit of rendered (to display, show) content within a font. Often, there is a one-to-one match between characters to be drawn and matching glyphs (e.g., often, the character "A" is rendered using a single glyph). But other times multiple glyphs are used to render a single character (e.g., use of accents é) or a single glyph can be used to render multiple characters (e.g., ligatures). A ligature occurs where two or more characters are joined as a single glyph. The & (ampersand) glyph was originally formed from the combination of the two letters E and t &.
A grid is an arrangment made from a series of intersecting (criss-crossing) straight; vertical, horizontal, and angled lines used to organize the placement and measurement of objects. The grid serves as a framework to assist the user in the organizition of multiple graphic items (images, shapes, text, paragraphs, etc.) in an ease-of-use method.
Guides (a.k.a. Guidelines) help with the alignment settings of text and objects. The placement of guides are all user defined, unlike grids which uses pre-defined placement and is universal to the file. Like grids, guides do not print.
A gradient is a gradual mix of colors and of a single color from a 100% opaque (full) to 0% (no color). It is also good way to create a smooth color change across one or more objects.
A small rectangle or circle that enables the user to control shape handles. While Shapes have handles in Inkscape, Path nodes also have handles and are referred to as node handles.
HSL is a color model for managing colors under the labels of:
Hue - rainbow of colors range (no black, white, and gray)
Saturation - gray depth/intensity range to Hue (full) color.
(1) Most graphic software providers use a numeric-value range of 0 to 255 for HSL settings, and was used as an example to show the Lightness values from black to full color to white.
An illustration is a decoration, clarification or visual explanation of a text, concept or process, designed for placement in published media, such as posters, flyers, magazines, books, teaching materials, animations, video games and films.
Is the opposite of another color, also referred to as contrasting colors. The Color Wheel color model is a simple way to find an inverse color. Here are a couple of inverse colors:
.
Icons are symbols that appear on most software application user interfaces and are used to graphically represent a command. A common example is a scissor symbol ✂ to represent cutting (removing) an object.
JPEG (often pronounced jaypeg) file format is specified in ISO standard 10918, the standard includes 29 distinct coding processes, with compression being one of its key features. Not all JPEG capable application use all 29 codings. Together with the Graphic Interchange Format (GIF) and Portable Network Graphics (PNG) file formats, JPEG is one of the image file formats supported on the World Wide Web, usually with the file suffix of ".jpg".
Is how the position of characters in text boxes are changed. The character position changes, help increase the appearance of the text. Here are a few letter combinations (To) (ff) (WA) (AV) that sometimes need kerning adjustments.
Left default character position, right after kerning edit
The kerning example graphic shows how kerning is also helpful when using multiple fonts in the same text box.
In graphic applications a layer is a way of organizing complicated and many objects in a file. Imagine a set of objects stacked on top of each other. If you want to make a change to one of the lower items, it will take alot of object moving and may lead to alot of boredom. Here is an example of how to use layers. The bottom layer is be the background color of a web banner. The layer above the background may have objects that decorate the banners edges, like flowers or shooting stars. The layer above the decorations may have text, like a slogan or motto. And the highest layer may have a logo or image. Placing related objects in their own layer is useful because they allow you to lock/unlock and view/hide layers you are not currently working on. Once your are done editing items in a layer, you can lock (no editing) it, but you still want to view (not hide) the items in the layer. So when you are working the decorations layer the other layers are viewable, but locked so there is no risk of accidently changing an item in another layer. The more complex the graphic, the more layers should be used.
Creates an effect string of filler text that displays Latin characters. It is used as a place holder for text dependant publications like the front page of a newspaper, slide show and a flyer. This effect assist the artist as it allows the creation of graphics involved in desktop publishing, without having to 'wait' on actual text to complete the graphic design portion of the file. Flowed text is another compliment edit for the Lorem Ipsum effect/extension.
Lossless compression is a term that describes the compression of a file. All of the original data is untouched when the file is uncompressed. The GIF image file is a format that uses lossless compression.
The opposite of lossless is lossy compression which reduces a file by permanently removing some of its data. When the file is uncompressed not all the original data is restored. The JPEG image file, used for photographs and other images, has edit based lossy compression. That can make a trade-off between file size and image quality when the compression rate is set.
Drop Down menus : TO DO
Popup menus : TO DO
Is is a graphical feedback item that is activated when the user moves or "hovers" the pointer over a software's user interface buttons (icons), numeric-value boxes and other software graphics (guides, snapping, etc) all referred to as trigger items. Once a user interface item is triggered by a mouseover, it will provide feedback by generating a button tooltip. The tip should provide a short, easy to understand description of the button's feature and (if applicable) its assigned shortcut key.
A point on a path or shape at which the path or shape can be changed.
OpenDyslexic is a open source font created to increase readability for readers with dyslexia. The typeface includes regular, bold, italic, and bold-italic styles. OpenDyslexic is free for Commercial and Personal use. [7]
WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get)
Help:Tutorial for Vectorial graphism — a basic tutorial on Inkscape; 3400 words,
Help:Inkscape#Saving files in Inkscape
Help:Text and Inkscape — 380 words
Inkscape — Official Web Page
Manual at flossmanuals.net — licensed under GNU GPL V2
Inkscape Manual — by Tavmjong Bah, available without paying only for personal use
Inkscape tutorials — at pearltrees.com
Inkscape tutorials — at inkscapetutorials.org
Inkscape tutorials — at goinkscape.com
Inkscape drawings — at DeviantArt
Inkscape v0.48 Keyboard Layout — at Open Clipart
Public Domain — at publicdomainvectors.org
Inkscape vectors — at scalablegfx.com
Free icons — at iconmonstr.com
Textures — at mayang.com
Textures — at imageafter.com
Textures — at digitalcraftsman.com
Textures — at textures.com
Textures — at texturelabs.org
Both GNU GPL V2 and GNU GPL V3 are incompatible with GNU FDL. Thus, the materials linked to licensed under either version cannot be taken over to Wikibooks.
↑ Library at microsoft.com
↑ a b c d e f Multimedia-Graphics at WhatIs.com
↑ W3C SVG 1.1
↑ Emoji chart at unicode.org
↑ Extensions at inkscape.org
↑ Open source Dyslexia font at Opendyslexic.org
You are probably already familiar with most of these concepts in terms of scientific or exponential notation for floating point numbers. For example, the number 123456.06 could be expressed in exponential notation as 1.23456e+05, a shorthand notation indicating that the mantissa 1.23456 is multiplied by the base 10 raised to power 5.
More formally, the internal representation of a floating point number can be characterized in terms of the following parameters:
The base or radix for exponentiation, an integer greater than 1. This is a constant for a particular representation.
The exponent to which the base is raised. The upper and lower bounds of the exponent value are constants for a particular representation.
Sometimes, in the actual bits representing the floating point number, the exponent is biased by adding a constant to it, to make it always be represented as an unsigned quantity. This is only important if you have some reason to pick apart the bit fields making up the floating point number by hand, which is something for which the GNU library provides no support. So this is ignored in the discussion that follows.
The mantissa or significand is an unsigned integer which is a part of each floating point number.
Many floating point representations have an implicit hidden bit in the mantissa. This is a bit which is present virtually in the mantissa, but not stored in memory because its value is always 1 in a normalized number. The precision figure (see previous article) includes any hidden bits.
Again, the GNU library provides no facilities for dealing with such low-level aspects of the representation.
The mantissa of a floating point number represents an implicit fraction whose denominator is the base raised to the power of the precision. Since the largest representable mantissa is one less than this denominator(base raised to the power of the precision), the value of the fraction is always strictly less than 1. The mathematical value of a floating point number is then the product of this fraction, the sign, and the base raised to the exponent.
We say that the floating point number is normalized if the fraction is at least 1/b, where b is the base. In other words, the mantissa would be too large to fit if it were multiplied by the base. Non-normalized numbers are sometimes called denormal; they contain less precision than the representation normally can hold.
If the number is not normalized, then you can subtract 1 from the exponent while multiplying the mantissa by the base, and get another floating point number with the same value. Normalization consists of doing this repeatedly until the number is normalized. Two distinct normalized floating point numbers cannot be equal in value.
(There is an exception to this rule: if the mantissa is zero, it is considered normalized. Another exception happens on certain machines where the exponent is as small as the representation can hold. Then it is impossible to subtract 1 from the exponent, so a number may be normalized even if its fraction is less than 1/b.)
We believe that subscribing to just one timeline for describing how technologies used for Open and Distance Education evolved would be very limiting. However, in this section we present a general timeline that can serve as a reference point in discussing the evolution of technologies for Open and Distance Education. It will be supplemented by the implicit categorizations of technologies into old school or traditional technologies and modern or, in our nomenclature, emerging technologies.[1]
The late 19th century marked its beginning with correspondence learning as a delivery method to learners. Paper-based technologies were thus used in this era because modules were print-based. These technologies include typewriters and mimeographs were the main technologies used in these times. This trend was maintained up until the 1980s.
It was in 1980 that distance learning institutions started using computers for content delivery. With the advent of the internet and the world wide web, some DE institutions also went online, such as the University of Phoenix. With this, the proliferation of e-Learning and internet based technologies became a phenomenon among DE institutions, especially among open universities. This continued to grow with the open source movement enabling the faster development of free to use and modify relevant software such as learning management systems, virtual learning environments and online communication software. Voice over IP (VOIP) also made synchonous voice and video communication possible and economical for DE.
Traditional technologies can refer to those that were used in correspondence learning and broadcast education, towards the earlier years of computer-based learning. Some technologies can be debatable depending on the perspective of the teacher or learner. Most teachers would still consider the CD-ROM as modern. However, digital natives would probably now consider storage devices that predate the Universal Serial Bus (USB)-based and flash memory devices as traditional or old-school.
It can be agreed though that laptop computers, which are used for online learning as well as smart phones, which are now becoming the device of choice for mobile augmented and virtual-reality based learning, are considered to be modern or emerging technologies in the present century. Such technologies are considered as hardware equipment and infrastructure, with the except ion of cloud computing, which includes software and hardware. In the section about common Open and Distance Education technologies, we shall enumerate on some emerging technologies that can be considered as significant.
↑ Jung, I. 2009. Open and Distance Learning. www.google.com
The killings were authorized by Adolf Hitler and Heinrich Himmler, the main men responsible for the Holocaust and the two most powerful Nazi leaders. A mass of evidence suggests that sometime in the fall of 1941, Himmler and Hitler agreed in principle on the complete mass extermination of the Jews of Europe by gassing, with Hitler explicitly ordering the "annihilation of the Jews" in a speech on December 12, 1941. Prior to this, Himmler had methodically planned out the Holocaust and then told Hitler of the "Final Solution" plan, which Hitler agreed to. Having gotten approval to put his plan into motion, Himmler quickly began a programme of systematic state-sponsored murder of Jews, Gypsies, Soviet prisoners of war, Polish and Soviet civilians, homosexuals, people with disabilities, Jehovah's Witnesses and other political and religious opponents, which occurred regardless of whether they were of German or non-German ethnic origin. Himmler also ordered the Einsatzgruppen ("task forces") to be formed. These were were death squads which went by foot murdering Jews, Poles, Soviets, and just about anyone resisting Nazi rule. Anyone who escaped concentration or extermination camps were hunted down by these death squads.
As to who knew of the mass murders, the concentration and extermination camps, the death squads, and medical experiments that were going on is debatable. Certainly, Adolf Hitler and Heinrich Himmler knew about everything that was happening. Hermann Göring is another high ranking Nazi official who knew, but didn't always approve of Himmler's ruthlessness. While Himmler was intent on murdering all "inferior sub-humans", Göring had always maintained that using the people for slave labor was far more beneficial to the Third Reich. Other Nazi's that knew of the killings were those directly subservient to Heinrich Himmler such as Ernst Kaltenbrunner, Reinhard Heydrich, Adolf Eichmann, Odilo Globocnik, and many SS doctors, guards and officers that worked directly in the camps like Rudolf Höss, Josef Mengele, and many others. The German people as a whole may not have known exactly the degree of mass murder that was going on, but most Germans were aware that non-Germans, especially Jews, were being taken away and persecuted. Most Germans turned a blind eye, and yet many others approved of the persecution of the Jews.
Previous:The Delegation. Ido
In 1903 the famous Italian mathematician G. Peano started his Latino sine flexione. This may be useful to express the abstract truths dealt with in mathematical treatises, but when it is claimed that it can be used also in other sciences and in practical everyday life, the matter is much more doubtful. The idea is to take the ablative of each Latin noun and one simple form of each verb to be used practically everywhere. This "interlingua" is now employed in the publication of Academia pro Interlingua, which purports to be a continuation of the Volapük "Kadem" of 1887; anyone can become a member in consideration of a modest subscription, and members are free to use what dialect they choose of this Latino - and there are several, though superficially different writers seem to write the same language. Some use que only as a conjunction ("that"), where others say quod, some also as a relative and interrogative pronoun and for "than" (que de melio que libertate?); ut is found for "in order that" and in other writers for "as" (ut seque, ut normale); lege in one writer means "law," in another "read," etc. Some use more or less self-made inflexions (veniva preterite, veniri future), while Peano himself, who has a curious predilection for etymology, expresses the former tense by a preposed e (the Greek augment, which has never existed in Latin), and the latter by a i (the Latin root "go", which has never been used for that purpose in any language), thus e i "went," i i "will go" (or perhaps e ire, i ire). It makes a curious impression in the midst of this dead speech material to come upon modern words like utiliza and hazarda: if their number is not greater, this is due to the subjects treated and the necessarily stiff style in which everything is written: there is in this periodical nothing of the freedom and ease of expression found in other recent interlanguages.
Nevertheless the experiment is interesting and has taken the fancy of some scientists who have not entirely forgotten the Latin they were taught at school and who now rejoice to find that they can read most of this Latin without being bothered with irregular verbs and difficult rules of syntax. The facility, however, with which this Latin is read is largely a delusion: for myself, though I have read a good deal of Latin in my life, I have found sentences which I could not make out except by translating them into the mother-tongue of the writer, Italian or French, and others which I was not able to understand even in that way. "Illo es nunc facto plus facile gratias ad factos" - does that mean "this is now an easier fact," or "more easily a fact," or "made easier"? I suppose the last. "Cresce impossibilitate de resana et illo procedi usque ad securo morte"; in the next following sentence "nam Volapük more tunc certo" I first took more to be "custom," but then discovered that it was Latin morior, and that the mark of past time was left out in consequence of the adverb tunc, so that the whole meant "V. died certainly."
This, or rather most of this, may be all very well for those who have learnt Latin, even if they have forgotten most of it; but what about the majority who have never had the benefit of a classical education? It is said that they can understand this Interlingua by means of a Latin dictionary - but how are they to know that when they see more, they are sometimes to look under mos, and sometimes under morior? Or where to look for homine, pote ("can"), etc.? It is, of course, much worse when it comes to writing (or speaking!) the language oneself: what is the use of telling a man who has learnt no Latin grammar that he is simply to take the ablative, when his dictionary gives him only the nominative and genitive? The interlanguage of the future must necessarily be autonomous and have its own grammar and dictionary: it cannot be dependent on reminiscences of other languages - though it may, and must, turn to account the fact that the majority of users have at any rate a smattering of some language or languages besides their own.
Peano is quite right in saying that when we say "Two boys came yesterday," we express both the plural and the time idea twice, and that it would be just as clear to say "Two boy come yesterday," but this is not the same as saying that a sign for the plural and for past time is generally, or even always, superfluous. Peano's ideal would be no grammar, or what he thinks is the same thing, the Chinese grammar; but no language can do entirely without grammar, however true it is that the grammar of an interlanguage can be made much simpler than that of our usual languages. Chinese grammar is simplicity itself, in so far as it has no inflexions of the European kind, but it uses other grammatical means, as when wang with one tone means "king" and with another tone "to be king," or when the rules for word-order show whether ta is to mean "big," or "bigness," not to mention the numerous particles used for grammatical purposes. In imitating the latter feature, and in using word-order to distinguish subject from object we are in perfect agreement with the whole trend of the development of West-European languages.
OpenBSD has an easy (although non-graphical) installation procedure.
Welcome to the OpenBSD/i386 4.4 install program.
This program will help you install OpenBSD. At any prompt except password
It is often helpful to have the installation notes handy. For complex disk
Proceed with install? [no] yes
Cool! Let's get to it.
You will now initialize the disk(s) that OpenBSD will use. To enable all
Available disks are: wd0.
Do you want to use *all* of wd0 for OpenBSD? [no] yes
Putting all of wd0 into an active OpenBSD MBR partion (type 'A6')...done.
You will now create an OpenBSD disklabel inside the OpenBSD MBR
The offsets used in the disklabel are ABSOLUTE, i.e. relative to the
Treating sectors 63-80292870 as the OpenBSD portion of the disk.
You can use the 'b' command to change this.
Initial label editor (enter '?' for help at any prompt)
b: 0.2G 5.0G swap
c: 38.3G 0.0G unused 0 0
d: 5.0G 5.2G 4.2BSD 2048 16384 328
Mount point for wd0d (size=2097144k)? (or 'none' or 'done') [/tmp] done
No more disks to initialize.
The next step *DESTROYS* all existing data on these partitions!
Are you really sure that you're ready to proceed? [no] yes
10239.9MB in 64 cyl groups (328 c/g, 161.44MB/g, 20608 i/g)
2048.0MB in 13 cyl groups (328 c/g, 161.44MB/g, 20608 i/g)
6144.0MB in 39 cyl groups (328 c/g, 161.44MB/g, 20608 i/g)
10240.0MB in 64 cyl groups (328 c/g, 161.44MB/g, 20608 i/g)
9216.2MB in 58 cyl groups (328 c/g, 161.44MB/g, 20608 i/g)
/dev/wd0a on /mnt type ffs(rw, asynchronous, local, ctime=Wed Nov 1 01:47:50 2006)
/dev/wd0h on /mnt/home type ffs
(rw, asynchronous, local, nodev, nosuid, ctime=Wed Nov 1 01:47:50 2006)
/dev/wd0d on /mnt/tmp type ffs
(rw, asynchronous, local, nodev, nosuid, ctime=Wed Nov 1 01:47:50 2006)
/dev/wd0g on /mnt/usr type ffs
(rw, asynchronous, local, nodev, ctime=Wed Nov 1 01:47:50 2006)
/dev/wd0e on /mnt/var type ffs
(rw, asynchronous, local, nodev, nosuid, ctime=Wed Nov 1 01:47:50 2006)
System hostname (short form, e.g. 'foo'): home
Available interfaces are: fxp0.
The media options for fxp0 are currently
IPv4 address for fxp0? (or 'none' or 'dhcp') 192.168.1.7[note 7]
No more interfaces to initilaize.
Default IPv4 route? (IP address, 'dhcp' or 'none') 192.168.1.1
Let's install the sets!
Location of sets? (cd disk ftp http or 'done') [cd] cdrom
[X] bsd.rd
[X] base44.tgz
[X] etc44.tgz
[X] misc44.tgz
[X] comp44.tgz
[X] man44.tgz
[X] game44.tgz
Set name? (or 'done') [bsd.mp] all
[X] bsd.rd
[X] bsd.mp
[X] base44.tgz
[X] etc44.tgz
[X] misc44.tgz
[X] comp44.tgz
[X] man44.tgz
[X] game44.tgz
[X] xbase44.tgz
[X] xetc44.tgz
[X] xshare44.tgz
[X] xfont44.tgz
[X] xserv44.tgz
Getting bsd ...
Getting bsd.rd ...
Getting bsd.mp ...
Getting base44.tgz ...
Getting etc44.tgz ...
Getting misc44.tgz ...
Getting comp44.tgz ...
Getting man44.tgz ...
Getting game44.tgz ...
Getting xbase44.tgz ...
Getting xetc44.tgz ...
Getting xshare44.tgz ...
Getting xfont44.tgz ...
Getting xserv44.tgz ...
NTP server? (or 'none' or 'default') [none] default
Do you expect to run the X Window System? [no] yes
Saving configuration files...done.
Generating initial host.random file...done.
Making all device nodes...done.
Installing boot block...
/usr/mdec/biosboot: entry point 0
/mnt/boot is 3 blocks x 16384 bytes
CONGRATULATIONS! Your OpenBSD install has been successfully completed!
To boot the new system, enter halt at the command prompt. Once the
The operating system has halted.
Please press any key to reboot.
The authors of this article: OpenBSD 101
CFeyecare- started page.
↑ This controls how much memory is in the root partition. I would not recomend using 10g as the example used. 5g would be plenty.
↑ This controls how much memory the swap partition has. The standard is twice your RAM.
↑ This controls how much memory the tmp partition has.
↑ This controls how much memory the var partition has.
↑ This controls how much memory the usr partition has. The usr partition is where you store all of your program. Vary the size depending on how many applications you want. 10g is good for a workstation. 3g is enough for a server.
↑ This controls how much memory the home partition has.
↑ If you want to use OpenBSD as a desktop or a workstation, you may want to use dhcp.
↑ Usually you will use your router as a DNS server (192.168.1.1).
Alaska shih Meeiguor zaih Beeimeeizhou xibeeibuh de liingtuu.
Nr.
Evangelists are Christians who feel strongly about that which they assert is true and wish to attempt to convert the rest of society to their beliefs.
D. L. Moody
This is an open source WikiBook that you can help edit.
It is different than many compendiums in that it is focused on styles in the sense of techniques rather than on styles in the sense of techniques associated with specific regions. Many fiddle styles are associated with specific regions and when that is the case we will acknowledge it. You may also be interested in other Wikibooks on related topics.
Early Music: Renaissance, Church Modal
Hoedown "Fiddle" Music and Later Developments
Primary author and general editor Geof Bard playing the dirge-like
McPherson's Lament, performed by its eighteenth century composer "upon the gallers tree".
This book is a required text for [Fiddlers' Green: Beyond Violin], a course at our sister site
.
Right cosets are defined in an analogous fashion:
.
Proof: We first prove the alternative formula for being in the same coset. If
, we find from the latter equation an
, the latter identity because
.
Hence, the two formulae for the relations coincide, and it remains to check that we're dealing with an equivalence relation. Indeed, suppose
. Then there exist
, ie.
, and symmetry follows because
.
Analogously, we have the following proposition:
.
, under which two elements belonging to the same right coset of
. But the relation defined by the latter was seen to be an equivalence relation.
.
Proof: We have seen that being in the same left coset is an equivalence relation, so that the equivalence classes partition
. Moreover, every equivalence class (ie. coset) has the same cardinality as
.
Proof: By Lagrange's theorem, the number of left cosets equals
. But we may consider the opposite group
. Its left cosets are almost exactly the right cosets of
, which, by Lagrange's theorem equals
Hence, we may also use the notation
.
, thus establishing another formula for the equivalence relation of being in the same coset.
Formulate Lagrange's theorem for right cosets, without using index notation.
Act II, Scene I-III
In Paris, the King of France bids farewell to a part of lords bound for the war in Florence, declaring that he may well be dead by the time they return. Two brothers, The First Lord and Second Lord Dumaine, urge Bertram to come with them to the war, but he says regretfully that the King has commanded him to remain at court. Parolles, boasting of his own prowess in battle, suggests that Bertram sneak away, and then wishes the two Lords good luck and the blessings of Mars, the god of war.
The King, meanwhile, is in conversation with Lafew, an old lord who was recently visiting Rousillon, and who tells his sovereign that a female doctor (Helena, of course) has recently arrived promising a cure for his ailment. Helena is ushered in, and tells the King that on his deathbed her father gave her a powerful medicine, ordering her to keep it safe--and that she has brought the medicine to save the royal life. The King thanks her for her offer, but says that there is no point in trying, since his doctors insist that the disease is incurable. Helena responds that there is no harm in making an attempt, and then boldly promises that the medicine will restore his health within just two days. She goes further, saying that if the cure fails, her life should be forfeit. If it succeeds, however, she asks permission to choose whomever she desires as a husband. The King agrees to the bargain, and promises to try the medicine immediately.
The Countess, after letting her Clown jest with her for a time, sends him to court with a message for Helena. In Paris, meanwhile, Parolles and Lafew remark on the amazing success of Helena's cure, which has restored the King to good health. True to his word, the King assembles five stalwart young noblemen as potential mates, but Helena passes over them all and selects Bertram. The young Count is taken aback, and declares that she is too far beneath him for the marriage to work. The King rebukes him, saying that inner worth is more important than noble birth, and promises to raise Helena to a higher rank; when Bertram still refuses to agree to the match, his monarch threatens to throw him out of royal favor. Faced with that threat, Bertram unhappily agrees, and the couple is immediately led to the altar. Left behind, Lafew and Parolle argue over the relative worth of the new husband and wife, with Lafew criticizing Bertram's conduct, and Parolles taking offense and trying to pick a fight--only to back away, saying that Lafew is too old for a duel. The old lord sees through the other man's bluster, and calls Parolles a coward. Meanwhile, Bertram returns, newly married, and tells Parolles that he will never consummate the wedding: he plans to send Helena home to his mother, and then run away to war.
The central problem of All's Well That Ends Well is illustrated by Bertram's behavior in these scenes. Given that he acts like a cad, treats her terribly, and essentially humiliates her, why does Helena continue to love him and pursue him? Why is she so smitten with a man who is obviously unworthy of her?
In a way, one can almost pity Bertram, who finds himself forced to marry against his will by what is, essentially, a fairy-tale sequence of events--a fair maid saves an dying King and receives her true love's hand as a reward. (The cure effects a change in the King's character, too, as he moves from a resigned passivity to fierce anger when Bertram attempts to refuse Helena's hand.) But the young Count quickly forfeits our pity when he whines "but follows it, my lord, to bring me down / Must answer for your raising? I know her well; / She had her breeding at my father's charge: / A poor physician's daughter my wife!" (Act II, Scene III, Lines 113-116). The arranged marriage--which a nobleman of the era would have been brought up to expect--bothers him less than the fact that Helena is not of noble birth, but only "a poor physician's daughter." In short, he is a snob, and a foolish one at that, since he cannot perceive what all the wiser characters know at once, namely, that Helena is a better woman than he deserves. The King's words put it aptly: "If she be / All that is virtuous, save what thou dislik'st-- / A poor physician's daughter--thou dislik'st / Of virtue for the name" (Act II, Scene III, Lines 122-125). But a noble name, more than virtue, is what matters to the callow Bertram.
Indeed, we should not be surprised that he fails to recognize Helena's worth, given his ridiculously high estimation of Parolles's character. His boastful companion is not a master of deceit, like the great Shakespearean villains (Iago in "Othello," Edmund in "King Lear"); rather, Parolles is easily seen through, and every wise character in the play does so, beginning with Helena in the first act, and continuing here with the able Lafew. Some critics have argued that Parolles leads Bertram astray, but this is putting the cart before the horse--the fact that Bertram is taken in by Parolles is indicative of the weakness and folly that exists, independent of any outside influence, at the heart of his character. And Bertram's foolishness, too, is hardly a secret: just as all the wise characters see through Parolles, so do all of them, beginning with Lafew, perceive that Bertram is committing a great wrong in his treatment of Helena. Shakespeare is not interested in shades of gray here--Bertram is condemned and Helena favored by everyone.
Hinduism is both a religion and a society, and their practices get overlapped. For example, caste is essentially a social system to safeguard the interests of particular groups with common ancestry. But over the years it has been identified as an integral part of Hinduism, the religion. Similarly, putting on the sacred thread was a religious practice. But later got transformed into a social custom for the upper caste Hindus.
Religion and Hinduism are synonymous, and hence Hinduism cannot be defined the way Islam or Christianity can be. However, for the sake of convenience, a Hindu is expected to have these basic beliefs and practices:
The belief in the transmigratory nature of the individual soul till it attains mukti, the absolute freedom from every kind of bondage and duality. This is the most important philosophical concept of the Vedas.
Acceptance of the law of karma, according to which every action produces its result, and does not allow the soul to get liberated till there is any residue of them left, good or bad.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
The scope of this book is a tutorial about the use and practical implications of Vissim’s tools for freeway, signalized intersection, pedestrian, transit, and bicycle simulation. The text is broken down into five sections; Freeway Simulation, Signalized Intersection Simulation, Pedestrian and Bicycle Simulation, Transit simulation, and Parking Simulation. Each section is split into subsection related to geometric network design, traffic data input, and/or simulation evaluation. These subsections explore important characteristics and attributes that contribute to building and validating a model. The Geometric Network Design section discusses the methods and tools that are used to build a spatial arena to represent the existing world or a proposed design with a step by step example. The Traffic Data Input section provides a step by step example on how to manipulate data input, compositions, and routes. The Evaluation section introduces a method to extract data from the model in order to analyze in a spreadsheet.
A simulation is only as accurate as the quality of the model and data input. This can be summarized by the expression “Garbage In, Garbage Out”, and is as true with Vissim as any traffic simulation software. One not must view the quality and smooth interface of Vissim as a reflection of the quality and relevance of their own model. A rigorous approach must be taken and the goal of this text is to provide the framework. Each section introduces basic concepts and procedures that can be used as a starting point for well calibrated sophisticated models.
1 To what extent do we agree with Sherry Turkle's argument that digital connections offer only an illusion of companionship?
To what extent do we agree with Sherry Turkle's argument that digital connections offer only an illusion of companionship?
According to Sherry Turkle, “Digital connections and the sociable robot may offer the illusion of companionship without the demands of friendship.” [1] (p.1) To what extent do you agree with this statement?
In Sherry Turkle’s book Alone Together she discusses the concept of always-on culture and states how digital connections offer the “illusion of companionship without the demands of friendship”.[1] Turkle continues this discussion in her TedTalk “Connected, but alone?” and states that these digital connections give us 3 gratifying fantasies: (1) we can put our attention where we want, (2) we will always be heard, and (3) never have to be alone. Always-on culture is a recent development that has unfolded in our society. It is the expectation that everyone must always be connected to the Internet, regardless of the social context.[2] By exploring several concepts closely related to always-on culture, we will discuss whether we agree with Turkle’s argument that digital connections provides companionship, but not real friendship.
Friends on Mobile Phones [3]
One of the concepts Sherry Turkle devised in relation to always-on culture is the notion of the ‘tethered self’. In her article ‘Always-on/Always-on-you: The Tethered Self’, Turkle describes the tethered self as a state in which we are constantly connected, or tethered, to our devices and the people we communicate with through them.[4] Technology has created a space in which we can live in both the online and offline world. Our activities may not be centred around the Internet, but there is the assumption that we are still connected to the network and are available for contact (pp. 72).[2]
Turkle describes how the tethered self has manifested in the offline world – she met with young people who exhibited the behaviours of people tethered to the Internet. These young people talked about situations in which they were waiting for a notification to appear on their phone, even putting their safety on the line for a connection, such as checking their phones while driving or getting into accidents while walking (pp. 171).[5]
The idea of the tethered self suggests that people are starting to prioritise online connections over real physical interactions.
This would suggest that because we value online connections over those in the real world, they are more ‘real’. Sherry Turkle explains that our lives are different on the network, and there is a difference between “what is true and what is “true here,” true in simulation.” Digital connections are divided by a screen and a physical distance; these connections therefore eliminate the intimacy that accompanies friendships in the offline world.
As Turkle explains, virtual friendships do not require the same level of commitment as those in real life (pp. 153).[6] This is the case because we only pay partial attention to the conversation at hand. Our attention is always divided: for example, while we pay attention to someone offline, we are constantly aware that our devices may receive a notification or a call, and so, we never give our full attention. Our attention may also be split to multiple interactions online, therefore, there is an artificiality to digital connections as they lack the attention and intimacy that friendships require. They also require less commitment because they are conditioned with the expectation that these friendships are disposable. If you don’t agree with someone, you can block them. There is also the phenomenon of “ghosting”: the act of ending a relationship by withdrawing all mobile communication without explanation.[7] The rules of connection are different on online platforms and therefore, it suggests a simpler form of friendship that is not replicated in real life.
Furthermore, on social media users tend to present the best versions of themselves or the person that they want to be. Online identity is performative; social media is intended to be used to share our lives, but we predominately use it to project the events in our day that we assume people will like. This builds the foundation for online connections that are not based on reality.
Virtual conversations are also defined by a kind of shorthand – we will speak in short phrases or emoticons that quickly communicate what one is feeling. These conversations lack the complexity of genuine conversation; they create a compacted version of friendship.
Additionally, online companionships tend to be defined by dependency. Through social media, one will communicate their feelings and look to others to validate those feelings. This in turn becomes a desire for continual validation – as Turkle explains, “I have a feeling/Get me a friend” becomes “I want to have a feeling/Get me a friend” [4]. As we are constantly tethered to our devices, we are never truly alone. This eliminates the opportunity for self-reflection that is important for developing a sense of self.
In the digital world, relationships are constantly being created, developed and sustained through various online and offline interactions. In particular, individuals use social media to connect with one another. For example, people use Facebook to connect with colleagues, friends, and family. However, the term ‘Facebook friends’ refers to acquaintances with whom one is only in contact through social media. (pp.102) [8] The term carries the implication that ‘friendship’ of such a kind, even under the label ‘friend’, is a lower category of friendship than ‘real friends’. This shows that social media platforms including Facebook allow individuals to create friends but those ‘friends’ can be organized into categories based on their closeness. As Miller argues in How the World Changed Social Media: Online and offline relationships “for a good friend social media is likely to help cultivate and enhance that friendship, whereas, if there is no bonding in the first place, being friends on Facebook may make little or no difference” (pp.103) [8] Meaning that people can connect with complete strangers but they will still question their level of friendship with them. Within the always-on culture, people also use social media to find intimate relationships as well. Many people use dating apps and services like Tinder, Snapchat and Bumble to connect with potential partners instead of having a real face to face conversation. Overall, social media accounts offer the illusion of companionship without the demands of friendships.
On any given day, we are exposed to an unimaginable amount of information. This can range from the physical environment around us, how we are feeling (emotional intellect), and not to mention the never-ending amount of information that can be found online. How do we deal with all of this infoglut? ‘Infoglut’ is a term used by Mark Andrejevic, meaning “an unimaginably unmanageable amount of information is available to anyone with Internet access”[9] (pp. 2). We do not have to go in search of the information that is at our disposal online, it comes to us. We see it through television, news, Tweets, texts, blogs, etc.
The overwhelming amount of information might not be a bad thing. Andrejevic mentions in his book how the Internet has made an “unprecedented amount of information available to a growing population of the populace, while also providing it with access to content creation and distribution tools” [9] (pp. 2). People can choose to be an active participant in the information and contribute to it.
It can be overwhelming to people to have all of this information thrown at them. How do people make sense of it all, and how do they choose what is relevant to them? They could make the conscious decision to back away from social media and other digital connections. However, by doing this, the risk their online ‘relationships’ and step away from the always-on culture. The infoglut only enables and encourages the always-on culture because there is so much information to be a part of.
Facebook currently has over 2.13 billion users across the globe, [10] and this number is growing every day. This is just one example of a social media platform that appears to never fail in growing larger each year. However, even in the always-on culture we live in today, it is becoming more common recently for users to disconnect from their profiles or take a break from social media, and other digital connections.
Pepita Hesselberth [11] goes into depth on the issues surrounding the “right to disconnect”, introducing the article with the proposed ban in Germany on the use of work related communicative devices outside of work at two leading car manufacturing companies: Volkswagen and BMW. The author highlights three key concerns in the discussion relating to:
Hesselberth explains in the article how although these concerns have been looked at individually, there is little research into how all three inter-relate. Digital labour can be a reason people opt to disconnect from digital connections. Christian Fuchs is one academic who is highly concerned with the idea of “playbour”, the concept of users of the internet working for free whenever they use the internet. Fuchs argues the point that because we live in an always-on culture, the “factory” is not just limited to the home and workplace, but “[…] the factory and workplace surveillance are also in all in-between spaces” (pp.118). [12] It can be argued that for some, the idea of withholding digital relationships with others whilst carrying out “unpaid work” is immoral, and therefore digital connections are not comparable to the same levels of companionship or friendship as “real life” connections.
Hesselberth [11] goes on to explain how the concept of disconnectivity is difficult to measure, as individuals who disengage from digital connections often do so partially, i.e. removing the Facebook app from your phone but still able to access the website on a computer, or choosing not to use a mobile device but still using a laptop. As well as depending on medium specificity, it can be situational to when and where the disengagement exists, the author uses the examples of only connecting during work/not during work. Lastly disengagement can depend on the specific purpose of the digital connection, i.e. not agreeing with the morals of privacy on specific online platforms (pp.4).
It is also important to note that there are different extremity levels of which people can disconnect. Some people may choose to take a break, with the conscious decision to return to the digital connection after a certain amount of time; some may choose to lessen the time spent on the digital medium; and some may choose to simply refuse the digital connection (media refusal).
Media refusal is described by Portwood-Stacer [13] as “[…] a term I use to describe the practice in which people consciously choose not to engage with some media technology or platform” (pp.1046). However, the term is not specific to just social media, but can be applied to all forms of media. The author continues to argue on the topic of Facebook, and how media refusal can be used to send a message/make a point for other users about something they don’t agree with on/about the social networking site.
People disconnect from digital connections for a mass of different reason, some being: an attempt to disengage with any fake news circulating; disagreement with the morals of the medium i.e. the concept of data mining and surveillance within social media sites, or the concept of the platform’s business model; to use their time in a more effective way; and to attempt to improve mental wellbeing.
In the process of attempting to disconnect, or disconnecting unintentionally, from any given digital connection, “Disconnectivity Anxiety (DA)” can often be noticed. Dr Jim Taylor [14] defines this term as “a persistent and unpleasant condition characterized by worry and unease caused by periods of technological disconnection from others”. Taylor elaborates on this term, relating the use of an always-on culture to the use of a highly addictive drug, where withdrawal symptoms can be seen when disconnection occurs - the connection itself representing the ‘drug’. The author continues and explains how being disconnected was once the standard, but nowadays it is unusual to be disconnected for a prolonged period of time. It can be argued that because of this disconnectivity anxiety, individual’s find it difficult to imagine a life without the companionship of some form of digital connection.
We are living in an ever-more connected society. We have digital connections such as social media to be active in the always-on culture. Now, our devices are also connected to us. Our phones are able to track someone’s location or count our steps, cars can now drive themselves, and we have home audio systems such as Alexa that can turn something - such as the television - on and off at the sound of our voice.
This variety of internet-connected devices is called the Internet of Things. According to Bunz, and Meikle, “The internet of things describes the many uses and processes that result from giving a network address to a thing and fitting it with sensors” [15]. This can be anything from a mobile phone to household appliances.
To some, the idea of everyday objects being connected to a network is a frightening. In an episode of the TV series Mr. Robot, a woman’s internet-connected devices go out of control. She didn’t know how to turn anything off because it was all connected throughout the walls of the smart home. This is a fictional example, however, more recently there had been reports of Alexa laughing for no reason. Alexa is a smart speaker that listens for commands and then does what it is being asked. Recently, Alexa was mistaking commands, such as ‘turn off the lights’ for ‘laugh’ [16]. It would frighten owners into thinking that their technology was taking over and developing a 'mind' of its own. However, this does not mean that Alexa, or other smart devices are taking over. It is simply a reminder that this technology is still advancing and needs more work to be fully functioning properly.
'Smart' Companions?
Do these smart devices offer the illusion of companionship, as Turkle argues? Some might think of Alexa as a companion because she can listen and perform commands. Others might think she is no more than a robot who has been programmed to respond to a user’s voice. Nonetheless, Alexa is no more than a speaker who has been programmed by humans, for humans. She is not a true companion, in that she cannot understand a human’s complex and intimate emotions. For example, she may be able to turn on our favorite song, but she does not know or understand why that song is our favorite like a friend in real life would.
There are many pros and cons to the Internet of Things. Justin Reich, a fellow at Harvard University’s Berkman Center for Internet & Society, addresses such effects:
“It will have widespread beneficial effects, along with widespread negative effects. There will be conveniences and privacy violations. There will be new ways for people to connect, as well as new pathways towards isolation, misanthropy, and depression.” [17].
The Internet of Things is still a developing area of interest. As it evolves, we may see more technological advances to human interaction and communication, or our face-to-face communication will continue to dissolve.
Another advancement in the Internet of Things is the 'sociable' robot. Robots have become some sort of replacement for humans and human interactions and intimacy. Sherry Turkle says “As sociable robots propose themselves as substitutes for people, new networked devices offer us machine-mediated relationships with each other, another kind of substitution.” [1] (pp. 3). Robots allow people to feel like they are in control. It is easy to have a companionship with a robot without having the demands of friendship. A person can talk to a robot as if it is a friend, but just as easily set it aside when they get bored or uninterested.
Robots as Companions?
Robots are a perfect example to address Turkle's notion that digital connections offer only the illusion of friendship. She addresses this in her book, Alone Together, "We don’t seem to care what these artificial intelligences “know” or “understand” of the human moments we might “share” with them.” [1] (pp.10). Human beings have a desire to feel wanted and needed, and when we don't get these desires fulfilled by another human, we reach out to technology. This can be by creating an avatar to live in a virtual world, seeking validation through online connections such as social media, or turning to robots to get the feelings of companionship.
There has been increasing discussion of robots becoming suitable romantic partners. However, skeptics such as Sherry Turkle disagree with the notion that robots can provide true love and an authentic relationship with a human. “A love relationship involves coming to savor the surprises and the rough patches of looking at the world from another’s point of view, shaped by history, biology, trauma, and joy. Computers and robots do not have these experiences to share.” [1] (pp.6). Robots might be able to provide a shallow illusion of companionship, but they are not able to provide a true relationship that is only available from another human being who has shared similar life experiences.
Creating robots that mimic the nurturing companionship of a nurse for the elderly in nursing homes is undergoing research. Many elderly people in nursing homes only share the company of part-time nurses and/or other residents. For some elderly residents, robot companions could be very beneficial to their health and well-being. Although robots are not able to -or at least not yet able to- provide the same care as nurses, they are able to provide comfort, much like an emotional support animal.
There are doubts as well about robots providing companionship to the elderly. Metzler, Lewis, and Pope and others address this doubt in their essay Could robots become authentic companions in nursing care? They question whether robots could replace nurses as both companions and caretakers. "If the intended role for these artefacts is to perform nursing assistive tasks and furnish companionship, then might some human nurses not wonder whether the ultimate purpose of the machines really is to assist or to replace?" [19]
More research is needed in the area of robots being suitable companions for the elderly in nursing homes. It can be argued both ways as to whether or not they can be companions capable of providing emotional, mental, and physical support. While robots can provide companionship to the elderly, it is still only an illusion of real friendship.
To conclude, there are many aspects of digital culture which contribute to the notion that digital connections only provide an “illusion of companionship”.[1] The Internet has provided a platform for people to connect, however these online friendships lack the intimacy and commitment of offline friendships. Although, the authenticity of these connections can be questioned, they are ubiquitous in the always-on culture that exists today.
↑ a b c d e f Turkle, S. (2011). Introduction. In Alone together: why we expect more from technology and less from each other, (pp. 1-20). New York, NY: Basic Books. Retrieved March 25, 2018.
↑ a b Boyd, D. (2001). Participating in the always-on lifestyle. In M. Mandiberg (Ed.), The social media reader (pp. 71-76). New York, NY: New York University Press. Retrieved March 23, 2018.
Garry Knight at en.wikipedia, the author of this work, hereby publishes it under the following licenses:
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported license. In short: you are free to share and to make derivatives of this work under the conditions that you appropriately attribute it, and that you only distribute it under the same, similar or a compatible license. Any of the above conditions can be waived if you get permission from the copyright holder.
Cc-by-sa-3.0
Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported
↑ a b Turkle, S. (2008). Always-on/always-on-you: The tethered self. In J. Katz (Ed.), Handbook of mobile communication studies, (pp. 121-137). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Retrieved March 23, 2018.
↑ Turkle, S. (2011). Growing up tethered. In Alone together: why we expect more from technology and less from each other, (pp. 171-186). New York, NY: Basic Books. Retrieved March 23, 2018.
↑ Turkle, S. (2011). Always on. In Alone together: why we expect more from technology and less from each other, (pp. 151-170). New York, NY: Basic Books. Retrieved March 23, 2018.
↑ Haynes, G. (2017, May 8). Cushioning, breadcrumbing or benching: the ​language of modern dating. Retrieved March 23, 2018.
↑ a b Miller, D., Costa, E., Haynes, N., McDonald, T., Nicolescu, R., Sinanan, J., . . . Wang, X. (2016). How the World Changed Social Media. London: UCL Press. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt1g69z35
↑ a b Andrejevic, M. (2013). Introduction: Infoglut and Clutter-Clearing. In Infoglut: How Too Much Information Is Changing the Way We Think and Know (pp. 1-19). New York, NY: Routledge. Retrieved March 22, 2018.
↑ Zephoria (2018). The Top 20 Valuable Facebook Statistics. Zephoria Digital Marketing. Retrieved March 23, 2018
↑ a b Hesselberth, P. (2017), Discourses on disconnectivity and the right to disconnect. In New Media and Society, 1(17) doi:10.1177/1461444817711449 Retrieved March 22, 2018
↑ Fuchs, C. (2014) Free Labour and Slave Labour. In Social Media a critical introduction, pp. 117-121. Sage Publications: Great Britain
↑ Portwood-Stacer, L. (2013). Media refusal and conspicuous non-consumption: The performative and political dimensions of facebook abstention. New Media & Society, 15(7), 1041-1057. doi:10.1177/1461444812465139. Retrieved March 23, 2018
↑ Taylor, J. (2010). Disconnectivity Anxiety. Retrieved March 21, 2018
↑ Bunz, M. & Meikle, G. The Internet of Things, Polity Press, 2017. ProQuest Ebook Central.
↑ Griffin, A. (2018, March 09). Alexa laugh: Why Amazon's Echo is refusing to follow instructions then emitting horrifying noises. Retrieved March 24, 2018.
↑ Anderson, J., & Rainie, L. (2014, May 14). The Internet of Things Will Thrive by 2025: About this Report. Retrieved March 23, 2018.
John F Williams at en.wikipedia, the author of this work, hereby publishes it under the following licenses:
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported license. In short: you are free to share and to make derivatives of this work under the conditions that you appropriately attribute it, and that you only distribute it under the same, similar or a compatible license. Any of the above conditions can be waived if you get permission from the copyright holder.
Cc-by-sa-3.0
Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported
↑ Metzler, T. A., Lewis, L. M. and Pope, L. C. (2016), Could robots become authentic companions in nursing care?. Nursing Philosophy, 17: 36–48. doi:10.1111/nup.12101.
ă like 'a' in "father", except said very quickly: chăn
e like 'eah' in "yeah": che, me
i like 'ee' in "see" or "deed": pin, xin
o like "awwwww...", but not quite as long: lý do, quả nho
ơ like â, except longer: bơ, bài thơ
ư like 'oo' in "book", with a hint of the 'i' in "lick": lá thư, giống như
This Wiki Fact Sheet is an analysis and critique on the journal article "Aerobic exercise improves self-reported sleep and quality of life in older adults with insomnia" by Reid et al. (2011).[1] Created by SID 3164690.
What is the background to this research?
Sleep disturbances and disorders have been shown to be associated with age.[2] Sleep complaints are a growing concern for the elderly population.[3] This study aimed to investigate whether an aerobic exercise intervention along with sleep education would improve the sleep quality in elderly individuals who were experiencing insomnia.
Insomnia is characterised by the difficulty in falling asleep, broken sleep and waking up early.[2] Such a debilitating illness can have adverse impacts on quality of life.[4] Research has shown insomnia to have significant effects on physical and mental health, productivity in the workplace and attention and memory skills.[4][5] Furthermore, individuals who suffer from insomnia are highly likely to also experience additional health issues, particularly mental illness such as depression and anxiety.[6]
Insomnia is commonly treated with behaviour modification, psychological treatment and medication. Although pharmaceutical interventions are the most popular treatment prescribed for insomnia, these medications are highly associated with negative side effects which can be threatening to health and well-being.[2][7] Growing evidence suggests that exercise may be an inexpensive and beneficial alternative to treating symptoms of insomnia.[1][8][9]
This study was carried out by researchers from Northwestern University Feinberg, School of Medicine Chicago and was approved by the NorthWestern University Institutional Review Board.[1]
The current study used a randomised controlled trial, conducted over sixteen weeks to investigate whether sleep education and aerobic physical activity had an effect on sleep, mood and quality of life for older adults with insomnia. Studies that use randomised trials aim to randomly distribute participants in either treatment or non-treatment conditions to address any issues of bias.[10] The pre and post design of the study was used to compare the different groups and measure the degree of change that occurred from the exercise intervention. These measurements were taken from a range of questionnaires and psychological testing. There were two conditions in which participants were randomly placed:
Sleep Hygiene Education and Non-Physical Activity (Non-PA)
Sleep Hygiene Education and Aerobic Physical Activity (PA)
What did the research involve?
The study involved 17 sedentary men and women aged 55 years or older who had been experiencing insomnia symptoms for at least 3 months. Eligible participants had problems falling asleep, maintaining sleep and waking up early, total sleep duration of less than 6.5 hours per night and had impairments in daytime functioning. Participants were also required to undergo stringent screening for any other sleep disorders or underlying psychiatric illness, not be on any sedative medication, be a non smoker and sedentary for the validity of the study. Baseline measures on sleep quality and mood were taken prior to the study.
Sleep Hygiene - All participants received sleep hygiene education, which involved meeting with a sleep specialist who provided counselling and written instructions prior to bedtime. They were also given a check list and were encouraged to follow the pre-bedtime procedures.
Aerobic Physical Activity - Participants in this group had undergone a conditioning period for the first 4–6 weeks of the study. For the duration of the study, they exercised for either two 20 minute sessions or one 30-40 minute session at 75% of their maximum heart rate for 4 times a week. These activities included walking, a cycle ergometer or treadmill.
Non-Physical Activity - Participants in this group were given a selection of recreational/ education activities, consisting of YMCA (knitting groups, bookclubs), museum lectures or church activities. They met 3-5 times a week for 45 minutes, for the total duration of the study.
After the 16 week intervention, all participants were admitted to the Clinical Research Unit for post-testing.
What were the basic results?
Sleep quality - The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index is a questionnaire which measures and assesses an individual's quality of sleep. Participants in the PA group showed improvements in sleep-onset latency and had a longer sleep duration time, indicating a significant improvement in sleep quality.
Daytime Sleepiness - The Epworth Sleepiness Scale used in the study is an assessment of the likelihood of falling asleep during different situations. Participants in the PA group showed a significant reduction in daytime sleepiness scores, while there were no improvements in daytime sleepiness for those in the non-PA group.
Depressive Symptoms - The CES-D is a screening test which measures depressive symptoms. When comparing the results from baseline and post measures, participants in the PA group showed a reduction in depressive symptoms, while the participants in the non-PA group showed no change.
Quality of Life - The SF-36 measures a range of general health factors from daily activities, physical health and mood. The PA group showed an improvement in several domains of quality of life.
While the results of the study are strong, there are several limitations throughout. The studys biggest flaw is the reliance on self-reported measures from medical questionnaires. Self-reported data is often associated with inaccurate and invalid measures of responders.[11] Secondly, of the 23 initial participants, 5 withdrew leaving only 17 participants for the study. Due to this small sample size, issues of making inferences from this sample can arise as it may not be representative of the wider population. Lastly, the study only compared the effect of one mode of exercise on insomnia - aerobic physical activity. Future research could focus on a bigger sample size and compare the possible effects of different exercise modalities such as resistance and circuit training on insomnia.
According to the authors, it is clear that physical activity may have an effect on improving the sleep quality, mood and quality of life for elderly people who suffer from insomnia. Physical activity and exercise has a positive effect on sleep quality - it can help you fall asleep faster and increase overall sleep duration. Numerous studies have illustrated the importance of physical activity in treating mental health conditions.[12][13][14] This is particularly important for people with insomnia, as mental illness can either arise from insomnia or contribute to its's onset.[1] This study yielded similar positive results of exercise and its role in improving depressive symptoms and mood. An exercise prescription program unique for each individual could be considered by health professionals who work with people who suffer from chronic insomnia. Future research could investigate the different/combined modes of exercise and its role in decreasing the symptoms of insomnia.
Sleep Help -'Shuti': http://www.blackdoginstitute.org.au/public/gettinghelp/shuti.cfm
Sleep Hygiene - 'Snore Australia': http://www.snoreaustralia.com.au/resources/item17/snore%20australia%20-%20sleep%20habits.pdf
How sleepy are you? - 'Epworth Sleepiness Scale: https://web.stanford.edu/~dement/epworth.html
↑ a b c d Reid, K., Baron, K., Lu, B., Naylor, E., Wolfe, L., Zee, P. (2010). Aerobic exercise improves self-reported sleep and quality of life in older adults with insomnia.Sleep Med, (11)9:934-940.
↑ a b c Stepneysky, C., Ancoli-Israel, S. (2008) 'Sleep and Its Disorders in Seniors'. Sleep Med Clin, 3 (2): 281-293.
↑ Jaussent, I., Dauvilliers, Y., Ancelin, M., Dartigues, J., Tavernier, B., Touchon, J., Ritchie, K., Besset, A. (2011). 'Insomnia symptoms in older adults: associated factors ad gender differences'. AM J Geriatr Psychiatry, 19 (1): 88-97.
↑ a b Bolge, S.C., Doan, J.F., Kannan, H., Baran, R.W. (2008). Association with insomnia and quality of life, work productivity and activity impairment. Quality of Life Research, 18(4):415-422.
↑ Noh, H., Joo, E., Kim, S., Yoon, S., Koo, D., Kim, D., Lee, G., Hong, S. (2012). The Relationship between Hippocampal Volume and Cognition in Patients with Chronic Primary Insomnia. Journal of Clinical Neurology, (8)2: 130-138.
↑ Buysse, D., Angst, J., Gamma, A., Ajdacic, V., Eich, D., Roessler, W. (2008). Prevalence, Course, and Comorbidity of Insomnia and Depression in Young Adults. SLEEP-NEW YORK THEN WESTCHESTER-,31(4) 473-480.
↑ Morin, C., Bootzin, R., Buysse, D., Edinger, J., Espie, C., Lichstein, K. (2006). Psychological and Behavioural Treatment of Insomnia: Update of the Recent Evidence (1998-2004). SLEEP- NEW YORK THEN WESTCHESTER-, 29(11):1398-1414.
↑ Yang, P., Ho, K., Chen, H., Chien, M. (2012). Exercise training improves sleep quality in middle-aged and older adults with sleep problems: a systematic review. Journal of Physiotherapy, 58(3): 157-163.
↑ Santos, R., Viana, V., Boscolo, R., Marques, V., Santana, M., Lira, F., Tufik, S., Mello, M. (2012). Moderate exercise training modulates cytokine profile and sleep in elderly people. Cytokine, 60(3): 731-735.
↑ Duflo, E., Glennerster, R., Kremer, M. (2007). Using randomisation in development economics research: a toolkit. Handbook of developmental economics, 4, pp3895 - 3962.
↑ Paulhus, D. L., & Vazire, S. (2007). The self-report method. In R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, & R. F. Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality (pp. 224–239). London, England: Guilford.
↑ Peluso, M.A.M. and Andrade, L.H.S.G.D., 2005. Physical activity and mental health: the association between exercise and mood. Clinics, 60(1), pp.61-70. Vancouver
↑ Biddle, S.J. and Asare, M., 2011. Physical activity and mental health in children and adolescents: a review of reviews. British journal of sports medicine, p.bjsports90185.
↑ Penedo, F.J. and Dahn, J.R., 2005. Exercise and well-being: a review of mental and physical health benefits associated with physical activity. Current opinion in psychiatry, 18(2), pp.189-193.
Encryption has been a hot topic in computing for a long time. It became a high priority item in national and international politics in 1991 when Dr. Phil Zimmermann at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) first published Pretty Good Privacy (PGP). With the arrival of the first web shops, encryption went from a specialty to a requirement and increasing volumes of money changed hands online. By 1996, encryption became essential for e-business. By 2000, it became recognized as a general, essential prerequisite in electronic communication. Currently, in 2010, there is almost no chance of maintaining control over or integrity of any networked machine for more than a few minutes without the help of encryption.
Nowadays, much communication over computer networks is still done without encryption. That would be most communication, if inadequate encryption is also taken into account. This is despite years of warnings, government recommendations, best practice guidelines and incidents. As a result, any machine connected to the network can intercept communication that passes over that network. The eavesdroppers are many and varied. They include administrators, staff, employers, criminals, corporate spies, and even governments. Corporate espionage alone has become an enormous burden and barrier.
Businesses are well aware of dumpster diving and take precautions to shred all paper documents. But what about electronic information? Contracts and negotiations, trade secrets, patent applications, decisions and minutes, customer data and invoicing, personnel data, financial and tax records, calendars and schedules, product designs and production notes, training materials, and even regular correspondence go over the net daily. Archived materials, even if they are not accessed directly, are usually on machines that are available and accessed for other reasons.
Many company managers and executives are still unaware that their communications and documents are so easily intercepted, in spite of apparent and expensive access restrictions. In many cases these can be show to be ineffectual and at best purely cosmetic. Security Theater is one obstacle and in the field of security it is more common to find snake oil than authentic solutions. Still, there is little public demonstration of awareness of the magnitude of corporate espionage nowadays or the cost of failure. Even failure to act has its costs.
Not only is sensitive data available if left unencrypted, but also trends in less sensitive data can be spotted with a large enough sampling. A very large amount of information can be inferred even from lesser communications. Data mining is now a well-known concept as is the so-called wireless wiretap. With the increase in online material and activity, encryption is more relevant than ever even if many years have passed since the issues were first brought into the limelight.
Excerpt of ssh-1.0.0 README from July 12, 1995
Tatu Ylönen, then at the Helsinki University of Technology, wrote the README[1] accompanying the early versions of his Open Source software, SSH. The following is an excerpt about why encryption is important.
...
Currently, almost all communications in computer networks are done
This is being done by hackers, curious administrators, employers,
Any information that you type or is printed on your screen can be
When the intruder has collected a few thousand credit card numbers, he
Businesses have trade secrets, patent applications in preparation,
Many companies are not aware that information can so easily be
Individual persons also have confidential information, such as
Government agencies may be able to monitor major communication
If the government some day starts to move into a more totalitarian
etc. This information can be used to 1) locate any persons who might
Fighting crime and terrorism are often used as grounds for domestic
a small amount of crime in the society than to let the society become
For these reasons (privacy, protecting trade secrets, and making it
Using it causes no harm (except for those who wish to monitor
Encryption has had a "military" or "classified" flavor to it. There
Some people would like to make it illegal to use encryption, or to
"bad guys" will be using true strong encryption anyway. Thus, any
"key escrow encryption" or whatever it might be called only serves to
...
Thanks also go to Philip Zimmermann, whose PGP software and the
Cryptography has done a great service in widely distributing knowledge
...
Phil Zimmermann on encryption and privacy, from 1991, updated 1999
Phil Zimmermann wrote the encryption tool Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) in 1991 to promote privacy and to help keep encryption, and thus privacy, legal around the world. Considerable difficulty occurred in the United States until PGP was published outside and re-imported in a very visible, public manner.
"Whatever you do will be insignificant, but it is very important that you do it."
–Mahatma Gandhi.
It's personal. It's private. And it's no one's business but yours. You may be planning a political campaign, discussing your taxes, or having a secret romance. Or you may be communicating with a political dissident in a repressive country. Whatever it is, you don't want your private electronic mail (email) or confidential documents read by anyone else. There's nothing wrong with asserting your privacy. Privacy is as apple-pie as the Constitution.
The right to privacy is spread implicitly throughout the Bill of Rights. But when the United States Constitution was framed, the Founding Fathers saw no need to explicitly spell out the right to a private conversation. That would have been silly. Two hundred years ago, all conversations were private. If someone else was within earshot, you could just go out behind the barn and have your conversation there. No one could listen in without your knowledge. The right to a private conversation was a natural right, not just in a philosophical sense, but in a law-of-physics sense, given the technology of the time.
But with the coming of the information age, starting with the invention of the telephone, all that has changed. Now most of our conversations are conducted electronically. This allows our most intimate conversations to be exposed without our knowledge. Cellular phone calls may be monitored by anyone with a radio. Electronic mail, sent across the Internet, is no more secure than cellular phone calls. Email is rapidly replacing postal mail, becoming the norm for everyone, not the novelty it was in the past.
Until recently, if the government wanted to violate the privacy of ordinary citizens, they had to expend a certain amount of expense and labor to intercept and steam open and read paper mail. Or they had to listen to and possibly transcribe spoken telephone conversation, at least before automatic voice recognition technology became available. This kind of labor-intensive monitoring was not practical on a large scale. It was only done in important cases when it seemed worthwhile. This is like catching one fish at a time, with a hook and line. Today, email can be routinely and automatically scanned for interesting keywords, on a vast scale, without detection. This is like driftnet fishing. And exponential growth in computer power is making the same thing possible with voice traffic.
Perhaps you think your email is legitimate enough that encryption is unwarranted. If you really are a law-abiding citizen with nothing to hide, then why don't you always send your paper mail on postcards? Why not submit to drug testing on demand? Why require a warrant for police searches of your house? Are you trying to hide something? If you hide your mail inside envelopes, does that mean you must be a subversive or a drug dealer, or maybe a paranoid nut? Do law-abiding citizens have any need to encrypt their email?
What if everyone believed that law-abiding citizens should use postcards for their mail? If a nonconformist tried to assert his privacy by using an envelope for his mail, it would draw suspicion. Perhaps the authorities would open his mail to see what he's hiding. Fortunately, we don't live in that kind of world, because everyone protects most of their mail with envelopes. So no one draws suspicion by asserting their privacy with an envelope. There's safety in numbers. Analogously, it would be nice if everyone routinely used encryption for all their email, innocent or not, so that no one drew suspicion by asserting their email privacy with encryption. Think of it as a form of solidarity.
Senate Bill 266, a 1991 omnibus anticrime bill, had an unsettling measure buried in it. If this non-binding resolution had become real law, it would have forced manufacturers of secure communications equipment to insert special "trap doors" in their products, so that the government could read anyone's encrypted messages. It reads, "It is the sense of Congress that providers of electronic communications services and manufacturers of electronic communications service equipment shall ensure that communications systems permit the government to obtain the plain text contents of voice, data, and other communications when appropriately authorized by law." It was this bill that led me to publish PGP electronically for free that year, shortly before the measure was defeated after vigorous protest by civil libertarians and industry groups.
The 1994 Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA) mandated that phone companies install remote wiretapping ports into their central office digital switches, creating a new technology infrastructure for "point-and-click" wiretapping, so that federal agents no longer have to go out and attach alligator clips to phone lines. Now they will be able to sit in their headquarters in Washington and listen in on your phone calls. Of course, the law still requires a court order for a wiretap. But while technology infrastructures can persist for generations, laws and policies can change overnight. Once a communications infrastructure optimized for surveillance becomes entrenched, a shift in political conditions may lead to abuse of this new-found power. Political conditions may shift with the election of a new government, or perhaps more abruptly from the bombing of a federal building.
A year after the CALEA passed, the FBI disclosed plans to require the phone companies to build into their infrastructure the capacity to simultaneously wiretap 1 percent of all phone calls in all major U.S. cities. This would represent more than a thousandfold increase over previous levels in the number of phones that could be wiretapped. In previous years, there were only about a thousand court-ordered wiretaps in the United States per year, at the federal, state, and local levels combined. It's hard to see how the government could even employ enough judges to sign enough wiretap orders to wiretap 1 percent of all our phone calls, much less hire enough federal agents to sit and listen to all that traffic in real time. The only plausible way of processing that amount of traffic is a massive Orwellian application of automated voice recognition technology to sift through it all, searching for interesting keywords or searching for a particular speaker's voice. If the government doesn't find the target in the first 1 percent sample, the wiretaps can be shifted over to a different 1 percent until the target is found, or until everyone's phone line has been checked for subversive traffic. The FBI said they need this capacity to plan for the future. This plan sparked such outrage that it was defeated in Congress. But the mere fact that the FBI even asked for these broad powers is revealing of their agenda.
Advances in technology will not permit the maintenance of the status quo, as far as privacy is concerned. The status quo is unstable. If we do nothing, new technologies will give the government new automatic surveillance capabilities that Stalin could never have dreamed of. The only way to hold the line on privacy in the information age is strong cryptography.
You don't have to distrust the government to want to use cryptography. Your business can be wiretapped by business rivals, organized crime, or foreign governments. Several foreign governments, for example, admit to using their signals intelligence against companies from other countries to give their own corporations a competitive edge. Ironically, the United States government's restrictions on cryptography in the 1990's have weakened U.S. corporate defenses against foreign intelligence and organized crime.
The government knows what a pivotal role cryptography is destined to play in the power relationship with its people. In April 1993, the Clinton administration unveiled a bold new encryption policy initiative, which had been under development at the National Security Agency (NSA) since the start of the Bush administration. The centerpiece of this initiative was a government-built encryption device, called the Clipper chip, containing a new classified NSA encryption algorithm. The government tried to encourage private industry to design it into all their secure communication products, such as secure phones, secure faxes, and so on. AT&T put Clipper into its secure voice products. The catch: At the time of manufacture, each Clipper chip is loaded with its own unique key, and the government gets to keep a copy, placed in escrow. Not to worry, though–the government promises that they will use these keys to read your traffic only "when duly authorized by law." Of course, to make Clipper completely effective, the next logical step would be to outlaw other forms of cryptography.
The government initially claimed that using Clipper would be voluntary, that no one would be forced to use it instead of other types of cryptography. But the public reaction against the Clipper chip was strong, stronger than the government anticipated. The computer industry monolithically proclaimed its opposition to using Clipper. FBI director Louis Freeh responded to a question in a press conference in 1994 by saying that if Clipper failed to gain public support, and FBI wiretaps were shut out by non-government-controlled cryptography, his office would have no choice but to seek legislative relief. Later, in the aftermath of the Oklahoma City tragedy, Mr. Freeh testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee that public availability of strong cryptography must be curtailed by the government (although no one had suggested that cryptography was used by the bombers).
The government has a track record that does not inspire confidence that they will never abuse our civil liberties. The FBI's COINTELPRO program targeted groups that opposed government policies. They spied on the antiwar movement and the civil rights movement. They wiretapped the phone of Martin Luther King. Nixon had his enemies list. Then there was the Watergate mess. More recently, Congress has either attempted to or succeeded in passing laws curtailing our civil liberties on the Internet. Some elements of the Clinton White House collected confidential FBI files on Republican civil servants, conceivably for political exploitation. And some overzealous prosecutors have shown a willingness to go to the ends of the Earth in pursuit of exposing sexual indiscretions of political enemies. At no time in the past century has public distrust of the government been so broadly distributed across the political spectrum, as it is today.
Throughout the 1990s, I figured that if we want to resist this unsettling trend in the government to outlaw cryptography, one measure we can apply is to use cryptography as much as we can now while it's still legal. When use of strong cryptography becomes popular, it's harder for the government to criminalize it. Therefore, using PGP is good for preserving democracy. If privacy is outlawed, only outlaws will have privacy.
It appears that the deployment of PGP must have worked, along with years of steady public outcry and industry pressure to relax the export controls. In the closing months of 1999, the Clinton administration announced a radical shift in export policy for crypto technology. They essentially threw out the whole export control regime. Now, we are finally able to export strong cryptography, with no upper limits on strength. It has been a long struggle, but we have finally won, at least on the export control front in the US. Now we must continue our efforts to deploy strong crypto, to blunt the effects increasing surveillance efforts on the Internet by various governments. And we still need to entrench our right to use it domestically over the objections of the FBI.
PGP empowers people to take their privacy into their own hands. There has been a growing social need for it. That's why I wrote it.
Philip R. Zimmermann
Subject: OpenBSD Press Release: OpenSSH integrated into operating system
OpenSSH: Secure Shell integrated into OpenBSD operating system
Louis Bertrand, OpenBSD media relations
Theo de Raadt, OpenBSD lead developer
Project Web site: http://www.openbsd.org/
Secure communications package no longer third-party add-on
[October 25, 1999: Calgary, Canada] -- The OpenBSD developers are
OpenSSH, to be released with OpenBSD 2.6, is compatible with
OpenSSH is based on a free release of SSH by Tatu Ylonen, with major
SSH Communications, and the TTSSH and SecureCRT Windows clients.
"Network sessions involving strong cryptographic security are a
"Everyone needs this. People using the telnet or rlogin protocols are
In previous releases of OpenBSD, users were urged to download SSH as
"I asked everyone `what is the first thing you do after installing
OpenBSD?' Everyone gave me the same answer: they installed ssh," says
OpenSSH relies on the Secure Sockets Layer library (libssl) which
OpenSSH was developed and integrated into OpenBSD by Niels Provos,
Theo de Raadt, Markus Friedl for cryptographic work; Dug Song, Aaron
Campbell, and others for various non-crypto contributions; and Bob
Beck for helping with the openssl library issues. The original SSH
OpenBSD is an Internet-based volunteer effort to produce a secure
OpenBSD, see the project Web pages at http://www.OpenBSD.org/.
During 2000, the European Commission investigated the state of international and industrial electronic espionage. Counter-measures and solutions were investigated as well as the risks. The result was a resolution containing a summary of the findings and a series of recommended actions for Member States to carry out and goals to meet.
"29.	Urges the Commission and Member States to devise appropriate measures to promote, develop and manufacture European encryption technology and software and above all to support projects at developing user-friendly open-source encryption software;"
. . .
"33.	Calls on the Community institutions and the public administrations of the Member States to provide training for their staff and make their staff familiar with new encryption technologies and techniques by means of the necessary practical training and courses;"[4]
It was found during the investigation that businesses were the most at risk and the most vulnerable and that widespread use of open source encryption technology is to be encouraged. The same can be said even today.
↑ "SSH 1.0.0 README". FUNET. 1995. ftp://ftp.funet.fi/pub/mirrors/ftp.cs.hut.fi/pub/ssh/old/.
↑ Phil Zimmermann (1991). "Why I Wrote PGP". Massachusetts Institute of Technology. http://www.mit.edu/~prz/EN/essays/WhyIWrotePGP.html. Retrieved 2011-02-18.
↑ "OpenSSH: Secure Shell integrated into OpenBSD operating system". LWN. 1999. http://lwn.net/1999/1028/a/openssh.html. Retrieved 2011-02-18.
↑ "European Parliament resolution on the existence of a global system for the interception of private and commercial communications (ECHELON interception system) (2001/2098(INI))". European Parliament. 2001. http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?type=TA&reference=P5-TA-2001-0441&format=XML&language=EN. Retrieved 2011-02-18.
Logging and Troubleshooting •
File Transfer with SFTP •
Public Key Authentication •
Certificate-based Authentication •
Host-based Authentication •
Renervate is a general revival spell, used when trying to resuscitate someone who has been left unconscious by magical means. In some editions of the books, it is mistakenly spelled "rennervate".
Beginner warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
We see this spell used once: Harry uses it to attempt to revive Professor Dumbledore after Dumbledore has succumbed to the potion guarding the locket in the lake. Harry has limited success.
This may seem to be a special version of Enervate, the charm that counters the effect of a Stun spell, as it seems to be used for more general resuscitation. As mentioned in the article on that spell, however, "enervate" is in direct opposition to the action of that spell, so the author apparently chose to rename the spell in the course of writing the books. We further note that in some early editions of the later books it was misspelled "rennervate", a misspelling that was corrected in later editions.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
White blood cells are a main part of the immune system. They attack things that do not belong to the body. They kill germs such as bacteria and viruses. They kill cancer cells. White blood cells also help to fight other toxic substances.
A reader requests that more images be included in this page or book.Images are useful for presentation and explanation. Free images can be found at Wikimedia Commons and used here at Wikibooks. If you have created relevant images, you should consider donating them.Remove this template when suitable images have been added. Please continue to edit this book and add images, even after this message has been removed. Discuss this books particular needs on the discussion page. For questions, go to WB:PROJECTS.
Long ago, when arctic winds whipped through Zora's Fountain, a temple of ice stood there. Over time, it melted into the lake. However, the cavernous hot springs of the fountain are starting to resemble another one...
Elusive HeartThere is a Heart Piece wedged in the furthest ice platform as you head straight. Make your way across the ice to get it.
Navi will mention that an arctic wind is blowing from Zora's Domain. That is your next destination. Head to Zora's River. When you are near the end of the path, it will begin to snow. When you get inside Zora's Domain, you will find that it has completely frozen over! The King and the shop entrance are frozen solid as well. When you head out to Zora's Fountain, you will find that Jabu-Jabu is no longer there, but a series of ice platforms leading to a cave. That cave is the Ice Cavern, your next dungeon. Be careful of the Octocroks and make your way towards the cavern.
Note: Before attempting this dungeon, make sure your bottles are empty before filling them with Blue Fire. You can find bottles throughout your quest before attempting this.
Note: There is an invisible Freezard that follows wherever you walk in the room, keep that in mind as you make your way to the other side.
First Ice SkulltulaIn the room with the spinning ice trap, a Gold Skulltula dwells behind a wall of ice spikes on the left (west) side of the room.
Head north into the next hallway. Cut your way through the stalagmites and enter the next major room. A frozen, spinning scythe is located directly in the center of the room. When a blade comes towards you, duck using your shield. To progress, you will need to gather the Silver Rupees in the room. Three rupees are easy to find, but are also located in the scythe's path. There is another silver rupee behind three blue stalagmites in the corner (to the left as you first enter the room, there is also a gold skulltula above that rupee). The last rupee hangs above the room. To reach it, climb up the cliff in the back of the room and jump out to grab the rupee. The door at the top of the cliff will now unlock. Climb up and go through it.
Continue along the path until you enter a wider room. This room contains a new kind of Keese, the Ice Keese. Upon impact, they will freeze you. Even worse, they do not lose their freezing effect once they touch you. The best method of attack against Ice Keese is the bow and arrows. You can also use your hookshot once you target them.
Climb up onto the ledge near the front of the room. Move slowly along it and eliminate the Freezard at the end. Jump to the platform on the left, and jump to the next platform. It contains a pillar which houses an altar of Blue Fire. Blue fire can be used to melt the Red Ice that you've seen around Zora's Domain and thus far in the Ice Cavern. Store Blue Fire in a bottle.
Use the Blue Fire to unfreeze the large chest within the room. It contains the Dungeon Map. Return to the room with the scythe.
Look to the left and right from the cliff where you emerge from the Dungeon Map room. You should see two bits of ice that have an red tinge near their base. These are barriers that can be melted with Blue Fire. Melt the barrier on the left (west side) first, and go down the hall. You may want to get in the middle of the next room and run in a small circle a few times to get rid of falling icicles.
Second Ice SkulltulaIn the room with the compass is an altar of blue fire, a heart piece, and a Gold Skulltula hiding above the heart piece.
Warm-HeartedWhen you find the room holding the Compass, take some blue fire from the altar and investigate the room. You'll discover the a Heart Piece encased in Red Ice. Thaw it and claim it as your own. This is the only Heart Piece you'll find in a dungeon (or mini-dungeon).
You should find yourself in a room containing another Blue Fire altar. Unfreeze the chest. It contains the Compass. Make your way back to the scythe room and look for the other "barrier" with a red-tinge base on the east side of the room. Melt the wall, then make your way down the hall and into the next major room.
Third Ice SkulltulaAs you enter the room, look to your left (the west) and you'll see the nearby Gold Skulltula.
To progress, you will need to collect all Silver Rupees while moving a sliding block in the correct direction to get them. Grab the block from its east side and push forward. Now, climb on top of it, and use it to reach the silver rupee on top of the tall stone block. Go to the south side of the block, and push it north. Get on top of it, and climb into the small alcove. Use your remaining bottle of Blue Fire to melt the Red Ice and take the Silver Rupee inside. Drop back down out of the alcove and push the ice block to the east or west and off the cliff to make it re-appear at the entrance to the room.
Now, grab the block from its north side and push it south. Get on the ice block and use it to reach the silver rupee on top of the rock. Grab onto the east side of the stone block and push it west. Get on top of the ice block, and grab the silver rupee on top of the stone. Jump back down and get on the south side of the ice block. Push it to the north. Grab the silver rupee from the stone that the ice block has to come rest on, and the door will open.
Hop on the ice block's east side and push it to the west, then get on its north side and push it south. Get on the ice block and jump over to the Blue Fire. Refill your bottles with Blue Fire. Drop back down to the ground, and push the block from its west side going east. Now, push it north going south. The block will run into the wall. Jump up onto the block, and jump diagonally to the doorway. Eliminate the Freezards along the way and melt the wall of Red Ice you encounter.
Continue along the path and you should come to a large, decorative room. Here, you will fight the White Wolfos, a slightly larger version of a normal Wolfos. Defeat it the way you would a normal Wolfos. You can stun it with a Deku Nut when it drops guard and jump slash it. Once it is dead, a chest will generate. Retrieve the Iron Boots from it. They will allow you to walk underwater.
As soon as you obtain the Iron Boots, Sheik will appear before you. It is revealed that the Zora's have been sealed under the ice. The source of this great freeze is the monster in the Water Temple. Unless it is destroyed, the ice will never melt. Sheik managed to save Ruto though. She already went to the temple. Sheik then teaches you the melody that will lead you to the Water Temple, the Serenade of Water.
Nintendo 64: A, C-down, C-right, C-right, C-left
There is a small square of water behind the chest you got the boots from. Equip your new boots and move along the underwater path. Be careful, if you stay underwater too long, you will drown. Enter the sliding door, and you will find yourself in the room with the spinning choppers. Simply take the hallway to the right after jumping off the cliff, and make your way out of the dungeon from there, but bottle up some Blue Fire before you leave.
Note: This is your chance to get the Biggoron Sword. You can attempt this after you unfreeze him with Blue Fire. Present him with the prescription and get ready to run and if you have Epona, ride to Lake Hylia.
Sunken TreasureOnce you have both the Iron Boots and a Zora Tunic, go back to Zora's Fountain and submerge yourself into the deep lake. At the very bottom is a Heart Piece, along with a few scattered green Rupees.
Practice writing ਬ by following its animation or click below to practice writing a different letter.
v • d • e PunjabiGurmukhi
Appendix 1 : Phonetics • Appendix 2 : Numbers
Punjabi grammar - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia • Online Punjabi Teaching -- ACTDPL, Punjabi University, Patiala • Omniglot: Useful Punjabi phrasesFurther readings
The dative is used for the indirect object.
`B 5~V6 `C4# `B qE6t# `B `Vm#5 i nér anta i parma i eldan "the man gives the book to the elf"
The word order is free because we can always recognize the indirect object by its ending:
`B 5~V6 `C4# `B `Vm#5 `B qE6t# i nér anta i eldan i parma "the man gives the elf the book"
`B `Vm#5 `B 5~V6 `C4# `B qE6t# i eldan i nér anta i parma "to the elf the man gives the book"
`B 5~V6 `B `Vm#5 `C4# `B qE6t# i nér i eldan anta i parma "the man, to the elf, gives the book"
Some verbs can have an indirect object without a direct object:
`B yR2% j%j1E6 `B `C7E5$5 i vendi liltar i aranen "the girls dance for the king"
The verb `CqiR5\ apsen- "remit, forgive" has a direct object in the dative:
`B `C7E5 `CqiR5$ `B 5$7R5 i aran apsenë i neren "the king forgives the man"
The preposition 7~C rá "on behalf of, for" is used with the dative:
`B `N6aY 1Uj°$ 7~C 8.D7Y2$5 i orco tullë rá Sauronden "the orc came on behalf of Sauron"
The dative is also used for the recipient of certain impersonal verbs:
`B iRm^5 ~Nj# lDnT`N5 i seldon óla aiwion "the boy dreams about birds"
The basic ending is \5 -n after vowels and \`V5 -en after consonants.
`C7E5 aran "king" → `C7E5$5 aranen
yR2$ vendë "girl" → yR2$5 venden
Words that have a stem-form use this stem-form:
5~B8 nís "woman" → 5%,R5 nissen (stem-form 5%,\ niss-)
aU7Y curo "device" → aU7U5 curun (stem-form aU7U\ curu-)
t#aGj macil "sword" → t#aGj%5 macilin
`Vm# elda "elf" → `VmlD5 eldain
(Note: this ending forms a diphthong when the noun ends in \`C -a , \`N -o or \`M -u)
Words ending in \`V -ë drop this -ë and have ~B5 -ín as ending:
j#,R lassë "leaf" → j#,~B5 lassín
Words ending in \`B`V -ië drop this -ië and have \~B5 -ín as ending:
t^65%`V mornië "darkness" → t^65~B5 mornín
Words ending in \`B -i (or with a stem-form in -i) also get \~B5 -ín:
`Cm& aldu "a pair of trees" → `Cm&5 aldun (nom.sing.: `Cm# alda)
aG7ÎE1 ciryat "a pair of ships" → aG7ÎE4 ciryant (nom.sing.: aG7ÎE cirya)
`C7E5$1 aranet "a pair of kings" → `C7E5$4 aranent (nom.sing.: `C7E5 aran)
(Note: these words are the only Neo-Quenya words that end in more than one consonant)
We always add -n to the nominative partitive plural:
aG7ÎEj% ciryali "some ships" → aG7ÎEj%5 ciryalin (nom.sing.: aG7ÎE cirya)
The Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL) is a collection of concepts and practices combined in a series of books to be applied in IT Service Management (ITSM), IT development and IT operations. At first it was created in late of 1980 by Central Computing and Telecommunication Agency (CCTA). The names ITIL and IT Infrastructure Library are registered trademarks of the United Kingdom's Office of Government Commerce (OGC).
ITIL can be classified as a collection of best practices, and its target is large companies, as well small ones.
Five books - Strategy, Design, Transition, Operation and Continual Service Improvement (CSI)
23 overall process - two for Strategy, 10 for Design, seven for Transition, seven for Operation and four for CSI
Responding to growing dependence on IT, the UK Government's Central Computer and Telecommunications Agency (CCTA) in the 1980s developed a set of recommendations. It recognised that without standard practices, government agencies and private sector contracts were independently creating their own IT management practices.
The IT Infrastructure Library originated as a collection of books, each covering a specific practice within IT Service Management. ITIL was built around a process-model based view of controlling and managing operations often credited to W. Edwards Deming and his plan-do-check-act (PDCA) cycle.
After the initial publication in 1989-1996, the number of books quickly grew within ITIL v1 to over 30 volumes.
In 2000/2001, to make ITIL more accessible (and affordable), ITIL v2 consolidated the publications into eight logical "sets" that grouped related process-guidelines to match different aspects of IT management, applications, and services. However, the main focus was known as the Service Management sets (Service Support and Service Delivery), which were by far the most widely used, circulated, and understood of ITIL v2
In April 2001 the CCTA was merged into the Office of Government Commerce (OGC), an office of the UK Treasury. In 2006, the ITIL v2 glossary was published. In May 2007, this organisation issued the version 3 of ITIL (also known as the ITIL Refresh Project) consisting of 26 processes and functions, now grouped under only 5 volumes, arranged around the concept of Service life cycle structure. In 2009, the OGC officially announced that ITIL v2 would be withdrawn and launched a major consultation as per how to proceed.
According to Wikipedia, service is "an intangible equivalent of an economic good". Customers "buy" a service when they:
Don't want or can afford with service price; OR
Don't want or can afford with risk.
Service price or risk can't be used as basis to define service value.
A service value is defined by fit to purpose (utility) and fit to use (warranty). Fit to purpose, or utility, means that service must fulfil customer needs. It doesn't matter that you rent a specialised black-and-white printer for half of the average market price if the user really needs a colour wax printer.
Fit for use, or warranty, means that service is available when a user needs it. A good example for this is a cell phone; it needs to be ready to use wherever you want to place a call. If connection keeps dropping every time, it is worthless. Warranty can be measured by availability, capacity, continuity and security.
Some definitions for better understanding of ITIL.
Portfolio comprises all services offered (current), retired, or to be offered. Current services are available in Catalog. Services being developed - to be offered - can be found in Pipeline. When a service ceases to be offered, it goes to Retired list.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
1 1. Have and review the Basic Sewing Honor.
2 2. Have a practical sewing box for your sewing supplies. Include in it a pin cushion, tape measure, pins, needles, thread, scissors, seam gauge and seam ripper.
3 3. Know how and when to: baste, overcast, zigzag, and blind hem.
4 4. Identify (a) 5 natural fabrics such as cotton, linen, wool, silk and etc. and (b) synthetic fabrics such as rayon, nylon, dacron and polyester.
5 5. Show and demonstrate how to straighten fabric before use.
6 6. Choose a pattern for an item such as a shirt, blouse, skirt or shop apron. Properly lay your pattern on the material, cut it out, and sew your item to completion.
Have and review the Basic Sewing Honor.
Instructions and tips for earning the Basic Sewing honor can be found in the Household Arts chapter.
Have a practical sewing box for your sewing supplies. Include in it a pin cushion, tape measure, pins, needles, thread, scissors, seam gauge and seam ripper.
These are all items you can buy in a department store or even in a thrift shop. It is also possible that you have an older relative who no longer sews and would love to give your some sewing supplies, especially if you show a real interest in learning the craft. Don't feel as though you need to buy everything on the list right away. You can spread out your acquisitions over time as you hunt for bargains.
Know how and when to: baste, overcast, zigzag, and blind hem.
To temporarily hold a seam or trim in place until it can be permanently sewn, usually with a long running stitch made by hand or machine called a tacking stitch or basting stitch.
To temporarily attach a lace collar, ruffles, or other trim to clothing so that the attached article may be removed easily for cleaning or to be worn with a different garment. For this purpose, tacking stitches are sewn by hand in such a way that they are almost invisible from the outside of the garment.
To transfer pattern markings to fabric, or to otherwise mark the point where two pieces of fabric are to be joined. A special loose looped stitch used for this purpose is called a tack or tailor's tack.
A basting stitch is essentially a straight stitch, sewn with long stitches and unfinished ends. The basting stitch is used for temporarily holding sandwiched pieces of fabric in place. The stitch is removed after the piece is finished. Often used in quilting or embroidery.
An overcast stitch is made at the edge of a piece of fabric to prevent it from unraveling. It is made by passing the needle through the top of the fabric near the edge, and then pulling the thread over the edge and passing it through the top again. The thread makes a spiral around the edge of the fabric, much as a spiral notebook is bound by a wire.
In sewing, a zigzag stitch is a machine stitch in a zigzag pattern. Tightly spaced zigzag stitches are used to emulate embroidery stitches such as satin stitch, and to reinforce buttonholes. A zigzag stitch is also used as a non-structural seam, to temporarily hold two panels together edge-to-edge (and eliminate the ridge that would "x-ray" through). This is done when another panel will overlay the seam and provide support.
A blind hem is a stitch that is nearly invisible on the finished side of the fabric. It can be used for hemming a garment, drapes, or curtains. If done by machine, the sewing machine must have a blind stitch as well as a specialized presser foot made for this purpose.
In the machine stitch, three running stitches are alternated with one zigzag stitch. The running stitch is made in the seam, and the zigzag goes out to the edge of the hem picking up only one or two threads of the weave.
When hand-stitching a blind hem, the principle of picking up only one or two threads still applies, but only on the front side of the fabric. On the wrong side, the stitches will be somewhat long and could be quite visible.
Identify (a) 5 natural fabrics such as cotton, linen, wool, silk and etc. and (b) synthetic fabrics such as rayon, nylon, dacron and polyester.
One way to meet this requirement is to visit a fabric store. Find examples of each of these types of fabric (fabric type will be labeled at the top of the roll). Examine them closely, and touch them.
If you are teaching this class bring in a few swatches of each type of fabric. Label each, and pass them around to your Pathfinders, telling them about each one. Tell them to closely examine and feel each sample.
Show and demonstrate how to straighten fabric before use.
Sometimes new fabric sports unfortunate creases across the bias. Any such creases should most definitely be removed with an iron before a pattern is cut from the fabric. This is because the crease will alter the lay of the fabric and distort the pattern. This distortion will be transferred to the garment.
Once all the creases have been removed, lay the cloth on a working surface large enough to accommodate the piece you wish to cut from it. Spread it out flat, and make sure no sewing tools have found their way beneath the fabric. Once this has been done, you are ready to lay the pattern on the material and pin it down.
At this point, you have a choice of either transferring the pattern to the material with tracing paper, or simply cutting the fabric as per the pattern.
If using a graded pattern, you should not cut out the pattern following the cut lines for any but the largest pattern.
If you would like to make one of the smaller sizes provided by the pattern, you can either fold the pattern along the proper cut lines, or trace them with tracing paper and a tracing wheel.
Choose a pattern for an item such as a shirt, blouse, skirt or shop apron. Properly lay your pattern on the material, cut it out, and sew your item to completion.
Read the instructions that came with the pattern before beginning the project. If you do not understand all the steps, keep reading. Study them until you do understand. Sometime enlightenment is difficult to achieve until you have actually followed the previous instructions and have cloth in hand and are ready to execute the step itself. Don't give up before you start!
The outside of the pattern's package will tell you how much and what types of material you will need to make the item. Read this carefully.
The next step is to lay out the cloth and cut out the pieces (see requirement 5). The pattern will also tell you how to lay the pieces on the cloth to minimize the amount of cloth you need for the item.
Once the pieces are cut out, follow the instructions in the pattern. Once you have made a seam, take it to the ironing board and press it, but see if the pattern tells you whether you need to press the seam open, to the back, or to the front. Hems are easier to sew if you press them first.
If you do not wish to make a shirt, blouse, skirt, or shop apron, perhaps you would enjoy making Bible costumes. If your whole club (or unit) is working on this honor together, you will have the opportunity to outfit an entire troop for a VBS program or a Christian Drama program.
Chemical Structure Lookup Service (CSLS: pronounced "sizzles")
Substructure Search of SRC's Pointer File (uses ChemS3)
Bioscreening.com database
Entrez, the Life Sciences Search Engine (NCBI)
Protein Sequences in the CAS Registry File on STN--Exact and Pattern Searching [PDF]
Nucleic Acid Sequences in the CAS Registry File on STN--Exact and Pattern Searching [PDF]
CATH (Class, Architecture, Topology, and Homologous Superfamily) Protein Structure Classification Database
SDSC Biology Workbench: The WorkBench allows biologists to search many popular protein and nucleic acid sequence databases. Database searching is integrated with access to a wide variety of analysis and modeling tools, all within a point and click interface that eliminates file format compatibility problems.
Algorithms & Thermodynamics for Nucleic Acid Folding, Hybridization & Melting Profile Prediction (Michael Zuker)
Sequence Searching of Proteins & Nucleic Acids
Chemical Structure Searching on STN and SciFinder
Before You Begin A Structure Search on STN
Tips for Building Structures for Substructure Searching
Stereoisomer Searching on STN (STN Quick Reference Card)
Structure Searching in CAS ONLINE Using STN Express: An Introductory Workshop (Grace Baysinger, Stanford University)
CrossFire Beilstein Structure Searching (Andrea Twiss-Brooks, University of Chicago)
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Identify the antipoverty government programs that compose the safety net
Explain the primary goals of the safety net programs and how these programs have changed over time
Discuss the complexities of these safety net programs and why they can be controversial
The U.S. government has implemented a number of programs to assist those below the poverty line and those who have incomes just above the poverty line, who are referred to as the near-poor. Such programs are called the safety net, in recognition of the fact that they offer some protection for those who find themselves without jobs or income.
From the Great Depression of the 1930s until 1996, the United States’ most visible antipoverty program was Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), which provided cash payments to mothers with children who were below the poverty line. This program was often just called “welfare.” In 1996, Congress passed and President Bill Clinton signed into law the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act, more commonly called the “welfare reform act.” The new law replaced AFDC with Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF).
Visit this website to watch a video of President Bill Clinton’s Welfare Reform speech.
TANF brought several dramatic changes in how welfare operated. Under the old AFDC program, states set the level of welfare benefits that they would pay to the poor, and the federal government guaranteed it would chip in some of the money as well. The federal government’s welfare spending would rise or fall depending on the number of poor people, and on how each state set its own welfare contribution.
Under TANF, however, the federal government gives a fixed amount of money to each state. The state can then use the money for almost any program with an antipoverty component: for example, the state might use the money to give cash to poor families, or to reduce teenage pregnancy, or even to raise the high school graduation rate. However, the federal government imposed two key requirements. First, if states are to keep receiving the TANF grants, they must impose work requirements so that most of those receiving TANF benefits are working (or attending school). Second, no one can receive TANF benefits with federal money for more than a total of five years over his or her lifetime. The old AFDC program had no such work requirements or time limits.
TANF attempts to avoid the poverty trap by requiring that welfare recipients work and by limiting the length of time they can receive benefits. In its first few years, the program was quite successful. The number of families receiving payments in 1995, the last year of AFDC, was 4.8 million. By 2012, according to the Congressional Research Service, the average number of families receiving payments under TANF was 1.8 million—a decline of more than half.
TANF benefits to poor families vary considerably across states. For example, again according to the Congressional Research Service, in 2011 the highest monthly payment in Alaska to a single mother with two children was $923, while in Mississippi the highest monthly payment to that family was $170. These payments reflect differences in states’ cost of living. Total spending on TANF was approximately $16.6 billion in 1997. As of 2012, spending was at $12 billion, an almost 28% decrease, split about evenly between the federal and state governments. When you take into account the effects of inflation, the decline is even greater. Moreover, there seemed little evidence that poor families were suffering a reduced standard of living as a result of TANF—although, on the other side, there was not much evidence that poor families had greatly improved their total levels of income, either.
The earned income tax credit (EITC), first passed in 1975, is a method of assisting the working poor through the tax system. The EITC is one of the largest assistance program for low-income groups, and projections for 2013 expected 26 million households to take advantage of it at an estimated cost of $50 billion. In 2013, for example, a single parent with two children would have received a tax credit of $5,372 up to an income level of $17,530. The amount of the tax break increases with the amount of income earned, up to a point. The earned income tax credit has often been popular with both economists and the general public because of the way it effectively increases the payment received for work.
What about the danger of the poverty trap that every additional $1 earned will reduce government support payments by close to $1? To minimize this problem, the earned income tax credit is phased out slowly. According to the Tax Policy Center, for a single-parent family with two children in 2013, the credit is not reduced at all (but neither is it increased) as earnings rise from $13,430 to $17,530. Then, for every $1 earned above $17,530, the amount received from the credit is reduced by 21.06 cents, until the credit phases out completely at an income level of $46,227.
[link] illustrates that the earned income tax credits, child tax credits, and the TANF program all cost the federal government money—either in direct outlays or in loss of tax revenues. CTC stands for the government tax cuts for the child tax credit.
In recent years, the EITC has become a hugely expensive government program for providing income assistance to the poor and near-poor, costing about $60 billion in 2012. In that year, the EITC provided benefits to about 27 million families and individuals and, on average, is worth about $2,296 per family (with children), according to the Tax Policy Center. One reason that the TANF law worked as well as it did is that the EITC was greatly expanded in the late 1980s and again in the early 1990s, which increased the returns to work for low-income Americans.
Often called “food stamps,” Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) is a federally funded program, started in 1964, in which each month poor people receive a card like a debit card that they can use to buy food. The amount of food aid for which a household is eligible varies by income, number of children, and other factors but, in general, households are expected to spend about 30% of their own net income on food, and if 30% of their net income is not enough to purchase a nutritionally adequate diet, then those households are eligible for SNAP.
SNAP can contribute to the poverty trap. For every $100 earned, the government assumes that a family can spend $30 more for food, and thus reduces its eligibility for food aid by $30. This decreased benefit is not a complete disincentive to work—but combined with how other programs reduce benefits as income increases, it adds to the problem. SNAP, however, does try to address the poverty trap with its own set of work requirements and time limits.
Why give debit cards and not just cash? Part of the political support for SNAP comes from a belief that since the cards must be spent on food, they cannot be “wasted” on other forms of consumption. From an economic point of view, however, the belief that cards must increase spending on food seems wrong-headed. After all, say that a poor family is spending $2,500 per year on food, and then it starts receiving $1,000 per year in SNAP aid. The family might react by spending $3,500 per year on food (income plus aid), or it might react by continuing to spend $2,500 per year on food, but use the $1,000 in food aid to free up $1,000 that can now be spent on other goods. So it is reasonable to think of SNAP cards as an alternative method, along with TANF and the earned income tax credit, of transferring income to the working poor.
Indeed, anyone eligible for TANF is also eligible for SNAP, although states can expand eligibility for food aid if they wish to do so. In some states, where TANF welfare spending is relatively low, a poor family may receive more in support from SNAP than from TANF. In 2014, about 40 million people received food aid at an annual cost of about $76 billion, with an average monthly benefit of about $287 per person per month. SNAP participation increased by 70% between 2007 and 2011, from 26.6 million participants to 45 million. According to the Congressional Budget Office, this dramatic rise in participation was caused by the Great Recession of 2008–2009 and rising food prices.
The federal government deploys a range of income security programs that are funded through departments such as Health and Human Services, Agriculture, and Housing and Urban Development (HUD) (see [link]). According to the Office of Management and Budget, collectively, these three departments provided an estimated $62 billion of aid through programs such as supplemental feeding programs for women and children, subsidized housing, and energy assistance. The federal government also transfers funds to individual states through special grant programs.
The safety net includes a number of other programs: government-subsidized school lunches and breakfasts for children from low-income families; the Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC), which provides food assistance for pregnant women and newborns; the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program, which provides help with home heating bills; housing assistance, which helps pay the rent; and Supplemental Security Income, which provides cash support for the disabled and the elderly poor.
Medicaid was created by Congress in 1965 and is a joint health insurance program entered into by both the states and the federal government. The federal government helps fund Medicaid, but each state is responsible for administering the program, determining the level of benefits, and determining eligibility. It provides medical insurance for certain low-income people, including those below the poverty line, with a focus on families with children, the elderly, and the disabled. About one-third of Medicaid spending is for low-income mothers with children. While an increasing share of the program funding in recent years has gone to pay for nursing home costs for the elderly poor. The program ensures that a basic level of benefits is provided to Medicaid participants, but because each state sets eligibility requirements and provides varying levels of service, the program differs from state to state.
In the past, a common problem has been that many low-paying jobs pay enough to a breadwinner so that a family could lose its eligibility for Medicaid, yet the job does not offer health insurance benefits. A poor parent considering such a job might choose not to work rather than lose health insurance for his or her children. In this way, health insurance can become a part of the poverty trap. Many states recognized this problem in the 1980s and 1990s and expanded their Medicaid coverage to include not just the poor, but the near-poor earning up to 135% or even 185% of the poverty line. Some states also guaranteed that children would not lose coverage if their parents worked.
These expanded guarantees cost the government money, of course, but they also helped to encourage those on welfare to enter the labor force. As of 2014, approximately 69.7 million people participated in Medicaid. Of those enrolled, almost half are children. Healthcare expenditures, however, are highest for the elderly population, which comprises approximately 25% of participants. As [link] (a) indicates, the largest number of households that enroll in Medicaid are those with children. Lower-income adults are the next largest group enrolled in Medicaid at 28%. The blind and disabled are 16% of those enrolled, and seniors are 9% of those enrolled. [link] (b) shows how much actual Medicaid dollars are spent for each group. Out of total Medicaid spending, more is spent on seniors (20%) and the blind and disabled (44%). So, 64% of all Medicaid spending goes to seniors, the blind, and disabled. Children receive 21% of all Medicaid spending, followed by adults at 15%.
The group of government programs that assist the poor are called the safety net. In the United States, prominent safety net programs include Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF), the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), the earned income tax credit (EITC), Medicaid, and the Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC).
We have discovered that the welfare system discourages recipients from working because the more income they earn, the less welfare benefits they receive. How does the earned income tax credit attempt to loosen the poverty trap?
The earned income tax credit works like this: a poor family receives a tax break that increases according to how much they work. Families that work more get more. In that sense it loosens the poverty trap by encouraging work. As families earn above the poverty level, the earned income tax credit is gradually reduced. For those near-poor families, the earned income tax credit is a partial disincentive to work.
How does the TANF attempt to loosen the poverty trap?
TANF attempts to loosen the poverty trap by providing incentives to work in other ways. Specifically, it requires that people work (or complete their education) as a condition of receiving TANF benefits, and it places a time limit on benefits.
Who are the near-poor?
Briefly explain the differences between TANF, the earned income tax credit, SNAP, and Medicaid.
Many critics of government programs to help low-income individuals argue that these programs create a poverty trap. Explain how programs such as TANF, EITC, SNAP, and Medicaid will affect low-income individuals and whether or not you think these programs will benefit families and children.
Think about the business cycle: during a recession, unemployment increases; it decreases in an expansionary phase. Explain what happens to TANF, SNAP, and Medicaid programs at each phase of the business cycle (recession, trough, expansion, and peak).
Congressional Budget Office. 2015. “The Effects of Potential Cuts in SNAP Spending on Households With Different Amounts of Income.” Accessed April 13, 2015. https://www.cbo.gov/publication/49978.
Falk, Gene. Congressional Research Service. “The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) Block Grant: Responses to Frequently Asked Questions.” Last modified October 17, 2013. http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/RL32760.pdf.
Library of Congress. “Congressional Research Service.” http://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/about/.
Office of Management and Budget. “Fiscal Year 2013 Historical Tables: Budget of the U.S. Government.” http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/budget/fy2013/assets/hist.pdf.
Tax Policy Center: Urban Institute and Brookings Institution. “The Tax Policy Briefing Book: Taxation and the Family: What is the Earned Income Tax Credit?” http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/briefing-book/key-elements/family/eitc.cfm.
a method of assisting the working poor through the tax system
a federal–state joint program enacted in 1965 that provides medical insurance for certain (not all) low-income people, including the near-poor as well as those below the poverty line, and focusing on low-income families with children, the low-income elderly, and the disabled
a federally funded program, started in 1964, in which each month poor people receive SNAP cards they can use to buy food
You've finally made that perfect object, armature or material: a gamepiece, a robot, a fully rigged vampire character, or a millimeter-accurate model of the Empire State Building. Besides using this work in your own artistic project, you have made the courageous decision to share that creation with the world.
Sharing your creative work is a great way to "give back to the community," even if you don't write Blender code and you can't translate the Blender documentation to Swahili.
So how do you make a library? In Blender, you don't need to export to a special format. In fact, you don't need to do anything special beyond saving your regular .blend file. Every .blend is a library file. Users can Append what they like from your .blend file, and ignore parts which they don't need for their own project.
This scheme has some benefits and some drawbacks.
The benefit of using .blend files as a library format is that it's super easy to include extra stuff to help the user see the objects. If the user loads the .blend file directly, it works like the pretty packaging for foods, including a quick and easy way to get a pretty "serving suggestion" rendering of the library contents. What you save in your .blend is what the user will see when they load it, including all your user interface settings, lighting types, and camera positions.
The drawback of using .blend files as a library format is that it's super easy to include unintended things, such as extra meshes, unused material and texture channels, and other things which the user will not find helpful. Blender doesn't save things which are no longer referenced anywhere, but it cannot read your mind if you leave a spare mesh on layer 13 which uses some abandoned Material.034.
Also, some people are not accustomed to the way that Blender saves all of the user interface settings along with the .blend file. When they load your mesh, they see your way of working. This can be instructive, but unless that's your intention, it's best to try to stick to a simple and clean user interface setup for your library files.
For best results, you need to apply some discipline to publish a clean and useful library.
After having used several library .blend files from various sources, I propose that anyone making libraries follow a few suggestions:
The dash prefixes for test-rendering cameras, boxes, floors and lights will help the user know at a glance what to Append and what not to Append from your library.
Here's a quick way to throw out all the stuff you really don't need, including extra meshes, materials and user interface complexity.
Append all the useful parts of your library .blend file (including the useful test-rendering items)
Blender saves the default settings in a file called .b.blend on your disk. If your own preferred default settings are still too complicated for newcomers to understand, you can move that file away temporarily to get the "factory" built-in default settings which the Blender team produces as a part of each new version of the software. Move the file back again when you want to go back to your individual way of working.
It's helpful to include the .txt file and/or post it separately so that people can read a summary before loading the blend file. This should include any credits, usage notes, layer explanations, and licensing information. For you Unix folks, remember to run it through unix2dos to enforce \r\n CRLF newlines, readable by people with less flexible tools such as Windows Notepad.
It's also of immense benefit to put up small test-renders of your library objects or materials. They don't need to be large but they should give an honest view of the work you're sharing before a potential user takes the time to download library files that will not be useful to them.
So, where do you publish your work of artistic genius?
If you post things on your own website, try not to rely on a free site that will over-run your bandwidth limits and disappear two months later. Search engine links will sometimes live on for years, just frustrating those who were hoping to find a millimeter-accurate model of the Empire State Building.
If you have even more time to spare, consider writing up a tutorial on how you achieved any tricky results!
For every artist who chooses to share their creative works with the community, there are a dozen artists, or even hundreds, who thank you immensely.
Applicable Blender version: 2.75.
This tutorial is designed to teach users to make a low-poly animesque head in Blender.
Noob Note: Using triangles on a subsurfed model may result in "peaks" appearing in some areas. To reduce this problem, merge as many triangles into quads as possible.
Click on "Align to view" in the settings at the bottom left side.
Now you have a pointed chin.
Re-arrange them so they make more of a chin shape by pressing the G to move and Z to constrain the movement to the Z-Axis.
Noob Note: Move it down; don't scale it out.
Now extrude ( E ) "edges only", along the Z-Axis ( Z ) so that you have another area.
As a precaution, remove doubles. (WKEY)
Scale it ( S ) so that it's not so cubic.
Now extrude along the Z-Axis again ( E then Z ) and scale ( S ) it down a bit.
Note: In newer versions you have to check the checkbox: "Quad/Tri Mode" in the lower left corner.
Now subdivide 2 times with the pair of vertices below the center line.
Yours should now look like this one on the right.
And rearrange the vertices so they make eye shapes.
Extrude it along the Y-Axis (EKEY) (YKEY) and move your mouse around to change how far it moves.
Now do the same to the other side, and you will have the nose's base.
Do this to the other side.
Now you have a nose.
Rotate the camera (CTRL+NUM1) so you are seeing the back.
Subdivide them.
Move (GKEY) the vertices back, along the Y axis (YKEY), a bit to give the face more smoothness
Rearrange the chin, by moving (GKEY) the bottom vertice along the Y axis (YKEY) till it looks right.
Ta da!
And here it is with sub-surfacing. You have finished. Hit (F12) to see the final render.
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) refer to the standard framework of guidelines for financial accounting used in any given jurisdiction; generally known as accounting standards. GAAP includes the standards, conventions, and rules accountants follow in recording and summarizing, and in the preparation of financial statements
Although you can write Ruby programs with any plain text editor, some text editors have additional features to aid the Ruby programmer. The most common is syntax highlighting.
The stage of Xenosaga: Pied Piper takes place T.C. 4667, 100 years prior to the events of Xenosaga Episode I. Before he became Ziggurat 8, Jan Sauer was a Captain in the 1875th Special Operations detachment of the Federation Police Bureau. He and his squad were deployed to the planet Abraxas (later renamed Michtam) to investigate murders in the U.M.N.. These terrorist acts were caused by a cloaked individual under the hacker alias "Voyager".
Sauer became further intertwined with the destiny of the Zohar when he met the widow Sharon Rozas and her son Joaquin. Jan Sauer and Sharon developed a relationship which led to marriage.
With the help of his squad and Sharon's medical knowledge, Sauer's investigation draws closer to the funding source of Voyager's murders. This turns out to be Dimitri Yuriev, who quickly utilizes his connections within the government to have Sauer and his team removed from the investigation. This does not stop Sauer, even after he and some of his subordinates are arrested.
Only after the death of one of his subordinates, Mikhail Ortmann, does Sauer discover that another member of his team, Erich Weber, is Voyager. Erich explains in part his connection with U-DO, before his Voyager alias takes over and lures Sauer to witness his wife and son's deaths. At this point, Voyager becomes the Black Testament, and Sauer could do nothing to prevent his family's death. The Black Testament presented an ultimatum to Sauer: either to be killed and have his soul consumed by Voyager or to join him (as another Testament) and live forever. Sauer refused both fates and he chose to commit suicide.
The witnesses of events that led to his death were Melisse Ortus and Lactis. Two years after his suicide he was activated as the cyborg Ziggurat 8, and about 100 years later the events of Xenosaga Episode I unfold.
Dialogue by Wilhelm suggests that Jan Sauer had a "shining will," and implicates that at some point Jan was considered to become a Testament. Given that Xenosaga Pied Piper has not been released to the US, most of Jan Sauer's background and his relation to the Zohar remains a mystery in Episode I and Episode II. The developers did not disclose his background so that it could be revealed in Episode III, where Voyager makes his first appearance.
In Episode I Ziggurat 8 is commissioned by the S.O.C.E. to infiltrate a U-TIC organization base and rescue M.O.M.O. During their escape their spacecraft would have been destroyed by the U.M.N. column walls if not rescued by the Elsa, and so he meets with Shion and the rest of the Xenosaga cast.
When first called Ziggy by M.O.M.O., Ziggurat 8 seemed uncomfortable. He suddenly had a flashback of his lost son, Joaquin. He remembered that during his life as Jan Sauer he purchased a synthetic dog for his son, as on a police officer's salary could not afford a real dog. The company which manufactured the dog was Nexus (and the dog's model name was "Nexus 6"), which prompted his son to give the nickname Nex, a truncation of the company's name. His manufactured name was similarly truncated by M.O.M.O. This may have been the action that sparked Ziggurat 8's response to take on a fatherly role toward M.O.M.O.
Ziggy seems self-conscious of his present body, and shows discomfort when young women see him undergoing maintenance. However he shows trust in M.O.M.O., as he states because of the "purity of her heart." In Cathedral Ship, when Cherenkov diffuses into the Zohar emulator and begins his transformation into a Gnosis, Ziggy remarks how it is "the same, just like that day." This is a reference to the events which happened in his past (or Xenosaga Pied Piper) where Voyager transforms into the Black Testament, through the same method.
Ziggurat 8 seems to understand some of the events regarding the Zohar, however his general disposition is reserved, and the game does not reveal too much of what he could know of his previous life. In the KOS-MOS Encephalon, Ziggurat 8's past was not shown despite the fact it is stated KOS-MOS sensed everyone's memories, and Nephilim urged everyone to accept the entirety of their memory. chaos explains why his and Allen's memories are not in the encephalon—yet there is no mention of Ziggurat 8's memories not being there. It is unknown why his memories/fears were not explored in the Encephalon. It could be due to the game's development of Ziggy not being as major a character as Shion and Jr. (In Xenosaga I & II for the Nintendo DS, Ziggy reveals more of his past to the rest of the characters.)
His only assignment is to protect and support M.O.M.O., yet he accompanies the rest of the party as a support character. During the destruction of Proto Merkabah Ziggy helps rescue KOS-MOS after Shion's grip of her has slipped.
In Episode II Ziggy continues to protect M.O.M.O. beyond the scope of his assigned mission. He strongly encourages Juli Mizrahi to be maternal to M.O.M.O. and he may also have feelings towards M.O.M.O. similar to that of his lost son. This is suggested by the way he is affected both during and after M.O.M.O.'s analysis. When she collapses, a vivid memory is triggered of Voyager standing over a large pool of blood.
Ziggy relates to Albedo's immortality in Episode II when he says, "Death is rest for the soul. Who was it that said that? If the body did not die, and the fears borne in the mind just continued to pile up, the world would be nothing more than an eternal prison." When Juli Mizrahi performs maintenance on Ziggy, he reveals the reason why he committed suicide was because of the death of his son. They form a connection because of the loss of their children and the resulting painful memories. Despite Juli Mizrahi's sympathy for Ziggy, the cold reality of his state of life is shown when Ziggy is made the lead (on screen) character and he talks with other employees of the U.M.N. Control Center. A majority treat him as old property.
Within Labyrinthos, Ziggy was briefly focused in on when the information within Canaan was accessed. He became suddenly reserved and placed his hands behind his back. This could implicate he knows this Canaan might be in some way tied to the mysterious program "Canaan" mentioned by his Realian subordinate Lactis in the past (Xenosaga Pied Piper). Given this, Ziggy should recognize Dimitri Yuriev and his intent as well. As to why Ziggurat 8 does not disclose to the party the familiar connections of these events is not yet known. He does however, inquire Jr. to explain what U-DO is before they dive into M.O.M.O.'s subconscious. (In Xenosaga I & II for the Nintendo DS, Ziggy reveals his past to the rest of the characters.)
M.O.M.O.
MOMO Mizrahi is a character that plays a central part in the storyline of Xenosaga, especially during Episode II.[6] Her first name is an acronym for Multiple Observative Mimetic Organicus.
In the video game and anime, MOMO is a Realian, a class of artificial humans.[7] Specifically, she is a prototype 100-series Observational Realian developed through genetic engineering by Joachim Mizrahi to combat Gnosis, an alien that exist in a different plane of existence. She was created with the appearance and personality of a young girl and does not show the signs of aging.l[8] Her primary motivation throughout the series is to fulfill the wishes of Joachim. She also seeks approval from Juli Mizrahi as something more than a replacement doll for her and her husband's deceased daughter, Sakura, with whom she was created in image. In addition she grows close to Ziggurat 8 "Ziggy" and Jr., both of whom lost someone dear to them as well.
Originally, MOMO was created by Joachim Mizrahi, a scientist,[8] to resurrect U-DO. She was crafted in the likeness of his dead daughter, Sakura.[8] He went so far as to tell MOMO that if she did good deeds, one day she could become a real human girl; that she could actually become Sakura.
After the death of Joachim Mizrahi, MOMO was rescued from her birthplace amidst the chaos of the Miltian Conflict and went to live on the planet Fifth Jerusalem, the hub of the Galaxy Federation, with Juli Mizrahi whom she termed "mother".[8]
MOMO was programmed with the behavior and emotions of a twelve-year-old girl, and considers both Joachim and Juli Mizrahi to be her parents. Aside from her pink hair and the yellow eyes, MOMO is an otherwise perfect physical copy of their deceased daughter, Sakura.
Aside from Juli Mizrahi, the two most important figures in MOMO's life are Ziggurat 8 "Ziggy", whom she nicknamed after he rescued her and Jr.
In Episode I, MOMO's outfit closely resembles a Japanese schoolgirl's uniform. She takes the role in the series as a magical schoolgirl.[9] Her weapon start out as short magical rods in Episode I and later, in Episodes II & III, as an Ether-based composite bow. The rods can be used to physically attack or to shoot musical- or petal-themed laser beams giving her both short- and long-ranged attacks, however when she wields a bow, it makes all of her attacks long-range.[10] Among her Ether skills is the ability to transform into a more powerful version of herself by performing a transformation sequence. The costumes she wears determines the either-based abilities she has access to[11] for a limited amount of time. In Episode III MOMO is specifically given new abilities to immobilize enemies by filling up an enemy's "Break meter".[12]
Juli Mizrahi and MOMO had a strained relationship due to her close resemblance to Sakura.[8] Although MOMO is an organic being capable of thought and emotions, Juli finds MOMO to be just a reminder of her deceased daughter.[8] Juli is unable to see MOMO as anything more than an artificial human until MOMO's near death during Episode II whereupon she realized she did care about MOMO.
Near the beginning of Episode I, Ziggy is assigned by S.O.C.E, and particularly Juli, to rescue MOMO from the U-Tic Organization and protect her until her safe return.[13]
MOMO is central to the storyline because she contains the Y-Data.[14] This has made her the target of kidnappings—specifically attempted kidnappings by Albedo and U-TIC—[13] and manipulation her and her friends by U.M.N. to get the data for themselves.[15] Later, during a near-fatal Y-Data extraction, she tried to stop Albedo from extracting it by destroying her mind, but the action was futile as Albedo was able to obtain it after threatening Jr. After these events, MOMO asked permission of Juli to assist the investigation of Old Miltia.
Left at the dawn of a new era after the events at Michtam, MOMO began to work with everyone to rebuild the world, with the belief that a new network was one way to save the world. She believed the network would reunite those who had already departed.
In Episode II, Episode III, Pied Piper, and Xenosaga I&II, he is referred to as Yeshua, which is said to have been the Aramaic name for Jesus of Nazareth. It is also a shortened form of Yehoshua. The implications of chaos having some "divine" significance are scattered all throughout Xenosaga. The Anima Vessels, which are half of chaos, are also referred to as the "body of God." The database also calls chaos' power the "power of God."
It is speculated that chaos is in some way connected to Wilhelm, president of Vector Industries. Wilhelm is the only person who seems to truly know chaos, as well as recognize his significance in the greater scheme of things. In turn, chaos seems to be the only one who truly knows Wilhelm, as Wilhelm states in Episode III that chaos is the only one who can define him. There is a diametric opposition between the two characters, both physically and in terms of personality. Wilhelm has red eyes and pale skin, while chaos has green eyes and dark skin. Wilhelm is directly engaged in just about every aspect of the conflicts that take place within Xenosaga. On the other hand, chaos maintains a passive role, and seems content with following the path of the games' other protagonists.
Much of chaos' history is clouded, but it is known that 6,000 years ago, he was one of the disciples of a man that Ormus would come to worship as their Lord and Messiah. During this time, chaos was still known as Yeshua, and performed miracles in that man's place. Exactly what happened during this time period and why it happened, is unknown. However, there may be clues in Nephilim's mention of chaos teaching humanity long ago, and the reaction of Anima to the scriptures about the resurrection of Jesus Christ. (The suggestion of chaos as Jesus, as well as a traditional Jesus figure, seem to be yet another of Xenosaga's Gnostic touches. In Gnosticism, Jesus is actually two separate beings, a divine aeon Jesus, and a human Jesus. One cannot assert for certain however that chaos would be an aspect of Jesus. The only direct depiction involving the two is of chaos standing next to Mary Magdaelene as the two listen to a sermon by Jesus. By this interpretation chaos may have been a prophet or disciple of Jesus. It is also possible that chaos may have been one of the many angels said to have accompanied Jesus.) Wilhelm and the database also state that chaos had died, at least physically, during this era, and had left behind the "Word of Yeshua", also known as Lemegeton.
Lemegeton is represented in the material world as words, but it is actually a wavelength energy. Lemegeton can only be understood and spoken by chaos (Anima), and when recited, they can access and control the Zohar. Through the Zohar, energy from the Higher Domain of U-DO can be accessed. Humans are unable to speak the "words", however the ancient people and future researchers such as Grimoire Verum were able to create programs from Lemegeton to control the Zohar. This was used in all Relics of God that made use of the Zohar's energy, such as Zarathustra and Omega. The Song of Nephilim is an incomplete translation of Lemegeton. People of the Zohar, whose wills resonate strongly with Anima due to their special bloodline, are also capable of controlling the Zohar, with the strongest among them capable of communicating with U-DO. In this way, the power of Anima is also seen as a proxy between humans and the power of the Higher Domain. (Only those who resonate purely with Anima are capable of controlling it, while those who resonate passively with Anima lead to dispersal.)
In Episode III it is revealed that chaos is the human incarnation of Anima, a power derived from the collective unconscious of humanity and present since the beginning of the universe in this dimension. Anima is a force that appears to be behind the theme of Will to Power and individuality. This is the antithesis to the convergence and unity theme behind the power of the Animus.
Long ago at the beginning of the universe, certain wills of humanity resonated purely with Anima. According to the database, these were past incarnations of consciousnesses that are capable of being Testament, which includes the player characters of the Xenosaga Series. These wills began a chain reaction throughout the collective consciousness, resulting in the dispersal of consciousnesses, a phenomenon that led the universe towards destruction. The dispersing wills that reject the collective consciousness are commonly called Gnosis when seen in the real world. Eventually, the increasing dispersal of the collective consciousness would lead the universe to collapse.
To counter this, Anima also possessed a failsafe function. When consciousnesses of rejection—those that desire dispersal—exceed critical mass, the imaginary number domain collapses, which causes the collapse of the real number domain and, as a result, leads to the collapse of the entire universe, swallowing up the upper domain. This is the universe's desperate, dangerous situation. When a breakdown or error is produced in one part of a system, the "failsafe" is the function that keeps the effect from spreading to the entire system. It is for the sake of ensuring safety. In other words, it is thought that the Failsafe is the system that keeps a problem produced in one section of the universe from spreading its ill-effects to all the world. If that's the case, then it is thought that the function of the universe's Failsafe is something for the sake of avoiding the collapse of the entire universe, including both upper and lower domains.
To save chaos' life, and to prevent the destruction, Mary used her power of Animus to seal away the power of Anima into the twelve Anima Vessels. Mary did this by separating chaos' soul in two, into the Anima power and the Will of Anima, which is the failsafe. Then the Anima power was divided into the twelve Anima Vessels. While separated from his Anima power, chaos' failsafe ability could not ignite.
However, as long as Anima existed, the consciousnesses of the universe would continue to disperse until the universe was slowly destroyed by collapse. Wilhelm chose Eternal Recurrence to avoid this. By using Zarathustra he planned to perpetually rewind time to the past, living in an eternal cycle. This prevented both the collapse through dispersal and the destruction of wills by the failsafe. But this meant living the same lives over and over again.
At the end of Episode III, chaos rejected the Eternal Recurrence, deciding to trust in the wills of humanity to change the future. He realized his power might be used to save the universe with the help of human wills who wish for it. His final cryptic instructions to Shion and friends was to lead humankind back to Lost Jerusalem. He states that the key to saving the universe could be found on Lost Jerusalem, yet does not elaborate on what this means. Although chaos believes they will likely all meet again on Lost Jerusalem, given how long it would take to travel there, this may be hinting at future incarnations.
After the awakened KOS-MOS restored his power to him, chaos believed he would disappear with the release of his power to slow the destruction of the universe and allow humanity more time to find Lost Jerusalem. However, his consciousness lived on, as the consciousnesses of the universe still desired his existence. He still remains as the failsafe of the universe, although his future form is unknown.
After saving the Elsa by holding open one last U.M.N. gate to allow them to escape the shockwave of the dimensional shift, he is last heard speaking to KOS-MOS as she drifts through space. His last words: "I guess both you and I still exist in this world, after all. As long as people... as long as the universe desires it, we will continue to exist. We haven't finished what we have to do yet. So, until then, sleep well, KOS-MOS."
Jr. was a survivor of the U.R.T.V. (U-DO Retro Virus) unit created by the scientist Dr. Yuriev to combat U-DO, a mysterious waveform that threatened to destroy the galaxy. Rubedo's unit number as a U.R.T.V. was 666. He possesses the unique abilities of all U.R.T.V.'s, including telepathy and various telekinetic powers. However, despite being a "designer child," he was born with his twin brother attached to him through the heart—a problem that was remedied when they were separated. He is the most powerful U.R.T.V. and is reputed to have the one perfect anti-U-DO wavelength (generated when Jr. goes into his "Red Dragon" mode), and was therefore made the leader of the U.R.T.V.'s. Although to date he hardly uses his unique powers compared to his living brothers, instead preferring to fight with his guns or machines, Albedo states that Rubedo is weaker than he was before either indicating a lax in training or that Albedo himself has become much stronger (or both). He was known as Rubedo, while his formerly conjoined twin brother was called Albedo, U.R.T.V. #667. Gaignun Kukai was the last brother, christened Nigredo.
Over the course of the first two games, Jr. and M.O.M.O. have grown very close to each other. This is due to Jr's past with Sakura Mizrahi, whom MOMO was modeled after. During his childhood, he promised Sakura that he would protect her mother and "little sister." That little sister was MOMO.
While Jr. looks like a child, and can act rashly, he is also capable of making tough decisions and cutting observations since he is in truth a matured man. He also has a fondness for guns, action movies, and classic novels, including The Adventures of Robinson Crusoe, The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, and Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea. Because of his hobbies Jr. is a master of gunplay, especially with pistols, and enjoys fighting akimbo. At the beginning of Episode I, Jr. carries a pair of Rook Company pistols. However, in Episode II he wields two antique Makalov pistols.
During the Miltian Conflict, Rubedo and the other U.R.T.V.'s fought against U-DO before the planet's disappearance into the void known as the Abyss. As leader of the U.R.T.V.'s, Jr. was responsible for keeping them connected through a spiritual link, which would protect them from U-DO's destructive powers. A moment before the U.R.T.V.'s were to destroy U-DO, Rubedo had a vision of the Old Miltian planet being destroyed when something monstrous emerged from within. Rubedo, fearing for the lives of his companions, broke the Spiritual Link leaving the other U.R.T.V.'s with no protection against U-DO. U-DO slew or drove mad all of the standard U.R.T.V.'s, as well as Albedo during the fighting, and Rubedo carried an injured Nigredo several minutes before Canaan and chaos rescued the U.R.T.V. duo on the E.S. Asher. Therefore, the only documented surviving U.R.T.V.'s were Nigredo and Rubedo, though Albedo and Citrine survived as well.
Along with Albedo, Nigredo, and Citrine, Jr. is one of the "variants," U.R.T.V.'s who undergo a stimulated mutation. Superficially this caused his hair to turn a bright red and his eyes a deeper blue but more significantly it allowed him to pause his cellular development. In addition to that he has a unique power called "Red Dragon Mode." The "Red Dragon Mode" is a special power that Jr. has which allows him to amplify the anti-U-DO waves that are emitted by both himself and Standard U.R.T.V.'s. This apparently increases Jr.'s power to some degree as well, as when Jr. used the power when overcome with emotion in his one on one battle with his brother Albedo. Part of Gaignun's role as a U.R.T.V., besides being the future host of Dimitri Yuriev's consciousness seems to be a living stop-gap meant to keep Jr.'s "Red Dragon" from going out of control. He has a tattoo of a red Chinese dragon on his left upper-arm that somewhat symbolizes his "Red Dragon Mode." Rubedo subconsciously suppresses his Red Dragon mode; as an unintentional side effect, his aging is also suppressed.
Because Rubedo and Albedo began life as conjoined twins, the two share similar but opposite powers regarding the regulation of their cellular growth. Jr. is able to slow down his aging at the cellular level, thus his youthful appearance, and Albedo is able to speed up cell growth to the point of being able to instantly regenerate any part of his body. Furthermore, the database indicates that Jr.'s halted development is "half-subconscious" which may lead to questions as to whether Jr. has full control over his range of extraordinary abilities.
In Episode III, Jr. is forced to finally come to terms with issues surrounding the remains of his "family"; his brothers Albedo and Gaignun, his sister Citrine and his father Dimitri Yuriev. After the group confronts Dr. Sellers on the Tactical Warship Merkabah he reveals to them that the reason Dimitri Yuriev is still alive is because he is inhabiting the body of his "son", Nigredo aka Gaignun Kukai. He also tells Jr. what Yuriev's goals are and where to find him; on the Durandal. Jr. and the group return to the Kukai flagship to find the entire crew murdered by Yuriev soldiers with the exception of Mary and Shelly Godwin and the cruisers' two guests, Juli Mizrahi and Canaan. They head to the Isolation Area to stop Yuriev but before they can reach him they are confronted by U.R.T.V. #668, Citrine.
Jr. tries to plead with Citrine to step out of their way and how what she and Yuriev is wrong, but Citrine wants none of it. She is so dedicated to her father's ideals that she is willing to fight her own "brother" and die if need be. She is fought and killed by the party and Jr. derides the needlessness of her death and how he has lost yet another of his U.R.T.V. comrades. In the Isolation Area, Jr. comes face to face with Yuriev as he removes the Zohar Emulators from their containment units. As Jr. tries to reach Gaignun with his words Yuriev outlines his plan to conquer his fear of God (U-DO), by ascending to the realm of the gods himself and killing him. Before the group can stop him, the Durandal's engines kick in and the ship flies off on a collision course with Abel's Ark. Yuriev disappears into the inner recesses of Isolation Area and Jr. and the others are forced to evacuate before the ship is absorbed by the Ark.
Jr.'s reunion with Albedo is short-lived, as Albedo gets right down to business with him, ordering him to link with him and use their anti-U-DO waves to destroy Yuriev. Their plans go slightly awry when Gaignun's consciousness emerges from Yuriev's. Jr. is hesitant to destroy his brother and best friend, but when Gaignun says it must be done he resolves to finish it. It had been Albedo's plan to transfer Gaignun's consciousness into Jr.'s body, but Gaignun instead took over Albedo's body and threw Albedo's consciousness into Jr. Powerless to stop him, Jr. (and Albedo) was thrown backward as Gaignun proceeded to shift himself and Yuriev into a higher dimension. Before disappearing, Gaignun communicates with Jr., saying goodbye and showing Jr. his true form. At this point a grown up version of Jr. is briefly glimpsed, looking very similar to Gaignun and Albedo. Jr. then finally settles his ordeal with Albedo as the two become one single person, like they were meant to be in the first place.
From there, he follows Shion and the others to Michtam to stop Zarathustra and Wilhelm. When Shion's new mission presents itself at the end of the game, finding Lost Jeruselam, Jr. is the only surviving party member to accompany her and Allen when the Elsa departs.
As a matter of trivia, Jr.'s adult form was originally meant to appear in Episode II. In the original script written by Soraya Saga, part-way through the game Jr. unpauses his growth and rapidly ages to adulthood. This new adult Jr. would still be a playable character in the game and be part of several key sequences in the later sections of the game, such as a reunion with U.R.T.V. #668 Citrine and a three-way battle between KOS-MOS, U-DO and himself and Albedo. This version of Jr., and many other things from Saga's Episode II script were cut out by a new team of writers and editors brought in by Monolith during production. Like several other removed concepts, it was put back into Episode III, after a fashion. However, Jr.'s adult form only appears as a representation of Jr.'s true self instead of his actual self in the form of a playable character.
During the Miltian Conflict, Jin managed to steal information from Margulis concerning the true nature of the Miltian Conflict—the Y-Data. After joining chaos and Canaan in their search for the U.R.T.V.s, the group was stopped by Margulis, who challenged Jin to a duel. Margulis displayed superior skill with his sword, wounding Jin during the duel. When it came to Ether skills, however, Jin proved to be the better. Both duelists hurled a ball of potent energy at each other. Margulis' sphere of energy crashed into Jin, knocking the breath out of him and severely weakening him. Jin's, however, hit Margulis in the face, which left the man with a vicious gash over his right eye that would eventually leave a permanent scar and makes the floor give out with Margulis on it.
While in the military, he was ranked directly under Margulis and was Pellegri's superior. Both Jin and Margulis trained under his grandfather, the swordmaster Ouga Uzuki. Ouga had also taught Shion martial arts abilities. Some of these martial art abilities, including a few sword fighting, may be seen in Episode II, if you decide to complete the certain GS quests to obtain a few of Jin/Shion Double Techs. Two examples are Phoenix Blade and Lion Heart.
After becoming aware of Margulis's treachery during the Miltian Conflict, Jin received information from his father Suou and began his own secret-information activities under then-Lieutenant General Helmer. His relationship with chaos also began during this period.
While he shared a deep connection with Pellegri during his time in the Federation military, they never walked the same path again, due to differences in their relative stations. It is a particularly sad conclusion considering that his mother Aoi, like Pellegri, had inherited the bloodline of the Immigrant Fleet, and the same blood clearly ran through Jin.
At the end of Episode III, Jin is mortally wounded by the Armaros Gnosis, being stabbed twice by its deadly blades, and dies beside the fallen E.S. Asher. Though he lost his life defending chaos and Nephilim within Zarathustra, his spirit—his consciousness—travels alongside Nephilim to Lost Jerusalem (Earth).
Canaan was sent on a mission during the Miltian Conflict by Lieutenant General Helmer along with chaos to retrieve the U.R.T.V.s and the Y-Data. During their mission the U-TIC Organization activates the Song of Nephilim. Canaan starts to become affected by it, but he fights off being overcome by it. Nearby, Federation Soldiers in A.M.W.S. are affected and start attacking Canaan and chaos. Jin Uzuki arrives in time and aids them. Shortly after, Jin shows them to the U.R.T.V.s location at Labyrinthos, headquarters of U-TIC. Margulis appears, and he and Jin fight. After the fight, Jin entrusts Canaan with information regarding the Miltian Conflict, which is also a fragment of the Y-Data. After uploading the data into Canaan, Jin leaves. Then something happens to Canaan (appearing as a strange black cloud in the sky which engulfs Canaan and causes him to pass out; chaos also sees this, but it is unknown if he was affected) and the information handed over to him becomes inaccessible to him. Some unknown time later, they continue their search for the variant U.R.T.V.s and find two of them: Rubedo (also known as Jr.), who is carrying out a wounded Nigredo (Gaignun Kukai). They rescue them both, but no other U.R.T.V.s. are reported being saved.
Fourteen years later Canaan is still unable to read the data that is locked inside his head. A side-effect of his mysterious affliction is occasional black-outs accompanied by data loss. He has spent much time during the years since the Miltian Conflict at Vector's 2nd Division on Second Militia attempting to extract the Y-data from his head. Representative Helmer asked him to aid Jr., chaos, Ziggy, and M.O.M.O. as they are under attack by U-TIC A.W.M.S. Units. He arrives in time and finishes the fight, by attacking Pellegri. During the fight their E.S. units freeze as if they are stopped in time. This is possibly their Vessels of Anima reacting to each other, or some unknown phenomena causing this. (the player can see someone for a brief second in an P.S. Gad with arms crossed on a building.) Eventually during the game he joins the main characters (although as an NPC) as they return to Old Milita to extract the data and analyze it.
With his name "Canaan," it has been speculated that he shares something in common with Lactis, a prototype Realian from Xenosaga: Pied Piper. In Xenosaga: Pied Piper, a Mysterious Voice (chaos) speaks to Lactis, and tells him to protect "Canaan," which the voice says, is "inside" of Lactis. In Xenosaga I & II there are hints that Lactis was Canaan's past incarnation. And in Episode III, it is finally confirmed that Canaan and Lactis are indeed both one and the same individual; created at first to observe Jan Sauer and Voyager, and then in the current future timeline 100 years after the events of Pied Piper to observe Shion and co. During the time of Pied Piper, the recording component ("personality") used was that of Lactis. Afterwards however the recording component was reformatted but the personality was still in use inside the current Canaan. Proving something not thought to be theoretically possible, a level of transcending consciousness that actually exists inside of Realians.
After being antagonised by Doctus for the majority of the first half of Episode III, Canaan comes to realize his actual identity after analyzing data corresponding to 'Program Canaan' itself, but also in doing so realizes his true nature having been an unintentional spy for Wilhelm all along. He reveals to chaos how he believes that he himself is an existence that would only bring suffering to others and confides in him. Voyager however, later breaks the secret of Canaan's true identity and purpose to the main party, much to the shock of Jr. & Ziggy.
In Episode III, the special characteristics of Program Canaan allow Canaan to secure a bypass route to Wilhelm's power. Canaan, cleverly using Voyager's desires after the battle with E.S Dan, convinces him that even Wilhelm could die and his power as a Testament could fade and connects Voyager's consciousness with the Compass of Order and Chaos. Canaan chides Voyager for his hubris at touching something that the hands of man were never supposed to touch and admits that he wants to protect his friends the best he can before finally wishing the main party success in their mission. Clutching Voyager's hand to his forehead and continuing the connection, both he and Voyager are sent into phase space, destroying both of their bodies.
Canaan is a temporary playable character for Episode III only during the first dungeon and uses an energy knife in battles; he remains with the party as a guest following that.
"Canaan" is an ancient term meaning the area around present-day Israel, western Jordan, southern Syria and southern Lebanon. It is also the name of one of the grandsons of the biblical Noah. Canaan, the fourth son of Ham, was cursed by Noah for the wrongdoings of his father.
After the Woglinde was destroyed by the Gnosis, Miyuki puts in a transfer to Second R&D Division and is accepted. Her former supervisor Shion, who was separated from her team as a result of the incident, did not learn about it until much later. Miyuki came riding to Shion and her companions' rescue in Episode I when the Gnosis mounted an assault on the Kukai Foundation when they were drawn to Second Miltia by Albedo and the Song of Nephilim. After Vector's new anti-Gnosis super weapon, the Rhine Maiden had cleared out most of the Gnosis from the surrounding area Miyuki supplied Shion and KOS-MOS with a Phase Transfer or P.T. cartridge which KOS-MOS could integrate into her present armament and use to reveal whatever was drawing the Gnosis to Second Miltia. It is not stated which of the four Vector vessels (the Woglinde II, the Wellgunde, the Floßhilde or Vector's headquarters the Dämmerung) Miyuki was on at the time of the incident. Shion asks her where she's contacting them from, but Miyuki does not answer the question and elects to boast about the Rhine Maiden instead.
In Episode II Miyuki's role is negligible at the very best, appearing only at the start of Disc Two after Shion's opening narrative and at the end of the game when she welcomes her and Allen home on the Dämmerung after their ordeal at Old Miltia.
When Shion leaves her job at Vector after the events of Xenosaga: A Missing Year, Miyuki keeps in constant contact with her. She even goes so far as to offer her direct help when Shion begins to work with the anti-Vector organization Scientia. At the start of Episode III she joins in on a mission to break into Vector's top secret S-Line Division databank and steal classified data on the Zohar control program Lemegeton. She later turns up on Fifth Jerusalem to help the party break into the Project Zohar weapons testing facility in order to rescue KOS-MOS from the scrap heap. In both instances she is a playable guest character, one of three in the game. On an interesting note, she not only uses Shion's original red M.W.S from the first game but one of her tech moves is one of Shion's own Tech Attacks from Episode 1, namely Lightning Blast.
Former Vice Chief of Vector Industries First R&D Division's KOS-MOS Project Joint Operation Systems Development, Allen is an assistant to Shion Uzuki and comic relief throughout the series. After graduating from Bormeo University, Allen joined Vector Industries' First R&D Division in T.C. 4764 and was placed on the KOS-MOS development project under then Chief Engineer Kevin Winnicot and Junior Chief Engineer Shion Uzuki. Although two years Shion's senior in age, in Vector he's one year her junior. After the incident where the KOS-MOS Archetype was prematurely activated by U-TIC, which resulted in Kevin's death, Shion was promoted to Chief Engineer and continued her mentor/fiancé's work while Allen was then promoted to Shion's former position as Junior Chief Engineer.
While Allen is a major presence he primarily stays in the background and lets the other main characters take a more active role in events. After chaos joins the party full-time Allen often takes his usual station on the bridge of the Elsa. In Episode II he accompanied Shion through the deep interior of the Dämmerung and helped her find E.S. Dinah, which the two piloted to Old Milita and broke the Federation quarantine.
When Dinah was attacked en route by Voyager, the Black Testament, Allen manned the E.S. Unit's weaponry while Shion did her best to pilot the craft through his attack drones' fire. Just when all seemed lost the two were saved by KOS-MOS, who was awoken on Second Milita when she sensed Shion was in peril and flew off to her rescue.
Allen is mostly overlooked by his fellow Vector workers. When Shion was able to reconnect with Miyuki after the Woglinde disaster, Miyuki noted that she never even noticed that Allen was missing when he had been with Shion the whole time. He is deeply in love with Shion, but has had some trouble expressing his feelings to her for a multitude of reasons. Shion is apparently oblivious to Allen's clearly intense feelings; rather obvious comments are made by various characters in front of Shion throughout the series which she never seems to register. Furthermore, Allen feels that trying to approach Shion on a romantic level would only be harmful to her until she can put the past involving her former love Kevin Winnicot behind her.
It appears that Allen comes from a wealthy family background, but he has since left that behind and does not wish to dwell on his past. One of his secret passions is fishing.
When Shion leaves Vector to join Scientia, Allen is promoted to the position of Chief Engineer of the First R&D Division and the KOS-MOS project shortly before it is canceled in favor of Roth Mantel's T-elos project. However, Allen has some trouble being addressed as "Chief" and continues to use this term (as a term of endearment) to refer to Shion Uzuki, who officially has no title at all, not working for Vector.
Allen often puts himself in harm's way in order to protect Shion. When the Woglinde was attacked by Gnosis, instead of fleeing with the rest of Vector's staff, he followed KOS-MOS when she went searching for Shion and ended up using an assault rifle to fend off Gnosis along with Lt. Virgil while they all made their way to the escape pods. He goes with Shion disguised as a U-TIC researcher to investigate Labyrinthos, and also shows a lot of concern for her well-being when she passes out from what appears to be over-exertion throughout the course of the story. Near the end of the story, he confronts Kevin for using Shion and KOS-MOS, almost dying by Kevin's hand in an attempt to convince Shion to stay with her friends. He also throws himself in front of a Gnosis that was prepared to attack an unarmed Shion.
At the end of Episode III, Allen accompanies Shion along with Jr., to find Lost Jerusalem. In Episode III, Allen is a playable character for a brief time during the game after Shion is captured by Margulis and the U-TIC Organization on the "Past Miltia". He wields a futuristic crossbow, however like all extra characters his equipment cannot be changed and he does not possess a Skill Line like the main characters. His stats with equipment are better than Miyuki's and near even with Canaan, though he is more fragile than Canaan. Allen's fighting style is much like his usual role in the games: a weak physical presence geared more toward assistance and support with a couple of unexpectedly strong points such as breaking (breaking is an attack technique that can render an enemy or ally unable to do anything for two turns). At the point in the game where Allen is a playable character, his break tech is strong enough to break most enemies in one or two rounds, allowing the stronger main characters an easy chance to do the physical damage Allen cannot.
These six men, along with several droids, own and operate the passenger/cargo cruiser Elsa Von Brabant, also known as the Elsa. Despite their humble status as a small tramp freighter, they are privately employed by the Kukai Foundation (due to Matthews' enormous debt to Gaignun Kukai), and are commonly called upon by the Foundation to take part in dangerous missions. However, this does not stop Captain Matthews from involving the Elsa in shady side jobs in desperate attempts to pay off his debt.
Captain Matthews' infamous debt is reportedly due to his frequent and frivolous spending habits. According to chaos, "no one holds a greater amount of debt than the Captain." One of the most difficult Global Samaritan missions in Episode II involve helping the Elsa droids to pay off the gargantuan debt (10 Million G), apparently in part due to the Professor adding his Robot Academy into the Elsa. It is unknown whether or not the debt will have reappeared a year later in Episode III'. (It is thought that Captain Matthews' name may be derived from the Biblical Apostle Matthew, who was believed to be a tax collector.)
Captain Matthews seems to have a certain fondness for the varied and eccentric droids that serve on board the ship, (which is returned in kind), and he has named them all after his favorite drinks.
Although it is his job, Hammer seems to dislike scavenging the wreckage of starship disasters, like the wreck of the Woglinde. However, once he gets down to business, any misgivings he has about scavenging quickly vanish: Hammer made quick work out of both the Federation escape pod and the wrecked U-TIC AutoTechs that made their way onto the Elsa. chaos' A.G.W.S. unit in Episode I was pieced together by Hammer from A.G.W.S. parts scavenged from battle fields.
This character in Xenosaga resembles a non-anthropomorphic animal version of a similar character also named Hammer in Xenogears.
Tony claims to be the best pilot anywhere, according to chaos, but as Tony has a massive ego when it comes to his piloting skill ("Tony, numero uno!"), the truth of this remains unknown.
Voiced by (English): Steve Blum[2]Voiced by (Japanese): Takeshi Aono[5]
In Episode I he was living on the Kukai Foundation, but in Episode II through circumstances not quite understood, even to Captain Matthews, the Professor relocated his Robot Academy onto the Elsa. With the help of Shion and friends, the Professor defeated his nemesis, the Dark Professor and Dark Erde Kaiser.
He designed and built the Elsa Evolution.
In Episode III, the Professor is still aboard the Elsa, and appears to be more involved in the main plotline, even appearing in full cutscenes. He, along with Scott and Allen rebuild KOS-MOS after she is destroyed by T-elos on Rennes-le-Chateau. He calls Allen "Assistant #2" and KOS-MOS "Assistant #3".
Voiced by (English): Brian Chase[2]Voiced by (Japanese): Kazuya Nakai[5]
Assistant Scott and the Professor often argue, but are united in their fanatical enthusiasm for building giant robots. As seen in the anime and Episode I, Assistant Scott sometimes feels that the Professor does not appreciate him. In the anime, Assistant Scott seemed to find a kindred spirit in Allen, which also seemed to be echoed by Assistant Scott in Episode II when he was happy to learn that Allen had come aboard the Elsa.
While he is an important character in all three episodes, Febronia is conspicuously absent from the TV Asahi animated adaptation of Episode I entitled Xenosaga: The Animation, save a half-second long cameo at Virgil's death. This vision of Virgil's also appears in I&II.
Towards the later parts of Episode I Gaignun is first introduced to the main party when they first enter the Kukai Foundation, Shion however upon meeting him felt that she had just apparently acted quite rude to him while shaking his hand and noticing his #669 brand on the palm of his hand, possibly alluding that even Shion was able to see or detect Gaignun's powers and true nature. Afterwards Gaignun is arrested by Cpt. Roman on allegations of treason along with most of the main party and put into a separate holding facility until the main party had proved the Kukai Foundation's innocence through KOS-MOS's triple A data recordings shortly prior to Albedo first using the Song of Nephilim. When Albedo eventually did use the Song of Nephilim, only Gaignun, chaos & Jr. could hear the song being played at first while on the Durandal. On the bridge almost immediately after, Gaignun and Jr. conversed telepathically over the proceedings until Shion was able to faintly hear the song being played. As the ending credits roll Gaignun is seen one last time discussing the status quo with Helmer over a video link, commenting that a vortex of temptation and obsession still remains in the aftermath of the games climax and finally adds that Albedo is being drawn into it all just the same.
In Episode II, Gaignun's past relationships with Albedo and Jr. are explored. He is first requested by Helmer when arriving on Miltia with M.O.M.O. to obtain reconnaissance information from a brief conversation with Albedo via a telepathic link in order to gain insight into Albedo's plans for the future tense, the two converse with Gaignun offering to come to terms with Albedo at the time but Albedo was only interested in goading his brother and even goes as far as calling him two-faced when Gaignun kinetically destroyed Albedo's right arm at one point during the conversation when Albedo had threatened Rubedo's life. Later on flashbacks occur when the main team take subconscious dives into Sakura Mizrahi's mind in order to allow her to speak once again. These adventures showed the rift growing between the trio of U.R.T.V. units, which eventually led to a breakdown during the Miltian Conflict, causing Albedo to come into contact with U-DO and become insane. At the end of Episode II, Gaignun suffers from a double personality; one part is Gaignun, the other is Dimitri Yuriev, his father. Dimitri most likely created Gaignun just as a host for his consciousness, for he somehow transmigrated into his body at the time of his "death" in TC 4753 when Gaignun as Nigredo in his childhood had apparently shot and killed his father. Yuriev awakened in Gaignun's body during the events of Episode II. Although Gaignun's consciousness now struggles to regain control of his own body, Yuriev currently has complete control of him and first makes his renewed presence known to Pellegri on a video link, tasking her to tell her superiors that he is not dying...ever.
Gaignun's dilemma throughout the series had always been secretly that he had struggled with the notion of eventually killing his own brother Rubedo, a task that was highlighted by Albedo earlier during their telepathic link in Episode II in which he had known about Gaignun/Nigredo's true form for many years. In truth his actual creation and very meaning to his own existence was to simply monitor his own brother Rubedo and if necessary terminate his life, to this end Yuriev had secretly implemented a second Red Dragon drive inside of Nigredo in the expressed purpose of rivaling Rubedo's power but as we see in Gaignun's nature he hides it all the way throughout the series.
In Episode III Gaignun's story comes full circle resulting in his eventual redemption when he comes to terms with what he is and had always been, Albedo arriving as a Testament during Yuriev's power bid after kidnapping Abel and the Zohar sheds some light on the fact that Gaignun had presumably let his own father take control of his body during the takeover with the thoughts of making his father proud somehow. As Albedo and Jr. initiate a link in order for Gaignun to be sent into Jr.'s body whilst Albedo in his Testament form would be sent into another dimension with their father Yuriev still in Gaignun's body. Gaignun however seeing through Albedo's feelings during this link expresses that he does not like taking orders and makes a desperate attempt at switching this vis a vis of minds around however resulting in Albedo's mind being thrown into Jr.'s body evidently reuniting the twin brothers for the first time in one body since their very birth. Saying his farewells to Rubedo/Jr. inside of Albedo's Testament body, Gaignun shows his brother his true form and tells him that his duty to keep watch over him has now ended or rather that he had wanted it to be over, but admits that if he had denied his nature in the end he would have been literally denying his own existence regardless. Jr. makes a last-ditch attempt at saving him by telling him they were always friends as Gaignun/Nigredo offer's to him that he'd like to play with his brothers again someday as he is sent into another dimension.
Gaignun shares his name with the horse that Roland, a general serving under King Charlemagne and wielder of the legendary blade Durandal, rode into battle on. Kūkai is also the name of a famous Japanese Buddhist monk; Buddhist undertones can also be seen in Xenosaga. The name Nigredo refers to the philosophic beliefs of Carl Jung, who believed that the process of self-realization has three major steps, which he named using terms derived from alchemy, which he studied prior to developing his theories. These three steps are known as Nigredo, the death of the old, perceived self, Albedo, the discovering of one's inner identity, and Rubedo, the process of living a self-aware life.[16]
In the series, Jr. and Gaignun both raised a cat named Gaignun, which is the origin of Nigredo's (and Jr's) alias.
Vanderkam is a Lieutenant Commander working for the U-TIC Organization and a covert operative of the Federation Military. He has a tattoo of a purple X across his face and has this nasty habit of punching employees he thinks are slacking off.
This character in Xenosaga resembles an extremely similar character with a tattoo of a purple plus sign also named Vanderkam in Xenogears.
Mary is also a temporarily playable character in Episode I. She appears in Jr.'s introduction when he has to infiltrate the U-TIC battleship. Mary, along with another Kukai Foundation soldier, are in A.G.W.S. during battle sequences; neither of them have in-battle character models like Virgil does. Mary pilots a pink Vector A.G.W.S.
Helmer seems to be well known in the Xenosaga universe. Besides knowing Canaan, chaos, Jr., Gaignun, Dr. Juli Mizrahi and Jin Uzuki he is also on good terms with Vector Industries' CEO Wilhelm. The two were seen discussing matters of security prior to Wilhelm's assistance with the Song of Nephilim incident and the Gnosis attack on the Kukai Foundation. However, this is the only time the two discussed matters; they are not close allies. The Patriarch of the Ormus Society also seems to know him and is not very fond of him, and that sentiment is also echoed by Commander Margulis.
In Xenosaga Episode I, Helmer was in trouble with the Galaxy Federation when an Ormus/U-TIC insider in the Federation helped hatch a plot that framed both Second Miltia (Helmer's planet) and the Kukai Foundation for the destruction of the Woglinde. Helmer and the Federation showed no signs of improving relations after Xenosaga Episode I, although they are not enemies. Moreover, Helmer's role in both Xenosaga Episode I and II remains strictly behind the desk. Outside the Miltian Conflict, Helmer's most significant roles include careful handling of the aforementioned "framing incident", the arrangement of saving Shion and her allies on numerous occasions, and many other political matters seen in the series. Helmer also seems to have extensive knowledge of the wave existence known as "U-DO" that may extend upon what happened at Miltia.
Helmer appears very briefly in Episode III, though never in person in the game. He is seen during the Planetary Disappearance Phenomenon, where he gives an update on the situation to Jr. and the party and says a quick but meaningful good bye before the Durandal loses the signal from Second Miltia and shown to be alive in the ending, communicating with Mary and Shelley on the Elsa.
Although Helmer's role on the political stage is significant, several matters about this man are still shrouded in history, including his role in the Miltian Conflict. He has a friendly working relationship with Wilhelm; however, he does not seem to be privy to or aware of any of his plans. Moreover, Helmer was clearly an enemy of Ormus and even Albedo.
Voiced by (English): Kim Mai Guest (Episodes II & III)[1][2]Voiced by (Japanese): Naomi Shindou[3][4][5]
In Episode I, Juli would rather not have anything to do with M.O.M.O., even though she is legally M.O.M.O.'s mother. She never quite got comfortable with the fact that her husband, Joachim created M.O.M.O. in the image of their late daughter, Sakura. She felt like M.O.M.O. was some sort of sick attempt to replace or recreate Sakura and she could not bring herself to try and relate to her. After speaking with Ziggy however her view of M.O.M.O. started to change. Ziggy, who had come to know M.O.M.O. as a real person since he rescued her, suggested that Juli not see M.O.M.O. as an attempt to replace her daughter but as a second daughter. Juli began to open up more and more to M.O.M.O. after that point and began to realize that she was indeed her own unique person and not just a copy of Sakura. After the events in Xenosaga Episode II, she decided to live with M.O.M.O. and accepted her role as her mother, with Ziggy on standby should a crisis arise.
Voiced by (English): Kim Mai Guest (Episodes II & III)[1][2]Voiced by (Japanese): Yumi Tōma[3][4][5]
Sometimes when Shion sees Nephilim in Episode I, a cross is seen swinging back and forth similar to the cross animation sequence that appears every time Fei Fong Wong sees himself as a child in Xenogears. An interesting similarity is that she very much resembles a young Elly from Xenogears, with both having the same Japanese voice actor in Yumi Tōma. This is further shown in that Abel appears to be drawing a picture of a girl who looks something like Nephilim.
She existed as a human during the era of Lost Jerusalem. At that time, the Zohar was excavated from Lake Turkana and shipped to Toronto, Canada, where its analysis began. After it had been discovered that the Zohar produced tremendous energy in response to a specific brainwave wavelength, everyone had become fixated upon finding a method to extract it. Systems programmer Grimoire Verum completed the control program Lemegeton based on the ancient language that had been unearthed from the same ruins as the Zohar.
The system went out of control during a control experiment, and the young girl participating in the experiment became the first to disappear. The disappearance phenomenon continued to expand, eventually erasing all of Earth from dimensional space. The girl who disappeared at this time was none other than Nephilim.
From the fact the girl's disappearance coincided with the appearance of Abel, it can be deduced that the two share a cause-and-effect relationship.
The Song of Nephilim is the result of amplifying the wavelength created by the Lemegeton through the use of a giant tuning fork. That system was designed and built by Joachim Mizrahi.
"Nephilim" is the name of the race of giants referred to in the Bible. According to the Book of Enoch and the Bible, the Nephilim were the offspring of the "sons of God" (angels) who descended to Earth and cohabited with the "daughters of men." This was one of the reasons for the Great Flood. Nephilim means "watchers," or "those who have come down," although Nephila also means "Orion" in Aramaic. This alludes to an extraterrestrial influence.
During the ending clip from Xenosaga III, Nephilim is seen absorbing the gnosis and transforming into an adult version of herself looking exactly like Elly.
In reality, Wilhelm is an immortal being as old as the beginning of time. He was created to prevent the destruction of the Lower Domain of the universe, except he has been doing so through eternal recurrence.
The Testaments are Wilhelm's closest assistants and servants. Characterized by colored robes with matching beaklike masks, the true nature and power of the Testaments is unknown. It is hinted that they possess the power to manipulate space, and they seem to be able to appear and disappear at will. Also, each Testament has their own E.S., a special kind of spacecraft that contains a Vessel of Anima. Four Testaments exist by the end of Episode II: red, blue, black, and white.
In terms of allusions and references, the four Evangelists John, Mark, Matthew and Luke who wrote the Gospels which are part of the New Testament are sometimes depicted as wearing cloaks of these four colors. The four compass directions in several cultures, including Feng Shui, and Aztec mythology, are equivalent to these four colors. It is also possible they allude to the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse, though this is unlikely because blue is not a color of the horsemen [though this is debatable as the translation usually is made as Pale which is usually interpreted as green to blue] (also because chaos refers to the U.R.T.V.s as the horsemen). They are more likely connected with the Gnostic concept of Archons which were powerful agents of the Demiurge who often wore animal masks and/or came in the form of animals. The fact that the Testaments often wear masks as well as the fact that their E.S. craft all resemble different animals (as opposed to every other E.S. having a more human like appearance) supports this.
In addition the Xenosaga universe, the three female protagonists: Shion, KOS-MOS and M.O.M.O., have also appeared in Namco × Capcom for the PlayStation 2 as playable characters.[17]
KOS-MOS and T-elos appeared again alongside M. O. M. O. in the sequel of the first Endless Frontier game Super Robot Taisen OG Saga: Endless Frontier EXCEED.
KOS-MOS and T-elos appeared in the Nintendo 3DS game Project X Zone and again in the sequel Project X Zone 2.
↑ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r "Xenosaga Episode II: Jenseits von Gut und Bose (2005) Cast". https://www.behindthevoiceactors.com/video-games/Xenosaga-Episode-II-Jenseits-von-Gut-und-Bose/cast/. A green check mark indicates that the role has been confirmed using a screenshot (or collage of screenshots) of the title's list of voice actors and their respective characters found in its closing credits and/or other reliable sources of information.
↑ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u "Xenosaga Episode III: Also Sprach Zarathustra (2006) Cast". https://www.behindthevoiceactors.com/video-games/Xenosaga-Episode-III-Also-Sprach-Zarathustra/cast/. A green check mark indicates that the role has been confirmed using a screenshot (or collage of screenshots) of the title's list of voice actors and their respective characters found in its closing credits and/or other reliable sources of information.
↑ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q "Xenosaga Episode I: Der Wille zur Macht (2003) Japanese Cast". https://www.behindthevoiceactors.com/video-games/Xenosaga-Episode-I-Der-Wille-zur-Macht/japanese-cast/. A green check mark indicates that the role has been confirmed using a screenshot (or collage of screenshots) of the title's list of voice actors and their respective characters found in its closing credits and/or other reliable sources of information.
↑ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q "Xenosaga Episode II: Jenseits von Gut und Bose (2005) Japanese Cast". https://www.behindthevoiceactors.com/video-games/Xenosaga-Episode-II-Jenseits-von-Gut-und-Bose/japanese-cast/. A green check mark indicates that the role has been confirmed using a screenshot (or collage of screenshots) of the title's list of voice actors and their respective characters found in its closing credits and/or other reliable sources of information.
↑ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u "Xenosaga Episode III: Also Sprach Zarathustra (2006) Japanese Cast". https://www.behindthevoiceactors.com/video-games/Xenosaga-Episode-III-Also-Sprach-Zarathustra/japanese-cast/. A green check mark indicates that the role has been confirmed using a screenshot (or collage of screenshots) of the title's list of voice actors and their respective characters found in its closing credits and/or other reliable sources of information.
↑ "Xenosaga Episode II Preview". Previews. 1UP. http://www.1up.com/previews/xenosaga-episode-ii-jenseits-von_2.
↑ Kasavin, Greg (2003-02-21). "Xenosaga Episode I: Der Wille zur Macht Review". Gamespot. http://www.gamespot.com/ps2/rpg/xenosaga/review.html.
↑ a b c d e f "MOMO Biography". Biography. GameSpy. http://stars.ign.com/objects/142/14232058_biography.html.
↑ Beveridg, Chris (2008-01-28). "Xenosaga Vol. #2". Anime/Manga Reviews. Mania.com. http://www.mania.com/xenosaga-vol-2_article_79775.html.
↑ (QuickTime) Xenosaga Japanese Gameplay. [Gameplay Footage]. GameTrailers. http://www.gametrailers.com/video/japanese-gameplay-xenosaga-episode/8608.
↑ "Xenosaga: Episode I - Der Wille zur Macht". Giant Bomb. http://www.giantbomb.com/xenosaga-episode-i-der-wille-zur-macht/61-20336/.
↑ Eller, Ian (2009-08-29). "Aliens, hot chicks, mechs, and German subtitles!". Xenosaga: Episode III: Also Sprach Zarathustra - Preview. RPGamer. http://www.rpgamer.com/games/xeno/xenosaga3/xenosaga3prev.html.
↑ a b Azraelot (2003-03-25). "Xenosaga". Game Reviews. Stratos Group. http://www.stratosgroup.com/reviews/games.php?selected=0303xeno.
↑ Adams, David (2005-02-02). "Xenosaga Sequel Wrapped Up". News. IGN. http://ps2.ign.com/articles/584/584840p1.html.
↑ Berscheid, Janelle (2005-02-15). "Contact Lenses and a side order of A.C.R.O.N.Y.M.'s.". Xenosaga II: Jenseits von Gut und Bose - Preview. RPGamer. http://www.rpgamer.com/games/xeno/xenosaga2/xenosaga2prev.html.
↑ Alchemy Information on Gaignun's influences.
↑ Parish, Jeremy (2005-08-26). "Namco x Capcom (PS2)". Previews. 1UP. http://www.1up.com/previews/namco-x-capcom.
File:PWAA Magatama.png
If you played the first game, you should be familiar with the Gatewater Hotel and Will Powers. Powers is the one that invited you over to the ceremony. In the conversation, you will hear that the Jammin' Ninja didn't bring his guitar, which is strange for Maya. Also, Pearl has tagged along with you and Maya to join in for the ceremony. You are then reminded about a press conference where the Nickel Samurai is going to confess something. Confess what?
Talk to Powers if you want to know more about him, the Nickel Samurai, and The Jammin' Ninja:
Will Powers: Powers used to work at Global Studios, one time he was framed for murder. Thankfully, you took this case (against your will) and cleared his name. Now, as funny as it sounds, he's wearing a bunny costume and doing a kid's exercise program.
The Nickel Samurai: The actor for the Nickel Samurai is named Matt Engarde, who is very popular according to Maya.
Jammin' Ninja: The Jammin' Ninja works at another studios. His name is Juan Corrida by the way. Apparently, he and Engarde don't get along very well.
It should take time before the show starts. Move to the Hallway.
8 ???
Examine everything if you want to pass time, otherwise Move back to the Viola Hall.
If you're not sure what the hallway looks like (since there's no picture), there's walls of flowers on the left, toilets near the end with the sign on the top, target style board with flowers on it and a teddy bear near the bottom left of the picture.
File:PW AdmissionTicket.png
After hearing you will be attending the press conference, Powers will give you the Press Conference Ticket, which will be added to the Court Record.
Now, Move to the Hotel Lobby.
Once you arrive, you will hear an announcement from the PA, which will tell you that the show is canceled due to unforeseen circumstances. They also have a request from the police to stay where you are. The police!? You are then encountered by a familiar voice. Those who remember the case with Powers may also recognize the grouchy Wendy Oldbag, who claims to be security here. (Then why is she wearing an astronaut suit? And a ray gun? Just hope she acts her age). Talk to Oldbag and if you remember the case, she's an inane chatterbox.
Wendy Oldbag: Oldbag worked with Global Studios until she was fired after "that" incident. She now works as a security personnel.
What happened?: Oldbag doesn't have all of the details, but another one of those "incidents" has occurred. A murder? Maya decides to check what happened. You agree to do so, unwillingly of course.
Move to the Viola Hall.
A bellboy borrows Maya for a moment saying someone is asking for her on the phone. Maya will leave the party for now.
Move to the Hallway.
It's Lotta Hart and Gumshoe! Their argument reveals a murder just took place! Lotta will leave. Talk to Gumshoe.
What happened: Pearl wonders if the Nickel Samurai was murdered. Gumshoe reveals that the Nickel Samurai actually got arrested! It was The Jammin' Ninja who was killed.
Lotta Hart: Gumshoe will say that Lotta was here when the murder was committed, and is now eager for a real "scoop". This comment will prove important later.
The victim: The name of the victim is Juan Corrida, the actor of the Jammin' Ninja. He and Engarde had been hogging the spotlight for years. Now that Corrida is gone, would Engarde hold the spotlight? Gumshoe doesn't think so.
Present Matt Engarde's Profile to Gumshoe. You will learn he had just been arrested for murder. Arrested!?
Arrested? Gumshoe says he can't bring out the details now. Maya's a big fan of Engarde's, so you know she's going to want to take the case as soon as she hears about this.
Move to the Hotel Lobby.
File:PWAAJFA Transceiver.png
You will see Powers. It looks like he is holding a transceiver. Powers says a bellboy handed it to him recently. Powers gives you the Radio Transceiver, which will be added to the Court Record. Why did the bellboy want Powers to give it to you? Talk to Powers:
Matt and Juan: Powers says the two are nasty rivals. They would butt heads over stardom.
Press conference: Engarde planned to wear the Nickel Samurai costume at the press conference. But why?
Pearl then asks a question, where's Maya? She's been gone for a long time for answering a phone call. Just then, the transceiver beeps. You answer it. A mysterious voice brings some bad news to you: Maya has been kidnapped! The voice is the kidnapper and is holding her life for ransom! The kidnapper wants you to take Engarde's case. He wants a complete acquittal for Engarde, because he says Engarde didn't kill Corrida, because he was set up by a smarter person.
The kidnapper brings you a tougher challenge, to get the not guilty verdict in one day! The kidnapper hangs up, introducing himself as "De Killer".
You can't get the police involved. Pearl suggests you talk to "Mr. Scruffy" detective. Will Powers would look after Pearl while you automatically go to the Hallway and explain to Gumshoe for a shocking reaction.
You tell Gumshoe about the ransom. Gumshoe thinks if De Killer is holding Maya for Engarde's complete acquittal, then he must be working for Engarde, and Engarde must be the real murderer. The police found so much evidence, they felt like something is wrong. Almost as if someone is setting Engarde up for the murder.
???
Wright & Co. Law Offices
The game returns to Phoenix's POV. A day has passed. Pearl will accompany you for now. Talk to Pearl:
What to do? You have no choice but to head to the Detention Center. Pearl is worried that Matt might be the killer but you tell her that it's too early to jump to conclusions.
Maya's situation: Pearl has no family. Her father left and her mother is in Detention Center because of the incident involving a broken Sacred Urn. Maya is like her sister and that's all she has left in the world.
Move to the Detention Center.
You will meet Matt Engarde himself after some misunderstandings. He likes to "talk" to his "phone" on his wristwatch from time to time (you'll see the antenna stick out of his device on his watch). Also, he likes to use the word "dude". Talk to Engarde.
Matt Engarde: Engarde doesn't answer directly and says he is writing an autobiography. His publisher tells him not to say anything personal.
What happened: Again, Engarde doesn't answer directly. He does, however, claim innocence.
He isn't talking. Present the Press Conference Ticket. He says he knows nothing about it. Huh?
Present the Radio Transceiver to Engarde. After hearing about the ransom, Engarde will accept you as his lawyer, and will help you out.
Matt Engarde: It looks like he enjoys being the Nickel Samurai. The popularity, the women, the stardom, etc.
What happened: Engarde claims he was preparing for the post-ceremony show. He was in his Nickel Samurai costume, resting all along. When he woke up, Corrida was already dead and Engarde was arrested.
The victim: Engarde says he had nothing to do with Corrida at the time. He beat Corrida at the ceremony, so he had no reason to kill him.
The charge of murder: Engarde says the police found a button on his costume. The button belonged to the Jammin' Ninja's costume, so they suspected Engarde. It looks like the real murderer tried to frame him.
Pearl convinces you to try out the Magatama. You don't have to present it as Phoenix does so automatically. Engarde says once more that he didn't kill Corrida. Thankfully, no Psyche-Locks appear. It looks like he is innocent after all!
On the morning of May 10, 1940 the Dutch awoke to the sound of aircraft engines roaring in the sky. Nazi Germany had commenced operation Fall Gelb and attacked the Netherlands, Belgium, France and Luxembourg: in the case of the Low Countries without a declaration of war given before hostilities.
The Luftwaffe was guaranteed air superiority over the Netherlands. The Dutch Air Force, the Militaire Luchtvaartafdeling (ML), had a strength of 144 combat aircraft, half of which were destroyed within the first day of operations. The remainder was dispersed and accounted for only a handful of Luftwaffe aircraft shot down. In total the ML flew a mere 332 sorties losing 110 of its aircraft.
The German 18th Army secured all the strategically vital bridges in and toward Rotterdam, which penetrated Fortress Holland(The main area of Dutch defence) and bypassed the New Water Line from the south. However, an operation organised separately by the Luftwaffe to seize the Dutch seat of government, Battle for The Hague, ended in complete failure. The airfields surrounding the city (Ypenburg, Ockenburg, and Valkenburg) were taken with heavy casualties and transport aircraft losses, only to be lost that same day to counterattacks by the two Dutch reserve infantry divisions. The Dutch captured or killed 1,745 Fallschirmjäger, shipping 1,200 prisoners to England. The Luftwaffe's Transportgruppen also suffered heavily. Transporting the German paratroops had cost it 125 Ju 52 destroyed and 47 damaged, representing 50 percent of the fleet's strength. Most of these transports were destroyed on the ground, and some whilst trying to land under fire, as German forces had not properly secured the airfields and landing zones.
The French 7th Army failed to block German armoured reinforcements of the 9th Panzer Division; they reached Rotterdam on 13 May. That same day in the east the Dutch retreated from the Grebbe Line to the New Water Line, when a counter-offensive to contain a German breach had failed.
An attempt by the Germans to cross the Afsluitdijk in the North, a thin dike that stretches from Friesland to North-Holland, failed. The German troops were unable to pass the Dutch fortifications and had to withdraw to their original positions.
The Dutch Army, still largely intact, surrendered in the evening of 15 May after the Bombing of Rotterdam by Heinkel He 111s of Kampfgeschwader 54 on the 14th killing about 900 civilians, and threats to do the same to other major Dutch Cities. They considered their strategic situation to have become hopeless and feared a further destruction of the major Dutch cities. However, the Dutch troops in Zealand and the colonies continued the fight while Queen Wilhelmina established a government-in-exile in Britain.
Culture During the Golden Age •
Suriname and the Caribbean •
Japanese Invasion of the East Indies •
Indonesian National Revolution •
Governors-General of the Dutch East Indies •
In this section we are going to present the aeroelastic calculation module in its classical mathematical perspective. For a wider introduction to the subject, visit the tutorial pages.
Open VOGEL models wings using beam elements. In principle, these could be made of any type: constant sections or variable sections with two or more nodes. The current version only works with two-nodes constant section elements (the so called ConstantBeamElement), but it leaves the IFiniteElement interface and the BeamElement abstraction open to declare and introduce different elements.
1 1. List at least three different ways to dry foods.
2 2. Why and how do you sulphur fruits?
3 3. How is dried fruit stored and protected from insects?
4 4. How are dried foods reconstituted?
6 6. How are dried nuts stored?
7 7. Dry the following and provide samples for testing
10 8. Reconstitute a vegetable and cook for sampling.
List at least three different ways to dry foods.
Food can be dried in the sun, but only if the temperatures are near 100 °F (38 °C) and the humidity is low. The fruit must be covered with cheesecloth (or something similar) to protect it from insects. If it is dried on a table, the table legs should be set in cans of water to prevent insects from crawling up the legs and getting into the fruit. The fruit will take several days to dry, and the humidity and other weather conditions must be monitored. If the temperature drops significantly during the night, dew may form, and the fruit will absorb it quickly. Because of this, it may be necessary to take the fruit indoors at night.
This is the fastest way to dry food, but only small quantities at a time can be dried this way. The oven is preheated to about 140 °F (60 °C) and the food is placed on racks in the oven. The door must be held open about two inches (5 cm) for a gas oven, or about 4 inches (10 cm) for an electric oven. A thermometer is placed in the center of the rack to make sure the temperature stays near 140 °F (60 °C). A fan should be placed near the open oven door so that air inside the oven can circulate and allow the moisture to escape.
The food trays must be rotated every 30 minutes because the heat inside the oven will not be distributed evenly. Rotate the trays from front to back, top to bottom, and left to right.
Food dryers can be purchased or home-built. They can dry more food than an oven but it takes a little longer. They also use less electricity than an electric oven. A food dryer is an enclosed box with a heat source, a fan, and a set of racks upon which the food is placed. Most home-built food dryers use a 100 watt light bulb as the heat source. It takes four to six hours to dry a batch of food in a food dryer, and like ovens, they operate at about 140 °F (60 °C).
You can build your own food dryer by lining a cardboard box with Styrofoam insulation, and then covering the Styrofoam with aluminum foil. Alternately, you can use insulation board with the foil already attached (this is available at most home improvement stores). It is very important that you line the insulation with foil, as this reflects the heat away from the insulation which would otherwise melt. Make an insulated lid for the box as well, but leave a gap at one end for moisture to escape.
The next thing you will need is a light fixture. Use a simple porcelain base, and mount it to a steel ceiling box (both of these are available in the electrical section of a hardware store). If desired, you can also use the thermostat from a water heater to control the temperature. These thermostats are generally settable between 40°C- 65°C - you will want to set it to 60°C. If you buy a deep ceiling box, you can mount the thermostat inside it, but make sure it makes good contact with the ceiling box so that heat is conducted to it. If you cannot mount the thermostat inside the box you will need to cover the terminals, as they will both carry household voltage (which is enough to kill a person who comes in contact with it).
The last item you will need is an extension cord. Cut the "female" end of it off and throw it away. Make a hole in box and poke the cut end through. Then run it through an opening in the ceiling box. Strip the ends of the wire and connect them to the porcelain light fixture. Tighten the clamp on the ceiling box to hold the extension cord in place. Screw in a 100 Watt bulb and plug in the cord. If the light does not turn on, unplug and check your wiring.
If you opt to use a thermostat, wire the "hot" wire on the extension cord (this is the one that connects to the narrower of the two blades on the plug) to either terminal of the thermostat. Run a wire from the remaining terminal of the thermostat to the light fixture. The neutral wire (connected to the wide blade of the plug) should be connected to the remaining terminal on the light fixture.
Finally, mount the fixture inside the insulated box and rig up a rack to hold your food trays. Keep a close eye on it the first time you use it.
If you do not use a thermostat, place a thermometer inside the box and keep an eye on it. You can control the temperature by varying the width of the gap in the lid, or by using a different wattage light bulb.
Why and how do you sulphur fruits?
Commercially prepared dried fruit may contain sulfur dioxide which can trigger asthma in sensitive individuals, though dried fruit without sulfur dioxide is also available, particularly in health stores. The sulphur is added to "fix" the colour of the product. "Organic" dried fruit is produced without sulphur which results in dark fruit and the flavor is much more characteristic of the fresh fruit. The color of some fruits can also be "fixed" to some extent, with minimal impact on flavor, by treating the freshly cut fruit with a preparation rich in Vitamin C (e.g., a mixture of water and lemon juice) for a few minutes prior to drying.
Sulphuring fruit is accomplished by burning a block of sulphur in an enclosed box (such as a dehydrator) with the fruit inside. The burning sulphur gives off sulphur dioxide which fixes the color of the fruit. This should only be done outside.
How is dried fruit stored and protected from insects?
As soon as it cools, dried fruit should be packed into insect-proof containers, such as glass jars or metal cans with tight-fitting lids. Do not let sulphured fruit touch metal, as this will cause the fruit to become discolored. You can pack fruit into plastic bags and then place that in a metal container. Plastic bags are not 100% insect (or rodent) proof, so make sure you store the fruit in a place where they cannot get to it. A cool, dry place is best.
How are dried foods reconstituted?
Just add water. You can also simmer them in boiling water for 15 minutes.
The fruit must be ripe, or slightly overripe. Be sure to use good quality fruit, as it will make good quality fruit leather. Select fruit that is fresh, and fully sound - basically, the same things you look for when selecting fruit for the table. Cut out any bad parts of the fruit. The saying, "one bad apple spoils the whole lot" applies to fruit leather, as a bad piece of fruit can impart a bad flavor to any of the fruit it comes into contact with. In making fruit leather, the fruit is pureed before drying, so the bad fruit will come into contact with all the fruit.
How are dried nuts stored?
Dried nuts must be stored in a cool, dry place in air-tight containers to prevent reabsorption of moisture.
Dry the following and provide samples for testing
a. Bread. Make crumbs and use in a recipe for sampling.
Bread can be dried without the use of special equipment by placing several slices in a large bowl and covering it with a towel. The bowl should be kept indoors. After several days, the bread will be dry (also known as "stale") and it can then be crumbled. The usual use for bread crumbs is to make stuffing. You may use any stuffing recipe you like (as long as it uses bread crumbs), or you can use this one:
Finely chop the onion, celery, and garlic, then sauté them in the margarine in a 2 quart pot until transparent. Add the sage and thyme and vegetable broth and simmer for 5 minutes. Remove from heat and add the bread crumbs, folding them into the mixture. Let it sit for 10 minutes, fluff, and serve.
b. Fruit leather
Wash the fruit and puree it in a food processor. Line a shallow pan with wax paper, being sure to bring the edges up so that the pureed fruit cannot run under it. Pour the fruit puree into the pan until it is about a quarter inch deep (0.6 cm). Place it in the food dryer set to 140 °F (60 °C). Check it after four hours (but it may take much longer). Remove the fruit when it is tacky to the touch. Remove it and the wax paper from the pan and slice into thin strips, leaving the wax paper attached. Roll the strips (and wax paper) into a spiral and place in a sealable plastic bag. Store in a cool dry place. Fruit leather can be stored for up to six months.
c. Vegetable leather
You can make vegetable leather from just about any type of vegetable so long as it is pureed first. A shortcut is to use baby food as the starting point, and then proceed as with fruit leather. Here are two other recipes (in case your Pathfinders rebel at the thought of eating baby food).
Combine ingredients and dry at 140 °F (60 °C) (same as for fruit leather).
Core and slice ripe tomatoes into quarters. Boil for 15 minutes. Remove from water, force through a colander or a sieve. Add salt (if desired for flavoring), and simmer until thick. Spread on a plastic or wax paper lined tray and dry at 140 °F (60 °C) (same as for fruit leather).
d. Fruit slices
Most fruits need to be pretreated before they are dried. Apples should be cored, peeled, and sliced. Fruits with pits (such as peaches, nectarines, and cherries) should be split in half and pitted.
Thin slices of fruit dry quicker than thick slices, so it is important to slice fruit into uniform thicknesses so that it dries evenly.
Fruit with thick, waxy skins (such as blueberries and cherries) must be cracked before it is dried. Cracking the skin allows the moisture to escape. To crack the fruit, drop it in boiling water for 30–60 seconds, and then quickly move it to very cold water.
Some fruits, such as apples, pears, and apricots become discolored quickly after they are peeled and sliced. To prevent them from turning brown, mix two teaspoons of ascorbic acid in one cup of water, and dip the fruit in this solution as you work with it. One cup of this solution should be enough to treat five quarts of fruit. Ascorbic acid (more commonly known as Vitamin C) is available in most drug stores. You can also crush a 500 mg tablet of Vitamin C and mix that with a quart (one liter) of water. Soak the fruit in that solution for two to three minutes.
Once the fruit has been prepared, arrange it in a single layer on a drying tray with the cut side up (if cut in half). Finally, place the trays in a food dryer, and wait. The amount of time varies depending on the fruit, how thick the slices are, et cetera. It should take between four and ten hours to dry.
e. Vegetable slices (such as carrots) or pieces (such as peas)
Nearly all vegetables need to be blanched before they are dried. Blanching stops enzymes from destroying the vegetables. Drying by itself does not stop the enzyme action. To blanch vegetables, drop them in boiling water for a minute or two. Then cool them in ice water for the same amount of time that they were blanched. Blanching does remove some nutrients from the vegetables, so be sure to blanch them for only the minimum specified time (see table).
Arrange the vegetables on a drying tray in a single layer. Place the trays in the dryer at 140 °F (60 °C) with a minimum of one inch between trays. Drying will take between four and twelve hours. Turn the vegetable pieces every thirty minutes and rearrange them on the tray so that they are dried evenly (different areas on the trays will dry at different rates). The pieces are dry when they are hard and brittle. You can test them by striking a piece with a hammer. If it shatters, the vegetable is dry.
f. Vegetarian jerky
1/2 cup Bragg Liquid Aminos
3-4 tablespoons liquid smoke
Drain and slice the tofu into quarter-inch (5mm) thick, long, narrow slices
Mix all the ingredients, adding the tofu slice last in shallow baking dish. Cover and refrigerate overnight.
Dry at 140 °F (60 °C) 4–6 hours, turning hourly.
Spread Stripples out in a single layer in food dehydrator or oven (set on lowest temperature setting).
Turn stripples once or twice as needed for even drying, throughout drying time.
g. Parsley or some other herb
Fresh parsley, mint, oregano, basil, marjoram, and rosemary can be dried without any special equipment. Simply bundle the fresh herbs and hang them in a dry corner of the kitchen out of direct sunlight for a couple of weeks. You can also dry them by spreading them out on a dish towel.
Reconstitute a vegetable and cook for sampling.
Vegetables can be reconstituted by soaking them in water for two or three hours. They should return to their full size. Cook any way you like.
Cladogram of ferns showing outgroups and the four subclasses down to orders:
A more detailed cladogram of New York State ferns down to subgenera or single species:
Equisetales : Equisetaceae : Equisetum
Psilotales : Psilotaceae (0 whisk ferns in NY)
Ophioglossoideae—Ophioglossum pusillum (northern adder's-tongue)
Marattiales : Marattiaceae (0 marattid ferns in NY)
Trichomanoideae—Crepidomanes intricatum (Appalachian bristle fern)
Lygodiaceae—Lygodium palmatum (American climbing fern)
Marsileaceae—Marsilea quadrifolia (water clover)
Continuation of Polypodiales part of above cladogram of New York State ferns, including the six suborders employed by PPG I (2016):
Cryptogrammoideae—Cryptogramma stelleri (fragile rockbrake}
Pteridoideae—Pteris multifida (brake fern - excluded!)
Diplaziopsidaceae—Homalosorus pycnocarpos (narrow-leaved glade fern)
↑ P.F. Stevens, (2001-2015). "Ferns s.l." Angiosperm Phylogeny Website. Page last updated: 03/11/2021
↑ PPG I (2016), A community‐derived classification for extant lycophytes and ferns. Jnl of Sytematics Evolution, 54: 563-603. https://doi.org/10.1111/jse.12229
Games for Learning – Skills Acquired Through Gaming
Technology has drastically changed the way our society works and lives. Computers in particular have had the greatest impact on our currently more efficient lifestyles. In addition to containing a plethora of programs to make our lives easier, computer and video games have added an extra ingredient to this technological mix. The use of video games in education is changing the playing field for the way we live and learn. Some would argue the effectiveness of video games with the claim that they are nothing but a senseless waste of time, leaving students with a clear lack of social skills and a diminished attention span, but studies have proven otherwise. Given an appropriate game for learning, students will reap numerous rewards that prove beneficial to their everyday lives.
Consultant and game developer Marc Prensky (2007), developed an inventory of skills that are acquired by students through serious game playing. According to Prensky, students learn how to cooperate, collaborate and work in teams. This skill is gained by playing interactive games where group decision-making is involved. Two player games exemplify this practice whereby players face off against one another either in direct combat or by taking turns. Students consult with one another, take turns, and essentially engage in a whole new type of digital social practice.
In addition, students “take prudent risks in pursuit of objectives” and make “effective decisions under stress” (Prensky, 2007). Games provide students with a safe venue to learn without intimidation or judgment when taking risks and applying new skills. If mistakes are made while playing, confidence is not lost; the strategy is simply re-attempted until success is reached. For instance, if one skill does not lead to victory or accomplishment of the objective, the player can deliver another strategy using “scientific deduction, lateral and strategic thinking”(Presnky, 2007). In the classroom setting, some students may be reluctant to answer out loud in fear of making a mistake, and once the mistake is made, they may become more apprehensive to try again. Computer games eliminate the anxiety of taking risks that some students experience. This leads to the persistence, and the mastery and application of new skills. Games allow students to apply skills and strategies in context in pursuit of their objective. Whether the skills are mathematical, scientific or literacy based, their application to the game being played becomes meaningful, engaging, motivating, and most important of all, fun. Success is attained through numerous attempts and failures, and valuable lessons are learned; hence leading to “understanding and dealing with foreign environments and cultures” (Prensky, 2007).
SAGE (Simulation and Advanced Gaming Environments) for learning, is a Canadian organization which studies the potential of technology-based educational games (About SAGE.2004). They look into cognitive factors affecting human learning, such as learning psychology, play theory, and psychology of perception, and study the interplay of these factors with characteristics of popular technology-based games and simulations (About SAGE research.). In addition to adding to the body of knowledge about technological games, SAGE also develops new technology-based games and simulations, which are then used in schools, businesses and hospitals for the purposes of education and training (About SAGE.2004). Their website, http://www.sageforlearning.ca/, features many demos of newly developed games and simulations, which are available in both English and French.
These days, there are many websites which offer free educational games for students of every age. Here is a small sample of these websites:
Educational Games for Children with Developmental Disabilities
Children with developmental disabilities benefit greatly from technology-based educational games for many of the same reasons that typically developing children enjoy these games; they are motivational, entertaining, challenging, and have fun and colourful graphics. Games that are specialized for specific disabilities are intrinsically motivating, since they are designed to capture the child’s attention and provide reinforcements, such as sound effects and graphics, targeted specifically at children with autism (Calvert, 1999). In addition, many programs that are designed for children with developmental disabilities have features that allow a parent, teacher, or therapist to individualize the program to suit the needs of the specific child and to target their particular areas of improvement. This is important, since the broad spectrum of developmental disabilities causes these individuals to have varying degrees of ability.
Unfortunately, there are not many games for special needs children which are available for free, and the effective games are often very expensive. The following is a website with some free information and games for special needs children:
Children with special needs can benefit from games that are not specially designed for children with disabilities. They can play, enjoy, and learn from games that are made for typically developing children. They may need to play games targeted to a younger age group, or stick to lower levels of the game.
What makes an online game exciting, interesting, social or more fun than another game? Motivation evolves from sensory gratification, role-playing, personality, taste, adrenaline, sociology, immersive and engaging environments, and the element of fun. Games in general motivate ideas. Topics include life, survival, strategy, role-playing, and building relationships.
Video games can manipulate otherwise unalterable variables. Manipulate otherwise unalterable variables. With simulations of natural systems such as SimEarth, learners can observe the effects of changing the globes oxygen levels, or raising the global temperature.
Enable students to view phenomena from new perspectives. In the simulation Hidden Agenda, learners can assume the position of a president in a Central American country, learning about economics, history, politics, sociology, and culture in the process.
Observe systems behavior over time. For example, in simulations like SimCity or Civilization, learners can observe social systems’ behavior over years or centuries. Similarly, in a Virtual Solar System course, students created models of the Solar System where they could observe the solar system in motion, examining rotations, revolutions, and eclipses (Barnett, Barab, & Hay in review). Whereas most physical models tend to be static, computer based simulations allow you to manipulate time (Herz 1997). Simulation games, such as Railroad Tycoon, add a gaming element in order to bolster student engagement.
Pose hypothetical questions to a system. In historical simulations, such as Antietam, learners can simulate hypothetical events, such as "what if", visualize a system in three dimensions (Barab, Hay, & Duffy 1999). In the Digital Weather Station, learners use special 3-D tools to visualize weather systems in three dimensions (Hay 1999).
Compare simulations with their understanding of a system. Simulations do not represent reality; they reflect a designers conception of reality (Thiagarajan 1998). For example, SimCity is weighted heavily toward public transportation, reflect author Will Wright’s fondness for public transportation (Herz 1997). Educators can capitalize on this discrepancy and have students examine a simulation for bias or inaccuracies.
Most importantly, thus far, video game research has found no relationship between video game usage and social maladjustment.
An interesting and educational Canadian history game can be found here:
Emerging technologies hold promise for improving student achievement and teacher quality.
The use of technology within the classroom has shown in various studies to have great benefits for students in cognitive, social and emotional levels and aspects.
Technology has the ability to enhance the length of the users’ or students’ attention span.
Technology allows us to become aware of how we think and to discover how the world functions around us.
The more a student feels that their role and information is validated by the software or peers, through positive reinforcement, they will be more inclined to participate in mathematics and become more socially active within the class.
The environment should then engage them with the mathematical concepts in such a way that they be able to gradually build up their knowledge and skills as they navigate through the environment, enjoying the learning process and being motivated through the game (Sedig 2008).
The more comfortable a teacher is with their ability and knowledge to use a computer the more effective their students will learn and benefit from technology.
Computers do not currently have a strong impact on student learning because most teachers find them to be of limited utility and hard to deploy in their daily teaching, and therefore use them in small doses" (Atwell et al., 2003, p. 280).
When contrasting classrooms that use technology in an integrated fashion to the child's learning abilities and interests, versus those which seldom use computers or in a way that matches the teacher's traditional pedagogy, we see a discrepancy between the impacts on children's learning. Those students who received proper use of technology often outperform their counterparts from the traditional classroom setting.
About SAGE. (2004). Retrieved 06/09, 2008, from http://www.sageforlearning.ca/
About SAGE research. Retrieved 06/09, 2008, from http://www.sageforlearning.ca/ \
Attewell, P. Belkis. S. G., & Battle, J. (2003) Computers and young children: Social benefit or social problem? Social Forces, 82(1): 277-296
Funbrain. Retrieved 06/09, 2008, from http://www.funbrain.com/
Gee, J. P. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Gimbert, B. & Cristol, D. (2004) Teaching curriculum with technology: Enhancing children's technological competence during early childhood. Early Childhood Education Journal 31(3): 207-16.
Haugland, S. W. (1999) What role should technology play in young children's learning? Young Children 54(6): 26-31.
Haugland, S. W. & Wright, J. L. (1997) Young children and technology: A world of discovery. Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
Link to learning. Retrieved 06/09, 2008, from http://www.linktolearning.com/
Marc Prensky - Home Retrieved 06/09, 2008, from http://www.marcprensky.com/
Nobelprize.org. Retrieved 06/09, 2008, from http://nobelprize.org/educational_games/
Rivera, H., Galarza, S. L., Entz, S. & Tharp, R. (2002) Technology and pedagogy in early childhood education: Guidance from cultural-historical-activity theory and developmentally appropriate instruction. Information Technology in Childhood Education Annual: 181-204
Sedig, K. (2008) From play to thoughtful learning: A design strategy to engage children with mathematical representations. Journal of Computers in Mathematics and Science Teaching, 27(1): 65-101.
If you intend to contribute to Games then please make sure to write it as a history and overview and not as a walkthrough or guide. If it is a game development section it should be written as a history and overview and should preferably in further pages of the chapter give basic usages and tutorials.
Turing, Allen, Computing Machinery and Intellegence, Mind, 1959, p433-460.
Minsky, Marvin, Why People Think Computers Can't, AI Magazine, Vol 3 No 4, Fall 1982.
Kurzweil, Ray, The Singularity is Near, Penguin Books, 2005. ISBN 0143037889
Giarratano, Joseph C., Riley, Gary D., Expert Systems: Principals and Programming, Fourth Edition, Thomson Course Technology, 2005. ISBN 0534384471
II. It is not true, in point of fact, that inequality of conditions existing between two similar branches of industry entails necessarily the ruin of that which is least favourably situated. On the turf, if one horse gains the prize, the other loses it; but when two horses are employed in useful labour, each produces a beneficial result in proportion to its powers; and if the more vigorous renders the greater service, it does not follow that the other renders no service at all. We cultivate wheat in all the departments of France, although there are between them enormous differences of fertility; and if there be any one department which does not cultivate wheat, it is because it is not profitable to engage in that species of culture in that locality. In the same way, analogy shows us that under the régime of liberty, in spite of similar differences, they produce wheat in all the countries of Europe; and if there be one which abandons the cultivation of that grain, it is because it is found more for its interest to give another direction to the employment of its land, labour, and capital. And why should the fertility of one department not paralyze the agriculturist of a neighbouring department which is less favourably situated? Because the economic phenomena have a flexibility, an elasticity, levelling powers, so to speak, which appear to have altogether escaped the notice of the protectionist school. That school accuses us of being given up to system; but it is the protectionists who are systematic in the last degree, if the spirit of system consists in bolstering up arguments which rest upon one fact instead of upon an aggregation of facts. In the example which we have given, it is the difference in the value of lands which compensates the difference in their fertility. Your field produces three times more than mine. Yes, but it has cost you ten times more, and I can still compete with you. This is the whole mystery. And observe, that superiority in some respects leads to inferiority in others. It is just because your land is more
Local Area Network designRapid Spanning Tree Protocol
Rapid Spanning Tree Protocol (RSTP), standardized as IEEE 802.1w (2001), is characterized by a greater convergence speed with respect to STP in terms of:
Port roles and states in RSTP.
Configuration BPDU format (35 bytes) in RSTP.
Version field (1 byte): it identifies RSTP as version number 2 (in STP it was 0);
BPDU Type field (1 byte): it identifies the Configuration BPDU always as type 2 (in STP it was 0), since Topology Change Notification BPDUs do no longer exist;[2]
Proposal (P) and Agreement (A) flags (1 bit each one): they specify whether the port role is being proposed by a bridge (P = 1) or has been accepted by the other bridge (A = 1);
2 flags in State field (S) (2 bits): they specify whether the port which the role is being proposed or has been accepted for is in learning (10) or forwarding (01) state;
Root Identifier and Bridge Identifier fields (8 bytes each one): RSTP includes technical specifications from IEEE 802.1t (2001) which change the format of Bridge Identifier:
STP Instance field (12 bits, default value = 0): used in Virtual LANs to enable multiple protocol instances within the same physical network: Local Area Network design/Virtual LANs#PVST;
Bridge MAC Address field (6 bytes): unchanged from IEEE 802.1D-1998;
Root Path Cost field (4 bytes): RSTP includes technical specifications from IEEE 802.1t (2001) which change the recommended values for Port Path Cost including new port speeds (up to 10 Tb/s);
Max Age and Forward Delay fields (2 bytes each one): they are altogether unused in RSTP, but they have been kept for compatibility reasons.
RSTP is characterized by a greater topology convergence speed with respect to the classical STP: in fact it switches from 50 seconds to less than 1 second (order of about 10 ms) if, as was the norm by then when RSTP was standardized, there are just full-duplex point-to-point links (therefore without hubs).
When a link fault occurs, its detection by RSTP is faster than the classical STP thanks to a more efficient BPDU handling.
Non-root bridges do not just propagate BPDUs generated by the root bridge: each bridge generates every Hello Time (default: 2 s) a BPDU, with the current root bridge as Root Identifier, even if it has not received the BPDU from the root bridge. If BPDUs have not been received for 3 Hello Time periods, the current BPDU is declared obsolete and a fault is assumed to be occurred on the link which the root port is connected to.
Once a bridge detected a link fault, it starts generating its own BPDUs → every neighbor bridge, as soon as it receives on its root port a BPDU from the bridge which is claiming to be the root bridge, instead of discarding it because it is worse than the current one, accepts the new BPDU forgetting the one previously stored, because it means that something bad happened on its path toward the root bridge. At this point:
Once a fault is detected, some ports can directly turn to the forwarding state without transitioning across the learning state.
In case the root port faults, the alternate port provides an alternative path between the bridge and the root bridge:
The alternate port represents a fast replacement for the root port.
In case a designed port faults, the backup port provides an alternative path between the bridge and the link:
The backup port represents a fast replacement for the designated port.
The proposal/agreement sequence is an algorithm for fast synchronization on the port role between two bridges.
When a new link is inserted between two bridges:
Cooperation between the two bridges through BPDU sending is faster with respect to the timer-based mechanism in the classical STP, and more efficient since it does not stop the whole network for a while but from time to time just a bridge neighborhood. The new link must be full-duplex so that BPDUs can be exchanged in both ways: the proposal BPDU along one direction and the acceptance BPDU along the other one.
RSTP is aimed to be less invasive with respect to the classical STP as regards filtering database updates following topology changes: in fact it avoids cleaning filtering databases from old entries, resulting in a considerably increased traffic sent in flooding, when it is not needed.
When a host connects to an edge port, the port immediately becomes designated and turns to the forwarding state without transitioning across the learning state → 30 seconds (2 times the Forward Delay) should not be waited anymore before having the port fully operational.
In addition, edge ports never trigger filtering database updates neither on moving to the forwarding state (host connection) or on moving to the discarding state (host disconnection) → the user does not experience anymore a network slowdown due to the increased traffic sent in flooding, and the first broadcast frame which the host will send will update filtering databases according to the usual learning algorithms of bridges.
An edge port still keeps listening to BPDUs coming from possible bridges wrongly connected to it, so as to be ready to immediately exit the edge role and take one of the other roles in order to protect the network against possible loops.
If a bridge not supporting RSTP is introduced into the network, on receiving Configuration BPDUs with Type equal to 0 they are able to automatically switch to STP mode, but this has some side effects:
A bridge can be configured so as to work in RSTP mode on some ports, and in STP mode on other ports → the network is split in two portions working with different spanning tree protocol versions. However this may lead to network instability because of transient loops due to the fact that the RSTP portion enables the forwarding of data frames earlier than the STP portion.
For a seamless coexistence of RSTP and non-RSTP bridges within the same network, Multiple Spanning Tree Protocol, standardized as IEEE 802.1s (2002), should be used: the network portions working with RSTP and the ones working with STP are separated in different domains.
RSTP works perfectly when links at the physical layer are reliable. If instead a link goes up and down frequently because of a dirty connector (optical fibers are quite sensitive), RSTP re-configures the network at every change of status of the link → the network will stay in a transient instable state most of the time, because of the too fast RSTP reactivity.
The 'antiflapping' Cisco's proprietary mechanism puts the port into 'error disabled' state when it detects a link flapping.
↑ A designated port is in discarding state during the proposal/agreement sequence.
↑ From now on Configuration BPDUs will be referred simply as BPDUs.
↑ a b The bridge keeps generating/propagating BPDUs until the TC While timer expires after a time equal to twice the Hello Time.
Local Area Network designRapid Spanning Tree Protocol
The Least Cost Theory states that a firm will locate in an area where the labour and raw materials are cheapest. However, it makes many assumptions. In particular:
Firms have no perfect knowledge about costs.
Firms are affected by personal preferences, especially small, new and family-run firms. For example, a family-run firm is more likely to operate in the family's hometown, even if it is not the most profitable there.
A maximiser has perfect knowledge about costs, and will located in the least-cost area. A satisficer, by contrast, is satisfied with the profits made even if it is below the maximum.
Agglomeration economies are the economic benefits brought by agglomeration:
It encourages more investment in that area.
Firms can purchase similar inputs in bulk, and have a closer relationship with suppliers and buyers.
Information can be exchanged between firms.
They can share sources of innovation.
All of the above can cut production costs and increase productivity.
However, there are also disadvantages:
Sometimes, even though the original locational advantage of locating a plant in an area is gone, the plant still decides to stay in that area.
Moving incurs high costs, especially for fixed capital like machines
The personal preference of the owner is also significant, especially for small-scale firms employing single-point production. Sometimes, government policy also discourages moving away as this will lead to unemployment.
A footloose industry is one that can be located in most places because locational factors are not very important.
v • d • e HKDSE Geography : Core Module 3 - Changing Industrial Location: How and Why Does It Change Over Space and Time?Industrial Location
Manufacturing System · Classification of Manufacturing · Site Factors · Situation Factors · Industrial Agglomeration, Industrial Inertia and Footloose IndustriesHong Kong's Manufacturing Industry
Historical Development · Factors Behind Industrial Relocation · Responses to Industrial RelocationChina's Iron and Steel Industry
Before 1950s · 1950s-70s · 1980s-2000s · Recent DevelopmentsThe US IT Industry
R&D Stage · Production Stage · Recent DevelopmentsIndustrial Relocation
Behaviourism. Graham, G. (2002) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Watson, J.B. (1907) Studying the Mind of Animals The World Today, 12, 421-426.
Watson, J.B. (1913) Psychology as the Behaviorist Views it. Psychological Review, 20, 158-177
Lektorsky, V.A. (1980)Subject Object Cognition.
Vygotsky L.S. (1925) “Consciousness as a problem in the psychology of behavior” Undiscovered Vygotsky: Etudes on the pre-history of cultural-historical psychology (European Studies in the History of Science and Ideas. Vol. 8), pp. 251-281
Gibson, J. J. (1950). The perception of the visual world. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin
Gibson, J. J.(1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin
Ryle, G. (1949). The concept of mind. Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin.
Writing Optimal Exporters and Importers for Blender:Python
If you are starting out in writing a script, don't take these guidelines too seriously, its worth getting things working and then sight a need for optimization before you begin to look for areas to optimize your script.
If you're making a tool for others, keep in mind that they might use it with larger datasets than those you have been testing with. So before releasing it can be good time to try to optimize.
For more generic python performance tips see http://wiki.python.org/moin/PythonSpeed/PerformanceTips
Blender.Object.Get() is often used to get all objects for exporting. This is bad practice since Object.Get() will return objects from every scene in Blender, this is almost never what the user wants and could result in overlapping data, but also could take a long time if the user has 2 or more large scenes consuming a lot of memory.
Instead use Blender.Scene.GetCurrent().getChildren() This returns all objects from the current scene.
Another alternative is to use Blender.Object.GetSelected() which returns selected objects on visible layers in the current scene.
Meshes are not just thin wrappers like most of the other Types in
Blender so you want to avoid meshObject.getData() and meshObject.data as much as possible, its best practice only calling each mesh data once.
To get the name of the data the object references do not use ob.getData().name
Note, recently (as of 15/10/05) the addition of the Mesh module (a thin wrapper around Blenders mesh data) means that you can do a meshObject.getData(mesh=1) without the problem NMesh has, however this is new and doesn't support all the NMesh functions.
As of Blender 2.37 nmesh.transform(ob.matrix) can be used to transform an NMesh by a 4x4 transformation matrix.
On my system it is over 100 times faster than transforming each vert's location and normal by a matrix within python. Though the overall speed gained by using this in my obj exporter was about %5.
This avoids un-needed vertex normal transforming.
Beware of python hogging memory. (python generally)
You may ignore this point, for small applications, but I have found that for larger scenes this can become a problem if not allowed for early on.
Basically making large lists in python and a lot of recursive variable
*If you can- avoid making large lists.
In Python there are some tricky list functions that save you having to search through the list.
Even though you're not looping on the list data python is, so you need to be aware of functions that will slow down your script by searching the whole list.
The above functions performs a full loop on the list, so if you can avoid using them on large lists, your script will run faster.
In python we can add and remove from a list, This is slower when lists are modified in length at the start of the list, since all the data after the index of modification needs to be moved up or down 1 place.
Of course the most simple way to add onto the end of the list is to use myList.append(listItem) or myList.extend(someList) and the fastest way to remove an item is myList.pop()
Sometimes its faster (but more memory hungry) to just rebuild the list.
It is faster to build a new list with list comprehension.
If you have a list that you want to add onto another list, rather then appending in a for loop, use
This example shows a very suboptimal way of making a reversed list.
Use myList.pop(i) rather then myList.remove(listItem)
This requires you to have the index of the list Item but is faster since remove needs to search the list.
Using pop for removing list items favors a while loops instead of a for loop.
A fast way of removing items, where you can mess up the list order, is to swap 2 list items, so the item you remove is always last.
When removing many items in a large list this can provide a good speedup.
When passing a list/dictionary to a function, it is better to have the function modify the list rather then returning a new list.
This means python dosn't need to create a new list in memory.
Functions that modify a list in their place are more efficient then functions that create new lists.
Also be note that passing a sliced list makes a copy of the list in python memory eg..
If mylist was a large list of floats, a copy could use a lot of extra memory.
When you access a dictionary item, someDict['foo'] A lookup is performed, pythons lookups are very fast, but if your are accessing this data in a loop its better to make a variable that can be referenced faster.
Blender pathnames are not compatible with path names from other generic python modules.
A common example is where your exporting a scene and want to export the image paths with it.
Blender.sys.expandpath(img.filename)
Will give you the absolute path, so you can pass the path to functions from other python modules.
Since many file formats are ASCII, the way you parse/export strings can make a large difference in how fast your program runs.
When importing strings to make into blender there are a few ways to parse the string.
Use float(string) rather then eval(string) and if you know the value will be an int then int(string)
If your checking the start of a string for a keyword, use...
Using Startswith is slightly faster (about 5%).
Also, if your unsure whether the text is upper or lower case use lower or upper string function.
Eg.
Writing Strings to a File (Python General)
Here are 3 ways of joining multiple strings into 1 string for writing
This really applies to any area of your code that involves a lot of string joining.
Pythons string addition.
Dont use if you can help it, especially in the main data writing loop.
String formatting. Use this when you're writing string data from floats and int's
Pythons string joining function. To join a list of strings
Simply timing sections of your code will point you to the part that needs optimizing.
A python module called psyco exists that can dynamically compile some of python functions.
Most of the speed gains affect algorithms written in python, so importers and exporters have less to gain from them then scripts that deal with 3d math.
For many scripts, a no brainier way of using psyco is to do a.
Psyco can also profile your code.
For scripts to be distributed it is polite to try loading psyco to avoid raising an error.
Note that psyco reports to use a lot of system memory, if you run out of ram it may be best not to use psyco.
The try function is useful to save time writing code to check a condition,
However 'try' is about 10 times slower then 'if', so dont use 'try' in areas of your code that execute in a loop that runs many times (1000's or more).
There are cases where using 'try' is faster than checking wether the condition will raise an error, so it is worth experimenting.
"==" Checks whether the 2 variables are the same value, where as "is" tests that the python object is the same, shares the same memory - are both an instance of the same object. (Python Object, not Blender a Object)
The advantage of using "is" is that its faster since it dosent need to compare as much data.
Here is a benchmark test that compares a python class and a blender vector- one the same and one different.
My Computer showed the following results. I should do more tests- but this is representative of other tests.
Starting benchmark.
The same test with vec1, vec2, class1, class2 as ints and floats.
Starting benchmark.
Radiation Therapy for Benign Disease Official Guidelines
2014 PMID 25238992 -- "DEGRO guidelines for the radiotherapy of non-malignant disorders : Part II: Painful degenerative skeletal disorders."
2002 PMID 11872298 -- "Consensus guidelines for radiation therapy of benign diseases: a multicenter approach in Germany."
✔ Appearance ✔ Standard ✔ Console
This function returns the computer name or the user name according to the nameType parameter. nameType is one of the following constants: _FBComputerName, _FBLongUserName or _FBShortUserName.
To make this routine available to your program, you must include the header file "Util_ComputerNames.Incl".
Include "Util_ComputerNames.Incl"
Print "Long User Name: """;¬
Print "Short User Name: """;¬
Before learning about what different storage devices are available, we need to have an understanding of the types of storage in a computer. The two types of storage are called primary and secondary storage. In devices that provide primary storage capability, the information is only stored temporarily and is easily accessible for processing. These are known as RAM chips (standing for “Random Access Memory”) and are connected to the motherboard as well as video cards. The devices that provide secondary storage capabilities are able to store information permanently, although the information that is stored is not as easily accessible as in primary storage but can still be accessed. Secondary storage devices would include hard drives, CDs, flash drives and the less common floppy disks. To distinguish the important difference between primary and secondary storage, think of being inside the kitchen of your own home. You are preparing a meal out of the family cookbook which you have laid out on top of your kitchen island along with your ingredients and tools sitting within reach. Your kitchen island is your primary storage because it keeps the items that you need to process within easy reach (you can think of yourself as the CPU) but those items do not remain there permanently. Your refrigerator, pantry and kitchen cabinets can be thought of as your secondary storage since items can be kept in these areas permanently, but would take more of your time when trying to cook a meal since you would have to search through them to find what you need.
Here is an example of flash drives, which enable portable permanent storage
A soft magnetic disk. It is called floppy because it flops if you wave it (at least, the 5¼-inch variety does). Unlike most hard disks, floppy disks (often called floppies or diskettes) are portable, because you can remove them from a disk drive. Disk drives for floppy disks are called floppy drives. Floppy disks are slower to access than hard disks and have less storage capacity, but they are much less expensive. And most importantly, they are portable.
8-inch: The first floppy disk design, invented by IBM in the late 1960s and used in the early 1970s as first a read-only format and then as a read-write format. The typical desktop/laptop computer does not use the 8-inch floppy disk.
5¼-inch: The common size for PCs made before 1987 and the predecessor to the 8-inch floppy disk. This type of floppy is generally capable of storing between 100K and 1.2MB (megabytes) of data. The most common sizes are 360K and 1.2MB.
3½-inch: Floppy is something of a misnomer for these disks, as they are encased in a rigid envelope. Despite their small size, microfloppies have a larger storage capacity than their cousins -- from 400K to 1.4MB of data. The most common sizes for PCs are 720K (double-density) and 1.44MB (high-density). Macintoshes support disks of 400K, 800K, and 1.2MB.
Floppy disk at the time was the only option of removable storage. One major problem with the disk was it was flimsy and easily destroyed. If you touched the exposed area your data could be completely destroyed. You had to use extreme caution when handling it.
The floppy disk evolved to a slightly more durable storage medium. The problem with it was if the metal piece was moved it exposed the data to elements that would destroy the data saved.
The Zip drive is a medium-capacity removable disk storage system, introduced by Iomega in late 1994. Originally it had a capacity of 100 MB, but later versions increased this to first 250 MB and then 750 MB.
The format became the most popular of the super-floppy type products but never reached the status of a quasi-standard to replace the 3.5-inch floppy disk. It has been superseded by flash-drive systems as well as rewritable CDs and DVDs, and is fading in popularity. The Zip brand was also used for internal and external CD writers known as Zip-650 or Zip-CD.
A hard disk drive (HDD, also known as hard disk, hard drive, or the now-near-obsolete terms fixed disk, fixed drive, fixed disk drive, hard file) is a digitally encoded non-volatile storage device which stores data on the magnetic surfaces of hard disk platters.
Hard disks were originally developed for use in connection with, or later inside, a single computer. Later, as a way of guarding against hard disk failure, they were arranged into configurations such as redundant array of independent disks (RAID). RAID is a method of storing data on two or more hard drives that work together. One common RAID technique which RAID1 uses is disk mirroring. Disk mirroring is when data is written to two duplicate hard drives at the same time. This way if one hard drive files, the date automatically moves to the other hard drive where you can access it. This technique greatly reduces the chance of loss of data and/or service.
Hard disks are also found in network attached storage (NAS) devices, but for large volumes of data may be most efficiently used in a storage area network (SAN). Over time, applications for hard disk drives have expanded beyond computers to include video recorders, audio players, digital organizers, and digital cameras. In 2005 the first cellular telephones to include hard disk drives were introduced by Samsung and Nokia.
The capacity of hard drives has grown exponentially over time. With early personal computers, a drive with a 20 megabyte capacity was considered large. In the latter half of the 1990s, hard drives with capacities of 1 gigabyte and greater became available. As of 2006, the "smallest" desktop hard disk still in production has a capacity of 40 gigabytes, while the largest-capacity internal drives are a 3/4 terabyte (750 gigabytes), with external drives at or exceeding one terabyte by using multiple internal disks. These new internal drives increased their storage capacities with Perpendicular recording.
The most traditional hard drives are magnetic hard drives, which contains one or more round pieces of metal coated with a magnetisable substance. These hard drives have heads which are used to store and retrieve the data, which directly attached to the access mechanism that helps the heads to move in and out over the surface of hard disk. Different types of hard drives are used for different type of computers. For example desktop computers use 2.5 inch or 3.5 inch hard drives, whereas mobile phones, portable digital media players and other small devices use 1.5 inch or smaller hard drives. But, no matter what the size of the hard drive is, each and every hard drive contains a stack of hard disk.
In recent years the development of network attached hard drives has also increased dramatically, this is commonly referred to as Network Attached Storage (NAS), it's most useful form is the storage area network (SAN) where a single computer hosts many disks and shares access to those disks (presents) them over the network, where they appear as if they were local to the client computer.
A good example of this is given at Building A Low Cost SAN.
Solid state drives are a newer type of hard drive that contain no moving parts allowing data to be stored on flash memory technology. Solid state drives or SSDs come in smaller sizes, 64-256GB, compared to traditional hard drives. SSDs are becoming more popular as they perform several times faster than a traditional SSD and have become more popular in ultra light netbooks and notebooks. The prices for SSDs are also coming down as the flash technology becomes more advanced and keeps current with SATA 6Gbit/s speeds. HDD and SSD
External(portable) hard drives are usually powered by USB. The current capacity limit for a single magnetic hard drive(typical hard drive with moving parts inside) is 500 gigabytes, but a single external hard drive can utilize several internal disks and exceed one terabtye(1,024 gigabytes) of storage. The current capacity limit for SSD(solid state drive) hard drives is 128 gigabytes. External drives are useful for backing up data and keeping it safe.
Hybrid hard drives are composed of a standard magnetic hard drive and a solid state drive (see Flash Memory below). This configuration allows for increased performance, aka speed, of the drive while not sacrificing size. The use of a flash drive can significantly decrease the amount of time it takes for the computer to boot and load applications. These devices are more expensive than standard hard drives, but may be suitable for power users.
USB flash drives sometimes called USB flash memory drives, thumb drives, or jump drives consist of flash memory media integrated into a self contained unit that connects to a computer or other device via a standard USB port and is powered via USB port. USB flash drives are designed to be very small and portable. In order to appeal to a wide variety of users, USB flash drives are available in a range of sizes, colors and appearances – including those designed to be attached to backpacks or worn around the neck, those built into necklaces, wristbands or wristwatches, those thin enough to fit easily into a wallet and those are made into custom shapes. When the USB flash drive is built into a consumer product such as watch, sunglasses or a Swiss Army knife, a retractable cord is used to connect the device to a computer when needed. They are used so widely, additional hardware related to USB flash drives are becoming available such as USB duplicator systems used by educators to copy assignments or other materials to and from a large collection of USB flash drives at one time. To Read or write, you just need to plug it into a USB port. If the USB flash drive is being used with a computer, then it is assigned a drive letter by the computer just like any other type of attached drive and files can be read from or written to the USB flash drive until it is unplugged from the USB port. The capacity of most USB flash drive today ranges from 1 GB to 64 GB. It is most useful to all students, employees to transport files from one computer to another as well as quickly backup important files.
USB keys are the new mobile storage unit. It is a flash memory stick with a casing that slides nicely into a computer's USB port for data transfer. USB keys can vary in size, smallest being the 32 MB and the max is currently 4 GB. It can carry any type of data such as your music files, word applications, and even powerpoint presentations, with little problems. USB keys are safer than their predecessors, the floppy drive and zip drive, in fact some USB keys have survived trips through washing machines! The USB keys are compatible to work with windows 98 or higher. They are also Mac and Linux compliant.
Tape drives research began in 1949 by IBM. The whole process was to find a suitable replacement for punch cards. The necessities being the replacement should be compact, faster, cheaper and reusable. The big difference between a tape drive and a audio cassette tape is in the machinery. The drives themselves are much quicker and more accurate than a home cassette player. The tapes store data in a continuous string of bits, also known as, sequential data, and the need to find a particular part of the information that is being searched for requires a mechanically efficient and accurate machine. They are able to fast-forward and rewind to a particular spot on the tape with high speed and accuracy. This is the image of the large reel-to-reel machines seen in old television and movies, and are still used today for their cost effectiveness for backups. Backups are the recording of data from a computer hard drive to another secondary storage device. Although compact discs are gaining in popularity, tape drives are still widely available. The improvement in tape drives has been dramatic since their inception. The original tape drive, IBM 701 Tape Drive, could store 100 bpi (bits per inch), run at a speed of 70 ips (inches per second) and could be as long as 1400 feet. Since then tapes have evolved to run 200, 556, 800, 1600, and even 6250 bpi. They run at greater speeds than original, and have lengths up to 3600 feet. Tape drives were at their prime up until the 1990's. Then the flexibility, speed, and storage abilities of hard drives overtook tape drives. As mentioned earlier, tape drives are still available, but are now relegated to inexpensive backups of vast amounts of data.
A smart card is a pocket-sized card with an embedded chip inside of it. There are many uses for these cards from printing applications, Identification, storing memory, credit card and banking. Smart Cards are also being used in SIMS for mobile phones, authorization cards for pay television, high-security identification and access-control cards, and public transport payment cards.
Recently smart cards are starting to be used as electronic wallets. The smart card chip can be loaded with funds which can be spent in parking meters and vending machines or at various merchants. SMart cards are highly effective with all the applications listed above as they are low in cost yet highly effective solution to handle data.
Smart cards store a small amount of data or for identification purposes. The increase in technology have greatly increase the capabilities for the smart cards. They can be used to enhance security at places like an office building. Smart cards are also used worldwide for student id cards. In some smart cards, there is even biometrics data in the card for an even higher level of security. Biometric data is used to ensure authenticity of the card’s user before the smart card releases any data to the user.
In order to use a smart card, you must insert the smart card into the card reader or place it near a card reader. Once the smart card have been verified, the user will be able to complete any transaction they want to make.
Flash memory refers to a memory chip that holds its content without power and that can be electronically erased and reprogrammed without being removed from the circuit board, often used in fax machines. It is called Flash memory because the microchip is organized so that a section of memory cells are erased in a single action or "flash." Flash memory is used in digital cellular phones, digital cameras, LAN switches, PC Cards for notebook computers, digital set-up boxes, embedded controllers, and other devices.
There are three forms of flash memory: 1)flash memory card, 2)flash memory sticks and 3)flash memory drives. first of all, flash memory cards are also known as flash ram. It can be inserted in the memory port of the digital cameras, handheld Pc, or other mobile devices. Moreover, this flash cards are removable storage and it doesn't have processor.
The second kind of flash memory is the flash memory stick that is small and holds more than one gigabyte of data. this is inserted into a memory stick port in different devices as digital cameras, camcorders, notebooks, PC among others.
The last form is flash memory drive which is also called USB drive flash card. This is typically small, lightweight, removable and rewritable. It also holds more data, and may be more reliable. The capacity of storage is up to 2 gigabytes, so people do not have to carry their laptops, this flash card can be inserted into computer's USB port or USB hub
Do you know that there is another way to storage information besides zip drive, memory stick, and floppy disk?. This is online secondary storage. People also can back up info using this service on internet. This way is utilized by companies to save their information as a backup. In the past, companies have lost lot of information when they experienced flood and fire. Some services are free, but another you have to pay. Some online storage companies offer internet backup as a service online. These companies are Driveway, Magical Desk and Backup among others. Online storage means that companies can storage confidential information in a safety way on internet and they will have a copy if they lost the original information. Also, this info can be shared with employees that are in different parts of the world and can be updated in anywhere. Some companies have decided to store information due to the fact that they are lost very important information due to virus, hardware theft, or when the software is not working properly. This storage is reliable, how does internet backup work? First, people have to buy a software and install it in its hard drive
Functionality - Online Backup, Remote Offsite Data Back-up via Internet: PerfectBackup UK -
Holographic Storage is just what you can imagine it to be. A type of 3D storage system that records images/data on a holographic disk or cartridge. Why would you use this besides it sounding awesome? It's insanely fast and holds a lot of space. This is possible because this type of storage uses light to send data. One single flash of light holds over one million bits of data. This is what makes it fast and can hold a substantial amount. A hologram is also stored through the thickness of the medium. For example, a disk has a spiral track that holds its data. A hologram on the other had is layered over it almost like a stack of sliced cheese, except much more miniscule.
So how is this done? A holographic drive splits the light it is receiving into two beams. The angle of the reference beam determines where the data will be stored. The other beam called the signal beam goes through a device (spatial light modulator) and translates the data in the light into a 3D model.
The image describes this process. Hologram maken (1)
Laser beam used to write or read data
This is the reference beams path.
This is where the signal beam passes through the spacial light modulator and translates the data
This is where the data is read and it is projected onto a detector to be reconstructed
Cloud storage is a remote storage device accessed through the internet. This storage can be accessed on demand therefore bringing convenience to you. There are some applications out there like Google Docs and Flickr where you can store things and access. Typically users of site like these would create an password protected account and choose files to be private or shared with specific individuals. This type of storage is increasing in users because of the availability of their files. They can log on to any computer or mobile device to access their files and this ensures that no matter where you are you have your important files with you. Online storage is also convenient because you can back up your files regularly therefore protecting your files even if your computer crashes. Most of these sites offer this type of storage for free.
There are also different types of cloud deployment. There is a public cloud in which a provider make the storage accessible to the public either for free or at a fee. Private clouds are used by single organization and are only accessible to users granted access in that organization. Private clouds are either operated internaly or externally depending on the organization's needs and capabilities. Community clouds are used by users over a number of organizations that have common concerns such as security, compliance etc. Hybrid models are made up of 2 or 3 of the different types of clouds but still remaining unique in their own opperations but offering communication between the different types without losing their original integrity.
When writing certain TI-Basic programs, it can be useful to get individual key presses for advanced menu handling or games. This can be achieved via the getKey (PRGM I/O 7). getKey returns the numerical value of a key press at the instance of the instruction execution.
The value that is stored into variable is a special number that represents the key that was pressed. The following diagram shows the value that corresponds to the key:
Each key has a two or three digit number assigned to it. The first digit, or two digits if the number is three digits, is the key's row number (how far down on the calculator the key appears) and the last digit is the key's column number (how far across on the row the key appears). Thus the SIN key is in the 5th row and the 2nd column, so its code is 52. The only slight exception to this is the arrows keys. ←, ↑, and → are all considered part of the second row and are numbered as such.
ON doesn't have an accessible numerical value (theoretically it should be 101; however, it acts as the program break button).
Because getKey only returns the key press during the instruction of the command, it will often return 0 since no keys were pressed while command was being executed. However, the getKey command can be run on a loop, allowing for user input to be registered at any time.
To do so, use this simple code:
This program will wait until the user presses a key on the keypad, then will break out of the loop and continue execution. Since getKey returns 0 if no keys are pressed, the code repeats since Repeat will loop if the condition is 0 or false.
Note that the variable K is the de facto variable to store getKey to.
It is possible to shave off 4 bytes by using Ans:
If getKey is called, but not stored to a variable, the value will be stored into Ans.
You try it!
Try these examples to practice using getKey.
Using getKey, draw a player (use a single character like *) on the screen and allow the user to push the arrow keys to move the player in X and Y directions. Make sure the player won't go off the screen.
Previous: Criteria InstructionsNext: MenusTable of Contents: TI-Basic Z80 Programming
Although ISPs may actively throttle bandwidth, there are several known methods to bypass the throttling of a user's bandwidth, if the throttling is focused on a particular protocol.
VPN – Generally costs a monthly fee to rent, but offers users a secure connection where data cannot be intercepted.
Force Encryption – Free method that works for some users.
Seedbox – A dedicated private server, usually hosted offshore, that offers high speed upstream and downstream rates and often storage for a relatively high monthly cost.
Some ISP's sometimes they tempt with type offers "Facebook/Netflix/Wikipedia/Other popular services zero", which means don't charge a data transfer limit. It's similar to modem. For example does exists project facebook-tunnel usage tuncap or transports by the same author using HTTP.
This is an analysis on the article "Exercise treatment for depression: Efficacy and dose response" by Andrea L.Dunn PhD, Madhukar H. Trivedi MD James B. Kampert PhD Camillia G.Clark PhD Heather O. Chambliss PhD.
Depression is a medical condition that significantly affects how an individual feels often causing a persistent lowering of mood. This can place great burden on how they function in everyday life.[1]
Exercise is commonly used in the prevention and treatment of a number of chronic diseases such as: Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis, diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease and many more.[2] The study was conducted to test if exercise could be used as a treatment for someone with mild to moderate major depressive disorder and furthermore, the dose-response relationship of exercise and its reduction of depressive symptoms.
With approximately only 23% of people seeking treatment due to the negative social stigma associated with this disease, it is thought by Andrea L. Dunn that perhaps if exercise was considered a viable treatment for mild to moderate major depressive disorder more people would seek treatment.
Lead researcher Andrea L. Dunn specialises in exercise science, health psychology, behavioural science and appears in numerous articles studying the effects of exercise on depression.
Cooper Institute, Behavioural Science Research Centre, Golden, Colorado: Andrea L. Dunn PhD
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Centre, Depression and Anxiety Disorders Program, Dallas, Texas, USA: Madhukar H. Trivedi MD
Cooper Institute, Centres for Integrated Health Research, Dallas, Texas: James B. Kampert PhD, Heather O. Chambliss PhD
Alberta Children’s Hospital, Psychology Section, Calgary, Alberta, Canada: Camilla G. Clark PhD
The research was a randomised 2x2 factorial design plus placebo. This design allows researchers to test two interventions (energy expenditure and exercise frequency) and two levels of the intervention (low dosage, public health dose and 3, 5 days per week) in one study. The results can be measured against the placebo group to determine its effectiveness. Placebo group does not receive any of the interventions.[3]
What did the research involve?
The research tests two interventions and two levels for each intervention on the reduction of depressive symptoms.
The first intervention was exercise energy expenditure and the two levels were low dose (LD) which is expending 7kcal/kg/week and public health dose (PHD) which is expending 17.5 kcal/kg/week.
The second intervention was exercise frequency and the two levels were 3 days per week and 5 days per week.
80 participants aged 20-45 diagnosed with mild to moderate major depressive disorder were randomly assigned to 5 possible groups: LD/3, LD/5, PHD/3, PHD/5 and placebo. The placebo group conducted 15-20 minutes of stretching 3 days per week. The placebo group is measured against the exercise groups to determine if there is a significant difference between exercise and basically no exercise in reducing depressive symptoms.
The 17- item Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HRSD17) was used to categorise the participants into mild or moderate severity and assess if the mean change in HRSD17 from baseline was greater in the exercise group compared to the placebo group. This is quite an old assessment measure and use to be the gold standard in assessment of depression but current research suggests that some aspects may be flawed and not as accurate as other tests.[4] Perhaps a more reliable test could be used like the Patient Health Questionaire-9 (PHQ-9).[5]
Participants took part in aerobic exercise on a treadmill or stationary bicycle under supervision in a lab to meet their required energy expenditure. There is no measurement of their energy expenditure outside the lab, this unknown information could be an implication for the test.
What were the basic results?
Over the 12 weeks there was a linear decline in HRSD17 scores for all groups, some more significant than others. The major finding was the significant response and remission rates from the public health dose groups. Response is defined as a 50% reduction in symptoms calculated from each individual’s baseline score. Remission is defined as a HRSD17 score of <7. The greatest response rate came from PHD/5 (44%) and the greatest remission rate came from the PHD/3 (41%) and an overall mean HRSD17 reduction of 47% from baseline.
While there was some sort of benefit from the low dose groups, its effect was not much greater than the placebo group in fact, LD/5 had a lower response and remission rate compared to the placebo.
Another finding was that there may not be a difference in frequency of exercise and the reduction of HRSD17 with only a 0.1 difference in declines of HRSD17 score between training 3 and 5 days a week (9.8 and 9.9). This suggests that response and remission of symptoms are based on total energy expenditure not frequency of training.
What conclusions can we take from this research?
Prescribing an energy expenditure dosage within the public health recommendations can be an effective intervention for treating mild to moderate major depressive disorder. Public health dosage has shown to have the best response and remission rates in this study whereas low dose exercise has little to no effect. There is research supporting the idea of exercise decreasing depressive symptoms; it suggests moderate intensity exercise for 150 minutes per week.[6][7]
Exercising within the public health guidelines, >30 minutes of moderate intensity at least 3 times a week can help reduce depression symptoms, in some cases it could be somewhat as effective as anti-depressants. Moderate intensity exercise is any activity that raises heart rate to 50-70% of its max, this can be exercises such as brisk walking, light jogging, bike riding and social games of cricket, tennis etc.
R E Sallis, (2009) Exercise is medicine and physicians need to prescribe it!. BMJ. 43(1).
J Lepine, (2011) The increasing burden of depression. Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment. 7(1) 3-7
D A Lawlor, (2001) The effectiveness of exercise as an intervention in the management of depression: systematic review and meta-regression analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 322(763).
↑ B. K. Pedersen (2015), Exercise as medicine – evidence for prescribing exercise as therapy in 26 different chronic diseases. Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports. 25(3):1-72
↑ Alan A Montgomery, (2003) Design, analysis and presentation of factorial randomised controlled trials. BMC Medical Research Methodology. 26(3)
↑ R. Michael Bagby, (2004) The Hamilton Depression Rating Scale: Has the Gold Standard Become a Lead Weight?. American Journal of Psychiatry. Volume unknown
↑ J A. Blumenthal, (1999) Effects of Exercise Training on Older Patients With Major Depression. JAMA. 159(19):2349-2356
↑ G M Cooney, (2013) Exercise for Depression. Cochrane Library. Volume unknown
Candidates should be able to control file access through the proper use of permissions and ownerships.
Manage access permissions on regular and special files as well as directories.
Use access modes such as suid, sgid and the sticky bit to maintain security.
Know how to change the file creation mask.
Use the group field to grant file access to group members.
Access to directories and files on Linux is controlled by a simple file permissions systems. Every file/directory has permissions for the file owner, the group to which the file belongs and other, that is users who are not the owner and do not belong to the group to which the file belongs. The permissions are known as the access mode of file/directory and can be viewed by running the ls -l command.
File access modes are displayed symbolically as group of 3 letters or numerically as a set of 3 octal digits, but represent a 9 bit number, with each bit representing an access right.
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4.7K 2009-10-06 22:45 hdparm.conf
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 92 2009-04-27 11:56 host.conf
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 4 2010-02-13 01:03 hostname
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 292 2010-06-24 11:57 hosts
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 579 2009-10-27 20:12 hosts.allow
The extract above is from running the ls -l command on the
/etc directory. When a file is created it is owned by the user who created the file and assigned to the default group of the owner.
Permissions can be read=r, write=w and execute=x. The octal values of these permissions are listed in the next table.
Octal and symbolic permissions.
Permissions apply to the user, the group and to others. An item has a set of 3 grouped permissions for each of these categories.
How to read a 755 or -rwxr-xr-x permission
UNIX system create files and directories with standard permissions as follows:
Every user has a defined umask that alters the standard permissions. The umask applies only at the point at which the file is created. The umask has an octal value and is subtracted(*) from the octal standard permissions to give the file's permission (this permission doesn't have a name and could be called the file's effective permission).
(*) While subtraction works in most cases, it should be noted that technically the standard permissions and the umask are combined as follows:
On systems where users belong to separate groups, the umask can have a value of 002.
For systems which place all users in the users group, the umask is likely to be 022 so that files do not have group write access by default.
From the previous figure we see that permissions can be acted upon with chmod. There are 3 categories of ownership for each file and directory:
Changing user and group with chown and chgrp :
A useful option for chmod, chown and chgrp is –R which recursively changes ownership and permissions through all files and directories indicated.
An executable can be assigned a special permission which will always make it run as the owner of this file. This permission is called SUID meaning 'set user ID'. It has a symbolic value s or a numerical value 4000.
Administrative tools may have the SUID bit set in order to allow non-root users to change system files.
For example the passwd command can be run by any user and will interactively change his or her current password. This password will be saved to /etc/shadow. However this file belongs to user root with typical permissions of 600.
This problem has been solved by setting the SUID bit on passwd hence forcing it to run as user root with the correct permissions to modify /etc/shadow.
-r-s--x--x 1 root root 18992 Jun 6 2003 /usr/bin/passwd
The SUID bit is shown in symbolic form in the command above. It is possible to get more information about a file using stat as well as seeing the octal representation of the permissions as follows:
Size: 18992 Blocks: 40 IO Block: 4096 regular file
The SUID permission is often associated with security issues. Here is an example that illustrates this.
A user would like to read user root' s mail. For this he changes the MAIL environment variable as follows:
The user then uses the command mail, hoping to see something!
/var/spool/mail/root: Permission denied
So far it doesn't work. This would be too easy!
But if root can be convinced to set the SUID bit on mail the previous commands would allow any user to read anybody's mail (including root).
The next examples are dangerous. Why?
The SGID is a permission similar to SUID that is set for group members. The symbolic value is s and the octal value of 2000.
Setting SGID on a directory changes the group ownership used for files subsequently created in that directory to the directory's group ownership. No need to use newgrp to change the effective group of the process prior to file creation.
The sticky bit permission with value 1000 has the following effect:
Applied to a directory it prevents users from deleting files unless they are the owner (ideal for directories shared by a group, or for /tmp
Applied to a file this used to cause the file or executable to be loaded into memory and caused later access or execution to be faster. The symbolic value for an executable file is t . It was supported in some versions of Unix but is not used in Linux.
Used files, terms and utilities:
Previous Chapter | Next Chapter
This part of the walkthrough covers the fifth Liberation Mission, where your team will face off against CosmoMan.
MegaMan: Lan, do you want to start the liberation mission?
MegaMan: OK, Lan. Then, let's go!
The first time you enter, you will get a cutscene:
NumberMan: Something's wrong with this DarkPanel.
Colonel: Good eye, NumberMan!
(camera goes up ahead to a Dark Hole)
Colonel: I've heard that some DarkPanels are booby trapped. We can't just liberate panels haphazardly.
CosmoMan: Hee-hee-hee...
CosmoMan: I'll take that as a complement.
TomahawkMan: Who the heck are you?
CosmoMan: I'm CosmoMan. I control the world of darkness. Let's see how you managed to make it this far!
KnightMan: At least he was polite enough to say his name.
Colonel: Take it as a sign of his confidence. He's a strong one, no doubt about it.
MegaMan: This place seems to be full of BarrierPanels. Keep an eye out for traps as we look for the key.
Colonel: Definitely... NumberMan?
NumberMan: I can search and grab items in a 6 sq range without needing to battle anyone.
Colonel: Your search power is something else! Complete the liberation within 9 phases!
Lan: Roger!
NumberMan and SearchMan have vastly different abilities. NumberMan's NumberCheck will claim all the items in a three by two range but not liberate any panels, while SearchMan can liberate all item panels in a line of unoccupied dark or item panels. Both, however, will disarm traps and claim all other prizes, so they are your only protection against traps.
There are two kinds of traps: damage traps and stun traps. Stun traps, regardless of how many are set off at a time, will incapacitate a navi for one turn. In this mission, damage traps will do 50 damage when they are set off. The main concern is, of course, getting rid of stun traps, as your navis should be able to take a 50HP hit if you set the damage traps off.
As for your team, Colonel will have 450 HP, KnightMan will have 600 HP, TomahawkMan 350, and NumberMan 300. The ColonelCannon C and the TomahawkSwing T will do 120 damage, the KingdomCrusher K will do 100 damage, while the NumberTrap N will do 120 damage.
The first thing you need to do is to get the first key, which you can either do in one phase (but losing one navi to a stun trap the next phase), or two (which, of course means more liberated area to work with). First, have MegaMan do a LongSword on the very left (you don't want to use TomahawkMan on the second column as you will destroy order points), which will set off a damage trap. Then have a second navi kill the Bladia in one-turn (alternately, one-turn or ScreenDivide around the Bladia). Your third navi should then take the panel on the left turnoff (easy as you don't have to one-turn). Now, you can either sacrifice your fourth navi for one turn so that you can NumberCheck and get the key (but leave you with no order points), or you can NumberCheck to get rid of the stun trap, and use your fifth navi to get two more order points (the panel down and to the right of where the Bladia once stood) and leave the key for Phase 2. The latter is the better choice for now, so we'll go with it. Make sure that you do not liberate the other item panel diagonal from the Bonus Panel - it's a damage trap.
You're nothing but dust-motes compared to me!
The Darkloids phase will see the TinHawk jump over the barrier, while a BigBrute will make its way to the other side of the Dark Hole.
Now you will need two navis to claim that key (either LongSword or TomahawkSwing, then a normal liberation is needed). The other three navis should focus on destroying the Dark Hole. One navi can claim the Bonus Panel and destroy the BigBrute (do not one-turn or you will set of a damage trap - moot if you use KnightMan), and another can destroy it, leaving you with one navi and (at least) two order points. Note that when you liberate the Dark Hole, one surrounding item panel remains dark - that's a stun trap (traps will always remain if a Dark Hole is liberated). Use your fifth navi to cut a region to the clean area beyond the stun trap, making sure to avoid the trap.
Darkloid phase will consist of the TinHawk moving towards you - not too big of a deal.
Now you need the second key, which is located in the rightmost panel just in front of CosmoMan. The fastest way of geting there is to use OmahawkMan and TomahawkSwing the middle column between the two Dark Holes, but you would be setting off a stun trap. Instead, have MegaMan LongSword the rightmost column (so he's in a pincer battle - one-turn to get the heart behind you), have another navi clear the Dark Hole, and NumberCheck to get the key and three order points (you would have used your last order point doing the NumberCheck, unless you got order points from the bonus panel). With TomahawkMan and your last navi, have TomahawkMan do the TomahawkSwing to the damage trap (left item panel - the other is 1000 zennys), then use Colonel to clear the Dark Hole.
Darkloids will do nothing here.
Now, we focus on the upper-left corner. Have TomahawkSwing in the right hand side on the same row as the inner Dark Hole. Then, use two navis to make your way to the Dark Hole (you will also gain two order points), and the last two navis to clear the last Dark Hole (the item panel around it is a BugFrag) from the outside edge.
CosmoMan will do nothing on his side of the ball.
This is where we end it. NumberCheck so that you can reach four items: a heart, a damage trap, three order points, but most importantly the third key. Then, have KnightMan claim the item panel where you got the second key (it's a damage trap - hence KnightMan). Then, have TomahawkMan TomahawkSwing the panel in front of CosmoMan (you do have the order points, and it will allow you to have four columns when fighting against CosmoMan). That leaves MegaMan and Colonel (and if necessary, four more phases) to take care of CosmoMan.
Whereas NumberMan's ability does not do liberation, SearchMan's ability does, and it is most useful when you have a line of item panels in front of you, as you can cut a path with it at the same time. However, unlike NumberMan, you will have to battle. Still, SearchMan should be the stronger of the two anyways.
Use Napalm on the far left column, which will set off a damage trap. Send a second navi to clear the single space, then use PanelSearch to disarm the stun trap and get the first key. Although you can get at the Dark Hole, chances are if you do so your second navi and SearchMan will be cut off from the Bladia reclaiming a tile so it can attack you (the Dark Hole is associated with the BigBrute and not the Bladia). Furthermore, you would be out of order points. Rather, be conservative for now and attack the Bladia, then go on the right column where there is one dark panel and use your last navi to clear it (you get 1000 zennys for one-turn liberation).
Some Guardian movement may be there, but not really anything serious.
Now have three navis go full frontal on the upper right Dark Hole - two to reach and destroy (first one will get a heart with a one-turn, second will get one BugFrag) and one to get rid of the panel that the Bladia once stood on. Then do a PanelSearch to get the key, three order points, and a trap disarmament. Then, with NapalmMan, cut a path through the left most column in the upper area (exposing the upper left Dark Hole).
CosmoMan will attack SearchMan for 80 damage, while NapalmMan will be attacked by the TinHawk that's behind him for 30 damage.
The idea now is to do the upper area, as you can clear the two Dark Holes and get the third key this turn. Have NapalmMan do Napalm either on the panel to the left of the corner item panel (a stun trap), the panel to the left of it, or the panel two above the trap (one above will destroy a panel containing two order points). In either way, you clear a way to the lower Dark Hole, which you clear with another navi. The third navi should concentrate on liberating while standing to the left of the panel where the Bladia once stood - a one-turn liberation nets three order points, 2500 zennys, and, more importantly, the third key. Then send your last two navis at the upper Dark Hole (you will get one BugFrag for your troubles).
Since you cleared all the Guardians out of your area, you shouldn't be attacked. The TinHawk will try to move (you didn't clear out that Dark Hole, after all...), but it's gone next turn anyways.
Use three navis to clear out the two remaining two Dark Holes (the first one and the one guarded by the TinHawk). For the lower Dark Hole, attack from the bottom end (snagging an AntiFire K with the first navi and a Guard2 B with the second) as the item panel to the top-right of the Dark Hole is a stun trap. Then your fourth navi should clear the row in front of CosmoMan, and your fifth to fight him. Five under par sounds real nice.
CosmoMan: I didn't expect to see you make it. It's actually very unfortunate for you that you did...!
Your navi: ...?
CosmoMan: You'll never ever catch me off guard. Because of that, your survival rate is less than zero!
Lan: Battles are never easy! That's why we fight with passion!
Your navi: That's right, Lan! This is it, CosmoMan!
CosmoMan: Welcome to my never-ending world of darkness!
(fight and win against CosmoMan)
CosmoMan: NO! I take my power from the cosmos! I am... invincible...! NOOOOOOOOO!
Congratuations, you have succeeded. Here's your reward:
Trainz Annotated Reference Pages Trainz Asset Maintenance and Creation
This is an alphabetically ordered list of the 411 non-obsolete, non-author# -3 products built-in to the combined JAs for TS10 & TS12. Non-built in asset types push the panoply of products to 1082 non-obsolete, non-Auran products currently on the editor's TS12 as of July 30, 2015.
Aluminium-Coils 2m x 1,5m
Arrow Buildings 10 x 13 ft. Lawn Building Product
Barry Railway 10 t Van Type 2 Pre 1914
Canadian Forest Products-CANFOR 8 Foot Lumber Pack
Caterpillar Bulldozer D11R Push Frames and Blade Product
Chlorine Canister Load for Gondola DES (Product)
Concrete Block Load for Bulkhead Flatcar DES (Product)
Concrete Culvert Load for Bulkhead Flatcar DES (Product)
Concrete Culvert Load for Gondola DES (Product)
Concrete RR Tie Load for Bulkhead Flatcar DES (Product)
Concrete RR Tie Load for Gondola DES (Product)
Copper Rod, 1/2 inch diameter, C10100
Copper Rod, 5/16 inch diameter, C10100
Culvert Long Load for Gondola DES (Product)
Empty 2.4m Pallets
FMA post-bags and small boxes (general goods)
Frozen Chicken bagged and boxed on Pallet
Frozen Fish bagged and boxed on Pallet
Frozen French Fries bagged and boxed on Pallet
Frozen Fruit bagged and boxed on Pallet
Frozen Pasta bagged and boxed on Pallet
Frozen Shrimp bagged and boxed on Pallet
Frozen Vegetables bagged and boxed on Pallet
Gravel, 0.25 to 2 inch
Hull & Barnsley Rly Refrigerated Ferry Van
Intermodal Load 1 for my Wellcar (Product)
Intermodal Load 10 for my Wellcar (Product)
Intermodal Load 11 for my Wellcar (Product)
Intermodal Load 12 for my Wellcar (Product)
Intermodal Load 13 for my Wellcar (Product)
Intermodal Load 14 for my Wellcar (Product)
Intermodal Load 15 for my Wellcar (Product)
Intermodal Load 16 for my Wellcar (Product)
Intermodal Load 17 for my Wellcar (Product)
Intermodal Load 2 for my Wellcar (Product)
Intermodal Load 3 for my Wellcar (Product)
Intermodal Load 4 for my Wellcar (Product)
Intermodal Load 5 for my Wellcar (Product)
Intermodal Load 6 for my Wellcar (Product)
Intermodal Load 7 for my Wellcar (Product)
Intermodal Load 8 for my Wellcar (Product)
Intermodal Load 9 for my Wellcar (Product)
John Deere Combine with Tires Removed (Product)
Large Logs Load for Bulkhead Flatcar DES (Product)
Large Logs Load for Gondola DES (Product)
Large Steel Beams Load for Bulkhead Flatcar DES (Product)
Large Steel Beams Load for FlexiBeam DES (Product)
Large Steel Beams Load for Gondola DES (Product)
Logs - Stack 4.2m long
Lumber Load for Bulkhead Flatcar DES (Product)
Lumber 1 Load for FlexiBeam DES (Product)
Lumber 2 Load for FlexiBeam DES (Product)
Lumber 3 Load for FlexiBeam DES (Product)
Lumber 4 Load for FlexiBeam DES (Product)
Lumber 5 Load for FlexiBeam DES (Product)
Lumber 6 Load for FlexiBeam DES (Product)
MAB_Radladerschaufel_Produkt
Milk Cans 20 gal.
Old RR Tie Load for Gondola DES (Product)
Pipe Load 1 for Bulkhead Flatcar DES (Product)
Pipe Load 1 for Gondola DES (Product)
Pipe Load 2 for Bulkhead Flatcar DES (Product)
Pipe Load 2 for Gondola DES (Product)
Pipe, Rusty, Load for FlexiBeam DES (Product)
Plywood Load for Bulkhead Flatcar DES (Product)
Pole Load for my Bulkhead Flatcar (Product)
Potatoes, bagged on pallet
Product Sulfur, Molten, Crude, Bulk Form, 99.7%
P and O Nedlloyd 40ft Containers Product
Rocks Large Load for Gondola DES (Product)
Sheet Metal Load for Bulkhead Flatcar DES (Product)
Sheet Metal Load for Gondola DES (Product)
Spools of Cable Load for Gondola DES (Product)
Square sets (8x8in x 6ft - 12times)
Stahl-Coils 2m x 1,5m
Stahl-Coils 2m x 1,5m(WP)
Steelcoil 2x2.4 m
Steel Beams Load for FlexiBeam DES (Product)
Steel Coil Load for Gondola DES (Product)
Steel Coil 1.5x1m
Steel Frame Load for Gondola DES (Product)
Stone 1 load- 1 large yellow stone
Strange Thing Load for Gondola DES (Product)
Tarp Load 1 for Bulkhead Flatcar DES (Product)
Tarp Load 2 for Bulkhead Flatcar DES (Product)
Tracks - Sleepers stack 16.5m
TYind Steel slab 5m x 1.5m x 0.25m
TYind Steel Strip Coil 1m x 1.5m dia
TYind Steel Strip Coil 1m x 2m dia
Victrainz Railway parcels #1
Wooden RR Tie Load for Bulkhead Flatcar DES (Product)
Wood Load 1 for Bulkhead Flatcar DES (Product)
Wood Load 1 for Gondola DES (Product)
Wood Load 1 for my Gondola for Logs DES (Product)
Wood Load 2 for Bulkhead Flatcar DES (Product)
Wood Load 2 for Gondola DES (Product)
Wood Load 2 for my Gondola for Logs DES (Product)
Wood Load 3 for my Gondola for Logs DES (Product)
Wood Load 4 for my Gondola for Logs DES (Product)
xBULK Cooper Response Touring Tires
1.1m steel coil w carrier product
1.2m steel coil w carrier product
2.2m steel coil w carrier product
2.4m steel coil w carrier product
20ft Container Steel Coil 2 product
20ft Platform Container product
20ft tankcontainer, empty
20ft tankcontainer, loaded
30ft Tank Container product (Hoyer)
30ft Tank Container product (Rugby)
40ft Container Trailers Weathered
40ft High Cubed Containers (Empty)
40ft High Cubed Containers (Loaded)
40ft Standard Cubed Containers (Empty)
40ft Standard Cubed Containers (Loaded)
42in cast iron pipe 50ft long
9ft.per-cast concert pipe
Trainz built-in categories can be seen by CM-searching for Author #-3.
Native methods were used in the past to write performance critical sections but with java getting faster this is now less common. Native methods are currently needed when
To complete writing native method, you need to process your class with javah tool that will generate a header code in C. You then need to provide implementation of the header code, produce dynamically loadable library (.so under Linux, .dll under Windows) and load it (in the simplest case with System.load(library_file_name) . The code completion is trivial if only primitive types like integers are passed but gets more complex if it is needed to exchange strings or objects from the C code. In general, everything can be on C level, including creation of the new objects and calling back methods, written in java.
[1] - JNI programming tutorial.
[2] - JNI specification.
The finishing process will almost always include a component of editing. Where it is possible for a creative editor to supply a finished sequence directly to a finishing artist, it is rare that continued client input and the need to create subtly different versions can be satisfied without an editorial tool. Montage window is that non-linear editing tool.
Very intuitive and seamless integrated with Mewa Film, montage window offers the ability to assemble, delete, replace frames on clip and simultaneously use the same clip in the Timeline or Node Graph.
You can have open as many montage windows as you wish, they are represented as tabs.
A frame is a single image and a clip is the container for a sequence of frames. It's important to understand the difference between a frame and a clip in the Montage window context. If you drag a frame you can see that the frame is dragged away from the clip. If you drag a clip, this is the rectangle containing the sequence of frames, the all clip including its frames are dragged with it.
To start editing a clip we need first to open a montage tab and add some footage to it. If you don't have any footage loaded see how to load some footage in section managing footage.
To open a montage tab just click the button . This button is part of the view toolbar.
To start editing a clip you need to bring a clip from your footage window to a montage window. You can add a clip in 2 ways,
We know that footage window holds the loaded clips of the current project. When a montage tab is created the user can create a copy of a clip from footage window and edit it at the montage tab.
Well, it's also possible to edit a footage window clip without creating a copy to a montage tab, this means, the clip can be edited and any changes made to the clip are applied directly to the clip.
A montage tab will be added with the name of the clip. The clip appears colored in green, to inform that this is a reference to a clip at footage, not a copy.
To pan the view,
Once a clip is in a Montage window you can start editing. All editing actions can be undone using undo and redo, allowing you to easily correct mistakes, as well give you freedom to experiment.
Selecting frames can be done using rubberband or ctrl key.
The rubberband is created when clicking, with the mouse left-button, in a empty area, and holding the mouse left-button, drag the mouse to create the region of selection.
When frames are selected a number appear on top of the frame. This number represents the selection order, so that, when a copying or cut-and-paste operation is performed the selection order is preserved.
Moving frames or 'cut and paste' frames are the same operation. Clicking on a frame you are selecting a frame, and if you drag it you can move the selected frame to another clip. A new clip is created if you drop the frame(s) in an empty area.
A copy operation of frames is achieved keeping the shift button pressed while dragging the selected frames.
To break, or split, a clip there is a easy tool called break line. Keep pressed the key B on your keyboard and use the left mouse button to draw a line so the line cuts the clip. The picture below ilustrates the break line spliting a clip.
Clips can be expanded or collapse by
Because clips can be very long, collapsing clips can be of great help when editing many clips. A collapse clip holds all the frames while showing only the first frame of the sequence, occupiing less space, makes moving the clips around easier.
Information about any individual frame is shown as tool tips.
These tool tips appear any time the mouse stops on top of a frame for a 2 or 3 seconds. This information include,
The original loaded file name,
It's possible to zoom in and out in a montage window, but all images (or frames) shown inside a montage window are thumbnails which resolution is set when creating a project.
To see a frame at full resolution
Explanation on output windows usage can be found at Main window/Output windows.
Clips can be long and to facilitate the navigation through a clip the montage player was created. It consists in a slider and 4 buttons. The slider makes montage player to jump to any frame in the clip. The image below describes the montage player and its buttons.
The montage player helps moving through a clip, moving inside the clip frame by frame, to the beginning and to the end of the clip by just clicking one button. But not only, you can preview a clip pressing, and holding pressed, the next frame button the clip will be played with a constant frame rate.
The montage player does not change the position of clips, it shifts the view to the desired frame position.
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 0-9
e4 is a very counter-intuitive move, as after the pawn is captured White does not get to make a developing move but must move an already developed piece again. However, practice has shown that the knight landing on g5 is hard to chase away and creates certain tactical threats (more than simply Nxe4!) that compensate for the lost pawn.
2...fxe4 is the only way to challenge White's idea.
"The way to refute a gambit is to accept it." - Wilhelm Steinitz
2...e5 transposes to the notorious Latvian Gambit. This may actually be a good practical choice for someone who knows nothing about the Lisitsin, as it gives Black a greater initiative.
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon · Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
Front Page: Radiation Oncology | RTOG Trials | Randomized Trials
Duke; 2006 PMID 17056197 -- "Dosimetric feasibility of cone-beam CT-based treatment planning compared to CT-based treatment planning." (Yoo S, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2006 Dec 1;66(5):1553-61.)
Conclusion: CBCT treatment planning is feasible; dosimetry comparable to CT-based plans
UCSF; 2005 PMID 15936579 -- "Method to account for dose fractionation in analysis of IMRT plans: modified equivalent uniform dose." (Park CS, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2005 Jul 1;62(3):925-32.)
Modified equivalent uniform dose (mEUD) that accounts for dose fractionation using biologically effective dose for use in IMRT plans
Esters are another carboxylic derivative. Out of all the carboxylic acid derivatives, esters are considered to be the most important. They are especially present in nature, as they are responsible for the smell of flowers and fruit. The general structure of an ester is shown in the picture to the right.
Esters are named as alkyl alkanoates. The part of the ester, known as the ester grouping: the carbon doubly bonded to the oxygen and single bonded to the OR group, is called the alkoxy carbonyl.
Generally speaking, a cyclic ester is called a lactone. The IUPAC naming is detailed below as follows:
The carbonyl carbon is designated as carbon number 1. This will be true unless there are more important functional groups present on the molecule but for these purposes, assume the ester is the predominant functional group. Other rules and modifications become necessary as the molecule becomes more and more complex and as more functional groups exist.
It is easiest to name the compound by treating it as two parts:
(a)	The first part is the alkyl group attached the terminal
(b)	Second portion is the alkyl group bonded to carbon #1.
Once the two groups have been identified, the alkyl groups should be named according to the usual IUPAC nomenclature for alkyl groups. Remember to include the carbonyl carbon when this chain is being named.
Once the two chains have been named, they need to be modified to represent the fact that an ester is present in the compound. The chain branching off the terminal oxygen is not modified. For example if a methyl group were attached, it would remain methyl. On the other hand, drop the “-ane”, “-ene”, or “yne,” suffix and add the suffic “oate” to signify that an ester is present.
The carboxylate group is a polar group in it of itself but nonpolar carbon and hydrogen chains surround it. Because of their presence, ester molecules are only slightly polar because of the dipole-dipole bonding between them. Because of this, the esters with few carbons are liquid at room temperature while the esters with more carbon chains are solids.
Resonance is prominent in esters. Recall that resonance is the movement of electrons within a molecule. Though it has many meaning, resonance implies the flow of electron density from one atom to another. It means that the electron density does not belong to just one of the atoms, but is shared within numerous atoms in the molecule. This property is the reason why the carbonyl carbon is not as electrophilic. One of the lone pairs of electrons from the terminal oxygen can form a double bond with the carbonyl carbon that breaks its double bond with the other oxygen thereby giving it a negative charge. Because electron density is being essentially given to the carbon, it becomes less electrophilic meaning that it in essence is less susceptible to nucleophilic attack.
Esters undergo numerous reactions though the majority of them follow the same mechanism. If one reaction is understood and the mechanism clear, the rest of the reactions and their mechanism inevitably become much easier to follow and understand.
Esters hydrolyze to carboxylic acids: Like the other carboxylic derivatives, esters also are susceptible to addition-elimination pathways. However, because of the resonance present in esters, they are less susceptible, though they still do occur. Because they are not as electrophilic, they need to be acid or base catalyzed in order for the reaction to take place before water creates the carboxylic acid.
Transesterification with alcohols: Transesterification means that the alkyl group attached to the terminal oxygen is switched with the alkyl group attached to the alcohol. To do this, it is necessary for the reaction to be acid or base catalyzed like it was in the previous reaction. Like the esterification process, this reaction is reversible.
The mechanism of this reaction is identical to the hydrolysis to the carboxylic acids. The carbonyl oxygen is protonated with the acid, after which the carbonyl carbon is attacked via nucleophilic attack. On the other hand, under base catalyzed reaction, the alcohol is deprotonated, and the alkoxide group that results from the deprotonation adds to the ester carbonyl group.
Amines and esters form amides: Amines are much more nucleophilic than the alcohols, thus they form amides. Because it is more nucleophilic than alcohols, acid and base are not needed to activate this reaction, though heat is sometimes needed. In this mechanism, the lone pair on the ammonia attacks the carbonyl carbon of the ester; the double bond breaks, and the lone pair moves to the top of the oxygen, creating a negative charge on the oxygen. When the lone pair comes back down to reform the carbon-oxygen double bond, the OR’ group leaves to form the amide.
Grignard reagents transform esters into alcohols: Esters converted into alcohols by using two equivalent ratios of Grignard reagents. All esters save that for formate esters -- which form secondary alcohols – form tertiary alcohols. The mechanism to form an alcohol is in two steps:
(1) The first step is for the first Grignard to attack the carbonyl carbon. The double bond between the carbon and the oxygen break, giving the oxygen a negative charge. When the lone pair comes down to reform the double bond, the OR’ group leaves to form the alkoxide ion.
(2) The second step is virtually identical to the first step. The difference is that the lone pair on the oxygen does not come back down to form the double bond because there is no good leaving group. In this case, in order to furnish the alcohol, which is now a tertiary alcohol, is made by an acid workup. This gives the tertiary or in that one specific case, the secondary alcohol.
Esters can be reduced to give alcohols or aldehydes: Esters can be reduced to give alcohols and aldehydes. The reducing agent that is used is often LiAlH4. However, in this case, only 0.5 equivalent is required instead of 1 equivalent. If an aldehyde is desired, a milder reducing agent is required such as bis(2-methylpropyl)aluminum hydride.
Esters bonds are found in naturally occurring fats and lipids as the fatty acid ester bonds to glycerol. As mentioned earlier esters are found in naturally occurring aromas and flavors. Phosphodiester bonds form the backbone of DNA.
Berg, Jeremy M. (2007). Biochemistry, 6th Ed., Sara Tenney. ISBN0-7167-8724-5.
Vollhardt and Schore (2007). Organic Chemistry: Structure and Function, 5th Ed.
Exercise (**). Reduce the inverse problem for the Schrodinger equation on domain to the conductivity equation one with conductivity c.
Calculating speeds or travel times along a corridor is straightforward given that one has constructed the TMC segments which make up the corridor and that one has a tool by which to access the data. One open source tool for writing the necessary code is Python. Python extensions, such as Psycopg, allow one to access SQL databases which are storing the speed/travel time data.
INRIX and NPMRDS provide either speed or travel time measurements for each TMC for every time interval (1 or 5 minutes). TMC lengths are also reported which allows for easy conversion between speed and travel time. Calculating speeds or travel times along a corridor only requires that these values be aggregated. Python scripting can be used to read from the databases for the necessary TMC segments and desired time periods and loop over the values in order to construct speeds/travel times. These speeds/travel times can then be written to a Comma Value Separated (CSV) file, or inserted into a database table.
Additional add-ons are available for Python which allow 3D graphing capabilities. Below are sample graphs created using the NPMRDS data set and the Matplotlib python library. Blank areas represent points where real-time data did not exist along the entire corridor.
Travel Times for 4-lane Inter-regional Freeway in January 2012
Travel Times for 6-lane Urban Freeway in January 2012
Previous Page → Availability of Real-Time Data
Next Page → Imputing Missing Speed Data
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Height: 0.6m/2'0"
Weight: 11.5kg/25.0lb
Gender Distribution: 50% Male
Move types which are good on Mawile: Fire, Fighting, Ground
Move types which are bad on Mawile: Bug, Dark, Dragon, Flying, Ghost, Grass, Ice, Normal, Psychic, Rock, Steel
Move types which don't effect Mawile: Poison
All other move types are normal effectiveness on Mawile.
RS/FL: Attract, Brick Break, Double Team, Facade, Fire Blast, Flamethrower, Focus Punch, Frustration, Hidden Power, Hyper Beam, Ice Beam, Protect, Rain Dance, Rest, Return, Rock Smash, Rock Tomb, Sandstorm, Secret Power, Sludge Bomb, Solarbeam, Strength, Sunny Day, Taunt, Torment, Toxic,
Introduction 02. Exercises 03. Basic Movements
Advanced Movements 05. Freerunning
The Burpee, also known as the squat thrust, is rumored to have developed in maximum security prisons. In such facilities, inmates are not allowed exercise equipment, and thus the burpee was developed by the prisoners to keep themselves in good physical condition.
Stand straight up, with your hands at your sides.
Bend your knees into a squat position, then fall forward, placing your hands on the ground, into the push-up position.
Hop your feet backwards, and fall forward into a push-up position.
Perform a push-up. At the highest point in the push-up, hop your feet back towards your hands and explode upwards in a jump, powered by your legs. Jump as high as possible.
Clap your hands together over your head at the highest point in the jump.
The terms "burpee" and "squat thrust" are sometimes used interchangeably, however, squat thrusts lack the jumping component of burpees.
Video demonstration, YouTube
A PDF version is available. (info)
How Do You Say ...?
Did you ever wonder how to say a particular word in Spanish? In this lesson, JP and Liliana tell us how to ask: “How do you say ... in Spanish?”—in Spanish that is. And that's also one of the keywords: el español – the Spanish language. The other keyword is: el inglés – the English language.
SpanishPod_newbie_lesson_A0008.ogg (file info) (mp3 file)
Title: “How Do You Say ...?” Dialogue only (file info)
Problems listening to the file? See media help.
Sí, igual.
Hey! How do you say internet in Spanish?
You say internet.
Yes, the same.
Wikipedia has related information at español
Wikipedia has related information at hot dog variations
How do you say ...?
This section includes grammatically related words. Some of them are required by the exercise Dialogue Recast.
Translate from Spanish to English. Click each bar to check your answer. If possible, read the Spanish sentences aloud.
Hey! How do you say internet in Spanish?Hey! How do you say internet in Spanish?
You say internet.You say internet.
Sí, igual.
Yes, the same.Yes, the same.
Now translate from English to Spanish. Remember to say the Spanish sentences aloud.
Listen! How do you say internet in Spanish?
You say internet.
Yes, the same.
Translate this variant of the dialogue from English to Spanish.
How do you say tequila in Spanish?
How?
How do you say tequila?
Yes, you say tequila.
Yes, the same.
This translation exercise requires some of the words from the More Vocabulary section.
Listen! How do you say internet in Spanish? (formal)
You say internet.
Yes, the same.
↑↑ index: SpanishPod lessons
Boiling-Using water and other ingredients to heat it with water
Braising-cooking an item in a liquid, usually a sauce
Frying-Use a fat/oil to give a crisp texture
One of the neat things of OpenClinica is the option to "attach" a file to a CRF. This can be useful if in your study X-rays are used. Another example could be pdf's of letters of specialists, etc.
Setting up this facility is very straight-forward: in your CRF-XLS file you add an item for the file. Give ITEM_NAME etc. as appropriate. For both RESPONSE_TYPE (N) and RESPONSE_LABEL (O) fill in "file"; for DATA_TYPE (T) "FILE".
You can upload this XL-file in the normal way and assign it to one or more of your events. When data-entry opens it, a button "Click to upload file" is displayed and the user can browse in the normal way to the file, confirm the upload and that's it.
Once the file is uploaded, the CRF changes: now two buttons appear: "Replace" and "Remove". Clicking on the file will open it in the application, associated with this type of file.
Where are these files stored?
All the "normal" data of your study are stored in your PostgreSQL or Oracle database, but not so the uploaded files. They are renamed uniquely and stored in the directory that also contains XL-s, XML-files, etc. This directory is (for Linux) /usr/local/tomcat/openclinica.data/attached_files. If you browse to that directory, you'll see subdirectories with the names of your studies, i.e. the Unique Protocol ID. The consequence of this is that you must not change the Unique Protocol ID after you have uploaded one or more files, because then OpenClinica can not retrieve them anymore!
And this is one more reason for including this directory in your backup-procedures.
Limitations and how to get around them
OpenClinica's code limits the size of a file to upload to a max of 10 MB.
The Apache Commons code is used and documentation about how to change the max file size can be found at http://commons.apache.org/fileupload/using.html
This would involve editing the source code, more specifically the file FileUploadHelper.java, located under the src/main/java/org/akaza/openclinica/bean/rule directory.
Before you do this, always make a backup of the original files. And document your changes, so you can easily repeat them in case you want to install a newer version of OpenClinica (which will overwrite the changed code).
His : i ty/i saj
Her : e tij/e saj
His : i ty/i saj
Her : e tij/e saj
When choosing to convert regular video to Flash Video, there are two basic codecs to keep in mind - each have different uses and strengths.
Codecs stand for Compression/Decompression - it is important to remember that neither of the primary Flash codecs are lossless - which means you will lose some data whenever you encode your source video into Flash. In order to shrink the file size of video to allow for transmission over the internet, some data is thrown out, regardless of whatever method you use. This is why you should avoid double compression - in other words trying to compress a previously compressed video file - when creating Flash Video. If you try to double compress a video, you will end up losing more data than you would have if you used high quality video, without necessarily decreasing the file size significantly.
Sorensen Spark was the primary codec for Flash Video for Flash versions 6-7. Because it's been around longer, several more years in fact, it has a wider area of compatibility than the VP6 codec does. If your video is intended to be watched by the general public over the internet, it might not be a bad idea to use the Sorensen codec to encode your video. Because video encoded with the Sorenses codec will play on Flash Player versions 6 and later, it is ideal for reaching the broadest audience.
With the advent of Flash 8, a new codec has been created that greatly improved encoding and playback of Flash Video. That codec is On2 VP6, and features much better compression and image quality than the Sorensen codec.
There is a drawback to using the new codec however, because users will only be able to watch video encoded with VP6 in Flash Player 8 or newer, and playback requires more processing power than previous codecs. Adobe even has specific size limits and bits per second limitations it recommends to avoid taxing the computers that are displaying your Flash video.
In the end, it is a matter of balancing availability versus file size and quality, so use whichever codec fits your desired project.
To control object's scope and lifetime by allowing or disallowing dynamic allocation using the free store (heap)
This section is empty. Please help by expanding it.
C++ provides two ways of controlling lifetime of an object and binding it with a program level identifier (variable). First is a scoped variable and an object, which are destroyed immediately after the scope ends (e.g., function scope integers). Second is a scoped variable (often a pointer) and a dynamically allocated object in the free store. In this case, at the end of the scope of the variable, the variable ceases to exist but the object's lifetime continues (e.g., singletons, a window object). It is possible to force the choice of the lifetime of an object either first way or the second using the Concrete Data Type idiom.
This idiom simply uses class level access modifiers (private, protected) to achieve the goal.
The following code shows how a MouseEventHandler class forces dynamic allocation.
Another way to force dynamic allocation is to prevent direct access to the constructor and instead provide a static function instance() to return a dynamically allocated object. It is in many ways similar to the Singleton design pattern. Moreover, it is not strictly necessary to use polymorphic delete to reclaim memory. A member function destroy() can serve the purpose saving the space required for a v-table pointer.
An opposite extreme of this idiom is to force scoped variable (a.k.a. automatic variable) only. It can be achieved using a private new operator.
ScopedLock * sl = new ScopedLock (); // Standard new and nothrow new are not allowed.
ScopedLock object can't be allocated dynamically with standard uses of new operator, nothrow new, and the placement new.
Concrete Data Type - J. Coplien.
Final Fantasy VI -> Finding Gogo
To get Gogo into your party, you'll want to head to the top right portion of the map where the little triangle island is, which is also where you could fight the Intangir in the world of balance. Gogo's level will be equal to the average level of your party when he joins, so keep that in mind for when you decide to get him. He also does not have to be taught any magic and can use any skill in the game. Anyway, heading to the triangle island, stick around until you find a zone eater and just stay put until it engulfs your entire party.
You'll find yourself inside a cave with stairs going up and down. The stairs up lead out of the zone eater and into the world map, so take the stairs down. There will be some stairs to your bottom right that lead to a lower area, and a bunch of walkways to the left. You'll almost certainly want the sprint shoes for this part. If you're next to any of the green men as they walk back and forth they'll push you off and you'll land in a lower area. Let them do this once and you'll get an ether and a red jacket, and hit the switch to climb back up the stairway you saw in the previous room.
You'll pass through a room and find yourself in a room with a bunch of platforms you can jump between and chests you can bounce on. Walk around the path and jump onto the platform with the switch to open up some more paths. Head back to the start and jump over to the bottom left and up to reach a chest with a thunder shield. Then head back around to where you jumped onto the platform with the switch and you can reach a platform which has a door. The door will take you to the master of mimicry, Gogo himself. You can select status on him from the menu screen to equip him with the abilities of any character, and if you equip him with the merit award which you can win in the Colliseum you can give him any weapons or armor and make him truly a force to be reckoned with. He never needs to be taught any magic and will automatically know the spells of everyone in the party if you give him the magic command. Use the warp spell or a warp stone to exit if you like or just make your way out of the zone eater in reverse.
My Varus led me, idle,
a young whore (as it then at once seemed to me)
Bithynia now, in what way did it hold itself,
Respondi id quod erat: nihil neque ipsis
I answered that which was: there was no reason--not for they themselves,
"At certe tamen," inquiunt "quod illic
"But still, certainly" they say "that which
I might make myself out to be one more blessed)
"non" inquam "mihi tam fuit maligne
I was not able to get eight sturdy men."
(At mi nullus erat nec hic neque illic
(But to me there was no man neither here nor there
Hic illa, ut decuit cinaediorem,
Here that woman, as befitted one more slutty,
"Quaeso," inquit "mihi, mi Catulle, paulum
"istud quod modo dixeram me habere...
Cinna est Gaius--is sibi paravit.
Verum utrum illius an mei, quid ad me?
Really, though, whether they're his or mine, what's it to me?
Utor tam bene quam mihi pararim.
I use them just as well as if I'd gotten them for myself.
Sed tu insulsa male et molesta vivis,
But you're a badly unwitty and annoying one,
Commentary by E.T. Merrill on Catullus 10
How RipNet Seeks To Improve Performance Of Lacrosse athletes
A customer will input their scoring data by entering shooting details such as goals, assists, and shots taken into RipNet.(6) http://www.rip.net/mens#scoring The shooting details are vital to improving performance of the athlete. Details such as how they got open, where on the field they took the shot and the placement of their shot on the goal.(6) Where the release point on the shot occurred, the time and amount of room of the goal scored, hand position, if the play was a fast break or if the offensive team was man up, the quarter the goal took place in, and if a dodge was made to score.(6) RipNet will create a database to provide a visual aspect of a player’s decisions, tendencies, and patterns of a player and his/her coaches by analyzing the player’s shooting data.(5) The shooting pattern can also show where a player is most likely to score, and where a player could be scoring more.(6) Images of what the database are located on http://www.rip.net/mens#scoring/
Instructional videos are offered through RipNet to help further improve performance. Customers can watch instructional videos discussing several offensive plays and drills for example scoring from the alley, cross crease finishing, rollback, and dodge redodge. (7) Videos from John Galloway; a two time NCAA champion and the most wins in NCAA history and Morgan Lathrop http://www.rip.net/mens#videos; a four time NCAA champion with 85 wins and 3 losses(8) http://www.rip.net/womens#videos; will further help develop a player's scoring ability by giving insider information on what goes on in the minds of the goalie(9). There are thirty videos, featuring slow-motion, and high tech graphics to further assist in this improvement, Morgan and John, focus on helping the shooter understand how goalies anticipate, react, and move; where they are most vulnerable and the keys to beating them.(9) This may enhance cognitive ability of the offensive player during game play. Video demonstration will help improve physiological skill abilities in relation to the sport of lacrosse. Images of videos are available on the RipNet website http://www.rip.net/mens#videos, http://www.rip.net/womens#videos
The social network portion of RipNet gives the ability to connect customers (players) to each other all over the world with everything lacrosse related. RipNet features player profiles, friending, feeds, forums and the latest news from the best lacrosse websites across the web. (9) http://www.rip.net/mens#social/ By staying connected to other lacrosse players, coaches, and enthusiast a customer will stay informed on events, camps and conferences going on around the United States which can further improve human performance by participating in these events or camps. Coaches and recruiters may use RipNet as a go to tool for top players which in due time may increase the performance level and create a higher standard of play for the collegiate and pro level lacrosse leagues. Images of the social Network portion of RipNet are available at http://www.rip.net/mens#social
There are many ways to evaluate tools and technologies for education. However many of them were borrowed from the field of Information Technology or Information Systems, specifically in Human and Computer Interaction.
The system usability scale is a quick and reliable way of measuring the usability of a website or software. It is a five-point Likert Scale that was developed by Brooke (1996). [1]
The technology acceptance model is a model developed by Davis (1989) that originally showed that Perceived Ease of Use (PEOU) and Perceived Usefulness (PU) can predict the intention of users to use a certain system or software.[2] It was revised several times and is now currently updated to version 3, which addresses the effects of trust and perceived risks upon use of the system in an e-commerce context (Venkatesh & Bala, 2008). [3]
The unified theory of acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT) is another form of technology acceptance model that was formulated by Venkatesh et al. (2003)[4] This theory has four key constructs to explain the user intentions on using information systems and the user's behavior upon usage: 1) performance expectancy, 2) effort expectancy, 3) social influence, and 4) facilitating conditions.
↑ Brooke, J. (1996). SUS-A quick and dirty usability scale. Usability evaluation in industry, 189(194), 4-7.
↑ Davis, F. D. (1989). "Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of information technology", MIS Quarterly, 13(3), 319-340.
↑ Venkatesh, V., Bala, H. (2008). Technology acceptance model 3 and a research agenda on interventions, Decision Sciences, 39(2), 273-315
↑ Venkatesh, V., Morris, D. (2003). User acceptance of information technology: Toward a unified view, MIS Quarterly, 27(3), 425-478.
"OpenGL ES Shading Language 1.0.17 Specification". Khronos.org. 2009-05-12. http://www.khronos.org/registry/gles/specs/2.0/GLSL_ES_Specification_1.0.17.pdf. Retrieved 2011-09-25.
r1bqkbnr/pppn1ppp/3p4/8/2BpP3/5N2/PPP2PPP/RNBQK2R
This is the only safe step in the minefield of traps. However, it looks strange, giving up the central strongpoint on e5, but Black remains solid. White usually plays Nxd4 and sets up one more trap.
Transfer cases for the Jeep Liberty are built by New Venture Gear, hence the NV prefix. New Venture inherited New Process Gear from Chrysler, therefore the older transfer cases are prefixed with NP. Whether prefixed with NV or NP, parts are interchangeable between the same transfer case model.
Full-time 4WD can be used on pavement because it utilizes the differential in the transfer case. Part-time 4WD Lo and 4WD Hi can't be used on pavement because they lock the axles together in the transfer case. While the 2WD, full-time 4WD, and part-time 4WD Hi modes support the maximum vehicle speed, the part-time 4WD Lo mode does not. Part-time 4WD Hi should not be engaged over 55mph. Essentially, part-time 4WD should be used for off-road, full-time 4WD for maximum traction on-road, and 2WD for everything else.
The NV231J, utilized in the Command-Trac system, is a mechanically shifted part-time transfer case. Its chain-driven aluminum construction makes it weaker than gear-driven iron transfer cases.
The NV241J, also known as Command-Trac HD, is sometimes incorrectly referred to as an "NV231J-HD". It was available in the 2005-2007 Jeep Liberty (KJ) with the 6-spd transmission in any package. The transfer case is tagged "241J" in these applications and uses the same gear ratios as the NV231J. This is not the limited production NV241OR found in the Wrangler Rubicon models.
A slip yoke eliminator replaces the slip yoke in the rear of the transfer case with a fixed yoke. Primarily this allows for the installation of double cardon joints and reduces the driveshaft angle by increasing the driveline length. These two changes help cut down on vibration caused by lifting the Jeep. As an added benefit, it prevents the transfer case from spilling fluid everywhere if the driveshaft gets pulled out. When installing a slip yoke eliminator, a drive shaft with an integrated slip yoke and double cardon joints must also be installed.
3,2,4,1,5,0,6,-1,7,...
Bass-reflex enclosures improve the low-frequency response of loudspeaker systems. Bass-reflex enclosures are also called "vented-box design" or "ported-cabinet design". A bass-reflex enclosure includes a vent or port between the cabinet and the ambient environment. This type of design, as one may observe by looking at contemporary loudspeaker products, is still widely used today. Although the construction of bass-reflex enclosures is fairly simple, their design is not simple, and requires proper tuning. This reference focuses on the technical details of bass-reflex design. General loudspeaker information can be found here.
Effects of the Port on the Enclosure Response
Before discussing the bass-reflex enclosure, it is important to be familiar with the simpler sealed enclosure system performance. As the name suggests, the sealed enclosure system attaches the loudspeaker to a sealed enclosure (except for a small air leak included to equalize the ambient pressure inside). Ideally, the enclosure would act as an acoustical compliance element, as the air inside the enclosure is compressed and rarified. Often, however, an acoustic material is added inside the box to reduce standing waves, dissipate heat, and other reasons. This adds a resistive element to the acoustical lumped-element model. A non-ideal model of the effect of the enclosure actually adds an acoustical mass element to complete a series lumped-element circuit given in Figure 1. For more on sealed enclosure design, see the Sealed Box Subwoofer Design page.
Figure 1. Sealed enclosure acoustic circuit.
In the case of a bass-reflex enclosure, a port is added to the construction. Typically, the port is cylindrical and is flanged on the end pointing outside the enclosure. In a bass-reflex enclosure, the amount of acoustic material used is usually much less than in the sealed enclosure case, often none at all. This allows air to flow freely through the port. Instead, the larger losses come from the air leakage in the enclosure. With this setup, a lumped-element acoustical circuit has the following form.
Figure 2. Bass-reflex enclosure acoustic circuit.
. A truly realistic model would incorporate a radiation impedance of the port in series with
, but for now it is ignored. Finally,
, the acoustical mass of the enclosure, is included as discussed in the sealed enclosure case. The formulas which calculate the enclosure parameters are listed in Appendix B.
. This forms a Helmholtz resonator (click here for more information). Physically, the port functions as the “neck” of the resonator and the enclosure functions as the “cavity.” In this case, the resonator is driven from the piston directly on the cavity instead of the typical Helmholtz case where it is driven at the “neck.” However, the same resonant behavior still occurs at the enclosure resonance frequency,
. At this frequency, the impedance seen by the loudspeaker diaphragm is large (see Figure 3 below). Thus, the load on the loudspeaker reduces the velocity flowing through its mechanical parameters, causing an anti-resonance condition where the displacement of the diaphragm is a minimum. Instead, the majority of the volume velocity is actually emitted by the port itself instead of the loudspeaker. When this impedance is reflected to the electrical circuit, it is proportional to
, thus a minimum in the impedance seen by the voice coil is small. Figure 3 shows a plot of the impedance seen at the terminals of the loudspeaker. In this example,
Figure 3. Impedances seen by the loudspeaker diaphragm and voice coil.
The performance of the loudspeaker is first measured by its velocity response, which can be found directly from the equivalent circuit of the system. As the goal of most loudspeaker designs is to improve the bass response (leaving high-frequency production to a tweeter), low frequency approximations will be made as much as possible to simplify the analysis. First, the inductance of the voice coil,
, can be ignored as long as
, thus an upper frequency limit is approximately 1 kHz for this approximation, which is certainly high enough for the frequency range of interest.
Another approximation involves the radiation impedance,
. It can be shown [1] that this value is given by the following equation (in acoustical ohms):
Hence, the low-frequency impedance on the loudspeaker is represented with an acoustic mass
(the transducer parameters, or Thiele-Small parameters) are converted to their acoustical equivalents. All conversions for all parameters are given in Appendix A. Then, the series masses,
, are lumped together to create
. This new circuit is shown below.
Figure 4. Low-Frequency Equivalent Acoustic Circuit
Unlike sealed enclosure analysis, there are multiple sources of volume velocity that radiate to the outside environment. Hence, the diaphragm volume velocity,
. This essentially draws a “bubble” around the enclosure and treats the system as a source with volume velocity
. This “lumped” approach will only be valid for low frequencies, but previous approximations have already limited the analysis to such frequencies anyway. It can be seen from the circuit that the volume velocity flowing into the enclosure,
, compresses the air inside the enclosure. Thus, the circuit model of Figure 3 is valid and the relationship relating input voltage,
In order to make the equations easier to understand, several parameters are combined to form other parameter names. First,
, the enclosure and loudspeaker resonance frequencies, respectively, are:
Based on the nature of the derivation, it is convenient to define the parameters
A parameter known as the compliance ratio or volume ratio,
Other parameters are combined to form what are known as quality factors:
This notation allows for a simpler expression for the resulting transfer function [1]:
It can be shown [2] that for
, a loudspeaker behaves as a spherical source. Here, a represents the radius of the loudspeaker. For a 15” diameter loudspeaker in air, this low frequency limit is about 150 Hz. For smaller loudspeakers, this limit increases. This limit dominates the limit which ignores
, and is consistent with the limit that models
.
Within this limit, the loudspeaker emits a volume velocity
, as determined in the previous section. For a simple spherical source with volume velocity
, the far-field pressure is given by [1]:
. In the following sections, design methods will focus on
A popular way to determine the ideal parameters has been through the use of alignments. The concept of alignments is based upon well investigated electrical filter theory. Filter development is a method of selecting the poles (and possibly zeros) of a transfer function to meet a particular design criterion. The criteria are the desired properties of a magnitude-squared transfer function, which in this case is
. From any of the design criteria, the poles (and possibly zeros) of
There are many different types of filter designs, each which have trade-offs associated with them. However, this design approach is limited because of the structure of
. In particular, it has the structure of a fourth-order high-pass filter with all zeros at s = 0. Therefore, only those filter design methods which produce a low-pass filter with only poles will be acceptable methods to use. From the traditional set of algorithms, only Butterworth and Chebyshev low-pass filters have only poles. In addition, another type of filter called a quasi-Butterworth filter can also be used, which has similar properties to a Butterworth filter. These three algorithms are fairly simple, thus they are the most popular. When these low-pass filters are converted to high-pass filters, the
More details regarding filter theory and these relationships can be found in numerous resources, including [5].
The Butterworth algorithm is designed to have a maximally flat pass band. Since the slope of a function corresponds to its derivatives, a flat function will have derivatives equal to zero. Since as flat of a pass band as possible is optimal, the ideal function will have as many derivatives equal to zero as possible at s = 0. Of course, if all derivatives were equal to zero, then the function would be a constant, which performs no filtering.
The loss function can be used to achieve the desired properties, then the desired gain function is recovered from the loss function.
Now, applying the desired Butterworth property of maximal pass-band flatness, the loss function is simply a polynomial with derivatives equal to zero at s = 0. At the same time, the original polynomial must be of degree eight (yielding a fourth-order function). However, derivatives one through seven can be equal to zero if [3]
. From this matching, the following design equations are obtained [1]:
The quasi-Butterworth alignments do not have as well-defined of an algorithm when compared to the Butterworth alignment. The name “quasi-Butterworth” comes from the fact that the transfer functions for these responses appear similar to the Butterworth ones, with (in general) the addition of terms in the denominator. This will be illustrated below. While there are many types of quasi-Butterworth alignments, the simplest and most popular is the 3rd order alignment (QB3). The comparison of the QB3 magnitude-squared response against the 4th order Butterworth is shown below.
, the equations guiding the design can be found [1]:
The Chebyshev algorithm is an alternative to the Butterworth algorithm. For the Chebyshev response, the maximally-flat passband restriction is abandoned. Now, a ripple, or fluctuation is allowed in the pass band. This allows a steeper transition or roll-off to occur. In this type of application, the low-frequency response of the loudspeaker can be extended beyond what can be achieved by Butterworth-type filters. An example plot of a Chebyshev high-pass response with 0.5 dB of ripple against a Butterworth high-pass response for the same
Figure 6: Chebyshev vs. Butterworth High-Pass Response.
The Chebyshev response is defined by [4]:
Fortunately, Chebyshev polynomials satisfy a simple recursion formula [4]:
For more information on Chebyshev polynomials, see the Wolfram Mathworld: Chebyshev Polynomials page.
When applying the high-pass transformation to the 4th order form of
, the desired response has the form [1]:
dB and can be chosen by the designer, similar to B in the quasi-Butterworth case. Using the recursion formula for
Thus, the design equations become [1]:
With all the equations that have already been presented, the question naturally arises, “Which one should I choose?” Notice that the coefficients
The general guideline for the Butterworth alignment focuses on
. Since the three coefficients
, fixing one of these parameters yields three equations that uniquely determine the other three. In the case where a particular transducer is already given,
In the case that the rigid requirements of the Butterworth alignment cannot be satisfied, the quasi-Butterworth alignment is often applied when
In addition to these three popular alignments, research continues in the area of developing new algorithms that can manipulate the low-frequency response of the bass-reflex enclosure. For example, a 5th order quasi-Butterworth alignment has been developed [6]; its advantages include improved low frequency extension, and much reduced driver excursion at low frequencies and typically bi-amping or tri-amping, while its disadvatages include somewhat difficult mathematics and electronic complication (electronic crossovers are typically required). Another example [7] applies root-locus techniques to achieve results. In the modern age of high-powered computing, other researchers have focused their efforts in creating computerized optimization algorithms that can be modified to achieve a flatter response with sharp roll-off or introduce quasi-ripples which provide a boost in sub-bass frequencies [8].
[1] Leach, W. Marshall, Jr. Introduction to Electroacoustics and Audio Amplifier Design. 2nd ed. Kendall/Hunt, Dubuque, IA. 2001.
[2] Beranek, L. L. Acoustics. 2nd ed. Acoustical Society of America, Woodbridge, NY. 1993.
[3] DeCarlo, Raymond A. “The Butterworth Approximation.” Notes from ECE 445. Purdue University. 2004.
[4] DeCarlo, Raymond A. “The Chebyshev Approximation.” Notes from ECE 445. Purdue University. 2004.
[5] VanValkenburg, M. E. Analog Filter Design. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc. Chicago, IL. 1982.
[6] Kreutz, Joseph and Panzer, Joerg. "Derivation of the Quasi-Butterworth 5 Alignments." Journal of the Audio Engineering Society. Vol. 42, No. 5, May 1994.
[7] Rutt, Thomas E. "Root-Locus Technique for Vented-Box Loudspeaker Design." Journal of the Audio Engineering Society. Vol. 33, No. 9, September 1985.
[8] Simeonov, Lubomir B. and Shopova-Simeonova, Elena. "Passive-Radiator Loudspeaker System Design Software Including Optimization Algorithm." Journal of the Audio Engineering Society. Vol. 47, No. 4, April 1999.
Figure 7: Important dimensions of bass-reflex enclosure.
Based on these dimensions [1],
.
= effective density of enclosure. If little or no filling (acceptable assumption in a bass-reflex system but not for sealed enclosures),
There is more to being a successful business than making a huge profit. Different stakeholders will have different views on what the business must do to be successful. Note that some of these might be in conflict with the objectives that the business sets itself.
For a business to be successful, it must meet the objectives that it has set for itself. The way in which the business tries to achieve its objectives is called its strategy. In this strategy, the business will set itself success criteria - these are targets it will use to measure whether or not it has met their objectives.
"The business is too big and powerful"
"They pollute the environment and treat animals badly"
"Even though they create lots of jobs, we'd be better off with a lower income and a healthier planet"
"I want good quality products at a low price"
"Some firms are too powerful and charge too much"
"I am concerned about the environment, but can't always afford environmentally-friendly products"
"I want the firm to be as profitable as possible so I can get a large dividend"
"I don't care how the business achieves this, but I don't want them upsetting other stakeholders, as this could hurt profits"
"I want the business to create wealth and jobs for the economy, then voters will think I'm doing a good job and vote for me in the next general election"
There are five main ways of measuring business success.
This is measured by financial ratios like profit margin. (See Ratio Analysis)
How many jobs has the business created?
This is measured by dividing the business's sales into the total sales of the market.
How happy are customers with the business's products?
This is measured by carrying out customer opinion surveys and market research.
How does the business's activities impact the environment?
This is measured by whether society believes the business is doing things the right way.
Most businesses fail because they become insolvent. That means that they don't have enough cash to pay their debts. There are three main reasons for this:
This could be due to a recession in the economy. If there is a lack of demand from consumers for the business's products, then they have less money coming in and therefore cannot pay its debts.
If the business takes on too many orders, then they may buy too many raw materials or hire too many staff. The business cannot fulfill all the orders and so they don't get the money from their customers quick enough to pay its debts.
A decision is taken which does not bring in as much money as predicted, for example expanding into new markets or bringing out new products.
In all cases, someone whom the business owes money to (called a creditor) does not get paid, and they decide to take legal action to get their money back.
For a sole trader or partnership, the creditor will sue the business in court in an attempt to get their money back. If the business does not have the money to pay them, the court can appoint an Official Receiver to run the business. The business will then be in receivership. The Official Receiver has full legal rights over all the owner's property, and it's their job to find the funds needed to pay the business's debts. If the business is believed to still be profitable, it will continue to be run. Otherwise, the owner's property will be sold in order the pay the business's debts. The business will close and the owner will be declared bankrupt.
For a limited company, the Official Receiver's job is to sell the assets of the business, not the owner's. If they think the business can still be profitable, they will try to find a buyer to sell the business to. If not, the company will enter liquidation: the Official Receiver will sell off the assets until they have enough cash to pay off all the debts. If there are not enough assets to pay everyone then some creditors may not get paid.
Top - 0–9 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
Paul is often thought to have taught against the observance of the Law of Yahweh God and yet upon a deeper investigation, we see that he not only kept it himself, but he also did not speak against doing so, as it appears. What Paul was teaching against was a legalistic approach to observance of the law that was not based on faith.
Paul was an observant Jew and that never changed. He kept the feasts, participated in offerings, and made vows according to the Jewish Law. Paul's testimony of himself proves that. In the book of Acts we see many accounts that Paul gives of himself as a Torah-observant believer . Toward the end of Paul's life and ministry when Paul was supposed to have liberated the first-century believers from the "shackles and bondage" of the Torah-observance, we read the following:
"I am indeed a Jew, born in Tarsus of Cilicia, but brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, taught according to the strictness of our father's law, and was zealous toward God as you are today. I persecuted this Way to the death ... " (Acts 22:3) Gamaliel was the leading teacher of the Pharisees in his day
"But this I confess unto thee, that according to The Way, which they consider a sect [of Judaism], so worship I the God of my fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law and in the prophets." (Act 24:14 )
Paul did not separate the church from Judaism - it remained a sect of Judaism.
Another reference to this being called "The Way" (Acts 19:23)
Often referred to as the way of truth, this way etc.. (Acts 22:4; 9:2 24:14, 22; 2 Peter 2:2; Hebrews 10:20; John 14:6)
"For we have found this man a plague, a creator of dissension among all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes." (Act 24:5)
The Nazarenes were an established sect of Judaism, also called the Way. Paul retained his Jewish identity. He did not found a "Gentile" church that was separated from the main Jerusalem-based Nazarene church.
"While he answered for himself, Neither against the law of the Jews, neither against the temple, nor yet against Caesar, have I offended any thing at all." (Acts 25: 8) Paul made this statement in his defense against accusations of teaching contrary to observance of the Law of Moses in a court of law about A.D. 62. He was not guilty of any offence against the Law - i.e. he hadn't gone against it.
"And it came to pass, that after three days Paul called the chief of the Jews together: and when they were come together, he said unto them, Men and brethren, though I have committed nothing against the people, or customs of our fathers, yet was I delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans." (Acts 28:17) This was in Rome written about A.D. 63 near the end of his life.
"And when they heard it, they glorified the Lord, and said unto him, You see, brother, how many thousands of Jews there are which believe; and they are all zealous of the law: And they are informed of you, that you teach all the Jews which are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, saying that they ought not to circumcise their children, neither to walk after the customs. What is it therefore? the multitude must needs come together: for they will hear that you are come. Do therefore this that we say to you: We have four men which have a vow on them; Them take, and purify yourself with them, and be at charges with them, that they may shave their heads: and all may know that those things, whereof they were informed concerning you, are nothing; but that you yourself also walk orderly, and keep the law." (Acts 20:20-24)
This was written in about A.D. 58 -60 when Paul came to Jerusalem. James also confirms that he knows that Paul kept the Law and the accusations about him that he taught contrary to the law of Moses were false. What he did teach against, was the oral law, the "works of the law", of the Judaisers and this inflamed them to attack him.
"For I have not shunned to declare unto you the whole counsel of God." (Acts 20:27) A statement made on his last visit and farewell to the elders in Ephesus.
Paul's conversion on the road to Damascus in Acts 9, was not a conversion to the form of present-day Christianity which has been attributed to him. The Nazarenes were a sect of Judaism and worshipped in the temple and in synagogues with their fellow brethren, even though they were persecuted. When going in search of the believers in Yeshua, he went looking for them in the synagogues in Damascus (Acts 9:1-2).
Prior to Rabbi Akiba's unification of the different sects, into what has continued up till today as Rabbinic Judasim, there were various sects of Judaism, namely the Pharisees, the Sadducees, the Essenes and the Nazarenes. Paul was from the strictest form of Pharisaism which he renounced, with their oral laws, to follow Yeshua the Messiah of Israel, and the unadulterated Torah.
"For you have heard of my conduct in time past in Judaism, how that beyond measure I persecuted the church of God, and ravaged it; and excelled in Judaism above many my peers within mine own kindred, being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my elders". (Galatians 1:13-14).
"Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews. Concerning the Law, a Pharisee. Concerning zeal, persecuting the congregation the church.
Touching the righteousness which is in the law, blameless. But what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for the Messiah. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the supremacy of the knowledge of Messiah Yeshua my Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may gain Messiah, And be found in him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the law but the righteousness which is from God by faith which is through the faith in Messiah." (Philippians 3:5-9)
Paul rejected the observance of the Law to obtain righteousness, but he didn't reject it's observance altogether,
"Do we then make void the law through faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the law." (Romans 3: 31)
"But we know that the law is good, if a man use it lawfully" (1 Timothy 1:8)
"Wherefore the law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just, and good." (Romans 7:12)
"For we know that the law is spiritual: but I am carnal, sold under sin." (Romans 7:14)
"For I delight in the law of God after the inward man... " (Romans 7:22)
"What shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin [i.e., violation of the laws - see 1 Jn. 3:4], that grace may abound? God forbid. How shall we, that are dead to sin, live any longer therein?" (Romans 6:1-2)
"But if, while we seek to be justified by Christ, we ourselves also are found sinners [i.e., violators of the law], is therefore Christ the minister of sin [lawlessness]? God forbid!" (Galatians 2:17)
Paul did not keep the Law and speak positively about it, and at the same time fail to live it and teach against it to the believers in the nations. Either he kept it or he didn't. Either he taught that it was valid, or he didn't. His testimony to the Ephesian church was that he had given them the whole counsel of God (Acts 20:27).
He had also set himself as an example to the believers and exhorted them to follow his example.
"Imitate me, just as I also imitate Christ" (1 Corinthians 11:1)
"Brethren, join in following my example, and note those who so walk, as you have us for a pattern." (Philippians 3:17)
"Therefore I urge you, imitate me" (1 Corinthians 4:16)
This is inconsistent with him living as a Jew himself and teaching those in the nations otherwise. His own testimony and that of James, refutes such a thing. Rather he warned that wolves would come in among the flock after he left and pervert the truth into Law-less-ness (Acts 20:29-30; 2 Timothy 2:19; 3:1-7, 15-17).
Alcohol is a very potent and potentially dangerous drug. It affects many systems of the body, especially the nervous and excretory systems. These effects can be dangerous if alcohol is used in excess. However, there are a number of benefits to alcohol, so it is important to understand its effects before consumption. Refer to the wikipedia article for additional information but ultimately consult your doctor on health issues.
Beers and wines have beneficial antioxidants in them. Non-alcoholic beers have become ever increasing in popularity, partially due to the fact that these benefits can be received without the effects of alcohol. Many people also find that alcohol and drinking are ways to relax and to socialize. These positive effects can easily be outweighed by excessive drinking, so it is important to remember moderation.
Alcohol has a profound effect on the nervous system, and intoxication can result in severe degradation of one's ability to make sound decisions. Effects of these bad judgments can range anywhere from self injury to death of one's self and others. It is important to understand the dangers of alcohol, and of drinking in general. Beyond the short term effects of intoxication, there are dangers in general with drinking over long periods of time in excess. Prolonged drinking can lead to obesity, alcoholism, liver and kidney damage, brain damage, circulatory and heart problems, and many other dangers. Those who have allergies to alcohol face dangers vastly magnified in comparison to others and must regulate their alcohol intake accordingly.
In addition to alcohol, there are dangers with specific drinks and the way that they are prepared. Flaming cocktails can cause damage to those who attempt to ingest them, and can lead to fires that may harm others and property. Other dangers include broken glass from glasses or bottles, as well as other dangers not listed. It is important that one remains coherent enough to understand these dangers, as a lack of cognizance can only magnify these problems.
By drinking responsibly, alcohol can be served, enjoyed, and used safely. It is important to remain aware of one's alcohol tolerance, and to know when to move to non-alcoholic beverages. As well as knowing one's own tolerances, it is important to keep a designated driver. Driving after consuming alcohol is under no circumstances safe, even if one is under the legal limit for intoxication.
At the end of the night, it is important that bartenders stop selling alcohol before the time designated by the licence e.g. 3am. This of course depends on the bar's individual licence and/or special circumstances e.g. a festival. For example during the Edinburgh International Festival, Bars, Pubs and Clubs can have extended licences.
Also it may also be necessary to discontinue service due to an accident or other unforeseen circumstance. There patrons must be politely informed of these circumstances as much as is in the interest of the company.
Serving a person already under the influence
When bartending, precaution must be taken when serving customers that are already intoxicated or who are possibly below the age of consent. Each bartender must decide whether serving the customer more, or in fact any alcohol is responsible and legal.
The H2 norm of a stable system H is the root-mean-square of the impulse response of the system. The H2 norm measures the steady-state covariance (or power) of the output response to unit noise input. In this module, the goal of H2 optimal state estimation is to design an observer that minimizes the H2 norm of the closed loop transfer matrix
Consider the continuous-time generalized plant P with state-space realization
m are respectively the state vector, the measured
r are the disturbance vector and the control vector,
A, B1, B2, C1, C2, D1, and D2 are the system coefficient matrices of
Given the system and a positive scalar
The break dynamics are found to be
For the system we introduce a full state observer in the following form:
The transfer function for this case is
The LMI: LMI for H2 Observer estimation
The H2 state observer problem has a solution if and only if there exists a matrix
Thus by formulation, we have converted the problem of H2 state observer design into an LMI feasibility problem by optimizing the above LMIs. In application we are often concerned with the problem of finding the minimal attenuation level
On implementation and optimization of the above LMI using YALMIP and MOSEK (or) SeDuMi we get 3 matrices as output,
There exists another set of LMIs which holds true for the same optimization problem as above.
A link to the Matlab code for a simple implementation of this problem in the Github repository:
[1] - LMI in Control Systems Analysis, Design and Applications
LMI Methods in Optimal and Robust Control - A course on LMIs in Control by Matthew Peet.
LMI Properties and Applications in Systems, Stability, and Control Theory - A List of LMIs by Ryan Caverly and James Forbes.
GENESIS is the first of the five Mosaic books in the Old Testament which together make up the Pentateuch. The name of the book comes from the greek word geneseos which means 'birth', 'geneology' or 'history of origin'. The name is appropriate as it reflects the main theme of the book: Beginnings.
Genesis was written by Moses, circa 1446 - 1406 B.C. The content and writing style is characteristic of similar manuscripts of that time period. Many similarities and parallelisms in content and lifestyles can be found between Genesis and other important manuscripts such as the Mesopotamian works Enuma Elish, Gilgamesh Epic and Hammurabi's code of Law.
We can estimate the timeframe of writing by referring to the Jewish history in the Book of 1 Kings. 1Ki 6:1 indicates that "In the four hundred and eightieth year after the Israelites had come out of Egypt,in the fourth year of Solomon's reign...he began to build the temple of the Lord". We know from historical records that the temple construction began circa 966 BC, putting the exodus of Israel around 1446 BC.
The Book of Genesis begins with an account of Creation. This account outlines the sequence in which God creates all things. It starts with the Creations of "the heavens' (note this is plural) and over seven days creation progresses through terrestrial objects, the Earth's form, plants, animals and finally Man. This occurs over a period of seven literal days (morning and evening being part of the narrative for each day).
The Christians believe that this book depicts some spiritual concepts about the creation.
Genesis is described as inspired by God that illustrates the creation from the point of view of the Jewish culture and its people.
It was written around the X century BC.
The genesis is not a scientific document, therefore it doesn't explain the creation in scientific words, However it is a religious document that explain spiritual truths based from a religious and spiritual point of view.
Nowadays, there are many different interpretations about the Genesis from many different Christian denominations.
This statement is proved by induction to number n. It is obvious that for n = 1 the lemma is true. Suppose that the lemma is true for all n – 1 eigenvalues of the transformation A; it remains to show that it is true for all n eigenvectors of the transformation A. Suppose a linear combination of n eigenvectors of the transformation A is 0:
Applying transformation A to this identity, one has
Moses lead the Israelites out of Egypt and lived in the desert for 40 years. During the whole of this time, he was their leader. Moses demonstrated both patience and wisdom. He cared for the people he led, and was constantly trying to help them both physically and spiritually.
Article 5-8 conferred citizenship on each person who met the criteria below at the commencement of the Constitution[2] :
Thus, Citizenship at the commencement of the constitution included provisions for Citizenship-by domicile, of migrants from Pakistan and of Indians residing in foreign countries.
Domicile of a person is his permanent home. No person can be without a domicile and no person may have more than one operative
Article 6 provides citizenship rights to migrants from Pakistan before commencement of constitution. A person who migrated from Pakistan to India before 19 July 1948 shall be considered a citizen of India, provided either of the person's parents or any of his grandparents were born in India as stated in the Government of India act, 1935 and has been residing since the date of migration[5].
For person/s migrated after 19 July 1948, the person should be registered as a citizen of India by an officer from the Government of India, but for registration the subjected person has to be a resident of India for at least six months, at the date of his application[5][2].
Article 7 makes special provisions regarding the citizenship rights of persons who migrated to Pakistan after March 1 1947 but returned to India subsequently. Such person/s become entitled to Citizenship of India, provided they fulfill the conditions stated for Migrants from Pakistan stated in Article 6. IS is necessary that in such cases too the visits of the migrants must not be for short/limited periods or be of a temporary nature or on purposes of business or otherwise[5]. It has to be noted that such cases are subjected to this article, as they were before the commencement of the constitution, cases pertaining to the period thereafter are to be governed by the Citizenship Act, 1955.
Article 8 provides that any person who or either of whose parents or grandparents was born in India as defined in Government of India Act 1935 and who is ordinarily residing in any country outside India shall be deemed to be a citizen of India if he has registered as an Indian Citizen by the diplomatic or consular representative of India in that country on an application made by him/her in the prescribed form to such diplomatic or consular representative, whether before or after the commencement of the Constitution.[5][2]
Article 9 states no person shall be a citizen of India by virtue of article 5, or be deemed to be a citizen of India by virtue of article 6 or article 8, if he has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of any foreign State.
Article 10 reads, every person who is or is deemed to be a citizen of India under any of the foregoing provisions of article 5-10 shall continue to be a citizen of India, subject to the provisions of any law that may be made by Parliament.[5] In the other words, the right of citizenship cannot be taken away from a person except through express parliamentary legislation.[2]
Parliament to regulate the right of citizenship by law
Parliament to make any provision with respect to the acquisition and
The Citizenship Act, 1955 that came into force with effect from 30th December 1955 deals with matters relating to the acquisition, determination and termination of Indian citizenship. It provides for the acquisition of Indian citizenship by birth, by descent, by registration and by naturalization[6] . The act has been amended by the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 1986, the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 1992, the Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2003, the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2005, and the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019.
The Original Act provided [2][6]:
a person born in India after 26 January 1950 would, subject to certain exceptions be a citizen of India by Birth
a citizen of commonwealth country would have the status of commonwealth citizen of India. Government could make suitable provisions on the basis of reciprocity.
↑ "Citizen". Merriam-Webster Dictionary. http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/citizen. Retrieved 23 May 2013.
↑ a b c d e f g Kashyap, Subhash C. (1994). Our Constitution : an introduction to India's Constitution and Constitutional law (2nd ed. ed.). New Delhi: National Book Trust, India. pp. 85-93. ISBN 9788123707341.
↑ "Abdul Rahman vs State, AIR 1964 Pat.384". Indian Kanoon. http://indiankanoon.org/doc/261051/. Retrieved 23 May 2013.
↑ a b c d e f "Law Ministry". Constitution of India Part II. http://lawmin.nic.in/olwing/coi/coi-english/Const.Pock%202Pg.Rom8Fsss(5).pdf.
↑ a b "Indian Citizenship Act 1955". Ministry of Home Affairs. Gov. Of India. http://mha.nic.in/pdfs/ic_act55.pdf‎. Retrieved 23 May 2013.
↑ "Ministry of Home Affairs". Ministry of Home Affairs. freshersedu. https://www.freshersedu.com/aiatsl-jobs-recruitment/. Retrieved 21 December 2020.
It is important to connect with your neighbors. You can connect Roads, Subways, Rails, Highways, Water Pipes, and Electric Lines with neighboring towns. Usually connecting with your neighbor will cost extra simoleans.
You cannot connect Water Pipes or Electric Lines in SC2K.
In SC3K and SC4, you can make deals with your neighbors. These are to Buy or Sell either Power, Garbage, or Water.
Buy: This is when you buy Power or Water. This will cost you based on how much your grid takes from the neighboring cities. This can also mean taking Garbage from another City and storing it in your landfill system. You get money based on a set amount of Garbage that you import - unlike Buying Power or Water, you have to agree to take more or cancel the contract.
Sell: This is when you sell Power or Water. Unlike Buying Power or Water, you have to agree to sell more or cancel the contract. This can also mean exporting Garbage, in which you will have to pay a set amount based on how much Garbage you have been exporting.
Neighbor Deals require Power Line connections (for Power Deals), Water Pipe connections (for Water Deals), or Road connections (for Garbage Deals) and are proposed by neighbors in SC3K - you cannot start them - but in SC4, as you control both cities, you may begin a deal at any time. There is a penalty fee that you are charged if you cancel the deal. When buying, you only have to worry about destroying all your connections. When selling, you will sometimes run out of the commodity and the deal will automatically close, thus causing you to pay the penalty. An interesting tactic is to buy a commodity and sell the same commodity, thus creating a "safety net" in which you will never run out (when Buying, your neighbor wont ever run out of whatever your buying from them) of what your selling.
Neighbor Deals do not exist in SC2K.
Parametric and Polar Equations ·
Sequences and Series ·
Multivariable Calculus & Differential Equations ·
2 Schrödinger's Equation Provides Three Integers Used to Define the Energy States and Orbital for an Electron
4 The Angular Momentum Quantum Number (Sub-levels, s, p, d, f)(s=sharp, p=principal, d=diffuse and f=fundamental)
We've spent a lot of this chapter talking about waves, and electron waves in particular. While most of us know what normal water waves look like, very few people have an understanding of what electron waves look like. In the last lesson, we talked about electron density, and how an electron wave could be thought of as representing the thickness or thinness of the electron density "fog" at any point in space within the atom. We considered the probability pattern for the electron in a hydrogen atom. Now let's consider some more complicated atoms.
Explain the meaning of the principal quantum number, n.
Explain the meaning of the azimuthal quantum number, ℓ.
Explain the meaning of the magnetic quantum number, ml.
Schrödinger's Equation Provides Three Integers Used to Define the Energy States and Orbital for an Electron
You should remember that electrons form standing waves whenever they are trapped within an atom. You should also remember that only certain standing waves are allowed in any confined space because only certain standing waves can fit perfectly inside that space (remember, a perfect fit requires that a wave begin and end where its box begins and ends). In a one-dimensional box, it's easy to picture all of the possible waves that fit perfectly inside. In three dimensions, it's a little harder. Unfortunately when it comes to electrons in an atom, there's an additional complication on top of the fact that electron waves are three-dimensional! It turns out that the electrons in an atom aren't confined to nice square or rectangular boxes. Instead, they're confined to spherical boxes (which should make sense, since atoms are, after all, tiny little spheres). In other words, electron waves inside an atom must begin and end on the surface of a sphere. You may have a really good imagination, and an amazing ability to picture objects in three-dimensions, but for most people, trying to figure out what these spherical three-dimensional waves look like can be quite a challenge.
Luckily, that's how electron wave functions can help. Electron wave functions basically describe the possible shapes that electron waves can take. We won't actually worry about the wave functions. Instead, we'll only worry about specific numbers, called quantum numbers. Quantum numbers are always part of an electron wave function and are extremely important when it comes to determining the shape of a probability pattern.
When electron wave functions were first developed by a man named Erwin Schrödinger (Figure 6.11), his goal was to show how a wave-like description of the electron could be used to understand the behavior of an electron in a hydrogen atom. In order to do this, Schrödinger first defined the size and spherical shape of the hydrogen atom itself. Schrödinger then assumed an electron trapped within a hydrogen atom formed a standing wave that fit perfectly inside without "spilling out" or "doubling over" on itself (it turns out that in circular or spherical boxes, misfit waves don't "spill out" so much as they "double over", as shown in Figure 6.12. Finally, Schrödinger supposed that an electron wave had to be continuous (remember, something that is continuous has no gaps, holes or jumps).
Figure 6.12: When waves fit perfectly on a circle (or a sphere) they meet up with themselves and form a closed loop. When waves don't fit perfectly on a circle, though, they end up "doubling over" on themselves.
Amazingly, what Schrödinger discovered was that in order to satisfy his basic assumptions about the electron wave both fitting inside the atom and being continuous, certain quantities in the electron wave function had to be "whole number integers". Whenever Schrödinger assigned a whole number to these quantities, he ended up with a wave that fit perfectly inside the hydrogen atom. However, whenever he assigned a decimal number to these quantities, he ended up with a wave function that either "doubled over" on itself, or was discontinuous! The quantities that had to be assigned whole numbers soon became known as quantum numbers. In the wave function for a hydrogen electron there are always three quantum numbers. The first quantum number, n, is called the principal quantum number, the second quantum number, ℓ, is called the azimuthal quantum number, and the third quantum number, ml, is called the magnetic quantum number. Together these three quantum numbers define the energy state and orbital of an electron, but we'll talk more about exactly what that means in the next section.
The first quantum number, known as the principal quantum number, is given the symbol n. In order to describe a valid standing wave, n has to have integer values, but there's an additional restriction on n as well. The value of n must be a positive integer value (n = 1, 2, 3, . . .). In other words, n can never equal a negative integer. In fact, n can never even equal 0! The principal quantum number gives you two different clues as to what an electron wave looks like. First, it tells you how the electron density spreads out as you move away from the center of the atom. For electron waves with low principal numbers, like n = 1, the electron density is very thick right in close to the center of the atom, but then becomes rapidly thinner as you move out. In contrast, for electron waves with high principal quantum numbers, like n = 6, the electron density isn't as thick near the center of the atom, but is spread quite a bit further out. In general, the higher the principal quantum number, the further away from the nucleus you'll be able to detect a significant amount of electron density (Figure 6.13).
Sometimes, you will hear people say that the principal quantum number determines the "size" of the electron wave function. When people say this, they don't actually mean the absolute or total "size" of the electron wave. What they mean is how big or small the electron wave appears to be based on where most (usually about 90%) of the electron density is concentrated. In an electron wave with a low principal quantum number, the electron density is mostly found close to the center of the atom. Even though there is a tiny bit of electron density at distances far away from the atom's nucleus, there's so little that you can't really tell it's there. As a result, electron waves with low principal quantum numbers appear small. On the other hand, in an electron waves with a high principal quantum number, the electron density is much more spread out, and thus much thicker at distances far from the center of the atom. Therefore, electron waves with high principal quantum numbers appear big.
The principal quantum number also describes the total number of nodes that the electron wave contains. What are nodes? Nodes are places where the electron wave has absolutely no amplitude, or "height". Take a look at the one-dimensional waves in the figure below. Can you spot the nodes (portion a.)? Now take a look at the two-dimensional waves (portion b.). Can you spot the nodes? A three-dimensional wave with nodes is something like an onion. Think of how the onion has layers and how in between the different layers there’s always an empty space or a break. If the onion was a three-dimensional wave, the breaks in between the onion layers would be like the nodes. The higher the principal quantum number, n, the more nodes an electron wave has.
A node is any place where a wave has zero amplitude, or zero height. Both a. and b. illustrate different ways of representing waves. In a. the amplitude corresponds to the height of the yellow line above (or below) the black axis. When the yellow wave crosses the black axis, the wave has zero amplitude and thus a node. In b., the amplitude of the wave corresponds to the thickness of the blue cloud. When there is no blue cloud, the wave has zero amplitude and thus a node.
The principal quantum number is extremely important, not only because it tells you something about the "size" of an electron wave and the number of nodes in an electron wave, but also because it tells you something about the energy of that wave. If you think back, you'll remember that negative electrons like to be close to the positive nucleus because the energy of an electron is lower the closer it is to a positive charge. What does that mean in terms of the principal quantum number? It means that an electron wave with a lower principal quantum number, and electron density centered close to the nucleus of the atom, will have a lower energy, while an electron wave with a higher principal quantum number, and electron density spread further away from the nucleus of the atom, will have a higher energy.
Similarly, as the number of nodes in an electron wave increases, the energy of the wave increases as well. Think about the jump rope experiment. Do you remember how you created standing waves in a jump rope? Did it take more or less energy on your part to get multiple waves to form along the rope? It should have taken you more energy to create more waves. That's because in the process of creating more waves, you also created more nodes and nodes are always associated with an increase in energy. Again, let's take a look at what his means in terms of the principal quantum number. An electron wave with a lower principal quantum number has fewer nodes, and thus will also have a lower energy. On the other hand, an electron wave with a higher principal quantum number has more nodes and thus will have a higher energy.
Notice that as n increases, both the "size" of the electron wave and the number of nodes it has increase as well. As a result, the energy of an electron wave always increases with n.
The bigger value of the n, the higher the energy.
The smaller the value of n, the lower the energy.
Since the principal quantum number determines the energy of a particular electron wave, n is often thought of as referring to the "energy level" of the electron. The term "energy level" actually comes from Bohr's old solar system model of the atom. Thanks to Schrödinger, and his wave equation, though, we now know that the energy level doesn't correspond to a particular orbit around the nucleus, but rather, to a particular electron wave adopted by the electron when it becomes trapped inside the atom.
The Angular Momentum Quantum Number (Sub-levels, s, p, d, f)(s=sharp, p=principal, d=diffuse and f=fundamental)
The second quantum number, known as the azimuthal quantum number, is given the symbol ℓ. While the principal quantum number told you about the "size" of an electron wave and the number of nodes in an electron wave, the azimuthal quantum number tells you more about the "shape" of an electron wave. In other words, the shape that the electron wave appears to have as a result of its electron density being "thicker" in one place than it is in another. You might be tempted to think that the shape of an electron wave is always spherical because the atom itself is spherical. It turns out, however, that while there are spherical electron waves, there are also waves that look like dumb-bells and waves that look like butterflies, and waves that look so crazy it's almost impossible to describe them! Some of the different
You might wonder about the various balloon-like shapes in the figure above. One difficulty with using drawings to represent electron waves is that the electron density itself is actually spread over a huge region of space surrounding the center of the atom. As you learned earlier, though, for many electron waves, almost all of the electron density is in close to the nucleus of the atom, with only a tiny bit of electron density further out. Over the years, scientists have developed a standard way of drawing electron waves. Rather than trying to account for all of the electron density in an electron wave, scientists usually just draw "balloons" around the region of space that contains about 90% of the electron wave's total electron density. The figure below shows how scientists convert a cloud of electron density into a balloon. Even though there is a little bit of electron density outside of the cartoon balloons (and thus a small probability of finding the electron outside of its balloon), most electron behavior can be understood by ignoring the tiny bit of electron density that the cartoon balloon doesn't capture.
The exact shape of the cartoon balloon representing an electron wave is determined by the value of ℓ. In other words, the dumb-bell shaped balloon in the image above has one value of ℓ, while the butterfly-shaped balloon has another value of ℓ. Of course, scientists would get pretty tired of saying things like "the dumb-bell shaped wave", or "the butterfly shaped wave", so instead, they name the different waves using letters from the alphabet. The most common shapes for waves are called s, p, d and f. (You would probably find it a lot easier to remember what the different waves looked like if scientists had given them nice descriptive names, like the "dumb-bell wave" or the "butterfly wave", but boring names like s, p, d and f turn out to be much more convenient).
In the next lesson, we'll take a closer look at exactly what some of the common wave shapes look like. First, though, we have to consider the relationship between n and ℓ. Remember that a wave function for an electron always has three quantum numbers. In order to fully describe an electron wave, then, you have to know the values of all three of these numbers (n, ℓ and ml). Now you might think that as long as n, ℓ and ml are all integers, the wave that they describe will be a perfectly good electron wave. But that's not the way it works. It turns out that for a particular value of n, only certain values of ℓ are allowed.
For wave functions that actually describe electrons in an atom, ℓ is always no less than 0, but also no more than n − 1 (ℓ = 0, 1, 2, … n − 1). The following examples should help to clarify the restriction on ℓ.
What are the allowable values of ℓ for an electron wave with n = 3?
Find the minimum value of ℓ.
The minimum value of ℓ is always 0.
Find the maximum value of ℓ.
The maximum value of ℓ is always n – 1
List all of the integers (no decimals!) starting from the minimum value of ℓ and ending with the maximum value of ℓ.
What are the allowable values of ℓ for an electron wave with n = 1?
Find the minimum value of ℓ.
The minimum value of ℓ is always 0.
Find the maximum value of ℓ.
The maximum value of ℓ is always n − 1
List all of the integers (no decimals!) starting from the minimum value of ℓ and ending with the maximum value of ℓ.
Often, scientists will refer the different values of ℓ as electron sublevels. In a hydrogen atom with one electron, the value of ℓ has no effect on the energy of the electron. However, in an atom with more than one electron, the value of ℓ does have a small effect on the electron's energy. In other words, the principle quantum number, n, always determines the overall energy level of an electron, but that energy level is actually divided into multiple sublevels based on the value of ℓ. All of these sublevels have equal energy in a hydrogen atom, because the hydrogen atom only has one electron. For atoms with more than one electron, though, the different sublevels split apart, and some of them end up having more energy than others.
The third, and final quantum number, known as the magnetic quantum number, is given the symbol ml. Remember, the principal quantum number told you about the "size" of an electron wave and the number of nodes in an electron wave, while the azimuthal quantum number told you more about the "shape" of an electron wave. The magnetic quantum number, though, gives you even more information about what the electron wave looks like. The magnetic quantum number tells you how the electron wave is orientated in space.
Orientation in space basically means where the electron wave points. Take a look at the two dumb-bell shaped electron waves shown in Figure 6.14 (in the next lesson, you'll learn that these are actually p orbitals). In the first electron wave, lobes of the wave point "up-and- down" along the z-axis, while in the second electron wave, the lobes of the wave point "in-and-out" along the x-axis. These two electron waves have different orientations in space, and thus different values for the quantum number ml.
Figure 6.14: Two possible orientations for an electron wave with a dumb-bell shape.
Now compare Figure 6.14 with Figure 6.15. In both figures, the electron wave has a different orientation in space, as indicated by the red arrow. But what do you notice about the orientations of the electron wave in Figure 6.15? They look the same, don't they? Obviously, orientation doesn't matter for the spherical electron wave. In other words, because the spherical electron wave looks the same no matter how you rotate it, there's really just one orientation. So how many different ml values should an electron wave with a spherical shape have (remember, ml values are used to describe orientation)? Clearly, an electron wave with a spherical shape should only have one ml value, because it only has one possible orientation. What about an orbital with a dumb-bell shape? Should it have a single ml value, or should it have several different ml values? Well, since different orientations of the dumb-bell shaped wave actually look different, you'd probably expect the dumb-bell shaped
Figure 6.15: Two possible orientations for an electron wave with a spherical shape. Notice that there isn't a noticeable difference between these orientations.
For a particular value of ℓ, only certain values of ml are allowed.
The rule for ml is that for any value of ℓ, ml can be any integer starting from −ℓ and ending at +ℓ. ml = −ℓ … +ℓ'). The following examples should help to clarify the restriction on ml.
What are the allowable values of ml for an electron wave with ℓ = 2?
Find the minimum value of ml.
The minimum value of ml is always −ℓ.
Find the maximum value of ml.
The maximum value of ml is always +ℓ
List all of the integers (no decimals!) starting from the minimum value of ml and ending with the maximum value of ml.
What are the allowable values of ml for an electron wave with ℓ = 0?
Find the minimum value of ml.
The minimum value of ml is always −ℓ.
Find the maximum value of ml.
The maximum value of ml is always +ℓ
List all of the integers (no decimals!) starting from the minimum value of ml and ending with the maximum value of ml.
Now that we’ve talked about all three of the different quantum numbers, you should have a good understanding of how different electron waves can be described. You can describe the "size" of an electron wave, and the number of nodes in an electron wave using the principal quantum number, n. You can describe the shape of an electron wave using the azimuthal quantum number, ℓ. Finally, you can describe the orientation of the electron wave using the magnetic quantum number, ml. Since you know how to describe a general electron wave, it's time to look at several examples of specific electron waves. That’s what we'll talk about in the next lesson.
Schrödinger discovered that in order for a wave function to describe a standing wave that was continuous, and that didn't "doubled back" on itself, certain quantities in his wave function had to have integer values.
The quantities in the wave function which must have integer values are known as quantum numbers.
In the wave function for hydrogen, there are three quantum numbers. They are called the principal quantum number (n), the azimuthal quantum number (ℓ), and the magnetic quantum number (ml).
The principal quantum number can only have positive integer values, (n = 1, 2, 3 …).
The principal quantum number determines how far the bulk of the electron density extends from the center of the atom. The higher the value of n, the further away from the nucleus you will be able to detect a significant amount of electron density.
The principal quantum number also determines the number of nodes in an electron standing wave. The higher the value of n, the more nodes there are in the electron wave.
The higher the principal quantum number, the greater the energy of the electron. Therefore, the principal quantum number is determines the energy level of the electron.
The azimuthal quantum number, ℓ, determines the shape of the electron wave. The values of ℓ are also called the electron sublevels. They are labeled with the letters s, p, d, f, g, h, etc.
For a wave function that actually describes an electron in an atom, ℓ is always no less than zero, but also no more than n − 1 (ℓ = 0, 1, 2 … n − 1).
In atoms with more than one electron, ℓ has a small effect on the electron's energy.
The magnetic quantum number, ml, determines how the electron wave is orientated in space. For any given value of ℓ, ml can be any integer from −ℓ to + ℓ (ml = −ℓ … +ℓ).
Match each quantum number with the property that they describe.(a) ni. shape(b) ℓii. orientation in space(c) mliii. number of nodes
Choose the correct word in each of the following statements.
(a) The (higher/lower) the value of n, the more nodes there are in the electron standing wave.
(b) The (higher/lower) the value of n, the less energy the electron has.
(c) The (more/less) energy the electron has, the more nodes there are in its electron standing wave.
Fill in the blank. For lower values of n, the electron density is typically found ________ the nucleus of the atom, while for higher values of n, the electron density is typically found __________the nucleus of the atom.
Circle all of the statements that make sense: Schrödinger discovered that certain quantities in the electron wave equation had to be integers, because when they weren't, the wave equation described waves which…
(c) were too long and narrow
(d) were too short and fat
(e) "doubled back" on themselves
What are the allowed values of ℓ for an electron standing wave with n = 4?
How many values of ℓ are possible for an electron standing wave with n = 9?
What are the allowed values of ml for an electron standing wave with ℓ = 3?
How many different orientations are possible for an electron standing wave with ℓ = 4?
What are the allowed values of ml for n = 2?
Defines the electron sublevel, and determines the shape of the electron wave.
Determines the orientation of the electron standing wave in space.
A place where the electron wave has zero height. In other words, it is a place where there is no electron density.
Defines the energy level of the wave function for an electron, the size of the electron's standing wave, and the number of nodes in that wave.
Integer numbers assigned to certain quantities in the electron wave function. Because electron standing waves must be continuous and must not "double over" on themselves, quantum numbers are restricted to integer values.
This material was adapted from the original CK-12 book that can be found here. This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 United States License
A powerful race, Ogres start off in the city of Oggok.  Ogres are fighters by trade and can play a Shadowknight, Shaman, Warrior, Beastlord, or Berserker.  They are the strongest and most naturally powerful of all the races. Considered an evil race, Ogres are killed on sight in most cities of Norrath.  Many players who play ogres like to talk in broken speech, so be forewarned when trying to communicate with your fellow players.
This is a critical analysis of the article “Effect of exercise intervention on endothelial function and incidence of cardiovascular disease in patients with type 2 diabetes” by Sadanori Okada, Aki Hiuge, Hisashi Makino, Ayako Nagumo, Hiroshi Takaki, Harumi Konishi, Yoichi Goto, Yasunao Yoshimasa, and Yoshihiro Miyamoto [1]
Type 2 Diabetes (T2D) is a progressive chronic condition where the body’s capacity for managing blood glucose levels and its ability to distribute it to necessary tissues is impeded.[2] T2D is often characterized by low levels of insulin, insulin resistance and high levels of blood glucose, specifically glycated haemoglobin referred to as HbA1c.[2]  Symptoms often include, fatigue, frequent urination, thirst, weight loss, blurred vision, and poor healing.[2] T2D often comes about because of combination of genetics and lifestyle risks such as obesity, insufficient exercise, and high energy diets.[2][3] Chronic hyperglycaemia can result in severe health complications for people suffering from T2D, both on a microvascular level (i.e. nephropathies or retinopathies) and/or a macrovascular level.[1][3] The macrovascular complications can include peripheral and coronary artery disease, atherosclerosis, and various other cardiovascular events. Many of these complications can result in serious debilitation or death.[3]
Effect of exercise intervention on endothelial function and incidence of cardiovascular disease in patients with type 2 diabetes by Okada et al was published in the Journal of Atherosclerosis and Thrombosis on the 13th of May 2010.[1] The Journal of Atherosclerosis and Thrombosis is published via J-stage which is an online journal database and publisher that is managed by the Japanese Science and Technology agency.
What kind of research was this?
The initial study was a randomised controlled trial (RCT) conducted over a period of three months, and there was a subsequent post hoc study that took place 24 months following randomisation.[1] RCTs seek to reduce bias when testing the effectiveness of specific treatments, be it new or in this case when seeking further understanding of the mechanisms of prior existing treatments.[4] Post hoc studies involve completing analyse after initial research and data collection has concluded.[4]
What did the research involve?
The study aimed to look at the specific role that exercise played in treating T2D.[1] There were 38 participants (21 male, 17 female), broken into two groups, the control, and the intervention.[1] As the study aimed to look at the role of exercise specifically, all participants in both groups received medical and dietary assistance with accord to diabetes treatment guidelines. The intervention included participants training 3-5 times a week, with each session comprising of a 10-minute warm up, 40-minutes aerobic activity, 20-minutes resistance training and a 5-minute cool down for a period of 3 months. Intensity was calculated at 60% based on the Karvonen heart formulae. The study looked at a variety of biological markers which were tested via blood test following a 12 hour overnight fast. These included: LDL, HDL, C reactive protein (CRP), HbA1c, serum adiponectin, and leptin.[1] BMI and peak VO2 were also tested to ascertain any changes to cardiorespiratory fitness and body composition.[1] Insulin sensitivity was determined via the steady-state plasma glucose method (SSPG), where patients receive an infusion of glucose and insulin and blood glucose is measured at 30-minute intervals for 2 hours.[1][5] Endothelial function was determined via flow-mediated endothelium-dependent vasodilation (FMD), where the brachial artery diameter was measured via ultrasound and was occluded via pneumatic cuff placed around the forearm and was measured for 2-minuyes following cuff deflation.[1][6] New-onset cardiovascular events were recorded in the 24-month post follow-up(1).
What were the basic results?
In both the intervention and control there was an increase in serum adiponectin levels and HDL and there was a decrease in LDL and HbA1c.[1] In the intervention there was a drop in BMI and increase in Peak VO2 and FMD.[1] There was an increase in Leptin in the control group. Neither group showed any statistically significant changes within CRP levels or SSPG.[1] Within the control group there were four cardiovascular events, with 1 case of angina pectoris and 3 cases of cerebral infarction, whilst the exercise group did not display any new cases.[1]
What conclusions can we take from this research?
For a few of the markers (LDL, HDL, HbA1c and serum adiponectin) there was a statistically significant change in both which would suggest that these were more so influenced by a healthy diet and appropriate medication rather than any exercise intervention. The increase in peak VO2 and drop in BMI are an unsurprising result for the intervention group, as an increase in physical activity and specifically aerobic activity would likely see a positive change in body composition (i.e. loss of adipose tissue) and also improved cardio fitness. The rise in serum leptin levels for the control group is somewhat inconclusive, as leptin concentrations are strongly correlated with levels of adipose tissues, so it is difficult to discern whether this increase and the lack of change in the intervention group is related to exercise or simply the decrease in adipose tissue of the intervention group.[1][7] Of note was the positive increase in FMD within the intervention group, as FMD was utilised as a surrogate marker for endothelial tissue function. This positive change could potentially explain the difference between the two groups in number of cardiovascular events, as the intervention group had 0 incidence whilst the control presented 4 in the 24 months post randomisation.[6] Based on the training modality of the individuals within the intervention group it can not be said specifically to what degree resistance and cardio training played individually.
Considering the positive change in results seen in LDL, HDL, Adiponectin, and HbA1c in both groups it is advised that individuals should eat a diet suitable for those suffering from T2D, specifically avoiding foods with a high glycaemic index such as foods high in added sugar and also saturated fats. Considering the reduction in risk of cardiovascular events and improved FMD it is highly recommended that individuals commence a suitable training program.
For further information on how to appropriately manage T2D, see the following pages.
Exercise Prescription in the Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus [2]
Diabtes what should I eat?[3]
Physical Activity/Exercise and Diabetes [4]
↑ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Okada S, Hiuge A, Makino H, Nagumo A, Takaki H, Konishi H et al. Effect of Exercise Intervention on Endothelial Function and Incidence of Cardiovascular Disease in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes. Journal of Atherosclerosis and Thrombosis. 2010;17(8):828-833.
↑ a b c d Blonde L. Current Antihyperglycemic Treatment Guidelines and Algorithms for Patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. The American Journal of Medicine. 2010;123(3):S12-S18.
↑ a b c Ramachandran A, Snehalatha C, Satyavani K, Latha E, Sasikala R, Vijay V. Prevalence of vascular complications and their risk factors in type 2 diabetes. J Assoc Physicians India. 1999;47(12):1152-1156.
↑ a b Sut N. Study Designs in Medicine. Balkan Medical Journal. 2015;31(4):273-277.
↑ Reaven G, Farquhar J, Nakanishi R. Steady State Plasma Insulin Response to Continuous Glucose Infusion in Normal and Diabetic Subjects. Diabetes. 1969;18(5):273-279.
↑ a b Alley H, Owens C, Gasper W, Grenon S. Ultrasound Assessment of Endothelial-Dependent Flow-Mediated Vasodilation of the Brachial Artery in Clinical Research. Journal of Visualized Experiments. 2014;(92).
↑ Zimmet P, Hodge A, Nicolson M, Staten M, de Courten M, Moore J et al. Serum leptin concentration, obesity, and insulin resistance in Western Samoans: cross sectional study. BMJ. 1996;313(7063):965-969.
Koopas are Bowser's evil minions, located almost everywhere in Dinosaur Land. Their shell colors can be green, red, blue, or yellow. Each color shell has a different effect on Yoshi when he eats one. Koopas can either be ground forces or have wings. Green Koopas move only in a straight line (unless they hit something; in that case, they turn around), while other colored Koopas patrol certain areas.
Normal Jump: A normal jump forces a Koopa out of its shell, making the Koopa vulnerable to a normal jump and the shell available to pick up and use with B.
Spin Jump: A spin jump kills a Koopa in one hit.
Jump with Yoshi: With Yoshi, a normal jump kills Koopas in one hit.
Fireballs: When hit with a fireball, Koopas turn into coins.
Cape Spin: Spinning with (B) or (R) with a cape will cause a Koopa to withdraw into its shell and its shell will turn upside down. It can then be used with B.
Yoshi's Tongue: Koopas can be picked up with Yoshi, each color giving him a different power. With a green Yoshi, each shell will do the following:
Green: Yoshi will spit out only the shell.
Red: Yoshi will spit out fireballs.
Blue: Yoshi will have wings for a limited amount of time.
Yellow: Yoshi will be able to stomp the ground, defeating nearby enemies.
Yoshi's Fireballs: Koopas turn into coins if you shoot fireballs at them (with Red Yoshi and/or a red shell).
Para-bomb - Para-goomba - Fishin' Lakitu - Lakitu - Spiny - Bob-omb - Wiggler - Sumo Brother - Pokey - Monty Mole - Bullet Bill - Amazing Flyin' Hammer Brother - Super Koopa - Jumpin' Piranha Plant - Volcano Lotus - Chargin' Chuck - Rex - Mega Mole - Banzai Bill - Dino-Rhino - Dino-Torch - Koopa - Blurp - Porcu-Puffer - Urchin - Rip Van Fish - Torpedo Ted - Spike Top - Swooper - Buzzy Beetle - Blargg - "Boo" Buddy - Fishin' Boo - The Big "Boo" - Eeries - Dry Bones - Lil' Sparky - Bony Beetle - Hothead - Thwomp - Thwimp - Ball 'n' Chain - Grinder - Magikoopa - Fishbone - Reznor - Mechakoopa
<<Back to Super Mario World
Congratulations on the new book! [click for more]
Please read Using Wikibooks to learn about editing and writing books. You can ask any questions in the help room.You can help people find this book by categorizing it.
Adventist Investiture Achievement Awards is an instructor's guide for teaching the requirements of the new (summer 2011) Investiture Achievement Awards to members of Pathfinder Clubs and Adventist Youth Societies.  Pathfinders and Adventist Youth are youth clubs operated by the Seventh-day Adventist Church.
There are 6 Investiture Achievement Awards that have been approved by the North American Division.  These are presented below.  The stage icons () indicate the percentage of the Investiture Achievement Awards that have comprehensive answers.
The answers here are based on the requirements as adopted for the North American Division.
This answer book is being written by Pathfinders for Pathfinders.  Anyone (even non-Pathfinders) can contribute new answers or edit existing answers, and the reader is encouraged to become an active participant in the development of this continually evolving work.
If you wish to contribute, welcome!  Here are some guidelines.
The requirements for every award are in the process of being entered.  Instruction for meeting the requirement, or an answer to the question posed by the requirement should follow the requirement.  Look at some of the existing answers to see how they are structured before you begin.  Press the "edit this page" link to see how wiki markup is done, and be sure to check out the "editing help" link that appears at the bottom of a page being edited.
Please do not copy content from copyrighted sources without securing permission first.  This especially applies to the answers in the official Answer Books by Leland Davis.  It also applies to content that other people have written for various Pathfinder websites and to images you find on the Internet.  Please read the Wikibooks:Copyrights section for more information.  It is OK to gather information from these resources, and you are encouraged to consult multiple sources - but with few exceptions, you must put answers in your own words.
Resources in the public domain can be incorporated here without any constraints.  This includes original works by the US government and anything published in the US before 1923.  You also may copy content (modified or verbatim) from Wikipedia, and you may use any images you find in the Wikimedia Commons.  Be aware though that many Wikipedia articles are written at a very high level, often requiring a college education (or medical degree!) to fully understand.
Keep your audience in mind when writing.  Try to use language that is geared toward the typical instructor that will be teaching this award.  It's OK to use technical terms as long as they are explained in the text.
To continue, your computer must display Persian. The box below should show these Persian letters on the far right:
If they are different or in the wrong order, see Persian Computing.
In lesson 1, you learned some greetings, the first nine letters of the Persian Alphabet, and how to spell several words with those letters from right to left.  You also learned that short vowels are usually not written, and that many letters change their shape depending on whether they connect with letters before or after them.
In this lesson, you will learn more formal greetings, the next eleven Persian letters and syllable stress.
Dialogue: ‹hâl-e šomâ cetor e?›
‹salâm, âqâ-ye peymân. hâl-e šomâ cetor e?›“Hello, Mr. Peyman.  How are you?”
Missing audio. If you are fluent in Persian, record and upload your voice.
‹salâm, âraš. xubam, mersi. šomâ cetorin?›“Hello Arash. I am well, thank you.  How are you?”
Missing audio. If you are fluent in Persian, record and upload your voice.
‹man xubam, mersi.  xodâ hâfez, âqâ-ye peymân.›“I am well, thanks.  Goodbye, Mr. Peyman!”
Missing audio. If you are fluent in Persian, record and upload your voice.
‹xodâ hâfez.›“Goodbye.”
Missing audio. If you are fluent in Persian, record and upload your voice.
Arash and Peyman are using a more formal style of speech typically used to show respect.  That is why they use the formal pronoun ‹šomâ›   instead of the informal ‹tow›   used in lesson 1.
‹šomâ›    /ʃoˈmɒː/ — “you” (formal, shows speaker's respect for listener)
‹cetor›    /t͡ʃeˈtoɾ/ — “how” (the endings ‹e› and ‹-in› will be explained in Lesson 5)
‹xodâ hâfez›    /xoˈdɒː hɒːˈfez/ — “May God keep you” (similar to the literal meaning of “goodbye”, i.e. “May God be with you”)
Family names are a relatively new aspect of Persian culture, having been introduced in Iran in 1912.
In most Persian words, the stress falls on the last syllable of the stem.
For example, in the following words from the dialogue, the stress is on the last syllable:
When suffixes and enclitics are added to Persian words and word stems, the stress usually does not move:
‹hast› + ‹-am› → ‹hastam›
A few prefixes and suffixes are stressed.  Those details will be explained in the lessons for those suffixes and prefixes.
A limited set of Persian words (interjections, conjunctions and vocatives), however, has the stress on the first syllable:
‹mersi› — First syllable is stressed when used as in the conversation above, "Thanks!"
‹âqâ-ye› — First syllable is stressed when addressing someone by title as in the conversation above, but not when talking with someone else about ‹âqâ-ye› so-and-so.
‹âraš› — First syllable is stressed when addressing Arash as in the conversation above, but the last syllable is stressed ‹âraš› when talking about him.
‹peymân› — First syllable is stressed when addressing Peyman as in the conversation above, but the last syllable is stressed ‹peyman› when talking with someone else about him.
Remember to write from right to left and to keep the base lines even.
The next two Persian letters have the same shape, but one of them has no dots and the other has three.
Remember to write from right to left and to keep the base lines even.
The next two Persian letters have the same shape, but only one has a dot.
Remember to write from right to left and to keep the base lines even.
The next two Persian letters have the same shape, but only one has a dot.
Remember to write from right to left and to keep the base lines even.
Recognizing letters:(To check your answers, click “[show ▼]”.)
What are the names of and sounds represented by the following letters?
The letter ‹šin›, which represents the sound ‹š› (IPA: [ʃ]).
The letter ‹dâl›, which represents the sound ‹d›.
The letter ‹sin›, which represents the sound ‹s›.
The letter ‹že›, which represents the sound ‹ž› (IPA: [ʒ]).
The letter ‹zâ›, which represents the sound ‹z›.
The letter ‹zâl›, which represents the sound ‹z›.
The letter ‹sâd›, which represents the sound ‹s›.
The letter ‹zâd›, which represents the sound ‹z›.
The letter ‹ze›, which represents the sound ‹z›.
The letter ‹tâ›, which represents the sound ‹t›.
The letter ‹re›, which represents the sound ‹r›.
Reading words:(To check your answers, click “[show ▼]”.)
Read these words by breaking them down into their component parts.
This exercise is incomplete.  Help the English Wikibooks Persian Language course by completing it.
Word recognition.:(To check your answers, click “[show ▼]”.)
See if you can recognize these familiar words:
In this lesson, you learned some greetings, the first nine letters of the Persian Alphabet, and how to spell several words with those letters from right to left.  You also learned that short vowels are usually not written, and that many letters change their shape depending on whether they connect with letters before or after them.
‹šomâ›    /ʃoˈmɒː/ — “you” (formal, shows speaker's respect for listener)
‹xodâ hâfez›    /xoˈdɒː hɒːˈfez/ — “May God keep you” (similar to “goodbye”, “God be with you”)
‹hâl-e šomâ cetor e?› — "How is your health?"
‹man xub hastam.› — “I am well.”
‹šomâ cetorin?› — “How are you?” (formal)
Below are all the core vocabulary words from lessons 1 and 2.  The far right column shows the words in Persian script.  Don't worry if you can't yet read the Persian script:
All vocabulary Lessons 1 - 2   edit
Noun: gentleman, sir, Mr.
Phrase: How are you? (informal)
Phrase: May God keep you. (Goodbye.)
Phrase: I’m fine.
The World Wide Web (the "Web" or "WWW" for short) is a hypertext system that operates over the Internet.  To view the information, you use a software program called a web browser to retrieve pieces of information (called "documents" or "web pages") from web servers (or "web sites") and view them on your screen.  You can then follow hyperlinks on the page to other documents or even send information back to the server to interact with it.  The act of following hyperlinks is often called "surfing" the web.
Looking further at web browsers, a web browser is an application program that accesses the World Wide Web, which then searches for wanted information on the Internet.  The first web browser named Mosaic was developed in the early 1990s.  The ease of information access provided by web browsers greatly added to the popularity of the Internet.  Companies and individual users alike can use a browser to access untold amounts of information, and its as easy to find as clicking a mouse.  The four most popular web browsers are Internet Explorer, Chrome, Firefox, and Netscape.  Tight competition has caused for continual improvement in the programs and associated technologies.  Web browsers are loaded with ease-of-use features and are customizable to an individual user’s preference.
The core functionality of the Web is based on three standards: the Uniform Resource Locator (URL), which specifies how each page of information is given a unique "address" at which it can be found; Hyper Text Transfer Protocol (HTTP), which specifies how the browser and server send the information to each other; and Hyper Text Markup Language (HTML), a method of encoding the information so it can be displayed on a variety of devices.
Tim Berners-Lee now heads the World Wide Web Consortium, which develops and maintains these standards and others that enable computers on the Web to effectively store and communicate all kinds of information.
The initial "www" program at CERN only displayed text, but later browsers such as Pei Wei's Viola (1992) added the ability to display graphics as well.  Marc Andreessen of NCSA released a browser called "Mosaic for X" in 1993 that sparked a tremendous rise in the popularity of the Web among novice users.  Andreesen went on to found Mosaic Communications Corporation (now Netscape Communications, a unit of AOL Time Warner).  Additional features such as dynamic content, music and animation can be found in modern browsers.
Frequently, the technical capability of browsers and servers advances much faster than the standards bodies can keep up with, so it is not uncommon for these newer features to not work properly on all computers, and the web as seen by Netscape is not at all the same as the web seen by Internet Explorer. The ever-improving technical capability of the WWW has enabled the development of real-time web-based services such as webcasts, web radio and live web cams.
Another significant advance in the technology was Sun Microsystems' Java programming language, which enabled web servers to embed small programs (called applets) directly into the information being served that would run on the user's computer, allowing faster and richer user interaction.
The similarly named, but actually quite different, JavaScript is a scripting language developed for Web pages.
In conjunction with the Document Object Model (DOM), JavaScript has become a much more powerful language than its creators originally envisaged.
The exponential growth of the Internet was primarily attributed to the emergence of the web browser Mosaic, followed by another, Netscape Navigator during the mid-1990s.
It brought unprecedented attention to the Internet from media, industries, policy makers, and the general public.
Eventually, it led to several visions of how our society might change, although some point out that those visions are not unique to the Internet, but repeated with many new technologies (especially information and communications technologies) of various era.
Because the web is global in scale, some suggested that it will nurture mutual understanding on a global scale.
The web is available to individuals outside the mass media. To "publish" a web page, one does not have to go through a publisher or other media institution, and the potential reader is around the globe, some thought. This to some is an opportunity to enhance democracy by giving voices to alternative and minority views. Some others took it as a path to anarchy and unrestrained freedom of expression. Yet others took it as a sign that hierarchically organized society, mass media being a symptomatic part of it, will be replaced by the so-called network society.
Also, the hyper-text seemed to promote a non-hierarchical and non-linear way of expression and thinking. Unlike books and documents, hypertext does not have a linear order from the beginning to the end. It is not broken down into the hierarchy of chapters, sections, subsections, etc. This reminded some of the ideas of Marshall McLuhan that new media change people's perception of the world, mentality, and way of thinking. While not unique issue to the web, hypertext in this sense is closely related to the notion of "death of author" and intertextuality in structuralist literary theory.
These bold visions are at least not fully realized yet. We can find both supporting and countering aspects of web usage.
First, regarding the increased global unity, indeed, many different kinds of information are now available on the web, and for those who wish to know other societies, their cultures, and people, it became easier. When one travels to a foreign country or a remote town, s/he might be able to find some information about the place on the web, especially if the place is in one of the developed countries. Local newspapers, government publications, and other materials are easier to access, and therefore the variety of information obtainable with the same effort may be said to have increased, for the users of the Internet.
At the same time, there are some obvious limitations. The web is so far a very text-centered medium, and those who are illiterate cannot make much use of it. Even among the literate, usage of a computer may or may not be easy enough. It has been known during the late 1990s, though with ample exceptions, that web users are dominantly young males in college or with a college degree. Now the trend has been changing and female and elderly are also using the web, level of education and income are related to the web use, some think (See also the Wikipedia article Digital divide). Another significant obstacle is language. Currently, only a limited number of languages are useable on the web, due to software and standard issues, and none would understand all the available languages. These factors would challenge the notion that the World Wide Web will bring unity to the world.
Second, the increased opportunity to individuals is certainly observable in the countless personal pages, as well as other groups such as families, small shops, which are not among those who publish materials. The emergence of free web hosting services is perhaps an important factor in bringing this possibility into reality. The activities of alternative media expanded into the web as well.
Yet not a small part of those pages seem to be either prematurely abandoned or one-time practice. Very few of those pages, even when they are well-developed, are popular. When it comes to the expression of ideas and provision of information, it seems that the major media organizations and those companies who became major organizations through their online operations are still favored by the dominant majority. Besides, the Web is not necessarily a tool for political self-education and deliberation. The most popular uses of the Web include searching and downloading pornography, which perhaps has a very limited effect in improving democracy. The most intensively accessed web pages include the document detailing the former U.S. president Bill Clinton's sexual misconduct with Monica Lewinsky, as well as the lingerie fashion show by Victoria's Secret. In sum, both in terms of writers and readers, the Web is not popularly used for democracy. While this is not enough to categorically reject the possibility of the Web as a tool for democracy, the effect so far seems to be smaller than some of the expectations for a quite simple reason, lack of interest and popularity. Anarchistic freedom of expression may be enjoyed by some, but many web hosting companies have developed their acceptable use policy over time, sometimes prohibiting some sensitive and potentially illegal expressions. And again, those expressions may not reach great many. The web is still largely a hierarchical place, some may argue.
Third, regarding the non-linear and non-hierarchical structure of the Web, the effect of those on people's perception and psychology are still largely unknown. Some argue that our culture is changing to that of postmodernity, which is closely related to a non-linear and non-hierarchical way of thinking, being, and even social organization. Yet the counter-evidence is available as well. Among the most notable would be the existence of web directories and search engines. Those sites often provide navigations to the most popular sites to visitors. Besides, it is quite obvious that many web sites are organized according to a simple hierarchy, having the "home page" at the top. At least the present state of the Web and web users seem to suggest the change has not been as great as envisioned by some.
2012: Interstitial PMID 22265440 -- "American Brachytherapy Society consensus guidelines for interstitial brachytherapy for vaginal cancer."
Note: includes use of interstitial brachytherapy for primary vaginal cancer or recurrent cervical, endometrial, or vulvar carcinomas involving the vagina.
Previous:An existing language?
Latin?
Latin was for centuries the international tongue of the higher intellectual world, and it is still used extensively in the Roman Catholic Church: why not then revive it for all purposes? It would certainly have the advantage of being neutral and thus avoid the objections just mentioned. To those few scholars who dream of this rôle for Latin the reply is obvious: Latin has had that position, and has lost it irrevocably in consequence of the natural development of the last three centuries or more. Even classical scholars use Latin very little nowadays in their scientific papers. And outside their narrow circles very few people are now able to read, still less to speak or write, Latin in spite of the great number of hours devoted to that language in many schools. How many scientists would now be able to read Newton's or Tycho Brahe's works in the original? And how many are there who read even such excellent works as Erasmus's Encomium Moriæ or Holberg's Nicolaus Climius in Latin? When it comes to expressing the ideas of our own day, the deficiencies of classical Latin appear with ruthless clarity: telephones and motor-cars and wireless have no room in Ciceronian Latin, and it will be of little use to coin Neolatin words for these and other modern inventions, for the whole structure of the language with its intricate forms and complex syntax, which tempts the writer to twisted sentences, has become so utterly antiquated that we of the twentieth century wince at the idea of having to clothe our thoughts in that garb.
Recently G. de Reynold in two remarkable articles (in the Revue de Genève, May and June 1925) - after a scathing criticism of the barbarisms of Esperanto and after a condemnation of the idea of an artificial language, which in my view is exaggerated and unjust - brought forward the proposal to use as an international language not classical Latin, but the Latin of the Middle Ages, with its simplified sentence constructions (quod instead of infinite clauses, etc.) and even further modernizations: he thinks it will be easy for a conference of philologists and experts of all countries to agree on a system for adapting Latin forms and phraseology to contemporary uses. This is to my mind much more Utopian than such a scheme as that advocated below: for where is such a conference to begin, and where to end? Irregular verbs? I think most lovers of Latin will object to a simplification of sum, es, est, and where are we to draw the line in the use of the subjunctive and the ablative, etc. etc.? Further as to the meanings and uses of words: is bellum classium to mean naval warfare or war of the classes in the modern sense? Redactio, sociologia, eventualitas, fixatio, realismus, radicalismus, jurista, vegetarianus and similar coinages would, of course, have to be admitted in spite of the protests of classicists, but what is to be done with radium and radio, not as case forms of radius, but as independent words? Hundreds of similar questions would inevitably arise, and the conference would probably split up into small groups representing the most diverging standpoints - some advocating the Latin of the Vulgate, others that of Erasmus, while some would simplify inflexions in a few points and others in a great many more, even down to partisans of Peano's Latino sine flexione, which in the eyes of not a few scholars is a barbarous profanation of the Latin they love, and which is evidently very far from de Reynold's idea. Even after a repeated reading of his eloquent plea I cannot help looking on Latin as irretrievably dead, at any rate for our purposes, which should cover the interests not only of scholars, but also of merchants, technicians, politicians and other men of the practical world. It is no use saying that Latin culture and through it the Latin language has pervaded and is pervading modern life in thousands of ways: no one denies that, and therefore great parts of the Latin language must necessarily be incorporated in our Interlanguage of the future - but only those parts which have proved their vitality by surviving in the languages actually now spoken - that is the test of what we can use and what not.
The decisive reason, however, why we must oppose the adoption of one of the existing languages, living or dead, is that each of them is several times more difficult than a constructed language need be and than those constructed languages are already which have any chance of being selected; while in Part II I shall try to show that it is possible in some respects to go further in simplification than most of the proposed artificial languages have gone. It will now be our task to consider those objections which are constantly raised against the idea of a constructed language and to show that they are far from being conclusive.
The Cullinan is a residential complex located in Hong Kong's Union Square. This prime waterfront residence has glass curtain walls and sweeping views of the Victoria Harbour. The glass facade gives the twin towers a futuristic look, matching the design language used on the nearby International Commerce Centre.
The history of Edmeston, New York: 1830 through 1839
By 1830 Edmeston had added to its other places of business a store, a tannery, and a post office [opened in February 20, 1816].  The store had been opened in 1824 by Lyman White, near the Peet Tavern and the tannery had been built by John Bilyea on this same street at the foot of the hill.  Despite the fact that there were few houses in Edmeston Center in 1830, the Town of Edmeston in that year had its largest population, 2087. — Hazel L. Jones
Esq. David Chapen carried on a large shoe shop, and also a tannery, keeping six or eight hands each.  In the shoe shop was Pitman Cook, John Bilyea, Mason Davis, Pardon Wolley, Elisha Burnam, Waterman Davis, and others.  John Bilyea built the first tannery at the Centre.  Thomas Southworth had a shoe shop on the corner, where Jared Robinson now lives and kept four or five hands.   Rufus Graves also ran a shoe shop, and employed several hands, and all had all they could do.
Col. Aden Deming lived among the Shakers until he was 21, when he pulled out and settled the farm where he died in 1847, aged 79 years.  He was in the War of 1812.  He called out his company and volunteered himself, and Benjamin Hopkins, Thomas Southworth, Israel Taylor, Joseph Howard, Ruben Rosier, and Merrill Lewis.  But the Col. and Hopkins were taken sick and did not stay long — Col. Deming became a great farmer having 500 or 600 acres [2 to 2.4 km²] of land all in a body.  Besides he had a timber lot in Norwich, and one in Pitsfield.  He built a saw mill on his land, and had a room furnished in the corner with a stove and bed in it, and I have heard his wife say he would often stay there from Monday morning until Saturday night.  He kept a large stock of cattle and sheep, for them days and made butter and cheese and fatted a good deal of pork.  I have known him to start for Albany with four or five teams with butter, and cheese and pork.  When he washed his sheep. all hands went, and when they were done all hands must play ball until chore time.  he would sit and keep tally, and hold the jug.  I remember I reaped for him one day in a seventy acre [283,000 m²] lot of rye.  We could just reap through and bind back by dinner time.  He had hands that worked for seven or eight years in succession.  Among them were Mr. Catly, Mr. Forbush, Edwin Phelps, George Tyler, and Aaron Noble.  He was poor master in town for a great many years and I don't think he ever had a charge against the town in the time.  He would take those who applied to him for aid home with him and, make them pay their way.  He was a very thorough man, never hurried his hands, but they must keep busy.  His rule was, when chopping down a tree, never to look up after he struck it until it was half off, no matter how large it was.
Erastus Waldo was a noble man;  He held some town office the most of the time until he left town.  Martin Lee was a man of some note and held several offices.  Esq. David Chapen was justice of the peace from the time the town was organized in 1808 until his death in 1821.  Mr. Rufus Graves was a noted man, the first to keep a tavern in town.  He had two sons, Rufus and Amos.  Rufus died here some sixty years ago, but Amos went to Michigan, where he died some twenty years ago.
There were many substantial men here at that time.  I can remember when they held town meetings in the school house.  they would come together and say "Who shall we have for Supervisor?  Someone would nominate Mr. Waldo, or some other person, and he was elected, and so on through until all officers were elected, and then get home before night.  Isaac Brown held the office of Town Clerk for over twenty years in succession.  Silas Peet was justice of the peace for a great many years, and held other offices.
Joseph Bootman was a cloth dresser and wool carder and bought out Mr. Stern. He was father of our townsmen Truman and Edgar Bootman.  Wm. Stickney came here about 1820, and in company with Samuel Simmons, started a trip hammer shop below the mill. m They also manufactured scythes and rifle barrels.  John Bilyea built the first tannery at the centre.  Lyman White the first store, where the old tavern now stands.  Nelson Green built a blacksmith shop and forge, where his son Lewis now holds forth.  Captain John Gross a cooper shop to the west and Arthur Hawkins a saw mill a little south.  Perry and Pierce Pope, a blacksmith and hame shop at South Edmeston.  About this time Wm. Stickney bought the mills and the Kennedy farm, built a large house and lived there until he died, some thirty years ago. — Yours truly, James Slocum
From 1830-1860 Edmeston Center continued to increase in population and improve in appearance.  In 1836 the grist mill which had been built by the Kennedy brothers in 1801, was replaced by a stone mill.  (The stone from that mill now,1953, forms a large part of Dr. L.N.Harrington"s home in Utica, N.Y.. — Hazel L. Jones
Warren DeLancy Postmaster at Edmeston Manor 1836, William D. Lansing, 1841 (last entry). — Flora Underwood
Charles Hammond and Wright Caulkins built a cabinet shop and dwelling near the present Opera House site in 1832.
Daniel R. Barrett located in Edmeston in 1832, on the farm I think where his grandson, Dan Barrett, now lives.  One of his sons, John, married Chrissa Deming, daughter of Col. Eri Deming and built the house in 1860 where Mrs. George Barrett and Lisle now live. — Myrta Kelsey
At an early date a still and potash building was erected on the upper side of the road from the grist mill and in 1832 Charles Hammond and Wright Caulkins built a cabinet shop and dwelling not far from the present opera house site.
In 1832 Nathan Hoxie came and settled on a farm near the villages of West Edmeston and South Edmeston.  His sons Samuel and Solomon did much to promote the agricultural interests of the town and greatly improved the dairying industry by introducing new and better breeds of cattle.  Samuel Hoxie was a leading member of the Unadilla Stock-breeders Association and was instrumental in its organization. — Hazel L. Jones
In 1833 our father was sent to the legislature (Philo Bennet) and spent two winters, I think in Albany. I remember when he came home one time, he had the stage coach stop at the school house and take us children home with him, which was fine for us.  He brought a number of song books, new and very charming songs, a bolt of small neat figured calico.  Calico was of some account in those days; and a Chintz dress for mother, a dark ground with small bright roses all over it, very fine, but she feared to gay for her.  It was made with large sleeves, such as are worn now (Dec. 21, 1895), with pillows of down to make them puff out. She wore cape with full pleated boarder trimmed and tied with ribbon, such was the style, and a woman at forty was considered old.   — Matilda C. Bennett
All the original building erected in Edmeston village [hamlet] was "on the hill" on East Street.  As late as 1834 there was but one street running east and west and there were but 16 houses from where the late Fred Hickling lived to the home of Howard P. Talbot. — Sandra Lohnas Haggerty
My father moved into Edmeston when I was 12 years old in 1834.  At that time there was but one street in the Village, the one running east and west and but 16 houses from where Reuben Talbot now lives to the present residence of Israel Talbot, about a mile [2km] apart. [1953, Dorr Hickling and Howard P. Talbot respectively].  About 1840 my husband bought a little over three acres [12,000 m²] of land on the corner and built what is known today as the Gaskin House [1992 location of the central National Bank]. — Esther Preston
Besides the settlements already mentioned, two others had been made in the Town of Edmeston on the Unadilla River.  The one in the northwestern part of the town was first called Coonsville, or Coontown because so many people by the name of Coon settled there.  John S. Coon was born in Plainfield, Otsego County, in 1807.  When he was 28 years of age (1835) he built a furnace (at what is now West Edmeston) In which he made all kinds of farming implements, and continued to follow the same trade for some twenty years, then he manufactured wagons and cutters.  For many years he was the sole owner of all the mills at West Edmeston. — Hazel L. Jones
West Edmeston post office opened 1/21/1835  — Dorothy Scott Fielder
The first school building in Edmeston Centre was built at the foot of West street in 1838.  [a frequent misquote, locations and dates are defined in "A register of the Property of the Town of Edmeston 1809"] The second school building was also located on West St. opposite Mrs. John Barrets residence. — Hazel L. Jones
On the last Sunday in May, Coroner Isaac Lewis of this village [Cooperstown] was called to Springfield, to hold an inquest on the bodies of five persons who were drowned in Lake Summit. They attempted to cross that pond in a leaky boat, which sunk with them. — S. M. Shaw
This VBA code module shows how bias can affect a shuffle algorithm, even when a random generator is used.   The module is intended for MS Excel and prints two statistics panels on the worksheet to show how the selected methods differ.   The good version is the Knuth shuffle algorithm, and the other is one that makes methodical swaps, sometimes multiple swaps, throughout the length of the array.
Copy the entire code listing into an Excel Standard module, save it, then run the top procedure.
The shuffle algorithms run for many cycles, (user set), and the bin count of discrete outcomes is presented in statistics.  Notice that a very small number of elements, (3 or 4), has been used to keep the display and run time manageable.   It may be of interest to know that the number of discrete outcome combinations is equal to the factorial of the number of elements. That is; using just six elements, say A,B,C,D,E,and F, would result in 6! = 120 discrete combinations, and a corresponding increase in the time to run.
In particular, it should be noted that a small coefficient of variation (CV) denotes a method that is close to random whereas one with a higher CV shows that there is bias in the method.
The method that uses multiple swaps is biased, whereas the Knuth method is not.
'Run this to compare the bias for shuffling
'character arrays using two methods.
'Note large sets are too time consuming,
'since there are n! combinations.
Dim vArr As Variant, vRet As Variant
Dim nT As Long, bOK As Boolean, vT As Variant
Dim nCycles As Long, n As Long, sT As String
'load a typical 1D data array with test data
'3 elements makes 3! = 6 bins
'4 elements needs 4! = 24 bins etc.
'set number of cycles for test
'Typical time to complete 3 element test:
'25 secs for 100000 cycles
'225 secs for 1000000 cycles
'dimension the collection array
ClearWorksheet "Sheet1", 3 'contents and formats
'runs number of shuffle samples
For n = 1 To nCycles
'give way to commands-eg; break
'pass array to a random shuffling proc
'make a single string from array elements
'save shuffle instance in an array
'pass array to the proc with label for the display
CountUniqueArrayValues2 vT, 2, 2, "Test Set: Rnd Knuth"
'run a number of shuffle samples
For n = 1 To nCycles
'give way to commands-eg; break
'pass array to a random shuffling proc
'make a single string from array elements
'save shuffle instance in an array
'pass array to the proc with label for the display
CountUniqueArrayValues2 vT, 2, 7, "Test Set: Rnd Biased?"
MsgBox "Display done."
Private Sub CountUniqueArrayValues2(vI As Variant, Optional nRow As Long = 1, _
Optional nCol As Long = 1, Optional sLabel As String = "")
'Counts instances of data number values in vI. Generates various stats
'for the bin quantities.
Dim vRV As Variant, vRQ As Variant, vDS As Variant
Dim LB As Long, UB As Long, vDB As Variant
Dim n As Long, bOK As Boolean
'make bins and count contents
ReDim vDB(LB To UB + 2, 1 To 3)
If bOK Then 'load bins and stats arrays
For n = LB To UB
On Error Resume Next 'avoids Mode() error when no value stands out
With Application.WorksheetFunction
MsgBox "Problems getting bin count - closing"
'ClearWorksheet "Sheet1", 3                    'clear both contents and formats of the worksheet
Array2DToSheet vDS, "Sheet1", nRow, nCol      'transfer stats panel to sheet with top left at row2, col2
Array2DToSheet vDB, "Sheet1", nRow + 13, nCol 'transfer bins panel to sheet with top left below stats
FormatCells "Sheet1"                          'apply font and autofit formats to all cells of the worksheet
Private Function DiscreteItemsCount(vIn As Variant, vRetV As Variant, vRetQ As Variant) As Boolean
'Counts number of repeats of element values found in vIn
'Returns with one column for each unitque value and quantity found.
'Returns as 2D vRet, unsorted; row1=input value, row2=item count.
Dim vA As Variant, vTS As Variant, vTB As Variant
Dim s As Long, b As Long, n As Long, bFound As Boolean
Dim LB1 As Long, UB1 As Long, LB2 As Long, UB2 As Long
Dim LBS As Long, UBS As Long
'get source 1D array bounds
'get source element value
If vTS = vTB Then 'found in bins
Loop Until b >= UB2 Or bFound = True
If bFound = False Then 'no such bin exists yet
ReDim Preserve vA(LB1 To UB1, LB2 To UB2 + 1)
'transfers -need to be separate for other uses
For n = LB2 To UB2
Debug.Print vbCrLf
Private Sub ClearWorksheet(ByVal sSheet As String, Optional ByVal nOpt As Integer = 1)
'clears worksheet contents, formats, or both
'but does not remove charts from the worksheet
With oWSht.Cells
MsgBox "Illegal option in ClearWorksheet - closing"
Private Sub Array2DToSheet(ByVal vIn As Variant, sShtName As String, nStartRow As Long, nStartCol As Long)
' transfers contents of input 2D array to specified worksheet positions
' Works for any array bounds
Dim oSht As Worksheet, rTarget As Range
Dim nRows As Long, nCols As Long
Dim nNewEndC As Long, nNewEndR As Long
'get reference to sheet for output
'get the pre-shift end points
'modify end point for parameter starting values
nNewEndR = nRows + nStartRow - 1
nNewEndC = nCols + nStartCol - 1
' define the sheet range for the array contents
'transfer the array contents to the sheet range
rTarget.Value = vIn
' Applies certain formats to all cells
' of the named parameter worksheet
'format all cells of the worksheet
.Font.Name = "Consolas" 'mono
.HorizontalAlignment = xlLeft 'xlRight 'xlCenter
.VerticalAlignment = xlBottom 'xlCenter 'xlTop
Private Function KnuthArrShuffle(vIn As Variant, vR As Variant) As Boolean
' Performs a modified Knuth random shuffle on the elements of the input array.
' The original by Fisher-Yates, was modified for computers by Durstenfeld
' then popularised by Knuth. Returns result in vR with vIn unchanged.
'Note: Some or all elements COULD occupy their original positions,
'but only in accordance with expectation based on the random generator.
'This is best seen for small arrays, say with only 3 elements or so.
Dim LB As Long, UB As Long, nL As Long
Dim i As Long, j As Long
nL = UB - LB + 1   'length of input array
vW = vIn 'transfer to a work array
For i = LB To nL
'first get a random number
'transfer jth of vW to ith of vR
'replace selection with current last of vW
'remove last of vW by shortening array
ReDim Preserve vW(LB To UB - 1)
'get new UBound of shortened vW
'exception; return if last chara
Private Function BiasedMultiSwapArrShuffle(vIn As Variant, Optional vRet As Variant) As Boolean
'Performs a random shuffle on input array strings.
'if provided, else in vIn modified.  Multiple shuffles applied.
'Displays more bias than the Knuth method.
Dim sT As String, sTJ As String, sTS As String, nC As Long
Dim LB1 As Long, UB1 As Long, LB2 As Long, UB2 As Long
Dim i As Integer, j As Long, bSUsed As Boolean, bRUsed As Boolean
For i = LB1 To UB1
'randomize the rnd generator
For i = LB2 To UB2
Private Function Arr1DToStr(vIn As Variant) As String
' Makes a single string from 1D array string elements.
' Works for any array bounds.
Dim nC As Long, sT As String, sAccum As String
Dim LB As Long, UB As Long
'join characters of array into string
For nC = LB To UB
Today in 2007 What.CD was launched. It was the most successful successor to Oink’s Pink Palace.
The Feast of Tabernacles, or Sukkot is five days after the Day of Atonement, a seven day period of great rejoicing for sins forgiven and expectation of the advent of the kingdom age to come.
The scripture instructed the Israelites to dwell in a temporary huts (sukkah or sukkot) for these 7 days. It can be undertaken today in a campsite or a backyard gazebo or pergola or a special structure suited to one's own situation.
/Tabernacles/Constructing a Sukkah
/Tabernacles/The Sukkah and the Lulav
/Tabernacles/History of the Feast
/Tabernacles/Hoshanna Rabbah - 7th Day
/Tabernacles/Shemini Atzeret and Simcha Torah
/Tabernacles/Services for Sukkot
/Tabernacles/Services for Shemini Atzeret
/Tabernacles/Recipes for Sukkot
Introduction —Going to classes —Assignments —Studying —Taking notes —If You Must Cram —Exams —Practice —Resources —Licensing
Taking notes is an extremely important aspect of studying that is often neglected, despite the fact that it can make the difference between a moderate grade and an excellent one. Taking notes can involve more cognitive or "thought work" than the common alternative of merely highlighting important terms or phrases in a text, but it also produces better learning. Its benefits happen by focusing attention on the material in two ways: initially at the time of reading it, and later at the time of reviewing the notes.
Why Take Notes?
Takings notes provides a person with a way to review material learned. Reviewing and reading notes allows a person a chance to know what is on an exam, test, or pop quiz. One of the more important reasons to take notes, is to create a placemark. This placemark allows the note taker to know when the lecturer stopped giving a lecture for the day.
For example: Did the teacher stop midway between Chapter 10.. or are we on Chapter 11 now?
You review the notes and notice how the ending material of the notes are similar to the material seen before the ending part of Chapter 10. Therefore, you figure the teacher did not lecture on Chapter 11 yet... or else you dazed out really bad the last half of class.
Knowing this gives you a chance to read ahead or study certain materials, and place emphasis on studying a particular section of notes and book reading.
Notes are also a way of reviewing what you have learned in the lecture. During the lecture, a teacher may put emphasis on a particular term or word. These particular terms or words may be found on an oncoming test or quiz. Studying materials on notes gives a person a chance to know what the teacher expects you to know, now that the teacher has presented you with that material.
If the material is on the notes, the teacher expects you to know the material is on the notes.
Therefore, there is a good chance the material will be on a test.
Besides the obvious paper and pencil, many technological additions of the past decades allow for someone to take notes with deadly accuracy.
OR Analog Voice Recorder (recorders that use casette tapes)
These additions save effort (and reduce writers' cramp) at the time of listening to a lecture, but they also have two kinds of limitations. One kind is practical--getting good quality sound (see below for more discussion of this challenge).
Another kind of limitation is the time needed, sooner or later, to listen to recorded notes. Since speech proceeds at a relatively fixed rate, it is hard to do "speed listening" equivalent to "speed reading" of notes that are written. This fact of life puts a premium on abbreviating voice recordings of notes--though it should also be noted that the physical work of writing puts a premium on abbreviating written as well. Since taking notes is work either by writing or by recording, the best advice is to use whichever medium feels most comfortable.
The voice recorder is essential to any student who wants to take accurate notes. More importantly is a voice recorder with the ability to upload voice files to a computer console. Often when looking into buying a voice recorder, the choice can be complicated and indefinite. Fore, one must buy and try before deciding on one to buy. However, due to the technical limitations provided by manufacturers and stores, reviews and other word of mouth advice seems to be the supplies provided in obtaining a decent voice recorder.
Many things should be considered when buying a voice recorder.
How long does the voice recorder record?
Can it record for two hours or more?
Some classes last two hours and thirty minutes (2:30 hours)
A recorder that can record for this long is essential.
Can the batteries be replaced or do the batteries need to be recharged?
What type of batteris does the recorder take?
Many devices "eat up" battery electrolytes (power) quickly.
Getting a recorder with easy to replace batteries found in common stores is suitable for replenishing the supply of power.
Can the recordings be saved to a computer?
Being able to put files on a computer allows for a person to sort lectures according to dates.
Getting a voice recorder saves a person a lot of time taking notes. If a teacher is mostly lecture, as in, the teacher rarely writes on the chalkboard/whiteboard, then it would be best to get a voice recorder to save your hand from developing arthritis.
The typical area of a placement is one of the greatest factors to consider when using a voice recorder.
Observation is the key to finding a good place to set the recorder.
If you notice that a teacher does not past a certain line of boundary, say past his or her desk, then you could possibly put the recorder on his or her desk. (ask if you may first)
However, if the teacher walks around the room this creates problems. If a teacher walks past the desk, and his or her back is facing towards the desk, then the teacher's voice will not reach the voice recorder as effective--and the voice may not be recorded at all.
Often placing the recorder one's own desk is suitable if better positioning cannot be found elsewhere.
However, to have a recorder sitting on a desk while jotting down notes can cause interference when voice and other sounds are being recorded. Often the writings and scribbles cause a sound of scratching on the paper which will be picked up on the recorder. At other times, the sound of flipping a page on a binder--to go to the next clean sheet for writing notes--will be picked up on the recorder. Another thing to consider is the sound of the arm moving against a desk, while the hand goes downwards on a sheet of paper, as notes are being written. Often the rubbing sound of an arm against a desk and the hand against the paper will be recorded.
The remedies recommended for these problems are as follows:
Use an inkpen.
Inkpens glide on paper. Also, pencil writings tend to fade with time.
Pencil is often a bad writing utensil for notes. This is why I suggest an erasable pen.
Human skin is like leather at times. Clothing will create less friction on the desk.
Use an ID card under your hand.
This is an art technique I learned long ago. It allows the hand to be placed on the ID, as the ID easily slides on paper. Sometimes it works; sometimes it does not.
Listen carefully to the person giving a lecture.
I've found that professors at times go off at a tangent. The best thing to do is notice when there is a break in his or her logic being conversated, and quickly flip the page. It is at times best to bring the notebook off the desk, away from the recorder, and then flip the page to reduce recorded noise.
I personally like to upload all files to a computer.
With one or more file belong to a particular date, say Feb-26-07, I put those files in a computer folder labeled: Feb-26-07
From there, I make a backup copy of the files inside the folders and put them on a CD.
CD-Drives are more common to find around schools than DVD-Drives. Therefore, a CD is more suitable than a DVD storage medium.
Also, I create a backup of that CD.
Take the files inside the CD and put those onto a storage medium: considerably another CD.
After burning a CD, make a backup on a DVD (if possible -- if not, then a CD) and then store that disc somewhere safe. I like to put things in my top dresser drawer. Always make backups of a lecture, this is very important. Backups are gravely important!
Another thing to consider is if you use a program to listen to the audio files. If you use a program to listen to the audio files, it would be best to find the setup program of that recorder. Take the setup program and put the program on the CD that you will carry around with you. Also, put a copy of the audio listening setup program on the backup to always have the setup program on hand.
Sometimes the setup programs can be found on the installation CD that comes with a voice recorder.
Never take the original with you!
Always take the Backup.
Take the backup with you around the campus and listen to the audio files at a campus computer when you want to study/review.
This is a guide if someone wishes to create a backup. Otherwise, a person could simply find a safe place to store his or her cassette tape and access when he or she wishes to listen to it.
Typically one uses the Line Out feature of a recorder and plugs a wire into the Line Out hole.
The wire then extends to the Line In hole of another device (computers, boombox, etc.) and then inserts that part of the wire into the Line In.
Typically one pushes play on the analog voice recorder and pushes record on the boombox.
Label the cassette tape with the date of the recording and set that somewhere safe.
You don't technically need to make a backup, however, I always like the idea of making backups.
I could be wrong, if I am, please someone correct this entry.
Often times a person in the classroom will cough harshly. Coughs are typically very loud and will block out any voice coming into the recorder. Many times, other students could not hear what the teacher said during the time someone in the class coughed. In consideration, what a person should do is ask the teacher to repeat what he or she said. Do not fear asking the teacher the question, "Could you please repeat that?" because many other students may not have heard the teacher over the other student's sneeze, cough, or disruptive movements.
A method that is very well used when taking notes and using a voice recorder can help a person backtrack and review notes. Often times a teacher will give lectures and write on the board rarely. When a teacher writes on the board, it is best to look at the voice recorder and take note of how much time has expired and write the current recording time on the note page.
Let's say the teacher has been talking about studies in psychology without writing anything on the board for a while.
Finally, the teacher writes something on the board.
Phallic Stage and male idea of swords
The recorder has been on for about one hour and thirty minutes. The recorder displays (1:30:15) with :15 being 15 seconds.
Write the time displayed on the notepage. (1:30:15)
Then, copy the material on the chalkboard onto the notepage.
Sometimes the teacher doesn't even use the chalkboard. However insane that may be, some may not.
In that situation, a voice recorder would be highly regarded as necessary.
As the teacher talks, you need to find placemarks that help you backtrack to certain parts of the lecture.
For instance, the teacher breaks the class lecture into three parts:
Subparts are included, however, he or she does not describe them to you.
Thus, as the lecture goes on, you'll need to find a way to backtrack to certain material that he or she has spoken about.
If you don't want to listen to the whole recording again, it would be wise write that time down. That way, you can backtrack and review that material.
Let's say the teacher talks about Native American weaving techniques.
You know this part is going to be on the test.
You look at the voice recorder displaying (1:45:19)
There are many disadvantages to using a recorder.  When recording a lecture, one must re-listen to the entire lecture.  This means using another 2 and 1/2 hours.  However, you could use a tape recorder if you intend to re-use a small clip in you're private study.
Taking notes while reading the text book
Taking notes while reading your text can be the most critical part of passing a class.  In most classes the majority of information learned is taken from the text book, thus it is critical you retain as much of the information as possible.  The mechanics of taking notes while reading a text book can be broken down further into various techniques.
Type or write?
Typing your notes or writing your notes is a matter of personal preference.  If you can type faster than you write, you might prefer typing over writing.  Also typing your notes makes sure that they are legible.  However if you do plan to type your notes make sure that you have your book, monitor, and keyboard in a comfortable position to avoid neck or back cramps while note taking.  Writing out your notes has the advantage of allowing free-form drawing.  Something that is possible when typing, but can be cumbersome.
Often words/terms in bold--or words/terms that are important--are read. The best thing a person can do is take a sheet of writing paper and fold it up until it forms a makeshift bookmark. Then, when coming across terms, write the word found in bold on the bookmark writing line with the page number. Sometimes putting down names read and the page number the information about the person is on--does well.
This way, a person can track what page he or she is on. Also, it provides a way for someone to glance quickly at the bookmark and try to remember what the term means. If he or she does not remember what the word/term means, he or she can simply turn back to the page and regrasp the material.
The best part of this technique is that you can fold the bookmark up and put it in your pocket while going from place to place. All someone has to do is take the bookmark out of his or her pocket, look at it, and think hard about the terms and words on the bookmark. This is a great way to quickly review.
Copying text from the text book verbatim is the least perferred method of taking notes, but it can be somewhat helpful if it is the only option avaliable.
When reading a Math or Science text, copying definitions verbatim is appropriate, and required.  Science and Math are build upon precise definitions, so modifying in any way will distort key concepts.  The definitions are so important that copying them to flash cards for memorization is encouraged if time permits.
Paraphrasing concepts is the ideal way to take notes.  It will force you to actually think about what you read.  For Math and Science texts, extract ALL definitions and relevant theorems from paragraphs, and organize them into lists and sublists.  This will make sure you know they exist.  When reading all other texts, try to summarize ALL concepts.  Summarizing paragraphs will help too, but isn't as effective because the author of the text has already done some of the organization for you.  You may think that summarizing all concepts is a bit extreme, but often in a class you don't know what will be on the test and what won't, so if you want a high grade, this is the only way to be sure.
What if I don't understand something in the text?
The following is just a partial list of what you can do in this situation.
Ask a friend or class mate.  This is a good option only if your friend knows the material better than you do.  If not then you will have a situation of the blind leading the blind.
Get another text book from the library that covers the same subject.  This is an excellent option because text book explanations are usually well thought out,  and there are often many text books in the library on the same subject, which all describe the same concepts, but from different points of view, and in different wording.
Asking yourself, and answering questions
This is an EXTREMELY good technique.  Once you read a section of text, ask your self as many  questions as time allows about what you have read.  Try to answer them based on the content of the book.  It is good to do this as you go along, because it will make sure that your truly understood read before you go on to the next section.  This technique is essential if you are reading from texts that don't have a lot of questions in them, or have questions that don't have answers in the back.
Shorthand can be helpful.  Following along in the derivation of a solution to a math problem is a very good way to stay focused.
Study Skills Library California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo
-- your implementation goes here
A popular, and minimal way to represent the time derivate of a pose is a twist. A twist consists of two 3 × 1 vectors:
Rotational velocities that are written with respect to the same frame can simply be added. Hence:
The linear velocity of the origin of a link is that of the origin of the preceeding link plus a rotational component:
Note: In the above equations the resulting velocities are expressed relative to the frame of the current link.
.
The two-link planar manipulator.
The link transformations that come with this manipulator can be easily derived graphically from looking at the figure on the right:
, respectively.
Hence, from the above equations:
With respect to the base frame, the end-effector velocity becomes:
Note that in the case of a non-redundant manipulator,
.
The time derivate of the above equations is found as follows:
This example presents a slightly other way of solving the above problem. The position kinematics equations of this manipulator can be easily derived using the technique presented in the Serial Manipulator Position Kinematics section, or graphically from looking at the figure above:
Hence, the end-effector velocity is:
Note that the end-effector's angular velocity is, of course, the sum of the joint velocities. Another possibility that yields exactly the same result would be to explicitly include the equation for angular velocity and then calculate the Jacobian accordingly. This result is, as could already be expected, the same as the one in the above example, where the link transformation matrices were used to achieve the result.
This problem can easily be solved by inverting the Jacobian...
White recovers the pawn and has threatened much of Black's space with the Knight. Black can try to force the White Knight away with 4...Nc6, which White can defend by moving pieces in to defend his Knight, or 4...c5, which White would need to counter by moving his Knight or creating a sufficient threat elsewhere to save it.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 exd4 4.Nxd4
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Philidor Defence
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
The first meter was installed in 1933. All stamps are inscribed “ETHIOPIA” or “ETHIOPIE”.
Upright frank with simulated perforation outer border and straight line inner border.
Six-pointed star at center with value figure at bottom center.
One machine only, N1, used by the Bank of Ethiopia.
Horizontal frank with simulated perforation border at top, bottom and right side.
“POST/ PAID” below crown at center.
Date figures raised in relation to value figures.
M# with “P.B.” prefix at bottom center.
Similar to Type 2 but “BIRR/ POSTPAID” below circular logo at center.
M# with “P.B.” prefix breaks bottom frame line.
a. Date present without town mark
Horizontal frank with simulated perforation border along all four sides
Date and value figures on same level.
M# with “PB” prefix.
Pitney Bowes-GB “A900”  series (MV).
Similar to Type 4 but “ETHIOPIA” at top and “POST PAID” at bottom.
M# with “EPS1” prefix at lower left.
Horizontal frank, not as wide as Type 4, with simulated perforation border.
Country name at top.  Circular logo at top left.
M# with “NE” prefix at bottom left.
This table contains one record for each invoice.
Used by: Accounts Receivable, Order Entry/Invoicing, Time Billing, Service Management
Hold Authorization (User and Date/Time, encrypted)
Comment (unique to this invoice, prints on invoice)
This page documents two bots used extensively by countervandalism channels.
Computer was the original recent changes filtering bot written as a mIRC script, developed by White Cat. It was replaced by pgkbot in 2005.
SWBot is a C# bot developed by Tangotango and Az1568. It is designed for use in networked or multiwiki channels. Features include dynamic loading and unloading of wikis and channels, a central configuration file and database, global lists, auto-broadcast of global changes to all other SWBot instances, and detection of page blanking and replacement using automated MediaWiki summaries. However, per-channel event configuration is not possible.
CVNbot is a unified centralized bot written in Perl by Pathoschild. It is currently in development and not actively used. The bot is intended to facilitate channel network administration and provide edit monitoring, without extraneous features.
Common bots: ErosionBot-1, MiszaBot, TheDJBot, ClueBot(RC).
Commands are issued to the bot by appending their name or "computer" to the beginning of the line. If you append the name, the command will only be recognized by the bot named. If you append "computer", all bots present will recognize the command. For example, if you want to add a user to pgkbot's blacklist, you would say pgkbot bl add username. Alternately, you could add the user to the blacklist of every bot in the channel. This is recommended, as it synchronises the backup bots. To do this, you would say computer bl add username.
Which commands a user can issue depends on which list they are in.
The bots maintain several lists of users, which can be reported, formatted, and treated differently from each other.
Admins:  this is a list of admins on the project. The relevant command is computer al add|del username.
Whitelist: this is the list of trusted users. The relevant command is computer wl add|del username.
Greylist: this is a temporary blacklist which the bot automatically populates with users that have recently been reverted, or matched one of the bnu list expression. Entries can be removed from the list, but cannot be added manually.
Blacklist: this is a list of suspicious users. All edits by blacklisted users are reported. The relevant command is computer bl add|del username.
Bots: this is a list of bots on the project. The relevant command is computer bot add|del user.
This table is a quick overview of commands. For additional help, address the following command to pgkbot on IRC: pgkbot help <command>. There are two optional flags which can be used with most commands. These can be used by appending them to the end of the command (expiry must be stated before the reason, if both are used).
"r=value" provides a reason. This is useful for other users, who may not know why something has been added to the list without.
"x=value" provides an expiry time in hours. After the specified number of hours, the command will be automatically undone.
Note that the symbols "[|]" are used in the table; these symbols should not be used with the bot (for example, use "pgk add blah" and not "pgk [add] blah"). Multiple possible actions are denoted as [option 1|option 2]; only one can be used at a time. Values are designated as <value>; all strings accept regex.
Add or remove users who can give restricted bot commands.
Modifies the configuration values. See in-depth documentation below.
Retrieve the list of admins or bots direct from the wiki being monitored
Reread some configuration files.
Configure the events to report to the channel.
Switch the events reported between two channels, useful for changing to preset settings.
Reset the connection to the recent changes channel (if the bot stops reporting).
Provides detailed help on a command. If a command is not specified, it will provide a link to this page.
Provides basic status information about the bot, such as whether it is reporting and connected to the RC feed.
Miscellaneous channel statistics.
Stop reporting event to the channel.
Report events to the channel.
A list of trusted IRC users. These users can issue operation commands to the bot.
A list of distrusted or vandal users.
A list of trusted users.
A list of possible distrusted or vandal users.
A list of administrators.
A list of bots.
Report all new usernames containing the string.
Report all new articles created containing the string.
Report all edits to a given article.
A list of articles to be ignored.
Report all uploads to a particular image name.
Report pages renamed to a title containing the string.
Queries information about an IP or username.
Queries information about an article.
Queries information about an image.
These settings affect the way the bot filters the raw recent changes to the reported events. They are viewed with the command computer config list and modified with the command computer config <option> <new value>.
Possible copyright violations (big new article size)
Possible vandalism or substubs (small new article size)
The number of simultaneous blocks to a single user to report.
The number of minutes to add a user to the greylist if their edits are rolled back by an administrator.
The number of hours to add new users to the greylist.
The number of minutes to add new users that match a string on the bnu list.
Alternate name a bot should respond to as well as its name. This should be "computer" in Countervandalism network channels.
Don't report events on startup (toggle, "yes" or "no")
Synchronise the Bad new username and Bad new article name lists.
These options toggle which events are reported to the channel. They are accessed with the command computer dest list and computer dest [add|del] #<channel name> <event>. The events are listed below. Each event will only be reported to a channel once, irrespective of fitting into several of these categories.
"Actions" in the tables below refer to all visible changes to the database, including edits, page moves, and deletions.
Don't report actions by administrators.
Don't report actions by whitelisted users.
Don't report actions by bots.
Report all actions by blacklisted users.
Report all actions by greylisted users.
Report the creation of all new users.
Report all edits by anonymous users.
Report all edits of templates by non logged in users
Report all edits of categories by non logged in user
Report new usernames matching an entry in the bnu list.
Report page moves to titles matching an entry in the wheel list.
Report creates of articles which match an entry in the bna list.
Report edits to pages on the cvp list.
Report uploads of images on the cvi list.
Report blocks.
Report unblocks.
Report page deletions.
Report page moves.
Report non userspace page protections/unprotections.
Report file uploads.
Report possible blanking (removal of content exceeding config bigremove).
Report possible gibberish (addition of content exceeding config bigedit).
Report possible copyright violation (creation of a page whose size exceeds config bignew).
Report possible nonsense (creation of a page whose size is smaller than config tinynew).
Listen for commands in this channel, but don't respond unless addressed by nickname rather than "computer".
Python: The bot requires the python environment to run, which is freely available from the python.org download page. It is recommended that you install for all users to C:\Python with all options enabled.
Twisted: Also required is the Twisted python library, available from the official website.
Note - Pgkbot can only work with Python version 2.4 or 2.5 and will not work with older versions.
Download the latest public version of pgkbot (1.7) from pathos.ca/tools/pgkbot.
Unzip it to C:\pgkbot.
There are a few text files that need to be edited before use.
This is the IRC server the bot will connect to.
The server port to connect to; this value should be fine.
Change this to the nickname of the bot you want to use. Do not use "pgkbot" or "computer".
The password to use when identifying. Comment out this line if not using Nickserv
Change to your nickname. This gives you full access to the interface.
This is the IRC server the bot will connect to to get the RC feed.
The server port to connect to; this value should be fine.
Change to your nickname. This gives you full access to the interface.
The channel the bot will report to.
The channel with the raw RC feed (see IRC channels).
Open a DOS prompt.
Type in c:\python24\python.exe CVUBot.py en.
SWMTBot is a port of pgkbot to C#, specially made to suit the needs of the Small Wiki Monitoring Team and other users who monitor a large number of feeds in one channel. Most commands have been kept identical to their pgkbot equivalents except where necessary; messages have also been kept as close to pgkbot's as possible.
Supports simultaneous monitoring of a very large number of wikis with minimal resource usage
One small configuration file containing information for all wikis
One SQLite database, using minimal resources, for all wikis
Global username/article title watchlists (supports regular expressions)
Global edit summary watchlist (flags potentially vandalistic edit summaries; supports regular expressions)
Auto-broadcast of all global lists to other SWMTBots
Catches page blankings/replacements (using the new autosummaries)
All global lists are automatically synchronized across all SWMTBots; per-wiki lists are not. There is a global article watchlist for all wikis, and one for each one; you can add/delete/show items on the global list by leaving out the "p=" parameter (see the command lists below for more information).
Returns a list of all currently monitored wikis
Downloads new messages from the wiki; use if any of the log entry messages in the MediaWiki: namespace on that wiki have changed
SWMTBot reload fr.wikipedia
Performs reload for all currently loaded wikis. Extremely resource-intensive and thoroughly not recommended
SWMTBot drop als.wikipedia
Removes from the database all users and watchlisted items pertaining to a particular wiki
SWMTBot purge als.wikipedia
Re-loads messages from the Console.msgs file; necessary only when the file has changed
Finds out which bot monitors a particular project. You can issue this command to any networked bot to receive the same results
SWMTBot bleep commons.wikimedia
Finds out how many wikis each bot monitors, and each bot's version. You can issue this command to any networked bot to receive the same results
Adds, deletes, or shows an item on the global blacklist. Set x=0 to make indefinite
SWMTBot bl add Tangotango x=0 r=Bad vandal (Adds Tangotango to the global blacklist indefinitely)SWMTBot bl del Tangotango (Removes Tangotango from the global blacklist)
Deletes a user from the greylist. Use this if you want to whitelist a user, but they are on the greylist. Remove them from gl and add to wl.
SWMTBot gl del Mike.lifeguard (removes Mike.lifeguard from the greylist)
Adds, deletes, or shows an item on the whitelist. Set x=0 to make indefinite
(See above; wl has the same syntax as bl)
Adds, deletes, or shows an article on the watchlist. Leave out p= to monitor articles with the same name on all wikis; set x=0 to make indefinite
SWMTBot cvp add United States p=en.wikipedia x=0 (Adds "United States" to the en.wikipedia watchlist)SWMTBot cvp add Main Page x=0 (Adds all pages named "Main Page" on all wikis to the watchlist)
Adds, deletes, or shows an item on the admin list on a particular wiki. Set x=0 to make indefinite
SWMTBot al add Tangotango p=ga.wikipedia (Adds Tangotango to the admin list on ga.wikipedia)
Adds, deletes, or shows an item on the flagged-bot list on a particular wiki. Set x=0 to make indefinite
(See above; bots has the same syntax as al)
Adds, deletes, or shows an item on the global bad new username list. Set x=0 to make indefinite
SWMTBot bnu add Tangot.*?ngo x=128 r=vandal meme (Adds Tangot.*?ngo as a bad new username)
Adds, deletes, or shows an item on the global bad new article title list. Set x=0 to make indefinite
SWMTBot bna add index\.php r=vandal meme (Matches "index.php" as a bad new page title)
Adds, deletes, or shows an item on the global bad edit summary list. Set x=0 to make indefinite
SWMTBot bes add !{3,} r=Too many exclamation marks (Makes SWMTBot flag any edit summary with 3 or more exclamation marks)
Downloads a list of admins from the specified project and automatically adds it to the SWMTBot database
SWMTBot config getadmins en.wikipedia
Downloads a list of flagged bots from the specified project and automatically adds it to the SWMTBot database
SWMTBot config getbots da.wiktionary
Performs getadmins and getbots for all currently loaded wikis
SWMTBot is tested and actively developed to work on Mac OS X, Linux (Debian), and Windows. The software is licensed under the MIT License.
See m:CVN/CVNbot.
The King beneath the mountains,
The King of carven stone,
Shall come into his own!
His crown shall be upholden,
His harp shall be restrung,
To songs of yore re-sung.
And grass beneath the sun;
And the rivers golden run.
The streams shall run in gladness,
The lakes shall shine and burn,
At the Mountain-king's return!
↑ The Hobbit, Chapter X: "A Warm Welcome"
You want a user interface control that allows a user to select a legal entity in a contract such as a person or an organization.  The list of people or organizations are supplied in a list that includes an id and a screen label.  You want as-you-type functions to narrow down a list of choices from these lists.
We will create a user interface control with two tabs.  The first tab will be for people and the second will be for organizations.
Entity Selector Control.  Note that only the person names that contain the string 'John' are displayed
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
Next Page: Repeat into table |
Because of a recent bug with the install location of the dev files on debian and the hard-coded locations in the Makefile of DBD::Sybase I have suspended this tutorial. More information on the bug can be found at the rt tracker. EvanCarroll (talk)
This tutorial assumes you are using a Debian based distribution of Linux; if not, you might have to modify the instructions appropriately for you distro.
To install both freetds and the drivers for iODBC and unixodbc use apt-get, i.e.,
If you plan to use iODBC, you'll want to run
If you're using Perl, after you install FreeTDS you'll want to install the DBD for Sybase:
Designed by Sybase, the Tabular Data Stream Protocol (TDS) describes how to communicate with MS-SQL and Sybase databases.
Many of the errors here are to assist those with Google searches and the users.
The following error is a result of not setting the sybase configuration variable
Haynes, Tim (2004-03-23). "ODBC-Perl HOWTO". OpenLink Software. http://www.iodbc.org/index.php?page=languages/perl/odbc-perlHOWTO. Retrieved 2008-03-04.
Bruns, Brian (2006). "FreeTDS User Guide: A Guide to Installing, Configuring, and Running FreeTDS". http://www.freetds.org/userguide/. Retrieved 2008-03-04.
Photo of Today's Automobile (Genesis G90)[1]
An automobile can be described as a motorized vehicle which commonly consists of four wheels and is propelled forward/back by an internal engine. The purpose of the automobile is to transport people or items from one location to another.[2]
In today’s society, roads are generally operated by motor vehicles. The motor is generally powered by an internal combustion engine which is fuelled by fossil fuels in the forms of petrol and diesel. The engine burns the fuel and converts the energy produced into mechanical energy to propel a motor vehicle. During this process, the release of carbon and hydrogen molecules react to produce high amounts of energy and heat[3]. Although it is the most effective way to produce suitable amounts of energy for the motor vehicle. Over the years where motor vehicles have increased in use, the emission of air pollution has had significant impacts to the climate and is the main reason for global warming. Alternative methods to power motor vehicles to help mitigate this issue such as electric powered cars and more commonly, hybrid cars.[4]
The technological characteristics of an automobile have been developed to meet the needs of user’s overtime. To create a vehicle which is able to navigate to various destinations at relative speeds, to provide comfort and safety for the user. A motor vehicle can be either controlled by manual transmission or automatic transmission.
Some of the basic functions of a motor vehicle include;
A system which enables you to propel forwards and reverse back (accelerate/decelerate),
Safety functions such as window wipers, seatbelt, brake/hazard lights and indicators
Some more complex characteristics of an automobile includes air conditioning system, entertainment system and GPS functions. These have developed overtime to meet the needs of the users
The automobile is the most dominant transportation technology in the world today. More than 90 percent of the Australian population lives in a household with access to car. The roads are also accompanied by other forms of motor vehicles which include buses, trucks and motor cycles.
Can be used as a feeder to other transport modes i.e. rail
Prior To The Advent Of The Automobile
Other technologies which were available prior to the automobile included boats, steam train, electric cars transport and also other land transport methods such as horses.
During the late 1700s and early 1800s, canals were used as a vital mode of transport throughout Britain. Transport of goods by land transport were generally done via horse. Water transport could carry bulk goods at significantly lower unit cost than land transport which was four times more expensive during this period. Majority of the settlement were made around the river banks throughout England, therefore the use of boats through canals were at the time, the easiest means of transportation of goods.[5]
The canals did not offer much technological breakthrough in transport with it being such a simple system. Most of the know-how of canal construction such as lock and sluice came from experiences from improving rivers and taking ideas from the toll roads.
The canals were created within a regional context due to the nature of the built environment and how the speeds produced from the boats were relatively slow, therefore only helped increase trade through regional levels rather than national.[5]
Although canals had their limitations they also provided experiences that would be beneficial for future modes to come. “They offered a new generation of entrepreneurs and engineers experience in the organisation of men and money”. Also, providing experience towards general policy for transportation and public works.[6]
The birth of the railway played an important role for experiences throughout transportation. As the demand for coal grew so did the need for methods to transport it. Initially beginning with horse powered carts and were designed so that the horse could pull them. Richard Trevithick and George Stephenson helped develop the steam powered train which was a huge step for technology development.
The limitations with the early rail was that at a lot of the times, the train could not haul the large loads when going uphill. Another issue was how reliable were the locomotives, in terms of longevity and how regular maintenance was needed to keep the tracks and locomotive in good condition.[6]
The experiences from the steam train was that it saw development in technology by using building blocks and incorporate them into new designs. The steam engine had been available in other technologies such as the steam boat. Other influences were taken from it such as the common carriage format and construction know how.[6]
Richard Trevithick's Steamcar[7]
The invention of the automobile is usually credited to Henry Ford because of how he was able to create an automobile that was practical in use and popular to use. Before him, were other innovations and inventions which would help develop into the automobile we know today.
William Morrison's Electric Car (1893)[8]
During the early 1800s, the turnpike era, Richard Trevithick would develop a steam road carriage, taking ideas from the steam boat and steam trains which had been so successful. He would find that they would not be as successful due to the impacts they had to road providers and also to rail owners. The main issue was the damages it would have to road surfaces and as a result, the steam powered cars did not grow during this period of the early nineteenth century.[6]
Karl Benz' Model 3 Motorwagen[9]
Ideas to develop an electric car was brought to light during the mid and late 1800’s. In 1831, Robert Davidson had built a carriage which was powered by batteries and motor and also in 1893 William Morrison built an electric car to show case at the World’s Columbian Exposition. The cars were able to produce necessary performances on the roads but were found to be economically impractical due to the costs of generation, transmission and storage.[6]
Just like other transport technologies, the idea of internal combustion was around for years prior to the development of it to automobiles. In 1680, Christiaan Huygens designed but never built an internal combustion engine which was to be fuelled by gunpowder. It wasn’t until over a century later that someone had transferred these ideas to an automobile but in 1826, Samuel Brown modified a steam engine to be able to burn gasoline and connected it to a carriage. The idea worked but was one of many that did not gain mass spread.
Finally, in 1886 Karl Benz built his three-wheeled motor car and there were some faults in the first design but he was able to fix these problems and showcased his ‘Model 3 Motorwagen’ at the World’s Fair in Paris. Although it was only able to go marginally faster than walking pace, the product was a huge step forward for transportation.[11]
Henry Ford was mistakenly seen as the inventor of the automobile but he was the man who popularised it. The Fordism movement took place in 1908, which was the production of cheap goods coming of an assembly line. He had introduced the Model T car, which comprised of four cylinders, a semiautomatic transmission, flexible suspension, an electric magneto and was considered the most modern and sturdiest of cars at the time. The car did not have many features, for example it did not come with a speedometer, windscreen wiper or doors.[12]
Since the mass production of the model T automobile, there have been major developments. The success from Ford, ignited other companies to compete with him. The automobile influenced changes to the road and developed into greater networking systems to meet the needs of the automobile. Developments to the car, saw greater quality in design which promoted greater speeds, comfort and safety. The popularity of the automobile saw an obvious increase in numbers therefore more policies were introduced to control the order and safety for automobile users on the roads.
The history of the automobile has been important in the development for both technology and transportation and although Henry Ford was able to take it to a worldwide level, it is important that we acknowledge the inputs of other innovations and inventions of the course of history.
The early markets of the automobile were experienced when the railroads and steam locomotives were taking off (1830s). During this time, the main source of transport on roads was by horse or horse powered carriages. Richard Trevithick developed his steam road carriage but due to issues with the road providers and the popularity of rail, it didn’t last[6].
During the turnpike era, developments were made to the roads. A method called ‘the corvee’, where governments would tax people of their time to help build the roads. Countries such as England, France and Japan used this idea. The problem with the method is that it was hard to control people to a decent day’s work and to a standard which would be of high quality. In some cases, it helped but it didn’t provide the necessary strength and quality at which was desired. John McAdam was influential in the design of quality roads, where he had mentioned that the main destroyer of roads was poor drainage. To improve the drainage, he imposed a method to cover the adjacent ground firstly with large rocks, then smaller stones and to be finally bound by gravel. The method was enhanced by using bitumen to create, what is most commonly known as ‘tarmac’ (short for tarmacadam). As roads were changing, so were the introductions of more technology, such as the bicycle and the decreased use in horses. The bicycle has been seen as one of the main building blocks for the automobile. Taking ideas from the pneumatic tyres as well as the demand for good roads for cyclists saw a development to new road systems for cars.[6] The development of the road and technologies helped develop the market to improve the automobile to what is seen today.
As technologies started to develop, the three most dominant competing technologies at the time were steam, gasoline and electric. It was believed that each would find its own market niche; electric would be for ladies (short trips) and gasoline would be for longer distance trips.[6]
The beginning of Henry Ford’s model T design gained huge praise and popularity. The United States became a key market for the automotive industry, as Ford was able to introduce a system which incorporated speed, uniformity, simplicity and interchangeability and was able to implement it to his mass production of the automobile.[13]
During World War 1, social and industrial changes put the automobile within buyers reach for middle class Americans. The creation of General Motors Acceptance Corporations in 1919 saw lowering of prices to the automobile which made it possible for those who did not earn as much such as labourers the opportunity to buy credit for cars.[14]
Understanding past experiences is important to the role of transport policy and there was no exception for the role of policy for the automobile.
Keeping order on the roads was a necessity, so policies were implemented. It is believed to have been influenced by human physiology. “With most humans being right handed, it was easier for a horse rider to travel on the left side of the road. By doing so he could fend off attackers, as well as reaching to shake hands with friends.”[15] This was the case for British road users and the rest of the world began using the right-hand side because “freight wagon drivers found it easier to clear incoming wagons””[15].
In 1903, the United States began to use license plates as the number of vehicles on the road increased.
In 1904 (UK), a license to drive was needed for when the term ‘reckless driving’ was introduced by the Motor Car Act. No driver’s test was needed to be completed, rather you would need to pay five shillings.
In 1901, Connecticut passed the first US state law which regulated motor vehicles and set the speed limit to 19km/h near cities and 24km/h outside [16]. One of the reasons policies such as it being compulsory to wear a seatbelt were not implemented was because of these slow speeds. Experiences of the automobile were not yet created as well.”[15]
The growth of the automobile took place post World War 2. The increase of car use was seen worldwide but the United States was leading the way, through their innovations and manufacturing of the ideal car at the time. America had developed new style of cars, which was able to introduce new markets. In the United States alone, car ownership had risen “from 45 million in 1949 to 119 million in 1972”[13].
During this period, the purchasing of an automobile was accessible to all and everyone wanted one. There was no care for the impacts that the cars emissions would have on the environment and prices for gasoline were relatively cheap.
The car had developed from a practical technology into a work of art as new designs and different coloured cars began to spread. The performance of the automobile was also seeing increases, with speed and the introduction of power steering (easier to drive/handle).
Safety was still a big issue, although seatbelts became more common during the 1950’s, there was no real promotion of safety incorporated with manufacturers designs of the automobile as they did not want buyers to think their product was deemed unsafe.[13]
The mature phase looks at how the automobile became the most dominant mode of transport and how experiences throughout the growth stage has developed new policies new markets and new designs.
With the increase in performance in design of cars and developments in construction of highways and roads, there was an increase in the death toll and by 1966 it was over 53000. As a result, the US Congress responded with the National Highway Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act and the Highway Safety Act (1966). It was a federal program to help address motor vehicle safety. Initially, the impacts were not positive as the death tolls continued to rise and by 1972, they had reached a high of 56,278. However, by 1992 the toll was at 40,000 for the first time since 1961.[17]
This was one of the many implementations towards safety throughout the United States and is a significant issue to the transport and automobile infrastructure.
The environment has become a big issue, with the huge increase in use of automobile all over the world, the damages caused by carbon emissions are significant and has become an important issue to transport. An idea to help mitigate the effects is to use alternative energy such as the electric/hybrid car. Electric cars are not new and were one of the main sources for energy for the automobile during the birth phase (1880-1900). They were not a big success during that time and it wasn’t until the 2000s that the electric car would see a revival. The hybrid car combines the petrol/diesel engine with an electric motor, where it consumes less fuel and emits less carbon. It has been a huge success towards the mitigation of pollutants to the environment.
The market of the automobile has seen a huge number of different companies being built. The United States was seen as the front runner of all things automobile and that was the case until new innovations took place and other countries learned from the United States experiences. In 2009, China was reported to have exceeded the United States in vehicle sales, making it the largest vehicle market in the world.[18]
The data was collected from The Federal Highway Administration, which is an agency within the US department of transportation. The data itself looks at the number of motor vehicle registrations in the United States from the year 1900 to 1996.
The data was estimated into a three-parameter logistic function to create an S-curve which helps relate stages of the life cycle of the automobile i.e. birth, growth and maturity.
To calculate the regression, use:
Firstly, use the largest value in the database and set a series value of K. For example, the first value used was slightly larger than the largest value of 133835.532 at 1988, so the first value for K in the series was 134000. From there the series of K would increase by 500 e.g. 134500 to 135000 etc.
To find K, observe which K value from the series has the regression squared (RSQ) value. From the series it can be seen that K=135000 has the greatest RSQ value at 0.884361.
The calculated results can be observed in Table 1.
The goodness of fit of the model can be represented by R-squared and is deemed accurate if its value is close to 1.0. The R-squared value from the data was 0.884, which shows that there are some differences with the actual data but is a result of the large length of time of almost a century of data was used. It can be said that the model is relatively accurate in that sense.
Now knowing all of the variables for the three-parameter logistic function, calculations of each estimate for each year can be observed on table 2.
Table 2: Number of Automobile Registrations in the USA (1900-1996)
S-Curve Graph (Birth, Growth, Maturity)
The life-cycle of the automobile through the S-curve:
During the birth phase, from the actual data (red) there is a small growth from around 1920 to 1928. This period was right after World War 1 and Henry Ford began to make significant progress with his model T automobile. There was a stagnant period from 1928 to 1944 as this was during World War 2 and economically was a very tough time for everyone including the automobile industry. During this period was when huge developments were made and greater emphasis was put towards the design and style of the car.
The growth phase began after World War 2 and can be seen as the Golden age of automobile with new markets, designs and policies. The phase stretched til the 1990s.
Currently we are in the mature phase of the automobile life-cycle. Although it still dominates the transport industry of today, the United States have come to a point where most families own an automobile. There has also been developments in other transportation modes such as public transport to mitigate the damages that the automobile have produced to the environment over the years.
The dates are accurate to the actual life cycle of the automobile.
↑ https://www.caranddriver.com/genesis/g90
↑ http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/automobile.html
↑  Online Sciences, 2018 [Online] Available at: https://www.online-sciences.com/the-energy/the-energy-transformation-inside-the-cars/
↑  Conserve Energy Future, 2018 [Online] Available at: https://www.conserve-energy-future.com/howfossilfuelswork.php
↑ a b P.  Bagwell and P.  Lyth, Transport in Britain: From Canal Lock to Gridlock. New York: Carnegie Publishing, 2002.
↑ a b c d e f g h W.  Garrison and D.  Levinson, The Transportation Experience. Oxford: Oxford University Press, USA, 2014.
↑ http://uniquecarsandparts.com/honour_roll_pre_war_era.htm
↑ http://www.american-automobiles.com/Electric-Cars/Morrison-Electric.html
↑  P. Lange, 2018 [Online] Available at: https://www.livescience.com/37538-who-invented-the-car.html
↑ http://www.american-automobiles.com/Ford/1911-Ford.html
↑  Live Sciences, 2018 [Online] Available at: https://www.livescience.com/37538-who-invented-the-car.html
↑ G.  Giucci, A.  Mayagoitia and D.  Nagao, Cultural Life of the Automobile. Austin: University of Texas Press, 2014.
↑ a b c S.  Parissien, The Life of The Automobile: A New History of The Motor Car. Atlantic Books, 2013.
↑ K.  Franz, Tinkering. Philadelphia: Univ Of Pennsylvania Pr, 2011.
↑ a b c  D. Patrascu, Road Traffic History, Before the Streets Got Swamped, 2009 [Online] Available at: https://www.autoevolution.com/news/road-traffic-history-before-the-streets-got-swamped-12954.html
↑ https://www.wired.com/2008/05/dayintech-0521/
↑ P.  Waller, "Challenges in Motor Vehicle Safety", Annual Review of Public Health, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 93-113, 2002.
↑ H.  Huo, M.  Wang, X.  Zhang, K.  He, H.  Gong, K.  Jiang, Y.  Jin, Y.  Shi and X.  Yu, "Projection of energy use and greenhouse gas emissions by motor vehicles in China: Policy options and impacts", Energy Policy, vol. 43, pp. 37-48, 2012.
↑  Federal Highway Administration, US Department of Transportation, 1900-1996 [Online] Available at: https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/ohim/summary95/mv200.pdf
In 2D games it's often necessary to rotate an image by 90 degrees.  This algorithm does so quickly and easily.
This is a boss battle against the Krow.
The Krow will pick up an egg and drop it. Run under it as it bounces towards you, then pick it up and throw it back at the Krow. Repeat this once.
Next, the Krow will ram its next, causing the eggs to fall by themselves. One egg will stop, allowing you to grab it and throw it at the Krow as it flies around in circles.
Once the Krow is hit four times, it will fall down.
If you are able to jump on the Krow's nest itself, you will find two banana tokens.
In his essay The Law of Accelerating Returns, Ray Kurzweil discusses advancement of technology as it moves towards a point that he calls the Singularity which he describes as "technological change so rapid and so profound that it represents a rupture in the fabric of human history." [1]  At this point, he says that biological and non-biological processing can be combined.  In essence, humans would become similar to the Borg, a race of cybernetic organisms from Star Trek.
Kurzweil mentions that this eventual merging of humans and technology is due to a double exponential growth in technology, which means that the rate of growth in technology is exponential, but that rate of change is itself exponential.  Using this double exponential growth, he says that we would not see 100 years of growth in the 21st Century, but would instead see growth similar to 20,000 years of linear growth.  He shows the double exponential growth by comparing growth rates in technology by plotting the speed per $1000 for 49 machines from the 1890s through the early 21st Century and showed that the rate of growth was a curve, thus it was growing exponentially itself.  The best features from each generation of technology feed into the next, accelerating this growth.
As technology advances and we hit Kurzweil's Singularity, it may be possible to merge humans and technology to the point that a copy of one's brain (and possibly one's being) could be "downloaded" into a computer and the person could in essence "live" forever.  Of course, this does get into the underlying question of what makes a person who they are and if that essence can actually be recreated using technology.  It might be possible to store a person's memories, but it would be more difficult to store a person's soul or the thing that makes them who they are because scientists can't really say what that is.
If a person's soul could be downloaded to a computer, that person could be immortal.  Kurzweil mentions that the copy of the person's brain file could be upgraded and migrated through different iterations of hardware, similar to how we move files from computer to computer when we upgrade.  Multiple copies could also be stored in case of hardware failure and that would increase the chance of immortality.
Kurzweil makes several interesting points, but intermingles them with points that are bordering on science fiction.  I agree that technology is advancing at an exponential rate, and this will lead to tremendous advancement in technology through the rest of this century.  I can't even begin to imagine the technology that will be in use at the end of this century, but I am doubtful that a human brain will have been downloaded into a computer.  It might be technically possible (the computer will be powerful enough), but I don't think we'll ever be able to find everything that goes into making a person who they are so we couldn't recreate it in a computer.  I think we will see more technology incorporated into daily life and even into our bodies and that will help us to live longer more fulfilling lives.  That could still lead to Kurzweil's Singularity, just not the way he's describing it.
↑ http://www.kurzweilai.net/the-law-of-accelerating-returns
What is the background to this research and where did it come from?
This Wiki reviews the article "Breaking up prolonged sitting with light-intensity walking improves *postprandial glycemia", by Daniel Bailey and Christopher Locke.[1] This article can be viewed via this link. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3329818/
In a modern day approach to a normal lifestyle, a lot of sitting or sedentary behaviour is present. There are many causes to this change. The invention of Television and video games, and the usual working day is spent sitting in front of a computer all day.  Due to this, it is highly speculated that this sort of lifestyle has caused a high rise in the prevalence of cardio-metabolic diseases.[2]
Cardio-metabolic diseases include; diabetes, heart disease or having a stroke. The most alarming statistic is that the high levels of sedentary behavior has increased the risk of getting diabetes by around 112%[1]
Postprandial means what happens after a meal.
Glycemia means the sugar levels in your blood.
What kind of research was this and what did it involve?
This research tested the effects of extended inactivity after a meal against breaks in the extended activity either via light exercise or simply standing. It majority focuses on blood sugar (glucose), but there was some mention of triglycerides (fat) and were used as a marker to explore the differences.
10 participants were split into three separate groups, all of which completed each of the three different testing methods in a randomised order.
Sitting + standing breaks
5 hours of sitting, with every 20 minutes, they would stand as still as possible for 2 minutes
Sitting + exercise breaks
5 hours of sitting, but every 20 minutes, they would undergo moderate exercise for 2 minutes
Each participant was asked not to have any caffeine or alcohol, and not to participate in any exercise 24 hours prior  to participating in each part of the study.
Participants were also asked to complete an overnight fast before coming in to the laboratory at 9am. Upon arrival, each participant was seated for an hour so that a resting blood pressure and and blood sample could be taken.
Once the resting measures were taken, they were offered two drinks.
The first drink was an all sugary drink, 75g of carbohydrates mixed in 200mls of water.
The second drink contained fats; 50g and protein; 4g, to help slow down the digestion of the sugary drink and somewhat simulate a normal meal.
After consuming the two drinks, the five hour testing period began.
Following each session, there was a minimum six days break before the next period. This is due to the reasoning that a session of physical exertion can increase insulin sensitivity for up to 72 hours.[3]
By having an increase in insulin sensitivity, it may augment the results with an improved response to glucose.
What were the basic results?
A study was done by Dunstan et al.[4] Whose results were used in comparison to this study. A few differences were made, however, as Dunstan did not test healthy individuals. Obese individuals were tested.
It was found in this study that there was a 24-30% reduction in blood glucose when breaking up sitting. Comparing the study done by [1] Dan, who tested a more healthy population, found that there was only an approximate 16% reduction.
There was no significant change in triglycerides when measured, however they were not measured hourly and may not be an accurate measure.
While there may not have been any major change in triglyceride levels, the positive results of the blood glucose levels are beneficial to ones health. Even if you do not have diabetes.
What conclusions can we take from this research?
Postprandial hyperglycemia (high blood sugar after a meal) has been counted as a cardiac risk factor for both people with diabetes and people without.[5]
Backed up by Dunstan and Peddie, it can be assumed that breaking your sitting with frequent bouts of light intensity exercise can be a good way to improve your postprandial glycemia and overall risk of metabolic diseases.[4] and [6]
While we may be able to draw these conclusions from these few studies. A much larger sample size, more variables and extended testing periods would be beneficial to discover the long term effects of breaking up your sitting.
If you work at a desk, why not stand up every 20 minutes and go for a quick walk? Go to the toilet, go to the water fountain and get a drink. The only issue would be getting your boss to allow such a thing to happen. Maybe it is time to present these findings to your boss, make it an office wide idea.
Get off the bus a few stops earlier, even if it means leaving home a bit earlier. Waking up early is always good for you! Or if you drive, park in a different car park than what you would normally. Who knows, this new car park may not be as busy as your usual one.
The classic as always, take the stairs instead of the lift.
Try and get a walk in on your lunch break.
Don't spend hours at a time watching T.V on the weekend. Try and break up this time with chores around the house. Maybe in the ad break you can vacuum a room of the house. You will even find if you do the household chores bit by bit like that the chores will get done very quickly and you won't even notice how hard it was!
Breaking up your after work hours television time. A good time is spent winding down in front of a T.V after work. Try to get things done during ad breaks, or if you are watching a movie pause the movie every half an hour and do some exercise. You will be better off for it in the long run!
Are you feeling worried? Check your risk of Diabetes using the Australian Diabetes calculator.
Further information about the different types of diabetes
You can get a temporary bout of diabetes while pregnant!
Have you just been diagnosed?
↑ a b c D.P. Bailey, C.D. Locke. Breaking up prolonged sitting with light-intensity walking improves postprandial glycemia, but breaking up sitting with standing does not. Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport 2015; 18(3): 294-298.
↑ Dunstan DW, Thorp AA, Healy GN. Prolonged sitting: is it a distinct coronary heart disease risk factor? Curr Opin Cardiol 2011; 26(5):412–419.
↑ Mikines KJ, Sonne B, Farrell PA et al. Effect of physical exercise on sensitivity and responsiveness to insulin in humans. Am J Physiol 1988; 254(3 Pt 1):E248–E259.
↑ a b Dunstan DW, Kingwell BA, Larsen R et al. Breaking up prolonged sitting reduces
↑ . Cavalot F, Petrelli A, Traversa M et al. Postprandial blood glucose is a stronger predictor of cardiovascular events than fasting blood glucose in type 2 diabetes mellitus, particularly in women: lessons from the San Luigi Gonzaga Diabetes Study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2006; 91(3):813–819.
↑ Peddie MC, Bone JL, Rehrer NJ et al. Breaking prolonged sitting reduces postprandial glycemia in healthy, normal-weight adults: a randomized crossover trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2013; 98(2):358–366.
Welcome to the LGBT Young Adult Literature wikibook! The goal of this wikibook is to introduce parents, children and teachers to concepts, themes and plots explored in LGBT YA Literature. It covers the History of LGBT YA novels, as well as the LGBT movement and the origin of YA Literature. It will also help analyze common themes of LGBT YA novels. Additionally, there will be summaries of important LGBT novels. The wikibook aims to keep its language simple so readers of all levels can enjoy it.
Young Adult Literature is a pretty new genre, and there are many ways to define it. The ALA (American Library Association) says YA Literature includes books written for people 12 to 18 years old [1].
Why is LGBT Young Adult Literature Important?
Until recently there have been few books written specifically for the LGBT community and especially few for the young LGBT community. The rights of the LGBT community are currently a hotly debated topic. LGBT youth have been the targets of physical and sexual harassment in schools across America.[2] LGBT Literature, particularly novels with realistic characters and positive outcomes, are important for the self-acceptance of LGBT youth.
↑ Human Rights Watch Report: May 2001
There is a reason why buffet owners cringe in the sight of a sumo wrestler, speaking in their walkie talkies "code 11...code11," preparing the special seats and the special food to handle such masses. As you may not know, people tend to gain weight while eating. As they eat, the net force of their body on the chair is thus changed. For example, if named Buffet owner does not prepare himself for such an arrival of such a hardcore bunch, then "normal" accommodations will simply fail. For example, as the sumo wrestler is too big for the chair and tends to eat food traditionally sitting down, he thus has to sit on the table citing that the floor is not pure enough for his presence. As the table is made of wood, and the sumo wrestler being the weight of 3 normal sized people, as the food wrestler consumes his food, his mass increases. Once the support of the table can not support his force anymore, the table breaks!
The simple reason why sumo wrestlers "break tables and eat lots of food" is because they are trained to exert a great "force" on other objects around it. The reason why Sumo wrestlers break tables is because due to their massive weight and the support of the table being smaller than their weight, the net force of the interaction results in the breaking of tables.
Many people say that Sir Isaac Newton discovered gravity due to seeing a apple fall on his head (likely due to the interaction of the apple and the collision with his head)
The classic equation: Newtons Second law (from  Newton's'Principa',  published  1687, Cambridge)
Force = Mass x acceleration
From common experience, everybody knows is that if you exert a force on an object with a certain mass, it will definitely accelerate or move. Unfortunately, many people who have played sports have felt the force of the ball interact with some part of their body. Their testimony wil cite that the faster and the more massive an object is, the more force it will exert on the contact.
Welcome to the Ukrainian language learning Wikibook!
Ivan Franko (1856 — 1916), a Ukrainian writer and scholar
Ukrainian is one of the Slavic languages. This means that it resembles in syntax and vocabulary languages such as Polish, Russian, and Belorussian. It belongs to the Indo-European family of languages. There are a number of theories concerning its origin, but linguists tend to agree that Ukrainian evolved from a proto-Slavic tongue spoken around the 8th century AD.
The literary form of Ukrainian developed in the 18th and 19th centuries through the writings of Taras Shevchenko, Ivan Franko, Ivan Nechuy-Levytsky, and their contemporaries. Shevchenko's popularity in Ukraine can be compared to that of Shakespeare in England or Dante in Italy. The same can be said of the Galician poet Ivan Franko, after whom universities, theaters, cities and provinces (Ivano-Frankivsk) thousands of streets, and several villages (Frankove, Ivana Franka, etc.) are named. Thus, the artists' work influenced the development of the region's language.
In more recent history, Ukraine has been ruled by Austria-Hungary and Russia. Fearing uprisings, these empires discouraged the use of the Ukrainian language. However, in the early 1920s Ukraine became the independent Ukrainian SSR and the language has since grown in usage. Today, it has approximately 42 million speakers.
Ukrainian pronunciation is clear and articulated. In terms of pronunciation clarity it resembles Russian. However, Ukrainian makes more frequent use of I vowels where Russian might use O/E vowels (for example, Peter´s: Russian - PetrOV, Ukrainian PetrIV).
BUILD-ATTACH-BODY is a function value.
"Return an email body with attached files."
Content-Transfer-Encoding: "base64"
] [net-error "Cannot parse file list."]
The reader will learn about major changes in thought during the 19th century.
The 19th century was a time of dramatic change. Beginning in the late 1700's and continuing throughout the 1800's was the Industrial Revolution, which brought about a completely new way of life. There was the invention of the steam engine, industrialization, capitalism, and many more that changed the life of the working class for the worse. There was even the advent of the middle class throughout Europe. With this stronger sense of a division of labor came Karl Marx and his socialist ideals.
The 19th century was a period of some advancement for minorities, namely Women and African Americans. In 1848 a Woman's Rights Convention was held in Seneca Falls, NY. There were a string of revolutions across Europe at this time. These revolutions could have inspired women to fight harder for their own rights. It was at this convention that women pushed the Declaration of Sentiments and fought for a right to higher education. At this time it was still believed that women were inferior to men and were not capable of being intellectual creatures or that higher education would ruin them and make them unsuitable mothers or wives. In fact, most men were strongly opposed to the idea of women in college. But, by the end of the Civil War (1861-1865) women were beginning to attend college. This does not mean that a large population of women attended college, in 1870 approximately .7% of the female population went to college. That number increased to 2.8% in 1900 and 7.6% in 1920. Nevertheless, these were still strides towards eventual equality.
Passed on January 31, 1865 the 13th Amendment abolished slavery in the United States. Although it took another one hundred years to gain full rights as citizens, in practice as well as laws. It was still the first step in the direction of toleration and unity. Women were beginning to get educated and join the work force, and blacks were technically free. Most of the education blacks received came from themselves and the efforts of other blacks. After the Civil War there were Jim Crow laws. Which are essentially a series of laws, in the South, used to keep blacks oppressed. Jim Crow laws made Southern schools segregated and stuck around until the 1960's. In 1896 the case of Plessy v. Ferguson went to the Supreme Court and reinforced the Jim Crow laws with the ruling of separate but equal accommodations for blacks. These separate services for blacks were always separate but very rarely were they equal.
In the United States, the 19th century marks the beginning of the "Common School Period", due to the shift of education from private to public. It took until the 1840's for an organized education system to take hold. In Massachusetts and Connecticut Horace Mann and Henry Barnard helped to create school systems for their respective states. They worked to get a free public school education paid for by the public, which we currently use today. They established compulsory school attendance laws and made public schools accountable to local school boards and the state government.From 1785-1787 the Northwest Ordinance was passed, which sold land in Michigan for $1 an acre to raise money for schools. One of the first laws passed towards public education.
The 19th century also brought about a change in the outlook on life and a contributions to sociology. With the industrialization of the modern world, the introduction of capitalism, and an increasing division of labor, Karl Marx based his class theory. Marx claimed that the history of the world was the history of class struggle. And that there would be a revolution of the working class where they rise up and basically bring the world to socialism, distributing the wealth equally. Most modern sociologists do not agree with Karl Marx's theories, but he contributed nonetheless. His theory was disproved during World War 1 where he anticipated the working class would band together. But Europe was in the grip of extreme nationalism, and everybody strongly supported their nation. Communism has its roots in Karl Marx's theories in his book, "The Communist Manifesto."
In 1859 the most revolutionary idea of the time was published by Charles Darwin in his book "On The Origin of Species." Through his travels, most notably to the Galapagos Islands, he put together evidence to support the theory of evolution. Today evolution is agreed to be true by most people, even the Pope acknowledges evolution and the age of the earth. In Darwin's travels he noticed that animals of the same species would have different qualities, enabling them to survive in their particular environment. For example the finches on the Galapagos Islands varied in size, beak size or shape, or any other characteristics that helped them survive. And he correctly assumed that the variations already existed, nature just enabled the ones with the best variations to survive. This was a very big deal, and Darwin's evidence in support of evolution really shook the world.
Later his theory of survival of the fittest took a horrible turn for the worst. A British philosopher by the name of Herbert Spencer turned the survival of the fittest towards society and developed Social Darwinism. Which claimed that survival of the fittest applied the human society and those that were poor and suffering simply were not meant to survive. Used to defend unequal distribution of wealth and power in Europe. It was also used to support European imperialism, which was very aggressive around this point in history.. Europe had colonies all over the world including North America, India, China, and numerous African nations( subsequently throwing the whole continent out of whack.
The 19th century was time of dramatic change. The Industrial Revolution completely changing the face of society. The development of the middle class and overpopulated dirty cities. The decreased standard of living for factory workers led to Karl Marx and his "Communist Manifesto." Over in America school was beginning to become public instead of private, even for women who were beginning to attend college. The civil war, which brought advancements of its own, and America joining their European counterparts and abolishing slavery. Close to the same time Charles Darwin completely changed the way the world thought by proving evolution and outraging whites who now had a connection to the blacks of Africa. And the development of Social Darwinism to continue the rule of the rich, white populations.
1)What court case had a ruling of separate but equal and was later ruled unconstitutional?
A)Plessy v. Ferguson
B)Marbury v. Madison
C)Roe v. Wade
D)Dred Scott v. John F.A Sandford
2)Where did the first organized public school systems begin to take place?
3)According to Karl Marx the history of the world was the history of what?
A)good vs. evil
4)Approximately what percentage of women were enrolled in some form of higher education by 1920?
"The Industrial Revolution." History Channel. A&E Television Networks. <http://www.thehistorychannel.co.uk/site/features/the_industrial_revolution.php#link6>.
Levine, Rhonda F. Social Class and Stratification. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield, 1998.
Lowe, Maggie. "Early College Woman: Determined to be Educated." Northnet. American Association of University Women. <http://www.northnet.org/stlawrenceaauw/college.htm>.
O'neil, Dennis. "Darwin and Natural Selection." Early Theories of Evolution. 08 Jan. 2009. Palomar College. <http://anthro.palomar.edu/evolve/evolve_2.htm>.
Paine, Shannon. "19th Century Education." The History of Education in America. <http://www.chesapeake.edu/library/EDU_101/eduhist_19thC.asp>.
Rate This!
Whenever trying to evaluate data that has been collected, often patterns appear, such as a -1 slope when making a scatter plot of
A store sells whatsits at P=3.49 each and the average number of whatsits sold (the volume) per day is V=100. Therefore the total money received T=P times V=349.00 ..... If the price is reduced then, maybe, more whatsits will be sold, but T may be more or less. Obviously if P=0 then T will also be zero. The following was the result:
Obviously the "best" price is somewhere between 2.99 and 3.49.
..... Curve fitting provides an equation for T versus P for each of the many models that are available for comparison.
The linear model is based on the "best" straight line. Using a calculator that can do regression, we find for the above data that the closest line of the graph showing T versus P is
T=605.268605263 - 68.9289473684 * P, and the correlation is shown as about 60% for this model.
P    Actual T   Calculated T       Difference     Difference2
Adding the differences, we find that their sum is nearly zero, indicating that it is the "best" linear model. Squaring a negative number always gives a positive number. so that the SUM OF SQUARES will give us an indication of the GOODNESS OF FIT. Here the SUM OF SQUARES is 1041.60796053, and we can compare the different models, selecting finally the model that has the LEAST SQUARES.
If you do NOT have a calculator or a computer that can do regression, then.....
Calculation of the least square line to fit the given points:
LOOKING FOR a and b in the equation of the straight line y=a+b*x:
Thus we have y=605.268605263-68.92894736828*x as the best line to fit the given points of this example.
If we have n points, then a polynomial of (n-1) degree will fit these n points exactly. We are given in this example 3 points, and a polynomial of the 2nd degree (parabola) should give us an exact fit. The calculator provides the equation(-663.1666666653)x2 + 4217.91999999x-6294.10448332, giving us
2.99   388.70   388.6999999956      4.4E-9 = zero plus rounding error
3.29   404.67   404.6699999951      4.9E-9 = zero plus rounding error
3.49   349.00   348.999999995       5.0E-8 = zero plus rounding error
That is a perfect fit, with the LEAST SQUARES indicating that this model be used.
Some of the many other models are based on the exponential function, logarithms, and various manipulations of the independent and/or the dependent variable(s). The "best fit" is usually the one that provides the LEAST SQUARES. Also weighting of the data could be used when some points on a graph are more important than others (such as, maybe, end points, for example).
Caution: Some calculators may require for Curve fitting consecutive, equally spaced, independent variables. Always compare the original graph with the "fitted" graph.
Basically, you can play different songs with the piano in Tifa's room in Nibelheim.
File:FF7-CMajorScaleAndChords.png
You have one octave to play with. The notes are as follows.
Asterisked entries mean you need to press either [PgUp] or [PgDn] while pressing the button in question. Therefore, either [9] or [3] on PC or L1 or L2 on PlayStation work.
You can also play three different chords.
If you play all the notes in order (as in on the list that comes up, you receve tifa's secret savings, a mighty 1 gil.
Playing piano is ended by pressing [Start] ([5] on PC, Start on PlayStation).
So far, see Tifa's limit break on information on how to play the Highwind theme.
Before moving on to other aspects of grammar, it would be a good idea to expand our repertoire of verbs. In most languages, the best verbs, in other words the ones that are used the most often and are the most important to learn, are usually irregular in some way. So in this section we'll cover a class of slightly irregular verbs, verbs that are irregular but in a regular pattern.
In English, we usually say that a verb that does not follow the usual conjugation pattern in irregular and leave it at that. German adds an extra dimension to this by also classifying verbs as weak and strong. This mostly has to do with the way the verb forms its past tenses and the reason lies deep in the history of the German language.
Strong verbs are often classified into types according to the specifics of the ablaut in the Germanic root. But that won't be covered here since it's debatable how useful this information is to people wishing to learn German as it's spoken today rather than how it was spoken in the ancient past.
We haven't covered the past tense yet, so why talk about strong and weak now? The reason is that there is a subclass of strong verbs which also experience a vowel change in the present tense, and it's these verbs which we'll be covering in this section. An easy example is schlafen ("to sleep"). It's conjugated as follows, with the vowel changes marked in bold.
Sentences with hören
Ich schlafe."I sleep."
Du schläfst."You sleep."
Ihr schlaft. "You sleep."
Sie schlafen."You sleep."
Er schläft."He sleeps."
Sie schläft."She sleeps."
Sie schlafen."They sleep."
The vowel changes are marked with an asterisk (*) here. Note that it only occurs in the second person familiar singular (the du form) and in the third person singular (the er/sie/es form).
Here is a list of common stem-changing verbs along with their vowel changes:
Ich schlafe. Du schläfst.
Ich sehe. Du siehst.
Ich falle. Du fällst.
Ich laufe. Du läufst.
Ich spreche. Du sprichst.
Because vowel changes, if they occur at all in the present tense, occur so consistently in du and er/sie/es forms, the common practice in dictionaries is to list only the third person singular in the present tense. Knowing the common pattern, you can usually deduce all forms of the present tense from the infinitive, which will be the form where the verb is listed, and this one additional form. Even if you you're using a dictionary that lists every possible conjugation, such as the English Wiktionary, it will certainly reduce the load on your memory to learn only one entry in the conjugation table instead of seven.
Introduction and overview •
Personal pronouns, formal and informal you, introduction to gender •
Intransitive verbs, verb conjugation, present tense •
Adverbs, V2 word order, Negation of verbs, Sentence adverbs •
Stem-changing verbs, Weak vs. Strong verbs •  Polar questions, V1 word order, Pre- and postambles • Noun gender • Noun plurals • Noun phrases, Articles • Transitive verbs, Accusative case, word order • Pronomial possessives, Possessive determiners, Possessive pronouns, Negation with kein • Irregular verbs, Past-like present verbs • Uninflected adjectives, Predicate phrases, Copulative verbs • Interrogatives, der words • Future tense, The sentence bracket
Adjectives and Adverbs •
Prepositions and Postpositions •
This book is about operating systems concepts as they have evolved through the history of operating systems implementations. Politics and implementation details are irrelevant. Emphasis is given to technically successful designs, aesthetic operating systems, and not on commercial success. In fact, mere commercial success isn't sufficient to make an operating system noteworthy. It also emphasizes working implementations over mere projects.
Tai Chi and Postural Stability in Patients with Parkinson’s Disease
By Li, Harmer, Fitzgerald, Eckstrom, Stock, Galver, Maddalozzo, & Batya (2012)[1]
What is the background to this research?
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a progressive neurological condition that effects approximately 80,000 Australians. It is categorised as a movement disorder, which has no known cause, and gets increasingly worse over time.[2] Given the prevalence of this condition, the debilitating symptoms that sufferers experience, and the fact it is still not well understood, research in this field is very important.
Poor balance is a common impairment of PD sufferers. This results in an increased risk of falling, and decreased functional ability.[3] Health professionals routinely prescribe exercise to assist in the management of such impairments, but few exercise protocols have been demonstrated to be effective. With this gap in literature in mind, Li et al. (2012) decided to investigate the effectiveness Tai Chi training on balance in PD patients.
Tai Chi is a balance based exercise regime, which has been demonstrated to improve strength, balance, physical function, and prevent falls. It emphasizes rhythmic weight shifting, symmetrical foot stepping, and controlled movements near the limits of stability. Li et al. (2012) hypothesised that Tai Chi may be more effective at improving balance than resistance based exercise and stretching in patients with PD; they therefore conducted a study to test this idea.
Li et al. (2012) conducted this research at various medical centres across the state of Oregon, in the United States of America. Funding for this research was aided by a grant from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.
Results were subsequently outlined in the article “Tai Chi and Postural Stability in Patients with Parkinson’s Disease”, which was published by The New England Journal of Medicine, in 2012.
What kind of research was this?
What did the research involve?
One hundred and ninety-five patients with stages 1–4 (mild-moderate) of PD, according to the Hoehn and Yahr staging scale (see further readings for details), were randomly assigned to one of three training intervention groups:
Each group did 60 minute exercise sessions in their assigned intervention style, twice per week, for 24 weeks.
The main outcome that was measured was changes in balance and stability, based on measures of maximum excursion and directional control.
The researchers also measured changes in secondary outcomes:
Timed Up and Go Test: Time to stand up from sitting, walk 5 meters, turn around and return to sitting in the chair
What were the basic results?
Greater maximum excursion and directional control than both groups
Better secondary outcomes than the stretching group
Greater stride length and functional reach than the resistance group
Lowered incidence of falls compared to stretching group, but not the resistance group
Tai Chi training resulted in no serious adverse effects
Importantly, these effects were maintained at three months follow up.
How did the researchers interpret the results?
The researchers concluded, that when compared to a resistance or stretching based training program, Tai Chi, had numerous advantages.
Based on their results, Li et al. (2012) established that Tai Chi was effective at improving postural stability and functional outcomes in patients with mild-moderate PD. Tai Chi was found to improve balance whilst reaching forward, transitioning from sitting to standing, and walking. Increased stride length and walking speed were also observed, demonstrating that Tai Chi is also effective in regards to treating other symptoms of PD, such as slowed movements.
It was suggested that the inherent training features of Tai Chi may be the causal factor for Tai Chi also being effective in reducing the probability of falls, when compared to a stretching intervention.
Furthermore, due to the fact that there were no serious adverse effects in Tai Chi training, and that improvements were maintained at three months post intervention, the researchers concluded that Tai Chi is both a safe and effective treatment for improving balance in patients with mild-moderate PD.
What conclusions should be taken away from this research?
Tai Chi training, two times per week, for 24 weeks, appears to be effective in improving balance, stride length, walking speed, and lowering the incidence of falls, in patients with mild-moderate PD. It was shown to be a safe intervention, and results maintained at three months follow up.
When examining the results of this research, multiple limitations, as acknowledged by the authors, must be taken in to account, before the conclusions can be trusted.
Participants were aware of their intervention, which may have created bias due to potential preferences and preconceptions.
There was no non-exercise control group, so the net total improvement as a result of Tai Chi training cannot be clearly established.
All participants were tested during the most effective period of their symptom controlling medication, which may have concealed the improvements that were induced solely by the training interventions.
The authors further highlighted that the mechanisms behind the physiological improvements that were observed are not well understood and warrant further research. Given the prevalence of this issue, this study will hopefully spark interest for further study in the area.
What are the implications of this research?
PD patients commonly have impaired balance, and therefore are at increased risk of falls, which at times, can be life threatening.
The research by Li et al. (2012), suggests that Tai Chi can be more effective than resistance and stretching based training programs at improving both balance and functional ability, in people with mild-moderate PD. Results also demonstrate that it is safe, and that benefits are maintained at three months post intervention.
The mechanisms behind such improvements are not well understood and should be investigated further, in order to fully appreciate the benefits that can be gained through Tai Chi training.
Tai Chi and Postural Stability in Patients with Parkinson’s Disease
Supplementary Material for Tai Chi and Postural Stability in Patients with Parkinson’s Disease
Hoehn and Yahr Staging of Parkinson's Disease
↑ Li F, Harmer P, Fitzgerald K, Eckstrom E, Stock R, Galver J, Maddalozzo G, Batya SS. Tai chi and postural stability in patients with Parkinson's disease. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(6):511-519.
↑ Parkinsons.org.au. What is Parkinson's [Internet]. 2015 [cited 1 October 2015]. Available from: http://www.parkinsons.org.au/what-is-parkinsons
↑ Fahn S, Jankovic J, Hallett M. Principles and practice of movement disorders: Elsevier Health Sciences; 2011
Alzheimer's disease is the most common form of dementia and may account for 60% to 70% of cases.
Type II diabetes is a disease that affects the metabolic system of the human body. Type II diabetes is the most common form of diabetes affecting 85-90% of people who have diabetes.[1] In 2014, there were approximately 981 000 people in Australia living with type II diabetes[2] and this number is projected to increase as more Australians continue to gain weight and live poor lifestyles. In people with type II diabetes their pancreas either cannot produce enough usable insulin or the insulin it does produce cannot be used properly by the body. Insulin is an important hormone, its role in the body is to help regulate glucose levels in the blood as it induces cells to express glucose channels to uptake glucose from the blood into the cell.[1]
There is no single cause of type II diabetes, however both genetics and environmental factors increase the risk of getting type II diabetes. In people who have a genetic predisposition of diabetes, there risk of getting type II diabetes is greatly increased if the individual:
Has high blood pressure,
Has low physical activity levels, and
Consumes a poor diet regularly.[3]
Screening usually occurs in people over the age of 40 by their GP as a way of monitoring potential cases however, these particular population groups are at higher risk of getting type II diabetes:
Are overweight or obese and have high blood pressure and known heart problems
Over 35 and have an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander background
Over 35 and have a Pacific Island, Chinese or Indian background and,
Women who have had gestational diabetes.[4]
As type II diabetes is also known as “lifestyle” diabetes, the risk is lowered in people who have a stable healthy weight, manage blood pressure, exercise regularly and avoid foods high in fats and salts.[1]
Exercise and how it effects the body
Exercise is an important tool in the management and prevention of type II diabetes without the reliance of insulin.[5] Exercise is a planned or structured activity with the aim of developing better cardiovascular and metabolic control.[6] The benefits of exercising if you have diabetes include; increases in insulin sensitivity, glycaemic control, increased aerobic capacity and weight loss.[7] The more intense the aerobic exercise the better the results in glycaemic control and insulin sensitivity. The effect of resistance training is a relatively new area of study and there has been mixed results with some indicating improvements while others did not show significant changes.[8]
One way that exercise helps with improving blood glucose levels is by increasing the uptake of glucose from the blood into the muscle cell using the GLUT-4 transporter. The GLUT-4 transporter is moved from the centre of the cell to the outer cell membrane during exercise. This shift of GLUT 4 is independent of insulin and as a result the number of this transporter increases by nearly 4 times as much compared to levels before exercise. This increase in GLUT 4 transporters will help improve insulin sensitivity in the body,[7] with the effect lasting anywhere from 24 to 72 hours post exercise which is why it is recommended to not have more than 2 consecutive days off exercising.[9]
Glycated haemoglobin or HbA1C is the amount haemoglobin that has glucose attached to it. The more glucose in the blood stream the higher the HbA1C levels a person will have. A HbA1C test gives you an average blood glucose reading over the lifespan of haemoglobin.[10] This test is the gold standard in measuring glycaemic control[11] and gives a longer term picture of blood glucose levels rather than the levels at a particular time like with a normal blood glucose test. A person without diabetes will have a HbA1C reading of approximately 5% whilst those with type II diabetes should aim to keep theirs around 6.5%.[10] Several studies have shown decreases in the HbA1C levels in people with type II diabetes after exercise,.[8][12] Both aerobic and resistance training, have shown a decrease in HbA1C levels after only a 10 week program. However, it is the resistance training that has a greater decrease compared to aerobic exercise. One study showed a decrease of nearly 20% in HbA1C levels in resistance exercise compared to only an 8% decrease in aerobic exercise.[8]
3-5 non consecutive days per week
Low to moderate (40-70% VO2 max) will induce changes in metabolism
Start off at 10 minutes progress up to 30 minutes
Common modes include walking, cycling, swimming
8-10 reps at weight that can be lifted no more than 8-10 times
A combination of resistance and aerobic exercise is best.
Type II diabetes is a common disease affecting thousands of people, although there is a large genetic influence in contracting diabetes, it can be prevented or managed with lifestyle changes. Exercise is an important tool in preventing and managing type II diabetes. It is recommended that both aerobic and resistance training be undertaken to achieve maximum results.
Diabetes New South Wales - http://www.australiandiabetescouncil.com/diabetes-education/type-2
World Health Organisation diabetes fact sheet - http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs312/en/
AUSDRISK Online diabetes risk assessment tool - http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/chronic-diab-prev-aus
Youtube video on type II diabetes - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OXAe3eOjqCk
↑ a b c 1.Diabetes Australia. Type 2 Diabetes [Internet]. Canberra: Diabetes Australia; 2013 [cited 2014 September 1]. Available from: http://www.diabetesaustralia.com.au/Understanding-Diabetes/What-is-Diabetes/Type-2-Diabetes/
↑ 2.National Diabetes Service Scheme. Data Snapshot [Internet]. Canberra: Diabetes Australia; 2014 [cited 2014 September 1]. Available from: http://www.ndss.com.au/Global/Data%20Snapshots/June%202014/NDSS-NartionalSnapshots-30June2014-TYPE2.pdf
↑ 3.Better Health Channel. Diabetes Type 2 [Internet]. Melbourne: Better Health Channel; 2014 [cited 2014 September 2]. Available from: http://www.betterhealth.vic.gov.au/bhcv2/bhcarticles.nsf/pages/Diabetes_Type_2
↑ 4.NPS Medicinewise. Who is at risk of type 2 diabetes? [Internet]. Surrey Hills: Department of Health; 2011 [cited 2014 September 2]. Available from: http://www.nps.org.au/conditions/hormones-metabolism-and-nutritional-problems/diabetes-type-2/for-individuals/risk-factors
↑ Hordern, Matthew D; Marwick, Thomas H; Wood, Peter; Cooney, Louise M; Prins, Johannes B; Coombes, Jeff S (2011). "Acute response of blood glucose to short-term exercise training in patients with type 2 diabetes". Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport 14 (3):  238–242. doi:10.1016/j.jsams.2010.11.003. PMID 21185229.
↑ Marwick, T. H; Hordern, M. D; Miller, T; Chyun, D. A; Bertoni, A. G; Blumenthal, R. S; Philippides, G; Rocchini, A et al. (2009). "Exercise Training for Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: Impact on Cardiovascular Risk: A Scientific Statement from the American Heart Association". Circulation 119 (25):  3244–3262. doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.192521. PMID 19506108.
↑ a b Jorge, Maria Luiza Mendonça Pereira; De Oliveira, Vanessa Neves; Resende, Nathalia Maria; Paraiso, Lara Ferreira; Calixto, Antonio; Diniz, Angelica Lemos Debs; Resende, Elmiro Santos; Ropelle, Eduardo Rochete et al. (2011). "The effects of aerobic, resistance, and combined exercise on metabolic control, inflammatory markers, adipocytokines, and muscle insulin signaling in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus". Metabolism 60 (9):  1244–1252. doi:10.1016/j.metabol.2011.01.006. PMID 21377179.
↑ a b c Bweir, Salameh; Al-Jarrah, Muhammed; Almalty, Abdul-Majeed; Maayah, Mikhled; Smirnova, Irina V; Novikova, Lesya; Stehno-Bittel, Lisa (2009). "Resistance exercise training lowers HbA1c more than aerobic training in adults with type 2 diabetes". Diabetology & Metabolic Syndrome 1:  27. doi:10.1186/1758-5996-1-27. PMID 20003276.
↑ a b Sigal, R. J; Kenny, G. P; Wasserman, D. H; Castaneda-Sceppa, C; White, R. D (2006). "Physical Activity/Exercise and Type 2 Diabetes: A consensus statement from the American Diabetes Association". Diabetes Care 29 (6):  1433–1438. doi:10.2337/dc06-9910. PMID 16732040.
↑ a b 10.Diabetes.co.uk. What is HbA1C [Internet]. [place unknown]; diabetes.co.uk; 2014 [cited 2014 September 18]. Available from: http://www.diabetes.co.uk/what-is-hba1c.html
↑ Phillips, P. J (2012). "HbA1c and monitoring glycaemia". Australian Family Physician 41 (1–2):  37–40. PMID 22276282. http://www.racgp.org.au/afp/201201/45597.
↑ Cauza, Edmund; Hanusch-Enserer, Ursula; Strasser, Barbara; Ludvik, Bernhard; Metz-Schimmerl, Sylvia; Pacini, Giovanni; Wagner, Oswald; Georg, Petra et al. (2005). "The Relative Benefits of Endurance and Strength Training on the Metabolic Factors and Muscle Function of People with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus". Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 86 (8):  1527–1533. doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2005.01.007. PMID 16084803.
↑ Albright, A; Franz, M; Hornsby, G; Kriska, A; Marrero, D; Ullrich, I; Verity, L. S (2000). "American College of Sports Medicine position stand. Exercise and type 2 diabetes". Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise 32 (7):  1345–60. PMID 10912903. http://insights.ovid.com/pubmed?pmid=10912903.
You can use the feedback mechanism so that quiz takers are automatically taken to another part of the quiz based on an evaluation of their answer. The jump can be to another question, to another page or to another piece of feedback. The evaluation will usually be whether a single score is greater or less than a particular value, but can also include more complex conditions (And, Not, Or).
You can try out this sample quiz in your browser [[1]].  In this quiz the quiz taker is asked a first question (the Screener). If the quiz taker does well, they skip to an advanced question; if they do poorly, they jump to an easier question.
There are a few things happening here.
Firstly the score variable 'Screener' is associated with the Partial Credit question. Any score achieved here is associated with this score variable and used to make an initial evaluation.
In the feedback node, we check to see if the score is greater than 6 - if so, we branch to the Population question. If not the user moves onto the Multiple Choice question skipping the more difficult Population question.
NB the Population and Vatican questions have metadata associated with them - this is so we can give them specific names. The name must the same in the Branch action as it is in the Question Metadata Title, the Page Title, or the Feedback identifier.
You can download the source file (.qwz) of this example to have a closer look at the set up [[2]].
You can set a new Redirect URL at the end of the quiz based on a user's score. For example, if the user passes, you might send him to one webpage, and if not to another. The setting is in the Branch element - the Branch is activated when the associated condition evaluates to true.
You can place the feedback in the report section instead of between the questions. This is useful if you want to send the results to the server before giving feedback to the user.
If you're displaying question feedback too, the custom feedback will appear in the position you place it between the questions. For example, if you place the feedback between questions 2 and 3 and check the 'Report Section' option, the feedback will appear between the question 2 feedback and question 3 feedback.
Here’s a sample quiz [3] with a full worked example. (Right click and ‘Save As). It forwards the user to one of four different Wikipedia pages based on the score achieved. You might need to publish the quiz in order to see the redirect in action, as a local security sandbox may prevent the quiz from redirecting to a new page.
Go To Introduction to Questions, Adding Questions, Adding Pages, Question Types, Custom Feedback, Question Display, Question Metadata
Its linear genome was observed to form a circle via complementary base pairing when entering a host cell. The genome was able to act in such a peculiar manner due to the presence of single stranded areas called cohesive sites (cos). These cos sites are able to base pair, and the nature of these sites are the same as those produced by restriction endonucleases. (Ex: EcoR1 produces "sticky ends"). This circular phage DNA is able to recombine with the host cell DNA via attachment sites. Progeny of the phage with the addition of some bacterial gene take place by the lysogenic pathway. What makes lambda phage extremely advantageous is the fact that it can destroy its host (lytic pathway) or it can become part of its host (lysogenic pathway). Studies on the control of these alternative cycles have been very important for our understanding of the regulation of gene transcription.
Lambda phage is a virus particle consisting of a head made up of double-stranded linear DNA as its genetic material, and a tail. It infects the host cell by injecting its own DNA through the tail at which point the phage will enter the lytic or lysogenic pathway. Large segments of the 48 kilobase pair DNA of the lambda phage are not essential for productive infection and can be replaced by foreign DNA, thus making lambda phage an ideal vector.
Lambda phage was first isolated by Esther Lederberg in 1950 from Escherichia coli. It has been an intensely studied organism, and has been a useful tool in molecular biology. Lambda phage can be used for cloning of recombinant DNA, the use of its site specific recombinase (int) for the shuffling of cloned DNAs by the 'Gateway' method, and in recombineering. The discovery and study of lambda phage led to an understanding of transduction which provides a major mechanism that can explain modes of evolution.
Bacteriophage Lambda was studied by Allan Campbell in 1962 who studied the phage's integration process. He observed that lambda phage had a unique characteristic what some phages would infect and reproduce in some strains of E. coli while other strains seemed immune. Probing further into why this occurred lead to the discovery that the immune strains contained a dormant copy of the phage, but the dormant copy could be activated. Study the phage provided priceless contributions into virus life cycles, the regulation and expression of genetic material, and the mechanism of integration and excision of genetic material.
Mutant phages have been genetically designed to make cloning easier. And especially useful one is called lambda(gt)-(lambda)(beta) which contains only two EcoRI cleavage sites instead of the normal five. After cleavage, the middle segment of this phage DNA can be removed leaving 72% of the normal genome length which is too little to be packaged into a lambda particle. Thus, a suitably long DNA insert between the lambda segments of DNA enables a recombinant DNA molecules to be packaged. These modified viruses enter bacteria much more easily than plasmids.
A genomic library is a large collection of DNA fragments. Such libraries assist in identifying DNA fragments that have a gene of interest. Creating a genomic library utilizes lambda phage. First, total genomic DNA is mechanically sheared to produce a random population of overlapping DNA fragments which are separated by gel electrophoresis. All fragments that are about 15 kilobase pairs long are isolated and attached with synthetic linkers to insert into a lambda phage which replicated themselves and then lyse their bacterial hosts. The resulting lysate contains fragments of DNA houssed in virus particles which constitute a genomic library.
Restriction: Phages grown in one bacterial cell fail to grow in other bacterial strains.
The degradation of phage lambda DNA was observed in certain bacterial strains. This was later found to be a result of restriction endonucleases which would cut the phage DNA after detecting it as being foreign. Thus, restriction endonucleases was termed because of its ability to restrict foreign DNA.
Modification: Phages are modified such that they can be grown normally in other bacterial strains.
An example of modification is the methylation of lambda phage DNA so that it would not be cut by restriction endonuclease.
Allison, et al. Fundamental Molecular Biology, 2007.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Prepositions, which generally show some sort of literal or figurative relationship between events, very rarely overlap exactly between different languages, both in literal and figurative usages. For example, to a non-native English speaker, it is not obvious why we talk about something, rather than talk on, at, or in something.
The correspondence shown below between some key Polish and English prepositions  should not be taken as a relation in terms of meaning (semantics); it is only a rough approximation.
However, in Polish, both the choice of verb and the preposition (the Polish preposition, of course) are constrained by the declension. Once you develop some intuition as to which preposition you should use, or which declension, the relation between these can be used to guess the declension from the preposition or vice versa. Common links are as follows.
Note that some prepositions, these regarding to place, can be used with two possible cases. Usually, a locative or instrumental are used when the acting takes place in this place and accusative when it is going towards the place. Compare:
Kot siedzi na stole. - The cat sits on the table. (table - locative)
Kot wskakuje na stół. - The cat jumps onto the table. (table - accusative)
Kot nie wskakuje na stół. - The cat doesn't jump onto the table. (table still in accusative, not genitive, because it is not an object here!)
(Todo: May need some expansion)
After the cutscene you splash down in the sewers. Talk to Tifa and Aerith to wake them up, but before you wake up the other of them, be sure to check up your healing and materia if necessary. Of course, Don Corneo wouldn't have thrown you into the sewers expecting the foul stench alone would have killed you!
Lv: 18, HP: 1800, MP: 0, Weaknesses: Fire, Strong against: Gravity, Absorbs: -
This is relatively easy fight still - just keep hammering away with limits, attacks and spells. Aps' sewer attacks are more of an annoyance than a real threat. In fact, he'll probably end up doing more damage to himself. One full-party healing should be enough (either take advantage of Aerith's limit break or use Restore+All combo to cast Cure on all party members.
There's a single notable item in the sewers, a Steal materia. Getting back to the surface after beating the boss should present no problems, the enemies are relatively weak.
The train graveyard is easier than it looks. The only thing that probably confuses at first is that the train cars may have holes on their roof so figuring out where the items are is more difficult. Use the ladders and ramps and whatnot to cross to the other side. There's a Hi-Potion and Ethers [I think] here.
On the other end of the train graveyard, the trains block your path. Hop on the nearest engine that has a door open. The engine will push one of the cars off the way. Then hop on the another engine, and the way clears.
TIPS: Give Tifa the steal materia since her DEX rating should be higher than Cloud and Aerith. On the second screen, you can steal ethers from Deenglows (the green flying creatures) and you can steal the Striking Staff for Aerith from Eligor, who looks kind of like a cross of Baraka from Mortal Kombat and a Centaur. The Striking Staff will not be sold in stores for a very LONG time (Junon).
The column is still standing! Regrettably, Wedge isn't, as he just fell down. Nor are Biggs and Jessie in much better condition a bit further up. Aerith scurries off to get Marlene from Tifa's bar. You can buy stuff from the merchant here. Save if you feel like.
Once you reach the top, Barret says that the enemies are coming by air and lets you get your Materia and equipment sorted out before they get closer. Get Barret equipped.
And then... oops, Reno shows up and calmly sets the hell bomb loose. Of course, fighting him does no good, but it always pays to try...
Lv: 17, HP: 1000, MP: 0, Weaknesses: -, Strong against: Gravity, Bolt, Absorbs: -
The red-tailed Turk is one of the recurring bosses, so don't think this will end here. Bolt only does half damage, but other elemental spells are pretty good. Reno's special attack is the Pyramid, which shields one of your characters in a gold pyramid. While a character is in the pyramid, they are considered knocked out, and if all three characters get enclosed, it's game over. To remove the pyramid, simply attack the character affected, and the pyramid will go away. His low HP makes this a relatively quick battle.
Reno will rush off at one point, and it's time for our characters to make for a quick escape. Barret will figure out how to use the hook cable, and off you go...
On to...Back to Aerith's House and the Road to Shin-Ra HQ
The Agility score of a hero is the level of physical dexterity that character has.  High Agility scores make it easier for the warrior to dodge enemy attacks as well as increasing the character's ability to accurately hit his foe.  Thieves, Ninja, Black Mages, and Black Wizards all have relatively high Agility scores.
Bird of prey/Raptor – Mandaragit
Vulture – Buwitre, Bwitre (Spanish - “buitre”)
Insect – Kulisap, Insekto
Bear – Oso (from Spanish "oso")
Cow – Baka (from Spanish “vaca”)
Horse – Kabayo (from Spanish "caballo")
Rabbit – Kuneho (from Spanish “conejo”)
Wolf – Lobo (from Spanish "lobo")
Horse - Kabayo (from Spanish "caballo")
This exercise is recommended for all readers.
. Which of these are in the nullspace? Which are in the rangespace?
First, to answer whether a polynomial is in the nullspace, we have to consider it as a member of the domain
. To answer whether it is in the rangespace, we consider it as a member of the codomain
.
The answer to both questions is, "Yes, because
.
This exercise is recommended for all readers.
Find the nullspace, nullity, rangespace, and rank of each map.
(we can get any real number by taking
This exercise is recommended for all readers.
Find the nullity of each map.
For each, use the result that the rank plus the nullity equals the dimension of the domain.
This exercise is recommended for all readers.
What is the nullspace of the differentiation transformation
? What is the nullspace of the second derivative, as a transformation of
-th derivative?
.
Example 2.7 restates the first condition in the definition of homomorphism as "the shadow of a sum is the sum of the shadows". Restate the second condition in the same style.
The shadow of a scalar multiple is the scalar multiple of the shadow.
.
This set is empty because the range of
This exercise is recommended for all readers.
.
All inverse images are lines with slope
.
This exercise is recommended for all readers.
Find the inverse function of each.
These are the inverses.
For instance, for the second one, the map given in the question sends
. So this map is actually self-inverse.
Describe the nullspace and rangespace of a transformation given by
.
. (Thus, this transformation is actually an automorphism.)
.
Because the rank plus the nullity equals the dimension of the domain (here, five), and the rank is at most three, the possible pairs are:
. Coming up with linear maps that show that each pair is indeed possible is easy.
This exercise is recommended for all readers.
.
Prove that a homomorphism is onto if and only if its rank equals the dimension of its codomain.
Conclude that a homomorphism between vector spaces with the same dimension is one-to-one if and only if it is onto.
One direction is obvious: if the homomorphism is onto then its range is the codomain and so its rank equals the dimension of its codomain. For the other direction assume that the map's rank equals the dimension of the codomain. Then the map's range is a subspace of the codomain, and has dimension equal to the dimension of the codomain. Therefore, the map's range must equal the codomain, and the map is onto. (The "therefore" is because there is a linearly independent subset of the range that is of size  equal to the dimension of the codomain, but any such linearly independent subset of the codomain must be a basis for the codomain, and so the range equals the codomain.)
By Theorem 2.21, a homomorphism is one-to-one if and only if its nullity is zero. Because rank plus nullity equals the dimension of the domain, it follows that a homomorphism is one-to-one if and only if its rank equals the dimension of its domain. But this domain and codomain have the same dimension, so the map is one-to-one if and only if it is onto.
Show that a linear map is nonsingular if and only if it preserves linear independence.
One half is easy— by Theorem 2.21, if
For the other half, assume that
. Hence, if a subset of
.
Remark. The statement is that a linear map is nonsingular if and only if it preserves independence for all sets (that is, if a set is independent then its image is also independent). A singular map may well preserve some independent sets. An example is this singular map from
.
Linear independence is preserved for this set
(recall that in a set, repeated elements do not appear twice). However, there are sets whose independence is not preserved under this map;
Corollary 2.17 says that for there to be an onto homomorphism from a vector space
, it is necessary that the dimension of
. Prove that this condition is also sufficient; use Theorem 1.9 to show that if the dimension of
, then there is a homomorphism from
(We use the notation from Theorem 1.9.) Fix a basis
. If the dimension
. This vector is the image, under the map described above, of
.
, because it is a size one linearly independent subset of
.
, the dimension of the domain of
This exercise is recommended for all readers.
Recall that the nullspace is a subset of the domain and the rangespace is a subset of the codomain. Are they necessarily distinct? Is there a homomorphism that has a nontrivial intersection of its nullspace and its rangespace?
Yes. For the transformation of
Prove that the image of a span equals the span of the images. That is, where
. This generalizes Lemma 2.1 since it shows that if
, because the span of the set
.
This exercise is recommended for all readers.
.
Conclude from the prior two items that for any linear system of the form
. Extend the conclusion made in the prior item.
-th derivative map is a linear transformation of
. Prove that this map is a linear transformation of that space
. Draw a conclusion as above.
We will show that the two sets are equal
, and so any member of the first set is a member of the second. For the
.
For the linearity check, briefly, where
.
, where the associated homogeneous differential equation has a constant of
.
. We shall prove that this map
.
, etc. But a homomorphism is determined by its action on a basis, so
.
Show that any linear map is the sum of maps of rank one.
's. We need only check that each
.
Is "is homomorphic to" an equivalence relation? (Hint: the difficulty is to decide on an appropriate meaning for the quoted phrase.)
, then every space is homomorphic to every other space as a zero map always exists.
(projection is one) but no homomorphism from
Show that the rangespaces and nullspaces of powers of linear maps
.
That they form the chains is obvious. For the rest, we show here that
. Induction then applies.
. Thus it has the same range:
.
On this page we'll finally learn some useful phrases for exchange students, queries and the Indicative Future as a bonus.
Verbs in Estonian have two kinds of Infinitives, ending with -ma and -da. The -ma Infinitive is used in dictionaries to list verbs. Here we'll show how to conjugate when given a -ma Infinitive. Some are straightforward while others take some additional vowels or change entirely.
Estonian verbs have no Indicative Future. Instead, the Indicative Present shows the Future. Often the verb saama (to get) is used with the appropriate Nominal form of the verb (not Nominative case) to indicate the Future as well, which we won't be covering here yet.
Kus on Toomas?
Millal Katrin tuleb?
Kes täna tuleb?
Kus on köök?
Miks on Martin siin?
Miks Martin siin on?
Kus pood on?
Mis ajal? : What time on?
Mis ajas? : What time at?
Mis ajaks : What time for?
Kui tihti? : How much often?
Viis korda päevas :  5 times a day
Iga päev : Any day
Terve päev/päeva : Whole day
Kogu päev/päeva : All day
Mitu päev : Several day
Kus sul on müts?
Where do you have the hat?
Mul on mütsi peas
I have the hat in the head
Kuhu sa paned müts?
Where do you put the hat?
Ma panen mütsi pease
I put the hat into the head
Kust sa võtad müts?
Where do you take the hat?
Ma võtan mütsi peast
I take the hat out of the head
Front Page: Radiation Oncology | RTOG Trials | Randomized Trials
Purpose: can Velban improve on RT alone?
288 pts (mostly supradiaphragmatic, but a few infradiaphragmatic). Stage I-II. No laparotomy. All pts received mantle field (if supradiaph.) or inverted Y (if infra).
Randomized to 1) no further treatment, or 2) weekly Velban x 2 years
Preliminary: PMID 5074778, 1972 (No abstract) — "A randomized study of irradiation and vinblastine in stages I and II of Hodgkin's disease. Preliminary results." Eur J Cancer. 1972 Jun;8(3):353-62.
PMID 116855, 1979 (No abstract) — "Long-term results of the E.O.R.T.C. randomized study of irradiation and vinblastine in clinical stages I and II of Hodgkin's disease." Tubiana M et al. Eur J Cancer. 1979 May;15(5):645-57.
PMID 2462943, 1989 — "Toward comprehensive management tailored to prognostic factors of patients with clinical stages I and II in Hodgkin's disease. The EORTC Lymphoma Group controlled clinical trials: 1964-1987." Tubiana M et al. Blood. 1989 Jan;73(1):47-56.
Comments: Suggests that salvage treatment was more efficient in the RT alone group. High incidence of relapse in the para-aortic region suggests a need to explore or treat this area.
Randomized to 1) staging laparotomy + splenectomy, followed by mantle field RT and para-aortic RT, 2) mantle + PA + spleen (i.e. subtotal nodal irradiation).
Pts with MC or LD histologies randomized to 1) Velban alone, or 2) Velban + procarbazine for 2 yrs.
PMID 7021162, 1981 (No abstract) — "Five-year results of the E.O.R.T.C. randomized study of splenectomy and spleen irradiation in clinical stages I and II of Hodgkin's disease." Tubiana M et al. Eur J Cancer. 1981 Mar;17(3):355-63.
PMID 2462943, 1989 — "Toward comprehensive management tailored to prognostic factors of patients with clinical stages I and II in Hodgkin's disease. The EORTC Lymphoma Group controlled clinical trials: 1964-1987." Tubiana M et al. Blood. 1989 Jan;73(1):47-56.
At 12 yrs, DFS 68% (STNI) vs 76% (lap-STNI). OS 77% vs 79%.  With positive staging lap, DFS 56% vs 83% for negative lap. However, no difference in OS according to staging lap, 80% vs 76%.  Pts with MC and LD histology who received chemo had DFS 85% vs 65%, but OS not different, 75% vs 80%.
Comments: Effective salvage treatment makes survival equivalent. Showed that laparotomy had no therapeutic benefit.
Purpose: Risk-adapted therapy. Based on prior studies (H1 + H2) it was known that pts with favorable risk factors could receive RT alone. Staging lap was used to confirm this favorable risk group who would receive RT alone. It was not known if mantle alone or mantle + PA should be given. Pts with unfavorable risk factors, despite a negative staging lap, were at high risk for relapse, and would be randomized between RT alone and combination therapy.
CS I-II supradiaphragmatic. 494 total pts. Divided into two groups based on prognostic indicators (based on analysis of H1 and H2 trials). Favorable group included all of the following: age <= 40, ESR <= 70, LP or NS histology, CS II (without mediastinal involvement) or CS I.
Favorable group, H5F (n=237): Underwent staging laparatomy. If negative lap (n=198;84%) received RT alone, randomized to mantle vs mantle+PA, 40 Gy each. If Lap+ (n=39) randomized similarly as H5U.
Unfavorable group, H5U (n=257+39): No staging lap. Randomized to total/subtotal nodal irradiation (TNI/STNI) vs. mantle + chemo sandwich therapy: MOPPx3 -> mantle RT 35 Gy -> MOPP x 3.
H5-Favorable -- Mantle 40 Gy vs Mantle + PA 40 Gy
Randomized. 198 patients, favorable (age <=40, ESR <=70, LP/NS, Stage I or Stage II without mediastinal involvement), negative staging laparotomy. Arm 1) Mantle RT 40 Gy vs Arm 2) Mantle RT + PA RT (T11-L4) 40 Gy
1988 PMID 2578012 -- "Clinical stages I and II Hodgkin's disease: a specifically tailored therapy according to prognostic factors." (Carde P, J Clin Oncol. 1988 Feb;6(2):239-52.) Median F/U 5.3 years
Conclusion: In surgically staged patients, more limited RT (mantle alone) is sufficient
Randomized. Two subsets of patients. H5F lap+: 39 patients, favorable, but positive staging laparotomy. H5U: 257, unfavorable profile (at least one unfavorable characteristic age >40, ESR >70, LP/NS, STage II bulky), but no staging laparotomy. Arm 1) Total Nodal Irradiation 40 Gy with 2-3 week rest; STNI allowed in female <40 vs Arm 2) MOPP x3 -> mantle RT 35 Gy -> MOPP x3
1988 PMID 2578012 -- "Clinical stages I and II Hodgkin's disease: a specifically tailored therapy according to prognostic factors." (Carde P, J Clin Oncol. 1988 Feb;6(2):239-52.) Median F/U 5.3 years
Conclusion: Improved outcome with combined chemo-RT over comprehensive RT alone
Purpose: Is laparotomy necessary? Compare ABVD vs MOPP for unfavorable.
EORTC H6-Favorable (1982-1988) -- staging laparoscopy + Mantle RT vs clinical staging + STNI
Randomized. 262 patients, favorable prognosis (1-2 nodal areas, no bulky disease, no B symptoms and ESR <50, B symptoms and ESR <30). Arm 1) No staging laparotomy, Mantle + PA RT 40 Gy vs Arm 2) Staging laparotomy (-), Mantle RT 40 Gy
1993 PMID 7693881 -- ""Clinical staging versus laparotomy and combined modality with MOPP versus ABVD in early-stage Hodgkin's disease: the H6 twin randomized trials from the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Lymphoma Cooperative Group." (Carde P, J Clin Oncol. 1993 Nov;11(11):2258-72.) Median F/U 5.3 years
Outcome: In patients undergoing lap, 33% found lap (+). 6-year FFP laparoscopy + Mantle 83% vs Mantle + PA 78% (NS); 6-year OS 89% vs 93% (NS)
Conclusion: No difference between surgical staging + mantle vs clinical staging + STNI
Randomized. 316 patients, unfavorable prognosis (at least one of: >2 nodal areas, bulky, B-symptoms, elevated ESR). No surgical staging. Arm 1) MOPP x6 + Mantle RT vs Arm 2) ABVD x6 + Mantle RT
1993 PMID 7693881 -- ""Clinical staging versus laparotomy and combined modality with MOPP versus ABVD in early-stage Hodgkin's disease: the H6 twin randomized trials from the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Lymphoma Cooperative Group." (Carde P, J Clin Oncol. 1993 Nov;11(11):2258-72.) Median F/U 5.3 years
Toxicity: Less fertility problems for ABVD (in both men and women).
Conclusion: In combination with mantle RT, ABVD superior to MOPP
Purpose: can involved field radiotherapy + chemo give equivalent results to STNI + chemo? Goal of reducing treatment toxicity
Two randomized trials: favorable disease (prognostic score 1-5) and unfavorable disease (prognostic score >=9). Please see Overview for further information
Randomized. 333 patients with Stage I supradiaphragmatic HL, favorable (prognostic score 1-5). No staging laparotomy. Arm 1) STNI alone (36 Gy uninvoled, 40 Gy involved fields) vs. Arm 2) EBVP x6 cycles + IFRT (36-40 Gy)
2006 PMID 16754934 — "Combined-modality therapy for clinical stage I or II Hodgkin's lymphoma: long-term results of the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer H7 randomized controlled trials." (Noordijk EM, J Clin Oncol. 2006 Jul 1;24(19):3128-35.) Median F/U 8.7 years
Conclusion: Combined chemo + IFRT is superior STNI alone
1997 ASTRO Abstract -- "Combination of radiotherapy and chemotherapy is advisable in all patients with clinical stage I-II Hodgkin's disease. Six-year results of the EORTC-GPMC controlled clinical trials 'H7-VF', 'H7-F' and 'H7-U'." (Noordijk EM, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1997; 39(2):S173
Outcome: 6-year RFS 73%, OS 96%
Conclusion: Relapse rate unacceptably high in these clinically staged patients; arm closed
Randomized. Stopped early due to worse outcome in EBVP arm. 389 patients with Stage I supradiaphragmatic HL, unfavorable (prognostic score >=9). No staging laparotomy. Arm 1) EBVP x6 + IFRT 36-40 Gy vs. Arm 2) MOPP/ABV x6 + IFRT 36-40 Gy
2006 PMID 16754934 — "Combined-modality therapy for clinical stage I or II Hodgkin's lymphoma: long-term results of the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer H7 randomized controlled trials." (Noordijk EM, J Clin Oncol. 2006 Jul 1;24(19):3128-35.) Median F/U 8.7 years
Comment (PMID 17989384): Three major conclusion: 1) clinical staging is sufficient for stratifying early stage disease, 2) chemotherapy followed by IFRT should be standard treatment, and 3) duration of chemotherapy should be adapted to severity of the disease
Randomized. 542 patients, Stage I-II supradiaphragmatic HD, favorable (Prognostic score using EORTC H7 criteria 1-5). Arm 1) MOPP-ABV x3 cycles + IFRT vs. Arm 2) STNI alone
2007 PMID 17989384 -- "Chemotherapy plus involved-field radiation in early-stage Hodgkin's disease." (Ferme C, N Engl J Med. 2007 Nov 8;357(19):1916-27.). Median F/U 7.7 years
Randomized, 3 arms. 996 patients, Stage I-II supradiaphragmatic HD, unfavorable (Prognostic score using EORTC H7 criteria >=9). Arm 1) MOPP-ABV x6 cycles + IFRT vs. Arm 2) MOPP-ABV x4 cycles + IFRT vs. Arm 3) MOPP-ABV x4 cycles + STNI. RT dose CR 36 Gy, PR 40 Gy
2007 PMID 17989384 -- "Chemotherapy plus involved-field radiation in early-stage Hodgkin's disease." (Ferme C, N Engl J Med. 2007 Nov 8;357(19):1916-27.). Median F/U 7.7 years
Conclusion: Best strategy for unfavorable disease is MOPP-ABV x4 cycles + IFRT
Two randomized trials: favorable disease and unfavorable disease
Randomized. Arm 3 stopped early due to >20% of failure. 783 favorable Stage I-II patients enrolled, 619 achieved CR(u) on EBVP x6 and were randomized. Arm 1) 36 Gy IF-RT Arm vs. 2) 20 Gy IF-RT vs. 3) no RT. Arm 3 stopped early due to high recurrence (>20%).
2005 ASCO abstract -- "First results of the EORTC-GELA H9 randomized trials: the H9-F trial (comparing 3 radiation dose levels) and H9-U trial (comparing 3 chemotherapy schemes) in patients with favorable or unfavorable early stage Hodgkin’s lymphoma (HL)." (Noordijk, EM ASCO 2005). Median F/U 2.7 years
Conclusion: In favorable patients in CR after 6 cycles of EBVP, omission of IFRT leads to unacceptable failure rate; 20 Gy provides comparable control as 36 Gy
Randomized. 808 patients, unfavorable Stage I-II.  Arm 1) ABVD x 6 vs. 2)ABVD x 4 vs. 3) BEACOPP x 4 followed by 30 Gy IF-RT in all arms.
2005 ASCO abstract -- "First results of the EORTC-GELA H9 randomized trials: the H9-F trial (comparing 3 radiation dose levels) and H9-U trial (comparing 3 chemotherapy schemes) in patients with favorable or unfavorable early stage Hodgkin’s lymphoma (HL)." (Noordijk, EM ASCO 2005). Median F/U 2.7 years
Conclusion: Similar early EFS with reduction of ABVD cycles to 4; BEACOPP similar but more toxic
H10 Protocol - "The H10 EORTC/GELA randomized Intergroup trial on early FDG-PET scan guided treatment adaptation versus standard combined modality treatment in patients with supradiaphragmatic stage I/II Hodgkin's lymphoma."
Standard arm: ABVD x 3 + INRT 30 Gy (+6 Gy boost for residual lesions). PET after 2 cycles.
Experimental: ABVD x 2, then PET. If PET negative, then ABVD x 2 additional cycles (total 4) without RT. If PET positive, switch to escalated BEACOPP x 2 + INRT 30 Gy (+6 Gy boost for residual)
Standard arm: ABVD x 4 + INRT 30 Gy (w/wo 6 Gy boost). PET after 2 cycles.
Experimental: ABVD x 2, then PET. If PET negative, then ABVD x 4 additional (total 6) without RT. If PET positive, BEACOPP x 2 + INRT 30 Gy (w/wo 6 Gy boost)
Interim results; 2014 PMID 24637998 -- "Omitting Radiotherapy in Early Positron Emission Tomography-Negative Stage I/II Hodgkin Lymphoma Is Associated With an Increased Risk of Early Relapse: Clinical Results of the Preplanned Interim Analysis of the Randomized EORTC/LYSA/FIL H10 Trial." (Raemaekers JM, J Clin Oncol. 2014 Mar 17. [Epub ahead of print])
Unfavorable pts (683): 74.8% had negative early PET. 16 events vs 9.  1-yr PFS 94.7% vs 97.3% (SS).
"Concluded it was unlikely that we would show noninferiority in the final results for the experimental arm and advised stopping random assignment for early PET–negative patients."
Conclusion: "On the basis of this analysis, combined-modality treatment resulted in fewer early progressions in clinical stage I/II HL, although early outcome was excellent in both arms. The final analysis will reveal whether this finding is maintained over time."
A task is a piece of code that can be executed.
A task can have multiple attributes (or arguments, if you prefer). The value of an attribute might contain references to a property. These references will be resolved before the task is executed.
There is a set of built-in tasks, along with a number of optional tasks, but it is also very easy to write your own.
All tasks share a task name attribute. The value of this attribute will be used in the logging messages generated by Ant.
Note 1: If "task1" has not been run yet, then it has not been configured (i.e., no attributes have been set), and if it is going to be configured later, anything you've done to the instance may be overwritten.
Note 2: Future versions of Ant will most likely not be backward-compatible with this behaviour, since there will likely be no task instances at all, only proxies.
Statistical Parametric Mapping refers to the construction and assessment of spatially extended statistical processes used to test hypotheses about functional imaging data.
SPM is Matlab based and has been designed for the analysis of brain imaging data sequences. The current release is designed for the analysis of fMRI, PET, SPECT, EEG and MEG.
The SPM software package can be extended by different toolboxes.
To start the SPM GUI type spm in small letters in matlab (by adding fmri, it will open the fmri mode already)
After you opened the SPM interface for fmri by pressing the fmri button it should look like this..
A Batch is a perfect tool to run your processing steps at once without MATLAB programming. For the basic understanding of SPM it is important to know, that each data processing step is called \module". There are several different modules e.g. for temporal (slice timing), spatial (realignment, normalisation, smoothing) or statistical (fMRI or factorial design specification, model estimation, contrast specification) processing of your MRI data.
A batch describes which modules should be run on what kind of data and how these modules depend on each other.
Compared to running each processing step interactively, batches have a number of advantages:
Documentation: Each batch can be saved as a MATLAB script. All parameters (including default settings) are included in this script. Thus, a saved batch contains a full description of the sequence of processing steps and the parameter settings used.
Reproducibility: Batches can be saved, even if not all parameters have been set. For a multi- subject study, this allows to create template batches. These templates contain all settings which do not vary across subjects. For each subject, they can be loaded and only subject-specific parts need to be completed.
Unattended execution: Instead of waiting for a processing step to complete before entering the results in the next one, all processing steps can be run in the specified order without any user interaction.
Multiple batches: Multiple batches can be loaded and executed together.
To generate a Batch you can click on the Batch button on the SPM fmri GUI:
By clicking SPM in the upper taskbar you can select the processings steps you need for your data. The parameters which needs to be defined individually beside the default settings are indicated by a cross (<--X).
How to create a batch!
When you specified the order of your processings steps it is really important to set the dependencies between the single steps. Otherwise the data which was processed in the previous step can not be used in the next one.
How to set the processing step dependencies!
Documentation, tutorials, links
In this website, there are a series of lecture slides about how to use SPM for fMRI design and analysis (scroll down you could find the slides download) http://neurometrika.org/BasicSPM12
Dun Morogh is the icy home of the dwarves and gnomes.
Cronus & Rhea  Hyperion & Theia  Coeus & Phoebe  Iapetus & Clymene  Oceanus & Tethys  Themis  Mnemosyne
|    Helios   Selene   Eos         |     Prometheus  |  Atlas & Pleone      Metis & Zeus
Hestia  |  Demeter  |  Hades  |     Artemis  Apollo          Zeus & Maia                 |
Poseidon       Zeus  &  Hera                               Hermes & Aphrodite        Athena
Front Page: Radiation Oncology | RTOG Trials | Randomized Trials
Scalp lesions are common in angiosarcoma, lymphoma, and melanoma
There are multiple approaches, from electron only fields, to mixed electron/photon fields, IMRT, and brachytherapy
Leipzig; 2007 PMID 17406803 -- "Helmet mold-based surface brachytherapy for homogeneous scalp treatment: a case report." (Liebmann A, Strahlenther Onkol. 2007 Apr;183(4):211-4.)
Description of brachytherapy mold using a customized polyethylene helmet, using HDR IR-192
Japan; 2003 PMID 12810835 -- "Iridium-192 brachytherapy for hemorrhagic angiosarcoma of the scalp: a case report." (Nakamura R, Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2003 Apr;33(4):198-201.)
Case report. Description of HDR Ir-192 mold.
Ankara; 2002 (Turkey) PMID 12419458 -- "Mold brachytherapy can be an optional technique for total scalp irradiation." (Ozyar E, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2002 Nov 15;54(4):1286.)
Case report. Description of HDR Ir-192 helmet; 48 catheters. Prescribed 40.5 Gy at 1cm (0.5 cm skin depth), over 3 weeks
2006 PMID 16504768 -- "Helical tomotherapy as a means of administering total or partial scalp irradiation: In regards to Bedford et al.", Khuntia D, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2006 Mar 15;64(4):1288-9; author reply 1289-90.)
Conclusion: excellent dosimetry, fast (~25 min) treatment times
Comparison of IMRT and helical tomotherapy plans
Conclusion: EUD better and brain dose lower with tomotherapy plans
Royal Marsden; 2005 (UK) PMID 16029817 -- "Treatment of extensive scalp lesions with segmental intensity-modulated photon therapy." (Bedford JL, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2005 Aug 1;62(5):1549-58.)
Comparison of static electrons, electron arc therapy, and 5-field photon IMRT for large, but only partial, scalp lesions
Conclusion: IMRT improves homogeneity to PTV, but increases dose to the brain
Washington Univ; 2002 PMID 11872304 -- "Potential of tomotherapy for total scalp treatment." (Locke J, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2002 Feb 1;52(2):553-9.)
Evaluation of IMRT plan and lateral photon/electron technique
Conclusion: lateral photon/electron technique superior; IMRT substantial dose to lens, brain, and orbit
MC Virginia; 1996 PMID 8665137 -- "Short communication: Total craniofacial photon shell technique for radiotherapy of extensive angiosarcomas of the head." (Kinard JD, Br J Radiol. 1996 Apr;69(820):351-5.)
Case report. Description of arc therapy
MD Anderson; 1993 PMID 8365936 -- "Dosimetric evaluation of total scalp irradiation using a lateral electron-photon technique." (Tung SS, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1993 Sep 1;27(1):153-60.)
Dosimetric evaluation of a modified opposed-lateral electron/photon UCSF technique
Conclusion: practical, acceptable dosimetry, adapted this technique for use at MDACC
Description of lateral opposed photons matched with lateral opposed electrons
MD Anderson; 1991 PMID 1917604 -- "Evaluation of a total scalp electron irradiation technique." (Able CM, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1991 Sep;21(4):1063-72.)
The Deathly Hallows are legendary magical artifacts of great power that purportedly allow the true owner of them to become "The Master Of Death".
Beginner warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
One of the three Hallows first appears in our story in Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, though it is not identified as such for six years. A second one appears in Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, though it also is not identified as being a Hallow for over a year. While the third Hallow appears throughout the series, no special note of it is made until it is identified as a Hallow in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows.
The Deathly Hallows are described to us initially in The Tale of the Three Brothers, one of the Wizarding fairy tales initially collected by Beedle the Bard. Hermione receives an early edition of this book in Albus Dumbledore's will, in which it appears Dumbledore has marked The Tale of the Three Brothers with what turns out to be the sign of the Deathly Hallows. Most believe the Tale of Three Brothers to be only a fairy tale, but there are a large number of wizards who believe the Deathly Hallows are actual artifacts.
According to the tale, Death himself gave the artifacts to the three brothers as reward for outwitting him. Dumbledore is less certain; he feels that the three brothers, the Peverells, were strong and dangerous magicians who created the artifacts themselves. We learn that one of the three brothers, Ignotus, is buried in Godric's Hollow, under a stone bearing the symbol of the Deathly Hallows; the other two, Antioch and Cadmus, we know little apart from their names.
The Elder Wand - An undefeatable wand given to the "combative brother", it will defeat any wizard in a duel so long as it has accepted the wizard holding it as its master. It can also do magic at amazing levels outside of battle, for example fixing Harry's wand when even the wandmaker Mr. Ollivander states it can't be fixed. It was supposedly created when Death picked a branch from a nearby elder tree and charmed a wand out of it. The wandmaker Gregorovitch claimed to have found it and was supposedly studying its secrets so that he could replicate it; before he managed that, however, it was stolen from him by Gellert Grindelwald. Grindelwald used that as the core weapon in his war against the Wizarding government in Europe, eventually falling to Dumbledore in 1945. Dumbledore then carried the wand until it was, in turn, captured from him by Draco Malfoy. Draco, of course, does not know the history of the wand, and is unaware that it has shifted allegiance to him. Dumbledore is buried with his wand, and Voldemort eventually traces it to his tomb, and then steals it, thinking that this will make him the master of it. However, Harry has already won its ownership by disarming Malfoy; the wand may not be aware of this, until it is confronted with Malfoy's wand, the same wand that caused Dumbledore to give it up, in Harry's hand. In the end, the wand favours Harry in the final battle, and Harry returns it to Dumbledore's tomb. The author has indicated that the core of the Elder Wand is a hair from a Thestral, "a powerful and tricky substance that can be mastered only by a witch or wizard capable of facing death." This seems entirely appropriate given the association with death of the Elder Wand, and of the Thestral.
The Resurrection Stone - This stone supposedly brings the dead back to life. According to the myth, it was created when Death charmed a stone from the river's edge for one of the Peverell Brothers. Throughout the seven books of the Harry Potter series, we are shown repeatedly that the dead can return in some form; there are the ghosts, of course, and the portraits, which share some characteristics of their originators: shape, memories, and apparently thought processes. There are the echoes of the people who Voldemort has killed, which are forced out of his wand by the Priori Incantatem effect in the graveyard; again sharing some of the characteristics of the people, although Dumbledore later says that they are not the people themselves. There is Voldemort himself, his soul anchored to the Earth by Horcruxes. And there is the Resurrection Stone, which does not actually reanimate people, but raises what might be called "shades", images of the summoned people with their characteristics, memory and appearance. This artifact was put into a ring which was passed down the generations of the Peverell Family, later becoming little more than a symbol of pure-blood pride. Voldemort, knowing only of its value as a relic of the now-gone Peverell family, and unaware of the connection with the Deathly Hallows, had turned it into a Horcrux and hidden it in the Gaunts' shack. Dumbledore, by the summer following Harry's fifth year, was hunting Horcruxes, having heard of the locket and the ring, and seen the destruction of the diary. He had traced the ring back to the Gaunts, and found it; though he had destroyed the Horcrux, in the process he had unwisely activated a curse in the ring itself, thus bringing an end, within the year, to his own life. Dumbledore passed the stone on to Harry by hiding it in the Golden Snitch which Harry had caught to win his first ever Quidditch match at Hogwarts.
The Invisibility Cloak - According to the legend, this is not the sort of invisibility cloak that can be made by human hands, charmed with a Disillusionment charm or a Bedazzlement hex, or woven out of Demiguise hair,  but rather is Death's own cloak, which unlike other cloaks, is immune to all charms, hexes, and even any form of physical damage which may occur to it. It is reputedly so powerful that it hides the wearer from even Death himself. Legend says that it will be passed down from father to son through the generations of the Peverell Family. Harry, Ron, and Hermione are stunned to realize that the cloak Harry is carrying while they are being told this is the only cloak they have ever seen that matches this description. Dumbledore later confirms this to Harry; the cloak had been passed down to the last descendants of Ignotus Peverell, born like Ignotus in Godric's Hollow: James Potter, and his son Harry. Only by two means has the disguise of the Invisibility Cloak been penetrated; the magical eye of Alastor Moody was able to see through it, and the Marauder's Map similarly would show the person under the cloak. It is uncertain whether the Cloak provides immunity to charms; it is certain that it is itself unable to be Summoned, as that was tried by Death Eaters at one point, so it is unlikely that it can be affected by any magical means. Unfortunately, while the cloak is immune to spells cast at it, it does not offer the same protection to those who use it. It is true that in the battle with the Death Eaters in Tottenham Court Road when a curse is thrown at Harry (who is under the cloak) he escapes untouched while a table behind him explodes, but it is uncertain whether the curse was properly aimed at Harry. However, when Harry hides in Draco's compartment on the Hogwarts Express, Harry is successfully petrified while wearing the invisibility cloak.
As we can see from the above, while the Deathly Hallows are only named in the seventh book, they play a vital role in the entire series, and actually two of the three play a continuing role: the Elder Wand, which is Dumbledore's from when we first see him, and the Invisibility Cloak, which had been James' and was passed on to Harry. More than that, though: a large part of Dumbledore's youth had been involved in the search for the Hallows, and for the means of mastering Death.
Dumbledore had hoped, by having the Elder Wand placed with him in his tomb, that the power of the Wand would then be ended; the wand would transfer its allegiance to the latest person who had captured it, and as Snape had killed Dumbledore, it would be Snape to whom the wand owed its allegiance. Snape, possibly not believing in the Deathly Hallows and unaware that the wand was one of them, and having promised to have Dumbledore buried with his wand in his hands, would thus have eventually died without having forcibly lost the wand. Not being skilled in wand lore, however, Dumbledore was unaware that Draco's disarming him would cause the wand to transfer its allegiance. Harry had checked this point with Mr. Ollivander; it is the gaining control over the wand against the will of the current holder, not causing the current holder's death, that causes the transfer of allegiance. Voldemort had the same mistaken belief, which is what led to his killing Snape. Harry, believing that by capturing Draco's wand from him, and then by capturing the Elder Wand from Voldemort, he had transferred the Elder Wand's allegiance to him, had the wand re-interred with Dumbledore's body. When Harry dies, if the wand has remained in Dumbledore's tomb, it will be impossible for anyone to gain its power, as Harry will not be there to try to prevent it.
While it is likely that Dumbledore would have been able to use the Resurrection Stone to bring his loved ones back, he was initially misled by the Horcrux in the ring, and then later came to believe that there would be no point. The brother who had received the Stone in the legend had caused his sweetheart to be resurrected, but had found that the resulting simulacrum was worse than her absence in death had been, and eventually he had killed himself to be properly reunited with her. Dumbledore rightly decides that he is likely to suffer the same sadness; the re-animated Percival, Kendra, and Ariana will not bring him joy at their return, but only sadness at their incompleteness. Harry, in his turn, though, uses the Stone not to recover those he has lost, but to seek their support in what he has to do. It is not the people themselves he wants, but their spiritual support, which as spirits they are uniquely able to provide. Having received that support from them, Harry deliberately drops the stone in its ring, and chooses to not search for it.
The Cloak, of course, is the one that Harry is carrying. On the night that James had been killed, Dumbledore had the cloak and was examining it; by that time, he had given up seeking the Hallows, but here was his chance to actually hold two of the three at one time. In the end, Dumbledore had passed it to Harry, as James would have wished; Harry chooses to pass on to his own descendants, as it was passed on to him. Dumbledore seems to think this is only right and proper. The fact that the cloak is out of the ordinary is a new idea to Harry and Hermione, as it is to us, the readers, when the story of the Deathly Hallows is presented to Harry; Harry's Cloak, exceptional as it may be, is the only one we've ever had the chance to examine. Ron may understand that it is out of the ordinary, but Ron is, relatively speaking, immature; he may not make the connection until Xeno Lovegood spells it out for them.
It may be worth mentioning that Voldemort had likely never heard the tale of the Three Brothers. Fairy stories are typically told to the young, of course, and at the age where he would be expected to hear these stories, he would have been in the Muggle orphanage. As a result, he likely heard of Cinderella, which wizards have never heard of; but the tales of Beedle the Bard would be a closed book, being too young for him and therefore something in which he was not interested when he finally entered the Wizarding world. This could explain why he was so interested in Horcruxes, and paid no attention to Hallows; he was unaware of the existence of the Hallows, to the point that he actually changed one of them into a Horcrux. It is true that he seeks the Elder Wand; however, Xeno Lovegood tells us that the Deathstick, as it is also called, has left a broad and bloody trail through history, and so for Voldemort it may have an existence totally separate from the other two Hallows, which have been less prominent in Wizarding history.
One of the things that is repeated a number of times is the idea that the holder of all three Hallows will be truly the Master of Death. The naïve wizard will think that this means that he will have power over Death, able to kill others and resurrect them with impunity, and hide from death himself. It is apparent from looking at the effects that the Hallows actually have that this is not what happens. While the holder of the wand cannot be bested in battle, still the wand may be removed from him by force, and he himself could be killed by non-magical means. The stone will not truly resurrect, but will only provide the sort of pale imitation of life that ghosts have. And one can hide under the cloak for a limited time only. The only way to achieve mastery over death is to understand it and be prepared for it. Dumbledore has said something about this as well: as early as the first book, Dumbledore said "To the well organized mind, death is but the next great adventure." Death can be postponed, as demonstrated by Nicholas Flamel, but it cannot be avoided; to gain power over death, you must gain understanding of it and lose fear of it.
One thing that is brought out is that the Hallows do prove something of a litmus test for the personality of the wizard. When Harry, Ron, and Hermione are discussing them, they each immediately choose which of the three is the most valuable. Hermione chooses the cloak, Ron the wand, and Harry the stone. We see immediately that Ron, in thinking of an undefeatable wand, is seeing himself as the head of a gang of followers; Harry is mourning his losses still, though perhaps more wistfully than actively; and Hermione, aware of the value of the cloak that they actually have, is thinking of how much they have been able to do while concealed by it. The young Dumbledore and Grindelwald similarly select the wand and the stone, for similar reasons.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Metabolism (Fig. 1) is, broadly speaking, the conversion of food into energy, cell components, and waste products.
The above diagram shows the different parts of metabolism:
Catabolic reactions release energy and are therefore exergonic, while anabolic reactions use up energy and are therefore endergonic.
Due to the large variety of food compounds, and the large number of biochemical reactions which need energy in anabolism, it would be quite inefficient to couple a specific anabolic reaction to a specific energy source in catabolism. Instead, the cell uses an intermediate compound, a kind of universal energy currency. This intermediate is called high-energy phosphate.
Now what makes this Ⓟ so special? To explain this, we must take a little excourse into pH and pKa values. A phosphate group has between zero and three OH groups. This allows Ⓟ to exist in up to four different forms (0, 1, 2, and 3 OH groups, Fig. 2), depending on the pH value of the surrounding solution. A pKa value gives us the pH value at which 50% of the molecules are in one form (e.g., 1 OH group) and another (e.g., 2 OH groups). This is expressed by the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation :
Figure 2: The four possible forms of a phosphate group. pKa2 represents the conditions in the cell.
Now to the promised difference between Ⓟ and PPi. The breaking of the ester bond of an ROⓅ releases more energy than the breaking of a PPi bond (Fig. 3), because of
Figure 3: Hydrolysis of Ⓟ and PPi.
Figure 4: Resonance stabilization of Pi.
Resonance stabilization means that both OH and =O can "travel" around the phosphate. Of course, this is a crude analogy; they do not really move, the electrons are just "smeared" around the phosphate atom. This is also indicated by the use of the ↔ arrow, instead of ⇌; the three forms do not exist, they are just a way of writing down the chemical reality.
Anhydride between phosphoric acid and carboxyl group
In the below picture, the final product should not have a carbon-carbon double bond, but a single bond with CH3 on the top. It is an error.
Adenosine triphosphate contains one low-energy and two high-energy phosphate bonds:
ATP is regenerated from ADP (adenosine diphosphate), Pi and energy (from food); H2O is released in the process.
ATP is the short-term energy "currency" of the cell.
Coupled reactions are always Ⓟ transfers, never direct hydrolysis
It should be noted that AMP can not directly be converted to ATP again. Instead, the enzyme AMP kinase forms two ADP molecules from one ATP and one AMP. The resulting ADPs are then treated as described above.
The destruction of covalent bonds takes up huge amounts of energy. The breakdown of an O2 molecule into two oxygen atoms needs ~460 kJ mol-1. Thus, nowhere in "living" biochemistry are covalent bonds actually destroyed; if one is broken, another one is created. This is where non-covalent bonds come in, they are weak enough to be broken down easily, and to form "bonds" again.  For this reason, many biochemical functions are using so-called weak/secondary/non-covalent bonds.
Weak bonds are created and destroyed much more easily than covalent ones. The typical range of energy needed to destroy such a weak bond is 4-30 kJ mol-1. Thus, the formation of weak bonds is energetically favorable, but these bonds are also easily broken by kinetic (thermal) energy (the normal movement of molecules). Biochemical interactions are often temporary (e.g., a substrate has to leave an enzyme quickly after being processed), for which the weakness of these bonds is essential. Also, biochemical specificity (e.g., enzyme-substrate-recognition) is achieved through weak bonds, utilizing two of their major properties:
Since individual weak bonds are, well, weak, several of them have to occur in a specific pattern at the same time in roughly the same place.
The short range of weak bonds.
The link that follows demonstrates the type of non-covalent forces: [1]
There are three basic types of weak bonds, and a fourth "pseudo-bond":
Ionic bonds are electrostatic attractions between permanently charged groups. Ionic bonds are not directed. Example:
X-CO2- ..... H3+N-Y
Hydrogen bonds are also established by electrostatic attraction. These attractions do not occur between permanently charged groups, but rather between atoms temporarily charged by a dipole moment, resulting from the different electronegativity of atoms within a group. Hydrogen bonds are even weaker than ionic bonds, and they are highly directional, usually along a straight line. Besides being weaker than ionic bonds, hydrogen bonds are also weaker, and longer than similar covalent bonds.
Hydrogen bonds are unique because they only exist when the Hydrogen is bonded to an oxygen (O), Nitrogen (N), or Fluorine (F), but the most common hydrogen bonds in biochemistry are:
Hydrogen bonds equal an energy between 12-29 kJ mol, whereas covalent bonds are much higher. For example, the covalent bond between oxygen and hydrogen is about 492 KJ mol-1.
Water has unique properties; after all, it is chosen to be the universal solvent. The unique properties of water are due to hydrogen bonding between all the oxygen and hydrogen atoms of the content. The hydrogen bonds occurring in water are about 2 angstroms apart from each other. Although hydrogen bonding is only about 5% as strong as covalent bond, they still cause water to have a high boiling point, and a high surface tension. The following link will take you to the structure of water and its Hydrogen Bonding.
Van der Waals attractions are established between electron density-induced dipoles. They form when the outer electron shells of two atoms almost (but not quite) touch. The distance of the atoms is very important for these weak interactions. If the atoms are too far apart, the interactions are too weak to establish; if the atoms are too close to each other, their electron shells will repel each other. Van der Waals attractions are highly unspecific; they can occur between virtually any two atoms. Their energy is between 4-8 kJ mol-1.
Hydrophobic forces are not actually bonds, so this list has four items, but still just three bond types. In a way hydrophobic forces are the negation of the hydrogen bonds of a polar solute, usually water, enclosing a nonpolar molecule. For a polar solute like water, it is energetically unfavorable to "waste" a possible hydrogen bond by exposing it towards a nonpolar molecule. Thus, water will arrange itself around any nonpolar molecule in such a way that no hydrogen bonds point towards that molecule. This results in a higher order, compared to "freely" moving water, which leads to a lower entropy level and is thus energetically unfavorable. If there is more than one nonpolar molecule in the solute, it is favorable for the nonpolar molecules to aggregate in one place, reducing their surrounding, ordered "shell" of water to a minimal surface. Also, in large molecules, such as proteins, the hydrophobic (nonpolar) parts of the molecule will tend to turn towards the inside, while the polar parts will tend to turn towards the surface of the molecule.
Cooke, Rosa-lee. Properties of Water. Lecture 10. Mountain Empire Community College. n.d. Web. http://water.me.vccs.edu/courses/env211/lesson10_print.htm
Kimball, John W.. Hydrogen Bonds. Kimball’s Biology Pages. Feb. 12, 2011. Web. http://users.rcn.com/jkimball.ma.ultranet/BiologyPages/H/Hbonds_water.gif
Lower, Stephen. States of matter: Water and hydrogen bonding. General Chemistry Virtual Textbooks. 2009. Aug. 26, 2010. Web.
n.p. Covalent vs. Non-Covalent Bonds. n.d. http://www.pearsonhighered.com/mathews/ch02/c02cv.htm
W. W. Norton & Company. Hydrogen Bonding in Water. Web. 2012.  http://www.wwnorton.com/college/chemistry/gilbert2/tutorials/chapter_10/water_h_bond/
WyzAnt Tutoring. WyzAnt Tutoring. Bonds. 2012. Web. http://www.wyzant.com/Help/Science/Chemistry/Bonds/
> Contents | Basics | Missions | Vehicles | Items | Appendices | Index | FAQ
Location: Ryder's house, Grove Street, Ganton, Los Santos
After the cutscene it will be 22:00, and you have until 06:00 (eight minutes real-time) to complete the mission. Get into the black Boxville truck with Ryder, and quickly head to Colonel Fuhrberger's house. Go in, follow the instructions by staying quiet. The six boxes are:
In the guy's room to the left
In the guy's room behind his bed
You should have plenty of time to get them all, but 3 is enough. Drive safely back to the lock-up to complete the mission.
Wikipedia has related information at AP Chemistry
This book is not meant to be an introduction to chemistry. It is meant as an extra study guide for those who need last-minute preparation for the AP Chemistry exam. If you need a college-level book, try General Chemistry.
One of the most important and complex parts of Direct3D is initialization. There are two ways to go about it, the correct (read: tedious, hard, annoying, but worth learning) way which the majority of this chapter is on, and the easy way, which will be used as an introduction, as some portions are required no matter how you do it. At the end of this section, we will apply this to our benchmarking application.
This function returns the address of the IDirect3D9 interface it created, or our Direct3D object. You need to tell it what version of DirectX the SDK is with the parameter. Generally you just pass D3D_SDK_VERSION, unless you want an older interface for some reason.
IDirect3D9* d3dobject = Direct3DCreate9( D3D_SDK_VERSION );
And that's that. Unfortunately, the rest of the process isn't so easy. The next thing you need is a set of presentation parameters, which are stored in a D3DPRESENT_PARAMETERS structure. If you look inside, you'll notice there are a lot of variables. You don't need to fill them all, not even most of them. Just make sure that they're all zeroed. The only two you're worried about are Windowed, and SwapEffect. For Windowed, you can just set it to true. SwapEffect depends on what you want. For this tutorial, the fastest, D3DSWAPEFFECT_DISCARD, will work fine. As of now, your code should look something like this:
D3DPRESENT_PARAMETERS d3dpresent;
d3dpresent.SwapEffect = D3DSWAPEFFECT_DISCARD;
IDirect3D9::CreateDevice( UINT Adapter, D3DDEVTYPE DeviceType, HWND hFocusWindow, DWORD BehaviorFlags,
D3DPRESENT_PARAMETERS * pPresentationParameters, IDirect3DDevice9 ** ppReturnedDeviceInterface );
d3dobject->CreateDevice( D3DADAPTER_DEFAULT, D3DDEVTYPE_REF, window, D3DCREATE_SOFTWARE_VERTEXPROCESSING, &d3dpresent, &d3ddevice );
And that's how you initialize a device!
Of course, you almost certainly want a faster device with more capabilities, and you really should check for errors so your user doesn't lose memory if your program crashes, but that's covered next.
All (good) commercial games that use DirectX initialize the device the right way. Nearly all (if not all) allow you to choose which graphics card, or adapter, their engine is running on. So that is where we will start.
Determining the graphics cards available is very useful. First, it gives a degree of freedom to the user, which is always important. For commercial games, it also allows them to create a list which has settings which work the best with that card, thereby making it easier for the user. We will certainly implement this feature into our benchmark application, albeit only for the first reason. The first thing that you must do (after initializing the IDirect3D9 interface, of course) is determine the number of adapters available. This is a simple function:
It returns the number of adapters available.
HRESULT IDirect3D9::GetAdapterIdentifier( UINT Adapter, DWORD Flags, D3DADAPTER_IDENTIFIER9 * pIdentifier );
This returns D3D_OK if the parameters were valid, or D3DERR_INVALIDCALL if something was wrong. The value passed to adapter is can be anything inside [0,GetAdapterCount()). Flags should be 0 (unless we want Windows to download new driver certificates, which we don't), and pIdentifier should be the address of the current index.
We can then choose the adapter our application will use based on which video card the user chooses (using the message handler), or whichever the program thinks is best based on the details in the D3DADAPTER_IDENTIFIER9 structure.
After we have chosen the adapter, we can find out what it can do with a D3DCAPS9 structure. Unfortunately, this is a somewhat drawn out process. You need to call:
HRESULT IDirect3D9::GetDeviceCaps( INT Adapter, D3DDEVTYPE DeviceType, D3DCAPS9 * pCaps );
The parameters are a bit tricky. Adapter and pCaps are simple, they're just the adapter number we chose and a pointer to the D3DCAPS structure we need filled. DeviceType is the problem. It must be determined with another function. We can check for a hardware device with:
HRESULT IDirect3D9::CheckDeviceType( UINT Adapter, D3DDEVTYPE DeviceType, D3DFORMAT DisplayFormat, D3DFORMAT BackBufferFormat,
After calling this, we can check if the device type worked based on whether it returned D3D_OK. The parameters, however, require another piece of information. For Adapter, we give the adapter number. DeviceType is the type we want to check for, and should be D3DDEVTYPE_HAL. Since we are windowed, that should be TRUE. DisplayFormat and BackBufferFormat are what we need to determine, and they should generally (for fullscreen, they must be) should be the same thing. They can be resolved through trial and error in a nested if statement, starting with the format we'd prefer, and going through most of them. Here is a list of valid Display and Back Buffer formats: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb172558(VS.85).aspx
If it never returns D3D_OK, you're stuck with D3DDEVTYPE_REF or D3DDEVTYPE_SW. We'll skip the formats with alpha fields, because they aren't supported by fullscreen, and we'll find the best format for either HAL or REF, because we'll need it later. Here's what our code will look like:
Some people who know how to do this may point out that you could just use IDirect3D9*->GetAdapterDisplayMode to determine a valid format for windowed applications. I did not do this here because it does not work when you're working in fullscreen, and the code above always works. In any case, you now have the device caps for the adapter. What do we do with it? The first thing we can do is find out if the hardware supports transformations or lighting. We can do that with the DevCaps variable in caps. You just need to use some bitwise operations to see if it has D3DDEVCAPS_HWTRANSFORMANDLIGHT. If it does, we will be able to use D3DCREATE_HARDWARE_VERTEXPROCESSING instead of D3DCREATE_SOFTWARE_VERTEXPROCESSING in CreateDevice. We are also able to extract other information about what we can pass through with it, such as D3DCREATE_PUREDEVICE (bad for debugging, very good for speed), which requires hardware.
We can also determine the present intervals we can use. It stores the valid intervals as a bit mask in its PresentationIntervals field. Any of the values on this page can be used: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb172585(VS.85).aspx . If we want to see if the device supports a certain form, we just do this:
There is more information about the device in the CAPS structure, but it is of little use currently (read: I don't know what to do with it).
IDirect3D9::CheckDeviceFormat( UINT Adapter, D3DDEVTYPE DeviceType, D3DFORMAT AdapterFormat, DWORD Usage,
D3DRESOURCETYPE RType, D3DFORMAT CheckFormat );
...
Multisampling is yet another trial and error procedure, and luckily the last one. We'll be determining two values to use: the multisampling level and the maximum quality of multisampling. These are both determined with this function:
HRESULT IDirect3D9::CheckDeviceMultiSampleType( UINT Adapter, D3DDEVTYPE DeviceType, D3DFORMAT SurfaceFormat,
CheckDeviceMultiSampleType returns D3D_OK if the multisampling typw is valid. It also gives us the maximum quality level in pQualityLevels. Our D3DFORMAT parameter should be our back buffer format, and pQualityLevels should be the address of a DWORD. D3DMULTISAMPLE_TYPE can be any of the values listed here: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb172574(VS.85).aspx
As always, here's our example usage:
D3DMULTISAMPLE_TYPE multisample;
...
HRESULT IDirect3D9::GetAdapterDisplayMode( UINT Adapter, D3DDISPLAYMODE * pMode );
pMode is the return that matters. It's a structure which gives us the resolution, refresh rate, and format the user is using. This method is quick and easy, but not as adaptive to environments as is sometimes needed. The next method is more complex, but more adaptive. You need two functions:
HRESULT EnumAdapterModes( UINT Adapter, D3DFORMAT Format, UINT Mode, D3DDISPLAYMODE* pMode );
GetAdapterModeCount is simple. It takes the adapter and the back buffer format and gives the number of display modes. EnumAdapterModes is a little more complex, but still simple. It also takes the adapter and back buffer format, but it also needs a number and a place to put mode. The number needs to be less than what GetAdapterModeCount returns, and pMode just needs to be some usable memory. You generally use the two in a loop to find the values you want. For example:
D3DDISPLAYMODE dispmode, bestmode;
This code gets the absolute best display mode for the chosen format and puts it into bestmode.
Now that we have all of this data we can initialize our device the way it should be done - fast and flexible! Our first goal is to fill in the D3DPRESENT_PARAMETERS structure. This is where the bulk of our data goes. Here's the structure in all its glory:
D3DFORMAT BackBufferFormat;
D3DMULTISAMPLE_TYPE MultiSampleType;
D3DSWAPEFFECT SwapEffect;
D3DFORMAT AutoDepthStencilFormat;
And here's how we'll fill it in (in a mostly linear order):
d3dpresent.BackBufferWidth = bestmode.Width;
d3dpresent.BackBufferHeight = bestmode.Height;
d3dpresent.FullScreen_RefreshRateInHz = bestmode.RefreshRate;
If you noticed, we didn't fill in all of the parameters. That's because we need to know what our application will do - we have (for the most part) free range on the parameters left. Our first unfilled parameter is BackBufferCount. We can fill this with any value between 0 and D3DPRESENT_BACK_BUFFERS_MAX. Generally we want this to be 1. Next we have SwapEffect. A list of valid swap effects can be found here: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb172612(VS.85).aspx. Generally this is D3DSWAPEFFECT_DISCARD. This MUST be D3DSWAPEFFECT_DISCARD if we set MultiSampleType to anything other than D3DMULTISAMPLE_NONE. Now we need to set EnableAutoDepthStencil. This can be TRUE or FALSE. If we want Direct3D to manage the depth stencil (we do), it should be TRUE. Finally, we need to get a value for Flags. This can be 0 or any of the values listed here: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb172586(VS.85).aspx. We'll use 0. And here's our code for the rest of the parameters:
d3dpresent.SwapEffect = D3DSWAPEFFECT_DISCARD;
HRESULT IDirect3D9::CreateDevice( UINT Adapter, D3DDEVTYPE DeviceType, HWND hFocusWindow, DWORD BehaviorFlags,
D3DPRESENT_PARAMETERS * pPresentationParameters, IDirect3DDevice9 ** ppReturnedDeviceInterface );
The only parameter that needs explaining is BehaviorFlags. BehaviorFlags specifies many things as a bitmask. A complete list of constants it can include is here: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb172527(VS.85).aspx. We will just be using it for the type of vertex processing we want. So we just plug in our vtx_proc variable. And this is our final device initialization function!
d3dobject->CreateDevice( adapter, devicetype, window, vtx_proc, &d3dpresent, &d3ddevice );
Although not strictly involved in initialization, it is good to talk about freeing up the memory you allocated in the initialization section. All devices created with the Direct3D object as well as the object itself must be released with their Release functions. Here, the only things we allocated were the device and the object, so we need to do:
Immigration Act Republic of China (Taiwan) LawArticle 38-4
Promulgated addition on 2015-02-04, effective 2015-02-05
Prior to the deadline of the temporary detention and whether it is necessary to continue the detention sanction, the National Immigration Agency shall apply for a continuation of the detention period by submitting the reasons to the court no later than 5 days before the deadline.
In case the detainee’s passport or travel document is lost or expired with no replacement, or reissued or extended prior to the deadline of the continued detention and whenever it is necessary to continue the detention sanction, the National Immigration Agency shall apply for an extension of the detention period by submitting the reasons to the court no later than 5 days before the deadline.
The period of continued detention shall not exceed forty-five (45) days from the deadline of temporary detention; the period of extended detention shall not exceed forty (40) days from the deadline of continued detention.
↑ "Immigration Act". Immigration Office (Taiwan). 2015-04-30. http://www.immigration.gov.tw/ct.asp?xItem=1096847&ctNode=30026&mp=2. Retrieved 2017-01-08.
After this activity a student should be able to explain the follow phenomena
Describe the structure of a generic volcano
Describe the main active volcanoes in the world
StudyJams - Volcanoes simpatico cartone ma chiaro e semplice (ha bisogno del plugin flash attivato)
Khan Academy - Hawaiian-islands-formation formazione delle Hawai su Khan Academy (non c'è altro...)
Volcanoes on Wikibook fo High School <-- very useful to work with (with exercises)
Simple and good physical geografy glossary of terms
Anki opensource software ti memorize terms and definitions. It's a flash card software. Here you can find a set of cards (deck) about volcanoes that help you to memorize the main english related words.
Example of a clil activity on vulcanoes
Lesson 4-5: work in group: build a power point (or a document, or a web page, ...) on a related subject.
Simple 1-bit digital sensors are the simplest type of input to read on a microcontroller. Most pins on microcontrollers are usable as general purpose I/O, which allows for the interfacing of numerous 1-bit digital sensors. Examples of these sensors might be limit switches, IR proximity detectors, high gain photodetectors (light sensors), or pushbuttons.
Binary on/off switching type sensors are very easy to integrate simply by having a pull-up or pull-down resistor connected to the switch output.
To read a sensor on an AVR microcontroller, two registers must be used to handle pin setup and reading. These two registers are:
Where the x indicates an arbitrary I/O port (i.e. A, B, C, D, etc.)
The DDR (Data Direction Register) is used to configure the specified pin as an input or output for a given port. A "1" bit for each location specifies that that port pin is set as an output, and a "0" bit for each location specifies that the pin is configured as an input.
The PIN register is used for reading the digital state of all 8 pins on each port, returning a 1 for logic high and 0 for logic low states for each bit. Note that this is not the PORTx register. PORTx is used for setting output values, while PINx is used for reading inputs.
To use a digital input, you must configure the pin as an input, and then read the appropriate bit from the PINx register. The simplest way to extract a single bit from PINx is to use a bitmask.
In these examples, the bitmask is used to remove the state of all other pins on the port from the conditional. Like with digital outputs, you can use AVR-GCC macros to make your code easier to read:
Many sensors measure a continuous signal, such as the position of a knob, the light level in the room, or the distance of an object from a sensor. Often, the output of these sensors is a voltage which is linearly related to the measured signal. To interface with these sensors, you must use an Analog Digital Converter (ADC). Most microprocessors contain several ADCs. An ADC converts the voltage into an integer, the size of which depends on the accuracy of the ADC. Most ADCs are 8- or 10- bit, meaning they use 8 or 10 bits to represent the entire range (from 0 to Vcc). A 10-bit ADC discretizes the analog voltage into  values, ranging from 0 (0 V) to 1023 (Vcc).
AVR's ADCs require several steps to configure and read an analog signal. In addition, only pins on the microcontroller can be used as analog inputs. Refer to your microcontroller's datasheet to find which pins can be used with the ADC (they are typically labeled ADCn, where n is a number). The registers involved with ADCs are:
ADMUX: Selects the ADC input being read
ADCL: Low 8 bits of the ADC conversion
ADCH: High bits of the ADC conversion
Because ADC pins can also be used as digital inputs/outputs, they must be configured as an input to be read by the ADC. The ADMUX register is used to select which ADC is being converted, and for single-ended inputs, is simply a number between 0..N, where N is the last ADC pin on the MCU. ADCSRA stands for ADC Control And Status Register A, and is used to begin a conversion and check when it has completed. ADCL and ADCH contain the result of the conversion.
Molecular evolution is in part a process of evolution at the scale of DNA, RNA, and proteins. Molecular evolution emerged as a scientific field in the 1960s as researchers from molecular biology, evolutionary biology and population genetics sought to understand recent discoveries on the structure and function of nucleic acids and protein. Some of the key topics that spurred development of the field have been the evolution of enzyme function, the use of nucleic acid divergence as a "molecular clock" to study species divergence, and the origin of noncoding DNA.
Recent advances in genomics, including whole-genome sequencing, high-throughput protein characterization, and bioinformatics have led to a dramatic increase in studies on the topic. In the 2000s, some of the active topics have been the role of gene duplication in the emergence of novel gene function, the extent of adaptive molecular evolution versus neutral processes of mutation and drift, and the identification of molecular changes responsible for various human characteristics especially those pertaining to infection, disease, and cognition.
In order for evolution to occur, three different processes are required and must be met:
Selection of members based on criterion of fitness
Reproduction to enrich the population in more-fit members
Nucleic acids are such molecules that are capable of undergoing all three processes. Combinatorial chemistry is the concept of rapidly producing an abundant amount of a specific molecule of interest. Because of this process, diverse populations of nucleic acid molecules can be synthesized. A common example of this process involves attempting to create an RNA molecule that specifically binds ATP and other nucleotides. First, a randomized pool of RNA sequences, called apimers, are placed into an ATP affinity column. Some RNA molecules are then found bounded to ATP. These molcules are released from the affinity column by adding excess ATP. This collection of molecules are allowed to replicate into DNA by using the enzyme reverse transcriptase. Once transcribed into DNA, the molecules undergo PCR, and ultimately transcribe back into RNA.
↑ http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK22506/#A963
Ralph goes to the beach because he needs a place to think and is overcome with astonishment. He understands the weariness of life, where everything requires improvisation. He calls a meeting near the bathing pool, realizing that he must think and must make a decision but that he lacks Piggy's ability to think. He begins the assembly seriously, telling them that they are there not for making jokes or for cleverness. He reminds them that everyone built the first shelter, which is the sturdiest, while the third one, built only by Simon and Ralph, is unstable. He admonishes them for not using the appropriate areas for the lavatory, and reminds them that the fire is the most important thing on the island, for it is their means of escape. He claims that they ought to die before they let the fire out. He directs this at the hunters, in particular. He makes the rule that the only place where they will have a fire is on the mountain. Ralph then speaks on their fear. He admits that he is frightened himself, but their fear is unfounded. Jack stands up, takes the conch, and yells at the littluns for screaming like babies and not hunting or building or helping. Jack tells them that there is no beast on the island. Piggy does agree with Jack on that point, telling the kids that there is no beast and there is no real fear, unless they get frightened of people. Percival speaks next, and as he gives his name he recites his address and telephone number; this reminder of home causes him to break out into tears. All of the littluns join him. Percival claims that the beast comes out of the sea. Simon puts forward the suggestion that the beast is really inside them and they themselves are the beast. However, as he does not express himself well and the other boys are not mature enough to understand him, he is shouted down. The boys speak about ghosts. Piggy says he does not believe in ghosts, but Jack attempts to start a fight again. Ralph stops the fight, and asks the boys how many of them believe in ghosts. Piggy yells at the boys, asking whether they are humans or animals or savages. Jack threatens him again, and Ralph intercedes once more, complaining that they are breaking the rules. When Jack asks "who cares?" Ralph says that the rules are the only thing that they have. Jack instead defies Ralph saying "Bollocks to the rules" that they will hunt the beast down. The assembly breaks up as Jack leads them on a hunt. This is significant as it is the first instance that Ralph has lost control of Jack. Only Ralph, Piggy and Simon remain. Ralph says that if he blows the conch to summon them back and they refuse, then they will become like animals and will never be rescued. He does ask Piggy whether there are ghosts or beasts, but Piggy reassures him. Piggy warns him that if Ralph steps down as chief Jack will do nothing but hunt, and they will never be rescued. The three reminisce on the majesty of adult life.
D4. Lab on a chip
Micro total analytical systems (also called “chips”) are miniaturized microfluidic devices, fabricated from a variety of materials within which channels are constructed for the transport of samples and reagents. The small size minimizes the consumption of reagents, reduces manufacturing costs and increases the possibilities for automation. Miniaturization of detectors, however, leads to problems due to the reduced volume of liquid in the detector and to difficulties inherent in scaling down the size of the particular detector. One solution is to interface the chip with a macro-scale detector such as a photomultiplier tube; this is called the “off-chip” approach. This can be achieved, for example, by using optical fibres to carry light from the chip to the detector. An alternative solution – the “on-chip” approach - is to assemble a compact version of the detector and integrate this on the chip with the rest of the analytical system.[1]
Chemiluminescence detection offers high sensitivity, low detection limits and instrumental simplicity but requires a relatively complex manifold on the microchip, the details depending on the chemiluminescence reaction system being used; for example, a Y-shaped channel junction works best when using peroxide-luminol chemiluminescence. Reagent is delivered by a micropump. The chip design must ensure that a high proportion of the emitted light enters the off-chip photomultiplier; this frequently involves coupling with an optical fibre. Such an arrangement typically achieves micromolar detection limits and has been used for  a range of analytes including catechol, dopamine, amino-acids, cytochrome c and myoglobin as well as the determination of chip-separated chromium(III), cobalt(II) and copper(II). Horseradish peroxidise can be determined at sub-nanomolar levels. Micromolar concentrations of ATP (adenosine triphosphate) can be measured by means of luciferin-luciferase bioluminescence. The effect of antioxidants has been measured using a microfluidic system incorporating peroxy-oxalate chemiluminescence, by injecting the antioxidants into the hydrogen peroxide stream. The method is simple and rapid and excellent analytical performance is obtained in terms of sensitivity, dynamic range and precision. Electrochemiluminescence detection has been applied for microchip separations using electrodes installed during fabrication.
Photodiodes have been fabricated into chips at the bottoms of the microfluidic channels and have been used for on-chip chemiluminescence detection of DNA produced by the polymerase chain reaction and separated on the same chip by capillary electrophoresis. These devices have been used also to detect luminol chemiluminescence for the micromolar determination of hydrogen peroxide generated by the oxidation of glucose with glucose oxidase. Thin-film organic photodiodes can be fabricated by vacuum deposition and integrated into chips. Copper-phthalocyanine-fullerene small molecule diodes have high quantum efficiency and have been used to determine hydrogen peroxide by peroxy-oxalate chemiluminescence. Another example has been used for hydrogen peroxide determination by luminol chemiluminescence.
↑ Kuswandi B, Nuriman, Huskens J and Verboom W, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2007, 601, 141-155.
Primary Assessment & Basic Life Support —
Medical Conditions & Poisoning —
Humans breathe by inhaling fresh air into the lungs, exchanging part (but not all) of the oxygen in it with unneeded carbon dioxide, and exhaling the spent air. Blood vessels located in the lungs distribute oxygen throughout the cells of the body. Human beings typically have a lung capacity of 4 to 6 liters.
When someone stops breathing, this is a life threatening condition known as respiratory arrest. Occasionally when a victim stops breathing, their
Without their lungs receiving oxygen, a victim will suffer permanent brain damage after only a few minutes. Because of this, it is crucial that rescuers provide rescue breathing (ventilation) quickly and correctly.
After opening the victim's airway, check to see if the victim is breathing. To do this, place your cheek in front of the victim's mouth (about 3–5 cm away) while looking down their chest (towards their feet). If desired, you can
You may Feel the victim's breath against your cheek.
You may Hear the air entering or escaping your victim's lungs.
You may See the chest rise and fall with each breath.
You may Smell the breath of the victim as they exhale.
If you have placed your hand on the victim's chest, you may also feel their chest rise and fall against your hand. Search for these signs for 10 seconds. If there is no breathing (or it is slower than 6 times per minute), your victim is not adequately moving air in and out of their body. In order to help them, you must perform rescue breathing.
If a bystander has not already summoned assistance, now is the time to make sure that emergency personnel are enroute (known as EMS, Ambulance Service, Rescue Squad, or Paramedics depending on the region).
You will need to give the emergency services:
Your exact location (including apartment number, suite, building, etc.)
The illness or injury that the victim is having (to the best of your knowledge).
A telephone number you can be contacted back on (for instance, if they have difficulty finding you)
Sometimes, the victim must be left unattended while the first aider leaves to seek help for them. If the victim is unconscious they should be left in the recovery position so they do not choke if they vomit. However, if you suspect the victim has an injury to their neck or back, they should not be moved and their head kept stationary, with two exceptions. One, if the victim is in immediate danger (such as from a fire), they should be moved regardless. Two, if the victim is unconscious, the threat of choking outweighs the potential injury to their neck or back, and they should be placed on their side anyway. There are alternative methods for safer positioning available to those with more advanced training.(See Suspected Spinal Injury for more information.)
In Europe, give 5 rescue breaths for victims of:DrowningTraumaDrug overdoseFor other victims, begin with compressions instead of rescue breaths.
Rescue breaths must be provided to victims in a state of respiratory arrest; do not provide them to a weakly breathing victim. If you cannot detect the breath of the victim, or they are breathing slower than once every ten seconds, begin rescue breathing.
If you have a CPR mask or other barrier device, you can use it to protect yourself and the victim from exchange of body fluids. Cheap, keyring-sized CPR masks are available in most pharmacies. Be sure to read the instructions and practice with any equipment you buy. In the event you do not have a barrier device, the rescuer should perform as best they can, given the situation and abilities. If you are uncomfortable performing direct mouth-to-mouth on a stranger, or you find blood or other bodily fluids present, you are not obligated to. You should, however, perform the chest compression portion of CPR, as it is better than doing nothing.
The 2010 CPR guidelines changed CPR so compressions are started first, after checking for breathing.
Kneel at the level of the victim, perpendicular to and facing them.
Maintain an open airway using the head-tilt chin-lift
Squeeze the nose of the victim with your free hand to seal it shut.
Put your mouth on the mouth of the victim in an airtight manner, and blow into the mouth of the victim so that their chest beings to rise. Never blow forcefully, as this may cause the air to enter the stomach and not their lungs. Instead, exhale smoothly over 1–2 seconds.
Remove your mouth, and let the victim exhale completely (watch for their chest to fall).
Repeat the above steps for your second breath.
If your breaths do not go in easily, or the victim's chest did not rise, the airway could have again become closed. Open the airway once again with the head-tilt chin-lift technique and try again, making sure the victim's neck is extended and their head is rocked back fully.
Continue with CPR compressions.
Emergency First Aid & Initial Action Steps —
As summarized in previous chapters, electromagnetic field is mathematical abstraction of two projections
, which meets Maxwell equations
The theorem results from field line definition directly
.
2.2.1 1. M v. K
2.2.2 2. K v. M
D was a caretaker of N who was required to put a correct amount of medication for N. D stole N's jewelry and failed to put the medication which led to N's death by overdose.
Larceny of Trick: $1,000
K opened a dog breeding facility in the outskirt of the city. The facility smelled and K failed to remedy it. M raises cats next to the facility and suffered from the noise and the smell from the facility. M once sprayed air fresheners to the dog to remedy it and the dog died.
M v. K
K v. M
Trespass to Land - sprays onto the land, sprays excrement
Trespass to Chattel - sprays dogs with air freshener
Conversion - sprays dogs with air freshener
After hearing burglary in his area, N placed loaded guns that he lawfully possessed in every room. N began looking forward to the prospect of shooting an intruder. Da and Do chose to break into N’s home. Dara parked outside and Don crept toward the house. Inside, Ned’s alarm activated. On the video feeds, Ned saw that Don was right outside his dining room window. Ned entered the dining room, picked up a shotgun, and shot Don through the window, killing him. Don had not yet touched Ned’s house when Ned shot him.
Time has come for Black to make an important strategic choice.
He may keep on developing his forces by playing 5...Nc6.
He can choose to strengthen his pawn structure and to reinforce his control of the center with 5...e6.
He can also start to take the control of the queen-side with 5...a6.
He may decide to put a deadly bishop in g7 and play 5...g6.
These are the four main variations. Another more aggressive option is 5...e5, less popular than the previous moves.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
1.e4 c5 2.Nf3 d6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3
...
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Sicilian Defence
Batsford Chess Openings 2 (1989, 1994). Garry Kasparov, Raymond Keene. ISBN 0-8050-3409-9.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
For this chapter, we have a calculator willing to perform more calculations than you are willing to input.
This program will run until your terminal stops running it (because you press Ctrl+C, or click the X). That's because the while loop, every time control reaches its bottom, jumps back up to the top - if its condition is still true, which it always will be in this case.
If we weren't in a context where the user could easily halt the loop, the while(true) would be a very bad idea. Instead of true, you can put any Boolean expression (like a == b) or bool variable between the parentheses.
Suppose we wanted to allow up to ten iterations (passes through the loop) instead of an unlimited number. We could do this:
And that would work just fine.
i++ is the same thing as i = i + 1, and results in i being one greater than it was. It's also the same as i += 1.
But C++ provides a prettier way to write that, the for loop:
For the first iteration, i will have the value 0. For the last iteration, it will have the value 9. It will never (usefully) have the value 10 because, just like with our equivalent while loop above:
Nonetheless, the loop does run 10 times.
Modern C++: The Good Parts
The recommended way of installing new software is to use a program called Xandros Networks, an application that installs, removes and updates software.
Xandros Networks can be launched from the desktop and the Launch menu.
From the menu on the left, select "New Applications".  You will see a list of common software packages offered and tested by Xandros which are not found on your computer. To install any of these, simply click on the "Install Now" to the right of the software description.
Expanding the "New Applications" on the left reveals the software categories for all available supported software from Xandros Networks.  Selecting a category will reveal the software packages in that category.  To install one of these packages, selected the desired software package and click "Install".
If you don't know the category or the name of the software you want to install, you can search for it.  Enter the name or type of software you want in the text box in the top-right corner of the window and click the "Search" button.
Autopackage is a simple way to install software on a wide variety of Linux distributions.
To install your first software from Autopackage:
Go to the Autopackage Downloads site.
Download the software package you want to install and save it on your computer.
Go to the folder where you saved the software package.
Click on the package with your right mouse button.
Click on the Properties menu item.
Check the top-most "Exec" checkbox.
Click OK.
Open the software package.
This is a one-time process.  After your first package software package from Autopackage has been installed, installing further software packages is as easy as downloading the file and double-clicking it.
A failure mode is the manner in which a system fails, or the manner by which a failure is observed. So, it is not the same as the cause of the failure, but it describes the way a failure occurs. There are three kinds of failure modes: conceptual, technological and organizational. This text deals with technological failure modes only, and concentrates on embedded control systems. This chapter is very relevant for the embedded systems designer because such systems often work without human supervision and at places where human correction of the failure are expensive to execute. Therefore, the designers should pay extra attention to what could go wrong in their system (i.e., to identify its failure modes) and to assess the risk of each failure (i.e., to analyse the consequences of each failure mode). It is obvious that it is way better to avoid failures than to repair them, and that simple designs are easier in this respect than complex systems; however, making simple designs is still a form of engineering art, and not yet a structured engineering discipline. Also keep in mind that many failures will not be detected by testing.
Technological failure modes in embedded systems can be divided into two main groups: hardware failure modes and software failure modes; the toughest failures to prevent however, are those caused by subtle interactions between hardware and software.
Some examples of software failure modes are:
Buffer overflow: the computer memory is smaller than the programmer expected, so during operation of the embedded system, one of the programs in the system is accessing wrong parts of the computer's memory.
Dangling pointers: this error is common in non-safe programming languages in which the human programmer is responsible for making sure that every pointer points to the right memory location at all times.
Resource leaks [1] in which programming errors lead to the loss of computer control over some of the hardware resources; memory leaks are the simplest form of resource leak.
Race conditions in which specific relative timing events of different components of the system leads to unexpected behaviour. Such race conditions are often hard to detect by testing only.
Semantic design, for example: the meaning of an arrow between two subsystems in a visual software environment should be the same as the interpretation of it by the hardware.
Electrical failure: short-circuiting, too high voltage/current
It is important to note again that these examples are only consequences and not causes!
Some examples of software failure causes are:
Deadlock: two or more processes are each waiting for the other to finish, so none of the processes ever finish.
Resource starvation: a process doesn't get the resources it needs, so it can never finish.
Hostile environments: any factor which prevents a system from functioning correctly.
Some failures are not caused by hardware or software, but are caused on the system level.
Operational failure: human operators make mistakes too. The Three Mile Island accident is a fine example of an operational failure.
Due to the increasing capabilities and functionality of embedded systems, it is difficult to prevent or sometimes even detect failure modes. One way to ensure reliability is extensive testing using techniques such as probabilistic reliability modeling. One of the problems with these techniques is that they are only used in the late stage of development. It is better to design quality and reliability in, in the early stages of development.
To detect failures in the design process it is important to perform different tests on the system (especially on the software) at the beginning of the design. But tests are often expensive and they also should provide the correct information: the usability of test results depend on the quality of the test. So it is not always easy to come up with an appropriate test.
Dynamic analysis in the software world is the testing and evaluation of software by executing programs on a processor. An example of a dynamic analysis on hardware could be vibration and stress analysis.
These days engineers have developed a static analysis for software, which is test-free: no specific tests need to be developed and the software can be checked for flaws without having to execute the program.
There are a number of possibilities to reduce the chance of failure occurrences. But some failures need to be treated more urgent than others. At first one should look at the frequency with which a systems fails, this is called the failure rate of a system. It is desired that systems don't fail, but if a failure is very rare it is often not necessary to take steps.
Another aspect of a failure mode is its severity. An electrical appliance that short-circuits can be life-threatening, whereas the jamming of a valve in vending machine is less life-threatening.
Despite all the effort an engineer can put into designing a system that doesn't fail, failures will always occur. For example: an average cell phone these days contains as much as 2 million lines of software code. It is very likely that in one of those lines a fault is introduced. Systems are getting even more complex. For instance: that same cell phone is expected to have as much as 10 million lines of code in 10 years. Therefore, a design should be more robust.[2] When the system detects something goes wrong it can signal this and go into a safe mode until the user takes appropriate actions. Take for example again the jamming of a valve of the vending machine: the machine can light all its LEDs to signal something is wrong and cease providing soda until it is repaired.
Failures are also to be expected when separate systems have to work together, for instance: the different robots in RoboCup. An other example of such a complex system are the robots of professor James McLurkin of MIT who have to perform the Star Wars theme tune together, but every robot can only play some notes. So they have to cooperate in order to play the entire theme correctly.[3]
The cost of designing embedded control systems tends to increase exponentially with increasing reliability: removing X% of the faults in a system will not necessarily improve the reliability by X% (a study at IBM proved that with removing 60% of the errors, only 3% reliability was added). In some cases, it may therefore be more cost effective to not investigate in more trustworthy systems but to pay the failure costs. However one has to keep in mind that this strategy can lead to a bad name of the company for selling systems that can not be trusted. There is always a trade-off between different design criteria, depending on the system. Off course, critical systems should always be designed as reliable as possible.
This all stresses out how important it is to rule out failures in the design process. Fortunately, engineers have developed some procedures to do this systematically. All the following procedures can be used in what is called safety engineering. The study of failures is an important aspect of designing embedded control systems as it can safe time, money and even lives, and helps with eventual future modification of a system.
There are many examples of real-time disasters, due to incomplete failure testing.
Safety factors are used to ensure that a design will work, and to protect it against failures. However, large safety factors don't always give rise to a reliable system. Often they lead to overdesigned systems, which are more expensive and can take a longer time to manufacture/assemble.
In order to reduce (or better prevent) the failure chance of a system, engineers have developed a technique called “Failure Mode and Effects Analysis” (FMEA). This is a tool to identify potential or actual failure modes in a system and to choose the proper corrective action, when designing. FMEA provides an analytical approach to determine which risk has the greatest concern, and therefore an action is needed to prevent a problem before it arises. The development of these specifications will ensure a system that will meet the defined requirements.
It is also possible to identify critical or important design/process characteristics that require special controls to prevent or detect failure modes. A crucial step is anticipating what might go wrong with a product. While anticipating every failure mode is not possible, a development team should formulate an extensive list of potential failure modes as completely as possible.
FMEA starts at the beginning of a design, and is maintained and adapted through the entire design process. This way it is possible to design out failures. This way FMEA contains important information for use in future system improvements.
The process for conducting an FMEA is straightforward. It is developed in 3 main steps, in which appropriate actions need to be undertaken. But before starting with a FMEA, it is important to do some pre-work to make sure the robustness and past history are included in the analysis. It is important to consider both intentional and unintentional uses! Unintentional uses are a form of hostile environments.
Determine all failure modes based on the functional requirements and their effects as perceived by the user.
Each effect is given a severity number(SEV) from 1(no danger) to 10(important). If the severity of an effect has a number 9 or 10, actions are considered to change the design by eliminating the failure mode, if possible, or protecting the user from the effect.
In this step it is necessary to look at the cause of a failure and how many times it occurs.
A failure mode is given a probability number(OCCUR), again from 1 to 10. Actions need to be determined if the occurrence is high (meaning >4 for non safety failure modes and >1 when the severity-number from step 1 is 9 or 10).
TIP: The probability number can also be used after implementation in a table of failures to give the operator a first guess of the origin of problems of frequent occurrence.
When appropriate actions are determined, it is necessary to test their efficiency. Also a design verification is needed. The proper inspection methods needs to be chosen.
Each combination from the previous 2 steps, receives a detection number(DETEC). This number represents the ability of planned tests and inspections at removing defects or detecting failure modes.
After these 3 basic steps, Risk Priority Numbers (RPN) are calculated.
RPN do not play an important part in the choice of an action against failure modes. They are more threshold values in the evaluation of these actions.
The failure modes that have the highest RPN should be given the highest priority for corrective action.
After these values are allocated, recommended actions with targets, responsibility and dates of implementation are noted.
Once the actions have been implemented in the design/process, the new RPN should be checked, to confirm the improvements. Whenever a design or a process changes, a FMEA should be updated.
A few logical but important thoughts come to mind:
Try to eliminate the failure mode (some failures are more preventable than others)
Reduce the occurrence of the failure mode
Like FMEA, Anticipatory failure determination (AFD) has the objective of identifying and preventing possible failures.[4] The approach of AFD however is just the inverse of that of FMEA. Rather than searching for causes of failure modes, AFD asks developers to view at the failure of interest as an intended consequence and to look for ways to make sure that this failure always happens reliably. In this way, AFD is a complementary method to FMEA. Using FMEA the failures with the highest Risk Priority Number can be found and afterward redesigned using the AFD method.
AFD is more suited for complex failure analysis than FMEA. FMEA relies on the identification of failures and their causes based on application or personal experience of others. However the problem with this approach is “the denial phenomenon”. If one tries to consider what can go wrong with a functioning system, there is the tendency to resist thinking about unpleasant possibilities that might occur unless they actually have been experienced before. Sometimes people even deny a problem because one would not admit having made mistakes in the design.
By reversing the problem, AFD overcomes this “denial phenomenon” and opens up creative insights into analysis of failures.
Step 1: Formulation or inversion of the problem
Instead of thinking about possible causes for a failure, an engineer should think about how to make that failure happen, under the same environmental conditions that made the failure happen. First identification of these conditions is needed. After that one should think about the scenario that gives rise to the failure and try to localize it.
Step 2: Search for solutions or methods to produce the failure
The thought process is now shifted to finding the mechanism or means to produce the examined failure. Function analysis can be useful to identify a series of functions or actions involved in the failure scenario.
Step 3: Verify that resources are available to cause the failures
There are seven potential categories of resources: substances, field effects, space available, time, object structure, system functions and other data on the system. For each of the potential solutions to cause a failure, it is necessary to check if the required resources are available to support this solution.
Fault tree analysis (FTA) is a third form of failure analysis in which an undesired state of a system is analyzed using boolean logic to combine a series of lower-level events. FTA takes place after implementation in the design process i.e. at testing level, but if all these fault trees are collected and maintained well they can be a useful aid at operating level too if failure nevertheless occur. This analysis method is mainly used in the field of safety engineering.
Step 1: Define the undesired event to study
Definition of the undesired event can be very hard to catch, although some of the events are very easy and obvious to observe. An engineer with a wide knowledge of the design of the system or a system analyst with an engineering background is the best person who can help define and number the undesired events. Undesired events are used then to make the FTA, one event for one FTA.
Step 2: Obtain an understanding of the system
Once the undesired event is selected, all causes with probabilities of affecting the undesired event are studied and analyzed. Getting exact numbers for the probabilities leading to the event is usually impossible for the reason that it may be very costly and time consuming to do so. System designers have full knowledge of the system and this knowledge is very important for not missing any cause affecting the undesired event. For the selected event all causes are then numbered and sequenced in the order of occurrence.
After selecting the undesired event and analyzed the system so that we know all the causing effects and if possible their probabilities we can now construct the fault tree. Fault tree is based on AND and OR gates which define the major characteristics of the fault tree.
Analyze the tree for any possible improvement or in other words study the risk management and find ways for system improvement. In short, in this step we identify all possible hazards affecting in a direct or indirect way the system.
This step is very specific and differs largely from one system to another, but the main point will always be that after identifying the hazards all possible methods are pursued to decrease the probability of occurrence.
Because assembling a FTA can be a costly and cumbersome experience, the perfect method is to consider subsystems and integrate them afterwards.
Robust product design through design of experiments
Static vs. Dynamic Detection of Bugs in Safety-Critical Code
AE kiting is a soloing technique in which non-targeted point-blank area of effect (PBAE/PBAoE) damage spells are used to kill a large number of mobs while they are kited by the player. Due to the limited range of most non-targeted AE damage spells, timing is critical, and mistakes are usually fatal. To be effective, the mobs must be the range of the AE when it finishes casting, yet the mobs must never be allowed within melee range of the player. Also, as with almost all kiting techniques, the mobs must not be able to summon the player. Overall, this is a technique with very high risk, but also very high rewards if executed successfully.
AE kiting was once commonly employed by the bard class due to their ability to move while casting a song, which is the bard's version of a spell. By continuously running in circles, the mobs will aggregate into one large clump. If the player runs at the right speed and in a circle of appropriate radius, the player can maintain the proper distance for AE kiting to be effective. Once this kiting path is established, the player can continue to twist a number of PBAE DoT songs to gradually kill the entire mob kite.  It was common for AE kites of 20+ mobs, although there have been accounts of AE kites exceeding 100 mobs. Due to the unbalanced power of this technique, and its tendency to disrupt zone behavior when players pulled very large numbers of mobs, this technique has been nerfed so as to be unusable by bards. As part of a patch, shortly after the release of the Omens of War expansion, bard AE songs now no longer affect moving mobs.
Map of the Earth with transparent water, i.e. the alpha component is 0 for water and 1 for land.
This tutorial covers various common uses of alpha texture maps, i.e. RGBA texture images with an A (alpha) component that specifies the opacity of texels.
It combines the shader code of the tutorial on textured spheres with concepts that were introduced in the tutorial on cutaways and the tutorial on transparency.
If you haven't read these tutorials, this would be a very good opportunity to read them.
Let's start with discarding fragments as explained in the tutorial on cutaways. Follow the steps described in the tutorial on textured spheres and assign the image to the left to the material of a sphere with the following shader:
This script uses a game property called cutoff to control the uniform variable of the same name. If you start the game, Blender should complain in the system console (available via Help > Toggle System Console in the menu of an Info window) about a missing floating-point value in the line
(anything a bit away from 0 and 1 will do).
If you start the game engine now, the fragment shader should read the RGBA texture and compare the alpha value against the threshold specified in the game property cutoff. If the alpha value is less than the threshold, the fragment is discarded and the surface appears transparent.
Since we can look through the transparent parts, it makes sense to deactivate backface culling as described in the tutorial on cutaways: choose the Blender Game engine in the menu of an Info window and then (in the Material tab of the Properties window of the sphere) uncheck Game Settings > Backface Culling. (Note that the usual depth test makes sure that the triangle occlusions are correct, even without checking Transparency in the Material tab.)
The tutorial on transparency described how to render semitransparent objects with alpha blending. Combining this with an RGBA texture results in this fragment shader (with the same vertex shader as above):
Unfortunately, you will see severe rendering artifacts in Blender 2.63 if you deactivate backface culling, even if Transparency > Z Transparency is activated (in the Material tab of the Properties window). Apparently, Blender 2.63 doesn't always sort all triangles according to their depth, which is a problem in this case.
However, changing Game Settings > Alpha Blend to Alpha Sort will tell Blender to sort all of the triangles for that material correcting the problem. (This should only be used when needed as sorting is costly, and is usually not necessary)
Note that all texels with an alpha value of 0 are black in this particular texture image. In fact, the colors in this texture image are “premultiplied” with their alpha value. (Such colors are also called “opacity-weighted.”) Thus, for this particular image, we should actually specify the blend equation for premultiplied colors in order to avoid another multiplication of the colors with their alpha value in the blend equation. Therefore, an improvement of the shader (for this particular texture image) is to employ the following blend specification:
Semitransparent globes are often used for logos and trailers.
We should not end this tutorial without a somewhat more practical application of the presented techniques. To the left is an image of a globe with semitransparent blue oceans, which I found on Wikimedia Commons. There is some lighting (or silhouette enhancement) going on, which I didn't try to reproduce. Instead, I only tried to reproduce the basic idea of semitransparent oceans with the following shader, which ignores the RGB colors of the texture map and replaces them by specific colors based on the alpha value:
If you deactivate backface culling, you will notice that there are rendering artifacts in Blender 2.63. Hopefully, this issue will be improved in coming versions.
Of course, it would be interesting to add lighting and silhouette enhancement to this shader. One could also change the opaque, green color in order to take the texture color into account, e.g. with:
. However, this results in oversaturated green that is clamped to the maximum intensity. This can be avoided by halvening the difference of the green component to the maximum intensity 1. This difference is 1.0 - gl_FragColor.g; half of it is 0.5 * (1.0 - gl_FragColor.g) and the value corresponding to this reduced distance to the maximum intensity is: 1.0 - 0.5 * (1.0 - gl_FragColor.g). Thus, in order to avoid oversaturation of green, we could use (instead of the opaque green color):
In practice, one has to try various possibilities for such color transformations. To this end, the use of numeric shader properties (e.g. for the factors 0.5 in the line above) is particularly useful to interactively explore the possibilities.
Congratulations! You have reached the end of this rather long tutorial. We have looked at:
How discarding fragments can be combined with alpha texture maps.
How alpha texture maps can be used for blending.
How alpha texture maps can be used to determine colors.
If you still want to know more
< GLSL Programming/Blender
Unless stated otherwise, all example source code on this page is granted to the public domain.
Page 4: Event scripting & Interface mods
As you should know by now, there are several different types of "thing" you can get in python: ints, floats, strings, and bools. You also might be aware of "pointers". I wasn't when I first came to python, so I'll give you a little heads-up about them.
Basically a pointer is a game entity. It can take the form of a unit, a plot (square), or a player. In the default python code, and in many modder's code, a variable is shown to be a pointer by prefacing it with "p". So pUnit will define a single unit in the game, pPlayer a single player.
Likewise, if a variable is prefaced with an "i" it is likely to be an integer (int) variable, and "b" a boolean (bool) variable. iPlayer, for example, will probably be a player's individual ID number, rather then the pointer for the player.
It does sometimes get confusing, as most pointers have integers which are closely related to them. This method of naming things helps to avoid confusion in a language like python where variables need not be declared, however it is only a guideline, and just because a varaible is named as if it were a certain type of variable, it won't neccessarily be one.
I also would like to put a note here about "Types". In most xml entries you will need to enter something into a type field. This field is a very important link to python, though must be converted to an int for it to work properly. There is one function that you'll be finding yourself using over and over again, so I thought I'd put it here. This fucntion will find the int corresponding to the type - and as most functions in the API (soon to come) will want the int value of the type it's very useful. For example:
If you don't get that last bit right now, don't worry - hopefully it'll come clear when you read the next section.
Ion mobility spectrometry (IMS) is an analytical technique used to separate and identify ionized molecules in the gas phase based on their ion mobility in a carrier buffer gas.  Though heavily employed for military or security purposes, such as detecting drugs and explosives, the technique also has many laboratory analytical applications, recently being coupled with mass spectrometry and high performance liquid chromatography. IMS devices come in a wide range of sizes (often tailored for a specific application) and are capable of operating under a broad range of conditions.  Systems operated at higher pressure (i.e. atmospheric conditions, 1 atm or 1013 mbar) are also accompanied by elevated temperature (above 100°C), while lower pressure systems (1-20 mbar) do not require heating.
IMS was first developed primarily by Earl W. McDaniel of Georgia Institute of Technology in the 1950s and 1960s when he used drift cells with low applied electric fields to study gas phase ion mobilities and reactions.[1]  In the following decades, he coupled his new technique with a magnetic-sector mass spectrometer, with others also utilizing his techniques in new ways.  IMS cells have since been attached to many other mass spectrometers and high-performance liquid chromatography setups.  Currently IMS is a widely-used technique implemented by many, and improvements and other uses are continually being developed.
Outside of laboratory purposes, IMS has found great usage as a detection tool.  More than 10,000 IMS devices are in use worldwide in airports, and the US Army has more than 50,000 IMS devices.[2]  In industrial settings, uses of IMS include checking equipment cleanliness and detecting emission contents, such as determining the amount of hydrochloric and hydrofluoric acid in a stack gas from a process.[3]
In the traditional method of drift-time IMS, commonly referred to as just IMS, produced ions travel through a drift tube which has an applied electric field and a carrier buffer gas that opposes the ion motion.  At the end of the tube is a detector.  Based on an ion’s mass, charge, size and shape (the ion mobility), the migration time through the tube is characteristic of different ions, leading to the ability to distinguish different analyte species.  The area of an ion that gas molecules strike is an ion’s collision cross-section, related to the ion size and shape.  The greater this collision cross-section is, meaning the larger the ion size, the more area available for buffer gas to collide and impede the ion’s drift – the ion then requires a longer time to migrate through the drift tube.
The physical quantity  ion mobility K is defined as the proportionality factor of an ion's drift velocity vd in a gas and an electric field of strength E,
Ion mobilities are commonly reported as a reduced mobilities, correcting to standard gas density n0, which can be expressed in standard temperature T0 = 273 K and standard pressure p0 = 1013 mbar:
The ion mobility K can be experimentally determined by measuring the drift time tD of an ion traversing within a homogeneous electric field the potential difference U in the drift length L:
The ion mobility K can also be calculated by the Mason equation:
A drift tube’s resolving power R can be calculated as
With a low electric field applied, the thermal energy of the ions is greater than the energy gained from the electric field between collisions.  With these ions having similar energies as the buffer gas molecules, diffusion forces dominate ion motion.
The molecules of the sample need to be ionized, usually by corona discharge, atmospheric pressure photoionization (APPI), electrospray ionization (ESI), or a radioactive source, e.g. a small piece of 63Ni or 241Am, similar to the one used in ionization smoke detectors. ESI and MALDI techniques are commonly used when IMS is paired with mass spec.
Doping materials are sometimes added to the drift gas for ionization selectivity.  For example, acetone can be added for chemical warfare agent detection, chlorinated solvents added for explosives, and nicotinamide added for drugs detection.[4]
In its simplest form an IMS system measures how fast a given ion moves in a uniform electric field through a given atmosphere.
An ion mobility spectrometer separates ions by shape and charge.
In specified intervals, a sample of the ions is let into the drift chamber; the gating mechanism is based on a charged electrode working in a similar way as the control grid in triodes works for electrons. For precise control of the ion pulse width admitted to the drift tube, more complex gating systems such as a Bradbury-Nielsen design are employed.  Once in the drift tube, ions are subjected to a homogeneous electric field ranging from a few volts per centimeter up to many hundreds of volts per centimeter.  This electric field then drives the ions through the drift tube where they interact with the neutral drift molecules contained within the system.
In the drift tube, chemical species separate based on the ion mobility, arriving at the detector for measurement.  Ions are recorded at the detector in order from the fastest to the slowest, generating a response signal characteristic for the chemical composition of the measured sample.
For drift-time IMS, two main methods are used – either reduced pressure or ambient pressure.  A reduced pressure is where the applied pressure gas is at a few torr, commonly used to measure ion collision cross-sections.  Ambient pressure is what is used for stand-alone detector devices, as well as detection for gas, liquid, and supercriticial fluid chromatographies.  The higher pressures of ambient pressure methods allow for higher resolving power and greater separation selectivity due to a higher rate of ion-molecule interactions.  Reduced pressure IMS allows for ion-focusing and an easier interface with mass spec.[1]
Though drift electric fields are normally uniform, non-uniform drift fields are also used.  These non-uniform field IMS results are often calibrated to uniform field instrumentation.  Non-uniform field usage is still in a relatively early developing stage.[5]
DMS (differential mobility spectrometer) make use of the dependence of ion mobility K on electric field strength E at high electric fields. Ions are subjected to different field strengths for different amounts of time. Thereby only ions with certain mobility dependence survive. These types of IMS work as a scanable filter. They are also called FAIMS
DMA differential mobility analyzer make use of a fast gas stream perpendicular to the electric field. Thereby ions of different mobilities undergo different trajectories. This type of IMS corresponds to the sector instruments in mass spectrometry. They also work as a scanable filter.
The drift gas pressure is an important parameter for the IMS instrument design and resolution. Most drift gases have a greater potential to break down at pressures higher than a few mbar, with the potential to break down increasing as the pressure increases.  As an example, high drift voltages of about 10-30 kV can be used with tubes of 1 m length and high gas pressures of 100-1000 mbar to obtain high resolutions.  At higher pressures than 10 mbar, ions become more difficult to store.  At lower pressures, ions can be stored more easily to obtain an accumulated continuous signal, with the trade-off of lower electric fields (around 10-30 V/cm).
Elevated gas temperature assists in removing ion clusters that may distort experimental measurements.[6][7]
Often the detector is a simple Faraday plate, however, more advanced ion mobility instruments are coupled with mass spectrometers where both size and mass information may be obtained simultaneously.
Ion trap mobility spectrometry is an instrumental analytical method for detection and analysis of chemical substances, able to detect very low concentrations of chemicals based upon the differential migration of ions through homogeneous electric field. It is a version of ion mobility spectrometry. ITMS provides a substantial performance improvement over IMS, as the shutter grid is eliminated together with the associated loss of sensitivity.
When IMS is coupled with gas chromatography, common sample introduction is with the GC capillary column directly connected to the IMS setup, with molecules ionized as they elute from GC.[8]  A similar technique is commonly used for HPLC.
When IMS is used with mass spectrometry, ion mobility spectrometry-mass spectrometry offers many advantages, including better signal to noise, isomer separation, and charge state identification.[1][9]  IMS has commonly been attached to several mass spec analyzers, including quadropole, time-of-flight, and Fourier transform cyclotron resonance.
Coupled with LC and MS, IMS has become widely-used to analyze biomolecules, a practice heavily developed by David E. Clemmer, now at Indiana University (Bloomington). [10]
Perhaps ion mobility spectrometry's greatest strength is the speed at which separations occur—typically on the order of tens of milliseconds.  This feature combined with its ease of use, relatively high sensitivity, and highly compact design have allowed IMS as a commercial product to be used as a routine tool for the field detection of explosives, drugs, and chemical weapons. A major manufacturer of IMS screening devices used in airports is Smiths Detection.
In the pharmaceutical industry IMS is used in cleaning validations, demonstrating that reaction vessels are sufficiently clean to proceed with the next batch of pharmaceutical product. IMS is much faster and more accurate than HPLC and total organic carbon methods previously used.  IMS is also used for analyzing the composition of drugs produced, thereby finding a place in quality assurance and control.[11]   As a research tool ion mobility is becoming more widely-used in the analysis of biological materials, specifically, proteomics and metabolomics.  For example, IMS-MS using MALDI as the ionization method has helped make advances in proteomics, providing faster high-resolution separations of protein pieces in analysis.[12]
↑ a b c Kanu AB, Dwivedi P, Tam M, Matz L, Hill HH (January 2008). "Ion mobility-mass spectrometry". J Mass Spectrom 43 (1):  1–22. doi:10.1002/jms.1383. PMID 18200615.
↑ Zolotov, Yu. A. (2006). “Ion Mobility Spectrometry.” Journal of Analytical Chemistry, 61 (6): 519.
↑ Particle Measuring Systems, Inc. “Ion Mobility Spectrometry (IMS) Theory and Applications”
↑ Creaser, Colin; Thomas, Paul; et al. (2004). “Ion mobility spectrometry: a review. Part 1. Structural analysis by mobility measurement.” The Analyst, 129: 984-994.
↑ Clemmer, David E. et al. (2008).  “Biomolecule Analysis by Ion Mobility Spectrometry.” Annual Review of Analytical Chemistry, 1: 293-397.
↑ Bengt Nolting, Methods in Modern Biophysics, Springer Verlag, 2005, ISBN 3-540-27703-X
↑ Gary Eiceman & Zeev Karpas, Ion Mobility Spectrometry, CRC Press, 2005, ISBN 0-8493-2247-2
↑ Creaser, Colin; Thomas, Paul; et al. (2004). “Ion mobility spectrometry: a review. Part 1. Structural analysis by mobility measurement.” The Analyst, 129: 984-994.
↑ Fenn LS, McLean JA (June 2008). "Biomolecular structural separations by ion mobility-mass spectrometry". Anal Bioanal Chem 391 (3):  905–9. doi:10.1007/s00216-008-1951-x. PMID 18320175.
↑ Clemmer, David E. et al. (2008).  “Biomolecule Analysis by Ion Mobility Spectrometry.” Annual Review of Analytical Chemistry, 1: 293-397.
↑ O’Donnell, Ryan M.; Sun, Xiaobo; de B. Harrington, Peter. (2008). “Pharmaceutical applications of ion mobility spectrometry.”  Trends in Analytical Chemistry, 27 (1): 44-53.
↑ McLean, J.A. . et al. (2005). “Ion mobility–mass spectrometry: a new paradigm for proteomics.” International Journal of Mass Spectrometry, 240: 301-315.
The WO (EOF, actually) way of handling rows (objects) can be confusing if you are using to thinking in SQL. The general outline of using WO for database rows is:
To fetch objects from your persistence layer (retrieve records from the database which will be converted to EnterpriseObjects on the fly), do the following:
To obtain any object that is related (has an EORelationship) to any of the EnterpriseObjects that you've already fetched, just refer to them as you would to any object referenced by another POJO (Plain Old Java Object). The reference will be enough to cause WO to "fire a fault" which causes the referenced objects to be retrieved for you automatically.
Although there are a few ways to do this, the safest and probably most efficient is to use:
If you have two EnterpriseObject classes that have an EORelationship, such as a one to many relationshiop for instance as follows:
You could also, of course, have used:
The important thing to remember is that the addObjectToBothSidesOfRelationshipWithKey method need only be used once on one of the objects to establish the relationship in both directions whether either or both of the relationships is a toOne or a toMany and whether the relationship is bidirectional or not. It's a VERY HELPFUL method.
Also see removeObjectFromBothSidesOfRelationshipWithKey for it's deleting counterpart.
In general, remember that the purpose of an editing context is to provide a runtime context for your program in which each EnterpriseObject is unique (within the editing context) and in which you can create, add, update and delete objects made known to that editing context. However, in general, nothing you do within your editing context is reflected in the database until you do ec.saveChanges(). Then, all the changes you've made since the last saveChanges() will be committed to the database.
There are esoteric exceptions to the above, but that's the best way to remember it.
There are, of course, many other things to know about WebObjects, but knowing the above should help you a lot and at least provide you with hooks to look up many of the ideas in the API reference.
If you're new to WO, be sure to read over the EOF Commandments to avoid some pernicious problems.
If any of the commandments aren't obvious to you, ask someone.
Alchemy Gold (GCHJN4) August 22, 2006 by Alibags
Finally! We arrived here and started to persuade our creaking and aching bodies around the final stage of this excellent series, because by hook or by crook we WERE going to complete this series in one day. It didn't matter that it was dark and we were ill equipped. It didn't matter that it started to rain. We didn't care that we had fat chance of seeing our beds before midnight. Who cares if we were so tired we started to make all sorts of silly errors. Big thanks to Moote, out PAF for today and also to the cache setter who even volunteered to come out when they were rung up and whinged at.
It was here we bumped into Crazy Frog and family (apologies from me too for not catching all your caching names... CF was easy to remember because of all the frogs all over her and the car!!). The two young lads who had been round all the caches that we had been round (even if it was over two days) and were STILL being as keen as anything, even long after their bedtime, was very inspiring! Well done to you! Puts us old farts to shame.
The incentive of finishing the series gave us just enough energy to drag our tired bodies that last leg, and we were glad we did. 2202 was well incentivised anyhow(is that such a word?) as he was aiming for (and got) his 500th cache with this one. Well done Tony. A spot of comedy furtling about in the dark later and voila! one cache. Thanks for the cache and thanks for the series MarkB! Now, can I have some sleeeeeeeeeeeeep please?
Tylenol, also known as acetaminophen, is a popular pain reliever.  This drug is famous for relieving headaches as well as reducing fever.  Tylenol is not considered an NSAID, anti-inflammatory.  It does not do much in halting inflammation.
Be careful if your joints are aching from intense exercise.  Tylenol would probably not be a good choice, compared to aspirin or Aleve.  This is because the aching of joints is due to inflammation.
The main ingredient in Tylenol which is acetaminophen was actually first discovered in Europe before aspirin even became a consumer product. However, it was never studied closely for its possible pharmaceutical uses until Robert L. McNeil of McNeil Laboratories. After an informal conversation with Raymond Conklin, who was vice president of the Institute for the Study of Analgesic and Sedative Drugs, at an American Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association meeting, this compound N-acetyl P-aminophenol was brought to Neil’s attention and his work began. One of the reasons for the great success of acetaminophen when compared to aspirin is the lack of stomach aches that arise from acetaminophen. The FDA approved the drug in June of 1955 and it was introduced as Elixer Tylenol.
Oral acetaminophen is rapidly and almost completely absorbed from the GI  primarily in the small intestine. This absorption process occurs by passive transport. The relative bioavailability ranges from 85% to 98%.
Acetaminophen appears to be distributed throughout most body fluids except fat. The volume distribution of acetaminophen is 0.95 L/kg. A small fraction of acetaminophen is bound to plasma proteins and binding is only slightly increased in plasma concentrations associated with overdose. Sulfate and glucuronide metabolites do not bind to plasma proteins even at relatively high concentrations.
Acetaminophen is primarily metabolized in the liver and involves three principal separate pathways
3.oxidation via the cytochrome
Acetaminophen is eliminated from the body primarily by formation of glucuronide and sulfate conjugates.
Tylenol, acetaminophen, belongs to a class of painkillers known as non-opioid analgesics. Non-opioid analgesics work by inhibiting an enzyme known as cyclooxygenase (COX). COX is a catalyst for the conversion of a fatty acid contained in cell walls, arachidonic acid, to a substance known as prostaglandins. Prostaglandins produce pain, inflammation and fever. It causes pain and inflammation after cell injury at the site of the injury in the peripheral nervous system. They elevate body temperature by affecting the hypothalamus.
By blocking COX and the subsequent production of prostaglandins in the central and peripheral nervous systems, Tylenol reduces both fever and inflammation. Tylenol differs from the other non-opioids in that it does not block COX in the peripheral nervous system that great. It appears to reduce pain primarily in the central nervous system by more than one mechanism, possibly in part by inhibiting a form of COX known as COX-3. Therefore, it is considered to be a weak analgesic and does not possess anti-inflammatory properties.
The first similarity between the two molecule is their benzene skeleton. Both these molecules have reactive oxygen and reactive hydrogens attach to the benzene ring that contribute to their molecule acidity. Aspirin has a carboxylic acid while Tylenol contains a phenol. The acidity of both molecules contributes to similar physiological activities, relieving pain.
Some people might present allergic reactions after taking tylenol. It is recommended to see a physician if the person presents one or more of the following symptoms:
Tylenol could react violently if taken with some other medications. Medications that could possibly react with tylenol to produce severe side effects are:
Although acetaminophen is safe for therapeutic doses, higher dosage can contribute to liver necrosis. Acetaminophen poisoning accounts for almost half of all cases of acute liver failure in the US and the UK. This results from the following steps:
Acetaminophen is metabolically activated by cytochrome 450 into a reactive specie which depletes glutathione, an antioxidant that  prevents damages to important cellular components caused by reactive oxygen species such as free radicals and peroxides.
Loss of glutathione with an increased formation of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species in liver cells undergoes necrotic changes;
Due to increased oxidative stress, mitochondrial permeability changes.
Mitochondrial permeability changes from the additional oxidative stress which leads to loss of mitochondrial membrane potential, and the loss of the ability of the mitochondria to synthesize ATP.
Loss of ATP will not enable the liver cell to function anymore leading to necrosis.
There are inflammatory mediators such as certain cytokines and chemokines that can modify the toxicity. Some have been shown to alter oxidative stress. In addition, existing data support the involvement of cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors in the initiation of regenerative processes of the liver.
As a result, pay careful attention to how much acetaminophen one is taking and never exceed the maximum daily dose (4,000 mg or eight Tylenol extra strength pills in a 24-hour period). If one needs more pain relief, consult with one’s doctor about incorporating other pain relief strategies or by switching to a different type of painkiller. Acetaminophen is also available in a variety of medications, from over-the-counter cough and cold medicines to prescription strength painkillers. Confirm the ingredients of all drugs to make sure the maximum dosage is not exceeded as over dosage will induce liver necrosis. If one has liver disease or drink alcohol heavily, avoid acetaminophen completely! If one regularly takes the drug, watch for signs of liver damage, which include dark urine, pale stools, right-upper abdominal pain, and a yellowish tinge in the whites of the eyes.
Diphenhydramine, an ingredient in Tylenol PM, is an antihistamine that also has sedative properties to help patients fall asleep. However, if people take too much diphenhydramine due to excessive use of Tylenol PM or by taking diphenhydramine in addition to the amount found in Tylenol PM, overdose can occur. This overdose can cause confusion, dry mouth, fatigue, muscle weakness, dizziness and chest congestion. In high doses, diphenhydramine can cause hallucinations and seizures.
From a structural standpoint, it is hard to see how acetaminophen would inhibit the COX site of COX because it lacks a carboxylic acid moiety for interaction with arginine 120. Early work provided a mechanistic approach to see why acetaminophen would have part of the therapeutic activities possessed by NSAIDs but lack anti-inflammatory and anticoagulatory activity. Acetaminophen exerts its effect on a subtype of COX located in the brain. The finding of 2 forms of COX validated the notion of COX subtypes, but further investigation of COX-2 failed to find it to be significantly inhibited by acetaminophen.
"Robert L. McNeil, Jr." Homepage of the Chemical Heritage Foundation. N.p., n.d. Web. 21 Nov. 2012.    <http://www.chemheritage.org/discover/online-resources/chemistry-in-history/themes/pharmaceuticals/relieving-symptoms/mcneil.aspx>.
↑ http://www.chemistryexplained.com/A-Ar/Acetaminophen.html
↑ http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20020268
↑ http://tuftsjournal.tufts.edu/2008/04/professor/01/
↑ http://dmd.aspetjournals.org/content/31/12/1499.full
↑ http://www.tylenolprofessional.com/pharmacology.html
↑ http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/content/31/Supplement_5/S211.full
↑ http://news.consumerreports.org/health/2011/11/repeatedly-taking-too-much-tylenol-can-be-dangerous.html
Books on this shelf deal with web development: any activity related to developing a web site for the World Wide Web or an intranet. This can include e-commerce business development, web design, web content development, client-side/server-side scripting, and web server configuration.
Color Models: RGB, HSV, HSL
Adjectives are words that add description to a person, place, thing, or idea.
Cars pollute, but are essential.
When you are sad, think of good memories.
In Icelandic, these take on endings and inflections like verbs and personal pronouns do in English.
In Icelandic, adjectives are inflected for gender and case. Most Icelandic dictionaries will give the masculine form of the adjective by default. Adjectives usually end in "-ur" in the masculine nominative.
Strong vs. weak adjectives
Case, gender, and number are not the only ways that adjectives are declined in Icelandic.
The strong form of an adjective is used when its meaning is not modified by the definite article, while the weak form is used when the meaning is modified. Examples:
a black cat".
Here, the definite article is not used at all, so the adjective would be in the strong form.
"the black cat".
Here, the adjective is used to say which cat the speaker is referring to, not to provide additional information. Therefore, the weak form of the adjective is used.
Kötturinn er svartur.
Here, even though the noun is in the definite, the adjective's meaning is not changed by the definite article, so the strong form is used.
The inflection table above shows the strong forms of the adjectives. This is how adjectives are declined in the weak form.
In Icelandic, as in with most other languages, adjectives have a positive, comparative, and superlative degree. Examples:
My car is bigger than yours. (comparative)
The comparative does not have separate strong/weak forms.
-legur (cognate with English "-like") is the most common suffix added to a noun or verb to form an adjective. Examples:
↑ a b c d e f g h i j k l m If the final non-ending vowel in the default form is a, then it will become ö in this inflected version.
Blocks are a way of solving the scoping problem. A block is a program region containing definitions of variables and that delimits the regions where these definitions apply. In C programming language, a block is created using a pair of curly braces. The beginning of the block is denoted by an open curly brace '{' and the end is denoted by a closing curly brace '}'. The block collects statements together into a single compound statements. The C code bellow shows two blocks. One of them defines the scope of the main function while the other (an inner block) creates a new scope inside this function. It is possible to see the definition of two variables with the same name, but inside distinct blocks.
The scope of a definition is the block containing that definition, from the point of definition to the end of the block, minus the scopes of any redefinitions of the same name in interior blocks. So, the scope of the variable 'n', defined in the line 3, begins at that line and ends at line 9. But, because there is a new definition of a variable named 'n' inside this block, the variable 'n' defined outside the inner block becomes hidden from line 5 to line 7. The same source code is presented bellow with the distinction of the visibility of the two variables named 'n'. The scope visibility of the first definition is represented by the letter 'A' while the scope visibility of the second definition is represented by the letter 'B'.
Many different constructs serve as blocks in different languages. The term block-structured is commonly referred to languages that use some kind of block to delimit scope. Nowadays, the majority of programming languages are block-structured and few people bother to make this distinction.
The ML programming language uses the let construct to define a block. The following source code shows an example of it use. The let construct contains definitions (located before the keyword 'in') and a region where those definitions apply (from the point of each definition to the final end). The letters 'A' and 'B' distinct the two scopes in the source code.
Un micri picatura in li fingre.
Rapidmen ma precisimen (precisi = sin fals movementes), Van Helsing fat li transfusion. Durant li transfusion yo videt que li vive semblat retornar al guancies de Lucy, e benque Arthur devenit plu e plu blanc yo videt que il devenit plu e plu content. Ma mem li fort Arthur devenit plu e plu debil, e yo suciat pri le. Pensante que Lucy besonat tam mult sangue, que un mann tam fort quam Arthur devenit debil...ma li professor continuat li transfusion. E mem con tam mult sangue Lucy semblat solmen un poc plu fort.
Poy li professor dit: “Sat. (= it es satisfant) Tu auxilia Arthur, yo va auxiliar li puella.” Yo auxiliat Arthur con su vúlnere.
Sin tornar su cap, Van Helsing dit: “Li brav amanto merite (merite = posse haver pro que il tam laborat) un altri besa.” In ti moment li bande circum li col de Lucy movet se, e monstrat un rubi punctu sur su col. Arthur ne videt it, ma yo audit li rapid inhalation (inhalar = respirar in) de Van Helsing e yo savet que il hat videt it. Ma il esset silent. Poy il dit me:
“Nu lassa nor brav amanto dormir un poc; dar le li vin de Portugal e lassa le retornar a su dom por manjar e trincar. Il ne deve restar ci. Un moment! Yo vide que tu es anxiosi, Arthur. Yo va dir te: li transfusion esset un successe, e tu ha salvat (salvar ↔ perdir) su vive. Tu posse dormir sin suciar. A revidentie.”
Quande Arthur hat exeat li dom, yo retornat al chambre. Lucy dormit e respirat plu fort, e Van Helsing sedet se apu la. Chuchotante yo questionat le:
“Li rubi punctu sur li col – quo vu pensa?”
“Quo tu pensa?”
“Yo ne save ancor.”
“Bon”, yo dit, “yo save nullcos.” Li professor levat se. “Ho-nocte yo deve retornar a Amsterdam. Yo besona libres e coses queles trova se ta. Tu deve restar ci li tot nocte, e observar la.”
“No, noi es plu bon servitoras quam ellas. Observa la li tot nocte, far talmen que ella manja bon, e dormi bon. Tu ne posse dormir. Noi va dormir plu tard, ne nu. Yo va retornar tam strax quam possibil, e tande noi va comensar.”
“Va comensar?” yo dit. “Cieles, quo vu vole dir con to?”
“Noi va vider!” il dit, e curret for. Pos un moment il revenit, monstrante solmen su cap tra li porta:
“Ne oblivia, tu va observar la. Si tu lassa la sol, e li coses ea mal, desde tande tu nequande va dormir bon!”
8 septembre – Yo sedet apu Lucy li tot nocte e ne dormit. Li medicament finit, ella avigilat se naturalmen e aspectet (aspecter = semblar esser) mult plu bon. Ella semblat mem un poc felici. Yo dit a Seniora Westenra que yo devet seder me apu Lucy li tot nocte e ella ne credet it necessi, ma yo dit que yo ne posset lassar la sol. Pos que li servitora hat preparat la por dormir yo intrat, hante manjat un diné, e sedet apu la. Quelc vezes ella semblat sur li punctu de (= solmen un poc ante) dormir, ma chascun vez avigilat se. It esset clar que ella ne volet dormir. Yo questionat la:
“Tu ne vole dormir?”
“Timer dormir! Pro quo? Omnes ama dormir.”
“Li comensa de horrore? Quo to significa, yo prega?”
“Yo ne save; oh, yo ne save. It es pro to que it es tam horribil. Li debilitá veni a me durant que yo dormi.”
“Ma, mi car puella, ho-nocte tu posse dormir. Yo observa te e yo promesse que nullcos va evenir.”
“Ah, yo posse fider te!”
Yo continuat: “Yo promesse que si yo vide alquo mal yo va strax avigilar te.”
“Tu va? Vermen? Un tam bon person tu es. Yo va dormir alor!” E in ti moment ella sospirat (sospirar = dir “ah….”) e dormit.
Li tot nocte yo observat la. Ella solmen dormit, un bon, quiet dorme qui dat la li vive. Ella subridet e it esset clar que ella ne havet mal revas.
In li matine li servitora venit, e yo retornat a hem. Yo inviat (inviar = misser) telegrammas a Van Helsing e Arthur diente que li transfusion hat successat. Yo questionat pri mi propri patiente Renfield; il hat esset quiet durant li passat die e nocte. Un telegramma venit de Van Helsing in Amsterdam durant que yo dineat, quel dit que yo deve esser in Hillingham ho-nocte, e que il va esser ci in li matine.
9 septembre. – Quande yo venit a Hillingham yo esset tre fatigat. Durant du noctes yo hat apen dormit, e mi mente comensat ne functionar (= laborar, standar) bon. Lucy aspectet tre bon e felici. Vidente mi visage, ella jocat:
“Ho-nocte tu ne posse vigilar. Tu es tre fatigat, e yo standa bon. Vice (vice = in loc de) tu vigilar sur me, fórsan yo va vigilar sur te!”
Yo pensat que ella esset corect, e noi manjat junt e trincat quelc glasses del excellent (excellent = bonissim) vin de Portugal. Poy Lucy monstrat me un chambre apu li su, e dit: “Tu va dormir ci. Yo va aperter mi porta, e li tui. Si yo have un problema, yo va vocar te. Bon?”
Yo esset fatigat “quam un can”, e ne posset dir no. Yo jacet sur li sofa, e obliviat omnicos.
Quande un grand cose ha evenit, on posse dir cieles! Li cieles es li loc de Deo, li ángeles, etc.
On posse dir simplicmen sat, o on posse dir it avan un adjective:
Li libre es sat bon scrit, yo crede. (= Li libre es satisfant)
On usa vice por parlar pri un duesim cose, ne li unesim.
Vice viagear per tren, yo pensa que viagear per cavalle vell esser plu plesent.
On posse usar vice· in paroles:
Borgomastro: li mastro (li max important person) de un borgo.
Vice-borgomastro: li duesim max important person in li borgo.
Ex vice noi have li verbe vicear.
Quo fa li vice-borgomastro? Quande li borgomastro es for, il vicea le. (= il labora quam borgomastro)
Essente plu rapid, li tren viceat li cavalle por transportation. (trans·porta·t·ion = portar trans)
Erst es simil a solmen, ma diferent. Erst A = ante A ne; solmen pos A.
Il have solmen quin pundes; il es povri.
Erst con cent pundes on deveni rich. (ante 100 pundes = ne rich, solmen pos 100 pundes = rich)
Il es tre yun; il have solmen deci annus.
Erst pos deciott annus yo comprendet li vive. (ante 18 annus yo ne comprendet li vive)
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Site of medieval motte and bailey castle within surviving walls of the Roman fort of Saxon Shore.
Moated, built largely of brick by Sir John Fastolf, a relatively intact 90 ft tower remains.
Extensive earthworks.
Prison during 18–19th centuries.
170118th and 19th century additions.
One of the highest mottes in England, about 80 ft high.
"HS" refers to Heavenly Stems, "EB" refers to Earthly Branches, and "Hid" refers to Hidden Stems.
Luck Pillars for H10 - E9 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 0] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H10 - E9 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 1] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H10 - E9 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 2] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H10 - E9 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 3] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H10 - E9 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 4] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H10 - E9 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 5] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H10 - E9 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 6] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H10 - E9 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 7] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H10 - E9 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 8] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H10 - E9 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 9] in direction R (reverse).
Luck Pillars for H10 - E9 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 10] in direction R (reverse).
The Copper Bracelet is a simple magical item made of copper.  It is worn around the wrist of a hero who does not wish to be burdened down with large, bulky armor.  The Copper Bracelet is enchanted to provide minor protection, and does not work when other armor is worn.  However, for many mages and wizards, who do not wear other armor because it interferes with spellcasting, the Copper Bracelet is an excellent way to improve chances of survival.
The system was announced by March 30th, 2019.[1] By April 15th, 2019 the system had launched.[2][3] The system cost between $34.90 and $39.90 at launch, depending on the retailer.[2][3][4] At launch much of the documentation was written in the Chinese language.[4]
The Kittenbot MeowBit uses a STM32F401RET6 microcontroller, containing an ARM Cortex M4 architecture processor.[3][2] The system has 2 megabytes of SPI Flash storage.[4] The system also has an SD card reader.[2]
The console uses a 1.8" color TFT LCD with a resolution of 160 by 128 pixels.[4] A simple buzzer is used for audio.[2][2]
The system uses a MP6050 gyroscope for motion controls.[3] The system also has a light sensor and a temperature sensor.[2]
The system is powered by a 3.3 volt 500 milliamp hour capacity lithium chemistry battery.[2][3]
The console is clad in casing made of silicone in either orange or baby blue colors.[5] Notably the bottom of the console contains a BBC Micro:bit connector for expansion.[4]
↑ "Meet Meowbit: Programmable Retro Game Computer" (in en). https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qvIrioiKMw4.
↑ a b c d e f g h Linder, Brad (15 April 2019). "Kittenbot Meowbit is a tiny, cheap, and programmable retro game console". Liliputing. https://liliputing.com/2019/04/kittenbot-meowbit-is-a-tiny-cheap-and-programmable-retro-game-console.html.
↑ a b c d e "Kittenbot Meowbit Retro Game Console Features BBC Micro:bit Edge Connector". www.cnx-software.com. https://www.cnx-software.com/2019/04/15/kittenbot-meowbit-retro-game-console-bbc-microbit-edge-connector/.
↑ a b c d e "Kittenbot Meowbit: A Handheld Micro:bit-Based Codable Gaming Console" (in en). Hackster.io. https://www.hackster.io/news/kittenbot-meowbit-a-handheld-micro-bit-based-codable-gaming-console-846429f85bdb.
↑ "KittenBot Meowbit - Codable Console for MakeCode Arcade". https://www.adafruit.com/product/4324.
Every Rebol2 money value consist of two parts: currency code (can be empty) and a numeric value of the decimal! type.
Analog broadcast television systems come in a variety of frame rates and resolutions. Further differences exist in the frequency and modulation of the audio carrier. When color television was introduced, the hue and saturation information was added to the monochrome signals in a way that black and white televisions ignore. In this way backwards compatibility was achieved. That concept is true for all analog television standards.
In principle, all three color encoding systems can be combined with any scan line/frame rate combination. Therefore, in order to describe a given signal completely, it's necessary to quote the color system and the broadcast standard as a capital letter. For example, the United States, Canada, Mexico and South Korea used NTSC-M, Japan used NTSC-J, the UK used PAL-I , France used SECAM-L, much of Western Europe and Australia used PAL-B/G, most of Eastern Europe used SECAM-D/K or PAL-D/K.
However, not all of these possible combinations actually exist. NTSC is only used with system M, even though there were experiments with NTSC-A (405 line) in the UK and NTSC-N (625 line) in part of South America. PAL is used with a variety of 625-line standards (B, G, D, K, I, N) but also with the North American 525-line standard, accordingly named PAL-M. Likewise, SECAM is used with a variety of 625-line standards.
For this reason many people refer to any 625/25 type signal as "PAL" and to any 525/30 signal as "NTSC", even when referring to digital signals; for example, on DVD-Video, which does not contain any analog color encoding, and thus no PAL or NTSC signals at all.
Video Scanning refer to the manner in which a television scene defines its luminance and chrominance values. They specify the number of lines per frame and the number of frames per second. Technical and economic considerations in various countries around the world have led to the development on numerous different compromises in transmission. These considerations are restrained by the fact that only one bit of information can be transmitted at a time . To work around this, the transmission has to be broken down into small elements transmitted sequentially and reassembled locally at the receiving end. The reconstructed images then has to be displayed in rapid succession to imitate movement.
A cathode-ray tube (CRT) television displays an image by scanning a beam of electrons across the screen in a pattern of horizontal lines known as a raster. At the end of each line the beam returns to the start of the next line; the end of the last line is a link that returns to the top of the screen. As it passes each point the intensity of the beam is varied, varying the luminance of that point. A color television system is identical except that an additional signal known as chrominance controls the color of the spot.
When analog television was developed, no affordable technology for storing any video signals existed; the luminance signal has to be generated and transmitted at the same time at which it is displayed on the CRT. It is therefore essential to keep the raster scanning in the camera (or other device for producing the signal) in exact synchronization with the scanning in the television.
The physics of the CRT require that a finite time interval be allowed for the spot to move back to the start of the next line (horizontal retrace) or the start of the screen (vertical retrace). The timing of the luminance signal must allow for this.
In television, Resolution is used to refer to the number of lines per picture height (LPH). Television systems have been developed to have square pixels, or equal ratio of horizontal and vertical resolution. Vertical resolution is the ability of the a broadcast format to resolve horizontal lines. It is usually displayed as the number of horizontal lines that can be distinctly resolved on a television screen.
The human eye has a characteristic called Phi phenomenon. The phi phenomenon has been referred to as "first-order" motion perception. It's modeled in terms of relatively simple "motion sensors" in the visual system, that have evolved to detect a change in luminance at one point on the retina and correlate it with a change in luminance at a neighbouring point on the retina after a short delay, and therefore quickly displayed successive scan images will allow the apparent illusion of smooth motion. Flickering of the image can be partially solved using a long persistence phosphor coating on the CRT, so that successive images fade slowly. However, slow phosphor has the negative side-effect of causing image smearing and blurring when there is a large amount of rapid on-screen motion occurring.
The maximum frame rate depends on the bandwidth of the electronics and the transmission system, and the number of horizontal scan lines in the image. A frame rate of 25 or 30 hertz is a satisfactory compromise, while the process of interlacing two video fields of the picture per frame is used to build the image. This process doubles the apparent number of video frames per second and further reduces flicker and other defects in transmission.
Different digital television broadcasting standards have been adopted in different parts of the world; below are the more widely used standards:
Advanced Television Systems Committee (ATSC) standards are a set of standards for digital television transmission over terrestrial, cable, and satellite networks. ATSC standards are marked A/x (x is the standard number). The digital television broadcast standard designated A/53 describes the system characteristics of the U.S. digital television system. The standard addresses a wide variety of subsystems required for originating, encoding, transporting, transmitting, and receiving of video, audio, and data by over-the-air broadcast and cable systems.  The ATSC standard specifies a system designed to transmit high-quality digital video, digital audio, and data over existing 6-MHz channels. The system is designed to deliver digital information at a rate of 19.29 megabits per second (Mb/s) and uses eight-level vestigial sideband (8VSB) for terrestrial broadcasting.
The European Telecommunications Standards Institute has adopted a set of standards for digital broadcasting of television, sound, and data services. Standards have been adopted for satellite, cable, and terrestrial signal delivery. The standard for terrestrial transmission, ETS 300 744, is designated Digital Video Broadcast–Terrestrial (DVB-T). This standard describes a baseline transmission system for digital broadcasting of television. It is similar in many respects to the U.S. DTV standard. However, there are also important and significant differences in both channel coding and modulation. The DVB-T standard specifies a system designed to transmit high-quality digital video, digital audio, and data over existing 7- or 8-MHz channels. The system is designed to deliver digital information at rates from 4.98 to 31.67 Mb/s and uses coded orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) modulation for terrestrial broadcasting.
Japan’s Digital Broadcasting Experts Group (DiBEG) has developed a standard for digital broadcasting of television, sound, and data services, designated integrated services digital broadcasting (ISDB). Standards have been developed for delivery of satellite, cable, and terrestrial signals. These standards include a description of a baseline transmission system that provides for digital broadcasting of television, including channel coding and modulation. The transmission standard for terrestrial digital television is similar in many respects to the DVBT standard. It is entitled Integrated Services Digital Broadcasting–Terrestrial (ISDB-T). The ISDB-T standard specifies a system designed to transmit over existing 6-, 7-, or 8-MHz channels. The system is designed to deliver digital information at data rates from 3.561 to 30.980 Mb/s. ISDB-T uses coded orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) modulation and two-dimensional interleaving. It supports hierarchical transmission of up to three layers and uses MPEG-2 video and Advanced Audio Coding. This standard has been adopted in Japan and the Philippines. ISDB-T International is an adaptation of this standard using H.264/MPEG-4 AVC, which has been adopted in most of South America and Portuguese-speaking African countries.
Previously known as DMB-T/H (Digital Multimedia Broadcast-Terrestrial/Handheld), the DTMB is a merger of the standards ADTB-T (developed by the Shanghai Jiao Tong University), DMB-T (developed by Tsinghua University) and TiMi (Terrestrial Interactive Multiservice Infrastructure); this last one is the standard proposed by the Academy of Broadcasting Science in 2002. The DTMB was created in 2004 and finally became an official DTT standard in 2006. The system is designed to deliver digital information at data rates from 4.813 to 32.486 Mb/s. DTMB adopts time-domain synchronous (TDS) OFDM technology and has been adopted in the People's Republic of China, including Hong Kong and Macau.
Advances in technology have made it cost-effective to transmit television signals using bit-serial-distribution. Digital video data bits, sync information, and ancillary data (Closed Captioning, AES/EBU Audio, etc.)can be distributed through a single coaxial cable.
The 4:2:2 component digital serial bitrate is equal to
Data Control Language is used to modify the user rights for the database.  It describes two statements: GRANT and REVOKE.
The exhaustive syntax of the GRANT statement is as follows:
ALL PRIVILEGES ON[ TABLE] <table or view name>
The GRANT statement is used to give a privilege to someone.  Any SQL operations are done using a user name.  The user name are created by the database management system.
The privileges apply on the tables (i.e. employee, office, etc...), the views, their columns, the domain, the collation, the charset and the translation.
...
The privileges can allow to process SELECT ("s"), INSERT ("i"), UPDATE ("u") and DELETE ("d") statements (not CREATE, ALTER or DROP statements).  Let's say that only the DataBase Administrator has the privileges.
...
For each privilege ("s", "i", "u" and "d"), there is also a meta-privilege ("S", "I", "U" and "D") : a user can send a privilege to another user.  Let's say that only the DataBase Administrator has the meta-privileges.
...
The rights for DEVELOPER_1 have changed:
...
SELECT indicates that we want to sent the SELECT privilege.  The keyword ON followed by employee indicates that the privilege applies on the table employee.  The keyword TO followed by DEVELOPER_1 indicates that the privilege has been sent to DEVELOPER_1.
The rights for DEVELOPER_2 and DEVELOPER_3 have changed:
...
Whereas you can send several privileges on a table to several users at once, you can't send privileges on several tables at once.  If you want to send all the privileges (SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE and DELETE), you can replace the list of privileges by the keywords ALL PRIVILEGES.
The rights for USER_1 have changed:
...
The keyword WITH GRANT OPTION indicates that we want to send privileges with the meta-privileges to the user.  Now, USER_1 can send the SELECT privilege on the table employee to the other users.  Let's say that USER_1 wants to allow anyone to process SELECT on the table employee:
...
The keyword PUBLIC indicates that we want to send privileges to all the users and the new future ones.
...
The operation has been refused because DEVELOPER_3 hasn't enough privileges.
The exhaustive syntax of the REVOKE statement is as follows:
ALL PRIVILEGES ON[ TABLE] <table or view name>
The REVOKE statement is used to take back privileges granted to someone.  This revocation may be more complicated than you expect.  To completely remove a privilege to a user, this privilege must be taken back by all the users that have sent the privilege.
...
If you remove a privilege to a user who was also sent the related meta-privilege (for example, SELECT privilege to USER_1), the operation also removes the meta-privilege.  To remove only meta-privileges, add the keywords GRANT OPTION FOR:
...
Now you can administrate a database.
Basic Regular Expressions: Note that particular implementations of regular expressions interpret the backslash symbol differently in front of some of the metacharacters. For example, egrep and perl interpret unbackslashed parentheses and vertical bars as metacharacters, reserving the backslashed versions to mean the literal characters themselves. Old versions of grep did not support the pipe alternation operator.
.
The dot operator matches any single character.
A compliment box enables a single character not within in a character list or character range to be matched.
An asterisk specifies zero or more characters to match.
The caret anchor matches the beginning of the line
The dollar anchor matches the end of the line
Since many ranges of characters depends on the chosen locale setting (e.g., in some settings letters are organized as abc..yzABC..YZ while in some others as aAbBcC..yYzZ).
The Posix Basic Regular Expressions syntax provided extensions for consistency between utility programs such as grep, sed and awk. These extensions are not supported by some traditional implementations of Unix tools.
Tools and languages that utilize this regular expression syntax include: TBD
Welcome to Perspectives in Digital Literacy! The goal of this book is to encourage critical reading and thinking of the origins, evolution, and underlying values of the Internet and the World Wide Web so that readers may reflect on the consequences of such values to their selves and their society.
As the collection grows, we hope to label each lesson based on the specific characteristics of its target audience (right now we are thinking of age, but we are open to other classifications). This means that there could be more than one lesson for a specific topic, if the lesson is clearly targeted for different audiences.
Since Perspectives in Digital Literacy was set up as a school project, the majority of its contributors will be students exploring how they wish to "teach" others a specific topic they studied while taking a composition class; nevertheless, we welcome all contributors who wish to offer a reflection on a notable topic about issues of the Net and Web.
Below you will find some ideas of how to create a simple lesson for your text(s) of choice. If you wish to suggest ideas for lessons, leave a note on the page of this introduction, or on my Talk page.
How can I create a lesson for my favorite text(s)?
The way you create your chapter will depend on your target audience and what you want them to focus on when thinking of the text(s). Here is a list of typical information that helps a reader understand a text and reflect on its purpose and significance:
Epigraph: a short quotation or saying (may be more than one) at the beginning of the chapter that suggests its themes or concerns.
Context: the circumstances that frame a text and provide resources for its appropriate interpretation. In other words, the historical, cultural, and/or textual situation in which the text was created, perhaps including relevant biographical information about the text's creator(s).
Summary: an account of the main points of a text. Summaries are useful if the text is long or complex.
Quotes:  a selection of passages from a text that reflect some particularly important idea that cannot be paraphrased. Quotes are useful if you want to attract the reader's attention to specific moments in the text or to the way language is being used. It is especially useful when combined with close reading questions (see below).
Images, sound, and/ or video to illustrate or explain a concept, theme, and/or purpose in a non-textual manner.[1]
Textual analysis: an examination of the elements and structure of a text to explain it, explain its importance, and its relationship to other texts or to the larger culture.
Notes: a short comment on or explanation of a word or passage in a text; an annotation.[2]
Glossary: an alphabetical list of words found in the text with explanations; a brief dictionary. It is particularly useful if your text uses words in a language other than English.
If you want your reader to engage with the text(s), you may try adding a few of the following sections:
Comprehension questions: questions intended to help readers process and understand the information they are reading.[3] These questions usually have right and wrong answers; if so, you may want to include the correct answers in a separate section.
Close reading questions: questions intended to help readers to "micro-read"[4] selected segments and/or aspects of the text(s) such as their structural elements, rhetorical features, and cultural and historical allusions.
Critical thinking questions: questions intended to have the reader reflect or inquire, such as open-ended questions, (re)search questions, comparison questions, problem-solving questions, connecting questions, and meta-cognitive questions about the text(s).
Further reading: a usually chronological or alphabetical list of texts which a reader may consult for additional and more detailed coverage of the topic or themes of the text(s). It may include brief annotations.
Extension activities: Ask the reader to create something connected to the text, like writing a poem or putting together a collage or a video in response to it, or writing a sequel or a different ending to the story. Or have the reader conduct a search, a survey, or an interview on a topic connected to the story. If you want them to have lots of fun, try some of the extension activities recommended by teacher Marilyn Pryle.
Games: Create a crossword puzzle using key vocabulary from your text.
↑ Media for Wikibook chapters must come from Wikimedia Commons.
↑ This is a note. For more examples of what Notes do, see this use of notes in Shakespearean sonnets and for Shakespeare's play Macbeth.
↑ "Catalog of question types | Reading comprehension." Khan Academy
↑ "Close and Critical Reading."
Domestic Kingship During the Reign of Henry V
One of the biggest problem during Henry IV's reign had been a narrow noble support base. Henry IV had to rely on Lancastrian retainer because there was no noble bedrock to uphold royal authority and do local government. The other consequence was that he was perhaps over reliant on certain individuals. The only great noble families were the Percies, Nevilles, and Beauforts. This reliance was restrictive. A number of the great noble families were heirs in their minority and were thus too young. Among the other noble families, some were Ricardian, or rebels, and therefore not trusted by Henry IV.
When Henry V inherited the throne, he was lucky that several of these minorities had come to an end. Further, there was less of a question about legitimacy - unlike his father, Henry V was not a usurper. His accession was remarkably stable, since Henry IV had successfully established his regime.
As a result, Henry V was the one who was able to bury the wrongs of the previous generation and move on. With the nobility, what Henry did remarkably well is that he brought everyone back into the fold and recreated a sense of noble unity.
His initial allies were the Earl of Westmorland, who remained vital in the North until his death in 1425, and Thomas Beaufort, Earl of Dorset, who was promoted in 1416 and became the duke of Exeter, a title previously held by the Hollands. He also remained a crucial figure in Henry V's regime throughout. For a sizeable chunk, Dorset is sent to Aquitaine. The new Earl of Warwick, Henry Beecham, reached his majority and was a crucial figure for a long time until his death in 1459. He became hugely important because he helped bring up Henry's son, Henry VI. He was put in charge of Calais. Prince John, duke of Bedford in 1414, was initially in the north with Westmorland later sent to France. Humphrey, made duke of Gloucester in 1414, obtained military experience in France, and was promising figure serving alongside his brothers. They were now all reaching full adulthood and able to become pillars of the regime. There was a well-established strong noble core.
Heirs of rebels and nobles who had dropped out the picture, the ones who had fallen out with Henry IV were being brought back into the picture by Henry V. Henry Percy, heir to earldom of Northumberland, was restored to his title in 1416, so they could become a loyal Lancastrian family again. John Holland was restored as earl of Huntingdon in 1417. John Mowbray, whose father was executed with Scrope, didn't need to be restored to Earl of Nottingham, but was brought back into the fold. He was restored as the duke of Norfolk in 1425. Thomas Montague, whose father was involved in the Epiphany Plot, was restored as Earl of Salisbury in 1421. All of these were young heirs of families who had lost lands and titles due to rebelling against Henry IV. Henry V affirmed that with loyal service they can earn it back. Especially Salisbury, they served the crown loyally.
The retainers don't disappear but become less significant as a mechanism of keeping control. The noble picture was about this unity of nobles supporting him in France, rather than the noble unity playing out in government in England.
Edmund Mortimer, earl of March, was still implicitly known to have a claim to the throne. He was a weak figure, not actively disloyal, died in 1425 without an heir, so the Mortimer lands passed through Anne to Richard, duke of York. Edmund Mortimer is a problem because he is representative of a potential risk. Therefore, Henry gives him fines and doesn't allow him to become an active threat.
Henry V is reconstructing the sort of nobility that Edward III would have had, offering stability and royal service. This is a very conservative form of kingship, bringing in all the heirs, and then offering them support and advancement if they show loyal service.
After Henry dies, it is extraordinary how long that noble unity holds so firmly behind his 9-month-old son and heir; Henry isn't just charismatic - he makes them believe in Lancastrian kingship
It could be said that he's very lucky to be the beneficiary of good generation of nobility. The interesting thing about Henry VI's reign is how long it does take to fall apart.
Ultimately, bringing in the heirs, young inexperienced men given the chance to prove their loyalty, and in doing so, Henry consigns the problems of faction to the past. This is arguably a great achievement.
In this respect, Henry is not unlike Edward III, who held the nobility together because there was camaraderie whilst fighting together in France. Henry V shares the campaigning spirt, and understands the rigours of campaign, inspires by example.
The ideal late medieval king was a law-giver, and did not allow crimes to go punish but was able to temper justice with mercy.
Henry V has a lasting military reputation as a warrior king.
However, it was Henry V's greatest achievement that he was seen as paragon of justice, and fulfilled expectations as a law-giver.
There is a sense of a contrast argument: it may be there is an element of contrast with what had gone on before, as in, it was seen as better under Henry V than it had been before. This must be regarded as a personal achievement, since Henry didn't do things differently, he just made things work. Changes were impermanent, there was no institutional innovation, and no new legal system put in place.
There were no changes in relations between king and local authority. Instead, Henry fulfilled contemporary expectations of how the existing machinery could work best.
The most indicative bit of evidence was in 1414, where Henry sent out judicial commissions of the court of king's bench, who were judges based in Westminster. They were staffed by his own appointees and he sent them out to the country to do justice and to hear cases and complaints. In a sense, it was a form of "mobile" justice. They were particularly active in counties where there were significant Duchy of Lancaster estates: Staffordshire, Leicestershire, Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire. Henry needed to check up on corruption and abuses in his duchy lands. There had been abuses of justice, which suggests that Henry IV's local government had resulted in abuses which Henry V wanted to straighten out.
In Shropshire and Staffordshire alone, there were nearly 1800 cases sent to the Commission, and they took action against 1600 people. Henry was not merely punishing crime, he was setting out to create feeling of restored order, because he was about to go to war. This set the tone for the new reign - a king who was confident, authoritative, active. Furthermore, something Henry V had learnt in Wales was how to handle local communities.
John Hardyng, a Percy retainer, believed that domestic peace was linked to successful foreign war. England was at peace during the late middle ages when kings were launching conquests in France. The Battle of Bosworth was the result of Edward not restarting Hundred Years War on time. Military recruitment campaigns are a vital safety valve, because it meant that potentially dodgy people could redeem themselves by fighting in France.
It was true that whatever the court of the king's bench did, local communities had to cooperate. In 1414, when the commission goes to Devon, there was very little cooperation. You can't directly control local areas. King therefore needs to be using local authority as much as he can. He also is able to use greater number of local nobles unlike H4. Allowing these nobles to bring men, who would otherwise commit petty offences, to the battlefield. It becomes harder to recruit like this because relies on nobles having credibility and war having popular support and enthusiasm.
It is worth noting that this is one of Henry's greatest successes, appearing to be paragon of justice. As Prince of Wales, he was concerned with military matters and finance. When he does become king, this new concern with law and order is great for his reputation
This Section raises the charge to corporation tax for the financial year beginning 1 April 2004 at 30%.
Latin American drama of the new millenium has been active. A work worthy fo note is".45'" (.45 caliber, 2003) by Sergio Blanco (1971-?) from Uruguay.
".45 caliber". Time: 2000s. Place: Uruguay.
Gun and .45 caliber bullets
Ulrich Richter, co-president of the oil company, Richter & Havers, is angry that his business partner, Garret, has convinced the board of directors on reducing the price of oil without consulting him. Because of the danger Garret represents within the company, Ulrich convinces Nold Havers, the other co-president, and Nold's son, Kurt, of the need to have him murdered. He hires Basilio, an employee at his private firing range and secretly his bastard son but adopted by Jeremias, mainly responsible for preparing the firearms. Basilio succeeds in killing Garret and burying him without a trace. To consolidate power within their ranks, Ulrich forces his daughter, Elena, to marry Kurt. Ulrich's son, Evard, arrives for the wedding ceremony of his sister. Since being told he accidently shot his mother at the age of ten, when actually his father killed her at the firing range, Evard has lived aloof from business matters, to his father's disappointment. To his further grief, Evard wants to divulge he is Basilio's half-son, because the latter, unconscious of the incestuous relation, has been for several years Elena's lover. Unable to convince his son to desist, Ulrich hires Celio, another employee at the firing range, to murder him. A third employee, Fabio, informs Celio that Jeremias, whom all three employees hate, has accidently fallen down a flight of stairs and is seriously injured. Celio believes Fabio pushed him down, which the latter denies in great fear. Jealous at Kurt's happiness, Basilio murders Elena during the wedding ceremony and escapes with her dead body. When Evard catches up to Basilio, he gives up and hangs himself. On seeing Celio arrive, Evard immediately understands he is to be his father's next victim and submits himself to being shot to death. Ulrich and Nold decide to cede control of the company to Kurt. At the end of a business deal with a cardinal concerning a Renaissance painting from the Vatican, Ulrich starts feeling sick and begs him to absolve his sins during confession, but becomes anguished when the pardon comes too easily. He dies terrified at imagined flames about his person. To Fabio's disappointment, Celio, as the new boss, becomes a second Jeremias to him, a tyrant bitterly complaining about the quality of his work.
Ask where someone works.
Learn when to use chi and ti
Respond personally to the question 'Where do you work?' using mewn and yn y/yr
Ask what someone likes.
Talk about your interests.
Learn how to respond 'Yes, I do' and 'No, I don't'.
Lle dych chi'n gweithio?
Dw i'n gweithio mewn banc. Lle dych chi'n gweithio?
Dw i'n gweithio yn y Brifysgol. Dych chi'n hoffi'r Brifysgol?
Ydw. Dw i'n hoffi'r Brifysgol.
Lle wyt ti'n gweithio?
Dw i'n gweithio mewn banc. Lle wyt ti'n gweithio?
Dw i'n gweithio yn y Brifysgol. Wyt ti'n hoffi'r Brifysgol?
Ydw. Dw i'n hoffi'r Brifysgol.
The definite article for an noun (the) has many forms in Welsh. If the noun begins with a consonant, use y. If the noun begins with a vowel, use yr. Directly after a vowel, use 'r.
Wyt ti'n hoffi sglodion?
Do you like chips?
Wyt ti'n hoffi'r sglodion?
Do you like the chips?
In the dialogue, you'll see dw i which translates as 'I do' or 'I am'. We can use this to make present tense sentences for the first person. Just use dw i plus a linking particle yn to connect a verb. Yn has to shorten to 'n, so the form is dw i'n. There are other variations of this patter, such as rydw i and rwy also.
Dw i'n gweithio.
I work OR I am working OR I do work.
Note, how Dw i'n gweithio is equivalent to all three English sentences 'I work', 'I am working', or 'I do work'. Again:
Dw i'n siarad.
I speak OR I am speaking OR I do speak.
Dw i'n hoffi Cymraeg.
I like Welsh. I am liking Welsh. I do like Welsh.
Dw i'n gweithio.
I work. I'm working. I do work.
Dw i'n darllen.
I read. I'm reading. I do read.
Chi v. Ti
Welsh has two words for the pronoun 'you' - Chi and Ti.Chi is used for formal situations, and ti for informal situations and familiar people.
Dach chi'n gweithio?
Wyt ti'n gweithio?
Dach chi and wyt ti are the question forms for chi and ti. Like dw i, need the linking yn to connect verbs. Some more examples:
Dach chi'n hoffi sglodion?
Do you like chips?
Wyt ti'n siarad Cymraeg?
Do you speak Welsh?
Dach chi and Rwyt ti are the affirmative forms for chi and ti. That is, they make statements, rather than questions.
Dach chi'n siarad Cymraeg.
You do speak Welsh. (statement)
Rwyt ti'n actio.
You do act. You are acting.
Use chi for formal situations, and ti for informal situations
A chi question is dach chi and a ti question is wyt ti
Using the linking yn to connect the 'to be' verb to another verb-noun. This shortens to 'n after a vowel. Verbs are called 'verb-nouns' in Welsh as they can serve as both a noun and a verb.
Dw i is the first person for the present tense. It also must be connected with 'n to use verb-nouns.
In Welsh, you do not answer with a general 'yes' or 'no'. Instead, you answer with 'I do', 'He does', etc. For the first person, ydw and nac ydw are the response words (I do and I don't).
The definite article (the) takes one of three forms: y/yr/'r. Y is used before consonants. Yr is generally used before vowels. 'r is used after vowels.
a: {http://purl.org/dc/dcmitype/Text}
{http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/mbox}: {mailto:mdupont777@yahoo.com}
People with more severe negative symptoms of schizophrenia usually have a history of maladjustment before the onset of the disease. Negative symptoms respond poorly to drugs and are more difficult to treat.
9.4.1 "E" and Consonant Adjectives
Scope: This Wikibook aims to teach the Spanish language from scratch. It will cover all of the major grammar rules, moving slowly and offering exercises and plenty of examples. It's not all grammar though, as it offers vocabulary and phrases too, appealing to all learners.
Purpose: The purpose of this Wikibook is to teach you the Spanish language in an easy and accessible way. By the end, you should be able to read and write Spanish skillfully, though you'll need a human to help with listening and speaking.
Audience: Anyone who wishes to learn Spanish, though adult and teenage learners are likely to enjoy it more.
Organization: This Wikibook requires no prior knowledge of the subject, and all relevant terms are explained as they are encountered. The book runs chronologically from lesson 1 to lesson 2 to lesson 3 and so on until the end.
Narrative: Generally engaging and thorough, with plenty of examples and exercises to aid learning. Once concepts are introduced, they are repeated, building a base of vocabulary and grammar that will stay in your mind.
Style: This book is written in British English, and the Spanish taught is generally Iberian Spanish (sometimes called Castellano in Spain), though key Latin American differences are explained as we go along. The formatting is consistent throughout, with Spanish in italics and all tables using the same formatting. Each lesson begins with a conversation, including the key grammar and vocabulary in the lesson. At the end, there is a summary, explaining what has been achieved. Exercises are linked throughout, and each new concept or set of vocabulary is accompanied by examples, each with a translation underneath.
You are about to embark on a course learning another language, the Spanish language!
The first lesson begins with simple greetings and covers important ideas of Spanish. Throughout education, methods of teaching Spanish have changed greatly. Years ago, the Spanish language was taught simply by memory. Today, however, it is taught by moving slowly and covering grammar and spelling rules.
Again, this is an introduction. If this is the first time you are attempting to learn Spanish, do not become discouraged if you cannot understand, pronounce, or memorize some of the things discussed here.
In addition, learning a second language requires a basic understanding of your own language. You may find, as you study Spanish, that you learn a lot about English as well. At their core, all languages share some simple components like verbs, nouns, adjectives, and plurals.  Your first language comes naturally to you and you don't think about things like subject–verb agreement, verb conjugation, or usage of the various tenses; yet, you use these concepts on a daily basis.
While English is described as a very complicated language to learn, many of the distinguishing grammar structures have been simplified over the years.  This is not true for many other languages.  Following the grammatical conventions of Spanish will be very important, and can actually change the meaning of phrases.  You'll see what is meant by this as you learn your first verbs estar and ser.
Do not become discouraged!  You can do it.
The aqueduct of Segovia.
Juanito: Fenomenal, gracias.
Translation (wait until the end of the lesson).
Hello!
Spanish Vocabulary • Print version
Good morning!
Good day!
Good afternoon!
Good night!
See you later!
See you tomorrow!
Hasta means "until"; luego means "then"; you can translate it as "see you later" or "see you soon". In the same vein, hasta mañana means "see you tomorrow".
Good morning, class!
Hello, how are you today?
Goodbye, see you later!
Go to the exercise.
What's your name?
Spanish Verb • Print version
Go to the exercise.
Spanish Vocabulary • Print version
It's a pleasure.
A real pleasure.
Mucho gusto.
How are you?
Great!
And you?
For some of the words above, there are two options. The one ending in "o" is for males, and the one ending in "a" is for females. It's all to do with agreement, which is covered in future chapters.
Also, there are cultural differences in how people respond to "How are you?". In the U.S., we might answer "mal" if we have a headache, or we're having a bad hair day. In Spanish-speaking cultures, "mal" would be used if a family member were very ill, or somebody lost their job.  Similarly, "fatal" in the U.S. might mean a ruined manicure or a fight with one´s girlfriend, but would be reserved more for things like losing one's home in a Spanish-speaking country.
Hello, Rosa. How are you?
Very well, thanks. And you, Juanito?
I'm good too. See you later!
Go to the exercise.
Here is the traditional Spanish alphabet. The current Spanish alphabet is made up of the letters with numbers above them, and is also sorted in that order. Please read the notes and sections below. (Blue and red letters are a part of the normal English alphabet).
Notes about Ñ
N and Ñ are considered two different letters. They are alphabetized as separate letters, so Ñ always comes after N, regardless of where it appears in the word.  Ex: muñeca comes after municipal. It is extremely rare for words to begin with Ñ—the only common example is ñoñear (to whine). Like the digraphs mentioned below, Ñ originally began as NN but morphed into a squiggle that was placed above a standard N to save space when writing. The character ~ is independently known as a tilde in English; tilde in Spanish can generally refer to any diacritic that modifies letters (such as the very common acute accent: ´) and the specific word for the tilde is virgulilla.
Notes about CH, LL, and RR
CH and LL are no longer distinct letters of the alphabet. In 1994, the Real Academia Española (Spanish Royal Academy) declared that they should be treated as digraphs for collation purposes. Accordingly, words beginning with CH and LL are now alphabetized under C and L, respectively. In 2010, the Real Academia Española declared that CH and LL would no longer be treated as letters, bringing the total number of letters of the alphabet down to 27. In even more rare and archaic sources, RR was treated as a single letter but was never the beginning of a word. It is still treated as a separate letter in the Filipino creole language Chavacano, which is based on Spanish.
K and W are part of the alphabet but are mostly seen in foreign derived words and names, such as karate and whiskey. For instance, kilo is commonly used to refer to a kilogram.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Spanish pronunciation of letters
Although the above will help you understand, proper pronunciation of Spanish consonants is a bit more complicated:
Most of the consonants are pronounced as they are in American English with these exceptions:
c before a, o, u and other consonants, like English k (IPA: /k/)
The same sound for e and i is written like que and qui, where the u is silent (IPA: /ke/ and /ki/).
d at the start of a word and after n, like English d in "under" (IPA: /d/)
d between vowels (even if these vowels belong to different words)  similar to English th in "mother" (IPA: /ð/); at the end of words like "universidad" you may hear a similar sound, too.
g before e or i, like ch in "Chanukah" or "Challah" (IPA: /x/)
h is always silent, except in the digraph ch and some very rare loan words, such as hip hop. So the Central American state of Honduras is pronounced exactly the same is if it were spelled “Onduras”: (IPA: /onˈduɾas/, [õn̪ˈd̪uɾas])
j like the h in hotel, or like the Scottish pronunciation of ch in "loch" (IPA: /h/ or /x/)
ñ like nio in “onion” (or gn in French "cognac" or Italian "gnocchi") (IPA: /ɲ/)
q like the English k; occurs only before ue or ui (IPA: /k/)
r at the beginning of a word; after l, n, or s; or when doubled (rr), it is pronounced as a full trill (IPA: /r/), elsewhere it is a single-tap trill (IPA: /ɾ/)
v is pronounced like the softer form of the Spanish b. (IPA: /b/)
x is pronounced much like an English x, except a little more softly, and often more like gs. (IPA: /ks/)
a [a] "La Mano" as in "Kahn"  (ah)
e [e] "Mente" as in "hen"  (eh)
i [i] "Sin" as the ea in "lean"  (e)
o [o] "Como" as in "more" (without the following 'r')
The y [ʝ] "Reyes" is similar to the y of "yet", but more voiced (in some parts of Latin America it is pronounced as s in "vision" [ʒ] or sh in "flash" [ʃ]) At the end of a word or when it means "and" ("y") it is pronounced like i.
Monosyllables aren't accentuated, unless when the diacritical mark is considered, i.e., homographs which have different meanings and pronunciations, as "de" (of / from) & "dé" (I or he/she give [in the subjunctive mood]).
How do you spell that?
Spanish Vocabulary • Print version
Good day. My name is Juanito. What's your name?
Hello. I'm Benjamin. How do you spell Juanito?
Go to the exercise.
In this lesson, you have learned
How to introduce yourself (Me llamo Juanito).
How to introduce others (Se llama Roberto).
How to say how you are (Fenomenal; fatal; bien).
How to spell your name (Se escribe J-U-A-N-I-T-O).
The Spanish Alphabet and how letters are pronounced.
You should now do the exercise related to each section (found here), and translate the dialogue at the top before moving on to lesson 2...
Drill the words covered in this lesson with this Flashcard Exchange deck.
Sofía: Tengo veinte años.
Translation (wait until the end of the lesson).
1,000.
2,000.
10,000.
100,000.
101,000.
1,000,000.
To form the numbers from thirty to one hundred, you take the multiple of ten below it, then y, then its units value:
"54" Cincuenta y cuatro    Like, fifty and four
"72" Setenta y dos    Like, seventy and two
"87" Ochenta y siete    Like, eighty and seven
To say one hundred you say just cien, never un cien. To form the numbers from one hundred to two hundred, you turn cien into ciento before adding the rest of the number:
For numbers between 200 and 900, use the plural "s" (doscientos, ochocientos). Also beware of the usage of these numbers with feminine nouns like the old Spanish currency "peseta". You need to use the feminine agreement then: doscientas pesetas. That agreement has to be observed even when it's in the middle of the number: doscientas veinticinco pesetas.
1,000,000,000 mil millones / un millardo (less common)
1,000,000,000,000,000 mil billones / un billardo (rare)
1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 mil trillones / un trillardo (rare)
The rule of thumb is to count how many "millions" are in the digits:
68,076,564,322,676,958,606    Sesenta y ocho trillones setenta y seis mil quinientos sesenta y cuatro billones trescientos veintidós mil seiscientos setenta y seis millones novecientos cincuenta y ocho mil seiscientos seis
Note that the words millones, billones, trillones are written in plural, but mil (thousand) is always kept in singular, even when counting several thousands. However, if you need to refer to an amount in several thousands without specifying how many, you can use the plural miles (He escrito miles de cartas = I've written thousands of letters). For this same purpose, you can use the synonym millares.
Similarly, there is the plural cientos (He escrito cientos de cartas = I've written hundreds of letters). Centenas and centenares are less common synonyms for cientos.
All those synonyms have forms in singular (Un millar de cartas = One thousand letters; Una centena / Un centenar de cartas = One hundred letters). These synonyms are not used for actually counting, though.
There is also decena, which means a group of ten.
I have 17 cats.
There are 35 classrooms.
Tengo noventa y seis primos.
I have 96 cousins.
There are 11 students in the spanish class.
I want a candy!
I want one!
Go to the exercises.
How old are you?
To say your age in Spanish, you use the irregular verb tener (which means "to have"), then your age, then años (which means "years"). For example, Tengo trece años means "I have 13 years" or "I am 13 years old".
Spanish Verb • Print version
He/She/You (formal, singular)/It has
They/You (formal, plural) have
"Tenéis" would only be used in Spain. In Latin America, one would use "Tienen" for both the second and third plural persons.
Tengo veinte años
I am 20 years old.
How old are you?
Tiene ochenta y siete años.
How old are they?
Go to the exercises.
What's the date today?
Spanish Vocabulary • Print version
Neither days of the week nor months of the year are capitalised, unless at the beginning of sentences.
On the first of the month, some Spanish speakers say primero [First] (Hoy es domingo primero de enero).
You may still find the spelling setiembre in books from the early 20th century. It emerged from the way some countries pronounce the consonants in it. This spelling is not standard usage and you should avoid using it.
Today is Wednesday, the 29th of September
Today is Thursday, the 15th of August.
Today is Saturday, the 2nd of January.
Go to the exercises.
When's your birthday?
Although birthday translates as cumpleaños, they do not imply the same exact meaning. In English, birthday literally refers to the day of your birth, so it is possible to wish happy birthday to a newborn. In Spanish, cumpleaños literally means "completing a year" and is only used for the day in subsequent years that matches the date on which you were born. Thus, you would never say "feliz cumpleaños" to a newborn, since he still hasn't "completed a year."
Spanish Vocabulary • Print version
Happy birthday!
My birthday is on the 11th of July.
My birthday is on the 8th of December.
Go to the exercises.
In this lesson, you have learned:
How to count from cero to one septillion (cero; veintiocho; noventa; cien; un cuatrillón)
The days of the week (lunes; miércoles; viernes)
How to say your age (Tengo cuarenta años)
How to say today's date (Hoy es jueves veintinueve de noviembre)
You should now do the exercise related to each section (found here), and translate the dialogue at the top before moving on to lesson 3...
Aconcagua mountain in the Argentinian Andes.
As in many languages, Spanish gives each noun a gender: masculine or feminine, both for singular things and plural ones.
Spanish, like English, has two articles: the definite article ("the") and the indefinite article ("a" or "an"). However, there are 4 forms, depending on the number and gender of the noun. The plural indefinite article is "some" in English.
If the noun ends in a vowel, to make it plural, add s (gato - "cat"; gatos - "cats").
If the noun ends in a consonant, to make it plural, add es (papel - "paper"; papeles - "papers").
Happily, the gender of Spanish nouns is usually pretty easy to work out. Some very simple rules-of-thumb:
If it ends in a, d, z or ión: it's likely to be feminine.
If it ends in o, or a consonant: it's likely to be masculine.
Spanish Grammar • Print version
The definite article  El artículo definido
Spanish Grammar • Print version
The indefinite article  El artículo indefinido
Go to the exercises.
We have already seen the present tense conjugations of two Spanish verbs, llamarse and tener. However, tener (to have) is an irregular verb. Luckily, many verbs follow an easy to understand conjugation scheme.
In Spanish, the conjugation of a regular verb depends on the ending of its infinitive. (The infinitive is the basic form of the verb that you find in the dictionary; for example, English infinitives are always written with to, like the verbs to run or to speak.) All Spanish infinitives end in the letter r, and the three regular conjugation patterns are classified into -ar, -er, and -ir verbs.
Unlike English, Spanish verbs conjugate depending on the person; that is, they change depending on who is being talked about. This occurs in the English verb to be (e.g. I am, you are, he is, etc.) but in Spanish this occurs for all persons in all verbs. As a result, pronouns are usually omitted because they can be inferred from the conjugation.
Nosotros (we) has a feminine nosotras that is used when the entire group is composed of females. Likewise, vosotros and ellos have feminine forms vosotras and ellas.
Llorar ("to cry"): lloro, lloras, llora, lloramos, lloráis, lloran
Cocinar ("to cook"): cocino, cocinas, cocina, cocinamos, cocináis, cocinan
Beber ("to drink"): bebo, bebes, bebe, bebemos, bebéis, beben
Comer ("to eat"): como, comes, come, comemos, coméis, comen
Deber ("to ought to do, to owe"): debo, debes, debe, debemos, debéis, deben
Leer ("to read"): leo, lees, lee, leemos, leéis, leen
Asistir ("to attend"): asisto, asistes, asiste, asistimos, asistís, asisten
Cubrir ("to cover"): cubro, cubres, cubre, cubrimos, cubrís, cubren
Escribir ("to write"): escribo, escribes, escribe, escribimos, escribís, escriben
Vivir ("to live"): vivo, vives, vive, vivimos, vivís, viven
There are many more "-ar" verbs than "-er" or "-ir". Make sure you are most familiar with these endings.
When reading texts, you will need to know the person of the verb at a glance. Notice the pattern:
A vowel that is not "O" denotes He/She/It
Go to the exercises.
You can also use question words, as indicated below.
Spanish Vocabulary • Print version
Where?
Who?
What?
Which?
How? (as in How does it work?)
Why?
When?
How much?
How many?
Whose?
Whom?
Whence?
Whither?
Wherefore?
With whom?
When's your birthday?
If you refer to a group of people, you can use the plural quiénes.
Go to the exercises.
In this lesson, you have learned:
How to conjugate regular verbs in the present tense (lloro; comes; vive; cocinamos; bebéis; cubren).
You should now do the exercise related to each section (found here) before moving on. This is a very important topic for future lessons; it is important that you know it well.
You have now completed this chapter! Return to the Contents...
Translation (wait until the end of the lesson).
Where do you live?
To say you are from a country, you use ser (meaning "to be [a permanent characteristic]"), then de (meaning "of" or "from"), then the country or place. To say you are currently living in a place or country, you use vivir (meaning "to live"), then en (meaning "in"), then the country or place.
While vivir is totally regular (vivo, vives, vive, vivimos, vivís, viven), ser is about as irregular as they come. It is conjugated below.
Spanish Verb • Print version
They are from Spain, but they live in Germany.
I live in the Southwest of Mexico.
I'm from the north of Australia.
Noreste has a variant nordeste. Sureste and suroeste have, respectively, variants sudeste and sudoeste.
Oeste has a synonym occidente which is used with the same frequency. The corresponding synonym of este is oriente. You can also use them in compounds like nororiente, noroccidente, suroriente/sudoriente and suroccidente/sudoccidente.
Their corresponding adjectives are septentrional (northern), meridional (southern), oriental (eastern), occidental (western). Compound adjectives like noroccidental and sudoriental are also possible.
The adjectives norteño (northern) and sureño (southern) do not refer to geographical positions but to someone's regional origin.
Go to the exercises.
Spanish Vocabulary • Print version
The singular is una habitación, but the plural is unas habitaciones (without the accent)
This is a general rule, because in the singular, the 'ó' shows the sound is to be emphasized, but for plural the 's' has also to be heard, so it is written as it is spoken, as 'o' without the accent).
He lives in a bungalow that has ten rooms.
Go to the exercises.
As we already learnt, Spanish nouns each have a gender. This doesn't just affect the article, but the adjective; it has to agree. Also, adjectives go after the noun, not before it.
If the adjective (in its natural form - the form found in the dictionary), ends in an "O" or an "A", then you remove that vowel and add...
The masculine O / feminine A rule is applicable to the vast majority of Spanish nouns. There are a handful of exceptions, though, but you'll get to memorize them.
Go to the exercises.
Spanish Vocabulary • Print version
The good thing about ... is that
The bad thing about ... is that
There are lots of things to do
The good thing about the city is that there are lots of the things to do.
The bad thing about the city is that there isn't any foliage.
Lo is the only Spanish word classified as neuter gender (although it is always accompanied by masculine adjectives). It is an unusual article that does not carry a noun, and is used to build sentences like esto es lo que yo quiero (this is what I want) and haz lo correcto (do the right [thing]), used to turn an adjective or adverb into a substantive. For this purpose, it's clearly demonstrated in this example: "lo peor ya pasó" (the worse [situation or thing] already had pass).
Go to the exercises.
In this lesson, you have learnt
How to say where you and others live and come from (Vivo en Inglaterra; Somos de Gales).
The basics of adjectives ending in "O" or "A" (la mujer mala; el niño bonito).
How to talk about the city of the countryside (la ciudad; el campo; no hay mucho para hacer).
You should now do the exercise related to each section (found here), and translate the dialogue at the top before moving on to lesson 5...
See you tomorrow!
Translation (wait until the end of the lesson).
Spanish Vocabulary • Print version
In Spanish, if an activity is a game, then you "play" it (jugar), otherwise you "practice" it (practicar). For example, it's jugar al tenis ("to play tennis") but practicar la natación ("to go swimming").
If someone plays an instrument you use the verb tocar. For example, tocar la guitarra ("to play the guitar")
The verbs are all regular, except:
Ver (veo, ves, ve, vemos, veis, ven)
Practico natación.
I go swimming.
Do you do judo?
Practicamos muchas actividades.
Why do you sing?
When does he or she read?
Go to the exercises.
Jugar the first type of irregular verb; known as a stem-changing verb. Basically, in the "I", "you", "he/she/it" and "they" forms, the u or o changes to a ue. The jugar example is written out below.
Spanish Verb • Print version
The verb jugar always has a after it: jugar a. In Spanish, a el gets contracted to al and de el gets contracted to del. So, it would be juego al rugby.
Poder (meaning "to be able to") is usually followed by another verb, making "I can do something". The following verb must be in the infinitive. For example, puede leer ("he can read").
I play tennis.
Do you play chess?
What sports do you play?
When do they play football?
Can you sing?
Where do you sleep?
Go to the exercises.
So far, everything we've written has been simple sentences — "My name is Santiago" (Me llamo Santiago); "The city is noisy" (La ciudad es ruidosa); "I play American football" (Juego al fútbol americano). Wouldn't it be fantastic if we could join them up? Below are some little words that will make our sentences longer, and more meaningful. You use them just like you do in English.
Also, everything we've written has been positive ("I do this, I do that"). To make it negative, we just add a word in front of the verb: no (meaning "not") or nunca (meaning "never"). For example, No juego al rugby (I don't play rugby"); Nunca como manzanas ("I never eat apples"). It's as simple as that.
Spanish Vocabulary • Print version
Porque ("because") and Por qué ("why") are similar and easy to mix up; make sure you don't!
My name is Chris and my birthday is on the 20th of August.
Hay duas direcciones: derecha e izquierda.
There are two directions: right and left one.
He doesn't do judo.
I play american football and I go swimming too.
I don't live in the city because cities are noisy.
Go to the exercises.
There is no verb for "to like" in Spanish. Instead, you use gusta (meaning "it pleases") and a personal pronoun; you say that "it pleases me" or "I am pleased by it". The personal pronouns are shown below.
Spanish Verb • Print version
Like any other verb, you can put no in front of it, to say "I don't like" (No me gusta).
If you like an activity rather than a thing, just use the infinitive afterwards: "I like swimming" (Me gusta nadar).
Gusta means "it pleases", so only works for singular things. If the thing that you like is plural (the women for example), you add "n"; because, in Spanish, the thing that you like (women, in this case) is the subject of the sentence: me gustan las mujeres ("I like women").
Just saying you like or dislike something is a bit dull. Saying you love something is really easy. Instead of gusta, use encanta (Me encanta leer means "I love reading"). To say you hate something, use the regular verb Odiar (odio, odias, odia, odiamos, odiáis, odian).
You can also use nada or mucho to add emphasis to gusta. For example, No me gusta nada ver la tele ("I don't like watching TV at all"); Me gusta mucho el ajedrez ("I like chess a lot").
What do you think of chess?
I like cricket.
He doesn't like sports.
We like playing rugby and football.
They like swimming a lot but they can't sing.
Do you like going swimming?
Why do (all of) you like tennis?
They hate chess.
I love sports, so I live in the city.
Go to the exercises.
In this lesson, you have learned:
How to say some sports and activities (el rugby; la natación; cantar).
How to say you play and do these things (juego al rugby; practicamos natación).
About a few stem-changing verbs (encuentro, encuentras, encuentra, encontramos, encontráis, encuentran)
You should now do the exercise related to each section (found here), and translate the dialogue at the top before moving on to lesson 6...
Translation (wait until the end of the lesson).
(m) above indicates that the noun is masculine (el queso — "the cheese"; los plátanos — "the bananas"), whereas (f) above indicates that it is feminine (la lechuga — "the lettuce"; las uvas — "the grapes")
In South America, papa is used instead of patata and Plátano refers to a plantain or cooking banana whereas a normal sweet banana is known as a banana or banano.
While agua is feminine, it takes the masculine articles un and el. For example, el agua curiosa ("the strange water") and las aguas curiosas ("the strange waters"). This is because agua starts with an accented a.
Wine comes in two varieties, "red" and "white". In Spanish, they are called vino tinto and vino blanco.
I like eggs.
I don't like lettuce at all.
I like carrots a lot, but cucumbers are boring.
What do you eat?
Spanish Verbs • Print version
All of these verbs are regular except almorzar, which is one of the UE Verbs we learnt about in the last chapter; almuerzo, almuerzas, almuerza, almorzamos, almorzáis, almuerzan.
What do you like to eat for lunch?
I eat oranges and bananas, but I don't like pears.
Me gusta comer uvas.
I like to eat grapes.
Do you drink milk?
Spanish Verbs • Print version
We previously learnt "unos/unas" as the translation for "some", e.g. unas manzanas ("some apples"), but this only works for plural nouns. "Some bread" has to be translated as algo de pan or just pan.
Also, there are two ways of saying "a glass of". Copa is for glasses with a stem (mostly wine: una copa de vino), and vaso is used for without a stem.
Obviously, in all these phrases, the un can be replaced with any number (Dos vasos de leche means "two glasses of milk").
Five and a half kilos of potatoes
Go to the exercises.
In Spanish, as in English, there are many ways of expressing what you would like to buy, some of which are listed below. You will also see some other useful words and phrases to use when shopping for food.
Spanish Verbs • Print version
I would like...  Me gustaría...
There you go; voila.
Comprar is a regular verb (compro, compras, compra, compramos, compráis, compran).
Costar is a O => UE verb (cuesto, cuestas, cuesta, costamos, costáis, cuestan), but obviously, you only use the third person.
I would like an apple, please.
I'd like to buy a loaf of bread.
I'd like to buy a bottle of red wine, please.
How much do the grapes cost?
What does a kilo of potatoes cost?
Go to the exercises.
"E" and Consonant Adjectives
In Spanish, clearly not all adjectives end in "o" or "a". The good thing about these is that they stay the same, irrespective of gender.
Adjectives ending in a consonant add an "es" when in the plural.
When an adjective (or indeed a noun) ends in z, it changes to a c in plural, then adds the "es" (feliz/felices — "happy").
Colours in Spanish are just adjectives, so they still have to agree and go after the noun. They are shown below.
Spanish Vocabulary • Print version
Adjectives can  function as nouns if you add an article in front of them. For example, el morado means "the purple one".
Take care with Brown!
The plural form of marrón is marrones (without the accent);  las zanahorias marrones means "the brown carrots".
Hair and eyes color brown is usually  Castaño (chesnut).  Brown skin color is Moreno (tanned).
The adjective negrita (Literally:little black/bold face) is a term of familiarity or endearment is in Spanish and not to be confused with an offensive English expression.
Naranja is only the noun form of the word; when used as an adjective, anaranjado is used.
The color rosa ends in "a" even if applied to a masculine noun; el balón rosa, "the pink ball"
Go to the exercises.
In this lesson, you have learnt
How to say you eat and drink things (como, comes, come, comemos, coméis, comen).
What to say in a shop (quisiera; querría; la cuenta).
How to form adjectives that don't end in "O" or "A" (la tienda verde; los quesos azules)
You should now do the exercise related to each section (found here), and translate the dialogue at the top before moving on.
You have now completed this chapter! Return to the Contents...
Pronouncing Spanish based on the written word is much simpler than pronouncing English based on written English.  This is because, with few exceptions, each letter in the Spanish alphabet represents a single sound, and even when there are many possible sounds, simple rules tell us which is the correct one. In contrast, many letters and letter combinations in English represent multiple sounds (such as the ou and gh in words like cough, rough, through, though, plough, etc.).
The table below presents letter-sound correspondences in the order of the traditional Spanish alphabet.  (Refer to the article Spanish orthography in Wikipedia for details on the Spanish alphabet and alphabetization.)
Between vowels, the lips should not be fully closed when pronouncing the sound (somewhat similar to the v in value, but much softer).
Before the vowels e and i, like th in thin (most of Spain) or like c in center (Parts of Andalucía, Canary Islands and Americas).
Everywhere else; like c in coffee
Does not have an exact English equivalent. Sounds similar to the d in day, but instead of the tongue touching the roof of the mouth behind the teeth, it should touch the teeth themselves.
Between vowels, the tongue should be lowered so as to not touch the teeth (somewhat similar to the th in the).
Between vowels (where the second vowel is a, o or u), the tongue should not touch the soft palate (no similar sound in English, but it's somewhat like Arabic ghain).
Before the vowels e and i, like a Spanish j (see below).
Silent, unless combined with c (see above). Hu- or hi- followed by another vowel at the start of the word stand for /w/ (English w) and /j/ (English y). Also used in foreign words like hámster, where it is pronounced like a Spanish j (see below).
Like e in he. Before other vowels, it approaches y in you.
Like the ch in loch, although in the majority of the dialects, it is pronounced like an English h.
Like the k in ask. This letter is limited in Spanish since it is mostly only used in words of foreign origin - Spanish prefers using c and qu (see above and below, respectively) as replacements for the letter k.
Does not have an exact English equivalent. It is similar to the English "l" in line, but shorter, or "clipped." Instead of the tongue touching the roof of the mouth behind the teeth, it should touch the tip of the teeth themselves.
Pronounced, mostly in Northern Spain, like gl in the Italian word gli. Does not have an English equivalent, but it's somewhat similar to li in million. In other parts of Spain and in Latin America, ll is commonly pronounced as /ʝ/ (somewhat similar to English y, but more vibrating). In Argentina and Uruguay it can be like sh in "flash" or like the s in the English "vision".
Like n in no. Before p, b, f and v (and in some regions m) sounds as m in important. For example un paso sounds umpaso. Before g, j, k sound (c, k , q), w and hu sounds like n in anchor: un gato, un juego, un cubo, un kilo, un queso, un whisky, un hueso. Before y sound (y or ll), it sounds like ñ, see below.
Like gn in the Italian word lasagna. As it's always followed by a vowel, the most similar sound in English is /nj/ (ny) + vowel, as in canyon, where the y is very short. For example, when pronouncing "años", think of it as "anyos", or an-yos. To practice, repeat the onomatopoeia of chewing: "ñam, ñam, ñam".
Like o in more, without the following r sound.
This has two pronunciations, neither of which exist in English. The 'soft' pronunciation [ɾ] sounds like American relaxed pronunciation of tt in "butter", and is written r (always written r).
The 'hard' pronunciation [r] is a multiply vibrating sound, similar to Scottish rolled r (generally written rr). 'Hard' r is also the sound of [r] at the start of a word or after l, n or s.
Like s in six. In many places it's aspirated in final position, although in Andalusia it is not itself pronounced, but changes the sound of the preceding vowel. (See regional variations). In most parts of Spain, it's pronounced as a sound between [s] and [ʃ].
Does not have an exact English equivalent. Like to the t in ten, but instead of the tongue touching the roof of the mouth behind the teeth, it should touch the teeth themselves.
Everywhere else, like oo in pool, but shorter.
Identical to Spanish b (see above). The pronunciation "v" is regarded as an over-cultism[citation needed].
This letter is hardly almost ever used in Spanish since it is only used in words of foreign origin (Spanish prefers using u). Pronunciation varies from word to word: watt is pronounced like bat or huat, but kiwi is always pronounced like quihui.
Like ks (English x) in extra. In some cases it may be pronounced like gs or s.
It sounds as a vowel [i]: a. when it is a word itself (y /i/, meaning "and" in English), b. at the end of a word like in rey /rei/ ("king"), c. in the middle of a compound word like in Solymar (sol y mar /so.li'mar/, meaning "sun and sea"), d. at the beginning of a word followed by a consonant in words or names that have retained an old spelling (Yfrán /i'fɾan/).
It sounds as a consonant [ʝ] in any other position: reyes /'re.ʝes/, yeso /'ʝe.so/. This standard pronunciation for y as a consonant does not have a perfect English equivalent, but it is somewhat similar to English y (just more vibrating). In Argentina and Uruguay y is pronounced similar to the English sh (/ʃ/) in she, or /ʒ/ (like  English s in vision).
One letter, one sound
Pronouncing Spanish based on the written word is much simpler than pronouncing English based on written English.  Each vowel represents only one sound. With some exceptions (such as w and x), each consonant also represents one sound. Many consonants sound very similar to their English counterparts.
As the table indicates, the pronunciation of some consonants (such as b) does vary with the position of the consonant in the word, whether it is between vowels or not, etc.  This is entirely predictable, so it doesn't really represent a breaking of the "one letter, one sound" rule.
The University of Iowa has a very visual and detailed explanation of the Spanish pronunciation.
Here is another page with links to the audio files of the letters.
In Spanish there are two levels of stress when pronouncing a syllable: stressed and unstressed. To illustrate: in the English word "thinking", "think" is pronounced with stronger stress than "ing". If both syllables are pronounced with the same stress, it sounds like "thin king".
The vowel of an unstressed syllable should be pronounced with its true value, as shown in the table above.  Don't reduce unstressed vowels to neutral schwa sounds, as occurs in English.
There are only the following rules for pronouncing the implicit accent. The stressed syllable is in bold letters:
If a word ends with a vowel or with n or s , the next-to-last syllable is stressed.Examples:
If a word ends with a consonant other than n or s, the last syllable is stressed.Examples:
A syllable usually contains exactly one vowel. If there are two adjacent vowels, they count as two distinct syllables if both are one of a,e and o. If, however, at least one of them is i or u, they count as only one syllable. If, according to the two rules above, that syllable is stressed, the first of the two vowels is stressed if it is one of a, e and o, while the second vowel is stressed if the first one is one of i and u.Examples:
In the clusters gue and gui, the u is not pronounced; it serves simply to give the g a hard-g sound, like in the English word gut (gue → [ge]; gui → [gi]).
The Spanish Wikibook was created on August 2, 2003 by ThomasStrohmann; it was the first language book on Wikibooks. During December 2006, it underwent a complete archive and rewrite, by Celestianpower. A list of major contributors — past and present — can be found below.
ThomasStrohmann (discuss · email · contribs · logs · count)
Karl Wick (discuss · email · contribs · logs · count)
Wintermute (discuss · email · contribs · logs · count)
Mariela Riva (discuss · email · contribs · logs · count)
Mxn (discuss · email · contribs · logs · count)
Sabbut (discuss · email · contribs · logs · count)
Javier Carro (discuss · email · contribs · logs · count)
Fenoxielo (discuss · email · contribs · logs · count)
Think Fast (discuss · email · contribs · logs · count)
Celestianpower (discuss · email · contribs · logs · count)
John D'Adamo (discuss · email · contribs · logs · count)
AnthonyBaldwin (discuss · email · contribs · logs · count)
Flickts (discuss · email · contribs · logs · count)
Neoptolemus (discuss · email · contribs · logs · count)
Akhram (discuss · email · contribs · logs · count)
I571 Chemical Information Technology (David J. Wild, Indiana University) [Part of the requirements for the Graduate Certificate in Cheminformatics]
In DB2, the hierarchy of storage units (from least inclusive to most inclusive) is Page, Extent, Container, Tablespace, Database.
In DB2, data is stored in a structure called a Page, it is the equivalent of an Oracle Block. The basic page structure in DB2 is that there is a fixed length page header, a variable length page trailer, and the space in between is used for data or free space.
The information stored in a page can be data records (rows or indexes) or system information such as a table space spacemap page, which keeps track of the free space in data pages in a table space. Index data and Row data cannot be stored in the same page, and row data will not be split across pages (unlike Oracle that will mix index data and row data in the same block, and will break rows into ‘row pieces’ that may span blocks).
Database page size can vary and is determined by the buffer pool size. Pages sizes can be 4, 8, 16 and 32KB. It is possible to set up a database instance that has mixed page sizes in it – 4KB for system pages, and 16KB for user data page sizes. While this gives flexibility in tuning page sizes for different application workloads (OLTP applications with small fast transactions will benefit from smaller page sizes, wheras OLAP applications doing analytical queries across large data volumes will benefit from a larger page size), there is an administrative overhead for the DBA in maintaining this mixed page size environment. Alternatively, the DBA can set up the database with a uniform page size, where depending on the application requirements, all pages in the database have the same size.
Regardless of how big the pages are, they all have a fixed 68 byte overhead that DB2 uses to describe the page. This header contains information such as the offset to the beginning of contiguous free space in the page, the location of free space within the page (the hole chain) and the total amount of free space in the page. Pointers to the information on the page (i.e. the location of rows stored in the page) are maintained in a chain of two-byte entries at the end of each table page. This is called the ID Map, and each of these entries contains a Relative Byte Address (RBA) pointing to the beginning location of a row. Since the entries in the ID Map are 2 bytes long, the upper limit on the number of elements that can be stored in a page is 255.
Because free space and user data are managed in a non-contiguous way throughout the page, the ID Map entries can change – in the example where a modified row no longer fits in its original location. If a row will not fit back into a page where it was originally, the ID Map RBA will point to a location that contains a 6 byte pointer to a different page and ID map (called an offset pointer).
Free space in each page is managed in pieces called ‘holes’. Large holes (greater than 4 bytes) are chained from the header; small holes (1 to 4 bytes) can be anywhere in the page. Any contiguous free space is immediately in front of the ID map area. Because its location is known, it is not stored in the hole chain, there is an offset in the header that points to the beginning of contiguous free space.
The elements that can be stored in a DB2 page are therefore records (Rows and Indexes), Holes, Overflow Records or pointers to Overflow Records. Each element has an identifying flag and a 6-byte ID Map entry number in its prefix – the ROWID. As mentioned earlier, this ROWID can either be the actual record in the page or a pointer to a ROWID of an Overflow Record in a separate page.
DB2 indexes an element to a page, and its location in the page is stored in the ID Map. This means that DB2 can reorganize elements in a page without updating the index – the index points to the page, but the location of the record referred to by the index is maintained in the ID Map. DB2 can do housekeeping on a page – if a record is too large to fit back where it originally came from, DB2 will de-frag any fragmented free space (holes) and the space freed up by this will become part of the contiguous free space immediately before the ID Map.
Data on a page is a record or an offset pointer and it is useful to visualize how it is organized. Initially the page has a lot of free space and a pointer to its location is kept in the fixed page header. Rows are inserted into a table in first-fit order. The page’s free space map is searched for the first available space large enough to hold the new row. When a row is updated, it will be updated in place unless it is now larger than the space it occupied previously, in which case DB2 will de-frag the page. If there is still insufficient space left on the page the record will ‘overflow’ into another page, and its new location will be stored as a 6 byte offset pointer in the original record location. As the page fills up with information and as the information is modified it becomes fragmented throughout the page. Since contiguous free space is maintained at the end of the table (before the ID Map), it can be thought of as information on the page growing downward from the page header. The page header also keeps track of the free space in the page (holes between page elements), and will chain the larger (more useful) holes together directly beneath the page header. When space begins to run out on the page will move records into the space that was taken up with large holes. Think of records ‘floating’ up the page into spaces that used to be holes. The data will thus shuffle up the page and increase the contiguous free space at the bottom of the page. Small holes may eventually become big holes in this process (and as data is modified on a page), and will become incorporated into the large hole chain.
A pointer is kept to the beginning of contiguous free space, since the end is ‘nibbled’ away by ID Map entries – each new element on a page gets a 2 byte ID Map entry, and this will grow this map upward from the bottom of the page.
An extent in DB2 contains a number of contiguous pages. The page size and extent size in DB2 are set at the time that the tablespace is created and cannot be altered easily (i.e. by an ALTER command), once they are defined they are set for the life of the database. It is inefficient for a DBMS to work on individual pages, the I/O overhead eats into performance. Database I/O works with extents, in this way a number of contiguous pages are fetched from disk in a single I/O. As we will see later, through design considerations that account for data distribution and application needs (access based design), you can arrange that large amounts of related (and hence likely to be needed) data are fetched with a single I/O. Table data cannot be mixed within extents, so one extent is for one table only.
An extent is a multiple of pages, so selection of the page and extent size will have an impact on the type of application processing you are doing. Typically an OLTP environment will have small pages (4k,8k), and a small number of pages per extent: 4,6,16. Decision Support and Data Warehousing applications will have larger pages (16 or 32K), and larger extents (16, 32, 64 or 128). The extent size should be chosen based on the table size and anticipated usage, depending on whether the application is query intensive, transaction intensive or a mixture of both. Smaller tables are handled more efficiently with smaller extents.
The extent size is used by DB2 to determine the size of the prefetch block when data is retrieved. It also determines the number of pages that will be written to a container before skipping to the next container. If new data needs to be written and there is insufficient space, the write will physically allocate a full extent of contiguous pages.
Containers are how DB2 handles the storage of data on the operating systems file system. Data in the database is viewed logically as tablespaces, tables, rows and so on. Each tablespace is stored and managed in one or more containers, and how the tablespace is defined determines how data in the tablespace is handled on disk.
Containers can be managed by the DBA – Database Managed Storage, by the Operating System File System – System Managed Storage, or by the Database – Automatic Storage.
Containers (and how they are managed) are more concerned with the efficient usage of storage than the logical considerations of the database.
Database Managed Storage (DMS) requires space to be allocated in advance, and when more space is required the DBA needs to manage this. In a DMS space, the containers can be in a file under the host file system, or can be created directly on a raw device. If a raw device is used, data is written directly to the disk from the container without any operating system cacheing. While DMS performance is very good, it has an administration overhead – the DBA has to pre-allocate space and manage this space as the dataset grows. DMS is flexible in that the DBA can drop, add and resize containers as needed.
System Managed Storage (SMS) stores containers in a file system directory. Tables and indices are created as files within the directory, and the host operating system is responsible for space allocation (both initially and as the dataset grows or shrinks.) Although this reduces the DBA overhead involved with DMS, the tablespace can become fragmented which will result in overhead when opening and closing multiple files. It is not as easy to manage the size of containers in SMS as it is in DMS.
With DB2 9 tablespaces and container management is increasingly handled by the database itself – Automatic Storage. In Automatic Storage the database has a number of storage paths associated with them, and the tablespaces (and hence containers) in the database are assigned and allocated based on those storage paths by DB2. In this way, you don’t need to explicitly define the containers. They will grow automatically in their directory paths, and if the directory paths are on different disks, the table data will be spread across these disks. DB2 will create new containers if they are needed.Automatic storage gives the best options of DMS (speed and flexibility) and SMS (ease of administration)
A tablespace is a very important structure in DB2. As we saw earlier, tablespaces are made up of a number of containers which map directly to the disk. The containers in the tablespace specify the storage paths or directory structures that will physically hold the data.
Tablespaces contain tables, and hence user data that maps to the user and database applications. When you create a table, it has to go in a tablespace, and you can specify which tablespace to use (if you don’t, the system will default where it puts the table, and it might not be where you need it).
The tablespace is also what is mapped into RAM. For each tablespace, you have to define the page size, and each tablespace must have access to a bufferpool of the same page size, and a system temporary tablespace of the same page size. You have to specify which buffer pool the table space is associated with.
DB2 Tablespace, RAM and Disk
An extent is the unit of I/O for the DBMS, multiple contiguous pages are fetched and written as an extent. Table data cannot be mixed in extents, an extent is for one table only. Extents are stored within containers. Depending on how the containers are set up (either with Automatic Storage, DMS or SMS) there is a path associated with each container to part of the physical file system. If the tablespace (and hence containers) are on a disk array, the extent size should be set to the disk stripe size. In this way we can see that extents striped across multiple containers can be resident on different disks (useful for performance reasons), and the relationship between tables, extents, containers and disks is shown in figure n below
DB2 Extents, Containers and Disk
There are three types of tablespace in DB2; Regular, Large, and Temporary.
A regular table space holdsl permanent data such as tables and indexes. It can also hold Large Objects (LOBs), or LOBs can be stored in a large table space.
A table created in a large table space can be larger than a table in a regular table space. A large table can support more than 255 rows per data page improving space utilization on data pages.
Tablespaces within Temporary are system temporary (for database operations like sorts and joins) and user temporary where the user can define global temporary tables. Tables created in system temporary are managed by the system, once they are no longer needed, the system will delete them. User Temporary tables need to be explicitly managed by the user.
A user temporary table space stores declared global temporary tables. No user temporary table spaces exist when a database is created. At least one user temporary table space should be created to allow definition of declared temporary tables. User temporary table spaces are optional. No user temporary table space is created by default.
In DB2 (like Oracle) A database is comprised of a number of tablespaces.
The size of a database is the sum of the tablespaces it contains, and the containers within each tablespace have storage paths within them that map to the underlying disk system, whether this is managed by the OS, DBMS or DBA.
When a database is first created, three system tablespaces are created
The catalog tablespace is a Regular tablespace called SYSCATSPACE and it holds the system catalog tables. There is only one catalog table space per database.
DB2 creates one large table space named USERSPACE1 when a database is created. A large table space stores all permanent data just as a regular table space does, including LOBs. This table space type must be DMS.
At least one system temporary must exist per database, and the default named TEMPSPACE1 is created with the database. A system temporary table space stores internal temporary data required during SQL operations such as joins, sorts, index creation, and table reorganization.
At database creation time, the recovery logs for the database are created, and a set of system tables is created in SYSCATSPACE. These system catalog tables contain information about the definitions of the database objects (i.e. tables, views, indexes, and packages), and database security information (i.e. which users can have access to these objects.) These tables are updated during the operation of a database; for example, when a table is created. The information in these tables is available through a series of routines and views.
After the database is created, the user can create additional Large Tablespaces, Regular Tablespaces and User Temporary Tablespaces. By default, no User Temporary Tablespaces are created along with the database.
Tablespaces manage space in the database, as they are created, grow and shrink, the method by with they are managed and the paths to the underlying storage take care of this for you. DBA’s can manage tablespaces for maintenance by taking them offline (i.e. for backup or recovery), however the SYSCATSPACE cannot be taken offline since it contains control information for the database.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Electromagnetic Radiation  is observed in Dipoles consists of two straight wire of different polarities carrying current . Electromagnetic Radiation is spread out as an ElectroMagnetic Wave that compose of  an ElectroMagnet Wave perpendicular to an Electric Wave
Electromagnetic Radiation travels at a speed equal to speed of light in a vaccum C = 3 x 1018 and has a Quanta Energy Level.
Electromagnetic Radiation Spectrum used in communication include frequencies of
Radio Waves , wave of frequency in the range of 2KHz - 20 KHz
Microwave , wave of frequency > 3MHz
Visible Light , wave of frequency > 3 THz
Ultra Violet Waves , wave of frequency > 3GHz
File:LOZ Dungeon 8 Quest2.png
Obtain the Magic Wand.
Obtain the Magic Key.
Increase the number of bombs that you can carry by four.
Beat three Dodongos.
Obtain a Heart Container.
Obtain the eighth Triforce piece.
To find the entrance to this dungeon, you must bomb along the cliff wall to the north of the stream in Section 3.  You will need to use the ladder, and you will find the entrance in C-2, about a fourth to a third of the way in from the left side.  To complete this dungeon, you will need to purchase Monster Bait.
From the entrance, head through the top door and you'll enter a room full of red Bubbles.  Doing your best to avoid them, push the left most block to reveal a staircase to an underground passage.  Take the stairs and use the passage.
If you do happen to get hit, go through the underground passage anyway.  When you arrive, instead of fighting the Goriyas, simply go right to find blue Bubbles.  You'll have to push the left block to find an underground passage that brings you a few rooms up from where you started.  Just head south to return to the red Bubble room and try again.
Fight the Goriyas and push against the south wall to find an invisible passage.  You encounter three Dodongos.  Unlock the door below and go through.
When you enter the room, defeat as many of the Wall Masters as you can without getting hit by a red Bubble.  If you do get hit, get away from the wall and touch the blue Bubble.  When the Wall Masters are defeated, push the middle block along the right column to reveal a stairwell that leads to the Magic Wand.
After you get the wand, return to the Dodongo room and proceed through the right door.  Fight the Goriyas and Keese, and bomb the bottom wall.  Defeat all of the Goriyas in the room to obtain the map.  Return to the room above.
Defeat all of the Goriyas and Keese so you can push the block closest to the left door to reveal a stairwell to an underground passage.  Take the passage, and you will return one room above the red Bubble room.
Defeat the Ropes and enter the door above.  Fight the Goriyas and enter through the next door above.
You will encounter a Digdogger.  You can defeat it in order to push the left block that reveals a one way underground passage that can serve as a significant shortcut, but taking it will mean missing the Magic Key.  Proceed through the top door.  If you do decide to take the shortcut, go through the passage and push against the top wall to go through an invisible passage. You may need to fight all the Keese first, though. After that, jump down to the step marked with three asterisks.
You will encounter a hungry Moblin.  Feed it Monster Bait in order to proceed through the top door.
Avoiding the traps, defeat all of the Keese in order to obtain the compass.  Proceed through the top door.
Defeat all of the blue Goriyas to open the door to the left and obtain a key.  Head through the left door.  Defeat all of the blue Goriyas here to open the doors as well.  Head through the left door.
You encounter another Digdogger.  I only recommend defeating it if you have less than 100 rupees since you earn a blue rupee for it.  Bomb the left wall to reveal a passage, and go through.
Carefully make your way to the locked door on the left and unlock it.  You do not need to defeat all of the Wall Masters here unless you need bombs for the Dodongos in the next room.  Go through the left door.
Defeat the three Dodongos to open the door to the left.  Enter it and avoid the red Bubbles.  The key is primarily a distraction that you should only collect if you have none.  Push the leftmost center block and take the stairs to the next underground passage.  Don't worry if you get hit with the red Bubbles, there's a blue Bubble on the other side.
Watch out for Wall Masters as you proceed to the left door to unlock it.  Defeat all of the Stalfos and push the left block in the center (fourth) row to reveal a stairwell.  Take the stairs to locate the Magic Key.
Dispatch the Ropes in the room. The block here can be pushed to reveal a staircase to an underground passage, but there is essentially no reason to take it if you have the Magic Key, as all you find is another key and be forced to repeat much of the dungeon.  Instead, push against the bottom wall to find an invisible passage.
Defeat all of the Goriyas and Keese for a blue rupee.  Enter the right door and walk through the corridor, fighting past the Keese, and unlock the right door.
Defeat all of the blue Goriyas in the room to obtain a set of bombs.  Then push the left most block to gain access to the stairwell.  Take the stairs to the underground passage.
You will arrive one room beneath the boss, but first defeat the Moldorms and bomb the bottom wall to reveal a passage.  Take the passage and defeat the Goriyas to obtain a blue rupee.  Go through the bottom door.
Defeat the Aquamentus to open the left door.  Proceed to the left, and you'll enter a room with Bubbles and Wall Masters.  Avoiding the red Bubbles, kill all of the Wall Masters, and then push the center block along the right column to open the left door.
Enter through the left door to find a man who will enhance your bomb carrying capacity by four bombs in exchange for 100 rupees.  When you're done, return all the way back to the room below the boss.  Unlock the top door and proceed to encounter the boss of the dungeon.
The bosses of the dungeon are three Dodongos.  Defeat them in the usual manner with bombs.  Either feed them two bombs, or explode a bomb in their face and stab them.
Defeat them to collect a Heart Container.  Then enter the room above to find the final piece of the Triforce.
A medicine woman is one screen west.
A replacement shield and monster bait can be purchased two screens west, one screen south, and one screen west.
From there, purchase extra bombs one screen west (after a southern loop).
Introduction to Information Literacy in the K12 Classroom/Table of Contents
Please add your name, one to two sentences about yourself, and what page you worked on. Also add your talk link (example: talk to Teresa Coffman) you get this link/page when you log into/become a member of wikibooks. It is where people will comment about your work.
Contributions have been made by education students at the University of Mary Washington and myself, Teresa Coffman, an associate professor of education at the University of Mary Washington in Fredericksburg, Virginia.
Students and User_Talk information are below
[2]- I teach third grade in Stafford, Virginia. I worked on updating Chapter 9.
[3]- I am a fifth grade teacher in Stafford County Virginia. This is my first wikibook experience!
Brian Mellott—I am a preservice teacher with plans to teach Social Studies at the high school level.  I am very interested in where technology is taking us, but feel a responsibility to know where we have been.  In that light, I have written a brief history of literacy in an attempt to grant readers the opportunity to appreciate how important information literacy is for their students' futures.
Shannon Moore- I am a teacher in Virginia.  I enjoy integrating technology into my lessons!  I have worked with my classmate Bruce on the chapter about technology tools.  Please see chapter 6: Information Literacy and Technology Tools.
Alison Morgan- I teach mathematics to 9-12 graders.  This is going to be my third year teaching in Spotsylvania, VA.  I wrote
Information Literacy Standards for Student Learning.  Hope you enjoy!
Lauri Raffetto—I am a preservice teacher currently attending the University of Mary Washington's College of Graduate and Professional Studies. I co-created Chapter 5 on Information Literacies and Differentiation. I plan to be a middle school teacher in San Diego County teaching History and English core classes by the 09–10 school year. I cannot wait to get into a classroom and begin integrating web 2.0 tools into my curriculum!
Jessica Greene—I am a currently a High School Business teacher in Virginia attending the University of Mary Washington's College of Graduate and Professional Studies for my Master's in Education. I co-created Chapter 5 on Information Literacies and Differentiation.
Arianne Patricia Mann wrote Chapter 3: Information Literacy Theories. I am currently finishing up University of Mary Washington's M.Ed. program, and will begin teaching elementary school this fall.
[http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/User_talk:bchadwick)
Bruce Chadwick---I am a teacher in Virginia and currently enrolled at the University of Mary Washington. I worked with Shannon on Chapter 6 dealing with information web 2.0 tools. Please take a look:Information Literacy and Technology Tools.
Daniel Stribling - I am a teacher in Stafford County Virginia.  I am currently working on a master's degree in Education at the University of Mary Washington. I worked on the Models section of this Wikibook.
Caras - I am a teacher in Spotsylvania County, Virginia. I am currently a graduate student at the University of Mary Washington.  I worked on ESL learners in the classroom. My chapter is Chapter 4.1: English Language Learners Background Information
Christine Bounds - I am currently working on a M.Ed. at the University of Mary Washington. I graduated with a B.S in Environmental Science Geology in 2006. I hope to have a teaching position for this upcoming school year in either 6th or 9th grade science.
Meredith Marconi - As many of my colleagues have already mentioned, I am also working on my M.Ed. at the University of Mary Washington.  I will be teaching English in Louisa County this Fall and I really enjoyed contributing to the Introduction for Information Literacy, Chapter 7 Application of Information Literacy.  Enjoy and thanks for looking.
Nicole Hodges - I am working on my M.Ed. at the University of Mary Washington and an English teacher in Fauquier County Schools. I contributed to Chapter 6 with information on blogging in the classroom.
Lauren Bass - I am a third grade teacher in the Prince William County Schools in Virginia. I work in a predominately ESL population, and therefore my contributions to this wikibook are in Chapter 4 on ESL and Information Literacy. I am currently finishing up my graduate work in the Masters of Education program at the University of Mary Washington.
Ryan Bayne - I am working on my M.Ed. at the University of Mary Washington.  Currently, I teach 6th grade history at Rodney Thompson Middle School in Stafford, Virginia.  I wrote a piece about Legal and Ethical Issues with computers in the classroom.
Laura Messinger- I am working on my M.Ed. in Secondary English Education at the University of Mary Washington.  I contributed to Chapter 9 of this wikibook.
Stephanie Iero - I am a graduate student and preservice teacher working on my Masters for Elementary Education at the University of Mary Washington.  I contributed to Chapter 6 and 6.2 on Technology Tools and Open Source Software.
Jessica Baker - I am a pre-service teacher at the University of Mary Washington getting my MEd. in Education. I contributed to the 2nd chapter of this wikibook! :)
Linda Jones- [4] I am finishing my M.Ed at the University of Mary Washington. I currently teach business and computer programming at Mountain View High School in Stafford, Virginia. I contributed to Chapter 6 and 6.3 about Photo Sharing.
Amanda Bates- Bates I am currently finishing up my M.Ed from UMW's College of Graduate and Professional Studies.  Currently I work for a gov. contractor, but hope to one day teach secondary English.  I contributed to Chapter 6 and 6.4 about Skype.
To illustrate the mentioned terminologies, characteristics and design criteria of an embedded control system, the example of a team of RoboCup robots is presented.
This example covers all the aspects that come across when designing an embedded control system.
RoboCup is a competition between 200 robot soccer teams from all over the world, participating in six different leagues. Each robot soccer team consists of six autonomous robots (so no human interaction is allowed).
A robot-system requires the close integration of planning, sensing, control and modelling. The robot must also take into account the interactions between itself, its task and its environment.
More information of the RoboCup competition can be found at this link: RoboCup
Each team participating in the RoboCup competition has to design a team of soccer robots. Every single soccer robot is an embedded control system and every team can therefore be seen as a system of systems.
The aim of this application chapter is to give an overview of the design job that every team has to master.
This example differs from other examples as aviation, etc. by:
The requirements are not well specified at the start of the project, but are continuously adjusted as shown in next chapter (moving target). This means the design phases are not as well specified and can change with the target.
There is a dominant hostile environment that is continuously changing and improving. In aviation the environment , like air traffic control or other planes (not in combat),  is an ally and cooperates with the actions of the plane.
There is a different design target: “try to do the best you can in the time you are given and with the human resources you have”. This means the resources can be assumed fixed.
In general, this example can be seen as a prototype of a system of systems on every design-level.
In general, Robotics can be divided into two domains: (in order of increasing complexity) design on system level (1 robot) or design on “system of systems” level (team of robots).
Choosing one design procedure above the other, depends on the priorities of the (team of) engineer(s).
However, both domains have to be designed, so  by starting from "system of systems" level, for instance,  working downwards and optimizing the individual robots (by learning from  obtained results) is needed.
The RoboCup Team Wiki has one year to design a team of autonomous soccer robots.  The team organizes a brain storm session with all the members and makes up a list with the skills and/or specifications each of the field soccer robots has to posses in order to serve its purpose and follow the regulations.  These skills and specifications are challenges for the designers and written in plain language and not yet (technically) specified.
The “four C’s”, explained in the main chapter embdedded control systems design, are now used to execute a thorough analysis of robotics.
The topics below reformulate these four concepts, applied to this subject.
Computation can be described  as the reaction speed on each possible input. Because computation on “system of system” level depends on that of the system level, a differentiation  is redundant.
On both levels, the hardware is decentralised. The software is centralised on system level, but decentralised on “system of system” level. This approach results in a faster system and moreover has a smaller chance of failure.
This is the programmation of de robots. The stand-alone code, as well as the cooperation code are implemented in each robot.
A division can be made between the functional coordination and system coordination. Functional coordination defines the tactical intelligence, such as the actions needed for an attack. System coordination on the other hand covers the junction between the different subsystems.
Communication creates the links needed to make all the aspects of the coordination possible. The links between de different subsystems of a robot are necessary for the system coordination.
For more general information on robustness, see Design Criteria.
Robustness is a very wide concept and has a lot of applications in many areas of this Robocup-example. It can be described as  the level of immunity for failure on software level (dealing with communication errors, etc.) or  hardware level (equal to collisions, etc.)
It’s very important to make a good balance between robustness in one hand, and efficiency and performance on the other hand.
The system must be robust enough to handle with moving targets. For example, always foresee a way to implement new rules into the   configuration by using an external link to upload new driver or software by wire. The possibility to switch between several management programs or play tactics is a smart thing to do.
Considering the hardware, client-server communication  creates a single-point-of-failure, which seriously decreases the robustness compared to peer-to-peer communication.
In case of peer-to-peer communication , the consideration can be made to implement a “server” on software level.  One randomly chosen robot collects all the inputs necessary for a tactical decision for the entire team and transmits it. In this case there is no direct loss in robustness and more efficiency. However, getting all field-info of the robots in an hostile environment is not evident. Therefore peer-to-peer on every level, this means  each robot determines a tactical decision (parallel with the others)  with the info he gets and transmits it, can be the better solution at first.
A minimum of communication will lead to a maximum of robustness. However, a remarkable decrease in efficiency cannot be neglected.
Within the world of the Robocup (in contrast to aviation for instance), redundancy isn’t implemented most of the time because of the increasing complexity, the higher cost and so on. With such a kind of  “constraint”, you lose robustness to network failures. However, it is still possible to exploit the available resources, by minimizing the communication to the necessary minimum and creating a different kind of robustness. After all, the more autonomous a robot can function, with only the necessary part of communication, the higher the robustness.
Often the priority lies within performance, instead of the physical  state of the robot. Physical damage (a collision for instance) is almost inevitable and the many possible reinforcements against them will cause a complete downfall of the performance. This drawback shows that physical robustness is a must up to a certain level, because don’t forget it’s a game where your team has to perform!
These considerations cannot be framed within one C, but are more likely to be cross-sectional design criterions. It’s obvious that without a certain form of robustness, performance and efficiency can hardly be achieved.
Autonomy is , just like robustness, a design aspect that rises above all others. Because communication is still very sensitive to failure, it is of critical importance that every robot can function autonomously. A certain degree of autonomy for each robot will automatically result in robustness to failure of the team.
Design challenges: play soccer, tactics, communication, energy management
Design constraints: autonomy, safety, size, weight
The design challenges, combined with the design constraints (given by the organization), give shape to the design requirements.
Although these constraints are mostly non-quantitative, a number of these design requirements are well specified.
Namely these of the client: play football according to the RoboCup rules.
Just as in every design environment, the rule is to keep it as simple as possible and mainly focus on the two most important design criteria.
More technical info about the design of these robots can be found in the appendix.
Foresee an alternative scenario in case of a communication error of any kind. When a tactical decision has to be made, don’t let a robot wait until he has all possible info, but foresee a certain autonomy so the robot can still make a fast decision without all info.
Be aware of the trade-off you make by choosing robustness over efficiency and performance or vice versa. It’s impossible to purchase the maximum of both criteria, so chose wisely which criteria has the highest priority before you start.
Considering the limited design time it is advisable to focus on the team instead of putting all the effort on one robot. Therefore, use the method described in “high level design” and use standard components without adjusting and reprogramming them more than necessary. That way, more valuable time and effort  can be spend on the teamplay-aspect. Via experiences on the field, adjustments can be made on system level.
Foresee a way to implement new rules into the  configuration by using an external link to upload new driver or software by wire. The possibility to switch between several  management programs or play tactics is a smart thing to do.
Communication via  Client-Server configuration, this creates a single-point-of-failure (as explained earlier).
Trying to implement that a robot can detect whether another robot deals with a serious failure.  This is very hard to do via communication: which signal must be sent and what if its communication system fails? It is only by continuous interpretation of the movement of the other robots or reverse processing that some sort of failure detection is possible.
On an inclined plane, application of Newton's laws is somewhat complicated. Gravity acts downwards, but the plane exerts a force back on the object at an angle. This can be used to build a right angled triangle, since the resultant force down the slope angles to the normal force, and gravity will be the hypotenuse. If there is friction acting, this will be in the opposite direction to the motion down the plane.
Friction is a force which opposes motion, thus if there is no motion, then there will be no force caused by friction. Friction can never make an object move, it can only slow an object down, and eventually stop it.
For two solid surfaces moving over each other, the friction will be affected by the nature (roughness etc) of the two surfaces, however the surface area and velocity of the object do not affect the friction. There are also two types of friction of solid surfaces, static and kinetic friction. Static friction is that which stops objects from beginning to move, and kinetic is that which slows objects down when they are moving.
These two types are defined individually by their constants µs and µk respectively. µs > µk in all cases (fairly obvious if you think about it).
The force of friction caused by each type is also dependent on the normal force the surface is applying, thus Ffr =< µsFn for objects which aren't moving, and Ffr = µsFn for objects which are moving. In the first case, the frictional force only exists if there is a force being applied, thus the less than or equal to sign. Friction will counteract all forces up to this point.
Objects falling through fluid (or indeed, air) also experience friction which opposes the force of gravity. This friction increases with velocity, and so there eventually comes a point where the force of gravity is being counteracted by friction, and the object falls at constant speed. This is known as terminal velocity.
When objects in projectile motion are launched at an angle, the horizontal and vertical components must first be calculated. From the vertical, we should be able to calculate its peak height, and the time taken to reach this height. From there, we can calculate the time required to reach the ground and using all these times, and the horizontal component, the horizontal distance travelled.
Simple harmonic motion is like that of a pendulum, where the object moves away from, and returns to the equilibrium point, and the restoring force is proportional to the extension (i.e. the further from the center the pendulum is, the bigger the force pulling it back). Starting from a fully extended position, displacement follows a cos curve, velocity a -sin curve, and acceleration a -cos curve (we're differentiating with respect to t each time : cos -> -sin -> -cos). As can be seen from this, a displacement vs acceleration graph will be a straight line with a negative slope (cos and -cos).
Graphing displacement vs time : This graph ranges from r (the amplitude) to -r, and follows a cos curve (assuming we're starting at the extended position). It will be a maximum at the points of extension and zero when the object passes through the mean position.
The total energy for an object in SHM is constant. When displacement is maximum, all the energy is potential (since it is being held up, compressed or whatever). When the displacement is zero, all the energy is kinetic (because it is moving, and at its lowest point/no compression or extension etc.), thus the two follow parabolic curves where the sum of the two curves is always equal.
As an example, we have SHM for a mass on a spring. When the mass is pulled downwards to an extension of x, and then released, the mass undergoes vertical oscillations which obey SHM.
If the elastic limit of the spring is exceeded, then it will no longer follow Hooke's law, and no longer follow SHM.
Assume a mass is on a pendulum, with string length l, and is displaced by x. This forms an angle of Ø between the mean position of the string, and the displaced position. The force of gravity towards the origin = mg sinØ ( this can be shown with a right angle triangle, mg is the hypotenuse, mg sinØ is the side at a tangent to the curve, because it is a similar triangle to the one made by the mass, the origin and the top of the string ). For small angles Ø, sin Ø = x/l(If we assume once again, that the curve between the origin and the mass is actually a straight line, which is valid for small Ø). Thus, the force towards O = mgx/l. Since F = ma, acceleration towards O = gx/l. Thus acceleration in x direction (away from O) = -gx/l. So as above, w2 = g/l, and so, T = 2 x Pi x (square root of l/g) (once agian, this is given in the data book).
Angular displacement : The angle from the centre of a circle (in radians) around which an object has moved. It's symbol is Ø, and it is defined as Ø = s/rwhere s is the length travelled around the circumference, and r is the radius. It is equivalent to displacement in linear motion.
s = rØ : The length covered on the circumference is the radius x the angle (in radians) covered. This allows the angular displacement to be converted into a length.
v = rw :  The velocity of an object on the circumference is the radius times the angular velocity (as defined above, in radians s-1)
That an object rotating in a circle has an acceleration towards the centre can be shown by taking two vectors at tangents to different points on the circle, and subtracting one from the other. The resulting vector will be directed towards the centre of the circle.
Bodies in circular motion include planets orbiting ( gravity provides ac ), buckets being spun around on ropes ( rope provides ac ) and cars going around banked curves ( The 'down the slope' component of the normal force provides ac ). Problems involving these can then be solved by finding ac and then working back through the above equations.
Masses moving in a vertical circle and affected by gravity : At every point in the circle, the force keeping the object moving in a circle (ie towards the center) must be constant, and can be calculated with the equations above. At the top of the circle, the force total keeping the object in a circle is Fc - Fg (since gravity is providing the force, Fc is smaller). At the bottom, Ft = Fc + Fg. At the sides, Ft = Fc (since no component of gravity is acting towards the center).
Centripetal force does not change the kinetic energy of a body because it only affects the direction of the velocity, not the magnitude, and Ek = 1/2mv2 is only conserved with the magnitude.
Newton's law of universal gravitation : F = (Gm1m2) / (R2), where G is the gravitational constant (on earth, 6.67 x 10-11 N m2 kg-2), m1 and m2 are the two masses in question, and R is the distance between the centers of the two masses. This must be applied both as a source of centripetal and gravitational force (in the pulling objects down sense). (This equation is in the data book)
Gravitational field strength is the gravitational force per unit mass at a particular point in the gravitational field. In simple terms, it's the force on one kg of mass, which is 9.8 N on Earth.
Beyond the surface of the mass, the force of gravity decreases in a parabolic curve (because of the R2 term it obeys the inverse square law). Inside the mass is messy to work out, but luckily it isn't required.
Gravitational potential ( with the symbol V ) is defined as the potential energy per unit mass at a point in the field. V approaches 0 as the distance between the masses approaches infinity. V = -Gm/r where m is the mass of the earth (or whatever) and r is the distance from the center of the Earth. (given in the data book)
Escape velocity is the speed at which an object must leave the planet's surface to completely escape its gravitational field. For this, the object must be given enough kinetic energy to go from the surface, where
Note: this one is not in the data book, so you can either memorize it, or remember how to derive it.
The work done on a force displacement graph is the area under the graph. This would normally be found by integrating, but since there's no calculus in this course, in any given question you'll be able to break the area up into triangles and rectangles to find the area.
For a linear spring, the force to extend (or compress) the spring is directly proportional to the displacement. If no force acts on it, the spring will naturally return to its equilibrium position. Unless, of course, the spring is displaced beyond it's elastic, in which case it's broken and probably no longer interesting.
Energy (elastic potential) is stored in a spring by compressing or extending it. When released, the spring will convert this energy into other forms (kinetic, thermal, sound etc.).
Deriving conservation of momentum for two bodies from Newton's laws.
First assume there are two objects, of mass m1 and m2 travelling towards each other at velocities v1 and v2. First we write Newton's second law in the form 'force is the rate of change of momentum'
This can then be applied to the first mass giving the equation Ft = m1v'1 - m1v1. Using Newton's third law, we know that the force on m2 will be equal and opposite and so the second mass. -Ft = m2v'2 - m2v2.
These two can then be combined to form m1v'1 - m1v1 = -(m2v'2 - m2v2) which rearranges to m1v1 + m2v2 = m1v'1 + m2v'2, which is the law of conservation of momentum for two masses.
In two dimensions, the law of conservation of momentum applies in both senses, so the momentum value must be broken up into its vector components. The total amount of vertical (or north/south or whatever) momentum will be conserved, and will the total amount of horizontal momentum. Therefore, a problem involving this can be treated as two separate one dimensional conservation of momentum problems.
Moment of inertia is the rotational equivalent of mass. It is defined as the sum of (mr2) for every point mass in the system where m = mass and r = the distance form the axis of rotation. This allows dumbbell type arrangements to be calculated, but the following shape formulae should also be known
A 'hoop' or cylinder rotating around the center of the hoop : I = MR2
A solid disk rotating around the center of the disk : I = 1/2MR2
A solid sphere rotating about any axis running through the centre : I = 2/5MR2
Angular momentum is the equivalent of linear momentum : L = Iw (angular momentum = moment of inertia x angular velocity).
All of the quantities and equations in rotational motion are equivalent to others in linear motion. The tables below illustrate this equivalence.
Displacement : s Angular displacement : Ø
Velocity : v Angular velocity : w
Mass : m Moment of inertia : I
Rotational velocity : w = Ø/t
Work done : W = Fs
Work done : W = TØ
Angular momentum : L = Iw
All these can be applied as appropriate to problems.
The write function writes a formatted (multi-line) record to the FILEHANDLE with the associated file format that has the same name per default of the filehandle. This name can be modified by assigning the new name to the $~ variable.
If the contents to be written are more than the page can hold, a form feed, and a special top-of-page format is used to format the new page header before the record is written that has by default the filehandle with "_TOP" appended, or "top" in the current package. But this name can be added to the $^ variable.
From the help page, we have seen that the sample function can take a number of different arguments. x must be a vector of items, size must be a number. Since 1:6 gives a vector of the numbers from 1 to 6, we can set x=1:6 and size=5. Here are 5 examples (note that the first 4 are equivalent, although the actual result will differ due to chance effects when sampling[1]).###The next 4 lines are equivalent, 5 numbers are selected from a list of 1..6
As noted, our "fair die" model is one of sampling with replacement: the same number can appear twice (and indeed does in our data). So our simulation model in R is simply sample(1:6, 5, TRUE)
Here are some very useful websites for you to visit. You've got dictionaries, language exchange websites, everything you'll need!
Online English-Turkish Dictionary with 1,500,000 words and idioms
Manisa Turkish - The Turkish Language explained for English Speakers
Turkish Table of Contents   view ⋅ edit ⋅ talk
I am...
Are you busy today?
You can give your feedback about this page on the talk page.
Flocks of seabirds, whales, dolphins, sharks, and schools of larger fish such as tuna and marlin follow mackerel schools and attack them in sophisticated and cooperative ways.
This is an analysis of the journal article Physical Activity Programs for Refugee Somali Women: Working out in a New Country by Pauline B Guerin, Roda Omar Diiriye, Callie Corrigan and Bernard guerin (2008)
What is the background to the research?
Somali Islamic refugee women face numerous challenges when trying to adapt to their new non-Islamic country of residence. The majority of these women are widows so are the main person responsible for the well-being of their families. Religious and language differences combined with a change in lifestyle from Pastoral and nomadic to a more sedentary urban life,[1] plus a change in diet can all lead to health problems with Somali women having higher rates of overweight/obesity, low fitness levels and low levels of cardio respiratory fitness compared to non-immigrant women[2]  as well as increased risks of developing diabetes, cardiovascular disease and mental health problems. Often these refugees have experienced abuse and trauma in these poorly rationed grim refugee camps [3] and so it is vitally important that their mental, physical and social health is improved and maintained. Achieving and maintaining good levels of physical activity can contribute to the overall good health of these women. The aim of this research was to facilitate opportunities for Somali women to participate in physical activities and to provide suitable facilities for these activities with the co-operation of the community and to identify barriers that prevented their involvement in exercise/ physical activity programs.
This study was carried out when the authors were employed by the Wiakato Institute of Technology in Hamilton, New Zealand. Hamilton has a population of 108,000 people(2002) from various cultural and ethnic backgrounds. The majority of the population living in Hamilton are of European Christian ethnic background, about 18% Maori and only 850-900 are Somali.[4]
What kind of research was this?
The type of research used was qualitative research through the use of Interviews, Observations and general conversations with the Somali Women.
What did the research involve?
Interviews, conversations and observations were used to identify the barriers to exercise and fitness of Somali women in Hamilton. AS a result three exercise programs were initiated with over 100 women participating, with ages ranging from 17 to 67 years. Most of these women had lived in New Zealand for an average of 3.5 years but the range was between 2 months and 7 years. Seventy five percent of the women had young families, the average having 5 children with ages 1–9 years. Education and employment details were not collected for this study but other data from research done by Guerin, Abdi & Guerin 2003 suggest that most Somali women are unemployed and receiving government benefits.
The three exercise programs initiated were: a sport and walking group, a 3 month trial membership at a women-only fitness centre and exercise classes conducted at a community centre. The programs were not operated independently and there was some overlap in membership of the groups.
The exercise classes were conducted at a community centre that had a gym facility. The times of the sessions were negotiated with the women and the gym facility was adapted so the women were not able to be seen as they exercised. The sessions were held three times a week in the evenings for six weeks.
After six weeks the community centre based exercise classes finished. A women-only facility was then approached to provide subsidized 3 month membership for 20 women who were interested in utilizing gym equipment to exercise.
Once the gym memberships had elapsed a walking/sport group was arranged. This was held after dark at a local high school sport field. The group met twice a week where the women were able to job, walk, play soccer or netball as well as other exercises and ball games.
What were the basic results?
The analysis of the three programs were compiled from interviews, conversations and observations during the one year the programs ran. Between eight and forty women attended each of the 16 sessions held at the community centre with the average attendance being 9 sessions(range 0-16) The walking/sport group usually had between 6-15 women attending. The gym membership was limited to 20 members. 27 women who attended the community centre classes, were interviewed and all stated that in the week before being interviewed that they had done less than 2.5 hours of physical activity and no participation in any sport and 96% agreed that they needed to be more physically active. Monitoring of the gym membership attendance was done through using the membership swipe cards and indications were that women regularly attended a few times a week for the three months. When questioned, most women enjoyed both types of exercise programs and 96% wanted the classes to continue.
Several barriers that prevented some women from attending the activities include
What conclusions can we take from this research?
One exercise program is not going to work for everyone. Exercise programs have to be adapted to meet the needs and preferences of individual groups in order to be successful. Information obtained from the Somali women through conversations and interviews indicated that opportunities for physical activity with the provisions that are religiously and culturally appropriate will benefit the women and their community in many ways. Engaging in physical activity decreases weight gain and improves the women's physical health. The opportunity for social relationships and cohesion in the community. The gym programs also provided opportunity for the women to interact with others from the wider community. Identification of the Somali women's needs and adapting the programs accordingly contributed to the success of these programs.
Exercise programs have to be adapted to meet the needs and preferences of individual groups in order to be successful. Constant consultation with members of the community is also vital to the success of these programs as well  as practical issues such as transport, childcare, language difficulties and cost.
Determinants of Physical Activity Among Somali Women Living in Maine John T. DevlinEmail authorDeqa DhalacAsha A. SuldanAna JacobsKhadija GuledKolawole A. Bankole http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10903-011-9469-2
Somali women’s view of physical activity – a focus group study Gerthi Persson, Amina Jama Mahmud, Eva Ekvall Hansson and Eva Lena Strandberg http://bmcwomenshealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1472-6874-14-129
Caring for Somali women: Implications for clinician–patient communication Jennifer Carrolla, Ronald Epsteina, Kevin Fiscellaa, Teresa Gipsona, Ellen Volpee, Pascal Jean-Pierre http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0738399107000250
Knowledge and Beliefs About Health Promotion and Preventive Health Care Among Somali Women in the United States
Jennifer Carroll , Ronald Epstein , Kevin Fiscella University of Rochester School of Medicine , Rochester , New York , USA , Ellen Volpe , Katherine Diaz & Sadiya Omar http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/07399330601179935?scroll=top&needAccess=true
↑ Devlin, John T. et al. "Determinants Of Physical Activity Among Somali Women Living In Maine". Journal of Immigrant and Minority Health 14.2 (2011): 300-306. Web.
↑ Persson, G. "Somali Women's View Of Physical Activity—A Focus Group Study". Physiotherapy 101 (2015): e1198-e1199. Web.
↑ Carroll, Jennifer et al. "Caring For Somali Women: Implications For Clinician–Patient Communication". Patient Education and Counseling 66.3 (2007): 337-345. Web.
↑ Guerin, Pauline B. et al. "Physical Activity Programs For Refugee Somali Women: Working Out In A New Country". Women & Health 38.1 (2003): 83-99. Web.
↑ Persson, G. "Somali Women's View Of Physical Activity—A Focus Group Study". Physiotherapy 101 (2015): e1198-e1199. Web.
↑ Devlin, John T. et al. "Determinants Of Physical Activity Among Somali Women Living In Maine". Journal of Immigrant and Minority Health 14.2 (2011): 300-306. Web.
↑ Carroll, Jennifer et al. "Caring For Somali Women: Implications For Clinician–Patient Communication". Patient Education and Counseling 66.3 (2007): 337-345. Web.
↑ Guerin, Pauline B. et al. "Physical Activity Programs For Refugee Somali Women: Working Out In A New Country". Women & Health 38.1 (2003): 83-99. Web.
↑ Carroll, Jennifer et al. "Knowledge And Beliefs About Health Promotion And Preventive Health Care Among Somali Women In The United States". Health Care for Women International 28.4 (2007): 360-380. Web.
A Wikibookian believes this page should be split into smaller pages with a narrower subtopic.
You can help by splitting this big page into smaller ones. Please make sure to follow the naming policy. Dividing books into smaller sections can provide more focus and allow each one to do one thing well, which benefits everyone.
You can ask for help in dividing this book in the assistance reading room.
Below is a general approach towards the semantic capture of technical rules and their abstraction into business rules.
A series of preparatory help to avoid protracted rules mining exercises, ensure that rules are valuable to the business, and speed the process of creating ‘business’ and not simply ‘technical’ rules. These steps are recommended to build the right organizational framework and to align rule mining with business priorities.
It is important to define the goals and outputs of the rules mining activity. This will vary depending on the business priorities of organizations. For some, the goal may be to address inflexibility or high downtime in a highly valuable and customized application. This may lead to the decision to move to a SOA-enabled packaged application.
Depending on the goal there will be two primary outcomes that can be derived from a rules mining activity:
In some cases, the goal may be to develop business-centric documentation of program code segments. This documentation, valuable as reference for other analysts and subject matter experts, may also be used to decorate high-level design models for the modernized, to-be applications. It would not normally result in executable business rules or inputs into development environments.
In other cases, the exact semantic behavior of edits and calculations in applications needs to be captured as true business rules. The captured semantics will be used as a basis for, and perhaps even directly fed into, target development environments. The outcome of this step will drive decisions regarding technology adoption, resource planning, and the best methods to apply for either type of rule mining.
A low-cost, low-value application of technology for rule mining is the documentation of rules in word processing or spreadsheet applications. This approach will not help address the most resource-intensive portions of rule mining – like analyzing application behavior and locating rules within source code segments.
Runtime simulation technologies that facilitate the capture of user behavior into processes and rules can help from a behavioral aspect. Their main drawback is that they are limited to those test scenarios actually performed within a given time frame – potentially missing out on critical exceptions not usually performed.
Text scanning tools that locate patterns within sources can accelerate the capture of rules based upon fixed patterns within source code (e.g. showing all moves to a variable). These tools typically generate a large number of false positives and tend to lead to technical rather than business rules.
Repository-based technologies that recompile the sources and build a syntactic parse tree can offer the highest value in rule mining. The most advanced automatically detect rules using semantic analysis, e.g. each statement upstream from a point of interest variable and which potentially impacts its value, is mined as a candidate rule.
Rule mining tools may also offer rule management and auditing capabilities, facilitating project workflow and rule maintenance activities by reviewers. They are also able to retain rule traceability to originating sources even when those undergo change (as they often do in a live environment).
Considering the above, the tradeoff of a low-cost approach to rule mining will be in higher manual effort and lower quality of results. This may be acceptable in one-off, small-scale documentation scenarios, but less likely to be so in enterprise level modernization efforts.
Project goals and choice of technology will impact resource allocation. All too often, expectations from the business side are to receive a precisely modeled set of business rules derived from the application semantics, without realizing the complexity of such an effort. On the IT side, practitioners without experience in rules mining or familiarity with the application subject matter are ill-equipped to offer reliable estimates.
An iterative approach toward time and resource estimation may be adopted. Mining rules for a representative sub-set of the application over the first few weeks provides insights into the methods that work best for selected applications, as well as a yardstick by which the overall effort can be estimated.
The logic mined is important because of its business context. After all, logic is a subset of an overarching business process. Mined rules will make sense only when placed into context within the associated process. For example, assigning a prospective customer to an income bracket based upon her zip code might have different significance in credit approval and marketing campaign processes (witness insurance companies advertising that they will only look at past behavior and not credit ratings to set premiums).
Further, viewing applications in a business process context is important in order to identify priorities for rules mining activities. An enterprise commonly views itself in terms of its processes – registering a new customer, underwriting a policy, receiving payment, registering a claim, depositing funds into an account and so on. Some of these processes are of critical importance to the organization, while others are simply commodity functionality. Some processes may be meeting service level agreements set by line of business executives, and others not. Where modernization activities will focus will vary based on this calculus.
Once the business processes have been modeled, application elements that support the chosen processes are identified. Historically, these applications were organized in silos, making the high-level match a straightforward step. At a more granular level, however, a monolithic order management application may handle customer enrollment, credit approval, order entry, and order fulfillment. If an organization is only interested in mining rules for the customer enrollment and order entry components, a mapping exercise between processes and their supporting application portfolio elements will be beneficial.
With repository-based software, application objects are registered and syntactic and semantic relationships within them are automatically captured.
Cases of overlap are noted, where a program or data store serves multiple business processes.
Example – Customer Orders
In Figure 1 below, the Customer Master, Order Master, and Inventory data stores are within the scope for rule mining despite the fact that they support additional processes outside of the scope. Similarly, the Customer Handling program is monolithic and includes logic for Credit Approval, outside of the scope of this effort.
Figure 1: Business Process Mapping to Application Objects
In the previous steps, an application has been inventoried and it has been understood, at a high level, where the required business processes of interest reside within application artifacts.  The next task will be to decompose the application into its constituent logical elements. A key factor continues to be contextualization. Elements of the application that are not relevant to organizational priorities are excluded. This scoping via context allows us to also see the ‘boundaries’ of rules and their associated impacts.
In this step, the application is further decomposed into its detailed components. The goal is to have a sufficiently detailed collection of artifacts to serve as input to the rule mining step.
Here too, technology can help. Repository-based software can create a parse tree of detailed application objects and their relationships. This information is then presented in multiple graphical and textual views, synchronized with each other to facilitate context-sensitive analysis.
For example, a context view will display all data field declarations, procedures, and procedure calls within a program in a compressed and outlined mode. A detailed source code view will display code segments corresponding to the context view, allowing for quick navigation through the program via the context view. Traversal through the context view will enable a user to gain quick insights into a program's structure and complexity.
Other views available at the detailed program level include diagrammatic control flow between paragraphs, logic flowcharts within paragraphs, execution paths and runtime simulators for chosen conditional outcomes. Such tools are used to gain detailed insights into an application prior to actually starting the rule mining phase.
Without the benefit of automated parsing tools, value can still be gained by conducting a manual inspection and walkthrough of application artifacts.
In the process of reviewing and analyzing an application, elements not to be included in the scope of rule mining, for functional and technical reasons, are marked. These may include standard utilities, reports, system routines and out-of-scope business processes. In the example from Figure 1, this would include the artifacts related to Credit Approval and Order Fulfillment, out of scope due to their nature as commodity, standardized business processes.
The identification of exclusions illustrates a benefit to be derived from the up-front business contextualization steps described above. If they had not been conducted, a "broad sweep" approach would have resulted in a higher investment at the rule mining and SME review stages, where rules from the commodity business processes would first have been mined and then later discarded as irrelevant.
A major challenge with mining rules from applications is that it can be difficult to navigate the various variables and naming conventions within. These conventions have often a tenuous link to business terminology, and can make understanding the logic from a business perspective difficult.
A best practice is to refine these technical terms to create more a more business-centric view. This can be achieved through glossary of application objects and related business terms. Objects could be data fields, paragraphs, programs, data sources, and other application objects of interest.
Sources of information for a glossary of terms can be business documentation, data dictionaries, database schemas, user notifications, and even source code comments.
Automated rule mining tools offer a facility to propagate values for repeating patterns (commonly called ‘tokens’) within your application. For instance, the token 'ACCT-' may be replaced everywhere by 'Account-'. A tool would then use the glossary business names to replace technical terminology in the automated construction of candidate rules.
The desired rules format is established in advance. The same rule to set an order discount may take alternate forms, such as
(i) Declarative form: "Each applicant who is a senior AAA member from California receives a 5% discount."
(ii) If-Then-Else form: If an applicant is a senior, then if she is an AAA member, then if she resides in California, assign a 5% discount.
(iii) As an entry in a decision table:
It can be useful to attach to a mined rule additional informational and workflow attributes, such as:
Rule type (I/O, calculation, validation, security)
Audit status (approved, not approved)
Workflow status (extracted, working, accepted, rejected)
Transition (valid, requires modification, duplicate, complete)
Code segment location (start, end)
A rule will also be placed within a hierarchy. All rules representing a decision or executing under a given set of conditions may be grouped into a Rule Set. Rule Sets will be grouped into higher level activity nodes reflecting the business processes they currently participate in.
If you are planning to populate an executable Business Rules Management System (BRMS), you will want to define a schema that is easily transferable into the specific target environment chosen. If the target environment is not yet known, refer to available business rule standards.
Enterprise rule mining is usually a multi-step process involving practitioners with disparate skill sets – including consultants, developers, architects, analysts, and subject matter experts. Often key personnel will be distracted by other projects and it is therefore crucial that a common workflow be defined and documented.
Following the guidelines provided further in this document, a high-level workflow may appear as:
Each step should be defined in detail, following an adopted methodology, project scope and constraints and rule mining technology usage. There may be multiple iterations of the first few steps until the rules are in an approved, final format.
At this point rules are mined from the application artifacts mapped to the scope of the business processes identified in previous steps. Rule mining tools help you assure that excluded artifacts are not included in scope by enabling the organization of an application into sub-groupings. Rules will be mined for a sub-grouping and not for the entire application.
The specific rule mining approach taken is primarily driven by application patterns and the desired output.
A top-down, or process-oriented approach starts from an examination of the user interface in an online application, or from the job flow in a batch application.
In an online application, a transaction may be invoked by a user selecting a menu option or entering a value to the screen. The fields that define the message or event that is sent from the screen to the interfacing application are identified. Each field in the triggering message may be considered a seed field for rule mining.
Using a seed field as a starting point, all of the downstream data impacts to the field including all conditional permutations are documented. Each data transformation (move into another field or calculation), represents a candidate business rule to be captured.
Rule mining software tools assists in this task by visualizing a data impact path forward for each seed field to each point where it is either populated by new values or used as input to other fields via comparisons, value propagation and calculations. At each such point, the tool can be used to document the underlying business rules. Automated rule detection methods can also be applied to capture each screen field edit as a candidate rule.
In a batch application, the concept is similar. Part of a job flow, e.g. a Job Control Language or group thereof that realizes a business process is identified, and all rules within individual programs relevant to that process are mined.
In Figure 4 above, note the format of the resulting "Derived Candidate Rules". Automatically detected from a Cobol program, they resemble its constructs, with variable names replaced by the Glossary definitions. These will later undergo review and transformation to a more businesslike form. While this example is demonstrated for a Cobol application, advanced mining tools may apply to a broad array of languages from PL/ and Natural to Visual Basic and Java.
A bottom-up, or data-oriented approach starts from an examination of system outputs – data sent to files (both batch and online), screens and output messages (online only).
Following this approach, rules are captured by starting from an interesting data point and identifying all logic impacting that point. For example, an Order Discount field is impacted by discounts calculated upstream from it, depending on the customer's location of residence.
Rule mining technologies are particularly well suited to this approach. Through visual inspection or a repository query, data outputs of interest can be quickly identified. Then, automated rule detection routines are able to capture a candidate rule for each statement that impacts the point of interest. Because of the pre-organization into contextualized sub-groupings mentioned above, the search results will be constrained by the subset of business processes deemed relevant for rule mining.
Inspection of relevant DBMS tables may also produce rules embedded in keys and any data rules for referential integrity and value constraints. Once all data points of interest have been covered, all application logic of interest oriented toward existing outputs has essentially been mined.
A hybrid approach combines the two approaches described above:
The first step is a top-down oriented capture of the relevant transactions;
For each transaction, bottom-up rule mining is performed, including only data outputs that have not yet been already mined for another transaction.
The benefit of this approach is to extend the coverage of rule mining while avoiding repetition.
Relating to the examples shown in Figures 4 and 5 above, following a strictly top-down approach resulted in repetitive efforts for the Quantity and Price fields since they both traversed identical downstream data impacts. Coverage was also partial since not all of the rules for Customer Discount were discovered.
Let’s consider an extended case involving both Order Entry and Proposal Issuance processes. Adopting an exclusive bottom-up approach would have also resulted in repetition, mining rules for upstream data impacts that "hit" multiple outputs (e.g. customer discount rules). Using the hybrid approach, we would first mine rules from all outputs of the order transaction, then only outputs of the proposal transaction particular to it.
At this point, after mining candidate rules from your application, verification and correction is a necessary step to ensure the correctness and completeness of the rules.
Does each rule correctly reflect the underlying application behavior? If automated rule detection technology has been used, a rule at the point of interest (seed field) will be preceded by rules upstream from it, possibly with triggers, control conditions, and automatic rule set groupings. Each one of them (or a chosen subset) is reviewed for accuracy and corrections are made where needed, until the results are deemed satisfactory.
Does a rule or rule set appear twice for the same application process? This can occur when rules are mined separately for two separate outputs that share upstream functionality. Or it can be a result of simple oversight like multiple team members inadvertently mining rules from the same code base. A rule attribute is used to mark duplication.
Another form of redundancy occurs when semantically identical rules were mined separately and with different names from different processes (e.g. Order Detail and Proposal). This will be dealt with in the next step, when you transform candidate rules to business rules format.
Beyond predefined exceptions, has all of the application functionality been covered? A rule coverage report, matching mined rule sources to overall sources, can provide the answer.
Can each mined rule be considered a candidate business rule? Although this is not yet the SME review step, there may be certain constructs that, upon inspection, are clearly irrelevant and should not be included in the scope of rules for review. Security verification rules, housekeeping routines and out-of-scope operations may all fall into this category. Indicate relevance on one of the rule attributes.
Transformation of Candidate Rules to Business Rules Format
In the previous steps, candidate rules have been mined and reviewed, reflecting legacy application behavior. These rules closely follow the application's procedural flow and operations.
A transformational step is now required, to convert candidate rules to actual business rules ready for review. This step is conducted either by application experts, rule architects, or subject matter experts. After review and conversion, the business rules captured reflect the current, as-is state to serve as a baseline or comparison to the target environment.
If the candidate rules were constructed manually, they may already be in the chosen business rules format. In other cases, they may have been captured in a technical format (like cut and paste from source code) and will require some modification and regrouping.
If an automated rule detection tool was used, the resulting candidate rules may somewhat resemble business rules, by using the glossary definitions to place business names within rule names, data elements and controlling conditions. However, even after the rule verification step, most of the approved candidate rules will need to be adapted to conform to a chosen business rule notation.
Due to their procedural nature, legacy applications tend to lock business logic into process-specific silos. However, true business rules are independent of process and should be maintained as such.
In our example, rules for the Order Detail Entry and Proposal Entry events have been separately mined and placed in Rule sets. Are they all unique? Upon further examination, most of the logic in them is identical by design. Analyzing the results from a business perspective, there is commonality between portions of any customer document – whether Order or Proposal.
From a tooling perspective, at this point it may make sense to switch over to a Business Rule Management System, importing the mined rules from the rule mining tool as described in the Integration section below.
Using a BRMS or a visual modeling tool, a Fact Model reflecting the significant business entities and their interrelationships discovered in your existing applications is constructed. These will link to the mined business rules and serve as a baseline for the to-be rules model.
In our example, part of the Fact Model would be:
Once this is done, the business rules are normalized to represent the desired business level semantics:
…whereby the Customer Document Handling rules apply to both Orders and Proposals.
At this point, the generated rule grouping and sequencing are considered. One point of attention is the triggering relationships between rules and other rules and rule sets. Since candidate rules are often derived from a 3rd generation language application (like Cobol or PL/I), they are automatically sequenced in a procedural manner. Transformation to a declarative mode will eliminate procedural elements that are non-business in nature.
As shown in Figure 8 below, declarative relationships that reflect true business requirements will be modeled as triggers between rules and other rules or rule sets. In the majority of BRMS] environments, a single rule may trigger multiple rules and rule sets, where the sequencing of each triggered rule or rule set is pre-compiled or resolved only at runtime.
Figure 8: As-is Business Rule Model (Event-driven)
Once mined rules have been transformed into business rules, they are handed over to subject matter experts (SMEs) and / or business analysts for review and approval.
Normally, SMEs will not make major changes to the rules at this point. Rule mining tools may include rule attribution capabilities to aid the SMEs and enable them to mark up the business rules as
Approved or rejected;
Reclassified to another category;
Annotated with additional information in textual description attributes.
Rule mining tools also often offer web portals with a functional focus on predefined SME activities. This can greatly accelerate the review and approval process.
Business rule reports are created in either hardcopy or digital formats. Rule mining tools produce reports and diagrams depicting detailed or summary rule information within your chosen context: hierarchy level, grouping, search result. These reports serve both as reference in the review steps and as documentation of record.
Depending upon the adopted modernization strategy, integration requirements with other environments will vary.
Redevelopment with a business rule approach will typically leverage a BRMS authoring environment. These tools typically include XML import capabilities, which will be used to define an "as-is" business rule space, allowing rule developers to selectively re-use candidate rules deemed relevant for the target environment. This will provide valuable (and sometimes crucial) traceability from newly deployed rules back to their legacy origins.
This approach typically involves building Java and .NET applications with comprehensive developer toolkits. Often, UML models will be used to define logical application views prior to actual code generation.
In these environments, mined business rules can be attached as behaviors in UML classes that leverage them. For example, an Order_Invoice class including Order_Discount as an attribute, may also include Calculate_Order_Discount as a class behavior. This behavior can be derived (and potentially imported) from the mined business rule performing the same function.
Process Management Business Process Management (BPM) tools facilitate process model creation and linkage to underlying rules and executable services. They also include the ability to define workflow rules (using BPEL) to govern the manual and automated transitions between activity nodes.
In this context, each activity node may be realized by business rules. Many-to-many relationships may exist between rule sets and supported activities. Populating BPM processes with their relevant mined "as-is" business rules can "close the loop" for business analysts and significantly advance IT / business alignment goals.
Vendor offerings also include requirement tools that enable the definition of high level use cases, detailed flowcharts and activities for effective application development and management. In these environments, mined business rules can be imported and attached as either core requirements or as textual annotations to activity nodes.
Service enablement of existing applications involves code refactoring and deployment as service capsules. The rule mining step can be invaluable in locating fine-grained services within source code and serving up the required service components. For example, the results of automatic rule detection for the calculation of an order discount will include all code segments leading up to the final calculation. By creating a component slice with that code (and its dependents) only, the order discount calculation can be redeployed as a service.
We expect most applications to continue and maintained for many years into the future. Having mined rules from them, it is crucial that they continue to be updated and kept synchronized with future application changes. Rule mining tools offer maintenance and management capabilities, including
Automatic alignment of rules with their original code segments even when they have moved as a result of overall source code changes;
Audit trails for manual rule changes;
"Changer" routines allowing for individual or mass changes, post- rule mining.
A well-defined approach to business rule mining will allow for business contextualization early on in the process. Not only will the contextualization step help frame mined rules correctly, it will also reduce the rule mining investment to focus only on critical and dynamic business processes of interest. Regardless of the application modernization strategy adopted, the best practices and tool-assisted approaches described here will help you achieve your goals at a lower cost, with less repetition and higher quality results.
↑  See Business Rules Manifesto.
↑  SBVR (Semantics of Business Vocabulary and Business Rules), adopted by OMG in 2005, is a meta-model for developing semantic models of business vocabularies and business rules.
↑  Also see [OMG's PRR (Production Rule Representation) specification.
NEUER, Mannes. Context is King: A Practical Approach to Rule Mining
To continue, your computer must display Persian. The box below should show these Persian letters on the far right:
If they are different or in the wrong order, see Persian Computing.
In lessons 1, 2, and 3, you learned some greetings, the first twenty-nine letters of the Persian Alphabet, and how to spell and pronounce several words with those letters.
Dialogue: ‹esm-e šomâ ci e?›
The dialogue below and those in subsequent lessons are shown in both Persian script and UniPers.  Some of the Persian letters used below are explained later in this lesson, so read the UniPers transcription for now, then come back to read the Persian script version after completing this lesson.
‹bebaxšid, esm-e šomâ ci-st?›“Excuse me, what is your name?”
‹esm-e man rezâ-st. va šomâ?›“My name is Reza.  And you?”
‹esm-e man širin e.›“My name is Shirin.”
‹xošbaxtam, xânom-e širin.›“Nice to meet you, Miss Shirin.”
Shirin meets Reza.
Remember to write from right to left and to keep the base lines even.
Certain combinations of letters are written in a combined form known as a ligature.
Like the accent mark over the e in café, Persian diacritics (symbols written above or below the letters) are not actual letters in the Persian alphabet.
Tashdid is a mark that looks like a small, curly w, placed above a consonant to double or strengthen it. It may be omitted, but is used in many situations for clarity.
The diacritic ‹hamze›, isolated and over ‹he›:
In children's books and some other learning resources, short vowel are marked using the following symbols:
Recognizing letters:(To check your answers, click “[show ▼]”.)
What are the names of and sounds represented by the following letters?
The letter ‹vâv›, which represents the consonant ‹v›, the long vowel ‹u›, or the short vowel ‹o›.
The letter ‹ye›, which represents the long vowel ‹i› or ‹ay› in a dipthong, e.g. ‹ye›, ‹ay›, ‹ey›, ....
The letter ‹nun›, which represents the sound ‹n›.
The letter ‹he›, which represents the consonant ‹h› or the short vowel ‹e›.
The letter ‹mim›, which represents the sound ‹m›.
Non-connecting letters.
Which seven Persian letters do not join with the letter that follows?
Reading words:(To check your answers, click “[show ▼]”.)
Read these words by breaking them down into their component parts.
The Persian script:(To check your answers, click “[show ▼]”.)
Determine which of these words has unwritten vowels (vowels not included in the spelling of the word).
No, the one vowel ‹â› is written, like all long vowels in Persian.
No, the vowel ‹â› is written, like all long vowels in Persian.
This exercise is incomplete.  Help the English Wikibooks Persian Language course by completing it.
Yes, the vowel ‹â› in the middle of the word is written, but the short vowel ‹e› at the beginning of the word is unwritten.
This exercise is incomplete.  Help the English Wikibooks Persian Language course by completing it.
Word recognition:(To check your answers, click “[show ▼]”.)
See if you can recognize these familiar words.
In this lesson, you learned the final letters of the Persian Alphabet and some diacritics.  You also learned about a Persian tradition called ‹haft sin›.
Congratulations!  You now know how to read, write, and pronounce Persian words!
‹xânom›    /xɒːnom/ — “Miss”
All vocabulary Lessons 1 - 4   edit
Noun: gentleman, sir, Mr.
Phrase: How are you? (informal)
Pronoun: what?
Phrase: May God keep you. (Goodbye.)
Noun: (person) wife, lady, Miss
Phrase: I’m fine.
Phrase: Nice to meet you.
Noun: Persian New Year’s tradition of “seven S’s”
This section of the Persian Language Wikibook is a stub.You can help Wikibooks by expanding it. (See the Persian course Planning page.)
There are several potential sources of information on the evolution of intelligence available to researchers, as well as a number of different ways evolutionary thinking has been applied to other problems relevant to cognitive science. This section will provide a brief description of some methodologies.
Biological evolution definitely has access to the broad differentiation between brain regions and the varying length of developmental time available to those regions (resulting in changes in size and complexity). (Finlay) Gene expression and epigenesis likely has a significant role here, but much more research is needed on the topic.
One of the least ambiguous examples is the evolution of lateralization. A single change, the delay in the development of the left brain, results in an incredible amount of functional localization. (Schore 2001)
Ethology & neuroethology – this distinction is important
“(i) proximate, what we would call
Tinbergen, N. (1963). On the aims and methods of ethology. Zeitschrift für
Tierpsychologie, 20, 410-433.
As Blevins (2001, 2004) has pointed out, the acquisition of grammars is subject to cultural transmission, and therefore features of grammars may be analysed in terms of cultural evolution as discussed above. From this proposal it follows that languages can be conceived of as being adapted to the sources of variation typical of the speech apparatus and human learning biases, (e.g. Christiansen et al. 1997) with the implication that many proposed linguistic universals are better analysed as being the result of diachronic and synchronic forces interacting to create statistical optima with varying degrees of stability diachronically and therefore differing frequencies amongst the corpora of known grammars synchronically. This is an interesting application of evolutionary theory to a field from which it is typically absent, but it has not yet developed into any coherent research programme. Furthermore, for a variety of technical reasons it is unclear how exactly it might ever develop into one. Nonetheless, the underlying insight remains valid.
It is clear that the above discussion of evolution in all its guises has profound implications for our understanding of cognition. However, it remains unclear precisely how. There is no universally defined field, or even theory, of cognitive evolution. Little is known definitely, and as such, the underlying assumptions brought to its study by the researchers’ varied backgrounds can be difficult to challenge. The result is a splintered and diverse literature that can be difficult to integrate.
Nanomedicine is really an interdisciplinary subject. It includes subject such as Nanoengineering, chemical engineering, bioengineering, chemistry, material science, biology, physics, pharmacy, and medicine. In order to ensure a drug is effectively taken place inside the body, the biological system, the chemical reactivity of the drug, and the physical transportation inside the body must be well considered. Nanomedicine is a field that is being heavily studied in recent decades.
There are more and more innovative ways to make an already known drug more effective, such as combining a drug with two or three materials to achieve a goal that just drug alone cannot achieve.
Example Quantum Dot – Aptamer Conjugates
In cancer treatment, it is important to see whether the cancer drug is killing tumor tissue or normal healthy tissue. Therefore, imaging is an important application. Fluorescent and quantum dots are two good indicators. Quantum dots, a type of semiconductor nanocrystal that functions similarily as fluorescent, has been increasingly utilized in biological system and labeling due to their unique optical properties, including board range of absorption with narrow photoluminescence spectra, high quantum yield, low photobleaching, and resistance to chemical degradation. The surface of quantum dot can be modified such that antibodies, aptamers, or peptide bonds can be attached to it. Now this complex exhibits several properties that are useful for cancer therapy.
The specific example given here comprises of quantum dots, aptamers, and doxorubicin conjugate (as the schematic shown below) that targets and kills prostate cancer cells. The quantum dot fluorescent functions as an imaging tool. One end of the RNA aptamers attaches to the surface of quantum dot and the other end attaches to doxorubicin. This aptamer also functions as an active ligand that targets cancer cells. Lastly, doxorubicin is a well-known cancer therapeutic agent that also has slight fluorescent property. The fluorescent of doxorubicin is too weak to be detected; therefore, it is not viable. However, if quantum dots are used, the fluorescent signal inside thin human body tissue can be detected.
When the quantum dot is by itself, it has a fluorescent color of green. That is known as the “on” state. In order to temporarily “turn off” the fluorescent of quantum dot, the fluorescent property of doxorubicin becomes crucial in this conjugate. When two materials both exhibit a fluorescent property are close together, they “quench” each other. In this case, they can temporarily disable the fluorescent property of each other. Doxorubicin exhibits a red fluorescent, while this specific quantum dot exhibits a green fluorescent. When the two form a conjugate, the two colors are able to “cancel” each other. The ratio to cancel doxorubicin to quantum dot is approximately 8 to 1.
Before this conjugate enters the cancer cell, this conjugate is in the “off” state. When the conjugate is being transported to the tumor site in blood streams by both convection and diffusion, the conjugate is able to target tumor cell due to the aptamer ligands on the conjugate. After the conjugate enters through endocytosis into the tumor cell, the conjugate is sent to lysosome. The lysosome is able to digest aptamer, breaking the conjugate. The release of doxorubicin recovers the fluorescent property of the quantum dot back to the “on” state, enabling imaging and detection. The released doxorubicin moves to the nucleus to kill the cancer cell. The figure shown below is a schematic of the conjugate inside the cancer cell.
This innovative conjugate is able to not only target the cancer cell but also provide imaging inside the cancer cell. There are numerous other methods that is yet to be discovered to achieve more effective targeted drug delivery.
Bagalkot, Vaishali, Liangfang Zhang, Etgar Levy-Nissenbaum, Sangyong Jon, Philip W. Kantoff, Robert Langer, and Omid C. Farokhzad. "Quantum Dot−Aptamer Conjugates for Synchronous Cancer Imaging, Therapy, and Sensing of Drug Delivery Based on Bi-Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer."Nano Letters 7.10 (2007): 3065-070. Print.
Height: 0.7m/2'4"
Weight: 1kg/2.0lb
Gender Distribution: 50% Male
Move types which are good on Misdreavus: Dark , Ghost
Move types which are bad on Misdreavus: Bug, Poison
Move types which don't effect Misdreavus:¹ Fighting, Normal
All other move types are normal effectiveness on Misdreavus.
¹ - This immunity can be eliminated if the attacking Pokemon uses Foresight or Odor Sleuth on Misdreavus; switching either Pokemon ends this effect.
GS/C/RS/FL: Attract, Double Team, Flash, Frustration, Hidden Power, Protect, Psychic, Rain Dance, Rest, Return, Shadow Ball, Sunny Day, Thief, Thunder, Toxic
GS/C: Curse, Defense Curl, Dream Eater, Endure, Headbutt, Nightmare, Psych Up, Sleep Talk, Snore, Swagger, Swift, Zap Cannon
RS/FL: Aerial Ace, Calm Mind, Facade, Secret Power, Shock Wave, Skill Swap, Snatch, Taunt, Torment
Questions on using MINC: MINC-users mailing list : MINC-usersbic.mni.mcgill.ca  http://www.bic.mni.mcgill.ca/mailman/listinfo/minc-users
Questions on MINC development: MINC-development mailing list : MINC-developmentbic.mni.mcgill.ca http://www.bic.mni.mcgill.ca/mailman/listinfo/minc-development
Trainz Appendices or Appendixes    Trainz Asset Maintenance and Creation
TOC | Beginnings | Fun | AM&C | Creation | InBook Refs | ORP Refs:  • Index • Containers • Kinds • Tags | Appendixes  • Vers
Be advised this new Trainz Wikibooks topic page is rough and incomplete. It was last edited on 29 March 2021, and is still under heavy construction.This Page UNDERCONSTRUCTION:Content here is likely to be changed significantly in a short amount of time. All Trainzer's and Wikibookians with knowledge in this subject are welcome to help out.
Background, Introductory history
Trainz, almost from its inception, used a data structure introduced with Trainz 1.0 SP3, the obsolete-table to allow Content to be superceded by a different, presumably newer better version of an asset.  By the time Trainz UTC was coming together, the KUID and KUID2 succession system was invented, leaving both methods as legal alternatives.
There are several problems with the use of obsolete-tables — and most of them emanating from Auran/N3V's inhouse content creation team's over use of the tables to maintain kuid identifiers with negative author indexes.  This dubious strategy has long outlived its utility, and should have been retired with the introduction of the kuid2 capabilities, which always point both forward and back in time to related generations of changed asset releases and by inference, to any later iteration. The base kuid identifier is applicable to the same asset, so a parent-child relationship is always explicit, and unlike obsolete-table enclosing kuids, which have their own base kuid with no specific relationship to the older kuid, assets sharing the same base kuid identifier are predictable--the newer generation is of a higher suffix, not a different (and unknowable!) random kuid.
On its face, this may seem like small beer, but in the multiplication of the practices by numbers of content creator over twenty years, in absolute terms, the numbers of disconnected next generation kuids is simply staggering.  The great majority of missing assets in any sizable downloaded route will suffer from this problem with about 50% of the unknown kuids being precisely because until both assets are in the local Content Manager data base, there is no way to know that relationship exists between two different base kuid identifiers.
The problem has also been exacerbated by N3V's nearly consistent practice of upping the iteration with each major retail release (and Major TBV plateau)—again (per differential binary comparison) with no particularly significant change to base component files except the identity within the new kuid and the revised obsolete-table.
As illustrative of the problem, consider the succession of an gravel-less 'bridge track' (key word "bridgetrack" in fact in dependent bridge kinds!) used as a linked resource asset in dozens, possibly hundreds of bridges (Some content creators create their own, others default to the N3V built-ins, swelling the count and size of the problem!):
The line items without identifiers are reported as 'unknown':
Which one came first, and in what order did they replace the previous? When an asset only knows what is in its kuid-table and obsolete-table, and the two don't both show in CM, there is an information gap which the GUI's can't overcome... they don't know what on-hand kuid to substitute for the older number in the kuid-table.
To be complete, this problem may be mitigated with changes to the data communication with the DLS and post-TS2012 Content Managers.  There appears to be extra information available, probably in a 'side list of linked kuids' that is available to TANE and TRS19 which does not get reported to or used by the design of the older Content Managers.  This is evident in the reported content of the above list.  The list returned by TS12 for the very same 'show asset versions' query is quite different:
So we can conclude <kuid:-25:196> superseded TS09/TS10 era's <kuid:-1:100673>, and nothing more.  Certainly not that its grandparent was a particular specific ubiquitous kuid dating back to TBV 1.3 and Trainz 1.0—which is what that newly downloaded older route or bridge may list as a dependency.  Bam, information gap, even to the software.  Which segues into the other related issue.  Generally superseding assets were assigned the very same Trainz-build (TBV), likely to expand international visibility and utility to a new language group added to the standard releases' asset queues.
<kuid  : Author ID# : Base Kuid index >
<kuid2 : Author ID# : Base Kuid index : Version Suffix>
Specifically the most common Auran 'Author Identifier' kuid-parts, spanning twenty years of growth are: {id#: -1, -3, -10, -12, -14, -16, -18, -25, -26, -101, -105 and lately many +523}; emphasis added to the ones with the most codes.
Ironically, testing and comparisons have shown the most of the successor kuids in the Auran genealogies are graphically and pragmatically identical assets, with the iterative changes mainly being focused on adding new internationalization data-names and descriptions (See: username-XX and description-XX) when a release was translated into other languages.
Other independent creators, '3rd Party Content' originators, causing widespread problems using obsolete tables rather than a generational kuid are a handful of the oldest group of content creators, including two of the most prolific steam engine originating modelers, maestros paulhobbs and bdaneal, who specialize in British and North American steam locomotives and rolling stock, respectively. Unfortunately, generally locating a specific missing kuid is problematic, and many are shrouded as unindexed parts of kits.  But which kit should be looked for and downloaded?  Others, especially a few key dependencies by Mr. Paul Hobbs were only released as part of a payware route of yesteryear—which aren't available now, and have been superceded in the routes replacement by a payware 'alleged upgrade', leaving the poor sod simply desiring to use a derivative reskinned asset with a missing dependency.  In this case, perhaps one that is incurable.[note 1]
Decentralized base kuids, and source locations
In the case of the later type, there seems to be an overreliance on private 3rd party websites to distribute full data sets.  Many of their locomotives in particular utilize a low poly, often invisible mesh as an anchor mesh providing orientation and the origin, axes of a coordinate system to provide anchor points to which other meshes attach. This sort of mesh can grow organically as parts are added, or have a particular anchor point moved in 3D spatial co-ordinates.
In the case of such gorgeous steam locomotives as both are known for, there is a definite mechanical advantage to the method: when the separately configured bits of something as bulging, bulky, and posessing so many moving parts, each with their own motion to animate, working a data set individually enables them to debug each part as they progress each subsystem over the months it takes to complete such a model. The same degree of complexity rarely applies to most Auran/N3V sourced models, which in the greatest cases generally have a much more mundane and uncomplicated  mission.
This page is a stub of an intended page, its' outline, or otherwise a page in major ways temporarily incomplete relative to plans for future contents Trainz Wikibook writing and in-progress overhaul. You can help Wikibooks and the Trainz  Wikibook project by adding to it and expanding it.
In the current state of scientific knowledge, quantum mechanics is the theory
The way that quantum mechanics has been obtained is very different
Gravitational interaction is difficult to describe with the quantum
(QED). This will not presented in this book, so the reader should
The goal of this chapter is to present the mathematical formalism of quantum
In Kdenlive, a project is made of clips. These can be whole audio or video files, or segments of files you add to the project.
If you drag a file onto the timeline that is not in the project (for instance, if you drag a DV file straight from Konqueror to Kdenlive), then the file will be automatically added to the project for you.
You can add clips to the Project List yourself. Either use the Project List context menu (right click on the window), or the Project menu on the menu bar. Select 'Add Clips' to bring up a file dialog in which you can select the clip you wish to add to this project. As long as the clips are valid, they will appear in the Project List.
You can delete clips from your project by selecting 'Delete Clip' via the clip context menu (right click) or from the Project menu.  When you delete a clip from the Project List, this will also remove any clips on the timeline that are using it.
Use Clean Project to remove any clips from your project that are currently unused. This is great if your Project List has become cluttered and you want to get a concise view of which clips exist. Cleaning a project will not alter your final edit in any way --- the only clips that are removed are those that are no longer in use anywhere.
The capital (of a country) is the political center of a country.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
At least 13 soldiers have been captured by the Taliban after a helicopter crash landed in Afghanistan, killing three of those on board.
Afghanistan zhirshengji zhuihhuii, jishahng 3 rern siiwarng, zhihshaao 13'g shihbing beih Taliban furluu.
Matrices A and B are said to be similar to one another if there exists an invertable matrix T such that:
If there exists such a matrix T, the matrices are similar. Similar matrices have the same eigenvalues. If A has eigenvectors v1, v2 ..., then B has eigenvectors u given by:
Some matricies are similar to diagonal matrices using a transition matrix, T. We will say that matrix A is diagonalizable if the following equation can be satisfied:
Where D is a diagonal matrix. An n × n square matrix is diagonalizable if and only if it has n linearly independent eigenvectors.
.
Therefore, if the matrix has n distinct eigenvalues, the matrix is diagonalizable, and the diagonal entries of the diagonal matrix are the corresponding eigenvalues of the matrix.
Consider the situation where a matrix A has 1 or more complex conjugate eigenvalue pairs. The eigenvectors of A will also be complex. The resulting diagonal matrix D will have the complex eigenvalues as the diagonal entries. In engineering situations, it is often not a good idea to deal with complex matrices, so other matrix transformations can be used to create matrices that are "nearly diagonal".
If the matrix A does not have a complete set of eigenvectors, that is, that they have d eigenvectors and n - d generalized eigenvectors, then the matrix A is not diagonalizable. However, the next best thing is acheived, and matrix A can be transformed into a Jordan Cannonical Matrix. Each set of generalized eigenvectors that are formed from a single eigenvector basis will create a jordan block. All the distinct eigenvectors that do not spawn any generalized eigenvectors will form a diagonal block in the Jordan matrix.
Define the following functions recursively (like the definitions for sum, product and concat above), then turn them into a fold:
Define the following functions using foldl1 or foldr1:
Use a fold (which one?) to define reverse :: [a] -> [a], which returns a list with the elements in reverse order.
Note that all of these are Prelude functions, so they will be always close at hand when you need them. (Also, that means you will want to use slightly different names for testing your answers in GHCi.)
--Using foldl'; you will want to import Data.List in order to do the same.
Write your own definition of scanr, first using recursion, and then using foldr. Do the same for scanl first using recursion then foldl.
-- An alternative scanl with poorer performance. The problem is that
-- last and init, unlike head and tail, must run through the entire
-- list, and (++) does the same with its first argument.
-- This implementation has poor performance due to (++), as explained
-- for scanl2Slow. In general, using (++) to append to a list
-- repeatdely is not a good idea.
In the efficient scanr implementations above, we use head and tail as a way to avoid having to break down the list argument with pattern matching in the where clause only to assemble it back in the right-hand side. In the Pattern matching chapter, we will see how as-patterns allow us to reach the same effect without needing head.
Write a returnDivisible :: Int -> [Int] -> [Int] function which filters a list of integers retaining only the numbers divisible by the integer passed as first argument. For integers x and n, x is divisible by n if (mod x n) == 0 (note that the test for evenness is a specific case of that).
--or, if you prefer to use filter...
Write a function choosingTails :: [[Int]] -> [[Int]] using list comprehension syntax with appropriate guards (filters) for empty lists returning a list of tails following a head bigger than 5:choosingTails  [[7,6,3],[],[6,4,2],[9,4,3],[5,5,5]]
Does the order of guards matter? You may find it out by playing with the function of the preceding exercise.
The boolean conditions in a list comprehension are evaluated in order, so if you swapped the conditions like this:
If one of the l turned out to be an empty list the program would try to apply head on it, which would cause an error. Putting not (null l) first causes the program to, when it meets an empty list, to short-circuit the conditional - that is, ignore the second condition since the first one being false is enough for rejecting the list - thus avoiding doing head [] and the error that follows.
Alternatively you may filter by pattern matching. Only non-empty lists match (l:ll)
Over this section we've seen how list comprehensions are essentially syntactic sugar for filter and map. Now work in the opposite direction and define alternative versions of the filter and map using the list comprehension syntax.
--no need for any condition, as all x will be accepted
Rewrite doubleOfFirstForEvenSeconds using filter and map instead of list comprehension.
--isEven, naturally, remains the same.
-- a small teaser - using the (.) function composition operator which will be formally introduced on "More on functions".
A PDF version is available. (corrected A0112, A0072)File size: 937 KB (info)
These lessons are based on SpanishPod newbie lessons for beginners without knowledge of Spanish. The teaching language is English; there are no prerequisites. The lessons can be studied in any order; thus, you are free to choose lessons according to your preferences. It is not necessary to study all lessons; however, it is very recommendable to review the lessons as often as possible.
An index of dialogue lines is available. It includes the lines of all lesson dialogues with translations and audio files.
An introduction to Spanish grammar is also available. This introduction is particularly useful to look up grammar terms that appear in the vocabulary lists of the lessons.
Are you ready yet?
How's it going?
Where are you from?
How do you say ...?
How do you spell beige?
Cheers!
Are you single?
How old are you?
Do you want a mint?
This British Protectorate is in the center of the Indian Ocean. Postage meters are used at a refueling station leased by the United States Navy on the island of Diego Garcia. The stamps are United States types with town mark containing “DIEGO GARCIA”.
Until 1965 Diego Garcia was a dependency of Mauritius, and a commercial meter of Mauritius was reportedly used during that period with town mark “DIEGO-GARCIA”.
Sometimes, abilities do not translate into stellar grades. An athlete on the All-State basketball team has to work hard to maintain fitness, and colleges realize this. So don't worry if your biggest talent is not a class in school. However, since you have no grades, you must show colleges that your ability exists.
"Jacob and Emily ride a Ferris wheel at a carnival in Vienna. The wheel has a
[For those interested, the picture is actually of a Ferris wheel in Vienna.]
The Khan Academy has video material that walks through this problem, which you may find easier to follow:
.
Revolutions per Minute to Degrees per Second
A wheel turning at three revolutions per minute is turning
, i.e. half a circle, and will be at the top most point of height
(because the diameter of the circle is
A cosine function, i.e.
. That's almost exactly opposite to what we want as we want the most negative value at
. Ergo, let's use the negative cosine to start our function.
To get make sure reality is not messed up (we can't have negative height
.
(* ETH Oberon, Copyright 1990-2003 Computer Systems Institute, ETH Zurich, CH-8092 Zurich.
Refer to the license.txt file provided with this distribution. *)
Logging to kernel log. Interactive display with System.OpenKernelLog
HexChar: ARRAY 17 OF CHAR;
W: Texts.Writer; Log*: Texts.Text;
Welcome to Brezhoneg Daoù. If you haven't done so, go and learn from Brezhoneg Unan where you will learn some basic Breton words.
In this Course, Brezhoneg Daoù, you will learn:
Chañs vat!
Good Luck!
Istor ar Brezhoneg/History of the Breton Language
Breton is a member of the Brythonic Branch of Celtic, along with Welsh and Cornish, but also, less known, Devonian and Cumbric. The Other Branch of the Celtic Language is Goidelic, with Scottish Gaelic, Irish and Manx.
British was spoken in the pre-Roman period, and has borrowed extensively from Latin (for example the word "skriva" write is from Latin SCRIBO, also "kegin" kitchen from COQUINA).
From the later maedieval period Breton was pushed back West.
Now, an estimated 300.000 people know Breton.
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Cognitive deficits are thought to cause undesirable psychosocial consequences of schizophrenia, which is said to be equivalent to a possible IQ drop from 100 to 70-85. Cognitive deficits may be neurocognitive (non-social) or social cognition.
This is a guide and reference book of Swift programming language for beginners. Its goal is to give a picture of Swift and its technologies and where to start learning.It aims to show a basic overview of the concepts needed to create a basic application, but also to provide a reference for each concept, in where it is possible to find more specific information.
Basic Concepts: The language is described and main concepts of the Swift architecture are defined simply.
Programming Environment: Is the introduction of the practical side and the description of the environment (Xcode) and suggestions for beginners to start programming.
Tricky Section: The authors findings about Autolayout, upload to the AppStore and more.
Here is a simple characterisation of the language:
Is a programming language created by Apple as a substitute for ObjectiveC.
First introduced at Apple's 2014 Worldwide Developers Conference.
Designed to work with Cocoa and Cocoa Touch for Apple products.
For further information you can follow this link
Syntax: Swift is more similar to high level languages such as Ruby or Python.If you are not familiar with this languages please start by reading this Quick Reference Guide.
Generics: Functions that can work with any parameters. It is one of the most powerful elements and it is worth reading.
Memory allocation: Swift doesn't need a separate memory allocation method to invoke like Objective-C does.
Optionals: Are a nice alternative to Forced unwrapping of variables. It is recommendable that you read at least the first section of the documentation of optionals
Swift is compatible with most of Objective-C libraries.
Views are used to present the application in the screen, but these views are controlled in a hierarchy defined by Apple. To understand this, first you need to understand the components of this architecture. The following concepts are the basic knowledge that you would need to start developing, but at the end of every description there is a link to the full documentation of every term in case you need further information.
Arranging views and their connections in the XCode Storyboard.
A storyboard is where you can create and modify graphically the flow of the program between the screens and create new elements. Storyboards
These are classes that manage the data and visual appearance of the screen shown by the application. When the UI is shown, the content is managed by one VC or more, that is why VC's are called the SKELETAL FRAMEWORK of the iOS apps.
The programmer can create and customize VC classes to manage the application behaviour.
The first View Controller of the app is called the Root View Controller.
Controls the stack of VC for the navigation of the app and its flow.
Contains and manages a set of View Controllers, each VC contains and manages a set of views; the purpose of the NC is to coordinate the navigation between the VC's.
In summary, this hierarchy concept can be explained as follows: One Navigation Controller controls many View Controllers, and one View Controller can control many Views. Other concepts involved in navigation are:
Helps control the navigation of your application by managing ViewControllers directly.
As the navigation controller, it has a stack of VC's and presents them independently and can be controlled directly by the TBC
The ways to connect and handle a transition from one screen to another are called Segues.
There are different types of segues used in XCode 6:
→Push segue: Adds the new ViewController to the navigation stack, the new VC will become part of the Navigation Controller
→Modal segue: The first VC presents the second VC, not including it in the Navigation Controller stack. To dismiss it, it needs the parent VC to take care of it.
Apple has a short and understandable description of segues. Please take a look at it before you start an application to make the right choice of segue for your program.
A Mac with either Mavericks or Yosemite
XCode is the developer toolset for Mac, iPhone, iPad, and Apple Watch. With this tool, you would be able to create and manage a Swift project, and also to run your application in a simulator.
The different sections of the XCode IDE.
It is a must that you learn how the pieces of an Xcode Project work together, but this comes with experience and interaction with XCode. Here is a nice graphical and written explanation):
Navigator area: Where your project files and settings are displayed.
Editor area: Center area where the files are shown.
Utility area: Where tools and identities of the objects can be modified.
Toolbar: Where the run button and the activity viewer are.
XCode does not impose a defined structure to the applications code tree. But when you create a new project, three default folders are created: Your main application folder, the test folder and the product folder.
You can also create Groups to organise your work or use folders to keep your program environment clean.
Apple has a comprehensive documentation with tutorials included on their website. For starting out, here is a tutorial where basic concepts are explained along with images, examples, and concept definitions. The tutorial can be found here. It is a good way to start, but if you continue their series of tutorials, it would take a long time and can be boring and unnecessary.
One of the most useful methods to learn a new programming language is to take a look at the examples available on any tutorial, as most of them are To-do List implementations that show how to connect Segues and return to the original View controller to display the information.
Jack Watson's Series of tutorials explain Swift's features, step-by-step, for simple applications. And hopefully a much quicker read!
Adding Libraries: For built libraries, Xcode has a 5 step procedure
Adding Files: Using Xcode you can just drag the files from the Finder Window and drop the into your project folder in the Xcode Navigation Area.
For programming in Xcode and running your app in the simulator, it is not necessary to have a certificate but you have to create an account anyways. But when you want to test the app in your own device, a developers certificate is needed and also you need to you install an associated provisioning profile on the device to enable the app to run. As it is specified in the site, the iOS Developer Program allows you to install your app on up to 100 iPad, iPhone or iPod touch devices.
Configuring your application for deployment is one of the trickiest parts of the development process, which is why you should follow and read every step in this guide. This process requires payed license for deployment. The developer license cannot be used to upload an application to the store; you must have at least one registered license for development on a device to be allowed to upload an app.
With Apple releasing more mobile products with different sizes of screen, the need for an implementation with just one setting for all screens is increasing.   For autolayout constraints are defined and configured to position visual elements dynamically. The auto layout is a tool developers have been avoiding, but it is actually not that difficult:
First a quick introduction of Size Classes: The screen, views and view controllers in the Storyboard have Size Classes. This correspond to the orientation and screen of the target device, there are three values for the horizontal and vertical orientation:
When developing for Any height and Any width will let you support all screen sizes. But relative constraints are needed to set the location of the elements in the View.
Now, if you decide you don't want to develop for different devices please go to the next section. Otherwise, enable auto layout and start using its features!
Proper guide is given by Ray Wenderlich. On this you may want to scroll down the page until you reach "Auto Layout to the rescue!", there is where the real explanation begins.
One of the most confusing issues of Swift is passing the information through the ViewControllers, therefore here are three easy methods to do it:
For user interaction and data output visual elements on the view are connected with code in the controller.
Singleton: A single intense of this class is created during the program run, it can be accessed using just the instantiation of the class in any other class. Information like web communication and login can be stored here.
Observer (delegate): Is one of the most used patterns in Swift, a View Controller is set up as the observer, and when the observing class needs to handle back data, it could be a notification or a variable, the observing class calls an observer method. This is used usually when the View Controller that has the information is a child from the observer ViewController that needs the information.
Send the data or object when calling the VC: Is the easiest way, when a Segue is called, the prepareForSegue method is called and the next View Controller can be accessed. This is used when one or few variables present in one View Controller are needed in the next one. The code would be as follows:
Segues are the responsible for the program flow, therefore you should pay attention to the correct way to handle them:
Segues can be called programmatically or using XCode´s assistant, segues are created using Xcode assistant, all you need is to select the origin View, press the ctrl key and drop the line that shows in the second View, then a popup menu will show and you can select the type of segue you want. By clicking on the segue, a name can be given to it on the Utility Area.
Programatically, that segue can be called like this: (If you use this approach, the parent View Controller is the responsible for dismissing the child View Controller and not the Navigation Controller)
From the Xcode assistant, a segue can be assigned to start depending on an action in an element of the view, for example, if instead of selecting a whole view, you select a button, press the ctrl key and drop the line on the next View Controller, the segue will be called when the button is pressed.
This is an important step if you want to take care of your applications memory usage because it will pop out the View from the stack, releasing the memory the View Controller was holding.
The dismiss action can be handled by the NC or programmatically.
By the Navigation Controller: Generally a regular "Show" segue can be closed automatically by pressing the back button the appears in the navigation bar in the top of the screen, the NC closes the View Controller.
By code: It is necessary to pop out the ViewController form the stack to be shown. An example of a call to pop all the View Controllers is the following:
So, now that you know the basics, you can start implementing application using popular features like the camera or QR Code Readers. In the next table you can find nice tutorials about this topic and more.
Here concepts from the elements of a view, to auto layout are covered
This is a well known, free and for students, tutorial recently written for Swift
Describes how to take control of the camera in Swift
The Viewing and Image settings on the Top Toolbar determine the resolution of the calculated image, the resolution of the displayed image, and the resolution of the image saved to disk.
The Image section sets the resolution, or pixel dimensions, for rendering. Choose a resolution for image calculation with the Width and Height fields.
Mandelbulb3D is a 32-bit application, which means it can only access 3 gigabytes of system memory. This RAM limit imposes a limit on the resolution of rendered images. The limit varies depending on the complexity of the scene, but in general Mandelbulb3D can't render images greater than 10,000 pixels on a side (10K).
Higher resolution output is possible with the Big Renders window. The high resolution image is divided into smaller tiles that can fit into system memory, and rendered in series. Render tiles need to be stitched together in an image manipulation application.
If the Keep Aspect checkbox is enabled, then the image aspect ratio is preserved. When the user changes either Width or Height, the other dimension is adjusted automatically to preserve the ratio of Width to Height. Disable Keep Aspect to change the proportion of the rectangle.
Three buttons on the right labeled Aspect provide access to aspect ratio presets: 4:3, 5:3, and User. The first two ratios are fixed. To define a User aspect, right-click the button. In the User Defined Aspect Ratio pop-up windows, enter the Width and Height of the desired aspect. Only integer values are permitted. For the HDTV ratio of 1.778:1, this is easily entered as 16:9. For cinematic aspect ratios, which are not low whole number ratios, it's OK to enter pixel values, even if these don't represent the final delivery resolution. For example, the standard cinematic aspect can be entered as 3996:2160, and widescreen 2.39:1 can be entered as 4096:1716. These values will be cropped on the User button, because they are too long to fit in the area of the button.
The up and down facing arrows labeled Scale multiply or divide the Width and Height by a value of two. The up arrow doubles the Width and Height. The down arrow divides the Width and Height by two.
The DE Stop + C checkbox is enabled by default to ensure consistency in Distance Estimation renderings when output resolution is changed. Distance Estimation is resolution dependent. The DE Stop parameter in the Calculation tab must be adjusted proportionally to any change to Image Width or Height. DE Stop + C makes that adjustment automatic. If DE Stop + C is disabled, changes to the Image Width or Height may alter the rendering significantly.
Depth of Field, found in the Postprocess window, is also resolution dependent. The Clipping Radius field sets a maximum blur radius, expressed in pixels. DE Stop + C also scales the Clipping Radius to maintain visual consistency at different render resolutions.
The Viewing buttons scale the image displayed in the center pane of the Main Window. In the default state, the image is displayed at the rendered Image Width and Height, and the Viewing field shows a ratio of 1:1.
Click the down arrow to reduce the size of the displayed image by a factor of one. The image is displayed at half resolution, and the Viewing field shows a ratio of 1:2. Each click of the down arrow reduces the size of the image, to ratios of 1:3, 1:4, etc. Click the up arrow to increase the size of the displayed image by a factor of one.
Images saved from the Save Pic tab are stored at the display resolution. If the Viewing field shows a ratio of 1:2, then the saved image will be half of the resolution of the original rendering. If this is the case, or if the ratio is 1:3, then Mandelbulb3D saves the image with optional Sharpening, to recover some of the detail lost from downsampling the image.
Many users choose to save at a Viewing ratio of 1:1, the full resolution of the rendering. Downsampling for anti-aliasing is then done in an image editing or compositing application. This gives more control over the final result.
Description - If you have selected "Automate handlers for 1 & 2 byte strings" in the Preferences window under the Vars tab, this function will return a non-zero value when operating in double byte mode. Single byte mode is used for Roman fonts. Two byte script systems such as Chinese, Japanese, Vietnamese, and Korean require two bytes per character. This function will return zero if you selected "Automate handlers for 1 & 2 byte strings" and if you have not used DEF SETSINGLEBYTE (or have reset the system with DEF SETDOUBLEBYTE.)
In all other cases, it returns -1.
See Also DEF SETDOUBLEBYTE; DEF SETSINGLEBYTE, USR GETSINGLEBYTE
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
1.Nf3 Nf6 2.c4 e6 3.Nc3 d5
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Queen's Gambit Declined
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
Albania is a country in southeastern Europe on the north coast of the Mediterranean Sea.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Roman alphabet, also called Latin alphabet, that is ABC. It is the most common alphabet in the world. Roman alphabet has 26 letters. The 26 letters are a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z in sequence.
Puzzles | Statistical puzzles | The Pentagon
You are standing near The Pentagon. Given you are standing far enough away that you are not only seeing one side, what is the probability of you seeing only two sides?
This is an analysis of a journal article on the relationship between resistance training loads and osteoarthritis in an elderly population. this is being written as an assignment for the unit: Health Disease and Exercise, at the University of Canberra
The article "Investigation of clinical effects of high- and low-resistance training for patients with knee osteoarthritis: a randomized controlled trial" by Jan, Lin & Liau(2008)[1]
"Muscle strength training is important for people with knee osteoarthritis (OA). High-resistance exercise has been demonstrated to be more beneficial than low-resistance exercise for young subjects. The purpose of this study was to compare the effects of high- and low-resistance strength training in elderly subjects with knee OA"[1]
What is the background to this research?
In an ageing population degenerative conditions such as osteoarthritis that play a negative role on quality of life become more prevalent. Studies such as this are developed to help determine possible solutions/treatments for these conditions. it has already been determined that a high resistance exercise program is more beneficial for younger sufferers of osteoarthritis than a low resistance program, this study's goal is to determine the preferred choice for more elderly peoples.
A degenerative joint disease, osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common chronic condition of the joints.[2] In OA, the cartilage that acts as a smooth protective cover of the end of the bone breaks down, causing pain, swelling and problems moving the joint through a full range. As the condition worsens small pieces of bone or cartilage may become dislodged and float around in the joint fluid, which in turn can lead to additional pressure and discomfort felt through the joint. Inflammatory processes also occur in and around the joint and cytokines (proteins) and enzymes are produced that further degenerate the cartilage. In the later stages of OA, the cartilage wears away completely and bone begins to rub against bone leading to additional joint damage and significantly more pain.
Where did this study occur?
Subjects were recruited from the Department of Orthopedics in the National Taiwan University Hospital, they were recruited between January 2004 to June 2005. Osteoarthritis was diagnosed on the basis of clinical history and physical examination of the patient by an orthopedic surgeon.
Each of the authors associated with this study have been cited in multiple clinical medicine studies, many of these studies were focused on physical adaptations and therapy for muscular conditions.
What kind of research was this?
This study was conducted as a randomised control trial performed under clinical settings. Each of the groups involved had a sample size of 28 people, which gives this study an 80% power to detect any clinically meaningful difference in muscular strength throughout the test.
What did the research involve?
Before any randomisation occurred all subjects were educated on knee OA, including interventions to enhance functional outcome, and an explanation of methods that may relieve pain, increase or maintain mobility, or changes they can make to their environment to assist with any functional issues, and how to better manage their discomfort at home. They were also but through a overall assessment of their pain and functionality, which acted as a baseline reading for the results that later on. These tests included  a pain and functionality scale, walking speed over 4 different surface types, and a measure on muscular torque at the knee joint.
After all the pre-screening and assessments were completed for this study the 102 participants were broken into three test groups: a high resistance exercise group(HR), a low resistance exercise group(LR), and a control group that did not receive any exercise interventions. The HR group would be completing their training at 60% of their individual 1RM, and LR group would be completing their training program at 10% of their individual 1RM. Before testing began a calibrated single direction leg press machine was used to determine each subjects individual 1RM. this was determined through calculations based on the amount of reps they could achieve while the weight was set at roughly half of the subjects body weight.
When the testing began the participants underwent 3 training sessions per week for 8 weeks at the prescribed weight. Each session was monitored individually with a trained and experienced therapist. Every 2 weeks 1RM was retested and the working weight was adjusted accordingly. Participants would rest for 1 minutes between each set and perform 3 sets of 8 repetitions in the HR group and 10 sets of 15 repetitions in the LR group. Both legs were trained with a 5 minute rest between the left and right leg workouts.
There was no significant difference among the demographics of the 3 groups on any variables at baseline. However the HR group had 3 subjects that could not continue with the exercise interventions due to knee pain during the testing. the mean heights and weights of each group were within 2-3% across the board with a similar range of weights around those points.
Significant changes were observed in the walking on different terrains testing with the HR and LR groups both improving on all surfaces but with smaller changes noticed with walking on flat ground. the control group that received no exercise intervention saw no changes in any of the trials. upon calculating the mean effect sizes for the participants it was seen that the HR group saw a higher rate of improvement when compared to the LR group.
When assessing muscle torque at the joint for both flexion and extension there were statistically significant improvements for both the HR and LR group when compared to the control group that saw no such changes. However when the HR and LR groups are compared to each other no significant difference could be observed.
Overall the Results of the study were that both the HR and LR groups saw statistically significant improvements when compared to the control group for both the walking tests and the muscular torque tests, however, based on effect size difference between exercise and control groups, the HR group improved more than the LR group
This study's results support the findings of many prior studies, indicating that strength training reduces pain and improves physical function in people with knee OA[1]
Many other studies have also found and reported the positive effects of Resistance training on chronic disorders such as osteoarthritis, such articles were compiled in 2015 by Fransen Et al.[3]
My personal interpretation of the data is that if a person is physically capable of performing a High Resistance exercise program without pain they will see far better results that if they take on an easier from of exercise intervention. While this study had people drop out of the HR group due to their knee pain not alleviating enough for them to continue the remainder of the group saw decent improvements, in saying this however we cannot forget that a low resistance program will also result in improvements and will minimize the risk of aggravating an existing condition or developing a new one.
This study like many others helps to reinforce the idea that an active lifestyle is helpful for maintaining health and well being through you entire life. Even if you do suffer from a condition that affects mobility or comfort in your day to day life such as OA, it is never to late to make positive changes that can help to alleviate certain symptoms. While this study was conducted on more senior participants the results show and other studies have confirmed that resistance based exercise performed at any age group can reduce the risk factors associated with OA as well as helping to manage certain symptoms.
Basic introduction to strength training (https://www.nerdfitness.com/blog/2014/01/14/strength-training-101-where-do-i-start/)[4]
Exercise reccomendations from the arthritis foundation (http://www.arthritis.org/living-with-arthritis/exercise/)[5]
Good information regarding osteoarthritis and osteoporosis can be found here (https://www.iofbonehealth.org/osteoarthritis) [6]
Basic lower body strength workout you can do from home(http://www.menshealth.com/fitness/leg-workout-without-weights)[7]
↑ a b c Jan M, Lin J, Liau J, et al. Investigation of clinical effects of high- and low-resistance training for patients with knee osteoarthritis: a randomized controlled trial. Phys Ther 2008;88:427–36.
↑ Arthritis.org. (2016). What is Osteoarthritis?. [online] Available at: http://www.arthritis.org/about-arthritis/types/osteoarthritis/what-is-osteoarthritis.php [Accessed 27 Sep. 2016].
↑ Fransen, M., McConnell, S., Harmer, A., Van der Esch, M., Simic, M. and Bennell, K. (2015). Exercise for osteoarthritis of the knee: a Cochrane systematic review. British Journal of Sports Medicine, 49(24), pp.1554-1557.
↑ Nerd Fitness. (2014). Strength Training 101: Where do I start? | Nerd Fitness. [online] Available at: https://www.nerdfitness.com/blog/2014/01/14/strength-training-101-where-do-i-start/ [Accessed 27 Sep. 2016].
↑ Arthritis.org. (2016). Exercises for Arthritis | Arthritis-Friendly Exercises. [online] Available at: http://www.arthritis.org/living-with-arthritis/exercise/ [Accessed 27 Sep. 2016].
↑ international osteoporosis foundation. (2016). osteoarthritis. [online] Available at: https://www.iofbonehealth.org/osteoarthritis [Accessed 27 Sep. 2016].
↑ Men's Health. (2014). The Best Leg Workout You Can Do without Weights. [online] Available at: http://www.menshealth.com/fitness/leg-workout-without-weights [Accessed 27 Sep. 2016].
A healthy, balanced diet that includes a wide variety of fruit and vegetables will benefit your overall health, and may help keep the retina healthy.
Tapping is the short name of fretboard tapping or finger tapping, a technique where the fingers hammer down (tap) against the strings in order to produce sounds rather than striking or plucking the strings. If both the left and right hand  are used then it is called two-handed tapping.
It is not clear who first developed tapping but it was certainly popularized by Eddie van Halen. Van Halen was listening to Heartbreaker by Led Zeppelin and he was quite inspired by the solo, which contained a variation of tapping. This is arguably the song that pushed Van Halen to use "tapping" frequently.
A rather different kind of independent two-handed tapping was discovered by Harry DeArmond and named "The Touch System" by his student Jimmie Webster. The "Touch System" is a complete playing method rather than a technique. Another method of independent tapping was discovered by Emmett Chapman, where the right hand comes over the fretboard and lines up with the frets like the left. The three kinds of tapping techniques are:
Interdependent tapping is by far the most common type of tapping. It is generally used as a lead guitar technique, most commonly during solos; however, a small number of songs are entirely tapped. The player's picking hand leaps out to the fretboard and begins to tap the strings with the fingers. However, one must get the pick out of the way in order to tap. Some players do this by sticking the pick between their fingers; others simply use the middle finger to tap.
The Van Halen technique of getting rid of the pick is done by moving the pick into the space between the first and second joints of his middle finger. Eruption by Eddie Van Halen is a good example of this technique.
As mentioned before, this is a whole playing style and a whole book could be written about it. The first musician to play this way was pickup designer Harry DeArmond in the 1940's, who used tapping as a way to demonstrate the sensitivity of his pickups.  While each hand could play its own part, DeArmond held his right hand in the same orientation as conventional guitar technique.  This meant the ability of that hand to tap scale-based melody lines was limited.  He taught his approach to Gretch Guitars employee Jimmie Webster, who wrote an instruction book called "The Touch System for Amplified Spanish guitar."  Webster made a record and travelled around demonstrating the method. Even though it inspired a few builders (Dave bunker, for example), the Touch System was limited by the lack of equal movements for the right hand and never caught on.
In 1969 Emmett Chapman, who had no previous knowledge of DeArmond, Webster or any other tapping guitarists, discovered that he could tap on the strings with both hands, and that by raising the neck up could align the right hand's fingers with the frets as on the left, but from above the fretboard.  This made scale-based melody lines just as easy to tap in the right hand as the left, and a new way of playing a stringed instrument was born.  Chapman redesigned his home-made 9-string guitar to support his new playing method, and began selling his new instrument (The Chapman Stick) to others in 1974.  In 1976 Chapman published his volume of collected lessons he used for teaching guitarists and Stick players as "Free Hands: A New Discipline of Fingers on Strings."
It has been popularised by players such as Tony Levin, Nick Beggs, John Myung, Bob Culbertson, and Greg Howard, and is currently experiencing a surge in popularity due to the internet. Stanley Jordan became famous in the 1980s for using the same method on the guitar.  Jordan discovered the method independently after Chapman did, was signed to Blue Note Records, and released several successful albums.The method that Chapman invented and Jordan also used allows complete self-accompaniment and counterpoint, as on piano.
Getting Started: Different Types of Guitars | Anatomy of a Guitar | Buying a Guitar | Buying an Amplifier | Tuning the Guitar | Tablature | Lead Guitar and Rhythm Guitar
For Beginners: The Basics | Intervals and Power Chords | Open Chords | Muting and Raking | Learning Songs | Song Library
Lead Guitar: Picking and Plucking | Scales | Arpeggios and Sweep Picking | Slides | Hammer-ons, Pull-offs, and Trills | Bending and Vibrato | Harmonics | Vibrato Bar Techniques  |  Tapping
Rhythm Guitar: Chords | Barre Chords | Chord Progressions | Alternate Picking | Tremolo Picking | Rhythm
Playing Styles: Folk Guitar | Blues | Slide Guitar | Rock Guitar | Country and Western | Metal | Jazz | Classical Guitar | Flamenco
General Guitar Theory: Tone and Volume | Singing and Playing | Writing Songs | Playing With Others | Recording Music |Tuning Your Ear | How to Continue Learning
Equipment: Guitar Accessories | Effects Pedals | E-Bow | Cables | Bass Guitar | Harmonica and Guitar Combo
Maintenance: Guitar Maintenance and Storage | Adjusting the Guitar | Stringing the Guitar
Appendices: Dictionary | Alternate Tunings | Chord Reference | Blanks
r1bqkb1r/pp1p1ppp/2n2n2/4p3/3NP3/2N5/PPP2PPP/R1BQKB1R
Moves: 1.e4 c5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3 e5
The variation is named after the Latvian Grandmaster Evgeny Sveshnikov. In the various Najdorf lines where Black plays e5, he gets his desired pawn structure at the cost of leaving his king's bishop stuck behind a pawn on d6. Right now, Black is trying to have his cake and eat it by delaying d6 until the bishop has fled to b4. The standard Najdorf was good enough to be played religiously by Garry Kasparov; White must cut out the threat of ...Bb4 or be faced with an improved Najdorf.
The move that does more or less force ...d6 is Ndb5. The knight threatens to invade the d6 outpost with check. Note that this forks Black's king and c8-bishop, but Black can deal with this easily with 7...Bxd6
Nde2 is the only significant sideline, fortifying the c3 knight to avoid the wrecking of the queenside pawns that would occur after ...Bb4 and ...Bxc3 bxc3. Neither Nb3 nor Nf3 offer anything in particular to compensate for letting the bishop out, Nf5 places the knight on a shaky square that can be instantly exploited with 6...d5! and Nxc6 bxc6 hands control of d5 back to Black.
1.e4 c5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 5.Nc3 e5
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Sicilian Defence
Batsford Chess Openings 2 (1989, 1994). Garry Kasparov, Raymond Keene. ISBN 0-8050-3409-9.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
Beginner warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Penelope Clearwater is first seen, although unidentified, at Christmas; Harry and Ron, disguised as Crabbe and Goyle, are wandering around looking for the Slytherin common room, and ask her for directions. Shortly after she rebuffs them, they run into Percy, who threatens them.
In April, Penelope Clearwater is petrified by the Monster in the Chamber of Secrets; Hermione is attacked at the same time. Percy is deeply shocked by this attack, possibly because he believed that Prefects would be protected by their office.
It is only at the end that it is revealed that Penelope is Percy's girlfriend; this explains the magnitude of the shock Percy feels when she is petrified, as well as explaining what she was doing in the school's lower levels at Christmas, near where Percy was. This also is the reason Penelope's age was changed in later book editions: first, until sixth year she could not be a prefect, and second, if she's in sixth year she's the same age as Percy, making it more likely that she could be his girlfriend.
Ron complains of having to use Errol for his correspondence because Percy has been sending messages back and forth to Penelope all summer, fully occupying Hermes' time.
While all the Weasleys are staying at the Leaky Cauldron preparatory to departing for Hogwarts, Percy accuses Ron (who is sharing a room with him) of spilling tea on Penelope's picture; apparently the image has some spots on her nose and is trying to hide behind the frame.
Before the Quidditch match with Ravenclaw, Harry brings his new Firebolt broom down to breakfast. Many other students come over to look at it, including Penelope, who asks if she can hold it. Percy warns her against sabotage, then later remarks that he has a ten-Galleon bet on the outcome of the game with Penelope. He later tells Harry that Gryffindor has to win, because he doesn't have ten Galleons.
When Harry, Ron, and Hermione are trapped by Snatchers, Hermione claims to be Penelope Clearwater. Unfortunately, this ruse does not last, as her likeness in a newspaper clipping identifies her as one of the people believed traveling with Undesirable Number 1, Harry Potter.
Penelope is Percy Weasley's girlfriend throughout the first three books, though it is unsure if their relationship still stands because she never directly appeared in any book after Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban. Percy's estrangement from the other Weasleys, up until the final book, likely left his family in doubt as to the state of his personal relationships.
There is no indication that Penelope and Hermione were friends while at Hogwarts, but in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, Hermione, to hide her identity, claims her name is Penelope Clearwater when Snatchers capture her, along with Harry and Ron. Whether she chose this name because Penelope was still in a relationship with Percy at the time is unknown, though it seems more likely that the name randomly occurred to Hermione because it had a prior connection to the Weasley family.
In the Weasley family tree that the author created following the series, it is revealed that Percy marries one Audrey. We can, therefore, assume that his relationship with Penelope had ended some time earlier.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
In general, counsel cannot ask leading questions on of the witness that they call.[1] Leading questions are questions that clearly seek a particular answer (eg. "you saw the accused, didn't you?") or are questions that assume a foundation not in evidence (eg. "what happened after the accused stabbed him?").[2]
The reason for not allowing leading questions include:[3]
a witness who is nervous, not alert, confused or otherwise easily persuaded may accept the suggestion of a leading question without reflection.[6] The leading question may "impose the questioner’s will on the witness so as to elicit inaccurate information, absent an intention to do so on the part of the counsel or witness”[7]
The importance of not leading depends on the circumstances. The rule should be flexible at the least for the sake of expediency.[8]
It is usually permissible to lead on a number of issues:
A judge has discretion to allow leading where it is in the interest of justice.[15]
The answer to a leading question is not necessaries inadmissible but will carry very little or less weight, especially on critical issues.[16]
The weight given to an answer from a leading question will depend on "how leading the question was, the subject matter and other evidence before the Court."
It will often be that the improperness of the question, and so the weight given to the answer, will be assessed in the light of whole circumstances of the case, after subsequent testimony of the witness.[18]
c.f. R. v. Bhardwaj, (2008), 456 A.R. 313 (Alta. Q.B.) per Lee J at para. 45 suggests that it only goes to weight
( "There is no rule of law that the answer to a leading question must be given no weight, or that they cannot be asked.”)
↑  R v. Rose 2001 CanLII24079 ONCA at 9
Nicolls v. Kemp (1915), 171 E.R. 408 per Lord Ellenborough (“If questions are asked, to which the answer yes or no would be conclusive, they would certainly be objectionable.”)
↑ Maves v Grant Truck Pacific Railway Co (1913) 6 Alta LR 396 Connor v Brant (1914) 31 OLR 274 Sopkina, Law of Evidence in Canada at ss.16.33
R. v. Clancey, [1992] O.J.  No. 3968 (Ont. Sup. Ct.), per Watt J. (the witness “may be too disposed to assent to the proposition of counsel, rather than upon reflection or exertion of the witness’ own and true memory”)
↑ MacWilliams Canadian Criminal Evidence 4th Edition p. 18:10
↑ R. v. Rose, 2001 CanLII 24079 (ON CA)
Cross on Evidence 3rd ed. (London: Butterworths 1967) p. 189
R. v. Rose, 2001 CanLII 24079 (ON CA) at para. 9
↑ Delisle, "Evidence: Principles and Problems" (7th Ed.) at p. 414, states at common law
↑ Rose at para. 9
↑ Delisle, ibid.
↑ Reference Re R. v. Coffin, 1956 CanLII 94 (SCC), [1956] S.C.R. 191, p. 22
↑  Moor v. Moor [1954] 2 All ER 458 (CA)
R. v. Williams, (1982), 66 C.C.C. (2d) 234 (Ont. C.A.) see p. 236 (“It is clear, however, that an answer elicited by a leading question is entitled to little, if any, weight.”)
R. v. Bhardwaj, (2008), 456 A.R. 313 (Alta. Q.B.) per Lee J at para. 45
MacWilliams Canadian Criminal Evidence 4th Edition at p. 18 - 16
MacWilliams Canadian Criminal Evidence 4th Edition at p. 18 - 16 (“The weight ... given ... is thus best assessed in light of the circumstances of the case. ...subsequent testimony from the witness, whether in chief or cross-examination, may make clear that the leading question had no improper impact on the answer elicited.”)
Generally, it is improper to do the following during cross examination:
Counsel cannot intentionally insult or abuse a witness.[3]
Specifically for the Crown in cross-examining the accused, it is improper to do any of the following:
An appellate court should only intervene when the questioning is so improper that it "tends bring the administration of justice into disrepute"[20]
R. v. Prince (1945), 85 C.C.C. 97, [1946] 1 D.L.R. 659
R. v. Ma, Ho and Lai (1978), 44 C.C.C. (2d) 537
R. v. Howard 1989 CanLII 99 (SCC), (1989), 48 C.C.C. (3d) 38 at 46 (S.C.C.): ("It is not open to the examiner or cross-examiner to put as a fact, or even a hypothetical fact, which is not and will not become part of the case as admissible evidence.")
R. v. A. J. R., 1994 CanLII 3447 (ON CA)
↑ R v R(AJ) 1994 CanLII 3447 at p.176
R. v. Brown, 1982 ABCA 292 (CanLII)
R. v. Dedier, 2012 ONSC 2889 -- this is because asking a witness to comment on the veracity of another witness is unreliable evidence and it may mislead the trier of fact in putting the burden on the accused
R. v. L.L., [2009] O.J. No. 2029 (C.A.) at para. 15
R. v. Rose, 53 O.R. (3d) 417, at para. 27
R. v. Bouhsass, 2002 CanLII 45109 (ON CA)
R. v. Yakeleya, (1985), 20 C.C.C. (3d) 193 - The main reason is that it may tend to shift the burden upon the accused to answer the question
Markadonis v. The King, [1935] S.C.R. 657
↑ R. v. Schell, 2000 CanLII 16917 (ON CA)
R. v. Bouhsass, 2002 CanLII 45109 (ON CA)
R. v. Schell, 2000 CanLII 16917 (ON CA) at 53
↑ R. v. Bouhsass, 2002 CanLII 45109 (ON CA)
R v R(AJ) 1994 CanLII 3447 at p.176
R. v. Fanjoy 1985 CanLII 53 (SCC), [1985] 2 S.C.R. 233;
R. v. Ruptash, [1982] 68 C.C.C. (2d) 182 at p.189, 36 A.R. 346 (C.A.)
Cross-examining an accused on a prior statement
The crown may withhold a statement of the accused until the defence's case at which time it can only be used where the statement is voluntary and only for the purpose of attacking credibility.[1] If the Crown is to hold back the statement for cross-examination it is necessary for voluntariness to be proven as part of the Crown's evidence, if there is no consent, or else the crown will be foreclosed from using the statement as it would require them to split their case.
The defence may introduce parts of the statement on rebuttal not used by the crown.[2]
↑  R. v. Hebert, [1955] SCR 120 (SCC)
Where trial counsel does not object to inadmissible evidence, that failure cannot make inadmissible evidence admissible.[1]
The cross-examination is a "cornerstone of the adversarial trial process"[1] and is "a fundamental feature of a fair trial"[2].  However, while the right to cross-examination is broad, counsel are generally bound by the rules of relevancy and materiality (R. v. Mitchell, 2008 ONCA 757 (CanLII), 2008 ONCA 757, paras. 17-19).
As such the scope of questioning can be broad. It is recognized as "being protected by ss. 7 and 11(d)" of the Charter.[3]
The right however is limited by the requirements of relevancy and materiality,[4] with relevancy being the main criteria.[5]
Suggestions can be put to the witness as long as there is a "good faith" basis for the question.[6] This is often a function of what is known by the lawyer at the time of the examination. So for example a defence lawyer examining an eye-witness in a case who was told by the accused that he did the offence cannot suggest to the witness that they are mistaken as to whom they identified. Similarly in a case where the defence is alibi, the defence counsel cannot still attack the credibility of the witnesses establishing the offence as he does not have a basis to believe they are being untruthful.
Witnesses, except for an accused, may be cross-examined on disreputable conduct so long as it relevant.[7]
The cross-examiner is entitled to ask questions without letting the witness know the purpose of the questions, though is subject to the court's discretion and cannot be put in a way that would mislead the witness as to what is asked.[8]
It is permissible to use an encirclement technique wherein questions to exclude all alternative possibilities are asked and then not ask the desired possibility and allow the court to infer based on inference.[9]
It is not permissible for either party to ask any questions about the veracity of another witness.
↑ R v Hart, 1999 NSCA 45 at 8
R v Pires; Lising 2005 SCC 66 at para 3 (it is "of fundamental significance to the criminal trial process")
↑ R. v. Esau, 2009 SKCA 31 (CanLII), 324 Sask. R. 95 at para. 17
↑ R v Lyttle 2004 SCC 5 at para 43
R. v. Mitchell, 2008 ONCA 757 (CanLII), 2008 ONCA 757, paras. 17-19
↑ Brownell v. Brownell, (1909) 42 SCR 368 1909 CanLII 21
↑ R. v. Lyttle, 2004 SCC 5
R. v. Titus, 1983 CanLII 49 (SCC), [1983] 1 S.C.R. 259;
R. v. Haussecker, 1998 ABPC 117 at 18-20
R. v. Haussecker, 1998 ABPC 117 at 21-22
↑ R. v. Mian 2012 ABCA 302 (CanLII)
Under 486.3(2), the Crown can seek to have the court appoint a lawyer to the accused for the purpose of conducting a cross-examination where the judge is "...of the opinion that, in order to obtain a full and candid account from the witness of the acts complained of, the accused should not personally cross-examine the witness.”  [1]
The initial onus lies on the crown to establish that the presumption in s.486.3 applies. This onus is on the balance of probabilities.[2]If established, it is on the accused to establish that the proper administration of justice requires that the presumption should not be followed.[3]
This section trumps the right to cross examine as the accused sees fit.[4]
Factors to be considered include the circumstances of the case, the nature of the relationship between the accused and the witness and the nature of the alleged criminal acts.[5] As well as the likelihood of the accused being aggressive and whether the questioning by the self-represented accused would be focussed, rational, and relevant.[6]
↑ see also:  R. v. Predie, 2009 O.J. No. 2723
R. v. D.J. 2011 NSPC 3, NSJ No 262
↑ R. v. Tehrankari, [2008] O.J. No. 565 para 19
See R. v. D.P.G., [2008] O.J. No. 767 (ONSC)
↑ R v Jones, [2011 NSJ 262
↑  R. v. Gendreau 2011 ABCA 256
R. v. Predie, [2009] O.J. No. 2723
Confrontation Rule (The Brown v. Dunn Rule)
The confrontation rule, also known as the rule in Brown v Dunn, states that where a party is advancing a theory that contradicts the testimony of a particular witness being questioned, the counter-version must be put to the witness.[1] More specifically, the witness should have "an opportunity to address or explain the point upon which credibility is attacked." [2]
Courts have not stuck strictly to the requirement of presenting the counter version in each and every case involving credibility, stating that it is not a hard and fast rule.[3]
A more flexible approach has been to focus on whether the failure created an unfairness.
It has been suggested that the rule should only apply to "matters of substance" and not "minor details".[5]
Some courts have simply put the failure to confront the witness as a matter of weight given to the evidence.[6]
Nevertheless, failure to put the counter story to a particular witness can result in an adverse finding on the counter-story.[7]
Where the Defence has not confronted the relevant Crown witnesses with the counter theory of events, the Crown will generally be given the option of recalling their witnesses to address the counter-story.[8]
Where the accused testifies and refutes the Crown's evidence, the rule may not apply such that the Crown need not to confront the accused's accused version of events. The accused would have been aware of the Crown evidence that came out in trial and would have been able to address it in their testimony.[9] However, this tactical choice not to confront will prohibit the Crown from making a full comparison between the witnesses versions and in a jury trial would require limiting instructions notifying the jury that the accused did not have "potential benefit" his credibility being tested.[10]
↑ R. v. Dyck, [1970] 2 C.C.C. 283 (B.C.C.A.)
R. v. I.I., 2013 ABCA 2 (CanLII) at para. 8 citing McWilliams, Canadian Criminal Evidence, 4th ed. (Aurora: Canada Law Book, 2003) at p. 18-104
R. v. Palmer 1979 CanLII 8 (SCC), [1980] 1 S.C.R. 759 at 781
R v Johnson, [2010] OJ No. 4153 at para 79: ("The rule is one of fairness, and is not absolute. ... Counsel should not necessarily be obliged to plod through a witness' evidence in-chief, putting him or her on notice of every detail that they do not accept. ... A pragmatic approach to the rule is most appropriate.")
R. v. Lyttle 2004 SCC 5 at para. 65
R. v. Palmer 1979 CanLII 8 (SCC), [1980] 1 S.C.R. 759 at 781
R. v. Giroux at para. 46
R. v. Werkman 2007 ABCA 130 at para. 7
R. v. MacKinnon, 1992 CanLII 488 (BCCA)
R. v. O.G.K., 1994 CanLII 8742 (BC CA)
R. v. Mete, (1973), 3 W.W.R. 709 (B.C.C.A.)
R. v. Khuc,  2000 BCCA 20
R. v. Carter, 2005 BCCA 381 at 54 to 60
R. v. Ali, 2009 BCCA 464
↑ e.g. see comments in R v Sparvier, 2012 SKPC 67 at para. 31
R. v. I.I., 2013 ABCA 2 (CanLII) - Crown only cross-examined on collateral matters and not the substance of incident
I.I. at para. 20, 23
Except where the accused places his character at issue, the Crown cannot cross examine the witness on the accused of the prior criminal record. The crown can ask the accused of the date and place of conviction; the offence convicted; the sentence imposed.
The Crown may not cross-examine the accused on lies told by the accused to the police at unrelated instances.[1]
See details at Canadian Criminal Evidence/Credibility/Criminal Record
R. v. Lee, 2005 CanLII 46628 (ON CA)
A witness who is not the accused may be cross-examined on outstanding charges, including the underlying conduct, regardless of whether it occurred before or after the incident at issue. It may be relevant to credibility and other issues such as self-defence.[1]
R. v. Chartrand, 2002 CanLII 6331 (ON CA)
An accused at a preliminary inquiry has "a right to full, detailed and careful cross-examination". Failure to be permitted to do so "is a failure to accord the accused an important right granted him by the provisions of the Criminal Code".[1]
See Also: Canadian Criminal Procedure and Practice/Preliminary Inquiry
A party calling a witness is entitled to re-examine the witness after cross-examination. The scope of the re-examination is limited to matters that arose in cross-examination.[1] Its purpose is to allow the witness to explain or qualify answers that were given in cross-examination. New matters may generally not be raised in questioning.
New facts may be raised in re-examination at the discretion of the judge. If the judge permits it, the opposing party must be permitted to cross-examine.[2]
The rule against leading questions still applies in re-examination.[3]
Re-examination may not be used to improperly bolster credibility of the witness after impeaching credibility in cross-examination.[4]
↑ R v Moore, (1984), 15 C.C.C. (3d) 541 (Ont. C.A.) at 66 cited in R. v. Evans [1993] 2 SCR 639 at 36
See Phipson on Evidence (13th Ed.). at p. 823-24; Wigmore on Evidence (3rd Ed.), vol. 6, p. 567
Books on this shelf deal with law: a system of rules, usually enforced through a set of institutions. It shapes politics, economics and society in numerous ways and serves as a primary social mediator in relations between people.
Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant: The WikiBook
Legal and Regulatory Issues in the Information Economy
Legal Aspects of Text and Data Mining
Legal framework of textual data processing for Machine Translation and Language Technology research and development activities
Author's Right, Copyright and Free Licenses for Culture on the Web
Fukushima Aftermath: Whither the Indian Point Nuke?
Annotated Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
Internal Improvements of the State of Ohio
N.C. Gen. Stat § 75-1.1: Unfair & Deceptive Trade Practices Under North Carolina Law
Thumb up.
The "cut-throat" or throat slash sign
Ronald Reagan with his horse "Little Man" at Rancho del Cielo, 1977
Body language is inherited by people from its animal ancestors, therefore it is not necessary to teach  by man to communicate in this language.
Animals conflicted and realized control with help of body language. The person hasn't lost up to the end ability to enter in conflict and to realize psychological control with help of a Body language after the invention of spoken language and written language. Men make gestures involuntary,  therefore it is impossible to lie in body language. It is possible to learn separate simple gestures in order to deceive interlocutor, but other small involuntary gestures can betray you. The education of body language is used under the education of managers today, because it makes it possible to understand secret intentions of partners in the business. Women understand body language better then men, therefore it is very difficult for husband  -  to deceive its wife.
In opinion of Allan Pease, it is possible to isolate three basic kinds of the gestures:
a dilated pupils (bedroom eyes), which indicate excitement; [2]
Woman begins to smarten up before the mirror (“to clean of plumes”) on the eyes of man, to do up hair, to color lips. [3]
The aggressive male gesture of courtship is thumbs-in-belt, that highlights genital region. Man also can “clean of plumes” ‐ man may straighten his tie and brush imaginary dust from shoulder.  [4]
The gestures of deceit, doubt, lying:
The opened palms indicate: “I speak truth”.[6]
To hide his palms in his pockets is the sign of secretive person. [7]  Boredom is expressed in the fact that man begin to use his hand to support his head. “I speak truth”.[8]
The hands are compressed in fists and rested against a belt.
The demonstration of thumb-up gesture indicates: “I am Boss” or “Everything is all right”. [9]
One palm gripping the other hand behind the back (the gesture of policeman) indicates: “I do not fear you”. [10]
Arms, tightly folded across his chest are sign of defensive. [11]
The round-shouldered back means an inferiority complex.
Straddling a chair means protection.  [12]
The V-sign of fingers means victory when palm faces out. The V-sign of fingers means obscene insult version when palm faces toward the speaker. [13]
Long fixed view in combination with the narrow pupils ("beady little eyes" or “snake eyes”) indicate anger in prison. [14]
Erving Goffman observed the life of cripples, patients of psychiatric hospitals, visitors of casino in America. Confusion is the sign of mistake in this game and confusion is the expression of request to repeat attempt. People, noted by "badge of shame“, can experience difficulties in the contact, because it is difficult to produce a good impression for this people. The color of the skin, scar on face, prosthesis, wart, birthmark on half of face and so on can become this "badge of shame“. Such people try to hide their "badge of shame“ and  they manage it temporarily sometimes.[15] According to its observations, the bureaucrat‐representative of middle class is forced to develop his capability to social mimicry that to create his image on the service. Image is social role. Each politician has own image also. It is possible to give examples of the successful images: First President of Russia Boris Yeltsin had image “The father of nation”, President of the USA Ronald Reagan has image "ordinary guy". Leader of liberal‐democratic party of Russia Vladimir Zhirinovsky has image “Clown”. Mayor of Moscow Yury Luzhkov  had image “Ordinary guy in the cap”, Governor general Alexander Lebed had image “Real Colonel”. The actor Alexey Buldakov has played role of "the real colonel" in the movie "Peculiarities of the National Hunt". The singer Alla Pugacheva has sung the "Real Colonel" song. Second President of Russia Vladimir Putin has image “the creator of order”. leader of party “Union of Right Forces” in Russia  Boris Nemtsov has image “curly-haired favorite of women”.  Bad image testifies about professional unfitness to the role of elective politician. Ronald Reagan, as the former actor, who played cowboys and supermen, used bodybuilding and cosmetic for creating of this image.
When husband and wife come to guests, then wife demonstrates respected subordination to the will of own husband, although she behaves completely differently at home. If blind person reminds about own unhappiness constantly and thus blind person degrades own merit, then people begin to avoid of contact with this blind person, because they don't want to have unnecessary problems. It is considered that the low cost of a wedding ring demonstrates that the groom appreciates of bride a little.
According to Herbert Blumer, interaction is the continuous dialogue, in process of which the people observe,  people comprehend intentions of each other and people react to this intentions.[16]   People play scenes as performances in the miniature in order to deceive, to push away, to throw into confusion, to offend, to humiliate or, on the contrary, to show high opinion about the person. Joseph Stalin loved to be late to the meeting in order to show that Joseph Stalin is most important man and nothing will begin without Joseph Stalin.
Harold Garfunkel studied rules of the communication between the people, this rules determine that, when it is appropriate to say something or to be silent, to joke or to deviate from sneers, to tie conversation or to end conversation delicately. If man violates rules of communication, this causes anger and bewilderment. Husband and wife understand each other from the half word and they communicate with help of the hints, for example, husband speaks that their son threw the coin into the automatic machine on the parking today, this hint means that their son had grown that their son has so grown up that their son can reach before cut for coins in the automatic machine.[17]
↑  Allan. Pease Body language. How to read others' thooghts by theirs gestures? Ten. Courtship gestures and signals. https://www.academia.edu/16115299/Body_Language_How_to_Read_Others_Thoughts_by_Their_Gestures_by_Allan_Pease_John_Chandler
↑  Allan. Pease Body language. How to read others' thooghts by theirs gestures? Nine. Eye signals.  https://www.academia.edu/16115299/Body_Language_How_to_Read_Others_Thoughts_by_Their_Gestures_by_Allan_Pease_John_Chandler
↑  Allan. Pease Body language. How to read others' thooghts by theirs gestures? Ten. Courtship gestures and signals. https://www.academia.edu/16115299/Body_Language_How_to_Read_Others_Thoughts_by_Their_Gestures_by_Allan_Pease_John_Chandler
↑  Allan. Pease Body language. How to read others' thooghts by theirs gestures? Ten. Courtship gestures and signals.https://www.academia.edu/16115299/Body_Language_How_to_Read_Others_Thoughts_by_Their_Gestures_by_Allan_Pease_John_Chandler
↑  Allan. Pease Body language. How to read others' thooghts by theirs gestures? Five. Hand-to-face gestures. https://www.academia.edu/16115299/Body_Language_How_to_Read_Others_Thoughts_by_Their_Gestures_by_Allan_Pease_John_Chandler
↑  Allan. Pease Body language. How to read others' thooghts by theirs gestures? Three. Palm gestures.https://www.academia.edu/16115299/Body_Language_How_to_Read_Others_Thoughts_by_Their_Gestures_by_Allan_Pease_John_Chandler
↑  Allan. Pease Body language. How to read others' thooghts by theirs gestures? Three. Palm gestures. https://www.academia.edu/16115299/Body_Language_How_to_Read_Others_Thoughts_by_Their_Gestures_by_Allan_Pease_John_Chandler
↑  Allan. Pease Body language. How to read others' thooghts by theirs gestures? Five. Hand-to-face gestures. https://www.academia.edu/16115299/Body_Language_How_to_Read_Others_Thoughts_by_Their_Gestures_by_Allan_Pease_John_Chandler
↑  Allan. Pease Body language. How to read others' thooghts by theirs gestures? One. A framework for understanding. https://www.academia.edu/16115299/Body_Language_How_to_Read_Others_Thoughts_by_Their_Gestures_by_Allan_Pease_John_Chandler
↑  Allan. Pease Body language. How to read others' thooghts by theirs gestures? Four. Hand and arm gestures.  https://www.academia.edu/16115299/Body_Language_How_to_Read_Others_Thoughts_by_Their_Gestures_by_Allan_Pease_John_Chandler
↑  Allan. Pease Body language. How to read others' thooghts by theirs gestures? One. A framework for understanding. https://www.academia.edu/16115299/Body_Language_How_to_Read_Others_Thoughts_by_Their_Gestures_by_Allan_Pease_John_Chandler
↑  Allan. Pease Body language. How to read others' thooghts by theirs gestures? Eight. Other popular gestures and actions. https://www.academia.edu/16115299/Body_Language_How_to_Read_Others_Thoughts_by_Their_Gestures_by_Allan_Pease_John_Chandler
↑  Allan. Pease Body language. How to read others' thooghts by theirs gestures? One. A framework for understanding. https://www.academia.edu/16115299/Body_Language_How_to_Read_Others_Thoughts_by_Their_Gestures_by_Allan_Pease_John_Chandler
↑  Allan. Pease Body language. How to read others' thooghts by theirs gestures? Nine. Eyes signals. https://www.academia.edu/16115299/Body_Language_How_to_Read_Others_Thoughts_by_Their_Gestures_by_Allan_Pease_John_Chandler
↑  Neil Smelser. Sociology. New-Jersey Prentice Hall 1988. Chapter 5. Social interaction.
The series below is called Fourier cosine series.
The 20th of October 2020, Jean-Yves Fauvergue et Alice Thourot introduced a new proposition of law to put in action within the French government. It included new regulations upon the municipal police’s power, the instauration of new equipment and devices (drones, cameras for pedestrians…) of video monitoring for enhanced  social security and new policies to restrict rights to disseminate videos of the police. The last proposition constitute the 24th article of the law and triggered massive social reactions and discontentment. [1]  We are going to base our study on the 24th article of the law which focuses on the filming of policemen
Sociology is a discipline which examines social structures, the evolution of social life and human behavior within a common culture.
[3] . Proving sociological insight on a law appears beneficial in the full understanding of a policy and its insertion in society. During a period of national confinement, several thousand citizens gathered during the month of November to challenge this law, which they  considere to be liberticidal. According to the government, this law only aims to tackle issues of increasing violence against the police due to online diffusion of videos calling for violence. Even though, this law claims to protect the nation’s police, many activists, journalists as well as the EU and the UN are expressing their dissatisfaction with this law, which is not in line with French values and human rights. [4]
In the midst of growing debates over the police’s role along with the diffusion on online platforms denouncing  police brutality and in the midst of a sanitary crisis, the law’s article 24  appears  to its opponents as a way to repress freedom of the press and gives free rein to impunity for the police’s action and responsibility.
Conflic theorists, centers their sociological perspective upon power relationships within broader social structure, in particular inequality and uneven wealth distribution causing consequent class conflict. [6] According to Chevigny and based on evidence he collected in America, a conflict theorist of the 95s,police brutality is a governmental instrument used for and by social elites to suppress potential social threats that could destabilize their privileges. [7] This perspective emphasize the exploitative aspect of social structure and the global passivity and lack of consciousness due to established and uncontested status quo and consensus. [8] Using this perspective as an evidence, the 2020 French law regulating rights upon video-recording the police, appear as a mean to prevent the population from having access to disturbing videos that could destabilize the established order to the detriment of potential victims, as well as allowing police officers to commit unjustified violence with impunity to groups that would repeat a threat. All of this in order to conserve the existing structure and cover up undesirable social movements, likely to cause social unrest.
The functionalist approach describes society as a large entity constituted of different major social institutions. Functionalists analyse how these institutions interact and coordinate each other to create a stable and robust body.[9]The functionalist theory underlines that the leading causes and consequences of specific events are not direct but rather indirect. As Herbert Spencer, the society from a functionalist perspective is "organs" that move together to become a "body".[10]
On the 17th of November 2020, the government decided to adopt the global security law. The new measure allows citizens to be observed from a drone as well as cameras that police officers will be wearing to record civilians actions during legal procedures. Civilians don't have the right anymore to take any video footage of the police. With the implementation of this law, the government reinforces its leverage on the population. The French people are now watched in all of their movements and are incapable of looking back at the authority, making the look a new object of power.[11] This is what Michel Foucault observes in his book " Discipline and punish" where he talks about the panopticon a project thought by Jeremy Bentham. The "panopticon" would be a tower of control at the centre of a prison where someone could observe every movement of the prisoners without them being able to look back at him. The human tends to act correctly in front of a camera: he stands straight tries to look decent for the eye of the observer. The subject of the film becomes a subject of the observer installing a new power relation between the two. As we are subjects to the others look, we become constrained physically, giving them more power. In this context, allowing a one-way observation of the other provides full control for police officers and attacks our freedom. However, Hobbes demonstrates that giving more power to a member of society is the key to societal cohesion. According to his book, "Léviathan" written in 1651 the " man is a wolf to man". Humans are naturally egoistic beings that are hostile towards his community as this would end into a war where everyone would fight each other. Civilians are therefore obliged to accept to submit themselves to one leader to guarantee security and social cohesion. Initially, men are violent and to prevent from a violent death they will forget about their natural human rights to follow a leader that will bring peace by being able to condemn the ones who don't follow the rules. In this situation, if we follow Hobbes train of thought, by giving more power to police officers, the French government is ordering for more social cohesion within the country.[12]
↑  https://www.vie-publique.fr/loi/277157-loi-de-securite-globale-police (Vie Publique, website, 2020)
↑ http://www.assemblee-nationale.fr/dyn/15/textes/l15b3452_proposition-loi
↑  https://www.asanet.org/about/what-sociology (American Sociological Association, website, 2020)
↑  https://www.euronews.com/2020/11/28/why-is-france-s-new-national-security-bill-controversial (online article by Emma Beswick, euronews, 2020, journal)
↑  https://learn.robinhood.com/articles/gzswQoUGEZSTPk9xcGS2T/what-is-conflict-theory/ (Robinhood, website, September 17, 2020)
↑  Book, “edge of the knife”, 1995, Paul Chevigny
↑  https://digital.lib.washington.edu/researchworks/bitstream/handle/1773/22805/Snyder_washington_0250O_11356.pdf?sequence=1 (Thesis, Policing the Police: Conflict Theory and Police Violence in a Racialized Society, Benjamin L Snyder, University of Washington 2013)
↑  cite book |first=John | last= Holmwood |title= "Funtionalism and its Critics | book= Historical developments and theoretical approaches in sociology |date= 2005 |volume= 2 |url= http://www.eolss.net/sample-chapters/c04/e6-99a-26.pdf
↑  Simon, Walter M. "Herbert Spencer and the "Social Organism"." Journal of the History of Ideas 21, no. 2 (1960): 294-99. Accessed December 1, 2020. doi:10.2307/2708202.
↑ https://d1wqtxts1xzle7.cloudfront.net/57894823/disciplineandpunish-1.pdf?1543623226=&response-content-disposition=inline%3B+filename%3DMichel_Foucault_DISCIPLINE_AND_PUNISH.pdf&Expires=1606846377&Signature=FkAQ551XzQBMNs~jV8a3IxqHVEaVnO~vsPByFjyoDGupCAQnlW1xXbSrbyjUEK5WT3Dbzv7UanGulfEs19lE0z3NRRsAvzR7cr85bZCuajy12RehYBFTavnSr~sAbvgp-AHocIwk1TxWdnVC~RA6eiM4~BBUOqVbzN-SlmWE02QzIAMSvsOizYC4l6yxYyO3sjI9FlhYDrwNHHuLzqhU1JZCzV8Ip9P4p00iFLjEllW4MGf1QTFEbSu5A1HDIgKllTNcrYiZ5Ors629MbJgjHrOKhKf4T4B9-TJX8WAStmAgY5dia0vClxtxhmgJ6ndUVTHMSlv8hkUFhlGHfpCIwg__&Key-Pair-Id=APKAJLOHF5GGSLRBV4ZA
↑ https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2410525
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
More than 170 inmates have escaped from a Haitian prison in Arcahaie, 45km (30 miles) north of the capital Port-au-Prince.
The Model Hot Air Balloons Honor is a component of the Artisan Master Award
.
1 1. State the role each of the following played in the development of flying balloons.
2 2. Cite the principle of Archimedes, and briefly describe how it applies to each of the following
3 3. Using a textbook of Chemistry, or a reference book of scientific tables, draw up a simple table showing the composition of air by weight and by volume.
4 4. Draw up a simple table showing a comparison of the atomic number, atomic weight, and density of hydrogen, helium, nitrogen, and oxygen.
5 5. Name two gases that are used in flying gas filled balloons.
6 6. Explain how heat/temperature affect the density of air, and how this applies to flying hot air balloons.
7 7. Explain the role of each of the following in the structure and flying of a hot air balloon.
8 8. Name two materials that may be used for the envelope of a hot air balloon, and compare the advantages each accords because of its properties.
9 9. Describe how flying balloons have served a useful function in
10 10. At what time of the day do most sport balloon flights take place? Why?
11 11. Describe how a pilot controls the vertical movement of
12 12. Describe how a pilot controls the lateral or horizontal movement of a flying balloon.
13 13. Build to completion one model hot air balloon ( or two if working in pairs ).
14 14. Successfully launch, fly, and recover the model hot air balloon(s) which you have built.
State the role each of the following played in the development of flying balloons.
a. Joseph Michel Montgolfier and Jacques-Etienne Montgolfier
Of the two brothers, it was Joseph who first contemplated building "machines". Joseph observed laundry drying over a fire incidentally form pockets that billowed upwards. Joseph set about building a box-like chamber 1 by 1 by 1.3 meters out of very thin wood and covering the sides and top with lightweight taffeta cloth. Under the bottom of the box he crumpled and lit some paper. The contraption quickly lifted off its stand and collided with the ceiling. Joseph then recruited his brother to balloon building.
The two brothers then set about building a contraption 3 times larger in scale (27 times larger in volume). The lifting force was so great that they lost control of their craft on its very first test flight on 14 December 1782. The device floated nearly 2 kilometres (about 1.2 mi). It was destroyed after landing by the "indiscretion" of passersby.
b. Jean Francois Pilatre de Rozier and Francois Laurent Marquis d'Arlandes.
The first untethered balloon flight, by Rozier and the Marquis d'Arlandes on 21 November 1783.
Jean-François Pilâtre de Rozier (30 March 1754 – 15 June 1785) was a French chemistry and physics teacher, and one of the first pioneers of aviation. His balloon crashed near Wimereux in the Pas-de-Calais during an attempt to fly across the English Channel, and he and his companion, Pierre Romain, became the first known victims of an air crash.
In June 1783, he witnessed the first balloon flight of the Montgolfier brothers. On 19 September, he assisted with the untethered flight of a sheep, a cockerel and a duck from the front courtyard of the Palace of Versailles. After a variety of tests in October, he made the first manned free flight in history on 21 November 1783, accompanied by the ambitious Marquis d'Arlandes. During the 25-minute flight using a Montgolfier hot air balloon, they traveled 12 kilometres from the Château de la Muette to the Butte-aux-Cailles, then in the outskirts of Paris, attaining an altitude of 3,000 feet.
c. Jacques Alexandre Cesar Charles and Nicolas Louis Robert.
In December of 1783, these two flew the first gas balloon, filled with hydrogen. This flight lasted for at least 2 hours, starting from the Tuileries gardens in Paris, and landing outside Paris where it was destroyed by terrified peasants.
Charles went on to discover Charles' Law which describes the relationship between the density of a gas and its temperature.
d. Ben L. Abruzzo, Maxie L. Anderson, and Larry Newman
From 11 August to 17 August 1978, these three completed the first transatlantic balloon flight in the Double Eagle II. They began their flight from Presque Isle, Maine and ended their flight at Miserey, France.
Ben Abruzzo and Larry Newman were also pilots on the Double Eagle V which in 1981 was the first balloon to cross the Pacific Ocean.
e. Bertrand Piccard and Brian Jones
On March 1, 1999, Bertrand Piccard and Brian Jones began the first balloon flight to circumnavigate the earth. Their flight was a success and ended on March 20, 1999. The flight took 19 days and 21 hours. The flight started in Switzerland and ended in Egypt.
Cite the principle of Archimedes, and briefly describe how it applies to each of the following
Archimedes' Principle states: any body fully or partially submerged in a fluid is buoyed up by a force equal to the weight of the fluid displaced.
a. A piece of cork floating in a bowl of water.
Cork is less dense than water, and weighs less than the volume of water displaced, causing the cork to float.
b. A ship floating in the ocean
Ships, though made of dense materials, are shaped so that much of the interior is air. Because the weight of the ship and its cargo is less than the volume of water displaced, the ship will float.
c. A hot air balloon floating in the atmosphere
As long as a balloon plus the gas it contains weighs less than the atmospheric air which it displaces, the balloon will float in the air.
Using a textbook of Chemistry, or a reference book of scientific tables, draw up a simple table showing the composition of air by weight and by volume.
Other (including Neon, Helium, Hydrogen, Xenon, & Radon)
To calculate the average weight of air in a balloon it can be worked out using rough percentages 70% Nitrogen and 30% oxygen as the make up of air. Atomic weight of Nitrogen is 14 g. Atomic weight of Oxygen is 16 g. Nitrogen and Oxygen gasses are formed using two atoms. So for a balloon with 22.4 litres of air use this formular. Of course if you want it more accurate the exact percentages of all gasses present would be used.
So a balloon with 22.4 litres of air weighs 29.2 g plus the weight of the balloon.
Draw up a simple table showing a comparison of the atomic number, atomic weight, and density of hydrogen, helium, nitrogen, and oxygen.
Name two gases that are used in flying gas filled balloons.
Hydrogen & Helium are both less dense than air and may be used when flying a balloon. Warm air is also used for flying balloons, since it is less dense than cold air.
Note: Hydrogen burns violently when ignited.  After the destruction of the Hindenburg, hydrogen was largely abandoned for the flying of manned balloons.
Explain how heat/temperature affect the density of air, and how this applies to flying hot air balloons.
As described by Charles' Law, heat applied to a gas will cause its molecules to move farther apart, reducing it's density. When the air in a balloon is heated above the temperature of the surrounding air, the air in the balloon becomes less dense than the air outside the balloon. Because the balloon is less dense, it will float or rise. The greater the difference in temperature between the air in the balloon and the surrounding air, the greater the difference in density between the air inside and outside the balloon, which increases the lift that the balloon will generate. This explains why balloons are mostly launched in cooler weather.
Explain the role of each of the following in the structure and flying of a hot air balloon.
The outer skin of the balloon, forming the container that holds the gas.
b. Support structure
The framework of larger balloons.
The lower opening through which the hot flame is applied to heat the air.
d. Fuel source
The fuel used to heat the air to make the balloon less dense than the surrounding air.
Name two materials that may be used for the envelope of a hot air balloon, and compare the advantages each accords because of its properties.
Paper may be used for model hot air balloons because of ease of acquisition and low price.
Plastic may be used for model hot air balloons because it is water resistant, easy to work with, and easy to acquire.
Fabric is usually used for larger, manned balloons. The fabric is specially treated.
Describe how flying balloons have served a useful function in
a. Military campaigns
Military uses include: “eyes in the sky”, observation of enemy troops and positions, delivery of explosives to enemy positions, and defensive use of entangling incoming enemy flying craft.
b. Scientific research
Scientific uses include instrument transport for data collecting, atmospheric studies, and aerial photography.
At what time of the day do most sport balloon flights take place? Why?
Early morning is best because the air has cooled over night making the difference of temperature inside & outside greater, thus increasing buoyancy.
Describe how a pilot controls the vertical movement of
a. A hot air balloon
The pilot controls the vertical movement of a hot air balloon by burning more fuel to make the air in the balloon hotter, causes the air in the balloon to become less dense, making it rise. Conversely, turning off the flame and allowing the air in the balloon to cool renders the air in the balloon more dense with respect to the surrounding atmosphere, causing the balloon to descend. More rapid increases in altitude can be achieved by lessening the weight of the balloon usually by dropping ballast, however this is limited by the amount of ballast available.
b. A gas filled balloon
Adding more of the lighter than air gas to ascend, and spilling some of the gas in order to descend varies the altitude of a helium or hydrogen filled balloon.
Describe how a pilot controls the lateral or horizontal movement of a flying balloon.
Horizontal movement of a gas filled flying balloon is entirely at the mercy of air currents. The pilot can only vary the altitude so as to get into the path of air currents, such as the jet stream. This involves careful study of charts of air currents, close attention to weather data, and a certain element of trial and error. Older airships, like the Hindenburg, had a rudder and propellers to move it so that it did not have to depend on air currents.
Build to completion one model hot air balloon ( or two if working in pairs ).
1 50"x20" piece of Linoleum (for making balloon panel form)
Use a rigid or semi-rigid material such as poster board or a piece of linoleum flooring. I would suggest a piece of linoleum flooring,as it is more rigid and can be used more times. Cut out a piece that is 50 inches long and 20 inches wide. For every other measurement, you will have to measure from the center of the form you are creating. You will need to mark each measurement on the outside edge (furthest from the center of the form).
The first measurement is the very bottom of the form (and all others will be going from bottom to top) and is 3 1/2 inches each direction from the center.
Seven inches from the bottom is another measurement of 3 1/2 inches from center.
Four inches up the center line is a measurement of 4 7/8 inches from center.
Four more inches up the center line is a measurement of 6 3/4 inches from center.
Six inches up the center line is a measurement of 8 5/8 inches from center.
Six more inches up the center line is a measurement of 9 5/8 inches from center (this is the widest measurement).
Six inches beyond the widest measurement is a smaller measurement of 9 1/8 inches from center.
Three inches up the line is a measurement of 7 1/2 inches from center.
Three inches further is a measurement of 6 1/2 inches from center.
Three inches further is a measurement of 4 3/4 inches from center.
Three inches further is a measurement of 3 inches from center.
Finally, 2 3/4 to 3 inches further is your top measurement. The top measurement is 1 5/8 inches from center.
Take the pen you are using to mark the measurements with and draw a line, starting from the bottom measurement, all the way around the outside of the measurement. It will look like a light bulb.
Cut along the line that you just drew to remove the extra material around the "light bulb" shape. That should give you the form needed to create the proper shape for the panels of your balloon.
Take 2 pieces of tissue paper and glue them end to end (vertically). Continue doing this with each set of tissue paper until you have 6 panels (a panel is 2 pieces of tissue paper glued end to end (vertically). You should only glue about a thumb's width or one straight line with the glue stick.
Once you have 6 panels, lay them one on top of another, making sure that one end of the stack has an even edge at the bottom of the panels.*
Take your Panel Form and lay it on top of your 6 panels. line up the bottom of the form with the straight edge of your 6 panels.
Trace, with a black marker, along the edge of the form (making sure not to move the form or the panels). The form will not reach the other end your your panel stack. This is alright. Just keep tracing beyond the form in a diagonal line until you reach the top of your panel stack. Then remove the form from on top of the your panels.
Take your scissors and cut on the outside of the black lines that you created by tracing the panel form. When you are done, you should have two (2) sets of scrap, one on each side of your panels. DO NOT THROW THESE AWAY! You may need to patch some panels that develop holes as well as use some of it to create a top for your balloon.
Take the top two (2) panels and pull them out beyond your other panels. Pull the bottom of the two panels out about one inch from the top panel. Take your scissors, and cut flaps into the bottom panel. Only cut in about 1/2 an inch deep. Do this all the way along one side of the bottom of the two panels. The flaps make it much easier to attach panels together.
Take a glue stick and apply glue to the top of the two panels. You want to apply the glue to the side of the panel that is next to the flaps that you just cut. Also when applying the glue, you will only need one glue stick width of glue along the edge. Because the glue dries quickly, you may want to apply, at most, enough glue for 2 or 3 flaps at a time. Then you will fold over the flaps on the bottom panel onto the edge of the top panel where the glue was applied. Continue doing this until you have fully attached 2 of the panels together.
Take a third panel and lay it on top of the 2 panels that you just glued together. Lay it so that the edge of the top panel, of the 2 attached panels, that has not been glued is exposed about an inch.
Once again, cut flaps on the inch of exposed panel that are about a half inch deep. The glue and fold over the flaps to attach the third panel to the second panel. Now you should have 3 panels attached together. Continue repeating steps 8 & 9 (Disregard the 2 panels reference in 8. Instead understand that it will now refer to the 2 panels that you just joined.) until all of your panels have been attached. Remember to alternate which side you are cutting the flaps on so that you do not tamper with any of the joints of the other panels.
Once you have attached all 6 of your panels together, flip them over. Raise the top panel and fold the inner panels back. Do not crease the inner panels. Then replace the top panel.
Cut the bottom panel just as you have every panel before. Remember to make the cuts only about 1/2 inch deep. Then pull the top panel towards the edge of the bottom panel until you have the same width of the bottom panel as you would have for previous panels.
Apply glue to the top panel just as you have for every panel before. Remember that it may be easier to apply glue for only 2 or 3 panels at a time and then fold the flaps over before continuing to apply the glue.
Now. Open up your balloon. You will notice that it does not have a top yet. From the scraps that you saved, when you cut out your panels, pick as large a piece as possible. From this piece, cut as large a circle as you can. (You may fold the piece of paper over once or twice to make cutting out the circle easier.)
Apply glue to the circle you just cut out (around the outside edges by one or two glue stick widths). Then attach the circle to the top of your balloon to cover the hole.
Take some wire and cut roughly a 2 foot section off of the spool.
Take some needle-nose pliers and shape the wire into a rigid circle. (I suggest making a little loop in one end. Turning it slightly. Threading other end of the wire through the loop a little ways and the twisting the threaded wire around the looped end. This keeps the wire circle from expanding or contracting in size.)
Put the open end of the balloon through the wire circle. Then fold the balloon over the wire and glue the folded over end back to the balloon. (You may cut flaps in the open end of the balloon to make it easier to glue.) There will be more balloon surface than wire. You may have to fold the end of a panel or two over a little to decrease the amount of panel that you have to deal with while gluing the balloon over the wire.
At this point your balloon is finished. You will want to go over the entire surface of the balloon to make sure there are no holes in the panels, no unglued panel joints, no unglued balloon cap spots, or rips at the bottom where the wire is. If there are any of these issues, take some of your left over scraps (Aren't you glad you saved them?) and patch the balloon by gluing pieces from your scraps over any holes.
Successfully launch, fly, and recover the model hot air balloon(s) which you have built.
Take a single burner camp stove and use it to heat the air underneath your balloon. Be careful not to get the balloon too close to the flame as it will ignite and burn up.
A more efficient way of getting hot air into your balloon is to take some rigid dryer vent, cut notches that can be slid over the pot stabilizers on your camp stove, and then slide the vent pipe onto the stove. This causes the heated air to be channeled up the vent pipe into the balloon. However, this does not eliminate the possibility of your balloon igniting and burning up. You will have to keep the balloon from touching the vent pipe and also watch the balloon to make sure it doesn't start turning brown nearest the vent pipe.
You will need two (2) people to launch the balloon. One to hold the top end of the balloon up (until enough hot air is within the balloon), and the other to hold the balloon mouth over the stove. Before holding the balloon over the stove, tie a spool of string to the wire that keeps the form of the balloons mouth. Hold the balloon over the stove so that hot air may enter the balloon. Keep the balloon over the stove until it looks/feels as though it is ready to take off (usually anywhere from 30–45 seconds will do). When enough hot air has entered the balloon, release the balloon and let it fly up and away. Let the balloon fly for about twenty (20) seconds. When the balloon has successfully been flown pull on the string that you attached to the balloon to recover the balloon. The string keeps the balloon from being blown away as well as keeping it from flying into trees or other objects.
Please keep safe by using heat resistant gloves such as oven mitts or welders gloves. The metal duct does get hot. The balloon is not over the duct pipe long enough to catch fire. We had to have both gas burners going to get sufficient heat up the pipe. Happy flying. There is a good DVD called Night Crossing about a family who escaped over the Berlin boarder. They built two balloons and had two attempts to freedom.
Content from Scriptapedia should be appropriately cited when used in publications and derivative works. The suggested format for citing Scriptapedia is:
Hovmand, Peter S., Etiënne A. J. A. Rouwette, David F. Andersen, and George. P. Richardson. 2015. Scriptapedia.
When referring to the entire body of Scriptapedia, italics should be used.
When referring to a specific script from Scriptapedia, quotations marks should be used (e.g. "Graphs Over Time" script).
Interior-warming prescriptions have been classified as follows:
Li Zhong Wan (Regulate the Middle Pill)
Li Zhong Hua Tan Wan (Regulate the Middle and Transform Phlegm Pill)
Fu Zi Li Zhong Wan (Prepared Aconite Pill to Regulate the Middle)
Gui Zhi Ren Shen Tang (Cinnamon Twig and Ginseng Decoction)
Xiao Jian Zhong Tang (Minor Construct the Middle Decoction)
Dang Gui Jian Zhong Tang (Tangkuei Decoction to Construct the Middle)
Huang Qi Jian Zhong Tang (Astragalus Decoction to Construct the Middle)
Gui Qi Jian Zhong Tang (Tangkuei and Astragalus Decoction to Construct the Middle)
Da Jian Zhong Tang (Major Construct the Middle Decoction)
An Zhong San (Calm the Middle Powder)
Si Ni Jia Ren Shen Tang (Frigid Extremities Decoction plus Ginseng)
Tong Mai Si Ni Tang (Unblock the Pulse Decoction for Frigid Extremities)
Shen Fu Tang (Ginseng and Prepared Aconite Decoction)
Hui Yang Jiu Ji Tang (Restore and Revive the Yang Decoction)
Dang Gui Si Ni Tang (Tangkuei Decoction for Frigid Extremities)
Dang Gui Si Ni Jia Wu Zhu Yu Sheng Jiang Tang (Tangkuei Decoction for Frigid Extremities plus Evodia and Fresh Ginger)
Huang Qi Gui Zhi Wu Wu Tang (Astragalus and Cinnamon Twig Five-Substance Decoction)
Reference: John K Chen and Tina Chen: "Chinese Herbal Formulas and Applications". Art of Medicine Press Inc. 2009. ISBN-10: 0-9740635-7-6
Mechanical engineers seem to model everything with a spring. Electrical engineers compare everything to a Resistor. Resistors are circuit elements that resist the flow of current. When this is done a voltage appears across the resistor's two wires.
A pure resistor turns electrical energy into heat. Devices similar to resistors turn this energy into light, motion, heat, and other forms of energy.
Current in the drawing above is shown entering the + side of the resistor. Resistors don't care which leg is connected to positive or negative. The + means where the positive or red probe of the volt meter is to be placed in order to get a positive reading. This is called the "positive charge" flow sign convention. Some circuit theory classes (often within a physics oriented curriculum) are taught with an "electron flow" sign convention.
In this case, current entering the + side of the resistor means that the resistor is removing energy from the circuit. This is good. The goal of most circuits is to send energy out into the world in the form of motion, light, sound, etc.
Before calculators and computers, conductance helped reduce the number of hand calculations that had to be done. Now conductance and it's related concepts of admittance and susceptance can be skipped with matlab, octave, wolfram alpha and other computing tools. Learning one or more these computing tools is now absolutely necessary in order to get through this text.
A simple circuit diagram relating current, voltage, and resistance
The drawing on the right is of a battery and a resistor. Current is leaving the + terminal of the battery. This means this battery is turning chemical potential energy into electromagnetic potential energy and dumping this energy into the circuit. The flow of this energy or power is negative.
Current is entering the positive side of the resistor even though a + has not been put on the resistor. This means electromagnetic potential energy is being converted into heat, motion, light, or sound depending upon the nature of the resistor. Power flowing out of the circuit is given a positive sign.
The relationship of the voltage across the resistor V, the current through the resistor I and the value of the resistor R is related by ohm's law:
[Resistor Terminal Relation]
A resistor, capacitor and inductor all have only two wires attached to them. Sometimes it is hard to tell them apart. In the real world, all three have a bit of resistance, capacitance and inductance in them. In this unknown context, they are called two terminal devices. In more complicated devices, the wires are grouped into ports. A two terminal device that expresses Ohm's law when current and voltage are applied to it, is called a resistor.
Resistors come in all forms. Most have a maximum power rating in watts. If you put too much through them, they can melt, catch fire, etc.
Resistance is an electrical passive element which oppose the flow of electricity.
Air can be considered as one of the resistances. Air is used as a resistance in Lightning Arrestors. Also vacuum also is used as a resistor.
Suppose the voltage across a resistor's two terminals is 10 volts and the measured current through it is 2 amps. What is the resistance?
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
The strange, small creature on Harry's bed has large, green eyes, pointy ears, and is wearing a ragged pillowcase. He introduces himself as Dobby, a House-elf. Harry realizes that the mysterious pair of eyes in the hedge had belonged to the elf. Dobby is unable to reveal the Wizarding family that owns him, and hits himself uncontrollably each time he tries. He also punishes himself for speaking badly about his masters and for leaving his home without permission, which he did to deliver a dire warning: Harry must not return to Hogwarts because terrible events will happen at the school. Dobby is once again unable to provide more details. When Harry ignores his warning, Dobby taunts him about his friends not writing to him all summer. When Harry asks how Dobby knew that, Dobby admits having intercepted Harry's letters hoping Harry would think his friends no longer cared about him, and so would not return to school.
Furious, Harry chases Dobby downstairs, where the Dursleys are dining with the Masons. Dobby levitates Aunt Petunia's cake. When Harry refuses his demand to stay away from Hogwarts, Dobby drops the cake, splattering cream over Petunia's spotless kitchen before vanishing. The Dursleys blame Harry, and Uncle Vernon attempts to pacify the Masons, telling them his nephew is slightly disturbed. However, when a messenger owl arrives, Mrs. Mason becomes frightened, dashing Uncle Vernon's hopes for a lucrative business deal.
The owl-borne letter is from Mafalda Hopkirk, an official at the Ministry of Magic, stating that Harry has violated the Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery. Any further magic on Harry's part while away from school may be grounds for expulsion from Hogwarts. Uncle Vernon locks Harry into his bedroom and bars the window, now knowing he is unable to use magic to escape.
Three days later, a rattling on the window bars awakens Harry; in the moonlight, Harry sees Ron peering in at him.
Harry is once again manipulated by forces he is unable to control. A House-elf wants to prevent his return to Hogwarts, nominally for Harry's own protection, though no specific information is provided as to what peril could be there. Harry, believing in his own strength, never considers any real danger awaits at Hogwarts, at least nothing serious enough to compel him to remain at the Dursleys. Dobby probably would have revealed additional information if he could, but as he appears to be a slave, he is likely prohibited from saying more. Of course, there is no definitive proof yet that the House-elf's warning is genuine, and there could even be some sinister motive behind his actions, though that seems unlikely — Dobby's character and actions seem too simplistic and transparent for such a deception, and the deception he does admit to, intercepting Harry's letters, seems almost child-like in its execution and expectation.
If Dobby is indeed being truthful, then his emotional reaction to Harry's respectful manner provides a glimpse into the Wizarding world beyond what Harry, and readers, have seen so far. Dobby's reaction suggests that non-human magical creatures are probably poorly treated in Wizarding society. Also, Dobby's reverential treatment toward Harry re-enforces his fame, and indicates it is even more wide-spread than Harry realized. Harry is still uncomfortable with the unwanted attention, and the knowledge that everyone knows more about him than he does. This fame, at least while he must stay at the Dursleys, is anything but an asset, resulting in his family treating him even more disdainfully as the magical world they so detest increasingly seeps into the Dursley household.
The Ministry's letter clearly surprises Harry. While he had been warned against using magic at home, he was unaware the Ministry could monitor him. However, they obviously are unable to detect just who performed the magic, as it was assumed it was Harry who cast the Hover charm. Harry's obvious fear while in the kitchen with Dobby was concern that Vernon would punish him for disobeying his orders, rather than the Ministry detecting him using magic. Harry knows Vernon still has significant power over him and can make his life even more miserable. Harry may also fear that Vernon will attempt to prevent him returning to Hogwarts, a fear that seems justified when Harry's bedroom becomes a jail cell.
Tension gradually mounts as Harry's chances to return to the place he loves grow ever more remote. While Ron's appearance at the window brings some immediate relief, it also raises questions: though Ron knows Harry's situation, how can he, also being underage, help Harry? And how, in fact, did he reach Harry's room without triggering a similar Ministry warning?
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Why can't Dobby reveal what the danger is to Harry?
Why does Uncle Vernon lock Harry in his bedroom?
Why would Dobby want to help Harry?
How could Dobby know something bad might happen to Harry at Hogwarts? What danger might that be?
How could Dobby, as a slave in another wizard household, be able to stop Harry's mail for all that time without his masters' noticing his absence?
Can Dobby be trusted, or could he be involved in a plot to harm Harry? Explain.
Why does the Ministry believe it was Harry who cast the Hover charm?
Why did the Ministry notice Dobby's magic at the Dursley house, but not the magic that Hagrid used in the first book?
What does Dobby's reaction to the way Harry treats him indicate?
Why has Ron appeared at Harry's window? How can Ron, also too young to use magic, help Harry?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Dobby, we will eventually learn, is the Malfoy family's House-elf; we, like Harry, don't yet know this for certain, as he is restricted from revealing anything to Harry. Perhaps unsurprisingly, Dobby's poor condition reflects how the Malfoys generally treat anyone they consider beneath them, just as Harry's physical condition reflects how badly the Dursleys treat him. We have already seen the Malfoys' disdain for those they consider their inferiors, as shown by Draco's treatment of Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Neville, treatment that will continue throughout the series. It is Dobby's similarly shabby treatment, compared with how Ron, Hermione, and Harry are treated by Draco, that leads the reader to guess, possibly before Harry, that Dobby is the Malfoy's House-elf.
Dobby is a minor character, though he proves extremely useful to Harry throughout the series. Here, he is violating orders by speaking to Harry; we gather this is because Dobby knows how House-elves' lots improved since the Dark Lord's fall following his encounter with Harry, and, aware that the Malfoys are planning some mischief at Hogwarts, has taken it upon himself to warn Harry. Dobby's freely-given loyalty to Harry will continue, and is returned with Harry's respect and treatment due an equal. The contrast between Dobby responding to Harry's needs, and his response to the Malfoys' demands, is a lesson in the difference and value of loyalty that is freely given as opposed to it being demanded.
It should be noted here that Dobby's expectations for ill-treatment from humans seems common among House-elves; we will see it again in Kreacher, and to a lesser extent in Winky. Later, we see that Ron, though treating House-elves benignly, also considers them as menials, while Harry and Hermione feel differently; Hermione is even moved to create a student organization, S.P.E.W., that advocates elf rights. Harry and Hermione have both been raised in non-magical households, and so only recently learned that House-elves existed and are enslaved. Raised as Muggle children, Harry and Hermione were isolated from the prevailing belief that House-elves are an under-class, and should be treated accordingly. Ron, having been raised in the magical world, believes it is morally acceptable to enslave these creatures, and agrees with the generally-held view that most elves are treated well, and are happy only when they have masters to serve. While this may actually be an accurate assessment, it could have resulted from centuries of selective breeding and behavioral conditioning. Bigotry towards House-elves, other non-human magical creatures, and also Muggle-born wizards and witches is a recurring theme throughout the series.
What Lucius Malfoy is planning to send into the school is Tom Riddle's Diary. It is always uncertain whether Malfoy knows exactly what the result will be, or even what the Diary is (Voldemort's Horcrux). The Diary, we later learn, was likely given to Lucius with information that it was an anti-Mudblood weapon, though without details as to how precisely how it would act. If Malfoy had known that the weapon was barely controllable and largely indiscriminate, he might have balked at putting it in such close proximity to his son, Draco, or would at least have issued Draco a stronger warning.
Interestingly, Dobby seems to be better aware of the threat's precise nature than Lucius Malfoy, who is orchestrating it. When Harry asks if the threat is connected to "He Who Must Not Be Named", Dobby claims it is not, but seems to be hinting at something. In the book's final chapter, Dobby states it was not precisely "He Who Must Not Be Named", as the threat was actually from before he stopped using the name Tom Marvolo Riddle in favour of the tabooed "Lord Voldemort". Dobby is clearly aware this early in the book that the threat, as embodied by the Diary and its embedded Horcrux, is Tom Riddle, who only later adopted his new, self-imposed title. We hear later that Lucius had told his son, Draco, that he did not know who the Heir of Slytherin was. We cannot know if Lucius was lying, but whether or not he knew that the Heir was Tom Riddle, he was probably ignorant about the precise nature of the weapon embedded in the Diary; if he had known that it was a Horcrux, he likely would have been far more careful about what he did with it, and would have known that the plan to attack Hogwarts with it would have to be placed in abeyance until Voldemort had returned and could give the go-ahead.
While Dobby knew Tom Riddle would be the threat's agent, it is unlikely he knew how the threat would be carried out. Dobby is probably unaware of what had happened the previous time the Chamber was opened, as Lucius was a student significantly after that sequence of events. (Tom Riddle had attended Hogwarts some fifty years before this; Lucius Malfoy, only about twenty years previous.)
It is mentioned elsewhere that stories involving magic have a drawback: by making anything possible and largely effortless, it becomes too easy for the hero to succeed, thus making the story uninteresting. The Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery is an intriguing method for the author to impose limitations on using magic. Harry certainly could make his life easier by judiciously using magic during his summer vacations, but that would remove an interesting plot point. The Dursleys, annoying as they are, will remain useful as a contrast to Harry's life at Hogwarts, and his means of coping with his aunt and uncle without using magic becomes a ruler by which to measure his growing character and maturity.  There is an exception to this in the next book when Harry reacts against his family using magic, though it is entirely unintentional, driven by extreme emotions after provocation.
The Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery is significant later in the series. The decree states that it is a  "reasonable" restriction, indicating that circumstances exist under which a minor can use magic, presumably in an emergency situation. While Harry is only issued a warning for the Hover charm, which he did not even cast, later, in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, when Harry and cousin Dudley are attacked by Dementors intending to suck out their souls, Harry casts a Patronus charm to repel them. However, the Ministry of Magic immediately suspends Harry from Hogwarts and charges him with a crime, forcing him to attend a full Ministry hearing. Their sole motive at that time is to permanently expel him not only from Hogwarts, but wizard society, thus removing him as an impediment to the Ministry's official agenda regarding Voldemort. The Ministry misuses the Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery solely to achieve this; Harry is forced to prove that his using magic in that situation is, in fact, reasonable, in the face of a court biased strongly against him.
The Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery is here mentioned for the first time by name. It is earlier mentioned in the previous book and in the first chapter of this book without being named. Concerns about violating this Decree will cause Harry to bolt early in the next book, only to be effectively pardoned in the following chapter. The Decree is mentioned again in the fifth book, and it is used later in that book as a weapon against Harry, at which it proves inadequate. Finally it is mentioned that the Trace enforcing the Decree has been terminated on the morning of Harry's 17th birthday.
"Harry Potter" is the first thing Dobby says in the series. It will be also the last thing he says in the series, before he dies.
The warning letter was sent by Mafalda Hopkirk. Mafalda will send Harry two more letters when he uses magic to protect himself and Dudley from Dementors. Later, when the Trio breaks into the Ministry, Hermione will be disguised as Mafalda by using Polyjuice Potion.
Front Page: Radiation Oncology | RTOG Trials | Randomized Trials
Per NCCN guidelines (v.1.2010), stage based on TURBT
Segmental cystectomy (highly selected patients with a solitary lesion in a suitable location, no Tis)
Radical cystectomy with pelvic lymphadenectomy is considered the standard of care.
In women, the anterior wall of the vagina, the ovary and the uterus are also taken
In men, the prostate and seminal vesicles are taken. Prostate-sparing radical cystectomy is controversial, as up to 40% may have urothelial cancer or prostate cancer found in the prostate
Dissection of presacral nodes is controversial and institution-dependent
Bladder reconstruction includes incontinent versus continent urinary tract
Incontinent urinary tract is when urine drains from ureters through segment of ilium to skin surface
Two types of continent urinary tracts include cutaneous reservoir versus orthotopic ileal reservoir. A cutaneous reservoir is  made from bowel with a valve to maintain continence. An orthotopic ileal reservoir is an ileal conduit which is anastomosed to the urethra and has improved the quality of life after radical cystectomy.
Operative mortality rate is generally cited at 2-5%, but tends to be lower in high volume institutions.
Outcomes depend on pathologic extent of disease
Overall 5-year OS after surgery alone is ~50%, primarily because ~50% will die of metastatic disease after radical cystectomy
Localized disease pTis-T2N0 (50-60%): 5-year OS 75-85%
Locally advanced disease pT3-T4aN0 (20-30%): 45-55%
Regional lymph node mets pN1-3 (20-30%): 25-35%
McGill; 2006 (1965-2006) PMID 16846680 -- "Delay in the surgical treatment of bladder cancer and survival: systematic review of the literature." (Fahmy NM, Eur Urol. 2006 Dec;50(6):1176-82. Epub 2006 Jun 13.)
Systematic review. 13 studies, 7700 patients. Effect of treatment interval on survival. Due to heterogeneity, meta-analysis could not be performed.
Outcome: No correlation in 3 papers (23%), trend to worse survival in 2 papers (15%), significant impact on survival 8 papers (62%)
Conclusion: Delays to treatment appear associated with worse outcome; window of opportunity <12 weeks from diagnosis to radical cystectomy
To decrease DM but also improves local control.
Rome; 2006 PMID 16419069 — "Adjuvant chemotherapy in muscle-invasive bladder carcinoma: a pooled analysis from phase III studies." (Ruggeri EM, Cancer. 2006 Feb 15;106(4):783-8.)
Meta-analysis. 5 RCTs, 350 patients. Benefit of adjuvant chemotherapy in addition to radical cystectomy
Conclusion: Results of analysis favor use of adjuvant chemotherapy
University of Southern California; 1991 PMID 1997689 - "The role of adjuvant chemotherapy following cystectomy for invasive bladder cancer: a prospective comparative trial." (Skinner DG et al. J Urol. 1991 Mar;145(3):459-64; discussion 464-7.)
Retrospective. 91 patients, s/p cystectomy + LN dissection. TCC with pathologic stage (3rd edition TNM, i.e. deep muscle invasion) T3-4 or N+. Randomized to 4 courses of cisplatin, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide (PAC) qmonth vs no further tx.
At 3 years, disease recurrence in 30% (chemo) vs 54%, death from bladder cancer 29% vs 50%. Difference in death from any cause (34% vs 50%) was N.S. Benefit of chemotherapy on survival and NED for all stratified nodal groups (0 LN, 1 LN, 2+ LN), but prognosis for 2+ LN was poor.
Conclusion: Adjuvant chemo improves survival for muscle-invasive bladder cancer
Advantage of neoadjuvant chemotherapy is the prognostic value of seeing a response to chemo.
Patients with a good response can potentially be triaged towards a bladder sparing approach.
Patients who achieve complete response (cT0) after neoadjuvant chemo still require cystectomy based on early results from SWOG 0129 ASCO 2008
SWOG 8710, 2003 - PMID 12944571 — "Neoadjuvant chemotherapy plus cystectomy compared with cystectomy alone for locally advanced bladder cancer." Grossman HB et al. NEJM 2003 Aug 28;349(9):859-66.
Randomized prospective trial comparing surgery alone to neoadjvuant MVAC
Nordic study, 2004 (1985-97) - PMID 15036674 — "Neoadjuvant cisplatinum based combination chemotherapy in patients with invasive bladder cancer: a combined analysis of two Nordic studies." Sherif A et al. Eur Urol. 2004 Mar;45(3):297-303.
Retrospective. 620 in two consecutive trials. T1G3, T2-T4a.
Conclusion: survival benefit for neoadjuvant cisplatin-based chemotherapy.
Meta-analysis: Ontario, 2004 (1984-2002) - PMID 14713760 — "Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder: a systematic review and meta-analysis." Winquist E et al. J Urol. 2004 Feb;171(2 Pt 1):561-9.
Absolute survival benefit of 6.5% for neoadj chemotherapy.
Preoperative radiation was popularized in the early 1980's with the theoretical advantage of making cells less viable and potentially decreasing dissemination of tumor cells after surgical manipulation.
Original data out of M.D. Anderson suggested a survival benefit with preoperative radiation therapy, but only when compared to historical controls using outdated surgical techniques.
Preoperative radiation fell out of favor with the advent of ileal conduits to radical cystectomy as irradiated bowel makes for a poor anastomosis and conduit.
Georgia; 1998 PMID 9677446 -- "Planned preoperative radiation therapy in muscle invasive bladder cancer; results of a meta-analysis." (Huncharek M, Anticancer Res. 1998 May-Jun;18(3B):1931-4.)
Meta-analysis. 5 RCTs comparing preop RT with cystectomy alone.
Outcome: Unadjusted analysis benefit of RT (OR 0.7, SS), however, after correction for design deficiencies, no benefit (OR 0.9, NS)
Conclusion: Available clinical trial data do not support role for routine preop RT
SWOG/Intergroup Preoperative Radiation Trial PMID 9072571, Journal of Urology, 1997
Radiation delivered 400 cGy x 5 fractions
% alive with intact bladder - 80%
No trials directly compare cystectomy and bladder-preservation.
There are 2 main concerns about bladder preservation compared with radical cystectomy:
Toxicity of radiation therapy on bladder function, which thus far appears to be reasonable
Field cancerization effect, whereby 30-50% of patients experience a local recurrence (~50% invasive and ~50% superficial), either in the area of tumor or in a different part of bladder. If bladder preservation is selected, close surveillance is critical
Yorkshire, UK; 2010 (1993-1996) PMID 19665319 -- "A 10-year retrospective review of a nonrandomized cohort of 458 patients undergoing radical radiotherapy or cystectomy in Yorkshire, UK." (Munro NP, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010 May 1;77(1):119-24. Epub 2009 Aug 6.)
Retrospective. 458 patients in Northern and Yorkshire Cancer Registry
Outcome: 10-year OS RT 22% vs radical cystectomy 24% (NS)
Conclusion: No significant difference in all-cause survival between surgery and radiotherapy
Definitive RT vs Preop RT And Surgery
Danish National Bladder Cancer Group, DAVECA 8201 (1983-1986) -- Definitive RT vs Preop RT + cystectomy
Randomized. 183 patients. cT2-T4a. Arm 1) Pre-op RT 40 Gy + cystectomy vs Arm 2) Radical RT 60 Gy with cystectomy for salvage.
1991 PMID 1785004 — "Treatment of advanced bladder cancer category T2 T3 and T4a. A randomized multicenter study of preoperative irradiation and cystectomy versus radical irradiation and early salvage cystectomy for residual tumor. DAVECA protocol 8201. Danish Vesical Cancer Group." (Sell A, Scand J Urol Nephrol Suppl. 1991;138:193-201.) Median F/U 4.2 years
Outcome: Salvage cystectomy 28%. Local/pelvic failure Cystectomy 7% vs RT 35%, no difference in DM. No difference in OS (29% vs 23%)
Conclusion: Improved pelvic control with surgery, but no difference in survival
Institute of Urology; 1982 PMID 7044462 -- "Treatment of T3 bladder cancer: controlled trial of pre-operative radiotherapy and radical cystectomy versus radical radiotherapy." (Bloom HJ, Br J Urol. 1982 Apr;54(2):136-51.)
Randomized. 67 patients, Stage B2-C (T3). Arm 1) definitive RT 60 Gy vs Arm 2) Preoperative RT 50 Gy followed by cystectomy
1977 PMID 402205 -- "Bladder cancer: superiority of preoperative irradiation and cystectomy in clinical stages B2 and C." (Miller LS, Cancer. 1977 Feb;39(2 Suppl):973-80.)
Conclusion: Institutional policy has changed to preoperative RT with planned cystectomy, except for patients declining or medically unfit for surgery
Initially a common treatment approach to bladder cancer, particularly for older patients and larger tumors
5-year OS for that patient population was ~30%, with local failure in ~50%; clinical CR after RT associated with improved survival
Dose and fractionation not clearly established, Perez recommends 60-66 Gy in 1.8-2 Gy/fx. Please see Radiation Technique
Definitive RT no longer used, due to both advances in radical cystectomy and development of orthotopic ileal reconstruction (for patients who get surgery) and due to benefit of concurrent chemo-RT (for patients who get bladder preservation)
Edinburgh; 1986 (1971-1982) PMID 2424878 -- "Primary radical radiotherapy for T3 transitional cell cancer of the bladder: an analysis of survival and control." (Quilty PM, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1986 Jun;12(6):853-60.)
Retrospective. 333 patients, T3 tumors <10cm, treated with radical RT, prior TUR in 23%. Median dose 55/20, majority treated with 3 field technique
Outcome: pCR 41%. 5-year local control 24%. 5-year OS 26%, 10-year OS 15%. Predictors for local control: Hgb >13 g/dl, tumor <7cm, urea <7 mmol/l, Grade 3 tumor
Conclusion: Patients should be selected for primary RT on the basis of tumor size, grade, and plasma urea level
Harvard; 1985 (1974-1982) PMID 4032570 — "Full-dose irradiation for patients with invasive bladder carcinoma: clinical and histological factors prognostic of improved survival." (Shipley WU, J Urol. 1985 Oct;134(4):679-83.)
Retrospective. 55 patients, T2-T4 (T2 14%, T3 53%, T4 33%). RT alone 64-68 Gy
Outcome: 5-year OS 28% (T2-T3 45% vs T4 9%, SS). Papillary 63% vs solid/flat pattern 20% (SS). Complete TUR 54% vs incomplete 17% (SS). Urethral obstruction none 47% vs present 14% (SS)
International BA06 30894 (1989-1995) -- definitive therapy +/- neoadjuvant CMV x3
Randomized. 976 patients from 106 institutions, muscle invasive urothelial carcinoma (T2G3-T4 N0-Nx). Arm 1) definitive therapy (surgery 50%, RT 43%, surgery + RT 8%) vs Arm 2) neoadjuvant chemotherapy cisplatin 100 mg/m2 + MTX 30 mg/m2 + vinblastine 4 mg/m2 Q3W x 3 cycles. Choice of definitive therapy based on patient/physician preference; RT patients primarily older, Nx, and T3-T4
2011 PMID 21502557 -- "International Phase III Trial Assessing Neoadjuvant Cisplatin, Methotrexate, and Vinblastine Chemotherapy for Muscle-Invasive Bladder Cancer: Long-Term Results of the BA06 30894 Trial." (International Collaboration of Trialists, J Clin Oncol. 2011 Jun 1;29(16):2171-7. Epub 2011 Apr 18.)
Outcome: 10-year locoregional relapse CMV- 39% vs CMV+ 40% (NS), mets-free survival 23% vs 33% (SS), overall survival 30% vs 36% (SS). Cause of death bladder cancer in CMV- 72% vs CMV+ 70%. Benefit comparable for surgery (26% reduction in risk of death) and radiation (20% reduction)
Toxicity: chemo-related mortality 1%, operative mortality 3.7%
Conclusion: Neoadjuvant CMV improves survival and should be considered state of the art. No impact on locoregional control
Randomized. 99 patients. cT2-T4b, either definitive therapy or pre-cystectomy (selected a priori). Arm 1) RT 40/20 or 60/30 vs Arm 2) Same RT with concurrent cisplatin 100 mg/m2 Q2W x3 cycles
1996 PMID 8918486 — "Improved local control of invasive bladder cancer by concurrent cisplatin and preoperative or definitive radiation. The National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group." (Coppin CM, J Clin Oncol. 1996 Nov;14(11):2901-7.) Median F/U 6.5 years
Outcome: 5-year pelvic failure RT 59% vs chemo-RT 40% (SS), first site pelvic failure 52% vs chemo-RT 29% (SS), held in both definitive and preop groups. No difference in DM. 3-year OS 47% vs 33% (NS). If definitive treatment, bladder preservation RT 36% vs chemo-RT 70% (NS)
Conclusion: Concurrent cisplatin may improve pelvic control and bladder preservation, but not (with a trend) overall survival.
BC2001 (2001-2008) -- RT vs RT+ concurrent fluorouracil and mitomycin C (also randomized to whole bladder vs. more localized)
Randomized. 360 patients from 45 UK centers. T2-T4a N0 (could have neoadjuvant cisplatin). Arm 1) radiation alone 55/20 or 64/32 (per center)with no pelvic LN RT vs. Arm 2) same RT with CI 5FU (500 mg/m2) fractions 1-5 & 16-20 + mitomycin C 12mg/m2 day 1
2012 PMID 22512481 -- "Radiotherapy with or without chemotherapy in muscle-invasive bladder cancer" (James, N. D. et al. N Engl J Med 366, 1477–1488 (2012)) Median follow up: 70 mo
Locoregional relapse at 2 years 18% vs. 32% (HR 0.57).
	Primarily due to decreased recurrent muscle-invasive bladder cancer (11% vs 19%), not non-muscle invasive bladder CA (14% vs 17%) or pelvic LN relapse (5% vs 7%). The low incidence of isolated pelvic relapse is notable given that patients were treated without pelvic LN RT.
Overall survival not significantly improved at 5 years 48% vs. 35% (HR 0.82; 95% CI: 0.63-1.09; P=0.16), but curves diverge after 2 years.
Chemotherapy associated with significantly more Grade 3-5 GI toxicity by CTCAE, primarily due to GI toxicity, but no difference in late toxicity by RTOG or LENT/SOM scales.
Conclusion: Concurrent 5FU and mitomycin C improves locoregional recurrence free survival and reduces local failure.
Naples, Italy; 2008 (1994-2002) PMID 18008364 -- "Bladder-sparing, combined-modality approach for muscle-invasive bladder cancer: a multi-institutional, long-term experience." (Perdona S, Cancer. 2008 Jan 1;112(1):75-83.)
Retrospective. 121 patients, TURBT and cT2-T4 bladder cancer (typically younger, T2, no hydronephrosis, no comorbidities). Neoadjuvant MCV x2, then definitive RT 65 Gy (n=43) or same RT with concurrent cisplatin or carboplatin (n=78). Restaging TUR 6 weeks later. Median F/U 5.5 years
Outcome: pCR 86%. Local recurrence 34% (invasive 18%). 5-year OS 68% (if TURBT R0 70%, if R1 56%), 5-year bladder preservation 51%. 5-year DSS after salvage cystectomy (overall in 20% patients) 50%
Toxicity: Cystectomy for shrinking bladder <1%, Grade 4 2%, urgency with nocturia 24%. Good overall bladder function
Conclusion: Conservative combined treatment is a reasonable alternative to radical cystectomy
Initial chemo-RT; 1990 (1985-1988) PMID 2211216 — "Radiotherapy with and without cisplatin in bladder cancer." (Sauer R, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1990 Sep;19(3):687-91.)
Retrospective. 67 patients, cT1-T4 on TURBT. RT 50.4/28 with concurrent cisplatin 25 mg/m2 D1-5, W1 and W5. Cystoscopy 6 weeks. Compared to historical and contemporaneous RT-only cohorts
Outcome: pCR 72% (including 70% in R2 TURBT). If pCR, local recurrence 18%; if pPR, local recurrence 9% (1/11). 3-year OS 66% (though T4 only 25%). Historical comparison of pCR: if complete TUR RT 78% vs chemo-RT 67% (NS), if incomplete TUR 45% vs 76%
Toxicity: Worsening of bladder function by chemo-RT not observed
Conclusion: Addition of concurrent cisplatin improves control rated, particularly if suboptimal TURBT perfomed, but has no impact on survival
Update; 1998 (1982-1996) PMID 9422567 — "Efficacy of radiochemotherapy with platin derivatives compared to radiotherapy alone in organ-sparing treatment of bladder cancer." (Sauer R, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1998 Jan 1;40(1):121-7.)
Retrospective. 282 patients, TURBT, cT2-T4 or high risk T1. Prior to 1986, primary RT (n=98) to 54-56 Gy, after concurrent chemo-RT with cisplatin (n=115) or carboplatin (n=69), RT 59.4 Gy. Cystoscopy 4-12 weeks later. If no pCR, salvage cystectomy. Median F/U 7.5 years
Outcome: pCR RT 57% vs cis-RT 85% vs carbo-RT 70% (cis vs carbo SS). 5-year OS 36% vs 61% vs 47%. 5-year bladder preservation 38% vs 47% vs 41% (79% of surviving patients maintained their bladder)
Toxicity: Grade 3 30%, Grade 4 1%
Conclusion: Addition of cisplatin improves bladder preservation and survival. Cystectomy should be reserved for those who fail chemo-RT
Update; 2002 (1982-2000) PMID 12118019 -- "Combined-modality treatment and selective organ preservation in invasive bladder cancer: long-term results." (Rodel C, J Clin Oncol. 2002 Jul 15;20(14):3061-71.)
Retrospective. 415 patients, TURBT, cT2-T4 (79%) or high risk T1 (21%). Primary RT (30%) or chemo-RT (70%), cystoscopy ~6 weeks later. If pCR, observation, otherwise several treatment options (observation 36%, local treatment 26%, radical cystectomy 37%). Median F/U 5 years
Outcome: Overall pCR 72%, cisplatin-RT pCR 82% (extent of TUR strong predictor). After CR, 10-year local control 64%, DM 35%, bladder preservation 80%. Salvage cystectomy (20% overall) 10-year DSS 45%; time-to-cystectomy nonresponders 6 months, responders with local failure 26 months
Toxicity: cystectomy for contracted bladder in 2%
Conclusion: Complete TUR with chemo-RT a reasonable alternative to radical cystectomy
Please see the RT Alone or Chemo-RT section above for more studies
Please see the Selective Bladder-Sparing Approach section below for further discussion of bladder preservation options
SWOG 9312; 2001 (1993-1998) - PMID 11125363 — "Combination cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil and radiation therapy for locally advanced unresectable or medically unfit bladder cancer cases: a Southwest Oncology Group Study." (Hussain MH, J Urol. 2001 Jan;165(1):56-60.
Phase II. 56 patients. Locally advanced T2-T4N+ (34%) or inoperable (21%) or refused cystectomy (45%). TURBT followed by RT 60 Gy with concurrent cisplatin 75 mg/m2 and 5-FU 1000 mg/m2 Q4 weeks. Treatment completed as planned in 57%, response not determined in 18%
Outcome: CR 49%. 5-year OS 32%, for patients who refused surgery 5-year OS 45%
Conclusion: Concurrent 5-FU/cisplatin with RT is feasible, may be alternative for cystectomy
National Bladder Cancer Group; 1987 (1980-85) PMID 3613023 — Treatment of invasive bladder cancer by cisplatin and radiation in patients unsuited for surgery. (Shipley WU et al. JAMA. 1987 Aug 21;258(7):931-5.)
70 pts, T2-T4. Cisplatin + RT. RT 45 Gy + boost to total of 64.8 Gy. Cisplatin q3w x 8 courses, beginning day before RT.
Outcome: cCR 77%. 4-yr OS 57% (for those with initial CR) vs 11% (non-responders).
Wayne State; 2005 PMID 16029789 — "A single institution experience with concurrent capecitabine and radiation therapy in weak and/or elderly patients with urothelial cancer." (Patel B et al. IJROBP 2005 Aug 1;62(5):1332-8.)
Retrospective. 14 patients, median age 80. RT 54-68.4 Gy with concurrent capecitabine 1600 mg/m2. Median F/U 10 months
Outcome: cCR 77%, local relapse 27%
Toxicity: Fatigue 43%, dehydration 43%, Grade 3 diarrhea 29%
Conclusion: Concurrent capecitabine and RT well tolerated in elderly patients
Operable patients, for whom the goal is to spare bladder but with planned cystectomy if no complete response to early induction
Initial favorable reports from MGH, RTOG, Paris, and Erlangen in early 1990's
Conceptual approach: Induction chemo-RT to ~45 Gy, then cystoscopy ~3 weeks later. Split-course consolidation chemo-RT to ~65 Gy if pathologic complete response (pCR), else planned radical cystectomy. This way, RT dose to bowel is kept in range to allow construction of conduit
The main difference between definitive chemo-RT and selective bladder-sparing approach is timing of salvage cystectomy (after ~45 Gy vs ~65 Gy).
It is not well documented whether delivering full chemo-RT dose improves pCR and ultimately bladder preservation rates
The incremental benefit of adding consolidative chemo-RT after induction is also not well established (e.g Erlangen chemo-RT 50.4 Gy outcomes)
Conversely, it is not well documented whether delaying radical cystectomy impacts outcomes in this setting. If performed alone, radical cystectomy should be performed within 12 weeks of diagnosis (see above)
The toxicity impact of irradiating bowel that might serve as a conduit to higher dose with definitive chemo-RT is also not well documented, particularly if partial bladder RT is used
The QoL in patients with post-therapy native bladder vs reconstructed neobladder has not been well evaluated
Current RTOG protocols use fundamentally the same approach as RTOG 85-12, with more modern chemo
CR rate of 70-80% with multi-agent chemotherapy + RT after radical TURBT. Extent of TURBT critical predictor of success, while multifocal disease, extensive CIS, and presence of hydronephrosis are a detriment
5-yr OS for bladder preservation 50-60%, majority with an intact bladder. These OS survival rates are comparable to cystectomy series
Please also see the section on Quality of Life evaluations below
RTOG 05-24 (ongoing) - A Phase I/II Trial of a Combination of Paclitaxel and Trastuzumab With Daily Irradiation or Paclitaxel Alone With Daily Irradiation Following Transurethral Surgery for Non-Cystectomy Candidates With Muscle-Invasive Bladder Cancer.
T2-T4a, N0-1 or T1 grade 3. Medically inoperable. 1.8 Gy for 39.6 Gy (small pelvic fields) then 14.4 Gy (whole bladder to 54 Gy) then 10.8 Gy (boost) for total 64.8 Gy. Weekly Taxol +/- Herceptin x 6 cycles. Herceptin given only for pts with her-2-neu overexpression (2-3+ by IHC).
RTOG 02-33 - Concomitant boost. TURBT followed by induction chemo/RT (BID RT and randomized to Taxol + cisplatin vs 5-FU and cisplatin), evaluate tumor response, then consolidation chemo/RT (BID RT and randomized to same arm as above), then 4 cycles adjuvant chemo (Gemzar, Taxol, Cisplatin).  Cystectomy for those who fail induction.
Purpose is to compare efficacy and morbidity of taxol vs 5-FU combined with cisplatin (comparing trials 95-06 and 99-06).
Radiation — Induction:40.3 Gy: BID RT x 13 days, 1.6 Gy small pelvic fields, 1.5 Gy boost to whole bladder (days 1-5) or 1.5 Gy boost to bladder tumor (8 days; days 8-17). Consolidation: 24 Gy: 1.5 Gy BID small pelvic fields x 8 days.  Total: 64.3 Gy (44.8 small pelvic, 7.5 whole bladder,  12 tumor)
2010 ASTRO Abstract -- "Preliminary Results of RTOG 0233: A Phase II Randomized Trial for Muscle-invading Bladder Cancer Treated by Transurethral Resection and Radiotherapy Comparing Two Forms of Concurrent Induction Chemotherapy" (Zietman AL, IJROBP Volume 78, Issue 3, Supplement , Pages S31-S32, 1 November 2010)
93 pts. Median F/U 3 yrs. 98% completed induction in TC arm vs 96% FC. Adj chemo completed in 67% of pts with TC and 53% for FC. Response (T0, Ta, or Tcis) after induction: 87% TC vs 79% FC. CR (T0) 72% and 62%. Alive with bladder intact at 4 yrs: 73% vs 69%.
Toxicity: grade 4 tox during induction: 4 in TC vs 1 in FC; during adj chemo: 11 in TC vs 15 in FC. Most toxicities were renal or heme. No GI grade 3+ tox in either arm during induction, but 3 seen during consolidation with FC. Late gr 3+ RT toxicity 9% TC and 4% FC, mostly bladder.
Conclusion: "Both induction regimens had high rates of completion, response, and bladder preservation. The completion rate for subsequent adjuvant chemotherapy was, however, lower for both arms. This study provides a useful benchmark for the evaluation of novel chemo-radiotherapy combinations in bladder cancer."
RTOG 89-03 (1990-93) -- Selective chemo-RT bladder sparing +/- induction MCV x2 cycles
Phase III. Stopped prematurely due to severe neutropenia and sepsis. 123 of 174 patients. cT2-T4a. Randomized to Arm 1) 2 cycles of MCV before, or Arm 2) no MCV before RT 39.6/22 with concurrent cisplatin 100 mg/m2 q3w x2 courses (per RTOG 88-02), cystoscopy 4 weeks later. If CR, consolidative RT 25.2/14 with concurrent cisplatin 100 mg/m2, else radical cystectomy. Total RT dose 64.8/36
1998 PMID 9817278 — "Phase III trial of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in patients with invasive bladder cancer treated with selective bladder preservation by combined radiation therapy and chemotherapy: initial results of Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 89-03." (Shipley WU, J Clin Oncol. 1998 Nov;16(11):3576-83.) Median F/U 5 years
Outcome: pCR MCV+ 61% vs MCV- 55%. r-year bladder preservation 36% vs 40% (NS). DM 33% vs 39% (NS). 5-year OS 48% vs 49% (NS) Predictors for worse outcome hydronephrosis and incomplete TURBT
Combined analysis, RTOG 9906 & 0233
2014 Abstract: ASCO Genitourinary Cancers Symposium -- "Long-term outcomes among patients who achieve complete or near-complete responses after the induction phase of bladder-preserving combined modality therapy for muscle-invasive bladder cancer: A pooled analysis of RTOG 9906 and 0233." (Mitin T, J Clin Oncol 32, 2014 (suppl 4; abstr 284))
Both trials allowed pts with near-complete response (Ta or Tis) after induction to proceed with consolidation therapy.
Median f/u 5.9 yr. Bladder recurrence in 36% of T0 pts vs. 28% of Ta/Tis pts (NS). DSS, OS, and survival with intact bladder were not significantly different.
Conclusion: "There is no apparent difference in the bladder recurrence and salvage cystectomy rates between complete and near-complete responders as judged at the time of cystoscopic evaluation after induction phase of bladder preserving CMT. It is appropriate to recommend that patients with Ta or Tis after induction chemo-RT continue with bladder-sparing therapy."
RTOG 99-06; 2009 (1999-2002) PMID 19100600 -- "Phase I-II RTOG study (99-06) of patients with muscle-invasive bladder cancer undergoing transurethral surgery, paclitaxel, cisplatin, and twice-daily radiotherapy followed by selective bladder preservation or radical cystectomy and adjuvant chemotherapy." (Kaufman DS, Urology. 2009 Apr;73(4):833-7. Epub 2008 Dec 18.)
Phase I/II. 80 patients, cT2-T4a on full TURBT. Induction chemo-RT, RT 40.3/26 BID over 3 weeks with concurrent cisplatin 120 mg/m2 + taxol 150 mg/2. Cystoscopy/urine cytology 3 weeks later. If CR, consolidation with chemo-RT, RT 24/16 BID with concurrent cisplatin/taxol. Total RT dose split-course 64.3/42 BID. Adjuvant cisplatin/gemcitabine x4 cycles. Median F/U 4.2 years
Outcome: pCR 81%. After full course, 5-year local recurrence 28%, regional failure 11%, DM 31%. 5-year DSS 71%, and OS 56%
Toxicity: Acute G3-4 26% (mainly GI) during induction, 8% during consolidation. Late toxicity 6% but resolved in all
Conclusion: Favorable tumor response; deserves further study
RTOG 97-06; 2003 (1998-2000) PMID 14529770 — "RTOG 97-06: initial report of a phase I-II trial of selective bladder conservation using TURBT, twice-daily accelerated irradiation sensitized with cisplatin, and adjuvant MCV combination chemotherapy." (Hagan MP, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2003 Nov 1;57(3):665-72.)
Phase I/II. 47 patients, cT2-T4aN0 on aggressive TURBT, operable. Induction RT 40.8/24 BID with concurrent cisplatin 20 mg/m2 QW, cystoscopy in 3 weeks. If CR, consolidative RT 24/16 BID with concurrent cisplatin 20 mg/m2 QW, followed by MCV x3 cycles. If less than CR, radicarl cystectomy + MCV x3 cycles. Total RT dose 64.8/40
Outcome: pCR 74%. After full course, local recurrence 18% (invasive 12%). 3-year OS 61%, 3-year bladder preservation 48%
Toxicity: Grade 3 in 20%; adjuvant chemo Grade 3-4 toxicty 77%
Conclusion: Accelerated chemo-RT well tolerated, with results comparable to prior studies. Adjuvant chemo poorly tolerated
RTOG 95-06; 2000 (1995-1997) PMID 11110598 — "The initial results in muscle-invading bladder cancer of RTOG 95-06: phase I/II trial of transurethral surgery plus radiation therapy with concurrent cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil followed by selective bladder preservation or cystectomy depending on the initial response." (Kaufman DS, Oncologist. 2000;5(6):471-6.)
Phase I/II. 34 patients. cT2-T4aNx on aggressive TURBT. Used Paris regimen: Induction RT hyperfractionated split-course RT 24/8 over 3 weeks (D1, D3, D15, D17 BID) with concurrent cisplatin 15 mg/m2 + 5-FU 500 mg/m2, cystoscopy in 3-4 weeks. If CR, consolidative RT 20/8 (D1, D3, D15, D17 BID) with concurrent 5-FU/cisplatin, else radical cystectomy. Total RT dose 44/16. Median F/U 2.4 years
Outcome: pCR 67%. After full course, local recurrence 45% (invasive 15%), DM 26%. 3-year OS 86%, 3-year bladder preservation 66%
Toxicity: Grade 3-4 hematologic toxicity 21%
Conclusion: Concern about local recurrence and toxicity, until data matures, plan to go ahead with conventional BID RT
Initial MGH report; 1993 PMID 8413433 — "Selective bladder preservation by combination treatment of invasive bladder cancer." (Kaufman DS et al. N Engl J Med. 1993 Nov 4;329(19):1377-82.)
Retrospective. 53 patients, cT2-T4 on TURBT. Initial 2 cycles MCV, then RT 39.6/22 with concurret cisplatin 70 mg/m2 Q3W. Response assessed after 40 Gy. If CR, continued with 25.2/14. Total RT dose 64.8/36. Median F/U 4 year
Outcome: pCR 77%. 5-year OS 48%, 5-year bladder preservation 58% (89% bladder preservation in those in pCR). Hydronephrosis poor prognostic factor
Conclusion: Conservative treatment may be an acceptable alternative
Retrospective. 106 patients, T2-T4a on maximal TURBT. Treatment approach as above
Outcome: pCR 66%. 5-year OS 52%, 5-year bladder preservation 43% (79% bladder preservation in those in pCR)
Conclusion: Results similar to cystectomy in these patients; majority of long-term survivors retain their bladder
RTOG 88-02; 1996 (1988-90) - PMID 8558186 — "Neoadjuvant combined modality program with selective organ preservation for invasive bladder cancer: results of Radiation Therapy Oncology Group phase II trial 8802." (Tester W, J Clin Oncol. 1996 Jan;14(1):119-26.
Phase II. 85 patientss. cT2-T4aM0 suitable for radical cystectomy. Induction with 2 cycles of MCV alone (MTX 30 mg/m2, cisplatin 70 mg/m2, vinblastine 2mg/m2), followed by RT 39.6/22 with concurrent cisplatin 70 mg/m2 Q3W, cystoscopy 2 weeks later. If CR, consolidative RT 25.2/14 with concurrent cisplatin 70 mg/m2, else radical cystectomy. Total RT dose 64.8/36
Outcome: pCR 80%. After full course, local recurrence 54% (invasive 26%), DM 22%. Cystectomy in 40% (induction 15%, invasive recurrence 18%, extensive noninvasive recurrence 7%). 4-year OS 62%, 4-year bladder preservation 44% (60% in patients with full course)
Toxicity: Worse toxicity compared with RTOG 85-12
Conclusion: Bladder preservation achieved in the majority of patients, and survival similar to surgical series
RTOG 85-12; 1993 (1986-88) - PMID 8478228 — "Combined modality program with possible organ preservation for invasive bladder carcinoma: results of RTOG protocol 85-12." (Tester W, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1993 Apr 2;25(5):783-90. )
Phase II. 48 patients, stage cT2-4N0-2. Induction RT 40/20 with concurrent cisplatin 100 mg/m2 Q3W, cystoscopy 2 weeks later. If CR, consolidative RT 24/12 with concurrent cisplatin 100 mg/m2, else radical cystectomy. Median F/U of surviving patients 3 years
Outcome: pCR 67%. After full course, local recurrence 40%, regional recurrence 11%, DM 29%. 3-year OS 64%
Conclusion: Need better patient selection to achieve disease control and bladder preservation
Universite Paris; 1993 (1988-1991) PMID 8229129 — "Combined radiation and chemotherapy for invasive transitional-cell carcinoma of the bladder: a prospective study." (Housset M, J Clin Oncol. 1993 Nov;11(11):2150-7.)
Prospective. 54 patients, T2-T4. TURBT followed by 5-FU/cisplatin + concomitant hyperfractionated split-course RT. RT given 24/8 over 3 weeks (D1, D3, D15, D17 BID). Cystoscopy after 6 weeks. If CR (74%), either chemo-RT (55%) or cystectomy (45%), not randomized. Boost RT 20/8 (D64, D66, D78, D80 BID) with concurrent 5-FU/cisplatin. Median F/U 2.2 years
Outcome: pCR 74% on cystoscopy. In CR patients, local control 90% (3/22 in chemo-RT vs 1/18 in cystectomy arms), DM rate 30%. 3-year OS 59%, no difference between cystectomy and chemo-RT
Conclusion: Neoadjuvant chemo-RT treatment may be proposed as the conservative approach
±MCV x2 alone, then cisplatin
GETUG 97-015; 2010 (1999-2001) PMID 20385453 -- "Quality of Life Assessment After Concurrent Chemoradiation for Invasive Bladder Cancer: Results of a Multicenter Prospective Study (GETUG 97-015)." (Lagrange JL, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010 Apr 10. [Epub ahead of print])
Phase II. 51 patients. cT2-T4. TURBT R0 66% (included patients who were not surgical candidates). Induction RT 45/25 with concurrent cisplatin/5-FU Q3W, cystoscopy 2 weeks later. If pCR, consolidative RT 18/10 with concurrent cisplatin/5-FU. EORTC QLQ-C30 questionnaire and LENT-SOMA scale used at 0.5, 1, 2, and 3 years after treatment. Median F/U 8 years
Outcome: 8-year OS 36% (for surgical candidates 45%), 8-year bladder preservation 66%
QoL: Satisfactory bladder function by LENT-SOMA in 100% of preserved bladders at 3 years. Patient satisfaction with bladder fuction satisfactory prior to therapy 35%, at 6 months 43%, at 18 months 57%, and at 3 years 29%. Sexual function preserved in 79%
Conclusion: Overall bladder preservation in 67% of patients at 8 years, with satisfactory QoL and bladder function in those who had preserved bladder
Harvard; 2003 (1986-2000) PMID 14532773 -- "Organ conservation in invasive bladder cancer by transurethral resection, chemotherapy and radiation: results of a urodynamic and quality of life study on long-term survivors." (Zietman AL, J Urol. 2003 Nov;170(5):1772-6.)
Retrospective. 49 patients (out of 71 alive in 2001), native bladders, disease-free after chemo-RT therapy. Urodynamic evaluation and questionnaire. Median F/U 6.3 years
Outcome: Normal urodynamic function 67%, decreased compliance 22%. Bladder hypersensitivity and incontinence 6%. On questionnaire, control problems 19%, urgency 15%, flow symptoms 6%. Pads worn by 11% of women. Bowel symptoms 22%. Majority of men retained sexual function. Global HRQoL high
Conclusion: Majority of patients retain good bladder function
Karolinska Institute; 2002 PMID 11937249 -- "Distressful symptoms after radical radiotherapy for urinary bladder cancer." (Henningsohn L, Radiother Oncol. 2002 Feb;62(2):215-25.)
Retrospective. 58 patients treated with radical RT before 1995 (63-68 Gy split course), compared with 251 patients with radical cystectomy, and 310 general population patients.
Outcome: GU moderate distress: RT 25% vs general population 9%, surgery not evaluated. GI moderate distress: RT 32% vs surgery 24% vs general population 9%. Sexual life dissatisfaction: 36% vs 67% vs 28%
Conclusion: Approximately three quarters of long-terms survivors after radical RT had functioning urinary bladder with little or no distress from urinary tract. Prevalence of sexual dysfunction was lower than after surgery, with comparable GI dysfunction
Trento, Italy; 1996 (1981-1994) PMID 8780548 -- "Assessment of quality of life after cystectomy or conservative therapy for patients with infiltrating bladder carcinoma. A survey by a self-administered questionnaire." (Caffo O, Cancer. 1996 Sep 1;78(5):1089-97.)
Retrospective study. 59 patients, treated conservatively (49%) or with cystectomy (51%), who returned questionnaire (~65% rate in both)
Outcome: QoL in conservative group better than in surgical group. Lower QoL after surgery due to stoma presence, lack of sexual activity, and worse physical condition. Little impact on social and recreational life
Conclusion:  Quality of life is better after conservative therapy than after cystectomy
Medical Research Council BA-09, 2000 - PMID 10802363 (Duchesne GM et al.)
Helsinki, Finland, 1992 - PMID 1378746 (Salminen E et al.)
41 pts with hematuria or pain. Clearing of hematuria in 59% (2 fraction) vs 16% (long course); improvement in pain in 73% vs 37%.
2012 PMID 22019246 -- "Treatment trends and outcomes of small-cell carcinoma of the bladder." (Koay EJ, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012 May 1;83(1):64-70.)
533 pts. No significant difference in outcomes between pts treated with TURBT+RT/Chemo vs Cystectomy+Chemo. However, <20% of pts treated with RT or cystectomy. Majority of pts treated with TURBT alone.
Conclusion: "Relatively few patients with small-cell carcinoma of the bladder receive potentially curative therapies. Chemotherapy should be a major component of treatment. Cystectomy and bladder-sparing approaches represent two viable strategies and deserve further investigation to identify the patients who may benefit from organ preservation or not."
2013 PMID 23671508 -- "Management of small cell carcinoma of the bladder: Consensus guidelines from the Canadian Association of Genitourinary Medical Oncologists (CAGMO)."
MSKCC; 2014 No PMID yet Abstract (Article in Press) "External beam radiation therapy for small cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder" (Mattes MD, Pract Radiat Oncol, Published online: May 27, 2014)
More Irish language resources can be found atWikiversity's Department of Irish Studies
Wikipedia has related information at Gaelic script
Modern Irish uses the Latin alphabet. The basic alphabet consists of 18 letters:
a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, l, m, n, o, p, r, s, t, u
Variations of a, e, i, o and u written with an acute accent (Irish: Síneadh fada or just fada for short) also exist in Irish. They denote both a longer pronunciation and a different vowel quality:
In addition to these letters others are used in words borrowed from other languages.
The letters are usually called by their English names, except that the letter a is called "ah". The names of the vowels with accents take the formula "name of vowel" + "fada, thus the name "Ciarán would be spelled out loud as "C, I, A, R, A-fada, N".
The oldest known Irish writing uses Ogham, an early alphabet that resembles tally marks. For more information, see the  Wikipedia article on Ogham. Ogham is interesting culturally but not relevant for most modern Irish students.
From the 16th century until the end of the 1940s, most Irish language books were printed in what is now known as Gaelic Type. This was a font based on the handwritten letters found in medieval manuscripts. There were very few books published in Irish until the Irish Language Revival started in the late 19th/early 20th Century.
Gaelaċ (Gaelach), the adjective meaning "Gaelic"
Corcaigh, the name of the city of Cork
Constant coefficients refers to the left hand side of a differential equation - the coefficients of all terms of y,(i.e. p1(x), etc) are constants.  While this may seem unrealistic, this actually happens frequently in electric circuits and harmonic motion.
"Homogeneous" refers to the right hand side of the equation.  If f(x)=0, the equation is homogeneous, if it isn't, it is nonhomogenous.  Again, it seems useless but it isn't.  And it makes for a much easier to solve problem.  We'll deal with nonhomogenous equations later.
So a homogenous equation of constant coefficients is an equation of the form
In order to show how these equations are solved, lets start with the most basic case - a second order equation
This is the auxiliary quadratic (AQ) of the DE. There are four classes of outcomes to the auxiliary quadratic:
, giving two distinct, real, roots.
, giving two coincident real, roots.
, giving complex roots.
a: Purely imaginary roots.
b: Complex-conjugate pair.
The method of solution of the DE depends on the class of AQ.
Going back to the substitution we made to obtain the AQ, we have
Generalizing, for the Second Order DE
For the other solution we will use the Method of Reduction of Order.  To do so we assume that it is in the form of:
The Method of Reduction of Order can be used on different equations and u(x) does not always equal x.  You can see below that
To check substitute these into the original DE:
Generalizing, for the Second Order DE
To have complex roots, the AQ must have a discriminant less than zero, so
Also, for the solution to be purely imaginary, the value of b must be exactly zero.
This means that a and c have to have the same signs: either a and c are both positive or they are both negative. If we consider our general second-order DE:
.
Therefore, the y term is always positive, and this can be represented by
.
This checks out, so
.
The other method of solving this equation is to use Euler's Formula:
Since A and B are arbitrary, we can set new constants for convenience, letting our new A equal A+B and our new B equal i(A-B).
Thus we have as our general solution
Generalizing, for the Second Order DE
Since it is a proven theorem that complex roots of polynomials always occur in conjugate pairs, the only remaining class of AQ is the one with complex conjugates for solutions.
Given that the solutions are complex, we know that in the AQ
The roots of this are in the form
From Euler's Formulas, we can now get
As A and B are arbitrary, we can collapse them as in Class 3a, so that we have the general solution
Generalizing, for the Second Order DE
We have now covered all possible types of homogeneous second-order differential equation, and we didn't even have to integrate anything! We will now have a look at higher order equivalents.
How do we expand the above to the nth order?  Well, the nth order has the same requirements of orders of x as second order equations do.  So we still need functions involving
.  There's just 2 major differences.  Firstly, we'll have more terms - we won't just be able to plug into the auxiliary quadratic equation to get the roots.  Secondly, there are more roots.  We'll end up with n roots, so y will be the sum of n equations.
.
Find the roots of the auxiliary cubic equation of the form
This is the classic starting position of the Grünfeld Defence, although d5 can be delayed if White has delayed e4 which typically happens if Nf3 is played at some stage.
Black plays d5 and challenges White's occupation of the center. White has a range of choices, the main one is to exchange the pawns on d5 to displace Black's pieces.
The main battleground of philosophies is the Exchange Variation, 4.cxd5 Nxd5 5.e4 Nxc3 6.bxc3. White's pawn center gains space, but Black has excellent play along the long, dark diagonal from a1 to h8, and can eventually target d4 with moves like ...Bg7, ...Rd8, ...c5, ...Nc6, and occasionally ...Qa5. Eventually he may also bring a bishop to fianchetto on the other diagonal, targeting e4.
The more classical moves are 4.Nf3, 4.Bf4, and 4.Qb3, which are more conservative ways to fight Black's system. The pawn center still remains, but Black's counterplay is still adequate. The most positional move is 4.Bg5.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3.Nc3 d5
......
Schlechter Variation, Makogonov Variation
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Grunfeld Defence
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
1.2 GROUP B: Upright rectangle with simulated perforation outer frame containing monogram of King George V (GvR)
1.4 GROUP D: Identical to Groups B and C except with monogram of King George VI (GviR)
1.5 GROUP E: Identical to Groups B, C and D except with monogram of Queen Elizabeth II (EiiR)
1.8 GROUP H: Rectangular frank with vertical "GREAT BRITAIN" at left and vertical "POSTAGE PAID" at right
1.10 GROUP J: MailmarkTM stamps: "Delivered by Royal Mail" at left, 2D barcode at center, mail class rectangle at right
The first meter was used on 23 August 1922.The stamps are mostly printed in red. A few early types have town marks in black. Modern digital stamps are often found in blue rather than red.
Meters manufacturers in Great Britain:Automatic Stamp Selling Machines (aka Wilkinson)
Neopost (Roneo Neopost, Roneo Vickers)
T.I.M. (Ticket Issuing Machines)
Westinghouse-GarrardThe stamps are grouped according to the monogram of the reigning monarch and also according to appearance and use.
B - Upright rectangle with simulated perforation border, monogram of George V
C - As B but monogram of Edward VII
D - As B but monogram of George VI
E - As B but monogram of Elizabeth II
F - Frameless frank with crown at top and floral emblems at sides
G - Frameless frank with large crown at top right and column of horizontal lines at left
H - Rectangular frame with crown and top and with vertical text outside frame lines at left and right
I - Rectangular frame with bar codes at sides
J - MailmarkTM stamps: "Delivered by Royal Mail" at left, 2D barcode in center, mail class in rectangle at rightMachines for special usesPO - Post office window machine stamps
Until approximately the 1940s, if a mailer used more then one postage meter, the license numbers were given a letter prefix, “A” for the second machine, “B” for the third and so forth.Prefix letter “X” indicates the meter is a relief or loaner machine that was lent to a mailer while his meter was being services or repaired. “X” varieties are scarce.For specialized information about the meter stamps of Great Britain, see “GB Meter Franking ⎯ History with a Future” by Jack Peach, serialized in Gibbons Stamp Monthly, May-Dec 2001.
GROUP A: Circular frank with blocks (squares) in all four corners* The corner blocks contain the denomination which is also spelled out in the upper half of the circle.
A horizontal bar through the center of the frank contains "GREAT (license number) BRITAIN".
Five variations of the center bar exist, as pictured.
A1. Pitney Bowes (FV-1), 23 August 1922.
Frank with wavy lines at sides.
Center bar A, square ends and circular center.
Frank size excluding wavy lines is 25 x 25mm.
License number with or without “A” prefix.
License number varies in size from small san-serif to large with serifs.
a. Provisional stamp blank in upper semicircle. Values: 1, 2½    [Scarce]
b. As a, 1d value with space at right of the ‘1’, made from altering a 1½d die    [Scarce]
c. With slogan in red printed separately on the front, usually at lower left    [$100]
d. With slogan in color other than red printed on the front (shown)    [$150]
e. With slogan in any color printed on the back    [$150]
A2. Universal Postal Frankers “N.Z.” (FV-6), 18 October 1922.
Frank without wavy lines at the sides. Center bar B (round ends and open at top and with semicircle at bottom).
Top portion of frank does not touch center bar. Frank 25 x 25mm. License number 1 only, except for A2D.
The "NZ" model is a modification of New Zealand's Automatic Franking Machine Model "D" meter (see New Zealand Type B2) which Universal had purchased the rights to use. The Model D was able to print a frank only, no town mark. The Type A2 sub-types (A through D) reflect Universal's experiments with adding a town mark by use of a separate printer mounted on the mailing machine. To get both the frank and the town mark (with or without slogan) the mail had to be fed through the mailing machine twice, once through the frank printer and then through the town mark printer.
A2A. Black TM: three text lines within five wavy lines printed at a considerable distance left of frank.    [Rare]
A2B. Black TM: three text lines and slogan within six wavy lines.
“Stop stamping/ TRY FRANKING”    [$150]
“Don’t Use Stamps/ TRY FRANKING”    [$200]
A2C. Red TM: Single circle within six wavy lines 40mm long.    [$300]
With slogan “Don’t use Stamps, GET A FRANKER”.
A2D. TM black, 3 text lines within 7 wavy lines 45mm across, without slogan.    [$100]
License number 57.
A3. Universal “N.Z.”  (FV-6), 1923.     [$200]
Very similar to Type A2 but the frank is narrower, 22mm wide.
This is the first machine that allowed the frank and town mark to print together in a single pass.
A4. Universal “N.Z.”  (FV-6), 1923. Center bar C, bottom line straight across. Frank size 22 x 25mm.
A4A. Red or black TM: text in two or three lines amidst six wavy lines.
Values:      3, 4½, 5½, 6, 1/-    [Very scarce]
a. Center bar with break at bottom (appears to be caused by damage)
b. With postage meter promotional slogan (as found with Type A2C, or "Note the frank and ask about it")    [Add $50]
c. Relief machine. License number with “X” prefix    [Add $25]
A4B. Black TM: text in two or three lines between single wavy lines at top and bottom    [$200]
a. With slogan (in red)    [Add $100]
A4C. TM: small single circle, in black.
Values:      ½, 1, 1½, 2½    [Very scarce]
A4D. TM with Wembley Exhibition lion within seven horizontal lines.
License numbers 1, 12, X3, and X12 only.
Large date figures.
License number 1 is the only one known used on actual mail. The others are all found (so far) only as specimens.
A. License number 1 with black town mark (13 June to 16 September 1924)    [$250]
B. License number 1 with red town mark (17 September to 1 November 1924)    [$250]
C. License number 12, X3, or X12    [Extremely rare. Meter 12 is known at present by a single example, X3 by three examples. Several impressions of X12 are known but all are in Royal Mail archives.]
The Exhibition was open from 23 April to 1 November 1924 and again from 9 May to 31 October 1925. The dates given for A and B span the known examples. It is possible earlier dates will be found for A. It also seems likely the machine was not in use during the second, 1925, session.
All the known examples of X3 and X12 are demonstration specimens dating from the period between the two sessions when the Exhibition was closed.
See also Type A7.1.
Values:      1, 2, 3, 6, 1/-    [Very scarce]
a. TM: BIC
b. TM: SC
c. TM: “EFFICIENCY/ EXHIBITION”, License number “X13”    [Rare]
A5. Universal “HS" and "EH”  (FV-1), 1923.
Frank similar to Type A4 but slightly wider, 23½ mm.
Only eight machines were fielded. License numbers are:    1 [very rare], 2 [rare], 3 (used in two locations) [uncommon], 3 [very rare], 3A [common], 4 [scarce], 6 [rare], and X1 [very rare, see b below]
A. Center bar C, open at top, continuous at bottom
B. Center bar D, open at top and bottom
C. Center bar D but the license number is underlined giving the appearance that the bottom line has two small breaks
a. Printed in black (error)    [Only one example known, value uncertain]
b. Relief machine. License number X1    [Very rare]
The ½ value from meter 4 has a center bar with bottom line nearly continuous but with a nick out immediately below the license number. Remnants of an underline above the bar are also visible.
Catalog values are for examples on cut-outs. Full cover examples are worth more.
A6. Universal “HS”  (FV-1), 1923.   [RRRR]
As Type A5B but the top portion of the frank is joined to the center bar with double arcs at the sides.
A. License number 1 (TM with "LONDON" at top and "S.W. 11." at bottom)
B. License number 2 (TM with "WATFORD" at top and an arc at bottom)
A7. Universal “Special Midget”  (FV-3), 1924.    [$100]
Frank style same as Types A4 and A5.
Small date figures.
License number 5 only.
a. With slogan “Stamp Your LETTERS/ THIS WAY”. License number 15, found only on proofs.
A7.1. Universal "Special Midget" (LV-3).    [Extremely rare]
Wembley Exhibition town mark as with A4D but from different meter model.
Small date figures rather than large as with Type A4D.
License number 2A only.
Values:      1½ seen (½ and 1 may exist)
NOTE: It is possible this machine was not used to frank actual mail. Only two examples are presently known to exist, both from demonstrations.
Center bar C.
Normally with top of frank joined to center bar with single arcs at sides. Exceptions are a and b below.
License number with “M” prefix.
a. Top of frank does not touch center bar    [Scarce]
b. Top of frank joins center bar with double arcs    [Scarce]
Upper image shows normal A8 plus A8a. Lower image shows A8b plus normal A8.
Center bar D, open at both top and bottom.
Top of frank joins center bar with double arcs.
License number with “N” below except on variety a.
A. FV-1 machine, 40mm between centers of town mark and frank
B. FV-4 machine, 48mm between centers of town mark and frank
Values:      4, 4½, 9    [Very scarce]
a. License number white in solid rectangle, License number “99”. (This is the first Neopost meter stamp.)    [Rare]
b. Town mark below the frank rather than at left    [Rare]
GROUP B: Upright rectangle with simulated perforation outer frame containing monogram of King George V (GvR)* “GREAT BRITAIN” in ribbon at top
“POST” and “PAID” in ribbons at lower corners above the prefix and license number.
Center of frank surrounded by oval of petal-like shapes.
“NZ” at bottom left, License number at bottom right.
A. TM DC, BIC or nil
B. TM two or three lines between six wavy lines
C. TM SC    [Uncommon]
a. Relief machine. License number with “X” prefix     [Uncommon]
B2. Universal “Special Midget”  (FV-3).    [Rare]
“M” prefix at bottom left. Frank 22 x 25mm. License number 5 only.
A. TM: DC between six wavy lines, 45mm wide
B. TM: BIC between six wavy lines, 35mm wide
Blank at bottom left.
Frank 22 x 25.
As B2 but TM DC or BIC.
With “M” at bottom left, serif or sanserif.
A. Frank 20 x 24/25 mm
B. Frank 22 x 25 mm
a. “M” at bottom right instead of bottom left
With “N” at bottom left. Bottom frame line continuous.
Double straight frame lines inside faux perforation outer line either double or single line. (The inner frame lines are close together and often appear as one line.)
A. FV-1 machine, 40mm between centers of town mark and frank
B. FV-4 machine, 48mm between centers of town mark and frank
a. TM below frank
b. TM at right of frank    [Uncommon]
c. Trial machine. License number with “X” prefix
d. TM: DC ("LEYLAND PRESTON LANCS." # A1 seen)
As Type B5 but 43mm between the centers of the town mark and the frank.
Double or single straight frame line/s inside faux perforation outer border.
A. Bottom frame line continuous (models 2-V and 3-V)
B. Bottom frame line with two small breaks below the sides of the value figure (models 2-VS, 3-VS and 6-VS)
a. TM at right of frank instead of left    [Uncommon]
b. TM blank at bottom
NOTE: Several of the values are scarce and worth a premium to some collectors.
B7. Pitney Bowes “Models A, B and F”  (FV-1).
License number “PB” can be at either left or right.
Spacing between TM and frank wide (17mm) or narrow (3mm).
A. Wide spacing, 17mm.
B. Narrow spacing, 3mm
a. With slogan applied separately in red, usually on the back of the cover     [$100]
b. With slogan applied separately in violet or green     [$200]
c. TM: SC
d. 1D value with space between the "1" and the "D", converted from a 1½D die
e. Without license number, "PB" at left, blank at right
B8. Pitney Bowes “Model H”  (FV-5).
With “H” at bottom left.
Spacing between TM and frank very wide, 27mm.
B9. Universal “Multi-Value”  (MV), 1932.
Value in center, crown and monogram at bottom.
A. Single line outer frame, 26mm wide
B. Double line outer frame, 25mm wide
V/F:      0/-½       0/0½       =½d
B10. Pitney Bowes “Model CV”  (LV-6).
Value in center, crown and monogram at bottom.
Normally with “P” at bottom left.
a.  “PB” at bottom left, PB2 only
With “M” at bottom left.
With “N” at bottom left. Bottom frame line continuous.
A. FV-1 machine, 40mm between centers of town mark and frank
B. FV-4 machine, 48mm between centers of town mark and frank
As Type C2 but 43mm between the centers of the town mark and the frank.
A. Bottom frame line continuous (models 2-V and 3-V)
B. Bottom frame line with two small breaks below the sides of the value figure (models 2-VS, 3-VS and 6-VS)
C4. Pitney Bowes “Model A”  (FV-1).
With “PB” at bottom left.
License number PB57 only.
C5. Universal “Multi-Value" (MV).
C6. Pitney Bowes “Model CV”  (LV-6).
With “P” at bottom left.
GROUP D: Identical to Groups B and C except with monogram of King George VI (GviR)
With “M” at bottom left.
With “N” at bottom left. Bottom frame line continuous.
A. FV-1 machine, 40mm between centers of town mark and frank
B. FV-4 machine, 48mm between centers of town mark and frank
As Type D2 but 43mm between the centers of the town mark and the frank.
Frank 23mm or 25mm wide.
A. Bottom frame line continuous (not shown)
B. Bottom frame line with two small breaks below the sides of the value figure
a. Military stamp. TM “A.R.C.A.P.O. 413 / US ARMY”    [Scarce]
D4. Pitney Bowes “Model H”  (FV-5).
Frank 21 x 24mm or 23 x 25mm.
With “H” at bottom left.
Wide spacing between TM and frank.
D5. Pitney Bowes “Models A, B, F”  (FV-1).
Frank with nine or ten petals at each side.
Double or single line bottom frame line.
With “PB” at bottom left.
A. Wide spacing between TM and frank
B. Narrow spacing
a. Without license number, blank at right    [Scarce]
b. TM: SC (PB50)    [Scarce]
D6. Universal “Multi-Value”  (MV).
With “U, UA, UB… UF” at bottom left.
a. Used by His Majesty’s Foreign Service, with “F.S.” at bottom of TM
D7. Pitney Bowes “CV”  (LV-6).
With “P” at bottom left.
“POST PAID” in small panels above License number and prefix.
Small frank, 22 x 25 mm.
D8. Pitney Bowes “CV”  (LV-6).
As with Type D7, “P” at bottom left.
“POST PAID” in arc above postage value.
Frank larger than Type D7, 26-27 x 28-30 mm.
a. Without license number, blank at bottom right
With “NZ” at bottom left.
Similar to other Group D types except the central area is circular rather than oval.
“POST” and “PAID” near top above value.
With “S, SA, SB…” at bottom left.
D11. Neopost “Frankmaster 305”  (MV).    [Scarce]
With “NA” at bottom left.
License number 156 only known.
GROUP E: Identical to Groups B, C and D except with monogram of Queen Elizabeth II (EiiR)
With “M” at bottom left.
Bottom frame line broken in two spots near the center.
Frank 23mm or 25mm wide.
With “N” at bottom left.
E3. Pitney Bowes models  “A”, “B”, “F”  (FV-1).
Spacing wide or narrow.
With “PB” at bottom left.
A. Wide spacing between TM and frank
B. Narrow spacing
With “NZ” at bottom left.
E5. Universal “Multi-Value”  (MV).
With “U, UA, UB…” at bottom left.
a. Post Office Official Mail, with "F.S." at bottom of the town mark
E6. Pitney Bowes “CV”  (LV-6).
With “P” or “PA” at bottom left.
With “S, SA, SB…” at bottom left.
Values:      ½D to 2/1, in ½ or 1D increments
With "NA, NB, NC..." at bottom left.
Distance between town mark and frank is variable.
With “A, AB, AC…” at bottom left.
GROUP F: Horizontal frank with no outer frame lineFloral emblems at the sides, crown and “POST PAID” at top
"GREAT BRITAIN" in ribbon at bottom above License number.
License number with “N” prefix.
F2. Pitney Bowes “CV”  (LV-6).
License number with “P, PA, PC” prefix.
F3. Pitney Bowes “Simplex”  (LV-21?).
License number with “S, SA, SB…” prefix.
Values:      ½D to 2/1 in ½D or 1D increments
NOTE: Value figures known both in serif font, variable thickness font (at left), and in plain font (at right).
F4. Universal/Pitney Bowes “Multi-Value”  (MV).
License number with “U, UA, UB…” prefix.
F5. Pitney Bowes “Automax”  (MV).
License number with “AA, AB, AC…” prefix.
Value figures always and only in plain font.
F6. Roneo Neopost “Frankmaster 305”  (MV).
License number with “NA, NB, NC…” prefix.
Small frank.
License number with “J” prefix.
License number with “N” prefix, as with Type F1, but with letter suffix. (F1 has no letter suffix.)
F9. Pitney Bowes “5000” series (MV), 1963.
Wide low design.
License number with “P.B.” prefix.
F10. Pitney Bowes “RT”  (MV).
Smaller frank than Type F8.
License number with “RT” prefix.
License number with “TN” prefix.
GROUP G: Horizontal frank, "GREAT BRITAIN" and large crown at topColumn of horizontal lines at left
"POSTAGE PAID" small at bottom
License number with “fml” prefix below column of horizontal lines or below “POSTAGE PAID”.
A. Meter number below column of lines
B. Meter number below "POSTAGE PAID"
GROUP H: Rectangular frank with vertical "GREAT BRITAIN" at left and vertical "POSTAGE PAID" at rightNOTES:
The frank dimensions shown in the descriptions are from the outside of "GREAT BRITAIN" to outside of "POSTAGE PAID" and from the top to bottom frame lines. The License number may extend below the bottom frame line in some cases.
Most stamps of this group (and some in earlier groups) have meter/license number suffixes as well as prefixes. The suffixes are a means of extending the range of numbers available. They can also symbolize information such as the year the meter was deployed.
Sub-group HA: Stamps from meters with mechanical (solid) die printing mechanism
License number with “N” or “NA”, “NB”, “NC” etc. prefix.
NOTE: Through acquisition Neopost postage meters became products of Roneo, Roneo Vickers, Roneo Alcatel and Neopost Alcatel. For the sake of simplicity this catalog uses ‘Neopost’ for all of them.
License number with “J”, “JA”, “JB”… , "P", or "2N" prefix.
B. Short date figures ("2205")    (This was previously cataloged as Type HA18.)
a. With slogan in color other than red
Frank wider than tall.
A. Frank 27-28 x 21-22 mm
B. Frank 31 x 23-24 mm
License number with “TN” prefix.
NOTE: This stamp with “RN” prefix is a specimen.
HA6. Pitney Bowes “CV”  (LV-6).
License number with “PB C” prefix followed by 3-digit number and “A”.
A. Small TM, 1-line date
B. Large TM, 2-line date
HA7. Pitney Bowes “Simplex”  (LV-25).
License number with “P.B.S” prefix.
Frank variable in size from about 23 to 26 mm wide.
HA8. Pitney Bowes “Automax”  (MV).
License number with “P.B.A” prefix.
HA9. Pitney Bowes “RF”  or “RT”  (MV).
License number with “P.B.R” prefix.
A. Large DC TM, ~21 mm with 4 mm spacing between rings.
B. Small DC TM, 19 mm with 2½ mm between rings.
HA10. Pitney Bowes “5000”  series (MV).
Value figures are below level of date figures.
A. Narrow frank. License number prefix “P.B.”, “P.B.C”, “P.B.H”, "P.B.J", “P.B.K”, “P.B.M”, “P.B.N” or “P.B.T”
B. Wide frank. License number prefix "P.B.E" or "P.B.V"    (This was previously cataloged as Type HA20.)
License number with “fml” or “FML” prefix.
TM: DC, date with stop centered after the year figures
NOTE: Type HA12 in the previous version of this catalog is now cataloged as Type HA10A.
HA13. Pitney Bowes “6300” series (MV), 1970.
License number with “P.B.” prefix plus 4-digit number and letter, or with “P.B. D” or “P.B. L” prefix and a 3-digit number and letter.
Date and value figures are on same level.
License number with “G” prefix.
Very narrow frank.
License number with “G” prefix.
License number with “HAS” and "HGB" prefixes.
A. License number breaks bottom frame line
B. License number above complete bottom frame line
NOTE: Type HA16 closely resembles Type HA11 which has a stop centered after the year figures in the date. Type HA16 has no such stop.
License number with “W” prefix.
NOTE: Type HA18 in the previous version of this catalog is now cataloged as Type HA2B.
NOTE: Type HA20 in the previous version of this catalog is now cataloged as Type HA10B.
HA21. Pitney Bowes “6900” series (MV), 1986.
License number with “PBF or PBG” prefix.
a. Self-service vending machine stamp, with boxed slogan titled “SMART MAIL TRIAL”. Printed in green    [$250]
b. With slogan in color other than red
HA22. Pitney Bowes “A900”  and  “B900”  series (MV), 1991.
License number with “PBC”, “PBW”, or “PB9” prefix followed by 4 or 5-digit number.
HA23. Pitney Bowes “Paragon”  (MV), 1992.
License number with “PBP” or “PBQ” prefix.
Similar to Type HA13 but frank is taller than wide.
License number with “PBB” prefix.
HA25. Frama “E3/E4”  (MV), 1982.
License number with “MMC”, later “FSC” prefix.
Value figures tall and thick.
NOTE: See Types HA33, HB8, HB9 and HB10 for other stamps with “FSC” prefix.
HA26. Neopost “Electronic” series (MV), 1983.
License number with “1NE, 2NE, 5NE, 6NE, 7NE, 8NE” prefix.
HA27. Neopost “SM78/SM94”  (MV).
License number with “3NE” prefix above broken bottom line.
License number with “9NE” prefix above broken bottom line.
NOTE: See Types HA36 and HB2a for stamp with same prefix.
License number with “EGS” or “AC.A” prefix breaks bottom frame line.
License number and prefix variable in size from small to quite large.
Value figures large and thick.
Date figures widely spaced.
License number with “ENV” prefix.
License number with “EMD” prefix.
The bottom frame line is complete.
HA32. Francotyp-Postalia “EFS3000”  (MV), 1986.
License number with “EFS” prefix.
The bottom frame line is complete.
License number with “FSC” prefix.
NOTE: See Types HA25, HB8, HB9 and HB10 for other stamps with “FSC” prefix.
HA34. ASCOM Hasler “Smile”  (MV), 1995.
License number with “HS” prefix.
HA35. SECAP “Alpha” and  “Minipost”  (MV), 1996.
License number with “ASA” or “ASM” prefix.
HA36. Neopost “SM75/SM85”  (MV), 1998.
License number with 9NE 5” prefix.
HB1. Ascom Hasler "InteliPost".
License number with "A" prefix breaks bottom frame line.
With block of alpha-numeric characters in three lines at lower left of TM. (See also Type HB6)
License number with “FSC2” or "FSC3" prefix above bottom frame line.
NOTE: See Types HA25, HA33, HB2.2 and HB2.3 for other stamps with “FSC” prefix.
HB2.2. Frama “Mailspirit” .
License number with “FSC7” prefix breaks bottom frame line.
NOTE: See Types HA25, HA33, HB2.1, and HB2.3 for other stamps with “FSC” prefix.
HB2.3. Frama “OfficeMail” .
Very similar to Type HB2.1 but the frank and town mark are slightly larger.
License number with “FSC9” prefix above bottom frame line.
NOTE: See Types HA25, HB2.1, and HB2.2 for other stamps with “FSC” prefix.
HB2.4. Frama “Matrix F2/F4/F6” .
Very similar to Type HB2.3 but the value figures are wider.
License number with “F1” prefix above bottom frame line.
A. Value figures wide, with stop:      0000
B. Value figures narrow, without stop:      00.00
HB3.1. Francotyp-Postalia “T1000/T1000S”  (thermal), 1992.
License number with “T” prefix above bottom frame.
A. Wide spacing between numbers in value figures (T1000S)
B. Narrow spacing in value figures (T1000)
HB3.2. Francotyp-Postalia “JetMail”.
Single column of vertical numbers reading up at left of TM.
License number with “FJ” prefix above bottom frame line.
HB3.3. Francotyp-Postalia "Centormail", “MyMail”, "Ultimail" and  “Optimail”.
Similar to Type HB3.2 but the frank is taller and the date figures are slightly more widely spaced.
The vertical numbers at left of the TM are shorter than with Type HB3.2.
Found in blue as well as red.
A. Centormail: “FC” prefix
B. MyMail: “FM” prefix
C. Ultimail: “FU” prefix
D. Optimail: “F04” prefix
E. PostBase: "FP" prefix
a. As B, but with "0FM” prefix
HB4.1. Neopost “SM22/26”.
Very narrow spacing between TM and frank.
License number with “4NE” prefix.
HB4.2. Neopost “IS-330/ 350" and "IJ25”  series, 2000.
Printed in red by ink-jet method.
License number with “N105/ 110/ 112-118” prefix breaking bottom frame line. (The N111 series was not used.)
A. IS-330 series: L# with N105 prefix
B. IJ25 series: L# with N110/ 112/ 113/  114 prefix
C. IS-350 series: L# with N115/ 116/ 117/ 118 prefix
a. Printed in blue by mistake, L# N1153662
b. Error: Used commercially with town mark "NEOPOST SPECIMEN"
HB4.3. Neopost “IJ65/ 75/ 80/ 90/ 110”, 2000.
Similar to Type HAxxx but value figures slightly wider.
Date as “00–00–00” or "00.00.00".
License number with “N120/124” prefix
Without bottom frame line.
A. Pre-production IJ65: one meter only, license number 9NE90001
B. IJ65/ 75 series: L# with N120 prefix, date figures as 00-00-00 (with dashes)
C. As B but date figures as 00.00.00 (with stops)
D. IJ80/ 90/ 110 series: L# with N125 prefix
a. License number in N124 or N129 series can be from any of the HB4.3 models.
HB4.4. Neopost “IJ65/ 75/ 80/ 90/ 110”, 2000.
License number breaks bottom frame line.
A. IJ35/45 series: L# with N130/ 131 prefix
B. IJ40/50 series: L# with N135 prefix
C. IS-460 series: L# with N137 prefix
D. IS-420 series: L# with N138 prefix
E. IS-440 series: L# with N139 prefix
Without bottom frame line.
Value figures widely spaced.
Very small date figures slightly above the level of the value figures.
A. IS-480 series: L# with N30 prefix (red or blue)
B. S-240/280 series: L# with N33 prefix (red or blue)
Bottom frame line complete.
Very small date figures.
Date and value figures are on the same level
License number with “N50” prefix breaks bottom frame line.
HB5.1. Pitney Bowes “PostPerfect”, 1995.
Small frank with two columns of stacked numbers left of TM.
License number with “PB7” prefix.
HB5.2. Pitney Bowes “PersonalPost”, 1998.
Short frank printed by ink jet method which leaves telltale horizontal tracks within the frank.
Two columns of stacked numbers left of TM.
License number with “PB2” or "PB4" prefix breaks bottom frame line.
HB5.3. Pitney Bowes “DM200/ 250”, “DM225/ 300”, “DM100i/150i/ 110i”, "DM400C/ 450C/ 475C" , and "DM50/ 55", 2000.
Two columns of stacked numbers left of TM.
Stamps from these models are identical in appearance except for License number prefix.
License number prefix breaks bottom frame line.
Known printed in blue as well as red.
A. DM200/ 250 (and possibly DM300C): “PB30/ 31/ 37"
B. DM225/ 300: “PB37” prefix
C. DM100i/ 110i/ 150i: “PB8” prefix
D. DM50/ 55: "PB0" prefix, later "PB33/ 34/ 35..."
E. DM400C/ 450C/ 475C: "PB6" prefix
Meter model names and prefixes change somewhat frequently. The correspondences shown for HB5.3 are educated guesses.
See also Type HB5.5.
HB5.4. Pitney Bowes “DM-400/ -500”, later  "Connect+ 1000".
Very similar to Type HB5.3 but with only one column of stacked numbers left of the TM.
License number with “PB50”, “PB52” or "PB550/ 551" prefix breaks bottom frame line.
HB5.5. Pitney Bowes “Connect+ FC” , later "Connect+ 2000".
Identical to type HB5.3 except the machine is capable of printing slogans and other data in multiple colors completely across the top of an envelope.
Two columns of alpha-numeric characters left of the town mark.
License number with "PB555/ 556/ 557" prefix breaks bottom frame line.
HB5.6. Pitney Bowes “DM160i/ 220i”.
Very similar to Type HB5.3 but the value figures are more widely spaced with zeros that are more squarish than oval.
Meter prefixes PB16 and PB8 seen.
a. Specimen stamp used on actual mail, "INVALID VALUE" at top
HB6. Secap / Pitney Bowes “DP-200/ -400”.
Small frank and short date figures.
License number breaks bottom frame line.
With block of alpha-numeric characters in three lines at lower left of TM (found also on Type HB1).
A. Secap DP200: “ST22” prefix
B. Secap DP400: “ST42” prefix
C. Pitney Bowes: “PB1" prefix
GROUP I: Frank with vertical bar codes at sides“Royal Mail” at top, license number at bottom.
Without crown, "GREAT BRITAIN" and "POSTAGE PAID".
The country name, changed to “United Kingdom”, is in the town mark.
I1.1. Pitney Bowes “A900” series (MV), 1996.
License number with “PBC” prefix.
I1.2. Pitney Bowes “6900” series  (MV).    [Very scarce]
License number with “PBG” prefix.
I1.3. Pitney Bowes “PostPerfect”  (digital).    [Scarce]
License number with “PB7” prefix.
License number with “AH3” prefix.
License number with “AH1” prefix.
License number with “NE5” prefix.
I3.2. Neopost “EFM7/4000”  (MV).    [Scarce]
License number with “NE6” prefix.
License number with “NE8” prefix.
I4.1. Francotyp-Postalia “MS5”  (MV).    [Rare]
License number with “FPM” prefix.
I4.2. Francotyp-Postalia “T1000” or "EFS"???  (digital).    [Rare]
License number with “FPE” prefix.
I5.1. Frama “EPS”  (MV).    [Rare]
License number with “FAE” prefix.
GROUP J: MailmarkTM stamps: "Delivered by Royal Mail" at left, 2D barcode at center, mail class rectangle at rightMailmark is a trademark of Royal Mail. The Mailmark stamps are replacements for Group HB.
At left: Cross-shaped crown+"Royal Mail" logo with "Delivered by" above it on domestic mail, without it on international mail
At center: date as 00-00-00 above the value figures and license number above the 2D barcode. International mail has "UK" above the date.
At right: an upright rectangle containing the mail class often, but not always, with the weight at bottom
The stamps do not include a town mark.
The stamps are nearly identical and can be identified most easily by the license number prefix. Because of their identical nature, not all stamp types are illustrated.
ITS / ROW1, ROW2 or ROW3    [ITS = International Tracked and Signed, ROW = Rest Of World.)
J1.1. Pitney Bowes "DM160i/220i"  (digital), 2014.
A. License number with "PB16/17" prefix. Found in red as well as blue.
B. License number with "PB20" prefix. Seven digits in license number.
J1.2. Pitney Bowes "Connect+"  (digital), 2014.
License number with "PB55" or "PB66" prefix.
NOTE: The Connect+ model is capable of printing a multi-color slogan across the entire length of the envelope.
J2.1. Frama "Matrix F12..."  (digital), 2014.
License number with "FR2" prefix.
License number with "NE6" prefix.
License number with "NE8" prefix.
License number with "NE9" prefix.
J4.1. Francotyp-Postalia "PostBase Qi3/4/6/9"  (digital), 2014.
License number with "FP611" prefix.
PC1. Royal Mail “SmartStamp” , 15 January 2004.
Square 2D barcode at left with value figures and identification code above and the ‘POST BY’ date below.
At center is a large negative letter indicating the class of mail/ “ROYAL MAIL”/ and a postage paid statement.
At right are two vertical bars of uneven widths (a mail class barcode).
C. “A” (international airmail) (‘Par Avion’ after the postage paid statement.)
D. “SU” (international surface mail)
E. “Royal Mail / specialdelivery”) (This appears in a large box replacing the middle box and bars at right.)
a. For use in Wales, with "POST/ BRENHINOL" replacing "ROYAL MAIL"
c. Without value figures. The weight (or weight/service) appears where the value figures normally are. (Possibly this is a format used by bulk mailers.)
d. “ROYAL MAIL”/ the postage paid statement/ “SmartStamp.co.uk”.
e. “ROYAL MAIL”/ service/ and the postage paid statement.
f. With "Signed For" postal direction added below the frank. Examples: "Signed For 1st Class", "Int Signed For Small Packets"
g. Value figures and date small
h. 2nd class stamp with 1st class barcode (larger bar at right)
NOTE: The SmartStamp on-line postage program was overhauled in August 2006. The update allowed users to add slogans in color. Some minor changes appeared in the frank but they are not consistent. For example, “POST BY” is often larger but is also found in the earlier, small size. The value figures and inscriptions can also vary in size. The frank may be slightly smaller than the first version although this may be due to printer variables rather than software changes.
PC2. Royal Mail “SmartStamp” , 2004.    [Appears to be rare]
As Type PC1 but the mail class indicator is positive and "ROYAL MAIL" is negative at the bottom.
Due to the early date (March 2004) this may be an early experimental or test design.
PC3. Royal Mail “Click & Drop”  (digital), 2017.
Click & Drop is an online system that allows anyone to print postage at home without having to register beforehand. The only requirement is that the franked mail must be dropped at a post office or specially designated post box.
The service offers postage labels for both parcels and letters. Shown here is the top of a large label which was used on a parcel. It is very likely that the labels for letters are smaller and in a different format.
The parcel stamp has the Royal Mail logo at top right and the service indicator at top left. Below this is a band containing the weight, the service indicator repeated, and the value figures. In the bottom section are a 2D barcode field and a tracking barcode.
PC4. Royal Mail “Click & Drop”  (digital).
Similar to type PC3 but with data rearranged.
The parcel stamp has the Royal Mail logo at top right and the service indicator at top left.
Under this is a band containing the service type, parcel type and weight.  The next section contains a 2D barcode field and a tracking barcode.
Below this are the recipient and sender's addresses (greyed out and labelled in the examples illustrated)
"A". With "Postage Paid GB" below Royal Mail logo at upper right, and with the postage cost and latest mailing date in the lower panel of the stamp.
"B". For Royal Mail account holders, with "Postage on Account GB" below Royal Mail logo at upper right, no value shown, and with customer data in the lower panel of the stamp.
Types PO1 and PO2 include a service indicator code. Not all the codes were used by both types. Many did not come into use until after PO1 was retired, and several became obsolete before PO2 was inaugurated. Here is a list of all codes seen or reported:
"1L" (large letter or packet weighing up to 60 grams)
"2L" (large letter or packet weighing more than 60 grams)
"FP" (Fully Paid, found on reposted underpaid airmail)
“P” (parcel post, replaced by "SP" in 2005)
“S” (surface letter mail weighing over ten grams, replaced by "SU")
"1B" (British Forces mail, letter mail weighing up to 60 grams)
"2B" (British Forces mail, letter mail weighing more than 60 grams)
"BL" (British Forces mail, large letter or packet weighing more than 60 grams)
NOTE: "PF" is probably not the only code that is rarely found.
Plain white self-adhesive label with rounded corners and anti-peel slits.
Large service indicator code at top between horizontal bars.
Below the code are “Royal Mail”/ ”POSTAGE PAID UK”/ date, value figures, post office ID/ numeric coded data in the form of #-########-#.
A. Inscriptions short and thick (early stamps only)
B. Inscriptions taller and thinner (replaced A starting in 2003)
a. Label without anti-peel slits (used during experimental period, February to April 2002)    [add $25]
c. As b but misspelled as "Post Brenhino"
NOTE: First day covers are rare because the first day of use was not announced publicly.
As Type PO1 but the label shows a large version of the Arnold Machin portrait of Queen Elizabeth in gold and white.
With semi-circular anti-peel slits.
A. The die-cut label has simulated perforations
B. Die-cut label with straight edges and rounded corners
C. As A, with "." plus lower case letter after "Royal Mail" and a number added after "POSTAGE PAID UK" (first appearing 29 September 2011)
D. As B, with "." plus lower case letter after "Royal Mail" and a number added after "POSTAGE PAID UK"
NOTE: The added letter and number of sub-type C indicate the service and tax rate applied to the postage.
As Type PO2.1B but the label is for domestic use only. It does not include "Royal Mail" or "UK".
The service indicator between two horizontal lines,
Value figures and weight,
Post Office branch number and date,
Transaction number (Session ID) and VAT code,
Unique postage number ("postage recognition number" ?) with "PRN:" prefix.
2D barcode at lower left, service indicator code ("L" - letter, "S" - special delivery) or mail class ("1", "2") at lower right.
Label is predominantly white with Machin portrait of Queen Elisabeth II in pale color at upper right.
The stamp is as Type PO2.1D and has the addition of "· SINGLE USE ONLY ·" between two semi-circles at lower right.
Otherwise as Type PO2.1B for international use.
A. The portrait and underprint are printed in beige.
B. The portrait and underprint are printed in gray.
Label as with Type PO3.1 but stamp as Type PO2.2.
With "· SINGLE USE ONLY ·" between two semi-circles at lower right
PO3.3. Horizon, Post&Go Kiosk (digital), 2016.
As Type PO3.2 but the text at top left below the mail class is underlined and in this order:
At right of the 2D bar code field are various codes between two parallel lines.
Simple square frank with crown at top.
Double circle TM with POSTAGE DUE at bottom.
Special slogan SURCHARGE POSTAGE DUE.
One example known printed in black on green tape
PD2. Neopost “Electronic”  (MV), 1994.    [Rare]
Nearly square frank with TO PAY at top.
With or without special slogan “(town name) SURCHARGE DUTY”.
GROUP PP: Special stamps used for Parcel PostNOTE: Catalog values are for loose tapes.
PP1. Ticket-Issue Machines (T.I.M.)  (LV-12), 1947.    [Rare]
Produced by two experimental machines used at Romford and Cambridge to March 1948 when they were withdrawn.
Boxed “PARCEL POST” vertical at left.
Values:      6d to 1/5 in 1d increments
PP2. Westinghouse-Garrard Ticket Machines Ltd.  (MV), 1947.
From an experimental machine used between Dec 1947 and Nov 1948 at Cambridge and between Feb 1949 and Aug 1950 at Birmingham.
Printed in red on white labels.
A. With “S D” below “POSTAGE” (Cambridge)    [$100]
B. With “PAID” below “POSTAGE” (Birmingham)    [$150]
Values:      1d to 9/11½ in ½d increments
PP3. T.I.M.  (LV-12), 1948.
As Type PP1 but “PARCEL POST / PAID” in the box at left, and the crown above value figures is smaller.
Values:      9d to 3/3 in 1d increments
NOTE: Specimens exist. They are printed on pink paper instead of white but otherwise look the same    [Rare]
PP4. Universal “Simplex”  (LV-17), 1950.    [Rare]
From two machines used from Sep 1950 at Romford, then from Jan 1952 at Aberdeen and Harrogate.
The machine used at Harrogote was moved to Leith after Feb 1955.
Values:      9d to 2/1 in 1d increments
PP5. T.I.M.  (LV-12), 1951.    [$50 for verified used example, $20 for unused example]
Special design used at Festival of Britain exhibition in London between May and September 1951.
Similar to Type PP3 but slightly wider and with center section closed at left.
Festival of Britain logo in box at left.
Values:      9d to 3/3 in 1d increments
PP6. Setright Registers Ltd.  (LV-22), 1951.    [Scarce]
From two experimental machines used in Birmingham and Cambridge to about 1958.
Design similar to Type PP3 but smaller and without straight inner line in value box.
Boxed “PARCEL POST / PAID” vertical at left
Values:      9d to 2/6 in 1d increments
PP7. Setright Registers Ltd.  (MV), 1958.    [$150]
Large Crown at top of value box, and without monogram of monarch at bottom.
With boxed “POSTAGE / PAID” vertical at left.
Larger than Type PP6.
From a trial machine used from Sep 1958 to late 1959.
Values:      1d to 19/11 in 1d increments. Postage values below 1/ are preceded by “=”.
PP8. Setright Registers Ltd.  (MV), 1959.
As Type PP7 but with boxed “PARCEL POST / PAID” at left.
Values:      1d to 19/11 in 1d increments. Postage values below 1/ are preceded by “=”.
RP1. National Cash Register Company Ltd. “900”  (MV), 1925.    [$100]
Used by the London and North Eastern Railway at Ipswich between 1933 and 1934.
Purple impression on orange labels.
Center line printed through a ribbon includes operator’s ID letter, amount paid, sequence number and date.
A. With “PARCEL STAMP” at top (as pictured).      V/F: -0 0-
B. With “Parcel Stamp Label” at top.      V/F: -0.0 o/R
RP2. National Cash Register “1900”  (MV), 1933.    [$100]
Used by the London and North Eastern Railway at Kings Cross, Liverpool Street, and Newcastle.
Purple impression on gray green label.
Center line printed through a ribbon includes clerks ID number, amount paid, rate, and sequence number.
RP3. Westinghouse-Garrard Ticket Machines Ltd.  (MV), 1947.    [$100]
From an experimental machine used in 1947 and 1948 at various stations including Harrow, Brighton, Luton, Kings Cross and Slough.
Upright rectangle with outer frame line.
V/F:      0 0 – (double lined numbers)
RP4. National Cash Register “1900”  (MV), 1948.    [$100]
Tall stamp used by the London and North Eastern Railway at Kings Cross.
Purple impression on green labels.
RP5. National Cash Register “100”  (MV), 1948.    [$100]
Plain stamp with station name in center and date-rate line at bottom.
Used by the London and North Eastern Railway at Kings Cross and Liverpool.
Purple impression on white with very pale green or pale blue underprinting (“British Railways” diagonally).
Bottom line printed through a ribbon shows date, sequence number, and amount paid.
RP6. T.I.M.  (MV), 1951.    [$100]
From an experimental machine used between 1951 and 1952 at Brighton, Southern Region.
Frank has straight-line frame lines segmented into several boxes.
The top of the frank is open at the top above the station name.
Shown vertically at left outside the frame at left are BRITISH RAILWAYS / S REGION / BRIGHTON.
Purple impression on white paper straight at top and bottom, serrated at the sides.
RP7. T.I.M.  (MV), 1950.    [Rare]
Similar to RP6, this stamp was used when no cash was involved at time of dispatch.
Station name vertical at left.
Without a value line.
Purple impression on white label.
RP7.1. T.I.M.  (MV), 1936.    [$200]
As Types RP6 and RP7 but the outer frame line is unbroken across the top.
Station name vertical at left, L.N.E.R. / IPSWICH.
The top center segment contains only the parcel stamp number, without the station name.
Red impression on tan label.
V/F:      1/- seen.    (possibly similar to the V/F for RP6)
NOTES: Type RP7.1 preceded Types RP6 and RP7 by nearly 15 years. L.N.E.R. stands for London and North Eastern Railway.
RP8. Westinghouse-Garrard Ticket Machines Ltd.  (MV), 1953.    [Scarce]
Town line boxed in center with value line above and serial number and date below.
Purple impression on cream paper.
Separation by two long slits at top and bottom.
Stamp used by British forces in East Africa during World War Two.
This was a Ceylon stamp converted from normal use by removal of “CEYLON” from the upper panel.
Not known used with attached town mark.
Found with double circle hand stamp “E.A. / A.P.O. 58”
Value seen:      20 cents
GROUP PV: Special stamps generated by public, self-service vending machinesNOTE: See also Type HA21a for a vending machine stamp.
Circular stamp with “POSTAGE PAID” and crown below value figure.
Used from 25 January to 31 August at G.P.O. London E.C.
A. First day cover    [$125]
B. Printed in red, used on any day other than 25 January    [$175]
D. Last day cover    [$300]
NOTE: The Wilkinson machine was promoted in the philatelic press of the day, and several stamp collectors made a point of getting examples on the first day of use. Use of the machine tailed off rapidly thereafter. It was finally removed from service because of lack of use.
PV1.1. Samkyung Hitech "Weigh and Pay”  (digital), 25 March 2004.    [Scarce]
The stamp is similar to Post Office stamp Type PO1 but the printed design is nearly square rather than tall like PO1.
The bottom line is in a much smaller font than with PO1.
Several services were available. Those verified are as follows:
A. “1st” (letter mail weighing up to 60 grams)
B. “2nd” (letter mail weighing more than 60 grams)
C. “A” (international air mail)
D. "SU" (international surface mail)
E. "HM" (special rate for mail to British military overseas)
Three machines were trialed in Alfreton, Broadgate (London), and Luton.
They were withdrawn from service after eight months of use, on 20 October, due to slow and awkward operation.
PV2. Pitney Bowes and Fujitsu “Post & Go”  (digital), 29 January 2007.
The stamp is nearly identical to Post Office stamp Type PO1 and is most easily identified by the lengthier alpha-numeric code at lower right which has the form of ##X####X-######-##. (or PAG-######-#)???
A full range of services was probably available but only these two are verified:
A. “1st” (letter mail weighing up to 60 grams)
B. “2nd” (letter mail weighing more than 60 grams)
NOTE: Two kiosks were tested in Birmingham starting on the date indicated. Soon after other kiosks were installed in Birmingham and Belfast and at other locations even later.
PV3. Wincor Nixdorf "Post & Go"  (digital), 8 October 2008.
Horizontal label with service indicator at top center above "Royal Mail"
A. Label with smooth edges, replaced by  B starting in January 2009
B. Label with simulated perforations at top and bottom
NOTE: These machines also produced dateless stamps that could be used anytime and anywhere. Such stamps show the Machin profile portrait of the Queen or color illustrations. They are not cataloged here.
PV4. Wincor Nixdorf "Post & Go”  (digital), 7 May 2010.
Similar in design to Type PC1 but without the square digital bar code at left.
Both "1st" and "2nd" stamps are found and have different bar configurations at the right.
With or without service indicator added below the value figures.
The stamps are printed on self-adhesive labels with security field at far left.
A. Prototype design printed on label with straight edges and rounded corners and security field that does not touch the left edge of the label, in use for a couple days only at the London 2010 Festival of Stamps exhibition.     [Rare]
B. Standard design printed on label with simulated perforations at top and bottom. The security field varies in density, is wider and touches the edge of the label.
a. With characters but no date under "Post By" (The font is larger than normal, and the "2" and bars are smaller than normal.)
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
Five molecules are moving at speeds of 1,5,6,8, and 36ms−1. What is their mean square speed?
What is the mass of one molecule of N2 (atomic mass 14, 1u = 1.66 x 10−27kg)?
Atmospheric pressure is 101,325 Pa. If one mole of Nitrogen takes up 2.3 m3 at about 10 °C, what is the mean square speed of the molecules in the air outside, assuming that the atmosphere is 100% nitrogen (in reality, it is only 78%)?
What is the average speed of a nitrogen molecule under the above conditions?
The particles in question 1 are duplicated 3000 times. If they have a completely unrealistic mass of 1g, what is their pressure when they are crammed into a cube with side length 0.5m?
Many People have contributed to MINC over the years. Peter Neelin originally conceived and wrote MINC in about 1992, here is a list of others who have contributed parts of MINC proper (in alphabetical order).
Louis Collins - mni_autoreg, classify and others
Jason Lerch - brain view and other surface things
Dave McDonald - conglomerate, register, Display
Claude LePage - many bugfixes to many packages
Steve Robbins - surface code, debian packaging
Mark Wolforth (wolforthpet.mni.mcgill.ca) - contributed to pages linked at MINC/Tools/emma
Greg Ward (gregbic.mni.mcgill.ca) - contributed to pages linked at MINC/Tools/emma
If you need to reference MINC itself in a paper, the best option is to use one of these two web links
Medical Imaging NetCDF (MINC) is a medical imaging data format and associated set of tools and libraries developed at the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) and freely available online
The tool classify_clean, which is used to classify stereotaxic MINC volumes, involves a Bayesian labeling scheme and a set of standard sample points to compute an initial volume classification. This classification is then employed to purge incorrect tag points from the standard set, yielding a custom set of labels for the particular subject. Finally, this tag point set is used by an artificial neural net classifier to classify the volume (Zijdenbos et al., 1998).
Zijdenbos, A., Forghani, R., Evans, A., 1998. Automatic quantificationof MS lesions in 3D MRI brain data sets: validation of INSECT. Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Interventation—MICCAI'98, pp. 439–448
Prynhawn da; P'nawn da
Gwael!
Awful!
Beth amdanoch chi?
What about you?
Hwyl fawr!
Goodbye!
Hwyl fawr am nawr!
Goodbye for now!
Wela i chi!
See you later!
Iechyd da!
Beth yw ... yn Saesneg?
Beth yw ... yn Gymraeg?
Ydych chi'n siarad ...?
Do you speak?
Beth yw hwn?
Beth yw hwnnw?
Beth yw hwn (hwnnw) yn Gymraeg?
Sut ydych chi'n dweud ... yn Gymraeg?
How do you say ... in Welsh?
Ydych chi'n iawn?
Are you OK?
Beth sy'n bod?
What's the matter?
Ble mae ...?
Ble mae'r ty bach?
Welsh doesn't have a single word to use every time for yes and no questions. The word used depends on the form of the question. You must generally answer using the relevant form of the verb used in the question, or in questions where the verb is not the first element you use either 'ie' / 'nage'. "Ie" is often pronounced "ia" in northern dialects of Welsh.
Oes and Nag oes are used to answer questions regarding a quantity or existence of an object (i.e. the 3 sg. present indicative of the existential verb).
Ydy and Nag ydy are the 3 sg. present indicative of the substantive verb 'to be' used, e.g.,  where the sentence involves a predicate.
Ydw and Nag ydw are the 1 sg. present indicative of the substantive verb, used either existentially or in the case of predicates.
Oes ci gyda chi? Oes. (southern Welsh)Oes gennych chi gi? Oes. (northern Welsh)
Do you have a dog? Yes.
Is there a dog with you? There is. (southern Welsh)Do you have a dog? Yes. (northern Welsh)
Oes ci gyda chi? Nac oes. (southern Welsh)Oes gennych chi gi? Nag oes. (northern Welsh)
Do you have a dog? No.
Ydy hi'n oer? Ydy.
Ydy hi'n oer? Nag ydy.
Is it (fem.) cold? It isn't.
Ydych chi'n hoffi siocled? Ydw.
Do you like chocolate? Yes.
Are you liking chocolate? I am.
Ydych chi'n hoffi siocled? Nag ydw.
Do you like chocolate? No.
Are you liking chocolate? I'm not.
When referring to the evening or night of a particular day, Nos precedes the name of the day (and a soft mutation takes place), otherwise the name of the day is preceded by Dydd.
Good morning!: Bore da! (bo-re da)
Good afternoon!: P'nawn da! (p'nown da)
Goodbye!: Da boch chi! (da BO-khi)
Cheerio!: Hwyl fawr! (hooil vowR)
Good night!: Nos da! (no:s da)
Please: Os gwelwch chi'n dda (oss GWEL-oo-khin dha)
Thank you very much: Diolch yn fawr (DEE-olkh'n vowR)
No thank you: Dim diolch (dim dee-olkh)
There are many different ways of saying “yes” or no, depending on the context
To answer “yes” you must use a response which is in grammatical agreement with the question.
“Ydw...?” (Am I...?) would however be answered appropriately with “Ydych” (Yes you are) and vice versa.
“Ie” (Yes) is used when the verb is not the initial element of the question.
To contradict someone or to give a more definite “no” you can however precede the words for “yes” with “na” or “nag”, e.g. “Nag oes!” (No there isn’t!) (The opposite of Do is Naddo.)
(I’m) sorry!: Mae'n flin gen i! (mai'n vleen Gen ee)
Isn’t it? Wouldn’t it? Aren’t they? Won’t we? etc.: Ynte? (un-teh)
Cheers! Good health!: Iechyd da! (YEKH-id dah)
Brittany. Never speak of price without taking into account
Consider what would have happened at Paris, for example,
Suppose that the first shoemaker who established himself in
Paris would at this moment have been still a village of 1200
The same thing will hold good of your commodity, cloth;
If you wish to prosper, allow your customers to thrive.
This is a lesson which you have been very long in learning.
When it is thoroughly learnt, each man will seek his own
Traditional Celtic music is played in various forms and can be classified variously as follows:
Set dances (dance solo) can be jig or reel. (Table dance:Footed on a tabletop).
Reels: Tend to be played very fast and usually consist of continuous eighth notes written in 4/4 time
Jigs: Much slower than reels, jigs usually have eighth notes in 6/8 time with accents falling on first and fourth beats.
Hornpipe: Similar to reels but more slowly,  They are usually written in 4/4 and often played without accents
Waltzes: Played in a "waltz pace"; Written in 3/4 time and use triplet rhythmn.
Strathspeys: Dotted rhythms; usually associated with Scottish playing, Cape Breton and Boston fiddle. Utilizes the "Scottish snap". Browns of Kincardie; Cummingses of Freuchie.
Hornpipes: Derived form pipcorn (stockhorn) Chaucer mentions in Romaunt of the Rose, 1260. 3/2, originally, now 4/4
<ref.Robin WIlliamson|Eng Welsh Scot & Irish Fiddle Tunes|oak Publ|197</ref>
Sharp keys are favored but some tunes are in C/Aminor or Fmajor. D, G and A are quite popular, in that order.
Introibo ad altare diaboli     (Latin) I will go in to the altar of the devil.[1] In the context of the Black Mass which is being parodied here, Father O'Flynn subverts the words of the Prayers at the Foot of the Altar from the Latin Tridentine Mass, which Mulligan quoted on the opening page of the novel. See 003.05. The correct form, however, is: Introibo ad altare Domini Inferi (I will go in to the altar of the Lord of Hell).[2]
Corpus Meum     (Latin) My Body.[3] During the Consecration of the Host in the Latin Tridentine Mass, the celebrant elevates the host and says: Hoc est enim corpus meum (For this is my body).[4] In the Black Mass, which is being parodied here, the corresponding words are: Hoc est corpus Jesu Christi (This is the body of Jesus Christ).[5]
In some editions of Ulysses, this phrase is emended to Corpus meum.
↑ Missa Niger.
↑ Missale Romanum 85.
↑ Missa Niger.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
Bacteria, viruses or fungi can enter the joints and cause inflammation. Organisms that can infect joints include Salmonella and Shigella (food poisoning or contamination), chlamydia and gonorrhea (sexually transmitted diseases), and hepatitis C (blood infections usually caused by sharing needles or blood transfusions).
A rook is on the 7X7 chess board is surrounded by 9 spawns arranging in such a way.
What is the move that rook should take in order to cover all the chessboard area that do not eating up the spawns
Large Intestine Meridian |
Small Intestine Meridian |
Urinary Bladder Meridian |
Head And Neck Acupuncture Points |
Chest And Abdomen Acupuncture Points |
Back Acupuncture Points |
Upper Extremities Acupuncture Points |
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
The Earth is an object of special importance, not because it has any special characteristics, but because it is our starting point. All satellites that we launch start on the surface of earth, and all our observations are made from its surface. The only exception to the second rule is that some observations are made from satellites that have been previously launched from earth. Most of the practical applications of astrodynamics are centered around the earth (orbiting satellites, ballistic missiles, etc.), and so we will focus much of our attention on it.
Generally, it is thought that the Earth has a spherical shape. One of the most prominent reasons for this is that whenever we do calculations based on it, we approximate it to a sphere having a radius of approximately 6300 km. This is also further exacerbated by the fact that pictorial representations of the Earth such as The Blue Marble  show it to be a sphere. However, the Geodetic data shows Earth to be more of an Oblate Spheroid. The Oblateness refers to a bulge at the equator, which is termed as the Equatorial bulge and is caused by the centrifugal force of the Earth's rotation around its own axis. This means that the diameter across the Equatorial plane is more than 42 kilometers longer than the diameter at the poles.
One earth rotation on its axis, such that the sun is at the same place in the sky, is known as a solar day. A solar day is 24 hours by definition.
The period of the Earth's rotation is known as a solar year. A solar year is equal to 365.25 solar days.
The Earth's orbital plane is not parallel with the Earth's equator. This tilt in the orbital plane causes the seasons.
When the sun appears directly over the equator, and the day is the same length as the night, it is called the equinox. The equinox between the months of March and April is known as the vernal equinox. The autumnal equinox is the transition between the months of September and October.
Wikipedia has related information at Equatorial Plane
The Earth's equator is a circle.  The plane containing this circle is the equatorial plane.  To someone standing on the surface of the Earth, this plane is everything that is at right angles from the north (or south) celestial pole. If they are standing at Earth's north (or south) pole, then the points in the direction of the horizon are on the equatorial plane.
Wikipedia has related information at Astronomical Unit
The distance between the earth and the sun can be difficult to measure, and the units involved can make calculations difficult. However, we can define a new unit, the astronomical unit (AU) that is the average distance between the earth and the sun. 1 AU = 149 597 870.691 km.
Once the new disks are visible by the server, add a primary partition on each of them with fdisk.
[root@collabn1 ~]# fdisk /dev/sdb
Device contains neither a valid DOS partition table, nor Sun, SGI or OSF disklabel
Building a new DOS disklabel with disk identifier 0x97cc9f57.
Changes will remain in memory only, until you decide to write them.
After that, of course, the previous content won't be recoverable.
Warning: invalid flag 0x0000 of partition table 4 will be corrected by w(rite)
WARNING: DOS-compatible mode is deprecated. It's strongly recommended to
The partition table has been altered!
Calling ioctl() to re-read partition table.
Syncing disks.
Repeat the same step for sdc, sdd and sde.
When finished, all disks have at least a partition:
[root@collabn1 ~]# ls -l /dev/sd?1
Configure the option -g for the scsi_id command to expect an UUID from the shared devices.
[root@collabn1 ~]# echo "options=-g" > /etc/scsi_id.config
Test to see if  scsi_id - returns data
If there is no data returned , if you are running on vmware on may have to change virtual machine config
[root@collabn1 ~]#  /sbin/scsi_id -g -u -d /dev/sdb
Prepare the file /etc/udev/rules.d/99-oracle-asmdevices.rules by running the following script:
Once completed, the file should look like the following (except for the scsi UUID).
Note: The lines beginning with "KERNEL" should not be splitted.
[root@collabn1 ~]# cat /etc/udev/rules.d/99-oracle-asmdevices.rules
KERNEL=="sd?1", BUS=="scsi", PROGRAM=="/sbin/scsi_id -g -u -d /dev/$parent", RESULT=="1ATA_VBOX_HARDDISK_VB2216c54a-825b4598", NAME="asm-disk1", OWNER="oracle", GROUP="dba", MODE="0660"
KERNEL=="sd?1", BUS=="scsi", PROGRAM=="/sbin/scsi_id -g -u -d /dev/$parent", RESULT=="1ATA_VBOX_HARDDISK_VB83dd4d7f-d052e72c", NAME="asm-disk2", OWNER="oracle", GROUP="dba", MODE="0660"
KERNEL=="sd?1", BUS=="scsi", PROGRAM=="/sbin/scsi_id -g -u -d /dev/$parent", RESULT=="1ATA_VBOX_HARDDISK_VB636da22f-87dc2f88", NAME="asm-disk3", OWNER="oracle", GROUP="dba", MODE="0660"
KERNEL=="sd?1", BUS=="scsi", PROGRAM=="/sbin/scsi_id -g -u -d /dev/$parent", RESULT=="1ATA_VBOX_HARDDISK_VB86aaf297-60dcda74", NAME="asm-disk4", OWNER="oracle", GROUP="dba", MODE="0660"
[root@collabn1 ~]# /sbin/partprobe /dev/sdb1 /dev/sdc1 /dev/sdd1 /dev/sde1
[root@collabn1 ~]# /sbin/udevadm test /block/sdb/sdb1
[root@collabn1 ~]# /sbin/udevadm test /block/sdc/sdc1
[root@collabn1 ~]# /sbin/udevadm test /block/sdd/sdd1
[root@collabn1 ~]# /sbin/udevadm test /block/sde/sde1
[root@collabn1 ~]# /sbin/udevadm control --reload-rules
[root@collabn1 ~]# /sbin/start_udev
Starting udev:               [OK]
[root@collabn1 ~]# /etc/init.d/oracleasm scandisks
[root@collabn1 ~]# /etc/init.d/oracleasm listdisks
[root@collabn1 ~]# ls -l /dev/asm*
This is a source for teaching someone for
o_intMax become tb[indexInd];
Method findMax(i_aryTab,int i_start,int i_end)
oMaxN = findMax(i_aryTab,i_start,i_start+intJ)
oMaxM = findMax(i_aryTab,i_start + intJ + 1,i_end)
Method : findMaxFourEle ( intA,intB,intC,intD)
Method: findMaxThreeEle(intA,intB,intC)
More data will be coming soon...
1.8 GROUP PV: Stamps generated only by public access, self-service, coin-operated machines
One of the earliest countries to use postage meters, the first meter was put on public trial in 1904. New Zealand is the only country to use meters on a commercial, non-experimental basis from 1905 to late 1920.
Unlike most other meter-using countries, meter stamps in New Zealand are often printed without a town mark/date stamp and are considered no different from preprinted adhesive postage. As such metered mail is usually found with postal cancelations. If a town mark is present, it is often not canceled.
The Automatic Franking Machine Co. Ltd. (AFM) (successor to ASM)
New Zealand Franking Machine Co. Ltd. (NZFM) (Robert Wales), 1904
C.R. Hawkins Ltd. (successor to AFM, 1932)
A.H. Aldridge
The stamps are grouped according to appearance of frank and function:
A – circular and oval franks
C – horizontal or square rectangle
D – frank without complete outer frame
NOTE: The early Group A stamps were self-service public vending machine stamps. They have been cataloged in Group A rather than Group PV because of the close developmental relationship they have with other Group A stamps.
One meter only, a public, coin-operated, self-service machine.
Double circular stamp with rings 19.5 and 12 mm in diameter.
Inscribed “N.Z. POSTAL STAMP / No 1” between the circles and “1D / PAID” in the center.
Printed in black from a rubber die.
Postal guidance required the stamps to be postmarked.
A. Used outside the main Post Office at Christchurch, 31 March to 15 April 1904    [$600]
B. Used outside the main Post Office in Wellington from 4 to 23 May 1904    [$900]
Almost identical to Type A1 but slightly larger, 21 and 13 mm.
Printed in black with a steel die.
Public, coin-operated, self-service meter used outside the Wellington main Post Office, 23 June to 4 November 1904.
This is from the same machine used for Type A1. Only the frank die was changed.
A3. ASM (Moss) model “2”  (FV-2), 11 July to 10 August 1904.      [One cover with 1d stamp known to exist. Value undetermined]
The stamp is identical in appearance to Type A1, but it is from a meter modified for use in a private business setting rather than as a public, self-service meter.
It can be identified by the postmark date which is later than for Type A1 and by the logo in blue of the Christchurch Meat Company on the envelope.
The machine operated by insertion of a Sovereign (£1 coin) which allowed a mix of up to 240 one penny or 480 ½d impressions before re-locking.
NOTE: Souvenir impressions from the machine were made long after its brief period of postal use. These souvenir impressions are all badly warped due to aging of the rubber die and are usually found on small squares of lined paper.    [$25]
Narrow, upright double oval with ”N Z” at top.
“ONE PENNY” at bottom, “1D” at the sides, and blank in the center.
Public, coin-operated, self-service meter installed outside the Dunedin Post Office.
Narrow upright oval as with Type A4 but “NEW ZEALAND” spelled out at top.
“ONE PENNY” at bottom.
This is from the same machine used for Type A4. Only the frank die was changed.
The center contains the postage value above the meter number.
Printed with a metal (zinc) die.
Sovereign (£1 coin)-in-the-slot operation as with Type A3.
A. No1, used by Christchurch Meat Co. Two covers (½d stamp and 1d stamp) and a single cutout (1d stamp) exist, printed in violet    [$2000]
B. No2, used by Pyne & Co, Christchurch. Two registered covers with 5d stamps (violet), and a cover and cut-out with 1d stamp (black) are known    [$2000]
C. No3, demonstration machine. A small number of value sets (less the 3d) are known to exist, printed in red or black and produced at a later date.    [$500]
Values: The model was capable of printing ½d, 1d, 2d, 3d, 4d, 5d and 6d values.
These stamps are from the first credit machine, an improvement over the Sovereign coin-in-the-slot operation. A postal employee would travel between meter users to collect payments and recharge the meters.
The stamps are found printed in black, purple, blue, red, and green. Black is relatively common with purple being rare. Blue, green and red are exceptionally rare.
Meter No’s: 1 to 22 have “No.” prefix. Meters from 23 to 44 are without prefix. These were all issued to Christchurch firms.
Values:      ½d, 1d    [$75]
Value:       ONE SHILLING    [$600]
a. Printed in purple      [Add $50 to ½d and 1d stamps, $100 or more to the other denominations]
b. Printed in blue, red, or green      [Add $250. Known only with ½d and 1d stamps]
This is from the same model "C" meter that produced Type A7. Only the frank dies were changed.
Town name, normally with “NZ”, added at top.
“POSTAGE PAID” at bottom.
Meter numbers start at 1 in each town.
The stamps are found printed in black, blue, and purple. Black is relatively common with blue being rare and purple very rare.
Values:      ½d, 1d    [$50]
Value:       ONE SHILLING    [$500]
a. Printed in blue      [Add $50 to ½d and 1d stamps, $100 or more to the other denominations]
b. Printed in purple      [Add $250. Known only with ½d and 1d stamps]
c. Town name only, without “NZ”. Napier 1, 2, 4-9, and Gisborne 1-5 recorded      [Add $25]
NOTE: The Wellington stamp dies from 1 to 26 have the town name abbreviated "WELLGTN. From 27 forward the name is spelled out in full.
This is from the same model "C" meter that produced Types A7 and A8. Only the frank dies were changed.
Large circle, 21-22 mm in diameter, with different interior design for each value:
A. ½d:      plain single circle    [$50]
B. 1d:      diamond    [$50]
C. 3d:      square with four semicircles    [$250]
D. 6d:      lines at top and bottom and small circles at the sides    [$500]
Town name alone at top, without country name or "NZ".
Meter numbers for each town are the same as used with Type A8.
Frank is upright rectangle with rounded corners.
Meter numbers start at 1 in each town.
A. Straight line rectangle (with rounded corners) with, “POSTAGE PAID NZ" in upper left.
Values:      ½d, 1d    [$40]
Value:       ONE SHILLING    [$500]
B. Frank frame is wavy line, "POSTAGE PAID" without "NZ" in upper left. Began use in 1915 with a postal rate change.    [$60]
One value only:      1½d
a. Printed in deep blue or purple (Dunedin 34, Hastings 2, Napier 1 and 12 seen, ½d and 1d known).      [Add $100]
NOTE: As the stamp dies were replaced in the Model "C" machines (from Type A7 through A9 to B1) a small number of machines had only some of the value dies replaced with the newer designs. Covers with multiple stamp types (B1 with A8 or A9) occasionally turn up. They are quite rare. Shown at right is a portion of a mailing tag franked with 1 shilling Type A8 and 1½d Type B1B, both from meter Auckland 50.
Straight frame line with squared corners.
Meter numbers continue up from those used with Type B1.
The stamps were at first printed in black, then maroon (dark purple), then dull red and finally pink. Dull red and pink are the most common with black and maroon less so.
The stamps from the "D" and "E" models are identical.
Values:      ½d, 1d, 1½d, 2d, 6d, ONE SHILLING
b. Printed in maroon (dull purple)      [Uncommon]
c. Printed in non-standard dark aniline purple      [Very rare]
d. Relief stamp (temporary replacement or ‘loaner’ machine). Meter number with “R” prefix. Meters R1-R5    [$350]
e. Relief stamp (temporary replacement or ‘loaner’ machine). "SOS" in center circle    [$500]
Similar to Type B2 but special design from a machine used at the Christchurch Industrial Exhibition.
"N.Z. / INDUSTRIAL" above, and "EXHIBITION" below the central circle which contains "CH CH”.
In operation only for seven weeks.
Value:       “ONE PENNY”    [$500]
Values:  “HALF PENNY"       "ONE SHILLING"      [Extremely rare, value uncertain, $2000?]
These two values are known on small sheets with large "CANCELLED" hand stamp. They were handed to the public as souvenirs of the show. The one shilling value is also known on an unmailed cover.
NOTE: The 1½d and 6d values may exist but have not been reported.
B4. AFM (Moss) model “E” plus converted "model D"s (FV-5), 1928.
Double-line outer rim with rounded corners.
“NEW ZEALAND/POSTAGE” at top without town name.
Meter numbers 1501 up without prefix.
Values:      ½d, 1d, 1½d, 2d
NOTE: At least one Model E machine (E142) was converted to decimal currency at some point. The postage values are 1, 2½, 3 and 5 cents. The one shilling value remained in the dial but was disabled and could not be selected. From the condition of the machine it appears that it had been in use, but no franked covers or examples of the decimal stamps have ever been reported. The machine is in the hands of a collector who says that all the dies had been removed when he received it and so is not possible to produce proofs after the fact.
As Type B4 but meter number with “F” prefix.
Meters F1 through F42 were reportedly fielded.
Herringbone pattern at sides with rays in lower corners.
Value figure (variable in size) in center with "POSTAGE" above and "PAID" below.
M# with “N” prefix.
TM: DC, BIC or nil
A. £sd values:      1d, 2d, 2½d, 3d, 4d, 6d
£sd values:      9d, 1/6, 1/9 .    [$20]
B. Decimal values:      2½c through 25c seen    [$10]
a. Solid block in place of meter number
b. M# with “No N” prefix
Unique design similar to Type B7 with herringbone pattern at sides, but “POSTAGE” in arc over “PAID” above small value figure at bottom center.
Meter number in lower corners, and postage value at bottom center.
Meter N71 only, used by Hikurangi Dairy Co.
This stamp is most likely the result of a locally fabricated repair.
Values seen:      ½d, 1d
B8. Hawkins “Rotex”  (FV-5), December 1931.
Frank with single line, simulated perforation border.
M# with “G” prefix, G1 up.
TM: squared circle with horizontal line background, or nil
Values: £sd:      ½d, 1d, 2d, 6d, 1/-
Values: Decimal:      1c, 2c, 4c seen
a. Without letter prefix: 1332    [$20]
b. Slogan applied to back of envelope    [$100]
Nearly identical to Type B8 but M# with “H” prefix.
Values: £sd:      ½d, 1d, 2d, 3d, 4d, 6d
Values: : Decimal:      2½c, 3c, 4c, 5c, 7c, 8c, 10c, 12c, 14c, 20c seen
B10. Universal “Multi-Value”  (MV), 1936.
Large frank with simulated-perforation outer frame line and straight inner frame line.
“NEW ZEALAND” curved at top above “POSTAGE”.
With “£ | s | d” below value figures.
B11. Universal “Multi-Value”  (MV), 1953.
As Type B10 but smaller, with double straight inner frame lines, and without “£ | s | d”.
V/F: Decimal:      =.00      0oo 0.00      00.oo      0.00=
Similar to B11 but much smaller, 23 x 27 mm, and with two parallel vertical lines at each side of the figure of value figures.
M# with “S” prefix.
a. Decimal value without “¢” (S.1294)
b. Error, with both "d" and "c" currency indicators    [$10]
c. Error, frame inverted, value upright. M# S.1111    [$20]
B13. Universal/Pitney Bowes “Automax”  (MV).
Very similar to Type B12 but larger.
With straight outer frame line, simulated inner frame line and third (straight) frame line.
Ornaments below curved “NEW ZEALAND” at top.
One machine only used until 1977.
M# “K1” breaks bottom frame line.
“NEW ZEALAND” in panel at top, “POSTAGE” and M# in panel at bottom.
M# with “X” prefix and with two short horizontal lines at the sides.
B16. Roneo Neopost “Frankmaster 305”  (MV).
Value in oval frame with petals at sides.
Crown at bottom below small “PAID”.
M# with “RN” prefix.
B17. Aldridge “Stamp Master”  (FV-7), 1954.
Small frank with straight, single line frame.
Tiny “New Zealand/Postage” at top.
M# nos. M1 to about M200, and M500 to about M600.
Values:      ½d, 1d, 2d, 3d, 6d, 1/-
NOTE: Although this machine did not have a town/date die, it could print slogans.
B18. Aldridge “Stamp Master”  (FV-7), 1955.
As Type B17 but with simulated perforation frame line.
Meter numbers start at 22.
A. M# with “M.” prefix
B. M# with “No. M” prefix
Values:      ½d, 1d, 2d, 3d, 4d, 6d, 1/-, 2/-, 3/-
NOTE: Ten shilling stamps (meter M118) exist on a proof cover. The value has not been reported as actually issued or used.    [Rare]
B19. Hawkins “Ace”  (either LV-12).
Frank with ‘checkerboard’ frame, 22 x 30 mm.
M# with “A” prefix, A1 up.
A. £sd values:     1d, 2½d, 3d, 4d, 6d, 2/- seen
B. Decimal values with “CENTS” stacked at the sides:     1c through 24c seen
C. Without “D” or “CENTS”:     2½ seen
Large frank, 28-29 x 31-32 mm, with simulated-perforation outer frame line and straight inner frame line.
With line bisecting frank above “POSTAGE”.
M# with “Z” prefix.
A. £sd values with “D”:     1d through 6d in ½ steps
B. £sd values with “PENCE” below:     2½d, 3d, 4d seen
C. Decimal values with “CENTS” above:     3c, 4c, 5c, 6c seen
D. Without currency indicator:     3 seen (Z631)
a. Without line under “NEW ZEALAND”: M# Z315
B21. Francotyp-Postalia "MS4/MS5"  (MV).
Frank similar to Type B11.
The panel at bottom containing the meter number is not as tall as with B11.
A. MS4 model. Meter number with “PA" prefix.      V/F: 000
B. MS5 model. Meter number with "PS" prefix.      V/F: 0000
Large frank, 27 x 32 mm, with simulated-perforation outer frame line and straight inner frame line.
With “C” at each side of value figure.
Values:     2c through 40c seen
♦♦ The Mailmaster is chiefly a limited value (LV) machine but has a 2-bank(see the glossary) multi-value (MV) feature. The left bank prints one of 24 whole numbers (1 to 24, or 5 to 120 in 5c steps). The right bank prints a half-cent value (½) when the operator pushes a button on the front of the machine.
C2. Mailroom Services Ltd. “Postmaster” (FV-5).
Small nearly square frank of slightly variable size, 17-20 x 18-20 mm.
Often with slogan in different color.
M# with “P” prefix.
A. Without “c” after value.    Values:  6, 10, 11, 14, 15, 17, 20, 24, 25, 28, 30, 35 seen
B. With “c” after value.    Values:  7c, 8c, 10c, 12c, 20c, 30c seen
C3. Hawkins “New Rotex”♦ (LV-25+½)♦♦
Checkerboard frame, 32-33 x 27 mm.
Large “N” and “Z” at the sides.
M# with “B” prefix.
A. £sd values with “PENCE” below “POSTAGE”    [Scarce]
B. Decimal values with “CENTS” below “POSTAGE”
♦ The New Rotex is basically the same machine as the Mailmaster (C1), but modified to include decimal values.
♦♦ The New Rotex is chiefly a limited value (LV) machine but has a 2-bank(see the glossary) multi-value (MV) feature. The left bank prints one of 24 whole numbers (1 to 24, or 5 to 120 in 5c steps). The right bank prints a half-cent value (½) when the operator pushes a button on the front of the machine.
Small frank slightly wider than tall.
With simulated perforation outer border and straight-line inner border.
Inner panel at bottom contains the meter number with "SA" prefix.
Square frank with herringbone sides and rays in lower corners.
M# with “J” prefix.
NOTE: Examples with slogan and town mark in different colors are known.
As Type C5 but wider than tall.
M# with “R” prefix.
Similar to Type C6 but frank not as wide.
Wide frank with “NEW ZEALAND” in panel at top, M# and “POSTAGE” in panel at bottom.
Country map left of value figures.
M# with “D” prefix.
A. With vertical line between the meter number and “POSTAGE”
B. No line between meter number and “POSTAGE”
Nearly identical to Type C7A but the spacing between the date and value figures is slightly wider (~28mm compared to ~25mm)
C9. Frama "M/E3" (MV).
Nearly identical to Type C7A but the value figures are thicker and larger.
Meter number with “F” prefix.
The stamp is identical to Australia Type H3 but with NEW ZEALAND at top.
Meter number SATAS / SA1002 seen.
D1. Pitney Bowes-GB “5000” series (MV).
Simulated-perforation frame lines at top and bottom, open at sides.
Frank design with concave curve at left to fit around town mark.
M# with “P.B.” prefix below four stars at center between date and value figures.
A. Top line of frank 40 mm wide.      V/F:   ≋0.00
B. Wide frank, top line 48 mm wide.      V/F:   ≋00.00
a. With advertising slogan instead of town name inside DC town mark
D2. Pitney Bowes-GB “6300” series (MV).
Similar to Type D1 but frank squared off at left, and date and value figures on same level.
M# with “P.B.” prefix.
D3. Pitney Bowes-GB “6900”  (MV).
As Type D1 but much taller.
“POSTAGE” below value figures.
M# with “PBZ” prefix.
D4. Pitney Bowes-GB “EasyMail”  (digital).
Wide and short design without town mark.
"NEW ZEALAND POST" across top with logo at left.
M# with “PBC” prefix.
Three numbers stacked at left, M#, date and post code (or "0000") stacked at right.
E1. Pitney Bowes "DM300"  (digital).
Large, square 2D barcode at right.
"New Zealand Post" and envelope logo at top left above value figures.
Meter number with "P23" prefix at bottom.
E2. Pitney Bowes "K700"  (digital).
Very similar to Type E1.
Value figures are more narrowly spaced than with E1.
The meter number figures are larger than with E1.
Meter number with "P19" prefix.
E3. Pitney Bowes "DM100"  plus other DM models (digital).
As Types E1 and E2.
Value figures narrowly spaced as with E2.
Small meter number digits as with E1.
Meter number with "P11", "P12", or "P17" prefix.
Frameless design with post office name at top, “POSTAGE PAID” at center, date and value figures at bottom.
Printed on adhesive labels with straight sides and serrations at top and bottom.
This stamp was used on both regular mail and parcel post.
Printed in red or violet on white tape.
PO2. Unidentified (digital), 2008 or earlier.
Large self adhesive label with horizontal panels.
Top panel contains "New Zealand Post" and postal service logo.
Next panel contains the destination in negative lettering on a solid field.
The third panel contains the mail class.
The large bottom panel contains three lines of point-of-sale data:
Printed in black that can fade to brown as the example shown.
V/F:      Price:      $00.00 (with slashed zeros)
PP1. Ticket Issue Machines (LV-12), 1950.    [Exceptionally rare]
Box at left with “PARCEL POST” reading up.
Value figure in box at right.
Printed on white tape imperforate at top and bottom, perforated at the sides.
One machine in use from late May to mid August 1950.
NOTE: A pre-production Specimen exists. It is printed on pink paper tape instead of white but otherwise look the same    [One example known, dated 14 October 1949]
PP2. National Cash Register "126"  (11 December 1959).
Frameless design printed on square self-adhesive labels.
The stamp consists of three lines of text: town line above "POSTAGE PAID" at top, date and value figures at bottom.
A. "POSTAGE PAID" alone
B. "POSTAGE PAID" with long dashes at the sides     [$20, one machine only]
Eight machines were eventually placed into use.
Similar in appearance to Type PP1 the Setright stamp has NEW ZEALAND at top below the town name.
A. Town line "WELLINGTON"      [extremely rare, in use two weeks only, value undeterined)]
B. Town line "KILBIRNIE"    [$25]
GROUP PV: Stamps generated only by public access, self-service, coin-operated machines
NOTE: See also Types A1, A2, A4, and A5.
Stamp from experimental public access self-service meter.
Large stamp with simulated perforation outer border and straight line inner border.
“NEW ZEALAND/ POST OFFICE” at top.
“C.P.O. CH.” (Central Post Office Christchurch) in bottom panel.
One machine only.
One value only:      3d
PV2. Comac (FV-1), 1972.    [$20 on cover, $200 for a set of twelve]
Self-service meter stamp.
Similar to Type PV1 but much smaller.
Bottom panel contains “C.P.O.” plus two letter abbreviation for the town where the machine was located.
Twelve machines were in use for a short time.
One value only:      5c
These stamps were used until the 1930s (or possibly later). More recent Official meter stamps are indistinguishable from regular business meter stamps and can be identified only by the return address.
As Type A8 but with department name at top, and without meter number.
A. “TAXES” at top, “A” below value figure.      Value: 1d    [$500]
B. “TOURIST” at top, “A” below value figure.
Value:      ONE SHILLING    [$1000]
C. “ADVANCES” at top, "B" below value figure.    [$750]
a. Printed in red or green      [Add $400]
As Type B1A but with departmental name in diagonal panel.
“POSTAGE / PAID” at top left.
A. “MARINE” with “A” above value figure.      Values: ½d, 1d    [$250]
B. “P.T. CHCH.”
Values:      ½d, 1d, 6d    [$250]
Value:       ONE SHILLING    [$500]
C. “P.T. AUCK.”    [$500]
As Type OO2 but with “OFFICIAL/ PAID/ N.Z.” at top left.
“•P. & S. DEPT.” in diagonal panel.
Values:      6d, 1/-    [Add $150]
As Type B2 but with departmental name in place of town name.
A. “MARINE. A”, meter number nil    [$150]
B. “P&S DEPT”, meter number nil    [$250]
C. “P.T. CHCH•”, meter number nil    [$250]
D. “P.T.W.” Meter number 33    [$150]
E. “TAXES” and “A”      [Reported but not verified]
As Type B3 but with department name at bottom and town name abbreviation or “A” in center circle.
Known printed in black, maroon, dull red and pink.
Listed below are verified department names. Others possibly exist.
Values:      ½d, 1d, 1½d    [$10]
NOTE: The 2d value may exist.
H. OFF. DEFENCE DEPT (WELTN)
P. TRUST DEPT., WELTN (A)
Bicycling has been a prominent part of Dutch culture since the turn of the 19th century, when the Dutch owned more bicycles per capita than any other country in Europe. This early popularity in Amsterdam and across the country is undoubtedly aided by the fact that it’s a flat, compact and densely populated nation with a moderate year round climate. But just as many western countries, the post-WWII era saw a  widespread adoption vehicles and a subsequent foray into auto-centric design. As the rest of the industrialized world left their bikes in favor of cars, many Dutch did not—particularly in Amsterdam, which had always been difficult to drive in due to its narrow streets and many canals. This new sharing of the roads led to a high number of vehicle-pedestrian accidents and deaths.  Amsterdam and the Netherlands arrived at a crossroads. In light of domestic protests and concerns over the sustainability of automobiles, the Dutch government began a nationwide policy to divest from cars in its towns and cities and to focus on alternative transportation that were less reliant on foreign oil. The pendulum swung back to favor bicycles in cities. With the aid of consistent investments over the last 30 years in infrastructure and education, Amsterdam has become the most bicycle friendly city in Europe with 881,000 bikes in a city of 780,559 people.
Fietsersbond ("Dutch Cyclists Union"): Early bicycle advocacy group that has been successful over time in lobbying politicians and civil servants at the national, provincial and local levels for bike infrastructure and bike safety policies. It’s now a large organization with 34,000 paying members that employs 45 staff. They publish a quarterly magazine called the Vogelvrije Fietser, "Free-as-a-bird Cyclist." [1]
Stop de Kindermoord ("Stop the Child Murder"): A protest organization started in 1973 in response to the high number of vehicular related deaths of children in the early 1970s. Notably, this was a coalition of bike advocates, environmentalists, parents and schools. The group successfully influenced the Dutch government to fund and build segregated cycle paths. In 2001 they became part of the larger road safety campaign, 3VO / Veilig Verkeer Nederland, or "Safe Traffic Netherlands", that continues to campaign for lower road deaths.[2]
PM Joop Den Uyl (“Uncle Joop”): Prime Minister of the Netherlands from 11 May 1973 until 19 December 1977. Seen as a polarizing figure in Danish politics, he was a force for leftist causes and a proponent for the maakbare samenleving, or the “makeable society” under which many bike improvements were made.[3]
1906: The Motor and Bicycle Act provides regulations for traffic rules and for bicyclists.  Bicycles needed to be equipped with a "properly functioning steering mechanism", a bell,at least one properly working brake and, when used after dark and a lantern.[4]
1919: Dutch Road Congress Association begins lobbying for better roads [4]
1923: Bicycle users and pedestrians are first allowed to use one meter of shoulder on country roads.
1932: The Dutch Road Plan was the first systematic attempt at road construction in the nation.[4]
1958: Amsterdam’s population peaks at 875,000, then began declining due to suburbanization.[4]
1972: Bicycle deaths peak at 3,300, sparking public outrage. Stop the Child Murder coalition, named from the headline of an article written by a journalist whose child had been killed by a car, protests for safer streets.[6]
1973: Labor Party candidate Joop Den Uyl wins election in the wake of oil crises, implements car-free Sundays in order to ration oil.
1974: First city centers made car free.[6]
1975: Dutch national government starts financing dedicated cycling route, separated from motor vehicles. Prototypes in the cities of Hague and Tilburg were massively successful. Between economic forces and design, both cities see biking rates increase by over 50%. The modern Dutch Cyclists' Union is founded as a national advocacy group solely for bike infrastructure and bike safety.[4]
1978: Amsterdam's traffic circulation plan gives priority to separated cycle tracks in place of wider roads for motor vehicles.
1980 to 2005: Rapid construction of separated bicycle paths. Cycling related injuries and deaths in Amsterdam fall 40% and 60%, despite the distance cycled per inhabitant increasing from 1.7 km to 2.5 km. Safer cycling encourages more cycling and more cycling encourages greater safety.
2003: A public bike-share system stationed at train stations, OV-Bicycle, starts and sees 100,000 rides in the first year.[8]
2006: Amsterdam begins implementing annual cyclist satisfaction survey that is applied to city planning.[7]
2011: 90% of Amsterdam roads are considered "bike friendly" by municipal government.
2014: OV-Bicycle rides exceed 1.5 million trips per year.[8]
Amsterdam is a small city, compact and flat, only 85 square miles in land area, approximately the size of San Francisco without hills.
Amsterdam's pre-industrial road infrastructure was not built for cars. Urban-renewal style clearance to make room for infrastructure was more political difficult than in comparatively less dense cities.
The energy/economic crisis captured national government's attention.
A coalition of environmentalists and concerned parents combined forces to campaign against auto-fatalities after an unusual number of accidents involving children.
The Netherland's high-tax, high-service model has enabled dedicated and sustained investment in cycling infrastructure.
In 2011, the City of Amsterdam released a long-term comprehensive plan for their bicycle infrastructure. The plan names three major problems to tackle over the next four years. The major problems are a lack of bicycle parking at the Central and Amstel Stations, narrow bike lanes on busy routes, and a lack of bicycle infrastructure construction. The City of Amsterdam promises to invest €120 million ($131 million) in bicycle infrastructure by 2020. By 2040, Amsterdam plans to make the investment a total of €200 million ($219 million).[10]
By 2016, the City plans to add at least 12,000 new bicycle parking spaces. Another 58,000 parking spaces will be added to Amsterdam's network between 2016 and 2020. A majority of the additions will be made at the Central station (16,000 by 2020) and the Zuid station (11,000 by 2020). Under this plan, cyclists will be able to park their bike up to 14 days (previously 7). Large parking facilities will also be ran with a bicycle monitor to track how long bikes stay without movement. Any abandoned bike is removed and donated.[10]
Plan Amsterdam Magazine: Cycling Policy and Design
The City of Amsterdam publishes magazine concerning the current projects, developments, and physical planning in the city proper as well as the Amsterdam Metropolitan Region. Plan Amsterdam releases seven issues per year. Two of the issues per year are in English while the rest are written in Dutch. Released in July 2014, the Cycling Policy and Design issue depicts the past, current, and future state of bicycling in the Amsterdam Metropolitan Region. The issue goes over the past history of cycling culture, upcoming projects and designs, a future forecast of cycling needs, and a look on biker behavior in Amsterdam.[11]
Bike lanes are abundant throughout Amsterdam. These lanes normally come in two fashions: protected and unprotected. Protected bike lanes involve a separation between the bicycle and vehicles moving the same direction. The separation can be a concrete median, a row of street parking, plastic poles, or even a row of trees and planters. Unprotected bike lanes move alongside traffic with different paint or color of road differentiating the two modes of transportation.
A two way fietsstraat separated by a shallow brick median.
Otherwise known as a bike street, fietsstraat are a road in which the bikes have the primary right of way while any vehicle must yield. The width of bike streets are normally around 12 feet wide to accommodate personal vehicles. Bike streets are typically found in residential areas where traffic remains low. The fietsstraat are also vital to the larger bicycle road network since they connect the local roads to bicycle highways as well as bypass roads that are too busy for riders.
Also known as snelfietsroutes, represent links of bicycle roadway made solely for long distance travel or recreational biking. These differ from fietsstraat as cars are not allowed to share the roadway. Additionally, there are no traffic lights, no intersections with vehicles, and no lengths of poor pavement along the bicycle highways. The Amsterdam metropolitan region currently has fietssnelwegen connecting to Utrecht to the southeast, Haarlem to the west, and Zaandam to the North. In construction or other planned highways connect to Pumerend, Almere, and Hoofddorp.[12]
Since there are more bicycles than humans in Amsterdam, there are multiple ways to safely park one's bike. Bike racks are abundant as well as a legal obligation from businesses to provide. As the popularity of biking increases, the number of available spaces also decreases. This is why engineers are creating more solutions for creating more bicycle parking space. Proposed solutions include floating mini-barges placed in the canals which hold 150 bikes a piece. Another solution proposed was to build an additional underground bike parking facility.
Since a large percentage of Amsterdammer commute by bicycle, safety alongside vehicles is of utmost importance. As designed in the PLANAmsterdam 2014, the City is introducing an intersection design called PlusNet. The design allows almost full separation of bicycles from cars at large, multi-lane intersections. Any bikes crossing the intersection do so in pedestrian-like avenues perpendicular to traffic. All right turns can be made without stopping at all.[11]
Amsterdam uses a shared bicycle system called OV-Fiets. OV-Fiets, originally an independent company, has been run by Nederlandse Spoorwegen (NS) otherwise known as the Dutch Rail since 2008. The NS introduced the OV-Fiets system in 2003. There were 70 bike stations in 2004, and the system has grown to over 250 stations in 2014.[14] One can rent a shared bicycle in various ways. The bikes can be found at staffed stations, self-serve stations (much like NiceRides in the Twin Cities), bike safes, bike carousels, bike lockers, bike dispenser, or at any of the OV-Fiet pop-up stores.[15] The pop-up stores are normally set just outside of the Amsterdam Central, Amsterdam Zuid, and The Hague Central Rail stations in September and October. The pop-up stores are used to alleviate congestion of commuters and tourists in the busy months. Extra pop-up stores are used throughout the metropolitan area during large events such as large soccer matches.[15] The wide availability of the bikes has made the program a success with 180,000 subscribers and over 1.5 million rides in 2014.[14] To participate in the program, subscribers pay a small €10 ($11) per year. After that, the bikes can be rented for €3,15 an hour ($3.45).[16]
In 2013, the main central rail stations of the Amsterdam metro area had bike parking issues. Those that used the bike share system could not find a spot to park their bike before taking their train home. This was due to the mass amounts of riders flocking to the same major rail stations as they commute out of the city. In response to the parking issue, OV-Fiets launched a pilot program called OV-Fiets@home. The pilot program allowed subscribers to take the bike home and use it again on the commute to work. This allowed more parking spaces at many of the rail stations across the network. Users could opt into the program for €15 ($16.50) a month. The program was tested at The Hague Central and Utrecht Central stations, two of the top five busiest stations. The pilot program was not tested in Amsterdam Central station in order to find any faults without having them occur at by far the busiest station in the metro. The program was considered a success. But, the pricing scheme was changed so that a separate subscription was not needed. Instead, the length of time a bike could be rented was extended to 72 hours for all users.[16][17]
Today, Amsterdam is perhaps one of the most bicycle friendly cities within the Netherlands, if not the world. In Amsterdam, over 60% of trips are made by bike in the inner city. Notably, Amsterdam is famous for its nearly 500 miles of bike lanes across the city. The popularity of cycling in Amsterdam and the Netherlands as a whole is aided by the flat, compact and densely populated terrain and the climate mostly moderate. The first velocipede, or bike, was introduced in the Netherlands around 1870 and were first used as a tool for the rich, as prices were too high for the average laborer. The bicycle continued to be a true luxury item in the Netherlands until the turn of the century when bike ownership disseminated to the broader society. Over this time, bikes were often met with hostility, particularly in rural Netherlands. The aggressive behavior of non-cyclists prompted the elite bikers to form cycling clubs, forming the first in 1883. Under pressure from these clubs, as well as increased motorist traffic, the national government implemented a vehicle tax to finance general roads, some of which went to bike infrastructure. From the 1920s onwards, bicycle use increased rapidly and was the most popular mode of transport in the country, with 2 bicycles for every citizen. In the 1930s, the total Dutch bicycle industry produced around 400,000 bicycles per year.The result of cheaper, more accessible bikes and cars led to a sixfold increase in traffic volume in Amsterdam between increased sixfold between 1916 and 1938. Following the war, the number of inhabitants in the Netherlands rose from 10.0 million in 1950 to 13.6 million in 1975. Women began to work, professional jobs doubled and development across the Netherlands started to suburbanize. In 1940, the maximum trip distance in the city was seven km, but by 1970 this was 15 km. As productivity increased, disposable income tripled and the Dutch began buying cars. The number of passenger cars rose from 139,000 in 1950 to 3.4 million in 1975. The city of Amsterdam, along with the rest of the Netherlands, began replacing early bicycle infrastructure with widened roads for motorists. As in many countries in Europe, roads became increasingly congested and the competition for road space became a safety hazard for cyclists. Around this time, Amsterdam began experimenting with one-way traffic, parking fees, and woonerfs—small residential areas that were pedestrian only, however these efforts were not enough. The rapid jump in drivers caused a sharp rise in cyclist deaths, peaking in 1971 with 3,300 deaths at the hands of motor vehicles. To the outrage of the nation, 450 of those pedestrian deaths were children under the age of 14. In response, a social movement  called Stop de Kindermoord, or Stop the Child Murder, was formed in order to advocate for safer cycling conditions.  Bicycling gained a political dimension after the oil criss in the Netherlands, the result of a boycott of Arabic oil-producing countries. Resistance to conceding entirely to the demands of the car rapidly gained ground. Car traffic regulation and the promotion of public transport became topics of discussion at the National level. In 1975, the Dutch Cyclists' Union was established out of defunct clubs to focus solely on lobbying for bicycle interests. These pressures helped to persuade the Dutch government under Joop den Uyl to shift its focus from accommodating cars to building out its now extensive network of paths and bike infrastructure, starting with a 1978 bike plan that listed building a bike route network as a top priority. These lanes, built up largely since the 1980s, are clearly marked with separate signs and lights for cyclists and are wide enough to allow side-by-side cycling and overtaking. Today, biking has become normalized around the entire country and is devoid of much of the stigma pervasive around the rest of the world.
↑ Fietsersbond.be,. 'Fietsersbond: The Conscious Choice For The Bike (2015)
↑ Vvn.nl,. 'Veilig Verkeer Nederland | Iedereen Veilig Over Straat!' (2015)
↑ a b c d e Fietsberaad,. 'Dutch Bicycle Master Plan' (1999)
↑ a b c Anderson, Michael. 'The Dutch Economy: A History Of The Dutch Economy Since WWII' (2010)
↑ a b Iamsterdam.com,. 'Amsterdam's Cycling History | I Amsterdam (2014)
↑ a b Fietberaad,. 'The Bicycle Capitals Of The World: Amsterdam And Copenhagen' (2010)
↑ a b Bicycle Dutch,. 'Bike Share The Dutch Way' (2011)
↑ a b City of Amsterdam. "Long-Term Bicycle Plan 2012-2016." (2012): n. pag. Gameente Amsterdam. Gameente Amsterdam, 2012. Web. 3 Nov. 2015. <https://www.amsterdam.nl/publish/pages/423840/samenvatting_eng_lowres3.pdf>.
↑ a b City of Amsterdam. Plan Amsterdam: Cycling Policy and Design. Gemeente Amsterdam. City of Amsterdam, June 2014. Web. 3 Nov. 2015. <http://urbantransform.eu/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2014/09/PlanAmsterdam-Cycling-policy-and-design-PDF-2MB.pdf>.
↑ The Free School. "Fietssnelwegen." Sustainable Development. Trans. Google Translate. The Free School in The Hague, 9 Nov. 2011. Web. 3 Nov. 2015. <http://www.onderde18.vrijeschooldenhaag.nl/site/binnen/duurzame_ontwikkeling/fietssnelwegen>.
↑ http://www.iamsterdam.com/en/visiting/what-to-do/architecture/bridges-of-amsterdam.
↑ a b Nederlandse Spoorwegen. "Grafeiken." Grafieken. Nederlandse Spoorwegen, 2015. Web. 03 Nov. 2015. <http://nsjaarverslag.nl/grafieken/>.
↑ a b Nederlandse Spoorwegen. "Verschillende Huurlocaties." Verschillende Huurlocaties. Nederlandse Spoorwegen, 2015. Web. 03 Nov. 2015.
↑ a b Nederlandse Spoorwegen. "Veelgestelde Vragen." OV-Fiets. Nederlandse Spoorwegen, 2015. Web. 03 Nov. 2015.
↑ OV-Fiets. "OV-fiets." Wikipedia. Trans. Google Translate. OV-Fiets, 2015. Web. 03 Nov. 2015. <https://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/OV-fiets>.
English: Welcome to the Turkish book. In this book you will find all you need to know in order to speak, write, and read the Turkish language. This is a collaborative effort, so please feel free to contribute anything, or even just correct mistakes.
Table Of Contents - İçindekiler
Geography of Turkey and the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus
Turkic: Azerbaijani | Turkish | Turkmen | Uzbek
Buyeo: *  Japanese* | Korean*
*The inclusion of Japanese and Korean in Altaicand the existence of Buyeo is controversial.See Altaic languages for more information on this dispute.
Present Tense - Şimdiki Zaman
Turkish Table of Contents   view ⋅ edit ⋅ talk
I am...
Are you busy today?
You can give your feedback about this page on the talk page.
This is a Category II Language.
Chapter edited and updated by: Poulami Barman and Sarah Allen
Contact pxb2979@rit.edu, sea3016@rit.edu
Protein interaction is crucial for every organism.  Most proteins function through interaction with other molecules, and often with other proteins.  Enzymes interact with their substrates, inhibitors interact with enzymes, transport proteins interact with structural proteins, hormones interact with receptors – and that’s just a few of the interactions that happen in a cell.  Some proteins are composed of more than one polypeptide chain, and the interactions between the different peptides are necessary for the whole protein to function.  Since they are so essential, protein-protein interactions are an important topic for scientists to understand.
There are many characteristics of a protein-protein interaction that are important.  Obviously, it is important to know which proteins are interacting.  In many experiments and computational studies, the focus is on interactions between two different proteins.  However, you can have one protein interacting with other copies of itself (oligomerization), or three or more different proteins interacting.  The stoichiometry of the interaction is also important – that is, how many of each protein involved are present in a given reaction.  Some protein interactions are stronger than others, because they bind together more tightly.  The strength of binding is known as affinity.  Proteins will only bind each other spontaneously if it is energetically favorable.  Energy changes during binding are another important aspect of protein interactions.  Many of the computational tools that predict interactions are based on the energy of interactions.
In recent years there has been a strong focus on predicting protein interactions computationally.  Predicting the interactions can help scientists predict pathways in the cell, potential drugs and antibiotics, and protein functions.  However, it has been an ongoing challenge to decipher those interactions.  Proteins are large molecules, and binding between them often involves many atoms and a variety of interaction types, including hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic interactions, salt bridges, and more.  Proteins are also dynamic, with many of their bonds able to stretch and rotate leading to different conformations.  Therefore, predicting protein-protein interactions requires a good knowledge of the chemistry and physics involved in the interactions.
This chapter discusses the characteristics of protein-protein interactions, how they are determined experimentally, and how they are predicted computationally.  It also contains a list of databases where you can explore known and predicted protein interactions.  The links above will lead you to the various sections.
The structure of a practice includes needs, methods, actors, means and goals, articulated into specific efforts that are aimed at addressing specific needs and achieving expected goals.
“Good practice” is used to describe the process of developing and following a standard way of doing things that different departments/organizations can use and/or apply.
Steps and Phases in implementation (how activities were carried out)
Intermediate Results and other Milestones of implementation steps
The description of a good practice is therefore accurate if:
Cassava rootManihot esculents (with common names including 'cassava) is a woody shrub of the Euphorbiaceae (spurge) family native to South America, is extensively cultivated as an annual crop in tropical and subtropical regions for its edible starchy tuberous root, a major source of carbohydrates. Cassava, when dried to a powdery (or pearly) extract, is called tapioca; its fermented, flaky version is named garri.
Cassava is the third largest source of food carbohydrates in the tropics, after rice and maize. Cassava is a major staple food in the developing world, providing a basic diet for over half a billion people. It is one of the most drought-tolerant crops, capable of growing on marginal soils.  Nigeria is the world's largest producer of cassava, while Thailand is the largest exporter of dried cassava.
Cassava is classified as sweet or bitter. Farmers often prefer the bitter varieties because they deter pests, animals, and thieves. Like other roots and tubers, both bitter and sweet varieties of cassava contain antinutritional factors and toxins.It must be properly prepared before consumption. Improper preparation of cassava can leave enough residual cyanide to cause acute cyanide intoxication and goitres, and may even cause ataxia or partial paralysis. The more toxic varieties of cassava are a fall-back resource (a "food security crop") in times of famine in some places.
Leaves of the cassava plantThe cassava root is long and tapered, with a firm, homogeneous flesh encased in a detachable rind, about 1mm thick, rough and brown on the outside. Commercial varieties can be 10cm in diameter at the top, and around 15 to 30cm long. A woody cordon runs along the root's axis. The flesh can be chalk-white or yellowish. Cassava roots are very rich in starch and contain significant amounts of calcium (50mg/100g), phosphorus (40mg/100g) and vitamin C (25mg/100g). However, they are poor in protein and other nutrients. In contrast, cassava leaves are a good source of protein (rich in lysine) but deficient in the amino acid methionine and possibly tryptophan.
In 2010, the average yield of cassava crops worldwide was 12.5 tonnes per hectare.
Cassava, yams and sweet potatoes are important sources of food in the tropics. The cassava plant gives the third highest yield of carbohydrates per cultivated area among crop plants, after sugarcane and sugar beets. Cassava plays a particularly important role in agriculture in developing countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, because it does well on poor soils and with low rainfall, and because it is a perennial that can be harvested as required. Its wide harvesting window allows it to act as a famine reserve and is invaluable in managing labor schedules. It offers flexibility to resource-poor farmers because it serves as either a subsistence or a cash crop.
No continent depends as much on root and tuber crops in feeding its population as does Africa. In the humid and subhumid areas of tropical Africa, it is either a primary staple food or a secondary costaple. In Ghana, for example, cassava and yams occupy an important position the agricultural economy and contribute about 46% of the agricultural gross domestic product. Cassava accounts for a daily caloric intake of 30% in Ghana and is grown by nearly every farming family. The importance of cassava to many Africans is epitomised in the Ewe (a language spoken in Ghana, Togo and Benin) name for the plant, agbeli, meaning "there is life".
Cassava root is essentially a carbohydrate source. Its composition shows 60–65 percent moisture, 20–31 percent carbohydrate, 1–2 percent crude protein and a comparatively low content of vitamins and minerals. However, the roots are rich in calcium and vitamin C and contain a nutritionally significant quantity of thiamine, riboflavin and nicotinic acid. Cassava starch contains 70 percent amylopectin and 20 percent amylose. Cooked cassava starch has a digestibility of over 75 percent.
Cassava root is a poor source of protein. Despite the very low quantity, the quality of cassava root protein is fairly good in terms of essential amino acids. Methionine, cysteine and cystine are, however, limiting amino acids in cassava root.
Cassava is attractive as nutrition source in certain ecosystems because cassava is one of the most drought-tolerant crops, can be successfully grown on marginal soils, and gives reasonable yields where many other crops do not grow well. Cassava is well adapted within latitudes 30° north and south of the equator, at elevations between sea level and 2,000 m (6,600 ft) above sea level, in equatorial temperatures, with rainfalls of 50 millimeters to 5 m (16 ft) annually, and to poor soils with a pH ranging from acidic to alkaline. These conditions are common in certain parts of Africa.
Cassava is harvested by hand by raising the lower part of the stem and pulling the roots out of the ground, then removing them from the base of the plant. The upper parts of the stems with the leaves are plucked off before harvest. Cassava is propagated by cutting the stem into sections of approximately 15 cm, these being planted prior to the wet season.
Cassava is a highly productive crop in terms of food calories produced per unit land area per unit of time, significantly higher than other staple crops. Cassava can produce food calories at rates exceeding 250,000 cal/hectare/day compared with 176,000 for rice, 110,000 for wheat, and 200,000 for maize (corn).
Cassava, like other foods, also has antinutritional and toxic factors. Of particular concern are the cyanogenic glucosides of cassava (linamarin and lotaustralin). These, on hydrolysis, release hydrocyanic acid (HCN). The presence of cyanide in cassava is of concern for human and for animal consumption. The concentration of these antinutritional and unsafe glycosides varies considerably between varieties and also with climatic and cultural conditions. Selection of cassava species to be grown, therefore, is quite important. Once harvested, bitter cassava must be treated and prepared properly prior to human or animal consumption, while sweet cassava can be used after simple boiling.
The traditional method used in West Africa is to peel the roots and put them into water for three days to ferment. The roots then are dried or cooked. In Nigeria and several other west African countries, including Ghana, Benin, Togo, Ivory Coast, and Burkina Faso, they are usually grated and lightly fried in palm oil to preserve them. The result is a foodstuff called gari. Fermentation is also used in other places such as Indonesia (see Tapai). The fermentation process also reduces the level of antinutrients, making the cassava a more nutritious food.
Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cassava
They are numerous.
Cassava can be cooked in many ways. The soft-boiled root of the sweet variety has a delicate flavor and can replace boiled potatoes in many uses: as an accompaniment for meat dishes or made into purées, dumplings, soups, stews, gravies, etc. This plant is used in cholent in some households, as well. Deep fried (after boiling or steaming), it can replace fried potatoes, bringing a distinctive flavor. It can be made into a flour that is used in breads, cakes and cookies.
Cassava-based dishes are widely consumed wherever the plant is cultivated; some have regional, national, or ethnic importance.
Step 1: Buy cassava tubes from a near by local market. This should preferably be done in the morning hours , when someone can get the freshet produce.
Step 2: Peel the cassava tubers , making sure all the brown skin is taken off
Step 3: Dice the cassava into small cubes
Step 4: Rinse the cassava cubes to remove any extra starch
Step 5: Place the cassava cubes in a pan with water and bring to a boil.
Step 6: Add seasoning to the mixture .
Step 7: In another pan, boil milk
Step 8: When the cassava is ready (soft), Drain the excess water and mash
Step 9: As you mash, gradually add milk until you reach a good consistency
Step 10: Roll the mash in small balls and dust with flour
Step 11: Leave them to stand for 10 minutes
Step 12: Add vegetable oil into a pan and place it over heat. When the oil is well heated ,then add the cassava rolls
Step 13: Deep fry them until they are  golden brown and serve
Cassava and matooke for steaming : Matooke is wrapped in banana leaves. The cassava is also wrapped in banana leaves and placed on top of the matooke. Water is poured in the saucepan and then saucepan placed on a stove.
Peel, cut and wash cassava.
Place banana stems into a pan and pour water over them
Place banana leaf over the stems cover in water.
Wrap the cassava into the banana leaves and let it steam for over 30 minutes.
The steamed cassava can be served along side beef stew, gnut sauce, leafy greens and a glass of juice
Lusaniya, a pork feast with boiled cassava chips/slices
Lumonde, Muwogo n'ebinyebwa : Sweet Potato, Cassava served with G-nut stew and green vegetables
Charcoal Roasted Pork Served with Boiled Cassava : Pork Chops are roasted on skewers after being marinated for 3 hours. It is served with boiled Cassava and chopped fresh tomatoes and onions.
Choice Vegetables(Carrots, Green Beans, Cauliflower etc)
Peel clean and cut the cassava into chunks
Wash the beans and soak them over night.
Boil the beans until they are soft
When the beans are almost ready add cassava chunks.
Allow the mixture to boil for  10 minutes until the cassava is soft.
Fry the onions and tomatoes in the oil until golden.
Drain the cassava and bean mixture and place in the pan along with the fried onions and tomatoes.
Add your choice vegetables, roughly chopped
Season it with salt and any choice spices
Cook for another 10 minutes and let everything heat through
The Georgia Water Council, as sequel to the Georgia Water Resources Council, was created by the Comprehensive State-wide Water Management Planning Act, from HB237, signed by Governor Sonny Perdue on May 13, 2004.[1]
This Act is based on the work of the Joint Comprehensive Water Plan Study Committee of 2001-2002.  It replaced the River Basin Management Planning Act of 1992.
Duties of the Georgia Water Council as specified in the Act (OCGA 12-5-524(b)) include:
Ensure coordination, cooperation, and communication among state agencies and their water related efforts in the development of a comprehensive state-wide water management plan;
Provide input to the Georgia EPD concerning the development of a comprehensive state-wide water management plan;
Review, modify if necessary, and approve the final draft of the proposed comprehensive state-wide water management plan; and
Recommend such initial proposed plan for consideration by the General Assembly not later than ... the first day of the 2008 regular session of the General Assembly.
The member composition of the Georgia Water Council is specified in the authorizing legislation,
O.C.G.A. Section 12-5-524, Comprehensive State-wide Water Management Planning Act (SB 237 of 2004).
Members of the Georgia Water Council are listed on the Council's website, and shown below in the order written in O.C.G.A. 12-5-524(a).
A.  Two Appointed Members (Both voting members)
One member is appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and one member is appointed by the President Pro Tempore of the Senate; each appointee shall not be a member of the General Assembly and shall serve for a term of four years and until a successor is appointed and qualified.
Gus H. Bell III of Savannah (appointed by Georgia Senate President Pro Tem Eric Johnson (R-Savannah))
Jerry Lane of Claxton Poultry (appointed by House Speaker Terry Coleman (D-Eastman))
B.  Eight Directors of Georgia State Agencies (All 8 ex-officio)
Carol Couch, Georgia Environmental Protection Division (chair of Water Council)
Noel Holcomb, Georgia Department of Natural Resources
David Bennett, Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission
Mike Beatty, Georgia Department of Community Affairs
B.J. Walker, Georgia Department of Human Resources
Tommy Irvin, Georgia Department of Agriculture
Kenneth Stewart Jr., Georgia Forestry Commission
Paul Burks, Georgia Environmental Facilities Authority
C.  Four Elected Representatives (2 ex-officio, 2 appointed, and all 4 advisory/non-voting)
The chairperson of the Senate Natural Resources and the Environment Committee, ex officio, and one additional member of that committee to be selected by its chairperson and the chairperson of the House Committee on Natural Resources and Environment, ex officio, and one additional member of that committee to be selected by its chairperson shall each serve in an advisory capacity (O.C.G.A. 12-5-524(a)).
Senator Ross Tolleson (R-Perry),  Chair of Senate Natural Resources and Environment Committee
Senator John Bulloch (R-Ochlocknee), District 11
Representative Lynn Smith (R-Newnan), Chair of House Committee on Natural Resources and Environment
Representative Tom McCall (D-Elberton), District 30
> Contents | Basics | Missions | Vehicles | Items | Appendices | Index | FAQ
Location: CJ's garage, Doherty, San Fierro
Note: If at any point during this mission you obtain a wanted level, you automatically fail the mission.
After the cutscene, head to the Vank Hoff Hotel. Follow the valet to the underground car park, and kill him while nobody is looking. Pick up the uniform, then head back out to the hotel entrance. You must wait for the D.A.'s car (a blue Merit) to turn up, and ensure you get in prior to any of your colleagues. You now have two and a half minutes to take the car back to the garage in Doherty, plant the drugs, then return it to the hotel car park in mint condition. If you should damage it even slightly, you have to return to the garage. Then get outside and phone the cops to complete the mission.
If you forget which one is the D.A.'s car, listen to the other valets. They will say something special when it arrives.
Drug TraffickingSection 5 of the Controlled Drugs and Substances ActElection / PleaElection
(1) No person shall traffic in a substance included in Schedule I, II, III or IV or in any substance represented or held out by that person to be such a substance.
(2) No person shall, for the purpose of trafficking, possess a substance included in Schedule I, II, III or IV.
Possession for the Purpose of Trafficking[1]
Along with the essential elements of time and date, identity and jurisdiction, the Crown must prove the elements of:
Possession of Substance (Knowledge, consent, control)
Substance is a Control Substance under the CDSA (certificate of analysis, chain of possession, amounts found)
The accused intended to traffic the Substance
Along with the essential elements of time and date, identity and jurisdiction, the Crown must prove the elements of:
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
v • d • e Drug OffencesOffences
Lists are used everywhere in newLISP - LISP stands for list processing - so it's not surprising that there are many useful functions for working with lists. It's quite hard to organize them all into one logical descriptive narrative, but here's an introduction to most of them.
A good thing about newLISP is that many of the functions that work on lists also work on strings, so you'll meet many of these again in the next chapter, where they'll be applied to strings.
You can build a list and assign it to a symbol directly. Quote the list to stop it being evaluated immediately:
Lists are often created for you by other functions, but you can build your own too, using one of these functions:
Use list to build a list from a sequence of expressions:
(set 'rhyme (list 1 2 "buckle my shoe"
Notice that the (3 4) element is itself a list, which is nested inside the main list.
To glue two or more lists together, use append:
Notice the difference between list and append when you join two lists:
To remember this: List keeps the List-ness of the source lists, but aPPend Picks the elements out and Packs them all together again.
Despite its constructive nature, it's technically a destructive function, because it changes the target list permanently, so use it carefully. It returns the value of the element that was inserted, rather than the whole list.
When you refer to the location of an element in a list, you use zero-based numbering, which you would expect if you're an experienced programmer:
If you don't specify a location or index, push pushes the new element at the front. Use a third expression to specify the location or index for the new element. -1 means the last element of the list, 1 means the second element of the list counting from the front from 0, and so on:
If the symbol you supply as a list doesn't exist, push usefully creates it for you, so you don't have to declare it first.
(push c number-list -1)                ; doesn't fail first time!
By the way, there are plenty of other ways of generating a list of unsorted numbers. You could also do a number of random swaps like this:
(That's one of the nice things about newLISP - a more elegant solution is just a re-write away!)
These two functions, like many other newLISP functions, work on strings as well as lists. See push and pop work on strings too.
A useful function called dup lets you construct lists quickly by repeating elements a given number of times:
There's a trick to get dup to return a list of strings. Because dup can also be used to duplicate strings into a single longer string, you supply an extra true value at the end of the list, and newLISP creates a list of strings rather than a string of strings.
(dup "x" 6 true)      ; a list of strings
Once you've got a list, you can start to work on it. First, let's look at the functions that operate on the list as a unit. After that, I'll look at the functions that let you carry out list surgery - operations on individual list elements.
In this example, apply expects a function and a list, and uses the elements of that list as arguments to the function. So it repeatedly applies the upper-case function to the loop variable's value in v. Since upper-case works on strings but apply expects a list, I've had to use the list function to convert the current value of v (a string) in each iteration to a list.
There's more about dolist and apply elsewhere (see Working through a list, and Apply and map: applying functions to lists).
In a way, randomize and sort are complementary, although sort changes the original list, whereas randomize returns a disordered copy of the original list. sort arranges the elements in the list into ascending order, organizing them by type as well as by value.
Here's an example: create a list of letters and a list of numbers, stick them together, shuffle the result, and then sort it again:
;-> ("a" "b" "c" "d" "e" "f" "g" "h" "i" "j" "k" "l" "m" "n" "o" "p"
;-> ("l" "r" "f" "k" 17 10 "u" "e" 6 "j" 11 15 "s" 2 22 "d" "q" "b"
Compare data before it was randomized and after it was sorted. The sort command sorts the list by data type as well as by value: integers before strings, strings before lists, and so on.
The default sorting method is <, which arranges thet values so that each is less than the next.
To change the sort method, you can supply one of newLISP's built-in comparison functions, such as >. Adjacent objects are considered to be correctly sorted when the comparison function is true for each adjacent pair:
;-> ("a" "b" "c" "d" "e" "f" "g" "h" "i" "j" "k" "l" "m" "n"
;-> ("z" "y" "x" "w" "v" "u" "t" "s" "r" "q" "p" "o" "n"
You can supply a custom sort function. This is a function that takes two arguments and returns true if they're in the right order (ie if the first should come before the second), and false if they aren't. For example, suppose you want to sort a list of file names so that the shortest name appears first. Define a function that returns true if the first argument is shorter than the second, and then use sort with this custom sorting function:
(define (shorter? a b)        ; two arguments, a and b
("." ".." "var" "usr" "tmp" "etc" "dev" "bin" "sbin" "mach" ".vol"
"Users" "cores" "System" "Volumes" "private" "Network" "Library"
"mach.sym" ".Trashes" "Developer" "automount" ".DS_Store"
"Desktop DF" "Desktop DB" "mach_kernel" "Applications" "System Folder" ...)
Advanced newLISPers often write a nameless function and supply it directly to the sort command:
This does the same job, but saves 25 characters or so. You can use either fn or lambda to define an inline or anonymous function.
There are also some useful functions for comparing lists. See Working with two or more lists.
Fortunately, flat is non-destructive, so you can use it without worrying about losing the structure of nested lists:
'((A1 B1 C1 D1 E1 F1 G1 H1)
(A2 B2 C2 D2 E2 F2 G2 H2)
And here's a nice bit of newLISP sleight of hand:
The explode function lets you blow up a list:
You can specify the size of the pieces, too:
Often you don't know what's in a list, and you want some forensic tools to find out more about what's inside it. newLISP has a good selection.
We've already met length, which finds the number of elements in a list.
The starts-with and ends-with functions test the start and ends of lists:
;-> alphabet is ("a" "b" "c" "d" "e" "f" "g" "h" "i" "j" "k" "l"
(starts-with alphabet "a")             ; list starts with item "a"?
(ends-with alphabet "z")               ; testing the list version
These functions work equally well with strings, too (and they take regular expressions). See Testing and comparing strings.
How about contains? In fact there isn't one single newLISP function that does this job. Instead you have find, match, member, ref, filter, index, and count, among others. Which one you use depends on what sort of answer you want to the question Does this list contain this item?, and whether the list is a nested list or a flat one.
If you want a simple answer with a quick top-level-only search, use find. See find.
If you want the item and the rest of the list as well, use member. See member.
If you want the index number of the first occurrence, even if the list contains nested lists, you can use ref. See ref and ref-all.
If you want a new list containing all the elements that match your search element, use find-all. See find-all.
If you want to know whether or not the list contains a certain pattern of elements, use match. See matching patterns in lists.
You can find all list items that satisfy a function, either built-in or one of your own, with the filter, clean, and index functions.  See Filtering lists: filter, clean, and index.
The exists and for-all functions check elements in a list to see if they pass a test.
If you want to find elements in a list purely to change them to something else, then don't bother to look for them first, just use replace. See Replacing information: replace. You can also find and replace list elements using the set-ref function. See Find and replace matching elements.
If you want to know how many occurrences there are of items in the list, use count. See Working with two or more lists.
Let's look at some examples of each of these.
(parse (read-file "/Users/me/Sherlock-Holmes/sign-of-four.txt")
(find "Watson" sign-of-four)
Here I've parsed the text of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's The Sign of Four (which you can download from Project Gutenberg), and tested whether the resulting list of strings contains various names. The integer returned is the first occurrence of the string element in the list.
(println "The drug " (sign-of-four loc) " is mentioned.")
Here I'm looking for any traces of chemical indulgence in Sherlock Holmes' bohemian way of life: "(tea|cocaine|morphine|tobacco)" means any one of tea, cocaine, morphine, or tobacco.
This form of find lets you look for regular expression patterns in the string elements of a list. You'll meet regular expressions again when we explore strings. See Regular expressions.
(set 'word-list '("being" "believe" "ceiling" "conceit" "conceive"
"deceive" "financier" "foreign" "neither" "receive" "science"
Here we're looking for any string elements in the word-list that match our pattern (a c followed by ie, the old and inaccurate spelling rule i before e except after c).
The regular expression pattern here (enclosed in braces, which are string delimiters, doing more or less the same job as quotation marks) is (c) followed by (ie). Then there's a comment, starting with (?#. Comments in regular expressions are useful when things get cryptic, as they often do.
(set 'word-list '("scientist" "being" "believe" "ceiling" "conceit"
"conceive" "deceive" "financier" "foreign" "neither" "receive" "science"
But in this case it's much easier to use filter:
Alternatively, you can use ref-all (see ref and ref-all) to get a list of indices.
If you're not using regular expressions, you can use count, which, given two lists, looks through the second list and counts how many times each item in the first list occurs. Let's see how many times the main characters' names are mentioned:
(count '("Sherlock" "Holmes" "Watson" "Lestrade" "Moriarty" "Moran")
The list of results produced by count shows how many times each element in the first list occurs in the second list, so there are 34 mentions of Sherlock, 135 mentions of Holmes, 24 of Watson, and only one mention for poor old Inspector Lestrade in this story.
It's worth knowing that find examines the list only superficially. For example, if the list contains nested lists, you should use ref rather than find, because ref looks inside sublists:
;-> nil                           ; didn't look inside the lists
The member function returns the rest of the source list rather than index numbers or counts:
There's a powerful and complicated function called match, which looks for patterns in lists. It accepts the wild card characters *, ?, and +, which you use to define a pattern of elements. + means one or more elements, * means zero or more elements, and ? means one element. For example, suppose you want to examine a list of random digits between 0 and 9 for patterns. First, generate a list of 10000 random numbers as source data:
Next, you decide that you want to find the following pattern:
To find all occurrences of a pattern, not just the first, you can use match in a while loop. For example, to find and remove every 0 when it's followed by another 0, repeat the match on a new version of the list until it stops returning a non-nil value:
You don't have to find elements first before replacing them: just use replace, which does the finding and replacing in one operation. And you can use match as a comparison function for searching lists. See Replacing information: replace, and Searching lists.
Here, find-all is looking for the string "onion" in the list food. It's using the > function as a comparison function, so it will find anything that "onion" is greater than. For strings, 'greater than' means appearing later in the default ASCII sorting order, so that "cheese" is greater than "bread" but less than "onion". Notice that, unlike other functions that let you provide comparison functions (namely find, ref, ref-all, replace when used with lists, set-ref, set-ref-all, and sort), the comparison function  must be supplied.
With the < function, the result is a list of things that "onion" is less than:
The ref function returns the index of the first occurrence of an element in a list. It's particularly suited for use with nested lists, because, unlike find, it looks inside all the sublists, and returns the address of the first appearance of an element. As an example, suppose you've converted an XML file, such as your iTunes library, into a large nested list, using newLISP's built-in XML parser:
(xml-type-tags nil nil nil nil)         ; controls XML parsing
(read-file "/Users/me/Music/iTunes/iTunes Music Library.xml")
Now you can look for any expression in the data, which is in the form of an ordinary newLISP list:
(ref "Brian Eno" itunes-data)
(ref-all "Brian Eno" itunes-data)
These functions can also accept a comparison function. See Searching lists.
Use these functions when you're searching for something in a nested list. If you want to replace it when you've found it, use the set-ref and set-ref-all functions. See Find and replace matching elements.
Filtering lists: filter, clean, and index
Another way of finding things in lists is to filter the list. Like panning for gold, you can create a filter that keeps only the stuff you want, flushing the unwanted stuff away.
The functions filter and index have the same syntax, but filter returns the list elements, whereas index returns the index numbers (indices) of the wanted elements rather than the list elements themselves. (These functions don't work on nested lists.)
The filtering functions filter, clean, and index use another function for testing elements: the element appears in the results list according to whether it passes the test or not. You can either use a built-in function or define your own. Typically, newLISP functions that tests and return true or false (sometimes called predicate functions) have names ending with question marks:
NaN? array? atom? context? directory? empty? file? float? global? integer? lambda? legal? list? macro? nil? null? number? primitive? protected? quote? string? symbol? true? zero?
So, for example, an easy way to find integers in (and remove floating-point numbers from) a list is to use the integer? function with filter. Only integers pass through this filter:
Think of clean as getting rid of dirt - it gets rid of anything that passes the test. Think of filter as panning for gold, keeping what passes the test.
This next filter finds all words in Conan Doyle's story The Empty House that contain the letters pp. The filter is a lambda expression (a temporary function without a name) that returns nil if the element doesn't contain pp. The list is a list of string elements generated by parse, which breaks up a string into a list of smaller strings according to a pattern.
(read-file "/Users/me/Sherlock-Holmes/the-empty-house.txt")
("suppressed" "supply" "disappearance" "appealed" "appealed"
"supplemented" "appeared" "opposite" "Apparently" "Suppose"
"disappear" "happy" "appears" "gripped" "reappearance."
"gripped" "opposite" "slipped" "disappeared" "slipped"
"slipped" "unhappy" "appealed" "opportunities." "stopped"
"stepped" "opposite" "dropped" "appeared" "tapped"
"approached" "suppressed" "appeared" "snapped" "dropped"
"stepped" "dropped" "supposition" "opportunity" "appear"
"happy" "deal-topped" "slipper" "supplied" "appealing"
You can also use filter or clean for tidying up lists before using them - removing empty strings produced by a parse operation, for example.
When would you use index rather than filter or clean? Well, use index when you later want to access the list elements by index number rather than their values: we'll meet functions for selecting list items by index in the next section. For example, whereas ref found the index of only the first occurrence, you could use index to return the index numbers of every occurrence of an element.
If you have a predicate function that looks for a string in which the letter c is followed by ie, you can use that function to search a list of matching strings:
(set 'word-list '("agencies" "being" "believe" "ceiling"
"conceit" "conceive" "deceive" "financier" "foreign"
"neither" "receive" "science" "sufficient" "their" "vein"
(define (i-before-e-after-c? wd)        ; a predicate function
(index i-before-e-after-c? word-list)
Remember that lists can contain nested lists, and that some functions won't look inside the sub-lists:
The exists and for-all functions check elements in a list to see if they pass a test.
The following example uses the < comparison function. find looks for the first element that compares favourably with n, ie the first element that n is less than. With a value of 1002, the first element that satisfies the test is 1003, the 3rd element of the list, and so the returned value is 3.
You can write your own comparison function:
'("elephant" "antelope" "giraffe" "dog" "cat" "lion" "shark" ))
(find "tiger" a-list longer?)
The longer? function returns true if the first argument is longer than the second. So find, with this function as the comparison, finds the first element in the list that makes the comparison true. Because tiger is longer than dog, the function returns 3, the index of dog in the list.
You could supply an anonymous (or lambda) function as part of the find function, rather than write a separate function:
If you want your code to be readable, you'll probably move longer or more complex comparators out into their own separate - and documented - functions.
You can also use comparison functions with ref, ref-all, and replace.
A comparison function can be any function that takes two values and returns true or false. For example, here's a function that returns true if y is greater than 6 and less than x. The search is therefore for an element of the data list that is both smaller than the searched-for number, which in this case is 15, and yet bigger than 6.
To summarize these contains functions, here they are in action:
'("this" "is" "a" "list" "of" "strings" "not" "of" "integers"))
(find "of" data)                        ; equality is default test
There are various functions for getting at the information stored in a list:
The first and rest functions are more sensible names for the traditional car and cdr LISP functions, which were based on the names of old computer hardware registers.
(set 'phrase '("the" "quick" "brown" "fox" "jumped" "over" "the" "lazy" "dog"))
A positive number selects an element by counting forward from the beginning, and a negative number selects by counting backwards from the end:
("the" "quick" "brown" "fox" "jumped" "over" "the" "lazy" "dog")
You can also supply a list of index numbers to select. For example, you can use the rand function to generate a list of 20 random numbers between 0 and 8, and then use this list to select elements from phrase at random:
;-> ("jumped" "lazy" "over" "brown" "jumped" "dog" "the" "dog" "dog"
Notice the duplicates. If you had written this instead:
;-> ("w" "a" "l" "d" "e" "r" "k" "i" "r" "s" "c" "h" "t" "o" "r" "t" "e")
If negative, the second number specifies an element at the other end of the slice counting backwards from the end of the list, -1 being the final element:
The cake knife reaches as far as - but doesn't include - the element you specify.
As an alternative to using nth, put the list's symbol and an index number in a list, like this:
If you have a nested list, you can supply a sequence of index numbers that identify the list in the hierarchy:
You can also use implicit addressing to get a slice of a list. This time, put one or two numbers to define the slice, before the list's symbol, inside a list:
(set 'alphabet '("a" "b" "c" "d" "e" "f" "g" "h" "i" "j" "k"
"l" "m" "n" "o" "p" "q" "r" "s" "t" "u" "v" "w" "x" "y" "z"))
;-> ("n" "o" "p" "q" "r" "s" "t" "u" "v" "w" "x" "y" "z")
Earlier, we parsed the iTunes XML library:
(xml-type-tags nil nil nil nil)
"/Users/me/Music/iTunes/iTunes Music Library.xml")
Let's access the inside of the resulting XML structure using the implicit addressing techniques:
(string "ambient, new age, electronica")
(string "Apple Lossless audio file")
To shorten a list, by removing elements from the front or back, use chop or pop. chop makes a copy and works from the end, pop changes the original and works from the front.
("a" "e" "i" "o" "u")                   ; original unchanged
An optional third argument for chop specifies how many elements to remove:
("a" "e" "i" "o" "u") ; original unchanged
You can also use replace to remove items from lists.
You can easily change elements in lists, using the following functions:
These are destructive functions, just like push, pop, reverse, and sort, and change the original lists, so use them carefully.
To set the nth element of a list (or array) to another value, use the versatile setf command:
Notice how the setf function returns the value that has just been set, 0, rather than the changed list.
This example uses the faster implicit addressing. You could of course use nth to create a reference to the nth element first:
;-> ERR: no symbol reference found
Sometimes when you use setf, you want to refer to the old value when setting the new value. To do this, use the system variable $it. During a setf expression, $it contains the old value. So to increase the value of the first element of a list by 1:
You can do this with strings too. Here's how to 'increment' the first letter of a string:
You can use replace to change or remove elements in lists. Specify the element to change and the list to search in, and also a replacement if there is one.
The replacement can be a simple value, or any expression that returns a value.
For more about system variables and their use with string replacements, see System variables.
If you don't supply a test function, = is used:
You can make replace find elements that pass a different test, other than equality. Supply the test function after the replacement value:
The test can be any function that compares two values and returns a true or false value. This can be amazingly powerful. Suppose you have a list of names and their scores:
How easy is it to add up the numbers for all those people whose scores included a 0? Well, with the help of the match function, this easy:
Here, for each matching element, the replacement expression builds a list from the name and the sum of the scores. match is employed as a comparator function - only matching list elements are selected for totalization, so Eric's scores weren't totalled since he didn't manage to score 0.
See Changing substrings for more information about using replace on strings.
There are even more powerful ways of modifying the elements in lists. Meet set-ref and set-ref-all.
You can locate and modify elements using these functions, which are designed to work well with nested lists. (See also Working with XML for some applications.)
The set-ref function lets you modify the first matching element in a list:
To change that 200 to a 300, use set-ref like this:
(set-ref 200 l 300)               ; change the first 200 to 300
Find and replace all matching elements: set-ref-all
How could you change every occurrence of that 'incline' symbol to be 'inclination'? It's easy using set-ref-all:
This returns the list with every 'incline changed to 'inclination.
As with replace, the default test for finding matching elements is equality. But you can supply a different comparison function. This is how you could examine the list of planets and change every entry where the moon's value is greater than 9 to say "lots" instead of the actual number.
The replacement expression compares the number of moons (the last item of the result which is stored in $0) and evaluates to "lots" if it's greater than 9. The search term is formulated using match-friendly wildcard syntax, to match the choice of comparison function.
The swap function can exchange two elements of a list, or the values of two symbols. This changes the original list:
Usefully, swap can also swap the values of two symbols without you having to use an intermediate temporary variable.
This parallel assignment can make life easier sometimes, such as in this slightly unusual iterative version of a function to find Fibonacci numbers:
If you have two lists, you might want to ask questions such as How many items are in both lists?, Which items are in only one of the lists?, How often do the items in this list occur in another list?, and so on. Here are some useful functions for answering these questions:
For example, to see how many vowels there are in a sentence, put the known vowels in one list, and the sentence in another (first use explode to turn the sentence into a list of characters):
(count '("a" "e" "i" "o" "u") (explode "the quick brown fox jumped over the lazy dog"))
The result, (1 4 1 4 2), means that there are 1 a, 4 e's, 1 i, 4 o's, and 2 u's in the sentence.
(directory "/Users/me/Library/Application Support/BBEdit"))
(directory "/Users/me/Library/Application Support/TextWrangler"))
It's important which list you put first! There are five files or directories in directory d1 that aren't in directory d2, but there are no files or directories in d2 that aren't also in d1.
The intersect function finds the elements that are in both lists.
;-> ("." ".." ".DS_Store" "Language Modules" "Menu Scripts" "Plug-Ins" "Read Me.txt" "Scripts" "Unix Support")
Both these functions can take an additional argument, which controls whether to keep or discard any duplicate items.
You could use the difference function to compare two revisions of a text file. Use parse (Parsing strings) to split the files into lines first:
There are various techniques available in newLISP for storing information. One very easy and effective technique is to use a list of sublists, where the first element of each sublist is a key. This structure is known as an association list, but you could also think of it as a dictionary, since you look up information in the list by first looking for the key element.
You can also implement a dictionary using newLISP's contexts. See Introducing contexts.
You can make an association list using basic list functions. For example, you can supply a hand-crafted quoted list:
Or you could use functions like list and push to build the association list:
It's a list of sublists, and each sublist has the same format. The first element of a sublist is the key. The key can be a string, a number, or a symbol. You can have any number of data elements after the key.
Here's an association list that contains some data about the planets in the solar system:
Each sublist starts with a string, the name of a planet, which is followed by data elements, numbers in this case. The planet name is the key. I've included some comments at the end, because I'm never going to remember that element 2 is the planet's mass, in Earth masses.
You could easily access this information using standard list-processing techniques, but newLISP offers some tailor-made functions that are designed to work specifically with these dictionary or association lists:
Both assoc and lookup take the first element of the sublist, the key, and retrieve some data from the appropriate sublist. Here's assoc in action, returning the sublist:
And here's lookup, which goes the extra mile and gets data out of an element of one of the sublists for you, or the final element if you don't specify one:
;-> 27, moons - value of the final element of the sublist
;-> 14.6, element 2 of the sublist is the planet's mass
This saves you having to use a combination of assoc and nth.
One problem that you might have when working with association lists with long sublists like this is that you can't remember what the index numbers represent. Here's one solution:
Here we've defined orbital-radius and au (astronomical unit) as constants, and you can use orbital-radius to refer to the right column of a sublist. This also makes the code easier to read. The constant function is like set, but the symbol you supply is protected against accidental change by another use of set. You can change the value of the symbol only by using the constant function again.
Having defined these constants, here's an expression that lists the different orbits of the planets, in kilometres:
(format "%-8s %12.2f %18.0f"
When you want to manipulate floating-point numbers, use the floating-point arithmetic operators add, sub, mul, div rather than +, -, *, and /, which work with (and convert values to) integers.
To change values stored in an association list, use the assoc function as before, to find the matching sublist, then use setf on that sublist to change the value to a new sublist.
Association lists are ordinary lists, too, so you can use all the familiar newLISP techniques with them. Want to add a new 10th planet to our sol-sys list? Just use push:
You can use sort to sort the association list. (Remember though that sort changes lists permanently.) Here's a list of planets sorted by mass. Since you don't want to sort them by name, you use a custom sort (see sort and randomize) to compare the mass (index 2) values of each pair:
You can also easily combine the data in the association list with other lists:
Here we've created a temporary inline function that map applies to each planet in sol-sys - lookup finds the planet name and retrieves the Unicode symbol for that planet from the unicode-symbols association list.
You can quickly remove an element from an association list with pop-assoc.
This removes the Pluto element from the list.
You can also use a database engine - see Using a SQLite database.
Another form of find-all lets you search an association list for a sublist that matches a pattern. You can specify the pattern with wildcard characters. For example, here's an association list:
To find all the sublists that end with 9, use the match pattern (? 9), where the question mark matches any single item:
(For more about match patterns - wild card searches for lists - see matching patterns in lists.)
You can also use this form with an additional action expression after the association list:
Beethoven wrote 9 symphonies.
Bruckner wrote 9 symphonies.
Here, the action expression uses $0 to refer to each matched element in turn.
Functional AnalysisFunctional analysis is the next step in the Systems Engineering process after setting goal and requirements.  Functional analysis divides a system into smaller parts, called functional elements, which describe what we want each part to do.  We do not include the how of the design or solution yet.  At this point we don't want to limit the design choices, because it might leave out the best answer.  In later steps we will identify alternatives, optimize them, and select the best ones to make up the complete system.  The name Function comes from mathematical functions, which act on an input value and produce a different output value.  Similarly, in the Systems Engineering method, functions transform a set of inputs to a set of outputs.
Figure 4.1-1. A single function box with standard flow locations.  Figure 4.1-2. Top level functions for a MakerNet location.There are different ways to record and display the functions which make up a system design.  A Functional Flow Block Diagram is a popular graphical method.  It uses a rectangular box to represent each function (Figure 4.1-1).  Arrows represent flows or states of any type to and from the function.  The flows connect to other functions or to outside the system.  By convention, inputs are shown on the left, and outputs are shown on the right.  The function box itself transforms the inputs to the outputs.  Mechanisms are the entities which perform the function, but which are not themselves transformed.  They are normally shown by arrows at the bottom, and typically represent use of a device.  Controls are inputs which command, limit, or direct the operation of the function, and are normally shown at the top.  Function names are typically made up from an action verb and noun, like "chop wood", which summarizes the task, and are shown inside the box.  A function number is usually included to uniquely identify it, since similar names may end up being used in different places in a project.  The most common numbering method takes the number of a parent function, and adds a digit to that number for each sub-function.  Thus 2.2 has sub-functions 2.2.1, 2.2.2, etc.  This allows tracing where a function is in the overall system simply by looking at its number.
The diagrams can be sequential, such as showing the steps of a production process; parallel, where different activities can happen at the same time; or looping, where there is feedback or iteration.  More generally, the output of any function can lead to an input to any other function.
Top Level Diagram -  In designing a factory, we are generally concerned with the production function.  The placement of the system boundary for design and analysis purposes, however, can be different.  Figure 4.1-2 shows a top-level block diagram for a complete location from the MakerNet example.  It includes a Production function, where most of the manufacturing takes place, a Habitation function, which are the homes and other buildings the owners live and work in, and a Transport function that moves physical items from place to place.  In this case the factory delivers products to a network of people who own and operate the equipment, and their associated community. It may also take wastes from them to be reprocessed.  Since the owners of production are the same group as uses the habitation and transport, this is a sufficiently integrated situation that it makes sense to place a system boundary around all of the relevant functions.  A factory which only produces products for sale does not have as strong a link to the end users, so in that case you can exclude anything outside the production function.  The inputs and outputs from outside the selected system boundary are shown to the left and right of the diagram, and are broken down by type.  Logically this diagram is identical to one at an even higher level, where all the inputs to the location are represented as a single flow arrow, like in Figure 4.1-1, and the entire project is reduced to a single box with no internal details.  Showing all the details of a project at once in a single diagram makes it too large and complicated to understand.  Instead the complexity is reduced by presenting multiple levels of detail, where a box at one level represents a more detailed diagram at the next level.  In this way, systems with any level of complexity can be described.
Flow Arrows -  Flow arrows represent a state of an item or the movement of any kind of resource between functions.  A raw metal casting from a foundry process and a machined part made from that casting are different states of a part being made.  The casting would be an input and the machined part would be an output from a "Machine Parts" function that converts one to the other.  Resources are things like energy and human labor which get used up as inputs, or created as outputs from functions.  Flows may divide and merge between endpoints, but it should be understood that mathematically both sides of the junction are equal.  Otherwise you have spontaneous creation from nothing, or an unaccounted for source or disposition of some item.  When flows on lower level diagrams show more detailed components, the combination should therefore be identical to a single flow that represents them on a higher level diagram.  Flows, like functions, are given names and unique numbers to identify them.  Both the flows and the function boxes will be further broken down into more detail as the design progresses.
Representing Functional Relationships - Figure 4.1-2 does not show all the interior flows connecting the function boxes for two reasons.  The first is that we have not defined them at this point of the design.  The second is it would make the diagram unreadable because there would be too many lines.  Higher level diagrams tend to have more flows because they are showing more of a system at once.  One way to handle this complexity is to use large drawings with multiple sheets.  It is understood that each sheet only shows a subset of the flows to the same functions, to make it more readable.  Another way to deal with complexity is to track the flows in spreadsheets and data tables, which can have as many entries as needed, one for each flow.  Whatever method is used to display and track the functions and flows, they represent the same relationships between parts of a system.  Block diagrams are just a convenient visual starting point to understand and analyze a system.
Representing Time -  Within a given diagram, a flow connecting two functions indicates the second function logically follows the first one.  As a minimum it means the second function cannot start any earlier than the start of the first one.  They can, however, start at the same time.  For example, a portable generator and whatever equipment it powers may be started together, but the equipment can't be started before the generator, because one of it's necessary inputs, namely electricity, is not available until the generator is working.  Sometimes a series of function boxes represents a strict time order, where one has to be completed before the next can start, but this is only necessary when flows include states of the same item.  For example, for an airplane, the function "Take Off from Runway" has to be completed before "Fly to Destination" and "Land at Destination", because the inputs and outputs are the same airplane, in the states of "Airplane at Departure Airport", "Airplane in Flight Leaving Departure City", and so forth.  When there is a loop in flow diagrams, such as a water treatment unit that takes dirty water from homes and sends back clean water, the start-up sequence should be accounted for in the design.  In this case, since there is no dirty water to process at first, a starting supply of clean water must be fed into the loop at some point.
A different representation of time is required when the system as a whole evolves from one stage to another, and new functional elements and flows are added.  One way to do this is to prepare different versions of the same diagrams for each stage, and marking the new items that were not present in the previous stage.  This can be by highlighting or coloring the new items.  More complex system representations, like simulations, can have the new items appear at the appointed time.
Beyond Flow Diagrams - A function or flow name used in a diagram is not enough to describe exactly what the item is supposed to be.  It is merely a label for a part of the design.  As additional details are worked out, they can be included as notes to the diagram, or in a variety of separate documents or files.  Any amount of additional data about the function can be linked to it by using the same identifying name and function number.  The unique tracking label helps organize all the data for a project in a consistent system.  Functional Descriptions expand on the diagram labels, and are often included on the diagram sheet itself, or supplementary sheets along with the diagrams.  Descriptions can be as long as necessary, but are typically a few sentences to a few paragraphs.  Mathematical models, design drawings for different options, or any other data that relate to the function are also marked with the same name and number to identify them.
The purpose of functional analysis is to divide a complex system into smaller and simpler parts, so that eventually they can be individually designed.  One way to divide into parts is along the time axis.  A large project can be divided into phases that are sequential in time, where each phase adds new capabilities or hardware.  A common example is developing real estate, where each phase develops different parts of a property.  Technical projects are often divided into several design phases, production, testing, and delivery, where milestones for a given phase must be completed before going on to the next phase.  Within a part of a system, some tasks must happen in a sequence or process in time order.  So each step in the sequence can be identified as a function.  Another way to divide functions up is when they do different things at the same time, but have inputs and outputs that connect them.  So the control electronics for a robot arm may send power to the motors, and read joint angles from a sensor.  The electronics is different enough from the motor and joint bearings that they can sensibly be treated as different functions, with different design issues to solve.
There is no single answer for how best to divide up a system.  Often different alternative designs will require different functional breakdowns.  The designer should use good judgement to break up a system into elements that have internal relatedness, and that follow a logical flow from one to the next.  A function should contribute to meeting some part of the overall system requirements, or else you can question the need for that function.  In our MakerNet example, the three top functions serve different purposes: changing things (Production), moving things (Transport), and using things (Habitation).  The owners/end users, who are the reason the MakerNet is built, are included in the system design because they are strongly connected.  They are expected to be the human operators of the system, their waste products are intended to be recycled, and the homes and commercial buildings may be physically connected to power sources and other utilities from the Production function.  An Industrial Production type factory which is only designed to make items for sale would have less interaction between production and the customers.  In that case you can reasonably draw the system boundary around only the production portion, and leave the end users and delivery as external flows.
The functional analysis, like all parts the design process, is not done once and then finished.  It will evolve and be revised as the design progresses.  Diagrams and their related records represent the current state of the design at some point in time.  Version numbers and dates help identify the most current state, and change histories explain why it was changed.  In a small project or early stage of a larger one such formal tracking is not as necessary.  In a large project, where each person can only be familiar with the parts they are working on, formal tracking helps keep the overall work coordinated, and is much more important.
Functions do not have a one-to-one relationship with hardware.  A given hardware item may perform multiple tasks, and a given function may need multiple hardware items in different places to be completed.  Rather, functions are mental abstractions.  They represent pieces of the intended purpose the system is built for.  When carried to a sufficiently detailed level, the pieces are then simple enough to design individually.
Figure 4.1-3. Next level functions within Provide Production Capacity.  Figure 4.1-4. Production Function Output Matrix.We will use as an example of next-level detail the Provide Production Capacity function for a MakerNet location.
Function and Flow Numbers - A name and a number are what identifies a particular function or flow within a system design.  The numbers are intended to be unique, and are made of a series of components, each containing numbers and letters, which are separated by periods.  The components represent hierarchical levels in the system design.  Our example uses a longer function number than is needed at the moment, to allow for future design work which may be needed at higher levels, without having to renumber things later.  Renumbering is both extra work, and can lead to confusion.  So a little thought and planning to reserve space in the numbering system is a good idea.  The five component number "F.2.1.1.1" is used for the Provide Production Capacity function as a whole, and the initial F indicates it is a function.  External Flows, Controls, Inputs, Mechanisms, and Outputs use E, C, I, M, and O as their first component label.
Continuing this example, the 2nd component indicates the project-level phase, with 1 for the Technology Development phase before the first full factory unit, and 2 for first generation units at actual locations.  Higher numbers would be used for later generation designs.  The third component in this case indicates the design environment, since the design will change according to the outside conditions.  Here 1 represents a moderate operating environment.  More difficult or extreme environments would get higher numbers.  The fourth digit is a location serial number, which is 1 because this is the first project location to be designed.  Other locations would get sequential numbers.  So F.2.1.1 identifies the first full MakerNet project location.  The location will expand in a series of construction phases.  When we consider these phases, we will attach letters to the location serial number, thus phase 1A, 1B, etc.  At the moment, we are considering the functions in general, without regard for construction timing, so the 4th component is just a 1.  The final .1 represents the Provide Production Capacity function for the location.  Note this is only an example of how a function number would be assembled, and not the actual components for a particular project.
Next Level Function Identification - Figure 4.1-3 shows the next level of sub-functions beneath Provide Production Capacity.  The particular set of sub-functions is decided by the designer, so other versions are possible, but here we follow the division of the reference architecture.  In general the set of sub-functions should be logical, and divide the larger function into different tasks which are internally related in themselves, and distinct from each other.  In this version of the diagram they are laid out on a diagonal for convenience in drawing flow arrows between any two of them.  However, The placement and numbering order of the function boxes can be whatever is clear and logical.  Placing them more or less in the order the tasks are performed allows an output arrow from one task to connect to the input side of the next in left to right order, so that kind of layout is often used.
Function blocks may not occur strictly in time sequence.  In fact, any cycle loops, such as when waste products are recycled to an earlier stage, means they cannot be put in definite time order.  Therefore the layout on the diagram should be whatever makes the most sense in the circumstances.
Output Matrix - Figure 4.1-4 shows another way besides arrows to display flows between functions.  This method works for situations where too many arrows would be confusing.  The functions themselves are placed on the diagonal of a grid.  Any grid rectangles above the diagonal indicate a flow from the function in the same row on the left to the function in the same column below.  Rectangles below the diagonal indicate a reverse flow from the function in the same row on the right back to the function in the same column above.  The grid method is not as good at showing outputs that return to the same function as they start, or the relationship of control and mechanism inputs.  It is helpful as an organized way to consider the relationships among the functions.  Each box in the grid can be examined in turn, with the question "Is there anything that goes in this direction between these two functions?  If not, that box can be marked with an "X".  If there is, the flows can be entered in that box, and worked out in more detail later.
Allocate RequirementsThe third major step in the systems engineering process is Requirements Allocation.  To ensure all the top level requirements will be met, they are assigned to one or more functions to implement.  The assignment may be the whole requirement, or by dividing it into parts and then assigning the parts to separate functions.  For example, US regulations require airline seats to withstand 16 g's of forward acceleration during impact.  This may be allocated to the Restrain Passenger, Support Seat Loads, and Support Floor Loads functions, which are implemented by the seat belt, seat structure, and floor structure design elements.  Time limits and other parameters are also passed down to lower tier functions.  For example, an airplane may have a requirement that ground maintenance not exceed 4 hours on average per flight.  This requirement may be allocated in part to Provide Propulsion (engines) and Support Flight Loads (structure) functions, even though those functions are not used during maintenance.  The design of the airplane engines and structure must then meet the maintenance time assigned to them.
Allocated requirements are documented in lower level requirements documents or specifications that apply to parts of a project.  Traceability is being able to trace the links between lower and higher level requirements and the logic of how they were generated.  At the lowest level, a subset of the requirements are assigned to a particular hardware or software item, skilled staff, procedures, facilities, interfaces, services, or other individual elements of the final system.  At that level, the subset of requirements and the system element are simple enough to actually design for.  With a complex project, software tools become very useful for the requirements allocation and tracking process.  They can help manage the mass of details, and ensure everyone on a project has the most current information.
Requirements allocation is not a one-time task, although it is weighted towards the early stages of a project.  As design and testing make progress, they can provide feedback and adjustment to the assigned requirements.  These changes propagate to higher levels, and by tracing back their impacts, you can determine how they affect the top-level goals of the project.  Changes can also have sideways effects at the same level.  For example, an increase in weight of one part of a system may require weight-saving efforts elsewhere to not affect top level performance.
The CPU (At the Heart of the Process)
As far as computing power goes, the Central Processing Unit (CPU) is the most important component of a computer system, while your computer can fail if any other component breaks. When you run your web browser, write your poems, doodle on graphics program such as Paint, etc. you're using a CPU (for graphics you're also likely to use a GPU, that supplements the CPU). The CPU carries out each instruction of the computer's program in sequence, performs the required arithmetic and logical operations, and directs the Input/Output (I/O) operations of the system. In short, the CPU has been compared to the brain in people, while there are also fundamental differences. The CPU doesn't "think", it only follows strict orders from the so-called program it "runs".
Two typical components of a CPU are: the (ALU) Arithmetic Logic Unit, which performs arithmetic and logical operations, and the (CU) Control Unit, which fetches instructions in sequence from memory, then decodes and executes them, using the ALU if necessary.
Personal computers have a CPU contained in a single microprocessor chip socketed on the motherboard, bearing a heat-sink with its own fan (a fan wasn't necessary historically and neither used in some recent computers) to dissipate the considerable heat generated by modern high speed CPUs.
Description: Candidates should be able to use system tools to back up important system data.
Knowlegde about directories that have to be include in backups.
Awareness of network backup solutions such as Amanda, Bacula, Bareos and BackupPC.
Knowledge of the benefits and drawbacks of tapes, CDR, disk or other backup media.
Perform partial and manual backups.
Verify the integrity of backup files.
Partially or fully restore backups.
/dev/st* and /dev/nst*
Minimizing hard disk drive failure and data loss
The Internet began life as a research project sponsored by ARPA. Previously US defense computers were connected to each other in a one way fashion such that each computer was connected to the others in series. In case of one computer being destroyed all others would lose communication. To avoid this the government decided to connect the computers in a web with each computer connected to all others. The motivation was to connect the few then existing proprietary computer networks to one interconnected network. The first version of the Internet was called ARPANET and was implemented in 1969. It then consisted of 4 Nodes in UCLA, UC Santa Barbara, Stanford Research Lab, and the University of Utah.In 1984,ARPA net has more than 1000 individual computers linked as hosts.In 1986,NSF connects NSF net to ARPA net and becomes what is known as internet.In 1995,NSF net terminates its networks on the internet and resumes status as research network.In 1996,internet2 was founded.It was to be the predecessor of what is today called the Internet.Today more than 550 million hosts connect to internet
We are all familiar with matter. The definition of matter is anything that has mass and volume (takes up space). For most common objects that we deal with every day, it is fairly simple to demonstrate that they have mass and take up space. You might be able to imagine, however, the difficulty for people several hundred years ago to demonstrate that air has mass and volume. Air (and all other gases) are invisible to the eye, have very small masses compared to equal amounts of solids and liquids, and are quite easy to compress (change volume). Without sensitive equipment, it would have been difficult to convince people that gases are matter. Today, we can measure the mass of a small balloon when it is deflated and then blow it up, tie it off, and measure its mass again to detect the additional mass due to the air inside. The mass of air, under room conditions, that occupies a one quart jar is approximately 0.0002 pounds. This small amount of mass would have been difficult to measure in times before balances were designed to accurately measure very small masses. Later, scientists were able to compress gases into such a small volume that the gases turned into liquids, which made it clear that gases are matter.
On the other hand, when you add heat to an object, the temperature of the object increases, but even the most sensitive balance cannot detect any difference in mass between an object when cold and when hot. Heat does not qualify as matter.
Define matter and explain how it is composed of building blocks known as "atoms".
Distinguish between mass and weight.
Knowing that planets, solar systems, and even galaxies are made out of matter doesn't bring us any closer to understanding what matter is. Up until the early 1800s, people didn't really understand matter at all. They knew that there were "things" in the world that they could pick up and use, and that some of these "things" could be turned into other "things". For example, someone who found a piece of copper could shape it into a necklace or melt it together with zinc to make brass. What people didn't know, though, was how all of these "things" were related. If they had, the alchemists probably wouldn’t have wasted so much
These building blocks are known as atoms, and so far, scientists have discovered or created a grand total of 118 different types of atoms. Scientists have given a name to each different type of atom. A substance that is composed of only one type of atom is called an element. Each element, therefore, has its own name; it also has its own symbol. The "periodic table" is a way of summarizing all of the different atoms that scientists have discovered (Figure 1.19). Each square in the periodic table contains the symbol (a capital letter or a capital letter followed by a lower case letter) for one of the elements.
Figure 1.19: The Periodic Table
At this point, what should amaze you is that all forms of matter in our universe are made with only 118 different building blocks. In some ways, it's sort of like cooking a gourmet, five-course meal using only three ingredients! How is it possible? To answer that question, you have to understand the ways in which different elements are put together to form matter.
The most important method that nature uses to organize atoms into matter is the formation of molecules. Molecules are groups of two or more atoms that have been bonded together. There are millions of different ways to bond atoms together, which means that there are millions of different possible molecules. Each of these molecules has its own set of chemical properties, and it's these properties with which chemists are most concerned. You will learn a lot more about atoms and molecules, including how they were discovered, in a later part of the textbook. Figure 1.20, however, gives you a preview of some of the common molecules that you might come in contact with on a daily basis.
Figure 1.20: Some common molecules and the atoms that they are made from.
Now back to the question of why alchemists had trouble making gold out of other common metals. Most naturally occurring metals, including gold, iron, copper, and silver are elements. Look carefully at the Periodic Table in Figure 1.19. Do you see the symbol Au? Au is the symbol for gold. Gold is one of the 118 different types of atoms – it's one of nature's building blocks. Take another look at the Periodic Table. Do you see the symbol Fe? Fe is the symbol for iron. Again, that means that iron is an element, or a type of atom. In fact, copper (Cu), tin (Sn), and silver (Ag) are all elements. In other words, alchemists were
Chemical reactions can turn elements into molecules, molecules into other molecules, and molecules back into elements. Chemical reactions cannot, however, turn one type of element into another type of element. The only way to do that is through what are known as nuclear reactions, and nuclear reactions require advanced technical equipment that wasn't around in the days of the alchemists. It's like building a house. You can make a house by cementing together bricks, stones, and wood, just like you can make a molecule by bonding together different types of atoms. You can also get your bricks, stones, and wood back by taking the house apart just like you can get your atoms back by taking the molecule apart. No matter how hard you try, though, you can't turn bricks into wood. Converting common metals like copper into gold or iron into gold would be like turning bricks into wood – it's simply not possible.
So far we've decided that the entire universe is composed of matter, which is in turn composed of atoms. Frequently, though, chemists want to know how much matter they actually have. To figure this out they rely on two fundamental properties of matter. All matter in the universe, from a teaspoon of salt to the Pacific Ocean, has mass and occupies space. When scientists measure how much space is taken up by a certain quantity of matter, they are measuring the object's volume. Obviously, the volume of the Pacific Ocean is a lot larger than the volume of a teaspoon of salt. Unfortunately, while volume is an important property, and plays an important role in a lot of different chemical experiments, volume is not the best way to determine how much matter you have.
Typically we think that the bigger something is, the more there is in it. That's certainly true a lot of the time in our everyday lives. If you pour yourself two cups of coffee in the morning, you'll be drinking twice as much coffee as you would have if you'd only poured yourself a single cup. Unfortunately, any time that we compare volumes in this way, we are making two assumptions that aren't always true in chemical experiments. First, we are assuming constant temperature. That's important, because the amount of space taken up by a certain quantity of matter depends on the temperature of that matter. In general, heating something up causes it to expand, and cooling something down causes it to contract. Secondly, when you compare volumes in everyday life, you are almost always comparing volumes of the same material. You can compare two cups of coffee to one cup of coffee, but how do you compare two cups of coffee to one cup of ice cream? It really doesn't make sense. Volume is not a good way to determine the quantity of matter that you have.
If you can't use volume to figure out how much matter you've got, what can you use? It turns out that the best way to determine quantities of matter is to use a measure known as mass. The mass of an object doesn't change with temperature, which makes it a lot easier to determine how much stuff you're dealing with, especially when you don't know what the temperature is or when the temperature keeps changing. Another good thing about mass is that an atom of a particular element always has the same mass (Strictly speaking that's not entirely true because of what are known as isotopes, but you won't need to worry about that now). For example, an atom of gold always has a mass of about 197 atomic mass units or daltons. Atomic mass units are units that we use to measure mass, just like a mile is a unit that we use to measure distance, and an hour is a unit that we use to measure time. Even when atoms are bonded together into molecules, the individual atoms have the same mass, meaning that by adding up all of the masses of the atoms in a molecule, it's fairly easy to figure out the mass of the molecule itself. You'll eventually learn how to do this.
Figure 1.21: The type of balance a chemist might use to measure the mass of an object.
One typical mistake that students make when learning about mass for the first time is confusing mass with weight. Again, this confusion is largely due to the fact that, in everyday English, we frequently use the word "weight" when we actually mean "mass". For example, when you say "I want to lose weight", what you really mean is, "I want to lose mass". In science, the word "weight" has a very specific definition that is different from what you might expect. Do not confuse the everyday meaning of the word "weight" with the scientific meaning of the word "weight" (Figure 1.21).
In science, mass is an intrinsic ("built-in") property of matter. The mass of an atom is the same regardless of the temperature or the other atoms that are bonded to it.
Similarly, the mass of an atom doesn't change depending on where it is. The mass of an atom is the same on Earth as it would be on the moon, or on Jupiter, or in the middle of space. Weight, on the other hand, does change with location. An object that weighs 240 pounds on earth would weigh about 40 pounds on the moon and that same object in a spaceship far away from any large mass would weigh zero (Figure 1.22). In all three cases, however, the object would have exactly the same mass.
Figure 1.22: With no large mass nearby, this spaceship is weightless.
In science, weight is a measurement of how strongly gravity pulls on an object. Weight depends on both the mass of the object and the force of gravity the object is experiencing. That's why your weight changes depending on where you're standing. In each case, your mass will be the same, but the force of gravity on Earth is different than the force of gravity on the moon, or on Jupiter and, as a result, your weight is different too. The force of gravity, however, doesn't change significantly on the surface of Earth. In other words, the force of gravity in California is approximately the same as the force of gravity in Australia. As a result, as long as you stick to the surface of the Earth, the more massive an object is, the more it weighs.
All physical objects are made of matter.
Matter itself is composed of tiny building blocks known as "atoms". There are only 118 different types of atoms known to man.
Frequently, atoms are bonded together to form "molecules".
All matter has mass and occupies space.
Volume is a measure of how much space an object occupies. Volume is not a good measure of how much matter makes up any given object.
Mass is an intrinsic property of matter that does not depend on temperature, location, or the way in which the matter is organized (how the atoms are bonded) As a result, mass is an excellent measure of how much matter is in any given object.
"Mass" and "weight" have two very different scientific meanings.
"Mass" only depends on how much matter is in an object. "Weight", on the other hand, depends on how strongly gravity pulls on an object.
What does weight mean?
In this chapter, we'll learn about atoms, which are the building blocks of all matter in the universe. As of 2011, scientists only know of 118 different types of atoms. How do you think it's possible to generate so many different forms of matter using only 118 types of building blocks?
Which do you think has more matter, a cup of water or a cup of mercury? Explain.
Decide whether each of the following statements is true or false.
(a) Mass and weight are two words for the same concept.
(b) Molecules are bonded together to form atoms.
(c) Alchemists couldn't make gold out of common metals because gold is an element.
Would you have more mass on the moon or on Earth?
Would you have more weight on the moon or on Earth? The force of gravity is stronger on the Earth than it is on the moon.
Match the following terms with their meaning.
(a) Massa. a measure of the total quantity of matter in an object(b) Volumeb. a measure of how strongly gravity pulls on an object(c) Weightc. a measure of the space occupied by an object
For the following statements, circle all of the options that apply:
Mass depends on…
(a) the total quantity of matter
(d) the force of gravity
Volume depends on…
(a) the total quantity of matter
Weight depends on…
(a) the total quantity of matter
(d) the force of gravity
The basic building block of all matter. There are 118 known types of atoms. While atoms can be broken down into particles known as electrons, protons and neutrons, this is very difficult to do.
A type of atom. There are 118 known elements.
Anything of substance that has mass and occupies space.
Two or more atoms bonded together. Specific molecules, like water, have distinct characteristics.
An intrinsic property of matter that can be used to measure the quantity of matter present in a sample.
A way of summarizing all the different atoms that scientists have discovered. Each square in the periodic table contains the symbol for one of the elements.
A measurement of how much space a substance occupies.
A measurement of how strongly gravity pulls on an object.
This material was adapted from the original CK-12 book that can be found here. This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 United States License
Hydrocodone is a popular pain-relief medication. Common prescription names are Vicodin, Lortab, and Vicoprofen. Prescribed for pain relief, hydrocodone is much like codeine, an opiate agonist, analgesic and antitussive used in the treatment of mild to moderate pain.
Liquid "Elixir" Hydrocodone
For people who may have trouble swallowing due to throat/tonsil surgery, or who may have heavy congestion of musus either Lortab Elixir, Atuss HX, Cotuss-V, Entuss, or Vortex are prescribed for pain relief and/or moderate to severe congestion from flu or similar illnesses. Liquid hydrocodone syrups commonly contain guaifenesin and hydrocodone.
If the systolic BP is >200 or the diastolic >110 before exercise, the exercise test should not be done.[1]
In normal individuals, systolic BP can raise 160 to 220 mmHg.  However, diastolic BP may not raise at all because the body is trying to open up the peripheral vessels to allow for the increased flow of blood rich with oxygen.[2]
In any patient, if the systolic BP goes >250 or diastolic >115 then the test should be stopped.[5]
More than a few things can cause excessive tachycardia during treadmill stress testing.  However, at this time research has not outlined an objective quantitative prognostic value for what would be considered an abnormally high chronotropic response.
The more coronary artery disease the patient has, the greater the sensitivity of ST depression in diagnosing ischemia.
The "location" of the ischemia on EKG does not truly localize the area affected, with the slight exception of lead V1 (this assumes the leads were placed correctly).
ST depression in contiguous leads (like V4-V5-V6) is more likely to be true ischemia.
ST depression at maximal stress that corrects quickly after cessation of exercise is more likely to be a false positive.  However, if ST depression continues long after exercise (more than 8 minutes), it is more likely a true positive.
T wave inversion that happens with ST depression is indicative of true ischemia.
If ST depression comes after exercise (>2-3min) it is likely a false positive.
True ischemia usually has an onset at a given rate and then goes away at the same rate.
Chest pain that happens with ST depression is likely to be true ischemia.
False positivity is more likely to happen in women, perhaps because women are less likely to have chest pain that is caused by cardiac ischemia.
More than 1mm of "downsloping" or "horizontal" ST depression is more likely to be true ischemia.
Upsloping ST depression, in general, is less likely to be a true event.  However, if there is upsloping ST depression that is 1.5mm at or after 80ms (two small bars) from the J point, it is more likely to be true ischemia.
Medications such as Dipyridamole, Adenosine, and Regadenoson(Lexiscan) are used instead of exercise stress testing because they have the ability to "mimic" the hemodynamic state of the heart during normal stress.  The primary mechanism of action is to dilate the cardiac vessels in general, thereby unmasking defects in vessels that may not be able to dilate and/or have blockage by atherosclerosis or plaque/embolus.  See more detailed descriptions below.
Dobutamine's mechanism of action is to directly produce stress by beta agonism and increasing chronotropic and inotropic activity in the heart.  See more detailed descriptions below.
A new medication that can be used instead of Adenosine for pharmacologic stress testing.  It is "selective" for A2A receptors with lower affinity for receptors that cause unwanted side effects (A2B, A3, A1) It is reputed to be better tolerated by patients and has is a non-inferior stress agent to Adenosine.
Indications - pharmacologic stress agent for patients that either cannot tolerate exercise portion entirely or has attempted exercise stress and is unable to reach optimal stress.  There is a new suggestion that Lexiscan can be used as a primary agent without the need to fail the exercise portion first.
Administration - 5mL quick bolus after a saline flush; wait 10 to 20 seconds then give stress radiotracer.  All of these injections may go through the same IV access.
Second or third degree AV block or sinus note dysfunction (with the exception of patients that have a working pacemaker)
Bronchospasm - patients with COPD or asthma should not use this med
Dipyridamole use within 48 hrs.
Aminophylline use within 24 hrs.
Caffeine use within 12 hrs.
Sinus bradycardia less than 40 beats per minute.
Reduced chance of error with single bolus dose of 0.4 mg of medication in a 5mL syringe for all patients and does not require a pump infusion.
Less activity in receptors that cause adverse side effects (A2B, A3, A1)
Less flushing 16% vs 25%
Less 1st degree block than Adenosine (3% vs 7%)
Less 2nd degree block (0.1% vs 1%)
Dyspnea - Reputed to cause more dyspnea than Adenosine, especially in patients with COPD but not necessarily an increase in bronchoconstriction.
Headache - causes more headache than Adenosine (26% vs. 17%)
Adenosine can be easily cut off by stopping infusion at any time.  The half life of Lexiscan is much longer and if there are severe or prolonged side effects, the patient must receive IV Aminophylline to reverse the effects.
When to give Aminophylline to halt side effects:
Hypotension with SBP less than 80 BPM
2nd degree heart block that does not go away and is symptomatic or 3rd degree heart block.
Chest pain with >2mm ST depression
If patient asks to halt the test
Quality of images compared to Adenosine and Dipyridamole are inferior because it does not create as large of a difference in blood flow in ischemic vs normal myocardium.  Also, it is not as studied as the more traditional stress agents.
Mechanism - Beta agonist of the Beta 1 and Beta 2 receptors to create increased chronotropic and inotropic stress on the heart.
For patients that cannot tolerate Adenosine, Regadenoson, or Dipyridamole because of a contraindication.
Atrial tachyarrhythmias with uncontrolled ventricular response.
Left ventricular outflow obstruction such as Hocm obstruction seen in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Headache/flushing - 14% each
When to terminate infusion and reverse with beta blocker
Please see reasons to terminate any exercise test.
Of note: the likelihood of any ST depression is greater with dobutamine.
Adriamycin (Doxorubicin) is a chemotherapeutic agent used in treating various cancers.  It has been shown to cause significant impairment of cardiac function.  The drug's effect can be measured well by the MUGA scan which is very accurate.
Heart failure has been shown to develop in some patients at a cumulative dose of >500 mg/m², and the risk increases with even higher doses.
It is shown that a decrease in EF will precede irreversible heart failure.
Two factors are important in monitoring these patients, the absolute EF and the change in EF.
If there is an absolute EF of 40% or
If there is a fall of >20% in EF at any time then there is said to be an impact by doxorubicin and the cessation of the medication should be considered based upon the given clinical scenario.
There is some controversy about the accuracy of attenuation correction.
It is commonly done with either a CT attenuation map or by gadolinium-153 source rods.
^ PMID 11243976 -- "Stress testing in cardiac evaluation : current concepts with emphasis on the ECG." (Tavel ME. Chest. 2001 Mar;119(3):907-25.)
^ PMID 15998671 -- "Exercise testing in asymptomatic adults: a statement for professionals from the American Heart Association Council on Clinical Cardiology, Subcommittee on Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, and Prevention." (Lauer M, Froelicher ES, Williams M, Kligfield P. Circulation. 2005 Aug 2;112(5):771-6. Epub 2005 Jul 5.)
^ PMID 17174798 -- "Stress protocols and tracers." (Henzlova MJ, Cerqueira MD, Mahmarian JJ, Yao SS; Quality Assurance Committee of the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology. J Nucl Cardiol. 2006 Nov;13(6):e80-90.)
^ PMID 19356442 -- "Effects of age, gender, obesity, and diabetes on the efficacy and safety of the selective A2A agonist regadenoson versus adenosine in myocardial perfusion imaging integrated ADVANCE-MPI trial results." (Cerqueira MD, Nguyen P, Staehr P, Underwood SR, Iskandrian AE; ADVANCE-MPI Trial Investigators. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2008 May;1(3):317-20.)
^ ISBN 0-323-02946-9 -- "Nuclear Medicine: The Requisites, Third Edition (Requisites in Radiology)." (Harvey A. Ziessman, Janis P. O'Malley MD, James H. Thrall MD. 2006. Mosby, Inc.)
The Backward Design Model is similar to the subject matter analysis model in that it starts by asking what students need to know for a particular task.  The Backward Design Model asks, "What should the students know?  What skills should they possess at the end of the lesson?"  These questions form the first level of deciding on curriculum. The final concept in the above diagram results from the second level of the decision making process which is what essential knowledge both disciplined and nondisciplined the students will possess based on standards.  The third level of stage one is to narrow the content to knowledge that will endure.  The second stage of the Backward Design Model, according to Wiggins and McTighe, is to determine how to evaluate success (2004).  What standards are necessary for the student to be considered to be successful based on the stage one information?  This stage should cause teachers to begin to think like assessors.  The final stage in the three stage process is to plan the educational activities based on the goals students must accomplish.  Some questions teachers should ask at this stage are:
What knowledge and skills will students need to understand and perform to attain success with the course?
What activities will enable students to master the requisite knowledge and skills?
What must a teacher teach and how should the teacher teach it in order for students to become knowledgeable and skillful in the identified content realm?
What materials must be employed to foster student success in the curriculum in question?
Does the overall design of this course or unit meet the principles of curriculum development?
The essential knowledge may be assessed using observations by instructors, or using evaluations such as quizzes or performance tasks or projects.
Ornstein, A. C., & Hunkins, F. (2004). Curriculum foundations: Principles and theory (4th ed). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
The Cognitive Thought Model is a model based on the process of thought itself.  This model depicts the thought process in a way that shows existing knowledge as the basis of cognition and new thought as informational ques that tap into existing knowledge in a way that builds new knowledge from existing knowledge.  This model is highly dependent on the resources and context in which the learner is taking on new information.  This model occurs in real-time.  Lastly, the Cognitive Thought Model can operate in conjunction with other processes, in the form of information exchange, or alone.
In the Cognitive Thought Model there are seven steps.  The steps in this model are not subject to reordering and must be completed in the sequential order given in order to achieve the desired outcome.  The steps include the following: Learner Readiness, Starting-Up, The Main Process, Possible Interpretation and Resumption, Purpose, Contemplation, and Final State.
Step 1 - Learner Readiness is the ability of the learner to focus on the task at hand, be it physical or mental, by ceasing other distractions.
Step 2 - Starting-Up, action initiation is made with conscious efforts by the learner.
Step 3 - The Main Process is when cognition of new thought begins.  Simply stated, this is where the learner stops preparing and becomes engaged.
Step 4 - Possible Interpretation and Resumption.  This step occurs while the learner is engaged.  The learner has the option at this point to decide if it is more advantageous to continue in the steps, if it is necessary to stop and restart, or if it is permissible to stop without restarting.
Step 5 - Purpose.  The point of this step is to allow the learner to make a determination of whether or not the original intent of the learning is being fulfilled.
Step 6 - Contemplation.  In this step the learner, assuming the all prior steps were worked successfully, must now start to look for a conclusion in the physical or mental task that they have been engaged in.
Step 7 - Final State.  This step allows the learner to contemplate the results of the prior engagement that is now completed.
The cognitive thought model was created using research from neurological studies.  Neural control systems have identical characteristics to those of cognitive thought.  The basic model for this approach is the same as the model that we use to control physical movement.  The way we train athletes is the same way that we can train students.
Ornstein, A. C., & Hunkins, F. (2004). Curriculum foundations: Principles and theory (4th ed). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
The first stage of this model is Curriculum Conceptualization and Legitimization. In this stage participants are demanded to engage in deliberation regarding the nature of the curriculum. This stage stresses understanding the nature and power of curriculum. It also confronts the various conceptions of curriculum. In order for this deliberation to be successful, social contexts, such as power politics, social and cultural views, have to be understood and deliberated. At this stage views of curriculum and its purposes must be legitimized. This is not any easy process; but is the most important.
The second stage of the model is Curriculum Diagnosis. This stage has two major tasks; translating needs into causes and creating goals and objectives from the needs. To begin this process educators develop needs analysis depending on the curriculum and the needs of the students. The needs analysis is derived from student data. When a curriculum is approved and becomes acceptable goals and objectives are generated to serve as guidelines.
The Curriculum Development Content Selection section deals with the “what” that is to be taught or learned. The content refers to the “stuff” of the curriculum. Content or the “what” refers to the procedures students learn to apply knowledge and skills dealing with facts, concepts, principles, theories and generalizations.
The next step in the Hunkin’s Decision- Making Model is Experience Selection. In this section the emphasis is placed on instruction. Here is where the decision of how the content will be taught or experienced. At this stage teachers will decide what materials will be utilized.  After the objectives/goals, content and instruction have been approved, is the next stage, implementation.
Curriculum Implementation has two stages. The first stage is initial piloting to work out any minor problems and the second stage is the final diffusion stage. The final diffusion of the program is where a management system is set up to ensure the curriculum is ready to be delivered and experienced by the student.Once the program has been implemented then it can be evaluated.
Evaluation is the next stage. This stage continues as long as the program is in effect. The purpose of evaluation is to furnish data to continue to modify, or discontinue the program.
The final stage of the model is Curriculum Maintenance. Curriculum Maintenance is the methods and means by which the implemented program is managed to assure its continual functioning.
The Hunkin’s Decision-making Model has a unique feature called the feedback and adjustment loop. This loop allows decision makers to refer back to previous stages to make changes and any modifications. This loop contextualizes the process of creating and implementing curriculum. This aspect of the model addresses many critics of technical models who say that technical models are not related to the times or context in which decisions about curriculum are made.
Ornstein, A. C., & Hunkins, F. (2004). Curriculum foundations: Principles and theory (4th ed). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Waters- People- Organizations- Education- Research- Best Practices- Laws- Ethics- Economics- Projects- Assistance- Data & Maps- Culture- News- Library
The social classes described in 1984. Most people in this society are Proles, who Winston places his hope in.
Winston is again writing in his diary. This time, he states that if hope exists, it exists in the Proles, who are not indoctrinated and compose the majority of Oceania. Winston broods about the definition of truth, and whether truth means anything if one can't prove it. Only once he held definitive evidence that the Party was lying about the past. In the end, he decides there is an objective truth that can be found.
(note CURRENTNODE PREVIOUS NEXT SOMETHING)
The Sumerian Verb "to be"
Finally, we get to the action! Well, to verbs anyway. The most basic and useful verb in many languages is the verb to be. The utility of this verb should be obvious.
Sumerian, like most other languages, uses conjugation of verbs to distinguish who is doing what. There are different forms, in principle at least, for the first, second and third persons, and for single and plural. The verb i.men = to be displays this type of conjugation:
1st sg.
2nd sg.
i.me.am
3rd sg.
1st pl.
2nd pl.
3rd pl.
First, we see that all these words share the initial /i/ sound, and then variations on an m...n theme in the conjugations.
We also notice that, quite strikingly, the 1sg and 2sg are identical! While some of the other seeming ambiguities were really only skin deep, this one is a little bit more problematic. In fact, cases like this point out how little we understand even the basics of Sumerian. Were these really pronounced identically? If not, why are they written identically? There are other cases where the same sound is written using two or more different cuneiform symbols; is this enough evidence to propose that Sumerian was a tonal language, like Chinese, where the pitch or inflexion of a word is a fundamental component of meaning?
These are questions that I am certainly not qualified to answer, and I doubt if anyone at this point can say with certainty. Wiki users, please feel free to add your two cents. That's what a wiki is all about.
If you look at the translations above for, say, i.men, you'll notice that it actually translates as a subject and a predicate, namely both words in he is. This is really neat, because it means we can make really simple sentences out of just two Sumerian words!
For instance, if I wanted to write the sentence I am your king, we just need to translate each piece. We just learned that I am translates to i.men. Now, remember from (way back in) Lesson Two, to say your something, we use the possessive particle .zu. By this point, you've probably picked up that lugal means king, so your king is just lugal.zu. Easy!
And it's just as easy to put the two together to make a Sumerian sentence: I am your king = lugal.zu i.men.
The only thing you might notice as odd is that I put the verb part last here. In English, we usually put the subject and verb first in a sentence, like in I am your king. In Sumerian, the verb usually goes last, like in lugal.zu i.men. Not really that tricky, because you can usually figure out pretty quickly what a sentence means even if you happen to forget where all the pieces are supposed to go. (And after all, wherever the words are in the original Sumerian trumps anything I say here! They are, of course, the ultimate authorities.)
Learn the conjugations of i.men.
We just learned the translation for I am your king. See if you can figure out these other simple phrases!
Here are some phrases to figure out as a review. Please edit these if you see any mistakes.
They are my brothers.
It is the wall of life. (I know it's confusing, but just go with it).
I am your sister. (Note that the context makes it 'I am' rather than 'you are').
I am/You are the queen of Uruk.
Now that we understand the verb "to be", it's a cinch to understand the copula.
In any language, there must be a way to link a subject with a predicate. In English, for instance, we say Helen was beautiful. We use the verb "to be" to perform this function, like we just saw above. In fact, we often see the conjugated forms of the Sumerian i.men when this situation arises. However, in Sumerian, there is another option: the copula is used.
By now you've noticed that lots of things in Sumerian are done via particles, those funny little syllables that are attached onto the end of a word to change meaning, change case, or do other neat things. Well, the copula is just the particle form of the verb "to be", known as the enclitic copula.
So instead of saying I am your king = lugal.zu i.men, we could just as easily say lugal.zu.en. Simple as that! The meaning is the same, it's just a little bit of syntactic variety to a common expression.
Here are the conjugation tables for the enclitic copula[1] with munus "woman"[2]:
Note that the copula marks the person and number of the absolutive argument. Also note that the pronunciations of the suffixes vary according to Sumerian's morphophonemic rules; thus, when "munus" takes the enclitc copula "(a)m" (which takes the vowel in parenthesis due to the fact that the preceding phoneme, /s/, is a consonant) as in Munusam the preceding phoneme to the enclitic copula is omitted, as is the case in Mam "It is a boat." See the references for further examples.
Previous (Lesson Three - The Genitive) :
Next (Lesson Five - The Verb Chain)
↑ http://home.comcast.net/~foxvog/Grammar.pdf
↑ Hayes, John L., "A Manual of Sumerian Grammar and Texts", Undena Publications, 2000, P. 421
· Civil Law (Property | Obligations | Family)
Property rights are defined by law and are not freely definable by transactional parties (Civil Code, article 175). The types of statutory property rights are:
Usufructary rights (yōeki bukken)
Mortgages or hypothecs (teitōken)
A person who has been dispossessed may sue to have their possession restored. Such a suit may be brought within one year of losing possession (Article 201).
Ownership (shoyūken) represents the right to freely use property, enjoy its benefits and dispose of it, within the restrictions of the law (Civil Code Article 206). Ownership of land extends above and below the land as far as can be managed (Article 207).
Ownership generally lasts indefinitely and does not expire unless another person acquires it by agreement, or by one of two unilateral methods:
If movable property has no owner, a person may acquire ownership by voluntarily possessing the property (Article 239).
Right to demand use of neighboring land (Article 209)
Right to demand access to public roads (Article 210)
Multiple persons may share ownership over one item of property by joint ownership.
The ownership share (mochibun) held by each party may be determined by agreement of the parties or by operation of law. Under the Civil Code defaults, joint ownership shares are equal (Article 250) and each joint owner may use the entire property to an extent proportional to their share (Article 249).
Ownership shares may be freely traded or waived. If a joint owner waives their ownership share or dies without a successor, their ownership share reverts to the other joint owners (Article 255). Transfers or other changes in ownership shares require the consent of all owners (Article 251) unless otherwise agreed.
Management of jointly-owned property is determined by a majority decision of the owners based upon the value of each of their ownership shares, but each joint owner may individually repair or otherwise preserve the property (Article 252).
Appurtenant liabilities (such as management fees and taxes) must be borne by the joint owners proportionally to their ownership. If a joint owner does not fulfill such a liability, another joint owner may acquire their share upon payment of just compensation (Article 253).
Joint owners may demand partition of their joint property at any time. This right may be waived by agreement of the joint owners for no more than a five-year period (Article 256).
Rights in property may generally be conveyed by contract, by succession or by prescription.
When real property is conveyed, the conveyance must be recorded (tōki) at the Legal Affairs Bureau before it can be legally asserted against most third parties (Article 177). Certain parties may have property rights asserted against them despite lack of recording (Supreme Court, Dec 15 1901):
Parties to a transfer (and their successors) with regard to that transfer
Illegal occupants are not considered to be third parties for purposes of Article 177 (Supreme Court, Dec 19 1950).
Persons who obstructed the recording through fraud or intimidation
Persons who have a duty to apply for the recording on another's behalf
Article 177 applies to most assertions of ownership of real property. For instance, a recipient of leased property must record the transfer before asserting their rights against any of its tenants (Supreme Court, Mar 19 1974).
Article 177 also applies when asserting ownership based on adverse possession (Supreme Court, Mar 2 1918).
Upon the death of an individual, one of their properties is inherited jointly by A and B as civil law successors. A records the property as their own, then transfers it to C. In this case, B retains the right to sue against C even if they have not recorded their share (Supreme Court, Feb 22 1963).
In contrast, if A is bequeathed the property and then B inherits it under civil law, records the inheritance and transfers it to C, A must record their bequest in order to assert it against C (Supreme Court, Mar 6 1964).
When movable property is conveyed, the key condition is delivery (hiki-watashi) (Article 178). Delivery may be physical, by directive or by a written instrument.
An exception is when property has been given to a third party for safe keeping. In that case, a lawful acquirer may assert their ownership against the custodian regardless of the Article 178 requirement (Supreme Court, Aug 31 1954).
If an agreement to sell property is rescinded by either party, each party is responsible for restoring their counterparty to their condition as it existed before the transfer, except where this would harm the rights of third parties (Article 545). This gives third parties limited protection when they have agreed to receive the same property from its recipient under the original sale agreement. However, this protection may only be asserted with regard to real property when that property has been recorded as transferred (Supreme Court, May 17 1921).
A lease is formed when one party allows another to use property, and the other pays consideration for this privilege (Article 601).
Leases over movable property and buildings have a maximum term of 20 years, and will be deemed to expire after 20 years if a longer term is provided in the contract. Land leases generally have a term of 30 years or more (Land and Building Lease Act, Article 3).
The maximum duration for a lease is shorter if the grantor does not have authority to enter a full lease. This is the case where the grantor is acting through an agent with unlimited authority or has no competency to dispose of property. In this case, the maximum terms are as follows (Article 602):
If there is no fixed term, the lease may be terminated by either party at any time (Article 617). The lease will then expire:
Upon expiration, a lease is automatically renewed, unless the owner objects or is unaware of the expiration (Article 619). Upon such an automatic renewal, the lease will become a non-term contract and may thus be terminated at any time.
Any transfer of a lease requires the consent of the owner, and cannot be asserted against the owner if the owner has not consented. The transfer of a lease without the owner's consent is grounds for termination (Article 612). However, this termination right has been severely limited by precedent and is only recognized in practice when the tenant has not acted in bad faith (Supreme Court, Sep 25 1953).
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
A virus is a tiny parasite which can infect living organisms. It is made only of a nucleic acid + a protein coat. Usually the nucleic acid is RNA; sometimes it is DNA.
Video Graphics Chipset: S3 Savage4 (Shared Memory) AGP 4x UMA
Screen Size: 14.1 inch
Pointing Device Type: Touchpad (with scroll button)
Performing a conversion from MS Word documents into instances of a specified SGML or XML DTD is a very complex task. What you will need for that is:
A SGML or XML document type definition (DTD) that serves as structure model for the output. One says that the output SGML document is valid to the specifies DTD, or it is an instance of this DTD:
A Word stylesheet that holds paragraph and character styles according to the structures in the DTD. So if in a DTD you have defined a structure for Author: e.g. expressed in the output file as:<author><title>Dr.</title><firstname>Peter</firstname><surname>Fox</surname></author>
You will need some kind of a configuration file that allows the mapping of the DTD elements into Word elements and vice versa.
Often a conversion is done by using a plug into MS Word directly, but other options use the Microsoft internal exchange format RTF (Rich Text Format) for conversion. Those tools can interpret the RTF file with the MS Word style that is still coded in this RTF file and export it into an SGML document. This process mostly happens within batch mode without using many graphical user interfaces.
Within the following paragraphs we describe several approaches:
Humboldt-University Berlin and Germanwide Dissertation Online project
There are other approaches in development as well, especially within Scandinavia and the University of Oslo/ Norway. We don't refer to their solution yet.
The process line for converting Word files into SGML documents developed within the CyberThèses project uses scripts written with the Omnimark language.
The input of the process line is an RTF file with a "structuring style sheet" and the output is an SGML document encoded according to the TEI Lite DTD (see the TEI web site at http://etext.virginia.edu/TEI.html).
The conversion process is made up of three main steps :
Most of the scripts will soon be available from the CyberTheses web site : http://www.cybertheses.org
This system is devoted to a particular DTD, but its generalization to other document models shall not pose any difficulty.
Using SGML Author for Word (Humboldt-University Berlin)
Why did we use the SGML Author for Word?
The "Dissertation Online" project implemented and refined a conversion strategy that allows writers to convert documents written in MS word with a special stylesheet (dissertation.dot) into an SGML instance of the DiM.dtd.
We used this product from Microsoft, the SGML Author for Word, for several reasons:
SGML Author is quite easy to configure
It is less expensive than other software producing SGML files with the same quality.
It support an international standard for tables: CALS.
As it is a Word-Add-On it handles docuents in MS-Word doc- format better than other tools.
As we started using this technology in 1997, it supported from the very beginning Word97, the version of word which was the actual one that time.
Unfortunately, Microsoft didn't continue the development of this tool. So there are no new versions available for Office 2000 or Office XP. However, the internal document format from MS Word 97, MS Word 2000 and Office XP are the same in the sense of the conversion into SGML. This means documents written in Word 2000 or Office XP can be imported into Word97 and therefore a conversion can be done.
For a successful conversion from a word document into a DiML document you will need:
The DiML-document type definition (diml20.dtd, calstb.dtd)
The Association file for the Microsoft SGML-Author for Word (diml20.dta)
The converter stylesheet, which consists of several macros programmed to make the preconversion process easier.
Several perl scripts to correct the transformation of tables.
You must have the following software installed at you computer:
SP (NSGMLS) (Parser for SGML-Files by James Clark). (new versions are availabe at http://openjade.sourceforge.net/doc-1.4/index.htm, but we haven’t tested that)
Run SP (A WYSIWYG tool for SP by Richard Light). http://www.light.demon.co.uk/runsp/index.htm
Perl (a scripting language for using the perl scripts).
The converter stylesheet and the authors stylesheet can be obtained from the following website: http://dochost.rz.hu-berlin.de/epdiss/vorlage.html
Converter scripts and perlscripts can be optained from http://www.educat.huberlin.de/diss_online/software/tools.exe (Perl scriptc, DTD and converter file for MS SGML-Author for Word - KonverterDiML2_0.dta)
The conversion from a Microsoft Word document into a SGML document, which is an instance of the DiML.dtd that is used at Humboldt-University, takes several steps:
Preparing the conversion without using the converter Microsoft SGML Author for Word directly
Load the stylesheet for conversion (NOT the one for the authors), see figure below.
There is a special feature to get the page numbers out of the Word document by using certain word specific text anchors. Those have to be converted into hard coded information using a page numer stylesheet.
Formattings that have been applied by the author without using style sheets have to be replaced by the correct style sheets.
In order to get a correct display of tables later on by using CSS stylesheets within common browsers, empty table cell have to be filled up with a single space (letter).
Soft coded line breaks have to be preserved for the conversion. This is done by inserting special characters #BR# to that. This will be used to insert later a special SGML tag for soft line breaks <br/>.
Converting with Microsoft SGML Author for Word
Press the button "Save as SGML" within the FILE menu.
Load the converter file KonverterDiML2_0.DTA
Check the XML/SGML output using the feedback file (fbk) see figure below.
Work through the output file (output according to the DiML.dtd) automatically.
Load the perlskripts using the batch file preprocessor.bat
Transforming the DiML file into a HTML file
Load the perl scripts by using the batch file did2html.bat
Check the HTML Output.
Correct possible errors manually within the SGML file and repeat the transformation.
A demonstration quicktime video may be found at the ETD-Guide server as well. (see http://www.educat.hu-berlin.de/diss_online/software/didi.mov)
Using FrameMaker+SGML6.0 for a conversion of MS Word documents into SGML instances.
Editing or converting using FrameMaker is much more complex than the previously described methods. FrameMaker is able to import formatted Word documents keeping the stylesheet information and exporting the document via an internal FrameMaker format as SGML or XML documents. In order to proceed with a conversion using FrameMaker you will need the following configuration files.
A conversion table. This contains the list of the Word styles and the corresponding elements within the FrameMaker internal format. This table is saved within the FrameMaker internal format (*.frm).
A document type definition will be saved within FrameMaker internally as EDD (Element Definition) It is saved within the FrameMaker internal document format (*.edd)
FrameMaker uses layout rules for the internal layout of documents. Within this layout definition the layout of documents is described just like it is within MS Word documents: single formats and their appearances like text height, etc. are defined. This file is also stored as (*.frm file).
The Read-Write Rules contain rules that define which FrameMaker format will be exported in which SGML / XML element.
The SGML- or XML DTD has to be used as well, including Catalog- or Entity files, as well as Sub DTDs, like CALS for tables.
To process a conversion a new SGML application has to be defined within FrameMaker+SGML. This application links all files that are needed for a conversion as described above. It enables FrameMaker to parse the output file when exporting a document to SGML or XML:
A workflow and a technology for conversion for ETD using FrameMaker+SGML6.0 was first developed at the Technical University Helsinki, within the HUTPubl project (1997–2000), see http://www.hut.fi/Yksikot/Kirjasto/HUTpubl
Text editors, Desktop Publishing Systems that can export SGML/XML documents
Tools that export using a user specified DTD:
Tools that export using their own native DTD:
Kword (KOffice, KDE Project/ open source) (http://www.kde.org )
TuSTEP (RZ Uni Tübingen) (http://www.uni-tuebingen.de/zdv/tustep/index.html)
Bollenbach, Markus; Rüppel, Thomas, Rocker, Andreas: FrameMaker+SGML5.5. Bonn; Reading, Mass., Addison-Wesley Longman, 1999, ISBN 3 8273 1508 5
St. Laurent; Biggar, Robert: Inside XML DTDs. New York, Mc Graw Hill, 1999, ISBN 0 07 134621 X
Ducharme, Bob: SGML CD. New Jersey, Prentice Hall, 1997, ISBN 0 13 475740 8
Smith, Norman E.: Practical Guide to SGML/XML Filters. Plano. Texas, Wordware Publishing Inc., 1998, ISBN 1 55622 587 3
Goldfarb, Charles; Prescod, Paul: XML Handbuch. München, Prentice Hall, 1999, ISBN 3 8277 9575 0 Invalid ISBN
Next Section: Conversions from LaTeX to SGML/XML
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Ribose primarily occurs as D-ribose. It is an aldopentose, a monosaccharide containing five carbon atoms that has an aldehyde    Ribosefunctional group at one end. Typically, this species exists in the cyclic form. Ribose composes the backbone for RNA and relates to deoxyribose, as found in DNA, by removal of the hydroxy group on the 2' Carbon.
Ribose is less resistant to hydrolysis and will cause tension in RNA due to the negative charge of the phosphodiester bridge and the hydroxyl group on the 2' Carbon. The hydroxyl group has the capability to attack the phosphodiesr bond that typically links it to another ribose, thereby forming a cyclic form of the sugar. An example of this is cyclic Adenosine Monophosphate (cAMP).
Aside of being the backbone for RNA and DNA, D-ribose is also important in the creation of ATP that all cells require to stay alive. It is currently used in medicinal practice to increase muscle energy and improve exercise performance. People that experiences Fibromyalglia and chronic fatigue syndrome that took a supplement of D-ribose improved their conditions dramatically. D-ribose supplements improved their conditions because it helps the patients produce more ATP in the body, because their body cannot produce a sufficient amount of ATP needed.
D-ribose has an important role in improving heart function for patients that suffer symptoms of congestive heart failure (CHF). Ischaemia, which is sudden decrease of blood supply, reduces myocardial ATP level. The addition of D-ribose will replenish the ATP level because it shortens the time it takes to create and restore ATP levels. Therefore the patient will be able to last longer during exercising before experiencing left chest pain, because the body is getting adequate amount of myocardial ATP. It also aided in regulating blood circulation in the heart by normalizing and readjusting blood flow through the left ventricle and atrium to accommodate the sudden change in blood supply. As a result patients suffering from CHF has an improved quality of life after taking D-ribose supplements because they are able to do more physical activity and return to a near normal lifestyle.
D-Ribose supplement is also important to athletes as well because it quickly replenishes ATP levels in muscle to help increase stamina and aid in strength building. D-ribose shorten the time it takes to create ATP because it directly enter the pentose phosphate pathway to create ribose-5-phosphate without having to go through the glucose-6-phospohate dehydrogense and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase, both of which require rate-limiting enzymes to form. The rate-limiting enzyme will slow down the creation of ATP, therefore by bypassing those pathways ATP will be produced at a higher rate. Hence, it restores ATP that was loss during exercise faster.
Provide a backbone for DNA and RNA
Regulate blood circulation in the heart.
D-ribose is a molecule that is naturally produced by the human body and is not found in food sources. However riboflavin, a component of d-ribose that helps aid in the production of d-ribose, is found in a plethora of food. Riboflavin, also known as vitamin B2 is found in found in eggs, milk products, nuts, vegetable, beef, and other proteins. However, these should be kept in areas where it is dimly lit because light can damage riboflavin.
Aside from helping form d-ribose, riboflavin also helps fight off free radicals that can be damaging to cell. Hence it is also a form of antioxidant for the body. Free radicals can damage cells and increase aging and contribute to health conditions, such as heart disease and cancer, therefore riboflavin aids in the reduction of free radicals found in one’s body. Another function of riboflavin is that it helps produce red blood cell and convert B6 vitamin into a form the body can use. Another function of riboflavin is that it helps skin develop properly.
Helps form ribose that is then converted to d-ribose
Helps produce red blood cells.
Convert B6 vitamin into a form the body can use.
Helps develop skin properly.
Sets a limit on how large the user can make a window by dragging its "grow box." After MAXWINDOW is executed, the user will not be able to drag the window's size wider than h pixels nor taller than v pixels (these dimensions refer to the window's "content region"; they don't include the "structure region" (frame) of the window). The MAXWINDOW statement applies to all currently open windows and all subsequently opened windows, until another MAXWINDOW statement is executed.
MAXWINDOW does not apply to windows which don't have a grow box. Also, it does not limit the dimensions of a window which is resized by clicking its "zoom box" (see the SETZOOM statement to learn how to do this).
If there is any currently open window (with a grow box) whose dimension(s) exceed h and/or v, MAXWINDOW will not shrink it immediately. The window will shrink the next time the user clicks on its grow box.
If you need to apply different size limits to each of several open windows, then you will need to execute MAXWINDOWeach time such a window becomes active. In your dialog-event handling function, watch for the _wndActivate event, then execute MAXWINDOW with the appropriate parameters depending on which window has become active. See the DIALOG function for more information.
The Typewriting Honor is a component of the Technician Master Award
.
1 1. Show how to clean the type or element properly and change ribbon on a type writer.
2 2. Know the difference between a fabric and a carbon ribbon.
3 3. Identify the following parts of the typewriter and know their function
4 4. Know how to set tabs for tabulation. Properly type a tabulated page with at least four columns.
5 5. Show how to center information horizontally and vertically on paper.
6 6. Show how to construct block and indented style letters.
7 7. Operate a typewriter at a speed of forty words a minute on new material for five minutes with no more than five errors.
Show how to clean the type or element properly and change ribbon on a type writer.
There is/was a fuzzy pink material that you fed into the typewriter and then typed each key several times to clean the type/element.
You could dab alcohol on the type/element and brush off the type/element using an old toothbrush.
You could use a toothpick to clean the type/element individually, especially to clean out the center of some type/elements like: q, R, o, O, p, P, a, A, d, D, b, B, and some of the other keys.
Some typewriters came with a single spool of ribbon. You would have to open the cellophane pack, put the spool on the spindle, thread the ribbon through the guides and in the strike area, and catch the ribbon on the take-up spool. Wind the spool(s) somewhat to take up the slack, close it all up, and go wash your hands.
Know the difference between a fabric and a carbon ribbon.
A fabric ribbon is basically a ribbon of cloth that was soaked (impregnated) with ink and can be re-used until all of the 'ink' is depleted.
A carbon ribbon is basically a 'single use' ribbon. When the typewriter keys struck the ribbon, it transfers the carbon from the ribbon to the paper, and the ribbon now has no carbon (ink) there. Many of us were resourceful, and re-used the carbon ribbon until no more carbon was left.
Identify the following parts of the typewriter and know their function
The type or elements and the keys are attached to the FRAME. The shift keys moves the FRAME so that the upper or lower case letters can be typed.
These are those 'keys' with the letters on them - the Q, W, E, R, T, Y, ...
Depending on the typewriter you have (if you can find one), there are 26 alphabet keys and some number keys (picture on the right shows only eight - 2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9), comma, parentheses, period, and other useful keys. The lowercase "L" was used for one (l) and uppercase "o" was used for zero (O).
c. Space bar
The wide key in the center (left-right) on the bottom row (closest to you).
d. Backspace key
This key moves the carriage one position to the left (i.e. backwards, therefore, backspace).
e. Shift keys and lock
The SHIFT keys are on the bottom left and right (sometimes only on one side) that moves the frame up or down so that the CAPITAL letters are typed instead of lower case. The SHIFT LOCK key may also be on one side only and mechanically locks the frame into the UPPERCASE position.
The roller used in typewriters (and friction-feed printers) to hold the paper in position for the typebars or print head.
g. Impression control
This controlled how soft or hard the typewriter key(s) would hit the paper.
h. Margin stops
The MARGIN STOPS limited how far you can go to the left or right. When using the CARRIAGE RETURN, the carriage would stop on the left margin stop, which is your left margin (and where you started to type for each line). You would get a bell shortly before the right margin stop so that you could finish up your word and use the carriage return to get to the next line to continue.
i. Paper release
The PAPER RELEASE releases the paper from the PLATEN so that you did not have to turn the platen to remove the paper.
j. Leverline-space lever
(maybe the question was supposed to be line-space lever since there is no mention of the carriage return lever)
A LINE-SPACE LEVER is otherwise known as a carriage return lever. This 'lever' returns the carriage (and your paper) to the leftmost margin for you to start a new line. You can also use the carriage return lever to advance the paper (and go up, or skip) a line.
k. Line-finder control
Not sure if this is related to the CARDHOLDER where there is usually a horizontal line on the clear plastic, so that you can find the line you want to type on and can correctly position the paper so that you type on the right line.
l. Paper centering scale
There is a guide on the side of the carriage. This guide has markings for different widths of paper. You would move this guide/scale to the width of your paper (8.5-inch, 11-inch, etc.) and when you aligned your paper to this guide/scale, your paper would be centered on the platen.
(I believe that is only on the typewriters where the carriage did not actually move - i.e. the electric typewriters, where the typing head/element moved, instead of the carriage).
Paper is more flexible than card stock. The cardholder is the clear plastic on both sides of the strike area that holds cardstock back against the platen so that it does not lean forward too much because it is bent/rolled around in the platen.
n. Paper bail lever
The paper bail is a horizontal bar across the platen with a number of small rollers to hold down the paper. The PAPER BAIL LEVER was on one side of the carriage which lifted this paper bail.
o. Pitch selection lever
A modern advance in technology introduced selectable "pitch" so that the typewriter could be switched among pica ("10 pitch", or 10 characters per inch) and elite ("12 pitch"), in one document.
p. Margin release
The MARGIN RELEASE allowed typing beyond the right MARGIN STOP so that if you had one or two letters to finish the word, you could do that.
Know how to set tabs for tabulation. Properly type a tabulated page with at least four columns.
See Wikipedia about tab stops.
A tab stop on a typewriter is a location where the carriage movement is halted by mechanical gears. Tab stops are set manually, and pressing the tab key causes the carriage to go to the next tab stop.
To set a tab stop, you would advance the carriage to each position where you want the TAB key to stop, and press the tab set key. When you are typing, you would use the TAB key to advance the carriage to the TAB STOP, type the information, and press the TAB key to advance to the next tab stop.
Trains        Farm Station    Suburban Station   City Center
Route101      06:30 am        07:00 am           07:30 am
Route102      09:30 am        10:00 am           10:30 am
Route202      12:30 pm        01:00 pm           01:30 pm
So, you would set the tab stops at the first position for each column, and press the TAB key as you finish the information in each column to quickly advance to the start of the next column.
Tab stop      Tab stop        Tab stop           Tab stop
v             v               v                  v
Trains        Farm Station    Suburban Station   City Center
Route101      06:30 am        07:00 am           07:30 am
Route102      09:30 am        10:00 am           10:30 am
Route202      12:30 pm        01:00 pm           01:30 pm
Press TAB key when you finish the text to advance
Show how to center information horizontally and vertically on paper.
Count the number of spaces that the paper can contain from left to right (example: 80).
Count the number of letters for the line you are centering (example: 60).
Subtract the 60 from the 80, which results in 20 (for this example).
You would start your typing TEN spaces from the left side of the paper.
Count the number of lines that the paper can contain from top to bottom (example: 66)
Count the number of lines you want to type on the paper (example: 50)
Subtract the 50 from the 66 which results in 16 (for this example)
You would advance the paper EIGHT lines down from the top before you start typing.
You have to do BOTH of the above to center information HORIZONTALLY and VERTICALLY.
Through trial and error, you will learn that there are half steps and other neat stuff you can do to get the information as centered as possible.
Show how to construct block and indented style letters.
In the block form, everything starts on the left margin.
This is a letter in block form. No lines are indented. Your name and contact
A new paragraph simply skips a line.
And then we have the closing paragraph here.
In the indented form, you would indent each paragraph.
In the indented form, each paragraph is indented. Again, your name and
Operate a typewriter at a speed of forty words a minute on new material for five minutes with no more than five errors.
Practice makes perfect. This is your opportunity to show off what you have learned. Enjoy!
Yahoo! Groups for Typewriters
The Heavenly Stems (HS) and Earthly Branches (EB) of the Year, Month and Day of 1979 in the Hsia Calendar, from January to December.
The last 2 columns give the Month (LM) and the Day (LD) of the corresponding Chinese Lunar Calendar. Where an intercalary month ('leap month' or 'run yue' in Pinyin) is introduced, the numeral representing the Lunar Month (LM) is followed by the letter 'a' or 'b'.
For the purpose of Date Selection, an '(X)' under the 'Month & Day' column indicates an inauspicious day.
This page overviews how to type in the Cyrillic alphabet, which is used in the Russian language.
Stuck in a lab/cafe/library?
Even if you have no administrator access, you can still type in Cyrillic! It might not be ideal, but it will do in a pinch.
Please see the excellent 'Virtual Keyboard for Russian and Ukrainian' by Paul Gorodyansky. Google for it, or try here: http://WinRus.com/screen_e.htm
Step 1 add the keyboard layout indicator applet to the panel
Right click on the main panel, somewhere where it is empty and gray.
(ie, move the mouse all the way to the top left hand corner of the screen, right click)
You should see a new panel applet, with something like 'USA' printed on it.
You can search under Russian Language, there are several options.
If you have a US/English keyboard, you might like the 'USA Phonetic Russian' layout. You can only find this by looking under English language or United States as a country.
Now, you should be able to switch your layout by left-clicking on the applet.
It should switch from saying USA to Rus or USA to USA2.
Try clicking it, and typing in cyrillic.
If you want to switch layout via keyboard---
If you are using the USA Russian Phonetic layout you can use a 'level 3' key to instantly let you type punctuation and other normal US-english characters. Look under layout options/keys for level 3.
Note: the X server configuration (see #XFree86 below) may conflict with KDE settings if you change both.
You don't need to install any software or fonts, but you do need to add Russian to your computer's list of languages.
Open System Preferences from the Dock and click on 'International'.
There you will find a tab called 'Languages' containing a list which may already include Russian.  If it isn't there, click 'Edit List' and add it.
Don't put Russian at the top of your list unless you want to start using Russian date styles or list attributes in all of your applications.
Another tab called 'Input Menu' in the same place will allow you to choose a keyboard layout such as Cyrillic or Phonetic.
Then you can switch keyboard layouts and languages at any time using the flag icon in the top-right of the screen.
Instructions follow for adding a traditional Russian keyboard layout for Windows, however many may prefer to use a phonetic Russian keyboard layout.  The setup is slightly more involved as the user must either create or use an existing third party keyboard layout.  One way to set up common versions of Windows with a phonetic Russian layout is to follow Paul Gorodyansky's instructions on his "Russification" site using files he has created for this purpose.  The relevant English language page is http://winrus.com/kbd_e.htm.
Click the Start button.
Go to Settings...Control Panel.
Double-click Keyboard.
Click the Input Locales tab.
Click the Change... button to bring up the Text Services window.
Under Installed Services, click Add....
If you would like to change between keyboard inputs without going through the Control Panel each time, click the Language Bar button under Preferences in the Text Services window. Next select to Show the Language Bar on the Desktop and click OK.
To exit, click OK in the Text Services window and in the Keyboard Properties window.
If you don't see "Russian" in the list:
Go back to Control Panel.
Under Language Settings for the system check off Cyrillic
Note: You might need Windows 2000 CD>
Better to check Cyrillic off during installation of Windows.
To set up the keyboard for Cyrillic Russian/Ukraine in Windows XP
To add the Cyrillic keyboard for use on your computer:
Click on the windows logo in the bottom left hand corner
Click the Control Panel button (or clickable text if you have it set that way)
For ease of finding this, press in the left pane "Switch to classic view"
Click on the Keyboards and Languages tab
A window should appear that lists all the installed languages to your computer. This window should be called Text Services and Input Languages
Press Add...
Now scroll down to where it says Russian (Russia)
Expand that menu by pressing the +
If the dropdown menu Keyboard isn't already expanded, press that too
Now checkbox Russian and press OK, and then Apply.
If this is the first language you've added to this computer, a small icon near your taskbar that says "EN" should appear, to change the input language to Russian for whatever window you have opened, press it and select RU.
Please note, every time you change windows (say from an IM window to your browser) it will keep your language setting on the previous window, and the new one will be set to use your default input language, which is most likely EN.
Keyboard icon wil show on taskbar. Left click to toggle between English and Russian.
As an added help, apply keyboard stickers for Cyrillic Russian/Ukraine.  You can find them on e-Bay, under 'stickers, Keyboard, under Computer/Networking. They are available in several
XFree86 4.3 may be configured for Russian keyboard layout in the Keyboard InputDevice section of the configuration file (typically /etc/X11/XF86Config).  Add the following two lines to that section:
Option          "XkbLayout"     "us,ru"
Option          "XkbOptions"    "grp:shift_toggle"
This arrangement will allow you to switch between US and Russian layouts by pressing the shift keys together.  Note that this configuration is independent of the desktop environment (GNOME, KDE) or window manager (sawfish, metacity, kwin) in use, and might conflict with it if you change both.
Same as XFree86, but the configuration file is called “xorg.conf”.
Syngas is a mixture of hydrogen (H2) and carbon monoxide (CO) produced from the gasification of carbonaceous feed-stocks. Since its first commercial use by the London Gas, Light, and Coke Company in 1812, syngas and its coal based antecedents (town gas, producer gas, coal gas) have been influential in the development of human society [1]. They have illuminated cities, provided heat and power, and fuelled vehicles through both direct use and conversion to liquid fuels. As global energy demand rises by nearly 44% from 2006 to a projected 715 EJ in 2030, syngas will become increasingly important for process heat, electric power generation, and liquid fuels [2]. There is renewed emphasis on coal gasification for enhancing national security, while mounting environmental sustainability issues have increased interest in biomass gasification. Raw product gas generated from gasification contains contaminants that must be mitigated to meet process requirements and pollution control regulations. This paper provides a comprehensive overview of the technologies used to remove these contaminants.
The term ‘syngas’ is widely used as an industry shorthand to refer to the product gas from all types of gasification pro-cesses. However, syngas is technically a vapor stream composed of only H2 and CO derived from a steam and oxygen gasification process. While not entirely accurate, this industry shorthand will be used in this paper with appropriate adjectives to maintain clarity and simplicity of discussion with regard to the industry and published literature [3].
Syngas has many uses which range from heat or power applications such as IGCC to a variety of synthetic fuels as shown below (Fig. 1). With such applications, each contaminant creates specific downstream hazards. These include minor process inefficiencies such as corrosion and pipe blockages as well as catastrophic failures such as rapid and permanent deactivation of catalysts.
A multitude of technologies exist to purify the raw synthesis gas stream that is produced by gasification. Some methods are capable of removing several contaminants in a single process, such as wet scrubbing, while others focus on the removal of only one contaminant. Techniques are available that minimize the syngas contamination by reducing the contaminants emitted from within the gasifier; an approach typically termed ‘primary’ or ‘in-situ’ cleanup. Also available are a variety of secondary techniques that clean the syngas downstream of the reaction vessel in order to meet the stringent requirements of today’s applications.
Gas cleanup technologies are conveniently classified according to the process temperature range:
There is considerable ambiguity in these definitions with no accepted guidelines to distinguish among them. Cold gas cleanup generally describes processes that occur near ambient conditions, while hot gas cleanup has been used to describe applications at a broad range of conditions from as low as 400 C to higher than 1300 C. Before reviewing these different kinds of gas cleaning, the nature of the contaminants to be removed from the gas stream is described.
[1] Knoef H. In: Handbook biomass gasification. Enschede (NL):
[2] International Energy Outlook: 2010. Washington DC; 2010
July. 327 p. Report No.: DOE/EIA-0484(2010).
[3] Bain RL, Broer K. Gasification. In: Robert CB, editor.
47e77.
The Panel is an area, often along the edge of the screen, which can contain program launchers, menus, the window list and notification area, and other applets.
GNOME by default has two panels on the desktop, one up the top of the screen and one down the bottom. The top panel contains some menus to the left, for Applications, Actions and Places, a notification area to the right, and a clock to the left of the notification area. The bottom panel contains a button on the left which hides all visible windows, displaying the desktop, a window list to the right of that, which contains buttons for all windows open on the desktop, and to the right of the panel a desktop pager.
Panels can be customized in a number of ways. It is possible to change their appearance slightly, to change their contents, and to change their position, size and behaviour.
The contents of panels are all applets, which can be added, moved and removed on the panel.
To move applets on the panel, right-clicking the applet in the appropriate area will open a context menu which contains options such as to Lock to Panel, Move and Remove from Panel. To move the applet, select Move and the applet will follow your mouse as you move it along the panel, changing its position. You will notice when moving applets around, the applet will flip to other sides of other applets, or move those applets out of the way if necessary. By right-clicking an applet and selecting Lock to Panel, the applet will not move around for other applets, and will be locked in position on the panel. If you are unable to move an applet on the panel, it might be because it is locked to the panel. Clicking the option from the context menu will deselect this option, allowing you to move the applet. Also note that you must sometimes click on the appropriate spot on the applet. For instance, right-clicking on an entry in the window list will open a context menu related to the window represented by the button (i.e. Close, Maximize, etc.). In the case of the window list, notification area, and some other applets, the right place to click is a small area to one side of the applet.
The Remove from Panel option under the context menu for applets will remove the applet in question from the panel completely. It can be returned at any time. Sometimes however, preferences related to the applet can be lost when removing them from the panel.
To add an applet to the panel, right-click on an empty space on the panel. Empty space might be hard to find sometimes i.e. the window list, when empty, looks like empty space, but is not, so watch out for this, and move / resize / remove applets if they get in your way. The context menu that appear will provide you with an option to Add to Panel. Selecting this will open a dialog which lists many applets that you can add, and their descriptions. They will be placed on the panel roughly where you right-clicked to open the context menu, and you can move them around and change them at will.
Sometimes when clicking on applets special options appear that are specific to that applet. These can provide options and preferences for that applet that you can change, for example, on their behaviour and appearance. You can experiment with some applets to see how you can customize them.
The appearance of panels can be changed in ways by right-clicking on an empty space on the panel to open a context menu, and selecting Properties. Under the Background tab, it is possible to change the background colour of the panel, to provide a background image which will be repeated across the panel, or to change the transparency of the panel.
The size and position of panels can be changed by opening the Properties dialog, and looking under the General tab. Orientation changes which edge of the screen the panel sits on. It is possible for it to sit horizontally on the top or bottom of the screen, or for it to sit vertically on the left or right. It is possible to change the height or width (depending on the orientation of the panel) of the panel by changing the Size option. Selecting or unselecting Expand will determine whether the panel expands to fill an entire side of the screen or whether it is only as big as its contents. Autohide will hide the panel, and make it reappear when your mouse hovers over the appropriate edge of the screen. Show hide buttons determines whether there are hide buttons on the panel, which you can click to make the panel appear or disappear.
It is possible to change the side of the screen a panel is on by clicking on an empty space on the panel and dragging it. When the Expand option for the panel is not set, it is possible for the panel to occupy parts of the screen other than the edges.
It is possible to add a new panel by right-clicking on an empty space on an existing panel to open the context menu and selecting New Panel. This will create a new panel on another side of the screen, which you can change around however you want. You can delete an existing panel by selecting Delete this Panel from the context menu.
Seehttp://www.byteclub.net/wiki/GnomePanelhttp://web.archive.org/web/20080723151557/http://www.byteclub.net/wiki/GnomePanel
Using GNOME/Coverage | What is GNOME? | Terminology Used | Logging  in | Main Desktop | Applications | Accessibility | Tips and Tricks | Power Users | Using GNOME/Further reading
Globish uses 24 out of 26 letters of ISO Latin Alphabet with no diacritics or upper cases. Those letters are: a b c[n 1] d e f g h i j k l m n o p r s t u v w y z
With the combinations of two of the above letters, we can get these diagraphs: aa ae au ch dh ee ei oa oo sh th zh
Installing on Ubuntu Linux [1]
In this section we will see how to install Ruby on Rails on Ubuntu GNU Linux distro. At the point of writing this piece of text we have Ubuntu 10.10. We will see how to install Rails 3.x.x in it.
The first step is to launch your terminal by going to Applications -> Accessories -> Terminal.
First, we will install tools that will compile Ruby source code; to do so in your terminal type the following:
Next, we will download the Ruby source code using wget; to do so type the following in terminal:
The above command will download Ruby 1.9.2 source code. The downloaded file is in tar.gz format, it must be unzipped; to do so type the following:
Next, we will compile and install Ruby using the following commands (type the commands one by one):
Next, we need to tell our operating system that Ruby is installed in /usr/bun/ruby ; to do so we need to add the path to /etc/environments file. To do so, type the following
The file opens and you mmight see something like this:
To the path string add :/usr/local/ruby/bin , it must at last look something like this:
PATH="/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin:/usr/games:/usr/local/ruby/bin"
Now, we run the source command for the file /etc/environment to apply changes.
Now check if everything is OK by typing the following:
If everything is done correctly, the output will look something like this:
Now we will create symbolic link to ruby and gem using the following commands:
Now we will install rails with gem using the following commands (type them one by one in terminal):
To check type rails -v, you must get output like something shown below:
When I installed Rails 3.0.3 was the stable version of Rails hence it got installed. Having installed our Rails web framework successfully lets create our first web application.
↑ [1], Installing Ruby 1.9.2 and Rails 3 stable on Ubuntu >
Height: 0.9m/2'11"
Weight: 21.6kg/48.0lb
Gender Distribution: 87.5% Male
Move types which are good on Grovyle: Bug, Fire, Flying, Ice, Poison
Move types which are bad on Grovyle: Electric, Grass, Ground, Water
All other move types are normal effectiveness on Grovyle.
Grovyle evolves at level 36.
Ruby / Sapphire<Emerald XD/ Colosseum
RS/FL: Aerial Ace, Attract, Brick Break, Bullet Seed, Cut, Dig, Double Team, Facade, Flash, Focus Punch, Frustration, Giga Drain, Hidden Power, Iron Tail, Protect, Rest, Return, Rock Smash, Rock Tomb, Safeguard, Secret Power, Solarbeam, Strength, Sunny Day, Toxic
Template:Wikibooks Pokédex:Treecko Series
Take some complex-valued sequence,
A Dirichlet series is an infinite series of the form,
The Gamma function extends the factorial to all complex numbers bar non-positive integers. It is defined by the improper integral,
!
Satisfying the properties,
Welcome to the world of Wikibooks' language guide in learning the Icelandic language. You are here either because you have an interest in learning this wonderful ancient and modern language, you are either Icelandic or have Icelandic blood, you have a passion for Scandinavian or Nordic languages, you are connected somehow to Iceland, you want to fully grasp the Icelandic sagas in its original language, you will take a trip to Iceland soon and want to communicate with the locals, or you just want to learn a language for fun. Whatever the reason may be for wanting to learn the language, you are here now and we are here to help you learn the language. Velkomin! (Welcome)
Map of the Republic of Iceland, located between Greenland and Scotland.
Icelandic is the mother tongue of about 320,000 people in the world. It is the only official language of the Republic of Iceland. The language has existed for a very long time, though called different names (such as Old Norse). Icelandic is one of the most unchanged and purest languages in the world. It is said that a speaker of Icelandic would be able to talk with a Viking hundreds of years ago without much difficulty. A speaker of Icelandic can also read the sagas without much difficulty either.
The Icelandic language belongs to the Western Scandinavian language group along with Faroese, the language of the Faroe Islands. It is possible to see many connections between the other Scandinavian languages too, such as Norwegian, Danish, and Swedish. If you are familiar with any other Scandinavian language, learning Icelandic shouldn't be a problem for you.
The most difficult aspect to grasp in Icelandic would be the complex grammar. There is a case system, like in German and Latin, that might frustrate English speakers or those who are not familiar with grammatical cases. This means that words will change form or have endings depending on what function of the sentence they have. Even names will change. If you have studied Latin before, you might be able to see some similarities between the grammar aspects of the language.
Do not be discouraged by the grammar though, this book is not a book designed to just drill grammar rules into your head. We will start off with the basics so you can communicate effectively in Icelandic, then slowly introduce grammar rules so you will be able to construct sentences of your own.
Remember that all languages are difficult to learn. Do not expect Icelandic to come easy, because nothing in life worth having comes easy. If you start to become frustrated, just think about how well you can speak English or whatever your mother tongue might be. If you can expand your vocabulary in English, then you should have no problem doing it in a foreign language. The feeling of being able to communicate in a foreign language is rewarding, especially that of Icelandic.
This book is a free content open source guide in learning the Icelandic language. Though it can be edited by anyone, it is also being monitored by the authors and administrators of this book and Wikibooks, to assure you 100% accuracy. So do not be discouraged about using this book as a primary or secondary reference in your language studies as this book is not giving you any false information.
The book is set up in step-by-step lessons which will introduce the language like a classroom setting and similar to a textbook style tutorial. It will commence with the basics of the language, and gradually introduce grammar aspects of the language, rather than give you a bunch of grammar explanations and a massive list of vocabulary to learn on your own. The book is set up accordingly so you can go at your own pace whether you are a fast learner or prefer to take your time.
Do not skip over the Málfræði (Grammar) sections. Though sometimes it might seem like a lot, it is essential information to read and understand. Icelandic grammar is difficult, but we will try to explain it as easily as possible for a simple understanding.
Use the navigation header above to navigate to the next lesson, a previous lesson, or the pronunciation guide. There will also be appendices (grammar references) at the end of the book which you can navigate to.
At the end of each lesson there will be small exercises to test yourself on the knowledge you've gained and accumulated in the previous lessons. Do not be tempted to skip over them! It is very easy to just say Oh! I have done enough, I know the answers, no problem at all. Try to work on each question and check yourself. This will only improve your knowledge on the language.
Gangi þér vel!
lE81E5# `Vj´R `Bt~BaD 5~BiG
lE7R t#7~B`C `V7U`N `H4#7Tj
~C 9ÍDt$ 7~Ct$5 ~MaD7T2^6
8~B `C6 j~Mt$,R hÍE eT7UyEt:$ -
Hail Mary, full of grace,
Holy Mary, Mother of God,
Amen.
As we age, the neck bone discs can degenerate. This is called neck arthritis. This can narrow the space between the neck spinal bones. It also adds stress to the neck joints.
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Interpret and analyze the prisoner’s dilemma diagram
Many purchases that individuals make at the retail level are produced in markets that are neither perfectly competitive, monopolies, nor monopolistically competitive. Rather, they are oligopolies. Oligopoly arises when a small number of large firms have all or most of the sales in an industry. Examples of oligopoly abound and include the auto industry, cable television, and commercial air travel. Oligopolistic firms are like cats in a bag. They can either scratch each other to pieces or cuddle up and get comfortable with one another. If oligopolists compete hard, they may end up acting very much like perfect competitors, driving down costs and leading to zero profits for all. If oligopolists collude with each other, they may effectively act like a monopoly and succeed in pushing up prices and earning consistently high levels of profit. Oligopolies are typically characterized by mutual interdependence where various decisions such as output, price, advertising, and so on, depend on the decisions of the other firm(s). Analyzing the choices of oligopolistic firms about pricing and quantity produced involves considering the pros and cons of competition versus collusion at a given point in time.
Why Do Oligopolies Exist?
A combination of the barriers to entry that create monopolies and the product differentiation that characterizes monopolistic competition can create the setting for an oligopoly. For example, when a government grants a patent for an invention to one firm, it may create a monopoly. When the government grants patents to, for example, three different pharmaceutical companies that each has its own drug for reducing high blood pressure, those three firms may become an oligopoly.
Similarly, a natural monopoly will arise when the quantity demanded in a market is only large enough for a single firm to operate at the minimum of the long-run average cost curve. In such a setting, the market has room for only one firm, because no smaller firm can operate at a low enough average cost to compete, and no larger firm could sell what it produced given the quantity demanded in the market.
Quantity demanded in the market may also be two or three times the quantity needed to produce at the minimum of the average cost curve—which means that the market would have room for only two or three oligopoly firms (and they need not produce differentiated products). Again, smaller firms would have higher average costs and be unable to compete, while additional large firms would produce such a high quantity that they would not be able to sell it at a profitable price. This combination of economies of scale and market demand creates the barrier to entry, which led to the Boeing-Airbus oligopoly for large passenger aircraft.
The product differentiation at the heart of monopolistic competition can also play a role in creating oligopoly. For example, firms may need to reach a certain minimum size before they are able to spend enough on advertising and marketing to create a recognizable brand name. The problem in competing with, say, Coca-Cola or Pepsi is not that producing fizzy drinks is technologically difficult, but rather that creating a brand name and marketing effort to equal Coke or Pepsi is an enormous task.
Collusion or Competition?
When oligopoly firms in a certain market decide what quantity to produce and what price to charge, they face a temptation to act as if they were a monopoly. By acting together, oligopolistic firms can hold down industry output, charge a higher price, and divide up the profit among themselves. When firms act together in this way to reduce output and keep prices high, it is called collusion. A group of firms that have a formal agreement to collude to produce the monopoly output and sell at the monopoly price is called a cartel. See the following Clear It Up feature for a more in-depth analysis of the difference between the two.
Collusion versus cartels: How can I tell which is which?
In the United States, as well as many other countries, it is illegal for firms to collude since collusion is anti-competitive behavior, which is a violation of antitrust law. Both the Antitrust Division of the Justice Departmentand the Federal Trade Commission have responsibilities for preventing collusion in the United States.
The problem of enforcement is finding hard evidence of collusion. Cartels are formal agreements to collude. Because cartel agreements provide evidence of collusion, they are rare in the United States. Instead, most collusion is tacit, where firms implicitly reach an understanding that competition is bad for profits.
The desire of businesses to avoid competing so that they can instead raise the prices that they charge and earn higher profits has been well understood by economists. Adam Smith wrote in Wealth of Nations in 1776: “People of the same trade seldom meet together, even for merriment and diversion, but the conversation ends in a conspiracy against the public, or in some contrivance to raise prices.”
Even when oligopolists recognize that they would benefit as a group by acting like a monopoly, each individual oligopoly faces a private temptation to produce just a slightly higher quantity and earn slightly higher profit—while still counting on the other oligopolists to hold down their production and keep prices high. If at least some oligopolists give in to this temptation and start producing more, then the market price will fall. Indeed, a small handful of oligopoly firms may end up competing so fiercely that they all end up earning zero economic profits—as if they were perfect competitors.
Because of the complexity of oligopoly, which is the result of mutual interdependence among firms, there is no single, generally-accepted theory of how oligopolies behave, in the same way that we have theories for all the other market structures. Instead, economists use game theory, a branch of mathematics that analyzes situations in which players must make decisions and then receive payoffs based on what other players decide to do. Game theory has found widespread applications in the social sciences, as well as in business, law, and military strategy.
The prisoner’s dilemma is a scenario in which the gains from cooperation are larger than the rewards from pursuing self-interest. It applies well to oligopoly. The story behind the prisoner’s dilemma goes like this:Two co-conspiratorial criminals are arrested. When they are taken to the police station, they refuse to say anything and are put in separate interrogation rooms. Eventually, a police officer enters the room where Prisoner A is being held and says: “You know what? Your partner in the other room is confessing. So your partner is going to get a light prison sentence of just one year, and because you’re remaining silent, the judge is going to stick you with eight years in prison. Why don’t you get smart? If you confess, too, we’ll cut your jail time down to five years, and your partner will get five years, also.” Over in the next room, another police officer is giving exactly the same speech to Prisoner B. What the police officers do not say is that if both prisoners remain silent, the evidence against them is not especially strong, and the prisoners will end up with only two years in jail each.The game theory situation facing the two prisoners is shown in [link]. To understand the dilemma, first consider the choices from Prisoner A’s point of view. If A believes that B will confess, then A ought to confess, too, so as to not get stuck with the eight years in prison. But if A believes that B will not confess, then A will be tempted to act selfishly and confess, so as to serve only one year. The key point is that A has an incentive to confess regardless of what choice B makes! B faces the same set of choices, and thus will have an incentive to confess regardless of what choice A makes. Confess is considered the dominant strategy or the strategy an individual (or firm) will pursue regardless of the other individual’s (or firm’s) decision. The result is that if prisoners pursue their own self-interest, both are likely to confess, and end up doing a total of 10 years of jail time between them.
Confess (do not cooperate with other prisoner)
A gets 2 years, B gets 2 years
A gets 8 years, B gets 1 year
Confess (do not cooperate with other prisoner)
A gets 1 year, B gets 8 years
A gets 5 years B gets 5 years
The game is called a dilemma because if the two prisoners had cooperated by both remaining silent, they would only have had to serve a total of four years of jail time between them. If the two prisoners can work out some way of cooperating so that neither one will confess, they will both be better off than if they each follow their own individual self-interest, which in this case leads straight into longer jail terms.
The Oligopoly Version of the Prisoner’s Dilemma
The members of an oligopoly can face a prisoner’s dilemma, also. If each of the oligopolists cooperates in holding down output, then high monopoly profits are possible. Each oligopolist, however, must worry that while it is holding down output, other firms are taking advantage of the high price by raising output and earning higher profits. [link] shows the prisoner’s dilemma for a two-firm oligopoly—known as a duopoly. If Firms A and B both agree to hold down output, they are acting together as a monopoly and will each earn $1,000 in profits. However, both firms’ dominant strategy is to increase output, in which case each will earn $400 in profits.
Hold Down Output (cooperate with other firm)
Increase Output (do not cooperate with other firm)
Hold Down Output (cooperate with other firm)
A gets $1,000, B gets $1,000
A gets $200, B gets $1,500
Increase Output (do not cooperate with other firm)
A gets $1,500, B gets $200
Can the two firms trust each other? Consider the situation of Firm A:
If A thinks that B will cheat on their agreement and increase output, then A will increase output, too, because for A the profit of $400 when both firms increase output (the bottom right-hand choice in [link]) is better than a profit of only $200 if A keeps output low and B raises output (the upper right-hand choice in the table).
If A thinks that B will cooperate by holding down output, then A may seize the opportunity to earn higher profits by raising output. After all, if B is going to hold down output, then A can earn $1,500 in profits by expanding output (the bottom left-hand choice in the table) compared with only $1,000 by holding down output as well (the upper left-hand choice in the table).
Thus, firm A will reason that it makes sense to expand output if B holds down output and that it also makes sense to expand output if B raises output. Again, B faces a parallel set of decisions.
The result of this prisoner’s dilemma is often that even though A and B could make the highest combined profits by cooperating in producing a lower level of output and acting like a monopolist, the two firms may well end up in a situation where they each increase output and earn only $400 each in profits. The following Clear It Up feature discusses one cartel scandal in particular.
Lysine, a $600 million-a-year industry, is an amino acid used by farmers as a feed additive to ensure the proper growth of swine and poultry. The primary U.S. producer of lysine is Archer Daniels Midland (ADM), but several other large European and Japanese firms are also in this market. For a time in the first half of the 1990s, the world’s major lysine producers met together in hotel conference rooms and decided exactly how much each firm would sell and what it would charge. The U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), however, had learned of the cartel and placed wire taps on a number of their phone calls and meetings.
From FBI surveillance tapes, following is a comment that Terry Wilson, president of the corn processing division at ADM, made to the other lysine producers at a 1994 meeting in Mona, Hawaii:I wanna go back and I wanna say something very simple. If we’re going to trust each other, okay, and if I’m assured that I’m gonna get 67,000 tons by the year’s end, we’re gonna sell it at the prices we agreed to . . . The only thing we need to talk about there because we are gonna get manipulated by these [expletive] buyers—they can be smarter than us if we let them be smarter. . . . They [the customers] are not your friend. They are not my friend. And we gotta have ‘em, but they are not my friends. You are my friend. I wanna be closer to you than I am to any customer. Cause you can make us ... money. ... And all I wanna tell you again is let’s—let’s put the prices on the board. Let’s all agree that’s what we’re gonna do and then walk out of here and do it.The price of lysine doubled while the cartel was in effect. Confronted by the FBI tapes, Archer Daniels Midland pled guilty in 1996 and paid a fine of $100 million. A number of top executives, both at ADM and other firms, later paid fines of up to $350,000 and were sentenced to 24–30 months in prison.
In another one of the FBI recordings, the president of Archer Daniels Midland told an executive from another competing firm that ADM had a slogan that, in his words, had “penetrated the whole company.” The company president stated the slogan this way: “Our competitors are our friends. Our customers are the enemy.” That slogan could stand as the motto of cartels everywhere.
How can parties who find themselves in a prisoner’s dilemma situation avoid the undesired outcome and cooperate with each other? The way out of a prisoner’s dilemma is to find a way to penalize those who do not cooperate.
Perhaps the easiest approach for colluding oligopolists, as you might imagine, would be to sign a contract with each other that they will hold output low and keep prices high. If a group of U.S. companies signed such a contract, however, it would be illegal. Certain international organizations, like the nations that are members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), have signed international agreements to act like a monopoly, hold down output, and keep prices high so that all of the countries can make high profits from oil exports. Such agreements, however, because they fall in a gray area of international law, are not legally enforceable. If Nigeria, for example, decides to start cutting prices and selling more oil, Saudi Arabia cannot sue Nigeria in court and force it to stop.
Visit the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries website and learn more about its history and how it defines itself.
Because oligopolists cannot sign a legally enforceable contract to act like a monopoly, the firms may instead keep close tabs on what other firms are producing and charging. Alternatively, oligopolists may choose to act in a way that generates pressure on each firm to stick to its agreed quantity of output.
One example of the pressure these firms can exert on one another is the kinked demand curve, in which competing oligopoly firms commit to match price cuts, but not price increases. This situation is shown in [link]. Say that an oligopoly airline has agreed with the rest of a cartel to provide a quantity of 10,000 seats on the New York to Los Angeles route, at a price of $500. This choice defines the kink in the firm’s perceived demand curve. The reason that the firm faces a kink in its demand curve is because of how the other oligopolists react to changes in the firm’s price. If the oligopoly decides to produce more and cut its price, the other members of the cartel will immediately match any price cuts—and therefore, a lower price brings very little increase in quantity sold.
If one firm cuts its price to $300, it will be able to sell only 11,000 seats. However, if the airline seeks to raise prices, the other oligopolists will not raise their prices, and so the firm that raised prices will lose a considerable share of sales. For example, if the firm raises its price to $550, its sales drop to 5,000 seats sold. Thus, if oligopolists always match price cuts by other firms in the cartel, but do not match price increases, then none of the oligopolists will have a strong incentive to change prices, since the potential gains are minimal. This strategy can work like a silent form of cooperation, in which the cartel successfully manages to hold down output, increase price, and share a monopoly level of profits even without any legally enforceable agreement.
Many real-world oligopolies, prodded by economic changes, legal and political pressures, and the egos of their top executives, go through episodes of cooperation and competition. If oligopolies could sustain cooperation with each other on output and pricing, they could earn profits as if they were a single monopoly. However, each firm in an oligopoly has an incentive to produce more and grab a bigger share of the overall market; when firms start behaving in this way, the market outcome in terms of prices and quantity can be similar to that of a highly competitive market.
Monopolistic competition is probably the single most common market structure in the U.S. economy. It provides powerful incentives for innovation, as firms seek to earn profits in the short run, while entry assures that firms do not earn economic profits in the long run. However, monopolistically competitive firms do not produce at the lowest point on their average cost curves. In addition, the endless search to impress consumers through product differentiation may lead to excessive social expenses on advertising and marketing.
Oligopoly is probably the second most common market structure. When oligopolies result from patented innovations or from taking advantage of economies of scale to produce at low average cost, they may provide considerable benefit to consumers. Oligopolies are often buffeted by significant barriers to entry, which enable the oligopolists to earn sustained profits over long periods of time. Oligopolists also do not typically produce at the minimum of their average cost curves. When they lack vibrant competition, they may lack incentives to provide innovative products and high-quality service.
The task of public policy with regard to competition is to sort through these multiple realities, attempting to encourage behavior that is beneficial to the broader society and to discourage behavior that only adds to the profits of a few large companies, with no corresponding benefit to consumers. [/contents/52d2598c-5c95-4611-98bc-b528988cb08a%406 Monopoly and Antitrust Policy] discusses the delicate judgments that go into this task.
Oligopolistic firms have been called “cats in a bag,” as this chapter mentioned. The French detergent makers chose to “cozy up” with each other. The result? An uneasy and tenuous relationship. When the Wall Street Journal reported on the matter, it wrote: “According to a statement a Henkel manager made to the [French anti-trust] commission, the detergent makers wanted ‘to limit the intensity of the competition between them and clean up the market.’ Nevertheless, by the early 1990s, a price war had broken out among them.” During the soap executives’ meetings, which sometimes lasted more than four hours, complex pricing structures were established. “One [soap] executive recalled ‘chaotic’ meetings as each side tried to work out how the other had bent the rules.” Like many cartels, the soap cartel disintegrated due to the very strong temptation for each member to maximize its own individual profits.
How did this soap opera end? After an investigation, French antitrust authorities fined Colgate-Palmolive, Henkel, and Proctor & Gamble a total of €361 million ($484 million). A similar fate befell the icemakers. Bagged ice is a commodity, a perfect substitute, generally sold in 7- or 22-pound bags. No one cares what label is on the bag. By agreeing to carve up the ice market, control broad geographic swaths of territory, and set prices, the icemakers moved from perfect competition to a monopoly model. After the agreements, each firm was the sole supplier of bagged ice to a region; there were profits in both the long run and the short run. According to the courts: “These companies illegally conspired to manipulate the marketplace.” Fines totaled about $600,000—a steep fine considering a bag of ice sells for under $3 in most parts of the United States.
Even though it is illegal in many parts of the world for firms to set prices and carve up a market, the temptation to earn higher profits makes it extremely tempting to defy the law.
An oligopoly is a situation where a few firms sell most or all of the goods in a market. Oligopolists earn their highest profits if they can band together as a cartel and act like a monopolist by reducing output and raising price. Since each member of the oligopoly can benefit individually from expanding output, such collusion often breaks down—especially since explicit collusion is illegal.
The prisoner’s dilemma is an example of game theory. It shows how, in certain situations, all sides can benefit from cooperative behavior rather than self-interested behavior. However, the challenge for the parties is to find ways to encourage cooperative behavior.
Consider the curve shown in [link], which shows the market demand, marginal cost, and marginal revenue curve for firms in an oligopolistic industry. In this example, we assume firms have zero fixed costs.
Suppose the firms collude to form a cartel. What price will the cartel charge? What quantity will the cartel supply? How much profit will the cartel earn?
Suppose now that the cartel breaks up and the oligopolistic firms compete as vigorously as possible by cutting the price and increasing sales. What will the industry quantity and price be? What will the collective profits be of all firms in the industry?
Compare the equilibrium price, quantity, and profit for the cartel and cutthroat competition outcomes.
If the firms form a cartel, they will act like a monopoly, choosing the quantity of output where MR = MC. Drawing a line from the monopoly quantity up to the demand curve shows the monopoly price. Assuming that fixed costs are zero, and with an understanding of cost and profit, we can infer that when the marginal cost curve is horizontal, average cost is the same as marginal cost. Thus, the cartel will earn positive economic profits equal to the area of the rectangle, with a base equal to the monopoly quantity and a height equal to the difference between price (on the demand above the monopoly quantity) and average cost, as shown in the following figure.
The firms will expand output and cut price as long as there are profits remaining. The long-run equilibrium will occur at the point where average cost equals demand. As a result, the oligopoly will earn zero economic profits due to “cutthroat competition,” as shown in the next figure.
Pc > Pcc. Qc < Qcc. Profit for the cartel is positive and large. Profit for cutthroat competition is zero.
Sometimes oligopolies in the same industry are very different in size. Suppose we have a duopoly where one firm (Firm A) is large and the other firm (Firm B) is small, as shown in the prisoner’s dilemma box in [link].
Firm B cheats by selling more output
A gets $1,000, B gets $100
Firm A cheats by selling more output
A gets $1,050, B gets $50
Assuming that the payoffs are known to both firms, what is the likely outcome in this case?
Firm B reasons that if it cheats and Firm A does not notice, it will double its money. Since Firm A’s profits will decline substantially, however, it is likely that Firm A will notice and if so, Firm A will cheat also, with the result that Firm B will lose 90% of what it gained by cheating. Firm A will reason that Firm B is unlikely to risk cheating. If neither firm cheats, Firm A earns $1000. If Firm A cheats, assuming Firm B does not cheat, A can boost its profits only a little, since Firm B is so small. If both firms cheat, then Firm A loses at least 50% of what it could have earned. The possibility of a small gain ($50) is probably not enough to induce Firm A to cheat, so in this case it is likely that both firms will collude.
Will the firms in an oligopoly act more like a monopoly or more like competitors? Briefly explain.
Does each individual in a prisoner’s dilemma benefit more from cooperation or from pursuing self-interest? Explain briefly.
What stops oligopolists from acting together as a monopolist and earning the highest possible level of profits?
Would you expect the kinked demand curve to be more extreme (like a right angle) or less extreme (like a normal demand curve) if each firm in the cartel produces a near-identical product like OPEC and petroleum? What if each firm produces a somewhat different product? Explain your reasoning.
When OPEC raised the price of oil dramatically in the mid-1970s, experts said it was unlikely that the cartel could stay together over the long term—that the incentives for individual members to cheat would become too strong. More than forty years later, OPEC still exists. Why do you think OPEC has been able to beat the odds and continue to collude? Hint: You may wish to consider non-economic reasons.
Mary and Raj are the only two growers who provide organically grown corn to a local grocery store. They know that if they cooperated and produced less corn, they could raise the price of the corn. If they work independently, they will each earn $100. If they decide to work together and both lower their output, they can each earn $150. If one person lowers output and the other does not, the person who lowers output will earn $0 and the other person will capture the entire market and will earn $200. [link] represents the choices available to Mary and Raj. What is the best choice for Raj if he is sure that Mary will cooperate? If Mary thinks Raj will cheat, what should Mary do and why? What is the prisoner’s dilemma result? What is the preferred choice if they could ensure cooperation? A = Work independently; B = Cooperate and Lower Output. (Each results entry lists Raj’s earnings first, and Mary's earnings second.)
Jane and Bill are apprehended for a bank robbery. They are taken into separate rooms and questioned by the police about their involvement in the crime. The police tell them each that if they confess and turn the other person in, they will receive a lighter sentence. If they both confess, they will be each be sentenced to 30 years. If neither confesses, they will each receive a 20-year sentence. If only one confesses, the confessor will receive 15 years and the one who stayed silent will receive 35 years. [link] below represents the choices available to Jane and Bill. If Jane trusts Bill to stay silent, what should she do? If Jane thinks that Bill will confess, what should she do? Does Jane have a dominant strategy? Does Bill have a dominant strategy? A = Confess; B = Stay Silent. (Each results entry lists Jane’s sentence first (in years), and Bill's sentence second.)
The United States Department of Justice. “Antitrust Division.” Accessed October 17, 2013. http://www.justice.gov/atr/.
eMarketer.com. 2014. “Total US Ad Spending to See Largest Increase Since 2004: Mobile advertising leads growth; will surpass radio, magazines and newspapers this year. Accessed March 12, 2015. http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Total-US-Ad-Spending-See-Largest-Increase-Since-2004/1010982.
Federal Trade Commission. “About the Federal Trade Commission.” Accessed October 17, 2013. http://www.ftc.gov/ftc/about.shtm.
a group of firms that collude to produce the monopoly output and sell at the monopoly price
a branch of mathematics often used by economists that analyzes situations in which players must make decisions and then receive payoffs based on what decisions the other players make
a perceived demand curve that arises when competing oligopoly firms commit to match price cuts, but not price increases
a game in which the gains from cooperation are larger than the rewards from pursuing self-interest
Children between 10-14  years: 2 or 3*1.5 minutes
Adolescent between 14-17 years : 2 or 3* 1.5 minutes
Youth between 17-20 years : 2 or 3* 2 minutes
Adults between 21-40 years : 2 or 3* 2 minutes
Senior 41- years : 2 or 3* 2 minutes
Lung cancer is a malignant lung tumor characterized by uncontrolled cell growth in tissues of the lung.
A spherical triangle is a part of the surface of a sphere bounded by arcs of three great circles. (For a discussion of great circles, see The Distance from New York to Tokyo.) Because the surface of a sphere is curved, the formulae for triangles do not work for spherical triangles.  In particular, the sum of the three angles always exceeds
The amount in radians that the sum of the angles exceeds
The length of a side is usually expressed as the angle that the side subtends at the centre of the sphere, so sides as well as angles are expressed in degrees or radians and we can talk about the sine or cosine of a side as well as of an angle.
This is similar to the sine theorem for ordinary triangles. If the sides are
Exercise: Compare to sine formula for Triangles on a Plane
For small triangles on a unit sphere
, provided we are measuring in radians, and we can make the percentage error as small as we like by taking a sufficiently small triangle. We therefore approach the sine formula for triangles on a plane as the triangles get very small.
For a spherical triangle with three right angles, that's a large triangle taking up
So, when is the plane triangle formula most in error if applied to a spherical triangle?
Despite its name, this does not look much like the cosine theorem for ordinary triangles. With the above notation,
This can be regarded as analogous to Pythagoras' theorem.
Compare to Pythagoras' Theorem for Triangles on a Plane
For small triangles on a unit sphere
, again providing we are measuring in radians, and we can make the percentage error as small as we like by taking a sufficiently small triangle. Applying this approximation to the analogue of Pythagoras' Theorem, we get
We therefore approach Pythagoras' Theorem for triangles on a plane as the triangles get very small.
There are of course similar formulae involving
. Thus, if two sides of a spherical triangle and the angle between them are known, we can find the third side from this formula. If all three sides are known, we can find all three angles from this and the similar formulae.
.
If the corners of a spherical triangle are
, the great circle of which side
.
Note: We will need proofs of all these theorems.
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
"Markets and Market Failure" is the first of 3 units which must be completed in order to attain an AS level and the first of 6 for a full A-level accredited by AQA.
Economics is the study of the social relations of production and distribution and how different societies cope with the basic economic problem of scarcity.
It is also the study of human behavior as it makes rational decisions to satisfy its needs.
Scarcity is based on the premise that human beings have unlimited wants and needs and that the resources which can be used to fulfill these wants and needs are limited (or finite). This means that choices have to be made about what, how and for whom to produce goods or services. Given the fundamental problem of resource scarcity in the face of infinite human wants, economic agents must make choices between competing alternatives. If resources were not scarce, there would be no need to choose between competing alternatives. Economics for this reason is also referred to as the science of constrained choice. Scarcity is why efficiency is so important to economists as inefficient use of resources reduces the amount of wants which can be satisfied.
Economic resources can be divided into four different categories; LAND, LABOUR and CAPITAL and ENTERPRISE. These are referred to as the factors of production, each of which has a factor payment.
Factor payments are payments made to scarce resources, or generated by the factors of production, in return for productive services. The factors of production are also known as resource inputs to the productive process.
Land consists of all naturally occurring resources, i.e. agricultural land, mineral deposits. The resource land includes anything growing on land such as forestry or agricultural produce, or mineral subsoil assets lying beneath the surface. The factor land thus generates many different types of raw materials used in the production process.
The factor payment for land is RENT.
Labour is a measure of the work carried out by human beings
Supply of labour is initially determined by the total population but then more directly by the labour force (those who are of working age and who participate in the Labour force).
The skills and training of the labour force affects the overall PRODUCTIVITY.
The factor payment for labour is WAGES
Is the physical and non-human inputs used in production. This can can include factory buildings and other equipment such as vehicles, plant and machinery or tools used in the production process.
The factor payment for capital is INTEREST. Interest is a simplification which embeds the assumption that typically many firms use a mixture of equity and debt to fund to acquisition of capital. Interest is payable on debt used for capital acquisition or expansion.
Enterprise is the role of entrepreneur within the economy. The entrepreneurial ability of management organises the other three factors into a cohesive production process which results in the output of goods or services.Enterprise represents the skill of management.
The entrepreneur is the risk taker who combines the other factors of production to create a good or service for which there is demand.
There are several factors which can affect the level of entrepreneurship within an economy
Start-up costs - high start-up costs will discourage entrepreneurship as it reduces the level of profit which can be attained. High start-up costs also discourage entrepreneurship because the total loss is great if the business fails.
Level of profits - the higher the level of profit available the more incentive for the entrepreneur, this can be altered by wages levels and availability of labour, availability and cost of land, level of tax on profit
Support - Financial support, such as loans. Knowledge support, advice on things such as marketing or accounts can encourage entrepreneurs.
Factor payment for enterprise is PROFITS. Profit is also the return to the firm and its owners after all other factor payments have been made. Dividends represent a distribution of profits.
A market is anywhere where buyers and sellers meet for purpose of exchange, such as: eBay, a market etc. Within a market prices are determined by the market mechanism.
Demand is the amount of goods and services buyers are willing and able to purchase at a given price over a given period of time, Demand can be represented graphically in a demand curve or in a table known as a demand schedule. The main determinants of demand are; the price of the good, the price of substitute goods, the price of complimentary goods, levels of income. The price of a good and the quantity demanded usually have an inverse relationship; if one increase the other decreases.
Demand schedules are tables which show the price of a good and the quantity demanded.
A demand curve is the graphical representation of a demand schedule, in which quantity demanded is plotted on the X axis and price on the Y axis. The curve on a demand curve slopes downwards left to right, the only exception being status goods in which the demand curve slopes upwards from left to right.
Movement along a demand curve occurs when the only variable to change is the price. For goods (except status goods) an increase in price causes a contraction of demand and a decrease causing an expansion of demand.
In this example the original price of the good was at P1 and the quantity demanded was at Q1. An increase in price to a level of P2 has caused a contraction of demand to a level of Q2.
A shift in a demand curve occurs when a variable other than price changes. For instance a change of income, a change in fashions or trends, a change in the price of a complimentary or substitute good, a successful/unsuccessful advertising campaign.
The extent to which the quantity demanded responds to a change in price.
Price elasticity of Demand =
Which can be worked out by;
Price elasticity of Demand =
P.E.D = 0 Any change in price will have no change in demand and whatever the price is the demand will remain equal.  If this were to occur firms would set as high a price as possible to make maximum profit.
0 < P.E.D < 1 This means that any change in price will have a less than proportional change in demand.
P.E.D = 1 Any change in price has an exactly proportional change in demand, i.e. 10% reduction in demand would cause a 10% reduction in price.
1 < P.E.D < ≈ Any change in price will cause a greater than proportional change in demand.
P.E.D = ≈ Any change in price will have an absolute change in demand as buyers will only buy at one price and no other.
The quantity of goods and services a firm is willing and able to sell at a given price over a given period of time.
As with demand schedules supply schedules are tables which displays the amount of goods and services supplied at what price.
A supply curve is the graphical representation of a supply schedule, in which quantity supplied is plotted on the X axis and price on the Y axis. The curve of a supply curve slopes upwards right to left, the only exception being status goods in which the demand curve slopes downwards from right to left.
Equilibrium is the point in a market at which supply and demand intersect, thus giving the equilibrium price and quantity. In the example below the equilibrium price is P1 and the equilibrium quantity is Q1. Were the price or the quantity supplied to change then the market would be in a state of disequilibrium. A price above P1 would mean there would be an excess of supplies, and a price below P1 would mean there is excess demand.
Elasticities measure the change on one variable in proportion to another.
Income elasticity of demand is a measure of the responsiveness of the demand for a good or service to a change in income. If an increase in income lead to  an increase in demand, then the income elasticity of that good or service would be said to be positive. If a change in income lead to no change in demand then that good would be said to have an income elasticity of demand of zero. A rise in income leading to a decrease in demand would mean that the good or service is said to have a negative income elasticity of demand.
The following formula is used to calculate a good or service's income elasticity of demand:
Income elasticity of Demand =
Cross elasticity of demand measures the responsiveness of the demand of one good to a change in the price of another good. This allows, for instance, how a rise in the price of natural gas affects the demand of electricity. In addition to this, by calculating the cross elasticity of demand, it is possible to identify the relationship between two goods or services. If the cross elasticity of demand for two goods is positive, then it can be summarised that the two goods are substitute goods, as would be the case for the example of natural gas and electricity. If the cross elasticity of demand for two goods is negative, then the two goods are complimentary goods, such as fish and chips.
The following formula is used to calculate the cross elasticity of demand:
Cross elasticity of Demand =
Price elasticity of supply is a measure of the responsiveness in quantity supplied to a change in price.
The following formula is used to calculate price elasticity of supply:
Price elasticity of Supply =
An absolute monopoly is a market structure in which only one firm supplies a good or service. In addition to this there are, within the UK, legal monopolies, which are firms with a market share greater than 25%. In the long run, monopolies are created and prosper due to the erection of barriers to entry.
The law can be used to create monopolies. This can be achieved in a number of ways. The use of copyrights or patents are examples of a legal barriers to entry. As one firm controls the production of goods for which they have a patent or copyright they can become monopolies. A further example would be the granting of a permit by the government to a firm, such as, the numerous train companies which are monopolies for their respective lines, allowing only them to run trains.  Professional licensing is also promoted by existing firms in an effort to keep out additional firms.  The licensing laws are often set up in ways that favor existing firms, but are difficult for new firms to meet.
If a firm is able to control some or all of the resources necessary to produce a good, it can then become a monopoly. For instance, an oil company which controls all the oil fields has monopoly power over the production of oil. De Beers, the diamond company, controls over 95% of the Earth's diamond reserves, allowing only a certain number of diamonds to be mined a year, keeping the price high.
Firms may undertake acts of unfair competition to maintain their monopoly status or to become monopolies. If a large firm is in competition with another then it could, as an example, lower its prices to a level which would drive a competitor out of business, safe in the knowledge that the loses associated can be sustained for a short amount of time due to the large reserves of the firm. Having driven the competing firm out of the market the monopoly is then free to revert back to the previous price charged.
'Natural Cost Advantages'
Due to economies of scale (in which a larger firm can make a product at a lower per-unit cost than smaller firms due to the larger scale of its production capacities) and economies of scope (in which a single large firm can use the same input resource in multiple production processes, resulting in the production of multiple goods for lower per-unit costs than two smaller firms would experience), it is possible that a market with a single large firm is the most cost-efficient means of producing a good or service.
r1bqkbnr/ppp2ppp/2np4/1B2p3/4P3/5N2/PPPP1PPP/RNBQK2R
The move is sometimes called the Old Steinitz Defence because it is viewed as not best for black.  The e5 is not threatened by Bxc6 so there is no need to defend the pawn.  Black allows his light square Bishop to become active, but at the same time his dark square bishop is getting blocked, so there isn't much of any gain in development.  The move also allows white to play d4 immediately.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 d6
Bxc6+...
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Ruy Lopez
Batsford Chess Openings 2 (1989, 1994). Garry Kasparov, Raymond Keene. ISBN 0-8050-3409-9.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
Ravioli is an Italian pasta. It is a dumpling made with different fillings such as meat, vegetables, and cheese.
Books on this shelf deal with multimedia software used to work with audio, video, and graphics.
Global Illumination and HDRI Maps in 3D Studio Max
Within a week after the meeting has ended (depending on how quickly future meetings are scheduled), the secretary typically distributes the meeting minutes with a request for feedback regarding missing or inaccurate items. The secretary would wait a period of time after the first distribution to receive and add changes before distributing a final copy of the minutes.
Meeting minutes can be kept on an organization's wiki. Many wiki-based software products allow user controls to limit who can see, edit or create pages. As a result, the secretary could create a page for the minutes and edit these minutes as per feedback comments received.
On paper, such as a bulletin board that all meeting participants have access to.
On paper, delivered to each meeting participant individually.
On a wiki with limited scope (such as a wiki only employees can see, or a wiki accessible only by certain members of an organization), with only the secretary capable of making edits.
On a wiki, with everyone able to edit the minutes.
On a static web-page, where only the secretary has the ability to edit.
By email. Here a secretary may request that all updates be made directly to him or her, rather than to the group as a whole. Alternatively, every modification might be emailed to every participant (not recommended - email threads can quickly become split if many people reply to everyone)
Within the minutes, outstanding issues are typically identified. To ensure that these are dealt with accordingly, it might be prudent to split these into action items for follow-up, or to include these issues in a future meeting. While it's still a good idea to mention these items in the minutes, if they are to be assigned to someone specific as an action item, it is also good to re-iterate these tasks separately.
From the minutes, there are typically action items - tasks that need to be followed-up on - that need to be assigned to specific individuals. It is the responsibility of the secretary (or a pre-identified representative) to notify these individuals - either individually (if practical) or en mass - of their specific tasks. Doing so ensures that everyone is aware of his or her responsibilities and expectations.
If tasks need to be completed, but no one was clearly assigned the task, the secretary and chairman should work with the meeting participants to determine who should take responsibility for a task. The secretary or chairman are not necessarily the de facto owners of these remaining tasks. Delegation may be required to insure that outstanding action items are taken care of.
Where appropriate, after the meeting a special guest presenter should be thanked with relevant note or thank-you gift. In the event that a guest is paid after attending the meeting, it is appropriate to split up the payment and the thanks. That is, the guest should be paid as agreed upon, and a thank-you card/gift should be sent in a separate package or given in person at a different time. This shows the guest that his or her contribution was appreciated and not just an after-thought borne out of obligation.
While this meeting is still fresh in everyone's mind, it is a good idea to work out a scheduled time for any future meeting, even if it is not until several months in advance. Doing so gives everyone a clear time-frame for their action items.
In VB, if you type 18 then 08. The game crashes - fix this.
Function CheckMoveIsLegal(ByVal Board(,) As String, ByVal StartRank As Integer, ByVal StartFile As Integer, ByVal FinishRank As Integer, ByVal FinishFile As Integer, ByVal WhoseTurn As Char) As Boolean
If FinishFile = StartFile And FinishRank = StartRank Then
If FinishRank = 0 Or FinishFile = 0 Then 'This is the required if statement
This converts lowercase to uppercase by using ASCII values.
Give the name of the identifier of a Constant
Give the name of the identifier of a Fixed Value Variable
Give the name of a Most Wanted Holder Variable
Give the name of the identifier of a Stepper Variable
Give the name of the identifier of a Temporary Variable
Give the name of the identifier of a Transformation Variable
What is the difference between a repeat until loop and a for loop
The 'for' loop will run a set number of times and finish when the count is complete. A repeat until loop will run until a condition has been met, the condition is checked at the end of the loop so it is possible for the loop to run once
Give an example of a SubRoutine whose only role is to output
To allow the use of Abs() in the process of checking whether moves are legal.
To return the absolute value. This is needed because the result of
(FinishFile - StartFile) or (FinishRank - StartRank) may be a negative number, whilst the move is still legal.
The Abs function returns the positive alternative, which prevents the program from crashing
Automation Wizard is a tool in PlanoTse. It helps you to automatically generate many search strings and prepare many web search commands for hidden, parallel execution. You also use this wizard to tell PlanoTse how to automatically process all web search results. To bring up the Automation Wizard, select the command [Automation » Web Search] from the main menu. The following image shows what you see when you bring up the PlanoTse Automation Wizard.
The user interface of this wizard is based on the PlanoTse user interface standard, also known as the PlanoTse GUI Standard.
The tree view here works as an extended menu structure for ease of navigation
The wizard logic works in the node editor, the middle panel.
The whiteboard, the last panel on the right, is where input error messages are displayed.
Other than Edit, the menu on this wizard carries standard items based on the PlanoTse GUI Standard. Two items concerning this wizard are highlighted below for ease of reference.
Using the PlanoTse GUI Standard, all input fields are placed on the Node Editor panel.
What is the mission of your web search automation project? Give it a name in a very short phrase as it will be used to name an output folder for your automation session.
Search factor is a multiplicative consideration for building the search string. If location is a factor, you may declare city as the name of your first factor and make a list of cities. If industry is a factor, you may declare industry as the name of your second factor and make a list of industries. In this example, with city and industry as the only two search factors, you put 2 in the field Factor Count.
For this field, create a comma-separated list of factors, as many as declared in the field Factor Count. For example, if you have two search factors such as city and industry then place the following string in this field: city, industry.
Limit your web search automation activities to only a limited number of top-level domain names such as com, gov and edu. This is not a bad way to keep your search from reaching domain names in other countries.
Otherwise, if not specified, all will be considered.
This field lets the automation program know to search only for articles published within the last 24 hours, the last 7 days, the last 4 weeks, or the last 12 months. This field can only have one of the following input values: 0, 1, 7, 30 or 365. When it is zero, time is not a factor in the search.
This button takes you to the page before last. It is for use by an experienced user.
This button takes you to the next page. It is positioned such that all the NEXT buttons are aligned at the same position.
This button saves the input data. The NEXT and BACK buttons will save the input data first before taking you to another page.
User-defined button will do what the user wants it to do by placing their desire in PlanoTseScript in the button. When you press the button, it will execute the source code stored with your button. To change its label and replace its source code, hold down the key Ctrl while clicking on the button. See Source Code Samples in PlanoTseScript.
Demo InstructionFor a demo do the following steps:
The Automation Wizard demo is now started.
Clear all input data by selecting the menu command [Edit » Clear All Input Data].
Place 0 in the Days-ago field.
Place 2 in the Factor-Count field.
Place the string, city, industry, in the Factors field.
Press the NEXT button.
Go to the next topic in this book: Search Factors
This demo instruction is one in a series that ends on this page, Execution Page.
This page is part of The Shortest Route, which is the shortest sequence of pages that would as quickly as possible bring you to the point where you can start using PlanoTse effectively for either job search automation or any other application in the mining of global data from the World Wide Web.
Practical investigations or activities included in this section are intended as a teaching resource rather than an assessment tool. Although all practical course recorded may be counted on the form 4/PSOW, these activities are probably not suitable for assessment of the IA criteria.
Microscopy, Measurements and Scales
I have been very happy with the book Biology with Vernier using the same brand data loggers. The book comes with a CD with teacher and student notes for the labs and are in word document so it's easy to edit them to make them OK for the IB Internal Assessment (namely not giving the students too much info). The students get reasonable results and can do DCP and CE labs with the results.
These ideas are included as a starting point for teachers planning investigations in this topic. Investigations included here are not endorsed by the IBO and may not match the criteria precisely. Please exercise caution and judgement when selecting IA topics for submission.
Further Investigations in Biology (Vol 1): Cells and Biochemistry. Billiet, P. et al. IBID Press, 2002. ISBN 1 876659 068
Cells Alive! Very visual website
'A Stem Cell Story' (DVD - 15mins). Eurostemcell, 2005. Available from http://www.eurostemcell.org
A change in ownership can be because of many different factors. When ownership changes (for example from a Private Limited Company to a Public Limited Company) there may be a change in focus. For example, a private company typically has few, if any, institutional investors and a stable shareholder register. This allows the company to focus on very long term goals, to retain profit for future investment, etc. A public company, in contrast, will have a more diverse and changeable shareholder base. This can lead to the company needing to maintain or increase income distributions year-on-year which could be against the best long term interests of the company.
These are the main ways change in ownership can occur.
This is where one company takes control of another. It can be an agreed takeover which happens when a current owner and an external person agrees a price which the share of the company is sold for. It can also occur in hostile conditions where a potential owner goes about collecting shares, buying off the market when they are made available and trying to get a large enough share to control the company. In the United Kingdom, public company take overs are governed by the Take Over Panel and company law. These set rules around how a stake is accumulated, the timetable for making an offer, etc. They also ensure all shareholders are treated equally.
Many advantages can be taken for the new owner. These include:
Even if the failing companies get taken over, the best parts of the companies can be retained, or the market share can still mean a larger market share (e.g., Volkswagen take-over of Skoda - Skoda before the takeover was known as a bad quality car but Volkswagen then put its engines and reliability into Skoda and before long Skoda became a good quality car at a lower price point).
Not only the good parts of companies are taken over, but also the bad parts
The cost of completely taking it over can be huge
Two companies may decide to join together to gain synergies. This could be where the companies have complimentary products (allowing a wider range to be offered or to cover a greater geographic area), have significant overlap (allowing duplication and hence cost to be eliminated) or other reasons. This is called a merger. An example is the now HBOS where Halifax and the Bank of Scotland merged and also Lloyds TSB when Lloyds merged with Trustee Savings Bank. Lastly when two gaming companies merged called Activision and Blizzard to form Activision Blizzard.
Blue Apple Loops vs. Green Apple Loops
What Are Plugins?
What Are Virtual Instruments?
IM has been around for some time now, but started off with people placing their notes and messages on bulletin boards and other online services.
Chat - Create your own chat room with friends or co-workers
Images - Look at an image stored on your friend's computer
Sounds - Play sounds for your friends
Files - Share files by sending them directly to your friends
Talk - Use the Internet instead of a phone to actually talk with friends
(http://www.howstuffworks.com/instant-messaging.htm) Retrieved January 16, 2007
It really kicked off in 1996 when Jewish programmers introduced ICQ. It was one of the first successful IM programs. After that, AOL came out with AIM instant messenger. It is messaging in real time and messages are sent trough internet to any computer you desire. When text messaging started, you were able to see message getting typed in real time. If you needed to make corrections in the text, the other party is able to see what you are doing. Now days the only messages you see is the ones that are sent whenever the typist is done writing. There are many popular IM services like MSN messenger, Meetro, Skype, Yahoo messenger, Gadu-Gadu and Google Talk are just some of them. Now days most popular one is MSN messenger. One of the most important is considered a very safe way to communicate. You still shouldn’t share important or personal information through IM.
</nowiki>. It was one of the first successful IM programs. After that, AOL launched AIM instant messenger. It is messaging in real time and messages are sent trough internet to any computer you desire. When text messaging started, you were able to see message getting typed in real time. If you needed to make corrections in the text, the other party is able to see what you are doing. Now days the only messages you see is the ones that are sent whenever the typist is done writing. There are many popular IM services like MSN messenger, Meetro, Skype, Yahoo messenger, Gadu-Gadu and Google Talk are just some of them. Now days most popular one is MSN messenger. One of the most important is considered a very safe way to communicate. You still shouldn’t share important or personal information through IM.
Instant messages create disruptions to work and studying.  Many people, mostly young kids and young adults use instant messenger.  The most frequent users are those who play online video games or spend hours surfing the net (http://www.personal.psu.edu/zev100/IM.pdf).  Instead of concentrating on a homework assignment or contributing productively at work people are spending their time instant messaging. This creates a generation that could become lazy due to low concentration levels.  Not only does instant messaging create a lazy generation it also contributes to a decreased awareness of spelling and grammar (http://www.personal.psu.edu/zev100/IM.pdf).  Instant messengers have created their own type of language made up of acronyms and abbreviations that they loose the smart vocabulary that people use in conversation.  Instant messaging also reduces face to face communication which teaches people how to communicate with body language and facial expressions which is an integral part of communication (http://www.personal.psu.edu/zev100/IM.pdf). A statement can be interpreted in the wrong way therefore offending the receiver.  Lastly instant messaging allows an open forum for children and people to chat with strangers that could be dangerous.  Personal information can be obtained by online chats that could be harmful if in the hands of the wrong person.
Nowadays we drop the use of the telephone to talk to someone and fire up the computer and use Instant Messaging to talk to our family, friends, Co-Workers, etc. Instant messaging is easy to use and is free to download. Some of them include AIM, Windows Live, or Yahoo. Instant Messaging is the long form of using Twitter. With an Instant message you type your thoughts into a box on the screen and it sends your comments over the World Wide Web to the recipients on the other end who is on your buddy list. Some of the features of Instant Messaging include sending Emoticons, different sounds & emotions, colors, fonts, and backgrounds. As long as you are not writing your ideas in all capital letters you’re talking in a polite voice. On the other hand, if you are mad at someone then go right ahead and type it all in capitals which means you is shouting at the person. More of today’s applications such as Twitter, Facebook, and MySpace are merging their friend lists straight into your favorite instant messengers. For several individuals like myself who use a screen reader I love having all of my social networking sites combined into one application where the screen reader is able to pick up the entire conversation to and from the recipient instead of being on the site and picking up half of the conversation.
Fixed-effects, additive single-factor, repeated-measures ANOVA model
Fixed-effects, additive two-factor, repeated-measures ANOVA model
Two-factor completely randomized fixed-effects factorial model
Readers will be able to list the different teaching options for sex education.
Readers will be able to identify reasons why adolescents are involved in sex and drugs.
Readers will understand the different influences adolescents encounter.
For many years popular culture has had such a strong influence on children.  The music that children listen to, the movies they watch, and most importantly their peers, all of which have influenced children in ways that parents could not imagine.  It has become a growing concern for many parents especially in modern society to know where their children are going for security and guidance if they are not going to the parents or family members.  With all the teen pregnancies occurring, children having access to drugs, it is extremely important for parents to know what and who are getting into the minds of their children.
School is supposed to be a safe place for children to learn history, math, English, art, and reading, not a place to learn about the different kinds of drugs people can get a hold of, how much alcohol they are able to consume, or why they should have sex now instead of later from their peers. It has been reported statistically that, â32.2% of adolescents had their first alcoholic drink by the age of 13 and 50% of teens feel pressured in sex and relationshipsâ (http://teens.lovetoknow.com/Statistics_on_Peer_Pressure, 2009). But school is also suppose to be a safe place where children are able to grow socially with their peers. Now where does that leave the children?   As society is growing and changing, parents are still trying to figure out how and why their children are being influenced so greatly by their peers and popular culture.  Letâs take a look at sex, drugs, and popular music in and out of the school setting.
Sex, sex, it's all about S E X
Sex education in schools has become a very controversial topic.  Some believe that when sex education is being taught, the information given is the cause for more sexual interactions among children, because they are being educated on all aspects of sex.  Others believe that if sex education should be taught, teachers should only educate the students about abstinence.  If abstinence is the only topic being spoken about, the belief is that there will be a decrease in pregnancy rates and STD rates.  Due to the fact that most students by time they reach a sex education class, they have already had intercourse, the abstinence education seems non-effective, but some schools have implemented a program where they still teach abstinence and how to safely protect themselves if they are sexually active or plan to become sexually active.  To see which states require sex education, or abstinence education or both, can be located at this website: http://www.teen-aid.org/State_Resourses/State_Sex_Education_Laws.htm.
One of the main influences on children are their peers.  If his or her peers are engaging in sexual activity, it is then âcoolâ for everyone else to be engaged in sexual activity including your child.  Usually those children that are very involved with their friends, tend to begin dating much sooner and end up in romantic relationships (Jayson, 2008).
According to Health Care Industry,  âadolescents who initiate sexual activity at young ages tend to have more sexual partners and use condoms less than those who initiate sex laterâ¦â (Sieving, 2006). This explains the high pregnancy rates among youth in America.
During these middle school and high school years children look to their friends before anyone else, for the simple reason that their friends understand how they are feeling and what they are going through better than any parent or adult can.  Moreover, children look to their peers for acceptance and oneâs perception of his or hers behaviors and attitudes (Sieving, 2006).
Not only do peers have an influence on children, but the media also has a huge impact.  After a phone survey was done on 1000 teens, it was recorded that girlâs ages 14–19 who listened to pop music, hip hop music, or read woman magazines, were associated with having had sex (AACAP, 2004). This survey and many other studies show the effects that media has had on teens and sex.  It has also been suggested that due to the provocative lyrics, the sexual content on how girls should act, and what feelings boys should have lead to sexual intercourse the many STDâs and pregnancies among teens. Media seems to play a big role in the lives of many adolescents.
Approximately 30.2% of young adults are given, offered, or sold drugs in high school and middle school.
Among recent inhalant initiates, 19.4% used inhalants on 13 or more days in the past year (NSDUH, 2006)
Drugs are defined as âany chemical substance that, when absorbed into the body of a living organism, alters normal bodily function.â (wikipedia, 2009)  In any health education class, children learn this basic definition, what the different drugs are and their effects on the body.  What seems to be the best teaching tool for drugs in the school is the well-known D.A.R.E. (Drug Abuse Resistance Education) program.  This curriculum is mostly geared towards elementary students, and teaches them to stay away from all drugs that are harmful.  According to researchers, students who have participated in the DARE program, are 5 times less likely to engage in drug related activities as they get older. (D.A.R.E, 2008)
Along with the DARE program, school districts follow the âzero toleranceâ act. With this act, any students caught with any drugs, alcohol, weapons, or anything tobacco related, regardless of how little it may seem, are punished.  The question in this case is, will punishing students actually have an effect on drug usage among adolescents? Well many school districts feel as though it is important and will help get rid of the disruptive students in the classroom settings, which will lead to less drugs and alcohol in the schools.  (Skiba, 1999)
Most children that are involved with drugs are usually said to be: depressed, have a family background of drug use and feel as though drug use is normal, has a need to fit in with their peers, or they have low self-esteem.  During these adolescent years a lot of experimentation with drugs happens, simply because they are at that age where they think they are indestructible from any consequences.  (AACAP, 2008) One of the more popular drugs in recent years that have been experimented with are inhalants.  Inhalants being the 3rd widely most used drugs among adolescents are very easy to get a hold of.
Adolescents are using the most common everyday items to inhale such as glue, shoe polisher, cleaners, lighter fluid, and degreasers, all of which are usually found in the home, or could be bought in any store.  It has also been reported that most adolescents that have tried inhalants, have already experienced drinking alcohol, smoking marijuana, and smoking cigarettes.(NSDUH, 2006) But its these moments of experimentation that may hinder an adolescents growth socially, or could be a one time event for self knowledge. It's always up to the adolescent what they learn and do from their experimenting.
Whatâs that youâre singing?
âLetâs talk about sex baby, letâs talk about me and you, letâs talk about all the good things and the bad things that may be, letâs talk about sexâ¦â These are lines from a very popular hip-hop song done by Salt and Pepper in the early 90âs.  As sex was beginning to become an issue in the early 90âs, many realized that adolescents were paying close attention to music lyrics.  That is why this song by Salt nâ Pepper was so significant at that time.  The song basically said, to talk about everything before making such a big step in oneâs life; make sure you both know everything good and bad, benefits and consequences about sex and each other. Not too many songs in any genre that are promoting no sex or safe sex.
On the other hand adolescents are hearing lyrics like âWhen it comes to sex donât test my skills, cause my head game will have you head over heels. Guys wanna wife me and give me the ring. Iâll do it anywhere, anyhow; Iâm down for anythingâ¦â this coming from a female rap start, many know as Lil Kim.  With such a message, many adolescent would not loose the idea of having sex.  Many songs sound like this one and they give adolescents more reason to engage in sexual intercourse. According to one research team, they found that with the explicit lyrics, there was an increase in sexual interactions among adolescents (Martino, 2006).
Because music is more accessible in todayâs society, there are many more music options that adolescents can get a hold of.  It is seen everyday in the schools how much of an impact rap music in particular has on adolescents.  Much rap and hip hop songs focus mostly on wealth, which is attained by the âthug lifeâ.  Thug life is basically gangs, drug dealing and larceny (Duncan, 2009). These images are also glamorized through music videos.  Adolescents are able to view a number of things such as: graphic violence, sex that focuses on devaluing women, violence toward women, lyrics showing suicide as an alternative solution (AACAP, 2004). Along with that when there are artist who believe "What else can you rap about but money, sex, murder or pimping? There isnât a whole lot else going on in our world. Rapper Ja Rule"(Strasburger, 2004). With all this in the hands of adolescents, it is important for parents to try and pay close attention to what their children are listening to.  Although it seems as though popular music has a strong hold on children, parents and their peers have just as much of an impact on them.
For information on how to deal with teen issues such as sex and drugs or peer pressure visit: http://teens.lovetoknow.com/Category:Growing_Up
Being in middle school and high school, those are the years that are easily swayed by parents, peers, and popular culture. It is all about what aspects are helping sway adolescents and in what direction.  Popular culture and peers have the largest impact on adolescents, because they are at that age where they feel as though they will be better identified in society, they will fit in with all that is going on around them (Skiba, 1999).  The facts that they learn in school and from parents sometimes are not enough.
As someone who has already been down that road, the best influence in an adolescentâs life is their parents and peers. I feel as though it is up to the parents to take control of what their children are exposed to and how they handle that exposure.  As for their peers, with the guidance of their parents adolescents should be able to figure out who would have a better impact on them, be able to weed out the bad friends and stick with the friends that will continue to help them grow socially in a positive direction.  Unfortunately, even though some adolescents have this structure, they are still swayed very strongly by popular culture.  Also, I feel as though for the education that is taught on sex and drugs, it is up to adolescents to take that information in and use it for their benefits.  But many shrug off the facts and go about their ways.  So no matter how hard the schools try the enforce no sex and staying away from drugs most students will do what their peers are doing, and what popular culture says is âcool.â
What is the percentage of teens that feel pressured to be in relationships or have sex?
Children who are usually involved with drugs are said to:
a.	Be straight A students
b.	Be very active in their community
c.	Have a need to fit in with their peers
d.	Enjoy playing sports
In states that are allowed to teach sex education which topics do they discuss?
a.	HIV/AIDâs and STDâs
d.	All of the Above
Which one of these song lyrics would make an adolescent think it is âcoolâ to drink alcohol?
a.	âI wanna li-li-li-lick you from your head to your toesâ¦â(Ludacris, 2000)
b.	âyou bout to buy a ring she needs tha finer things gucci designer framezâ¦â(Ludacris, 2003)
c.	âOkay we popping champgne like we won a championship gameâ¦okay start straight shots and then pop bottlesâ¦â(Birdman, 2007)
d.	âAs my Daytons spin, lowrider, sittin low hittin corners so hard you can taste my rimsâ¦â(P.Diddy, 2006)
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry.  (2004) âThe Influence of Music and Music Videos.â Retrieved February 2, 2009 from http://www.aacap.org/cs/root/facts_for_families/the_influence_of_music_and_music_videos.
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. (2008) âTeens: Alcohol and other Drugs.â Retrieved February 2, 2009 from http://www.aacap.org/cs/root/facts_for_families/teens_alcohol_and_other_drugs.
Birdman and Lil' Wayne. (2007). "Pop Bottles." Retrieved February 3, 2009 from http://www.lyrics.com/.
D.A.R.E. Retrieved February 3, 2009 from http://dare.com/home/about_dare.asp.
Duncan, Charles. (September 25, 2007). âThe Influence of Rap Music upon Youth.â  Retrieved February 2, 2009 from https://archive.is/20130628170201/www.associatedcontent.com/article/386184/the_influence_of_rap_music_upon_youth.html?cat=9.
Jayson, Sharon. (September 9, 2008) âHow the USA compares in teaching Teens About Sex.â USA Today. Retrieved February 2, 2009 from http://www.usatoday.com/news/education/2008-09-07-sex-education-side_N.htm?loc=interstitialskip.
Ludacris. (2000). "What's your Fantasy?" Retrieved February 3, 2009 from http://www.lyrics.com/.
Ludacris. (2003). "Splash Waterfalls." Retrieved February 3, 2009 from http://www.lyrics.com/.
Martino, Steven C., Rebecca L. Collins, Marc N. Elliott, Amy Strachman, David E. Kanouse and Sandra H. Berry. (2006). âExposure to Degrading Versus Non-degrading Music Lyrics and Sexual Behavior Among Youth.â Pediatrics. 118.  e430-e441.
P. Diddy. (2006). "We Gon' Make it." Retrieved February 3, 2009 from http://www.lyrics.com/.
Skiba, Russ and Reece Peterson. (January 1999).âThe Dark Side of Zero Tolerance:
Can Punishment Lead to Safe Schools?.â Retrieved January 28, 2008 from http://www.pdkintl.org/kappan/kski9901.htm.
Strasburger, Victor C. MD. (2004) âChildren, Adolescents, and the Media.â Current Problem Pediatric Adolescent Health Care. 34. 54-113.
Sieving, Renee E., Eisenberg, M E., Pettingell, S., and Skay, C. (2006) âFriends Influence on Adolescentâ first sexual intercourse.â Health Care Industry. Retrieved January 31, 2009 from http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m0NNR/is_1_38/ai_n16119586.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2006). âCharacteristics of Recent Adolescent Inhalant Initiates.â National Survey on Drug Use and Health. 11.
Rate This!
Serre goes on to prove that this is in fact a bilinear form over
After the definition he gives a method for computing the Hilbert Symbol in the proposition: It states that there is a short exact sequence
He then goes on to prove/state some identities useful for computation:
Existence of Rational Numbers with given Hilbert Symbols
Ribonuclease is a type of enzyme that is capable of cleaving the phosphodiester bond between each unit of nucleic acid that form the RNA backbone. A phosphodiester bond in a single RNA strand is formed by the linkage between the 3’ carbon atom of one ribose sugar molecule and the 5’ carbon atom of another ribose sugar attached to an adjacent nucleoside. These enzymes have overlapping functions as the small nuclear RNAs acting on mRNAs, such that they catalyze RNA degradation by breaking down RNA into shorter partial strands.
Ribonuclease can be grouped into two categories: endoribonucleases and exoribonucleases.
300px a picture of two RNA nucleotides with base adenine and cytosine
Endoribonulcases, much like the restriction endonucleases, are able to recognize certain RNA nucleotides within RNA and cleave at a specific site. These enzymes are able to break apart both single or double-stranded RNAs.
Exoribonucleases cleave RNA by removing terminal nucleotides from either the 5’ end or the 3’ end of the RNA strand. Enzymes that remove nucleotides from the 5' end are called 5'-3' exoribonucleases, and enzymes that remove nucleotides from the 3' end are called 3'-5' exoribonucleases.
Both endonucleases and exoribonucleases can be further broken down into sub-classes of ribonucleases based on their chemical cleaving mechanisms, such as phosphorolytic and hydrolytic activations. They exist in all kingdoms of life, the bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes. They are involved in the degradation of many different RNA species, such as messenger RNA, transfer RNA, ribosomal RNA, microRNA, etc.
The left side shows the hydrolytic activity of RNases in which a water molecule intercepts the 3’ ester bond between the phosphate group and the 5’ –OH group of the adjacent sugar, breaking off one nucleotide. The left side shows the phosphorolytic activity of RNases in which a phosphate group intercepts the 3’ ester bond between the phosphate group and the 5’ –OH group of the adjacent sugar, breaking off a nucleotide with two phosphate groups on it.
The left side shows a strand of mRNA, protected by a G-cap and a poly-A-tail. The Dcp1/2 protein recognizes the G-cap at the 5’ end of the RNA, takes it away, and exoribonuclease Xrn1 comes and starts chewing off the RNA strand from the 5’ end.  The right side shows the deadenylase protein recognizing the poly-A-tail and starts chewing it off. Then comes the exosome, another exoribonuclease that degrade RNA from the 3’ to 5’ direction. The middle shows an endoribonuclease binding to a specific sequence within the RNA and cleaving it internally.
File:RNase A.jpeg
The structure of RNase A was first crystalized 50 years ago. It was the first enzyme and the third protein whose amino sequence was determined. It is a single chain protein that contains 4 disulfide bridges.  It contains 124 amino residues and 19 out of the 20 amino acids, except for tryptophan. These enzymes were found in the exocrine cells of the bovine pancreas. They are very tough and highly stabilized enzymes, mostly due to their structures and folding patterns. Its molecular formula is C575H907N171O192S12 and the general structure consists of 2 sheets of alpha helices and beta sheets cross-linked by four disulfide bridges. RNase A has basic properties. It specifically attacks at the 3’ phosphate of a pyridine nucleotide. The cleavage involves simply two steps: 1). the 3’,5’-phosphodiester bond is cleaved to generate a 2’,3’-cyclic phosphodiester intermediate and 2). the cyclic phosphodiester is hydrolyzed to a 3’-monophosphate.
Example: pG-pG-pC-pA-pG undergoes RNase A cleavage would result in 2 sequences: pG-pG-pCp and A-pG.
RNase A can be activated by potassium and sodium salt and inhibited by alkylation of His12 or His119 in initiate RNA cleaving. It utilizes both phosphorolytic and hydrolytic activities to cleave a strand of RNA.
Sidney Altman discovered and named RNase P while working in the Laboratory of Molecular Biology in Cambridge, England, focusing on the functions of tRNA. He proposed that by altering spatial relationships in tRNA, either by insertion of new nucleotides or deletion of existing nucleotides, would affect or change the function of the tRNA. His experiments with E. coli. have shown that mutated tRNAs could not develop into a full mature tRNA, which in turn could not serve its functions of delivering amino acids during protein synthesis. However, these dysfunctional tRNAs quickly resolved back to wild-type tRNAs. By isolating the DNA to RNA transcript of tRNA, Altman had found that there are extra nucleotides hanging off of the 5’ and 3’ ends of tRNAs. When these tRNAs were introduced to a live medium, an enzyme was observed to cut off the extra nucleotides through the cleave of a phosphodiester bond, exposing the 5’ end of the molecule.  This RNase was different than other previous known RNase because of its specificity at the 5’ end of the tRNA. Altman also showed that RNase P-like activities were present in cells extracted from a variety of organisms, including humans.
RNase P is unique that it is ribozyme. While it cleave other RNAs, it cleaves itself as well, meaning it self-destructs during reaction. It is a single stranded protein containing 120 amino residues. They are found in many organisms such as archaea, bacteria and eukarya as well as chloroplasts in plants. The make-up of RNase P differ from one organism to another, but their functionalities are the same because of orthogonal properties. RNase P is a crucial component in the production of functional tRNA molecules.
T2 family Ribonucleases are considered to be transferase type RNases and are distinguished from the RNaseA and RNaseT1 protein families based on three features.
First of all T2 ribonucleases are more evenly distributed and are found in bacteria, plants, protozoans, animals and even viruses, whereas RNase T1 enzymes exist only in bacterial and fungal organisms and RNaseA family enzymes are highly represented in animals.
Secondly, the optimal pH of activity of many T2 ribonucleases is between 4 and 5.
By contrast, RNaseT1 and RNaseA families have optimal pH activity at alkaline (pH 7-8) or weakly acidic (pH ~7).
Thirdly, T2 ribonucleases do not discriminate their cleavage sites. T2 families generally cleave at all four bases, whereas RNaseA and RNaseT1 families tend to be specific for pyrimidine or guanosine bases respectively.
The biological role for T2 Ribonucleases varies. These endoribonucleases are ubiquitously represented in organisms across kingdoms and have been show to perform a variety of functions in different organisms besides it's ability to hydrolyze RNA. Some examples of biological roles include the scavenging of nucleic acids, the degradation of self-RNA, modulation of a host immune response, and serving as cellular cytotoxins.
T2 RNase are transferase-type RNases and catalyze the cleavage of ssRNA (single-stranded RNA) through a 2',3'-cyclic phosphate intermediate. The result of this catalyzed reaction are mono- or oligonucleotides with a 3' phosphate group. Typically, these RNases are secreted from the cell or specific special locations within the cell such as vacuoles, which may prove important to how their activity is modulated within the cell. This family of RNases has a specific structure and mechanism that is well known from x-ray crystallography. Likewise, crystallography has defined specific places such as specific binding sites, called B1 for sites with a 5' end and B2 for site with a 3' end, as well as a core made up of alpha and beta structures. Additionally, the catalysis of T2 RNase starts with one to three histidine residues. It should be noted that alteration or mutation of these residues causes inactivation of the RNase. The two main steps of this catalysis are transphosphorylation and hydrolysis. Further study is being conducted in the following areas for these specific RNases:
Discovering how RNases from this family can function independent of catalysis
Mutational analysis to determine the regions necessary for nuclease-independent functions
How these RNases enter the cell to reveal how proteins cross membranes, while many things cannot
T2 Family ribonucleases: ancient enzymes with diverse roles.
Luhtala N, Parker R.
Trends Biochem Sci. 2010
Raines, Ronald T. "Ribonuclease A." Chem Rev. Wisconsins: University of Wisconsins, 1998. 1045-065. Print.
Gopalan, Venkat, Agustin Vioque, and Sidney Altman. "RNase P: Variations and Uses*." RNase P: Variations and Uses. JBC Papers in Press, 10 Dec. 2011. Web. 20 Nov. 2012. <http://www.jbc.org/content/277/9/6759.full>.
Cuchillo, C. M.; Nogués, M. V.; Raines, R. T. (2011). "Bovine pancreatic ribonuclease: Fifty years of the first enzymatic reaction mechanism". Biochemistry 50: 7835-7841. PMC 3172371. PMID 21838247.
J. Holzmann, P. Frank, E. Löffler, K. Bennett, C. Gerner & W. Rossmanith (2008). "RNase P without RNA: Identification and functional reconstitution of the human mitochondrial tRNA processing enzyme". Cell 135 (3): 462–474. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2008.09.013. PMID 18984158.
Sassafras albidum (Sassafras, White Sassafras, Red Sassafras, or Silky Sassafras) is a species of Sassafras native to eastern North America, from southern Maine and southern Ontario west to Iowa, and south to central Florida and eastern Texas. It occurs throughout the eastern deciduous forest habitat type, at altitudes of sea level up to 1,500 m.[1][2][3] It formerly also occurred in southern Wisconsin, but is extinct there as a native tree.[4]
The name "Sassafras", applied by the botanist Nicolas Monardes in the sixteenth century, is said to be a corruption of the Spanish word for saxifrage. Before the twentieth century, Sassafras enjoyed a great reputation in the medical literature, but became valued for its power to improve the flavor of other medicines.[5]
It is a medium-sized deciduous tree growing to 15–35 m tall, with a trunk up to 60 cm diameter, and a crown with many slender branches. The bark on trunk of mature trees is thick, dark red-brown, and deeply furrowed. The branching is sympodial. The shoots are bright yellow green at first with mucilaginous bark, turning reddish brown, and in two or three years begin to show shallow fissures. The leaves are alternate, green to yellow-green, ovate or obovate, 10–16 cm long and 5–10 cm broad with a short, slender, slightly grooved petiole. They come in three different shapes, all of which can be on the same branch; three-lobed leaves, unlobed elliptical leaves, and two-lobed leaves; rarely, there can be more than three lobes. In fall, they turn to shades of yellow, tinged with red. The flowers are produced in loose, drooping, few-flowered racemes up to 5 cm long in early spring shortly before the leaves appear; they are yellow to greenish-yellow, with five or six tepals. It is usually dioecious, with male and female flowers on separate trees; male flowers have nine stamens, female flowers with six staminodes (aborted stamens) and a 2–3 mm style on a superior ovary. Pollination is by insects. The fruit is a dark blue-black drupe 1 cm long containing a single seed, borne on a red fleshy club-shaped pedicel 2 cm long; it is ripe in late summer, with the seeds dispersed by birds. The cotyledons thick and fleshy. All parts of the plant are aromatic and spicy. The roots are thick and fleshy, and frequently produce root sprouts which can develop into new trees.[1][2][3][5]
It prefers rich, well-drained sandy loam with a pH of 6–7, but will grow in any loose, moist soil. Seedlings will tolerate shade, but saplings and older trees demand full sunlight for good growth; in forests it typically regenerates in gaps created by windblow. Growth is rapid, particularly with root sprouts, which can reach 1.2 m in the first year and 4.5 m in 4 years. Root sprouts often result in dense thickets, and a single tree, if allowed to spread unrestrained, will soon be surrounded by a sizable clonal colony, as its stoloniferous roots extend in every direction and send up multitudes of shoots.[2][3][5]
Sassafras is often grown as an ornamental tree for its unusual leaves and aromatic scent. Outside of its native area, it is occasionally cultivated in Europe and elsewhere.[2]
An essential oil, called sassafras oil, is distilled from the root bark or the fruit. It was used as a fragrance in perfumes and soaps, food (sassafras tea and candy flavoring) and for aromatherapy. The smell of sassafras oil is said to make an excellent repellent for mosquitoes and other insects, which makes it a nice garden plant. Acids can be extracted from bark for manufacturing perfumes.
The essential oil was used as a pain killer as well as an antiseptic in dentistry. The pith is used in the U.S. to soothe eye inflammation and ease catarrh.
Sassafras oil is the preferred source of safrole, which is the main component (75-80%) of the essential oil.[6]
The root or root bark is used to make tea, although commercial "sassafras teas" are now artificially flavored as a result of the FDA ban (see below). A yellow dye is obtained from the wood. The shoots were used to make root beer (formerly an alcoholic beverage, but now a soft drink), which owed its characteristic odor to the sassafras extract, now replaced by other natural and/or artificial flavors.
Safrole is now recognized by the United States Department of Agriculture as a potential carcinogen. Safrole, and sassafras not certified as safrole-free, have been banned in the United States as food additives or flavoring agents by the FDA since 1976 due to safrole's designation as a carcinogen.[7] Sassafras leaves do not contain sufficient amounts of safrole to be covered by the FDA ban.
Safrole is commonly used by clandestine laboratories to synthesize various hallucinogenic drugs such as MDA (3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine), MDMA (Ecstasy), and MDEA (Love). For this reason, the sale of safrole and sassafras oil is monitored by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration.
The wood is dull orange brown, hard, and durable in contact with the soil; it was used in the past for posts and rails, small boats and ox-yokes, though scarcity and small size limits current use. Some is still used for making furniture. [8]
Propagation of the tree is most easily achieved trough the separating of root sucklings that are found around almost all mature trees.  Simply cut the root below the sapling leaving some 10 cm of the root. Plant the sapling in a pot containing a free draining organic rich soil and leave in a relatively protected spot from wind, heat, and intense sunlight. They are very hardy and it's almost impossible to fail.
↑ a b Flora of North America: Sassafras albidum
↑ a b c d U.S. Forest Service: Sassafras albidum (pdf file)
↑ a b c Hope College, Michigan: Sassafras albidum
↑ U.S. Forest Service Silvics Manual: Sassafras albidum
↑ a b c Keeler, H. L. (1900). Our Native Trees and How to Identify Them. Charles Scriber's Sons, New York.
↑ Kamdem D. P., Gage, D. A. (1995). "Chemical Composition of Essential Oil from the Root Bark of Sassafras albidum". Journal of Organic Chemistry 61 (6):  574-575. doi:10.1055/s-2006-959379.
↑ "US FDA/CFSAN: Listing of Food Additive Status". FDA. July 2006. http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/opa-appa.html. Retrieved 2007-04-25.
↑ Missouriplants: Sassafras albidum
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Sassafras albidum
"Qui" can be most easily translated as "which", or "who".  It's used when referring to a specific item or person doing something (La chienne qui aboye), or when asking a question (as in "Qui aimes-tu").
"Que" can be used to compare something (he eats more than she eats = il mange plus qu'elle mange), or to be used to say "that" ("he thinks that he eats a lot" = "Il pense qu'il mange beaucoup").
"Ce que", and "ce qui" are indefinite pronouns.  Ce que is used to describe something the subject of a sentence is modifying, and ce qui describes the subject of a sentence.
This is what he wants = "C'est ce qu'il veut".
This is something that satisfies me = "C'est ce qui me satisfait."
"Est-ce que" is a phrase placed in front of a statement to make it a question.
"Tu l'aimes" = "You like it." In French, when describing the subject of a sentence in relation to another object or place, the subject goes first, then the pronoun of the object or place being related to, and then the verb.
"Est-ce que tu l'aimes ?" = "(Do) you like it?"
"Qu'est-ce que" means "what is it that", as in "What is it that he likes to eat" (Qu'est-ce qu'il aime manger ?) Similarly, "Qu'est-ce qui" means "What is it that", however, just like "ce qui", it refers to a subject instead of an object.  ("Qu'est-ce qui aboye ?" = "What's barking?")
"Tout", when used as an adverb, always stays invariant. When used as an adjective, it agrees in gender and number with the noun it modifies (like every adjective in French).
Ils sont sales means "They are dirty". Adding tout gives a complementary information, different whether tout is employed as an adverb or an adjective:
Ils sont tout sales. (Adverb: invariant). Insists on the adjective sale. In this case tout means "very" or "completely".
Ils sont tous sales.  (Adjective: agree with "sales" in gender and in number). Insists on the fact that they are ALL dirty.
Sale vs. sale: in French, "sale" is an adjective that means "dirty". eg. des sales = some dirt
Travailler vs. to travel: "travailler" is a verb meaning to work, not "to travel".
La librairie vs. library: "librairie" denotes bookstore.
La figure vs. figure: "figure" in French means face.
Best way to remember is that 'take' has an 'e' so the verb starts with an em.
Si vous venez nous voir, amenez votre frère.
Same formula to remember: 'take' has an 'e' so the verb starts with an em.
Plus can mean "more" or "not anymore" according to the context. The final "s" is pronounced only when it means "more"
The days and months names are always in lowercase (unless they begin a sentence):
Bon is usually an adjective. It modifies a noun and means good, suitable, efficient, correct, useful, etc.
Bien means good, right, healthy, etc., and can often be used as an adjective with the verb être. It usually is an adverb, however.
The masculine forms tend to simply refer to the time. The feminine forms tend to place an emphasis on the length of time, or the time passed.
Pas can be substituted for other words to give a negation new meanings. For instance, ils ne regardent pas - "They are not watching" can become:
Ils ne regardent plus - They are no longer watching
Ils ne regardent guère (formal) - They are barely watching
Ils ne regardent jamais - They are never watching
c'est vs il est, ce vs il vs one
C'est means this is. For example, saying C'est un chien would mean 'This is a dog'.
Il est means it is. For example, saying Il est malade means 'He (or it) is sick'. Note that est is the il form (present) of the verb être, which is a 3rd group verb.
Verbs like manger(to eat) and commencer(to start) have a slight deviation in the nous form for these verbs.
For verbs like manger, which use the ger ending, add an e to the nous form in front of the g of 1st group verbs - that is nous mangeons.
For verbs like commencer, which use the cer ending, add a cedilla(Ç) to the c in commencer - that is nous commençons.
Hints and common errors ·
This table contains one record for every bank account.
GL Distribution Group (contains all the postable account numbers)
RSA-GENERATE-KEY is a native value.
"Creates a new private/public key pair"
ActionScript is a scripting language developed by Adobe (formerly Macromedia) for its Flash animation studio. ActionScript is similar to JavaScript with its syntax and functionality. The latest version, ActionScript 3.0, released together with Flash CS3, emphasizes Object oriented programming more so than previous versions. ActionScript is a proprietary language designed to control animations and create advanced interactive applications such as slide-shows, games, quizzes, tutorials, and websites. ActionScript 3.0 has grown substantial capabilities in comparison with previous versions. ActionScript may be difficult to learn for beginners with no programming experiencing, however, it becomes easier to grasp with repeated practice and use.
This tutorial is designed for use with Actionscript 2.0.  Changes for ActionScript 3.0 will be listed as well.
General and difference between Number and String data types
Nobody can exactly forecast the future. There is a whole part of literature, the utopian literature, which is today called  Science fiction . This kind of fiction deals with the possible future of mankind and the extraterrestrial life in space. Famous example of this literature are Thomas More's book Utopia, Swift's book Gulliver's Travels, the books of Jules Verne, the book Brave New World, the book 1984, the books of S. Lem and many more. In these books one can find many predictions of possible technical and social developments. The above books are quite exciting, and still worth reading.
A branch of science tries to forecast the future. It is called  futurology . This science has developed methods to determine future developments. One of these methods, for example, includes the Delphi survey. A group of experts in their field are asked to estimate the most important changes to come. The result is statistically evaluated. For instance, nuclear physicists can be asked when they expect the technical completion of a fusion reactor.
Some statements about the future are no doubt from a scientific point of view. They are described below.
The future of life is not predetermined. It does not have  a goal , even if it develops according to the rules of the evolution. The further biological development is open. It is ruled by randomness and biological needs at the same time and it is only partly foreseeable. Randomness is the basis of genetic mutations and variation, whereas the selection process is not random but governed by environmental conditions. Increasingly human technology alters and accelerates this biological evolution by breeding and genetic engineering, so that the natural development is strongly overlaid already today by the human influence.
The end of life in the scientific view of the world is rather clear. This future may appear a little sad, because it does not offer any paradise. It confronts us with the fact of own death, the death of mankind and the death of life on earth. This future is from today's viewpoint unalterable. Perhaps later generations may find means and ways, to overcome these limits.
The following hard rules about future are valid in the scientific conception of the world:
Each human being is mortal. Its active mental life is mortal too and his mind will die latest with the death of its body.
It is also sure, that life on earth will end at the latest when our sun will be blowing up to a red giant through exhaustion of its energy reserves.
Mankind will become extinct once. Except mankind will become independent of the sun.
This all has a positive aspect: Humans do not need to fear of making everything wrong.
At the same time it has also a negative aspect: No matter how we strive, the end of the earth will come once.
There is a law of thermodynamics, which says that all structures tend toward more disorder. Another law of astronomy says that the world started with the Big Bang is expanding.
If these two laws possess universal validity, then the universe is an increasingly empty space and it will end in a physical heat death.
However, some structures like our sun will stay quite stable over billions of years, an extremely long time from a human perspective.
The Heavenly Stems (HS) and Earthly Branches (EB) of the Year, Month and Day of 1940 in the Hsia Calendar, from January to December.
The last 2 columns give the Month (LM) and the Day (LD) of the corresponding Chinese Lunar Calendar. Where an intercalary month ('leap month' or 'run yue' in Pinyin) is introduced, the numeral representing the Lunar Month (LM) is followed by the letter 'a' or 'b'.
For the purpose of Date Selection, an '(X)' under the 'Month & Day' column indicates an inauspicious day.
DICE provides Software Architects with a set of core concepts, at the DPIM layer, to specify the fundamental architecture elements that constitute a Data-Intensive Application (DIA), i.e., during the DIA Design phase. Designers may use the identified core architecture elements to quickly put together the structural view of their Big-Data application, highlighting and tackling concerns such as data flow and essential high-level processing properties (e.g., rate, properties provided and required by every component, etc.) as well as key data processing needs (e.g., batch, streaming, etc.).
DPIM includes all concepts that are relevant to structure a DIA. At the DPIM level we define the high level topology of the application and its QoS requirements. Elements of the DPIM meta-model fall into two categories:
Active DIA elements, which process the data, such as computational nodes ;
Passive DIA elements, which stores and visualize the data, such as the storage nodes ;
Picture of the DICE DPIM Profile (Meta-model)
More in particular, the DICE DPIM Profile meta-model shows that DIA elements are essentially aggregates of two sets of components. Firstly, the "ComputationNode", which is basically responsible for carrying out computational task like map, or reduce in MapReduce. One of important attributes of ComputationNode is "computationType" that shows the processing type of big-data i.e, batch processing or stream processing. The ComputationNode itself, further specializes into "SourceNode" and "Visualization" nodes. The role of the SourceNode is to provide data for processing. In other words, the SourceNode represents the source of data which are coming into application in order to being processed. The attribute "sourceType" further specifies the characteristics of source. The ultimate goal of a big-data application is to process the data that have high volume and velocity. So the SourceNode, and ComputationNode are in DPIM since there are the essential part of each and every DIA. The sourceNode is the entry point of data into the application and the Computation is where data would be processed. Visualization here means to visualize the data to represent the knowledge more intuitively and effectively by using different graphs which are computed through Data-Intensive means. Even though, the visualization of big-data itself could be done by a separate application, but here we considered visualization as specification of ComputationNode since ultimately the visualization is a data-intensive computation task. Another element which is also specification of ComputationNode is the FilterNode. Its role is to do any type of pre-processing and post-processing of data if needed.
The second key element in the DICE profile is the "StorageNode". As its name may suggest, the StorageNode represents the element which is responsible to store the data, either for long or short term. Moreover, it is associated with "Channel" that represents the communication channel in the application. The specification of Channel also shows the restrictions and constraints of a channel. It also specifies the characteristics related to transformation of data like information rate and taps. The concept of StorageNode  in DPIM mainly corresponds with the "database" in the model. In some cases, it could also be a "filesystem". The channel in DPIM is a representation of "Governance and data Integration" in which mainly includes the technologies responsible for transferring the data, like message broker systems. The other elements in the model are "DataSpecification" and "QoSRequiredProperty", which are annotation stubs for specification the type and format of data and the QoS for system and its evaluation respectively. These annotations are inherited from MODACloudML[1]. Appendix A[2] specifies the DICE Profile with greater detail. Table 1 summarizes the current list of stereotypes of the DICE Profile for the DPIM level.
Description (This stereotype is for model elements representing. . . )
DIA components with computation throughput, type of data processing, and maybe expected target technology.
Filter nodes that extend general DpimComputationNode with input and output ratios.
DIA components with a given storage volume, type of generated data, and data generation rate.
DIA component with resource multiplicity, type of stored data, and speed in terms of maximum operations rate.
Connectors that have a maximum speed and that are subject to failures and propagation of errors.
An execution scenario of the DIA, which defines the quality properties of interest and the scenario quality requirements.
DPIM Example: The Maritime Operations Case Study
In this section, we describe a UML-based design (i.e., Activity Diagram) that is annotated using the DPIM profile. In particular, input parameters are assigned to the mean durations of the action steps (i.e., hostDemand tagged-values) and to the data stream arrival rate (i.e., arrivalRate tagged-value). We show the modelling of a portion of the Maritime Operations case study.
As previously explained in Introduction to Modelling, the DPIM profile rely on the standard MARTE and DAM profiles. This is because DAM is a profile specialized in dependability and reliability analysis, and MARTE offers the GQAM sub-profile, a complete framework for quantitative analysis. Therefore, they matches perfectly to our purposes: the quality assessment of data intensive applications. Moreover, MARTE offers the NFPs and VSL sub-profiles. The NFP sub-profile aims to describe the non-functional properties of a system, performance in our case. The latter, the VSL sub-profile, provides a concrete textual language for specifying the values of metrics, constraints, properties, and parameters related to performance. VSL expressions are used in DPIM-profiled models with two main goals: (i) to specify the input parameters of the model and (ii) to specify the performance metric(s) that will be computed for the model (i.e., the output results). An example of VSL expression for a host demand tagged value of type NFP_Duration is:
This expression specifies that the parsing step in (yellow box in the image) demands $parse (1) milliseconds (2) of processing time, whose mean value (3) will be obtained from an estimation in the real system (4). $parse is a variable that can be set with concrete values during the analysis of the model.
DICE UML-based application modelling heavily rotates around DPIM, a new refined UML profile to specify the fundamental architecture elements that constitute a Data-Intensive Application (DIA).
↑ MODAClouds (2016). ﻿MODACloudML Development - Initial Version﻿ (Report). http://www.modaclouds.eu/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/MODAClouds_D4.2.1_MODACloudMLDevelopmentInitialVersion.pdf.
↑ The DICE Consortium (2016). ﻿Design and Quality Abstractions - Initial Version﻿ (Report). http://wp.doc.ic.ac.uk/dice-h2020/wp-content/uploads/sites/75/2016/02/D2.1_Design-and-quality-abstractions-Initial-version.pdf.
The format of a library varies with the operating system and compiler one is using. For example, in the Unix and Linux operating systems, a library consists of one or more object files, which consist of object code that is usually the output of a compiler (if the source language is C or something similar) or an assembler (if the source language is assembly language). These object files are then turned into a library in the form of an archive by the ar archiver (a program that takes files and stores them in a bigger file without regard to compression). The filename for the library usually starts with "lib" and ends with ".a"; e.g. the libc.a file contains the Standard C library and the "libm.a" the mathematics routines, which the linker would then link in. Other operating systems such as Microsoft Windows use a ".lib" extension for libraries and an ".obj" extension for object files. Some programs in the Unix environment such as lex and yacc generate C code that can be linked with the libl and liby libraries to create an executable.
We're going to use as an example a library that contains one function: a function to parse arguments from the command line. Arguments on the command line could be by themselves:
The library also has four declarations that it exports in addition to the function: three integers and a pointer to the optional argument. If the argument does not have an optional argument, the pointer to the optional argument will be null.
In order to parse all these types of arguments, we have written the following "getopt.c" file:
The interface would be the following "getopt.h" file:
At a minimum, a programmer has the interface file to figure out how to use a library, although, in general, the library programmer also wrote documentation on how to use the library. In the above case, the documentation should say that the provided arguments **argv and *opts both shouldn't be null pointers (or why would you be using the getopt function anyway?). Specifically, it typically states what each parameter is for and what return values can be expected in which conditions. Programmers that use a library, are normally not interested in the implementation of the library -- unless the implementation has a bug, in which case he would want to complain somehow.
Both the implementation of the getopts library, and programs that use the library should state #include "getopt.h", in order to refer to the corresponding interface. Now the library is "linked" to the program -- the one that contains the main() function. The program may refer to dozens of interfaces.
In some cases, just placing #include "getopt.h" may appear correct but will still fail to link properly. This indicates that the library is not installed correctly, or there may be some additional configuration required. You will have to check either the compiler's documentation or library's documentation on how to resolve this issue.
As a general rule, headers should contain any declarations and macro definitions (preprocessor #defines) to be "seen" by the other modules in a program.
In the above getopt.h example file, one function (getopt) is declared and four global variables (optind, optopt, optarg, and opterr) are also declared. The variables are declared with the storage class specifier extern in the header file because that keyword specifies that the "real" variables are stored elsewhere (i.e. the getopt.c file) and not within the header file.
The #ifndef GETOPT_H/#define GETOPT_H trick is colloquially called include guards. This is used so that if the getopt.h file were included more than once in a translation unit, the unit would only see the contents once. Alternatively, #pragma once in a header file can also be used to achieve the same thing in some compilers (#pragma is an unportable catchall).
Linking libraries into executables varies by operating system and compiler/linker used. In Unix, directories of linked object files can be specified with the -L option to the cc command and individual libraries are specified with the -l (small ell) option. The -lm option specifies that the libm math library should be linked in, for example.
C FAQ: "I'm wondering what to put in .c files and what to put in .h files. (What does ".h" mean, anyway?)"
PIClist thread: "Global variables in projects with many C files."
"How do I use extern to share variables between source files in C?".
Can donate more than one hydrogen ion. (Bronsted-Lowry)
Titration is the combining of a known concentration solution with an unknown concentration solution. The titration is stopped at the equivalence point, where all of the acid or base has been reacted. Polyprotic acids have more than one equivalence point. This is described by the equilibrium law of volumetric analysis:
Conjugates differ by one hydrogen ion. Strong acids have weak base conjugates, and vice versa.
Constants and Equations · About the AP Exam
The calculator can work with variables of other types in programs. Here, we show some examples of manipulating and accessing all other types of variables from a program. It is assumed you understand basic operation of the variable types.
2.1.1 4x4 Multiplication Table
Complex numbers on the calculator use the same variables as Real numbers. So, the A variable can hold both 3.14 and 3i+2, but not at the same time. Essentially, you do not have to use different types of variables for real and complex numbers.
Matrices store data in two dimensions, much like a table. To instantiate a matrix:
*Where x and y are the dimensions of the matrix.
:[A](x,y) // Get a value
:3.14→[A](x,y) // Storing a value
:I*J→[A](I,J)
The Hadamard product for two matrices of equal dimension is (in this example 3x3 matrices):
This code performs the Hadamard product of Matrix A and B and stores it into Matrix C:
The Y-Vars are special strings that hold the expressions used in graphing. They operate just like normal strings, but are used when graphing and are parsed as expressions. Entering a string into a Y-Var will allow it to be graphed on the screen. Use the letter X to denote the variable, just like you would when entering an equation into the Y= screen.
Pics store a snapshot of the graph screen, including all the drawings made to the graph screen. Pics do not store the equations that make up the drawing, but rather just the pixels that are colored.
To store and recall Pics means to write and read pics, respectively:
Where n is a number from 0–9, or a Pic variable like Pic1.
Graph Databases (GBD) are used for storing the current graphing information. It includes:
All graphing equations in the current mode
Window variables excluding zoom and table settings
Where n is a number from 0–9, or a GBD variable like GBD1.
Previous: LoopsNext: GetKeyTable of Contents: TI-Basic Z80 Programming
In the Jewish calendar, it is usual to give the year as A.M. (Anno Mundi, Year of the World).  This is calculated from the data given in the Tanach (Old Testament); the calculation is given in a book called the Seder Olam (Order of the World).  The six days of creation described in Genesis chapter 1 have to be in some year, so they are assumed to be the last six days of Year 1.  The first Shabbat (Saturday), described in Genesis chapter 2, was also the first day (Rosh Hashanah) of year 2AM.
An earlier tradition was that the first five days of creation were the last five days of Year 1 and the Friday was the first day of year 2AM.  However, this is not in accordance with the present calendar rules, which forbid the year to start on Monday, Wednesday or Friday.
According to the Jewish calculation, creation was in the autumn of 3761 BCE, slightly later than the traditional Christian figure of 4004 BCE.  Thus the year 5701 began in 1940 in the Gregorian calendar and ended in 1941.  Using that as a starting point, it is easy to convert years between the two calendars, remembering always that the new years do not coincide so a year in one calendar will always overlap with two years in the other.
A year is a leap year if the remainder (in AM) on division by 19 is 3, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17 or 0.  Thus 5703, 5706, 5708, 5711, 5714, 5717 and 5719 were leap years with 13 months each, but not the years between, which only had 12 months.  This rule is based on the Metonic cycle, which assumes that 19 years exactly equal 235 lunar months.
The 19 year cycle is quite accurate.  Assuming 365.24219 days for the tropical year, to do better with a fixed cycle would require a cycle of 182 years containing 2,251 months.  However, it is not perfect; see The long-term accuracy of the calendar.
The total time between molads 19 years apart is 235 months, or 6939 days, 16 hours, and 595 chalakim.  After the  postponements are applied, however, a 19-year cycle may have 6939, 6940 or 6941 days.  It is theoretically possible for it to have 6942 days, but this is very rare, as will be discussed later.  However, 19 consecutive years, some in one cycle and some in the next, may have only 6938 days, for example 5719-5737 and 5790-5808, and 19 years of total length 6942 days are more common than exact cycles of this length.
Two days on the same date but exactly 19 years apart may thus be 6938, 6939, 6940, 6941 or 6942 days apart.  In the Julian or Gregorian calendars, two days on the same date but exactly 19 years apart may be 6939 or 6940 days apart; they may be only 6938 days apart in the Gregorian calendar if the period includes say 1900 or 2100, which are not leap years.  Thus, your 19th birthday by the two calendars is not necessarily on the same day, but may be one or two days different, and in rare cases the Jewish date may be three or possibly four days after the civil one.
Boolean logic symbolically represents relationships between entities. There are three Boolean operators:
Use the AND operator to retrieve a set in which each citation contains all the search terms. This operator places no condition on where the terms are found in relation to one another; the terms simply have to appear somewhere in the same citation.
Use the OR operator to retrieve documents that contain at least one of the specified search terms.
Use OR when you want to pull together articles on similar subjects.
Use the NOT operator to exclude the retrieval of terms from your search.
Originally copied from PubMed Tutorial.
A complex number is something that has both real and imaginary parts. So what is an imaginary number? an imaginary number is represented as j. j2 = -1 so -10.5 = j. Using j all quadratics can be solved. this makes j a very powerful and usable idea. j is not a prime.
Note: The letter j is generally used by engineers and i by mathematicians. j is used throughout this course.
?
However how do we then deal with the
? We do it by substituting it for a letter, j.
This fact can be used to simplify complex numbers.
These can all be easily calculated by yourself, I've just included them to show that j follows all of the rules of algebra.
. Essentially the same but there is no real simplification.
Complex numbers can be plotted on an Argand diagram, with the x axis being used to represent real numbers and the y axis being used to represent the imaginary part of an equation.
Knowledge of Radians is recommended for the next section.
We can therefore give complex numbers in a different form, using their modulus (distance from origin) and angle (in radians). This is called polar form.
.
These equations can be calculated using simple trigonometry and Pythagoras.
You may wonder what the value of polar form is, and that's fine as it is not readily apparent. When the solutions of an equation are plotted on an Argand diagram they form a circle (and finding the equation of the circle is a common question)
Creativity techniques are methods that promote original thoughts by facilitating divergent and/or convergent thinking.  Some techniques require groups of two or more people while other techniques can be accomplished alone.  These methods include word games, written exercises and different types of improvisation.  Creativity techniques can be used to develop new materials for artistic purposes or to solve problems.
Most creativity techniques use associations between the goal (or the problem), the current state (which may be an imperfect solution to the problem), and some stimulus (possibly selected randomly). There is an analogy between many creativity techniques and methods of evolutionary computation.
Randomness, or aleatory, is the introduction of chance elements. Aleatory is commonly found in music, art, and literature, particularly in poetry.  In film, Andy Voda made a movie in 1979 called "Chance Chants" which he produced by a flip of a coin, or roll of a dice. In music, John Cage, an avant-garde musician, composed music by superimposing star maps on blank sheet music, by rolling dice, and by preparing open ended scores that depended on the spontaneous decisions of the performers. (1) Other ways of practicing randomness include coin tossing, picking something out of a hat, or selecting random words from a dictionary.
In short, aleatory is a way to introduce new thoughts or ideas into a creative process.
Improvisation is a creative process which can be spoken, written, or composed without prior preparation.[1]
Improvisation, also called extemporization, can lead to the discovery of new ways to act, new patterns of thought and practices, or new structures. Improvisation is used in the creation of music, theatre, and other various forms.  Many artists also use improvisational techniques to help their creative flow.
Improvisational Theater is a form of theater in which actors use improvisational acting techniques to perform spontaneously. Many “improv” techniques are taught in standard drama classes. The basic skills of listening, clarity, confidence, and performing instinctively and spontaneously are considered important skills for actors to develop.[2]
Free Improvisation is real time composition. Musicians of all kinds “improv” music; this music is not limited to particular genre. Two contemporary musicians that use free improvisation are Anthony Braxton and Cecil Taylor.  Through free improvisation, musicians can develop increased spontaneity and fluency.[3]
Each type of improvisation improves the thinking and acting skill of the actor, this is made by using no practise, a similar set of techniques is called  Alienation since one of its many techniques uses actors that haven't rehearsed or even read the play, improvisation is an acting skill where actors make up a storyline, start and ending on the spot and actors have to try their best to keep in character.
In problem-solving contexts, the random word creativity technique is perhaps the simplest method. A person confronted with a problem is presented with a randomly generated word, in the hopes of a solution arising from any associations between the word and the problem. A random image, sound, or article can be used instead of a random word as a kind of creativity goad or provocation.[4][5]
Projective therapy is a form of psychotherapy which uses synthesis to produce original interpretation and problem solving strategies. Fiction is read in the form of a novel or observed in the form of a film. In this therapeutic technique, patients analyze the fictional work and immerse themselves in this fictional world. Rather than focusing on their problems, they analyze the author- or actors- motivation, plot-development and cinematography during the group process. By reading/viewing many consecutive works during this process, the patients are able to achieve a creative link between their own issues and those of the fictional characters. This synthesis is usually unique to each individual since it bypasses the conscious and directly accesses the  unconscious by linking with semiotic objects and archetypes which populated this otherwise inaccessible part of the mental process.[6] This technique was first used by Dr. A James Giannini  at Yale University using the World of Tiers science-fiction series written by Philip Jose Farmer. A later novel in this series, Red Orc's Rage, was produced by both Farmer and Giannini. This particular novel reviewed the technique of projective therapy; the use of the creativity unleashed in this process: and the evolution of the Tiers series itself.[7]
↑ http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/improvisation
↑ http://www.cognos.com/newsletter/decisions/st_070307_01.html
↑ http://www.musilosophy.com/jazz-improvisation.htm
↑ http://ideaflow.corante.com/archives/2003/05/09/more_on_idea_generation_tools_and_techniques.php
↑ http://mitsloan.mit.edu/vc/Ideationpaper022805.pdf
↑ AJ Giannini. Use of fiction in therapy. Psychiatric Times. 18(7):56-57,2001.
Get familiar with vocabulary used when introducing yourself to peers
Get familiar with vocabulary for talking about everyday actions/ people
Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix
The Protean Charm makes multiple objects act as if they are the same object – changes made to one object appear on all of them.
Beginner warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
In order to make it easier to contact all the members of Dumbledore's Army, Hermione creates a large number of false Galleons. These Galleons are charmed such that, once the date of the next meeting is determined, Harry can change one Galleon to show that date, and all the others will similarly change, and heat up to let their holders know that they have changed. Terry Boot recognizes the charm as a Protean Charm, and is impressed: this is NEWT-level magic.
A parallel is drawn to the Dark Mark tattoo that Death Eaters wear on their left forearm, and Hermione indicates that she had not thought that Harry would want to inflict pain on his prospective students.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Suppose we have a very long solenoid carrying some current I.  Around the solenoid we have a ring which can pivot around the axis of the solenoid, onto which we have glued some positive charges.  At first, the ring is motionless, but suddenly, we turn the current off. From one perspective, the changing magnetic field means there is an electric field going around the solenoid (from Faraday's law), which will push on the charges on the ring, causing it to spin. On the other hand, at first, there is no angular momentum in the system (ignoring the mass of electrons -- you may want to justify this to yourself).  Afterwards, we would expect angular momentum to be conserved and so the ring will remain motionless.
The question, of course, is whether or not the ring will spin.  Understanding the answer will lead you to a surprising and important feature of electromagnetic fields.  But to do this problem, you will need to think creatively.
The terms lead guitar and rhythm guitar are mildly confusing, especially to the beginner. Of course, a guitar should almost always follow some sort of rhythm, whether loose or tight. Plus, many times, guitars are very prominent in a song, where it drives the music, but it's not quite lead. Plus, the lead guitarist doesn't even play a lead part, and that happens almost all the time! How can we untangle this mess?
The distinction is somewhat arbitrary. Many bands in contemporary music have two guitarists, where usually one would specialize in "lead" and the other in "rhythm". The Beatles, Dethklok, and Metallica are examples of bands who use this combination. Lead guitar means melody guitar, meaning that the lead guitarist must specialize in playing the melody of the song, so any guitar playing a solo is not a lead. Sure, a lead guitarist may get to solo, but someone cannot be called a lead guitarist simply because he/she plays a solo in a song. A lead part contributes entirely to melody (as lead guitar means melody guitar), instead of to the foundation, which is carried by the rhythm guitar. This means the rhythm guitarist is the driving source. Lead guitar uses few or no chords, although sometimes it can be following a chord structure, while rhythm guitar uses the chords to drive the music.
It is important to realize that lead guitar and rhythm guitar fit into two different parts of a band, but it just happens that they are played on the same instrument. Lead guitar provides a solo voice, and is grouped with the lead vocals, lead piano, etc. Rhythm guitar is part of the underlying rhythm section, along with instruments like bass, drums, sometimes piano, background vocals, etc. Generally speaking, the rhythm provides the groove of the song, while lead provides the melody.
However, these distinctions get fuzzy, especially when the so-called lead guitarists play chords and double-stops in their riffs. In some cases, a single guitar part provides both the melody and accompaniment (especially power chord riffs, commonly found in rock and metal, and finger picking, found in folk guitar).
Some bands (often three piece bands) feature a single guitarist who can act as either, by either assuming one role at a time or, in a recording studio, recording a lead track over their own rhythm track. For example, the band Dire Straits has been in both situations: in the early days, David Knopfler played rhythm while Mark Knopfler played lead. When David left, Mark usually played both parts on studio albums, and hired another guitarist to play rhythm for live shows. Some guitarists reached such technical proficiency that they were able to play both parts "simultaneously". A famous example of this technique is Dimebag Darrell, particularly on songs such like Walk or Breathing New Life (using an harmonizing effect pedal).
The bass plays a big part like in songs such as Seven Nation Army by The White Stripes (even though there is no bass guitar in the song, it's an electric acoustic) to set the speed and tone for the song and that the lead guitarist (otherwise known as melody guitarist) in the chorus follows the bass and drums not, the bass follow the chorus player.
Very often, a lead guitar part is played on an electric guitar, using moderate to heavy distortion (also known as drive or gain). For this reason, many amplifier manufacturers refer to their distortion channel as a lead channel. Distortion provides a more powerful sustain than a clean channel, and this is often best represented in extreme techniques like shredding and tapping, which some guitarists feel can only properly be done with distortion. Of course, lead guitar can be played on an acoustic guitar, but some techniques may not be as pronounced as on an electric.
The most common techniques for creating lead parts are bending, vibrato and slides. These provide the basic means of emphasizing notes, and allow for greater expression in the melody. Often the lead guitarists may employ arpeggios or sweep picking to add depth, and the progression of the solo often mirrors the underlying rhythm guitar part.
Rhythm guitar is characterized mostly by playing chords in patterns. Some players criticize rhythm guitar as sounding "chordy", or not being as interesting as the lead part. Although rhythm guitar does not "express" as much as the lead guitar, there is so much to be learned about chords, chord progressions and rhythm patterns, and a player is limited only by their imagination.
Rhythm guitar is just as easily played on electric or acoustic, clean or distorted. The technique is less about expressing individual notes, and more about choosing chords or chord voicings that enrich the overall sound, which may add its own expressive tone to the music.
Getting Started: Different Types of Guitars | Anatomy of a Guitar | Buying a Guitar | Buying an Amplifier | Tuning the Guitar | Tablature | Lead Guitar and Rhythm Guitar
For Beginners: The Basics | Intervals and Power Chords | Open Chords | Muting and Raking | Learning Songs | Song Library
Lead Guitar: Picking and Plucking | Scales | Arpeggios and Sweep Picking | Slides | Hammer-ons, Pull-offs, and Trills | Bending and Vibrato | Harmonics | Vibrato Bar Techniques  |  Tapping
Rhythm Guitar: Chords | Barre Chords | Chord Progressions | Alternate Picking | Tremolo Picking | Rhythm
Playing Styles: Folk Guitar | Blues | Slide Guitar | Rock Guitar | Country and Western | Metal | Jazz | Classical Guitar | Flamenco
General Guitar Theory: Tone and Volume | Singing and Playing | Writing Songs | Playing With Others | Recording Music |Tuning Your Ear | How to Continue Learning
Equipment: Guitar Accessories | Effects Pedals | E-Bow | Cables | Bass Guitar | Harmonica and Guitar Combo
Maintenance: Guitar Maintenance and Storage | Adjusting the Guitar | Stringing the Guitar
Appendices: Dictionary | Alternate Tunings | Chord Reference | Blanks
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
The current, editable version of this book is available in Wikibooks, the open-content textbooks collection, at
Chapter 1: Points, Lines, Line Segments and Rays
Points and lines are two of the most fundamental concepts in Geometry, but they are also the most difficult to define. We can describe intuitively their characteristics, but there is no set definition for them: they, along with the plane, are the undefined terms of geometry. All other geometric definitions and concepts are built on the undefined ideas of the point, line and plane. Nevertheless, we shall try to define them.
A point is denoted by a dot.
A point has no size.
As for a line segment, we specify a line with two endpoints.  Starting with the corresponding line segment, we find other line segments that share at least two points with the original line segment.  In this way we extend the original line segment indefinitely.  The set of all possible line segments findable in this way constitutes a line.  A line extends indefinitely in a single dimension.  Its length, having no limit, is infinite.  Like the line segments that constitute it, it has no width or height.  You may specify a line by specifying any two points within the line.  For any two points, only one line passes through both points.  On the other hand, an unlimited number of lines pass through any single point.
We construct a ray similarly to the way we constructed a line, but we extend the line segment beyond only one of the original two points.  A ray extends indefinitely in one direction, but ends at a single point in the other direction.  That point is called the end-point of the ray.  Note that a line segment has two end-points, a ray one, and a line none.
An angle can be formed when two rays meet at a common point. The rays are the sides of the angle. The point of the end of two rays is called the vertex.
A point exists in zero dimensions.  A line exists in one dimension, and we specify a line with two points.  A plane exists in two dimensions.  We specify a plane with three points.  Any two of the points specify a line.  All possible lines that pass through the third point and any point in the line make up a plane.  In more obvious language, a plane is a flat surface that extends indefinitely in its two dimensions, length and width.  A plane has no height.
Space exists in three dimensions.  Space is made up of all possible planes, lines, and points.  It extends indefinitely in all directions.
Mathematics can extend space beyond the three dimensions of length, width, and height.  We then refer to "normal" space as 3-dimensional space.  A 4-dimensional space consists of an infinite number of 3-dimensional spaces. Etc.
An angle is the union of two rays with a common endpoint, called the vertex.  The angles formed by vertical and horizontal lines are called right angles; lines, segments, or rays that intersect in right angles are said to be perpendicular.
Angles, for our purposes, can be measured in either degrees (from 0 to 360) or radians (from 0 to
). Angles length can be determined by measuring along the arc they map out on a circle. In radians we consider the length of the arc of the circle mapped out by the angle. Since the circumference of a circle is
Angles are named in several ways.
By naming the vertex of the angle (only if there is only one angle formed at that vertex; the name must be non-ambiguous)
By naming a point on each side of the angle with the vertex in between.
By placing a small number on the interior of the angle near the vertex.
Triangle congruency.
If three sides of one triangle are congruent to three sides of a second triangle, then the two triangles are congruent.
If two sides and the included angle of a second triangle, then the two triangles are congruent.
If two angles and the included side of one triangle are congruent to two angles and the included side of a second triangle, then two triangles are congruent.
If two angles and a non-included side of one triangle are congruent to two angles and the corresponding non-included side of a second triangle, then the two triangles are congruent.
The "ASS" postulate does not work, unlike the other ones.  A way that students can remember this is that "ass" is not a nice word, so we don't use it in geometry (since it does not work).
Chapter 4. Inductive and Deductive Reasoning
There are two approaches to furthering knowledge: reasoning from known ideas and synthesizing observations. In inductive reasoning you observe the world, and attempt to explain based on your observations. You start with no prior assumptions. Deductive reasoning consists of logical assertions from known facts.
Before one can start to understand logic, and thereby begin to prove geometric theorems, one must first know a few vocabulary words and symbols.
Conditional: a conditional is something which states that one statement implies another. A conditional contains two parts: the condition and the conclusion, where the former implies the latter. A conditional is always in the form "If statement 1, then statement 2." In most mathematical notation, a conditional is often written in the form p ⇒ q, which is read as "If p, then q" where p and q are statements.
Converse: the converse of a logical statement is when the conclusion becomes the condition and vice versa; i.e., p ⇒ q becomes q ⇒ p. For example, the converse of the statement "If someone is a woman, then they are a human" would be "If someone is a human, then they are a woman." The converse of a conditional does not necessarily have the same truth value as the original, though it sometimes does, as will become apparent later.
AND: And is a logical operator which is true only when both statements are true. For example, the statement "Diamond is the hardest substance known to man AND a diamond is a metal" is false. While the former statement is true, the latter is not. However, the statement "Diamond is the hardest substance known to man AND diamonds are made of carbon" would be true, because both parts are true.
OR: If two statements are joined together by "or," then the truth of the "or" statement is dependent upon whether one or both of the statements from which it is composed is true. For example, the statement "Tuesday is the day after Monday OR Thursday is the day after Saturday" would have a truth value of "true," because even though the latter statement is false, the former is true.
NOT: If a statement is preceded by "NOT," then it is evaluating the opposite truth value of that statement. The symbol for "NOT" is For example, if the statement p is "Elvis is dead," then ¬p would be "Elvis is not dead." The concept of "NOT" can cause some confusion when it relates to statements which contain the word "all." For example, if r is "¬". "All men have hair," then ¬r would be "All men do not have hair" or "No men have hair." Do not confuse this with "Not all men have hair" or "Some men have hair." The "NOT" should apply to the verb in the statement: in this case, "have." ¬p can also be written as NOT p or ~p.
NOT p may also be referred to as the "negation of p."
Inverse: The inverse of a conditional says that the negation of the condition implies the negation of the conclusion. For example, the inverse of p ⇒ q is ¬p ⇒ ¬q. Like a converse, an inverse does not necessarily have the same truth value as the original conditional.
Biconditional: A biconditional is conditional where the condition and the conclusion imply one another. A biconditional starts with the words "if and only if." For example, "If and only if p, then q" means both that p implies q and that q implies p.
Premise: A premise is a statement whose truth value is known initially. For example, if one were to say "If today is Thursday, then the cafeteria will serve burritos," and one knew that what day it was, then the premise would be "Today is Thursday" or "Today is not Thursday."
⇒: The symbol which denotes a conditional. p ⇒ q is read as "if p, then q."
Iff: Iff is a shortened form of "if and only if." It is read as "if and only if."
⇔: The symbol which denotes a biconditonal. p ⇔ q is read as "If and only if p, then q."
∴: The symbol for "therefore." p ∴ q means that one knows that p is true (p is true is the premise), and has logically concluded that q must also be true.
∧: The symbol for "and."
∨: The symbol for "or."
There are a few forms of deductive logic. One of the most common deductive logical arguments is modus ponens, which states that:
If I stub my toe, then I will be in pain.
I stub my toe.
Another form of deductive logic is modus tollens, which states the following.
(not q, therefore not p)
Modus tollens is just as valid a form of logic as modus ponens. The following is an example which uses modus tollens.
If today is Thursday, then the cafeteria will be serving burritos.
Another form of deductive logic is known as the If-Then Transitive Property. Simply put, it means that there can be chains of logic where one thing implies another thing. The If-Then Transitive Property states:
For example, consider the following chain of if-then statements.
If today is Thursday, then the cafeteria will be serving burritos.
If the cafeteria will be serving burritos, then I will be happy.
Therefore, if today is Thursday, then I will be happy.
Inductive reasoning is a logical argument which does not definitely prove a statement, but rather assumes it. Inductive reasoning is used often in life. Polling is an example of the use of inductive reasoning. If one were to poll one thousand people, and 300 of those people selected choice A, then one would infer that 30% of any population might also select choice A. This would be using inductive logic, because it does not definitively prove that 30% of any population would select choice A.
Because of this factor of uncertainty, inductive reasoning should be avoided when possible when attempting to prove geometric properties.
Truth tables are a way that one can display all the possibilities that a logical system may have when given certain premises. The following is a truth table with two premises (p and q), which shows the truth value of some basic logical statements. (NOTE: T = true; F = false)
Unlike science which has theories, mathematics has a definite notion of proof. Mathematics applies deductive reasoning to create a series of logical statements which show that one thing implies another.
Consider a triangle, which we define as a shape with three vertices joined by three lines. We know that we can arbitrarily pick some point on a page, and make that into a vertex. We repeat that process and pick a second point. Using a ruler, we can connect these two points. We now make a third point, not on the line through the first two points, and using the ruler connect it to each of the other points. We have constructed a triangle.
In mathematics we formalize this process into axioms, and carefully lay out the sequence of statements to show what follows. All definitions are clearly defined. In modern mathematics, we are always working within some system where various axioms hold.
The most common form of explicit proof in highschool geometry is a two column proof consists of five parts: the given, the proposition, the statement column, the reason column, and the diagram (if one is given).
Now, suppose a problem tells you to solve
, showing all steps made to get to the answer.  A proof shows how this is done:
Written proofs (also known as informal proofs, paragraph proofs, or 'plans for proof') are written in paragraph form. Other than this formatting difference, they are similar to two-column proofs.
Sometimes it is helpful to start with a written proof, before formalizing the proof in two-column form.  If you're having trouble putting your proof into two column form, try "talking it out" in a written proof first.
We are given that x + 1 = 2, so if we subtract one from each side of the equation (x + 1 - 1 = 2 - 1), then we can see that x = 1 by the definition of subtraction.
A flowchart proof or more simply a flow proof is a graphical representation of a two-column proof.  Each set of statement and reasons are recorded in a box and then arrows are drawn from one step to another.  This method shows how different ideas come together to formulate the proof.
Chapter 6. Five Postulates of Euclidean Geometry
Postulates in geometry is very similar to axioms, self-evident truths, and beliefs in logic, political philosophy, and personal decision-making.  The five postulates of Euclidean Geometry define the basic rules governing the creation and extension of geometric figures with ruler and compass.  Together with the five axioms (or "common notions") and twenty-three definitions at the beginning of Euclid's Elements, they form the basis for the extensive proofs given in this masterful compilation of ancient Greek geometric knowledge.  They are as follows:
A straight line segment may be drawn from any given point to any other.
A straight line may be extended to any finite length.
A circle may be described with any given point as its center and any distance as its radius.
All right angles are congruent.
If a straight line intersects two other straight lines, and so makes the two interior angles on one side of it together less than two right angles, then the other straight lines will meet at a point if extended far enough on the side on which the angles are less than two right angles.
Postulate 5, the so-called Parallel Postulate was the source of much annoyance, probably even to Euclid, for being so relatively prolix.  Mathematicians have a peculiar sense of aesthetics that values simplicity arising from simplicity, with the long complicated proofs, equations, and calculations needed for rigorous certainty done behind the scenes, and to have such a long sentence amidst such other straightforward, intuitive statements seems awkward.  As a result, many mathematicians over the centuries have tried to prove the results of the Elements without using the Parallel Postulate, but to no avail.  However, in the past two centuries, assorted non-Euclidean geometries have been derived based on using the first four Euclidean postulates together with various negations of the fifth.
Chapter 7. Vertical Angles
Chapter 8. Parallel and Perpendicular Lines and Planes
Two coplanar lines are said to be parallel if they never intersect.  For any given point on the first line, its distance to the second line is equal to the distance between any other point on the first line and the second line.  The common notation for parallel lines is "||" (a double pipe); it is not unusual to see "//" as well.  If line m is parallel to line n, we write "m || n".  Lines in a plane either coincide, intersect in a point, or are parallel.  Controversies surrounding the Parallel Postulate lead to the development of non-Euclidean geometries.
Parallel Lines and Special Pairs of Angles
When two (or more) parallel lines are cut by a transversal, the following angle relationships hold:
If a line in a plane is perpendicular to one of two parallel lines, it is perpendicular to the other line as well.
If a line in a plane is parallel to one of two parallel lines, it is parallel to both parallel lines.
If three or more parallel lines are intersected by two or more transversals, then they divide the transversals proportionally.
Chapter 9. Congruency and Similarity
Congruent shapes are the same size with corresponding lengths and angles equal. In other words, they are exactly the same size and shape. They will fit on top of each other perfectly. Therefore if you know the size and shape of one you know the size and shape of the others. For example:
Each of the above shapes is congruent to each other. The only difference is in their orientation, or the way they are rotated. If you traced them onto paper and cut them out, you could see that they fit over each other exactly.
Having done this, right away we can see that, though the angles correspond in size and position, the sides do not. Therefore it is proved the triangles are not congruent.
Similar shapes are like congruent shapes in that they must be the same shape, but they don't have to be the same size. Their corresponding angles are congruent and their corresponding sides are in proportion.
Chapter 10. Congruent Triangles
Commonly used prerequisite knowledge in determining the congruence of two triangles includes:
Chapter 11. Similar Triangles
For two triangles to be similar, all 3 corresponding angles must be congruent, and all three sides must be proportionally equal.
Two triangles are similar if...
Two angles of each triangle are congruent.
The acute angle of a right triangle is congruent to the acute angle of another right triangle.
The two triangles are congruent.  Note here that congruency implies similarity.
A quadrilateral is a polygon that has four sides.
A parallelogram is a quadrilateral having two pairs of parallel sides.
The two opposite sides are equal.
Opposite angles are equal.
A rhombus is a quadrilateral of which all four sides are the same length.
A rectangle is a parallelogram of which all four angles are 90 degrees.
A square is a quadrilateral of which all four sides are of the same length, and all four angles are 90 degrees.
A trapezoid is a quadrilateral which has two parallel sides (U.S.)
U.S. usage: A trapezium is a quadrilateral which has no parallel sides.
U.K usage: A trapezium is a quadrilateral with two parallel sides (same as US trapezoid definition).
A kite is an quadrilateral with two pairs of congruent adjacent sides.
One of the most important properties used in proofs is that the sum of the angles of the quadrilateral is always 360 degrees. This can easily be proven too:
If you draw a random quadrilateral, and one of its diagonals, you'll split it up into two triangles. Given that the sum of the angles of a triangle is 180 degrees, you can sum them up, and it'll give 360 degrees.
A parallelogram is a geometric figure with two
The opposite sides are equal in length and the opposite angles are also equal.
The area is equal to the product of any side and the distance between that
The following properties are common to all parallelograms (parallelogram, rhombus, rectangle, square)
A rhombus is a parallelogram with four congruent sides.
The diagonals of a rhombus are perpendicular.
Each diagonal of a rhombus bisects two angles the rhombus.
A rhombus may or may not be a square.
A square is a parallelogram with four right angles and four congruent sides.
A square is both a rectangle and a rhombus and inherits all of their properties.
A Trapezoid (American English) or Trapezium (British English) is a quadrilateral that has two parallel sides and two non parallel sides.
The interior angles sum to 360° as in any quadrilateral.
The parallel sides are unequal.
Each of the parallel sides is called a base (b) of the trapezoid. The two angles that join one base are called 'base angles'.
If the two non-parallel sides are equal, the trapezoid is called an isosceles trapezoid.
In an isosceles trapezoid, each pair of base angles are equal.
If one pair of base angles of a trapezoid are equal, the trapezoid is isosceles.
A line segment connecting the midpoints of the non-parallel sides is called the median (m) of the trapeziod.
The median of a trapezoid is equal to one half the sum of the bases (called b1 and b2).
A line segment perpendicular to the bases is called an altitude (h) of the trapezoid.
The area (A) of a trapezoid is equal to the product of an altitude and the median.
Recall though that the median is half of the sum of the bases.
Chapter 15. Circles/Radii, Chords and Diameters
A circle is a set of all points in a plane that are equidistant from a single point; that single point is called the centre of the circle and the distance between any point on circle and the centre is called radius of the circle.
a chord is an internal segment of a circle that has both of its endpoints on the circumference of the circle.
a secant of a circle is any line that intersects a circle in two places.
a secant contains any chord of the circle
a tangent to a circle is a line that intersects a circle in exactly one point, called the point of tangency.
Chapter 16. Circles/Arcs
An arc is a segment of the perimeter of a given circle. The measure of an arc is measured as an angle, this could be in radians or degrees (more on radians later). The exact measure of the arc is determined by the measure of the angle formed when a line is drawn from the center of the circle to each end point. As an example the circle below has an arc cut out of it with a measure of 30 degrees.
As I mentioned before an arc can be measured in degrees or radians. A radian is merely a different method for measuring an angle. If we take a unit circle (which has a radius of 1 unit), then if we take an arc with the length equal to 1 unit, and draw line from each endpoint to the center of the circle the angle formed is equal to 1 radian. this concept is displayed below, in this circle an arc has been cut off by an angle of 1 radian, and therefore the length of the arc is equal to
From this definition we can say that on the unit circle a single radian is equal to
. Another useful property of this definition that will be extremely useful to anyone who studies arcs is that the length of an arc is equal to its measure in radians multiplied by the radius of the circle.
Converting to and from radians is a fairly simple process. 2 facts are required to do so, first a circle is equal to 360 degrees, and it is also equal to
. using these 2 facts we can form the following formula:
The same sort of argument can be used to show the formula for getting 1 radian.
Chapter 17. Circles/Tangents and Secants
A tangent is a line in the same plane as a given circle that meets that circle in exactly one point. That point is called the point of tangency. A tangent cannot pass through a circle; if it does, it is classified as a chord. A secant is a line containing a chord.
The point of tangency is labeled A, the tangent line is labeled B, and the secant line is labeled C.
A common tangent is a line tangent to two circles in the same plane. If the tangent does not intersect the line containing and connecting the centers of the circles, it is an external tangent. If it does, it is an internal tangent.
Two circles are tangent to one another if in a plane they intersect the same tangent in the same point.
The external tangent is labeled A, and the internal tangent is labeled B.
Chapter 18. Circles/Sectors
A sector of a circle can be thought of as a pie piece. In the picture below, a sector of the circle is shaded yellow.
To find the area of a sector, find the area of the whole circle and then multiply by the angle of the sector over 360 degrees.
A more intuitive approach can be used when the sector is half the circle. In this case the area of the sector would just be the area of the circle divided by 2.
Appendix A. Postulates & Definitions
For real numbers a, b, and c
Addition Property of Equality: if a=b , then a+c=b+c
Subtraction Property of Equality: if a=b , then a-c+=b-c
Multiplication Property of Equality: is a=b, then ac=bc
Division Property of Equality: if a=b and c≠0 , then (a/c)=(b/c)
Symmetric Property of Equality: if a=b, then b=a
Transitive Property of Equality: if a=b and b=c , then a=c
Reflexive Property of Equality: if a=a , then a=a
Substitution Property of Equality: if a=b, then a can be substituted for b
Distributive Property of Equality: a(b+c)=ab+ac
A figure is an angle if and only if it is composed of two rays which share a common endpoint. Each of these rays (or segments, as the case may be) is known as a side of the angle (For example,
Acute Angle: an angle is an acute angle if and only if it has a measure of less than 90°
Right Angle: an angle is an right angle if and only if it has a measure of exactly 90°
Obtuse Angle: an angle is an obtuse angle if and only if it has a measure of greater than 90°
Straight Angle: an angle is a straight angle if and only if it has a measure of exactly 180°
Using the Right Angle Congruence Theorem and the Straight Angle Congruence Theorem, all right angles and all straight angles are congruent
The arithmetic mean of 2 numbers a and b can be calculated as:
A figure bisects another figure if and only if it splits the figure it intersects into two equal parts
Point P is the center of circle C if and only if all points in circle C are equidistant from point P and point P is contained in the same plane as circle C.
The set of all points in a plane that are equidistant from a given point (called the center of the circle).
The distance around a circle.
Two angles are complimentary if and only if the sum of their measures equals up to 90 degrees.
A polygon is said to be concave if and only if it contains at least one interior angle with a measure greater than 180° exclusively and less than 360° exclusively.
Two figures are congruent if and only if they have the same measure. It is designated by "≅".
There are four pairs of corresponding angles: ∠1 and ∠3, ∠2 and ∠4, ∠5 and ∠7, and ∠6 and ∠8.
Two angles formed by a transversal intersecting with two lines are corresponding angles if and only if one is on the inside of the two lines, the other is on the outside of the two lines, and both are on the same side of the transversal.
If two lines cut by a transversal are parallel, then their corresponding angles are congruent.
Corresponding Parts of Congruent Triangles are Congruent Postulate
The Corresponding Parts of Congruent Triangles are Congruent Postulate (CPCTC) states:
CPCTC also applies to all other parts of the triangles, such as a triangle's altitude, median, circumcenter, et al.
A trigonometric ratio, abbreviated as cos.
A line segment is the diameter of a circle if and only if it is a chord of the circle which contains the circle's center.
Distance between 2 points can be calculated as the absolute value of the difference of the coordinates of the points.
In a coordinate plane, distance for points A(x1,y1) and B(x2,y2) can be calculated as:
The distance between a point and a line is measured by the perpendicular segments connecting the 2 (using the Perpendicular postulate).
For 2 positive numbers a and b, the geometric mean of a and b is the positive number x that satisfies (a/x)=(x/b). So, x2=√(ab)
The perpendicular distance bewtween 2 bases of a paralellogram
In a right triangle, the side opposite of the right angle.
Using the Pythagorean Theorem, the measure of the hypotenuse can be calculated as:
c2=a2=b2 (where c is the hypotenuse and a and b are legs of the right triangle)
A collection of points is a line if and only if the collection of points is perfectly straight (aligned), is infinitely long, and is infinitely thin. Between any two points on a line, there exists an infinite number of points which are also contained by the line. Lines are usually written by two points in the line, such as line AB, or
A collection of points is a line segment if and only if it is perfectly straight, is infinitely thin, and has a finite length. A line segment is measured by the shortest distance between the two extreme points on the line segment, known as endpoints. Between any two points on a line segment, there exists an infinite number of points which are also contained by the line segment.
The interior angles of a regular polygon are all congruent. As such, the measure of one interior angle of a regular polygon with n number of sides can be calculated as:
A trapezoid in which the legs are congruent.
A triangle with at least 2 congruent sides.
Using the Base Angles theorem, the angles opposite of the congruent sides are also congruent.
The adjacent angles whose noncommon sides are opposite rays.
Using the Linear Pair Postulate, the angles in a linear pair are also supplementary.
If 2 angles forming a linear pair are congruent, then both the angles are right angles and the lines containing the angles are perpendicular.
An arc whose measure is greater than 180 degrees. It must be named by 3 points.
A segment that connects the midpoints of the legs of a trapezoid.
It is parallel to the bases and the length of it is the arithmetic mean of the measures of the bases.
An arc whose measure is less than 180 degrees.
Two lines or line segments are said to be parallel if and only if the lines are contained by the same plane and have no points in common if continued infinitely.
In a coordinate plane, two lines are parallel if and only if they share the same slope.
Two planes are said to be parallel if and only if the planes have no points in common when continued infinitely.
Two lines that intersect at a 90° angle.
In a coordinate plane, two lines are perpendicular if and only if their slopes' products are equal to -1 (or if the slopes are negative reciprocals).
Given a line,
, then there is one and only one line that goes through point P perpendicular to
An object is a plane if and only if it is a two-dimensional object which has no thickness or curvature and continues infinitely. A plane can be defined by three points. A plane may be considered to be analogous to a piece of paper[1].
A point is a zero-dimensional mathematical object representing a location in one or more dimensions[2]. A point has no size; it has only location.
A polygon is a closed plane figure composed of at least 3 straight lines. Each side has to intersect another side at their respective endpoints, and that the lines intersecting are not collinear.
The radius of a circle is the distance between any given point on the circle and the circle's center.
All radii in the same circle (or congruent circles) have the same measure.
A ray is a straight collection of points which continues infinitely in one direction. The point at which the ray stops is known as the ray's endpoint. Between any two points on a ray, there exists an infinite number of points which are also contained by the ray.
The points on a line can be matched one to one with the real numbers. The real number that corresponds to a point is the point's coordinate. The distance between two points is the absolute value of the difference between the two coordinates of the two points.
An arc whose measure is 180 degrees.
Sum of the interior angles of a polygon
The sum of the interior angles of a polygon with n number of sides is calculated as:
Two angles are supplementary if and only if the sum of their measures equal up to 180 degrees.
Two and Three-Dimensional Geometry and Other Geometric Figures
.
, then the arclength can be calculated using the following fomula
Derivation of formula can be found using differential geometry on infinitely small triangles.
The method for finding the area of a circle is
Three ways of calculating the area inside of a triangle are mentioned here.
If one of the sides of the triangle is chosen as a base, then a height for the triangle and that particular base can be defined. The height is a line segment perpendicular to the base or the line formed by extending the base and the endpoints of the height are the corner point not on the base and a point on the base or line extending the base. Let B = the length of the side chosen as the base.  Let h = the distance between the endpoints of the height segment which is perpendicular to the base. Then the area of the triangle is given by:
This method of calculating the area is good if the value of a base and its corresponding height in the triangle is easily determined.  This is particularly true if the triangle is a right triangle, and the lengths of the two sides sharing the
If the lengths of all three sides of a triangle are known, Hero's formula may be used to calculate the area of the triangle. First, the semiperimeter, s, must be calculated by dividing the sum of the lengths of all three sides by 2. For a triangle having side lengths
Then the triangle's area is given by:
If the triangle is needle shaped, that is, one of the sides is very much shorter than the other two then it can be difficult to compute the area because the precision needed is greater than that available in the calculator or computer that is used. In otherwords Heron's formula is numerically unstable.  Another formula that is much more stable is:
.
See also Heron's Formula at MathWorld and How JAVA's Floating-Point Hurts Everyone Everywhere
. It is useful because you don't need to find the height from an angle in a separate step, and is also used to prove the law of sines (divide all terms in the above equation by
The area calculation of a rectangle is simple and easy to understand. One of the sides is chosen as the base, with a length
. An adjacent side is then the height, with a length
, because in a rectangle the adjacent sides are perpendicular to the side chosen as the base. The rectangle's area is given by:
Sometimes, the baselength may be referred to as the length of the rectangle, l, and the height as the width of the rectangle, w. Then the area formula becomes:
Regardless of the labels used for the sides, it is apparent that the two formulas are equivalent.
Of course, the area of a square with sides having length
The area  of a parallelogram can be determined using the equation for the area of a rectangle. The formula is:
The height is a perpendicular line segment that connects one of the vertices to its opposite side (the base).
The area of a trapezoid is derived from taking the arithmetic mean of its two parallel sides to form a rectangle of equal area.
The area of a kite is based on splitting the kite into four pieces by halving it along each diagonal and using these  pieces to form a rectangle of equal area.
Alternatively, the kite may be divided into two halves, each of which is a triangle, by the longer of its diagonals,
. The area of each triangle is thus
And the total area of the kite (which is composed of two identical such triangles) is
The areas of other quadrilaterals are slightly more complex to calculate, but can still be found if the quadrilateral is well-defined. For example, a quadrilateral can be divided into two triangles, or some combination of triangles and rectangles. The areas of the constituent polygons can be found and added up with arithmetic.
Volume is like area expanded out into 3 dimensions. Area deals with only 2 dimensions. For volume we have to consider another dimension. Area can be thought of as how much space some drawing takes up on a flat piece of paper. Volume can be thought of as how much space an object takes up.
s = length of a side
r = radius of circular face, h = height
Any prism that has a constant cross sectional area along the height:
A = area of the base, h = height
r = radius of spherewhich is the integral of the Surface Area of a sphere
a, b, c = semi-axes of ellipsoid
A = area of the base, h = height of pyramid
r = radius of circle at base, h = distance from base to tip
.
(The units of volume depend on the units of length - if the lengths are in meters, the volume will be in cubic meters, etc.)
The volume of any solid whose cross sectional areas are all the same is equal to that cross sectional area times the distance the centroid(the center of gravity in a physical object) would travel through the solid.
Image:PappusCentroidTheoremExample.jpg
If two solids are contained between two parallel planes and every plane parallel to these two plane has equal cross sections through these two solids, then their volumes are equal.
Image:CavalierisPrinciple.jpg
A Polygon is a two-dimensional figure, meaning all of the lines in the figure are contained within one plane. They are classified by the number of angles, which is also the number of sides.
One key point to note is that a polygon must have at least three sides. Normally, three to ten sided figures are referred to by their names (below), while figures with eleven or more sides is an n-gon, where n is the number of sides. Hence a forty-sided polygon is called a 40-gon.
A polygon with three angles and sides.
A polygon with four angles and sides.
A polygon with five angles and sides.
A polygon with six angles and sides.
A polygon with seven angles and sides.
A polygon with eight angles and sides.
A polygon with nine angles and sides.
A polygon with ten angles and sides.
For a list of n-gon names, go to [3] and scroll to the bottom of the page.
Polygons are also classified as convex or concave. A convex polygon has interior angles less than 180 degrees, thus all triangles are convex. If a polygon has at least one internal angle greater than 180 degrees, then it is concave. An easy way to tell if a polygon is concave is if one side can be extended and crosses the interior of the polygon. Concave polygons can be divided into several convex polygons by drawing diagonals. Regular polygons are polygons in which all sides and angles are congruent.
A triangle is a type of polygon having three sides and three angles.  The triangle is a closed figure formed from three straightline segments joined at their ends.  The Line Segments at the ends can be called the corners, angles, or vertices of the triangle.  Since any given triangle lies completely within a plane, triangles are often treated as two-dimensional geometric figures.  As such, a triangle has no volume and, because it is a two-dimensionally closed figure, the flat part of the plane inside the triangle has an area, typically referred to as the area of the triangle.
A triangle must have at least some area, so all three corner points of a triangle cannot lie in the same line.  The sum of the lengths of any two sides of a triangle is always greater than the length of the third side.  The preceding statement is sometimes called the Triangle Inequality.
The sum of the interior angles in a triangle always equals 180o.  This means that no more than one of the angles can be 90o or more.  All three angles can all be less than 90oin the triangle; then it is called an acute triangle.  One of the angles can be 90o and the other two less than 90o; then the triangle is called a right triangle.  Finally, one of the angles can be more than 90o and the other two less; then the triangle is called an obtuse triangle.
If all three of the sides of a triangle are of different length, then the triangle is called a scalene triangle.
If two of the sides of a triangle are of equal length, then it is called an isoceles triangle.  In an isoceles triangle, the angle between the two equal sides can be more than, equal to, or less than 90o.  The other two angles are both less than 90o.
If all three sides of a triangle are of equal length, then it is called an equilateral triangle and all three of the interior angles must be 60o, making it equilangular.  Because the interior angles are all equal, all equilateral triangles are also the three-sided variety of a regular polygon and they are all similar, but might not be congruent.  However,  polygons having four or more equal sides might not have equal interior angles, might not be regular polygons, and might not be similar or congruent.  Of course, pairs of triangles which are not equilateral might be similar or congruent.
Further discussion of Congruent Triangles and Similar Triangles may be found in those corresponding sections.
If one of the sides of a triangle is chosen, the interior angles of the corners at the side's endpoints can be called adjacent angles.  The corner which is not one of these endpoints can be called the corner opposite to the side.  The interior angle whose vertex is the opposite corner can be called the angle opposite to the side.
Likewise, if a corner or its angle is chosen, then the two sides sharing an endpoint at that corner can be called adjacent sides.  The side not having this corner as one of its two endpoints can be called the side opposite to the corner.
The sides or their lengths of a triangle are typicaly labeled with lower case letters.  The corners or their corresponding angles can be labeled with capital letters.  The triangle as a whole can be labeled by a small triangle symbol and its corner points.  In a triangle, the largest interior angle is opposite to longest side, and vice versa.
Any triangle can be divided into two right triangles by taking the longest side as a base, and extending a line segment from the opposite corner to a point on the base such that it is perpendicular to the base.  Such a line segment would be considered the height or altitude ( h ) for that particular base ( b ).  The two right triangles resulting from this division would both share the height as one of its sides.  The interior angles at the meeting of the height and base would be 90o for each new right triangle.  For acute triangles, any of the three sides can act as the base and have a corresponding height.  For more information on right triangles, see Right Triangles and Pythagorean Theorem.
If base and height of a triangle are known, then the area of the triangle can be calculated by the formula:
Ways of calculating the area inside of a triangle are further discussed under Area.
The centroid is constructed by drawing all the medians of the triangle. All three medians intersect at the same point: this crossing point is the centroid. Centroids are always inside a triangle. They are also the centre of gravity of the triangle.
The three angle bisectors of the triangle intersect at a single point, called the incentre. Incentres are always inside the triangle. The three sides are equidistant from the incentre. The incentre is also the centre of the inscribed circle (incircle) of a triangle, or the interior circle which touches all three sides of the triangle.
The circumcentre is the intersection of all three perpendicular bisectors. Unlike the incentre, it is outside the triangle if the triangle is obtuse. Acute triangles always have circumcentres inside, while the circumcentre of a right triangle is the midpoint of the hypotenuse. The vertices of the triangle are equidistant from the circumcentre. The circumcentre is so called because it is the centre of the circumcircle, or the exterior circle which touches all three vertices of the triangle.
The orthocentre is the crossing point of the three altitudes. It is always inside acute triangles, outside obtuse triangles, and on the right vertex of the right-angled triangle.
Please note that the centres of an equilateral triangle are always the same point.
Right triangles are triangles in which one of the interior angles is 90o.  A 90o angle is called a right angle.
Right triangles have special properties which make it easier to conceptualize and calculate their parameters in many cases.
The side opposite of the right angle is called the hypotenuse.  The sides adjacent to the right angle are the legs.  When using the Pythagorean Theorem, the hypotenuse or its length is often labeled with a lower case c.  The legs (or their lengths) are often labeled a and b.
Either of the legs can be considered a base and the other leg would be considered the height (or altitude), because the right angle automatically makes them perpendicular.  If the lengths of both the legs are known, then by setting one of these sides as the base ( b ) and the other as the height ( h ), the area of the right triangle is very easy to calculate using this formula:
This is intuitively logical because another congruent right triangle can be placed against it so that the hypotenuses are the same line segment, forming a rectangle with sides having length b and width h. The area of the rectangle is b × h, so either one of the congruent right triangles forming it has an area equal to half of that rectangle.
Right triangles can be neither equilateral, acute, nor obtuse triangles.  Isosceles right triangles have two 45° angles as well as the 90° angle.  All isosceles right triangles are similar since corresponding angles in isosceles right triangles are equal.  If another triangle can be divided into two right triangles (see Triangle), then the area of the triangle may be able to be determined from the sum of the two constituent right triangles.
Also the Pythagorean theorem can be used for non right triangles. a2+b2=c2-2c
For history regarding the Pythagorean Theorem, see Pythagorean theorem.  The Pythagorean Theorem states that:
In a right triangle, the square of the length of the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares of the lengths of the other two sides.
Let's take a right triangle as shown here and set c equal to the length of the hypotenuse and set a and b each equal to the lengths of the other two sides.  Then the Pythagorean Theorem can be stated as this equation:
Using the Pythagorean Theorem, if the lengths of any two of the sides of a right triangle are known and it is known which side is the hypotenuse, then the length of the third side can be determined from the formula.
Sine, Cosine, and Tangent for Right Triangles
These three functions are related to right triangles in the following ways:
.
Polyominoes are shapes made from connecting unit squares together, though certain connections are not allowed.
A domino is the shape made from attaching unit squares so that they share one full edge.  The term polyomino is based on the word domino.
There is only one possible domino.
A polymino made from three squares is called a tromino.  There are only two possible trominoes.
A polymino made from four squares is called a tetromino.  There are five possible combinations and two reflections:
A polymino made from five squares is called a pentomino. There are twelve possible pentominoes, excluding mirror images and rotations.
Ellipses are sometimes called ovals.  Ellipses contain two foci.  The sum of the distance from a point on the ellipse to one focus and that same point to the other focus is constant
Area Shapes Extended into 3rd Dimension Linearly to a Line or Point
Geometry/Area Shapes Extended into 3rd Dimension Linearly to a Line or Point
Suppose you are an astronomer in America. You observe an exciting event (say, a supernova) in the sky and would like to tell your colleagues in Europe about it. Suppose the supernova appeared at your zenith. You can't tell astronomers in Europe to look at their zenith because their zenith points in a different direction. You might tell them which constellation to look in. This might not work, though, because it might be too hard to find the supernova by searching an entire constellation. The best solution would be to give them an exact position by using a coordinate system.
On Earth, you can specify a location using latitude and longitude. This system works by measuring the angles separating the location from two great circles on Earth (namely, the equator and the prime meridian). Coordinate systems in the sky work in the same way.
The equatorial coordinate system is the most commonly used. The equatorial system defines two coordinates: right ascension and declination, based on the axis of the Earth's rotation. The declination is the angle of an object north or south of the celestial equator. Declination on the celestial sphere corresponds to latitude on the Earth. The right ascension of an object is defined by the position of a point on the celestial sphere called the vernal equinox. The further an object is east of the vernal equinox, the greater its right ascension.
A coordinate system is a system designed to establish positions with respect to given reference points. The coordinate system consists of one or more reference points, the styles of measurement (linear measurement or angular measurement) from those reference points, and the directions (or axes) in which those measurements will be taken. In astronomy, various coordinate systems are used to precisely define the locations of astronomical objects.
Latitude and longitude are used to locate a certain position on the Earth's surface. The lines of latitude (horizontal) and the lines of longitude (vertical) make up an invisible grid over the earth. Lines of latitude are called parallels. Lines of longitude aren't completely straight (they run from the exact point of the north pole to the exact point of the south pole) so they are called meridians. 0 degrees latitude is the Earth's middle, called the equator. 0 degrees longitude was tricky because there really is no middle of the earth vertically. It was finally agreed that the observatory in Greenwich, U.K. would be 0 degrees longitude due to its significant role in scientific discoveries and creating latitude and longitude. 0 degrees longitude is called the prime meridian.
Latitude and longitude are measured in degrees. One degree is about 69 miles. There are 60 minutes (') in a degree and 60 seconds (") in a minute. These tiny units make GPS's (Global Positioning Systems) much more exact.
There are a few main lines of latitude:the Arctic Circle, the Antarctic Circle, the Tropic of Cancer, and the Tropic of Capricorn. The Antarctic Circle is 66.5 degrees south of the equator and it marks the temperate zone from the Antarctic zone. The Arctic Circle is an exact mirror in the north. The Tropic of Cancer separates the tropics from the temperate zone. It is 23.5 degrees north of the equator. It is mirrored in the south by the Tropic of Capricorn.
One of the simplest ways of placing a star on the night sky is the coordinate system based on altitude and azimuth, thus called the Alt-Az or horizontal coordinate system. The reference circles for this system are the horizon and the celestial meridian, both of which may be most easily graphed for a given location using the celestial sphere.
In simplest terms, the altitude is the angle made from the position of the celestial object (e.g. star) to the point nearest it on the horizon. The azimuth is the angle from the northernmost point of the horizon (which is also its intersection with the celestial meridian) to the point on the horizon nearest the celestial object. Usually azimuth is measured eastwards from due north. So east has az=90°, south has az=180°, west has az=270° and north has az=360° (or 0°).
An object's altitude and azimuth change as the earth rotates.
The equatorial coordinate system is another system that uses two angles to place an object on the sky: right ascension and declination.
The ecliptic coordinate system is based on the ecliptic plane, i.e., the plane which contains our Sun and Earth's average orbit around it, which is tilted at 23°26' from the plane of Earth's equator. The great circle at which this plane intersects the celestial sphere is the ecliptic, and one of the coordinates used in the ecliptic coordinate system, the ecliptic latitude, describes how far an object is to ecliptic north or to ecliptic south of this circle. On this circle lies the point of the vernal equinox (also called the first point of Aries); ecliptic longitude is measured as the angle of an object relative to this point to ecliptic east. Ecliptic latitude is generally indicated by
, whereas ecliptic longitude is usually indicated by
.
As a member of the Milky Way Galaxy, we have a clear view  of the Milky Way from Earth. Since we are inside the Milky Way, we don't see the galaxy's spiral arms, central bulge and so forth directly as we do for other galaxies. Instead, the Milky Way completely encircles us. We see the Milky Way as a band of faint starlight forming a ring around us on the celestial sphere. The disk of the galaxy forms this ring, and the bulge forms a bright patch in the ring. You can easily see the Milky Way's faint band from a dark, rural location.
Our galaxy defines another useful coordinate system — the galactic coordinate system. This system works just like the others we've discussed. It also uses two coordinates to specify the position of an object on the celestial sphere. The galactic coordinate system first defines a galactic latitude, the angle an object makes with the galactic equator. The galactic equator has been selected to run through the center of the Milky Way's band. The second coordinate is galactic longitude, which is the angular separation of the object from the galaxy's "prime meridian," the great circle that passes through the Galactic center and the galactic poles. The galactic coordinate system is useful for describing an object's position with respect to the galaxy's center. For example, if an object has high galactic latitude, you might expect it to be less obstructed by interstellar dust.
A spherical triangle solved by the law of cosines.
One can use the principles of spherical trigonometry as applied to triangles on the celestial sphere to derive formulas for transforming coordinates in one system to those in another. These formulas generally rely on the spherical law of cosines, known also as the cosine rule for sides. By substituting various angles on the celestial sphere for the angles in the law of cosines and by thereafter applying basic trigonometric identities, most of the formulas necessary for coordinate transformations can be found. The law of cosines is stated thus:
To transform from horizontal to equatorial coordinates, the relevant formulas are as follows:
Transformation from equatorial to ecliptic coordinate systems can similarly be accomplished using the following formulae:
A topological space is a set X, and a collection of subsets of X, C such that both the empty set and X are contained in C and the union of any subcollection of sets in C and the intersection of any finite subcollection of sets in C are also contained within C. The sets in C are called open sets. Their complements relative to X are called closed sets.
Given two topological spaces, X and Y, a map f from X to Y is continuous if for every open set U of Y, f−1(U) is an open set of X.
There are precisely three different classes of three-dimensional constant-curvature geometry: Euclidean, hyperbolic and elliptic geometry. The three geometries are all built on the same first four axioms, but each has a unique version of the fifth axiom, also known as the parallel postulate. The 1868 Essay on an Interpretation of Non-Euclidean Geometry by Eugenio Beltrami (1835 - 1900) proved the logical consistency of the two Non-Euclidean geometries, hyperbolic and elliptic.
The parallel postulate is as follows for the corresponding geometries.
Playfair's version: "Given a line l and a point P not on l, there exists a unique line m through P that is parallel to l." Euclid's version: "Suppose that a line l meets two other lines m and n so that the sum of the interior angles on one side of l is less than 180°. Then m and n intersect in a point on that side of l." These two versions are equivalent; though Playfair's may be easier to conceive, Euclid's is often useful for proofs.
Given an arbitrary infinite line l and any point P not on l, there exist two or more distinct lines which pass through P and are parallel to l.
Given an arbitrary infinite line l and any point P not on l, there does not exist a line which passes through P and is parallel to l.
Hyperbolic geometry is also known as saddle geometry or Lobachevskian geometry. It differs in many ways to Euclidean geometry, often leading to quite counter-intuitive results. Some of these remarkable consequences of this geometry's unique fifth postulate include:
The sum of the three interior angles in a triangle is strictly less than 180°. Moreover, the angle sums of two distinct triangles are not necessarily the same.
Two triangles with the same interior angles have the same area.
The following are four of the most common models used to describe hyperbolic space.
The Poincaré Disc Model. Also known as the conformal disc model. In it, the hyperbolic plane is represented by the interior of a circle, and lines are represented by arcs of circles that are orthogonal to the boundary circle and by diameters of the boundary circle.
The Klein Model. Also known as the Beltrami-Klein model or projective disc model. In it, the hyperbolic plane is represented by the interior of a circle, and lines are represented by chords of the circle. This model gives a misleading visual representation of the magnitude of angles.
The Poincaré Half-Plane Model. The hyperbolic plane is represented by one-half of the Euclidean plane, as defined by a given Euclidean line l, where l is not considered part of the hyperbolic space. Lines are represented by half-circles orthogonal to l or rays perpendicular to l.
The Hyperboloid Model. The hyperbolic plane is represented on one of the sheets of a 2-sheeted hyperboloid. This model is used in modern physics to represent velocity space.
Based on this geometry's definition of the fifth axiom, what does parallel mean? The following definitions are made for this geometry. If a line l and a line m do not intersect in the hyperbolic plane, but intersect at the plane's boundary of infinity, then l and m are said to be parallel. If a line p and a line q neither intersect in the hyperbolic plane nor at the boundary at infinity, then p and q are said to be ultraparallel.
For any two lines m and n in the hyperbolic plane such that m and n are ultraparallel, there exists a unique line l that is perpendicular to both m and n.
Spherical geometry gives us perhaps the simplest model of elliptic geometry. Points are represented by points on the sphere. Lines are represented by circles through the points.
Projective and Affine Planes (necessary?)
If you would like to request anything in this topic please post it below.
An Alternative Way and Alternative Geometric Means of Calculating the Area of a Circle =
Geometry/An Alternative Way and Alternative Geometric Means of Calculating the Area of a Circle
In selection control structures, conditional statements perform different computations or actions depending on whether a programmer-specified Boolean condition evaluates to true or false.[1]
The basic attribute of a selection control structure is to be able to select between two or more alternate paths. This is described as either two-way selection or multi-way selection. A question using Boolean concepts usually controls which path is selected. All of the paths from a selection control structure join back up at the end of the control structure, before moving on to the next lines of code in a program.
The if then else control structure is a two-way selection.
Output "You can vote."
Output "You can't vote."
The case control structure is a multi-way selection. Case control structures compare a given value with specified constants and take action according to the first expression to match.[2]
65 +      Display "You should be retired."
Python does not support a case control structure. There are workarounds, but they are beyond the scope of this book.
A two-way selection control structure.
A multi-way selection control structure.
The stdatomic.h header defines several macros and declares several types and functions for performing atomic operations on data shared between threads.
Pri li numral sisteme del finni lingue.
On dikte ofte ke li finni lingue es tre desfasili. In serteni maneres disu es veri, ma in altris finnum es plu fasil kam multi altri lingues. Un tal manere es li sisteme de numres, kel es li teme de dis kurti esaye. Altri es li sisteme de ortografia e pronuntiatione. Por ke li lektere pove pronuntia korektim li finni numres, li sisteme de ortografia bli brevim deskripte.
o	kom sud-angli hot
ä	kom sud-angli bat
Omni disus es kurt vokales. Longi vokales kun li sami suones es skriptet kom duopli vokales. Exemplim, ii es li longi i kun sami suone ma plu longi. Es anke kelki diftonges ma disis non es besonat in dis esaye.
b	kom angli bat (in finnum nur in vordes pruntat fro stranjeri lingues)
c	kelkitem kom angli cap, kelkitem kom angli sap (nur in stranjeri nomes)
f	kom angli for (nur in vordes pruntat fro stranjeri lingues)
h	kom angli hat (anke talim pronuntiat devan konsonante)
q	nur in “qu“, kom germani Quelle (kv)
w	kom v (nur in stranjeri nomes)
x	kom ks (nur in stranjeri vordes)
z	kom ts (nur in vordes pruntat fro stranjeri lingues)
Finni vordes preske sempre bli pronuntia kom skripte segun li ortografi regles. Duopli vokales mus bli pronuntia kom longi e samiman duopli konsonates mus bli pronuntia kom du konsonantes.
Li strese de simpli, non-komposit vorde es sempre sur li unesmi silabe. Komposit vordes bli pronuntia quasi separat vordes.
Interesanti trete del finni gramatike es li forme del vorde after numre. Li gramatikal kasu es li partitivi singulare, exept after yksi kand lu es li nominativi singulare. Tamen, por li eme de dis esaye, on pove regarda li partitivi singulare kom plurale.
e seteru.
Disu es importanti por komprenda qualim li sistema funktiona. Li sekuenti dek numres es:
Li numres fro dek-un a dek-nin bli forma per adi li sufixe -toista a li apti numre sub dek (faktim li vorde toista signifika ”altri” o ”duesmi”). Duanti, kaksikymmentä es literalim ”du dekos”, kymmentä esent li partitivi singulare de kymmenen. Numres plu grandi kam duanti have li forme ”du dekos un”, ”tri dekos set” e seteru:
Sentos bli forma samiman kam dekos. Li partitivi singulare de sata (sent) es sataa (sentos).
Vida quam longi kelki numres apari!
In a radial basis function (RBF) networks are neural nets with three layers. The first input layer feeds data to a hidden intermediate layer. The hidden layer processes the data and transports it to the output layer. Only the tap weights between the hidden layer and the output layer are modified during training.
Each hidden layer neuron represents a basis function of the output space, with respect to a particular center in the input space. The activation function chosen is commonly a Gaussian kernel:
This kernel is centered at the point in the input space specified by the weight vector. The closer the input signal is to the current weight vector, the higher the output of the neuron will be. Radial basis function networks are used commonly in function approximation and series prediction.
Testimonials  -  Development Cooperation Handbook Steps and Tools
Andris Piebalgs was the EU Commissioner for Development at the European Commission.
Interview on Youtube  ⇒ playlist
Brussels, Belgium July 2011
Play media  Equitable access to the resources
Europe Aid is trying to do its best with limited resources but real change will be possible only when we all citizens need to adopt a responsible life style.
Play media  The human dimension of development work
Play media  Satisfaction and Challenges of my job
My personal story tells about how political engagement con change people lives
Play media  A Latvian school teacher who becomes Europe Aid Commissioner
We will never stop the cooperation with the Syrian people
Play media  We will never stop the cooperation with the Syrian people
Eoam was a settlement on the island of Beirland. It was located in a bay on the west side of the island and appears to be the farthest west inhabited settlement in Alagaësia. There is also an example of "wild magic" at Eoam. Both Oromis and Arya describe a floating crystal being there. This is one of the natural manifestations of energy, more powerful than a living spellcaster and more dangerous.
Phenomenology is a tradition of theory that explores phenomena through human experience (Husserl 1982). The word phenomenology is rooted in the combined meaning of the Greek words “logos” and “phenomena”: the art and practice of letting things show themselves (Heidegger 1927). Thanks to the work and concepts of 20th-century philosophers Edmund Husserl, Martin Heidegger, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, and Alfred Schutz phenomenology has, as a discipline, fully came into its own. It is distinct from but related to other key disciplines in philosophy, such as ontology, epistemology, logic, and ethics (Smith 2003). In our modern ever technologically advancing society, phenomenology is more relevant than ever. Under the guise of qualitative research, phenomenology is used to study and analyze how humans interact and experience technology. One example of this is the way in which humans perceive self-driving and autonomous automobiles.
French Phenomenologist Philosopher Maurice Merleau-Ponty makes perhaps the most sustained argument for the elemental role perception plays in how humans understand and engage with the world around them (Merleau-Ponty 1968). How might autonomous vehicles succeed if they take away the perception that we as humans are no longer in control? How much does the fear of AI and technology taking over the world have to do with our perception of reality? How are autonomous vehicles/self-driving cars altering our perceptions of reality and our perceptions of control? Are humans afraid of their world becoming less real? In the past quarter of a century, the move away from direct, material connectivity to what we often call “wireless” technology (Philosophy of Technology 2012) has left some feeling less materially connected and less in control. Because of these questions and assumptions, extensive research on the meanings of particular experiences for drivers/passengers as time goes on will serve to benefit the widespread usage of autonomous vehicles and the comfort of the humans using them. This is especially important because the potential benefits of this technology can only be realized once self-driving cars are adopted en masse (Howard and Dai 2014).
As self-driving cars become more prevalent, the public is demanding more information about how automated vehicles will coexist with current cars and predict human behavior.  Phenomenology may be used to study how passengers and drivers perceive not being in control and figure out how artificial intelligence might be implemented to adapt to the various nuances in human interactions with autonomous vehicles. One of the debates posed by self-driving cars involves the fear over loss of our autonomy. Automobiles and our understanding of independence are so deeply connected. However, that could fade when we experience the loss of control of their systems (Brogan 2016). By analyzing this new technology in a phenomenological way we can see more clearly how the self-driving car isn’t that much different from the invention of the railroad train centuries ago. This is because as Verbeek and Marshall McLuhan have pointed out, "technologies can be mediators of experience". Rather than distancing us further and further away from reality, they help shape our relationship with it. With each new technology comes the potential to create new forms of very real human engagement (Verbeek 2002).
Edmund Husserl: The founder of phenomenology. Most phenomenological works either directly or indirectly link back to the original work of the Austrian-born German philosopher. According to Husserl’s phenomenology, our experience is directed toward—represents or “intends”—things only through particular concepts, thoughts, ideas, images, etc. These make up the meaning or content of a given experience and are distinct from the things they present or mean (Smith 2003).
"All consciousness is consciousness of something"
Martin Heidegger: A 20th-century German existential phenomenologist especially concerned with Ontology and the meaning of "being". His later work focused on the cultural impact of technology by which he exposed the limitations of mediated representation.  He was also a known member of the Nazi party from 1933 until the party's demise in 1945. Heidegger never publicly apologized for his involvement with the Nazi Party and is only known to have expressed regret once, privately. Because of this, his relation between his philosophy and National Socialism are still highly controversial.
“This techne as a form of revealing has in the modern world been replaced by technology as a form of control that offers human beings a picture of the world in which they hold dominion or mastery. ”
Maurice Merleau-Ponty: French 20th phenomenologist philosopher who was influenced by the work of Husserl and Heidegger. He emphasizes the foundational role perception plays in understanding the world and the centrality that the body plays in perception. In contrast to his contemporaries, he believed that it is through our bodies and sensation that we perceive and experience things; that we are embodied subjects, involved in existence.
"The perceiving mind is an incarnated mind"
Alfred Schutz: Alfred Schutz work focuses on Social Phenomenology which involves the social construction of reality. He studied Husserl's work intensively in seeking a basis for a sociology of understanding. His work resulted in a book entitled Der sinnhafte Aufbau der sozialen Welt (The meaningful construction of the social world) which was published in English as The Phenomenology of the Social World. He is also known for his theoretical contribution of dividing the lifeworld into four subcategories. The theory of the lifeworld is that social experience creates a world that is separated from social reality that has been directly experienced and social reality that is on the horizon of direct experience.
Consciousness: the state or quality of awareness, or, of being aware of an external object or something within oneself.
Embodiment: Refers to experience mediated through a body.
Intentionality: According to Husserl intentionality is aboutness or directedness as exemplified by conscious mental acts.
Lifeworlds: The intersubjectivity of knowing. As an observer, we can only interpret the experience of one another through our own meaning context, based on limited access to objectively see another person's stream of life activity (Schutz 1967).
Locus of Control: The locus of control is a framework for understanding people's perception of the controlling factors in their lives. Having an Internal locus of control can also be referred to as "self-agency", "personal control", "self-determination", etc. Those with an external locus of control attribute outcomes of events to external circumstances. Externals tend to believe that the things which happen in their lives are out of their control. They are also more prone to depression (Locus of Control Wiki 2017).
Perception: Phenomenology is primarily concerned with external perception but to a degree internal and mixed perception as well. External perception or sensory perception is the way we process the world around us — everything outside of our body. Internal perception tells us what is going on within our bodies. Mixed perception is that which is oriented with our moods and emotions.
Blake, William "The Marriage Of Heaven And Hell". 1793 . En.Wikipedia.Org. Accessed May 3 2017. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Marriage_of_Heaven_and_Hell.
Brogan, Jacob, Jacob Brogan, and Jacob Brogan. 2016. "Your Cheat-Sheet Guide To The Key Players And Debates Around Self-Driving Cars". Slate Magazine. Accessed May 9 2017. http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2016/06/a_cheat_sheet_guide_to_self_driving_cars_key_players_debates_and_pop_culture.html.
"Consciousness". 2017. En.Wikipedia.Org. Accessed May 3 2017. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consciousness.
Dreyfus, Hubert L. 1996. “The Current Relevance of Merleau-Ponty’s Phenomenology of Embodiment.” University of California - Berkeley. http://ejap.louisiana.edu/EJAP/1996.spring/dreyfus.1996.spring.html.
Heidegger, Martin. "Being and time. 1927." Trans. John Macquarrie and Edward Robinson. New York: Harper (1962).
Howard, Daniel, and Danielle Dai. "Public Perceptions Of Self-Driving Cars: 2 The Case Of Berkeley, California". N.p., 2014. Web. 3 May 2017.
Husserl, E. Ideas pertaining to a pure phenomenology and to a phenomenological philosophy. 1st book: General introduction to a pure phenomenology, trans. by F. Kersten. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1982
LaFrance, Adrienne. 2016. "Two Big Questions For Elon Musk". The Atlantic. Accessed May 10 2017. https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2016/07/new-tesla-master-plan/492362/.
"Locus Of Control". 2017. En.Wikipedia.Org. Accessed May 2 2017. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Locus_of_control.
"Maurice Merleau-Ponty". 2017. En.Wikipedia.Org. Accessed May 3 2017. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maurice_Merleau-Ponty.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. The primacy of perception: And other essays on phenomenological psychology, the philosophy of art, history, and politics. Northwestern University Press, 1964.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. The Visible And The Invisible: Followed By Working Notes. 1st ed. Northwestern University Press, 1968.
"The Perception Of Control | UX Booth". 2017. Uxbooth.Com. Accessed May 3 2017. http://www.uxbooth.com/articles/the-perception-of-control/.
"Philosophy of Technology." The Journal of Speculative Philosophy 26, no. 2 (2012): 321-32. doi:10.5325/jspecphil.26.2.0321.
Schutz, Alfred: [1932] 1967 The Phenomenology of the Social World. Evanston, Ill.:
Smith, David Woodruff. 2003. "Phenomenology". Plato.Stanford.Edu. Accessed May 3 2017. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/phenomenology/.
Verbeek, Peter-Paul. "Devices of engagement: on Borgmann's philosophy of information and technology." Techné: Research in Philosophy and Technology 6, no. 1 (2002): 48-63.
Front Page: Radiation Oncology | RTOG Trials | Randomized Trials
Atypical choroid plexus papilloma 9390/1*
Chordoid glioma of the third ventricle 9444/1
Dysplastic gangliocytoma of cerebellum (Lhermitte-Duclos) 9493/0
Papillary glioneuronal tumor 9509/1*
Rosette-forming glioneuronal tumour of the fourth ventricle 9509/1*
Pineal parenchymal tumour of intermediate differentiation 9362/3
Papillary tumour of the pineal region 9395/3*
Medulloblastoma with extensive nodularity 9471/3*
Tumors of the Cranial and Paraspinal Nerves
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumour (MPNST) 9540/3
MPNST with divergent mesenchymal and / or epithelial differentiation 9540/3
Spindle cell oncocytoma of the adenohypophysis 8291/0*
Up to now all of our programs have been very straightforward: Start at the top and read each line once until you get to the bottom. That changes now, because that's not really a very useful way to write a program. Useful programs usually repeat some things, or decide to not do some. This chapter covers how to select a course of action on the fly.
== is the equality operator; it determines whether two values are equal, and returns true or false. Note: It does not change the value of anything.
Anything that looks like if(...){...} is an if statement. a == b is an expression which evaluates to a bool. An expression is some code which can be resolved to a value. The curly brackets just after if(a == b) contain code which will run if a equals b.
When some logic is selected for execution in this way, "control" is said to "flow" into the logic. So if statements are considered control flow statements or control structures, a set which contains some other constructs to be introduced later.
Write a calculator, asking the user for two floats and an operator and then printing the result.
a statement which modifies control flow. Also called a control flow statement.
Modern C++: The Good Parts
Now it gets interesting.
Determine what the patient already knows about sickle cell
Assess what concerns the patient wants to address today
Vaso-occlusion - blockage of small blood vessels that may lead to pain and tissue damage.
Splenic sequestration - increase in spleen size due to storage of red blood cells
Organ failure - may result from insufficient blood flow later in life
Parents who both have sickle cell trait will have a 25% chance of having a child with sickle cell disease, a 50% chance of having a child with sickle cell trait, and a 25% chance of having a normal child who is not a carrier
If one parent has sickle cell disease and one parent has sickle cell trait, they have a 50% chance of having a child with sickle cell disease but the child will have sickle cell trait.
If one parent has sickle cell disease and the other parent is normal the child will have sickle cell trait but 0% chance of having sickle cell disease.
Clarification: In order for a child to have sickle cell disease both parents must have at least one copy of the abnormal sickle cell gene, or in other words both parents must have sickle cell trait for the child to have sickle cell disease.
1/400-600 children are born with sickle cell disease
People of Hispanic, Greek, Italian, Arabic, and Asian Indian also have high carrier rates
Guilt over passing on trait to children
The Ohio Sickle Cell Affected Families Association, Inc.
National Association for Sickle Cell Disease, Inc.
Headings, Verle E. "Psychosocial Issues in Sickle Cell Counseling" Genetic Counseling: Psychosocial Dimensions. 1979.
March of Dimes Public Health Education Information Sheet. Sickle Cell Disease.
Koshy, Mabel. "Sickle Cell Disease" University of Chicago
Ricknagel, D. "Sickle Cell Syndromes"
↑ John (23 January 2017). "What is Hemolytic Anemia?". hemolyticanemia.org. https://www.hemolyticanemia.org/. Retrieved 23 January 2017.
The Fischer esterification mechanism is a reversible reaction between an alcohol and a carboxylic acid. Upon acid catalysis, the carboxylic acid is protonated and transforms into an activated electrophile. The alcohol, being the nucleophile, attacks the carbonyl carbon because of its positive charged electronegativity experienced by the withdrawing oxygen atom. The result of this attack is a tetrahedral intermediate. Once the intermediate is formed, the alcohol group from the original carboxylic acid undergoes deprotonation while the hydroxyl group protonates. With a protonated hydroxyl group, the functional group is removed by delocalized electrons from the carboxyl group resulting in the removal of a water molecule, leaving the final product as an ester. Due to equilibrium mechanics, all the steps mentioned in the Fischer esterification mechanism can be reversed, which is not desired in order to achieve a final ester product. Le Chatelier’s principle can be used to manipulate the reaction in order for the creation of ester to be more favorable than the reverse reaction. In order for this to happen, an excess of carboxylic acid or alcohol can be added along with the removal of water, the side product of the reaction found in the forward reaction.
When a chemical reaction is introduced, oftentimes only the reactants and products are shown. In the example shown below, normally the ester would be shown as the starting material, along with its product, the carboxylic acid. It is our job to describe the overall transformation taking place in a reaction, in the example below—the hydrolysis. In the example shown below, the ester was able to hydrolyze to the carboxylic acid through a series of reaction intermediates. With organic mechanisms it is our job to study how and when bonds break and form, and how different changes in substrates might affect the outcome of a reaction.
Upon addition of a base, the old ester bond breaks and a new one forms. This is known as transesterification
Step 1: Catalysis: The base attacks the carbonyl carbon, pushing the electrons from the double bond to the oxygen.
Step 2: Leaving Group: The electrons from the oxygen anion reform the double bond, kicking out the old ester group, completing the hydrolysis.
Step 3: Deprotonation: If an OH- group would have been the nucleophile, then the hydrogen would be deprotonated.
Upon acid catalysis, a old ester bond breaks and a new one is formed.
Step 1: Catalysis: The carbonyl oxygen is protonated by the acid catalyst.
Step 2: Nucleophilic Attack: The nucleophile attacks the carbonyl carbon, pushing the electrons from the double bond to the oxygen. The oxygen from H2O serves as the nucleophile during the attack at the electrophillic carbon of the carbonyl. This creates a tetrahedral intermediate.
Step 3: Intramolecular Protonation: The original -OMe group picks up a proton from the newlyadded water group. This protonation converts -OMe into a good leaving group.
Step 4: Hydrolysis: The electrons from the hydroxl group moves down forming a double bond, thus kicking out the old ester group.
Step 5: Deprotonation: The solvent picks up the proton from the newly formed double bonded oxygen. The deprotonation of the carbonyl oxygen leads to regeneration of the acid catalyst. This leads to the final product.
This shows one example of a mechanism used in organic chemistry. A good understanding of the properties of organic molecules and the nature of their bonding allows us to predict mechanisms.
The above images show an ester bond being broken and replaced with another ester group.
Below, you will find the same mechanism, but without the reforming of a new ester bond a.k.a transesterification
Keto and enol tautomers are in equilibrium in either acidic or basic conditions. An enol is short for an unsaturated alcohol and keto is short for a ketone. In the process of going from a keto to an enol, an enolate is formed which is the resonance structure with a charge delocalized over the oxygen and the carbon. Both the acid and the base catalyzed reactions occur very quickly  and that the keto form is more likely to be found in solution.[1]
Step 1: Protonation: The alkene attacks a free acidic hydrogen proton in the acidic solution.
Step 2: Relief of charge: The lone pair from the alcohol moves down to relieve the positive charge on the carbon.
Step 3: Deprotonation: The resulting carbonyl compound with is then deprotonated, most likely from the solvent or water.
Note that it is the same mechanism but in reverse to go from a ketone to alcohol in acid conditions where the carbonyl is protonated and then a proton from a carbon is pulled off leaving the electrons to form an alkene.[1]
Step 1: Deprotonation: A base pulls off the hydrogen proton from the alcohol group.
Step 2: Resonance: Resonance structures show that the negative charge can be somewhat stabilized on the carbon.
Step 3: Reprotonation: The negatively charged carbon then pulls in a hydrogen proton, most likely from the base or solvent.
Note that it is the same mechanism but in reverse to go from the ketone to an alcohol in basic conditions where the  base would pull of the hydrogen forming the alkoxide intermediate which then takes back the hydrogen from the base.[1]
Aldol Condensation is the attack of an enolate ion on a carbonyl functional group to form a carbon-carbon bond. The name aldol comes from aldehyde alcohol. Aldol condensation can be done with ketones as well as aldehydes, either the same aldehyde/ketone as the starting enolate or a different aldehyde which would be called a crossed aldol condensation. It is a condensation reaction because it releases water. Also note that it regenerates one equivalent of the base used. [1]
Step 1: Enolate Formation: A base (hydroxide in this example) deprotonates a hydrogen and forms an enolate ion with two resonance structures.
Step 2: Enolate Attack: The carbon with the negative charge attacks a second aldehyde (or ketone) at the carbonyl carbon. Note that the enolate alkoxide is more stable with the negative charge than the carbon so the resonance structure is shown to accurately portray the carbon-carbon bond that will form.
Step 3: Protonation: The resulting alkoxide after the enolate attack is then protonated to give the final product. Note that the base is regenerated.
Step 1: Enolate Formation: A base such as hydroxide deprotonates a hydrogen from the carbon and forms an enolate ion.
Step 2: Enolate Attack: The alkoxide pushes down its extra set lone pair of electrons reforming the carbonyl and the carbon attacks the conjugated carbon of the Michael acceptor. In a chain reaction of electron pushing another alkoxide is formed after the two reactants are fused together by a carbon-carbon bond.
Step 3: Protonation: the newly formed alkoxide is then protonated by either the solvent or water.
[1] Vollhardt, Peter, and Neil Schore. Organic Chemistry: Structure and Function. 6th ed. New York: W. H. Freeman and Company, 2011.
Database practitioners talk about normalization a lot, but it's often poorly understood. Some people see it as an academic detail that is impractical in the real world. Many practitioners are convinced that normalization is always too costly in terms of performance. In fact there are important practical benefits to normalization. Even though there may be legitimate reasons to eschew normalization in some circumstances, it is always best to make this decision from a standpoint of understanding the costs and benefits than dismissing it out of ignorance.
Normalization provides a set of rules and patterns that can be applied to any database to avoid common logical inconsistencies. Normalizing a database design will typically improve:
Consistency, since errors that could be made with the database would be structurally impossible
Extensibility, since changes to the database structure will only affect parts of the database they are logically dependent on
Efficiency, since redundant information will not need to be stored
The database community has identified several distinct levels of normalization, each more stringent than the last. These are referred to as normal forms and are numbered from one (the lowest form of normalization, referred to as first normal form or 1NF) through five (fifth normal form or 5NF). It's quite common in practice to speak of one database design as being more or less normalized than another, as defined by these levels.
In practical applications, you'll often see 1NF, 2NF, and 3NF along with the occasional 4NF. Fifth normal form is very rarely seen but is briefly discussed in this article. Fifth normal form means that the SQL selecting newbies won't produce misleading results by doing a join with artificial, spurious rows occurring due to a many-to-many dependency, or something equal to or more than a 3-way relationship, which are rare in comparison to the most of the many-to-one that will be detected by the earlier forms.
2.3 3NF decomposition follows on with the products of a failed BCNF decomposition, and achieves a lossless joining , FD preserving decomposition in all cases
2.5 4NF and 5NF deal with 1-to-many and many-to-many relationships , or multivalued dependencies
Why perform normalization ?
A database is a set of facts about the world. Database administrators would like their database to contain only true facts about the world, and no false facts. Normalization allows the RDBMS to prevent some classes of false fact from occurring in the database, and therefore helps consistency. Obviously much of the information in the database can't be verified by the computer; the only types of error that can be prevented are errors that are inconsistent and entail some logical contradiction. Generally speaking, with each additional level of normalization one or more classes of logical error are made impossible by virtue of the structure of the tables.
An anomaly occurs in a database if the database starts in a consistent state and an apparently valid action causes the database to become inconsistent. This can be further specified as an update, insertion or deletion anomaly depending on whether the action that causes the error is a row update, insertion or deletion respectively.
The example above shows an update anomaly. A database user has attempted to update an employee's address. However, since the address occurs more than once in the table and only one copy has been updated, there is now inconsistent data in the table: the employee cannot have two addresses at once.
This example shows an insertion anomaly. A new faculty member has been hired, but this information cannot be inserted into the database until he has been assigned to teach at least one course.
What's an FD ?
A Functional Dependency, or FD, looks like
Which means that b is functionally dependent on a. Another way to read this is to say, "a determines b."
The idea here is just that if you know a value for one field (a) then you also know the value for the other field (b). For example, if you know someone's Social Security Number (in the U.S.) then you can find that person's last name, first name, etc. Knowing one piece of data is enough for you to determine the others.
Another example might be that if you know the serial number on a car, you can also find (determine) the car's manufacturer and model.
Thus manufacturer and model depend on serial number.  This is a functional dependency.
Notice that this relationship often does not work in reverse. If you know a car has a given manufacturer, that is not enough information to find out what its serial number is (since there are many individual cars, with different serial numbers, all made by the same manufacturer).
What's the point of knowing Functional Dependencies ?
If you don't know your functional dependencies, then forever will you be condemned to reincarnate your update, insertion and deletion anomalies. Contemplate your FDs, and you may be able to achieve BCNF across your whole database, and if not, at least there are two levels in normalization Nirvana, and you could do 3NF, and break the hold of inefficient database design, which your puny and vain ER modelling did not account for. Despite the best efforts of that DB Kung Fu master to show you the way of ER Diagramming, it is still no match for the Fumbling Palm Style or the Fist of the Unyielding Blind Computer. You thought you chose great relationships and hung all the necessary attributes off your entities rectangles, and underlined all your primary key attributes, but the diagrammed decomposition of the originally cloud of an idea of a Video store franchise management system didn't prevent lossy joins and dropping some FDs. Skeptically, you could say that dropping FDs isn't a big deal if you don't know about FDs in the first place, but the point of FDs is that they're like used car warranties, and preserving FDs avoids update anomaly costly repairs.
What Boyce-Codd Normal Form does is to connect the dots between the concept of FDs and the concept of relational table key attributes, remembering that any candidate key of a table can be a primary key. In BCNF, all FDs left hand sided attributes, the Dominatrix of the FD relationship, are candidate keys.
Consider the negative case, that when one or more FDs are not candidate keys, then the schema is not in BCNF, and
Before we begin our discussion of the normal forms, it's important to point out that they are guidelines and guidelines only. Occasionally, it becomes necessary to stray from them to meet practical business requirements. However, when variations take place, it's extremely important to evaluate any possible ramifications they could have on your system and account for possible inconsistencies. That said, let's explore the normal forms.
Normal forms are as fun as watching legal dramas:
"I swear to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help me god".
"All non-key attributes will tell a fact about the key, the whole key, and nothing but the key, so help me Codd." (about 2NF, 3NF, and BCNF).
Some terms used to understand each of the normal forms:
2NF, 3NF, BCNF -  a key is a set of attributes of a relation which can be used to identify a row in a relation. A superkey is a superset of a candidate key,  a minimal set of attributes which can be used to identify a row. Hence, all the attributes of a relation can be a superkey.
2NF - non-key attributes are dependent on other non-key attributes, whole candidate keys, but not dependent on a part of a composite key.
3NF - non-key attributes are directly dependent on  whole candidate keys, or are a part of a candidate key.
BCNF - non-key attributes are directly dependent on whole candidate keys and are not part of keys.
The above summary seems good enough, but it isn't, because the definition of superkey is that all the attributes of a relation can be a key, and therefore, there are no "non-key" attributes. So it is better to express the normal forms in terms of functional dependency, X -> A "X determines A", or "A depends on X".
2NF then becomes "X cannot be a part of a candidate key, but can be a candidate key, or an attribute of a superkey that is not in the minimal key set of the superkey."
3NF becomes "X is a whole superkey, or A is part of a candidate key".
BCNF becomes "X is a whole superkey"
Why have a NF ?
1NF - makes it easier to write a query. The example is a Clients table where the Client has three separate phone numbers (perhaps to allow office, home and cellphone numbers to be entered). Your DB is not even 1NF if you have a client / customer table with multiple telephone number fields.
Not being in first normal form makes queries complex and inefficient if you want to look up a client from a given phone number. Since you don't know which of the fields the phone number will appear in, you have to do something like the following:
2NF - one textbook says it isn't relevant given 3NF, and BCNF, and is probably being posh about why one splits a table into a parent and child relations linked by a foreign key. An example, like having a client table, is a contractor table, where contractors have more than one skill, and having the contractor-skill table own
a contractor's address field means owning a non-prime attribute that is partially dependent on the whole key contractor-skill, i.e. address determined by contractor only. If a contractor has more than one skill, then there will be redundant rows containing the same contractor name and address. 2NF would mandate splitting the table according to the FDs, N -> A , and the multivalue dependency, N ->-> S, or (Name , Address), and (Name, Skill ); as well as being 2NF, this is 3NF, BCNF, and also 4NF.
Why ?
3NF - is like a restrictive form of BCNF, so maybe easier to look at BCNF first to see if it doable, before doing 3NF.
BCNF - the mapping is easier because for every FD X->A, X must be a superkey. This makes it easy to show when breaking a non-normalized 1NF or 2NF relation into
a BC normal form  can't be done without losing a conflicting FD, and therefore the decomposition is not dependency preserving , and the normalization should then
3NF - the only additional relaxation is that if a FD X-> A applies, then A can be part of a candidate key. To see a decomposition which is not BCNF because an FD is not preserved, but is 3NF, an example would be helpful, and this author is not cognitive enough to think of one, so some internet and book derived examples will be given,
For the original part_supply relation, the second and thirds FDs have determinants X which don't fit the statement "X is a superkey".
The transitive axiom of Armstrong's Axioms suggests that the first FD,  1) Project part -> contract  ,  doesn't make the original relation violate BCNF, because Project,Part is a superkey or alternate key , as it transitively maps to the original singly attributed key,  contract.
The recommended decomposition step is to use a violating FD which has a single dependent A in X -> A, possible because of another Armstrong Axiom  stating X-> A B C , can always be decomposed to X -> A , X->B, X -> C, singly attributed dependent FDs .
(The decomposition axiom is another way of stating the Reflexivity Axiom combined with the Transitivity Axiom, i.e. that if X is a superset of Y then X -> Y, and since, in this instance, A B C is a superset of A, and X -> A B C , so X transitively -> A because A B C -> A. )
Going back to the statement 2 paragraphs back, to use a FD X -> A where
a) A is a single attribute of R , and
b) X must be a subset of R .
c) the FD X -> A  is a member of a minimal cover set of FDs , which implies the original set of FDs have all been transformed into FDs with single dependents, and
R = ( contract, supllier, department, project, part, quantity,  value) , X = supplier department, A = part
So R -A = ( contract, supplier, department, project, quantity, value) , and XA = ( supplier, department, part ).
Because X -> A, X can be a key of XA and X can be joined naturally with R - A , because the attributes of R is a superset of X.
Then step 2 is to check the resulting decomposition relations for BCNF e.g.
Recurse if BCNF is violated, so now R = contract, supplier, dept, project, quantity, value,
(contract, department, project, quantity, value)
However, the only remaining violating FD is project, part -> contract , but here X ( project, part) is not a subset of R ( contract, department, project, quantity, value).
Therefore BCNF decomposition cannot continue. At this point, attempting to achieve BCNF is abandoned, and achieving 3NF is the next goal.
3NF decomposition follows on with the products of a failed BCNF decomposition, and achieves a lossless joining , FD preserving decomposition in all cases
The technique for decomposition into 3NF is to start with a lossless decomposition of the original relation, and the set of violating FDs. The former is created by the
This is the rationale for starting with BCNF as a goal, because the abandoned results of failure to achieve BCNF can be used to achieve 3NF.
To achieve 3NF, for every violating FD  X -> A, simply add a relation XA .  In this example, the last FD , project, part -> contract, can form a relation
(contract, department, project, quantity, value)
To summarize without the example,
Step 1: Attempt to decompose into BCNF.
Step 2: Attempt to decompose into 3NF.
To do step 1,
a. remember Armstrong's axioms :
Reflexivity,  if X is a subset of Y, then Y -> X,
Transitivity, if X -> Y and Y -> Z, then X -> Z,
Augmentation, if XB -> YB, then X-> Y
Reflexitivy and Transitivity implies Decomposition: ABC -> A ,  X -> ABC, then X -> A, ( and X->B, and X-> C)
b) convert the original set of FDs , into a minimal covering set of FDs using Armstrong's axioms.
b1. Use Decomposition to make all FDs singly attributed on the right hand side ( singly attributed dependent).
b2. Use Armstrong's axioms to remove redundant determinant attributes , and then
b3. remove equivalent transformed FDs.
c) Use one FD from the remaining set of minimal covering set of FDs.
d) for this FD, X -> A (single),  X and A must be respectively a subset and a member of R 's attributes. i.e. R is a superset of X union  A .
e) remove from A from R , to get R - A as one decomposition product, and  another relation X A  as another decomposition product (i.e. attributes making X and A ).
f) remove the used FD from the covering set of FDs, and go back to c). , using the set of relations - R, union with each decomposition product R -A, and X A  as the source set of relations to be decomposed , and continue until t all the minimal covering set of FDs has been exhausted (emptied),
If there are remaining FDs, then BCNF cannot be achieved whilst preserving all FDs.
Switch to 3NF covering relation generation by constructing:
Get each FD  that is part of a residual minimal set of FDs i.e. each FD is of the form X-> A where A is a singly attributed dependent, with Armstrong's axioms applied to remove any redundancy on the determinant side (X), and then removing   any remaining essentially equivalent FDs , until no more FDs can be removed without losing the ability to reconstruct the original set of FDs.
With this FD, construct a relation XA and remove the FD from the remaining set of FDs; continue until all FDs are processed.
The resulting set of relations , either from successful BCNF conversion, or from BCNF/3NF conversion,  can be recomposed by joins into the original relation without loss or generation of spurious rows, and preserves all the original functional dependencies. Update, insertion and deletion anomalies should not occur when using these normalized relations.
4NF and 5NF deal with 1-to-many and many-to-many relationships , or multivalued dependencies
Achieving BCNF may achieve 4NF if the resulting decomposed relations have single attributed keys. A multivalued dependency is expressed as X ->-> A,
For instance, stereotype_expertise is a multivalued relation, with stereotype values / multivalued dependency expertise instances:
In 4NF, a multivalue dependency will always hold if the determinant and the multivalued dependents of this single MVD  are   the only attributes of the relation,
The rationale for 4NF is illustrated by the example of a relation which has 2 independent multivalue dependencies, e.g. Person Skill Language.
A person has a set of skills, and a set of languages. An example of a design problem is when a person adds a language, there is a design choice :
In this kind of table, person cannot be a candidate key, due to multiple skill + language mappings, and actually all 3 attributes form the key.
So by 4NF, this relation needs to be decomposed until all MVDs X->->Y have either only X Y as attributes , or X is a superkey ( which really doesn't make
[http://www.bkent.net/Doc/simple5.htm#label4
William Kent, "A Simple Guide to Five Normal Forms in Relational Database Theory", Communications of the ACM 26(2), Feb. 1983, 120-125]
This author's good but slightly inconsistent textbook states that
Presumably, a composite key can be projected with only one of its two or more attributes, into a smaller decomposition, which when re-joined, with the rest of the relation , will result in spurious rows. 5NF is like a declarative version of the procedural decomposition of BCNF by its functional dependencies, and the patching with additional single FD relations of 3NF, except it is being applied to MVDs as well, in that the lossless join condition is incorporated into the definition of join dependency, which is that a 5NF relation can be decomposed into any set of smaller relations, and all of these can be rejoined without spurious rows.
Normal Forms, without the logic fetish
First normal form (1NF) sets the very basic rules for an organized database:
Eliminate duplicate columns from the same table.
Create separate tables for each group of related data and identify each row with a unique column or set of columns (the primary key).
Second normal form (2NF) further addresses the concept of removing duplicate data:
Meet all the requirements of the first normal form.
Remove subsets of data that apply to multiple rows of a table and place them in separate tables.
Create relationships between these new tables and their predecessors through the use of foreign keys.
Third normal form (3NF) goes one large step further:
Meet all the requirements of the second normal form.
Remove columns that are not dependent upon the primary key.
If a remaining column ( attribute) plays a part in a functional dependency, all the attributes of the functional dependency
The latter means that another table  which has the determinant attributes as a key, maps these determinant attributes against the dependent
If an attribute of a table plays a part as a determinant attribute in a functional dependency, then it and all the other determinant attributes of the functional dependency
Fourth normal form (4NF) has one additional requirement:
Meet all the requirements of the third normal form.
The purpose of 5NF is to achieve a lossless join decomposition with respect to all the candidate keys of a relation.
5NF is defined in terms of not breaking join dependencies that hold over a relation. A Join dependency is a statement that
a particular decomposition will result in a lossless recomposition. A multivalued dependency, is a special case of a join dependency,
A paper showed that if a 3NF relation has all candidate keys as single attributes, then all join dependencies will hold (there will be
Domain-Key Normal Form eliminates insertion and deletion anomalies while relying only on domain constraints and key constraints (no arbitrary CHECK constraints are needed). Unfortunately there is no general method for transforming a database into DKNF, so it is usually the hardest normal form to achieve.
After reading about Normalization above and how things should be broken up, you may be thinking:
Well, now I have all these tables all over the place, and I have to join a buncha them just to get simple sets of data out of the system!  How is that gonna affect the performance?
Well, you may be right.  In some cases where performance is an issue, it may be necessary to denormalize parts of your database/schema and have wider tables that may contain duplicated/redundant data.
However, such decisions are best left in the hands of an experienced DBA, because there may be other ways to improve performance such as physical design, indexes, query optimization, etc. that DBA's specialize in.  Database Denormalization, just like Normalization, is best left in the hands of the experienced.
But if you were cocky enough to want to be good at Database Denormalization,  then reading a chapter out of a good database textbook about database tuning would help;
The health professional is one of GNU Health's key components: It's used in appointments, patient evaluation, surgeries, lab tests, etc. This is why it is important to have them defined in your system before hand.
The health professional is a general concept: It covers physicians, nurses, biochemists, psychologists, and any other occupation related to health sciences.
To define or edit a new Health Professional, follow this path: Health →  Health Professionals
The Main steps involved in defining a Health Professional are:
Associate an internal user (login user) to the party
Define the health professional list of specialties
The health professional is a party with specific attributes, but is always a party. This abstract concept of party allow us to be different entities at the same time. For example, a health professional can also be a patient; both entities sharing the property of being a person.
The party concept provides versatility and simplicity to GNU Health.
When you create the associated party from the Health Professional form, the Person and Health professional attributes will be automatically set. At this point, you need to enter the Health Professional demographics, in the same way as you have done when creating an individual. You might want to refresh the idea by glancing over the Individuals section.
Associating the login user to a health professonal in GNU Health
The Individual, when assigned the property of being a Health Professional, it has an extra - and required - field. The "Internal User" field.
This internal user is the user that the individual types in then logging into GNU Health. That user allows to digitally sign documents, and to audit their actions.
Once you are done with the party, save the party record ( Ctrl + S ).
Assigning a Main Specialty to the health professional from the list of this professional.
A health professional might have more than one specialty. In the Health Professional view, you can add all the specialties related to this particular professional. Once you are done, save the record ( Ctrl + S ). This is important so the system links the party with the health professional record.
Finally, add the information related to the professional:
Although these fields are not formally required, they are very important and should be entered in the system. Each health professional must have these fields filled in whenever possible. For instance, the Main Specialty field will be used as a default value whenever the doctor is assigned an appointment, or when creating a new evaluation.
Shelter will keep you out of the elements and help prevent hypothermia. It will provide shade in the heat. It also has an important positive psychological effect.
Bring a cheap, lightweight tent with you whenever you go hiking, even if you are not staying the night. Consider a "tube tent," for example...such a tube can be constructed by gluing (with waterproof glue) the long edge of a thin tarp or plastic drop cloth to the matching edge, creating a tube of-sorts. To use, simply string the string from one end of the tube through the other end, and tie the ends between two trees. If you are injured in the wilderness, such a shelter can be easy to erect quickly. When injured (particularly in cold weather) proper shelter can be essential for your survival.
A lean-to can be made by lashing a stick between two trees, then leaning more sticks on it to form a triangular structure.  It can be improved by insulating it with evergreen boughs, branches and leaves, or snow. Alternatively just lay sticks against a log and fill with an cover with insulation. Remember add as much insulation as possible.
Get your body off the ground. Build an insulating pad between your body and the earth using sticks, pine boughs, leaves, etc. You should have twice as much insulation below you as above you.
Building a fire reflector (a wall of sticks, rocks, etc.) will improve a lean-to by reflecting the fire's warmth back into the open side of the lean-to.
Bring one or two metallic rescue blankets wherever you go. They are useful for building shelters, reflectors, and water collectors, and you can even cook with them.
In snowy conditions, build a quinzhee.
One shelter that has worked very well in the past, is a lean-to shelter, it is fairly easy to construct, and is very effective.
In the average consideration of survival it often seems shelter is overlooked, or at least taken for granted and misplaced on the scale of priorities.
It is always good to remember the "rule of threes":
"A person can survive for three minutes without air,
While not absolute these guidelines are reasonable and appropriately stress the need for shelter.  Protection from the elements comes second only to breathing.
Quick thoughts about the conditions under which three hours of exposure is a generous life-expectancy should immediately clarify that when shelter is most needed it may be most difficult to find or create.
A recent engineer by the name of Howard "Chubby" Fultz has developed an idea that could revolutionize outdoor survival. It is commonly referred to as "The Chubby Dome." The official name is "CD320." Although still in the developing stages, The Chubby Dome offers a fresh water supply, food storage, power, shelter, and a small bathroom.
The first level of shelter to consider is that of clothing.  Simply put, you have to be able to "walk home" in the clothing you have on or at hand.  Take a hard look at the difference between what you want to wear and what you should have for all possible conditions.
Waypoints where additional resources are available (camp, basecamp, your car) can certainly be the initial target of any self-extraction.  Such caches then cover situations of different scope ~what's on your person will get you back to camp, what's at camp will get you to your car, etc.
The concept of walking home may sound out of place, but there is a distinction between being lost and/or injured, and simply being in a difficult spot for an indefinite period of time.  As a rule, if you are lost or injured do not wander -get yourself found-.
A minimal set of equipment should be incorporated into one's wardrobe.  Without the ability to make fire and cut things -right now- you're not even trying to be prepared and will be hard-pressed to spend anything but a summer night outdoors safely.
Debris Hut Construction from the Self-Reliance Handbook
Only one “slice” (Greek prefix “tomo-”) of the target exposed at any one time by the linear accelerator (linac) beam
The three components distinctive to this modality:
A collimator pair that defines the length of the strip
A binary multileaf collimator whose leaves open and close during treatment to modulate the strip’s intensity
A couch that scans the patient across the beam at a fixed speed the during treatment delivery
In this section, our aim is to prove several closely related results, all of which are occasionally called "Picard-Lindelöf theorem". This type of result is often used when it comes to arguing for the existence and uniqueness of a certain ordinary differential equation, given that some boundary conditions are satisfied.
Picard–Lindelöf Theorem (Banach fixed-point theorem version):
.
We first rewrite the problem as a fixed-point problem. Indeed, using the fundamental theorem of calculus, one can show that the simultaneous equations
.
Replacing the fixed-point principle by summation techniques, we get a slightly better result in the sense that the domain of definition of the function
.
Picard–Lindelöf theorem (telescopic series version):
, then the initial value problem
We first prove uniqueness. To do so, we use Gronwall's inequalities. Suppose
(right Gronwall's inequality) and
Now on to existence. Once again, we inductively define
.
, we have to prove that this definition always makes sense, i.e. that
.
By the telescopic sum, we have
.
!
.
Again, by the very same argument, an analogous bound holds for
.
Thus, by the Weierstraß M-test, the telescopic sum
It is now possible to interchange differentiation and summation in the latter sum; for, on the one hand, we are uniformly convergent, and on the other hand,
.
An imperative sentence begins with the verb.
A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  Q-R  S  T  U  V  W-Z
The bow is held by the right hand, at the frog, the black endpiece of the bow. Bowhand is not a strict requirement that must be conformed to exactly. Obviously, as one plays and learns from their experience, they will develope a more personalized bowhand.
However, the bowhand remains mostly the same for each player. The thumb is placed on the gap between the bowgrip, the rubber grip on the bottom portion of the bow and the frog.
The index finger is placed ahead of the thumb, near the middle of the bowgrip. The middle finger is positioned roughly on the line between the end of the frog and the start of the bow hair. The ring finger is placed in the middle of the frog. Finally, the pinky is placed on the side of the screw. The bow should also be held with a straight wrist.
Following WWI, Americans felt that they had enough of War. Many wanted to return to isolationisim, which had been the policy prior to World War I.
3.5.3.1 - Bits and bytes
Computers process data in digital form. Essentially this means that they use microprocessors, also referred to as chips or silicon chips, to control them. A chip is a small piece of silicon implanted with millions of electronic circuits. The chip receives pulses of electricity that are passed around these microscopic circuits in a way that allows computers to represent text, numbers, sounds and graphics.
A bit is a binary digit. The processor can only handle electricity in a relativity simple way - either electricity is flowing or it is not. This is often referred to as two states. The processor can recognise whether it is receiving an off signal or an on signal. This is handled as a zero (0) for off and a one (1) for on. Each binary digit therefore is either a 0 (no signal) or a 1 (a signal).
The processor now needs to convert these 0s and 1s into something useful for the user. Everything you can use your computers for its represented internally by a series of 0s and 1s. Computers string zeros and ones together to represent text, numbers, sound, video and everything else we use our computers for.
The clock speed of your computers indicates the speed at which the signals are sent around the processor. In simple terms, a clock speed of 2 GHz means that it will receive 2 billion of these on/off pulses per second.
A single byte is a string of eight bits. Eight is a useful number of bits as it creates enough permutations (or combinations) of zeros and ones to represent every character on your keyboard:
With one bit we have two permutations: 0 and 1.
With two bits we have permutations: 00, 01, 10 and 11. This could be represented as 22 or 2 x 2. As we increase the number of bits, we increase the number of permutations by the power of two.
Three bits would give us 23 which is 2 x 2 x 2 = 8 permutations.
Four bits would give us 24 permutations which is 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 = 16 permutations.
The basic point here is that the more bits you use, the greater the range of numbers, characters, sounds or colours that can be created. Taking numbers as an example, as we have seen, 8 bits would be enough to represent 256 different numbers (0-255). As the number of bits increases, the range of numbers increases rapidly. For example 216 would give 65,536 permutations, 224 would give approximately 1.6 million and 232 would give over 4 billion permutations.
Larger combinations of bytes are used to measure the capacity of memory and storage devices. The size of the units can be referred to either using binary or decimal prefixes. For example, in decimal, the term kilo is commonly used to indicate a unit that is 1,000 times larger than a single unit. So the correct term would be kilobyte (KB). In binary, the correct term is actually kibibyte (Ki) with 1024 bytes being the nearest binary equivalent to 1,000.
The tables below show both binary and decimal prefixes.
Which is biggest, a Mi, a Ki or a Gi?
Explain the difference between a kibibyte and a kilobyte.
Welcome to the exercises related to Basic Lesson 2 of learning Hebrew.
Click "▼" to check your answers.
Read out loud the following numbers in Hebrew (pronounce the Vav as an ə/e):
Translate the following English expressions to Hebrew and vice versa:
How old are you (f)?
Add the definite article to the following nouns and adjectives (you don't have to know their meaning):
Bugs (Specific languages: Japanese as source language)
Description: Scan function (also known as Concordance in other CAT tools) does not work reliably. Words in Japanese source text are not always found. No pattern has been established yet.
Not read by Atril yet.
Kidney beans are rich in vitamins, minerals and plant compounds. They are also rich in antioxidants.
File:SMB3-Level8.png
Eight worlds of blood, sweat and tears boil down to a final assault on Bowser's menacing Castle. It's been a long and difficult fight, but you've made it to Bowser's creepy looking Castle of Koopa. A long time has passed since Mario and Bowser first met. You've seen how Mario has changed since then—now find out how time has treated Bowser!
File:SMB3 W8 BC a.png
1: Bowser is a vain creature, and the statues he set up in his own image shoot laser beams from their mouths! Dash as fast as you can underneath the statues. If you slow down, you'll get drilled by a laser.
File:SMB3 W8 BC c.png
2: Catch the Donut Lift in the area to the corridor above.  The lift is invisible until you walk on top of it. If you miss the lift go through the door and come back again—it'll be there for you. The door will transport you to the room shown to the right. When you reach the top, stay on the Donut Lift until you see an opening to the right, then jump for it.  If you miss the opening, you'll fall into a bottomless pit.
3: This stairway can be tricky. Crouch on the step near the hub of the Roto-Disc to avoid its whirling attack. Then move slowly past them to ensure you don't get burned.  While you're at the top, grab the 1-Up in the Invisible Block.
4: Bowser's Fortress is like a maze—if you take the wrong path, you'll end up back at the beginning! Enter the door to reset all of the ? Blocks in Bowser's Castle.  Go back and grab a power-up as many times as you need.
File:SMB3 W8 BC b.png
5: Donut Lifts will crash down if you hesitate too long between jumps, so keep on trucking at a brisk pace. Podoboos leap out of the lava and guard several gaps that you must cross. Try to make your way up as high as you can on these Donut Lifts, it will be to your advantage. In any event, be careful; these lifts are the only thing between you and molten lava.
6: One method of reaching Bowser is to take the top of the three passages at the end of the fiery chamber. You'll be taken to the top map of Part 2, where you'll have to content with fewer laser spitting statues, but more precision jumping.
7: At the end of the middle of the three passages on the far-right side of the fiery chamber, you can pick up a much needed power-up. Use the Donut Lift to drop to the passage below.
8: Bowser's Castle is full of crafty traps. Spring this Thwomp, then jump over him onto the Donut Lift. Fall down with the lift, and jump off at the last moment to reach the door which will take you to the lower of the two maps in Part 2.
File:SMB3 W8 BC d.png
9: You will reach this map if you took the door to the right of point 6. You'll have to dodge the lasers from four Bowser statues, until you reach the Donut Lifts. Bowser breathes fire at you while you try to cross the lava. The fireballs move slowly, making them hard to jump over. What's worse, you can't stand on the Donut Lifts for long before they begin to sink into the lava. No matter what, you must keep moving.
File:SMB3 W8 BC e.png
10: You'll reach this map instead if you dropped down with the Donut Lift at point 8, and made your way to the door below. This route has 5 laser shooting Bowser statues to contend with, but it offers a small reward in the form of a power-up in the ? Block. Rather than dealing with Donut Lifts, you can strategically time your jumps over Bowser's breath on the solid brick platforms, but leap carefully, as they are quite small and difficult to land on.
The King of the Koopas has barricaded himself in the bowels of his grand castle. Innumerable traps guard every approach to Bowser's throne room—use every technique you've mastered to reach the final confrontation.
File:SMB3 W8 BC f1.png  From the top map of Part 2
File:SMB3 W8 BC f2.png  From the bottom map of Part 2
When Bowser unleashes his horrendous breath, either jump or crouch to avoid the fireballs. Stay in position until Bowser leaps into the air, then scurry away to a safe spot.
After breathing fire at you, Bowser will jump high into the air and crash down on the place you were standing just before he jumped. When he lands, he'll bust through a layer of blocks beneath him.
When Bowser jumps again, move into the depression he just landed in and wait there, dodging fireballs, until he leaps into the air. Hop out of the way at the last instant.  Bowser will pound the weakened area of the floor you just scrambled out of. If he crashes down onto the same section three times, Bowser will fall into a bottomless pit!
You score 100 points if you defeat Bowser with fireballs.
And finally, Mario will rescue Princess Toadstool from Bowser.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
You can help improve this previously featured book by addressing community concerns. It may then qualify as a featured book under current standards once again. You can ask for assistance in the projects reading room.
A PDF version is available. File size: 51.7 MB (info)
Transatlantic Encounters and Colonial Beginnings (1492 - 1620)
The Crisis of the Republic (1837 - 1877)
Manifest Destiny and the Slavery Question (1837 - 1861)
A Nation Divided: The American Civil War (1861 - 1865)
Wealth, Innovation, and World Power (1877 - 1913)
The Age of Invention and the Gilded Age (1877 - 1900)
The War to End All Wars (1914 - 1920)
The Great Depression and the New Deal (1929 - 1939)
Hope, Adversity and Challenges for the New Century (1989 - 2016)
Bush and Clinton presidencies, 1st Gulf War (1989  - 2000)
George W. Bush, September 11, 2nd Gulf War, and Terrorism
This section of the book should not be used for academic studies because it deals with events that may be too recent for "historical perspective".
Hope & Crisis: America Today and In the Future
Appendix A: Presidents and Vice Presidents of the United States
The Annotated Constitution of the United States
The History of the Native Peoples of the Americas
Basic U.S. History Q&A
A website with testing information to pass a college credit equivalent test on U.S. History from Early Colonizations to 1877.
A website with testing information to pass a college credit equivalent test on U.S. History from 1877 to Present.
A summary of the book Presidential Courage: Brave Leaders and How They Changed America 1789-1989, by By Michael Beschloss
Front Page: Radiation Oncology | RTOG Trials | Randomized Trials
Morphologically the same as Paget's disease of the breast, but unlike in the nipple, there is only rarely an underlying malignancy. It appears to be a primary epithelial malignancy
Areas of involvement: peno-scrotal area, perineum, perianal area, vulva, axillae, groin, umbilicus, eyelid
Tends to arise in sites where apocrine glands are present in high concentration
In cases with an underlying malignancy (~20% of cases), it is often a cutaneous adnexal carcinoma, usually of apocrine or eccrine glands
Presenting symptoms: pruritus, scaly eczematous lesion
Histology shows presence of Paget cells, which are large cells with abundant basophilic cytoplasm and a large hyperchromatic and pleomorphic nucleus. Staining positive for CEA, CK7, EMA, and CAM 5.2; may also show overexpression of Her2
Internal malignancies (e.g. colon, ovarian) may be associated in 10-20%
Primary treatment is surgery, but margin may be diffuse and difficult to clear. Suggested margins have been 3-5cm, Mohs should be considered
Hong Kong; 2007 PMID 17665242 -- "Extramammary Paget's Disease in Chinese Males: A 21-year Experience." (Chiu TW, World J Surg. 2007 Oct;31(10):1941-6.)
Retrospective.
Outcome: recurrence rate 35% (simple WLE 60% vs. intraop frozen sections 25%)
Vollhardt, Peter. Schore, Neil. Organic Chemistry 6th Edition. W.H. Freeman and Company. New York. 2011
Topic 3: Circular functions and trigonometry discusses functions based on the circle, how trigonometric functions are derived, and various trigonometric identities and rules.
1 3.1 The circle and radian measure
2 3.2 Trigonometry as circular functions
3 3.3 Compound and double angle identities
4 3.4 Composite trigonometric functions
5 3.5 Inverse trigonometric functions
6 3.6 Solutions to trigonometric equations
7 3.7 Sine and cosine rules
Section content: The circle: radian measure of angles; length of an arc; area of a sector
.
. All ratios are positive.
. Only the sine ratio is positive.
. Only the tangent ratio is positive.
. Only the cosine ratio is positive.
Tip: These relationships are not found in the formula booklet. However, you can use ASTC (all, sine, tangent, cosine) to make a phrase to make this relationship with the quadrants easier to remember; for example: "Add sugar to coffee".
A straight line passing through the origin O(0, 0) has the equation
.
Exact values for acute angles are summarised in the following table. Paper 1 uses this knowledge and you may also be asked to use this in Paper 2.
The first two of these are included in the formula booklet.
All three of these are included in the formula booklet.
Section content: Compound angle identities; double angle identities
The compound angle identities expresses trigonometric ratios of the sum of two angles in terms of ratios of separate angles. These are:
(note that the signs between the terms are opposite of that in the original function)
The proofs of these have been explicitly excluded from the syllabus.
The double angle identities can be derived from the compound angle identities.
...and...
Rewind: 2.3 - Transformation of graphs: translations; stretches; reflections in the axes
Consider a composite trigonometric function f where
|a| is the amplitude, half the vertical distance between the maximum and minimum height. When a is negative the graph is also reflected along y = d.
c is the phase shift, or horizontal shift (to the left or right). When c is positive the graph moves to the left; when c is negative the graph moves to the right.
d is the vertical shift (up or down). When d is positive the graph moves up; when d is negative the graph moves down.
Tip: The phase shift c is sometimes confused with bc due to the common perception that b = 1. Examination questions may trick you by expanding the expression in the trigonometric function. For example
Section content: The inverse functions arcsin x, arccos x, arctan x; their domains and ranges; their graphs
Rewind: 2.1 - Inverse function, including domain restriction; 2.3 - The graph of the inverse function as a reflection in y = x
From topic 2.1 you would have known that inverse functions will only exist for one-to-one functions and not for many-to-one functions, hence in technicality the inverse of a trigonometric function is not a function. However the domain of f(x) can be restricted so that it becomes a one-to-one function and hence has an inverse.
. Hence the domain of arcsin x and arccos x is -1 ≤ x ≤ 1, while arctan x has the domain x: x exist for all real numbers.
Alternative notation (especially on calculators; will also be used throughout the guide):
You should know the identity for sum of arctan functions
Section content: Algebraic and graphical methods of solving trigonometric equations in a finite interval, including the use of trigonometric identities and factorisation
Rewind: 2.6 - Solving polynomial equations both graphically and algebraically; use of technology to solve a variety of equations, including those where there is no appropriate analytic approach
Trigonometric equations can be solved through algebraic and graphical means. To solve such an equation algebraically:
Usually this will reduce to a single linear equation. However it can also be reduced to a polynomial whereby x is replaced with a trigonometric function. In this case solve as you would with a standard polynomial equation e.g. by factorisation, quadratic formula or the binomial theorem. You could also use the graphing function of your GDC to solve the equation when it is too difficult to solve manually.
.
To solve graphically, plot the left hand side of the equation as one graph and right hand side of the equation as another graph on the same pair of axes. Make sure that your GDC is on the correct angle mode (degrees or radians) - assume radians unless stated by the exam paper. The intersection points will be the solutions to the equation.
Section content: The cosine rule; the sine rule including the ambiguous case; area of a triangle as 1/2 ab sin C
The sine and cosine rules relate the sides and angles in any triangle.
If you are given the lengths of any two sides a and b and the angle C between those two sides (the included angle), then you can use the cosine rule to calculate the length of the remaining side c:
.
If you are given the lengths of all three sides a, b and c, then you can use the cosine rule to calculate any angle within the triangle; for angle C this is:
.
If you are given any two angles A and B and the length a side not in between these two angles - either a or b, then you can use the sine rule to calculate one of the missing sides:
.
If you are given the lengths of any two sides a and b, and the angle A or B that is not in between the two sides, then this is known as the ambiguous case as the sine rule:
. In this case, determine which one of the angles is not possible from the information given in the question.
The area of any triangle, given the lengths of any two sides a and b and the included angle C, is:
These rules are given in the formula booklet.
Edgeworth is now at the outside of the Babahlese embassy next to the stage. He has left Franziska with the Allebahstian investigation. Now we need to check out the Babahlese statue to see if there are any clues about them being moved. We are greeted by the ambassador, Kay, and Gumshoe, though they've not made any progress thus far. Edgeworth gives the Stand-In Request, Letter from a Stalker and Lady's Undershirt to Gumshoe for keeping since we don't need those pieces of evidence anymore. Edgeworth also discards the Steel Samurai's Autograph. All of our remaining evidence has also been rearranged. If we try to enter the crime scene we find that it's blocked, so we can only spend some time looking around this open-air stage.
Talk to Ambassador Palaeno.
Open-air stage: The stage is used to host events to promote Babahl. Palaeno planned to give a speech too, after being suggested by Manny Coachen, but the fire prevented that from happening.
Primidux Statue: The statue was said to be a symbol of sovereignty, which is why both countries claim the statue they possess is real.
Manny Coachen: The victim was very good at his job, so good that even Palaeno didn't realize he was involved in a smuggling ring. After Palaeno was selected as the representative of the Country Unification Council, Manny had been working extra hard. Palaeno also reveals that both countries were to merge back to one tonight if not for the events that had transpired.
Present Allebahst's Primidux Statue. Palaeno has received the news from Franziska and confirmed that the statue in the Babahlese embassy belongs to Allebahst. He also reveals that Allebahst has the real statue and that the rulers of Babahl wanted him to negotiate with Ambassador Alba to fake the results, claiming that the real statue could not be identified.
File:AAIME Silhouette Lantern.png
File:AAIME Pick.png
File:AAIME Ms. Yews Perfume.png
Now talk to Detective Gumshoe. He didn't find anything new in his investigation so far.
Investigation update: Gumshoe reveals that Ambassador Palaeno gave him a lantern. The flame is green because the fuel used for the lantern is whitcrystal oil only found in Babahl. There are cutouts on the sides of the lantern that create silhouettes. The Silhouette Lantern is added to your Organizer.
Edgeworth now recalls all the facts of the case and determines that the person that smuggled the murder weapons across both countries must be the fake Yatagarasu, who made her appearance in both embassies. Ambassador Palaeno tells us that the Yatagarasu was first spotted in Allebahst's rose garden where Ambassador Alba was to give a speech. Kay gives us something she found that looks like a guitar pick. It is slightly wet, but there isn't any water around here. The Pick is added to your Organizer. Kay also gives us Ms. Yew's perfume bottle that she found and kept seven years ago. Ms. Yew's Perfume is added to your Organizer.
Now that we've just about wrapped up things at Babahl, let's continue our investigation at Allebahst, where the Yatagarasu was first spotted.
File:AAIME crime05f.png
File:AAIME Fountain Spouts.png
File:AAIME King Statue.png
File:AAIME Queen Statue.png
File:AAIME crime05g.png
File:AAIME crime05h.png
Edgeworth meets up with Franziska back at Allebahst. After exchanging some information, Franziska reveals that the silhouette of the Yatagarasu appeared just as Ambassador Alba was to give a speech. After that, the Babahlese fire started. Without further ado, let's get started!
Talk to Agent Lang. He says that he was called back to the Interpol Headquarters for some urgent matter, but he isn't leaving until the murderer is found.
Yatagarasu's appearance: Lang said that he witnessed Yatagarasu's shadow at the same time as the others. The spotlight went on, the shadow was revealed, and the lights went off. When Lang and his men managed to get the lights back on, the Great Thief had vanished. He later found out that the reason the lights went off was that the cord for the electronics was unplugged, either on purpose or by accident. Lang also says that it couldn't have been someone else's shadow, since that shape is unique.
Examine the pool. Franziska mentions that the pool's water is used to put out fires. Edgeworth also observes that the pool automatically refills until it reaches its normal level. That means the pool must have been used recently. The Fountain Spouts are added to your Organizer.
At this moment, Larry suddenly emerges from the pool! He says that the reason he was there was to find the lost Iron Infant doll, which he lost around the time he shook hands with the ambassador. He then swims back into the pool.
Examine the left statue. Edgeworth notes its similarity to the Primidux Statue. Examining the right statue reveals that its the statue of a queen. Not much information for us.
After you've done all that, Edgeworth says that he has figured out how Yatagarasu's shadow was created. Present the left statue. It doesn't look like the shadow, but that's because the statue is only part of the shadow. Present the right statue. The Yatagarasu's shadow is in fact, a combination of the shadow of two statues. Some spotlights have been moved during the confusion when the shadow appeared, which is why it no longer shows the shadow.
Edgeworth attempts to recreate the shadow. Combining them looks nothing like the real shadow, so what did we do wrong? The king's statue shadow makes up most of the shadow's shape, but whoever created the shadow only needed part of the queen statue. Present her left hand. The missing portion from the king statue's shadow has five, thin lines which resemble hands. Rearranging the spotlights so it only shines on the hand makes it look exactly like the shadow we saw. That means the Yatagarasu wasn't in Allebahst tonight, only in Babahl, though we can assume she has an accomplice in Allebahst to set up the shadow. And with that, our investigation is complete!
Bad Ending Three: If you run out of logic here, Lang decides that it's too late at night. He asks Edgeworth to go home and get some rest as Lang himself is just playing around.
File:AAIME Photo of Yatagarasu.png
Detective Badd joins us, saying that he left the murder investigation to Agent Lang and wants to focus on catching the Yatagarasu. He said that a woman who claims to be an international journalist (Ace Attorney fans might deduce her to be Lotta Hart) gave him a photo. It was taken from a nearby building after the fires and shows a shadowy figure flying over the wall. The Photo of Yatagarasu is added to your Organizer. This is not the first time in the series where we have dealt with flying people. The figure flew from the Babahlese side, so that's where we should head for.
Returning to the theatre, we are joined by Kay. Go right into the Babahlese side. The staff had finished cleaning up the secretariat's office, so maybe we'll be able to get some new clues we previously missed. First, we need to compare the state of the room before and after the fire. Then we need to find out who the mysterious man Kay saw is. Kay seems to recognize the shadow in the photo we just received as that suspicious person. Let's get down to investigating!
File:AAIME Fires in Babahl.png
File:PWAATaT Testimony.png
Talk to Ambassador Palaeno. He reveals that two fires broke out tonight. The first broke out during the Jammin' Ninja show and only affected the fourth and fifth floors of the embassy, but was kept secret to avoid causing panic. Detective Badd also mentioned the first fire when he gave us the photo, which means it was taken right after the first fire. The Photo of Yatagarasu is updated in your Organizer. The second fire occurred on the third floor, alleged to be caused by the embers on the upper floors after the first fire. The Fires in Babahl are added to your Organizer.
Morning activities: Palaeno was to shake hands with the Jammin' Ninja, but Manny Coachen wanted to turn it into a photo op, so they spent the morning tidying up Manny's office. The event couldn't be held in the ambassador's office because it was being renovated. You get the Renovations logic. That is also why the knife set and the Primidux Statue are in the secretariat's office. Palaeno also says that he used the fireplace during the cleanup, accidentally spilling some Babahlese ink on the back wall. He also forgot to clean the ashes in the fireplace. Amb. Palaeno's Testimony is added to your Organizer.
Afternoon activities: Manny and Palaeno were together that afternoon, until the start of the Steel Samurai show. Palaeno had to return to his office to get ready for the photo op at the end of the show. After that, he went back to his office, but then the fire broke out and he had to escape down the stairs. This means that Palaeno did not see the victim at all after the Steel Samurai show.
First, examine the table to enter a close-up scene. Examine the ink bottle. It is still quite full, and the fire couldn't burn away any of it. Palaeno notes that something is odd about the ink. Talk to him about it.
File:AAIME crime05i.png
Mr. Coachen's ink: Manny Coachen was worried about his office when the second fire broke out, so he rushed in. Ambassador Palaeno tried to follow him but was stopped by an inferno of green flames when he tried to enter the office. The flames could only have been caused by the whitcrystal oil in the ink, so he was quite surprised when there was still a bottle of ink on Manny's desk.
Back at the close-up scene, examine the open drawer to open it a bit more. Now that you can see what's in the drawer, deduce the orange paper and present DeMasque II's Note. The shape and color of the note look exactly like the one we have. Palaeno says that its a souvenir from somewhere in the country. He also confirms that the handwriting on the note is Manny's. That means Manny ordered DeMasque II to steal Allebahst's Primidux Statue! Talk to the ambassador again.
Job for DeMasque II: Babahl's Primidux Statue was a fake, as we were previously told. Palaeno was concerned about this fact when the statues were to be examined at the end of the event. After consulting the victim, he probably wrote the note. Why did Manny want to ensure Palaeno became the ambassador of the reunited Cohdopia as he himself was more capable?
Detective Gumshoe enters the room, saying that he has all the information about the office before the fire. With this information, Kay can use Little Thief to recreate the state of the room before and during the fire!
Bad Ending Four: If you run out of logic here, Shih-na ends the investigation and asks Edgeworth and Kay to vacate the premise.
File:AAIME Wire.png
First, examine the grandfather clock. It seems like it was flush against the wall before the fire, but was moved afterwards. Detective Gumshoe finds a length of wire inside the clock that prevented it from chiming. The Wire is added to your Organizer. Someone, likely Mr. Coachen's killer, tampered with the clock.
Now examine the knife rack. It appears that one of the knives had already gone missing before the fire.
Examine the flames. Since the flames were out by the time Kay entered the room and because Ambassador Palaeno could not do the same when the fire was burning, we can assume that the only people that entered after the fire started was Kay and the mysterious person. There is one thing that could be the source of the fire, even though it's not as large. Present the Silhouette Lantern. The lantern burns with whitcrystal oil, which is probably what caused the fire. Palaeno was mistaken about the source. Present the Babahlese Ink. The ink also consists of whitcrystal oil, which was why Palaeno mistook it as the fuel for the fire. We know that the victim smuggled a lot of ink, which could be used to create something flammable, something that could cause such a large fire. Present the Counterfeit Bills. Manny Coachen was counterfeiting the bills used in Zheng Fa, and whoever started the fire used the bills as fuel. Counterfeit Bills are updated in your Organizer.
Now talk to Gumshoe. He says that the first fire took him by surprise and he tried to escape using the elevator, but it was being used by someone, so he had to use the stairs. The ambassador mentions that all staff members are warned to use the stairs, so who used the elevator?
File:AAIME crime05j.png
During the fire: A mysterious person wearing a long coat was spotted in the embassy, causing quite some panic. It seems to match the figure that Kay saw.
What you saw: Gumshoe couldn't chase the Yatagarasu because he was lost, but soon encountered Kay being arrested by Shih-na. Gumshoe also mentions that he saw Shih-na coming out of the next room when he was nearing Kay's location. You get the Shih-na's location logic.
File:AAIME Case 05 Logic 06.png
File:AAIME Revolving Fireplace Wall.png
File:AAIME Case 05 Logic 07.png
File:AAIME Case 05 Logic 08.png
We have examined everything in this office, but there is still something that bothers Edgeworth. The office looks very similar to Ambassador Alba's. Ambassador Palaeno reveals that both embassies are bilaterally symmetrical. You get the Bilateral symmetry logic.
Now go into Logic Mode and connect Bilateral symmetry and Connected fireplaces. If the building is symmetrical, that means this room's fireplace might also have a hidden passage. The killer likely used this passage to escape. You get the Revolving fireplace used? logic.
We are now in a close-up scene of the fireplace. Sure enough, there is an X that activates the revolving wall, but something is missing from this scene. Deduce the logs and present Amb. Palaeno's Testimony. Ambassador Palaeno said that he forgot to clean up the ash after burning some files this morning, so where did they go? You get the Missing ashes logic. Kay inputs some new information into the recreation, so now the fireplace has the missing ashes.
Go back into Logic Mode and connect Revolving fireplace used? with Missing ashes. Ambassador Palaeno also mentioned that he spilt some ink on the back wall, but we can't see any trace of it. This indicates that the revolving wall was used and that both sides had been switched. The Revolving Fireplace Wall is added to your Organizer. That means whoever killed Mr. Coachen escaped through the fireplace. You get the Escaped through revolving fireplace logic.
Finally, connect Shih-na's location with Escaped through revolving fireplace. Since Gumshoe witnessed Shih-na coming out of the next room, it could mean that she used the secret passage, and that might make her Manny Coachen's killer!
With that, our investigation is complete!
Edgeworth now recalls the time Kay was arrested. Shih-na came out of the next room as soon as she heard Kay scream and instantly accused Kay of the crime. However, we need to do something else before confronting Shih-na. Edgeworth requests Gumshoe to run a handwriting analysis on DeMasque II's note. He also makes Gumshoe try and fit through the passage, through the ashes.
We might have figured out who Manny's killer might be, but there are still a lot of unanswered questions. Gumshoe returns from the next room. His jacket is dirty from the ashes and ink, but we now know that someone can move through the passage. We still need the results from the handwriting analysis, though that would take a bit of time. For now, we should wait at the Theatrum Neutralis with Agent Lang and Agent Shih-na.
The chapter now ends.
Ventricular tachycardia is a type of arrhythmia defined by a series of three or more consecutive heart beats arising below the atrioventricular node at a rate of between 100 and 250 beats per minute (bpm).[1][2] It is the most commonly occurring life-threatening arrhythmia and is known to become increasingly prevalent with age.[1][2]
A higher risk of ventricular tachycardia exists among the following populations:[2]
People with conditions that may affect heart disease, such as hypertension or diabetes
People with a family history of sudden cardiac death or coronary artery disease
People who have previously experienced heart disease
Ventricular tachycardia can be classified as either sustained (occurring for more than 30 seconds) or non-sustained (occurring for less than 30 seconds).[1][2] The condition is often found in patients with underlying structural heart diseases, such as myocarditis, congenital heart disease and myocardial ischemia.[2][3] However, around ten percent of all cases of ventricular tachycardia occur in patients with structurally normal hearts and no underlying disease.[4] In this instance, the condition is referred to as idiopathic.[4]
For sufferers of ventricular tachycardia, exercise may be a trigger of the condition.[5] In many cases, exercise-induced ventricular tachycardia leads to the discovery of an underlying structural heart condition. However, the occurrence of idiopathic ventricular tachycardia during exercise is also common.[6] Often, ventricular tachycardia will occur during the recovery period post exercise due to increased levels of adrenaline.[7][8] In a study conducted in 1991, it was found that 70% of patients tested experienced idiopathic ventricular tachycardia as a result of exercise.[9] A similar study found that exercise initiated ventricular tachycardia in 80% of idiopathic patients and 80% of patients with coronary artery disease.[6]
Research identifies that there may also be a link between endurance exercise and the prevalence of ventricular tachycardia. It has been suggested that athletes undergoing continuous and excessively strenuous training may have a weakened heart, predisposing them to a decrease in cardiac function.[10] As a result, left ventricular function may also be decreased and the risk of ventricular tachycardia amplified.[5] Research shows that a heightened vagal tone may also contribute to athletes experiencing bouts of ventricular tachycardia.[10] Greg Welch and Emma Carney, both triathletes, are examples of high level endurance athletes who have had their careers cut short by exercise-induced ventricular tachycardia.[5]
Symptoms experienced by patients with both sustained and non-sustained ventricular tachycardia may include:[2][4]
However, ventricular tachycardia patients may also be asymptomatic.[2]
The prognosis for patients with ventricular tachycardia is largely dependent on whether or not there is an underlying structural heart condition. For idiopathic patients, ventricular tachycardia induced by exercise may be recurrent but ultimately has a good prognosis.[9][11] However, patients with a heart condition may be at a higher risk of ventricular fibrillation, an uncoordinated contraction of the heart resulting in cardiac arrest.[5]
When symptoms of ventricular tachycardia present, it is highly recommended that the patient be transferred to hospital immediately, where they will undergo an electrocardiogram (ECG) to confirm the diagnosis. Upon diagnosis of ventricular tachycardia, patients generally undergo further investigation for any structural heart diseases.[1][5] Treatment of ventricular tachycardia varies depending on the results of this investigation; however, various lifestyle changes are often recommended to all patients. These include discontinuing smoking, avoidance of excessive drug and alcohol use as well as dietary modification.[2] Use of an implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) is also common amongst patients with ventricular tachycardia. An ICD is a small, electronic device placed in the chest that detects any abnormal heart rhythm, such as that experienced during ventricular tachycardia. The ICD returns the heart to normal rhythm either by tuning the heart beat to a programmed rhythm or electrically shocking the heart.[12] Another treatment commonly used is radiofrequency ablation, a procedure in which abnormal tissue is destroyed by heat generated from a high-frequency current.[7][13] Radiofrequency ablation produces a cure rate of around 90% in patients with idiopathic ventricular tachycardia.[4][13]
Patients with ventricular tachycardia are often restricted from participating in exercise of moderate to high intensity; however, controlled levels of exercise can be maintained following medical consultation.[5] It has been found that the risk of ventricular tachycardia decreases with deconditioning, which in turn may decrease the risk of sudden cardiac death. For this reason, athletes with the condition are generally no longer able to compete at a high level and may be forced to retire from competitive sport.[10]
↑ a b c d Dadkhah, S. et al. 2011, ‘Exercise Induced Non-Sustained Ventricular Tachycardia and Indication for Invasive Management’, Clinical Medicine Insights: Cardiology, vol. 5, p. 121-126.
↑ a b c d e f g h Clinical Key, n.d. Ventricular Tachycardia, retrieved 14/10/13, http://www.clinicalkey.com.au/topics/cardiology/ventricular-tachycardia.html.
↑ Khan, I. 2002, ‘Exercise-induced bidirectional ventricular tachycardia with alternating right and left bundle branch block-type patterns--a case report’, Angiology, no. 53, vol. 5, p. 593-598.
↑ a b c d Moreno R, Merino J. 2009, ‘Ventricular tachycardia in patients without apparent structural heart disease : Focus on ventricular outflow tract tachycardia’, ESC Council for Cardiology Practice, vol. 8, no. 11.
↑ a b c d e f Seedhouse, E. 2012, Triathlon’s Danger Sign: Ventricular Tachycardia, retrieved 14/10/13, http://triathlon.competitor.com/2010/07/insidetri/triathlons-danger-sign-ventricular-tachycardia_10996
↑ a b Rodriguez, L. et al. 1990, ‘Exercise-induced sustained symptomatic ventricular tachycardia: Incidence, clinical, angiographic and electrophysiologic characteristics’, European Heart Journal, no. 1, vol. 3 p. 225-232.
↑ a b Fogoros, R. 2011, Repetitive Monomorphic Ventricular Tachycardia (RMVT), retrieved 14/10/13, http://heartdisease.about.com/od/palpitationsarrhythmias/a/Repetitive-Monomorphic-Ventricular-Tachycardia-Rmvt.htm
↑ Mokotoff, D. et al. 1980, ‘Exercise-Induced Ventricular Tachycardia’, Chest Journal, no. 77, vol. 1, p. 10-16.
↑ a b Mont, L. et al. 1991, ‘Clinical and electrophysiologic characteristics of exercise-related idiopathic ventricular tachycardia’, The American Journal of Cardiology, no. 68, vol. 9, p. 897-900.
↑ a b c Maron B, Pelliccia A. 2006, ‘The Heart of Trained Athletes: Cardiac Remodeling and the Risks of Sports, Including Sudden Death’, Circulation, no. 114, p. 1633-1644.
↑ Yang, J. et al. 1991, ‘Ventricular tachycardia during routine treadmill testing. Risk and prognosis’, Archives of Internal Medicine, no. 151, vol. 2, p. 349-353.
↑ Heart Foundation, 2010, Implantable Cardiac Defibrillators (ICDs), retrieved 14/10/13, http://www.heartfoundation.org.au/SiteCollectionDocuments/Implantable-Cardiac-Defibrillators.pdf
↑ a b American Heart Association, n.d. Ablation for Arrhythmias, retrieved 14/10/13, http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/Conditions/Arrhythmia/PreventionTreatmentofArrhythmia/Ablation-for-Arrhythmias_UCM_301991_Article.jsp
A client-server model is defined as the relationship between two computer programs that communicates with each other. The clients initiate the communication by sending service requests to the servers. They are typically personal computer with network software applications installed. Mobile device can also be function as a client. Servers are usually devices with files and databases stored inside, including complex applications like web sites. They have higher-powered central processors, larger disk drives and more memory compare to the client. The server will fulfil the request of the client by sharing resources with the clients while the client does not have any processing capability.  This client-server model often happened over a network of computers. However, it can happen within a single computer too.
The client-server model can be found in functions such as email exchange, web access and database access. A web browser is actually a client. It runs software locally that processes information received from the web server. In a typical client-server model, one server is activated and it will wait for the client requests. Multiple client programs share the service of the same server program. They are often part of a larger application. The Internet's main program, TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol) is also built based on client-server model. The TCP/IP allow user to make client requests for FTP (File Transfer Protocol) servers.[1]
The client-server architecture helps to reduce network traffic by providing a query response. It does not provide total file transfer. There are two type of the client-server architecture, which are the two tiers architecture and the three tier architectures. As for the two tier client-server architecture, the user interface is stored in the client while the data are stored in the server. Information processing is separated between the user interface environment and the data management server environment. In the three tiers client-server architecture, middleware is used between user interface environment and the data management server environment. This helps to overcome the drawback of the two tiers client-server architecture. It improves the performance when there are a large number of users. It also improves in flexibility as compare to the two tier approach. However, its development environment is more difficult to use than the development of the two tier’s application.[2]
A client program is a program running on one end system (host) that requests and receives a service from a server program running on another end system. The client-server model includes Web, e-mail, file transfer remote login, and many other popular applications. Client-server internet applications are defined as distributed applications since a client program typically runs on one computer and the server program runs on another computer.
The client program and server program interact by sending messages to each other over the internet. At this level of abstraction, the routers, links and other nuts and bolts of the internet serve as a black box that transfers messages between the distributed of an internet application.
In client-server architecture, the server is an always-on host and the clients host can be either always-on or sometimes-on. The Web is a classic example of an always-on host. In the client-server architecture, clients do not communicate directly with each other. For instance, two browsers do not directly communicate. Besides that, because a server is an always-on host, a client can always contact the server by sending a packet to the server’s address.
A single server host isn't capable of keeping up with all the requests from clients; the server will quickly become overwhelmed if it is only one or two servers that handle all of the requests. To solve this problem, data intensive is often used to create a powerful virtual server in server-client architectures (application base on client-server are often infrastructure intensive, that means they require the service provider to purchase, install and maintain server farms). The service providers need to pay a cost for an interconnection and bandwidth cost for sending and receiving data and infrastructure intensive. For example, a popular service like Facebook is infrastructure intensive and is costly to provide.
However, not all of the internet consists of pure client programs interacting with pure server programs. Two predominant architecture paradigms are used in modern network applications, client-server and peer-to-peer (P2P). Different from client-server, P2P is direct communication between pairs of intermittently connected hosts. Some examples include internet calling (e.g.Skype), file distribution (e.g.BitTorrent), file sharing (e.g.eMule) and IPTV (e.gPPLive)[3].[3]
A long time ago, client-server computing was just using mainframes and connecting to dumb terminals. Through the years, personal computers started to evolve and replaced these terminals but the processing is still done on the mainframes. With the improvement in computer technology, the processing demands started to split between personal computers and mainframes.
The term client-server refers to a software architecture model consisting of two parts, client systems and server systems. These two components can interact and form a network that connect multiple users. Using this technology, PCs are able to communicate with each other on a network. These networks were based on file sharing architecture, where the PC downloads files from corresponding file server and the application is running locally using the data received. However, the shared usage and the volume of data to be transferred must be low to run the system well.
As the networks grew, the limitations of file sharing architectures become the obstacles in the client-server system. This problem is solved by replaced the file server with a database server. Instead of transmitting and saving the file to the client, database server executes request for data and return the result sets to the client. In the results, this architecture decreases the network traffic, allowing multiple users to update data at the same time.
Typically either Structured Query Language (SQL) or Remote Procedure Calls (RPCs) are used to communicate between the client and server.[4] There are several types of client-server architecture.  One of the architecture is the Two Tier Architecture, where a client is directly connected to a server. This architecture has a good application development speed and work well in homogeneous environments when the user population work is small. The problem exists in this architecture is the distribution of application logic and processing in this model. If the application logic is distributed to dozens of client systems, the application maintenance will be very difficult. To overcome the limitations of the Two-Tied Architecture, Three Tier Architecture is introduced. By introducing the middle tier, clients connect only to the application server instead of connect directly to the data server. By this way, the load of maintaining the connection is removed. The database server is able to manage the storage and retrieve the data well. Thus, the application logic and processing can be handled in any application systematically.To enhance the Three Tier Architecture, it can be extended to N-tiers when the middle tier provides connections to various types of services, integrating and coupling them to the client, and to each other.For example , web server is added to Three Tier Architecture to become Four Tier Architecture where the web server handle the connection between application server and the client.Therefore ,more users can be handled at the same time.[5]
A server farm or server cluster is a group of computers acting as server that is kept in a single location. When demands are increase on a computer server, it may be difficult or impossible to handle with just only one server. Hence, server farm is being used. With server farm, workload is distributed among multiple server components, providing for expedited computing processes.
Server farms were most frequently used by institutions that were academic/ research- based or big companies. However, since computers and companies have become more main stream, server farm is now being used in many companies regardless of the companies’ size or demand.[6]
A server farm perform services as providing centralized access control, file access, printer sharing, and backup for workstation users. The servers may have individual operating systems or a shared operating system and may also be set up to provide load balancing when there are many server requests.[7]
In a server farm, there are usually a primary and a backup server. These two servers might be given the same task to perform. Hence, if one server fails, the other server can act as backup. This is to maintain server functionality while preventing the server from going offline if a problem were to occur. Usually, a server farm will have network switches and routers, these devices allow different parts of the server farm to communicate. All these computers, router, power supplies and all the others components are typically mounted on a 19-inch rack in a server room.[8]
The performance of a server farm is not evaluated by the performance of the processors. A server farm performance is actually limited by the server room’s cooling system and the cost of electricity. Due to its large consumption of electricity, the design parameter for a server farm is usually based on performance per watt. For those on a 24/7 run system, power saving features is more important in order to make sure that the system is able to shut down some parts according to demand. Thus, the service will not be interrupted while the system can save more power.[9]
There are many examples of the Client-Server Model. In this chapter, we will discuss on the interface, internet, banking account and data processing system.
Firstly, we will discuss about the interface. Interface is a concept where components interact between each other. A component is then able to function independently while using interfaces to communicate with other components via an input/output system and an associated protocol.[10]
The internet is also an example of a client server. On the internet, we are the clients and requests are sent by us to the server. The internet which is the server will then search for the subject and then provide us with options. Hence, the internet, or also known as the World Wide Web is actually a huge collection of servers that responds to various types of clients. The information that is available on the web server can be access by many different clients.[11]
The process of checking account balance in a bank using online banking system is another example of a client-server program. The client program in the computer will send service request to the server of the bank. The program may also forward the request to its own database client program which sends the request to the server database of another bank in order to get the information. The information is then sent back to the bank’s data client and return back to the client program of the computer which display the account balance to the user.[12]
Data processing is another application that implements the client-server model. When copying a file from another computer, a client is used to access the file on the server. In other words, the server serves data to the client.
↑ Sullivan, J. (2000). Definition::Client/Server. In TechTarget. Retrieved November 10, 2011, from http://searchnetworking.techtarget.com/definition/client-server
↑ Types of Client Server Architecture? (2011,, November 10). In Answer.com. Retrieved November 10, 2011, from http://wiki.answers.com/Q/Types_of_client_server_architecture
↑ Ross, K. (2010). Networking: A Top-down Approach, Fifth Edition
↑ Andykramek ( 2008, September 29). Introduction to Client Server Architecture. Retrieved November 15, 2011, from http://weblogs.foxite.com/andykramek/archive/2008/09/29/6935.aspx
↑ David Raney(2009).The Evolution of Client/Server Computing. Retrieved November 15, 2011, from http://cis.cuyamaca.net/draney/214/web_server/client.htm
↑ Server Farm (2011, November 23). In Server Farm Org. Retrieved November 23, 2011, from http://serverfarm.org/
↑ Definition:: Server Farm (2011, November 23). In TechTarget. Retrieved November 23, 2011, from http://searchcio-midmarket.techtarget.com/definition/server-farm
↑ What is a Server Farm? (2011, November 23). In WiseGeek. Retrieved November 23, 2011, from http://www.wisegeek.com/what-is-a-server-farm.htm
↑ Server Farm (2011, November 23). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved November 23, 2011, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Server_farm
↑ Mitchell, B. Client (2011) Server Model:: What is Client Server Network Technology. In About.com. Retrieved November 23, 2011, from http://compnetworking.about.com/od/basicnetworkingfaqs/a/client-server.htm
↑ Greer, J. D. (1995-1996) Client/Server, the internet and WWW. In Robelle Solutions Technology Inc. Retrieved November 23, 2011, from http://www.robelle.com/www-paper/paper.html
↑ Client Server Model (2011, November 10). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved November 10, 2011, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Client%E2%80%93server_model
Today in 2001 The Secret History of Hacking was published, a documentary film about the golden age of hackers whose culture of creativity and sharing spawned the computer industry and their own exclusion with commercialization.
1.4 1992–present: Modern era
Introduction  |  Contributors  |  Textual Introduction
Bibliography A-M  |  Bibliography N-Z  |  Encoded Materials
←Nowe fare well love and theye lawes forever
f. [75r] 1    ffor to love her for her lokes{es} lovelye2    my herte was sett in thought right furmlye3    trusting bye toruthe trouthe to have had Relessed redresse /4    but she hath made anodre promes5    and hathe gyven me leve full honestelye6    yet do I not refuse yt gretelye7    for on my faith I lovid so surelye8    but reson woll that I doo leese9    for to love her.10    sins that in love the paynes be dedelye11    me thinckes{es} yt best that reddelye12    I doo retorne to my furst addresse13    for at this tyme to grete is the presse14    and parells apere to abbundauntelye15    for to love her.
Attributed to Sir Thomas Wyatt,[1] this poem was entered by H8. The speaker judges that the perils of loving the lady are too great; thus, he will reasonably return to a lighter, more courteous demeanor toward her (“my furst addresse”). This poem provides an interesting glimpse into the different manners and consequences of addressing a lady.
↑ R.A. Rebholz, ed. Sir Thomas Wyatt: The Complete Poems. London: Penguin, 1978. 223.
1      lovelye] lovely LEge10 2      herte] hert LEge10     sett] set LEge10     furmlye] fermely LEge10 3      bye toruthe] by LEge10     trouthe] trought LEge10     Relessed redresse /] redresse LEge10 4      anodre] an othee LEge10     promes] promese LEge10 5      hathe] hath LEge10     gyven] geven LEge10     love] leve LEge10     honestelye] honestly LEge10 6      refuse yt gretelye] reioyse it greately LEge10 7      lovid] loved LEge10     so] to LEge10     surelye] surely LEge10 8      reson] reason LEge10     woll] will LEge10     doo loosse] do sesse LEge10 9      her.] her> LEge10 10      sins] Syns LEge10     be dedelye] ben dedly LEge10 11      thinckes] thincke LEge10     yt] it LEge10     riddelye] reddely LEge10 12      doo] do LEge10     retorne] retorn LEge10     furst] first LEge10     addresse] adresse LEge10 13      grete] great LEge10     presse] prese LEge10 14      parells] perilles LEge10     apere] appere LEge10     abbundauntelye] abundauntely LEge10 15      her.] her LEge10
All franks are inscribed “VENEZUELA”.
Most stamps show a License number (L#) rather than a Meter number (M#).
The stamps are grouped according to appearance and function as follows:A - Commercial use designs, inscribed “CORREOS”
B - Commercial use designs, inscribed “IPOSTEL”
GROUP A: Stamps for private and commercial use, inscribed “CORREOS”
A1. Pitney Bowes “R”  (MV), 1950.
Horizontal design incorporating TM.
Inscribed “EEUU DE VENEZUELA/ CORREOS” across top.
Horse design between TM and value box.
L# with “LIC.—“ prefix and “-P.B.” suffix.
A2. Pitney Bowes “R”  (MV).
As Type A1 but inscribed “REPUBLICA DE VENEZUELA/ CORREOS” at top.
A. L# with “LIC.—“ prefix and “-P.B.” suffix
B. L# with “MH.—“ prefix and “-P.B.” suffix
Similar to Type A2, but value box is wider.
L# with “LIC.” prefix and “P.B.” suffix.
A4. Pitney Bowes-GB “5000”  (MV).
Similar to Type A3 but country inscription starts right of the town mark and extends beyond the right side of the value box.
L# with “LIC.” prefix and “P.B.” suffix.
A5. Pitney Bowes-GB “6300”  (MV).
Similar to Type A4 but “CORREOS” is below the value box, and the date and value figures are on the same level.
L# below “CORREOS” with “LIC.” prefix and “P.B.” suffix.
A6. Pitney Bowes-GB “Automax”  (MV).
Frank with single, simulated perforation border line.
Country name in curved panel at top. “CORREOS” in panel at bottom with “BOLIVARES” and M# above.
L# with “P.B.” prefix.
V/F: =0.oo
A7. Francotyp “Cc/Ccm”  (MV).
Upright frank with simulated perforation outer border and straight-line inner border.
“BOLIVARES” above “CORREOS” in scroll at bottom.
Meter model “FRANCOTYP CCM” above L# with “SERIAL” prefix below TM.
a. Without “BOLIVARES” [$5]
Upright frank with double, straight-line frame.
Country name in scroll at top.
Ornamental design above value figures.
L# with “H (circled) HASLER” prefix below frank.
Spacing between TM and frank variable.
A. “Bs.” right of value figures
B. “Bs.” left of value figures
V/F: 0,oo  ✳0,oo  ◇0,oo
a. M# repeated inside TM below date
b. With 5-digit impression counter number high left of TM
c. Unengraved ‘half moon’ in TM below date
Upright frank with single, straight-line frame.
Coat of arms breaks frame at lower right.
“BOLIVARES” above and “CORREOS” at left of coat of arms.
L# with “POSTALIA” prefix, low, outside frank at left.
a. Value figures break frame line at left
Horizontal rectangle with large “CORREOS” across bottom and small “Bs” at right.
Frank without ornaments.
L# with “H” prefix below frank.
GROUP B: Stamps for private and commercial use, inscribed “IPOSTEL”
Small upright frank with double straight-line frame.
Identification number between town mark and frank.
Only two examples seen, both quite weak, from 1987 and 1996, identification numbers S/017 and [S?]043.
Presumably with "IPOSTEL" in the frank but possibly not.
As Type A10 but with "IPOSTEL" across bottom of frank.
Small "DE" between "REPUBLICA" and "VENEZUELA".
L# with “H” prefix below frank.
B3. Pitney Bowes-GB “Paragon”  (MV).
Similar to Type A5 but value box much deeper with “IPOSTEL” below.
Without “LIC”.
M# with “PBE” prefix.
B4. Pitney Bowes-GB “A900”  (MV).
Similar to Type A5 but value box is wider, value figures are larger, and with “IPOSTEL” replacing “CORREOS”.
M# with “PBE” prefix.
B5. Pitney Bowes-GB “5000” series  (MV).
Similar to Type B5 but "IPOSTEL" is above the value box.
Value figures are below the level of the date figures.
M# with “PBE” prefix.
OO1. Universal “MultiValue”  (MV), 1943 or earlier. [$20]
Similar to Type A6 but with “E.E.U.U. DE / VENEZUELA” at top and with large “G.N.” in dotted letters above “CORREOS” at bottom.
Similar to Type A2 but with “REP. DE VENEZUELA” across top.
Large “G.N.” below value box.
Identification number 001 without prefix is below the horse (obscured in the image).
Wikipedia has related information at Hybrid Kernel
A hybrid kernel is one that combines aspects of both micro and monolithic kernels, but there is no exact definition. Often, "hybrid kernel" means that the kernel is highly modular, but all runs in the same address space. This allows the kernel avoid the overhead of a complicated message passing system within the kernel, while still retaining some microkernel-like features.
Programmers familiar with C, C++ or Java are likely to find this section familiar, and may want to skim or skip it at their discretion.
This chapter introduces the basics of conditions and loops, the basic constructs of program flow.
Simple Looping (The while and do-while loops)
In 1820, Joseph Smith Jr. was a 14-year-old boy in upstate New York.  There was a great excitement in the area about religion.  Young Joseph attended their meetings "as often as occasion would permit."  He had a hard time determining which sect he should join, however.  They all interpreted the Bible so differently that he lost all hope of answering the question by an appeal to the Bible.
One day, while reading his bible, he came across a passage in James 1:5, which reads, "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him."
Joseph decided to do as the scripture directed and ask God.  On a spring morning in 1820, he went to a grove of trees near his home and asked God in prayer for a forgiveness of sins.  In answer to his prayer, God the Father and Jesus Christ appeared to him. He asked the personages "which of all the sects was right" and was told that none of them contained a fullness of the gospel. Joseph was to restore the Church of Jesus Christ to the earth as it had been in the time of Jesus' ministry. On April 6, 1830, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was formally organized, and from that time the fullness of the gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored to the earth.
Use of Firearm in Commission of an Offence (85)
Possession of a Weapon for a Dangerous Purpose (88)
Possession of a Restricted or Prohibited Firearm (95)
Possession of a Weapon Contrary to an Order (117.01)
Making Sexual Explicit Materials Available to Child (171.1)
Agree or Arrange a Sexual Offence Against Child (172.2)
Failing to Provide the Necessities of Life (215)
Breach of Undertaking, Recognizance, or Probation (145, 733)
Failure to Attend Court or Appear (145)
Intimidation of a Justice System Participant (423.1)
Dangerous Operation of a Motor Vehicle (249)
Flight from a Peace Officer (249.1)
Failure to Stop at Scene of Accident (252)
Theft and Forgery of a Credit Card (342)
Use of Firearm in Commission of an Offence (85)
Possession of a Weapon for a Dangerous Purpose (88)
Possession of a Restricted or Prohibited Firearm (95)
Possession of a Weapon Contrary to an Order (117.01)
Agree or Arrange a Sexual Offence Against Child (172.2)
Procuring and Living on the Avails of Prostitution (212)
Failing to Provide the Necessities of Life (215)
Breach of Undertaking, Recognizance, or Probation (145, 733)
Failure to Appear or Attend Court (145)
Intimidation of a Justice System Participant (423.1)
Dangerous Operation of a Motor Vehicle (249)
Failure to Stop at Scene of Accident (252)
Theft and Forgery of a Credit Card
v • d • e Canadian Criminal Law
Books: Canadian Criminal Law - Canadian Criminal Evidence - Canadian Criminal Procedure and Practice - Canadian Criminal Sentencing
Periodic motion refers to any motion moving at a distance above and below the equilibrium position and this motion keeps repeat itself over a period of time. This type of motion is also called Oscillation .
The moving up and down of a spring
The swinging side by side of a pendulum
The moving up and down of a spring
When apply a force on an object of mass m attach to a spring , the spring will move a distance y above and below the equilibrium point
The force acts on the object is
The Restoring Force of spring is given by Hook's law as
When The Net Force on the system is 0 then there is no movement
The swinging side by side of a pendulum
The concept of a fully autonomous, mission capable, legged robot has for years been a Holy Grail of roboticists. Development of such machines has been hampered by actuators and power technology and control schemes that cannot hope to compete with even some of the “simplest” systems found in the natural world.
Faced with such a daunting task, it is not surprising that more and more researchers are beginning to look toward biological mechanisms for inspiration.
Biology provides a wealth of inspiration for robot design.
There are millions of species of animals that have evolved efficient solutions to locomotion and locomotion control.
Insects in particular are well known not only for their speed and agility but also for their ability to traverse some of the most difficult terrains imaginable; insects can be found navigating rocky ground, walking upside down, climbing vertical surfaces, or even walking on water.
Furthermore, insects almost instantly respond to injury or removal of legs by altering stance and stepping pattern to maintain efficient locomotion with a reduced number of legs [1].
Given the ultimate goal of autonomy, this ability to reconfigure locomotion strategies will be crucial to the robustness of autonomous robots [2].
There are of course other mechanisms capable of producing locomotion, most notably wheels and caterpillar treads.
While these devices are admittedly much easier to design and implement, they carry with them a set of disadvantages that inhibits their use in military or exploratory applications.
Primary amongst these limitations is the simple fact that wheels, and to a lesser extent treads, are not capable of traversing terrain nearly as complex as that which a legged vehicle is capable of maneuvering over [2].
Even wheeled and tracked vehicles designed specifically for harsh terrains cannot maneuver over an obstacle significantly shorter than the vehicle itself; a legged vehicle on the other hand could be expected to climb an obstacle up to twice its own height, much like a cockroach can.
This limitation on mobility alone means that in any environment without fairly flat, continuous terrain, a walking vehicle is far preferable to a wheeled or tracked one.
Legged vehicles are also inherently more robust than those dependent on wheels or tracks.
The loss of a single leg on a hexapod will result in only minimal loss in maneuverability; on a wheeled vehicle a damaged wheel could spell the end of mobility, and a damaged caterpillar tread almost always results in catastrophic failure.
Finally, legged vehicles are far more capable of navigating an intermittent substrate—such as a slatted surface—than wheeled vehicles [3].
Given the preceding argument for the use of legged locomotion in certain environments, one is left with the daunting task of actually designing an efficient legged robot.
While such a task is difficult to say the least, nature has provided us—literally—with a world full of templates.
Animals can be found that are capable of navigation over almost any surface, and it is from these natural solutions to locomotion problems that engineers are more and more often seeking inspiration.
Actuator Selection The selection of actuators plays a pivotal role in any mobile robot design, as the shape, size, weight and strength of an actuator must all be taken into account, and the power source of the actuators often provides the greatest constraint on a robot’s potential abilities. Actuators perform like muscles and joints of a robot to bring about motion.
Biological organisms have a great advantage over mechanical systems in that muscle, nature’s actuator of choice, has a favorable force-to-weight ratio and requires low levels of activation energy.
The most frequently used actuators, electric motors and pneumatic/hydraulic cylinders, are far from equivalent to their biological counterparts.
Electric motors are probably the most commonly used actuation and control devices in modern day robotics, and with good reason.
Motors in a wide range of sizes are readily available and they are very easy to control.
These devices are also fairly easy to implement, normally requiring just a few electrical connections. However, electric motors have several disadvantages.
Most importantly, their force-to-weight ratio is far lower than that of pneumatic and hydraulic devices, and in a field such as legged robotics, where weight is of the utmost importance, this makes them unsuitable for many applications.
Typically, electric systems have a power to weight ratio of 50-100 W/kg (including only motor and gear reducer, operating at rated power), whereas fluid systems produce 100-200 W/kg (including actuator and valve weights) [4] and biological muscle, which varies widely in properties, produces anywhere from 40-250 W/kg [5].
In addition, when trying to take advantage of an animal’s efficient  biomechanical design, the drastic difference between the rotary motion of most electric motors and the linear motion of muscle can cause complications.
Pneumatic and hydraulic cylinder systems eliminate some of the problems associated with electric motors [6].
As a general rule, they provide a significantly higher force-to-weight ratio than motors; an advantage that in itself often leads to their use, even given the increased complexity and weight of control valves and pressurized fluid lines required for operation.
These actuators also produce linear motion, which makes them more suitable to serving a role equivalent to muscle.
Unfortunately, air cylinders are better suited to “bang-bang” operation; that is, motion from one extreme to another with mechanical stops to halt motion.
Smooth walking motion requires a much larger range of states, and the  stiction present in most pressure cylinders makes even coarse position control difficult.
Fluid pressure devices are still quite massive; for example, almost seventy-five percent of CWRU’s Robot III’s weight is composed of its actuators and valves [7].
Braided pneumatic actuators (BPAs) provide a number of advantages over conventional actuation devices, and share some important characteristics with biological muscle.
These devices consist of two major components: an inflatable bladder around which is wrapped an expandable fiber mesh (Figure 1).
The resulting actuator is significantly lighter than a standard air cylinder; however, the braided pneumatic actuator is actually capable of producing greater forces (and thus possesses a much higher force-to weight-ratio) than its heavier counterpart.
When the bladder is filled with pressurized air, its volume tends to increase. Because of the constant length of the mesh fibers, this can only be accomplished by the actuator expanding radially while simultaneously contracting along its axis.
The result is a muscle-like contraction that produces a force-length curve akin to the rising phase of actual muscle [8].
An important property of BPA to note is that at maximum contraction (L/Lo≈0.69) the actuator is incapable of producing force; conversely, the maximum possible force is produced when the actuator is fully extended. Therefore, similar to muscle, the force output of these actuators is self-limited by nature.
While an electric motor controller could conceivably become unstable and drive a system until failure of either the structure or the motor, a braided pneumatic actuator driven by an unstable controller is less likely to be driven to the point of damaging itself or the surrounding structure.
Because of this property, braided pneumatic actuators are well suited for the implementation of positive load feedback, which is known to be used by animals including cockroaches, cats and humans [9].
BPAs are also known as McKibben artificial muscles [10], air muscles, and rubbertuators.
They were patented in 1957 by Gaylord and used by McKibben in orthotic devices [11].
Like biological muscle, BPAs are pull-only devices. This means that they must be used in opposing pairs, or opposing some other antagonist.
This property is of significant importance for useful application of these devices, for although it requires the use of two actuators or sets of actuators at each joint, it allows the muscle-like property of co-contraction, also known as stiffness control.
If one considers a joint in the human body, such as the elbow or knee, it should be obvious that whatever
From an engineering standpoint, this is accomplished by increasing the force produced by each muscle in such a way that the net moment produced at the joint is zero.
As a result, the joint angle remains the same but perturbations, such as the application of an outside force, result in less disturbance.
From a practical standpoint, this means that the joint can be varied through a continuum of positions and compliances independently.
The resulting joint can be stiff when needed, such as when bearing weight while walking, or compliant, as in cases of heel strike where compensation for uneven terrain may be needed.
The greatest impediment to widespread use of BPAs has been their relatively short fatigue life.
Under operating conditions such as we desire, these devices are capable of a service life on the order of 10,000 cycles as they were originally designed.
A significant improvement to these devices has been made by the Festo Corporation, which has recently introduced a new product called fluidic muscle.
This operates on the same principles as a standard BPA, with the critical difference being that the fiber mesh is impregnated inside the expandable bladder. The resulting actuators have a demonstrated fatigue life on the order of 10,000,000 cycles at high pressure.
Two previous robots developed at CWRU have provided significant insight and impetus for the design of Robot V.
Both of these cockroach-based robots are non-autonomous, and rely on off board controllers and power supplies for operation.
Robot III was the first pneumatically powered robot built at CWRU, and relied on conventional pneumatic cylinders for actuation.
This 15 kilogram robot was powerful, and was demonstrated to be capable of easily lifting payloads equivalent to its own weight.
The fundamental failing of this robot was the difficulty inherent in the control of the pneumatic cylinders; although capable of maintaining stance robustly and cycling its legs in a cockroach manner, to date this robot has not demonstrated smooth locomotion [12].
Kinematically similar to its predecessor, Robot IV implemented braided pneumatic actuators in place of Robot III’s pneumatic cylinders.
This robot was underpowered; it was barely able to lift itself, the valves were moved off-board for walking experiments.
However, this robot was significantly easier to control, in large part because the valves allowed air to be trapped inside the actuators, so that joint stiffness could be varied as well as joint position.
Using an open-loop controller, this robot was able to locomote [13]
Design Case Western Reserve University’s most recent robot, Robot V (Ajax) like its predecessors Robot IV and Robot III is based on the death head cockroach Blaberus discoidalis.
Although it is not feasible to capture the full range of motion exhibited by the insect—up to seven degrees of freedom per leg—analysis of leg motion during locomotion suggests that this is not necessary.
This is because in many cases joints demonstrate only a small range of motion, while the majority of a leg’s movement is produced by a few joints.
We have determined that three joints in the rear legs, four in the middle legs, and five in the front legs are sufficient to produce reasonable and robust walking [7] [14].
The different number of DOF in each set of limbs represents the task-oriented nature of each pair of legs.
On the insect, the front legs are relatively small and weak, but highly dexterous (Figure 2), and are thus able to effectively manipulate objects or navigate difficult terrain.
This dexterity is attained in the robot through three joints between the body and coxa.
These joints are referred to (from most proximal to most distal) as
Figure 2: Schematic of front leg with axes of joint rotation
The two remaining joints are between the coxa and femur and the femur and tibia.
The middle legs on the insect play an important role in weight support, and are critical for turning and climbing (rearing) functions; however they sacrifice some dexterity for power.
Finally, the cockroach uses its rear legs primarily for locomotion, and although these limbs are not as agile as the others, they are larger and much more powerful; likewise, the rear legs of the robot have only one joint between each of the segments.
Although each leg has a unique design, one component they have in common is the tarsus, or foot, construction. This consists of a compliant member attached to the end of the tibia and a pair of claws.
The compliant element is capable of bending to maintain contact with the ground, thus providing traction.
The claws are angled differently on each leg to assist in its specific task; for example, the claws on the rear leg are angled backwards like spines, allowing the foot additional traction when propelling the robot forward.
Each joint is driven by two opposing sets of actuators, allowing for controlled motion in both directions (previous robots have used a single actuator set paired with a spring) [15].
Each actuator set is driven by two two-way valves; one for air inlet and one for air exhaust.
This scheme doubles the number, and thus the weight, of valves as compared to Robot III; however, it allows for the implementation of stiffness control, or co-contraction.
Because the pressures in opposing actuators can be independently varied, the same joint angle can be achieved using different combinations of actuator pressures; all that is required is that the moments on a given joint sum to zero at the desired position.
As a result, a joint can be made very stiff by pressurizing both sets of actuators, or very compliant, by pressurizing one actuator only enough to overcome the mass properties of the limb to reach a desired position.
The actuators  onboard a legged robot can generally be subdivided into two classes:
One of the fundamental differences between these two types of actuators is the load that is required of them.
The swing actuators need only provide the force necessary to overcome the weight and inertia of the limb, whereas the stance actuators must support not only a significant portion of the entire mass of the robot, but also provide the force necessary for locomotion.
This disparity between operational demands can potentially lead to large, powerful stance actuators and small swing actuators (as can be seen in the human body with powerful quadriceps muscles which maintain stance, and the respectively weaker hamstring muscles, which are used for swing);
As a result, the forces required of the stance actuators are significantly reduced while the swing actuators must produce greater forces, but still remain within their operational range.
Robot V, like Robot IV, was designed as an exoskeleton, where the structural members are placed outside and around the actuators.
Not only did this allow a significant reduction in weight, but it also provided a limited protection for the actuators, which are susceptible to puncture and abrasion (Figure 3).
The vast majority of the structural elements were made of 6061-T6 Aluminum, although axles and actuator mounting shafts were made of 1018 steel, and fasteners were made from stainless steel. All joint axles were mounted in nylon journal bearings.
Whenever possible, actuators were directly mounted to both their insertion and their origin.
This precluded the need for tendons, allowing the maximum possible length of actuator to be used.
This in turn maximized the force and stroke available for each individual joint.
This was done to reduce the overall height of the robot.
The first legs to be built were the middle legs.
These were chosen for initial tests because they must be dexterous and forceful to maintain stance in a tripod gait.
After completion of the first leg the range of motion (ROM) of each of its joints was measured and compared to the design values. These data are summarized below:
These tests were performed at both 5.5 and 6.25 bar, with no significant difference between the results of the two, suggesting that at these pressures the actuators had reached their full contraction.
Although the desired ROMs were not reached, the measured ROMs are in excess of those demonstrated by animal.
The demonstrated ROM’s of the leg were deemed sufficient for walking and climbing.
A gantry was constructed to support the middle legs for preliminary stance and motion tests.
With only horizontal support—to prevent tipping—the legs were able to maintain stance while supporting their weight (three kilos) plus the weight of the valves for the actuators (one half kilo) and a gantry element (one kilo) without any pressurized air in the actuators.
This capability, a result of the aforementioned stance bias, clearly demonstrates the ability of these legs to support not only the weight of the robot, but a significant payload as well. An open loop controller was then used to cycle the legs through “push-ups”; raising themselves from a minimum to a maximum height.
In this fashion, the legs were able to lift the body approximately 6 cm.
This process was repeated with additional payloads (beyond valve and gantry weight) of two and a half and five kilograms using 6 bar air.
In both cases, the legs were able to attain the same height.
Fully assembled—including valves—Robot V weighs 15 kilograms.
Range of motion tests have been performed for all joints, and are summarized below.
In many cases, specifically the femur-tibia joints of all legs, these ranges of motion are in excess of the desired ROM.
In all cases, they are sufficient for walking and climbing.
Ajax demonstrates a propensity to stand due to the preloads placed on the torsion springs; even without pressure in the actuators, the middle and rear
Figure 4: Robot V without activated actuators (top) and standing (bottom). Note that even when the actuators are un-pressurized, they maintain a near-stance position, with only the feet contacting the surface.
Legs maintain a near-stance position.
Initial tests of the robot have shown that it is capable of supporting its weight in a standing position and of achieving stance both unloaded and with a five kilogram payload (Figure 4).
Further tests have shown that the robot is able to achieve a tripod stance and alternate between tripods, which is important for walking.
These tasks were achieved using a simple open loop controller.
Furthermore, the passive properties of the BPA’s are clearly highlighted in the robot’s ability to return to its desired position after suffering perturbations without the use of any form of active posture control.
Using a feed forward controller with absolutely no feedback, the robot can produce reasonable forward locomotion.
Although this is by no means the robust, agile walking that is the ultimate goal of this project, it is a clear demonstration of not only the robot’s capabilities, but also the advantages offered by the BPA’s.
The ability to move using only an open loop controller is in large part a result of the passive properties of the actuators, which provide compensation for any instabilities in the controller itself and immediate response to perturbations without the need for controller intervention.
This can be contrasted with Robot III, which, even with kinematic and force feedback, was not able to walk.
This failure of Robot III is attributed to the inability of both the pneumatic cylinders and posture controller to deal with the sudden changes in load associated with locomotion.
In short, the BPA’s act as filters, providing immediate response to perturbation; a task the controller is incapable of.
This same process occurs in biological muscle, which responds nearly instantaneously to perturbation, but only slowly to neurological input [16].
With the addition of a biologically inspired closed loop controller in the future, Ajax is expected to display robust, insect-like locomotion.
Although the mechanical aspects of this robot have been completed, the control system is still in its infancy.
Because the mechanics of a system are inextricably linked to its control circuits, Ajax’s controller is expected to benefit from the close relationship between its design and that of the actual insect.
This relationship is perhaps most prominent in the muscle-like nature of the braided pneumatic actuators.
Sensors will be added to provide not only joint position feedback, but force feedback as well.
Joint angle can easily be determined with a potentiometer, as has been done on our previous robots.
Force feedback will be attained through pressure measurements from the actuators, which, given actuator length, can be used to determine actuator force.
Although strain gauges properly placed on the mounting elements of the actuators can produce sufficient force feedback, previous work has shown many desirable characteristics inherent in pressure transducers: they have much cleaner signals, do not require amplifiers, and do not exhibit cross talk; all disadvantages of strain gauges.
In addition, strain gauges must be mounted directly adjacent to the actuator they are recording from; this requires more weight at distal points of the limb, (thusly increasing the moment of inertia of the limb) and generally reduces the usable available stroke of the actuator.
We have demonstrated that a pressure transducer located down-line from an actuator produces a sufficient signal to determine actuator force.
An insect-inspired controller was developed for Robot III, and this will be modified for use on Robot V.
It is a distributed hierarchical control system.
The local to central progression includes circuits that control joint position and stiffness, inter-leg coordination and reflexes, intra-leg gait coordination, and body motion.
The inter-leg coordination circuit solves the inverse kinematics problem for the legs and the centralized posture control system solves the force distribution problem.
Wikipedia has related information at  Pneumatic artificial muscles
"Biorobotics - Build Your Own Robotic Air Muscle Actuator" is a page that explains what air muscles are and how to build one at home.
Shadow robot company: Air Muscle overview: "Air Muscles are normally operated using compressed air in the 0-60psi (0-4 bar) range."
Delcomyn, F Foundations of Neurobiology W.H. Freedman and Company, New York, 1998.
Raibert, M.H., Hodgins, J.K., Legged Robots, “Biological Neural Networks in Invertebrate Neuroethology and Robotics” ed. By Beer, R.D., Ritzmann, R.E., and McKenna, T. 1993.
Espenschied, K.S., Quinn, R.D., Chiel, H.J., Beer, R.D. (1996). Biologically-Based Distributed Control and Local Reflexes Improve Rough Terrain Locomotion in a Hexapod Robot. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Vol. 18, 59-64.
Binnard, M.B. (1995) Design of a Small Pneumatic Walking Robot. M.S. Thesis, M.I.T.
Davis S.T., Caldwell D.G “The Bio-Mimetic Design of a Robot Primate Using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators” Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Climbing and Walking Robots (CLAWAR 2002), Karlsruhe, Germany, 24-26 Sept. 2001.
Song, S.M., Waldron, K.J., Machines That Walk MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1989.
Bachmann, R.J. (2000) A Cockroach-Like Hexapod Robot for Running and Climbing. M.S. Thesis, CWRU.
Klute, G.K., B. Hannaford, “Modeling Pneumatic McKibben Artificial Muscle Actuators: Approaches and Experimental Results,” Submitted to the ASME Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurements, and Control, November 1998, revised March 1999.
Prochazka, A., Gillard, D., and Bennett, D.J., “Implications of Positive Feedback in the Control of Movement” The American Physiological Society, 1997.
Nickel, V.L., J. Perry, and A.L. Garrett, “Development of useful function in the severely paralyzed hand,” “Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery,” Vol. 45A, No. 5, pp. 933-952, 1963.
Caldwell, D.G, Medrano-Cerda, G.A., and Bowler C.J. “Investigation of Bipedal Robot Locomotion Using Pneumatic Muscle Actuators” . IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA'97), Albuquerque, NM.
Nelson, G.M. (2002) Learning About Control of Legged Locomotion Using A Hexapod With Compliant Pneumatic Actuators. Ph.D. Thesis, CWRU.
Bachmann, R.J., D.A. Kingsley, R.D.Quinn, and R.E. Ritzmann, "A Cockroach Robot with Artificial Muscles," Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Climbing and Walking Robots (CLAWAR 2002), Paris, 25-27 Sept. 2002.
Watson, J. T. and R. E. Ritzmann (1998). Leg kinematics and muscle activity during treadmill running in the cockroach, Blaberus discoidalis:slow running. J. Comp. Physiol. A 182: 11-22.
Powers, A.C. (1996) Research in the Design and Construction of Biologically-Inspired Robots. M.S. Thesis, University of California, Berkeley.
Loeb, G.E., Brown, I.E., Cheng, E.J. (1998). A hierarchical foundation for models of sensorimotor control. Exp. Brain Res. 1999, 126: 1-18.
Note that sequences of functions can be seen as sequences over a normed space, which will mostly be left untouched in this chapter.
.
7.18 Theorem No reference. #TODO existence of continuous nowhere differentiable function
No reference for pointwise bounded, but for F is uniformly_bounded (MESFUN10:def 1).
The algebra of complex functions on a domain
You're using Xcode, and you'd like to use one or more third party JAR files in your project.
As of WO 5.2, one reasonable solution would be to just toss all the JAR files that you need into /Library/WebObjects/Extensions/ (see What's New in WebObjects 5.2 in the section on Launch Architecture: http://developer.apple.com/documentation/WebObjects/WhatsNew5.2/ ). The problem with this solution is that it creates a bit of a management headache. You don't necessarily know which projects are using which JAR files, and you might have trouble if different projects were to need different versions of the same third party JARs.
For example, we have a project that uses the Batik SVG Toolkit. We needed classes from many of the jar files that are included with batik-1.5.1. But what happens when another project comes along that needs a different (e.g. a newer) version of Batik? We'd have to either make sure the old project works with the newer batik, or restrict ourselves to the old batik code for the new project.
One solution to this problem is to create a WebObjects framework that contains all the jar files for a particular version of an external project (like Batik). That way, several WO apps can use the same WO framework (e.g. batik-1.5.1.framework), but if a newer batik comes out that we need to use for a new project, and if it turns out to be at all incompatible with the old version, then we can just create another batik WO framework, named for the new version; e.g. something like batik-2.0.framework, if/when a batik-2.0 is released.
Here's how to do it (I'll continue to use my batik-1.5.1 example):
(1) In Xcode, create a new WebObjects Framework project (e.g. batik-1.5.1).
(3) Add the desired JAR files to this group. For my batik example, I selected all the .jar files in my batik-1.5.1/lib directory. Check Copy items into destination group's folder (if needed), and select the aggregate target (i.e. the one with the same name as your project).
(4) We want to add a new build phase to the aggregate target. Open the Targets group (under Groups & Files) and double-click on the aggregate target. It's essential that this new build phase be added to the aggregate target rather than the Application Server target!
(5) We want to add the new build phase at or near the end of the list of Build Phases. So right-click (or control-click) on the last build phase, select New Build Phase, then New Copy Files Build Phase. You can also drag the new build phase to a new position after you create it.
(6) Change the Where: popup for your new build phase to Java Resources.
(7) Back in the main project window, select all the JAR files that you added to your new Resources -> Java group, and drag them into the Files: area for your new Copy Files build phase (in the aggregate Target panel).
(8) Build and install your WO framework:
That's all there is to it. Inside your installed framework, you'll find all your .jar files located in the Resources/Java directory
(e.g. /Library/Frameworks/batik-1.5.1.framework/Versions/A/Resources/Java),
Many thanks to Chuck Hill for the key ingredients of this solution.
A WebObjects application will automatically load any .jars located in the sub-folder "Contents/Extensions" inside the .woa wrapper. Compared to the Frameworks method, it has the advantages of keeping the .woa completely self-contained and avoiding potential version conflicts if different WebObjects applications need different versions of the .jar file. The downside is that the .jar is not shared between applications, so that if you want to update it you need to update it for each .woa individually, and you can have multiple copies of the .jar taking up disk space. (The latter is usually not a problem these days.)
To automate this as a part of the build process in XCode, add a Copy Files build phase to the top-level target. Set the Destination to "Wrapper" and the Path to "Contents/Extensions".
1 101.2 Boot the System
Provide common commands to the boot loader and options to the kernel at boot time.
Demonstrate knowledge of the boot sequence from BIOS to boot completion.
Check boot events in the log files.
When an x86 computer starts up it follows a predefined set of steps to boot the operating system. On start up the CPU jumps to the address of the BIOS and proceeds to load it. The BIOS performs some checks and initializes hardware before locating the configured boot device. The boot device is configured in the BIOS user interface by setting the boot order of attached mass storage devices.
Once the boot device is located the BIOS proceeds to load the Master Boot Record (MBR) of the boot device. The MBR is the first sector ( 512 bytes) of the boot device and contains the 1st stage boot loader with a partition table. The first stage boot loader can either directly boot the operating system in the case of a Linux 1st stage boot loader but usually the 1st stage boot loader is responsible for locating and loading the 2nd stage boot loader which, in the case of Linux boot loaders, allows for more flexibility in selecting the kernel and operating system to boot.
The partition table is required for the 1st stage boot loader to be able to locate the offset to the 2nd stage boot loader. Due to the limited size of the MBR the partition table only contains the location of the primary partitions which therefore requires that the 2nd stage boot loader must be located on a primary partition.
The 1st stage boot loader locates the partition of the 2nd stage boot loader by looking at the boot sectors of the partition marked as active/bootable. (We will cover marking partitions (as opposed to entire devices) as bootable later when looking at disk partitioning.)
The second stage boot loader has the task of loading the operating system for Linux; this means the Linux kernel and initial ram disk. The second-boot loader may present the user with a menu to select which kernel to boot and may even allow the user to boot heterogeneous operating systems (aka dual boot).
Once the 2nd stage boot loader has loaded the kernel it passes control over to it, The kernel starts and configures the CPU type, interrupt handling, the rest of memory management such as paging tables and memory paging, device initialization, drivers, etc.
The kernel also loads any initial RAM disk image that may be present into memory and mounts it as a temporary root filesystem in ram. The initial ram disk (initrd) contains an image of system configuration files and modules that the kernel will need to be able to access system hardware. It is here that various file system and disk drivers are loaded that enable the kernel to find and mount the real root partition. For example, if the real root partition is on a raid 1 devices, the module for raid1 will need to be loaded to enable the kernel to mount and read the root filesystem. The temporary root files system is later swapped out for the real root filesystem once the kernel has access to it.
Once the kernel is fully operational it starts an initial programme which by default is /sbin/init. The init programme sets up user space and starts the login shells and/or the graphical login. What services are started and the state of the machine after the init process has completed its initialization depends on the default runlevel and its configuration.
Figure 101.2.1: The Bootup Process
There are two widely used boot loaders for Linux, namely GRUB and LILO. Both boot loaders are broken into at least two stages. The first stage is a small machine code binary on the MBR. Its sole job is to locate and load the second stage boot loader. The 2nd stage boot loader then locates and loads the Linux kernel passing in any parameters with which it has been provided.
When the 2nd stage boot loader is running, you are presented with an opportunity to pass additional parameters to the Linux kernel via a text console that is part of the boot loader. Typical parameters that you may pass to the kernel include:
There are many more parameters that can be passed to the kernel at boot time. Please consult the kernel documentation for more options.
Once the kernel has finished loading it starts the init process. Init is responsible for checking and mounting file systems, and starting up configured services, such as the network, mail and web servers for example, it does this by entering its default runlevel. This is configured in the /sbin/init application configuration file /etc/inittab. An example of the inittab file is given below:
l0:0:wait:/etc/rc.d/rc 0
l1:1:wait:/etc/rc.d/rc 1
l2:2:wait:/etc/rc.d/rc 2
l3:3:wait:/etc/rc.d/rc 3
l4:4:wait:/etc/rc.d/rc 4
l5:5:wait:/etc/rc.d/rc 5
l6:6:wait:/etc/rc.d/rc 6
1:2345:respawn:/sbin/mingetty tty1
2:2345:respawn:/sbin/mingetty tty2
3:2345:respawn:/sbin/mingetty tty3
4:2345:respawn:/sbin/mingetty tty4
5:2345:respawn:/sbin/mingetty tty5
6:2345:respawn:/sbin/mingetty tty6
x:5:respawn:/etc/X11/prefdm -nodaemon
Aline in the inittab file has the following format:
Line 5 sets the default run level for init. In order to determine the default runlevel the init process searches for the initdefault entry, if there is no such entry (or no /etc/inittab at all), a runlevel must be entered at the system console. There are 6 run levels. On a RedHat-style system, the default run level is 3 for a server (no GUI) or 5 for a desktop machine.
Line 8 is for the sysinit action, this process is run for every runlevel.
Line 10 – 16 define the scripts that should be run for each runlevel.
Line 19, 25, 28 define the processes to be run when the specified actions occur. These actions are:
Line 25 when the a signal from the ups on a power outage is received, the computer is told to shutdown after 2 minutes,
Line 28 when power is restored and the machine has not shutdown the scheduled shutdown is canceled.
Line 32-37 spawn the console logins. They are set to automatically restart when the process dies.
Line 40 – starts the graphical login console for runlevel 5
After it has spawned all of the processes specified, init goes dormant, and waits for one of three events to happen:- processes it started to end or die, a power failure signal or a request via /sbin/telinit to further change the runlevel.
During boot process the various modules that the kernel loads/probes for their supported hardware, producing copious amount of log output in the processes. These are the console messages that fly-by during system boot.
Since the logging service has not yet been started the kernel logs its messages to an in memory ring buffer. It is called a ring buffer as, once the log has reached a set memory size, earlier messages are overwritten by newer messages.
As this information in the ring buffer could be lost on reboot or by being overwritten most distributions write the ring buffer entries to disk either under /var/log/dmesg, /var/log/messages or /var/log/syslog depending on their logging service configuration.
The contents of the ring buffer can be read with the dmesg command. This is usually combined with a pagination utility, such as less, as the amount of data contain in the ring buffer is usually too large to fit on one screen.
If you have hardware that is not being configured properly during boot the ring buffer is a good place to look for clues as to what could be wrong as usually the driver will write out some error message that can help in resolving the issue.
Beside the ring buffer you can also by examining the system log files configured by the logging service. These files are located under /var/log and may be /var/log/syslog or /var/log/messages.
In some cases you may be dumped to the command line during the boot process with a message that the root device could not be found or that you can type Ctrl-D plus the root password to perform maintenance. Usually this means that the root device has not been configured properly and you may be able to fix this from the command line.
In other cases you may get a message which says “kernel panic” and the machine automatically reboots, or waits in an unusable state until rebooted. The causes of this kind of problems can be many, from an incorrectly configured initrd image, to a missing root device. The output on the screen, before system failure can provide you with a clue as to the configuration error. This may be due to:
In the cases of incorrectly configured boot loaders you can either enter the boot loader editor during the 2nd stage, by pressing 'e' for the grub loader, or at the lilo prompt, and passing in the correct parameters to get the computer to boot, editing the configuration file once the system has successfully started. In other cases it may be necessary to boot a live CD and then trouble shoot the root file system without mounting it.
Used files, terms and utilities:
Previous Chapter | Next Chapter
Entries should be succinct, lucid, and preferably provide big-picture insights.
Here are some basic conlanging and linguistics terms.
It's valuable to note when a term is used in different senses that could cause confusion.  This glossary seeks to give fair warning of discrepancies between mutually incompatible dialects of technical jargon, rather than setting down a single self-consistent dialect that would then be inconsistent with various usages encountered in the field (which happens a lot in any technical subject that's been around for a while).
Terminology often works best within a limited framework; succinctly explaining when it doesn't work so well is big-picture insight that may be difficult to obtain from enthusiastic, or simplified, explanations within its favored framework.
If a term could be listed either in adjective or noun form (as inflectional or inflection), prefer whichever feels more natural and provides smoothest coverage.  An adjectival entry should list definitions for the various kinds of nouns it can modify; but if the adjectival form has a generic sense and then specifics to be mentioned for some nouns and not others, it may work better to list the noun form and then list specific adjective-noun combinations.
If a term doesn't list any sections of the book where it is discussed, although it could be something that doesn't need coverage in the book proper, or something that is covered but not yet linked from here, it could also signal a topic waiting for coverage.
Named theories and models are also listed here; both those traditionally treated as proper nouns, such as Optimality Theory, and those not, such as universal grammar or word-and-paradigm morphology.
A script whose symbols represent consonant sounds.  Vowels may be omitted altogether, but often are optionally representable by diacritics on the consonant symbols, and provision may be made for representing vowels in exceptional cases where the vowel does not accompany a consonant.  In most such systems, the vowel follows the consonant.  Contrast alphabet, abugida.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
A case sometimes indicating removal from the marked noun, in which case it is a variety of locative.  In English, likely introduced by preposition from.  Usage varies greatly between languages.  The term ablative comes from a Latin verb meaning take away.    (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia;  external: SIL)
Change of a word form by altering a vowel (or vowels).  The more usual form of apophony, also called vowel mutation; contrast consonant mutation.    (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a noun, absolutive case.
Of a language, ergative-absolutive.
A case indicating the patient of a transitive verb or subject of an intransitive verb in an ergative-absolutive alignment pattern.
A case indicating the subject of an intransitive verb in a tripartite alignment pattern.
A script whose symbols represent consonant sounds with default associated vowels, and diacritics to change these vowel defaults.  Contrast abjad, syllabary.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
Of a noun, accusative case.
Of a language, nominative-accusative.
A case indicating the patient of a transitive verb in a nominative-accusative or tripartite alignment pattern.   (linguistics; Advanced)
A word that modifies a noun.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
A word that modifies any part of language except a noun — verbs, adjectives, other adverbs, clauses, sentences.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
A dependent clause that qualifies anything except a noun.  Contrast relative clause.   (linguistics)
A word-part that attaches to words and modifies their meaning.  More narrowly concerned with form, and thus carries less conceptual baggage, than related term bound morpheme.   (linguistics; Beginner, Intermediate)
a consonant that starts plosive and releases fricative, usually with the same place of articulation.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
A thematic role: The participant of a situation that carries out an action.   (linguistics; Advanced)
Of a language, combining morphemes into words without changing their forms.  May or may not imply synthetic, depending on who you ask.  Contrasts with fusional, but affixation doesn't have to be either agglutination or fusion.  The concept of morpheme works more smoothly in agglutinative than in fusional languages.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
Any of the phones representing a phoneme in a given language.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
A script whose symbols represent speech sounds, including vowels.  If only consonants are represents, that's either an abjad or an abugida.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
Another name for an abugida.
Alternative history language.  An artlang meant to be what some historical natlang would have evolved into in some alternative history.   (conlanging; Types)
Of a consonant, having primary articulation by constricting airflow between the alveolar ridge and the tongue.  May be apical or laminal.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
The ridge at the top of the mouth just behind the teeth and before the hard palate.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
The phenomenon of discovering that a weird, supposedly original feature in your conlang already exists in some natural language.  Coined in recognition that natural languages regularly turn out to be even more bizarre than what conlangers can devise.  Acronym for (sic) another natlang already dunnit except worse.   (conlanging; FAQ)
Of a language, not inflecting words for their grammatical relationships.  Says nothing necessary about morpheme/word ratio, nor about other kinds of inflections; cf. synthetic, isolating.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
The act of referring with an expression to some referent that depends on context.  The referring expression is the anaphor.  See pronoun.
More noarrowly, when the reference depends on a preceding expression.  The preceding expression is the antecedent.  Contrast cataphora, postcedent.
Of a consonant, having primary articulation using the tip of the tongue (the apex).  See coronal.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Change of a word form by altering a phoneme (or phonemes).  Most often a change of vowel, called ablaut or vowel mutation; changing a consonant is consonant mutation.  More often inflectional, sometimes derivational.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a feature, borrowed from natural languages rather than invented.  Of a conlang, mostly composed of a posteriori features.   (conlanging; Types)
Of a feature, invented rather than borrowed from natural languages.  Of a conlang, mostly composed of a priori features.   (conlanging; Types)
Of a consonant, having manner of primary articulation by constricting airflow (so it's not a vowel) but not enough, or in such a way as, to cause turbulence (so it's not a fricative).  All approximants are either liquids or glides; they're sonorants just below the vowels in the sonority hierarchy.    (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
The notion in semiotics that signs have no direct connection to the concepts they represent.  Principle heavily relied upon to justify clean separation between different levels of language description, by Ferdinand de Saussure and since; even Noam Chomsky, while mostly avoiding semiotics, has invoked arbitrariness.  The notion of phonaestheme violates arbitrariness of the sign.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a consonant, an organ used to constrict the airflow at a point of articulation.  Active if it moves, passive if it doesn't; the tongue is especially commonly used as an active articulator.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Artistic language.  A conlang created as art.   (conlanging; Types)
Structure of the action of a verb with respect to time.
The unmodified term usually refers to grammatical aspect, which is arrangement of the action indicated by inflection of the verb.   (Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia;  external: Conlangery)
Lexical aspect is a property of the verb independent of inflection, necessarily involving a smaller set of possibilities since it excludes details of a particular instance of the verb.   (external: Conlangery)
A sound change in which a consonant becomes sibilant.  Cf. palatalization.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
In phonology, change of a phone to sound more like another nearby phone.  May be either regressive or progressive; synchronic or diachronic.  See harmony.   (linguistics; Intermediate, Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
An alignment system with many voices that do not reduce the verb's valency, allowing most any noun argument to be promoted to become the subject.  See also trigger system.   (conlanging; Advanced)
Auxiliary language.  A conlang meant as a common second language for people with different native languages.   (conlanging; Types)
Of a vowel or semivowel, having the highest part of the tongue toward the back of the mouth.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a vowel, how far back in the mouth the highest part of tongue is positioned when pronouncing it.   (linguistics; Intermediate; wikibook; sister: Wikipedia)
A morpheme that cannot occur in a word without other morphemes; such as English plural morpheme -s.  Similar term affix is more narrowly concerned with form, thus carries less conceptual baggage.  Cf. inflectional/derivational morpheme.  Contrast free morpheme.   (linguistics)
Of writing, alternating between lines left-to-right and right-to-left.  The word is borrowed from Ancient Greek, meaning ox-turn-fashion (turning in the manner of an ox when plowing a field).  In some boustrophedon writing, the glyphs are reflected right-to-left on lines going opposite directions; in rongorongo the glyphs are rotated 180 degrees between lines, a variant sometimes called reverse boustrophedon that, as far as we've heard, occurs in no other natural script.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
The art of visually beautiful writing. The roots of the word mean beautiful writing.   (linguistics; wikibook; sister: Wikipedia;  external: Conlangery)
Of a noun, its grammatical function in the sentence.  Nouns are often inflected for case.  Case distinctions vary by language.  Case categorization is typically similar to semantic thematic relation but coarser-grained.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
Of a vowel or semivowel, having backness intermediate between front and back.
Of a consonant, not lateral.
When a sound is described as a semivowel, central refers to backness; whereas when the same sound is descried as an approximant, central means not lateral.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Any Indo-European language in which the palatovelars of Proto-Indo-European merged with the plain velars.  Contrast satem language; the two types are named after the words for hundred in respectively Latin and Sanskrit, which illustrate the contrasting phonetic evolution patterns.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
A pair of words that mark the beginning and end of a modifying phrase.   (linguistics)
A grammatical structure expressing a single complete proposition — a verb and its noun arguments, with modifiers but not including any related proposition. Compare dependent clause.   (linguistics)
A lingual ingressive.  Typically quite loud, though softer in a few of the natlangs that have them.  Found in some natlangs in southern Africa and a few in eastern Africa, and in Damin.   (linguistics; Advanced; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a consonant, having more than one place of articulation.  See secondary articulation, doubly articulated.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
The part of a syllable after the nucleus, if any.  Consonantal.   (linguistics; Intermediate, Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Inflection of a verb.
A paradigm for a verb.
Constructed language.  A language deliberately invented by someone.   (conlanging; FAQ)
A speech sound with constricted air flow through the vocal tract.  Distinguished by voicing and by how and where the air flow is restricted — manner and place of articulation.  Contrast with vowels, which have higher sonority.   (Beginner, Intermediate)
A glyph written to represent a consonant sound.
Assimilation between non-adjacent consonants.  Much less common than vowel harmony.  A relatively common form is coronal harmony, whereby coronal fricatives (such as /s/ and /S/) assimilate to the same place of articulation.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Change of a word form by altering a consonant (or consonants).  May indicate grammatical information or reflect grammatical context.  Form of apophony less common than ablaut.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a consonant, having primary articulation using the front of the tongue.  Contrast dorsal.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Study of language by statistical analysis of large bodies (corpora) of text, generally without making any prior structural assumptions (cf. grammar).  For a sense of relative scale, the Brown Corpus from 1961 is about a million words in 500 texts.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
A bound morpheme that has no meaning of its own but distinguishes words; such as then cran- in English cranberry.  Also called fossilized morpheme.   (linguistics)
Voicing with the sides of the larynx —the arytenoid cartilages— pulled closer together, reducing airflow and loosening the vocal folds.  Also called by a variety of other names, in various contexts, such as vocal fry.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a script, using symbols meant to be easy to write rapidly by hand.  The term is also used for modern cursive handwriting in which consecutive letters within a word usually flow one into another.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
A case indicating a recipient or beneficiary.  Typically the indirect object; in English, often introduced by preposition to or for.  The term dative comes from a Latin verb meaning give.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia;  external: SIL)
A form of lenition in which a consonant's place of articulation changes, typically moving back toward the glottis.  Latin root buuca means mouth; thus, removal from the mouth (i.e., removal to the glottis).   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Inflection of a noun.
A paradigm for a noun.
An element of a compound grammatical structure that is not the head. See also dependent clause.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
A clause qualifying another element of the sentence, rather than being a sentence in itself.  May or may not be the same as subordinate clause.   (linguistics)
Changing the form of a word to create another word — altering its meaning or grammatical class.  Cf. derivational morpheme.  Contrast inflection.   (linguistics)
A bound morpheme that changes the core meaning or class of the word.  Contrast inflectional morpheme.   (linguistics)
Of language change, taking place over time.   (linguistics)
Of linguistic study, concerned with language change over time.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a conlang, having its own internal fictional history.   (conlanging; Types)
Contrast synchronic.
A glyph whose function is to modify another glyph.  Cf. abjad, abugida.   (linguistics; Appendix/CXS)
A situation where two dialects of a language are used by a single population.  In the usual case, one dialect is vernacular and the other formal.  The formal dialect is often an earlier form of the language, is used in writing, and is not natively spoken.   (linguistics; FAQ; sister: wikipedia)
A combination of two vowels forming the nucleus of a syllable.  One of the two is always weaker, and may even be treated as an approximant; if the first is weaker, it may be called an on-glide, and the diphthong is rising; if the second is weaker, an off-glide, and falling.  See also glide.
An object directly affected by the verb.  Contrast indirect object.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
Instances of language falling outside the traditional structured sentence; variously longer than a single sentence, involving multiple conversants, and/or in actual speech rather than polished prose.   (linguistics)
An inflection that removes part of the word form it's applied to.  May be described, with additional conceptual baggage, as a subtractive morpheme (at some stretch to the notion of morpheme, since a subtractive morpheme is not only bound but has no form of its own).   (linguistics; Advanced; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a clause, relating three noun arguments to a verb.  The arguments are typically called the agent, theme, and recipient.
Of a verb, mediating a ditransitive clause.
Of a consonant, pronounced with the tongue bunched up.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a consonant, having primary articulation using the back of the tongue (dorsum).  Contrast coronal.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a consonant, characterized by two airflow restrictions of the same manner, which are therefore both considered primary articulations.  A special case of co-articulated.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Reduplication, when viewed as an affix.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a speech sound, produced with an outward airflow though the mouth and/or nose.  The outward airflow may be produced either by the lungs (pulmonic), by the glottis (glottalic), or by the tongue (lingual); most human speech sounds are pulmonic egressive.  Contrast ingressive.   (linguistics; Advanced; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a consonant, produced by an airstream from the glottis closed and moving rapidly upward.   (linguistics; Advanced)
A sequence of characters depicting a facial expression, used to express emotion.  Most often punctuation characters.  Modern use of emoticons in electronic discussion is generally traced to a proposal in 1982.   (linguistics; FAQ; sister: wikipedia)
Engineered language.  A conlang designed to meet objective criteria.   (conlanging; Types)
Of a consonant, having primary articulation in the lower pharynx, by constricting airflow via the aryepiglottal folds at the top of the larynx against the epiglottis.  May be classed as radical or laryngeal.   (linguistics; Advanced; sister: Wikipedia)
A flap in the lower pharynx protecting the larynx, so food doesn't go down the wrong way when swallowed.  Place of articulation for epiglottals.   (linguistics; sister: wikipedia)
Of a noun, ergative case.
Of a language, ergative-absolutive.
Of a language, following an alignment pattern that treats the patient of a transitive verb like the subject of an intransitive verb (absolutive case), while distinguishing them from the agent of a transitive verb (ergative case).  The second most common alignment pattern amongst natural languages; much less common than nominative-accusative.   (linguistics; Advanced)
A case indicating the agent of a transitive verb in an ergative-absolutive or tripartite alignment pattern.   (linguistics; Advanced)
An auxlang whose vocabulary is entirely Indo-European, often entirely Romance.   (conlanging; Types)
Of a verb, how the speaker knows the action happened.   (linguistics; Beginner)
Fictional auxlang.  A supposed auxlang created by a character in a fictional setting.   (conlanging; Types)
A verb form that inflects for tense and person, and can serve as the verb in an independent clause.  From the Latin finitus, meaning in this context definite, because it inflects for person.   (linguistics)
A consonant whose manner of primary articulation momentarily blocks airflow by throwing the active articulator against the passive articulator.  Differs from a stop because the block is instantaneous so there's no pressure build-up; differs from a single-contact trill because the articular is moved by muscular contraction, rather than by vibration due to the airflow.  Commonly synonymous with tap; if not, the difference may be that the articulators in a flap strike tangentially whereas in a tap they strike directly.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
A morpheme that can occur alone as a word; contrast bound morpheme.   (linguistics)
Of a consonant, having manner of primary articulation by forcing airflow through a narrow enough opening to produce turbulence.  A glottal fricative may instead be called a glottal transition, avoiding awkward questions about whether the sound is a consonant or a vowel and whether the vocal cords themselves are technically part of the vocal tract.  The word fricative is from a Latin verb meaning rub.   (Intermediate, CXS; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a vowel, varying usage refers to some part of a blending between a fricative consonant and an immediately following vowel; typically, between a sibilant and a high vowel.  The term "fricative vowel" is sometimes used for the consonant colored by its anticipation of the vowel, sometimes for the vowel ostensibly colored by residual turbulence from the consonant, and sometimes for the different phenomenon of a syllabic fricative consonant.   (sister: Wikipedia)
Of a vowel or semivowel, having the highest part of the tongue toward the front of the mouth.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a language, having the property that a single affix may indicate multiple derivational/inflectional changes; e.g. a Latin noun suffix which may indicate at once gender case and number.  Fusional may or may not imply synthetic, depending on who you ask.  Contrasts with agglutinative, but affixation doesn't have to be agglutination or fusion.  The concept of morpheme is more awkward in fusional languages than agglutinative ones.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
See runes.
The lengthening of a consonant.   (linguistics; Intermediate, Advanced)
A way of classifying nouns into groups.  May be completely unrelated to sexual gender.   (linguistics; Beginner)
A case typically indicating the marked noun owns another noun, or that the other noun is attributed to the marked noun.  Similar to the possessive case in English.  The term genitive comes from a Latin word meaning origin/birth.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia;  external: SIL)
An approximant that differs from a vowel only by being slightly more closed.  Linguists may differ on whether some approximants correspond to a vowel, hence whether they should count as glides.  It's generally agreed that lateral approximants are not glides.
An approximant that occurs in the transition to or from the nucleus of a syllable.
A vowel treated as a consonant, i.e., not the nucleus of a syllable.  See diphthong.
Of a consonant, having primary articulation at the glottis.  The terminology here is debated, in that the vocal tract is ostensibly what the sound passes through after being generated at the glottis, thus does not include the glottis, making the glottis ineligible as a place of articulation; but natlangs often, not always, treat these speech sounds as consonants rather than vowels.  See glottalized, glottalic.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a speech sound, produced with airflow initiated by the glottis.  Contrast pulmonic, lingual.  The term glottal is also occasionally used for glottal, generally not for glottalized.   (linguistics; Advanced; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a speech sound, having its basic identity colored by a partial or total closure of the glottis.  A secondary articulation.  See creaky voice.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
The opening of the vocal cords; in practice, the vocal cords themselves.  See glottal, glottalic.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
An elemental symbol used in writing.   (linguistics; Beginner; sister: Wikipedia)
The study of the rules governing the use of a given language.   (linguistics; Beginner, Intermediate, Advanced)
Of a consonant, pronounced with the sides of the tongue raised so that airflow is a narrow stream directed at the teeth.  See sibilant.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
The front of the roof of the mouth.  Lined with bone (technically, the bone itself is the hard palate), whereas the back of the roof of the mouth is soft tissue, the velum.   (linguistics; Advanced; sister: wikipedia)
In linguistics, assimilation between non-adjacent sounds.  The term is not usually used without specifying the type(s) of sound(s) involved.  Most common is vowel harmony; see also vowel-consonant harmony, consonant harmony.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
The element of a compound grammatical structure that primarily defines the nature of the structure.  Most often the structure is a phrase, in which case the head is a word (such as the preposition in a prepositional phrase); but also, if a word is viewed as a collection of morphemes, the head of the word would be a morpheme.  Other elements of the structure are called dependents.  Especially associated with universal grammar, but the term head can be used descriptively without that conceptual framework.  See endocentric.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia;  external: paper)
Of an endocentric grammatical structure, having its head at the end.  Sometimes called left-branching.  Contrast head-initial.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
Of an endocentric grammatical structure, having its head at the start.  Sometimes called right-branching.  Contrast head-final.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
See exocentric.
Of a vowel, how open the mouth is when pronouncing it.  Termed high or low for how far the jaw drops, thus low for more open, high for less.   (linguistics; Intermediate; wikibook; sister: Wikipedia)
Any of certain particularly ancient scripts whose symbols appear to be pictograms.  Generally the term has become attached to a script before it was deciphered.  The term hieroglyphic comes from roots meaning sacred writing.  The classic example is Egyptian hieroglyphs; others include Cretan, Anatolian, and Mayan.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wiktionary)
International Auxillary Language.  An auxlang intended for use on an international scale.  Auxlangs are almost always IALs, to the point where the two terms are often treated as synonyms.   (conlanging; Types)
A written symbol representing an idea/concept.  A script made up of logograms is am ideographic system.  An ideogram provides no information about the sounds used to express its meaning.  In this inclusive sense, most logograms are ideograms.  The term ideogram is sometimes used in a more exclusive sense to mean a symbol representing an idea independent of language (potentially raising questions about the nature of written language).   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wiktionary)
Formation of a specialized verb by means of a compound lexeme joining the verb with an adverb or with its direct object.  Often associated with polysynthesis.   (linguistics; Advanced; sister: Wikipedia)
An object indirectly affected by the verb.  Contrast direct object.   (linguistics)
A family of related languages historically spoken in India, Europe, and points between.  Reconstructed common ancestor Proto-Indo-European.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
A locative case indicating location within the marked noun.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia;  external: SIL)
An affix that attaches to the middle of a word.  Contrast prefix, suffix.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
Changing the form of a word to indicate a grammatical category such as number or case, without altering the word's core meaning or grammatical class.  Cf. paradigm.  Contrast derivation.   (linguistics)
A bound morpheme that does not alter the core meaning or class of the word.  Contrast derivational morpheme.   (linguistics)
See laryngeal cavity.
Of a speech sound, produced with an inward airflow though the mouth and/or nose.  The inward airflow may be produced either by the lungs (pulmonic), by the glottis (glottalic), or by the tongue (lingual).  Contrast egressive.   (linguistics; Advanced; sister: Wikipedia)
A case indicating the marked noun is the means by which the action is accomplished.    (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia;  external: SIL)
Of a consonant, occurring between two vowels.  Lenition often occurs intervocallically.   (linguistics; sister: Wiktionary)
Of a clause, relating a single noun argument to a verb.  The argument is called the subject.
Of a verb, mediating an intransitive clause.
A natlang that isn't known to be related to any other natlang on Earth.
The only living member of a large family of related languages.
Of a language, having no inflections and very low morpheme/word ratio.  Must be analytic, cannot be synthetic.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
Of a conlang, having many exotic features with no apparent reason or overall scheme.   (conlanging; Types)
Of a consonant, produced with the lips puckered, creating an additional resonance cavity between the lips and teeth and thereby altering the sound.  The same effect for a vowel is called rounding.  Occurs in most languages but might not be phonemic.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a consonant, having primary articulation using the blade (top surface of the front, just behind the tip) of the tongue.  See coronal.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
A language is a learned system for using sequences of words for general sapient communication.  Description of a language is usually analyzed into morphology and grammar.  Scientists struggle over just what language is, but it appears to be strictly a behavior of sapient beings; thus far no non-human animal has been shown to use a language with the complexities of human communication, and most non-human communications (such as those of birds, a much-studied case) clearly aren't even remotely comparable.  It's difficult to determine whether even some human communication systems qualify, such as rongorongo.  See also written language.   (linguistics; FAQ; sister: Wiktionary;  external: Language Log)
Of a consonant, having primary articulation in the neighborhood of the larynx.  Certainly includes glottals; may or may not include epiglottals.    (sister: Wikipedia)
One of a hypothesized series of consonants in Proto-Indo-European, based on indirect evidence of effect on vowels in daughter languages.  Though called "laryngeals" by early proponents who thought their place of articulation might be glottal, epiglottal, or pharyngeal, current speculation also includes uvular and velar.  See Hittite.   (sister: Wikipedia)
The interior space of the larynx.  Divided by the vocal cords into the vestibule above, connecting to the pharynx, and infraglottic cavity below, connecting to the trachea (windpipe).   (linguistics; Advanced; sister: wikipedia)
The voice box, from which speech sounds project into the vocal tract; connects from the windpipe (and thence the lungs) to the lower pharynx.  See vocal cords, laryngeal.   (linguistics; Advanced; sister: wikipedia)
Of a consonant, produced with airflow along the sides of the tongue while airflow is blocked along the center of the mouth.  Produces an L-like sound.  The usual English sound /l/ is an alveolar lateral approximant; there are others, even lateral clicks.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
A locative case indicating some sort of motion to the marked noun.  In English, likely introduced by preposition to or into.  Cf. ablative.    (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia;  external: SIL)
A sound change in which a consonant becomes more sonorous, or disappears altogether.  The term lenition originally means weakening.  Lenition tends to happen to a consonant in an intervocalic position.   (linguistics; I:Sandi, I:Sound changes; sister: Wikipedia)
The identity of a word that does not change under inflection but does change under derivation.  Encompasses core meaning and grammatical class, but not grammatical categories such as number, case, etc.   (linguistics)
An approach to morphology in which a stem is altered by a (derivational/inflectional) process to produce a word form.  Contrast morpheme-based, word-based.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a speech sound, produced with airflow initiated by the tongue.  This involves a double closure (coarticulation), one at the back of the mouth (either velar or uvular) and one farther forward; usually the sound is described by its forward articulation.  Lingual ingressives are called clicks; lingual egressives don't usually occur in natlangs, an exception being Damin.  Contrast pulmonic, glottalic.   (linguistics; Advanced)
A pattern that usually holds for natlangs.  Idea pioneered by Joseph Greenberg.  Compare universal grammar.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a consonant, being either lateral approximant or rhotic. A hybrid classification; lateral approximants and rhotics feel similar, subjectively, placed at the same level on the sonority hierarchy and often having similar phonotactics in natlangs.  The choice of term recalls a similar term hygrós (ancient Greek meaning moist) used by Dionysius Thrax over two thousand years ago (though he also included nasals).   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
A case indicating the marked noun specifies a location.  The term is sometimes used to designate a specific case in a language, sometimes to describe a general property of a case with a more specific name.  Estonian and Finnish each have a half dozen or more locative cases.  The term locative comes from a Latin word meaning place.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia;  external: SIL)
Logical language.  A conlang based on formal logic.   (conlanging; Types)
A written symbol representing a whole word or phrase.  A script made up of logograms is a logographic system. Logographic systems are generally very large and impure, with some symbols representing syllables or individual sounds.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
Of a consonant, how the air flow is disrupted.  Compare place of articulation.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a verb, the possibility and necessity of the verb — whether it happens, might happen, can happen, is commanded to happen, etc.   (linguistics; Beginner, Intermediate)
Classically, a word-part that has a meaning of its own.  Cf. free/bound.  Words are more easily analyzed into morphemes in agglutinative than in fusional languages.  Alternatively, some linguists view a morpheme as a process; see subtractive morpheme.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia;  external: SIL)
An approach to morphology in which morphemes are combined to produce a word form.  Contrast lexeme-based, word-based.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
The study of the internal structure of words.   (linguistics; Beginner; wikibook; sister: Wikipedia)
A coherent part of the form of a word, without necessarily any meaning attached to it.  Term coined for use in word-and-paradigm morphology, where parts of a word form don't have meanings.   (linguistics; Advanced; external: CONLANG-L)
The grammatical relationship between the way a transitive verb relates to its noun arguments, and the way an intransitive verb relates to its noun argument.   (linguistics; Beginner, Advanced)
See apophony.
Of a consonant, produced with air flow through the nose rather than through the mouth.  Contrast with oral.  Compare nasalized.  See velum.    (Intermediate; wikibook; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a vowel, nasalized.
Of a speech sound, produced with some air flow through the nose in addition to air flow through the mouth.  Both consonants and vowels can be nasalized.  Not to be confused with nasal.  See velum.    (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Natural language.  A human language that occurred naturally, as opposed to a conlang.   (conlanging; FAQ)
A proposed framework in which the semantics of all human languages would be built up from a common set of semantic primes.  The primes, language-independent irreducible meanings, would be combined into semantic molecules.  The theory was proposed by linguist Anna Wierzbicka in the early 1970s.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a noun, nominative case.
Of a language, nominative-accusative.
Of a language, following an alignment pattern that treats the agent of a transitive verb like the subject of an intransitive verb (nominative case), while distinguishing them from the patient of a transitive verb (accusative case).  The most common alignment pattern amongst natural languages; contrast ergative-absolutive.   (linguistics; Advanced)
A case indicating the agent of a transitive verb and the subject of an intransitive verb in a nominative-accusative alignment pattern.
Of a language, not using word order for organizing the elements of a sentence, so that word order is available for use for other purposes (such as discourse structure).  This term comes from the phrase-structure tradition of linguistics.   (linguistics)
A word that denotes a thing (concrete or abstract).   (linguistics; Beginner, Intermediate, Advanced)
The core sound in a syllable; the peak, most sonorous, usually a vowel.   (linguistics; Intermediate, Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Synonym for head.
Of a noun, how many of the noun there are.   (linguistics; Beginner, Intermediate)
A part of a sentence that specifies a thing secondarily involved in the action of the verb.  One of the three main parts of a sentence.  intransitive verbs take no object; the terminology becomes somewhat tangled for ditransitive verbs, which take two objects.  See also prepositional object.   (linguistics; Beginner, Intermediate)
A speech sound with an obstructed airflow; anything from fricatives on down on the sonority hierarchy.  Contrast Sonorant.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: wikipedia)
See plosive.
Of a language, having few morphemes with an isolating structure (very low morpheme/word ratio).  No found in nature; conlang Toki Pona is oligoisolating.  Prefix oligo- means few.  Contrast oligosynthetic.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a language, having few morphemes with a high morpheme/word ratio (synthetic).  Arguably not possible in nature; conlang aUI is claimed as an example.  Prefix oligo- means few.  Contrast oligoisolating.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
The part of a syllable before the nucleus, if any.  Consonantal.   (linguistics; Intermediate, Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
A model of language in which the surface forms of language are generated from underlying representations by optimizing between competing constraints; OT for short.  Constraints are not involable rules, rather may be overriden by higher-priority constraints.  Most of the specifics are supposed to be universal, languages differing only by relative priorities of the constraints.  Controversial; notably, critics suggest OT cannot account for successively applied rules.  Usually applied to phonology, but sometimes also to higher-level concerns such as syntax.  Proposed in 1991.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia;  external: wikia)
Not nasal: of a consonant, produced with air flow through the mouth; of a vowel, produced without air flow through the nose.    (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
The correct way of using a specific writing system to write the language.   (linguistics; Beginner, Intermediate)
Rare language type in which the neutral ordering of the three main sentence elements is object-subject-verb.  Most natlangs put the subject before the object.  OSV natlangs are mostly native to the Amazon basin.   (linguistics; Beginner)
Rare language type in which the neutral ordering of the three main sentence elements is object-verb-subject.  Most natlangs put the subject before the object.  Some native languages of the Americas are OVS.   (linguistics; Beginner)
Of a consonant, having primary articulation by constricting airflow between the hard palate and back of the tongue (dorsum).  Compare retroflex.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a consonant, having its basic identity colored by narrowing of airflow between the tongue and the  hard palate.  A secondary articulation; as if the consonant were closely followed by a palatal approximant.   (sister: Wikipedia)
Of a speech sound, having undergone a sound change either causing or caused by either a palatal consonant, palatalized consonant, or front vowel.  Often ends in assibilation.   (Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
A complete pattern of all the ways a word can vary by inflection.  Cf. declension, conjugation.   (linguistics)
A case indicating the marked noun is partial in nature, atelic; covers a variety of situations.  Notably Finnish, Estonian, and Quenya have such a case.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia;  external: SIL)
A thematic role: The participant of a situation upon whom an action is carried out.   (linguistics; Advanced)
See nucleus.
Of a noun, how it relates to the speaker and the audience.   (linguistics)
Of a consonant, having primary articulation in the upper pharynx, by constricting airflow in the pharynx (the throat) using the root of the tongue.
Of a consonant, either having primary articulation either in the pharynx or epiglottal.
Of a speech sound, having its basic identity colored by constriction of the pharynx or epiglottis.  A secondary articulation.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
The upper part of the throat; roughly, the part of the throat that is also part of the vocal tract.  Has three parts, the nasopharynx at the back of the nasal cavity, oropharynx behind the mouth, and laryngopharynx connecting to the larynx and esophagus.  See velum, radical.   (linguistics; Advanced; sister: wikipedia)
A pattern of form in words that naturally pairs with meaning, in violation of Ferdinand de Saussure's principle of arbitrariness of the sign.  Phonaesthemes are not limited to a single language, and do not compose to fully define a word form; contrast morpheme.  Spontaneous word coinages are statistically likely to involve phonaesthemes.  Common examples are "gl-" for words related to light and vision, "sn-" for words related to the mouth or nose.   (linguistics; external: page)
The qualitative sound of a language, including its beautiful (euphonic) and harsh (cacophonic) aspects.  Term in this sense attributed to J.R.R. Tolkien; cf. cellar door.
The relationship between form and meaning of words; cf. phonaestheme.
A language sound made using the vocal tract.  See allophone.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
A minimal sound element of language that can distinguish words from each other.  See allophone.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a feature of speech sound in a language, capable of changing the meaning of a word.  For example, in English, vowel height is phonemic while rounding is not.  Compare phoneme.   (linguistics; sister: Wiktionary)
The study of the sounds of human speech.  There is no concept of phoneme in phonetics.   (linguistics; Beginner, Intermediate, Advanced)
The study of the sound system of a specific language. May deal with both phones and phonemes.   (linguistics; Beginner, Intermediate, Advanced)
Of a language, the rules of how phonemes can be combined.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
An ideogram that uses a picture to suggest its meaning.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a consonant, where along the vocal tract the air flow is disrupted.  Compare manner of articulation.  See coarticulation.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a consonant, having manner of primary articulation where airflow is blocked.    (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Morphological agreement of a verb with several of its arguments.  In natlangs, may occur with polysynthesis, may occur with ergativity.  Basque has polypersonal agreement.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a language, having a very large number of morphemes per word.  Term coined circa 1819 by linguist Peter Stephen du Ponceau to describe American natlangs.  Raises questions of what a word is.  Some linguists have proposed more restrictive definitions to clearly exclude phenomena such as agglutination.  Polysynthetic languages often use incorporation and polypersonal agreement.   (linguistics; Advanced; external: Conlangery)
Of a consonant, having primary articulation by constricting airflow between the inner side of the alveolar ridge and the tongue.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
See cataphora.
A word that marks the end of a modifying phrase.  Cf. adposition, preposition.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia;  external: SIL)
The study of the ability of natural language speakers to communicate more than what is explicitly stated.   (linguistics; Beginner, Advanced)
In traditional grammar, one of the two parts of a sentence, saying something about the subject.
In some formal treatments of grammar, a boolean-valued function asserting a property of a single element or a relation between multiple elements.  Sometimes predicator to distinguish from the traditional sense of predicate.
An affix that attaches to the beginning of a word.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
A word that marks the start of a modifying phrase.  Cf. adposition, postposition.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia;  external: SIL)
An object introduced by a preposition.   (linguistics)
Of a consonant, the constriction of airflow that gives the consonant its character.  If the consonant is co-articulated, distinguished from the secondary articulation, which only colors the consonant without changing its identity.  See doubly articulated.   (linguistics)
Assimilation in which a later sound is influenced by an earlier one.   (linguistics)
An anaphor whose referent is a noun.   (linguistics; Beginner, Advanced; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a speech sound, produced with airflow in/out of the lungs (controlled by the muscles of the diaphragm).  Human speech sounds are most commonly pulmonic egressive.  Contrast lingual, glottalic.   (linguistics; Advanced)
A vowel with the quality of a rhotic approximant.  Technically, a vowel whose third formant is shifted downward in frequency.  The concept may be partly or entirely dispensed with; some rhotic syllable nuclei may be interpreted as rhotic approximants, while others may be treated as diphthongs of an uncolored vowel with an R-colored neutral vowel.  If R-colored vowels aren't really vowels, then rhotic approximants aren't semivowels.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a consonant, having primary articulation in the pharynx.  May mean specifically articulation in the upper pharynx by airflow constriction using the root of the tongue (the word radical comes from Latin radix meaning root); but in some usage, radical also includes epiglottal.   (linguistics; Advanced; sister: Wikipedia)
A thematic role: participant of a change of ownership that acquires ownership, as the student in "The librarian gave the book to the student."   (linguistics)
The property of a language that a sentence can contain a sentence within it as a subpart, allowing unlimited depth of nesting ("I know that they know that I know that they know that...").  Noam Chomsky has claimed recursion is universal to human language, a claim recently challenged by Daniel Everett citing Pirahã as a counterexample.  Considerable controversy has ensued.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Change of a word form by repeating part of it.  Prominently used in Austronesian natlangs; scattered uses elsewhere, e.g. in English.    (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia;  external: SIL)
Assimilation in which an earlier sound is influenced by a later one.   (linguistics)
A dependent clause that qualifies a noun.  Contrast adverbial clause.   (linguistics)
A conlang that too closely imitates a pre-existing language.  Shortened, and generalized, from linguistic term relexification.   (conlanging; Types)
A process of language change in which most or all of the lexicon of the language is replaced by vocabulary from another language (the lexifier).  Origin of the generalized conlanging term relex.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a consonant, having primary articulation between the front of the tongue curled back to some degree or other, and a place on the roof of the mouth at or behind the alveolar ridge.  With a fully curled-back tongue, the active surface is subapical; sometimes retroflex is used to include apical and laminal sounds, in which case the subapicals may be called true retroflex; but generally not other tongue positions such as domed.  May be alveolar, postalveolar, or palatal.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a consonant, being qualitatively R-like.  It's generally agreed which consonants are rhotic, but there has been some difficulty identifying a technical criterion to explain it; consider how little the alveolar approximant and alveolar trill have in common, as sounds.  Rhotics behave similarly in human languages; their resemblance is phonological rather than phonetic.  Some linguists consider approximant rhotics to be glides.  See R-colored.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
The combination of nucleus and, if present, coda of a syllable; all of the syllable except the onset if any.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a vowel, produced with the lips puckered, creating an additional resonance cavity between the lips and teeth and thereby altering the sound.  The same effect for a consonant is called labialization.  Occurs in most languages but might not be phonemic.   (linguistics; Intermediate; wikibook; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a vowel, either the property of being rounded, or the binary property of whether or not the vowel is rounded.   (linguistics; Intermediate; wikibook; sister: Wikipedia)
Alphabetic glyphs of a certain style using straight lines that make them easy to inscribe on stone.  Specifically, runes refer to certain alphabets used for Germanic languages: in particular, several futhark (fuþark) for Scandinavian languages, and the futhorc (fuþorc) for Old English.  See also Cirth.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
The hypothesis that a person's language affects how they think.   (linguistics; FAQ; sister: Wikipedia;  external: Conlangery)
Any Indo-European language in which the labioovelars of Proto-Indo-European merged with the plain velars while the palatovelars didn't.  Contrast centum language; the two types are named after the words for hundred in respectively Sanskrit and Latin, which illustrate the contrasting phonetic evolution patterns.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
A writing system, used to represent language.  This is the sense in this wikibook; we use it interchangeably with writing system.  Scripts do not necessarily correspond one-to-one with languages; a language may be written using multiple scripts, and a script might be used to write multiple languages.  Usually if a language is exclusively written, one would describe it as a language rather than as a script.  (Beginner, Intermediate)
Calligraphy, especially cursive handwriting.  (sister: Wikipedia)
Of a co-articulated consonant, a constriction of airflow that only colors the consonant, without determining its character.  Whatever the manner of the primary articulation, secondary articulations are approximant.  See doubly articulated.
Also sometimes used of a vowel, indicating a secondary constriction that colors the vowel without changing its identity.
See Natural Semantic Metalanguage.
Aspects of meaning, as expressed in language or other systems of signs.   (linguistics)
See glide.
The theory of how signs are used to communicate meaning; encompasses both linguistic and non-linguistic sign systems.  Founded by Ferdinand de Saussure, who called his work semiology.   (linguistics)
See glide.
Of a fricative or affricate, a hissing quality; secondary feature caused by airflow between tongue and sharp edge of teeth which raises the frequency.  Occurs in English alveolar and postalveolar fricatives/affricates.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Apophony, when viewed as an affix.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
See velum.
A speech sound with unobstructed airflow; anything strictly above the fricatives on the sonority hierarchy.  Sonorants are usually voiced.  Contrast obstruent.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: wikipedia)
An ordering of speech sounds according to how free the air flow is.  Vowels are more sonorous than consonants, sonorants than obstruents.  Linguists disagree on some details of the ordering.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Alteration of a speech sound, either synchronically depending on context  (Intermediate), or diachronically  (Intermediate); may be phonemic or not.   (linguistics)
Common language type in which the neutral ordering of the three main sentence elements is subject-object-verb.  About 40% of natlangs are of this type.  SOV languages include Latin, Sanskrit, and Japanese.   (linguistics; Beginner)
See phone.
A form of lenition in which a stop or affricate changes to a fricative (spirant).   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
See plosive.
Of a consonant, belonging to a conventional set of loud sounds.  Always includes the sibilants; sometimes only the siblants, sometimes also some lower-frequency fricatives/affricates.   (sister: Wikipedia)
Of a vowel, highly pharyngealized combined with an epiglottal trill.  Commonly used in discussing Khoisan languages.   (sister: Wikipedia)
Of a vowel, fricative.
Of a consonant, having primary articulation using the underside of the tongue tip.  See retroflex, sublaminal.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
In traditional grammar, one of the two parts of a sentence, specifying the noun that performs the action; see predicate.
As a thematic role, the only participant of an intransitive clause.   (Advanced)
Of a consonant, having primary articulation using the bottom side of the front of the tongue; suggests a part of the tongue further back than subapical.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
A dependent clause; that is, a clause qualifying any other element in the sentence.
An adverbial clause; that is, a clause that doesn't qualify a noun.
See disfix.
An affix that attaches to the end of a word.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
The occurrence, in different inflections of a single word, of multiple, etymologically separate forms.  English examples are went as a form of go, or good better best.    (linguistics; I:Comparison, I:Irregularities; sister: Wikipedia;  external: SIL)
Common language type in which the neutral ordering of the three main sentence elements is subject-verb-object.  About 40% of natlangs are of this type.  VOS languages include English, French, Mandarin, and Russian.   (linguistics; Beginner)
A script whose symbols represent syllables.  Compare abugida.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
A consonant serving as the nucleus of a syllable.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Basic unit of sound, of which words are made; a cluster of speech sounds with a sonorous peak.  Use of written symbols to represent syllables is older than use of written symbols to represent individual phonemes.  Some linguists view some languages as not having syllables.   (linguistics; Intermediate, Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
A form of vowel-consonant harmony in which all sounds in a syllable take on the same frontness.  Noted of the Proto-Slavic language.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
A written symbol representing a syllable.  See abugida).   (linguistics)
Of changes in a language, taking place due to some factor other than time (such as adjacency in an utterance).
Of linguistic study, concerned only with language as it exists at a given time, disregarding changes over time.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a conlang, not having an internal fictional history.   (conlanging; Types)
Contrast diachronic.
The study of how words are arranged into sentences.   (linguistics)
Of a language, having high morpheme/word ratio.  Cf. analytic.   (linguistics; Intermediate)
A consonant whose manner of primary articulation momentarily blocks airflow by throwing the active articulator against the passive articulator.  Differs from a stop because the block is instantaneous so there's no pressure build-up; differs from a single-contact trill because the articular is moved by muscular contraction, rather than by vibration due to the airflow.  Commonly synonymous with flap; if not, the difference may be that the articulators in a tap strike directly whereas in a flap they strike tangentially.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Of an activity, the property of achieving some sort of completion.  In English this may be captured by the distinction between doing something in an hour (telic) versus doing something for an hour (atelic).  May interact in various ways with tense and aspect in various ways in different languages.  See partitive case.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia;  external: Conlangery)
Of a verb, when the action happens — past, present, future, etc.   (linguistics; Beginner, Intermediate)
Of a noun, its semantic function in the sentence.  A categorization of nouns typically similar to grammatical case but finer-grained.  Also called thematic role, especially when used with a more grammatical emphasis.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
A thematic role: participant of a situation that does not change state, as the book in "The librarian gave the book to the student."   (linguistics)
In linguistics, an approach to grammar as a formal process of generating sequences of words based on phrase structure rules.  Associated with Noam Chomsky.  The form of the rules is generally presumed universal.  The transformational grammar approach may present conlanging hazards (see related caveat on theory and practice).   (linguistics)
Of a clause, relating two noun arguments to a verb.  The arguments are called the agent and patient.
Of a verb, mediating a transitive clause.
An alignment system in which any theta role in a sentence can be the focus/trigger of the sentence, marked only as the trigger rather than for case while the verb is marked to indicate the trigger's role.  Conlang device inspired by Austronesian alignment; however, incompatible with more recent theory on how Austronesian alignment works.   (conlanging; Advanced; external: discussion)
A consonant whose manner of primary articulation is airflow causing vibration of the active articulator so that the articulators make intermittent contact, typically two or three times though more contacts, or just one, are possible.  See also tap.   (linguistics; Advanced; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a language, following an alignment pattern that distinguishes the agent of a transitive verb (ergative case), patient of a transitive verb (accusative case), and subject of an intransitive verb (absolutive case).  Less common than either nominative-accusative or ergative-absolutive.   (linguistics; Advanced)
The hypothesis that grammar arises from innate structure of the human brain.  Associated with Noam Chomsky.  Controversial; fortunately, conlangers have no stake in the controversy, even if they explore language features that it swirls around.   (linugistics; Advanced)
See voiced.
A fleshy projection hanging down from the middle of the back edge of the roof of the mouth.  It closes off the nose when swallowing (as the epiglottis closes off the larynx).  Quite visible if you can get a good look, in a mirror, down your throat past your tongue. See velum.   (linguistics; Advanced; sister: wikipedia)
Of a consonant, having primary articulation at the uvula, by constricting airflow between the uvula and back of the tongue.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a consonant, having primary articulation at the velum, by constricting airflow between the velum and back of the tongue.   (linguistics; CXS; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a consonant, having its basic identity colored by narrowing of airflow between the tongue and the  soft palate.  A secondary articulation.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
The back of the roof of the mouth.  Also called the soft palate; soft tissue, whereas the front of the roof of the mouth is lined with bone, the hard palate.  The uvula hangs down from the velum.  The velum, together with the uvula, can partly or entirely block airflow to the nose and mouth.  See pharynx.   (linguistics; Advanced; sister: wikipedia)
A word that denotes action performed by or on a thing (sometimes, the trivial action of being).
The part of a sentence that specifies the central action of the sentence.  One of the three main parts of a sentence.
See laryngeal cavity.
Two folds of tissue stretching across the laryngeal cavity, capable of vibrating to produce voicing.  Also called vocal folds.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: wikipedia)
The anatomical cavity through which sounds pass after being generated.  For human beings, this consists of the nasal and oral cavities, pharynx, and laryngeal cavity.   (linguistics; Advanced; sister: Wikipedia)
See R-colored vowel.
Of a speech sound, either the property of being voiced, or the binary property of whether or not the sound is voiced.   (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a verb, which participant in the action is the subject — whether the subject does the action, has the action done to it, or does it to itself.   (Advanced; sister: Wikipedia)
Of a speech sound, voicing.
Of a speech sound, produced with the vocal cords vibrating.    (linguistics; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Rare language type in which the neutral ordering of the three main sentence elements is verb-object-subject.  Most natlangs put the subject before the object.  Some Austronesian and Mayan languages are VOS.   (linguistics; Beginner)
A speech sound with unconstricted air flow through the vocal tract.  Distinguished by height, backness, and subtler features such as rounding.  Contrast with consonants, which have lower sonority.   (Beginner, Intermediate)
A glyph written to represent a vowel sound.
Assimilation between non-adjacent sounds involving both vowels and consonants.  Much less common than vowel harmony.  Noted in some native languages in British Columbia, Canada; see also syllabic synharmony.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Assimilation between non-adjacent vowels.  Common in agglutinative languages.  The most common form of harmony.   (linguistics; Advanced; sister: Wikipedia;  external: SIL)
Language type in which the neutral ordering of the three main sentence elements is verb-subject-object.  About 15% of natlangs are of this type.  VSO languages include Welsh and classical Arabic.   (linguistics; Beginner)
A standalone unit of language.  May be used in either a concrete or abstract sense; generally clear from context, but, for precision, prefer word form or lexeme.   (linguistics; Beginner; external: SIL)
See word-based morphology.
An approach to morphology in which a word follows a paradigm to produce word forms.  Also called word-and-paradigm morphology; sometimes abbreviated WP. Contrast morpheme-based, lexeme-based.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
An inflected form of a lexeme.   (linguistics)
See word-and-paradigm morphology.
See script.
Language in written form; however, this could mean either a written encoding of spoken language, or a language whose form is written.  When there is an associated spoken language, the written form may use a different register, and may also contain some purely written elements, e.g. emoticons.  Some conlangs are purely written with no spoken form, such as X.   (linguistics; FAQ)
A 2004 book on Sindarin by David Salo.   Purists wishing to distinguish Salo's extrapolations from Tolkien's notes may refer to the language described in Salo's book as Neo-Sindarin.   (conlanging; external: Tolkien Gateway)
An essay by J.R.R. Tolkien, first delivered as a talk around 1931 and later revised and redelivered, presenting what is now called artlanging.  A major milestone in the history of conlanging.  Tolkien "outs" himself as an artlanger, distinguishes between auxlangs and artlangs, discusses the relation of mythology to language, and discusses phonaesthetics.   (conlanging; sister: Wikipedia)
Author of a book about conlangs, In the Land of Invented Languages, 2009.  PhD in psycholinguistics (psychology of linguistics) at the University of Chicago in 2004.  While researching the book, attended a Language Creation Conference.   (psycholinguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
A mailing list created in 1997, split off from CONLANG-L.   (conlanging; external: AUXLANG-L)
A common exercise in conlang application, translation of the story of the Tower of Babel, Genesis 11:1–9.  Proposed as a standard exercise by Jeffrey Henning, who hosted some four or five hundred such translations on the langmaker website.   (conlanging; Beginner, Appendix; sister: Wikisource;  external: langmaker (archived))
A part of the human brain related to producing speech.  Located toward the front of the dominant hemisphere (which is usually the left hemisphere since most people are right-handed).  See Wernicke's area.   (neurology; FAQ; sister: Wikipedia)
This phrase has been cited as an exemplar of a euphonious (beautiful-sounding) English phrase. J.R.R. Tolkien, describing his attitude toward Welsh in 1955, wrote, "in Welsh for me cellar doors are extraordinarily frequent".   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Conlanger who created conlang Liva, and subsequently proposed what is now called the Gnoli triangle.   (external: page)
The Conlang flagA symbol of the online conlanging community, designed by an organic democratic process on CONLANG-L mailing list.  Depicts a sunrise, symbolizing conlanging coming out into the open; behind the Tower of Babel, referring to the Babel Text and symbolizing the many-layered development of a conlang.   (conlanging; external: The Outer Hoard)
A mailing list created in 1991, that drew together language creators into a community.  The term conlang is derived from the name of the mailing list.  In early 1997, auxlang advocacy was banished to a separate list AUXLANG-L as CONLANG-L moved to a server at Brown University.   (conlanging; FAQ; external: CONLANG-L)
Linguist who has studied the Pirahã since the late 1970s.  Early in his career he followed Noam Chomsky's methodologies, but has since come to the position that Pirahã is a counterexample to some of Chomsky's theories of universal grammar, especially universality of recursion, resulting in heated controversy; Chomsky has called Everett a "charlatão puro" (pure charlatan).   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Conlanger who created artlang ámman îar, spending over four decades on it.  1942–2007.   (external: page)
David J. Peterson
Co-founder of the Language Creation Society, and its president for several years.  Has created a number of conlangs for television and movies, including Dothraki for Game of Thrones.   (conlanging; sister: Wikipedia;  external: page)
Linguist.  Author of A Gateway to Sindarin, 2004; provided translations for the Lord of the Rings movies, 2001–2003.  At the time of the LOTR movies, was in graduate school.   (conlanging; sister: Wikipedia)
Grammarian, circa 170–90 BCE, attributed creator of the oldest surviving language grammar, highly influential on grammars since.   (sister: Wikipedia)
Creator of auxlang Ro.  Reverend, from Ohio, 1853–1937.   (conlanging; external: archive)
Linguist and semiotician, considered amongst the founders of the twentieth-century forms of both subjects.  1857–1913.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Creator of altlang Breathanach.  Suggested bogolang for an altlang in which the historical sound changes of one natlang are applied to another natlang (as with Breathanach, arguably Brithenig, etc.).   (conlanging; external: archive)
Pen name of journalist and author Eric A. Blair, who described fictional language Newspeak.   (journalism; sister: Wikipedia)
Italian mathematician and linguist, creator of Latino sine flexione, 1858–1932.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
A triangle showing the mixture of practical, technical, and artistic motivations for a conlang. The pure motivations are at the corners: auxlang, engelang, and artlang.  Proposed by conlanger Claudio Gnoli in the late 1990s.   (conlanging; Types; external: page)
German polymath, one of the inventors of differential calculus.  1646–1716.  Attempted to create Characteristica universalis.  1614–1672.   (conlanging; sister: Wikipedia)
Twelfth century German Benedictine abbess, who created Lingua Ignota.  Noted for contributions to natural science; long considered a saint in various branches of Roman Catholicism; named a Doctor of the Church in 2012 by Pope Benedict XVI.  Since a 2010 proposal by the Conlanging Librarian at the Language Creation Society, her feast day of September 17 has gained some traction in the internet conlanging community as a conlanging holiday, when conlangers wish each other a happy Saint Hildegard's day.   (conlanging; sister: Wikipedia;  external: Conlanging Librarian)
An alternate history project started in 1997 around Brithenig.  At last check, more than 75 contributors, more than 30 conlangs including Brithenig and Wenedyk.   (conlanging; sister: Wikipedia;  external: page)
In the Land of Invented Languages: Esperanto Rock Stars, Klingon Poets, Loglan Lovers, and the Mad Dreamers Who Tried to Build A Perfect Language
A 2009 book about conlangs by psycholinguist Arika Okrent.   (conlanging; external: page)
Creator of Loglan.  1921–2000.  Sociologist, science fiction author.   (conlanging; sister: Wikipedia)
Dutch linguist and conlanger.  Coauthor of auxlang Interslavic and author of altlang Wenedyk.   (conlanging; sister: Wikipedia;  external: page)
Conlanger who authored the Model Languages newsletter in 1995–6 and later hosted the langmaker website until circa 2009.  See Babel Text.   (conlanging)
Creator of logical philosophical language Ithkuil.  California-based, bachelor's degree in linguistics.  Sometime speaker at Language Creation Conferences.   (conlanging; external: Ithkuil FAQ)
Creator in the seventeenth century of an influential philosophical language.  1614–1672.  Anglican Clergyman.   (conlanging; sister: Wikipedia)
US linguist who investigated linguistic universals.  1915–2001.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
J.R.R. Tolkien
Creator of Quenya and Sindarin.  1892–1973.  Philologist, professor, and lifelong artlanger.  A major influence on conlanging as a whole; see The Hobbit, The Lord of the Rings, A Secret Vice.   (conlanging; sister: Wikipedia)
A major conlanging website maintained until about 2009 by Jeffrey Henning.  Resources hosted included (amongst others) descriptions of roughly two thousand conlangs; four or five hundred Babel Texts; and the Model Languages newsletter archive.   (conlanging; sister: Wikipedia;  external: archive.org)
A widely recognized introduction to conlanging by conlanger Mark Rosenfelder, first on his website and more recently also in dead-tree form.   (conlanging; sister: Wikipedia;  external: page)
A university-hosted conference on conlanging.  Recently, a two-day conference held in odd-numbered years at a university, except the first one-day in 2006.  So far, hosted by universities in North America and Europe.   (conlanging; external: page)
A non-profit corporation dedicated to promoting conlanging, founded in 2007.  Runs the Language Creation Conference.   (conlanging; FAQ; external: page)
A non-profit organization formed in 1987 to develop Lojban.   (conlanging; external: page)
L.L. Zamenhof
Creator of Esperanto.  1859–1917.  Medical doctor, born of Polish-Lithuanian Jewish parents in an area of partitioned Poland with many ethnic groups at odds with each other; believed a common language could promote peace.  His idealism earned him the Esperanto nickname Doktoro Esperanto, meaning Doctor Hopeful, from which the language got its name.   (conlanging; sister: Wikipedia)
Creator of the Klingon language in the 1980s for the Star Trek franchise, and later the Atlantean language for 2001 Disney movie Atlantis: The Lost Empire.  US linguist; has studied native American languages.   (conlanging; sister: Wikipedia)
Prominent conlanger, a.k.a. Zompist.  Maintains the zompist.com website, including the Zompist Bulletin Board and Language Construction Kit; creator of conlang Verdurian.  Author of several books, including the dead-tree edition of the Language Cconstruction Kit.   (conlanging; external: zompist.com)
A series of articles about conlanging written in 1995–6 by Jeffrey Henning.  A prominent on-line conlanging resource, hosted on the langmaker website until its demise.   (conlanging; external: archive.org)
US linguist centrally associated with the universal grammar hypothesis and transformational grammar.   (linguistics; Advanced; sister: Wikipedia)
An online encyclopedia of writing systems and languages, set up by Simon Ager.  Started in 1998 and evolved into an encyclopedia due to Ager's interests.  Emphasis on writing systems.  Includes some conlangs, numerous constructed scripts.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia;  external: page)
Creator of auxlang Novial.  Danish linguist, 1869–1943.  Significant contributions to theory of structural linguistics.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia)
Creator of the Na'vi language for 2009 film Avatar.  US communications professor with a PhD in linguistics.   (conlanging; sister: Wikipedia)
Creator of conlang Tceqli.  US cartoonist.   (conlanging; sister: Vikipedio;  external: page)
US-based conlanger active in the internet conlanging community mainly during the 1990s.  Creator of conlangs Vorlin and Esperanto sen fleksio.   (conlanging; sister: Vikipedio;  external: archive)
A stone monument discovered in the Nile Delta in 1799, repeating a decree in three different scripts, which famously provided the key to deciphering Egpytian hieroglyphics.  The decree was issued in 196 BCE.  Weight a little over half a ton, inscribed surface around a square yard (or, square metre).  Ancient Greek, demotic, and hieroglyphic; actually deciphering the latter took about another 20 years.   (conlanging; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
Pen name of Sarah Higley; conlanger, science fiction writer, and professor of English at the University of Rochester in upstate New York.  Creator of artlang Teonaht.  In science fiction, noted for creating character Reginald Barclay of the Star Trek franchise.  Author of 2007 book Hildegard of Bingen's Unknown Language, about Hildegard's conlang Lingua Ignota.   (conlanging; sister: Wikipedia;  external: page)
Well-known computer program for automatically applying sound changes to words, written by Mark Rosenfelder.  The original program was written in the C programming language in 2000 CE.  He wrote up upgraded version in javascript, running on a web brower and supporting unicode, in 2012.   (linguistics; Intermediate; external: SCA)
See A Secret Vice.
A non-profit corporation that promotes study and documentation of languages around the world, especially endangered ones; literacy; and translation of the Christian Bible into those languages.  Extensive linguistic research and resources are provided by SIL.  The United Nations formally recognizes SIL in a consulting role.   (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia;  external: site)
An annual award by David J. Peterson to a noteworthy conlang, given since 2006.   (conlanging; FAQ; external: page)
Creator of philosophical language Toki Pona.  Toronto-based linguist.  Formerly Sonja Elen Kisa.
A parody science journal on linguistics.  Scholarly tone; archives suggest it's existed in one form or another since the late 1980s.    (linguistics; sister: Wikipedia;  external: page)
A 2015 book on conlanging by David J. Peterson.  About the creative process; doesn't contain exercises.  He also posted a same-named series of videos on YouTube, starting at about the same time.   (conlanging; FAQ; external: [1])
A fantasy novel for children by J.R.R. Tolkien, published in 1937; now considered classic children's literature.  Contains an undercurrent of linguistic appreciation and insight, and some quotable quotes sometimes used in a linguistic or conlinguistic context.
An epic fantasy novel by J.R.R. Tolkien, first published in 1954–1955; one of the best-selling novels of all time (as of this writing, only surpassed by Don Quixote and A Tale of Two Cities).  Provides a significant slice of Tolkien's legendarium and conlangs of Middle Earth, which he'd been developing since World War I.  In the successful movie adaptation from 2001–2003, translations into Tolkien's languages were handled by conlanger David Salo.
Creator of the Pakuni language in the 1970s for TV show Land of the Lost franchise, and later created a Vampire language for the 1998 movie Blade (but for the sequel Blade II, after her death, her notes on the language could not be found and another linguist was hired).  1923–2000.  UCLA professor of linguistics.    (conlanging; FAQ; sister: Wikipedia)
W. John Weilgart
Creator of philosophical language aUI.  1913–1981.  Born in Vienna.  In childhood, had vision of beings from space and was told by a psychiatrist to describe visions to other people as dreams or poems; studied linguistics, earned a doctorate in psychology, and created aUI, "the language of space".  His 1968 book on aUI starts with a poem about a visitor from space.   (conlanging; external: Dr. Weilgart’s Story)
A part of the human brain related to understanding language.  Located (usually?) toward the back of the dominant hemisphere (which is usually the left hemisphere since most people are right-handed).  See Broca's area.   (neurology; FAQ; sister: Wikipedia)
Character in the Star Wars movie franchise, noted linguistically (though Star Wars has been notoriously thin on linguistic interest) for peculiar word ordering in English that seems to suggest his native language may be OSV.   (conlanging; Beginner; sister: Wikipedia)
A popular on-line conlanging discussion form maintained by Mark Rosenfelder.   (conlanging; sister: Wikipedia;  external: page)
Most of these are conlangs.  Only list natlangs when of particular interest to conlangers (or we'd drown in a sea of them!).  Constructed scripts will usually, though not always, be subsumed by their associated languages; see also the remarks on written language in the FAQ, at What's a "Language"?.
List conlangs only when they have gotten some attention in the conlanging community; don't list your own conlangs here (unless they've gained some fame/notoriety in the community).  Any conlang that has a Smiley Award or an ISO language code presumably qualifies.  Likewise any script with an ISO script code.  As a rule, provide ISO codes for constructed languages/scripts, omit for natural ones.
This list is an opportunity to explain how each language fits into the big-picture perspective of conlanging; this high-level view is often difficult to deduce by studying detailed resources about each language (to which this list will usually provide an outgoing link).
An artlang created over many years by conlanger David Bell.  An ergative-absolutive language, likely started the trend of ergative conlangs.  Set in a corner of J.R.R. Tolkien's fictional world.  Winner of the 2010 Smiley Award.   (artlang; Intermediate, Advanced; external: Smiley, page)
A script used in Asia Minor (Anatolia) on Crete from roughly 1300–700 BCE.  Historically sometimes called Hittite or Luwian hieroglyphs.  Deciphered.  Displaced by alphabetic script.   (script; sister: Wikipedia)
A philosophical language first published in the 1960s by philologist and psychoanalyst W. John Weilgart, in which words are built up as sequences of a small set of semantic primes — 31 single-phoneme morphemes.  Billed as "the language of space", the idea being that human corruption is encoded in the vast vocabularies of human languages.  ("aUI" = space mind/spirit sound; space language.)    (engelang; Types; sister: Wikipedia)
A conlang created by conlanger Carsten Becker starting in 2003, exploring the concept of trigger language.  Its creator has since written extensively on how Ayeri differs from Austronesian alignment.   (artlang; Advanced; external: page)
A natlang commonly studied by conlangers as a particularly pure example of ergativity.  Language isolate spoken in the Basque Country of Spain and France.  Agglutinative; most verbs only occur in non-finite form with auxiliary verbs showing polypersonal agreement.   (natlang; I:allophones, I:polypersonal, A:alignments; wikibook; sister: Wikipedia;  external: Omniglot Conlangery)
An altlang created by conlanger Geoff Eddy in 1998.  Supposes Latin supplanted the native Celtic language of Ireland; thus Q-Celtic to Brithenig's P-Celtic.  Part of Ill Bethisad.   (altlang; Types; sister: Breton Wikipedia;  external: Ill Bethisad wiki)
An altlang created by conlanger Andrew Smith in 1996.  Considered the classic example of its type, supposes that Latin displaced the native Celtic language of Great Britain, and applies to it the same language transformations that turned Old English into Modern English.  Winner of the 2013 Smiley Award.  ISO language code bzt.  See also Ill Bethisad.   (altlang; Types; sister: Wikipedia;  external: Smiley, page)
An abugida developed in southeast Asia circa 1000 CE, still in use for Burmese and several other languages in and near Burma (Myanmar).  About forty glyphs, including diacritics.  Cursive form began to shun straight lines from around 1600 CE due to use of a writing surface likey to be punctured by a stylus when writing straight lines (palm leaves).   (script; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia;  external: Omniglot)
A logical language proposed, but never constructed, by Gottfried Leibniz, as a formal basis for an imagined calculus of logic.  Inspired by Wilkins's philosophical language.   (engelang; sister: Wikipedia)
A writing system created by J.R.R. Tolkien.  Within Tolkien's fictional universe, a system of symbols invented by the Sindar (aka gray elves) for their language, Sindarin.  Alphabetic.  Suitable for carving in hard serives where curves are difficult; Tolkien drew inspiration from runic natural scripts.  ISO script code Cirt.   (script; sister: Wikipedia)
A script used on Crete from roughly 2100–1700 BCE.  Not generally agreed to have been deciphered.  About 700 glyphs.  No ISO script code (at this writing).   (script; sister: Wikipedia)
A script developed in the Sumerian civilization circa 3000 BCE, which evolved and continued in use for about three millennia.  One of the oldest scripts.  Number of glyphs varied over time from roughly 1000 to 600.  Specifically developed for use on clay tablets using a blunt wedge; the word cuneiform means wedge-shaped.   (script; sister: Wikipedia)
A logical language constructed for knowledge representation in a long-term research project attempting to produce AI through accumulation of knowledge.   (engelang; Types; sister: Wikipedia)
A ceremonial language, no longer extant, believed to have been constructed, of some natives of the Gulf of Carpentaria (the big rectangular notch on the north side of the coast of Australia).  Notable for some very unusual linguistic features; clicks, otherwise not found outside Africa; only two pronouns, first-person and not-first-person; very small vocabulary of root words; regular adjective-reversing prefix.   (engelang; sister: Wikipedia;  external: page)
An artlang created for the 2011 HBO television series Game of Thrones by David J. Peterson.  See also Valyrian.   (artlang; FAQ; sister: Wikipedia)
A cursive script used in Egypt from roughly 650 BCE to 450 CE.  Derived from hieratic.  The term demotic can also refer to the modern Greek language, and to a logographic Vietnamese script.   (script; sister: Wikipedia)
A script used in Egypt (Anatolia) on Crete from roughly 3200 BCE to 400 CE.  One of the oldest scripts; ancestor of most alpahbets now in use.  Started with fewer than a thousand glyphs, eventually grew to about five thousand; logograms, syllabograms, and alphabetic letters.  Modern decipherment due to the Rosetta Stone.   (script; sister: Wikipedia)
The oldest runic script, used for Germanic languages at least from the second century CE.  Twenty four runes.   (script; sister: Wikipedia)
A significant genre of fictional conlangs are languages for elves.  J.R.R. Tolkien's most extensive diachronic family of languages were elvish, especially Quenya and Sindarin.  The adjectival form elvish, rather than elfin, was an aesthetic preference of Tolkien's.   (artlanging; sister: Wikipedia)
An auxlang first created in the late 1800s by L. L. Zamenhof; first published in 1887.  The most widely spoken conlang; spoken by possibly as many as two million people, spoken natively by about 1000–2000 people.  Intended to promote peace through communication.  Indo-European; Slavic phonemes, largely Slavic semantics, Roman alphabet, primarily Romance vocabulary.  ISO language code eo, epo.   (auxlang; Types; wikibook; external: Omniglot)
An auxlang created by Rick Harrison.  The name means Esperanto without inflection, though more precisely it has fewer inflections.  Inspired by Latino sine flexione.  Harrison called it a dialect of Esperanto, to emphasize it wasn't meant to be a reform of Esperanto such as Ido.   (auxlang; sister: Vikipedio)
A natlang of northern Europe.  Related to Estonian, unrelated to the Scandinavian language family.  Heavily influenced Tolkien's artlang Quenya.  Agglutinative; vowel harmony; a fairly large repertory of cases, notably including a partitive case and an elaborate system of locative cases.   (natlang; I:Case, I:Mood, A:Vowel harmony; sister: Wikipedia;  external: Omniglot)
A runic script used for Old English and Old Frisian from roughly the fourth century CE.  Evolved from the Elder Futhark, also influenced by ogham.  Around forty letters; named fuþorc after the sounds of the first six.   (script; wikibook; sister: Wikipedia)
An auxlang developed by Ronald Clark and Wendy Ashby, circa 1972–1992, building on Interglossa.  Purely isolating.  Claims to be modeled on Italian with similarities to German.  Has been criticized, though, as a relex of English.   (auxlang; Types; sister: Wikipedia;  external: criticism, page)
A cursive script used in Egypt from roughly 3200 BCE to 650 BCE after which it was supplanted by demotic.  Primarily ink on papyrus.    (script; sister: Wikipedia)
A natlang spoken in Mesopotamia between three and four thousand years ago.  The earliest attested Indo-European language.  Deciphered around World War I, providing evidence for the previously abstract hypothesis of laryngeals in Proto-Indo-European (PIE); though some linguists have suggested the ancestor of Hittite may be a sister rather than daughter of PIE.   (natlang; sister: Wikipedia;  external: Omniglot)
An auxlang created in 1907 as an attempted reform of Esperanto, taking a minority of the Esperanto community with it, in an event known as the schism, or even the Great Schism, from which there are still resentments more than a century later.  Ido vocabulary is more Romance.  The Ido community further split over additional reforms.  Ido is estimated to have about 100–200 speakers.  ISO language code io, ido.   (auxlang; Types; wikibook; sister: Wikipedia;  external: Omniglot)
An auxiliary language by conlanger Larry Sulky.   (auxlang; Types; external: review, page)
An auxlang developed by Lancelot Hogben, first published in 1943.  Purely isolating.  ISO language code igs.  See Glosa.   (auxlang; sister: Wikipedia)
An auxlang coauthored by Jan van Steenbergen, for communication between, and with, speakers of Slavic languages; circa 2006.  Largely based on Old Church Slavonic.   (auxlang; sister: Wikipedia;  external: page)
A logical philosophical language designed by John Quijada to express thoughts precisely and very densely.  Winner of the 2008 Smiley Award.   (engelang; Types, Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia;  external: Smiley, page)
A group of African languages that, alone amongst extant natlangs, use clicks.  Grouping originally proposed by Joseph Greenberg. Not related to other languages, not all related to each other either; two of them are isolates.   (natlang; Advanced; sister: Wikipedia)
An artlang created in the 1980s for the Star Trek franchise by Marc Okrand.  Possibly a few dozen fluent speakers; reportedly a couple once taught their son to speak it natively.  OSV, agglutinative, sound inventory very guttural-heavy, deliberately skewed toward a war-like mentality.  No verb to be, a contrarian choice that later presented a challenge when translating "To be or not to be".   (artlang; Types; wikibook)
An engelang created by linguist and science fiction author Suzette Haden Elgin, meant to embody the perceptions of women.  Supposes a strong form of the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, and that Western languages favor the perceptions of men.   (engelang; FAQ; wikibook; sister: Wikipedia)
A natlang spoken originally by the ancient Romans.  Served, in various forms, as a European auxiliary language for about two millennia, through Vulgar Latin, Church Latin, and Neo-Latin.  Ancestor of several major western European languages — the Romance languages — through Vulgar Latin.  Heavily inflected.   (natlang; wikibook; external: Omniglot)
An auxlang created by mathematician Giuseppe Peano, published in the early twentieth century.  Simplification of Latin, citing inspiration from remarks of Gottfried Leibniz.  The name, Latino sine flexione, means Latin without inflections.   (auxlang; Types; sister: Wikipedia)
Perhaps the earliest known full-blown conlang, created in the twelfth century by Hildegard of Bingen.  Subject of a 2007 book by Sarah Higley.   (artlang; sister: Wikipedia)
An engelang created by Claudio Gnoli, starting around 1995.  As often happens, there was some artistry mixed in, and a few years later Gnoli proposed what's now called the Gnoli triangle.   (engelang; Types; external: archive)
A logical language developed from the 1950s onward by sociologist Dr. James Cooke Brown as a tool suitable to test the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis.  Brown asserted copyright control over aspects of the language, which caused a fork of the project, Lojban.   (engelang; Types; wikibook)
A logical language started in 1987 as a fork of Loglan by members of Loglan's language community, in reaction to copyright claims on Loglan by its creator.  Initially a relexification of Loglan.  At this writing, development of Lojban is ongoing.  ISO language code jbo.   (engelang; Types; wikibook; external: page)
A pictographic script used by the Mayan civilizaiton of Mesoamerica roughly from the third century BCE to the sixteenth century CE.  The only native Mesoamerican script deciphered (as of this writing).  Mixture of logograms and syllabograms; the syllable notation focuses on vowels.  Numerals using base twenty, with a zero symbol, and 1–19 using a secondary base of five.   (script; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia;  external: Omniglot)
An artlang created for the 2009 movie Avatar by Paul Frommer.  Ejective consonants, providing an exotic sound manageable by the movie actors.  Conjugation by infixes; nonconfigurational.   (artlang; wikibook)
A fictional planned language described by George Orwell in his dystopian novel Nineteen Eighty-Four.  In-story, the language is designed by a totalitarian state to prevent dissident thoughts by making them impossible to express; see Sapir-Whorf hypothesis.   (engelang; sister: Wikipedia)
An auxlang created by linguist Otto Jespersen, first published in 1928.  Jespersen split off from the Ido movement.  German and Romance roots.  ISO language code nov.   (auxlang; Types; wikibook; external: Omniglot)
A rune-like script used for early Irish languages starting from perhaps the fourth century CE, or earlier.  Originally twenty letters in four groups of five; later another set of five were added.  Characters are attached to a continuous line, allowing rather arbitrary writing directions.  It's been suggested ogham may have been an encoding of another alpahbet, though which other alphabet is no agreed upon.  Used in neo-paganism mainly for divination.   (script; sister: Wikipedia)
An artlang created in the 1970s for children's TV show Land of the Lost by Victoria Fromkin.  About three hundred words; spoken within the story world by a race of primitive humanoids.  Meant to be potentially educational, simple enough for kids to learn.   (artlang; FAQ; sister: Wikipedia;  external: FrathWiki, Pop Apostle)
A natlang spoken by the Pirahã tribe (estimated 250–400 speakers) in the Amazon rain forest, studied since the late 1970s by linguist Daniel Everett, with notoriously peculiar features.  According to Everett, the associated culture has no art or storytelling, and the language no vocabulary for number or time, and no verb tense, very few phonemes and can also be whistled.  The pronoun system seems to be borrowed from an unrelated language.  Everett, who started the study under the auspices of SIL International using Chomskyist methodology, after studying the Pirahã became an atheist and opponent of the universal grammar hypothesis.   (natlang; sister: Wikipedia;  external: Omniglot)
Created by J.R.R. Tolkien as a common ancestor for his elvish languages.  See diachronic; Quenya, Sindarin.   (artlang; sister: Wikipedia)
Reconstructed common ancestor of the Indo-European language family.  Easily the most intensively researched proto-language, using the comparative method notably based on classical Greek, Latin, and Sanskrit.   (natlang; sister: Wikipedia)
An artlang created by J.R.R. Tolkien.  One of the most developed of Tolkien's elvish languages.  Strongly influenced by Finnish.  ISO language code qya.  Cf. Sindarin.   (artlang; Types, I:phonotactics, I:infixes, I:nouns, I:polypersonal; wikibook)
An artlang created by conlanger Henrik Theiling.  Polysynthetic; evidentiality; clicks.    (artlang; Intermediate; external: page)
A classification language created in 1904 by Edward Powell Foster.  Alternating consonants and vowels progressively narrow meaning.  Supporters included Melvil Dewey, creator of the Dewey Decimal System.   (engelang; Types; sister: Wikipedia)
A system of written symbols used on Easter Island (aka Rapa Nui; the southeast corner of the Polynesian Triangle, about 2000 miles/3500 kilometres west of South America).  In the mid-nineteenth century, diseases and slave raids eliminated almost all the island's population, apparently including the last people who knew how to read rongorongo.  Linguists now disagree on whether or not it is actually writing as such.   (script; Intermediate; sister: Wikipedia)
A natlang spoken originally about 1500 BCE in south Asia.  Earliest form is called Vedic Sanskrit.  Later form served as a lingua franca in India through to after 1000 CE.  Now used in various liturgical and philosophical tranditions.  See Proto-Indo-European.   (natlang; wikibook; sister: Wikipedia;  external: Omniglot)
An auxlang created by conlanger Dana Nutter in 2003.  Designed for simplicity with power.   (auxlang; Types; sister: Vikipedio)
An artlang created by J.R.R. Tolkien.  One of the most developed of Tolkien's elvish languages.  Strongly influenced by Welsh.  ISO language code sjn.  Cf. A Gateway to Sindarin; Quenya.   (artlang; sister: Wikipedia)
An auxlang created by François Sudre, from 1827 through a posthumous book in 1866.  Words are built from seven phonemes, represented especially by the seven notes of the western musical scale (do through si), with alternate representations including the seven colors of the rainbow.   (auxlang; Types; sister: Wikipedia;  external: Omniglot)
Aka Dutton Speedwords.  An auxlang created by Reginald J. G. Dutton, developed over much of the early-to-mid twentieth century with the latest revision published in 1951.  Has been assessed by conlangers as a relex of English.   (auxlang; Types; sister: Wikipedia;  external: assessment)
An artlang created by Dutch conlanger Rolandt Tweehuysen, starting in the early 1960s.  Uses word order to indicate verb tense; resultative case indicates that the referent ceases to exist.  Very large vocabulary, around 25,000 words.   (artlang; sister: Wikipedia;  external: page)
A micronational language created by Robert Ben Madison in 1980 for his micronation Talossa, which he founded in 1979 at the age of 14.  Has a mythical history in which it dates back to the Roman Empire.  ISO language code tzl.   (artlang; Types; sister: Wikipedia;  external: page)
A logical language inspired by Loglan, that took a turn toward the naturalistic.  Created by Rex May.  Letter "q" in its orthography represents sound /N/ ("ng" in usual English spelling), "tc" represents /tS/, so "Tceqli" is pronounced roughly as "Cheng-Lee" (the basis for a pun on the language's web page).   (engelang; Types; sister: Vikipedio;  external: page)
A writing system created by J.R.R. Tolkien.  Within Tolkien's fictional universe, a system of symbols invented by the elf Fëanor, designed to be painted with a brush, with the form of each symbol describing features of the represented speech sound.  Can be used to write any spoken language, by choosing a mapping of sound features onto form features (a mode of the tengwar).  ISO script code teng.  (An earlier writing system within Tolkien's legendarium, by a different elf, Rúmil, is also sometimes called tengwar.)   (script; wikibook; sister: Wikipedia;  external: Amanye Tenceli)
An artlang created over decades by conlanger, science fiction writer, and professor of English Sally Caves.  Well-reputed in the internet conlanging community.  OSV.  A distinctive feature is its Law of Detachability.  Winner of the 2007 Smiley Award.   (artlang; sister: Wikipedia;  external: Smiley, page)
A fauxlang created by conlanger Rex May, set in an alternative history where L.L. Zamenhof emigrated to the Republic of Texas.   (fauxlang; Types; external: archive)
An artlang created by conlanger Jim Henry in the 1990s.  Spoken by non-humanoid.  Inflections largely carried by articles rather than nouns or verbs.   (Intermediate; external: page)
A twenty-first century conlang facilitating Taoist thinking, created by linguist Sonja Lang in 2001.  Few words, no inflections at all, uncomplicated meanings, simple grammar.   (engelang; Types; wikibook; sister: Wikipedia;  external: page)
A diachronic family of artlangs created for the 2011 HBO television series Game of Thrones by David J. Peterson.  Parent language High Valyrian, descendants Astapori Valyrian and Meereenese Valyrian.  See also Dothraki.   (artlang; FAQ; sister: Wikipedia)
A fictional language created by conlanger Mark Rosenfelder for a Dungeons & Dragons world, circa 1995.  Borrows from, without resembling, various European natlangs.   (artlang; Types; sister: Wikipedia)
A conlang created by conlanger Rick Harrison, first published in 1991; underwent major changes later.  Original billed as an IAL, but continued after its author announced he was no longer developing an IAL.   (artlang; Types; sister: Vikipedio;  external: page)
An auxlang created in the later 1800s by German Roman Catholic priest Johann Martin Schleyer.  Most successful auxlang before Esperanto, which was first published about ten years later.  Vocabulary derived from German roots.  ISO language code vo, vol.   (auxlang; Types; wikibook; external: Omniglot)
An altlang created by conlanger Jan van Steenbergen.  Well reputed altlang in the internet conlanging community; blends Vulgar Latin and Slavic features supposing the Romans conquered Poland, as part of Ill Bethisad.   (altlang; Types; sister: Wikipedia;  external: page)
A seventeenth century classification language created by John Wilkins.  Planted the idea of this type of philosophical language, later considered amongst others by Gottfried Leibniz and Peter Roget (of Roget's Thesaurus).   (engelang; Types; sister: Wikipedia)
A purely pictographic conlang created by David J. Peterson.  A trigger language.   (artlang; FAQ; external: page)
A twenty-first century philosophical language created by Andrew Nowicki.  Two-letter morphemes used in compounds; consecutive vowels mark word boundaries.   (engelang; Types; external: page)
Universities requiring or accepting ETDs should provide students with basic levels of support such as
In this chapter, we will discuss the thoughts of mathematician,  Neo-Luddite, and serial killer Theodore "Ted" Kaczynski and compare them with the ideas of more mainstream thinkers.  We limit our picture of Kaczynski's thoughts to those presented in his manifesto, Industrial Society and Its Future[1]. Of these ideas, we are specifically interested in the ethical considerations that Kaczynski thinks should guide the progress of science and technology and the values that he thinks define modern technical professionals.  These ideas combine to form a unique perspective on professional ethics for engineers. All quotations from Kaczynski are taken from his manifesto and referenced by paragraph number.
In this section, we will briefly describe Kaczynski's life, through the publication of his manifesto and his subsequent arrest, to provide context for his ideas.  Kaczynski, born in 1942, was recognized early as an academic prodigy, with special abilities in mathematics. At the age of 16, he was accepted as a student to Harvard University, where he studied math and physics [2].  Kaczynski went on to earn his PhD in mathematics from the University of Michigan, where his award-winning dissertation [3] was widely praised by the faculty members he worked with [4].  After a short-lived professorship at UC Berkeley, Kaczynski resigned and built himself an isolated wood cabin in rural Montana.   Kaczynski at Berkeley
From the early to mid-70's Kaczynski lived in this cabin without electricity or running water, learning a variety of survival skills and reading books about sociology and philosophy [2].  In 1978, he began a series of 16 bombings, mostly targeting university professors and computer store owners [5].  He was widely referred to as  "the Unabomber" prior to his identification and arrest.  Kaczynski's attacks culminated with a letter to the New York Times, which demanded that a reputable newspaper or journal publish his 35,000 word manifesto regarding the dangers of modern industrial-technological society. Though there was some initial hesitation [6], the New York Times and the Washington Post published the Unabomber manifesto on September 19, 1995 [7]. While a costly FBI investigation had been underway since the first bombing, Kaczynski was not caught and arrested until April 3, 1996 [5], after his brother recognized the writing style of the published manifesto [8].  In May 1998, Kaczynski was sentenced to life in prison, with no possibility of parole [5].
To understand Kaczynski's ethical perspective, we must first determine what he defines as good.  He never defines this explicitly, concluding that "in a discussion of this kind one must rely heavily on intuitive judgment" (paragraph 231).  He appears to assume a shared, intuitive understanding with the reader of what things are right.  His occasional examples fall in line with conventional ideas.  In paragraph 153, for example, he identifies "good purposes, such as discouraging child abuse or race hatred".  His full definition  of what is right cannot be typical, though, because society deemed his deliberate, murderous bombings criminal.  We must therefore carefully analyze the things that Kaczynski classifies as right and wrong.
He justifies most of his objections to the modern industrial system by attributing "immense suffering all over the world" (paragraph 169) to it.  We may thus conclude that Kaczynski considers the suffering of people bad.  He deliberately inflicted suffering on people, though, which appears to violate this simple precept.  What, according to Kaczynski, makes some suffering worth causing?  He provides hints in the section on "Human Suffering" (paragraphs 167-170), where he states that "it is not all certain that the survival of the [industrial] system will lead to less suffering than the breakdown of the system would" (paragraph 169) and "one has to balance the struggle and death [of a revolution] against the loss of freedom and dignity" (paragraph 168).  These excerpts suggest that Kaczynski's guiding principle is a sort of  Utilitarian arithmetic for minimizing net human suffering.  He makes this explicit for his own actions in paragraph 96, claiming that to have "some chance of making a lasting impression, we've had to kill people".  He casts his murders as negative actions but believes that this harm was outweighed by the exposure of his writing.
Kaczynski's views on the ethics of technology rely on his model of human psychology and the ways that its interactions with modern technology allegedly lead to suffering.  Kaczynski believes that a core element of human psychology is what he calls the "power process" (paragraph 33).  He theorizes that, in order to have healthy, functional lives, people must formulate goals and exert nontrivial efforts to attain them. Reaching goals without effort is not sufficient; Kaczynski offers the trend that "leisured, secure aristocracies that have no need to exert themselves usually become bored, hedonistic and demoralized" (paragraph 34) as evidence for the value of the power process.  Kaczynski also believes that people derive the greatest enjoyment from participating in this process independently, claiming that "most people need a greater or lesser degree of autonomy" (paragraph 42) to feel satisfied.
Some goals, such as food and shelter, are necessary for survival.  When meeting these goals is a nontrivial endeavor, people are required to participate in the power process.  According to Kaczynski, however, the "effort needed to satisfy the biological needs has been reduced to triviality" (paragraph 41) by modern industry.  In other words, he thinks we have become like the "leisured, secure aristocracies" (paragraph 34) of past ages.  Much of the manifesto is devoted to describing the psychological pathologies that supposedly follow from this disruption of the power process.
Not all modern people lose touch with the process, though; some people formulate artificial goals.  This idea has precedent in A.H. Maslow's writings on the "hierarchy" of human needs.  Maslow claims that, when basic goals are reached, "At once other (and 'higher') needs emerge and these, rather than physiological hungers, dominate"[9] (p. 375). Kaczynski refers to the nontrivial efforts that people make toward such goals as "surrogate activities" (paragraphs 38-41).  Kaczynski's list of examples includes "scientific work, athletic achievement, humanitarian work, artistic and literary creation, climbing the corporate ladder, acquisition of money and material goods far beyond the point at which they cease to give any additional physical satisfaction, and social activism when it addresses issues that are not important for the activist" (paragraph 40).  Of particular relevance to professional engineering ethics is Kaczynski's identification of technical professions as surrogate activities.
Kaczynski devotes a section of his manifesto to "The Motives of Scientists" (paragraphs 87-92).  He argues that scientists (and presumably other technical professionals) pursue their careers as surrogate activities, mainly to fulfill the power process.  Kaczynski dismisses the objections that scientists might be motivated by curiosity (paragraph 87) or the "benefit of humanity" (paragraph 88).  He reaches the conclusion that "science marches on blindly, without regard to the real welfare of the human race" (paragraph 92).  This surrogate activity -- that every engineer partakes in -- is thus at best orthogonal to Kaczynski's implicit guiding ethical principle:  minimizing total human suffering.  As we saw in his discussion of the disrupted power process, Kaczynski thinks that the advancement of technology can in fact work against human welfare.
Small-scale vs. Organizational technology
It is important to note that Kaczynski did not hate all forms of technology. He defines two forms of technology as "small-scale" and "organizational" (paragraph 208). Small-scale technology "can be used by small-scale communities without outside assistance." This includes technology such as steel and the water wheel.  Organizational technology requires organization on the social level, and falls into disrepair if that organization disappears.  An example Kaczynski gives is the Roman aqueduct system.  It was not maintained after the empire's collapse, while small-scale Roman technologies survived (paragraph 208). He hypothesizes that the refrigerator (among other things) would meet a similar fate if modern society collapsed (paragraphs 209-210).  Kaczynski endorses small-scale technology while condemning organizational technology.　E.F. Schumacher made a similar distinction and reached the similar (but less militant) conclusion that Small is Beautiful.
In a portion of Kaczynski's manifesto entitled "The Future", he outlines some of the dangers of organizational technologies. Two of the particular risks involve artificial intelligence and genetic engineering. Kaczynski argues that our reliance upon machines will progress to the point where they make the majority of decisions for us. At this point, "People won't be able to just turn the machines off, because they will be so dependent on them that turning them off would amount to suicide" (Paragraph 173).  This sentiment was expressed by E.M. Forster almost a century earlier in his short story The Machine Stops[10] and is related to the more recent concept of the Singularity.  Computer scientist Bill Joy stated that, although Kaczynski was "criminally insane", he "saw some merit in" Kaczynski's reasoning about the dystopian possibilities for computing[11].  Even if humans remain in control, Kaczynski claims that advances in the field of genetic engineering will "continue until man and other organisms have been utterly transformed" because "once you start modifying organisms through genetic engineering there is no reason to stop at any particular point" (Paragraph 177). Kaczynski thinks that the inevitable regulation of genetic engineering (paragraph 123) would lead to a curtailment of the autonomy that he believes enhances the power process (paragraph 42), concluding that "The only code of ethics that would truly protect freedom would be one that prohibited ANY genetic engineering of human beings" (paragraph 124). The popularity of the film Gattaca[12], a depiction of a genetically engineered society, released shortly after the Unabomber's arrest, suggests widespread sympathy for this view.
Kaczynski classifies certain technologies as ethical and others as unethical, on the basis of their alleged effects on overall human welfare.  This implies a set of ethical principles for technical professionals that is very different from the motivations that Kaczynski thinks actually drive science and technology forward.  While Kaczynski's sanity is questionable [13][14], we find that some of his conclusions are compatible with those of more mainstream authors and may even resonate with the general public.  This makes his perspective worthy of consideration, in spite of the criminal actions that got it published.
↑ "The Unabomber Trial: The Manifesto". The Washington Post. Sept 22, 1995. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/national/longterm/unabomber/manifesto.text.htm. Retrieved April 29, 2011.
↑ a b Schwartz, John; Kovaleski, Serge (April 4, 1996). "Bookish Recluse Lived Sparse Cabin Existence". http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/national/longterm/unabomber/bkgrdstories.defendant.htm. Retrieved April 29, 2011.
↑ Kaczynski, Ted (1967). "Boundary Functions". https://search.proquest.com/docview/288225414.
↑ McFadden, Robert (May 26, 1996). "PRISONER OF RAGE -- A special report.;From a Child of Promise to the Unabom Suspect". The New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/1996/05/26/us/prisoner-of-rage-a-special-report-from-a-child-of-promise-to-the-unabom-suspect.html. Retrieved April 29 ,2011.
↑ a b c "16 Bombs, Three Deaths". 1998. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/national/longterm/unabomber/bkgrdstories.ted.htm. Retrieved April 29, 2011.
↑ LaFraniere, Sharon; Thomas,  Pierre (July 1, 1995). "Manifesto Poses Ethical Dilemma for Two Newspapers". http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/national/longterm/unabomber/manifesto.ethics.htm. Retrieved April 29, 2011.
↑ Graham, Donald; Sulzberger, Arthur (September 19, 1995). "Statement by Papers' Publishers". http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/national/longterm/unabomber/manifesto.pubs.htm. Retrieved April 29, 2011.
↑ Claiborne, William (August 21, 1998). "FBI Gives Reward to Unabomber's Brother". http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/national/longterm/unabomber/trialstory.htm. Retrieved April 29, 2011.
↑ Maslow, Abraham (July, 1943). "A theory of human motivation". pp. 370-396. http://psycnet.apa.org/journals/rev/50/4/370/. Retrieved April 29, 2011.
↑ Forster, E.M. (1909). "The Machine Stops". http://archive.ncsa.illinois.edu/prajlich/forster.html. Retrieved April 29, 2011.
↑ Joy, Bill (April, 2000). "Why the Future Doesn't Need Us". Wired. http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/8.04/joy.html. Retrieved April 29, 2011.
↑ Booth, William (December 26, 1997). "Kaczynski Resists the Insanity Defense". The Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/local/longterm/aron/kaczynski122697.htm. Retrieved April 29, 2011.
↑ Booth, William (January 9, 1998). "Kaczynski Agrees to Mental Exam, Seeks to Represent Himself". http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/national/longterm/unabomber/bkgrdstories/psych0109.htm. Retrieved April 29, 2011.
Audio interview: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3hZe-8s2nnk
Use this statement to write the contents of the relocatable block specified by handle& to the open file or serial port specified by deviceID, in a format suitable for input by the READ FIELD statement.
WRITE FIELD starts writing at the current "file mark" position. If first writes a 4-byte long-integer which indicates the size of the block; following this, it writes the contents of the block itself.
If you want to write only the block's contents to the file (without the 4-byte length indicator), use the WRITE FILE statement instead:
Krunch, one of the anthropomorphic crocodiles from the Donkey Kong games, was in Diddy Kong Racing as a playable character. As the story goes, he had been working on a spy mission to check for anti-Kremling plans. On Timber's Island, though, he ended up helping the creatures who were trying to kick Wizpig off of the island. He was going to reappear in the game Diddy Kong Pilot before the Rare Ltd. buyout occurred and the game was changed to Banjo-Pilot.
None of the Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms stated so far assert the existence of an infinite set. The next axiom of ZF set theory does just this.
First we need the concept of an inductive set.
. For a given set
.
There exists an inductive set.
Whilst there are many inductive sets, we can prove the following.
Theorem There exists a unique inductive set which is a subset of all inductive sets.
. But then by the Axiom of Extensionality,
.
, etc. The unique inductive set that is a subset of all inductive sets is denoted
.
One of the most useful theorems involving natural numbers is the following.
.
Here is a straightforward result that can be proved using induction.
.
Proof We prove this by induction on
.
. In other words, for that value of
.
. There are two cases.
. Bu then by the inductive hypothesis,
.
Here is another simple result that follows by induction.
.
Proof We prove this by induction on
.
A useful variant of induction is the following.
.
Proof We prove this result by ordinary induction. Let
.
Thus by ordinary induction,
.
The Ba Zi of anyone born in Year 1950. The Hour Pillar and Luck Pillars are obtained by clicking the items under the respective column.
The term "SS" refers to the "Season".
The Hour Pillar is derived from the hour of birth. At the page that shows the Hour Pillar, one has to use the time of birth to look up the Hour Pillar.
The Luck Pillars depend on whether a person is male or female. By clicking under one of these columns, we can see the respective Luck Pillars, together with the starting Age. An item such as Age 9 (H2E12r) means that the starting Age is 9, the Heavenly Stem is 2, the Earthly Branch is 12 and the Luck Pillars unfold in a 'reverse' direction. An item such as Age 8 (H10E9f) means that the starting Age is 8, the Heavenly Stem is 10, the Earthly Branch is 9 and the Luck Pillars unfold in a 'forward' direction. If the first Luck Pillar is H4E7, then the next pillar (when the Age increases by 10 years) will be H5E8 in the 'forward' direction. In the 'reverse' direction, the next pillar (when the Age increases by 10 years) will be H3E6. In the 'forward' direction, both the Heavenly Stem and the Earthly Branch are incremented by 1, but in the 'reverse' direction, both numbers are decremented by 1, provided that the Heavenly Stems range from H1 to H10, and the Earthly Branches range from E1 to E12.
Fundamentals for Trainz Trainees    Trainz Asset Maintenance and Creation
TOC | Beginnings | Fun | AM&C | Creation | InBook Refs | ORP Refs:  • Index • Containers • Kinds • Tags | Appendixes  • Vers
Operations Note: Clicking on a footnote ([2]) or note tag ([note 12]) in the main body of text will navigate you (position the page) to the exact text for the entry.  • Then: Clicking there on the ? symbol, will return you back to read on from where you started.
ANIM files	— Animation, for example a steam locomotive's connecting rod movements, or water movement on a river or lake. Those wheels you see rotating under the train or that lever you can throw in the CAB all involve dynamic positioning of graphic elements.
The range and appearance of those motions are defined in an animation file by the CC
BMK files	— have existence only in map folders (post-save having semi-permanent existences like all map asset files, and in the data subfolder \Cache\bookmarks and both never involve human actions directly, but record specific camera viewpoint coordinates.  These later files will be active (open or changing) only when Surveyor is active in those specific maps provided that a user has changed any bookmarks state within Surveyor.[note 3]
About Bookmarks...
There are ten bookmarks, 0-9 built into Surveyor's editing aids.  The are used to record the current camera position (and active data, such as center of view, focal distance, and 3D co-ord of the viewpoint) at the moment when and where they are defined.
They are all indexed to the number keys 0 -9  (the default 'action' keys), allowing an map builder to quickly return to exactly the same view as when saved.
The one sometimes-bad feature is their action (teleportation, n'est pas?) activates merely by pressing the keys 0-to-9 without any Ctrl+Alt+⊞ Win+⇧ Shift key (nor confirmation!) with no appeal and instant displacement—even if you didn't mean it! (On a QWERTY keyboard, it is easy enough to brush one of these accidently when using other some other map tools key sequences).
They were also historically Set or Cleared by using 'that number hotkey' in combinations with shift/control keys or a mouse-click to select a specific change in the active edit camera location (teleportation!).  These abrupt displacements in viewpoint state change use the number activation keys (action key) or 'require a click on the action-button' now-a-days relocated into today's pick list—a bummer when working with the pick list closed.
These state-change commands always include their respective action button—either by a Shft control key press + a mouse click or by referencing the action (number) keys directly pressing it with the same control keys—either way requiring a combination to set or clear a specific hot key.  In TANE the set/clear key variations in Surveyor and use of such 'in-world displacements' still allow using the same number 'action keys', but the  new software team has not replicated the same historic control keys (only) set/clear combinations.
Before TS2009's release these action buttons from Trainz 1.0—TC3 were visible along the top of the screen in the 'Windows Title Bar, which in all those versions, would hide showing more screen viewing real estate, until and unless the action-mouse cursor approached the top of the screen.  Inexperienced/new Trainzer users should be advised most in-surveyor activity is focused on the screen center, so this was quite nice.  In TS2009-TRS19 the buttons were moved into the pick list drop down menu panel near the top of the Pick List slider box.
Using Bookmarks, Defining to Canceling
In Trainz—TC3, these key combinations, and those of other simulator hotkeys were configurable in a .txt file in the ..\Settings folder.  The table below was cribbed from such a file with a lot of massage editing afterwards.
Surveyor Utility Editor Keys and Bookmark Buttons
Bookmarks allow you to set a place and view angle so one can 'instantly return' to the camera angle and viewpoint to continue work there later.
All Set the location, height and viewpoint of the current camera view.
ALL ten set the location, height, direction, and viewpoint of the current camera view.
Clears Viewpoint Bookmark #1 Hotkey.
Last Clear Viewpoint Bookmark (#0) Hotkey.
CDP files	— Content Dispatcher Pack. A file used by Auran and some other content creators to distribute additional assets. A CDP file can contain one or more assets.
CDPA files	— Content Dispatcher Pack Archive. An archive version of the CDP format, used by Auran to place an asset off the main database into axillary data bases controlled by the user, while keeping the asset in a loadable form. Archived assets are no longer selectable when building a route or session, but because they are still indexed, an asset which needs the dependency can still load it. Use primarily to put aside assets needed in something you want to run, but would never use in creation. Example: A North American Trainzer might archive all the Non-American rolling stock and locos, or signs or architectures not likely useful in any route he may build.
CDP2 files	— Content Dispatcher Pack 2. A new version of the CDP format, used by Auran and some other content creators to distribute additional assets for Trainz Classics.
File:TS2010 Chump, mesh, and texture files in a randomly selected Trainz 2010 data cache-EN.png  Anatomy of a random TSxx 'load' asset's raw source files and processed (post-committed) compressed data.  The .chump and .texture files are optimized for fast display and a bit to be fast loading as well.
CFG files	— Used to store the program's configuration details. This is a widely used file extension type, but the format is specific to each manufacturer's specific program suite or single application.
A CHUMP file — Trainz pre-processed ready to load (cached) asset file. These are generated by CMP when an asset is committed to the database, and the data file is the actual storage locale of the asset data. Where each Trainz version keeps committed asset files has changed somewhat with major technology releases:
Before TRS2006, a folder hierarchy schema using asset kind-groups (types) stored together in pre-defined root locations held asset's data filed under KUIDS-named folders.
With Content Manager Plus's introduction, the rest of The TR's used a hash-coded folder naming system to store data under the install's root folder in ..\local. The assets.tdx file acted as an index into this linear architecture.
The data arrangement of TS09–TS09-SP3 followed that of the TR's until the last TS09 changes created TS09-SP4 trainz-build, which rearranged the file structure to match that developed in TS10 (often under concurrent development with TS09's software updates).
TS10–TS12 in the TS's arranged all non-JA file data in ..\UserData folder, using a scaffold of 256 sub-folders (Hexadecimal coded ('00'-'FF') directories names) to increase speed of access to the asset's data folder, once again stored under the KUIDs code as a folder name. The assets.tdx file was retained, but had other stored information necessary to operating the database system moved into it.[note 4]
The TANE file storage architecture is again a new arrangement, part of which was user requested and part which made it more compatible with more recent versions of the Windows OS.  It is capable of letting the user put the program and support data files where Windows practices prefer and letting the user put the game data files in a directory chosen by the user. This arrangement of the facility allows the user to switch between local data groups so a route building content creator can run on one folder setup that includes payware and non-DLS items, and can test versus another 'standard items' data set to verify only items on the DLS are used in a route and session.  In the long run, this can result in a set of cleaned up routes on the DLS giving far less hassles to downloading users, provided N3V polices and enforces requirements on uploads to exclude routes and sessions (kind map & kind profile) with non-DLS items.  Hopefully N3V will also enforce similar policy with respect to payware, which assets many of us do not want contaminating a normal installation.
GND files	— The terrain file that contains the topographic details of a map.  One of the traditional four specialty file types found in the edit folder of a map asset.  When creating a map from Geographic survey data, this is the file that is produced when creating a map from DEM data, and the one replaced when editing a map's terrain.
GameScript is a C-like computer language which generate GS files— Gamescript source files for inclusion in assets and the game's script libraries.
Many interactive assets depend on these script files to interface with the Trainz run time modules. Script updates account for a common reason an interactive or animated asset becomes obsolescent or may not function, as the script libraries from release to release (including updates like hotfixes and service packs) usually evolve a few of the library files. The other main effect of this version drift is the sometimes impossible difficulty of taking an asset using an advanced TBV with a need for such a script update to an earlier version of Trainz, such as TS2009, the TC's, or even TRS2004/TRS2006. In general, most assets can be retrograded, but when they can't, a script language feature in the code build and it's successors is the main reason such an asset cannot.
In the summer of 2014, Andi06 published a new set of assets depending upon TS2012's service pack 1 and the fourth hotfix in the series. TS2012-SP1+hf3 COULD NOT ever work with the new diamond crossing assets. The software hooks needed in the runtime modules surveyor and Driver just didn't exist before hotfix 4 for TS12. This is also an example (one of many) where the programmers responded to a request from the users and improved Trainz by granting our wish. Most such improvements have been user demand generated. A good reason to stay active monitoring the Auran forums.
GSE files	— GameScript DRM security encoded file. Uneditable save by originator.
IM files, .im.files	— Indexed 3D mesh files, where the indexing means they are constructed in such a manner as to be easily scalable based on distance from the viewport camera.  These are the heart and soul of Trainz digital models, which at a particular distance, render them as a Wire-frame model, remove hidden lines and planes, then draw in (color) visible surfaces with the designated textures.
Somebody making a turntable? The mesh count in something like this circular cavity is rather high, especially to appear this smooth.
Before texturing a terminal, software looks at distance and angle, then removed hidden polygons so it can put a surface only where needed.
Trainz polygons are built up of Triangles, like the dolphin above.  The triangle is the smallest possible polygon and the most stable and geometrically three points define a plane, or face.
A couple of key points should be kept in mind if one is altering assets opened for editing
You can't rename a texture.txt file, because that is the name hard coded into the mesh.  You can (most times) easily examine what textures exactly a mesh expects by using PEV's Mesh Viewer2.exe tool (RHChol and select
Texture.txt files do not have to refer to individual texture image files, if the same texture is used in more than one folder. The program will happily follow a DOS/Windows shortcut path to an image file from a subfolder (e.g. Primary=..\this_color.tga and/or Alpha=..that_color.bmp and so forth.)
OBS files	— map folder Objects files, contains the 3D co-ordinate loci, rotation, elevation changes and so forth applied to each occurence of each asset listed in the config file's kuid-table excepting similar information sets for track and spline object locus, vertices data which reside in the corresponding Trainz .TRK file of the asset.
PM files	— Progressive 3D mesh. Obsolescent after Trainz UTC–TRS2004, but because depreciation was not enforced, is still in many older DLS assets generated into the early TRS2006 era. With TRS2006-SP1, a warning message was generated educating content creators to convert to the newer im file/.im/.im file/.im file 'indexed mesh' format. Today, .pm files and references to .pm files are most often seen in 'aliased assets', those re-skinned items of rolling stock referencing an older era's traincars. New Users are advised to obtain PEV's 'PEVSoft' utility tools or PEVtools, available from a number of Trainz user sites. PM2IM.exe will convert to the newer IM format. Mesh references will need be updated in the config, or a utility like FNR.exe can be incorporated in a PM2IM.bat launcher file to do it automatically.
Like this  @echo off
"C:\Tools\pm2im\PM2IM.exe" -trawl -close %1%
@dir %1 /N/OGNE/L/S >> ..\Asset_files.txt
Or this combo batch file  @echo off
"C:\Tools\pm2im\PM2IM.exe" -trawl -close %1%
"C:\Tools\Images2TGA\Images2TGA.exe" -trawl -close -fixcolour %1%
@dir %1 /N/OGNE/L/S >> ..\Asset_files.txt
Such tools work in TANE and TRS19 as well as UTC, TR04 and TR06 with a few procedural wrinkles... firstly lets understand what is happening. A file is either built-in (in a .JA file or added. Trainz discriminates files added from local drives, previous installs in other folders, and from third party cdp files or those opened and modified (Fixed!) as 'Modified'. These are given residence in the ..\local sub-folders, whilst those download from the DLS are placed in the ..\original sub-folders. If you peek in such sub-folders, you will find most data compressed into a Trainz .chump file. Opening an asset for edit unpacks these in part.  Images2TGA unpacks the textures, and the instructions files for applying such textures (.texture.txt files) into
Written for TS2009 data changes, which included graphics enhancement capabilities, when it unpacks compressed data from .texture files Images2TGA will generate AlphaHint='something' lines that give indigestion to Trainz UTC through TC3.
Just edit the line out, or insert a double-hack ('//') at the beginning of such lines so you can restore the AlphaHint if you port the asset to a newer Trainz release.  Secondarily, these older Trainz will be intolerant of the very existence of the .texture (source) files, so they should be deleted
TANE and TRS19 will boot such batch files out of the tane editting directory during any auto-updates... so they should be kept in an utility folder.
SRT Files are the mesh files for displaying SpeedTree items such as trees or grass.
SpeedTree was developed by IDVInc. N3V Games are licensed by IDVInc to use the SpeedTree format in TS2010 and TS12.
The SRT file contains all of the geometric and texture mapping data needed to render a tree object as well as data for wind movement animation.
N3V Games provides no editing or manipulation programs for SpeedTree files. Third-party SpeedTree creation may be undertaken under license between the content creator and IDV Inc.
Reverse engineered files from the UDK version of SpeedTree are prohibited for Trainz use under the terms of the IDVInc license.
The game has session-wide adjustments for the wind movement effect in the environment section of Surveyor. This generally needs decreased for better realism.
Not to be confused with texture.txt files which are part of what is compressed in a texture file.
TEXTURE files	— A 2D ready-to-load asset texture which is to be applied to a surface of a 3D object by the game engine. Generally BMP, JPG, and most often the preferred TGA file types act as source files for texture.txt control files, both of which are combined by CM into dot-texture files. Files with a *.texture extension will generally be seen only when an asset is opened for editing, and the Trainz is an older release.
TRK files	— Usually found with a .GND file, contains information about the trackwork of a layout.
TSO files	— Trackside Object. The variations in a layout that are required for a specific scenario, for example extra trackmarks and triggers.
This part of the Notations and terminology page describes some of the more common train-related, content-creation-related, and general computing terms used in the Trainz environment. Users are encouraged to add their own common terms to this page in a similar fashion. Please keep in mind that this site is dedicated to Trainz content creation, and terms which are meaningless in this context may be removed.
New Trainzers will find a wealth of general knowledge and terminology in the English language Wikipedia Glossary of rail transport terms, the Train and Trainz articles, and on the Trainz Wikibook and it's Trainz Wikibook glossary.
Be advised this new Trainz Wikibooks topic page is rough and incomplete. this Trainz/terminology page created by exporting material from another page 2015-0225 with the intent to sort and repark some of the data, then transform the page into a reference about general railroad terminology aimed at the new Trainzers. It was last edited on 3 February 2015, and  this Trainz/terminology page created by exporting material from another page 2015-0225 with the intent to sort and repark some of the data, then transform the page into a reference about general railroad terminology aimed at the new Trainzers. is still under heavy construction.This Page UNDERCONSTRUCTION:Content here is likely to be changed significantly in a short amount of time. All Trainzer's and Wikibookians with knowledge in this subject are welcome to help out.
A note about general train terminology: even among nations where English is the official language, there are differences in terminology. For example, in England, the part of track known as a "sleeper" is called a "tie" in North America. An English railroader speaking of a "bogey", and an North American railroader speaking of a "truck" are likely talking about the same thing.
In Advance Of - Signalling term. A signal is said to be 'in advance of' something, if a driver stopped at that signal would have to drive forwards to get there.
In Rear Of - Signalling term. A signal is said to be 'in rear of' something, if a driver stopped at that signal would have to drive backwards to get there.
This Trainz/Terminology/terminology section is a stub placeholder, an outline or marker that this section of the book is otherwise incomplete. You can help the Wikibooks Trainz project by expanding it with fuller discussion of the topic.
PM file - Progressive Mesh file format; this is an obsolete mesh file format that is no longer supported.
LM file - Config file representation of the LM.txt_file a text file format used by Level of Detail meshes.
.TXT files like config.txt_file, used by Trainz as a data INI file type.
.texture.txt file
.pm file [Note: this is an obsolete, and no longer supported format.]
Alias - An asset which takes it's mesh from another asset, but replaces one or more of the original textures with locally provided ones. Commonly used to reskin an asset.
Note: Trainz 2009 (version 2.9) onwards do not accept aliased assets in Content Manager, though they still work in the game.
Alpha blending - The process of using an opacity setting or texture alpha channel to allow partial transparency. Alpha blending is a hardware operation, however by itself blending does not combine well with a traditional hardware depth-buffer technique.
The end result is that multiple overlapping layers of alpha blending will not be rendered in the physically correct order without some alternative non-hardware-accelerated techniques. Such techniques should be avoided due to the associated performance losses.
In short: use alpha blending sparingly, and do not apply an alpha-blended material to polygons which could do without.
Alpha masking - The process of using a texture alpha channel to "mask out" parts of the texture, allowing arbitrary see-through areas on the texture. Unlike alpha blending, alpha masking does not allow semi-transparent areas - each resultant texel is either fully textured, or fully transparent. Alpha masking is a fully hardware-accelerated technique, and so acceptable.
Asset - A single item of content in the Trainz environment, consisting of a config.txt file and any associated resource files.
Sometimes, even frequently,... used (incorrectly) interchangeably with 'content'; technically, content is an asset included in a route or session—until then an asset is an potential content item.
Each asset is uniquely identified by its KUID. An asset may reference any number of dependencies which are required for correct operation.
Blender - A free Modeling tool with similar functionality to the commercial MAX software.
Bogey - Asset type used to represent wheels and suspension components. Used for anything that needs to rotate as the train moves along the track (e.g. wheels), or move (by rotation or translation) to match the angle and position of the track (e.g. subframe and suspension components). In the US this is normally referred to as a truck, and in the UK as a bogie.
Bump mapping - Another term for Normal mapping.
Cab / Cabin / Interior - Asset made to represent the inside of an object, typically a Vehicle.
Content Manager - Program for querying and editing the Trainz Asset Database.
Common tasks performed with Content Manager include downloading, uploading, installing, editing, archiving, error trapping (testing for, generation of) and removing content.
Dependency - An asset which is required by this asset in order to function properly.
Dependent - An asset which requires this asset in order to function properly.∅
Geometry - A three-dimensional mesh, without any related textures or material properties.
GMAX -A 3D modeling tool originally produced by Discreet for use in producing game assets. While still available, the software has not been in active development for some time, and is not considered to be a state of the art tool for Trainz asset creation. See also 3DSMax.
Indices - Each triangle has three indices. Each index is a reference to a vertex. (Vertices can be shared between multiple polygons).
KUID - Unique identifier for a specific Trainz asset. Consists of Creator ID, Content ID and Version number fields.
Kuid-table - The kuid-table container of an asset's config.txt file. Used to specify dependencies.
Level-Of-Detail (LOD) - A technique where an object (typically a mesh) is built with a number of variations which look as close as possible to identical, but which trade off quality as distance from the viewing point increases and that aids rendering performance to differing degrees.
TheAuran_JET graphics engine selects between the various levels at runtime based on metrics such as distance from the observer.
For textures, mip-mapping serves a similar purpose without requiring manual attention.
All medium-to-high-detail meshes should supply LOD variants. LM.txt_files are used for LOD on moving/animated models.
Material - A named object with a specific material type in combination with its necessary parameters and textures.
MAX / 3D Studio Max, or obsolescent Gmax once bundled with early Trainz retail releases - The commercial Modeling tool used and supported by Auran.
Mesh - A three-dimensional model used in the game environment. The word mesh is often used to refer to a specific game file containing the three-dimensional geometry without related properties such as the model's textures.
Mesh Library - An asset which other assets use. These assets refer to the mesh library by KUID, using a 'mesh-asset' tag in their mesh table. Nothing special is needed for an asset to be a mesh library, it just has to contain mesh files.
"mesh-table"_Container Mesh Table container - The mesh-table container of an asset's config.txt file.
Mip mapping - Process to reduce texture detail for objects in the distance, or at a sharp angle to the camera. Used to avoid problems with aliasing (flicker), which can occur where the texture is of comparable or higher detail than the display equipment.
Model - A three-dimensional definition of an virtual 3D object, built in a special modeling package such as Blender, Gmax or 3ds Max. The word model is often used to describe the concept of a three-dimensional object including materials, surface reflectance and opacity properties often combined and implemented as attributes of its textures.
Normal mapping - A more advanced form of texture mapping which allows per-pixel control over the lighting conditions on the target geometry. Among other benefits, this technique allows a content creator to define small bumps and grooves in a surface in addition to simple coloration.
Obsolete - An asset is obsolete if it has been replaced by a newer version with newer technology models and definitions, breaking the asset in part for a new trainz-build value (version).
A container type or tag in a KIND is obsolete because the programmers say so—because they have a real need to change the data structure in a new Trainz advance, normally without warning the user community first.
Pixel - One individual point on a texture image, consisting of red, green, blue and alpha components (e.g. a texture size of 512 pixels by 512 pixels). May also refer to one individual point within a display (e.g. a display size of 1024 pixels by 768 pixels).
Polygons - In modeling terms, a polygon is always a triangle. (Please note, this is different from the 3DSMax definition).
Route / Layout / Map - Asset created in Surveyor, consisting of a textured landscape and one or more Layers containing scenery objects, splines, trackside objects, Vehicles, etc.
Scenery / Map object  - A scenery object is an instance of an asset that is placed in Surveyor at a given location and orientation.
Session - Asset created in surveyor, which extends a map by placing on it additional layers of objects - commonly Vehicles, but any scenery object, spline, trackside object, etc, can also be added. The Session also contains all the saved script data from any asset in the combination of map and session.
Specular lighting - Lighting effects that vary dependent on the angle of incident light.
Spline - A continuous linear 3D model such as a hedge, a fence, a road, or a track. Splines are placed in Surveyor as a series of spline control points and the geometry is built in a smoothed path between the control points.
Texel - One texture pixel, once mapped onto a 3D Model and rendered in a scene. Does not correspond to one screen pixel.
Texture - A two-dimensional image used for texture mapping.
Texture Sharing - When two or more meshes in the same asset (which may be a mesh library, and thus used by many assets) use the same material and texture. Trainz can then use mesh stitching to render them in the same draw call, with corresponding performance improvements.
Trackside object - A trackside object is a specialisation of a scenery object that is placed attached to a spline. When the spline is moved, the trackside object is also moved.
TrainzScript / GameScript - Used interchangeably, these terms refer to the Trainz scripting language.
Trainz Asset Database - Contains all the metadata information about Trainz content. Editable throughContent_Manager and TrainzUtil.
TrainzUtil - Command line tool to query and edit the Trainz Asset Database.
Triangles - Three vertices (or specifically, three indices) form a triangle. The triangle is the basic unit of a mesh geometry.
Vehicle - All assets which can be placed into a train (consist). Includes locomotives. Not to be confused with road cars, which are actually Trackside objects (as they are attached to roads).
Vertices - The individual three-dimensional (x, y, z) coordinates that form the corner points of triangles in a mesh geometry.Notes and references
↑ script 'hooks' and events are also handled in the ubiquitous config.txt file, of course.
↑ Sound effects most often work the same way, triggered or by trigger radius.
↑ The cache filed .BMK files are kuid, not name indexed, and stand-alone.  It is likely these are solely bookmarks set when a user is touring-to-learn built-in maps, but does not (or may not) create a clone under his own user identity when exiting the toured map.
↑ CM's filters (initially kept in the Windows registry) and several small user data configuration files in '..\settings' were moved into the assets.tdx file.  Some of these moves were alleged to be because of a security breech ca. 2007-09 wherein some Eastern European users had ripped off the contents of the DLS, set up their own version, and were issuing fake Trainz user-IDs and copied software releases violating copyrights.  The breech also altered manual DLS FTP-protocols which had been exploited in the data theft, so now using FTP-protocols have to be conducted one by one.  The Fake DLS was supposedly organized with a Cyrillic Alphabet and Russian names as default standards; it took several years for N3V Games to shut it down.
↑ Everything after the '<NUL' is logging, and can be left out.
This, the left gunport, is a minor gunport using the display theme, race track. Notice that the 'border' around this gunport is not a closed loop.edit
This, the right gunport, is a minor gunport using the 'paper1' display theme. Obviously the theme name is based on the graphic for the border of this gunport, which looks like a piece of paper.edit
Do the following steps to create a main (major) and two minor gunports as shown on this page. Each gunport is based on a different display theme.
Step 1:From the Windows Start menu, run the program WikiverSuite >> Wikiversant
Step 2:From the Wikiversal tree view, double-click on and start the Gunport Builder program.
Step 4:On config page 2, set the Main Section input field to gunport1.
Step 5:Set the Main Title input field to Main Gunport.
Step 6:On config page 3, set border to be 3, dashed, and Red.
Step 7:Set border theme to be Wikihigh then press the Save button.
Step 8:Set canvas background color to be khaki.
Step 9:Set the Right Section input field to gunport2.
Step 10:Set the Left Section input field to gunport3.
Step 11:Set right width and left width each to be '25%'.
Step 12:On gunport config page 6, set border theme to be paper1 then press the Save button.
Step 13:On gunport config page 7, set border theme to be race track then press the Save button.
Step 14:On config page 1, press the Generate button.
Step 15:Copy the generated code over the target wiki page.
Step 16:Press the button Save Page.
Step 17:Get the full URL of the wiki page and show its final result in a better browser.
The imaginary units v such that v 2 = −1 lie on a two-sheeted hyperboloid in split quaternions
There are at least three portals leading to split quaternions: the dihedral group of a square, matrix products in M(2,R), and the modified Cayley-Dickson construction. The work of Max Zorn on split octonions showed the necessity of including split real AC algebras in the aufbau of the category.
The development through the dihedral group was started with a lemma in the Introduction, and is completed with exercises below.
Or one can start with a basis {1, i, j, k} taken from M(2,R), where the identity matrix is one,
Then the real AC algebra of split-quaternions uses coefficients w, x, y, z ∈ R to express an element, its conjugate, and the quadratic form N:
.
What are the involutions on a square ?
As reflections, what is the angle of incidence of the axes of reflection ?
The composition of these reflections has what angle of rotation ?
Insight into the structure and dynamics of split-quaternions is available through elementary computational exercises. These exercises use j2 = +1 = k2 and jk = −i, contrary to the quaternion group, which is expressed with the same letters i, j, k, but which here refer to the dihedral group of a square instead.
Compute ir .
Definition: q and t are orthogonal when <q, t> = 0.
Show that for any theta, r and ir are orthogonal.
Let p = i sinh a + r cosh a. Show that p2 = +1 for any a and r.
Let v = i cosh a + r sinh a. Show that v2 = −1.
For a given a and r, show that p and v are orthogonal.
Let m = p exp(bp) = sinh a + p cosh a. Show that m m* = −1.
Let w = exp(bp) = cosh b + p sinh b. Show that m is orthogonal to w.
Show that m is orthogonal to v.
r1bqkbnr/pp1npppp/3p4/1Bp5/4P3/5N2/PPPP1PPP/RNBQK2R
Moves: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. Bb5+ Nd7
...Nd7 is a more defensive variant considered to grant White a minor advantage.
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Batsford Chess Openings 2 (1989, 1994). Garry Kasparov, Raymond Keene. ISBN 0-8050-3409-9.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
NOTE:  Inquiries about the courses listed below should be addressed to the academic institution in which they are offered.
Guides to Chemistry Courses on the Internet
Global Instructional Chemistry (Henry Rzepa, Imperial College)
ChemSpy.com Tutorials Guide
Chemical Separations (James K. Hardy, University of Akron)
The Basics of NMR (Joseph P. Hornak, RIT)
NetBiochem (Topics in Medicinal Biochemistry) (James Baggott, Hahnemann and Sharon E. Dennis, University of Utah)
C472 Computer Sources for Chemical Information (Gary Wiggins, Indiana University) [no longer offered]
I571 Chemical Information Technology (David J. Wild, Indiana University) [Part of the requirements for the Graduate Certificate in Cheminformatics]
Chemical Information Technology (Henry Rzepa, Imperial College)
Chem 202 Course (Thurston Miller, Notre Dame)
UCAIR (Undergraduate Cooperative Access to Information Resources) (Robert G. Landolt, Texas Wesleyan University)
Interactive Tutorial about Diffraction (Th. Proffen and R.B. Neder, Michigan State University and University of Würzberg)
Topic Review: General Chemistry (George Bodner, Purdue University)
Chemistry Tutorial (University of Arizona: The Biology Project)
General, Organic, and Biochemistry (J.K. Hardy, University of Akron)
Chemland (William Vining, University of Massachusetts, Amherst)
ChemBuddy Lectures (Marcin Borkowski: pH, concentration, chemical equation balancing and stoichiometry)
Chemistry Webercises Directory (Steven Murov, Modesto Junior College)
Online Introductory Chemistry (Dr. Walt Volland, Bellevue Community College, WA)
General Chemistry Online (Frederick A. Senese, Frostburg State University)
ChemgaPedia, a comprehensive curricular encyclopedia for chemistry
Quantum Chemistry in Molecular Modeling (Fred Brouwer, University of Amsterdam)
Computational Chemistry and Organic Chemistry (Hens Borkent, CAOS/CAMM Center)
The National Institutes of Health Center for Molecular Modeling
C687 Computing Methods in Biochemistry (Martin Stone and Marty Pagel, Indiana University) [no longer offered]
Virtual Textbook of Organic Chemistry (William Reusch, Michigan State University)
Combinatorial Chemistry Review This web site provides a basic introduction to the field of combinatorial chemistry describing the development of major techniques and some applications. (Oleg Larin)
Undergraduate Organic Chemistry Laboratory Experiments (David A. Nelson, University of Wyoming and James J. Worman, Dartmouth)
An Introduction to Quantum Mechanics (Neal McDonald et al., Ohio State University)
The Macrogalleria Polymer Science Learning Center a multimedia education site for polymers
Physical Chemistry of Polymers Definitions and introductory concepts. (Not a free service)
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
A mobile phone (cell phone), or wireless phones, often called "Big Brothers" in the early days in China,  is portable telephone terminals that could be used in a wider range in service area. They were first used by Bell Labs in the United States. The field mobile phone manufactured in 1940 developed. On November 18th, 1987, the first analog cellular mobile phone system was completed and put into commercial use in Guangdong Province.
The essential technological characteristics incorporate the discovery of electromagnetic radiation, the invention of telegraph and landline.
Compared with the landline, the initial advantages of mobile phones have no place restrictions on communication and are faster than telegrams. With the development of mobile phones, more and more functions are given to mobile phones, it can help us improve work efficiency, enhance the feelings of friends and family, and relax such as playing music, watching videos, taking photos, etc.
The current market of mobile phones is extended to everyone and everywhere.
Back to the scene prior to the advent of the mobile phone in China,  the major communication method include letters, landline and city public telephone.
One of the limitations of letters is its low communication efficiency because it usually takes ten days and a half or more to receive letters. In addition, information on the way of letters is easily destroyed or lost, in the event of extreme weather or human error.
Compared to the mobile phone, it is obvious that the limitation of the landline is not convenient enough. When you have a call, you have to be next to the phone and activities are limited. Second, the installation of the phone is relatively more troublesome. The city public phone has the same limitation with the landline, and it is more inconvenient because the location of the telephone is outside your home and the number is limited.
In 1987, in order to tie in with the "6th National Games" held in Guangzhou, the wireless branch of the Guangdong Post and Telecommunications Bureau is preparing to launch the first batch of 100 analog mobile phones.[1] This is the most direct factor to make mobile phones evolve in the market. Besides, the demand of public for more convenient communication and pursuing the latest fashion  pushed the new product into the market.
The Birth Phase of Mobile Phone (1987-1997)
In 1831, Faraday discovered the phenomenon of electromagnetic induction in the United Kingdom. Maxwell further elaborated the research results of Faraday et al. using mathematical formulas, and extended the theory of electromagnetic induction to space. After more than 60 years, Hertz confirmed the existence of electromagnetic waves in the experiment. The discovery of electromagnetic waves has become a turning point for "radio communication" from "cable communication" to the origin of the entire mobile communication. [2]In 1908, an American named Nathan Stubfield made the first radiotelephone device in a rural house in Murray, Kentucky. This mobile phone for wireless mobile communications is a human "The earliest exploration of technology.In 1924, the public trial began with a tram connection between Berlin and Hamburg. In 1925, the company Zugtelephonie AG was established to provide train telephone equipment and provided telephone service on the German national railway company's train in 1926. It also provided German mail service on the route between Hamburg and Berlin and was approved. For first-rate travelers. In 1940, Bell Labs of the United States produced a mobile telephone in the field. In 1946, the world made a phone call from a mobile car in St. Louis with a mobile phone.[3][4]In 1973, a man stood on the streets of New York and pulled out a radio telephone with about two large bricks and started talking. This person is the mobile phone inventor Martin Cooper. At that time he was a Motorola engineering and technical personnel. This was the first mobile phone in the world at the time。In 1975, the United States Federal Communications Commission (FCC) determined the frequency spectrum of land mobile telephone communications and large-capacity cellular mobile telephones. This prepares the mobile phone for commercial use.[5]In 1979, Japan opened the world's first cellular mobile phone network. In 1982, Europe established the GSM (Mobile Communications Special Group). In 1985, the first mobile phone in the modern sense was commercially available. It places the power supply and antenna in one example and weighs 3 kilograms. Mobile phones close to modern shapes were born in 1987. Its weight is still about 750 grams, compared with today's mobile phone weighing only 60 grams, like a big brick. Since then, the "slimming" of mobile phones has become more rapid. In 1991, the mobile phone weighed about 250 grams. A mobile phone with a volume of 100 cubic centimeters and a weight of 100 grams appeared in autumn 1996. Since then, it has been further miniaturized and lightened. By 1999, it was lighter than 60 grams.[1]
Before the middle of the 1990s, the prices were expensive, and only a small number of people with better economic strength could afford them, and they were bulky.
In the 90s of the last century, China did not have its own mobile phone. Nokia, Motorola, and Ericsson had three foreign companies and divided 80% of China's mobile phone market. China is only a foreign mobile phone factory.
The Growth Phase of Mobile phone (1997-2014)
In 1990, the number of mobile phone users in China was only 18 thousand. but In 1997, it broke through 10 million key points. In 1998, mobile phone users in China added 18 million new, 12 million in 1999, about 30 million in 2000, about 300 million in 2001 and mobile phone users reached 120 million. China's mobile phone market still maintained a 40% high growth rate in 2002. .[6] A important reason of this growth is that in 1997, Dongfang communications company set up China's first mobile phone field line, marking the start of domestic mobile phones. In October 1998, China's first domestic mobile phone KGH-2000 was finally listed, and the domestic mobile phone formally entered the market competition. Over the past 1998-2003 years, sales of domestic mobile phone manufacturers increased year by year, and occupied 5 of the market share in 5 years.[6]
In 2005, China’s policy on mobile phones was loosened. A large number of people saw this opportunity and poured into the mobile phone manufacturing industry. After that, the growth of mobile phone users has accelerated.[7]
In 2009, some of the country’s policies (such as the industrial revitalization plan, government-enterprise informationization, etc.) are spawning the industry user market. For example: The public security department needs police mobile phones, as well as disease prevention and control systems, urban management, industry and commerce, and taxation departments all need "informational armed forces." This will help the development of smart phones.
The Development During Mature Phase of Mobile phone (2014-)
Smartphone (smart phone) refers to "an independent operating system like a personal computer, which can be provided by the three party service providers, such as software, games, and other users, to expand the function of the mobile phone through such programs, and to move the wireless network access by moving the communication network." The general name of a type of cell phone. In addition to mobile phone calls, smart phones have most of the functions of PDA, especially personal information management and browser based on wireless data communication, GPS and e-mail. Smart phones provide the user with enough screen size and bandwidth, not only convenient to carry, but also provide a broad stage for software operation and content service. Many value-added services can be launched, such as stock, news, weather, traffic, goods, application downloads, music picture downloads and so on.[8]
The constant innovation and development of smart phones has given the mobile phone industry a lot of possibilities, and it may be able to maintain its growth during the mature period.
The data of the annual mobile phone users from the end of 1988 to 2016  is collected from National Bureau of Statistic of China and showed as below in table 1.[9]
Use the data to estimate a three-parameter logistic function:
S(t) is the status measure,
Finding Proper Value of K and b
From Table 1, we know that the maximum value is 132194.3 million in 2016, so when setting K group, the value of the first K should be slightly larger than 132194.3 million, so the first value is set to 132400. After testing, the K value was chosen to be 132700, with the largest value of SQR (0.95268) in the whole set, and corresponding values of b is 0.55829. (figure 1)
↑ a b The development history of mobile phone in Chinahttps://wenku.baidu.com/view/f2d96dee81c758f5f61f6715.html
↑ Mobile Phonehttps://baike.baidu.com/item/%E6%89%8B%E6%9C%BA/6342?fromtitle=%E7%A7%BB%E5%8A%A8%E7%94%B5%E8%AF%9D&fromid=896790#reference-%5B1%5D-5443915-wrap
↑ History_of_mobile_phoneshttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_mobile_phones
↑ History of mobile phones and the first mobile phonehttps://www.uswitch.com/mobiles/guides/history-of-mobile-phones/
↑ Technology Timeline http://about.att.com/innovation/labs
↑ a b https://wenku.baidu.com/view/8d1d1bcba1c7aa00b52acb62.html?from=search
↑ http://www.sohu.com/a/194889025_765877
↑ https://wenku.baidu.com/view/a3d300ee19e8b8f67c1cb95e.html
↑ http://data.stats.gov.cn/easyquery.htm?cn=C01
Informed consent is required before upper endoscopy. The main risks are bleeding and perforation. When a biopsy or other intervention is performed, the risk increases.
Hetherington, Stephen. "Gettier Problems". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. https://iep.utm.edu/gettier/. Retrieved 28 May 2021.
Ichikawa, Jonathan Jenkins; Steup, Matthias (2018). "The Analysis of Knowledge". in Edward N. Zalta (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2018 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2018/entries/knowledge-analysis/.
Beaney, Michael (2021). "Analysis". in Edward N. Zalta (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2021 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2021/entries/analysis/.
Daly, Chris (2010). "Analysis". An Introduction to Philosophical Methods. Broadview Press. pp. 41–100. ISBN 9781551119342. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/An_Introduction_to_Philosophical_Methods/wilaDwAAQBAJ?gbpv=1&pg=PA41.
Grice, Paul (1989). "Postwar Oxford Philosophy (1958)". Studies in the Way of Words. Harvard University Press. pp. 171–180. ISBN 978-0-674-85271-6. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/Studies_in_the_Way_of_Words/QqtAbk-bs34C?gbpv=1&pg=PA171.
Grice, Paul (1989). "Conceptual Analysis and the Province of Philosophy (1987)". Studies in the Way of Words. Harvard University Press. pp. 181–185. ISBN 978-0-674-85271-6. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/Studies_in_the_Way_of_Words/QqtAbk-bs34C?gbpv=1&pg=PA181.
Margolis, Eric; Laurence, Stephen (2021). "Concepts". in Edward N. Zalta (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2021 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2021/entries/concepts/.
Gettier, Edmund L. (1963). "Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?". Analysis 23 (6):  121–123. doi:10.2307/3326922.
Plato (1997). "Theaetetus [M. Burnyeat, M. J. Levett (trans.)]". in John M. Cooper (ed.). Plato: Complete Works. Hackett. pp. 157–234. ISBN 9780872203495. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/Complete_Works/eSKTvJDrr5kC?gbpv=1&pg=PA157.
Plato (1997). "Meno [G. M. A. Grube (trans.)]". in John M. Cooper (ed.). Plato: Complete Works. Hackett. pp. 870–921. ISBN 9780872203495. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/Complete_Works/eSKTvJDrr5kC?gbpv=1&pg=PA870.
Russell, Bertrand (2009). "Fact, Belief, Truth, and Knowledge". Human Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits. Routledge. pp. 130–142. ISBN 978-0-415-47444-3. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/Human_Knowledge_Its_Scope_and_Limits/SoqEipeoO_cC?gbpv=1&pg=PT148.
Weatherson, Brian (2003). "What Good are Counterexamples?". Philosophical Studies 115 (1):  1–31. doi:10.1023/A:1024961917413.
Machery, Edouard; Stich, Stephen; Rose, David et al. (2015). "Gettier Across Cultures". Noûs 51:  645–664. doi:10.1111/nous.12110.
No false lemmas and sensitivity to truth
Clark, Michael (1963). "Knowledge and Grounds: A Comment on Mr. Gettier's Paper". Analysis 24 (2):  46–48. doi:10.1093/analys/24.2.46.
Goldman, Alvin I. (1976). "Discrimination and Perceptual Knowledge". Journal of Philosophy 73 (November):  771–791. doi:10.2307/2025679.
Kripke, Saul A. (2011). "Nozick on Knowledge". Philosophical Troubles. Collected Papers Vol I. Oxford University Press. pp. 162–224. ISBN 9780199730155. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/Philosophical_Troubles/0RibxOr0pzIC?gbpv=1&pg=PA162.
Nozick, Robert (1981). "Knowledge". Philosophical Explanations. Harvard University Press. pp. 172–196. ISBN 9780674664791. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/Philosophical_Explanations/N4zH86WogYwC?gbpv=1&pg=PA172.
Rabinowitz, Dani. "The Safety Condition for Knowledge". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. https://iep.utm.edu/safety-c/. Retrieved 27 May 2021.
Shope, Robert K. (1983). "Additions to Standard Analyses II: Limitations on the Presence of Falsehoods in Justification". The Analysis of Knowing: A Decade of Research. Princeton University Press. pp. 81–95. ISBN 9781400886555. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/The_Analysis_of_Knowing/nI0rDgAAQBAJ?gbpv=1&pg=PT95.
Becker, Kelly. "Reliabilism". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. https://iep.utm.edu/reliabil/. Retrieved 30 May 2021.
Goldman, Alvin (1979). "What is Justified Belief". in George Pappas (ed.). Justification and Knowledge. D. Reidel. pp. 1–25. ISBN 9789027710246. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/Justification_and_Knowledge/cb-ai68OlcwC?gbpv=1&pg=PA1.
Goldman, Alvin (1986). Epistemology and Cognition. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-25896-9. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/Epistemology_and_Cognition/9XwhBw2jMqMC.
Goldman, Alvin; Beddor, Bob (2021). "Reliabilist Epistemology". in Edward N. Zalta (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2021 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2021/entries/reliabilism/.
Battaly, Heather (2008). "Virtue Epistemology". Philosophy Compass 3 (4):  639–663. doi:10.1111/j.1747-9991.2008.00146.x.
Greco, John; Reibsamen, Jonathan (2018). "Reliabilist Virtue Epistemology". in Nancy Snow (ed.). The Oxford Handbook of Virtue. Oxford University Press. pp. 725–⁠746. ISBN 9780199385195. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/The_Oxford_Handbook_of_Virtue/g8Q9DwAAQBAJ?gbpv=1&pg=PA725.
Millar, Alan (2010). "Perceptual Knowledge and Recognitional Abilities". in Duncan Pritchard, Alan Millar, Adrian Haddock (eds.). The Nature and Value of Knowledge: Three Investigations. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-172336-0.
Sosa, Ernest (2007). A Virtue Epistemology: Apt Belief and Reflective Knowledge, Volume I. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-929702-3. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/A_Virtue_Epistemology/vNoSDAAAQBAJ.
Sosa, Ernest (2009). Reflective Knowledge: Apt Belief and Reflective Knowledge, Volume II. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-921725-0. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/Reflective_Knowledge/ipgSDAAAQBAJ.
Turri, John; Alfano, Mark; Greco, John (2019). "Virtue Epistemology". in Edward N. Zalta (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2019 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2019/entries/epistemology-virtue/.
Wright, Sarah (2018). "Virtue Responsibilism". in Nancy Snow (ed.). The Oxford Handbook of Virtue. Oxford University Press. pp. 747–⁠764. ISBN 9780199385195. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/_/t_pADwAAQBAJ?gbpv=1&pg=PA747.
Zagzebski, Linda (1996). Virtues of the Mind: An Inquiry Into the Nature of Virtue and the Ethical Foundations of Knowledge. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521578264. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/Virtues_of_the_Mind/w-YC4foOSBwC.
Zagzebski, Linda (1999). "What Is Knowledge?". in John Greco, Ernest Sosa (eds.). The Blackwell Guide to Epistemology. Blackwell Publishing. pp. 92–116. ISBN 9780631202912.
Carter, J. Adam; Gordon, Emma C.; Jarvis, Benjamin W., eds (2017). Knowledge First: Approaches in Epistemology and Mind. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-871631-0. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/Knowledge_First/I3w7DwAAQBAJ.
Greenough, Patrick; Pritchard, Duncan, eds (2009). Williamson on Knowledge. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-928751-2. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/Williamson_on_Knowledge/FrUUDAAAQBAJ.
Williamson, Timothy (2000). Knowledge and Its Limits. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780198250432. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/_/oXXnCwAAQBAJ.
Williamson, Timothy (2010). "Knowledge First Epistemology". in Sven Bernecker, Duncan Pritchard (eds.). The Routledge Companion to Epistemology. Routledge. pp. 208–218. ISBN 978-0-203-83906-5.
Markie, Peter (2017). "Rationalism vs. Empiricism". in Edward N. Zalta (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2017 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2017/entries/rationalism-empiricism/.
Steup, Matthias; Neta, Ram (2020). "Epistemology". in Edward N. Zalta (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2020 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. §5. Sources of Knowledge and Justification. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/epistemology/#.
Crane, Tim; French, Craig (2021). "The Problem of Perception". in Edward N. Zalta (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2021 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2021/entries/perception-problem/.
Huemer, Michael (2001). Skepticism and the Veil of Perception. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 9780742512528. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/Skepticism_and_the_Veil_of_Perception/TCjXAAAAMAAJ.
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm (1982). New Essays on Human Understanding. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521285391. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/New_Essays_on_Human_Understanding_Abridg/3lw4AAAAIAAJ.
Locke, John (2004). An Essay Concerning Human Understanding (Project Gutenberg eBook). Produced by Steve Harris and David Widger. Project Gutenberg. https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/author/2447.
Plato (1997). "Meno [G. M. A. Grube (trans.)]". in John M. Cooper (ed.). Plato: Complete Works. Hackett. pp. 870–921. ISBN 9780872203495. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/Complete_Works/eSKTvJDrr5kC?gbpv=1&pg=PA870.
Plato (1997). "Phaedo [G. M. A. Grube (trans.)]". in John M. Cooper (ed.). Plato: Complete Works. Hackett. pp. 49–100. ISBN 9780872203495. https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/Complete_Works/eSKTvJDrr5kC?gbpv=1&pg=PA49.
Samet, Jerry (2019). "The Historical Controversies Surrounding Innateness". in Edward N. Zalta (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2019 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2019/entries/innateness-history/.
"name of page" with e.g. Temperance - this is what the html site here will be called later
"exact name of spell/tome/disc" - this is what the hyperlink will be called, e.g. Temperance
"Quest/Bazaar/Researched/Dropped" - remove the ones n/a, like e.g. leave "Quested"
Salve PAL/1 RNG/1 BST/1 1: Increase Hitpoints by 5 (L1) to 9 (L8)
Glimpse RNG/2 WIZ/2 1: Increase Magnification by 55%
Flame Lick RNG/3 DRU/1 2: Decrease Hitpoints by 1 (L1) to 4 (L6) per tick
Tangling Weeds RNG/5 DRU/1 2: Decrease Movement by 21% (L1) to 35% (L15)
Snare RNG/6 DRU/1 2: Decrease Movement by 41% (L1) to 55% (L15)
Skin like Wood RNG/7 DRU/1 1: Increase AC by 3 (L1) to 4 (L10)
Dance of the Fireflies RNG/10 DRU/1 1: Summon Item: Summoned: Firefly Globe
Hawk Eye RNG/11 1: Increase Chance to Hit by 10% with Archery
Feet like Cat RNG/12 SHM/3 1: Increase AGI by 12 (L3) to 18 (L9)
Thistlecoat RNG/13 DRU/7 2: Increase AC by 4 (L7) to 6 (L14) 3: Increase Damage Shield by 1
Burst of Fire RNG/14 DRU/3 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 11 (L3) to 14 (L8)
Grasping Roots RNG/15 DRU/2 1: Decrease HP when cast by 10 2: Root
Invoke Lightning RNG/15 DRU/4 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 20 (L4) to 25 (L9)
Panic Animal RNG/16 DRU/1 1: Fear up to level 52
Firefist RNG/17 DRU/6 1: Increase ATK by 4 (L6) to 10 (L18)
Bind Sight RNG/17 WIZ/16 ENC/8 1: Bind Sight
Ignite RNG/19 DRU/8 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 38 (L8) to 46 (L16)
Shield of Thistles RNG/24 DRU/7 1: Increase Damage Shield by 4 (L7) to 6 (L12)
Stinging Swarm RNG/25 DRU/10 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 25 (L10) to 32 (L17) per tick
Strength of Earth RNG/26 DRU/7 1: Increase STR by 8 (L7) to 15 (L20)
Eyes of the Cat RNG/27 1: Infravision
Riftwind's Protection RNG/29 2: Increase Damage Shield by 2 3: Increase AC by 11 (L29) to 12 (L30)
Flaming Arrow RNG/29 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 113
Barbcoat RNG/30 DRU/17 2: Increase AC by 10 (L17) to 12 (L24) 3: Increase Damage Shield by 2
3: Pacify 45 Alteration Animal
Bramblecoat RNG/34 DRU/27 2: Increase AC by 16 (L27) to 18 (L34)
3: Increase Damage Shield by 3 75 Abjuration Self
Careless Lightning RNG/37 DRU/16 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 96 (L16) to 105 (L25)
Nature's Precision RNG/37 1: Increase ATK by 15 50 Evocation Self
Burning Arrow RNG/39 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 182 86 Evocation Single
Harmony of Nature RNG/39 DRU/29 1: Frenzy Radius(15/65) 2: Reaction Radius(15/65)
Swarm of Pain RNG/40 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 50 (L40) to 56 (L46) per tick
Quest: “Swarm of Pain” in Gunthak with Gaudric Stormwynd
2: Increase Movement by 30% 80 Alteration Single
Sold: 72 ADV points in East Commonlands Ldon camp
Spikecoat RNG/42 DRU/37 2: Increase AC by 23 (L37) to 25 (L44)
3: Increase Damage Shield by 4 110 Abjuration Self
Shield of Brambles RNG/43 DRU/27 1: Increase Damage Shield by 10 (L27) to 12 (L32)
Immolate RNG/44 DRU/25 2: Decrease Hitpoints by 32 per tick
Ensnaring Roots RNG/45 DRU/21 1: Decrease HP when cast by 31 (L21) to 60 (L50)
2: Root 60 Alteration Single
Superior Camouflage RNG/47 DRU/18 1: Invisibility 40 Divination Single
Wolf Form RNG/48 DRU/20 1: Illusion: Black Wolf 2: Increase Movement by 40% (L20) to 55% (L50) 3: Increase ATK by 21 (L20) to 30 (L29) 60 Alteration Self
Force of Nature RNG/48 1: Increase Hitpoints by 5 per tick 2: Increase Damage Shield by 3 3: Increase ATK by
2: Increase Movement by 30% 320 Alteration Group v1
Sold: 200 ADV points in Everfrost Peaks Ldon camp
Loot: Great Divide – a crystaline shardwurm & Shardwurm Matriarch
Loot: Icewell Keep – Loremaster Solstrin
Loot: Plane of Growth – a rolling plains steed
Loot: Velketor’s Labyrinth – Multiple Mobs
Jolt RNG/50 1: Decrease Hate by 500 60 Alteration Single
Ensnare RNG/51 DRU/26 2: Decrease Movement by 56% 35 Alteration Single
Strength of Nature RNG/51 1: Increase ATK by 25 2: Stacking: Block new spell if slot 4 is effect 'Max Hitpoints' and < 1075 4: Increase Max Hitpoints by 75
Resistant Discipline PAL/51 RNG/51 SHD/51 BRD/51 BST/51 MNK/30 ROG/30 WAR/30 BER/30 1: Increase All Resists by 16 (L30) to 20 (L38) 0 Defense Self
Firestrike RNG/52 DRU/38 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 402 (L38) to 422 (L43)
Falcon Eye RNG/52 1: Increase Chance to Hit by 20% with Archery
Icewind RNG/52 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 403 186 Evocation Single
Quest: “Icewind” in Gunthak with Gaudric Stormwynd
Storm Strength RNG/53 DRU/44 1: Increase STR by 32 (L44) to 35 (L50)
Drones of Doom RNG/54 DRU/32 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 62 (L32) to 71 (L41) per tick 145 Conjuration Single
Skin like Diamond RNG/54 DRU/36 1: Increase AC by 12 (L36) to 13 (L40) 2: Increase Max Hitpoints by 172 (L36) to 200 (L50)3: Increase HP when cast by 172 (L36) to 200 (L50) 200 Abjuration Single
Jolting Blades RNG/54 1: Add Proc: Jolting Blades Strike 120 Conjuration Self
Fearless Discipline PAL/54 RNG/54 SHD/54 BRD/54 BST/54 MNK/40 ROG/40 WAR/40 BER/40 1: Increase Chance to Resist Fear Spell by 10000% 0 Defense Self
Cinder Jolt RNG/55 1: Decrease Hate by 500 60 Alteration Single
Loot: Plane of Growth – A Sylvan Protector
Loot: Velketor’s Labyrinth – velium hunter & stalker, & Crystal & Icy Guardians
Fire Swarm RNG/55 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 70 (L55) to 75 (L60) per tick
Sold: 410 ADV points in Butcherblock Mnts Ldon camp
Trueshot Discipline RNG/55 1: Increase Archery Skill Check by 12%
2: Increase Archery Damage Modifier by 105% 0 Offense Self
Greater Wolf Form RNG/56 DRU/30 1: Illusion: Black Wolf 2: Increase Movement by 50% (L30) to 60% (L50) 3: Increase ATK by 31 (L30) to 40 (L39)
Mark of the Predator RNG/56 2: Increase ATK by 20 100 Abjuration Group v2
Greater Healing CLR/20 PAL/36 RNG/57 DRU/29 SHM/29 BST/57 1: Hitpoints unknown calc: 7 range: 140 -> 350 115 Alteration Single
Nullify Magic CLR/38 PAL/58 RNG/58 SHD/58 DRU/43 SHM/44 NEC/37 WIZ/34 MAG/32 ENC/28 BST/58 1: Cancel Magic(4) 2: Cancel Magic(4)
Shield of Spikes RNG/58 DRU/37 1: Increase Damage Shield by 14 (L37) to 17 (L48)
Eagle Eye RNG/58 1: Increase Chance to Hit by 40% with Archery 2: See Invisible(1)
Sold: 450 ADV points in North Ro Ldon camp
Skin like Nature RNG/59 DRU/46 1: Increase AC by 15 (L46) to 16 (L50) 2: Increase Max Hitpoints by 242 (L46) to 250 (L50) 3: Increase HP when cast by 242 (L46) to 250 (L50) 5: Increase Hitpoints by 2 per tick
Dustdevil RNG/59 DRU/43 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 582 162 Evocation Single
Enveloping Roots RNG/60 DRU/36 1: Decrease HP when cast by 82 (L36) to 110 (L50)
Thorncoat RNG/60 DRU/47 2: Increase AC by 31 3: Increase Damage Shield by 5
Loot: Cobalt Scar – Kelorek’Dar
Dragon Necropolis – Queen Raltaas & Zlandicar
Kerafyrm’s Lair(Sleeper’s Tomb) – Multiple Mobs
Plane of Growth – Multiple Mobs
Velk’s Labryinth – Lord Doljonijiarnimorinar & Velketor the Sorcerer
Western Wastes – Multiple Mobs
Warder's Protection RNG/60 1: Increase Damage Shield by 21 2: Increase ATK by 70
3: Increase AC by 13 4: Increase Max Hitpoints by 75 5: Stacking: Block new spell if slot 4 is effect 'Max Hitpoints' and < 1075 6: Stacking: Block new spell if slot 1 is effect 'Damage Shield' and < 1021 7: Stacking: Block new spell if slot 3 is effect 'AC' and < 1035 8: Stacking: Block new spell if slot 2 is effect 'ATK' and < 1070
Weapon Shield DISCIPLINE RNG/60 1: Increase Chance to Parry by 10000%
Exile Summoned RNG/61 DRU/55 MAG/56 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 798
Sold: Arial Fern & Brackin Nartoise in Firiona Vie
Sold: Possibly in the Abysmal Sea from the Druid Vendor there?
Circle of Winter RNG/61 DRU/51 1: Increase Fire Resist by 45
Loot: Burning Woods – Multiple Mobs
Loot: Charasis (Howling Stones) – a bottomless devourer & a pyre golem
Loot: City of Mist – any golem’s and Gyrating Goo
Loot: Old Sebilis – Multiple Mobs
Loot: Skyfire Mountains – Multiple Mobs
Loot: Trakanon’s Teeth – froglok forager and froglok hunter
Researched – a piece of parchment, a quill, Primordial substance, & Rune of Draught. Trivial 182
Earthen Embrace RNG/61 2: Decrease Movement by 55%
Shield of Thorns RNG/62 DRU/47 1: Increase Damage Shield by 24
Drifting Death RNG/62 DRU/40 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 91 per tick
Quest: PoP spell – Ethereal Parchment turn in to Pathfinder Viliken
Strength of Tunare RNG/62 1: Increase ATK by 60 2: Stacking: Block new spell if slot 4 is effect 'Max Hitpoints' and < 1125 4: Increase Max Hitpoints by 125
Quest: PoP spell – Ethereal Parchment turn in to Pathfinder Viliken
Circle of Summer RNG/63 DRU/52 1: Stacking: Block new spell if slot 1 is effect 'Cold Resist' and < 45 2: Stacking: Overwrite existing spell if slot 1 is effect 'Cold Resist' and < 45 4: Increase Cold Resist by 45
Loot: Burning Woods – Multiple Mobs
Loot: Charasis (Howling Stones) – a bottomless devourer & a pyre golem
Loot: City of Mist – any golem’s and Gyrating Goo
Loot: Old Sebilis – Multiple Mobs
Loot: Plane of Sky – a thunder spirit
Loot: Skyfire Mountains – Multiple Mobs
Loot: Trakanon’s Teeth – Doom, Dragontail, & froglok hunter
Researched – a piece of parchment, a quill, Flake of Lodestone, & Rune of Ellipse Trivial 182
Bladecoat RNG/63 DRU/56 2: Increase AC by 37 3: Increase Damage Shield by 6
Quest: PoP spell – Spectral Parchment turn in to Pathfinder Viliken
Researched: Parchment, quill of the Storm Warden, Ink of the Listless, Debilitating Thickener, & Luclin’s Ink Additive Trivial 231
Frozen Wind RNG/63 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 695
Quest: PoP spell – Spectral Parchment turn in to Pathfinder Viliken
Sold: Dadein Shadowbow in Abysmal Sea?
Nature's Rebuke RNG/64 1: Add Proc: Nature's Rebuke Strike
Quest: PoP spell – Spectral Parchment turn in to Pathfinder Viliken
Researched: Quill of the Forest Stalker, Ink of Pain, Invigorating Thickener, Ink Additive of the Nameless, & Fine Vellum Parchment Trivial 322
Spirit of the Predator RNG/64 2: Increase ATK by 70
Quest: PoP spell – Spectral Parchment turn in to Pathfinder Viliken
Brushfire RNG/64 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 612
Quest: PoP spell – Spectral Parchment turn in to Pathfinder Viliken
Feral Form RNG/64 1: Illusion: Black Wolf 2: Increase Movement by 40% 3: Increase ATK by 65 4: Ultravision 5: See Invisible(1)
Sold: 650 Adventure points in Guk Ldon camp
5: Increase Hitpoints by 4 per tick
Sold: Dadein Shadowbow in Abysmal Sea?
Loot: Akheva Ruins – The Va’Dyn
Loot: Fungus Grove -  A Domestic Underbulk & a small underbulk
Loot: The Deep – a thought horror spiriter & a thought leech spiriter
Loot: The Maiden’s Eye – Xi Vius, Xi Xaui, & Xin Thall Centien
Loot: The Umbral Plains – Disturbed Elysian Remains
Mask of the Stalker RNG/65 DRU/60 1: Increase Player Size by 25% 2: Increase Magnification by 115% 3: Increase Mana by 3 per tick 4: See Invisible(1)
Loot: Acrylia Caverns – an evolved burrower
Loot: Akheva Ruins – The Itraer Vius
Loot: Grieg’s End – Grieg Veneficus
Loot: Ssraeshza Temple – Multiple Mobs
Loot: The Deep – The Burrower Beast & Thought Horror Overfiend
Loot: The Umbral Plains – Doomshade
Researched: piece of parchment, a quill, Dew Clover, part of Yaeth’s Compendium Pg. 117 left and Pg. 118 left, Rune of Zephyr Trivial 227
Protection of the Wild RNG/65 1: Increase Damage Shield by 34 2: Increase ATK by 130
3: Increase AC by 34 4: Increase Max Hitpoints by 125 5: Stacking: Block new spell if slot 4 is effect 'Max Hitpoints' and < 2125 6: Stacking: Block new spell if slot 1 is effect 'Damage Shield' and < 2034 7: Stacking: Block new spell if slot 3 is effect 'AC' and < 2115 8: Stacking: Block new spell if slot 2 is effect 'ATK' and < 2130
Quest: PoP spell – Glyphed Rune Word turn in to Pathfinder Viliken
Cry of Thunder RNG/65 1: Add Proc: Cry of Thunder Strike
Quest: PoP spell – Glyphed Rune Word turn in to Pathfinder Viliken
Sylvan Light RNG/65 1: Hitpoints unknown calc: 7 range: 395 -> 850
Quest: GoD spell – Turn in Taelosian Geomancy Stone Yiktu to Reyfin Malakwa
Researched: Quill of the Forest Stalker, Ink of Tunare, Ameliorating Thickener, Ink Additive of the Nameless, & Runic Parchment Trivial 351
Sylvan Burn RNG/65 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 673
Quest: GoD spell – Turn in Taelosian Geomancy Stone Jelki to Reyfin Malakwa
Quest: GoD spell – Turn in Taelosian Geomancy Stone Eril to Reyfin Malakwa
Ancient Burning Chaos RNG/65 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 734
Nature Veil RNG/66 1: Add Defensive Proc: Nature's Veil Parry rate mod 300
Quest: OOW turn in Minor Muramite Rune to Karsor the Mad in Dranik Scar
Displace Summoned RNG/66 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 956
Quest: OOW turn in Minor Muramite Rune to Karsor the Mad in Dranik Scar
Shield of Briar RNG/66 1: Increase Damage Shield by 32
Quest: OOW turn in Minor Muramite Rune to Karsor the Mad in Dranik Scar
Locust Swarm RNG/67 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 173 (L67) to 179 (L70) per tick
Quest: OOW turn in Lesser Muramite Rune to Karsor the Mad in Dranik Scar
Sylvan Water RNG/67 1: Increase Hitpoints by 1135 (L67) to 1165 (L70)
Quest: OOW turn in Lesser Muramite Rune to Karsor the Mad in Dranik Scar
Guard of the Earth RNG/67 2: Increase Damage Shield by 13 3: Increase AC by 49
Quest: OOW turn in Lesser Muramite Rune to Karsor the Mad in Dranik Scar
Strength of the Hunter RNG/67 1: Increase ATK by 75 2: Stacking: Block new spell if slot 4 is effect 'Max Hitpoints' and < 1155 4: Increase Max Hitpoints by 155
Quest: OOW turn in Lesser Muramite Rune to Karsor the Mad in Dranik Scar
Briarcoat RNG/68 2: Increase AC by 49 3: Increase Damage Shield by 8
Quest: OOW turn in Muramite Rune to Karsor the Mad in Dranik Scar
Frost Wind RNG/68 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 956
Quest: OOW turn in Muramite Rune to Karsor the Mad in Dranik Scar
Hunter's Vigor RNG/68 1: Increase Hitpoints by 30 per tick
Quest: OOW turn in Muramite Rune to Karsor the Mad in Dranik Scar
Tranquility of the Glade RNG/68 1: Reaction Radius(15/70)
Quest: OOW turn in Muramite Rune to Karsor the Mad in Dranik Scar
Quest: DoD spell progression – Kelliad in Stoneroot Falls, complete 5 missions and Hail Brother Hidden Path in Undershore “The Rage of Kelliad” missions
Nature's Denial RNG/69 1: Add Proc: Nature's Denial Strike
Quest: OOW turn in Greater Muramite Rune to Karsor the Mad in Dranik Scar
Howl of the Predator RNG/69 2: Increase ATK by 90 9: Increase Double Attack by 3%
Quest: OOW turn in Greater Muramite Rune to Karsor the Mad in Dranik Scar
Hearth Embers RNG/69 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 842
Quest: OOW turn in Greater Muramite Rune to Karsor the Mad in Dranik Scar
Earthen Shackles RNG/69 2: Decrease Movement by 55%
Quest: ? DoN progression? Not a lot of info on this yet
Warder's Wrath RNG/69 2: Increase Chance to Critical Hit by 200%
3: Increase Chance to Hit by 100% with All Skills
Quest: DoD spell progression – complete Tier 2? (kill Emoush)
Onyx Skin RNG/70 1: Increase AC by 33 2: Increase Max Hitpoints by 540 3: Increase HP when cast by 540 5: Increase Hitpoints by 6 per tick
Quest: OOW turn in Glowing Muramite Rune to Karsor the Mad in Dranik Scar
Ward of the Hunter RNG/70 1: Increase Damage Shield by 45 2: Increase ATK by 170
3: Increase AC by 49 4: Increase Max Hitpoints by 165 5: Stacking: Block new spell if slot 4 is effect 'Max Hitpoints' and < 2165 6: Stacking: Block new spell if slot 1 is effect 'Damage Shield' and < 2045 7: Stacking: Block new spell if slot 3 is effect 'AC' and < 2150 8: Stacking: Block new spell if slot 2 is effect 'ATK' and < 2170 9: Increase Double Attack by 3%
Quest: OOW turn in Glowing Muramite Rune to Karsor the Mad in Dranik Scar
Ancient North Wind RNG/70 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 1032
Quest: OOW turn in Ancient Muramite Rune to Karsor the Mad in Dranik Scar
Scorched Earth RNG/70 1: Decrease Hitpoints by 1150
Task: PoR? Skins task in Devistation?
Task/Quest/Mission: Skylance Mission?
Nucleic acids are polymers of nucleotides linked in a chain through phosphodiester bonds. In biological systems, they serve as information-carrying molecules or, in the case of some RNA molecules, catalysts. This brief review will focus on aspects of structure of particular importance in manipulating DNA.
Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) is the enabling technology for the new broadband (IP) public network. It can be considered as a protocol architecture (or a suite of protocols) to control different sub-protocols.
MPLS operates at a layer that is generally considered to lie between traditional definitions of layer 2 (data-link layer) and layer 3 (network layer).
MPLS introduction simplifies the traditional 'big onion'.
IP protocol was developed for research purpose and was not designed to be sold as a service. It is a so-called 'best-effort protocol', which means that there is no explicit purpose in giving a guaranteed reliable service (speed, delays...).
When IP was starting to become a commercial good, the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) started developing protocols (such as ATM, frame relay, etc.) targeting service reliability and stability, thinking they would have been permeating the computer telecommunication world. Nevertheless end users have kept using IP, and as a result service providers nowadays have to deal with a lot of protocols in order to carry IP to end users: this 'big onion' makes very few sense for service providers due to high maintenance, equipment and software development costs to guarantee interoperability.
Cisco Systems was the first vendor to implement tag switching into their routers, then IETF adopted the protocol and named it as MPLS.
MPLS combines the best features from the connection-less protocols with the best ones from the connection-oriented protocols, representing the solution for the 'big onion' problem for two reasons:
MPLS provides an IP-based network with a greater service reliability and a single unified control plane more isolated from the data plane:
MPLS allows to re-use the traditional ATM devices by simply updating their software.
Example of MPLS network.
A Label Switch Router (LSR) is the device responsible for switching the labels used to route packets. LSRs are called label edge routers when placed at the edges of the MPLS cloud. LSRs combine smartness of routers and speed of switches: they are able to route in a clever way like routers, avoiding complicated data structures and algorithms like switches.
MPLS clouds can be gradually deployed: they can grow up and can be integrated to each other.
Data plane is the capability of switching packets based on their labels.
Format of a packet containing a single label stack entry.
IP packets are prefixed with an MPLS header containing one or more label stack entries. Each label stack entry contains four fields:
Example of MPLS label switching.
A Label Switched Path (LSP) is a path set up by a signaling protocol that links a source label edge router (ingress) to a drain one (egress):
A Forwarding Equivalence Class (FEC) is a set of packets which may be forwarded in the same way; that is, they may be bound to the same MPLS labels. Labels are not unique over the whole MPLS cloud, but they are changed on each hop (label swapping). Consider that granting the uniqueness of the labels all over the network would require too complex protocols and too long labels.
Using labels enables MPLS to provide two kinds of services:
MPLS provides a faster lookup with respect to IP because packet-forwarding decisions are made solely on the label, placed before the IP packet, without the need to examine the contents of the packet itself: each label in fact can be used as key to access the routing table as an array or hash table in order to expedite the route discovery;
MPLS is able to control the traffic like a connection-oriented protocol: MPLS routing involves both source and destination labels, and routers can assign to a new packet flow the label corresponding to the least-loaded path in order to avoid congestion and allow traffic distribution. Moreover a failure in a path due to a non-working node will not affect the other paths.
Hierarchy of labels along an LSP.
MPLS is very scalable: inside a big MPLS cloud of domain 1 it is possible to define in a hierarchical way a smaller MPLS cloud of domain 2 and so on, and multiple label stack entries can be stored next to each other in a stack data structure. The label stack entries are added from the inner one to the outer one while the packet enters clouds of higher domain and stripped off from the outer one to the inner one while the packet exits clouds of lower domain, and LSRs not at the edges of the clouds always process the outer label stack entry. This hierarchy of labels can correspond to a hierarchy of providers, and the number of labels is limited only by the Ethernet frame size.
Control plane is the capability of choosing the labels to be inserted into the packets.
The creation of a forwarding table (and in a broader sense of the LSP) for a specific FEC is performed in three steps:
Three protocols, incompatible to each other, can be used by the downstream node in order to communicate to the upstream node the label bindings:
Label Distribution Protocol (LDP): designed specifically for label distribution;
The traditional routing protocols can be enhanced to support traffic engineering because they carry information about routing constraints.
Thanks to routing protocols such as OSPF-TE and IS-IS-TE (based on OSPF, IS-IS, BGP-4), every node can collect information about the network topology in order to know which nodes are its upstream nodes to be notified with the label bindings.
In order to support explicit routing, the basic distribution labels should be extended:
↑ An overhead is required to keep available two LSPs for the same FEC.
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
r1bqkb1r/ppp2pp1/5n1p/3P4/2P1p3/5N2/PPP1QPPP/RNB1K2R
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bc4 Nf6 4.Ng5 d5 5.exd5 Na5 6.d3 h6 7. Nf3 e4 8. Qe2 Nxc4 9. cxd4
Bc5 65%, Bd6 21%, Be7 14%
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Two Knights Defence
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
The GNURoot Debian app is an environment allowing any Oberon capable of working as a subsystem of a Linux system, to work in Android.
Oberon V5 RISC emulator on GNURoot Debian on Android on an Alcatel 9015B tablet with keyboard and mouse connected by Bluetooth.
For an external medium (SD card or USB), a contemporary Android supports only FAT.  A filesystem of an Oberon system and an ext filesystem, as used in Linux, is not accessible from Android. This is a serious constraint (showstopper) for practical use of an Oberon system on Android.
Connect a keyboard and mouse using Bluetooth or USB On-The-Go.
Verify that both work.
Open the Google Play Store and install Xserver XSDL and GNURoot Debian.  Several tutorials are found with a search for "android gnuroot install".
Can require more than 60 minutes.  To avoid tedium, attend to other work.
Start GNURoot Debian and execute these in the terminal.  The full lxde isn't necessary for Oberon.
Install and run the Oberon RISC emulator
Create a local repository for the emulator
If you want oberon-risc-emu to be in your home directory then,
If you want another location then,
Then make the local repository.
Your local copy of the repository is now in your home directory or myPreferredDirectory, in a subdirectory named oberon-risc-emu.
The screen dimensions of a particular device can be found with a search.  Google "Alcatel POP7 specs" for example.  Then edit .bashrc to create an appropriate alias,
This is an example.  Adjust to requirements.
./risc --size 1024x600 ./DiskImage/Oberon-2016-08-02.dsk"
Alternatively.
./risc --size 1024x600 ./DiskImage/Oberon-2016-08-02.dsk"
Save with <ctrl>+o.  Exit nano with <ctrl>+x.
Start GNURoot Debian.  Tap the Xterm icon, 4th from the right in the menu bar.  Touch in the Xterm to focus it.  Then,
DNA is a long polymer made from repeating units called nucleotides. As first discovered by James D. Watson and Francis Crick, the structure of DNA of all species comprises two helical chains each coiled round the same axis, and each with a pitch of 34 Ångströms (3.4 nanometres) and a radius of 10 Ångströms (1.0 nanometres). According to another study, when measured in a particular solution, the DNA chain measured 22 to 26 Ångströms wide (2.2 to 2.6 nanometres), and one nucleotide unit measured 3.3 Å (0.33 nm) long. Although each individual repeating unit is very small, DNA polymers can be very large molecules containing millions of nucleotides. For instance, the largest human chromosome, chromosome number 1, is approximately 220 million base pairs long.
In living organisms, DNA does not usually exist as a single molecule, but instead as a pair of molecules that are held tightly together. These two long strands entwine like vines, in the shape of a double helix. The nucleotide repeats contain both the segment of the backbone of the molecule, which holds the chain together, and a base, which interacts with the other DNA strand in the helix. A base linked to a sugar is called a nucleoside and a base linked to a sugar and one or more phosphate groups is called a nucleotide. If multiple nucleotides are linked together, as in DNA, this polymer is called a polynucleotide.
The backbone of the DNA strand is made from alternating phosphate and sugar residues. The sugar in DNA is 2-deoxyribose, which is a pentose (five-carbon) sugar. The sugars are joined together by phosphate groups that form phosphodiester bonds between the third and fifth carbon atoms of adjacent sugar rings. These asymmetric bonds mean a strand of DNA has a direction. In a double helix the direction of the nucleotides in one strand is opposite to their direction in the other strand: the strands are antiparallel. The asymmetric ends of DNA strands are called the 5′ (five prime) and 3′ (three prime) ends, with the 5' end having a terminal phosphate group and the 3' end a terminal hydroxyl group. One major difference between DNA and RNA is the sugar, with the 2-deoxyribose in DNA being replaced by the alternative pentose sugar ribose in RNA.[1][2]
These bases are classified into two types; adenine and guanine are fused five- and six-membered heterocyclic compounds called purines, while cytosine and thymine are six-membered rings called pyrimidines. A fifth pyrimidine base, called uracil (U), usually takes the place of thymine in RNA and differs from thymine by lacking a methyl group on its ring. Uracil is not usually found in DNA, occurring only as a breakdown product of cytosine. In addition to RNA and DNA, a large number of artificial nucleic acid analogues have also been created to study the proprieties of nucleic acids, or for use in biotechnology.[3][4]
The structure of the DNA double helix. The atoms in the structure are colour coded by element, the spiralling backbone of the two strands is shown in orange and the detailed structure of two base pairs is shown in the bottom right.
Griffith's experiment discovering the "transforming principle" in pneumococcus bacteria.
Griffith's experiment was conducted in 1928 by Frederick Griffith, one of the first experiments suggesting that bacteria are capable of transferring genetic information through a process known as transformation.
Griffith used two strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae bacteria which infect mice – a type III-S (smooth) and type II-R (rough) strain. The III-S strain covers itself with a polysaccharide capsule that protects it from the host's immune system, resulting in the death of the host, while the II-R strain doesn't have that protective capsule and is defeated by the host's immune system. A German bacteriologist, Fred Neufeld, had discovered the three pneumococcal types (Types I, II, and III) and discovered the Quellung reaction to identify them in vitro. Until Griffith's experiment, bacteriologists believed that the types were fixed and unchangeable, from one generation to another.
In this experiment, bacteria from the III-S strain were killed by heat, and their remains were added to II-R strain bacteria. While neither alone harmed the mice, the combination was able to kill its host. Griffith was also able to isolate both live II-R and live III-S strains of pneumococcus from the blood of these dead mice. Griffith concluded that the type II-R had been "transformed" into the lethal III-S strain by a "transforming principle" that was somehow part of the dead III-S strain bacteria.
Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase conducted  series of experiments  in 1952 by , confirming that DNA was the genetic material, which had first been demonstrated in the 1944 Avery–MacLeod–McCarty experiment. These experiments are known as Hershey Chase experiments. The existence of DNA was known to biologists since 1869, most of them assumed that proteins carried the information for inheritance that time.
Hershey and Chase conducted their experiments on the T2 phage. The phage consists of a protein shell containing its genetic material. The phage infects a bacterium by attaching to its outer membrane and injecting its genetic material and leaving its empty shell attached to the bacterium.
In their first set of experiments, Hershey and Chase labeled the DNA of phages with radioactive Phosphorus-32 (p32) (the element phosphorus is present in DNA but not present in any of the 20 amino acids which are component of proteins). They allowed the phages to infect E. coli, and through several elegant experiments were able to observe the transfer of P32 labeled phage DNA into the cytoplasm of the bacterium.
In their second set of experiments, they labeled the phages with radioactive Sulfur-35 (Sulfur is present in the amino acids cysteine and methionine, but not in DNA). Following infection of E. coli they then sheared the viral protein shells off of infected cells using a high-speed blender and separated the cells and viral coats by using a centrifuge. After separation, the radioactive S35 tracer was observed in the protein shells, but not in the infected bacteria, supporting the hypothesis that the genetic material which infects the bacteria was DNA and not protein.[6][7]
Hershey shared the 1969 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his “discoveries concerning the genetic structure of viruses.”
Oswald T. Avery,    Colin MacCleod,  Maclyn McCarty with Francis Crick and James D Watson [8]
A GC base pair demonstrating three intermolecular hydrogen bonds.
An AT base pair demonstrating two intermolecular hydrogen bonds.
Two helical strands form the DNA backbone. Another double helix may be found by tracing the spaces, or grooves, between the strands. These voids are adjacent to the base pairs and may provide a binding site. As the strands are not directly opposite each other, the grooves are unequally sized. One groove, the major groove, is 22 Å wide and the other, the minor groove, is 12 Å wide. The narrowness of the minor groove means that the edges of the bases are more accessible in the major groove. As a result, proteins like transcription factors that can bind to specific sequences in double-stranded DNA usually make contacts to the sides of the bases exposed in the major groove. This situation varies in unusual conformations of DNA within the cell, but the major and minor grooves are always named to reflect the differences in size that would be seen if the DNA is twisted back into the ordinary B form[9].
Structure of DNA.
Chargaff's rules was given by Erwin Chargaff which state that DNA from any cell of all organisms should have a 1:1 ratio of pyrimidine and purine bases and, more specifically, that the amount of guanine is equal to cytosine and the amount of adenine is equal to thymine. This pattern is found in both strands of the DNA. They were discovered by Austrian chemist Erwin Chargaff.
In molecular biology, two nucleotides on opposite complementary DNA strands that are connected via hydrogen bonds are called a base pair (often abbreviated bp). In the canonical Watson-Crick DNA base pairing, Adenine (A) forms a base pair with Thymine (T) and Guanine (G) forms a base pair with Cytosine (C). In RNA, thymine is replaced by Uracil (U). Alternate hydrogen bonding patterns, such as the wobble base pair and Hoogsteen base pair, also occur—particularly in RNA—giving rise to complex and functional tertiary structures. [10]
The German chemist Emil Fischer in 1884 gave the name 'purine' (purum uricum). He synthesized it for the first time in 1899 by uric acid  which had been isolated from kidney stones by Scheele in 1776. Beside from DNA and RNA, purines are also components in a number of other important biomolecules, such as ATP, GTP, cyclic AMP, NADH, and coenzyme A. Purine itself, has not been found in nature, but it can be produced by organic synthesis.A purine is a heterocyclic aromatic organic compound, consisting of a pyrimidine ring fused to an imidazole ring.
Adenine is one of the two purine nucleobases (the other being guanine) used in forming nucleotides of the nucleic acids (DNA or RNA). In DNA, adenine binds to thymine via two hydrogen bonds to assist in stabilizing the nucleic acid structures. Adenine forms adenosine, a nucleoside, when attached to ribose, and deoxyadenosine when attached to deoxyribose. It forms adenosine triphosphate (ATP), a nucleotide, when three phosphate groups are added to adenosine.
Guanine, along with adenine and cytosine, is present in both DNA and RNA, whereas thymine is usually seen only in DNA, and uracil only in RNA. In DNA, guanine is paired with cytosine. With the formula C5H5N5O, guanine is a derivative of purine, consisting of a fused pyrimidine-imidazole ring system with conjugated double bonds.
Guanine has two tautomeric forms, the major keto form and rare enol form. It binds to cytosine through three hydrogen bonds. In cytosine, the amino group acts as the hydrogen donor and the C-2 carbonyl and the N-3 amine as the hydrogen-bond acceptors. Guanine has a group at C-6 that acts as the hydrogen acceptor, while the group at N-1 and the amino group at C-2 act as the hydrogen donors.
Cytosine with numbered components. Methylation occurs on carbon number 5.
Pyrimidine is a heterocyclic aromatic organic compound similar to benzene and pyridine, containing two nitrogen atoms at positions 1 and 3 of the six-member ring. It is isomeric with two other forms of diazine.Three nucleobases found in nucleic acids, cytosine (C), thymine (T), and uracil (U), are pyrimidine derivatives.
A pyrimidine has many properties in common with pyridine, as the number of nitrogen atoms in the ring increases the ring pi electrons become less energetic and electrophilic aromatic substitution gets more difficult while nucleophilic aromatic substitution gets easier. An example of the last reaction type is the displacement of the amino group in 2-aminopyrimidine by chlorine and its reverse. Reduction in resonance stabilization of pyrimidines may lead to addition and ring cleavage reactions rather than substitutions. One such manifestation is observed in the Dimroth rearrangement.
Compared to pyridine, N-alkylation and N-oxidation is more difficult, and pyrimidines are also less basic: The pKa value for protonated pyrimidine is 1.23 compared to 5.30 for pyridine.[11]
Pyrimidine also is found in meteorites, although scientists still do not know its origin. Pyrimidine also photolytically decomposes into Uracil under UV light.
Cytosine can be found as part of DNA, as part of RNA, or as a part of a nucleotide. As cytidine triphosphate (CTP), it can act as a co-factor to enzymes, and can transfer a phosphate to convert adenosine diphosphate (ADP) to adenosine triphosphate (ATP).The nucleoside of cytosine is cytidine.
In DNA and RNA, cytosine is paired with guanine. However, it is inherently unstable, and can change into uracil (spontaneous deamination). This can lead to a point mutation if not repaired by the DNA repair enzymes such as uracil glycosylase, which cleaves a uracil in DNA.
Cytosine can also be methylated into 5-methylcytosine by an enzyme called DNA methyltransferase or be methylated and hydroxylated to make 5-hydroxymethylcytosine. Active enzymatic deamination of cytosine or 5-methylcytosine by the APOBEC family of cytosine deaminases could have both beneficial and detrimental implications on various cellular processes as well as on organismal evolution. The implications of deamination on 5-hydroxymethylcytosine, on the other hand, remains less understood.[12]
Thymine (T, Thy) is one of the four nucleobases in the nucleic acid of DNA that are represented by the letters G–C–A–T. The others are adenine, guanine, and cytosine. Thymine is also known as 5-methyluracil, a pyrimidine nucleobase. As the name suggests, thymine may be derived by methylation of uracil at the 5th carbon. In RNA, thymine is replaced with uracil in most cases. In DNA, thymine(T) binds to adenine (A) via two hydrogen bonds, thus stabilizing the nucleic acid structures.
Uracil found in RNA, it base-pairs with adenine and replaces thymine during DNA transcription. Methylation of uracil produces thymine. It turns into thymine to protect the DNA and to improve the efficiency of DNA replication. Uracil can base-pair with any of the bases, depending on how the molecule arranges itself on the helix, but readily pairs with adenine because the methyl group is repelled into a fixed position. Uracil pairs with adenine through hydrogen bonding. Uracil is the hydrogen bond acceptor and can form two hydrogen bonds. Uracil can also bind with a ribose sugar to form the ribonucleoside uridine. When a phosphate attaches to uridine, uridine 5'-monophosphate is produced.
Nucleosides are glycosylamines consisting of a nucleobase (often referred to as simply base) bound to a ribose or deoxyribose sugar via a beta-glycosidic linkage. Examples of nucleosides include cytidine, uridine, adenosine, guanosine, thymidine and inosine.
Nucleosides can be phosphorylated by specific kinases in the cell on the sugar's primary alcohol group (-CH2-OH), producing nucleotides, which are the molecular building-blocks of DNA and RNA[13].
Nucleosides can be produced by de novo synthesis pathways, in particular in the liver, but they are more abundantly supplied via ingestion and digestion of nucleic acids in the diet, whereby nucleotidases break down nucleotides (such as the thymine nucleotide) into nucleosides (such as thymidine) and phosphate.
Thymidine (more precisely called deoxythymidine; can also be labelled deoxyribosylthymine, and thymine deoxyriboside) is a chemical compound, more precisely a pyrimidine deoxynucleoside. Deoxythymidine is the DNA nucleoside T, which pairs with deoxyadenosine (A) in double-stranded DNA.
If cytosine is attached to a deoxyribose ring, it is known as a deoxycytidine.[14]
Structural elements of the most common nucleotides
A nucleotide is composed of a nucleobase (nitrogenous base), a five-carbon sugar (either ribose or 2'-deoxyribose), and one to three phosphate groups. Together, the nucleobase and sugar comprise a nucleoside. The phosphate groups form bonds with either the 2, 3, or 5-carbon of the sugar, with the 5-carbon site most common. Cyclic nucleotides form when the phosphate group is bound to two of the sugar's hydroxyl groups. Ribonucleotides are nucleotides where the sugar is ribose, and deoxyribonucleotides contain the sugar deoxyribose. Nucleotides can contain either a purine or a pyrimidine base.
Nucleic acids are polymeric macromolecules made from nucleotide monomers. In DNA, the purine bases are adenine and guanine, while the pyrimidines are thymine and cytosine. RNA uses uracil in place of thymine. Adenine always pairs with thymine by 2 hydrogen bonds, while guanine pairs with cytosine through 3 hydrogen bonds, each due to their unique structures.[15]
A deoxyribonucleotide is the monomer, or single unit, of DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid. Each deoxyribonucleotide comprises three parts: a nitrogenous base, a deoxyribose sugar, and one or more phosphate groups. The nitrogenous base is always bonded to the 1' carbon of the deoxyribose, which is distinguished from ribose by the presence of a proton on the 2' carbon rather than an -OH group. The phosphate groups bind to the 5' carbon of the sugar.
When deoxyribonucleotides polymerize to form DNA, the phosphate group from one nucleotide will bond to the 3' carbon on another nucleotide, forming a phosphodiester bond via dehydration synthesis. New nucleotides are always added to the 3' carbon of the last nucleotide, so synthesis always proceeds from 5' to 3'[16].
A phosphodiester bond is a group of strong covalent bonds between a phosphate group and two 5-carbon ring carbohydrates (pentoses) over two ester bonds. Phosphodiester bonds are central to most life on Earth, as they make up the backbone of the strands of DNA. In DNA and RNA, the phosphodiester bond is the linkage between the 3' carbon atom of one sugar molecule and the 5' carbon of another, deoxyribose in DNA and ribose in RNA.
The phosphate groups in the phosphodiester bond are negatively-charged. Because the phosphate groups have a pKa near 0, they are negatively-charged at pH 7. This repulsion forces the phosphates to take opposite sides of the DNA strands and is neutralized by proteins (histones), metal ions such as magnesium, and polyamines.
In order for the phosphodiester bond to be formed and the nucleotides to be joined, the tri-phosphate or di-phosphate forms of the nucleotide building blocks are broken apart to give off energy required to drive the enzyme-catalyzed reaction. When a single phosphate or two phosphates known as pyrophosphates break away and catalyze the reaction, the phosphodiester bond is formed.
Hydrolysis of phosphodiester bonds can be catalyzed by the action of phosphodiesterases which play an important role in repairing DNA sequences.
In biological systems, the phosphodiester bond between two ribonucleotides can be broken by alkaline hydrolysis because of the free 2' hydroxyl group[17].
Diagram of phosphodiester bonds (PO43-) between nucleotides. Which presents Thymine (U) and two molecules of Adenine (A).
w:Adenosine monophosphateAMP
w:Adenosine diphosphateADP
w:Adenosine triphosphateATP
w:Guanosine monophosphateGMP
w:Guanosine diphosphateGDP
w:Guanosine triphosphateGTP
w:Ribothymidine monophosphaterTMP
w:Ribothymidine diphosphaterTDP
w:Ribothymidine triphosphaterTTP
w:Uridine monophosphateUMP
w:Uridine triphosphateUTP
w:Cytidine monophosphateCMP
w:Cytidine diphosphateCDP
w:Cytidine triphosphateCTP
DNA structure determination using molecular modeling and DNA X-ray patterns
After DNA has been separated and purified by standard biochemical techniques one has a sample in a jar much like in the figure at the top of this article.  Below are the main steps involved in generating structural information from X-ray diffraction studies of oriented DNA fibers that are drawn from the hydrated DNA sample with the help of molecular models of DNA that are combined with crystallographic and mathematical analysis of the X-ray patterns.
Silica glass is another example of a material which is organized into a paracrystalline lattice.
A paracrystalline lattice, or paracrystal, is a molecular or atomic lattice with significant amounts (e.g., larger than a few percent) of partial disordering of molecular arrangements. Limiting cases of the paracrystal model are nanostructures, such as glasses, liquids, etc., that may possess only local ordering and no global order. A simple example of a paracrystalline lattice is shown in the following figure for a silica glass:
Liquid crystals also have paracrystalline rather than crystalline structures.
Highly hydrated B-DNA occurs naturally in living cells in such a paracrystalline state, which is a dynamic one in spite of the relatively rigid DNA double-helix stabilized by parallel hydrogen bonds between the nucleotide base-pairs in the two complementary, helical DNA chains (see figures). For simplicity most DNA molecular models omit both water and ions dynamically bound to B-DNA, and are thus less useful for understanding the dynamic behaviors of B-DNA in vivo. The physical and mathematical analysis of X-ray[19][20] and spectroscopic data for paracrystalline B-DNA is therefore much more complicated than that of crystalline, A-DNA X-ray diffraction patterns. The paracrystal model is also important for DNA technological applications such as DNA nanotechnology. Novel techniques that combine X-ray diffraction of DNA with X-ray microscopy in hydrated living cells are now also being developed.[21]
A-DNA: A-DNA is one of the many possible double helical structures of DNA. A-DNA is thought to be one of three biologically active double helical structures along with B- and Z-DNA. It is a right-handed double helix fairly similar to the more common and well-known B-DNA form, but with a shorter more compact helical structure. It appears likely that it occurs only in dehydrated samples of DNA, such as those used in crystallographic experiments, and possibly is also assumed by DNA-RNA hybrid helices and by regions of double-stranded RNA[22].
B-DNAThe most common form of DNA is B-DNA. The DNA double helix is a spiral polymer of nucleic acids, held together by nucleotides which base pair together. In B-DNA, the most common double helical structure, the double helix is right-handed with about 10–10.5 nucleotides per turn. The double helix structure of DNA contains a major groove and minor groove, the major groove being wider than the minor groove. Given the difference in widths of the major groove and minor groove, many proteins which bind to DNA do so through the wider major groove.
The geometry of a base, or base pair step can be characterized by 6 coordinates: Shift, slide, rise, tilt, roll, and twist. These values precisely define the location and orientation in space of every base or base pair in a nucleic acid molecule relative to its predecessor along the axis of the helix. Together, they characterize the helical structure of the molecule. In regions of DNA or RNA where the "normal" structure is disrupted, the change in these values can be used to describe such disruption.
For each base pair, considered relative to its predecessor, there are the following base pair geometries to consider:
Shear: bases appear as though they have moved past one another on the xy-plane.
Stretch: two bases are stretched apart in the horizontal direction.
Stagger: bases have both moved past one another and stretched apart on the xy-plane.
Buckle: the ends of the bases that do not touch are inclined upwards towards the z-axis.
Propeller twist: rotation of one base with respect to the other in the same base pair.
Opening: bases touch at one side, but lean apart at the other side.
Shift: displacement along an axis in the base-pair plane perpendicular to the first, directed from the minor to the major groove.
Slide: displacement along an axis in the plane of the base pair directed from one strand to the other.
Rise: displacement along the helix axis.
Tilt: rotation around this axis.
vRoll: rotation around this axis.
Twist: rotation around the helix axis.
Rise and twist determine the handedness and pitch of the helix. The other coordinates, by contrast, can be zero. Slide and shift are typically small in B-DNA, but are substantial in A- and Z-DNA. Roll and tilt make successive base pairs less parallel, and are typically small. A diagram of these coordinates can be found in 3DNA website.
Note that "tilt" has often been used differently in the scientific literature, referring to the deviation of the first, inter-strand base-pair axis from perpendicularity to the helix axis. This corresponds to slide between a succession of base pairs, and in helix-based coordinates is properly termed "inclination".
TA-DNA: TA-DNA is a form of DNA that is most closely related to A-DNA in terms of structure. The TA-DNA helix is right handed like A-DNA, and it The most noticeable difference between the two forms is that TA-DNA has a greater inclination of its base pairs at an angle of approximately 50 degrees with respect to the helix axis. Because of this, TA-DNA is sometimes described as tilted A-DNA.[23]
Z-DNA: Z-DNA is one of the many possible double helical structures of DNA. It is a left-handed double helical structure in which the double helix winds to the left in a zig-zag pattern (instead of to the right, like the more common B-DNA form). Z-DNA is thought to be one of three biologically active double helical structures along with A- and B-DNA. Z-DNA is quite different from the right-handed forms. In fact, Z-DNA is often compared against B-DNA in order to illustrate the major differences. The Z-DNA helix is left-handed and has a structure that repeats every 2 base pairs. The major and minor grooves, unlike A- and B-DNA, show little difference in width. Formation of this structure is generally unfavourable, although certain conditions can promote it; such as alternating purine-pyrimidine sequence (especially poly(dGC)2), negative DNA supercoiling or high salt and some cations (all at physiological temperature, 37°C, and pH 7.3-7.4). Z-DNA can form a junction with B-DNA (called a "B-to-Z junction box") in a structure which involves the extrusion of a base pair. The Z-DNA conformation has been difficult to study because it does not exist as a stable feature of the double helix. Instead, it is a transient structure that is occasionally induced by biological activity and then quickly disappears.[24][25]
From left to right, the structures of A, B and Z DNA
Difference between three major forms of DNA
C: C2'-endo,G: C2'-exo
Minor and Major Grooves of DNA: The minor and major grooves of DNA are characteristic of the type of DNA in which they are a part of. They are very important because they not only make up the characteristic structure of A-DNA, B-DNA, and Z-DNA, but their differences determine the interaction of these DNA with various proteins. The wideness, narrowness, deepness, shallowness, and the electrostatic potential found within these grooves all play an important role in determining how the DNA will react with certain proteins, with which proteins it will react, and whether or not certain parts will be likely to react at all.[26]
Difference between the minor and major grooves of the three major forms of DNA
Wide and Shallow with relatively lower electrostatic potential
Narrow and Deep with relatively high electrostatic potential
Wide and Shallow with relatively lower electrostatic potential
Narrow and Deep the a zigzag curving of the backbone
Indistinct and the base edges create a convex surface
From left to right, the global structures of A, B and Z DNA ‎
Differences in the Relative Charges of A-DNA, B-DNA, and Z-DNA: For all forms of DNA the global structure has an overall negative charge and the overall electrostatic potential is negative. This is largely due to the phosphate groups of DNA which bear an overall negative charge due to the negatively charged oxygen atoms they have. However, DNA has both positive and negative charges covering its outer structure. The charge dispersion over the global structure of DNA varies between A-DNA, B-DNA, and Z-DNA.  A-DNA has mostly negative electrostatic potential throughout but concentrated mostly in the site of the major groove. It also has neutral electrostatic potential spread widely throughout the rest of its structure besides the major groove. Finally, A-DNA has sparse positive charges scattered along its surface. B-DNA has mostly negative electrostatic potential spread throughout its global exterior and concentrated mostly in major and minor grooves. It has some positively charged surface area scattered sparsely over its surface and mostly peppered within the wide major groove. Z-DNA has a negatively charged minor groove and the indistinct area where a major groove would normally be has slight positive charged places. Overall, the Z-DNA has a negative charge in all of its global structure. The structures of A-DNA, B-DNA, and Z-DNA have an overall negative charge.
Difference between the electrostatic potentials of the three major forms of DNA
Massively present throughout the global structure but concentrated most highly in the major groove
Massively present throughout the global structure and evenly concentrated in the major and minor grooves
Massively present throughout the global structure and present most highly in the minor groove
Very sparsely present scattered in the minor groove and hardly at all in the major groove
Very sparsely present scattered throughout the global structure, mostly in the major groove
Scattered sparsely in greater amounts than in A-DNA or B-DNA, but outside of the minor groove
Moderately present throughout the structure and mostly in the minor groove, but not in the major groove
Moderately scattered throughout the structure, but in a smaller amount than in A-DNA
Moderately scattered throughout the entire global structure apart from the minor groove
From left to right, the global structures of A, B and Z DNA and their electrostatic potentials ‎
Supercoiled structure of circular DNA molecules with low writhe. Note that the helical nature of the DNA duplex is omitted for clarity.
Supercoiled structure of linear DNA molecules with constrained ends. Note that the helical nature of the DNA duplex is omitted for clarity.
DNA supercoiling is important for DNA packaging within all cells. Because the length of DNA can be thousands of times that of a cell, packaging this genetic material into the cell or nucleus (in eukaryotes) is a difficult feat. Supercoiling of DNA reduces the space and allows for a lot more DNA to be packaged. In prokaryotes, plectonemic supercoils are predominant, because of the circular chromosome and relatively small amount of genetic material. In eukaryotes, DNA supercoiling exists on many levels of both plectonemic and solenoidal supercoils, with the solenoidal supercoiling proving most effective in compacting the DNA. Solenoidal supercoiling is achieved with histones to form a 10nm fiber. This fiber is further coiled into a 30nm fiber, and further coiled upon itself numerous times more.
DNA packaging is greatly increased during nuclear division events such as mitosis or meiosis, where DNA must be compacted and segregated to daughter cells. Condensins and cohesins are Structural Maintenance of Chromosome proteins that aid in the condensation of sister chromatids and the linkage of the centromere in sister chromatids. These SMC proteins induce positive supercoils.
Supercoiling is also required for DNA/RNA synthesis. Because DNA must be unwound for DNA/RNA polymerase action, supercoils will result. The region ahead of the polymerase complex will be unwound; this stress is compensated with positive supercoils ahead of the complex. Behind the complex, DNA is rewound and there will be compensatory negative supercoils. It is important to note that topoisomerases such as DNA gyrase (Type II Topoisomerase) play a role in relieving some of the stress during DNA/RNA synthesis[28].
NA supercoiling can be described numerically by changes in the 'linking number' Lk. The linking number is the most descriptive property of supercoiled DNA. Lko, the number of turns in the relaxed (B type) DNA plasmid/molecule, is determined by dividing the total base pairs of the molecule by the relaxed bp/turn which, depending on reference is 10.4-10.5.
Lk is merely the number of crosses a single strand makes across the other in a planar projection. The topology of the DNA is described by the equation below in which the linking number is equivalent to the sum of TW, which is the number of twists or turns of the double helix, and Wr which is the number of coils or 'writhes'. If there is a closed DNA molecule, the sum of TW and Wr, or the linking number, does not change. However, there may be complementary changes in TW and Wr without changing their sum.
The Gibbs free energy associated with the coiling is given by the equation below[30]
The linking number is a numerical invariant that describes the linking of two closed curves in three-dimensional space. Intuitively, the linking number represents the number of times that each curve winds around the other. The linking number is always an integer, but may be positive or negative depending on the orientation of the two curves[31].
Since the linking number L of supercoiled DNA is the number of times the two strands are intertwined (and both strands remain covalently intact), L cannot change. The reference state (or parameter) L0 of a circular DNA duplex is its relaxed state. In this state, its writhe W = 0. Since L = T + W, in a relaxed state T = L. Thus, if we have a 400 bp relaxed circular DNA duplex, L ~ 40 (assuming ~10 bp per turn in B-DNA). Then T ~ 40.
Negative supercoils favor local unwinding of the DNA, allowing processes such as transcription, DNA replication, and recombination. Negative supercoiling is also thought to favour the transition between B-DNA and Z-DNA, and moderate the interactions of DNA binding proteins involved in gene regulation.[32][33]
RNA sequencing was one of the earliest forms of nucleotide sequencing. The major landmark of RNA sequencing is the sequence of the first complete gene and the complete genome of Bacteriophage MS2, identified and published by Walter Fiers and his coworkers at the University of Ghent (Ghent, Belgium), between 1972 and 1976.
Prior to the development of rapid DNA sequencing methods in the early 1970s by Frederick Sanger at the University of Cambridge, in England and Walter Gilbert and Allan Maxam at Harvard, a number of laborious methods were used. For instance, in 1973, Gilbert and Maxam reported the sequence of 24 basepairs using a method known as wandering-spot analysis.
The chain-termination method developed by Sanger and coworkers in 1975 soon became the method of choice, owing to its relative ease and reliability.[34]
In 1976–1977, Allan Maxam and Walter Gilbert developed a DNA sequencing method based on chemical modification of DNA and subsequent cleavage at specific bases. Although Maxam and Gilbert published their chemical sequencing method two years after the ground-breaking paper of Sanger and Coulson on plus-minus sequencing,Maxam–Gilbert sequencing rapidly became more popular, since purified DNA could be used directly, while the initial Sanger method required that each read start be cloned for production of single-stranded DNA. However, with the improvement of the chain-termination method (see below), Maxam-Gilbert sequencing has fallen out of favour due to its technical complexity prohibiting its use in standard molecular biology kits, extensive use of hazardous chemicals, and difficulties with scale-up.
The method requires radioactive labeling at one 5' end of the DNA (typically by a kinase reaction using gamma-32P ATP) and purification of the DNA fragment to be sequenced. Chemical treatment generates breaks at a small proportion of one or two of the four nucleotide bases in each of four reactions (G, A+G, C, C+T). For example, the purines (A+G) are depurinated using formic acid, the guanines (and to some extent the adenines) are methylated by dimethyl sulfate, and the pyrimidines (C+T) are methylated using hydrazine. The addition of salt (sodium chloride) to the hydrazine reaction inhibits the methylation of thymine for the C-only reaction. The modified DNAs are then cleaved by hot piperidine at the position of the modified base. The concentration of the modifying chemicals is controlled to introduce on average one modification per DNA molecule. Thus a series of labeled fragments is generated, from the radiolabeled end to the first "cut" site in each molecule. The fragments in the four reactions are electrophoresed side by side in denaturing acrylamide gels for size separation. To visualize the fragments, the gel is exposed to X-ray film for autoradiography, yielding a series of dark bands each corresponding to a radiolabeled DNA fragment, from which the sequence may be inferred.
Also sometimes known as "chemical sequencing", this method led to the Methylation Interference Assay used to map DNA-binding sites for DNA-binding proteins.[35]
Part of a radioactively labelled sequencing gel Because the chain-terminator method (or Sanger method after its developer Frederick Sanger) is more efficient and uses fewer toxic chemicals and lower amounts of radioactivity than the method of Maxam and Gilbert, it rapidly became the method of choice. The key principle of the Sanger method was the use of dideoxynucleotide triphosphates (ddNTPs) as DNA chain terminators.
The classical chain-termination method requires a single-stranded DNA template, a DNA primer, a DNA polymerase, normal deoxynucleotidephosphates (dNTPs), and modified nucleotides (dideoxyNTPs) that terminate DNA strand elongation. These ddNTPs will also be radioactively or fluorescently labelled for detection in automated sequencing machines. The DNA sample is divided into four separate sequencing reactions, containing all four of the standard deoxynucleotides (dATP, dGTP, dCTP and dTTP) and the DNA polymerase. To each reaction is added only one of the four dideoxynucleotides (ddATP, ddGTP, ddCTP, or ddTTP) which are the chain-terminating nucleotides, lacking a 3'-hydroxyl (OH) group required for the formation of a phosphodiester bond between two nucleotides, thus terminating DNA strand extension and resulting in DNA fragments of varying length[36].
The newly synthesized and labelled DNA fragments are heat denatured, and separated by size (with a resolution of just one nucleotide) by gel electrophoresis on a denaturing polyacrylamide-urea gel with each of the four reactions run in one of four individual lanes (lanes A, T, G, C); the DNA bands are then visualized by autoradiography or UV light, and the DNA sequence can be directly read off the X-ray film or gel image. In the image on the right, X-ray film was exposed to the gel, and the dark bands correspond to DNA fragments of different lengths. A dark band in a lane indicates a DNA fragment that is the result of chain termination after incorporation of a dideoxynucleotide (ddATP, ddGTP, ddCTP, or ddTTP). The relative positions of the different bands among the four lanes are then used to read (from bottom to top) the DNA sequence[37].
DNA fragments are labelled with a radioactive or fluorescent tag on the primer (1), in the new DNA strand with a labeled dNTP, or with a labeled ddNTP. (click to expand) Technical variations of chain-termination sequencing include tagging with nucleotides containing radioactive phosphorus for radiolabelling, or using a primer labeled at the 5’ end with a fluorescent dye. Dye-primer sequencing facilitates reading in an optical system for faster and more economical analysis and automation.  The later development by Leroy Hood and coworkers [38][39] of fluorescently labeled ddNTPs and primers set the stage for automated, high-throughput DNA sequencing.  Sequence ladder by radioactive sequencing compared to fluorescent peaks
Chain-termination methods have greatly simplified DNA sequencing. For example, chain-termination-based kits are commercially available that contain the reagents needed for sequencing, pre-aliquoted and ready to use. Limitations include non-specific binding of the primer to the DNA, affecting accurate read-out of the DNA sequence, and DNA secondary structures affecting the fidelity of the sequence[40].
Dye-terminator sequencing utilizes labelling of the chain terminator ddNTPs, which permits sequencing in a single reaction, rather than four reactions as in the labelled-primer method. In dye-terminator sequencing, each of the four dideoxynucleotide chain terminators is labelled with fluorescent dyes, each of which emit light at different wavelengths.
Owing to its greater expediency and speed, dye-terminator sequencing is now the mainstay in automated sequencing. Its limitations include dye effects due to differences in the incorporation of the dye-labelled chain terminators into the DNA fragment, resulting in unequal peak heights and shapes in the electronic DNA sequence trace chromatogram after capillary electrophoresis (see figure to the left).
This problem has been addressed with the use of modified DNA polymerase enzyme systems and dyes that minimize incorporation variability, as well as methods for eliminating "dye blobs". The dye-terminator sequencing method, along with automated high-throughput DNA sequence analyzers, is now being used for the vast majority of sequencing projects[41].
Common challenges of DNA sequencing include poor quality in the first 15–40 bases of the sequence and deteriorating quality of sequencing traces after 700–900 bases.  Base calling software typically gives an estimate of quality to aid in quality trimming.[42][43]
In cases where DNA fragments are cloned before sequencing, the resulting sequence may contain parts of the cloning vector.  In contrast, PCR-based cloning and emerging sequencing technologies based on pyrosequencing often avoid using cloning vectors.  Recently, one-step Sanger sequencing (combined amplification and sequencing) methods such as Ampliseq and SeqSharp have been developed that allow rapid sequencing of target genes without cloning or prior amplification.[44][45][46]
Current methods can directly sequence only relatively short (300–1000 nucleotides long) DNA fragments in a single reaction. The main obstacle to sequencing DNA fragments above this size limit is insufficient power of separation for resolving large DNA fragments that differ in length by only one nucleotide. In all cases the use of a primer with a free 5' end is essential[47].
View of the start of an example dye-terminator read Automated DNA-sequencing instruments (DNA sequencers) can sequence up to 384 DNA samples in a single batch (run) in up to 24 runs a day. DNA sequencers carry out capillary electrophoresis for size separation, detection and recording of dye fluorescence, and data output as fluorescent peak trace chromatograms. Sequencing reactions by thermocycling, cleanup and re-suspension in a buffer solution before loading onto the sequencer are performed separately. A number of commercial and non-commercial software packages can trim low-quality DNA traces automatically. These programs score the quality of each peak and remove low-quality base peaks (generally located at the ends of the sequence). The accuracy of such algorithms is below visual examination by a human operator, but sufficient for automated processing of large sequence data sets[48].
1869 DNA was first isolated by the Swiss physician Friedrich Miescher who discovered a microscopic substance in the pus of discarded surgical bandages.
1937 William Astbury produced the first X-ray diffraction patterns that showed that DNA had a regular structure.
1928 Frederick Griffith discovered that traits of the "smooth" form of the Pneumococcus could be transferred to the "rough" form of the same bacteria by mixing killed "smooth" bacteria with the live "rough" form.
1952 Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase in the Hershey–Chase experiment showed that DNA is the genetic material of the T2 phage.
1972 Development of recombinant DNA technology, which permits isolation of defined fragments of DNA; prior to this, the only accessible samples for sequencing were from bacteriophage or virus DNA.
1977 Allan Maxam and Walter Gilbert publish "DNA sequencing by chemical degradation".Frederick Sanger, independently, publishes "DNA sequencing with chain-terminating inhibitors".
1984 Medical Research Council scientists decipher the complete DNA sequence of the Epstein-Barr virus, 170 kb.
1986 Leroy E. Hood's laboratory at the California Institute of Technology and Smith announce the first semi-automated DNA sequencing machine.
1990 The U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) begins large-scale sequencing trials on Mycoplasma capricolum, Escherichia coli, Caenorhabditis elegans, and Saccharomyces cerevisiae (at US$0.75/base).
1991 Sequencing of human expressed sequence tags begins in Craig Venter's lab, an attempt to capture the coding fraction of the human genome.
1995 Craig Venter, Hamilton Smith, and colleagues at The Institute for Genomic Research (TIGR) publish the first complete genome of a free-living organism, the bacterium Haemophilus influenzae. The circular chromosome contains 1,830,137 bases and its publication in the journal Science marks the first use of whole-genome shotgun sequencing, eliminating the need for initial mapping efforts.
1996 Pål Nyrén and his student Mostafa Ronaghi at the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm publish their method of pyrosequencing
1998 Phil Green and Brent Ewing of the University of Washington publish “phred” for sequencer data analysis.
2000 Lynx Therapeutics publishes and markets "MPSS" - a parallelized, adapter/ligation-mediated, bead-based sequencing technology, launching "next-generation" sequencing.
2004 454 Life Sciences markets a parallelized version of pyrosequencing. The first version of their machine reduced sequencing costs 6-fold compared to automated Sanger sequencing, and was the second of a new generation of sequencing technologies, after MPSS.
↑ http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=DNA&oldid=424928563
↑ Berry, Andrew; Watson, James D. (2003). DNA: the secret of life. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 0-375-41546-7.
↑ http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=DNA&oldid=424928563
↑ Berry, Andrew; Watson, James D. (2003). DNA: the secret of life. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 0-375-41546-7.
↑ Hershey–Chase experiment
↑ Hershey, A.D. and Chase, M. (1952) Independent functions of viral protein and nucleic acid in growth of bacteriophage. J Gen Physiol. 36:39–56.
↑ A very–MacLeod–McCarty experiment
↑ http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=DNA&oldid=427633053
↑ http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nucleoside&oldid=419856059
↑ http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nucleotide&oldid=422383586
↑ http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Phosphodiester_bond&oldid=407638927
↑ Herbert R. Wilson, FRS. Diffraction of X-rays by proteins, Nucleic Acids and Viruses., London: Edward Arnold (Publishers) Ltd. 1966.
↑ Hosemann R., Bagchi R.N., Direct analysis of diffraction by matter, North-Holland Publs., Amsterdam – New York, 1962.
↑ Baianu, I.C. (1978). "X-ray scattering by partially disordered membrane systems.". Acta Cryst., A34 (5):  751–3. doi:10.1107/S0567739478001540.
↑ Yamamoto Y, Shinohara K (October 2002). "Application of X-ray microscopy in analysis of living hydrated cells". Anat. Rec. 269 (5):  217–23. doi:10.1002/ar.10166. PMID 12379938.
↑ http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=A-DNA&oldid=379025458
↑ Rohs, Remo, Xiangshu Jin, Sean M. West, Rohit Joshi, Barry Honig, and Richard S. Mann. "Origins of Specificity in Protein-DNA Recognition." Annual Reviews. N.p., 24 03 2010. Web. 29 Oct 2011. <http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/full/10.1146/annurev-biochem-060408-091030?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub=pubmed>.
↑ http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Z-DNA&oldid=418927717
↑ Zhang H, Yu H, Ren J, Qu X (2006). "Reversible B/Z-DNA transition under the low salt condition and non-B-form polydApolydT selectivity by a cubane-like europium-L-aspartic acid complex". Biophysical Journal 90 (9): 3203–3207.
↑ Rohs, Remo, Xiangshu Jin, Sean M. West, Rohit Joshi, Barry Honig, and Richard S. Mann. "Origins of Specificity in Protein-DNA Recognition." Annual Reviews. N.p., 24 03 2010. Web. 29 Oct 2011. <http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/full/10.1146/annurev-biochem-060408-091030?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub=pubmed>.
↑ http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=DNA_supercoil&oldid=417575151
↑ Vologodskii AV, Lukashin AV, Anshelevich VV, et al. (1979). "Fluctuations in superhelical DNA". Nucleic Acids Res 6:  967–682. doi:10.1093/nar/6.3.967.
↑ http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=DNA_supercoil&oldid=417575151
↑ H. S. Chawla (2002). Introduction to Plant Biotechnology. Science Publishers. ISBN 1578082285.
↑ http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=DNA_supercoil&oldid=417575151
↑ http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=DNA_sequencing&oldid=422803407
↑ Smith LM, Sanders JZ, Kaiser RJ, et al (1986). "Fluorescence detection in automated DNA sequence analysis". Nature 321 (6071):  674–9. doi:10.1038/321674a0. PMID 3713851. "We have developed a method for the partial automation of DNA sequence analysis. Fluorescence detection of the DNA fragments is accomplished by means of a fluorophore covalently attached to the oligonucleotide primer used in enzymatic DNA sequence analysis. A different coloured fluorophore is used for each of the reactions specific for the bases A, C, G and T. The reaction mixtures are combined and co-electrophoresed down a single polyacrylamide gel tube, the separated fluorescent bands of DNA are detected near the bottom of the tube, and the sequence information is acquired directly by computer.".
↑ Smith LM, Fung S, Hunkapiller MW, Hunkapiller TJ, Hood LE (April 1985). "The synthesis of oligonucleotides containing an aliphatic amino group at the 5' terminus: synthesis of fluorescent DNA primers for use in DNA sequence analysis". Nucleic Acids Res. 13 (7):  2399–412. doi:10.1093/nar/13.7.2399. PMID 4000959. PMC 341163. http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=4000959.
↑ http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=DNA_sequencing&oldid=422803407
↑ "Phred - Quality Base Calling". http://www.phrap.com/phred/. Retrieved 2011-02-24.
↑ "Base-calling for next-generation sequencing platforms — Brief Bioinform". http://bib.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2011/01/18/bib.bbq077.full. Retrieved 2011-02-24.
↑ Murphy, K.; Berg, K.; Eshleman, J. (2005). "Sequencing of genomic DNA by combined amplification and cycle sequencing reaction". Clinical chemistry 51 (1): 35–39.
↑ Sengupta, D.; Cookson, B. (2010). "SeqSharp: A general approach for improving cycle-sequencing that facilitates a robust one-step combined amplification and sequencing method". The Journal of molecular diagnostics : JMD 12 (3): 272–277.
↑ http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=DNA_sequencing&oldid=422803407
GOMS basically, “a model of user performance that also centers around user goals and actions is the goals, operators, methods, and selection rules (GOMS) model developed by Card, Moran, and Newell (1983) and extended by Kieras (1988a).”
Goals are what the user is trying to accomplish in a given task for example unlocking a cell phone screen. To accomplish this goal using the ‘click/press key’ would be the example of operator. Methods are sequences of operators and sub-goals that accomplish a goal for example to set up a password steps may include the following steps 1. Select lock screen setting, 2. Select screen lock option, 3. Entering the old PIN, 4. Choosing an option among None/ Swipe/ Face Unlock/ Pattern/ PIN/ Password, 5. Set new desired password option, 6. Confirming new password, 7. Click done button. Selection rules implies which method should be picked to satisfy a particular goal, as there are different options to reach the same goal. The user can select any option among None, Swipe, Face Unlock, Pattern, PIN and Password depending upon their desired security level and knowledge. GOMS model is very practical in the case where the user have many ways to accomplish the same goal.
However “evaluation of the GOMS structure reveals problems such as too many methods for accomplishing a goal, similar goals supported by inconsistent methods, and methods that rely too heavily on long-term memory (e.g., see Gong & Kieras, 1994).” GOMS model also failed to address user behavior, biological, or organizational factors into account.
Wickens, C., & Gordon, S. (2004). An introduction to human factors engineering (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Gong, R., & Kieras, D. (1994). A Validation of the GOMS Model Methodology in the Development of a Specialized, Commercial Software Application. In Proceedings of CHI, 1994, Boston, MA, USA, April 24-28, 1994. New York: ACM, pp. 351-357.
Computing » Computer Science » Computer Programming » Ada Programming
Subprogram parameters may have three modes.
A parameter of any mode may also be explicitly aliased.
The formal parameter is an access (a pointer) to some variable. (This is not a parameter mode from the reference manual point of view.)
Note that parameter modes do not specify the parameter passing method. Their purpose is to document the data flow.
The parameter passing method depends on the type of the parameter. A rule of thumb is that parameters fitting into a register are passed by copy, others are passed by reference. For certain types, there are special rules, for others the parameter passing mode is left to the compiler (which you can assume to do what is most sensible). Tagged types are always passed by reference.
Explicitly aliased parameters and access parameters specify pass by reference.
Unlike in the C class of programming languages, Ada subprogram calls cannot have empty parameters parentheses ( ) when there are no parameters.
When the procedure is called with the statement
C, being an out parameter, is an uninitialized variable before the first assignment. (Therefore in Ada 83, there existed the restriction that out parameters are write-only. If you wanted to read the value written, you had to declare a local variable, do all calculations with it, and finally assign it to C before return. This was awkward and error prone so the restriction was removed in Ada 95.)
Within a procedure, the return statement can be used without arguments to exit the procedure and return the control to the caller.
For example, to solve an equation of the kind
Valid := False;  -- Being out parameter, it should be modified at least once.
A function is a subprogram that can be invoked as part of an expression. Until Ada 2005, functions can only take in (the default) or access parameters; the latter can be used as a work-around for the restriction that functions may not have out parameters. Ada 2012 has removed this restriction.
(There is, by the way, also the attribute Integer'Min, see RM 3.5.) Or in Ada2012:
The body of the function can contain several return statements and the execution of any of them will finish the function, returning control to the caller.  If the flow of control within the function branches in several ways, it is necessary to make sure that each one of them is finished with a return
Every call to a function produces a new copy of any object declared within it.  When the function finalizes, its objects disappear.  Therefore, it is possible to call the function recursively.  For example, consider this implementation of the factorial function:
When evaluating the expression Factorial (4); the function
A formal parameter of a function can be of any type, including vectors or
In this example, the function can be used on a vector of arbitrary dimension.
Therefore, there are no static bounds in the parameters passed to the
In the same way, a function can also return a type whose bounds are not known a priori. For example:
Result : Float_Vector(V'Range);   -- Fix the bounds of the vector to be returned.
The variable Result has the same bounds as V, so the returned vector will always have the same dimension as the one passed as parameter.
A value returned by a function can be used without assigning it to a variable, it can be referenced as an expression.  For example, Invert_Components (V4) (1), where the first element of the vector returned by the function would be obtained (in this case, the last element of V4, i.e. 7.8).
In subprogram calls, named parameter notation (i.e. the name of the formal
Another use is for calls with numeric literals:
On the other hand, formal parameters may have default values. They can, therefore, be omitted in the subprogram call. For example:
In the first statement, a "regular call" is used (with positional association); the second also uses positional association but omits the second parameter to use the default; in the third statement, all parameters are by default; the fourth statement uses named association to omit the first parameter; finally, the fifth statement uses mixed association, here the positional parameters have to precede the named ones.
Note that the default expression is evaluated once for each formal parameter that has no actual parameter. Thus, if in the above example a function would be used as defaults for A and B, the function would be evaluated once in case 2 and 4; twice in case 3, so A and B could have different values; in the others cases, it would not be evaluated.
Subprograms may be renamed. The parameter and result profile for a renaming-as-declaration must be mode conformant.
Valid  : out Boolean) renames Quadratic_Equation;
This may be especially comfortable for tagged types.
Message: Some_Package.Message_Type;
Method_Ref: access procedure := Print'Access;  -- thus taking 'Access should be illegal; GNAT GPL 2012 allows this
Message.Print;                 -- Ada 2005 method.object call - note: no use clause necessary
Print;                         -- Message.Print is a parameterless procedure and can be renamed as such
-- This has been corrected in the current version (as of Nov 22, 2012)
But note that Message.Print'Access; is illegal, you have to use a renaming declaration as above.
Since only mode conformance is required (and not full conformance as between specification and body), parameter names and default values may be changed with renamings:
The Wikipedia page on public transit provides a brief overview on what transit is and how it works.
Public transit increases the theoretical passenger capacity of roads by consolidating passengers into fewer vehicles. The graphs to the right depict the vehicle and passenger capacity for a road capable of accommodating 1,800 cars or car equivalents per hour.  In this hypothetical example, a car carries 1.8 passengers and a bus carries 47 passengers while occupying the space of two cars.  This results in a road capacity of 3,240 passengers if all travel by cars or 42,300 if all travel by bus.[1]
Gordon Newell's notes on public transportation calculate the necessity for Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) to serve workers in San Francisco's financial district.[2]  Newell estimates that the financial district attracts 200,000 in-bound trips to a 1 square mile area.  Given the typical number of roads serving one square mile (10 city blocks), Newell calculates the theoretical maximum number of vehicles that could enter the area (parking considerations aside) to be 40,000 cars per hour.[2]  Transit is an essential component of central business district (CBD) configurations with very high job densities such as the SF financial district.
Numerous types of transit modes exist, serving a range of needs, capacities, and scales.  Fixed route service is provided by buses, streetcars, or rail.  They can operate in mixed traffic, special lanes, or exclusive right-of-ways.  Demand responsive transport, e.g., Paratransit, uses the same roadways as private autos.
Comparison of modes by passenger capacity and average speed[3]
Derrible and Kennedy (2010)[4] document how transit networks can be represented as graphs which reveal ways they differ from other transportation networks.  Their work focuses on passenger rail metro systems for simplicity, but these concepts can also be applied to bus networks and other forms of fixed-route public transit.  Transit networks consist of lines that connect multiple edges. Some lines can overlap which presents challenges in graphing and analyzing.
Vertices can represent either all nodes (stations) or only nodes that are transfer points and termini.   The former allows for analyzing average stop spacing and the regional or local focus of the network.  Derrible and Kennedy focus on the latter definition because it more accurately represents the network design.[4] Vertices are subdivided into end-vertices (
.
In the example graph of the LA Metro network[note 1], there are 6 lines with a total of 83 nodes.  7 are terminal points (
) and 5 are transfer points between 1 or more lines (
Since transit lines can overlap, edges are classified as either "single" (
) to isolate redundancies [4].  The LA Metro example contains 11 single edges and 2 multiple edges (
Network diameter is usually a measure of the shortest path between the two most distant vertices in the network.  In transit networks, however, the number of transfers is a more meaningful indicator of travel friction.  Thus Derrible and Kennedy use the maximum number of transfers required to complete the longest journey in a transit network as their measure of network diameter. [4]
In the Los Angeles Metro map pictured, the maximum number of transfers is 3.  Trips that start along the green line and end in the Valley, Pasadena, or East LA (or the reverse journey) require three different transfers.  All other OD pairs require two or fewer transfers.
Derrible and Kennedy use the Beta Index to measure the developmental stage of the transit network. [4]  The beta index is simply a ratio of links to nodes in the network.  Trees and simple networks have values smaller than one, and more complex networks have values higher than one.  This developmental measure assumes that transit networks start with radial edges and add cross-town links as they develop and demand increases.
In the Los Angeles metro network pictured, the beta index value is about 0.92, which is consistent with the aforementioned interpretation of beta index values below 1.  When double edges are treated as a single edge, the network is a perfect tree.
Average stop spacing and average line length can be used to gauge the focus of a transit network.  Longer lines and more distant stops suggest that the network is serving longer distance commuters, while smaller values of each indicate a local network, such as a streetcar system.[4]
Derrible and Kennedy tested the networks of 19 urban rail transit networks to look for scale-free network features.[5]  Of these, 14 systems followed a power law distribution for the number of lines hosted by each station.
Derrible and Kennedy also tested urban rail transit networks to see if they were small-world networks: networks with a high degree of clustering and a small average shortest-path length.[5]  Since urban rail networks are planar and typically small graphs, Derrible and Kennedy use the number of transfers rather than the absolute distance for the "shortest path length".  They find that the urban rail networks in their study are in fact small-world networks, and become increasingly more connected as they grow in size.[5]
Public transit access during midday periodPublic transit access during PM peak period
Public transit networks differ from other types of transportation networks in some key respects.  Most notably, since public transit services are typically provided on fixed schedules and fixed routes in urban settings, they lack the temporal and spatial ubiquity of road networks.  For instance, if I want to make a trip by car in an urban area, all I need is a vehicle and a valid driver's license.  I can access the network virtually anywhere and travel to most destinations within the area in a reasonable amount of time.  By contrast, if I wish to make a trip between two points in an urban area by public transit, I have to go to a place that is served by the network at the times that service is available.
The supply of public transit services, and hence the extent of the network, varies both by time of day (rush hour versus non-rush hour) and by day of the week (weekdays versus Saturday/Sunday), and is roughly in proportion to demand.  Since much of the demand for public transit is concentrated during conventional peak travel periods on weekdays, there are often major differences in service levels between peak and off-peak (midday, evening, and late night) periods.  For example, in 2009 Metro Transit (the largest transit provider in the Minneapolis-St. Paul region) operated a fleet of 735 buses during the PM peak period, the period of greatest demand.  During the midday period it had on average only 292 buses in service.  The corresponding figures for Saturday and Sunday, which do not tend to exhibit the same sharp peaks in demand during the day, are 235 and 166 buses, respectively.
Another way to illustrate the temporal variations in the level of service provided by the public transit network is to look at the level of accessibility it provides at different times.  The figures at right shows the level of accessibility to jobs provided by the public transit network in 2005 in the Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN (Twin Cities) region during the midday and PM peak periods.  The locations denoted by the "hotter" colors (red/orange/yellow) have higher levels of accessibility, while the "cooler" colors (shades of green) represent locations with lower accessibility.  The biggest differences between peak and off-peak accessibility appear to be in suburban areas, where some locations only receive service during peak periods (e.g. commuter buses) and others receive significantly more frequent service.
Travel along public transit networks tends to disaggregate the typical trip into several segments.  Whereas I might be able to simply walk out of my house to access my car, I will need to walk to the nearest bus stop or train station if I wish to use public transit.  If there isn't a stop within walking distance of my house I might need to bike, get a ride, or drive to a nearby park-and-ride facility in order to access the transit network.  In some cases this may represent a significant component of overall travel time.  Apart from access time, transit trips also require waiting time.  Passengers often wish to arrive at a bus stop a few minutes prior to the scheduled departure time as a response to travel time uncertainty.  The penalty for missing a particular trip will likely be greater on routes with less frequent service.  It is commonly observed in practice that wait times at stops are systematically related to the frequency of service.  Longer or multi-directional trips by public transit often require transfers which in most cases results in additional waiting and in-vehicle time (though in certain cases timed transfers can be arranged at transfer points to minimize the inconvenience.  Finally, a passenger's destination may or may not be next to a transit stop, and so some time may be spent in egress once they have alighted from the bus or train.
A key feature of the design of transportation networks is the ability to exploit  scale economies.  Scale economies exist where the marginal cost of producing another unit of output falls below the average cost over some range of output.
For most types of transportation networks, scale economies arise from the ability to spread some fixed cost of the network out across a large number of users.  The basic example is road networks, where much of the cost of providing a road is fixed (at least in the short term).  Thus, for greater numbers of users, the average cost per user will fall and marginal costs become very low, up to the point where congestion sets in.  Likewise, airlines may derive scale economies from more intensive use of its fixed infrastructure, e.g., airports runways and terminals.
Sources of Scale Economies in Public Transit Networks
A traditional argument for the public provision of transit services has held that production of services is subject to strong economies of scale, and hence may have some characteristics of a natural monopoly.  The measurement of scale economies, which typically involves analyzing the behavior of the cost function with respect to some measure of output, is complicated in the case of public transit networks.  This is due to the fact that 1) there are multiple types of outputs and 2) outputs are produced on a network, implying that there are different ways in which output levels can change.
The former argument, that there are multiple types of output, is an important one.  Analysts often distinguish between produced outputs, such as vehicle-miles, and consumed outputs, such as passenger boardings or passenger-miles of travel.  This distinction matters since produced outputs tend to relate to service levels, while consumed outputs are more closely related to service utilization, and hence are more commonly found to be a source of scale economies.
The latter argument, that transit services are produced on networks, gives rise to another distinction in the measurement of scale economies.  In principle, it is possible to expand the (produced) output of public transit networks in two different ways.  The first is to expand the size of the network, say by adding a new link while holding the flows on the rest of the links constant.  The second is to increase the flows on the existing links of a network while holding the size of the network constant.  If average costs are declining in the long run, we would say the first case is an example of economies of size, while the second case is an example of economies of traffic density.
Most of the evidence that has been collected on bus systems suggests that returns to scale are approximately constant, though there is some evidence of increasing returns with respect to passenger flows and capacity utilization[6][7].  This makes sense, since most buses can handle additional passengers at little additional cost up to the point that a unit of capacity (bus) is used up.  Rail systems are typically assumed to exhibit greater economies of scale due to their larger fixed costs and higher capacities.  A study by Savage[8] examined a sample of US heavy and light rail systems and found evidence of fairly large economies of traffic density when looking at variable costs, but found only constant returns with respect to system size.
Up to this point, we have only been considering the costs that are faced by the providers of public transit services.  However, it turns out that one of the most critical components of cost when analyzing public transit networks is the time cost that users of the system face.  A seminal paper by Mohring[9] demonstrated that public transit networks may be subject to scale economies if the definition of cost is expanded to include user time costs.  Mohring showed that if transit operators respond to an increase in demand by increasing service levels (i.e. by reducing the headway between buses) or by increasing the density of coverage of the network, that total costs could fall via reductions in the access and waiting times users face.  This phenomenon has come to be known as the Mohring effect.  To the extent that the savings in user cost translate into increased ridership, the Mohring effect can be seen as an example of a positive feedback system.  This source of increasing returns has been seldom exploited in practice however, at least in many US cities, due to lower average population densities and hence fewer suitable corridors for operation[10].
The existence of scale economies with respect to user costs has implications for the design of optimal transit networks.  In particular, it suggests that networks ought to be designed to be more convenient for users, with routes and stops being sited to reduce access and waiting times, which empirical research has shown to be valued more highly (i.e. have greater disutility) than in-vehicle time[11].  Designs which reduce costs to users tend to involve tradeoffs in the form of higher agency or provider costs, as more vehicles must be deployed and/or capital investment sunk into the network.
The evaluation of these design considerations can be formulated mathematically and solved as an optimization problem in order to determine the parameters of transit networks that are in some sense "optimal".  This type of problem is commonly known as a network design problem, or NDP.  The public transit version of the NDP is complicated by the intermittent nature of transit services, that is, the fact that fixed-route transit tends to rely on pulse scheduling.  Thus, the design problem often involves several decision variables, such as route and stop spacing, frequency of service (headway) and in certain cases, fare levels.  Numerous different variants of the transit NDP have appeared in the published literature on engineering, transportation, and operations research.  A recent review of this literature[12] has suggested that the many studies can be synthesized and categorized according to three main criteria:
Objectives, which denote the element of the system to be optimized, e.g., social cost, total welfare, transit use.
Parameters, the attributes which characterize a public transit network.  These can be further classified according to decision variables (route or stop spacing, service frequency, number and/or size of vehicles), network structure (rectangular grid, irregular grid, radial), demand patterns (many-to-one, many-to-many), and demand characteristics (fixed, elastic, time/space/service dependent).
Solution method, which describes the method used to solve the mathematical problem that characterizes the design of the network.  Some problems are simple enough to be solved analytically, others require heuristics or more elaborate numerical methods, such as linear or nonlinear programming and various solution algorithms.
Most of the papers that analyze the transit NDP do not consider transit mode as a design parameter of the network.  One recent study by Daganzo[13] sought to compare modes within the general framework of the transit NDP.  The study was described as an effort to identify the characteristics of "competitive" transit networks, with competitiveness referring to the ability of the network to provide a level of service comparable to that of the private auto, and was conducted with an emphasis toward applying the findings to real-world settings.
The study focused on an idealized service area with a perfectly square shape and uniform patterns of demand.  Three modes were considered: regular bus, bus rapid transit and metro/heavy rail, each with certain infrastructure and access cost characteristics.  The objective function, which was to be minimized, was expressed in terms of total costs, defined as the sum of agency costs (infrastructure, vehicle fleet, and mileage-related costs) and user costs (walking access, waiting, transfer, and in-vehicle time costs, plus mileage-related costs).  For each mode, the model was solved for three time-independent decision variables:  stop spacing, service frequency (headway) and the structure of the network, which was characterized by a parameter indicating the degree to which the network resembled a grid versus a hub-and-spoke network.  In each case, total costs were converted into units of user time to permit comparisons across transit modes as well as comparisons with an auto-based alternative.  The square service area was characterized by parameters describing its dimension (size) and its level of demand intensity.  Both of these parameters were allowed to vary in order to test scenarios which represented different combinations of city size and demand intensity.
The results indicated that in every scenario user cost represented a large share of total costs, confirming the findings of Mohring and other analysts who have stressed the importance of user costs in optimal transit design.  Among the modes, the bus rapid transit option was found to be competitive under a variety of different circumstances (excluding big cities with low demand intensity) and tended toward a more grid-like network structure.  Systems with more expensive infrastructure, especially the metro mode, tended to favor network structures closer to the hub-and-spoke concept.  The study also observed a critical level of stop spacing, beyond which both user and agency costs would increase.  Commenting on the results of the study, which indicated the superiority of BRT under a range of scenarios, Daganzo suggested that the proliferation of metro systems, especially in European cities, reflects the lack of suitable streets (and public support) for running a BRT network with the coverage and frequency characteristics that described the optimal solutions in each scenario.
↑ Example models only the 6 lines with exclusive right-of-ways: 2 subway lines (red and purple), 3 LRT lines (gold, green, blue), and 1 BRT line (orange)
↑ Example scenario used as an assignment in PA 5231, Fall 2010, with Professor Jason Cao.  Charts made by Jessica Schoner and submitted in a group paper with Laura Eash and Eric Gunderson.
↑ a b Newell, Gordon F. 1994. Lecture Notes on Public Transportation.
↑ Transit Capacity and Quality of Service Manual, 2nd Edition
↑ a b c d e f Derrible, S. & Kennedy, C. 2010. Characterizing metro networks: state, form, and structure.  Transportation 37:275-297.
↑ a b c Derrible, S. & Kennedy, C.  2010. The complexity and robustness of metro networks.  Physica A 389: 3678-3691.
↑ Karlaftis, Matthew G.; McCarthy, Patrick (January 2002). "Cost structures of public transit systems:  a panel data analysis". Transportation Research, Part E:  Logistics and Transportation Review 38 (1):  1-18. doi:10.1016/S1366-5545(01)00006-0.
↑ Harmatuck, Donald J. (2005). "Cost functions and efficiency estimates of Midwest bus transit systems". Transportation Research Record 1932:  43-53. doi:10.3141/1932-06.
↑ Savage, Ian (November 1997). "Scale economies in United States rail transit systems". Transportation Research, Part A:  Policy and Practice 31 (6):  459-473. doi:10.1016/S0965-8564(97)00003-7.
↑ Mohring, Herbert (September 1972). "Optimization and scale economies in urban bus transportation". American Economic Review 62 (4):  591-604. http://www.jstor.org/stable/1806101.
↑ Small, Kenneth A. (November 1997). "Economics and urban transportation policy in the United States". Regional Science and Urban Economics 27 (6):  671-691. doi:10.1016/S0166-0462(96)02166-7.
↑ Wardman, Mark (October 2004). "Public transport values of time". Transport Policy 11 (4):  363-377. doi:10.1016/j.tranpol.2004.05.001.
↑ Daganzo, Carlos F. (May 2010). "Structure of competitive transit networks". Transportation Research, Part B:  Methodological 44 (4):  434-446. doi:10.1016/j.trb.2009.11.001.
There is intelligent life other than us humans in the universe: whales, dolphins, elephants, pigs, seals, great apes, and surprisingly octopuses. But none of these is ever likely to build spaceships or transmit signals into space, and we have difficulty understanding the other intelligent species on our planet.
We have an intense curiosity: are we alone in the universe as a technological civilization? Some people would like to believe that other civilizations, perhaps with creatures even more different from us than elephants or even octopuses are far away in space, and that those creatures have something that we can learn.
To find such intelligent civilizations deep in space we need first to find signals from deep in space. That won't be easy; even radio has been broadcast for a short time (about 85 years as of 2008), a short time compared to human existence. We might also look for planets that have conditions similar to those of Earth—similar in size and temperature. Extraterrestrial civilizations are unlikely to be found on a gas giant planet or a planet of the Moon's size. We also have to be lucky enough to find a congenial planet with a civilization that has been sending signals of its own sophistication for a long enough time to reach us. If some sophisticated civilization has been sending signals to us for forty years but is fifty light-years away from us, then we on Earth will not get them for another ten years, and then only if we are tuned in. A civilization so sophisticated as ours was in 1875 would have given no evidence of its existence (such as electric lighting) visible even from the Moon—even if we then had some fine art, literature, and music.
What about alien visitors? Some people believe that some UFOs, or Unidentified Flying Objects are visitors from space. Almost all prove to have simpler explanations such as mirages, optical illusions, aircraft, and weather balloons. Even the planet Venus, bright enough to be visible by day is often seen as a UFO. Most scientists discount stories of visitors from outer space even if they think visits from distant space possible. Not until we actually see a creature like "ET" or, worse, the alien visitors of the movie Independence Day can we claim to have met alien visitors. Space travel is difficult and time-consuming. Species with lifespans similar to ours are unlikely to travel to and from "promising" planets such as their and ours.
Please ensure that you are reading the Indic fonts correctly. For details in setting up your computer, please see w:Wikipedia:Enabling complex text support for Indic scripts
Main tumse avashyá miloonga (Hindi)
You are welcome [as in welcome to our home]
How are you?
Instead of please, most people just say please or add zara into the sentence
Happy Birthday!
Would you like to eat something?
Kyaa aap kuchh khaanaa pasand karenge?
Mera naam _____ hai
(see note for tomorrow/yesterday)
This page is a place-holder for the general introductory text for this book.
Frames is an HTML technology that divides the screen window into two or more sub-windows which can be changed or scrolled independently. Web designers love frames because they can put a menu in one frame and the selected page in another frame.
Unfortunately, frames have a lot of usability problems:
It is not always obvious to the user whether a page is divided into frames or not.
Does not work well on small screens.
Does not work in all browsers and devices.
It is difficult for the user to navigate because the address bar of the browser shows the URL of the frameset, not the selected page.
The user cannot set a bookmark to an individual page in a frame system.
Others cannot make a link to a particular page in a frame system.
If you want to inform a friend about a particular page in a frame system then you cannot just give them the URL. You have to give a detailed explanation of which menu items to click on.
The browser doesn't show which frame has the focus. When you issue a print command you may print the wrong frame.
The user may want to open a link in a new window. This may not work correctly with frames.
Users who, for whatever reason, use the keyboard rather than the mouse don't know which key to use for changing the focus from one frame to another.
A user may - deliberately or by accident - open a subpage separately rather than as part of the intended frameset. Thereby they lose the context and the navigation menu.
Search engines are generally not able to handle frame systems adequately.
Web designers often make errors in frame systems. A very common error is that when you click a link to an external web page it is shown inside the same frame system.
The conclusion is clear: Never use frames!
If you want the same menu on many pages then use server-side includes or server-side programming. If you prefer to use client-side programming then be sure to test it in different browsers and provide an alternative for browsers that don't support your script or applet.
Goods and services are often sold on credit in the buyer has some period in which to pay the invoice.  Terms define when the invoice and due and whether there is any discount for quick payment.
This textbook serves as a free alternative to EMT-Basic course texts based on the National Standard Curriculum of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in the United States.  The main content of this text is arranged according to the modules and lessons outlined in the National Standard Curriculum.
All contributions to this wikibook should conform to the National Standard Curriculum which is available online [1]
Wikibooks contains books on many medical topics; however, no warranty whatsoever is made that any of the books are accurate. There is absolutely no assurance that any statement contained or cited in a book touching on medical matters is true, correct, precise, or up-to-date.  The overwhelming majority of such books are written, in part or in whole, by nonprofessionals.  Even if a statement made about medicine is accurate, it may not apply to you or your symptoms.
The medical information provided on Wikibooks is, at best, of a general nature and cannot substitute for the advice of a medical professional (for instance, a qualified doctor/physician, nurse, pharmacist/chemist, and so on).  Wikibooks is not a doctor.
None of the individual contributors, system operators, developers, sponsors of Wikibooks nor anyone else connected to Wikibooks can take any responsibility for the results or consequences of any attempt to use or adopt any of the information presented on this web site.
Nothing on Wikibooks.org or included as part of any project of Wikimedia Foundation Inc., should be construed as an attempt to offer or render a medical opinion or otherwise engage in the practice of medicine.
This text is meant to supplement classroom and laboratory instruction by qualified EMS educators.  DO NOT attempt to perform any of the procedures described in this text unless you are properly certified in your jurisdiction or you are under the direct and appropriate supervision of a professional EMS educator.  Performed improperly, some of these procedures may result in death or permanent disability to a patient and - depending on the laws in your jurisdiction - you may be held personally liable for such disability if you have performed these procedures without the appropriate training and certification.
Electronically adjustable in 0.1° steps from 11.2° to 180°
Luma sampling freq.
54mm stainless steel PL Mount (accepts 35mm lenses)
Uses any HD recording system with HD-SDI inputs
The D-20 is ARRI's concept of a practical digital movie camera. Like the Panavision Genesis, it uses a single image sensor the same width as a standard 35mm film frame, but unlike the Genesis, this also has the same height as a 35mm frame.
The D-20 uses a custom-designed CMOS sensor rather than the older CCD technology of the Genesis. Instead of the Genesis's RGB stripe filter, the D-20 uses a Bayer Array, similar to that used on digital still cameras. The CMOS sensor's "native resolution" (before the color mask is applied) is 3018 x 2200 pixels, which allows a 1920 x 1080 standard HD output with a resolution similar to the Genesis. Recording can be either on HD Beta tape or a hard disk array.
The D-20 is actually based on a modified ARRIFLEX 435 film camera chassis. It can use any "PL-Mount" cinematography lens, and was specifically designed to be as familiar in operation to a film camera operator as possible. In particular, it retains the rotating mirror shutter/reflex viewfinder that is standard on all ARRI film cameras, which allows the incorporation of a standard optical viewfinder.
The optical viewfinder image can safely be used for critical focussing, whereas current model electronic viewfinders tend to have insufficent resolution for this.
No power is needed while setting up a shot, nor is there any particular need for a "video village" of monitoring equipment.
The camera operator can see outside the frame that is actually being recorded, so (s)he (and/or the focus puller)"can see what's coming". (A major shortcoming of all-electronic viewfinder systems is the camera operator can only see what is actually being sent out to the recording system).
At present (Oct 2005) the D-20 is still undergoing refinement and to date no commercial projects have been shot with it. It has been observed that ARRI seem far less serious about the D-20 than Panavision do about the Genesis, since the CMOS sensor it is based on was principally designed for use in ARRI's anvanced film scanner, the Arriscan.
Currently, as of during the Sundance Film Festival for 2006, there is only one ArriFlex D-20 located in the United States of America. In about a month from the festival, Arri Rental facilities should have the D-20 available for rent. However, rental prices are still unknown.
The entirety of Chapter III of Max Payne: Payne & Redemption (2006)
German Short film Der Häfling des Monats (german: The Detainee of the Month)
The parts of GLSL ES that are relevant for Shadertoy :
Preprocessor: # #define #undef #if #ifdef #ifndef #else #elif #endif #error #pragma #extension #version #line
Types: void bool int float vec2 vec3 vec4 bvec2 bvec3 bvec4 ivec2 ivec3 ivec4 mat2 mat3 mat4 sampler2D
Function Parameter Qualifiers: [none], in, out, inout
Vector Components: .xyzw .rgba .stpq
Flow Control: if else for return break continue
Output: vec4 gl_FragColor
There are four main types:[3]
Converting Shadertoy shaders to :
"Shaders are programs that are executed in the GPU. A shader actually consists of two programs: the vertex shader and the fragment (or pixel) shader." [5]
Shader is a " one program, to act on a single pixel, but then Shadertoy and WebGL run it (simultaneously) on every single pixel in the viewport ... thanks to the awesomeness of GPU acceleration" [6]
Image shaders implement the mainImage() function in order to generate the procedural images by computing a color for each pixel.
This function is expected to be called once per pixel, and it is responsability of the host application to provide the right inputs to it and get the output color from it and assign it to the screen pixel.
"Uniforms are for getting values from outside of the shader,  into the shader.... Uniforms can be vectors, floats, float arrays, integers and integer arrays."[7]
Shader can be feed with different types of per-frame static information by using the following uniform variables ( shadertoy specific inputs ) :
The viewport resolution. iResolution has width/height set as x and y respectively. z is pixel aspect ratio, usually 1.0
Time for channel (if video or sound), in seconds
It  contains the current pixel position (coordinates)  in pixels for which the shader needs to compute a color. We can access x and y values of it
The resolution is passed to the shader through the iResolution uniform (see above table).
To normalize the coordinate  ( normalized device coordinates = NDC) do :
"Now our x and y is in range 0..1 and we don’t care anymore about (screen) resolution, width or length."[8]
x *= iResolution.x / iResolution.y;
"For image shaders, the regular gl_FragColor is used as output channel. It is not for now mandatory but recommended to leave the alpha channel to 1.0;"
Circle using pixel coordinate :
Circle using world coordinate and center/radius plane description:
Julia set :
Orbit trap , parabolic checkerboard
Dynamics for quadratic 1D polynomials fc(z)=z²+c
p.x *= iResolution.x/iResolution.y;
Mandelbrot set set :
Plane description using :
Mandelbrot set set :
Plane description using :
(fragCoord.x-iResolution.x/2.0)/iResolution.y,
z.x=tz.x*tz.x-z.y*tz.y+c.x;
Filled Mandelbrot created by Kramin in 2015-Dec-1
↑ A Beginner's Guide to Coding Graphics Shaders by Omar Shehata15 Apr 2015
↑ NeHe : GLSL: An Introduction
↑ converting ShaderToy shaders
↑ Shadertoy Primer for Non-Graphics Programmers by Michael Mara
↑ BLUR SHADERS #5 PART 2 by Xor
↑ Glsl Basics by Lukas Pukenis
↑ Shader Lesson by Matt DesLauriers edited this page on 12 Jul 2014
Returns the current local date and time.
/year -- Returns the year only.
/month -- Returns the month only.
/day -- Returns the day of the month only.
/time -- Returns the time only.
/zone -- Returns the time zone offset from GMT only.
/date -- Returns date only.
/weekday -- Returns day of the week as integer (Monday is day 1).
/yearday -- Returns day of the year (Julian)
/precise -- Use nanosecond precision
"Returns the current local date and time."
/year "Returns the year only."
/month "Returns the month only."
/day "Returns the day of the month only."
/time "Returns the time only."
/zone "Returns the time zone offset from GMT only."
/date "Returns date only."
/weekday {Returns day of the week as integer (Monday is day 1).}
/yearday "Returns day of the year (Julian)"
/precise "Use nanosecond precision"
Level 6 Science for the New Zealand Curriculum
Boundary conditions can be turned on and off by assigning special NODATA values instead of normal input in the time-value, time-raster and time-file tables. For example, the default NODATA value is -99999., and the following table:
1000.0    -99999.
For rasters and files, the default NODATA value is the string 'none'.
If for some reason you need to change the default NODATA value you can use:
The following instructions are used to change the NODATA values used for rasters and files :
Extension : Uses of gates
This section is provided to extend your knowledge above and beyond that which is required for the A-Level course.  The concepts here are not easy but you might find them interesting and if you choose to study Computer Science at uni, the material here should come in useful.
a one bit adder with carry (called a full adder) built of logic and a bistable (either in transistor/CMOS or circuit form) showing storage of one bit
Almost all modern digital electronics is made using "CMOS". Earlier valve, DTL (Diode-Transistor Logic) and TTL (Transistor-Transistor Logic) are of historical interest but now used for special purposes only (TTL signalling levels are often used with CMOS logic which can result in confusion).
The name CMOS is an amalgam of "C" for Complementary and the "MOS" of MOSFET (Metal Oxide Semiconductor Field Effect Transistor). MOS comes from the original construction as a metal (aluminium) gate on a layer of oxide (Silicon Dioxide) insulation on top of a semiconductor (or Silicon) base. Polysilicon is now used instead of metal because it is easier to make but metal is coming back in the very latest designs. Similarly better materials than Oxide are used in the latest designs.
MOSFET devices come in two variants, n-type (NMOS) and p-type (PMOS) depending on the doping agent added to the semiconductor base. CMOS uses pairs of one NMOS and one PMOS transistors with typically the same input connected to the NMOS gate and the PMOS gate and the drain and source in series. Only one transistor conducts at once, minimizing the power drain.
The advantage of CMOS is that because the gate is insulated and the drivers complementary (so one is on and one off) there is minimal leakage current except when the gate is actively switching. Indeed where CMOS is driving CMOS, the static current is practically negligible. On any large integrated circuit only a small percentage of the gates will be switching at any one time and the rest static. So only the active gates consume power and only for the short switching period. This also explains why the power usage (and thus heating) of modern CPU chips is proportional to the clock speed.
The basic inverter circuit (NOT gate) looks like this:
The upper gate is a PMOS transistor which conducts only when A is low voltage (near Vss, the source voltage) and the lower gate is NMOS which conducts only when A is high voltage (near Vdd, the drain voltage). The output Q is thus forced to Vdd when A is near Vss and vice-versa. In addition the voltage change in A (with minimal current) can produce a significant current supply in Q. Normally Vdd is in the range +2v to +5v and regarded as a logic "1" whereas Vss is 0v and regarded as a logic "0".
Note that if the input A came from an external switch or similar then a pull-up or pull-down resistor would be required so that when the switch was open A would take a definite value and not float (take on an indeterminate value). The switch would connect A to the opposite rail. If A came from an external source then diodes would be added to ensure that A takes values only between Vss and Vdd.
The basic two input NAND gate looks like this:
Here the bottom part of the circuit pulls down only if both A and B are high (opening the two bottom transistors) and the upper part pulls up if either are low. This pattern can be extended to three or four inputs with ease allowing for gates with more than two inputs. In practice, an inverter needs to be added to the output to make the gate perform correctly. Thus the most basic gate is an AND:
Here it is shown with one inverter making an OR gate (An additional inverter would be required to get a NOR gate):
Practical CMOS XOR gates actively use the A and B inputs instead of Vss and Vdd to reduce the number of gates and are beyond the scope here. In real life you would take a standard design; but it is possible to create a XOR gate out of other CMOS gates, using the following identity we could theoretically make a CMOS XOR out of an OR ANDed with a NAND:
.
A physical CMOS NAND (without inverter) looks like this:
A one bit memory is called a flip-flop. These are used for CPU registers such as the MAR (but not for bulk memory as they take up a lot of physical space and RAM chips would be infeasibly big). One of the simplest is called a JK flip-flop:
The two NOR gates form the memory; at any one time one is high, the other low and feedback maintains that state. A J high pulse causes the top NOR to go off and a 1 to be stored (Q is high) and a K high pulse causes the bottom NOR to go off and a 0 to be stored (Q is low). (If both J and K pulse together the output changes state.) Real world devices would have input conditioning, output inverters and often additional set, reset and clock inputs.
You may have met the following logic circuit before:
You may be able to tell, what the above circuit does is allows you to add the two inputs, A and B, together:
This is great and called a half-adder, but it only manages to add two 1 bit digits together.  What is needed is a full-adder. A more complex circuit is a one bit adder that take into account any carry brought over from a previous calculation:
This device allows you to string the one bit adders together, creating a multiple bit adder (in this case 4 bit):
In producing a multi-bit adder, the A and B are inputs for each bit and S the respective sum output bits. The Cin comes from the next lower bit and the Cout goes to the next higher bit or to the overflow detection logic (which checks when a result is too big to fit into all the S outputs). In practical designs carry look ahead is done 4, 8 or more bits at a time to avoid the ripple delay of carry propagation (the time taken for the carry bits to filter through from the first calculation to a calculation several steps down). In real ALUs (arithmetic logic units) additional inputs select the function to be done (add, subtract, and, or, etc.) so that a general purpose unit for all simple bitwise functions is created.
The days of individual logic elements connected by wire or PCB tracks are long gone. A typical modern design uses a few basic building blocks such as memory, CPU and Ethernet interfaces (which are off the shelf) and mops up the remaining design into a few large chips which contain many individual logic elements.
The ability to put many millions of transistors on a single chip means that designing a chip for one purpose is a very expensive and time consuming process. It can be justified only for chips that will sell in very large volumes (like desktop and laptop computers or industrial controllers that will be used in a range of products). Two approaches are used for smaller volume chips.
A Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) is a chip that contains blocks of logic and memory that determines how the blocks are interconnected. Sometimes the memory is permanent (but re-writable) although more frequently it is dynamic and loaded from a Flash chip external to the device during the power up sequence. Occasionally it is loaded by a CPU. Originally the logic blocks were simple functions (flip-flops, adders, AND gates etc.) but in modern FPGAs they can include whole CPUs, RAM areas and similar features as well as basic logic functions. The terms CPLD (Complex Programmable Logic Device) and PAL/PLA (Programmable Array Logic/ Programmable Logic Array) are similar but used for smaller devices.
An application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) is similar to an FPGA except that the chip is part fabricated as a standard design with logic blocks and then the last few layers of metal interconnect are added to the customer specification. This is cheaper than a custom designed chip but it can still cost millions of dollars to produce the masks and prototypes. It does produce a faster and more compact result than an FPGA so there are some designs that can only be done on an ASIC.
ASICs also have a cheaper unit cost, but FPGAs have advanced to the point where they are used in production not just for prototyping. The cost of a mistake in an ASIC is substantial whereas an FPGA can be upgraded in the field. ASICs are harder to copy than FPGAs and so are used in some applications requiring secrecy or security.
For both ASIC and FPGA designs the manufacturer provides software that translates a logic design into a layout for the device and enables simulation of the operation. There are also non-manufacturer specific tools and in particular a language called VHDL which can be used to describe a logic system and simulate it. Manufacturers then provide tools to produce the ASIC or FPGA design (often free). VHDL stands for “VHSIC hardware description language” and VHSIC stands for very high speed integrated circuits.
(* ETH Oberon, Copyright 1990-2003 Computer Systems Institute, ETH Zurich, CH-8092 Zurich.
Refer to the license.txt file provided with this distribution. *)
IMPORT Files, Modules, Printer, Objects, Fonts, Texts, Strings, Oberon, Pictures;
Escape*: PROCEDURE (P: Printer.Printer; s: ARRAY OF CHAR);
l, t, r, b: LONGINT;
(* to do: many of these variables should be local to the printer object *)
(* Increase the size of the bounding box. *)
PROCEDURE Box*(P: PSPrinter; x, y, w, h: LONGINT);
nOfBoxes, nOfRuns: INTEGER;
n := pixmapDX * metrics[m].h;
f: Files.File; R: Files.Rider;
P.FrameW := P.Width-P.FrameX-P.FrameW;
P.FrameH := P.Height-P.FrameY-P.FrameH;
PROCEDURE Open*(P: Printer.Printer; printer, options: ARRAY OF CHAR);
P.anonymous := FALSE
Error("file not found", headerFileName)
PROCEDURE UseListFont*(P: Printer.Printer; name: ARRAY OF CHAR);
PROCEDURE Escape*(P: Printer.Printer; s: ARRAY OF CHAR);
(* Don't make more that one page when making eps *)
PROCEDURE ReplConst*(P: Printer.Printer; x, y, w, h: INTEGER);
(* Don't make more that one page when making eps *)
PROCEDURE ContString*(P: Printer.Printer; s: ARRAY OF CHAR; fnt: Fonts.Font);
(* Don't make more that one page when making eps *)
Box(P, P.sx - dsr, P.sy, w, h);
Str(bodyR, "Courier8.Scn.Fnt")
Str(bodyR, fontTable[curFont].name)
| 80X..95X, 0ABX:
PROCEDURE String*(P: Printer.Printer; x, y: INTEGER; s: ARRAY OF CHAR; fnt: Fonts.Font);
(* Don't make more that one page when making eps *)
Box(P, x - dsr, y, w, h);
PROCEDURE ReplPattern*(P: Printer.Printer; x, y, w, h, col: INTEGER);
(* Don't make more that one page when making eps *)
PROCEDURE Picture*(P: Printer.Printer; pict: Pictures.Picture; sx, sy, sw, sh, dx, dy, dw, dh, mode: INTEGER);
n, h0, h1, k, i: INTEGER;
(* Don't make more that one page when making eps *)
PROCEDURE Circle*(P: Printer.Printer; x0, y0, r: INTEGER);
(* Don't make more that one page when making eps *)
PROCEDURE Ellipse*(P: Printer.Printer; x0, y0, a, b: INTEGER);
(* Don't make more that one page when making eps *)
PROCEDURE Line*(P: Printer.Printer; x0, y0, x1, y1: INTEGER);
(* Don't make more that one page when making eps *)
PROCEDURE UseColor*(P: Printer.Printer; red, green, blue: INTEGER);
SolveTriDiag(a, b, c, d, n)
a, b, c, w: RealVector;
a[i] := 2.0*b[i-1] + hn; d[i] := d1 + dn;
x1 := x0 + p.c*lim/3.0;
PROCEDURE Spline*(P: Printer.Printer; x0, y0, n, open: INTEGER; VAR X, Y: ARRAY OF INTEGER);
x, xd, y, yd, s: RealVector;
(* Don't make more that one page when making eps *)
(*from u, v compute x, y, s*)
x[i] := X[i] + x0; dx := x[i] - x[i-1];
(*compute coefficients from x, y, xd, yd, s*)  i := 0;
p[i].a := ds*ds*(xd[i] + xd[i+1] - 2.0*dx);
p[i].b := ds*(3.0*dx - 2.0*xd[i] -xd[i+1]);
p[i].c := xd[i];
p[i].d := x[i];
p[i].t := s[i];
q[i].a := ds*ds*(yd[i] + yd[i+1] - 2.0*dy);
q[i].c := yd[i];
q[i].d := y[i];
p[i].t := s[i]; q[i].t := s[i];
P.location := 1-P.location
S: Texts.Scanner;
R: Texts.Reader; ch: CHAR;
|"M", "B": Str(printR, "-Bold")
REPEAT Files.ReadBytes(srcR, buffer, bufSize); Files.WriteBytes(printR, buffer, bufSize-srcR.res) UNTIL srcR.eof;
PROCEDURE GetMetric* (P: Printer.Printer; fnt: Fonts.Font): Fonts.Font;
ParseName(Fonts.Default.name, default, size, style, class)
Printer.current := NIL
System.Free PSPrinter ~
System.Free EamonPrinter LPRPrinter PSPrinter ~
1.5 1,000 to 10,000:
1.6 10,000 to 1 Million:
1.7 1 Million to 100 Million:
1.8 100 Million & Beyond:
↑  Not words for zero, but can be used for zero: cumna "empty", munta "nothing".
The numbers 11 to 19 follow the pattern of using the stem form of the numeral with the suffix –quë. There also exists other names for several of these numbers resulting from Tolkien's experimentation of the numeral system:
Alternate Quenya names from 12 - 16
↑ hÍUv$ yunquë is used for counting, 7D81E rasta for "Dozen", possibly Duodecimal in origin.
↑ From hÍUv$ yunquë + `V4# enta "another, one more"; "Twelve and one more".
From here, the following numbers are conjectured constructions of what these numbers would be based on the material we know, and are not attested.These are based on the earlier stages of Quenya, going back to Qenya, and our knowledge of Quenya word construction.
The multiples of 10, from 20 to 90, are constructed with either the suffixes –quëan, –quain, or "Qenya" –cain from alD5$5 cainen:
↑ Possible known word for 100 from the Númenorean calendar. Meaning uncertain whether it's the word for century, or the last year of a century.
To make a number between the multiples of 10, the units are written first, then the tens (Similar to German and Dutch Numerals):
The numbers between 100 and 200 can be made in the same fashion:
`C1;D `N1YzlD5 1Ua|D
Just as for 12, the numbers 110 and 120 can be written in two different ways:
To write the numbers 200 to 900 we use the same prefixes as the multiples of 10, but this time with the suffix –tuxa:
↑ From Sindarin: t5$x$73Y Menegroth "The Thousand Caves".t5$x$ meneg? (Primitive Elvish? "menekē") "thousand"?
↑ Attested Qenya word, may not be part of Late-Quenya.
`C1Ua|D t$f$
hÍ~M`C1Ua|D t$f$
5$j`C1Ua|D t$f$
aD5#`C1Ua|D t$f$
j$qR4&a|D t$f$
`V5$4&a|D t$f$
`N1Y`C1Ua|D t$f$
1Yj^`C1Ua|D t$f$
5$1R6`C1Ua|D t$f$
hÍ~M1Ua|Dt$f$
t$f% hÍ~M1Ua|D
t$f% 5$j1Ua|D
t$f% aD5#1Ua|D
j$qR4&a|Dt$f$
t$f% j$qR4&a|D
t$f% `V5$4&a|D
`N1Y1Ua|Dt$f$
t$f% `N1Y1Ua|D
t$f% 1Yj^1Ua|D
t$f% 5$1R61Ua|D
hÍ~MzF`C2~N7D
aD5#zF`C2~N7D
j$qRv$`C2~N7D
`V5$v$`C2~N7D
`N1YzR`C2~N7D
1Yj^zR`C2~N7D
5$1R6zF`C2~N7D
hÍ~M1Ua|D2~N7D
5$j1Ua|D2~N7D
aD5#1Ua|D2~N7D
j$qR4&a|D2~N7D
`V5$4&a|D2~N7D
`N1Y1Ua|D2~N7D
1Yj^1Ua|D2~N7D
5$1R61Ua|D2~N7D
↑ Based on the Long Scale counting:
Numbers are said to follow the noun, except for `V6 er "one, alone". Before `C1;E atta "two", the noun is in "singular" form.
`Vm# `C1;E Elda atta "Two Eldar" - lit. "Elves two"
`Vm#6 5$m$ Eldar neldë "Three Eldar"
`Vj$5 `C1;E Elen atta "Two stars"
`Vj$5% 5$m$ Eleni neldë "Three stars"
The first three ordinals are irregular, then from four onwards, we remove the last vowel of the cardinal number and add \`V`C –ëa*
Fractions can be made by compounding the numeral with the word `C81E asta "month; division, part (esp. one of other equal parts)":
There also exists quotientals that are used when something has happened a certain number of times. They are used as adverbs:
5$j nel "thrice / three-times"
The higher numbers are formed with the suffix \j°&t$ –llumë:
zR`Ct"$f$j°&t$
1Ua|Dt$f$j°&t$
Writing the numerals in Tengwar is quite different to write compared with Arabic numerals, but not too different from them to give any form of great difficulty in learning it.
As the elves originally used the duodecimal (base-12) number system, they had need for 12 single digits.Note that the letters A and B are used for the values of 10 and 11 in duodecimal.
Tengwar numerals are written from right to left, with the lowest power written first, followed by the next higher power:
Decimal numbers can be given a single dot above the numeral to indicate a decimal number:
Larger numbers in decimal can be given a single bar above the numerals:
ûððñ = B001 = B:11 ones / 0 twelves / 0 grosses / 1 great-gross = 100B = 1739 in Decimal
Duodecimal numbers are indicated by having single dot tehta placed below the numbers. The second digit however is given a circular tehta instead:
Like large decimal numbers, the larger duodecimal numbers can also be given a bar, but is placed below instead:
Not much is known on the names of duodecimal numbers, but a theorised construction of these names can be found at the duodecimal numerals page here.
FreeDOS is a great way to bring all of those old, much-loved and hard to replace programs from the DOS world back to life under a modern operating system. Using FreeDOS, graphical programs that won't run under Microsoft Windows, Wine or DOSBox might just run flawlessly under QEMU.
Download one of the bootable CD images from the FreeDOS distribution. The FreeDOS 1.2 "standard" CDROM image should work on most computers and PC emulators. FreeDOS 1.2 was released 25 December, 2016.
To make it possible to exchange files with FreeDOS by copying files to and from the image, don't create the image as qcow. Instead, just create raw images. This will allow the FreeDOS image to be mounted under Linux and other Unix-like hosts just like a regular hard drive. Create a 100 MiB hard disk image named freedos.img:
Now boot up FreeDOS from the CD image (FD12CD.iso) and follow the menus to partition, format and install onto the hard drive.
Once the install is complete, you can boot FreeDOS from the image file without the CD.
To transfer files between FreeDOS and the host, stop QEMU and mount the FreeDOS image under the filesystem.
Reminder: never mount the image while QEMU is using it and remember to unmount it before starting QEMU again!
SNK vs. Capcom - Match of the Millennium
B. B. Hood |
Pressing P for the Gaiki Dorota Bou will make her appear on the left side of the screen, while pressing K will make her appear on the right side of the screen
The Tenmon Amata no Hoshikuzu (both the Joudan and the Gedan forms) are Akari's hidden MAX super combos.
The first hit of the Tenmon Amata no Hoshikuzu (Chuudan) is an overhead attack.
The first hit of the Tenmon Amata no Hoshikuzu (Gedan) is a low attack.
Learning Management systems (LMS) such as Blackboard and Moodle are excellent tools that can be used in the K-12 classroom to promote the school and its curriculum.
A learning management system allows students to download and upload files, participate in chat and discussion boards, as well as take assessments. Students are also able to view grades as well as contact the teacher and classmates. An LMS is a step above a classroom website which is a more static approach to giving classroom information. These systems utilize tools similar to those that tech savy students already use outside of the classroom. Although most educators think of an LMS as being limited to older students it can help younger students in the elementary grades to organize their work while simultaneously keeping parents in tune with what is going on in the classroom. An LMS allows teachers to tutor and build skills by placing reusable learning objects, documents, video, practice exercises, and assessments on the system. Using an LMS allows parents to review the course curriculum, classroom calendar and monitor their student's progress. If the instructor posts samples of student work and rubrics, students and parents can see how other classmates are performing and have a clearer idea of academic expectations. The use of a learning management system gives the teacher the opportunity to promote classroom activities and course expectations. However, once an LMS is implemented there is pressure on the instructor to keep the content up to date and located in such a way as to be easily found by the students and parents. Once parents and students have ready access to certain information, for example grades, that information must be kept up to date. An LMS system also allows for distance learning for students that are out of school due to illness or suspension.
The use of a learning management system also allows for teacher collaboration at grade level or by subject in the design of learning objects to post on the system. Given proper planning time teachers can design thematic units using reuseable learning objects and perscriptive activities for groups of students based on test data. The Amarillo Independent School District in Texas uses the Blackboard learning management system with a set of add-ons to support teacher collaboration and curriculum development.(Waters,2007) This allows teachers across the district to work independently and contribute to the team effort asynchronously without having to attend district wide meetings.
Waters, J (2007,March). Curriculum Unbound. T.H.E. Journal,34, 40-48.
A yellow caterpiller. Jumping on it knocks the flower off its head, changes it red, and makes it angry. To kill red wiggler you can't stomp on it again, a Koopa shell or a fireball will do it.
Para-bomb - Para-goomba - Fishin' Lakitu - Lakitu - Spiny - Bob-omb - Wiggler - Sumo Brother - Pokey - Monty Mole - Bullet Bill - Amazing Flyin' Hammer Brother - Super Koopa - Jumpin' Piranha Plant - Volcano Lotus - Chargin' Chuck - Rex - Mega Mole - Banzai Bill - Dino-Rhino - Dino-Torch - Koopa - Blurp - Porcu-Puffer - Urchin - Rip Van Fish - Torpedo Ted - Spike Top - Swooper - Buzzy Beetle - Blargg - "Boo" Buddy - Fishin' Boo - The Big "Boo" - Eeries - Dry Bones - Lil' Sparky - Bony Beetle - Hothead - Thwomp - Thwimp - Ball 'n' Chain - Grinder - Magikoopa - Fishbone - Reznor - Mechakoopa
Number of seconds to take centering the object. Default is 1.0 second.
Based on the observer:center() method.
Get observer instance of the active view and center objectname.If no <duration> is given, the default time = 5.0 seconds !!!
Example:The following example selects the Earth and takes 5.5 seconds to center it on the screen. If you do not see the Earth, press the [G] key on your keyboard and you should see the Earth zoom into view from the center of the display.
Placeholder to hold pages for a new book with incorrectly placed pages
This research study ‘ Effects of Aerobic Training, Resistance Training, or Both on Glycemic Control in Type 2 Diabetes by Ronald J. Sigal, MD, MPH; Glen P. Kenny, PhD; Normand G. Boulé, PhD; George A. Wells, PhD; Denis Prud'homme, MD, MSc; Michelle Fortier, PhD; Robert D. Reid, PhD, MBA; Heather Tulloch, MSc; Douglas Coyle, PhD; Penny Phillips, MA; Alison Jennings, MA; James Jaffey, MSc, is a randomized control trial that will be further critiqued in this Wiki.
What is the background to this research?
Diabetes is a condition that affects the body’s ability to respond to insulin, leading to abnormalities revolving carbohydrate metabolism.[1] Due to this, diabetes heavily affects the body’s ability to monitor blood glucose levels, therefore glycemic control must be monitored to prevent health risks. Glycemic control is defined as the regulation and maintenance of blood glucose levels in the body. Glycemic control is assessed by haemoglobin A1c levels (HbA1c), which are responsible for monitoring blood glucose levels.[2] Research suggests that poor glycemic control can lead to cardiovascular risks such as heart failure and myocardial infarction. Other health related risks include:
Evidence has suggested that exercise is a viable option for improving glycemic control for patients with type 2 diabetes.[3] In particularly, aerobic training, resistance training and the combination of both. It can be said that monitoring blood glucose levels is important to prevent further health related risks amongst patients diagnosed with type 2 diabetes.[4]
The research was conducted by various professions and institutions including the University of Ottawa, Clinical Epidemiology Program, Ottawa Health Research Institute, and Prevention and Rehabilitation Centre, University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, and University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.[5]
What kind of research was this?
The research was conducted as a randomized, control trial that was performed over 26-week time period
The evidence behind a randomized control trial reduces bias throughout the study as well as preventing skewed or deliberate manipulation of results
Participants were randomly placed in either a control group, aerobic training, resistance training or combined group (both aerobic and resistance training)
What did the research involve?
251 participants aged between 39 to 70 years old with type 2 diabetes underwent a randomized control trial. Each participant was placed in either a control group, aerobic training group, resistance training group or the combination of both types of training, to determine the effects of exercise on improving glycemic control. The study was conducted over a 26-week period to mitigate the effects of exercise on Haemoglobin A1c levels. The first 4 weeks of the study consisted of a run-in phase. The aim of the run-in phase was to allow the body to gradually adapt to incoming stimulus whilst preventing muscle soreness and injury. Aerobic training was performed a cycle ergometer or treadmill at 50% maximum oxygen consumption with the use of polar oy heart monitors to reach the desired intensity. Intensity and duration were increased on a weekly basis to allow for progression and further training adaptations. The resistance training method involved participants to perform a resistance training regimen that outline specific exercises, repetitions and sets. This training regimen was modified to ensure that progressive overload was being achieved. The combined group performed both aerobic and resistance training sessions as one big training session.
Limitations of the study show that the combined group (aerobic and resistance training) had a longer duration of training time when compared to the aerobic and resistance groups.
What were the basic results?
Results of the study indicated that glycemic control was improved through aerobic and resistance training alone, as well as the combination of the two training methods. The findings of the research displayed that all training methods resulted in decreased haemoglobin A1c levels, therefore improving glycemic control. Aerobic activity showed a decrease of HbA1c levels from 7.41% to 6.98%. For optimal glycemic control, evidence indicate the maintenance of 7% or below in HbA1c is efficient for older patients with type 2 diabetes.[6]
Results displayed that resistance training was effective in decreasing haemoglobin A1c levels. Over a 6-month period, haemoglobin A1c showed a decreased of 7.48% to 7.18%. In addition to this, the effect of resistance training improved body composition through fat loss and improved muscular endurance.
The main finding of the study was concluded through the results of the combined training on HbA1c. Over a 6-month period, participants HbA1c dropped from 7.46 to 6.56 (0.9%). This figure represents that the combined trial group was the most effective in terms of improving glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes.
What conclusions can we take from this research?
The findings of the research concluded that either aerobic training, resistance training or the combination of both, reduced haemoglobin A1C levels. The study suggests that the combination of aerobic and resistance training on a weekly basis (at least 3 times per week) is optimal for improving glycemic control when compared to aerobic and resistance training alone. The findings of this study conclude that haemoglobin A1c levels were significantly decreased in the combined training group, indicating that a combination of aerobic and resistance training is most appropriate method for improving glycemic control. When compared to other similar studies, this study concludes that the idea of combined training is most beneficial when performed in the combination of both aerobic training at 50% maximum oxygen consumption and high intensity resistance training.[7]
Conclusion of this study also suggests that performing exercises on a weekly basis is directly linked to changes in body composition, by decreasing fat loss and increasing muscular endurance.
Engage in the combination of both aerobic and resistance training to maximise the effect of exercise on haemoglobin A1c levels
It is recommended that individuals engage in either aerobic or resistance training (or both) at least 3 times per week
When performing aerobic sessions, it is recommended that individuals perform aerobic activities at 50% of maximum oxygen capacity to optimise results
To ensure optimal results through resistance training, make sure that high intensity is maintained throughout each training session
Perform resistance exercises from repetition ranges of 6-12 to allow for hypertrophy and muscle growth
Implement various resistance exercises every 4 weeks to allow for new stimulus to shock the muscles
To reduce the risk of injury, ensure that warm-up and cooldown protocols are included
Further information regarding the management of glycemic control and type 2 diabetes can be found below:
↑ Diabetesaustralia.com.au. (2019). What is diabetes?. [online] Available at: https://www.diabetesaustralia.com.au/what-is-diabetes.
↑ Church TS, Blair SN, Cocreham S, Johannsen N, Johnson W, Kramer K, et al. Effects of aerobic and resistance training on hemoglobin A1c levels in patients with type 2 diabetes: a randomized controlled trial. 2010;304(20):2253-62.
↑ Norris SL, Lau J, Smith SJ, Schmid CH, Engelgau MMJDc. Self-management education for adults with type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis of the effect on glycemic control. 2002;25(7):1159-71.
↑ Castaneda C, Layne JE, Munoz-Orians L, Gordon PL, Walsmith J, Foldvari M, et al. A randomized controlled trial of resistance exercise training to improve glycemic control in older adults with type 2 diabetes. 2002;25(12):2335-41.
↑ Sigal RJ, Kenny GP, Boulé NG, Wells GA, Prud'homme D, Fortier M, et al. Effects of aerobic training, resistance training, or both on glycemic control in type 2 diabetes: a randomized trial. 2007;147(6):357-69.
↑ Albright A, Franz M, Hornsby G, Kriska A, Marrero D, Ullrich I, et al. American College of Sports Medicine position stand. Exercise and type 2 diabetes. 2000;32(7):1345-60.
↑ Dunstan DW, Daly RM, Owen N, Jolley D, De Courten M, Shaw J, et al. High-intensity resistance training improves glycemic control in older patients with type 2 diabetes. 2002;25(10):1729-36.
Freeware Programmer's Notepad makes a useful editor in tracking several or many related files.
NoOfficial website:  https://www.govchannel.go.th/v • d • e
The GovChannel web portal is a unified web portal that brings together seven government sites that provide public services in electronic form to the population.
INFO.GO.TH - government information: regulations, acts, licenses and guidelines that can be used when contacting the organization (695339 official manuals);
DATA.GO.TH - a set of publicly available information of public institutions, as well as open source data sources (1,200 open source data sets);
APPS.GO.TH - government applications that can be downloaded from any mobile device (293 state application);
EGOV.VO.TH - e-service center (or e-government portal), where users can choose online services (845 sources of public services);
BIZ.GOVCHANNEL.GO.TH - public services developed exclusively for the business sector. Corporate entrepreneurs and investors can get consulting services to start a business through online channels available on mobile devices, anywhere and anytime (34 services);
GOVSPENDING.DATA.GO.TH - information on public spending, in particular on taxes paid by citizens (4,444,299 public sector projects);
NSO.GO.TH - statistical and information services.
Jags EPG v3.0 Pre-Beta 5
This TAP is one of the main EPG replacement TAPs, it adds functionality over the built in EPG and is not dependent on any other TAPS, although it can make use of the "DescriptionExtender 1.4" TAP
Jags EPG is also able to collect EPG data for use by MyStuff.
Since the new July 2006 “Bastille Day” firmware Jags has been less stable and the developer (Jag) will address the reported issues as soon as he can (he is currently moving house & job).
Users have reduced instability by one or more of the following:
Using the memory watcher TAP to help tune the settings
Good new behaviour caused by the July 2006 “Bastille Day” firmware is that the native EPG buffer is populated much more efficiently so Jags only needs a brief visit to each channel in order to sort its own EPG data out. Previously it was necessary to set Jags to scan each channel for maybe 90 seconds, but now a mere 5 seconds is reported to be enough.
First recognized in 1827 by Cusack JW
Designated as adamantinoma in 1885 by the French physician Louis-Charles Malassez
Finally renamed to the modern name ameloblastoma in 1930 by Ivey and Churchill
Rare, benign or cancerous tumor of odontogenic epithelium (ameloblasts, or outside portion, of the teeth during development)
Much more commonly appearing in the lower jaw than the upper jaw
Four types of ameloblastoma have been described by the WHO 2017 classification:
Surgical resection or enucleation remains the most definitive treatment for this condition
Chemotherapy, radiation therapy, curettage and liquid nitrogen have been effective in some cases of ameloblastoma
Note: To use this book, your web browser must first be configured to display Marathi language characters (i.e. Devnagari script). If the characters in the grey box below appear as blank boxes or garbage, it is not properly configured.
Marathi is 15th largest language by number of people who speak Marathi. There is large ethnic Marathi diaspora across the globe. If you are staying overseas you can look for Maharashtra Mandals for getting coaching support in Marathi language in many countries across the globe. To know more about Marathi language click the following links.
East Indian Marathi is a dialect of Marathi, according to leading historians, it is very similar to Dynaneshwari. The East Indian language  a mixture of Marathi, Portuguese and Konkanni. It is among the oldest language in Mumbai. The East Indians are the Original Inhabitants of Mumbai. Earlier it was written in the Modi script.
A few words from East Indian Marathi,
This chapter intents to provide background knowledge of networks for the understanding of network coding discussions.
The following is a nice easy short story for the Latin novice:
Sol fulget. Lucius oculos aperit. Videt uxorem suam, Octaviam. Octavia dormit. Ergo, Lucius ad forum it.
Lucius multos amicos habet. Unus ex amicis Claudius est. Claudius semper in foro est. Claudius temptat dicere cum feminis, quod Claudius multas feminas amat. Multae feminae, tamen, Claudium non amant.
Lucius ad forum ambulat. Multos Romanos videt. Unus Romanorum ad cives orationem facit. Est Claudius!
"Ecce! Ecce!" dicit Lucius. Lucius vult dicere cum amico. Claudius, tamen, dicit ad turbam.
"Amicus meus, Lucius" dicit, "hominem necavit."A
Lucius anxius respondet, "Quid dicis, amice?"
Claudius est attonitus. Dicit,
"Te non video, mi Luci..."
Lucius respondet, "hominem non necavi! Cur tanta dicis?"
"Volo videriB fortissimus, amice. Feminae te amant. Me dolentC."
Lucius omniaD turbaeE patefacit.
Multae feminae ad Claudium misserimum rident. Mox, etiam Claudius ad se ridet.
A Necavit is the perfect form of necare, meaning "he killed." For more, check out the next chapter.
B Videri means "to appear," (or more literally, "to be seen") and is the passive infinitive of video. There is more on that in chapters 2-4.
C Me dolet means "makes me suffer".
D Omnia means "everything".
E turbae is the dative case of "turba", meaning "to the crowd".
Definition 2.1:
.
The sum of prime factors with multiplicity:
Wikipedia has related information at Arithmetic function
.
. Hint:
.
Exercise 2.1.4: Prove that for each
.
The convolution and the ring of arithmetic functions
Definition 2.3:
.
Wikipedia has related information at Dirichlet convolution
In the following theorem, we show that the arithmetical functions form an Abelian monoid, where the monoid operation is given by the convolution. Further, since the sum of two arithmetic functions is again an arithmetic function, the arithmetic functions form a commutative ring. In fact, as we shall also see, they form an integral domain.
Theorem 2.4 (Abelian monoid properties of the arithmetical functions):
The convolution is commutative, i. e.
.
The convolution is associative, i. e.
.
1.:
2.:
3.:
Theorem 2.5:
The ring of arithmetic functions is an integral domain.
.
We shall now determine the units of the ring of arithmetic functions.
Theorem 2.6:
.
. Then for any arithmetic function
.
, given by the recursive formula
Exercise 2.2.1:
Exercise 2.2.2:
Definition 2.7:
.
Theorem 2.8:
.
To rigorously prove this actually is an exercise in itself. But due to the multiplicativity of
.
Theorem 2.9:
.
. It follows from the definitions and the rule
.
Then by the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, there exists an
.
Then we have by the triangle inequality for
.
From this easily follows the claim.
It is left to show that the product on the left is independent of the order of multiplication. But this is clear since if the sequence
Definition 2.10:
.
Equivalently, a strongly multiplicative function is a monoid homomorphism
.
Theorem 2.11:
.
Due to strong multiplicativity and the geometric series, the latter expression equals
.
. Prove that the function
Definition 2.12:
.
We shall here compute the Bell series for some important arithmetic functions.
.
Euler' totient function (we use lemma 9.?):
The number of prime divisors including multiplicity:
Theorem 2.14 (compatibility of Bell series and convolution):
.
In chapter 9, we will use Bell series to obtain equations for number-theoretic functions.
Definition 2.16:
.
Theorem 2.17 (rules for the derivative):
(this wouldn't make much sense anyway since
2.:
. Hence, by 2.
.
Note that a chain rule wouldn't make much sense, since
Robots need some form of artificial intelligence in order to be able to navigate around a room or to solve a problem. Such AI can range from simple, as in following particular rules when a specific input is received, through more complicated, as in fuzzy logic rules or simple neural nets, to complicated, as in state of the art machine learning methods.
How complicated you can make your AI depends on a few factors:
Processing power: How fast is your microprocessor, is it 8-, 16-, or 32-Bit, How many microprocessors do you use?
Available memory: Both temporary and "permanent" memory. Limited amounts of memory restrict how much data can be held at a time, e.g. a map of the surroundings, sensor history, movement history. Systems with much permanent storage and little ram are slower than systems with large amounts of ram.
Your knowledge: AI is a very broad subject. Parts of it are very math intensive and can be tricky to understand.
Provocation will have an effect on sentence for assault. Where the injury occurred while in an initially consentual fight the sentence will be less than where the attack was unprovoked and against a defenceless victim.[1]
In offences of violence involving a weapon, "the primary sentencing objectives to be applied are deterrence and protection of the public."[2]
Random acts of violence upon strangers will often attract jail sentence. [3]
Sports-related violence can frequently allow for discharges.[4]
↑  R v. Johnson [1998] B.C.J. NO.2924 (B.C.C.A.)
R. v. Philpott, 2011 NLTD(G) 30
R. v. Lewis, 1983 OntCA -- 9 mo for random unprovoked assault
History of spousal abuse / previously assaulted same victim
Criminal record for violence or related convictions
Spouse or common law spouse is victim == breach of trust
Children witnessed the assault or were present when the assault occurred
Separate acts occurring over a period of time
Section 718.2(a)(ii) provides that “evidence that the offender, in committing the offence, abused the offender’s spouse or common law partner...shall be deemed to be an aggravating factor." This can include those who are in a sexual relationship but may not be co-habitating.[1]
The primary principles are denunciation and general deterrence for domestic violence offences.[2]
Custodial sentences are considered the norm where significant bodily harm has been inflicted in a domestic violence situation.[3] This is in part due to courts recognising that domestic violence is often part of continuous abuse ongoing in the relationship.[4]
Domestic violence causing bodily harm will result in ranges from 9 to 15 months.[5]
R. v. Wenc, 2009 ABCA 328 (CanLII) at para. 23 to 25
R. v. McCarthy  2005 NLCA 36
R. v. Dodd 1999 CanLII 18930 (NL CA), (1999), 180 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 145  at 38
R. v. O'Keefe, (1997), 158 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 138 (N.L.P.C.) at p. 252
R. v. Rahaman,2008 ONCA 1 (CanLII) at para. 46 (The primary objectives in offences of "violence arising out of an existing or failed domestic or romantic relationship" is denunciation and deterrence.)
↑  R. v. Inwood, [1989] O.J. No. 428 (C.A.)
R. v. Lynns 1976 NBCA - 9 months; unrelated record
Certain courts have divided offences involving the assault of children into three cateogories:[1]
↑ R. v. MacDonald (K.), 2009 MBCA 36, 236 Man.R. (2d) 239 at 14 [1]
Police officers put themselves in harm's way to protect the community and preserve a just, peaceful and safe society. "Violent attacks upon police officers who are doing their duty are attacks on the rule of law and on the safety and well-being of the community as a whole. Sentences imposed for those attacks must reflect the vulnerability of the police officers, society's dependence on the police, and society’s determination to avoid a policing mentality which invites easy resort to violence in the execution of the policing function."[1]
R. v. MacArthur, [2004] O.J. No. 721 (ONCA) at para. 49
Factors to offences of violence by police officers:[1]
Was the officer on duty at the time or off duty?
Was the offence committed spontaneously in the heat of the moment or was it committed continually or with time for the officer to consider his actions?
Was there a concern for his personal or fellow officers’ safety at the time of the assault?
What was the nature of the assault?
What were the injuries suffered by the victim?
Was the sentencing at the conclusion of a trial or was it a result of a guilty plea?
Did the officer express or show remorse?
Did the officer impede or assist the resulting police investigation of his actions?
What was the experience and rank of the officer at the time of the offence?
↑ R. v. Gillian, 2009 BCPC 241 at 69
Every one who, with intent to enable or assist himself or another person to commit an indictable offence,
(a) attempts, by any means, to choke, suffocate or strangle another person, or by any means calculated to choke, suffocate or strangle, attempts to render another person insensible, unconscious or incapable of resistance, or
(b) administers or causes to be administered to any person, or attempts to administer to any person, or causes or attempts to cause any person to take a stupefying or overpowering drug, matter or thing,
R.S., c. C-34, s. 230; 1972, c. 13, s. 70.
Choking is often serious and can be life-threatening. Where the victim has been choked to the point of unconsciousness or bodily harm it is not a mere detail to an underlying offence. It should have an aggravating effect on sentence. The court should consider would be whether to impose:[1]
a consecutive sentence for the choking offence under s. 245
a concurrent sentence that is greater than the sentence underlying the choking
a sentence for the underlying offence that is greater than it would otherwise be.
↑ R. v. Lemmon, 2012 ABCA 103 (CanLII)
v • d • e Violent OffencesOffences
Administering a Noxious Substance (245), Criminal Harassment (264), Uttering Threats (264.1),  Common Assault (266), Assault with a Weapon (267), Assault Causing Bodily Harm (267),  Aggravated Assault (268), Assault Peace Officer (270), Kidnapping and Unlawful Confinement (279), Robbery (343, 344), Extortion (346), Intimidation (423), Animal Cruelty (445, 445.1)Sentencing
Administering a Noxious Substance (245), Criminal Harassment (264), Uttering Threats (264.1),  Common Assault (266), Assault with a Weapon (267), Assault Causing Bodily Harm (267),  Aggravated Assault (268), Assault Peace Officer (270), Kidnapping and Unlawful Confinement (279), Robbery (343, 344), Extortion (346), Intimidation (423), Animal Cruelty (445, 445.1)
Capillary electrophoresis mass spectrometry (CEMS) is an analytical chemistry technique formed by the combination of the liquid separation process of capillary electrophoresis with mass spectrometry.[1] Ions are typically formed by electrospray ionization,[2] but they can also be formed by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization[3] or other ionization techniques. It has applications in basic research in proteomics[4] and quantitative analysis of biomolecules[5] as well as in clinical medicine.[6][7]
↑ Loo JA, Udseth HR, Smith RD (June 1989). "Peptide and protein analysis by electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry and capillary electrophoresis-mass spectrometry". Anal. Biochem. 179 (2):  404–12. doi:10.1016/0003-2697(89)90153-X. PMID 2774189.
↑ Maxwell EJ, Chen DD (October 2008). "Twenty years of interface development for capillary electrophoresis-electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry". Anal. Chim. Acta 627 (1):  25–33. doi:10.1016/j.aca.2008.06.034. PMID 18790125. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0003-2670(08)01244-0.
↑ Zhang H, Caprioli RM (September 1996). "Capillary electrophoresis combined with matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry; continuous sample deposition on a matrix-precoated membrane target". J Mass Spectrom 31 (9):  1039–46. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1096-9888(199609)31:9<1039::AID-JMS398>3.0.CO;2-F. PMID 8831154.
↑ Metzger J, Schanstra JP, Mischak H (August 2008). "Capillary electrophoresis-mass spectrometry in urinary proteome analysis: current applications and future developments". Anal Bioanal Chem 393 (5):  1431–42. doi:10.1007/s00216-008-2309-0. PMID 18704377.
↑ Ohnesorge J, Neusüss C, Wätzig H (November 2005). "Quantitation in capillary electrophoresis-mass spectrometry". Electrophoresis 26 (21):  3973–87. doi:10.1002/elps.200500398. PMID 16252322.
↑ Kolch W, Neusüss C, Pelzing M, Mischak H (2005). "Capillary electrophoresis-mass spectrometry as a powerful tool in clinical diagnosis and biomarker discovery". Mass Spectrom Rev 24 (6):  959–77. doi:10.1002/mas.20051. PMID 15747373.
↑ Dakna M, He Z, Yu WC, Mischak H, Kolch W (November 2008). "Technical, bioinformatical and statistical aspects of liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) and capillary electrophoresis-mass spectrometry (CE-MS) based clinical proteomics: A critical assessment". J. Chromatogr. B Analyt. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci. 877 (13):  1250–8. doi:10.1016/j.jchromb.2008.10.048. PMID 19010091. http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1570-0232(08)00801-5.
Addition operations are denoted by the + sign and the - (-)= +. The addition operator (plus sign) will take any two numbers, called addends, as operands to work on.  The result is called the sum of the two numbers.
The operation of addition is commutative.  This means that the addition of two numbers will give the same sum regardless of the order in which the numbers are added.
To add vertically, stack the numbers on top.
Now add the numbers in the first or right column. If you get a number with tens in it, put what's in the tens place on the tens place in the problem. You should have:
Add the tens column now.
Repeat in a similar fashion for each additional column (hundreds, thousands, etc.)until you finish the problem.
Subtraction, as you probably also have seen, uses the minus (-) sign.  The generic subtraction operator will take any two numbers as operands.  The result is called the difference of the two numbers.
Subtraction is not a commutative operation.  Changing the order of the operands will likely give a different (not the same) result.
Vayelech "He went"	Deuteronomy 31: 1 - 30
Moshe formally gathered the children of Israel together to ratify their covenant with Yahweh.  He then pleads with the people to choose life -  the path of obedience to the Torah and commandments of Yahweh.  If they would do so, they would be blessed and prosper; but if not, they would be cursed with exile, persecution, and the threat of utter destruction.
Then he said to them,  "I am one hundred and twenty years old today, and can no longer go forth and come in."
Yahweh had confirmed that he was soon to die and Y'hoshua (Joshua) was to be ordained as his successor to lead the people successfully into the Promised Land across the Jordan river.  In the presence of the entire assembly, Moshe urged Y'hoshua to be strong and courageous, and to place his full trust in Yahweh.
Moshe then committed the Law to writing and delivered it to the kohanim (priests) for safekeeping.  He then commanded that after Israel was safely in the land, the law should be publicly recited to all of Israel during the festival of Sukkot every seven years, in order that “they may hear and learn to fear Yahweh your God, and be careful to do all the words of this law.”
At 120 years old, he is ready to pass on the mantle of leadership and responsibility to Y’hoshua , his faithful servant before his death.  He reminds the people that because of Yahweh’s punishment, he himself will not accompany them, but that Y’hoshua will lead them into the land promised to them.  His encouragement to be strong and reliant on the protection of the Almighty, despite the seeming opposition ahead, is typical of this most famous leader of Isra’el.   Of the 120 years that Moshe lived, a better part of his last third was spent in encouraging this young nation to press on to the greatness that Yahweh had called them into.
At this point in his life, and in the lives of the people, this compassionate servant of Yahweh knew that they needed to hear this type of message, and that the only one suitable for delivering it to them was himself.  The fact that he publicly admonishes Y’hoshua to leadership, was also a very wise and necessary administrative action.  When the people witnessed this passing of the “mantle of responsibility” between these two great leaders (one already proven in faithful service, while the other possessing great potential), it reaffirmed to Isra’el, the confidence that Moshe had in Y’hoshua.  It served at a visible statement to let the people know that “Since you trusted me, and I  trust Y’hoshua, then you can trust him also”.
Yahweh himself then summons the two men into the Tent of Meeting to commission Y'hoshua as Moshe’s successor, for the official transfer of leadership and change of command from the outgoing commander  who gives the “troops” his final challenge, to his successor, the incoming commander, and encourages them to the same loyalty and trust that they have shown him.
Y'hoshua has been the faithful servant of Moshe for nearly forty-years.  His service goes back to his youth:   “Then Y'hoshua the son of Nun, the attendant of Moshe from his youth, said, "Moshe, my lord, restrain them" (Numbers 11:28).  Y'hoshua serves first for many years as the military leader as seen in the war against Amalek (Exodus 17:13); at this point he appears as the disciple of the leader. Y'hoshua is the first to greet Moshe as he descends from the mountain, and it appears that he, in fact, waited for Moshe throughout the forty days at the very limits of the border which marked the extent to which he was permitted to approach (Exodus 24:12-13).  Then, after Moshe isolates himself outside of the camp, we are told: "Y'hoshua ben-Nun - the lad did not move from inside the tent."  The Torah is actually showing us here why Y'hoshua is chosen later on to replace Moshe. He had been a faithful, as well as a loyal and committed disciple of Moshe and walked perfectly before Yahweh.  He was the natural extension of his great teacher.
Moshe knew God face to face and Y'hoshua had seen him live, breathe, and walk the Torah. The Torah lived within Moses and in turn Moses lived out the Torah before Israel and it bore fruit in Y'hoshua's life.   Apart from Caleb, he was the only one of the original generation to go into the land.  Having been tried and tested in the wilderness wanderings, he was a worthy and able vessel to lead the new generation in to take the land as their inheritance.
Y'hoshua was one of the twelve spies, along with Caleb, who came back from Canaan with a good report:  “But Y'hoshua the son of Nun and Caleb the son of Jephunneh remained alive out of those men who went to spy out the land.” (Numbers 14:38).
Yahweh had already instructed Moshe to lay his hands on Y'hoshua in front of the Israelites to indicate that he would follow Moshe to lead the sons of Israel into the Land:   “and he took Y'hoshua and set him before Eleazar the priest and before all the congregation.  Then he laid his hands on him and commissioned him, just as Yahweh had spoken through Moshe”   (Numbers 27:22-23).  Now, Moshe realizes that Y'hoshua is ready to inherit the leadership responsibilities for the children of Israel.  It is at this point, that Moshe exhorts the sons of Israel to “be strong and courageous” prior to entering the Land.   (Deuteronomy 31:6-8)
In Vayelekh in chapter 31, we find Moshe challenging the people to obedience, as he promises and charges young Y’hoshua in verse 23 to be strong and full of courage, for indeed he will lead the people into the Land of Promise.  But on the heel of that promise, and in keeping with the theme of obedience, he warns of the future apostasy of that often-rebellious bunch.
The Hebrew word that is translated as “strong” is “chazak”,[2] which means “strong”, “firm”, “hard”, “violent”, “mighty”, “powerful”. Steadfastness and strength is an inner power that helps man not to loose courage and pull back in times of crisis.
Steadfastness and strength are necessary in order to keep the commandments while met with resistance. Steadfastness and strength are necessary in order to get the victory when under attack. When you feel tempted to become discouraged, it is important to stand firm and keep pressing on to see the Eternal’s supernatural intervention.
What is the purpose of Yahweh reminding them of their rebellious nature and their upcoming failure to obey Him in the face of the seemingly insurmountable challenge that awaits the people as they endeavor to enter the Land of Promise?
Yahweh uses Moshe to point out the downfalls of the people to exhort them from the past experience of Sinai where they broke covenant with Him to greater commitment and consecration and to act in faithfulness toward Him. Moshe reiterates the Torah to awaken within them a remembrance of hearing God’s words at Sinai.  Now when the nation was about to enter the land the experience is revived.  The entire exhortation which Moshe gives is built around the model of the events that took place at Har Sinai and their consequences.  The parallel to the Sinai experience is clear:  there, the nation believed that Moshe had died - “This man Moshe, we do not know what has become of him” (Shemot 33:1), and as emphasized by the Midrash (Yalkut Shim’oni), “‘And the nation saw that Moshe was tarrying’ - At the end of 40 days Satan came and turned the world upside down, and their volatile response was  -   ‘for this man Moshe, we do not know what has become of him.'”    The nation, convinced that Moshe was dead, turned and made an idol in the image of a calf, “a god which will walk before them.” Correspondingly, Moshe warns in parashat Vayelekh, “For Yahweh your God - He is the One who WALKS BEFORE YOU” (31:6).
It was at this point that the tribe of Levi assumed the task of preserving and reinforcing God’s covenant and leadership of the nation, just as they proved themselves faithful in the matter of the Golden Calf, now they are given added responsibility in being custodians of the Torah which is placed in the Ark.
The emphasis is on the Torah, for in the keeping of the covenant they will prosper and live long in the land.  For this reason they are instructed to read this section of the Torah from chapter 27 onwards every seven years at Sukkot.
“And Moshe commanded them, saying: At the end of seven years, at the appointed time of the Shemitta year, on the festival of Sukkot, when all of Israel come to present themselves before Yahweh God at the place that He will choose, you shall read this TORAH before all of Israel, that they may hear.” (31:10-11)
The person commanded to read the selected portions is the king, who is filling in for Moshe Rabbeinu - who was a king (Rambam, Hilkhot Beit Ha-Bechira 6:11).  And since the purpose of the ceremony is to awaken and strengthen the people, it is not necessary that it be held often.  It is more effective as a special ceremony held once every seven years.
In their past failures, they had learnt their need of Yahweh’s mercy and grace and the budding young nation had already begun to live within that framework, which was initiated at the Mount Sinai experience.  Yahweh was training them to become dependant upon His grace alone to get them out of ‘hot water’.   The enemies that they would encounter on their way to conquer and inhabit the land would indeed be hot.
Having warned the people about their coming days of lawlessness (verses 16-18 of Devarim chapter 31), Yahweh then commands Moshe to teach them a song of remembrance (verse19-22), which will serve as a witness for their God, against the people of Israel.   “...this song can be a witness for me against the people of Isra’el.” (31:19b)
The actual song itself is recorded for us in Chapter 32.   Although Moshe tells the nation “After my death you shall surely become corrupt...,” we know that throughout Y’hoshua’s period of leadership this did not take place - “indicating that a person considers his close disciple as part of himself;” as long as Y’hoshua lived, it was an extension of his own lifetime.
Moshe exhorts the people in the presence of its leadership, Y’hoshua, the Kohanim (priest), the sons of Levi and all the elders of Israel regarding the special role to be played by the leaders in this command to teach the Torah every seventh year at Sukkot.
His focus is on Y’hoshua, who will fulfill the role of king, as he had done.   And Moshe summoned them all directing his instruction to Y’hoshua, “At the end of seven years, at the time of the Sabbatical year, during the festival of Sukkot, when all Israel comes to appear before Yahweh, your God, in the place He will choose; you will read this Torah before all Israel, in their ears.  Assemble (HAK’HEL) the people, the men and the women, and the children, and the stranger in your gates, so that they will listen and so that they will learn, and they will revere Yahweh, your God, and they will observe to do all the words of this Torah. And their children, who do not know, will listen and learn to revere  Yahweh, your God, all the days that you live on the land to which you are crossing the Jordan to possess it” (Devarim 31:7-13).
Hak’hel, (the Assembly) as explained here and in the Talmud (Sotah 31a,41a; Chagigah 3a, etc.), requires the entire people of Israel to gather on the first day of Sukkot after the Sabbatical (Shemittah) year.  The leader (i.e. king) reads to those assembled from the beginning of Devarim to 6:9; 11:13-21; and 14:22-28:69 which comprises the main body of the Torah.  These passages, as noted by the Jewish Rabbis, were to in words of Rambam, “encourage the people towards the commandments and strengthens their commitment to the true faith.”
The word that is repeated and becomes a theme in the end of Deuteronomy 30 is chayim, “life.”  In verse 19 we read, “I have put before you life and death, blessing and curse.  Choose life—if you and your offspring would live.” Some translations read, “so that you and your offspring may live.”  How do our choices affect the lives of our offspring?
Perhaps this verse brings us back to the theme of mortality.  Moshe is facing his own death, and his message forces us to do the same.  We learn that as a result of his actions, he is not permitted to enter the Promised Land.   Even though God does not tell him he is going to die until chapter 31,  we get a glimpse of Moshe’ own state of mind when he tells the people, “I am now one hundred and twenty years old, I can no longer be active [or, come and go].  Moreover, Yahweh has said to me, ‘You shall not go across yonder Jordan’ ” (Deuteronomy 31:2).  The awareness that he feels compelled to pass on to the people is that our lives are fleeting, and that we are ultimately judged by the choices we make during our lives.
When we are aware of our own mortality, we are exercised to repent, that is, to return and review our choices and attitudes and to resolve to change them for the better.  Our legacy to the next generation, whether or not we are sealed in the Book of Life, is determined by the impact we make, our unique and enduring signature which we leave in the minds and hearts of others.
We can have a wrong perspective of death, since “to be absent from the body is to be home with Yahweh,” (2 Corinthians 5:8) -  it might seem natural to look forward to death and embrace it when it comes,  but death is the last enemy of God. (1 Cor. 15:26)   Though death is an inevitable certainty this side of the kingdom, it is never our hope.  Our hope is in life, and the only reason we find comfort in death is that we know that the Messiah overcome it.
Because we are made for immortality, death is a sacrilege to our inner-being.   For this reason Moshe reluctantly went to his appointment with death.  In the same way, the second Moshe, goes to death in anguish.  His reluctant struggle in Gethsemene and His agonized cry from the cross,  “Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from Me!” (Matthew 26:39)
Death is abhorrent, and one has an obligation to strive against it.  Just as Moshe beseeched God for reprieve, so too did Yeshua.  Yet ultimately, both Moshe and the Master surrendered to the will of the Father. “Not as I will, but as You will.” (Matthew 26:39)  For it is in submission to the Father that life is found.   They chose life, even in death, and in the death of Messiah, we find life.
What is the need to make the heavens and the earth witnesses of the transaction of the covenant, repeated several times in Devarim?   Moshe who is the witness for Yahweh to the covenant is destined to die  and Israel could later refute that they had accepted the covenant upon themselves.   Therefore he made the heavens and the earth witnesses to them – witnesses that exist forever and by their precise automatic functioning, according to God's laws of Nature, will reward or punish them.   Like any other witnesses,  who must be present at the time of the assumption of an obligation  -  the heaven and earth are present in all generations and enduring witnesses to this covenant.
This is not the first time that the heavens and the earth have served as Moshe's witnesses.  At the end of the first speech in Deuteronomy, Moshe also makes the heavens and the earth his witness  (4:25-26);  also in Deut. 30:19, we read:  "I make witness to you today the HEAVENS and the EARTH: I have placed life and death before you"
Moreover, they (heaven and earth) will respond and bear witness to them if they keep the covenant: the vine will give its fruit, the earth will yield its produce, the heavens will give dew.  If they are guilty, the witnesses will be the first to punish them: 'He will stop up the heavens and they will not give rain, and the earth will not give its produce;' thereafter, 'You will perish quickly' – by the hands of the nations."  Deut. 11:17;   Lev.26:19;  Deut. 28:12
In Jewish Law, witnesses are the first to punish a criminal; thus natural disaster precedes foreign conquest, when Israel abandons Torah.
The Power of Torah Through Vision and Leadership  Haftorah  1 Kings 1:18
A parallel sequence of events to that of Moses is to be found in 1 Kings I:18.  We read of the conflict between Elijah and the priests of Ba'al at Mount Carmel.
"When the verse states, 'By means of a prophet God brought Israel out of Egypt, and by means of a prophet He watched over them,'
There were two prophets of Israel who came from the tribe of Levi; Moses was the first and Elijah is the last, and both served as messengers of the Divine in order to bring about Israel's redemption - Moses redeemed them from physical bondage in Egypt while Elijah delivered them from spiritual bondage to Ba'al.
Moses and Elijah have similarities in many respects in that they were both prophets, Moses is called a 'man of God' and so was Elijah, Moses went up to heaven as well as Elijah. Moses gathered the nation of Israel in front of Mount Sinai and Elijah gathered them at Mount Carmel; Moses destroyed idolatry... and Elijah destroyed idolatry. Moses was zealous... and Elijah was zealous; Moses was buried in a cave... and Elijah was buried in a cave.
Elijah builds an altar out of twelve stones, corresponding to the number of the tribes, and correspondingly we read of Moses that he "built an altar beneath the mountain with twelve stones for the twelve tribes of Israel" (Shemot 24:4).
Elijah announces that the purpose of the gathering at Har Carmel is that "it will be known today that You are God in Israel ... and the nation will know that you are Yahweh" (1 Kings 8:36-7), while Moses at Sinai says, "You were shown that you may know that Yahweh is God" (Devarim 4:35).
Likewise, just as Moses commands the tribe of Levi to slay the worshippers of the golden calf by the sword, Elijah commands Bnei Yisrael to slay the priests of Ba'al.
Just like Moses, earlier on, Elijah is commanded to appoint the prophet who will take his place.  After he transfers his cloak to Elisha, we read: "And he (Elisha) got up and went after Elijah and he served him."   Just as Joshua served Moses, so Elisha is chosen because of his service to Elijah.
These great prophets, the first and last of their tribe set a pattern which needed to be followed and continued. There must be permanent spiritual leadership which bridges the generations to preserve the covenant, as well as daily encouragement to maintain stability.
"Therefore, my beloved brothers, be steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the Lord's work, because you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord."   1 Corinthians 15:58
Metals such as iron, zinc, and copper all perform important roles in many of the enzymatic reactions that fuel the body’s metabolism. For instance, ions such as Fe2+ can bind to the hemoglobin and myoglobin protein to help transport oxygen to organs in the body. Other metals like magnesium and copper act to stabilize the shapes of enzymes.[1] However, there are some metal ions that are highly toxic in excessive amounts. Thus, the body exerts strict control to assure that only one or two free metal atoms are present inside an individual cell.
Na+, K+ play an important role in nerve cell membranes. They are electrical charge carries that conduct nerve cell impulses by moving back and forth across the membrane generating an voltage(difference in electrical charge), or potential across the membrane. These ions help communicate electrical signals in the nerves and heart.
Ca2+ plays a critical role in muscle cell contraction and relaxation.
Ca2+, Mg2+, Mn2+, Zn2+ help stabilize a particular protein configuration.
Mg2+ is used for cleavage and replication of DNA, RNA strands
Bones and shells contain Ca2+ like the mineral hydroxyapatite Ca(OH)2.3Ca3(PO4)2
Mg2+ as a co-factor in an enzyme
Zn2+ and Co2+ catalyzes the hydrolysis of phospates by serving as Lewis acids.
For example carboxypeptidase catalyzes the hydrolysis of C-terminal amino acid residues of proteins. It is released in pancreatic juice of animals for the digestion of proteins.
Hemoglobin,myoglobin, hemocyanin, and hemerythrin provide O2 storage and transport.
Dehydrogenation; catalyzed by Cu, Mo and Fe by changing their oxidation states.
Ribose turns into deoxyribose with a catalysis of Co.
Toxic metals can hinder important enzyme functions.
Lead inhibits the body's ability to make hemoglobin by interfering with the synthesis of heme which disrupts the blood's oxygen transport system.
Mercury binds to sulfur-containing molecules which can cause irreversible neurological damage.
Arsenic can cause cancer in the skin and lungs.
↑ Davis, Alison. The Chemistry of Health. Bethesda, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, National Institute of General Medical Sciences, 2009
Gary Mieesler; Donald A. Tarr; ınorganic Chemistry 3.Edition, 2004.
Returns TRUE if value is not NONE.
"Returns TRUE if value is not NONE."
What teaching styles can educators employ?
Style in teaching is more than a superficial collection of interesting mannerisms used to create an impression; it is best viewed as a persuasive quality that plays an important role in several aspects of teaching. Personal qualities can direct and guide the selection of instructional processes. Just as each student has their own individual learning styles, teachers have certain teaching styles that work best for them. It is important to be aware of your personal preferences when creating and delivering lesson plans. However, one must not limit themselves to one particular style of teaching because not every student learns the same way. It is a number one priority to keep the students in mind when thinking of ideas for your classroom.(Michigan State University Board of Trustees 2007)
There is a symbiotic relationship among our personal qualities, the instructional processes we employ to convey the content and the styles our students display as learners. It is proven by research that most teachers teach the way they were taught. It is a good idea to first put yourself in the student’s position, so you are aware of the students’ capability of understanding the material at hand. Typically these teachers are field independent, meaning they are more content oriented and prefer to use more formal teaching methods favoring less student involvement and more structured activities in the classroom. Research also supports the view that if students learning preference matches the teachers teaching style the student will be more motivated to achieve their learning goals (Miller 2001).
Many of the different teaching styles include formal authority, demonstrator or personal model, facilitator and delegator. Teachers who use the formal authority teaching style focus mainly on content. Formal authority is teacher centered where the teacher is responsible for controlling and providing the amount of content and how the student is expected to receive and interpret the content. This form of teaching style is not concerned with building relationships with their students nor is it important that their students form relationships with other students. One negative aspect of this form of teaching style is that it does not require much student participation in class; this can cause the student to loose interest in the course material, thus leading to sleeping in class or not attending the class at all. However, this teaching style may work better with students who become frustrated when facing new challenges that aren’t explained, or with students who like to compete with peers for classrom rewards.(Jennifer Stein, Linda Steeves, and Christine Simth-Mitsuhashi 2001)
Teachers who like their classroom to be more interactive would choose the demonstrator or personal model teaching style, which tends to be teacher-centered with emphasis on demonstration and modeling. This type of teacher is perceived as a role model by demonstrating skills, thus, helping students develop and apply these skills and knowledge. It is important that students can independently solve similar problems by using and adapting demonstrated methods. Teachers that use this style of teaching are interested in encouraging student participation and adapting their presentation to include various learning styles. Students should take some responsibility for learning course material as well as asking for help when they don’t understand the content. This style works best with students who enjoy working with their peers as well as others who may become easily frustrated.
Teachers who use the facilitator style of teaching focus on activities conducted in the classroom. This style of teaching emphasizes student-centered learning placing more responsibility on the student for meeting the demands of various learning tasks. The facilitative style of teaching is best for students who are independent learners and who are willing to actively participate and collaborate with their peers in or outside of the classroom. Facilitative teaching is also designed for group activities which are used to necessitate active learning, problem solving, and student to student interaction. This method was designed to provide activities which require student processing and application of course content in an original and creative manner. However, it may become difficult for students who have an aggressive behavior to succeed when being taught with this teaching method.
Teacher who use delegator teaching style place control and responsibility for learning on individual or groups of students. A delegative teacher is one who always gives the students' a choice to implement their own complex learning projects. These particular students will often have to work independently or in groups and it is necessary for them to maintain motivation and focus. The goal of delegative teaching style is to teach students more than just course material such as making them be effective in group effort and be able to manage interpersonal relationships. Students who are taught by the delegative teaching method will be able to retain more information and use the critical thinking process to manage daily tasks or projects.
Click to reveal the answer.
There is a ______ relationship among personal qualities and the instructional processes we employ to convey the content and styles our students display as learners.
D. SymbolicD. Symbolic
The goal of which teaching style is to teach more than just course material but also how to manage interpersonal relationships?
E. DelegativeE. Delegative
(This lesson is incomplete. Click "edit" to provide an example.)
A. StyleA. Style
Which of the following teaching styles works best with every student?
D. None of the above
D. None of the aboveD. None of the above
It is proven by research that most instructors teach the way they were taught.
A. TrueA. True
If a teacher finds that she cannot fit comfortably into any teaching style she has seen or studied, what might be a good solution?
A. Give up teaching.
B. Go with the style that most closely fits her.
C. Ask her peers which style they recommend.
D. Create her own teaching style that fits her well.
D. Create her own teaching style that fits her well.D. Create her own teaching style that fits her well.
If a teacher notices that most of the students in her gifted class are independent learners who take a proactive approach to learning, which style might she adopt in teaching them?
A. Formal Authority
C. FacilitatorC. Facilitator
A middle-school math teacher usually uses the formal authority teaching style. What is the most likely reason?
A. His teachers growing up taught him this way.
B. His college professors taught him to teach this way.
C. His peers recommended that he teach this way.
D. His students asked to be taught this way.
A. His teachers growing up taught him this way.A. His teachers growing up taught him this way.
Which teaching style do you prefer and why?
Returns TRUE for function values.
This page is a critique of the research article "Exercise therapy correlates with improving renal function through modifying lipid metabolism in patients with cardiovascular disease and chronic kidney disease" conducted by Toyama K et al. (2010)[1]
What is the background to this research?
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) refers to reduced function of the kidneys over a lasting period of time, and may require a kidney transplant and even lead to death.[2] CKD affects 13.4 percent of the population worldwide as of 2016,[3] therefore clearly requires clinical attention and intervention.
This study largely focuses on CKD indicators such as differences in glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and lipoprotein metabolism. CKD is typically characterised by a relatively low GFR, low plasma high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) concentrations, high plasma low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) concentrations, and high plasma triglycerides.[4] In terms of treatment, literature often emphasises dialysis or transplantation for severe cases, dietary interventions, and certain medications.[5][6] Although these methods of treatment are relevant and effective, exercise prescription as treatment is often overlooked or disregarded.
This study was conducted in Kumamoto, Japan. Koyama, Sugiyama, Sumida and Ogawa are from the Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Faculty of Life Science, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto University. Oka is from the Division of Cardiology, Health Insurance Hitoyoshi General Hospital.[1]
These authors appear to be extremely qualified and reliable, having published over 1000 peer-reviewed journal articles/documents between them, many of which are in the area of cardiovascular disease, diabetes etc. (i.e. similar conditions to CKD). There would be the potential for bias towards exercise prescription as a treatment method if the authors had a strong background in exercise science; however, they are mostly involved in more clinical/medicinal operations. If anything, this makes the study seem more reliable, as these experienced professionals went outside of typical treatments to find success with exercise treatment.[7][8][9][10][11]
What kind of research was this?
This research was in the form of a prospective open-labelled clinical trial. This involves two groups of patients diagnosed with CKD, where all participants and researchers are aware of the circumstances of the study. Study conditions are prescribed for a 12-week period. Measures are taken prior to the intervention and at the end of the 12-week period, and differences between the two groups pre- and post-intervention are observed. Different types of studies may have different degrees of effectiveness. Prospective cohort studies are considered to be the gold standard in epidemiological study design, with emphasis on being unbiased.[12] Therefore this study
What did the research involve?
19 participants with CKD were divided into two groups: an exercise training (ET) group (n=10) and a non-exercise training (non-ET) group (n=9). Both groups were prescribed an intervention in the form of diet therapy, mental support, counselling for medication, and CVD/CKD education. The ET group (unlike the non-ET group) were additionally prescribed an exercise program that involved a weekly 30 minute bicycle ergometer session in the hospital, as well as daily 30 minute home exercise (walking at 12-13 RPE on Borg Index). All participants underwent pre- and post-intervention blood sampling and cardiopulmonary exercise tests to determine anaerobic metabolic threshold (AT-VO2). Baseline measures of a large range of health markers were also taken for both groups.
This methodology seems effective, although 30 minutes of daily walking seems too short in duration for such a light exercise. So perhaps extending those walking bouts to one hour would produce stronger results. The study is also quite low in the number of participants, which is understandable as it may be difficult to recruit a large number of willing CKD patients. Since these patients are diagnosed with a chronic disease that involves numerous health restrictions, they would be at high risk when participating in the cardiopulmonary exercise tests and the exercise program itself. Therefore caution should be taken throughout the study.
What were the basic results?
Figure 1: Changes in health markers over the 12-week period
Results shown in figure 1 are interpretations of the results given in the study, where extents of increase/decrease are relative to each other. The main findings in the study were displayed in the form of bar graphs comparing the ET group to the non-ET group. This form of display may have visually emphasised the desired results, although all results were still statistically significant with p-values <0.05.
For example, in the ET group:
All results shown in the study favour the implementation of an exercise training program for improving health in CKD patients.
What conclusions can we take from this research?
Exercise prescription is an effective way of improving renal function in CKD patients, particularly through lipid metabolism. If something as little as a 12-week exercise program that is relatively light in intensity displayed such significant results, then increasing the load and extending the program could do much more.
More recent research has aligned with these findings, and specified that aerobic exercise at an intensity of >60% maximum capacity is recommended. It further suggests exploring resistance training for potentially reducing inflammatory responses.[13]
For those with CKD or reduced renal function/lipid metabolism; daily, light-moderate exercise for >30 minutes can significantly improve these health aspects. Increased benefits may come with longer bouts of exercise. Speak with a medical professional beforehand and proceed with caution as the may be a high risk of injury/events.
CKD Information: http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/chronic-kidney
CKD Management handbook: https://kidney.org.au/health-professionals/prevent/chronic-kidney-disease-management-handbook
CKD Support groups: https://kidney.org.au/connect/support-groups/community-support
↑ a b Toyama K, Sugiyama S, Oka H, Sumida H, Ogawa H. Exercise therapy correlates with improving renal function through modifying lipid metabolism in patients with cardiovascular disease and chronic kidney disease. J Cardiol [Internet]. 2010 Sep [cited 2018 Sep 5];56(2)142-146. Available from: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0914508710001334
↑ Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. Chronic Kidney Disease [Internet]. Australia: AIHW; 2018 Jan 18 [cited 2018 Sep 5]. Available from: https://www.aihw.gov.au/reports-statistics/health-conditions-disability-deaths/chronic-kidney-disease/overview
↑ Hill N, Fatoba S, Oke J, Hirst J, O’Callaghan C, Lasserson D et al. Global prevalence of chronic kidney disease – A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One [Internet]. 2016 Jul 6 [cited 2018 Sep 6];11(7):e015876. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4934905/
↑ Kwan B, Kronenberg F, Beddhu S, Cheung A. Lipoprotein metabolism and lipid management in chronic kidney disease. J Am Soc Nephral [Internet]. 2007 Apr [cited 2018 Sep 6];18(4):1246-1261. Available from: http://jasn.asnjournals.org/content/early/2007/03/14/ASN.2006091006.full.pdf
↑ Levey A, Coresh J, Balk E, Kausz A, Levin A, Steffes M et al. National kidney foundation practice guidelines for chronic kidney disease: evaluation, classification, and stratification. Ann Intern Med [Internet]. 2003 Jul 15 [cited 2018 Sep 6];139(2):137-147. Available from: http://annals.org/aim/fullarticle/716575
↑ Turner J, Bauer C, Abramowitz M, Melamed M, Hostetter T. Treatment of chronic kidney disease. Kidney Int [Internet]. 2012 Feb 2 [cited 2018 Sep 6];81(4):351-362. Available from: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0085253815553143
↑ Scopus. Toyama, Kensuke [Internet]. [location unknown]: Elsevier; 2018 [cited 2018 Sep 8]. Available from: https://www.scopus.com/authid/detail.uri?authorId=8503386200
↑ Scopus. Sugiyama, Seigo [Internet]. [location unknown]: Elsevier; 2018 [cited 2018 Sep 8]. Available from: https://www.scopus.com/authid/detail.uri?authorId=7402031001
↑ Scopus. Oka,Hideki [Internet]. [location unknown]: Elsevier; 2018 [cited 2018 Sep 8]. Available from: https://www.scopus.com/authid/detail.uri?authorId=36515208900
↑ Scopus. Sumida, Hitoshi [Internet]. [location unknown]: Elsevier; 2018 [cited 2018 Sep 8]. Available from: https://www.scopus.com/authid/detail.uri?authorId=7005826086
↑ Scopus. Ogawa, Hisao [Internet]. [location unknown]: Elsevier; 2018 [cited 2018 Sep 8]. Available from: https://www.scopus.com/authid/detail.uri?authorId=55485134500
↑ ScienceDirect. Prospective cohort study [Internet]. [location unknown]: Elsevier; 2018 [cited 2018 Sep 8]. Available from: https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/medicine-and-dentistry/prospective-cohort-study
↑ Smart N, Williams A, Levinger I, Selig S, Howden E, Coombes J et al. Exercise & sports science Australia (ESSA) position statement on exercise and chronic kidney disease. J Sci Med Sport [Internet]. 2013 Sep [cited 2018 Sep 9];16(5):406-411. Available from: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S144024401300025X
The linear no-threshold model (LNT) is a method for predicting the long term, biological damage caused by ionizing radiation and is based on the assumption that the risk is directly proportional to the dose at all dose levels.
In other words, the sum of several very small exposures have the same effect as one larger exposure. The LNT model therefore predicts higher risks than either the threshold model, which assumes that very small exposures are negligible, or the radiation hormesis model, which predicts the least risk by assuming that radiation at very small doses can be beneficial. Because the current data is inconclusive, scientists disagree on which method should be used.[1]
LNT, or at least "no threshold", is sometimes applied to other cancer hazards such as polychlorinated biphenyls in drinking water.[2]
The linear-no-threshold model was first expressed by John Gofman, and rejected by the Department of Energy, according to Gofman, because it was "inconvenient".[3]
The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation (BEIR) report, NAS BEIR VII was an expert panel who reviewed available peer reviewed literature and writes, "the committee concludes that the preponderance of information indicates that there will be some risk, even at low doses".[4]
If a particular dose of radiation is found to produce one extra case of a type of cancer in every thousand people exposed, LNT predicts that one thousandth of this dose will produce one extra case in every million people so exposed, and that one millionth of this dose will produce one extra case in every billion people exposed. This means that any given quantity of radiation will produce the same number of cancers, no matter how thinly it is spread. The model is simple to apply: a quantity of radiation can be translated into a number of deaths without any adjustment for the distribution of exposure, including the distribution of exposure within a single exposed individual. For example, a hot particle embedded in an organ (such as lung) results in a very high dose in the cells directly adjacent to the hot particle, but a much lower whole-organ and whole-body dose. Thus, even if a safe low dose threshold was found to exist at cellular level for radiation induced mutagenesis, the threshold would not exist for environmental pollution with hot particles, and could not be safely assumed to exist when the distribution of dose is unknown.
The linear no-threshold model is used to calculate the expected number of extra deaths caused by exposure to environmental radiation, and it therefore has a great impact on public policy. The model allows any radiation release, like that from a dirty bomb, to be translated into a number of lives lost, while any reduction in radiation exposure, for example as a consequence of radon detection, can be immediately translated into a number of lives saved. When the doses are low, the model predicts new cancers only in a very small fraction of the population, but for a large population, the number of lives can easily reach hundreds or thousands, and this can sway public policy.
A linear model has long been used in health physics to set maximum acceptable radiation exposures. The United States based National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements (NCRP), a body commissioned by the United States Congress, recently released a report written by the national experts in the field which states that, radiation's effects should be considered to be proportional to the dose an individual receives, regardless of how small the dose is.
The LNT model and the alternatives to it each have plausible mechanisms that could bring them about, but definitive conclusions are hard to make given the difficulty of doing longitudinal studies involving large cohorts over long periods.
A review of the various studies published in the authoritative  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences concludes that "given our current state of knowledge, the most reasonable assumption is that the cancer risks from low doses of x- or gamma-rays decrease linearly with decreasing dose."[5]
A 2007 study of Swedish children exposed to fallout from Chernobyl while they were fetuses between 8 and 25 weeks gestation has found that the reduction in IQ at very low doses was greater than expected, given a simple LNT model for radiation damage, indicating that the LNT model may be too conservative when it comes to neurological damage.[6] Neurological damage has a different biology than cancer, and for cancer rates there are conflicting studies.
In recent years, the accuracy of the LNT model at low dosage has been questioned. Some believe that if radiation is distributed evenly enough, so that the levels are comparable to the natural levels, it has no harmful health effects.
Several expert scientific panels have been convened on the topic of the Linear no-threshold model.
In 2004 the United States National Research Council (part of the National Academy of Sciences) supported the linear no threshold model and stated regarding Radiation hormesis:[7][8]The assumption that any stimulatory hormetic effects from low doses of ionizing radiation will have a significant health benefit to humans that exceeds potential detrimental effects from the radiation exposure is unwarranted.
In conclusion, this report raises doubts on the validity of using LNT for evaluating the carcinogenic risk of low doses (< 100 mSv) and even more for very low doses (< 10 mSv). The LNT concept can be a useful pragmatic tool for assessing rules in radioprotection for doses above 10 mSv;  however since it is not based on biological concepts of our current knowledge, it should not be used without precaution for assessing by extrapolation the risks associated with low and even more so, with very low doses (< 10 mSv), especially for benefit-risk assessments imposed on radiologists by the European directive 97-43.
The Health Physics Society's position statement first adopted in January 1996, as revised in July 2010, states:[13]
In accordance with current knowledge of radiation health risks, the Health Physics Society recommends against quantitative estimation of health risks below an individual dose of 5 rem in one year or a lifetime dose of 10 rem above that received from natural sources. Doses from natural background radiation in the United States average about 0.3 rem per year. A dose of 5 rem will be accumulated in the first 17 years of life and about 25 rem in a lifetime of 80 years. Estimation of health risk associated with radiation doses that are of similar magnitude as those received from natural sources should be strictly qualitative and encompass a range of hypothetical health outcomes, including the possibility of no adverse health effects at such low levels.
The American Nuclear Society recommended further research on the Linear No Threshold Hypothesis before making adjustments to current radiation protection guidelines, concurring with the Health Physics Society's position that [14] : There is substantial and convincing scientific evidence for health risks at high dose. Below 10 rem (which includes occupational and environmental exposures) risks of health effects are either too small to be observed or are non-existent.
Furthermore, some authors promote Radiation hormesis, the idea that low level radiation actually promotes DNA repair. As an example, Dr John DeSesso, academic expert in teratology writes,[15]
When conducting risk assessments, the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) does not currently consider the beneficial effects from exposure to concentrations of agents below the no observed adverse effect level (NOAEL). If such benefits were observed, and if the beneficial and toxicological mechanisms of action were  identical, this would probably be represented as a ‘j–shaped’ hormetic dose–response curve. If such data are available, they should be considered when assigning uncertainty factors for safe exposure calculations.
Professor Wade Allison argues that linearity is not appropriate in biology, or in any scientific context where correction or feedback is significant. He argues that data on  therapeutic radiation, exposure to elevated natural radiation (such as the presence of radon gas in homes), the diseases of Hiroshima and Nagasaki survivors and other data are consistent with non-linearity. Consequently he suggests that radiation safety levels could be raised while still balancing the risks of personal medical and public environmental radiation exposures. Such a change would have major effects on the acceptability and costs of nuclear technology.[16] Professor Bernard Cohen of the University of Pittsburgh arrived at a similar conclusion in his comparison of the effects from differing levels of environmental radon in 1601 U.S. counties.[17]
Nuclear power debate#Health effects on population near nuclear power plants and workers
↑ Consumer Factsheet on: polychlorinated biphenyls  US Environment Protection Agency.
↑ Gofman on the health effects of radiation: "There is no safe threshold"
↑ NAS BEIR VII Phase 2 Executive Summary retrieved 8 October 2008
↑ Brenner, David J; et al. (2003-11-10). "Cancer risks attributable to low doses of ionizing radiation: Assessing what we really know". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 100 (24):  13761–6. doi:10.1073/pnas.2235592100. PMID 14610281. PMC 283495. http://www.pnas.org/cgi/content/full/100/24/13761. Retrieved 2007-08-29.
↑ Douglas Almond, Lena Edlund, Mårten Palme, "Chernobyl's Subclinical Legacy: Prenatal Exposure to Radioactive Fallout and School Outcomes in Sweden" August 2007, NBER working paper 13347, [1]
↑ Society News Archive: BEIR VII Report Supports LNT Model
↑ UNSCEAR 2000 REPORT Vol. II: Sources and Effects of Ionizing Radiation: Annex G: Biological effects at low radiation doses. page 160, paragraph 541. Available online at [2].
↑ Heyes et al. (2006-10-01). "Authors' reply". British Journal of Radiology (The British Medical Journal) 79 (946):  855–857. doi:10.1259/bjr/52126615. http://bjr.birjournals.org/cgi/content/citation/79/946/855. Retrieved 2008-03-27.
↑ Health Physics Society, 2010. Radiation Risk in Perspective  PS010-2 [3]
↑ The American Nuclear Society, 2001. Health Effects of Low-Level Radiation. Position Statement 41 [4]
↑ The case for integrating low dose, beneficial responses into US EPA risk assessments Human & Experimental Toxicology journal.
↑ Allison, Wade (2009-10-23). Radiation and Reason: The Im pact of Science on a Culture of Fear. Wade Allison. ISBN 0956275613. http://www.radiationandreason.com.
↑ Cohen, Bernard L.  Test of the linear-no threshold model theory of radiation carcinogenesis for inhaled radiation decay products "Health Physics" February 1995, pp 157-174.
UNSCEAR, United Nations Scientific Committee on the effects of Ionizing Radiations
NCRP, National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements, USA
IRSN, Institute for Radioprotection and Nuclear Safety, France
Report from the European Committee on Radiation Risk broadly supporting the Linear No Threshold model
ECRR report on Chernobyl (April 2006) claiming deliberate suppression of the LNT in public health studies
How dangerous is ionising radiation? Reprinted "Powerpoint" notes from a colloquium at the Physics Department, Oxford University, 24 November 2006
File:Zelda Oracles L-1 Sword.png Wooden Sword (L-1)
Attack: 2, wears down enemies slowly
File:Zelda Oracle Noble Sword.png Noble Sword (L-2)
Lost Woods from Trading items quest/Return Linking
Attack: 4, sacred power increases damage done: can fire beams at full hearts
Lost Woods from Trading items quest while Main Linked/by Return Linking
Attack: 6, legendary, can take out most enemies with one swipe
Attack: 8, amazingly strong, yet very hard to handle. Must be equipped in both hands, so it will take up both the Template:Gb and Template:Gb slots
File:Zelda Oracles L-1 Shield.png Wooden Shield (L-1)
Sold at the shop (30 Rupees)/Equipped when Main Linked
Defense: 2 Regular shield, protects against some damage. Can block rocks, deku seeds, and arrows.
The blacksmith/Return Linking (Must have Wooden Shield first)
Defense: 3 Immune to more attacks than Wooden Shield. Can block fireballs.
The blacksmith while Main Linked/Return Linking. (Must first have Iron Shield, or you'll get that instead)
Defense: 5 Best shield, shiny armor protects against many attacks. Can block Beamos beams.
File:Zelda Oracles Rickys Flute.png Ricky's Flute
Ricky if the player doesn't have other flute
Ricky comes when the flute is played
File:Zelda Oracles Dimitris Flute.png Dimitri's Flute
Dimitri comes when the flute is played
File:Zelda Oracles Mooshs Flute.png Moosh's Flute
Moosh comes when the flute is played
File:Zelda Oracles Strange Flute.png Strange Flute
Can become Ricky's, Dimitri's, or Moosh's Flute
File:Zelda Oracles Seed Satchel.png Seed Satchel
File:Zelda Oracles Bomb.png Bombs
Break cracked walls and blocks or attack enemies
File:Zelda Oracles Power Bracelet.png Power Bracelet
Can pick up a rock, sign, bush, and vase, or push rollers when equipped
File:Zelda Oracles Rocs Feather.pngRoc's Feather
Can jump one space, cross over danger; jump 3 spaces (just barely) with Pegasus Seeds
Can move, attract, and deflect things by magnetic force, or pull towards them
File:Zelda Oracles Boomerang.PNG Boomerang (L-1)
Stop an enemy from moving, activate switches across rooms, retrieve items
File:LoZ OoS Magicboomerang.gif Magical Boomerang (L-2)
Can control this with the Template:Gb while the Template:Gb or Template:Gb (depends on which button it's equiped to) button is held, reaching more objects
Can jump 3 spaces, allowing slick movement; jump 6 spaces (just barely) with Pegasus Seeds
3-way slingshot, shoots 3 seeds for the cost of one
File:Zelda Oracles Shovel.png Shovel
Allows you to dig and remove earth and sand
Can actually be used to attack for some strange reason
File:Zeldaoracles Ember Seed.gif Ember Seeds
Can burn signs and bushes, and light torches. Can only be collected from trees in Winter.
File:Zelda Oracles Mystery Seed.png Mystery Seeds
Can get hints from the blue owl, random effect when shot. Can only be collected from trees in Summer.
File:Zelda Oracles Scent Seed.pngScent Seeds
Can attract certain monsters to the scent, or be used as (the best) slingshot ammunition. Can only be collected from trees in Spring.
Can run faster and jump further,(when using Roc's Feather/cape) can also stop an enemy from moving when fired from slingshot. Can only be collected from trees in Autumn.
File:Zelda Oracles Gale Seed.png Gale Seeds
Warp the player to a mystical tree, blow away an enemy when shot. Can only be collected from trees in Summer.
File:Zelda Oracles Rod of Seasons.PNG Rod of Seasons
File:Zelda Oracles Power of Spring.PNG Power of Spring
File:Zelda Oracles Power of Summer.PNG Power of Summer
File:Zelda Oracles Power of Autumn.PNG Power of Autumn
File:Zelda Oracles Power of Winter.PNG Power of Winter
Pasword-linked game; Syrup sells these after you get them
Hone in on enemies, then explode
File:Zelda Oracles Zoras Flippers.png Zora's Flippers
Can swim faster by pressing Template:Gb and dive by pressing Template:Gb
File:Zelda Oracles Magic Potion.png Magic Potion
Sold at Syrup's Shop, can receive from Maple event
Revive the player when out of health
File:Zelda Oracles Gasha Seed.png Gasha Seed
Allows you to grow a Gasha Tree that grows a Gasha Nut that can have rings, faries, a piece of heart, or rupees inside.
File:Zelda Oracles Gnarled Key.PNG Gnarled Key
File:LoZ OoS Floodgatekey.gif Floodgate Key
Take the Rusty Bell to the blacksmith
Needed for the Pirate's Ship to leave
Complete the Master Diver's task to get this
Sold at the basement shop in Horon Village
Needed to see jewels (used to enter Tarm Ruins) on map
Dig up the ground at Subrosia seaside
Trade in the Star-shaped Ore at Subrosia market
Needed to go on a date with Rosa
Take the Red and Blue Ore to the blast furnace
Needed to get the better Iron Shield
File:Zelda Oracles L-1 Ring Box.png L-1 Ring Box
File:Zelda OraclesL-2 Ring Box.PNG L-2 Ring Box
File:Zelda OraclesL-3 Ring Box.PNG L-3 Ring Box
Holds 5 rings, the maximum amount
File:Zelda Oracles Fertile Soil.PNG Fertile Soil
Seeds scattered across bountiful lands are nourished in this Fertile Soil!
File:Zelda Oracles Gift of Time.PNG Gift of Time
Seeds sprout as seasons change with the Gift of Time!
File:Zelda Oracles Bright Sun.PNG Bright Sun
Young shoots grow quickly under the warm rays of the Bright Sun!
File:Zelda Oracles Soothing Rain.PNG Soothing Rain
Bathed in drops of Soothing Rain, shoots grow into saplings!
File:Zelda Oracles Nurturing Warmth.PNG Nurturing Warmth
Balmy days build strong saplings with their Nurturing Warmth!
File:Zelda Oracles Blowing Wind.PNG Blowing Wind
Sweet fruit is born when pollen is carried by the Blowing Wind!
File:Zelda Oracles Seed of Life.PNG Seed of Life
Life begins anew when birds carry this, the Seed of Life, to new lands!
File:Zelda Oracles Changing Seasons.PNG Changing Seasons
Scattered seeds sprout in spring, grow in summer, bear fruit in fall and sleep through winter. It is an endless cycle of life... the Changing Seasons!!
File:Zelda Oracles Huge Maku Seed.PNG Huge Maku Seed
Maku Tree after collecting all 8 Essences
A mystical seed that holds the Maku Tree's full power. It can break the spell of Onox's Castle.
1.1 GROUP A: Frameless horizontal or square design with Mount Fuji motif, circular town mark
1.5 GROUP E: Nearly square frank, double wavy border at top, Mount Fuji motif with curled corners at bottom
1.6 GROUP F: Frank similar to Group A but straight-line town mark in center with date in rectangle at left
1.8 GROUP H: Small upright frank with notched single-line frame, open at center of sides
1.9 GROUP I: Frank nearly square with simulated-perforation outer border, chrysanthemum design at bottom
1977 onward “NIPPON”The stamps are grouped as follows:A - frameless horizontal or square design with Mount Fuji motif, circular town mark
B - small horizontal, straight-line rectangle
C - square frank, dove with spread wings at bottom
D - upright frank, single-line frame and ornamental corners
E - nearly square frank, double wavy border at top, Mount Fuji motif with curled corners at bottom
F - frameless horizontal design with Mount Fuji motif, straight-line town mark
G - frameless horizontal design with flying dove over globe motif
H - small, upright frank with notched, single-line frame
I - nearly square frank with simulated-perforation border
J - nearly square frank, unframed, with country inscription vertical at left
PV - designs used only in self-service stamp vending machinesThree vertical lines at right of stamp: In 1965 all new and replacement private use meter dies were required to include three bold vertical lines along the right edge. This made the stamps compatible with new automatic mail sorting equipment. Fielded meters in use at the time were exempt. In later years, some Post Office and Self-Service meter stamps also included the three lines.
Year of the Emperor: Stamps are found occasionally with the year of the reigning monarch rather than Western year.For specialized information about the meter stamps of Japan, see Handbook of Japanese Meter Stamps, compiled by the Meter Stamp Unit of the Japan Philatelic Society, Inc., 2000.
GROUP A: Frameless horizontal or square design with Mount Fuji motif, circular town mark
Sub-group AA: Mount Fuji at right, cherry blossoms at center
AA1.  Pitney Bowes “R”  (MV), 1952.
Value figures in small square box.
Small date figures with either Roman month or as 1.12.
Date figures raised in relation to value figures.
M# with “P.B.” prefix at bottom center.
AA2.  Pitney Bowes “5000”  (MV), 1962.    [Scarce]
Similar to Type AA1 but wider value box.
M# with “P.B.” prefix at bottom center.
C. As A, but with three vertical lines at far right, M# 300 only
As Type AA2 but the value box is wider still.
M# with "P.B." prefix at bottom center.
A. “JAPAN” in TM, no vertical lines at right. M# 309 and 310 only.    [Scarce]
B. “NIPPON” in TM, three vertical lines at right
AA4.  Pitney Bowes-GB “5000”  (MV), 1967.
Similar to Type AA2 but town mark much larger, and date figures taller and closer together.
M# with “P.B.” prefix.
A. “JAPAN” in TM. Horizontal dash at top left of TM 6 mm long
B. “JAPAN” in TM. Horizontal dash at top left of TM 10 mm long
C. “NIPPON” in TM. Horizontal dash at top left of TM 6 mm long
D. “NIPPON” in TM, three vertical lines at right
E. "NIPPON" in TM. Horizontal dash at top left of TM 10 mm long
AA5.  Pitney Bowes-GB “5000”  (MV), 1969.
Similar to Type AA4 but the value box has no right side, and the frank has three vertical lines at far right.
M# with “P.B.” prefix.
a. Value box with lines at top and left only, no bottom line
AA6.  Pitney Bowes-GB “Simplex”  (LV-21), 1963.    [Scarce]
Rectangular frank wider than tall, with two vertical lines at far right.
Distance between TM and frank 21-22 mm.
M# with “P.B.” prefix.
TM: DC with “JAPAN” at the bottom
Values:      1 to 21?
AA7.  Pitney Bowes-GB “Automax”  (MV), 1963.    [Scarce]
Similar to Type AA6 but frank is square, and distance between TM and frank is shorter, 13 mm.
M# with “P.B.” prefix.
NOTE: Shown is a specimen impression with unengraved elements.
AA8.  Pitney Bowes-GB “6300”  (MV), 1973.
Value box raised with date and value figures on same level.
M# at bottom below value figures.
Three vertical lines at far right.
A. “NIPPON” in TM. M# with “P.B.” prefix
B. “JAPAN” in TM. M# with “Y” prefix. Post Office stamp.
C. “NIPPON” in TM. M# with “Y” prefix. Post Office stamp.
AA9.  Pitney Bowes-GB “6900”  (MV), 1986.
Large frank.
M# with “P.B.” prefix.
AA10.  Pitney Bowes “A/B900”  (MV), 1991.
Similar to Type AA9 but shorter.
Value box is wider than tall.
M# with “PB” prefix.
AA11.  Pitney Bowes “Paragon”  (MV), 1993.
Similar to Types AA9 and 10 but value figures not boxed.
Prefix “PB” above M#.
Sub-group AB: Mount Fuji and fenced pathway at center
AB1.  Satas “Federal”  and  “Rotary”  (MV), 1960.    [Scarce]
Without inner box around value figures.
Date figures tall or short.
B. TM with “NIPPON” at bottom. M# with “SR” prefix
Sub-group AC: Mount Fuji and horizontal linear ornaments at center
Value figures narrow.
A. M# with “PF” prefix
B. M# with “WK” prefix
AC2. Francotyp-Postalia “NEF300”  (MV).
Flying dove added below Mount Fuji.
M# with “PF” prefix.
GROUP B: Frank is small, horizontal, single, straight-line rectangle
B1.  Francotyp “CC”, “CCM”  (MV), 1952.
Japanese Post inscription across top, M# with “F” prefix at lower left, F#, F##, F1###, F6###.
Spacing between TM and frank 6 mm.
A. Without vertical lines at right. “JAPAN” in TM
B. Without vertical lines at right. “NIPPON” in TM    [Scarce]
C. Three vertical lines at right. “JAPAN” in TM
D. Three vertical lines at right. “NIPPON” in TM    [Scarce]
a. Spacing between TM and frank 10 mm.
B2.  Francotyp “A9000”  (MV), 1963.    [Scarce]
Very similar to Type B1 but the date is much wider.
M# with “F” prefix, F9###.
A. Without vertical lines at right, “JAPAN” in TM
B. Three vertical lines at right, “JAPAN” in TM
C. Three vertical lines at right, “NIPPON” in TM
Very similar to Type B1 but value figures narrower.
Three vertical lines at right.
M# with “F” prefix, F10###.
Frank frame with notches in the sides.
M# with circled “H” prefix below frank.
M# with or without dashes at sides.
a. Spacing between TM and frank wider (16 mm)
b. Neither “JAPAN” nor “NIPPON” in the TM. M# H466 (error)
D1.  Universal “MultiValue”  (MV), 1953.    [Scarce]
Frank with geometric ornaments in the corners.
M# with “U” prefix below frank.
GROUP E: Nearly square frank, double wavy border at top, Mount Fuji motif with curled corners at bottom
E1.  Postalia “D2/D3”  (MV), 1954.    [Scarce]
Frank 28-29 mm tall.
Without vertical lines at right.
M# with “PF” prefix below frank.
E2.  Postalia “D2/D3”  (MV), 1967.    [Scarce]
As Type E1 but smaller, frank 26 mm tall.
M# with “PF” prefix below frank.
E3.  Postalia “D2/D3”  (MV), 1969.
As Types E1 and E2 but smaller still, frank 23-24 mm tall.
With three vertical lines at right.
M# with “PF” prefix below frank.
GROUP F: Frank similar to Group A but straight-line town mark in center with date in rectangle at leftSub-group FA: Country inscription above value box
FA1.  Hasler “F88”  (MV), 1957.    [Scarce]
Country inscription with chrysanthemum in center.
All lines at right of Mount Fuji straight.
Value box relatively tall.
M# with “H” prefix.
No lines at right of value box.
Country name “JAPAN”
a. Value figures large:      0,000
Similar to Type FA1 but smaller, especially the value box.
Central three lines at right of Mount Fuji with curve.
M# with “H” prefix.
Country name “JAPAN”.
A. Without vertical lines at right of value box    [Scarce]
B. One vertical line at right of value box (shown)
C. Three vertical lines at right of value box    [Scarce]
Similar to Type FA2 with curve in lines at right of Mount Fuji, but without chrysanthemum in center of country inscription.
With three vertical lines at right of value box.
M# with circled “H” prefix.
a. Value figures large:      0000
FA4.  Hasler “F88” and  “F66”  (MV), 1972.
Country inscription without chrysanthemum.
Lines at right of Mount Fuji straight.
Value box with thick frame, smaller than Type FA1 but larger than Types FA2 and 3.
M# with circled “H” prefix.
Value figures small or large.
Sub-group FB: Mount Fuji above value box, country inscription at right
FB1.  Frama “M/E”  (MV), 1969.
Country inscription vertical at right with three vertical lines at far right.
Five chrysanthemums above the date box.
M# below “JAPAN” with prefix “FR” below the date box.
A. “JAPAN”    [Scarce]
B. “NIPPON”    [Very scarce]
Sub-group FC: Country inscription above unboxed value figures
FC1.  Frama “M/E”  (MV), 1976.
Three vertical lines at right.
M# with “FR” prefix below date box.
Sub-group FD: Mt. Fuji and flowers at center
FD1.  Pitney Bowes “PostPerfect”  (digital), 1995.
Under Mount Fuji are one large flower at center and two small ones at left and one at right.
The triad (≋) at left in the value figures is a horizontal wave.
M# with “PB68” prefix at bottom.
FD2. Pitney Bowes “EasyMail”  (digital).
Very similar to Type FD1 but without horizontal lines above and below town/date field.
Impression made up of fine horizontal lines usually most noticeable in the value figures.
The triad (≋) at left in the value figures slants downward.
M# with “PB80” prefix at bottom.
Very similar to Type FD1 but the large flower under Mount Fuji has two smaller flowers on both the left and right sides, and "NIPPON" is larger.
M# with “PB26” prefix at bottom.
As Type FD1 with one small flower at right of the larger flower under Mount Fuji.
As Type FD3 with large "NIPPON" but the frank is 23.5 mm tall.
M# at bottom, seen with prefix “PB11”, "PB13" and "PB88". Other prefixes may exist.
Three vertical lines at right.
Inscribed “NIPPON”.
a. With unengraved meter number "HM■■"
Similar to type G1 but with several differences including:
"NIPPON" not flush with bottom of the three bars at right
Value figures are raised in relation to the date figures.
M# with “NA” prefix.
Similar to type G2 but with straight line town mark between bars.
M# with “ND” prefix.
GROUP H: Small upright frank with notched single-line frame, open at center of sides
Country inscription at top.
M# with “F” prefix below “SATAS” at bottom.
Date figures tall.
H2.  Satas “Rotary”  (MV), 1960.    [Scarce]
Similar to Type H1 but M# with “R” or “R.T” prefix.
Date figures short.
H3.  Satas “Guichet”  (MV), 1963.    [Scarce]
Similar to Types H1 and 2 but M# with “S.G” prefix.
Date figures tall.
A. “JAPAN” (Post Office stamp)
Similar to Type H3 but M# with “SV” prefix.
Date figures tall.
A. “JAPAN” (Post Office stamp)    [Scarce]
H5.  Francotyp-Postalia “T-1000”  (digital), 1994.
Tall, narrow frank with “NIPPON” above M# at bottom.
With three vertical bars at right.
M# with “PT 0” prefix.
H6.  Francotyp-Postalia “T-1000 TSS”  (digital), 1998.
Frank very similar to Type H5 but now quite as narrow, and the value figures are squarish.
With three vertical bars at right.
M# with “PT 1” prefix.
GROUP I: Frank nearly square with simulated-perforation outer border, chrysanthemum design at bottom
I1.  Frama “M/E”  (MV), 1961.    [Scarce]
Country inscription at top with circled “〒” in center.
Seven small chrysanthemums connected by lines across bottom.
M# with “FR” prefix below frank.
I2.  Frama “M/E”  (MV), 1973.    [Scarce]
Frank open at right with three vertical lines.
Three chrysanthemums with connecting lines at bottom right.
Country inscription without symbol at center.
Small Mount Fuji and waves at top.
Three vertical lines at right.
“NIPPON” above M# with “RA M” or “RA S” prefix at bottom.
GROUP PO: Special designs used only on post office metersMost of these stamps have variable colors, e.g. deep maroon, dark to brick red, and rose to pink.
Some have point-of-sale data applied in a shade different from the rest of the design.
PO1.  National Cash Register “1900”  (MV), 1950.
Frameless design date at top followed by “JAPANESE POSTAGE”, value line, “PAID”/town name. “PAID” and town name have ornaments at sides.
Value line has 3- or 4-digit impression counter number at right.
Printed in red shades on pale blue or off-white adhesive label.
Without M#.
Month usually in letters but occasionally as numeral.
V/F:      0000,000 followed by a letter,      000,000 followed by a letter
V/F:      0000,000 without letter,      –000,000 followed by a letter,      –000,000 without letter,      00,000 followed by a letter,      00 0000 followed by a letter    [Scarce]
V/F:      00,000 without letter
V/F:      –00,000 without letter    [Scarce]
V/F:      letter preceding 000 00 followed by vertical Roman numeral    [Very scarce]
a. Letter in parenthesis at right of town name
b. Letter in parenthesis below town name
NOTE: The town name greatly influences the value of these stamps. The smaller towns are more in demand than Tokyo and other large cities.
PO2.  National Cash Register “1925”  (MV), 1952.
Value figures and impression counter number at center.
Double-line framed shape at bottom containing town name, “JAPAN”, and M# with “N” prefix.
V/F:      00,000 without a letter    [Scarce]
V/F:      00,000 followed by a letter,      0000,000 followed by a letter or without a letter    [$15]
PO3.  National Cash Register “N21”  (MV), 1965.
Similar to Type PO2 but town mark shape at top with date above value figures at bottom.
Inscribed “JAPAN”.
Without M#.
A. Town mark frame 39 mm wide
B. Town mark frame 37 mm wide    [Scarce]
As Type PO3 but date and value figures on same line.
Year figures vertical.
V/F:       0.000       000.000       oo0.000
a. With impression counter number between date and value figures
Date at lower left, and value figures at lower right.
A. Year horizontal, without impression counter number
B. Year vertical, impression counter number between date and value figures.    [Scarce]
NOTE: Size and shape of asterisk and value figures variable.
A. “JAPAN”. Year horizontal, without impression counter number
B. “JAPAN”. Year vertical, with impression counter number between date and value figures
C. “NIPPON”. Year horizontal, without impression counter number
D. “NIPPON”. Year vertical, without impression counter number
E. “NIPPON”. Year horizontal, with impression counter number
F. “NIPPON”. Year vertical, with impression counter number
PO7.  Postalia “D2/D3”  (MV), 1964.
M# with “PF” prefix.
A. “JAPAN”    [Scarce]
Frameless, horizontal frank with birds amidst leafy branches motif.
Printed on plain, white labels.
M# 0101 and 0102 with “TEC” prefix.
P09.  TEC “Model PT”  (MV), 1979.
Similar to Types PO5 and 6 but with 4-digit impression counter number at lower left and with date as DD–MM–YY above it and value figures.
Inscribed “NIPPON”.
NOTE: For Types PO10 through PO15 and all of Group PV, the stamps often include a 2-digit year of the Emperor’s reign as well as the western date. The reign year is usually found between asterisks above the regular date.
PO10.  Matsushita Electric Company “Model PM”  (MV), 1979.    [Scarce]
Vertical design with two cranes in flight at center.
Three horizontal bars at top.
Country name “NIPPON”.
P011.  Matsushita Electric Company / Tokyo Electric Company “Model UE”  (MV), 1980.
Vertical design with three bars above Mount Fuji and two flowers at top.
Date above value figures at bottom.
P012.  Matsushita Electric Company / Tokyo Electric Company / Terakoa Seiko Company, 1983.
Frame lines are at the sides of the frank above the dates.
a. Printed on salmon paper rather than white
NOTE: This Post Office stamp is virtually identical to self-service vending machine stamp Type PV9.
PO13. Matsushita Electric Company.
As Type PO10 but with three horizontal bars at top.
PO14. Matsushita Electric Company (MV).
Very similar to Type PO11 but the design is not as tall, most noticeable in the height of the value box.
The year of the Emperor is also closer to the value box.
PO15. Matsushita Electric Company  (MV).
Vertical stamp with central design of a water bird with wings spread.
Three horizontal bars at top.
Value boxed below “NIPPON”.
a. Printed on salmon paper rather than white
GROUP PV: Special designs used only in self-service stamp vending machinesAs with Group PO, most of these stamps have variable colors, e.g. deep maroon, dark to brick red, and rose to pink.
Most stamps have point-of-sale data applied in a shade different from the rest of the design.
PV1.  Kokuto Koki Kogyo  (MV), 1970.    [$250]
Horizontal label with underprint design of large arrowhead and Japanese Post symbol.
Point-of-sale data applied through an inked ribbon.
Adhesive labels only.
Meter NIHONBASHI YK-1 only.
V/F:      exact denomination without leading zeros
PV2.  Hokuto Koki Kogyo (MV), 1972.    [$200]
Similar to Type PV1 but underprint design with flying bird.
Meter KAMATA YK-1 only.
V/F:      exact denomination without leading zeros
PV3. Matsushita Electric Company “Model SS”  (MV), 1975.
A. Date box 5 mm tall. Blank between English town name and date box
B. Combination of four letters and/or stars between English town name and date box
C. Date box 10-11 mm tall. Blank between English town name and date box
The letters found in version B indicate added services or special condition, as follows:
All stars and no letters means no special services or conditions
a. Commemorative stamp vended at stamp show, inscribed "KOBE-PORTOPIA '81"
NOTE: The receipts for these stamps are purple and appear to be photostats (shown at right).
PV4. Tokyo Electric Company, 1 March 1990.    [Scarce]
Similar to Type PO9 but point-of-sale date cruder, applied by dot matrix process.
This stamp vended by experimental self-service facility “Intelligent Post”.
PV5. Matsushita Electric Company, 1 March 1990.    [Scarce]
Very similar to Type PV4 but entire frank applied by dot matrix process.
The elements are slightly smaller than in Type PV4.
This stamp also comes from the experimental “Intelligent Post” facility.
PV6. Matsushita Electric Company, 1982.
Vertical design featuring Kabuki actor with pine tree background.
Three horizontal bars at top followed by value figures in white box.
The stamp has an overall web-like underprint.
Both the date and value figures are in boxes without the underprint.
PV7. Matsushita Electric Company, 1983.
With underprint as with PV6.
The value box is between the town name and Kubuki image, and it has a background of fine horizontal lines.
The date figures also have a background of fine horizontal lines.
V/F range:       ＊10 to 9990
PV8.  Matsushita Electric Company (MV), 1985.
Vertical design featuring two knitted balls near top.
The stamp has an overall web-like underprint.
One machine only, YOTSUYAEKIMAE.
PV9. Matsushita Electric Company / Tokyo Electric Company / Terakoa Seiko Company, 1983.
The stamp cataloged as Post Office Type PO12 is indistinguishable from self-service vending machine stamps from the same company).
Ornaments in the value figures and flanking the year of the Emperor are 5-pointed stars.
PV10.  Matsushita Electric Company (digital), 1987.    [Scarce]
Similar to Type PV9 but date and value figures cruder, applied by a dot matrix process.
Ornaments in the value figures and flanking the year of the Emperor have six points including two horizontal.
The value figures contain leading zeros.
PV11.  Matsushita Electric Company (digital), 1987.    [Scarce]
Similar to Type PV10, but the asterisks have eight arms and are taller than wide.
Ornaments in the value figures and flanking the year of the Emperor have eight points.
Value figures without leading zeros.
PV12.  Matsushita Electric Company (digital), 1987.    [Scarce]
Very similar to Type PV9, but the value figures are centered rather than right justified.
Ornaments in the value figures and flanking the year of the Emperor are 5-pointed stars.
Value figures without leading zeros.
PV13.  Matsushita Electric Company, 1990.    [Scarce]
Very similar to Type PV10 but the 6-pointed ornaments in the value figures and flanking the year of the Emperor have vertical arms rather than horizontal.
Value figures without leading zeros.
PV14. Matsushita Electric Company (digital).
Similar to Type PV13 but without year of the Emperor’s reign.
Value figures without leading zeros.
An L owes duties to his client as soon as the relationship is formed. The relationship is formed even if the client never retains the L but approaches him regarding legal representation.
P was hit by a car…P contacted T, a real estate attorney, and asked him to represent her in a claim against the driver.
An L may not have a conflicting interest himself to his client.
A concurrent conflict of interest exists if there is significant risk that the representation of one or more clients will be materially limited by L’s responsibilities to another client, a former client, or a third person or by a personal interest of L.
ABA: Where there is a conflict L may represent the client only if L reasonably believe there will not be an adverse effect, and the client consents in writing after consultation.
Cal: Only requires written disclosure of the conflict arises from L’s relationship (legal, personal, etc.) with a party of witness in the same matter as the client’s that would substantially affect L’s representation.
An L representing an organization may also represent any of its directors, officers, employees, members, shareholders or other constituents.
H's lawyer reminded L that several years ago L represented a now-dissolved partnership, of which H was a limited partner, in an unsuccessful effort by the partnership to acquire an apartment building for investment purposes.
L represents BHC Company, a health insurance provider.
A lawyer has a duty of fair dealing to the public and third parties.
Lawyer has a duty of loyalty to his client and may never place his own interests above that of his client.
Rita and Fred wanted to form a corporation to be named “Rita’s Kitchen, Inc.” (RKI) for the purpose of opening a restaurant. They contacted 75 friends who agreed individually to become investors in RKI. Five of these investors also agreed to serve on the RKI Board of Directors with Rita and Fred.
Rita and Fred retained Art as their attorney to form the corporation. They told Art that 75 of their friends had committed to invest and become shareholders of RKI. Irv was a duly appointed representative of the 75 investors. Rita, Fred and Irv met with Art, and they agreed that Art would represent Rita, Fred, and all the investors. After extensive discussions with Rita, Fred, and Irv about the operation of the proposed business, Art agreed to prepare the necessary documentation to incorporate RKI.
Later, outside of Irv’s presence, Rita and Fred asked Art to draft a shareholder agreement that would specifically designate Rita and Fred as permanent directors and officers of RKI and set Rita and Fred’s annual salaries at 12.5% of the corporate earnings. Without further discussion, Art properly formed the corporation. He then prepared the shareholder agreement, including the terms that Rita and Fred had requested.
The 75 investors each purchased their shares of stock and signed the shareholder agreement. RKI operated for one year but failed to make a profit. RKI ceased operations and currently owes three months of back rent under the lease.
Austin had been a practicing physician before he became a lawyer. Although he no longer practices medicine, he serves on a local medical association committee that works to further the rights of physicians to be compensated fairly by health insurance providers. The committee develops recommendations, but its members do not personally engage in public advocacy. Austin is a close friend of several of the other physicians on the committee, though as a lawyer he has never represented any of them.
In his law practice, Austin represents BHC Company, a health insurance provider. BHC has been sued in a class action by hundreds of physicians, including some of Austin’s friends, for unreasonable delay, and denial and reduction of reimbursements for medical services. Austin initially advised BHC that he was not confident it had a defense to the lawsuit.
Officer is the treasurer of Bank. Officer called the Bank's regular outside counsel, Lawyer, and asked that they meet immediately. Lawyer offered to come to Bank, but Officer insisted that they meet elsewhere for "confidentiality reasons."
When Officer arrived, he was visibly upset. He began by telling Lawyer that Bank was experiencing financial difficulties which, if not corrected, would lead "to more serious problems." The problem began several years ago when Officer's superior, Boss, the president of Bank, began making loans to fictitious corporations for Boss' benefit. The loans were initially for small amounts, but the amounts increased and now totaled over $1,000,000. Neither Boss nor any of the fictitious corporations is able currently to repay the loans, and interest on the loans has not been paid for some time.
Officer learned of the loans a year ago but agreed with Boss to keep quiet. In return, Boss arranged to have a $25,000 loan made to XYZ, a newly created corporation, for Officer's personal benefit. Officer reminded Lawyer that Lawyer's firm prepared the incorporating documents for XYZ Corporation.
Officer believes that all loans for both his and Boss' benefit could be repaid over time, but because Bank's auditors are scheduled to review Bank's financial statements the following week, the problem loans are likely to be revealed.
Officer asked Lawyer to agree to advise him how to protect himself, Boss, and Bank from liability. Officer requested that the information he had disclosed and Lawyer's advice be kept confidential. Lawyer has not responded to Officer's requests.
Betty, a prominent real estate broker, asked her attorney friend, Alice, to represent her 18 year-old son, Todd, who was being prosecuted for possession of cocaine with intent to distribute. Betty told Alice that she wanted to get the matter resolved “as quickly and quietly as possible.” Betty also told Alice that she could make arrangements with a secure in-patient drug rehabilitation center to accept
Todd and that she wanted Alice to recommend it to Todd. Although Alice had never handled a criminal case, she agreed to represent Todd and accepted a retainer from Betty.
At a subsequent court appearance, the prosecutor offered to reduce the charge to simple felony possession and to agree to a period of probation on the condition that Todd undergo a one year period of in-patient drug rehabilitation. Alice asked Todd what he thought about this, and Todd responded: “Look, I’m innocent. Don’t I have any other choice?” Alice, cognizant of Betty’s wish to get the matter resolved, told Todd she thought it was Todd’s best chance. Based on Alice’s advice, Todd accepted the prosecution’s offer, entered a guilty plea, and the sentence was imposed.
A client has a right not to disclose any confidential communication between L and client relating to the professional relationship. Client is the holder of the privilege.
A lawyer owes his clients the duty of competence under ABA and CA, which requires using the requisite skill, preparation, thoroughness, and knowledge to adequately represent his client’s interests. An attorney should not agree to represent a client where the subject matter of the case is outside his area of knowledge unless he can learn the relevant law without undue delay or expense to his client, or he can associate himself with an attorney who is experienced in that area of law. L may not withhold work for nonpayment of fees.
Although Alice had never handled a criminal case, she agreed to represent Todd and accepted a retainer from Betty. Alice called her law school friend, Zelda, an experienced criminal lawyer. Zelda sent Alice copies of her standard discovery motions. Zelda and Alice then interviewed Todd. Alice introduced Zelda as her “associate.” Todd denied possessing, selling, or even using drugs. Todd said he was “set up” by undercover officers. After Todd left the office, Zelda told Alice that if Todd’s story was true, the prosecution’s case was weak and there was a strong entrapment defense. Alice then told Zelda that she, Alice, could “take it from here” and gave her a check marked “Consultation Fee, Betty’s Case.”
Patty was hit by a car…Patty contacted Tom, a real estate attorney, and asked him to represent her in a claim against the driver. Tom agreed, and entered into a valid and proper contingency fee agreement. Tom later told Patty that he had referred her case to Alan, an experienced personal injury attorney, and she did not object.
Rita and Fred asked Art to draft a shareholder agreement that would specifically designate Rita and Fred as permanent directors and officers of RKI and set Rita and Fred’s annual salaries at 12.5% of the corporate earnings. Without further discussion, Art properly formed the corporation. He then prepared the shareholder agreement, including the terms that Rita and Fred had requested.
In a brief meeting with Booker and Clare, Alex agreed to represent both of them and set up the partnership for a fee of $5,000. Because Alex had no experience with forming partnerships, he hired Dale, a recently-disbarred attorney, as a “paralegal” at a wage of $250 an hour. Although Dale had no paralegal training or certification, he had decades of experience in law practice, including the formation of partnerships. Alex notified the State Bar about hiring Dale and disclosed Dale’s involvement and disbarred status to both Booker and Clare.
Lawyer may request withdrawal from representation where there is no material adverse effect to the client. L must give reasonable notice (ABA rule.)
L who withdraws must return all of client’s papers and property, even if owed money.
Attorney informed Wife that it was her right to obtain another lawyer, but that if she wanted her case file, it would be necessary for her to pay the outstanding balance of her account and sign a general release of liability.
ABA rule: L may not agree to limit L’s liability to the client without advising the client in writing to seek independent legal counsel regarding settlement.
ABA Code and Cal. rules do not allow L to prospectively limit liability to a client.
Attorney informed Wife that it was her right to obtain another lawyer, but that if she wanted her case file, it would be necessary for her to pay the outstanding balance of her account and sign a general release of liability.
ABA: A lawyer has the duty to maintain all confidential communications acquired in the course of representation except the client consents and other applicable exceptions. In CA, there is no delineated duty of communication. However, the Attorney’s Oath requires lawyers to maintain the client’s secrets and confidences.
(After Patty retaining Tom as her lawyer) Tom later told Patty that he had referred her case to Alan, an experienced personal injury attorney, and she did not object.
A lawyer has the duty to reasonably communicate with his or her client and keep him or her informed of the status of the case during all stages of representation.
Patty was hit by a car…Patty contacted Tom, a real estate attorney, and asked him to represent her in a claim against the driver. Tom agreed, and entered into a valid and proper contingency fee agreement. Tom later told Patty that he had referred her case to Alan, an experienced personal injury attorney, and she did not object.
Later, outside of Irv’s presence, Rita and Fred asked Art to draft a shareholder agreement that would specifically designate Rita and Fred as permanent directors and officers of RKI and set Rita and Fred’s annual salaries at 12.5% of the corporate earnings. Without further discussion, Art properly formed the corporation. He then prepared the shareholder agreement, including the terms that Rita and Fred had requested.
Art also failed to communicate with Irv when Rita and Frank asked him to draft a shareholders’ agreement that directly affected his interest. Art’s failure to communicate deprived Irv of the opportunity to make an informed decision concerning the terms of the shareholder agreement.
Lawyer did not tell Client that he had written a letter to Physician, Client’s doctor, assuring Physician full payment of her medical expenses from the accident out of the recovery in the case.
A lawyer owes the duty to the legal profession to maintain the public confidence, dignity, and efficiency of the legal system and the profession. Additionally, even those actions by an attorney that are not specifically prohibited by the ABA or CA professional conduct rules, or the law, may still be prohibited if they reflect poorly on the profession. A lawyer has the duty to refrain from altering or obstructing access to legally discoverable evidence. A lawyer may not pay a witness for their testimony. If it is an expert witness, the expert witness’s expenses for travel and time away from work may be paid for.
Cal. rule: Prohibits a lawyer from threatening to present criminal, administrative, or disciplinary charges to obtain an unfair advantage to a civil dispute.
Patty was hit by a car, whose driver did not notice her because he was texting. Joe, a journalist, wrote a story about Patty’s “texting” accident. (Alan represented Patty in the personal injury suit.) Alan sent a $200 gift certificate to Joe with a note stating: “In your future coverage of the ‘texting’ case, you might mention that I represent Patty.”
Patty was hit by a car, whose driver did not notice her because he was texting. Patty met with Alan (her attorney) and told him that Walter, a homeless man, had seen the driver texting just before the accident. Alan then met with Walter, who was living in a homeless shelter, and said to him: “Look, if you will testify truthfully about what you saw, I’ll put you up in a hotel until you can get back on your feet.”
When Bertha, counsel for the class of physicians, heard the defense Austin planned to assert in the lawsuit, she wrote him a letter stating that if he presented that defense she would report him to the state bar for engaging in a conflict of interest.
Lawyer shall not bring or defend a proceeding unless there is a basis in law and fact for doing so that is not frivolous.
Austin initially advised BHC that he was not confident it had a defense to the lawsuit. After further research, however, Austin discovered that a stated policy of the health care law is the containment of health care costs. He advised BHC that he could plausibly argue that reimbursements to physicians may legally be limited to avoid a dramatic increase in the health insurance premiums of patients. He explained that he would argue for a modification of existing decisional law to allow such a result based on public policy.
Cal rule: Permits but does not require, the reporting of ethical violations.
?
A lawyer, if meeting with a person who is not represented by an attorney, must not make any indications that he represents that person’s interests or is impartial.
Patty (Plaintiff) met with Alan (Attorney) and told him that Walter, a homeless man, had seen the driver texting just before the accident. Alan then met with Walter, who was living in a homeless shelter, and said to him: “Look, if you will testify truthfully about what you saw, I’ll put you up in a hotel until you can get back on your feet.”
Under the ABA and CA, a lawyer may refer a client to another lawyer with the informed consent of the client and as long as the referral agreement is ‘non-exclusive.” Under the ABA, referral fees are prohibited; under CA, they are permitted as long as the client gives informed consent and the total fees are not increased due to the referral agreement.
Patty was hit by a car…Patty contacted Tom, a real estate attorney, and asked him to represent her in a claim against the driver. Tom agreed, and entered into a valid and proper contingency fee agreement. Tom later told Patty that he had referred her case to Alan, an experienced personal injury attorney, and she did not object.
Under the ABA, fees must be reasonable and agreed upon by the client (consented to) in writing. In CA, the fees must be ‘not unconscionable’ and agreed upon (consented to) by the client in writing.
Dale spent four hours on his own preparing the partnership documents and meeting with Booker and Clare about them. Alex paid Dale $1,000 for his work. Alex spent a total of two hours on the partnership matter, including the initial meeting with Booker and Clare, reading the partnership documents in order to learn about partnerships, and a final meeting to have Booker and Clare sign the documents.
Fee splitting is prohibited by both the ABA and CA with non-lawyers. However, under the ABA, a lawyer may split fees with another lawyer if (i) it is in proportion to the services rendered or both L’s are jointly and severally liable, (ii) the total fee is reasonable, (iii) the client gives informed consent, and (iv) the total fee is not increased. Under CA, a lawyer may split fees with a non-lawyer if (i) the total fee is not unconscionable, and (ii) the client gives written consent.
(Patty the plaintiff retained Tom as her attorney.) They entered into a valid and proper contingency fee agreement. (Tom later referred her case to another attorney Alan.) Unknown to Patty, Alan agreed to give one-third of his contingency fee to Tom.
Contingency fees are fees to be paid as a percentage of a successful judgment. Under the ABA and CA, contingency fees must be in writing, clearly state the method for calculating the fee, and identify if litigation expenses are to be deducted before or after the calculation of the contingency fee.  CA additionally requires the lawyer to note that the fees are negotiable and to indicate how legal fees not covered by the contingency will be paid.
(Patty the plaintiff retained Tom as her attorney.) They entered into a valid and proper contingency fee agreement.
Generally, L may not have a proprietary interest, or stake, in a cause of action. However, contingency fees may be allowed subject to the following limitations. Contingency fees in domestic cases: ABA rule prohibits. ABA Code rarely allows.
Cal. rule only prohibits if it causes marriage to break up. Such an agreement must be in writing with the percentage clearly identified.
Attorney stated that he would continue to represent her if she would agree to pay him for his services, in addition to the $5,000, 25 percent of any property award she would receive in the divorce proceedings.
Lawyer may advance litigation expenses to an indigent client and recover the expenses from the contingency fee. ABA: does not allow advances for living expenses. CA: Does allow advances for living expenses, so long as the advance is a loan and not a gift, and the agreement is in writing. Cal.: Presumes any guarantees, warranties, or predictions to be a violation of the rules.
Lawyer and Client entered into a valid, written contingency fee agreement, whereby Lawyer would receive one-third of any recovery to Client related to the truck accident. Because Client was indigent, however, Lawyer orally agreed to advance Client’s litigation expenses and to lend her $1,000 monthly in living expenses that he would recoup from any eventual settlement.
Jones & Smith is a law firm concentrating on plaintiffs' personal injury litigation. The firm has decided to take several steps to increase its business volume. First, the firm plans to run television advertisements stating that the firm offers to handle cases for discount contingency fees. The advertisements will state that, while most firms normally charge a 33% contingency fee for handling a personal injury case, Jones & Smith will undertake representation for a fee of 25%. In addition, the advertisements will state that the firm offers interest-free advances against prospective judgments in cases of clear liability of up to 50% of the firm's estimated value of the case.
L shall not practice with or form a partnership or association authorized to practice law with a non lawyer
Finally, the firm plans to make use of nonlawyers in order to reduce costs. The firm will employ several paralegals and investigators who will be responsible for working up personal injury cases. Their activities will include fact investigation, witness interviews, negotiation with insurance adjusters, meetings with clients to discuss proposed settlements, and settlement conferences with clients to explain releases and to execute other documents necessary to conclude a case.
Here, paralegals and investigators are allowed to gather facts, as investigators often do, and paralegals help to type up such reports. The witness interviews may be appropriate if the lawyer has provided the investigators and paralegals with information they want addressed and specific reports are made or they are just doing fact gathering.
The negotiations and meetings to discuss settlements should be performed only by the lawyers since they best understand what is in their client’s interest, and these types of tasks require specific legal knowledge and judgments that should be made by lawyers, and lawyers have a duty to communicate with their clients. Non-lawyers should only execute documents that the lawyer instructs them to prepare, and the lawyer should review them prior to concluding any case.
Lawyer shall not make false or misleading communications about L or the L’s services. L may advertise services through written, recorded, or electronic communication unless the prospective client made known to L their desire to not be solicited. An attorney cannot engage in real-time phone or live contact with prospective clients with whom he has no prior personal or business relationship. Any advertising must be labeled attorney advertising, it cannot make any misrepresentations or be misleading, and it must state the name of at least one attorney responsible for the material. In California, making any guarantees or warranties as to results is considered presumptively improper and constitutes a misrepresentation.
Patty was hit by a car, whose driver did not notice her because he was texting. Joe, a journalist, wrote a story about Patty’s “texting” accident. (Alan represented Patty in the personal injury suit.) Alan sent a $200 gift certificate to Joe with a note stating: “In your future coverage of the ‘texting’ case, you might mention that I represent Patty.”
L may advertise services through written, recorded or electronic communication unless the prospective client made known to L their desire to not be solicited.
All advertisements must (1) Contain the name the office address of at least one lawyer (2) Be labeled as advertising material
Cal: need to label as communication or solicitation but must not use any particular words so long as in 12-point type on first page.
Cal: L must retain a correct copy of the communications for two years.
Cal.: Presumes a violation of ethical rules for communications that contain a dramatization without a disclaimer that it is a dramatization.
First, the firm plans to run television advertisements stating that the firm offers to handle cases for discount contingency fees. The advertisements will state that, while most firms normally charge a 33% contingency fee for handling a personal injury case, Jones & Smith will undertake representation for a fee of 25%. In addition, the advertisements will state that the firm offers interest-free advances against prospective judgments in cases of clear liability of up to 50% of the firm's estimated value of the case.
Jones & Smith is a law firm concentrating on plaintiffs' personal injury litigation.
The firm has decided to take several steps to increase its business volume.
Second, the firm plans to acquire from the police department lists of individuals who have been involved in automobile accidents, and to mail letters to those persons informing them that the firm is available for consultation about their legal rights arising out of the accident. Individuals who have been hospitalized as a result of an accident will receive a flower arrangement, delivered "compliments of Jones & Smith, Attorneys at Law."
An attorney may pay reasonable expenses for a witness in connection with testimony at trial; however, any payment cannot be made in connection with the witness’ testimony at trial. Reasonable expenses in connection with a witness’ testimony could include travel expenses, a place to stay and meals during the time that the witness is required to be present at trial.
Patty was hit by a car, whose driver did not notice her because he was texting. Patty met with Alan (her attorney) and told him that Walter, a homeless man, had seen the driver texting just before the accident. Alan then met with Walter, who was living in a homeless shelter, and said to him: “Look, if you will testify truthfully about what you saw, I’ll put you up in a hotel until you can get back on your feet.”
ABA: Prohibits sexual contact between lawyer and clients unless a preexisting relationship.
Cal: Allows sexual relationships between lawyers and clients unless L: (1) demands sex a condition of representation; or (2) uses coercion or undue influence; or (3) represents the client incompetently because of the sexual relationship
Client was reluctant to accept the offer. Realizing, however, that this case could drag on indefinitely with little chance of substantial recovery, Lawyer took Client out for an expensive dinner, at which they shared two bottles of wine. Afterward Lawyer took Client to Lawyer’s apartment where they engaged in consensual sexual relations. Later that evening Lawyer persuaded Client to accept the settlement offer by agreeing to give her the net proceeds after his contingency fee and the amounts he had advanced were deducted and not to pay Physician anything.
Betty, a prominent real estate broker, asked her attorney friend, Alice, to represent her 18 year-old son, Todd, who was being prosecuted for possession of cocaine with intent to distribute. Betty told Alice that she wanted to get the matter resolved “as quickly and quietly as possible.” Betty also told Alice that she could make arrangements with a secure in-patient drug rehabilitation center to accept Todd and that she wanted Alice to recommend it to Todd. Although Alice had never handled a criminal case, she agreed to represent Todd and accepted a retainer from Betty.
At a subsequent court appearance, the prosecutor offered to reduce the charge to simple felony possession and to agree to a period of probation on the condition that Todd undergo a one year period of in-patient drug rehabilitation. Alice asked Todd what he thought about this, and Todd responded: “Look, I’m innocent. Don’t I have any other choice?” Alice, cognizant of Betty’s wish to get the matter resolved, told Todd she thought it was Todd’s best chance. Based on Alice’s advice, Todd accepted the prosecution’s offer, entered a guilty plea, and the sentence was imposed.
Betty, a prominent real estate broker, asked her attorney friend, Alice, to represent her 18 year-old son, Todd, who was being prosecuted for possession of cocaine with intent to distribute. Betty told Alice that she wanted to get the matter resolved “as quickly and quietly as possible.” Betty also told Alice that she could make arrangements with a secure in-patient drug rehabilitation center to accept Todd and that she wanted Alice to recommend it to Todd. Although Alice had never handled a criminal case, she agreed to represent Todd and accepted a retainer from Betty.
At a subsequent court appearance, the prosecutor offered to reduce the charge to simple felony possession and to agree to a period of probation on the condition that Todd undergo a one year period of in-patient drug rehabilitation. Alice asked Todd what he thought about this, and Todd responded: “Look, I’m innocent. Don’t I have any other choice?” Alice, cognizant of Betty’s wish to get the matter resolved, told Todd she thought it was Todd’s best chance. Based on Alice’s advice, Todd accepted the prosecution’s offer, entered a guilty plea, and the sentence was imposed.
When you log in to gnome, you will appear on the main desktop.?! This chapter will explain the items you are likely to see on the desktop.
Using GNOME/Coverage | What is GNOME? | Terminology Used | Logging  in | Main Desktop | Applications | Accessibility | Tips and Tricks | Power Users | Using GNOME/Further reading
This chapter gathers some standard results that will be used in sequel. In particular, we prove the Hahn-Banach theorem, which is really a result in linear algebra. The proofs of these theorems will be found in the Topology and Linear Algebra books.
The axiom of choice states that given a collection of sets
,  there exists a function
.
Exercise. Use the axiom of choice to prove that any surjection is right-invertible.
In this book the axiom of choice is almost always invoked in the form of Zorn's Lemma.
Theorem 1.1 (Zorn's Lemma]). Let
.
Exercise. Prove that
Theorem 1.3 (Tychonoff). Every product space of a nonempty collection of compact spaces is compact.
Exercise. Prove Tychonoff's theorem for finite product without appeal to Axiom of Choice (or any of its equivalences).
By definition, a compact space is Hausdorff.
. The converse holds too. Since
.
Proposition 1.5. (i) Every second-countable space is separable. (ii) Every separable metric space is second-countable.
Proof. To be written.
Exercise. The w:lower limit topology on the real line is separable but not second-countable.
Theorem 1.6 (Baire). A complete metric space is not a countable union of closed subsets with dense complement.
Proof. See w:Baire category theorem.
We remark that the theorem is also true for a locally compact space, though this version will not be needed in the sequel.
Exercise. Use the theorem to prove the set of real numbers is uncountable.
Theorem 1.7 (Ascoli). Let X be a compact space. A subset of
Proof. See w:Ascoli's theorem.
The next exercise gives a typical application of the theorem.
Exercise. Prove Peano's existence theorem for ordinal differential equations: Let
. Then the initial value problem
. (Hint: Use w:Euler's method to construct a sequence of approximate solutions. The sequence probably does not converge but it contains a convergent subsequence according to Ascoli's theorem. The limit is then a desired solution.)
Exercise. Deduce w:Picard–Lindelöf theorem from Peano's existence theorem: Let
. Then the initial value problem
. (Hint: the existence is clear. For the uniqueness, use w:Gronwall's inequality.)
Theorem 1.8. Given a metric space X, there exists a complete metric space
.
Proof. w:Completion (metric space)#Completion
Theorem 1.9. Let V be a vector space. Then every (possibly empty) linearly independent set is contained in some basis of V.
(i.e., a totally ordered subset), then
.
. Thus, by Zorn's Lemma, it has a maximal element, say, E. It spans V. Indeed, if not, there exists an
, contradicting the maximality of E.
The theorem means in particular that every vector space has a basis. Such a basis is called a Hamel basis to contrast other bases that will be discussed later.
.
Proof. First suppose that
.
. It follows that
.
. It can be shown that
(TODO: need more details). Hence, by Zorn's Lemma, we can find the maximal element
.
We remark that a different choice of
Exercise State the analog of the theorem for complex vector spaces and prove that this version can be reduced to the real version. (Hint:
Note the theorem can be formulated in the following equivalent way.
Theorem 1.11 (Geometric Hahn-Banach). Let V be a vector space, and
Proof. We prove the statement is equivalent to the Hahn-Banach theorem above. We first show that there is a one-to-one corresponding between the set of sublinear functional and convex sets. Given a convex set
.
. Taking inf over t and s (separately) we conclude
. Now, note that:
. This suggests that we can define a set
Corollary 1.12. Every convex subset of a vector space is the intersection of all hyperplanes containing it (called convex hull).
Exercise. Prove Carathéodory's theorem.
a canonical surjection. If
(where X is some vector space) is a linear map, then there exists
.
By this definition, (i) is now clear. (ii) holds since
.
Proof. Obvious.
.
Proof. Obvious.
Exercise. Given an exact sequence
.
The total ∆G is negative because of the coupling of reactions. In this diagram, ∆G(1) stands for the change in G resulting from the reaction of glucose + Pi --> Glucose 6-phosphate, ∆G(2) is the free energy resulting from the reaction of ATP --> ADP + Pi, and ∆G3 is the total change in free energy by coupling these two reactions together.
Many chemicals' reactions are not spontaneous and require energy to occur. The spontaneity of a chemical reaction is determined by its Gibbs free energy value. If negative, the reaction will proceed spontaneously; if positive, the reaction will not be spontaneous. Note that this is not equivalent to kinetics, or the speed of a reaction; Gibbs free energy only determines the spontaneity of a given reaction. How quickly the reaction proceeds is determined by other factors, such as the presence of enzymes, the amount of heat (energy) that the system has available, and the physical properties of the reacting molecules.
Spontaneous reactions occur without the need for extra energy, but they may happen slowly. In order to catalyze non-spontaneous reactions, such as the synthesis of macromolecules, enzymes and coupling are used by the cell. Almost all reactions that take place in a cell are catalyzed by enzymes that decrease the activation energy of the reaction. Essentially, this means that the enzyme opens up a more favorable "pathway" for the reaction, allowing it to initiate more easily than before, and with less energy. In addition, an unfavorable reaction can be coupled together with a favorable one to make the overall reaction favorable. For example, Glucose + Pi -> Glucose-6-phosphate has a positive
G and is therefore unfavorable. But it can be coupled with ATP -> ADP + Pi (which has a negative
G) to make the reaction favorable. The overall reaction thus becomes ATP + Glucose -> ADP + Glucose-6-phosphate and has a negative
G. Therefore, ATP is considered the energy currency of the cell. However, it should be noted that other energy carrying molecules, such as GTP, do exist and are used for certain processes.
Anabolic and  catabolic processes are examples of how the cell couples reactions together to create efficient energy exchange cycles. These processes are explained in more detail in their respective sections; however, it is appropriate to mention them here as they provide a relevant example of reaction coupling. Basically, catabolic reactions are those that convert chemical fuels to molecules that the cell can use for energy, such as ATP and other high-energy compounds. Anabolic reactions are those that require some amount of energy to occur. Thus, the cell can conveniently couple anabolic reactions with catabolic ones - the products of catabolic reactions can be used to drive anabolic reactions to completion. This allows the cell to link different types of reactions together efficiently; it's almost a type of "cellular recycling", as the products of one reaction (i.e. a catabolic one) can be re-used to help another reaction reach completion (i.e. an anabolic one).
Organisms are transducers of energy, since in the transfer of energy they are less than 100% efficient. Organisms employ the energy harnessed to grow, repair, and maintain their bodies. The energy is also use to compete with other organisms, and to produce new organisms (offspring). In the process of doing these things, organisms generate waste, chemicals and heat. Organisms create local regions of order at the expense of using up some fraction of the total supply of useful energy found in the universe.
A sulfhydryl is a functional group consisting of a sulfur bonded to a hydrogen atom. The sulfhydryl group, also called a thiol, is indicated in chemistry nomenclature by "-thiol" as a suffix and "mercapto-" or "sulfanyl" as a prefix. Thiols have great affinity for soft metals. Sulfhydryls play an important role in biochemistry, as disulfide bonds connect necessary amino acids together for functional purpose in secondary, tertiary, or quaternary  proteins structures.
Sulfhydryl groups can be found in the amino acid cysteine. When two cysteine residues are in close proximity to each other, they can form a disulfide bridge also called cystine. The formation of a disulfide bond is an example of a post translational modification. It can be helpful to the structure of proteins, but it can make it difficult to accurately determine the sequence of a protein through the technique of Edman Sequencing. Disulfide bridges often play important structural and functional roles in proteins. Their hold are crucial in the formation of many tertiary structures of proteins. Extracellular proteins usually contain disulfide bonds whereas intracellular proteins usually lack disulfide bonds. These disulfide bonds can be broken with the addition of beta mercaptoethanol. Beta mercaptoethanol reduces the disulfide bonds back into their sulfhydryl form. It was found by Christian Anfinsen that proteins denatured by beta mercaptoethanol in urea will spontaneously reform its disulfide bonds if trace amounts of beta mercaptoethanol are present. This reformed protein was found to be fully functional. If the protein was reformed in the absence of urea, it was found that the function was greatly reduced. This is due to the fact that the wrong disulfide bonds were formed and the amino acid became "scrambled."
The C-S bond in thiols are 180 picometers in length, and the C-S-H bonds are at a 90° angle, significantly more acute than alcohols. Their main cohesive forces are van der Waals interactions, and sulfur is less electronegative than the oxygen in hydroxyl groups, making them less polar.
Thiols can be easily oxidized, and thiolates act as potent neucleophiles.
The conjugate bases of thiols can be alkylated to give thiolethers.
Thiols, in the presence of a base, are oxidized to give an organic disulfide.
Thiols can be oxidized by more powerful reagents such as sodium hypochlorite to yield sulfonic acids.
R–SH + 3H2O2 → RSO3H + 3H2O
Thiols can also undergo thiol-disulfide exchange.
Organolithium compounds can react with sulfur to make thiols.[1]
Berg, Jeremy M. (2007). Biochemistry, 6th Ed., Sara Tenney. ISBN0-7167-8724-5.
Campbell, Neil A. Biology. 7th ed. San Francisco, 2005.
E. Jones and I. M. Moodie (1990), "2-Thiophenethiol", Org. Synth.; Coll. Vol. 6: 979
↑ E. Jones and I. M. Moodie (1990), "2-Thiophenethiol", Org. Synth.; Coll. Vol. 6: 979
Note for VB.NET users:
While the methods used here are still valid, they are generally not used. They have been included in this guide as they are more similar to the Pseudocode file management, hopefully making them easier to understand. Even though it is not practice to use them, they should still be acceptable in an exam.
FileOpen(17, “Beans.txt”, OpenMode.Append)
FileOpen(FileNumber, “Styles.css”, OpenMode.Input)
FileOpen(NamesFile, “Names.tmp”, OpenMode.Output)
In VB.NET you can use the FreeFile() function to automatically obtain an unused file number, avoiding any problems that could occur if accidentally using the same number for two files.Dim FileNumber As Integer = FreeFile()
It is good practice to always keep track of your file numbers, as it will help reduce bugs (aka forgetting or using the wrong file number), remove any Magic Numbers and make the code easier to read and understand.
Used when Writing data to the file.
If the file already exists, the new data will be added to the file after any existing data.
Used when Reading data from the file.
Used when Writing data to the file.
If the file already exists, the file will be deleted and a new file will be created with the new data.
One a file is opened in 'Read' mode, you can use the following commands to read the data from the files.
/Datatypes declared as strings
The File Identifer is the file number used identify the file when it was opened.
The Variable should be of data type STRING. This command reads the text file line by line.
The EOF() function can be used in Pseudocode and VB.NET to determine whether the file pointer is at the end of the file. It returns a Boolean Value, and can be useful when implementing loops.EOF(<File Identifier>)
Once a file is opened in 'Write' or 'Append' mode, you can use the following commands to write the data to the files.
WRITEFILE Beans.txt, BeanData
WRITEFILE Names.tmp, CurrentUser
WRITEFILE Recipes.db, NewRecipe
The File Identifer is the file number used identify the file when it was opened.
The Variable should be of data type STRING.
CLOSEFILE Beans.txt
CLOSEFILE Styles.css
CLOSEFILE Names.tmp
The File Identifer is the file number used identify the file when it was opened.
You should always remember to close your files. Failure to do so can result in major problems later on when any program tries to open the file, or the program tries to open or edit a different file with the same identifier.
Description: Most giant puffballs grow to be 10 to 70 cm in diameter, although occasionally some can reach diameters up to 150 cm and weights of 20 kg. The inside of the mature Giant puffballs is greenish brown, whereas the interior of immature puffballs is white. The large white mushrooms are edible when young.
Availability: Late Summer, Fall
Use: Cooked vegetable, or use like cultivated mushrooms
WARNING: Cut the mushroom open before using it, and check for rudimentary gill or stem. The deadly Amanitas looks like a puffball when it is young before its stem grows, but it will have the gills or stem. Also, make sure  the interior flesh is pure white rather than yellowish.
Allocate 760M of memory for the virtual machine and choose 1 processor.
Choose to Create a New Virtual Disk.
Set the disk size to 30G and name the file [RAC11g] collabn1/system.vmdk – leave all other options at their defaults and click Next.
Choose to Add a Network Adapter.
Choose to create a NAT network connection.
Choose Don't Add a CD/DVD Drive.
Choose Don't Add a Floppy Drive.
Choose Don't Add a USB Controller.
Review the configuration and click Finish.  Do not power on the virtual machine yet.
Reduplication is a process that takes place when the root or stem is reduplicated and added to the existing one. The added morpheme might or might not be further modified and on the basis of this division one can distinguish partial and complete variants or reduplication. The latter of the two does not change the structure of the reiterated word.
Examples found in the Indonesian language[1]:
While these clearly show that the additional morpheme not only denotes 'various X' but also suggests plural, conversely English girly-girly and goody-goody represent derivatives whose meaning implies using irony or sarcasm.
Partial reduplication, in turn, takes advantage of morphemes that have been modified to a degree. This is where pseudomorphemes are introduced — such that have been modified in a way they remain as sound clusters that no longer carry meaning and serve as a tool of expressing stylisation or emotional involvement of the speaker: shillyshally, zig-zag. The presence of pseudomorphemes is an indicative of the word being an outcome of reduplication rather than compound-creation where meaningful morphemes are used.
↑ Szymanek, Bogdan (1998). Introduction to Morphological Analysis. p. 72.
The structural-functionalist school of sociology is concerned with macro-level explanations. Therefore, this school is interested primarily in how norms and institutions fit in the study of deviance.
In a society, a norm is a sort of rule that is enforced by the society. They are generally unwritten and most people take them for granted, not realizing the powerful force of norm enforcement until they have deviated from a norm. Society may punish deviants in three different levels:
Legal sanctions.
Stigmatization by the society as a deviant.
The preference of one action over another.
Anomie, in contemporary English, means a condition or malaise in individuals, characterized by an absence or diminution of standards or values. When applied to a government or society, anomie implies a social unrest or chaos.
In the original city state democracy, the majority rule was an aspect of arché because it was a rule-based, customary system which might or might not make laws, i.e. nomos. Thus, the original meaning of anomie defined anything or anyone against or outside the law, or a condition where the current laws were not applied resulting in a state of illegitimacy or lawlessness.
The contemporary English understanding of the word anomie can accept greater flexibility in the word “norm”, and some have used the idea of normlessness to reflect a similar situation to the idea of anarchy. But, as used by Émile Durkheim and later theorists, anomie is a reaction against or a retreat from the regulatory social controls of society, and is a completely separate concept from anarchy which is an absence of effective rulers or leaders.
The nineteenth century French pioneer sociologist Emile Durkheim borrowed the word from the French philosopher Jean-Marie Guyau and used it in his book Suicide (1897), outlining the causes of suicide to describe a condition or malaise in individuals, characterized by an absence or diminution of standards or values (referred to as normlessness), and an associated feeling of alienation and purposelessness. He believed that anomie is common when the surrounding society has undergone significant changes in its economic fortunes, whether for good or for worse and, more generally, when there is a significant discrepancy between the ideological theories and values commonly professed and what was actually achievable in everyday life. This is contrary to previous theories on suicide which generally maintained that suicide was precipitated by negative events in a person's life and their subsequent depression.
In Durkheim’s view, traditional religions often provided the basis for the shared values which the anomic individual lacks. Furthermore, he argued that the division of labor that had been prevalent in economic life since the Industrial Revolution led individuals to pursue egoistic ends rather than seeking the good of a larger community.
Robert King Merton also adopted the idea of anomie to develop Strain Theory, defining it as the discrepancy between common social goals and the legitimate means to attain those goals. In other words, an individual suffering from anomie would strive to attain the common goals of a specific society yet would not be able to reach these goals legitimately because of the structural limitations in society. As a result the individual would exhibit deviant behavior. Friedrich Hayek notably uses the word anomie with this meaning.
Anomie as a social disorder is not to be confused with anarchy. Anarchy denotes lack of rulers, hierarchy, and command, whereas anomie denotes lack of rules, structure, and organization. Many proponents of anarchism claim that anarchy does not necessarily lead to anomie and that hierarchical command actually increases lawlessness (see e.g. the Law of Eristic Escalation).
As an older variant, the Webster 1913 dictionary reports use of the word anomie as meaning “disregard or violation of the law”.
Emil Durkheim is the founder of the structural functionalist perspective. This is essentially the view that everything in society has a given function that it must perform within that society in order for it to continue to survive. There are two main types of functions that a particular social phenomena can perform. They are Manifest and Latent functions. The former are those functions in society that are intended and direct. An example of this would be the function of a police force to prevent crime and enforce criminal law. Latent functions on the other hand are those things which come about indirectly and, while still being a necessary function, are less straight forward. Another example using a police force would be its latent function of maintaining the belief in the general population that society is operating smoothly (or that it isn't running so smoothly, depending on regional variations).
Merton's structural-functional idea of deviance and anomie.
Robert King Merton expanded on the idea that anomie is the alienation of the self from society due to conflicting norms and interests by describing 5 different types of actions that occur when personal goals and legitimate means come into conflict with each other. Instead of social integration and social regulation, Merton focused on the two variables of goals and legitimate means.
These two dimensions determine the adaptation to society according to the cultural goals, which are the society's perceptions about the ideal life, and to the institutionalized means, which are the legitimate means through which an individual may aspire to the cultural goals.
There are 5 possible combinations of adaptation. When an individual accepts the goals and means together, he is working under conformity. (Example: White collar employee who holds a job to support a family.) When an individual accepts the goals but uses illegitimate means in order to achieve them, he commits crimes in order to emulate the values of those who conform; in other words, they must use innovation in order to achieve cultural goals. (Example: Drug dealer who sells drugs to support a family.) An individual may lose faith in cultural goals but still feel obligated to work under the routines of legitimate daily life. This person is practicing ritualism. (Example: A white collar employee who holds a job, but has become completely discontent with the American Dream.) Individuals may also reject both goals and means and fall under retreatism, when they ignore the goals and the means of the society. (Example: Drug addicts who have stopped caring about the social goals and use drugs as a way to escape reality.) Finally, there is a fifth type of adaptation which is that of rebellion, where the individual rejects the cultural goals and the institutionalized means, but seeks to redefine new values for society. (Example: Radicals who want to repair or even destroy the capitalist system in order to build a new social structure.)
Merton states that anomie is the state in which social goals and the legitimate means to achieve them do not correspond.
5 ways of adaptation to society according to Culture Goals (A) and Institutionalized Means (B)
The General Assembly is one of the six principal organs of the United Nations. It is the only one of these six in which all Member nations are given the opportunity for representation.
The GA serves as a forum where all Member States have a voice since all member states are represented. Member nations can launch initiatives regarding international questions of peace, economic progress, and human rights. The GA can initiate studies; make recommendations; develop and codify international law; promote human rights; and further international economic, social, cultural, and educational programs.
In the event that the Security Council cannot meet, or cannot concur unanimously for a resolution on a specific matter, the GA may have the opportunity to hold special "emergency sessions". Within the GA, it is arguably much more feasible to successfully pass a resolution, given that a big five nation (one of the five major Allied victors of World War II) in the SC vetoes a resolution. The GA mandates that all Member nations are offered representation, as opposed to merely 15 total Members in the Security Council. It is important to note, however, that the reason why the Security Council has relatively fewer nations than the GA is so that it can act quickly. Again, the single veto of a big five nation can impede progress.
Resolutions passed in the GA are nonbinding, meaning that the resolutions the GA passes do not need to be followed by nations, as opposed to the Security Council, which passes binding resolutions, in which nations are required to follow by the terms of SC resolutions if specified to do so.
Veto power is absent within the GA.
First Committee: The First Committee is formally known as the Committee on Disarmament and International Security, sometimes abbreviated as DISEC. The role of First Committee is to discuss threats to international public safety, such as anti-personnel land mines and weapons of mass destruction. The First Committee has discussed nuclear arms/weapons proliferation since the conceiving of the first nuclear weapons in the 1950's by the United States of America. Because the Committee has dealt with nuclear proliferation for such a long time, many people or scholars who study the United Nations generally recognize First Committee as the 'sideline' nuclear proliferation committee within the UN. (The main UN committee that deals with nuclear proliferation is the IAEA, or International Atomic Energy Agency)
Second Committee: The Second Committee is formally known as the Economic and Financial Committee . ECOSOC, or Economic and Social Council, deals with similar matters that the Second Committee discusses sometimes.
Third Committee: The Third Committee is formally known as the Social, Political, Humanitarian Committee, SOCHUM for short. Some issues of common discussion and debate are religious intolerance in troubled areas around the world, basic human rights violations, and humanitarian violations. Some additional UN organs that usually have more of a part than Third Committee include the World Health Organization, United Nations Children's Fund, among others.
Fourth Committee: Otherwise known as the Committee for Special Political and Decolonization, or SPECPOL, the Fourth Committee attempts to ameliorate situations in which a territory once occupied through imperialistic forces can enter a state of self-sovereignty.
Fifth Committee: The Administrative and Budgetary Committee deals with administration within the UN and finances that the UN finds necessary in order to function.
Sixth Committee: Known notoriously as the Legal Committee, Sixth Committee deals with the legal aspect of UN issues. The Legal Committee sometimes refers issues to the ICJ, or International Court of Justice.
After a GA sub-committee has met and agrees on a resolution, the sub-committee submits their resolution to the main GA body for a special plenary session, in which all members of the GA are given the opportunity to vote on that sub-committee's resolution.
PAUL: Mes chers collégues, Every day there are brought to
Paris great masses of firewood, which drain away large sums of
a park, and he will guarantee an adequate supply of fuel to our
JOHN: I support the proposal of my honourable friend, the
How to study German using the bite-sized lesson format
The bite-sized lesson format means that you typically will not need to spend a lot of time on each lesson. Both new grammar and new vocabulary have been kept to a minimum. This was done with three goals in mind:
You will not be overwhelmed with the amount of new things you are expected to learn;
You will be able to practise what you learned very quickly rather than having to go a long while without any control that you understood correctly;
You will probably not have to stop reading in the middle of a lesson;
In order to make the maximum out of this format, go through the following steps:
When starting to study a new lesson, find at least 1 hour of free time, preferably away from any distractions in a calm and tidy place where your only focus will be on the lesson. Study the lesson carefully and if possible without interruptions (breaks of a few minutes are allowed and may even be beneficial if you just close your eyes and sit back):
Look at the goals of the lesson and think of how being able to speak German in general and achieving the lesson's goal in particular can be helpful for you. Imagine yourself expressing yourself fluently in German.
Read the text or dialogue and try to grasp the gist, but at least try to recognise a few words. English introductions, the format, foreign words or names appearing in the text, German words that look similar to English ones or that you have learned in a previous lesson are your friends.
Study the mandatory vocabulary. Pay attention to the comments in the third column, they might contain useful hints. Looking up the words in the text / dialogue may help you to remember how they are used. Try to think of mnemonics (things that help you memorise, e. g. imagining lifting a very heavy box, it dropping on your foot and you swearing in order to remember that the German word for 'heavy' is 'schwer', sounding approximately like the English word 'swear'). Mnemonics allow you to learn words much more quickly. Even if words don't sound 100% the same, they are close enough for your brain to get the hint. If you found a mnemonic that isn't mentioned in the lesson, please add it so that other users may benefit from it, too.
Study the grammar. Look at the text for further examples. Mnemonics will help you here, too, but if you can't find any, just saying things as a rhyme or with rhythm will usually do the trick. Also,  it may help you to memorise sample sentences or sample words with the feature you're trying to learn, e. g. students of Latin typically learn "amo - amas - amat - ..." rather than just the endings -o, -s, -t... .
Re-read the text and do exercises in order to make sure that you understood everything. You needn't do all of the exercises if you are sure you understood already.
Now imagine yourself involved a similar situation. Is there anything you would like to say that you can't say yet? Having a look at the Extension section and the lists of optional vocabulary there might help you. The words introduced there can be used without any additional grammar knowledge. You may also use this section in order to build your vocabulary. Pick out any words that you consider relevant to your situation or that you believe would be useful to know. These are typically words that some might use often and others rarely or not at all. Any words that are really frequently used will eventually be taught in the main vocabulary section of the lessons (even if they appeared in the optional vocabulary section of a previous lesson).
Now you may stop studying for the day, if you like. You could also continue to the next lesson, if you feel ready for more grammar and vocabulary and if you have the time.
You should try to revise the lessons you already did at least twice on different days. Revision doesn't take as long as the actual study, so it can be integrated into the day much more easily, whenever you have a few minutes to spare. If you don't have the time to read through the whole lesson, just re-read the text / dialogue in order to remind yourself of the vocabulary and grammar. If you find you can't understand something then, you should look it up in the vocabulary or grammar section and maybe do some more exercises. You could also just do some exercises without reading the rest of the lesson if you want to see whether you remembered the grammar correctly.
In order to be really sure that you commit the vocabulary to your long-term memory rather than just the short-term one, I recommend flashcards along with the method of making different stacks and quizzing yourself on the ones that you appear to know less often than on the ones that you can't seem to memorise. You can find special boxes with compartments for this method or computer programs employing it, too.
You can find more general information about how to learn a language well in the Wikibook "How to learn a language"
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
v • d • e Research MethodsBook's main Page: Research Methods
Measurement, Reliability, Validity
Comparing Two Levels of Independent Variables (IV): t-Test
Categorical DataThis template is to be used on all pages of the book Research Methods.
In response to Sosa's formulation of a virtue epistemology that rested on the virtuous use of reliable faculties, other philosophers began to formulate their own versions. Some thought that although Sosa had been right to bring attention to intellectual virtues, that he was wrong in not conceptualising intellectual virtues as praiseworthy character traits more akin to the virtues of virtue ethics. The contributions of this group of philosophers led to the birth of virtue responsibilism. Although virtue epistemologists had many different motivations for developing this theory, such as to better understand our intellectual responsibilities to others or as a way of guiding intellectual practice, in this chapter we will be focusing on the work of Linda Zagzebski whose project was focused on the use of virtue responsibilism to provide the proper analysis of knowledge. Zagzebski defines knowledge simply: knowledge is "belief arising out of acts of intellectual virtue". However, this simplicity hides a complex theory of intellectual virtues that at once attempts to solve the Gettier problem in a way similar to Sosa, whilst at the same time explaining the acquisition of high-level knowledge such as that acquired by a brilliant scientist or genius detective.
The virtue responsibilist analysis of knowledge: S knows that p if and only if
S believes that p, and
S's belief that p arises from an act of intellectual virtue
An act of intellectual virtue A is an act which:
Acts of intellectual virtue have three components.
When people have moral virtues such as generosity, compassion, kindness and so on, they are motivated to make the world a certain way. For example, a compassionate person seeing somebody in pain would want to relieve there suffering and so would be motivated to do something to make the person feel better. In direct analogy, the first feature of an intellectually virtuous act is that it must arise from the motivational component of an intellectual virtue. In the case of compassion, the motivational component is a desire to relieve the suffering in the world. In the case of curiosity (as an example of an intellectual virtue), the motivational component is the desire to discover new things and to come to a deeper understandings of the things we already know. Likewise, intellectual humility may motivate us to hear out other perspectives before we form conclusions, and intellectual courage may motivate us to propose creative solutions to problems even if they seem outlandish to others. These are all examples of intellectually virtuous motivations.
Virtuous motivations are part of what makes an act praiseworthy but it isn't the whole story. Consider the example of a person that acts kindly to somebody else but only because they do not want to seem mean to their friends (not because they are genuinely motivated by kindness). It seems that in this case, the act of kindness itself is morally valuable even if it is not motivated by virtuous reasons. In general, people who are not virtuously motivated can still do the "right" thing and this is just as true for intellectual action as it is for moral action. To put it in other words, part of the value of a virtuous act is that it is the kind of thing that a virtuous person would do under the circumstances and, therefore, another component of an intellectually virtuous act is that it is the kind of thing that an intellectually virtuous person would do.
Finally, acts of intellectual virtue must also be successful in meeting the ends of the virtuous motivation because of these previously mentioned features. In the case of the compassionate person described previously, the motivational component of compassion is the desire to relieve the suffering in the world and the end of this motivational component in the given scenario is to make the hurting person feel better. For an act under these circumstances to be truly virtuous, it must succeed in making the hurting person feel better, otherwise it would be a failed virtuous act, and it must achieve this success because it was virtuously motivated and because it was the kind of thing a virtuous person would do, otherwise it would just be lucky. For acts of intellectual virtues, truth is the end that must be successfully achieved and it must be achieved due to the first two components. Similarly to Sosa's aptness condition, this condition requires that the truth of the belief be tied up with the virtuousness of the act and there is a similar argument that because of this it can avoid Gettier cases.
Some virtue epistemologists have critiqued Zagzebski's theory of intellectually virtuous acts. For example, many virtue epistemologists see the analysis of knowledge to be a less important task of epistemology than the task of telling us what we should believe and how we should conduct our intellectual inquiry. These virtue epistemologists, called "virtue anti-theorists", argue that the central task of virtue epistemology is to study particular intellectual virtues to fully understand their unique value and that any attempt to make systematic connections between all virtues and knowledge is doomed to failure. In the next chapter, we will study similar thoughts behind an approach to epistemology called "knowledge first epistemology" which holds that knowledge is unanalysable. A more particular argument against Zagzebski's theory is that the conditions for a virtuous act are too strict. For example, consider a person who donates to charity out of kindness but the money is lost in transaction before it got to the charity. In this case, it seems that even though the act of giving to charity failed to achieve its virtuous end, it is nonetheless a virtuous act. We might also worry that the condition that we have intellectually virtuous motivations for a belief to count as knowledge may be too strict. This will be discussed more in the next section of this chapter and the distinction between high and low grade knowledge.
A Gettier counterexample to Zagzebski's virtue responsibilism provided by Heather Battally is shown below:
Brenda is a detective investigating the murder of an accountant for a big corporation
There are 2 suspects: the CEO of the corporation and the accountant’s husband – there is evidence against both of them and they both have a motive
Brenda considers the evidence and comes to the conclusion that, although it’s mixed, it points more towards the CEO than the husband
Out of intellectual humility, Brenda is motivated to hear out the opinions of her investigative team so that she can feel more certain that she has come to the truth (virtuous motivation)
The CEO of the company knows the evidence against him is strong, so he uses his massive amount of money to hire a hypnotist to brainwash the investigative team into believing that the accountant’s husband committed the murder
After listening to her investigative team (the kind of act an intellectually humble person would do), Brenda is convinced and forms the belief that the husband is the murderer
It turns out that the murderer actually was the accountant’s husband
If Brenda hadn't been virtuously motivated and acted as an intellectually humble person would do, she would not have believed that the husband committed the murder
Therefore, Brenda is successful in reaching the truth due to the appropriate features of her actions and so according to virtue responsibilism has knowledge
BUT we would never really consider this knowledge because the investigative team was brainwashed - Brenda only has knowledge through luck!
Serial Programming: Introduction and OSI Network Model
-- RS-232 Wiring and Connections
-- Typical RS232 Hardware Configuration
-- MAX232 Driver/Receiver Family
-- Hayes-compatible Modems and AT Commands
-- Error Correction Methods
-- Packet Recovery Methods
-- Practical Application Development
-- IP Over Serial Connections
This content is part of the Serial Programming book. It covers the programming of Hayes and Hayes-compatible telephone modems. Such types of modems are the norm in consumer applications, as well as many professional applications - basically, wherever modems are still used.
Modem programming is slowly becoming a lost art, particularly with the widespread migration of users from dial-up lines to DSL for very obvious performance reasons. Nevertheless, modems are used for many applications. In recent times, modems can be found in new areas where they were previously not seen. For example, embedded modems in machines are used to automatically  "call home" to the manufacturer in case the machine is in need of some service. Often this is done via a wireless phone system, where the wireless module still provides a Hayes-compatible interface for dialing and data transmission.
The original Hayes modem command set is exclusively used as a reference in this module. Vendor specific extensions are not covered, and do not belong into this module. The module explains the origin of the term Hayes, and the related AT commands. It also includes some principal information about what a modem is, and how the signaling with a modem happens. The module then continues with a description of the basics of modem programming, including the set-up of a development environment.
Further, the module provides detailed (but incomplete) programming information, and an incomplete reference of the original Hayes command set and registers.
This section particularly addresses potential authors. Please note:
This module is not a dumping ground for random modem programming information and folklore.
This module is operating-system–agnostic. The Programming Serial Data Communications book provides other modules for such information.
This module deals with generic Hayes modems, not with any vendor-specific extensions. If you really want to see your particular love-child covered, provide an Appendix with that vendor-/brand-specific information.
Do not assume that just because something works on your particular modem it is the standard and other modems do it the same way. If you have no firsthand experience that something is done the same way on "almost" all Hayes-compatible modems, then leave it out, or mark it at least as doubtful.
The reason why this module sticks with the original Hayes command set is to have a defined boundary. This module is not intended as a reference manual. Once someone has mastered the basic set, and implemented the code, it is rather straightforward to deal with vendor-specific extensions. Other extensions, e.g. the very rough and basic FAX extensions, require some deep insight into the involved protocols (e.g. in the case of FAX the detailed encoding, compression and timing of fax data on the phone line). This is out of the scope of this book. If you know how to handle the FAX extensions, write your own book.
Hayes Microcomputer Products, Inc. was a modem manufacturer from the beginning of the 1980s until the end of the 1990s, with its heyday in the early '90s. The name Hayes still exists as a brand name, owned by Zoom Telephonics, Inc. (as of Fall 2004).
In 1981, Hayes developed the Hayes Smartmodem.  This was a unique product at the time, because this modem was no longer simply a "dumb" device blindly converting serial data to and from audio tones, but contained some "intelligence". It was possible to send commands to the modem to configure it, to execute certain operations (such as dialling a number, quieting the speaker, hanging up, etc.), and to read the current status of the connection. Hayes developed and published a command set to control the modem over a serial line. This command set became popular among consumer modem manufacturers, and was cloned by many different manufacturers. Known as both the "Hayes command set" and the "AT command set", it has long been the de facto standard for controlling consumer modems and also many professional modems. Modems which support this command set are called Hayes-compatible.
The commands were standardised at some point in time, however, as it is typical with standards, there are several standards. Plus, of course, there are still vendor-specific extensions and implementations in different modems vary slightly. Some of these enhancements were required to support at that time emerging features, such as data compression and FAX support. As a result, the command sets of modern modems are not fully compatible with each other. The original Hayes commands, however, should still work, and still form the core of almost all consumer modem command sets.
The basic set of commands was at some point in time standardised as TIA/EIA-602 and the syntax as EIA/TIA-615. But as already mentioned, modem manufacturers added their extensions. A larger extended set, particular under the pressure from cell phone manufacturers, was standardised as ITU V.250 (old name V.25ter). That one usually forms the base for professional Hayes-compatible modems, and cell phones with build in data modems. ITU V.250 further referes to a bunch of other standards (e.g. V.251, V.252, V.253) for particular applications and extensions, and also has some supplements. Plus, of course there are the many standards defining other aspects of a modem, like compression and transmission.
What are AT Commands?
Almost all of the Hayes modem commands start with the two letter sequence AT - for getting the modem's attention. Because of this, modem commands are often called AT Commands. This still holds for many of the manufacturer specific command set extensions. Most of them also start with AT, and are called AT Commands, too. Please note, that just because an AT command contains a & does not make it an extensions. & commands were already part of the original Hayes command set.
The exact usage of the term AT command set slightly varies from manufacturer to manufacturer, often subject to marketing blurbs. In general, it can be assumed that a modem with an AT command set
A modem in the classic sense is a modulator/demodulator for transmitting digital information over analog wires, such as the analog telephone system's two-wire or four-wire lines. The term has come to be used as acceptable slang for many communication devices used to link a computer to either another computer, or a wide-area network (Wikipedia:WAN).  For example, the Ricochet radio data transceivers were commonly known as "Ricochet modems".
This module deals with the classic type of smart modems, designed to convert data from/to a serial interface to/from an analog line. The module also applies to modems which provide the classic serial interface but connect over a different physical layer, such as a digital line, as well as devices providing a serial modem-like interface for other purposes. For our purpose, the modem is a classic DCE (data communications equipment) device, controlled via serial line by a classic DTE (data terminal equipment) device (such as a computer).
Depending on the type of modem, the modem can use a number of different technologies and speeds to transmit the data over the analog line. The details of these technologies are of no particular interest here, other than to note that it is possible with most modems to specify these communication parameters (for example, to disable compression, or to change modulation techniques).  The data this module deals with is not the data on the analog line, but the data as it appears on the serial interface between the DTE and DCE. I.e. the data as read and written by a device like a computer.
(Smart) Modems also provide auxiliary services, such as dialling a particular number to set up a connection. As a consequence, a modem can be in a number of different states and modes, which are not always orthogonal. It is possible, for example, for a modem to be in the command mode while still keeping a connection (see the +++ sequence for details).
The original RS232C/V.24 specification contained a TX wire for transmitting data and a RX wire for receiving data, and other completely separate wires for transmitting control information between the DTE and DCE, the idea being to separate data and control information. In telecommunication jargon this is called outband signalling.
Hayes-compatible modems use almost none of these RS232C/V.24 features. Instead, communication with the modem is done almost exclusively via the same RX/TX lines which are used for transferring the data. This mechanism is called inband signalling.
Inband signalling has significant disadvantages. At any point in time, both the DTE and DCE must know if information sent or received via the TX and RX lines is for signalling purposes, or if it is data, which should be handled transparently.  Therefore, the DTE and DCE must operate in sync. If they get out of sync, either data will be lost, data will be incorrectly interpreted as commands, or signalling information will be interpreted as data, effectively destroying the original data.
Inband signalling has the advantage that the wiring between the DTE and DCE is simpler, and also that, at least at first glance, the communication software in the DTE is simpler.
As it has been said, Hayes-compatible modems use almost none of the RS232 control lines. But only almost. For example, they often drive DCD (data carrier detect). This, however creates the situation that modem-driving software now has to take care not only of the inband, but also the outband signalling with a modem. This slightly complicates the communication software's state machine.
Further, especially with the rise of cell phone modems, manufacturers have again started to introduce more outband signaling. Such modems provide multiple virtual serial interfaces. Some of these interfaces are exclusively dedicated to data transport, controlled by another serial interface which is either used exclusively for signalling (i.e. outband signalling) or can still also be used in the more conventional inband signalling scenario. In such cases the communication software needs to manage even more complex states.
With respect of controlling the modem a Hayes-compatible modem is in one of two main states:
The modem interprets data from the DTE as modem commands. The modem can be in command state while still keeping a connection with a remote party.
The modem interprets data from the DTE as payload and transmits it to the other party. This state requires that a connection to the remote site has been established.
Inside these main states are a number of sub states. Also, with respect to other issues a modem has a number of communication states, e.g. if a remote carrier has been detected or not.
A modem in originating mode is a modem which is setting up a connection, e.g., by dialing the number of a remote station and initiating the negotiation of protocols.
A modem in answer mode is a modem waiting to be contacted and ready to "answer the phone".
A modem is supposed to send a response for almost all commands it receives. These responses can either be in the form of ASCII strings, or numeric values. The response type can be switched with a command, but it is typical to use the ASCII responses.
Responses need to be tracked by the DTE with great care. Among other things they inform the DTE if the dialling of the remote site was successful or not, and if the modem switches from command state to on-line state or not.
Unfortunately, the set of response messages has been greatly enhanced since the original Hayes modems and are often configurable via additional AT commands. It is suggested to not strictly parse response messages but to forgivingly check if they contain interesting keywords, like CONNECT. It is also suggested to study the manual of a particular modem very carefully.
The so called S-registers are also a Hayes heritage which all Hayes-compatible modems support. They are registers in the modem which contain various settings. And like the AT commands, they have been extensively enhanced by different modem manufacturers.
The reason why they are called S-Registers is a little bit unclear. Some say the S stands for modem settings. Some say they are just called like this, because      they are set and read with ATS... commands.  In the common vernacular they were usually termed storage registers because they permanently stored the values even through power-off.
Several of the other AT commands also change values of particular S-Registers. There is usually no difference in setting a value directly via an S-Register or via another AT command. It depends on the particular situation which way of setting a register is better.
In order to program for an actual modem it is a rather good idea to obtain the command reference for that particular modem. Unfortunately, it has become quite common for no-name modems to ship without any kind of usable command reference. Thanks to Windows' Plug & Play feature it is no longer necessary on Windows to know the individual commands. Instead, all that is needed for a modem to run on Windows is to be shipped with the necessary .inf files (often hidden inside some "installer" software, and called a "driver" which is technically not the case, Windows already contains the necessary drivers).
If the modem doesn't come with a command reference the next logical step is to search the web. However, unfortunately, a lot of modem information has vanished from the surface of the earth and the web in recent years. With the rise of broadband Internet connections, modems have become old fashioned devices and many sources are no longer available. It has become more and more difficult to find basic information about particular modem types. Even for modern modems like cell phone modems it can be difficult to find the necessary information.
There are a number of alternatives to obtain a command reference if one doesn't come with the modem:
Maybe the distributor provides one on its website
Maybe the OEM manufacturer provides one.This requires to identify the OEM manufacturer. A possible way is to use the FCC number of the device, and then looking the original manufacturer up on the FCC web site.
Maybe the chipset manufacturer provides one.Consumer modems are often just build around "off-the-shelf" modem chipsets from larger hardware manufacturers. The cheaper the modem, the more likely it is that the modem manufacturer didn't change anything in the firmware and is using the original example software from the chipset manufacturer. Some chipset vendors provide command references for their modems.
By looking into the corresponding Windows .inf files it is possible to at least obtain the basic commands
By using the generic Hayes command reference in this Wikibook module.
Obtaining the previously mentioned standard documents if there is an indication a particular modem complies to such a command standard.
Using some kind of sniffer program to monitor the communication between the modem and the DTE and reverse engineering the commands using the obtained information. This requires that (a) reverse engineering is legal in your jurisdiction and (b) that there is some DTE communication software available that handles the particular modem so there is some valid communication to sniff.
It is highly recommended to spend some preparation time setting up a suitable development environment before starting to write drivers or software for a modem. Most of this consists of hardware set-up.
It is suggested to set up a small network with a "remote" computer and a second modem in answer mode. "Remote" computer in this case means a computer sitting right next to the development machine, but connected via the modems. If a terminal program is being developed, the "remote" computer should run some small BBS software (for example), so there is always someone ready to answer, and/or protocol analysis/data dump software. Developing modem software without such a setup can be extremely frustrating. Such a set-up pays off a hundred times in reduced development time and lower stress.  Likewise, the modems used should have real speakers, and support ATMn commands well enough that you can leave the speaker on for the entire connection process (and ideally have the option to leave it on, period).  "Debugging by ear" can be a reality with modems, particularly during compatibility testing.
If possible, a hardware protocol analyser, or at least an RS-232 breakout box, should be obtained.  These can be placed between the computers and modems, if needed, to troubleshoot the serial link and ensure that data is, in fact, being transferred between the modem and the computer -- a sanity check which comes in handy far more often than you might expect.  Actual hardware protocol analysers are surprisingly expensive, however; old Wyse terminals are not, and are almost as useful for this purpose.  If you find one, pick it up.  Terminals that support automatic baud-rate detection are particularly useful.
If dialing with the modem also needs to be tested, a small analog PABX for home usage is needed.  These PABX units are dirt cheap; an analog PABX for four internal lines and one external line should cost no more than US$50. If dialing is not needed, then the modems should be capable of directly driving a two-wire or four-wire line in leased-line mode; otherwise, the PABX is still needed.
c) Leased-Line Mode with Protocol Analyser
Other combinations are of course also useful. And being able to easily reconnect the protocol analyser, e.g. between Modem B and the BBS Computer is helpful, too.
Operating System, Programming Language & Communication Basics
Before dealing with the details of handling a modem, a few basics should be in place. First of all, the communication with the serial interface should be in place. This includes that the APIs as provided by the particular operating system for serial communication - if any - should be understood. If the operating system doesn't provide such APIs, then it is recommended to first implement the UART access and wrap it into a library, if the serial UART in some hardware is supposed to be programmed directly. Alternatively, a programming language which provides convenient access to a serial interface can be used.
Whatever is used, it should be tested before starting to program for the modem. There is nothing more annoying than not knowing if a particular misbehaviour is caused by a failure in the serial communication with the modem, or is a problem with the modem (usually with the commands sent to it).
Unless in the most simple case, it is suggested to use hardware handshaking with the modem - particularly for speeds greater then 2400 bit/s or 9600 bit/s. Therefore, the used low-level serial communication software and hardware should support hardware handshake. If the UART supports some FIFO, like the 16550 UART, the FIFO should be enabled (both for sending and receiving data).
It is undecided if data reception via polling or via interrupts is better. If every incoming byte raises an interrupt there are many interrupts at high communication speeds, and, as surprising as it might sound, polling the UART might be more efficient in such cases.
Communication as supported by a modem is usually half-duplex. Either the DTE or the DCE talks, the other side is supposed to listen. The communication with the modem should best be done with
See the next section for speed information.
Helpful Hint!
An issue which can be very confusing is the difference between the line speed (the data transfer speed on the telephone line) and the speed on the serial line between the DTE (computer) and the DCE (modem).
First, there is always some general confusion about the line speed, because some line speed is given with taking compression into account, while other data is given without taking compression into account. Also, there is a difference between bps and Baud due to the modulation schema used on the line. In addition, marketing blurbs obscure the picture. We will not make any attempt to clean up the long-standing Baud vs. bit/s confusion here (it is hopeless :-)). It is just recommended that whenever the modem returns information about line speed the above mentioned differences are taken into account to avoid any misinterpretation.
Second, the speed on the telephone line does not necessarily have to be the same as the speed on the serial line. In fact, it usually isn't on modern modems. It is recommended to set the DTE/DCE speed to a fixed speed instead of following the line speed. Logically, the fixed DTE/DCE speed should be large enough to cope with the highest expected line speed. V.90 modems should e.g. be accessed via 115200 bit/s or higher on the serial interface.
Setting the DTE/DCE speed on modern modems is quite simple. They all use autosensing on the serial interface. That is, they themselves detect the speed of data as received from the DTE and use the same speed to return data to the computer. They usually also autosense the parity, and 7 bit / 8 bit data length. Usually modems assume one stop bit when autosensing the serial interface. Therefore it is enough to just configure the serial interface on the DTE to the desired DTE/DCE communication parameters and let the modem figure it out on its own.
Autosensing can fail in rare cases and some modems might have broken autosensing. If a modem tends to fail autosensing it can help to start the initial communication after the DTE is configured with one or more nop AT commands
When a modem sets up a connection with a remote party it can report the used speed. In fact, it can report the line speed or just the DTE speed (some modems can report both). The end user is most probably interested in the line speed, and not the DTE/DCE speed. So from this point of view, it is best to set the modem to report the line speed, and e.g. write the received information to a log file.  However, some old communication software or modem drivers interpret the response from the modem as a request to change the DTE/DCE speed. In such cases the modem must be set to always return the DTE/DCE speed. Since this DTE/DCE speed will be the same as detected via autosensing there will be no speed change.
In the rare case that the DTE/DCE speed should indeed follow the line speed, the responses from the modem should of course be set to return the line speed. Then the DTE software has to evaluate the response, and change the DTE/DCE speed accordingly. This is really not recommended these days.
See the #W: Negotiation Progress Message Selection command for details on how to set which response to get.
Commands sent to the modem, and textual responses are supposed to be in the ISO 646 character set. ISO 646 is just another name for the  familiar 7-bit ASCII character set. Typically, modems chop off any 8th bit in commands they receive anyhow. They interpret the result as if the command has been sent using only 7-bit characters. However, it is not recommended to rely on this, but instead ensure that commands are only sent using 7-bit characters.
Commands are not case sensitive, assuming a modern modem. Some early modems insisted on uppercase-only commands. Still, a generic driver could do worse than ensuring that all commands are sent in uppercase, and all responses are interpreted case-independent. Typically, both letters of the AT command prefix must be of the same case. So AT and at are acceptable, while At and aT are not.
Modem programming means to tap into the world of telecommunications. This is an unknown field for most amateur, as well as professional programmers. Telecommunication is heavily centered around state-machines. And in fact, it is rather difficult or impossible to program a modem without using a state-machine. The modem is at any time in a particular state, and any DTE software which tries to control and use the modem needs to track the state of the modem - in its own state machine. This is necessary, because a Hayes-compatible modem can only do certain things when it is in a certain state. E.g. it can only dial out if it is not already connected to some remote site.
Part of a modem's state can be tracked via particular RS-232 lines. E.g. DCD (data carrier detect) can be used to figure out if the modem has detected a remote modem's carrier signal. Other information is provided by the flow-control lines. However, some states, and associated data need to be tracked via interpreting the modem's result codes.
People unfamiliar with the theory and practice of state machines often try to circumvent the issue by "tough coding". Which means, they throw more and more code onto the problem (wrapped in a heap of if/the/else/otherwise/maybe/... statements), until things seem to work - sort of. If they are lucky they have implicitly managed to create a state machine which works. If they are unlucky, they end up with a partial state machine, which breaks down should something unusual happen in the communication. This usually comes with the problem that the software was not designed to recover if things break down. So such software tends to hang or crash.
It is much more efficient to first spend a few hours to to learn the basics of simple state machines, and then spending a few more hours to describe the communication with the modem as a state machine. The result of this planning serves as a nice template for implementing the DTE software.
To do:Provide a complete state machine, describing all the usual modem and communication states, and the possible transitions
A slow device needs a way to tell its peer that currently, it is busy, so further incoming data must be stopped until this slow device tells otherwise. This mechanism is provided by flow control.
There are two ways of doing flow control: by hardware or software.
Hardware flow control is usually implemented using the CTS (Clear To Send) and RTS (Request To Send) lines, which needs separate hardware data lines between devices. This is allocated in the RS-232 cable specification.
Hardware flow control based on DSR (Data Set Ready) and DTR (Data Terminal Ready) is uncommon, particular for modems. It can usually be found at serial printers. Again, DSR/DTR hardware flow control requires additional hardware data lines between devices.
From a programming point of view there is usually not much difference in programming CTS/RTS or DSR/DTR hardware flow control. The hardware has to provide means to drive/read the corresponding signals in the serial interface. If the hardware supports both, CTS/RTS and DSR/DTR flow control, then it is recommended to support both and provide the user with a configuration option.
It should be noted that some hardware or operating system drivers do not provide means to drive/read the less common DSR/DTR combination. If the remote device insists on DTR/DSR flow control a common workaround is to use CTS/RTS in the software, but rewire the cabling so the CTS/RTS wires are in fact connected to DSR/DTR.
This kind of flow control doesn't need extra signal line(s) like hardware flow control, but instead uses special control characters within the data content.  To stop further incoming data, the receiving device sends the XOFF character.  To enable more data, an XON character will be sent.
However, since the data being sent cannot contain these characters (unless you know that the receiving device ignores such information), binary (non-ASCII) data cannot be transmitted this way.  Software flow control is typically used for communications to terminals and other character-based devices.  Binary data should not be sent this way as it could, randomly, contain these characters.  Hardware flow control using RTS/CTS is usually used.
Helpful Hint: Realizing that the Control Key is a special "shift" key that chops off the 100 bit (octal), it is easy to remember that the ASCII character used for sending XOFF is a Control-S (23 Octal) while the character for XON is a Control-Q (21 Octal).  [Think of "S" for Stop and "Q" for Qontinue... don't you spell it that way?]
Changing the state from command state to on-line state or vice versa is either straightforward or a great mystery. This module covers the more obscure ways.
It is of course possible to switch from on-line state to command state by dropping the connection (going on-hook in modem terminology). It is also possible to temporarily switch into command state while keeping the connection.
Going on-hook programmatically (and not via dropping a modem control line) requires to first switch into command state while keeping the connection, too.
Switching into command state, while in fact in the middle of transferring data (nothing else is meant with on-line state) requires to send a certain escape sequence as part of the data. This escape sequence is detected by the modem and the modem changes state. Since this character sequence might also be part of the normal data, an additional mechanism is needed to separate the escape sequence from normal data. This is the curse of inband signalling.
The separation of the escape sequence is done by using a so called guard time, which was once patented by Hayes. As a result, some modem manufacturers eliminated the guard time using an alternate escape sequence called the Time Independent Escape Sequence. Anyway, the escape sequence is only recognized by the modem when there was no other data from the DTE (terminal) for at least the duration of the guard time, and when there was no other data from the terminal after the escape sequence for at least the duration of the guard time, too.
An escape sequence consists of three times the same particular character. The character, as well as the guard time is configurable. By default, the character is +, and the guard time is one second. So, with the default configuration, a change to command state requires
If the connection should be dropped, this escape sequence should be followed by the AT command to go on-hook, which is ATH0:
The usual way to go from command state to on-line state is via dialing the remote site (see D command). But if the connection already exists, and the modem has been switched to command mode via the escape sequence, the way is different.
If the connection should not be dropped, but instead data transmission should be continued, the ATO0 (letter o, digit zero) command is needed:
Sync. vs. Async. Interface
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
The following list is the list of the original Hayes commands. Different modems use slightly different commands. However, this list is supposed to be as "generic" as possible, and should not be extended with modem specific commands. Instead it is recommended to provide such command lists in an Appendix.
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Here is a summary of the format and syntax of AT commands. Please note that most of the control characters are configurable, and the summary only uses the default control characters.
AT commands are accepted by the modem only when in command mode. The modem can be forced into command mode with the #+++: Escape Sequence.
Commands are grouped in command lines.
Each command line must start with the #AT: Command Prefix and terminated with #<CR>: End-of-line Character. The only exception is the #A/: Repeat Last Command command.
The body of a command line consists of visible ASCII characters (ASCII code 32 to 126). Space (ASCII code 32) and ASCII control characters (ASCII code 0 to 31) are ignored, with the exception of #<BS>: Backspace Character, #<CAN>: Cancel Character, and #<CR>: End-of-line Character.
All characters preceding the #AT: Command Prefix are ignored.
Interpretation / execution of the command line starts with the reception of the first (and also command-line terminating) #<CR>: End-of-line Character.
Characters after the initial #AT: Command Prefix and before the #<CR>: End-of-line Character are interpreted as commands. With some exceptions, there can be many commands in one command line.
Each of the basic commands consists of a single ASCII letter, or a single ASCII letter with a &prefix, followed by a numeric value.  Missing numeric values are interpreted as 0 (zero).
The following commands can't be followed by more commands on the command line. They must always be the last commands in a command line. If they are followed by other commands, these other commands are ignored. However, some of these commands take command modifiers and it is possible that a following command is accidentally interpreted as a command modifier. Therefore, care should be taken to not follow these commands with any more commands on the same command line. Instead, they should be placed in an own command line.
A command line can be edited if the terminating #<CR>: End-of-line Character has not ben entered, using the #<BS>: Backspace Character to delete one command line character at a time. The initial #AT: Command Prefix can't be edited/deleted (it has already been processed, because upon reception of the #AT: Command Prefix the modem immediately starts command line parsing and editing, but not execution).
The modem echoes command lines and edits when #E: Command State Character Echo Selection is on (surprise, surprise :-)).
When echo is on, #<BS>: Backspace Characters are echoed with a sequence of <BS> <BS> (backspace, space, backspace) to erase the last character in e.g. a terminal program on the DTE.
A command line can be cancelled at any time before the terminating #<CR>: End-of-line Character by sending the #<CAN>: Cancel Character. No command in the command line is executed in this case.
The #A: Answer Command and #D: Dial Command can also be cancelled as long as the handshake with the remote site has not been completed. Cancellation is done by sending an additional character. In theory, it doesn't matter which character. But care has to be taken that cancellation is not attempted when the handshake has already completed. In this case the modem has switched to on-line state (#Command State to On-line State) and the character will be send to the remote side. A save way to avoid this problem is to always use the #+++: Escape Sequence followed by going on-hock with the #H: Hook Command Options. If the modem is already in the on-line state, this will drop the connection. If the modem is still in the handshake phase the first character of the #+++: Escape Sequence will cancel the command (and the rest will be interpreted as a normal command line, doing no harm).
Command line execution stops when the first command in the command line fails, or the whole command line has been executed. Every command before the failed command has been executed. Every command after the failed command and the failed command in the command line has not been executed.
There is no particular indication which command in a command line failed, only that one failed. It is best to repeat the complete command line, or to first reset the modem to a defined state before recovering from a failure.
A modem only accepts a new command line when the previous command line has been executed (half-duplex communication). Therefore, care should be taken to only send the next command line after the result code from the previous command line has been received.
To be removed when all commands are documented.
<The syntax of the command, when necessary in EBNF>
<Description of the command, including information about the purpose and effects>
Parameter was valid <description of success>
<Link list of related commands and registers>
See Special Commands and Character Sequences Reference
Modern consumer modems provide a number of additional features which were originally uncommon for a modem, but became standard features over time. This section provides an overview about how to program these features.
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Serial Programming: Introduction and OSI Network Model
-- RS-232 Wiring and Connections
-- Typical RS232 Hardware Configuration
-- MAX232 Driver/Receiver Family
-- Hayes-compatible Modems and AT Commands
-- Error Correction Methods
-- Packet Recovery Methods
-- Practical Application Development
-- IP Over Serial Connections
A reader requests expansion of this book to include more material.You can help by adding new material (learn how) or ask for assistance in the reading room.
A Wikibookian believes this page should be split into smaller pages with a narrower subtopic.
You can help by splitting this big page into smaller ones. Please make sure to follow the naming policy. Dividing books into smaller sections can provide more focus and allow each one to do one thing well, which benefits everyone.
You can ask for help in dividing this book in the assistance reading room.
Web Browsing functionality is available in the .Net Framework Class Library. In this article we will look at techniques for loading and manipulating web pages using Visual Basic .Net. You will need Microsoft Visual Basic .Net 2005 to use the example code.
Let's look at the Web Browser Object. This object is present in the .NET Framework Class Library. It is new to the framework in version 2.0. If you distribute a program that uses the object, the target system must have version 2.0 (or greater) installed.
The WebBrowser object does not require a form. You can use it to load web pages programmatically without displaying them. However, your program is subject to the configuration settings that you have set for your traditional browser. For example, if you are allowing popups, then any web page that you load into the wbInCode object will have permission to launch popups. The popups will launch in browser windows that are external to your program, even if your WebBrowser object is not displaying in a window.
If a JavaScript method crashes on a loaded page and your are configured to halt on such errors, the web browser control will also halt. Your program will hang. In short, if you plan to use the control in an automated environment you will need to take a close look at your default browser settings. Otherwise you will find that your application has been held up by defective web pages and your display has been inundated with popups.
Load a WebPage into the Browser Object
Use the Navigate method of the WebBrowser object to load a web page:
' Theoretically we shouldn’t need this, but experience says otherwise.
' If we just bang on the IsBusy() method we will use up a lot of CPU time
'  and probably bog down the entire computer.
You can also have the object tell you when it's finished. The DocumentCompleted event fires after a page has loaded. This example adds an event handler method that will be called when the page has finished loading.
Dim wbInCode As New WebBrowser   ' Create a WebBrowser instance.
' Add an event handler. The AddHandler command ‘connects’ your method called
' ReadyToPrint() with the DocumentCompleted event. The DocumentCompleted event
' fires when your WebBrowser object finishes loading the web page.
AddHandler wbInCode.DocumentCompleted, _
' Set the Url property to load the document.
Print a Web Page from the Browser Object
Private Sub ReadyToPrint(ByVal sender As Object, _
' Create a temporary copy of the web browser object.
'  At the same time we will assign it a value by coercing the sender argument
'  that was passed into this method.
Dim webBrowserTmp As WebBrowser = CType(sender, WebBrowser)
' Therefore we don’t have to check if the WebBrowser object is still busy.
' It’s time to print…
Access the HTML Stored in the Browser Object
After you have loaded your web site you have access to the underlying HTML. The document object is a property of the web browser object.
Anorexia nervosa (AN) refers to an eating disorder where an individual, in order to maintain a below average body weight, either severely limits their food intake, or goes through binging and purging cycles.[1] The latter is generally achieved by means of vomiting or laxative abuse.[1] Some research has found strong links between AN and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), specifically that both share obsessive ritual-like behaviours, including but not limited to cleaning and counting.[2] Due to most AN patients being obsessed with their weight and body image, it seems logical that they subsequently could turn to exercise as a means of achieving their goal(s).
The term "excessive exercise" (or "hyperactivity") in association with AN pertains to sufferers' overriding need to exercise, rather than the sheer quantity of exercise performed.[1] Someone who exercises excessively is recognised as prioritising exercise above other actions, keeping an exercise schedule and irritable when they cannot complete any exercise.[3] The combination of these two factors - caloric restriction and calorie burning, can have detrimental effects on the body.
Anorexia Nervosa is seen as a chronic illness, due to a mean duration of five to seven years [4]
Has the highest death rate of all mental illnesses (20% in 20 years)[4]
10x more common in females than males [5]
Hyperactivity presence in AN patients estimated to be between 40-81% [1]
Signs of AN[4]
Self-perception of being overweight when they are not
Symptoms of AN[4]
Reduced resting energy expenditure (REE)[6]
While there is no single factor which can cause an individual to develop Anorexia Nervosa, there are recurring trends among AN patients with hyperactivity:
High levels of Obsessive Compulsive Personality Disorder (OCPD) characteristics
Hyperactivity and AN together make for a lethal combination. Considering the lack of carbohydrates and subcutaneous fat in a patient with AN, further depleting energy stores through excessive exercise can create new health concerns:[7]
With regard to recovery, AN patients who exercise excessively generally take longer to rid themselves of the condition. Hyperactivity has been linked to high levels of relapse, lengthier spells in hospitals and more general physical problems, including a requirement for higher energy intake levels to gain weight.[1]
In a normal course of events, exercise can be prescribed to aid in the management of an abundance of mental health issues. Herein lies the dilemma - how could we reap the benefits that come from exercise in patients who need to exercise less? One study by Beumont et. al.[7] suggested using exercise as a reward for the patients continued compliance with their treatment. Through therapy, diet restoration, and exercise, the overall well-being of the individual can be significantly improved, and their treatment completed. Beumont et. al.[7] prescribed an exercise regime consisting of:
Benefits of Exercising[7]
The biggest hurdle in the fight against Anorexia Nervosa and hyperactivity is the mental side of things. Whilst a patient suffers from such severe body image distortion, very little can be achieved in terms of restoring them to good health. One study suggested an exercise where patients stand in front of a full-length mirror without criticising their body, but rather accepting the body as it appears in that instant.[8] This method has proved effective in obese binge eaters and body dysmorphic individuals.
Exercise (in healthy levels) should be implemented in conjunction with a balanced diet and therapy, as the positive effects of exercise cannot be actively replicated using any other means. The most important of these for AN patients, is the regulation of metabolism.[6] The emphasis of their treatment needs to be from an overall health perspective, rather than appearance. They need to be shown that they can balance nutrition and exercise, leading them to become healthier. At this point, perhaps they will see that the appearance of their body in a healthy state is more attractive than a dilapidated skeleton wrapped in skin.
↑ a b c d e f Bewell-Weiss, CV, Carter, JC (2010). "Predictors of Excessive Exercise in Anorexia Nervosa", Comprehensive Psychiatry, 51, pp. 566-571.
↑ Davis, C, Kaptein, S (2006). "Anorexia Nervosa with Excessive Exercise: A Phenotype With Close Links to Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder", Psychiatry Research, 142, pp.209-217.
↑ Dalle Grave, R, Calugi, S, Marchesini, G (2008). "Compulsive Exercise to Control Shape or Weight in Eating Disorders: Prevalence, Associated Features, and Treatment Outcome", Comprehensive Psychiatry, 49, pp. 346-352.
↑ a b c d Australian Government, Department of Health. "Anorexia nervosa: Australian treatment guide for consumers and carers", 2005. http://www.health.gov.au/internet/publications/publishing.nsf/Content/mental-pubs-a-anorex-toc~mental-pubs-a-anorex-int (accessed 27th of September, 2014).
↑ Serpell, L, Livingstone, A, Neiderman, M, Lask, B (2002). "Anorexia Nervosa: Obsessive-compulsive disorder, obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, or neither?", Clinical Psychology Review, 22, pp.647-669.
↑ a b Zipfel, S, Mack, I, Baur, LA, Hebebrand, J, Touyz, S, Herzog, W, Abraham, S, Davies, PSW, Russell, J (2013). "Impact of Exercise on Energy Metabolism in Anorexia Nervosa", Journal of Eating Disorders, 1:37, pp. 1-9.
↑ a b c d Beumont, PJV, Arthur, B, Russell, JD, Touyz, SW (1994). "Excessive Physical Activity in Dieting Disorder Patients: Proposals for a Supervised Exercise Program", International Hournal of Eating Disorders, 15:1, pp. 21-36.
↑ Wilson, GT (1999). "Cognitive Behaviour Therapy for Eating Disorders: Progress and Problems", Behaviour Research and Therapy, 37, pp. S79-S95.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Chinese President Xi Jinping has told US president-elect Donald Trump that co-operation is the "only correct choice" for relations.
With Custom Feedback an evaluation is made of the answer given and feedback is displayed depending on the evaluation.  The evaluation usually checks a score against a particular value, and feedback is displayed depending on whether or not conditions that you have set are met.
In this example the aim is to show separate feedback for different groups of questions. The questions have been labelled as either Geography or History and the feedback shows the scores that the quiz taker has achieved in each group as well as the overall score.  This indicates potential areas of weakness.
NB There are no conditions set so the evaluation is always true and the feedback is always shown.
The second piece of feedback evaluates the geography score, and if it is less than 20, the condition evaluates to 'true' and so displays the simple message.
The third piece of feedback does the same, but for the history score.
The Condition can contain And, Or and Not nodes, so evaluations can take place that depend on multiple scores, or one thing being true and another being false, or any one of a number of things being true. The feedback can also redirect the user to another part of the quiz - maybe to bounce the user back into the question if he answered incorrectly, or to skip a question based on a response given by the user. You can find out more about this in Skipping and Branching.
You can try out this sample quiz in your browser [[1]] or download the source file (.qwz)to have a close look at the set up [[2]].
Go To Introduction to Questions, Adding Questions, Adding Pages, Question Types, Skipping and Branching, Question Display, Question Metadata
Waves : Geometrical Optics
As was shown previously, when a plane wave is impingent on an aperture which has dimensions much greater than the wavelength of the wave, diffraction effects are minimal and a segment of the plane wave passes through the aperture essentially unaltered.
This plane wave segment can be thought of as a wave packet or ray consisting of a superposition of wave vectors very close in direction and magnitude to the central wave vector of the wave packet. In most cases the ray simply moves in the direction defined by the central wave vector, i. e., normal to the orientation of the wave fronts.
However, this is not true when the medium through which the light propagates is optically anisotropic, i. e., light traveling in different directions moves at different phase speeds. An example of such a medium is a calcite crystal. In the anisotropic case, the orientation of the ray can be determined once the dispersion relation for the waves in question is known, by using the techniques developed in the previous section.
If light moves through some apparatus in which all apertures are much greater in dimension than the wavelength of light, then we can use the above rule to follow rays of light through the apparatus. This is called the geometrical optics approximation.
This approximation can be applied to any wave theory.
Waves : Geometrical Optics
It is better to first get the right people on the bus, the wrong people off the bus, and the right people in the right seats, and then figure out where to drive. &#151;Jim Collins
If you give yourself a goal or objective and you want to seriously contribute towards it, then the first thing you'll want to do is manage what to do first. Management is the key to success, no matter what you are trying to achieve. Management in simple terms is a noun that is related to the word "manage" which means:
To direct or be in charge of.
To handle or control, to force.
To succeed at an attempt.
In a computer, you sometimes defragment your hard drive in order to arrange the data so it can be accessed easily. This is similar to management. Project management is another type of management and so on. Management is not always on the same scale, sometimes at a bigger level there will be times when certain tasks become increasingly difficult, especially in such demanding environments such as the workplace. You may find that you will spend a large amount of your life worrying about these issues. Effective management can greatly reduce this stress.
Management for students is different from management for working adults. Students manage not only their routine but their behavior and many other responsibilities. Fortunately, these things are not as demanding as they are for adults, and a student has ample time to sort out a plan.
Management done at a critical moment with quickness and accuracy.
e.g. If somebody attacks you, your body will need to quickly react by taking in the surroundings and deciding on a course of action. This type of life-threatening problem will probably not occur too often, but there are other types of crises which may provoke similar reactions out of your body, even if they are not needed. Do you ever feel that sinking feeling in your heart when you have a lot of assignments due at once? That is a type of problem which your body will react to in a similar way to a life-threatening danger. Your body's reaction is rarely needed when this happens, so it is best to avoid it altogether. Stress management and also long-term management will help to prevent this.
A form of long-term management which occurs on a daily, weekly, or even yearly basis. Some people refer to this as a 'routine', and that's the general idea behind life management. Organizing events into a predictable schedule may not sound very exciting, but it makes it easier to tackle one problem at a time. For this kind of management you may want a calendar which you can write on so that you can mark all of the important obstacles in your life, and work around them.
3.) Project/Task Management
Management done to complete a certain task. In your school you may be required to write an assignment on a certain topic, which may be due by the end of the week. When you are working on it, you will need to figure out what to do, what order to do it in, and the amount of time you should allocate to each smaller task.
Management becomes much easier when you are relaxed and able to sit back and outline what should be done. If you are tired you may find this difficult, so remember to get lots of rest at night, and also practice those relaxation techniques we showed you earlier. Your mind works much like a computer. It prefers information to be in an orderly fashion, this is why your brain rearranges itself while you sleep. You can make things a lot easier for your mind if you order things before you put them in. This is why planning is so useful for getting work done.
In order to produce an exceptional Project, it's helpful to ask these six questions. If you want, you can put them on a piece of paper to use as your plan.
"What is the task I need to complete?"
If you don't know where you're going, you won't arrive where you need to be.  For example: I need to write a 5-page paper on Environmental Pollution. Write this at the top of your paper.
"What information do I need?"
If your paper is on Environmental Pollution, you need to find out what types of pollution there are and collect details about the subject. Now would be a good time to plan subheadings for your plan so that you know exactly what areas of the topic you are going to cover. For example:
This will introduce your topic in general. Normally you would want something more catchy than this.
What kinds of pollution are there?
This will make your topic more specific, and zoom in on what you want to cover. This is where you will introduce 'Environmental Pollution'.
Dealing with environmental pollution.'
One of your focus questions. There may be thousands of possible focus questions for each topic. Choose the ones that interest you most. Here are some other focus questions:
The future impacts of environmental pollution.
The impact of environmental pollution on animals.
The impact of environmental pollution on global warming.
If you are lucky, a teacher will let you choose these focus questions yourself, but sometimes you will be given a list that you must choose from. In this case it is not a good idea to go for the most interesting one, as everyone else will go for that. Instead, go for the most difficult one. I assure you, the teacher will appreciate reading something different after reading twenty essays on the same topic, and will award you with good grades, even if your essay wasn't as good as the others.
"What are the resources I have at my disposal to complete my task?"
You might use the Internet, library, magazines, or go to a book store.  Maybe one of your friends works at a water treatment Plant. You could interview this friend.  Many other sources of help are usually available: teachers or supervisors may be able to direct you to helpful sources. Remember, teachers will reward creativity, and an essay with quotes from your friend who works at a water treatment plant will most definitely get very good marks, as it will be something different from all of the other essays that teachers are forced to sit through.
"What is the end product going to look like?"
Is it a presentation, a written paper, a website, a physical construction like a model?  What were the teacher's / supervisor's guidelines on this assignment?  If the directions were not clear, this is the time to go back and ask questions.
"Now that I have the information, what do I do with it?"
Take notes, make a chart, highlight, collect citation information. In essence, you have everything you need. Anything from now on will just build on from what you have collected.
Evaluate the product before turning it in / presenting it.
"Does it meet the requirements that were given to me?"  If something was left out, fix it before submitting it. Remember to proof-read your work. I assure you that you will have made at least a couple a spelling errors somewhere in your work. Reading over your work, even just skim-reading, will help you to find and remove those small errors.
For more information and tips on studying, have a look at the Study_Skills Wikibook.
That's enough management for now as a student. Now let's learn to help others and advise them next.
Many people are used to following written instructions, but most people have never written instructions for another person. In many professional roles, you may have to write instructions. While some instructions may be simple and brief, other instructions may be more complex and take longer to complete. For this reason, it is important to know how to write useful instructions.
Writing useful instructions can be difficult because people read and comprehend things differently. For example, some people are visual learners and may have difficulty following written instructions. Readers also have a variety of educational backgrounds. When writing instructions, it is important to use a simple, logical style and format.
When writing instructions, avoid persuasive language and take a task-based approach. Keep the writing concise and clear, and focus on enabling the user to successfully accomplish the task.
Keep sentences short and understandable. Use common terminology whenever possible. Avoid using idioms, slang, jargon, nicknames, abbreviations, and acronyms. If you do use terminology that might be new or confusing, then clearly define each term when it first appears in the instructions.
It is important to know your audience when writing instructions, so you are including all necessary information and excluding unnecessary information. Knowing your audience allows you to make reasonable and well-informed assumptions based on the audience's likely background, experience, and familiarity with the subject. For example, if you are writing instructions for a group of senior citizens at the local branch of the public library, it may not be safe to assume that they are familiar with the basics of opening a specific software application. However, if you are writing instructions for a group of software developers within a professional organization, it may be safe to assume that they are familiar with the basics of opening a specific software application.
When deciding what information to include and exclude from instructions, it is important to clearly identify who your audience is and what their likely proficiency is with the topic of the instructions and related background information.
If an audience is likely to have a wide range of experience and knowledge that includes varying levels of familiarity and expertise, you can use various techniques to keep each set of instructions concise and focused on a single task, while still providing necessary information. For example, you can create separate instructions for prerequisite information and provide your audience with the means to quickly and easily access the separate instructions (through hyperlinks, appendices, etc.).
Pictures speak louder than words. Adding graphics to convey your thoughts may be more effective than the words themselves. Instructions that are well illustrated and accompany your written instructions are usually highly successful. It adds an extra level of understanding and allows the reader to skim or troubleshoot if problems occur. Pictures add an additional dimension that will allow your reader to visualize the end product. Also, when using graphics you should be mindful of those visual learners, and adapt the graphics.
Although pictures are great, you must be cautious not to include photographs or illustrations that are confusing or not associated with the actual written instructions. If you pair a poor picture with your instructions, you might cause the reader stress or introduce confusion when trying to decipher what you mean.
Also, when taking pictures, ensure that the area is well lit and the pictures are clear and bright. Dark or fuzzy pictures are often difficult to follow. Take care to photograph the subject in the same orientation each time to avoid confusion and consider using a tripod.
Size is also important when using images in instructions. A picture that is too small to see is just as useless as a blurry image.
To be powerful and understandable, your text and graphic for each step should clearly correlate to that step of the instructions.
Remember that the readers will actually be performing the task as they read along with the instructions. So you should not use solid blocks of small, hard to decipher text. Make sure to create a design and layout for your instructions page that will allow easy readability and add aesthetic quality. Keeping the page simple, but with a defined hierarchy, will assist the reader in completing the steps of the instructions.
When designing your page, a solid hierarchy is important for scan-ability. The use of bold headings, italics, and roman numerals will aid the reader in finding their place easily and helps with the overall visual appearance.
It is important your instructions be planned out in a logical progression. Make sure to state the problem clearly on the first page. Follow your problems with a set of specific steps detailing how to solve the proposed problem. Technical instructions must flow in a logical pattern. For example, when assembling a table it would not be good if you put the finishing touches on it before you had all the screws in place. As stated before, there should also be clear graphics where necessary to clarify the action. Remember, a picture is worth a thousand words.
We all know that instructions are difficult to write and that sometimes it sounds good on paper, but when you actually attempt to put the instructions to use, you might find that your wording makes no sense to others. Remember what might be common or obvious to you might baffle your readers, so know your audience. In addition to testing your instructions on yourself, have someone who knows nothing about your product test it. This is called a usability study. Take notes on what worked and what didn't and then revise your instructions accordingly. In the long run the more people that test your instructions, the more effective the final set will be.
Tailoring your instructions to the intended audience can be one of the most difficult tasks of your writing process. Before you begin your writing process you need to identify who your audience will be and how you can tailor your instructions to make them as understandable as possible. To help you do this, there are several questions you can ask yourself:
What background might your audience members have, and what prior knowledge might they possess? This will help you to determine what you will need to include or not include in your instructions.
What will their needs/interests be?
How will their demographics affect how you write? If the majority of your audience comes from a different demographic than you, you need to take into consideration language issues and make sure graphics are clear.
Is there a variability in your audience? If your audiences are composed of people with varied backgrounds, your writing should be tailored to the majority of your audience, and you may also consider adding additional information in appendices.
Based on your answers to the above questions, there are several ways you can ensure that your instructions will be as clear as possible to your readers.
Add information (such as tips, side notes) the readers will need in order to understand your instructions and make sure no key information is missing.
Do not add information that is unnecessary; it may confuse or mislead your readers.
Add examples/graphics. Graphics can be very helpful to a reader.
Have a clear organization. Lack of organization creates confusion and frustration.
The following sections are descriptions of the different parts of the general superstructure of a set of instructions. What sections to include will vary based on the complexity of the instructions. Your document may contain any of the following sections:
What is included in your introduction will depend on what your instructions are for and who will be using them. In any case, the introduction should be brief, but still informative. The introduction can include any or all of the following sections:
Subject/Aim: Here you should indicate the specific task that will be explained and what the outcome of the procedure will be.
Intended Readers: You may want to identify who the intended readers of the instructions are and if the reader will need additional knowledge or background in order to complete the task.
Scope: This will help the reader to know if the instructions will help them complete the task they want to or not.
Organization: Giving the reader an overview of what the rest of the instructions will look like can help them to more easily understand them. This section could also go under scope.
Safety: It is your responsibility to inform the readers of any hazards or dangers that could occur while they are completing the task. You need to display warnings in a clear and understandable fashion.
If there is equipment that the reader will have to use in order to operate or repair a piece of equipment, you may want to include a description of it.
Provide a list of equipment that the reader will need to accomplish the task so they know if they need additional tools or things they may not normally have. A list of supplies is also helpful for a reader to make sure that they have all the parts and pieces they need.
This section is obviously the most important part of an instructions set since it is the actual steps that the reader will follow to complete the task at hand. There are many ways to format the procedures, but most are done with numbered lists. The following are things you should do to make the steps clear and concise:
Write each step with concise wording so it is easily understood and completed.
Give readers enough information to perform the step, avoid redundancy.
Put the steps in a list. Numbering often works the best.
Highlight key words.
Number steps.
Skip lines between steps.
Tell the reader what to do if they make a mistake. Not knowing what to do will cause frustration and the reader may give up on the task.
The use of graphics and pictures to correspond to each step is highly recommended. Each person has different learning habits; some like texts while others are better off with pictures. The presence of graphics also allows the reader to make sure he/she is still on the right track. In most situations it would be beneficial to have a combination of both graphics and words.
Instructions should include this section to tell the reader what to do if something goes wrong during the building process or if the completed project does not look like the expected outcome. Putting this information into a table format often works the best.
For an example set of instructions visit [1] This webpage contains information from the textbook entitled Power Tools for Technical Communication by David A. McMurrey.
Usability testing is an absolutely crucial step in preparing an effective set of instructions. Once you have completed a draft of your instructions, it is important to test them to see where improvements can be made. A usability test should be performed on multiple testers for each updated draft of your instructions. Here is how you go about performing a usability testing:
First, you should choose your testers from a group that is representative of your intended audience. In order to single these specific users out, you may need to ask a few preliminary questions. For example, asking what their experience level with the task is or what their job field is.
Next you need to choose how you will evaluate the tester's performance in completing the task. There are different methods to choose from, but one method is called the "Think Aloud" method. When using this method you ask your tester to complete the task using your instructions while verbalizing everything that is going through their head as they go through the instructions. Do not offer any help to the tester as he or she goes through the test, kindly tell them that you can answer their questions at the end. As the tester says what is confusing or hard you take notes. You can record this information in a chart that has three columns. In the first column you will record the problems your tester had. In the second column you write down what the possible cause of each problem was. In the third try to generate a possible solution to the problem or possible ways you can change your instructions to make them more understandable. Be sure to be descriptive in what you want to find out. Be sure to lay out the testing form to collect all pertinent information about your testing so no information is overlooked or misplaced.
After the test is done look at your notes and ask the tester to elaborate on the problems that you noted. This is an important step because you are getting direct feedback from your audience. Make sure that you understand exactly what was confusing for them, as this will help you in writing the most successful set of instructions. Ask testers how you could change that step or part of the instructions to make them unambiguous.
Based on your findings edit and update your instructions. After you do so they should be more understandable and easier to follow for your intended audience. In many cases it is appropriate or even necessary to conduct one or more rounds of usability tests as you perfect your instructions. More testing may prove beneficial in discovering problems that were overlooked the first round of testing or because the problems may have been masked by original complications. If time permits, be sure to run as many rounds of usability testing as needed.
Note: Pay special attention to your intended audience and ensure that you have the number of testers, and accurate demographics necessary to accurately represent your sample. For example, if you are making instructions for a 'beginner audience' and test an all 'expert' audience your sample will not be representative. In addition, if you are wanting to make instructions for a large audience of several ages, gender and experience level, your sample will need to be large and representative of that population.
If the instructions require the tester to use both hands (like tying a tie), consider making all the instructions visible without turning pages so it is easier for them to complete the task.
Many people resist reading instructions. They try to figure out for themselves how to operate a product or perform a task and will turn to the instructions only if all their efforts fail. When they do read the instructions, they want to understand everything immediately without having to read anything twice. A simple design, plain wording, and clear instructions will be critical to encouraging readers to pay attention to your instructions or procedures.
When writing technical documents and instructions there are several style tips you should keep in mind:
Use a lot of imperative, command or direct address, kinds of writing. It is OK to use "you" when writing instructions, because you are addressing the reader directly.
Use active instead of passive voice.
Do not leave out articles such as a, an and the.
Use action verbs.
Ensure graphics match descriptive text to avoid confusion.
Label graphics by steps, for example Step 17 "...Put...", the graphic should be labeled clearly with a number "17" or if multiple graphics exists for a line of text writing in chronological order "17a, 17b, etc." or if different views "17 front, 17 back, etc."
Keep text short but descriptive.
Avoid complicated jargon, use simple verbiage to ensure understanding by a broad spectrum of users.
Use concise headings and subheadings to describe and highlight each section.
Leave plenty of white space around headings.
Highlight safety information and warnings.
Keep illustrations as simple as possible.
Bahasa Indonesia ~ English
There are about a handful of standard data structures types.
More to come...
These can be implemented in various ways, but the specific characteristics of each are always maintained.
In short a stack is a collection of data with the Last In First Out (LIFO) paradigm.  This means that the last item put on the stack is the first one that would come off of it.  Items beyond this item cannot be directly accessed or removed, short of clearing the stack entirely.
These are the general actions one can perform on a stack:
Keep in mind that exactly how one implements a stack can be completely different and this could cause the methods available on a stack to differ as well.  For example, if the stack is static (cannot grow) and has a size of N, having the is_full is handy to tell when the stack is full.  However, if the stack is dynamic (it can grow, if necessary) the is_full isn't handy if the stack can not technically fill up.  Though some might choose to have a dynamic stack with an upper limit, making the is_full useful again.   Also, it depends on the style of the developer creating the stack.  At a minium there will always be something like a push or pop, though they might have different names.
Think of the Pez Candy dispensers - the last candy you put in is the first one out.
Here's another one - the plate dispensers in a buffet line. The plates are piled inside on a spring loaded platform and customers take them off the top, one by one.
a RPN (Reverse Polish Notation) calculator.
National Institute of Standards and Technology Stack Page
A queue is a collection of data with the First In First Out (FIFO) paradigm.  This means that the first data put into it is the first data returned from it.  Items cannot be randomly access from within the queue, only the item in the "first" position can be accessed.  If you want to think of it terms of time - the oldest item in the array is the first one returned and the only one accessible at any one time.
These are the general actions that can be performed by a queue:
As with the stack, the is_full (and maybe the is_empty) may or may not be useful depending on the implementation (static array, dynamic array, linked list... etc).  Which methods are available also depends on the style of the developer creating the queue. At a minimum there will always be enqueue and dequeue, though they might have different names.
a line for a ride at an amusement part - the people in front, who have been waiting the longest, go first (or next).
a line at a bank, where people are waiting for the next available teller.
National Institute of Standards and Technology Queue Page
Makes a bitset of chars for the parse function.
"Makes a bitset of chars for the parse function."
Puzzles | Action sequences | Crossing the River II | Solution
Label the fathers A, B and C, the sons a, b and c, river . and boat <  >.
........
A B Cc  .....<  >  a b
........
A B Cc  ..<b >..   a
........
A B C   ..<bc>..   a
........
A B C   .....<  >  a b c
........
A B C   ..<c >..   a b
........
A B Cc <  >.....   a b
........
b c  ..<a >..  A B C
........
a b c <  >.....  A B C
........
c  ..<ab>..  A B C
........
Wireless Distribution System (WDS) Repeater Network setup
The "Basic Wireless" Setup screen should look like this afterwards:
Wireless Mode = Access Point + WDS
Shared Key = putyoursharedkeyhere
MAC Address = (*wireless* MAC address of the Repeater Router below)
Shared Key = putyoursharedkeyhere
MAC Address = (*wireless* MAC address of the Main Router) (might not even need to be set)
There are many hormones within the human body which regulate and control bodily functions. Among them, one key member is Secretin. Secretins are hormones which regulate normal secretion into the duodenum and manipulate homeostasis throughout the human body. Duodenums are found in the intestinal gland found contained within the epithelial lining of the small intestine in the human body. Here, S cells, which are responsible for the creation of secretin,  can be found. Secretins are found to participate in vital features of osmoregulation in several of the body's functional organs such as the kidney.
A more specific feature for the functionality of secretins is their ability to regulate pH of the contents within the duodenum. This functionality can be carried out because the secretin hormones are able to manipulate specific secretion of gastric acid and control it's pH properties by using various chemical buffers. Typically, the chemical buffers used must be something the human body can have readily and not require additional intake of nutrients. The compound used by this the specific secretin to buffer pH then is bicarbonate. Bicarbonate can be found from the spindle-shaped cells called centroacinars within the pancreas. In addition to being discovered in the pancreas, bicarbonate can also be found in the intercalated ducts.
An interesting fact about secretins are that they were the first hormone to be discovered and identified correctly.
Secretins were first discovered in the early 1900s by two english physiologists, Ernest Starling and William Bayliss. The experimental design which for their project was to target how a nervous system responded and regulate digestion processes. Because of earlier discoveries, they knew that the pancreas was the main component in secreting compounds which aid in digestion. This process can occur as food enters the duodenum through the pyloric sphincter. The two scientists were able to contradict this earlier discovery during this experiment when they found that the nervous system, in fact, did not control digestive functions. Rather, they discovered substances now known as secretin produced in the intestines is the actual factor which controls the digestive system.
The chemical composition of Secretin involves several key components. The structure is first created initially with a precursor which contains the a spacer, the secretin hormone itself, an N-terminal signal peptide, and a C-terminal peptide which contains 72 amino acids. The entire precursor to the hormone is 120 amino acids long in total; however, the secretin portion is actually only between the residues  of 28 and 54.
In addition to the precursor peptide, there also contains a mature secretin peptide. This peptide is composed of 27 Amino Acid residues and is arranged in an linear sequence. It is characteristic in having a molecular mass of 3055. The 3-D structure of this mature linear secretin peptide shares its structure to some other common compounds. Similar to that of glucagon, glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptides, and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, the secretin takes on the shape of a helix. This is most prominent in positions of amino acids five to thirteen. The amino acid breakdown of this helical chemical structure is as follows. Seven of the amino acid residues in mature secretin can also be found in the vasoactive intestinal polypeptides, fourteen can be found in similar placement as those found in glucagon, and ten amino acids residues in secretin can be found in corresponding positions in the glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptides.
In addition to the precursor and mature secretin. Another special property of the secretin hormone is that it has an amidated carboxyl-terminal amino acid, valine.
Therefore, the corresponding sequence for the secretin hormone is:
H2N–His-Ser-Asp-Gly-Thr-Phe-Thr-Ser-Glu-Leu-Ser-Arg-Leu-Arg-Asp-Ser-Ala-Arg-Leu-Gln-Arg-Leu-Leu-Gln-Gly-Leu-Val–CONH2.
T2SS: The Type II Secretion System helps regulate the amount of hydrolytic enzymes as well as expelling toxins from the periplasm outwards of the cell. Bacteria that have been known to carry T2SS was Escherichia coli and Vibrio cholera, bacteria which are known for cholera and diarrheal diseases. The toxins that are associated with those diseases have been correlated to the T2SS protein.
T4PS: The Type IV Pili System is a secretin that helps with the production and dismantling of extracellular fibers found on pathogenic/environmental bacteria. This secretin is made of many types of type IV pilin; T4aP and T4bP. These type IV pili are mainly responsible for motility, protein secretion, and attaching the secretin to cells. Some bacteria that have T4PS are Neisseria gonorrhoeae and pseudomonas aeruginosa.
T3SS: The Type III Secretion System is a pathway that transfers viral proteins to the cytoplasm. Also known as injectisomes, T3SS allows for pathogens to transfer effectors into the host and directly altering normal cell behavior. Pathogenic responses from T3SS could lead to physiological cell responses such as inflammation, phagocytosis, and even cell apoptosis. Some bacteria that utilize T3SS is salmonella, enteropathogenic Escherichia coli, and and shigella flexneri.
Secretin hormones are first created in the S-cells. Specifically, in the cytoplasmic secretory granules portion of this cell. Furthermore, S cells can also be found in the mucous membranes which are linings covered in epithelium, a product which plays a key component in absorption and secretion. In addition, these linings can also be found in the duodenum as well as the jejunum portion of the smaller intestines. However, the S-cells and the secretin count in the small intestines are in smaller portions here.
Depending on differing species, secretin usually produce different responses based on the pH range of the environment of the duodenum. Generally, when the duodenal pH reaches an acidic function of around 2 to 5, the secretin hormone will be activated and released into circulation. Another case of secretin release could also occur within the intestinal lumen. However, both cases are in response to the pH change into the lower spectrum. In addition to pH control, the secretin secretion is can also be maximized when amino acid residue decomposition produces products which are contained in the mucosa of the smaller intestine, usually in the upper region.
Duodenums usually create their acidic environment based on the amount of hydrochloric acid(HCl) contained in their chambers. Masses of semi-digested food, or chyme, is jettisoned by the stomach and into the duodenum. As a result of this, hydrochloric acid is carried through the region of the stomach which connects the stomach and duodenum, called the pylorus sphincter. Once the HCl has reached the duodenum, it will acidify the environment and cause a pH drop, and in turn activate the release of secretin. Once secretin is finally released, it is used to target the glandular organ in the digestive and endocrine system, the pancreas. Once the pancreas receives a certain amount of insulin, the organ can then produce and expel a bodily fluid which is rich in bicarbonate. This solution then flows through the corresponding intestines. The pancreas needs to produce bicarbonate because the individual ions produced by this polyatomic ion can be used to neutralize the acid which is already present. With the bicarbonate present, the body can now utilize this to create a pH favorable environment so that it can carry out actions of the digestive enzymes in the intestinal tracts. A key feature of having bicarbonate is to neutralize the acid and prevent acid burns. The pancreas can also introduce bicarbonate as a response to the secretin by produce fatty acids and various bile salts. Both of these compounds can in turn produce bicarbonates as a product and be put in combination with the initial set of bicarbonate and placed in the small intestines.
A method in which the secretion of secretin can be inhibited is by the addition of a class of drugs used to block the action of histamine in the cells on the stomach region. These are called the H2 receptor antagonists. These compounds function by reducing the gastric acid secretions. Due to the lowered amount of gastric acid in the duodenum, the pH cannot be maintained at a lowered level. Thus, once the pH of the duodenum has increased above 4.5-5, the secretin can no longer be produced and released. And the functions of the corresponding organs can be successfully shut down.
The main function of the secretin hormone is to increase the bicarbonate solution from the bile as well as the pancreatic duct epithelium. The cells which are stationed in the pancreas have receptors which recognize secretin hormones once the secretin reaches its plasma membrane. Once the hormone has attached itself to the receptor, it can actively energize and produce adenylate cyclase activity. The adenylate cyclase activity is used to convert adenosine triphosphate, ATP, to Cyclic adenosine monophosphate or cAMP. In other words, an energy storing molecule to a messenger important in biological processes. It is worth noting that Cyclic AMP is used as a secondary messager to transmit signals throughout the cell and promote the increase in releasing more water carbonate ions. In addition, the production of more Cyclic AMP can be used to promote the growth and structurally stabilize the pancreas.
Further functions of secretin include counteracting the effects of an increase in blood glucose concentration spikes that is produced by the pancreas. When the pancreas decreases its release of insulin, the blood glucose concentration within the human body begins to spike haphazardly. By releasing  secretin into the body, it can postpone and eliminate the effects of such blood concentration spikes by triggering the insulin release.
Another function which secretin takes place in the human body is that it can actively delay and stop the gastrin release from the stomach.  Secretin can preform this function because it can reduce the acid secreted from the stomach and inbits the gastrin release from G cells.
This functionality aids in neutralizing the pH of the products of digestion entering the duodenum. It has been shown that enzymes produce digestive functions at an optimal state that is a pH with slight basicity.
In addition, a function that secretin serves in the human body is that it can actively increase the pepsin secretion from cells in the stomach which releases pepsinogen, chymosin, and gastric lipase, or chief cells. This active stimulation of chief cells can help decompose proteins during the process of food digestion. Secretin can achieve this functionality because it stimulates the release of somatostatin release-inhibiting factor and glucagon.
Finally, the last function of secretin in addition to maintaining the additional acidic chyme passed through the duodenal organs, secretin also has other functions as well. One of these is that secretin ameliorates the effect the peptide hormone cholecystokinin and induce extra secretion of certain enzymes needed in digestion from the pancreas. Another effect produced by secretin in this function is that it can also increase bile produced within the gallbladder, a small organ which aids in fat digestion.
There are a variety of sectors in industry which secretin can be used. One unique function that secretin serves is that it can increase the pancreatic secretion of a human. This is extremely important in the medical field as scientists whom monitor pancreatic functions and testing must require the amplified effect produced the secretin hormone. Several methods can be used to introduce secretin into the body. Two main pathway in which secretin can be introduced to the human body is either through a direct injection into the duodenum or through a normal injection
The result of certain secretin tests have been used to prove and provide insight into abnormalities in the pancreas.
Finally, it has been shown that secretin can provide potential treatment to autism and other brain-based diseases.
Secretins assist in secreting proteins into the extracellular environment of gram-negative bacteria (which are bacteria that have the ability to gain resistance to antibiotics [9]). In bacteria, they make up three different, outer membrane channels. [10]
The T2SS consists of three subassemblies: the outer membrane complex, a filamentous pseudopilus, and the inner membrane platform.These are responsible for secreting toxins from the periplasm (the area between plasma membrane and membrane bordering the cytoplasm [11]).
Secretion occurs in two steps. The proteins are produced with N-terminal signal peptides. This is followed by removal of the signal peptide along with the folding and release of the mature proteins into the periplasm. They may undergo further modifications before they are secreted across the membrane through the T2SS.[13]
The T4PS help move the bacteria across surfaces without the using a flagella by assembling and disassembling the fibers on the surfaces of bacteria. These system consists of two subclasses of pilus: T4aP and T4bP. [10]
These are also known as injectisomes. They are used to transport bacterial effectors.[10]
It has a basal body, a needle structure, and a tip. [12]
The tip is secreted into the surrounding environment by the bacteria and comes in contact with host cells. The needle structure forms a pore in the host cell membrane. The effector protein can then pass into the host cell via needle.[12] This would eventual lead to the spread of the bacteria within the host.
Secretins are generally produced in the outer membrane by a lipoprotein called pilotins. One known example is MxiM, a pilotin commonly found in T3SS. MxiM is composed mainly of B-sheets with one alpha-helix, combining together to form a cone-like structure. The hydrophobic portion of MxiM’s B-sheets act as the binding portion for lipids or itself (the N-terminus can bind with the C-terminus, making a circular-linked structure). After formation, the pilotin binds with the outer membrane and secretin is assembled. The way that the pilotin forms with each other (or with other lipids or pilotin) help dictate its structure, which thus resembles the function of the pilotin. Different structured pilotin thus lead to the formation of different secretin specific for different functions.
Another notable example would be the pilotin PilF, which is essential for the production of PilQ, a T4PS secretin commonly found in the bacterium P. aeruginosa. PilF often binds with another pilotin from a similar bacterium N. meningitides; PilW, allowing for the creation of a multimer secretin. With regards to function following form, both pilotins have a concave structure on the surface, which many researchers have argued could be a potential binding site for the production of T4aP necessary to create T4PS secretins.
Upon production of the different secretin systems by the pilotins, the secretion systems bind to the inner membrane of the cell and forms a secretin multimer. These secretin multimers are composed of many secretins that come together in order to form a specific secretin system. Examples of such secretin include GspCEpsC and GspMEspM, which are two fluorescent green proteins that are commonly found in the T2SS system. These two proteins have been known to help with localization of the secretin system inside the membrane as well as the actual production of the entire system as a whole.
14.http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1046/j.1365-2958.1999.01339.x/full
Transmedia storytelling represents a process where integral elements of a fiction get dispersed systematically across multiple delivery channels for the purpose of creating a unified and coordinated entertainment experience. Ideally, each medium makes its own unique contribution to the unfolding of the story." - Henry Jenkins.
In the past few years transmediality and transmedia storytelling has totally altered the way in which film makers set about creating a world. It is now longer the norm to simply focus on a single film but rather, create something that can prosper and thrive in an ever expanding media entertainment market. Transmedia storytelling focusses on continuing narrative or characters or other aspects of a story across multiple means of media such as television, comics, video games to name a few. For the purpose of this essay we shall be conducting our research using Henry Jenkins' theories as a basis, he explains transmedia storytelling as,
"Transmedia storytelling represents a process where integral elements of a fiction get dispersed systematically across multiple delivery channels for the purpose of creating a unified and coordinated entertainment experience. Ideally, each medium makes its own unique contribution to the unfolding of the story." -Henry Jenkins
This essay will explore the in depth world of transmedia storytelling with relevant works, discuss some comparison works and how transmedia storytelling is seen in modern Hollywood with an example of the Star Wars franchise.
This part of this essay will attempt to deconstruct and assess Henry Jenkins’ definition and overall thoughts on transmedia storytelling. Particular attention will be paid towards Jenkins’ article ‘Transmedia 202: Further Reflections’, which has also been deconstructed into note form in the ‘Main Concepts’ section of this wikipage. Other works of Henry Jenkins will be looked at as well to offer more support to the concept of transmedia storytelling within this collaborative essay.
Jenkins opens his article by saying, “transmedia storytelling represents a process where integral elements of a fiction get dispersed systematically across multiple delivery channels for the purpose of creating a unified and coordinated entertainment experience,” which is the main discussion point of our collaborative essay. What Jenkins is saying here is that transmedia storytelling is a way in which a story unfolds through various forms of media, whether that is in films as well as video games, or even TV and books. Each form of media offers their own unique storytelling experience and when put together, offer a more complete narrative. Jenkins also borrows a term from video game designer Neil Young – ‘additive comprehension’. This refers to the degree in which each new medium adds our understanding to the story as a whole. Jenkins then breaks down transmedia storytelling into a more concise way of thinking. He believes that transmedia offers the following to a narrative: backstory, world mapping, other character's perspectives and also a deepening of audience engagement. All of this clearly allows a narrative to have more depth and create an immersive world for audiences across multiple mediums. This idea is of world building is discussed again in Jenkins’ book Convergence Culture. Jenkins says that “more and more, storytelling has become the art of world building, as artists create compelling environments that cannot be fully explored or exhausted within a single work or even a single medium.”
In this article, Jenkins highlights some criticisms that have been raised by others about his thoughts on transmedia storytelling. A lot of criticisms seem to highlight that transmedia storytelling is simply just a way of corporatizing a franchise. For example, he talks about how some people believe that transmedia storytelling is simply a form of branding. Jenkins then discusses how he feels it is better to see branding as one specific part of transmedia storytelling, but should not be the main focus of transmediality as a whole.
To allow for a clearer idea of what transmedia storytelling is, Jenkins uses ‘The Matrix’ as a useful example. As a franchise, ‘The Matrix’ particularly benefits from transmedia storytelling due to the amount of world building it creates. Audiences can experience the main body of the story through the three theatrical films that were released. However, if further investment is desired, audiences can experience the world of ‘The Matrix’ through various other mediums such as video games, short films and comic books. All of these extra platforms add more layers to the world of ‘The Matrix’ and it is clear why Jenkins uses this franchise as a prime example.
To see just how big a part transmedia storytelling plays in ‘The Matrix’, it is important to begin to look at specific mediums within the franchise. More world building is offered with the video game ‘Enter the Matrix’ with tie-ins to the original theatrical film ‘The Matrix’. In the film, we encounter two characters named Ghost and Niobe. These characters offer little impact to the overall narrative of the film and are simply supporting roles. However, if fans of the franchise play ‘Enter the Matrix’, they in fact get to journey through the narrative of the game playing as either character. The game offers side-stories that run linear to the overall plot of the film, therefore more in-depth story elements are experienced by the player. Jenkins, as mentioned before, believes that transmedia storytelling offers other character's perspectives. Since audiences get the chance to experience these characters role in the story allows for a deepening of audience engagement and more backstory. Also, players will get a sense that these supporting characters in the film now have a newly found greater impact on the overall story.
Further transmedia storytelling is shown within ‘The Matrix’ through various other mediums. A series of animated short films were also released to create a deeper narrative within ‘The Matrix’ franchise. ‘The Animatrix’ featured stories which intertwined with the main body of ‘The Matrix’, and featured new narratives with side characters audiences may have already been familiar with.
Jenkins talks about other ways in which transmedia storytelling can exist. He talks about how various characters move between different plots but still all exist within the same medium. This is known as ‘radical intertextuality’ and is particularly relevant within comic books. Jenkins talks about Marvel Comics as an example. Many characters within Marvel Comics will encounter each other within different stories, and other characters may not. Marvel's ‘Civil War’ was used by Jenkins as another example. Within this comic book story, various characters encounter each other who audiences would never have expected to ever meet. The characters can exist within their own standalone adventures and then can also crossover into greater, more populated storylines.
Christian Fuchs has several issues with Henry Jenkins’ ICA Talk “Spreadable media” and tries to undermine his theory laying out the flaws of Jenkins’ argument drawing attention to Jenkins’ definition of ‘participation’, and his engagement with other theorists. Critical Studies scholars’ criticisms have influenced Jenkins work, according to Jenkins, however Fuchs questions how much he has engaged with other scholars’ work and how much Jenkins has actually changed his analysis. He refers to social media users as like a Habermasian public sphere. However Fuchs believes that Jenkins’ notion of Habermasian public sphere is incorrect. Habermas asserts that corporate social media are declarations of the limits of the bourgeois public sphere in contrast to Jenkins’ definition. Fuchs furthermore questions if he has truly engaged with Critical Studies scholars as he makes a critical error in misnaming scholars such as Hans Magnus Enzensberger and Mark Andrejevic. He uses quotations from Enzensberger however presents a different view on corporatism and participation to him tainting his argument. Jenkins furthermore miss-references a quotation from Enzensberger's work in 1970, stateing it was from the 1960s. Fuchs points out that Jenkins does not mention several important issues such as what role social media and media in general has in protests, political rebellions and revolutions, and does not touch on WikiLeaks, where he ought to as he is a leading scholar. Jenkins focus’ on the aspects of pleasure and creativity without giving much thought to exploitation which is a dominating issue in relation to Web 2.0 and therefore does not grasp the dialectics that is being created. Fuchs asserts that we need to take into consideration not only what phenomena we find on social media, but how they interconnected and to what degree they are present. It is clear that Web 2.0. users are creative but we need to consider to what extent they are active and to what extent of creativity their practices have. It is considered that Cultural Studies scholars such as Jenkins have tendency to exaggerate the creativity and activity of users on the web. Creativity does not lie out with exploitation to web 2.0, but is its very foundation. Fuchs brings particular attention to Jenkins’ notion of ‘participation’ which is about expressions, engagement, creation, sharing, experience, contributions and feelings which Jenkins has continuously argued that “the Web has become a site of consumer participation”. Fuchs’ issue with ‘participatory culture’ lies within the assertion that participation is a political science term that is heavily linked to participatory democracy theory. Jenkins has a culturalistic notion of participation and dismisses the notion of participatory democracy: he ignores questions of ownership of companies or platforms, joint decision-making, profit, class and the dispensation of material benefits. Fuchs argues that if anything, users and employees of corporate platforms such as Facebook are excluded from economic decision-making, they do not ‘participate’. Jenkins, in Fuchs’ opinion has a reductionist comprehension of culture that dismisses contemporary culture's political economy. He ignores the wide concept of participatory democracy and its issues for the internet focusing his notion of participation to a cultural dimension. The web is controlled by corporations that gain capital through exploiting and commodifying individuals therefore can never be participatory according to participatory democracy. It can only be participatory where there is opposition to corporate authority and where users are involved in non-profit, non-commercial internet projects for example Wikipedia. Fuchs asserts that Jenkins dismiss questions of who dominates and financially benefit from cooperate social media. Tga00002 (discuss • contribs) 10:48, 5 April 2018 (UTC)
Will Brooker presents in his article ‘Living on Dawson’s Creek: Teen viewers, cultural convergence, and television overflow’ difficulties of cultural convergence associated with the televising show Dawson's Creek and its viewers, arguing that modern television is increasingly overflowing from the original script across several platforms, and that the programme seeks participatory engagement which builds the programme as an extended, invested experience. Viewers can follow the television show Dawson's Creek on websites such as Dawson's creek.com which includes features such as ‘slam book’, ‘summer diaries’, e-postcards, show playlists and bulletin boards, drawing them into the Dawson Creek experience. These are in place so that the narrative continues when the show ends; the show is not limited to the television medium. Brooker makes a significant amount of references to Henry Jenkins work, specifically his notion of convergence and his ‘black box’ analogy: Brooker has clearly been influenced by Jenkins’ work. The article draws attention to Jenkins example of convergence – his son owning a laptop, a CD player, and a big screen TV are privileges, so Brooker questions whether less privileged individuals have the same opportunity to participate in cultural convergence? Furthermore, geographical differences also make it more difficult to participate in convergence due to time lag issues: the airing time of Dawson Creek is very different to the UK presenting media convergence issues. The Dawson's Creek fan sites creates a problem for Jenkins’ stern distinction between owner-produced and fan-produced convergence: the official site could be viewed to encourage creativity and community through its many features, or perhaps these interactive forums purely propose an advanced process of incorporation by the producers. The site could be argued that it is effectively maintaining fans in its own playing fields and restraining resistance by attracting ‘folk’ culture within cooperate boundaries. Brooker argues that Dawson Creek's audience participation is confined to Jenkins’ notion of media convergence, instead of folk art. It is clear that Will Brooker has been highly influenced by Henry Jenkins and his notion of media convergence, and Brookers example of Dawson's Creek is an excellent example of this.
Now that we have established Henry Jenkin's theories surrounding transmediality and transmedia storytelling it would be apt to show how this is established in 21st century Hollywood. As an example this essay shall focus primarily on the Star Wars franchise and Disney's involvement in the franchise.
Disney's involvement in the Star Wars franchise caused an international eruption in an already mammoth universe when they purchased LucasFilm in 2012. The franchise is now heavily featured in every sort of medium, from the successful blockbusters to travel mugs in the local supermarket. It is a transmedia phenomenon and a contender for world's most profitable entertainment franchise.
A characteristic of Star Wars that makes it the masterpiece that it is, is largely through its use of transmedia storytelling, in which there are few other franchises that could rival Star Wars for top place. This is where Henry Jenkins features and we are reminded by the essay question,
“Transmedia storytelling represents a process where integral elements of a fiction get dispersed systematically across multiple delivery channels for the purpose of creating a unified and coordinated entertainment experience” (Jenkins 2004: 31)
Star Wars is an excellent example of transmedia storytelling as it uses various mediums of output such as blockbuster films, television series, comic book, novels and video games to name a few. A reason that Star Wars is able to take full advantage of this type of storytelling is largely due to the incredibly rich and prosperous world that George Lucas created back in the 1970s.
When Star Wars came out in 1977 it single-handedly managed to change to entire film industry, showing how a film could be turned into a merchandising and branding juggernaut, and then turning into one of the most successful entertainment franchises to date. We discuss the topic transmedia storytelling today, however Star Wars has been using this method over the last four decades, creating discussions between storytelling, participatory audiences and ever-changing media-industrial practices.
Henry Jenkins discusses his experiences of Star Wars in the foreword for Star Wars and the history of Transmedia Storytelling. He explains how he was not necessarily enthralled by the concept as, at the time, he was a Star Trek fan, however he has now been totally encapsulated by the franchise as it not only met the needs of young fans but allowed genuine discussion between more mature film goers, even meeting his wife over a Star Wars fueled debate.
“There’s no question that George Lucas was a founding figure in the evolution of modern transmedia storytelling.” (Jenkins 2018:17)
Jenkins explains some of the reasoning behind the franchise becoming a transmedia masterpiece. When Lucas sought out funding for the original film he opted to waive his director fee in turn for a percentage of the gross of supplementary products. As this was to be his source of income it meant that it became important for Lucas to create a world where extra merchandising products and spin offs could take place and as this interest was so important for his revenues it meant that it was also important to the stories that were created.
As a result of this decision it meant that the Star Wars story could continue off the screen and throughout other sources of mediums when the blockbusters were not being shown. This was unheard of at the time as no other science fiction franchise had managed to so fully saturate and entire generations media experiences, a genre that was merely a sub category, now being recognized as base for mass entertainment spectacle.
Star Wars also falls under Jenkins’ ideas surrounding transmediality and synergy. The notion of Synergy is that one means of production owns or has economic interest in various media outlets. With these rights to ownership it allows them to better use transmedia branding and storytelling as a narrative structure in order to spread narrative, characters and settings across the multiple mediums and therefore maximize their returns invested.
In the case of Star Wars and Synergy, Disney is the nucleus of the operation. Walt Disney Studios distributes the films in the cinema, Star Wars: Rebels is distributed on the television on Disney XD channel, the comics and graphic novels are distributed through Marvel Comics (which is now owned by Disney) and finally the narrative is continued through video games such as Star Wars: Battlefront. This allows for different ways in which to read Star Wars, one being as a world of its own, a world that you can explore different areas and gain in depth new background information as if it was a part of the main story. Each of these different areas being transmitted and told through the multiple mediums discussed. This means that fans are able to attempt to achieve a superior knowledge of the franchise as the information is out there but means that we, as the audience, have to search across all platforms for the much needed knowledge.
Overall, after delving into Henry Jenkins thoughts on transmedia storytelling, it's clear that he offers a clear, concise idea of what transmediality is in his article. His opening statement, “transmedia storytelling represents a process where integral elements of a fiction get dispersed systematically across multiple delivery channels for the purpose of creating a unified and coordinated entertainment experience,” which is also the main focus of this essay, is broken down further and given clarity through his dissection and use of ‘The Matrix’ as an example. The other sections of this essay will include a more focussed look and some criticisms of Jenkins’ work, as well as a discussion about how ‘Star Wars’ exists as an example of transmedia storytelling.
Star wars managed to set a new bar for transmedia storytelling, a claim that Henry Jenkins himself would agree with. It is continually paving the way for ingenious methods of both storytelling and merchandising and setting examples for other franchises to follow. Now with the success of the more recent exploits of Star Wars one can only speculate what the future will hold for the franchise.
Guynes, S. Hassler-Forest, D. (2018) Star Wars and the History of Transmedia Storytelling. Amsterdam University Press B.V: Amsterdam
Jenkins, H (2004), “The cultural logic of media convergence”, International journal of Cultural studies, 7(1) pp. 33–43 London: SAGE Publications
Jenkins, H (2006) Convergence Culture: Where old and new media collide
Jenkins, H. (2008) Searching for the Origami Unicorn: The Matrix and Transmedia Storytelling, chapter 3, pages 93{130. New York University Press, New York and London.
Lucas, G (1977) Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope. USA. LucasFilm
Lucasfilm (n.d.) In Wikipedia. Retrieved 4/4/18. from Lucasfilm
Bury, R., & Li, J. (2013). Is it live or is it timeshifted, streamed or downloaded? Watching television in the era of multiple screens. New Media & Society, 17(4), 592–610. doi:10.1177/1461444813508368
Christian Fuchs. (n.d.). From http://fuchs.uti.at/570
Can audio media player technology when used in an education context actually widen participation and provide equality of opportunity to a broad range of students. In my view this is a resounding yes. The new generation of audio media players have an increasing role to play in providing enhanced learning opportunities to learners not in traditional learning environments. A very good example of this is in the area of Work Based Learning. Work based Learning is mainly a programme of study in the work place and includes a significant amount of work based assessment. Although it may include attendance at further education institutions, it is typically for people in paid employment. This can present significant barriers to achievement and in particular, progression to further and higher education and progression routes are an even greater than ever priority for increasing participation. Foundation Degrees are a good example of the sector’s response to this issue and are designed to offer the flexibility of study to attract employed students. With this work based element in mind audio media player technology can play a major part in bringing the classroom into the work place and make studying and revision more accessible.
Many education and training institutions are now utilising the use of IPOD technology to enable students to learn in the workplace. Students can be issued with MP3 players onto which they can down load lecture notes, handouts and training materials which can be viewed multiple times in the workplace without the need for attendance in a formal classroom setting. The benefits are not just confined to presenting lecture notes but have direct benefits in the workplace environment. For example the NHS Greater Hospital Glasgow issue staff with this technology to deliver audio induction to the workplace which is followed by a computer-based knowledge test. They are then used to train staff about issues like workplace safety, infection control and coping with violence. New hand held technology such as Smartphones can be easily and efficiently used to undertake learning in the work place. Examples of software applications include Letterdraw which teaches students literacy skills which may be particularly beneficial to a student reluctant to attend formal literacy classes but needs to improve these skills in order to progress both on their programme of study and to progress within the workplace. Pod casting technology is also a significant development in supporting work based learners. Students can listen to broadcast lectures and view materials multiple times with out the need for classroom attendance and have the opportunity to multitask whilst listening to lectures. Obviously this is a major benefit to a student that is primarily based in the workplace.
Handheld Computers and Smartphones in Secondary Schools: A Guide to Hands-on Learning by Dr. Bard Williams  found on http://www.iste.org/eseries/source/orders/excerpts/handco.pdf (accessed 30/03/06)
SCENE 3: Peter is going to Alan Tanner's office.
He says he has to find a receptionist/secretary,
Petro: Mr. Tanner? Alan?
Tanner: Oh, hello, Petro. Come on in.
Petro: Thanks. Listen, I need your help.
Tanner: Fine. What can I do for you?
Petro: There are two things, to tell the truth.
Tanner: Yes?
Petro: First, we need a secretary/receptionist.
Tanner: Ah, a person who can answer the telephone
Petro: Yes, exactly.
Tanner: A bilingual secretary? A trilingual one?
Petro: Okay, English is the most important. After
Tanner: Yes. Do you want a man? A woman?
Petro: That's not at all important, but probably
Tanner: Very well. First I'm gonna consult with
And naturaly you could also publish a small classified
Petro: Yes, as soon as possible.
Tanner: Very well. What was the second thing?
Petro: The other thing is an apartment for me.
Tanner: But I thought you already had an apartment.
Petro: No. I'm living now in a hotel. I want
Tanner: Yes. We have a housing office, but I believe
I saw something indicating that you already have
(On the phone) Mr. Chambon, please. Yes? He's
Mr. Minelli. He needs an apartment and ... yes?
Ah, yes, I also thought so. Thanks. Chambon is
Two apartments, on the same floor. Someone in
Strasbourg has arranged for them.
Tanner: Yeah.
Petro: Two apartments?
Tanner: Yeah. Your associate ...
Petro: Oh, God!
Tanner: Pardon?
Petro: Excuse me. Can I see Mr. Chambon?
Tanner: Yeah. He's gonna return to his office
Petro: I'm gonna go there to see him.
Tanner: Fine. Soon I'm gonna find a secretary
Petro: Thank you so very much.
Tanner: It's a pleasure.
Guide: Let's listen to this friendly conversation.
A man: How's everything?
A woman: Just fine, thanks. And you, how're you
A man: Oh, just fine, thanks. Everything's going
A woman: Yes, thank you. Everything's going fine.
How's business?
A man: Oh, not bad. Everything's going the way
A woman: Oh, okay, I guess. We've got a lot to
A man: Things are going fine with them. And how's
A woman: Oh, he's doing okay. He's very worried
Guide: This seems rather easy to me. Petro wanted
SCENE 4: Geneva, the offices of the holding company:
Petro is talking to Mr. Chambon, who has the
a small apartment in another building at a certain
Petro: Good mornng, Miss.
The secretary: Good morning, sir.
Petro: Can I speak to Mr. Chambon, please? I'm
Petro Minelli. Mr. Tanner sent me here.
The secretary: I'm sorry, but Mr. Chambon is not
Petro: Very well. Can I wait for him?
The secretary: Certainly. You can sit down over
Petro: Thanks a lot.
The secretary: It's a plesure.
Chambon: You are Mr. Minelli, no doubt.
Petro: Yes, I am.
Chambon: Come (on) in. Excuse me for not being
Petro: Don't worry about that. I didn't have to
Chambon: Fine. I suppose that you want to see me
Petro: Exactly.
Chambon: Fine. I believe that I have two suitable
Petro: What?
Chambon: Yes. The rent is eight thousand two hundred
Chambon: Okay ... let's see ... It's eight thousand
Petro: Eight thousand five hundred euros ... Listen,
I think there's a mistake.
Chambon: Oh really?
Petro: You received an order from Strasbourg?
Chambon: Exactly.
Petro: Did you receive a letter from ...
Yes, A. Martini. Alicia Martini.
Petro: Alicia Martini. Yes, I believe that there
Chambon: Oh, really?
Petro: Yes. It seems that my secretary did not
Chambon: Small?
Petro: Yes, very small and very cheap. A rather
Chambon: Ah, that's gonna be much more difficult
Petro: But can you try to find me one?
Chambon: I'll do everything that I can do.
Petro: Thanks a lot.
Chambon: You're sure you don't want these two larger
Petro: Yes, completely.
Chambon: Very well. I'm gonna try to help you
Petro: Thank you so much.
Chambon: Don't worry. It's a pleasure.
Guide: It seems that Petro's secretary is causing
A man: There's a mistake.
A woman: Excuse me?
A man: There's a mistake.
A woman: A mistake?
A man: Yes. That's not the right price. It's
A woman: Three thousand euros? But you told me
A man: Yes, but there's a mistake. I believe I
A woman: It isn't two thousand euros?
A man: Unfortunately no. I'm sorry about this.
A woman: But in your letter you said two thousand
A man: Yes, I know. The letter said two thousand
I'm very sorry about it.
Guide: I think I now understand.
While the general plan of the traditional Indian tipi represents an excellent design as far as smoke exhaustion and the maximum utilization of space are concerned, there are serious limits to its portability. The necessity of providing from 18 to 24 long poles at each site, or of transporting existing poles from site to site, makes the traditional tipi construction suited for the most kinds of camping that is popular.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Information is the knowledge or facts about someone or something.
Much effort has been invested in ensuring validity, reliability, and cross-cultural measurement equivalence of a new personal cultural orientations scale. Consumer ethnocentrism and consumer innovativeness for ensuring nomological validity of this scale.
I am more interested in buying new than known products. (0.72)
I like to buy new and different products. (0.74)
I am usually among the first to try new products. (0.73)
I know more than others about latest new products. (0.71)
Sharma (2010): Measuring Personal Cultural Orientations: Scale Development and Validation. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 38, No. 6, pp. 787–806
8 Read a story about beavers, their families, and how parent beavers protect their young.
9 How many babies does a mother beaver have? How soon after birth can baby beavers swim?
10 Draw or color a picture of what a beaver’s lodge looks like, if you slice off one side of a typical beaver lodge.
What does a beaver use its tail for?
Beavers have a large flat tail that helps them steer through the water. When beavers chew on trees they use their tail like a kick stand to give them support. When a beaver feels threatened by danger it will slap its tail on the water as a warning of the predator. Beavers also store fat in their tails for the long, cold winters.
Why do beavers have such big front teeth?
To gnaw through tree trunks, they need extra-strong teeth. Fortunately, their tooth enamel contains iron, which makes them incredibly strong, sharp, and orange.
What do beavers eat?
Beavers eat the leaves, inner bark, and twigs of aspen (a favorite food), alder, birch, cottonwood, willow, and other deciduous trees. Beavers also eat shrubs, ferns, aquatic plants, grasses, and crops, including corn and beans.
How do beavers cut down trees? Move large logs?
A) With nothing but its four front teeth
However, when a tree is a bit larger in diameter, beavers prefer to cut the trunk to a point and then let the wind blow the tree down.
B) Beavers can transport their own weight in material;
How do beavers build dams? Why do they build them?
When beavers come into a new location, they first build dams across small streams. The dam traps water behind it and creates a pond. The purpose of the dam is to provide deep enough water for the beaver to build a safe home - called a lodge.
Beavers don't live in dams, they build two different types of structures. They create a wide, cone-shaped lodge with underwater entrances to live in, and they build dams to provide them with areas of deep, calm water within which to build their lodge.
How is a beaver’s home made?
Beavers build their lodge in the middle of the pond, where the pond water provides safety from predators like bears and wolves. But the water level must also be deep enough not to freeze solid in the winter, because beavers live under the ice in the winter, accessing their lodge from underwater entrances and eating twigs and branches they have stored in their submerged larder.
Build a beaver dam using small sticks and glue or build a beaver lodge.
Read a story about beavers, their families, and how parent beavers protect their young.
How many babies does a mother beaver have? How soon after birth can baby beavers swim?
A) The mother in the family may give birth to between one and six kits every year.
B) His eyes open right away, and he has his teeth and his full coat of waterproof fur.
Because the kit is so well-developed, it is able to start swimming on the day.
A few days after its birth, it may leave the lodge with its mother or father.
Draw or color a picture of what a beaver’s lodge looks like, if you slice off one side of a typical beaver lodge.
Note:  A beaver puppet is used by many to work on this chip.  A nice puppet is available for sale here from AdventSource.
The experimental section appeared in Section 2. Ratings of this administration placed its difficulty slightly above that of other recent exams.
Examinees found the arts passage easiest and the science passage hardest.
On the whole, Test takers found this to be a difficult section because of the number of questions, difficulty of the questions, and complexity of the passages.
The first passage discussed Mexican-American writers and argued that their writing displays a fusion of language and theme unique to their experiences.
The second passage reviewed changes in bankruptcy law, noting a shift in emphasis from punishment to restitution. The author viewed the change as beneficial because those who declare bankruptcy can better repay their debtors.
The third passage addressed the malleability of cultural identity. It used historical examples to illustrate how one culture can engulf another and cause identity shifts.
The last passage dealt with chaos theory, specifically the idea that you can predict a future state but not how something will get to that state. It described recent work in the field that challenges the reproducibility of scientific results and has the potential to undermine some of science’s core tenets.
Most examinees found one of the sections harder than the other, though the difference in difficulty was less pronounced than on some other recent exams.
Princeton Review students rated the difficulty of this section as easier than Games sections that have appeared on exams within the past year.
In the first game, you had to determine at which of four airports six flights, ordered 1 to 6, landed.
The second game involved selecting a panel of five people from a group of three parents, three students, and four teachers.
The third game asked test takers to determine in which of five years three students graduated and in which of those years they purchased cars.
In the last game, a child eating alphabet soup decided to eat from one to three of six remaining letters in three spoonfuls. You had to determine which letters were in each spoonful.
This section will ask you questions that you will have to find programming solutions to.  There will be more than one way of answering each question, so the answers below are only indicative of what we are looking for.  As long as you get the same answers it doesn't matter how you do it. You may be given pseudeocode to help you program the problem.
Write a program to enter batting scores until the number -1 is input.  And then output the total and average score.
Score = Console.ReadLine
Console.Write(" Your Total Is: " & Total)
Console.Write(" Your Average Is: " & Ave)
Write code to keep asking for login, only accepting: username= PSN Password = easy.  Otherwise it should say. “Not hacked yet”:
If username = "PSN" And password = "easy" Then
Console.WriteLine("Not Hacked yet")
Loop Until username = "PSN" And password = "easy"
Write code to print out a Christmas tree of a user defined size: even rows = *, odd = #.  For example for the number 4 it should output:
Console.WriteLine("Please enter a number: ")
For count = 1 To number
If count Mod 2 = 0 Then
For x = 1 To count
The purpose of this article is to critique a study titled "Reduction of children's sport performance anxiety through social support and stress-reduction training for coaches" that investigates the effect of coaching behaviour on the mentality of their athletes.
What is the background to this research
Sport performance anxiety (SPA) is a highly prevalent issue in today's society. It occurs when an athlete feels too nervous or fearful to perform to the best of their ability.[1] Generally, anxiety can be divided into two subsections; cognitive and somatic. Cognitive anxiety refers to the mental processes that cultivate anxiety, such as worrying. Somatic anxiety refers to the physical representation of that mentality, for example an elevated heart rate.[2] There are many reasons that cause this anxiety, such as the fear of failure, rejection and social approval. The fear of failure is closely associated with low self confidence and a strong desire to succeed.[1]
Analysing SPA is important as it can be highly detrimental to performance. One way this is shown is through the notion of "choking".[1] This concept is when an athlete's response to anxiety is the physical feeling of being unable to breathe, which may lead to a decrement or cessation of performance.
This research fills a gap in existing knowledge as it is the first study to demonstrate how relevant interventions targeted at coaches may decrease performance anxiety within children. It shows that children who had a high amount of SPA were particularly sensitive to how they were perceived by their coaches. Therefore, this study addresses the association between coaching behaviour and performance anxiety in young athletes.
The authors of this article, Ronald E. Smith et al., represent the University of Washington. This paper was published in the Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology and was conducted through Little League Baseball in Washington. However, no mention was made of any conflict of interest.
What kind of research was this?
This study was a randomised controlled trial (RCT). An RCT is often referred to as the gold standard of scientific trials, with the aim of decreasing bias while testing the efficacy of one or more interventions.[3] Due to this reduction of bias, RCT’s are generally thought to be a more valid form of investigation.
In this study, the trained group had an intervention program implemented, where the control group remained without.
What did the research involve?
The researchers conducting this study applied an intervention known as Coach Effectiveness Training (CET) to 18 male baseball coaches. To meet the inclusion criteria, the coaches all held a similar style of coaching. The subjects involved were 152 male 10-12 year old Little League Baseball players, all whom competed at a major level within the Seattle area code. Coaches within the trained group received a pre-season intervention in which they were presented with behavioural guidelines to help decrease performance anxiety. Coaches within the control group did not receive any guidelines. Children who played for each coaching group were then interviewed pre and post season using sport-specific anxiety scales. The CET was implemented in the training group 2 weeks prior to the start of the baseball season. The crux of the CET intervention revolved around a set of behavioural guidelines that the coaches were instructed to follow. The guidelines followed concepts of positive control as opposed to aversive, and the ideology that success was defined by maximal effort as opposed to outcome. There were four behaviours that the guidelines targeted: mistake-contingent encouragement, positive reinforcement, corrective and technical instruction. Alongside that, there were four behaviours the guidelines deemed as undesirable: punishment, non-reinforcement, punitive instruction and controlling behaviour. These behaviours by the coaches were linked to influencing the fluctuation of performance anxiety within the young athletes. To minimise bias, trained coaches were asked to keep the intervention guidelines private, which prevented leakage of information.
To assess changes within performance anxiety levels, the boys undertook the Sport Anxiety Scale (SAS) within pre and post season interviews. The SAS is a sport-specific determination of cognitive and somatic anxiety, and provides a competitive trait anxiety score to determine changes in athletes' anxiety levels.
The methodology of implementing a change in behaviour to affect anxiety was an effective approach, as behaviour is a common way coaches may influence anxiety levels in children. However, there were limitations within this intervention that compromised the efficacy of the study. For example, all participants were male. Studies have shown that female athletes tend to experience anxiety to a higher degree than males,[4] which could have possibly skewed the results in the study. It has also been suggested that the positive approach implemented within this intervention may have a greater effect on reducing SPA within females than males. Another limitation is that parental influence was not included. It has been shown that parents can be a major source of anxiety within young athletes.[5] Thus, including parents within the intervention may have resulted in further anxiety decrement.
What were the basic results?
Preseason and postseason anxiety levels were compared through t tests to determine the effectiveness of the CET intervention. A significant reduction in SAS scores were depicted in athletes from the trained group, whereas the control group did not reveal any significant SAS decreases.
Out of the 8 behavioural traits enforced within the guidelines, results from 2 desirable traits (reinforcement and encouragement) and 2 undesirable traits (non-reinforcement and punishment) are shown below:[6]
The statistics above displayed that boys who played for the trained coaches perceived them as possessing greater desirable traits. The boys who played for the control coaches perceived them as having greater undesirable traits.
The researchers determined that the CET intervention was successful in reducing SPA in young boys as a result of the coaches' changed behaviour. They concluded that athletes playing for the trained coaches had an increased level of self confidence, associated with a negative relationship to performance anxiety.
What conclusions can we take from this research?
Based on the evidence presented within this study, applying a behavioural intervention to coaches is likely to decrease children's tendency to experience SPA. A positivity-focused approach in how coaches interact with their athletes results in higher levels of self confidence, thereby reducing anxiety. However, despite the intervention being successful, it doesn't pinpoint whether a reduction in performance anxiety is directly correlated to performance improvement. In my opinion, the findings from this study are an accurate representation of the correlation between coaching influence and performance anxiety due to similar results being presented within more recent studies. An example of this is a study conducted by Joseph Baker analysing the relationship between athletic sport anxiety and coaching behaviours.[7] The majority of research deems that an increase in positive coaching attributes aligns with decreased performance anxiety, supporting the findings of this study.[8]
Although this study was conducted on young athletes, SPA affects athletes of all ages. Any professional athletes experiencing extreme performance anxiety would benefit greatly from an intervention. Advice for coaches with athletes suffering through this is to reflect upon their own behaviour and see if positive and supportive interventions can be implemented.
Coaches involved with young athletes, as well as young athletes experiencing anxiety may benefit from the following readings. However, these readings do not substitute professional medical advice.
↑ a b c Cohn, P. (2012). What is Performance Anxiety in Sports? | Sports Performance Anxiety. [online] Performanceanxietysports.com. Available at: https://www.performanceanxietysports.com/performance-anxiety-in-sports/
↑ Steptoe, A. (1990). Cognitive and Somatic Anxiety. [online] Available at: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/000579679090057P
↑ Pal, S. (2019). Randomized Trials vs Meta-analyses: Which Is the Better Bet? - The ASCO Post. [online] Ascopost.com. Available at: https://www.ascopost.com/issues/june-10-2014/randomized-trials-vs-meta-analyses-which-is-the-better-bet/ [Accessed 18 Sep. 2019].
↑ Patel, D. (2010). Sport-related Performance Anxiety in Young Female Athletes. [online] Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/46425791_Sport-related_Performance_Anxiety_in_Young_Female_Athletes
↑ Smith, R. (1995). Reduction of children's sport performance anxiety through social support and stress-reduction training for coaches. [online] Available at: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0193397395900209
↑ Smith, R. (1995). Reduction of children's SPA through social support and stress-reduction training for coaches. [online] Available at: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0193397395900209
↑ Baker, J. (2000). [online] Available at: http://The relationship between coaching behaviours and sport anxiety in athletes [Accessed 18 Sep. 2019].
↑ Felton, L. (2013). Attachment and well-being: The mediating effects of psychological needs satisfaction within the coach–athlete and parent–athlete relational contexts. [online] Available at: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1469029212000933 [Accessed 18 Sep. 2019].
The Intel 8051 microcontroller is one of the most popular general purpose microcontrollers in use today. The success of the Intel 8051 spawned a number of clones, which are collectively referred to as the MCS-51 family of microcontrollers, which includes chips from vendors such as Atmel, Philips, Infineon, and Texas Instruments.
The Intel 8051 is an 8-bit microcontroller which means that most available operations are limited to 8 bits. There are 3 basic "sizes" of the 8051: Short, Standard, and Extended. The Short and Standard chips are often available in DIP (dual in-line package) form, but the Extended 8051 models often have a different form factor, and are not "drop-in compatible". All these things are called 8051 because they can all be programmed using 8051 assembly language, and they all share certain features (although the different models all have their own special features).
Some of the features that have made the 8051 popular are:
Bit as well as byte addressable RAM area of 16 bytes.
Four 8-bit ports, (short models have two 8-bit ports).
16-bit program counter and data pointer.
Variants of the 8051 may also have a number of special, model-specific features, such as UART, ADC, Op_Amps, etc., making it an even more powerful microcontroller.
8051 chips are used in a wide variety of control systems, telecom applications, robotics as well as in the automotive industry. By some estimations, 8051 family chips make up over 50% of the embedded chip market.
PIN 9 is the reset pin which is used to reset the microcontroller’s internal registers and ports upon starting up. (Pin should be held high for 2 machine cycles.)
The 8051 has a built-in oscillator amplifier hence we need to only connect a crystal at these pins to provide clock pulses to the circuit.
Pins 40 and 20 are VCC and ground respectively. The 8051 chip needs +5V 500mA to function properly, although there are lower powered versions like the Atmel 2051 which is a scaled down version of the 8051 which runs on +3V.
As described in the features of the 8051, this chip contains a built-in flash memory. In order to program this we need to supply a voltage of +12V at pin 31. If external memory is connected then PIN 31, also called EA/VPP, should be connected to ground to indicate the presence of external memory.
PIN 30 is called ALE (address latch enable), which is used when multiple memory chips are connected to the controller and only one of them needs to be selected.We will deal with this in depth in the later chapters.
PIN 29 is called PSEN. This is "program store enable". In order to use the external memory it is required to provide the low voltage (0) on both PSEN and EA pins.
If we use an external ROM then it should have a logic 0 which indicates Micro controller to read data from memory.
This Pin is used for ALE that is Address Latch Enable. If we use multiple memory chips then this pin is used to distinguish between them.It is activated periodically with a constant rate of 1/6th of oscillator frequency.
This Pin also gives program pulse input during programming of EPROM.
If we have to use multiple memories then by applying logic 1 to this pin instructs Micro controller to read data from both memories first internal and afterwards external.
There are 4 8-bit ports: P0, P1, P2 and P3.
The port P1 is a general purpose input/output port which can be used for a variety of interfacing tasks. The other ports P0, P2 and P3 have dual roles or additional functions associated with them based upon the context of their usage.The port 1 output buffers can sink/source four  TTL inputs.
When 1s are written to portn1 pins are pulled high by the internal pull-ups and can be used as inputs.
PORT P3 acts as a normal IO port, but Port P3 has additional functions such as, serial transmit and receive pins, 2 external interrupt pins, 2 external counter inputs, read and write pins for memory access.
PORT P2 can also be used as a general purpose 8 bit port when no external memory is present, but if external memory access is required then PORT P2 will act as an address bus in conjunction with PORT P0 to access external memory. PORT P2 acts as A8-A15, as can be seen from fig 1.1
PORT P0 can be used as a general purpose 8 bit port when no external memory is present, but if external memory access is required then PORT P0 acts as a multiplexed address and data bus that can be used to access external memory in conjunction with PORT P2. P0 acts as AD0-AD7, as can be seen from fig 1.1
Serial Asynchronous Communication Output or Serial Synchronous Communication clock Output.
The 8051 requires an external oscillator circuit. The oscillator circuit usually runs around 12 MHz, although the 8051 (depending on which specific model) is capable of running at a maximum of 40 MHz. Each machine cycle in the 8051 is 12 clock cycles, giving an effective cycle rate at 1 MHz (for a 12 MHz clock) to 3.33 MHz (for the maximum 40 MHz clock).
The oscillator circuit generates the clock pulses so that all internal operations are synchronized.
One machine cycle has 6 states. One state is 2 T-states. Therefore one machine cycle is 12 T-states.
Time to execute an instruction is found by multiplying C by 12 and dividing product by Crystal frequency.
Internal schematics of the 8051.
The 8051 Microcontroller can be programmed in PL/M, 8051 Assembly, C and a number of other high-level languages. Some compilers even have support for compiling C++ for an 8051.
Program memory in the 8051 is read-only, while the data memory is considered to be read/write accessible. When stored on EEPROM or Flash, the program memory can be rewritten when the microcontroller is in the special programmer circuit or, if not using a 8031, through a preinstalled bootloader.
The 8051 starts executing program instructions from address 0000 in the program memory.
The Special Function Register (SFR) is the upper area of addressable memory, from address 0x80 to 0xFF.  A, B, PSW, DPTR are called SFR.This area of memory cannot be used for data or program storage, but is instead a series of memory-mapped ports and registers. All port input and output can therefore be performed by memory mov operations on specified addresses in the SFR. Also, different status registers are mapped into the SFR, for use in checking the status of the 8051, and changing some operational parameters of the 8051.
The A register is located in the SFR  memory location 0xE0. The A register works in a similar fashion to the AX register of x86 processors. The A register is called the accumulator, and by default it receives the result of all arithmetic operations. The B register is used in a similar manner, except that it can receive the extended answers from the multiply and divide operations. When not being used for multiplication and Division, the B register is available as an extra general-purpose register. The A and B registers can store up to 8-bits of data each.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
The owner of a gypsum mine in the province of Shandong in the east part of China has killed himself, during rescuers try to rescue 17 miners who have been trapped for 2 days, Xinhua news agency reports.
Xinhuarsheh baohdaao, shihtur yirngjiuh ZG dongbuh Shandong sheeng 1'g shirgao-kuahng 17'g beihkuhn 2 rih d kuahnggong zhijih, zhaohshih kuahngchaang laaobaan zihsha siiwarng.
Atia¹ ted tejea² totamu³,
To create a database in SQL enter
The above example has created a database called Test.
To create a table in the database
Germany became two separate political spheres by 1949, divided by the Western and Eastern powers.
Economic differences between West Germany and East Germany
West Germany had a larger industrial output, larger population, and was larger geographically.
West Germany received Marshall aid and underwent an 'economic miracle' and had good living standards.
East Germany's leader was Walter Ulbricht.
He adopted a forced collectivisation of farms and of socialisation.
This was disastrous for the economy.
Political differences between West Germany and East Germany
West Germany had democracy.
East Germany had no free elections from 1946 onwards and was Stalinist and authoritarian.
East Germany not only protested but fled to the Wast. Some where contained.
As a result, there were no efforts by either side to unite Germany.
Khrushchev described Berlin as 'a fishbone in East Germany's gullet.'
Why did the Berlin Crisis develop?
West Berlin had political freedom and an open lifestyle which encouraged East Germans to migrate, leaving the hardship of the East, via Berlin.
It was mainly young and skilled East Germans that escaped, one-sixth of the German population.
The West used Berlin as propaganda and as an espionage hotspot, inside Eastern territory.
27 November 1957, Khrushchev demanded Berlin be demilitarised and Western troops withdrawal.
Clever diplomacy: If the West did not decide in six months he would surrender access routes to Western sectors to the GDR.
The Paris Summit and the U-2 incident, May 1960
This book is all about the things you can do to help yourself, but don't forget to get help from other people too. Clinical depression is a serious mental illness that can be seriously debilitating and even fatal. It's very important to get the professional help you need and to make the most of whatever services are available to you. Health systems vary widely from country to country, but the basic advice here still applies.
First time?
Some people may be afraid of getting help in the first place. It's common to feel embarrassed or ashamed; you may be unwilling to admit that you can't "cope". Or you may think that your problems aren't serious enough to bother the doctor with, or that they'll think you're being silly. Some people may try to tell you that people choose to be depressed, or that you just need to "pull yourself together". Although they often mean well, usually these people don't have any first hand experience of serious mental health issues. They don't know what you're feeling, only you do. If your depression is making your life unbearable, or having a negative effect on your relationships, job or family life, then it's time to get help. Make an appointment to see your GP or family doctor and tell them how you feel. If you're worried about getting it out once you're in front of them, write a few things down that you want to say before you go in. Doctors nowadays are very experienced with dealing with people with mental health problems, and often have some training in this area. Attitudes have changed dramatically over the last few decades. You won't be laughed out of the door, or carted off to the asylum. Remember too, that doctors are human, and may not give you the exact response you would hope for. If your doctor is dismissive or unhelpful, try to see a different one. If you have health insurance, you may be able to see a professional directly without going through your GP. Local governments often have mental health clinics.
Dementia is caused by damage to brain cells. This damage interferes with the ability of brain cells to communicate with each other. When brain cells cannot communicate normally, thinking, behavior, and feeling are all affected.
This tutorial begins assuming you have the SmartChain (version 2.4) downloaded and installed already with a connected wallet and a registered username. You will also need Radon to support the Publishing of the Text Note - the current rate is 1 Radon per 40 bytes of text. For information regarding registration or obtaining Radon, please visit the  [Registration Walkthrough] and the [Radium Decay Walkthrough]
1.) Open the SmartChain and select your username. Then select the "Prove Something" Button as circled below, which brings you to the Known Text Notes Screen shown in Step 2.   SmartChain - Verify file S1
3.) The Text Note window will auto-populate your username as the publishers name. You can apply a title for your text note and  fill out the text note you need recorded. Once you have your note crafted to your liking, you can run the built-in Cost Calculator to get an idea of the exact cost and compression ratio that will be applied to your note.  When you are satisfied with your note and costs, select "Place in Blockchain!"  SmartChain - Verify file S3
4.) Two confirmation windows will appear. One is to confirm the title and the user you are acting as, and the other is to confirm the costs that are going to be applied to the balances of your SmartChain user account. These are your last chances to review your entries before publishing to the SmartChain. Please review closely.  SmartChain - Verify file S4
5.) Upon submission the note will not immediately show up in the SmartChain. As previously noted, it runs 4 blocks behind the Radium Blockchain so you will need to wait a few minutes for your text note to appear.  When it appears you can inspect the published text note and select "View Document" to review the published note.  SmartChain - Verify file S5
6.) Inspecting the note shows the exact time and date of the recording, as well as the User who recorded it, what block of the SmartChain the note was published in, and the exact text that was entered.   SmartChain - Verify file S6
Please reach out to someone in the Project Radon Slack Channel with any issues or questions!
The SmartChain functionality is undergoing rapid development at the moment and the steps of this guide may change or be slightly altered. If you see any discrepancies please notify the project group in the Project Radium Slack channel so we can make the appropriate updates.
For questions about installing the SmartChain and registering a username, please visit this page: Radium SmartChain/registration walkthrough
For questions about decaying Radium into Radon, please visit this page: Radium SmartChain/Radium Decay Tutorial
Top view of a table made from two trees, two poles, and several shorter spars
A camp sink need not be any more than a few large containers placed on a table.  For the containers, you can use a large salad bowl or a plastic storage tub.  The table to place them on can be constructed by finding two trees at least 20 cm in diameter and about 2 meters apart.  Then using square lashing, attach two long poles to either side of the trees, at waist-height.  Use continuous lashings to lash several shorter poles across the support poles to make the table surface.  The short poles should all be as close to the same diameter as possible, or if that's impossible, arranged from smallest to largest.
Advanced Planning and Scheduling has the following functions:
CEL scripts are short text-based programs that Celestia can read. They contain simple commands that take control of Celestia (once it is launched) and enable a script writer to design a specific journey or set of scenes that a user of the script will see and experience. For example, a script may take the user on a short tour of the solar system, pausing briefly at all of the planets. In that way, a CEL script is used to change the position of Celestia's viewpoint.
CEL scripting is basically a sequence of commands similar to key-presses, which are executed in specific timing and at a particular speed to give viewers a visual experience that the script writer wants to display. There is however no interactivity with the user during the execution of a CEL script.
Scripts can take users to very specific locations in the Celestia universe. For example, a script can be written to take them into orbit around Venus, or take them outside the Milky Way to view it from intergalactic space. What happens when they get there is controlled by the script as well. There may be a 30 second pause, followed by a movement to another location. There may also be text displayed, to teach the user some information about a particular place.
Scripts also have the ability to change specific Celestia (render) settings. For example the rendering of orbits can be turned on/off or planets can be given a marker or alternative surface texture. Note however, when a CEL script ends or is terminated by the user, there is NO ability to reset those settings to the values they were before running the script. It is advised for the user to have their own reset.cel script, so specific Celestia (render) settings can be easily restored after running other CEL scripts.
A script can be launched from the Celestia/File/Open script... or Celestia/File/scripts drop down menu and it will run until it is complete. Meanwhile it can be paused by the user by pressing the [Spacebar] key or it can be stopped at any time by pressing the [Esc] key.When the file extension ".cel" of a script is also correctly associated with the Celestia program, it is also possible to launch the script externally, e.g. from a hyperlink or by double clicking.
Scripts offer a Celestia user several key advantages:
A Celestia script writer can give inexperienced users a beautiful visual tour of a particular Celestia environment.
Important celestial events can be displayed for a user, controlled by script. For example, a script can take a user to 1957 to see Sputnik 1 orbiting Earth on its maiden flight. The script can put the viewer into a position just 10 meters from Sputnik, and pace it as it flies over the Soviet Union, then display a paragraph of text explaining the significance of Sputnik.
If no script were available, it might take a user many minutes to set up Celestia to go to the same spot at the same time. Also, no text would be displayed.
In the special Celestia-ED version of the Celestia program, CEL scripts have been given the ability to also command sound and music files to play. As such, scripts can be designed which choreograph complex movements of planets or spacecraft, while moving to music.
Anyone can write a CEL script. Some knowledge of how to do so is required and is summarized below, but you do not have to be a very experienced Celestia user to write a CEL script.
The very first character in a CEL script must be an opening curly brace "{". The very last character in a script must be a closing curly brace "}".
Therefore, an empty, but valid Celestia CEL script file looks like the following:
Every script you create for Celestia will have at least one command line in it, which is a line of text instructing Celestia to set or do something.
A typical single Celestia script command line consists of the following pieces:
A command name, such as wait
An opening curly brace "{"
Zero or more argument names, along with the value you want the argument set to.
A closing curly brace "}"
The "#" character can be used as the first character in a script line to make that line a comment line, which the script engine will ignore (not execute).
Assign a <number> value of 5.5, to the argument duration, in the command wait, which tells Celestia to pause for the number of seconds you enter.
Note: there are no double quote marks (") around the <number> value (5.5) because double quote marks are used only to specify a <string> value.
Note: Here, double quote marks tell Celestia that a <string>, or text value (Mars), is being sent to it. When sending a <string> to Celestia, the value must be enclosed in double quote marks.
Example of a comment line.
Some Celestia CEL script commands, such as print, send more than one argument. In these cases, you enclose all arguments and their associated values between the command's opening and closing curly braces, such as:
Note: All arguments for each command must be enclosed within the command's curly braces, such as the example above shows. You may include as much white space (spaces, blank lines, etc.) as you deem necessary, and you may even specify each argument and its associated value on a different line – all for clarity.
When you save a Celestia CEL script file to disk, the file extension must be ".cel", which allows your operating system to recognize the file as belonging to Celestia, and allows Celestia to know this file is one of its CEL scripts. Also, you must save the file as plain text. Rich Text Format files do not function in Celestia because they also contain embedded formatting information.
An index of the available CEL commands can be found at the CEL command index section of the CEL to CELX migration chapter.
By clicking on a specific command, you will be routed to the explanation of its functionality. The index also contains an explanation on how that CEL command can be migrated to equivalent CELX objects and methods. Before starting with CELX scripting however, you may need to have some programming experience with CEL scripting first.
A main advantage of CEL scripting is that it's MUCH easier to use than CELX scripting. The syntax is easy due to the simple structure of the commands, and most of the time it's very easy to translate keyboard commands directly into their CEL counterparts.
The primary disadvantage in using CEL-scripting versus CELX-scripting is its limited flexibility, its inability to respond to keyboard commands, the absence of a possibility to reset changed user settings to the values they were before running the CEL script and a lack of support for many of the new Celestia features that appeared in Celestia version 1.6.0 and newer Celestia versions/releases.
The main differences between CEL scripting and CELX scripting are summarized below:
The extension of CEL and CELX scripts differ from each other:
More words and more commands make CELX scripts look more complex than CEL scripts, but it also gives your scripts more possibilities, including the usage of Lua logic (like building loops, make decisions on what to do, calculations, etc.), and interactive keyboard input.The CEL to CELX migration section will help you with the more complex CELX equivalents of the CEL commands, so you can use these equivalents in your own script. Besides the equivalents, there are also examples included. You can copy the equivalents into your own script and modify them according your own wishes. After a while you’ll become more familiar with CELX scripting and copying or typing a sequence of CELX methods and objects will become easier each time.
The units of the components of a position object in CELX are millionths of a light-year. When you have position components defined in km (CEL scripting) or miles, you first have to convert those components to millionths of a light year.Therefore, you can use a constant, which must be initialized first within your CELX script:
From km to millionths of a light year, use constant: uly_to_km = 9460730.4725808.
From miles to millionths of a light year, use constant: uly_to_mls = 5912956.5453630.
Next you can convert km or miles to millionths of a light year as follows:
Be aware that some default parameter values have changed in CELX compared with the equivalent defaults in CEL scripting.
Time in CELX is defined in TDB (Barycentric Dynamical Time) instead of UTC or Juliandate, because UTC includes "leap seconds" in order to stay aligned with the Earth's varying rotation. Leap seconds happen essentially randomly, when they are needed. Although Celestia does incorporate a table of leap second times, the use of UTC in versions of Celestia before v1.5.0 caused problems when used with ephemerides which are defined using TDB.Starting with version 1.5.0, although it still displays UTC on the screen, Celestia uses the TDB time scale internally for everything else. As a result, Celestia places objects much more accurately than before.
To convert from Juliandate and/or UTC to TDB is explained in the section: CEL: time.
Transparency of markers can be true or false in CELX (starting from Celestia version 1.6.0). In CEL scripting there’s no possibility to enable or disable the transparency of markers. The Celestia releases 1.5.0/1.5.1 and older always displayed the markers, but from Celestia version 1.6.0 (or Celestia-ED version 1.5.1), the default marker transparency is true, resulting in disappearing markers in case of Occultations, or partially show markers on the surface of celestial objects. To overcome this, the usage of the false parameter in the CELX: object:mark() method is necessary, which also makes CELX scripting necessary, instead of CEL scripting!
Sometimes, timing can be more sensitive in CELX scripting than it is in CEL scripting, especially when lots of Lua commands and Celestia (related) methods are used within a short period of time with a high timerate value ([i]i.e.[/i] when time has been speeded up). Solving those timing issues on your own computer may not always give the same result on other computers with different CPU speeds. In those cases, the usage of a CEL equivalent part within your CELX script may give a more consistent result.
-- Within the subsequent part of your CELX script you can now use CEL script commands as follows:
CEL and CELX Scripts can be temporarily paused, by pressing the [Spacebar] key. Pressing the [Spacebar] key again will result in the continuation of the script.Note: When using CEL script parts and functions within a CELX script, this pause function will not work completely correctly. Although the scene you’re looking at will pause directly, the CEL script parts and functions will continue to run in the background, resulting in a part of the script being visually skipped when you press the [Spacebar] key again to continue the script.
A slightly out-of-date summary of .CEL commands.
A list of more of the .CEL scripting commands, somewhat cryptically organized.
An example .CEL script
Some helpful .CEL and .CELX scripts for Celestia are available on Don G's Celestia Scripting Resources
A Wikibookian believes this page should be split into smaller pages with a narrower subtopic.
You can help by splitting this big page into smaller ones. Please make sure to follow the naming policy. Dividing books into smaller sections can provide more focus and allow each one to do one thing well, which benefits everyone.
You can ask for help in dividing this book in the assistance reading room.
Syllabus (as set by the College Board)
The purpose of this 'book' is to provide quick revision to students. It is  by no means a replacement for a typical school textbook.
All the topics in the syllabus are covered. For detailed information, click the hyperlinks which will take you to the relevant topics in wikipedia.
A. Kinematics includes velocity, acceleration, motion in one dimension, and motion of projectiles.
B. Dynamics includes force, Newton’s laws, and statics.
C. Energy and Momentum includes potential and kinetic energy, work, power, impulse, and conservation laws.
D. Circular Motion includes uniform circular motion and centripetal force.
E. Simple Harmonic Motion includes mass on a spring and the pendulum.
F. Gravity includes the law of gravitation, orbits, and Kepler’s laws.
Distance is defined as the entire distance traveled by an object.
It is crucial to remember that only displacement is used in to calculate velocity and not distance.  Thus, if an object goes in a circle and returns to its initial point, the displacement is 0 and the velocity is therefore 0 m/s as 0 m/s is always equal to zero.  Even if the object is moving a speed of 100 m/s when making that one loop, the lack of a displacement means that the velocity is 0.
Acceleration is the rate of change of velocity. Acceleration is said to take place when either the speed of an object changes, or its direction changes.
When the acceleration and the velocity of an object are in the same direction, an object is speeding up.  When the acceleration and the velocity of an object are in opposite directions, an object is slowing down or decelerating.  This can be explained as the acceleration being negative relative to the velocity which means that the acceleration would actually be deceleration relative to the velocity we know as the act of slowing down.  When the acceleration and the velocity of an object are perpendicular to each other, the object is turning.
Position vs. Time Graphs
The slope of a position vs. time graph is the equal to the velocity
The area inside the graph of a velocity vs. time graph is equal to the displacement
When solving projectile motion questions, the question can be broken up into horizontal motion and vertical motion components that are independent
Horizontal motion is unaffected by the acceleration caused by gravity and the initial horizontal velocity is constant throughout the entire motion with the absence of air resistance.
The horizontal distance traveled by a projectile can be calculated with the initial horizontal velocity and the projectile's air time.
Vertical Motion is affected by the acceleration due to gravity or g which is equal to 9.81 m/s2 which can also be rounded to 10 m/s2 as the SAT II does not allow the use of calculators and simple numbers will make calculations easier.
With projectile motion, the vertical motion can simply be treated as the motion of a projectile being thrown straight up then falling back down as the horizontal component does not affect the vertical motion.
The total air time of a projectile can be calculated with the following formula.
g: acceleration due to gravity
An object continues in its state of rest or uniform motion, until an external force is applied to it.
This law is called the law of inertia.  Inertia is an object's resistance to motion and is directly proportional to the mass of said object.
The rate of change of momentum is proportional to the applied force and takes place in the direction of the force.
Every action has an equal and opposite reaction.
Is the attractive force exerted by two objects.
G: Universal Gravitational Constant (6.67 * 10-11 Nm2/kg2)
m1a1=m2a2 or F1=F2 because the force exert by two objects on eacch other will be equal by in opposite directions.
Is the force that gravity exerts on an object.
g: acceleration due to gravity
Is the energy possessed by a body due to its position in a gravitational field.
h: height above the ground
Is the energy possessed by a body due to its motion.
m: mass of the moving body
v: velocity of the body
Is the product of the mass and velocity of a body.
p: momentum in Ns or kgms-1
Impulse is a force acting for a very short period of time, as during in a collision.
Force = Change in Momentum/Time = Mass x Acceleration
Impulse = Force x Time = Change in Momentum = Mass x Change in Velocity
A. Electric Fields, Forces, and Potentials, such as Coulomb’s law, induced charge, field and potential of groups of point charges, and charged particles in electric fields.
B. Capacitance, such as parallel-plate capacitors and transients.
C. Circuit Elements and DC Circuits, such as resistors, light bulbs, series and parallel networks, Ohm’s law, and Joule’s law.
D. Magnetism, such as permanent magnets, fields caused by currents, particles in magnetic fields, Faraday’s law, Lenz’s law.
A. General Wave Properties, such as wave speed, frequency, wavelength,superposition, standing waves, and Doppler effect.
B. Reflection and Refraction, such as Snell’s law and changes in wavelength and speed.
C. Ray Optics, such as image formation using pinholes, mirrors, and lenses.
D. Physical Optics, such as single-slit diffraction, double-slit interference, polarization, and color.
A. Thermal Properties, such as temperature, heat transfer, specific and latent heats, and thermal expansion.
B. Laws of Thermodynamics, such as first and second laws, internal energy, entropy, and heat engine efficiency.
Heat, or thermal energy, always flows from a region of higher temperature to a region of lower temperature.
When two bodies are in thermal equilibrium, no net heat flows between them.
Method of heat transfer without appreciable motion of the medium. 'Free electrons' conduct the heat.
As metals have a lot of free electrons, they are very good conductors of heat.
Air, glass, water, and vacuum are bad conductors (or good insulators) of heat.
Heat transfer in fluids due to the motion of fluids themselves.
Also see convection currents.
Heat transfer due to wave motion.
Black surfaces are good radiators and good absorbers of heat.
White and shiny surfaces are bad radiators and absorbers of heat.
Radiation, unlike conduction and convection, can also take place in a vacuum.
See also vacuum flask.
Is the amount of heat required by one kilogram of a substance to raise its temperature by one kelvin.
c: specific heat capacity
Is the amount of heat required to bring about a change in state of a kilogram of a particular substance, without changing the temperature of the substance. (For example, changing a kilogram of ice to water at 0°C.)
See also latent heat of fusion and latent heat of vaporisation.
The total energy of a closed system is conserved.
The first law of thermodynamics is also called the law of conservation of energy.
Is the total of the miroscopic kinetic and potential energies of the molecules in a substance.
Heat cannot flow from a cooler region to a hotter region unless external work is done.
Entropy is a measure of the random disorder of a system. The higher the entropy, the more disordered the system
Entropy = Heat Absorbed/Kelvin Temperature
The entropy (not the energy) of the Universe is increasing.
0°K is called the absolute zero.
273°K is the freezing point of water.
373°K is the boiling point of water.
Efficiency of a system = Work done by the system / Energy supplied to the   system.
The efficiency of diesel engines(about 40%) is usually more than gasoline or steam engines.
A. Quantum Phenomena, such as photons and photoelectric effect.
B. Atomic, such as the Rutherford and Bohr models, atomic energy levels, and atomic spectra.
C. Nuclear and Particle Physics, such as radioactivity, nuclear reactions, and fundamental particles.
D. Relativity, such as time dilation, length contraction, and mass-energy equivalence.
A. General, such as history of physics and general questions that overlap several major topics.
B. Analytical Skills, such as graphical analysis, measurement, and math skills.
C. Contemporary Physics, such as astrophysics, superconductivity, and chaos theory.
Laboratory Skills: In each of the six major topics above, some questions may deal with laboratory skills in context.
Zakarpattia or Transcarpathia is another mountainous region.  Movements tend to be vertical and bouncy.
This section identifies steps that form the foundation of this regional style of dance, and which may be performed by both men and women (boys and girls).
This section identifies steps that are only performed by men and boys.
This section identifies steps that are only performed by women and girls.
This section identifies steps that require two or more dancers.
This section provides sample choreography which may be used by dance groups wishing to perform a dance that is characteristic of this region.
No engineering structure can be built on the ground or within it without the influence of geology being experienced by the engineer. Yet geology must remain an ancillary subject to students of engineering and it is therefore essential that their training is supported by a concise, reliable and usable text on the subject of geology and its relationship to engineering. In this book all the fundamental aspects of geology are described and explained, but within the limits thought suitable for engineers.
The structure of the Earth and the operation of its internal processes are described, together with the geological processes that shape and fashion the Earth and produce its rocks and soils. The commonly occurring types of rock and soil, and many types of geological structure and geological maps, are described. Throughout this book care has been taken to focus on the relationship between geology and geomechanics. For this reason emphasis has been placed on the geological processes that bear directly upon the composition, structure and mechanics of soil and rocks, and on the movement of groundwater.
1.1 1. The Earth: Surface, Structure, Age
The Earth: Surface, Structure, Age
GET requests are not supposed/expected to trigger actions/changes and are happily followed by various browser mechanisms like Prefetching or Session Restore and by crawlers. This can cause unwanted actions to be triggered completely without user interaction and without the need for an attack.
Use POST requests instead of GETs for anything that triggers an action
GET requests can be automatically and unintentionally triggered, for example by crawlers. For example in cases of “delete” buttons, this can cause a single user with aggressive Prefetching to accidentally delete everything just by opening a listing page. POST requests are expected to trigger actions and are handled accordingly by browsers.
v • d • e Web Application Security Guide
| File inclusion and disclosure
| File upload vulnerabilities
| XML and internal data escaping
| XML, JSON and general API security
| Cross-site request forgery (CSRF)
| Truncation attacks, trimming attacks
| Prefetching and Spiders
| SSL, TLS and HTTPS basics
Okapi Framework wish list: what users want to be implemented. Please add your request and your name.
Web portal of the Central Authority  in the field of digital signatureMultilanguage
FacebookOfficial website:  https://czo.gov.ua/ca-registryv • d • e
The central authority in the field of digital signatures of Ukraine is a web portal that provides services and information related to electronic digital signatures (EDS).
In addition to the registry, the web portal of the central authority for digital signatures contains other information that is published in the following sections:
The state of compatibility of EDS;
Structure of the Central Certifying Authority (CUO);
Regulations of the CUO;
Forms of documents;
Certificates of CUO;
Lists of revoked certificates of CUO;
Regulatory legal acts in the sphere of EDS;
Request for public information;
Check and imposing EDS.
The central authority in the field of digital signatures provides users with the following electronic services:
The imposition of electronic signature on electronic documents;
Verification of EDS.
Registration on the web portal for receiving electronic services is not required.
Register of the central body in the field of digital signature of Ukraine - an electronic register of providers of services related to electronic digital signatures (EDS).
The register provides a list of more than 21 accredited entities that can provide services to the field of EDS.
For thousands of years Hindus have been discussing and explaining various aspects of religion. This has resulted in a huge mass of religious literature whose variety and depth leaves one awestruck. Most of these books are in Sanskrit, but every Indian language has its own version and translation of the important works. Because of the sheer volume of the literature, it is difficult for anyone to study them entirely.
The more important ones of these books are:
Upanishads: These are the last sections of the Vedas, but because of their special philosophical nature and importance, they are treated separately. These books contain the philosophical truths realised by the sages, which form the philosophical base of Hinduism. The most important of these truths is the Oneness of everything, Sarvam Khalu idam Brahma, and that the individual is one with the universal, Aham Brahma Asmi.
It is believed that there are one hundred and eight Upanishads, but ten of them are more  famous.
Epics: Ramayana and Mahabharata: These are the two great epics that have served as the hope, ideal and inspiration of the Hindus. These works are not mere stories of the kings and queens, but highlight the struggle of an individual to hold on to religious principles in good times and also during crisis. In addition, they contain information regarding nearly everything that a person may need to lead a healthy life. The Mahabharata is also famous for its sheer volume of one hundred thousand verses that makes it the largest epic of the world.
Many classics have been composed in Indian and other South East Asian languages centring the lives of Sri Rama and Sri Krishna. Every Hindu child learns, reads, and knows the main stories of Sri Rama, Sri Krishna, and the Pandava brothers, and even illiterate Hindus recite regularly from these classics.
The Gita is the most popular Hindu sacred book, and can be treated as the handbook of Hinduism. Composed in mere seven hundred verses, it is a small part of the Mahabharata, but stands in its own majesty of poetry, philosophy and spirituality. Devout Hindus recite it daily as a source of inspiration, and also read it aloud when someone dies. With seven hundred verses in eighteen chapters, it contains practically everything of religion, and also the complete philosophy of the Hindus. The Puranas are eighteen in number and form the mythological base of the Hindus. In total these have around 5.5 lakh verses, through which the popular stories of gods and goddesses are described. The most popular of these books is Srimad Bhagavata Purana which deals mainly with the story of Sri Krishna. Shiva Maha Purana is another popular work centring Lord Shiva.
The Puranas were composed to suit the needs of the masses for an easy understanding of the spiritual truths. Despite their mythological nature, they discuss philosophy, ethics and rituals of the Hindus in detail, and hence are considered to be complete scriptures in themselves.
The Smritis are the law books of the Hindus which prescribe the personal and social code. The rules laid down in these books cover practically everything --starting from the most trivial daily acts of an individual, through the duties of a king, to the highest philosophical wisdom that one may require to lead a good life. They are not like the constitution of a country, or the criminal procedure code, but are a means to take an individual to the highest spiritual realisation.
The Smritis are based on the principles of the Vedas, but have been written for that particular period of time. So, there are innumerable smritis, of which the most famous is Manu Smriti, written around the second century B.C.E.
The sages knew that a society ruled by archaic laws becomes stagnant. So new smritis were codified from time to time according to the need of the age. Unfortunately, no new smriti has been written in the last thousand years or so. This has rusted the vitality of Hinduism.
The Tantras are the expansive growth of the ritualistic aspect of religion. Most of these books are devoted to Lord Shiva,or Shakti, the female principle of God. Some of the practices mentioned in these books do not meet social approval, and hence they are not as popular as other books. However the books on Tantra are innumerable, and dictate the rituals of Hinduism. In every ritualistic worship of the Hindus, the practises are drawn either directly from the Vedas, or from the Tantras.
Like every other class of literature discussed above, The Tantras are a complete system of thought with a distinct philosophy, mythology and rituals.  Even without referring to the Vedas, a follower of Tantra can learn everything that is to be known in religion.
The Chandi,or Durga Saptasati is devoted to Shakti, the Cosmic female principle behind the universe. Composed in seven hundred verses, it is a part of the Markandeya Purana, and is considered to be an extremely sacred work. It is believed that a daily recital of this sacred book brings safety and success.
In addition to these, there are thousands of books which serve as the basis for various sampradaya (religious sects) of Hindus.
Previous: Installing JME3, Next: Hello Node
You have downloaded the jMonkeyPlatform (or set up the jMonkeyEngine3 in another IDE of your choice)
You have created a Java SE project with the JME3 libraries on the classpath.
You are ready to create your first jMonkeyEngine3 game! You can generally use the tutorials in this introductory series with any integrated development environment (IDE), such as the jMonkeyPlatform, NetBeans, Eclipse, or run them straight from the commandline. In the following, we will use the jMonkeyPlatform.
Create a jme3test.helloworld package and a file HelloJME3.java in it.
In the jMonkeyPlatform, you right-click the Source Packages node:
Enter a package: jme3test.helloworld
Click Finish.
Replace the contents of the HelloJME3.java file with the following code:
Display a blue 3D cube and view from all sides by
Box b = new Box(Vector3f.ZERO, 1, 1, 1); // create cube shape at the origin
Geometry geom = new Geometry("Box", b);  // create cube geometry from the shape
Material mat = new Material(assetManager,
"Common/MatDefs/Misc/Unshaded.j3md");  // create a simple material
Build and run the HelloJME3 class. If a jme settings dialog pops up, confirm the default settings.
You should see a simple window displaying a 3-D cube.
Use the WASD keys and the mouse to navigate around.
Press Escape to close the application.
Congratulations, it works! How did we do that?
The code above has initialized the scene, and started the game.
How you say it in JME3 terminology
You want to create a cube.
You create a Geometry with a 1x1x1 Box shape.
You want to use a blue color.
You create a Material with a blue Color property.
You want to colorize the cube blue.
You set the Geometry's Material.
You want the cube to appear in the scene.
You attach the cube to the rootNode.
In Java, the creation of a blue cube looks as follows:
Box b = new Box(Vector3f.ZERO, 1, 1, 1); // create cube shape at the origin
Geometry geom = new Geometry("Box", b);  // create cube geometry from the shape
Material mat = new Material(assetManager,
"Common/MatDefs/Misc/Unshaded.j3md");  // create a simple material
In the simpleInitApp() method, you create or load all game objects before the game starts. The simpleInitApp() method is automatically called once at the beginning of every JME3 game.
A typical JME3 game has the following initialization process:
You create or load objects and position them.
You make objects appear in the scene by attaching them to the rootNode.
Examples: Load player, terrain, sky, enemies, obstacles, and place them in their start positions.
You set variables to their start values.
You want to use variables track the game state.
Examples: Set the score to 0, set health to 100%, and so on.
The following input bindings are pre-configured by default:
W,A,S,D keys – Move around in the scene
Mouse movement and arrow keys – Turn the camera
Escape key – Quit the game
Add your own keys and mouse clicks.
Examples: Click to shoot, press Space to jump, etc.
The HelloJME3.java class extends com.jme3.app.SimpleApplication, which is a subclass of com.jme3.app.Application. Every JME3 game is an instance of com.jme3.app.SimpleApplication.
Typically you start a game from your Java application's main() method.
These few lines of code simply display a static 3D cube. You can navigate around in this 3D scene.
You have learned that a SimpleApplication is a good starting point because it provides you with:
A simpleInitApp() method where you create objects.
A rootNode where you attach objects to make them appear in the scene.
Useful default input settings that you can use for navigation in the scene.
When developing a game application, you will now want to:
Initialize your game world,
Trigger actions in the event loop,
Respond to user input.
In the following tutorials you learn how accomplish these tasks with the jMonkeyEngine 3.
Continue with the Hello Node tutorial, where we will first show you more details about how to initialize the game world, also known as the scene graph.
Create a JME3 project.
Postage stamps and postal history of British Columbia and Vancouver Island
Denom.
Paper.
Perf.
Cat. No.Mi/Sc/Gi
Imperf.
Defin.
Imperf.
Defin.
Imperf.
Defin.
Software is rarely flawless. A huge cybersecurity workforce shortage and inadequate security education for programmers creates a perfect environment for development of insecure systems.[1] Business competition shifts the focus of companies away from quality to speed, letting software flaws slip through. The flaws can resurface later while the system is being actively utilized by many users.
Software vulnerability disclosure refers to the act of releasing the details of a security flaw in an application to a certain audience. In the industry, these flaws are frequently referred to as "zero-day vulnerabilities" (or "zero-day exploits" when weaponized). Depending on the communication method and the audience, this disclosure can lead to a completely different outcome. Value can be gained from the knowledge of these flaws, which turns them into "vulnerability equity."
The rediscovery rate of vulnerabilities is very high. Researchers estimate that 15% to 20% of all vulnerabilities are discovered independently at least twice within a year, more than previously thought.[2] Certain methods of disclosure or lack of it can cause the vulnerability to remain unfixed, putting every single user of that system at a big risk.
In the recent past, many organizations believed that as long as no one saw what is inside the code, it was secure. This is known as "security through obscurity." [3] If someone found a vulnerability, it was common to either ignore the researchers or threat them with legal action, leaving the vulnerability unpatched. In 2011, an Australian security expert Patrick Webster, who worked as a security analyst at a police department, found a serious security flaw in software owned by First State Super. While working with the system, he found a flaw allowing users to pull full names, addresses, age, insurance information, fund amounts, beneficiaries and employer information from all of the site's 770,000 users - including Police officers and politicians. Upon discovery, he immediately notified the company thinking that he was doing a good deed. Within days, his account was disabled, computers were confiscated, and he was claimed to be liable for any costs in fixing the flaw.[4] Finding a flaw to some extent implies that you attacked the system. Without explicit written permission or "bug bounty" programs, these findings put researchers in a legal gray zone. Webster's mistake was that he actually downloaded the data to his computer while looking at the flaw, which was used against him by First State. This retaliation causes an adverse effect where researchers are afraid to report flaws they find. Fortunately, new laws are being passed protecting the rights of these whistleblowers.[5]
Upon disclosure, there is often a lack of action from the vendor. James Glenn, a security researcher in Bulgaria found a flaw in a Cisco video surveillance system. After presenting the findings in a detailed report to his supervisor and to Cisco's incident response team, no action was taken. After following up and meeting with Cisco representatives, he was fired within 3 days. The problem was fixed only years later, after the US government filed a lawsuit against Cisco.[6]
Upon intentional or unintentional discovery of a bug, a researcher has several options and paths of disclosure.
Do nothing. This leaves every user of the system at risk. If the researcher gets hacked, the attackers can steal the vulnerability as use it themselves. This has happened to governments, including the United States, who stockpile vulnerabilities rationalizing that they might have a need for them in the future.[7]
Report the flaw to the vendor. This puts the researchers at the mercy of the company, which may then reward or sue them. The monetary rewards are generally smaller in comparison to other buyers. The companies are invested in keeping their data safe, and a breach can be very hurtful to their reputation, but they often underestimate the risks.
Releasing the vulnerability publicly. This has obvious negative implications that now anyone (even those with no security experience, known as "script kiddies") can take this exploit and use it, as there is no existing patch. It is even worse when some of these vulnerabilities take a really long time to fix.
Sell the vulnerability on a grey/black market. This puts the exploit in the hands of a nation state or a malicious actor who may want it to execute their agenda. The payouts are generally the highest, but the researcher loses control over how the vulnerability is used.
Each of these options has a different side effect. One can fight to fix the flaw quickly, get rich, or stay put and avoid any career risks. Each of these options has it's own negative consequences, so the benefits have to be weighted. Based on his or her own agenda and understanding of ethics, each researcher has to make this choice for themselves, and almost any of the choices above can be justified. These mindsets can be categorized into 3 general motives: altruism, profit, or politics.
Nowadays, a researcher may elect to publish a zero-day vulnerability online. Often, this is done for bragging rights rather than with malicious intent. This means of disclosure may also be chosen if the researcher has not received great enough concern or attention over the vulnerability. This was the case for the Michele Thompson, an Arizona mother who published a vulnerability in Apple's FaceTime app on twitter after days of attempting to contact the tech giant. Thompson's 14 year old son had discovered a method by which FaceTime could be used to receive audio from a remote source without alerting the contacted phone.[8] When she realized her calls were falling on deaf ears, Thompson turned to Twitter to reveal the security issue, which quickly raised the issue's priority to Apple. Although it is less common than responsible disclosure, public disclosure represents a viable method for giving critical issues notoriety. This method does open the researcher up to potential legal action taken by a company claiming the researcher illegally hacked their products.
Currently, the most common method for disclosing zero day vulnerabilities is a sort of bargaining method, wherein the researcher enters a contract with the necessary party. This contract gives the company a set amount of time (usually 90 days due to the precedent set by Google's "Project Zero") to replicate and solve the vulnerability. After the time period has elapsed, the researcher can freely publish the vulnerability for bragging rights or any other purposes. Ideally, this allows a client time to fix an issue before the vulnerability is published and can be abused. In some cases however, responsible disclosure agreements may not allot enough time for a company to fix a more complex vulnerability, or a client may simply deem a vulnerability too low priority to work through. The responsible disclosure process can also be arduous for researchers, who may suffer through days or weeks of tedious communication to see results. Some companies offer standing bounties for researchers who find vulnerabilities in their systems. Microsoft is currently offering up to $300,000 for vulnerabilities in its Azure cloud services. This can however lead to companies sorting through many complex vulnerability reports, leading to some inevitably being dropped. Responsible disclosure practices have naturally led to the formation of larger companies which create their own vulnerability pricing models and timeframes, which allows clients to avoid the difficult process of negotiating bug pricing with researchers. These programs, like Zerodium and Project Zero, have given responsive disclosure more structure.
Irresponsible disclosure is any way of disclosing a vulnerability other than notifying the company or vendor that is responsible for the software.  It can come in many different forms, and usually comes as a result of a researcher looking for personal gain, whether it be through payment or even bragging rights.  This is where the ethical issues of software vulnerability disclosure lie, as researchers face making a decision to either act morally or instead do something unethical in pursuit of personal gain.  One security researcher with the moniker "SandboxEscaper" posted a zero day vulnerability on twitter that exploited a flaw in Windows.  She seemed to be frustrated with Microsoft's bug bounty program, which shows how important it is for companies to have usable bug reporting system in place.  Companies have also been at fault for irresponsible disclosure.  MedSec, a cybersecurity firm, found a vulnerability in medical equipment from St Jude.  Rather than notify St. Jude, they partnered with an investment firm to short St. Jude stock before they disclosed this vulnerability, effectively profiting off of their discovery.[9]  Many in the security field opposed this move, as protocol would have called for MedSec to notify St. Jude first after their discovery.
In some instances, researchers or organizations find a vulnerability, and then choose to not disclose it any capacity, and make use of the vulnerability themselves.  A common case in which this occurs is when a government agency or company comes across a vulnerability, and sees an opportunity in which they can use the exploit to their own advantage, typically by gathering more intelligence about competitors/nation states.  One notable instance of this case came from the NSA.  The NSA became aware of a very severe exploit that affected many different versions of Windows.  Rather than notify Microsoft, they used the exploit in a tool called EteranlBlue, which they used for nearly five years for classified purposes.[10] In 2017, code from this tool was leaked and then used in a ransomware attack known as WannaCry, which was one of the largest cyber attacks ever.[11]  The NSA only alerted Microsoft of this exploit after the code became leaked, and faced heavy criticism from the technology community.
Many researchers choose to sell their vulnerability on third party markets, usually looking for a larger payout than those that choose to responsibly disclose vulnerabilities.  Researchers divide these markets into three categories: white, grey, and black markets.  White markets include things such as bug bounty programs or responsibly disclosing vulnerabilities to necessary parties.  Researchers that choose to sell on these markets can expect a large payout, and should not expect the vulnerability to be addressed anytime soon.
Grey markets are mainly a medium in which government agencies, defense contractors, and other brokers can purchase software vulnerabilities.  Typically, some kind of entity acts as a intermediary so that both the buyer and seller can remain anonymous.  Transactions that take place in this market are technically legal, and the buyers tend to pay less than those on the black market.
Black markets are more nefarious in nature, typically involving parties who want to use software vulnerabilities for some sort of illegal purpose.  Criminal organizations are typically the buyers on this market, although some government agencies whose needs cannot be met on the grey market may use the black market.  Transactions on this market are almost always illegal, and take place on the dark web: the part of the internet not indexed by typical browsers.  As a result, it is easier to remain anonymous on these markets.  Transactions on the black market also pay the highest on average.
↑ Crumpler, W., & Lewis, J. A. (2019, January 29). The cybersecurity workforce gap. CSIS. https://www.csis.org/analysis/cybersecurity-workforce-gap
↑ Herr, T., Schneier, B., & Morris, C. (2017, July). Taking Stock: Estimating Vulnerability Rediscovery. Harvard Kennedy School Belfer Center. https://www.belfercenter.org/sites/default/files/files/publication/Vulnerability%20Rediscovery%20%28belfer-revision%29.pdf
↑ SecurityTrails. (2020, February 13). Security through obscurity. https://securitytrails.com/blog/security-through-obscurity
↑ Whittaker, Z. (2018, February 19). Lawsuits threaten infosec research — just when we need it most. ZDNet. https://www.zdnet.com/article/chilling-effect-lawsuits-threaten-security-research-need-it-most/
↑ Rodriguez, K., Opsahl, K., Cardozo, N., Williams, J., Ugarte, R., & Israel, T. (2018, October 16). Protecting security researchers' rights in the Americas. Electronic Frontier Foundation. https://www.eff.org/wp/protecting-security-researchers-rights-americas
↑ Goodwin, B. (2019, August 9). Whistleblowers: James Glenn’s battle with Cisco opens new front on cyber security. Computer Weekly. https://www.computerweekly.com/news/252468089/Whistleblowers-James-Glenns-battle-with-Cisco-opens-new-front-on-cyber-security
↑ Chappell, B. (2017, May 15). WannaCry ransomware: Microsoft calls out NSA for 'stockpiling' vulnerabilities. NPR. https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/05/15/528439968/wannacry-ransomware-microsoft-calls-out-nsa-for-stockpiling-vulnerabilities
↑ McMillan, R. (2019, January 29). Teenager and his mom tried to warn Apple of FaceTime bug. The Wall Street Journal. https://www.wsj.com/articles/teenager-and-his-mom-tried-to-warn-apple-of-facetime-bug-11548783393
↑ Bone, J. (n.d.). Independent research firm confirms St. Jude security vulnerabilities. MedSec. https://medsec.com/entries/stj-lawsuit-response.html
↑ Burgess, M. (2017, June 28). Everything you need to know about EternalBlue – the NSA exploit linked to Petya. Wired. https://www.wired.co.uk/article/what-is-eternal-blue-exploit-vulnerability-patch
↑ Sherr, I. (2017, May 19). WannaCry ransomware: everything you need to know. Cnet. https://www.cnet.com/news/wannacry-wannacrypt-uiwix-ransomware-everything-you-need-to-know/
This section will help with ratios and proportions. The categories are:
The B-50 series is a series of layered shots including:
The book will cover knowledge patterns in the small (in the heads of individuals), and in the large (collective or distributed  knowledge).
Filbert Street in San Francisco (North Beach)
Road Vehicle Performance forms the basics that make up highway design guidelines and traffic analysis.  Roads need to designed so that the vehicles traveling upon them are accommodated.  For example, the Interstate Highway system in the United States has a maximum allowable grade that can be used, so that the semitrucks that frequently use these roads would be able to travel them without encountering grade problems.  While this can pose quite a design challenge in mountainous regions like Colorado Rockies, without it those trucks would be forced to find better alternative routes, which costs time and money.  The ability of a certain vehicle type to use a road is dependent on the power produced by its motor, as well as other road-based and environmental characteristics.  When choosing a road design, these elements need to be considered.
The famous Lombard Street, the curviest street in the world only has a grade of 14.3%. Sources vary on the steepest street in San Francisco.   Filbert Street between Hyde and Leavenworth has a grade of  31.5%, Prentiss between Chapman and Powhattan reportedly has a grade of 37%.
Driving in San Francisco at times is like a roller coaster, you can’t see below the nose of your car sitting at the top of the hill, though you can usually see the base of the hill.
What is max grade allowed by law?
Maximum grade is not regulated so much by law as by engineering standards. Maximum grade varies by type of road, and expected speed.  In practice, it depends on the alternatives: Is the alternative no road at all? Max grade in the relatively flat Minnesota might be lower than Max grade in mountainous Colorado where there are fewer alternatives. Some typical values for illustration:
An interstate is out of standard if it has a grade > 7%.
The National Road (built in 1806) had a maximum grade of 8.75%.
Local roads are much higher (12% or 15% are sometimes allowed)
Otter Tail MN County roads 6%, alleys 8%
Driveways can be as much as 30% for a short distance
Tractive effort and resistance are the two main forces that oppose one another and determine the performance of roadway vehicles.  Tractive effort is the force exerted against the roadway surface to allow a vehicle to move forward.  Resistance encompasses all forces that push back and impede motion.  Both of these are in units of force.  The general formula for this is outlined below:
Aerodynamic resistance is a force that is produced by turbulent air flow around the vehicle body.  This turbulence is dependent on the shape of the vehicle, as well as the friction of air passing over the vehicle's surface.  A small portion of this resistance comes from air flow through vehicle components, such as interior ventilation.  This resistance can be estimated through the following formula:
= Frontal area of the vehicle
Air density is a function of elevation and temperature.  Frontal area and coefficient of drag are generally unique to each vehicle or type of vehicle.
Rolling resistance is caused by the interaction of tires with the roadway surface.  Three main causes exist that create this resistance.  The first is the rigidity of the tire and the roadway surface.  The second is tire pressure and temperature.  The third is vehicular operating speed.  This value of rolling friction can be calculated from a very simplified formula, given here in metric.
The resistance caused by this friction will increase as weight is added to the vehicle.  Therefore, rolling resistance can be calculated.
Grade resistance is the simplest form of resistance.  It is the gravitational force acting on the vehicle.  This force may not be exactly perpendicular to the roadway surface, especially in situations when a grade is present.  Thus, grade resistance can be calculated in the following formula:
Tractive effort is the force that allows the vehicle to move forward, subject to the resistances of the previous three forces.  The derivation of the formula comes from understanding the forces and moments that on around the various tires.  It can be summarized into a simple concept, illustrated here.
= Maximum Tractive Effort
= Coefficient of road adhesion
= Distance from rear axle to vehicle's center of gravity
= Distance from front axle to vehicle's center of gravity
= Coefficient of rolling friction
= Height of the center of gravity above the roadway surface
Most of the work surrounding tractive effort is geared toward determining the allowable grade of a given roadway.  With a certain known vehicle type using this road, the grade can be easily calculated.  Using the force balance equation for tractive effort, a value for grade can be separating, producing the formula below:
This calculation produces the maximum grade allowed for a given vehicle type.  It assumes that the vehicle is operating at optimal engine capacity and, thus, no acceleration can occur, dropping that element from the overall equation.
A racecar is speeding down a level straightaway at 100 km/hr.  The car has a coefficient of drag of 0.3, a frontal area of 1.5
, a weight of 10 kN, a wheelbase of 3 meters, and a center of gravity 0.5 meters above the roadway surface, which is 1 meter behind the front axle.  The air density is 1.054 kg/
Use the force balancing equation to solve for
.
Since the straightaway is a level one, the grade is zero, thus removing grade resistance from the general problem.
Looking back to the force balancing equation:
Divide out mass, which can be computed from weight by dividing out gravity.
Thus, divide mass from the force and acceleration can be found.
Thus, the vehicle is accelerating at a rate of 1.82 meters per second squared.
Using the same case from Example 1, assume that instead the racecar encounters a steep hill that it must travel up.  It is desired that the driver maintain the 100 km/h velocity at a very minimum.  With that being said, what would be the maximum grade that the hill could be?
At the steepest eligible hill, the racecar would be able to maintain 100 km/h without any room for acceleration or deceleration.  Therefore, acceleration goes to zero.  All other values would stay the same from Example 1.  Using the grade formula, the maximum grade can be calculated.
Why is it that, in mountainous country, trucks and cars have different speed limits?
Tractive effort is one of the leading reasons, as trucks have a harder time going up steep hills than typical passenger cars, but it is not the only one.  Safety is another leading reason, surprisingly, as big rig trucks are obviously more difficult to control in a harsh environment, such as a mountain pass.
Distance from rear axle to vehicle's center of gravity
Distance from front axle to vehicle's center of gravity
Height of the center of gravity above the roadway surface
The day of Pentecost or the feast of Shavuot is one of the most important feasts in Judaism and great mark in Christianity.This is the day on which the God of Israel gave the law ,He descended on mount Sinai in the form of fire.On this great and wonderful day He wrote the law on stone tablets but in the first day of Pentecost of the new covenant He wrote His law on their hearts through His Spirit.In the new covenant He baptised them with the Holy Spirit and fire.On the first day of Pentecost in the Old covenant three thousand people were killed ,but in the New covenant first day of Shavuot three thousand people/souls were saved.Thus what the apostle Paul said in 2nd Corinthians ,the law kills but the Spirit gives life.Shavuot should be celebrated by the New testament Church but not under obligation or law, but  under the spirit of celebrating the descent of the Holy                          Spirit on the church.
Unless you have been trained to properly do so, avoid swimming to the assistance of a person who is drowning.  A drowning non-swimmer is typically in a panic, and may grab onto anyone or anything he can reach in an effort to support their airway above the surface of the water. If the victim submerges the rescuer, the rescuer's life is endangered and the original victim has nobody to assist them.
Instead of entering the water, do one of the following:
Talk the victim in; coach them to kick their legs
Throw life ring, life jacket, or some other flotation device to the victim
Reach an item such as a rope, pole, oar, or paddle to the victim, and once the victim grabs it, pull them in
Wade into shallow water attempt the above
Row out to the victim in a boat, or use powered craft if possible; try the above from in the boat
The study of membrane protein folding has been complicated by several factors.  Historically, membrane proteins have been very difficult to crystallize due to their large amounts of hydrophobic residues.  Proteins that reside in these biological membranes have different surface properties than water-soluble proteins.  The proteins are more so affected by the lateral forces and elastic forces from being within the membrane.  Duplicating these conditions in order to observe a membrane protein in vitro has been difficult due to the fact that once the membrane protein has been separated, it either unfolds or no longer stays functional.
Maniuplating the lipid bilayer to observe proteins has been increasingly successful.  Studies used on smaller water-soluble proteins are very effective with this method.  The combination of kinetic and thermodynamic studies of the small water-soluble proteins have been feasible to observe the helical proteins which contain a lot of alpha helices.
Incorrectly folded proteins are associated with prion-related illnesses such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (mad cow disease), amyloid-related illnesses such as Alzheimer's disease and familial amyloid cardiomyopathy or polyneuropathy, as well as intracytoplasmic aggregation diseases such as Huntington's and Parkinson's disease. These age onset degenerative diseases are associated with the aggregation of misfolded proteins into insoluble, extracellular aggregates and/or intracellular inclusions including cross-beta sheet amyloid fibrils. While it is not completely clear whether the aggregates are the cause or merely a reflection of the loss of protein homeostasis, the balance between synthesis, folding, aggregation and protein turnover, the recent European Medicines Agency approval of Tafamidis or Vyndaqel (a kinetic stabilizer of tetrameric transthyretin) for the treatment of the transthyretin amyloid diseases suggests that it is the process of amyloid fibril formation and not the fibrils themselves that causes the degeneration of post-mitotic tissue in human amyloid diseases.[18] Misfolding and excessive degradation instead of folding and function leads to a number of proteopathy diseases such as antitrypsin-associated emphysema, cystic fibrosis and the lysosomal storage diseases, where loss of function is the origin of the disorder. While protein replacement therapy has historically been used to correct the latter disorders, an emerging approach is to use pharmaceutical chaperones to fold mutated proteins to render them functional.
Some Turkish conjunctions are borrowed from Persian and Arabic.
The cumulative sense of the English "A and B" can be expressed several ways:
B ile A (ile is also a postposition);
For the adversative sense of "but" or "only", there are ama and fakat (both Arabic), also yalnız (which is also an adjective corresponding to "alone").
For emphasis: hem A hem B "both A and B".
For the sense of English "(either)…or":
The pattern of the last two can be extended:
Ne A ne B "Neither A nor B":
"Neither USA nor EU: Fully Independent Democratic Turkey"
Ne A ne B ne C "Not A or B or C."
((Eğer)) A'ysa, (o zaman) B'dir. "If A, then B." ("Eğer" is not generally used.)
The Persian conjunction ki brings to Turkish the Indo-European style of relating ideas (#Lewis [XIII,15]):
Beklemesini istiyorum "Her-waiting I-desire"; but
İstiyorum ki beklesin "I-desire that he-wait."
Thus ki corresponds roughly to English "that", but with a broader sense:
Güneş batmıştı ki köye vardık "The-sun had-set [when] that at-the-village we-arrived."
Kirazı yedim ki şeker gibi "The-cherry I-ate [and found] that [it was] sugar like."
"Vahdettin ne yazık ki haindi"
...Bu iki açıklamadan anlıyoruz ki
Ecevit, Osmanlı Tarihi adlı bir kitap hazırlıyormuş...
Vahdettin, Tevfik Paşa ve Londra Konferansı hakkındaki açıklamaları gösteriyor ki
Sayın Ecevit, yakın tarihimizi ciddi olarak incelememiş,
"Benim şahsen çocukluğumdan beri dinlediğim şeyler var..."
"...From these two accounts, we understand that
Ecevit is preparing a book called Ottoman History...
His accounts concerning Vahdettin, Tevfik Pasha and the London Conference show that
Mr Ecevit has not seriously studied our recent history,
"'There are many things I heard personally from my childhood till today...'"
The political term "presidential packaging" refers to the "selling" of a presidential candidate to the public.  The term originated during the first radio broadcasted presidential election.  This technological innovation allowed candidates to directly influence constituents through media by means of record albums.  Although this technological development was the first in a series that would aid political campaigning, the most significant change was the introduction of the television. Campaign teams recognized the increased demand for televisions in the early 1950's as a source to implement political advertisements and influence constituents.  Richard Nixon utilized this advertisement form in his "Checkers Speech"[1] to reach the largest TV audience ever until that point in September 1952.  This unprecedented audience of 60 million people watched the live speech broadcast unaware that the Republican Party paid soap opera directors $75,000 to formalize the prime-time advertisement.  In the thirty minute broadcast, Nixon appealed to viewer ethos in attempts to improve his image following a secret campaign fund scandal; many political pundits believe that the advertisement time helped Nixon reach the Vice Presidential position in November of 1952.  In the hope of creating a "New Nixon" image in 1968, Nixon's presidential campaign again utilized television advertisements to convey a new political message[2]. A series of ads depicted Nixon as a mature, presidential figure who had the ability to respond calmly and professionally to questions asked by "Average Joe" constituents rather than the media.  This series of intentional and rehearsed interviews painted Nixon in a new, commanding and respected light. Rising approval ratings indicated the packaging attempts successfully swayed public opinion of Nixon and led to his eventual presidency in 1969.  From this point forward, politicians have acknowledged television advertising and appearances as an important, if not critical part of campaign efforts.
Clinton Image before the 1992 Campaign Trail
Prior to the presidential campaign of 1992, Bill Clinton was relatively unknown on the national scale.  His only well publicized action was delivering the opening night address at the 1988 Democratic National Convention;[3] however, the disastrous speech nearly destroyed any chance of Clinton running for president in the following election. In the speech he droned on about programs and policies, and political analysts suspected that public opinion polls would reflect this inability to reach his audience.  To recover from this faux pas, Clinton made an appearance on the "Tonight Show" and, by using humor and self deprecation, restored his image before a large public viewership[4].  This image transformation foreshadows the tactics used during his presidential campaign in 1992 to sway public opinion.
In 1990, Larry Nichols, a former Arkansas state employee, sued Bill Clinton for wrongful termination.  In this suit, he alleged that Clinton used a slush fund to finance affairs with five women.  At the time, all five women denied the claim.[5]  In January 1992, the controversy reemerged.  Star magazine released an interview with Gennifer Flowers, one of the five women named in the Nichols suit.  Flowers claimed Clinton had a 12 year affair with her and claimed she had recorded phone calls between herself and Clinton as proof.  Nichols then announced that he was dropping the lawsuit, and that he had no evidence of the affairs.  George Stephanopoulos, Clinton's deputy campaign manager, argued that this further discredited Flowers' claim.[6]  To address the debacle, Mr. and Mrs. Clinton appeared on 60 Minutes after Super Bowl XXVI.  During the interview, both husband and wife strongly refuted Flowers' claims, but Bill "acknowledged wrongdoing" within his marriage and "causing pain" to his wife.[7]
During the early stages of his 1992 campaign, many Americans viewed Bill Clinton as unpatriotic. Whilst in college, Bill Clinton carefully avoided the Vietnam War draft and actively protested the war.
Similar to many Americans seeking education at the time, Clinton initially received a draft deferment as an undergraduate student at Georgetown University. Upon graduation, he sought yet another deferment under the stipulation that he join the ROTC program at the University of Arkansas while he continued his education; however, instead of attending the University of Arkansas law program as planned, Clinton avoided his ROTC responsibilities by continuing his studies as a Rhodes Scholar in Oxford, England.  The draft board assigned to Clinton learned of this on October 31, 1969 and reclassified him as eligible for service. This reassignment proved fruitless in the end, as on December 1, 1969 his number was drawn 311th out of 366, guaranteeing he would not be drafted after all.
After finishing two years at Oxford, Clinton then attended Yale Law School. While at Yale, he helped coordinate anti-war Senate candidate Joe Duffey's campaign in Connecticut, then spent an entire semester co-managing anti-war George McGovern's Texas campaign[3]. Author Taylor Branch said "He was much more on the political operative side than the protest side."[8] However, he became involved in protest operations after attending a reunion for volunteers of Eugene McCarthy's 1968 campaign in the summer of 1969. Clinton then spent the remainder of that summer as an office volunteer for the Washington, D.C. anti-war demonstrations that would happen in October and November of 1969. After returning to England for the fall semester, he helped plan and participated in several more protests, including one at the American embassy and a teach-in at the University of London.[9] Additionally, he took a trip to Moscow at the end of 1969.  During the 1992 campaign, Bush's deputy campaign manager Mary Matalin asked "why Bill Clinton traveled to the heart of of enemy territory at the height of the war?"[8] The draft-dodging allegations coupled with Clinton's adamant disavowal of the Vietnam War left many constituents at odds during his election campaign with understanding the extent of his support for the United States Armed Forces and general patriotic, or rather unpatriotic, tendencies.
Among the emerging controversies surrounding Bill Clinton on the campaign trail was his suspected marijuana usage as a young adult. Bill Clinton had admitted to trying marijuana but not inhaling the substance or every trying it again [10] Although public opinion would suggest that Americans were okay with attributing the substance use to youthfulness and immaturity, general opinions reflect discontent with Clinton's dishonesty regarding the situation. This outright denial coupled with vague language explained why many Americans viewed Clinton as a distrustful figure.  He was viewed as a sneaky politician who consistently evaded the truth and that particular image worked against the efforts of his 1992 campaign.
Clinton Image on the 1992 Campaign Trail
On June 3, 1992, the day after winning the California primary, Bill Clinton appeared on The Arsenio Hall Show. This marked the first time a major-party presidential candidate appeared on late-night television. On the show, Clinton wore a loud, gold tie and Ray Ban Wayfarers while playing "Heartbreak Hotel" on his saxophone.  This was designed to connect with young and minority voters; an attempt to show Clinton as mold-breaking and relatable to the general public.[11] After jamming on the saxophone, Hall interviewed Clinton on a slew of topics ranging from democracy and the recent LA riots to his reported marijuana use. Clinton later appeared on Larry King Live and and MTV town hall.  These events combined to increase his poll ratings, most greatly with young and African-American voters.
In an effort to connect with the common American people, the Clinton-Gore ticket embarked on two bus tours following the Democratic National Convention.  The candidates wore plaid shirts instead of suits. Additionally, they emphasized their youth by featuring music from John Lennon and John Mellencamp.[12] Clinton and Gore both portrayed their marriages as typical middle-American couples and not, as Republicans have said, "too far out of the mainstream."[13]
The first tour started the day after the Democratic National Convention ended.  The bus left from New York City and traveled 1,000 miles through eight states, finishing in St. Louis. Bus stops targeted small towns and featured speeches on specific policy points relevant to the people of that stop.  Local and regional politicians attended these rallies, though they rarely shared stage space with the candidates.  This tactic was part of an effort to brand the Clinton-Gore ticket as establishing a "new direction" for American politics, rather than "four more years of the same."[12]
The second tour started on the road a month after the first tour concluded. It was a three day journey from St. Louis to Minneapolis.  Touted as "made-for-television", this tour was highly popular with local media but received minimal national coverage. National reporters believed "[the candidates] said little new or newsworthy."[13] Rural news sources delighted with the opportunity to see the "personal side" of the candidates. Local stations sent about 250 reporters on the tour over the three-day period. In an effort to combat the high level of publicity the Clinton campaign garnered, the Bush campaign offered these same local stations free interviews with senior administration and campaign officials.
The Clinton campaign strategy constantly worked to evoke a specific ethos from the American public. From a media perspective, the platform for "Governor Bill Clinton" and "Congressman Al Gore" vanished and the 'Bill and Al’ ticket emerged instead. They campaign portrayed two average, hard working members of the American middle class as candidates for the presidential and vice presidential ticket. Numerous photos snapped of 'Bill and Al' wearing hard hats at construction sites or kissing babies at rallies flooded media outlets.  It seemed as if overnight, Bill Clinton’s image as an untrustworthy womanizer was erased and replaced with a brand new image: Bill Clinton as the everyday American citizen.  Clinton capitalized on this momentum and even referred to himself as "The Comeback Kid"[14], a title people can relate to and even root for once again.
Conclusive Media Evidence of Clinton's Image Transformation
From the beginning to end of his 1992 presidential campaign, Clinton was able to completely transform his image.  A series of Time magazine covers during 1992 illustrates this point perfectly.  The January 1992 cover featured a picture of Clinton with the caption "Bill Clinton: Who is this guy?", a testament to the widespread disapproving opinions of Clinton at the time. Conversely, the December edition featured Bill Clinton as Time's Man of the Year.  In just one year, Clinton and his team managed to not only win over the media cycles, but also champion the cause of Americans all over.
As the progression of technology and use of media continues, the integration of these advancements in society becomes even more prevalent.  The social interface of these mass media technologies and the perception of the American public due to these new media outlets will expand as new technology is developed. This growth may meet especially impressive outcomes in times of heightened political discontent.  As shown by the 2016 presidential election, media clippings emerged from years and even decades ago that diminished the character of candidates in both parties and significantly hindered both candidates' chances for winning the White House. These clippings permeated the internet and television, circulating on countless social media sites (Facebook, Twitter, Buzzfeed etc.) and faux newspaper websites (DCGazette and ClickHole), further inciting the charged viewership emotions.  As similar sites gain traction, media continually contributes more influence over election outcomes and constituency opinions.
↑ http://digitalassets.lib.berkeley.edu/etd/ucb/text/Galloway_berkeley_0028E_12704.pdf
↑ http://millercenter.org/president/biography/nixon-campaigns-and-elections
↑ a b http://nymag.com/news/features/45063/
↑ http://millercenter.org/president/biography/clinton-life-before-the-presidency
↑ http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/politics/special/clinton/stories/enemies030298.htm
↑ http://articles.latimes.com/1992-01-26/news/mn-1476_1_larry-nichols
↑ http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/politics/special/pjones/stories/pj012792.htm
↑ a b http://articles.latimes.com/1992-10-10/news/mn-689_1_vietnam-war-protest
↑ http://www.nytimes.com/1992/10/09/us/1992-campaign-vietnam-war-campaign-focus-vietnam-reviving-debates-60-s.html?pagewanted=all
↑ http://www.nytimes.com/1992/03/30/us/the-1992-campaign-new-york-clinton-admits-experiment-with-marijuana-in-1960-s.html?pagewanted=all
↑ http://www.ozy.com/2016/bill-clintons-great-sax-appeal/69591
↑ a b http://www.nytimes.com/1992/07/21/us/the-1992-campaign-the-democrats-tour-touches-small-town-america.html
↑ a b http://www.nytimes.com/1992/08/09/us/the-1992-campaign-the-media-clinton-bus-tour-woos-and-wows-local-press.html
↑ http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/02/08/us/politics/bill-hillary-clinton-new-hampshire.html?_r=0
Definitions of keywords and terms that you will need to know.
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
Zero on the thermodynamic temperature scale, or 0 K (kelvin), where a substance has minimum internal energy, and is the coldest possible temperature. It is equal to -273.15 degrees Celsius.
A spectrum of dark lines across the pattern of spectral colours produced when light passes through a gas and the gas absorbs certain frequencies depending on the elements in the gas.
The (instantaneous) rate of change of velocity in respects to time.
The acceleration of a body falling under gravity (9.81ms-2 on earth).
A device used to measure the electric current in a circuit. It is connected in series with the components.
A SI quantity, measured in moles (mol).
The SI unit for electric current.
The maximum displacement of a wave from its rest/mean position (measured in metres).
A point of maximum amplitude along a stationary wave caused by constructive interference.
Distance travelled from the brakes being applied to the car stopping completely.
The force between two charges is directly proportional to the product of the charges and inversely proportional to the distance between them squared
Two equal, opposite and parallel forces which create rotational force.
Density is the mass of a body per unit volume
The probability of decay of a nucleus per unit time
The force that a unit charge would experience at a specified point. Measured in Volts per metre or Newtons per Coulomb
The energy that a unit charge would have at a specified point. Measured in Volts
The change in length of an object when a force is applied to it
The emf induced in a conductor  is directly proportional to the rate at which the magnetic flux changes.
A force causes a mass to change motion
The number of waves that pass a fixed point in a unit of time
The force that a unit mass would experience at a specified point. Measured in metres per second per second or Newtons per kilogramme
The energy that a unit mass would have at a specified point. Measured in Joules per kilogramme
The SI unit of work done, or energy. One joule is the work done when a force of one newton moves an object one metre.
The energy an object possesses due to its motion, given by KE = 0.5 x mass x velocity²
An induced electromotive force (emf) always gives rise to a current whose magnetic field opposes the original change in magnetic flux.
Magnetic flux is the product of magnetic flux density and the projection of area onto a surface at right angles to the magnetic field
Unit in which force is measured. Symbol "N". One Newton is the force required to give a mass of 1kg an acceleration of 1ms^-2
Voltage is directly proportional to current as long as all other physical properties remain constant (V =IR)
The time taken for one complete oscillation. Denoted by 'T'.   T=1/f
The rate at which work is done.
The load applied to an object per unit surface area.
The work done in moving a unit positive charge from one point to the other. The unit is volt.
Often used as the symbol for charge in equations
The property of a material that measures it resistance to electric current. It is defined as the resistance a wire of the material would have if it had a cross sectional area of one metre square and a length of one meter.
A radian is the angle subtended at the centre of the circle when the arc length is equal in length to the radius.
A quantity with magnitude but no direction.
A scalar quantity, speed = distance / time
Stopping distance = Thinking distance + Braking distance
The amount of heat energy required to raise the temperature of a substance per unit of mass by 1 degree, without going through a change in state.
The amount of heat energy required to change the state of 1 kg of the mass of a substance, without a change in temperature.
The amount of heat energy required for a phase change of 1 kg of the mass of a substance from solid to liquid or from liquid to solid, without a change in temperature.
The amount of heat energy required for a phase change of 1 kg of the mass of a substance from liquid to gas or from gas to liquid, without a change in temperature.
A SI quantity, measured in kelvin (K).
The forces being applied onto a material (usually a wire) on two opposite sides in order to stretch it. Both forces' values are the same as the tensile force value.
The tensile force per unit cross-sectional area.
An electrical component that changes its resistance depending on its temperature.
The distance travelled from seeing the need to stop to applying the brakes.
The lowest frequency of electromagnetic radiation that will result in the emission of photoelectrons from a specified metal surface.
A type of force due to an engine (usually  forward force).
A SI quantity, measured in seconds (s).
Moment = force x perpendicular distance from the pivot to the line of action of the force
Torque = one of the forces x the distance between them
A progressive wave that transfers energy as a result of oscillations/vibrations.
If three forces are acting at a point that can be represented by the sides of a triange, the forces are in equilibrium.
More than one forces that if unbalanced will cause a rotation.
The maximum tensile force that can be applied to an object before it breaks.
The maximum stress that can be applied to an object before it breaks.
A form of electromagnetic wave (wavelengths 10-9-3.7x10-7m). It may cause sun tanning. Usually classified into three categeries:UV-A, UV-B and UV-C.
A force experienced due to the pressure difference of the fluid at the top and bottom of the immersed portion of the body.
A quantity with magnitude and direction.
The (instantaneous) rate of change of displacement with respect to time. Velocity is a vector.
A motion graph which shows velocity against time for a given body.
The unit of potential difference (p.d.) or electromotive force (e.m.f.)
A device used to measure the potential difference across a component. It is connected in parallel across a component.
A physical quantity representing how much 3D space an object occupies, measured in cubic metres(m3)
The unit of power.
Series of vibrations that transfer energy from one place to another.
The smallest distance between one point of a wave and the identical point of the next wave, measured in metres (m).
The theory which states that all objects can exhibit both wave and particle properties.
The gravitational force acting on a body, measured in newtons (N).
The energy transferred when an object is moved through a distance by a force. Can be calculated by multiplying the force involved by the distance moved in the direction of the force.
Alternatively, [work done = transfer of energy].
i.e., work is done when energy is transferred from one form to another. [OCR do not accept this definition if asked "Define work done by a force"]
The minimum energy that is required for a material to release an electron, measured in joules(J).
A form of electromagnetic wave (wavelengths:10-12-10-7m). It is used in X-ray photography.
An experiment to demonstrate the wave nature of light via superposition and interference.
Stress per unit Strain, units: Pascals or N/m2
Top               A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
Daytime is a period that has daylight.
The Paper Quilling - Advanced Honor is a component of the Artisan Master Award
.
1 1. Know and be able to correctly make each of the following Eccentric shapes
2 2. Know and complete three of the following shaping techniques.
3 3. Make a picture or ornament using at least three of the Eccentric Shapes.
4 4. Make a three-dimensional object.
Know and be able to correctly make each of the following Eccentric shapes
a. Eccentric Loose Circle
b. Eccentric Teardrop
c. Eccentric Marquise
d. Eccentric Fan
e. Eccentric Crescent
f. Eccentric Bunny Ear
g. requirement g has not been defined by the NAD
h. Eccentric Tulip
Know and complete three of the following shaping techniques.
a. Fringed Flower
b. Grape Roll
d. Loop Method
f. Weaving Paper
g. Twisted Loop
i. Folded Roses
j. Curled Flowers
The Book of Paper Quilling: Techniques & Projects for Paper, 1995 Melinda Johnston,
Sterling Publishing Company, Inc
Liter - The basic unit of volume in the metric system
Meter - The basic unit of length in the metric system.
Why Should I Learn Statistics?
What Do I Need to Know to Learn Statistics?
Relationships among Arithmetic, Geometric, and Harmonic Mean
z Test for a Single Mean
z Test for Two Means
t Test for a single mean
t Test for Two Means
z Test for a Single Proportion
z Test for Two Proportions
Testing whether Proportion A Is Greater than Proportion B in Microsoft Excel
Statistics/Numerical_Methods/Random Number Generation
Data analysis is one of the more important stages in our research. Without performing exploratory analyses of our data, we set ourselves up for mistakes and  loss of time.
Generally speaking, our goal here is to be able to "visualize" the data and get a sense of their values. We plot histograms and compute summary statistics to observe the trends and the distribution of our data.
Matter, energy and information
Atoms, molecules, elementary particles, photons
The history of inanimate nature, astronomy
How do we see the world?
Spirit, soul, consciousness, free will
Good and evil in nature, conscience
Achievements of man, transcendence of nature
What are the natural sciences and how do they work?
What are laws of nature?
Boundaries of the scientific worldview and the limits of nature
What does the future look like?
A hourglass, one of the earliest methods of measuring the passage of time.In this article I shall define absolute dating, and shall discuss the conditions that we would require to use a geological process as the basis for absolute dating.
In the articles on stratigraphy we looked at what is called relative dating, where we could say that one geological feature was older or younger than another but without actually putting dates on them. By contrast, absolute dating allows us to assign dates to geological features.
To avoid confusion later on, let us say at once that the "absolute" in "absolute dating" is not short for "absolutely correct". In this context, the word "absolute" is not the opposite of "approximate" but just of the word "relative". A method of dating which was accurate to within a billion years either way would still technically speaking be a method of absolute dating, it would just be a very bad one.
Suppose that we wanted to find out how long it has been since an hourglass was set running by measuring the amount of sand in the lower bulb. To do so successfully, we would need to assure ourselves of the following conditions:
That we know the rate (or rates, if it may have varied) at which the sand has trickled from the upper bulb to the lower.
That there is no hole in the lower bulb from which sand may have leaked out.
That there was no sand in the lower bulb when the process started.
That the process has been uninterrupted, and that since the hourglass was set running it hasn't spent time lying on its side, or standing the other way up.
Given these conditions, we can find out how long the hourglass has been running. If we wish to use a geological process as the geological equivalent of an hourglass, we would want to have similar conditions: we would like to find some quantity which we can measure reliably (corresponding to the condition that we can measure the amount of sand in the lower bulb of the hourglass); which increases or decreases from a known quantity (corresponding to the lower bulb of the hourglass being empty when it starts running) at a known rate (corresponding to knowing the rate of flow of sand); and so forth.
Note that the conditions we have given for the hourglass are ideal conditions which we would require to know exactly how long it is since the hourglass started running. If conditions are less than ideal, we may still be in a position to come up with an approximate figure which is better than nothing. If, for example, we cannot measure precisely the amount of sand in the lower bulb, but we have good reason to think that our estimate of it must be within 10% of the true value, then we also have a good reason to think that we can give the time it's been running to within 10%. Or again, if there may have been sand in the lower bulb when it started running, but we have a good reason to think that there can't have been very much, then we also have a good reason to think that the figure which we get for the time can't be very wrong; and so on.
The geological processes that we'll be discussing work rather like that. We have no reason to believe that nature will be so obliging as to always provide us with the ideal conditions that would provide us with ideal clocks; but by analysis of the geological conditions as they actually are, we can often set limits to how imperfect the geological clocks can be.
For educational purposes, we shall start with a method which barely works at all under any circumstances. This will be the subject of the next article.
On the other hand, if we fix the outcome of our random experiment to
It has independent, stationary increments. Let
The following is a list of words that are used commonly by those who are participating with the development of the Scratch programming language, and whose meaning may not be clearly understood by those new to programming in Scratch.  If there are additional words or terms that are used by the Scratch community that you may not understand, please simply add that word to this list without a definition.  If you are an "old hand" to the Scratch community, help us out as well by adding words that may be confusing.
An individual command or instruction used within a script.
Sometimes known as a "program".  A project is a collection of scripts, sprites, sounds, backgrounds, and other images that are saved in a single file and used together.
Sometimes known as the rotation point. The point on a sprite that stays in the same position when it is rotated. The x and y values of a sprite are determined by the x coordinate and the y coordinate at the rotation center.
One or more blocks that describe the appearance, sounds, and behavior of a sprite, the stage, or variable of a project.
An individual object that can change costumes and perform on a stage.
A collection of scripts, images and sounds that provide the "background" that sprites perform on.
The content of the Scratch Wikibook is licensed simultaneously under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License and the Creative Commons Attribution ShareAlike License v. 2.5.  For details and discussion, please see Scratch/Content License.
Study Success developed by SBorch Inc.
Understand the system design of Study Success IS
Concept Map for the Development of the Study Success IS
In today’s educational environment, IS technology is a must.  The world around us uses IS technology and we do not want our children left behind not knowing how to use IS tools.  A school setting is a great place to start giving students these tools.  Quia (short for the Quintessential Instructional Archive) is one IS software system that is helpful not only to teachers but for students to explore and learn using today's technology.  Quia is a web-based system that allows educators to build online curriculum and where students can access it from anywhere they have an internet connection. The Quia system allows teachers to create assessment tests and activities for students to use to enhance their learning of concepts.  The Quia system also tracks student's progress in their activities as well as records and saves the grades of the assessment test.
Some of the functions that are included in Quia’s IS software are creating classes, tracking quizzes that students complete, electronic grade book, availability of a class calendar, sharing activities with students, friends and other educations.  The software allows educators to enter data in the form of quizzes and activities.  This data can then be presented to students.  After a student takes a quiz, the quiz is graded and the scores are returned back to the students.  Quia also collects the scores and presents them back to the instructor.  This can be used to see where students are having trouble grasping concepts or where mastery has been achieved.  Just think of the time it would take to hand grade each student test and then compile the test scores to see trends.  Instructors don't have time to do all this and still give students the attention they need to make them successful. Test questions can also be presented to students in an essay form.  These questions are marked for instructors grading.  In the analysis phase, requirements are gathered.
Recently a new IS software system has emerged on the internet.  It is called "Study Success" and was developed by SBorch Inc.  They wanted to develop a system similar to Quia but allow teachers to develop activities to allow students to learn anytime and anywhere.  So they developed a software product that is similar to Quia which allows students and parents to download activities for studying to a cell phone or ipod.  This gives students the opportunity to study and learn whenever it is convenient for them.  The Study Success IS system has been developed using the system development cycle.  SBorch Inc. followed the guidelines for system development.  They felt that using the phases in the system development, they would be creating a viable and very useful system for educational purposes.  The system development cycle is made up of 4 phases.  These phases are: planning, analysis, design and implementation.  The creators of Study Success want to explain what they did in each phase and show the capabilities of the software.
The planning phase is made up of several tasks.  These tasks are: reviewing project request, prioritizing project request, allocating resources and forming a project development team.  One of the first tasks SBorch Inc. did was to form a steering committee which included a variety of people from the education profession.  An overview of the Study Success system was introduced to the steering committee.  The committee discussed how effective the system would be so students could raise their test scores.  Students could also save the activities for later review if they needed to.  The committee felt that this software system could really help the education world.
SBorch Inc. wanted the Study Success system to include the following:
Building a developmental area for building online curriculum
Way to create an instructor profile (Home web page)
Means to create your own online games & activities
Means to create your own online tests & assessments
Accessible from anywhere there is internet access
During the planning phase, information is collected from potential users and existing software.  Other information that was gathered was from phone companies about popular phones so downloading could be developed.  Surveys were given to students and parents to see what browsers they use to accommodate the web based software.
Delivery of the compiled information was introduced to the steering committee.  The committee set up milestone to keep the development of the project on track.  They also prioritized what needed to be done to show the importance of particular tasks that the Study Success system needed to include.  The committee also had the task of looking at the cost and where funding will be coming for completing the development of the software.
SBorch Inc. formed a team of systems analysts and project leaders to lead the project into the next phase; analysis.
In the analysis phase, defining goals are written for each function of the Study Success software.  SBorch Inc. extensively interviewed students to see which activities they feel will help them in their studies.  SBorch Inc. met with teachers and found out which activities they feel would benefit students and to collect their input to what they would want to see in the assessment testing section of the Study Success software system.  The systems analysis team also collected the data on what types of phones students buy.  This information will help when designing the interfaces from the web application to a cell phone.
Each section of the Study Success software was broken down and analyzed.  The systems analyst will put together a feasibility study to decide if the project is needed and cost efficient.  Additionally, if the project cost is over budget, cutting parts of the project may be warranted and will be added in a future phase.
Teachers have to set up a roster for their class(es).  This will allow students to have a personal login and password.  The Study Success system will create the password for them but will allow the student to change it.
Teachers can also create a profile page.  This is where teachers can organize links to activities and the assessments.
Teachers enter the data in a question format for the student assessments. These questions can be in the form of multiple choice, matching, True/False, ordering, selection, and essay questions.
Students answer assessment questions by clicking on radio buttons, selecting from drop-down boxes, typing text in textareas.  This data will be used to grade the assessment and be stored for review.
Teacher has the choice of printing out a test or delivering the test in an online version.
The Study Success IS will grade all questions that are marked for computer grading.  Questions marked for review will be teachers graded and scored.  When the grade is presented to the student, the score page will display both a maximum points (if the student got all question correct) and a low score (if they did not get the reviewed questions correct).
Study Success keeps a grade book of all test score for each student.  These scores can be viewed when the student signs on the web-bases system.  In addition to viewing the scores, the system allows to students to go back to a test and view their mistakes.
Study Success has collaborated with multiple online grade book software developers to create a link that will import scores from the Study Success system into your preferred online grade book IS.
Teachers enter the data for several different types of activities that students can use to reinforce lesson concepts.  Some of these activities are: Rags to Riches, Word search, Crossword puzzle, Web Scavenger Hunt, Matching, Flashcard, Concentration, Battleship, Jeopardy, and Challenge Board.
Students use the activities to reinforce new concepts.  The scores will be recorded and saved.
Students can use the activities on the internet or they can upload the activities to an ipod or phone.  The phone or ipod will keep the scores and number of times the student used the activities.
The software to upload the activities will be presented as a link on the Study Success Web site.  Students/parents will have to click the link and view the terms of usage before downloading the software.  The software will be downloaded to the ipod or phone.  Once this is completed, there will be an icon that can be clicked to load the Study Success to the ipod or phone.
The software to upload the activities also contains to capability to import back to the web-based Study Success.  Students/parents have to select the "Import to web" option.  This will trigger the process for importing to web.
The Study Success IS can be divided into 3 sections: one is the web application.  The web application will be loaded and run on a hosting server.  Additional servers are needed to store the activity and assessment data as well as for backing up all the pertinent data for security and safety issues.  The second section is the download of activities to a media device.  Again, the system analyst has negotiated the programming talents of several phone manufactures to write the download of the web application activity to their phone.  Some of the phone manufacturers wanted a minimal fee for a download program and others felt it should be free since it will be used for educational purposes.  The third section is to import scores back to the Study Success system.  Again the phone manufacturers are offering their programming services to help with creating the import.
SBorch Inc. started planning the financial factors for the Study Success system.  Phone manufactures were very excited about this project.  Since this is an educational product, some of the manufactures offered to help with designing a download from the Study Success software to their phone. Additional funding will be collected by allowing the phone manufactures to place restricted ads on particular web pages.
Through out the planning and analysis phase, documentation has been collected. All this data will be compiled and stored for informational purposes.  A project dictionary will be used to hold the information and record the milestones/deliverables that are set for the project.
SBorch Inc. assigned several systems analysts to draw up an entity-Relationship diagram, data flow diagram and to set up a project dictionary.  An entity-relationship diagram (ERD) is a tool showing, in a graphical way, how objects, having data can be used in the IS system, are connected.[1] This helps the system analyst understand the flow of the system.  The data flow diagram (DFD) is a graphic displaying how data will flow through the IS system.[2] This will show the data inputs and data outputs.
Data for activities Data for test Data for profile page Roster information
Answers for assessment test Scores for activities
Assessment Score Test on paper Activity scores
The IT department's requirements must be included in the analysis phase.  Since they are needed for the success of the project, their input needs to be included.  The systems analyst collects all requirements, studies them and then creates a system proposal.  The system proposal contains the recommendations for the Study Success IS.  This proposal is given to the steering committee.  The steering committee reviewed it and will approve it or reject it.  The steering committee that reviewed the System proposal for the Study Success IS approved the recommendations that were presented.  Now SBorch Inc. started the design phase of the project.
In the design phase, SBorch Inc. submitted RFI's (request for information) to various vendors to get prices, service information and warranties on the pieces of hardware and software that are to be used in creating the Study Success IS.   The design team for the Study Success system was also working on the program specifications so they could be handed to programmers for coding. A prototype of the teacher’s web applications was created to show to the steering committee and was viewable for a small group of teachers.  The teachers returned their critiques.  A prototype of the download to a phone was also created.  Students were excited to see how easy the process was and they indicated that they would use it.
The design of the Study Success software allowed teachers with little or no experience in IS technology to get their class(es) using the product.  All of the features are template driven to where the instructor simply enters the data to create a test, activity, or profile.  Each screen has been designed efficiently making tasks easy to understand and simple to use. Every screen has a help option allowing the user to get additional information. Many software systems have poor documentation so importing data into the system or setting up an activity can be a nightmare.  This frustrates many teachers.
The environment in the Study Success software allows students to gain knowledge at a pace where they feel they can learn.  When the instructor creates the curriculum, students can move from one level to the next gaining knowledge towards mastery.  Each level can be assessed and the score will be recorded in the online grade book.  Educators can view the data collected and evaluate if the level was mastered.  To make each level attractive to a student, Study Success allows videos files, audio files, and images to be uploaded and included in a teacher’s profile.  They can also be included in the quizzes.  Links to web sites can be inserted into lessons so students can get further understanding of topics.
Security is a must with a system that is collecting individual grades.  Students as well as instructors must logon when quizzes are taken and scores are monitored.  This gives students privacy to their own grades.  Parents will be using their child's logon to see the grades and the progress they are making in class.  Instructors have a personal logon so that they can retrieve their class grades.  It also allows for maintaining a class profile page. SBorch Inc. wanted to allow teachers to collaborate with other teachers.  The system will have the capabilities to share (taking the security off) activities and test assessments if a teacher gives the proper permissions. Shared activities can help supplement curriculum and help engage students.
At the end of the design phase, SBorch Inc. had a portfolio consisting of: documentation for the Study Success IS, several prototypes, data dictionary and record layouts, screen layouts, program specifications, hardware and software vendors, and deliverables.
The Study Success system is a web-based system. Each web page must be written so various types of browsers can view it and interpret it properly.  A coding language that can save data, read saved data and format data is needed. In the implementation phase, programs are written, software and hardware is installed and testing of the system is done.  Also, documentation is created for the user.  Study Success software has a "help" icon on every page.  This icon gives a description of what the page is used for and then gives detailed instructions on what can be done.  There is always a "Technical Support" text link at the bottom of every page for additional help.
Once a section of the Study Success system was written it went through a stringent test by the quality assurance team to verify that it was functioning properly.  Once the entire system was completed, a full system test was performed.  The errors were documented and corrected.  SBorch Inc. wanted to use a small group of users to utilize the system before giving it to the world.  Two nearby school districts volunteered to use the Study Success system and comment back to SBorch Inc.  First, training had to be scheduled. Several in-service days were scheduled where teachers were given a users manual and were trained in the following areas:
Downloading an activity to phone or ipod
Importing activity results from phone or ipod
SBorch Inc. had open communication with the teaching staff when problems occurred and for additional training.
SBorch Inc. wanted this to be successful for students, so they gave mini-classes in the homeroom.  The mini-classes showed students how to access their class, the class activities, and class assessments.  It also, helped them to find their scores and where to view their learning progress.  For the upper grades, an additional section was added on how to download activities to a phone or ipod was added.  After the mini-classes had been completed teachers were instructed to tell to their students that parents will be informed on how to log into the Study Success system and how they can view scores and progress.  SBorch Inc. came to one of the PTA meetings and showed parents the system and how beneficial it was for them to look and view their child’s progress.
Both school districts were very excited to use the system.  Several requests for changes were given to SBorch Inc., by the school districts that would improve the system.  SBorch Inc. took this as a system improvement and said they would review the request and put it into a deliverable.  On September 1, 2008, the Study Success system was open to the world.  Currently it is offered to teachers/instructors/trainers for free.  The first deliverable was installed on December 31, 2008.
As technology changes, SBorch Inc. will be making changes to the Study Success IS.  Other downloads will need to be added or changes to the existing download will be made.
As newer ipods are introduced, new code will be written to accommodate the use of them in the Study Success system.  With new users signing up daily, additional servers will be added.  SBorch Inc. is constantly monitoring the performance issues of the system.  They have made it a goal that no user should wait more than 3 seconds for a page sent back from the server.
If the statement is true circle "T" otherwise circle "F" if false.
T     -     F        Testing is the first step in the Information System Development Cycle.
T     -     F     The analysis phase of the Development cycle includes testing and debugging of programs.
T     -     F     The entity-Relationship diagram, data flow diagram and setting up a project dictionary is done in the                   analysis phase.
Identify which of the functions are done by a teacher (T) and which would be done by a student(S).  If the function can be done by both teacher and student, mark it with a B.
T     -     S  -     B      Setting up a class roster
T     -     S  -     B       Viewing grades
T     -     S  -     B       Export activities to a phone
T     -     S  -     B       Entry of data for activities
List the six phases of the development cycle in order and briefly describe the purpose of each phase.
Explain why a parent would want to use the Study Success system.
Why did  SBorch Inc. allowed 2 school districts use the Study Success software before introducing the        system to the entire world?
Name at least 2 educational purposes that the Study Success IS will help students.
What marketing tactic did SBorch Inc. use to entice users to try/use the Study Success system?
↑ Discovering Computers 2009 Complete, Shelly, Gary B. & Vermaat, Misty E., 2008
↑ Discovering Computers 2009 Complete, Shelly, Gary B. & Vermaat, Misty E., 2008
Quia http://www.quia.com
Shelly G., Cashman T., Vermaat, M.. (2007). Discovering computers: A gateway to information. Boston, MA: Thomson Learning, Inc.
D8. Photo-induced chemiluminescence
Photo-induced chemiluminescence (PICL) involves irradiating an analyte with ultra-violet light in order to convert it to a photoproduct of different chemiluminescence behaviour, usually substantially increased emission. Such reactions form the basis of highly sensitive and selective analytical techniques. Irradiating a molecule can break it into fragments of smaller molecular weight (photolysis) or can induce reactions such as oxidation, reduction, cyclization or isomerization. Direct photolysis involves absorption of photons by the target molecule; in indirect photolysis, the target molecule absorbs energy from another molecule that has previously absorbed photons.[1]
Photochemistry is concerned with excited electronic states induced by the absorption of photons. Photoexcitation is more selective than thermal excitation and leads to a different energy distribution within the molecule.  The excited molecule can undergo photochemical processes, the products of which are sometimes involved in side processes. In analytically useful photochemical reactions the light is strongly absorbed by the analyte but not by the photoproducts; the photochemical yield is high; the photoproducts are stable for as long as is needed to complete the analysis and are structurally rigid enough for the emission to have an adequate quantum yield. Successful analytical application also depends on appropriately designed photoreactors. When those conditions are fulfilled, using light has several advantages over the use of chemical derivatization. Lamps are inexpensive and their stable light output allows reproducible results. They differ in their spectral characteristics, which gives scope for increasing selectivity. The use of light has minimal environmental impact and can be effected in ambient conditions. Analysis times are shorter because photochemical reactions are fast and can be shortened further by optimizing reactor configuration or increasing lamp power. PICL has a linear relationship with analyte concentration over a wide concentration range and extends the range of analytes that can be detected by chemiluminescence. It is not necessary to identify or separate the photoproducts.
In PICL-based methods, the sample is irradiated on-line and subsequently merged with the chemiluminescence reagents prior to reaching the flow cell in front of the detector. Flow methods allow the irradiation time to be easily controlled and provide better reproducibility than stationary methods, coping better with the very fast rate of chemiluminescence reactions. Sample throughput, ease of automation and reagent consumption are also improved using flow methods.
PICL has the same instrumentation as other chemiluminescence but, in addition, a photoreactor is required and this has two essential elements – a light source and a container for the sample. Lamps are selected on the basis of power and spectrum (continuous or discrete). Continuous spectra span a wide zone, whereas discrete spectra are series of individual lines in a narrow wavelength range. The mercury-xenon lamp provides a continuous spectrum and is used when its high power is necessary, though it needs cooling. The low-pressure mercury lamp generates little heat and is a typical discrete-spectrum lamp, emitting over the range 200-320 nm, maximally at 254 nm; most substances absorb in this zone. The absorption zone of the selected lamp must be the most useful for excitation and bond-breaking.  In flow systems, the sample is usually contained in PTFE tubing, which admits little light but maximises its effect by repeated reflections from the inner tube surfaces; the tubing can be coiled around a low-power lamp. Batch methods instead use quartz cells, which are transparent to ultra-violet. Quartz is more inert than PTFE, but also more fragile.
↑ Icardo M C and Catalyud J M, Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem., 38, 2008, 118-130.
PL/I is a full procedural language.
The program has its entry point specified as OPTIONS(MAIN), in a procedure statement, as in:
There are no column specialities.
In this numeric assignment statement, d is subtracted from c, and the result multiplied by the value of b, before storing in variable a.
Note: Using a compile-time option the concatenation operator || may be replaced by another pair of symbols, for being compatible with existing PL/I programs often !! is used.
Every comment commences with the pair /* and terminates with the pair */. Comments may span lines.
Declarations are not compulsory, though most PL/I compilers provide a compiler option to force declarations, while some of the subset compilers insist that every variable be declared.
To declare i as an binary and give it an initial value of 0
To declare a variable as decimal,
The first declaration is of an integer D stored in decimal format, while the second is of a variable E capable of storing ten digits having 4 digits after the decimal point. To initialize E, write:
Note that values such as 0.1 are stored exactly.
(typical declarations for the PC). The numbers 15 and 18 indicate the number of decimal digits that will be stored. (Although the values are actually held in binary, the decimal precisions are more convenient to recall than specifying the precisions in binary.) To specify a complex variable, simply include the word COMPLEX in the declaration, thus:
The assignment includes the complex constant 5.2+8i where 5.2 is the real part and 8 is the imaginary part.
The arithmetic data attributes for base (binary or decimal), scale (fixed or float) and mode (real or complex) may appear in any order, the attribute for precision (e.g. (15)) must not be the first one.
The following definitions are equivalent, except for the last one.
To declare a variable having the picture attribute:
To declare variable S as a character string:
String S can store exactly 10 characters.
To declare variable V as a character string capable of storing up to 100 characters:
V holds the three characters abc.
V holds the 8 characters friendly.
Data structures, or aggregates, may be declared:
Arrays are declared by one of the above means, along with dimension information:
Multi-dimension array are declared by separating the dimensions with commas
To handle dates given as 2-digit years and as 4-digit years, possibly intermixed in the same program, the DATE attribute may be used.
The keywords DECLARE and INITIAL may abbreviated as DCL and INIT, many attributes may abbreviated, too.
The first example writes Hello world! on the standard output (a screen or printer or file). The words are printed after any output already on that line. The second example starts a new line (the word SKIP) before printing.
Describe how methods/functions/procedures are declared and implemented. The following example is of a complete PL/I program containing a function.
The above program contains some typical input and output statements of the list-directed form.
The first PUT statement prints the date.
The second requests the reader to type three values representing the parameters of some triangle.
The third echoes the inputs as confirmation.
The last PUT statement contains a function reference, area(b, c, angle), which invokes the function. When it has been computed, the current PUT statement prints that area.
The definition of the function AREA includes a PROCEDURE statement that lists the parameters required from the calling program, namely, b, c, and angle. These parameters are defined in the next statement (DECLARE).
The PROCEDURE statement also states the type of the result to be returned to the calling program, namely, a floating-point value. This is indicated by RETURNS (FLOAT).
The RETURN statement contains the formula to be used in calculating the area of the triangle. It then returns control to the calling program. A RETURN statement typically includes the name of a variable, but may include an expression (as is the case here).
The scope of PL/I variables is confined to procedures in which they are declared. The scope extends into any procedures contained within that procedure (except of course any procedures in which a new declaration of the same name occurs).
In the event that a variable is not declared, then the scope of that variable is the whole program. Again, if a declaration (for a variable of the same name) appears in a block that is subordinate to the one(s) where the variable is (are) used, then the scope is excluded from the block containing the declaration.
Conditional Statements: IF..THEN..ELSE
Consider the two examples of conditional statements:
The first example illustrates one optionally-executed statement c = d;
The second example shows two optionally-executed statements, the first of which is executed when a > b, and the second of which is executed if a <= b;
When multiple statements are to be executed conditionally, statement brackets do and end are used.
....
OTHERWISE      unit_other;
Evaluate var_or_expr and store it to the variable TEMP.
Evaluate val_I,
Execute unit_other.
The OTHERWISE clause (which may be abbreviated OTHER) is optional,
A WHEN clause may contain more than 1 value, e.g.
....
OTHERWISE       unit_other;
Execute unit_other.
OTHERWISE      ; /* clause with empty statement to avoid run time error if a = b */
The body of the loop is executed ten times, with control variable k taking the values from 1 through 10. On loop exit, the value of k is one increment more, namely 11. The loop extends to the next END statement. Variations of looping statements are:
A loop that is conditionally terminated uses the WHILE construct:
Such a loop is executed zero or more times, the test being performed at the beginning of the loop.
The loop specified by the above statement is executed at least once, the test being performed at the end of the loop.
In the following, a REPEAT is used to specify an unusual change in the value of the control variable.
In this case, the control variable k takes on the values 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, and so on, until k becomes greater than 1000.
(both examples are equivalent, i.e. the order of WHILE and UNTIL in the statement doesn't matter )
DO I = ... may by followed by WHILE or REPEAT or both of them:
(the last two examples are equivalent)
... some_statements ...
One more example: The following statement specifies that the do-group has to be executed eight times, with the value of I equal to 1, 3, 5, 9, 18, 36, 9, 18.
In PL/I bit (1) strings represents single boolean values:
'1'B is interpreted as True
'0'B is interpreted as False
Bit (1) strings may be used as boolean expressions in conditional and loop statements.
.....
Boolean operators may be used for calculating new values:
The prefix operator ¬ is used as logical NOT.
The  infix operator & is used as logical AND.
The  infix operator | is used as logical OR.
Note: Using compile-time options NOT operator and OR operator may be replaced by other symbols, for being compatible with existing PL/I programs often ^ is used as NOT, ! is used as OR.
PL/I provides error detection and error handling.
The user can permit the system to report the error and perform a default action, or the user can specify a computational action to be executed when a given error is detected.
Events (including errors) are termed conditions.
For a condition to be detected, it must first be enabled. If the condition is enabled, and the corresponding condition occurs, the corresponding ON-unit (if supplied by the user) is executed.
...
In the event that the product b*c exceeds the maximum value permitted, the OVERFLOW condition is raised, and the ON-unit for OVERFLOW is executed. The ON-unit here is one of the simplest (go to), and merely transfers control to the statement labelled RESTART (where, perhaps, the program deals with the next set of values).
The keyword SNAP causes the running program to print an error message, along with the statement number where the error occurred.
In this example, the error detection and handling parts are shown in upper case.
Subscript checking is enabled by the condition prefix SUBSCRIPTRANGE (parenthesised before the PROCEDURE statement).
Before any statements are executed, the ON statement must be executed, which establishes the action to be carried out in the event of a subscript error.
The next statement executed is the input statement GET, which reads in a value, say 12.
Some conditions are provided to handle everyday events, for example, end of file and end of page. For example, to print a page number on the top of each page:
To detect the end of the input file IN, and to transfer to a named statement:
The programmer can invent his own conditions, and can signal them.
The SIGNAL statement is provided to test a given ON-unit (error-handler) during program testing. For example, SIGNAL ZERODIVIDE;
To raise a user-defined condition called RANGE, the statement SIGNAL CONDITION(RANGE); would be used.
<List containers or references to lists of containers available natively for this language.  List ways to incorporate containers if they are not native to the language.>
Sort algorithms and an XML parser is provided by IBM for its compilers.
All variables with the automatic attribute or allocated with the automatic (auto) builtin are removed from storage at the end of the block where they are declared. All allocated storage (ALLOC statement or alloc builtin) is removed from storage at the end of the program.
The libraries of the standard functions are all automatically provided; it is unnecessary to do anything to obtain access to them, such as to specify directories or to use INCLUDE statements or the like.
Source programs may be written in upper or lower case. There is no difference between the cases, except within strings.
Varying strings (declared with the attribute VARYING) are similar to C's char.
For an exact equivalant, in Enterprise PL/I for z/OS you may use the attribute VARYINGZ, in which strings are zero-terminated.
Without the attribute VARYING, strings are of fixed length. Such strings always store the specified number of characters. Thus,
Content of V after V = 'abc';:
|   3   | a | b | c | ? | ? | ? | ? | ? |   /* "?" means: value is undefined */
1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8     /* index of character */
Content of V after V = V || 'dog';:
|   6   | a | b | c | d | o | g | ? | ? |   /* "?" means: value is undefined */
1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8     /* index of character */
Decimal arithmetic, because it is fixed-point, needs some care.
The built-in functions ADD, SUBTRACT, MULTIPLY, and DIVIDE are provided to enable the programmer to specify the precision of each result. Thus they help to avoid overflow. For decimal fixed-point division, it is strongly recommended that the DIVIDE function be used. Thus, to divide A by B, where A has precision (10,5), and B has precision (6), the recommended form is:
In the DIVIDE reference, the arguments 10 and 5 direct that the result A/B has a total of ten digits, with 5 digits after the decimal point, respectively. This value is then stored in C. IBM PL/I permits up to 31 decimal digits for fixed-point working.
When running PL/I programs, use the condition prefixes SIZE, STRINGRANGE, STRINGSIZE, and SUBSCRIPTRANGE, on the initial procedure statement thus:
This enables checking for fixed-point overflow, and range-checking and truncation for strings and for subscripts.
The lower bound of arrays is unity by default, not zero.
Division of integers (whether decimal or binary or mixed) may produce a fixed-point result having a scale factor. Thus, 9/2 produces 4.5000000, unlike Fortran which produces the integer 4. Should an integer result be required, TRUNC or DIVIDE may be used, thus: TRUNC(9/2) or - more generally - DIVIDE(J, K, 31), the latter giving 31 bits of precision for a binary integer result. Alternatively, declaring binary integer variables to have maximum precision (typically 31 bits) will ensure that the result of dividing two such integer variables will give an integer result.
[2] IBM manuals: Enterprise PL/I for z/OS
J. K. Hughes, PL/I Structured Programming, 3rd Ed., Wiley, 1986. (beginner to professional; commercial applications)
R. Reddy & C. Ziegler, PL/I: Structured Programming and Problem Solving, West, 1986, ISBN 0-314-93915-6. (beginner to advanced)
R. A. Barnes, PL/I for Programmers, North-Holland, 1979. (professional)
G. F. Groner, PL/I Programming in Technological Applications, Books on Demand, Ann Arbor, MI, 1971. (professional)
M. E. Anderson, PL/I for Programmers, Prentice-Hall, 1973. (professional)
D. R. Stoutemyer, PL/I Programming for Engineering & Science, Prentice-Hall, 1971. (professional)
E. Sturm, Das neue PL/I (fur PC, Workstations and Mainframe), 5th Ed., Vieweg-Verlag, 2002.
We all know that when we drive, our cars pollute the atmosphere.  We can literally see, feel, hear, and smell the pollution coming out of our exhaust pipes.  Of course, cars aren't the only source of air pollution.  Almost everything we do in modern society causes air pollution, and in particular the emission of carbon dioxide (CO2) into the atmosphere, which cases global warming.  Shopping causes CO2 emissions because of all the energy used to get products into the stores in the first place.  Sending an e-mail (CO2) emissions because of the electricity used by our computers.  Eating causes CO2 emissions because of the electricity and gas used by our kitchen appliances.  Even sleeping causes CO2 emissions if we use air conditioning or heating in our bedrooms, listen to music, or set an alarm clock.  There's no way around it: simply living in modern society pollutes the air and contributes to global warming.
In Chapter 3, countries' levels of CO2 emissions were regressed on their numbers of passenger cars in a simple linear regression model of CO2 emissions.  Given that CO2 emissions come from multiple sources, not just passenger cars, it seems like a multicausal model would be more appropriate.  Ideally, a multicausal model of CO2 emissions would include all sorts of variables, like electricity usage, air, rail, and truck transportation, agricultural CO2 emissions, and other sources of pollution.  The inclusion of all of these variables in a multiple linear regression model would help create a model that might predict CO2 emissions very accurately, since all the contributors to CO2 emissions would be accounted for.
A much simpler multicausal model of CO2 emissions is presented in Figure 8-1.  Using data from Figure 3-1, tons of CO2 emissions per person in 51 countries are regressed on three predictors: passenger cars per 1000 people, national income per person, and western European status.  Theoretically, greater numbers of passenger cars and higher overall national income per person should be associated with higher levels of CO2 emissions.  Western European status should be associated with lower levels of CO2 emissions, since western European countries have been very active in promoting action on climate change in recent years.  Three models are presented in Figure 8-1: a simple linear regression model based on passenger cars (Model 1), a multiple linear regression model that adds national income (Model 2), and an additional multiple linear regression model that also adds European status (Model 3).
Figure 8-1. Regression of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions on passenger cars and national income, 2005 (data from Figure 3-1)
From the perspective of passenger cars as an independent variable of interest, national income is a control variable.  The slope associated with passenger cars is 0.013 in Model 1, but after controlling for national income the slope declines to 0.008.  This decline means that national income is a competing control from the perspective of passenger cars: it competes with passenger cars in explaining the same facts about CO2 emissions.  This is not surprising.  After all, driving a car is an integral part of living life in a rich country.  When countries have higher levels of national income per person, they have more cars.  As a result, the two variables compete in explaining CO2 emissions in a country.  For national income to complement passenger cars, it would have had to explain something else about a country that might have obscured the true relationship between passenger cars and CO2 emissions.
Something that does complement both passenger cars and national income is European country status.  European country status helps bring out the true relationships between passenger cars and CO2 emissions and between national income and CO2 emissions because European countries have relatively low emissions levels for their passenger car and national income levels.  In western Europe, passenger cars tend to be small and fuel-efficient, so western European countries have lower levels of CO2 emissions for the same number of cars.  Similarly, western Europe relies heavily on nuclear and wind power, resulting in lower CO2 emissions for the same level of national income.  As a result, European status is a complementary control from the perspective of both passenger cars and national income.  It complements national income especially strongly.
Which variable has a stronger overall effect on CO2 emissions, the number of passenger cars or the level of national income more broadly?  It's hard to say for sure, because the variables are expressed in very different units.  An increase of one car per 1000 people has a smaller effect than an increase of $1000 in national income, but it's not obvious that this is a fair comparison.  After all, an increase of 100 cars per 1000 people would have a much bigger effect than an increase of $1000 in national income.  We could compare the t statistics for passenger cars and national income to determine which one is more significant statistically, but we don't yet have a mechanism for comparing the absolute sizes of the effects of different variables on the same scale.  Without this, we can't determine which variable has a bigger impact on CO2 emissions.
Going one step further, how much of the international variability in CO2 emissions is explained by these two variables taken together, or by these two variables plus European status?  After all, the ultimate goal of statistical modeling is to explain things about the world.  The models presented in Figure 8-1 partially explain country differences in CO2 emissions, but we don't know how much they explain CO2 emissions.  This would be a very nice thing to know, certainly from a scientific standpoint but also from the standpoint of social policy.  Politicians and the public have a legitimate desire to know just how much of the wide variability in the real world can be explained by our statistical models.  If we can explain 90% of the observed variability in the world, great.  If we can explain 50%, alright, at least that's something.  If we can only explain 10% of the observed variability in the world and the rest of reality is fundamentally random, the world has a legitimate right to ignore us and our statistical results.
This chapter shows how the relative explanatory power of different variables can be directly compared in the context of multiple regression models.  First, in order to compare variables, they have to be put on the same scale through a process called standardization (Section 8.1).  Regression slopes estimated using standardized variables can be used to directly compare the relative explanatory power of each variable.  Second, when standardized variables are used in a simple linear regression the result is a correlation coefficient that measures the strength of the relationship between the variables (Section 8.2).  The correlation conveniently measure the strength of the relationship between two variables on a scale from -1 to +1.  Correlation coefficients can also be used to evaluate the overall predictive power of any regression model (Section 8.3).  The total variability in the dependent variable that is explained by the independent variables can also be measured.  An optional section (Section 8.4) illustrates how correlation coefficients can be used to explore the structure of the relationships connecting a large number of variables at the same time.
Finally, this chapter ends with an applied case study of people's satisfaction with democracy in Taiwan (Section 8.5).  This case study illustrates how standardized regression coefficients are used to evaluate and compare the performance of different variables in multiple regression models.  It also illustrates how the relative explanatory power of different regression models can be compared.  All of this chapter's key concepts are used in this case study.  By the end of this chapter, you should be able to use multiple regression to make basic inferences about the effects of multiple independent variables on a single dependent variable.
8.1. Comparing like with like using standardized variables
Linear regression involves comparing the values of variables that mean very different things.  In Model 2 of Figure 8-1 it is reported that every 1 additional passenger car per 1000 people in a country is associated with an increase of 0.008 tons of CO2 emissions per person, while every $1000 in national income is associated with an increase of 0.074 tons of CO2 emissions.  The variable passenger cars is expressed as a number per 1000 people, the variable national income is expressed in thousands of dollars, and the variable CO2 emissions is expressed as tons per person per year.  The use of so many different units makes it hard to compare countries across different variables.  For example, Australia has 542 cars per 1000 people, a national income of $29,480 per person, and CO2 emissions of 18.1 tons per person.  Are these figures high, low, or about average?  How do they compare to each other, and to other countries?
One way to judge whether a value of a variable is high or low is by using means and standard deviations.  Figure 8-2 reports the means and standard deviations of CO2 emissions, passenger cars, and national income for the 51 countries used in Figure 8-1.  Australia's CO2 emissions (18.1 tons) are well above the mean level for CO2 emissions across the 51 countries.  In fact, Australia's CO2 emissions are more than 2 standard deviations above the mean.  The mean is 6.15 tons.  The mean plus one standard deviation is 6.15 + 4.34 = 10.49 tons.  The mean plus two standard deviations is 6.15 + 4.34 + 4.34 = 14.83 tons.  Australia, with emissions of 18.1 tons, is far above this level.
Figure 8-2. Means and standard deviations of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, passenger cars, and national income, 2005 (data from Figure 3-1)
Australia also has a large number of cars per 1000 people, 542 cars versus a cross-national mean of 242 cars.  Australia's level is more than 1 standard deviation above the mean, but not quite 2 standard deviations.  Australia's national income level of $29,480 is well above the mean, but by a little less than 1 standard deviation.  It's actually just 0.83 standard deviations above the mean.  So while Australia is around 1 standard deviations above the mean on passenger cars and national income, it's more than 2 standard deviations above the mean on CO2 emissions.  This suggests that CO2 emissions are especially high in Australia.  Looking back at Figure 3-2, this seems to be the case: Australia's observed CO2 emissions are much higher than its expected levels as indicated by the regression line.  Australia is a clear outlier.
On the other hand, Mexico is 0.47 standard deviations below the mean on CO2 emissions, 0.51 standard deviations below the mean on passenger cars, and 0.42 standard deviations below the mean on income.  It is below the mean by roughly the same amount on all three variables.  It is also much closer the mean on all three variables than Australia is, at least in terms of standard deviations.  For example, where Mexico is 0.47 standard deviations below the mean on CO2 emissions, Australia is 2.75 standard deviations above the mean.
Discussing variables in terms of standard deviations above or below the mean is actually a very useful technique. Instead of computing standard deviations above or below the mean for particular cases, it makes more sense to convert all the values of a variable into standard deviations above or below the mean at the same time in a process called "standardization."  Standardized variables are variables that have been transformed by subtracting the mean from every observed value and then dividing by the standard deviation.  Because of the way they are constructed, standardized variables always have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.  Also because of the way they are constructed, standardized variables have no units.  For example, Mexico is 0.42 standard deviations below the mean on national income.  It is not 0.42 dollars below the mean or 0.42 percent below the mean.  It is just 0.42 standard deviations below the mean.
This is the only downside of standardized variables: they have no units.  When social statisticians are interested in doing something that requires the original units, like using a regression model to make predictions, they need the original units.  Unstandardized variables are variables that are expressed in their original units.  All variables start out as unstandardized variables, expressed in dollars, pounds, percentages, cars per 1000 people, or some other unit.  In general, "unstandardized variables" are just "variables."  The term "unstandardized variable" is only used to when it is necessary to distinguish an unstandardized variable from a standardized variable.
The most important use of standardized variables is in linear regression models.  In Figure 7-13, smoking rates in the 13 Canadian provinces and territories were regressed on average daily temperatures and rates of heavy alcohol drinking.  Both temperature and heavy drinking were statistically significant predictors of smoking rates, but since they are recorded in different units (degrees versus percents) their effects were difficult to compare.  Standardizing all three variables (smoking, temperature, and drinking) makes possible a meaningful comparison of the effects of temperature and drinking on smoking rates.  The first step in standardizing variables is to find their means and standard deviations.  Means and standard deviations for all three variables are reported in Figure 8-3.  The second step is to use these means and standard deviations to convert each value of each variable into a standardized value.
Figure 8-3. Means and standard deviations for smoking rates, average temperature, and heavy drinking in 13 Canadian provinces and territories, 2008 (data from Figure 4-8)
Normally, standardization is performed automatically by statistical computer software, but the steps in the process of standardization are illustrated in Figure 8-4 for the variable "heavy drinking."  All 13 Canadian provinces and territories are listed in Column 1 and their heavy drinking rates are reported in Column 2.  The mean value of heavy drinking is recorded in Column 3.  The difference between each value and the mean is calculated in Column 4.  The standard deviation of heavy drinking is recorded in Column 5.  The standardized value of heavy drinking for each province is calculated in Column 6.  The values in Column 6 represent how many standard deviations each province is from the mean level of heavy drinking for all provinces.
Figure 8-4. Illustration of how variables are standardized, using the example of smoking in 13 Canadian provinces and territories, 2008
Standardization changes the value of each case in a variable into a standardized value, but it does not change the distribution of a variable in any way.  High cases are still high cases and low cases are still low cases.  It's only the units that change.  This is illustrated in Figure 8-5.  The left side of Figure 8-5 is a scatter plot of smoking rates versus heavy drinking rates for the 13 Canadian provinces and territories using the original, unstandardized variables.  The right side of Figure 8-5 depicts the same relationship using standardized variables.  The layout of the points is identical, but the scales of the axes change.  The standardized plot is centered on 0 and runs from a low of -3 to a high of +3 in each direction.  Notice also how the regression line depicted on the standardized plot runs right through the center point.  This happens with any regression estimated using standardized variables.
Figure 8-5. Comparison of scatter plots of smoking rates versus heavy drinking rates for unstandardized (left) versus standardized (right) variables across 13 Canadian provinces and territories
The coefficients of a multiple linear regression model regressing the provincial smoking rates on average temperatures and heavy drinking rates are reported in Figure 8-6.  Two sets of coefficients are reported, one set using the unstandardized variables and one using the standardized variables.  Unstandardized coefficients are the coefficients of regression models that have been estimated using original unstandardized variables.  Standardized coefficients are the coefficients of regression models that have been estimated using standardized variables.  The unstandardized coefficients are just the regular coefficients found using the three variables in their original units.  They are the same as the coefficients that were reported in Figure 7-13, Model 2.  The standardized coefficients, on the other hand, are the coefficients of the model that result when the new, standardized versions of the variables are used.
Figure 8-6. Regression of smoking rates on temperatures and heavy drinking rates across 13 Canadian provinces and territories, 2008 (after Figure 7-13, Model 2)
Since the standardized coefficients are both expressed in standardized units (in terms of standard deviations, not degrees or percentages), they are directly comparable.  The relationship between temperature and smoking is more than twice as strong as the relationship between heavy drinking and smoking.  Every one standard deviation increase in temperature is associated with a 0.832 standard deviation decline in the smoking rate, while every one standard deviation increase in heavy drinking is associated with a 0.398 standard deviation increase in the smoking rate.
No intercept is reported for the standardized model because the intercept for standardized models is always 0.  It would not be incorrect to report 0 as the intercept, but it is customary to leave the intercept blank for standardized models.  Because of this custom, it is easy to tell at a glance whether a model uses unstandardized or standardized variables.  Whenever an intercept is reported, the model is unstandardized.  When no intercept is reported, the model must be standardized.  The t statistics and probability levels are the same for the unstandardized and standardized coefficients.  Since standardization doesn't change anything about the layout of the points in an analysis or the amount of error, it doesn't have any effect on significance levels.
The standardized coefficients for the regressions models for CO2 emissions are reported in Figure 8-7.  In Model 2, the standardized coefficient for passenger cars is larger than the standardized coefficient for national income.  This indicates that the number of passenger cars predicts CO2 emissions more strongly than does the level of national income.  The difference between the two standardized coefficients is small but clear.  Controlling for western European status in Model 3 changes the situation.  In Model 3, the standardized coefficient for national income is stronger than the coefficient for passenger cars.  This happens because controlling for western European status removes a lot of the error from the relationship between national income and CO2 emissions (western European status strongly complements national income).
Figure 8-7. Comparison of metric and standardized coefficients for the regression of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions on passenger cars and national income, 2005 (after Figure 8-1)
So which variable most strongly predicts CO2 emissions?  The answer is that their effects are about equal.  Which one is stronger depends on whether or not we control for western European status.  Western European status itself has a much weaker effect on CO2 emissions, a little more than half as strong as either of the other variables.  The use of standardized variables to produce standardized coefficients makes all these comparisons possible.
In Figure 8-6 and Figure 8-7, standardized coefficients are used to compare the relative strengths of relationships within a model.  The relationship between temperature and the smoking rate is much stronger than the relationship between heavy drinking and the smoking rate across Canadian provinces.  The relationship between passenger cars and CO2 emissions is roughly the same strength as the relationship between national income and CO2 emissions across countries.  In each of these cases, the strengths of different relationships are compared within a single regression model.
Standardized coefficients can also be used to compare the strengths of relationships across models.  For example, in Chapter 1 it was theorized that low incomes led to higher junk food consumption.  This theory was operationalized into two specific hypotheses.  First, it was hypothesized that US states with higher median incomes would have less soda consumption.  Second, it was hypothesized that states with higher incomes would have less sweetened snack consumption.  It turned out that the first hypothesis was correct, but the second was wrong.  Contrary to expectations, states with higher incomes actually had more sweetened snack consumption, not less.
We might want to know which relationship was stronger, the (expected) relationship between income and soda or the (unexpected) relationship between income and sweetened snacks.  The results of regressions of each dependent variable on state median income are reported in Figure 8-8 and Figure 8-9.  The unstandardized coefficients in each model are the same coefficients as were reported in Chapter 1.  The unstandardized coefficients indicate that each additional $1000 in state median income is associated with a 0.603 gallon decline in soda consumption per person per year and a 0.611 pound increase in sweetened snack consumption per person per year.  The standardized coefficients indicate that the strength of the relationship between income and soda consumptions is actually slightly stronger than the strength of the relationship between income and sweetened snack consumption.
Figure 8-8. Comparison of metric and standardized coefficients for regression of soda consumption on state median income for 48 US states, 2008 (data from Figure 1-2)
Figure 8-9. Comparison of metric and standardized coefficients for regression of sweetened snack consumption on state median income for 48 US states, 2008 (data from Figure 1-2)
Standardized coefficients from simple linear regression models are often used in this way to gage the strengths of the relationships between variables.  Standardized coefficients are a convenient shorthand for the relationship between two variables for several reasons.  First, since they are based on standardized variables, they are always comparable, no matter what units the original variables were measured in.  Second, it turns out that in simple linear regression models with one predictor, it doesn't matter which variable is the dependent variable and which is the independent variable.  Either way the standardized coefficient will be the same.  Third, again only in simple linear regression models with one predictor, it turns out that the standardized coefficient will always fall somewhere between -1 and +1.  The slope is never larger than 1 in either direction.
This use of standardized coefficients from simple regression models is so common that it has its own name and symbol: correlation, denoted using the symbol "r."  Correlation (r) is a measure of the strength of the relationship between two variables that runs from r = -1 (perfect negative correlation) through r = 0 (no correlation) to r = +1 (perfect positive correlation).  The correlation between two variables is exactly the same thing as the standardized coefficient from a regression of one of the variables on the other variable.  Figure 8-10 demonstrates how the correlations of state income with soda and sweetened snacks might be compared.  Notice how the correlation coefficients are identical to the simple linear regression coefficients reported in Figure 8-8 and Figure 8-9.  Similarly, their probabilities correspond to those from the t statistics reported in Figure 8-8 and Figure 8-9.
Figure 8-10. Correlation of state median income with soda and sweetened snack consumption for 48 US states, 2008
8.3. R and R2
In addition to gaging the strengths of the relationships between variables in general, correlations have another, very specific use.  Correlations can be used to evaluate the overall predictive strength of any regression model.  For example, the table in Figure 8-11 repeats the results of the regression of the gender gap in science scores on three independent variables (national income, educational spending, and number of teachers) from Figure 7-6.  In Figure 8-11 both unstandardized and standardized coefficients are reported.  The standardized coefficients indicate that the effects of teachers and national income are stronger than the effects of educational spending, but they don't tell us how well the model as a whole does in predicting the gender gap in science.
Figure 8-11. Multiple linear regression of the gender gap in science scores on various independent variables, 2006 (after Figure 7-6; data from Figure 7-1)
Correlations can be used to help shed light on this.  The key question in evaluating the performance of a model is: how well do the values of the dependent variable predicted by the model correspond to the actually observed values of the dependent variable?  In other words, what is the strength of the relationship between the dependent variable's expected values and its actual values?  A correlation is ideal for measuring the strength of the relationship between two variables.  When the two variables being correlated are the actual and expected values of a dependent variable from a regression model, the correlation is represented by the capital letter R (to distinguish it as a specific type of correlation).  For Model 1 of Figure 8-11, R is 0.446.
This means that in Model 1 of Figure 8-11 the actual values of the gender gap in science are correlated r = 0.446 with the expected values generated by the regression model.  This is not ideal (a perfect correlation would be r = 1), but it's something.  Figure 8-12 plots the actual values of the gender gap in science scores against the expected values generated by Model 1 of Figure 8-11.  There is a definite positive relationship between the two, but it is not very strong.  By way of comparison, for the regression predicting smoking rates across Canadian provinces (Figure 8-6) the model's predictive performance was R = 0.928, while for the regression predicting CO2 emissions across countries (Model 3 of Figure 8-7) the model's predictive performance was R = 0.632.  The regression model in Figure 8-11 does predict the gender gap in science scores, but not especially well.
Figure 8-12. Scatter plot of actual versus expected values of the gender gap in science scores based on Model 1 of Figure 8-10
In addition to summarizing the predictive strength of a regression model, the regression model R statistic also has one more very important use.  The R statistic plays a role in linking regression models back to mean models.  In Chapter 4, Figure 4-10 showed how the mean model for smoking rates across Canadian provinces could be mapped into the regression model for smoking.  Each province's deviation from the mean smoking rate (left side of Figure 4-10) was spread out over the range of average temperatures in the regression model for smoking (right side of Figure 4-10).  In Figure 8-13, the same kind of mapping is done for the relationship between smoking rates and heavy drinking rates.  Again, each province's deviation from the mean smoking rate (left side) is spread out over the range of the independent variable, which in this case is heavy drinking (right side).
Figure 8-13. Illustration of mean and regression models of smoking rates across the 13 Canadian provinces and territories, 2008
Viewed in this way, a regression model is nothing more than an explanation of why certain cases deviate from the mean more than other cases do.  In this view, Ontario has a low smoking rate at least in part because it has a low drinking rate, while the Northwest Territories have a high smoking rate at least in part because they have a high drinking rate.  These provinces' smoking rates are also explained in part by their temperatures (Figure 4-10).  Together, temperatures and heavy drinking rates explain a large portion of the total cross-province variability in smoking rates, but how much?
Answering this question properly requires a lot of algebra, but the end result of all that algebra is that the proportion of the total variability in the dependent variable that is explained by the independent variables in a regression model is equal to R x R, or R2 ("R squared").  R2 is a measure of the proportion of the total variability in the dependent variable that is explained by a regression model.  As with other regression-related statistics, there is no need to calculate R2.  Any software program that estimates regression models will automatically report the R2 statistic for the model.  The R2 for the model predicting the gender gap in science scores in Figure 8-11 is 0.199 or 19.9%, indicating that together national income, educational spending, and the number of teachers in a country explain almost 20% of the international variability in the gender gap in science.
The R2 for the model predicting Canadian provincial smoking rates (Figure 8-6) is 0.861, indicating that over 86% of the variation across provinces in smoking rates can be explained by differences in temperatures and heavy drinking.  The R2 for the full model predicting CO2 emissions across countries (Model 3 of Figure 8-7) is 0.399, indicating that nearly 40% of international differences in CO2 emissions are explained by differences in national income, passenger cars, and western European status.  Since R2 has such an important intuitive meaning (proportion of variability explained), most tables of regression results report R2, not R.  Since by definition R2 equals R squared, it is easy to calculate one from the other (if necessary) using a calculator.  In practice, R is rarely used, but R2 is reported and discussed for almost every regression model.
Correlations are summary measures of the strengths of the relationships between variables.  As such, they are useful even outside the context of regression models.  Sometimes we just want to know what relationships exist among a group of variables.  A table of all the correlations connecting a group of variables is called a correlation matrix.  For example, the correlation matrix for the four variables included in Figure 8-6 (the regression model for CO2 emissions) are reported in Figure 8-14.  The dependent variable from the regression model is listed first in Figure 8-14, followed by all the independent variables, but the order of variables in a correlation matrix doesn't have any effect on the correlations.  The table or matrix is just a convenient way to organize all the correlations among all the variables.
Figure 8-14. Correlation matrix of variables from Figure 8-6 (CO2 emissions regression)
Correlations matrices like the one depicted in Figure 8-14 always have the same number of rows as columns, because every variable is listed both as a row and as a column.  Where a variable is matched with itself in the table, the correlation is always 1 (every variable is perfectly correlated with itself).  As a result, correlations matrices always have a diagonal of 1's running through the middle.  Another feature of correlation matrices is that the correlations reported in the upper right corner are the mirror image of the correlations reported in the lower left corner.  This happens because correlations are symmetrical: the correlation of income with cars is the same as the correlation of cars with income.  Since the entries in the upper right corner repeat the entries in the lower left corner, the upper right corner is sometimes left blank in correlation matrices.  These half-blank matrices with the redundant correlations removed are known as triangular matrices.
A triangular correlation matrix with seven variables is depicted in Figure 8-15.  These correlations are based on the characteristics of 1145 Taiwanese respondents to the 2006 World Values Survey (to be discussed in Section 8.5).  Due to the long names of some of the variables, each variable is listed on a numbered row, and the numbers are used as headings for the columns.  Means and standard deviations for all of the variables have also been included for easy reference.  Correlations matrices with means and standard deviations summarize all of the important features of a group of variables in a compact space.  Though many authors do use triangular matrices like the one depicted in Figure 8-15, full (square) matrices are much more convenient.  It can take a few minutes to find the correlation you're looking for in a triangular matrix, but in a square matrix you can always read across a row to find any correlation you want.
Figure 8-15. Correlation matrix including descriptive statistics for variables included in the Taiwan democracy regression (Figure 8-16)
Correlation matrices can be used both to pick out which independent variables are likely to be significantly related to the dependent variable.  For example, in Figure 8-15 the variables that are most closely related to the democracy rating are age, education, and confidence in institutions.  Correlations matrices can also be used to pick out which independent variables are likely to compete with or complement each other based on what independent variables are correlated with each other.  Highly correlated groups of variables like age, education, and income, or trust and confidence, are likely to compete with or complement each other.  Variables that are not correlated with each other are unlikely to be either competing or complementary when used in a regression model.  Differentiating between competing and complementary controls based on the correlation matrix, however, is difficult or impossible.
8.5. Case study: Satisfaction with Taiwan's democracy
In Chapter 5, data from the Taiwan edition of the 2006 World Values Survey (WVS) were used to study the relationship between people's ages and their ratings of the quality of democracy in Taiwan.  People's rating of democracy in Taiwan was scored on a scale from 0 to 100 where:
Rating = 0 means the respondent thinks there is not enough democracy in Taiwan
Rating = 50 means the respondent thinks there is just the right amount of democracy in Taiwan
Rating = 100 means the respondent thinks there is too much democracy in Taiwan
In a regression model reported in Figure 5-7, age was found to be positively related to people's rating of Taiwan's democracy, with each additional year of age predicting a 0.105 point increase in the democracy rating (older people thought Taiwan was more democratic than younger people).  The mean democracy rating among the 1216 people studied was 38.7, indicating the most people were less than satisfied with the amount of democracy in Taiwan.
The results of two more extensive multiple regression models for the democracy rating in Taiwan are reported in Figure 8-16.  These models are based on only 1145 survey responses because some people didn't answer all of the questions used in the models.  The models reported in Figure 8-16 include six independent variables:
Age -- the respondent's age in years
Gender -- the respondent's gender, coded as Female=0 and Male=1
Education -- the respondent's yeas of education
Income -- the respondent's income decile (lowest tenth, second tenth, third tenth, etc.)
Trust in society -- a variable measuring the respondent's level of trust in society on a scale from 0 to 18
Confidence in institutions -- a variable measuring the respondent's level of confidence in the institutions of society (like government, corporations, and churches) on a scale from 0 to 45
It is expected that education and income would be positively related to people's ratings of democracy, since people who have been more successful at advancing in society usually have a higher opinions of that society.  Similarly, those who have a higher level of trust and confidence in their society's institutions would be expected to rate their society's democracy more highly.  Gender is also included as a control variable, but with no particular expectation of its effects.
Figure 8-16. Regression of citizens' democracy ratings in Taiwan on six independent variables, 2006 (N=1145)
The first column of results in Figure 8-16 reports the correlations of the democracy rating with each of the six independent variables.  Only three of these correlations are statistically significant: those for age, education, and confidence in institutions.  Figure 8-16 also reports the results of two regression models.  For each model, both unstandardized coefficients and standardized coefficients are reported.  The unstandardized coefficients are just the ordinary regression coefficients based on the unstandardized variables for each of the variables in the model.  The standardized coefficients are the regression coefficients that result from the same regression model estimated using standardized variables.  The standardized coefficients in Model 1 indicate that age has the most powerful effect on the democracy rating of any of the four variables included in the model.
In Model 2, confidence in the institutions of society (including government) is positively associated with people's ratings of their country's democracy.  This makes sense, since people who have no confidence in government would be unlikely to rate their government as being very democratic.  Surprisingly, trust in society has no significant effect on people's ratings of how democratic their government is in Taiwan.
Correlation (r) is a measure of the strength of the relationship between two variables that runs from r = −1 (perfect negative correlation) through r = 0 (no correlation) to r = +1 (perfect positive correlation).
R2 is a measure of the proportion of the total variability in the dependent variable that is explained by a regression model.
Standardized coefficients are the coefficients of regression models that have been estimated using standardized variables.
Standardized variables are variables that have been transformed by subtracting the mean from every observed value and then dividing by the standard deviation.
Unstandardized coefficients are the coefficients of regression models that have been estimated using original unstandardized variables.
Unstandardized variables are variables that are expressed in their original units.
A reader has identified this chapter as an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
The most basic relationship between two variables
This is called a quadratic equation and it follows a shape called a parabola. High powers of
-axis several times.
George W. Bush and "Enhanced Interrogation Techniques"
On September 11, 2001, 19 hijackers crashed four jetliners into the Pentagon and the World Trade Center, killing more than 3,000 people in the largest terrorist attack on U.S. soil. In the wake of these terrorist attacks, the Bush administration launched the global war on terror in Afghanistan and Iraq to defeat terrorists and their organizations. Controversy has abounded over his support of so-called "enhanced interrogation techniques". Many critics view these “enhanced techniques” as torture whereas supporters view these techniques as imperative to national security.
Enhanced interrogation methods include sensory deprivation, prolonged periods in stress positions, sleep deprivation, hypothermia, and waterboarding. Between 2002 and 2003 the CIA considered these techniques to be legal arguing that terror detainees were not protected by the Geneva Conventions' ban on torture.[1] Since 2001 approximately 100 detainees, including those held by the CIA, have died during interrogations. Some of these deaths may be linked to torture. [2][3] Most of these interrogations have been conducted outside of US legal jurisdiction in "black sites," which are secret prisons operated by the CIA, to facilitate the United States’ War on terror.
Critics believe the use of torture could have counterproductive military effects as it can cause captors to resist cooperation and give false information. Following the futile advice can have negative economic consequences, and this use of torture may intensify the enemy combatants will to fight. Scholars have tried to verify the effectiveness of torture with little success. Metin Basoglu, MD, PhD and Professor of psychiatriatry, explained that, “torture generates intense hatred and desire for vengeance against the perpetrators, radicalizing even ordinary people with no strong political view.”[4]
Proponents believe the United States is acting within the international treatment guidelines for enemy combatants, and CIA director George J. Tenet has expressed that about one-third of the Al-Qaeda leadership have been captured or eliminated as a direct result of interrogation.[5] Among these include Ramzi bin al-Shibh a key facilitator for the September 11 attacks and Omar al-Faruq who led plans to blow up US embassies around Asia.[6][7] In addition, the U.S. National Security Council spokesman Sean McCormack articulated that “the United States is treating enemy combatants in U.S. government control, wherever held, humanely and in a manner consistent with the principles of the Third Geneva convention of 1949.”[5]
The Bush administration experienced repeated policy change over the rights of enemy detainees and the use of interrogation techniques.
On September 18, 2001, in response to the terrorist attacks, President Bush signed the Authorization for Use of Military Force. The act gave the president the authority to use necessary and appropriate force against contributors to the attacks. However, the United States Supreme Court case Hamdi v. Rumsfeld limited the power us this act by determining that detainees who are U.S. citizens have the right to due process and to challenge their enemy combatant label. The Bush administration believed that if an individual was caught in arms against the U.S. it is constitution to define them as an enemy combatant without access to the court systems. In response, on October 17, 2006, Bush signed into law the Military Commissions Act of 2006, which allowed the U.S. government to prosecute unlawful enemy combatants by a military tribunal rather than a civilian trial and denies them access to habeas corpus. While it also bars the torture of detainees, it allows the president to determine what constitutes torture. [8] On March 8th, 2008, Bush vetoed legislation that would ban the CIA from using harsh interrogation methods such as waterboarding[9] saying that "the bill Congress sent me would take away one of the most valuable tools in the War on Terror". Furthermore, he said that, “This is no time for Congress to abandon practices that have a proven track record of keeping America safe,” illustrating how he has prioritized the security of the United States.[10]
A United States survey found that only 25% of Americans believe the use of torture against suspected terrorists can never be justified.[11] Even with a majority of Americans in support, President Bush was forced to make the tough decision between national security and the human rights of the detainees. He made the decision to take a very supportive stance on enhanced interrogation, asserting that they do not constitute torture and instead provide critical information to preserving American lives, enough though it may infringe upon human rights.
In his memoir, Decision Points, published in 2010, Bush considered his biggest accomplishment to be keeping "the country safe amid a real danger"[14] and defended his administration's enhanced interrogation techniques, specifically the waterboarding of Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, saying, "I'd do it again to save lives."[15]
The HeLa cell line was the first immortal cell line discovered and is still among the most commonly used. Like other immortal cell lines, such as A549, HEK 293, and Jurkat, it has played a role in medical testing and contributed to major breakthroughs. The cell line was derived from the cervical cancer cells of Henrietta Lacks.[18] She was diagnosed with cancer in 1951 and received radiation therapy at Johns Hopkins. As was standard procedure in that time period, samples of her healthy tissue and cancerous tissue were taken for comparison.[19] 8 months later, on October 4th, 1951, Henrietta passed away. Physician George Otto Gey was given Henrietta Lacks' cell samples and, when he cultured them, he noted the "cells did something they'd never seen before: They could be kept alive and grow."[20] Due to the genetic abnormality of the cancer cells, they were immune to the Hayflick Limit that made the useful life of cells 3 or 4 days.[21]
While tissue sampling was standard procedure and something she would have consented to as part of her treatment, she did not know what was to become of those cells.[19] She did not consent to her cells being cultured in perpetuity. Henrietta's descendants settled the property rights with the National Institutes of Health in 2013 for a hand in controlling the future of the line and acknowledgements in scientific papers.[22] The central question surrounds whether a person has property rights to their discarded biological tissue. The issue reached the Supreme Court of California in the case Moore v Regents of the University of California in 1990.[18] The family of John Moore wanted a share of the profits from his cell line, purported to have had a 3 billion dollar commercial value over a six year period. The Court decided that Moore has no property rights to his tissue and issued a statement that the "Court needs to balance between protecting rights of patients and the threat of ‘civil liability’ and the hindering of medical research." [23]
Western culture has strong views on the sanctity of the human body, with Apostle Paul and John Locke, two of the most important philosophers in influencing the western thinking, shaping opinions on the human body and personal rights. Apostle Paul stated in 1 Cor 6:19-20 that "Your bodies are temples of the Holy Spirit."[24] John Locke stated that "Every man has a property in his own person. This nobody has a right to, but himself."[25] They would contend that Henrietta Lacks has the right to prevent her cells from being immortalized and manipulated.
The HeLa cell line was crucial in the development of a safe and effective polio vaccine.[26] Prior to the development of the HeLa cell line, researchers spent more time developing and maintaining short lived cultures than they spent running experiments. Jonas Salk was able to get large quantities of robust cells to test his vaccine on, accelerating the process of vaccine creation.[26] The polio vaccine decreased the incidence of polio in America from 21,000 cases in 1952 to 61 cases in 1965, following the introduction of the polio vaccine in 1955.[27]
Consequentialism vs. Deontology
Consequentialism, coined by philosopher Gertrude E. M. Anscombe in 1958, holds that the consequences of one’s conduct are the ultimate basis for any judgment on its rightness or wrongness. In the above cases, one could argue that enhanced interrogation, or the use of HeLa cell line is ethical if there is a net positive gain by society. Many scholars, however, doubt the efficacy of enhanced interrogation practices and cite many negative consequences, such as its effect on the perpetrator and its resulting perception of US foreign policy, lending argument to the unethicality of enhanced interrogation even by consequentialist standards.
Contrasting consequentialism is the idea of deontology, where the rightness or wrongness of an act is judged based on its intrinsic character. With many individuals considering enhanced interrogation as torture, it would be considered highly unethical by deontological ethics. On the other hand, some may believe that the use of discarded biological tissues does not truly wrong an individual, thus deeming our second case as ethical even by deontological standards.
Bush’s decisions to support enhanced interrogation techniques and the use of the HeLa cell line are complex and controversial issues that deal with weighing the human rights of an individual against the welfare of a population. While there is no right answer to these problems, consequentialism and deontology provide two opposing moral frameworks with which to consider their ethicality, and may help a professional in making decisions that strike a balance the between the consequentialist systems that make peoples' lives better versus the deontological morality of those systems.
↑ Previously secret torture memo released [1]
↑ The Bush Administration Homicides [2]
↑ The suppressed fact: Deaths by U.S. torture [3]
↑ The effects and effectiveness of using torture as an interrogation device: Using research to inform the policy debate [4]
↑ a b U.S. decries abuse but defends interrogations[5]
↑ Al-Qaida: Dead or captured[7]
↑ Military Commissions Act of 2006[8]
↑ H.R.2082.ENR[9]
↑ Bush vetoes bill banning waterboarding[10]
↑ Statistics on torture[11]
↑ Slim majority wants bush era interrogations[12]
↑ Bush vetoes torture ban; interrogation methods 'valuable' tool in war on terror [13]
↑ Bush's Glib Waterboarding Admission Sparks Outrage[15]
↑ CNN Poll: How will history remember George W. Bush?[16]
↑ Historian tips rethink of Bush presidency[17]
↑ a b Skloot, Rebecca (2010). The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks. New York: Crown/Random House. ISBN 978-1-4000-5217-2
↑ a b Washington, Harriet "Henrietta Lacks: An Unsung Hero", Emerge Magazine, October 1994
↑ Claiborne, Ron; Wright IV, Sydney (2010-01-31). "How One Woman's Cells Changed Medicine". ABC World News. Retrieved 2012-08-19.
↑ Ivanković M, Cukusić A, Gotić I, Skrobot N, Matijasić M, Polancec D, Rubelj I (2007). "Telomerase activity in HeLa cervical carcinoma cell line proliferation". Biogerontology 8 (2): 163–72. doi:10.1007/s10522-006-9043-9. PMID 16955216
↑ Callaway, Ewen (7 August 2013). "NIH director explains HeLa agreement". Nature. doi:10.1038/nature.2013.13521
↑ Pannelli, J. Moore v. Regents of University of California Majority Decision. Supreme Court of California, 51 Cal.3d 120
↑ Corinthians, First Epistle to the, "The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia", Ed. James Orr, 1915
↑ Locke, John. Two Treatises of Government. Ed. Peter Laslett. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (1988), 137
↑ a b Batts DW (2010-05-10). "Cancer cells killed Henrietta Lacks – then made her immortal". The Virginian-Pilot. pp. 1, 12–14
↑ WHO. (2014, March 1). Poliomyelitis Fact Sheet. Retrieved , from http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs114/en/
Type:InsectsFamily:Several familiesOrder: HemipteraMetamorphosis:IncompleteDamaging stages:All stagesVulnerable stages:"Crawlers" (early-instar nymphs)
The scale insects are small insects of the order Hemiptera, generally classified as the superfamily Coccoidea.  There are over 7,000 species of scale insects, all of which are parasites of plants, feeding on sap drawn directly from the plant's vascular system.
Scale insects vary dramatically in their appearance from very small organisms (1-2 mm) that occur under wax covers (some look like oyster shells), to shiny pearl-like objects (about 5 mm), to creatures covered with mealy wax. Adult female scales are immobile and permanently attached to the plant they have parasitized.  They secrete a waxy coating for defense; this coating causes them to resemble reptilian scales, hence the name.
Scale insects feed on a wide variety of plants, and many scale species are considered pests.  Some types are economically valuable, such as the cochineal and lac scales.  Scale insects' waxy covering makes them quite resistant to pesticides, which are only effective against the juvenile crawler stage.  However, scale can be controlled with horticultural oil, which suffocates them, or through biological controls.  Soapy water is also reported to be effective against infestations on houseplants. Female scale insects, unusually for Hemiptera, retain their larval form at sexual maturity (neoteny).  Adult males have wings but never feed and die within a day or two.  The specifics of their reproductive systems vary considerably within the group, including hermaphroditism and seven forms of parthenogenesis.
Scales feed on a very wide variety of plants, though most of the particular species have fairly narrow host ranges. If the particular scale can be identified, part of the control strategy is to inspect the area for other host plants, since the scale insects do not travel very far.
Physical removal: Some scales can be blasted off with water (all are susceptible to this in the crawler stage). Early infestations of the larger scales can be controlled by simply removing the individual scales by hand.
Pesticides: Imidicloprid is often used through injection to control scales.
Organic pesticides: Horticultural oil, insecticidal soaps, and neem oil are effective if applied directly to the insect bodies.
Timing: Scales are easiest to control in the crawler stage.
Cottony Cushion Scale: the pest that launched a pest control revolution  with photos
Two of the advanced plug-ins for Adobe Acrobat Reader are.
These plugins used Adobe Acrobat allow you to make amendments to the PDF. These are more beneficial for Printing. For example. Suppose a graphic designer designed a flyer size 8.5 x 11 in Quark Express and the graphic designer is sending the file on behalf of the customer to get 2000 flyers printed. Suppose the printshop does not have the expensive quark express. If he makes a PDF and sends it to the printer then the printer has to print it single up on a sheet of 8.5 x 11. However it is cost beneficial if the 8.5x 11 flyer is printed 2 up on an 11 x 17 sheet. The Pdf designed 1 up on a sheet will not work and it has to duplicated on the file on a larger sheet. Adobe acrobat does not allow you the option of doing so but The quite imposing plug in for Acrobat Does. You can hit the step and repeat option and duplicate the page on a sheet. This plug in has been extremely effective for printing complex designs with links, exclusive fonts, bleeds, etc.
Another benefit of this plug-in is booklet making. Booklet Making is a much more complex idea then most designers perceive. I understand this as I have done it manually as well. Quite imposing allows you to make a booklet out of single facing pages into a saddle stitched booklet or a perfect bound booklet. This feature saves time, money, and a lot of hassle.
Pit Stop on the other hand allows you to change the information. It is intriguing how file designed in a software that you don't have can be manipulated in the PDF document. You can change features such as colour modes from CMYK to RGB, colour hues, saturation, editing text, etc.
These plug-ins enhance the usage of PDF documents predominately benefiting the Printing and Publishing Industry in Information Technology.
The oldest theatrical area is at the Minoan Palaces at Phaistos. It consisted of stone risers for a standing audience of about 500. It also had a rectangular performing surface. Originally, the patrons of the Theatre of Dionysus had to stand to watch the performance. Around 489 B.C.E., temporary wooden seats were introduced. Permanent stone seats were not completed until  some time around 330 B.C.E..
Typical audiences ranged for 17,000 to 21,000 and could seat upwards of 30,000 during festival times in what was called the Theatron. Known as 'the seeing place', it was usually built into the natural slope of a  hilly terrain that sloped down into a flt bottomed area that was in or near a city. This shape was known as the Koilon which was a word for the actual flow of the whole of the theatre.  The Koilon was split into what were called Diazoma, the upper and the lower, which were the wide horizontal walkways between the upper and lower areas of seating. The theatron was broken up into Kilmakes, the stairways of the theatron, and the Kerkis, the wedge shaped pieces of seating.
-The greek stage and all of it's parts.
The actual area for performance was split up into several different sections as well. The Orchestra, the Thymele, the Skene, and the Paradoi. The orchestra was known as 'the dancing place' and was a flat circular space at the bottom of the koilon. n the Theatre of Dionysus, the orchestra was created first, and was thought to be rectangular until it was rounded out in the forth century (which means that it was rectangular during the era in which the surviving Greek plays were written and performed). It was the area of the stage where the chorus was located and stayed. The chorus leader would stand upon the Thymele, an altar to Dionysus.
Yet a different view of the Greek Stage.
As drama developed into a major form and developments had to be made to just basic flat areas of stage, the Skene, which was roughly translated to "Tent", was at first (Around the fifth century) made up of wooden poles with a canvas roof that became stone in the fourth century. Started small and became grander as plays became grander. Also served as storage. It served as the back wall of the stage and had doors and sets within it as well as served as storage for the performance. Later on in time the name changes later to Scaenae which comes closer to our current 'scenes' and 'scenery'. It evolved in later time to a wooden structure with a flat roof with a stone core for onstage changing of costumes and masks while the chorus would sing. The Paradoi were one or two (Usually two) entrances for actors between the skene and the seats and is where the chorus entered. Located on either side of the Skene, they served as entrances and exits for the actors. Usually two gangplanks off either side of the orchestra that the chorus or actors would used for entrances. In addition to the Skene, the Paraskenion were side additions to the Skene in one of two story wings that could be ornamented with pillars or support a frieze. At some point in the theatre's development, the Logeion Proskenion was added as well. The name refers to "something set up before the skene" and was a raised platform in front of the skene.
An interesting addition that came along with the advent of Greek theatre are the Charonian steps. They were used as entrances into the action from the 'underworld' or ghostly apparitions of the departed.
Several devices were used as set pieces to forward the action in Greek theatre. The Machina, Ekkyklema, and the Periaktoi. A crane, the Machina,  was used to lift the actors and sometimes certain props, such as a Pegasus, into the air. It was used to represent the gods or heroic characters or in comedy to make fun of such situations. TheEkkyklema was a roll out platform that was used for tableaus. It was most often used to display the dead bodies of actions that took place off stage and was rolled out from a center door in the skene. Finally, the Periaktoi were triangle pieces of scenery that allowed scene changes. Each side was a different piece of the scenery and could be turned in order to make a new backdrop with either side of all of the pieces.
The Deus Ex Machina was the term for the overuse of the Machina which was usually used to 'clean up' plots or contrived endings, usually by Euripides. The Gods would simply come down and solve the problems and then disappear again.
6 Resistance to change and the Technology Coordinator’s roles as a Change Agent and a Leader:
Why is effective change management important in schools that wish to integrate distance learning into their curriculums?  Because given the many significant benefits offered by distance learning, distance learning programs are still not as widely adopted these days as they should be, nor have this technology been used to its full potential.  Distance Learning programs have been greeted with resistance from K-12 schools, universities, and the professional community because the distance learning model is being viewed by most as a change to the traditional teaching methods.  In order for distance learning to become successful initiatives in K-12 schools, the technology coordinator needs to understand the various aspects of change management as well as exercising strong leadership.
Based on Sociological observations, the acceptance of change depends on several factors:
The extent to which it is consistent with existing ideas and social patterns
The balance between the benefits and costs of change, including a generalized fear of the unknown
The strength of resistance by those with a vested interest in the status quo
The paper will focus on the 2nd and the 4th factors by analyzing the benefits and disadvantages of distance learning as well as presenting ways where the technology coordinator can assume leadership as a change agent.
Distance learning is defined per Wikipedia as:
“A field of education that focuses on the pedagogy and andragogy, technology, and instructional systems design that aim to deliver education to students who are not physically ‘on site’. Rather than attending courses in person, teachers and students may communicate at times of their own choosing by exchanging printed or electronic media, or through technology that allows them to communicate in real time and through other online ways.”
Distance learning has become an increasingly popular educational tool in the last few years.  Because distance learning can break down the barriers of time and distance, student learning can take anytime and anywhere in the world.
Online degree and certificate programs at universities have especially received much media attention.  Based on an article published on the Wall Street Journal in May 2006, “while overall higher-education enrollment in the U.S. is virtually stagnant, online enrollment is skyrocketing”.
Although distance education in K-12 schools has not received as much media attention, distance learning can and should become integrated into the K-12 curriculum given its advantages (some of which will be explored in later sections of the paper).  In addition, as one function of the K-12 schools is to prepare the students for the challenges later on in college and the professional world, by learning how to study in distance education classes, students can have the opportunity to obtain the hands-on experience with technology tools such as emails, discussion boards, video lectures (synchronous and asynchronous), WebTV, YouTube, Wiki, podcasting, etc.
The distance learning model, like other technological innovations can be greeted with enthusiasm or resistance from teachers, students, schools, and the community.  While some will welcome a new and effective learning method, others will view distance learning with fear and anxiety.
Managing change is not easy.  Managing change in the teaching and learning environment presents additional challenges when the technology coordinator must effectively manage the relationships with the principal, teachers, students, parents, and the community.  Throughout the implementation of the distance learning model in K-12 schools, the technology coordinator has the unique position to become the technological leader for the school.  In addition, the technology coordinator can transform his/her role if he/she can understand the human aspects of change.  Instead of being a support staff who follows the strategic directions set by the principal, the technology coordinator can exercise significant leadership.
Change can be better accepted if the technology coordinator can show that the distance learning teaching mode meets the needs of students and teachers.  Change can also be better accepted if the technology coordinator can effectively articulate the benefits of distance learning to the principals, students, and teachers as well as demonstrating that they can all manage the shortcomings of distance learning.
As an effective change agent, the technology coordinator should be able to clearly articulate the benefits of distance learning to the school board, the teachers, the students, the parents, and the community.
Advantage #1: Flexibility, Distance learning can take place anywhere and anytime
Distance Learning technologies have broken the down the barrier of time and space.  With new technologies, learning can take place any time and anywhere in the world.  Students in K-12 schools and adult learners can undertake learning at their own pace and convenience.
Advantage #2 Additional teaching and learning formats
Distance Learning can create more varied teaching formats.  In Foreign Language and Culture classes, the technology coordinator can arrange and set up chat rooms with students in a foreign country.  The technology coordinator can also arrange and set up video conferencing features where the US students can chat with people at a foreign country using that foreign language in order to practice that language and learn more about the culture.  By using tools such as YouTube, Skype, and chat rooms, the teachers can increase student enthusiasm and interest for the courses.
Advantage #3 Cost Savings for the School
Although cost saving should not be regarded as the number one reason for the implementation of distance learning courses, there are significant long term cost saving opportunities.  With distance learning tools, the school can increase the number of students attending a class per a teacher.
Advantage #4 Access to additional Courses from other Schools
Distance learning brings new access to new information; courses that could not be offered previously now can be accessed.  For example, a class taught in a middle school by a famous instructor in New York City can now be accessed by students from suburban schools in the US or even students from other countries.  Participation from students around the country or around the globe can also increase dialogue between the students.
Advantage #5 Familiarizing students with the Distance Learning technologies in preparation for college Distance Learning courses and lifelong learning when entering the workforce.
Online courses and e-Universities have met the many needs of adult learners and have therefore grown in number and capacity.  Many professionals understand the importance of lifelong learning and are actively pursuing continuing education through various means.  Because a large portion of the professional lifelong learning are taking place through distance learning courses, it is advantageous for K-12 students to become familiar with the many distance learning technology tools in preparation for college and the workforce.  As good habits should be formed at a young age, distance learning courses can be implemented in as early as elementary school.
Advantage #6 Giving students the opportunity to practice discipline.
In contrast to the traditional courses taught by an instructor in a classroom, distance learning classes, especially asynchronous courses, require the students to have more discipline in order to succeed in the class.  In the absence of a physical classroom and instructor, the distance learning courses require the students to exercise more self-discipline in order to keep up with the classroom readings and assignments.
Advantage #7 Teaching students to take initiatives for their learning.
Once a K-12 student reaches adulthood and becomes a professional, no one will force them to take classes, yet each professional must take responsibility for his/her own learning.  It is essential for professionals to engage in lifelong learning in order to stay competitive in the job market.  For example, a professional with a college degree in Information Technology might be asked by the company president to be in charge of the IT department budget.  Instead of stating that he does not have any Accounting knowledge, this professional can impress the company if he would take the initiative to enroll in continuing education courses in Accounting.  In contrast to traditional classroom courses where knowledge is passed from the instructor to the students, Distance learning courses require the students to take more initiatives for their learning as the students are often required to conduct individual research to complete assignments and contribute to class discussions.  When students enter the professional world, there will be many subjects that will be unfamiliar to them, by knowing how to take initiatives for their learning, distance learning courses can prepare the students to become proactive professionals.
Limitations of Distance Learning and Ways to Manage Them:
The technology coordinator should understand some of the limitations to distance learning as well as ways to minimize and manage these limitations.
Limitation #1: Learners might feel isolated
One of the limitations of distance learning is that the face to face interaction is lost in a distance learning class; this causes the learners to feel isolated during the learning process.  To manage this limitation, the technology coordinator should train the teachers to set up chat rooms, ask the students to post web pages with their pictures to be viewed by classmates, and set up opportunities for students to chat in synchronous format via software such as adobe connect.  Teachers can also set up face to face meetings with the students during the course.  Another way the technology coordinator can manage this shortcoming is to emphasize the fact that distance learning courses often offer the students more opportunities for interactions than in a traditional classroom.  In contrast to a traditional lecture-format classroom where student participation can be limited to those students with extrovert personalities, distance learning courses offer the opportunities for even the shyest students to participate via written formats.  When students are required to participate via the written format, they would often spend more time to organize their thoughts before making their comments, thus increasing the quality of the contributions.
Limitation #2: It is more difficult for learners to raise questions
Another limitation of distance learning is that it is harder for students to ask questions in a distance learning class.  In contrast to a traditional classroom where a student simply needs to raise his/her hand to ask a question, it is harder for students to ask questions to clarify their confusions in a distance learning class.  Therefore, the technology coordinator should inform the teachers of this limitation and encourage the teachers to spend extra efforts to make the instructions as detailed as possible to avoid confusion, the technology coordinator can also encourage the teachers to be responsive to questions from students.
Resistance to change and the Technology Coordinator’s roles as a Change Agent and a Leader:
Fear and anxiety are natural emotions to have when people encounter change.  As an effort to maintain the status quo, many people will adopt a resistance attitude as a defense mechanism.  During the Industrial Revolution, workers in factories have been known to destroy new plant machines because they understood that the introduction of automation would replace manual labor.  The technology coordinator should understand that some of the emotional resistance to distance learning are well-founded and work with the school leadership to manage and provide solutions to these negative emotions.
It is natural for teachers to fear that they might lose the respect of their students as many children today are technology savvy and spend considerable time with computers.  Equipping teachers with knowledge on distance learning technologies through IT training sessions is one of the most effective ways to decrease the anxiety.
With the fast pace of technology innovations, teachers are not the only ones who are frustrated with the constant learning that has to take place in order to stay on top of these innovations.  Many users of technology might become frustrated when they have spent significant time to master a new technology innovation, only to find that their learning has quickly become obsolete in a few months.  To address this frustration, the technology coordinator should exercise technology leadership by providing frequent training sessions to teachers and school staff on the most current distance learning innovations.
A frustrating aspect for teachers who utilizes distance learning or other types of technologies is that technology is prone to bugs and breakdowns.  The technology coordinator should expect the technical difficulties and be understanding to users who become frustrated.  To ease these fears, the technology coordinator should hold frequent “open-door” office hours to support the teachers and make efforts to be responsive to user inquiries.
In order for a technology such as distance learning to be successfully implemented and accepted by the academic community, the technology coordinator should not only assume the role of a technology leaders, but more importantly, he should provide leadership as a change agent in order to change the school culture.  The technology coordinator can present a case to the principal on how the isolation of teacher can contribute to the fear of change, and how the establishment of a teacher support group can allow the teachers to share IT knowledge and communicate with each other.  The technology coordinator can also bring in outside Change Consultants to provide coaching and change awareness sessions to the teachers as a part of the teacher support program.  In addition, the technology coordinator can also petition the principal to support the teachers to enroll in distance learning courses in technology at universities such as the Teachers College at Columbia University.  By becoming students in distance learning courses, the teachers can experience the technology first hand and thus become more comfortable teaching with these technologies.
Adopting distance learning in K-12 schools can be a rewarding yet challenging task.  A technology coordinator thus has the opportunity to exercise significant leadership in the technology and change management areas.  In order to assume effective leadership, the technology coordinator should not only be familiar with the advantages and limitations to distance learning, but he should also lead the change process with confidence and compassion to the teachers.  To influence the teachers, the technology coordinator must first understand the teachers as well as their fears and frustrations.
With the many advantages offered by distance learning technologies, this form of teaching and learning will soon become embedded in our education systems.  Students will choose to learn in technology rich classrooms instead of traditional classrooms where the lessons were taught in lectures using blackboards.  As Charles Darwin once said, “It is not the strongest of the species that survives, nor the most intelligent, but the one most responsive to change.”
Hess B., Markson E., & Stein P. (1996) Sociology. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon
“Wall Street Journal”.  9 May 2006.  Online University Enrollment Soars.  Retrieved November 15th, 2008 from
<http://institutionalperformance.typepad.com/institutional_performance/2006/05/growth_in_onlin.html>
“Wikipedia”.  29 October 2008.  Distance Education.  Retrieved November 15th, 2008 from
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Distance_learning>
St. Charles Place
4×dice if 1 owned, 10×dice if both owned
St. James Place
4×dice if 1 owned, 10×dice if both owned
DataNucleus AccessPlatform is a Java persistence solution, supporting JDO and JPA specifications, providing much more than a simple ORM provides.
The goal of DataNucleus is to provide support for persistence of Java objects using JDO or JPA APIs to a range of datastores. These currently include RDBMS, ODBMS, XML, ODF, Excel, LDAP, JSON, Google BigTable, Amazon S3, HBase, Cassandra and Neo4j. This range of possible datastores is by far the widest available with any JPA implementation, and in addition allows use of JDO metadata and persistence using JPA's API if required, or indeed use of JPA metadata and persistence using JDO's API, again more flexible than available with any other JPA implementation.
To view further details about current capabilities of AccessPlatform, please visit the DataNucleus AccessPlatform website.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Donald Trump has said he will "terminate" the deal between the US and Cuba if the Cuban government does not improve the deal on offer.
1.3.1 #define and #undef
1.5.2 #ifdef and #ifndef
1.6.1 #error and #warning
The preprocessor is either a separate program invoked by the compiler or part of the compiler itself. It performs intermediate operations that modify the original source code and internal compiler options before the compiler tries to compile the resulting source code.
The instructions that the preprocessor parses are called directives and come in two forms: preprocessor and compiler directives. Preprocessor directives direct the preprocessor on how it should process the source code, and compiler directives direct the compiler on how it should modify internal compiler options. Directives are used to make writing source code easier (by making it more portable, for instance) and to make the source code more understandable. They are also the only valid way to make use of facilities (classes, functions, templates, etc.) provided by the C++ Standard Library.
Check the documentation of your compiler/preprocessor for information on how it implements the preprocessing phase and for any additional features not covered by the standard that may be available. For in depth information on the subject of parsing, you can read "Compiler Construction" (http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Compiler_Construction)
All directives start with '#' at the beginning of a line. The standard directives are:
Inclusion of Header Files (#include)
The #include directive allows a programmer to include contents of one file inside another file. This is commonly used to separate information needed by more than one part of a program into its own file so that it can be included again and again without having to re-type all the source code into each file.
C++ generally requires you to declare what will be used before using it. So, files called headers usually include declarations of what will be used in order for the compiler to successfully compile source code. This is further explained in the File Organization Section of the book. The standard library (the repository of code that is available with every standards-compliant C++ compiler) and 3rd party libraries make use of headers in order to allow the inclusion of the needed declarations in your source code, allowing you to make use of features or resources that are not part of the language itself.
The first lines in any source file should usually look something like this:
The above lines cause the contents of the files iostream and other.h to be included for use in your program. Usually this is implemented by just inserting into your program the contents of iostream and other.h. When angle brackets (<>) are used in the directive, the preprocessor is instructed to search for the specified file in a compiler-dependent location. When double quotation marks (" ") are used, the preprocessor is expected to search in some additional, usually user-defined, locations for the header file and to fall back to the standard include paths only if it is not found in those additional locations. Commonly when this form is used, the preprocessor will also search in the same directory as the file containing the #include directive.
The iostream header contains various declarations for input/output (I/O) using an abstraction of I/O mechanisms called streams. For example, there is an output stream object called std::cout (where "cout" is short for "console output") which is used to output text to the standard output, which usually displays the text on the computer screen.
When including standard libraries, compilers are allowed to make an exception as to whether a header file by a given name actually exists as a physical file or is simply a logical entity that causes the preprocessor to modify the source code, with the same end result as if the entity existed as a physical file. Check the documentation of your preprocessor/compiler for any vendor-specific implementation of the #include directive and for specific search locations of standard and user-defined headers. This can lead to portability problems and confusion.
A list of standard C++ header files is listed below:
↑ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v In C++11 only
Everything inside C++'s standard library is kept in the std:: namespace.
Old compilers may include headers with a .h suffix (e.g. the non-standard <iostream.h> vs. the standard <iostream>) instead of the standard headers. These names were common before the standardization of C++ and some compilers still include these headers for backwards compatibility. Rather than using the std:: namespace, these older headers pollute the global namespace and may otherwise only implement the standard in a limited way.
Some vendors use the SGI STL headers. This was the first implementation of the standard template library.
Non-standard but somewhat common C++ libraries
↑ Streams based on FILE* from stdio.h.
↑ Precursor to iostream. Old stream library mostly included for backwards compatibility even with old compilers.
↑ Uses char* whereas sstream uses string. Prefer the standard library sstream.
Before standardization of the headers, they were presented as separated files, like <iostream.h> and so on. This is probably still a requirement on very old (non-standards-compliant) compilers, but newer compilers will accept both methods. There is also no requirement in the standard that headers should exist in a file form. The old method of referring to standard libraries as separate files is obsolete.
The pragma (pragmatic information) directive is part of the standard, but the meaning of any pragma directive depends on the software implementation of the standard that is used.
Pragma directives are used within the source program.
You should check the software implementation of the C++ standard you intend to use for a list of the supported tokens.
For example, one of the most widely used preprocessor pragma directives, #pragma once, when placed at the beginning of a header file, indicates that the file where it resides will be skipped if included several times by the preprocessor.
Another method exists, commonly referred to as include guards, that provides this same functionality but uses other include directives.
In the GCC documentation, #pragma once has been described as an obsolete preprocessor directive.
The C++ preprocessor includes facilities for defining "macros", which roughly means the ability to replace a use of a named macro with one or more tokens.  This has various uses from defining simple constants (though const is more often used for this in C++), conditional compilation, code generation and more -- macros are a powerful facility, but if used carelessly can also lead to code that is hard to read and harder to debug!
Macros do not depend only on the C++ Standard or your actions. They may exist due to the use of external frameworks, libraries or even due the compiler you are using and the specific OS.  We will not cover that information on this book but you may find more information in the Pre-defined C/C++ Compiler Macros page at ( http://predef.sourceforge.net/ ) the project maintains a complete list of macros that are compiler and OS agnostic.
The #define directive is used to define values or macros that are used by the preprocessor to manipulate the program source code before it is compiled:
The #undef directive deletes a current macro definition:
It is an error to use #define to change the definition of a macro, but it is not an error to use #undef to try to undefine a macro name that is not currently defined.  Therefore, if you need to override a previous macro definition, first #undef it, and then use #define to set the new definition.
Because preprocessor definitions are substituted before the compiler acts on the source code, any errors that are introduced by #define are difficult to trace. For example using value or macro names that are the same as some existing identifier can create subtle errors, since the preprocessor will substitute the identifier names in the source code.
Today, for this reason, #define is primarily used to handle compiler and platform differences. E.g, a define might hold a constant which is the appropriate error code for a system call. The use of #define should thus be limited unless absolutely necessary; typedef statements, constant variables, enums, templates and inline functions can often accomplish the same goal more efficiently and safely.
By convention, values defined using #define are named in uppercase with "_" separators, this makes it clear to readers that the values is not alterable and in the case of macros, that the construct requires care. Although doing so is not a requirement, it is considered very bad practice to do otherwise. This allows the values to be easily identified when reading the source code.
Try to use const and inline instead of #define.
If for some reason it is needed to break a given statement into more than one line, use the \ (backslash) symbol to "escape" the line ends.  For example,
In some (fairly rare) cases macros can be more readable when split across multiple lines.  Good modern C++ code will use macros only sparingly, so the need for multi-line macro definitions will not arise often.
It is certainly possible to overuse this feature.  It is quite legal but entirely indefensible, for example, to write
That is an abuse of the feature though: while an escaped newline can appear in the middle of a token, there should never be any reason to use it there.  Do not try to write code that looks like it belongs in the International Obfuscated C Code Competition.
Warning: there is one occasional "gotcha" with using escaped newlines: if there are any invisible characters after the backslash, the lines will not be joined, and there will almost certainly be an error message produced later on, though it might not be at all obvious what caused it.
Another feature of the #define command is that it can take arguments, making it rather useful as a pseudo-function creator. Consider the following code:
It is generally a good idea to use extra parentheses for macro parameters, it avoids the parameters from being parsed in a unintended ways. But there are some exceptions to consider:
Since comma operator have lower precedence than any other, this removes the possibility of problems, no need for the extra parentheses.
When concatenating tokens with the ## operator, converting  to strings using the # operator, or concatenating adjacent string literals, parameters cannot be individually parenthesized.
Notice that in the above example, the variable "x" is always within its own set of parentheses. This way, it will be evaluated in whole, before being compared to 0 or multiplied by -1. Also, the entire macro is surrounded by parentheses, to prevent it from being contaminated by other code. If you're not careful, you run the risk of having the compiler misinterpret your code.
Macros replace each occurrence of the macro parameter used in the text with the literal contents of the macro parameter without any validation checking. Badly written macros can result in code which will not compile or creates hard to discover bugs. Because of side-effects it is considered a very bad idea to use macro functions as described above. However, as with any rule, there may be cases where macros are the most efficient means to accomplish a particular goal.
If ABSOLUTE_VALUE() was a real function 'z' would now have the value of '-9', but because it was an argument in a macro z++ was expanded 3 times (in this case) and thus (in this situation) executed twice, setting z to -8, and y to 9.  In similar cases it is very easy to write code which has "undefined behavior", meaning that what it does is completely unpredictable in the eyes of the C++ Standard.
With the GCC compiler extension called "statement expression" (not standard C++), it is allowed to use statements in an expression, please consult the compiler manual for other considerations, it becomes then possible to only evaluate it once:
Using inlined templated functions may then be an alternative to macros, removing the problem of side effects inside the argument to the macro.
It is generally good idea to stay away from compiler specific extensions, unless the dependency is planed for.
A variadic macro is a feature of the preprocessor whereby a macro is declared to accept a varying number of arguments (similar to a variadic function).
They are currently not part of the C++ programming language, though many recent C++ implementations support variable-argument macros as an extension (ie: GCC, MS Visual Studio C++), and it is expected that variadic macros may be added to C++ at a later date.
Variable-argument macros were introduced in the ISO/IEC 9899:1999 (C99) revision of the C Programming Language standard in 1999.
The # and ## operators are used with the #define macro. Using # causes the first argument after the # to be returned as a string in quotes. For example:
Observe the leading and trailing whitespace from the argument to # is removed, and consecutive sequences of whitespace between tokens are converted to single spaces.
Using ## concatenates what's before the ## with what's after it; the result must be a well-formed preprocessing token. For example:
...
String literals cannot be concatenated using ##, but the good news is that this is not a problem: just writing two adjacent string literals is enough to make the preprocessor concatenate them.
To illustrate the dangers of macros, consider this naive macro
Take a look at this and consider what the value after execution might be.  The statements are turned into
Thus, after execution i=8 and j=3 instead of the expected result of i=j=8! This is why you were cautioned to use an extra set of parenthesis above, but even with these, the road is fraught with dangers. The alert reader might quickly realize that if a,b contains expressions, the definition must parenthesize every use of a,b in the macro definition, like this:
This works, provided a,b have no side effects. Indeed,
So what is the correct solution? The solution is not to use macro at all. A global, inline function, like this
Indeed, this is (a variation of) the definition used in STL library for std::max(). This library is included with all conforming C++ compilers, so the ideal solution would be to use this.
Another danger on working with macro is that they are excluded form type checking.
In the case of the MAX macro, if used with a string type variable, it will not generate a compilation error.
It is then preferable to use an inline function, which will be type checked. Permitting the compiler to generate a meaningful error message if the inline function is used as stated above.
One minor function of the preprocessor is in joining strings together, "string literal concatenation" -- turning code like
Apart from obscure uses, this is most often useful when writing long messages, as a normal C++ string literal is not allowed to span multiple lines in your source code (i.e., to contain a newline character inside it). The exception to this is the C++11 raw string literal, which can contain newlines, but does not interpret any escape characters. Using string literal concatenation also helps to keep program lines down to a reasonable length; we can write
"onto a single line very nicely -- but with string literal "
"concatenation, we can split it across multiple lines and "
"the preprocessor will glue the pieces together");
Note that this joining happens before compilation; the compiler sees only one string literal here, and there's no work done at runtime, i.e., your program will not run any slower at all because of this joining together of strings.
Concatenation also applies to wide string literals (which are prefixed by an L):
L"this " L"and " L"that"
L"this and that".
For completeness, note that C99 has different rules for this than C++98, and that C++0x seems almost certain to match C99's more tolerant rules, which allow joining of a narrow string literal to a wide string literal, something which was not valid in C++98.
Conditional compilation is useful for two main purposes:
To allow certain functionality to be enabled/disabled when compiling a program
To allow functionality to be implemented in different ways, such as when compiling on different platforms
It is also used sometimes to temporarily "comment-out" code, though using a version control system is often a more effective way to do so.
...
The #if directive allows compile-time conditional checking of preprocessor values such as created with #define. If
The expression used after #if can include boolean and integral constants and arithmetic operations as well as macro names.  The allowable expressions are a subset of the full range of C++ expressions (with one exception), but are sufficient for many purposes.  The one extra operator available to #if is the defined operator, which can be used to test whether a macro of a given name is currently defined.
The #ifdef and #ifndef directives are short forms of '#if defined(defined-value)' and '#if
!defined(defined-value)' respectively. defined(identifier) is valid in any expression evaluated by the preprocessor, and returns true (in this context, equivalent to 1) if a preprocessor variable by the name
(Possibly the most common use of #ifndef is in creating "include guards" for header files, to ensure that the header files can safely be included multiple times.  This is explained in the section on header files.)
The #endif directive ends #if, #ifdef, #ifndef, #elif and #else directives.
This can be used for example to provide multiple platform support or to have one common source file set for different program versions. Another example of use is using this instead of the (non-standard) #pragma once.
When we compile foo.cpp, only one copy of foo.hpp will be included due to the use of include guard. When the preprocessor reads the line #include "foo.hpp", the content of foo.hpp will be expanded. Since this is the first time which foo.hpp is read (and assuming that there is no existing declaration of macro FOO_HPP) FOO_HPP will not yet be declared, and so the code will be included normally. When the preprocessor read the line #include "bar.hpp" in foo.cpp, the content of bar.hpp will be expanded as usual, and the file foo.h will be expanded again. Owing to the previous declaration of FOO_HPP, no code in foo.hpp will be inserted. Therefore, this can achieve our goal - avoiding the content of the file being included more than one time.
The #error directive causes the compiler to stop and spit out the line number and a message given when it is encountered. The #warning directive causes the compiler to spit out a warning with the line number and a message given when it is encountered. These directives are mostly used for debugging.
Source file names and line numbering macros
The current filename and line number where the preprocessing is being performed can be retrieved using the predefined macros __FILE__ and __LINE__. Line numbers are measured before any escaped newlines are removed.  The current values of __FILE__ and __LINE__ can be overridden using the #line directive; it is very rarely appropriate to do this in hand-written code, but can be useful for code generators which create C++ code base on other input files, so that (for example) error messages will refer back to the original input files rather than to the generated C++ code.
Moves: 1.d4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5 3. Bg5
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation
1.d4 Nf6 2.Nc3 d5 3.Bg5
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
This Chess related article is a Wikibooks:Chess stub.  Please assist Wikibooks by expanding it.
You could be asked to add an "r." function to reset the Plaintext and the Ciphertext variables.
This is the VB.net Solution
'If option 'r' is selected, an empty string will be assigned to both variables.
'Added to Sub 'DisplayMenu':
Console.WriteLine("  r.  reset the plaintext & ciphertext")
There is unnecessary code in the EveryNthCharacterSteganography function and GetTextFromFile. There is no need to pass the CurrentPosition twice from the EveryNthCharacterSteganography function. In the GetTextFromFile function this means the second loop is not required as it means the start and end position are the same thing.
Of course it could mean that you will be asked to add a variable in which the user will set how many characters should be grabbed
For Count := 1 To StartPosition-1
This is the Vb.Net solution:
Function GetTextFromFile(ByVal StartPosition As Integer) As String
FileOpen(1, "diary.txt", OpenMode.Binary)
For Count = 1 To StartPosition - 1
TextFromFile = TextFromFile & CharacterFromFile
Currently the menu option will not accept capital letters. Modify the code to allow this.
MenuChoice = Console.ReadLine
'The "Lcase" function converts the content of "MenuChoice" to the lower case
' add .ToLower to the console.readline statement
MenuChoice = Console.ReadLine.ToLower
Function GetMenuChoice : Char;
You may be asked to validate the users choice to make sure it is valid.
Dim AcceptedChoices As String = "abdeghjknq" ' Create a list of accepted choices
Dim MenuChoice As Char ' Create a variable to store the users input
Dim ValidChoice As Boolean ' Create a boolean to store whether the input is valid
Do ' Do loop <--- Will loop through at least once
MenuChoice = Console.ReadLine.ToLower ' Read the users input and store it in MenuChoice
ValidChoice = AcceptedChoices.Contains(MenuChoice) ' Check if the MenuChoice exists in the list of acceptable choices and save it as a boolean
If Not ValidChoice Then ' If the entered choice is not valid
Console.WriteLine("Invalid Choice") ' Tell the user the choice is invalid
Loop Until ValidChoice ' Keep looping until the entered choice is valid
GetMenuChoice = MenuChoice ' Return the users entered choice
Or, if you don't want to waste a load of time doing a pointless loop where the code needs to be changed every time if a new menu choice is added, look below:
However, the above choice is better because it constantly prompts the user to enter a new choice until a valid one is entered.
Using the example below means you will have to close the program and start it up again if you enter an invalid choice which is
Actually, you are wrong. The menu loops until;
Therefore it does actually work as the menu will just loop again. Actually try it!
Console.WriteLine("Choice is not valid")
Alternatively, using a set:
The Caesar Cipher Encryption does not work for keys lower than -26. Fix this. Nor of course for keys over +26
Function ApplyShiftToASCIICodeForCharacter(ByVal ASCIICode As Integer, ByVal AmountToShift As Integer) As Integer
'The following line uses modulo arithmetic to get the remainder of the input after it is divided by 26
'This is because at values above 26, it simply cycles back through the alphabet. F0r values below -26 it
'cycles back to the negative number ie (-28 Mod 26 = -2)
AmountToShift = AmountToShift Mod 26
If TypeOfCharacter = "Upper" Then
'add 26 to cancel effect of negative keys
If TypeOfCharacter = 'Upper'
If a Zero or negative value of N is used the program will get stuck in an infinite loop - preventing this by requiring a positive value to be entered is easy and quite possible they will ask.
Function GetValueForN : Integer;
Console.Write("Enter the value of n: ")
'The following Do loop repeats itself until the value for n is larger than 0
N = Console.ReadLine
Console.WriteLine("Please enter a number greater than 0 for N")
There are several other examples where the range of an integer input is not checked but ought to be: StartPosition should be positive, EndPosition should be greater than StartPosition, the Caesar key should be between 1 and 25. These could all be straightforward questions. Perhaps write a generic range-checking function?
This is the Pascal/Delphi solution. It is a general function that can be called anywhere you need to check a number. It returns 0 if the number is not valid. This means it returns 0 if it is not a number and 0 if it is the number 0. This is because 0 is invalid even it if is a number as all of the numbers required in the system should be greater than 0.
{try to see if the number is an integer. If it is and is above 0 assign it to
An alternate form uses the Val procedure to avoid creating an exception
{try to see if the number is an integer. If it is and is above 0 assign it to
{function that reads a number as a string, calls a function to check
Write('Enter the number of lines in the rail fence: ');
{check to make sure it is greater than 1 and less than or equal to the length of the
This is the VB.Net solution. It is a general function that can be called anywhere you need to check a number. It returns 0 if the number is not valid. This means it returns 0 if it is not a number and 0 if it is the number 0. This is because 0 is invalid even it if is a number as all of the numbers required in the system should be greater than 0.
Function checkValidNumber(ByVal numberToCheck As String) As Integer
Dim convertedNumber As Integer        'string number converted to an integer
'try to see if the number is an integer. If it is and is above 0 assign it to
If convertedNumber > 0 then
'if it is not set checkValidNumber to 0.
An alternate form uses the TryParse procedure to avoid creating an exception
Function checkValidNumber(ByVal numberToCheck As String) As Integer
Dim convertedNumber As Integer       'string number converted to an integer
'try to see if the number is an integer. If it is and is above 0 assign it to
If Integer.TryParse(NumberToCheck,convertednumber) then
Cannot see this being something the students need to do but if anyone is interested here is the code to crack diary.txt.
n:=GetSizeOfFile; // note wrote a function to do this.  If you just want to check it out try 9 which is the example given by exam board
The Caesar Cipher Key (N) could also be validated using a "Type check" (signed integer), a "Range check"(-25 to +25), and a "Presence check"
Console.Write("Enter the amount that shifts the plaintext alphabet to the ciphertext alphabet: ")
Try 'Trycatch will pick up TYPE and PRESSENCE checks
Key = Console.ReadLine
Console.WriteLine("Please enter a value between -25 and 25")
Console.WriteLine("Please enter a signed integer between -25 and 25")
This is the Pascal/Delphi solution.
Function GetKeyForCaesarCipher : Integer;
Key,interrorcode : Integer;
Write('Enter the amount that shifts the plaintext alphabet to the ciphertext alphabet: ');
WriteLn('Please enter a value between -25 and 25')
The current menu has some missing letters/options (c, f, i, l and m). Maybe they could ask the following ...
Add a new PLAINTEXT option (c) to read the plaintext from a text file. The user should choose the filename.
Console.WriteLine("What file do you want to get plaintext from?")
FileOpen(1, PlaintextName & ".txt", OpenMode.Binary)'This finds the file name which the user enters.
FileLength = FileLen(PlaintextName & ".txt") 'This gets the length of each file so the for loop knows where to end.
For Count = 1 To FileLength - 1' Counts from beginning to end of file
TextFromFile = TextFromFile & CharacterFromFile
'Add this to the DisplayMenu()
Console.WriteLine("  c.  Get plaintext from file")
'Add this to the Sub(Main)
Plaintext = GetPlaintextFromFile() 'This makes the subroutine's value equal to plaintext so other subroutines can access it.
Filename, resultstring : string;
Add a new CIPHERTEXT option (f) to read the ciphertext from a text file. The user should choose the filename.
Console.WriteLine("What file do you want to get ciphertext from?")
CiphertextName = Console.ReadLine() 'Asks for filename to search for
FileLength = FileLen("U:/" & CiphertextName & ".txt") 'This gets the length of each file so the for loop knows where to end.
FileOpen(1, "U:/" & CiphertextName & ".txt", OpenMode.Binary)'This finds the file name which the user enters.
For Count = 1 To FileLength - 1' Counts from beginning to end of file
TextFromFile = TextFromFile & CharacterFromFile
'Add this line into the appropriate part in DisplayMenu()
Console.WriteLine("  f.  Get ciphertext from file")
'Add this line into the appropriate part of Main()
Add a new ENCRYPT option (i) to write the ciphertext to a text file. The user should choose the filename.
Console.WriteLine("What name do you want to give the file?")
FileName = "U:\" & Console.ReadLine() & ".txt" 'Writes a file into the directory
FileOpen(1, FileName, OpenMode.Binary) 'The FileOpen function writes an empty text based file (due to ".txt" being defined before) if no file is found.
FilePut(1, Ciphertext) 'Puts the Ciphertext stored into the file location.
'Add this to the appropriate part in DisplayMenu()
Console.WriteLine("  i.  Save ciphertext as file")
'Add this to the appropriate part to the Main()
Add a new DECRYPT option (l) to write the plaintext to a text file. The user should choose the filename.
Console.WriteLine("What name do you want to give the file?")
FileName = "U:\" & Console.ReadLine() & ".txt" 'Writes a file into the directory
FileOpen(1, FileName, OpenMode.Binary)'The FileOpen function writes an empty text based file (due to ".txt" being defined before) if no file is found
FilePut(1, Plaintext) 'Puts the Plaintext stored into the file location.
'Add this to the appropriate part in DisplayMenu()
Console.WriteLine("  l.  Save plaintext as file")
'Add this to the appropriate part in Main()
Option (m). What could this be used for?
Possibly add a new cipher altogether; some of the letters may also have been omitted for the purpose of confusing students.(e.g. vignere – but this requires a lot of work to set up).
Maybe the option to multiple encrypt for added security . I.e. encrypt the encrypted text or combining different algorithms?
'The following series of functions requires little modification and can be used to apply multiple levels of encryption for
'This is the equivalent decryption code
You can improve the caesar algorithm by randomizing the transposition (instead of it jumping by the same amount. If you ‘randomize(encryption_key)’ before generating random values both sender and receiver will get the same series of random transpositions)
Add a new section to the menu called 'CRACK' with the options to crack either the 'ceaser' or 'rail fence'. Get some encrypted text from a fellow student and see (without knowing the encryption key) what the message is. In the case of the ceaser cipher you need to try 52 different keys (-26 to 26). In the case of the rail fence you need to try each value up to the number of characters in the cyphertext string. Make sure you utilise the existing decryption functions!
Case "p" 'Code to Crack Railfence
Console.WriteLine("Please enter a code to crack.")
Ciphertext = Console.ReadLine
For x = 1 To SizeOfRailFence
Console.WriteLine("Try number " & x & ".")
To edit the code to crack the ceaser cipher: (By Quoc-Hau Pham. Student of CTKSFC Lewisham)
For AmountToShift = 1 To 26
Or you can do a function to crack the ceaser cipher.:
For AmountToShift = -1 To -26 Step -1 ' all of the possible combinations
DecipheredText = UseCaesarCipher(Ciphertext, AmountToShift) 'uses the function they gave us hue hue hue
Console.WriteLine("The key attempted is: " & AmountToShift) ' informs the user what the key is
End Function ' by Woj & Kiran
'Add the following code to the case statement in the Main() Subroutine:
'Add the follwing code to the DisplayMenu Subroutine:
Console.WriteLine("  c.  Crack Caesar's cipher")
'p' is the case I used for the menu, which can be changed. Just enter an encoded rail fence and it'll run all the possible rail numbers. Remember to add the option in your menu so a user can use it.
NOTE: There is currently a bug where the program has trouble working with codes that haven't been encryted in the same session. I'm working on a fix. If you fix it yourself, feel free to overwrite this. Fixed - it was decrypting the cyphertext variable whist assigning user input into plaintext
You can give a negative starting position and it returns the first character of the file repeatedly
Function EveryNthCharacterSteganography(ByVal StartPosition As Integer, ByVal EndPosition As Integer, ByVal N As Integer) As String
'If less then 0 assign 0 so that we ignore negative start positions
If StartPosition < 0 Then
CurrentPosition = CurrentPosition + N
For the Caesar Cipher, the Rail Fence and the input for StartPosition, EndPosition and N, it doesn't check that it is an integer.
'Extra string is added to use as a validation check
Dim userInput As String = ""
Console.Write("Enter the value of n: ")
Console.WriteLine("Invalid value for n")
Console.Write("Enter the value of n: ")
The "userInput" variable can be used to validate the StartPosition and EndPosition parameters in the GetPositionToUse procedure as demonstrated above.
The EndPosition of the steganography section can be greater than the end of the text file.
Function GetTextFromFile(ByVal StartPosition As Integer, ByVal EndPosition As Integer) As String
FileOpen(1, "diary.txt", OpenMode.Binary)
For Count = 1 To StartPosition - 1
For Count = StartPosition To EndPosition
TextFromFile = TextFromFile & CharacterFromFile
Catch ex As IO.EndOfStreamException
If the number of lines in the rail text entered is greater than the number of characters in plain text then the encryption doesn't work.
Function GetSizeOfRailFence(ByVal OriginalText As String) As Integer
Dim LengthCheck As Boolean = True
' the variable to check for errord
Do While LengthCheck = True
Console.Write("Enter the number of lines in the rail fence: ")
SizeOfRailFence = Console.ReadLine
If SizeOfRailFence >= OriginalText.Length Then
'Checks if the rail fence entered is greater than the length of the plaintext
Console.WriteLine("The railfence must be smaller than " + CStr(OriginalText.Length))
'Tells the user to enter a value less than the number of characters in plaintext
'Loops untill the rail fence is less than plaintext length
Add a parameter to the GetTextFromFile function to replace the hard-coded 'diary.txt" file name. Pass the file name to the function when it is called. Ask the user for the file name when option n is chosen.
Combine the functions UseCaesarCipher, GetTypeOfCharacter and ApplyShiftToASCIICodeForCharacter into one function, that can also apply the cipher to numbers. Furthermore this function should also include any modifications to allow the entry of minus numbers under -26.
Function NewUseCaesarCipher(ByVal OriginalText As String, ByVal AmountToShift As Integer) As String
AmountToShift = AmountToShift Mod 26
For Count = 0 To OriginalText.Length - 1
Code provided by AQA is linked here
The file path issue should be able to be corrected by your teacher and they can agree the change with AQA and provide code that will find the file.  This happens most years in VB6 and the simple addition of App.path & "\ to the front of the filename solves the problems as long as the file is in the same location as the program - AQA will agree to this change to be made.
Stop program from freezing with N option - by iPhoneK1LLA (Like A Sir on Student Room)
If you run the raw code in Visual Studio, select option n, type 1, enter key, 208, enter key, 9, enter key, the application will crash. The solution to this problem is to view the 'GetTextFromFile' function  Function GetTextFromFile(ByVal StartPosition As Integer, ByVal EndPosition As Integer) As String
FileOpen(1, "diary.txt", OpenMode.Binary) 'This needs to be changed to the full path of file to make it run
For Count = 1 To StartPosition - 1
For Count = StartPosition To EndPosition
TextFromFile = TextFromFile & CharacterFromFile
You need to look at this line FileOpen(1, "diary.txt", OpenMode.Binary)
If you try and run this it will freeze. This needs to be changed to the FULL file location, so, for mine it would be FileOpen(1, "C:\Users\iPhoneK1LLA\Dropbox\COMP4\COMP1 PM June 2013\diary.txt", OpenMode.Binary)
Run the program again and you'll see that the program now gives you 'MeeT ME at the coLD room'
Who put this all into 1 file? I was the first one to put it onto the site and it was all split up into its different subs, then someone changed it into one big chunk of text :( - iPhoneK1LLA
Also note that the code is probably copyrighted by the AQA and may not be allowed on wikibooks.  Discussion around the code and potential questions are fine, for the moment use the link above to access it for all languages. Pluke (discuss • contribs) 08:52, 5 March 2013 (UTC)
This wasn't a problem running under Delphi/Pascal,
I've just loaded the code and entered n, 1, 208 etc and it printed the meet me in the cold room,
iPhoneK1LLA can you absolutely confirm the crash because "N=9 Start=1 End=208" works fine in python 2.5.6
I'll upload a video in a second running the raw code for VB.Net - iPhoneK1LLA
It's not really a crash - it just can't find the file. Either alter the file path as has been suggested or place the diary.txt file into the debug/bin folder and it will work fine. There have been 'problems' like this in previous years.
In relation to above, the program only crashes if the file is not present, or the file contains no text, which isn't a problem for the exam, but if you would like to make the program more robust then you need to add validation to check if the file exists and that the file contains more than 0 characters, such as a Catch and Try statement, or the following:
There needs to be solutions for python.
If Not System.IO.File.Exists("diary.txt") or filelen("diary.txt") < 1 Then
Console.WriteLine("diary.txt does not exsist")
Front Page: Radiation Oncology | RTOG Trials | Randomized Trials
Randomized. 347 patients, primary BCC of the face, <4 cm, confirmed by bx. Arm 1) Surgical resection, at least 2 mm margin vs Arm 2) RT using 3 available techniquest: interstitial brachytherapy Ir-192 65-70 Gy over 5 days (55%), superficial contact RT 50 kV 36/2-40/2 over 2 weeks (33%), orthovoltage RT 8-250 kV 60 Gy in 2-4 Gy/fx 3x/week (12%).
1997 PMID 9218740 -- "Basal cell carcinoma of the face: surgery or radiotherapy? Results of a randomized study." (Avril MF, Br J Cancer. 1997;76(1):100-6.)
Outcome: 4-year local failure surgery 0.7% vs RT 7.5% (SS), by modality interstitial BT 9% vs contact RT 7% vs orthovoltage RT 5%.
Toxicity: Cosmesis significantly better after surgery than RT, good result according to patients surgery 87% vs RT 69% (SS). Dyspigmentation and telangiectasia in 65%
Conclusion: Surgery preferred to RT in smaller BCC of the face
Germany -- Imiquimod x 8 weeks vs Imiquimod x 12 weeks
Randomized. 90/102 patients with nodular basal cell. Arm 1) imiquimod TIW x8 weeks vs. Arm 2) imiquimod TIW x12 weeks. Both followed by excsion
2007 PMID 17610993 -- "A phase III, randomized, open label study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of imiquimod 5% cream applied thrice weekly for 8 and 12 weeks in the treatment of low-risk nodular basal cell carcinoma." (Eigentler TK, J Am Acad Dermatol. 2007 Oct;57(4):616-21.)
Outcome: No difference between arms. Clinical clearance 78%, histological clearance 64%. Residual tumor in 17% of clinical CR
Toxicity: minor/moderate local inflammation in 92%
Conclusion: No difference between arms. Modest activity, due to 17% residual tumor after clinical CR, recommend excision for all
Introduction  |  Contributors  |  Textual Introduction
Bibliography A-M  |  Bibliography N-Z  |  Encoded Materials
←My harte I gave the not to do it paine
Attributed to Sir Thomas Wyatt[1] and entered by H2, this poem focuses on authorship and literary rivalry.
↑ R.A. Rebholz, ed., Sir Thomas Wyatt: The Complete Poems (London: Penguin, 1978), 266.
1      pen] penne STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     payn] payne STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     lytyll] lytle STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3 2      to] To STC_26053.5.3     folow] folowe STC_26053.5.3     that whyche] the thing that STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     dothe] doth STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     chace] chase STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3 3      &] and STC_24650.5_05     & hathe in] And STC_26053.5.3     hathe] hath STC_24650.5_05     hold] hold, STC_24650.5_05     hart] harte STC_26053.5.3 4      but] And STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     thow] thou STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     thys] this STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     browght] brought STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     passe] passe: STC_24650.5_05 5      my] My STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     pen] pen, STC_26053.5.3     prithe] pray the STC_26053.5.3     prithe wryght nomore] praye the wryte no more. STC_24650.5_05     wryght] write STC_26053.5.3     nomore] no more. STC_26053.5.3 6      Remember] Remembre STC_26053.5.3     oft] how STC_24650.5_05  STC_26053.5.3     thow] thou STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     me eaysyd] oft pleased STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3 7      & all my payns full well apeaysyd] And al my sorowes also eased STC_24650.5_05 And my sorowes also eased STC_26053.5.3 8      but] But STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     I know vnknowen] vnknowen , I knew STC_24650.5_05 vnknowen I knew STC_26053.5.3 9      ffor] That STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     where] wher STC_24650.5_05     dysceavyd] deceyued STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3 10      &] And STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     thow] thou STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     canst] canst do STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     more] more. STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3 11      Atyme] A tyme STC_24650.5_05 A time STC_26053.5.3     thow] thou STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     haddyst] hadst STC_24650.5_05 haddest STC_26053.5.3     have] haue STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3 12      to wryght] To wryt STC_24650.5_05     to wryght whyche] To wryte which STC_26053.5.3     whyche] whych STC_24650.5_05     crave] craue STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3 13      that] That STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     tyme] time STC_26053.5.3     ys] is STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     past] past, STC_24650.5_05     withdrawe] wythdraw STC_24650.5_05 withdraw STC_26053.5.3     therffore] therfore STC_24650.5_05 therefore STC_26053.5.3 14      syns] Sens STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     do] doo STC_24650.5_05     that] and STC_24650.5_05 let STC_26053.5.3     save] saue STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3 15      as] As STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     leve] leave STC_24650.5_05     leve off & wryght] leaue of, and write STC_26053.5.3     off & wryght] of, and wryt STC_24650.5_05     more] more, STC_24650.5_05 more. STC_26053.5.3 16      yn worthe to vse] And vse to worke STC_24650.5_05 And vse to worke STC_26053.5.3     another] an other STC_26053.5.3     waye] way STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3 17      not] Not STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     we] ye STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     wold] would STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     we] ye STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     maye] may STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3 18      for ons my losse ys] For els my lyfe is STC_24650.5_05 For els my life is STC_26053.5.3     past] paste STC_26053.5.3     Restore] restore STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3 19      &] and STC_24650.5_05 And STC_26053.5.3     desyre] desire STC_24650.5_05     ys] is STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     Decaye] decay STC_24650.5_05 decaye STC_26053.5.3 20      my] and yet my STC_24650.5_05     my pen yet wryght a lytyll more]  STC_26053.5.3     yet wryght a lytyll more] now wryt no more. STC_24650.5_05 21      love] loue STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     vayn who euer] vaine whosoeuer STC_24650.5_05 vayne who so euer STC_26053.5.3     shall] shal STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3 22      off] Of STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     worldlye] worldly STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     payn] payne STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     yt] it STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     passythe] passeth STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     all] al STC_24650.5_05 23      as] As STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     lyke] like STC_24650.5_05     case] case, STC_24650.5_05     fynd] find STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3 24      to] To STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     fast] fast, STC_24650.5_05     &] and STC_24650.5_05 and STC_26053.5.3     ffall] fal STC_24650.5_05 fall STC_26053.5.3 25      alas] Alas STC_24650.5_05 Alak STC_26053.5.3     wryght] wryte STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     more] more. STC_24650.5_05 26      Syns] Seyng STC_24650.5_05     thow] thou STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     payn] payne STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     thys] this STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3 27      to] To STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     whyche] whych STC_24650.5_05 which STC_26053.5.3     dothe] doth STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     me] the STC_26053.5.3     chace] chase STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3 28      &] and STC_24650.5_05 And STC_26053.5.3     hathe] hath STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     hold] holde STC_26053.5.3     hart] hert STC_26053.5.3 29      now] And now STC_24650.5_05 ndA now STC_26053.5.3     hast]  STC_26053.5.3     hast thow browght my mynde] to haue brought this STC_24650.5_05     thow] thou STC_26053.5.3     browght my mynde] hast this brought STC_26053.5.3 30      my] My STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     prithe] pray the STC_24650.5_05 STC_26053.5.3     wryght] to wryt STC_24650.5_05 write STC_26053.5.3     more] more. STC_24650.5_05
10 Even though your body must die because of sin, if Christ is in you, your spirit has Life because of righteousness.
11 And if the Holy Spirit is in you, He who raised up Christ from the dead will add to your mortal existence such abundant Life as comes with the indwelling of His Spirit.
12 Therefore, brothers and sisters, we are under no obligation to live a life ruled by our baser instincts.
13 For if you follow that path, death is near; but under the powerful sway of the Spirit, when you put those inclinations aside, you will live.
15 You have not entered a state of bondage again as a slave to fear. But you are conscious of being among the children of adoption, and by this we cry out, "Abba! Father!"
16 The Holy Spirit, attune to the spirit within us, bears witness to the fact that we are children of God;
17 and if children, then heirs also−heirs of God and co-heirs with Christ; if indeed we share in Christ's sufferings, we too may share in His glory.
20 Creation itself seems futile (not of its own choice, but by the will of Him who made it so).
21 Yet with hope that in the end all Creation would be set free from the effects of death and decay to enjoy the liberty that will come to the children of God in their ultimate glory.
22 For we know that the whole of Creation groans together in the pains of childbirth even to this very hour.
23 And more than that, we ourselves, though we possess the Holy Spirit as a foretaste of bliss, do inwardly sigh, while we wait for full vestment as concerns the disposition of our bodies.
24 In hope we have been saved. For an object of hope is such no longer when it is seen; a person does not hope for what he or she already sees.
26 In the same way the Holy Spirit also helps us in our weakness; for we do not know what prayers to offer nor in what way to offer them. Even the pleadings of the Spirit on our behalf are beyond words,
27 yet, the Searcher of hearts knows what the Spirit's meaning is regarding the people of God, because spiritual intercession is in God's will.
28 And we know that all things work together for good to them that love God, yes, to them who are called according to His divine purpose.
Titus 2 - "Our Blessed Hope"
12 teaching us to renounce all irreverence and worldly desires, and to live sober, upright, and godly lives in this present age,
13 while we wait for the blessed hope−the appearing in glory of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ;
14 who gave Himself for us to rescue us from any harmful activity and purify for Himself a people that are zealous for good works.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Marietta Edgecombe is one of Cho Chang's closest friends.
Beginner warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Marietta was first introduced to us when Cho Chang brings her, somewhat unwillingly, to the first meeting of Dumbledore's Army. She is present at the meeting at the Hog's Head, but says nothing, and we do not even learn her name, she is "Cho's friend".
We see her again at the first full meeting of Dumbledore's Army; here, she and Cho are practicing the Disarmament jinx, and Cho is so flustered by Harry's presence that she ends up setting Marietta's sleeve on fire.
Shortly before the Easter break, Professor Umbridge learns about the existence of Dumbledore's Army. Harry, forewarned by Dobby, manages to engineer the escape of the rest of the group, but is himself caught. In Professor Dumbledore's office, Harry finds that Marietta had reported the existence of Dumbledore's Army to Dolores Umbridge. (It is only at this point that we learn her surname; Professor Umbridge introduces her as part of her exposition of what has been going on.) As a result of this betrayal, a charm that Hermione had set on the parchment that all DA members had signed, had covered Marietta's face in purple pustules that spelled the word "sneak."
Marietta's blemishes make it very hard for her to show her face in Dumbledore's office, particularly as one of those present is Cornelius Fudge, the Minister for Magic. With her robes up around her face, her responses to questions put to her by Umbridge are answered generally by whimpers and gestures. Before she can actually give much testimony, Kingsley Shacklebolt, there as one of the Auror guards Fudge has brought with him, modifies her memory surreptitiously so that she no longer remembers that the DA had been meeting regularly. Marietta's changing her story almost incites Umbridge to violence against her. Harry recognizes the glazed look in her eye as being a symptom of memory alteration, though it seems nobody else there, with the possible exception of Dumbledore, does. Though she remains in Dumbledore's office until after Dumbledore's departure, Marietta plays no further part in affairs, simply standing there.
Afterwards, Harry and Cho get into something of a fight about Marietta, with Cho saying that Marietta is basically a good person who had made a mistake, that she had felt she had to because her parents work in the Ministry, and that Hermione's charming the parchment to do that to Marietta's face was sneaky. Harry, on the other hand, points out that Ron's father also works in the Ministry, and he isn't going around with the word "Sneak" on his face. He goes on to say that he thinks Hermione's charm was brilliant. This fight basically ends their relationship.
On the Hogwarts Express back home, Harry sees Cho and Marietta walk past; Marietta has apparently not managed to hide the word on her face, as she is wearing a balaclava.
It is mentioned in passing that Marietta's face still showed signs of the purple pustules, though she tried to cover them with make-up.
Marietta is Cho Chang's best friend, and friend of Mandy Brocklehurst.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Was Marietta's punishment by Hermione fair and proportionate to her 'crime'? If not, then was it necessary? Should her 'betrayal' of the DA have been punished by possibly-permanent disfigurement? Why or why not?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
Primary endosymbiosis is the process which involves the engulfment of a prokaryote by another living cell. The engulfed organism may be used as an advantage, supplying the larger cell with its products. For example, if a eukaryotic cell engulfs a photosynthetic alga cell, the eukaryotic cell can then use the products of the alga and become an autotrophic organism.
Either cell can be affected if one of the cells dies. If the larger cell dies the engulfed cell may leave the remains of the larger cell in order to survive. If the originally engulfed cell dies instead, the larger organism will continue to live.
Following primary endosymbiosis, the larger cell may be engulfed itself. This is the process of secondary endosymbiosis.
Scientists believe that endosymbiosis has led to the creation and evolution of both cholroplasts and mitochondria. This theory is called the Endosymbiotic theory.
Endosymbiotic theory: Scientists believe that chloroplasts and mitochondria were created from the process of endosymbiosis.
Primary versus Secondary Endosymbiosis. Word Press Blog 2010. <http://endosymbiotichypothesis.wordpress.com/primary-versus-secondary-endosymbiosis/>
Four major areas of civilization emerged in early Africa: the grasslands south of the Sahara, western Africa, the northern desert regions, and eastern Africa.  Each area was unique, but the regions became more interconnected as a result of two major developments: the domestication of the camel and the arrival of Islam in Africa.  The camel facilitated trade over long distances, including the vast Sahara Desert, while Islam connected Africa more closely to cultures and trade systems in the Mediterranean and the Middle East.
In this unit, we will examine the emergence of highly varied African kingdoms.  Some, such as Mwenemutapa, developed in isolation from much of the rest of Africa, while others, such as the Swahili kingdoms in east Africa, were heavily influenced by the Arab world.  We will pay close attention to commercial and agricultural advancements in Africa as well as to the rise and impact of Islam.
Uitspraakgids  ~ Pronunciation guide
Alfabet en Uitspraak ~ Alphabet and Pronunciation
The Dutch alphabet, like English, consists of 26 basic letters. However, there are also a number of letter combinations. The following table includes a listing of all these letters and a guide to their pronunciation.  As in English, letter sounds can differ depending upon where within a word the letter occurs.  The first pronunciation given below (second column) is that in English of the letter (or combination) itself. Reading down this column and pronouncing the "English" words will recite the alphabet in het Nederlands (in Dutch). Note that letter order is exactly the same as in English, but pronunciation is not the same for many of the letters. Trouble areas for Anglophones are marked in red
/b/, but /p/ when at the end of a word. (Final devoicing)
/s/ preceding i, e and y; /k/ preceding a, o, u and consonants
/d/, but /t/ when at the end of a word (Final devoicing)
/l/. Before consonant or at end of word /ɫ/
For the Netherlands: /ʋ/ for Flanders (Belgium): between the lips /w/
Diacritics are not very numerous in Dutch and they are mostly limited to loans, but the orthography does for example demand a diaeresis, mostly on ë and ï in words like geërgerd, geïnteresseerd. It marks the boundary of two syllables and is fairly common. It is not to be confused with the German umlaut that only occurs on a few German loans like überhaupt.
Less commonly, the orthography also allows stress marks to be added. Acute accents can be used for that purpose, but only then if:
There are some 200 words and word forms that occur in two forms that only differ in stress pattern, where that can be an issue.
The cedille is rare but occurs in a few French and Portuguese loans like façade, Curaçao
A useful tip is to install a Dutch international keyboard. For Microsoft operating systems this will tell you how to proceed.
Nederlandse uitspraak ~ Dutch Pronunciation Guide
Dutch has quite a few vowels (13). To be well understood by a native speaker it is imperative to master them, which can be quite challenge for native speakers of languages that rely more on their many consonants such as Russian. One general observation is that they are always pronounced as more or less pure (or only slightly diphthongized) vowels as in French, never quite as drawled or 'chewed upon' as in many varieties of English. Admittedly this does vary from speaker to speaker and region to region, but for Anglophones it is certainly advisable to limit the 'drawling'.
Most vowels occur in pairs that are traditionally indicated by the terms short and long. Unfortunately, this nomenclature is rather misleading because the difference is not so much a matter of length, but rather a difference in the position of the tongue root (lax vs. tense, or in Dutch: gedekt and open, covered and open).
/a/ as in broad US 'my God!' (Gaad) or Fr. bâteau
In addition there is a neutral vowel that occurs in almost all unstressed syllables, the schwa /ə/ as is does more or less in English as well. It is spelled with an 'e', so that this letter has three meanings: the above two in stressed syllables, the schwa in unstressed ones.
Notice the value of the open letter 'u' in Dutch. As in French it denotes the /y/ sound. Thus, in German it corresponds to ü.
It is relatively rare in Dutch because most words that used to have it have shifted it to the diphthong ui. It occurs mostly at the end of words like u, nu or in front of a w or r: ruw, stuur.
Trick: Pronounce /i/ and round your lips. There you have the /y/ sound.
This combination represents the [u] sound in German Mut or Spanish tu. Most languages use 'u' as German and Latin. (French uses 'ou', English often used 'oo', although it does have words like shoe). The Dutch /u/ sound is strongly rounded and dark with the tongue pretty far retracted back in the mouth. American 'oo' sounds tend to be intermediary between /u/ and /y/  and that is a problem. Compare:
Before "r" vowels have a tendency to be modified:
The vowels oe and eu are single, but as we saw above five vowels occur in open/covered pairs: a, e, i, o, u.
There is a systematic way in the spelling to indicate which of the two varieties is intended.
An open syllable ending in a vowel has the 'long' open variety,
A closed syllable ending in one or more consonants has the 'short' covered variety..
If a conflict arises, either the vowel or the consonant is doubled:
Notice how the formation of the plural necessitates a good mastery of this principle. The vowels oe and eu do not exhibit the dual quality of the other vowels.
The case of the letter i is a bit special. There has been a double ii in the past but to avoid confusion with a hand-written u it was replaced by ij. Afterwards the long /i:/ sound it represented became a diphthong /ɛɪ̯/ (although many dialects retain /i/). To write the /i/ sound Dutch mostly uses -ie.
The covered version as in rit corresponds more to the English sound in will or rid, than to the German sound in mit or Kind.
As said above, the distinction 'short'-'long' has little to do with pure length, because the change from open to closed is much more important. There is an exception. In front of -r the long vowel may indeed just be the same vowel held a bit longer:
In front of -r there are a few other oddities:
Diphthongs like /ɔɪ̯/ (as in English toy) or /ɑɪ̯/ (as in English my) are not used in the standard language. In various dialects they do occur and producing them is often frowned upon. They are considered 'lower class' in many circles.
In unstressed syllables like the suffix -lijk the ij represents a schwa.
Most consonants in Dutch are pronounced more or less the same way as in English but there are a number of notable exceptions. First of all a number of phonemes that English has are simply missing in Dutch. Phonemes are sounds that suffice in marking one word as different from the other.
Please avoid these sounds when speaking Dutch.
Even /ʃ/ : sh as in ship is not really a native Dutch sound, but it occurs in quite a few loans from various sources (Frisian, English, German, French) and as most Dutch people learn English these days they are quite familiar with it. The same thing goes for /ʒ/ as in garage and their affricate versions as in /ʧ/ in church or /ʤ/ George. None of them are native to Dutch.
The g, ch and sch problem
The spelling sch- can be rather confusing for people familiar with some German. In German it is used to write the /ʃ/ sound, where English uses sh-. In Dutch the sch- combination also occurs quite frequently but is pronounced rather differently. In most cases it presents a combination of s+ch where the latter is the voiceless velar fricative /x/ as heard in German Bach or Scottish loch.
In older versions of the orthography (prior to 1947) the combination -sch represented a simple /s/ sound in final position. The guttural ch at the end had gone mute. (Originally it represented a k- sound as it still does in some dialects and in Frisian). The final -sch spelling is still used for one rather common ending: -isch and also in numerous geographical names as they have never been altered in spelling:
In principle Dutch has both a voiceless and a voiced velar fricative and the letter 'g' represents the voiced one and the combination 'ch' the voiceless one. However, the number of words where this creates a phonemic distinction is very small:
It depends on the region whether this distinction is actually made in the spoken language. Around Amsterdam it would not be, further south the phoneme 'g' is often pronounced as a voiced palatal fricative, so that the difference becomes more pronounced.
Worldwide, the voiced /ɣ/ sound is pretty rare. It only occurs in a few languages like Arabic and Gaelic. As many native speakers do not use it either, it is recommended not to bother about it and use the voiceless /x/ for both, unless your mother tongue happens to have the difference.
The Randstad showing the accessibility of jobs
Another, similar, problem for English-speaking learners is the Dutch "r".  Essentially there are two, both of which were historically trilled.
The first, alveolar /r/, is the "rolling" trilled "r" also used in Spanish, produced with the tip of the tongue against the alveolar ridge. This sound was considered standard only a few decades ago and is still used by quite a few speakers. That includes the author of this book, who grew up at the southern edge of the Randstad, the Drechtsteden region, as well as many people outside the Randstad, including Flanders.
However, particularly in the Randstad, the rolling alveolar /r/ is gradually replaced by a voiced velar or uvular trill [ʁ], which is also used in many dialects of German; it is also similar to the French "r", but is voiced and articulated somewhat further forward (it is less "throaty"). Both /r/ and /ʁ/ sounds are often not trilled when spoken by native speakers; the alveolar [r] is more often a light tap, while the uvular /ʁ/ can turn into a fricative or approximant. This also presents a considerable challenge for those unaccustomed to the sound when they are confronted with words like groot ("big"). The first two sounds tend to blend to one lengthy velar/uvular /xoːt/ or /ɣoːt/, which may cause confusion with words like rood (red) and  goot (gutter).
A third type of r currently making inroads into Dutch is Gooise R (/ɹ/), named after the Gooi area in the Netherlands, where Dutch television is produced (Hilversum) and this speech feature is popularly thought to have originated. This concerns an approximant sound, not unlike American /ɹ/ in words such as bar, without trilling or friction.
f represents /f/ as in English
t represents /t/ a true dental. Unlike UK-English it is not aspirated and unlike US-English it does not become a /ɾ/ in the middle of a word.
k represents /k/. again it is never aspirated as often happens in English or German.
As in German, but unlike English all consonants at the ends of words are devoiced (..at the ents off worts are devoist...). You may hear that phenomenon when people speak English with a strong Dutch accent.
Assimilation with the previous word often devoices the consonant in initial position as well:
The neutral article het is often reduced to a prefixed t-sound in the spoken language and occasionally rendered as such in the written language as: 't. Het zaad -> 't zaad.
Notice however that both the /z/ and the /d/ reappear in the plural:
Contrary to d, the letters v and z are not written in the final position in such cases:
Apart from the devoicing effects Dutch has the following voiced consonants:
b represents /b/ as in English
v represents /v/ as in English, although its voicing is less emphatic
d represents /d/ as in English
z represents /z/ as in English
g represents /ɣ/ not /g/ as in English (see above)
Around Amsterdam the tendency to devoice is so strong that /v/ /ɣ/ and /z/ are seldom heard. People use /f/, /x/ and /s/ instead.
Liquids, nasals, clusters
m represents /m/ as in English
w represents /ʋ/, it is a labiodental approximant, not a bilabial one. Bring your upper teeth close to your lower lip and produce sound without breath. Put otherwise: produce a v-sound without breath. Speakers from e.g. Surinam often do use the bilabial version.
Thus, in the Netherlands f, v and w are all pronounced with the upper teeth resting on the lower lips but there is a distinction in voicing and in aspiration (blowing)
In erwt /ɛrt/ (pea) the w is silent for most speakers, but in initial wr- (wraak /vraːk/ or /ʋraːk/) w tends to sound more like /v/.
Although the pronunciation of "w" varies, it is not silent as in English. For the combination kn- the same holds: the 'k' is clearly pronounced:
n represents /n/ as in English
Many plurals (including the plural forms of the verb) have an ending -en. For many speakers this is pronounced as /-ə/ and the final n is dropped, but this is not true for all speakers. It depends strongly on the region of the speech area you are in. Around Amsterdam it is certainly  /-ə/, but in Groningen or in West-Flanders it is a syllabic /-n/ instead. It also depends on how well people are trying to articulate or on the next word. If the latter starts with a vowel the -n is more likely to be pronounced.
Even in loans the /ŋg/ tends to be avoided: mango : [ˈmɑnɣo] or [ˈmɑŋɣo]
j represents a /j/ sound, which in English usually written as y. The English j as in Jack is virtually unknown.
In combination with i it forms a diphthong: ij. Although this is a two letter combination, both letters get capitalized at the beginning of a sentence: ijs -> IJs (ice). /ɛis/.
The suffix -je that forms the rather ubiquitous diminutives tends to palatellize the previous consonants or even fuse to a palatal stop all together in rapid speech.
y is not a native Dutch letter but it occurs in loans where it is pronounced /i/ or /j/.
l represents an /l/ that is neither velarized (dark) as most English l's are, nor is it the slender variety as in German, French (or Irish). It is neutral and in between.
r can represent a variety of sounds. A rolled 'r' /r/ was more or less the norm, but is heard less and less. A variety of uvular forms is taking its place. Retroflex ones (as in US English) sound distinctly foreign.
h represents /ɦ/ a voiced version of the h-sound commonly heard in English and German. It only occurs in initial position of a syllable.
It is much less used than in German, e.g. theater: /teˈjatər/ rather than /teˈʔatər/.
Clusters of consonants are common in Dutch although perhaps less so than in language like Russian. Usually speakers will pronounce all the consonants in the cluster, but if clusters are consecutive, e.g. in compound words, some elision may occur. E.g. in the compound vaststellen typically only one 'st' is actually pronounced. Clusters can occur both initially and finally in a syllable:
Common initial clusters: bl-, br-, chl- chr-, dr-, dw-, fl-, fn-, fr-, gl-, gn-, gr-, kl-, kn-, kr-, kw-, pl-, pr-, sch-, schr-, sf-, sj-, sk-, sl-, sm-, sn-, sp-, spl-, spr-, tr-, tw-, vl-, vr-, wr-, zw-
Dutch is -like English and German but unlike French- a typical stress language. One syllable tends to get all the attention. It is at the same time loud, long and high in pitch and it never has a schwa ə. Instead it has a full vowel or a diphthong. Unstressed syllables tend to be short, low, soft and usually have a schwa, although there are exceptions.
Stress is not represented in the spelling unless ambiguity can arise for native speakers. In that case acutes can be added, otherwise orthographic rules demand that they be omitted. For non-native speakers this is a bit of a problem, but often an educated guess can be made which syllable is the stressed one.
Because the schwa is written as a e in the orthography it is often quite clear where the stress falls in a word:
Unfortunately for the non-native speaker the letter e is also used for other purposes.
The middle -e represent a full /e/ sound (as the ai in bait), but that is only clear for a native speaker. But with a bit of knowledge of grammar it will be clear that /led/ is the root of a verb (lijden actually) and that ver- is a prefix and -en the suffix. In general, the root of a verb (or noun) will get the stress in Dutch.
Of course, there are complicated cases:
It's a word which has three e's, each pronounced differently. The first syllable has a full [e] even though it is not stressed.
In such cases Dutch spelling does allow stress patterns to be written with an acute, but only if otherwise confusion might arise.
Some words and names can have rather surprising stress patterns:
The rules for capitalization in Dutch are similar to those in English. Capitalization occurs at the beginning of a sentence. Eigennamen  (proper names, e.g., of persons, organisations, countries etc.) are capitalized, but soortnamen (generic names) are not.
As mentioned above, when a word beginning with ij has to be capitalized, both letters become capitals, e.g. IJsselmeer.
Listen to the above audio recordings and write down the sentence
Do you find it nice in Muiden?
Communication signals travel through wire as radiated electromagnetic wave to receiver
Communication signals travel through the air as radiated electromagnetic wave to receiver
If you wish to delve deeply into the subject of Latin cases, see Wikipedia.
Explicitur totum, pro amore Dei, da mihi potum.
The whole thing is done, for the love of God, give me a drink.[1]
The case of a noun or pronoun tells us its function in a sentence. For example, in English a noun in a sentence could be a subject, as in The quick cat chased the little mouse, or it could be a direct object, as in The quick cat chased the little mouse. However, English is an uninflected language, which means that a noun does not inflect (that is, change form) based on its case. Notable exceptions are the pronouns, where, for example, I takes the form me when it is a direct object.
However, Latin — like many modern languages — is an inflected language, so nouns in Latin change form based on their case. Specifically, each case changes the ending of a noun.
There are seven cases in Latin. Here is the list of cases, along with the general idea of what they are used for. As with everything in language, there are exceptions and special rules, but for now this is a quick summary.
Nominative, which is used for the subject of a sentence: what is the sentence about?
The quick cat chased the little mouse.
Genitive, which is used for the possessor of another noun: whose is the noun?
The tall man's quick cat chased the little mouse.
Accusative, which is used for the direct object of a sentence: what does the action in the sentence apply to?
The quick cat chased the little mouse.
Dative, which is used for the indirect object of a sentence: who benefits from the action in the sentence?
The quick cat gave the dead mouse to his owner.
Ablative, which is used for many, many things, including where and when the action takes place, what was used to perform the action, and who was also there:
In the basement, the quick cat with his friend batted the little mouse at noon with his paw.
Vocative, which is used when addressing someone:
Silly cat, take that dead mouse outside!
Locative, which is used for where the action takes place, but only for some words, such as cities:
The silly cat chased mice in Rome.
The first five are the most widely used. Since the vocative and locative cases have highly restricted uses, we will introduce them later.
In each of the following sentences, identify the noun that has nominative case.
The dog barked at the cat.
The big man's hand grasped the mouse.
The ball was hit by the cat's paw.
In each of the following sentences, identify the noun that has genitive case.
The dog barked at the lady's cat.
The big man's hand grasped the mouse.
The ball was hit by the cat's paw.
In each of the following sentences, identify the noun that has accusative case.
The big man's hand grasped the slippery mouse.
The silly cat pushed open the bathroom door.
The dog climbed the stairs.
The grammatical gender of a noun has nothing to do with the physical gender of the thing it represents (its "natural gender"). Rather, gender simply means type, and there can be any number of genders in a language. Just as the number of a noun (singular or plural) forces other words in the sentence to match that number (a cat bites, but cats bite), the grammatical gender of a noun forces other words in the sentence to match that gender.
Latin has a system of three genders: feminine, masculine, and neuter. The Luganda language of Uganda has ten genders, while Swahili has 18!
↑ Another grateful scribe. Gameson, Richard (2002). The Scribe Speaks? Colophons in early English manuscripts. University of Cambridge. p. 3. ISBN 0953217272. http://weblearn.ox.ac.uk/site/human/english/materials/grad/mstpages/650_1550/readings/Gameson%20-%20Scribe%20Speaks.pdf.
Dissociative disorders can be a difficult set of disorders to diagnose due to their significant comorbidities and overlap with other psychiatric and medical diagnoses.  Studies show a range of inpatient prevalences of 5% to 21% with outpatient prevalences ranging from 12% to 29%, which highlights the difficulty in accurate diagnosis (Brand et. al 2009).  Dissociative disorders are shown to have significant comorbidity with multiple other psychiatric disorders that should be screened for including depression, borderline personality disorder, social anxiety, and somatization disorders (Evren et. al 2007) (Evren et. al 2009).  More research needs to be done with dissociative populations to draw more firm conclusions, but many correlations have been gathered.  Special populations that should be considered in relation to dissociative disorders include suicidal/self-mutilating, traumatized, eating disordered, substance abusing, and pediatric groups.
Both suicide attempts and self-mutilating behavior fall into the broader category of self-harm.  While the difference between a suicidal or parasuicidal (self-mutilating) action may not always be easy to distinguish clinically, by definition they are quite distinct.  Self-mutilation involves self-harm with no goal of suicide, while suicidal actions are meant to bring about one’s death.
There is a fair amount of evidence supporting a relationship between dissociative disorder and suicide ideations/attempts.  In one study of drug dependent patients there is a statistically significant increase in suicide attempts when comparing patients with dissociative disorder diagnoses to those without them (Tamar-Gurol et al. 2008).  Another study showed that among patients with multiple suicide attempts, dissociative disorders are the strongest predictors of multiple suicide attempts when compared with borderline personality disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, and alcohol abuse/dependence (Foote et al. 2008).  With frequent comorbidity, there can be significant overlap between dissociative disorders, other psychiatric disorders, and suicidal behaviors.  While there appears to be a link between dissociative disorders and suicidal ideations, a comorbid diagnosis of somatization disorder with dissociative disorder is a significant predictor of suicidal ideation (Ozturk and Sar, 2008).  While suicidal behavior can be present in each specific dissociative disorder, it is particularly prevalent in Dissociative Identity Disorder possibly due to decreased affect tolerance (Kaplan and Sadock, 2007).
While self-mutilation and suicide attempts are distinct entities, nearly 55% to 85% of people with self-mutilating behavior have made a suicide attempt (Evren et al. 2008).  Thus with dissociative disorders carrying such a high risk for suicidal behaviors, it comes as no surprise that they also increase the risk for self-mutilation.  Among alcohol dependent patients, those placed within a dissociative group based on results of Dissociative Experiences Scales were at higher risk for self-mutilation (Evren et al. 2008).
Traumatic events are a common factor in many psychiatric diagnoses including anxiety disorders, such as posttraumatic stress disorder, and personality traits like borderline personality disorder.  A history of traumatic experience is quite common among all of the various dissociative disorders as well.  Studies have shown a statistically greater incidence of emotional abuse among subsets with dissociative diagnoses than those without such diagnoses (Tamar-Gurol et al. 2008).  However, the nature of the trauma can be quite diverse or specific from one dissociative diagnosis to the next.  Dissociative fugue states are frequently seen around times of natural disasters, or during wartime among military personnel.   Childhood trauma, usually of physical or sexual nature, is seen in 85% to 97% of patients with Dissociative Identity Disorder.  Dissociative amnesia is often due to abuse; however, it can be related to wartime experiences as well.  Like posttraumatic stress disorder, the severity of symptoms is highly correlated with the intensity of the combat (Kaplan and Sadock, 2007).  With the correlation of traumatic experiences and dissociative disorders, presence of one should warrant screening for the other.
Many impulsive behaviors have been associated with dissociative disorders, and pathologic eating behaviors are included in this set.  In fact, dissociative symptoms are frequently described in individuals with bulimic disorders (Waller et al. 2001).  Among the various dissociative diagnoses, it appears that eating disorders are most prevalent with dissociative identity disorder (Kaplan and Sadock, 2007).  One study looked at groups of women with eating disorders ranging from anorexia, anorexia with binge-purge subtype, bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating.  These women were then administered Dissociative Experiences Scales (DES) to identify those with the most significant dissociative features.  Findings showed the binge-purge subtype of anorexia to have the greatest proportion of dissociative cases while binge-eating disorder patients were lower and similar to control groups (Waller et al. 2001).  Other factors like abuse or trauma may confound the analysis of studies like these.  However, there appears to be a correlation between dissociative disorders and impulsive behaviors, which includes eating disorders.
Substance abuse is a common comorbidity with multiple psychiatric disorders including mood, anxiety, and psychotic disorders.  Among those with dissociative disorders, substance abuse is frequently reported.  However, studies show varied results in regards to their association.  One study included inpatients with drug dependence (marijuana, cocaine, heroine, ecstacy, solvents) that often had comorbid alcohol dependence as well.  The prevalence of dissociative disorders among the drug dependent inpatients was significantly higher than the general psychiatric inpatient population, showing correlation between the two (Tamar-Gurol, 2008).  Another study included inpatients with alcohol dependence excluding any other comorbid drug abuse.  Here the percentage of dissociative disorders among alcohol dependent patients was very similar to the general psychiatric inpatient population.  This confers no increased risk of dissociative disorders among alcohol dependent inpatients (Evren et al. 2005).  The reason for the difference seen between alcohol versus drug dependence is not known.  However, both studies show that dissociative symptoms were present in a majority of the population before alcohol or drug use, 90% and 59.3% respectively (Evren et al. 2005)(Tamar-Gurol, 2008).  This emphasizes the importance of screening for dissociative symptoms to potentially help prevent the progression to substance abuse or dependence.
Though pediatric populations are not frequently diagnosed with dissociative disorders, this subgroup may experience the trauma later associated with dissociative diagnoses.  One study of drug dependent patients evaluated several variables between groups with dissociative disorders and those without them.  Aside from suicide attempts, the only variable to reach statistical significance for increased risk for dissociative diagnoses was emotional abuse taking place during childhood (Tamar-Gurol, 2008).  Another study showed that even among children and adolescents treated for dissociative disorders, 82.6% met the criteria for psychiatric disorders at an average of twelve years later.  Nearly half of these had diagnosed personality disorders with significantly lower psychosocial adjustment in adulthood (Jans et al. 2008).  Thus, recognizing childhood trauma and dissociative symptoms may prove helpful in starting early treatment to help adult adjustment and functioning.
As often is seen in pediatric populations, there are sometimes differences in expression of symptoms between children and adults.  In dissociative identity disorder children are noted to be less able to distinguish lapses in time and abnormal behaviors, and often teachers and relatives document these changes.  In dissociative fugue adults are often noted to travel large distances or for prolonged periods of time.  However, children and adolescents are often much more limited in this capacity and their fugues are often of shorter distances or of shorter duration (Kaplan and Sadock, 2007).
The first section of the prefix.grok file should consist of a description of the problem being defined. As for the rest of the file, blank lines and lines beginning with an exclamation point (!) are ignored.
The description can contain from zero up to as many lines as the user requires to describe the problem. Each line can contain up to 60 characters. The description is printed at the beginning of the listing files for grok (prefixo.eco) and HydroGeoSphere (prefix.lst).
The user must signal the end of the description using the End instruction.
Table of Contents• Glossary
Applicable Blender version: 2.63.
Start by opening a new Blender document. Select the default cube. Ensure that the timeline  is showing that you are at frame number 1. Press  I , and choose “Location”; this will insert a keyframe at frame 1 which remembers the current location of the cube. Move the current frame (green line) away from frame 1, and you will see that there is a yellow line left behind.
Now go to, say, frame 25. With the cube still selected, press  G , and move the cube to a different position—anywhere a few cube widths away will do fine. Press  I  again, and insert another Location keyframe.
Now try scrubbing with  LMB  between the two yellow lines in the timeline, and watch the cube move smoothly between the two positions you set as keyframes.
Now press  ALT + A , and Blender will automatically cycle through the timeline for you, animating the cube as it goes. There will probably be a long pause in the motion after it gets to frame 25, because by default the animation will run until frame 250. Press  ESC  to stop the animation, click in the box at the bottom of the timeline labelled “End:”, and reduce the end frame number to, say, 50. Press  ALT + A  to start the animation again, and watch the movement cycle through a little more quickly this time.
Stop the animation, go back to frame 1, and press  ALT + I  to delete that first keyframe. Move the current time away from frame 1, and confirm that the yellow line that was there has gone. Now restart the animation; what happens? You should see the cube snap to the location specified by the only remaining keyframe, and stay there. Without a second keyframe specifying a different value for a parameter, Blender sees no reason to change the value for that parameter to anything else. Hence the rule:
A parameter is only animated at a particular time if there are keyframes before and after that time specifying different values for that parameter.
Press  ESC  to ensure the animation is stopped, then  CTRL + Z  to undo your deletion of the first keyframe above. Press  ALT + A  to start the cube moving between its two positions again. While it runs, the 3D View window remains fully operational; try using  MMB  to rotate the view, the mouse wheel to zoom in and out,  NUM0  to toggle in and out of camera view, etc. All the while, the cube keeps running through the dance you choreographed for it. How neat is that?
Those yellow lines in the timeline aren’t really very informative. They tell you there is a keyframe at that time, but not what settings are being specified. And there is no way to adjust an already-inserted keyframe, you have to delete it and insert another one.
All this fine control (and much more) is possible elsewhere, in the Graph Editor window, but we’ll leave that for later. For now, just bring up the Properties Shelf in the 3D View by pressing  N  (if it’s not already visible). At the top of this is the “Transform” panel, where you can see location/rotation/scaling settings for the currently-selected object. Notice that the Location values for the cube are displayed against a coloured background, either green or yellow; move the current frame time to a keyframe time, and it will be yellow, otherwise it will be green.
This coloured background is your cue that the specified value is being animated, and whether the current animation time is a keyframe time for that value. This goes for animating other properties as well, not just object transformations.
Think of this next example as a teaser. It will be left incomplete for now, because to see the full effect you will need to put a bit more work into material, lighting and render settings, and render out the full sequence for viewing in some kind of external movie player. Feel free to come back and fill in the gaps as you learn more about those things.
One of the goals in the Blender 2.5x rework was to introduce the concept of being able to “animate anything”. Animation had been a bit of an afterthought in earlier versions of Blender, but in 2.5x it is integrated very deeply, to the point where just about any object property can be animated over time.
Start a new Blender document. Select the default cube, and create a new material for it. You don’t need to change the colour or any of the other settings for it, but look in the material settings for the “Transparency” panel and check the title box.
Look in that panel for the “Alpha:” slider (which might be abbreviated to something like “Alp”, depending on the size of your screen). It should be showing the default value of 1.000 (fully opaque). Right-click on it ( RMB ) to bring up a menu with a bunch of options, of which the one we want is the top one, “Insert Keyframe”. Once you select this, the background of the Alpha slider should turn yellow.
Set the current frame to another point, say frame 25. As you move away from frame 1, the background of the Alpha slider turns green, indicating it is being animated, but is not currently at a keyframe. At frame 25, set the Alpha value to zero, or fully invisible (by either dragging across it with  LMB  or clicking in it and typing the new value). Then right-click on it and insert another keyframe.
Now try scrubbing back and forth in the timeline between frame 1 and frame 25, and you should see the Alpha value change accordingly between the two key values you specified. If you look in the preview image at the top of the material properties window, you should see the sample object there correspondingly fade in and out. Unfortunately the actual cube in the 3D view won’t do this ("Solid" Viewport), but it will when you set the Viewport to "Material". If you were to render the image at the current frame with  F12 , you should see the cube appear with varying degrees of faintness, down to becoming completely invisible at the end.
In short, you now have an animated disappearing cube.
Table of Contents• Glossary
These 357 words include every combination of consonant and vowel in the English language.
Discuss pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic treatments of metabolic diseases in geriatric patients
Describe appropriate lab values for diabetics in the geriatric population and deviations from expectations for younger patients
Describe the use of insulins and oral medications for treatment of diabetes in the geriatric population
Describe treatment of hypertension in the geriatric population and consequences of untreated hypertension
Describe pharmacologic methods of treating hyperlipidemia in the geriatric population
Diabetes mellitus is a chronic condition that affects the way glucose is metabolized. Primarily among older adults, type 2 diabetes is the most common, and is characterized by (1) impaired fasting glucose and (2) impaired glucose tolerance due to decreased insulin sensitivity (i.e. increased insulin resistance). Treatment is both non-pharmacologic (weight loss, lifestyle modifications) and pharmacologic. The primary goal in maintaining glycemic control is to minimize long-term microvascular complications associated with the increased osmotic pressure due to increased glucose concentrations in the blood. However, as age increases, risk of developing these complications decreases due to onset of disease and life expectancy. Furthermore, hypoglycemia will have faster and more detrimental effects on older and frail patients compared to hyperglycemia. Therefore, tight glycemic control is not always appropriate. The choice of insulin replacement versus anti-hyperglycemic oral agents must be tailored to goals of care.
Diabetes mellitus control can be monitored by hemoglobin A1c testing. The test is typically performed every three months as this coincides with the lifespan of the erythrocyte (red blood cell) and the extent of glycosylation from the concentration of glucose in the blood, providing an average blood sugar over this period. For older adults, a hemoglobin A1c in the range of 7-9% (an average blood sugar range 152-212 mg/dL) is felt to be appropriate depending on functional status and location of care. Community-dwelling adults should be closer to 7%; long-term care residents may be maintained closer to 9%. (Sources will disagree over these numbers.) Goals must be individualized and tailored to individual patient care. Ideally, A1c values in both community-dwelling and long-term care residents will be above 5%.
Diabetes is diagnosed in adults if their hemoglobin A1c is greater than 6.5% or if a random blood sugar greater than 200 mg/dL; some flexibility with regard to initiation of treatment in older adults is warranted. Insulin sensitivity decreasing with age is part of normal aging physiology and occurs due to increasing adipose tissue (fat) and decreased muscular metabolism of glucose. Symptoms of prolonged hyperglycemia (typically >400 mg/dL) will include fatigue, polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, and weight loss, among others. Symptoms of hypoglycemia (typically <60 mg/dL) which are more acutely concerning than hyperglycemia include dizziness, weakness, confusion, diaphoresis, and delirium.
Pharmacologic treatment of diabetes, when warranted, include insulin (long-acting versus short-acting), metformin (depending on kidney function), sulfonylureas (which are known to precipitate hypoglycemia), thiazolidinediones (TZDs; known for exacerbating heart failure), and dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP4) inhibitors. Insulin is sometimes underutilized in the elderly because of fear (by the physician, patient, or family) that it is too complicated or too dangerous. With the availability of long acting insulins, it has become easier to incorporate insulin with oral hypoglycemic medications in older patients who have suboptimal glycemic control. Insulin metabolism is altered in patients with chronic kidney disease, and less is required for adequate treatment.
Mechanism: bind to ATP-sensitive potassium channels on pancreatic beta cells, opening voltage-gated calcium channels increasing insulin release
Mechanism: activate peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) to decrease amount of fatty acids in circulation, increasing need for glucose metabolism to provide energy for cellular processes
Mechanism: work by reducing glucagon and blood glucose levels due to increased incretin leading to increased insulin secretion and decreased gastric emptying
Other concerns for diabetics include hepatitis B vaccination status (check serum hepatitis B surface antibody reactivity), monitoring lipid panels due to diabetes being a coronary artery disease risk equivalent, vision screening (retinopathy), and foot care (neuropathy and peripheral vascular disease).
Hypertension occurs when the force of the blood against the walls of the arteries is increased beyond acceptable range. With increasing age, there is increased thickness of arterial intima and media. The net result of this is increased vascular stiffness, leading to increased acceptable blood pressures of 150 mm Hg for systolic blood pressures compared to 140 mm Hg for younger adults. Diastolic blood pressures should be maintained under 90 mm Hg regardless of age. Medications known to increase blood pressure, as discussed in  previous chapters, include corticosteroids, NSAIDs, and others.
Treatment  as recommended by the JNC8 guidelines  include starting with any one of thiazide diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE inhibitors), angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), or calcium-channel blockers (CCBs). Aggressive therapy is not appropriate if adverse side effects (such as orthostatic hypotension) cannot be avoided. Chapter 10 discusses syncope and hypotension.
Complications of untreated chronic hypertension include hypertensive heart disease (chronic systolic/chronic diastolic heart failure), hypertensive kidney disease, (chronic kidney disease), and cerebrovascular disease (CVAs/TIAs), among others.
Hyperlipidemia is the abnormal elevation of lipids in the blood. Four quantities of interest measured in a lipid panel include total cholesterol (TC), triglycerides (TG), high-density lipoprotein (HDL), and low-density lipoprotein (LDL). LDL is calculated and not directly measured: LDL(calc) = TC – TG/5 – HDL
Lipid panels are ordered fasting due to the effect of food metabolism on triglycerides; however, a non-fasting lipid panel should provide accurate insight into lipid control with the exception of the triglyceride level. Ideally, TC should be less than 200 mg/dL, TG should be less than 150 mg/dL, HDL should be greater than 40 mg/dL, and LDL(calc) should be less than 70 mg/dL. However, "treating to a number" has fallen out of favor, replaced by the 10-year-risk score of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease score. An example of the ASCVD calculator can be found at here with scoring guidelines. Coronary artery disease and hyperlipidemia show a direct proportionality, however: low HDL and high LDL show increased incidence. Frail older adults often have decreased cholesterol levels. As such, lipid-lowering medications should not be prescribed to patients with a limited life expectancy.
Treatment of hyperlipidemia involves lifestyle modifications and pharmacologic treatment. Pharmacologic treatment of hyperlipidemia involves the use of bile-acid binding resins (cholestyramine), ezetimibe, fibrates (gemfibrozil), HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins), niacin, and omega-3 fatty acids. First-line treatment of hyperlipidemia should be accomplished with statins. While, arguably, niacin and fibrates will show better effects for the lowering of triglycerides, statins show improvement in TG, HDL, and LDL levels. Statins are associated with myopathic pain, especially with higher intensity. Higher intensity statins are indicated for coronary artery disease with myocardial infarction and cerebrovascular disease with TIA/CVA events. Pravastatin has shown the least incidence of myopathic pain. Statin equivalency charts are available which provide conversion between one statin to another should intolerance become an issue. The ATP III guidelines provide a useful comparison of agents and their effectiveness. A statin equivalency chart is available for reference.
Questions 1-2: A 72-year-old female presents to her primary care physician for follow up of her chronic medical conditions. Her past medical history is notable for hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes mellitus type 2. She currently takes glipizide, lisinopril, and atorvastatin.; Her hepatitis B surface antibody is non-reactive. Her most recent hemoglobin A1c was 7.2%. She denies any new problems or complaints. Her mentation is at its baseline. Her son who is with her for the visit has no concerns at present. Her vital signs and physical exam are unremarkable.
Compared to the ambulatory community, what is an optimal hemoglobin A1c in a long-term care resident?
A. Less than 5%.
B. Less than 6%.
C. Less than 7%.
D. Less than 8%.
E. Less than 9%.
A. Decreased compliance of arterial blood vessels.
B. Increased compliance of arterial blood vessels.
C. Decreased compliance of the left ventricle.
D. Increased compliance of the left ventricle.
v • d • e Geriatric MedicineChapters
A document prepared by the enterprise for use by the customer during receiving.  Packing slips normally do not include prices.
Below are a collection of tips to relieve stress that a person can accumulate throughout the day.
Practice TV Turn Off Weeks or TV Turn Off Days
P.01 - Front Cover
Registered in Australia for transmission by post as a periodical.
P.01 - Rola Ad
P.02 - R.C.S. Radio Ad
P.03 - Contents Banner
P.03 - Publication Notes
Published by the Proprietor — A. G. HULL, Box 13, Mornington, Vic.
Short-wave Editor — L. J. KEAST, 7 Fitzgerald Rd., Ermington, N.S.W. Phone: WL1101
In Queensland: John Bristoe, Box 82, Maryborough, Q.
In New Zealand: H. Barnes & Co., 4 Boulcott Terrace, Wellington & S.O.S. Radio Ltd., 283 Queen St., Auckland
In England: Anglo Overseas Press Ltd., Chronicle House, Fleet St., London, W.1.
Distributed throughout the World by Gordon & Gotch (A/asia) Ltd.
Subscription Rates: 12 issues - 16/-; 24 issues - 30/-;  To N.Z. and Overseas - 12 issues, 18/-; POST FREE
Address for all correspondence - Australasian Radio World, Box 13, Mornington, Vic.
Printed by The Clyde Press, 608 High St., Thornbury, for the Proprietor of the Australasian Radio World, A. G. Hull, Box 13, Mornington, Victoria (Footnote P.35)
Home Truths About Amplifiers . . . . 5
The Multi-Meter . . . . 11
Audio Frequency Amplifier . . . . 16
Peak Protection Devices . . . . 24
Sapphires Hard on Records . . . . 31
Speedy Query Service . . . . 34
A couple of years ago we ran a Special Data and Handbook Issue, complete with Buyers’ Guide. This issue proved an outstanding success, as is often brought home to us by the blank space on the back numbers' shelves. The compilation of such issues, however, calls for so much extra effort, so many more hours of time, that we haven’t been able to get around to tackling another. As most readers understand, we have a heck of a job to get even ordinary issues out on time. Things may be better in the near future, however, so here is a preliminary announcement of another special issue and with it an appeal for your co-operation............. Dealing first with the subject of data. How about dropping us a line if there is anything special you would like to see? Last time we ran the morse code, the international prefixes, the Q code, the broadcast station wavelengths, valve socket connections, circuit symbols, resistor colour codes, coil colour codes, and the frequency allocations. Can you suggest any more? Then there is a big series of constructional articles set down for future issues; quite a technical development programme, in fact. We know to start with a five-valve general purpose set, then a four-valve midget, but what next? Have you any ideas for the plan? What type of circuits seem to have been neglected lately? How many people would build a high-fidelity F.M. set on the off chance that the experimental F.M. transmissions are to become permanent? In fact, any suggestions you care to make will be doubly welcome at the moment, as big plans are being laid for the future. — A. G. HULL
P.05 - Home Truths About Amplifiers
P.07 - Volume Compression
P.11 - The Multi-Meter
P.16 - Audio Frequency Amplifier
P.24 - Peak Protection Devices
P.27 - Amateur Activities
P.31 - Sapphires Hard on Records
P.34 - Speedy Query Service
This is a textbook in the United States (primarily federal) law of employment discrimination. It is designed primarily for undergraduate students who have an interest in the field, not for law school students who would require a more detailed analysis of the statutes and cases involved.
The text assumes a basic familiarity with such legal concepts as common law reasoning, the creation of statutes, the fundamentals of contract and tort, etc.
Kenneth Schneyer (a.k.a. kschneyer), Professor of Legal Studies at Johnson & Wales University, began work on this wikibook on September 29, 2005.
To maintain consistency, contributors should name each new page "EmplDiscr xxxxx", where "xxxxx" is the name of the new page.
Infancy consists of the period from birth to about two years of age. The first years of life are a time of incredible growth and development. Although there is uniformity in the growth and development of most children, no two children develop exactly alike. Children differ in physical, cognitive, social, and emotional growth patterns. They also differ in the ways they interact with and respond to their environment as well as play, affection, and other factors. An understanding of infant growth and development patterns and concepts is necessary for parents and caregivers to create a nurturing and caring environment that will stimulate optimal growth in young children.
Physical Development refers to physical changes in the body and involves changes in weight, height, motor skills, vision, hearing, and development of the senses and perceptions. Physical growth is rapid during the first two years of life. WIth each physical change, a child acquires new abilities. By repeating motor actions, an infant builds physical strength and muscular coordination.
Cognitive Development refers to the development of cognitive skills such as reasoning, language acquisition, problem solving, and knowledge acquisition. Children learn through their senses and through mulitple interactions with people and things in the environment. As children grow and interact with their environment, they go through various stages of cognitive development.
Emotional Development is the expression of feelings about one's self, others, and things. Social development is relating to others. These two types of development are placed together because they are closely interrelated growth patterns and are referred to as social-emotional development. Social-emotional development includes developing feelings of self-esteem, trust, and friendship. It also includes developing skills to socialize and interact effectively with others.
Developmental milestones are the physical or behavioral signs of development or maturation in infants and children. Observing developmental milestones helps to determine the growth and development  progress of an infant over time.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Python supports object oriented programming paradigm. This essentially means that Python programming paradigm is centred on data for solving all problems posed. A variable is location in the memory of the computer you are running the program. The assignment operator,=, is used to assign values to the variable.
For e.g., x=5
Python allows for multiple assignments in a single command.
Python does not type cast variables. There is no need to instantiate variables before their usage quite unlike its C or Java counterpart. Python reduces the coding efforts on the programmer. Python provides three basic built data types namely None, Numeric class, and Boolean class.
The word None denotes an object with no value.
Out of the above mentioned four numeric classes, the Python numeric classes that implement integer and floating data types called int and float. The standard arithmetic operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and power of exponentiation can be used within parentheses forcing the order of operations from the normal operator precedence. There are two more very useful operations the remainder operator %, and integer division, //. When two integers are divided, the result is a floating point. The remainder operator % returns the remainder remaining after the division, and the integer division // returns the integer portion of a division after truncating the quotient.
The boolean data type is implemented in the Python bool class representing the truth values. The possible state values for a Boolean object are True and False with the standard boolean operators, and, or, and not.
Python is strongly typed, that is Python does not convert data from one type into another data type automatically. So if you have a string variable and a numeric variable, Python print command will throw an error instead of automatically converting one of them into another type and then print.
TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for +: 'int' and 'str'
Python has a built in string class named “str”, so because careful while using a variable called str for your programming purposes. String is a series of Unicode characters. Strings can be enclosed within single quotes or double quotes. Multiple line strings can be denoted using triple single ‘’’ or double quotes “””.
Python strings are immutable, that is they cannot be changed after they are created. New strings can be created as we go on programming. Characters in the string can be accessed by the [] operator but cannot change the value. Strings are indexed with 0 at the beginning.
TypeError: 'str' object does not support item assignment
Lists in Python are one of the most used data types and is very flexible. The individual data items with the list may or may not be of the same type. Lists are declared by enclosing the data items in square brackets with each item separated from one another with a comma. The slice operator [] can be used to access the items with in lists. You can add items to the list, replace the items in the list, and delete items in the list using the index or using the item itself.
['file1', 'my string', 5, 7]
['file1', 'my string', 5, 7, 10]
['file1', 'my string', 5, 7, 10, 'python', 'no this']
['file1', 'new string', 5, 7, 10, 'python', 'no this']
['file1', 'new string', 5, 7, 10, 'python']
['file1', 'new string', 5, 7, 10]
Tuples in Python are of immutable set or ordered items that can be strings, or any other type of variable. Once created, tuples cannot be changed.
TypeError: 'tuple' object does not support item assignment
A dictionary in Python allows one to one mapping of data and key values.  There is a key value that points to the value separated by a semicolon (:). Every key value is pair separated from each other with a common and the entire dictionary is enclosed in flower brackets. Keys must be unique values; however values may or may not be unique.
{'a': 'annual fees', 'c': 'biweekly', 'b': 'monthly fees', 'd': 'weekly'}
{'a': 'annual fees', 'c': 'biweekly', 'b': 'monthly fees', 'e': 'daily', 'd': 'weekly'}
{'a': 'annual fees', 'c': 'biweekly', 'b': 'monthly fees', 'e': 'hourly', 'd': 'weekly'}
While working in Python, one must understand that Python calculates based on formulas. Values are bound to variables and then calculations are stored in the variables. There are operators which indicate a particular function being carried out on the values tied to variables and resulting in the output.  Complex formulas can be built upon these simple operators that perform calculations and return values. In the following sections, we will examine Python operators.
The simple assignment operator, =, assigns a numeric or Boolean value to the variable.  The first assignment of the value to a variable creates the variable.
3.3.2. Relational and Logical Operators
Relational and logical operators compare values on either side and return Boolean values indicating whether a test that was made using the relational and logical operator holds good or not. Table 1 provides introduces Python’s relational and logical operators.
Table 1 Python's relational and logical operator
If the two values on the right hand side and left hand side of the operator are the same, the condition becomes true
If the values on the right hand side and left hand side of the operator are not the same, the condition becomes true
If the value on the left hand side is less than the right hand side of the operator, the condition becomes true
If the value on the left hand side is greater than right hand side of the operator, the condition becomes true
When the value on the left hand side is less than or equal to the value on the right hand side, the condition returns true
When the value on the left hand side is greater than the value on the right hand side, the condition returns true
When the values on either side of the operator are not equal, then the conditional operator returns true
The statement checks for the Boolean value of the individual statements and returns the Boolean when both the conditions is true
The statement checks for the Boolean value of the individual statements and returns the Boolean when at least one of the conditions is true
Returns the negative of the statement made
Bitwise operators work on bits and perform bit by bit operation. In binary operations, numbers are treated as string of bits. For example, 0 is represented by 0, 1 is represented by 1, and 2 is represented by 10 in binary.
Returns x with the bits shifted to the left by y places (and new bits on the right-hand-side are zeros). This is the same as multiplying x by 2**y
Returns x with the bits shifted to the right by y places. This is the same as //'ing x by 2**y
Does a "bitwise and". Each bit of the output is 1 if the corresponding bit of x AND of y is 1, otherwise it's 0
Does a "bitwise or". Each bit of the output is 0 if the corresponding bit of x AND of y is 0, otherwise it's 1
Returns the complement of x - the number you get by switching each 1 for a 0 and each 0 for a 1. This is the same as -x - 1
Does a "bitwise exclusive or". Each bit of the output is the same as the corresponding bit in x if that bit in y is 0, and it's the complement of the bit in x if that bit in y is 1
(Explanation: It's an artifact of two's complement integer representation.
In Python, one can examine the existence of an item, element within a list, string, or a dictionary using the IN operator. The non existence of a particular pattern, element, value, key can also be verified by using the NOT IN operator. A programmer should always consider not naming the variables as key words used by Python.
The identity operators are used to compare two values and return a Boolean value as the result.
The following table lists all operators from highest precedence to lowest.
Complement, unary plus and minus (method names for the last two are +@ and -@)
Multiply, divide, modulo and floor division
Bitwise exclusive `OR' and regular `OR'
This script is used to create a master plan for the GMB workshop.
Modeler with moderate to expert skills in SD
Gatekeeper with knowledge of what the participants might be expecting from the GMB
The team should aim for a detailed plan that alternates convergent and divergent tasks.
The tasks are used to elicit variables and model structure as well as incorporate reflection.
The facilitator, modeler, and gatekeeper discuss the agenda for the GMB session using 15-20 minute time blocks to discuss each activity to be included.
Some tasks may take more than 15-20 minutes to plan.
The facilitator, modeler, and gatekeeper revise the agenda after the first version has been completed. The agenda may be revised multiple times.
A complete and detailed agenda for the GMB session is created. A three to four column planning sheet is a good format for the agenda. It should include:
The public agenda to be shared with the group
A detailed agenda for the modeling team
Notes on the preparation and materials needed for each part of the meeting or session
Originally described in Luna-Reyes et al. (2006).
Luna-Reyes, L. F., Martinez-Moyano, I. J., Pardo, T. A., Cresswell, A. M., Andersen, D. F., & Richardson, G. P. (2006). Anatomy of a group model-building intervention: Building dynamic theory from case study research. System Dynamics Review, 22(4), 291-320.
{Sets the line text information in an object for a face.}
Slipping at home or simply falling from a standing height only, can end up fracturing your hips and wrists. These have the potential to do permanent damage to your body when your bones are too weak, and this is exactly what someone with osteoporosis goes through. The moment the fracture is triggered, it takes years to come back to their normal lives.
Osteoporosis is a medical condition of weakened bones in which the bone loses its quality as well as its density. It is also called silent killer as bone loss occurs without symptoms. Typically, osteoporosis happens in women above the age of 55-60 and sometimes in men.
Front Page: Radiation Oncology | RTOG Trials | Randomized Trials
Screening and Prevention |
Androgen Suppression Therapy  |
Adjuvant RT after Prostatectomy  |
Localized prostate cancer  |
Recurrence after RT |
Standard 2D dose cannot reasonably exceed 70Gy due to bowel toxicity.
Prospective dose escalation studies (RTOG 94-06, French, Dutch, Memorial Sloan Kettering, and Fox Chase) have shown reasonably good tolerance to doses of at least 81 Gy; GI and GU side effects appear to show more a volume effect.
As a result, several Phase III trials evaluated 3D-CRT to escalate dose above 70Gy. All except for the initial Harvard Proton Boost trial in locally advanced disease showed a biochemical progression free survival benefit for higher dose
Because they used different doses, it is not clear what actual dose should be used, or whether further dose-escalation would be beneficial
The Dutch trial allowed ADT for high risk disease, the MRC trial mandated neoadjuvant ADT; the other trials did not use ADT
A prospective non-randomized risk-adapted data from Spain argues for benefit of dose escalation in the presence of ADT
Meta-analysis. 7 trials, 2812 patients
Outcome, reduction in bPFS (SS), no difference in PCSM (p=0.45), or OS (p=0.38). Low, intermediate, and high risk all benefited. Linear correlation between total dose and bPFS
Toxicity: Increased G3+ late GI toxicity
Conclusion: High dose RT superior to conventional dose RT, and should be offered for all patients, regardless of risk status
PAPER RETRACTED - Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2013 Mar 15;85(4):899.Zietman AL, Viani GA.
RTOG 01-26 -- "A Phase III Randomized Study of High Dose 3D-CRT/IMRT vs. Standard Dose 3D-CRT/IMRT in Patients Treated for Localized Prostate Cancer"
3D-CRT/IMRT to 79.2 Gy in 44 fractions vs. 70.2 Gy in 39 fractions; intermediate prognosis tumors
Activated March 2002, ongoing, no publications yet
Randomized. 306 patients, intermediate risk (T2-T3, or T1 and GS 7+ or PS >10, PSA <50 ng/mL). Arm 1) 70/35 Gy vs. Arm 2) 80/40 Gy. 3D-CRT 4F 46/23 then multi-field technique. Rectum wall Dmax 76 Gy, bladder wall Dmax 80 Gy
2004 PMID 15519775 -- "The GETUG 70 Gy vs. 80 Gy randomized trial for localized prostate cancer: feasibility and acute toxicity." (Beckendorf V, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2004 Nov 15;60(4):1056-65.)
Acute GI toxicity: low dose Grade 2 27%, Grade 3 2% vs. high dose 28%, 2% (NS)
Acute GU toxicity: low dose Grade 2 31%, Grade 3 5% vs. high dose 30%, 7% (NS)
Randomized. 843 men, T1b-T3a (T3 in <20%), PSA <50 ng/mL. . Neoadjuvant AST 3-6 months, then RT Arm 1) 64/32 Gy vs. 74/37 Gy. GTV = prostate +/- SV (depending on risk). CTV = GTV + 0.5 cm. PTV = CTV + 0.5-1.0 cm
Pilot 2005 ASCO Abstract -- "Phase III pilot study of dose escalation using conformal radiotherapy (CFRT) in prostate cancer: PSA control and side effects" (Dearnaley, 2005 ASCO)
Single institution pilot for MRC RT01 using 2x2 dose (64 Gy vs. 74 Gy) and margin design (1.0 cm vs. 1.5 cm); median follow-up 6.5 years
5-year PSA-DFS dose 74 Gy vs. 64 Gy: 71% vs. 59% (p=0.1)
5-year PSA-DFS margin 1.0 cm vs. 1.5 cm: 67% vs. 63% (p=NS)
Acute side effects: GU greater in 74 Gy and 1.5 cm, GI greater in 1.5cm
Late side effects: GU (p=NS), GI greater in 1.5cm
Conclusion: "Dose escalation from 64 Gy to 74 Gy using CFRT may improve long term PSA control but a treatment margin of 1.5cm is unnecessary and is associated with increased bowel and bladder side effects."
2004 PMID 15297138 -- "Implementing the UK Medical Research Council (MRC) RT01 trial (ISRCTN 47772397): methods and practicalities of a randomised controlled trial of conformal radiotherapy in men with localised prostate cancer." (Sydes MR, Radiother Oncol. 2004 Aug;72(2):199-211.)
Early toxicity; 2007 PMID 17391791 -- "The early toxicity of escalated versus standard dose conformal radiotherapy with neo-adjuvant androgen suppression for patients with localised prostate cancer: Results from the MRC RT01 trial (ISRCTN47772397)" (Dearnaley DP, Radiother Oncol. 2007 Mar 26)
Early toxicity measured using physician-reported instruments (RTOG, LENT/SOM, Royal Marsden Scales) and patient-reported questionnaires (MOS SF-36, UCLA Prostate Cancer Index, FACT-P)
Grade 2 standard vs. escalated: bladder 38% vs. 39%, bowel 30% vs. 33%. Urinary frequency improved from pre-AST, but bowel and sexual function deteriorated
Conclusion: Escalated group broadly similar early toxicity, except immediately post-RT
5-years; 2007 PMID 17482880 -- "Escalated-dose versus standard-dose conformal radiotherapy in prostate cancer: first results from the MRC RT01 randomised controlled trial." (Dearnaley DP, Lancet Oncol. 2007 Jun;8(6):475-87.) Median F/U 5.2 years
By risk group: low-risk 85% vs. 79%, intermediate-risk 79% vs. 70%, high-risk 57% vs. 43%; benefit across all groups
Toxicity: GI Grade 2+ high dose 33% vs. standard dose 24% (SS); GU Grade 2+ 11% vs. 8% (NS); sexual dysfunction prevalent
Conclusion: Escalated dose with neoadjuvant AST seems clinically worthwhile, but increased incidence of long-term adverse events
Bcl-2; 2010 PMID 20092961 -- "Expression of Bcl-2, p53, and MDM2 in Localized Prostate Cancer with Respect to the Outcome of Radical Radiotherapy Dose Escalation." (Vergis R, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010 Jan 19. [Epub ahead of print])
Subset analysis. 308 patients, neoadjuvant ADT and RT. Tumor expression of Bcl-2, p53, and MDM2 evaluated. Median F/U 7 years
Outcome: Univariate, Bcl-2 and p53 but not MDM2 associated with 5-year bPFS. Bcl-2 associated on MVA. For Bcl-2+ tumors, 7-year bPFS 64 Gy 41% vs 74 Gy 61% (SS). For Bcl-2- tumors, 81% vs 87% (NS)
Conclusion: Bcl-2 positive patients had worse biochemical control, and benefited from dose escalation
Randomized. 220 patients, prostate cancer T1-T3M0 (T3 26%), PSA <50. Arm 1) EBRT 55/20 vs Arm 2) EBRT 35.75/13 + HDR 17/2. ADT 76%.
Initial; 2007 PMID 17531335 -- "High dose rate brachytherapy in combination with external beam radiotherapy in the radical treatment of prostate cancer: initial results of a randomised phase three trial." (Hoskin PJ, Radiother Oncol. 2007 Aug;84(2):114-20. Epub 2007 May 24.) Median F/U 1.25
Outcome: Mean bRFS combined modality 5.1 years vs EBRT 4.3 years (SS). Improvement seen in all risk groups
Toxicity: Acute GI toxicity better in combined group, other acute and late toxicities comparable. QoL FACT-P score better in combined group
Conclusion: HDR brachytherapy + EBRT results in improved outcome with less acute toxicity and improved QoL
Randomized. 664 patients, T1b-T4, with PSA < 60 (excluded low risk: T1a, T1b-c with GS<5 and PSA <=4; excluded pN+). Arm 1) 68/34 Gy vs. Arm 2) 78/39 Gy. Both 3D-CRT. CTV = prostate +/- SV (depending on risk group); PTV = 1.0 cm margin to 68 Gy, then 0.5 mm and 0 mm posteriorly. Prescription dose was to the isocenter. Stratified by risk group. Hormonal therapy in 22%
Toxicity, 2005 PMID 15752881  — "Acute and late complications after radiotherapy for prostate cancer: results of a multicenter randomized trial comparing 68 Gy to 78 Gy." (Peeters ST, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2005 Mar 15;61(4):1019-34.)
No late GI and GU toxicity difference (p=NS), except for rectal bleeding requiring laser treatment or transfusion (p = 0.007) and nocturia (p = 0.05)
Conclusion: Acute and late toxicity higher, but not NS except late rectal bleeding and late nocturia
5-years, 2006 PMID 16648499 — "Dose-response in radiotherapy for localized prostate cancer: results of the Dutch multicenter randomized phase III trial comparing 68 Gy of radiotherapy with 78 Gy." (Peeters ST, J Clin Oncol. 2006 May 1;24(13):1990-6.). Median F/U 4.2 years
Toxicity: GI Grade 2+ high-dose 32% vs. low-dose 27% (NS), GI Grade 3+ 5% vs. 4% (NS). GU Grade 2+ 39% vs. 41% (NS), GU Grade 3+ 13% vs. 12% (NS).
Conclusion: Significantly improved FFS, with comparable toxicity
Sexual fn, 2007 PMID 17331667 -- "Sexual function after three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy for prostate cancer: results from a dose-escalation trial." (van der Wielen GJ, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2007 Jun 1;68(2):479-84.)
ED in pretreatment potent men: at 1 year 27%, at 2 years 36%, at 3 years 38%. No difference between low and high dose.
2-year outcome: 30% had considerable/very much sexual desire; 14% used sexual aids
Conclusion: Lower % of ED than previously reported
Urinary obstruction; 2010 PMID 20056354 -- "Urinary Obstruction in Prostate Cancer Patients From the Dutch Trial (68 Gy vs. 78 Gy): Relationships with Local Dose, Acute Effects, and Baseline Characteristics." (Heemsbergen WD, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010 Jan 5. [Epub ahead of print])
Subset analysis. 40 patients with urinary obstruction (19 low dose arm and 21 high dose arm). Dose-difference maps
Outcome: Early events within 2 years (47%) predicted by baseline complaints and TURP. Late events after 2 years (53%) predicted by bladder surface receiving ≥ 80 Gy and especially with dose to bladder neck in the trigone
Conclusion: Late urinary obstruction associated with local dose to trigone
Risk factors; 2010 PMID 20227123 -- "Subgroup analysis of patients with localized prostate cancer treated within the Dutch-randomized dose escalation trial." (Al-Mamgani A, Radiother Oncol. 2010 Mar 11. [Epub ahead of print])
Subset analysis. Two prognostic models: Chism risk group (low risk T1-T2 and GS ≤ 6 and PSA ≤ 10; high risk T3-T4 or GS 8-10 or PSA >20) and PSA-level (<10 and ≥ 10)
Outcome: 6-year bPFS 68 Gy 51% vs 78 Gy 63% (SS). Low-risk 84% vs 80% (NS); intermediate risk 54% vs 78% (SS); high risk 40% vs 49% (NS). If PSA <10 no difference; if PSA &ge: 10, 62% vs 40% (SS); PSA optimal cut-off for no benefit 8 ng/ml. For patients treated with ADT, bPFS improved with high dose
Conclusion: Intermediate-risk group derived greatest benefit from dose escalation, though no indication was found to exclude low-risk or high-risk patients from high-dose RT
Randomized. 2 institutions (Harvard and Loma Linda). 392 patients, stage T1b-T2b, PSA <15 ng/mL (median PSA 6.3); 75% GS <7. Low risk 58%, intermediate risk 37%. Arm 1) proton boost 19.8/11 GyE followed by photons 50.4/28 vs. Arm 2) proton boost 28.8/16 followed by photons 50.4/28. Proton CTV = prostate + 5 mm margin. PTV = CTV + 7-10 mm. Loma Linda used opposed lateral beams, 250 MeV protons; Harvard used perineal boost, 160 MeV protons. Rectal Lucite probe, inflated with 25-50 mL saline. Photons were 4F plan, photon CTV = prostate + 10 mm margin. No hormones
5-years; 2005 PMID 16160131 -- "Comparison of conventional-dose vs high-dose conformal radiation therapy in clinically localized adenocarcinoma of the prostate: a randomized controlled trial." (Zietman AL, JAMA. 2005 Sep 14;294(10):1233-9.). Note erratum published after incorrect analysis of failures during initial publication, which changes outcomes. Values below are corrected values. Median F/U 5.5 years
Outcome: 5-year bNED 70.2 Gy 79% vs. 79.2 Gy 91% (SS), 59% reduction in risk of failure. LC 48% vs. 67% (SS) No difference in OS 97% vs 96% (NS)
Risk stratification: low risk (PSA <10, stage <=T2a, GS <7) 83% vs. 97% (SS); high risk 74% vs. 82% (NS). When high risk sub-analyzed: contemporary intermediate risk 75% vs. 87% (SS), but contemporary high risk not significant, but small number of patients)
Late toxicity: Grade 3+ 70.2 Gy 1% vs. 79.2 2%; GU Grade 2 18% vs. 20% (NS), GI Grade 2 8% vs. 17% (SS). Most GI toxicity by 3 years; GU toxicity continuous
Conclusion: Men with intermediate-risk clinically localized PCA have better bNED with high dose, without worse severe toxicity and with only small increase in G2 GI toxicity
10-years; 2010 PMID 20124169 -- "Randomized Trial Comparing Conventional-Dose With High-Dose Conformal Radiation Therapy in Early-Stage Adenocarcinoma of the Prostate: Long-Term Results From Proton Radiation Oncology Group/American College of Radiology 95-09." (Zietman AL, J Clin Oncol. 2010 Mar 1;28(7):1106-11.) Median F/U 8.9 years
Outcome: 10-year ASTRO (backdating) bPFS low-dose 68% vs. high-dose 83% (SS). For low-risk disease 72% vs 93% (SS); for intermediate-risk 58% vs. 70% (p=0.06). No difference in OS (78% vs 83%)
Toxicity: Late Grade 2+ low-dose 29% vs. high-dose 39% (SS); Grade 3+ 2% in both arms (NS)
Conclusion: Long-term advantage for high dose in low/intermediate risk PCA patients, with comparable Grade 3 toxicity
Patient surveys; 2010 PMID 20233822 -- "Patient-reported long-term outcomes after conventional and high-dose combined proton and photon radiation for early prostate cancer." (Talcott JA, JAMA.  2010 Mar 17;303(11):1046-53.)
Post-hoc analysis. 280 patients surveyed (83% of surviving cohort). Main outcome: Prostate Cancer Symptom Indices. Median F/U 9.4 years
Outcome: No difference in urinaty obstruction/irritation, urinary incontinence, bowel problems, sexual dysfunction, and most other outcomes. Patients receiving standard dose had less confidence that their dose was under control (76% vs 86%, SS). Many patients reported their function as normal, despite substantial symptoms
Conclusion: Higher dose not associated with increase in patient-reported symptoms
Rectal DVH; 2010 PMID 20207497 -- "Gastrointestinal Quality of Life After Conventional and High-Dose Radiation for Prostate Cancer: A Subgroup Analysis of a Randomized Trial." (Nguyen PL, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010 Mar 5. [Epub ahead of print])
Subset analysis. 50 men with >7 year follow up, QoL questionnaire and DVH data. Anterior rectal wall correlated with patient-reported QoL
Outcome: Trend toward association between higher V60, V65, V70, and V75 and long-term GI QoL. No difference between conventional and high-dose arms
Conclusion: DVH constraints rather than total prescribed dose have impact on long-term bowel function
Randomized. 301 T1-T3 patients, stratified by PSA <10 (65%), 10-20 (35%), >20 (few). Arm 1) 70 Gy vs. Arm 2) 78 Gy. Technique 4F 46/23, Arm 1) 4F RF 24/12, Arm 2) 3D-CRT 6 fields 32/16. CTV = prostate/SV, margin 1.5 cm anterior/inferior, 1.0 cm posterior/superior. No hormones
Preliminary; 1996 PMID 8621278 -- "Conventional vs. conformal radiotherapy for prostate cancer: preliminary results of dosimetry and acute toxicity." (Pollack A, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1996 Feb 1;34(3):555-64.)
Toxicity; 2000 PMID 11020558 -- "Complications from radiotherapy dose escalation in prostate cancer: preliminary results of a randomized trial." (Storey MR, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2000 Oct 1;48(3):635-42.) Median F/U 40 mo.
6-years; 2002 PMID 12128107 -- "Prostate cancer radiation dose response: results of the M. D. Anderson phase III randomized trial." (Pollack A, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2002 Aug 1;53(5):1097-105.). Median F/U 5 years
Outcome: 6-year overall FFF 64% vs. 70% (p=0.03); however: 6-year FFF if PSA < 10 ~75% in both groups (NS), but FFF if PSA >10 43% vs. 62% (p=0.01). No difference in clinical DFS or OS
Toxicity: Grade 2+ rectal toxicity 12% vs. 26% (p=0.001); Grade 2+ bladder toxicity NS
Conclusion: Highly significant FFF improvement for intermediate-to-high risk patients, no benefit if PSA <10. Increased rectal toxicity
8-years; 2008 PMID 17765406 -- "Long-term results of the M. D. Anderson randomized dose-escalation trial for prostate cancer." (Kuban DA, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2008 Jan 1;70(1):67-74. Epub 2007 Aug 31.) Median F/U 8.7 years
Conclusion: Dose escalation improved PSA and clinical control, particularly if PSA >10 ng/ml
Randomized. 104 patients, locally advanced T2-T3. All underwent staging pelvic lymphadenectomy. Arm 1) EBRT 66/33 vs. Arm 2) LDR 35 Gy (delivered via 18 needles over 48 hours) + EBRT 40/20 for total 75 Gy (>80% of prostate received 80 Gy)
5-years; 2005 PMID 15718316 -- "Randomized trial comparing iridium implant plus external-beam radiation therapy with external-beam radiation therapy alone in node-negative locally advanced cancer of the prostate." (Sathya JR, J Clin Oncol. 2005 Feb 20;23(6):1192-9.). Median F/U 8.2 years
Conclusion: Higher doses of radiation over shorter duration results in better control
Randomized. 202 patients, Stage T3-T4Nx,0-2. Standard photons 50.4 Gy four-field, then Arm 1) Conformal protons 25.2 CGE (total 75.6 CGE) vs. Arm 2) Photons 16.8 Gy (total 67.2 Gy). Median F/U 5.1 years
1993 PMID 8514551 -- "Late rectal bleeding following combined X-ray and proton high dose irradiation for patients with stages T3-T4 prostate carcinoma" (Benk VA, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1993 Jun 15;26(3):551-7.) Median F/U 3.7 years
Rectal bleeding (none Grade 3-4): high dose 34% vs. low dose 16% (SS)
1995 PMID 7721636 -- "Advanced prostate cancer: the results of a randomized comparative trial of high dose irradiation boosting with conformal protons compared with conventional dose irradiation using photons alone." (Shipley WU, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1995 Apr 30;32(1):3-12.)
Outcome: 5-year LC photon+proton 92% vs. photons 80% (NS), no difference in OS, DSS, TRFS. GS 4/5 patients 94% vs. 64% (SS)
Toxicity: Rectal bleeding photon+proton 32% vs. photons 12% (SS), urethral stricture 19% vs. 8% (p=0.07)
Conclusion: Boosting dose with protons increased LC in poorly differentiated tumors, but also worsened late toxicity. No impact on DFS or OS
2002 PMID 11743288 -- "Late normal tissue sequelae in the second decade after high dose radiation therapy with combined photons and conformal protons for locally advanced prostate cancer." (Gardner BG, J Urol. 2002 Jan;167(1):123-6.)
Retrospective. 39/42 patients alive from original cohort of 167 patients, T3-T4, treated with 4 field box photons to 50.4 Gy, follower by perineal proton boost to 27 Gy in 11 fractions. Median F/U 13.1 years
GU toxicity: G2+ GU 59% at 15 years but persisted in 18%. G2+ hematuria 21% at 5 years, 47% at 15 years. G3+ hematuria 3% and 8%. Urethral stricture 10%, urinary incontinence 8% (strongly associated with prior/subsequent prostate surgery)
Conclusion: High dose RT results in high rate of low-grade rectal bleeding, but low rate of G2+ GI toxicity; stable after 5 years. GU morbidity continues to worsen over time, but high-grade uncommon
86.4 Gy; 2012 (1997-2008) PMID 22795805-- "Long-term Survival and Toxicity in Patients Treated With High-Dose Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy for Localized Prostate Cancer." (Spratt DE, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012 Jul 12. Epub 2012.)
Started as prospective trial. 1002 patients. NCCN very low risk 10%, low risk 10%, intermediate risk 46%, high risk 34%. RT 86.4/48. PTV 0.6 cm rectal, otherwise 1 cm, weekly portal imaging. ADT x 3-6 months at discretion. Median F/U 5.5 years
7-year bRFS very low risk 100%, low risk 97.7%, intermediate risk 85.6%, high risk 67.9%
7-year DMFS very low risk 100%, low risk 98.9%, intermediate risk 94.1%, high risk 82%
7-year PCSM very low risk 0%, low risk 0%, intermediate risk 3.3%, high risk 8.1%
Late toxicity: Actuarial 7-yr late Grade 3 GI and GU, 0.7% and 2.2% respectively.
Of 427 men with full potency at baseline, 74% retained sexual function at time of last follow-up.
Conclusions: Ultra-high dose escalation to 86.4 Gy is safe and effective with remarkable long term outcomes, especially for the lower risk groups.
Strengths: Highest EBRT dose published in the literature with over 1000 patients.  It is the largest IMRT series to date (when published) with remarkably low late toxicities despite dose escalation.  One of the first reports to include the very low risk group (requires prostate volume measurements).
81 Gy; 1998 PMID 9635694 -- "Dose escalation with three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy affects the outcome in prostate cancer." (Zelefsky MJ, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1998 Jun 1;41(3):491-500.
Dose response: escalation to 75.6/81.0 Gy improved PSA-DFS of intermediate (p=0.04) and unfavorable (p=0.03) patients, but not favorable (p=0.5) patients
Neoadjuvant AST: No impact on PSA outcome, significant impact (p<0.001) on local control but also impotence (p<0.001)
Conclusion: "The data provide evidence for a significant effect of dose escalation on the response of human prostate cancer to irradiation and defines new standards for curative radiotherapy in this disease."
Phase I dose escalation. 1055 men. 3D Conformal. 3 patient groups. Group 1 (T1-T2, low risk of SV) treated to prostate only; Group 2 (T1-T2, >15% of SV involvement) treated to prostate + SV, then prostate boost; Group 3 (T3 tumors) treated to prostate+SV. No Group 3 in Levels III-V. Doses: 68.4 Gy (1.8 Gy/fx; level I), 73.8 Gy (1.8 Gy/fx; level II), 79.2 Gy (1.8 Gy/fx; level III), 74 Gy (2 Gy/fx;level IV), 78 Gy (2 Gy/fx; level V). PTV margins 5-10 mm. see RTOG 94-06 page
Long-Term Toxicity; 2010 PMID 19577865 -- "Long-Term Toxicity Following 3D Conformal Radiation Therapy for Prostate Cancer from the RTOG 9406 Phase I/II Dose Escalation Study." (Michalski JM, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2010 Jan 1;76(1):14-22.) Median F/U 6.1 years (Level V) to 12.1 years (Level I)
Late Grade 3+ GI/GU toxicity:
Conclusion: Excellent tolerance; more toxicity with 2 Gy/fx than 1.8 Gy/fx
Clinical results; 2012 PMID 22633552 -- "Clinical Outcome of Patients Treated With 3D Conformal Radiation Therapy (3D-CRT) for Prostate Cancer on RTOG 9406." (Michalski J, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012 Jul 1;83(3):e363-70.)
Median f/u 9.2-11.8 yrs. 5-yr OS 90%, 87%, 88%, 89%, and 88% for dose levels I-V. 5-yr clinical DFS (excluding PSA definition) 84%, 78%, 81%, 82%, and 82%.
Conclusion: "Dose-escalated 3D-CRT yields favorable outcomes for localized prostate cancer. This multi-institutional experience allows comparison to other experiences with modern radiation therapy."
PMID 12243818 -- Dose response in prostate cancer with 8-12 years' follow-up. (2002 Hanks GE, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2002 Oct 1;54(2):427-35.)
229/233 assessable patients; median follow-up 9.2 years; favorable definition (T1-T2a, GS 2-6, no PNI)
Dose escalation: 68-79 Gy in 2 Gy steps (<70 Gy 50 pts, 70-72.5 Gy 80 pts, 72.5-75 Gy 28 pts, 75- 77.5 Gy 56 pts, 77.5-80Gy 21 pts)
PSA-DFS was 55% at 5 years, 48% at 10 years, and 48% at 12 years (median dose 74 Gy)
8-year PSA-DFS if PSA 10-20: 19% vs. 31% vs. 84% (p=0.003) Only dose-response seen.
Conclusion: "The long-term results of the original Fox Chase radiation dose escalation study with >9 years of median follow-up confirm the existence of a dose response for both bNED control and FDM. The dose response in prostate cancer is real, and the absence of biochemical recurrence after 8 years demonstrates the lack of late failure and suggests cure."
PMID 9635695 -- Dose escalation with 3D conformal treatment: five year outcomes, treatment optimization, and future directions. (1998 Hanks GE, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1998 Jun 1;41(3):501-10.)
Dose escalation: 68-79 Gy in 2 Gy steps (<70 Gy 50 pts, 70-72.5 Gy 80 pts, 72.5-75 Gy 28 pts, 75- 77.5 Gy 56 pts, 77.5-80Gy 21 pts)
Toxicity: RTOG grade 3,4 GI morbidity at 5 years was <1%.
5-year PSA-DFS if PSA 10-20: 29% vs. 57% vs. 73% (p=0.02)
For each 1 Gy increase in dose, the hazard of bNED failure decreased by 8%
Conclusion: "A dose response was observed for patients with pretreatment PSA >10 ng/ml based on 5-year bNED results. No dose response was observed for patients with pretreatment PSA < 10 ng/ml. Dose response was observed for FC-LENT grade 2 and grade 3,4 GI sequelae and for LENT grade 2 GU sequelae. Optimization of treatment was made possible by the results in this report. The improvement in 5-year bNED rates for patients with PSA levels > 10 ng/ml strongly suggests that clinical trials employing radiation should investigate the use of 3DCRT and prostate doses of 76-80 Gy."
PMID 9112451 -- Optimization of conformal radiation treatment of prostate cancer: report of a dose escalation study. (1997 Hanks GE, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1997 Feb 1;37(3):543-50.)
Dose escalation: 68-79 Gy in 2 Gy steps (<70 Gy 50 pts, 70-72.5 Gy 80 pts, 72.5-75 Gy 28 pts, 75- 77.5 Gy 56 pts, 77.5-80Gy 21 pts)
Dose response: none if PSA <10, PSA 10-20 (69% 70 Gy vs. 80% 75 Gy vs. 89% 80 Gy), PSA 20+ (36% 70 Gy vs. 46% 75 Gy vs. 57% 80 Gy)
Dose response toxicity: Grade III/IV (4% 70 Gy vs. 9% 75 Gy vs. 19% 80Gy)
Conclusion: "Patients with pretreatment PSA < 10 ngm/ml do not benefit from dose escalation, and the serious late morbidity of conformal radiation at 70 Gy is < 3%. Patients with PSA values 10-19.9 ngm/ml and 20+ ngm/ml benefit from dose escalation beyond 70 Gy. Treatment beyond 75 Gy results in > 10% serious morbidity unless special precautions are taken to protect the rectal mucosa. All levels of severity of radiation morbidity show a dose response and combined with the dose response for bNED survival these data allow the optimization of treatment."
French Multi-Institutional PMID 10974470 -- Dose escalation with 3D-CRT in prostate cancer: French study of dose escalation with conformal 3D radiotherapy in prostate cancer-preliminary results. (2000 Bey P, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2000 Sep 1;48(2):513-7.)
GI toxicity: [66-70 Gy Grade I 19.5%, Grade II 6.5%, Grade III 0%] vs. [74-80 Gy Grade I 26.3%, Grade II 9.3%, Grade III 0%] (p=NS)
GU toxicity: [66-70 Gy Grade I 17.3%, Grade II 2%, Grade III 6.5%] vs. [74-80 Gy Grade I 16%, Grade II 3.3%, Grade III 0.8%] (p=NS)
Probability to achieve nadir <1ng/ml: better in 74-80 Gy (p=0.003)
Conclusion: "This multi-institutional study demonstrated the feasibility of escalating the dose of radiation to 80 Gy in prostate cancer patients."
Dutch Multi-Institutional PMID 9588921 -- Estimation of the incidence of late bladder and rectum complications after high-dose (70-78 GY) conformal radiotherapy for prostate cancer, using dose-volume histograms. (1998 Boersma LJ, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998; 41:83-92.)
Conclusion: "These data show that dose escalation up to 78 Gy, using a conformal technique, is feasible. However, these data have also demonstrated that the incidence of severe late rectal bleeding is increased above certain dose-volume thresholds."
Wayne State Hyperfractionation PMID 8621290 -- Hyperfractionated conformal radiotherapy in locally advanced prostate cancer: results of a dose escalation study. (1996 Forman JD, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996; 34:655-62.)
25 patients with locally advanced PCA treated to 78 Gy at 1.3 Gy bid in 6 weeks, followed by 24 patients treated to 82.8 Gy at 1.15 Gy bid in 7 weeks; 30-month follow-up
12-month outcome: 84% had PSA <= 4; and 53% < or = 1 ng/ml; 71% had post-RT biopsies that were either negative (55% or showed a marked therapeutic effect (16%).
Conclusion: "The use of hyperfractionated conformal radiotherapy facilitated dose escalation with no increase in chronic toxicity compared to standard doses. The initial tumor response based on prostate specific antigen measurements and postradiation biopsies is highly encouraging. Based on these results, an increase in dose to 87.4 Gy has been planned according to the schema of this ongoing dose escalation study."
Multi-institutional (1994-5) PMID 15667961 -- Improved biochemical relapse-free survival with increased external radiation doses in patients with localized prostate cancer: the combined experience of nine institutions in patients treated in 1994 and 1995. (2005 Kupelian P, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2005)
Conclusion: "With similar follow-up duration, higher than conventional radiotherapy doses were associated with improved PSA-DFS when controlled for the influence of pretreatment PSA levels, biopsy GS, and clinical T stage."
Michigan PMID 12957249 -- Dose escalation for localized prostate cancer: substantial benefit observed with 3D conformal therapy. (2003 Symon Z, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2003; 57:384-90.)
Retrospective review of 1473 patients treated with 3D-CRT (1987-2000); median follow-up 35 months
Intermediate risk patients (T1-T2 and GS 7 or PSA 10-20): each 1-Gy increment in total radiation dose was associated with a highly significant 8% reduction in the probability of failure (hazard RATIO = 0.92, p = 0.005).
Conclusion: "Dose escalation using 3D-CRT significantly reduces the risk of biochemical/disease failure among intermediate-risk prostate cancer patients."
RTOG (1975-92) - PMID 10894874 (Full text) — Survival advantage from higher-dose radiation therapy for clinically localized prostate cancer treated on the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group trials. (2000 Valicenti R, J Clin Oncol. 2000 Jul;18(14):2740-6.)
Retrospective analysis of 4 Phase III RTOG trials: 75-06, 77-06, 85-31, and 86-10. Included 1465 pts treated with RT alone (no hormonal therapy). Not randomized to dose.
Higher radiation dose associated with improved DSS and OS only for Gleason 8-10.
Multi-institutional PMID 3198435 -- The effect of dose on local control of prostate cancer. (1988 Hanks GE, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. Dec;15(6):1299-305.)
Stage B (725 patients): dose 60-70Gy appropriate; dose <60Gy significant increase in local failure; dose >70 Gy no demonstrable improvement in local control, but increase in complications
Conclusion: "The policy of treating all stages of prostate cancer with the same dose is not supported by these data."
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 2003 (1988-2001).
PMID 14571409 — "Technological Advances in External-Beam Radiation Therapy for the Treatment of Localized Prostate Cancer." Leibel SA et Al. Semin Oncol 30:596-615.
Conclusion: RT dose escalation to 76 Gy or greater improved patient outcome for all prognostic groups except those at the favorable (PSA <10 and Gleason 2-6) and unfavorable (PSA >20 and stage T3-T4) extremes.
Fox Chase Retrospective Lymph Node Risk Study Abstract Jacob, IJRBOP 2005
420 patients, >15% risk of LN+ (but negative radiologically), 3D-CRT to whole pelvic (WP), partial pelvic (PP), or prostate only (PO) fields. +/- short term androgen deprivation. Median follow-up 43 months
5-year FFBF rate by dose group was 48% for <73 Gy, 64% for 73-76.9 Gy, and 74% for >=77 Gy (p = 0.002).
Conclusion: The radiation dose was the most significant determinant of FFBF in patients with a lymph node risk >15% in the patient population studied. These data suggest that the primary tumor takes precedence over lymph node coverage or the use of STAD. Doses >70 Gy are of paramount importance in such intermediate- and high-risk patients.
Fox Chase; 2007 PMID 17398026 -- "What dose of external-beam radiation is high enough for prostate cancer?" (Eade TN, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2007 Jul 1;68(3):682-9. Epub 2007 Mar 29.)
Outcome: Adjusted 5-year Phoenix bNED 70%, 81%, 83%, 89%. 10-year FFDM 93%, 93%, 95%, 96%. Dose-response curve increasing benefit >80 Gy
Conclusion: Doses >=80 Gy recommended for most men with prostate cancer
Low/Intermediate risk; 2005 PMID 15752878 -- Dose-response characteristics of low- and intermediate-risk prostate cancer treated with external beam radiotherapy. (Cheung R,Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2005; 61:993-1002.)
Low risk: TCD(50): ASTRO def 57.3Gy, dose-response using ASTRO but not using CN+2 definitions. The dose-response curves essentially plateaued at 78 Gy
Intermediate risk: TCD(50): ASTRO def 67.5Gy, CN+2 def 57.8Gy
Most benefit seen by patients with PSA >7.5
Conclusion: Marginal improvement for Phoenix failure definition; little gain with doses >78 Gy for low risk patients. Dose-response for intermediate-risk patients
High risk; 2003 PMID 12873666 -- "Dose-response for biochemical control among high-risk prostate cancer patients after external beam radiotherapy." (Cheung R, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2003; 56:1234-40.)
TCD(50) was 75.5Gy; Gamma50 was 1.7. 78 Gy dose at the steep portion of dose-response curve. 78 Gy -> 83 Gy may improve PSA control by 10%
Conclusion: Benefit to dose escalation in this group.
MSKCC PMID 12065099 -- "Risk group dependence of dose-response for biopsy outcome after three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy of prostate cancer." (Levegrun S, Radiother Oncol. 2002)
Failure determined by post-treatment prostate bx >2.5 years after treatment
TCD(50) for high risk patients is ~10Gy higher than for low risk patients (~65Gy vs. ~75Gy)
TCD(95) is 78Gy, 83Gy, and 88Gy for low, intermediate and high risk groups
Gamma50 for the entire cohort is 2.9, but increases to ~5 for risk groups stratified by 2-3 factors. This supports that the shallowness of overall RT dose-response is a summation of steeper subgroups
Conclusion: "Dose-response of prostate cancer, quantified by TCD(50) and gamma(50), varies by prognostic subgroup."
Multi-institutional PMID 7607946 -- "Radiation dose-response of human tumors." (Okunieff P, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1995; 32:1227-37.) using data published in PMID 3967982 -- "Patterns of care studies: dose-response observations for local control of adenocarcinoma of the prostate." (Hanks GE, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1985 Jan;11(1):153-7.)
574 patients treated 1973-1975; failure determined by DRE and at that time standard imaging
Conclusion: "A change in institutional policies to treat with optimal doses as indicated by this study would result in an overall increase in local control and a decrease in complications."
PMID 7410129 -- Irradiation of carcinoma of the prostate localized to the pelvis: analysis of tumor response and prognosis. (1980 Perez CA, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1980 May;6(5):555-63.)
Netherlands (1983-85) - PMID 2298625 — "Late radiation damage in prostate cancer patients treated by high dose external radiotherapy in relation to rectal dose." Smit WG et al. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1990 Jan;18(1):23-9.
2-yr incidence of moderate or severe proctitis was <22% for 70-75 Gy but increased to 60% when the dose at the anterior rectal wall was > 75 Gy.
See also:  Localized Prostate Cancer (Dose Escalation vs ADT)
GICOR; 2005 (Spain)(1999-2001) PMID 16170164 -- "Risk-adapted androgen deprivation and escalated three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy for prostate cancer: Does radiation dose influence outcome of patients treated with adjuvant androgen deprivation? A GICOR study." (Zapatero A, J Clin Oncol. 2005 Sep 20;23(27):6561-8.)
Prospective, nonrandomized. 416 patients assigned to low, intermediate, and high risk groups. Low risk: 3D-CRT only; Intermediate risk: 3D-CRT and 4-6 months ADT; High risk: 3D-CRT and 2 years ADT. RT dose varied per institution (median 72 Gy, 64.8-82.6). Median F/U 3 years
Outcome: 5-year bDFS low risk 80%, intermediate risk 73%, high risk 79%.
Conclusion: Additional benefit of high-dose (>=72 Gy) when combined with ADT
Prospective. 150 patients with T1-3N0 prostate cancer. Asked if they wanted to choose dose, and if so what dose (70 Gy vs 74 Gy). Decision aid used to show higher cure but higher toxicity for 74 Gy dose. Control group of 144 treated with fixed dose without choice. Follow up at baseline, after choice, at 2 weeks and 6 months after RT completion
2008 PMID 17765404 -- "Offering a treatment choice in the irradiation of prostate cancer leads to better informed and more active patients, without harm to well-being." (van Tol-Geerdink, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2008 Feb 1;70(2):442-8. Epub 2007 Aug 31.)
Outcome: Involved group increased participation (SS), increased knowledge (SS), improved risk perception (SS), higher satisfaction with quality of information (SS), and appropriateness of treatment (SS). No difference in well-being
Conclusion: Offering a choice with decision aid led to better-informed patient; no overall impact on well-being
2007 PMID 17634489 -- "Doctors' and patients' preferences for participation and treatment in curative prostate cancer radiotherapy." (Stalmeier PF, J Clin Oncol. 2007 Jul 20;25(21):3096-100.)
Physicians gave substitute judgments (their estimate of what the patient would want) after initial consultation, but prior to patient decision
Outcome: MDs believed 66% wanted to choose (vs. actual 79%). Lower dose favored by 20% of physician preference, 51% of physician substitute preference, and 71% of patient preference (SS)
Conclusion: Physicians had problems predicting patient preference, and underestimated patients preference for less toxic treatment
2006 PMID 17008699 -- "Do patients with localized prostate cancer treatment really want more aggressive treatment?" (van Tol-Geerdink JJ, J Clin Oncol. 2006 Oct 1;24(28):4581-6.)
Outcome: 79% wanted to choose dose. In these, 75% chose lower dose. Lower dose chosen more often by older, low-risk, no hormone, or low anxiety/depression score
Conclusion: Most patients with localized PCA prefer lower radiation dose; many patients attach more weight to QoL aspects than improving survival
A substance is a thing that is a solid, liquid, or gas. Every substance has its special quality.
Main Paper: Herring, M. P., Jacob, M. L., Suveg, Cynthia., O’Connor, P. J. (2011). Effects of short-term exercise on training signs and symtpms of generalized anxiety disorder. Mental Health and Physical Ancivity, Science Direct, 4, 71-77.
What is the background to this research?
A new study has revealed that Exercise greatly reduces the symptoms associated with Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD). In the promising study conducted on 30 women diagnosed with GAD, it was revealed that both short term Resistance training and Aerobic training over a 6 week period, provoked improvements in a range of signs and symptoms that characterize GAD patients including anxiety, irritability, pain and fatigue.[1]
Generalized Anxiety Disorder is a stress-related condition characterized by excessive and persistent worry about everyday activities on most days over a 6 month period. Patients feel worry, tense and anxious about the smallest of matters relating to aspects of everyday life, including work, family, health and financial issues.
The most common signs and symptoms of GAD include patents feeling anxious, tired, irritable, fatigued, have difficulty concentrating and have problems falling asleep and staying asleep. Physical symptoms such as headaches, muscle tension and stomach pains are also very common. GAD can also be closely related to other major physical and psychological disorders such as heart disease, irritable bowel syndrome, panic disorder and even depression.[2]
Previous studies have shown that that both resistance and aerobic training has positive effects on GAD signs and symptoms. These include
Despite this, there are certain factors such as the psychological consequences of exercise training and the link between irritability and exercise which have limited research. No other randomized control study has quantified and compared exercise interventions with this many signs and symptoms of GAD.
The research was conducted by Matthew Herring, PhD, from the University of South Carolina, USA along with colleagues from the University of Georgia, Athens, USA.
What kind of research was this?
The study was a randomized controlled trial using exercise interventions to determine if exercise is an effective treatment option for the signs and symptoms that characterize GAD patients.
What did the research involve?
The study’s propulsion size of 30 sedentary women (18-37 y.o), diagnosed with a primary diagnosis of GAD who were not involved in any other treatment other than pharmacotherapy, were split into 3 groups. These consisted of two exercise groups of a Resistance program and aerobic program with a third group that was used as a baseline with no exercise intervention or lifestyle change. The hedges d equation was used to calculate the magnitude of the improvements compared to the baselines (Week 0) of the 3 groups.[7]
The following table summarizes the Exercise training format.
2*16 min sessions/ week, 6 weeks
Leg Press, Leg Curl, Leg Extensions
HR and RPE taken at end of each exercise/session
Week 1: 50% 1RM, Then 5% load progression weekly
Week 1: Unknown starting load. Then 5% progression weekly
The signs and symptoms measured included.
Feelings of Anxiety-Tension, Vigor, Fatigue and Confusion
Reaction Time and ratio of errors/ valid responses
What were the basic results?
The results of the study revealed positive improvements of the 12 associated signs and symptoms of GAD. In fact, between the resistance and aerobic exercise programs, 11 out of the 12 outcomes were improved, with the exception of pain locations which increased by week 6. Resistance exercise showed large improvements in anxiety tension, frequency and intensity of irritability, and muscle tension, while showing smaller improvements in trait-anxiety, depression, vigor, concentration and pain intensity. Aerobic exercise resulted in large improvements in pain intensity and mean reaction time, while showing small improvements in trait anxiety, concentration, fatigue, vigor, irritability and muscle tension. Overall, Resistance exercise showed greater improvements in 9 of the 12 outcomes, however, the improvements were for most, only slightly better than Aerobic exercise effects.
How did the researchers interpret the results?
Herring and colleagues hypothesized that both exercise interventions would bring positive results and but didn’t predict the shear dominance of the resistance intervention. They think this could be due to the fact that the perceived intensity (perceived exertion and HR) of resistance treatment was higher than the aerobic across the trial.
What conclusions should be taken away from this research?
The Study’s findings show that exercise is an extremely viable short-term treatment option for GAD patients with most associated signs and symptoms improving, as well as providing added benefits such as it’s low cost, limited risk and lack of negative side affects. The results not only support the work of previous research on the more important signs and symptoms associated with GAD such as Depression,[3] Anxiety [5] and Muscle tension,[6] but add to the field's overall knowledge with it’s positive exercise effect results on Irritability.
Herring’s positive findings on Irritability are important as it could be seen as the most vital symptom among GAD patients. Its association with a handful of other disorders such as major depressive disorder and dysthymia as well as it’s role in exacerbating the other symptoms of GAD patients, links to disability and the development of heart disease show why exercise is so important for improving Irritability symptoms.
Despite this, one thing the study didn’t show comprehensively was a clear differentiation between the exercise effect for those taking or not taking medication during the trial. With it’s negative side effects and limited effectiveness, medication needs to looked at more closely in future research to determine if exercise can be used as a stand alone treatment. Future research could also show the exercise effect on females with pre-reported high levels of GAD, the effect on males, younger populations, especially young women, and with most improvements really coming to fruition in week 6, a longer study to show what happens in week 8, 16, etc, to see if bigger improvements can occur. Stonerock's 2015 Systematic review on Exercise as Treatment for Anxiety mentioned the fact that most Anxiety/ GAD studies don't pre-select patients with high anxiety levels like Herring's study didn't do.[8]
What are the implications of this research?
Herring has shown that Exercise is an effective, easy and simple treatment option not only for GAD patients but patients of other mental disorders. He has set the platform for future research to get rid of the use of other treatment options which are expensive and bring negative side effects.
WebMD – GAD General Information
↑ Herring, M. P., Jacob, M. L., Suveg, Cynthia., O’Connor, P. J. (2011). Effects of short-term exercise on training signs and symtpms of generalized anxiety disorder. Mental Health and Physical Ancivity, Science Direct, 4, 71-77.
↑ Generalised Anxiety Disorder, (Fact Sheet), Beyond Blue (2008). http://resources.beyondblue.org.au/prism/file?token=BL/0505 First Accessed 7 September 201
↑ a b Blumenthal, J. A., Babyak, M. A., Moore, K. A., Craighead, W. E., Herman, S., Khatri, P., et al,(1999). Effects of exercise training on older patients with depression. Archives of Internal Medicine, 159, 2349-2356.
↑ Puetz, T. W., O’Connor, P. J., & Dishman, R. K. (2006). Effects of chronic exercise on feelings of energy and fatigue: a quantitative synthesis. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 866-876.
↑ a b Broocks, A., Bandelow, B., Pekrun, G., George, A., Meyer, T., Bartmann, U., et al. (1998). Comparison of aerobic exercise, clomipramine, and placebo in the treatment of panic disorder. American Journal Psychiatry, 155, 603-609.
↑ a b Smith, J. C., O’Connor, P. J., Crabbe, J., & Dishman, R. K. (2002). Emotional responsiveness after low- and moderate-intensity exercise and seated rest. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 34, 1158-1167.
↑ Hedges, L. V., & Olkin, I. (1985). Statistical methods for meta-analysis. New York: Academic Press.
↑ Stonerock, G. L., et al (2015). Exercise as Treatment for Anxiety: Systematic Review and Analysis. Annals of Behavioural Medicine. 49 (4), 542-556
Focus on engineering science (CDIO), not engineering technology (ISTE). This course is best taught by someone who majored in engineering and worked at least 5 years in the field. Industrial art teachers should stick with Project Lead the Way's (PLTW) Engineering Design and Development (EDD) Capstone Class.
Provide a framework by which general engineering introductions can be assessed.
Minimize content.
Transition to open ended projects as soon as possible.
Link to other wiki pages within this text first, minimize outside links.
Look for content within Wikimedia space that already exists rather than re-create.
Books and web sites that informed this course are
Engineering and the Mind's Eye by Eugene S. Ferguson
Engineering Design .. a project-based introduction by Clive Dym and Patrick Little
The Engineer Entrepreneur By Daniel T. Koenig
Lateral Thinking ... creativity step by step .. by Edward de Bono
Design engineering: a manual for enhanced creativity, Volume 10 W. Ernst Eder, Wolfgang Ernst Eder, Stanislav Hosnedl
Engineering design: a systematic approach By Gerhard Pahl
Fundamentals of Engineering Documentation and Communication by Earl J. Scribner
Engineering Labour by Peter Meiksins and Chris Smith
Critical Perspectives on Nonacademic Science and Engineering by Paul T. Durbin
An Introduction to Engineering and Engineering Design by Edward V. Krick
Practical Engineering Design By Maja Bystrom, Bruce Eisenstein
Introduction to Engineering Design by Arvid Eide, Roland Jenison, Lane Mashaw, Larry Northrup
Strategies for Creative Problem Solving by H. Scott Fogler and Seven E. LeBlanc
Introductory Engineering Design: A Project Based Approach by Javier Abarca, Al Bedard, Denise Carlson, Larry Carlson, Jean Hertzberg, Bev Louie, Jana Milford, René Reitsma, Trudy Schwartz and Jackie Sullivan
Adventures from the Technology Underground by William Gurstelle
How to Fossilize Your Hamster by Mick O'Hare
ASEE Papers (there are lots of them)
Open Sicilian 2...e6 3.d4
Moves:1.e4 c5 2.Nf3 e6 3.d4
3...cxd4: Sicilian Paulsen; Taimanov; Scheveningen
3...d5!?
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Sicilian Defence
Batsford Chess Openings 2 (1989, 1994). Garry Kasparov, Raymond Keene. ISBN 0-8050-3409-9.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
This Chess related article is a Wikibooks:Chess stub.  Please assist Wikibooks by expanding it.
Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) is a zoonotic viral respiratory disease caused by the SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV).
A reader requests expansion of this book to include more material.You can help by adding new material (learn how) or ask for assistance in the reading room.
Tompkins Consolidated Area Transit, usually referred to as TCAT, is a network of bus services in Tompkins County, New York. The vast majority of TCAT service is based around the City of Ithaca, New York, and several routes serve Ithaca College, Cornell University, and Tompkins Courtland Community College (TC3)
Currently, there are more than thirty bus routes that comprise the TCAT system. Routes are identified by number and are usually indicated on a marquee at the front of the bus, and sometimes on the side as well. Some notable routes are as follows:
Route 10 is a loop shuttle service between the Cornell University Campus and downtown Ithaca (The Commons.) Service is every ten minutes, the most frequent of any route on the system, and runs Monday through Friday 7:30am to 5:30pm
Route 11 connects the Ithaca College Campus with downtown Ithaca. It runs every half hour Monday through Saturday until 7:00 PM and hourly on Sunday until around 5:00 PM. It also serves the Longview Retirement Home.
Route 15 connects the Ithaca Commons with Wegmans Supermarket, also stopping at Walmart, Kmart, Lowes Home Improvement and other shops along the way. Connects with the 11 route.
Route 30 links the Commons with the Pyramid Mall, running through the Cornell Campus along the way. Service is every half hour, during peak periods every fifteen minutes. Runs seven days a week.
Routes 80 and higher solely serve the Cornell Campus, many other routes pass through the Cornell Campus. Route 81 serves between A lot and B lot in Cornell campus. Route 82 serves between Hasbrouk apartment complex for graduate students and East Hill Plaza. Route 83 serves between West Campus and North Campus via Uris Hall in Central Campus.
Routes 90 and higher provides night services. Route 90 serves between Ithaca Commons and Robert Purcell Community Center in Cornell campus. Route 92 and 93 serves various points at Cornell campus including North campus, West campus, and East Hill Plaza. More frequent services are provided during the weekend.
Fares are based on TCAT's zone system. When riders travel within one zone (which is the case for the majority of passengers), they pay the single-zone fare. Riders that travel through two or more zones pay the multi-zone fare. On weekends there is one fare for all zones -- the single zone fare.
Zone 1 includes all of the City of Ithaca and the neighborhoods of South, East, and West Hill, and the Northeast neighborhood areas -- including the Tompkins County Airport, the Cayuga Medical Center, and Pyramid Mall.
Zone 2 covers the outer suburban areas of the county and the rural towns (includes Lansing, Etna, Freeville, Dryden, McLean, Groton, Brooktondale, Slaterville Springs, Danby, Newfield, Enfield, and Trumansburg).
Adult single fares are $1.50 and $3.00 for single and multi zone trips respectively. Child fares are $1.25 and $2.50, and fares for seniors and disabled persons are 75 cents and $1.50. Various pass options also exist ranging from a single day pass to an annual one offering unlimited travel anywhere on the system. Although no special fares for college students exist, there are several semester pass options for Ithaca College and Cornell University students.
Transparency means that the user can easily find out what is going on behind the surface. A mechanical device may simply be designed so that the movements of important parts are visible or it may have a control panel showing the state of its internal parts in an intuitively understandable way.
In electronic devices there may not be any mechanical parts to show, so the state of internal actions must be visualized with text or drawings. It should be clear where a program stores its files so that the user can make backup copies or delete old files for security reasons.
The picture above shows a queue for a printer. Whenever commands or jobs are queued, there should be a visual representation of the queue, and preferably a way to cancel jobs in the queue or change their priority.
The payphone shown below is an elegant example of making a function visible. You simply place your coins in the slide on top before making a call. The coins then fall down, one by one, as they are needed. It is very clear to the user what is happening, and nobody can be in doubt how much money they have left to talk for. The user can even remove coins or change their order during the session.
This design is not perfect, though. Rejected coins are returned in a little compartment covered by a metal flap (at the drawing of a twisted coin). The user may be able to hear coins falling down in this compartment, but cannot see them. I would prefer that the coins fall down in an open basket so that they are easy to see and easy to pick up.
About 10 liters of fluid pass through the gastrointestinal system each day, and only about 2 liters are ingested, the rest represent secretions from the system itself. About half, 3.5, liters is secreted from the exocrine glands, the salivary glands, the stomach and the liver, the other half is secreted by the epithelial cells of the of the digestive tract it self. Nearly all this fluid is absorbed, so the pellets of feces only contain a significant amount of fluid in diarrhea.
To put this in perspective a 70 Kilogram man has about 42 liters of fluid, so the secretions represent about a sixth of the body's volume. The circulation contains about 3.5 liters, so these secretions represent twice the body's circulating volume. Failures of absorption of the intestinal secretions can thus lead to rapid dehydration and electrolyte imbalance.
The secretions consist of  digestive enzymes, mucous and substantial amounts of fluid and ions.
Several different types of gland are found in the GI Tract:
Single cell mucous glands and goblet cells.
Pit glands. Invaginations of the epithelia into the submucosa. In the small intestine these are called Crypts of Lieberkuhn.
Deep tubular glands. These are found in the stomach - the gastric glands, and the upper duodenum - Brunners glands.
Complex glands, the salivary glands, the pancreas, and the liver. The salivary glands and the pancreas are compound acinous glands.
Stimulation occurs due to local effects; autonomic stimulation; and hormones
The mechanical presence of food causes stimulation not only locally but also adjacent regions. This may either be a direct effect, or via. the enteric nervous system.
Stimulation of parasympathetic nerves invariably serve to increase secretion. Stimulation of sympathetic nerves may increase some secretions, but usually diminishes blood flow, which will usually decrease overall secretion.
Several different hormones affect secretions. They will be looked at in the regional review of secretions.
Digestive enzymes are secreted by glandular cells which will store the enzyme in secretory vesicles until they are ready to be released. These cells are characterised by a robust rough endoplastic reticulum and numerous mitochondria. Passage of materials from the ribosomes, through the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi body to the secretory vesicles takes about 20 minutes.
Note the presence of nerve fibers on the basal side of the cell.
Glandular secretions must also secrete water and electrolytes to go along with the organic substances. The following illustration shows the most likely mechanism for this.
Neural stimulation causes an influx of -ve chloride ions decreasing resting potential by 10-20 mV
Sodium ions follow down the electrical gradient. Cell contents become hyper osmotic.
Water follows. Intracellular pressure increases
Increased pressure opens ports on apical side of cell flushing water and electrolytes
Micro electrode studies indicate that the whole process lasts about a second!
The following table shows a summary of the digestive enzymes of the GI tract:
Note that in both the stomach and the Pancreas the protein digesting enzymes are secreted in non-active forms - pepsinogen in the stomach and Tripsinogen and Chymotripsinogen in the pancreas. This is to prevent autodigestion. They are then activated in the lumen, in the case of Tripsinogen and Chymotripsinogen these are activated by the small intestine enzyme enterokinase.
Numerous  hormones are secreted by the Gastrointestinal system. Here is a summary of the most important hormones secreted by the gut.
GastrinG cells of StomachHistamine secreting and parietal cells of stomachPeptides in lumenIncreases acid secretion in stomach and gastric motility
Cholecystokinin (CCK)Endocrine cells of small intestinegall bladder; pancreas; gastric musclepartially digested proteins and fatty acids in duodenumgallbladder contraction; inhibits gastric emptying; stimulates secretion of Pancreatic Enzymes
SecretinEndocrine cells of small intestinePancreas; stomachAcid and partially digested proteins and fatty acids in duodenum and small intestineStimulates bicarbonate secretion and pepsin release; inhibits gastric acid secretion, bile ejection
MotilinEndocrine cells of upper small intestineSmooth muscle of Antrum and duodenumFastingStimulates gastric contractions (hunger pangs)
Mucous is a viscous secretion used for protection and lubrication. It consists mainly of Glycoproteins. It is made by mucous cells in the stomach and Goblet cells in the small intestine. Up to 25% of the intestinal epithelial cells are goblet cells.In the mouth about 70% of the mucous is secreted by the minor salivary glands.
Adherent properties, it sticks well to surfaces
Enough body to prevent contact of most food particles with tissue
Lubricates well - has a low resistance to slippage
Neutralizing properties. As well as a buffer like effect, mucous can also contain large quantities of bicarbonate.
Control of secretion is by a variety of neuropeptides in the enteric nervous system; parasympathetic innervation; and cytokines from the immune system.
Transverse section of Villus showing goblet cells
A large portion of the 7 liters is composed of water and ions. The ionic composition varies from region to region.
The acini of the salivary glands secrete a sodium and chloride rich secretion, this is then turned to a potassium, bicarbonate rich secretion as it travels down the lumen and ducts of the glands
The Oxyntic cells of the stomach secret Hydrochloric acid
The mucous cells of the stomach secrete a mucous rich in bicarbonates
The pancreatic ducts and ductules secrete a solution rich in bicarbonate
The Salivary glands consist of the parotid, submandibular, and sublingual glands as well as numerous smaller buccal glands  secreting both serous and mucoid secretions. The parotid secretions are mainly serous, the buccal glands mucus, and the sublingual and submandibular are a mixture of the two. The acini secrete proteins and a fluid similar in consistency to interstitial fluid, and the ducts exchange the sodium for potassium and Bicarbonate for chlorine leaving saliva that is rich in Potassium and bicarbonate ions.
The glands secrete between 800-1500 mls a day
Salivary Glands, From Grays Anatomy
The sodium ions are actively reabsorbed, and the potassium ions are actively secreted at the luminal side of the cell with an excess of sodium reabsorbtion causing a -70mV gradient. This causes passive reabsorbtion of chlorine ions. Bicarbonate ions are both passively exchanged , and actively secreted in exchange for chlorine. This is illustrated in the diagram below.
The saliva contains the enzyme Ptyalin, an amylase for breaking down carbohydrates as well as a lipase.
The mouth contains numerous bacteria, and an important function of saliva is oral hygine. The saliva contains thiocyanate, a potent antibacterial. The lipase in the saliva will also breakdown bacteria cell walls and facilitates the passage of thiocyanate into the bacteria.
The lipase in fact is not very important for the digestion of food, most fat digestion occours with the pancreatic enzymes, but is important in its anti-bacterial  and oral hygiene role.
Salivation is controlled via the parasympathetic system from the salivary nuclei in the brain stem. Factors that induce salivation include:
Taste stimuli, especially sour taste
Higher centers especially appetite anticipation, smells and visual clues
In response to signals from the stomach and upper GI tract, particularly irritating stimuli. Salivation can also occour as a prelude to vomiting.
Histopathologic image of focal lymphoid infiltration in the minor salivary gland associated with Sjögren syndrome. Lip biopsy. H & E stain
Sjögren's syndrome is an auto immune disorder where immune cells attack the salivary and tear glands. This can play havoc with oral hygiene and lead to rampant caries.
[See Wikipedia Sjogrens Syndrome]
Link to Histology Slide at University of Ottawa
Esophageal secretions are entirely mucous in character, and assist passage of food as well as protecting the lower end of the esophagus from gastric reflux.
The adult stomach secretes about 1500 cc in a normal day consisting of hydrochloric acid, bicarbonate rich mucous, and the digestive hormone precursor pepsinogen. Pepsinogen is activated to its active form pepsin by the acidity of the stomach. G cells also secrete the hormone gastrin.
The gastric pits of the stomach open on to branching glands: pyloric glands in the antral part of the stomach; gastric or oxyntic (acid forming) glands in the fundus and body of the stomach. A schematic diagram of an oxcyntic gland is shown here (see also anatomy).
The parietal or oxcyntic cells secrete hydrochloric acid; the peptic or chief cells secrete pepsinogen; the mucous cells secrete a bicarbonate rich mucous; and the G cells (found only in the antral glands) secrete the hormone Gastrin.
The oxcyntic or parietal cell contains a large number of of intracellular canaliculi shown schematically here:
The pH of the secreted acid is about 0.8, and has a hydrogen ion concentration of about 3 million times that of arterial blood. To achieve this level of concentration requires a lot of energy, about 1500 calories per liter of secretion. The mechanism of hydrogen ion formation is illustrated schematically here.
Carbon dioxide and water enter the cell and combine to form carbonic acid under the influence of the enzyme carbonic anhydrase.
Bicarbonate is actively excreted at the basal side of the cell and is exchanged for chlorine.
Potassium is exchanged for hydrogen ions at the apical side of the cell
Chlorine ions (not shown in diag.) are also actively secreted.
Clinical Note: Intrinsic factor and Pernicious anaemia
The oxcyntic or parietal cells also secrete intrinsic factor, a substance essential for the absorption of Vitamin B12 in the small intestine. In chronic gastritis, this may not be secreted, and the medical condition pernicious anaemia will develop.
Mucous secretion rich in alkaline bicarbonate protects the stomach from the Hydrochloric acid of the gastric juice.
Bicarbonate ions are generated by the mechanism illustrated below:
Carbon dioxide and water enter the cell and combine to form carbonic acid under the influence of the enzyme carbonic anhydrase.
Hydrogen ions are actively secreted on the basal side of the cell in exchange for sodium.
Bicabonate ions are actively secreted on the apical or lumen side of the cell in exchange for chlorine
Pepsinogen is secreted by the peptic or chief cells of the gland.
When first secreted pepsinogen is inactive, but contact with acid converts it to the active form pepsin by splitting the pepsinogen molecule. Pepsin functions best at a pH between 1.8 and 3.5
Stimulation of Gastric Acid secretion.
The Oxcyntic cells function in close association with histamine producing cells called enterochromaffin-like cells (ECL) which secrete histamin. These cells release histamin in direct contact with the oxcyntic glands and promote the secretion of HCl. The activation of this complex is under hormonal (Gastrin) and nervous control.
Gastrin, secreted by the G cells in the antrum of the stomach in response to the presence of protein is the most potent stimulator of the Histamine/Acid complex. The gastrin is not only carried by the blood stream, but is also carried directly into the lumens of the gastric pits an has a direct stimulating action.
The Histamin/HCl complex is also activated by acetylcholine released by the vagus nerve
Other substances also control Acid secretion, mainly through their action on  Gastrin production.
Inhibition of Gastric Acid secretion.
Factors which slow stomach emptying, which was discussed when considering motility will also reduce gastin production and hence Acid secretion.
Pepsinogen secretion occours in response to two signals:
The upper small intestine secretes the hormones Cholecystokinase and secretin, mucous, Intestinal digestive juices, and possibly enzymes. The Digestive enzymes are secreted by the small intestine at a rate of about 1800 ccs a day. The pH of the small intestine secretions averages 7.5 to 8.0.
Cholecystokinin (CCK)is secreted in response to fats and peptides in the upper small intestines, particularly the duodenum. Actions of CCK include:
Secretion of Copious amounts of bicarbonate rich fluid by the biliary and gall bladder ducts
Secretion of alkaline rich mucous by Brunners glands
The first few centimeters of the Duodenum, between the pylorus of the stomach and the Ampulla of Vater, contain numerous compound mucous glands called Brunner's Glands. These secrete an Alkaline rich mucous - pH between 8.0 & 8.9 - in response to various stimuli:
Local irritation and the presence of Acid
Gastrointestinal hormones, particularly secretin.
The mechanism for secreting the alkaline rich mucous is similar to that already discussed for the stomach.
Gastric and duodenal ulcers are due mainly to the breakdown of the protective barrier of alkaline mucous.
The following factors have been identified as causes:
Non Steroidal Anti-inflamatory Drugs (NSAIDs).
The bacteria Heliobacter Pylori.
Excess acid secretion which can over whelm the defences. This can occour particularly in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, caused by  benign gastrin secreting tumors which may develop in the stomach or duodenum.
It is of interest that Brunner Cell secretion is inhibited by sympathetic stimulation, thus this may be a connection between the 'hyper' personality and their disposition to duodenal ulcers. Less mucous may be secreted making the duodenum more vulnerable to stomach acid and stomach pepsin.
These are located over the entire surface of the small intestine adjacent to the villi. They secrete a copious solution almost identical to interstitial fluid. The mechanism for secretion is not well understood but one hypothesis is illustrated here which differs only slightly from the hypothesis described earlier:
Sodium and chlorine ions are pumped into the cell; water follows by osmosis; the chlorine ions are actively pumped into the lumen; water and sodium follows from the cell itself or possibly passes through 'leaky' tight junctions.
The villi are covered with goblet cells. About a quarter to a half of the villi cells are mucous producing.
Small intestine secretions that are free of cellular debris contains almost no enzymes! Thus the enzymes are either secluded within the cell, or possibly they are attached to the brush border. In any case they are not flushed down the lumen, and they remain local.
Secretions are produced almost entirely from local enteric nervous reflexes  in response to local stimuli.
The pancreas is a large endocrine and exocrine gland  situated retroperitonealy beneath the stomach. The endocrine portion of the gland secretes Insulin and glucagon from the Islets of Langerhans (see thumbnail of histology). This function of the pancreas will be looked at else where. The microscopic structure of the pancras is similar to the salivary glands, the acini secrete enzymes, and the ductules and ducts secrete large quantities of a bicarbonate rich juice. These travel down the pancreatic duct to the second part of the duodenum where it exits via the  Ampulla of Vater, protected by the Sphincter of Oddi.
Enzymes secreted by the acini include proteolytic enzymes, amylases and lipases. The proteolytic enzymes are all secreted in an inactive form to prevent auto-digestion(see below).
The following table summarizes the digestive enzymes secreted by the pancreas:
Amylase breaks down carbohydrates (except cellulose) to di-saccharides  and some tri-saccharides.
Proteolytic enzymes are secreted in the in active form to prevent auto digestion, they are converted to the active form in the small intestine. Trypsin is activated by enterokinase, secreted by the intestinal mucosa;
Lipase converts fats to fatty acids and monoglycerides
The cells that secrete proteolytic enzymes also secrete another substance called tripsin inhibitor. This prevents any tripsin that may form in the cells or ducts from becoming active, or activating the other enzymes. If however the pancreas becomes damaged or the pancreatic ducts become blocked then the action of tripsin inhibitor can be over whelmed, and the very serious condition acute pancreatitis can develop. This can also occur if there is regurgitation of intestinal contents through the Ampulla of Vater. Wiki Article on Acute Pancreatitis
Copious quantities of Bicarbonate ion rich solutions are secreted by the ducts and ductules of the pancreas in response to the hormone Secretin. The mechanisms are similar to that of the mucous cells of the stomach, except that large quantities of fluid are also produced.
Carbon dioxide and water enter the cell and combine to form carbonic acid under the influence of the enzyme carbonic anhydrase.
Hydrogen ions are actively secreted on the basal side of the cell in exchange for sodium.
Bicabonate ions are actively secreted on the apical or lumen side of the cell in exchange for chlorine
Sodium and Water ions follow either passively through 'leaky' tight junctions, or through cell by the mechanism described above in 'Water & Electrolyte secretions'.
Like Gastic secretions, Pancreatic secretions can be divided into three phases:
The Cephalic phase occurs  when we think about or anticipate food. It is mediated by the vagus nerve. It causes secretion of about 20% of the enzymes, but as this secretion is not accompanied by fluid secretions, the enzymes are not flushed out and tend to remain in the ducts.
The gastric phase occurs when food enters the stomach, and again is mediated by neural stimuli. This accounts for another 5-10%, and again in the absence of serous flow these secretions tend to remain in the ducts.
The Intestinal phase occurs when food enters the small intestine and both serous pancreatic secretion becomes copious due to the hormone secretin.
Acetylcholine from the parasympathetic nerves of the vagus and the cholinergic nerves of the enteric nervous system.
Cholecystokinin secreted in the duodenum and the uopper small intestine
Secretin, also secreted in the duodenum and upper jejunum.
The following diagram summarizes the factors controlling pancreatic secretions.
Acetylcholin and Cholecystokinin cause secretion of digestive enzymes, but these tend to remain in the gland, as there are no secretions to flow them out.
Secretin causes copious secretions of sodium bicarbonate rich fluids which wash the enzymes into the small intestine, and also neutralize the Hydrochloric acid from the stomach.
2HCl + Na2CO3 --> 2NaCl + H2CO3 --> H2O + CO2
The carbonic acid (a weak acid) immediately dissociates into Carbon Dioxide and water The Carbon dioxide is absorbed into the blood stream.
Pancreatic enzymes work best between a pH of 7-8. Sodium Bicarbonate has a pH of about 8.
About 1500 mLs of bile are secreted every day. The bile is secreted continuously by the hepatocytes of the liver, and if not immediately required for digestion are stored in the gall bladder. Here they are concentrated up to 15 times. Initially bile fluid has about the same electrolyte concentration of interstitial fluid, but during concentration large quantities of electrolytes (but not Ca ions) are reabsorbed.
In the presence of fats in the duodenum, cholesystokinin is secreted which causes strong contractions of the gall bladder and relaxation of the Sphincter of Oddi, propelling the bile into the small intestine. Vagal stimulation can have a similary but secondary effect.
Bile contains Bile salts, an emulsifying agent neccessary for the digestion and absorption of fats; as well as bilirubin, cholesterol and fatty acids
Manufacture of Bile and Structure of Hepatic Lobule
The illustration below shows a schematic diagram of a liver lobule. Blood is conveyed to the lobules by branches of the hepatic portal vein and the hepatic artery. It then flows through sinuses, bathing the hepatocytes, to the central vein of the lobule, a branch of the Hepatic vein which drains into the Inferior Vena Cava. The hepatocytes secrete bile into bile canuliculi running between the hepatocytes, and these drain into branches of the bile duct.
Bile is continuously secreted by the hepatocytes. The fluid part of the secretion, a watery substance rich in sodium and bicarbonate is added by the ducts of the biliary system, and this secretion is stimulated by Secretin.
Histology slide from the University of Ottawa
Bile salts are recycled by the GI System. About 95% of bile salts are are reabsorbed from the terminal ilium and returned to the liver via the portal system. In addition, some salts are produce by bacterial action in the Large intestine, and these too are returned to the liver.
About 0.2 gm per day of bile salts are manufactured by the Liver, and the total pool of salts is about 3.5gm, so recycling is very important. recycling occurs 6-8 times per day or about twice per meal. If the terminal ilium is resected, or affected by disease such as Crohn's, fat digestion is seriously compromised, and mal-absorption of fat soluble vitamins can occur.
The following Diagram summarizes the regulation of Bile secretion:
The chief function of the large intestine is absorption of fluids and the formation of faeces. About 1-2 liters of fluid enter the large intestine, and these are mainly absorbed, only about 200 cc being egested each day.
The large intestine secretes about 200 cc of fluid a day, mainly in the form of mucous.
The large intestine can produce large quantities of water and electrolytes in response to irritation, such as occurs in infections. This can lead to dehydration, but also has the beneficial effect of flushing out the irritants.
Statistical computations require extra accuracy and are open to errors such as truncation and cancellation error. These errors occur as a result of binary representation and finite precision and may cause inaccurate results. In this work we are going to discuss the accuracy of statistical software, different tests and methods available for measuring the accuracy and the comparison of different packages.
Accuracy can be defined as the correctness of the results. When a statistical software package is used, it is assumed that the results are correct in order to comment on these results. However, it must be accepted that computers have some limitations. The main problem is that the available precision typically provided by computer systems is limited. It is clear that statistical software can not deliver such accurate results, which exceed these limitations. However statistical software should recognize its limits and give clear indication that these limits are reached.
We have two types of precision generally used today:
Binary representation and finite precision cause inaccuracy NIKHIL. Computers don’t have real numbers -- we represent them with a finite approximation.
Example: Assume that we want to represent 0.1 in single precision floating point. The result will be as follows:
It is clear that we can only approximate to 0.1 in binary form. This problem grows, if we try to subtract two large numbers which differ only in the lowest precision digits. For instance
With single precision floating point we can only represent 24 significant binary digits, in other words 6-7 decimal digits. In double precision it is possible to represent 53 significant binary digits equivalent to 15-17 significant decimal digits.
Limitations of binary representation create five distinct numerical ranges, which cause loss of accuracy:
Overflow means that values have grown too large for the representation. Underflow means that operands are so small and so close to zero that the result must be set to zero. Single and double precision representations have different ranges.
These limitations cause different errors in different situations:
Cancellation errors result from subtracting two nearly equal numbers.
Accumulation errors are successive rounding errors in a series of calculations summed up to a total error. In this type of error it is possible that only the rightmost digits of the result are affected or that the result has no single accurate digits.
Another result of binary representation and finite precision is that two formulas which are algebraically equivalent may not be equivalent numerically. For instance:
The first formula adds the numbers in ascending order, whereas the second adds them in descending order. In the first formula the smallest numbers are reached at the very end of the computation, so that these numbers are all lost to rounding error. The error is 650 times greater than the second.(McCullough,1998)
Truncation errors are approximation errors which result from the limitations of binary representation.
!
The difference between the true value of sin(x) and the result achieved by summing up finite number of terms is the truncation error. (McCullough,1998)
Algorithmic errors are another source of inaccuracies. There can be different ways of calculating a quantity and these different methods may vary in accuracy. For example according to Sawitzki (1994) in a single precision environment using the following formula in order to calculate variance :
Due to limits of computers some problems occur in calculating statistical values. We need a measure which shows us the degree of accuracy of a computed value. This measurement is based on the difference between the computed value (q) and the real value (c). An often used measure is Log Relative Error or LRE (the number of the correct significant digits)(McCullough,1998)
q should be close to c (by less than 2 digits). If they are not, set LRE to zero
If LRE is greater than number of the digits in c, set LRE to number of the digits in c.
If LRE is less than unity, set it to zero.
In this part we are going to discuss two different tests which aim to measure the accuracy of the software: Wilkinson Test (Wilkinson, 1985) and NIST StRD Benchmarks.
The Wilkinson dataset “NASTY” which is employed in Wilkinson’s Statistic Quiz is a dataset created by Leland Wilkinson (1985). This dataset consists of different variables such as “Zero” which contains only zeros, “Miss” with all missing values, etc. NASTY is a reasonable dataset in the sense of values it contains. For instance the values of “Big” in “NASTY” are less than U.S. Population, and “Tiny” is comparable to many values in engineering.
On the other hand the exercises of the “Statistic Quiz” are not meant to be reasonable. These tests are designed to check some specific problems in statistical computing. Wilkinson’s Statistics Quiz is an entry level test.
These benchmarks consist of different datasets designed by National Institute of Standards and Technology with different levels of difficulty. The purpose is to test the accuracy of statistical software with regard to different topics in statistics and different levels of difficulty. In the webpage of “Statistical Reference Datasets” Project there are five groups of datasets:
In all groups of benchmarks there are three different types of datasets: Lower level difficulty datasets, average level difficulty datasets and higher level difficulty datasets.
By using these datasets we are going to explore whether the statistical software deliver accurate results to 15 digits for some statistical computations.
In the group of ANOVA-datasets there are 11 datasets with levels of difficulty, four lower, four average and three higher. For each dataset certified values to 15 digits are provided for between treatment degrees of freedom, within treatment degrees of freedom, sums of squares, mean squares, the F-statistic, the
, and the residual standard deviation. Since most of the certified values are used in calculating the F-statistic, only its LRE
For testing the linear regression results of statistical software NIST provides 11 datasets with levels of difficulty two lower, two average and seven higher. For each dataset we have the certified values to 15 digits for coefficient estimates, standard errors of coefficients, the residual standard deviation,
, the analysis of variance for linear regression table, which includes the residual sum of squares. LREs for the least accurate coefficients
In nonlinear regression dataset group there are 27 datasets designed by NIST with difficulty eight lower, eleven average and eight higher. For each dataset we have certified values to 11 digits provided by NIST for coefficient estimates, standard errors of coefficients, the residual sum of squares, the residual standard deviation, and the degrees of freedom.
In the case of calculation of nonlinear regression we apply curve fitting method. In this method we need starting values in order to initialize each variable in the equation. Then we generate the curve and calculate the convergence criterion (e.g. sum of squares). Then we adjust the variables to make the curve closer to the data points. There are several algorithms for adjusting the variables:
One of these methods is applied repeatedly, until the difference in the convergence criterion is smaller than the convergence tolerance.
NIST provides also two sets of starting values: Start I  (values far from solution), Start II (values close to solution). Having Start II as initial values makes it easier to reach an accurate solution. Therefore Start I solutions will be preferred.
We can also choose between numerical and analytic derivatives.
Testing Software Package: SAS, SPSS and S-Plus
In this part we are going to discuss the test results of three statistical software packages applied by M.D. McCullough. In McCullough’s work SAS 6.12, SPSS 7.5 and S-Plus 4.0 are tested and compared in respect to certified LRE values provided by NIST.  Comparison will be handled according to the following parts:
Table 1: Results from SAS for Univariate Statistics (McCullough,1998)
All values calculated in SAS seem to be more or less accurate. For the dataset NumAcc1 p-value can not be calculated because of the insufficient number of observations. Calculating standard deviation for datasets NumAcc3 (average difficulty) and NumAcc 4 (high difficulty) seems to stress SAS.
Table 2: Results from SPSS for Univariate Statistics (McCullough,1998)
All values calculated for mean and standard deviation seem to be more or less accurate. For the dataset NumAcc1 p-value can not be calculated because of the insufficient number of observations. Calculating the standard deviation for datasets NumAcc3 and -4 seems to stress SPSS, as well. For p-values SPSS represents results with only 3 decimal digits which understates the accuracy of the first p-value and overstates the last.
Table 3: Results from S-Plus for Univariate Statistics (McCullough,1998)
All values calculated for mean and standard deviation seem to be more or less accurate. S-Plus also hs problems in calculating the standard deviation for datasets NumAcc3 and -4. S-Plus shows poor performance in calculating the p-values.
Table 4: Results from SAS for Analysis of Variance(McCullough,1998)
SAS can solve only the ANOVA problems of lower level difficulty.
F-Statistics for datasets of average or higher difficulty can be calculated with very poor performance and zero digit accuracy.
SPSS can display accurate results for datasets with lower level difficulty, like SAS.
For dataset “AtmWtAg” SPSS displays no F-Statistic which seems more logical instead of displaying zero accurate results.
S-Plus handles ANOVA problem better than other software packages.
Even for higher difficulty datasets S-Plus can display more accurate results than the others. But still results for datasets with high difficulty are not  accurate enough.
S-Plus can solve the average difficulty problems with sufficient accuracy.
Table 5: Results from SAS for Linear Regression(McCullough,1998)
SAS delivers no solution for dataset Filip which is a ten degree polynomial. Apart from Filip, SAS displays more or less accurate results. But the performance seems to decrease for higher difficulty datasets, especially in calculating coefficients.
Table 6: Results from SPSS for Linear Regression(McCullough,1998)
SPSS has also Problems with “Filip” which is a 10 degree polynomial. Many packages fail to compute values for it. Like SAS, SPSS delivers lower accuracy for high level datasets.
Table 7: Results from S-Plus for Linear Regression(McCullough,1998)
S-Plus is the only package which delivers a result for dataset “Filip”. The accuracy of the result for Filip seems not to be poor but average. Even for higher difficulty datasets S-Plus can calculate more accurate results than other software packages. Only coefficients for datasets “Wrampler4” and “-5” are under the average accuracy.
Table 8: Results from SAS for Nonlinear Regression(McCullough,1998)
For the nonlinear regression, two setting combinations are tested for each software package, because different settings make a difference in the results. As we can see in the table in SAS preferred combination produce better results than the default combination. In this table results produced using the default combination are in parentheses.
Because 11 digits are provided for certified values by NIST, we are looking for LRE values of 11.
Preferred combination :
Table 9: Results from SPSS for Nonlinear Regression(McCullough,1998)
Also in SPSS the preferred combination shows a better performance than default options. All problems are solved with initial values “start I” whereas in SAS higher level datasets are solved with Start II values.
Table 10: Results from S-Plus for Nonlinear Regression(McCullough,1998)
As we can see in the table, the preferred combination is also better in S-Plus than default the combination. All problems except “MGH10” are solved with initial values “start I”.
We may say that S-Plus showed better performance than other software in calculating nonlinear regression.
All packages delivered accurate results for mean and standard deviation in univariate statistics. There are no big differences between the tested statistical software packages. In ANOVA calculations SAS and SPSS can not pass the average difficulty problems, whereas S-Plus delivered more accurate results than others. But for high difficulty datasets it also produced poor results. Regarding linear regression problems, all packages seem to be reliable. If we examine the results for all software packages, we can say that the success in calculating the results for nonlinear regression greatly depends on the chosen options.
S-Plus solved from Start II one time.
SPSS never used Start II as initial values, but once produced zero accurate digits.
SAS used Start II three times and produced zero accurate digits each time.
In this part we are going to compare an old version with a new version of SPSS in order to see whether the problems in older version are solved in the new one. In this part we compared SPSS version 7.5 with SPSS version 12.0. LRE values for version 7.5 are taken from an article by B.D. McCullough (see references). We also applied these tests to version 12.0 and calculated regarding LRE values. We chose one dataset from each difficulty groups and applied univariate statistics, ANOVA and linear regression in version 12.0. The source for the datasets is NIST Statistical Reference Datasets Archive. Then we computed LRE values for each dataset by using the certified values provided by NIST in order to compare the two versions of SPSS.
Our first dataset is PiDigits with lower level difficulty which is designed by NIST in order to detect the deficiencies in calculating univariate statistical values.
Certified Values for PiDigits are as follows:
Sample Standard Deviation : 2.86733906028871
File:Version12pd.jpg  Table 11: Results from SPSS version 12.0 for dataset PiDigits
As we can see in the table 13 the results from SPSS 12.0 match the certified values provided by NIST. Therefore our LREs for mean and standard deviation are
Second dataset is NumAcc3 with average difficulty from NIST datasets for univariate statistics. Certified Values for NumAcc3 are as follows:
Sample Standard Deviation : 0.1
File:Version12na3.jpg  Table 12: Results from SPSS version 12.0 for dataset NumAcc3
In the table 14 we can see that calculated mean value is the same with the certified value by NIST. Therefore our LREs for mean is
: 15. However the standard deviation value differs from the certified value. So the calculation of LRE for standard deviation is as follows:
LREs for SPSS v 7.5 were
Last dataset in univariate statistics is NumAcc4 with high level of difficulty.
Certified Values for NumAcc4 are as follows:
Sample Standard Deviation : 0.1
File:Version12na4.jpg  Table 13: Results from SPSS version 12.0 for dataset NumAcc4
Also for this dataset we do not have any problems with computed mean value. Therefore LRE is
: 15. However the standard deviation value does not match to the certified one. So we should calculate the LRE for standard deviation as follows:
LREs for SPSS v 7.5 were
For this part of our test we can say that there is no difference between two versions of SPSS. For average and high difficulty datasets delivered standard deviation results have still an average accuracy.
The dataset which we used for testing SPSS 12.0 regarding lower difficulty level problems is SiRstv. Certified F Statistic for SiRstv is 1.18046237440255E+00
File:Version12ss.jpg  Table 14: Results from SPSS version 12.0 for dataset SiRstv
Our dataset for average difficulty problems is AtmWtAg . Certified F statistic value for AtmWtAg  is 1.59467335677930E+01.
File:Version12awa.jpg  Table 15: Results from SPSS version 12.0 for dataset AtmWtAg
LREs for SPSS v 7.5 :
We used the dataset SmnLsg07 in order to test high level difficulty problems. Certified F value for SmnLsg07 is 2.10000000000000E+01
File:Version12sl07.jpg  Table 16: Results from SPSS version 12.0 for dataset SmnLsg07
LREs for SPSS v 7.5 :
ANOVA results computed in version 12.0 are better than those calculated in version 7.5. However the accuracy degrees are still too low.
Our lower level difficulty dataset is Norris for linear regression. Certified values for Norris are as follows:
Sample Residual Sum of Squares  : 26.6173985294224
Table 17: Coefficient estimates for Norris(www.itl.nist.gov)
LREs for SPSS v 7.5 :
File:Version12nor.jpg  Table 18: Results from SPSS version 12.0 for dataset Norris
Certified Values for NoInt1 :
Sample Residual Sum of Squares  : 127,272727272727
Coefficient estimate : 2.07438016528926, standard deviation : 0.16528925619834E-0(www.itl.nist.gov)
LREs for SPSS v. 7.5 :
File:Version12nint.jpg  Table 19: Results from SPSS version 12.0 for dataset NoInt1
Our high level difficulty dataset is Longley designed by NIST.
Model: y =B0+B1*x1 + B2*x2 + B3*x3 + B4*x4 + B5*x5 + B6*x6 +e
: -log10 | 0,16528925619836E-01 – 0,16528925619834E-01|/ |0,16528925619834E-01| = 12,9
LREs for SPSS v. 7.5 :
As we conclude from the computed LREs, there is no big difference between the results of two versions for linear regression.
By applying these test we try to find out whether the software are reliable and deliver accurate results or not. However based on the results we can say that different software packages deliver different results for same the problem which can lead us to wrong interpretations for statistical research questions.
In specific we can that SAS, SPSS and S-Plus can solve the linear regression problems better in comparision to ANOVA Problems. All three of them deliver poor results for F statistic calculation.
From the results of comparison two different versions of SPSS we can conclude that the difference between the accuracy of the results delivered by SPSS v.12 and v.7.5 is not great considering the difference between the version numbers. On the other hand SPSS v.12 can handle the ANOVA Problems much better than old version. However it has still problems in higher difficulty problems.
McCullough, B.D. 1998, 'Assessing The Reliability of Ststistical Software: Part I',The American Statistician, Vol.52, No.4, pp.358-366.
McCullough, B.D. 1999, 'Assessing The Reliability of Ststistical Software: Part II', The American Statistician, Vol.53, No.2, pp.149-159
Sawitzki, G. 1994, 'Testing Numerical Reliability of Data Analysis Systems', Computational Statistics & Data Analysis, Vol.18, No.2, pp.269-286
Wilkinson, L. 1993, 'Practical Guidelines for Testing Statistical Software' in 25th Conference on Statistical Computing at Schloss Reisenburg, ed. P. Dirschedl& R. Ostermnann, Physica Verlag
National Institute of Standards and Technology. (1 September 2000). The Statistical Reference Datasets: Archives, [Online], Available from: <http://www.itl.nist.gov/div898/strd/general/dataarchive.html> [10 November 2005].
After World War I was announced to be over, Australia as a nation was eager to leave the hardships of war behind them. Several introductions to the domestic household that was meant to improve the quality of life such as the automobile and the wireless (radios) were changing the way people lived and shaped the industry around it. This was still the era of traditional social family structure, where man was viewed as the sole bread winner. However, women started to gain independence to a certain extent, although racial tension between natives and settlers remained high.
The Great Depression in 1929 changed the way Australia operated due to the crash in the global stock markets. This lead to a reaction of events which eventually ended with the unemployment rate higher then ever before, and with Australians turning to sporting legends like Don Bradman for inspiration.
With the new age rapidly approaching, a new age in fashion was also taking flight. When Orville and Wilbur Wright first flew their bi-plane in 1903, little did they know what a world wide phenomenon it would be. Aviation was in, and corsets were out. People not only went to air shows, but also wore aviation equipment wherever they went. Pilots were regarded as heroes, and their planes were seen as a symbol of the perfect modern age. Aviation is still popular, even today. People flock to air shows to watch the latest planes and aircraft in action. The aviation fashion has not continued though. Unfortunately people don’t wear flying suits around town any more, or wear the over sized goggles.
The Ford Model T was by far the most popular automobile of the 1920s. People flocked to buy them, and Henry Ford’s revolutionary factories could produce them in less than 1 hour. When you went out driving with your family you usually dressed in full driving attire including the goggles. Not only did people think that the goggles meant that they were exclusive in this modern age, but they provided protection for the eyes, as many of the motorcars did not have roofs.
Suits were also very popular. The businessman wore a suit wherever he went, even if he was going off to play a soccer game, or slide down a slippery dip. It was incredibly fashionable to have fair skin. Women would go to extreme measures to keep their skin nice and pale. Parasols and hats were popular fashion accessories and often complemented the long flowing dresses the women wore.
As the years progressed the fashions began to change. Men no longer wore suits everywhere they went, but donned more relaxed styles of clothing like t-shirts and shorts. Women wore shorter dresses and usually cut their hair in short practical styles.
The 1920s the  host of musical styles was jazz to soul. Louis Armstrong, perhaps one of the most famous Jazz players of all time, rose to fame in the nightclubs of the 1920s. People eager to forget their sorrow and leave their pasts behind them would not only dance to their favorite tunes, but also with the revolutionary gramophone, listen to their favorite tracks in the comfort of their living rooms.
Movies that incorporated music were now also being released. Ben Hur, the most noted film of the 1920’s, incorporated nearly two whole hours of music in the film, which was met with open arms. The audience could now tell what the film was going to be about, just by listening to the music, due to the emotions that could be invoked with instruments.
The Charleston also became rather famous.
During the 1920s and 1930s people were coming up with new and exciting ways to keep themselves entertained. Newsreels gave way to cinema with 95% of all movies in Australia coming from Hollywood. This was one of the first signs of the upcoming dominance of America.
Although not many people in our modern day society go for joyrides in their cars, in the 1920s and 1930s going for a ride in your new Model-T or Model-A motorcar was the one of the best family outings there was.
People would often seek out cheap forms of entertainment. Sports games were  affordable and a very exciting way to spend your Saturday afternoon or evening. Soccer, cricket and Australian Rules football were by far the most popular sporting codes and could draw crowds of 20,000 plus. The wireless had justnbeen introduced as well. People could sit down for hours at a time and listen to their set.
Beaches like Bondi were also growing in popularity. People would flock from all across the country to sit on those golden beaches and take a dip in the cool water. This new “beach rush” saw a change in fashion as well. Designers were designing short and practical swim suits for women to swim in.
Some other things like dancing was a type of entertainment that Australians will do in parties at home, or out in the public. It was a good way of moving around, and getting exercise. Jazz was popular, but some other dance types like country was popular too.
Transport was changing. From wooden carts drawn by horses, to the beautifully designed and crafted model T by Ford, cars were quickly revolutionising the way people were living. They could now go and visit relatives or friends any time they pleased. If they needed to go shopping, they didn’t walk for an hour to get to the shops, simply took a quick drive in their motorcar
.
Henry Ford’s factories could produce thousands of cars every day. The factories were actually giant moving assembly lines. Henry Ford invented the moving assembly line as a way of hiring unskilled workers to produce cars. The moving assembly line was in essence a line that moved. The special thing was that every meter or so, someone would do a little job on the bit of car that was going past. Whether it was screwing in a bolt or putting on a door handle, every job was small and very easy to accomplish. This enabled Ford to avoid paying for skilled workers and pay low wages to the working class.
By 1921, Australia already has its first Airline, Qantas. These new flying machines could fly across the world in days, not weeks. What used to be a trip on the high seas turned into a pleasant and smooth flight flying as the hawk flew from destination A to B.
Electric trams were also fast revolutionising the way people traveled. The first trams could only travel a few kilometres an hour, but by 1920, they were reaching speeds of up to 30km/h.
New advances in the field of technology were taking the world by storm. In Australia the radio or wireless as it was known back then had just hit the airwaves. In 1923 Australia’s first radio station, 2SB, began transmitting. At first users needed to pay a small fee to the government, but this soon changed to lifelong membership. In 1925 60,000 people had subscribed to the radio in Australia. By 1929 over 300,000 people had a radio license.
The gramophone was also gaining popularity. A gramophone is a fancy piece of equipment that plays vinyl records. People liked to sit down much as we do today, and listen to their music pumping through their speakers.
The radio was probably the most noted piece of technology in the period. It boomed growing from the first station to over 200 stations today. Unlike the past however, we can listen free unlike when people who lived back in the 1920s who paid a small fee to the government.
As electricity became more widely used, things like washing machines and hot water started creeping into people’s houses. All of these advances were contributing to a general feeling that society couldn’t really get any better, and people started to buy goods. It was this idea of a perfect society that provided the building block for Henry Ford’s Company. He employed unskilled workers, paid them good salaries and built cars. However, he developed a system to allow unskilled workers to build cars through a moving assembly line. The moving assembly line was his most genius creation. He pulled apart every little job there was in the creation of a car, and then gave that job to someone to do over and over. This enabled him produce thousands of cars everyday and sell them cheaply to the population.
The Sydney Harbour Bridge was built, during the Great Depression. It was an attempt to get the economy flowing again. The bridge, was maybe one of the greatest industrial achievements of the century. It measured over 1 km long and is the longest arch bridge in the world.
Sport in the 1920’s was just as prominent as it is now. Australia’s population not only followed professional sport, but played lots of sport themselves. Australians believed everyone should get a fair go, and this simple but just motto, still applies even today.
Cricket, soccer and AFL were Australia’s favourite sports. Cricket, was one of the sports we were really good at. Australians flocked to pitches to see the likes of Gordon Coventry and Sir Donald Bradman. Sir Donald Bradman was a crowd favourite. His quick eye, good coordination, and perfect footwork gave him a freakish ability to score lots of runs, without getting out. It was Heroes like Don who attracted massive crowds to the sporting arenas.
Sport however was sometimes  used to promote bad intentions, Hitler used the 1936 Olympics as a way to promote Aryan supremacy over the world. Unfortunately for him, Athletes like Jesse Owens upset his plan by winning nearly everything they went in.
The wireless radio had a massive impact on the sporting field. People could now follow their favourite individuals or teams, without actually being at the sporting ground. In 1924 people from all over Australia listened to Andrew Charlton win the 1500m swimming finals in Paris.
The 1920s and 1930s were scarred by racism towards the Aboriginal People. The Aboriginal Protection Board was meant to ease the tensions and fix Aboriginal problems. What they did was take away children from their parents and place them in white training institutions called missions. The belief was, if they took the children away, the Aboriginal problems would breed out.
The generation has now become known as the Stolen Generation. Many of the Stolen Generation have struggled with depression, and some have even taken their own lives. Recently a case was settled for the government to pay compensation for a man who was taken from his parents. This money however is too little and too late.
The Australian government also repossessed sacred Aboriginal land for soldier settlement schemes. Aboriginal soldiers who had served Australia in both World Wars lay forgotten or returned back to racism and hatred that they had faced before the war.
Aboriginals were also subject to horrid working conditions. They often worked for 16 hours a day, and only received a fraction of what the equivalent white man would receive. It was these racial tensions that in 1928, lead to the murder of 31 Aboriginal men, women and children, in supposed self-defence as a team of investigators researched the death of a Dingo Hunter.
On Australia Day 1938 The Aboriginals commemorated 150 years of white settlement not with a day of celebration but with a day of mourning.
A Trade Union is an organisation which people of a certain skill are part of. Australian worker by the late 19th Century had developed strong Trade Unions. This enabled skilled workers to gain good wages for themselves and feed their hungry families. During World War 1, Trade Unions organised strikes. These strikes were to protest frozen wages that the tradesmen were submitted to.
When the Labor party was torn apart by the conscription issue, Trade Unions received little to no support from the conservative parties and their powers were diminished
As you can see, the 1920s and the 1930s were a time of great change. People forgot the old and embraced the new in an attempt to leave the hardship and struggles of the war behind them. New Technology was being created like toasters and cars. The fashion world was seeing great change in the latest fashions. Aboriginals still faced the racial tension from nearly the whole of Australia.
Today in 2011 the Internet was shut down in Egypt. Contrary to the intentions, it led to more people in the streets and was followed by an Anonymous Operation. Eventually Mubarak resigned.
For example: I want to go to the store. Yo quiero ir a la tienda.
He wants to see a movie. El quiere mirar una película.
For example: We will go to school tomorrow. Vamos a la escuela mañana.
What are you doing _______? (this weekend, tomorrow, etc.)
Where are you going ______? (This weekend, tomorrow, etc.)
Are you cooking or eating out?
How will you get there?
Practice with these terms in this interactive exercise: Question match practice
In the following dialogue, Pablo shares his weekend plans with Jorge.
Pablo: Quiero pasarla con mi familia.
Pablo: Quiero comer comida deliciosa con mi familia.
Pablo: Yo voy al mercado de agricultores para comprar productos locales con mi familia entera.
Pablo: Normalmente, caminamos por en parque hacia Grand Army Plaza.
Equation of a line, y = mx + c
etc.
When are lines perpendicular or parallel?
Rationalising the Denominator.
Vertex of, line of symmetry of
Tangents are perpen. to radii
Tangents from an external point are equal, etc.
Circle from three points, finding tangents to a point
Simultanoues Eq.
Intersections of curves as sol'n to sim. eq.
Translations of curves.
IDEA: finding the gradient of the tangent to a curve
Are b/w two curves b/w two points
Geophysical fluid dynamics is the study of the atmosphere and oceans using the machinery of general fluid dynamics. Much of the interest and novelty of geophysical flows derives from the fact that they take place in a rotating reference frame.  The Coriolis Force, for example, is a result of this rotation, and is a very prominent feature of large scale flows.  Other factors contributing to the unique character of geophysical flows include the (thermodynamical) interaction between the atmosphere and oceans and the fact that the systems under investigation are vertically arranged in stable layers (vertical density stratification).
-o is a file test that tests, if the file is owned by effective uid.
It takes one argument, either a FILENAME, a FILEHANDLE, or a DIRHANDLE to test the associated file to see, if something is true about it. If the argument is omitted, it tests $_. -o returns 1 for true and an empty string for false. If the file doesn't exist or can't be examined, it returns undef and sets $! (errno).
Today in 2017 Google released version 1.0.0 of TensorFlow.
A TiddlyWiki 5 complete manual.
If you are looking for information regarding TiddlyWiki Classic, please refer to TiddlyWiki Classic.
Post a question on a TidldyWiki Forum
There rule similar to the product rule for quotients.  To prove it, we go to the definition of the derivative:
This leads us to the so-called "quotient rule":
Which some people remember with the mnemonic "low D-high minus high D-low (over) square the low and away we go!"
Remember: the derivative of a product/quotient is not the product/quotient of the derivatives. (That is, differentiation does not distribute over multiplication or division.)
However one can distribute before taking the derivative.  That is
Parametric and Polar Equations ·
Sequences and Series ·
Multivariable Calculus & Differential Equations ·
Wikipedia has related information at Unit of alcohol
The margarita is the most common of all tequila-based cocktails. There are three main ingredients in a margarita: Tequila, Triple Sec, and lime juice. The traditional recipe is 3:2:1 – three parts Tequila, two parts Triple Sec and one part lime juice; however, the IBA standard is 7:4:3 = (50% tequila, 29% Triple Sec, 21% fresh lime or lemon juice), which keeps 50% tequila, but uses slightly less Triple Sec and correspondingly slightly more lime juice.
Other orange flavored liqueurs are frequently substituted for Triple Sec; Cointreau is most common, but there are many alternatives.
The rim of the glass is often, but not always, salted.
Traditional tequilas are dry, and served without ice; however, one may prepare sweet tequilas, often with other fruit juices such as pineapple, or serve over ice, or even blended. These sweet and iced variants are looked down upon by traditionalists, and despised as “party drinks”, but frequently served at parties.
Tequila – or mezcal, or sotol
Blanco (unaged) is most common and recommended, but reposado (aged under 1 year) is also often used, and añejo (aged 1 to 3 years) is sometimes used.[1] The issue is that tequila is the focus of the drink, and conversely the margarita is the most common tequila cocktail. Blanco is most assertive, and the purest expression of agave, while reposado is gentler and with somewhat less agave and a little wood (from oak); añejo has less agave taste and makes a very gentle margarita.
100% agave is recommended, as it is the focus; mixto (less than 100% agave) is significantly cheaper, but of inferior quality. If cost is an issue or if very sugary, mixto may prove acceptable, though one should compare with 100% agave before serving.
Widely varying grades of tequila are used in margaritas, from the cheapest grade to the fanciest. This significantly affects the quality and the cost, and comparison is strongly recommended.
Issues to consider in orange liqueur include: alcohol content – orange liqueurs vary in alcohol content from 15% to 40% (30 to 80 proof); neutral spirits base (such as Cointreau) or brandy base (such as Grand Marnier) – this affects taste and color; and price – generic triple sec adds negligibly to the price of a margarita (compared to tequila), while name brands can double the price.
Citrus juice – or other fruit juice
Most often fresh lime juice, ideally from key limes; Persian limes are most common in stores, however. One can also use other citrus such as lemon, or even others such as grapefruit, though this is properly a variant. One may even use other fruit juices (as is common in daquiris), though this should be flagged.
Fresh lime juice is strongly recommended, and considered a defining characteristic; one may use Rose’s lime juice or sour mix, but this yields a significantly sweeter drink due to added sugar, and is considered deeply inferior.
Generally coarse salt is used; one may also use fine salt, or various flavored salts or sugar (of various fineness) instead.
Some serve sweet tequilas; this is most easily accomplished by using simple syrup, sour mix or pre-packaged “tequila mixes”. Sweet margaritas are looked down upon as “party drinks”, and subtle details of the tequila or orange liqueur tend to be masked by the overwhelming sugar flavor, but they are widely served at parties.
The margarita glass may be used, particularly when serving a blended fruit margarita.
Most formally a cocktail glass is used, as the classic margarita is a classic drink. Alternatively one may use an old-fashioned glass, particularly if serving on the rocks, or serve in a specialized margarita glass, particularly when serving with a blended fruit margarita.
Ratios vary; they almost universally adhere to the order of tequila, triple sec, lime: the focus is tequila, and extra lime would yield a very sour drink.
1:1:1 = 6:6:6 (33% tequila, 33% Triple Sec, 33% lime) – a very sour variant.
For overall amounts, one often uses 1.5 oz. or 2 oz. of tequila; the juice of half a lime is then enough. A cocktail glass, in which a margarita is generally served, can hold 2 such margaritas (assuming no ice), as reflected in the IBA standard quantities, and margaritas are mostly alcohol, so a full cocktail glass of margarita is a significant amount of alcohol.
(Optional) Salt the rim – rub the rim of a cocktail glass with a lime wedge (or half) or paper towel, dip in coarse salt.
One often takes care to coat only the outside of the rim by only rubbing the outside with the lime or towel, and rotating the outside of the rim through a salt dish (rather than dipping the entire rim into a dish of salt), and then shaking (after a brief pause for drying), so that the salt does not fall into the drink.
One may also salt half the rim, or salt most of the rim but leave a gap, allowing the drinker the option of a salted or unsalted rim.
More simply, one may ask the drinker their preference.
Salt may be omitted as interfering with the flavor of the tequila, or used to mask the flavor of an inferior tequila.
Alternatively, for sweet tequilas one may use sugar instead on the rim.
One may pre-salt glasses, as this is time-consuming and there is little loss from doing so ahead of time.
Mix tequila, orange liqueur, and citrus juice.
One may alternatively stir, but shaking is preferred for mixing with fruit juices, and the tequila is a strong drink, so the ice shards of shaking are of little consequence or even a benefit.
Some serve tequila on the rocks, though more purely it is served strained.
(Optional) Garnish with a lime wedge or slice.
.5 oz. lime juice
1/3 cup generic tequila.
Serve in a sugar or salt rimmed glass, on the rocks or with crushed ice.
½ oz. orange liqueur
½ oz. lime juice plus 1 lime wedges
In a blender, combine the ingredients and blend until slushy.
Pour into prepared margarita glass and serve with a lime wedge.
Fruit juices can also be added to a Margarita. Examples of such combinations that go well are:
Lime juice with raspberry.
Strawberry or peach, with lemon juice.
Note, however, that fruit Margaritas are not recognised as part of the standard Margarita repertoire.
2 1/2 oz Prickly Pear Infused Tequila (Voodoo Tiki Desert Rose)
Pour the ingredients into a cocktail shaker with ice.
Shake well.
Strain into a chilled margarita glass with a sugar or salt rim.
Garnish with a sugar coated lime wheel.
↑ Margarita - Blanco or Reposado, Chowhound
↑ The Great Oh Gosh! Orange Liqueur Showdown, part of Orange Liqueur Showdown series; see especially Awards
Daiquiri – a basic rum sour; rum-based blended ice and fruit drinks are known as fruit daiquiris, analogously to fruit margaritas
This section provides an overview of our chosen program.  Later sections of Part 4, design studies in Part 5, and related information located elsewhere and linked will provide more details.  The program concept is incomplete as of late of 2017, and readers are invited to contribute to it and improve it.  Conceptual and Preliminary Design, which are the early stages of overall design and development, have not been finished.  Therefore we have not selected all the preferred choices, and multiple candidates are often presented.
Program GoalsEvery program needs identifiable goals and objectives to direct the design and implementation work.   Section 5.1 was an early study to develop these goals and objectives, and an initial design concept to meet them.  The most compact statement of the program's goals are:
Upgrade civilization on Earth, and progressively expand to more difficult environments, including multiple regions in space.
Improving Life on Earth by developing better technology to make material goods and to live sustainably from local resources.
Expanding Material and Energy Resources by access to currently difficult Earth and space locations.
Increasing Biosphere Security by adapting to more difficult environments, including future changes to the Earth itself, and by countering undesirable changes.
Reducing Hazards from Space by identifying what they are, followed by developing methods to deal with them.
Understanding the Earth Better by observing our home planet, its environment in space, and other planets and environments.
Long Term Survival by dispersal to multiple locations and acquisition of needed new resources.
Increasing Choice and Freedom by opening unoccupied regions to habitation and use.
Increasing Opportunity by access to unclaimed resources and more efficient technology.
Low cost access to space, removing a current barrier to activities there.
Spin-off technology from attempting difficult tasks, which can then find uses elsewhere.
Optimism for the future by demonstrating we are not in a finite, closed world.  An optimistic viewpoint in turn changes how people act.
These benefits of the program accrue to civilization as a whole, although the specific projects may be funded and carried out by smaller organizations.
Program SummaryOur current civilization significantly uses only 13.5% of the Earth's surface.  The biosphere plus the human-built environment averages about 200 kg/m2 if distributed evenly across this area.  This is a tiny fraction of the 11.71 billion kg/m2 of the Earth's total mass.  The known major planets and smaller bodies of the Solar System amount to 447 times more mass than the Earth alone.  In terms of thickness, our current civilization amounts to a 20 cm thick layer on the portion of the Earth we use.  This is a very thin veneer compared to the bulk of the Earth.  The layer thickness assumes the contents average the density of water (which living things approximately do) and were flattened and distributed evenly.
Our civilization uses about 20 TW of energy in all forms.  Ignoring other energy sources, this is a small fraction of the 174,000 TW of sunlight that falls on the Earth, and a microscopic fraction of the 383 trillion TW the Sun produces.  Problems like poverty and material scarcity don't stem from a lack of resources.  They exist because we hardly use the vast amounts of material and energy resources that are there.  Our program's approach can then be simply explained as "using more of what's already there".  Of course, we want to do so responsibly, and minimize side effects to the biosphere and people's current lives.
Historically, people first occupied the easiest environments, and used the easiest sources of materials and energy.  Our program concept is to continue the "easiest first" path, but apply modern technology towards occupying and using progressively more difficult environments on Earth, and then in space.  We can leverage existing production equipment and use "smart tools" (automation, software, robotics, and AI) to efficiently make more.  This starts in the easiest places, which are existing locations where people already live.  Starter sets of equipment are then sent to the next harder environments, where they can use local energy and materials to grow.  When they have expanded enough, they can then contribute to starting in even harder locations.  People accompany the starter sets when the environment is not too difficult.  In the more extreme and remote locations the equipment operates automatically or by remote control until suitable space for people is built.  In this way civilization can progressively upgrade itself where people already live, expand horizontally across areas we mostly don't use yet (i.e oceans, deserts, and ice caps), and vertically down into the Earth and up into space.
We expect the program would be carried out as many separate projects, each for its own reasons.  For the purpose of engineering analysis, design, and optimization, though, we will consider the program as a whole.  This is similar to how airplane design has to consider the airports and traffic control system they operate with, even though the airplane manufacturers, airlines, airports, and traffic control network are all operated by different organizations.  By presenting the entire program, we hope to provide a hopeful vision for the future, and inspiration for people to follow selected parts according to their interests and abilities.
Figure 4.1-1 - Program Phases vs Time.  Figure 4.1-2 - Sequence of program upgrade and expansion phases. Our "easiest first" approach is a progressive series of upgrades and expansions to new environments, with previous regions providing the means to open up the next ones.  Existing environments continue to be occupied and used as new ones are established.  Therefore we organize the program into a number of phases, with staggered starting times (Figure 4.1-1) and a sequence for which phases lead to the later ones (Figure 4.1-2).  Once started, a phase continues in parallel with earlier phases, and the rest of civilization outside the program.  In turn, phases are divided into smaller projects, locations, and functions, with engineered systems and subsystems which perform the functions.  The parts of the program interact with each other at all levels, and with the rest of civilization, via an assortment of inputs and outputs.
The first four phases begin on Earth.  These are:
The Research & Development Phase supplies necessary technology and designs to the later phases, and therefore comes first.  Phases 1, 2, and 3 are distinguished by scale of operations and moderate vs difficult or extreme operating environments.  Different scales and environments will lead to different specific designs, so we define phases for each.  Smaller scale equipment can be used to build larger equipment, and gathered in numbers to make larger production systems, hence the sequence from starter to distributed and industrial phases.  The easiest places to start are developed areas with moderate conditions, so the first three phases begin there.  Phase 3 builds on that experience and therefore comes fourth, in progressively harder environments.  If you wonder why four out of seven phases in a book about space systems are on Earth, keep in mind that most current space activity actually occurs on the ground.  For example, six people occupy the International Space Station in orbit, but the US portion of the project alone employs about 12,000 people on Earth.
The remaining three phases are in space, which are typically harder than the most difficult locations on Earth.  This is partly due to conditions like lack of breathable air, radiation, and temperature.  The energy and travel times to reach various regions in space adds to their difficulty.  These phases are:
Orbital development begins with regions nearest the Earth, and progresses outwards by distance to higher orbits, then to ones around the Sun from inner to outermost.  Planetary System regions are tied by gravity to the Moon and major planets.  They include orbits around them, on their surfaces and their moons.  Finally, Interstellar regions are not tied to our Sun and Solar System.  The order of Phases 4, 5, and 6 is according to distance and difficulty of reaching their locations, since equipment for a given region has to come from or through the previous ones.
Most of the major phases are divided into more specific sub-phases: 2A, 2B, 3A, 3B, etc.  The entire sequence of growth and expansion is intended to be self-funding once started.  Self-expanding production and other new technologies should be valuable enough to justify development on their own.  Using those technologies progressively on Earth and in space can fund each later expansion.
Existing civilization has already accumulated a large amount of technical knowledge, designs, and equipment.  There are some new items that are needed for the various program phases, so the R&D phase will do the necessary work to develop them.  This includes conceptual and preliminary design, component research, detailed design, prototype fabrication, and testing.  Finished items are supplied to later phases, and also to society at large when appropriate.  New knowledge and technology from this phase is also contributed back to civilization as a whole.  The R&D Phase is divided into multiple sub-phases, according to the later phases for which the R&D is needed.  This includes for Phase 0 itself, in case unique facilities, equipment, or processes are needed to carry out the R&D work.
The first major technology to be developed in Phase 0 is that of Seed Factories.  We feel this concept is important enough, and its application to Earth distinct enough from space, to devote a separate book to the subject.  Seed factories are systems which can bootstrap from a starter set of people and equipment to whatever size you need.  They grow by making more equipment for themselves using existing tools and machines, local energy and material resources, and process and design knowledge.  As new and different equipment is added to the collection, the growth rate can increase exponentially.  Like any other factory system, seed factories are intended to make useful finished products.  The portion of output devoted to growth vs finished products can be variable, and is determined by user needs.  Where possible they take advantage of Smart Tools such as automation, software, robotics, and artificial intelligence, to leverage the work that people do.  Smart tools and remote control are especially useful in dealing with difficult and extreme environments.
The current state of technology does not allow a seed factory to be fully automated or make 100% of its own parts, so it is not entirely Self Replicating.  Instead, the goal is to reach a high and increasing level of self-production and automation.  When expanding to a new environment or location, you bring a starter set, and it sets about using local materials and energy to make parts for new equipment.  Whatever can't be found or made locally continues to be imported, but at a decreasing level as local capacity grows.  The farther away and more difficult the environment, the greater the advantage of producing locally over bringing everything from elsewhere.  So this approach becomes more useful as you reach farther into space.  Even in developed locations on Earth, a starter set would be less expensive to buy than a full factory.  So seed factories have economic justification for terrestrial use.
In already developed areas, the growing factories can also take local waste and scrap as inputs, besides using local raw materials.  This provides environmental benefits.  In both developed and new locations they take whatever inputs they get and convert them to finished materials, then finished parts and complete products.  Items the factory cannot make efficiently will continue to be imported, and a small percentage of items will need rare materials not found locally.  So even when it has reached full size, the factory is not likely to produce 100% of what it needs.  All of the locations within the program, and the rest of civilization, will then make up a linked trading network, supplying each other with things they lack locally or are too hard to make.
Some other new or upgraded technologies will be useful for the program.  One example is distributed production networks.  Traditional factories brought people and equipment together in one place because it was the only way to efficiently organize the work.  With modern communications and transport it is possible to coordinate work that is distributed across many places.  This has been achieved for software development, but needs improvement for physical goods.  Areas that need improvement include remote operations, and automatic process compilation to support an ever-changing set of equipment.
In space technology, current programs still do not fully incorporate already existing knowledge and hardware, such as electric propulsion.  They don't yet incorporate the most basic in-space production methods, although some research is ongoing towards it.  Many new ideas languish from lack of funds.  So the R&D phase will follow a dual approach.  First is to make the best use of what already exists in planning a coherent program.  Second is to use some of the production capacity we develop on Earth to build and test equipment for the new and yet-untried ideas.  Many of these ideas are listed in Parts 2 and 3 of this book.  Since some of the space technology can only be tested fully in space, later parts of the R&D phase will involve locations in space.
Early Phase 0 R&D, Phase 1, and Phase 2 all occur in moderate environments on Earth, which are the easiest places to start.  We define moderate conditions for a number of environment parameters such as temperature, water supply, and air pressure.  Each parameter is considered moderate where the middle 90% of people currently live, with 5% at each extreme.  If any parameter is outside the moderate range, then the whole location is no longer moderate.  The moderate range is intended as "typical" or "normal" conditions to design for, such that a single design should be able to operate in any part of the environment.  Moderate conditions are measured by the natural exterior environment, and not the interiors of controlled production, habitation, or transport spaces.
Phase 1 begins gaining experience with bootstrapping from starter sets by building the first operational seed factory equipment.  Early equipment includes conventional tools and machines that are bought or made, plus starter set machines designed in the R&D phase.  Starter locations are in already developed and populated areas which can supply whatever else is needed to get started and operate.  Phase 1 machines are typically small, such as for hobby crafts and home improvement type uses.  This makes them affordable for individuals or small groups.  The machines can be located in homes or locally-built workshops.  Besides direct use for small-scale production in this phase, the experience will be useful for later phases.  More remote and difficult locations will be easier to bootstrap from small starter sets, because less equipment needs to be imported.
Phase 1 also develops experience in other areas. One is creating a distributed network of individuals and small groups, with equipment in multiple places.  As a coordinated effort to produce useful products and services, it can still be considered a factory or business enterprise, just not a traditional one in a single physical place.  Another area is building the knowledge and skills of the people using the equipment.  Small-scale production isn't taught to most people in their general education, so along with seed equipment and software, we need education and training for the users.  Knowing what skills and training is needed will be useful in later phases.
We expect Phase 1 operators to mostly use their skills and machines to make items for themselves, for each other, and for their immediate community.  Commercial-scale production with significant sales to the public would fall to the next phase.  Since the starter sets are designed for upgrade and expansion, the evolution to the next phase can be natural and gradual.  Within this phase, new network nodes and new locations can be started with partial equipment sets sent from existing ones, or purchased from outside.
As more people, their skills, and equipment accumulate in a given location, they can start to sell and trade beyond their own community.  They can then get most of their financial support from network operations, where in Phase 1 it was more hobby and part time levels of effort.  To the extent people can support themselves, it relieves conventional risks of job insecurity and displacement by automation.  In less developed regions it would mean an improved quality of life.  These are useful ends in themselves, besides working towards later program goals.
The direct bootstrap approach is to use existing machines to make parts for larger machines.  This scales the equipment from home and hobby, to small business, commercial, and industrial sizes.  More extensive use of the equipment puts an emphasis on higher duty cycles (percentage of the time it is in operation) and service life (total hours of operation).  Where light-duty equipment is adequate at a hobby level, heavy-duty equipment is preferred at industrial levels.  Both scale and intensity of use require modified designs from Phase 1, and will require continuing R&D to develop.  At smaller scales it is feasible to gather the full range of fproduction machines in one place, and make a wide range of products.  At larger scales, the equipment and their operators become more distributed and specialized, and serve larger markets.  Location designs and production flows are therefore also modified to account for the changes.
We therefore divide Phase 2 into two sub-phases based on scale and specialization.  Not everyone will upgrade to larger scales and intensity of operation, so Phase 1 continues to operate, and there would be a mix of small, medium, and large equipment.  Phase 2 locations are in the same moderate environments as Phase 1, with developed and populated areas nearby.
Phase 2A: Distributed Locations - This covers locations that move beyond hobby and home improvement levels of effort within the network, to small business and commercial levels capable of providing most of an individual's financial support, and a wider total range of products and services provided to people outside the network.
Phase 2B: Industrial Locations - These serve larger and more widespread markets at the most efficient levels of size and specialization.  This scale may require outside funding for land and equipment, where earlier phases could be self-financed through internal growth.  This is because buying and developing an industrial-scale site is hard to do in small increments.  Because sources of supply and customers are more widespread, transport capacity becomes more important.  Outside market forces also become more important than the internal needs of the community.  One way to deal with market forces is distributed ownership across multiple industries, so that people's work and equipment can be reassigned as needed.
Difficult and extreme regions on Earth are those which are more than 10 and 20% beyond moderate conditions in any of a number environment and development parameters.  See Section 5.2 Environment Ranges for details on the parameters.  These areas include remote, unpopulated, and undeveloped areas on the surface, such as oceans, deserts, and ice caps.  They also include areas away from the surface, such as deep underground below existing cities, or at higher altitudes.  These may be physically close to moderate surface locations, but harder to build in.
The more difficult and extreme the conditions, the more that designs have to be modified to accommodate them.  This is accomplished by either modifying the working equipment, or artificially moderating the local operating environment to a suitable range.  Because of the scope of design modifications needed, we divide this phase into two sub-phases, based on the amounts required.  Because conditions can vary in many ways from moderate ones, we expect a number of custom designs will be needed.  These locations are generally undeveloped and unpopulated.  So starter sets and other equipment can't be obtained locally, and would be delivered from previous locations.  They would not typically be small scale, because local operators don't have other jobs to support themselves, or the extra space to house them.  The higher costs of transport, and supporting on-site people and remote operations, also tends to make small scale equipment uneconomic.
This major phase allows us to extend civilization to the 6/7ths of the Earth's surface we don't yet significantly use, and vertically both down into the ground and oceans, and up to higher altitudes.  The world's population is expected to continue growing in the 21st century.  People in currently less-developed areas also want to reach higher levels of economic development.  Expansion to new areas will to some degree be needed to satisfy all their needs.  This is not so much a need for personal space, since on-going urbanization concentrates people in compact clusters.  Rather, it is to access increased energy and material resources.  An example project for these areas is to establish greenhouses and water supply systems in deserts to increase food supplies.  Automation and remote control allows such locations to operate, even if a lot of people don't want to live there.  The two sub-phases are:
Phase 3A: Difficult Earth Locations - These are defined as having at least one parameter 10% or more beyond the moderate range, measured linearly or logarithmically depending on the parameter.  The parameters are measured before local development and upgrade.  For example, reaching deep underground is difficult before suitable tunnels and shafts are built, but not afterwards.  Difficult temperatures are average winter lows below -18C or average summer highs above 42C, such as arctic or hot desert areas.  Drier deserts and wet rainforests have difficult levels of water supply - too little or too much.  Altitudes above 2750 meters begin to cause problems for some people, and soil strength below 0.19 MPa or ground/water pressure above 2.5 MPa are difficult to build for.  Energy supply, primarily from wind and solar, below 125 W/m2 makes all activities which need power difficult.  Locations well below the surface are cut off from these sources.  Gravity is nearly constant on Earth, and most places are below 17 mSv/year in background radiation, and are not difficult in these parameters.  Communications round-trip (ping time) over 100 ms and normal one-way travel time for people that takes over 2.5 days are considered difficult.  Average residence times below 5 years and cargo transport energy above 2.85 MJ/kg impose extra transport burdens from staff turnover and difficulty of outside supply.
Phase 3B: Extreme Earth Locations - Extreme locations use the same parameters, but are at least 20% beyond the moderate range, up to the limits of existing technology.  So average daily lows below -23C or highs above 47C are extreme, and only found in severe climates, at high altitude, or deep underground.  Water supply below 0.12 or above 3.8 meters/year, and air pressure below 70 kPa or above 120 kPa (+5500m and -1600m altitude) are also extreme conditions.  Soil strength below 0.12 MPa, which includes water surface of no strength, are extreme conditions to build on.  Therefore all of the ocean surface where it is too deep to build from the sea floor is considered extreme.  Ground and water pressure above 3 MPa require extra structural support, and are found at depths below 300 meters in water and 120 meters in rock.  Gravity is never extreme on Earth, but some high background radiation areas and high altitudes over the magnetic poles exceed the 21 mSv/year level and are considered extreme.  Ping time over 125 ms occurs if modern communications are absent, and travel times over 3 days if conventional transport isn't available.  These fall into the extreme range, as are residence times below 3 years 4 months, and cargo transport energy above 3.5 MJ/kg.  Determined mining should be able to reach depths of 9.5 km in continental crust and 7 km in oceanic crust in addition to water depth.  Counting the oceans, the equivalent of 4.6 billion km3 of total resources should be accessible.
We already explore and use space beyond the Earth to some degree.  That use is limited by the difficulty and expense of lifting everything needed up the Earth's deep gravity well.  We get around this problem by exploiting the energy and materials already in the Phase 4 regions to make things locally.  This allows much fuller development of the regions and expansion of civilization.  Production capacity from the previous phases is used to build things like rockets and launch sites, which can deliver starter sets and other equipment to orbit.  These bootstrap local production, habitation, transport, and services in a progression of locations, starting near Earth, then moving into "open space", away from strong gravity wells.  These locations share high levels or full-time sunlight for energy, low gravity for ease of moving large masses, and vacuum which can enable certain production methods.  These shared conditions lead to shared designs, so they are grouped into one major phase.
With greater distances from Earth and the Sun there are increasing transportation needs, and thermal, power, and other design changes needed.  This leads us to identify six sub-phases by region.  Each of these leads to the next in sequence, with products from one phase used to help deliver and set up locations in the next.  Orbital production would first support existing space industry, which amounts to nearly 1500 active satellites and $340 billion in economic activity as of 2016.  As bootstrapped production lowers costs, current markets should expand, and new one become economic.  So, like previous phases, this phase should be self-supporting once started.
Phase 4A: Low Orbit Development -  We define Low Earth Orbits as extending from 160 to an average of 2700 km above the surface.  The lower bound is set by significant atmospheric drag, which prevents stable orbits.  The upper bound is half the potential energy from the lowest orbit to Earth escape.  It is stated as an average altitude, because elliptical orbits are possible, which vary constantly in altitude, but not in total energy.  Most low orbits are in the Earth's shadow from 22-40% of the time, which lowers available solar power, and typically requires power storage for the time in shadow.  Temperatures and lighting are moderated by the nearby Earth, and communications and travel times are relatively short.  The natural environment includes the inner part of the Van Allen radiation belts, and a modest flux of meteoroids.  Material resources include the upper edge of the Earth's atmosphere, and artificial space debris.  Other materials would have to be imported from elsewhere.
Phase 4B: High Orbit Development - High Earth Orbits extend from 2700 km average altitude to the limit of the Earth's gravitational dominance at about 1.5 million km.  Although this is a large range in distance, it only represents the upper 25% of energy between the Earth's surface and escape.  It excludes distances within 35,000 km of the Moon and the Moon itself, which are assigned to Phase 5A below.  High orbits are in sunlight 78 to 100% of the time, and temperature is mostly governed by the Sun.  Communications and travel times at the outermost edge can extend to 10 seconds ping time and 7 months transit by the most efficient route.  Like lower orbits, the natural environment includes high radiation levels from the remainder of the Van Allen belts, and, outside the magnetosphere, from solar and galactic radiation sources.  Meteoroid flux is similarly modest, as it is for most of the rest of the Solar system.  Material resources in place include a smaller amount of artificial debris, but high orbits are fairly accessible to the Moon and Near Earth Asteroids.  Materials can be delivered from these locations, and then the high solar flux used for local production.
Phase 4C: Inner Interplanetary Development - This region includes orbits from as close to the Sun as technically possible to an average of 1.8 AU, where the Main Asteroid Belt starts.  It excludes the four major planets Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars and the gravitationally bound regions around them.  Inner interplanetary orbits are in sunlight 100% of the time, and solar flux varies from 31% to many times that near Earth.  Even the lowest levels match the best places on Earth, because there is no night or atmospheric absorption to reduce it.  Temperatures vary with amount of solar flux, requiring sunshields or insulation to moderate them for people and equipment.  Communications time is up to 1 hour round-trip across this region, and travel time can be several years by lowest energy transfer orbit.  There are over 17,000 known objects in this region as of late 2017, growing about 1500/year.  The largest member alone has an estimated mass of 17 trillion tons.  So material and energy resources are widely available for production and other purposes.
Phase 4D: Main Belt and Trojan Development - This region includes orbits averaging from 1.8 to 5.2 AU from the Sun, except for the part within 20 million km of Jupiter.  Conditions are similar to the previous phase except that solar flux varies from 31 to 3.7% of that near Earth.  At the outer reaches, solar reflectors or other power sources such as nuclear may be needed to maintain temperature and supply power.  Communications times can range up to 2.88 hours in the worst case, and travel can take 12 years by the most efficient route.  Material resources include over 700,000 known objects in the Main Belt, Hilda, and Jupiter Trojan groups.  Their combined mass is on the order of 3 billion billion tons, all of which is accessible to sufficiently determined mining operations.  These materials can be sent slowly but efficiently to inner regions by means of electric propulsion and gravity assists from the major planets.  The farther part of the region contains large amounts of water ice and other volatile compounds because of the low temperatures.
Phase 4E: Outer Interplanetary Development - This region includes orbits from 5.2 to 50 AU from the Sun, except for the regions around Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.  Solar flux is quite low in this region, from 3.7 to 0.04% of that near Earth.  Nuclear power sources or very large and lightweight solar reflectors will be needed to supply power and keep warm.  Without those, objects will naturally be at temperatures of -56 to -200 C, depending on color.  Round-trip communications time ranges up to 1.15 days, and travel times would be up to 350 years by the most efficient orbits.  This is too long to make economic sense, so actual travel times will depend on the availability of faster transport methods.  There are about 1750 known objects in the Kuiper Belt beyond Neptune (30-50 AU), and another 340 Centaurs and short-period comets, whose orbits cross one of the gas giants. This includes Pluto and several other dwarf planets, with a total mass in this region of 4-10% of the Earth's.  There are likely many more objects in the region which are too small to find at present.  The region is rich in water and frozen gases due to the low temperatures.
Phase 4F: Scattered, Hills, and Oort Development - The final orbital region is the vast one extending from 50 to 100,000 AU average distance from the Sun.  This region shares extremely cold temperatures and being close to Solar escape energy.  We divide it into three parts by distance - The Scattered Disk from 50 to 2000 AU, Hills Cloud from 2000 to 10,000 AU, and Oort Cloud from 10,000 to 100,000 AU.  The outer limit is where the Sun's gravitational dominance ends.  Our ability to detect objects in this region is poor at present.  This is due to distance, and lack of sunlight to reflect back to us.  Only about 335 objects in fixed orbits are known, and a small number of long-period comets.  We expect many thousands more await discovery, including a possible planet the size of Neptune.  Total mass in this region is not known, but may be a large multiple of the Earth's.   Travel, communications, and powering of equipment would be very difficult with current technology.  So significant development will await future improvements in those areas.
Planetary system locations differ from orbital ones in being tied to relatively large gravity wells, requiring additional transport capacity to traverse.  They can also experience shadowing or night when close to or on the surface, and higher radiation levels from trapped particle belts.  The surfaces of large bodies have significant gravity levels, and sometimes an atmosphere.  All of these conditions are different from those in the open space of Phase 4, leading to a different phase with different designs for them.  The various planetary systems also differ from each other, requiring designs to accommodate each.  So we provide five sub-phases to cover the range of such locations.  The sub-phases are in approximate order of difficulty.  The start of sub-phases for Orbital and Planetary development overlap in time.  Each planetary one starts after the orbital regions which must be traversed to reach them.
Phase 5A: Lunar Development -  The Lunar region includes the Moon itself, and orbits within 35,000 km on average from the Moon's center.  The Moon is relatively close in physical distance to Earth, but reaching the surface requires significant additional energy due to it's gravity well.  Therefore it comes after Phase 4B: High Orbit in terms of difficulty.  Communications and travel times are relatively short, less than for some parts of High Orbit.  Available sunlight per area of the Lunar surface is 50% of that for high orbit on the equator, and less at higher latitudes.  Availability can reach 99% for the highest circum-lunar orbits.  Average temperatures are similar to that on Earth, but exposed areas can vary hundreds of degrees between light and dark.  Determined mining on the Moon should be able to reach depths of 50 km before rock pressure makes it unreasonably difficult.  This makes 2 billion cubic km of resources potentially available.  Because of its origin and history, the Moon is depleted in Volatiles compared to even nearby asteroids.  These are elements and compounds with relatively low boiling points, such as water and atmosphere found on Earth.  Conversely, Lunar Geology indicates a high percentage of metallic oxides, making it a good source of oxygen and various metals.
Phase 5B: Mars Development - The Mars region includes the planet itself, and orbits up to 340,000 km in average distance from its center.  This includes the natural moons Phobos and Deimos.  The orbit of Mars is eccentric, so solar flux varies from 36 to 52.5% of the near-Earth reference amount.  Surface gravity on Mars varies from 3.68 to 3.74 m/s2 (37.5% of Earth), and atmospheric pressure varies from 30 to 1155 Pascals (0.03-1.14% of Earth).  Mars locations would follow phase 4C: Inner Interplanetary, since you must travel through interplanetary space to reach Mars.  Determined mining should be able reach depths of about 25 km, providing 3.6 billion cubic km of accessible resources, nearly double than from the Moon.  Mars retains significant water, and has a quite varied geology.
Phase 5C: Venus and Mercury Development - These regions include the two planets, and orbits averaging less than 600,000 and 100,000 km from their centers.  A relative lack of known nearby asteroids or moons, higher delta-V to reach their orbits and land on them, and extremely hot or high pressure conditions places these locations after Mars.  Their advantage consists of 1.9 and 4.6-10.6 times more solar flux, providing ample energy to extract and process resources.  The lack of known asteroids in this region may be due to the short orbit times, which allow frequent planet flybys.  A given asteroid will then be removed by either hitting a planet, shifting the orbit outwards, or shifting it so close to the Sun it vaporizes.  New objects are supplied by gravitational changes from farther orbits.  The lack may be partly due to the difficulty of finding small objects when looking towards the Sun.  If the planets themselves and nearby asteroids prove insufficient or the wrong composition, it can be made up by imports from the better supplied outer regions.
Phase 5D: Jupiter System Development - The Jupiter system includes the largest planet, 69 known moons, four of which are very large, and orbits within 20 million km of the planet's center.  The larger moons are useful for gravity assists, making travel between locations easier, but the great mass of Jupiter makes reaching the planet itself very hard.  Development of Jupiter would logically follow Phase 4D: Main Belt and Trojan.  Jupiter sits between it's Trojan clusters, and the outermost moons are really loosely captured asteroids, making it an easy next step.  Progressing inwards needs more transport energy, and you encounter lethal radiation levels, requiring lots of shielding for people and equipment.  The large moons represent many billions of cubic km of resources, which would eventually make them attractive sources.  However solar flux of 3.3-4.1% of Earth's is a challenge to supply enough power to make use of those resources.
Phase 5E: Outer Gas Giant Development - This phase includes Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, and the surrounding regions within 20, 12, and 12 million km respectively.  It includes 103 known moons, a number of which are large, and three ring systems, one of which is famously prominent.  Solar flux is 1%, 1/4%, and 1/9% of Earth's, respectively, making alternate energy sources very attractive.  These locations follow Phase 4E: Outer Interplanetary, as you must travel through that region to reach the three planets and their surroundings.  This phase is far enough in distance and needed technology that a significant amount of research and development is needed before it can be used.
The last major phase includes locations which are not tied to the Sun's gravity well.  This includes open interstellar space not tied to a specific star, and the regions around other stellar systems.  There is no reason to stop the expansion of civilization at the borders of our Solar System, assuming we have the necessary technology and it is economically reasonable.  However, at present we don't have full knowledge of what planetary systems exist around even the nearest stars, and transport technology to reach them in reasonable time is currently speculative.  We include this phase as a long-range program goal, but with the understanding that most of the details will have to wait.  We divide this phase into three sub-phases, to account for the different environments and activities in nearby interstellar space and exostellar systems, and for farther reaches of the Milky Way.
Phase 6A: Nearby Interstellar Development - This region begins 100,000 AU from the Sun, where it's gravity is no longer dominant.  For design purposes we set an arbitrary limit of 20 light-years from the Sun.  If we can reach that distance, and restock/rebuild our equipment, then later projects can travel further in increments of 20 light years, but not require new designs.  The interstellar region excludes the stars within 20 light-years and their respective regions of gravitational dominance.  They are assigned to Phase 6B since they have more in common with previous phases closer to the Sun than the spaces between stars.  The volume of this region therefore resembles the solid portion of Swiss cheese, with scattered holes that are not included.  Contents of this region are poorly known as of 2017, but very low density.  It includes the interstellar medium of gas, dust, particles, and radiation.  It likely includes a population of objects larger than dust but smaller than stars, which are so far mainly undetected.
Phase 6B: Nearby Exostellar Development - There are currently about 105 known Stellar and Brown Dwarf  star systems within 20 light years.  We know much more about the stars than what orbits them or the spaces in between, because stars are bright and we can more easily collect information from their light.  Each star has a region of gravitational dominance over the Galaxy as a whole and other nearby objects.  This is estimated to be 100,000 AU times the square root of the system mass in units of our Sun's mass.  The stars are all in motion relative to each other, so the population within 20 light-years changes on average every 1150 years.  There are about two dozen known planets in this region, and two have circumstellar disks, but this data is incomplete due to the difficulty in detecting planets.  Design for these locations must await better information, and a lot of new technology development.
Phase 6C: Farther Interstellar Development - Our last sub-phase is a place-holder to cover the remainder of the accessible Universe.  It begins 20 light-years from the Sun and extends as far as transport methods make it possible to reach.  Since current and near-term methods are far from able to reach such distances, work on this sub-phase beyond transportation improvements is reserved to some point in the future.
Program StructureTo make a large and complex program comprehensible, we divide it into multiple levels of detail, with each level dividing a given part into a reasonable number of smaller parts.  At the most detailed level, individual program elements are small and simple enough to be designed and implemented, without further division.  For this example of a complex program we will not carry it to that level of detail.  It would first require completing conceptual and preliminary design, which isn't done yet, and there isn't space in this wikibook to include all the information.  Instead, we will present the top several levels and the process of defining their elements, with the understanding that future work can use similar processes at the lower levels.
The top level is our program as a whole.  It is here that overall goals and objectives are defined, and top level interactions occur with the rest of civilization. Decisions are also made to implement parts or all of the program vs. staying with what is already in progress and planned.  Change takes more work than staying with what already exists.  So a new program has to be sufficiently better to motivate people to change.  That requires developing the needed ideas and technology, and educating people about why they are better.  We refer to what already exists as the Existing Baseline.  For example, in space launch that would include rockets that are already in operation, and new ones already funded and in development.  For factory production it would include currently operating factories, and the state of the art for building new ones.  Our program is not yet developed enough to recommend implementing it, but we think it has great potential.  This is what has motivated our work to date, and we hope to continue it until we can make a recommendation for or against it.
Level 2 of the program includes the major program phases and sub-phases described above, and in the later sections of Part 4.  These phases inherit parts of the top level goals and objectives, such that all the phases together meet all of them.  Earlier phases and their parts may only meet some of the goals, or at lower levels of performance, with the intent to upgrade and expand the coverage later on.  Part of the early design process is to specify what goals and performance levels each phase will accomplish, and timing for when they reach them.  Since the phases are covered in more detail elsewhere, we won't duplicate that information here.
Each phase can include one or more projects.  These projects are intended to accomplish a task or meet a goal.  For example, the Seed Factory Project, which has already been started, is intended to design and test prototype systems to prove out ideas for self-expanding production.  This project is part of Phase 0: R&D.  A hypothetical "Floating Cities Project" would be part of Phase 3, due to the difficult or extreme environment of the oceans.
The program is aimed at upgrading and expanding civilization for the reasons listed in the Program Goals section above.  The general approach is to build up a given location, adding functional elements that allow internal growth and useful outputs.  Each location helps support itself, interacts with previous locations, and with the rest of civilization.  When enough capacity has built up at current locations, they can deliver starter elements to a new location.  The starter set then repeats the cycle of growth and useful outputs.  Parts and materials are delivered from previous locations for whatever cannot yet be made locally.  Locations are defined by ease of internal local transport for people and bulk goods.  An example is a metropolitan area around a city, where travel times are a couple of hours or less between the various parts, and a good road network exists.  Transport between locations will happen, but the increased time and cost will make it less frequent, and preferably for high value, low mass items.  So you may ship a computer to a distant location, but you prefer not to send a truckload of gravel that far.
Locations in undeveloped, difficult, or extreme environments, and in space, may be much smaller than a city at first.  This is due to lack of transport systems like roads and airports, and large distances to the next location.  In developed regions, the overall size of a program location is typically that of a  metropolitan area, but does not include all the contents of that area.  It only involves program-specific people and equipment located there.  They interact with the surrounding non-program region, and other program locations.
Figure 4.1-3 - Example functional diagram.The next level below a single location are the functions performed there.  All of civilization shares common functions, such as protection from bad weather, supplying food and drink, fabricating parts, and assembling them into useful items.  Eating utensils and CNC laser cutters, for example, can be more or less the same from one location to the next.  So we don't have to design unique elements for every location.  Instead, we can identify the functions that need to be performed there, then copy existing designs or modify them as needed to satisfy the needs.  Each function, like cutting parts from stock material, has inputs like electricity, and instructions on what part to make, and outputs like the finished parts and unused scrap.  These inputs and outputs connect functions to each other, and to outside the program boundary.  The functions and their connections can be displayed in various ways, such as the example diagram in Figure 4.1-3.
Because civilization shares common functions and these functions share common connections between them, we can define a Reference Architecture that applies to existing elements of current civilization, and new elements of our program.  This makes it easier to compare what already exists to what is new, and saves us from having to define the organization of new locations each time.  A given location may only include a subset of the common functions, especially when it is new.  Locations can evolve over time, adding new functions.  The program as a whole also evolves over time, adding new functions and upgrading existing ones.
Functions can be subdivided into more detailed ones, and then systems and specific elements designed to perform those functions.  This work falls into the various fields of engineering.  For space systems, some of the methods and concepts are described in earlier parts of this book.  For other kinds systems, we refer the reader to the enormous range of technical literature for them.  For reasons of space and time, we will not cover this level of detail in our current work, but we will note it is eventually needed to implement actual projects.
Soil erosion is a two-phase process consisting of the detachment of individual soil particles from the soil mass and their transport by erosive agents such as running water, wind or mechanical impact (e.g. tillage). When sufficient energy is no longer available to transport the particles, a third phase, deposition, occurs (Morgan, 2005)[1].
Detaching agents loosen the soil so that it is easily removed by agents of transport.
Kinetic energy of Raindrops striking bare soil surface detaches and breaks up soil aggregates. Continuous exposure to intense rainstorms considerably weakens the soil by surface sealing and crusting processes.
Both, mechanical, by alternate wetting and drying, freezing and thawing and frost action, as well as biochemical weathering breaks up the soil.
Soil ist disturbed by tillage operations and by the trampling of people and livestock.
Shear stress affecting the surface soil by running water and wind detaches soil particles.
Transporting agents comprise those that act alreally and contribute to the removeal of a uniform thickness of soil (interrill erosion), and those that concentrate their action in channels (rill erosion).
Particles may be thrown through the air over distances of several centimeters. Soil surface slope effects a dominance of downslope transport.
Surface runoff in the form of shallow flow of infinite width moves soil particles towards rills.
Shear, the magnitude of which depends on wind velocity, moves particles of different sizes according to their critical shear velocity.
Transport by concentrated water runoff in small rills, which can be obliterated by weathering and tillage operations.
Concentrated runoff in larger more permanent channel features with very specific formation threshold conditions and mechanisms.
The severity of erosion depends upon the quality of material supplied by detachment over time and the capacity of eroding agents to transport it. Where the agents have the capacity to transport more material than is supplied by detachment, the erosion is described as detachment-limited. Where more material is supplied than can be transported, the erosion is transport-limited.
The energy available for erosion takes two forms: potential and kinetic.
The potential energy of erosion is converted into kinetic energy
, the energy of motion. This is related to the mass
Most of this energy is dissipated in friction with the surface over which the agent moves. Only 3-4 % of the energy of running water, and 0.2 % of that of falling raindrops is expeded in erosion (Pearce, 1976)[2]
↑ Morgan, R. (2005). Soil Erosion and Conservation. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
↑ Pearce, A. (1976). Magnitude and frequency of erosion by hortonian overland flow. Journal of Geology,84:65–80.
The British exam board AQA offers an A-level in Applied Science. There is as yet no textbook published.[1] This is an attempt to rectify the matter.
Please contribute any material you want. This is a multi-author, open project; but you can contact Ewen if there is anything you would like to add but you are not sure how to do it, or if you have any suggestions.
Definitive details from the AQA website.
Teachers' guide, FAQ and other resources from AQA.
Resources from the shareIT website.
Resources for OCR version of the course, some of which are identical to AQA's
↑ 4Science are offering some materials and developing more - see 4science website
Thymus 'Spicy Orange'Thymus 'Spicy Orange' 'Spicy Orange' Thyme
Genus:ThymusFamily:LamiaceaeVariety:'Spicy Orange'Type:Perennial herbLight requirements:full sun to light shadeBloom season:spring
'Spicy Orange' is a hybrid cultivar of Thymus grown for its strong flavor and sweet, citrus-like scent.
'Spicy Orange' is a low, spreading thyme with sharp awn-shaped leaves and pale purple flowers.
As with most thymes, good drainage is essential, otherwise not picky about soils.
A very strong flavored herb when used fresh. Also grown as a scented ground cover, and tolerates some foot traffic.
Propagate by cuttings or division.
Best used as a fresh herb. Cut growing tips 1-2" long, cool and refrigerate until ready to use.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Thymus 'Spicy Orange'
Wikiversity is collecting bloom time data for  Thymus 'Spicy Orange' on the Bloom Clock
Internal Energy and the meaning of Temperature
(the energy of it components) and the Potential Energy
(the energy of the interactions), so
We can have a system formed by molecules that rotate. The rotational energy must be included in the calculation of
. In this composite systems we may need skills to compute the value of
Here we can reveal the true nature of Temperature: we can say that is a measure of the Kinetic Energy of the system.
An Ideal Gas is a gas where there's no interaction between the molecules, so
. So, Temperature it's an absolute magnitude.
The action on the system that make it raise the Internal Energy of the molecules without acting a force on them (that would be an interaction) is called Heat (
). It doesn't matter if later the molecules act forces between them.
The action on the system that make it raise the Internal Energy of the molecules only acting a force on them is called Work (
). Work is of the type of the force enacted (it can be mechanical work, electromagnetic, etc. ...)
Now we will set a equilibrium for the Internal Energy. The raise of
Here there are many things to say.
First, we have to say that
Heat and Work, instead, are not state functions. This means that they depends on the process itself.
So Energy doesn't depend of the process? Yes it does, but multiple processes that change Internal Energy in the same amount can have totally different Heats and Works.
Another thing to be said is that in the formula used below,
Now we have to understand how this apply to our surroundings, but that's another story.
HotShot (Enter the password -L1, Triangle, R1 and Triangle- into the machine in Lucca's house)
Agree to go with her to Termina/When you get there
MaidenFaith (Talk to H Leena's Grandma after Serge regains his body -Answer positively at at H Opasa Beach, and say "I'm Serge!" at A Dock-)
Unleashed (Talk to Home Leena after Serge regains his body)
HoodooGooroo (Talk to the fisherman in H, then go back to the Another location, and examine the cats in order: Staring, Electric and Licking)
Get the Shark Tooth from the fisherman in H and show it to him in A after fighting Karsh. Mojo will join after
Witness the event at Viper statue (same as Nikki & Pierre) then talk to Guile (You can't talk to Nikki's manager or Pierre)
LimeLight (Bring A Nikki to H Nikki)
Talk to Nikki's manager. Go to the Shadow Forest and save Nikki from the monsters
BigCatch (Examine the tank in Termina with Korcha, talk to the man, and go down and talk to the Mermaid)
Do the Hydra quest. Joins after Glenn talks about Fort Dragonia
Say you can't save Kid. Joins after Glenn talks about Fort Dragonia
BamBamBam (Talk to the octopus on H Sky Dragon Isle, leave the screen, come back, and choose to help the butterfly)
Get the Green Tinkler from the Dwarf in the Guldovian Bar after choosing whether to save Kid, then go to A Hydra Marshes and use it on the plants that you use to walk on. Get the Sparkle of Life in the deep recesses of the Marshes, and bring it to the balcony where Kid gets stabbed, and use it on the flower in the pond
Raz-Flower (Don't use her in Hydra quest, and use her in Ice Breath quest)
Go up in the Marshes and fight the bug. Go on until the ground breaks, and you'll fall on a squid. Examine Razzly, and the squid attacks. She joins afterwards
Talk to him after the Mansion sequence
Choose not to save Kid, and Glenn will join when you leave Termina
TestAmeba (Take Luccia to the kitchen, and go into the grate. Examine the blob)
Talk to her after Kid is wounded
(Level 7 Tech and his transformations are too complicated to fit here)
Unlock Pip's cage in Luccia's lab, and find him on the S.S. Invincible (-Can be found again as Lynx in A World on S.S. Invincible-)
Talk to her after you leave for Fort Dragonia with Kid
HangTen (Show Doc the Medical Book from the Dead Sea)
Don't help Kid, and he automatically joins later
BigBreath (Bring Draggy to the big skull in A Fossil Valley)
Take the Egg from the Dodo nest, and bring it to A Fort Dragonia. Put it in one of the incubators, and Draggy is hatched
Joins after you fight him as Lynx
Myconoids (When you turn back to Serge, bring him to his cave, and have him eat a mushroom)
Beat a Headless blocking a cave in H Sewers, and a man will give you a mushroom. Give a man in a cave it in exchange for his treasure, and he turns into a mushroom man and joins
Keep speaking with him until he joins
Back up Van's story, and he will eventually join you
TopShot (Take H Norris to A Norris)
StarStruck (Search his ship again after getting the anti-grav device)
Find the Star Fragment in his UFO at El Nido Triangle, and take it to White Dragon Isle. Open the chest and MegaStarky attacks
What'sUpDoc (Have Janice talk to the land octopus in the Bend of Time)
Beat her three times in the Grand Slam on the S.S. Zelbess
When you beat the Sage, talk to Sneff at the Casino, and then Backstage
SirenSong (Can only do this if you watched Nikki's concert. Once you get Serge back, bring Irenes to H Marbule, talk to the witch doctor in the first hut twice)
Turn into a cat and go across the rope on the crow's nest to Nikki's boat, and witness the scene between Nikki and Irenes. Beat the Sage, and then return to the dressing room and talk to her
After beating all of the Lagoonates, go immediately to the restaurant on the S.S. Zelbess, and talk to her
Axiomatic (Get after fighting Solt & Peppor on the Isle of the Damned)
Go into Termina Bar in Another, and a woman will tell you to come into the door by the bar. Go inside, past Guile, into a hidden door. Karsh and Zoah will be there, and eventually, you'll have to choose which one you want to come with you. If you choose Karsh, Zoah will join later
Toss&Spike (Put Zoah in the front of your party, and have him open the chest in his room)
Go into Termina Bar in Another, and a woman will tell you to come into the door by the bar. Go inside, past Guile, into a hidden door. Karsh and Zoah will be there, and eventually, you'll have to choose which one you want to come with you. If you choose Zoah, Karsh will join later
Computing » Computer Science » Computer Programming » Ada Programming
File: function_overloading.adb (view, plain text, download page, browse all)
G : Random_Pack.Generator;
MaxValue : Integer) return Integer
G : Random_Pack.Generator;
Ada supports all six signature options but if you use the arguments' name as option you will always have to name the parameter when calling the function. i.e.:
Note that you cannot overload a generic procedure or generic function within the same package. The following example will fail to compile:
-- The first declaration of a generic subprogram
-- with the name "Generic_Subprogram"
...
-- This subprogram has the same name, but no
-- input or output parameters. A non-generic
-- procedure would be overloaded here.
-- Since this procedure is generic, overloading
-- is not allowed and this package will not compile.
...
-- The same situation.
-- Even though this is a function and not
-- a procedure, generic overloading of
-- the name "Generic_Subprogram" is not allowed.
8.6: The Context of Overload Resolution (Annotated)
The genitive case is used to indicate the ownership of an object to some other person or object.
Its equivalent in English is the use of "'s" (apostrophe s) to indicate ownership, but in Finnish it also extends to an attributive form which in English is not marked with apostrophe s.
Rule:  The genitive singular case ending is -n.
Genitive plural case endingsThe genitive plural is a rather complex subject.
The plural is usually formed by adding the plural marker -i- to the singular stem before adding the genitive -en.  However, the formation will transform the -i- to -j- if it appears between two vowels, and there are other transformations that often take place.
The common genitive plural endings are -ien -iden -itten -ojen and less often -sten -ten
Do you already understand the genitive plural? You can improve this section by writing the rules for the formation of the genitive plural!
How to use the GenitiveGenitive object attributeThe genitive case is used an attribute of ownership in much the same way as apostrophe s ('s) does for nouns in English.
This is Timo's car (Literally, this car is Timo's)Sometimes, however, English will mark ownership with the word "of".  In equivalent phrases in Finnish the genitive is used.
The University of HelsinkiAnd there are situations where English does not always mark the attribute with an "apostrophe s" or with the word "of", but uses the nominative form. However, Finnish is usually consistent and marks it with the genitive.
Turku Castle (Turku's castle or the Castle of Turku)Lontoon pörssi
The London Stock Exchange (London's Stock Exchange or The Stock Exchange of London"Personal Suffixes with Nouns and PronounsExcept in existential phrases, the genitive marker -N is added to the person or the pronoun and the object owned is marked with a personal suffix.
-nsa/-nsä or -Vn  see  third person  explanation below
Meidän talomme on jo remontoitu
Pesin isän auton
I washed dad's car""""""""::Note that isän is the genitive. Car, auto, also has an -n ending but this is not the genitive. It is instead a whole object marker known as the -N accusative.
Pesin hänen autonsa
We have already seen the exceptional existential phrase structure that does not mark the sentence's OBJECT with a personal suffix.  These will always have the existential verb olla.
The phrase is essentially existential (something is something). These types of sentence do not take a personal suffix.But on the other hand, if the object owned is the SUBJECT of the sentence then the personal suffix must be given.
My watch is brokenThe personal suffix is always added to the stem but if the word already carries a case marker then the personal suffix is always added after the case ending.
He tulivat meidän talollemme
House Talo adds case ending lle before personal suffix-mmeHampaani on kipeä
Tooth, hammas has the stem form hampaa- to which the personal siffix -ni is added.But note! The addition of a personal suffix will NOT of itself cause a hard grade consonant to weaken.
Rule 1. The third person suffix is the same whether the subject is singular or plural.  That is, it applies to situations such as "his", "her" or "their". Whether the meaning is singular or plural is known because the personal genitive will either be singular or plural.
Its his houseSe on heidän talonsa
Rule 2. The genitive marker of the person is not used if the person is the person owning is the person of the verb
He menivät pankkiinsa
Kokkoset kulkivat kauppatorilla Erkki ja Marja Suomelan kanssa. Sitten he menivät heidän pankkiinsa
The Kokkonens walked in the market square with Erkki and Marja Suomela. Then they went to their bank.
Rule 3. The third person marker is only -nsa (or -nsä) if the case is nominative singular (unmarked), nominative plural (-T) genitive, illative, or accusative ( -N or -T forms). The -N or -T from these forms is dropped before adding the -NSA.  Otherwise the vowel at the end of the case ending is lengthened and just -n is added to make the personal suffix.
Its not their houseHän päätti, että hän ei myy taloaan
He decided not to sell his house
His own scissors would not cut into the material
Sakset scissors is a plural noun as in English. Sakset + -nsa becomes saksensa. The plural t is lost altogether.
Raine and Anne have both lost their wallets
So lompakkonsa can be both plural and singular depending on context. Lompakot (nominative plural) + -nsa becomes lompakkonsaHän otti lomapakon
He or she took the wallet (but we don't know whose wallet)
He or she took (his or her own) wallet
Lompakon + -nsa becomes Lompakkonsa.  Notwithstanding that this was originally in the weak case, the addition of the -nsa cause the original -n to be lost and the weakened stem to become string again.and just to reinforce a point made before
Hän otti hänen lompakkonsa
He or She took his or her (i.e. someoneelse's) walletGenitive within Compound WordsThe genitive form is sometimes seen within compound words. E.g. pyykinpesu pianonsoitonopettaja and talonpoika.
Knowing when to compound words and when to use the genitive in a compound word is quite a complex matter and even many Finns find it hard to understand. You can get an explanation of this at http://www.cs.tut.fi/~jkorpela/kielenopas/6.1.html#yhdyss-merk.
If you understand Finnish and understand the article at the link above and can explain this en English, you may be able to help students reading this wikibook by updating this page with an English translation of elements relating to compound genitive words. Please also write this in the Finnish version of this page in the Finnish Wikibook.
Genitive with PrepositionsMany of the words describing relative place in Finnish such as edessaä in front of, takana behind, vieressä alongside come after the word describing the absolute place. This word is always a noun that is in the genitive case.  Words such as veressä are therefore known as prepositions (meaning put after). Equivalent English words such as behind, under, over are known as prepositions. Lets look at a few genitive prepositional phrases.
So the construction when transliterated is something like the table is of the sofa in front. Because the construction is so different from English this sounds quite strange.Kirkon vieressä on kirkkotupa 1600-luvulta.
Next to the Church is the church hall from the 1600s
My childhood summers were spent at my grandparents place in Raisio (a small town close to Turku)See the additional article about genitive prepositions.
Complete the sentences with the help of the hints that are in brackets.
a on kaupunki (close to Rovaniemi).
b on kylä (beside Turku).
(On the table) on lehtiä ja (under it) on matto.
(Inside the box) on pommi. (Inside the bomb) on ruutia.
(in the front of the department store) on myyntikoju.
(Beside the shop) on kirkko ja (Beside the church) on metsä.AnswersExercise onea on kaupunki Rovaniemen lähellä.
b on kylä Turun vieressä
Pöydän päällä on lehtiä ja sen alla on matto. (Pöydän päällä = pöydällä).
Laatikon sisällä on pommi. Pommin sisällä on ruutia.
Tavaratalon edessä on myyntikoju.
Kaupan vieressä on kirkko ja kirkon vieressä on metsä.
A database is a file on the hard drive that has a structure to it so that it can hold large amounts of information and access it quickly.
SQLite is one type of database. It was written by Dwayne Richard Hipp (born 1961 in North Carolina). It was first released in August 2000. It is public domain, meaning anyone can use it free of charge. Google Chrome, Firefox, the Android operating system for smartphones, Skype, Adobe Reader and the iPhone all use SQLite. It’s just nice. And you pronounce it “S Q L Lite”, so saith Wikipedia.
Databases store information in tables. Gambas has a tableview. This, too, has rows and columns. You can think of a database table as an invisible tableview in the database file.
Rows are called Records. Columns are called Fields.
For example, a teaching might have a database with a Students table. In that table there is a row for every student. Looking across the row you see StudentID, FirstName, LastName, Sex, DateOfBirth, Address, PhoneNumber. These are the fields. They are the columns.
This could be a TableView, or a Table in a Database file.
In SQLite all data is stored as strings, even though you might specify some columns as integers, others as strings and others as dates. SQLite is very forgiving: you can put things that aren’t numbers into integer columns and so on, but try not to. Empty cells are NULL. Try to avoid those, too. When you make a new blank record, initialise values to the empty string, “”.
SQLite is a component (optional part) of Gambas. There is also a Database access component. On the Project Menu > Properties… > Components page, be sure to tick gb.db and gb.db.sqlite3. Without these components in your project you will get errors as soon as you try to run your program.
You send messages to SQLite and it sends answers back to you using a special language called SQL (“S Q L” or “sequel”, pronounce it either way.) This means learning another language, but the simple statements that are used most frequently are not difficult to learn. They are the only ones I know, anyway. SQL was invented by Donald D. Chamberlin and Raymond F. Boyce and first appeared in 1974. SQL is so universal that everyone who writes databases knows of it. It is an international standard. SQLite is one implementation of it.
For example, you might send a message to SQLite sayingSELECT * FROM Students
That will get the females first, because “F” comes before “M”. The females will all be in random order and likewise the males unless you writeSELECT * FROM Students ORDER BY Sex DESC, LastName ASCSELECT * FROM Students ORDER BY Sex DESC, LastName ASC
This returns a table to you with males first (alphabetically by surname) followed by females (alphabetically by surname).
You might only want the students names, so you could writeSELECT FirstName, LastName FROM Students ORDER BY LastName
Perhaps you want only those students who were enrolled in 2019. Now, this is part of the StudentID. You want only those students whose StudentID number starts with “2019”. You use a “wildcard”. The percent (%) sign means “anything here will do”.SELECT FirstName, LastName FROM Students WHERE StudentID LIKE '2019%'
Suppose you have a database called db1 (as far as Gambas is concerned) and it is attached to MyStudentDatabase.sqlite which is the actual database file on your hard drive. You need a result to store the reply:Dim res as Result
'do something with res!FirstName, res!LastName and res!DateOfBirth etc
For displaying information in a tableview there is a special event that is triggered each time a cell has to have its contents painted on the screen. It is particularly useful if your set of records is large. The tableview does not have to hold all the information from all the records in itself. It can get the information as it needs it for when it has to be displayed. Be a little careful here: if you are depending on all the information being in the tableview, it may or it may not be all there. This is an example of using the _Data event, getting the information from the result table res when it is needed to display a particular cell in the tableview:Public Sub TableView1_Data(Row As Integer, Column As Integer)
TableView1.Data.Text = res!FirstName
TableView1.Data.Text = res!LastName
Notice the use of TableView1.Data.Text , which represents the text in the cell.
Notice we have result.MoveTo to go to a particular record, result.MoveNext if we are stepping through them one at a time, and result.Available to check to see if there is another record to MoveNext to. Useful in setting the number of rows to have in your tableview is result.RecordCount.
Besides accessing the information in the database, with databases you want to be able to:
All but the simplest databases have more than one table in them. Tables can be linked to each other, so records can have signposts in them to indicate lines in other tables that apply. The signpost is the record ID or other primary key of a record in another table. For example, a database of political candidates might have a signpost to the party they belong to. SQL is so smart it can look up the two tables at once to provide you with the information you need, for example this ‘join’ of two tables. (Candidates are in a particular party, and it is the parties that have policies on a variety of issues.)SELECT Candidate,PolicyOnPensions FROM Candidates,Parties WHERE Candidate.PartyID = Parties.PartyID AND Candidates.Electorate="Fairfax"
Database with a Single Table, to be filled with Random Numbers
The next program comes from https://kalaharix.wordpress.com/Gambas/creating-a-databases-and-tables-from-Gambas/ slightly rearranged. It creates a database in your home folder called Test.sqlite, fills it with random two-digit numbers, then accesses the database to show them in a tableview.
You need a form with a tableview called tv1. Make it long and thin, as it has 2 columns.
If Exist(User.home & "/Test.sqlite") Then
Kill User.home & "/Test.sqlite"
'create test.sqlite
hTable.Fields.Add("RecID", db.Integer)
hTable.Fields.Add("Value", db.Integer)
hTable.PrimaryKey = ["RecID"]
For i = 1 To 10000
'change the rowcount of the gridview from 0 to the number of records.
'This triggers the data handling event
Public Sub tv1_Data(Row As Integer, Column As Integer)
If Column = 0 Then tv1.Data.Text = rs!RecID Else tv1.Data.Text = rs!Value
'If Column = 0 Then tv1.Data.Text = Str(rs["RecID"]) Else tv1.Data.Text = Str(rs["Value"])
'Either of these two lines will do it.
When you work with a database a temporary “journal” file is created. That file is incorporated into the database when it is “committed”. If you don’t want to commit, you “rollback” the database to what it was before you made these latest changes. The temporary file contains the “transaction”, meaning the latest work you have just done to change the database. That is what the db1.Begin, db1.Commit and db1.Rollback mean.
The above program is a good template to adapt when making a database.
This application saves records of cash spending. You can allocate each expenditure to a category. Each time you allocate to a category, totals are worked out for the categories and you can see what fraction of your spending went to each of the categories.
If you know you spent, say, €100, and you can only account for, say €85, you can distribute the remaining €15 among the categories.
Before letting loose on the code and after a look at the form we shall take a look at the process of designing such an application.
The File menu has items MenuNewDatabase, MenuOpen and MenuQuit.
The Data Menu has items MenuNewSpending, MenuNewCategory, MenuClearSpending,  MenuClearCategories, MenuRound, MenuUnselectAll, MenuCalculate and MenuCopy.
The textbox whose name you cannot quite see above is tbDistribute.
The program starts by opening the last database file that was open, or prompting to make a new one if it is the first time, or locating it if you sneakily moved it since the last time it was open. It also starts with a blank row in the Spending and Categories tableviews.
When a category is chosen for the selected spending line (click a category line anywhere except in the name column and press Enter) the category totals and percentages are recalculated.
Internally, the database has two tables called Spending and Categories. You can see two tableviews corresponding to the two database tables. These are the fields in each table:
The two primary keys are SpendingID and CatID. They number the records in sequence (1, 2, 3...)
The Spending table’s Category field contains a number which, when you look it up in the Categories table, gives you the category name. This is good: if you change the spelling of a category name you only have to change it once.
The user does not need to see the record IDs. They are internal to the database. They have to be unique: each record must have its own record ID. They are the primary keys of the Spending and Categories tables. They will be the very first columns in the tableviews, but they will be hidden from view (zero width). Also, in the Spending table, the user does not want to see the Category ID (the reference to one of the categories). It will be the last column in the Spending table, and also zero width. The columns start from zero, so it is column 5, just to the right of the Amount column.
Having sketched out a form design and planned the tables and fields with pencil and paper, we next think of what we want the program to do. It is good to keep in mind the things databases do: Add, Delete, Modify (as well as display the data). Here is a list. These are going to be the subs.
Create a new database file on disk with its two tables
Add			up totals and work out percentages for each category
Grand totals for amounts in spending and categories tables
The right number of rows and columns and column headings
Add a record to the Spending table
The final part of ShowSpending, really. Alternating blue lines
Part of “DoTotals”; add up all the spending totals
Clear a category (make it a right-click menu)
Add a record to the Categories table
The final part of ShowCategories. Alternating blue lines.
Part of “DoTotals”; add up all the category amounts
Enter on a line inserts category on the selected spending line.
Work out how much is left to allocate
Distribute what is left among the categories
Copy everything as text, to paste into a word processing document
Round numbers to whole euros (and check totals are not out by one)
A Quit menu item to close the program
Given the CatID number, return the Category Name (a string)
Given the user’s choice of filename, remove bad characters
Now it is time to program. Write the subs. Work out when they will be called on to do their work. Some can be consigned to menus. Some can happen when you click things. You are the one who is going to use this program: Do you want to click buttons? Do you want windows to pop up when you add a new category or a new spending transaction? Are there nice ways of doing things—intuitive ways—so things can happen naturally, as a new user might expect them to happen? We do some thinking and come up with some ideas:
We can do with a blank row in each table to start with, that you can type in.
When you finish typing in a cell, save that cell. Avoid having to click a Save button.
When you press Enter in the last cell of the line, make a new line.
When a category line is selected and the user presses Enter, put that category into whatever line in the spending table that is selected (highlighted). Move to the next spending line that doesn’t have a category so you can click a category line and Enter it. So you can enter categories for all the lines at the end, after you have entered everything else.
When you start, open the same database you had open last time. If none, give a choice of creating a new database or browsing to find the database that you moved or somebody may have given to you on a USB or in an email.
Edit a category by clicking on it.
Edit a cell in the spending table by clicking on it (except the category — just Enter on a line in the categories table to put a new one in.)
When you allocate a spending line to a category, recalculate the percentages for all categories.
When you change the total in the Target textbox, do a subtraction to find out how much you still have left to allocate.
Put blanks into cells that have nothing in them rather than zeros.
Pressing Delete or backspace in either of the tableviews will delete the selected (highlighted) line and delete its record from the database. No questions, no confirmation request—it just does it. Only one	line can be deleted at a time, and it is easy enough to re-enter if you press Delete by mistake.
If the first cell on a tableview row has a record ID number in it, the record exists and saving just has to update it. If it is blank, the database has to first create a	new record, giving it the next highest record number, put its record	number in the first cell, and then update it.
Here are the names of the objects on the form FMain:
Labels saying “Spending”, “Categories”, “Target:”, “=  Done:”, “+  Still to do:”, “Amount:”
Labels called “LabSpendingTotal” and “LabCategoriesTotal” top right of the tableviews.
TextBoxes: tbTarget, tbDone, tbToDo, tbDistribute
File Menu: MenuNewDatabase, MenuOpen (Ctrl-O), MenuQuit (Ctrl-Q)
Help Menu: Help and Instructions (F1) (Opens a separate form called Help. Put on it what you like.)
Category Menu (invisible, so it is not on the main menubar): MenuClearCategory (This one pops up with you right-click a category cell in the spending table.)
Here is the code. Following it is an explanation of the SQL statements.Public fdb As New Connection 'finance database
Public rs As Result 'result set after querying database
If IsNull(Settings["Database/host"]) Then
OpenDatabase(Settings["Database/host"], Settings["Database/name"])
Public Sub OpenDatabase(dbHost As String, dbName As String) 'if these are null, ask where the database is
If Not Exist(dbHost &/ dbName) Or IsNull(dbHost) Then 'it's not where it was last time, or path not supplied
Dialog.Title = "Where is the database?"
Dialog.Filter = ["*.db"]
Dialog.Path = User.Home &/ "Documents/"
If Dialog.OpenFile() Then Return ' User pressed Cancel; still can't open a database
Dim s As String = Dialog.Path
Dim p As Integer = RInStr(s, "/") 'position of last slash
Try fdb.Close
Try fdb.Open
If fdb.Opened Then
FMain.Caption = fdb.host &/ fdb.Name
Settings["Database/host"] = fdb.host
Settings["Database/name"] = fdb.Name
Dialog.Path = User.Home & "/" 'setting it to "~/" doesn't work
Dialog.Title = "Create a New Database"
If Dialog.SaveFile() Then Return 'clicked Cancel
Dim s As String = Dialog.Path & ".db"
Dim p As Integer = RInStr(s, "/") 'position of last slash
Dim FName As String = Mid(s, p + 1)
Try fdb.Open 'opens a connection to the database; do this after setting properties and before creating
Try fdb.Open
If Not fdb.opened Then
Message("Unable to open the data file")
If fdb.Error Then
Message("Couldn't save a first record in the Spending table.<br><br>: " & Error.Text)
Try fdb.Open
If Not fdb.opened Then
Message("Unable to open the data file")
If fdb.Error Then
Message("Couldn't save a first record in the Categories table.<br><br>: " & Error.Text)
Dim L, CatID As Integer
While rs.Available
L = tv1.Rows.max
CatName = rs!Category
If tv1.Rows.Count = 0 Then tv1.Rows.Count = 1
While rs.Available
L = tvCategories.Rows.max
If tvCategories.Rows.Count = 0 Then tvCategories.Rows.Count = 1
If tvCategories.Rows.Count > 0 Then
If tvCategories.Column = 3 Then tvCategories.Edit
For i = 1 To tv1.Columns.Max - 1
For i = 1 To tvCategories.Columns.Max
For i As Integer = 0 To tv1.Rows.Max
For j As Integer = 0 To tv1.Columns.Max
If j = 2 Or j = 3 Then tv1[i, j].Padding = 4
If i Mod 2 = 1 Then tv1[i, j].Background = &hF0F0FF
For i As Integer = 0 To tvCategories.Rows.Max
For j As Integer = 1 To tvCategories.Columns.Max
If i Mod 2 = 1 Then tvCategories[i, j].Background = &hF0F0FF
Public Sub Massage(s As String) As String
'Doesn't like spaces or hyphens in file names. Doesn't complain; just doesn't create the file.
For i As Integer = 0 To Len(s) - 1
If IsLetter(s[i]) Or IsDigit(s[i]) Or s[i] = "_" Or s[i] = "." Then z &= s[i] Else z &= "_"
Public Sub tvCategories_Save(Row As Integer, Column As Integer, Value As String)
Dim OriginalValue As String = tvCategories[Row, Column].Text
If IsNull(tvCategories[Row, 0].Text) Then 'no record ID, so we need a new record
If IsNull(Res!TheMax) Then RecID = 1 Else RecID = Res!TheMax + 1
RecID = tvCategories[Row, 0].Text
If Value <> OriginalValue Then ShowSpending 'category name was changed
Public Sub tv1_Save(Row As Integer, Column As Integer, Value As String)
Dim FieldName As String = Choose(Column, "TransDate", "Amount", "Category", "Comment")
If IsNull(Res!TheMax) Then RecID = 1 Else RecID = Res!TheMax + 1
Message("Couldn't save: " & Error.Text)
RecID = tv1[Row, 0].Text
Message("Couldn't save ... have you created and opened a database yet?")
Stop Event 'Don't go automatically to the next cell. If you do, you'll get this message twice.
Case Key.BackSpace, Key.Del 'remove record
Dim RecID As Integer = tv1[tv1.Row, 0].Text
If tv1.Rows.Count = 0 Then tv1.Rows.Count = 1
Case Key.Enter, Key.Return
If tvCategories.Rows.Count > 0 Then
Case Key.BackSpace, Key.Del 'remove record
Dim RecID As Integer = tvCategories[tvCategories.Row, 0].Text
Case Key.Enter, Key.Return
Public Sub CategoryNameFromID(ID As Integer) As String
If Not res.Available Then Return "?"
If IsNull(res!Category) Then Return "-"
Public Sub EnterOnCategoryLine()  'apply this category to the selected Spending line
If tv1.row < 0 Then Return
If IsNull(tv1[tv1.row, 0].text) Then
Message("Please save this spending record first by entering some other item of data; there's no record ID yet.")
Dim CategoryID As String = tvCategories[tvCategories.row, 0].Text
Dim SpendingID As String = tv1[tv1.row, 0].text
For i As Integer = tv1.row To tv1.Rows.Max
If IsNull(tv1[i, 3].text) Then
Dim i, j, CategoryID As Integer
Dim t, GrandTotal As Float
For i = 0 To tvCategories.Rows.Max 'every category
If IsNull(tvCategories[i, 0].Text) Then Continue
CategoryID = tvCategories[i, 0].Text
While res.Available
t = res!TotalAmount
If t = 0 Then tvCategories[i, 1].Text = "" Else tvCategories[i, 1].Text = Format(t, "##0.00")
If GrandTotal = 0 Then Return
For i = 0 To tvCategories.Rows.Max
s = tvCategories[i, 1].Text
If Not IsNull(tbTarget.text) Then
For i As Integer = 0 To tvCategories.Rows.Max
Public Sub SaveCategoryLine(i As Integer) 'i is the line number
Dim t, pct As Float
Dim s, CategoryName As String
CategoryName = tvCategories[i, 3].Text
s = tvCategories[i, 2].Text
RecID = res!MaxCatID + 1
'before checking Error, don't forget to use TRY. Otherwise Error will be set and you'll seem to have an error when you don't
For i As Integer = 0 To tvCategories.Rows.Max
s = tvCategories[i, 1].Text
For i As Integer = 0 To tv1.Rows.Max
s = tv1[i, 2].Text
If Key.Code = Key.Enter Or Key.Code = Key.Return Then FMain.SetFocus
Dim t, pct, y, z As Float
If IsNull(tbDistribute.Text) Then Return
Dim x As Float = Val(tbDistribute.Text)
For i As Integer = 0 To tvCategories.Rows.Max
If IsNull(tvCategories[i, 1].Text) Then Continue
If IsNull(tvCategories[i, 2].Text) Then Continue
If y = 0 Then tvCategories[i, 1].Text = "" Else tvCategories[i, 1].Text = Format(y, "##0.00")
Public Sub tbDistribute_LostFocus() 'when leaving, fix the appearance
Public Sub tbDistribute_KeyPress() 'enter leaves the textbox
If Key.Code = Key.Enter Or Key.Code = Key.Return Then FMain.SetFocus
For i As Integer = 0 To 8
s = Choose(i + 1, "Provisions", "Travel", "Medical", "Donations", "Papers etc", "Clothes", "Personal", "Phone", "Repairs")
Dim x, t As Float
For i As Integer = 0 To tvCategories.Rows.Max
s = tvCategories[i, 1].Text
For i As Integer = 0 To tvCategories.Rows.Max
s = tvCategories[i, 2].Text
Dim s, z As String
Dim i, j As Integer
For i = 0 To tv1.Rows.Max
s = tv1[i, 1].Text
For j = 2 To 4
s &= gb.Tab & tv1[i, j].Text
z &= gb.NewLine
For i = 0 To tvCategories.Rows.Max
s = tvCategories[i, 1].Text
For j = 2 To 3
s &= gb.Tab & tvCategories[i, j].Text
z &= gb.NewLine & gb.NewLine & "Total Withdrawn: " & tbTarget.Text & gb.tab & " =  Total Accounted For: " & tbDone.Text & gb.tab & " +  Cash on hand: " & tbToDo.Text
Dim RecID As Integer = tv1[tv1.row, 0].Text
Some of these statements are used as they appear. Others are a string that is built up from parts. You might see SQL = … . Bits of the statement are SQL and the field name might be added to it in the right place and be stored in a variable, for example. Or perhaps the record ID might be in a variable called RecID. Use single quotes in the string that is sent to SQLite. Use double quotes when assembling the statement in Gambas.
Create a new record in the Categories table.
Put 123 into the CatID field and Entertainment into the Category field.
The Categories table has to be updated.
In the record with CatID equal to 123, put Entertainment in the Category field.
Create a new record in the Spending table.
Put “4-11-2019” into the TransDate field of the record in the Spending table that has a SpendingID of 123.
Give me the name of the category that goes with the CatID record number 123.
Set the Category field of record 123 of the Spending table to 4. This spending item goes into the fourth category, whatever that is. To find out what the fourth category is, look up the Categories table and find the record with CatID=4
Create a new Categories record. Set the CatID field equal to 4 and the Category to “Travel”.
Put a blank into the Category field of Spending record 123
These are not the only SQL statements: there are many more. They are enough to get a working knowledge of SQL. Online help for SQLite can be found at
Be careful when updating records.
If you omit the WHERE clause, ALL records will be updated!
For example, do not write this: UPDATE Spending SET Amount=12.50 .This puts 12.50 into the Amount field of every record. All amounts become 12.50. You should say UPDATE Spending SET Amount=12.50 WHERE SpendingID=42 .
This is a critic of a paper discussing physical activity and how it assists with ADHD. It has been written as part of an assignment for the unit Health, Disease and Exercise at the University of Canberra.
Paper: Kerling A, Keweloh K, Tegtbur U, et al. Effects of a Short Physical Exercise Intervention on Patients with Multiple Sclerosis (MS). Kleinschnitz C, Meuth S, eds. International Journal of Molecular Sciences. 2015;16(7):15761-15775.
What is the background to this research?
Multiple Sclerosis (MS) [1] is a disease of the central nervous system (CNS) and it may affect the brain, spinal cord and/or optic nerve. The cause of MS is unknown however it occurs when a wrongly programmed nerve cell causes inflammation in one or more of these areas and damages the myelin sheath around nerve cells. This produces scars or legions which interfere with nerve transmission. Sclerosis means scarring and multiple refers to the often numerous legions that develop. The symptoms vary greatly between individuals but they depend on which parts of the CNS are affected.
Most common chronic disease of the CNS in young Australians
An estimated 2.5 million people in the world suffer from MS
The study was run by the MS Healthcare Center of the Hannover Medical School. Individuals which met the credentials of the study were sought out by neurologists in the Hannover area or through the MS society newsletter. Individuals were eligible to participate in the study if they had MS, were between the ages of 18-65, and had a maximum value of 6 on the EDSS (Expanded Disability Status Scale) which means they suffer a low to moderate level of the disability. Some individuals were excluded from the study due to factors such as cardiovascular risks, pregnancy or if they had been participating in regular physical activity in the prior 12 months. The available subjects were randomised by age, BMI and EDSS, and placed into one of two testing groups.
Although the study began with 60 participants, 18 of these were withdrawn or pulled themselves out of the study due to personal issues. The reasons ranged from a lack of time or difficulty committing to training, to a worsening of symptoms.
What kind of research was this?
This was a randomised, uncontrolled study. There were two testing groups which underwent either endurance training or a combined endurance and resistance training program to show the effects each had on a number of factors for the individual with MS.
What did the research involve?
Initial baseline testing and surveying was conducted on all of the participants in the study. This consisted of:
Resting heart rate- Measured by an ECG
Heart rate while working at 50W- Measured by an ECG
Maximum force production (Fmax) of knee flexion and extension, and shoulder flexion and extension- Measured on a dynamometer
Quality of life (QOL) as indicated by a SF-36 questionnaire.[4]
After this testing the participants were randomised and placed into either the endurance workout group (EWG) or the combined workout group (CWG). The EWG consisted of 13 females and 5 males, while the CWG consisted of 15 females and 4 males. The training intervention went for three months and involved two 40 minute sessions per week at a moderate intensity. Both groups start each training session with 20 minutes of work on a bicycle ergometer, the second half of the session is where it differs. The EWG does another 20 minutes on a different machine with the choice of using a cross trainer, stepper, arm ergometer or rowing ergometer. The CWG does 20 minutes of resistance work that was prescribed and supervised by a sports scientist. The participants would complete two sets of 10-15 repetitions on six out of the eight different machines. The eight machines available were leg press, hamstring curl, chest press, row, pull down, overhead press, abdominal, and back extension.
When the three months of exercise intervention was completed the tests that were used for baseline measurements were repeated to see any improvements or declines.
What were the basic results?
A better endurance capacity after the training period was apparent from a lower heart rate at rest and at 50 W and lower lactate values at 50W in both groups.[5]
Motivation-independent parameters, such as VAT, lactate at 50 W, and heart rate at 50 W, showed a significant improvement of aerobic capacity
The Fmax for each of the measurements increased, as shown by the dynamometer testing at the end of the three month period.
Both the EWG and CWG showed improvement in shoulder flexion
The results from the SF-36 survey showed improvements in general health perceptions, vitality, social functioning, role limitations due to physical limitations and general health. These factors lead to a better QOL.
For both the patients suffering from fatigue indicated in their baseline testing and for the whole group, a significant improvement in fatigue was found, as determined using MFIS.
How did the researchers interpret the results?
The researchers found that the increases in V02 peak were smaller when compared to other similar studies. They put this down to a lower frequency and duration time of training or a possible lack of motivation in the participants in this study. It is still apparent that aerobic capacity was significantly increased especially when considering the motivation-independent parameters as mentioned previously.
The researchers were surprised to find that Fmax in the shoulder had increased in both testing groups. Some of the EWG participants did however use a cross trainer, arm ergometer or rowing ergometer on top of the cycling ergometer and is thought to be the main reason for the increase in Fmax in the upper body. This is supported in a similar study by Petajan et al.[6] who also found an increase in muscular strength in subjects who solely participated in endurance activity.
Improvements in subjective measures, such as QOL, can be explained by social or group effects independent of physical exercise.
What conclusions and implications should be taken away from this research?
This study shows that moderate activity, in 40 minute sessions, twice weekly, is sufficient in improving various factors in individuals who suffer from low to moderate levels of MS. Aerobic capacity, maximum force production in the knee and shoulder joints, QOL, and fatigue levels were all improved at the end of this three month exercise intervention. A combined endurance and resistance training program is more effective when measuring these parameters however an endurance program can also show similar progression if the machines that are used involve the upper extremities.
There were a few limitations or areas where this study could have improved. A control group may have been beneficial as it would have shown the natural progression of the parameters that were measured, without the benefits of an exercise intervention.
↑ Kerling A, Keweloh K, Tegtbur U, et al. Effects of a Short Physical Exercise Intervention on Patients with Multiple Sclerosis (MS). Kleinschnitz C, Meuth S, eds. International Journal of Molecular Sciences. 2015;16(7):15761-15775.
↑ Flensner G., Ek A.C., Soderhamn O., Landtblom A.M. Sensitivity to heat in MS patients: A factor strongly influencing symptomology—An explorative survey. BMC Neurol. 2011;11
↑ Wasserman K., Whipp B.J., Koyl S.N., Beaver W.L. Anaerobic threshold and respiratory gas exchange during exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 1973;35:236–243.
↑ Kerling A., Keweloh K., Tegtbur U., Kuck M., Grams L., Horstmann H., Windhagen A. Physical capacity and quality of life in patients with multiple sclerosis. NeuroRehabilitation. 2014;35:97–104.
↑ Mostert S., Kesselring J. Effects of a short-term exercise training program on aerobic fitness, fatigue, health perception and activity level of subjects with multiple sclerosis. Mult. Scler. 2002;8:161–168.
↑ Petajan J.H., Gappmaier E., White A.T., Spencer M.K., Mino L., Hicks R.W. Impact of aerobic training on fitness and quality of life in multiple sclerosis. Ann. Neurol. 1996;39:432–441
U.S. Land and Water Conservation Fund Act (1965)
Assists in the preservation, development and accessibility of outdoor recreational resources so that such resources may be utilized and enjoyed by all present and future citizens and visitors of the United States.
Providing funds for and authorizing Federal assistance to the States in planning, acquisition, and development of needed land and water areas and facilities and
Providing funds for the Federal acquisition and development of certain lands and other areas.
The funds distributed under the Act are to be the revenues generated by park fees and park permits.
PIO means Programmable Input/Output and this is the simplest way of controlling and measuring digital voltage levels on the pins of the AVR32 processor pins connected to the bus connectors.
To use a GPIO pin as a PIO, you must first set the pin to be an input or an output. If you set it as an input, you can then check the input voltage to see whether it has a low or a high value coming into it, for example to check the position of a switch. If you set it to be an output, you can program it to output a low voltage or a high voltage to control lights, motors or other circuits.
For PIO pins that are inputs, you can also ask that, when the voltage on that pin changes from 0 to 1 or from 1 to 0, this will generate an interrupt. When this happens, the processor will stop what it is doing, run a special piece of code called an interrupt routine, and when it has finished doing that it will go back and continue what it was doing when the interrupt happened.
Lastly, each pin has an optional pull-up resistor that can be enabled so that, if nothing is connected to a pin that is an input, it will float up to logic "1" instead of waving up and down at random.  This is the usual way to connect switches or pushbuttons: you program a pull-up resistor on the pin, then connect the switch between the pin and zero volts so that when contact is closed you will read a value of 0, and when the contact is open you will read a value of 1.
Any of the AT32UC3A chip's peripheral pins can be read as a digital input or set as an output and programmed to 0 or 1 logic level.
When a pin is set to be an output, a 0 logic output connects the pin to 0 volts, while a logic 1 ("high") value puts 3.3 volts on it with a maximum current supply or drain of 4 milliamperes for both states.
When they are set to be inputs, a voltage level from 0.0 to 0.8 volts reads as a "0" (low) input, and a voltage level from 2.0 volts to 5.0 volts reads as a "1" (high) input. Values from 0.8 to 2.0 volts may read as high or low and are not certain.
Some pins of the Mizar32 can only be used as programmable I/O pins because they are not used for anything else. Others carry signals to various peripheral devices but, if those devices are not being used, the pins can be used as PIO pins instead.
Other pins are critical to the correct functioning of the processor, for example those used to access the SDRAM, oscillators and other on-board circuitry; if you use those as PIO pins the board will probably crash and need its reset button pressing.
Unused ADC, PWM, SPI or UART pins can also be used as PIO pins. See those sections for the relevant pin names. This brings the total number of usable PIOs to 66.
The PIO Alcor6L module allows you to set any pin as a logic input or to set it as an output and put 0v or 3.3V on it and you can enable a pull-up resistor on any pin.
This example lights the on-board LED.
(pio-pin-setdir *pio-output* led)
Reading the voltage on a pin as an input (eLua)
Here is an example of reading one PIO pin and driving another in response to it.
We will read the pin connected to the onboard user button and, as long as it is pressed down, we will make the on-board LED flicker.
-- Make the Mizar32 on-board LED flicker as long as the user button is held
-- A function to give a short delay of 1/10th of a second
-- First, make sure the LED starts in the "off" position
-- Now enable input/output pins
-- If the button is pressed down...
-- ... turn the on-board LED on and off again
Reading the voltage on a pin as an input (PicoLisp)
(setq led 'PB_29 button 'PX_16)
(pio-pin-setdir *pio-output* led)
The user button's electrical circuit is quite simple: when the button is pressed, it connects its PIO pin to zero volts, giving a low input value, and there is a resistor connected between the PIO pin and 3.3 volts so that if the button is not pressed the PIO pin is gently pulled up to 3.3V and reads as a high value.
Other PIO pins that are not connected to anything, if you program them as inputs, will pick up random noise from the surrounding environment and give values that are sometimes high and sometimes low. The programmable pull-up resistors are a way to ensure that, if no signal is connected to an input pin, it will gently be pulled up to a high value instead of floating randomly.
This example turns one of the unused GPIO pins into a PIO input, but ensures that, if nothing is physically connected to it, it will always return a high value of 1.
If you remove the pio.pin.setpull() line from the following code (on my test board, at least), it prints mostly zeroes but if you touch the underside of the Mizar32 board the value flickers between 0 and 1.  With the pio.pin.setpull() line included, the input value is always 1 unless you connect the pin it to a GND pin (e.g. BUS5 pin 14) with a piece of wire.
(pio-pin-setdir *pio-input* pin)
(pio-pin-setpull *pio-pullup* pin)
Although Alcor6L also has a similar primitive PULLDOWN, the AVR32 chip used in the Mizar32 does not have programmable pull-down resistors in its hardware, so using this will provoke an error message.
To disable the pull-up resistor again, you use
(pio-pin-setpull pin *pio-nopull*)
Another use for the programmable pull-up resistors is to implement "open-collector outputs". In this scheme of things, a pin can be in one of two states: either it is being driven as a 0 output or it being read as an input. The pull-up resistor ensures that, if no one is driving it as an output, everyone will read it as a high value. This is used when several computers need to communicate over a single signal wire in such a way that any computer can talk with any other one without needing a master-slave relationship or a way to negotiate who is controlling the bus. Using this system, any computer can read the wire to see if its value is high or low, and any computer can drive the wire to a low value, to be read by all the others. This is different from driving a wire as a high or low output because if one computer is driving it high and another is driving it low at the same time, that could damage the computers in question and would certainly result in garbled communication.
A simple example would be a system to turn a house light on and off in a way that can be activated by any one of several switch units. The I2C bus, instead, is an advanced example that uses open-collector outputs on its signal wires so that any one of the computers on an I2C bus to talk with any other one without ever causing conflicting signals on the bus wires.
The following code implements an open-collector output on a PIO pin, giving one function to configure it as an OC pin, one function to drive it as a low output and one to set it as an input and tell you what value is on the wire at the moment:
-- Turn a PIO pin into an open-collector output.
-- OC output starts as an input, not driving the bus wire
-- arrange that, when it is an input and no one is driving it, it will float high
-- and that when we set it as an output, it will drive a low value
-- Drive a low output value onto the pin.
-- The low output value is already programmed during setup()
-- so we only need to enable it as an output.
-- Make the pin an input and return the value on the bus wire
(pio-pin-setdir *pio-input* pin)
(pio-pin-setpull *pio-pullup* pin)
(pio-pin-setdir *pio-input* pin)
Please note: There is currently no support for interrupt handling in PicoLisp. See issue #12.
You can however use interrupts in eLua.
You can arrange for your own Lua function to be called whenever the logic level changes on a GPIO pin, without having to keep checking the pin all the time.
You can ask for your interrupt function to be called either when the logic level on a GPIO pin goes from 0 to 1, when it goes from 1 to 0 or both.
The following example creates an interrupt function and arranges for it to be called every time the user button is pressed. The circuitry of the user button is such that its GPIO pin is high when the button is not pressed and low when it is pressed, so we ask for our interrupt routine to be called when the logic level of the pin goes from high to low.
-- Example program to show the use of Lua interrupts on PIO edges.
-- This flashes the on-board LED every time the user button is depressed.
-- Which PIO pins are the button and the LED connected to?
-- Enable the LED as an output, starting in the "off" state.
-- and the button as an input.
-- Set our interrupt handing function and make it sensitive to a
-- change from high to low of the PIO pin connected to the user button.
-- Do something for about ten seconds while the test runs
-- and remove our interrupt handler function.
Any GPIO pin can be made to react to edge-based interrupts, whether they are inputs, outputs or have some completely different function.
You can enable the positive edge interrupt function for a pin, the negative edge interrupt function, or both. If you enable both, you can either make both kinds of interrupt be handled by the same function, or by two different functions.
Functions like pio.PB_29 return numbers that are used internally in eLua to identify the GPIO pins. You do not need to know anything about the values of these numbers except in one circumstance: when you have several edge-triggered interrupts enabled on different GPIO pins at the same time.
This is the "resource number", the internal number that eLua uses to represent the pin, and it is the same as the value returned by pio.PX_16 and so on.
So you can say, in your interrupt function,
For pins on Port A, port will be 0 and pin will be from 0 to 31.
For pins on Port B, port will be 1 and pin will be from 0 to 31.
For pins on Port C, port will be 2 and pin will be from 0 to 5.
For pins on Port X, port will be 23 and pin will be from 0 to 39.
The Atmel AT32UC3A datasheet Chapter 22: General-Purpose Input/Output Controller (GPIO)
The PIO section of the eLua manual for details of all eLua pio.*() functions
Set the lowest Magnitude of stars to be displayed when Auto-Magnitude is on.
The magnitude at which stars will become visible, when Auto-Magnitude is on. Default is 8.5.The Celestia user interface allows a range from about 1.0 to 15.0.
Based on the celestia:setrenderflags() and celestia:setfaintestvisible() methods.
Enable "AutoMag" and set the faintest magnitude of stars at 45°.<faintestnumber> is the new faintest magnitude of stars.
Together with the cochlea, the vestibular system is carried by a system of tubes called the membranous labyrinth. These tubes are lodged within the cavities of the bony labyrinth located in the inner ear. A fluid called perilymph fills the space between the bone and the membranous labyrinth, while another one called endolymph fills the inside of the tubes spanned by the membranous labyrinth. These fluids have a unique ionic composition suited to their function in regulating the electrochemical potential of hair cells, which are as we will later see the transducers of the vestibular system. The electric potential of endolymph is of about 80 mV more positive than perilymph.
Since our movements consist of a combination of linear translations and rotations, the vestibular system is composed of two main parts: The otolith organs, which sense linear accelerations and thereby also give us information about the head’s position relative to gravity, and the semicircular canals, which sense angular accelerations.
The otolith organs of both ears are located in two membranous sacs called the utricle and the saccule which primary sense horizontal and vertical accelerations, respectively. Each utricle has about 30'000 hair cells, and each saccule about 16'000. The otoliths are located at the central part of the labyrinth, also called the vestibule of the ear. Both utricle and saccule have a thickened portion of the membrane called the macula. A gelatinous membrane called the otolthic membrane sits atop the macula, and microscopic stones made of calcium carbonate crystal, the otoliths, are embedded on the surface of this membrane. On the opposite side, hair cells embedded in supporting cells project into this membrane.
The otoliths are the human sensory organs for linear acceleration. The utricle (left) is approximately horizontally oriented; the saccule (center) lies approximately vertical. The arrows indicate the local on-directions of the hair cells; and the thick black lines indicate the location of the striola. On the right you see a cross-section through the otolith membrane. The graphs have been generated by Rudi Jaeger, while we cooperated on investigations of the otolith dynamics.
Cross-section through ampulla. Top: The cupula spans the lumen of the ampulla from the crista to the membranous labyrinth. Bottom: Since head acceleration exceeds endolymph acceleration, the relative flow of endolymph in the canal is opposite to the direction of head acceleration. This flow produces a pressure across the elastic cupula, which deflects in response.
Each ear has three semicircular canals. They are half circular, interconnected membranous tubes filled with endolymph and can sense angular accelerations in the three orthogonal planes. The radius of curvature of the human horizontal semicircular canal is 3.2 mm
[1].
The canals on each side are approximately orthogonal to each other. The orientation of the on-directions of the canals on the right side are [2]:
(The axes are oriented such that the positive x-,y-,and z-axis point forward, left, and up, respectively. The horizontal plane is defined by Reid's line, the line connecting the lower rim of the orbita and the center of the external auditory canal. And the directions are such that a rotation about that vector, according to the right-hand-rule, excites the corresponding canal.)
The anterior and posterior semicircular canals are approximately vertical, and the horizontal semicircular canals approximately horizontal.
Orientation of the semicircular canals in the vestibular system. "L / R" stand for "Left / Right", respectively, and "H / A / P" for "Horizontal / Anterior / Posterior". The arrows indicate the direction of head movement that stimulates the corresponding canal.
Each canal presents a dilatation at one end, called the ampulla. Each membranous ampulla contains a saddle-shaped ridge of tissue, the crista, which extends across it from side to side. It is covered by neuroepithelium, with hair cells and supporting cells. From this ridge rises a gelatinous structure, the cupula, which extends to the roof of the ampulla immediately above it, dividing the interior of the ampulla into two approximately equal parts.
The sensors within both the otolith organs and the semicircular canals are the hair cells. They are responsible for the transduction of a mechanical force into an electrical signal and thereby build the interface between the world of accelerations and the brain.
Transduction mechanism in auditory or vestibular haircell. Tilting the haircell towards the kinocilium opens the potassium ion channels. This changes the receptor potential in the haircell. The resulting emission of neurotransmittors can elicit an action potential (AP) in the post-synaptic cell.
Hair cells have a tuft of stereocilia that project from their apical surface. The thickest and longest stereocilia is the kinocilium. Stereocilia deflection is the mechanism by which all hair cells transduce mechanical forces. Stereocilia within a bundle are linked to one another by protein strands, called tip links, which span from the side of a taller stereocilium to the tip of its shorter neighbor in the array. Under deflection of the bundle, the tip links act as gating springs to open and close mechanically sensitive ion channels. Afferent nerve excitation works basically the following way: when all cilia are deflected toward the kinocilium, the gates open and cations, including potassium ions from the potassium rich endolymph, flow in and the membrane potential of the hair cell becomes more positive (depolarization). The hair cell itself does not fire action potentials. The depolarization activates voltage-sensitive calcium channels at the basolateral aspect of the cell. Calcium ions then flow in and trigger the release of neurotransmitters, mainly glutamate, which in turn diffuse across the narrow space between the hair cell and a nerve terminal, where they then bind to receptors and thus trigger an increase of the action potentials firing rate in the nerve. On the other hand, afferent nerve inhibition is the process induced by the bending of the stereocilia away from the kinocilium (hyperpolarization) and by which the firing rate is decreased. Because the hair cells are chronically leaking calcium, the vestibular afferent nerve fires actively at rest and thereby allows the sensing of both directions (increase and decrease of firing rate). Hair cells are very sensitive and respond extremely quickly to stimuli. The quickness of hair cell response may in part be due to the fact that they must be able to release neurotransmitter reliably in response to a threshold receptor potential of only 100 µV or so.
Auditory haircells are very similar to those of the vestibular system. Here an electron microscopy image of a frog's sacculus haircell.
While afferent haircells in the auditory system are fairly homogeneous,those in the vestibular system can be broadly separated into two groups: "regular units" and "irregular units". Regular haircells have approximately constant interspike intervals, and fire constantly proportional to their displacement. In contrast, the inter-spike interval of irregular haircells is much more variable, and their discharge rate increases with increasing frequency; they can thus act as event detectors at high frequencies. Regular and irregular haircells also differ in their location, morphology and innervation.
Curthoys IS and Oman CM (1987). "Dimensions of the horizontal semicircular duct, ampulla and utricle in the human.". Acta Otolaryngol 103:  254–261.
Della Santina CC, Potyagaylo V, Migliaccio A, Minor LB, Carey JB (2005). "Orientation of Human Semicircular Canals Measured by Three-Dimensional Multi-planar CT Reconstruction.". J Assoc Res Otolaryngol 6(3):  191-206.
The desire to keep stored or send information secret dates back into antiquity. As society developed so did the application of cryptography. Below is a timeline of notable events related to cryptography.
Wikipedia has related information at Timeline of cryptography
3500s - The Sumerians develop cuneiform writing and the Egyptians develop hieroglyphic writing.
1500s - The Phoenicians develop an alphabet
600-500 - Hebrew scholars make use of simple  monoalphabetic substitution ciphers (such as the Atbash cipher)
c. 400 - Spartan use of scytale (alleged)
c. 400BCE - Herodotus reports use of steganography in reports to Greece from Persia (tatoo on shaved head)
100-0 - Notable Roman ciphers such as the Caeser cipher.
1450 - The Chinese develop wooden block movable type printing
1450-1520 - The Voynich manuscript, an example of a possibly encrypted illustrated book, is written.
1466 - Leone Battista Alberti invents  polyalphabetic cipher, also the first known mechanical cipher machine
1518 - Johannes Trithemius' book on cryptology
1553 - Belaso invents the (misnamed) Vigenère cipher
1585 - Vigenère's book on ciphers
1641 - Wilkins' Mercury (English book on cryptography)
1586 - Cryptanalysis used by spy master Sir Francis Walsingham to implicate Mary Queen of Scots in the Babington Plot to murder Queen Elizabeth I of England. Queen Mary was eventually executed.
1614 - Scotsman John Napier (1550-1617) published a paper outlining his discovery of the logarithm. Napier also invented an ingenious system of moveable rods (referred to as Napier's Rods or Napier's bones) which were a precursor of the slide rule. These were based on logarithms and allowed the operator to multiply, divide and calculate square and cube roots by moving the rods around and placing them in specially constructed boards.
1793 - Claude Chappe establishes the first long-distance semaphore "telegraph" line
1795 - Thomas Jefferson invents the Jefferson disk cipher, reinvented over 100 years later by Etienne Bazeries and widely used a a tactical cypher by the US Army.
1809-14 George Scovell's work on Napoleonic ciphers during the Peninsular War
1831 - Joseph Henry proposes and builds an electric telegraph
1835 - Samuel Morse develops the Morse code.
1854 - Wheatstone invents Playfair cipher
1883 - Auguste Kerckhoffs publishes La Cryptographie militare, containing his celebrated "laws" of cryptography
1885 - Beale ciphers published
1894 - The Dreyfus Affair in France involves the use of cryptography, and its misuse, re: false documents.
c 1915 - William Friedman applies statistics to cryptanalysis ( coincidence counting, etc.)
1917 - Gilbert Vernam develops first practical implementation of a teletype cipher, now known as a stream cipher and, later, with Mauborgne the  one-time pad
1917 - Zimmermann telegram intercepted and decrypted, advancing U.S. entry into World War I
1919 - Weimar Germany Foreign Office adopts (a manual) one-time pad for some traffic
1919 - Hebern invents/patents first rotor machine design -- Damm, Scherbius and Koch follow with patents the same year
c. 1924 - MI8 (Yardley, et al.) provide breaks of assorted traffic in support of US position at Washington Naval Conference
c. 1932 - first break of German Army Enigma machine by Rejewski in Poland
1929 - U.S. Secretary of State Henry L. Stimson shuts down State Department cryptanalysis "Black Chamber", saying "Gentlemen do not read each other's mail."
1931 - The American Black Chamber by Herbert O. Yardley is published, revealing much about American cryptography
1940 - break of Japan's Purple machine cipher by SIS team
December 7, 1941 - U.S. Naval base at Pearl Harbor surprised by Japanese attack, despite U.S. breaks into several Japanese cyphers. U.S. enters World War II
June 1942 - Battle of Midway. Partial break into Dec 41 edition of JN-25 leads to successful ambush of Japanese carriers and to the momentum killing victory.
April 1943 - Admiral Yamamoto, architect of Pearl Harbor attack, is assassinated by U.S. forces who know his itinerary from decrypted messages
April 1943 - Max Newman, Wynn-Williams, and their team (including Alan Turing) at the secret Government Code and Cypher School ('Station X'), Bletchley Park, Bletchley, England, complete the "Heath Robinson". This is a specialized machine for cypher-breaking, not a general-purpose calculator or computer.
December 1943 - The Colossus was built, by Dr Thomas Flowers at The Post Office Research Laboratories in London, to crack the German Lorenz cipher (SZ42). Colossus was used at Bletchley Park during WW II - as a successor to April's 'Robinson's. Although 10 were eventually built, unfortunately they were destroyed immediately after they had finished their work - it was so advanced that there was to be no possibility of its design falling into the wrong hands. The Colossus design was the first electronic digital computer and was somewhat programmable. A epoch in machine capability.
1944 - patent application filed on SIGABA code machine used by U.S. in WW II. Kept secret, finally issued in 2001
1946 - VENONA's first break into Soviet espionage traffic from early 1940s
1948 - Claude Shannon writes a paper that establishes the mathematical basis of information theory
1949 - Shannon's Communication Theory of Secrecy Systems pub in Bell Labs Technical Journal, based on work done during WWII.
1951 - U.S. National Security Agency founded, subsuming the US Army and US Navy 'girls school' departments
1968 - John Anthony Walker walks into the Soviet Union's embassy in Washington and sells information on KL-7 cipher machine. The Walker spy ring operates until 1985
1964 - David Kahn's The Codebreakers is published
June 8, 1967 - USS Liberty incident in which a U.S. SIGINT ship is attacked by Israel, apparently by mistake, though some continue to dispute this
January 23, 1968 - USS Pueblo, another SIGINT ship, is captured by North Korea
1969 - The first hosts of ARPANET, Internet's ancestor, are connected
1974? - Horst Feistel develops the Feistel network block cipher design at IBM
1976 - the  Data Encryption Standard was published as an official Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) for the US
1976 - Diffie and Hellman publish New Directions in Cryptography article
1977- RSA public key encryption invented at MIT
1981 - Richard Feynman proposes quantum computers. The main application he had in mind was the simulation of quantum systems, but he also mentioned the possibility of solving other problems.
1986 In the wake of an increasing number of break-ins to government and corporate computers, the US Congress passes the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, which makes it a crime to break into computer systems. The law, however, does not cover juveniles.
1988 - First optical chip developed, it uses light instead of electricity to increase processing speed.
1989 - Tim Berners-Lee and Robert Cailliau built the prototype system which became the World Wide Web at CERN
1991 - Phil Zimmermann releases the public key encryption program PGP along with its source code, which quickly appears on the Internet.
1992 - Release of the movie Sneakers (film)|Sneakers, in which security experts are blackmailed into stealing a universal decoder for encryption systems (no such decoder is known, likely because it is impossible).
1994 - 1st ed of Bruce Schneier's Applied Cryptography is published
1994 - Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) encryption protocol released by Netscape
1994 - Peter Shor devises an algorithm which lets quantum computers determine the factorization of large integers quickly. This is the first interesting problem for which quantum computers promise a significant speed-up, and it therefore generates a lot of interest in quantum computers.
1994 - DNA computing proof of concept on toy traveling salesman problem; a method for input/output still to be determined.
1994 - Russian crackers siphon $10 million from Citibank and transfer the money to bank accounts around the world. Vladimir Levin, the 30-year-old ringleader, uses his work laptop after hours to transfer the funds to accounts in Finland and Israel. Levin stands trial in the United States and is sentenced to three years in prison. Authorities recover all but $400,000 of the stolen money.
1994 - Formerly proprietary trade secret, but not patented, RC4 cipher algorithm is published on the Internet
1994 - first RSA Factoring Challenge from 1977 is decrypted as The Magic Words are Squeamish Ossifrage
1995 - NSA publishes the  SHA1 hash algorithm as part of its Digital Signature Standard; SHA0 had a flaw corrected by SHA1
1997 - Ciphersaber, an encryption system based on RC4 that is simple enough to be reconstructed from memory, is published on Usenet
1998 - RIPE project releases final report
October 1998 - Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) becomes law in U.S., criminalizing production and dissemination of technology that can circumvent measures taken to protect copyright
October 1999 - DeCSS, a computer program capable of decrypting content on a DVD, is published on the Internet
1999: Bruce Schneier develops the Solitaire cipher, a way to allow field agents to communicate securely without having to rely on electronics or having to carry incriminating tools like a one-time pad. Unlike all previous manual encryption techniques -- except the one-time pad -- this one is resistant to automated cryptanalysis. It is published in Neal Stephenson's Cryptonomicon (2000).
January 14, 2000 - U.S. Government announce restrictions on export of cryptography are relaxed (although not removed). This allows many US companies to stop the long running, and rather ridiculous process of having to create US and international copies of their software.
March 2000 - President Clinton says he doesn't use e-mail to communicate with his daughter, Chelsea Clinton, at college because he doesn't think the medium is secure.
September 6, 2000 - RSA Security Inc. released their RSA algorithm into the public domain, a few days in advance of their US patent 4405829 expiring. Following the relaxation of the U.S. government export restrictions, this removed one of the last barriers to the world-wide distribution of much software based on cryptographic systems. It should be noted that the IDEA algorithm is still under patent and also that government restrictions still apply in some places.
2000 - U.K. Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000|Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act requires anyone to supply their cryptographic key to a duly authorized person on request
2001 - Belgian Rijndael algorithm selected as the U.S.  Advanced Encryption Standard after a 5 year public search process by National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST)
September 11, 2001 - U.S. response to terrorist attacks hampered by Communication during the September 11, 2001 attacks|lack of secure communications
November 2001 - Microsoft and its allies vow to end "full disclosure" of security vulnerabilities by replacing it with "responsible" disclosure guidelines.
2002 - NESSIE project releases final report / selections
2003 - CRYPTREC project releases 2003 report / recommendations
2004 - the hash MD5 is shown to be vulnerable to practical collision attack
2005 - potential for attacks on SHA1 demonstrated
2005 - agents from the U.S. FBI demonstrate their ability to crack WEP using publicly available tools
2007 - NIST announces w:NIST hash function competition
2012 - proclamation of a winner of the w:NIST hash function competition is scheduled
2015 - year by which NIST suggests that 80-bit keys for symmetric key cyphers be phased out. Asymmetric key cyphers require longer keys which have different vulnerability parameters.
The Eukazini is a cocktail invented on the December 17, 2006. It was invented by bartender Kaz Santiago and customer Euan Morse in Edinburgh's Ryan's Bar.
A small triangle of orange to complete the drink.
A chilled martini glass rimmed with granulated sugar.Use a lemon or lime wedge to 'juice' the glass.
Fill a shaker with ice, then add all ingredients.
Shake ingredients till shaker is frosted, (shake very vigorously).
Then strain into a chilled martini glass.
Garnish with orange and serve.
Complex Electronics | Electricity |
History of Electronics |
A cell, or electrochemical cell, Galvanic cell or Voltaic cell, is a component used to store and provide electrical energy. The energy in a cell is stored as a chemical potential energy, and electrical energy can be extracted when the chemicals undergo a chemical reaction. A battery is the term used to refer to multiple cells that are used together as one unit, and can be connected in series, parallel or in a combination of series and parallel connections.
The properties of the cell can be determined by the chemistry of the cell (i.e. what it is made up of), and its physical design. Different chemistries will affect cell voltage, energy density, internal resistivity, and other factors. Physical design will affect the total cell energy capacity, total internal resistance and the shape and size of the cell. Generally, increasing the size of a cell, while maintaining the cell chemistry, will result in a greater energy capacity and lower internal resistance, and consequently a greater current supplying capability, and vice versa.
Cells are categorised as Primary (Dry) cells, and Secondary (Wet) cells, based on their chemistry. Primary cells are single-use and disposable, for example alkaline cells. Secondary cells are rechargeable, for example lead-acid cells.
Cell: Two materials with a voltage difference between them. This causes current to flow, which does work. Electrons travel from the cathode, do some work, and are absorbed by the anode.
Anode: Destination of electrons.
Cathode: Source of electrons.
What is the relationship between voltage and electronegativity?
Electronegativity is a concept in chemistry used to measure and predict the relative likelihood of a chemical reaction causing electrons to shift from one chemical to another resulting in ions and molecular bonds.  A battery cell operates by allowing two chemicals to react and supply ions to the anode and cathode.  When the supply of a reactant is consumed, the battery is dead.  It no longer produces different electrical potential at the anode and cathode driven by the chemical reaction.
Voltage is the electrical potential of a point due to surrounding measurable electric charge distributions and points as calculated by application Coulomb's Law.  Voltage difference between two points connected by a conductor results in electron flow.
A1: For main workstation is 16 GB the optimum?
Hugh performance improvements can be achieved by adding more RAM memory to the system, especially when working with large sets. However, due to the addressing limits of 4GB on a 32bit system OsiriX needs to run on a 64bit system to benefit from the added memory. This requires the 64bit extension to be separately purchased. See http://www.osirix-viewer.com/OsiriX-64bit.html for more information
A2: Is 4 core enough or is it better value to get 8 cores?
Product ratios of reactions can be changed according to the conditions in which the reaction occurs.  Depending on the kinetic and thermodynamic control of the reaction, product ratios can vary dramatically. An example of this is the hydrobromination of 1,3-butadiene at 40oC v.s 0oC.  At 0oC, the reaction is under kinetic control and the products favor 3-Bromo-1-butene over 1-Bromo-2-butene in a 70:30 mixture.  However at 40oC, the reaction is under thermodynamic control and favors the 1-Bromo-2-butene product with a 15:85 ratio. [1]
Chemical reactions can be controlled by thermodynamic or kinetic means. When a reaction can yield two different products, the reaction conditions change the outcome and therefore the products. When conditions of a reaction changes, the reaction itself may change. Some conditions to be considered are temperature, pressure, light, or even solvent. The difference between thermodynamic and kinetic conditions is that thermodynamic factors associate with the relative stability of the molecules while the kinetic factors are associated with the rate of product formation. This phenomena of different products can only occur when there are two different paths with two different activation energies or energy required to make the reaction progress. In essence, when temperature is low the reaction undergoes kinetic control where the major product is the one that comes from the quickest reaction. When temperature is high, the reaction undergoes thermodynamic control which provides the more stable system and product. Under kinetic control the reaction is rate based and is not reversible, but under thermodynamic control the reaction is in equilibrium and is also reversible under the correct conditions. [2]
↑ Invalid <ref> tag; no text was provided for refs named Schore
↑ control, November 20, 2012.
When the product ratio of a reaction depends upon the thermodynamic stability of the products, a reaction is said to be under thermodynamic control. In the hydrobromination of 1,3-Butadiene at 40oC, the ratio of the products favors the more stable isomer, as it is under thermodynamic control. At higher temperatures or over long periods of time, the more stable isomer will dominate as the two isomers will be in equilibrium and rapidly interconvert.[1]
Thermodynamic control of a reaction favors the more thermodynamically stable molecule. This reaction pathway is selected for by using long reaction times or high temperatures. Long reaction times or high temperatures will give the molecules more energy to surpass the lower kinetic pathway to eventually make its way over to the more stable thermodynamic product. Even though molecules have already taken the kinetic pathway, with enough time or high enough temperatures, the molecules will have the energy to go back and overcome the higher activation energy in order to rest in the more stable state or product. Essentially, with enough time or temperature molecules will select for the thermodynamically controlled pathway and end as the more stable product. [2]
A product ratio that follows the relative rates of formation, such as the hydrobromination of 1,3-butadiene at 0oC, is said to be under kinetic control.  The reason 3-Bromo-1-butene dominates is because at 0oC, the reverse formation is much slower than at 40oC so the isomers are not rapidly inter-converting.[1]
Kinetic control favors shorter reaction times. This is also the path that requires less energy or has a lower activation energy. This is because at the start of a fast reaction more molecules will go towards the kinetic lower energy path and if stopped short, the molecules will not have a chance to return and take the thermodynamic path. Also, low temperature favors the kinetic pathway because it does not give the molecules that already took the kinetic path enough energy to return back to the starting material and then take the thermodynamic path. The way to get the kinetic product is to use short times for reactions to trap the kinetic product or use high temperatures.  [2]
↑ a b Schore, Neil E. (2011). Organic Chemistry Structure and Function 6th Edition. W. H. Freeman
↑ a b control, November 20, 2012.
The exec collection of functions of Unix-like operating systems cause the running process to be completely replaced by the program passed as an argument to the function. As a new process is not created, the process identifier (PID) does not change, but the data, heap and stack of the original process are replaced by those of the new process.
In the execl, execlp, execv, and execvp calls, the new process image inherits the current environment variables.
In MS-DOS environments, a program executed with one of the exec functions is always loaded into memory as if the "maximum allocation" in the program's executable file header is set to default value 0xFFFF. The EXEHDR utility can be used to change the maximum allocation field of a program. However, if this is done and the program is invoked with one of the exec functions, the program might behave differently from a program invoked directly from the operating-system command line or with one of the spawn functions.
Many Unix shells also offer an exec built-in command that replaces the shell process with the specified program.[1]
Wrapper scripts often use this command to run a program (either directly or through an interpreter or virtual machine) after setting environment variables or other configuration. By using exec, the resources used by the shell program do not need to stay in use after the program is started. [2]
The functions are declared in the unistd.h header for the POSIX standard and in process.h for DOS, OS/2, and Windows.
Some implementations provide these functions named with a leading underscore (e.g. _execl).
The base of each function is exec, followed by one or more letters:
e - An array of pointers to environment variables is explicitly passed to the new process image.
l - Command-line arguments are passed individually to the function.
p - Uses the PATH environment variable to find the file named in the path argument to be executed.
v - Command-line arguments are passed to the function as an array of pointers.
The path argument specifies the path name of the file to execute as the new process image. Arguments beginning at arg0 are pointers to arguments to be passed to the new process image. The argv value is an array of pointers to arguments.
The first argument arg0 should be the name of the executable file.  Usually it is the same value as the path argument.  Some programs may incorrectly rely on this argument providing the location of the executable, but there is no guarantee of this nor is it standardized across platforms.
Argument envp is an array of pointers to environment settings.
The exec calls named ending with an e alter the environment for the new process image by passing a list of environment settings through the envp argument. This argument is  an  array  of  pointers  to  null-terminated strings. The envp array must be terminated by a NULL pointer.
Normally the exec function will replace the current process, so it cannot return anything to the original process. Processes do have an exit status, but that value is collected by the parent process.
If an exec function does return to the calling process, an error occurred, the return value is −1, and errno is set to one of the following values:
The argument list exceeds the system limit.
The specified file has a locking or sharing violation.
The file or path name not found.
Not enough memory is available to execute the new process image.
↑ http://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/bashref.html#IDX74 - exec built-in command in bash manual
↑ http://tldp.org/LDP/abs/html/wrapper.html
Start your adventure by selecting the "Begin A New Quest" option.  Next, choose the Adventure Log it will be stored in.  There are three Adventure Logs, so three Warriors can store their quests in the Game Pak.  After this, enter the name by which you will be known in Alefgard by moving the cursor over the letter chart.  After starting a game, you begin in Castle Tantagel.  Speak to the king and guards before you leave the castle.
File:DW1 Map ThroneRoom.png  Speak with King Lorik.
Tales of your arrival have preceded you to the throne and the King has been waiting anxiously.  The old prophecies seem to be coming true!  In his regal presence you listen closely to each word, for the King's many years have bred great wisdom.  The Kingdom is in desperate trouble, ravaged by werewolves and dragons.  Until your arrival there was no hope.  Then the King tells you about the Ball of Light, an ancient artifact with the power to radiate peace over the land.  Now the Ball of Light grows ever dimmer in the shadows of the Dragonlord's keep.
File:DW1 Snap TakeGold.png  Check all of the chests.
Only by recovering the precious globe can you save Alefgard, even though you are a stranger to this land and ill-equipped for the task.  Seeing this, the King offers you gifts to get you started.
The gifts presented to you by King Lorik are the Torch, a Magic Key, and 120 Gold.  The key is used almost immediately in opening the door (and trains you in using items), the gold is used to purchase items from the nearby town, and the torch will be used when you enter your first dungeon.
After you have spoken with the King, the Palace Guards can tell you more.  To speak to them, stand before one or the other and press A to bring up the Command Window.  Then select Talk with the arrow and push A again.  Now the guard will tell you what he knows.
To leave the throne room, unlock the door by using the magic key, then head towards the stairs.  While standing directly on the stairs, open the Command Window, and select STAIRS.   The use of stairs is automatic in the Dragon Warrior I & II release.
File:DW1 Map Tantegel.png
Much of the information you need is gathered from the citizens of this kingdom.  Although the legends are old, many contain a seed of truth.  Remember their words by writing down who the speaker was and what town he was in, and keep all your clues together in a notebook for easy access because you may need them later to solve a puzzle.  If a message seems mysterious, it probably means that it is important.  Compare messages to see if they might be connected.
File:DW1 Snap Magic.png  This man restores your magic
Once you reach level 3 and earn the spell of Heal, there's no reason to visit the Brecconary Town Inn any more.  You can save 6 gold pieces by visiting this man to the right of the castle entrance.  He will chant a prayer that will restore 100% of your magic points.  Now you can cast Heal until your hit points are full, and talk to the man once more to reclaim the used MP.
Many doors throughout the Kingdom have been securely locked.  While there is a magic key shop within the castle, you need to already have such a key before you can reach it.  As such, you will hear tales of a city far to the south east, the city of Rimuldar, that will contain the first magic key.   The journey there will be filled with danger, but you will be at the mid-point of the game once you get there.
Random events, sample spaces, sets & probability
Hormones are defined as chemical signals that affect one or more cells in an organism. Hormones can have an amplification effect where a small signal causes a large response.
Scala provides several access modifiers.
Access modifiers can be used to change in which contexts the members of classes, objects, traits and packages can be accessed.
Limiting access to members can help separate interface from implementation,
An access modifier changes when a member can be referenced.
Attempts at referencing an in-accessible member causes
a compile-time error.
The default access modifier for members is the "public" access modifier.
Members with "public" access can be accessed from anywhere.
There is no keyword for "public" access.
The "private" access modifier prevents access anywhere outside
The first member definition of the class is
"private var seconds = 0".
The keyword "private" is used before the "var" declaration
The methods "addSeconds" and "currentSeconds" respectively modifies
Note that "addSeconds" prevents negative values from being added to "seconds".
The lines following the class definition instantiates an instance of the class "StopWatch",
It is not possible to subtract from "seconds" using the "addSeconds" method,
Thus, the invariant that requires that "seconds" is 0 or positive is always obeyed,
Paclitaxel (taxol) is an important anti-cancer pharmaceutical drug.  In 1967, Monreoe E. Wall and Mansukh C. Wani extracted paclitaxel from the bark of a Pacific yew tree, Taxus brevifolia.
Paclitaxel is used to treat AIDs-related Kaposi sarcoma, breast, ovarian, and lung cancer in UK.  This medicine binds to the tubulin and inhibits the disassembly of microtubules. This stabilizes the microtubules and prevents further cell division.
Seek medical attention if you have these side effects:
Swelling of the face, lips, tongue, or throat
Pale skin, easy bruising or bleeding, unusual weak
Fever, chills, body aches, flu symptoms
Sores inside your mouth or on your lips
Mild nausea, and vomiting
The structure of (1S,2S,3R,4S,7R,9S,10S,12R,15S)-4,12-Diacetoxy-15-{[(2R,3S)-3- (benzoylamino)-2-hydroxy-3- phenylpropanoyl]oxy}-1,9- dihydroxy-10,14,17,17-tetramethyl -11-oxo-6-oxatetracyclo [11.3.1.0~3,10~.0~4,7~] heptadec-13-en-2-yl rel-benzoate:
It has 11 stereocenters.
Microtubules are cellular components that act as a skeleton for the cell. For cell division to occur, microtubules need to depolymerise back to tubulin. After that, tubulins repolymerise to form the spindle of cell division. The movement of the replicated chromosomes during mitosis depends on the spindle and therefore, the depolymerization of microtubules.
Paclitaxel or Taxol enhances the polymerization of tubulin to stable microtubules and also interacts directly with microtubules, stabilizing them against depolymerization. Hence, it interferes with the spindle formation process. Chromosomes are unable to move to the opposite sides of the dividing cells. Cells division is inhibited and eventually, cell death is induced.
Borad, Brijesh. "CYTOTOXIC EFFECT OF TAXOL AND VITAMIN E SUCCINATE COMBINATION IN COMPARISON WITH TAXOL ALONE ON MCF-7 BREAST CANCER CELL CULTURE BY MTT ASSAY." PharmaTutor. N.p.. Web. 7 Dec 2012.
This is a glossary covering terms commonly encountered when dealing with the subject of this book. More detail can be found in the book, Wikipedia, and in other sources.
Deinterlacing — the process of converting interlaced video into a progressive equivalent. Deinterlacing takes two forms: the conversion of video that was created in interlaced form from interlaced to progressive (e.g., true interlaced video as created by a video camera), and inverse telecine, which is the recovery of the original progressive film frames from interlaced telecine video. Inverse telecine is a relatively simple process. Deinterlacing true interlaced video is inexact and difficult.
(Video) Field — a division of a frame obtained by sampling only a portion of the scan lines in that frame. Where fields are used in modern video, they are obtained by sampling every other line from a frame; thus two fields, one containing the even scan lines and the other the odd, make up a frame of video. The fields are said to be "interlaced" and are transmitted consecutively.
(Video) Frame — the basic unit of video transmission, a single complete image. A frame may be composed of multiple interlaced fields, or may be a single progressive unit. A frame is made up of a stack of horizontal scan lines; this is a product of the scan line-oriented nature of analog video. In digital video, there is less of a distinction between horizontal and vertical rows of pixels.
Frame Rate, frames per second, fps — the rate at which frames occur in a video stream. Some common frame rates are 29.97 fps (NTSC),  24 fps (film), 23.976 fps (film playback rate for NTSC), and 25 fps (PAL).
Hard Telecine — recorded interlaced material derived from film so that the telecine interlacing is built into the signal. An NTSC hard telecine recording has interlaced frames at 29.97 fps. This is different than what normally occurs with film sources on DVDs, where the content is stored as a 23.976 fps progressive stream that is then converted (by a 3:2 pulldown converter in the DVD player) to an interlaced stream at 29.97 fps for viewing.
Interlacing, interlaced scan — made up of a sequence of fields that in turn make up a sequence of frames. NTSC is interlaced; an NTSC frame consists of an even field (the even numbered scan lines from the frame) followed by an odd field (the odd numbered scan lines).
Inverse telecine, IVTC — the process of converting telecined video back into its film equivalent. Generally, this involves deinterlacing as well as a change in frame rate. It is a (somewhat) straightforward process.
Progressive, progressive scan — made up of a sequence of progressively-scanned (i.e., non-interlaced) frames. A progressive scan frame is an entire frame; it is called progressive because the frame appears in the video stream in its entirety one line at a time from top to bottom.
3:2 Pulldown — a process used to convert 24 fps film source into 29.97 fps interlaced NTSC video. Because four 24 fps film frames will fit evenly (practically speaking) in the space of five 29.97 fps NTSC frames, four film frames are fit into five video frames by interlacing two of the four film frames so that three of the video frames are a mixture of two of the film frames; the other two film frames appear intact. This produces a relatively smooth conversion.
Pullup - synonym for inverse telecine.
Scan line — a horizontal line in a video frame or field. Analog television physically draws video images from the top to the bottom of the television screen, one horizontal line at a time. Digital monitors work, at least conceptually, the same way. NTSC video has approximately 480 visible scan lines; PAL has 576.
Telecine — the process of converting film shot at 24 frames per second into video at either 29.97 fps (NTSC) or 25 fps (PAL).
Joseph N. Hall
Your customer service skills are almost as important as your tech skills. Although this information is briefly addressed and contained on one page, expect it to color every interaction you have in your IT career. While you may do an amazing job as a tech, you will not be very successful if you are difficult to deal with, obnoxious, or offensive. A person with mediocre skills is better remembered if they were pleasant to be around and made work a priority. These skills also apply to dealing with co-workers and management team, even when you don't deal with customers directly.
Your first impression is the most lasting, and the hardest to fix if you get it wrong. Someone who arrives on time, dresses appropriately, and seems positive sets the tone for someone who is responsible and cares whether they do a great job.
Arriving when you are expected shows the customer that they can depend on you, and is the first commitment to the customer you will need to meet. If you will be late, or significantly earlier than expected, contact the customer to see if the new timeframe is acceptable. If necessary, schedule a new time to meet with the customer. The customer expects to be contacted if anything changes, and will appreciate communicating these changes.
It is important to keep up with your appearance as a tech. You will want to avoid clothing that is dirty, stained, torn, or wrinkled. Some environments have a dress code that will require a shirt with a collar and dress pants. If your environment is particularly dirty, jeans may be appropriate. Some environments allow dress shoes, especially if you will be walking or standing often. If you have no formalized dress code, see what everyone else is wearing and make sure you are not under- or over-dressed for work.
Also, make sure that you keep up with your personal hygene. Brush your teeth, bathe regularly, and wear deodorant. This may seem like basic principles to you, but it is overlooked by some. This is part of the impression you leave with a customer, and someone who is difficult to be around because of smell is hard to invite back. I personally keep a travel hygene kit with me for those just-in-case moments.
Maintaining a positive attitude is more than just thinking positive. Frame what you will say in a positive manner. Instead of "I don't think I can get this done today," try "I should have this done by tomorrow." Focus on what you can do to make the situation better instead of what is wrong.
Cultural Sensitivity, in this sense, means being accepting of cultural differences. When you deal with someone, be sure to remain open-minded for cultural differences. You do not want to offend someone by providing your opinion of their culture. This is what people mean by not discussing religion or politics, but you should also try to avoid discussing gender, ethnicity, or sexual orientation. Some people will become offended by sports conversation. You can easily make small talk about your work and stay positive to create a lasting positive impression.
This next section involves dealing with the customer. Now that you have made your first impression, it is time to get down to business. Are you going to wow the customer with your knowledge of the problem? What do you do if you get a personal call? When is it appropriate to repair the PC or just replace it? How does the customer know what you actually did? You will be coached on how to speak with a customer, avoiding distractions, setting expectations with the customer, and documenting your work.
When you are talking to the customer, you want to avoid jargon or slang. It is best to evaluate how technical the customer is before getting too technical. Most customers will not know the difference between memory and storage, and that is why you are here! Do your best to speak clearly, in a way the customer will understand, and explain the issue. Please compare these pairs of sentences:
Part of your computer was damaged by static electricity when the case was open.
I bounced your connection. You're up.
I reset the connection between us and your modem, and your modem is now working properly.
You have a cached version of the page. I'll clear your cache and cookies.
That's a BSOD. We'll scandisk that and run a defrag.
Windows is crashing, and we're going to have to do some diagnostics to figure out what is going on.
The first sentence is something someone might say to describe a situation to someone else of the same technical level. Using this type of language drives a wedge between you and the customer, and makes it difficult for the customer to follow what you are saying.
The best way to understand how to talk to customers is by listening to them. Listening is more than passively hearing what someone says. It definately helps to acknowledge what someone says, but active listening skills are even better. Active listening requires discussion, and often repeating back what someone is saying. For example:
(Tech) Hello, this is Willy at Acme computers. How can I help you?
(Customer) Hello, this is Robert. My computer isn't working.
(Tech) I'm sorry to hear that your computer isn't working. What is on the screen right now?
(Customer) There is nothing on my screen now. It's been black for the past 20 minutes.
(Tech) 20 minutes is a long time to see nothing on your screen. What was happening before your screen went black?
(Customer) I was rearranging the things on my desk, and my screen went black. I don't know what to do.
By repeating back what Willy hears, Robert knows that Willy is paying attention. The customer is much less likely to repeat information, and feels engaged.
Part of listening is not interrupting the customer. Although you may feel like you know what the problem is, it is always best to let the customer finish what they are saying. When you interrupt, you are no longer listening to the customer and may miss vital information. It is quite possible that Robert had accidentally unplugged or turned off his monitor. If Willy interjects at this point, the fact that the power went out briefly for the whole building would have been missed. Sadly, the brief interruption of power was enough to cause the power supply to fail on the computer. Willy would have gone through several steps of unnecessary troubleshooting before realizing that the PC was not powered on, and would not have powered on without a repair. This is embarassing as a tech, as the customer knows you weren't listening and begins to question your competency.
Repairing vs. replacing
Friday is the day after Thursday.
Carbon satellites are small peaks that can be seen shouldering the main peaks in an NMR spectrum.  These peaks can occur in the NMR spectrum of any NMR active atom (e.g. 19F or 31P NMR) where those atoms adjoin a carbon atom (and where the spectrum is not 13C-decoupled, which is usually the case).  However, Carbon satellites are most often encountered in proton NMR.
In the example of proton NMR, these peaks are not the result of proton-proton coupling, but result from the coupling of 1H atoms to an adjoining Carbon-13 atom. These small peaks are known as carbon satellites as they are small and appear around the main 1H peak i.e. satellite (around) to them.  Carbon satellites are small because Carbon-13 only makes up about 1% of the atomic carbon content of carbon, the rest of the carbon atoms are predominantly NMR inactive Carbon-12.  Carbon satellites always appear as an evenly spaced pair around the main 1H peak. This is because they are the result of 1% of the 1H atoms coupling to an adjoined 13C atom to give a wide doublet (Carbon-13 has a spin of a half).  Note, if the main 1H-peak has proton-proton coupling, then each satellite will be a miniature version of the main peak and will also show this 1H-coupling, e.g. if the main 1H-peak is a doublet, then the carbon satellites will appear as miniature doublets, i.e. one doublet on either side of the main 1H-peak.
For other NMR atoms (e.g. 19F or 31P atoms), the same applies as above, but obviously where the proton atom is replaced with that oterh NMR active atom e.g. 31P.
Sometime other peaks can be seen around 1H peaks, these are known as spinning sidebands and are related to the rate of spin of an NMR tube.
Carbon satellites (and spinning sidebands) should not be confused with impurity peaks.
Cis-Stilbene   Trans-Stilbene Carbon satellites can be used to obtain structural information, which is not available by looking at the main peaks in the NMR spectrum.
This usually occurs when the purely C-12 compound is symmetrical but where the 1% of the compound which has a C-13 atom in it is no longer symmetrical.
For example, you can not tell if stilbene (Ph-CH=CH-Ph) has a cis- or trans- double bond just by examining at the main peaks in the 1H NMR spectrum.  The =CH- proton does not couple to the adjacent =CH- proton as the molecule is symmetrical.  However 1% of the stilbene molecules will have a 13C atom on one of these double bond carbons (i.e. Ph-13CH=12CH-Ph). In this situation, the proton adjacent to 13C atom will couple to the 13C atom to give a wide doublet. Also, as this molecule is no longer symmetric the 13CH= proton will now couple to the adjacent 12CH=  proton, causing a further doubleting.  Thus this additional coupling (additional to the 13C coupling) is diagnostic of the type of double bond, and will allow one to determine if the stilbene molecule has a cis- or trans- configuration i.e. by examining the size of the diagnostic J coupling constant from -CH=CH- bond. Thus only a single 1H NMR spectrum is need, albeit with close inspection of the satellite peaks, rather than any further complex NMR or derivative chemical experiments.
The same would be see for 1,2-Dichloroethene.[1]
↑ Harald. Gunther. NMR Spectroscopy: Basic principles, concepts, and applications in chemistry (second ed.). pp. 214–219.
NMR SATELLITES AS A PROBE FOR CHEMICAL INVESTIGATIONS SHIzuo FUJIWARA, Yogi ARATA, HIR0sHI OZAWA and MASAYUKI KuruGI Department of Chemistry, The University of Tokyo, Japan [1]
Y. Ogimura, S. Fujiwara and K. Nagashima, Chemical Instrumentation 1, 21 (1968); S. Fujiwara, Y. Yano and K. Nagishima, Chemical Instrumentation 2, 103 (1969); S. Fujiwara, Magnetic Resonance, ed., C. K. Coogan et a!., Plenum Press, New York (1970).
H. Ozawa, Y. Arata and S. Fujiwara, J. Chem. Phys., to be published.
N. Bloembergen and R. V. Pound, Phys. Rev. 95, 8 (1954); S. Bloom, J. App!. Phys. 28, 800 (1957).
A. O. Niel, Phys. Rev. 77, 789 (1950).
Geometry determination of tetrasubstituted stilbenes by proton NMR spectroscopy, Viviana S. Fluxáa, Titus A. Jennya and Christian G. Bochet, Tetrahedron Letters, Volume 46, Issue 22, 30 May 2005, Pages 3793-3795
Section 170.2 of the IRPA
The legislative provision reads:No reopening of claim or application
170.2 The Refugee Protection Division does not have jurisdiction to reopen on any ground — including a failure to observe a principle of natural justice — a claim for refugee protection, an application for protection or an application for cessation or vacation, in respect of which the Refugee Appeal Division or the Federal Court, as the case may be, has made a final determination.
Network Media and TopologiesObjective 2.2: Connectors
Objective 2.3: Physical Topologies
Objective 2.2: Identify common connector types
RJ-11 is a physical interface often used for terminating telephone wires.
It is probably the most familiar of the registered jacks, being used for single line Plain Old Telephone Service (POTS) telephone jacks in most homes across the world.
RJ-14 is similar, but for two lines, and RJ-25 is for three lines.  The telephone line cord and its plug are more often a true RJ-11 with only two conductors.
The 8 Position 8 Contact (8P8C) (often incorrectly called RJ-45) plugs and sockets are most regularly used as an Ethernet connector.  8P8C connectors are typically used to terminate twisted pair cable.
The BNC (Bayonet Neill-Concelman) connector is a very common type of connector used for terminating coaxial cable.  The BNC connector is used for RF signal connections, for analog and digital video signals, amateur radio antenna connections, aviation electronics (avionics) and many other types of electronic test equipment.  It is an alternative to the RCA connector when used for composite video on commercial video devices, although many consumer electronics devices with RCA jacks can be used with BNC-only commercial video equipment via a simple adapter.
A fiber-optic connector with a socket that is locked in place with a bayonet lock. ST was the first de-facto standard for fiber-optic cabling, and has since been made an official standard.
Developed by Lucent. It looks like a smaller version of the SC connector. It is used in Telco environments.
RS-232 (Recommended Standard 232) is a standard for serial binary data signals connecting between DTE (Data Terminal Equipment) and DCE (Data Circuit-terminating Equipment). It is commonly used in computer serial ports.
Network Media and TopologiesObjective 2.2: Connectors
Objective 2.3: Physical Topologies
Parts of this page are based on materials from: Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia.
Google provides users with free services and in return gathers personal data from users for revenue and product purposes. Companies largely retain control over the collected data, and to maintain operations grant select engineers access. The selection criteria for said engineers prioritize technical skill over ethical needs. Together with market forces that pressure Google to increase profits, Google is incentivized to act in ways that value data collection over data privacy. Ultimately, this results in a company environment where engineers may easily abuse their power. Such was the case for David Barksdale, an ex-Google employee.
Google is an expansive company that has many applications used daily and widely throughout our lives. Google collects all inputted data and categorizes by account information. The data is crucial for product research, selling data used towards advertising, and for customer service. Google's Site Reliability Engineers (SREs) use this data to help resolve any issues with an account.
David Barksdale, a former SRE, violated Google's internal privacy[1]. Using his data privilege, he spied on four minors’ accounts by viewing their call logs, contact lists, and chat transcripts. He used their data to threaten the minors and to chat with them over Google's Buddy List. Google made the following statement upon discovery:
“We dismissed David Barksdale for breaking Google’s strict internal privacy policies. We carefully control the number of employees who have access to our systems, and we regularly upgrade our security controls -- for example, we are significantly increasing the amount of time we spend auditing our logs to ensure those controls are effective. That said, a limited number of people will always need to access these systems if we are to operate them property - which is why we have any breach so seriously.” - Bill Coughran, Senior Vice President, Engineering, Google [1]
However, despite Google's security protocol and limited access to customer data, Barksdale was not the first perpetrator[1].
Data Privacy & Google's Site Reliability Engineers
The SRE position requires access to Google databases and customer data. According to a former Google SRE who left the company in 2007, “since site reliability engineers are responsible for troubleshooting issues on a constant basis, they access Google’s servers remotely many times a day, often at odd hours,” whenever an issue needs to be fixed [1].
Troubleshooting problems quickly is important to maintain happy Google users. Google users expect their Google services to operate at all times, quickly, and to never lose their information. Google’s many services are linked so that users may maintain a single user account across all of the Google platforms. The databases behind these services are linked in order to support this framework. The former Google SRE suggests that “SREs are given unfettered access to user’s accounts for the services they oversee,” allowing them to troubleshoot problems promptly when they happen [1]. In other words, SREs have access to an array of databases to troubleshoot problems that may span across multiple Google service platforms. For example, “if you’re an SRE…on Gmail, you will have access to mailboxes because you may have to look into the databases. You’ll need access to the storage mechanisms,” according to the former SRE. In this case, “in order to determine the cause of a technical issue with Gmail, an SRE might have to access emails stored on Google’s servers to see if data is corrupted” [1].
Google’s internal structure may insufficiently prevent deviant abuse of sensitive customer data. When SRE’s access Google’s databases, their activities and other information such as the type of maintenance performed and date and time of access are stored in activity server logs. Activity server logs are generally comprised of extensive data fields for details about maintenance activities. Reading and interpreting logs is no small task, thus they may not be monitored in real time.  However, activity server logs are very helpful to prove things after-the-fact. In the case of Mr. Barksdale, the threat of his activities being recorded in maintenance logs did not stop him from intrusively accessing customer data. Google has since stated that the company will be "significantly increasing the amount of time [they] spend auditing [their] logs"[1]. Server logs do not prevent deviant behavior; at best they discourage it and certainly did not prevent Mr. Barksdale from abusing his access to customer data.
Google trusts its employees with access to customer data based primarily on their technical expertise. Google’s trust in its' SREs may be more justified with additional behavioral interviewing as a criterion for the position.
Google’s interviewing process for the SRE position is focused almost solely on technical material. Below is a description of the interview process for the SRE position written by an interviewee at Glassdoor.com  [2].
“On-site interview #1: System Administration. We spent most of the time working on the design of a hypothetical web service.”
“On-site interview #2: Troubleshooting. We made it through two problems, one dealing with networking and the other to figure out why a service was failing.”
“On-site interview #3: Large System Design. The problem dealt with analyzing large volumes of data.”
“On-site interview #4: Perl Coding. Consisted of a regular expression question and then a data analysis question with several iterations that made it progressively harder.”
“On-site Interview #5: Networking. The interviewer wasn’t particularly helpful and this was a definite fail” [2].
The interviewee offers a concise description of each interview and does not mention any behavioral interviewing or any nontechnical conversation during the interviews. As highlighted, the entire interview process is a knowledge test. In the words of a former Google employee, “the company does not closely monitor SREs to detect improper access to customers’ accounts because SREs are generally considered highly-experienced engineers who can be trusted” [1].
Market Forces & The Right To Be Forgotten
Understanding why Google does not react more strongly to these ethical violations requires placing Google in the context of public markets. Google is a public company, and consequently under pressure from investors to generate returns. This pressure causes a company to pit certain values against one another, in this case data privacy and data collection. To understand why, it is useful to see how Google generates revenue.
To appease investors, Google must either improve existing revenue streams or create new ones. Today, advertisements remain Google's primary source of revenue, accounting for nearly 90% of 2014 revenue [pic]. As such, the company spends a lot of energy improving advertisements. Using personal data collected earlier, advertisements are tailored to users' tastes, improving click-through rates (i.e., if I know you like shoes, then you are more likely to click on an ad about shoes). Fundamentally, this is how Google improves revenue - by improving the ad experience. Furthermore, the data acts as a barrier to entry to new competitors, giving Google a strong competitive advantage. Basically, data fuels Google's bottom line. It is therefore important for Google to retain control over its data, so that it may remain competitive. This is why Google fought so hard when the European Union challenged Google over data ownership.
In May 2014 [3], the European Union ruled that search engines must remove customers' data from their servers at their customer's request. The ruling became famous for its idea that citizens have a right to be forgotten (though that term also dates back to an earlier ruling [3]). The ruling made waves and proved popular: nearly 70,000 requests poured in within the first eight weeks. As the largest search engine in the world, Google was hit the hardest, and valuable data had to be removed. The data, however, pales in comparison to what Google is more frightful of: that the ruling fundamentally challenges who is in control over the data. It effectively changed power over users' data from Google to the citizens. Furthermore, the ruling sets precedent for more comprehensive laws to further erode Google's dominance over their data. Google retaliated by upping lobbying efforts to the point where EU commissioner Viviane Reding responded by acknowledging the "unprecedented lobbying" effort [4]. This is a battle that continues today, as Google fights to retain control over their data.
Market pressures, then, pit data collection against data privacy. The European Union's ruling favored citizens' data privacy, but Google responded by fighting to repeal the law.
David Barksdale is a technical expert, but in this case, his actions were clearly not those of a professional. Google is a transformative company that creates many popular products for its' customers, but has competing interests in mind. In this case, neither Mr. Barksdale nor Google fulfilled their professional obligations. A key element to achieve professionalism is ethics. Mr. Barksdale lacked ethics, and Google's pressure to improve profits requires them to value technical expertise and data collection over ethical values like data privacy.
↑ a b c d e f g h Chen, A. (2010). GCreep: Google Engineer Stalked Teens, Spied on Chats (Updated). http://gawker.com/5637234/gcreep-google-engineer-stalked-teens-spied-on-chats
↑ a b Anonymous Employee. (2013), "Google Site Reliability Engineer Interview Questions." Glassdoor. Web. 29 Apr. 2015.
↑ a b "The Right To Be Forgotten." (2012). European Commission. http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/files/factsheets/factsheet_data_protection_en.pdf
↑ Warman, M. (2012). EU Privacy regulations subject to 'unprecedented lobbying'. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/news/9070019/EU-Privacy-regulations-subject-to-unprecedented-lobbying.html
Shift lights on Dash (Maybe Pitside option)
Use AIM Beacon to set Start/Finish into IOIO
Hardware button into IOIO for Set Splits/Acknowledged & General Marker
This Sections sets the non-corporate distribution rate for the financial year beginning on 1 April 2005 at 19%.
, are the state vector and the input vector, respectively. Moreover, the state feedback control law is defined as follows:
Thus, the closed-loop system is given by:
According to the definition of the spectral norms of matrices, this condition becomes equivalent to:
One can use the Lemma 1.2 in [1] page 14, the aforementioned inequality can be converted into:
Title and mathematical description of the LMI formulation.
s.t.
This problem is a special case of Intensive Disk Region Design (page 230 in [1]). This problem may not have a solution even when the system is stabilizable. In other words, once there exists a solution, the solution is robust in the sense that when there are parameter perturbations, the closed-loop system's eigenvalues are not easy to go outside of a circle region within the unit circle [1].
A link to Matlab codes for this problem in the Github repository:
A list of references documenting and validating the LMI.
[1] - LMI in Control Systems Analysis, Design and Applications
In the second half of the 20th century the pace of growth of the world population and its technological capacity to utilise natural resources increased to such a degree that human activity now impinges on all segments of the biosphere. As the scale of habitat destruction has multiplied so have human efforts for the remainder to be vigilantly protected by applying ecological principles to safeguard, legislate, evaluate and manage fragile ecosystems and their declining species.
Conservation on a global scale may be approached either through organisations that focus on its rare and endangered species or through the work of others that highlight the world's 'fragile' habitats. The international bodies that illustrate these two complementary approaches are the World Conservation Union and UNESCO's Man and the Biosphere programme.
The World Conservation Union (http://www.iucn.org/) began as the International Union for the Protection of Nature (or IUPN) founded in October 1948 following an international conference in Fontainebleau, France. The organization changed its name to the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources in 1956 and became the  "World Conservation Union" began in 1990.  The full name and the acronym are often used together as many people still know the Union as IUCN
The theme of 'man and the biosphere' became an international concern in 1972 with the launch of UNESCO's programme of environmental research.  It is an interdisciplinary undertaking of environmental research initiated to develop the basis, within the natural and social sciences, for the rational use and conservation of the resources of the biosphere, and for the improvement of the global relationship between people and the environment. The hallmark of the MAB Programme is its holistic and interdisciplinary approach. Examination of human impacts on a specific ecosystem - that is, the interrelationship between people and the environment - requires studies of both the natural sciences (e.g. climatology, biology, soil sciences and forestry) and the social sciences (e.g. economics, human geography and sociology). Hence, the name of the programme: "Man and the Biosphere" or 'MAB'(http://www.unesco.org/mab/).
The World Conservation Union is probably best known for monitoring the state of the world's species through the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species.  But it also supports and develops conservation science; implements this research in field projects around the world; and then links both research and results to local, national, regional and global policy by convening dialogues between governments, civil society and the private sector.
The priority of the Union's current Programme (2005–2008) is to build recognition of the many ways in which human lives and livelihoods, especially of the poor, depend on the sustainable management of natural resources.
In its projects, the Union applies sound ecosystem management to conserve biodiversity and builds sustainable livelihoods for those directly dependent on natural resources. The Union is actively engaged in managing and restoring ecosystems and improving people's lives, economies and societies.
The Union's databases, assessments, guidelines and case studies, prepared by its global membership, Commissions and Secretariat, are among the world's most respected and frequently cited sources of information and reference on the environment.
As the world's largest environmental knowledge network, the Union has helped over 75 countries to prepare and implement national conservation and biodiversity strategies. The Union also has the official status of Observer at the United Nations General Assembly.
UNESCOs MAB programme uses an applied ecological approach that focuses on mountain ecosystems, on arid lands or on humid tropical forests. Shortly after the programme was launched in April 1973, a panel of experts met in Salzburg, Austria, to discuss the "Impact of human activities on mountain and tundra ecosystems". Its task was to elaborate the scientific content of projects to be proposed under the MAB Programme. The panel recommended study of the following factors:
A working group assembled in Lillehammer, Norway, later in 1973 to define further the scope, objectives, methodologies and possible outputs of studies in areas where problems were acknowledged. This meeting led to a more clearly defined identification of thematic and regional problems requiring study, as follows:
In order that study methods and results could be compared, the working group in Lillehammer identified tentative "minimal" research requirements for both natural sciences (e.g. climatology and soil sciences) and social sciences (e.g. sociology and economics). It was considered vital that the results of regional mountain studies in one area could be compared with those elsewhere in an international context.
The variables identified for study in mountain areas may appear obvious and simplistic - air temperature, precipitation and wind velocity, for example, in climatic studies. Nevertheless, considerable efforts were made to achieve international agreement on a uniform and consistent methodology for research on mountain ecosystems within the framework of an intergovernmental scientific programme. Conceptually, the establishment of this catalogue of minimal research requirements was an important step forward in international cooperative research. As a consequence, a large number of case studies were carried out worldwide within the framework of the MAB Programme, in particular in the Andes and the Alps.
In the early 1990s, the MAB Programme entered into a new phase following the decision of its governing body, the MAB International Co-ordinating Council. The three new major thrusts are: scientific capacity building, research on biological diversity and ecological processes, and promoting the World Network of Biosphere Reserves. The third undertaking proved to be particularly successful and there are currently 352 biosphere reserves in 87 countries; of these, over 40 percent are located in mountain regions.
Biosphere reserves are areas of terrestrial and coastal/marine ecosystems where, through appropriate zoning patterns and land management, the conservation of ecosystems and their biodiversity is combined with the sustainable use of natural resources for the benefit of local communities. Thus, they represent a major tool for implementing the concerns of Agenda 21 (such as Chapter 13 on mountains), the Convention on Biological Diversity and other international agreements.
The concept of "biosphere reserve" implies environmental conservation, scientific research and sustainable development. The management of biosphere reserves aims to show that environmental conservation can be used to promote sustainable development based on scientific research findings together with a partnership with the local people. This is realized through a specific land-use system, which takes into account the topographic, biological, economic and socio-cultural characteristics of each site.
Biosphere reserves have three different, but interrelated, functions:
Biosphere reserves provide protection of indigenous genetic resources, plant and animal species, ecosystems and landscapes of value for the conservation of the world's biological diversity.
Biosphere reserves seek to combine conservation concerns with sustainable use of resources through close cooperation with local communities, taking advantage of traditional knowledge, indigenous products and appropriate land management.
Biosphere reserves are linked through a global network; they provide facilities for research, monitoring, education and training at the local level as well as for comparative research and monitoring programmes at an international or regional level.
While the relative importance of these three basic functions will vary from case to case, it is a combination of their roles that characterizes the distinctive feature of biosphere reserves. The articulation of these roles is translated on the ground through a pattern of zonation. This includes a core area (or areas) that is strictly protected according to pre-established conservation objectives. The core area is surrounded by, or contiguous with, a delineated buffer zone (or zones) where only activities that are compatible with the conservation objectives can take place. Finally, a more loosely defined transition area encircles the core and buffer areas and here cooperation with the local population and sustainable resource management practices are developed.
At the heart of the international community's interactions with the global environment, particularly through actions mandated by two World Environment Summits, is the United Nationals Environment Programme (UNEP (http://www.unep.org/))  Biodiversity information for policy and action to conserve the living world is provided by UNEP's World Conservation Monitoring Centre in Cambridge.  Its programmes concentrate on species, forests, protected areas, marine, mountains and freshwaters; plus habitats affected by climate change such as Polar Regions. It also address the relationship between trade and the environment and the wider aspects of biodiversity assessment.(http://www.unep-wcmc.org/)
Between them, MAB the WCU and the WCMC, are well placed to provide answers to questions about the state of major international habitats and rare species.
This module is intended to describe some of the protected sites and species of major international importance with respect to the following three questions about their state as an endangered resource:
What should be done?
Additional Articles of the Constitution of the Republic of China Republic of China (Taiwan)Article 2
Wikipedia has related information at President of the Republic of China
This Article deals with the president and vice president.
(From http://taiwaninfo.nat.gov.tw/fp.asp?xItem=408&CtNode=124 )
Additional Articles of the Constitution of the Republic of China (1997)
Article 2. The president and vice president shall be directly elected by the entire populace of the free area of the Repub lic of China. This shall be effective from the election for the ninth-term president and vice president in 1996. The presidential and vice presidential candidates shall register jointly and be listed as a pair on the ballot. The pair that receive the highest number of votes shall be elected. Citizens of the free area of the Republic of China residing abroad may return to the ROC to exercise their electoral rights and this shall be stipulated by law.
Presidential orders to appoint or remove from office the president of the Executive Yuan or personnel appointed with the confirmation of the National Assembly or Legislative Yuan in accordance with the Constitution, and to dissolve the Legisla tive Yuan, do not require the countersignature of the president of the Executive Yuan. The provisions of Article 37 of the Constitution shall not apply.
The president may, by resolution of the Executive Yuan Council, issue emergency orders and take all necessary measures to avert imminent danger affecting the security of the State or of the people or to cope with any serious financial or economic crisis, the restrictions in Article 43 of the Constitution notwithstanding. However, such orders shall, within ten days of issuance, be presented to the Legislative Yuan for ratification. Should the Legislative Yuan withhold ratification, the said emergency orders shall forthwith cease to be valid.
To determine major policies for national security, the president may establish a national security council and a subsidiary national security bureau. The organization of the said organs shall be stipulated by law.
The president may, within ten days following passage by the Legislative Yuan of a no-confidence vote against the president of the Executive Yuan, declare the dissolution of the Legislative Yuan after consulting with its president. However, the president shall not dissolve the Legislative Yuan while martial law or an emergency order is in effect. Following the dissolution of the Legislative Yuan, an election for legislators shall be held within 60 days. The new Legislative Yuan shall convene of its own accord within ten days after the results of the said election have been confirmed, and the term of the said Legislative Yuan shall be reckoned from that date.
The terms of office for both the president and the vice president shall be four years. The president and the vice president may only be re-elected to serve one consecutive term; and the provisions of Article 47 of the Constitution shall not apply.
Should the office of the vice president become vacant, the president shall nominate candidates within three months and convoke the National Assembly to elect a new vice president, who shall serve out the original term until its expiration.
Should the offices of both the president and the vice president become vacant, the president of the Executive Yuan shall exercise the official powers of the president and the vice president. A new president and a new vice president shall be elected in accordance with Paragraph 1 of this article and shall serve out each respective original term until its expiration. The pertinent provisions of Article 49 of the Constitution shall not apply.
Recall of the president or the vice president shall be motioned by one-fourth of all delegates to the National Assembly, proposed with the concurrence of two-thirds of such delegates, and passed by more than one-half of the valid ballots in a vote taken part in by more than one-half of the electorate in the free area of the Republic of China.
Should a motion to impeach the president or the vice president initiated and submitted to the National Assembly by the Legislative Yuan be passed by a two-thirds majority of all delegates to the National Assembly, the party impeached shall forthwith be dismissed from office.
(From http://taiwaninfo.nat.gov.tw/fp.asp?xItem=18017&CtNode=103 )
Additional Articles of the Constitution of the Republic of China (2000)
Article 2. The president and the vice president shall be directly elected by the entire populace of the free area of the Republic of China. This shall be effective from the election for the ninth-term president and vice president in 1996. The presidential and the vice presidential candidates shall register jointly and be listed as a pair on the ballot. The pair that receives the highest number of votes shall be elected. Citizens of the free area of the Republic of China residing abroad may return to the ROC to exercise their electoral rights and this shall be stipulated by law.
Presidential orders to appoint or remove from office the president of the Executive Yuan or personnel appointed with the confirmation of the Legislative Yuan in accordance with the Constitution, and to dissolve the Legislative Yuan, shall not require the countersignature of the president of the Executive Yuan. The provisions of Article 37 of the Constitution shall not apply.
The president may, by resolution of the Executive Yuan Council, issue emergency decrees and take all necessary measures to avert imminent danger affecting the security of the state or of the people or to cope with any serious financial or economic crisis, the restrictions in Article 43 of the Constitution notwithstanding. However, such decrees shall, within 10 days of issuance, be presented to the Legislative Yuan for ratification. Should the Legislative Yuan withhold ratification, the said emergency decrees shall forthwith cease to be valid.
To determine major policies for national security, the president may establish a national security council and a subsidiary national security bureau. The organization of the said organs shall be stipulated by law.
The president may, within 10 days following passage by the Legislative Yuan of a no-confidence vote against the president of the Executive Yuan, declare the dissolution of the Legislative Yuan after consulting with its president. However, the president shall not dissolve the Legislative Yuan while martial law or an emergency decree is in effect. Following the dissolution of the Legislative Yuan, an election for legislators shall be held within 60 days. The new Legislative Yuan shall convene of its own accord within 10 days after the results of the said election have been confirmed, and the term of the said Legislative Yuan shall be reckoned from that date.
The term of office for both the president and the vice president shall be four years. The president and the vice president may be re-elected to serve only one consecutive term; and the provisions of Article 47 of the Constitution shall not apply.
Should the office of the vice president become vacant, the president shall nominate a candidate(s) within three months, and the Legislative Yuan shall elect a new vice president, who shall serve the remainder of the original term.
Should the offices of both the president and the vice president become vacant, the president of the Executive Yuan shall exercise the official powers of the president and the vice president. A new president and a new vice president shall be elected in accordance with Paragraph 1 of this article and shall serve out each respective original term until its expiration. The pertinent provisions of Article 49 of the Constitution shall not apply.
Recall of the president or the vice president shall be initiated upon the proposal of one-fourth of all members of the Legislative Yuan, and also passed by two-thirds of all the members. The final recall must be passed by more than one-half of the valid ballots in a vote in which more than one-half of the electorate in the free area of the Republic of China takes part.
Should a motion to impeach the president or the vice president initiated and submitted to the National Assembly by the Legislative Yuan be passed by a two-thirds majority of all delegates to the National Assembly, the party impeached shall forthwith be dismissed from office.
(From http://law.moj.gov.tw/eng/LawClass/LawSearchNo.aspx?PC=A0000002&DF=&SNo=2 )
Additional Articles of the Constitution of the Republic of China (2005)
Article 2.
The president and the vice president shall be directly elected by the entire populace of the free area of the Republic of China. This shall be effective from the election for the ninth-term president and vice president in 1996. The presidential and the vice presidential candidates shall register jointly and be listed as a pair on the ballot. The pair that receives the highest number of votes shall be elected. Citizens of the free area of the Republic of China residing abroad may return to the ROC to exercise their electoral rights and this shall be stipulated by law.
Presidential orders to appoint or remove from office the president of the Executive Yuan or personnel appointed with the confirmation of the Legislative Yuan in accordance with the Constitution, and to dissolve the Legislative Yuan, shall not require the countersignature of the president of the Executive Yuan. The provisions of Article 37 of the Constitution shall not apply.
The president may, by resolution of the Executive Yuan Council, issue emergency decrees and take all necessary measures to avert imminent danger affecting the security of the State or of the people or to cope with any serious financial or economic crisis, the restrictions in Article 43 of the Constitution notwithstanding. However, such decrees shall, within ten days of issuance, be presented to the Legislative Yuan for ratification. Should the Legislative Yuan withhold ratification, the said emergency decrees shall forthwith cease to be valid.
To determine major policies for national security, the president may establish a national security council and a subsidiary national security bureau. The organization of the said organs shall be stipulated by law.
The president may, within ten days following passage by the Legislative Yuan of a no-confidence vote against the president of the Executive Yuan, declare the dissolution of the Legislative Yuan after consulting with its president. However, the president shall not dissolve the Legislative Yuan while martial law or an emergency decree is in effect. Following the dissolution of the Legislative Yuan, an election for legislators shall be held within 60 days. The new Legislative Yuan shall convene of its own accord within ten days after the results of the said election have been confirmed, and the term of the said Legislative Yuan shall be reckoned from that date.
The terms of office for both the president and the vice president shall be four years. The president and the vice president may only be re- elected to serve one consecutive term; and the provisions of Article 47 of the Constitution shall not apply.
Should the office of the vice president become vacant, the president shall nominate a candidate(s) within three months, and the Legislative Yuan shall elect a new vice president, who shall serve the remainder of the original term until its expiration.
Should the offices of both the president and the vice president become vacant, the president of the Executive Yuan shall exercise the official powers of the president and the vice president. A new president and a new vice president shall be elected in accordance with Paragraph 1 of this article and shall serve out each respective original term until its expiration. The pertinent provisions of Article 49 of the Constitution shall not apply.
Recall of the president or the vice president shall be initiated upon the proposal of one-fourth of all members of the Legislative Yuan, and also passed by two-thirds of all the members. The final recall must be passed by more than one-half of the valid ballots in a vote in which more than one-half of the electorate in the free area of the Republic of China takes part.
Should a motion to impeach the president or the vice president initiated by the Legislative Yuan and presented to the grand justices of the Judicial Yuan for adjudication be upheld by the Constitutional Court, the impeached person shall forthwith be relieved of his duties.
A Staten Island Ferry is a variation on the Piña Colada that does not require coconut cream, and thus is more easily mixed in bars that lack the specialty ingredients and blenders that a Piña Colada would require.
Mix equal parts Malibu rum and pineapple juice over ice. Garnish with a pineapple wedge.
Beta-Cantenin gets jaded and von Hippel-Lindau is to blame
This research papers delves into the idea of the von Hippel-Lindau protein that is negatively regulated by beta-Catenin and Jade-1 via various mechanisms. One must first understand the proteins to connect the significance of their partnership.
Von Hippel-Lindau is a tumor suppressor protein encoded by the VHL gene. The inactivity of the protein is associated with Von Hippel-Lindau disease. The VHL protein works through E3 ubiquitin ligase activity which targets specific proteins for degradation. However, the inactivity of the protein may cause an excess growth of cells, or a tumor.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Factory activity in the world's second largest economy, China, worsened in November as the manufacturing sector continued to shrink.
Music of the Medieval Period was categorized into sacred and secular music. Sacred music was music that was used by the Roman Catholic Church and secular music was music that had no relation to the Church.
Sacred music evolved from a form called the Gregorian chant. Gregorian chants were named after Pope Gregory I and they are the official pieces of the Catholic Church.
Melody - The melody of a Gregorian chant is very free-flowing. The chant moves up and down by steps and small leaps within a narrow range. Melodies are often melismatic- syllables are held out over multiple notes.
Harmony - Gregorian chants are monophonic in texture, so have no harmony. However, the use of drone (singing of the same note for an extended period of time usually in at least whole notes) was common.
Rhythm - There is no precise rhythm for a Gregorian chant. Notes may be held for a duration of “short” or “long,” but no complex rhythms are used.
Form - Some Gregorian chants tend to be in ternary (ABA) form. A cantor begins the piece with an introductory solo, called an incipit. The choir then sings the piece and at the end the cantor concludes with his solo, which was often in a reduced dynamic level and featured a narrower range of pitches.
Timbre - Sung by all male choirs. However, sometimes they were written for women who were nuns of convents  as a teaching device.
Texture - Gregorian chants are one of the few pieces of music that are entirely monophonic. There is only one melodic line in a Gregorian chant.
Context - Gregorian chants were used by the Church to aid prayers. Monks (and occasionally nuns in convents) would sing them. As well, as it was the official music of the Roman Catholic Church, all gregorian chants had only vocals as instrumentation was considered to be Pagan. This also caused all text to be written in Latin. All gregorian chant was passed down orally, as the use of sheet music was very uncommon. They were performed at the "office" and "mass" of religious ceremony.
Church Modes - These were the scales in which gregorian chants were sung. They were used in the middle ages until the Renaissance. Most folk music uses them, this can be seen in the example "What can we do with a drunken sailor." Church modes use 7 tones and the eighth tone duplicates the tonic an octave higher.
Hildegard of Bingen - The first woman composer with a significant output of works.
Most other composers are unknown since works were given to the Church.
The Gregorian chant began to evolve around 700. From 700 - 900, composers would write a line in parallel motion to the chant at a fixed interval of a fifth or a fourth above the original line. This technique evolved further from 900 - 1200. During this period, the upper line moved independently of the original chant. After 1100, upper lines even began gaining rhythmic independence.
A Gregorian chant to which additional lines were added is called organum. The original Gregorian chant on which the upper lines are based is called the cantus firmus. Between the lines they are intervals of fourths and fifths that move in contrary motion.
Two composers, Leonin and Perotin, were instrumental to the development of organum. Leonin was the director of music at the Notre Dame Cathedral and Perotin, his pupil, succeeded him. These two composers and their students are thus appropriately referred to as the School of Notre Dame.
Leonin- He is the first known composer to use measured rhythm in his compositions.
Perotin- He is the first known composer to write three simultaneous, distinct lines.
Sacred music was primarily vocal. This was mostly due to the connection of instruments to pagan rituals. Nevertheless, instruments did become more important over the span of the Medieval Period. The most important instrument of sacred music in the Medieval Period is the organ. Early organs are not like modern organs; though they were loud, they were much more difficult to operate and required a great deal of physical strength.
Unlike sacred music, secular music had a more clearly defined beat and its texture was closer to homophony or polyphony. (It was not true homophony since chords were only implied). Like sacred music, the texture was primarily vocal, though it didn’t regard instruments with as much suspicion as the Church.
Much secular music during the Medieval Period was written by troubadours and troubavères. These were French nobles and they often wrote music to gain prestige.
Guillaume IX, duke of Aquitaine
Jongleurs also composed and performed secular music. Jongleurs were wandering minstrels that would entertain towns with music, juggling, and drama. They had no civil rights but were important parts of society since they spread news from town to town. One form of music they played is the estampie. An estampie is a fast dance in triple meter.
Around 1350, a new style of music called Ars Nova (New Art) emerged. Ars Nova includes both sacred and secular music, though secular music gained importance during this period.
Ars Nova saw the appearance of a grand form for sacred music- the mass ordinary. The mass ordinary consists of five prayers set to music as five different movements. The prayers are:
Because of diminishing influence of the Church, secular music became more prominent in the Ars Nova Period. Instruments were used more often, though the music was still primarily vocal. A new secular form of the Ars Nova period is the ballata. The ballata is a dance in the form of A BB AA. A ballata is also known as a falala for its use of this line throughout its pieces.
Notre Dame Mass - This is the first known polyphonic mass.
Ecco la Primavera - This is an example of an Ars Nova ballata.
For many, many years, heavy evidence has accumulated that a well known protein structure is required to know the exact function of the protein. Many believed that the biological phenomena at the cellular level relied on the structure-function model. Although that the structure-function concept was highly apparent in all proteins, there were small hints and signs that intrinsically disordered proteins had a role in cell functions as well and were vastly left to be of no importance to cellular functions. The importance of intrinsically disordered proteins was revealed not too long ago and it was discovered that many proteins or regions of proteins are intrinsically disordered under native, functional conditions. The evidence for intrinsically disordered regions of proteins was very limited compared to the evidence dealing with the structure-function model; however, the importance of intrinsically disordered regions of proteins sparked interest that began the development of insightful knowledge to such structures.
This new concept was relied based on a few experimental observations of disorder in several proteins where as the structure-function model was based on thousands of proteins identified in the Protein Data Bank (PDB). Surprisingly, thousands of the proteins identified in the Protein Data Bank contain disordered regions “that become structured only in the presence of a binding partner, and there are also many regions that are actually missing from electron density maps”.[1]  Additional evidence was revealed by other techniques such as NMR and circular dichroism, which led to the creation of DisProt which is a database that contains knowledge on structural disorder. DisProt is now available to identify more than 1300 curated intrinsically disordered proteins or intrinsically disordered regions of proteins.
The discovery and identification of many intrinsically disordered proteins “also enabled the development of sophisticated bioinformatic algorithms for predicting disorder from sequence, which further advanced the field”.[1] About a decade ago, predictor of natural disordered regions (PONDR) was the only sequences available to scientists for predicting disorder; today, one can use about any of 50 different predictors to predict disorder, which are based on several different principles.  Structural disorder correlates different states of the protein which restricts the prediction accuracy of predictors by any single approach.
Structural disorder is vast in all protein species based on predictions and due to its strong relationship with regulatory and signaling functions, there is a significantly higher level of disorder in eukaryotes than in prokaryotes.  The percentage of structural disorder in eukaryotes and prokaryotes is 15-45% and 10-35% respectively. The notion that structural disorder increases with protein complexity and size; however, the highest levels are disorder are “not witnessed in most complex metazoan eukaryotes, but in single-celled eukaryotes that lead a host-changing lifestyle”.[1]
↑ a b c d Tompa, Peter (2012). "Intrinsically disordered proteins: A 10-year recap". Trends in Biochemical Sciences 37 (12):  509–16. doi:10.1016/j.tibs.2012.08.004. PMID 22989858.
Cataracts cause half of all cases of blindness and 33% of visual impairment worldwide.
The preterite verb form describes past actions that have begun or completed.  The preterite sets something in the past as an event, with a beginning and an end.  Spanish has another past tense form, the imperfect, that is used for past actions that are continuing, or for which its beginning or its end is not important.
Eliminate the "-ar" and replace it with one of the following endings:
Notice that the "nosotros" form conjugates the same as it does in the present tense. This can cause confusion so look for context tools to make sure you have the right tense.
Eliminate the "-er" or "-ir" and replace it with one of the following endings:
There are 2 types of irregular verbs in the preterite tense. We will start with the more regular of the 2.
The endings of these irregulars are all the same, which is why I am referring to them as more regular. The endings are:
The stems of these verbs also change as follows:
Note that for stems ending in j the ending 'ieron' is shortened to 'eron'
The more irregular verbs conjugate as follows:
C has a wide range of operators that make simple math easy to handle. The list of operators grouped into precedence levels is as follows:
Identifiers are names of things in C, and consist of either a letter or an underscore ( _ ) optionally followed by letters, digits, or underscores. An identifier (or variable name) is a primary expression, provided that it has been declared as designating an object (in which case it is an lvalue [a value that can be used as the left side of an assignment expression]) or a function (in which case it is a function designator).
A constant is a primary expression. Its type depends on its form and value. The types of constants are character constants (e.g. ' ' is a space), integer constants (e.g. 2), floating-point constants (e.g. 0.5), and enumerated constants that have been previously defined via enum.
A string literal is a primary expression. It consists of a string of characters within double quotes ( " ).
A parenthesized expression is a primary expression. It consists of an expression within parentheses ( ( ) ). Its type and value are those of the non-parenthesized expression within the parentheses.
In C11, an expression that starts with _Generic followed by (, an initial expression, a list of values of the form type: expression where type is either a named type or the keyword default, and ) constitutes a primary expression. The value is the expression that follows the type of the initial expression or the default if not found.
First, a primary expression is also a postfix expression. The following expressions are also postfix expressions:
A postfix expression followed by a left square bracket ([), an expression, and a right square bracket (]) in sequence constitutes an invocation of the array subscript operator. One of the expressions shall have type "pointer to object type" and the other shall have an integer type; the result type is type. Successive array subscript operators designate an element of a multidimensional array.
A postfix expression followed by a dot (.) followed by an identifier selects a member from a structure or union; a postfix expression followed by an arrow (->) followed by an identifier selects a member from a structure or union who is pointed to by the pointer on the left-hand side of the expression.
A postfix expression followed by the increment or decrement operators (++ or -- respectively) indicates that the variable is to be incremented or decremented as a side effect. The value of the expression is the value of the postfix expression before the increment or decrement. These operators only work on integers and pointers.
First, a postfix expression is a unary expression. The following expressions are all unary expressions:
The increment or decrement operators followed by a unary expression is a unary expression. The value of the expression is the value of the unary expression after the increment or decrement. These operators only work on integers and pointers.
The following operators followed by a cast expression are unary expressions:
&         Address-of; value is the location of the operand
+         Value-of operator
~         Bit-wise complement
The keyword sizeof followed by a unary expression is a unary expression. The value is the size of the type of the expression in bytes. The expression is not evaluated.
The keyword sizeof followed by a parenthesized type name is a unary expression. The value is the size of the type in bytes.
A unary expression is also a cast expression.
A parenthesized type name followed by any expression, including literals, is a cast expression. The parenthesized type name has the effect of forcing the cast expression into the type specified by the type name in parentheses. For arithmetic types, this either does not change the value of the expression, or truncates the value of the expression if the expression is an integer and the new type is smaller than the previous type.
First, a multiplicative expression is also a cast expression, and an additive expression is also a multiplicative expression. This follows the precedence that multiplication happens before addition.
In C, simple math is very easy to handle. The following operators exist: + (addition), - (subtraction), * (multiplication), / (division), and % (modulus); You likely know all of them from your math classes - except, perhaps, modulus. It returns the remainder of a division (e.g. 5 % 2 = 1). (Modulus is not defined for floating-point numbers, but the math.h library has an fmod function.)
Care must be taken with the modulus, because it's not the equivalent of the mathematical modulus: (-5) % 2 is not 1, but -1. Division of integers will return an integer, and the division of a negative integer by a positive integer will round towards zero instead of rounding down (e.g. (-5) / 3 = -1 instead of -2). However, it is always true that for all integer a and nonzero integer b, ((a / b) * b) + (a % b) == a.
The mathematical order of operations does apply. For example (2 + 3) * 2 = 10 while 2 + 3 * 2 = 8. Multiplicative operators have precedence over additive operators.
The shift operators (which may be used to rotate bits)
A shift expression is also an additive expression (meaning that the shift operators have a precedence just below addition and subtraction).
Shift functions are often used in low-level I/O hardware interfacing.
Shift and rotate functions are heavily used in cryptography and software floating point emulation.
Other than that, shifts can be used in place of division or multiplication by a power of two.
Many processors have dedicated function blocks to make these operations fast -- see Microprocessor Design/Shift and Rotate Blocks.
On processors which have such blocks, most C compilers compile shift and rotate operators to a single assembly-language instruction -- see X86 Assembly/Shift and Rotate.
The << operator shifts the binary representation to the left, dropping the most significant bits and appending it with zero bits.
The result is equivalent to multiplying the integer by a power of two.
The unsigned shift right operator, also sometimes called the logical right shift operator.
It shifts the binary representation to the right, dropping the least significant bits and prepending it with zeros.
The >> operator is equivalent to division by a power of two for unsigned integers.
The signed shift right operator, also sometimes called the arithmetic right shift operator.
It shifts the binary representation to the right, dropping the least significant bit, but prepending it with copies of the original sign bit.
The >> operator is not equivalent to division for signed integers.
In C, the behavior of the >> operator depends on the data type it acts on.
Therefore, a signed and an unsigned right shift looks exactly the same, but produces a different result in some cases.
Contrary to popular belief, it is possible to write C code that compiles down to the "rotate" assembly language instruction (on CPUs that have such an instruction).
On some systems, this may be "#define"ed as a macro or defined as an inline function called something like "rightrotate32" or "rotr32" or "ror32" in a standard header file like "bitops.h".
On some systems, this may be "#define"ed as a macro or defined as an inline function called something like "leftrotate32" or "rotl32" in a header file like "bitops.h".
A relational expression is also a shift expression; an equality expression is also a relational expression.
The relational binary operators < (less than), > (greater than), <= (less than or equal), and >= (greater than or equal) operators return a value of 1 if the result of the operation is true, 0 if false. The result of these operators is type int.
The equality binary operators == (equals) and != (not equals) operators are similar to the relational operators except that their precedence is lower. They also return a value of 1 if the result of the operation is true and 0 if it is false.
One thing with floating-point numbers and equality operators: Because floating-point operations can produce approximations (e.g. 0.1 is a repeating decimal in binary, so 0.1 * 10.0 is hardly ever 1.0), is it unwise to use the == operator with floating-point numbers. Instead, if a and b are the numbers to compare, compare fabs (a - b) to a fudge factor.
The bitwise operators are & (and), ^ (exclusive or) and | (inclusive or). The & operator has higher precedence than ^, which has higher precedence than |.
The values being operated upon must be integral; the result is integral.
One use for the bitwise operators is to emulate bit flags. These flags can be set with OR, tested with AND, flipped with XOR, and cleared with AND NOT. For example:/* This code is a sample for bitwise operations.  */
The logical operators are && (and), and || (or). Both of these operators produce 1 if the relationship is true and 0 for false. Both of these operators short-circuit; if the result of the expression can be determined from the first operand, the second is ignored. The && operator has higher precedence than the || operator.
&& is used to evaluate expressions left to right, and returns a 1 if both statements are true, 0 if either of them are false. If the first expression is false, the second is not evaluated.
...
Here, the && operator checks the left-most expression, then the expression to its right. If there were more than two expressions chained (e.g. x && y && z), the operator would check x first, then y (if x is nonzero), then continue rightwards to z if neither x or y is zero.
Since both statements return true, the && operator returns true, and the code block is executed.
...
The && operator checks in the same way as before, and finds that the first expression is false.
The && operator stops evaluating as soon as it finds a statement to be false, and returns a false.
|| is used to evaluate expressions left to right, and returns a 1 if either of the expressions are true, 0 if both are false. If the first expression is true, the second expression is not evaluated.
...
The || operator here checks the left-most expression, finds it false, but continues to evaluate the next expression.
It finds that the next expression returns true, stops, and returns a 1.
Much how the && operator ceases when it finds an expression that returns false, the || operator ceases when it finds an expression that returns true.
It is worth noting that C does not have Boolean values (true and false) commonly found in other languages. It instead interprets a 0 as false, and any nonzero value as true.
The ternary ?: operator is the conditional operator. The expression (x ? y : z) has the value of y if x is nonzero, z otherwise.
The expression x evaluates to 0. The ternary operator then looks for the "if-false" value, which in this case, is 6. It returns that, so y is equal to six. Had x been a non-zero, then the expression would have returned a 10.
For the others, x op= y is shorthand for x = x op (y) . Hence, the following expressions are the same:
The value of the assignment expression is the value of the left operand after the assignment. Thus, assignments can be chained; e.g. the expression a = b = c = 0; would assign the value zero to all three variables.
The operator with the least precedence is the comma operator. The value of the expression x, y will evaluate both x and y, but provides the value of y.
This operator is useful for including multiple actions in one statement (e.g. within a for loop conditional).
Here is a small example of the comma operator:
Technically, this is not the comma operator. */
"Cleanups in ROTL/ROTR DAG combiner code" mentions that this code supports the "rotate" instruction in the CellSPU
"replace private copy of bit rotation routines" -- recommends including "bitops.h" and using its rol32 and ror32 rather than copy-and-paste into a new program.
Semasiological map for [meč]
(For areas without shading there is no information yet.)
< Index of semasiological maps
< False Friends of the Slavist Homepage
These are Wikijunior books on school-related topics.
What can you use math for?
Bertha Jorkins was a witch working with the Department of Magical Games and Sports in the Ministry of Magic. She was also Sirius Black's and James Potter's school mate at Hogwarts. When she is first mentioned in the book, she has been missing since being on vacation in Albania. It is later revealed that she is dead.
Beginner warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
In Chapter One, Lord Voldemort reminds Wormtail that he murdered Bertha Jorkins after they forced her to reveal Ministry information. With this information, Voldemort devised a plan to lure Harry Potter to a place where he would use him for a sinister purpose.
After her disappearance from Ludo Bagman's department, Bagman seems unconcerned, saying, "Poor old Bertha... memory like a leaky cauldron. Will likely turn up sometime in October thinking it's still July." Arthur Weasley is later called upon to assist in damage control when Rita Skeeter discovers her unexplained absence and writes about it in the Daily Prophet.
Bertha's absence is mentioned several times throughout the book. Sirius Black disputes Bagman's claim about Bertha, telling Harry that when they were at school together, she had a very good memory and a very long nose for gossip; a bad memory is not something he would associate with her. Professor Dumbledore summons her memory from his Pensieve, and he and Harry see her accusing a fellow student of jinxing her only because she followed him, though she later expands on this, saying she had followed him and his girlfriend, had seen them kissing, and had told him she would tell everyone about it.
Finally, under Veritaserum, Barty Crouch Jr. reveals that Bertha had visited Bartemius Crouch Sr.'s house some time before our story begins, and had discovered that Barty, who supposedly died in Azkaban, was hidden at his father's house. Bartemius put a memory charm on Bertha, but it caused her ongoing memory problems. On vacation, she fell in with Wormtail, who brought her to Voldemort. From her, Voldemort learned about the Triwizard Tournament being held at Hogwarts. By breaking the memory charm, he learned also that Barty Crouch Jr. had escaped Azkaban and was being hidden at his father's house. Breaking the memory charm destroyed Bertha's mind, and Voldemort quickly murdered her as she was no longer useful.
Before Bartemius Crouch damaged it, Bertha had evidently quite a good memory, and one gathers that she had something like Rita Skeeter's nose for gossip.
After her memory had been charmed, she seems to have become notably weak in her ability to remember, and had been, as a consequence, shunted around from department to department at the Ministry.
In Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, Voldemort had gained some kind of body shortly after Bertha had been captured by Peter (Wormtail) Pettigrew.  Later on it mentions that Voldemort "pointed his wand" at Peter and used the Cruciatus Curse on him.  When Harry arrives in the graveyard Peter drops an "ugly baby" into the cauldron.  What if the "service" that Bertha provided was more then just the information about Barty Jr. and the Triwizard Tournament at Hogwarts? It is entirely possible, though horrible to contemplate, that the body that Voldemort inhabited during this book was, in fact, Jorkins' child, possibly one that she had gone on holiday to have privately. Voldemort would, of course, not mention this in his exposition to the Death Eaters as to how he had survived, due to the shameful weakness of the body he had been forced to inhabit; and the author would not have mentioned it anyway in a book intended for children.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Forward written by Prof. Beckman and blah blah blah
As of its conception, this book is explicitly broken into three distinct sections. In the first section, Quantum Mechanics for Engineers, the fundamental concepts and mathematics needed for the engineer to operate within a quantum framework are presented. The second section, Band Theory of Solids, expands upon the quantum mechanical concepts from the first to explain bonding and the quantum electronic structure of solids. The final section, Electronic Properties, explains how the electronic properties of materials come from the electronic structure derived from quantum mechanics.
At this point I do not have a working template, but I'm hoping to make progress on this over time. For now, the pages (chapters) associated with this book are given by direct link
Chapter 3: The_Fundamental_Postulates
Chapter 5: Momentum_Velocity_and_Position
Chapter 8: Variational_Methods
Chapter 9: Perturbation_Methods
Chapter 10: Many_Electron_Atoms
Chapter 11: Density_Functional_Theory
Palpable lesions deeper in or below the dermis are called Nodules.
Centroids Of Common Shapes Of Areas And Lines
Area Moments Of Inertia of Common Geometric Shapes
This is used for hollow cylinders where there is solid material between the outer and inner radius, but no material between the inner radius and the center, like a pipe's cross-section.
Statics/Geometric_Properties_of_Solids
This poem and any consequent annotation contains obscene material. Any readers who might be offended by content of this type should leave this page. This WikiBook's aim is to provide all of Catullus' works uncensored, and as such cannot guarantee the protection of minors.
If you still want to read this poem, click the link below:
I Still Want To Read Poem 113
✔ Appearance ✔ Standard ✔ Console
This function deletes HowMany& items from gMyDynamicArray, beginning with item First&. Any subsequent items will shift down to replace the removed items, resulting in an array of HowMany& fewer items. Each subsequent item will have its index reduced by HowMany&. If SavePtr& is 0, the data will be expunged without warning or recourse. If a pointer is passed in SavePtr&, the data to be removed will first be copied to that address.
Whether currently populated or not, a dynamic array must have held data at some point before being passed to this function.
gMyDynamicArray is any FutureBASIC Dynamic Array previously dimensioned using DYNAMIC or DIMÊDYNAMIC.
First& is the array position of the first item to be removed. It must be >= 0. DEFÊDYNAMICREMOVEITEMS will not remove more items than exist in the array. For example, if your array holds 10 items (0-9) and you attempt to remove 5 items beginning with item 8, 2 items (8-9) will be removed instead and the array will be left with 8 items (0-7).
HowMany& specifies the number of contiguous items to be removed. If there are too few items following First&, only the number available will be removed. SavePtr& is an address to which the items being removed from gMyDynamicArray will be copied.
SavePtr& must point to an allocated memory block (or variable) of adequate size to hold all data being removed.  DEFÊDYNAMICREMOVEITEMS does not check to ensure there is adequate space. If there are fewer than HowMany& items available to remove, only the number removed will be copied to SavePtr&. To remove data without saving it, pass 0 in SavePtr&.
Living in such a busy, on the go world things can often get forgotten, such as maintaining a healthy lifestyle and eating well. With so many temptations out there it often seems like the cheaper and easier option is to go for convenience or fast food. However this is of no benefit to health, and eating healthy while maintaining a budget really isn't as hard as you may think!
Healthy eating means consuming a well-rounded and adequate diet that meets your nutritional requirements as well as providing your body with energy to keep it going throughout the day. The Australian Guide to Healthy Eating has developed specific guidelines about what and how much we should be eating of each of the main food groups, to ensure optimal health. The latest guidelines were released in February 2013 and split up each food group by gender and age group, so that it is easy to follow.
The grains food group includes items like breads, cereals, pasta, oats and rice. The Australian Guide to Healthy Eating recommends that wholegrains should be the preferred choice and that both males and females between 19-50 years old should consume 6 serves from this food group per day.
The dairy food group includes milk, cheese, yoghurt as well as milk-alternatives such as soy milk or rice milk. The Australian Guide to Healthy Eating recommends choosing low-fat dairy options and that 2.5 serves of dairy should be consumed by males and females between 19-50 years old per day.
The vegetable food group includes both fresh, frozen and canned vegetables as well as legumes and beans. The Australian Guide to Healthy Eating recommends that a variety of different coloured vegetables are consumed so that many different vitamins and minerals can be obtained from them. 5 serves of this food group per day for women, and 6 for men aged 19-50 years old will ensure adequate vitamin, mineral and fibre intake.
The fruit food group includes fresh, canned and dried fruit, as well as fruit juice. The Australian Guide to Healthy Eating recommends that like with vegetables, a variety of different coloured fruit is eaten. Both males and females aged 19-50 years old are recommended to eat 2 serves from this food group per day.
'Sometimes' foods include food items that are high in saturated fat, sugar or salt and can lead to negative health outcomes such as obesity or heart disease. The Australian Guide to Healthy Eating recommends that these foods should be limited in the diet, and not consumed in excessive amounts.
How do I meet the Guidelines on a budget?
Although it may seem like there are a lot of food (and costs) associated with eating healthily, it really doesn't have to be expensive!
Simple things like eating breakfast can really make a difference so you don’t pick on things or are tempted to buy things during the day.
Adding chopped vegies to a stew or stir fry will increase your daily serves of vegetables and will also help increase the bulk of the meal and keep you fuller for longer.
Going for high fibre options such as wholegrains will boost your fibre intake as well as your cereals and grains daily serves, and will keep you feeling satisfied for longer. Instead of choosing your regular high sugar cereal or white toast, try wholemeal bread as it provides double the fibre content of white bread.
Making a smoothie out of frozen berries and yoghurt if you’re rushed for time will instantly increase your daily fruit and dairy intake. And frozen berries are usually much cheaper and last for much longer than the fresh variety, and still have the same amount of nutrients!
Adding nuts and seeds is a good way to get a nutritious kick to a breakfast or snack. They will increase your protein intake, as well as providing your body with the good fats that it needs.
Top 5 Tips for Healthy Eating on a Budget
Buy foods when they are on special or in season.If you can’t purchase fresh food in season, buy frozen fruits and vegetables to have ready to go in the freezer. Or if not on special, the generic or supermarket brands are often cheaper than the better known brands anyway, and the quality is almost identical.
Buy fruits and vegetables from a green grocer or farmers market, not the supermarket.Supermarkets have a higher price on fresh produce compared to local green grocers and farmers markets, so it is worth looking around your area to find a good one.
Buy items in bulk.It is often cheaper to buy something in a kg or L tub than in small serving sizes. This way it is cheaper, and will last longer too, especially if it is something you can freeze.
Cook in large quantities and freeze food for later in the week.This way you can just grab it out of the freezer, re-heat and eat. And you know that it is healthy and much cheaper than calling your local take-away shop when you’ve come home and can’t be bothered cooking.
Avoid shopping on an empty stomach.The shopping cart will soon fill up with unnecessary, and often unhealthy items that you just didn’t need.
Dietitians Association of Australia: Healthy Eating on a Budget
NHMRC, Department of Health and Ageing 2013, Australian Dietary Guidelines. NHMRC: Canberra
NHMRC, Department of Health and Ageing 2013, Healthy Eating for Adults. NHMRC: Canberra. Retrieved from: http://www.eatforhealth.gov.au/sites/default/files/files/the_guidelines/n55g_adult_brochure.pdf.
Whitney, E., Rolfes, SR, Crowe, T., Cameron-Smith, D. & Walsh, A. (2011). Understanding Nutrition: Australia and New Zealand Edition. South Melbourne, Australia: Cengage Learning Australia.
This chapter will try to provide an overview of what is Peer-to-Peer, it's historical evolution, technologies and uses.
P2P and the Internet: A "bit" of History
P2P is not a new technology, P2P is almost as old as the Internet, it started with the email protocols and the next generation were called "metacomputing" or classed as "middleware". The concept of it took the Internet by storm only because of a general decentralization of the P2P protocols, that not only gave power to the simple user but also made possible savings on information distribution resources, a very different approach from the old centralization concept.
This can be a problem for security or control of that shared information, or in other words a "democratization" of the information (the well known use of P2P for downloading copies of MP3s, programs, and even movies from file sharing networks), and due to it's decentralizing nature the traffic patterns, are hard to predict, so, providing infrastructures to support it is a major problem most ISPs are now aware.
P2P has also been heralded as the solution to index the deep Web since most implantations of P2P technologies are based and oriented to wired networks running TCP/IP. Some are even being transfered to wireless uses (sensors, phones and robotic applications), you probably have already heard of some military implementation of intelligent mines or robotic insect hordes.
Ultimately what made P2P popular was that it created a leveled play field, due to the easy access to computers and networking  infrastructures we have today in most parts of the world. We are free to easily become producers, replacing the old centralized models where most of the population remained as consumers dependent on a single entity (monopoly, brand, visibility) for the distribution or creation of services or digital goods. This shift will undoubtedly reduce the costs of production and distribution in general as the price of services and products that can be digital transfered, the cost is now also becoming evident the quality will also be downgraded until a new system for classification emerges, this can be seen today in relation to the written media after the Internet impact.
FIdoNet is still today a worldwide computer network that is used for communication between bulletin board systems (BBSes). It uses a store-and-forward system to exchange private (email) and public (forum) messages between the BBSes in the network, as well as other files and protocols in some cases.
To do:It would be nice to prompt up the self organization and quasi Independence of nodes, as well as the dictatorial and monolithic hierarchy that supports it and how it is mostly decentralized and self organized
The FidoNet system was started based in a number of small collaboratively interacting programs. These "peers" run alongside the BBS systems and interacted with them via scripts or some form of lower level inter-precess communications. Their function was to automatically pack/unpack and import/export content from one system's location to another. Being independent greatly eased porting, and FidoNet was one of the few networks that was widely supported by almost all BBS software, as well as a number of non-BBS online services. This modular construction also allowed FidoNet to easily upgrade to new data compression systems, which was important in an era using modem-based communications over telephone links with high long-distance calling charges.
The rapid improvement in modem speeds during the early 1990s, combined with the rapid decrease in price of computer systems and storage, made BBSes increasingly popular. By the mid-1990s there were almost 40,000 FidoNet systems in operation, and it was possible to communicate with millions of users around the world. Only UUCP came close in terms of breadth or numbers; FidoNet's user base far surpassed other networks like BITNET.
The broad availability of low-cost Internet connections starting in the mid-1990s lessened the need for FidoNet's store-and-forward system, as any system in the world could be reached for equal cost. Direct dialing into local BBS systems rapidly declined. The availability of internet connectivity is by no means universal, and although FidoNet has shrunk considerably since the early 1990s, it remains in use around the world.
Electronic mail (often abbreviated as e-mail or email), started as a centralized service for creating, transmitting, or storing primarily text-based human communications with digital communications systems with the first standardization efforts resulting in the adoption of the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), first published as Internet Standard 10 (RFC 821) in 1982.
Modern e-mail systems are based on a store-and-forward model in which e-mail computer server systems, accept, forward, or store messages on behalf of users, who only connect to the e-mail infrastructure with their personal computer or other network-enabled device for the duration of message transmission or retrieval to or from their designated server.
Originally, e-mail consisted only of text messages composed in the ASCII character set, today, virtually any media format can be sent today, including attachments of audio and video clips.
Peer to Mail ( http://www.peer2mail.com/ ) is a FreeWare application for Windows that lets you store and share files on any web-mail account, you can use Web-mail providers such as Gmail (Google Mail), Walla!, Yahoo and others, it will split the shared files into segments that will be compressed and encrypted and then sends the file segments one by one to an account you have administration access. To Download the files the process is reversed.
The encryption was broken in Peer2Mail v1.4 (prior versions are also affected) - Peer2Mail Encrypt PassDumper Exploit.
Usenet is the original peer to peer file-sharing application. It was originally developed to make use of UUCP (Unix to Unix Copy) to synchronize two computers' message queues. Usenet stores each article in an individual file and each newsgroup in its own directory. Synchronizing two peers is as simple as synchronizing selected directories in two disparate filesystems.
Usenet was created with the assumption that everyone would receive, store and forward the same news. This assumption greatly simplified development to the point where a peer was able to connect to any other peer in order to get news. The fragmentation of Usenet into myriad newsgroups allowed it to scale while preserving its basic architecture. 'Every node stores all news' became 'every node stores all news in newsgroups it subscribes to'.
Of all other peer-to-peer protocols, Usenet is closest to Freenet since all nodes are absolutely equal and global maps of the network are not kept by any subset of nodes. Unlike Freenet, which works by recursive pulling of a requested object along a linear chain of peers, Usenet works by recursive pushing of all news to their immediate neighbors into a tree.
The File Transfer Protocol (FTP), can be seen as a primordial P2P protocol. Even if it depends on a client/server structure the limitation is only on the type of application (client/server) one run since the roles are flexible.
Zero configuration networking (zeroconf), is a set of techniques that automatically creates a usable Internet Protocol (IP) network P2P fashion, without manual operator intervention or special configuration servers.
Bonjour, formerly Rendezvous. A service discovery protocol by Apple Inc.'s. Bonjour locates in a P2P fashion, devices such as printers, as well as other computers and the services that those devices offer on a local network using multicast to maintain a Domain Name System record. The software is built into Apple's Mac OS X operating system from version 10.2 onward, and can be installed onto computers using Microsoft Windows operating systems. Bonjour also supports components that included other software, such as iTunes.
Bonjour for Windows ( http://support.apple.com/downloads/Bonjour_for_Windows )
Bonjour for Windows includes a plugin to discover advertised HTTP servers using Internet Explorer. If you have Bonjour devices on your local network with embedded HTTP (Web) servers, they will appear in the list.
Read the Variables and Data Types article before reading this one.
User Input is one of the most important aspects of programming concepts. Every program should have some sort of user interaction, from getting a character's name for a game to asking for a password to log into a database. This article will teach the basics of user input in the BASIC Programming Language. Please note that the following code may vary from compiler to compiler. (FreeBASIC Users: Do not use line numbers).
Hello, yourName, I am your computer, nice to meet you.
10: Dim userInput declares the variable userInput. As String tells the compiler that userInput is a string (A collection of pure text, can include numbers and symbols, but is considered text).
20: Input "What is your name?" prompts the user for their name.  userInput OR  a$ tells the compiler to store the answer in the variable in userInput or a$.
30: Makes a blank line.
40: A normal Print statement, ; tells the compiler not to skip to the next line.
50: Sleep makes the program wait for the user to press a key.
60: The ending to all BASIC programs, signifies a termination of the program.
A group of employees that bargain as a group with the enterprise.  The result is a standard contract that specifies pay, benefits and working conditions.  The contract can be for one, two, three or more years.  Normally, as part of the contract, the enterprise collects union dues and remits them to the union.  See also Seniority.
This UIKit object is just a regular navigation bar. This wasn't meant to be used by itself as it's included within UINavigationController and UIToolbar. So you'll have to go without a navigation stack if you choose this route. (thanks to DHowett for providing this info.) However, just for informational purposes, it is provided here in case you wanted to create your own class that is dependent on UINavigationBar (whatever that may be.)
Create or open an existing Theos project and open the header file to any view controller in your project. In your view controller's header file, you'll want to place the following code:
@interface RootViewController : UIViewController
After you add the navigation bar's label, add the declaration of the label.
@interface RootViewController : UIViewController
Now that we have our navigation bar and our label declared in the header, it's time to define them in the implementation file(.h).
Defining the BarNow that we have the navigation bar declared, it's time to define it. Now let's start by opening the implementation of your project (in this case, it's RootViewController.mm). In the implementation file, we will start by adding two blank lines in between the brackets and placing the following code:
Turkey is made up of 7 regions:
İç Anadolu bölgesi - Central Anatolian region
Turkish Table of Contents   view ⋅ edit ⋅ talk
I am...
Are you busy today?
You can give your feedback about this page on the talk page.
This page is intended to contain a summary of information on how to translate NetHack or other roguelike games into other languages.
There is a Spanish translation of NetHack available. There are Japanese translations of NetHack and Slash'EM available.
The Spanish translation does not use GNU gettext, the universal system for translating all applications.
There is a Ubuntu roguelike translation project although it has just been started and is not yet active.
Many other people have started (and often abandoned) work on other translations; search the rec.games.roguelike.* newsgroups for more info. If you find information on abandoned roguelikes, please post the original translator's contact information here if possible.
For more info, see the appropriate threads in the rec.games.roguelike.* newsgroups.
What’s going on?
It’s a Ritva on Shabbos 39a, I believe.
Rashi on the spot explains.
The Cake Decorating Honor is a component of the Artisan Master Award
.
1 1. List equipment necessary for cake decorating.
2 2. Learn from memory the two cake icings-butter cream and royal-and their proper uses. Name one other icing used for frosting.
3 4. Name three essential steps to good cake decorating.
4 5. Demonstrate pressure control with tubes. Learn the technique and name the proper tip (tube) used to make the following
5 6. Name four color techniques. Demonstrate two, including two-color icing.
6 7. Learn to make the following flowers
7 8. Demonstrate writing technique using two different tips and methods.
8 9. Decorate a doll cake or a cake prepared in a specialty cake pan using star fill-in method. Use at least two colors to make the design or pattern.
9 10. Make a special occasion cake of your choice using two or more borders of different types, and a floral arrangement.
10 11. Make a heart cake using borders, florets, string work, and writing.
List equipment necessary for cake decorating.
Small triangular shaped bags made from cloth, plastic or parchment paper which are fitted with decorating tips and filled with icing and used to pipe decorative items such as icing flowers, borders, scrollwork and lacework designs.
Sometimes called nozzles. These tips are used to create decorative items such as icing roses, shell borders, basketweave patterns and more. These come in various shapes and are used with an icing or pastry bag so that when the bag is squeezed the icing or cream is piped out in the shape of the tip, which may or may not be the final shape desired. For example, drop flowers are created with a single squeeze, while rose petals are created with skilled maneuvering.  The collars are optional equipment that allow the tip to be changed without removing frosting from the bag.
Similar to a butter knife, but with smooth edges on the unsharpened blade.  This is used to apply a smooth layer of frosting to a cake.
Shaped like a nail with an oversized head, this is used for piping royal icing and buttercream flowers onto before transferring to the cake.
A platter on which the cake sits as it is decorated and served.  It can be as simple as a piece of corrugated cardboard covered with aluminum foil.
Learn from memory the two cake icings-butter cream and royal-and their proper uses. Name one other icing used for frosting.
Buttercream Icing recipe is perfect for spreading or decorating.
(Put mouse over calculator to get English measurements)
Soften the butter by leaving it out of the refrigerator for a few hours before you need it.  Place the butter and shortening in a mixing bowl and cream it with a mixer.  Add the sugar, one cup at a time, beating it in as you go.  Add the vanilla extract and milk and continue mixing.
For a white frosting, substitute more shortening for the butter (that is, use 250 ml shortening, and no butter).  For a tastier icing, substitute butter for shortening.
Cover with a damp cloth until ready to use, or seal in an airtight container and refrigerate (it will keep for up to two weeks).  Add food coloring as desired and mix it in thoroughly.
This smooth, hard-drying icing is perfect for making decorations that last. It is also useful as a "cement" to fasten decorations together. Royal icing is edible, but not recommended for icing cakes.
(Put mouse over calculator to get English measurements)
Combine the confectioner's sugar and the meringue powder in a large bowl and beat with an electric mixer.  Add the water, vanilla extract, and food coloring and beat on medium to high speed until the icing forms stiff peaks (5–7 minutes).  Adjust the consistency by adding either more confectioner's sugar or more water.  Use immediately, or cover in an airtight container and refrigerate.  Royal icing hardens when exposed to air.
(Put mouse over calculator to get English measurements)
Combine whipping cream and sugar in mixing bowl.  Whip to soft peak stage.  Add Piping Gel and vanilla, then continue to whip until stiff peaks form.  Do not overbeat.  Makes 1 1/2 to 2 cups.
==3. Learn and demonstrate proper construction of the decorating tube using parchment, wax papers, or a disposable bag. Show proper method of inserting tip, brushing with color, filling with icing, and folding of top.The name of the top fold is the Diaper fold.
Name three essential steps to good cake decorating.
If the consistency of your decorating icing is not just right, your decorations won't be right either.  Just a few drops of liquid  will make a great deal of difference in your results.
The way your decorations curl, point, and lie depends not only on the icing consistency but also on the way you hold the bag and the way you move  it.  Bag positions are described in terms of both angle and direction.
Angle refers to  the position of the bag relative to the work surface.  There are two basic angle positions.
90° angle, or straight up, perpendicular to the surface.  Used when making stars or flat petal flowers.
45° angle, or half way between vertical and horizontal. Used for writing and borders.
The angle of the bag to the work surface is only half the story of the bag position. The other half is the direction in which the back of the bag is pointed.  Correct  bag direction is easiest to learn when you think of the back of the bag as the hour hand of a clock.  When  you hold the bag with the tip in the center of the clock, you can sweep out a circle with the back end of the bag.  Pretend the circle you formed in the air is the clock face.  The hours on the clock face correspond to the direction you point the back end of the bag.
The size and uniformity of your icing designs are affected by the amount of pressure you apply to the bag and the steadiness of the pressure : how you squeeze and relax your grip on the decorating bag.  Your goal is to learn to apply pressure so consistently that you can move the bag in a free and easy glide while just the right amount of icing flows through the tip.  Practice will help you achieve this control.
Demonstrate pressure control with tubes. Learn the technique and name the proper tip (tube) used to make the following
a. Star, fill-in and border
Use the star tube.  Hold the bag in an upright position, and lightly touch the tip of the tube on the cake. Apply pressure to the bag until the dab of icing is the required size. Cease the pressure, and lift the tube quickly from the cake.
Use a rose nail. Add a small piece of waxed paper to the flat pedestal of the rose nail with a dot of frosting. Position the petal tube vertically in the center of the rose nail and begin lightly squeezing out frosting while twirling the rose nail with your fingers to make a small frosting cone. Once the cone is slightly taller than the width of the base of the cone, stop squeezing the bag and pull it away. Turn the bag at a 45-degree angle and position the petal tube about 1/3 of the way down from the top of the cone. Pipe a petal all the way around the cone at this angle for just one full turn of the rose nail so that the ends of the petal are touching. Remove pressure and pull the bag away. Angle the piping bag at a 45-degree angle or slightly more and position the petal tube on one side of the cone. Squeeze the bag gently and pipe a ribbon of frosting about 1/3 of the way around the cone while spinning the rose nail to create a petal. Continue doing this until the rose is the size desired. Let the rose dry until it is slightly firm, and then transfer it onto your cake.
c. Shell border
Use a rose nail. Add a small piece of waxed paper to the flat pedestal of the rose nail with a dot of frosting. Position the petal tube vertically in the center of the rose nail and begin lightly squeezing out frosting while twirling the rose nail with your fingers to make a small frosting cone. Once the cone is slightly taller than the width of the base of the cone, stop squeezing the bag and pull it away. Turn the bag at a 45-degree angle and position the petal tube about 1/3 of the way down from the top of the cone. Pipe a petal all the way around the cone at this angle for just one full turn of the rose nail so that the ends of the petal are touching. Remove pressure and pull the bag away. Angle the piping bag at a 45-degree angle or slightly more and position the petal tube on one side of the cone. Squeeze the bag gently and pipe a ribbon of frosting about 1/3 of the way around the cone while spinning the rose nail to create a petal. Continue doing this until the rose is the size desired. Let the rose dry until it is slightly firm, and then transfer it onto your cake.
d. "S" design
Use a round tip. Slide a plastic coupler base into the bottom of an icing bag. Place a round tip over the coupler base and the bag. Screw a coupler ring over the tip, bag and base to secure. Fold the top half of the bag down to form a cuff. Unfold the cuff and twist the top half of the bag to secure the icing. Hold the bag at a 90 degree angle at the top perimeter of an iced cake. Gently squeeze the bag, directing the flow of icing to create a horizontal "S" shape near the edge of the cake's surface. Stop squeezing, and lift straight up to stop the flow of icing. Create another "S" shape next to the previous one, creating scrolls all the way around the perimeter of the cake. Let the icing harden for 15 minutes before moving the cake.
Use a rosepetal tip.
f. Zigzag border
Use a star or round tip.
Use a leaf tip.
Name four color techniques. Demonstrate two, including two-color icing.
a. Sweet pea
c. Full American beauty rose
d. Drop flower
Demonstrate writing technique using two different tips and methods.
Decorate a doll cake or a cake prepared in a specialty cake pan using star fill-in method. Use at least two colors to make the design or pattern.
Electric bike, or E-bike, is a variation of the traditional bicycle. E-bikes entered the Chinese market in the late 1990s with the production and ownership rates skyrocketing since 2004. In 2014, 90% of the world's E-bike production was completed in China[1]. In 2017, China had 250 million E-bikes and had the most E-bike owners in the world[2].
The following article analyses the historic life-cycle of E-bike in the context of China from qualitative and quantitative aspects. Regarding qualitative aspects, this article introduced the life-cycle from its birth, grow and mature phases and the technology as well as related policies in each phase. In the quantitative analysis, a regression model was used to find the curve of best fit for the production of bikes. Using the curve generated, the three phases mentioned in qualitative analysis can be justified.
Although the development of E-bike in China has been relatively successful based on the figures, the process was not smooth and the future prediction is relatively negative. From the data prediction from Citron[3] and the quantitative analysis section in this page, E-bike in China has entered mature phase and the production/sales are declining. The miracles achieved by E-bike indicates that this industry plays a vital role in China's development and cannot be simply abandoned. To revitalise the market and prevent E-bike, a technology with potentials, from entering an end phase, a life-cycle study is conducted to analyse the technology and policy issues during the development and therefore provide suggestions for this industry.
Using the model described below, an S-curve is generated to analyse the life-cycle
The core equation for the model used to predict annual production is shown below
.
For the linear regression, the independent variable was selected to be the years and the dependent variable is calculated by
For the regression analysis, the Data Analysis Tool in Microsoft Excel 2016 was used.
First, the dependent variable Y for each year under different saturation level was found and a linear regression was conducted. The spacing between K was narrowed down to 100 to provide a more accurate saturation level.
Using the preliminary results, it can be seen that when K=37700, the R-squared was the closest to 1. Therefore, K=37700 was used to find and plot the S curve. The summary of the regression results for K=37700 is shown below.
As shown the t-Stat is greater than 2 which indicates that the variables are statistically significant .
The annual production of E-bike represents a good example for the life cycle for a new transportation method. From the S-curve, it can be roughly decided that the birth phase is from 1999-2004, the growth phase is 2004 - 2009 and the mature phase is 2009 - now.
Even though E-bike business is booming fast in a global scale[3], there has been a significant contraction in Chinese market which results in the decline of production after 2013. Since the 2008 financial crisis, there had been a trend of slow in grow of annual production. The government policies became the last trigger that caused the contraction in 2013. The detailed discussion is in mature phase below. According to third party prediction, if the policies are still as tight as the current policy, the Chinese market is likely to further contract for the next 10 years but remain at a level of 30,000,000.
China remains the major market for E-bike. In 2017, over 30,000,000 E-bikes were sold in China while the total sales for the rest of the world were about 3,000,000. China dominates about 90% of the market in E-bike sale and 50%-80% in E-bike production. With no grow of demand in Chinese market, it is rational that the annual production in China stop expanding and even experience minor contraction.
From a more practical perspective. At the start of 2018, it is estimated that there are over 250 million E-bikes in China. The total production throughout years roughly adding up to 357 million E-bikes in total. If omits the production before 2007 (since E-bikes over 10 years old are likely to be recycled already), the total production is around 340 million. This figure is reasonable for the current ownership and stock in the storage.
Data source: Zhiyan Consulting Group[4], The Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of the People's Republic of China (MIIT), Bike Europe[5], The China Light Industry Year Book (2010, 2011, 2012) and Zufang Sheng[6]
E-bike is a variation of traditional man-powered two-wheel pedal bike with a battery to provide assisting power. It has features similar to a motorbike such as headlights, horns, turn/brake lights and a motor. However, it is more closely related to bike with pedals, brake and can only travel at 25 km/h[2][7][8]. E-bike is very similar to E-motorcycle and the only differences are speed limit and weight. E-bike is environmentally friendly, produce nearly no noise and affordable so it is welcomed by the general public and environmentalists. Unfortunately, this travel mode was under suppression due to safety concerns from many local governments. The policies to restrain E-bike not able to accommodate the fast grow speed so some local governments decided to ban all the bikes temporarily. Recently, more and more cities started to embrace E-bike by carrying out new policies but the general policy environment is still harsh.
A typical E-bike on a street from China
The following is a list of essential technology components involved in a common E-bike.
Bicycle drive-train systems: the chain system on a bike to transmit power to kinematic energy. In this case, it helps to combine and transport both man-power and electric power to movement of the bike.
Battery: Battery is the core of energy source for an E-bike. An E-bike can also work without electricity, but it would simply be an over-weighted bike. The quality of the battery is important since it is directly linked to the length of travel per charge (endurance)[2]. More importantly, poor design or low quality battery would cause partial overheating and trigger the combustion of lithium[9] or explosion.
Lighting system: unlike a bike, E-bikes are generally equipped with a front light for lighting and brake/turn lights for indication.
Controlling system: an integrated circuit that is designed to optimise the current from battery and pedal to the motor and prevent the entire system from overload. It is also known as the 'brain'[6] since it separated E-bike with a simple combination of bike and battery.
Lower time-space resource consumption[10]
Allow people with physical limitation to ride a bike[11]
Help alleviate environmental impact (noise, air etc.) from commute activities.
The areas discussed might overlap with each other since they are not categorised using the same standard.
Migrant Worker: E-bike is affordable. Migrant workers in China are normally former farmers from rural areas. They seek to improve their economic status by working in cities and generally have lower average income. An affordable option for a daily commuting vehicle would be an E-bike.
White collar: E-bike helps them to avoid congestion. This group mainly works in CBDs which are the most congested. E-bikes help them travel better through the traffic flow in the congested areas.
Senior: E-bikes overcomes the physical limitation. In China, many of the seniors take part in purchasing daily house consumption. Physical limitation restrained their ability to use a bike and using a car would be quite inconvenient. The senior in a typical family would go for morning exercise in a nearby park[12] and make the purchase afterwards. This group would experience difficulties in maneuvering a bike but can easily use an E-bike.
Homemaker: E-bikes is light and convenient for them. Homemakers generally will use E-bike as a method to send children to school and buy daily consumptions.
Small business: E-bike is ideal for small-cargo transport. For small businesses, the moving of goods either from wholesalers or to customers normally will not require a vehicle with large capacity. Instead, they might need a vehicle that can park freely along the side of the road and low in cost, which makes E-bike a reasonable solution.
Fast grow speed. Unlike a typical transport technology which experiences a long birth, growth period, E-bike in China only had less than 10 years for these two periods in total. It quickly overcomes the technological difficulties and started mass production with an affordable market price.
Largest ownership: In 2017, China has 250 million E-bikes, making it the largest E-bike owner country in the world[2].  The Sales of E-bike in China is in dominant position comparing to other markets and is estimated to continue for a long time[3].
High economic outcome: MIIT estimated that E-bike industry generates over 4.8-billion RMB direct benefit in 2017[13].
Bus (public transport), car, motorcycle and bicycle. The new e-cyclists were mainly from motorcycle and bicycle users[10].
High maintenance  cost (fuel, repairing)
Geographical  constraints (long distance, hills)
In the 1990s, the Chinese Economic Reform took place in the mainland, and the economy started to grow. At this stage, people were only able to afford normal bikes, and E-bike was impractical due to a technological constraint on battery. At that time, China had a large population using bikes and was on the brink of massive motorisation. In the early 21 centuries, the technology revolution and the boost of economy encouraged the production of the E-bike. The mass production lowered the market price which stimulates the market and eventually achieves economy of scale. The evolving of the market in the growth period is a typical example of 'magic bullet'[14] in which the large demand helps achieve economy of scale and therefore lower the price as well as improve the quality. The lower price and higher quality trigger more demand and form a positive loop. Therefore, the market for E-bike should keep expanding according to 'magic bullet' theory.
However, the end of the growth period for E-bike entered only 10 years into the growth period. It was caused by disincentive policies from local governments. Many local governments banned E-bike due to either road safety concern or manufacturing safety concern[15]. For example, Beijing has restricted the use of E-bike in the inner-city region to alleviate the congestion issue[16]. E-bike became useless if riding on the road is not allowed, and therefore less costumer will make the purchase. Further discussion will be conducted in the mature phase.
How the factors stimulated the rising of new E-bikes:
E-bikes are most useful during medium-distance travel. Comparing to the car, the E-bike is more affordable and does not require a well-defined rectangular space for parking. Comparing to bike, it helps an individual with insufficient strength to ride a bike for medium-long distance. Comparing to public transport, it allows individual to travel at their schedule and grant them with a certain amount of private spaces. Based on all the demand for improvement in various transportation technology, the opportunity for E-bike emerged and industrials stared to seize the opportunity to provide a solution: E-bike.
E-bike is an end-driven, applied innovation. The invention of this technology can be described from two perspectives.
Using the experience from Japan[10], engineers in China started to combine bike with an electric motor to provide suit with the market demand. The engineers from different areas cooperated to combine components for a bike and a electric together and invented e-bike.
Initially, E-bike was designed to substitute for gasoline scooter and bike. In the late 1990s, the Chinese government predicted the dramatic increase of traditional gasoline in the future, so it invested in alternative methods to travel as a way to reduce the needs for gasoline in daily commuting[6].
Mechanical engineers: They designed and improved the structure of E-bike. They have to combine aero-dynamics and human body mechanics to minimise the energy input required and maximise the effect of output.
Mechatronic engineers: They designed the mass production technology of E-bike. These engineers designed and improved the assembly line for an E-bike to achieve the highest efficiency to lower the cost of production.
Information Technology engineers (late entry): Recently, IT engineers entered the industry to develop advance programs in the controlling system to optimise the energy allocation and battery use to prolong the life of E-bike.
Traffic engineers: They are the consulting group for policymakers to decide how to fit the new transportation mode in the existing system.
Lawyers: They help the policy maker to decide if the certain behaviour of the E-bike is abiding the existing law. They can also help in designing new road rules for the E-bike to encourage more standardised
Government officials (policy makers): These are technological experts in a loose definition since they are experts in politics. They are in charge of approving law bills or standards related to E-bike to legalise the position of the E-bike. They have to consider beyond the hardware aspect and combine the real-life situation and decide whether or not it is feasible to use E-bike under certain circumstances.
An early design of E-bike in 1932. It can been seen that the appearance dose not change significantly comparing to E-bike in the 21st century.
Early in the 1890s, patents of E-bike design were filled in the U.S. Early in the design; there was no gear with the battery attached either at the crankset or the top of the rear wheel[17]. This initial design was quickly substituted with gear design (which is now the predominant design) in the early 1900s. The gear design was considered to be more efficient.
In China, after the taking the initial design from Japan, the engineers quickly modified the design by combining it with gasoline scooter. However back in the 1990s, the price of an E-bike was significantly higher than a gasoline scooter[18]. The price disadvantage greatly suppressed the evolution of E-bike. At the starting point of the growth phase, the large market demand and central governments’ wishes to explore higher efficiency, cleaner fuel resulted in the next surge of new E-bikes.
From then on, the design of E-bike started to shift thanks to technology development in other fields. First, lead (Pb)-acid battery was substituted with predominant li-ion battery for higher energy density and lower environmental pollution. Second, the steel/iron frame design was changed into alloy frame for more stubborn and less weight. Currently, the E-bike has a mature design with the potential to go as high as 80 km/h[15].
From a software perspective, the initial intention was to serve as a substitution for only gasoline scooter and bike. Nowadays, E-bikes are fulling its duty to substitute bike and motorcycles and additionally, also substituting other methods like cars or public transport during daily commuting.
The analysis on birth phase was conducted on researching the market niches, the functional enhancement and its functional discovery. Furthermore, the policies associated with E-bikes in the birth phase are discussed.
Individuals who lack physical strength in riding a bike need a similar method for medium-long distance travel or overcome a hill.
Individuals who are suffering congestion in metropolis need a non-sweating way to commute.
Small businesses need a convenient way to transport their goods at lower cost.
Lower income class needs to purchase an affordable vehicle. The average car will cost about 100,000 – 150,000 RMB, which is about six times more than the average income of a city dweller. Meanwhile, an electric bike would only cost 2000 RMB which was 1/8 of the average income[10].
China was at the edge of a large-motorisation, so the potential market was gigantic[18].
Metropolis, like Beijing, Shanghai, have limited parking resources, so the commuter has to reduce the size of their private vehicle.
In the early market, E-bike was a fashionable new way of substituting other types of vehicles. It was quieter, cleaner and does not cause traffic congestion (superficially speaking). In 1999, Shanghai Economy and Trade Committee listed E-bike as a 'highland' for light industry construction[18].
E-bike in the early market encourages a considerable number of seniors and housewife who would generally not travel and stay home to travel.
Being a new method of transportation, E-bike had many policies following it, and they can be categorised as either borrowed policies or new policies. They can be further subcategorised as either embedded policies, imposed policies or both embedded and imposed.
In the earliest stage, the government couldn’t accurately define the electric bike: they weren’t powerful enough to be motorbike but had a higher average speed than a normal bicycle. In 1999, Electric Bicycles. General technical requirements (GB17761-1999) identifies E-bike as a two-wheel vehicle who uses electricity from the battery as assisting power and able to operate either pedelec- style (from pedal electric cycle), manual-pedal-style or fully hand throttle[8]. Even with the bike loosely defined, the legal right of E-bike on the road was still not officially granted. It borrowed the policies from both bike & motorcycles for management during this period. Some examples of borrowed policies include:
Ride on the right[19] : similar to the U.S., China adopted a Right-hand traffic system , and E-bike is also required to following the same rule. This item is an embedded and imposed policy.
Braking system[7]: similar to the bike, an E-bike is required to have both functional front and rear brake to be qualified to ride on the road. This item is an embedded and imposed policy.
Age limits[19]: individuals have to be older than 16 years old to be qualified to operate an E-bike.
The size of the front and rear wheel should be the same: this design can help maximise the efficiency of the drivetrain system. This is an embedded policy since it is not sanctioned by the government but for the benefit of the user and manufacturer.
The Road Traffic Safety Law of the People's Republic of China in 2004 officially granted E-bike a legal position. However the right of way was not clear and each province, the city has different rules about E-bike.. Among the policies imposed by the government in the birth phase, the following are some of the significant new policies:
The speed limit on the product itself: instead of imposing a speed limit for E-bike on different road sections, GB17761-1999 requires the manufactures to produce E-bike with speed limit of 25 km/h. This item is an imposed policy by the government.
Battery quality standards: the battery has to follow the according to national battery standard to be qualified to be installed on an E-bike. This item is an embedded and imposed policy.
No need for a helmet: a helmet is required for motorcycle but not in the regulation for E-bike since it is a variation of the bike. A helmet is only advised to be worn. This item is an embedded policy.
The public provides an excessive amount of ‘demand’ in this period, and the private sector was in charge of producing supply to fit the need. The supply and demand are hard to fit, and the large demand caused some illegal private sector players to enter the period. The fast grown public sector and illegal supplier eventually caused the government to intervene.
Insufficient regulation about manufacturing the E-bike: there was only a general national standard without clear definition about parts. Also, the policies on supervising the manufacturers were loose which gave chance to illegal manufacturers to massively produce unqualified e-bikes with either weak frames or bad batteries.
Insufficient regulation about operating an E-bike in some cities: At the start of the growth period, there was insufficient regulation about operating about E-bike in some cities.
Over regulation about operating an E-bike in other cities: Despite some cities had almost no regulations on E-bike, some cities accused E-bike for causing casualties. Several cities even banned the E-bike entirely from riding on the road or retailing in the city, which inevitably gave a hard time to the industry. For example, Fuzhou city completely banned the sale of E-bike on June 1st, 2003, which result in the start of 'Black June for E-bike'[20].
No clear lane assigned: E-bike was classified as bike but has the potential to travel on the road. Without a clear designation for E-bike, they are free to travel between roads and pedestrian lane which caused a chaotic situation. When riding on the road, it is generally slower than a car and is vulnerable to any form of impact. When riding on the pedestrian lane, the E-bike is significantly faster than pedestrian or a normal bicycle and could injure both of them.
During the growth phase, the regulations in China tends to become more and more strict. No more subsidies were provided to e-bike purchase and many local government started to view E-bike as a source of trouble. To prevent injury related to E-bike, many local governments directly banned E-bike to 'solve the problem from source'[21]. As a matter of fact, the harsh policy together with the economic recession ended the fast growth of E-bike market in 2009. In 2013, the growth of annual production ended at 370 million and started to contract afterward.
During the mature phase, the increase of new users remains steady. The mature phase of E-bike arrived partially due to the harsh policies imposed by the government. Even now, many of the cities are still not allowing E-bike to ride on the road for safety concerns. Such disincentive policies directly impacted the growth of E-bike market.
Building higher end brand: Instead of focusing on selling affordable E-bikes, companies like Yadea and NIU have been trying to promote their higher end brand to lead the sale from the top – down[22].
Legalise the right to ride on bicycle lane: Many of the cities, like Shenzhen, banned E-bike from entering the bicycle lane since the average speed is too high[23]. Currently, bicycle lanes that are massively being constructed all around China[24] and E-bikes are required to operate on roads which increases the unsafety factor and congestion level[10]. Companies have been trying to legalise the use of bicycle path to enhance user experience.
Adapt the change of policy view: China is still using the 1999 standard for classifying E-bike which was out-dated and less useful. It wasn’t until 2018 that a new specification was announced and about to be implanted. On Jan 16th, 2018, the General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine (AQSIQ) together with Standardization Administration of the People's Republic of China (SAC) published a beta version of the new specification and starting to collect feedback from the public[7]. The new policy proposed a different policy value than 20 years ago with a stricter definition of the E-bike. For example, to ensure safety for the user, the new standards now require the manufacturers to add fire-proof circuit and need to prevent the battery from self-combustion.
How has ‘lock-in’ constrained these adaptions:
Lock-in in this context stands for the constraint of mind or method of production after standardisation when economies of scale is achieved[14].
For the higher brand sale attempts, NIU has been successful in Europe market, but the Chinese market is hard to open. A stereotype of E-bike has formed that E-bike only belongs to low-income class so the public, to some extent, does not consider E-bike as a new ‘fashion’ method of travel. The current impression is a lock-in for the promotion of new E-bikes.
For the improvement of manufacturing technique, the existing assembly lines are designed especially for the current model and have already minimised the cost. This is the result of achieving economies of scale. If major improvement is to be implanted on the new model, the current standard and machines have to be updated which would inevitably increase the cost. The factories may be unwilling to accommodate the new standards as a result.
With the life-cycle reaching mature phase and started to decline, the industry urgently requires new opportunities for further improvement market share. Otherwise, this method might be abandoned by the public in a few years. The following are some advice proposed based on the suggestion from Garrison and Levinson[14].
Shared E-bike: as the sharing economy recently becomes a new business thanks to the development of dockless sharing bike, a new possibility for E-bike present
Specially designed for delivery: Food and small parcel delivery often requires light and swift design vehicles. Short distance delivery service in China is more advanced than any other country and has higher demand. E-bike inherently will have a lower cost than cars so a new design of E-bike especially for courier can potentially increase the market share by bulk sale to the delivery companies.
Avoid high capital cost: The manufactures can lower their cost by consolidating different companies and cooperate in developing safer E-bike. By combining assembly line and factories can minimise the cost of capital.
Due to the strict constraining policies in both manufacturing and operating perspectives imposed by the local governments, the prediction of the market share in the next five years is relatively negative. However, since the existence of E-bike aligned with many of the goals that major metropolis are trying to achieve: use clean energy, less time-space resource consumption, less noise more chance for people to exercise etc. The current recession might be a temporary setback in the long term.
↑ Altoumaimi , R., Altoumaimi, T., & Upadhya, B. P. (2014). Characteristics and Control of motor system in E-bikes. SWEDEN: Blekinge Institute of Technology.
↑ a b c Citron, R. (2016). Li-Ion and SLA E-Bikes: Drivetrain, Motor, and Battery Technology Trends, Competitive Landscape, and Global Market Forecasts . N/A: NAVIGANT Research.
↑ Huang, P., Wang, Q., Li, K., Ping, P., & Sun, J. (2015). The combustion behavior of large scale lithium titanate battery. Beijing: Scientific Reports. doi:10.1038/srep07788
↑ a b Dill, J. (2012). Electric bikes and transportation policy. Transportation research record , p.1.
↑ a b c Garrison, W. L., & Levinson, M. D. (2006). The Transportation Experience: Policy, Planning and Development. New York: Oxford University Press, Inc.
↑ Bolton, O. (1895). the United States of America Patent No. 552,271.
↑ a b c Xue, J., Ma, C., & Berry, C. (2006). The Transition To Electric Bikes In China: History And Key Reasons For Rapid Growth. Davis: UC Davis, Institute of Transportation Studies.
↑ Li, W. (2011). Electric Bicycle’s Development and Management of Ethical Considerations. Chengdu: Southwest Jiaotong University.
↑ Chen, S. (2017, 09 04). Chinese city starts work on world’s biggest urban cycle network. Retrieved from South China Morning Post: http://www.scmp.com/news/china/society/article/2109635/chinese-city-starts-work-worlds-biggest-urban-cycle-network
This game is so named because the King and Queen of each suit seem to watch the action.
First, sixteen cards are dealt to form a square. These compose the reserve, or "antechamber." On the other hand, the space inside the square is called the "audience chamber." This is where twelve cards are to be placed later. All cards in the antechamber are available for play.
After the cards are dealt, the King and Queen of each suit, whenever both are available, are placed inside the audience chamber, never to take part in the rest of the game. Also, the Jack and the Ace of each suit, whenever they become available at the same time, are placed inside the audience chamber with the Jack on top; these two become the foundation, to be built down by suit to deuces (twos).
There is no building among the cards in the antechamber; they are only available for play to the foundations. When a card leaves the antechamber, it is replaced with a card from the wastepile or, if there is none, the stock.
When play goes on a standstill, cards from the stock are dealt one a time to a wastepile, the top card of which is available for play. The stock can only be dealt once.
The game is won when all cards end up in the audience chamber. King's Audience can be won three times out of four.[1]
↑ Moyse Jr., Alphonse (1950). 150 Ways to Play Solitaire. Whitman Publishing Company. pp. 24–25.
On completion of this unit a learner should:
Be able to use scientific techniques to separate and assess purity of substances
Be able to use instruments/sensors for scientific investigations.
Colorimetry is "the science and technology used to quantify and describe physically the human color perception." It is similar to spectrophotometry, but is distinguished by its interest in reducing spectra to the physical correlates of color perception, most often the CIE 1931 XYZ color space tristimulus values and related quantities.
In medicine, titration is the process of gradually adjusting the dose of a medication until the desired effect is achieved.
Titration setup: the titrant drops from the burette into the analyte solution in the w:flask. An indicator present then changes color permanently at the w:endpoint.
Titration is a common laboratory method of quantitative/chemical analysis which can be used to determine the w:concentration of a known w:reactant. Because volume measurements play a key role in titration, it is also known as volumetric analysis.
A w:reagent, called the titrant, of known concentration (a w:standard solution) and w:volume is used to react with a solution of the w:analyte, whose concentration is not known in advance. Using a calibrated w:burette to add the titrant, it is possible to determine the exact volume that has been consumed when the endpoint is reached. The endpoint is the point at which the titration is complete, often determined by an indicator (see below). In the classic strong acid-strong base titration the endpoint of a titration is when the pH of the reactant is just about equal to 7, and often when the solution permanently changes colour due to an indicator. There are however many different types of titrations (see below).
Many methods can be used to indicate the endpoint of a reaction; titrations often use visual indicators (the reactant mixture changes colour). In simple w:acid-base titrations a pH indicator may be used, such as w:phenolphthalein, which becomes pink when a certain pH (about 8.2) is reached or exceeded. Another example is w:methyl orange, which is red in acids and yellow in alkali solutions.
Not every titration requires an indicator.  In some cases, either the reactants or the products are strongly coloured and can serve as the "indicator".  For example, an oxidation-reduction titration using w:potassium permanganate (pink/purple) as the titrant does not require an indicator.  When the titrant is reduced, it turns colourless. After the equivalence point, there is excess titrant present.  The equivalence point is identified from the first faint pink colour that persists in the solution being titrated.
Due to the logarithmic nature of the pH curve, the transitions are generally extremely sharp, and thus a single drop of titrant just before the endpoint can change the pH significantly — leading to an immediate colour change. That said, there is a slight difference between the change in indicator colour and the actual equivalence point of the titration. This error is referred to as an indicator error, and it is indeterminate.
In a titration, both titrant and analyte are required to be aqueous, or in a solution form. If the sample is not a liquid or solution, the samples must be dissolved. If the analyte is very concentrated in the sample, it might be useful to dilute the sample.
Although the vast majority of titrations are carried out in aqueous solution, other solvents such as glacial ethanoic acid or ethanol (in petrochemistry) are used for special purposes.
A measured mass of the sample can be placed in a flask and then be dissolved or diluted. The mathematical result of the titration can be calculated directly. Sometimes the sample is dissolved or diluted beforehand and a measured volume of the solution is used for titration. In this case the dissolving or diluting must be done accurately because the mathematical result of the titration must be multiplied with this factor.
Some non-acid-base titrations require buffering to maintain a certain pH for the reaction. Therefore, buffer solutions are added to the reactant solution in the flask.
Some titrations require "masking" of a certain ion. This can be necessary when two reactants in the sample would react with the titrant and only one of them must be analysed, or when the reaction would be disturbed or inhibited by this ion. In this case another solution is added to the sample which "masks" the unwanted ion (for instance by a weak binding with it or even forming a solid insoluble substance with it).
Some reactions may require heating the solution with the sample and titration while the solution is still hot (to increase the reaction rate).
A typical titration begins with a conical flask containing a precisely known volume of the reactant and a small amount of indicator, placed underneath a w:burette containing the reagent. By controlling the amount of reagent that is added to the reactant, it is possible to detect the point at which the indicator changes colour. As long as the indicator has been chosen correctly, this should also be the point where the reactant and reagent neutralise each other, and by reading the scale on the burette the volume of reagent can be measured.
As the concentration of the reagent is known, the number of moles of reagent can be calculated (since
). Then, from the chemical equation involving the two substances, the number of moles present in the reactant can be found. Finally, by dividing the number of moles of reactant by its volume, the concentration is calculated.
Titrations can be classified by the type of reaction. Different types of titration reaction include:
w:Acid-base titration is based on the neutralisation reaction between the analyte and an acidic or basic titrant. These most commonly use a pH indicator, a pH meter, or a conductance meter to determine the endpoint.
A w:Redox titration is based on an oxidation-reduction reaction between the analyte and titrant. These most commonly use a potentiometer or a redox indicator to determine the endpoint. Frequently either the reactants or the titrant have a colour intense enough that an additional indicator is not needed.
A w:Complexometric titration is based on the formation of a complex between the analyte and the titrant. The w:chelating agent w:EDTA is very commonly used to titrate metal ions in solution. These titrations generally require specialised indicators that form weaker complexes with the analyte. A common example is w:Eriochrome Black T for the titration of w:calcium and w:magnesium ions.
A form of titration can also be used to determine the concentration of a w:virus or w:bacterium. The original sample is diluted (in some fixed ratio, such as 1:1, 1:2, 1:4, 1:8, etc.) until the last dilution does not give a positive test for the presence of the virus. This value, the w:titre, may be based on w:TCID50, w:EID50, w:ELD50, LD50 or pfu. This procedure is more commonly known as an w:assay.
Different methods to determine the endpoint include:
w:pH indicator: This is a substance that changes colour in response to a chemical change. An acid-base indicator (e.g., w:phenolphthalein) changes colour depending on the w:pH. Redox indicators are also frequently used. A drop of indicator solution is added to the titration at the start; when the colour changes the endpoint has been reached.
A w:potentiometer can also be used. This is an instrument which measures the w:electrode potential of the solution. These are used for titrations based on a redox reaction; the potential of the working electrode will suddenly change as the endpoint is reached.
w:pH meter: This is a potentiometer which uses an electrode whose potential depends on the amount of H+ ion present in the solution. (This is an example of an w:ion selective electrode. This allows the pH of the solution to be measured throughout the titration. At the end point there will be a sudden change in the measured pH. It can be more accurate than the indicator method, and is very easily automated.
Conductance: The conductivity of a solution depends on the ions that are present in it. During many titrations, the conductivity changes significantly. (For instance, during an acid-base titration, the H+ and OH- ions react to form neutral H2O. This changes the conductivity of the solution.) The total conductance of the solution depends also on the other ions present in the solution (such as counter ions). Not all ions contribute equally to the conductivity; this also depends on the mobility of each ion and on the total concentration of ions (w:ionic strength). Thus, predicting the change in conductivity is harder than measuring it.
Colour change: In some reactions, the solution changes colour without any added indicator. This is often seen in redox titrations, for instance, when the different oxidation states of the product and reactant produce different colours. Such titrations are known as 'self-indicating'.
Precipitation: If the reaction forms a solid, then a w:precipitate will form during the titration. A classic example is the reaction between Ag+ and Cl- to form the very insoluble salt AgCl. Surprisingly, this usually makes it difficult to determine the endpoint precisely. As a result, precipitation titrations often have to be done as "back" titrations (see below).
An isothermal titration calorimeter uses the heat produced or consumed by the reaction to determine the endpoint. This is important in biochemical titrations, such as the determination of how substrates bind to w:enzymes.
Thermometric titrimetry is an extraordinarily versatile technique. This is differentiated from calorimetric titrimetry by the fact that the heat of the reaction (as indicated by temperature rise or fall) is not used to determine the amount of analyte in the sample solution. Instead, the endpoint is determined by the rate of temperature change.
w:Spectroscopy can be used to measure the absorption of light by the solution during the titration, if the w:spectrum of the reactant, titrant or product is known. The relative amounts of the product and reactant can be used to determine the endpoint.
w:Amperometry can be used as a detection technique (w:amperometric titration). The current due to the oxidation or reduction of either the reactants or products at a working electrode will depend on the concentration of that species in solution. The endpoint can then be detected as a change in the current. This method is most useful when the excess titrant can be reduced, as in the titration of halides with Ag+. (This is handy also in that it ignores precipitates.)
The term w:back titration is used when a titration is done "backwards":
As applied to w:biodiesel, titration is the act of determining the w:acidity of a sample of WVO by the dropwise addition of a known base to the sample while testing with w:pH paper for the desired neutral pH=7 reading. By knowing how much base neutralizes an amount of WVO, we discern how much base to add to the entire batch.
Titrations in the w:petrochemical or food industry to define oils, fats or biodiesel and similar substances. An example procedure for all three can be found here: [1].
w:Acid number: an acid-base titration with colour indicator is used to determine the free fatty acid content. See also: pH of fatty acids.
w:Iodine number: a redox titration with colour indication which indicates the amount of unsaturated fatty acids.
w:Saponification value: an acid-base back titration with colour indicator or potentiometric to get a hint about the average chain length of fatty acids in a fat.
“The fundamental principle behind any sampling activity is that a small amount of collected material should be representative of all the material being monitored. The number and location of samples that are needed to make up a representative sample depends on how homogeneous the material is. If it is very homogeneous, only a few samples may be required. If the material is heterogeneous, many more samples will be required.”[1]
Periodic measurements – measurements are made at periodic intervals; for example, once every three months. The sample is often withdrawn from the sampling site (extractive sampling). An instrumental or automated technique may be used, where the sampling and analysis of the substance is fed to an on-line analyser. Alternatively, a technique may be used where a sample is extracted on site and analysed later in a laboratory. Samples may be obtained over several hours, or may be so-called “spot” or “grab” samples collected over a period of seconds to several minutes.[1]
Intermittent measurements are made when convenient/possible. The timing between measurements may be semi-periodic (e.g. every day, sometime during working hours).
Continuous emissions monitoring systems (CEMs) are automated measurements carried out continuously, with few (if any) gaps in the data produced. Measurement may be carried out in situ, or extractive sampling may be used with an instrument permanently located at or near the stack. CEMs are also referred to as Automated Monitoring Systems (AMS), particularly in Europe.[1]
Should ambient air sampling be continuous or intermittent?
Short sampling programmes are unlikely to give data representative of long-term conditions. Meteorological conditions and source variations can have significant effects on pollutant concentrations. Where short-term peaks are of interest, these may be unusual events occurring for only a few days each year. Hence short-term monitoring campaigns are of very limited value for characterising air-pollution episodes.[2]
Comparison of continuous and periodic monitoring for water analysis
Monitoring covers all or most of the period that substances are discharged
Real-time results if portable instrumental analysers used; delayed results if laboratory end-method used
Sensors may be prone to fouling or other malfunction
Sample integrity needs to be maintained before analysis
Only a limited number of methods possible
May not be able to meet performance requirements at present
Methods that will meet the performance of most regulatory requirements are available
Results continuously averaged over (typically) one hour or 24 hours
Results reported as daily average or instantaneous
Tends to be higher than equivalent periodic monitoring method
Tends to be lower than equivalent CWMs
Sampling plane – the plane at 90° to the centreline of the stack, duct or channel at the sampling location.
Sampling point – the specific position on the sample plane from where the sample is extracted.
Isokinetic sampling – when the flow enters the sampling nozzle at the same velocity and direction as usual flow at the sampling point.
Representative sampling of particulates, gases and liquids
Although a flowing gas or liquid might be thought of as being more homogeneous than, for example, a stockpile of coal; such flows can become heterogeneous. This may be due to differences in chemical composition, or differences in temperature and velocity, which may lead to stratification and swirling. Where the flow is also carrying particulates or aerosols along the duct or channel, there is likely to be even less uniformity. Here, special measures must be taken to ensure samples are representative.
If the flowing sample may be heterogeneous, samples must be obtained from multiple sample points across the sampling plane to give an overall average value.
If the emission rate is to be calculated, the flowrate will need to be measured; this will require velocity measurements to be made at several points across the sampling plane.
For extractive methods involving gases or liquids carrying particulates or aerosols, the sample must be collected isokinetically.
Where to sample?
Spatial considerations encompass both the location of monitoring positions relative to study area or emission source, and individual sampling site criteria, e.g. position relative to local emission sources and any interfering effects.
Data handling and data analysis.
Is the speed of results generation important? For example, results may be required in real time for public health warnings, whereas several weeks turnaround may be adequate for supplying routine results for authorisation compliance monitoring.
How to sample?
Both the type of sampling and analytical end method need to be considered. Sampling may be unidirectional or omnidirectional; in-situ, mobile or remote sensing. Method selection involves an appraisal of cost versus performance, the latter including limits of detection, sensitivity, speed of instrument response, susceptibility to interfering species and the overall uncertainty of the measurement.
Supplementary data collection.
Other information may be relevant to the study, for example meteorological conditions, process data and traffic flows. Meteorological conditions are obviously important in assessing the impact of a single source on its surroundings since they dictate the transport and dispersion of pollutants in ambient air. Many chemical transformations between reactive species in the atmosphere are also influenced.
If a property of the sample changes over time, then the analysis shall be carried out without as soon as possible.
If a sample has been stabilised, or preserved then this fact shall be recorded when the results are reported and details of the stabilising procedure or preserving agent shall be recorded.
When a sample has been dried and is subsequently analysed, sufficient information shall be provided to establish the stability of the parameter analysed. Such information shall provide justification for analysing the dried sample, rather than analysing the sample on a “wet-weight” or “as submitted” basis.
↑ a b c d e Sampling requirements for stack emissions monitoring
↑ a b c Ambient air monitoring methods
↑ Monitoring discharges to water and sewer
↑ Performance Standard for Laboratories Undertaking Chemical Testing of Soil
Edexcel recommend the following resources except * which have been added to their list.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Titration
Science aid: Titration An informative yet simple explanation of titration aimed at teens
Titration - apparatus, technique and calculation
Titration freeware - simulation of any pH vs. volume curve, distribution diagrams and real data analysis
Basics of Titration: Free downloadable guide (pdf) from METTLER TOLEDO
Coyne G S — The Laboratory Companion: A Practical Guide to Materials, Equipment
Dean J R et al. — Practical Skills in Chemistry (Prentice Hall, 2001) ISBN 013028002X
Dean J R et al. — Practical Skills in Forensic Science (Prentice Hall, 2005)
Derenzo S E — Practical Interfacing in the Laboratory: Using a PC for
Instrumentation, Data Analysis and Control (Cambridge University Press,
Jones A et al. — Practical Skills in Biology, 3rd Edition (Prentice Hall, 2002)
Lintern M — Laboratory Skills for Science and Medicine: An Introduction (Radcliffe
Medical Press, 2006) ISBN 1846190169
Prichard E and Lawn R — Practical Laboratory Skills Training Guide: Measurement of
pH (The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2003) ISBN 0854044736
Prichard E and Lawn R — Practical Laboratory Skills Training Guide: Measurement of
Volume (The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2003) ISBN 085404468X
Reed R et al. — Practical Skills in Biomolecular Science (Prentice Hall, 2003)
*Ecological sampling methods
This book is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
In the vastness of Asia is the region of Central Asia, a land determined primarily by the area's climate and geography. The aridity of the region makes agriculture difficult and distance from the sea cut it off from much trade. Thus, few major cities developed in the region. Nomadic horse peoples of the steppe dominated the area for millennia.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Myanmar's parliament has elected Htin Kyaw as the country's next president, the first civilian leader after more than 50 years of military rule.
Myanmar guorhuih xuaanchu Htin Kyaw weir zoongtoong, shih junfang toongzhih chaoguoh 50 niarn houh shoougeh pirngmirn liingxiuh.
h= planck's constant (big number that doesn't change)
'Energy' basically means the amount of energy contained in each 'packet' of energy that arrives in light.
LONDON: SIMPKIN. MARSHALL, AND CO.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Compositing using blue screen and green screen / Chroma key
This is a way for actors to be imposed onto a separate piece of film. This can be used if the real event would have been too dangerous, or would need a large budget.
This effect is created by having two separated pieces of film. One where there is an actor in the foreground standing in front of a green/blue back ground, the other piece of film will be filmed or computer generated. Software then removes the green/blue background from the foreground image, reveling the background behind.
The white and black silhouettes act as a layer mask for the foreground, one colour will represent the area of the foreground to keep, the other colour will represent the area of the foreground to delete.
One problem with green screen is that you can't have green on the actor, similarly, actors can't wear blue in front of blue screen. This is why there are two main colours of back drop, but it does mean people can't wear blue and green without getting another backdrop colour.
Computer-generated graphics are now common in most films; they are used to create effect that would have otherwise been impossible. CGI can be combined with film footage (most likely through the use of a Chroma key) to create extreme special effects which makes for an excellent piece of final footage.
Computer-generated graphic animation are created through the following steps:
A wire-frame of model is created; this is a series of lines that connect up the points/corners of a model.
Faces are then added that lie in-between the connected points of the wire-frame.
Colour and textures are then added to the faces of the model.
A skeleton can then be added inside the model, this will warp the points of the geometry making for easier animation.
Lighting is then added to the scene which affects the look of the geometry/model.
A camera is then added to the scene as a way to view the scene from.
Key-framing is then used; this where you place things in the scene and you save the state and time, you then move the object and the time and save again, the computer will then add a smooth transition from the first state to the last state over the given time.
The director of the footage can choose the angle in which it is shot from, where as in reality, there would be certain angles that would be difficult.
Costs a lot of money to buy good enough hardware for the computer that will be good enough to render and process the data.
Many possibilities come from the fact that objects can be rotated.
Requires highly skilled staff that know how to use the software and create a good animation.
Can eliminate the need for green-screen in certain cases which would save a lot of time.
The software and hardware will become out of date quickly, which requires you the company to spend more money.
Features of a person can be changed digitally: costumes, make-up, body size and age.
Lighting can be added to the scene
Motion capture is when people where camera can track their location as they move; this is achieved by them standing in a room full of sensors that pick up tracking nodes in their suit. This is useful for obtaining a digital accurate representation of reality in an animation. Sportsmen and women have found this useful for tracking their movements in their sport and observing their technique to look for problem in their technique.[1]
Rotoscoping is where film is recorded, and then it is then traced over, frame by frame to create a pictorial representation of the footage. Previously, this would have been done by hand, but more recently computer graphics have replace the tedious task.[2] Rotoscoping can be used to give the newly created footage a distinct look to it.
↑ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Motion_capture#Methods_and_systems
↑ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rotoscoping
Candidates should be able to query databases and manipulate data using basic SQL commands. This objective includes performing queries involving joining of 2 tables and/or subselects.
Use of basic SQL commands.
Perform basic data manipulation.
The Structured Query Language (SQL) is a database management programming language. SQL is a tool for accessing databases, and more specifically, relational databases, and can be used with different database products. This chapter will prepare you to learn basic database management using this language.
Some of the more common choices in Linux include the following:
MySQL - This SQL Implementation is owned by Suns, and is released under the GPL. Most major Linux distributions will include MySQL in their package databases.
PostgreSQL - Released under the BSD license, PostgreSQL was evolved from Ingres software. (PostgreSQL= post-Ingres SQL). It’s available as multiple packages in most Linux distributions.
SQLite – To implement SQL as a library, you need SQLite. SQLite is intended to provide users and programs a way to store data using a SQL interface within the program. SQLite3 can be used to manipulate SQLite databases for major Linux distros.
SQL is used to access relational databases. Each database contains more or less tables which in turn contain more or less rows and columns. Hereby a single row is seen as a separate object with features represented by the tables' columns. To access a table's data you first have to connect to its database.
A SELECT statement retrieves zero or more rows from one or more database tables or database views. In most applications, SELECT is the most commonly used Data Manipulation Language (DML) command. As SQL is a declarative programming language, SELECT queries specify a result set, but do not specify how to calculate it. The database translates the query into a "query plan" which may vary between executions, database versions and database software. This functionality is called the "query optimizer" as it is responsible for finding the best possible execution plan for the query, within applicable constraints.
GROUP BY groups rows sharing a property so that an aggregate function can be applied to each group.
HAVING selects among the groups defined by the GROUP BY clause.
ORDER BY specifies an order in which to return the rows.
A WHERE clause specifies that a SQL statement should only affect rows that meet specified criteria. The criteria are expressed in the form of predicates. WHERE clauses are not mandatory clauses of SQL statements, but should be used to limit the number of rows affected by a SQL DML statement or returned by a query.
The following query returns only those rows from table mytable where the value in column mycol is greater than 100.
DISTINCT will eliminate all duplicate rows from the selection. DISTINCT ON column will eliminate all duplicates in the specified column; this is equivalent to using GROUP BY column. ALL will return all candidate rows, including duplicates.
The GROUP BY clause is used to project rows having common values into a smaller set of rows. GROUP BY is often used in conjunction with SQL aggregation functions or to eliminate duplicate rows from a result set. The WHERE clause is applied before the GROUP BY clause.
The example below demonstrates a query of multiple tables, grouping, and aggregation, by returning a list of books and the number of authors associated with each book.
SQL Examples and Guide         4
The Joy of SQL                       1
An Introduction to SQL            2
Pitfalls of SQL                        1
A HAVING clause in SQL specifies that an SQL SELECT statement should only return rows where aggregate values meet the specified conditions. It was added to the SQL language because the WHERE keyword could not be used with aggregate functions.
To return a list of department IDs whose total sales exceeded $1000 on the date of January 1, 2000, along with the sum of their sales on that date:
The ORDER BY clause allows a user to specify that he/she wishes the rows sorted according to the ASCending or DESCending mode operator.
All rows match the predicate if their value is one of the candidate set of values. This is the same behavior as
All rows match the predicate if their value is between 'value1' and 'value2', inclusive.
Find any string that begins with the letter 'S'
Find any string that ends with the letter 'S'
Find any string that contains, anywhere, the letter 'S'
Find any string that contains the letter 'A' followed by any single character followed by the letter 'E'
SQL programmers need to be aware that the LIKE predicate typically performs a search without the normal performance benefit of indexes. Using '=', '<>', etc.. instead will increase performance. Users of the LIKE predicate should be aware that case sensitivity (e.g., 'S' versus 's') may be different based upon database product or configuration.
In SQL the UNION clause combines the results of two SQL queries into a single table of all matching rows. The two queries must result in the same number of columns and compatible data types in order to unite. Any duplicate records are automatically removed unless UNION ALL is used.
Note that UNION does not guarantee the order of rows. Rows from the second operand may appear before, after, or mixed with rows from the first operand. In situations where a specific order is desired, ORDER BY must be used.
Note that UNION ALL may be much faster than plain UNION.
Note that there are two rows for Joe because these rows are distinct across their columns. There is only one row for Alex because these rows are not distinct for both columns.
A SQL join clause combines records from two or more tables in a database. It creates a set that can be saved as a table or used as is. A JOIN is a means for combining fields from two tables by using values common to each. ANSI standard SQL specifies four types of JOINs: INNER, OUTER, LEFT, and RIGHT. In special cases, a table (base table, view, or joined table) can JOIN to itself in a self-join.
A programmer writes a JOIN predicate to identify the records for joining. If the evaluated predicate is true, the combined record is then produced in the expected format, a record set or a temporary table.
LEFT JOIN can be used when you want to retrieve the data from the main table (table_11) even if there is no match in other tables (table_2, table_3....). While RIGHT JOIN is used to retrieve the data from all other tables (table_2, table_3...) even if there is no match in the main table.
An inner join is the most common join operation used in applications and can be regarded as the default join-type. Inner join creates a new result table by combining column values of two tables (A and B) based upon the join-predicate. The query compares each row of A with each row of B to find all pairs of rows which satisfy the join-predicate. When the join-predicate is satisfied, column values for each matched pair of rows of A and B are combined into a result row. The result of the join can be defined as the outcome of first taking the Cartesian product (or cross-join) of all records in the tables (combining every record in table A with every record in table B)—then return all records which satisfy the join predicate. Current SQL implementations normally use other approaches like a hash join or a sort-merge join where possible, since computing the Cartesian product is very inefficient.
SQL specifies two different syntactical ways to express joins: "explicit join notation" and "implicit join notation".
The "explicit join notation" uses the JOIN keyword to specify the table to join, and the ON keyword to specify the predicates for the join, as in the following example:
The "implicit join notation" simply lists the tables for joining (in the FROM clause of the SELECT statement), using commas to separate them. Thus, it specifies a cross-join, and the WHERE clause may apply additional filter-predicates (which function comparably to the join-predicates in the explicit notation).
INSERT allows one to insert new rows into a table. One can insert a single row at a time or several rows as a result of a query. The columns in the target list may be listed in any order. In every column not present in the target list, its default value will be inserted. If a column has no declared default value it will be assumed as NULL. If the expression for each column is not of the correct data type, automatic type coercion will be attempted.
UPDATE changes the values of the columns specified for all rows which satisfy condition. Only the columns to be modified need appear as column. Array references use the same syntax found in SELECT. That is, either single array elements, a range of array elements or the entire array may be replaced with a single query. You must have write access to the table in order to modify it, as well as read access to any table whose values are mentioned in the WHERE condition.
The following is a partial list of the files, terms and utilities that were used.
Previous Chapter | Next Chapter
The Cambodian, also known as Khmer, is the official language of the Kingdom of Cambodia and almost all Cambodians speak it. Khmer is also understood by people in many bordering countries such as Thailand (in the eastern provinces of Buriram, Surin and Srisket in northern Thailand), in the Mekong Delta region in South Vietnam and in southern Laos.
The Cambodian is the main modern representative of the Mon-Khmer language family, which includes hundreds of related dialects dispersed throughout most of Southeast Asia. As for foreign influences in the language, the Khmer language has borrowed many words from Sankrit. With the advent of Theravada Buddhism in the early fifteenth century, Khmer began to borrow Pali's words, and continue to use Pali as an important source of neologisms today (Huffman 1970). During the period of French domination, many French words were borrowed from the language and have become part of the colloquial language, as well as in medical and technical terms. There are also a handful of loans in Chinese and Vietnamese in colloquial form.
Unlike Thai, Vietnamese and Lao, Khmer is not tonal and has a high percentage of disyllabic words that are derived from monosyllabic bases by prefixing and infixing.
Some Proofs do not fall into any of the categories listed above.  For example, a non constructive existence proof is a method which demonstrates the existence of a mathematical entity, without actually constructing it.
For example, proofs exist which show the existence of nonconstructible numbers (numbers which can not be created using any combination of algebraic operations).  These proofs can clearly not be constructive.
Proofs which analyse and document every instance of an assertion in a case-wise analysis can be used in finite cases.  This is a cumbersome method of proof and is really only suitable when dealing with fairly small sets.  A more involved use of proof by exhaustion is the proof of the Four-Colour Theorem.  The proof has broken down the four-colour problem into subsets and a four-colour proof was applied to each of these by a computer.  This proof has not currently been verified by a human and is hence not considered fully proven.
The current, editable version of this book is available in Wikibooks, the open-content textbooks collection, at
4.4 40 Gigabit Ethernet and 100 Gigabit Ethernet
Local Area Network designIntroduction to Local Area Networks
The IEEE 802 working group defined the Local Area Network (LAN) as a communication system through a shared medium, which allows independent devices to communicate together within a limited area, using an high-speed and reliable communication channel.
Protocols for Wide Area Networks (WAN) and for Local Area Networks evolved independently until the 80s because purposes were different. In the 90s the IP technology finally allowed to interconnect these two worlds.
WANs were born in the 60s to connect remote terminals to the few existing mainframes:
LANs appeared at the end of the 70s to share resources (such as printers, disks) among small working groups (e.g. departments):
Before the advent of hubs and bridges, the shared communication medium could be implemented in two ways:
MAC: it arbitrates the access to the physical medium, and is specific for each physical-layer technology;
LLC: it defines the interface toward the network layer, and is common in all physical-layer technologies.
Every network card is identified uniquely by a MAC address. MAC addresses have the following format:
Organization Unique Identifier (OUI) field (3 bytes): code assigned uniquely by IEEE to identify the network card manufacturer:
Universal (value 0): the address is assigned uniquely;
Local (value 1): the address is customized by the user;
NIC Identifier (NIC ID) field (3 bytes): code assigned uniquely by the manufacturer to identify the specific network card (also called 'Network Interface Controller' [NIC]).
The Media Access Control (MAC) header has the following format:
Destination Address field (6 bytes): it specifies the destination MAC address.
This is put before the source MAC address because in this way the destination can process it earlier and discard the frame if it is not addressed to it;
Source Address field (6 bytes): it specifies the source MAC address (always unicast);
Length field (2 bytes): it specifies the payload length;
Frame Control Sequence (FCS) field (4 bytes): it includes the CRC code for integrity control over the entire frame.
If the CRC code check fails, the arrived frame was corrupted (e.g. because of a collision) and is discarded; higher-layer mechanisms (e.g. TCP) will be responsible for recovering the error by sending again the frame.
A network card set in promiscuous mode accepts all frames → it is useful for network sniffing.
The Logical Link Control (LLC) header has the following format:
LLC header format (3 or 4 bytes).
DSAP field (1 byte, of which 2 bits reserved): it identifies the upper-layer protocol used by the destination;
SSAP field (1 byte, of which 2 bits reserved): it identifies the upper-layer protocol used by the source;
Control (CTRL) field (1 or 2 bytes): it derives from the HDLC control field, but is unused.
The Subnetwork Access Protocol (SNAP) is a particular implementation of LLC for protocols which have not a standard code.
The LLC SNAP header has the following format:
Organization Unique Identifier (OUI) field (3 bytes): it identifies the organization which defined the protocol.
Protocol Type field (2 bytes): it identifies the upper-layer protocol (e.g. 0x800 = IP, 0x806 = ARP).
Actually, the LLC SNAP header is not very used due to waste of bytes, to the benefit of the 'Ethertype' field in Ethernet DIX.
↑ a b According to the canonical order (network byte order), which is the native order in IEEE 802.3 (Ethernet) but not in IEEE 802.5 (token ring) (please see section Bit-reversed notation in article MAC address on the English Wikipedia).
Local Area Network designIntroduction to Local Area Networks
Ethernet is nowadays the most used technology in wired LANs with shared bus architecture, because it is a simple and little expensive solution with respect to other LAN technologies such as token ring and token bus.
Two versions of Ethernet exist, with different frame formats:
IEEE 802.3 standard (1983): version standardized by the IEEE 802 working group.
Since there are two versions of Ethernet, a considerable inhomogeneity in upper-layer protocol envelopments exists:
The DIX Ethernet II packet[1] has the following format:
Preamble can be shortened whenever the packet crosses a hub → it is not possible to connect more than 4 hubs in a cascade:  Local Area Network design/Repeaters and bridges#Interconnection at the physical layer;
Start of Frame Delimiter (SFD) field (1 byte): bit sequence identifying the beginning of the frame;
EtherType field (2 bytes): it identifies the upper-layer protocol used in the payload (it is a number greater or equal to 1500);
Inter-Frame Gap (IFG) field (12 bytes): pause, that is no signal, identifying the end of the frame.
The IEEE 802.3 packet can have one of the two following formats:
a DIX Ethernet II frame and an IEEE 802.3 frame can be distinguished by looking at the value in the field following the source MAC address:
10-Mbps Ethernet can work over the following transmission physical media:
10BaseT: cable with 4 twisted pairs of which just 2 used (max 100 m):
Shielded (STP): shielded with single global shield;
Foiled (FTP): shielded with single global shield + a shield per pair;
At the beginning shared bus was physically made by a coaxial cable:
T-connectors: every network card is connected to a thin coaxial cable through a T-connector → connecting and disconnecting a host requires to unplug the whole network.
With the introduction of the twisted copper pair, cabling (that is cable laying in buildings) acquired a greater flexibility: every host can be connected to a RJ45 wall socket through the specific RJ45 connector, and all sockets are in turn connected to a cabinet.
In addition, the RJ11 connector used by telephony can be connected to the RJ45 wall socket, too → in cabling RJ45 sockets can be placed in the whole building and then one can decide whenever whether an Ethernet card or a telephone should be connected, by switching between the data connection and the telephone connection in the cabinet.
A collision occurs when two or more nodes within the same collision domain transmit at the same time and their signals overlap. The Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Detection (CSMA/CD) protocol specify how to recognize a collision (CD) and how to recover a collision (retransmission).
CSMA/CD is a simple and distributed random-access (that is non-deterministic) protocol: it does not contemplates intermediate devices or particular synchronization mechanisms, unlike token ring where the synchronization mechanism is the token itself → the CSMA/CD protocol is efficient in terms of throughput because there is no overhead for synchronization, in terms of delays and channel occupancy.
In full-duplex mode the CSMA/CD protocol does no longer need to be enabled.
Instead of transmitting the whole frame and just at the end checking for a collision, the node can use Collision Detection (CD): during the transmission sometimes it tries to understand whether a collision occurred ('listen while talking'), and if so it immediately stops the transmission, avoiding to waste the channel for a useless transmission.
In the real world, collision detection is performed in two different ways depending on the type of transmission medium:
The jamming sequence is a powerful signal which is sent by who has noticed a collision to guarantee that the CRC code is invalid and to maximize probability that all the other nodes understand that a collision occurred.
Carrier Sense (CS) allows to reduce the number of collisions: the node which wants to transmit listens to the channel before transmitting:
1-persistent CSMA: the node keeps checking whether the channel is free and transmit as soon as it becomes free;
0-persistent CSMA: the node tries again after a random time;
-persistent CSMA: the node with probability
In a LAN in the worst case the channel occupancy is equal to 30-40% the available bandwidth → Ethernet implements 1-persistent CSMA/CD because it is aimed for averagely unloaded networks with low probability of collisions.
However, with twisted copper pair or optical fiber CSMA is not able to avoid collisions altogether (otherwise CD would not be useful): if propagation times are considered, a far node can sense the channel as free, even if actually it is busy but transmission has not reached the far node yet:
The vulnerability interval is defined as the time interval where starting a transmission by the far node would create a collision (it is equal to the propagation delay on the channel), and this interval is as larger as distance increases → this protocol works well on small networks.
After a collision occurred, the frame has to be transmitted again. If the stations involved in the collision transmitted again immediately, another collision would occur → back-off algorithm inserts into the wait a randomness element exponential in retransmissions:
1st retransmission: the node waits a time
2nd retransmission: the node waits a time
3rd retransmission: the node waits a time
At the end of every wait, the node listens again to the channel by CS.
Constraint between frame size and collision diameter
Since the channel access is contended, when one manages to get the network access it is better to transmit large packets. A minimum size for frames needs to be established: if the frame is too small and the collided transmission lasts too little time, it may happen that no stations notice the collision:
, that is the outward and return time, is lower than the transmission time
Increasing the transmission speed means increasing the frame minimum size, or for the same minimum size it means decreasing the maximum distance among nodes, but too large frames would increase the transmission error probability and would clog the network.
In Ethernet DIX the theoretical collision diameter can not exceed 5750 meters:[2]
Without hubs the maximum network size is quite limited by maximum distances supported by transmission media (e.g. due to signal attenuation). Thanks to hubs the network size can be extended (although at most to 3 km due to non-idealities in devices): the hub, typically placed as the star center in a star topology, re-generates the signal (repeater) and internally simulates the shared bus allowing to connect multiple stations together through the twisted copper pair:  Local Area Network design/Repeaters and bridges#Interconnection at the physical layer.
↑ The standard names the Ethernet frame + the 'Preamble', 'SFD' e 'IFG' fields of the physical layer as 'Ethernet packet'.
Interconnection at the physical layer in OSI stack.
Repeater and hub[1] are network devices for interconnection at the physical layer, which just receive and propagate a sequence of bits. The interconnected physical-layer channels can also have different technologies (e.g. twisted pair to optical fiber), but all the upper layers must be equal (e.g. Ethernet-only, FDDI-only).
Repeater also performs the function of recovering the signal degradation: it synchronizes itself with the square wave signal and regenerates it so as to clean it. The preamble preceding the frame is used for synchronization, that is signal recognition, and so whenever the signal crosses a repeater a part of this preamble is 'eaten' → it is not possible to connect more than 4 repeaters in a cascade.
Example of interconnection at the physical layer.
A collision domain is the set of nodes competing to access the same transmissive medium → the simultaneous transmission causes collision. Interconnecting two network segments creates a single collision domain: repeater is not able to recognize collisions which are propagated to all ports → this is a limit to the size of the physical domain.
Interconnection at the data-link layer in OSI stack.
Bridge and switch are network devices for interconnection at the data-link layer, which store (store-and-forward mode) and then regenerate the frame. Also the interconnected data-link-layer domains can have different technologies (e.g. Ethernet to FDDI).
In practice it is often impossible to interconnect two different data-link-layer technologies, due to issues related to the maximum frame size: for example, in an Ethernet-based network having MTU = 1518 bytes interconnected with a token ring-based network having MTU = 4 KB, what happens if a frame larger than 1518 bytes comes from the token ring network? In addition fragmentation at the data-link layer does not exist.
Example of interconnection at the data-link layer.
Bridge decouples broadcast domain from collision domain:
Bridges avoid creating collisions thanks to their store-and-forward mode.
A point-to-point link at the data-link layer between two nodes (e.g. a host and a bridge) can be performed in two ways:
Example of learning algorithm behaviour.
Routing is performed in a transparent way: the bridge tries to learn the positions of the nodes connected to it filling a forwarding table called filtering database, whose entries have the following format:
Smart forwarding process increases the network aggregate bandwidth: frames are no longer propagated always in broadcast on all ports, but they are forwarded only on the port towards the destination, leaving other links free to transport other flows at the same time.
Ageing time allows to keep the filtering database updated: it is set to 0 when the entry is created or updated by the backward learning algorithm, and it is increased over time until it exceeds the expiration time and the entry is removed. In this way the filtering database contains information about the only stations which are actually within the network, getting rid of information about old stations.
Data-link-layer networks natively support mobility: if the station is moved, remaining within the same LAN, so as to be reachable through another port, the bridge has to be 'notified' of the movement by sending any broadcast frame (e.g. ARP Request), so that the backward learning algorithm can fix the filtering database. Windows systems tend to be more 'loquacious' than UNIX systems.
Internal architecture of a switch.
'Switch' is the commercial name given to bridges having advanced features to emphasize their higher performance:
a switch is a multi-port bridge: a switch has a lot more ports, typically all in full-duplex mode, than a bridge;
Bridges have scalability issues because they are not able to organize traffic, and therefore they are not suitable for complex networks (such as Wide Area Network):
Some attacks to the filtering database are possible:
The attacking station generates frames with random source MAC addresses → the filtering database gets full of MAC addresses of inexistent stations, while the ones of the existent stations are thrown out → the bridge sends in flooding (almost) all the frames coming from the existent stations because it does not recognize the destination MAC addresses anymore → the network is slowed down and (almost) all the traffic within the network is received by the attacking station.[2]
The attacking station generates frames with random destination MAC addresses → the bridge sends in flooding all the frames coming from the attacking station because it does not recognize the destination MAC addresses → the network is slowed down.
↑ The difference between repeaters and hubs lies in the number of ports: repeater has two ports, hub has more than two ports.
↑ Not all the traffic can be intercepted: when a frame comes from an existent station the bridge saves its source MAC address into its filtering database, so if immediately after a frame arrives heading towards that station, before the entry is cleared, it will not be sent in flooding.
With the success of Ethernet new issues arose:
Fast Ethernet, standardized as IEEE 802.3u (1995), raises the transmission speed to 100 Mbit/s and makes the maximum collision diameter 10 times shorter (~200-300 m) accordingly, keeping the same frame format and the same CSMA/CD algorithm.
Fast Ethernet physical layer is altogether different than 10-Mbit/s Ethernet physical layer: it partially derives from existing standards in the FDDI world, so much that Fast Ethernet and FDDI are compatible at the physical layer, and definitively abandons the coaxial cable:
100BASE-T4: twisted copper pair using 4 pairs;
100BASE-TX: twisted copper pair using 2 pairs;
100BASE-FX: optical fiber (only in backbone).
When Fast Ethernet was introduced, its adoption rate was quite low because of:
Fast Ethernet started to be adopted more widely with:
Gigabit Ethernet, standardized as IEEE 802.3z (1998), rises the transmission speed to 1 Gbit/s and introduces two features, 'Carrier Extension' and 'Frame Bursting', to keep the CSMA/CD protocol working.
Decuplicating the transmission speed would make the maximum collision diameter 10 more times shorter putting it down to a few tens of meters, too few for cabling → to keep the maximum collision diameter unchanged, the minimum frame size should be increased to 512 bytes[1].
Stretching the minimum frame however would cause an incompatibility issue: in the interconnection of a Fast Ethernet network and a Gigabit Ethernet network by a bridge, minimum-sized frames coming from the Fast Ethernet network could not enter the Gigabit Ethernet network → instead of stretching the frame the slot time, that is the minimum transmission time unit, was stretched: a Carrier Extension made up of padding dummy bits (up to 448 bytes) was appended to all the frames shorter than 512 bytes:
Gigabit Ethernet packet format (532 to 1538 bytes).
Ethernet II DIX/IEEE 802.3 frame
Carrier Extension occupies the channel with useless bits.For example with 64-byte-long frames useful throughput is very low:
The maximum frame size of 1518 bytes is obsolete by now: in 10-Mbit/s Ethernet the channel occupancy was equal to 1.2 ms, a reasonable time to guarantee the statistical multiplexing, while in Gigabit Ethernet the channel occupancy is equal to 12 µs → collisions are a lot less frequent → to reduce the header overhead in relation to useful data improving efficiency, the maximum frame size could be increased.
Stretching the maximum frame however would cause an incompatibility issue: in the interconnection of a Fast Ethernet network and a Gigabit Ethernet network by a bridge, maximum-sized frames coming from the Gigabit Ethernet network could not enter the Fast Ethernet networks → Frame Bursting consists in concatenating several standard-sized frames one after the other, without realising the channel:
Gigabit Ethernet packet format with Frame Bursting.
...
IFG between a frame and another is replaced by a 'Filling Extension' (FILL) to frame bytes and announce that another frame will follow;
Frame Bursting does not address the primary goal of reducing the header overhead: it was opted to keep in every frame all headers (including preamble, SFD and IFG) to make the processing hardware simpler;
Gigabit Ethernet can work over the following transmission physical media:
Single-Mode Fiber (SMF): its maximum length is 5 km.
Gigabit Ethernet introduces for the first time gigabit interface converters (GBIC), which are a common solution for having the capability of updating the physical layer without having to update the rest of the equipment: the Gigabit Ethernet board has not the physical layer integrated on board, but it includes just the logical part (from the data-link layer upward), and the user can plug into the dedicated board slots the desired GBIC implementing the physical layer.
10 Gigabit Ethernet, standardized as IEEE 802.3ae (2002), raises the transmission speed to 10 Gbps and finally abandons the half-duplex mode, removing all the issues deriving from CSMA/CD.
Twinax: coaxial cables, first used because units for transmission over twisted copper pairs were consuming too much power;
10Gbase T: shielded twisted copper pairs, having a very high latency;
40 Gigabit Ethernet and 100 Gigabit Ethernet, both standardized as IEEE 802.3ba (2010), raise the transmission speed respectively to 40 Gbit/s and 100 Gbit/s: for the first time the transmission speed evolution is no longer at 10×, but it was decided to define a standard at an intermediate speed due to still high costs for 100 Gigabit Ethernet. In addition, 40 Gigabit Ethernet can be transported over the already existing DWDM infrastructure.
These speeds are used only in backbone because they are not suitable yet not only for hosts, but also for servers, because they are very close to internal speeds in processing units (bus, memory, etc.) → the bottleneck is no longer the network.
↑ In theory the frame should be stretched 10 times more, then to 640 bytes, but the standard decides otherwise.
↑ Please refer to section FCoE.
Local Area Network designAdvanced features on Ethernet networks
Autonegotiation is a plug-and-play oriented feature: when a network card connects to a network, it sends impulses by a particular encoding to try to determine network characteristics:
Autonegotiation is possible only if the station connects to another host or to a bridge: hubs in fact work at fixed speed, hence they can not negotiate anything. If during the procedure the other party does not respond, the negotiating station assumes it is connected to a hub → it automatically sets the mode to half-duplex.
If the user manually configures his own network card to work always in full-duplex mode disabling the autonegotiation feature, when he connects to a bridge the latter, not receiving reply from the other party, assumes to be connected to a hub and sets the half-duplex mode → the host considers sending and receiving at the same time over the channel as possible, while the bridge considers that as a collision on the shared channel → the bridge detects a lot of collisions which are false positives, and erroneously discards a lot of frames → every discarded frame is recovered by TCP error-recovery mechanisms, which however are very slow → the network access speed is very low. Very high values in collision counters on a specific bridge port are symptom of this issue.
However in several cases it would be useful to have a frame larger than normal:
Baby Giant frames are frames having sizes bigger than the maximum size of 1518 bytes defined by the Ethernet original specification, because of inserting new data-link-layer headers in order to transport additional information about the frame:
VLAN tag stacking (IEEE 802.1ad) adds 8 bytes:  Local Area Network design/Virtual LANs#Tag stacking;
MPLS adds 4 bytes per stacked label:  Computer network technologies and services/MPLS#MPLS header.
In Baby Giant frames the maximum payload size (e.g. IP packet) is unchanged → a router, when receiving a Baby Giant frame, in re-generating the data-link layer can envelop the payload into a normal Ethernet frame → interconnecting LANs having different supported frame maximum sizes is not a problem.
The IEEE 802.3as standard (2006) proposes to extend the maximum frame size to 2000 bytes, keeping the MTU size unchanged.
Jumbo Frames are frames having sizes bigger than the maximum size of 1518 bytes defined by the Ethernet original specification:
Mini Jumbos: frames having MTU size equal to 2500 bytes;
Jumbos (or 'Giant' or 'Giant Frames'): frames having MTU size up to 9 KB;
If a LAN using Jumbo Frames is connected to a LAN not using Jumbo Frames, all Jumbo Frames will be fragmented at the IP layer, but IP fragmentation is not convenient from the performance point of view → Jumbo Frames are used in independent networks within particular scopes.
Network cards with the TCP offloading feature can automatically condense on-the-fly multiple TCP payloads into a single IP packet before turning it to the operating system (sequence numbers and other parameters are internally handled by the network card) → the operating system, instead of having to process multiple small packets by triggering a lot of interrupts, sees a single bigger IP packet and can make the CPU process it at once → this reduces overhead due to TCP mechanisms.
Bridges having the Power over Ethernet (PoE) feature are able to distribute electrical power (up to few tens of Watts) over Ethernet cables (only twisted copper pairs), to connect devices with moderate power needs (VoIP phones, wi-fi access points, surveillance cameras, etc.) avoiding additional cables for electrical power.
Non-PoE stations can be connected to PoE sockets.
Local Area Network designAdvanced features on Ethernet networks
Example of sending a unicast frame to a station not included in the filtering database in a data-link network with a ring in topology.
If the network has a logical ring in topology, some frames may start moving indefinitely in a chain multiplication around the loop:
Moreover, bridges in the loop may have their filtering databases inconsistent, that is the entry in the filtering database related to the sender station changes its port every time a frame replication arrives through a different port, making the bridge believe that the frame has come from the station itself moving.
This page includes CC BY-SA contents from Wikipedia: Spanning Tree Protocol.
The spanning tree algorithm allows to remove logical rings from the network physical topology, by disabling links[1] to transform a mesh topology (graph) into a tree called spanning tree, whose root is one of the bridges called root bridge.
Each link is characterized by a cost based on the link speed: given a root bridge, multiple spanning trees can be built connecting all bridges one with each other, but the spanning tree algorithm chooses the spanning tree made up of the lowest cost edges.
Bridge Identifier: it identifies the bridge uniquely and includes:
Port Identifier: it identifies the bridge port and includes:
Root Path Cost: it is equal to the sum of the costs of all links, selected by the spanning tree algorithm, traversed to reach the root bridge (the cost for traversing a bridge is null).
The spanning tree can be determined by the following criteria.
A root bridge is the root for the spanning tree: all the frames going from one of its sub-trees to another one must cross the root bridge.[2]
The bridge with the smallest Bridge Identifier is selected as the root bridge: the root of the spanning tree will be therefore the bridge with the lowest priority, or if there is a tie the one with the lowest MAC address.
Criteria for selecting a root port for the bridge the arrow points to.
Least-cost path.
Smallest remote Bridge ID.
Smallest remote Port ID.
Smallest local Port ID.
A root port is the port in charge of connecting to the root bridge: it sends frames toward the root bridge and receives frames from the root bridge.
The cost of each possible path is determined from the bridge to the root. From these, the one with the smallest cost (a least-cost path) is picked. The port connecting to that path is then the root port for the bridge.
When multiple paths from a bridge are least-cost paths toward the root, the bridge uses the neighbor bridge with the smallest Bridge Identifier to forward frames to the root. The root port is thus the one connecting to the bridge with the lowest Bridge Identifier.
When two bridges are connected by multiple cables, multiple ports on a single bridge are candidates for root port. In this case, the path which passes through the port on the neighbor bridge that has the smallest Port Identifier is used.
In a particular configuration with a hub where the remote Port Identifiers are equal, the path which passes through the port on the bridge itself that has the smallest Port Identifier is used.
Criteria for selecting a designated port for the link the arrow points to.
Least-cost path.
Smallest local Bridge ID.
Smallest local Port ID.
A designated port is the port in charge of serving the link: it sends frames to the leaves and receives frames from the leaves.
The cost of each possible path is determined from each bridge connected to the link to the root. From these, the one with the smallest cost (a least-cost path) is picked. The port connected to the link of the bridge which leads to that path is then the designated port for the link.
When multiple bridges on a link lead to a least-cost path to the root, the link uses the bridge with the smallest Bridge Identifier to forward frames to the root. The port connecting that bridge to the link is the designated port for the link.
When a bridge is connected to a link with multiple cables, multiple ports on a single bridge are candidates for designated port. In this case, the path which passes through the port on the bridge itself that has the smallest Port Identifier is used.
A blocked port never sends frames on its link and discards all the received frames (except for BPDU configuration messages).
Any active port that is not a root port or a designated port is a blocked port.
This diagram illustrates all port states as computed by the spanning tree algorithm for a sample network.
The above criteria describe one way of determining what spanning tree will be computed by the algorithm, but the rules as written require knowledge of the entire network. The bridges have to determine the root bridge and compute the port roles (root, designated, or blocked) with only the information that they have.
Since bridges can exchange information about Bridge Identifiers and Root Path Costs, Spanning Tree Protocol (STP), standardized as IEEE 802.1D (1990), defines messages called BPDUs.
Configuration BPDU format (35 bytes) in STP.
Topology Change Notification BPDU format (4 bytes).
BPDU Type field (1 byte): it specifies the type of BPDU:
Configuration BPDU (CBPDU) (value 0): used for spanning tree computation, that is to determine the root bridge and the port states:  #Ingress of a new bridge;
Topology Change (TC) flag (1 bit): set by the root bridge to inform all bridges that a change occurred in the network;
Topology Change Acknowledgement (TCA) flag (1 bit): set by the root bridge to inform the bridge which detected the change that its Topology Change Notification BPDU has been received;
Root Identifier field (8 bytes): it specifies the Bridge Identifier of the root bridge in the network:
Root Priority field (2 bytes): it includes the priority of the root bridge;
Root MAC Address field (6 bytes): it includes the MAC address of the root bridge;
Bridge Identifier field (8 bytes): it specifies the Bridge Identifier of the bridge which is propagating the Configuration BPDU:
Bridge Priority field (2 bytes): it includes the priority of the bridge;
Bridge MAC Address field (6 bytes): it includes the MAC address of the bridge;
Root Path Cost field (4 bytes): it includes the path cost to reach the root bridge, as seen by the bridge which is propagating the Configuration BPDU;
Port Identifier field (2 bytes): it specifies the Port Identifier of the port which the bridge is propagating the Configuration BPDU on:
Port Priority field (1 byte): it includes the port priority;
Port Number field (1 byte): it includes the port number;
Message Age field (2 bytes): value, initialized to 0, which whenever the Configuration BPDU crosses a bridge is increased by the transit time throughout the bridge;[3]
Max Age field (2 bytes, default value = 20 s): if the Message Age reaches the Max Age value, the received Configuration BPDU is no longer valid;[3]
Hello Time field (2 bytes, default value = 2 s): it specifies how often the root bridge generates the Configuration BPDU;[3]
Forward Delay field (2 bytes, default value = 15 s): it specifies the waiting time before forcing a port transition to another state.[3]
Only the root bridge can generate Configuration BPDUs: all the other bridges simply propagate received Configuration BPDUs on all their designated ports. Root ports are the ones that receive the best Configuration BPDUs, that is with the lowest Message Age value = lowest Root Path Cost. Blocked ports never send Configuration BPDUs but keep listening to incoming Configuration BPDUs.
Instead Topology Change Notification BPDUs can be generated by any non-root bridge, and they are always propagated on root ports.
When a bridge generates/propagates a BPDU frame, it uses the unique MAC address of the port itself as a source address, and the STP multicast address 01:80:C2:00:00:00 as a destination address:
...
A port switched off because no links are connected to the port.
A port that would cause a loop if it were active. No frames are sent or received over a port in blocking state (Configuration BPDUs are still received in blocking state), but it may go into forwarding state if the other links in use fail and the spanning tree algorithm determines the port may transition to the forwarding state.
The bridge processes Configuration BPDUs and awaits possible new information that would cause the port to return to the blocking state. It does not populate the filtering database and it does not forward frames.
While the port does not yet forward frames, the bridge learns source addresses from frames received and adds them to the filtering database. It populates the filtering database, but does not forward frames.
A port receiving and sending data. STP still keeps monitoring incoming Configuration BPDUs, so the port may return to the blocking state to prevent a loop.
Port roles and states in STP.
When a new bridge is connected to a data-link network, assuming it has a Bridge Identifier highest than the one of the current root bridge in the network:
When a topology change occurs, STP is able to detect the topology change, thanks to the periodic generation of Configuration BPDUs by the root bridge, and to keep guaranteeing there are no rings in topology, by recomputing if needed the spanning tree, namely the root bridge and the port states.
When a link (belonging to the current spanning tree) faults:
Configuration BPDUs which the root bridge is generating can not reach the other network portion anymore: in particular, the designed port for the faulted link does not send Configuration BPDUs anymore;
STP continues analogously to the case previously discussed related to the ingress of a new bridge:
When a new link is inserted, the ports which the new link is connected to become designated in listening state, and start propagating Configuration BPDUs generated by the root bridge in the network → new Configuration BPDUs arrive through the new link:
When after a topology change STP alters the spanning tree by changing the port states, it does not change entries in filtering databases of bridges to reflect the changes → entries may be out of date: for example, the frames towards a certain destination may keep being sent on a port turned to blocked, until the entry related to that destination expires because its ageing time goes to 0 (in the worst case: 5 minutes!).
STP contemplates a mechanism to speed up the convergence of the network with respect to the filtering database when a topology change is detected:
The STP philosophy is 'deny always, allow only when sure': when a topology change occurs, frames are not forwarded until it is sure that the transient has dead out, that is there are no loops and the network is in a coherent status, also introducing long waiting times at the expense of convergence speed and capability of reaching some stations.
Assuming to follow the timers recommended by the standard, namely:
With the introduction of the learning state, after a link fault the network takes approximately 50 seconds to converge to a coherent state:
20 s (Max Age): required for the last Configuration BPDU listened to to expire and for the fault to be detected;
15 s (Forward Delay): required for the port transition from the listening state to the learning one;
15 s (Forward Delay): required for the port transition from the learning state to the forwarding one.
In addition, achieving a coherent state within the network does not result necessarily in ending the disservice experienced by the user: in fact the fault may reflect also at the application layer, very sensitive to connectivity losses beyond a certain threshold:
It would be possible to try customizing the values related to timing parameters to increase the convergence speed and extend the maximum bridge diameter, but this operation is not recommended:
Often STP is disabled on edge ports, that is the ports connected directly to the end hosts, to relieve disservices experienced by the user:
However exclusively hosts must be connected to edge ports, otherwise loops in the network could be created → some vendors do not allow this: for example, Cisco's proprietary mechanism PortFast achieves the same objective without disabling STP on edge ports, being able to make them turn immediately to the forwarding state and to detect possible loops on them (that is two edge ports connected one to each other through a direct wire).
Given a root bridge, multiple spanning trees can be built connecting all bridges one with each other, but the spanning tree algorithm chooses the spanning tree made up of the lowest cost edges. In this way, paths are optimized only with respect to the root of the tree:
STP is not suitable to work on a geographical scale.
An IP network instead is able to organize traffic better: the spanning tree is not unique in the entire network, but every source can compute its own tree and send traffic to the shortest path guaranteeing a higher link load balancing.
Virtual LANs (VLAN) solve this problem by setting up multiple spanning trees.
STP assumes every link is bidirectional: if a link faults, frames can not be sent in either of two directions. Indeed fiber optical cables are unidirectional → to connect two nodes two optical fiber cables are needed, one for communication in one direction and another for communication in the opposite direction, and a fault on one of the two cables stops only traffic in one direction.
If one of the two unidirectional links faults, a loop may arise on the other link despite STP: Configuration BPDUs are propagated unidirectionally from the root to the leaves → if the direct propagation path breaks, the bridge at the other endpoint stops receiving from that link Configuration BPDUs from the root bridge, then moves the root port to another link and, assuming there is no one on that link, sets the port as designated creating a loop:
Unidirectional Link Detection (UDLD) is a proprietary protocol of Cisco's able to detect whether there are faults on a unidirectional link thanks to a sort of 'ping', and to disable the port ('error disabled' state) instead of electing it as designated.
Optimal configuration.
Configuration to be avoided.
The location of the root bridge has heavy impact on the network:
a star topology, where the root bridge is the star center, is to be preferred → every link connect only one bridge to the root bridge:
→ the priority needs to be customized to a very low value for the bridge which has to be the root bridge, so as not to risk that another bridge is elected as the root bridge.
The location of the backup bridge, meant to come into play in case of fault of a primary link or of the primary root bridge:
Electing the user's bridge as the root bridge
A user may connect to the network a bridge with a very low priority forcing it to become the new root bridge and changing the spanning tree of the network. Cisco's proprietary feature BPDU Guard allows edge ports to propagate only Configuration BPDUs coming from inside the network, rejecting the ones received from outside (the port goes into 'error disabled' state).
Almost all professional bridges have some form of broadcast storm control able to limit the amount of broadcast traffic on ports by dropping excess traffic beyond a certain threshold, but these traffic meters can not distinguish between frames in a broadcast storm and broadcast frames sent by stations → they risk filtering legitimate broadcast traffic, and a broadcast storm is more difficult to be detected.
A single bridge without STP or with STP disabled can start pumping broadcast traffic into the network so that a loop outside the control of STP is created: connecting a bridge port directly to another one of the same bridge, or connecting the user's bridge to two internal bridge of the network through two redundant links, are examples.
Sometimes two different STP domains, each one with its own spanning tree, should be connected to the same shared channel (e.g. two providers with different STP domains in the same datacenter). Cisco's proprietary feature BPDU Filter disables sending and receiving Configuration BPDUs on ports at domain peripheries, to keep the spanning trees separated.
↑ Please pay attention to the fact that the traffic moving within the same sub-tree does not cross the root bridge.
↑ a b c d Time fields are expressed in units of 256th seconds (about 4 ms).
↑ The bridge keeps generating the Topology Change Notification BPDU every Hello Time, until it receives the acknowledge.
↑ The root bridge keeps generating back the acknowledgement Configuration BPDU for Max Age + Forward Delay.
↑ When this constraint was established, the learning state had not been introduced yet and the ports turned directly from the listening state to the forwarding one.
↑ Exactly the minimum value for the Forward Delay would be equal to 14 s, but a tolerance 1 s long was contemplated.
Local Area Network designRapid Spanning Tree Protocol
Quality of service in IEEE 802 LANs
Rapid Spanning Tree Protocol (RSTP), standardized as IEEE 802.1w (2001), is characterized by a greater convergence speed with respect to STP in terms of:
Port roles and states in RSTP.
Configuration BPDU format (35 bytes) in RSTP.
Version field (1 byte): it identifies RSTP as version number 2 (in STP it was 0);
BPDU Type field (1 byte): it identifies the Configuration BPDU always as type 2 (in STP it was 0), since Topology Change Notification BPDUs do no longer exist;[2]
Proposal (P) and Agreement (A) flags (1 bit each one): they specify whether the port role is being proposed by a bridge (P = 1) or has been accepted by the other bridge (A = 1);
2 flags in State field (S) (2 bits): they specify whether the port which the role is being proposed or has been accepted for is in learning (10) or forwarding (01) state;
Root Identifier and Bridge Identifier fields (8 bytes each one): RSTP includes technical specifications from IEEE 802.1t (2001) which change the format of Bridge Identifier:
STP Instance field (12 bits, default value = 0): used in Virtual LANs to enable multiple protocol instances within the same physical network:  Local Area Network design/Virtual LANs#PVST;
Bridge MAC Address field (6 bytes): unchanged from IEEE 802.1D-1998;
Root Path Cost field (4 bytes): RSTP includes technical specifications from IEEE 802.1t (2001) which change the recommended values for Port Path Cost including new port speeds (up to 10 Tb/s);
Max Age and Forward Delay fields (2 bytes each one): they are altogether unused in RSTP, but they have been kept for compatibility reasons.
RSTP is characterized by a greater topology convergence speed with respect to the classical STP: in fact it switches from 50 seconds to less than 1 second (order of about 10 ms) if, as was the norm by then when RSTP was standardized, there are just full-duplex point-to-point links (therefore without hubs).
When a link fault occurs, its detection by RSTP is faster than the classical STP thanks to a more efficient BPDU handling.
Non-root bridges do not just propagate BPDUs generated by the root bridge: each bridge generates every Hello Time (default: 2 s) a BPDU, with the current root bridge as Root Identifier, even if it has not received the BPDU from the root bridge. If BPDUs have not been received for 3 Hello Time periods, the current BPDU is declared obsolete and a fault is assumed to be occurred on the link which the root port is connected to.
This faster aging of information is useless on modern networks:
Once a bridge detected a link fault, it starts generating its own BPDUs → every neighbor bridge, as soon as it receives on its root port a BPDU from the bridge which is claiming to be the root bridge, instead of discarding it because it is worse than the current one, accepts the new BPDU forgetting the one previously stored, because it means that something bad happened on its path toward the root bridge. At this point:
Once a fault is detected, some ports can directly turn to the forwarding state without transitioning across the learning state.
In case the root port faults, the alternate port provides an alternative path between the bridge and the root bridge:
The alternate port represents a fast replacement for the root port.
In case a designed port faults, the backup port provides an alternative path between the bridge and the link:
The backup port represents a fast replacement for the designated port.
The proposal/agreement sequence is an algorithm for fast synchronization on the port role between two bridges.
When a new link is inserted between two bridges:
Cooperation between the two bridges through BPDU sending is faster with respect to the timer-based mechanism in the classical STP, and more efficient since it does not stop the whole network for a while but from time to time just a bridge neighborhood. The new link must be full-duplex so that BPDUs can be exchanged in both ways: the proposal BPDU along one direction and the acceptance BPDU along the other one.
RSTP is aimed to be less invasive with respect to the classical STP as regards filtering database updates following topology changes: in fact it avoids cleaning filtering databases from old entries, resulting in a considerably increased traffic sent in flooding, when it is not needed.
When a host connects to an edge port, the port immediately becomes designated and turns to the forwarding state without transitioning across the learning state → 30 seconds (2 times the Forward Delay) should not be waited anymore before having the port fully operational.
In addition, edge ports never trigger filtering database updates neither on moving to the forwarding state (host connection) or on moving to the discarding state (host disconnection) → the user does not experience anymore a network slowdown due to the increased traffic sent in flooding, and the first broadcast frame which the host will send will update filtering databases according to the usual learning algorithms of bridges.
An edge port still keeps listening to BPDUs coming from possible bridges wrongly connected to it, so as to be ready to immediately exit the edge role and take one of the other roles in order to protect the network against possible loops.
If a bridge not supporting RSTP is introduced into the network, on receiving Configuration BPDUs with Type equal to 0 they are able to automatically switch to STP mode, but this has some side effects:
A bridge can be configured so as to work in RSTP mode on some ports, and in STP mode on other ports → the network is split in two portions working with different spanning tree protocol versions. However this may lead to network instability because of transient loops due to the fact that the RSTP portion enables the forwarding of data frames earlier than the STP portion.
For a seamless coexistence of RSTP and non-RSTP bridges within the same network, Multiple Spanning Tree Protocol, standardized as IEEE 802.1s (2002), should be used: the network portions working with RSTP and the ones working with STP are separated in different domains.
RSTP works perfectly when links at the physical layer are reliable. If instead a link goes up and down frequently because of a dirty connector (optical fibers are quite sensitive), RSTP re-configures the network at every change of status of the link → the network will stay in a transient instable state most of the time, because of the too fast RSTP reactivity.
The 'antiflapping' Cisco's proprietary mechanism puts the port into 'error disabled' state when it detects a link flapping.
↑ A designated port is in discarding state during the proposal/agreement sequence.
↑ From now on Configuration BPDUs will be referred simply as BPDUs.
↑ a b The bridge keeps generating/propagating BPDUs until the TC While timer expires after a time equal to twice the Hello Time.
Local Area Network designRapid Spanning Tree Protocol
Quality of service in IEEE 802 LANs
Local Area Network designQuality of service in IEEE 802 LANs
Link aggregation – IEEE 802.3ad
Quality of service in traffic forwarding is required when there is a limited amount of resources such that the offered traffic exceeds the capacity of draining data creating congestions.
Usually LANs are over-provisioned, because it's very cheaper to expand the network than enforce quality of service → in the worst case, the channel occupancy is equal to 30-40% the available bandwidth → apparently there is no need for quality of service because there are no congestions.
Problems may occur in some possible scenarios:
Backbone not well dimensioned.
Data transfer from several clients to a single server.
Data transfer from a fast server to a slow client.
Quality of service is potentially a nice feature, but has contraindications which make the need for it not so strong: quality of service is just one of the problems to be solved to make the network efficient, and often improvements which it brings are not perceived by the end user.
The IEEE 802.1p standard defines 8 classes of service, called priority levels, and each of them is assigned a different (logical) queue.
A frame can be marked with a specific class of service in field 'Priority Code Point' (PCP) of the VLAN tag:  Virtual LANs#Frame tagging.[1] The standard also offers the capability of selecting the desired priority scheduling algorithm: round robin, weighted round robin, weighted fair queuing.
It would be better to let the source, at application layer, perform the marking because just the source exactly knows the traffic type (voice traffic or data traffic), but most of users would declare all their packets as high-priority because they would not be honest → marking needs to be performed by access bridges which are under the control of the provider. However recognizing the traffic type is very difficult for bridges and makes them very expensive, because it requires to go up to the application layer and may not work with encrypted traffic → distinction can be simplified for bridges in two ways:
The standard suggests which type of traffic each priority level is destined to (e.g. 6 = voice traffic), but lets the freedom to change these associations → interoperability problems among different vendors may rise.
The 802.3x standard implements a flow control at the Ethernet layer, in addition to the flow control existing at the TCP layer: given a link, if the downstream node (bridge or host) has its buffers full it can send to the upstream node at the other endpoint of the link a PAUSE packet asking it to stop the data transmission on that link for a certain amount of time, called pause time which is expressed in 'pause quanta' (1 quantum = time to transmit 512 bits). The upstream node therefore stores packets arriving during the time pause into its output buffer, and will send them when the input buffer of the downstream node will be ready to receive other packets → packets are no longer lost due to buffer congestions.
On every node the flow control mode can be configured, but the auto-negotiation phase has to determine the actual configuration so that the chosen mode is coherent on both the nodes at the endpoints of the link.
Sending PAUSE packets may be problematic in the backbone.
Sending PAUSE packets may be problematic in the backbone: a bridge with full buffers is able to make the traffic be stopped only on the link it is directly connected to but, if the intermediate bridges in the upstream path do not feel the need for in turn sending PAUSE packets because having larger buffers, it is not able to 'shut up' the host which is sending too many packets → until the access bridge in turn sends a PAUSE packet to the concerned host, the network appears blocked also to all the other hosts which are not responsible for the problem → the PAUSE packets send by non-access bridges have no capability of selecting the exceeding traffic to slow down the responsible host, but they affect traffic from all the hosts.
This is why it is recommended to disable flow control in the backbone and use PAUSE packets just between access bridges and hosts. Often the asymmetrical flow control mode is chosen, where only hosts can send PAUSE packets: generally buffers of access bridges are big enough, and several commercial bridges accept PAUSE packets from hosts, blocking data transmission on the concerned port, but they can not send them.
However sending PAUSE packets may be problematic also for hosts, because it may trigger a livelock in the kernel of the operating system: the CPU of the slow host is so busy in processing packets coming from the NIC interface that can not find a moment to send a PAUSE packet → packets accumulate in RAM bringing it to saturation.
↑ Two marking fields for quality of service exist, one at the data-link layer and another at the network layer:
Local Area Network designQuality of service in IEEE 802 LANs
Link aggregation – IEEE 802.3ad
Local Area Network designLink aggregation – IEEE 802.3ad
Quality of service in IEEE 802 LANs
Link aggregation, standardized as IEEE 802.3ad, normally is used between bridges in the backbone or between a bridge and a server to aggregate multiple physical links (usually 2-4) into a single logical channel in order to:
All the physical links aggregated in the same group must:
Link Aggregation Control Protocol (LACP) is used for automatic aggregate configuration:
Each aggregate is identified by a Link Aggregation Group Identifier (LAG ID).
When a frame arrives, which one of the links within the aggregate should it be sent to? The standard, although it suggests possible frame distribution criteria on ports, does not define an algorithm to distribute frames → bridges from different vendors can use different frame distribution algorithms.
The simplest solution consists in forwarding the incoming frame to the free port subsequent to the one to which the previous frame was forwarded.
Reordering problems can arise: a smaller frame arriving at the bridge just after a bigger frame may finish being received by the other bridge before the bigger frame → the frame order coming out of the other bridge is not correct because the smaller frame 'overtook' the bigger one:
The frame reordering problem can be solved by sending to the same link the frames belonging to the same conversation. The most common solution to find the frames belonging to the same conversation is based on source MAC address and destination MAC address pairs.
Finding conversations based on MAC addresses however in some cases is not effective in terms of link load balancing:
If two nodes are connected by multiple aggregates, only one aggregate will be active due to STP: STP will disable the other aggregate because it sees every aggregate as a single link with cost equal to the sum of link costs in the aggregate.
Through a proper setting of link priorities, a configuration with N aggregated links, of which only M<N active, is possible → the other N-M links are stand-by links: in case an active link faults, a stand-by link activates avoiding to decrease the available bandwidth in the logical channel.
Cisco's proprietary feature Virtual Switching System allows to overcome the constraint of having only two nodes at the aggregate endpoints: a bridge can be connected to two bridges which STP sees as a single logical bridge, so traffic can be distributed on both the aggregated links.
Local Area Network designLink aggregation – IEEE 802.3ad
Quality of service in IEEE 802 LANs
Link aggregation – IEEE 802.3ad
Bridges forward frames in different ways depending on the type of destination MAC address:
If the bridge knew which multicast groups stations connected to its ports belong to, the bridge could forward frames addressed to a certain multicast group just on the ports which hosts registered to that multicast group are connected to, in order to decrease traffic sent in flooding.
GMRP allows a station to communicate its membership multicast group to the bridge.
However GMRP is barely used, because exploiting an already existing and commonly used technology, namely IGMP, is preferred to adding a new network protocol.
IGMP allows a station to communicate its membership multicast group to routers on the IP network:
Host Membership Query message: the router sends to all hosts an IGMP message asking whether some of them are interested in registering to a certain multicast group;
Host Membership Report message: the host sends back an IGMP message accepting the request for registration to the multicast group.The Host Membership Report message arrives, besides the router, also at all the other stations over the LAN → every other station interested in the multicast group, while knowing that at least one station over the LAN has registered to that group, can avoid sending a Host Membership Report message to the router, because traffic related to that multicast group exits the router interface and propagates to the whole LAN.
'224.0.0.x'-like multicast IP addresses are 'well-known' addresses which do not require IGMP (e.g. multicast packets sent by network-layer routing protocols).
The IGMP snooping feature allows a bridge to learn which multicast groups stations connected to its ports are registered to, by observing IGMP messages going through the bridge itself:
Host Membership Query message: the bridge records the port which it is coming from as the port toward the router, and sends it in flooding on all the other ports;
Host Membership Report message: the bridge records the port which it is coming from as a port toward an interested station, and sends it only on the port toward the router (that is the one which the Host Membership Query came from).The bridge does not send it on the other ports, because otherwise hosts on receiving would disable sending Host Membership Report messages, preventing the bridge from knowing which hosts are interested in that multicast group;
IGMP snooping is a violation of the OSI model: bridges are required to recognize whether the data-link-layer frame encapsulates an IP packet which in turn encapsulates an IGMP message → bridges do no longer work independently of the network layer: bridges which do not support the IPv6 protocol may discard multicast packets, used a lot in IPv6 (e.g. in the autoconfiguration process), because they can not recognize them.
↑ Actually a single multicast MAC address is corresponding to 25 IP addresses = 25 multicast groups.
Link aggregation – IEEE 802.3ad
Redundancy and load balancing at layer 3 in LANs
Virtual LANs (VLAN) allow to share a single physical infrastructure (same devices, same cabling) among multiple logical LANs: just traffic of a certain LAN flows through some ports, just traffic of another LAN flows through other ports, and so on → each bridge has one filtering database for each VLAN.[1]
A data-link network made up of multiple VLANs is more advantageous with respect to:
a network-layer network, thanks to mobility support: hosts can keep being reachable at the same address (their MAC addresses) when moving;
a single physical LAN, thanks to:
An example of VLAN application is a campus network: a VLAN is reserved for students, another VLAN is reserved for teachers with less restrictive policies, and so on.
Data can not cross at the data-link layer the VLAN boundaries: a station in a VLAN can not send a frame to another station in a different VLAN, since VLANs have different broadcast domains. A possible solution may consist in connecting a port of a VLAN to a port of another VLAN, but in this way a single broadcast domain would form → the two VLANs would belong actually to the same LAN.
Therefore a station in a VLAN can send data to another station in a different VLAN just at the network layer → a router is needed to connect a port of a VLAN to a port of another VLAN: a station in a VLAN sends an IP[2] packet towards the router, then the latter re-generates the data-link-layer header of the packet (in particular it changes MAC addresses) and sends the packet to the station in the other VLAN. This solution however occupies two interfaces in a router and two ports in the same bridge, and requires two wires connecting these two network devices themselves → a one-arm router allows to interconnect two VLANs through a single wire, occupying a single bridge port and a single router interface: traffic of both the VLANs can flow through the single wire and through the bridge port.
Data-link-layer broadcast traffic still can not cross the VLAN boundaries, because the router do not propagate it to its other interfaces by splitting the broadcast domain → a station in a VLAN which wants to contact a station in another VLAN can not discover its MAC address by ARP protocol, but has to send a packet to its IP address, which has a different network prefix because the two VLANs must have different addressing spaces.
Every bridge makes available some ports, called access ports, which hosts can connect to. In access links untagged frames, that is without the VLAN tag, flow; access ports tag frames based on their membership VLANs.
When a host connects to an access port, its membership VLAN can be recognized in four ways:
Every access port is associated to a single VLAN → a host can access a VLAN by connecting to the related bridge port.
Every host is associated to a certain VLAN based on MAC address.
Every user owns an account, and every user account is associated to a certain VLAN. When he connects to a bridge port, the user authenticates himself by inserting his own login credentials by the 802.1x standard protocol, and the bridge is able to contact a RADIUS server to check credentials and assign the proper VLAN to the user if successful.
Every user is associated by himself to the VLAN he wants: it is the operating system on the host which tags outgoing frames, so they will arrive through a trunk link to a bridge port already tagged.
Trunk links are links which can transport traffic of different VLANs:
In trunk links tagged frames, that is having VLAN tag standardized as IEEE 802.1Q (1998), flow:
Priority Code Point (PCP) field (3 bits): it specifies the user priority for quality of service:  Local Area Network design/Quality of service in IEEE 802 LANs#IEEE 802.1p;
Canonical Format Indicator (CFI) flag (1 bit): it specifies whether the MAC address is in canonical format (value 0, e.g. Ethernet) or not (value 1, e.g. token ring);
VLAN Identifier (VID) field (12 bits): it identifies the VLAN of the frame:
IEEE 802.1Q does not actually encapsulate the original frame; instead, it adds the tag between the source MAC address and the EtherType/Length fields of the original frame, leaving the minimum frame size unchanged at 64 bytes and extending the maximum frame size from 1518 bytes to 1522 bytes → on trunk links there can not be hubs because they do not support frames more than 1518 bytes long:
Insertion of VLAN tag in an Ethernet frame.
Example of VLAN transport of a frame through a trunk link in the backbone.
Transporting a frame from a station to another through trunk links is performed in the following way:[3]
Example of VLAN transport of a frame through virtual network interfaces in a one-arm router and in a server.
Typically a server needs to be contacted at the same time by multiple hosts located in different VLANs → since just one VLAN can be associated to each network interface, the server would require to have a network interface for each VLAN, each one connected to the bridge by its own physical link. A similar problem applies to a one-arm router, which needs to receive and send traffic from/to multiple different VLANs to allow their interconnection.
Virtual network interfaces allow to have at the same time multiple logical network interfaces virtualized on the same physical network card, whose single physical interface is connected to the bridge through just one trunk physical link: the operating system sees multiple network interfaces installed on the system, and the network card driver based on VLAN tag exposes to the operating system every frame as if it had arrived from one of the virtual network interfaces.
Virtual network interfaces have different IP addresses, because every VLAN has its own addressing space, but they have the same MAC address, equal to the one of the physical network card; however this is not a problem as a MAC address just has to be unique within the broadcast domain (so within the VLAN).
Tag stacking (also known as 'provider bridging' or 'Stacked VLANs' or 'QinQ'), standardized as IEEE 802.1ad (2005), allows to insert multiple VLAN tags into the stack of a tagged frame, from the outer tag to the inner one:
Insertion of two VLAN tags in an Ethernet frame.
Tag stacking is useful to transport traffic from multiple customers using VLANs over a shared provider network: two different customers may decide to use the same VLAN Identifier within their company networks → bridges at the edges of the provider network add to incoming frames and remove from outgoing frames external tags which distinguish VLANs having the same VLAN Identifier but being of different customers.
Ethernet tunneling: edge bridges have to encapsulate the frame into a new Ethernet header → complex operation;
VLAN scalability: tag stacking is more scalable with respect to VLAN translation:
VLAN translation: edge bridges change the VLAN Identifier in every frame so that each VLAN Identifier is unique within the provider network → scalability issue: just a maximum of 4094 VLANs are available;
MAC address scalability: tag stacking is less scalable with respect to Ethernet tunneling:
Ethernet tunneling: the filtering database in every bridge within the provider network sees just MAC addresses of bridges at the edges of the network;
Standard STP and RSTP do not support VLANs: the spanning tree is unique across the network and the spanning tree algorithm works regardless of VLANs. Several vendors offer proprietary features for VLAN support: for example Cisco offers Per-VLAN Spanning Tree (PVST) and Per-VLAN Spanning Tree Plus (PVST+), based on STP, and Rapid Per-VLAN Spanning Tree Plus (Rapid-PVST+), based on RSTP.
PVST allows multiple spanning trees in the network, one for each VLAN; every tree is determined through per-VLAN configuration of spanning tree protocol parameters. In particular, priority of each bridge should be customized based on VLAN in order to differentiate the root bridge among different VLANs, otherwise the same tree would result for all VLANs, by identifying the priority value refers to by the STP Instance field (12 bits), introduced into Bridge Identifier by IEEE 802.1t (2001):
Bridge Identifier format settled by IEEE 802.1t.
PVST optimizes the traffic load across the network: if spanning trees are well balanced, all links are used → there are not active active but altogether unused anymore;
PVST does not optimize the traffic load inside a VLAN: traffic in a VLAN is still bounded to a specific spanning tree → the shortest path toward the destination can not be chosen as it happens in IP networks;
CPU load: running multiple spanning tree protocol instances at the same time increases the load on bridge CPUs;
Broadcast traffic is sent on all trunk links, besides access links associated to the VLAN which the broadcast frame belongs to:
a broadcast storm on a link, caused by traffic of one VLAN, may affect other VLANs by saturating trunk links → although frames can not go from a VLAN to another at the data-link layer, network isolation is not complete even with VLANs due to the fact that links are shared;
a broadcast frame belonging to a certain VLAN can reach a bridge at the end of the network on which there are no access ports belonging to that VLAN → the filtering database in that bridge will insert through learning mechanisms a useless entry containing the source MAC address.
In order to reduce broadcast traffic on trunk links and avoid useless entries in filtering databases, every bridge needs to know of which VLANs to propagate broadcast traffic on each trunk port:
GVRP protocol: it is a standard, very complex protocol which allows bridges to exchange information about VLANs in the network topology;
VLANs are not a plug-and-play technology (as STP was), and home users are not skilled enough to configure them → low-end bridges typically are without VLAN support, and may discard tagged frames because too big.
Another reason of incompatibility among network devices from different vendors is tagging on trunk ports: some bridges tag the traffic belonging to all VLANs, other ones leave the traffic belonging to VLAN 1 untagged.
↑ In the real implementation, filtering database is unique and usually made with a single TCAM across the network device.
↑ For the sake of simplicity here IP protocol is considered as the network-layer protocol.
↑ It is assumed to adopt the port-based assignment.
Redundancy and load balancing at layer 3 in LANs
Local Area Network designRedundancy and load balancing at layer 3 in LANs
At the boundaries of the corporate LAN with the network layer, the router providing connectivity with outside (typically Internet) represents, for hosts having it as their default gateway, a single point of failure, unless the router is redounded properly.
Simple router duplication is not enough: hosts are not able to automatically switch to the other router in case their default gateway fails, because they are not able to learn the network topology through network-layer routing protocols.
Therefore some protocols for automatic management of redundant routers have been defined:
HSRP: Cisco's proprietary protocol specific for default gateway redundancy and with partial support to load balancing:  #HSRP;
GLBP: Cisco's proprietary protocol which improves load balancing with respect to HSRP:  #GLBP.
Example of corporate network with three redundant routers thanks to HSRP.
Hot Standby Routing Protocol (HSRP) guarantees automatically that every host keeps connectivity with outside the LAN through its default gateway even in case one of the redundant routers fails.
Interfaces belonging to the corporate LAN of all redundant routers are assigned a single virtual IP address and a single virtual MAC address, in addition to their actual IP and MAC addresses. Routers can be:
The virtual IP address has to be set explicitly by the network administrator during the HSRP configuration, while the virtual MAC address has Cisco's well-known prefix '00:00:0C:07:AC':
Organizationally Unique Identifier (OUI) field (3 bytes): string of bits '00:00:0C' is the OUI assigned to Cisco so that MAC addresses of network cards sold by Cisco are globally unique;
HSRP string field (2 bytes): string of bits '07:AC' identifies a HSRP virtual MAC address, and can not appear in any physical MAC address → the virtual MAC address is guaranteed to be unique within the LAN: it is not possible for a host to have a MAC address equal to the HSRP virtual MAC address;
The virtual IP address is set to all hosts as their default gateway address, that is as the IP address to which the hosts will send IP packets heading outside the LAN.
The goal of HSRP is to 'deceive' the host by making it believe to be communicating with outside through a single router characterized by an IP address equal to the default gateway address and by a MAC address equal to the MAC address got via ARP protocol, while actually HSRP in case of fault moves the active router to another router without making the host realize that:
ARP Request: when a host connects to the network, it sends an ARP Request to the IP address set as default gateway, that is the virtual IP address;[1]
ARP Reply: the router sends back an ARP Reply with its own virtual MAC address;
HSRP can be used to achieve redundancy of a single machine to improve its fault tolerance: a server can have two network interfaces, one primary and one secondary, to which HSRP assigns a virtual IP address and a virtual MAC address → the server will keep being reachable at the same IP address even if the link connecting the primary interface to the network fails.
Hello packets are messages generated by redundant routers to:
HSRP Hello packet format generated by the active router.
HSRP Hello packet format generated by the stand-by router.
Time To Live (TTL): it is equal to 1 so that packets are immediately discarded by routers which they reach, because they can be propagated just within the LAN;
Op Code field (1 byte): it describes the type of message included in the Hello packet:
0 = Hello: the router is running and is capable to become the active or stand-by router;
1 = Coup: the router wants to become the active router;
2 = Resign: the router does no longer want to be the active router;
State field (1 byte): it describes the current state of the router sending the message:
8 = Standby: the HSRP packet has been sent by the stand-by router;
16 = Active: the HSRP packet has been sent by the active router;
Hello Time field (1 byte): it is the time between Hello messages sent by routers (default: 3 s);
Hold Time field (1 byte): it is the time of validity for the current Hello message, at the expiry of which the stand-by router proposes itself as the active router (default: 10 s);
Priority field (1 byte): it is the priority of the router used for the election process for the active/stand-by router (default: 100);
Group field (1 byte): it identifies the group which the current HSRP instance is referring to:  #HSRP groups
Authentication Data field (8 bytes): it includes a clear-text 8-character-long password (default: 'cisco');
Virtual IP Address field (4 bytes): it is the virtual IP address used by the group, that is the IP address used as the default gateway address by hosts in the corporate LAN.
With default values for Hello Time and Hold Time parameters, convergence time is equal to about 10 seconds.
Example of network with multiple HSRP groups.
HSRP groups allow to distinguish multiple logical IP networks over the same physical LAN: a HSRP group is corresponding to each IP network, with a pair virtual MAC address and virtual IP address. Hosts in an IP network have one of the virtual IP addresses set as their default gateway address, hosts in another IP network have another virtual IP address set as their default gateway address, and so on.
Each redundant router knows multiple pairs virtual MAC address and virtual IP address, one for each group → every router (except listen routers) generates a Hello packet for each group, and answers to one of the virtual MAC addresses on receiving traffic from hosts in an IP network, to another one on receiving traffic from hosts in another IP network, and so on.
The last 8 bits in the virtual MAC address identify the group which the address is referring to → HSRP is able to manage up to 256 different groups over the same LAN.
Example of network with multiple HSRP groups where there are VLANs.
Defining multiple HSRP groups is mandatory if there are VLANs: every VLAN is in fact a separate LAN with its own default gateway → each VLAN is assigned a HSRP group. Every one-arm router has multiple virtual interfaces, one for every VLAN → HSRP groups are configured on the same physical interface but each one on different logical interfaces.
By a proper priority configuration, traffic from IP networks can be distributed over redundant routers (load sharing):
mHSRP is more convenient when incoming traffic for the LAN is symmetrical: a one-arm router for VLAN interconnection can be redounded so that a router sustains traffic incoming from a first VLAN and outgoing to a second VLAN, while the other router sustains traffic incoming from the second VLAN and outgoing to the first VLAN;
mHSRP is not so convenient when incoming traffic for the LAN is asymmetrical: load sharing in fact affects just outgoing traffic (incoming traffic is independent of HSRP), and outgoing (upload) traffic generally is lower with respect to incoming (download) traffic;
HSRP offers protection from failures of the link connecting the default gateway router to the LAN and from failures of the default gateway router itself, but not from failures of the link connecting the default gateway router to Internet: a failure on the WAN link in fact forces packets to be sent to the active router which in turn sends them all to the stand-by router, instead of immediately going to the stand-by router → this does not imply a real loss of internet connectivity, but implies an additional overhead in the packet forwarding process.
The track feature allows to detect failures on WAN links and trigger the stand-by router to take the place of the active router by automatically decreasing the priority of the active router (default: −10).
The track feature works only if the preemption capability is on: if the priority of the active router is decreased so as to bring it below the priority of the stand-by router, the latter can 'preempt' the active state from the active router by sending a Hello message of Coup type.
However, detecting failures happens exclusively at the physical layer: the track features is not able to detect a failure occurred on a farther link beyond a bridge.
Example of fault inside the data-link-layer network.
HSRP does not protect against all the faults in the data-link-layer network. For example, the fault in the side figure partitions the corporate network into two parts, and since it happens between two bridges it can not be detected by routers at the physical layer. The stand-by router does no longer receive Hello messages from the active router and promotes itself as the active → outgoing traffic is not affected at all by the occurrence of a fault: each of the two routers serves the outgoing traffic from one of the two network portions.
The fault has instead an impact on incoming traffic, because some frames can not reach the destination hosts. Network-layer routing protocols in fact work exclusively from router to router: they just detect the path between the two router was broken somewhere, but they are not able to detect path breaks between a router and a host, because their task is to forward the packet so that it arrives at any of the edge routers, which then is in charge of the direct delivery of the frame to the final destination. As seen from outside, both the routers appear to have connectivity to the same IP network, therefore network-layer routing protocols will assume all the hosts belonging to that IP network can be reached through both the interfaces and choose any of them based on shortest path criterion:
Therefore it is important to redound all the links inside the data-link-layer network, by putting multiple links in parallel managed by the spanning tree protocol or configured in link aggregation.
Example of network topology suffering from periodic flooding.
In some network topologies, traffic asymmetrical routing may lead to a situation where in some periods of time the incoming traffic from outside sent in flooding increases considerably, while in other ones the incoming traffic is forwarded properly by bridges. This is due to the fact that router ARP caches generally last longer than bridge filtering databases.
For example, in the side figure mappings in the ARP cache on ingress router R2 expire in 5 minutes, while entries in the filtering database on bridge B2 expire in just 2 minutes:
This problem in the network is not easy to be identified because it manifests itself intermittently; once the problem is identified, it is possible to:
Example of fault on a unidirectional link.
HSRP does not contemplates fault management on unidirectional links: for example, in the side figure a fault occurs toward the stand-by router, which does no longer receive Hello messages from the active router and elects itself as the active, starting sending Hello packets with the virtual MAC address as their source addresses → the bridge receives alternatively Hello packets from both the active routers having the same MAC address as their source addresses, and the entry related to that MAC address will keep oscillating periodically → if a host sends a frame to its default gateway while the entry in the bridge filtering database is associated to the former stand-by router, the frame, being unable to go through the unidirectional link, will be lost.
Parts of this page are based on materials from: Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia.
Example of corporate network with three redundant routers thanks to GLBP.
Gateway Load Balancing Protocol (GLBP) adds to the default gateway redundancy the capability of automatically distributing outgoing traffic over all redundant routers.
GLBP elects one Active Virtual Gateway (AVG) for each group; other group members, called Active Virtual Forwarders (AVF), act as backup in case of AVG failure. The elected AVG then assigns a virtual MAC address to each member of the GLBP group, including itself; each AVF assumes responsibility for forwarding packets sent to its virtual MAC address.
In case of an AVF failure, the AVG notifies one of the still active AVF entrusting it with the task of answering also traffic addressed toward the virtual MAC address of the faulted AVF.
The AVG answers ARP Requests sent by hosts with MAC addresses pointing to different routers, based on one of the following load balancing algorithms:
↑ Please remember that the ARP Request is a data-link-layer frame with broadcast destination MAC address and with IP address in its payload.
Local Area Network designRedundancy and load balancing at layer 3 in LANs
Local Area Network designThe network layer in LANs
Redundancy and load balancing at layer 3 in LANs
Routers are a fundamental part of a LAN because they provide internet access and VLAN interconnection.
In a corporate network the router represents the bottleneck for internet access and VLAN interconnection, because it implements complex algorithms running on a CPU.
The layer 3 switch is a router made purely in hardware to improve performance. Its manufacture is less expensive with respect to traditional routers, but it lacks some advanced features:
Example of multilayer switch.
The multilayer switch is a device integrating both L2 and L3 capabilities on the same hardware card: the customer can buy a multilayer switch and then configure every interface in L2 or L3 mode according to his needs, for a greater flexibility in the network deployment.
On a multilayer switch four types of interfaces can be configured:
L3 physical interfaces: they can terminate L3-pure (C) or trunk-mode (D) links;
L3 sub-interfaces (E): a L3 physical interface can split into multiple L3 sub-interfaces, one per VLAN;
L3 virtual interfaces (F): they connect the internal router with the internal bridge, one per VLAN.
Interconnection of two VLANs through a one-arm router requires that traffic crosses twice the trunk link toward the router → the multilayer switch, thanks to integrating routing and switching functionalities, virtualizes the one arm so that traffic enters with a VLAN tag and exits (even the same port which entered) directly with another VLAN tag, without making the load on a link be doubled:
The multilayer switch optimizes the one-arm router.
Examples of router positioning in a corporate network.
Backbone with VLAN segmentation.
Backbone with IP segmentation.
VLAN segmentation: the whole corporate network is at the data-link layer, and every area (e.g. university department) is assigned a VLAN → mobility is extended to the whole corporate network;
IP segmentation: each access bridge is connected to a router (typically layer 3 switch), and every area is assigned an IP network → higher network isolation and higher scalability.Often internal bridges connect all the access routers one to each other and to the exit gateway router;
Example of LAN design.
Multi-group HSRP (mHSRP): a multilayer switch can be active for some VLANs and stand-by for other ones;
Per-VLAN Spanning Tree (PVST): a spanning tree protocol instance is active for each VLAN, to optimize paths based on VLANs.The root bridge must always be the HSRP active router, otherwise some paths are not optimized;
Local Area Network designThe network layer in LANs
Redundancy and load balancing at layer 3 in LANs
Local Area Network designIntroduction to Storage Area Networks
A company typically needs to store a lot of data:
A datacenter is a centralized location where all servers are concentrated, and allows to avoid having too many servers scattered around the company under the control of so many different organizations:
In a DAS system, every server has exclusive access to its own hard disk set:
The SCSI standard defines a full protocol stack:
NASes and SANs allow to decouple disks from servers connecting those entities through a network → a disk can be accessed by multiple servers.
Example of NAS.
A NAS exports file systems, serving logical files, instead of disk blocks, over the network (usually LAN).
File systems are shared with network clients: both servers and clients connected to the network can access files.
Typical protocols used to export file systems are:
Example of two-tier SAN.
A SAN exports physical disks, instead of logical volumes, and allows to address disk blocks according to the LBA schema, just as if the disk was connected directly to the server via SCSI (DAS system).
Clients can access data through servers, which they are connected to via a Wide or Local Area Network. Typically a datacenter follows a three-tier model:
SANs can not base exclusively on the classical TCP/IP, since TCP error-recovery mechanisms may introduce a non-negligible performance overhead → some protocols have been developed for SANs aimed to keep as much as possible high speed, low latency and high reliability typical of SCSI:
Fibre Channel.
FCoE.
iSCSI.
All SAN protocols adopt SCSI as the upper layer in their protocol stacks and work below it → this guarantees compatibility with all the existing SCSI-based applications, with a minimum impact for DAS to SAN migration.
Example of Fibre Channel-based SAN with switched fabric topology.
The Fibre Channel standard was born from the need to have a reliable support for optical fiber connections between servers and storage disks, and is thought to replace the physical layer of SCSI. Fibre Channel supports high transfer rates: 1 Gbps, 2 Gbps, 4 Gbps, 8 Gbps, 16 Gbps.
The standard contemplates three possible topologies for SANs:
Routing is performed by the Fabric Shortest Path First (FSPF) protocol, very similar to the OSPF protocol in IP networks. No spanning tree protocols are contemplated for rings in topology.
Every port of a Fibre Channel node (server or JBOD) is dynamically assigned a 24-bit address:
Domain ID field (8 bits): it identifies the bridge which the node is connected to;
Area ID field (8 bits): it identifies the group of ports which the bridge port, to which the node is connected, belongs to;
Port ID field (8 bits): it identifies the node port.Every server is connected to the fabric through an interface called Host Bus Adapter (HBA).
Fibre Channel enhances SCSI error-recovery mechanisms by introducing a hop-by-hop flow control based on a credit mechanism: each port has an amount of credits, which is decreased whenever a packet is forwarded and is increased whenever an acknowledge is received → if the available amount of credits goes down to 0, the port can not send other packets and has to wait for the next hop to communicate via an acknowledge which it is ready to receive other data into its buffer → this mechanism avoids node buffer congestions and therefore packet losses.
Moreover the credit mechanism allows resource reservation and guarantees in-order delivery of frames: the destination node has not to implement a mechanism for packet re-ordering (like in TCP).
Virtual SAN (VSAN): the equivalent of VLANs for SANs;
Parts of this page are based on materials from: Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia.
The Fibre Channel over Ethernet (FCoE) technology allows to encapsulate Fibre Channel frames into Ethernet frames via the FCoE adaptation layer, which replaces the physical layer of Fibre Channel → this allows to use 10 Gigabit Ethernet (or higher speeds) networks while preserving the Fibre Channel protocol.
Before FCoE, datacenters used Ethernet for TCP/IP networks and Fibre Channel for SANs. With FCoE, Fibre Channel becomes another network protocol running on Ethernet, alongside traditional IP traffic: FCoE operates directly above Ethernet in the network protocol stack, in contrast to iSCSI which runs on top of TCP and IP:
Since, unlike Fibre Channel, the classical Ethernet includes no flow control mechanisms, FCoE required some enhancements to the Ethernet standard to support a priority-based flow control mechanism, to reduce frame loss from congestion.
Priority-based flow control in FCoE.
The basic idea is adopting PAUSE packets from the 802.3x standard for flow control over Ethernet, but the Ethernet channel between two bridges is logically partitioned into lanes (for example, one dedicated to storage traffic and another one dedicated to the normal internet traffic) → the PAUSE packet, instead of blocking the whole traffic over the concerned link, just blocks traffic of a certain lane without affecting traffic of other lanes.
Typically for servers with FCoE technology top-of-the-rack (TOR) switches are preferred to end-of-the-row (EOR) switches used with Fibre Channel, because switches with FCoE technology are less expensive with respect to switches with Fibre Channel technology:
Example of iSCSI-based SAN.
The iSCSI protocol, proposed by Cisco to counteract Fibre Channel hegemony, allows to make a SAN by using the most common network technology, namely TCP/IP: SCSI commands are encapsulated into TCP packets via the iSCSI adaptation layer and cross the SAN over an Ethernet network.
Example of FCIP-based SAN.
A datacenter is subject to data loss risk due to natural disasters (like earthquakes, tsunamis, etc.) → in order to improve resiliency (business continuity), the datacenter can entirely be replicated in another location, generally at a distance of some hundred kilometers. The main datacenter and the backup datacenter could communicate one with each other by using Fibre Channel, but connecting them through a simple optical fiber would be too expensive due to the long distance.
The Fibre Channel over IP (FCIP) technology allows geographically distributed SANs to be interconnected by using the existing TCP/IP infrastructure, namely Internet, without making internal devices in datacenters be aware of the presence of the IP network:
The Fibre Channel frame minimum size, however, exceeds the Ethernet payload size limit, and the overhead for fragmentation would be excessive → Ethernet frames must be extended to about 2.2 KB so that minimum-size Fibre Channel frames can be encapsulated.
Local Area Network designIntroduction to Storage Area Networks
Mouse and Keyboard Controls Used for Navigation in Celestia
Celestia works best with a three-button wheel-mouse. Very inexpensive ones are available which work well with Linux, Mac and Windows computers.
Left drag:           Orient the view.
Right drag:          Orbit the selected object.
Wheel:               Adjust the distance to your current selection.
Right + Left drag:   Adjust your distance to the selection.
Ctrl  + Left drag:   Adjust your distance to the selection.
Shift + Left drag:   Changes your field of view (e.g. => Telescopic view.)
Wheel click:         Toggles the field of view between 45 degrees and the previous field of view.
Left double click:   Center the selection.
Right click:       Brings up the context menu.
C    : Center on the currently selected object.
G    : Go to the currently selected object.
F    : Follow the selected object.
Y    : Orbit the selected object at a rate synchronized to its rotation.
:    : Lock on the selected object.
"    : Chase the selected object. (The orientation is based on the selected object's velocity.)
T    : Track the currently selected object. (Keep the selected object centered in the view.)
HOME : Move closer to the currently selected object.
: Look back. Causes the view to shift from objects forward in the direction of motion, to objects rearward.
END  : Move farther from the selected object.
ESC  : Cancel the currently executing motion or script.
Shift+C   : Center/orbit. (Center the selected object without changing the position of the reference object.)
Left : Move (or roll) the camera view left.
Right: Move (or roll) the camera view right.
Up   : Move (or pitch) the camera view up.
Down : Move (or pitch) the camera view down.
Shift+ Arrow: Orbit the currently selected object in the direction indicated by the arrow selected.
Ctrl+C, or Ctrl+INS  : Copy location URL to your clipboard.
Spacebar : Pause/Resume the flow of time and scripts (toggle)
J : Reverse/Forward time (toggle)
\ : Set time rate: 1x forward (norm), cancels faster/slower x factors
L : Change time rate : 10x faster
K : Change time rate : 10x slower
Shift+L : Change time rate: 2x faster
Shift+K : Change time rate: 2x slower
! : Set time to current system date and time
? : Display light-travel delay between ovserver / selected object
(hyphen) : Subtract light-travel delay from current simulation time
Ctrl+L : Night side maps
Ctrl+B : Constellations bounaries
Ctrl+K : Markers (placed on objects)
O : Orbits (toggle ALL selected orbits)
{ : Decrease Ambient Light
} : Increase Ambient Light
( : Decrease Galaxy Light Gain
) : Increase Galaxy Light Gain
[ : Decrease Magnitude Limit :
If AutoMag OFF : Decrease limiting magnitude (fewer stars)
If AutoMag ON  : Decrease limiting magnitude at 45 deg FOV
] : Increase Magnitude Limit :
If AutoMag OFF : Increase limiting magnitude (fewer stars)
If AutoMag ON  : Increase limiting magnitude at 45 deg FOV
Ctrl+Y : Toggle Auto Magnitude (auto adaptation of start visibility of FOV)
, : Narrow Field of View [Shift+Left Drag]
. : Widen Field of View [Shift+Left Drag]
Ctrl+X : Toggle Antialias lines
Alt+Enter : Toggle Display mode (Full-Screen / Windowed)
Ctrl+P : Mark selected object
+ : Toggle Planet Texture type (Artisitic / Limit of Knowledge)
% : Star color table toggle (classic / Blackbody D65)
Ctrl+S : Cycle the Star Style (points / fuzzy discs / scaled discs)
V : Cycle the Info text verbosity (None / Terse / Verbose)
Ctrl+W : Toggle Wireframe mode
F1 : Stop.
F2 : Set velocity to 1 km/s.
F3 : Set velocity to 1,000 km/s.
F4 : Set velocity to speed of light.
F5 : Set velocity to 10x the speed of light.
F6 : Set velocity to 1 AU/s.
F7 : Set velocity to 1 ly/s.
A  : Increase velocity.
Z  : Decrease velocity.
Q  : Reverse direction.
X  : Set movement direction toward center of screen.
4  : Yaw left.
6  : Yaw right.
8  : Pitch down.
2  : Pitch up.
7  : Roll left.
9  : Roll right.
5  : Stop rotation.
X axis    : Yaw.
L trigger : Roll left.
R trigger : Roll right.
Button 1  : Slower.
Button 2  : Faster.
The first postage meters were used in 1952.
All stamps are inscribed “THAILAND”.
Essays from 1928 with the country’s former name, “SIAM”, exist.The stamps are grouped according to appearance and usage:A – Franks with outer frame line and separate town mark
B – Digital stamps with 2D barcode
GROUP A: Franks with outer frame line and separate town mark
A1. Universal “MultiValue”  (MV), 1 May 1952.
Horizontal frank with simulated perforation outer border and straight inner border.
Country name in curved panel at top with triangular ornaments in the upper corners.
A2. Universal, later Pitney Bowes “Automax”  (MV), 1970.
Very similar to Type 1 but the ‘perforation holes’ in the outer frame line are smaller, and the value figures are of uniform thickness.
A. M# with “U” prefix (Universal)
B. M# with “P” prefix (Pitney Bowes)
V/F:       =0.oo
A3. Pitney Bowes-GB “5000” series (MV), 1970.
Horizontal frank wider and shorter than with Types A1-A3.
Triangles in upper corners are without ornament.
M# with “P.” prefix in boxes at bottom.
Small “POSTES” breaks bottom frame line.
a. With Thai instead of Western year date
A4. Kilburn (MV), 1979.      [Meter K9 is very rare, the others numbers are extremely rare]
Square frank with single-line simulated perforation border.
Meter number and prefix in floating boxes at bottom.
M# with “K” prefix.
Ten machines only were used, most being withdrawn quite early. Meter K9 was used longest.
Very similar to Type A2 but only two parallel lines under “POSTES” instead of five.
Spacing between the TM and frank is narrower than with Type A2.
a. With Thai instead of Western year date
A6. Pitney Bowes-GB “6300”  (MV), 1983.
Small, horizontal frank with single-line simulated perforation border.
Scrollwork ornaments at sides.
M# with “P.” prefix in lower corners.
a. With Thai instead of Western year date
A7. Pitney Bowes-GB “6600”  (MV).
Similar to Type A5 but taller.
M# with. “P” prefix
a. With Thai instead of Western year date
A8. Pitney Bowes “A/B900” series (MV).
Similar to Type A5 but slightly wider and with larger, 5-bank value figures.
M# with “P” prefix.
a. With Thai instead of Western year date
A9. Neopost Alcatel “Electronic”  (MV), 1995.
Horizontal frank with straight line border.
Country name in horizontal panel at top.
M# with “A” prefix flanking “BAHT” at bottom
B1. Pitney Bowes "DM1000"  (digital), December 2008.
Frameless, horizontal frank with 'paper airplane' design at top center above the baht currency symbol.
Vertical 2D barcode at far left.
"THAILAND POST" at top right above the value figures, date, and 5-digit number.
At left are a number with "P. prefix, a 6-digit number, and the town name.
PO1. Matsushita Electric Company (MV), 4 August 1987.      [Scarce]
Upright frank in red on plain adhesive tape without outer frame.
Country name in Thai at top above two horizontal bars with the value figures in between.
“POSTAGE’ breaks the upper bar.
The town mark and country name in English are at center
A transaction number and the date are at bottom.
A. “POSTAGE” 10 mm wide
B. Small “POSTAGE” 7 mm wide (shown at right)
PO1.1. Matsushita Electric Company (MV).      [Appears to be rare]
Similar to Type PO1 but with "THAILAND" boxed at top and the post office identification boxed at center.
"POSTAGE" breaks the center box at its bottom.
NOTE: This may be an experimental design used for only a short time or at a single location.
PO2. Unidentified local manufacturer (digital), 2000.
Horizontal, unframed design printed in black on adhesive labels with serpentine 'perforations' at the sides.
Illustration of elephants at right below English country name.
Value figures below elephants, and various data including date and machine number at left.
A. Label with very faint horizontal lines      [Scarce]
B. Plain white label with fluorescent red stripe across top (2001)
C. Plain white label with inscription in blue and red across bottom, small characters (2004)
D. As C but the characters are larger (2006)
a. As D but the text and numbers are somewhat lighter, the date figures have footed 1's, and the date elements are separated by dashes instead of dots. These differences may represent a different machine model.
Sub-type PO2A labels tend to fade. Keeping them away from light has no affect. Sub-types PO2B, C, and D do not have this problem.
Many minor variations of Type PO2, and Type PO3 below, can be found. The differences are in the font and font size and also in the image of the elephants. It is probable that Thai Post tweaks the operating system in these machines frequently.
PO3. Unidentified local manufacturer (digital), 2008.
As PO2D but value figures are different, narrower and thicker, and with a wide space between the "≋" and the first digit.
a. Value figures without "≋"
NOTE: See the second Note below Type PO2.
PO4.1. Unidentified local manufacturer (digital).
Stacked at left: country name in English, transaction number, date and time, "POSTAGE".
Stacked at right: country name in Thai, weight, origin post code, value figures.
A. Used on ordinary mail, with elongated elephant above the preprinted "THAILAND POST" logo
B. Used on registered mail, with registration number and RR left of barcode. No elephant.
C. Used on express mail, with E and second letter left of barcode. No elephant.
a. With recipient's name added below value figures
b. With additional postage amount at left immediately above POSTAGE. This is the amount of postage pre-affixed when the mail piece was handed to the postal clerk.
c. Printed on label with the Thailand Post logo printed in a colorless ink that can be seen only under ultraviolet light. (See Type PO4.2)
PO4.2. Unidentified local manufacturer (digital).
Very similar to Type PO4.1 but the Thailand Post logo across the bottom is printed in a colorless ink that can be seen only under ultraviolet light.
A. Used on ordinary mail
B. Used on registered mail, with registration number and single large R at left
C. As B but with two smaller italic RR's left of barcode
D. Used on express mail, with E and second letter left of barcode. No elephant.
E. With large U at left. The service this indicates needs identification.
a. With Thailand Post logo upside-down
b. With recipient's name added below value figures
NOTE: The year in the date has been found in both the Western calendar (2018) and the Thai calendar (2561).
PV1. Thailand Post in cooperation with a local university (digital), 2006.
Label imperforate along top and bottom and with serpentine 'perforations' at the sides as used with types PO2 and PO3.
With barcode at bottom above the Thailand Post logo in blue and red (as found on type PO2D).
Ten machines were trialed in the Bangkok area.
The date is printed on the label, and they are valid only on the date of purchase.
V/F:       B00.00
a. BAHT misspelled as BATH (shown)
The Hasler "Mailmaster" stamp shown below was found on a mailed cover. It is inscribed entirely in Thai except for the town name at the bottom of the town mark. The status of the stamp is uncertain, but it may be a design used only for internal or local mail.
The frequency of the DDS output is as stable as the quartz the circuit is clocked with.
The frequency steps can be very small and the frequency value ranges up to the half of the clock frequency.
DDS can be used to realize function generators or oscillators within more complex circuits such as mixers, modulators and phase-locked loops.
A DDS is a free-running counter.
When the counter reaches its maximal value, it folds back to zero.
The counter output provides a sawtooth signal of programmable frequency
The counter MSB provides a binary signal with the same frequency
Considering the sawtooth output as a phase signal allows to calculate trigonometric functions and delivering a sine or even quadrature sine and cosine outputs
The sine and cosine values have been traditionally obtained with the help of ROM or Look-Up Tables (LUT).
However, the CORDIC operator calculates these functions with the same level of accuracy together with a highly reduced hardware cost.
If the counter increments by 1 at every rising clock edge,
The counter itself provides a sawtooth signal.
The counter MSB provides a square signal.
A sinewave output can be produced considering the sawtooth as a phase signal.
The sine function can be computed with the help of the CORDIC operator.
The following figure shows the time signals of a DDS.
The Fourier transform of the square and sine waves is given in the following figure.
The sinewave gives the two blue peaks, as expected.
The square wave is a periodic signal and has only odd harmonics.
The preceeding figures have been made with a nice step value: 16.
When the step value doesn't exactly divide the counter range, the teeth of the sawtooth are more ragged
The following figure shows the time signals of a DDS with an odd-valued step.
The Fourier transform of the square and sine waves is given in the following figure.
The sinewave remains a pure tone.
The square wave shows much more frequency content.
The DDS circuit can be very efficiently implemented in programmable circuits such as FPGAs.
It is built out of a counter followed by a block calculating a sine from the counter output which is considered as a phase.
The calculation of the sine is best done using the CORDIC algorithm.
The VHDL source for a DDS can be found on opencores.
This implementation prefers to calculate the sine function with the help of lookup tables rather than with CORDIC.
This is the flexible move. The Knight comes out to f6 and threatens the e4 pawn. It's important that Black determines how White deals with the e4 pawn before moving pawns further if White plays Nc3 then he can no longer play c4 first. 5.e5? is a common mistake as ...Qa5+ picks up material.
1.e4 c5 2.Nf3 e6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Sicilian Defence
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
This Chess related article is a Wikibooks:Chess stub.  Please assist Wikibooks by expanding it.
In this section, you will learn how to use the tools in Paint.NET  Screenshot of the Paint.NET tools menu.  Screenshot of the Paint.NET tools window
Click on the tool you want to learn about! If you're a beginner, you should start from the top left.
To access your tools, you can
Use the pull-down menu on the upper-left hand corner of your screen
Many class activities take on communication patterns that class members learn to expect without even being reminded. Each pattern is a participation structure, a set of taken-for-granted rights and responsibilities expected from students and teacher during an activity. Sometimes the teacher announces or explains the rights and responsibilities explicitly, though often they are just implied by the actions of class members, and individual students learn them simply by watching others. A lecture, for example, has a particular participation structure: students are responsible for listening, for raising a hand to speak, and for keeping comments brief and relevant if called on. The teacher, on the other hand, has the right to talk at length, but also the responsibility to keep the talk relevant and comprehensible.
In principle, a host of participation structures are possible, but just a handful account for most class activities (Cazden, 2001).[1] Here are some of the most common:
Lecturing—the teacher talks and students listen. Maybe students take notes, but maybe not.
Questions and Answers—the teacher asks a series of questions, calling on one student at a time to answer each of them. Students raise their hands to be recognized and give answers that are brief and “correct.” In earlier times this participation structures was sometimes called recitation.
Discussion—the teacher briefly describes a topic or problem and invites students to comment on it. Students say something relevant about the topic, but also are supposed to respond to previous speakers if possible.
Group work—the teacher assigns a general task, and a small group of students work out the details of implementing it. The teacher may check on the group’s progress before they finish, but not necessarily.
Each of these structures influences how communication among teachers and students tends to occur; in fact each is itself sort of an implied message about how, when, and  with whom to interact. To see how this influence works, look in the next sections at how the participation structures affected classroom communication for one of the contributors to this book (KelvinLeeSeifert as he taught one particular topic—children’s play—over a twenty-year period. The topic was part of a university-level course for future teachers. During this time, Kelvin’s goals about the topic remained the same: to stimulate students’ thinking about the nature and purposes of play. But over time he tried several different structures of participation, and students’ ways of communicating changed as a result.
The first time one of the contributors to this book, (KelvinLeeSeifert, taught his students about children’s play, he lectured about it. He used this structure of participation not because he believed on principle that it was the best, but because it was convenient and used widely by his fellow university teachers. An excerpt from Kelvin’s lecture notes is shown in Table 12-3a, and gives a sense of what he covered at that time.
In some ways the lecture proved effective: Kelvin covered the material efficiently (in about 20 minutes), related the topic to other ones in the course, defined and explained all key terms clearly, and did his best to relate the material to what he thought were students’ own interests. These were all marks of good lecturing (Christensen, 2006).[2] Students were mostly quiet during the lecture, but since only about a third of them took notes, Kelvin had to assume that the rest had committed the material to memory while listening. Students quietness bothered him a little, but as a newcomer to university teaching, Kelvin was relieved simply to get through the class without embarrassment or active resistance from the students.
But there were also some negative signs. In spite of their courtesy, few students lingered after class to talk about children’s play or to ask questions. Worse yet, few students chose children’s play as a term paper topic, even though it might have made a highly interesting and enjoyable one. On the final exam few seemed able to relate concepts about play to their own experiences as teachers or leaders of recreational activities.
There was an even more subtle problem. The lecture about play focused overtly on a topic (play) that praised action, intrinsic motivation, and self-choice. But by presenting these ideas as a lecture, Kelvin also implied an opposite message unintentionally: that learning is something done passively, and that follows an intellectual path set only by the teacher. Even the physical layout of the classroom sent this message—desks faced forward, as if to remind students to look only at the person lecturing. These are features of lecturing, as Kelvin later discovered, that are widely criticized in educational research (McKeachie & Svinicki, 2005; Benedict & Hoag, 2004).[3][4] To some students the lecture format might even have implied that learning is equivalent to daydreaming, since both activities require sitting quietly and showing little expression. An obvious solution might have been to invite students to comment from time to time during the lecture, relating the topic to experiences and knowledge of their own. But during Kelvin’s first year of teaching about play, he did little of this. The lecture medium, ironically, contradicted the lecture message, or at least it assumed that students would think actively about the material without ever speaking.
Because of these problems, Kelvin modified his approach after a few years of teaching to include more asking of questions which students were invited to answer. This turned the lecture on children’s play into something more like a series of explanations of key ideas, interrupted by asking students to express their beliefs, knowledge, or experience about children’s play. Kelvin’s preparation notes changes in appearance as a result (see Table 12-3b). Asking questions and inviting brief responses was reassuring because it gave indications of whether students were listening and understanding the material. Questions served both to motivate students to listen and to assess how much and how well they knew the material. In this regard Kelvin was using a form of communication that was and continues to be very popular with many teachers.
But there were also new challenges and problems. For one thing the topic of children’s play took longer to cover than before, since Kelvin now had to allow time for students to respond to questions. This fact forced him to leave out a few points that he used to include. More serious, though, was his impression that students often did not listen to each other’s responses; they only listened carefully to Kelvin, the teacher. The interactions often become simply two-way exchanges between the teacher and one student at a time: Kelvin asked, one student responded, Kelvin acknowledged or (sometimes) evaluated. (Mehan, 1979; Richards, 2006).[5][6] Some of the exchanges could in principle have happened just as easily without any classmates present.
In general students still had little control over the course of discussion. Kelvin wondered if he was controlling participation too much—in fact whether the question-and-answer strategy attempted the impossible task of controlling students’ very thought processes. By asking most of the questions himself and allowing students only brief responses, was Kelvin trying to insure making sure that students thought about children’s play in the “right” way, his way? To give students more influence in discussion, it seemed that Kelvin would have to become less concerned about precisely what ideas about children’s play he covered.
After several more years of teaching, Kelvin quit lectures altogether, even ones interspersed with questions and answers, and began simply leading general discussions about children’s play. The change again affected his planning for this topic. Instead of outlining detailed content, he now just made concise notes that listed issues about children’s play that students needed to consider (an abbreviated version of the notes are shown in Table 12-3c). The shift in participation structure led to several major changes in communication between teacher and students as well as among students. Since students spoke more freely than before, it became easier to see whether they cared about the topic. Now, too, more students seemed motivated to think and learn about children’s play; quite a few selected this topic, for example, for their term projects. Needless to say, these changes were all to the good.
But there were also changes that limited the effectiveness of classroom communication, even though students were nominally freer to speak than ever. Kelvin found, for example, that certain students spoke more than their share of the time—almost too freely, in fact, in effect preventing more hesitant students from speaking. Sometimes, too, it seemed as if certain students did not listen to others’ comments, but instead just passed the time waiting for their turn to speak, their hands propped permanently in the air. Meanwhile, there were still others who passed the time apparently hoping not to speak; they were busy doodling or staring out the window. Since the precise focus of discussion was no longer under Kelvin’s control, furthermore, discussions often did not cover all of the ideas about children’s play that Kelvin considered important. On one occasion, for example, he meant for students to discuss whether play is always motivated intrinsically, but instead they ended up talking about whether play can really be used to teach every possible subject area. In itself the shift in focus was not bad, but it did make Kelvin wonder whether he was covering the material adequately. In having these misgivings, as it happened, he was supported by other educators who have studied the effects of class discussions on learning (McKeatchie & Svinciki, 2005).[7]
By the time he had taught about children’s play for twenty years, Kelvin had developed enough concerns about discussion as a communication strategy that he shifted approach again. This time he began using a form of collaborative group work: small teams of students carrying out projects on aspects of children’s play that interested them, making observations of children at play, reporting on their results to the class, and writing a common report about their work. (Kelvin’s work guidelines given to the groups are shown in Table 12-3d.) Kelvin hoped that by giving students a common focus, communication among them would improve. Conversations would deal with the tasks at hand, students would necessarily listen to each other, and no one could afford either to dominate talk excessively or to fall silent.
In some ways these benefits did take place. With a bit of encouragement from Kelvin, students did listen to each other more of the time than before. They also did diversify their tasks and responsibilities within each group, and they did seem to learn from each other in the course of preparing projects. Participation in the unit about children’s play reached an all-time high in Kelvin’s twenty years of teaching at university. Yet even now there were problems. Some groups seemed much more productive than others, and observing them closely suggested that differences were related to ease of communication within groups. In some groups, one or two people dominated conversations unduly. If they listened to others at all, they seemed immediately to forget that they had done so and proceeded to implement their own ideas. In other groups, members all worked hard, but they did not often share ideas or news about each other’s progress; essentially they worked independently in spite of belonging to the group. Here, too, Kelvin’s experience corroborated other, more systematic observations of communication within classroom work groups (Slavin, 1995). When all groups were planning at the same time, furthermore, communication broke down for a very practical reason: the volume of sound in the classroom got so high that even simple conversation became difficult, let alone the expression of subtle or complex ideas.
↑ Cazden, C. (2001). Classroom discourse: The language of teaching and learning, 2nd edition. Westport, CT: Heinemann.
↑ Christensen, N. (2006). The nuts and bolts of running a lecture course. In A. DeNeef & C. Goodwin (Eds.), The academic’s handbook, 3rd edition, pp. 179-186. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
↑ McKeatchie, W. & Svinicki, M. (2005). Teaching tips: Strategies, research, and theory for college teachers, 12th edition. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
↑ Benedict, M. & Hoag, J. (2004). Seating location in large lectures: Is location related to performance? Journal of Economics Education, 35(3), 215-231.
↑ Mehan, H. (1979). Learning lessons: Social organization of the classroom. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
↑ Richards, K. (2006). ‘Being the teacher’: Identity and classroom discourse. Applied Linguistics, 27(1), 51-77.
↑ McKeatchie, W. & Svinicki, M. (2005). Teaching tips: Strategies, research, and theory for college teachers, 12th edition. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
<< Macedonian | Macedonian Alphabet | Macedonian Grammar | Macedonian Numbers | Macedonian Verbs | Macedonian Words | Common phrases >>
Writing the book I was working on XFCE graphic environment which is one of two supported by sidux
But sidux is in 100 % compatible with Debian so I can't see any reason to not try others environments.
a. Konquror - web browser
b. Dophin - file manager
c. K3b - CD/DVD burning studio
d. Digikam - graphics files organizer and editor; supports digital cameras as well
e. KMail - e-mail client
f. Kopete - multi-messenger
g. Amarok - audio player
h. Kaffeine - video player
i. KTorrent - BitTorrent client
Download sidux LiveCD "Lite" or "Full" version from project side: http://sidux.com/module-mirrors.html and make new installation from beginning.
Or install it with existing environment "Lite" version:
Next re-boot your system and choose on screenspash: Sesssion-> KDE.
You can set KDE as primery environmet or run it for one session only.
About KDE on Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/K_Desktop_Environment
Add-ons for KDE: http://www.kde-look.org/
If have you been installed sidux with KDE before and want to install XFCE as a second one:
After that log out and log in choosing; Sessions-> XFCE.
You can install sidux with XFCE from a CD of course too.
a. Thunar - file manager
b. Mousepad - text editor
c. Xfmedia - audio and video player
d. Xfburn - CD/DVD burner
e. Orage - simply calendar
f. Ristretto - graphics files viewer.
On Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xfce
Add-ons for XFCE: http://xfce-look.org/
Next graphic environment (not supported by sidux but supported by Debian) is GNOME.
It is a large environment (like KDE) with many applications such as:
a. Nautilus - file manager
b. Evolution - e-mail client
c. Epiphany - web browser
d. AbiWord - text processor
e. Brasero - CD/DVD burner
e. Ekiga - VoIP telephony client
f. Gimp - raster graphics editor
g. Pidgin or Empathy - multi-messenger
h. Totem - video player
"Lite" version installation:
After installation just log out and log in as before.
Add-ons for GNOME: http://gnome-look.org/
LXDE is a very light environment designed for older computers.
a. OpenBox - window manager
b. LXPanel - desktop panel
c. PCMan - file manager
d. Xarchiver - archivizer
e. GPicView - graphics viewer
FluxBox: http://www.fluxbox.org/, on Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fluxbox
Enlightenment: http://www.enlightenment.org/, on Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enlightenment
IceWM: https://ice-wm.org/, on Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IceWM
Openbox file manager: http://openbox.org/, on Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Openbox
WMmaker file manager: http://www.windowmaker.info/, on Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Window_Maker
Xpde: http://www.xpde.com/
Fatty liver disease is associated with other diseases that influence fat metabolism.
User management is needed to associate metadata with its authors. FOAF should help out with this : http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/
Drawing on the experience of the Indian Ocean tsunami disaster
This Publication has been developed by United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction Asia & Pacific.
About UNISDR Regional Office for Asia & Pacific
With over 50% of the total world disasters, the Asia and Pacific Islands region represents the widest and most disaster prone continent in the world, beyond Africa, with a regular and increased frequency of typhoons, tsunamis, floods, droughts, fires and other natural hazards. Despite the wealth of expertise, knowledge and know-how in disaster risk reduction, the increasing population growth, widespread poverty, environmental degradation, rising pollution and wild human settlements keep increasing the vulnerabilities of most communities in Asia and the Pacific Islands, thereby creating a favorable terrain to allow the above natural hazards to transform invariably into devastating disasters wiping out all human lives and economic lifelines on their way, and setting back years of continued development efforts.
In December 2004, the tragic tsunami in the Indian Ocean has heightened the level of awareness of the communities in Asia and the Pacific about the importance of integrating disaster risk reduction into national development planning and reminded them of the need to work together in a coordinated manner to respond to the threat of disasters.
In that spirit, as a direct follow-up to the World Conference on Disaster Reduction (January 2005, Kobe, Japan) and at the request of the 168 UN Member States grouped together on the occasion, the UN/ISDR established a regional presence to cover the whole Asia and Pacific Islands region. The UN/ISDR regional Unit for Asia and the Pacific was set up in June 2005 in Bangkok, Thailand, hosted by the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP).
The UN/ISDR Asia & Pacific is currently divided into two separate bodies:
(i) A regional unit, based in Bangkok, Thailand, which covers the whole Asia and Pacific Islands region. It includes a Senior Regional Coordinator and a Regional Programme Officer, as well as two local support staff
(ii) A sub-regional liaison office for Central Asia, based in Dushanbe, Tajikistan and covering Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan and Tajikistan, is coordinated by a Junior Professional Officer
The core mandate of the UN/ISDR Asia & Pacific includes awareness-raising activities in disaster risk reduction, including the promotion of the World Disaster Reduction Campaign and the annual UN Sasakawa Award for Disaster Reduction, advocacy through policy formulation, the dissemination of guidelines to assist in the implementation of the Hyogo Framework for Action (HFA), promote the establishment of national platforms for disaster risk reduction, enhance networking and partnership-building to contribute to an effective culture of safety and protection of all communities in the Asia and Pacific Islands region.
Three specific areas of focus have been identified to guide the work of the UN/ISDR Asia and the Pacific. They include:
(i) The promotion of the Hyogo Framework for Action (HFA 2005–2015) throughout the whole Asia and Pacific Islands region and the forging of partnerships at the regional level to facilitate its implementation, with the effective operational support and expertise of members of the ISDR Asian Partnership on Disaster Reduction (IAP) and other relevant players.
(ii) The follow-up and strengthening of the projects carried out under the United Nations Flash Appeal for the Indian Ocean Tsunami Early Warning System (IOTWS), including an increased cooperation and coordination with relevant technical partners and the donor community. (iii) The development of an effective information management system with comprehensive databases, the maintenance of a regional website, the production of a bi-annual publication “Disaster Reduction in Asia and the Pacific - ISDR Informs”, the dissemination of regional highlights promoting regional partners’ initiatives and relevant events among other.
The UN/ISDR Asia and Pacific Islands works through a growing network of national platforms to mobilize governmental actions in disaster risk reduction as well as directly with the governments in the region, as mandated though the HFA, to assist them in identifying their priorities and in formulating their national action plan on disaster risk reduction towards its integration in national development plans. It also makes an effective use of regional partners’ networks at the national level, in particular the UN Country Team members, to facilitate the effective implementation of DRR strategies.
The report draws on the experiences of many organizations and individuals during and following the tsunami. The eleven lessons for a safer future are offered as a contribution to the ongoing process of learning how nations, communities and individuals can become better prepared for and reduce the risk of potential natural hazards.
Public awareness is an essential element of preparedness for saving lives and livelihoods.
Individuals and communities play important roles in managing risks from natural hazards.
Diverse livelihood systems and micro-financial services help poor people to survive disaster events.
Traditional knowledge is valuable and can inform and protect communities.
Disaster knowledge should be included in formal education curricula.
Early warning systems are needed for all hazards and all people.
Land use planning and protection of ecological systems can reduce disaster risks.
Developing and adhering to building codes can minimise risks and losses.
Political and public commitment to reduce the risk of disasters is imperative.
Humanitarian and development innovations are needed to reduce disaster risks.
Natural hazards span borders and their management requires global cooperation.
Hyogo Framework for Action 2005-2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters (HFA)
Also contained in the Report of the World Conference on Disaster Reduction, A/CONF.206/6, 16 March 2005.
Available in English, French, Spanish, Chinese, Arabic and Russian at web site http://www.unisdr.org/eng/hfa/hfa.htm
Living with Risk: A Global Review of Disaster Reduction Initiatives 2004 version, Inter-Agency Secretariat of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UN/ISDR), Geneva. 430pp.
See http://www.unisdr.org/eng/about_isdr/bd-lwr-2004-eng.htm
Joint Evaluation of the International Response to the Indian Ocean Tsunami: Synthesis Report, John Telford and John Cosgrove, and Rachel Houghton,Tsunami Evaluation Coalition, July 2004, 176pp.
A synthesis of five detailed reports by the multi-stakeholder Tsunami Evaluation Coalition covering humanitarian coordination, needs assessment, impacts on local and national capacities, funding processes, and links from relief, rehabilitation and development.
See http://www.alnap.org and http://www.tsunami-evaluation.org
United Nations Office of the Special Envoy on Tsunami Recovery.
See http://www.tsunamispecialenvoy.org/ for reports, press releases and other materials.
Lessons save life: Story of Tilly Smith and The power of knowledge: Story of a little boy from Semilieu, Indonesia, videos produced by UN/ISDR, 2005.
Available on CD as Video file in English at http://www.unisdr.org/eng/media-room/mr-videos.htm
See http://www.unisdr.org/eng/library/lib-biblio.htm
More information and links concerning disaster risk reduction and the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction may be found at http://www.unisdr.org
You can download the complete publication from United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction- Asia Pacific
This subsection moves from the canonical form for nilpotent matrices to
We have shown that if a map is nilpotent then all of its eigenvalues are zero.
We can now prove the converse.
-dimensional space has only the single eigenvalue of zero
.
The Cayley-Hamilton Theorem says that a map satisfies its
We have a canonical form for nilpotent matrices,
(To make this representation unique we can fix some arrangement of
We next extend this to all single-eigenvalue matrices.
.
The natural way to extend the results for nilpotent matrices is to
, and try to use that
.
The next result says that this try works.
.
, as required.
.
The null spaces are routine to find; to ease this computation we take
.
Thus, the canonical form for
We can produce the similarity computation.
Recall from the Nilpotence section how to find the change of
.
An array that is all zeroes, except for some number
Jordan block.
We have shown that Jordan block matrices are
The three classes have these canonical representatives.
We will now finish the program of this chapter by extending this work to
The best possibility for general maps and matrices would be
(which we represent using its Jordan block),
, etc.
More precisely, we shall take three steps to get to this section's major
's eigenvalues.
Note that the restriction[1]
.
To ensure that the restriction of a transformation
For the generalized null space, if
For the generalized range space, if
.
The next result is the first of our three steps.
's part unchanged.
.
, then for any other eigenvalue
For the first sentence we check the two implications of the
"if and only if" separately.
For the other implication suppose that the subspace is
.
, as required.
The second sentence follows straight from the first.
From this, applying the first sentence again, we
The second step of the three that we will take to prove this
, that they are complementary.
Recall that if a space is the direct sum of two others
The next result says that for any subspaces
.
Since the two subspaces are complementary, the concatenation of a basis
.
The argument for the upper right is similar.
.
So, with subspaces that are invariant and complementary,
a linear transformation into two lower-dimensional subproblems.
The next result illustrates this decomposition into blocks.
's are blocks of zeroes,
.
In the permutation formula for the determinant
.
e.g., if
.
So the above formula reduces to a sum over all permutations with
.
Now, the distributive law
(and the fact that the signum of a composition is the product
.
Now for the promised third, final, step to the main result.
.
For the latter, by Lemma 2.7,
.
That cannot be, so this restriction has no eigenvalues:
(Lemma V.II.3.10 shows that
To prove statement (2), fix the index
.
By the uniqueness clause of the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic,
.
Statement (2) will be proved if we will show that
, because then the degree of
For that, first,
.
By Note V.III.2.2, the map
.
's down the diagonal and some subdiagonal ones).
, consider the linear map
.
Lemma 2.8 and the prior lemma show
To make those blocks into Jordan blocks, pick each
.
Jordan form is a canonical form for similarity classes of square
Jordan blocks from least eigenvalue to greatest and then
.
Computation of the powers, and the null spaces and nullities,
(Recall from Example 2.3 the convention
From the way that the nullities grow we know that the action
.
Thus the restriction can be represented in the canonical form
Consequently, the action of the restriction of
The second eigenvalue's computations are easier.
Its action on a string basis must be
Consequently, the canonical form
.
For the basis we can use any nonzero vector from the generalized null space.
Taken together, these two give that
.
While the characteristic polynomial is the same,
(So the contrast with the prior example is that while
.
For the other eigenvalue, the arguments for the second eigenvalue of
.
(Checking that the third vector in
.
A similar calculation for the other eigenvalue
.
We close with the statement that the subjects considered earlier in this
Chpater are indeed, in this sense, exhaustive.
Every square matrix is similar to the sum of a diagonal matrix and a nilpotent
Do the check for Example 2.3.
State its characteristic polynomial and its minimal polynomial.
This exercise is recommended for all readers.
Find the Jordan form from the given data.
.
Find the change of basis matrices for each example.
This exercise is recommended for all readers.
Find the Jordan form and a Jordan basis for each matrix.
This exercise is recommended for all readers.
Find all possible Jordan forms of a transformation with characteristic
.
Find all possible Jordan forms of a transformation with characteristic
.
This exercise is recommended for all readers.
Find all possible Jordan forms of a transformation with characteristic
.
Find all possible Jordan forms of a transformation with characteristic
.
This exercise is recommended for all readers.
Diagonalize these.
This exercise is recommended for all readers.
Find the Jordan matrix representing the differentiation
.
This exercise is recommended for all readers.
Decide if these two are similar.
Find the Jordan form of this matrix.
Also give a Jordan basis.
How many similarity classes are there for
?
This exercise is recommended for all readers.
Prove that a matrix is diagonalizable if and only if its minimal
Give an example of a linear transformation on a vector
Find the formula for the characteristic polynomial of
Is trace invariant under matrix equivalence?
Show that the trace of a map is the sum of its eigenvalues
Show that the trace of a nilpotent map is zero.
Does the converse hold?
To use Definition 2.6 to check whether a subspace
This exercise is recommended for all readers.
Under union?
Complementation?
Sums of subspaces?
Give a way to order the Jordan blocks if some of the eigenvalues
That is, suggest a reasonable ordering for the complex numbers.
, the vector space (over the
Show that they are subspaces.
Are they complementary?
Are they invariant under the differentiation transformation?
Lemma 2.8 says that if
Does the implication reverse?
.
Show that any nonsingular matrix has a square root.
Rendering of Cayley's nodal cubic surface using different colors on the two sides of the surface.
This tutorial covers two-sided per-pixel lighting (i.e. two-sided Phong shading).
Here we combine the per-pixel lighting discussed in Section “Smooth Specular Highlights” with the two-sided lighting discussed in Section “Two-Sided Surfaces”.
The required changes to the code of Section “Smooth Specular Highlights” are: new properties for the back material, deactivation of culling, new local variables for the material parameters in the fragment shader, which are set either to the front material parameters or the back material parameters according to gl_FrontFacing. Also, the surface normal vector is negated in case a back face is rendered. It's actually quite straightforward. The code looks like this:
Shader "GLSL two-sided per-pixel lighting" {
_BackSpecColor ("Back Material Specular Color", Color)
As always, the only difference between the two passes is the lack of ambient lighting and the additive blending in the second pass.
Congratulations, you have reached the end of this short tutorial. We have seen:
How two-sided surfaces can be rendered with per-pixel lighting.
If you still want to know more
Unless stated otherwise, all example source code on this page is granted to the public domain.
You will need to pass through three gold rings to open the force field to DarkIce Mines. Fail to do so would require you to do it again.
The Arwing will land at the bottom of a lava pit. There are two paths out of the pit: one in front of the Arwing and one behind it. It doesn't matter which one you choose because they will soon converge, and the path will narrow dramatically. At that point, you might want to walk instead of run. Be careful of fireballs shooting from the lava and the numerous gaps (including a hidden one where the bridge will collapse on contact) that are scattered across the trail.
Have Tricky dig a tunnel through the pile of snow that is blocking the entrance to shed on the left side of the trail. Destroy the two SharpClaws inside to get rid of the red barrier, and press the A button while in front of the newly-revealed container to open it. There is a Shackle Key inside. Use it to free the shackled SnowHorn outside of the shed. She will ask that you help Belina Te, Garunda Te's daughter, and she will give you a Bridge Cog, an item that she discovered during her captivity.
Continue along the path, and you'll come across a small gorge with a river flowing at its bottom. Climb down the stones on the far left, and cross the wooden dock at the bottom to the machine behind the waterfall. Place the bridge cog where indicated by a C-Stick, raise the lever on the left with the A button, and a bridge will appear across the gorge.
NOTE: If you fall into the water, get out as quickly as possible because you will gradually lose health if you stay there. Also, watch out for enemies hiding in the walls of the gorge that fire green projectiles. You can destroy them by using the Fire Blaster on the green eyes that pop up in the nooks of those walls.
This is Wiki review of the journal article: A nutrition and exercise intervention program for controlling weight in Samoan communities in New Zealand by Bell et al. (2001)[1]
What is the background to this research?
Samoans are considered one of the most obese populations in the world.[1] Previous studies have investigated the connection between migration, changing of diet, and less physically demanding jobs to the increased chances of mortality and chronic diseases, such as obesity, diabetes and cardiovascular disease.[2][3][4][5][6]
The large majority of research has been conducted with Samoan church communities in New Zealand. Researchers have acknowledged that with migration, the church has replaced the role of the village and become the centre point and social hub of the community.[2][6]
The objective of the Samoan Ola Fa’autauta (Life Wise) Study was to conduct a nutrition and exercise intervention to promote weight loss in Samoan church communities in Auckland.[1]
The study was carried out by a team of researchers from the Faculty of Medicine and Health Science at the University of Auckland, who were supported by the Health Research Council of New Zealand and the Pacific Islander Heartbeat, a program run by National Heart Foundation of New Zealand. The study was published in the 2001 International Journal of Obesity.[1]
What kind of research was this?
The Samoan Ola Fa’autauta Study used a quasi-experimental study to assess weight change. A quasi-experimental study can be defined as research that aims to evaluate interventions without the use of randomisations.[7]
Researchers chose this type of design so that the Otara church (the largest of the three churches) was non-randomly selected to receive the one year intervention activities, while the two smaller churches acted as control groups.[1]
What did the research involve?
The study involved 609 adults who were 20 years old and over. The participants were required to have their height, weight, waist and hip circumferences measured, complete a diet and life style questionnaire and have their physical activity levels assessed.
A diet and life style questionnaire was used to understand the participants’ nutritional knowledge and healthy habits.[1] The questionnaire assessed the following:
Participants’ knowledge of the fat content in 23 commonly consumed foods
Frequency of green vegetables consumed during dinner
Frequency of fat from meats was removed
Participants’ physical activity levels were assessed by determining whether they were moderately or vigorously active during leisure time in a normal week. Brisk walking and other similar activities were considered a moderate level of physical activity, while activities causing the participant to sweat or breathe heavily was classified as a vigorous level of physical activity. For the participants who did not undertake any exercise or didn’t meet the criteria of moderate physical activity they were classified as sedentary.[1]
The main aim of the intervention group was to lose weight. The intervention consisted of three main components:[1]
Encouragement of a low fat diet was conducted in the form of one hour nutrition education sessions delivered to participants, their families, caterers and the whole church congregation. The sessions advised dietary recommendations based on the healthy food pyramid and demonstrated fat lowering techniques and alternatives.[1]
Creation of walking groups and weekly aerobic sessions were established to encourage physical activity. Aerobic sessions were conducted by the Pacific Islander Heartbeat and scheduled around normal church gatherings.[1]
Train church members to become leaders of nutrition education and aerobic sessions.
Church members were selected to participate in training sessions to gain accreditation in nutrition education and aerobics fitness. It was hoped that the accredited church members would be able to lead nutrition education and aerobic sessions without the assistance Pacific Islander Heartbeat after the study was completed.[1]
What were the basic results?
Weight loss for intervention group: Mean of 0.4 kg loss
Weight gain for the control group: Mean of 1.5 kg was gained
Decline in hip circumference for intervention group: Mean of -0.5 cm
Increase in hip circumferences for the control group: Mean +2.1 cm
No significant change in waist circumference or blood pressure
o	Weight that had been lost during the intervention year was regained
o	Decrease in moderately active participants
o	Increase of people diluting coconut cream
How did the researchers interpret the results?
The researchers interpreted the results of the study by concluding that one year of nutrition and exercise intervention was beneficial in stalling weight gain and encouraging a number of people to increase physical activity intensity from moderate to vigorous. The results also acknowledged positive changes in blood pressure and the continuation of physical activity after the study.[1]
What conclusions should be taken away from this research?
The current trend is that Samoan communities are very obese and vulnerable to weight gain and this likely to continue unless there is drastic changes.[1] Better nutrition and an increase in exercise have proven to achieve weight loss. However several areas were identified that still needs to be addressed such as maintaining weight loss, Samoans community’s cultural beliefs about food, sedentary behavior and continual increase in weight gain despite the pre-existing adiposity.[1]
What are the implications of this research?
The research indicates that the implementation of a nutrition and exercise intervention in Samoan communities is proven to have health benefits. An increase in physical activity and better nutrition can decreases chances of mortality and reduces the likelihood chronic diseases, such as obesity, diabetes and cardiovascular disease.[1][2][3][4][5][6]
However, despite the good intentions of the researchers and the benefits associated with the interventions, the Samoan community need to take greater responsibility in addressing the serious health issues in their population. Adequate changes that could be made include a cultural shift in the role of food in traditional customs, promoting the intake of traditional foods and greater leadership within Samoan communities to promote healthier and more active lifestyles.[1][3][4]
Future interventions needs to ensure that any healthy weight loss and participation in physical activities is preserved over a lifetime.[1][4]
↑ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q 1.	Bell AC, Swinburn BA, Amosa H & Scragg R. A nutrition and exercise intervention program for controlling weight in Samoan communities in New Zealand. International Journal of Obesity [Internet]. 2011 [Cited 2015 Sept 28]; 25 (6): 920-927. Available from: http://zh9bf5sp6t.scholar.serialssolutions.com/?sid=google&auinit=AC&aulast=Bell&atitle=A+nutrition+and+exercise+intervention+program+for+controlling+weight+in+Samoan+communities+in+New+Zealand&title=International+journal+of+obesity+%282005%29&volume=25&issue=6&date=2001&spage=920&issn=0307-0565
↑ a b c 2.	Simmons D, Fleming C, Vovly J, Fou F, Feo S & Gatland B. A pilot urban church-based programme to reduce risk factors for diabetes among Western Samoans in New Zealand. Diabetic Medicine [Internet]. 1998 [Cited 2015 Sept 28]; 15 (2): 136-142. Available from: http://zh9bf5sp6t.scholar.serialssolutions.com/?sid=google&auinit=D&aulast=Simmons&atitle=A+pilot+urban+church%E2%80%90based+programme+to+reduce+risk+factors+for+diabetes+among+Western+Samoans+in+New+Zealand&id=doi:10.1002/%28SICI%291096-9136%28199802%2915:2%3C136::AID-DIA530%3E3.0.CO%3B2-P&title=Diabetic+medicine&volume=15&issue=2&date=1998&spage=136&issn=0742-3071
↑ a b c 3.	Pawson I & Janes G. Massive obesity in a migrant Samoan population. American Journal of Public Health [Internet]. 1981 [Cited 2015 Sept 28]; 71 (5): 508-513. Available from: http://zh9bf5sp6t.scholar.serialssolutions.com/?sid=google&auinit=IG&aulast=Pawson&atitle=Massive+obesity+in+a+migrant+Samoan+population.&id=pmid:7212139
↑ a b c d 4.	Bell AC, Swinburn BA, Amosa H, Scragg R & Sharpe S. The impact of modernisation on the diets of adults aged 20-40 years from Samoan church communities in Auckland. Asia-Pacific Journal of Public Health [Internet]. 1999 [Cited 2015 Sept 28]; 11 (1): 4-9. Available from: http://zh9bf5sp6t.scholar.serialssolutions.com/?sid=google&auinit=AC&aulast=Bell&atitle=The+impact+of+modernisation+on+the+diets+of+adults+aged+20-40+years+from+Samoan+church+communities+in+Auckland&id=pmid:10829820
↑ a b 5.	Renzaho A, Mellor D, Boulton K & Swinburn B. Effectiveness of prevention programmesfor obesity and choric diseases among immigrates to developed countries – a systematic review. Public Health Nutrition [Internet]. 2010 [Cited 2015 Sept 28]; 13 (3): 1-13. Available from: http://zh9bf5sp6t.scholar.serialssolutions.com/?sid=google&auinit=A&aulast=Renzaho&atitle=Effectiveness+of+prevention+programmes+for+obesity+and+chronic+diseases+among+immigrants+to+developed+countries%E2%80%93a+systematic+review&id=doi:10.1017/S136898000999111X&title=Public+health+nutrition&volume=13&issue=03&date=2010&spage=438&issn=1368-9800
↑ a b c 6.	Simmons D, Fleming C, Vovly J, Fou F, Feo S & Leakehe L. Tale of two churches: differential impact of a church-based diabetes control programme among Pacific Islands people in New Zealand. Diabetic Medicine [Internet]. 2004 [Cited 2015 Sept 28]; 21 (2): 122-128. Available from: http://zh9bf5sp6t.scholar.serialssolutions.com/?sid=google&auinit=D&aulast=Simmons&atitle=Tale+of+two+churches:+differential+impact+of+a+church%E2%80%90based+diabetes+control+programme+among+Pacific+Islands+people+in+New+Zealand&id=doi:10.1111/j.1464-5491.2004.01020.x&title=Diabetic+medicine&volume=21&issue=2&date=2004&spage=122&issn=0742-3071
↑ 7.	Harris A, McGregor J, Perencevich E, Furuno K, Zhu J, Peterson D & Finkelstein J. The use and interpretation of quasi-experimental studies in medical informatics. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association [Internet]. 2006 [Cited 2015 Sept 28]; 13 (1): 16-23. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1380192/
Wikibooks Modern HistoryPopulation, Governance, Philosophy, Invention, Weapons, Combat, Trade, Exploration
Current status: This book does not yet contain much content. Work for expansion is beginning. Creation of stubs linking to Wikisource and Wikipedia is in progress.
Contributors: If you copy (instead of link) content from elsewhere into this book, for example content from Wikipedia or public domain sources, then you MUST CREDIT the source of such copied text.
This section is for criticisms of fluency shaping therapies.
As described in the entry for the qualitative description of shocks, finite amplitude waves in any medium will undergo a steepening phenomena cumulating in the formation of shock wave. For strong flows and wave conditions where fluid velocity is similar in magnitude to sound speed, u/co ≥ O(1), where u is the particle velocity and co is the ambient sound speed, the transition to a shockwave occurs rapidly and can be termed a local effect. For weaker wave conditions where u/co << 1, but nonlinear effects are still observable, wave steepening occurs over many wavelengths and can be termed a cumulative effect. In this regime of wave strengths an important result of wave deformation is the accumulation of harmonic content in the propagating waveform.
Figure 1: Progressive deformation of an initially sinusoidal wave profile. Local trajectories are plotted on the x-t axis for the wave maximum (c + v), the local equilibrium (co), and the wave minimum (c + v).
Provided sufficient amplitude, or a nearly inviscid fluid, shock waves are formed in a progressive wave. It is for this reason that cumulative deformation is more likely to result in shocks in water than air, as air can be highly dissipative at the required wave amplitudes. Although not discussed in the sections to follow, the generation of new harmonic content continues after shock formation. The analytical description of this process is not fundamentally different from the analysis given, as the weak shock assumption is employed. For more details on the post shock regime refer to the seminal paper by Blackstock [3] or in a variety of reference texts on the nonlinear acoustics.[1][2][4][5]
Frequency Analysis of Solutions Obtained Using the Method of Characteristics
The most intuitive analytical solution to the deformed wave profile, u(x,t), is obtained when using an approach method based on the method of characteristics. When applied to planar progressive waves this approach is described in the entry for the qualitative description of shock waves. Discussion focusing on the intermediate wave profile in addition to the shock formation properties are given in many reference texts on nonlinear acoustics, including those by Hamilton and Blackstock,[2] Elfno,[5] Beyer,[4] or Pierce.[1]
For this particular example the wave amplitude was set to achieve shock formation after five wavelengths. For generality all magnitudes of the solution are given in non-dimensional form. For the fluid, the parameter of nonlinearity was set to B/A = 5.0, which corresponds to fresh water at 20oC.[1] The upper portion of Figure 2 gives the spatial wave profile in which the wave steepening is readily apparent. In the lower three panels of Figure 2, the frequency spectrum of the velocity wave is shown as while passing through the regions indicated by red bands. The frequency spectrum plots were obtained using Discrete Fourier transform (DFT) of the calculated time domain signal at each indicated location.
From this form of the solution the coefficient magnitudes directly yield the harmonic amplitudes, while the complete Fourier series yields the solution in the time and space domains. The challenge in this approach is the evaluation of the Fourier coefficients. In the context of nonlinear acoustics this solution is first attributed to Fubini in 1935,[3] where manipulation of the integral terms was used to achieve the integral form of Bessel’s function, thus the harmonic components can be directly defined according to:
Where Jn is the Bessel function of the first kind. Historically, the subsequent work by Blackstock in 1966 [3] clarified the physical implications of this solution somewhat and also brought this solution to a wider audience in nonlinear acoustics. For additional details on this derivation refer to the texts by Pierce,[1] Elfno,[5] or Hamilton.[2] For completeness, Figure 3 plots the continuous harmonic profile as a function of normalized propagation distance. The wave conditions are the same as those used in calculations for Figure 2. In this particular example the shock formation occurs at five wavelengths; however, the plotted harmonic profile is general to any value of xshock.
↑ a b c d e f g Pierce, A. D. (1989). Acoustics : an introduction to its physical principles and applications. Woodbury, N.Y., Acoustical Society of America.
↑ a b c d Blackstock, D.T., Hamilton, M.F., Pierce, A.D. 2008. Progressive Waves in Lossless and Lossy Fluids. In Nonlinear Acoustics (eds. Hamilton, M. F., Blackstock, D. T.) Acoustical Society of America.
↑ a b c Blackstock, D. T. (1966). "Connection between the Fay and Fubini Solutions for Plane Sound Waves of Finite Amplitude." The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 39(6).
↑ a b Beyer, R. T. (1997). Nonlinear acoustics. Woodbury, NY, Acoustical Society of America.
↑ a b c d Enflo, B. O. and C. M. Hedberg. 2002. Nonlinear Waves with Zero and Vanishing Diffusion. In Theory of Nonlinear Acoustics in Fluids. Dordrecht ; Boston, Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Here's a list of open data sources. There are many more. Add any you know of!
Marine Geoscience Data System (MGDS) - A data portal, hosted at the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory (Columbia University), for a number of NSF-supported marine research programs
National Oceanographic Data Center (NODC)- World-wide marine environmental and ecosystem data
GEON- Portal for datasets and visualization tools
National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) - Cryospheric datasets from ground field research and satellites (Source: http://library.uoregon.edu/datamanagement/repositories.html )
iNaturalist.org API for plant and wildlife sightings
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
004.13       Two dactyls Buck Mulligan's real name, Malachi Mulligan, contains two groupings of three syllables. A dactyl is a metrical foot used in poetry which contains a stress on the first syllable, as Mal*ach*i Mull*i*gan.[1]
004.17 Jejune       Mulligan's modifier for "jesuit" reflects the tone of the chapter towards the Catholic faith, tradition, and liturgy.
(1) without interest or significance; dull; insipid: a jejune novel.
(3) lacking knowledge or experience; uninformed: jejune attempts to design a house.[2]
↑ [1] Dactyl (poetry Wikipedia article.
↑ [2] Jejune Dictionary.com article
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
Implements the Apprixmated Mean Filter for background modeling described in
N. J. B. McFarlane1 and C. P. Schofield1, Segmentation and tracking of piglets in Images.
Median is better for background subtraction because it does better rejection of outliers. This algorithm recursively approximates the median image, and then subtracts the background model from the current frame to find foreground objects.  Its disadvantage is that it takes a long time to update the background when an object starts moving after being still for a long time.  Combine it with BackgroundSubtractionCheungKamath to reject that type of noise.
See also: English-Hanzi/Broccoli is good for detoxification
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Phytochemicals glucoraphanin, gluconasturtiin and glucobrassicin compose a terrific trio in broccoli. Together, they aid all steps of the body's detoxification process, from activation to neutralization and elimination of contaminants.
Activity: #in-class/short-term, #offline/long-term, #group-work, #critical-thinking, #needs-preparation
Case study is a practical activity that can be arranged as a one-class task or a long project. Case studies presume students to observe a real-life condition, such as a news article, video, event, etc. Typically, a list of questions students should focus on is already given by the teacher.[1] Through mutual interactions and discussions students will explore the problem and hence, find solutions to resolve it. However, more complicated cases do not have a clear answer to the problem which requires students to analyse the case more deeply and gather information elsewhere. The study requires students to observe the question from different perspectives - with a number of students dealing with the case it becomes an enabling environment to share opinions.[2] The activity provides students with an opportunity to apply theory learned in a course to an actual practical situation. Therefore, students are compelled to adapt their critical thinking skill, deep analysis and estimation.[3]
According to Carleton university article, case studies can be divided into project-based learning or problem-based learning.  In the first case, the project is supervised by an instructor who sets up the whole activity, where students focus mainly on finding solutions to the problem. Students are expected to use previous lectures and additional materials an instructor can provide. But in the second case, students are way more independent as they decide on how they will organize their work. An instructor provides students with a problem, but further plays only a supportive role whenever students need extra help.[4]
Detailed / Extensive case studies  This format of case study is typically used in business courses and assigned to be done individually. The volume of the work can be quite big - up to 100 pages or more. The purpose is to develop analytical skills and provide a list of solutions to be applied to the problem.
Descriptive / Narrative casesPrimarily, this type of case study was used in medical schools. The work should be about 5 pages long. In this format students should “generate hypotheses, develop the learning objectives and generate study questions for each part of the case” .
Mini casesThese cases are to be done during one class and usually are focused on a specific topic. The aim of this case study is to encourage students to apply their knowledge in practical tasks.
Multiple choice casesIn this activity students are provided with a list of possible solutions to a problem and they are expected to choose the best one. The question is commonly addressed to ethics or policy problems and is held during the class.
As there are a variety of case study formats to choose from, the activity arrangement will differ. Yet, these are the main points to keep in mind:
How to use this method in online class?
As was already mentioned before, activity arrangement depends on duration and size of a group. For in-class online activities, students can be divided into breakout rooms in Zoom or Google Meet. If students are assigned to work on the case as a project, they should decide on a platform they will be using for communication. The assignment can be submitted in Moodle, where additional materials can be uploaded. It can also be used to interact with students and access their tasks.
↑ Queen’s University, ‘Teaching and learning in higher education - Examples of Active Learning Activities’, n.d., received from https://www.queensu.ca/teachingandlearning/modules/active/12_exmples_of_active_learning_activities.html
↑ Queen’s University, ‘Active learning in practice: Case Studies’, n.d., received from https://www.queensu.ca/teachingandlearning/modules/active/08_case_studies.html
↑ https://canvas.dartmouth.edu/courses/11143/pages/case-study-approach
↑ Educational Development Centre, ‘Experiential education: Case Studies’, Carleton University, n.d., received from https://carleton.ca/experientialeducation/activity-and-course-design/case-study/
Alkynes readily combine with water in the presence of acid (usually sulfuric acid) and mercury(II) salts (usually the sulfate is used) to form carbonyl compounds, in a process known as Kucherov's reaction.
In the case of acetylene (ethyne) the product is acetaldehyde (ethanal), while other alkynes form ketones. Terminal alkynes reliably form methyl ketones and symmetric internal alkynes give single ketone products, but mixtures of ketones may form from unsymmetrical internal alkynes.
The intermediate product is an enol (an alkene with a hydroxyl group attached to a doubly bonded carbon), which then transforms to its keto tautomer through keto-enol tautomerisation.
Addition to either end of a symmetric alkyne (internal or acetylene/ethyne) gives the same cation and only one carbonyl product is formed, but addition to unsymmetrical alkynes gives two possible cations, and two products are possible. Terminal alkynes selectively produce a methyl ketone owing to a strong preference for the most highly substituted vinyl cation, but unsymmetrical internal alkynes can produce two different vinyl cations, whose stabilities may be similar if the alkyne's substituents are electronically and sterically similar, and therefore two different ketone products would be obtained in a mixture.
A specific SEAr analogy to the H+-Hg2+ exchange involved in alkyne hydration is the acid-promoted demercuration of arylmercury(II) salts, triggered by ipso-protonation, while the mercuration of arenes, a substitution of H+ by Hg2+, would be an example of the reverse reaction.
A definition of technology can be taken from any technology curriculum, but what it means to each individual is dependent on one's understanding of technology.
Below are some teachers' understanding of technology:
Technology teaches communication, problem solving, finding solutions (based on informed choices), time and self management. Technology reinforces the fact that there are often many solutions to problems.
Technology is a process whereby learners identify a need or opportunity. Through the acquisition of knowledge they apply their skills. It stimulates critical thinking and creativity.
It is about using the relevant skills, knowledge, and creativity making a contribution to address the problem in a particular situation by making use of necessary materials. It is a technique of doing something to solve a particular problem.
Technology is about applying the knowledge and skills which was acquired to meet certain needs and wants of society.
Engaging in a process (Investigate, design, make and evaluate) to solve human needs and wants.
The RNCS does not say what I must do!
This sets the stage for a basic differentiation between a curriculum and a syllabus...
A curriculum states in general terms concepts, skills, attitudes & awareness that should be developed, whilst, a syllabus is specific about what exactly must be developed e.g. a curriculum might say manipulative skills , while a syllabus might say cutting.
The RNCS is a curriculum statement, not a syllabus.
In each of the learning outcomes assessment standards spells out the minimum that a learner should be able to do and know at any particular grade level. What it says are the key concepts and ideas that should be developed. These can be developed through activities that are relevant to the concept of idea. Minimum does not preclude learners functioning at levels higher that those for a specific grade. Many of the assessment standards have some text within brackets. These texts are prefaced with;  such as ,  e.g.  and some are not prefaced. Interpretation of these texts will depend largely on whether the reader analyses it linguistically, technically, or emotively. Whatever the approach, it must not detract from the core requirement of the assessment standard.
The development of technology in the RNCS through the assessment standards suggests an approach which can be summed up thus:
FP - craft-like in the approach to projects  focus on the developing of manipulative skills
IP - some elements of reproduction and/or adapting of existing products focus on development of cognitive skills while further developing manipulative skills
SP - more innovative   no reproduction    focus on the honing of manipulative and specific skills   greater emphasis on creative and lateral thinking.
Teaching and learning in Technology must be aimed at developing Technological Literacy so that learners are empowered to cope with the challenges of a technological society. As all developments are manifested through economic, political, social and environmental context there is a need for an understanding of the interconnections between technology, society and the environment. Inherent in the development towards technological literacy is Technological Capability. In the South African technology curriculum, the development of the skills associated with problem solving lies at the heart of capability.
What are these Learning Outcomes about?
The Learning Outcomes in the Technology Learning Area are interrelated statements that state in broad terms the facets that are considered vital to develop technological literacy in learners. The three outcomes focus on the following:
The learner is able to apply technological processes and skills ethically and responsibly using appropriate Information and communication Technologies
This outcome is a SKILLS outcome. The technological process is a way of doing something (like the scientific process skills). When a learner does technology he/she is demonstrating the ability to do the skill. But the outcome talks of Process and Skill this refers to the stages of the process (South African) which are: Investigate Design, Make, Evaluate and Communicate. Each of these stages has skills associated with them, viz:
Investigate: the skills of Finding out.
Design: the skills of Planning / Decision making.
Make: the skills of Making / Manufacturing.
Evaluate: the skills of Reflecting / Checking.
Communicate: the skills of Communication.
The learner is able to understand and apply relevant technological knowledge ethically and responsibly.
This outcome is about the Content (South African) through which we do our technology. It states the Knowledge and Understanding in the areas that form the focus of our studies. These are; Structures, Processing, and Systems & Control. Each of these are have information (knowledge) associated with them, but acquiring knowledge on its own is of no use unless there is an understanding of it. It is Very Important to note that the knowledge is written in as concepts. Refer to the section on Key Concepts to gain a better understanding of what is required in terms of these areas.
The learner is able to demonstrate an understanding of the inter-relationships between technology, society and the environment.
This outcome is about the interrelationship between Science & Technology and Society. It is designed to provide opportunities to develop Awareness of and opportunities to come up with strategies to address situations. This outcome is by far the Most Powerful of the outcomes because it gives us reasons for doing Technology. This outcome can provide the context and situations / scenarios for technology modules / projects. Technology exist because of us (our needs, wants and aspirations, to fix the things we do wrong and improve on the things we do right) and Technology is for us (to make our lives easier and comfortable). It is also important to note that this outcome is Exactly the same in the Natural Science learning area.
The key concepts are the results of the lead teachers analysis of all the assessment standards. It talks to the key aspects that need to be addressed in each outcome at any grade level.
Our  modules are complete units of work that contain a series of enabling activities / tasks and a challenge.
Each of these modules is designed to provide the learner with an opportunity to apply knowledge and skills in an authentic situation.
The activities have been  designed to develop specific knowledge & associated skills that form the core of the assessment standards of the various grades. These must not be considered, nor taken to be "technology" - They are only enabling activities designed  specifically to assist you with ideas for the development of concepts, what needs to be taught, learnt, so that learners have a chance at success when engaging in technology. The activities are not contextualised in any module as such and are not about making a product,  as our focus is on the development of concepts.
Cocaine can be extracted from bank notes by vortex agitation with 15 ml methanol for 5 minutes. The extract is then evaporated and the sample can be reconstituted in 0.5 ml methanol.[1]
The presence of cocaine is confirmed using the cobalt thiocyanate (Scott) test.
The cobalt thiocyanate reagent can be prepared by dissolving ten grams of cobalt (II) thiocyanate in a mixture of 490 milliliters of distilled water and 500 milliliters of glycerin.
The cobalt thiocyanate test is performed by placing approximately 2 to 4 milligrams of a target substance in a glass test tube, then 5 drops of cobalt thiocyanate reagent. After shaking, 1 or 2 drops of concentrated hydrochloric acid are added, and the tube is again shaken. Ten drops of chloroform (or similar solvent) are then added, and the tube is vortexed, then allowed to settle and separate into two layers. The final colour of the chloroform (organic) layer is recorded.
Addition of the cobalt thiocyanate reagent to cocaine hydrochloride results in the surface of the particles turning a bright blue (faint blue for cocaine base). The solution changes back to pink upon adding one or two drops of hydrochloric acid and mixing. Addition of 10 drops of chloroform, vortexing, and allowing the solution to settle results in a blue organic layer for both cocaine hydrochloride and cocaine base.
Diphenhydramine and lidocaine also give blue organic layers. These compounds are known false positives for cocaine.
Amanda J. Hanson "Specificity of the Duquenois-Levine and Cobalt Thiocyanate Tests Substituting Methylene Chloride or Butyl Chloride for Chloroform."
↑ Francesc A. Esteve-Turrillas, et al "Validated, non-destructive and environmentally friendly determination of cocaine in euro bank notes."
Computers define and control many aspects of our lives.  From banking systems to air traffic control, food production to medical care, we are continuously exposed to technological systems which potentially track our behaviour, invade our privacy and put our safety at risk.  How then, to ensure that ethical concerns are taken into account? A litigious society ensures (most of the time) that human lives are not at risk from faulty products, but can we also be sure that software meets the needs of the disabled community, or that the ecological impact is minimised?
Developers naturally focus on getting the technical components of a system correct.  Is the system effective, is it robust, is there sufficient bandwidth to meet the client’s requirements?  However the software may be used in ways never intended by the developers and assumptions made during the development process can have a critical impact on outcomes. For example, in industrial settings, users sometimes disable electronic safety systems in order to increase outputs, possibly at the cost of fingers or limbs.
Computing systems are tools that are increasingly embedded and invisible to the end user. Computer errors, whether intentional or accidental, can affect educational outcomes, financial records, alter personal data or determine elections,  This potentially creates a power imbalance as computer ‘experts’ have the ability to manipulate systems to their own advantage.
In addition, software systems do not function in isolation.  They are designed and used by humans, who bring their own values and biases to the process.  It is important to take these factors into consideration when designing software, by using thoughtful value choices and being aware of the choices we are making.
The Therac-25 was a computer controlled medical linear accelerator used for treating cancer.  Many of these machines were in use in the United States during the 1980’s.  See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Therac-25 for details.
For software engineers, ethical practice has two dimensions:
Doing a technically competent job at all phases of the software development process
Using a set of moral values to guide the technical decisions
Software engineering has grown from its computer engineering roots into a recognised professional discipline.  The development of a code of ethics was an important step in this process, and the Software Engineering Code of Ethics was adopted by the IEEE Computer Society and the ACM in 1999.
The code, developed through extensive consultation within the software engineering  industry,  “documents the
In brief, the code suggests that software engineers should
A critical aspect of any ethical analysis is to identify the stakeholders who may be affected by the use of the system under development.
What is a stakeholder?  Traditional definitions from the corporate world usually assume a financial stakeholding in a project.  This narrow focus would usually only include the client who has commissioned the software system.
Williamson (2003) defines four levels of stakeholder:
Direct - People or groups who directly interact with the project (eg, end users, operators).
Indirect - People or groups who do not directly interact with the project, but exercise strong influence over direct
Remote - People or groups who remain at a distance from the project, but could be affected/influenced by the    project (eg, patients, clients).
Societal - Wider social influences.  This might include government or regulatory agencies who have an interest in the organisation where the software is used.
This broader view ensures that we consider the ‘downstream’ effects of the system being developed. For an ethical analysis there is a need to check for issues at every stage of development, with every stakeholder and from every perspective.
Williamson uses a "audience map" to help identify the stakeholders.
The audience map was used by groups to identify stakeholders of the Living Campus project.  These stakeholders were then used in the SoDIS process that followed.
SoDIS (Software Development Impact Statement) is a system which uses a stakeholder impact analysis to identify, evaluate and mitigate risks in the software development process.  Through this process the developer is encouraged to consider of people, groups or organisations and how they are related to the proposed project and its products or deliverables.
This tool is designed to identify risks in a software engineering project through a rigorous analysis of the impact on stakeholders of the development and use of the final product.  It primarily addresses ethical issues but in the process wider concerns are often identified.  It can be used at any stage of the SDLC as a review exercise, but would generally be applied in the early planning stages.
The SoDIS Project Auditor is a software package that uses SoDIS to facilitate the process of auditing projects for risks.
We are using SoDIS during the first iteration of the Design Concept.  In this way we can identify potential design issues with the system before any significant design decisions are made.  Later we will do an in depth Sodis analysis, which will highlight risks associated with the use of the system in place.
Williamson, A. Defining your Stakeholders. Wairua Consulting, Auckland. 2003.
Gotterbarn, D., Miller, K. W., Computer Ethics in the Undergraduate Curriculum: Case Studies and the Joint Software Engineer’s Code, Consortium for Computing Sciences in Colleges, 2004.
Group:  Chad Roulston and Siaosi Napualani Vaka
Table of Contents   edit
Storyboard of the Get Well Manufacturing Model
Step 2: Play with the RCA Model
Unit 5 - Populating Your Own RCA Database
Importing of Resource Pool & Business Process Master Data from a source file
Importing of Product Master Data from a source file
Importing of Primary Costs & Consumption Quantities from a source file
Importing of Capacity Quantities from a source file
Appendix A. Palo Installation Guide
Step 2: Play with the RCA Model
In this section, six different templates are discussed that allow the user to change the existing data or add new data in the Get Well model.
These templates allow the user to examine the sensitivity of the Get Well model by means of data changes to be made to its operations so that further evaluation and alternative planning scenarios can take place.
Maintain Consumptions (i.e. Secondaries)
A critical analysis of the article "Percutaneous Coronary Angioplasty Compared With Exercise Training in Patients With Stable Coronary Artery Disease" by Hambrecht, R et al.[1]
This has been created by u3117317. '
What is Coronary Heart (artery) Disease?
Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a leading cause of death and is commonly the source of angina (chest pain) and heart attacks.[2] It is triggered by atherosclerotic plaque build-up on the inside of artery walls. This narrows and even blocks the blood vessels, decreasing blood supply to the heart.[2]
According to the Australian Bureau of Statistics heart disease is one of the leading causes of death worldwide.[3] In 2011, CAD contributed to 15% of all deaths in Australia and accounted for almost 1 in 2 cardiovascular disease deaths.[4]
Surgery, Exercise and CAD
Advances in surgical strategies have made percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with stent implantation a treatment of choice among CAD patients.[1] PCI is a procedure in which a thin flexible tube inserts a stent to improve blood flow through vessels that have been narrowed by plaque buildup.[6]
Studies have shown that regular exercise for stable CAD patients improves blood flow through the heart and inhibits progression of CAD.[7] Results from Hambrecht's study compare the intervention methods described above. Cost of PCI surgery is a barrier to recovery for patients with CAD. This article provides the reader strategies to combat CAD without the cost of surgery.
This study originates from Lepzig University. It was written in correspondence with Rainer Hambrecht a Professor of Medicine, and was published by the American Heart Association in March 2004.[1]
What kind of study is it?
This study was a randomised controlled trial in which a total of 101 male patients aged 70 years and over were employed following a routine coronary angiography and randomly assigned to either 12 months of exercise training or to PCI.[1] Randomised trials aim to distribute participants randomly into different conditions. They are often considered one of the higher standards for clinical research.[8] The study was carried out between March 1997 and March 2001.[1]
What did the research involve?
Male patients were clinically tested (for stable CAD) and chosen to participate in the study, only participants who lived within a 25 km radius of the institution were chosen for practicality. Patients were randomly assigned either stent angioplasty (PCI) or exercise training by drawing an envelope with the treatment assignment enclosed.[1]
Two interventions were used, PCI surgery involved the implantation of a stent into problem arteries. The exercise training program involved an initial supervised stage where  patients exercised for 10 minuted 6 times a day on a bicycle ergometer at 70% of the symptom-limited maximal HR. Patients were then asked to exercise on the bicycle ergometer close to their symptom-limited maximal HR for 20 minutes per day and to participate in one 60-minute group training session per week.[1]
Assessments were performed prior to intervention and again after 12 months of prescribed treatment:
Myocardial scintigraphy → An examination of cardiac muscle assessed how blood flows though the heart.[9]
Cardiac catherization → Insertion of a thin flexible tube into arteries to assess results of coronary intervention in the PCI group and progression of CAD in both groups.[1] Cardiac catheterization provides accurate and detailed information when compared to other diagnostic tests.[10]
Scoring system of disease progression → A narrowing of vessels <10% was classified as unchanged. A decrease in diameter of the vessel of >10%  was graded as regression and an increase of >10% was graded as progression.[1]
The number of ischemic events within each group determined survival.
Ischemic events were defined as one of the following:
Worsening angina that resulted in hospitalisation[1]
Calculation of cost-effectiveness was based on the total cost of the intervention.[1]
In both groups, clinical symptoms improved significantly during the study period.
Event-free survival of 70% in the PCI group
Event-free survival of 88% in the training group
Patients in the exercise training group showed a mean progression of 0.30±0.
Patients in the PCI group showed a mean progression of 0.81±0.20
$6086±370 per PCI patient
$3708±156 per exercise training patient
When compared to PCI, regular exercise resulted in better event-free survival rates at lower cost. Such conclusions were drawn from lower incidence of rehospitalisation and increased vascularisation in patients assigned to the exercise intervention.[1]
No control group was used so there were no baseline results for either intervention.
Only participants living within a 25-km radius of the institution were involved. Therefore, the living status of participants may not be representative all CAD patients.
Only male participants with stable CAD were involved in the study.
Essentially, the sample used is not an accurate representation of all CAD patients.
Replication of such a study is unlikely. The investigational protocol for this study was approved by the ethics committee for human studies at the University of Leipzig. However, present day ethics committees are unlikely to approve another trial of this type, as it is unethical to put the likelihood of survival up to chance.
The sample used for this study is not representative of all CAD patients, thus exercise in female and unstable CAD patients may not have the same outcomes. It is crucial to consider the severity of CAD when prescribing exercise interventions. A qualified medical practitioner should evaluate CAD patients prior to engaging in any exercise program. Patients identified as high risk for cardiovascular complications during exercise should defer exercise training until problems are controlled.[11]
This study highlights methods to combat CAD after it presents, however measures to decrease risk of developing CAD should be a priority. Physical activity is a recognised preventative measure for atherosclerosis.[12] The Australian Physical Activity guidelines recommends accumulating 150–300 minutes of moderate intensity or 75– 150 minutes of vigorous physical activity or an equivalent combination each week.[13] Dietary intake impacts risk of CAD, and according to the National Cholesterol Education Program the most important dietary recommendations are as follows:
Body mass index below 25 kg/m2.
Consume <10% of energy from saturated fat and <2% from trans fat.
Eat fish at least once a week.
Eat ≥400 g of vegetables/fruits per day.
Limit salt consumption to <6 g/d.[14]
Smoking increases CAD risk and should be avoided, including exposure to secondhand smoke.[15]
For further information on CAD follow the links below:
Heart Foundation: http://heartfoundation.org.au/about-us/what-we-do/heart-disease-in-australia
Nutrition Australia: Nutrition and Cardiovascular disease: http://www.nutritionaustralia.org/national/resource/cardiovascular-health
↑ a b c d e f g h i j k l Hambrecht, R., Walther, C., Mobius-Winkler, S., Gielen, S., Linke, A., Conradi, K., Erbs, S., Kluge, R., Kendxiorra, K., Sabri, O., Sick, P., Schuler, G. (2004). Percuteneous coronary angioplastly compared with exercise training in patients with stable coronary artery disease. Retrieved from the American Heart Association website: http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/109/11/1371
↑ a b World Heart Foundation. (2016). Different Heart Diseases. retrieved from the World Heart Foundation website: http://www.world-heart-federation.org/cardiovascular-health/heart-disease/different-heart-diseases/
↑ Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2013). Heart Disease. Retrieved from the Australian Bureau of Statistics website: http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lookup/by%20Subject/4338.0~2011-13~Main%20Features~Heart%20disease~10005
↑ Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. (2014). Coronary Heart Disease. retrieved from the AIHW website: http://www.aihw.gov.au/WorkArea/DownloadAsset.aspx?id=60129547730
↑ National Institute of Health. (2016). What Are Coronary Heart Disease Risk Factors? Retrieved from the AIH website:https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/health-topics/topics/hd
↑ Heart & Stroke Foundation. (2016). Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI or angioplasty with stent). Retrieved from the Heart and Stroke Foundation website: http://www.heartandstroke.com/site/c.ikIQLcMWJtE/b.3831925/k.4F32/Heart_disease__Percutaneous_coronary_intervention_PCI_or_angioplasty_with_stent.htm
↑ Schuler, G., Hambrecht, R., Schlierf, G., Niebauer, J., Hauer, K., Neumann, J., Hoberg, E., Drinkmann, A., Bacher, F. and Grunzehttp, M., (1992) Regular physical exercise and low-fat diet. Effects on progression of coronary artery disease. Journal of Circulation: doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.86.1.1
↑ Glazerman, S., Levy, D.M., & Myers, D. (2002) Nonexperimental Replications of Social Experiments: A Systematic Review. Mathematica Policy Research discussion paper. 8813-300.
↑ Klinik AM Ring. (2016). Cardiac Diagnostics (myocardial scintigraphy). Retrieved from the Klinik AM Ring website:http://radiology.klinik-am-ring.com/index.php/Nuklearmedizin/cardiac-diagnostics-myocardial-scintigraphy.html
↑ Cardiovascular consultants. (2006). Cardiac Catheterization. Retrieved from the Cardiovascular Consutants website: http://www.cardioconsult.com/DiagnosticTechniques/CardiacCatheterization.php
↑ Medscape. (1994). Exercise for Patients with Coronary Artery Disease. Retrieved from the Medscape website: http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/716347_3
↑ A Ali-Mamari. Atherosclerosis and Physical Activity. Oman Med J 2009; 24(3) doi: 10.5001/omj.2009.34
↑ Australian Government. (2016) Australia's Physical Activity and Sedentary Behaviour Guidelines. Retrieved from the Australian Government website: http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/health-pubhlth-strateg-phys-act-guidelines
↑ Kromhout, D., Menotti, A., Kesteloot, H. and Sans, S. (2002). American heart Association. J of Circulation. Prevention of Coronary Heart Disease by Diet and Lifestyle. 105( 7) 893-898 doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/hc0702.103728
↑ National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. (2016). How Does Smoking Affect the Heart and Blood Vessels? Retrieved from the NIH website: https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/health-topics/topics/smo
Note that if you invoke super without arguments, all arguments to executing method will be passed to the parent method as well - and if parent's signature does not match the number of arguments, an exception will be raised. So, if the child version of the method uses a different number of arguments than the version in superclass, you need to list arguments that you want to pass to the parent's version of the method.
Note also that you can use any method name, not just initialize (in this case).
Iterators provide a method for cycling through a set of values and performing an operation, usually specified by a code block, for each value.  Iterator functionality is often provided through the mixin Enumeration module.
The first iterator that Ruby programmers are likely to encounter is the each iterator.
You can therefore make your own method looking like the built-in times:
Although the book has proposed a concrete solution for practical DevOps in software engineering, unavoidably the book could not cover in details a number of emerging themes in DevOps and software systems development. In this section, we discuss two emerging challenges in the area, which may spawn new industrial and academic research efforts.
Throughout the book, we have focused on developing enterprise IT applications that rely on Big data processing technologies. However, we have not developed in detail the problem of designing and maintaining a data feeding pipeline for a Big data application. This problem, which typically falls under the remit of data engineering experts, involves the acquisition, filtering, analysis, and storage of the data collected by the Big data application. Specific architectures are progressively emerging, such as the notion of data lakes that consolidate all heterogeneous datasets of an organization in a single storage location, and data engineers have recently recognized the need to adopt DevOps-style methods for the release and update of the code involved in the data pipelines.
To make a concrete example, a set of teams collaborating on developing a business analytics pipeline, also need to test, update, and release new data queries and statistical analyses, in the same way in which a software engineer releases new versions of an application or its composing elements. This emerging trend, called DataOps, raises new research challenges, such as deciding which methods developed in DevOps could be adopted in this problem domain or establishing whether DevOps and DataOps methods can coexist in the same methodology. Quality-driven engineering methods raise strong challenges in the DataOps domain, as one needs to guarantee data privacy and data integrity with all releases, calling for dedicated methods for testing.
Emerging industry trends, such as microservices, are raising the problem extending DevOps to support the delivery of cloud applications that are decomposed into fine-grained and independently deployable services, called micro-services. Micro-services different from traditional web services in a number of ways:
Micro-services are lean, meaning that a traditional web service can expose many APIs, whereas a micro-services typically implement a single, or very few, functions. Moreover, a micro-service is typically based on lightweight REST/JSON communication, as opposed to the SOAP/WS-* stack common in web services.
Next, a micro-service is meant to map exclusively to a single development team, so that each team can release independently of the others new versions of that service. This implies, among others, the notion that each team can manage in a decentralized fashion its own data, relieving the application architecture of shared databases and thus fostering the need to define new architectural paradigms and also new methods to ensure availability, consistency, and checkpointing. Another important property of micro-services i
Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, micro-services are meant to exploit the advantages of containerization, which implies, for example, the ability to autoscale the services. A consequence of this is that when a micro-service becomes so fine-grained to be equivalent to a single function call in the application code, a so-called nano-service, it is effectively possible to auto-scale portions of the application code, trading performance for a lower cost of scaling.
Clearly, the above properties of micro-services make them rather different from basic enterprise applications, and they require DevOps to evolve in the direction of being a decentralized practice, with each team having at its disposal tools to reason about application updates before delivering to production. Developing support tools for decentralized software engineering of microservices and to reason on how to decompose an application architecture into right-sized services are among the most pressing research challenges for the near future.
Studies have shown that daily self-monitoring can promote healthy lifestyles and weight loss over an extended period of time. While the act of recording daily activity is in itself beneficial, using mobile applications to monitor fitness makes it easier for people to change their lifestyle habits and adhere to their fitness goals. However, many of these studies also rely on extensive coaching, incentives, and feedback to promote behavioral changes.
With the advent of numerous fitness applications available for mobile devices, people are able to collect quantitative data on their day-to-day activity patterns and behaviors. Applications like Fitbit connect a biometric wearable to a mobile device to keep track of daily step count, distance walked, calories burned, and sleep patterns. As the collection of personal data becomes more popular and present in new technology, we seek to study how knowledge of this data would help create positive lifestyle changes. We would also like to further understand features that can help motivate users and increase the effectiveness of the Fitbit application.
Positive motivation is applied in specific ways in the current Fitbit user experience. However, encouragement is known to help with goal attainment and perception (Burke 2012). Perhaps an expanded suite of motivational tactics will help increase the likelihood that positive motivation be beneficial for Fitbit users as they work to attain their fitness goals.
One other common barrier to entry is that people often find it difficult to make time for exercise. A simple daily reminder to exercise could aid in increasing activity. It would be interesting to see if awareness of quantified personal fitness data along with daily reminders and positive reinforcement to walk would increase exercise levels. Are interactions with the Fitbit wearable and mobile application, as well as daily prompts and positive messages, enough to enact real changes in activity level?
Do wearables, when paired with a fitness app for monitoring, promote positive behavior change, and can this behavior be sustained over a period of time?
According to studies regarding the Fitbit user base (Sadarangani, 2015), their customer persona is someone who has a desk job, has an expendable income, and is possibly an early adopter of technology. Despite being comfortable with and owning technology they are value conscious. They are willing to pay for a product that would help them improve health habits and want to work out more. The Fitbit consumer owns a smartphone and is active on social media. They are more likely to believe in a product that has good reviews and is from an established company.
The sample of participants that were recruited for this study were selected based on their ownership and usage of a Fitbit wearable tracker and application. Having a smartphone was also a requirement for this study, as it would allow a medium by which to set reminders for their daily exercise. Participants should have a fairly stable baseline activity level. We also recruited participants who demonstrated a desire to add more activity in their lives, regardless of their availability to actually do so.
We used a number of different methodologies to collect our data: pre-screened surveys, self-reported step counts before and during study, pre-study survey, and post-study survey.
Participants were screened via an online qualifying survey using Qualtrics as our primary survey data collection platform. We recruited 12 smartphone users from Des Moines, IA, Los Angeles, CA, San Francisco, CA and Seattle, WA to pre-qualify for our study. The data from this survey was used to determine if the potential study participants already had the Fitbit fitness tracker and mobile app, to understand their current usage of mobile technologies, and to understand their fitness goals and aspirations. 9 out of 12 participants were selected to join the study.
The participants were sent a pre-study survey so that we could measure their current perceptions regarding self-image, motivation to exercise, their goals and aspirations for participating in our study, and what they’ve found to be challenging with regards to their exercise goals. Since we were working with human participants, we provided each person with an informed consent form that outlined the purpose of the study. Participants received detailed instructions on how to report their daily steps and how to set up notifications and alerts on their smartphone calendars.
In order to establish a threshold of behavior and perception change, we designed a short baseline period by which the step measurements from the first two days of the study would act as a baseline activity level. For this baseline period, participants reported their step counts from their Fitbit mobile application, but did not receive any reply from their study contacts.
For the next eight-day period, participants were then asked to send us their daily step count as well as to add daily timed alerts on their smartphone calendar to remind them to take a walk every day for at least 15 minutes. During this eight day study phase, participants were provided positive reinforcement in the form of an encouraging text or email message soon after they report their daily step count. A predetermined list of encouraging statements were used for all participants to keep messages consistent. An example of positive reinforcement messages used for the study were, “Good job!”, “Excellent!” and “You’re making good progress!” along with their daily step count number.
At the conclusion of the study phase, participants were given a final online survey that mirrored the pre-study survey to measure changes in impressions before and after the study as well as new questions about their feelings on positive reinforcement and their feelings of goal attainment.
Participants achieved their ideal exercise amount with daily Fitbit interaction, reminders, and positive reinforcement. The average participant increased their step count over baseline by 19%. Weekend step counts varied much more than weekday step counts, due to changes in routines and schedules that greatly affected activity (With weekends omitted, the average participant increased their step count over baseline by 28%). The participants had an overall positive opinion on step tracking and the survey results also reported that participants’ awareness of their daily step count was motivating to them. Participants found positive reinforcement motivating as well, they also reported that they felt less self-conscious about others viewing their step count data after the study. The participants reported that the biggest source of difficulty in adhering to a new exercise regimen was variability in daily schedules. A program with a remote coach sending encouraging statements based on step count such as the one piloted in this study, was recommended by the participants as a possibility for helping people keep to an exercise routine.
While our study was not long enough to measure statistically significant changes in behavior, our participants responded to reminders to walk, interaction with the Fitbit wearable/app, and positive reinforcements to increase their activity. The study interventions supported our participants’ ambitions to achieve their exercise goals. Most participants seem to be motivated to continue their new, daily exercise routine.
The 15 minutes goal of extra walking may not have been enough to see an average difference considering the length of time for this study. Participants who experienced variations in daily routines and changes in schedules may have found it difficult to find time to exercise. Other unexpected daily challenges (work, school, family etc.) could also affect step count measurements, especially if their baseline was high. A larger sample size could have produced different results, but because of the study time lines it was not possible to gather a larger sample size to discover other relationships in the data. Another limitation to this study was that we did not having a sample of participants who represented a population that reported very low activity levels so that a relationship could have been gathered based on prompts to exercise.
Participants preferences to workout outdoors or indoors may have also affected the overall results. The environmental conditions, for example weather, was also not taken into account for this study. Participants who prefer outdoor workouts without having an indoor alternative and had bad weather during the study may have had their step counts adversely affected just due to circumstance which cannot be accounted for in the results. Self reported data can also be biased and since a post survey was conducted for this study these reports may be providing data that is bias. While participants report that they intend to continue with their new exercise regimen, the study must be expanded and contain a follow up period to see if people made actual long term lifestyle changes. This study, as was conducted, was not long enough to enact real behavior modifications.
Burke LE, Styn MA, Sereika SM, et al. Using mHealth Technology to Enhance Self-Monitoring for Weight Loss A Randomized Trial. American journal of preventive medicine. 2012;43(1):20-26. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2012.03.016.
Weinberg, R. S., Bruya, L., Garland, H., & Jackson, A. (1990). Effect of goal difficulty and positive reinforcement on endurance performance. Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 12(2
The current, editable version of this book is available in Wikibooks, the open-content textbooks collection, at
Wikipedia: "Yoga refers to traditional physical and mental disciplines originating in India. The word is associated with meditative practices in Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism. Major branches of yoga in Hindu philosophy include Raja Yoga (Patanjali, meditation and positive thinking), Karma Yoga (do good), Jnana Yoga (think about yourself), Bhakti Yoga (pray to God, the Guru or to your inner self), and Hatha Yoga (body exercises and meditation)."
Yoga is a path of health, relaxation and inner happiness. We cleanse systematic our body and mind of the tensions (samskaras). This gives us inner happiness, healing and ongoing health. The body becomes healthy. The mind becomes positive. We get the properties of inner peace, inexhaustible energy, mental clarity, embracing love, joy and kindness. Yoga provides a variety of techniques. It has techniques for the body and the mind. We should practice each yoga exercise so that it works well for us. What hurts us, we omit. What is good, that we do. We can vary all yoga exercises creatively. We ask ourselves constantly: “What do I need now? What’s good for me? What triggers best my tensions?”
Yoga refers to traditional physical and mental disciplines originating in India. Patanjali systematized the conceptions of Yoga and set them forth on the background of the metaphysics of Samkhya. Samkhya is one of the six schools of Hindu philosophy and classical Indian philosophy. The Samkhya school is dualistic (God and nature exist). Advaita Vedanta (non-duality, only God exists) is considered to be the most influential school of Hindu philosophy. Vishishtadvaita Vedanta is a sub-school of the Vedānta. Vishishtadvaita is a non-dualistic school. It is non-dualism of the qualified whole, in which Brahman (God) alone exists, but is characterised by multiplicity. In consequence the Advaita Vedanta says that only enlightenment is important. Vishishtadvaita and Samkhya say, that Enlightenment (God) and a good wordly life is desirable. We have to work for a happy world and our own happiness. These are the two fundamental spiritual positions.
Hatha Yoga is a system of Yoga introduced by Yogi Swatmarama, a sage of 15th century India, and compiler of the Hatha Yoga Pradipika. In this treatise Swatmarama introduces Hatha Yoga as a way of physical purification that the body practices for higher meditation. The word Hatha is a compound of the words Ha and Tha meaning sun and moon. A Yogi has to join together sun (masculine, active) energy with the moon (feminine, receptive) energy, thus producing balance and enlightenment in an individual. Hatha Yoga is a strong practice done for healing and purification. Hatha Yoga is what most people in the Western world associate with the word “Yoga” and is most commonly practiced for mental and physical health. The most comprehensive text of Hatha Yoga is the Hatha Yoga Pradipika by Yogi Swatmarama. It includes information about shatkarma (purification), asana (postures), pranayama (subtle breath energy), chakras (centers of energy), kundalini (enlightenment energy), bandhas (energy control), kriyas (purification techniques), nadis (energy channels), and mudras (energy gestures). Traditionally, Shiva is credited with propounding Hatha Yoga. It is said that on a lonely island he gave the knowledge of Hatha Yoga to Goddess Parvati, but a fish heard the entire discourse and gave it to the fisherman and yogi Matsyendra. The fish is a symbol for the contact to your own intuitive wisdom. Matsyendra has heard Shiva and Shakti in himself. For us this means that the Hatha Yoga is an intuitive and not a dogmatic spiritual system. Each person is allowed to develop his own best way of practicing yoga.
Quotes from the Hatha Yoga Pradipika: Hail to Shiva, who expounded the knowledge of Hatha Yoga which guides us gradually to the highest peaks of Raja Yoga (enlightenment yoga, meditation and mind work). Yogi Swatmarama now explains the Hatha Yoga.  Matsyendra, Goraksa and other great yogis knew about the wisdom of yoga and thanks to their benevolence Yogi Swatmarama learned it. All the great masters broke the power of death and roam as free souls in the universe. A Yogi should practice Hatha Yoga in a secluded place. He should live in a country where is peace, where are good people and where you can get food easily. The effects of yoga can be destroyed by the following six causes: too much food, too much effort, too much chatter, too extreme practicing, too much contact to other people and too much inconsistency. The following 6 causes bring quick success: courage, boldness, perseverance, good understanding, trust and seclusion. Important are: self-discipline, confidence, compassion, determination, reading, morality, wisdom, simple needs, renouncement. Whether you are young or old, skinny or sick, the one who overcomes inertia will be successful in yoga. By reading books on yoga alone, no one can attain success. Practice alone is the way that leads to success. That's for sure. Through asanas (yoga exercises) and kumbhakas (breathing exercises) the inner power awakens. Asana, kumbhakas and other techniques should be practiced until success in yoga comes. Due to the impurities of the energy channels the energy flows not through the central channel. How then can success be attained in enlightenment? Once the yogi has cleaned the energy channels through his yoga practice, he is able to direct the energy (to do Raja Yoga, Kundalini Yoga). If the dormant kundalini energy awakenes by the blessing of a Guru (inauguration, power transmission), then all the power blocks are removed. Sushumna (the center channel from the pelvic floor to the head) is the main pathway for the flow of energy. Then the mind is free from all bonds. The fear of death is defeated. The yogi whose kundalini is awakened by the grace of an enlightened master and who renounces of all activities (living in the rest) achieves effortlessly samadhi (enlightenment). Oh Parvati! Diseases are destroyed by yoga and even the death will overcome. When the mind is united with God, there is no dualism. Unceasing joy arises.
A sadhu by the Ghats on the Ganges
Inner tension and inner conflict occur when people prevent themselves from being at peace and from experiencing true happiness at a deeper level. This inner tension and conflict takes energy, destroys any chance for contentment, and lower one’s overall spiritual positivity. A highly tense and conflicted person tends to have negative thoughts. Love for oneself and others is blocked mentally and spiritually.
Inner conflict can mainly be traced to one’s childhood. In a conflicted society, where pressure to perform and competition is a daily reality ingrained upon its members, a tendency toward conflict and tension is passed on from parents to their children during their upbringing. Parents live out their worries, doubts, fears, aggressions, addictions, and thus influence the spiritual development of their children. Other childhood sources of learned conflict stem from television. Tension in turn then comes from professional stress, strained relationships, divorce, and more, as these children grow up to face similar challenges as their parents face or once faced.
The good news is, whenever this inner conflict builds up inside, it can also be eliminated.  The bad news is this can take quite a while. Whenever tension builds over the course of several years, it will also take years to relieve. It is always worth the effort, however, to take on the challenge of curing oneself of such inner negativity. For example, illness later on in life can be avoided as a life full of peace, energy, and positivity is a healthier one.
The amount of inner peace a person possesses correlates oppositely to the amount of tension in one’s body and spirit. The lower the tension, the more positive the life force present. Every person has the potential to find absolute peace and contentment. Everyone can achieve enlightenment. The only thing standing in the way of this goal is our own tension and negativity. Once these darker feelings subside, our inner positive energy grows.
A good way to go about curing oneself of this life force robbing negativity is to practice several spiritual exercises every day. We have to live in a way that facilitates a gravitation towards the light, instead of the dark. Most people in today’s day and age are on a march in the opposite direction. They live day to day feeling egotistical and stressed out. They live their lives focused on creating more tension and end up burnt out, sick, negative, and depressed.
Tension can reside in the body and the soul. The body and the soul are connected, and in order to relieve ourselves of inner tension, we should practice spiritual exercises for both elements. Inner happiness can manifest on a deeper level only when we cleanse ourselves of this inner tension. As people are very individual, no two have the same sorts of tension and negativity. Everyone should therefore experiment with said exercises to find what is best for him or her to direct one’s path in the appropriate way for him or herself to find inner happiness. True contentment can be found as one of the enlightened. The deeper purpose of life is to reach enlightenment.
Karma Yoga is the path of all-embracing love. We reach enlightenment, if we take the happiness of our fellow man more important than our own happiness. We identify ourselves with all. We see us in all. We feel at last one with all. In this way we overcome our ego and get a unity consciousness. Ego sacrifice combined with a cosmic consciousness is the basis of enlightenment. If we train these qualities, we relax deep in our soul, because we take ourselves not so important. We visualize ourselves in all person and thus awake our Kundalini energie. Karma Yoga practised on the real way awakes our inner peace, love and happiness.
The path of all-encompassing love gives life a deeper meaning. It gives us the power to overcome barriers and burdens. When we facilitate the desire for a better world, then we grow further towards enlightenment. The secret to this wish is the connection from the inner to the outer world. We are not spiritually separated from other beings. Their happiness or lack thereof affects us. When we visualize other beings as happy, then we also feel happy. Those who foster and encourage this goal to a happy world creates positivity within. When we send light to all beings, then one day light will come through to our souls. When we do something good for the world, the world will reward us with a positive psyche. But there is a danger along the path of unconditional, all-encompassing love. We can overwhelm ourselves and work too hard and have no energy left for happiness.
A karma yogi must practice equally rooted in love and rest and balance rest with activity. A karma yogi must take care of him or herself, as it is impossible to take care of others unless the self is cared for. Furthermore, a path of exhaustion only leads to burn-out, not to enlightenment. Jesus stated, “love God and love your neighbor.” (Meaning, practice spiritually for the development of the self and help others.) Swami Shivananda declared, “love, serve, give, meditate, purify, and realize your true self.” Sai Baba said, “helping hands are holier than lips which pray.“ Those who work towards happiness for all beings are holier than the yogi who only searches for self-enlightenment. But Sai Baba also taught the balance and the connection between personal practice and all-encompassing love. He recommended six hours per day of helping the fellow man, six hours per day of meditation, six hours per day to enjoy life, and six hours of sleep. There are two great goals a human can have. He or she can seek enlightenment or work towards a happier world. At best, we combine the two. The vision of a happy world provides motivation in a life as a Yogi.
Play media  Meditation with the inner voice. Video 10 min.
Please see Computer Yoga at Wikiversity.
How to practice Yoga?
Before you opt for a particular style of yoga, you should consider what you’re looking for. Do you want strenuous exercises (stretching, muscle building, bodystiling) or relaxation (stress reduction, health, peace)? Sporting challenge you will find with Power Yoga, Iyengar Yoga and Kundalini Yoga. Relaxation you can find in the normal Hatha Yoga (Sivananda Yoga, Integral Yoga) and in the Viniyoga. Try out what is good for you (List of yoga schools). Ultimately, every yoga teacher has his personal style. Every yoga teacher has weaknesses and strengths. Learn from any yoga teacher. Find your own way to practice yoga. Take the best for you and accept in any yoga class the things that are personally not effective for you. And above all, always stay on your path of truth and accuracy. Don´t give up your mind on the door to spirituality.
Yoga is a path of health, relaxation and inner happiness. The ultimate goal of yoga is to live permanently in the light. We cleanse systematic our body and mind of the tensions (samskaras). This gives us inner happiness, healing and ongoing health. The body becomes healthy. The mind becomes positive. We get the properties of inner peace, inexhaustible energy, mental clarity, embracing love, joy and kindness. Yoga provides a variety of techniques (List of asanas). It has techniques for the body and the mind. We should practice each yoga exercise so, that it works well for us. What hurts us, we omit it. What is good, that we do. We can vary all yoga exercises creative. We ask ourselves constantly: “What do I need now? What’s good for me? What triggers best my tensions?” Ideal is a practice time of fifteen minutes. If you do four weeks yoga every day at a certain time, your mind gets accustomed to your daily practice. Then it is easy for you. Yoga becomes for you a simple way to preserve your health and your inner happiness.
Find your individual rhythm and your priorities. Do the breaks at the right moment and in the right track. If you do not want to spend much time for yoga, just do a little break at the end. Through the exercises you will gain experience with yoga. You learn the key techniques. You get a lot of exercise tips. After a while you'll know what is good for you. You'll find out what yoga exercises you need personally. You'll find your personal way to practice yoga. Yoga is an ongoing experiment. On the way to self-realization, you will need many different yoga practices. There are specific techniques for each stage of development. If you know the basic exercises presented here, you will find quickly in any situation the right technique.
Play media  Surya namaskar with breathing in and out.
Breathing in yoga is basically a natural breathing. The breath is calm and relaxed. For most people it is the best not to focus on the breath, but on the body and the postures. The breath finds on its own its optimal form. If a yoga exercise is strenuous, we breathe more calm and relaxed. We do not hold your breath. Thus we could cramp inside and block the process that releases tensions. It is better  to breathe deeply in the stomach. Deep breathing is the natural way at a strenuous exercise. The body can absorb more oxygen and perform strenuous exercises with internal relaxation. Many schools of yoga teach to focus on the breath while doing the yoga postures. Sometimes even the yoga exercises are done in breathing patterns. You breathe in, go into a yoga pose, exhale and go into the next yoga pose. This is especially at the sun salutation, a series of well-known yoga practice. Yoga thus is a breathing meditation. This can be good for you. Then stick to it. But the concentration on the breathing leads to a loss of body awareness and inner relaxation. Yoga becomes ineffective. Most yoga practitioners can not concentrate on breathing and at the same time stay relaxed in the body. They are overwhelmed and tense up. The best way is to practice yoga exercises and breathing exercises separately in principle. Breathing exercises are important. We can absorb energy through respiration and resolve our tensions. Make breathing exercises in the sitting position to calm the mind.
Get used to a certain time for your yoga practice. At best you do every morning and evening for about 5 to 15 minutes yoga or meditation. If yoga twice a day is too much, you can practice yoga also once a day. Even once a day regularly yoga is a great asset to the health and relaxation.  A daily practice is ideal for long-term tension reduction, for the maintenance of physical health and mental wellbeing. The yoga exercises in the morning will make you ready for the day. You bring your energy system in motion and go with positive mood through the day. Yoga exercises or meditation in the evening are important to resolve the tensions accumulated during the day. As a result, the recovery value of your sleep increases significantly. You recover better and have so much more from your life. Scientific studies have shown that the stress of the day is stored in the muscles. This stress is still largely present in the body in the next morning. It has not gone away. This shows the need for a regular tension reduction. Otherwise it may be that your inner stress is getting bigger over the years and causes great harm in the long term. Give yourself a shake and practice yoga or meditation every day. The time is really quite small and the effect is huge in the long term.  It is important to develop self-discipline. You need it to win spiritually. When we practice yoga in the long term, it will always open up new dimensions of practice. The seemingly simple yoga exercises unfold deeper effects. We feel energy that is created with each yoga postures. Yoga is a game with energy. And at some point the energy will then flow more strongly, and we remain a long time in a yoga position with a sense of ease, peace and bliss.
An important point in the daily practice of yoga is the motivation. We all have to reckon with the fact that, although we recognize that a daily yoga program in the long term has a very positive effect on our health and general well-being, we all have very little self-discipline and perseverance. We can counter it by working regularly on our motivation. First, we should never let go of our daily routine. Once we have slipped from the right path, we take up again our daily practice immediately after our period of weakness. We oppose our self-destructive thoughts through the positive thought of spiritual victory. We think about the benefits of a daily health and relaxation program. Second, it is important to make our daily yoga practice in a way, that we enjoy doing it. An important tool for this is beautiful music. If we do the yoga exercises with beautiful music, it is a lot easier. Third, we feel what is effective and good for us. We can vary our yoga exercises. We do yoga corresponding to our personal needs. A big help is to make yoga in a group. A group strengthens us to take Yoga important. The energy of the group carries us through the yoga exercises. A solid yoga group gives us great support for a continuous yoga practice. About 20% of people can keep their yoga practice alone, but 80% with a group.
Yoga is a great treasure. Yoga keeps the body flexible, strengthens our muscles, dissolves tensions in the internal organs, activates our life energy and makes our mind positive. Yoga helps us to cope our life, to preserve our health and to let the happiness grow in our world. Through yoga we can become a Buddha, a Shiva and a Goddess. Kings have given up their kingdom to gain the wealth of yoga. Yoga is so vast that it can hardly be imagined. Many people nowadays are on an intensive search for the great good fortune. They seek it in relationships, in career and consumerism. They seek happiness in the wrong place. Where they seek, they will not really find it. All external happiness is fleeting. Lasting happiness a person can find only in himself. 90% of the happiness comes from the consciousness of a person. It depends on his mental attitude, his inner qualities and his ability to think positive. This is the clear recognition of the current happiness research. The ancient yogis knew these facts for thousands of years. They have focused their lives on the realization of their inner potential. Many people exercise wrong. They practice yoga only formally (as an external form) without inner feeling. They do not resolve tensions. It is important that we practice goal-oriented, effective and with endurance. Live as a winner. God bless you.
Play media  Yoga for Beginners (18 min.)
Get the benefits of yoga. Learn yoga from a video with beautiful music. Relax in a few minutes with an easy yoga series. Do it as it is good for you. If you cannot do something, don't do it. The first ten minutes we learn some basic yoga exercises and the last minutes we meditate with some mantras and the muscle relaxation. If you have little time, make only the yoga exercises or only the meditation. Do yoga at least once a week so that you stay healthy and happy.
We lie down on our back and relax.
We raise the outstreched right leg and hold it in the air. Then we raise the left leg in the air and hold it.
We raise both legs and the head in the air. We hold it as long as possible and breath relaxed in our belly.
We go into the candle, raise the butt and the legs to the sky. The hands strengthen our back. We move our feet and relax a minute in the candle.
We lie down again and rotate the spine. We turn the pelvis to the right and the head to the left. And the other way round. We twist the spine as far as possible.
We put our head backwards and bring our feet as far as possible to the head. The legs are in the air and the hands lie beside the body on the ground. They support the position. We hold the Cobra, breath relaxed into the belly and move the feet.
We lie the head on our hands, move our feet and relax.
We sit cross-legged or in the heel seat. The back is straight and the belly relaxed. We think one minute the mantra "Om Shanti". We think it so fast, that all thoughts come to rest. Then we move a hand in blessing and think: "I send light to (name). May all people be happy. May the world be happy."
We lie down and make the muscle relaxation. We tense the muscles of the legs and feet. We relax. We tense the muscles of the arms and hands. We relax. We tense the muscles of the head and the face. We relax. We tense the muscles of the whole body. We relax. We move the feet. We relax completely for some minutes. We go peaceful and happy our way.
---> Yoga for Beginners with pictures
Play media  Meditation with the inner voice. Video 10 min.
Yoga for Absolute Beginners. Try this!
Yoga for your Back - 20 Minutes Yoga Class
Yoga to Get Your Morning Moving!
Yoga to Make You Happy, Relaxing Beginners Routine for Stress & Depression, Lori Austin
Yoga Full 30 minute routine - eFit30
A Yoga class consits of Dynamic Exercises, Exercises in Lying and Meditation. Then you feel complete well. Find first your personal Dynamic Exercises. You cannot stretch before warming up. You need cardiovascular exercises for your health for at least 10 to 20 minutes.
The Shake Meditation is a good way to quickly reduce stress and recharge with positive energy. We turn on a beautiful music, stand upright and move dynamically in the knees up and down. We can dance or go on the spot. The Shaking is a fast movement from the knees. The knees shake the body. The movement in the knees is small and fast.
Be angry. We shake all the stress of life out of us. We think the mantra, "anger". We transform all stress unto motion and liberate us as this.
Be sad. We solve our pent-up grief. We think the sentence: "I am sad because ...". We move all the sadness out of us. What makes you sad today? Think the reason several times as a mantra.
Turn the spine. We rotate into the spine left and right. We solve all the tension in the spine. The head also rotates to the sides.
Massage your body. We massage our body with a healing color. We are wrapped in a cloud of a healing energy. What healing color is good for you today? Think of the name as a mantra, "Yellow, Orange, Purple ...". Massage the healing color from head to toe in your body.
Earth you. We rub the healing color with the right and left foot on the floor. We paint a healing circle around us. When painting with our feet, we feel the earth. We think the name of the color as a mantra.
Go on shaking, move one hand and send a person light. We send the whole world light and think, "May all people be happy. May the world be happy."
Move around a few minutes as you like. Feel what you need now? Do it!
Video Shake Meditation Yogi Nils (10 min.)
Visualize the sun and think, "Om"
Inhale and think, "Sun"
Circle with the arms, inhale, "Sun"
The Sun Salutation is one of the most popular yoga series.  It exists in many forms.  Here is an abridged version. The secret of its potency is the combination of simple body movements with a strong visualization of light. We really see the sun in the sky. We feel how her love, light and heat radiates down on us and fills us with strength. Best we perform the Sun Salutation facing the sun, so that we can directly take the light. We make the Sun Salutation fast or slow. Normally the movements are associated with inhalation and exhalation. Do the (1 - 10) Sun Salutation 5 to 10 minutes. Then relax in lying down.
Sun = We stand upright on our yoga mat. We put the palms together in front of the heart chakra. We face the sun and think (or speak) the mantra "Om". We welcome the sun, the light and the life.
Earth = We bow the straight upper body down, hands lay next to the feet on the ground and think, "Om". The crown chakra shows to the feet. Thus, the root chakra is activated (earth energy). We breathe out.
Step backwards = We put a foot wide backwards and stretch our face back up to the sun. We breathe in and think, "Sun." Our hands are beside our feet.
Dog (mountain) = We also put the other foot back. We breathe out and push our butt up to the sky. The head points to the feet, "Om".
Cobra = We move our pelvis to the ground and stretch our head back and up to the sun. The two legs are on the ground, we push the upper body with our arms up, and the back hanging down relaxed. We breathe in and think, "Sun."
Dog (mountain) = We strech again the butt to the sky, the head shows to the feet. We breathe out and think, "Om".
Step forward = We put a foot forward between the hands. The head rises again to the sun. We breathe in: "Sun".
Earth =  Feet between our hands, the butt to the sky, head to the ground, breathe out, and think, "Om".
Circle with the arms = We get up and make a big circle around us with our arms. We visualize the unity of the cosmos, breathe in and think, "Sun."
Relax = We lie down, move our feet, stop one minute all thoughts and then relax.
Yoga Walking is enlightenment while walking. This is the ultimate kick! This is health training, stress reduction and inner happiness in one. Yoga Walking is your daily pilgrimage into the light. If you really pilgrimage, the pilgrimage will you turn into a goddess of happiness. Go first rather quickly (power walking) and at the end rather slowly (slow walking). You can also go at home on the spot (10 minutes to music) or in a gym (treadmill).
When walking stomp your anger into the ground. Let all the pent-up anger out. Think the mantra "Anger, Anger, Anger ..." What annoyed you today? Free yourself! Solve then when walking your sadness. Feel in your sadness inside. What makes you sad today? Think several times the mantra: "I'm sad because ..."
Shoulders rotate. Solve the tension in your shoulders and your neck. In what way do you have to move the shoulders so that you achieve a good effect?
Spine rotation. Turn yourself when walking several times in the spine to the right and to the left. Also turn the head with.
Massage a healing color from head to foot in your body, and think the color name as a mantra. What color do you need now? "Orange, blue, gold, pink ..."
Concentrate when walking on the ground. Feel the earth. Think the mantra "Earth" and breathe a minute into your feet.
Move one hand and send a person a positive sentence. What do you want to say to him today? Think the phrase several times as a mantra. Send light to the world and think: "May all beings be happy. May the world be happy."
Imagine the numbers 1 to 20 in the head, chest, abdomen, legs, feet, and in the ground (beneath the feet). Solve so every day quickly and effectively the tensions in all major areas of the body.
Visualize a beautiful sun in the sky and clothe yourself with a golden ray of sunshine. Fill you with light and think many times the word "Light" as a mantra.
Stop all thoughts. Move five minutes when walking all the stress out of you, until your mind becomes calm.
Walk freely. Let all thoughts come and go as they want. Go the way you feel you want to do. Enjoy it. Observe how your mind becomes slowly positive. You are now back from your pilgrimage into the light. You did an important fact for your physical health and your mental well-being. Keep your happiness. The light will accompany you through your whole day.
The Five Tibetan Rites are well suited as morning activation. They clean our chakras and give us inner strength. They get our blood circulation moving and strengthen our muscles. It takes only about 5 to 10 minutes. The Five Tibetans presented in a modified form. Instead of the knee stand we make the windmill. The leg lifting is practiced in a back-friendly form. The sixth Tibetan (abdomen tightening, breath holding) is replaced by a sitting meditation.
Circle = We are running a minute on tiptoe on the spot, turn us in a circle (around our own axis, the spine) and shake our arms. We can turn around the right or left. While circling around, we visualize a cloud of light around us and think the word "light" as a mantra. If we become dizzy, we turn more slowly. We then massage the light in the whole body and think the mantra "light, light, light ..."
Windmill = In triangle stand (feet apart) we bow forwards with a straight spine. We extend our arms out to the sides and turn ten times in the spine backwards and forwards. The hand points to the opposite foot. We think the numbers 1 to 10 in our body.
Mountain and valley = We go forward in the push-up on the floor and stretch our butt up. We alternate between mountain (dog) and valley (push-up) back and forwards. We visualize a cloud of light around us and think the numbers from 1 to 10 as a mantra. The head goes in the valley position to the back and in the mountain position to the earth.
Pelvis up and down = We rotate into a sitting position, support us with our hands behind the back on the ground and push the pelvis forward up into the air. We stand backwards on the hands and the feet. We form a rectangular table with the body. We move our pelvis back to earth. We go ten times with the pelvis between the earth and the air back and forwards. The head goes forwards (table position) and back. We visualize light around us and count the numbers from 1 to 10.
Leg lifting = We sit on the ground and support us from behind our back with the elbows on the ground. The legs lie outstretched on the earth. We move the stretched right leg ten times up and down. Then we lift the left leg ten times. We visualize light around us and think the numbers from 1 to 10 in each leg.
Meditation = We sit in the meditation position (cross-legged or heel seat) and put the hands in the lap. The back is straight and the belly relaxed. We move a hand in blessing and think, "I send light to ... May all people be happy.  May the world be happy." We span a minute the abdominal and pelvic muscles, and stop all thinking. We relax. We lie down for a minute.
Evening Ganga Aarti, at Varanasi
The steam locomotive activates our Kundalini energy. It gives us inner strength. We can do it in running or going. Some people love it rather quickly and some slowly. For the duration of yoga practices, there are two principles: We do each exercise as long as it is good for us. If in doubt we make any yoga exercise for a minute.
Steam locomotive = We run on tiptoe on the spot. We feel the ground beneath our feet. The arms we move as two steam piston forward and back. The hands are clenched into fists. We breathe loud as a steam locomotive quickly and deeply from the belly. We breathe through the mouth and make noises like a steam locomotive. We first run a little on the spot and then turn us around our own axis (the spine). Depending on our intuition, we can turn around the right or left. We begin with a slow turning. Later we turn on the dizzy limit. Thus, the energy moves into our midst. She pulls into our center and strengthens our self. If we become too dizzy, we turn more slowly. We should not stop quickly. This increases the dizziness. It is better to slowly untwist and then walk a little on the place. While circling, we visualize a cloud of energy around us and think the word "Cloud" as a mantra.
Bend forward = We stand in the triangle (feet wide apart). The hands are together behind our back. The arms are stretched and pulled upwards. In the triangle we bend with the torso forward. We breathe relaxed into this position. The knees should be slightly buckled.
Candle  = We lie on the back and go into the candle. We stretch our legs up, move the toes and think the mantra "Light." We visualize the sun in the sky above us and fill us with light. We can also meditate in rest one minute in the candle.
Meditation = We roll off from the candle in the medition seat (cross-legged, heel seat or chair). The hands are placed in the lap or on the legs. We breathe in the belly and think one minute while breathing the mantra "Om".
Relaxation = We lie down. We move a little our feet and then stop a minute every thought. We relax a  minute.
Play media  Kundalini Meditation. Video 10 min.
Morning Yoga for Flexibility with Tara Stiles
Sun Salutation, Yoga with Esther Ekhart
How to Practice Sun Salutation-step by step, pose by pose guide
A Fun Sun Salutation, Yoga Warm up with Aki Omori
Morning Yoga for Strength & Inspiration with Tara Stiles
Yoga for Weight Loss morning and evening routine
Yoga Flow Series Workout For Burning Calories!
Play media  Basic Yoga Series (15 min.)
Yoga provides a variety of techniques (List of asanas). It has techniques for the body and the mind. We should practice each yoga exercise so, that it works well for us. What hurts us, we omit it. What is good, that we do. We can vary all yoga exercises creative. We ask ourselves constantly: “What do I need now? What’s good for me? What triggers best my tensions?” Find your individual rhythm and your priorities. Do the breaks at the right moment and in the right track. If you do not want to spend much time for yoga, just do a little break at the end. Through the exercises you will gain experience with yoga. You learn the key techniques. You get a lot of exercise tips. After a while you'll know what is good for you. You'll find out what yoga exercises you need personally. You'll find your personal way to practice yoga. Yoga is an ongoing experiment. On the way to self-realization, you will need many different yoga practices. There are specific techniques for each stage of development. If you know the basic exercises presented here, you will find quickly in any situation the right technique.
The Basic Yoga Series takes about 10 to 20 minutes. Decide how much time you want to invest every day in your path of yoga. Practice the Basic Yoga Series so that it is good for you. Make small relaxation breaks between the exercises, if it is helpful for you. In a yoga group, there is basically after each exercise a short break. At home you can relax at the end of the series. The relaxation at the end is important because most of the tensions resolve there and we get into a good mood.
Cycling = We lie on our back on the yoga mat (blanket). We are raising the head, arms and legs. We move the arms and legs like riding a bicycle. We think the mantra "Cycling". We move to the left and right side.
Pelvic rotation = We lie down outstreched on the floor. The arms surround the head. We rotate the pelvis to the left and head to the right. And vice versa. We focus on the spine. We do this gently several times, so that we solve well the tensions in the spine.
Candle = From the supine position, we stretch the legs to the sky and prop up us on the back with our hands. We move the legs, such as cycling and think the mantra "Candle".
Swing =  We roll gently from the candle in the supine position and pull our knees toward our chest. We embrace our legs and relax rocking from side to side. It is as if we swing lovingly a little kid.
Arm-leg raising = We turn around and lie on our stomach. We lift the right arm and the left leg stretched as far as possible. We then lift the left arm and right leg. We do this several times and count the numbers from 1 to 20 in the body.
Pelvic rotation =  In the prone position we lie our head on the hands and turn with our breath   several times the pelvis relaxed to the left and right. We focus on the spine and twist as much as possible.
Feet = We stay relaxed in the prone position and move softly our feet. The head rests on the hands. We focus on the feet and move it relaxed and gently on our way.
Meditation = We rise up in a sitting position (heel seat or cross-legged) and put the hands in our lap (or on the legs). The back is straight and the belly relaxed. We think the mantra "Om Shanti" until our mind comes to rest.
Blessing = We move our hand and think, "I send light to (name). May all people be happy. May the world be happy."
Relaxation = We lie down comfortably and relax. First we stop one minute every thought, focus on the feet and move it gently. Then we relax for a few minutes completely.
---> Basic Yoga Series with pictures
Play media  Dynamic Mantra Yoga (20 min.)
The dynamic Mantra Yoga is a quick way to relaxation, health and happiness. We connect dynamic yoga exercises with mantras (positive words). We resolve systematically the tensions in all parts of the body. By this we get health and happiness. We become happy out of ourselves.  Learn it in an easy way with the video. It is good for beginners and advanced. This yoga series lasts 20 minutes. The first ten minutes we make the dynamic exercises and the second 10 minutes we meditate. Do yoga as it is good for you.
Cycling = We lie on our back on the yoga mat (blanket). We raise the head, arms and legs. We move the arms and legs like riding a bicycle. We think the mantra "Cycling". We move to the left and right side.
Butt knocking = We turn onto the back, put our feet on the ground near the butt and knock a minute dynamic with the butt up and down on the ground. We work all our stress and aggressions out. We focus on our body. We lift the butt while knocking so much in the air, that we resolve the tensions in the upper body.
Feet and fist stomping = Move all your anger out and and think the mantra "Anger".
Candle = We go into the candle, straighten both legs to the sky and support us with our hands at the back. We think the mantra "Candle".
Spine rotation = Lie down on your back. Move your pelvis to the left and your head to the right side. Both to the other side. Twist on this way several times your spine. Feel the spine. Move your feet and rotate the spine. Resolve all tension in your spine.
Arm-leg raising = We turn around and lie on our stomach. We lift the right arm and the left leg stretched as far as possible. We then lift the left arm and right leg. We do this several times and count the numbers from 1 to 20 in the body.
Up and down = Sit in the heel seat, raise your hands up to the sky, visualize a beautiful sun and think the mantra "Light". Bow forward in the heel seat, bring the light to the earth and think "Light". Do this several times. Finally put your hands behind your back and bring it together with your arms extended upward. This relaxes the chest.
Meditation seat = We rise up in a sitting position (heel seat or cross-legged).
a) Move a hand in blessing: "I send light to (name). May all people be happy. May the world be happy."
b) Think a minute the mantra "Om Shanti".
a) Count the nummers 1 to 20 in the head, chest, belly, legs and feet.
b) Tense and relax twice all muscles.
c) Move your feet.
d) Relax some minutes completely.
Get up and think the mantra: "Om all enlightened Masters. Om inner wisdom. Please guide and help me on my way."
Play media  Computer Yoga (sitting, 9 min.)
Don´t work too much. Don´t rest too much. Find your personal balance. Stay healthy and happy. Do every day some spiritual exercises. Do Computer Yoga every day. It is very easy. Relax in a few minutes. Go positiv through your life.
Move your head and think the mantra 5 to 10 times "Om" in your head. Turn your head left and right. Forward and backward.
Move your shoulders, so that all tensions resolve. What is the best way for you? Move forward, and another way round. Move with your elbows and think "Om, Om, Om..." And another way round. Om..
Move your spine to the right and left side. The head also. Think "Om , Om, Om.. " in your spine.
Move your feet on the ground. Say "Om" in your belly, in your legs, in your feet and in the earth. Concentrate on the whole earth and think the mantra "Earth".
Massage your body from head to feet. Put your hands over your head together, rub the palms, visualize the sky above you and say the mantra "Heaven". The light comes down and you massage the light into your face, your eyes, your ears, your whole body and think "Light, Light..." Fill yourself with light. Move your feet, fill light into the earth and think, "Light ..."
Move your hand and send light so your people, "I send light to ... May all people be happy. May all the world be happy."
Rub your palm together, think on the enlightened masters and say, "Om all enlightened masters, please help me on my way." Now you can ask a question. Think about your life. What are your goals? What is your way? Hear the answer within you. Feel the answer inside. What is the answer?
Put your hands on your legs or your belly. Make your mind calm and think the mantra "Om" in your head, your thorax, your belly, your legs, feet, in the earth and in the whole cosmos. "Om Om Om Shanti Om Peace Om Peace Om Shanti Om Peace ..."
Stop one minute all your thinking. Sit only there. Don´t think.
What do you have to take in your life? Take it. What is your positive sentence now? What helps you to go positive through your day and your life? "My positive sentence is: I am optimistic. I go my way optimistic."
Computer Yoga for Advanced (video, 9 min.)
In the Western world we have relaxation yoga, power yoga, stretch yoga, meditation yoga and different kinds of spiritual yoga. Creative Hatha Yoga works with all of these techniques. Most western yogis first learn one special yoga way and then they practice creative yoga. Whatever you choose to do, the main point is to follow your own wisdom, to feel what you need and to find your personal yoga practice. The Creative Hatha Yoga is a way of spontaneously and creatively develop the currently useful yoga exercises. Listen to the voice of your inner wisdom and feel in your body. What exercises do you need right now? How you must practice it, so that your inner tensions dissolve, that your Kundalini energy awakes and you get in a state of happiness and well-being? Try different yoga exercises. Feel what is good for you. Developed your personal yoga series.
Watch the video (Creative Hatha Yoga). The video is in german language, but you can understand it, when you read the following text.
Circle = We start with the shaking. We run on tiptoe on the spot and shake the body. We turn around. We massage light in the whole body and think the mantra  ”Light, Light, Light … “
Cobra = We slowly bow forward. We lay on the ground. We base our head on the hands. We highlight the knees slightly and swing the feet back and forth. We count in the kidneys the numbers 1 to 20.
Pelvic rotation = We lay with our head on the hands and relax. We rotate the basin far to the left and right, back and forth. We focus on the spine.
Feet = We move the feet and toes slightly. We circle the feet over the ground. We feel the feet. Relax.
Massage = We come up and kneel down on the heels. We turn in the spine to the right. The head is also turning. We turn to the left. The head is also turning. We massage the body from top to bottom. We rub all the stress and tension out.
Earth rubbing = We bend forward in the heel seat. We rub the ground with our hands and think the mantra “Earth”. We draw with our hands a circle of light on the earth around us. We sit in the circle of light. What color has the circle of light? Yellow, orange, blue, gold?
Cycling = We turn around and lay on our backs. We move with the feet a bike ride. We lay our hands on the belly, lift the head, the legs turn to the right and left. The head always shows in the opposite direction.
Shoulder stand (Sarvangasana) = We go into the candle. The feet points to the sky. We base with our hands up at the back. We go on riding a bike with our feet, see the light around us, thinking the mantra “Light” and turn our head slightly to the left and right.
Blessing = We gently roll down from the candle into our meditation seat (cross legged). We move a hand in blessing and think, “I send light to (name). May all people be happy. May the world be happy.”
Video Creative Hatha Yoga (germ., 6 min.)
Play media  Fitness Yoga (10 min.)
Fitness Yoga is a dynamic form of yoga. We can eliminate our stress after work and recharge us with positive energy. In 10 minutes we are fit again.
Shake Meditation = We make five minutes the  Shake Meditation and move out all the accumulated stress: Dissolve your anger (think the mantra, "anger"). Dissolve your grief ("I'm sad because ..."). Circle your shoulders. Twist your spine. Massage your body. Rub the earth with your feet.
Windmill = In triangle stand (feet apart) we bow forwards with a straight spine. We extend our arms out to the sides and turn ten times in the spine backwards and forwards. The hand points to the opposite foot. We think the numbers 1 to 20 in our body.
Arm-leg raising = We turn around and lie on our stomach. We lift the right arm and the left leg stretched as far as possible. We then lift the left arm and right leg. We do this several times and count the numbers from 1 to 20 in the body.
Pelvic rotation = We lie our head on the hands and turn with our breath several times the pelvis relaxed to the left and right. We focus on the spine and twist as much as possible.
Butt knocking = We turn onto the back, put our feet on the ground near the butt and knock a minute dynamic with the butt up and down on the ground. We work all our stress and aggressions out. We focus on our body. We lift the butt while knocking so much in the air, that we resolve the tensions in the upper body.
Abdominal muscle training = We put our hands together behind your head and pull thirty times the head to the knees. The knees are bent and move to the head. We move our upper body 10 times in the middle high, 10 times  to the right and 10 times to the left side. We count in the body of the numbers 1 to 30.
Candle = We go into the candle, straighten both legs to the sky and support us with our hands at the back. We breathe one minute relaxed into the body.
Meditation = We rise up in a sitting position (heel seat or cross-legged) and put the hands in our lap (or on the legs). The back is straight and the belly relaxed. We think the mantra "Om Shanti" until our mind comes to rest. We move our hand and think, "I send light to (name). May all people be happy. May the world be happy."
Relaxation = We lie down comfortably and relax. First we stop one minute every thought, focus on the feet and move it gently. Then we relax for a few minutes completely.
The greatest gift we can give our children is a spiritual education. If we teach our children positive values​​, they will be able to lead a happy and successful life. If we bring them close to inner happiness as the center of life, one day they will find their own way to get there.
Sun = We stand in a circle and put our hands together in front of the heart chakra. We bow to each other and think, "We welcome the sun."
Sky = We raise our arms to the sky and stand on the tip toe. "We welcome the sky."
Moon = We stand like a moon, bow to the left and then to the right side in the hips, and move the outer arm over our head. "We welcome the moon."
Stars = We make big circles with our arms, visualize the entire cosmos full of stars and think, "We welcome the stars."
All children = We're turn ourselves with outstretched arms in the spine left and right, see the children around us and say, "We welcome all children."
Grass = We bow the upper body forwards and rub with our hands in circles the earth, "We welcome the grass."
Fun = We stand again up straight, put one foot on the opposite knee, standing on one leg like a yogi and shout: "This is fun." For this we applaud vigorously with the hands, until we have all the good mood.
Fears are part of our time. Many people have fears. Anxiety is caused by work pressure, violence and movies on TV. Yoga can help to overcome fears by relieving inner tensions, calming the mind and generate positive thoughts. Yoga gives us the strength to overcome anxiety provoking situations. Yoga makes us inwardly and outwardly strong. If you get enlightened, all fears vanish. Face it.
Anger = We lie on our back and put our feet on the bottom near the butt. Our knees are upright. The head is on the earth. We pound our fists on the ground and stomp our anger alternately with our feet in the ground. We solve all the pent-up anger. To whom or what are you angry today?
Butt Knocking = We knock a minute dynamic with the butt up and down on the ground. We work all our stress and aggressions out. We focus on our body. We lift the butt while knocking so much in the air, that we resolve the tensions in the upper body.
Bridge = We put in the supine position our arms around the head and press the pelvis as much as possible upwards. The shoulders and the head rest on the floor. We make large circles with our pelvis in the air. First ten times left and then ten times right around. We visualize water and think the mantra "Water".
Candle = We go into the candle, straighten both legs to the sky and support us with our hands at the back. We breathe one minute relaxed into the body.
Meditation Posture = We're rolling out of the candle into the heel seat (or cross legged). We stretch our arms to the sky. We breathe in. Then we bow before us and put the hands on the floor. We breathe out. This exercise we do several times and count the numbers 1 to 20 in the body.
Blessing =  In our meditation seat we move a hand in blessing and think, "I send light to (name). May all people be happy. May the world be happy." We then think the mantra "Light" and send light a) to our friends b) to our enemies c) to ourselves.  We massage the light into our body.
Meditation = We sit in the meditation position (cross-legged or heel seat) and put the hands in the lap. The back is straight and the belly relaxed. We stop one minute every thought. Then we remain in meditation, thoughts can come and go as they please. All feelings of anger, fear and grief appear and dissolve by themselves.
Forward = Forward with optimism.
See also: Video Yoga for Anxiety from Sue, Video Yoga for Anxiety Ekhart Yoga, Yoga for Anxiety (Video from Amy), Video Tara Stiles
Yoga stretching strengthens the agility of the body. By stretching, combined with a relaxed concentration on the body, the tensions in the muscles is released. See also the video BEGINNING YOGA FOR STRETCH AND STRENGTH (10 min.).
Plier =  In standing or sitting. We stretch our legs forward. The hands grasp the feet. We pull the head as far as possible to the feet. We move the feet gently back and forth. We send light from the head  to our feet and think: "Light, light, light."
Butterfly = In sitting. We pull the feet to the body, put the soles of our feet together, grasp the feet and stretch the knee sideways to the ground. The back is straight. We move the knee like a butterfly gently up and down. We think the numbers from 1 to 20 in the legs.
Spine = We sit cross-legged. The spine is straight. We rotate several times in the spine. The head spins also. The eyes look left and right to the horizon. What do we see there?
Blessing = We move a hand in blessing and think: "I send light to ... (name). May all people be happy. May the world be happy."
Meditation = The back is straight and the head upright. The hands lie in the lap. We stop one minute every thougt. We relax.
Yoga with meditation is slowly and quietly. The various yoga postures activate our chakras (inner energy channels) and load us with good energy. Meditation while the yoga exercises brings our minds to rest. We  meditate on each yoga posture 1 to 3 minutes. We feel how each yoga posture forms a specific energy field (aura field) around the body. Through the creation of certain energy fields, we clean our body and mind of tensions. It is helpful, if we can feel the spiritual energy. But it is not necessary. It is enough to concentrate relaxed on our body and the postures.  We take breaks as needed between the yoga exercises.
Leg raising = We lie on our back and lift a minute the stretched right leg. We meditate on the right leg. The toes point to the head. The head rests on the ground. We set off and lift the stretched left leg as far as possible. The toes point to the head. We meditate for one minute on the left leg. The arms lie relaxed at the sides.
Two-leg raising = In the supine position we lift up both legs. The toes point to the head. We raise our head towards the feet. We send a light beam from the toes to the head and think the mantra "Light". We breathe in the stomach. We meditate one minute on the posture.
Candle = We go into the candle, straighten both legs to the sky and support us with our hands from the back. We breathe one minutes relaxed into the body.
Feet = We roll from the candle again in the supine position, stretch our legs, put our hands on the belly and move gently our feet. We stop our mind and focus a minute on our belly.
Cobra = We turn on our stomach and lift as far as possible a minute the upper body with our back muscles. The head is in the back, the hands are placed laterally from the body on the floor. We breathe relaxed into the cobra. We send a beam of light from the head down the back and think "Light".
Locust = We set off the head and lift the right leg stretched as far as possible in the air. We meditate one minute on the leg. We lift the left leg for a minute and concentrate relaxed on it.
Cobra with feet to head = We raise like in the cobra the upper body and head. The hands are placed laterally from the body on the floor. In addition, we now lift both legs and bring the feet as close as possible to the head. We breathe relaxed in the stomach and hold the position for a minute. We send a beam of light from the feet to the head and think the mantra "Light".
Pelvic rotation = In the prone position we lie our head on the hands and turn with our breath several times the pelvis relaxed to the left and right. We focus on the spine and twist as much as possible.
Meditation = The back is straight, the head upright, and we relax the belly. The hands lie in the lap. We circulate light in the head, in the whole body, in the legs, feet, arms and hands. At the same time we think the mantra "light, light, light". We visualize in the earth a small star (dot of light). The star circulate in the earth and we think, "Earth". Then we let the star circulate in the sky above us, around our body and in our body. Thereby we think the mantra "Star, Star, Star." We rub in circles with one hand our stomach and the star comes to rest.
Relaxation = We lie down or sit in a comfortable position and move gently our feet. We stop one minute all thoughts. Then we relax completely. Go your way positive. Take things as they are. Concentrate on your goals. Work for a world of love, peace and happiness. Move a hand, send all people light and think, "I send light to (name). May all people be happy. May the world be happy."
Play media  Yoga with Positive Thinking, Video 10 min.
Yoga with positive thinking is very helpful for many people. It allows one to quickly overcome negative tendencies and reach a happy and healthy life. Positive thinking and daily meditation are the two basic techniques of enlightenment. All the negative characteristics are ultimately based on attachment (to external pleasures, other people, to his ego) or rejection (of suffering situations, pain). If we accept the suffering in our lifes and let go of our worldly desires and longings, the tensions in our minds resolve. Our inner happiness creates a positiv feeling of life. We get into a life in the light (in a paradise view of life). The main way to overcome the negative qualities is to focus on the positive qualities of wisdom, self-discipline, peace, love and happiness.
Go = Jog on the spot, with your arms moving by your side. Visualize light, turn around and think, "I go the positive way."
Windmill = Straddle your legs apart, bow forward, turn like a windmill into the spinal column and think: "My goal is ...".
Frog = Bring your feet together. Bow your upper body forward. Push yourself up with your hands on the floor and move your buttocks down in a crouch and back up in the air. The head goes up to the sky and down to the earth. Practice the frog several times and think: "I have strength and endurance."
Arm-leg raising = Lie down on your stomach. Raise your left arm and right leg. Bring both back to the earth and lift the right arm and the left leg. Do this several times. Think, "I take things the way they are."
Upper body raising = Lie in the prone position, with your hands on the floor and repeatedly press the upper body up and down. The head goes to the neck and forward. While breathing in and out, think, "I let go of my false desires."
Pelvic rotation = In the prone position, turn your pelvis to the right and then to the left. Your head must lie on your hands. Think, "I am sad because ...".
Feet = Get your feet moving in the prone position. The head lies relaxed on your hands. Think, "I forgive... (my partner / parents / the cosmos / God), that he/she...". Whom do you want to forgive today? Think these words until a feeling of sadness arises in you, of letting go and forgiveness.
Cycling =  Turn on your back, lift your head and move your arms and legs. Think, "My positive thought today is....".
Candle = Stretch your legs to the sky. Your hands support you at the back. Visualize the sky, move your feet and think many times the mantra "Optimism".
Meditation = Roll from the candle into your meditation seat (cross-legged or heel seat). Put your hands in your lap. The back is straight and the stomach is relaxed. Move one hand and wrap them and think, "I send light to ... May all people be happy. May the world be happy." Stop all your thoughts for a minute. Relax.
Today's professional life is marked by a lot of stress and strain. The Office Yoga helps us to preserve our health and inner happiness.
Stretch =  We put our hands together, turn up the palms outside and stretch our hands pleasurably over the head. We keep our hands above the head and breathe several times deeply in and out.
Right and left stretch = We stretch the right and left side of the body. We continue to hold the hands over the head and breathe several times in the stretched side of our body.
Spine rotation = We continue to hold the outstretched hands above our head. We turn the spine several times to the right and to the left side.
Elbow circles = We lay the hands on the shoulders and make dynamic circles with the elbows. We resolve the tension in the shoulders and neck. We feel that movement we need and what is good for us. We make small and large circles.
Head moving =  We lay our hands on the legs. We stretch the head backwards,  to the right side,  to the left side and let him hang forward. Each time we breathe relaxed in and out.
Massage =  We rub the eyes and face, so that we can see clearly again. We visualize a color of healing and massage it from head to foot on our body. What is your healing color today? We think the name of our color as a mantra: "orange, blue, gold, pink ...". We  bow down and rub also the ground.
Meditation = We put the hands in our lap, thinking the mantra: "I am a Buddha (Shiva, Goddess) of the rest. I live in the rest.  I go the way of rest." Then we move a hand in blessing and think: "I send light to (name). May all people be happy. May the world be happy."
Little Bird = We rub our feet on the ground, visualize ourselves as a tree with  roots, trunk, leaves and crown. Thereby we think as mantra: "Tree." We let the roots grow deep into the earth and think our mantra until we are well rooted in the earth. A little bird comes flying, sits on the tree and gives us a positive sentence. What is your bird? What does he say to you?
Pelvic floor = We tense the pelvic muscles, stop our breath, think the numbers 1 to 20 in the pelvis and move the toes. Then we relax the pelvis.
Belly = We move the abdominal muscels to the spine, exhale, stop the breath, think in the belly 1 to 20 and move the toes. We relax.
Chest = We draw the belly in the chest, exhale, hold our breath, think in the chest the numbers 1 to 20 and move the toes. We relax.
Spine = We tense again the pelvic muscles, pull our stomach in the chest, hold our breath and turn us several times in the spine to the right and left. We also rotate the head. We think the numbers 1-20 in the body. We relax.
Healing = We rub our hands in front of the heart chakra and ask the enlightened Masters (God) for help. "Om all enlightened Masters. Om inner wisdom. Please guide and help me on my way." We now can make a question of healing. We hear the answer inside. What is your problem? What is your healing question? What is the answer of your inner wisdom? What solves the problem?
Healing salve = We visualize a healing salve in our hands, think her color as a mantra and rub it into our whole body. We massage the ointment especially on our sick body areas. What is your color of healing? Rub it for so long in the diseased area of ​​the body, until it has absorbed all the healing energy.
Blessing = We rub with our feet the earth, move a hand in blessing and think: "I send light to (name). May all people be happy. May the world be happy." We relax. Feel into your body. How do you feel now? Feel the relaxation and well-being in you.
This meditation strengthens our life force. It heals our internal organs, we center us in our body and get the power to act positively.
Moving = We make faces, move our head, shoulders, arms, hands, legs and feet. We turn in the spine backwards and forwards. We relax.
Internal organs = We visualize our brain and think several times the mantra "brain." We think the mantra "brain" until we feel that our brain is well filled with healing energy. We also visualize successively all other internal organs and think their name as mantra: "Lungs, stomach, intestines, bladder, kidneys (right and left  at the back), liver (front right), spleen (front left), solar plexus, heart." In conclusion, we visualize all the organs at once and think several times: "All internal organs".
Bones = We visualize one after another all bones and think at least twice: "Skull, spine, chest bones, arm bones, hand bones, pelvis, leg bones, feet bones, skeleton." So that we can feel the individual bones better, we move them easily. Finally, we visualize all the bones together and revolve light around us. We think the mantra "light."
Sun = We see a beautiful sun in our belly. We think the mantra "Sun" and thereby radiate light in our body. The sunlight becomes stronger and fills the entire universe around us with light. We move our arms and think the mantra "Stars". We see the whole universe full of stars and light.
Stop = We stop all thoughts. We bring our mind to rest. We relax. If we have meditated enough, we return slowly. How do you feel now? Feel the relaxation and well-being in you.
Alternate nostril breathing is an important yoga technique. It brings us into the inner balance. In the body there are three main energy channels: the left (Ida, moon, peace), the right (pingala, sun, activity) and the central energy channel (sushumna, Kundalini channel). If we have filled the left and the right channels with prana, increases the Kundalini energy by its own in the central channel. Then appears peace, happiness and inner strength.
Bellows breathing = We place one hand on your stomach and practice a minute bellows breathing. We breathe at a higher speed with the abdominal muscles and fill our body with spiritual energy (prana, light).
Switch breathing = We press our thumb on the right nostril and breathe with the bellows breathing through the left nostril, move the left toes and count from 1 to 20 in the body. We press with your index finger (middle finger, ring finger) on the left nostril and breathe with the bellows breathing through the right nostril, move the right toes and count 1-20 in the body. Then we switch back and forth between the left and right nostril and forth, count the numbers, until a feeling of inner peace and harmony is created.
Pelvic Floor = We tense the pelvic floor, count there are the numbers 1 to 20 and move the toes of both feet. We relax.
Circles with the upper body  = We put the hands on our knees and circle with a straight upper body several times to the left. We tense the pelvic floor and visualize a large sea around us. We think the mantra "Water". Then we revolve several times in the other direction and think again the mantra "Water". We relax the pelvic floor.
"Om" in the belly = We put our hands together in her lap, think a minute the mantra "Om" in our belly, breathe into the belly and move the toes. We stop a minute every thought. We relax.
Goddess Yoga means to pray to the Goddess, visualize the Goddess, identify with the Goddess and realize the Goddess within oneself. To visualize and to meditate on the Goddess awakes the energy of healing, happiness and enlightenment (kundalini energy). The four main Goddesses in Yoga are Durga (the Goddess of power on a tiger), Kali (the black Goddess with a sword), Sarasvati (the white Goddess with a book) and Lakshmi (the Goddess of luck with giver hands). They embody the four properties strength, peace, wisdom and love. If we want to be happy in our lives, we need all these four properties. The Goddess Yoga is the highest form of Yoga. With him we can awaken the kundalini energy (the inner happiness). We can quickly get into the light. Important in Goddess Yoga is, that we are always in touch with ourselves and our inner wisdom. We should never practice formally (without internal involvement). We should find creativity in our personal form of Goddess Yoga.
Durga Durga is the Goddess of power. She rides on a tiger (or lion). She has the force of a tiger within herself. What she decides to be her goal, she reaches it. She is a winner. She has many weapons around her, meaning, that she uses creative methods to reach her goals. We shake both fists near our head and think the word "power", until we feel the power of Durga in us. What are the goals in your life? In which way you can reach them? "My goal is ... My way to be victorious is ..."
The black Goddess Kali has a sword. She is able to sacrifice her ego and thus to get peace in her mind. We put our hands in the lap. We rub the earth with the feet, we feel the ground and think: "I let go of my false desires. I take the things as they are."
Sarasvati is the Goddess of wisdom and creativity. She holds a book and a rosary in her hands. She roots herself in the holy books and in her own wisdom. What is your wisdom today? Track the index finger beside the head to the sky, move it a little and think, "Wisdom is ... Unwisdom is ..."
Lakshmi is the Goddess of luck and happiness. Beside her head are two flowers. She sees the beauty in her live. She recognizes her world as a paradise. She is enlightened and has a paradise view of the cosmos. In her lap she holds a pitcher full of gold pieces. She has inner and outer wealth and spend it to her followers. What is your wealth? Recognize yourself as the Goddess of wealth. Rub your hands on your belly and think the mantra: "The wealth in my life is... I am grateful for ... "
Be a mother of the earth. Consider all beings as your children. Identify yourself with them. Wish them luck and happiness. You are now Lakshmi with the giver hands. Move your hands and think, "I send light to ... May all people be happy. May the world be happy ."
We activate with the star circling the Kundalini energy and then meditate with the Shambhavi Mudra on the light within us. We thus get quickly inner peace and happiness. Sitting in the Shambhavi meditation the light flows more and more into us. The bliss grows more and more. The Shambhavi Mudra is Shivas main meditation. It is the easiest way to stay in the light (in Sat-Chid-Anananda).
Earth = We visualize a bright star. We imagine the earth beneath us and circle with a star in the globe. We think the word "Earth" as a mantra. We circle as long with our star in the earth, until the whole earth among us is full of light. We rub the ground with the feet.
Sun = We see a beautiful sun in the sky. She sends her rays down on us. We let the light flow into us. We fill our entire body with light and think often the mantra "Sun". We move the feet and toes.
Body = We circle with the star around our body and think the mantra "body". We clean all the tensions around our body. We wrap us with light. We massage our body.
Inside =  We circle with the star in the body. We clean all areas of the body sequentially from their tensions and fill it with light. We think the mantra "Light." We circle with the star particularly in our head, chest, abdomen, legs and feet. We massage the special part of the body.
Blessing = We move a hand in blessing and think, "I send light to (name). May all people be happy. May the world be happy."
Om Shanti = The hands are in the belly. We tense the muscles in the pelvis, in the abdomen and chest. We keep the tension. We relax. We do that once again. Then we breathe deeply several times in the belly. We think by inhalation "Om" and by exhalation "Shanti". We come with the mantra "Om - Shanti" more and more toward inner peace. Our thoughts become quiet.
Shambhavi mudra = By the star circling, our energy has turned inwardly. The back is straight, the head upright, and the belly relaxed. We open half or whole our eyes and focus on the energy in us (the light, a chakra, or the Kundalini channel in the middle of our body). Thus the energy of the eyes flows inwardly and stabilizes our meditation. We stop all thoughts. We concentrate on the Kundalini channel, a chakra (heart or sacral chakra) or the light within us. We spend some time in quiet meditation. Then we come back slowly.
Video  of Fire Kundalini Yoga Breathing Exercise
Video Chakra Meditation Technique for Kundalini Awakening
Video High Kundalini Yoga Meditation Technique (Sa Ta Na Ma)
Video Kirtan Kriya Woman (Sa Ta Na Ma)
Play media  Chair Yoga for Beginners (video 6 min.)
Chair Yoga is a simple path of yoga practice. It is suitable for beginners. With Chair Yoga, you can quickly relax at home or at work and recharge with good energy.
Wikipedia: Chair yoga is the term generally used to describe a gentle form of yoga that is practiced sitting in a chair, or standing using a chair for support. It is not recognized formally as a type of yoga distinct from other types, such as Iyengar Yoga or Ashtanga yoga. However the poses, or Asanas, are often adaptations of Hatha yoga poses. Chair yoga has helped people with the symptoms of many health issues including: hypertension (high blood pressure), anxiety, chronic fatigue syndrome, arthritis, vertigo (medical), multiple sclerosis, carpal tunnel syndrome, clinical depression, and chronic pain.
Chair Yoga is one of the gentlest forms of yoga available.
Stretch the arms upward. You can fold your hands and turn them to the sky. Stretch as it does you good. Relax.
Massage your body from head to toe. Visualize a sun in the sky above you. Think while massaging the mantra "light".
Bow down with your upper body, stretch your hands to the ground and visualize the earth beneath you. Think the word "earth". The head shows to the earth. Then shift up with your upper body, stretch out your hands to the sky and visualize the sky above you. Think "heaven." Move now dynamically several times from top to bottom and think "sky" or "earth." Thus, the tensions dissolve in your stomach.
Move your head several times forward (nod) and back (neck). Concentrate on your body and send light to the front over the sternum and to the back over the spine to the feet. Think the mantra "light".
Move your shoulders in your own way. Release the tensions in the shoulders and neck. Circle with your shoulders forward and backward.
Turn yourself in your spine several times gently as far as possible to the left and to the right. Focus on the spine and think several times the mantra "spine".
Breathe deeply into your belly and fill you with breath energy (prana). You can also breathe in the pelvic floor or the soles of the feet. Find out what brings you best to rest.
Move your feet in your own way. Release the tensions in the feet. Think in the feet the numbers 1 to 20.
Move a hand in blessing and think: "I send light to (name). May all people be happy. May the world be happy."
Meditate and bring your thoughts to rest. The back is straight and the stomach is relaxed. What is the best hand position for your meditation? Relax. Come back.
Yoga can be easy. Beginners need simple yoga exercises. The presented exercises involve two levels. First, they are a simple gymnastics, well suited for quick relaxation and for stress relief. Second, they activate all the major chakras and help people to get good energy.
Chair Yoga is a new development in yoga. Chair Yoga can be done in the office or in a simple way in front of the computer. Most people do not need difficult and complicated exercises, but yoga techniques that are easy to practice and can be made in a short time. The most important thing for most people is to do every day something for their health. This series of exercises is very helpful for this.
Do yoga as it is good for you. If you cannot do something, don't do it.  Many people exercise wrong. They practice yoga only formally (as an external form) without inner feeling. They do not resolve tensions. It is important that we practice effective and with endurance.
Too much stress is one of the main problems of today's professional life. Who is constantly under great stress harms the long run his health and his inner happiness. He becomes mentally negative, weak and often plagued the rest of his life from various diseases. Those who do not learn clever to deal with stress consume quickly their life energy.
The root cause of job stress lies in our current economic system. It creates profit for a small number of people and the majority of the world population suffers from  increasing poverty and destitution. It produces on the one hand a lot of unemployment and on the other side many working people having an extreme pressure in their job. In the long term we need to make the inner happiness to the center of a new economic world order. The economy must be organized so that it provides everyone with sufficient food and labor, that the health of the working people is protected, that there is no destruction of the environment, and that the inner happiness grows. Not the profit (the money), but the love must be the engine of world economy. In the short term we will have to live with the unwisdom of the ruling politicians. The more important it is that all people care good for themselves and secondly, that we work as powerful as possible for a better world.
Every working person has to do enough exercises every day for his body and his soul. With a lot of stress at work for everyone a daily health and relaxation program is absolutely necessary. The law of life is relentless. Who does not care for his body has not very long something from it. A well maintained car lasts twice as long as a badly treated car. A human body can live 20 to 30 years longer if he is properly fed, sufficiently relaxed and moved well. Who wants to live healthy, must first take a clear decision. Only this gives him the self-discipline for a healthy life. He must clearly define his health goals and create a strong will to do the necessary things. Just then man has the strength to live a long healthy and positive life.
Second, one must look closely at his life situation. One has to recognize what his body and his mind exactly needs. One must consider how to organize his life so that long-term he maintains his health and increases his happiness. One must create a clear daily schedule of sport, relaxation and a healthy diet.
Third, you have to implement your health care plan at least two months every day consistently. Then your mind gets used to it. The daily health practices are then part of your life.
Incorporate the necessary health exercises creativity in your life. At least you should go for a walk on the weekend for an hour. You can meditate on the train or during breaks at work. You can use any contact with your fellow human beings to practice love and full of positive thinking. The big secret for more energy while working is to sensitively put many small breaks in the workday. Anyone who takes a break five minutes every hour, doubles his work force.
Chronic stress we must avoid. If we cannot work long term in our profession relaxed enough, we are not suited for the job. Then we have to change something in our life. We should always think long term. Our job should feed us, and he should contribute to the happiness of all beings. He should not destroy us in our health and inner well-being. If our work over calls us, we must reorganize something, work less, or if necessary, change our profession.
The most important thing in life is to live in the essence. The essence of life is health and happiness. We should take good care of us. Who cares good for himself, sometimes must say "no". He must say "no" to self-defeating thoughts and self-injurious behavior. We alone are responsible for our life. We should organize our lifes so that we at the end are happy with us. Not our job is the center of our life, but the spirituality. If you look at things this way, you can live much more relaxed. You can work relaxed. And you can let go your profession, if it needs to be. You set the priorities in your life right. Those who live by the right goals, know when and how they have to act.
Smile and be happy.
The most important results of today’s happiness research can be summed up in ten points.
A Proactive Life is a Happy One
Happy people have positive goals and positive tasks. Proactive people are 15% more satisfied with their lives than more passive people. Happiness researcher Ed Diener explains, “happy people set goals for themselves again and again.”
An Active Life is a Happy One
Regular physical activity keeps the body healthy and makes the spirit happy. Daily walks raise the level of happiness 12%. David Niven says, “people who stay fit via sports are healthier, more positive, and more successful.”
Doing Good for the World is a Source of Happiness
Those who regularly do good things for others are 24% happier than those who only live for themselves. John A. Schindler wrote, “live as a giving person. Those who give are happier than those who only take. Those who give to others discover the beauty in the world.”
The central point of a healthy and happy life is to find the balance between rest and activity. Besides, work, physical activity, and time spent with others, we need time to rest and relax. We need to get enough sleep. Scientific research shows that relaxed people think more positively and are happier. Every hour of sleep missed lowers the positivity one can experience during the day.
Where that point of balance between rest and activity lies, must be decided for oneself. Everyone needs to experiment a little to find this correct balance. We have to figure out who much sleep we need and how much relaxation time we need and at what speed we function at our best. We in the western world of „go, go, go“ who wish to stay happy and healthy, must also live extra clever. We need to organize our lives in an intelligent way to facilitate inner happiness and find one’s personal way to inner balance.
Those who think positively double their chance to realize happiness. Those who wish to be happy should think positively. The positive characteristics of wisdom, love, peace, inner power and joy in life should be set as the central point of one’s life. One should exercise a conscious decision to be positive. Fo example, we can ask ourselves, “ how can I go through the day in a positive way?”
The way to positive TV viewing consists of : a) choose your programs carefully. Avoid negative films. B) Find the correct amount of TV. Children should watch a maximum of one hour per day of television. C) After watching TV, one should practice some form of spiritual exercise (such as yoga, meditation, walking, reading, contemplating the meaning of life).
Build on your positive circle of friends. Women who talk to others reduce their worries by 55%. Cancer stricken women who met with a group once a week raised their survival chances to twice as high as those who didn’t meet with a group. In the western world, there is a strong tendency towards isolation. There are many single and lonely people. People who have a good circle of friends are happier and not isolated. We should take care of our friendships and practice positive activities with them.
Those who can find little elements of joy in their lives can raise their overall happiness by 20%. Nils once felt bad and in order to raise his spirits, he ate a lot of sweets. His spirit brightened more and more. Then he visualized the sweets in his stomach and awakened his kundalini energy. He awakened a strong energy which quickly brought him back into the light. Nils learned to thus connect outer enjoyment with spiritual exercises. One then needs less sweets. Just a bit of outer enjoyment is enough for inner happiness.
Those with a good sense of humor raise their positivity by 33%. We should foster our sense of humor and learn to not take things so seriously. We should learn to laugh at our selves. Those who are able to do so, can live lighter and brighter. It is good to see cheerful films, read funny books, and to visit joyful people.
Happy people believe in themselves. They believe in their goals, their wisdom, and their power. They see themselves as winners. They know they will prevail in the long term. In a world of doubt, all followers of the way of bliss need inner strength in order to go about their way successfully. The followers of inner happiness need a clear anchor in terms of wisdom, self-discipline, and self-confidence to avoid being brought back by materialism and doubt.
Basically, the path of inner happiness consists of health practices and of mental work. Health exercises are sports (walking, jogging, biking - if necessary on the exercise bike), yoga and meditation. Add to this a healthy diet. Mental work means to avoid negative thoughts and to encourage positive thoughts. Negative thoughts lead to internal tensions, the destruction of the health and to bad social relationships. They are often associated with feelings such as fear, anger and addiction.
Positive thoughts create positive feelings and a constructive external behavior. Positive thoughts we get by self-reflection, positive intentions and reading in positive books. Importante is a constant attention to the inner thoughts, feelings and positive life principles (love, peace, truth, strength, happiness). Recommendable are the philosophy of happiness (Epicurus), Buddhism, Christianity and Yoga. The positive psychology found many good ways to live a happy life. It is important that we are always in touch with ourselves, our inner truth and love. A spiritual teaching gives us an orientation. For proper application in our concrete situation we are responsible for ourselves. What is good for us? What brings us forward on the path of happiness? What is usefull to build up a happy world?
The easiest way of spiritual centering is the daily reading in a spiritual book. We can also read something positive in the internet. We must not read much. A small text, a meditation a day is enough to keep us on the path to lasting happiness. For many people a daily oracle card is helpful to get a positive outlook on life. For this we need each day just a minute. That time has everyone. The gain is long term immeasurable.
Think about your daily happiness practice. How can you integrate The Five Principles of Health into your life? What is your main way of spiritual centering (Yoga, Buddhism, Christianity, Philosophy, Positive Psychology)? Which spiritual role-model inspires you and gives you energy for a positive life (Buddha, Jesus, Epicurus)? What exercises do you want to practice regularly?
Yoga on a chair with Jessica Hatchett
Yoga for Seniors. Ekhart Yoga Ekhart Yoga
Chair Yoga. By Ann Pizer
The Power of Chair Yoga: 6 Seated Poses Anyone Can Do
There are many techniques for practicing meditation. What do you want from meditation? Happiness, healing, enlightenment? Be always in good contact with your body and your soul. Feel what they want and need.
Play media  Easy meditation for beginners (6 min.)
Sit down comfortably. The hands are in the lap or on the legs. The back is straight. The abdomen is relaxed.
Concentrate on your body. Think several times (5-10 times) the mantra "Om" in the head, chest, abdomen, hands, legs, feet, in the ground and then in the whole universe: "Om Shanti. Om Peace ... "
Stop one minute every thought. When thoughts come, push them off.
Linger one minute in the meditation. Thoughts may come and go as they want.
Relax. Feel the peace and relaxation in your body.
Move your body, your feet and your hands. You're back. Ahead with optimism.
Play media  Computer Meditation (5 min.)
A guided meditation on the computer is a fast way of relaxation. Through simple yoga movements in connection with positive sentences you can resolve emotional blocks and get a positive spirit in five minutes. See also the video.
Visualize yourself as a Master of life (Buddha, Shiva, Goddess) and rub the earth with your feet, "I am a Master of life. I go my way positively. "
Move a hand and think: "I send light to ... (name). May all people be happy. May the world be happy."
Connect with the enlightenment energy (God, enlightened Masters), rub your palm in front of your heart and think, "Om all enlightened Masters. Om inner wisdom. Please guide and help me on my way."
Get inner peace, rub the palms above your head and think, "I take things as they are. I let my false desires go off."
Put your hands on your legs. The spine is straight and the belly is relaxed. Stop one minute all your thinking. Sit only there. Don´t think. Then relax.
Play media  Yoga-Meditation (8 min.)
We sit upright in our meditation seat (cross-legged, heel seat, chair) and in our meditation posture (hands on the legs or lap). The back is straight and the belly is relaxed.  The eyes are open, semi-open or closed.
Sun = We see a beautiful sun in the sky. She sends her rays down on us. We wrap our whole body with light and think the mantra "Light."  We take a golden ray of sunshine and wrap ourselves with it completely. We circle with the light around our body and think the mantra "Light, light, light." We let the light flow into us. We fill our entire body with light and think often the mantra "Light."
Body = We bring our mind to rest by a mantra. We think the numbers 1 - 20 in the head, chest, abdomen, feet and into the earth.
Cosmos = We make big circles with our arms, visualize the whole universe full of stars around us and think the numbers 1 - 20 in the whole universe.
Blessing = We move a hand in blessing and think, "I send light to (name). May all people be happy. May the world be happy."
Master = We rub the palms in front of the heart chakra, connecting us with the enlightened Masters and think, "Om all enlightened Masters. Om inner wisdom. Please guide and help me on my way."
Mantra Om = We put your hands in our lap. We think a minute when breathing out (at breathing in, or at the inhalation and exhalation) the mantra "Om" in the belly.
Stop thinking = We stop a minute every thought. If thoughts come, we push them away. Then we relax for a minute.
Oracle = Forward with optimism. You are guided by the light (by the enlightened Masters, by God). Follow consistent your inner wisdom and your love. Make every day your spiritual exercises. Bring the light on your way into the world. Success.
Progressive muscle relaxation is a relaxation technique by alternately tensing and relaxing the muscles. The presented form was developed by Yogi Nils in his Yoga groups. We can do it in sitting or lying down.
Muscle tension = We tense the muscles of the legs and feet. We stop every thought. We can hold our breath or breathe normally. Then we relax the muscles of the legs and feet. We tense and relax in the same way the arms and hands, the head (face) and the whole body.
Numbers = We count several times the numbers from 1 to 20 in the head, focusing on the head and breathe into the head. Our mind calms. We focus on the chest, breathe into the chest and count the numbers 1 to 20 in the chest. We breathe in the belly, and count there the numbers 1 to 20. We focus on the legs and feet, and count there the numbers 1 to 20. We visualize under the soles a large ball and count the numbers from 1 to 20 in the ball.
Sun = We see in the sky a beautiful sun. She sends her rays down on us. We feel her light and warmth on our skin. It is as if we are on holiday in the sun. We enjoy the sunlight. We wrap our whole body with light. We take a golden ray of sun and let the sunlight everywhere circle around us. We think the mantra "Light." We let the sunlight flow into us and fill us with light. We think the mantra "Light."
Sending light = We move a hand and send another person light. We envelop him with light and let the light flow into him. Think many times the word "Light". After that we send light all over the world. We wrap the whole world with light, fill it with light and think often "Light."
Stop thinking = We stop a minute every thought. Then we linger in meditation. Thoughts may come now if they want to. We feel our the body and enjoy the peace and well-being. If we have meditated enough, we come back again. We move our feet and hands. We stretch and move ourselves. We sit up and are back.
Play media  Sun-Meditation (12 min.)
This is the main meditation in the yoga groups of Yogi Nils. It finishes each yoga class. We lay or sit down comfortably. Cover you for lying, so you do not get cold.
Relaxation = We tense the muscles of the legs and feet. We keep the tension,  stop all thoughts and breathe into the legs. Then we relax. We stretch the muscles of the arms and hands. We breathe into the arms and hands. We relax. We tense the muscles of the head and face. We breathe into the face. We relax. We tense the muscles of the whole body. We breathe into the whole body. We relax.
Numbers  = We count several times the numbers from 1 to 20 in the head, focusing on the head and breathe into the head. Our mind calms. We focus on the chest, breathe into the chest and count the numbers 1 to 20 in the chest. We breathe in the belly, and count there the numbers 1 to 20. We focus on the legs and feet, and count there the numbers 1 to 20. We visualize under the soles a large ball and count the numbers from 1 to 20 in the ball.
Sun = We see in the sky a beautiful sun. She sends her rays down on us. We feel her light and warmth on our skin. It is as if we are on holiday in the sun. We enjoy the sunlight. We wrap our whole body with light. We take a golden ray of sun and let the sunlight everywhere circle around us. We think the mantra "Light." We let the sunlight flow into us and fill us with light. We think the mantra "Light."
Sending light = We move a hand and send another person light. We envelop him with light and let the light flow into him. Think many times the word "Light". After that we send light all over the world. We wrap the whole world with light, fill it with light and think often "Light."
Om Shanti = We think inhaling "Om" and exhaling "Shanti". We stop all other thoughts. We feel calmness, serenity and peace in us. We stop a minute every thought and move gently our feet. We focus on our feet and move on, until our mind comes completely to rest. We relax. We lie a few minutes relaxed just there. We are in harmony with ourselves, our life and our world.
Coming back = We come back slowly. We move our feet and hands. We stretch and move ourselves. We sit up and are back. Life can come. We have the sun within us.
Play media  Mantra Meditation (12 min.)
We lie down comfortably. We can do this meditation in bed for a long time while listening to beautiful music. It is good for all persons who cannot slep or want to relax in bed.
Lie on the back. Pull your knees to your chest and put the arms around. Rock yourself back and forth easily. Think or speak the mantra: "Om all enlightened Masters. Om inner wisdom. Please guide and help me on my way."
Prone position: "I send light to (name). May all people be happy. May the world be happy." Hands under your head. Move your pelvis (spine) and move your feet.
Turn right in the Child Pose: "Om Shanti". The hands lie on the legs or one hand on the legs (or the hip) and one hand under the head (stops your thoughts).
Turn left in the Child Pose: "Om Shanti". The hands lie on the legs or one hand on the legs (or the hip) and one hand under the head (stops your thoughts).
Supine position, left feet on the right leg: "Om Shanti". You can move the feet and the hands a little bit.
Right feet on the left leg. Move your feet and your hands: "Om Shanti".
Legs extended. Move the feet. Count the numbers 1 to 20 in the head, thorax, belly, legs and feet.
Move your hands in circling, visualize the universe and think: "Om Universe". Relax.
Relax completely for some minutes. Hands at the sides or on the belly.
Sit up and do the Buddy Breathing. Press with the thumb the right nostril and inhale through the left nostril. Press the left nostril and inhale at the right side. Make this several times until inner peace occurs. Then go back in your everyday life.
The Goddess Durga blesses us with power.
The power animal meditation (see Wikipedia: Animal worship) makes us aware that we have helpers on our way. In Yoga, each deity is associated with a power animal. Shiva has as a totem a white bull (Nandi). The bull is a sacrificial animal. Shiva sacrifices his ego (he takes things as they are), concentrates on his goals and thus enters a life of light. Vishnu has as helper an eagle (Garuda). The eagle is a winged creature, which brings love and wisdom in the world. Brahma has a white swan (purity, cosmic consciousness). The elephant Ganesha is holding a bowl with sweets in his hand. He goes his way with joy. The Goddess Durga rides a tiger and swings many arms around her head. Who lives as mother of all beings (as a spiritual master / mistress), needs the power of a tiger and many methods (weapons) in order to help his fellow man successfully.
Moving = We gently move the arms, legs, the feet and the head. We think ten times the mantra Om in our body. Then we relax. Our thoughts come slowly to rest.
Our life = We look at our life. What are your main goals in life? What is your way of life? Through which scenery leads your way? Is the sun shining? Does it rain? Is the landscape flat, mountainous, a desert or full of flowers? Is your way rocky, hard to walk, easy, twisted or straight?
Power animal = We go our way of life. On the horizon lights up our goal. Create a pictorial vision of your goal state. Focussing on the pictorial vision of our goal, we can recognize the path we must take to reach our goal. Along our personal winner way we meet our power animal. It embodies the qualities we need in order to achieve our goal. What is your power animal? What does it say to you? Think his words several times as a mantra. Get the victory in your life by concentration on your power animal.
Stop thinking = We stop a minute every thought. We move our feet and hands. We rotate the spine left and right. We relax.
Optimism = Go your way optimistic. You will succeed.
Shiva is the supreme God in Yoga. We can see him as the symbol of a victorious yogi. Shiva has a cosmic consciousness. He lives above the world of duality. He lives in the light (sat-chit-ananda, peace-unity-bliss). Shiva as cosmic consciousness can occur in many forms. The most famous incarnations of Shiva are the meditator, the blessing (the karma yogi), the ego sacrificer (subordinated under the goddess Kali/under the will of God) and the dancer with the life (Nataraja). Shiva is the Master of life. He lives his life with the qualities of earth (associated with Brahma, happiness), fire (associated with Rudra, power), water (associated with Vishnu, love), air (associated with Muni, wisdom) and ether (associated with all that exist, space, unity, transcendence).
The Winner = We shake the fists near our head and think: "I am a winner. I reach my goal. ... My goal is...."
The Strong = We rub the feet on the ground and visualize the Mount Meru among us, "I'm sitting on the Mount Meru (Himalaya Mountains). I maintain equanimity in pain. I'm going with perseverance my way."
The Egoless = We make large circles with our hands around us, visualize the cosmos full of stars and think, "I live in the great system of the cosmos (nature). I take things the way they are."
The Hatha-Yogi = We visualize within ourselves the Kundalini Serpent, twist in the spine, move our toes and think: "I am a Hatha Yogi. I save myself with my spiritual exercises."
The Karma-Yogi = Shiva means "The Good". He works for the goal of a happy world. We move our hand, send all beings light and think, "I send light to (name). May all beings be happy. May the world be happy."
Master Yoga = We rub the palms before our heart chakra, visualize the sky above us and think, "Om all enlightened Masters. Om inner wisdom. Please guide and help on my way."
Shiva Picture = Concentrate on a picture or a statue of Shiva. Move one hand and take the energy from Shiva. Think several times the mantra "Om Namah Shivaya" (I connect myself with Shiva) or "Shivo Ham" (I am Shiva) and feel how the energy of Shiva flows with the mantra in you.
Meditation = We put our hands in the lap, move your toes and think one minute the mantra "Om Shanti. Om Peace" in the belly. Then we stop a minute every thought. The spine is straight and the belly is relaxed. Sit only there. Don´t think. Then relax.
If we watch TV every day it is difficult for us to stay on the path of inner happiness. The happiness research has clearly established that much TV consumtion leads to unhappiness. It causes attachment, aggression, fear and unwisdom. Not the outer pleasure but the inner happiness is the center of life. We need love, peace and spirituality to get a happy life. When we watch television, we should be aware of the negative influences. We should wisely select our television programs, watch only little or no television (one hour a day) and cleanse us spiritually after each television (self-reflection, spiritual reading, meditation, walking).
Globe = We visualize the earth beneath us, rub the earth with our feet and think, "May all beings be happy. May the world be happy."
Television = What man on television today touches you negative or positive? Clean the energetic connection, visualize him as a Buddha. Give him a positive sentence. Aggressive people you can send wisdom and inner peace. With happy people you can rejoice. Suffering beings you can give light and strength. Think the sentence as a mantra until you have overcome all attachment or rejection. Everything you see outside makes a knot in your soul. Create harmony in your mind. The first step to happiness is a positive world in your mind. We move a hand and send all the people in the television light: "I send light to .. I wish him / her wisdom, love and happiness. May all people on TV be Buddhas or Goddesses of love."
Mantra = We put our hands together in the lap, move our feet and think many times the mantra "Om Shanti" in our body, in our legs and in the whole world. We stop a minute every thought. We relax. Practice love, peace and wisdom. Send every day all people light. This is the way to become enlightenment und to live in the light (in happiness, in God).
Through the breathing meditation, we can absorb spiritual energy and fill our bodies with light. Our mind becomes peaceful and positive.
Breathing out = We concentrate on exhalation. We breathe out deeply. We breathe out all of our worries. We give all our worries to the earth (universe, life). Rename all your worries, "My grief, my worries, my problems are ...." Enumerate all of your worries. Breathe out all your worries. Give them to the earth, "I let go of my worries. I take all things the way they are."
Blessing = The back is straight and the belly relaxed. We move a hand in blessing and think, "I send light to ... May all people be happy. May the world be happy."
So Ham = We put the hands in the lap. We think "So" by inhalation and "Ham" during exhalation. So is the sun (light) and Ham is the body. We focus on the breath and the mantra. Thus we fill us a minute by breathing with energy. Our mind becomes calm and positive. We observe one minute just our breath. We breathe in and out normally. We can observe the breath in the abdomen, chest or in the nose. We focus on our breath and stop all thinking. We relax.
You can do the flower meditation in sitting or lying down. It is a good way to awaken the Kundalini energy.
Movement = We move the shoulders, arms, hands,  legs and feet. We turn our head and make faces. Then we relax.
Feet = We visualize in the middle of the soles each a flower. We try to see the flowers as clearly as possible. What color are the flowers? We breathe to the bottom of the feet and think 10 times the mantra "flower."
Chakras = Similarly, we visualize flowers in the pelvic floor, sacral chakra, navel, solar plexus, heart chakra (in the center of the chest), throat, forehead and crown chakra. We breathe into the individual chakras, visualize flowers there and think "flower."
All flowers = We visualize all flowers in the chakras at once and think "All flowers." We combine all the chakras together. We think the mantra until we see all the flowers or feel them. Which flower type we see?
Light circle = We let a beam of light circle around our body. We wrap us totally with the light. We think the mantra "light." We let the light flow into our body and fill us with light. We circulate in our body with light and think "light". We think the mantra so many times, until we are full of light.
Medium energy channel = We visualize a twine from the pelvic floor up to the crown chakra and let light circling around the twine. We think the mantra "light." We move our toes. We meditate on the energy channel (the twine) in the center of the body between the pelvis and the crown chakra.
Resting point = We circle with light in the heart chakra, abdomen, forehead, crown, root chakra (pelvic floor), hands and soles of the feet. We place the light in that chakra, where it wants to be placed. For most people, it is the heart or sacral chakra. We focus on our chakra and thus bring our mind to rest. We stop a minute every thought. We relax.
The Buddha of Healing sends you from the center of the mandala (unity consciousness) light and power.
Sun = We visualize above ourselves a beautiful sun, raising both hands to the side at head height and think several times the mantra "sun." We let the light of the sun  flow down on us and massage it into the body.
Earth = We visualize the earth below us, rub the earth with our feet and think: "I send light to the earth. May all beings in the world be happy."
Healing Massage = We consider what part of our body needs healing in the moment. We let light flow into it, massage it in circles and think the word "light" as a mantra. By the light massage we resolve the tensions in the particular area of ​​the body and enable it in the self-healing. We can visualize the light in a color  we feel that it heals us. We think the color name as a mantra. We can successively rub the light of healing in several parts of the body, thinking always the mantra "Light".
Cosmos = We visualize the cosmos around us full of stars, make big circles with our arms and think, "Om cosmos. I take the suffering in my life. I consistently walk my way of health and healing."
Buddha of Healing = We visualize before or above us the Buddha of Healing (an enlightened Master). We rub our hands in front of the heart chakra and think, "Om Buddha of Healing. Om inner wisdom. Please guide and help me on my way."
Question of Healing = We focus on a part of our body who needs healing or on a personal problem. What is the way of our healing? What do we have to do? What triggers our problem? We think so long until we are satisfied with the result. When we hear no answer, we are either blocked inside (we don't want to see the real causes of the problem), or we have a bad contact to our inner voice (we sense ourselves poorly). The best way then is slowly to get into thinking about our problem.
Sick people = We move a hand, bless all people with light and think, "May all the people who have the same problem as I be healed. My problem is ... The way of healing is ..."
Om Shanti = We think inhaling "Om" and exhaling "Shanti". We stop all other thoughts. We feel calmness, serenity and peace in us. We stop a minute every thought and move gently our feet. We focus on our feet and move on, until our mind comes completely to rest. Then we linger in a slight meditation. All thoughts and feelings may come and go as they please. We relax.
Play media  Kundalini Meditation. Video 10 min.
There is in all people a thought which hinders the enlightenment and the inner happiness. This thought mostly has something to do with unwisdom, immodesty and lack of love to all.  We need either wisdom, humility, resting, self-discipline, some fun or universal love. We need a special thought which awakens the lacking quality. Suddenly the happiness, the love, the light and the peace is in us. The right word in the right moment for the right person causes a breakthrough to inner happiness. What is now your magic word?
Shower = We visualize a shower above us. We turn on the shower and clean us with enlightenment energy. We think the mantra "Water" and massage water (or light energy) from head to toe in our body. We rub all tensions and stress from the body.
Earthing = We rub the earth with our feet. We draw a circle with a color of healing around us.  We think the name of our healing color several times as a mantra. What is your healing color (purple, orange, yellow, red)?
Friend = We go in the shower on the spot. We move our feet. We visualize a boyfriend or a girlfriend and say a positive word. What is your positive word?  Imagine that the word actually reaches your person. Think your word several times as a mantra: "My word for... is... (I love you.)"
Enemy = We remember an enemy (aggressive person). Whom do you feel in this moment as an enemy? Who is your opponent? Give him a positive word. What do you say to him? Forgive him and get inner peace. Move a hand and send him wisdom and love. Think your word so long as a mantra, until you are in peace with your enemy.
A word for you = Investigate your own mind. Is there a thought that blocks your inner peace, your happiness and your love? Which positive word can overcome it? "My negative thought is ... My positive thought is ... (Forward on the way of wisdom, love and happiness.)"
Shanti means peace in yoga. The term "Shanti" refers to both the outer and the inner peace. As yogis, we wish a world of love, peace and happiness. So that we can successfully work for a happy outer world, we should first make peace and happiness within ourselves. Those who have no peace within themselves, can cause very limited external peace in his world. It is important that we create every day the peace in ourselves.
Body = We gently move our head, shoulders, arms, hands, legs and feet. We turn in the spine right and left. We resolve all tensions in the body by feeling in our body and moving the tensed parts. Where you are tensed today? Move and relax this area.
Breathing = We breathe deep into the pelvis. We fill the whole body with prana (breath energy). We breathe in the legs, the feet, the arms, the hands, the head, the thorax and the abdomen. At the same time we think  the mantra "Om".
Lighting circuits = We see a beautiful sun in the sky. The sun emits light and heat down on us. We feel the warmth on our skin. It is as if we lie on holiday in the sun. We enjoy the sunlight. We take a golden ray of sunshine and wrap ourselves with it completely. We circle with the light around our body and think the mantra "Light, light, light." We let the light flow into us. We fill our entire body with light and think often the mantra "Light."
Sending light = We send another person light. We envelop him with light and let the light flow into him. Who do you want to send light today? Think many times the word "Light". After that we send light all over the world. We wrap the whole world with light, fill it with light and think often "Light."
Om Shanti = We think inhaling "Om" and exhaling "Shanti". We stop all other thoughts. We feel calmness, serenity and peace in us. We stop a minute every thought. When thoughts arise, we push them away. We move the feet and toes. We relax. We lie a few minutes relaxed just there. We are in harmony with ourselves, our life and our world.
Play media  Meditation with the inner voice. Video 10 min.
One-Moment Meditation: "How to Meditate in a Moment"
Meditation video Yogi Nils (germ., 6 min.)
Patanjali statuePlay media  Maha Aarti in Varanasi, India.
The basis of Yoga are the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali. In it, Patanjali recommends a two-step way. The first stage is the development of positive ethic qualities (the ten yoga principles). Without positive qualities in meditation inner peace will break through the chaos of the outside world again and again. The second stage of the yogic path is to practice meditation. One can say, that Yoga in the essence is based on  positive thinking and meditation.
No killing other beings. Be meek. Be peaceful.
Live in the truth. Basically, be honest with yourself and others. Also no little lies of convenience. A lie is permissible only in well justified situations, for example, if you save with a lie the life of another human being. A Yogi is silent in doubt. Those who consistently lives in the truth radiate truth. Their fellow men trust them.
Not stealing, not cheating. A Yogi is in professional life generally honest. He does not seek unwarranted advantage, but he is looking for fair trade.
Live in the spiritual focus (in the light/in God = Brahman). Do not serve the money (outer luck) but the inner happiness (God, Brahman, enlightenment). Be centered in your inner happiness and peace.
Be moderate in external enjoyment and consumption. A spiritual person lives modestly outwardly and inwardly rich. A Yogi uses his energy not in outer actions, but lives so peaceful that it turns inward and cleanse his body from the inside. One day, he lives permanently in the light.
Thus we do not lose our spiritual path, it is necessary that we remind ourselves again and again to our spiritual goal. We can worship an image (Goddess, Shiva, Patanjali), we can bow before a statue (Buddha, Jesus, Shiva) or speak a mantra (prayer).
Purification / cleaning. The way into the light passes through the crucifixion of the ego. Without a crucifixion there is no enlightenment. True sacrifice is an art. He who sacrifices too much braced themselves internally. Who sacrifices too little, does not solves his tentions.
A clear goal, a clear life plan and a clear way of practicing. Tapas means to lead a disciplined life.
The daily reading (mantra, meditation) keeps us on the spiritual path, cleanses our spirit, connects us with the enlightened masters and makes us to spiritual victors.
Satisfied with what one has.
The five principles of health give us a long, healthy and happy life. If we live by these principles, we can avoid most diseases. If we are sick, we become significantly faster healthy.
Eat healthy. A healthy diet consists of fruits, vegetables, cereals, milk, potatoes, pulses, etc. It is advised to eat little or no meat and much raw food (raw fruits and vegetables). Raw food gives the body lots of vitamins and minerals that protect him from disease.
Avoid drugs, smoking and alcohol. That causes many diseases and usually shorten your life significantly. Too many sweets (sugar, fat), lots of salt and lots of meat are also unfavorable. Don´t eat too much calories. You live longer, if you eat less (but not too less). Hear to your body. He knows what is good for you. Live wisely and stay healthy.
Do sports. Go walking, jogging, cycling, swimming once or twice a day (one half to one hour), to keep the body strong and healthy. It is also sufficient to train on an exercise bike (bicycle, treadmill) or to do dynamic yoga (creativ hatha yoga) for half an hour a day. Or to go for a walk on the weekend for an hour. It is important, that the body is well warmed through (practice until a slight sweating). It kills disease germs.
Relax sufficiently. Stress should always be put away by adequate recovery periods, yoga or meditation. For the inner happiness, it is important to live in the right proportion of personal activity (work) and rest (relaxation).
Think positive. Avoid negative thoughts. Keep your mind through conscious control predominantly positive. Positive thoughts lead to positive feelings and positive emotions have a positive effect on your body. Motivate yourself with positive phrases and ideas. Read positive books and have a positive task (hobby).
Positive thinking can be defined by the goal of health and happiness. It concentrates at positive qualities such as inner peace, strength, love, joy and happiness. In this direction research the positive psychology.
Positive thinking and meditation are a path to enlightenment. However, positive thinking is a term that can be filled with different contents. Some people misunderstand it as a way of manipulation, repression of feelings and problems. Dogmatically practiced positive thinking can be the enemy of free thought. Properly practiced positive thinking leads to inner happiness, peace, health and good interpersonal relations. Positive thinking must be based on the principles of wisdom, love, strength, peace and happiness. Helpful positive thoughts often arise from the careful and free thinking about a problem. Buddha was a master of positive thinking. He called it right thinking. His thinking had a clear goal: awakening, enlightenment, peace, love, happiness.
Positive thinking is a mental technique, that must practiced wisely. It should not be misused to repress feelings or problems. Positive thinking must used sensitively and healingly. According to the Buddhist master Tsongkhapa enlightenment is created by the wise combination of positive thinking and meditation. The combination of mind work and meditation is the basis of the eightfold buddhist path and the eightfold yoga path (Patanjali).
Wikipedia: Optimism is a mental attitude that interprets situations and events as being best (optimized). A common idiom used to illustrate optimism versus pessimism is a glass with water at the halfway point, where the optimist is said to see the glass as half full, but the pessimist sees the glass as half empty. Optimism may be linked to health. Optimists have been shown to live healthier lifestyles which may influence disease. For example, optimists smoke less, are more physically active, consume more fruit, vegetables and whole-grain bread, and consume more moderate amounts of alcohol.
The relationship between optimism and health has also been studied with regards to physical symptoms, coping strategies and negative affect for those suffering from rheumatoid arthritis, asthma, and fibromyalgia. A meta-analysis has confirmed the assumption that optimism is related to psychological well-being: “Put simply, optimists emerge from difficult circumstances with less distress than do pessimists. (...) Optimists seem intent on facing problems head-on, taking active and constructive steps to solve their problems; pessimists are more likely to abandon their effort to attain their goals.”
How to practice positive thinking?
Those who think positively, get more out of life. They live happier. They live healthier. They have better relationships with other people. They don’t take life too seriously. They live like winners and win as they go through life. Sad and gray was yesterday. Today, optimism is in demand and on the rise.
Starwoman: My way of positive thinking is this mental mantra: “hold your head up high, don’t let anything get you down.”
Jenny: There’s good to be found in everything. You just have to learn to recognize it.
Man: Don’t take everything too seriously. The sunshine comes out after the rain. There is a positive aspect to everything.
Monika: Stop any worthless thoughts. Tell yourself: ”Stop! That’s not how it goes!” if worthless thoughts run through your mind. Replace negative thoughts with new and encouraging thoughts. Positive mantras such as “I can do it.” Repeat these self-encouragement mantras several times daily. Think out a nice, positive thought that feels good for you! Then sit down for five minutes and think this thought for the entire time. Feel the good feelings in you. If you stray from the good thought, then just let it happen and bring yourself back to the positive thought gently. With practice, positive thinking gets easier.
Helga: After the death of my husband, I did autogen training for 1 year on a regular basis. Since that time, I’ve managed to think positively. That wasn’t always the case with me. With positive thinking, life is easier and it’s easier to find reasons to be glad.
David: One should be able to rest and find calm within the self. Listen to yourself and don’t allow yourself to be influenced by the negativity of others.
Rick: Meditate and concentrate on Buddha or another positive role model.
Sabrina: You can write down 10 nice things every evening. At first it’s difficult but after awhile it will get easier to think of things that went well during the day or that were pleasant. That way, you’ll also get better at seeing the small things that are positive and as a result you’ll be able to think more positive, too.
God loves me and I don’t need to have fear.
Whatever I can’t change, I accept.
Don’t let people aggravate you.
Religion and the Bible have always helped me. They’ve accompanied me through my life and influenced my life.
A master is yet to fall from the sky.
Mistakes are there for us to learn from.
God doesn’t burden people with more than they can handle.
I’ve always tried to live my life in a way that makes me happy. I’ve tried to be harmony with myself and to live from my inner guidance. I have experience a lot of negative things. Somehow I’m a rugged person who always gets back up when knocked down with a strong will to survive.
In every life there is pain, loss, illness, loneliness and death. We have no claim to a long life still to be spared by fate. What is your pain today?
The Problem: Describe briefly your situation and your problem. How exactly is your situation? What is the problem? Where is the center of the problem?
The Emotions: What are the feelings it in you? Fear, anger, addiction / desire, grief. What feeling is strongest? Where is the feeling sitting in your body?
The Thoughts: What thoughts are connected with your feelings? Why are you sad, anxious, angry or longing? Count all your stressful thoughts down. (My thoughts are ...)
Thinking: What triggers your problem? What is the way out of your problem? What brings you to love, success, fulfillment, satisfaction? Think about your problem for so long, until you find a solution. Think about different solutions. Collect all the information you need.
Implementation: Follow your positive thoughts. Fulfil your positive life plan. Avoid meaningless brooding. Now is the time to realize powerful. Go your way to victory. "My positive motto is  ...."
Tips for happiness from Anselm Grün (Benedictine monk)
Accept your limitations!
Don’t take yourself too seriously!
Look over your thinking!
We should look at what we think and see if our thoughts are actually damaging. Do our thoughts really reflect reality, or is it a false reality? If I see my job as negative, I will also experience it as negative.
Learn to simply be!
Learn to live intensively. Try to go slower more consciously when you want to walk around at work. Take each step consciously when going for walks. Feel how you touch the earth and then step away from it.
Learn to wait!
Waiting causes consciousness of the moment we live in, and to the people with whom we are speaking with at a given moment. Waiting makes the heart big and open.
Dare to try something new! Show courage!
We live in a world and in a society that doesn’t take much consideration for weakness. Of course, one tries to work without errors. But at work, we also see that those who don’t want to make mistakes never try something new.
Open your heart!
To really speak means to break open the heart and to open it for others, to allow them to enter your own heart.  Speak so that the relationship grows and trust is created.
Enjoy- it is later than you think!!
People don’t know how long life will last. They should enjoy every second.
Don’t repress or hide anything from yourself!
Those who do not pay attention to their wounds will be ruled by them. They live a lie. They think that they have their own lives, but they simply repeat the errors from their childhood.
Go your own way!
You have to find your own personal way. It is not enough to follow others. You have to listen to your inner voice to find your way. And then you need to bravely decide to take that path, even if you feel lonesome doing it.
Patanjali is the father of Indian  Yoga. He lived in the second century before Christ. In the Yoga Sutra he summarized the essence of Yogic knowledge with just a few words. The two main tenets of Patanjali say “Yoga is the calming of the spirit. Then the Yogi rests in the light.” The more you live in a state of calm, the greater the inner happiness and the more all-encompassing the light. Patanjali said that inner happiness takes a long time to develop and only can be reached through consistent practice. The calming of the thoughts can be achieved using the two step path. The first step is the development of positive characteristics (the 10 pillars of Yoga). The second step is meditation. Simply spoken, Patanjali’s way of practice is also the way of positive thinking and meditation.
Non-violence (Ahimsa)= Never injure another being. Be peaceful and gentle.
Truthfulness. (Satya)= Live in the truth. Be honest with yourself and others. Be consistent in your personal truth and live from that as your center. A lie is only allowed in especially well-founded circumstances, for example, if you can save someone’s life with a lie. A Yogi is silent, when in doubt.
Integrity (Asteya)=Don’t steal and don’t deceive. A Yogi is honest in his or her professional life. A Yogi doesn’t strive for an unjustified advantage over others, but rather for a fair balance, a fair trade. A Yogi can be trusted in his or her professional life. He or she gives too much rather than too little. Those who are fair do not create bad karma.
Wisdom (Brahmacharia) = To live spiritually, to live in wisdom. To differentiate between the essential and the non-essential. A Yogi doesn’t use up his or her energy in worldly doings, rather lives calmly and peacefully so that the self is turned inward and so that the body cleanses itself from the inside. One day, then the Yogi is able to receive God energy and let it flow within the self and to give this energy to others through good deeds from a place of love. In that way, the Yogi grows eternally in his or her inner happiness, energy and love.
Simplicity(Aparigraha)= Moderation on external enjoyment. A spiritual person lives modestly on the outside and rich on the inside. He or she does not strive toward riches (carrier, maximum consumption). Yogis make sure they have what they need and concentrate otherwise on spiritual exercises (Yoga, meditation, thought work)and the well-being of fellow beings.
Honoring of the spiritual goal (Ishvara-Pranidhana) = So that we don’t lose our way along the spiritual path, it is necessary to constantly focus on our spiritual goal. We can honor an image, a statue or speak a mantra. The four most important role models in Yoga are Vishnu (love), Shiva (strength), Brahma (living in peace and calm)and Ganesha (joy).
Ego sacrifice (Shaucha)= Cleansing. The way to light leads to the crucifiction. The ten ego characteristics are pride, envy, the desire to possess, longing, addiction to enjoyment, fear, rage, sadness, laziness, foolishness. What is your negative characteristic today? Which positive thoughts help you to overcome them?
Goal striving (Tapas)= A clear decision, a clear plan for life and a consistent path. Tapas means living a disciplined life. Those who have a good plan and enough perseverance are victorious along the spiritual path. What is your decisive plan for spiritual action today? Ask an enlightened master for guidance and help, follow your inner wisdom and you will be victorious on the spiritual path.
Reading (Svadhyaya) =The daily reading meditation keeps us on the spiritual path, cleanses our spirit, connects us with the enlightened masters and makes us into spiritual victors. Those who do not involve themselves with spirituality daily lose their inner happiness to the age of consumption. What is your spiritual text for today?
Satisfaction (Santosha)= Reach great satisfaction with yourself and life. Which thoughts help you to come to a satisfied state? “My thoughts of satisfaction today are…”
Yoga with positive thinking is very helpful for many people. It allows one to quickly overcome negative tendencies and reach a happy and healthy life. Positive thinking and daily meditation are the two basic techniques of enlightenment. All the negative characteristics are ultimately based on attachment (to external pleasures, other people, to his ego) or rejection (of suffering situations, pain). If we accept the suffering in our lifes and let go of our worldly desires and longings, the tensions in our minds resolve. Our inner happiness creates a positiv feeling of life. We get into a life in the light (in a paradise view of life). The main way to overcome the negative qualities is to focus on the positive qualities of wisdom, self-discipline, peace, love and happiness.
Go = Jog on the spot, with your arms moving by your side. Visualize light, turn around and think, "I go the positive way."
Windmill = Straddle your legs apart, bow forward, turn like a windmill into the spinal column and think: "My goal is ...".
Frog = Bring your feet together. Bow your upper body forward. Push yourself up with your hands on the floor and move your buttocks down in a crouch and back up in the air. The head goes up to the sky and down to the earth. Practice the frog several times and think: "I have strength and endurance."
Arm-leg raising = Lie down on your stomach. Raise your left arm and right leg. Bring both back to the earth and lift the right arm and the left leg. Do this several times. Think, "I take things the way they are."
Upper body raising = Lie in the prone position, with your hands on the floor and repeatedly press the upper body up and down. The head goes to the neck and forward. While breathing in and out, think, "I let go of my false desires."
Pelvic rotation = In the prone position, turn your pelvis to the right and then to the left. Your head must lie on your hands. Think, "I am sad because ...".
Feet = Get your feet moving in the prone position. The head lies relaxed on your hands. Think, "I forgive... (my partner / parents / the cosmos / God), that he/she...". Whom do you want to forgive today? Think these words until a feeling of sadness arises in you, of letting go and forgiveness.
Cycling =  Turn on your back, lift your head and move your arms and legs. Think, "My positive thought today is....".
Candle = Stretch your legs to the sky. Your hands support you at the back. Visualize the sky, move your feet and think many times the mantra "Optimism".
Meditation = Roll from the candle into your meditation seat (cross-legged or heel seat). Put your hands in your lap. The back is straight and the stomach is relaxed. Move one hand and wrap them and think, "I send light to ... May all people be happy. May the world be happy." Stop all your thoughts for a minute. Relax.
There is in all people a thought which hinders the enlightenment and the inner happiness. This thought mostly has something to do with unwisdom, immodesty and lack of love to all.  We need either wisdom, humility, resting, self-discipline, some fun or universal love. We need a special thought which awakens the lacking quality. Suddenly the happiness, the love, the light and the peace is in us. The right word in the right moment for the right person causes a breakthrough to inner happiness. What is now your magic word?
Shower = We visualize a shower above us. We turn on the shower and clean us with enlightenment energy. We think the mantra "Water" and massage water (or light energy) from head to toe in our body. We rub all tensions and stress from the body.
Earthing = We rub the earth with our feet. We draw a circle with a color of healing around us.  We think the name of our healing color several times as a mantra. What is your healing color (purple, orange, yellow, red)?
Friend = We go in the shower on the spot. We move our feet. We visualize a boyfriend or a girlfriend and say a positive word. What is your positive word?  Imagine that the word actually reaches your person. Think your word several times as a mantra: "My word for... is... (I love you.)"
Enemy = We remember an enemy (aggressive person). Whom do you feel in this moment as an enemy? Who is your opponent? Give him a positive word. What do you say to him? Forgive him and get inner peace. Move a hand and send him wisdom and love. Think your word so long as a mantra, until you are in peace with your enemy.
A word for you = Investigate your own mind. Is there a thought that blocks your inner peace, your happiness and your love? Which positive word can overcome it? What makes you feel good? What brings you to peace and happiness? Do it!
Develop feelings of friendliness and good intentions for yourself. Remind yourself of a moment where you were happy and felt good. Think: “May I be friendly to myself. May I feel good. May I be happy.” What is your way to make yourself feel good and be happy?
Imagine a person you like. Wish him happiness and think: “may he feel good and be happy.”
Think of some people whom you are neutral to (people on the street, in the supermarket, in your city). Wish them happiness, love, wisdom and peace. Move a hand in a blessing, send light and think: “may everyone in the world be happy. May the world be a happy one.”
Think of someone you don’t like or that you find difficult. Wish them love, peace, happiness and wisdom, too. Send them light, move a hand in a blessing and think: “may even this person be happy. May the world be a happy place.”
Imagine all of these people (yourself, your friend, your enemy and the neutral people.) Move your hand in a blessing, send light to everyone and think: “I send light to everyone. May everyone be happy. May the world be a happy place.”
Relax. Let the meditation work on you. Think it over. See yourself as mother and father to every being on earth. Every being is your child, including the good and the bad. Wish them all love, happiness and peace. Do what you can toward that end.
Passion Test (from Janet and Chris Attwood)
Go your way. Live in the essence. Proceed with wisdom, love and infinite perseverance. You WILL have success in your life. Your life will be a success. Those who connect wisdom with optimism are winners.
The most important results of today’s happiness research can be summarized in 10 points.
People are happy when they‘re busy
People are happy when they have positive goals and positive tasks. Active people are 15% more happy with their lives than those who are more passive. Happiness researcher Ed Diener explained: “happy people set goals again and again.”
Regular exercise keeps the body healthy and makes the spirit happy. Daily walks increase happiness by 12%. David Niven confirms: “People who stay fit with exercise are healthier, more positive and more successful.”
Doing good for others makes you happy
Those who do good things for others on a regular basis are 24% happier than those who only live for themselves. John A. Schindler wrote: “be a giving person. Those who give are happier than those who take. Those who give to the world and all beings discover the beauty of the world.”
In addition to spending time working, exercising and being around others, we should take time to rest and recover every day. We need to get enough sleep. Scientific research shows that relaxed people think more positively and are happier. Every hour of missed sleep affects how positive one’s attitude is the next day by 8%.
Those who think positively double their chances of happiness. Those who want to be happy should work on thinking positively every day. They should facilitate wisdom, love, peace, inner strength and joy and put them at the center of their existence and work on those characteristics daily. For example, a positive attitude for the day can consist of: “how are things looking today? How can I get through the day positively? What will make me a winner today?”
Scientific research has found: “Every hour of TV decreases happiness in life by 5%.” TV causes people to focus more on material happiness. It awakens wishes and aggression. It creates fear. Those who want to grow in inner happiness should get rid of the TV or learn to have a positive way of dealing with it.
The way of positive TV watching consists of three steps: a) choose your television programs consciously. Avoid negative films. B) Find the right amount of TV. Children should watch a maximum of one hour of TV every day. C) Do some spiritual exercises after each TV watching session (to center oneself on the spiritual path).
Find a positive circle of friends. Women who meet and converse with other women feel their worries decrease by 55%. Cancer inflicted women who meet in a group weekly survive twice as often as women who don’t meet in such a group. In the western world, there is a strong tendency to isolation. There are a lot of singles and lonely, old people. People with a good circle of friends are happy. Overcome the isolation. Let’s dedicate time and energy to friendships.
Those who incorporate little elements of joy into their lives increase their general happiness in life by 20%. Once, Nils felt bad. In order to find balance, he ate a lot of sweets. His spirit felt lighter and lighter. Unfortunately, after a while his stomach felt a bit uneasy. Despite this, his mind was still totally happy. Nils imagined the sweets in his belly and awakened his kundalini energy. A strong happiness energy awoke, which brought him to the light quickly. Nils learnt how to connect enjoyment with spiritual exercises. You don’t need to eat too many sweets. Just enjoying something nice is enough for the path of inner happiness.
People with a sense of humor are 33% happier. We should facilitate and encourage humor in our lives. We shouldn’t take things too seriously. We should learn how to laugh about ourselves. Those who can laugh about themselves go more lightly through life. It’s good to watch cheerful and funny movies, humorous books and to visit with happy people.
Happy people believe in themselves. They believe in their goals, their wisdom and their strength. They see themselves as winners. They believe that they will be successful in life. May we all be winners along the spiritual path. May we have faith in ourselves, our positive goals and our inner strength.
Sonja Lyubomirsky is among the best known American happiness researchers. She is a professor at the University of California and wrote the worldwide bestseller “Be Happy” (2008). Her specialty is the level of happiness. She brought the debate surrounding the level of happiness to modern happiness research.
Sonja was annoyed that newer research results seem to indicate that a person’s level of happiness remains the same. The danger with such research is that it strengthens people’s tendency to falling back on the comfortably familiar (even if this causes people to be stuck on a lower level) : “my level of happiness is genetic and is dependent on outer circumstances. I can’t do anything to be happier. Everything is pointless.”
Sonja wondered what she could do if she wants to have a happy life. She accepted that today’s research has the position that 50% of a person’s level of happiness is genetic (determined by the body and hormone production). Some 10% of a person’s level of happiness is determined by outer circumstances. 40% of a person’s level of happiness can be influenced by working on one’s thoughts.
If only 10% of a person’s general happiness is determined by outer circumstances then it isn’t usually important to change one’s circumstances in life. It is relatively unimportant for one’s personal happiness whether one has a better job, better partner, better children or a better apartment. We can only change our level of happiness by 10% by changing some circumstances of our lives.
We should concentrate on the 40% that can be changed. Sonja is very radical. “Let your outer circumstances stay the way they are. Work on yourself instead. Exercise positive thoughts and positive behaviors. That is the way to be happy over the long run.”
Sonja even has a word of warning regarding this too: “Don’t think that it’s easy to raise your level of happiness. It requires decisiveness and constant effort throughout one’s life. Without goal-orientedness, perseverance, effort and daily motivation it won’t work. You have to practice happiness exercises every day.”
A lot of time and effort is necessary. The most important component is to establish positive habits in life. We have to get used to stopping our negative thoughts and countering them with positive thoughts. We begin each day with a positive resolution. We forgive others for their errors and turn our perspective to the positive in life with gratitude.
We should organize a system of social support. Most people need a group or a friend, partner or spiritual teacher to support them in order to raise their level of happiness. Only a few people have the necessary self-discipline required to do happiness raising exercises an entire life long. The results of research in the area of self- help show that only 24% of all people stay more than a half a year on the  path of a positive life alone. 95% stick to it with the help of others.
Those who would like to increase their overall level of happiness should avoid excessive stress in their lives. Outer circumstances only play a small role regarding inner happiness. An exception to that is stress. Too much stress has a negative influence on the overall happiness of a person.
In particular, this point shows how incorrect the west is in terms of priorities. High stress is the main characteristic in today’s schools and in today’s professions. This stress is transferred to people’s relationships, destroys physical health and reduces happiness. We should work to reduce stress in each of our lives as much as possible.
Sonja recommends regular exercise, a healthy diet, and to meditate every day for 20 minutes. It’s enough to start with five minutes and then to slowly increase to twenty minutes. What could be eaiser than doing Yoga for a few minutes or meditating every day for a few minutes to systematically reduce stress?
The main technique of thought work is contemplation. Think about yourself, your life or your situation. Solve your problem and then calm yourself. If you can’t find a solution then take things as they are. Life doesn’t need to be perfect. An enlightened person is happy in an imperfect world. Accepting things in an imperfect world can be a way to enlightenment.
Find your way of wisdom. Consider what is right at that given moment. Is it correct to take action or to take no action? What needs to be done? Do it. Don’t think too much about it. Be present and in a state of calm.
If you can’t solve a problem at the given moment, then let go of it. Take some time each day to think about that problem. With time, you’ll find a solution.
Most of the time we can find a thought that brings us to inner calm and peace during the course of contemplation. If no such thoughts come to us, then we have to probe our inner being thoroughly. Which feelings are present in you? Anger, grief, fear, addiction or longing? What is the strongest feeling? Which problem is connected with it? Which thoughts appear when you feel out your emotions?
Feelings of fear, rage, sadness and addiction can be dissolved if you can find the negative thoughts that dissolve the feeling. Which positive thoughts help to dissolve the negative thoughts? We have to be very creative with this sometimes. Which thoughts are strong enough to overpower the negative thoughts? What do we believe in the depths of the soul? It’s good to develop strong pillars of faith. They help us in emergencies and help to overcome negative thoughts.
Most of the time, thorough contemplation or personal pillars of faith help us to find inner peace. The negative feelings and thoughts often come from the depths of the consciousness. Our subconscious is like a small child. We have to be careful when dealing with the small child. We have to convince it and take good care of it. Then a positive psyche can develop.
Which thoughts does the small child in us react to? When do the negative thoughts dissolve? Does the inner child need love, happiness, wisdom or strength? Find a way to give that to him. Do something good for yourself. Concentrate on your wisdom. Take the path of all-encompassing love. Send all beings light and do a good deed. If your inner child needs strength, go your way with discipline. Exercise, do your spiritual exercises, work on yourself and strength and peace will appear.
If these techniques don’t help, then exercise thought control. Stop all of your negative thoughts. Meditate, think a mantra, or distract yourself by reading or watching videos. Often it’s good to talk to other people. Half the problem disappears when you can talk about it with a good friend. If you don’t have any good friends, then connect with God or your spiritual master. Tell them about your problems. Take an oracle card (Buddha oracle, tarot) and you will get an answer that helps you.
Negative thoughts can be stopped with a mantra. Find your personal mantra. Think “stop” or another mantra (a motto of wisdom) until the negative thoughts totally disappear. Repeat the mantra during crisis situations. At some point you will have overcome your negative thoughts. Feelings like happiness, love and peace will appear in their place.
Visualization exercises are a big help. Do a fantasy journey. Imagine what the solution to your problem looks like. Visualize yourself in a happy life. Let burdening situations play out in your mind’s eye. Find a positive thought that helps you.
Orient your perspective around positive intentions and a positive future. Go with positive intentions throughout the day. What gives you strength to get through your day positively? What gives you hope and confidence in your life? Begin each day with a positive intention. In the evening, consider whether you put your positive intentions into practice. What could you do better the next day? Develop a plan for a positive life. Put into practice with consistency. That’s how winners live. What is your goal? What is your way to win?
Reward yourself whenever you have managed to put your positive resolutions into practice. Your inner child loves rewards. This way you can motivate yourself to stay positive along your way. It doesn’t need to be a big reward. Sometimes a cookie or a beautiful flower is enough. Sometimes one needs big visions in order to maintain the strength for a positive life. Such a positive vision could be enlightenment, the life in lasting joy and happiness and peace. Such a vision could also be the goal for a happy world. Find your way of happiness and love and spread those characteristics throughout the world. Then you will make yourself happy and overcome negative thoughts.
Psychic well-being appears through the dissolving of tension in the body and the mind. If a person is relaxed on the inside, then happiness develops on its own. There are three steps to inner happiness.
Think about your problem and find an inner and outer solution. What is your problem? What would solve your problem? What is your path of wisdom?
Find a positive thought that you can use to overcome negative thoughts. What is your negative feeling (rage, fear, grief, addiction or longing)? What negative thoughts are connected to that? What positive thoughts help you? Positive thoughts come from wisdom, love, letting go, acceptance, joy and strength (self-discipline).
Develop a positive resolution and think out a mantra. Repeat it again and again. Stop your negative thoughts this way :”my way of wisdom is… my way of love is… My false wishes are… I accept… What can I do good today? What makes me happy? Proceed with happiness.”
Meditate, work out or og for a walk if negative thoughts start to bother you. Come to a state of calm. Read a book. Talk to positive people.
Live positively. Plan your life positively. Then you will come to a state of calm and be happy.
Feel your emotions. Understand your emotions. Recognize the source of your thoughts.
Don’t suppress your feelings. Be sad when you feel sad. Be angry without hurting others. Go for a walk. Meditate on your rage.
Learn to peacefully deal with the aggression of other people. Don’t identify with it. Forgive. Find positive thoughts.
See your fears for what they are. Feel the center of your fear. Then you can find a way to overcome it.
Dissolve your inner tension and conflict with exercise (Yoga, walking, jogging).
Meditate regularly.
Practice a calm and relaxed lifestyle.
Avoid stress to the extent that it is possible.
Think like a Buddha. Act like a Buddha. Live like a Buddha. Be a Buddha. Concentrate on making other people happy and forget your own worries.
Most people believe that they can’t think any differently in a given situation. They think their way of thinking depends on the outer situation. They don’t understand that each person has a choice between various thoughts in each situation.
Each person can think thoughts that lead to positive feelings, to health and to well-being. Each person can think thoughts that make him or her unhappy,  that lead to suffering and that harm other people. What he or she thinks depends less on the outer situation and more on the inner habits related to thinking. These habits form over a person’s life and form his or her character.
How a person’s thinking can differ within the context of a similar situation can be reflected in the following example. Imagine that a young couple is sitting in a train kissing. In the same section of the train, five old ladies are seated. The first one thinks :”That’s unbelievable.” The second thinks: “I’d also like to be loved.” The third fears: “Hopefully a conductor doesn’t come to chase them away.” The fourth thinks : “two people are kissing.” And the fifth is of the opinion: “Oh how nice, there are people who love each other.”
Now let’s take a look at the emotions that the old ladies have because of their thoughts. The first is angry, the second sad, the third afraid, the fourth neutral, and the fifth is happy. The first three women are full of tension, the fourth is relaxed, and the fifth feels good.
We can see that the same occurrence causes varied reactions and feelings. In extreme cases, one of the first three women could become so upset that bodily symptoms like stomachache or difficulty breathing or heart attack could appear.
This example is useful in explaining what positive thinking actually is. Positive thinking is thinking which doesn’t result in inner tension. It doesn’t hinder health, instead it facilitates inner well-being. Positive thinking can also be neutral thinking. It is important to make use of this in difficult situations. We first accept the situation and then consider what we can do in order to constructively find a solution to improve the situation.
An often heard preconception against positive thinking is that positive reality doesn’t fully take in reality. Unpleasant realities are suppressed. The above example makes it obvious that the five women observed reality. They simply interpreted it differently. If one of the ladies looked away, only then would she be blind to reality. Sometimes such things can be helpful, but sometimes not. It’s not very helpful when it hinders one’s ability to take action. We don’t always need to expose ourselves to negative thought patterns.
We’ve gotten to know the way to influence feelings through the thoughts. Bodily tension (energy blockages) and feelings can influence the thoughts. If someone is very tense, they tend toward negative thoughts. If someone is very sad, they find it difficult to see the beauty in the world. Maybe you’ve seen that you see life more positively when you can relax and go through the day. If you are tense then you can get aggravated about the smallest things.
It’s important to understand the context if you want to take the path of health and happiness (who doesn’t?) Only then is it possible to develop inner well-being and positivity. What needs to be done in order to achieve lasting positive feelings?  First of all, one should recognize negative thought patterns in the self and replace them with positive thoughts and habits. Another thing one should do is to work out already present sources of tension systematically with the help of Yoga and meditation.
Feelings of rage and sadness appear through negative thoughts that cause conflict within. This tension is resolved through feelings of rage and grieving. With these feelings, our inner tension works itself out. They are actually something positive, because they help to relax us deep inside. We should let ourselves live out these feelings (within reason in the context of socially acceptable means).
At the same time we should try to overcome the negative thoughts that cause these feelings using positive thoughts. Otherwise negative thoughts will create new tension again and again. Our rage and sadness then become reinforced, and we do not want that.
It’s also possible to meditate on the feeling. We put ourselves in a meditate state. The thoughts and feelings come and go as they will. We observe them. We don’t give them any energy. This way, they will quiet on their own after a time. They appear again, and then dissolve. At some point, peace and happiness will appear spontaneously.
Basically we need both techniques of working with the feelings. We need to dissolve negative thoughts using positive thinking and we need the meditative perspective on the feelings. Positive thinking and meditation are ways to relax deep within and enlightenment. Our wisdom tells us which methods are  correct at which moment.
Fear is based in thoughts. These thoughts can be dissolved using positive thoughts. We have to look at the situation closely in order to dissolve the fear.
If we try to run from the fear, it will just grow larger. If we go through the fear, it will dissolve on its own. Questions such as: “What is really so bad about it? Is my happiness really dependent upon it? What is the worst that could happen? Are these thoughts realistic? Or am I worrying for no reason? Is there a positive side to the situation?”
The more our positive thoughts affect the problem and the more we believe in it, then the more we can overcome our fears. We can try out various positive thoughts and figure out which thoughts help us out of our fear the most effectively. The strongest thoughts arise out of thorough contemplation and an exact observation of the situation.
A good method to overcome fears is to place one’s self in a relaxed state and then to confront one’s self with the fear. We relax in the state of fear until the tension from the fear dissipates or at least decreases. If we repeat the exercise often, then we can overcome our fears.
It helps to have faith. If we believe in ourselves and our own power, then we can overcome every fear. If we believe in God and the enlightened masters, then we take fear out of our future. It is good to read the holy texts from one’s given religion.
Fear can be overcome using inner strength. Exercise, Yoga and meditation help us to build up our inner strength. Our self trust grows and our fears lessen. We concentrate on our fear when going for walks and move them out of our bodies. We thus loosen the inner tension and then make room for peace, strength and positivity to take over within us.
It’s good to have goals in life. If we concentrate on something positive, the negative thoughts and feelings lessen.
Some fear can sometimes be a helpful thing. Fear protects us from doing the wrong things. It gives us the strength to master our lives. It helps us to take the path to enlightenment because it is the only way to really be free of suffering. In enlightenment, we raise ourselves above all of the suffering in the world and all of the fears. Peace, love and happiness reign in us instead.
Negative feelings arise when other people are aggressive to us. It is difficult to shield the self from other people’s aggressions.
It is possible if we send back the aggression energy, or redirect it and change it into something positive. The transformation occurs through positive thoughts. You can try to understand why the other person is aggressive and develop understanding for it. You can consider how you can help that person or what you can do in this situation. You can look at the aggressions from a positive point of view with thoughts such as: “Those who are angry with me, show that I am important to them with their anger.”
Another possibility is to step outside the situation and then direct the energy to yourself as a third person in the situation. That way, it doesn’t affect you personally. You simply accept that you made a mistake. You give up the need for perfection. Everyone makes mistakes. You can also direct the aggression to a third object, and together complain about the unpleasant situation (instead of about each other).
You can also tell the other person he or she is right and let them talk. When things have calmed down, you can both go back to being reasonable and calmly solve the problem.
The psychological learning theory suggests that positive thinking can be learned. An athlete trains for several weeks or months an external behavior. He carries a certain behavior, and after some time he masters it. Thoughts can be understood as the internal behavior of a person. When we consciously practice some time a positive mental behavior, then our mind accustoms to positive thinking. It automatically responds to certain external situations with positive thoughts.
Positive thoughts lead to positive feelings. And positive feelings lead to health and happiness.  To train positive thoughts has a great gain. It gives us a happy and healthy life. Especially if we practice also regularly sports (yoga, walking), enough relaxation (enough breaks, enough sleep, daily meditating) and a healty diat (at least an apple a day).
How to learn positive thoughts? The learning method consists of four steps. First, we need a positive thought system that suits us like the philosophy of happiness. The philosophy of happiness teaches to make the happiness to the center of life. The essence of the philosophy of happiness are the five qualities of wisdom, peace, love, strength and joy. These five properties we practice every day.
The second step is systematically to train positive thoughts. The best way is to remember every morning on the five positive qualities. We create a positive plan of the day. We get up with a positive thought. We retain our positive vision  during the day. And at night we think about the day and what we can do better the next day. We feel our negative emotions (fear, anger, grief, addiction). What negative thought is associated with it? What positive thought helps us to overcome it? Which thought brings us into a positive attitude towards life? Helpful positive phrases are, "I'm a winner. I reach my goals. Wisdom is to organize my life so that I can live healthy and happy. "
The third step is to observe consistently our thoughts throughout the day, and to stop all negative thoughts. If we recognize a negative thought, we push him away immediately. We consider what positive thought is helpfull right now. We develop a positive thought and set it in place of the negative thought. If we make this at the long term, our negative thoughts are becoming less and our positive thoughts grow more and more. Nils was able to overcome his depression by this technique.
The constant observation of thought is the essence of positive thinking. Often we overcome our negative thoughts already through the constant observation of our mind. We are aware of our negative thoughts and that already deprives them their power. Sometimes we have to intervene forcefully. And just at the beginning of our mental work we should be relatively strict with our thoughts. If our inner children are educated good, we can give them a little more freedom.
The fourth step is the stabilization of positive thinking. It is not easy all day to control our negative thoughts. We need strong helpers to keep us on our long-term path of inner happiness. Such helpers are the daily spiritual reading in a book, the daily oracle reading, the daily meditation, walking and a group of positive thinking people. Very good it is to distribute some caregivers throughout the day. We create our system of daily happiness exercises. We're putting so many exercises for us in right intervals in the day that we keep ourselves constantly on the path of the positive. We stay with perseverance on our way of wisdom and happiness. If we fall off the path once, we stand up again next day. In particularly difficult situations helps the constant change of lying (hearing meditation music), reading (praying, chanting), sports (yoga, walking) and work (doing good to others). We are practicing it for so long until our negative emotions have calmed down und we are positive again.
The stone of the wise looks astoundingly similar to the stone of the fools. Joachim Ringelnatz
A friendly word can warm up three winter months.
God has given you a face. It is up to you to smile.
It is better to light a tiny candle than to curse the darkness.  Confucius
Today’s Happiness Tea Saying= Do what brings you fulfillment.
Your way begins there where you stop following others.
Greatness isn’t being this or that, rather it is to be one’s self. Søren Kierkegaard
Have the courage to serve your own understanding. Immanuel Kant
What a man thinks of himself decides his fate.  Mark Twain
The wise live in inner fulfillment and not in outer appearances. Laotse
Those who do not know the word “enough” will never have enough. Epicurus
When the thoughts come to a state of calm, the Yogi rests in the light.  Patanjali (Yoga-Sutra)
Blessed are the pure of heart, for they will see God. Jesus (sermon on the moun)
Everywhere Krishna, the lord of Yoga is, there you find victory, wisdom and happiness. Krishna (Bhagavad Gita)
A friend is someone who hums the melody when you have forgotten your own song!
I don’t have friends. I have a selection of crazy people.
If you have just the right amount of food and drink, you will live to an old age and seldom be sick.
Everyone has dumb thoughts, but the wise keep them to themselves. Wilhelm Busch
A clever man never contradicts a woman. He waits until she does it herself. (Humphrey Bogarth)
The world could be so much better if I could just be cloned! (Lucy/Peanuts)
Through diet and exercise the greater portion of all disturbances may be equalized and overcome, if the right mental attitude is kept.(Edgar Cayce)
Nice days, not crying when they are gone. Rather smiling that they once were.  Rabindranath Tagore
Wait out bad luck. Often what seems bad at the moment will reveal itself as a great blessing in the end.  Euripides
Those who do not contemplate the morning will have worry before the day is through.  Confucius
Perseverance is the talisman of life.
Think of your goals. They decide where you will arrive one day.
Only those who dare can win.
Life is too short to be taken seriously!! Oscar Wilde
Intelligence is following me, but I am faster.
You are correct, but I still prefer my own opinion.
I am not perfect. I am not working to change that either.
When God created me, he wanted to brag.
A halo? I already had one. It didn’t look good on me.
There are sheep and there are wolves. And you are a fish. What now? Be a fish!!
Dear God, give me patience!! But right now!!
As an uninvolved party, what do you say to the topic of intelligence?
A life without chocolate? Possible. But pointless.
"You only need a little to live a happy life.”
Monika Minder Say thank you for the wonderful time, so much love, so much life, and for all that remains.Monika Minder
"I have decided to be happy because it is good for my health" Voltaire
"To love one’s self is the beginning of a lifelong romance."
" One day it will have to be admitted officially that what has been called reality, is a greater illusion than the world of dreams " Salvador Dali
"A day without laughter is a lost day " Charlie Chaplin
"The more you give, the more treasures you will find.." Anais Nin
"Everything viewed with the eyes of love is beautiful."
" Many people miss out on the little happiness because they are waiting for the big happiness in vain ."
Pearl S. Buck
"Be yourself. All of the other options have been taken.."
„ Joy, my friends is the medicine of life! I am happy when I hear something good from another person, or when my dog wags his tail, or a cat is purring in the corner.”
" If you don’t have the urge to do something, do nothing.”
" The hands in the sand, the feet in the sea, the face turned toward the sun, freedom from the day’s stress. Be happy simply.  "
""The most beautiful harmony occurs through the uniting of opposites."
" Life is a white leaf, the colors are in you. Color it bright, radiant and beautiful"
„The earth could become a paradise. Everything is possible.”
"Those who sow thoughts today, harvest the deed tomorrow, the habit the day after, and destiny after that."
"First they ignore you, then they laugh at you, then they fight you and then you win.”
"The universe doesn’t follow any firmly established plan. As soon as you make a decision, the universe works with it."
„ Serve others, love everyone, live to give, cleanse yourself on the inside, meditate a lot and realize the holiness in you.“
" Do what you love and love what you do. "
„ Regular Yoga exercises help you to deal with the hectic daily life and counteract its effects.“
B.K.S. Iyengar
"Yoga allows chaotic thoughts to be softened."
B.K.S. Iyengar
" If the light of Yoga is lit once, do not burn it out. The more intensive the practice, the more bright the flame will burn. "
B.K.S. Iyengar
" Make efforts to only allow positive thoughts. Then miracles will occur within you.”
Wikipedia has related information at Positive psychology
A World of Peace, Love and Happiness
How to Be a Bodhisattva (Buddha of Love)
Lakshmi gets blessing.
Once there was a frog who lived with many other frogs in a small well. Once at midday the sun shone briefly in the well. Apart from that it was in the lives of the frogs rather dark and sad. Our frog wanted to live always in the light. He wanted always to feel love and happiness within. One day at lunch time, the frog jumped out of the well and followed the sun. He followed the light in his heart. After some time he came to a great sea. He jumped in and was transformed. The frog had realized his spiritual self. He had jumped in the great nothingness of egolessness. He had let go of all attachment to all external things. He had given up his search for his dream girl. He had gone through the feeling of loneliness and boredom. Through his spiritual practices, his mental tension structure had disintegrated, and the light within was awakened. From his chakras bubbled the life force energy. The frog had found the sun in himself. He lived now permanently in happiness. It did not matter if it was raining outside or not. The frog was so happy with his new state of bliss, that he told it to all the other frogs. Most frogs did not believe him. They believed more in the great luck in the little frog pond. They believed that they would be happier if they would catch more flies. But some frogs trusted him and followed him on the way of light.
There was once a frog family. The frog mother showed her children the world: "This is the water. The Lord has made it​, so that we can swim beautiful." The frog children jumped into the water, swam around and cheered: "Wonderful. This has the Lord done well." Then the frog mother pointed to the many insects that flew across the pond: "The Lord has made the insects, so we have something to eat every day. Otherwise, we would starve." The frog children jumped for joy into the air: "God did well. Praise the Lord. He is our great father and breadwinner." The frog mother took her children to the colorful flowers on the shore: "God has made the flowers so that there is beauty in our lives." The frog children admired every single flower, smelling its delicious scent and sang a song in honor of the great father. The frog mother sat down with her children in the green grass. They let the sun shine on their stomach. The frog mother said: "God has made the sun, so there is light in the world, otherwise we would live forever in the dark." The frog children thanked the good Lord for the great light. Suddenly a serpent came and ate one of the frog children. The frog children were horrified: "What is about the snake?" The frog mother said, "God has made also the serpent.Through the snake we have to recognize that the center of life is the inner  happiness and not the outer enjoyment."
There was once a poor woman. She had a tough time in her life. She tried to be happy in a relationship. But all her relationships had failed. She tried to be happy at work. But in her profession she learned only stress, struggle and selfishness. Over the years, she more and more exhausted her internal energy. She now lived alone, without a man, without a job, without a deeper meaning to life and frustrated. Every day watching TV and eating candy was in the long run not the way to great happiness. Somehow the woman was looking for a fulfilling life. One night her appeared the Yoga God Shiva in a dream. He said to her: "It's your lucky day. You have three wishes." The wife wished for love, strength, and happiness. The next day she went out leaded by an unseen hand to a bookstore. She bought a yoga book and worked through it thoroughly. She made every day in the morning, afternoon and evening her spiritual practices. She read in a spiritual book, walked, practiced her favorite Yoga series and meditated before bedtime. She did not practice much, but regularly. And above all, effective and with an inner sense. She felt every day what she exactly needed. With her yoga exercises, she managed to awaken her Kundalini energy. Suddenly, she had a lot of strength and happiness within. She gave her knowledge in her own way to her fellow human beings and thereby opened her heart chakra. She got into the energy of the all-encompassing love. She lived from now on focus on the goal of a happy world, found her personal mission and became a bringer of light. Yoga had made her life to a path of grace.
There was once a woman who had two children. Her husband went to work during the day, and she cleaned the house, cooked the food and cared of the children. She had a good life. But it does not filled her out. Her lacked a deeper meaning of life. Ultimately lacked the deep happiness in her life. To do something for herself, she took part in a yoga class. She read a yoga book and learned that by yoga one can awaken his inner happiness. One who practices a lot of yoga may thus come into a life of light and to lasting happiness. The woman decided to live as a yogini. From now on, she took all the freedom in her housewife life, to do spiritual exercises. While cleaning, she thought mantras. When shopping, she did a walking meditation. Playing with her children she practiced karma yoga. Before falling asleep, she meditated. Thus she sparked further tensions during sleep. It's called Sleep Yoga. Every morning, she prayed to her enlightened Master. She made an hour yoga every day. She blocked her talkativeness and kept her spiritual energy. This is Mauni Yoga. She practised every day consistently her spiritual path. After twelve years she was enlightened.
There was once a man who was very frightened. He wanted to overcome his fear. So he went to an enlightened Master and asked his advice. The Master advised the man to become a yogi and to disband his neurotic anxiety with his spiritual exercises. The man pulled into a lonely hut in a large forest. In the forest, there were tigers, snakes and jackals. The yogi feared all. Therefore he read in his clever yogi book what a yogi has to do in such a case. First advice: Look closely at every fear. Who closely looks at frightening situations can optimally protect himself. Fear is caused by negative thoughts. Fear thoughts can be overcome with the eight major techniques: reflecting (alone or talking with another person), mantra (thinking a positive word), thought-stopping, acting wisely, doing something good, walking, yoga or meditating (resting in inner happiness and let all thoughts come and go). Who exactly looks at his fear, finds his negative thought and can dissolve it with a appropriate positive thought. Second advice: Sacrifice the ego. Unchangeable things we have to accept as they are. We have to let go of our false wishes. All fears are only mental constructs based on an exaggerated rejection. Who sacrifices himself into the center of his fear, triggers the fear by this. It is the best to hand over yourself to the will of life (God). Who can let go of his ego, can flow positive through all suffering. Third advice: Ask the great Masters (God) for help. Then think about the problem and go with endurance the path of your personal wisdom. The yogi looked closely at his problems. Jackals just howl and don't bite. Snakes only bite when they feel attacked. When a yogi is careful and moves slowly the snakes will do him nothing. Only tigers eat people, but it is rare. It is the best to go such a tiger out of the way. And if that is not possible, a yogi sacrifices his ego, takes the situation, and continues practicing Yoga in the next life. The Yogi went his way with courage and perseverance. And one day he was enlightened, and all the fear was gone.
There once was a farmer in India who had a large goiter on his neck. The goiter looked very ugly and was very painful. The farmer was desperate. He asked many doctors. But no one could help him. In his distress he went on pilgrimage to a holy place where an enlightened master lived. The farmer was called Kukcipa. The name of the enlightened master was Nagarjuna. Nagarjuna is one of the founders of Mahayana Buddhism, the connection of the path of enlightenment with the way of all-embracing love.
Nagarjuna instructed the farmer to meditate every day on his crop. He should dissolve the tensions in his throat chakra with yoga exercises. He should envelop it with light and send healing energy to all people over the world. He should think the mantra "light" until his mind is completely at rest. Then he should spend some time in the rest. Kucipa practiced for many years as a yogi. First, the pain in his throat grew bigger and bigger. Prior to healing often comes a phase of energizing. Then the pain became less, the goiter disappeared and Kucipa was healed. He was outwardly and inwardly healed. Outwardly he got a healthy body and inwardly peace and happiness.
There once was a woman who wanted to realize her inner happiness. She wanted enlightenment immediately and in this life. She longed to live permanently in the light and in the love. There was only one problem. The woman did not like to be alone. To come to enlightenment usually one has to live many years in seclusion. Those who want to quickly reach enlightenment need a lot of rest, a spiritual daily schedule and a way of all-embracing love. These three things cause a fast growth in the light. The woman solved her problem. She bought a dog and moved together with the dog in a remote cabin in the woods. Twice a day, she walked an hour with him. If she did yoga and meditation, the dog was lying peacefully beside her. So she was never lonely. The dog gave her every day love, inspiration and joy. The dog guarded her house and protected her from pushy men. She practiced for many years with the dog her path of yoga. The dog was a positive center in her life. After twelve years she realized enlightenment on an easy way.
Shiva gets the blessing of the Goddess Ganga.
Bhagiratha was an Indian king. All his brothers and sisters lived in the hell. They lived in the world of suffering. They were inwardly unhappy. They were tormented by the seven demons anger, pride, envy, greed, fear, addiction and unwisdom.
Bhagiratha knew that his brothers and sisters could not recover by themselves from their spiritual unwisdom. The path of inner happiness is hard to understand. The consistent spiritual practice is difficult to learn. And still more difficult it is the way of effective practicing to be found. Most people lose themselves in the formal practice and do not come forward. Without an enlightened master is not easy for a normal man to come into the light successfully.
Bhagiratha decided to save his brothers and sisters from the hell. He became a yogi and brought first himself into the light. After having practiced twelve years intense yoga and meditation, one night Shiva appeared in his dream and asked him what he wants. Bhagiratha replied: “I want to free my brothers and sisters from hell. I want to bring all people of the world into the light. I wish a happy world full of happy people. “
Shiva then opened the sky and let water (enlightenment energy) flowing down on the earth. The impact on the earth was so great that Shiva had to soften it. He let the water run through his matted hair, and it was spread on the ground in many small streams. The streams splashing from the Himalaya mountains into the Indian plains and irrigated the land. All India began to flourish, the people were happy and the animals too. The result was the river Ganges, which supplies northern India with water. Bhagiratha transformed into Shiva. The enlightenment energy flowed inside and outside over his head and his hairs down on his body. After some time Bhagiratha was quite full of happiness and surrounded by a cloud of light. Where he stepped his feet, the earth started to bloom. Red roses and white lilies lined his path. Near him the wild animals were tame, and the birds began to sing. When he looked like a God, beaming with happiness, he went back into the world of suffering and told his people from the way of inner happiness. As he himself had achieved this, they believed him and followed him. Thus, the paradise was brought to earth.
Stay in your inner happiness, no matter how life happens outside.
On the way of Tantric Yoga we live in the conflict of outer pleasure and inner happiness. Both paths are exactly opposite. The path of the outer pleasure leads to the growth of attachment to the world and reinforces inner tensions. The more we live in the outer pleasures, the more our attachment grows. The internal tensions become more and more and shrink the inner happiness. We are losing our inner peace, our strength and our inner harmony. On the way of inner happiness we solve systematically all inner tensions. We free us from all attachments to external things. Enlightenment is the ultimately freedom from the outer world. And thus we can keep our inner happiness in all outer circumstances. The less inner tensions we have, the greater is the inner happiness. Until we live permanently in the light, in the enlightenment and in the unity (God, Nirvana).
One can say that there is ego-realization and self-realization. The long-term the ego-realization basically leads to inner unhappiness and the self-realization to inner happiness. The ego-realization is easy at the beginning and suffering at the end. The self-realization is difficult at the beginning and an incredible grace at the end. The ego-realization consists of good food, lots of sex, nice travel, extreme consumption, and external praise. It follows the sloth (tamas), or the exaggerated activity (rajas). The self-realization consists of daily work on yourself and constant mental effort. We don't set the ego (our external desires), but the self (the freed psyche) in the center of our life.
In Tantric Yoga, we solve the conflict between the outer and the inner path by flowing with wisdom with the things of life. We live the outer pleasures so that they bring us forward into the light. We live them sensitively, in due measure and with the right mental attitude. We put the spiritual goal in the focus of our lives. We use the positive potential of the external pleasures, without getting lost in them. We solve all attachments again and again with our spiritual techniques (meditation and mind work) and always get back into the light (to inner harmony). We live primarily in rest, in our spiritual practice and in the all-embracing love.
If we do not see the problem of attachment, we go into the big trap of Tantra. We are strengthening our attachment and block our enlightenment. We come into the dynamics of self-indulgence. Our needs are constantly increasing, we see more and more the negative sites of our partner, and the satisfaction with our relationship is decreasing more and more. We want love from others and not to give love. We do not live primarily out of the spirituality. Then the development of attachment and negativity can not be controlled. A happy relationship arises when we live our relationship with wisdom and love. We should practise our relationship so that both partners grow in their inner happiness. We should put the happiness of all beings in the center of our lives. Then we will succeed in our relationships and our lives. Live positive relationships with your fellow man. Success! Send a friend light. Send him a positive sentence.  "I send light to (name). May all people be happy. May the world be happy."
There once was a man who had a beautiful woman. The two loved each other dearly. They thought positively and therefore could lead a happy relationship for many years. The man was Kankaripa. Kankaripa had a successful career in his job and a happy relationship. He was very happy with his life.
But nothing lasts forever in the outer life. One day his woman died. Kankaripa was inconsolable. He depended entirely on his deceased wife. He could not rid himself of the attachment. So he went to a spiritual Master and asked him for advice The Master said, that at a great love the emotional connection is very strong. It can be resolved only through spiritual exercises over a long period of time. The Master recommended Kankaripa to make three hours every day spiritual exercises. He should take a walk, do yoga, mental work, meditation and read in a spiritual book. He should practice his profession in focus as a Karma Yogi for the goal of a happy world. He should concentrate more on the happiness of his fellow man than his own happiness.
In addition, he should practice every day mentally Tantra Yoga. He should visualize himself in a sexual union with his wife, enjoy the happiness, think the mantra "light", envelop both in light and then resolve both persons in the unity of the cosmos. He should visualize the universe full of stars around him, thinking the mantra "stars". Then he should stop three minutes his thoughts and after that he should linger in a relaxed meditation and let his thoughts and feelings flow.
This Kankaripa did a few years and then he was cured of his relationship addiction. He could now live a new relationship and also good to be alone, just like life it brought with it. His firm roots in spirituality allowed him to flow positive with all the changes in his life and always to preserve his inner happiness.
In India, there lived an old man, whose name was Tantipa. By profession he was a weaver. He made many beautiful woven rugs and blankets in his life. But now in the age his hands were stiff. He could no longer practice his profession. Now he was missing a task. Tantipa sat alone in his hut. His wife had died several years ago. His profession and his wife had been his purpose in life. He had children, but the children went their own ways, and wanted to have nothing to do with him. The only thing they did for their old father, was to give him something to eat every day. Externally Tantipa had enough to live on, but inside he was bored. Tantipa lived many years sadly to himself. Loudly he complained his cruel fate.
Then one day a yogi came and heard Tantipa lament. He said to him, "You're a fool. You don´t see the great treasure in your life. You could live as a yogi and develop your inner happiness. Through your daily yoga practice you could get a meaningful age. Instead of using the big opportunity, you spend your days complaining about your fate and increase your pain." Tantipa knew that the way of inner happiness exists. The ideal of life of Hinduism is to learn in the youth, to work as an adult, to have a family, and to attain enlightenment at the end of the life. Tantipa realized that the yogi was right. He asked the yogi for the right exercises for him, and immediately began an intense spiritual practice.
In his career as a weaver Tantipa had been very busy. He had worked hard and with endurance. These qualities brought him fast forward on his path of yoga. Tantipa practiced diligently every day reading, going, yoga, meditation and positive thinking. After twelve years he reached enlightenment. All internal tensions broke up, and his Kundalini energy began to flow. His body was full of energy and his mind full of happiness. He radiated love and light. All people came to see him, to hear his wisdom and to get some of his good energy. Tantipa became never bored again. He was very happy about his well-used life on earth.
Ambapali was a prostitute. All the men were lying to her feet. She was beautiful, rich and intelligent. Ambapali was very proud of herself and her body. When she heard a sermon of Buddha one day, she realized that all outer wealth and also her beautiful body were transient. Only her soul would always exist. To have a happy soul, one has to cultivate his inner happiness. Ambapali changed her life radically. She became a yogini. She practiced intensively. She resolved systematic the proud of her beautiful body. She meditated constantly on the transience of all things on earth. She visualized herself as an old woman, a  suffering woman, the death of her body and her transformation into a buddha and a life in nirvana. After a few years she realized enlightenment. All of her negative qualities disappeared. A prostitute became a saint. In spirituality it is not important what job a person has, but what inner spirit he or she has.
Sacrificing under the feet of the Goddess.
There was once a king who wanted to realize his inner happiness. A priest told him that a five-fold renunciation is necessary. The king had a lot of wisdom and a strong will. He was willing to perform a sacrifice, if it was necessary to achieve his goal. First, the king renounced his kingdom. He moved to a secluded forest and lived as a yogi. Second, the king renounced on sexuality. He lived without a relationship to better focus his energy on his spiritual exercises. That was for him the greatest sacrifice. Third, the king renounced on his thoughts. He meditated a lot and lived in great peace. Fourth, he renounced his ego. He let go of his ego, went through the vast emptiness (becoming internal nothing, no feeling of an independent self) and came into the light. It feels uncomfortable when the ego dissolves. But behind this is waiting the inner happiness. Who knows this, can easily sacrifice his ego. The king enjoyed some time in the happiness of enlightenment. Then he thought of the suffering of his people. They needed an enlightened Master who guided them along their way. The king renounced so fifthly on the happiness of seclusion and went back to his kingdom. He lived as a Hatha Yogi (physical exercises, meditation), as a Karma Yogi (love to all) and as a Bhogi Yogi (much external pleasure) permanently in the light (in unity consciousness, Nirvana). The five sacrifice were found to be the greatest grace in his life.
Jada Bharata was the first great king in India. He united the whole country under his rule and gave him a common religion. Jada Bharata called his religion the Sanatana Dharma (eternal truth). Sanatana Dharma can be called the science of happiness. In the west the Sanatana Dharma is called Hinduism.  Neo-Hinduism is the predominant form of Hinduism of today. Neo-Hinduism emphasizes the all-embracing love, the unity of all religions and the spiritual practice. Important representatives of Neo-Hinduism are Ramakrishna, Vivekananda, Ramana Maharshi, Anandamayi Ma, Mahatma Gandhi, Yogananda, Swami Sivananda, Sai Baba, Mata Amritanandamayi and Mother Meera.
Jada Bharata taught the way of the four stages of life. In youth, one acquires spiritual and professional knowledge. Then do you set up a family. If the kids are grown up, you concentrate on the spiritual practice. The age is then spent in inner happiness and after death you move up into the world of light. Simplified one can say that a wise man should divide his life into two parts. The first half of life on earth we explore the world outside and enjoy it's pleasures. In the second half we realize our inner happiness. One lives first mainly as Bhogi (hedonist) and then as a Yogi (happy man). This is from the perspective of yoga a fulfilled life. Buddha also followed this dichotomy. Until about the age of 30 years he lived with his wife and son. And then he transformed from a secular to a spiritual person and lived the second part of his life as a Buddha (enlightened).
Jada Bharata himself became a yogi and realized the inner happiness. Shortly before his death, he thought about if he now should stay permanently in the world of light, or return to earth again. Each enlightened yogi has in the moment of his death the choice. With his last thought (mantra), he decides his fate. Jada Bharata saw the many suffering in the world and opted for a rebirth as a spiritual Master. In his next life as a human he became a yogi, and quickly reached the enlightenment. He lived as Jivanmukta (liberated soul, Buddha) in the big nothing (nirvana, happiness). One day, "by chance" the new Indian king visited him. Jade Bharata initiated him into the path of universal love. The Indian religion was temporarily paralyzed in a formal way of practicing and preserving the power of the ruling class. The king gave the Sanatana Dharma the real spirituality back and transformed India into a happy country.
A young man in India was keen to achieve the goal of enlightenment. He longed to develop his inner happiness and lasting inner peace and to live in the all-encompassing love. Unfortunately, he had a lot of tension in his body and his mind. He was inwardly very nervous. He constantly changed his residence, his relationships and his jobs. He could not meditate long time in sitting. His master so gave him the exercise to make a pilgrimage to the 24 places of power.
For twelve years the young man wandered from one place to another. He always felt his right line between too much rest and too much action. While walking, he said a mantra or thought about the meaning of life. While sitting he meditated in silence. He honored all the holy statues of all religions along his way. He visualized himself as Shiva, Buddha, Jesus and father of all beings (bodhisattva). Thus he activated his Kundalini energy. Shiva filled him with power, Buddha gave him inner peace, Jesus helped him so sacrifice his ego, and the bodhisattva way made him living in the energy of love. The many suffering people in the world touched him. He did not look away, but helped them, as far as he could. He shared his money with them and his wisdom. He strengthened them materially and spiritually. He became one with the joy and the pain of others. So he grew more and more into a cosmic consciousness. He practiced constantly positive thinking and reflecting the life. After twelve years of persevering pilgrim awoke in him the light. The pilgrimage to the 24 holy places opened his 24 inner gates of energy (chakras).
Pilgrimage for many people is a useful exercise. In India there are 24 official places of power. Many are located on the holy river Ganges, such as Benares, Allahabad and Rishikesh. There is the holy Mount Kailash and the birthplace of Buddha. Also inside a man there are after the teaching of yoga 24 places of power. The further one is spiritually evolved, the better you can feel it. Trying to find them in your body, concentrate on the point and feel how the energy flows out of it. If you regularly visit them, they supply you every day with energy and happiness. The most famous places of power are the seven chakras (vertex, forehead, throat, heart, solar plexus / navel, lower abdomen, pelvis ground). But there are chakras at the back, along the spine, in the mid-channel, in the hands and the soles of the feet. There are even outside the body chakras above the head in the sky, below the feet, two feet under the seat and deep in the earth. The greatest chakra is God. Whoever meditates on the cosmos, all living things, and the enlightened, awakens his inner power the fastest. Find your way of daily inner or outer pilgrimage and grow by this into the light.
A thousand years ago in India lived a beautiful princess. She was known as Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth, prosperity and  fortune. Lakshmi was a gentle and loving young woman. According to the tradition in India at that time she was married by her parents to the son of a friend of the King. The princess then traveled with a large entourage to her future spouse. When she reached the gates of the town, the king's son came back from the hunt. He was a rough fellow. He was surrounded by fierce warriors. On the saddle of his horse hung many killed animals. When the princess saw her groom, she was horrified. So did not want to marry a rough and unspiritual man. She waited for the night, fled out of the palace and hid in a cave in the woods. Friendly people gave her something to eat. The Princess Lakshmi spent her time with yoga and meditation. After seven years awoke her kundalini energy. She broke through to enlightenment. She lived in the light and radiated light. She had now become a real goddess of bliss. Many people came and visited her. Lakshmi spent her life happily in God and in the giving of love and bliss. The prince married another woman. She was just like him and believe in the happiness of a worldly life. He therefore made no attempt to find Lakshmi. Bur one day the father of the prince, the old king, discovered Lakshmi in her cave. He immediately realized that she had reached enlightenment. He bent down in front of her and asked for a lesson. Lakshmi said, "Life in the world is mainly suffering. Constantly happy is only the enlightened one." The king took the words to heart, abdicated and became also a yogi.
Ganesha is a thick Yogi (Buddha) with an elephant head (wisdom and power). He has a big belly. He concentrates his energy in his belly. This happens because he is living at rest (doing nothing, pure existence in nirvana), in the all-embracing love and with the pleasure principle. He works for the happiness of all beings, but he does it out of the pleasure principle. He feels every day exactly what is good for him and for his fellow people. He does not work too much und not too less. He gives himself every day the outer pleasure that he needs for his inner balance. Some years ago the little Yogi Nils felt bad. In order to gain his balance again, he ate lots of sweets. His spirit brightened more and more. Unfortunately, after some time his abdomen was completely full. And yet his mind was not totally happy. Our little Yogi visualized the sweets in his belly and through this his kundalini energy awakened. Within him arose a strong happiness energy, which quickly brought him into the light. Our Yogi learned from it, to connect external pleasure and spiritual exercises. Then you don´t need to eat so many sweets. Some external pleasure is enough for the path of inner happiness.
Once upon a time there lived in northern India an evil magician. He possessed great spiritual power and dominated his fellow people. All were afraid of him. No one could break his power. The magician was a friend of the Maharaja (ruler) of his district. The secular and the spiritual leader of the district lived in an unholy alliance to oppress the local population.  But one day the Maharaja visited the enlightened master Mahaprabhuji. He was so impressed of Mahaprabhujis sacred aura that he became his devotee. At home, he immediately gave up his excessive worldly life and practiced all-embracing love. Mahaprabhuji protected him with his spiritual power against the influence of the evil magician.  But the magician was furious and wanted to destroy Mahaprabhuji. He walked to Mahaprabhuji. On the way he was injured severely on the leg. He had two dreams. In one dream, he saw himself in hell and suffered great anxiety and great pain. In the second dream, he saw himself in heaven. His soul was filled with peace, love and happiness. When he came to Mahaprabhuji, he beamed all his negative energy on him. But Mahaprabhuji remained calm and unperturbed. The negative energies could not harm him. He said to the magician: "The light is stronger than the darkness. It wins by inner peace and all-embracing love." The magician recognized the spiritual greatness of Mahaprabhuji. He understood what his two dreams meant. If he would continue on his path of black magic, he would come after his death in hell. If, however, he repented of his wrong doings and does only good things in the future, he would be saved. His eyes were opened to the true path. Mahaprabhuji healed the leg of the magician and took him as his disciple.
Two angels walk into the light of God.
We are beings of the light. We are children of the light. The cosmos is our great mother and our great father. We play games of happiness in God and thus grows the eternal happiness of all beings. The problem with most of our fellow creatures is that they can not distinguish between good and bad games. Bad games often make happy the short term and unhappy the long term. Bad games are all games who focus of worldly desires.
If we anchor ourselves in external things, we always long for more. We become tensed inside, our inner happiness decreases and it takes everyone down. We are allowed to live the external things. We can have relationships. We can play relationship games. We are permitted to make us the outside world beautiful. But we must bring the spirituality at the center of our lives. We need to play our life games out of the focus of spirituality. We have to play on the basis of wisdom, love and peace. Only those games benefits us.
This is difficult to understand. There are many little devils in the world playing negative games. Little devils are always poor devils. They lack wisdom and they end up harming themselves primarily. We need many angels in the world who can teach the little devils to play in the right way. If the angels are centered in wisdom, in their spiritual practices and in all-embracing love, then they win and that will be good games for everyone.
Atisha was a Tibetan Master of Love. He was born in 980 in India. He worked as a professor at a cloister university. Atisha wanted to find the fastest way to self-realization. He travelled from Master to Master, and tried out their techniques. The Master Rahula brought him to the big break, "Any form of self-relatedness prevents you from being fully enlightened. Even if you meditate for decades in a secluded cave, you might win great spiritual powers, but probably pride will arise in you ... and this pride blocks your enlightenment. Pride blocks your complete oneness with the cosmos. You have to recognize your ego-self as a mental mistake. You need to overcome your ego, your self-relatedness. Then you will freed. Then you live in the light. Then you come into a unity consciousness. And thereby you receive peace, happiness, love, power and enlightenment."
This convinced Atisha. But how could he do this? He lacked an effective technique to overcome his ego. This technique he learned from the Master Serlingpa. It is called Tonglen in Tibetan Buddhism. Tonglen means replacement. You practice it, to identify with your fellow man. You connect youself with their suffering and wish all beings happiness. Atisha practiced this consistent for twelve years and then got enlightenment. After that he went to Tibet and showed the people there the way of all-embracing love.
Tonglen can be practiced in various ways. The Tibetan way is very radical. You assume mentally all suffering of your fellow men and send them all your happiness. And you practice it so seriously, that you expect that a transfer of real suffering energy (bad karma) takes place. Nils has mitigated Tonglen for himself. After his experience, it is sufficient to concentrate on the suffering in the world, and to live as a helper. The fastest way to enlightenment is to live in enough rest, to make enough spiritual exercises (yoga, reading, going, meditating) and to focus in working for the happiness of all beings. How are you able to identify with your fellow beings: 1st Humanity is one family. All men are brothers and sisters. In a family, all help each other. 2nd If I feel bad, I also want me to be helped. Whom it goes well, should help those who it goes bad. 3rd I am a mother / father of all beings. I see all beings as my children. I want everybody to be happy.
In a bookstore, Nils saw in 1995 the book of Samuel Sandy Weis "Sai Baba the Holy Man and the Psychiatrist." Nils bought the book, read it and loved it. In 1997 showed Sai Baba him in a dream, how he helps him on the spiritual purification path. He took away some of Nils bad karma (destiny). In another dream Sai Baba appeared to him and constantly changed his faces. He pointed to the fact that a Karma Yogi should be flexible. In 2000 appeared the yoga gods Shiva, Vishnu and Brahma in a dream. Nils saw the three gods as beautiful statues side by side made of dark green jade. They gave him the path of Trimurti Yoga, the combination of praying (Bhakti Yoga), love (Karma Yoga) and spiritual practice (Hatha Yoga). In 2001 Nils received the paradise dream. He saw himself walking with many people through the mountains (Himalayas) to a beautiful village in the  paradise. Everyone got there his own house (way of living in paradise). Later, also the yoga god Ganesha appeared to him. Ganesha embodies the middle spiritual path with some enjoyment. In 2003 Nils knelt before a king in a red robe (love). The king sat on a golden throne and had a suit of armor (strength). The king pushed his sword into the crown chakra of Nils. Sai Baba activated his Kundalini energy and gave him all the power he needed to be successful on his spiritual path. Two weeks later, Nils saw himself on a congress for the unity of all religions. Nils got the task to work as a Yogi for the cooperation of all spiritual people.
There were five people who sought God. One was an atheist, an other a Christian, the third a Yogi, the fourth a Muslim, and the fifth a Buddhist. One day the five seekers came to a large mountain. Up on the mountain shone a bright light. The atheist said: "This is the sun." The Christian said: "This is God." The Muslims gave it the name of Allah. The Buddhist thought it was the Nirvana (emptiness / unity / bliss). The Yogi called it Brahman (the higher reality). The five-seekers debated long about the light, the happiness and God. The atheist insisted that there is no God. The Buddhists did not believe in a personal God. Which the Muslim and the Christian contradicted violently. The Yogi surprised his friends by stating: "This question cannot be clarified by an unenlightened man. God is a mystery. We all must get enlightenment, then we will understand what God is."
The five seekers had a long talk about God. They learned about their respective viewpoints. The talk was a great enrichment for all. But they could not come to a final result. They therefore decided to climb the mountain and to investigate the light exactly. There were many paths leading up the mountain. Everyone rose up on his own path. When everyone had arrived at the summit, they decided to enter into the great mystery. They took each other by the hand and went into the great light. They passed through a great darkness (the ego resolution) and found themselves in God (transcendence). They stayed some time in God and then went back into the world of matter (the duality of things). In God all had been speechless. But now her mind began to work. Excited, they told each other about their experiences.
The Yogi felt God as unity consciousness, the Christian as universal love, the Buddhist as inner peace (no attachments), the Muslim as a great power and the atheist experience God as a higher truth. The Muslims got the word "Allah", the Christian the word "God", the Buddhist the word "Enlightenment", the Yogi "Sat-Cit-Ananda" (unattached being-unity-bliss) and the atheist "Cosmos". If they thought their particular word, they could immediately go back into the light. The word was their personal key to entry into the great mystery. Anyone who has met God, can come with the power of the memory and his personal mantra again into the state of enlightenment. Each of the seekers kept his word as the greatest. They were arguing about their prayers and could not agree on a verbal level. So they decided to end their conflict and prefer to concentrate on the spiritual practice. They lived many years together on the mountaintop. They read in their scriptures, meditated a lot, pilgrimaged every day to the mountain summit and met once a week to a joint celebration. Some day all arrived the permanent light. And the great light transformed them. They saw the light in all beings and all things of the world. They realized that they are all brothers and sisters. May we stop all religious wars in the world. May we be build a golden age of love, peace and happiness on earth.
Daria (internet-girl): Hi everyone, I would like to discuss with you the mysterious concept of "happiness". What is happiness for you? What can make you happy? Do you believe that "all obstacles" may be a chance? But before I share my thoughts about happiness with you, I would like to introduce myself. I am a 23-year-old Ukrainian girl. I am a happy person (with some exceptions of course). I'm studying for five years diploma translator. Soon I will make my degree. I love to laugh, to dream, and when people smile. The people around me think I'm a bright, cheery girl, even though many have no idea how I can be happy in my situation. I was born severely disabled physically. I can not go and not stand alone. When I'm home, I can make 99% of everything. I feel like a queen. But when I'm outside my apartment, I'm as helpless as a baby. I can move a little, but it is not enough to go anywhere without being accompanied. My mother is my legs. She is my everything. Without her help I would not be able to study.
Thank God my mental capacity is not affected. I am a normal person, with my own dignity, with dreams and desires. I only wish that I could go anywhere, go where I want. Sometimes I am sad because I will never be a person of normal life and enjoy its pleasures. I can never go to parties or discos, visiting friends or simply stroll along the white beach under palm trees in the South Seas hand in hand with a loved one. I console myself with the thought that my world is not really the worst. :) Nothing happens for nothing. That's what I have learned in my life. I think I've come with the job on the world to make a difference.
To find happiness in life is a real complicated art. I try to be happy about all the little pleasures. My greatest treasure is to see all the small moments of happiness and enjoyment. You must not have the body of a model. Happiness is when you can see the beauty of life with a non-standard body. I will not hide it. Sometimes it frustrates me to be obstructed. But I stand to me and my different kind of body. I just wish people could see me, as I really am - behind my body. I am glad, that some of my friends that actually can. Life is beautiful. No matter how it is external. It is the greatest gift we could receive from God. Thankfulness is my main way to inner happiness.
Citta was a disciple of Buddha, who doubted a lot. He often wavered between his worldly desires and his spiritual goals back and forth. First he was a very worldly-oriented person. Then he met the Buddha and was thrilled by the idea of ​​inner happiness. Citta became a monk and practiced his spiritual exercises intensively for several years. Then he got a great displeasure. He left the monastic community, learned a profession and married a beautiful woman. But the woman was not always pretty, his profession became boring and doubts about the worldly life appeared.
Citta gave up his job, separated from his wife and became a monk again. This time he stayed many years with Buddha. One day he broke through to enlightenment. But the enlightenment disappeared, his doubts came back and Citta returned to his secular life. His wife took him back. He worked in his old job and enjoyed a time the worldly pleasures. Then his wife irritated him again, the stress on the job was too much and he longed for the quiet life in the monastery. After initial resistance from the monks Citta was still taken a second time and then he reached permanent enlightenment.
Budai was a very lazy Zen Master. He lived during the Tang Dynasty in China. He is also called the Laughing Buddha, or the Happy Chinese. Budai lived consistently in rest (doing nothing). He just enjoyed the happiness of his enlightenment. He lived in existence-unity consciousness-happiness (Sat-Chid-Ananda). He liked to laugh, to eat sweet things and to play with the children. Budai had a big bag, in which many beautiful things were hidden. He gave away it to the children. He was a bit like a Chinese Santa Claus. He was very popular by all children. And the adults loved to linger in his good energy and to relax in his presence a bit from the stress of life.
Chinese are usually very busy. They have a collective neurosis of much working. They think that working and not enlightenment is the purpose of life. Sometimes they are then very exhausted. They need a counter-example to get mental balanced. Budai is a counterpart role-model for them and their secretly dream of life. Budai once was asked, what enlightenment means. He stretched his arms in the air, smiled happily and then immediately disappeared into the crowd. He lived in inner happiness and in outer nothingness. He refused even to be a Zen Master and to teach the people. He was just a happy Buddha. It is enough to be happy, but it is also good to work for a better world and to make all people happy. Budai´s way was it to live enlightened, to see life as a game and to give away enlightened energy (symbolically sweets).
Samavati was as a child of poor parents. Because she was very beautiful, the king of Kosambi fall in love with her and married her. One day Buddha came with his monks in her country. She heard his teachings and was thrilled. Every day from now on she practiced meditation and universal love. She practiced the four brahmaviharas: 1) loving-kindness, 2) compassion, 3) empathetic joy, and 4) equanimity. She sent all beings each day light and lived for the goal of a happy world. Thus after some time she was enlightened.
Although she did nothing but good things to all people, there was a woman in the palace who was jealous of her. She wanted to become the queen instead of Samavati. One night, this woman set fire to the palace of Samavati. Samavati put herself into a deep meditation, forgave her enemy, and blessed all beings with light. She went through death with equanimity. Due to her meditation of all-embracing love her soul rose on to paradise after death (in a dimension of light in the afterworld).
The big test on the way of universal love is the love of enemies. We can only be permanent enlightened if we can integrate all of our problems into our enlightened psyche. Ultimately, all difficulties and all people with opposed interests are emotionally our enemies. We can integrate them into our psyche, if we found a positive word. What thought can help us, if a person harms us? We just think that our inner happiness and the paradise after death are more important as our current problem. We see all the external problems as ultimately meaningless, and only our happiness as really important. A second technique is to see us as a mother of all beings and all beings as our children. As a mother (or father), we wish a happy family and help even our evil children to go the path of wisdom and love.
For Nils the loneliness is his emotional enemy. He does not like it. His positive thought is, that it as an opportunity to practise intensive spiritually and to get enlightenment. For Samavati the situation was even more difficult. She was killed by her enemy. If she had hated the woman, internal tensions were created. These tensions would have blocked her rise into the paradise (preserve an enlightenment consciousness). In such a case, you can also try to clean your mind after your death. Anyone who goes through life constantly with spiritual exercises, will be able to do them even after his death. If we get touched by difficult situations, we always can build up our happiness again (in life and in the afterlife). Constant spiritual practise is a great grace for everyone.
Anuruddha was the disciple of the Buddha with the ability to single-minded practice. Anuruddha means translated to practice to (anu)  a point (the target, Ruddha/Rudra = Shiva as role model, the enlightened Master of Yoga). Anuruddha grew up as a prince in external wealth. When he heard about the goal of spiritual self-realization, in him arose the desire to achieve it. But he was small, weak and loved the pleasures of the world. How should a small man like him can go  the long and hard path to enlightenment? He remembered his cleverness. He thought that enlightenment is the greatest pleasure in the world. He practised with regard to his goal. He focused on his goal every day, visualized himself as a Buddha (Ruddha). He did every day the step forward who was possible for him. With special exercises (Deity Yoga) he activated every day his Kundalini energy (the energy of Shiva, the Kundalini snake). And he gave himself enough outer pleasure on his way. Thus he got the power to succeed.
The Buddha of Power. The Vajra-Scepter (right hand) is a power symbol. The bell (left hand) is rung and gives the Yogi power.
Mahamoggallana (Moggallana the Great) was a chief disciple of Buddha. As a youth he was strong and wild. He made many bad jokes and annoyed his fellow man. One day he heard of the spiritual self-realization. This goal was far greater than all his youthful pranks. That attracted him very much. Moggallana left his hometown and went in search of self-realization. Twenty years, he moved back and forth across India. He studied with many spiritual masters. He practiced many spiritual techniques. But the way of his personal effective practicing, he did not find. Despite all the search and try he did not get enlightenment.
Disappointed, he returned. Near his home town he met Buddha. Buddha gave him the knowledge of his effective spiritual practice. Then Moggallana became a yogi and moved to a secluded hut. He practiced extensively the alternating sitting and walking meditation. Shortly before his spiritual breakthrough him captured a large inertia and apathy. Buddha gave him seven tips: 1st  Always consistently follow your daily schedule, even if you're tired. After some time the fatigue goes away. 2nd If the tiredness does not go away, think about your goals and your spiritual path. What is your way to win today? 3rd Rub your face and body with cold water. That activates you. 4th Read a page in a spiritual book. 5th Do some exercise (yoga, walking, breathing, Kundalini awakening). 6th Maybe you're really tired. Then take a break. Give you enough rest. 7th Connect yourself with your spiritual master and ask him for guidance and help. Hear the voice of your inner wisdom. Find your way of rightness.
With these seven techniques Moggallana got his breakthrough into the light. He had won thanks to his wisdom and perseverance. Yogi Nils completed the seven tips with three more tips: 8th Live for the goal of a happy world. Send every day all beings light and think, "I send light to (name). May all people be happy. May the world be happy." In this way you get the energy of universal love and awaken your unity consciousness. 9th Hear beautiful or powerful music. 10th Bring as many elements of joy in your life so that you can walk your spiritual path positive. "My deed of  joy today is ..." So you can go eternally your spiritual path until you reach your goal.
Tenzin Palmo is a Western woman who has decided to become a female Buddha. She was born in 1943 in London as Diane Perry. After graduation, she worked in a library. She liked to read. One day she discovered a Buddhist book and was impressed by the teachings contained therein. She traveled to northern India and met her Master, the 8th Khamtrul Rinpoche. She became a Buddhist nun in the tradition of Kagyupa (Kundalini Yoga and Meditation).
She noticed that there are very few female Tibetan Buddhist Masters. She therefore put off the vow to attain Buddhahood as a woman - no matter how many lifetimes it would take. She saw this as her contribution to the emancipation of women. The 16th Karmapa blessed her and said. "You are the first Western woman I ordain.  You have to be strong and vigilant. It is very important that the beginning of a new movement is purely. In the coming years there will be many western women who go the Buddha-way.
On the night she had a vision of the Goddess Tara, who smiled happily and gave her a flower. That was a good omen. Buddha gave his successor also a flower. Tenzin Palmo spent several years in a monastery. She learned that there is in Tibetan Buddhism a nearly extinct line of female yogis, the Togdenmas. Tenzin Palmo wanted to restore the tradition of the Togdenmas. She moved into a cave in the Himalayas and meditated intensively there for twelve years.
At the age of about fifty years she came back to the West. She radiated happiness, peace and light. She founded a convent and traveled throughout the West, to raise money for her monastery. Wherever she went, people were enthusiastic. Her teaching was authentic, non-dogmatic and suitable to the needs of western women.
Thich Nhat Hanh and Chan Khong are two well-known Zen masters. Thich Nhat Hanh came from Vietnam and had been engaged there very much for peace. In 1982 he founded together with the nun Chan Khong in southern France the spiritual center "Plum Village". There, people from all over the world can learn the Buddhist mindfulness meditation.
Chan Khong was born in 1938 in Vietnam. She met Thich Nhat Hanh at the age of 21 years and became his close companion. She studied biology and was also involved in political action, becoming the student leader at the University, spending much of her time helping the poor and sick in the slums of the city. She directed a nursery school for orphans. 1968 during the American Vietnam war a bombing killed almost all her children. Chan Khong was desperate. She could eat a long time nothing but a little rice. How could she win back her inner peace?
She sought refuge in spirituality. By meditation and positive thinking she got back her happiness. She realized enlightenment. Today she shines a lot of power and love. She manages the ashram of Thich Nhat Hanh and organizes his many travels. With her inner strength she helps many Western women to get inner peace and happiness.
Alice Cnristensen is the founder of the American Yoga Association. In her book "Yoga of the Heart" (1999), she describes the exciting path as she took to yoga. Swami Sivananda in India saw Alice in the U.S. from his higher cosmic perspective. He saw her good heart. A good heart is the main on the spiritual path. Through yoga exercises one gets a lot of inner power. This power can be steered in the wrong direction, if it is used without wisdom and love. Alice was a homemaker and mother. One night in the summer of 1952, she woke up and saw a large pillar of light standing at the foot of her bed. The whole room was filled with light. The pillar of light came toward her, enveloped her and melted into her. She lost consciousness and woke up the next morning as a new woman. Suddenly she was a clairvoyant and could feel the energy of others. In her mind popped the word 'yoga' on. She read all the books about yoga, she could get. Some time later Swami Sivananda appeared her in a vision and introduced himself by name. He pointed her to a particular book, in which his address was. She bought the book and then communicated mainly writing with him. Alice had several experiences of enlightenment. In 1960 she was spiritually so developed that she could teach yoga. In her book she recommends a daily yoga practice from twenty to thirty minutes. She also writes, that daily reading a spiritual book is very important: "If you do yoga every day and also practice the positive qualities love, peace and truth, you will bring your inner power source to bubbling. You will get health, inner strength, self-confidence and contentment."
Anita Blanke is a student of Sai Baba, who realized  enlightenment through the path of a spiritual relationship (My way to the source, 2003). She was born in Austria and had in school a special talent for music, dance and theater. After high school she went to Berlin and became an actress. From the age of fifteen on she danced from relationship to relationship. Her subject of life was searching for the right man. At a theater in Berlin she met Norbert. He was a technician. Anita was thrilled by his calm and strong male type. They moved together. But after a while Anita noted that Norbert was not perfect. There were sides in him that she did not like. She expected the great enduring happiness from her partner and thus necessarily had to fail. The great happiness can only be found within oneself. It was a long road for Anita to recognize this. She started nagging. She focused on the negative aspects of her partner. Her relationship cooled more and more. Anita began to search her luck in other men. She had several love affairs.
In 1986 she heard of Sai Baba and went to India. When she saw Sai Baba, she knew at once that he was her Master. She had arrived at the end of her search. Her Master was her great love. Unfortunately, she had to realize after some time that a purely spiritual relationship with an enlightened Master was not enough for her. She needed also a real man. She asked Sai Baba for guidance and help. In a dream, Sai Baba said to her that she would find a husband and have two children. But where was the right man? Anita had to think by herself. In a book she read that the mental and spiritual harmony in a relationship is more important than the physical level. The sexual desires in a relationship usually disappear after a few years. What remains is the mental and spiritual level. Anita wondered with what man she mentally best corresponded. With whom she could imagine a happy relationship in the long term. The only suitable partner she remembered was Norbert. But her heart refused. Norbert promised her, to give her more love. That opened her heart. They married and had two children, a son and a daughter. In the beginning they were very happy. But then the children began to niggle, Norbert sought his task of life, and Anita went from theater to theater. Since she was never really happy, she made a training as a psychotherapeutic healing practitioner. She moved with her husband and children to Kassel. There they rented a big house and pulled together with lots of friends. Anita became the head of the Sai Baba group of Kassel.
The main path to enlightenment for Anita  was to accept life as it comes. She constantly tried to live inwardly unattached. Sometimes she broke through into deep states of happiness. But mostly it was a tough inner rings. She remained on her way about twelve years. She prayed every day to her Master and got helpful dreams. She also meditated and practiced regularly yoga. In a dream she received the message from Sai Baba: "The outer guru-worship has to be given up. Visualize yourself as Master. Live for the happiness of your fellow people. Serve all beings and everything serves you spiritually. If you take all things in the right way, everything becomes a helper to enlightenment."  The Community in Kassel collapsed. Inwardly, she felt heavy, tired and dreary. Until suddenly disappeared her I consciousness.  She transformed into a unity consciousness. The Kundalini energy in her began to flow and she lived from now on  permanently in the light. The outer things always changed, but the inner happiness remained.
The Yamuna is one of the sources of the Ganges. It brings the water from the glaciers of the Himalayas to the Indian plains and unites there with the second major source of the river Ganga. At the point of uniting meet regularly pilgrims from all over India and ask for light, happiness and abundance in their lives. They visualize the Ganga and the Yamuna river as Goddesses. Ganga is a girlfriend of Shiva. She gives us the power to succeed on our spiritual path. Yamuna is the sister of the God of death, Yama. She is the Goddess of piety. She reminds us that we all have to die one day (meet Yama). We should use the time of our lives to grow spiritually and to rise after death into the light.
In February 2008, the Goddess Yamuna appeared Yogi Nils in a vision while meditating. Nils found himself in a group of people who knelt in front of a small white statue of a standing Goddess. It was a Goddess of fertility, a Goddess of wealth. Nils spontaneously heard from inside the name Yamuna. As if under a force he put his forehead on the ground at the feet of the Goddess. His mind kept thinking the words, "pray, pray, pray ..." The blessing of the Goddess was transferred to him. Nils felt how her energy connected with him. Nils did not knew anything from a Goddess Yamuna. A few days later Nils read in a book that Yamuna is the Goddess of devotion and teaches the daily praying. Nils got by his vision informations that he had not had before. This is in Yoga seen as a typical sign of a genuine vision.
Who every day connects himself spiritually with God (the Goddess, the enlightened Masters), can be seen permanently from the higher dimension. Thereby him can be helped permanently. Who prays every day, gets blessing every day. The Goddess Yamuna gave Nils no specific prayer, but simply the words "pray, pray, pray". Every spiritual person may pray in his own way. He or she may speak mantras, read a spiritual book or perform other rituals (yoga, meditation, chanting, pujas, oracle).
In the year of 2001, Nils saw himself as a jellyfish in a dream. This jellyfish was about to be eaten by a sea spider. The little jellyfish could not escape the spider. In the jellyfish’s state of desperation, it called to God. God gave the jellyfish the mantra “yes” (in German, “Ja”). The little fish thought of the mantra over and over, and went through death in a state of affirmation, constantly repeating the word “yes”.  The black spider killed the jellyfish and the fish continued to think „yes, yes, yes, yes…“ while Nils noticed how his consciousness lapsed. His life disappeared. That was a very unpleasant experience, but through the mantra „yes“, he was able to keep his spirit stable and positive. He did not get tense in the course of the death experience, and did not lose positive energy. After his consciousness was extinguished, he moved ahead spiritually. Suddenly, Nils was there again, and everything was light, peaceful and beautiful. The spider was no where to be seen. Nils was in a light dimension of the other side, and he felt good.
After a time, Nils woke up from the dream. He lay in bed again and found himself at home, as a person. He still felt happy though, and that day he took a long walk through trees and fields where flowers grew, as the sun shone on this beautiful day. Nils still had this paradise feeling from his dream. He felt a large sense of peace, joy, and all-encompassing love for all beings and plants around him. He stayed in this state for three days after the dream. Nils saw this dream as a gift. In the dream, Nils learned that one can go through death more easily with a mantra. Those who die repeating a positive mantra can land in paradise after death. The knowledge of the death mantra was a saving grace for him. The concept of such is hardly known in the western world. That Nils is able to share this dream, imparted to him by his enlightened Masters, is a great gift.   Everyone must die one day. It is good to have a mantra at hand for this experience. Everyone can choose whichever mantra serves him or her. Christians might have a prayer at hand. Nils can confirm that the mantra "Yes" has a very strong force and brings a soul good through death. He recommends this mantra to all people. In yoga is usually the mantra "Om" related. A very powerful mantra is also the name of the personal enlightened Master.
Reincarnation is the religious or philosophical concept that the soul or spirit, after biological death, begins a new life in a new body that may be human, animal or spiritual depending on the moral quality of the previous life's actions. This doctrine is a central tenet of the Indian religions and is a belief that was held by such historic figures as Pythagoras, Plato and Socrates. One of the most well-known cases of reincarnation in India is Shanti Devi. She was born in 1926 in New Delhi and could remember her previous life as a house wife in Mathura. Although she was never in that location, she was able to describe her previous husband, her previous house, and the city itself. She could even remember where she had always hidden her money in her former life.
Yogi Nils: My beliefs are based mainly on my own experiences. I have seen about thousand previous lives in the course of my spiritual cleansing processes. After seven years as a Yogi, I was suddenly overcome by the wish to know my earlier life. I went back in my meditation to a previous time and felt resonance with a particular time. I looked in that direction and could spiritually “see” four earlier lives. If you dissolve systematically all tensions in the body and in the spirit with spiritual exercises, one day you reach the stress situations of your earlier lives. This is what happened at St. Anthony, the founder of the Christian desert fathers. He saw how he was eaten in his past lives by bigger animals. Visions of demonic beasts appeared in his mind's eye. All the major stress is stored in the soul. If the tensions dissolve, dip in dreams or visions short scenes (short films) of the stress situations. The solution process is often associated with intense physical reactions such as restlessness, tremors, heat or cold. First I resolved the tensions of my present life. In short movie scenes I saw stressful exam situations, relationship conflicts and repressed accidents. Since I still had the stressful events in the memory, the connection between spiritual practice, the resolution of inner tensions and the appearance of solution dreams became clear. I learned to distinguish solution dreams from normal dreams. After eleven years as a Yogi, many former lives came in dreams to the surface of my consciousness. Differing from the conscious perceptions while meditating, very clear films like short videos appeared. I could see the details of the situations and the environment I was in at the time of the previous life. From the single pictures I could see geographical details.
Bhadda and Kassapa were two disciples of Buddha. They were married. They had a harmonious and happy marriage. As they grew older, in both developed the desire for spiritual self-realization. They gave up their worldly lives and became pilgrims. Together they visited many holy places and gained a great spiritual knowledge. One day they realized that each of them needs his own path to enlightenment. Bhadda became a nun in a convent. For her the right spiritual path was a life in a community together with other women. In this way she reached her spiritual goal in a few years. After that she worked as an enlightened Master for her fellow sisters. She thought of her husband always full of love and of gratitude for the good years together.
Kassapa had chosen for himself the path of a secluded and hard-practicing yogi. In the solitude of the mountains he built a small hut. Every day he followed strictly his spiritual program. He had no desire for human contact. He wanted nothing more from his fellow man. And perhaps for this reasons he was chosen after Buddha's death to his successor. Kassapa is regarded as the first Zen Master. He practiced the way of mindfulness. He constantly watched his mind and hold his body calm. His path is similar to today's Zen Buddhism. Zen is a Japanese form of Buddhism which has its focus in the strict meditation (sitting and going) and in a meditative life.
Rita of Cascia lived from 1380 to 1457 in the town of Cascia, Italy. She had to endure much in her life. She had to forgive others, God and her life a lot. She mastered difficult situations with equanimity, perseverance and optimism. Rita was married at a young age by her parents with a violent man. She endured her marriage eighteen years. Then her husband became a victim of the Italian vendetta. Rita had to forgive her husband his brutality, and also his killers, that she from now on had to live alone. Rita had two children. Shortly after the death of her husband, her children died of the plague. That was a hard fate, in which a mother can break easily. Rita was 33 years old. What should she do now? Should she get married once again? Or should she stay alone?
Rita chose the spiritual path and became a nun. She did every day full of self-discipline her exercises. At the age of sixty years she got enlightenment (holiness). Her rigorous spiritual practice had brought her freedom from all the suffering of life. An important element for her breakthrough to enlightenment was to forgive. Her forgiveness led her to the complete acceptance of life. Saint Rita was able to accept everything the way it was. Even the suffering in her life and in the world. May we all have an enlightened life. May we all be able to forgive, to heal and to become a happy holy in the difficult western life.
Laozi lived in the sixth century BC in China. His biggest fear was to act too much. Who is doing too much, loses his inner happiness. He loses his inner energy in outward actions. Over the years, he shrinks into his life energy. This is the path from the inner happiness to the inner unhappiness. Almost all people in the western world live like this. They work too much, think too much and talk too much. They live too little in rest. In ancient China, people were just as unwise. Also Laozi. He was the head of the imperial library. He lived only for his career. He got exhausted in doing senseless external things. Unlike most other people he realized what was happening. As head of the imperial library, he had read the writings of the old Chinese sage. All sages advise to live a life of peace and happiness. They warn of a life of over-activity.
Laozi realized that he was doing exactly what he should not do as a person of wisdom. He was so shocked by his own unwisdom, that he radically changed his life. He got the motto: "The wise man lives in inner fullness and not in outward illusion." He gave up his career and became a hermit. He wrote a book called "Tao Te Ching" in which he taught the great philosophy of wu wei.
What does "wu wei" mean? Simply put, it's the principle of the relaxed way of life. Man lives in the balance of activity and relaxation. He lives in his internal equilibrium. On a deeper level, wu wei is the most important way to enlightenment. One acts outwardly so little that the energy turns inwardly and dissolves the tensions. By a lot of rest people heal by themselves. Rest is the main road of healing for inner tensions.
Too much rest leads to inertia. Then the internal energy dries up and healing does not occur. The big mystery is the exactly right amount of rest and activity. The exact boundary between too much doing and doing too little is a fine line you can only find individually with a lot of wisdom and intuition. To live on this thin line is the optimal path of spiritual growth. Then you do only a few hours your spiritual exercises and most of the time your body resolves his tensions by his own. Enlightenment happens mainly by itself. This path is difficult to walk. People want to follow their favorite neurotic tendencies. Most people tend to be either too slow or too active. They are either lazybones or workaholics. The wise man must fight against both tendencies. The optimal way of spiritual growth is a constant hard work against ones own neurotic tendencies. To resolve tensions often means to resolve internal resistant. The best way to enlightenment is a personal daily schedule with an optimal balance of rest and activity. And one has to keep closely to it. And sometimes a little pleasure principle is allowed.
At the end of 8th century lived in China the old mendicant monk Kang. Kang owned the great knowledge of the Pure Land Buddhism. He knew the easy way to paradise, which every human being can go. One has to visualize every day a golden Buddha in a meditation posture in the sky above the crown chakra (where one feels personally his paradise). It is helpful to speak or think the mantra: "Om  golden Buddha in the Paradise. Om all the enlightened Masters. Om inner wisdom. Please guide and help me on my way. I send light to .... May all beings be happy. May the world be happy."
One day a bright beam of energy came from an inscription in a temple. A short time later the old monk Kang had a vision of Shan-tao, an enlightened Master of the Amitabha Buddhism, who spoke out of the empty space to him: "Kang, go to Yanzhou. The people there need your wisdom." Shan Tao lived about 200 years before the old Kang in China. Shan Tao got the complete enlightenment, and then came into the Paradise of Amitabha. He now possessed great spiritual power and could see the world under him. He could send light, energy and positive words to all the people who were connected with Amitābha Buddha. He could send in particular helpful thoughts and energy through his books and the pictures of Amitabha. He could therefore connect himself in reality with the old Kang. This is probably a true historical fact. Nils has experienced a similar incident in 2005 with the Tibetan Master Patrul Rinpoche.
Hakuin is one of the most famous Japanese Zen Masters. Zen Buddhism is a line of Mahayana Buddhism, which developed in China and there was called Chan. Chan is the Chinese name from the Sanskrit word dhyana, which means meditation. Chan is much influenced by Taoism, the Chinese philosophical way of naturalness and spontaneity. Zen is the Japanese form of Chan. One can describe Zen as the path of strict form and hard practicing. Hakuin lived from 1685 to 1768 in Japan. His father was a samurai (a Japanese knight) and his mother was a follower of the Buddhist doctrine of Paradise (Amitabha). At the age of 15 he entered a Buddhist monastery. Hakuin remained four years in the monastery. He was disappointed because he made no progress. Therefore, he went on a spiritual tour. He visited various spiritual teachers. An enlightened Master advised him to think about the word "nothing". This led Hakuin to release all attachments to external things. Hakuin broke through to enlightenment. He lived in inner happiness. Now, however, pride appeared in him. Pride is a neurotic state of mind, an inner tension. It blocks the progression to greater enlightenment. Hakuin met an old hermit, who called him "poor devil in a dark cave." This convinced Hakuin and he stayed with the hermit. The old hermit trained Hakuin with great severity, and destroyed completely his ego-mania. Hakuin realized enlightenment on a high level. But he recognized, that there was still much to do. Over the years he became a kindly and modest spiritual master.
Nils studied law and founded in autumn 1984 together with some friends a law firm. He was happy being a lawyer. His job was varied and interesting. In particular, he devoted himself to the disadvantaged people in his town. Once a poor woman came to him, she should lose all her money at an unfair contract. Nils caused the lawyers of the opposite side to renounce of the entire debt. The woman was very grateful. She brought him again and again  flowers into his law office. Most of his processes he won. He worked thoroughly and was prepared well for his processes. And he advised his clients not to processes that were hopeless from the outset. In addition to his professional activities, Nils took about three hours daily spiritual exercises. He read in spiritual books, meditated and attended spiritual events. His energy was slowly increasing. Once  his Sacral Chakra opened wide. Nils was enveloped by an aura of light. He felt a great strength in himself. It also noted the presiding judge, who suddenly had a great respect for Nils.
As a lawyer Nils watched as many of his colleagues got ill by the constant stress in their job. Nils therefore practiced systematically a spiritual stress management. He made lots of little breaks during the day. He trained positive thinking and serenity. In the afternoon he took a long walk. And he lived with a good time plan, so that he had no constantly time pressure. He preferred to work longer and easier than fast and stressful. It was particularly important that he saw his deeper purpose in life not in making money and in a professional career. He retained as a lawyer his spiritual orientation. This enabled him to avoid a lot of stress because his work was not too important.
In 1985 Nils suddenly felt a  violent breathing while meditating. After about fifteen minutes the breathing became normal again. Then the body began to twitch intensive about an hour long. Nils had such experiences often from now on. This were inner processes in which tensions were dissolved. Through the intensive breathing the muscles were supplied with energy. Then they could dissolve the stored stress from the past. Nils experienced muscle twitching, restlessness, feelings of cold and heat. The solution processes often lasted a day or two. In November 1986, Nils had his first major enlightenment experience. At a meditation suddenly a warm energy pillar rose slowly upward from the lower abdomen in the middle of his body. Nils watched the energy with interest. The higher the energy rose, the quieter he was. It felt like a thick warm stream of water. On reaching the middle of his head, Nils suddenly was one with the cosmos. He felt supreme bliss.
Very important for Nils was the feeling of a comprehensive correctness. His mother had never been content with him. She had produced in him a strong sense of inferiority through excessive demands. Up to that enlightenment experience he always felt, that he was not okay the way he was. He felt always somehow inadequate, inferior. Now he experienced that everything was right as it is. Also he was just right as he is. In him dissolved a deep inferiority complex. The state of bliss lasted about half an hour. Some hours after this experience, Nils was very restless. But after a while things calmed down. In yoga, this experience is referred as the ascent of kundalini energy. It is the highest level of hatha yoga. Nils was blessed at the very beginning of his spiritual journey with a high experience of enlightenment.
In March 1987 Nils got the unity consciousness. He had been invited by his step-sister Gesa to a birthday party. It was a big party with many people who were talking cheerfully. Nils did not know the most people. He was a little off and bored. He had not found a person with whom he could converse well. To overcome his boredom, Nils began to meditate. Suddenly his consciousness expanded. It filled the entire room. Nils became one with all. He outgrew of his body consciousness and felt like the room. He saw also his body only as a part of the room. He identified himself with the totality of space and all the people in it. He was filled with peace and happiness. And he was one with all people in the room.  He felt the thoughts and feelings of all people. He needed no longer to entertain himself. It was talking in him. Nils just sat there and looked at all the people friendly. Some people looked back friendly. They probably thought that Nils was happy enough in himself. And so it was. It was a great party with much conversation.
In August 1987, Nils had one more energy experience. Again, the Kundalini energy rose in the middle of his body upward. But this time it did not stop in the head. It gathered at the apex (crown chakra) and then shot up suddenly with great force into the sky. After a while it came back and flowed on the outside of his body down to earth. Thus, the circuit was closed. Nils had been connected with the energy of heaven and earth. All this happened while standing in a yoga position. He was then bathed for an hour with happiness showers. Mother Meera teaches: "Reaches the Kundalini energy the crown chakra, you get the darshan of God. When the Kundalini rises over the head, one attains a constant connection with the light." Nils grew from now on constantly further into the light.
The Holy Spirit as a dove.
The culmination of his experiences was the entrance of the Holy Spirit. In  December 1987, Nils was at a satsang by Keith Sherwood. Keith Sherwood was a non-dogmatic spiritual Master from the United States. He had come for a short visit to Hamburg (Germany). Keith Sherwood was an hour late for the event. He had moved through Hamburg by his intuition to find the event location. Perhaps he should have bought a better road map, rather than trusting in the guidance of God. During the event happened to Nils nothing special. But on the way home he felt a strong energy within and around him. He went home as in a trance. The next morning he woke up early. Suddenly a thick beam of energy flowed down from the sky and entered through the crown chakra into his body. The spiritual energy flooded his body and filled it out completely. The energy beam on the diameter was as large as the head of Nils. It just could pass through the totally opened crown chakra. On his head appeared a flame of energy. Comparable to the experience at Pentecost, in which appeared energy flames on the heads of the early Christians. Nils spontaneously thought that he had now been blessed by the Holy Spirit. He felt the energy beam as a descent of the Holy Spirit. He had the feeling that he had now got a complete baptism directly from God.
A short time later Nils had another amazing experience. When he made his daily walk one evening, he suddenly had the feeling that he was seen from above. As if there was a large eye in the sky that saw him. The eye in the sky is in Christianity a symbol of God. Nils interpreted it as a common manifestation of his enlightened Masters. They wanted to say him that he is seen by God. He is guided and protected. The spiritual path is not always easy. It often leads through rocky terrain and difficult routes, where people need urgently help from a higher dimension. The message of the Eye of God was: "You can trustful go your spiritual way. You are seen and guided."
The Öko woman was a typical New Age woman who likes trying out a lot. She sought the appropriate therapy method, the suitable spiritual path and the right man. She was dressed organic and ate vegetarian. The Öko woman had studied economics and then made a training in psycho therapy. As a therapist, she was very good. She was highly intelligent and able to empathize well with others. In fall 1989, Nils was already living as a yogi in his little house in the wood. He made a therapy training, worked as a lawyer and gave in the evening after work in his law firm meditation and positive thinking courses. The Öko woman was interested to learn something new in positive thinking and came to the group. After the group they talked together a little bit. They noted that they had the same way home.
Spiritually the Öko woman was a follower of Thich Nhat Hanh. Thich Nhat Hanh is next to the Dalai Lama the most famous Buddhist Master in the West. He is from Vietnam, lives today in southern France, and leads with the nun Chan Khong the spiritual center "Plum Village". Thich Nhat Hanh teaches the Buddhist mindfulness meditation. With him, everything is extremely peaceful. Going slowly. Eating slowly. Pay attention to your breath. Consider your thoughts and your feelings. Think positive. Live in peace and in existence. At his events can take part people of all spiritual religions. He explains that the truth lies ultimately over all spiritual systems. If you want to come to enlightenment, you must rise above all conceptual systems. Thich Nhat Hanh often occurs at Christian events. In Hamburg he was invited by an evangelical church. Nils took the opportunity and went to the weekend seminar. The extreme slowness was difficult to endure for him. He preferred a mix of dynamic exercises and meditation. Nils had learned to take good care of himself and to feel his spiritual needs. During the lunch break, he made ​​a dynamic walk and was therefore in his personal balance between rest and activity. Many other participants experienced the extremely calmness as very stressful. For them the weekend seminar was hard inner work. The Öko woman loved the peace and calmness at Thich Nhat Hanh. It gave her a hold in her restless life. It helped her to find peace within herself. The Öko woman took part in a retreat at his center in southern France. For three months she practiced it not to think, to observe her breath and to move slowly. Then she came back rested and in a good mood.
Nils and the Öko woman had for a time a good relationship. They had the same interests and the same basic spiritual views. They were interested in yoga, psychology and positive thinking. Both were a great addition for each other. The Öko woman visited Nils over the weekend in his hut and once a week Nils went to her apartment. Then she cooked a wonderful vegetarian meal. She wanted to live together with him. But Nils had become cautious because of his many difficult relationships. He wanted a harmonious partnership. If he would live together with a woman, then only in a harmonious relationship. And, unfortunately, the Öko woman loved to dispute. She had learned in her therapy training that arguing belongs to a good relationship. Every weekend they were arguing about two hours. Then she was satisfied. Then they loved themselves again. Nils gave the Öko woman Buddhas sentence, "Be harmonious, monks!" The Öko woman was not particularly impressed. She was a liberated woman, who went her own way. And she found a nice a man, married and got a nice child. And Nils became a nice hermit.
For Nils the Yoga path began with an amazing story. His late father appeared to him in early 1987 in a dream and asked him: "Do you need something?" Nils replied, that he still lacked a path of practice with which he could quickly get inner strength. As Nils woke up, he went intuitively into a bookstore, looked at the shelves and suddenly saw a book on Rune Yoga. He knew immediately that this book contained the promise of the dream. Rune Yoga is the Yoga practice of the Germanic tribes, the ancestors of many people in Europe. The runes were carved in stone. So they could take over the millennia. Nils practiced two years every day for half an hour Rune Yoga. He turned on a beautiful music and began with a shaking in the knees, to loosen the body. He took a rune position, visualized the rune and thought a word as a mantra. By the Rune Yoga Nils received a sense of energy. His internal energy perception awoke. After six months of Rune Yoga, he could feel energies within himself and in other people. That was very helpful on his path of yoga. It was helpful for him personally and also for the teaching of yoga. Nils was able to feel inside, what the people in his groups needed, which physical and mental exercises were good for them. After two years of Rune Yoga Nils had the idea to try out the Indian Yoga. He bought a Yoga book and tested the described postures. He noted, that the Indian postures gave a person also a strong energy. Over the years, he moved more and more to the Indian Hatha Yoga. Only his Shake Meditation reminds at his beginning as a Rune Yogi.
Mid-1988 Nils moved into his small house in the woods and became a Yogi. He made a training as a psychotherapist and gave positive thinking courses in a health center. Sometimes individual clients visited him in his Yogi-hut. In early 1991 he sat in prior to his first yoga group. Twelve strangers looked at him curiously. This was their yoga teacher. What would he do now?  Nils also did not know. But he was full of optimism. Basically one should make a yoga teacher training before passing a yoga group. But here was a special situation that required an exception to the rule. Nils felt the inner calling to be a yoga teacher immediately. After all, Nils had a daily yoga practice since four years. He had read many yoga books. And he had a good feeling for spiritual energy. He could feel which yoga exercises are helpful in a situation. First, Nils made a round of introductions. Each participant told what he personally expected from the yoga class. Thus Nils could give them what they wanted. Most group members wanted some relaxation, some gymnastics, and some health training. They wanted to reduce their stress and maintain good energy. Some participants were without any expectations. They simply wanted to know what yoga is. After the introductions Nils turned on some music. All the people danced for ten minutes on their way freely out their stress. Later on Nils developed the Shake Meditation for the beginning of each yoga class.
After the free dance they all lay on their yoga mats and relaxed. Nils then showed them simple yoga exercises in the supine position, the prone and the sitting. Basically, in a yoga class always all body parts are trained so that one gets an all around good feeling. After the dynamic yoga exercises they meditated ten minutes in sitting and fifteen minutes in lying down. After the yoga class, he asked the participants what was good and bad. He changed some yoga exercises and adapted them to the needs of the people. Over time he developed his special style of yoga. He called it intuitive Hatha Yoga. The focus of practice was on the inner feeling. Each participant was allowed to try out what was helpful for him. Later, Nils found the word Happiness Yoga for his style of yoga. He taught a yoga that makes happy. After a yoga session all participants were peaceful and happy. A real rush began on his group. Gradually he got more and more yoga classes, until he had almost every day in the week two groups. And on weekends, he regularly hosted a yoga weekend.
In the fall of 1991, Nils visited for a few days his sister Inge in Berlin. A Sivananda Yoga course was offered in the neighborhood. Nils went there to learn perhaps something new. He asked the yoga teacher if he could join a trial lesson. Suddenly he was hit by a strong spiritual energy. That energy came neither from the group nor of the yoga teacher. Nils thinks, that Swami Shivananda has sent him this energy. He later on appeared Nils several times in dreams and gave him spiritual advices. Nils felt very connected with the Sivananda Yoga organization. He called at the headquarter in Munich and received a brochure about a yoga teacher-training. The training should take place in the summer of 1992 in Canada. The price and the time was good for Nils. He signed up immediately.
In July 1992 Nils flew by plane to Montreal. With a car he was picked up from the airport and taken to the ashram in Val Morin in the Canadian mountains. Nils looked for a campsite, pitched his tent and was able to start. At 5:30 in the morning a large bell rang. A strict daily routine began, that lasted up to 23 clock at night. They sung mantras, heard lectures, practiced yoga and meditated a lot. Approximately 150 participants from around the world struggled four weeks through a comprehensive yoga program. Most participants were from the United States and Canada. The German group consisted of 20 men and women of all ages. The main trainer of the German group was Swami Durgananda. She was a true superwoman. With iron discipline she trained the budding yoga teachers. Every day there were four hours Hatha Yoga with Durgananda. Each student was accurately controlled. Each yoga position had to be 100% right. Durgananda later became one of the successors of Swami Vishnu-devananda, who died in 1993. As a young woman she traveled in search of a spiritual teacher for one year through India. She learned yoga in different ashrams under different Masters. In 1973 she met Swami Vishnu-devananda. She was excited about his spiritual charisma and became a member of his yoga organization. Her was given the name Swami Durgananda. Durga is the Goddess of Power in yoga. Ananda means happiness. Nils would like to have some of the great power of Swami Durgananda. She survives her spiritual crises with her self-discipline. Her motto is: "Yoga is a great challenge. Self-discipline must be activated again and again.  A child who learns to walk, falls often. Who gets up again and again, succeeds on the spiritual path."
Very good on the yoga teacher training was the food. It was prepared by the participants themselves. Every day there were two large buffet, where everyone could put together his own personal menu. At morning they got fruit, bread or cereal. At 18 o'clock in the evening was the great common main meal. The meal was purely vegetarian. This pleased Nils. He had given up eating meat since he became a yogi. Instead meat, there was delicious Indian rice dishes, lots of salad and sweets for dessert. Nils was a fan of sweets since childhood. Once the dessert tasted him very well. He stood so often in the queue at the dinner table, that he finally got the whole bowl for scraping.
Karma Yoga is the path of all-embracing love. We reach enlightenment, if we take the happiness of our fellow man more important than our own happiness. We identify ourselves with all. We see us in all. We feel at last one with all. In this way we overcome our ego and get a unity consciousness. Ego sacrifice combined with a cosmic consciousness is the basis of enlightenment. If we train these qualities, we relax deep in our soul, because we take ourselves not so important. We visualize ourselves in all person and thus awake our Kundalini energy. Karma Yoga practised on the real way awakes our inner peace, love and happiness.
In the Yoga teacher training Karma Yoga has been understood as service to the community. All tasks in the ashram were distributed by lot to the participants. Nils was assigned to manual work. He was pleased. Not so pleased was a woman who had to clean the toilets for four weeks. She protested loudly against this task. But it did not help her. Someone had to clean the toilets. And she was the someone. Karma Yoga must not always be easy and pleasant. Especially on difficult tasks we can resolve well our ego. A man just grows on his internal resistance. God loves sacrifice. He who sacrifices his ego every day, one day lives in the light. But sacrifice is a great art. Who sacrifices too much, is tensioned internally. And who sacrifices too little, does not resolve his ego. The sacrifice must be dosed sensitive. In particular, we need wisely to manage our thoughts. The great problem in the teacher training was,  that no specific instructions were given for positive thinking. So the poor toilet woman tensed herself with her negativity. If she had practiced positive thinking, then the toilet cleansing could have been a real breakthrough into the light.
At the end of the training each had to give a yoga class. Everyone was very excited. They prepared themselves thoroughly for their teaching practice. Nils learned how much the personality of a yoga teacher influences the yoga class. One can say that about 50% of the effect of a yoga class makes the yoga teachers and 50% the yoga exercises. A powerful yoga teacher strengthens the group members in their power. A loving yoga teacher gives us the energy of love. A yoga teacher must consider exactly what he wants to bring in his group. Most important is that he teaches yoga authentically. He has to bring the energy of truth, love, peace, joy and strength on his personal way to the group.
After the yoga classes, the prospective yoga teachers were tested in a written examination on their knowledge of yoga. They had to answer questions about yoga philosophy and yoga exercises. Most of the students passed the exam. After the tests, there was a big celebration. All yoga teachers gathered and received from their trainers the yoga teacher certification. Every yoga teacher was called up individually. Nils also had passed the examination. He walked to the podium and received his certificate from Swami Durgananda signed by Swami Vishnu-devananda. In 1999 he appeared Nils in a dream and embraced Nils. He accepted that Nils teaches his own style of yoga. The great doctrine of Swami Vishnu-devananda was "Unity in Diversity." There are many yoga paths. But all yogis should work together for the goal of a happy world. They should see themselves as a great spiritual family. Great were the words of Swami Vishnu-devananda:  "I'm not a super guru. I am a searching soul like you. I can fall on the spiritual path like you. The daily prayer to the enlightened Masters or to God is very important. I will never go my way without praying. I pray morning and evening. It is of no importance, at what stage of spiritual development we are. Hold the prayer in your heart. Ask God to give you the strength to stay always on your spiritual path."
Shiva and Parvati.
Somewhere in the autumn of 1991 a small group of yoga students sat closely amassed to a small insignificant yoga teacher. Outside, the cold wind was blowing. The yoga room was sparsely furnished. But at least it was nice warm: The heater worked. The room was dark. In the middle burned a solitary candle. With quiet words the yoga teacher spoke to his people. He gave them a brief introduction to yoga. After that, all participants introduced themselves. Then the yoga class started. They practiced some basic exercises and finally made a long meditation while lying down. The yoga instructor looked at the participants of his yoga class. Most of the people he did not know. There were predominantly women who had signed up for his course. Only a few men had the courage to do yoga. For most students yoga was a new experience. They were excited about what would happen. Mostly they wanted to relieve stress and get some good energy. Most participants were employed and by their profession strongly stressed. She urgently needed a relaxation program. What did they think about the yoga teacher? For most participants, he was just a man whose labor they had booked for a certain time for little money. They hoped that he would do his job fairly well. They hoped that he was nice. That was as all they demanded. Enlightenment for most of them was a foreign word. From inner happiness they had never heard. Some women saw the yoga teachers with special eyes. For them he was an alpha male, a kind of leader, a chief of the primal horde. Secretly, they projected onto him their longings for love and tenderness. They developed unrealistic fantasies and beamed their sexual energies on the poor yoga teacher. They thought he did not notice that. He noticed it. He knew their thoughts and feelings. He could feel their energy. But on the other hand he was on top of things. He looked at sexual desires as a normal part of life. After some time, things would calm down. With the yoga exercises he would focus them on themselves. They would then mainly deal with their bodies, their minds and their yoga processes. Moreover, he saw all people generally positive. He practiced the universal love. He was basically a helper and friend to all his students. Their weaknesses, he barely noticed. He focused on the positive in them. He concentrated on how he could help them best. He wanted them to relax well, become positive and also a little bit to understand the deeper meaning of yoga.
But then there was this woman who radiated absolutely too much energy on him. Energy of love and sexuality. He felt that she wanted him. The poor little yoga teacher sent a silent prayer to heaven: "I can't resist this woman!" God did not answer. So it was probably his karma that he did not resist. After the yoga class, he asked whether they could meet once. A few days later a letter came to his yogi hut. It contained her phone number. Nils visited her, rang the doorbell and she opened the door. They looked at each other. They embraced. And a tremendous energy of love captured them. The Yoga Woman said that they actually do not need to have sex. The energy was already completely strong enough. Nils saw things differently. And so they made love. The energy grew more and more. They became one in love and happiness. Every weekend began a new dance of love. The woman said that she had never experienced such a thing. She had no experience with Tantra Yoga. Nils believes that he had been guided by his enlightened Masters. They took him to an intuitive form of Tantra Yoga. He did not practice rituals and difficult body positions. He felt his path from inside. The Yoga Woman and Nils had a harmonious relationship. Nils gave her at the beginning of the relationship his book of positive thinking. She read it and loved it. She explained that she would like to know this earlier in her life. The Yoga Woman and Nils practiced intensely positive thinking. Therefore, the time of their great love lasted a long time. She was his Lakshmi (Goddess of happiness), his Parvati (Goddess of love), his Saraswati (Goddess of spiritual instruction) and sometimes his Kali (Goddess of suffering). They danced the eternal dance of man and woman. With joy, love, happiness and a little with pain. There were also difficulties and disagreements between them. But with positive thinking, the will to a good relationship and the grace of God, they overcame all the problems and always found back to love. They stayed together for ten years. But all things change. A yogi lingers in the light and the enlightenment. He flows with times of relationship and times of seclusion. And is always happy. Anyway mostly. Some sadness is part of the life on earth.
The first four years as a yogi, there was good progress. After Nils had about half a year adjusted to his new situation, defined his goals and found the right spiritual exercises for him, he resolved much old stress and often came in blissful states of consciousness. In his dreams he saw past exam situations, difficult relationships and negative experiences from his childhood. All the stress from his former life disintegrated. His mind became calm, peaceful and happy. One night in 1991 Nils dreamed even of his birth. In the dream, he flowed through a long dark tunnel. He made a birth cry and woke up by it. He breathed like a newborn. Nils had a difficult birth. Thus many tensions arose. These tensions went away now. Later on Nils felt a deep longing to be a baby again. He wanted to be in his mother's womb. That was impossible. But possible was it to be enlightened and to live in a cosmic consciousness, in the womb of God.
In 1990 Nils wrote a book about positive thinking. In writing this book, he came across the question of the best path to inner happiness. Is it more important to exercise consistent or to live in a relaxed way? Enlightenment appears, if we resolve our inner tensions. Tensions heal, if we live relaxed. But they also dissolve, if we do consistent spiritual exercises. There are two different schools of thought in yoga. One school emphasizes the life of unattached being (Ramana Maharshi, Lao Tzu, Buddha) and the other school focuses on the spiritual practice (Swami Sivananda, Sai Baba, Mata Amritanandamayi, Mother Meera, Dalai Lama). Who is right? Nils had to clarify this question for himself. He thought a day so intense about the problem of being or exercising, that after falling asleep in the night the thinking goes on. When he awoke in the morning, he was in a deep state of enlightenment. His mind had solved the problem in the night. The answer was conclusive. Enlightenment, inner happiness and the state of unattached being are closely linked. If you let go of all attachments to external things, you relax so deeply into your soul, that the inner happiness can unfold. Being can be described as a precursor to enlightenment. A yogi must come into a state of unattached existence. Then eventually enlightenment  develops by itself. On the other hand normally nothing happens without consistent practice. According to Nils both doctrines are right. Practicing and being are both important on the spiritual path. Every person has to find his personal way. Who is prone to laziness, should emphasize the exercises. Whoever is uneasy inside, should come to calmness and live without attachment to worldly things. Nils path is it primary to live in rest, to work a little bit for a better world and to do steady some spiritual exercises. On his way Nils feels each day very sensitive, if he has to focus on exercising, doing good or relaxing.
One day Nils visualized himself before bedtime as a Buddha. When he awoke in the morning, his spirit had turned him into a Buddha. He was turned overnight into a small Buddha. He woke up as a Buddha. The identification with Buddha as a role model had awakened his enlightenment energy. Inner peace and the image of a Buddha are closely related. They aimed precisely at the point, that prevented mostly his enlightenment. Nils as a restless person needed primary techniques of rest to unfold his Kundalini energy.
In early 1991 Nils visualized on a walk the whole universe full of happy beings. He wished that all beings all over the world might be happy. He identified himself with all beings and their desire for happiness. He thought the mantra: "May all beings in the world be happy." He opened his heart for all beings. Suddenly he got into a dimension of universal love. The entire landscape around him changed completely. It was bathed in bright light. In Nils appeared the thought: "I am love."  He never had had such a strong  experience of love. The whole universe consisted of happiness and love.
In 1992, Nils had reached a stage where very often breakthroughs took place in enlightenment dimensions. It was an exciting but also very stressful time. Nils often got great inner happiness and a cosmic consciousness. This usually lasted for several hours. Then by the strong energy dissolved many internal tensions and Nils came in difficult cleaning processes. In his body it was raging and his mind became negative. Nils then immediately made spiritual exercises. He walked for an hour. He read in spiritual books. He meditated a few hours. So the inner rage calmed down. If this did not help, Nils rescued himself through sweets or watching television. The first half of 1992 was a very stressful time. Nils lived in constant alternation of joy and pain. This constant change was very stressful. Although the many experiences also inspired him. But he was happy when the high energy processes calmed down after a while. There were, in the opinion of Nils two reasons. First, Nils was something gentle with himself. He practiced his exercises sensitive and not so radical. Second, he was now living on a good daily plan. He combined wisely cleaning and recovery phases. Thereby he could largely avoid negative states of mind.
In December 1995, after seven years as a yogi, started again a difficult time. Intense energy processes passed through his body. At night he could not sleep and during the day he was limp and exhausted. It was particularly bad in the thirteenth year. He had one after another an illness, an accident and his girlfriend parted from him. The last major cleaning phase was then in March 2003. In a short time dissolved a lot of internal tension. Nils had for four weeks the feeling as if he had stuck his hands into a socket. He was glowing so much, that he needed sometimes no blanket at night. Although it was winter. After four weeks the cosmos turned the power off. Nils had to recover for one week. He ate one day very much cake. And then he felt good again.
For Nils, the spiritual daily schedule is the central technique on the path into the light. It is based on letting go of tensions in the body and soul. Nils meditates for six hours and goes for an hour walk twice a day. He practices Yoga for an hour and reads a spiritual book for one hour. He also works towards the happiness of others three to four hours per day. He exercises constantly. He divides his spiritual exercises in a way that enables him to constantly undergo the inner purification process. Eating, sleeping, working, and even watching TV are Yoga exercises for Nils. If we meditate before going to sleep, meditation continues while sleeping. When we work in a state of relaxation, work becomes a type of meditation. Nils spiritual techniques are simple. They consist of walking, reading, helping others, and lying in bed. Everyone can do that. The secret here is the right application of the right technique at the right moment. You can lie in bed, read, and take walks in a way that only causes you to feel dull and lazy. Yogis know when they need which technique. When the body is dull and lacking energy, the Yogi goes for a walk. When he or she feels restless, he or she practices Yoga or meditates. When the spirit seems to rebel against the spiritual way, a book on spiritual topics helps to bring back the conviction towards enlightenment. A Yogi senses his inner conflicts and uses the proper techniques to dissolve the tensions. That is usually what the body and soul wants the least at that moment. Wherever the neurotic defense is, is usually the way into the light. On the other hand, we need to sometimes give the body and soul what they would like, otherwise tension is built. The way to happiness requires a lot of wisdom and inner sensitivity.
A woman wrote to Nils, she was very happy that she had learned yoga. In recent years there had been professionally and personally a lot of stress in her life. She had therefore largely lost her positivity and her life satisfaction. Through yoga she had managed to reduce her internal stress. She was now happy again in her life. She felt not stressed anymore. For this she was very grateful. Yoga has given her the ability to clearly differentiate between important and unimportant things. Thus she could focus more on the essentials in life. She did not stress herself so much with unnecessary things, and therefore save much energy. She would practice every day the positive thinking and living permanently in a state of happiness. But a few days, if she does not practice yoga and positive thinking, then her good energy quickly disappears. So she had decided to go her path of yoga every day more and more consistently.
Over time, her positive feelings had become more intense. But she was also more sensitive to negative energy. But she could handle it. She had found a way to cope with difficulties of every kind. She simply asks herself, "How would the Dalai Lama act now?" And then she would quickly come up with the proper handling of each of those things. The woman described in her letters a typical problem on the spiritual path. The positive energy is increasing. But a person is also more sensitive to negative energies.
Negative energies can be handled in several ways. One can try to avoid negative situations as much as possible. You can give up contact to negative people or severely reduce it. You can hold your internal balance during the contact by positive thinking and mantras. And you can after the contact rebuild your positive energy through spiritual exercises (yoga, reading, meditation). Very good is it to go with a clever strategy through the day and often make short breaks. At work, it is important to avoid stress and work in his personal speed. Who works relaxed, saves a lot of energy and can easier be positive. Sometimes it will also be necessary to reduce the working hours. The woman did this after a few years and felt very well with it. Who lives wisely, can avoid a lot of suffering. Anyone who lives consistently healthy prevents 3 / 4 of diseases. Who eats little (few calories and lots of vitamins) and makes exercises regularly, lives on average 14 to 20 years longer than his fellow men. Who puts the spirituality to the center of his life, gets a happy life.
The Buddha of Healing sends you from the center of the mandala (unity consciousness) light and power.
The Tibetan Buddhism is based on the teachings of Buddha, but were extended by the mahayana path of love and by a lot of techniques from Indian Yoga. In principle the Tibetan Buddhism is very simple. It consists of Kundalini Yoga, meditation and the path of all-embracing love. With Kundalini Yoga the Kundalini energy (enlightenment energy) is awakened through yoga postures, breathing exercises, mantras and visualizations. The center of Tibetan meditation is the Deity Yoga. Through the visualization of various deities the energy channels are cleaned, the chakras are activated and the enlightenment consciousness is created. The Karmapa is the representative of the Dalai Lama. In 2003 Nils son Florian traveled to Dharamsala in northern India, seat of the Tibetan government in exile. He was initiated by the Dalai Lama in the way of love (Avalokitesvara) and got the darshan of the Karmapa. Florian had bought for his father an embroidered meditation painting (Thanka) with Avalokiteshvara (the Karma Yogi) and Amitabha (the Buddha of Light, on the top over the head of Avalokiteshvara) against a background of mountains. He asked the Karmapa to bless the meditation painting. The Karmapa threw a few grains of rice on the painting. As Nils later meditated on the Thanka, much energy came out of it. Nils became one with the gods and thus activated his Kundalini energy. The blessings of Avalokitesvara and Amitabha had come to him. The mural now hangs in the yoga hall of Nils. Let the blessing also come to you. Visualize yourself first as a Bodhisattva (Avalokiteshvara, Karma Yogi, God/Goddess of Love), then the overall picture (in the unity of the cosmos) and then meditate on the figure in the painting, that you want to be.
Satsang is the company with an enlightened Master or with other truth-seekers. Sat means truth, true essence, being (enlightened existence) and to live in the light (God). Sangha is a word in Pali and Sanskrit meaning "association", "assembly," "company" or "community". Swami Sivananda taught: "Brothers and sisters. Meet, speak and meditate together. Built up centers of peace, brotherhood and unity. Invite good and holy man, and let inspire you. Satsang is the biggest helper and illuminator of people. Where Satsang is, is the presence of God (the enlightened Masters). Satsang is very helpful to obtain spiritual deliverance. One minute satsang with an enlightened man is better than the rule over a kingdom." In the West exists a Satsang movement. Enlightened people offer around the country everyone the possibility of contact with the enlightened energy. The Satsang donors are very different. An important starting point in the Western Satsang movement was the Indian saint  Poonja. He is one of the main disciples of Ramana Maharshi. Poonja advised many of his enlightened Western students to give satsang. He explained: "The request to give Satsang does not mean, that all teachers of Satsang are already fully realized Masters."
Nils gave his first Satsang in 2002. In the summer, he invited every Friday evening his yoga people in his little yogi hut. The first Satsang was terrible. All participants told their problems. And people in the West have many problems. One problem was worse than the previous one. During the evening the group became more and more depressed. Nils was shocked. The next Satsang, he changed the program completely. He focused on the positive. There was meditation music. He served tea and biscuits. Each person got a positive oracle card and could read fifteen minutes in a spiritual book. They meditated together and asked the enlightened Masters for guidance and help. Then they made a small round table. Everybody could tell five minutes something positive about himself, his life or other people. Nils developed positive subjects, of which the group chose one at the beginning of a discussion. "What I'm grateful for? What is beautiful in my life? What makes me optimistic?" Then they talked a little personally with each other. Finally they meditated five minutes with a beautiful music. It was a successful evening.
In front of your mind's eye appears a beautiful island. It is surrounded by a large ocean. The water laps gently on the beach. In the center of the island stands a great mountain. Its slopes are covered with spicy-smelling bushes. Up on the hill is a temple (or a church). It is the temple of your inner wisdom. You walk the path from the beach up to the temple. You enter through the door. The temple is half dark and very quiet. In the middle sits a wise woman or a wise man on a throne. It is the embodiment of your own inner wisdom. Who do you see in your temple? A master, a goddess, a wise woman, yourself? The highest wisdom is superior to all forms. It can express itself through all forms. You can now ask your wisdom being a question. Think about your life. What experiences have you had in your life? What are your goals? What is your current situation? How do you imagine your future? What is your life plan? What is your way to develop your inner happiness? What is your way of a wise life? What is your way to victory? Meditate on the question, until you can see your way clear. Listen inwardly to the answer. Find your way of victory. What says your inner wisdom to you? Think the answer is several times as a mantra. Stop a minute every thought. Linger after a few minutes in the meditation. Think about life. Does enlightenment exist? Is there a path of love, peace and happiness? Be a master of life. What is your way?  Look closely at your situation, think thoroughly and meet a clear decision. "My way of a successful life is ..." Go your way consistently. See you strong, wise and successful. Forward. Optimism. Success.
Trimurti Yoga is the path of love (do good, work for a happy world), spiritual practice (yoga, meditation, mental work) and daily connection with the enlightened masters (reading, praying, oracle). Find your personal way of connecting, your daily exercises and your path of doing good. Then you will live in inner peace, love and happiness. Your life will be happy and healthy. Trimurti Yoga is the easiest way to enlightenment. You can go forward in your speed. You only have to practise consistently every day.
Mid-1988 Nils moved into his small house in the woods and became a Yogi. In early 1991 he sat in prior to his first yoga group.
First, Nils made a round of introductions. Each participant told what he personally expected from the yoga class. Thus Nils could give them what they wanted. Most group members wanted some relaxation, some gymnastics, and some health training. They wanted to reduce their stress and maintain good energy. Some participants were without any expectations. They simply wanted to know what yoga is. After the introductions Nils turned on some music. All the people danced for ten minutes on their way freely out their stress. Later on Nils developed the Shake Meditation for the beginning of each yoga class.
After the free dance they all lay on their yoga mats and relaxed. Nils then showed them simple yoga exercises in the supine position, the prone and the sitting. Basically, in a yoga class always all body parts are trained so that one gets an all around good feeling. After the dynamic yoga exercises they meditated ten minutes in sitting and fifteen minutes in lying down. After the yoga class, he asked the participants what was good and bad. He changed some yoga exercises and adapted them to the needs of the people. Over time he developed his special style of yoga. He called it intuitive Hatha Yoga. The focus of practice was on the inner feeling. Each participant was allowed to try out what was helpful for him.
After a yoga session all participants were peaceful and happy. A real rush began on his group. Gradually he got more and more yoga classes, until he had almost every day in the week two groups. And on weekends, he regularly hosted a yoga weekend.
In the fall of 1991, Nils visited for a few days his sister Inge in Berlin. A Sivananda Yoga course was offered in the neighborhood. Nils went there to learn perhaps something new. He asked the yoga teacher if he could join a trial lesson. Suddenly he was hit by a strong spiritual energy. That energy came neither from the group nor of the yoga teacher. Nils thinks, that Swami Shivananda has sent him this energy. He later on appeared Nils several times in dreams and gave him spiritual advices.
The first four years as a yogi, there was good progress. After Nils had about half a year adjusted to his new situation, defined his goals and found the right spiritual exercises for him, he resolved much old stress and often came in blissful states of consciousness. In his dreams he saw past exam situations, difficult relationships and negative experiences from his childhood. All the stress from his former life disintegrated. His mind became calm, peaceful and happy. One night in 1991 Nils dreamed even of his birth. In the dream, he flowed through a long dark tunnel. He made a birth cry and woke up by it. He breathed like a newborn. Nils had a difficult birth. Thus many tensions arose. These tensions went away now. Later on Nils felt a deep longing to be a baby again. He wanted to be in his mother's womb. That was impossible. But possible was it to be enlightened and to live in a cosmic consciousness, in the womb of God.
In 1990 Nils wrote a book about positive thinking. In writing this book, he came across the question of the best path to inner happiness. Is it more important to exercise consistent or to live in a relaxed way? Enlightenment appears, if we resolve our inner tensions. Tensions heal, if we live relaxed. But they also dissolve, if we do consistent spiritual exercises. There are two different schools of thought in yoga. One school emphasizes the life of unattached being (Ramana Maharshi, Lao Tzu, Buddha) and the other school focuses on the spiritual practice (Swami Sivananda, Sai Baba, Mata Amritanandamayi, Mother Meera, Dalai Lama). Who is right?
Nils had to clarify this question for himself. He thought a day so intense about the problem of being or exercising, that after falling asleep in the night the thinking goes on. When he awoke in the morning, he was in a deep state of enlightenment. His mind had solved the problem in the night. The answer was conclusive. Enlightenment, inner happiness and the state of unattached being are closely linked. If you let go of all attachments to external things, you relax so deeply into your soul, that the inner happiness can unfold. Being can be described as a precursor to enlightenment. A yogi must come into a state of unattached existence. Then eventually enlightenment develops by itself. On the other hand normally nothing happens without consistent practice.
According to Nils both doctrines are right. Practicing and being are both important on the spiritual path. Every person has to find his personal way. Who is prone to laziness, should emphasize the exercises. Whoever is uneasy inside, should come to calmness and live without attachment to worldly things. Nils path is it primary to live in rest, to work a little bit for a better world and to do steady some spiritual exercises. On his way Nils feels each day very sensitive, if he has to focus on exercising, doing good or relaxing.
In early 1991 Nils visualized on a walk the whole universe full of happy beings. He wished that all beings all over the world might be happy. He identified himself with all beings and their desire for happiness. He thought the mantra: "May all beings in the world be happy." He opened his heart for all beings. Suddenly he got into a dimension of universal love. The entire landscape around him changed completely. It was bathed in bright light. In Nils appeared the thought: "I am love." He never had had such a strong experience of love. The whole universe consisted of happiness and love.
In 1992, Nils had reached a stage where very often breakthroughs took place in enlightenment dimensions. It was an exciting but also very stressful time. Nils often got great inner happiness and a cosmic consciousness. This usually lasted for several hours. Then by the strong energy dissolved many internal tensions and Nils came in difficult cleaning processes. In his body it was raging and his mind became negative. Nils then immediately made spiritual exercises. He walked for an hour. He read in spiritual books. He meditated a few hours. So the inner rage calmed down. If this did not help, Nils rescued himself through sweets or watching television.
The first half of 1992 was a very stressful time. Nils lived in constant alternation of joy and pain. This constant change was very stressful. Although the many experiences also inspired him. But he was happy when the high energy processes calmed down after a while. There were, in the opinion of Nils two reasons. First, Nils was something gentle with himself. He practiced his exercises sensitive and not so radical. Second, he was now living on a good daily plan. He combined wisely cleaning and recovery phases. Thereby he could largely avoid negative states of mind.
In December 1995, after seven years as a yogi, started again a difficult time. Intense energy processes passed through his body. At night he could not sleep and during the day he was limp and exhausted. It was particularly bad in the thirteenth year. He had one after another an illness, an accident and his girlfriend parted from him. The last major cleaning phase was then in March 2003. In a short time dissolved a lot of internal tension. Nils had for four weeks the feeling as if he had stuck his hands into a socket. He was glowing so much, that he needed sometimes no blanket at night. Although it was winter. After four weeks the cosmos turned the power off. Nils had to recover for one week. He ate one day very much cake. And then he felt good again.
Spiritually, humans can be compared to onions. Tensions and inner conflicts (inner stress) must be dissolved layer by layer. When one layer is peeled away, the next quickly appears at the surface until the inner core is revealed. At this point, a lasting inner joy is found, and the Yogi or Yogini lives in light. Inner joy appears in a person when the tentions (Samskaras) in body and soul have been dissolved. We need exercises for the body (Yoga, Meditation) and for the soul (reflection, Positiv Thinking). Buddha developed a very simple yet genius practice. This consisted of “sitting, going, and thought practice.” This is the center of a successful Hatha Yoga Practice. You need body work (Yoga, walking), mental work (reflection, reading, praying, mantra) and meditation (sitting or lying). And everything in balance, in the right moment and with the right technik.
When one varies one’s activities between body work, mental work and meditation, the inner conflict and tension can be done away with. When a person only meditates, the spirit becomes dull and listless. Routine movement makes the spirit clear, keeps the body healthy and gives the person inner energy. If you only go or do Yoga asanas, the mind is restless. Inner happiness comes from inner peace. If the body is kept very quiet, well you can get into deeper dimensions of meditation.
Meditation can be practiced either in a sitting position or lying down. Some people can meditate better when sitting, others when lying down. Those who fall asleep easily when lying down, should meditate by sitting. Those who cannot sit straight for a long time should practice meditation lying down. In addition to periods of sitting and relaxing in combination with movement, working with the thoughts is important in getting rid of inner conflict. A Yogi or Yogini should develop his or her thoughts with love, wisdom, and self-discipline.
The five most important spiritual activities are: lying down (or sitting and meditating), reading, walking (or Yoga asanas), doing good for others (work), and to enjoy life. Meditation is a way to get inner peace. Reading spiritual books helps to cleanse the spirit. Walking, jogging, biking, swimming or yoga gives you health and inner strength. Even the Dalai Lama rides a stationary bike every day, for a half an hour. Swama Shivananda liked to take walks. There are appropriate exercises for everyone. Yogis living in caves developed the very well-known sun salute, for example.
A yogi should find out how much contact with others is good for him or her. At a certain point, physical rest can cause the energy of a person to go inward. This turning point must be discovered by each yogi for him or herself. It is difficult to find and difficult to hold onto. Life energy tends toward an excess of activity or towards dullness. Both need to be avoided with daily self-discipline.
When we keep inner calm, inner happiness appears. An effective yogic life feels like a constant swimming against the tide of ones own neurotic impulses. It's like living in a pressure cooker. First rest is extremely boring and then the energy starts to work intensive in the body. It tingles and pulls and you want to move. But if you stay at rest, then suddenly inner peace and happiness arises. We become happy in ourselves. We enter into a life in the light.
For Nils, the spiritual daily schedule is the central technique on the path into the light. It is based on letting go of tensions in the body and soul. The secret here is the right application of the right technique at the right moment.
A Yogi senses his inner conflicts and uses the proper techniques to dissolve the tensions. That is usually what the body and soul wants the least at that moment. Wherever the neurotic defense is, is usually the way into the light. On the other hand, we need to sometimes give the body and soul what they would like, otherwise tension is built.
The way to happiness requires a lot of wisdom and inner sensitivity. Nils begins his day with a positive attitude and assessment of the day, to get himself situated. Which exercises does he need in which order? What should be emphasized? If he feels dull, he emphasizes exercises to activate himself. If he feels restless, he emphasizes rest. He asks himself, ”What do I need today? What do I like today?”
According to Swami Sivananda, enlightenment occurs via relaxation, practice, and love. When a Yogi or Yogini lives in an area of peace, he or she is already halfway there. The second half is tackled with spiritual practice (yoga, walking, meditation, mental work). We pass through the gate to a life in light, if we live in focus for a happy world and train the quality of love to all.
Play media  Enlightened Masters. Blessing.
Our goal state of being is a state of freedom from tension. Then health and inner happiness can thrive. Then inner healing can take place. Then we feel good from deep within. We live in light and in God and in happiness.
Being free from inner tension can also be described as emptiness. We become an empty vessel. In Christianity, it is said that the Holy Ghost of God can flow into people when they become empty. In the sermon on the mount it is said:” blessed are the pure for they will see God.” We reach a state of consciousness of the unity of all things. We experience peace, love and happiness. We see the light of God in the world. We are filled with light and become a light of God.
Buddhism speaks of Nirvana. Nirvana means inner happiness. Only when we completely relax can we experience real emptiness. All phenomena are empty when it comes down to it. They are meaningless emotionally. We can only dissolve them when we dissolve our attachment and rejection of things. Only then can happiness develop within us. Then we become a Buddha. We are happy independent of what happens in the world around us.
It is difficult to comprehend on its own. It has to be experience. We do spiritual exercises, achieve a state of pure being and become spontaneously happy. That happened to me this morning. I went for a walk, did my chair Yoga exercise while walking, dissolved my energy blockages and arrived in a state of light. The energy flowed again. I was happy unto myself. I could see the beauty of the world. I recognized that it is enough to live in enlightened being. That is the deeper purpose of life.
The center of life is not to seek change in the outside world, it is inner change. Despite this, we should work toward contributing in making the world a happy place. We should live in a way that makes us feel good on the outside, too. Above all, we should help others find their way to the path of lasting happiness. We should live in a state of all-encompassing love. We should bring light into the world.
The best way to make that happen is through spiritual exercises that awaken the happiness within us. If we are in a state of light, then we pass that light on to other beings. In that way, we stabilize our state of happiness and open the heart. We live in the energy of peace, of happiness and in love. In the Yoga texts it is said that an enlightened Yogi is 100 times happier than a person without inner happiness. An enlightened Yogi of love (Karma Yogi, Bodhisattva) is 100 times happier than a regular enlightened Yogi because the love of life makes one infinitely happy.
It's a great idea to combine the way of inner happiness along with the path of all-encompassing love. We find our mission in the world, our way of love. We do a good deed every day. We send all beings light every day. We live in our enlightened being and all-encompassing love.
It's important to not stress along the spiritual way. Stress destroys inner happiness. Stress burns up our happiness energy. Too much stress is bad for happiness energy. With stress, we grow depressed instead of enlightened. We need to take action from a relaxed state of being so that it almost feels like doing nothing. We are simply there. We do nothing and everything happens on its own. We do what is right at any given moment in a relaxed state of being and go where our love leads us.
We enjoy our lives. We give ourselves what we need for a happy life. We need to bring enough joy into our lives so that we can take our path in a positive manner. Buddha called that the middle way. Those who practice spiritually too vigorously winds up tense. Those who practice too little, do not grow along the way of happiness. The middle way is between the two extremes.
It's important to be ourselves. Enlightenment is self-realization. We develop our higher self, God, the light and the happiness within us. That can only take place if we develop a good sense of ourselves. We have to take the spiritual path with wisdom and sensitivity. It is of no use to take a foreign path if we use an unfamiliar spiritual system that exists outside of us. At first such a system can be helpful. But at some point we need to go beyond that and take our own personal path that is beyond spiritual systems.
Relaxation then takes place at a deep level of being. We feel that we are on the right path. We feel peace and harmony. We are satisfied with ourselves and our lives. This way is not ego realization. Ego realization only affects temporary happiness. Enlightenment means the overcoming of the ego. That takes place along the path of calm and peace, spiritual practice and unconditional love. We live emphasizing the happiness of other people. We also give ourselves what we need and what makes us feel well. That is the greatest gift that a person can possess.
The "Trimurti" (Sanskrit, "three forms") is a concept in Hinduism "in which the cosmic functions of creation, maintenance, and destruction are personified by the forms of Brahma the creator, Vishnu the preserver and Shiva the destroyer or transformer." These three gods have been called "the Hindu triad" or the "Great Trinity", often addressed as "Brahma-Vishnu-Maheswara." They are actually manifestation of One person in three forms who is called Svayam Bhagavan. Svayam Bhagavan ("The Lord" or "The Lord Himself") is a Sanskrit theological term for the concept of absolute representation of God as Bhagavan within Hinduism.
Brahma = We make large circles with our hands around us, visualize the cosmos full of stars and think, "I live in peace (enlightened being), unity consciousness and bliss."
Shiva = We visualize within ourselves the Kundalini Serpent, twist in the spine, move our toes and think: "I am a Yogi. I save myself with my spiritual exercises."
Vishnu = We move our hand, send all beings light and think, "I send light to (all my friends). May all people be happy. May the world be happy."
Master Yoga = We rub the palms before our heart chakra, visualize the sky above us and think, "Om Shiva. Om Vishnu. Om Brahma. Om Trimurti. Om Yoga, Love and Wisdom. Please guide me on my way."
Meditation = We put our hands in the lap, move your toes and think one minute the mantra "Om" in your belly.  Then we stop a minute every thought. The spine is straight and the belly is relaxed. Sit only there. Don't think. Then relax.
Play media  Meditation with the inner voice
Video Trimurti Yoga Teacher Training in India
Wikipedia has related information at List of Hindu gurus and saints
Wikipedia has related information at Guru#Gurus_in_the_West
Guru is a Sanskrit term for "teacher" or "master", especially in Indian religions.
Wikipedia: The word guru means the imparter of knowledge (jñāna). The guru is seen as the one who brings his disciples from the darkness of unwisdom into the light of God (to enlightenment). In the Gita, Krishna speaks to Arjuna of the importance of finding a guru: "Acquire the transcendental knowledge from a Self-realized master by humble reverence, by sincere inquiry, and by service." Often a guru lives in an ashram or in a gurukula (the guru's household), together with his disciples. It is believed that the guru could awaken dormant spiritual knowledge within the pupil. The act of doing this is known as shaktipat. In Hinduism, the guru is considered a respected person with saintly qualities who enlightens the mind of his or her disciple, an educator from whom one receives the initiatory mantra, and one who instructs in rituals and religious ceremonies. In Indian culture, a person without a guru or a teacher (acharya) was once looked down on as an orphan or unfortunate one.
Play media  Enlightened Masters. Blessing.
God is a mystery that can be described personal and impersonal. According to Amritanandamayi (Amma) there are fully enlightened souls in the afterworld. They are through their cosmic consciousness one with the cosmos (with God) and also one with each other. We can therefore pray to God or to the enlightened souls in the afterlife. According to Amma, a prayer is always heard and reacted to or upon by one of these higher beings. It doesn't matter what name humans use in the process. The only point of importance is that the person praying would like help from a higher force in the cosmos. God is often described as a cloud in Christianity. This image goes well with the idea of the aforementioned great enlightened souls. We could consider these souls as an energy cloud of highly developed consciousness. They are capable of affecting every dimension of the cosmos with beams of light. This often transpires via symbols such as books, images, and statues which appear in certain locations. More spiritually developed humans are able to sense these beams of energy which emanate symbolically through the statues and images. People can focus and turn this energy into inner power, peace, or positive thoughts.
Yogi Nils (the author): A big question on the spiritual path is wether praying is helpful.  I believe that God is connected with our inner voice of wisdom. For me,  the personal God is a collective term for all enlightened Masters. They live in God and are one with God. They are one  with everything and also with us. They are especially one with us in our inside. They got through their purified consciousness special abilities. With these abilities they can help us. If we want it. In my experience, it is sufficient to connect with God or the enlightened Masters through a prayer, and then follow ones own inner wisdom. A prayer has two areas of impact. First, it is an appeal for help, and secondly it works as a mantra. A mantra is a spiritual technique that cleans ourselves internally and fills us with happiness energy. A mantra can be thought as often as you like. It brings us forward on the spiritual path. It builds up inside us positive energy.
Rafa: It is said of God, he would answer prayers, but when you pray, it's pure chance whether something happens.
Yogi Nils: Those who pray for selfish goals, only exceptionally gets a wish-fulfillment. But who prays for his enlightenment and for help on his way of all-embracing love, always gets help. But not always the way he wanted. Not in a way that he feels great, rather in a way that his ego dissolves. God lives in a dimension above our material cosmos. He is able to act that it seems to be happend by chance but it wasn´t.
Enlightenment is the core of all religions. Religions will lead to enlightenment. All founders of religions have made an enlightenment experience. In this experience, they saw a higher reality which they have referred as God. This higher reality is difficult to describe. Therefore, there are many expressions and many pictures. In Buddhism, Nirwana is described as a higher dimension of consciousness associated with the feelings of emptiness (egolessness) and abundance (unity, happiness, love). In Hinduism, it is called a state of being (Sat-Chid-Ananda). No word describes God perfectly. All terms will ultimately lead us to God, to enlightenment (holiness) and to a life in God. Moses was enlightened, as he saw a shining (burning) bush after many years of a secluded life in the desert. He saw the light of God in the bush. He got this through living in rest for a long time and through Kundalini Yoga, learned from the Egyptian priests. In the Bible it is described by the words, "So Moses threw down the staff, and it turned into a snake!" The snake is the Kundalini snake and the staff his spinal column. He made spine practices of visualization and thus the Kundalini snake (energy) awoke. Jesus became enlightened, after John the Baptist gave him the Enlightenment energy (Kundalini energy). After this Jesus meditated 40 days in the desert. Then the devil (his ego) left him and the angels ministered to him (he was able to help with the enlightenment energy his fellow people). Buddha got enlightenment after six years as a yogi under the Bodhi tree. Mara (the devil) disappeared and Buddha rested in happiness.
Yogi Nils: "I have six arguments: 1. The statements of the enlightened. They see God as light in the world in the form of love, peace, and happiness. God is a term for the perception of the enlightened. Every real religion establishes itself around an enlightened master. Every real religion has a word for God, (Tao, Nirwana, Brahman, Allah, Yahwe). 2. The near death research refers to the independence of the soul from the body and the continued existence of the soul after death. The most important witness is Pam Reynolds. She has seen the light of God in the afterlife, and learned that there is a paradise area. She has also demonstrated that her otherworldly experience was real. She heard the doctors during her out-of-body experience and could reproduce exactly the conversation later on. The gauges showed during her out-of-body experience that her brain could not think. There were no brain waves. And yet she has heard the conversation. Pam Reynolds could have heard the conversation of the doctors only with her soul. Her ears were stoppered while the operation. 3. Physics refers to the existence of a higher cosmic information field (Amit Goswami, God as higher consciousness). The string theory supports this point of view. 4. Parapsychology researches spiritual abilities such as thought transfer and to perceive and sense over large distances. 5. Scientific happiness research has proven the context between enlightenment, peace, happiness, and love. They have recognized the principles which lead to a happy life. They have researched Matthieu Ricard as an enlightened person. 6. I live as a hermit. I have been in various states of enlightenment. I have seen God as light in the world, and felt as happiness, love, peace, and truth in myself. I maintain that enlightenment and God exist. I maintain that it is better and happier to be enlightened than unenlightened. I maintain that it is good to live in God."
Wikipedia: Mysticism is the knowledge of, and especially the personal experience of, states of consciousness, or levels of being, or aspects of reality, beyond normal human perception, including experience of and even communion with a supreme being. (...) Many if not all of the world's great religions have arisen around the teachings of mystics (including Buddha, Jesus, Lao Tze, and Krishna); and most religious traditions describe fundamental mystical experience.
Swami Sivananda (also written Shivananda) lived from 1897 to 1963 in India. He was one of the greatest Indian saints of modern times. By profession he was a doctor. He taught the yoga of the trinity (Trimurti Yoga), the combination of Hatha Yoga (spiritual exercises), Karma Yoga (work for a happy world) and Master Yoga (daily connection with an enlightened master). He pushed for the cooperation of the religions. All yogis should cooperate too. In 1958 he organized a conference in Venkatagiri with Sathya Sai Baba, another great indian saint. According to Swami Sivananda, enlightenment occurs via relaxation, practice, and love. When a Yogi or Yogini lives in an area of peace, he or she is already halfway there. The second half is tackled with spiritual practice. In order to pass through the gate to a life in light, all-encompassing love must be at the heart of the seeker of enlightenment. When a Yogi lives for the happiness of others, then the ego can be dissolved. When the ego disappears, the person is in light. Swami Sivananda loved the humor. He wrote the song of the eighteen properties that a Yogi should have. Humor is the top priority. Other properties are regularity, truthfulness, integrity, purity, endurance, flexibility, strength, calmness, equanimity, simplicity, humility, kindness and generosity.
Quote from Swami Sivananda: Enlightenment is not an accident or fortune. It is achievable through a thorny path with many steps. I climbed the arduous journey, step by step, but on each lap the enlightened Masters helped me. And I was easily lifted to the next level. As a teenager, I loved gymnastics and sports. With a teacher I learned fencing. He was a Harijan (outcaste). I was informed that it is not befitting for a Brahmin like me to be a disciple of an untouchable. I thought carefully about it. I felt that God dwells in the heart of this untouchable. I went with flowers, sweets and clothes to him, crowned him, laid a flower at his feet and prostrated myself before him. So God came into my life, to lift the veil of caste differences. I took the medical profession to serve all. Any type of healing and relieve human suffering gave me great pleasure. If there was a good recipe for malaria, I had the feeling that the whole world must know it immediately. I wanted to know everything about disease prevention, health promotion and treatment of diseases. Later, when I worked as a doctor in Malaysia, God came in the form of sick and suffering to me. For some, life was a lingering death. When God created this world not only as hell, there must be something beyond this. At this crucial point in my life I met a wandering monk. He gave me the first lesson in the philosophy of enlightenment.  It pulled me out of Malaysia to the Himalayas, to a life of a yogi. Every day I did consistently my spiritual exercises and after some years I reached the goal of enlightenment.
Ananda means happiness. Anandamayi Ma is the mother of happiness. She lived from 1896 to 1982 as a yogini in India. By her nature, she was friendly, calm and serene. She was a beautiful woman. She could tell wonderful stories. She loved to dance. She taught her followers to laugh, “Whenever you have the opportunity to laugh, laugh as much as you can.” We can see Anandamayi Ma as the incarnation of the Goddess Lakshmi. As Lakshmi she was happy in herself and gave consistently light to her fellow men. She gave us the way of the complete Hatha Yoga. The complete Hatha Yoga consists of physical exercises, mental exercises, meditation and the path of embracing love (Karma Yoga). As a young woman Anandamayi Ma practiced several years the physical exercises of Yoga, visualized herself as a Goddess and lived three years in a great rest. She practiced the body postures (asanas) from her inner feeling. She practiced creative and intuitive Hatha Yoga. She visualized the Goddesses she needed. One after another the various Goddesses flowed through her mind. She visualized their forms, identified herself with them, said their names as a mantra and thus activated the Kundalini energy in herself. After Anandamayi Ma has charged her body and her mind with spiritual energy, she spent three years in the great silence. She hardly spoke, acted a little  and mostly just sat there. She needed no more exercises. The awakened Kundalini energy cleansed from its own her body, her spirit and her soul. She needed just a lot of rest. She had to prevent that the Kundalini energy went out in external activities. She had to live so calm, that her energy turned inwardly and dissolved by itself all the tensions. Then the inner happiness awoke in her. The people felt the light and wanted her blessing. Anandamayi Ma from now on lived as a Karma Yogi, and traveled through India. She gave everyone her darshan and inspired the people to lead a spiritual and happy life.
Mother Meera is an enlightened master who lives in Germany. She was born on 26/12/1960 in India. 1982 she married a German. She now lives in Thalheim near Frankfurt. On weekends, she gives satsang (meeting) in the castle Balduinstein. Everyone can visit her and receive her free blessings (darshan). She gives darshan also in the USA and Canada. A darshan is an important purification step on the spiritual path. Often enlightenment energy is transfered, which one day develops in a great grace.
Mother Meera receives thousands of visitors for darshan which she conducts in total silence. Her darshan consists of a ritual, where she will touch a person's head, and then look into his eyes. During this process, she reportedly 'unties knots' in the person's subtle system and permeates them with light. She teaches the unity of all religions. Everyone can go his own way. It is only important to be connected with the light (the personal spiritual role model) by praying, reading or meditating.
Mother Meera has lived some time in the ashram of Sri Aurobindo. Sri Aurobindo was one of the great Indian saint of modern times. He taught the Integral Yoga, the combination of meditation and Karma Yoga (doing good). Mother Meera has said that she works together on a spiritual level with the Dalai Lama for the good of the world.
Statements of Mother Meera: "Each religion has its basic books. It is helpful to read these major works of religions. You may enjoy material life, but centering yourself in spirituality. (Live the joy as part of the spiritual path.) (...) Whoever comes to me for darshan, receives always what he needs. I look at everything within you to see where I can help, heal and give strength. I take anyone who comes sincere to me. The grace works automatically when the quest is sincere. Prayer always helps."
Amritanandamayi (Amma) was born in 1953 in India. Her full spiritual name is “Mata Amritanandamayi”, which means “mother of bliss-energy”. She began her spiritual journey at the age of five, praying to Krishna everyday. While working, she repeated Mantras silently and found enlightenment at the age of 17. At first her enlightenment was unstable, but with the age of 22, the light flowed into her being. Her inner voice told her to help everyone on earth to follow the spiritual path to self-realization, to become a sort of mother of all beings. She taught the way of all-encompassing love and meditation. Amma built up an extensive humanitarian organization in India. She financed schools, universities, and hospitals. She also set up an organization for single mothers which gave enough money for them to live, which is quite extraordinary in India. Amma also engaged herself in the efforts towards equality for men and women. She renewed the Brahma cult. Brahma is the Indian god of wisdom. Equal to his side is Brahmani, the priestess of the comprehensive love. Amma is a living proof of the ability women possess to achieve enlightenment, equal to that of men.
In the year of 2002 Amma was awarded the Gandhi-King prize from the UNO. At the World Parliament of Religions in 2004 in Barcelona she explained, “love is our true self. Love and empathy are the essence of all religions”. She said that in today’s world people suffer from two kinds of inadequacy. The first is a lack of nourishment, and the second is a lack of love. We need to overcome both types of poverty. In order to fight wars, people spend billions. If only a small portion of that could be invested in peace and harmony, all the hunger and poverty in the world could be overcome. More than a billion people on earth suffer from hunger and poverty. That is actually the biggest enemy of mankind. When we develop love in ourselves, then we can really defeat the enemy that is suffering and misery. Amma travels every year around the world, and has been doing this since 1987. She gives everyone her Darshan, her blessing. Her particular spiritual method consists of hugging people. She shows everyone that they are loved. She makes love tangible. “Let’s concentrate on what we can give, and not what we can get from others, then we can experience happiness and fulfillment in life”.
ShantiMayi (mother of inner peace) is an American from the hippie era. She demonstrated to the slogan "Make love not war" and wore flowers in her hair. After the end of the 80 she married. She had three children, and now has four grandchildren. Her marriage failed and she became a forest guardian in a national park. There she had much time to think about the meaning of life. She learned yoga and meditation. One day in her the desire arose to travel to India. She sat down on the plane and the next day she was in Rishikesh. Rishikesh is a small town in the Himalayan mountains. In this place live many sadhus (religious ascetic/holy man), yogis and swamis (monks). In summer, the yogis meditate in the mountains and in winter they move into an apartment in Rishikesh. Through Rishikesh is flowing the river Ganges. On both sides of the place rise the majestic peaks of the Himalayas. In Rishikesh, there are many famous ashram (spiritual centers). ShantiMayi was strolling through the small town, looking at the many strange people and also visited a nice little ashram. She spontaneously liked the Master of the Ashram. He looked so serene, peaceful and happy. She spoke to him the significant words: "I would be like you." The Master knew her future and said, "You will." She became his successor. ShantiMayi stayed many years in his ashram. The Master showed her the secrets of Kundalini meditation and transferred her shortly before his death his spiritual power. ShantiMayi had to promise him that she once a year travels to the West. In May 1999 she moved to Germany. In a protestant church in Hamburg, a large space was decorated solemnly. Many people came and sang songs with her. The little Yogi Nils went also to her satsang. ShantiMayi lived in a cloud of enlightenment energy that filled the room. Nils has been hit by this energy, she turned him, and at the end of the satsang he beamed even as Shanti Mayi. First in him resolved much grief and then he became happy inside.  ShantiMayi winked at him. What this meant, we do not know. But he likes ShantiMayi because she is just as undogmatic as he.
Interview ShantiMayi 2008 (how to open up knots in the heart)
Ramana Maharshi (December 30, 1879 – April 14, 1950) was a Hindu spiritual master ("jnani"). He was born to a Tamil-speaking Brahmin family in Tiruchuzhi, Tamil Nadu. After experiencing at age 16 what he later described as liberation (moksha), he left home for Arunachala, a mountain considered sacred by Hindus. He lived at the mountain for the rest of his life. Although born a Brahmin, he declared himself an "Atiasrami", a Sastraic state of non-attachment to anything in life and beyond all caste restrictions. The ashram that grew around him is situated at the foothill of Arunchala, to the west to the pilgrimage town of Tiruvannamalai. Sri Ramana Maharshi maintained that the purest form of his teachings was the powerful silence which radiated from his presence and quieted the minds of those attuned to it. He gave verbal teachings only for the benefit of those who could not understand his silence. His verbal teachings were said to flow from his direct experience of Atman as the only existing reality. When asked for advice, he recommended self-enquiry as the fastest path to moksha. Though his primary teaching is associated with Non-dualism, Advaita Vedanta (only the light exists for him), and Jnana Yoga (wisdom), he recommended Bhakti Yoga (love) to those he saw were fit for it, and gave his approval to a variety of paths and practices.
At age 16, Ramana Maharshi had a life-changing experience. He spontaneously initiated a process of self-enquiry that culminated, within a few minutes, in his own permanent awakening. In one of his rare written comments on this process he wrote: 'Enquiring within Who is the seer? I saw the seer disappear leaving That alone which stands forever. No thought arose to say I saw. How then could the thought arise to say I did not see.'. As Sri Ramana reportedly described it later: "I was sitting alone in a room on the first floor of my uncle's house. I seldom had any sickness and on that day there was nothing wrong with my health, but a sudden violent fear of death overtook me. I just felt I was going to die and began thinking what to do about it. It did not occur to me to consult a doctor or any elders or friends. I felt I had to solve the problem myself then and there. The shock of the fear of death drove my mind inwards and I said to myself mentally, without actually framing the words: 'Now death has come; what does it mean? What is it that is dying? This body dies.' And at once I dramatised the occurrence of death. I lay with my limbs stretched out still as though rigor mortis has set in, and imitated a corpse so as to give greater reality to the enquiry. I held my breath and kept my lips tightly closed so that no sound could escape, and that neither the word 'I' nor any word could be uttered. 'Well then,' I said to myself, 'this body is dead. It will be carried stiff to the burning ground and there burn and reduced to ashes. But with the death of the body, am I dead? Is the body I? It is silent and inert, but I feel the full force of my personality and even the voice of I within me, apart from it. So I am the Spirit transcending the body. The body dies but the spirit transcending it cannot be touched by death. That means I am the deathless Spirit.' All the conscious activity connected with the body was centered on that I. From that moment onwards, the "I" or Self focused attention on itself by a powerful fascination. Fear of death vanished once and for all. The ego was lost in the flood of Self-awareness. Absorption in the Self continued unbroken from that time. Other thought might come and go like the various notes of music, but the I continued like the fundamental sruti note." After this event, he lost interest in school-studies, friends, and relations. Avoiding company, he preferred to sit alone, absorbed in concentration on the Self, and went daily to the Meenakshi Temple, ecstatically devoted to the images of the Gods, tears flowing profusely from his eyes. He decided to leave his home and go to Arunachala. Knowing his family would not permit this, he slipped away, telling his brother he needed to attend a special class at school. After walking about 11 miles (18 km), he reached the temple of Arayaninallur, outside of which he sat down to rest. When the priest opened the temple for puja, Ramana Maharshi entered and sat in the pillared hall where he had a vision of brilliant light enveloping the entire place.
Ramakrishna.  Sarada Devi (1853–1920), wife and spiritual counterpart of Ramakrishna
Ramakrishna  (18 February 1836 – 16 August 1886), was a famous mystic of 19th-century India. His religious school of thought led to the formation of the Ramakrishna Mission by his chief disciple Swami Vivekananda – both were influential figures in the Hindu renaissance during the 19th and 20th centuries.
Ramakrishna was born in a poor Brahmin Vaishnava family in rural Bengal. He became a priest of the Dakshineswar Kali Temple, dedicated to the goddess Kali. Ramakrishna attended a village school with some regularity for 12 years, he later rejected the traditional schooling saying that he was not interested in a "bread-winning education". Kamarpukur, being a transit-point in well-established pilgrimage routes to Puri, brought him into contact with renunciates and holy men. He became well-versed in the Puranas, the Ramayana, the Mahabharata, and the Bhagavata Purana, hearing them from wandering monks and the Kathaks—a class of men in ancient India who preached and sang the Purāṇas. He describes his first spiritual ecstasy at the age of six: while walking along the paddy fields, a flock of white cranes flying against a backdrop of dark thunder clouds caught his vision. He reportedly became so absorbed by this scene that he lost outward consciousness and experienced indescribable joy in that state. Ramakrishna reportedly had experiences of similar nature a few other times in his childhood — while portraying God Shiva in a drama during Shivaratri festival, and worshipping the Goddess Vishalakshi (the mother of the universe). As the divine eye can perceive the entire universe, the Goddess is called Vishalakshi, the vast-eyed.
From his tenth or eleventh year on, the trances became common, and by the final years of his life, Ramakrishna's samādhi periods occurred almost daily. Rumors spread that Ramakrishna had become unstable as a result of his spiritual exercises. His mother and his elder brother Rameswar decided to get Ramakrishna married, thinking that marriage would be a good steadying influence upon him—by forcing him to accept responsibility and to keep his attention on normal affairs rather than his spiritual practices and visions. The bride Saradamani Mukhopadhyaya (later known as Sarada Devi) was found and the marriage was duly solemnised in 1859. Sarada Devi became a strong follower of his teachings. After the marriage, Sarada stayed at Jayrambati and joined Ramakrishna in Dakshineswar at the age of 18. By the time his bride joined him, Ramakrishna had already embraced the monastic life of a sannyasi; as a result, the marriage was never consummated. He regarded Sarada as the Divine Mother in person, addressing her as the Holy Mother, and it was by this name that she was known to Ramakrishna's disciples. Sarada Devi outlived Ramakrishna by 34 years and played an important role in the nascent religious movement.
The most widely known amongst his first spiritual teachers was an ascetic woman, called Bhairavi Brahmani skilled in Tantra and Vaishnava bhakti.  Tantrism focuses on the worship of shakti and the object of Tantric training is to transcend the barriers between the holy and unholy as a means of achieving liberation and to see all aspects of the natural world as manifestations of the divine shakti. Under the guidance of Bhairavi Brahmani, Ramakrishna began with mantra rituals such as japa to purify the mind and establish self-control. He later proceeded towards tantric sadhanas, which generally include a set of heterodox practices called vamachara (left-hand path), activities like eating of fish and meat along with drinking of wine and sexual intercourse. Ramakrishna did not directly participate in the last of those activities, all that he needed was a suggestion  to produce the desired result. Under the tutelage of the Bhairavi, Ramakrishna also learnt Kundalini Yoga. Later an Advaita Vedantin ascetic taught him non-dual meditation, and according to Ramakrishna, he experienced nirvikalpa samadhi under his guidance.
Ramakrishna also experimented with other religions, notably Islam and Christianity, and said that they all lead to the same God. In 1866, Govinda Roy, a Hindu guru who practiced Sufism, initiated Ramakrishna into Islam. Ramakrishna said that he "devoutly repeated the name of Allah, wore a cloth like the Arab Moslems, and said their prayer five times daily." At the end of 1873 he started the practice of Christianity, when his devotee Shambu Charan Mallik read the Bible to him. Ramakrishna said that for several days he was filled with Christian thoughts. Ramakrishna describes of a vision in which the picture of Madonna and Child Jesus became alive and had a vision in which Jesus merged with his body. In his own room amongst other divine pictures was one of Christ, and he burnt incense before it morning and evening. There was also a picture showing Jesus Christ saving St Peter from drowning in the water.
Neem Karoli Baba was a Hindu guru and devotee of the Hindu deity Hanuman. He is known outside India for being the guru of a number of Americans who travelled to India in the 1960s and 1970s, the most well-known being the spiritual teachers Ram Dass and Bhagavan Das, and the musicians Krishna Das and Jai Uttal. His ashrams are in Kainchi, Vrindavan, Rishikesh, Shimla, Bhumiadhar, Hanuman Gadi, Lucknow, Delhi in India and in Taos, New Mexico, USA. He was born in an affluent Brahmin family and his father's name was Pundit Durga Prasad 'Vedacharya'. He was married to Rambeti (daughter of Pundit Rewati Ram) and had three children. But he left his married life to become an independent yogi. He wandered throughout northern India as a sadhu. Neem Karoli was a lifelong adept of bhakti yoga, and encouraged service to others (seva) as the highest form of unconditional devotion to God. He worshiped all the gods and all religions. From 1967 to 1973, many young people came from the West to Neem Karoli Baba. He showed them different spiritual practices. Some he gave the path of Hatha Yoga and others the path of Karma Yoga. For the majority of his followers, he taught the way of the Master Yoga (Bhakti Yoga). The Way of the Master Yoga is to connect oneself every day with an enlightened Master. Neem Karoli Baba taught the individual spiritual path. His exercises were tailored individual to each student. On his festivals, there were lots of candy. One of his favorite sayings was, "Eat sweets, drink tea." In the book Miracle of Love, compiled by Ram Dass, a devotee named Anjani shares the following account: There can be no biography of him. Facts are few, stories many. He seems to have been known by different names in many parts of India, appearing and disappearing through the years. He said, that he was ‘nobody.’ Simple stories were his teachings. Usually he sat or lay on a wooden bench wrapped in a plaid blanket while a few devotees sat around him. Visitors came and went; they were given food, a few words, a nod, a slap on the head or back, and they were sent away. There was gossip and laughter for he loved to joke. Orders for running the ashram were given, usually in a piercing yell across the compound. Sometimes he sat in silence, absorbed in another world to which we could not follow, but bliss and peace poured down on us.
Love everyone, Serve everyone, Remember God and Speak the truth.
Whenever you'll think about me, I will come to you.
Gautama Buddha was prince from Nepal who lived 560-480 BC. He came from the family of the Shakya and is therefore called Shakyamuni Buddha in Tibetan Buddhism. Gautama Buddha was married. At age 29 he left his wife and son and became a yogi. He saw the worldly life as meaningless and superficial. He meditated for six years in the solitude and then got enlightenment. After his enlightenment, he felt compassion for the suffering people in the world. The remaining 45 years of his life, he lived as a spiritual teacher in India and gave people the wisdom of inner happiness. The teachings of Buddha are called Dharma. Basis of the Dharma are the Four Noble Truths: 1. Living in the cycle of existence involves suffering. 2nd The cause of suffering is attachment to worldly pleasures, denial of unpleasant situations and ignorance of the deeper meaning of life (inner happiness). 3th If the causes are dissolved, the suffering disappears. 4th The way to overcome suffering is the Noble Eightfold Path. The Eightfold Path to enlightenment consists of the right wisdom (living in inner happiness), the right decision (for spiritual practice), the right speech (do not lie), the right action (do not steal, not kill), the right livelihood (do good), the right struts (after enlightenment), the right mindfulness (mental work) and the right concentration (meditation). There are three ways to develop enlightenment. There is the path of spiritual practice (yoga, meditation, reading, walking). There is the way of all-embracing love (do good, the bodhisattva path). And there is the path of rest (inner peace). The main path to inner happiness is to live in the rest. The essence of a Buddha is the inner seclusion from the world. A Buddha enshrined his soul in the transcendence (in a higher dimension of consciousness, in the Nirvana, in pure being, in the void / unit, in inner peace and  happiness). The Buddhism is a philosophy that has its origins in India. We can summarize the essence of Buddhism in mental work (inner peace, wisdom and love) and meditation. The meditation consists of lying, sitting, standing and walking. The main meditation Buddhas are the four stages of contemplation: thinking about life, inner peace, happiness, dissolving the ego / enlightenment. The fourth stage of meditation is difficult to achieve for an untrained person. It comes by grace (by itself). The more a man is walking the spiritual path, the sooner he can  reach a life in the light (Nirwana, God).
Gangaji (born Texas, 1942) is an American born spiritual teacher and author. She lives in Ashland, Oregon with her husband, fellow spiritual teacher Eli Jaxon-Bear. Gangaji was born Merle Antoinette Roberson in Texas on June 11, 1942, and grew up in Mississippi. After graduating from the University of Mississippi in 1964, she married and had a daughter. In 1972, she and her family moved to San Francisco. There, she was soon divorced and pursued many paths to change her life including relationship, motherhood, political activism, career, and spiritual practice. She took Bodhisattva vows, practiced Zen and Vipassana meditation, helped run a Tibetan Buddhist Meditation Center, and had a career as an acupuncturist in the San Francisco Bay area. Feeling unfulfilled by her seemingly successful life, she and her new partner, Eli Jaxon-Bear, sold their house and moved to Hawaii in 1989, where they were married. At this time she met Andrew Cohen, a spiritual teacher and student of Sri H.W.L. Poonja, also known as Papaji. Impressed by Cohen’s "enormous confidence", she returned to California to sit with him for two months. In the meantime, her husband, Eli, traveled to India and located Papaji. Struck by the letters she received from Eli, in the spring of 1990, Gangaji herself traveled to  Papaji. In the biography of her life, Just Like You, she said, “The extraordinary event in this life was that I met Papaji. Until then I looked everywhere for the transcendental or the extraordinary, but after meeting Papaji I began to find the extraordinary in every moment.”
Papaji, a student of Ramana Maharshi, gave her the name Gangaji, and asked her to share what she had directly realized with others. Today, Gangaji travels the world as a teacher and author. Her teachings find wide acceptance among spiritual seekers interested in self-realization. She teaches that the truth of who you are is already free and at peace, and that it can be discovered. In her satsangs Gangaji often asks a person to the stage. She then performs a meditative conversation, during which many people get short or long term to enlightenment. Gangaji focuses on the enlightenment potential of her counterpart and releases emotional blocks through targeted questions. “I invite people to just stop and be still. And in that you discover who you are. I use inquiry as a way of getting the mind to turn inward to the silence. It could be the question, “Who am I?” Or it could be “What am I avoiding in this moment?” Or, “Where is silence?” “What is needed in this moment, right in this very moment, what is needed for true peace?” In facing strong emotions such as fear and anger, or in dealing with traumas which keep people locked in personal misery and unable to experience freedom, Gangaji teaches “direct experience.” Although Gangaji states that her realization and meetings are not part of any particular religion or philosophy, her teaching has sometimes been described as consistent with Advaita Vedanta.
Video: Gangaji What's my core message?
In August 2005 the first great Yoga Festival took place in Berlin. Six thousand people flocked to the many offered Yoga sessions, meditations, lectures and musical events. The highlight was the darshan of Sri Durgamayi Ma. Durgamayi Ma is one of the enlightened Yoga Masters in Germany. Her Master is Neem Karoli Baba, the laughing guru of the hippie era. Durgamayi Ma was born in Germany. She worked as a teacher. In 1972, she saw a picture of Neem Karoli Baba and immediately set off for India. When she met her Master, she could not help crying for three days. All her heartbreak in her life dissolved. Neem Karoli Baba gave her the love she had always longed for. Durgamayi was aware that her heart was broken for a long time and now could be healed. She later told her students: "The most important on the spiritual path is to be aware of ones broken heart. Most people in the West suffer from a broken heart. They are blocked in their love and in their happiness. Enlightenment heals the brokenhearted. Enlightenment is the only way of permanent cure. Enlightenment means opening all the chakras, especially the heart chakra. Who is aware of this fact, walks the path of enlightenment up to the end." (Morning darshan, 2001). After the death of Neem Karoli Baba in 1973 she went to Ma Jaya Sati Bhagavati in America. After seven intensive years on the path of Bhakti Yoga her ego was burnt in the fire of love for her spiritual teacher; Sri Durgamayi Ma recognised the divine in her Ma, in herself and in all human beings. Back in Germany, Mataji’s first students soon found their way to her. She says: "Peace in our society can only be attained if we find it in ourselves. Achieving this peace is the aspiration of all religions. That is why it is important not to focus on what separates them but to concentrate on what unites them, not to emphasize their differences but to recognise and live that which they have in common."
Mahaprabhuji was a great enlightened master, who lived from 1828 to 1963 in Northern India (Rajasthan). He taught the unity of all religions and the way of universal love. He was a great poet and could sing beautifully. From all over India, people came to visit him. The follower of Mahaprabhuji was Swami Madhavananda, who in 1972 sent his chief disciple Maheshwarananda to Austria to inaugurate the people there in the yoga path. He wrote the famous book "Yoga and everyday life" and founded a spiritual center. In 1990 Maheshwarananda came to Hamburg and met Yogi Nils (the author). Some times later Mahaprabhuji appeared in a dream of Yogi Nils and blessed him. Working as a yoga teacher (spiritual adviser, spiritual master) is a way to sacrifice the ego, to live in the all-embracing love and to attain enlightenment. Many spiritual people have lost themselves on the way of helping. If a not enlightened man wants to work as a spiritual teacher, he must be aware of the ego traps and able to control his negative qualities. After any contact with his unenlightened fellow men he must spiritually cleanse his mind. Who is not fully enlightened and works as a spiritual teacher has to be aware of his actions. He should focus on his own practicing, connect every day with the enlightened Masters and check himself on pride, greed, attachment, careerism, and sexual lack of clarity.
Swami Maheshwarananda talk about the first steps you do in Yoga (video)
Mahaprabuji is also a Name of Preceptor Shri Vallabhacharyaji [1535 - 1587] the Father of the Pushti Path of Devotion. His lineage continues till date one of whom H.H.Vrajrajkumarji's details are on http://vallabhyouth.org/
Sai Baba of Shirdi. Blessing.
Sai Baba of Shirdi, also known as Shirdi Sai Baba, was an Indian guru, yogi, and fakir who is regarded by his Hindu and Muslim devotees as a saint. He had no love for perishable things and his sole concern was self-realization. He taught a moral code of love, forgiveness, helping others, charity, contentment, inner peace, and devotion to God and guru. Sai Baba of Shirdi lived from 1838 to 1918 in India. The Master (Guru) of Shirdi Sai was Venkusa. He went to him as a young man and learned from him Hatha Yoga (physical exercises and meditation). His main technique was to meditate on his Master. He visualized himself as one with his Master and said his name as a mantra. At the age of twenty, he came to Shirdi. Shirdi was then a small village. He moved into a dilapidated mosque and lived there for the rest of his life. Every day he went through the village and begged for some food. He often wandered into the surrounding forest and meditated many hours. He planted a small flower garden and watered the flowers every day.  After three years, the flowers were grown and contributed many beautiful flowers. Shirdi-Sai cut the flowers and gave them to the temples in Shirdi. He had been raised by Muslim parents. His master Venkusa was a Hindu. Sai Baba of Shirdi felt therefore that he belongs to both religions. In his mosque, he practiced the customs of both religions. An important ritual in Hinduism is the kindling of light. In his mosque burned all night several oil lamps. The oil he got from the oil traders in the village. One day the oil traders had no more desire to give him free oil every day. They refused to share the daily donation. It is said that Shirdi Sai filled water in the oil lamps, blessed the water and light the wicks. The oil lamps were lit by itself all night. When the villagers realized that Shirdi Sai can do wonders, they began to worship him. An older woman supplied Shirdi Sai daily with food. One day he cried, "Oh Lakshmibai, I'm very hungry!" The woman ran immediately and made him a nice meal. She handed it to her Master and he gave it to a dog. Shirdi Sai said, "To satisfy the hunger of the dog is the same as to satisfy my hunger." Shirdi-Sai's love was especially for the poor, the small and the weak. He taught, "God loves the poor and the rich, but especially he loves the poor. I came to help the small and the weak." The main teaching of Shirdi Sai was the daily Master Yoga (Guru Yoga), "Who every day connects himself with an enlightened Master and sees God in all creation, will be saved." Sai Baba of Shirdi accomplished during his lifetime many miracles. He healed the sick, blessed women with the birth of a child and raised the dead to life. We can see the wonders of Shirdi Sai as spiritual tales. People in India love fairy tales. Maybe the miracle are really happened. We do not know. It's been a long time. The biggest miracle of life is the possibility of enlightenment.
Sathya Sai Baba (23 November 1926 – 24 April 2011) was an Indian guru, mystic and philanthropist. Sai Baba had ashrams in 126 countries and also ran a network of hospitals, clinics and schools that were often free. Sai Baba said that his followers do not need to give up their original religion, saying "My objective is the establishment of sanatana dharma, which believes in one God as propitiated by the founders of all religions. So none has to give up his religion or deity." The Sai organization promotes and advocates five human values: Sathya (truth), Dharma (right conduct), Ahimsa (non-violence), Prema (love for God and all his creatures) and Shanti (peace). The materializations of vibhuti (holy ash) and other small objects such as rings, necklaces and watches by Sathya Sai Baba were a source of both fame and controversy; devotees considered them signs of divinity, while skeptics viewed them as simple conjuring tricks.
Wikipedia: A 1995 TV documentary accused Sathya Sai Baba of faking his materializations. However, the scientist Haraldsson stated that, on investigating the DD video, researchers did not find evidence of fake materialisation. According to Haraldsson, the video was taken to a company which investigates corporate fraud. In spite of improving the graininess of the low quality video with enhanced filters and running it through advanced image processing systems, Haraldsson stated the DD video did not provide firm evidence of sleight of hand. The guru and his followers consistently denied the charges of misconduct, which were never proved.
I have a "Task": To foster all mankind and ensure for all of them lives full of ananda (bliss). I have a "Vow": To lead all who stray away from the straight path again into goodness and save them. This means that I will never give up those who attach themselves to me.
I have come to restore Love among mankind. The Golden Age will come.
Help ever, Hurt never. Love all, Serve all.
A big help on the spiritual path is the daily Master Yoga (Bhakti Yoga). Yogi Nils begs his enlightened Masters every day for guidance and help. The Masters lead him through his inner voice (the feeling of rightness) through the day. Nils prays at least twice a day, and especially in any dangerous situation. Nils owes the daily Master Yoga from the founder of Tibetan Buddhism Padmasambhava. He taught: “Whenever you doubt or hesitate on your way, pray to the enlightened Masters. Then follow the voice of your inner wisdom. Feel within yourself, think for yourself and find your way of wisdom. The voice of your inner wisdom is the voice of the enlightened Masters. If you proceed in this way, you will be victorious along the spiritual path.”
Wikipedia: In the Tibetan tradition, the guru is seen as the Buddha, the very root of spiritual realization and the basis of the path. Without the teacher, it is asserted, there can be no experience or insight. The Dalai Lama, speaking of the importance of the guru, said: "Rely on the teachings to evaluate a guru: Do not have blind faith, but also no blind criticism."
Guru Yoga (or teacher practice) is a tantric devotional process whereby the practitioners unite their mindstream with the mindstream of the guru. The process of guru yoga might entail visualization of an entire lineage of masters (refuge tree). It usually involves visualization of the guru above or in front of the practitioner. Guru yoga may entail a liturgy or mantra. The Guru or spiritual teacher is essential as a guide during tantric practice, as without their example, blessings and grace, genuine progress is held to be impossible.
Iṣṭa-devatā: Within Hinduism, an Ishta-deva or Ishta devata is a term denoting a worshipper's favourite deity. Typically a practitioner worships his Ishta-deva through the form of a murti. This worship may involve offering items to their chosen divinity such as incense or flowers, reciting mantras, singing their names and offering prayers. Within a number of Hindu traditions living people have claimed (or are claimed by followers) to be Avatars of a divine or Supreme being. In these cases followers have then in some instances worshipped these individuals as Ishta-devas. Although these tend to be minority groups within Hindism, it has been a growing tendency in modern times (Sai Baba, Amritanandamayi, Mother Meera for example). This often attracts criticism from other Hindu traditions who do not share the same belief. Swami Sivananda has said that a guru can be likened to God if he himself has attained realization and is a link between the individual and the Absolute. Such a guru, according to his definition and interpretation, should have actually attained union with God, inspire devotion in others, and have a presence that purifies all.
"How do I transform myself?" - Sadhguru (video)
Saint Anthony the Great, a Christian Yogi.
It is a highly debated issue of whether Christians could practice Yoga. From the perspective of Yoga it is no problem, because Yoga teaches the unity of all religions. But within Christianity there are many different opinions.
Christianity is a religion based on the life and teachings of Jesus. There are many Christian groups with different opinions. Some accept Yoga and some do not. First of all Yoga is in the west mainly a body exercise. In this way everybody can do Yoga. Yoga is good for relaxation, fitness and mental health. In Yoga each may go his own spiritual way. Christians are allowed to keep their faith in Jesus. Most important is to which spiritual Master you pray or what role model you have. If you pray to Jesus, Jesus will lead you in your Yoga exercises. There are in Yoga many different spiritual paths and concepts of God. A Yogi can be an Atheist, Christian, Buddhist, Hindu or follower of other faiths.
Wikipedia: Some Christians integrate yoga and other aspects of Eastern spirituality with prayer and meditation. This has been attributed to a desire to experience God in a more complete way. Christian meditation is a form of prayer in which a structured attempt is made to get in touch with and deliberately reflect upon the revelations of God. The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola (1491–1556), the founder of the Jesuits, contain numerous meditative exercises. Saint John of the Cross (1542–1591) viewed Christian meditation as a necessary step toward union with God, and wrote that even the most spiritually advanced persons always needed to regularly return to meditation. Saint Padre Pio (1887–1968) said: "Through the study of books one seeks God; by meditation one finds him".  St. Teresa of Ávila (1515–1582) viewed Christian meditation as the first of four steps in achieving "union with God", and used the analogy of watering the garden. She compared basic meditation (thinking) to watering a garden with a bucket, Recollection (praying) to the water wheel, Quiet (contemplation) to a spring of water and Union (enlightenment) to drenching rain.
Christian websites for yoga: (www.kath.ch) "More and more Christians discover yoga and other Far Eastern meditation techniques. The Catholic educational centers are long on this trend and offer a variety of courses. The practice of yoga is not contrary to Christian teaching. Yoga affects not only beneficial to the body and mind, but also enables new approaches to Christian spirituality." Catholic parish of St. Michael in Stuttgart-Sillenbuch: "Yoga is an ancient system of physical and mental exercises that addresses the whole person in his unity of mind and body. Yoga tolerates very well with Christian meditation. Yoga exercises are offered in St. Michael for more than 25 years very successful."
Nils: All the holy books of the world form a whole and complement each other. Enlightenment is difficult to understand and can be described by many different ways. Who thinks across systems understands the contexts. In the Second Vatican Council (1963 to 1965) it is stated that God is found in all religions. In Christianity, there is much uncertainty about the path of enlightenment. A major criticism is that the mystics want to redeem themselves and the Christians are saved by the grace of God.  In Yoga, we focus on the spiritual practice. On the other hand, one can not force enlightenment. It finally comes spontaneously, by itself, by grace.
(Quotes from Yoga and Christianity)
Jessup: I'm working towards taking it up for concentration purposes, as I have some kind of weird learning trouble and can't focus all the time. I'm hoping that Yoga will help me to be able to be focus and retetain. My friend who has introduced me to it, says that it has helped him a bunch in learning and concentrating.
Nils (Mystic): Yoga is helpful in learning and concentrating. You have to find the right exercises for you personally.
Nils: It is good to have a Christian yoga teacher. But if not, you can pray to Jesus. Then Jesus will lead you in your yoga exercises. Yoga is a body exercise. Most important is what role model and spiritual background system you have. Here is the difference between Hinduistic and Christian Yoga. The essence of Christianity is the dual path of love to God and to all beings (the neighbor). A Christian Yoga is based on these two principles.
Hunter24: I've heard Christians say all the time that Yoga and Buddhist meditation can lead to demonic possession.
Nils: That is really nonsense. I do Yoga and Buddhist meditation for more than 24 years, and I never got problems with demons. You only come in contact with your own psychic tendencies. If you go deeper with Yoga, you have to learn to deal clever with your spirit and your mind. It is good to have psychological knowledge. And is also good to anchor your mind in positive Christian principles. I got a training in Yoga and in Psychotherapy. That was very helpful for me. I put the main principles in my oracles, so that everybody can train his mind positively.
InJesusItrust: Demons do exist and only someone without firsthand experience can claim they don't. Oftentimes a mental illness is an illness, but if a case is a genuine spiritual attack it may be mistaken for mental illness.
Nils: I believe that demons exist, but we are protected from the enlightened Masters. Our only problem are our negative inner tendencies. What we see as demons are normally negative thoughts, created by ourselves. Exorcism is the wrong practice to overcome these demons. I sometimes had problems with strong opposing forces on my spiritual path. They were often much stronger than me. But I prayed to Jesus, was protected and always ultimately triumphed. Trust in Jesus and love. Love is the strongest force in the universe. Do not become a victim of demons by busying yourself with them or work with fear on the spiritual path. The center of Christianity is love and not fear. This is very important to recognize. Send the demons love, pray for them, and they will disappear. They have no chance against love.
Michael Mayo: Do we not sometimes become too concerned about dangerous spirits when the reality is that we alone are resposnible for our own behaviors and the most important dangers are Lust, Greed, Gluttony, Envy, Anger, Pride, and Sloth?
Nils: That is exactly the way it is. Normally our demons are anger, greed and aggression. They have to be overcome by psychotherapeutical methods and working on the mind. There is a good phrase in spirituality: "Don't care about demons and the demons don't care about you." Most demons in the religions are caused by the religions themselves. They teach their people the fear of demons and the demons are created in the mind.
Nils: Many gestures and customs of Christianity come from other religions. That's no problem. The religions learn from each other and take the good from other religions. That is precisely why Christians can make yoga. It is only important that they preserve their role models and spiritual background system.
Hunter24: in school i was told that Christians think Demons are irredeamable because the sided with Satan, so why pray for them?
Nils: The devil does not really exist. It is a symbol for the ego. The Bible refers to a devil who came to Jesus as he sat for forty days in the desert and meditated. Shortly before Jesus came to enlightenment, the devil appeared to him. The devil wanted to stop him from destroying his ego and from attaining the point where he could stay in the light. Before the inner conflict within a person dissolve, they strengthen for a time. That is very important to understand. A strong feeling of aversion to a spiritual life appears and the worldly pleasures appear for a time to be more important than god. They appear as a large source of confusion and temptation. With a little imagination, the devil can be imagined. One can see the ego as a sort of inner devil who stops one in the path towards enlightenment. However, this devil is not a being, but a part of the individual’s own self. This is a visualized ego conflict. In the Bible it is described with an image, a presence, but this is not to be taken literally. In Buddhism, the devil is called Mara. Before he achieved enlightenment, Mara came to Buddha. Buddha reached his hand towards the earth, activated his root chakra, and rid himself of this ego conflict. Mara and his entire army of temptation disappeared. After Buddha triumphed, the light of enlightenment flowed within. With Jesus, it meant that angels came and served him, after he managed to overwhelm his ego. Satan does not exist, but in the world exist good and evil. There are good people and bad people. But the bad people are not completely bad. They have good and bad qualities as the good people. But in bad people the bad qualities predominate. Every soul can strengthen the good qualities and overcome the bad. And so it is with demons. Therefor we can pray for bad people and also for demons, that they find the way to God and to love. And if we pray for our enemies (bad people or demons), we overcome them in our spirit. We create love and peace inside and transform us to holiness.
Michael Mayo: I would go own to wonder about the specific nature of the demon problem and what it might have to say about one's spiritual life.
Nils: Understanding the demons means to understand ourselves. It means to find our path to holiness and to paradise.
Nils: In my opinion every fallen angel can stand up again. Every soul can be saved by the grace of God. God is good and omnipotent.
Michael Mayo: Are we to assume that demons can put thoughts into our minds (temptations)? Affect our moods?
Nils: That is an interesting question. On a spiritual level everything is connected. If I create positive thoughts in my mind, I can transform the people in my yoga class. I often experienced this. And thus can negative people or demons influence our mind. We have to protect our mind through concentrating on love, God and positive thoughts.
God cares for the body and the lions for the self-discipline.
Desert Fathers is a term for the early Christian Yogis, who lived in the third  century a reclusive life in the deserts of Egypt and Syria, either as a hermit or in groups. The main principle of the Desert Fathers was to sit down in the hut (cell) and then "feel the path of effective spiritual practice from within." They called it "your hut will teach you." The skill on the spiritual path is to find exactly the right degree of personal rest and activity. Decisively on the path of enlightenment (inner happiness) is to deal wise with the thoughts. We have to find a way to resolve the mental blockades. Then there is suddenly an inner transformation and man is in happiness. The victory over all suffering is the awakening of the inner light (God consciousness). An important problem of the Desert Fathers was dealing with sexuality. They have talked about it openly. Who represses his sexuality, gets tensions and  blocks his enlightenment. On the other hand, too much sex causes attachments and in turn creates internal tensions. The Desert Fathers have been trying to find sensitive their personal way of resolution of sexual addictions and relationship desires. A desert father convinced himself of living alone with the thought, that he had to work much for a relationship. The life of a hermit is much more quiet and friendly.  Another desert father saw women only as people (sisters, daughters, mothers, goddesses) and not as sexual beings. A third desert father had a girlfriend in a nearby village. When he was visited by his fellow monks, he hid her. A holy father discovered her, but he did not betray. He only told the monk to give good care of himself. This can  be understood that one can have a relationship, but without losing his spiritual path.
The desert fathers dealt also with the question, whether it is more important to help a fellow human being, or to pray. Who is holier, the helper or the prayer (contemplation)? Basically both is important. But the helper is holier than the prayer. A helper could consume in helping and lose his peace of mind. Therefor a helping man needs the rest and prayer, if he wants to find God. The desert mother Synkletika knew that the hermit who want to live a life in God, stands before a lot of inner work and hard fighting. But in the end there would be an unspeakable joy. On the path to God one should not overwhelm oneself. Some hermits need a flower in their hut, and some do not. Suppose someone can not live without a flower, he should plant one. Who needs joy on his way should give himself sufficient enjoyment.
(Excerpts from Sayings of the Desert Fathers])
Abba Moses, "Sit in thy cell and thy cell will teach thee all."
A hermit said, 'Take care to be silent. Empty your mind. Concentrate on God, whether you are resting or at work. If you do this, you will overcome your problems.'
A man who keeps death before his eyes will at all times overcome his problems.
Abba Lot went to see Abba Joseph and said to him, 'I fast a little, I pray and meditate, I live in peace, and, as far as I can, I purify my thoughts. What else can I do?' Then the old man stood up and stretched his hands towards heaven. His fingers became like ten lamps of fire and he said to him, 'If you will, you can become all flame.'
Abba Ammonas was asked, 'What is the "narrow and hard way?" (Mt. 7.14) He replied, 'The "narrow and hard way" is this, to control your thoughts, and to strip yourself of your own will, for the sake of God."
It was said of Abba Helladius that he spent twenty years in the Cells, without ever raising his eyes to see the roof of the church.
Amma Theodora said, 'Let us strive to enter by the narrow gate, Just as the trees, if they have not stood before the winter's storms cannot bear fruit, so it is with us; this present age is a storm and it is only through many trials and temptations that we can obtain an inheritance in the kingdom of heaven.'
Nils: "My parents are atheists. After my studies, I became a lawyer. When I was thirty, I found my spiritual calling in addition to my profession. I did three hours of spiritual exercise daily. In November 1986 I had my first big enlightenment experience. During a meditation while lying down, a warm column of energy slowly rose from my lower belly. As the energy reached my head, my self-consciousness disappeared, I became one with the all-encompassing love of the cosmos. I experienced extreme happiness. I was suddenly able to understand the holy books written throughout mankind's history at a deeper level.
The high point of my spiritual experience was what I felt as the entrance of the Holy Spirit. A thick beam of energy flew from the sky and into my crown chakra. The energy flowed through my body and filled it out completely. On my head was a small flame of energy. This experience is comparable with the Pentecost event. On the heads of the early Christians appeared small energy tongues. Spontaneously arose in me the thought that now I have been blessed by the Holy Spirit. I felt the energy beam as a descent of the Holy Spirit. A short time later I had another amazing experience. When I made my daily walk one evening, I suddenly had the feeling that I was seen from the sky. It was as if at the sky there was a large eye that saw me. The message of this eye was: "You can go your way with trust. You are guided by God." I read the Bible thoroughly from front to back. Through my experiences of enlightenment I could now understand the deep wisdom in the Scriptures. I also understood what the term "God" did mean.
One day I laid on my bed and meditated. My thoughts always came to rest more and more. Suddenly Jesus Christ stood as a great shining light in the middle of the room. Back then I lived for six years as a hermit in seclusion. I knew immediately that this luminary was Jesus Christ. Jesus came to me and floated into me. I was filled with bliss. I rested for some time in this unimaginably large energy of love, peace and light.
Nils: Good day, dear Ulla! Can you tell me something about your life?
Ulla: When I was sent to Sunday school, I liked to listen to the stories of Jesus. Then followed a long period of spiritual sleep, how I would describe it today. I had several friends, but always felt it was not the right man. Until I got a man, with whom I had over 30 years of a desperate relationship. On the one hand, I always wanted to get away from him because he was doing me no good. On the other hand, I was not able to do it. But this negative relationship was at least the advantage that I got interested in religion. As my husband always went to bed early, I was still on long and I busied myself with the various religions. I prayed to God since my childhood. God or Goddess? I wanted to know. I went on a fantastic meditation. I wanted to meet the goddess in a clearing! I imagined how I went to a little house through a garden with flowers. I walked a beautiful forest trail along until I came to the clearing. There I waited for the goddess! This meditation, I did with a wunderfull meditation music. The meditation became independent. The road rose gradually, without being burdensome, and the vegetation was lost. As I looked around me there was suddenly left and right of way only emptiness. When I went higher, I saw before me a bright light. As I approached this wonderful, warm light, I saw a Greek statue of a deity. I went to this wonderful bright, love-emitting light, and asked simply, "So there is not a goddess?" The light being turned to me, changed his form and I looked at my own face. I suddenly knew that God bears within himself the female, male, and everything else. I realized that each of us is a tiny part of God. God wants nothing more than to re-unite with us. But we must be like God, full of love and selflessness. And this is often a long way. I was overcome with such a wonderful warmth, such a deep love and peace, that I would always prefer to stay with God. But unfortunately, I was then quickly brought back to my body. I found no rest and always wanted to come back to God. I meditate every night and was very unhappy that it did not work. Then suddenly I had found the path again, but I saw a lot of branching paths. I realized that one should always be carefully on his way to not fall back again. And then I heard a voice in my heart, who said: "Why do you spend unnecessary time to see me again? Live your life and be happy and make others happy, then you have done a lot?" Since that day my life changed completely. I have no more fears, can see into the hearts of the people, do not have a husband anymore, no more house, no money and I am completely happy.
The yoga of love is a way to connect yoga exercises with the energy of love. Thus yoga gets a great cleansing power and can lead you on a fast and easy way to enlightenment. Yoga of love awakens the love in you and brings you to a life in love and in the light. Yoga gives you health, beauty and happiness. It brings you into a life in the light and love, if you connect yourself with the enlightenment energy (God, the enlightened Masters). Do yoga as it is good for you. Practise with wisdom, love and joy. Then you only need lifelong endurance. The grace will come to you by its own. Everybody on the yoga path will be filled with bliss, if he or she goes with the power of love. It is only a question of time.
Find a spiritual role model you love and you trust. In Indian yoga people usually pray to Shiva befor starting with our yoga exercises.  You thus do yoga in connection with the energy of Shiva and this energy transforms you. Modern yoga teaches the unity of all religion. You can have the believe you want. You have to find a role model that suits to your believe. You can believe in the power of natur and pray to the sun. Many yogi perform the sun salutation and get by this into a life in the light. You can pray to God, to Jesus, to Buddha or to an enlightened Master you want. If you believe you role model is enlightened, your believe will activate the enlightenment energy within you. If your role model really is enlightened, he or she can help you with his spiritual abilities.
Find a picture oder statue of your role model. Have a clear vision how he or she looks like. Read regularly in a book of your role model. Read yoga tales, pray or work with an oracle. A real darshan consits of the three points seeing, hearing and touching. Darshan is the energy transfer. The energy of love can flow into you, if you see a picture, a statue or a real enlightened person you like. Hear the teachings or to read something from the spiritual role model you like. An it must touch you inside. You have to feel love or trust. Then the energy of love can come to you.
Give the energy of love to all people. Wish that all people may be happy. Wish that the whole world may be happy. Then the light of your role model flows through you to world and fills you with love. You get a unity consciousness which is necessary for enlightenment, inner peace and happiness.
Feel connected with your role model while doing your yoga exercises. Think or speak mantras. Do yoga for yourself and as a way to connect you regularly with spirituality, wisdom and love. Get the power for a life in love and truth from your daily spiritual exercises.
Video Dynamic Mantra Yoga (example for yoga of love)
Finding God through the path of enlightenment
God is a mystery that can be seen and understand only by enlightenment. One can see God only in enlightenment. The Bible says: "Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God." Who cleans his heart (his mind) with spiritual exercises, enters the dimension of God and sees God. With funding of physics or logic, we can describe God very limited. Science cannot explore more than circumstantial evidences for God. If one really want to know whether God exists, one must realize enlightenment.
Purify yourself with yoga and mantra yoga. Do yoga for beginners, easy yoga poses with mantra meditation, dynamic mantra yoga, fitness yoga or yoga with positive thinking. Practice the five principles of health.
Do kundalini yoga. Kundalini is a great power, which leads us to enlightenment. Read How to Get the Benefits of Kundalini Yoga. Pracice the sun meditation.
Do the yoga of love. Send regularly all people light. All-encompassing love is the quickest way to a life in God. Read How to Be a Karma Yogi.
Connect daily with God or the enlightened Masters and follow the voice of your inner wisdom. Read in the holy books, pray or think a mantra as: "Om all enlightened Masters. Om inner wisdom. Please guide and help me on my way." You can change the mantra, so that it applies to your personal beliefs. Buddhists say: "Om Buddha". Christians can pray: "Dear God", or "Jesus Christ". Atheists can think: "Om inner wisdom". Find your personal word to connect with the enlightenment energy. Get help from the yoga oracle or the angel oracle.
Think positive. Practice the five qualities inner peace, love, wisdom, self-discipline and happiness. Become positive through forgiveness and thankfullness.
Video ShantiMayi: How to open up knots in the heart
Video What is Enlightenment? - Sri Bhagavan
Video What's my core message? (gangaji)
Video "How do I transform myself?" - Sadhguru
God painted as a saint in a circle (unity consciousness).
Why is there the word God? Because it is helpful for many people to come to enlightenment. The center is enlightenment, not the word God. God is a mystery, and goes beyond the normal human understanding (the rational thinking, the four-dimensional system of thinking). In the enlightenment, we learn that we are not only on a higher level of relaxation, but in a higher cosmic dimension. And an enlightened can test this. He gets special abilities. These abilities have something to do with omniscience (infinite knowledge), omnipotence (unlimited power), omnipresence (present everywhere) and omnibenevolence (perfect goodness). Perfect goodness means to see the good in all and to act basically positiv.
Enlightenment occurs when the tension in the body and mind are dissolved. In the Bible, this is described with the words: "God is found in silence." The tensions are caused by the stress of life and mental false reactions. Tensions can lead to mental abnormalities (neuroses) and psychosomatic illnesses. You can put it like this: "An enlightened is inwardly healthy (whole, a holy)."
Meditation and mental work are the two main techniques to resolve inner tensions. In meditation, there are various techniques. You can work with visualisations. Positive images can resolve internal tensions and mental disorder. The center of meditation is inner peace. Then all of the stored stress ultimately emerge by itself and dissolve.
The enlightened mind is characterized by inner peace. God is therefore no concept, but from the inner peace unfolds a higher consciousness. One can suddenly think better. The tensions are eliminated. The mental capacity is multiplied. One can think holistically (excluding an ego from the entire cosmic system).
By the purified mind one can recognize what God is. God is not a concept but the basic perception of man. A person sees all things as they really are. He sees everything in context. Where previously a man by his ego was fixated on himself, he now thinks and feels egoless as one with the cosmos. If the tensions disappear in man, from the deep inner peace arises a deep inner happiness. The man is one with himself and the world. He feels peace, happiness, strength, love and clarity in himself. He has a higher perception. He can suddenly think above the higher dimensions in the cosmos. The space-time limitation is lifted. And an enlightened sees God as light in the world. He recognizes that there is a higher consciousness that permeates and directs everything. He is in his consciousness connected with God.
Spirituality is a way of working on oneself and his mind (spirit). Through spiritual techniques such as mental work (positive thinking) and meditation one can come into contact with a higher level of consciousness (God consciousness, unity consciousness). One sees the light in the world, in himself and in his fellow man. The most effective exercise is to rest, to practice (Yoga, meditation, reading) and to love all beings (to do good for others). You must center your life in inner happiness and find out how you can stay within and grow spiritually. The most important thing in spirituality is the inner voice. The inner voice is the voice of your own truth and wisdom. It is your feeling of rightness.
Wikipedia has related information at Desert Fathers
Wikipedia has related information at Anthony the Great
How to Find the Energy of God
How to Become a Christian According to the Bible
(taken from discussions on Internet forums about Yoga, God, religion, mysticism and spirituality)
My personal basis in philosophy is that of happiness. This philosophy is based on the Greek Epicurus and modern research on happiness. I believe striving toward happiness is at the core of human existence. Everyone would like to be happy and to avoid suffering. The highest level of happiness is enlightenment. Enlightenment is at the core of happiness philosophy. You could also describe this as a life in light, or the kingdom of God (paradise).
I’ve searched for a way to lasting happiness my entire life. This path has lead me to the philosophy of Epicurus. Later, I became occupied with Buddhism, Taoism, Hinduism, and Christianity. I found helpful techniques everywhere among these teachings. Professionally, I was a lawyer first and then a Yoga teacher and a psychotherapist. I am for the unity of religions and the personal way of spirituality for each person. People of all religions should work together toward a happy world. They should speak to one another, and learn from one another.
The greatest happiness is experienced in a life of light (in God, in enlightened existence) and in all-encompassing love. When one lives with this depth of meaning of life, one no longer needs to search for the meaning of life.
The basis of the spiritual way is enlightenment, sainthood, life in light (in the kingdom of God). God is to be found in each and every one of us, and in order to find God one has to change their consciousness, to be aware of God. The important thing is to find peace, love, happiness and joy and to develop them in oneself. The main techniques along the way to enlightenment are meditation and thought work.
With meditation, you can find a calm inner state. You can quiet the thoughts with a mantra or prayer, through concentration on an outer or inner point, or through conscious observation and stopping the thoughts. Then peace and calm can exist. What’s fascinating is that with a longer practice of meditation, inner joy and happiness arise as well.
Inner peace and happiness arise when you work consistently on your thoughts. When you overcome thoughts and feelings like rage, addiction and fear by stopping the thoughts or by replacing the negative thoughts with positive thoughts. When that is successfully achieved, peace of mind can be obtained. Then the mind can concern itself with positive things. If you concentrate on love, happiness and joy in life and then live these qualities as well, then happiness and joy in life will arise naturally.
At some point a change occurs in the spirit. You arrive at a higher level of happiness. You experience life as mainly a happy thing. The more you cleanse your inner being, the greater your happiness can become, until enlightenment is achieved. Enlightenment is a very particular level of the spirit. The spirit is so far removed  from negativity, addiction, fear and rage that the light of God can flow within. Enlightenment can be described as existence without attachments, without addictions (the “I am” from Moses, one rests in the simple state of being and is no longer attached to worldly things), as being conscious of God (unity consciousness, one lives in light in the kingdom of God) and as happiness (inner happiness, joy and love).  These three characteristics belong together and serve one another.
With emphasis on taking the path of inner calm, we can reach a God-consciousness, which means we can find God in inner peace and calm. We can also concentrate on developing a consciousness of unity. We can identify with other people and other beings. We can wish them happiness and help them as much as possible.
If you experience other people in a positive way, you know what all-encompassing love is. It develops as an encompassing inner happiness, a unity consciousness of love that at some point leads to enlightenment. Jesus taught the way of all-encompassing love for that reason. He also advised his followers to love their enemies. We can consider our enemies among our own problems and suffering. If we can accept this, see this in a positive light and love, then we have found a way to God-consciousness. In order to enter the kingdom of God, your love must be all-encompassing, unconditional, and practiced constantly. I send all beings light and pray for my fellow humans every day. I work for a world of love, peace and happiness.
It’s important to me also remember to enjoy life, to keep joy in life, besides taking the path of inner calm and all-encompassing love. I love myself enough. I do what is fun. I enjoy life every day. I know spiritual exercises with which I can create happiness in myself, in a way comparable to Jesus’ transfiguration on the mountain. Jesus prayed to God, and visualized God in himself, and meditated (brought his thoughts to a state of calm rest) and came to the light.
How do you have fun in life? There are a lot of opportunities to take to create joy in life. It varies from person to person. You can eat something you like, listen to good music, watch a nice film, talk to positive people or chat with them online. You can do something creative, such as making music, painting, and writing, exercising or playing sports or look for a fascinating mission. I like to make videos and to save the world. It’s important to center yourself in your inner happiness first, otherwise everything is superficial and pointless. I also consider which spiritual exercises I need each day in order to arrive at this state of happiness. If you have inner happiness, then joy in life will develop almost by itself. You only need little things to enjoy to experience the beauty of life.
Those who see themselves as being responsible for saving the world will never be bored. There is always something to do. It doesn’t have to be anything big. You can speak some kind words to build up other people, or say a prayer for people or save the life of an animal. I can constantly save the lives of frogs, toads and snails. I bless them then. In this way good karma results that will at some point come back to me. I can even send good karma to other people if I have too much. Doing good is a lot of fun, as long as you don’t overwhelm yourself and as long as you are creative about it.
The path of a spiritual practice varies from individual to individual. I live as a hermit. For me, the spiritual practice is different than for someone with a career and a family. It is even further removed when you live as a monk or a nun in a monastery. I live according to a spiritual plan for each day. I cleanse my inner being by reading, praying, going for walks, meditating and working. I do everything at the right moment and for the right amount of time so that I am constantly in the state of cleansing. It takes a lot of inner sense and discipline.
I had a lot of enlightenment experiences. I have gotten to know the mystery of God. I have risen to high levels of paradise consciousness with my spirit. But I still have a lot to cleanse. One could say that I am still just a poor sinner. I have lived as a hermit for 25 years. The inner cleansing takes a long time for most people. At the moment, I am going through a phase of intense transformation. I live in times of happiness, in times of darkness, and times of inner conflict. I experience my way as being lead by God. Everything seems to follow an exact plan, but I don’t know what lies ahead; the end of the plan.
I follow the path of the Christian desert masters. They described exactly how one should live as a spiritual hermit, how one should practice. The main point of the desert fathers is that you should sit in your hut and then feel out an effective way of spiritual practice. This was called “your hut will teach you.” Enlightenment appears basically through the way of rest, love, and thought work. God is to be found in the calm. Modern research in happiness states that calm makes you happy. The art of the spiritual way is to find the correct amount of calm. Too much rest makes one lazy and slow. The desert fathers recommended not only to sit in your hut and wait for the spirit of God, but to work toward this.
On the other hand, they warned about too much work. If you stretch a bow to far, it will break. If a hermit or monk is too active on the outside then God cannot come in because God needs calm. The calm must be great enough that the body and spirit can heal from the inner tension. The hermits in the  desert had enough calm already due to their isolated life, separate from the outside world. A constantly calm state feels unbearable first, but that is how the process of inner healing can begin.
Problems with enough rest result in a monastery. Here there’s the danger one might work too much, or let oneself be distracted by one another, so that the inner process needed for oneself cannot be established, or to lose oneself in external rules. A basic rule of the desert fathers was to work only as much as the space the body needs when it lies down. God is the focus, and not the work. The work should only serve to bring forth a life in God (in light) and to hold onto that. A hermit has to sensitively feel out how much work will take him or her forward toward that goal.
On the path to God, a deciding factor is the nature of one’s thoughts. A spiritual person has to find a way to dissolve inner conflict, blockages and false images to the best of his or her ability. He or she has to overcome fear, addiction and rage. This way, at some point in time an inner change will occur and that person will arrive in a state of happiness. In that sense, he or she is healed. The victory over suffering is the awakening of inner light.
Having people accompany you in life makes the way easier. Two people can live in love, if they put their relationship together in the right way. Two people can support each other along the spiritual way. They can strengthen one another energetically and mentally. God made man and woman so that they can live together in paradise. The main story in the bible shows that. The mystery is that they can both awaken the kundalini snake that wraps itself around the tree of enlightenment with their love and sexual energy. They were then allowed to eat the apple of enlightenment which stands for unity, oneness and life in God (symbolized through its round shape). I lived without much contact for ten years. Then I realized some contact does me good.  It’s wonderful that it’s very simple and easy to get contact with other people over the internet.
I’ve tried a lot of different things in my life. I’ve done karate, I’ve gone hiking, went dancing in clubs, went skiing, discussed political topics at events and visited psychology seminars. I had a political, philosophical, a psychological and a spiritual phase. At the moment, everything has rather come to rest. For awhile, I practiced strictly and now I practice more according to how I feel. The only difficult thing for me at present are the extremely powerful kundalini developments. I hope, though, that one day I will get over that phase and simply be in happiness, in peace, love and strength.
Western yogis are free to shape their spiritual paths according to their needs. Some live alone, some in a group, and others in a relationship. I live my life in a way that makes me feel well. It’s important for me to have a mission or goal that excites me. I’ve studied a lot of different things, taken various workshops in the spiritual scene and written a lot of books and lead a lot of yoga groups. My path is never boring.
I see myself as a mystic who is beyond religions but somehow also finds himself within all of the religions. In enlightenment, I experienced a dimension that can be described as God, nirvana, or unity. I recognized that religions use different names for this state of consciousness. My enlightenment experience allowed me to see the common thread between Christianity and Buddhism. This common thread is the enlightened state of being. Moses could see the light of God in the world (the burning bush) and received knowledge of “ I am “ in God. This “ I am” state is achieved when the ego disappears and when one arrives in unity consciousness. This unity consciousness canbe given the name “Nirvana”. Nirvana means deletion, nothing, emptiness, dissolution of the ego. It isn’t an absolute state of nothingness, rather one arrives in light via this state of nothingness. Nothingness and happiness go together. In Christianity Master Eckhart and Pseudo-Dionysius Areopagita (negative theology) worked with this concept particularly.
I would like to share with you my kundalini experiences. First there was a very strenuous phase which lasted some five weeks. The chakras opened and the energy started to flow intensely. Every few days I had a short break to recover, then it started up again. Then I had a few weeks of rest. I used that time to mentally prepare myself, which was useful since the whole process started up again. A few times I was really at my wits’ end,  really at the limit of what I can take. What bothered me the most were the sleepless nights. I could only get myself through with the help of spiritual exercises.
The energy processes vary a lot. The night before yesterday I observed this. I sat in front of the television and felt how the tension in my solar plexus chakra eased. This transformation period took two hours. I had the feeling that my body was being turned inside out. I felt a tugging everywhere, and felt I might break down. I watched very interesting films on TV so that I would be distracted enough from my inner crisis so I could get through it. Ten after 24 hours the energy began to flow through the solar plexus chakra into the body. I felt like I was under an intense electrical charge and couldn’t sleep. But it was a form of happiness energy, so this made it easier to get through.
The nightly processes of tension dissolving are varied. They range from painful to enjoyable to a combination. It depends on whether the happiness energy dominates or the dissolving of old tension and problems. Mostly the nights are a mixture of both and are rather difficult. I have to constantly consider which spiritual techniques (visiualization, mantras, meditation, yoga poses) will help me through the process. The right technique dissolves blockages and gets the energy to flow again. Sometimes I have to try one thing for awhile before it starts to work effectively.
In bigger conflicts I listen to the help of my masters. Once I thought I wouldn’t make it through the night because I was so exhausted from the strain of the previous days. I fell asleep immediately and felt better, even though the energy flow in my body was so strong I never would have thought I could sleep. One day I needed to get things done that required a lot of inner strength, and that was after a sleepless night. Right before getting out of bed, strength shot through me. I felt like I had the strength of a giant and could use that to get everything done. This was a miracle to me.
The energy isn’t just felt by me, but from other people too. A woman visited me as I was at that time working on the energy in me. She was so happy near me that she hardly wanted to go home. As I visited my mother, happiness energy suddenly flowed through me and I was happy to rest in bliss for about an hour. That affected my mother, too. Our conversation was calm and positive.
I’m a lazy Yogi at the moment. My yoga consists of a walk while doing breath of fire and mantras. I lay in bed in yoga posititions and meditate. That’s enough for me right now. I am constantly in intense energy processes. My main meditation is watching TV. I am just there and live my life. I connect with God every day and my enlightened masters. I listen to my inner voice and do what it advises me at any given moment. That’s how I get through all of my spiritual crises.
There are many bad gurus. I recommend that everyone test the enlightened masters and to follow only the good ones. For me, they are Buddha, Jesus, Patanjali, Laotse and Socrates. Their teachings can help us find our way to light.
It began with the awakening of my ability to sense energy in 1986. Since that time, I can feel the energy of other people and help them. In 1987 I started small meditation groups where I also taught positive thinking. At that time, I still worked as a lawyer. After splitting up with my ex wife I gave up my lawyer profession and have lived as a hermit for 25 years. In the course of the last few years I’ve written a lot of texts online in German and English. Many people connect with me mentally and spiritually. I feel their energy, their trust and help them as much as I can.
I had a happy family, a nice wife and a lovable son. But life is constant change. Now I live as a hermit. How do you arrive in light? In that you leave material things behind and develop inner happiness. Enlightenment exceeds even the happiness of the happiest family.
I’ve recognized that the deepest point of life is to be happy and to live in all-encompassing love. One arrives in all-encompassing love when one works for a happy world. If you have this goal, there is always something to do. Life is never boring and always has a purpose. One just has to see in any given moment, what needs to be done and what one can do.
Everyone is allowed to find his own spiritual way. I refer to the enlightened masters and their teachings which inspire me. I can say that I have the feeling my way works for me. I am careful and approach the spiritual path with wisdom. I generally advise following a gentle spiritual way.
A yogi is a person who practices yoga. Yoga consists of physical and mental, spiritual exercises. The goal of yoga is to develop the self, to find enlightenment. There are many different directions in yoga. Yoga goes beyond religion. Buddha was also a yogi. Even the Christian dessert teachers were yogis.
Yoga is there for people, and for that reason needs to be adapted to cultural and personal conditions. The modern western yoga is different from the traditional, Indian yoga. Often, yoga is only practiced as bodily exercise in the west, with the goal of flexibility, health, beauty or relaxation. The spiritual content is missing. That’s a problem for many Indian yoga masters such as Swami Sivananda. For me, it’s OK. Variation is the strength of western yoga.
Enlightenment takes place through the dissolving of tension (energy blockages) in the body and spirit. The way to this end varies from person to person and requires a good inner sense for what one needs at any given time. Sometimes extreme exercises and sometimes gentle ones are necessary, depending on the given moment. Rigid dogma is the wrong way. A real enlightened master gives every student exactly what that student needs.
I go about finding what does me good along the spiritual path in an undogmatic way. I’m vegetarian and don’t do any drugs (smoking, alcohol and other substances) or gamble. But sometimes I do eat meat when my body needs it. I get a buzz from chocolate or watching TV when my soul needs it. My game is called enlightenment. You never know when you will win and what comes next, and that’s what makes the spiritual way so exciting.  What is material gain next to eternal bliss?
And what about sexuality? Does a yogi have to do without it? No! For a tantric yogi, sexuality is also a way to God when practiced correctly. It’s important, according to the Hatha yoga principles, that one sticks to moral principles. For me, among the most important are loyalty in a relationship. If a yogi has a relationship, he or she should live by loyalty, love, and honesty.
Self-disciplince is important on the path of yoga. Self-discipline is the main way to spiritual success, but one shouldn’t overdo it. Too feel discipline causes tension and energy blockages. One should sense exactly whether discipline is necessary at any given time, or whether being laidback is more appropriate. Staying in an asana for hours can be a good thing or a bad thing. Buddha found that extreme practice makes the body weak and for that reason suggested a middle way. Why should one practice in the extreme cold of a cave in the Himalayas when you can practice in a nice warm house in Germany, with an internet connection? Why rub ashes onto yourself when you can wash yourself with soap? Why hold your breath when you can succeed with simpler exercises?
Along the yogic path, one gets great power. The chakras open up, the kundalini energy is activated and spiritual energy develops in an unimaginable way. The spiritual energy is neutral and can be abused. For that reason a yogi should always ground him or herself in love, empathy and humility. Yoga should be combined with positive thinking.
A yogi should hold to the ten ground rules of Patanjali. 1. Non-violence (Ahimsa). Don’t hurt or kill others. Be ready for peace, live gently. 2. Truth (Satya) Live in truth. Be honest to yourself and others. 3. Righteousness (Asteya). Don’t steal, cheat or betray. A yogi is honest in his life’s work. 4. Wisdom (Brahmacharya) . Live spiritually, in wisdom(Brahmacharya. Don’t serve money, serve God. Differentiate between the essential and the non-eseential. 5. Simplicity (Aparigraha). Have moderation in what you enjoy. A spiritual person lives modestly on the outside and richly on the outside. A yogi doesn’t use energy on what he does in the outer world, but lives calmly, and turns to the inside and cleanses himself from the inside.
Further principles of yoga according to Patanjali: 6: Honoring the spiritual goal (Ishvara, the personal divinity). So that we don’t lose our spiritual way, it’s necessary to concentrate on our spiritual goals, and to refocus on them when necessary. 7. Sacrifice of the Ego. (Saucha, purification/cleansing). Without sacrificing the ego, it’s not possible to come to enlightenment. To sacrifice the ego the right way is an art. Those who sacrifice too much create tension. Those who sacrifice too little don’t dissolve any ego tension or attachments. How do you come to inner peace, inner strength, and all-encompassing love the right way today? What’s the right way for you at this given moment?
Further principles of yoga according to Patanjali. 8: Goal-oriented life (Tapas). Tapas means to lead a disciplined life. 9. Self-study. (Swadhyaya). Reading from a spiritual book daily helps us stay on the spiritual way, and makes us spiritual winners.10. Satisfaction (Santosha). Plan your day and your life so that you are satisfied. Which thoughts help you to come to satisfaction?
There are gentle and there are extreme spiritual techniques. Extreme exercises can lead to spiritual breakthroughs. It’s important to practice with wisdom. For me, God makes my personal life sufficiently extreme. There are difficult faces to go through, again and again which lead to spiritual breakthroughs. They develop on their own, during my daily life. That’s enough. I generally prefer a gentle spiritual way.
There are dogmatic and non-dogmatic people in spirituality. From my perspective, everything has it’s right to exist in the way of spirituality. It depends on whether you use wisdom to find the right path for you personally. Dogamtic people usually have great strength and are consistent along their way. If that’s connected to ego, then it leads to ego, and if connected with wisdom, leads to light. Unfortunately, dogmatic people are usually not able to apply self-awareness to their own situation. We need self-discipline and wisdom along the spiritual way to be successful. I feel out my way each day to find my personal combination of these elements, wisdom and self-discipline.
The spiritual path is a free decision. Enlightenment is voluntary. No one is forced into happiness. The free will is respected. However, the brain is like a computer when we look at it closely. The mind is programmed through experiences and our reactions towards them, as well as our thoughts. An inner program comes into being, according to what a person decides. I have had countless experiences in the course of thousands of lives. I thought about life and established happiness as a goal of life. In this life, I read about the philosopher Epicurus and decided to take the path of inner happiness. It was a free decision. But I couldn’t do anything else but decide this, on the basis of what I knew before. According to Laotse, “if the wise learn of the true way, they must take that course. If a fool hears of the way of enlightenment, he laughs out loud. If he isn’t laughing, it isn’t the true spiritual path.”
The will of a human is free, to look at it from a very basic perspective. However, people make decisions based on outer impulses and inner programs, depending on the person. In this way, decisions are determined, or pre-determined. Only in enlightenment does a person get true freedom because he or she is free of worldly impulses, attachments and wishes. He or she is happy and in a desireless state because he or she is happy from the inside. This person doesn’t need any material things anymore to be happy. A life in the light of God is enough. He or she can still enjoy material existence if he or she likes though.
Enlightenment is consciousness, pure and without an identity. In order to act in the world, a person has to take on an identity. In that case, you’re like a free actor who can decide which role you would like to take. The enlightened always know that it is just a roll. The enlightened are beyond all roles. They can decide to be the good guys or the bad guys. The path of evil strengthens the ego and distances one from light. The way of good encourages inner happiness and love. If you combine love with wisdom and self-discipline, you arrive along the way of good in a life of light. I also believe that you can arrive in light along the path of evil.  The path of evil causes you to encounter suffering, to achieve wisdom and then destroys attachments to the world. Before you arrive in enlightenment though, you have to get rid of your bad karma. Many evil people will often become saints or healers in their last lives on earth.
I observe in myself that I mostly took the path of good in my earlier lives. For that reason, my mind is basically programmed along the path of good. Once I could decide freely within enlightenment, if I wanted to take on a good or evil identity, I automatically decided on the path of good. So that we have a lot of good enlightened people, the enlightenment path of love should be taught. The enlightenment path of love can take a bit longer than direct enlightenment, but the world benefits greatly from this. In Tibet some thousand years ago there was a conflict between Tibetan Buddhism (way of love) and Zen Buddhism (strict meditation and quick enlightenment). The Tibetan king decided on the way of love. For that reason, Tibetan Buddhism puts a lot of value in a thorough teaching of the mind. Only when a good basis in love and wisdom is achieved, can quick techniques and intensive meditation (three years as a yogi) lead to enlightenment.
For me, God is formless, the incomprehensible behind all forms. Shiva, Vishnu and Brahma are just forms of God, just like Jesus, Buddha and Krishna are forms of godly consciousness. I root myself in the formless and use the form of God to bring myself forward in my concrete moments and to lead to light. Sometimes Krishna (the master of love) an inspiring role model, sometimes  Jesus (the master of ego sacrifice), sometimes Buddha (the master of peace and calm), sometimes Shiva (the strict yogi), sometimes Brahma (the wise), and sometimes Ganesha ( the God of happiness and joy in life). Another way to see it is that every spiritual role model has all of the important aspects and forms in God in itself.
I don’t consider other religions to be less than my own. We should recognize one another as being equal in value. Only in this way can love and peace be built upon. Religious and cultural pluralism is the way in light today.
After an intense practice of rune yoga I awoke with a distinct sense of energy. Since that time, I can sense the energy of others and mentally help them. In 1987, I also began to direct small groups in meditation and positive thinking. At the time I still worked as a lawyer. After separating from my ex-wife I gave up my lawyer practice and have lived as a hermit for 25 years.
I believe I am lead by God and get all of the necessary help from God. As a former atheist I have experienced some difficulty in believing in God. But I observe that my life is directed in a mysterious way. If a crisis gets too big, I always get some help. Suddenly I can sleep, happiness energy is awakened, a nice person appears, or I can be happy about something. When I have to take care of things in the outside world, the cleansing process is reduced. Every day, an optimal development process takes place that normally challenges me a lot, but doesn’t overwhelm me. And that has been taking place for 25 years!
I experience God as an identity-less ”I am”, as a higher consciousness. I can only say that life develops in a certain way that I think is steered. I can’t say who controls this. I think it comes from the enlightened masters I’m mentally connected with. You can see their pictures in this almanac.
I see it like this: the enlightened masters comprise a complete consciousness that can help in the cosmos, to take direct action. Normally, this consciousness rests happily within itself. It helps especially when it is asked for help. In order to achieve constant guidance, a daily prayer is very important. I connect with my enlightened masters daily. One can also pray directly to God. It doesn’t matter which name you speak to the higher consciousness with. Important is only that you are serious about receiving real guidance and help. Then you get help so that you go forward spiritually, and not so that all egoistical wishes are fulfilled. I especially recommend to everyone to connect with the higher consciousness daily. Everyone can do that in his or her own way.
Important in my view, is that one takes the spiritual way consistently daily. It doesn’t matter which exercises are done. One should feel what one needs and what does one good. It doesn’t have to be any particular or special exercises. The important hing is it should bring you further spiritually. Everything will happen at the right time. A good exercise is a to read daily from a spiritual book, or to pull an oracle card, or to pray, say a mantra, to visualize an image of an enlightened master. Those who have more time can meditate daily, do yoga and go for walks.
Being alone is a necessary exercise for me. I have to live alone so that I can develop myself spiritually. But I don’t need to be that strict about it. For me, the middle way is good where I have some contact. Even a relationship isn’t out of the question. I lived the first twelve years as a yogi in a relationship. Then there was a time where my spiritual energy disappeared and I hardly had any energy for a relationship. Now it seems my energy is developing slowling again.
Many Christians are afraid of yoga nad meditation. But Jesus was a yogi. He received kundalini energy (the holy Ghost, symbolized through the baptism) by Johnn the Baptist and meditated for 40 days in the desert. He overcame the devil (his ego) and could help other people with spiritual energy (the angels served him). Buddha also meditated and the devil appeared ( his ego) and tried to tempt him. He let go of his worldly attachments and turned to the light and the devil disappeared. The enlightenment stories of Buddha and Jesus are very similar.
Principally, the way of inner and outer happiness are opposites. If you take the path of outer happiness, you built up attachments on outer things and other people who will reduce your happiness in the long run. If you go the path of inner happiness, you will reduce and get rid of your attachments. Attachments are inner tension. The more you let go of your inner tension, the more happiness can develop within you.
The enlightened masters (God) lead us through our inner voice, to truth. It is important to have constant contact with one’s own voice of truth and wisdom. We should feel within ourselves and ask what is important at that moment along the way of wisdom.
Meditation of the inner voice: 1. Sit down in the meditation position (sit Indian style, or in a chair) Close your eyes. Breathe in and out. Relax. 2. Stop all thoughts for a minute and relax. 3. Visualize the earth, move one hand and thin :” I send light. May all beings be happy. May the world be happy.” Send light to suffering people. Use the TV as a window to the world and surround all beings with light. 4. Put your hand on your lap. Imagine yourself as Buddha, Shiva or a goddess. Move your toes and think this mantra : “I am a goddess (Buddha, Shiva) of peace. I take the path of peace. I live in peace.” 5. Visualize the cosmos around you full of stars. Make big circles with your arms and think: “I take things as they are. I let go of my false desires. I flow with positivity in my life.” 6. Connect with the enlightened masters or God. Rub the palms of your hands in front of your heart chakra and think: “om all enlightened masters (God). Om inner wisdom. I ask for guidance and help along my way.”
Holy wars take place in many lands of the world and cause suffering. The solution is clear: we have to accept that we live in a world of varied religions. We have to learn to be loving, peaceful, tolerant and non-violent with one another.
After my enlightenment experience, I recognized that enlightenment is the deeper point of life. Enlightenment is the deliverance from the suffering of life. Enlightenment is the greatest happiness and highest fulfillment. In enlightenment, you realize your true self. Summarized: those who live enlightened, live better. An unenlightened person thinks that he or she will be happier with more money, sex, recognition, consumption and material riches. Only the wise recognize that inner prosperity will make you happier than material prosperity. You can enjoy life and develop spiritually at the same time. There are strict spiritual practitioners and there are moderate spiritual practitioners. I represent the way of the moderate practitioners who have enough fun in life.
When you are completely pure inside, God can enter and fill you with peace, love and happiness. In the Bible, it says the human being must choose between God (inner happiness) and money (the way of material happiness). Those who want to go forward spiritually should choose the path of inner happiness.
There are various stages of enlightenment. Enlightenment begins with the feeling of harmony with oneself and the world. Then peace, happiness and love appears. Then the stage of dissolving of the “I” consciousness and the presence of the consciousness of unity (God consciousness) comes into being. The highest stage (full enlightenment)  is Nirvikalpa Samadhi, the resting in a dimension of highest happiness. This can be considered unity with God, the unity of Shiva and Shakti (the human being and God), or as the highest paradies (Sathyaloka, the place of highest truth). Only once have I reached this state, after my kundalini energy completely unfurled. It rose as a thick ray of energy from the bottom of the pelvis up to the head. Then there was a change of consciousness and I was in highest happiness. I was aware that this was the goal of all souls. The highest goal is not “simple” enlightenment, rather the “full” enlightenment (to be Buddha, or a Jivanmukta).
Swami Sivananda: ”Samadhi (enlightenment) is unity. The spirit goes into the eternal, the Atman, like salt in water or camphor in flames. It is a state of pure consciousness. Recognition made in Samadhi is the recognition of God. In Samadhi there isn’t consciousness of the body or of the mind. There is only existence (sat). The one meditating has dissolved his personality in the ocean of God, drowned and forgotten, until he is just a tool of God. When he opens his mouth, he speaks without effort and without consideration through the direct intuition of the word of God, and when he lifts his hand, God streams through it to work miracles.”
Samadhi is not a state of dullness, forgetfullness or deletion. It is a state of absolute consciousness that defies every attempt to describe it. It isn’t the end destination of all. It is moksha (freedom, the release from suffering). The human being now rests in his middle- the goal of his search in absolute freedom, independence and perfection.
People generally believe Samadhi means to sit with a loincloth in a state of nothingness consciousness in the lotus position. Such Samadhis are brought about through Hatha Yoga kriyas. In Jada Samadhi the prana is moved up high and held in one chakra. Through this one can anchor the self in serenity, strength, love, clarity or unity.
Full enlightenment is totally different. There, all doubt, confusion and the three knots avidya (uncertainty), kam (worldly longing) and karma (determination, destiny) are destroyed. It gives fearlessness and an unbreakable state of mind. The Samadhi state also holds firm when taking action. Those who are anchored in complete enlightenment hold the mind and spirit in balance and use them as a service to other people.
In Samadhi, the cleansed spirit goes to God and becomes God consciousness. To know Brahman means to become Brahman. When the spirit becomes Brahman, it also dissolves the world, which is a creation of the spirit, in the Brahman and the spirit becomes Brahman. In this experience darkness and emptiness do not exist. There is only light. It is an experience of unity, and oneness. Time and space cease to exist, there is only eternity. You become all-knowing and all-powerful. You know the mystery of creation. You have achieved immortality, higher knowledge and eternal bliss. Every duality disappears, there is no subject and no object.
When you are rooted in the highes Nirvikalpa Samdhi, you don’t have any body consciousness. You have the full awareness of Brahman. There is nothing other than the self. It is a wonderful experience. You are full of reverence. It is a state that one must achieve through one’s own efforts. It is without end, complete and an experience from existence and pure consciousness. When you have this experience , the mind, wishes, activities and feelings of joy and worry disappear.
Samadhi gives moksha. That is the high point of yoga. With the recognition of the self, uncertainty disappears. With the disappearance of the main reason for the uncertainty, the ”I” thinking disappears. The yogi now has knowledge of the past and future, as well as from the present. Everything is “now”. Everything is “here”. Time and space do not matter anymore.
A person who comes out of Samadhi can still live like they did before, but their consciousness is greatly changed. No one can reach Samadhi until they are a pure soul. You have to have a pure heart. The spirit has to be full cleansed. Only then is the person ready to receive the light of God. You have to be strong enough to take the pressure of a sudden consciousness expansion and to be able to tolerate a cosmic viewpoint.
Deep meditation leads to Samadhi, to being one with God. Contemplate God. Fill your spirit with God. Identify your spirit with God. The way you think, is the way you will be. Think yourself godly and you will become that. Be silent. Recognize yourself. Let your spirit go into God.
The leadership through the inner voice of wisdom is very important. Only this way can you tell what the wrong and right techniques are. The same techniques can be in one moment wrong, and the next minute the right ones. If you don’t progress spiritually, then that is an indication of a wrong method of practicing. In contrast, if you arrive in light, love, happiness, peace, and truth and strength, then you are doing the right things.
The real fulfillment of life can be enoyed with a positive psyche only. Those who are enlightened recognized their world as a paradise. The small things are enough to make great joy. God is fulfillment but only a fulfillment that comes from the inside. It is important to also flow positively with life, go with the flow, and to not become attached to material things. ;-)
Even in the western world we can realize our inner happiness and come to enlightenment. We don’t have to live as strict hermits away from the world in order to do that. Through the grace of the enlightened masters it’s possible without the most extreme circumstances. They can give us energy, wisdom, strength and love that we can use along our way. When we connect to an enlightened master of our choice every day and do enough spiritual exercises then we can grow in this material world, also spiritually. Particularly we can arrive in paradise after death. That is a great gift. Those who understand can practice master yoga every day by calling to the enlightened, praying, using an oracle and reading.
Some people proceed best along the spiritual path when they are strict about it, as monks, nuns, hermits, yogis or desert dwellers. According to Amritanandamayi, you come to enlightenment five times faster when you live along. Asceticism isn’t the only spiritual way. Only a few people are able to live this way. I believe in reincarnation. Most people develop in the course of many lives. There is also a way to spiritually cleanse on the other side. In Amitabha Buddhism, there is a paradise in between lives where you can develop slowly to the highest state of nirvana (happiness, light, God). This paradise in between is basically what one usually thinks of paradise in Christianity.
You can always develop further spiritually. After enlightenment, there are also a lot of stages of enlightenment. According to my experience there is a stage of unity consciousness, and after that the stage of omni-presence, all-knowingness, and all-powerfullness. Swami Sivananda describes these states as the signs of full enlightenment. One can deal everywhere and help people everywhere, also from other dimensions. This happens according to my experience through thinking, visions, dreams, energy transfer (giving peace, strength, love, happiness, wisdom). Before you achieve these powers, there is a long path to take. I observed in myself that these abilities develop slowly. I am still at the beginning.
The greatest meaning in life is experienced through the way of enlightenment and the way of love. The way of enlightenment is developed through deep potential for happiness. You live in unity, harmony, and light. That gives you a deep feeling of meaningfulness. Those who live in love, experience life as full of meaning. If you are searching for meaning in your life, then you should concentrate on these points.
Material happiness is an illusion. True happiness is only obtained through enlightenment. Enlightenment is the deeper meaning of life. True happiness remains even when unfortunate things occur in life. That destroys the illusion of outer happiness. Buddha taught life is mainly suffering. In Christianity, the cross is the main point of focus. Along the way of inner happiness, you open your inner sources of happiness and rise above all outer suffering one day. There are many ways to enlightenment. Find the way that fits you and works best. Principally happiness arises through spiritual practice like yoga, walking, meditating and thinking positively. It is helpful to have an enlightened master.
Without sacrifice, you can’t break through into the light of enlightenment. The sacrifice of the ego and incorporating the self into the will of God (will of life, the universe).  Letting go of the ego and sacrificing the right way is a great art. If you sacrifice incorrectly, you create more tension. We shouldn’t let go of too much at once and not too little either. If done correctly, you let go of inner tension. I am creative about my rituals of ego sacrifice. I can tell what I need at any given time and what will work best. To do this with wisdom, you need to think about a situation exactly and consider what the best way is at the time. In this way, you give up your ego. It’s similar to a sacrifice of love, where you give something or someone up because you love them. I prefer sacrificing for something I like. If I don’t like a situation, I eat so many sweets that I can tolerate the situation, or I watch TV until I’ve forgotten all of the suffering in my life.
There once was a king who wanted to realize his inner happiness. His priests explained to him that a five- fold renunciation was necessary. First, the king renounced his kingdom. He moved into a forest and lived as a yogi. The second thing he gave up was sexuality. He lived without a relationship in order to effectively put his energy into his spiritual exercises. That was the biggest sacrifice for him. The third thing he gave up were his thoughts. He meditated a lot and lived in peace. The fourth thing he gave up was his “me” consciousness.He let go of his ego and went through the great emptiness and landed in light. It feels unpleasant when the ego is destroyed. But behind that unpleasantness, awaits inner happiness. Those who know that, can easily let go of their ego. The king enjoyed the happiness of enlightenment for a time. Then he thought on the suffering of his fellow humans. They didn’t know the way to inner happiness. They needed an enlightened helper to show them the way to inner peace, love and happiness. The king sacrificed his lone enjoyment of happiness and went back to his kingdom. He helped a lot of people along the spiritual way. He lived as a hatha yogi with constant practice, as a karma yogi of great love and a bhogi yogi in immeasurable happiness in a constant consciousness of paradise (in God, light, unity consciousness). The fifth thing he sacrificed proved to be the biggest source of grace in his life.
The best spiritual exercise is the exercise that brings you forward in any given moment. That could be reading from a spiritual book, a nice walk in the woods, meditation, meeting a spiritual person. Siddhasana can be a good exercise for advanced yogis. I reached the Nirvikalpa-Samadhi when laying down. The kundalini energy shot out of the skull chakra and into the heaven and came back in a big circle with a standing yoga exercise. Then I was integrated into the unity of the cosmos at a deep level. When walking the holy Ghost of God came to me and went into me. I received a holy energy baptism like the first baptism of Christ at Pentecost. The fire built itself around my head of energy. I was aware that I was blessed and lead by God. These were all very simple exercises that brought a high level of success. The spiritual way doesn’t need to be complicated. It’s enough to go walking regularly, a bit of yoga, some meditation, and reading daily in a spiritual book in addition to consistent thought work, positive thinking.
You can activate kundalini energy with spiritual exercises. You can come to a state of strength, serenity, and happiness. You can put so much strength into your erxercises that you go above and beyond all of your problems. Physical yoga exercises are helpful, as well as God- Yoga (visualizing God), kundalini meditaion and working with negative thoughts such as fear, rage and addiction. You have to see inside yourself which technique will work for you best in which moment.
Working with kundalini energy is a process not well known in the west. But it is the strongest energy a person has within him or herself. When it develops, a cleansing process often accompanies it for a longer or shorter period of time, as I am going through currently. There are some reports over such processes in spiritual literature. The most well-known is the Gopi Krishna. Gopi Krishna (1903-1984) was an Indian yogi, mystic, academic and author. After he awoke to kundalini energy at the age of 34,  he began to research the phenomen of Kundalini energy. According to his own accounts, he perceived streams of light, heard otherworldly sounds, and moved into a boundless state of consciousness.
The American David Ramon Hawkins (1927-2012) was a doctor and a psychiatrist. He had uncommon supernatural experiences of hell, happiness and godly peace. He was an alchoholic and reached a point where he didn’t know what to do. He called to God, “if there is a God, I ask him to help me now.” He fell unconscious and woke up as an enlightened person the next day. The enlightenment leap helped him to spontaneously heal from addiction and also from 15 chronic illness. He dissolved his personal ego. He needed 30 years to integrate this consciousness leap.
The development of kundalini proceeds in various ways. According to Indian teachings, it has its own intelligence and does what each person needs. You can say that the cleansing process is controlled by God. You are challenged, but will not be overwhelmed by the process.Jesus’ kundalini energy was activated through John the Baptist. Then it developed in the desert for 40 days so that Jesus could only meditate in the desert. Finally, his ego let go (the devil)  in a last temptation and Jesus received healing powers (the angels served him). Such a fast kundalini development is possible for great enlightened souls who have incarnated on earth. That is also how it took place for  Holy Antonius, the founder of the desert fathers and Christian hermits. He reported demons which harassed him for years.
In 1986 kundalini energy was awakened after an intense enlightenment experience. Since that time, I’ve found myself in a state of constant cleansing. I’m going through another time of transformation now. The first five weeks were really difficult. Then it calmed down a bit. Every day I went through an intense cleansing process from morning until night, and only sometimes did the kundalini energy unfurl. This is how it was just yesterday and the day before yesterday. The day before yesterday I felt very restless.At 3 in the morning I realized the kundalini energy was very active. I could feel a strong charge in myself that kept me from sleeping. After 24 hours this energy flowed  through me until it suddenly disappeared. This energy was really powerful. I could only concentrate and try to go with the flow in a positive way. I meditated on the suffering in myself in the world. This way, I received a lot of inner strength and could get through the cleansing process.
(Quote Wikipedia): In Tantric writings, kundalini is described as etheric power in humans. According to these writings, this energy is resting under the lowest part of the spine and is symbolically portrayed as a coiled snake sleeping in the lowest chakra.Through yogic practice, it can be awakened and rise through the chakras and cause transformation. If it reaches the highest chakra, it unites with the cosmic spirit and brings highest happiness to the person experiencing the transformation. Certain phenomena are described as appearing with the rising kundalini. Among these include heat waves, a feeling of warmth, cold spells, ticks (unintended shaking, trembling), chronic and temporary pain in the whole body, numbness of hands and feet, laughing, crying and ecstatic happiness.
29.(Quote from Sahaja): According to the old sources, kundalini is the most subtle, holy and powerful energy in the universe. Kundalini isn’t a modern discovery, it was already described thousands of years before Christ. Shri Mataji Nirmali Devi explained Kundalini as the energy of the godly wish to become one with God again. This energy has been at work since the beginning of time and moves evolution forward. Knowledge of kundalini provides a bridge between creation and evolution theories. Kundalini is the godly power which controls evolution. In the western tradition this power has been called the Holy Ghost. If a person is pure in his or her inner being, they achieve freedom, Moksha when the Kundalini awakens. This full freedom occurred with Buddha as he had let go of all attachments and temptations before his self-realization.  If the kundalini energy is awakened in “imperfect” people, the various chakras start to cleanse.Sat-Chit-Ananda-the truth, the consciousness, permeates everything and makes pure joy a reality.
Enlightenment goes beyond normal perceptions of happiness, joy and suffering. It is a higher level of happiness that brings great inner peace with it. One can also achieve highest happiness using certain techniques. That’s what I consider Samadhi. You can rest in highest happiness on the other side (highest paradise, satyaloka). You can use your body on earth to develop a strong happiness energy. Anandamayi Ma rested in enlightenment unity consciousness in her life. She practiced intensive Hatha and divinity yoga as well as meditation for six years. She reached immeasurable happiness this way. It’s particular to the experience on earth to also be able to go through great suffering. But you can use your body and spirit to develop inner happiness, peace, power and love.
I am a yogi. Buddha was a yogi. I can also practice buddhist techniques. As a yogi, I believe in Ramakrishna (neo-Hinduism) and the unity of all religions. I can use exercises from different religions and consider all religions to be good. The different religions have different names for God. In Buddhism, the term Nirvana is used. God is the highest dimension of consciousness that you experience in enlightenment. (Light, unity). God as a person is my enlightened master and an avatar like Krishna and Jesus. They can help me with their abilities to see all, know all, and to be all-powerful to help me along the spiritual way and help lead me to light.
In Christianity you practice gratitude. If you practice gratitutde every day, your happiness increases. The American happiness researcher Sonja Lyubimirsky  stated you can increase your general level of happiness in life by 40% if you think positively on a consistent basis. Sonja recommends exercising regularly, to eat healthy and to meditate 20 minutes every day.
A clear line to a goal is important. We should practice in a goal-oriented way. We have to be clear about the goal of inner happiness, enlightenment, a life in light and to concentrate on God. Then we can find exercises that bring us forward personally. We can do exercises from various religions without losing ourselves in them. We should listen to our inner voice of truth to lead us. If we are confused by the diversity of religions, we should concentrate on one religion. But one can also lose the way with a single religion because there are traps everywhere along the spiritual way. The biggest traps are dogma and personally being more dedicated to a worldly orientation, being more concerned with material reality in secret.
Honesty with oneself is the basis of the spiritual path. Everyone has negative characteristics, it’s important to work on them. Pride is the most dangerous characteristic on the spiritual path because it can exist even after enlightenment. Arrogance is overcome with humility and through love. We see the suffering in the world and in our own lives. Then we can live with modesty. We recognize our unity with all beings, wish every being happiness and thus overcome our ego-centric nature.
Tension is in the body and spirit. For the body we need physical exercise, and for the spirit we need spiritual and mental exercise. If both areas are cleansed enough, inner happiness arises. The mistake western psycho-therapy makes is to concentrate on just the mind or the body. The way to success to combine both, and the spirit. In my positive thinking groups I’ve always also meditated. In my yoga groups, I’ve always released blocked feelings like fear, rage, sadness and addiction and practiced positive thinking. Trauma is best released through mental exercises, physical exercise, lots of rest and lots of love. Along the yogic way, through the years, past trauma is released. With me, first traumatic experiences from this life and then from past lives appeared, and I relived them again and then they disappeared.
Yoga of love (bhakti yoga, karma yoga) is a way to do yoga exercises while combining them with the energy of love. Yoga also possesses a power to cleanse and can lead you to enlightenment in a simple way. Yoga of love awakens the love in you, and brings you to a life in light and love. 1. Find a spiritual role model you like and trust. 2. Connect to this role model daily. 3. Send light and love to all people regularly. 4. Feel connected to your role model while you do your yoga exercises. 5. Wish for happiness for all beings, as well as love and peace.
Samadhi means happiness, in my view, which is experienced in deep meditation and enlightenment. Moses practiced kundalini yoga and reached enlightenment. It is also implied that he threw his staff (kundalini channel) onto to the earth (he earthed himself), the staff then changed into a snake (the kundalini energy rose) which gave him special powers. Kundalini yoga is the basis of Judaism and Christianity, even if only a few Christians realize that. They don’t understand the symbolic language of the bible. In paradise, the kundalini snake wrapped itself around the tree of enlightenment (the kundalini channel). Jesus also practiced meditation on the mountain. He arrived quickly in light and could see Moses and Elia (two desert yogis).
You don’t have to know the term kundalini to practice kundalini yoga. If you look closer at Christian and Jewish teachings, you will find a lot of techniques of kundalini yoga. Jacob  wrestled with God and put his hands on his hips. That is a yoga technique to awaken kundalini energy. To visualize God is a technique of kundalini yoga, just as it is kundalini yoga to connect with the saints and angels or to visualize paradise with a tree. To see two trees in paradise means to activate both of the side channels. To bless   other people with light will get the light flowing in yourself as well.
There is only one energy, one light, one God, one Holy Ghost. The spiritual energy can be awakened in many different ways. Kundalini yoga is the way to activate the middle energy channel. That’s one of the quick ways to enlightenment, but isn’t the only one. The energy of God can also flow from the heavens through the crown chakra or fill the heart chakra or appear when a person is grounded well. One of the ways to ground yourself is to go for a walk.
In yoga, there’s a technique where you can consciously leave the body. Advanced yogis can die when they consider the point in time to be correct. When the soul leaves the body through the skull chakra, it ascends to heaven. The body then dies within three days. In Tibetan Buddhism there is training to learn how to do this. In Amitabha Buddhism you visualize a golden Buddha Amitabha above the crown chakra in heaven, in order to ascend there with a mantra. I believe that at some advanced point in time in yoga, you automatically get the ability to consciously leave the body and consciously die. Pyar Troll tried that once in meditation, arrived in highest paradise and then didn’t want to leave. Only the love of his followers brought him back to earth.
You advanced quickest along the way that is best for you. Many yogis like to live very disciplined and strict lives. I prefer the middle way. Swama Sivananda gave his students either the way of karma yoga (love), of hatha yoga (body exercises), of jnana yoga (wisdom, contemplation, “who am I?” ), of raja yoga (meditation) or of bhakti yoga (honoring God and masters), depending on the personalities of said students. Some students he recommended take a strict way, others a more gentle approach. Generally speaking, the students advanced more when being consistent.
I don’t believe it’s necessary to sacrifice chocolate in order to come to enlightenment. Enlightenment requires an inner departure from the world more so than a complete outer renunciation. If you become attached to worldly enjoyment and have worldly wishes, your energy goes to the outer world. You rest in the inner happiness of enlightenment when the energy is directed inwards and can collect there. Outer renunciation can be helpful so that the spirit isn’t always occupied by material things. For me, it was important to destroy all attachment. I had to give up sex as a part of that.
Generally, I prefer a medium spiritual way. You should center yourself in God and not in the outer world, but joy in life can be helpful for the spiritual way. The important thing is to enjoy everything in the right amount and right way. I eat chocolate every day to motivate myself for the spiritual way. I can take the spiritual approach when it’s connected to worldly joy. A tantra yogi is allowed to eat meat and have a relationship. In enlightenment, there is no more separation between the world and God. Everything is light and can be a help or a hindrance along the spiritual way.
We need a lot of yogis in the west. I teach a simple way that can be practiced by everyone. I’ve developed my yoga style in a simple way for normal people who attend the night school where I teach. No one needs to be super- strict. It’s enough to live according the five basics of health (some exercise, healthy diet, avoid harmful substances, enough relaxation, positive thinking).
According to the Indian philosophy, we’re living in the Kali Yuga era, the era of the ego and suffering. This era will be stopped someday by the golden era. In order for this to happen, all good people have to do something. With the support of God, the efforts of good people will make it succeed. God’s support is already reinforced by many enlightened masters, angels, saints. He sent them to earth to achieve the victory of the good. Important is that humankind overcomes its extreme ego. This is what the enlightened masters are working for.
You have to let go of the world to come to the level of light. You have to make the glass of worldly wishes empty so that God can fill it with light. In the Bible, it says that you have to basically choose between God (inner happiness) and money (worldly happiness). Buddha taught that attachment on worldly pleasures has to be let go of in order to come to nirvana. The spiritual energy of a person can flow into the outside world, or can collect on the inside. In yoga, living away from the world and getting a lot of rest is important. You can live within the world, and be departed from it on the inside.  According to my experience, you can enjoy material pleasure to encourage your inner happiness. I prefer to take a medium, moderate spiritual approach.
After I had lived as a yogi for seven years, I was suddenly overcome by the desire to know about my previous lives. I sent my senses back in time and felt a resonance at a certain time. Then a certain resistence appeared, then I felt, saw even closer. One after another, I mentally sensed four earlier lives. I could recognize the place, time and also the nature of these previous lives. In yoga, you use spiritual exercises systematically to get rid of tension in the body and mind. Then one day you can access stress situations from earlier lives. Traumatizing and particularly stressful events remain in the spirit , and when you get rid of tension, the situations which caused you stress before appear in dreams or when you are awake as short scenes that are viewed in the mind’s eye. The processes of dissolving tension are often combined with bodily reactions like restlessness, muscle shivers, heat or cold waves.
For me, first the tension from my present life dissolved. In film-like scenes in my mind’s eye, I saw stressful exam situations,  relationship conflicts and accidents I wanted to forget. As I could still remember what had caused me stress, the connection between the spiritual exercises and the letting go of inner tension and the appearance of dreams and images was apparent to me. I learnt to differentiate between dreams that came as a result of the exercises and dissolving of tension, and normal dreams. After 11 years as a yogi, suddenly earlier lives appeared in my mind. First, only single earlier lives appeared, then suddenly many came to the surface of my consciousness. After four years the process began to dissipate. In contrast to the intentional attempt to learn about my past lives, now I was seeing short films play before my eyes. I recognized the details of the stress situations and the surroundings I was in. In some pictures I could see some geographic and landmarks of what era I was in. In the course of my spiritual cleansing processes, I have seen some thousands of earlier lives.
After my last relationship came to an end, I lived alone for ten years. For three years I’ve met a lot of friends over the internet. I think that’s very nice. It’s easier to be happy when you have at least one good friend. It’s important to be positive and honest when communicating with one another so that both friends can grow spiritually and have harmony, love and truth with one another and within each of themselves.
I was just at the drug store. An Indian woman works there as a cashier. At first, I thought it was Mother Meera sitting there. She is about the same size and same age. The Indian woman had strong spiritual energy. I think she also sensed me, too. I didn’t say that I live here as a yogi and am a yoga teacher. (Maybe then she would have tried to make me her house priest) I wondered where she got such strong energy. She probably does her spiritual rituals daily, like most Indian woman. She connects with her enlightened masters and is guided by them daily. She probably does her job as karma yoga. She doesn’t do it to earn money, but as service to other people. She greets every customer warmly and talks to each one. She builds up her customers emotionally. I felt stronger emotionally after talking to her. I smiled after visiting. I should go to that shop more often.
This last night I had another cleansing crisis. Strong energies flowed through me and I couldn’t sleep. My psyche was ready to break down. I considered what techniques might help. I oriented myself around God-Yoga. I connected my energy with the death goddess Kali with the chain of skulls around her neck. I sacrificed myself in my suffering. I then connected with the goddess of strength Durga, who rides on a Tiger. I identified with her, and received a lot of energy. Then I saw myself as the goddess of happiness, Lakshmi in order to connect with inner happiness. As Sarasvati, I centered myself in wisdom to get through the difficulties. Finally, I was Sri Devi, the mother of all beings. I sent all beings light and so arrived in the dimension of all-encompassing love. The five goddesses activated my kundalini energy and gave me the power to get through the difficult times. I let go of the five goddesses in that I made it clear that God is pure consciousness and above all identities. You can dissolve the goddesses in God, or let their energies play out and disappear on their own.
God-yoga (role model yoga) is the highest form of yoga. The four main goddesses in yoga are Durga (the power goddess on the tiger), Kali ( the black goddess with the sword), Sarasvati (the wise goddess with the book), and Lakshmi (the happiness goddess with the giving hands.) Durga is the goddess of strength. She rides a tiger or lion. She has the strength of a tiger. Whatever she decides to do, she accomplishes. She is a winner. We stretch both fists high, shake them and think of the word “strength” until we feel the strength of Durga within. Kali is the black goddess with the sword. She cuts off Shiva’s head (her own head). She sacrifices her ego and thus comes to inner peace. She gets through the overcoming of all attachments, and over her own body and comes to a life in light. Sacrifice your ego. Put your hands in your lap. Rub your right foot and then your left foot in a circle against the earth, feel and visualize the ground beneath you and think :” I let go of my false wishes. I accept the suffering in my life. I flow positively with life.” What do you need to let go of today? What do you want to accept today? What is your way of ego-sacrifice and inner peace?
How do you solve the problem of fear of the devil at a deep level? By destroying him, which is done by having a non- dualistic image of God. God is above the devil. God is enlightenment consciousness of peace, love and happiness. God is pure light. God is knowledge of unity. Those who rest within God know there is no devil and no demons. Fear of the devil can be overcome by achieving an enlightenment consciousness. If you don’t have any more thoughts, then fears and devils disappear. There are two basic techniques for this. If you get afraid by thinking of the devil, then concentrate on God, and become one with God. This can also be achieved through a prayer to God, Jesus or an enlightened master you trust. Pray as long as you need to come to the pure light of God. Another way is to do a resting meditation and allow all of your fears to come and go as they wish. They will then play out and disappear on their own. Both techniques of prayer and meditation are good to combine.
I don’t believe in curses. Those who go with God are protected. If someone curses you, then connect with God or an enlightened master through a prayer. Pray for those who curse and send them light. In that way, no curse can reach you. Today, every person is confronted with negative energies. We have to learn to deal with that in a positive way. When there’s a problem in your life, it doesn’t necessarily come from a curse. There are problems in every life, and they help you to inner growth.
Overcoming negative energies is often hard work that takes a long time. Continue consistently on the way of light and everything will be good. Things will get easier, and problems will disappear. The important thing is you work with your thoughts and bring them to rest. Then positive thinking and meditation can take place. Through the way of light you can dissolve all negative energies that affect you from the outside. When you accept the suffering in your life calmly and concentrate on the good in life, you can also be happy in a life that is constantly changing on the outside.
The kundalini energy has been rather extreme for me for the last two months. I am exhausted, but I still manage to get through the crises. At the moment, things have calmed a bit and there is a certain happiness energy present. I switch between states of happiness and inner cleansing. The happiness energy is slowly growing. I consider my life blessed.
I cleanse myself regularly with my walks, through meditation, by reading spiritual texts and with my work for a happy world. I am constantly in a cleansing and growth process. Every day I connect with my enlightened masters and listen to my inner voice. In this way, I am lead through life in an optimal way. Negative energies are cleansed on their own. Happiness, peace and love develop. It’s important that I bring many elements of joy into my life every day.
Beware of the false gurus in every religion. They bring only messages of violence, material riches and separation. They work for their egos and take advantage of their followers. They are very clever. We can only see through them using a lot of wisdom. We should take note of the fruits of their efforts. Do they harvest the fruits of peace, love, happiness and enlightenment? Or is it hate, war and ego? Do they tolerate other opinions or do they accept only their own? A true mystic lives in wisdom and love. He or she radiates truth and love.
The TV asana is one of my favorite exercises. I can manage it for three hours, though normally two hours are enough. If you watch TV with enough inner sense, you can also come to enlightenment that way. For me, TV has become a type of meditation. Watching TV and going for walks regularly are my Buddha way to light.  The important thing when watching TV is that you see through the negative thoughts and attachments and let go of them. Watching TV can be an intense spiritual training that helps you to overcome various material attachments. How do you get rid of material addiction? By recognizing that enlightenment is better than the rich and beautiful. God is bigger than TV. Those who recognize that work toward a life in light, for inner peace and all-encompassing love.
Love is on its way. Yesterday evening, a blockage in my heart chakra let go. In this way, my front energy channel opened. I felt such a strong cleansing in the channel from the forehead over the heart chakra to the tips of the toes that I couldn’t fall asleep for a long time. Then suddenly the energy became weaker, and I fell into a restless sleep that I woke up from several times. After waking up for the day, I went for my walk in the woods, to get moving and use the energy for something. Then I meditated for an hour, and now I feel better.
I’ve been posting fairytales in an esoteric forum daily, as of late. Today I posted the Rossmann’s Magic Harp. In the original version, a man with a blocked heart chakra falls in love with an angel and chaos ensues. He has to choose between his wife and the angel. If we see the angel as the ambassador of God, the man has to choose between God (enlightenment) and the outside world. He decides on his wife, but is never really happy. That’s how it is once you’ve gotten to know great happiness just once. But according to my experience, you can make compromises. You should take the spiritual path as the main point of your life. If a relationship is lived out wisely, then it can be a way of light and support both partners on the spiritual way. Then at some point, both live in light, in paradise and in all-encompassing love and in God. That would be my end for the fairytale.
What is the spiritual meaning of the fairytale Sleeping Beauty? Those who want to come to enlightenment and a life in God and light first have to work with their thoughts. They have to put their thoughts in order, and make a golden carpet of happiness from their thoughts. They have to think positively and should think of the characteristics of inner peace, love, wisdom, self-discipline and joy of life and train these characteristics.  That’s what the German version of the story tells us.
The daily work with ones thoughts are symbolized by the spinning wheel. Those who work on their thoughts enough will come to a point in time where the chakras open. The spiritual energy begins to flow. Then it’s time to emphasize meditation. When Sleeping Beauty sleeps, it means she is meditating. She meditates on the kundalini energy that woke her up through a prick on the finger. In yoga it is called the bite of the kundalini snake. A chakra in the finger or point of the toe opens through the grace of God (or a wise woman). The enlightenment energy flows gently and continuously into the person. It is a great blessing when such takes place. The person is blessed with enlightenment. Then that person needs to just wait and do their spiritual exercises regularly. Sleeping Beauty slept for 100 years.
When the time is right, the roses start to bloom and the prince appears. Sleeping Beauty is kissed awake through God (light, the Holy Ghost) and the mystic wedding can take place. The mystic wedding consists of three steps: cleansing, enlightenment, and unity. The person is filled with light, feels his world is full of light and his or her ego is dissolved and he or she lives in light and in a paradise of the consciousness. He or she recognizes the roses of love in the world. He or she concentrates on the good and beautiful, and remains in light.
I’ve lived as a yogi for 25 years and have worked toward enlightenment. Along the way on the mountain of happiness, I’ve encountered a lot of swamps, steep paths and dark forests. I hide at night mainly to grow spiritually. Somehow I always manage to get enough sleep, but it’s a difficult and strenuous time.
The divine source has opened. It bubbles with joy. It brings darkness into light. I dissolve it through meditation and positive thinking. When negative images from earlier lives appear, I let them play out and go through the rage and sadness, become one with all of the monsters, enemies from earlier lives, and they dissolve. If you block your fear, it becomes stronger. If you sacrifice yourself to yourself, the fears disappear. And suddenly the little yogi comes to light.
Yesterday, my musician friend from Berlin came to visit. His mother lives nearby. He visits her every three months and then comes to visit me too. He gets yoga cookies with chocolate and a cup of coffee. We get along well. He tells me about his life as a musician. I tell him the latest details from my wild yogi life.
There once was a woman who was searching for happiness. One day she came to a big forest and met an old yogi there. The old yogi was nice and she fell in love with him. She fell in love with his spiritual self. She learnt through love to get to know herself better. By loving the old yogi, she found her way to herself. The yogi showed her his big forest, the wild animals and the sun in the sky. In the spring they planted flowers of love. The whole summer long, flowers bloomed of all different types. Their life was full of color, sun and the singing of the birds. In the fall, they were overjoyed at the sight of the mushrooms in the forest. In the winter, they loved the snow and clear air. They talked about God, spirituality and love. They were happy with one another. One day, they both awoke in light. They lived in light, in God, and in love. Many people came and visited them. And if they haven’t died yet, then they still live today and give the gift of the flowers of light and of love.
There are enlightened masters in every religion, who teach the unity of all religions and don’t mind mixing belief systems. In Christianity, the Catholic priest Bede Griffiths that only all of the religions together can give way to the complete picture. In Hinduism, Ramakrishna practiced all of the major religions and recognized they all lead to enlightenment. The Tibetan Buddhism is a mixture of many different Hindu teachings connected with the way of Buddha.
Rumi (sufi mystic): If you do things from your soul, then you will be in harmony with yourself. Then you will feel joyful.
Nils: Hello Karl, how is your enlightenment developing? Karl: Personal progress is always interrupted by doubt. The need for calm is growing, and the silence is as well, and listening to the depth of my heart. I melt into the universe, into everything. I overcome dualism, also time and space.
Nils: I’ve met a woman over the internet whom I write emails with daily. Sometimes we talk on the telephone. I’ve decided to take things as they come. If a woman enters my life, then that’s how it should be. I see myself as being lead by God. And if God thinks I need a woman and a woman needs me, then there is no reason to go against this. I’m curious as to how my spiritual path will develop.
Feelings come and go. That belongs to life, and especially to love. If there isn’t any jealousy, then there also isn’t any kind of deep love either. It’s important not to overdo it. Along the way of enlightenment, you learn to keep feelings within a certain framework and not to let them rule you. You learn to center yourself in God, in your inner happiness. Then you don’t become overcome by feelings like fear, rage, jealousy or grief.
Two people fall in love. Then after awhile, love disappears and then boredom or hatred appears. This can only be avoided through the spiritual approach to life. If two people go the spiritual way together, then they can open the heart chakra further and futrhter, and things will never get boring because enlightenment and love is a constant adventure.
The yoga god Shiva meditates and switches between phases of outer activity and meditation. (Having a relationship and resting in meditation). That’s a good way to grow in light. Through tantric yoga, kundalini energy can be activated. You meditate afterward. Then the man and woman heal and become enlightened. Tantric yoga is a way of healing in the context of a relationship, when it’s based on love and loyalty.
You can base a relationship around striving for enlightenment. You should emphasize God (spirituality, calm, centering oneself). One should always listen to the voice of inner wisdom.
Living alone is difficult for most people. You can harden on the inside and block sexuality and the desire for a relationship. There are people who have hindered their enlightenment. It’s important for me to have enough joy in life in my spiritual approach. A relationship can be a part of that.
Experiencing God is possible. A person can develop their inner happiness, inner peace, and love. He or she can live in light. Meditation is a way to enlightenment. First you become enlightened through meditation and then you practice keeping this state of being after meditating. Meditation and acting in the world will become one state of being.
For the spiritual approach you don’t need yoga exercises. But it’s faster with asanas for most people. The asanas stabilize the health and help get rid of tension. If the body isn’t cleansed of tension, spiritual progress is difficult. In yoga and in Tibetan Buddhism, that’s the reason you do bodily exercises for a long time before you begin with higher forms of meditation. In my view, it doesn’t need to be yoga exercises. Taking walks regularly is also a good way to cleanse the inner self. Muktananda first took a pilgrimage to India for 20 years before he committed to 9 years of intense meditation. I take daily walks as my main bodily exercise, but combine it with mantras and breath exercises.
I just got back from a child’s birthday party where I was invited as the magician. It finally worked out! It’s difficult to be a convincing magician for kids these days. Six months ago, it didn’t work out at all. But you can always learn from your mistakes. This time I did everything right: I focused on my strengths. My strengths are yoga and psychology. First I did laugh yoga with the children. Then everyone got into a good mood. And then I showed them my magic tricks. I made a handkerchief appear from my sleeve and the audience could rip it up. Then I made the kerchief disappear in my fist and conjured a whole kerchief from my sleeve.
I conjured a pink plush elephant from my magic hat. I put a little plush mouse into the magic hat and took out a big one from underneath. Finally everyone took a tarot card and I interpreted them. They were happy about that because they felt acknowledged and got a positive perspective on life. What does the happiness oracle say to you today?
At the child’s birthday party, there were a lot of energetically sick children and mothers. On the outside I was a happy magician, but energetically I worked as a healer. I took on many energies. I needed two days to work them out. During the course of those two days, visions of people appeared originating from the people whose energy I needed to cleanse myself of. I was a magician on the inside and outside, at the child’s birthday party. I wasn’t a healer on purpose. I don’t see myself as a healer. I’m just a simple yogi. But if God wants it, then healing takes place in my presence.
Whether or not perfect enlightenment exists, I don’t know. Once your ego has left the picture, you take things as they are. Everything is perfect at that point, even things that aren’t perfect normally. If you find happiness and peace, then the perfect enlightenment isn’t important to you anymore. It’s just enough to find your way of happiness. According to my experience, there is a level of cosmic consciousness (egolessness). But there are many further levels, that are connected to abilities such as healing and seeing into the future.
Enlightenment goes hand in hand with self-realization. The way there varies from person to person. According to my experience, it is enough to orient yourself around truth and love and to take your personal approach. At some point, you experience God. This might occur after some lives. It goes faster when you lead your life spiritually and can see exactly what is most effective, and wisest.
Those who connect to God or an enlightened master are blessed. He or she is lucky or blessed and is guided into the light. All of the negative happenings in their lives develop into blessings. Difficult times lead to inner growth. If you have a good heart, the devil can’t reach you. The devil is a symbol for the ego. In order to come to enlightenment, you have to overcome the ego and develop a cosmic consciousness. You have to learn to deal with suffering in a laidback way. You can’t get trapped in worldly addictions like the ferryman, who longs for money and material riches. You have to let go of your wordly wishes. Then you are free. Get the three golden hairs daily with spiritual practice, all-encompassing love and prayer to God. Then you will be blessed.
The personal image of God often leads to problems with great suffering in the world. Many people have lost their faith for that reason, but God is above joy and above suffering. God is the enlightened consciousness of unity. Moses speaks of “I am”. If you take things as they come, you will come to inner peace. If you practice enough spiritual exercises, you can reach enlightenment. In enlightenment, you can rise above outer suffering. The spiritual way helps to deal with suffering. We should avoid suffering as much as it is possible.
The fairytale of the Six Servants gives away the techniques we need to come to enlightenment. The first thing we need to do is to see our goal clearly. Then we need to be light. The second thing we need is the perseverance to reach our goal. We need the long legs of the servant. The third thing we need is a good sense of ourselves and what exercises are effective. We have to be like the clairvoyant  to hear within the self. We need techniques like meditation and thought work to charge ourselves with spiritual energy. We need to learn to save energy in the belly, like the fat man. There’s a simple technique for that. We visualize our foot in our bellies and think a mantra (for example: I’m thankful for the good food) or a prayer (God bless my food). That’s a good exercise for christimas. At some point, the kundalini energy rises in the body and inner happiness appears. If we give that happiness on to other people, there will be a happy Christmas.
Once we’ve awakened our inner happiness with kundalini yoga, we meditate on the spiritual energy. A good technique for that is the tratak, the meditation gaze. If we concentrate on an outer point, we can keep the spirit calm. If we don’t fall asleep during the medtation (the third test in the fairy tale, then our consciousness will change to enlightenment consciousness at some point. We arrive in the unity of the cosmos (the golden ring) and feel the energy of God in and around us (the energy sea) and the mystic wedding can take place. The energy of God begins to cleanse us on the inside. There are cold and heat waves, like the servent felt in the fire. Then the body can let go of inner tension through spasms. If we meditate enough, the inner impurities will be burnt and we land in light.
But there is a danger: the spiritual pride. Even an enlightened person can have certain negative characteristics. We need to develop humility and modesty. We should see ourselves as servants of our fellow humans. Then we can come to complete enlightenment. We are happy on the inside and outside. We can recognize the beauty in the world (the beauty and the daughter of the king) without following into the trap of the sorceress. We get the enlightenment view of the world. What thoughts help you to see your world as a paradise? What is your positive thought of the day?
The fairy tale of the Valiant Little Tailor gives us courage. Trust yourself and live wisely. Even a weak person can win on the spiritual way. You only need perseverance. There are seven chakras (energy gates). When all of them are purified, the kundalini energy rises in the body to the head and you are united with God. You live in unity and light. In order to achieve the mystic wedding, the little tailor has to be clever and courageous. He wins over his inner giants, and cleverly flows with his inner impulses and directs them in the right direction.
The unicorn represents the enlightenment energy that the tailor awakens through clever spiritual exercises in the tree of enlightenment (the kundalini channel). The wild boar, or the wild nature of the tailor (the ego) is tamed. It is locked into a church. In this way the inner transformation can succeed. The tailor becomes king and marries the daughter of the king. He becomes a master of life who lives in light.
My enlightenment is progressing slowly. Six months ago, the big transformation began. The first five weeks were difficult. Then it got easier. I experienced days of intense purification and days of recovery, changing between the two. The cleansing mostly began with a difficult phase where energy blockages from earlier lives dissolved. Then came old feelings and old fears. Thankfully, this phase mostly began in the evening when I watched TV. I was therefore distracted and could get through it. Then around midnight the energy of happiness began to flow. That can last up to 24 hours. It annoyed me a little because I couldn’t sleep and then the next day was tired.
In enlightenment, you experience God and comprehend what God is. Moses described the central being and the way to God as “I am”. God is in silence and calm and can be found within the calm. Then you arrive in happy existence and see God as light in the world. It doesn’t mean you have fear in God, but that you let go of your own will in favor of God.
The point is to be merciful and to find the mercy and grace of God. God goes beyond material. People block their way to God when they focus on material instead of God. Those who are merciful, help the poor and work for the happiness of all beings will be rewarded with growth in the light.
If you see God as a person in heaven, then you have problems with the suffering on earth. If you try to be within God, you overcome the inner suffering. Then through the way of spiritual practice you can accept suffering at a deeper level and integrate it within your life and grow within and arrive in peace. You will find that despite and because of your suffering you will grow in light and develop inner happiness. You can be blessed however your outer life develops.
Kundalini processes are constantly taking place within me. The night before yesterday, I couldn’t sleeping because such strong energy was flowing. I lay the entire night in a state of happiness energy, and the day too. But exactly at 8 pm something let go in me. I went through difficult energies that I overcame by watching interesting television. Then I meditated an hour and went for a walk in the forest and again arrived in happiness.
I have a crazy daily schedule. I mostly watch TV from 8-10 pm. Then I meditate an hour and go into the forest for an hour. At 12 midnight I’m on the internet for an hour. Then I read a little and go to bed. I sleep and meditate until 10 or 11 am. At 1pm I am normally available. I sit at the computer and take care of my tasks. When I’m done with that, I go for a walk, eat and meditate. This daily schedule works for me, but I’m flexible. I can change my schedule according to outer or inner situations. I feel within myself, what the correct way is at any given time. So I remain in a constant spiritual process of growth.
Survey on happiness 2013: health and family and friends are among the most important factors for people to develop personal happiness. People also consider work important, but religion is less and less important in the eyes of most people. One third of those surveyed think it is important, two thirds think it is not important, and 34 percent think religion has nothing to do with it. 72 percent of Germans belong to a religious community, but even among them, they have less and less religious conviction.
China is going in the wrong direction and doesn’t notice. Maximum economic growth and maximum consumption are a stupid idea. The people in China will just keep getting unhappier and unhappier despite growing wealth. Just like in Germany. Depression is growing. People are more psychically ill. The point of life is maximum inner happiness and not maximum outer happiness. The right idea is a socialist one, that everyone has enough to eat and a good life. Then there can be inner self-realization. A happy and thriving society can only be based on inner happiness and the associated principles of spirituality, enlightenment and all-encompassing love. Reforms are correct and necessary. But the correct long-term perspective is missing in the reforms that take place today. As long as that isn’t recognized, China will just collapse. It shouldn’t orient itself as a country around the west, but on the wisdom of the Chinese ancients.
I’ve had some detail discussions about God in a Catholic and a Protestant internet forum. I’ve published this in the American Wikibooks and on the German Wordpress site. I felt the energies of the readers flow through me all week. Many people connected with my heart. I sent them light and love and prayed for them. I healed and cleansed them as much as possible. Otherwise, I prayed with my masters and left the healing to God. As far as help is needed, it will come from God. I believe that.
The readers had a varied array of problems. Many monks blocked their sexual energy because they consider sex sinful. They view sexuality in a dogmatic way. They were so tense, they couldn’t go forward in their spirituality. I could feel their problems. I considered how I could help them. All of the encouraging words that they should see things in a more laidback way were no help. I walked in the forest, did my spiritual exercises and healed them spontaneously. Spontaneously a lot of the blockages were healed, just by going for a walk.
Many of the readers were conflicted over whether God exists as a being who can act and intervene in the world. Does God help in times of emergency? I was also concerned with the question. The answer came the same night. I had a healing vision and I felt healing within minutes. It was clear that God intervened when my way became difficult. I now feel more calm when going through my kundalini processes. If God helps me, then everything will surely be alright in the end. I also believe though, that God puts me through a bit too many difficulties and could help me more. But God probably thinks I can handle it and will grow from the experience.
Afterwards, I thought about God. God is enlightenment consciousness that flows through the cosmos. God is happy existence, peace, and unity consciousness. God is in “I am”, in enlightened existence. Enlightened existence arises through serenity, meditation and working on the mind (to take things as they are, and to let go of material wishes).
15.. God is also love. The love of God acts especially though the enlightened masters. The enlightened masters are the incorporation of the love of God so that God can help people.All of them together form the energy field of love. Everyone helps with his or her special abilities.
Tibetan Buddhism came into existence around 900 AD. There is still a lot to be done for it to adjust to today’s world. Otherwise, Tibetan Buddhism is a good religion that deals with meditation, kundalini yoga and all encompassing love. The Dalai Lama believes in equality for men and women. He teaches modesty and love for other beings.
Words of the Dalai Lama: those who feel demoralized, sad and only complain won’t solve their problems that way. If we only pray, we won’t solve our problems. We have to trust ourselves, and never give up.
There is a tantric practice in Tibetan Buddhism. The Nyingmapa bransch of Tibetan Buddhism is nondogmatic and members can live as monks or as free yogis in relationships. Normally, sexual union is only visualized. Through Tantric God unity images the kundalini energy is activated.
I have just discovered an interesting video online. It deals with the cooperation of masculine and feminine energies. At the first level, it deals with addictive relationships. At the second level, you concentrate on yourself (self-enlightenment). At the third level, you flow positively with all energies. At this level, men and women work together toward enlightenment.
I’ve lived as a yogi and a hermit for 25 years. At the moment, something is changing. I don’t know how long this transformation phase will last. I don’t know what the next step is in this transformation and which missions I will have to fulfill. I can only wait and see what the right way will be. I navigate my way creatively every day. How much personal contact is important? How much peace and quiet and solitude do I need?
Some perfectionism is sometimes helpful, but one shouldn’t overdo it. I try to balance this. I combine goal-oriented thinking and self-discipline with a laid-back attitude and knowing that I am imperfect. I feel out what I need to grow optimally spiritually. That is my perfectionism; the exact observation and feeling out what I need.
I have a difficult time behind me. Now it seems to be getting better. I go to bed, observe my body and am curious what will happen. Does the energy start to flow? Is it so strong that I can’t sleep? How long will the energy flow? Three hours, 24 hours, or 2 days? If I get four hours of sleep I’m happy. That’s enough for me. The cleansing process circles my body and my spirit. Again and again fears, relationship longings and additions and nervousness appear. The most difficult phases are overcome by watching TV, going for walks, doing meditation and mantras. I enjoy something nice to awaken joy.
I have a girlfriend. OK, ”girlfriend” is maybe going too far. She wrote to me online and we email, skype or talk on the telephon every day. It’s like a real relationship because we can feel each other’s energies even at a distance. God sent her to me so that I would be strengthened and encouraged on my way. She is very self-confident. She just explained to me: “the mistress recognizes the master”.
We learn from one another and support each other along the spiritual way. She says “life is beautiful.” I would formulate it for myself like this: “life is. You can use joy or suffering in order to grow in enlightenment.”
My girlfriend is an important part of my spiritual path at the moment. I connect with her, meditate on her and am in happiness. I see her as a goddess, and activate my kundalini energy that way. I send her light and she dances in happiness. My life is beautiful through her. I can get over the difficult phases. There isn’t any more boredom as a hermit. There is something to talk about daily, something to love, and to learn and to laugh about. She has a good sense of humor. I like that.
The magic of happiness is the enlightenment. In enlightenment you get a view of paradise. You see your world as paradise. You can be successful in love because you have happiness, love and positivity in you.
In Mahayana Buddhism there is the goal to free all beings on earth of their suffering. Jesus sacrificed himself to help his suffering fellow humans. He gave his own life to help people on the way of enlightenment and all-encompassing love. In Yoga, we think the mantra “Lokah Samastah Sukhino Bhavantu” (May all beings be happy.) We practice the way of all-encompassing love and help others as much as possible.
Through capitalist globalism a lot of problems in the world are worsening. Although the middle class has grown in India and China and the number of poor perhaps a bit lower, the poverty problem has not been solved. Poverty and hunger in Africa is growing. Through the pressure of industrialization, depression, fear and psychic illness is increasing.
The slums are growing world wide. Two thirds of the farmers in the developing countries will lose their jobs due to farming becoming industrialized. A smaller number of people own more land. The number of landless and starving farmers is increasing. These problems can only be solved by dividing riches more fairly.
We have to change from predator capitalism to a social market economy. Social, economic and ecological problems have to be solved democratically. That can only work when people are centered in positive values like love, peace and justice. Egotistical people in the economy and politics shouldn’t be rewarded anymore. Only people with integrity should rise to the top. Positive values should be taught in school and not egotistical pressure to achieve. For a happy world to exist, we need people to find a positive way of dealing with each other. We should visualize ourselves as Buddha, a Goddess or an angel and think “I send all beings light. May all beings be happy. May there be a happy world.”
The kundalini energy has been flowing strongly for a few months. I observe the various phases. 1. The tension dissolving phase. Tension dissolves from deep-seated places. That is often unpleasant. Old pain rises again. I have to go through feelings of fear and sadness. My spirit is nervous and negative. I get through these times by watching TV, listening to music, going for walks, reading or meditating. Mostly it lasts three hours, then it all calms down again. 2. The happiness energy flows. I feel how a chakra opens (at the moment its usually the solar plexus chakra) Then happiness energy flows through my body for some 24 hours. That is a bit annoying at night because I can’t sleep. On the other hand, I usually just can enjoy the feelings of happiness. 3. The recovery phase. This phase can last a bit longer.
Whenever God (life, my masters) think that I need some rest, the kundalini processes stop and I can rest for a few hours or a few days. At that point I’ve gotten enough rest and the whole thing starts again. It’s a rather strenuous time for me. I hope that it will stop at some point and that I will be in lasting happiness. I know that in the meantime also. It’s a pleasant state to be in. I’m so laidback, happy, full of love and joy. All fears disappear. Such phases come every five days lately.
I think there are various possibilities for life after death. A person can develop spiritually on the other side or in life on earth. Or both, combined. It depends on what a person needs and their abilities and what they have decided. As I know thousands of my earlier lives, I believe in the ability to reincarnate. Jesus promised the seriously practicing Christians a life in paradise after death .The same promise exists in Amitabha Buddhism. In yoga there are also teachings of paradise. Yogis can also come to paradise (Siddhaloka, Shivaloka).
Only a few of those who have reached full enlightenment will come back to earth. Life on earth is full of suffering. One has to have a very strong sense of empathy as an enlightened being to incarnate on earth again. If you reincarnate as an enlightened on earth, you most certainly will din your personal proper spiritual path, at the right moment the right information will come. I came across the philosopher Epicure and knew spontaneously that he was right. I could only consistently follow my spiritual path from that point. A woman one read from a book on Buddhism, and immediately knew which path she had to take.
I had my first enlightenment experience through my first love. She opened my heart chakra and I arrived in light. Maybe that’s why I still love women, because through them I can see  the beauty of God.
For me, the Indian Gods are symbolic role models for enlightenment. If we meditate on them, pray to them and identify with them, we awaken our kundalini energy. Then we will become Gods, everyone in his own way. The Gods incorporate various characteristics that you need for enlightenment. Such characteristics as wisdom (Brahma), strength (Shiva), rest (Buddha), love (Lakshmi), meekness (Shiva let Kali overpower him) and happiness (Ganesha).
In my view, there is no devil. The devil is a symbol for the ego, that you overcome with enlightenment. Jesus arrived in enlightenment after 40 days of meditation. The devil left him and the angels served him. He could help and heal other people. An enlightened (saint) doesn’t see the devil, rather God and light in his fellow beings.
God goes beyond good and evil. God is light. You recognize that in enlightenment. You arrive in enlightenment in that you go beyond the level of good and evil, joy and suffering. You achieve that through meditation, in that your mind comes to rest, and also through all-encompassing love, in that you accept suffering and problems in your life.
I studied law and considered the reasons for crime. I believe teaching guilt and social pre-destiny. According to the teachings of pre-destiny, everything is determined already. The reasons for crime are in the outer circumstances of life, and in the psyche. Crime  can be stopped by improving the conditions people live in and by changing the mental pre-disposition of perpetrators. Earlier in Ladakh (an Indian Buddhist region) there was no violence. First with the introduction of western civilization was there violence there.
If we perceive God as a dimension of consciousness in which enlightenment is experience, then we can understand the mystery of suffering. Suffering can lead us to wisdom and empathy. Wisdom is a method to avoid suffering and to reach happiness. Empathy is a way to identify with others and to help them overcome their suffering. Both lead to an enlightened consciousness of unity. If we deal with suffering correctly, then we can grow into enlightenment. We can rise above the suffering in our lives if we do our spiritual exercises and concentrate on building a happy world.
A lot of people have trouble with self-discipline, but self-discipline can be learnt. According to my experience, it’s best to make a clear daily schedule and then follow it consistently for 1-2 months. That’s the time it takes for the mind to get used to it. Self-discipline is important for the way of enlightenment and the way of love. Without self-discipline, you quickly become a victim of your own foolishness, the foolishness of others or from negative energy. In the western world, we live torn between worldly and spiritual energy. Without proper grounding in wisdom and self-discipline it’s hard to stand the worldly energies.
God is a mystery that can also be described with the words, father, son and holy Ghost. From the perspective of enlightenment God is the father of the cosmos, the entirety, the unity consciousness. God as the son is every enlightened person. God as the holy Ghost is the spiritual energy. The kundalini energy mostly rises from the pelvis to the middle of the body up to the head. Then it reaches the crown chakra and consciousness of God is attained.
Suffering in the world can only be ended through the overcoming of the ego of humanity and with a philosophy of love and happiness for all. Many enlightened people are needed for that. Before the Mongolians became the enlightened Tibetan masters of Buddhism, they were warrior-like and put people through a lot of suffering. Then they were a peaceful people. Humankind can become happier. Human rights are an important step in that direction.
I like to plan my life well. I expect to live somewhere between 80 and 90 years. I mentally prepare myself for that. I organize my life so that I get to experience the most important things. I plan my spiritual development so that I am as enlightened as possible before my death. Those who are enlightened can go through death well, thanks to their strong inner energy, and then they reach paradise after death as they already dwell in a paradise consciousness before death.
People in my family usually live to be very old, around 94 years. If I get older than 80, I see that as a gift. If I die sooner, I accept it. God’s plan goes before human plans. But a person can do a lot to live long and to become enlightened. You can live healthy and think positively. Those who eat healthy and exercise regularly live longer. Those who practice spiritually have a good chance of coming to light after death.
Life can only be planned to a certain degree. There are always coincidences which can’t be planned. You have to be flexible to live well. And you should not only think of the future, but live in the present. You need to enjoy life enough. Those who experience enlightenment recognize the deeper point of life. Only a life in enlightened existence and all-encompassing love give deepest fulfillment.
I experience God as an identity-less existence, as the highest consciousness in the whole cosmos. About God’s actions I can only say that my life has developed in a certain way that I see as directed. I cannot say exactly from whom these actions come. If God is a cosmic enlightenment consciousness at the center of happy existence, then God as a being who can act is above all identities and images. You can’t feel any specific being, just the results of the actions in your life. These actions are so subtle that they can only be felt, but cannot be proven. This cannot be measured scientifically, only judged by your own feelings and observed.
I connect to my enlightened masters every day because they inspire me. They are Buddha, Jesus, Swami Sivananda, Sathya Sai Baba, Dalai Lama, Amritananadamayi, Anandamayi Ma, Mother Meera and Epicure. I have tested their teachings with my own experiences and have found them good. I visualize their images, think their names, and read their books. I follow their teachings as far as that works for me. There are many videos on the net which feature my masters.
You can also pray directly to God, It doesn’t matter which names you use. The only important thing is that you are looking for serious guidance and help. The way God helps is to bring you forward spiritually and not to fulfill your egotistical wishes. Everyone can connect with God through prayer, calling, thinking, feeling, oracle, mantra, visualization of a spiritual role model, reading from spiritual texts.
It is important to consistently take the path of wisdom and love each day. The exercises you choose to do are of secondary importance. You should feel within which exercises you need and what will do well for you. Then everything will come at the correct time. Buddha recommended observing the thoughts and to switch between activity (walking) and meditating. For yogis, daily yoga exercises are an important daily ritual. Christians prefer to pray, to read the bible and to visit the church service once a week. Esoterics like to check an oracle, consult angels or the stars for advice. God is in everything and works through everything for those who connect with him seriously.
If you constantly have fearful thoughts, then they can make you sick. If you have thoughts full of rage, then these can lead to rage manifesting on the outside world. Then that person can go so far as to kill themselves of others. Thoughts create our inner feelings and are the basis for our actions. It is important to differentiate between good and bad thoughts and to overcome the bad thoughts. Only in that way can we be happy and build a better world.
Everyone is responsible for his or her own life. Everyone is responsible for his or her own thoughts and  actions. The inner happiness develops on its own if we can overcome our inner blockages and attachment to the outer world. The thoughts come to rest, the body relaxes. If the body is relaxed then healing and inner well-being arises. If the spirit is empty of worldly wishes, God can fill you with light and happiness.
24.. Only those with a goal can achieve a goal.
Many things heal on their own. But most illnesses need good medicine. The spiritual path is medicine for inner peace, happiness and all-encompassing love. We should turn earth into a paradise and create love, peace and happiness. Humanity is developing in the direction of enlightenment and a golden age.
It is easier to go through life with company. Two people can support one another on the spiritual path. They can strengthen each other energetically and mentally. God made man and woman so that they can live together in paradise. The central story in the bible shows that. The mystery is that they can both awaken the kundalini snake through their love and sexual energy. Then they can eat the apple of enlightenment, which is a symbol for entirety, unity and life in God.
In that sense, we’re all alike. We are all sparks of God. We can all live in highest happiness. Of course, souls are varied. They have varied abilities and needs. They have different tasks. The problems begin though when some people exploit others, when some live in luxury and others starve. When wars over power and riches take place and people die for no reason, when not everyone is living out their abilities and needs, when not everyone can develop their spiritual potential: these are when trouble starts.
There are different paths to take to get to enlightenment. It is enough to be enlightened, it is enough to have inner peace, happiness and light. But there is also the way of empathy. One sees the suffering in others and helps and wishes other beings happiness and takes others to be more important than oneself. One puts love for others as the first priority and one’s own enlightenment is secondary. The Zen Bodhisattva vow says: the number of beings is eternal, I vow to deliver them all. Greed, hate and ignorance arise constantly, I vow to overcome all of this. The gates of Dharmas is countless, I vow to enter all of them. The path of Buddha is like nothing else,I vow to realize it-
Buddha taught that one should bring the self to enlightenment and not harm others. That is also the main way of yoga according to Patanjali. In addition, there is the way of love in Buddhism (Mahayana, Dalai Lama) and in yoga the way of karma yoga often in connection with bhakti yoga. Along the way of love in Buddhism the Bodhisattva is the central model. A Bodisattva sacrifices the complete entrance into Nirvana until one has rescued all fellow beings.
In Yoga, the God of love, Vishnu incarnates on earth when he needs to help people. There are many enlightened masters like Amritanandamayi and Mother Meera who devote their lives to the spiritual rescue of their fellow beings. Amritanandamayi had the choice of becoming a Buddha or a mother of all beings. She decided on the latter. My observation is that there is suffering in the world. There are a lot of egotistical people who cause a lot of suffering. They have the choice of continuing that or to work toward a happy world. It is a blessing that many enlightened masters don’t think just on their own happiness, but on other people.
Yesterday, my television broke. Unfortunately, I was so upset about it that I set some strong energy processes in motion. I tried to stay calm, but that only worked a little. I bought a new television, installed it, and tortured myself with the directions. At some point I tried again, and it suddenly turned off. God is playing with me!
The present is a time of healing. For the past thirty years, I’ve been burdened by burnout I had from exam stress while studying. I felt powerless and had sleep disturbances. Two weeks ago, a lot of tension dissolved from my head. That was the main cause of my sleep disturbances. For the five days since then, my body feels lighter and I have   more energy. The burnout seems to have healed. At some point that had to happen. The chakras open again and energy can flow once more. The body and the spirit are healthy again. At some point, you have a lot of love, strength, happiness and energy within.
There is God. God is experienced in enlightenment. Then you know what God is. The term God should lead to enlightenment and the experience of God. There are many ways to God. There are many names for Gods. Everyone can choose the path or the name that helps him or her. God is a mystery. Jesus described the mystery of God in his way. He never said his way was the only way. John the Baptist put these words in his mouth in order to divide him from Judaism. Jesus saw himself as a Jew and a follower of Moses and Elija. Jesus didn’t want to start a new religion. His followers tried that. It began with Paul and came to a head some 100 years after Christ with the scripture of John. Today we should try to return to the original Christianity. A good basis for this is the second Vatican council 1962 to 1965 where it was recognized that the light of God shines through all religions.
I believe that everyone has a free will. Everyone can decide whether to go to enlightenment and to God or not. It is the essence of my teachings to recommend the spiritual way to people and for them to decide on enlightenment as a goal. If you decide to go for enlightenment seriously, then God and enlightened masters will help and lead you. Enlightenment means dissolving the ego. And that means that things will develop differently from the way you planned. For me, a woman came into my life totally unplanned and my enlightenment path is developing entirely differently from the way I expected.
There are different ways to enlightenment. The concept of Buddha is significant. A person should avoid attachments and outer enjoyment and to reject suffering and to concentrate on wisdom and should develop inner happiness and inner peace, modesty. Then he or she can reach enlightenment and become a Buddha. Jesus taught that it was good to live in the kingdom of God. The kingdom of God is life in light and the overcoming of duality (good, evil, joy, suffering). Through spiritual energy, you feel connected to everything. You are more connected to your spiritual energy, rather than your body.
The Buddhist enlightenment concept can be described with the image of a resting Buddha. We practice being a Buddha and accepting things calmly. Jesus centered around sacrifice of the ego and to submit to the will of God (life) and to work for the happiness of all beings (and to live in all-encompassing love and to give endlessly). The core of the Christian teachings is love of God and to love others.
In Hinduism, there are many ways to come to light. Shiva is the master of the five elements. He mastered the five characteristics of wisdom, love, strength, calm and joy while living on earth. He awoke his inner happiness with kundalini yoga. His wife Parvati (Shakti) brought love in his life. His son Ganesha preferred the way of joy. At the same time he is also the God of wisdom and success.
Today I’m feeling fine. My cleansing processes are resting a bit. Yesterday night cleansing energy flowed through me for five hours. Then it stopped suddenly and I fell asleep. I slept five hours and felt recovered. After the difficult cleansing, I felt like myself again and back in my normal life. I just wrote in the esoteric forum that my inner happiness is awakened by imagining a beautiful landscape with a person I love. That’s paradise yoga, then you get a feeling of paradise daily. My dream woman exists for real in my life. I get a Darshan from my Goddess daily.
My girlfriend: ”I’ve never had an enlightenment experience, but I’ve seen miracles that prove for me that confirm God’s existence, and that he is with me and also the enlightened masters. I understand that Nils has a need to pass on his experiences, and I think it’s wonderful that he does just that. I also feel that need, but I don’t have his energy or his confidence. My self-doubt, but also the constant conflicts with my ego, and the danger that I could be lead to it make me a “mistress/master in hiding.””
And further: ” I was convinced I could find my way on my own, as I didn’t trust anyone or anything other than my understanding and my limited senses. Today I am more humble and mild. I can give up my fighter tendencies for a time and look into the depths of things. There are words I hate such as “you must, you should, you can do this, you can’t do that.” And what do I gladly read in texts from Nils? Just these words!! But now I can perceive them in a different way. I feel their energy, the deeper meaning, not the words or single sentences that bothered me before. I read, feel and can get a lot from the experience and wisdom!”
In a dream a little girl appeared to Nils. She had forgotten her name, and who she was. She had lost her enlightenment consciousness. Nils hugged her and caused her to laugh. He felt a great love from heart to heart. He took the little girl by the hand and they went through the dream, full of wonder and surprise, until they both came to a river through which energy began to flow through them both.
The core of enlightenment is the sacrifice of the ego. Without a sacrifice, you can’t come to enlightenment. There is the wisdom sacrifice. We orient ourselves around wisdom and take our personal way of wisdom. We live in rest and spiritual practice to come to light, but there is also the sacrifice of love. We make a sacrifice to others to help them along the spiritual way. We do things for others and go beyond our own fixation on the ego. We work for the happiness of all beings and achieve unity consciousness.
A spiritual person can abstain. He or she can live without a relationship. Many yogis, monks and nuns do just that. Those who want to live in the kingdom of God, should give up outer attachments. Then the life energy flows within and awakens the inner happiness. A lot of rest, living away from the world and effective spiritual exercises like yoga, walking, meditation, reading, praying and working with the thoughts are the basis for enlightenment and a life in light.
For many people, living alone is necessary to be free of the attachments to other people, sex and relationships. For me personally, it was the right thing to live without a relationship for ten years. But I see that a relationship with a woman is good for me. She brings love and joy into my life and opens my heart. I learn to communicate with another person and to see myself in another person.
Relationships can be a spiritual learning process and at the same time a way of opening the heart. A positive relationship can heal through love and sexuality. They can go together to happiness, light and enlightenment. There is the way of tantric yoga. Sexuality is practiced in a way that spiritual energy is awakened and tension is dissolved. Tantric yoga is an art. Healing energies must be developed with losing oneself in worldly energies. It is important to anchor the being in calm, God, and spirituality. We should overcome our attachments through spiritual exercises, through peace and quiet and being alone. We should allow ourselves to be lead through God, our enlightened masters and the voice of our inner wisdom.
Sathya Sai Baba is a well-known Indian master. He tells most of his followers to follow the way of the spiritual relationship. He dedicated his book “Sai Baba Talks about Relationships” to his student Stephan von Stepski-Doliwa. He teaches daily meditation, positive thinking and the guidance of the inner voice. He sees sexuality as Godly energy. It should be experienced with joy and responsibility. Both partners should connect themselves with their higher selves or God or light or inner truth. The goal should be to grow in light together. Those who do good for others will harvest goodness. Those who live their relationships through God are blessed.
Selfless serving is an important spiritual exercise for Sai Baba. Sai Baba says “obligate yourself to serve selflessly if you want to keep your heart pure.” Seva gives us the consciousness of unity. Sai Baba says that we should first serve our own families, only then when we’ve fulfilled our obligations in love, then we can go onto the next step of serving the community. The big goal of Sai Baba is to build a golden era on earth. Everyone can help each other.
I believe that Sai Baba was enlightened. His teachings about all-encompassing love are very good. His core teachings were of love, peace, truth, justice and non-violence. He saw ways to God in all religions.
Wikipedia: "Śri Sathya Sai Baba was an Indian guru and spiritual leader. The reputed materialisations of vibhuti (holy ash) and other small objects such as rings, necklaces, and watches by Sathya Sai Baba along with reports of miraculous healings, resurrections, clairvoyance, bilocation, and alleged omnipotence and omniscience were a source of both fame and controversy; devotees considered them signs of divinity, while sceptics viewed them as simple conjuring tricks." I can not say anything about materializations. But I know that one can help with spiritual energy and healing.
I think enlightened masters don’t need to be perfect and are allowed to have imperfections. Imperfections make people think. It can destroy the ego if you are aware of your own imperfections. In Tibetan Buddhism it is practiced that one is aware of his or her mistakes. On the other hand it’s important to overcome imperfections and mistakes as much as possible. We should concentrate on the positive aspects of ourselves and others.
Last night, the energy processes continued, but I could still sleep four hours. It was interesting how the night went. I had the feeling God wants to train me to be a spiritual master who can help other people optimally spiritually. I had a lot of crises last night. I could only overcome them by doing the absolute correct thing at the correct moment. I had to view each situation exactly, figure out which energy points to concentrate on and which words (visualization, mantras, prayers) would work best.
Then the blockages dissolved, the energy began to flow, the crisis was over and inner happiness arose and I came to a state of peace and quiet. I slept until the next energy process arose. Then high concentration was necessary. A new situation with new strategies for solving the problem. Ten hours of energy work are behind me. I’ve emerged victorious. If I can help myself, then I can also help others. That is probably the idea behind my hard spiritual training. I just drank a hot cocoa and went for a long walk.
Girlfriend: “I am very glad if I can help to dissolve blockages on your heart. I do energy work and sometimes know what is a topic of interest with a person I deal with.”
Nils: "Which goals do you have for your life? What do you wish for the future? What do you want to do and achieve.” Girlfriend: “ I simply want to hear and listen what the divine  wants for me, which way the divine leads me and to courageously follow my heart and my love. Otherwise, like everyone, I want to be happy. Happy with myself and to have God happy with me, and to be happy with others. And also to experience real love within a partnership.”
Nils: To go together in light is the best perspective that a person can have. Under the protection and leadership of God, you have the foundation for optimism. Everything will go well with us both. And everything is already good the way things are. We’ve found each other at exactly the right moment. Just now I’m ready for you, and you are ready for me. If we met earlier, I wouldn’t have been ready for a woman.
I walk the path of all-encompassing love. I’ve taken the Bodhisattva vow with the Dalai Lama. I think it is good to work for the happiness of all beings. And it’s nice if I can do that with a partner.
My main method of healing is according to the five principles for health ( healthy diet, regular exercise, enough relaxation, avoiding poison, and thinking positively). Yoga helps to relieve conflict through exercise, meditation and positive thinking. In this way, you help activate the body’s self healing capacity. According to my experience you can heal yourself with spiritual energy and send this to other people as well. There are many ways to transfer energy such as reiki, shiatsu, massage hooponopono. I see myself not as a healer, rather a spiritual teacher. My girlfriend feels more attracted to healing work. I am glad that she also found Mother Meera’s teachings.
The deeper point of life isn’t material happiness, it’s inner happiness. Material happiness is reached through consumption, carrier and material riches. Inner happiness is developed through spiritual exercises. Then one day you can reach light, God, inner peace and immeasurable happiness in all-encompassing love, which is the true fulfillment of life. It is also nice if you can connect inner and outer fulfillment.
I’m going through a difficult time because the kundalini energy is flowing constantly, and many old hurts are coming up and keep me from sleeping. I hope that it will get better soon. Yesterday evening I was suddenly very tired. I lay down to meditate, then suddenly during the course of the evening a great layer of tension lifted. I considered what problem was hidden under that. When I went to bed, I felt the happiness energy flow as a result of the tension dissolving. After four hours the problem appeared which had caused such inner tension.
I went through a dying situation from an earlier life. I didn’t want to let go of my family and friends, so I became tense for many lives. An image of a mother with many children appeared. She was happy. And now she had lost everything. I transformed myself, looked for happiness in myself and went into death. I know that people die and have to let go of attachments to the world in order to go into the light. I first went through all of the feelings of addiction, anger and mourning. I went through all of my feelings of loss enough and so let go of them. Then I tried to reach light. I imagined myself as a Buddha of happiness and activated my kundalini energy. I sent all of my friends light and reached light myself.
I went for long walks, let go of my sadness, arrived in peace and was suddenly in unity. I experienced energy of calm, unity, happiness and love. I notice I achieved a leap up in consciousness.
God can be experienced. God is love, peace, happiness and joy. Those who experience God, are enthusiastic and want more God until they reach complete enlightenment.
Amritanandamayi (Amma) Is one of the most well-known spiritual masters today. She was born 27.9.1953 in Kerala. Already at age 5 she began her spiritual practice. Her motto was “ don’t waste a moment of your life.” At the age of 17 she reached enlightenment and with 22 she reached complete enlightenment. She established an Ashram in Souther India (Kerala) where many people from the west also live. Her teachings are typical for neo-Hinduism. She is undogmatic, humorous and emphasizes the unity of all religions.
Amritanandamayi has built up a lot of humanitarian work. She set up villages for poor families. She finances schools, universities and hospitals. She started an organization for single mothers. She gives all mothers enough money to live from. That is a very big social deed in India. She works for the equal treatment of men and women. She established an Indian temple with female priests, and re-awakened the Brahma cult. Brahma is the Indian God of wisdom. Equal to him is Brahmani, the mistress. She holds a book, ap prayer chain and a musical instrument.
It is good to take a specific time daily for the spiritual way. It is also good to take a particular time daily for intensive spiritual practice. The amount of time needed for enlightenment varies from person to person. Jesus needed 40 days, Ramanamaharshi 5 minutes, Buddha 6 years, Swami Shivanda 9 years, Amma 12 years and Moses 40 years.
The teachings of the four stages of life are a basis in Hinduism. The four phases are: the student, the family, the spirituality and the enlightenment. In other words: “ In Hinduism there are four phases or Ashramas in life: the time of Brahmacharya or the student, Grihastha or the household, Vanaprastha or the time of the hermit and Sannyasa, the phase of ascetism.  (Yogawiki) The 60th birthday is especially celebrated in India because this is the entrance step into the spiritual life. Many Indians move to a place alone or with a partner to practice intensively spiritually.
Enlightenment can be compared with varied levels of happiness. People live at quite varied levels of happiness. Some people are depressed, some afraid, some aggressive, some addicted, some are more or less happy. And some people are enlightened. Even an enlightened person can experience joy and suffering. But his general level of happiness is higher than others.
In yoga, it is said that an enlightened person is 100 times happier than one who is not enlightened. And an enlightened person along the way of all-encompassing love is 100 times happier than a regular enlightened person. There are many levels of enlightenment. You can develop far. You don’t act from the ego anymore. You can always deal from the perspective of love and help others. Then you stabilize and strengthen your experiences in enlightenment.
Laotse:”I’m good to the good, and to the evil I am also good, because I am good.” Jeses taught the way of all-encompassing love and to also love one’s enemies. According to my experience, you then arrive in light (the dimension of enlightenment beyond all duality), if you send all beings light.
There are many types of spiritual students. Some follow their master word for word and some anchor themselves in their own wisdom. I belong to the latter.
Those who would like to be successful along the spiritual way need self-discipline. Those who practice with a goal in mind and live in all-encompassing love while connecting with God or enlightened masters will one day arrive in light. Those who practice with perseverance will one day be filled with grace by God.
Special spiritual abilities (Siddhi) develop along the spritual way. In yoga, Siddhi should not be shown to the public in order to keep the ego from becoming stronger. On the other hand it is good to help others with special abilities. They should be practiced in a way that the ego is not reinforced, they can be used subtly, and with positive motivation.
It is better to be happy rather than unhappy. It is better to be wise rather than unwise. It is better to be enlightened rather than unenlightened. Those who comprehend that , make their way to the light. They find the appropriate spiritual exercises and one day arrive in a life in God. Our deepest longing is for love and for happiness and to live in eternity.  We long for a life in light, a life in God, for enlightenment. May we all recognize this longing and realize it as well.
The yogi is laughing about this ”” Two women are talking. One says: ”lately I’ve had such a difficult time speaking. I wanted to say, “I want to drink wine.“Instead I said, “I want to drink line”. The other said. “I experienced something just like that. At breakfast I wanted to say to my husband: “please pass me the coffee.” Instead I said: “you damn asshole, you’ve ruined my whole life!””
Fifteen year old girl on the internet ”My life is just school, food, TV and computer. There’s nothing worse than that…” Answer from Yogi Nils: “There is. No school, no food, no TV and no computer. Seriously, the center of life is inner happiness. Those who do not know the way of inner happiness suffer in life. Build your inner happiness daily with spiritual exercises like yoga, meditation, reading, thought work, doing good for others. Then you can see the positive in your life. Live as a spiritual person in God and you live in happiness.”
A person can also grow in enlightenment without a spritual practice if he or she goes through life consciously, thinks positive and does good for others.  Meditation and thought work are the main techniques on the spiritual way. At best, they are both practiced to reach enlightenment, but for some people, positive thinking is enough. For others meditation or prayer to God is enough.
I differentiate between the way of enlightenment and the way of love. Both lead to a life in light, but they have different points of emphasis. Along the way of love, you try to see yourself in others, to help them and to help them become enlightened and to build a world of love and peace. Then you reach all-encompassing love, unity consciousness and light. Along the way of enlightenment peace and calm is practiced, in addition to attachment-free existence and self- discipline. God is found in calm. The mind is empty of worldly things. The thoughts calm to rest. The person relaxes deep in the soul. And suddenly inner happiness appears.
The original Buddhism is the way of enlightment, just like yoga according to Patanjali. You work for your own enlightenment and try not to harm others. The Dalai Lama represented the Mahayana Buddhism, which is a mix of the way of love and the way of enlightenment. In Christianity we also find the double path of love to others and enlightenment (the love to God). Neo Hinduism follows the way of love and combines it with the path of entlightenment and the Guru yoga (Bhakti yoga).
Then you don’t get lost along the spiritual way and won’t risk being the victim of false gurus. Fake teachers exist all around the world, sadly. They put their ego, their riches or power as the center of their methods. They are often so clever that it is hardly noticeable, but those who look exactly and sense, will see it at some point.
There is only one truth, there is only one God. But there are many images of God. You should find the image that helps you personally along the spiritual path. Be aware that God (enlightenment) is beyond all images.
I see God as the higher consciousness behind the material cosmos. This consciousness works through all people, beings, and also through the material. God consciousness expresses itself through enlightenment and saints. They give us orientation to find our way to the kingdom of God and light. They help us along our spiritual way and bring spiritual energy to us.
Those who have a happy life on earth will hardly reach toward enlightenment. Those who first know enlightenment as a goal accept the effort it takes. Those who know paradise will try to get there. Those who so wish, can incarnate on earth many times. No one can force you to enlightenment. At some point the soul is ready because it wants to come to happiness and it wants to be free of suffering.
There are various directions in yoga. I support and teach the way of love, peace and happiness. I work for a cooperation of all religions, all spiritual people and all yogis. I try to connect the religions. For that reason, I gladly use the term God. I can also express myself in a way that Christians will understand.
In Christianity, it is told to reject magic. At the same time, Jesus and Moses were magicians. They had spiritual abilities and helped others with them. The difference is that Jesus and Moses didn’t see themselves as doing magic, rather that God was acting through them. Their egos were not strengthened through the acts of magic, for that reason. They didn’t use their own energy because they acted through God’s energy, were more tools for God.
I had an interesting experience yesterday. Some people connected with me mentally and wanted to have some of my spritual energy. I gave them as much energy as I could. I noticed it wasn’t enough. I asked my masters for guidance and to help these people. Suddenly I saw myself in God (surrounded by the cosmos, and in the unity of the cosmos). My kundalini energy awoke. I saw the light of God in the world. And I had so much power and happiness in me that I could give all of the people what they needed. I noticed why I wrote the sentence, that God works through me. He helped me to arrive in light and to let God act through me.
God is in Yoga symbolically described as an elephant. Every unenlightened person considers only a part of the elephant. How can we see the entire elephant? How can we come to the bigger picture of the world? How can we see the unity of the world? There are a few techniques. We can meditate, let the thoughts flow by and become empty inside.
We can think about the elephant and come to comprehension of the entirety. We can understand the elephant through individual parts of it. We can hold onto the tail and let God bring us into light. We let the elephant stomp on our ego. We let go of our own will in the face of life. We take things as they are. We sacrifice our worldly wishes on the altar of light.
We can begin with the head of the elephant. We can practice listening to our inner voice of wisdom. We practice seeing with the eyes of the elephant (the eyes of God). We can listen to the suffering of other beings with the big ears of the elephant and use our trunks (our hands) to do good for others. At some point we learn to ride the elephant and to mentally be permanent in enlightened existence. Then the inner sun shines and enlightens our world.
If we fall from the elephant, we can use spiritual exercises to bring the light back. We use self-discipline to be back in the light of God. Christians have the mass or church service, prayer, reading in the bible and works of mercy. In Islam, one prays five times a day, goes to Mecca, fasts, gives almose and orients the self around God.
In yoga there are many ways to enlightenment, such as hatha yoga (physical exercise), tantric yoga (the way of spiritual relationships), kama yoga (the clever use of joy and enjoyment), kundalini yoga (yoga of enlightenment energy), mantra yoga (meditative chanting), raja yoga (meditation), jnana yoga (the way of wisdom, thinking), bhakti yoga (master yoga) and karma yoga (doing good).
You should learn to watch the ego. Otherwise you can easily become a victim of it. Even enlightened persons can get lost in the trap of worldly energy. Even enlightened people can fall into the trap of power, sex and greed. There are many examples of that. Enlightenment must be developed on the basis of wisdom and all-encompassing love.
It is a trap to see one’s own spiritual path as the only correct path. There are many ways to come to enlightenment. Enlightenment goes beyond all concepts, but concepts are used to reach enlightenment.
Anandamayi Ma (born 30. April 1896, died 27. August 1982) was a well-knwon spiritual mistress from India. Ananda means happiness. Anandamayi was a mother of happiness. She was friendly, calm and cheerful. She could tell stories well and sing nicely. She liked to dance. She taught people to laugh: “laugh as much as possible.” She was married with 12 years and moved in with her husband with 18 years old.
At the age of 21 she started her six year Sadhana. She first spoke the name of the God Visnu “hari” as a mantra because her parents were followers of Vishnu. Her husband, however was a follower of Shiva, so she switched to the mantra “Shiva”. She danced to the mantras and then rested in a peaceful meditation afterward. After some months she began with bodily exercises of yoga that came to her spontaneously without having learnt them. She practiced these asanas intuitively. She practiced creative and intuitive hatha yoga, and did her mental exercises creatively and intuitively. She practiced the positive characteristics and the images that she needed at the right moment. The various divinities flowed through her mind. She visualized their forms, identified with them and thought their names as mantras and activated thus her kundalini energy.
After Anandamayi Ma had loaded her body and mind with spiritual energy, she rested for three years in the great peace (raja yoga). She hardly spoke (mauna) and did little. Mostly she just sat there. She didn’t need any more exercises. She had awakened her kundalini energy and it cleansed her body, mind and soul by itself. She only needed peace and quiet. She had to stop her energy from being used in outer activities. She had to live as calmly as possible so that the energy went inside and dissolved conflicts and tensions.
Anandamayi Ma was a master of hatha yoga. She gåve the world the way of creative yoga. Creative yoga consists of exercises for the body (hatha yoga), mental yoga (bhakti yoga), meditation (raja yoga) and the way of all-encompassing love (karma yoga).
In 1922, her husband explained that without the initiation of a guru there could be no greater progress along the spiritual way. So she decorated her room, lit incense and initiated herself. She connected with her inner guru and a mantra appeared suddenly in her mind.
At the end of her Sadhana, she reached a state of inner happiness that fit her title of “happy-spirited mother”. At this point, she wished for all beings to experience the level of joy she had felt. She wanted to share her enlightenment with the entire world and worked as a spiritual master in India for the rest of her life. As yogi Nils heard her sentence in 2001 (“ may all beings experience this joy”) he spontaneously threw a hand into the sky and cried, “here I am! I’m ready. I want to live in great happiness.” Anandamayi Ma heard him from the other side and sent him a dream. A little snake bit Nils and awoke his kundalini energy. Nils was flooded by light for three days. The snake is a symbol of the god Shiva. A little snake meant that Nils should develop himself slowly, toward enlightenment. And that’s how it went, too.
Anandamayi Ma taught a life of austerity as a yogi as well as a spiritual life within the context of a family. She recommended everyone, whatever their life situation, to meditate at a certain time each day. The core of her teachings was: “the highest calling of a person is to strive toward self-realization. All other obligations are secondary.” Those who practice spiritually 15 minutes every day will be blessed by her. Anandamayi Ma taught the unity of all religions. We can use spiritual exercsises from all of the religions. We should see what works well for each of us personally.
Inner happiness can take hold in a person when the tension in body and spirit are dissolved. Buddha developed an ingenious way to do this. This was called “sitting, walking, and mind work”, If you switch between sitting and walking, then inner tension can be released in an optimal fashion. If you just sit, the mind becomes dull. Regular movement makes the mind clear and the body healthy. It gives people inner power. It enables people to take the spiritiual way. It gives them the strength to live as a winner. If you only walk or run, then the mind becomes restless. Inner happiness arises out of inner calm. If the body is held still and quiet, then you can come to the deeper dimensions of meditation. Meditating can be done while sitting or lying down. Both are good meditative positions. It varies from person to person as to which are the best. In addition to meditation and exercise, the dissolving of tension with thought work is an important method to come to enlightenment. A yogi should develop thoughts of love, wisdom and self-discipline. He has  to keep his or her thoughts stiller and stiller until he or she lives entirely in calm and peace.
This basic model for the dissolving of tension has been expanded by Yogi Nils to include five activities: lying down (or sitting and meditating), reading (thought work), walking (exercise, yoga), doing good for others (work), and to enjoy life. Switching between these activities is an effective way to dissolve tension. This is his way into the light.
From a certain point in the course of maintaining calm, the energy of a person turns inward. He no longer lives through his outer activities. He lives from the perspective of inner cleansing, the dissolving of tension and the development of inner happiness. The yogi is then cleansed by his own life energy and doesn’t need to do very many spiritual exercises any longer. He or she then just needs to maintain a state of calm. Every yogi needs to find this point where energy goes inward. It is difficult to find, and difficult to maintain. Life energy can move to a state of over-activity or dullness. Both need to be stopped with self-discipline on a daily basis. An effective yogi life feels like constantly living against the stream of neurotic impulses. First the state of calm is boring and then suddenly the energy begins to work within. If you keep the state of calm, then inner happiness appears.
According to Swami Shivananda, enlightenment can appear through silence, spiritual exercises, and all embracing love. If a yogi lives alone in silence then half the way to enlightenment ist already gone. The second half is done with spiritual practices (yoga, meditation, positive thinking). The gate to a life in the light you pass with all-encompassing love. If a yogi lives mainly for the happiness of all beeings and for a happy world then the ego will dissolve.
My spiritual daily schedule is the main techinque along my way to the light. Mainly, it takes a very sensitive and consistently practiced schedule to dissolve the tension in my body and spirit. I divide my spiritual exercises throughout the day so that a constant inner cleansing will take place.
A yogi feels out which techniques are needed at any moment. If the body is getting limp and flabby, he or she goes for a walk. If the mind is restless, he or she does some yoga or meditates. If the spirit feels against the spiritual path, the yogi reads a spiritual book. A yogi feels out where the tension lies and uses the right methods. The tension is usually found in that which the body and spirit don’t seem to want at the moment. Where the neurotic defense mechanisms are, that is the way to the light.  On the other hand, it’s good to give the body and spirit what they want sometimes, otherwise more tension is created.
The way of inner happiness requires a lot of wisdom and inner feeling, and this needs to be developed daily. I begin each day with a positive attitude. Which exercises do I need in which order? Then I create a positive vision of the day and put a statue on my altar that reflects this vision. What is a positive quote for you today? Which activity brings you into the light?
The main principle for dealing with a painful situation is to behave correctly on the outside and to manage the thoughts and feelings as well as you can. If a problem appears, keep your head clear. What is the right thing right now? What needs to be done? Deal with the problem without becoming enmeshed in your feelings. Get a clear picture of reality. Solve the problem to the extent that you can. Consider how you can deal with stressful thoughts. Stop your stressful throughts! Are there some positive thoughts that will help you?
If the painful situation is over in the outer world, we can relax on the inside, too. We can heal our spiritual wounds. A Buddha goes through painful situations without spiritual wounds. But, as we aren’t yet Buddhas, wounds are likely to appear. At some point in these problems, we’ve probably created tension. This tension needs to be dissolved.
If we don’t heal ourselves after stress situations, then the wounds incurred stay in the soul. They limit our spiritual well-being and lead to neurotic behaviors and can also cause physical illness. For this reason, it’s important to take enough time to recover after a stressful situation. We let ourselves relax, and we are gentle with ourselves. We let go of bottled up rage, our fears and our grief. The painful situation is worked with, worked on, and cleansed from the soul until peace and positiviity appear. We do relaxation exercises, yoga and meditation. We can go for walks, read spiritual books and enjoy something nice. With rest, exercise and some joy in life, our souls can be healed.
It’s important to examine your fears. It’s important to find the fears we’ve buried in us in order to let go of them. We think about our fears, we find positive sentences which help us. One could be “I accept reality, the way it is. I concentrate on my positive goals. I live as a winner.” Many of our fears can be dissolved with positive thoughts. It often helps to think clearly about the fears. Once we’ve recognized these fears, we can develop them into positive thoughts. In an emergency situation, we can think a positive sentence as long as a mantra to get the fearful thoughts to disappear.
For many people, it’s helpful to talk to others about problems. Who can you talk to? You can also send someone else a letter or email, or connect to enlightened masters or God.
Otherwise, there is the zen meditation. This meditation can be done while sitting, lying down, or when walking. We stop all of our thoughts for a short time until we come to a state of meditation (1 to 5 minutes). We concentrate on our problem, then think some positive sentences and let our feelings and thoughts take their course. We observe our thoughts from a distance. They can develop or die down as long as it takes before they disappear. The entire time we stay in a light meditative state. The main principle with the zen meditation is that we don’t think consciously, but let the thoughts go, that they do their own thinking. The problems dissolve into nothingness this way. Calm, wellbeing, and all-encompassing positivity grow in us. We reach light and inner happiness.
If a problem affects me particularly strongly, then I practice a ritual to overcome suffering. The first thing I do is take an oracle card (Tarot, Buddha oracle, Angel oracle). When shuffling the cards, I connect with an enlightened master or God and ask for guidance and help. Then I take a card, read the text, and think how the oracle card fits to my situation. Which strategies does the oracle recommend for my situation? What does the oracle say about my problem? Which helpful thoughts does it give to me?
I usually start to see things from a positive perspective when reading the oracle and thinking about the text. It makes me feel better when I recognize there is a positive strategy for every situation. A positive quote from the oracle strengthens the positive in me. Thinking about it leads me to a constructive consideration process of my problem at the time. I notice that there is something I can do. I am not a helpless victim. I can live as a winner. I can solve the problem.
After I take an oracle card, I read some pages in a spiritual book. I consider which book I need at the time. Which book gives me strength? Which book strengthens positive energy? A spiritual book has a positive energy field. If we take some time within this energy field, we achieve a more positive state of mind.
24.. After reading, I go for a walk for an hour. I move my rage and nervous emotions out of my body. I practice mantras, and do meditation (five minute thought stop). Then I think about the problem. After a half an hour, I usually feel better. I begin to see things clearer and in the right perspective. I am one with the world and myself.
After going for a walk, I do some yoga exercises and a longer meditation while lying down. I put some music on and stay lying down until my mind has come to rest. Then I get up, eat something nice and think about what else I need. Then I give it to myself as well. It’s often helpful to do something creative, like painting, writing, playing music and other forms of expression. We can do something good for others and bring some energy of love to them and ourselves. What is your way toward all-encompassing love and how can you take action for the happiness of all beings?
In times of bigger problems, I have to do several rounds of reading, walking, doing good, enjoying myself and meditating. Then I come to the point where peace and calm arise. After that I am gentle with myself and heal myself more and more. If a problem doesn’t go away, I give myself some time each day to work with bigger problems. Then I stop my thoughts. I don’t allow myself to think about the problem, because thinking about it too much is not productive and just increases stress.
Overcoming suffering is a creative process. You have to sense what you need at each moment. What is the best way to solve problems at the moment? What will lead you to inner peace and positiviity? People vary, and so need varied strategies. It’s important though to avoid addictive things such as pills, smoking, drugs, alcohol and too many sweets. It’s better to overcome problems with techniques for inner happiness. Then we grow with the problems. We raise ourselves above the problems and land in happiness one day. May that come to be for all of us.
Work with the psyche is a personal thing. Positive thinking helps for some people. Solving problems is also important.  Supressing feelings is usually a bad idea from a spiritual perspective. But we can learn how to deal with our feelings and even learn to control them to a certain degree. Feelings come from thoughts. If we avoide negative thoughts, we avoid negative feelings. Often, we have a tiny window of time before thoughts manifest into feelings. In that moment we can decide to stay in inner peace.
The main work along the spiritual way is mostly work from the shadow side. We work with our negative characteristics like attachment, fear, addiction, grief, pride, rage and foolishness. We solve our problems. We accept things as they are. We integrate suffering into our lives. We develop our inner happiness, inner peace and our ability to just flow, and roll with things. We rise above our suffering.
The journey and the goal are intertwined. We need a spiritual goal to help us find our spiritual path. We should hang onto the goal until we’ve reached it. We should sense what is right with every step we take. Being focused on the end goal and being present in the moment are not mutually exclusive, rather they compliment one another. That is the way to go.
Enlightenment means intense work on one’s own psyche over a long period of time. Mother Meera says you need thousands of lives to reach enlightenment. The main thing is to see through the way of worldly enjoyment and to comprehend the meaning of inner happiness. If you recognize enlightenment as the main goal in life, then you can practice with that goal in mind. According to Amritanandamayi, you grow five times as fast if you live in peace and calm away from others. Sathya Sai Baba said that one needs three lives as a yogi to come to complete enlightenment. The quickest spiritual way is the way that can be practiced effectively for you personally, without overwhelming yourself. It’s possible to come to enlightenment in one life as a yogi, but that can be difficult if you have a lot of tension. It is easier to find your way in the light through several lifes. With every life, you grow a little in happiness, peace and love.
Mother Meera is an enlightened master who lives in Germany. She gives light and blessings as a free gift to all people. Her Darshan is free. In the beginning just a few people went to her. Now she is in the center of the spiritual scene in Germany. Nils recommends every yogi  receive a blessing at least once in his or her life from an enlightened master. A Darshan is an important cleansing step along the spiritual way. Often, enlightenment energy is transferred that can develop into great grace one day. Mother Meera believes in the unity of religions and the right to choose individual paths in spirituality. Statements from Mother Meera:
“God is calm. Everything comes from the calm. In calm, more work can be done.” (live in calm and deal from your presence).
“I accept everyone who comes to me sincerely.”
“I look at every side of your being. I see everything in you, in order to see where I can help, heal and give strength.”
“ You can enjoy material life, but realize it’s a representation of the divine only.” (experience joy as a part of the spiritual path).
" “Every religion has its holy books. It helps to read these books.”
“My work is for the whole world.”
“Those who come to me for Darshan, always get what they need.”
”It’s not necessary to come to me, I can help everywhere.” (It’s important to mentally connect through a mantra, a prayer, a meditation).
”Grace and mercy come into effect immediately if the striving for it is authentic.”
An enlightened master connects enlightenment with all-encompassing love, empathy, and humility. He or she is modest. He or she doesn’t necessarily announce him or herself as an enlightened master. A master sees his or her fellow beings more than the elf. He or she lives for the spiritual way and to help with it, and not for the ego (money, riches, power, recognition).
It is an important question along the spiritual way to consider whether there is such a thing as heavenly mercy. Is there God, angels, Buddha, enlightened masters who can help us from the other side?
God (an avatar acting as a force of God) posesses the characteristics omni-presence, ominipotence, goodness, and is all-knowing. For this reason, he can see every person and give that person exactly what he or she needs spiritually. The more a spiritual person develops, the more they can participate in these characteristics.
It is good to visit the Satsang of an enlightened person. The important thing isn’t the teaching, but the enlightened energy that you come into contact with. Everyone gets what he or she needs, what is correct for their particular level of development. Those who have an enlightened master they connect with daily is blessed and receives leadership.
I’ve visited a lot of enlightened masters. Often, enlightenment energy is transfered directly, which results in a great step forward along my way. At the moment I visit the Satsangs of Mother Meera. Everytime, I experience something totally different and get a different type of energy. One time, my heart chakra was healed. Another time I felt her happiness energy in me. A third time I just enjoyed the good energy in the room.
Can we get help? According to my experience, yes. I feel the energy of the enlightened masters. They transfer energy from their images, statues, books and words. They come from what we perceive as nothingness, which is in fact more than just an empty space.
When do God, the angels and enlightened masters help us? When we connect with them through prayer, by invoking them, by visualizing them or by reading their books. We should do that every day. They will then lead us to enlightenment, if we’re ready for it. If we take the path of love, wisdom, humility every day, grace manifests in our lives. I feel lead by God and my enlightened masters. Everything develops at the right moment in the right way. I’m amazed by it myself, because I can hardly comprehend it.
9.Enlightenment is a good goal. There is nothing better. But there is the possibility of reincarnation. We don’t need to reach the goal in one life. You can take the right pace for you and develop through each life further into the light.
a. You live at a higher level of happiness. You feel more love, peace, strength and happiness. Christians can say that you live in paradise. If you have experienced enlightenment, you can say it is better to live enlightened than unenlightened. Enlightenment is the deeper meaning of life.
b. You are free of suffering. Christians spoke of deliverance. I would say that every fear disappears and you have so much strength and happiness in you that you can easily go through every situation in life. You can integrate suffering into your life. You can overcome everything through your inner peace, strength and all-encompassing love. You also get through death especially well.
c. After death, you come to the light. Then you live in paradise (in God) and can incarnate as an enlightened master (Siddha, Bodhisattva) on earth. If there is life after death, then the benefits are immeasurable. If there isn’t life after death, then as an enlightened being you have an optimal life on earth.
There are different ways to get to enlightenment. The main way is to live alone or in a little community away from society, to meditate and to work on one’s thoughts. Along this way, Buddha, the Christian desert fathers and yogi masters such as Swami Sivananda and Anandamayi Ma are guiding lights providing good examples. I have been living as a hermit yogi for 25 years because I have the feeling this is the best way for me to make spiritual progress. In Tibetan Buddhism, it is said that you’ve already gotten halfway to enlightenment by living alone as a yogi. Only a few people live that way. There are spiritual communities, Ashrams and convents. That can also be a good way to grow spiritually, especially with the help of an enlightened master.
Even if I prefer the yogic way, I do believe that with the help of an enlightened master, you can grow spiritually when living with a job and family. An enlightened master can send a lot of energy every  day, and one can lead a spiritual life in a way that constant spiritual cleansing and growth take place. There are ways to combine a worldly life with spiritual growth. For most people, that is the main way to come to the light. The important thing is to emphasize spirituality and to connect with God and his enlightened masters. Living spiritually means to live according to the cornerstones of love, peace, truth, wisdom and self-discipline. It is helpful to have a plan. You can construct this plan according to your personal needs.
At the beginning of the spiritual way, peace, happiness, love, and trust develop. At some point an awakening can occur, which causes the concept of the self to dissolve and a perception of the unity of all things comes into being. But the way is still long after that. I experienced a great sense of inner peace and positivity after a phase of ego dissipation. However, I first recognized the great goal as my kundalini energy rose from the middle of my body to my head, to my crown chakra. Suddenly I was in a dimension of unimaginable happiness, peace, love and truth. In yoga, that’s called Sathyaloka, the location of great Truth. As a Christian, one would speak of the highest paradise where you sit beside God. It was first in this moment that I knew that the deeper meaning in life is to come to enlightenment. I didn’t have that feeling when I was first awakening. The first time that feeling appeared was when I had my great enlightenment experience. I recognized there what all religions strive for. There are various techniques in the different religions. In yoga there is hatha yoga, kundalini yoga and raja yoga (the highest meditation).
Along the spiritual path, you can get lost in the abyss. It is a trap along the spiritual way. People are given the ability to deal with this, by God. We can be a force for better behavior in the world, we put a stop to egomaniacs. We should give everyone in the world something to eat, stop war, and stop murder. We should work for a world of love, peace and wisdom. This way, a golden era in the world’s history can arise.
Love can cause the enlightened to incarnate onto earth once more to work for the good of all, just as Krishna and Jesus both did. I follow the teachings of the Buddhist Madhyamaka. According to these teachings, there are various levels in the cosmos and all of them are real. A spiritual master can deal on all of the levels, and be in all of the levels. He can build an identity when it is necessary, but also rest in God without an ego in order to enjoy highest happiness.
The more I go into unity, the less I am interested in doing things out in the world. I rest in my happiness and peace. But that is also a trap. An enlightened person has great capabilities to go out into the world and improve things. They can help their fellow beings to overcome their suffering and to be happy. The enlightenment is incomplete when you no longer can feel the suffering of your fellow beings. A full enlightened master is also completely connected with all of the beings in the cosmos. He or she can feel their suffering. Just as he or she came to happiness, the enlightened master also wants to bring others into happiness.
Jesus taught his followers to love their fellow beings. He didn’t disconnect himself from others. One only needs to look around in his or her own circle of aquaintances to find the way to love and helping. The important thing is the love to God and to other human beings. Another way it is to teach people to connect with enlightened masters. Those who ask God or the enlightened for help, will get an impulse to act. Through the connection of all beings, the enlightened are helped. Mother Meera explained that praying always helps. Those who pray daily or connect with an enlightened master are shown the way to the light.
A long time ago, a young man lived in India who wanted to be a Buddha and live in light. He called himself Amitabha and became a hermit. He went through a lot of spiritual crises. He put in a lot of effort to overcome his inner laziness and to figure out what was the most effective way to practice at any given moment and to do his spiritual exercises with self-discipline. Amitabha knew that only a few people can take the path of the lone yogi. The way to enlightenment is hard work. He therefore chose to create a space in heaven after his enlightenment which contained happy energy where even worldly people could land. Those who spoke the mantra “Om Amitabha” (in Japanese “Om Amida Butsu”, Tibetan “Om Amitabha Hri”) or even thought the mantra would land in paradise after death, as Amitabha promised. Amitabha meditated for thirty years and landed in complete enlightenment. Now he could bring all of his seriously practicing followers into paradise.
Amitabha probably lived around the same time as Jesus Christ. His teachings spread about 100 years after Christ in India, Tibet, China and Japan. He had a lot of enlightened followers who went in his footsteps. They are all connected with us through the Amitabha mantra. And through the Amitabha oracle. What does Amitabha say to you? Try the Amitabha oracle.
Visualize a large sun over your crown chakra. A golden Buddha sits in the sun (in the sky above you). The Buddha is you. The Buddha sees the suffering on earth and sends all beings light. Move your hand in blessing and think “I send light to.... May all people be happy. May the world be happy.”
An important cornerstone of Amitabha Buddhism is trusting Amitabha (the other power, Tariki). It is often taught that one cannot do anything for his or her own enlightenment. We can only pray and hope that Amitabha (God or an enlightened master) will save us. In this regard,  there is a similarity with the Christian teachings of Martin Luther, that people can only be saved by the grace of God.
I have argued against this on protestant online forums. This teaching is false and illogical. Jesus gave exact directions as to how one can become blessed, or enlightened. One has to purify the heart, live in all-encompassing love and to love God. Jacob wrote: ”Act on the words, don’t just listen. Didn’t Abraham become righteous by sacrificing his son (his ego) on the alter? One is saved through actions, not through faith alone.”
When striving toward enlightenment, we have to each take the respective, personally most effective way. From this perspective, Tariki (not practicing spiritual exercises, instead trusting solely in God) is a method that is sometimes helpful and sometimes not. To make a dogma of it is certainly the wrong way to go. Basically enlightenment happens through spiritual practice over a longer period. At the same time, we usually can’t find our way to enlightenment alone due to the ego fixation. We need leadership by an enlightened master. We need trust in the  higher power, but also must work on ourselves intensively. For me, the optimal spiritual way is spiritual practice, practicing all-encompassing love, daily prayer or connecting with God, Amitabha or a personal enlightened master. I find the Amitabha teachings to be fascinating. They are a common thread between Buddhism and Christianity. They have Christian, Hindu and Buddhist elements. I personally don’t believe Buddha taught them. But someone had taught these at some point, and this person probably came from a Buddhist background. At any case, the teachings of the Buddhist Amitabha path have been spread far and wide and well-received from a lot of people. For me, the Buddhist Amitabha way is too restrictive in its typical portrayal. I would take a less non-dogmatic approach so that people from various religious backgrounds and individuals can learn from it and still take their personally correct approach.
An important point along the spiritual way is whether there is a God or a higher enlightened being that can help us from the other side. From my own experience and the knowledge I have at this point in time, I believe there is life after death. Near death research and reincarnation research as well as reports from the experiences of spiritual people also would lend weight to this conclusion. Many people can travel to the other side. They see the paradise level and meet higher beings. If there are higher beings that want to help us, then we should accept their help. If they want to lead us, bring us to enlightenment and lead us to paradise after death, then that is a huge gift. We should accept it.
There is life after death. There is a paradise on the other side. Everyone can reach this paradise. You can come to paradise through a mantra when dying. You can reach paradise with the help of an enlightened master. You can reach paradise through a positive life. All religions are methods to come to paradise. Every person can take the personally path to paradise. Prayer, mantra, meditation, invocation, visualization, oracle and reading a spiritual book are all good exercises.
Everyone wants to be happy and not suffer. We should put our lives together in a way that makes us happy. We should consider what we need, and then give that to ourselves. We should work for a happy existence for everyone on earth. Mostly, the happiness of a person comes from within. For that reason, we should develop our inner happiness. We should think positively, speak positively, and act positively. We should find positive role models to follow.
If there is life after death, we should live so that we come to a good place after we have passed. We can choose the masters who inspire us. We can choose to follow Jesus, Amitabha, Satyha Sai Baba, Mother Meera or other masters. We can work with God, the angels or the enlightened masters of yoga. The more we practice, the stronger is the connection to our enlightened helpers.
By visualizing paradise, enlightenment energy can become awakened in us. Everyone can imagine paradise so that they feel good in it. Paradise is a realm of enlightenment and light. It is good to lead a life of love, peace, self-discipline and inner happiness.
We can build up a paradise on earth. There is enough prosperity for everyone, we just need to share the riches of the earth fairly. No one needs to go hungry. But mostly, paradise is in everyone on the inside. We just need to change our consciousness so that we can recognize paradise in our world. We need to orient around the positive in our lives. We should be grateful for what life gives us.
My masters gave me the mantra “yes” in a dream. They showed me how one can get through death and reach paradise. Those who think of paradise will reach it. Christians go to the Christian heaven, Muslims to their version, Hindus to theirs. Enlightened beings can go where they want, because they transcend all forms.
There will always be some suffering on earth. However, most suffering has been created by humans themselves. We could organize life so that all people have enough to eat, so that there isn’t any more war and that the environment is clean. We could reduce suffering when dying by making pain medicine available to everyone, and by helping others to develop their enlightenment consciousness before dying.
A soul retains its individual consciousness unless it decides to dissolve itself within God. Buddha probably did just that. However, there are also souls which will continue to exist until all beings are enlightened. In Buddhism, there is the Bodhisattva path toward this end. In Hinduism, Vishnu is the great role model along the way of love. He incarnates again and again in order to help people when it is necessary to give them assistance on their spiritual way.
Shiva, the enlightened dancer with life (Nataraya)
In Hinduism, we find the term “Avatar”. An Avatar is an incarnation of God. Here there are dimensions of enlightenment to be found which exceed my experiences and my knowledge. I can only speculate. When I connect with an Avatar like Mother Meera or Sathya Sai Baba or Krishna or Jesus, can this Avatar lead me perfectly along my spiritual path into the light? I feel my life is guided. Everything happens at the right moment, but I also will admit that I don’t fully comprehend that. Many people strive toward enlightenment through intensive spiritual practice. But many others try to reach their goal through prayer to an avatar and through the guidance of that avatar, find their way.
Enlightenment is self-realization. Enlightenment is clarity, peace, calm, happiness, love, joy, knowledge of the connectedness of all things. In enlightenment there is no boredom. You live in happiness, and that is enough. The more enlightened you are, the more you lose interest in worldly things. However, it makes you happy to do good things for others.
Enlightenment is also just a word. Enlightenment exceeds all terms. Terms can be helpful. The term enlightenment is helpful when it helps people to reach their spiritual goals. The goal can also be described with the words God, paradise, light, nirvana, happiness, love and self-realization. The goal and the way are important. Both form the context. Some people find it helpful to concentrate on the goal, for others concentrating on the way to the goal is more helpful, and for most it helps to oncentrate on both. It’s good to take one step at a time, but without being focused on a goal, you can wind up wandering aimlessly through life and get caught up in the various traps that life lays out. Those who have a clear goal can find their way easily.
If we visualize God on the outside, we can awaken God on the inside. And if we awaken God in the inside through our spiritual exercises (purification, prayer, meditation, doing good, all-embracing love), we will see God in the outside.
In my view, the path of enlightenment solves the problems of the world at a deeper level when it is combined with the path of all-encompassing love. How do you want to convince a capitalist or a dictator to not exploit other people or try to have power over them? That would only work if you can convince such people about the path of inner happiness and love, as it has happened before in Buddhism. The Mongolians became peaceful through Buddhism. The cruel Indian ruler Ashoka brought happiness to the land once he became a Buddhist. And that is also how it should happen worldwide. The leading elites should lose their overdriven egos and develop wisdom, peace and love for of all.
Every religion provides a way to enlightenment. The various methods can be combined when done so wisely. Followers of the various religions don’t need to fight one another. They can go to the light together and help one another. I see myself as a mystic who is above all religions and spiritual paths.
An enlightened being can incarnate on earth if he or she would like to help mankind. If there were no enlightened beings on earth, mankind would probably just have made itself extinct. Right now we are in the middle of a transitionary period, to another, higher level of consciousness.
Whether various spiritual masters who have risen are at the same level as Jesus, Buddha or Krishna, I don’t know. I don’t know them. I would, however, sense and feel whether they are authentic or not.There are those who pretend to be enlightened in order to use others. I would compare their teachings with those of Buddha, Jesus and Krishna.
Enlightenment is difficult to explain because it cannot be explained, it must be experienced. Enlightenment is life in the klingdom of God. It is the way to sainthood, or inner healing and perfection, The way of enlightenment is developed with qualities like joy, happiness, strength and all-encompassing love.
I experience enlightenment as spiritual energy. Spiritual energy is consciousness energy. If you only have a little consciousness energy, you concentrate mainly on yourself. That’s OK that way, because the energy needs to be protected and expanded. When the energy expands, then it extends out of the body. In this case, the person is not only aware of one’s own body, but also the surrounding people and environment, and less of oneself because most of the energy is outside of the self.
Spiritual energy has the characteristics happiness, love, peace, power and clarity. If the peace and clarity expand, then the mind comes to rest and be calm. The ego disappears because all the theories and concepts floating in the mind come to rest. The ego is helpful for life in the world, in a material sense. According to my experience, the ego disappears when happiness and peace have reached a certain level. The closer you get to this leve, the smaller the ego and the greater the harmony and the consciousness of the unity of all things. I feel more and more like a part of the cosmos. I am in harmony with the world. I live from my higher self.
I have also experienced that the ego can be dissolved on purpose. The ego consists of attachment to enjoyment, the rejection of suffering, and unwisdom. We can think:” I accept things as they are. I let go of my desires. I live in light, peace, and unity.” If we have strong tendencies to desire things, then the ego will be renewed again and again. Therefore, it is a good idea to shrink the wishes and desires down over the long term and to cultivate characteristics like acceptance, humility, inner peace and all-encompassing love.
My experience has shown me that enlightenment is the deeper point of life and that there are specific ways to get there. There is the Buddhist way. There is also Yoga, and there is Christianity. God is above all religions. Every good spiritual technique can be practiced by anyone.
Enlightenment is the way to rise above suffering. You become freed from suffering, fear, addiction, aggression, bodily pain, spiritual pain and unhappiness. You become anchored in God.
I practice the connection of Hatha yoga, Karma yoga and Bhakti yoga (master yoga, Guru yoga). I pray to my spiritual role models. I work for a happy world and for the happiness of all beings. I meditate, go for walks and practice various yogic exercises. Find the spiritual path that is best for you.
Everything in the cosmos follows the cause and effect principle. From that point of view, there isn’t any free will. Everything is pre-determined. It’s difficult to know what has been pre-determined, so we have to do as if we have free will. In enlightenment we can feel that everything is determined. We are instruments of the cosmos like cogs in a watch. You can go about life in a relaxed way if you recognize that everything has already been determined. Then you live completely in harmony with yourself and the world. One of my enlightenment experiences I reached by imagining everything as determined.
An enlightened master can recognize that everything has been pre-determined once he or she has reached the level of all-knowingness. Then the master knows the past, present and future of his or her students. And here there seems to be a mystery that Sai Baba reports from. If a person can see through pre-determination, he or she can rise above it and deal freely. He or she can put new impulses into motion. That became clear in a dream of my Tibetan master Lonchenpa. He showed me that he had re-written my book of life. He knew my future and could change it for the better thanks to his spiritual abilities.
I am a humble person. God works to make sure that I stay humble. He brings enough suffering and difficulty into my life so that I don’t feel too amazing to myself. At the beginning of my search 30 years ago, I was enthused by my spiritual experiences. But during the course of the years, that has become mainly meaningless. They are just experiences. What matters is lasting enlightenment, and I am far from that. Furthermore, I have established that you can have the greatest spiritual experiences and most people don’t care and some will even deny they happened. It is more of a burden to speak of them. I only do it to help others along their way.
Jesus had an enlightened master who transferred enlightenment energy to him. That was John the Baptist. Jesus demonstrated that Christians should have an enlightened master. The transfer of enlightenment energy is the fastest way into the light. Jesus meditated after the energy transfer for 40 days in the desert and his enlightenment was complete. The devil (the ego) disappeared and the angels (spiritual energy) served him. He could heal others and help them spiritually. He became one with God. God spoke through him.
The first Christians had Jesus as a physically present enlightened master. The Apostles were also enlightened and could pass the enlightenment energy (holy ghost). Then came the Christian desert fathers who had their enlightened fathers and mothers. There were many enlightened masters among the Christians. I am thinking mostly of Master Eckhart, Teresa from Avila, John of the Cross and the holy Frances.
I interpret the Bible in terms of enlightenment. The term Son of God means that a person is enlightened, he lives in God (in the kingdom of God) and is God’s son for that reason. The teaching of the trinity describes the relationship between an enlightened person and God. God is the higher consciousness dimension in the cosmos, the unity dimension, the light. The Holy Ghost is the spiritual energy that fills a person with the light of God. An enlightened person as the son of God can heal with the light of God and perform miracles.
Those who would like to have experiences of God and enlightenment should lead an intensively spiritual life. He or she needs to work on him or herself. This person should cultivate characteristics like love, peace, truth and self-discipline, and meditate and pray and live in love. He or she should follow Jesus radically and not lead a life of material enjoyment.
The desert mother Amma Synkleitika knew that hermits who would like to lead lives in God have to deal with a lot of hard inner work and inner fights, but in the end there is indescribable joy. In order to get through these inner fights, the desert fathers mainly concentrated on death. Those who think of their death can overcome every weakness. The thoughts of death and paradise give a spiritual person the power to follow his path to its goal. On the other hand, one should not overwhelm oneself as a monk or hermit. Many hermits needed a flower, others didn’t. Those who need joy along their way, should give themselves the joy they need.
I celebrate Christmas with my old mother who is 90 years old, my sister and one of her sons. The other son is in Australia. On the first and second Christmas days I visit two neighbors. In that regard, I’m not alone. I’ve lived as a hermit for 25 years. It was difficult to be alone on Christmas the first years, because I had lived in a family before that. But, after some years passed I got used to it. Now it isn’t a big deal. I have developed my own Christmas ritual. I light candles and incense. I watch the Protestant and Catholic Christmas services on TV. I also visit people when possible.
25.In my family, Christmas was always celebrated. We were atheists, but Christmas was an important ritual to meet people, celebrate and give gifts. I feel connected to Christianity. For that reason, I like to celebrate Christmas and think of the birth of Jesus. It is a happy event that a spiritual person was born into the world.
Jesus taught us to live in a way that would bring us to paradise after death. How do you imagine your paradise? What needs to be there for you to be happy? Do you want to meet your friends, partner, children, relatives?
The paradise of yogis is called Siddhaloka. It can also be called Shiva Loka. It is the home of the God Shiva. By Swami Muktananda, Siddhaloka is the most beautiful paradise with the highest happiness energy and the greatest potential for spiritual growth.
A little blue star was his soul vehicle. Muktananda described exactly how one gets to Siddhaloka. You meditate, concentrate on the skull chakra and a blue star appears over the crown chakra. Muktananda flowed into this star with his soul, and the star brought him to paradise.
Muktananda experienced Siddhaloka as a paradise full of rest, calm and peace. Everywhere there was blue, cheerful light. Muktananda met a lot of yogis and yoginis (female yogis). There were high mountains, green forests, bubbling springs and flowing streams. Deers played on meadows full of flowers. In the middle there was a sea.
Paradise is a state of enlightenment, inner happiness and awakened kundalini energy. Then you have a consciousness of paradise due to your great happiness.  Through visualization of a happy world, you can awaken happiness. How you can get there depends on you. For some people, it is enough to imagine a beautiful landscape where they sit with people they love. The inner energy begins to flow when they imagine springs, rivers or a sea in paradise. The visualization of a tree lets the energy flow through the middle energy channel. Once it reaches the head, then one becomes happy. The same effect can arise when imagining oneself as a Buddha, Shiva or a goddess in a palace or beautiful house. Around the house you plant beautiful flowers.
Every concept of enlightenment has to be destroyed again and again when they cease to be helpful. The enlightenment is above all concepts and images of it. We find our way to the light when we are consistent with the basics of truth, wisdom and love. We should always be in good contact with our inner voice of truth and wisdom, our conscience. We should connect us with an enlightened master or God (the light) every day. May we all live in happiness, peace and love.
Laughter Yoga with exercises, jokes and spiritual stories
Laughing is healthy. Laughing makes you happy. Be happy. Become a Buddha. Enlightenment is happiness without a reason. You do not need a specific reason to be happy. Laugh Yoga is a good way to get happiness energy flowing. There are various methods to do laugh Yoga. You can watch funny videos. You can also read jokes on the internet until you laugh. Or you can just laugh without a reason. That's the main form of laugh Yoga. You reach the energy of humor, and at some point the laughter is in you.
We lie on the back and relax. What is the joke of your life today? Because God has a sense of humor, he gives every person at least one joke per day. You just have to recognize it. If you can't think of a joke, then laugh without reason. Laugh as you feel. You can say the mantra “ ha ha ha” or “ho, ho, ho” or “hee hee hee”. Every mantra is different and comes from a different part of the body. If you are feeling angry or sad, then you can also cry during laugh Yoga. In that case, the mantra “hoo hoo hoo” is appropriate. If you are angry, think “rage, rage, rage”. If you are angry with your ex-boyfriend, then you can yell “stupid man!” If you already feel like laughing, then you are ready for laugh Yoga.
We lift the right leg that is stretched out and hold it in the air and then laugh. Then we lift the left leg and laugh. Which mantra is helpful for you?
We lift both of the legs and the head. We hold the position and laugh as long as possible.
We do a shoulder stand, lift the btt and stretch the legs out to the sky. The hands support the back. We move our feet slightly and laugh. It is good to laugh at the sky.
We lay down again and turn the spine several times. We move the pelvis to the right and the head to the left, and then the reverse. We move the spine as far as possible. We laugh to the left and to the right side. We laugh at all beings on the left and the right side.
We lay on the stomach and lift the right leg. We hold it and then laugh. Then we lift up the left leg, hold it in the air and then laugh.
The head is tipped back and we bring the feet as far as possible toward the back of the head. The upper thighs are in the air and the hands support the position next to the body. More advanced Yogis do the Cobra pose as shown in the photo. We laugh at the same time because it is great. We hold the Cobra pose, laugh and move the feet.
We lay our head on our hands, move our feet and laugh at the earth.
We sit Indian style, on the ankles or on a chair. The back is straight. The hands lay on the belly. We laugh from the belly for a moment. Now is a good time to find something funny. In an emergency, you can laugh about me. That always works. Then we move our hand into a blessing, send the laughter to the entire world and think: “ may all beings be happy. May there be a happy world.”
We lay down in a comfortable position. Then we tense the muscles of the legs and the feet. Then we relax. Then we tense up the muscles of the arms and the hands. Then we relax. We tense up the muscles of the head and face. Then we relax. We tense up the muscles of the entire body. We relax. We move the feet. We think the mantra “om” three times.
Woman: I am very focused on appearances and put a lot of effort into how I look. I always pay attention to my figure and work out a lot. I have a treadmill in my apartment so that I can also sweat in the winter. Before I go to work, I sit in front of the mirror and style my hair and put on makeup. I have to always look presentable.
Laughyogi: Calling myself ugly and old is of course just a joke. I like women who take care of their figure and their appearance. It’s wonderful that you have the self-discipline to use a treadmill. Applying makeup for two hours is extreme from the perspective of a man. But for women, it’s not unusual. An ex-girlfriend of mine was the same way. Do you still think a lot about your appearance or have you gone beyond it? My musician friend was here again because he is addicted to my good coffee. I will need to go shopping again soon. The musician ate the last marzipan roll. I had planned on him just eating the cookies from the cookie bowl. But he is unpredictable and just does what he feels like. Now he is on his way back to Berlin and will come back in three months. Until that time, I can eat up my sweets alone.
Woman:  You always make me laugh. For that reason, I think you are godly and enlightened. Thank you for your calming and reassuring words. Now my ego is satisfied again and feels attended to. Yes, we can say that you are worse off than I am so that I feel OK. But it would also be enough for me if you thought I was amazing and printed out my picture and hung it up over your altar.
Now... regarding my favorite topics: the figure and appearance. At the moment, I am not that hung up on it, my skin needs a break. I walk around in an old dress and never wear a bra when I am at home in my apartment. My neighbor thinks that one would waste away without going to work. I love being lazy! However, I do shower and brush the teeth daily because that contributes to overall well-being. For shopping and cycling, I don’t get dressed up, I just wear an anorak and jeans and boots. At night I sleep without clothes and leave the window open until it’s freezing.
Laugh yogi: In order for me to be able to print out your picture and hang it up above my altar, you have to first send me one. I live the lazy look, especially women who go around without a bra. My unenlightened erotic fantasies are threatening to overwhelm me. It would be better if you told me about cosmetics, solarium and so forth. That way I come back to earth with the reality that I am an ugly, old Yogi and don’t have a chance with such a beautiful woman.
Tell me about your girlfriends. Do they look good? Are they single? Are they looking for a good-looking, intelligent, rich and humorous man with a villa in a well-manicured nature park? A man who honors them, worships them and goes everywhere with them? Someone who wants to make them happy forever? Someone who can listen to them? And otherwise very low-maintenance? He only needs a kiss in the morning and two cookies to eat. If they have had enough of him, they can just put him in the closet and he'll meditate there until he is fetched again.
Woman: In terms of appearance, I imagined you are in your mid 40s because you are so fresh and young and pure and happy and don’t have any wrinkles. The white hair in the beard do not mean much, because younger men also have them sometimes. Also, because you are slim, you also come across as youthful. Your overall radiance contributes to that. It is clear that something new is developing within you, and that is surely due to your spiritual development. The joy that you always have radiating from you, your eyes are so clear and laugh along with you.
I’ve read a lot of your free books and have downloaded a lot of them from Amazon. I find it fascinating to read about your life. You write so well. Your words warm the heart and are so personal. It really speaks to me. Thank you also for conveying your inner processes and how you deal with them. That is really helpful for me.
Laugh yogi: Thank you for seeing me in such a positive light. I can really use that today. All of last night, fears from my childhood arose. I felt so small, weak and pathetic. As I read your messages, I knew that I am in fact a hero. Young, fresh, radiance… at the age of 62 to be like 40. Wonderful. A God. That goes well with a Goddess like you. Of course I write well and heart-warmingly. For that reason, slowly I am starting to become one of the famous German philosophers and writers. At least here in this forest.
Goddess: A few years ago today, an egg lay in Hamburg which moved back and forth because something was going on inside it. On the shell, the godly letters were written: “Nils, best-selling author and enlightened Yogi master.” Precisely on the letter “i” in the word “Yogi” something broke through the egg and the little chick thought: “finally light and air!” After a little while, it was at the point where it cracked open and the Nils chick had reached the moment of truth:  it tumbled out of the egg shell and hatched out into the world. All of the chickens and roosters came to look at the yellow thing and greet the new fluffy chick that had just come into the world. What a special moment! Horay! Nils was there! What a joy for the world! Everyone wiped tears of joy from their eyes, surrounded the little one and gave him their blessing. Today, Nils is a  grown up rooster with grand feathers and his loud crowing can be heard he from afar. He is the boss of the chicken coop and is surrounded by many hens. He goes his way with certain steps according to the original writing on his egg shell. Today we remember the day he hatched and are happy that he is there and gives us the gift of his existence. Thank you for being you, Nils.
Poor hermit: Thank you for your friendly words. The holy egg greets the holy egg in you the egg. May the egg shell break open and a Buddha or Goddess step into the world. Of course, you are already a goddess. May you radiate even more love and happiness, if that is even possible. Today the weather is a little gray. The world needs a few rays of light, warmth and light. The little hermit  would especially like to be an enlightened Yogi master who lives in inner happiness and wants to bring love into the world. He can only cheer up the world with his strange jokes and books, which are not well received by everyone. 63 years ago, a beak picked its way out of the shell and the chick thought he would become big and strong one day. A big, glorious rooster who thought he could make all of the hens crazy. How wrong was that notion.  God wanted a poor, little Yogi and here he is. Thank God for your little joke. Yes, I am alive. Or maybe it is just a nightmare? Kiss me awake, if you want to kiss such a disgusting frog.
Goddess: Dear Hermit, I am envious of the hens following you.
Poor hermit: Dear Goddess, lovely that you are jealous. That means I am important for you. It is lovely to be important to someone.You are also important for me. I enjoy your daily good mood messages and your deep wisdom. I am happy to know someone who is so much further spiritually  developed than I am. I am thankful that a goddess like you could like a silly bug like me. That shows your greatness.
I celebrated my birthday yesterday by filling up the forums with dumb sayings. I talked on the phone the whole day with my girlfriend who is suffering and had a visit from Lady C. She is a real captain and can navigate giant ocean liners. She is boss over a whole army of men who also want to be captains. Yesterday she had to strictly test the men. And then she came over to visit me. But she did not test me, rather she cooked for me. She can do everything. She is even captain in the kitchen. She is also a good mood bear and laughs a lot.
Today, two former Yoga students are coming to my birthday party. Now I am the captain. I will simply be intimidating in my enlightened presence and let them be a part of my blissful light. Of course, they are allowed to ask questions. I will gladly guide them from the darkness to the light. As reward, they have each baked me a cake. I will live on cake next week. That is fitting of a great guru. I will simply transform the cake in my stomach into light. Then I will radiate more light until the world is filled with light. Ok, enough nonsense. Now I am just the nice little Yogi again.
The Shake Meditation is a good way to quickly reduce stress and recharge with positive energy. We turn on a beautiful music, stand upright and move dynamically in the knees up and down. We can dance or go on the spot. The Shaking is a fast movement from the knees. The knees shake the body. The movement in the knees is small and fast.
Be angry. We shake all the stress of life out of us. We think the mantra, "anger". We transform all stress unto motion and liberate us as this.
Be sad. We solve our pent-up grief. We think the sentence: "I am sad because ...". We move all the sadness out of us. What makes you sad today? Think the reason several times as a mantra.
Turn the spine. We rotate into the spine left and right. We solve all the tension in the spine. The head also rotates to the sides.
Massage your body. We massage our body with a healing color. We are wrapped in a cloud of a healing energy. What healing color is good for you today? Think of the name as a mantra, "Yellow, Orange, Purple ...". Massage the healing color from head to toe in your body.
Earth you. We rub the healing color with the right and left foot on the floor. We paint a healing circle around us. When painting with our feet, we feel the earth. We think the name of the color as a mantra.
Go on shaking, move one hand and send a person light. We send the whole world light and think, "May all people be happy. May the world be happy."
Laugh while shaking.
Video Shake Meditation Yogi Nils (10 min.)
In every man there's something good. Even if it is just the kitchen knife.
Why can't men get mad cow disease? Because men are pigs.
What does a man consider helping with the housekeeping? Lifting the legs up so that she can vacuum better.
Getting married is like a trip with friends to a restaurant. You order what you want and when you see what the others have gotten, you would rather have that.
Him: “Honey, I’m going to make you the happiest woman in the world!” She: “I’ll miss you!”
And now, jokes for men:
How many brain cells does a woman have? Four, one for each stovetop.
If God had wanted women to be pilots, the sky would be pink.
Two men are talking: “ my wife died last week!” “Yeah, and?” “ The bed looks the same as always, only the kitchen is a chaotic mess!”
A younger man goes for a walk and sees a shriveled, wrinkled old woman who is sitting happily in her rocking chair on the porch. “Excuse me,” he speaks to the woman, “but you look so happy and satisfied. What is the secret to your life?” The woman answers: “60 cigarettes, at least one bottle of schnapps, no exercise, and lots of younger men… that is the secret of my life!” “Unbelievable!” The man is amazed, “ and can I ask how old you are now?” “39….”
Another school day, yet another day full of annoying offensive comments and humiliations. Hesitantly, I get up. Should I really listen to this crap every day and do nothing about it? Yes, what else can I do?
Who wants to speak out against the majority of the pubescent teens on their ego trip? No one. Not the teacher. They try to help you, but that usually makes things worse. I am not angry with them, actually I feel bad for them. I feel bad that they direct the attention to themselves. I know who I am and what I can do.
I have another tip: don’t let it get to you, because it is just not worth it. Just be yourself and be happy with yourself because that is all you can do.
Nils:  Very good. The situation in the schools, on the job and over the net is difficult. Anchor yourself in the way of inner happiness (in happiness philosophy), give yourself enough time to relax, live healthily, and save yourself with spiritual exercises (thought work, oracle, reading, Yoga, walking, meditation) and enjoy something nice often. Follow your goals and do something for yourself. You can also live in the light in a world of suffering.
You can start to worry about it, but when you look more closely, I don't think it's too bad! Because “I am just turning 60 now!”
If you don't know your own telephone number, no reason to panic! You only need to say-
If you spill your soup on yourself, no problem, because-
At that age, everyone expects that you will have developed into a grumpy old fart because
If you make it to your sixtieth birthday, then everyone is amazed that you are still alive, that you can still stand and walk and still have a few bright moments.
At the age of 59 people are still angry with you for whatever reason. At 60, they forgive you for almost everything.
“ I am finally 60!”
Hello, anyone out there?
Is someone there? For days, there hasn't been any mail in the mail box, no emails, no telephone calls. Why hasn't anyone taken contact? I feel like I have been cut off from the world. I haven't been snowed in, the electricity hasn't gone out, and the battery on my cell phone is fully charged.
It's like I don't exist anymore. The line of a song comes to mind: “ no one is calling me, no one cares for me…” My ego is irritated, you could say. On days like these, I feel like I have been sucked into a black hole and no one notices that I live.
Is there no one out there who wants to talk to me, or even write me a short message so that I know that I am not totally shut off from the outside world. If someone hears me, then please let me know. I have to see if there's an obituary for me in the newspaper tomorrow, if not.
Opinion: Good that you make yourself seen! You don’t really need to worry until no one responds to you if you say hello to them out on the street. Only then have you really become invisible. ;)
I'm Maike and I am 13 years old. My hobbies are playing sports and listening to music as well as singing or dancing. When I am alone at home, I am mostly very bored. Then I can sing. I love to sing. I go to middle school. I met my best friend Victoria there, she is very nice. She and I are searching for a boyfriend. But that can still wait. Sometimes I think otherwise, but it doesn't matter really. I keep it under control. Like every child, I have a dream. I want to become a superstar.
Yogi Nils: My senses also sometimes play tricks on me. I also have a dream. I wish for a happy world without hunger or suffering. If you try to save the world, you will never be bored. That is very good. I don’t want to be a superstar. It is enough for me to be a little Yogi. I can see the superstars and popstars in the TV. I know that I must save the world.
The sad life of a 16 year old
My life is so bad, simply awful. I think and I stuff cookies into my mouth. I look at the cookies that only consist of a few crumbs after I have eaten them all up and I have to sigh. OK, my life isn't SOO bad. I at least have cookies to stuff my face with. Despite the cookies and an entire package in the cellar I am still not happy.
I look around and see a completely normal room for a young person. It's somewhat chaotic, but there's a system to it and it is painted in a bright, summery yellow color. My new laptop hums and I just got an email from a friend. In her message, she wrote that she loves me and that she greet us ladies. Now I feel lonely.
I don't have a boyfriend, am 16 years old and nothing works in my life the way I imagine. I am not a pessimistic teenager, at least I don't think I am. My girlfriends at least say that it is normal. I would not like to be normal. I'd like to be something special.
Despite the normalcy in my life, such as daily school, a few friends and a very nice family, I am still not satisfied. I don't know why I can't meet a guy.  Are there no good guys my age, in my area who look good, are funny and also very nice?
Somehow, it is all so messed up. My mother says I am too demanding. Yesterday, I actually planned to send roses to my friends, but most of them had already gotten some from their boyfriends. Hmpf. I hope next year will be better. At least a little. “I like you.” or something like that.
Two women are talking. The first one says. “Somehow, I have had trouble speaking lately. I wanted to say, I want some wine. Instead, I said I want wome sine.” The other woman answered: “I have had the same problem lately. At breakfast, I wanted to say to my husband, please send me the coffee. Instead, I said to him: you damn asshole, you have ruined my whole life!”
“My life only consists of school, food, TV and the computer. There is nothing worse than that...”
Nils: Yes there is. No school, no food, no TV, and no computer. Seriously, the center of existence is the inner happiness. Those who do not know the path of inner happiness suffer in life. Build up your inner happiness every day with spiritual exercises like Yoga, meditation, reading, thought work, doing good and you will then find it easier to see the positive in your life. Live as a spiritual person, and you will live in happiness.
The phenomenon is  terrible. All women want the same type of men. How often do I hear that women want a man who is at least 6 feet tall, great figure and athletic. He has to be charismatic, with nice hands, good clothes, nice eyes, nice lips, a great smile. Smart, honest, faithful, funny and good-looking. Not boring. Such an image swims in the brain of every single woman’s brain.
The man should be athletic, but then when the guy has hardly any time we complain to our girlfriends. He only hangs around at the soccer field. We hate that. And how often do we find it that our dream prince doesn't have a great character. He is in love with himself, but can't love anyone else. Even if it's difficult, everyone should banish the image of the dream man from their brains.
Nils: Why? There’s me. I’m smart, honest, good-looking, trustworthy, well-trained and funny. Unfortunately, I am a little under 6 feet tall. I never knew I was almost a dream man. I lack less than an inch of height. So, for that reason I am just a lonely Yogi. Despite my great smile, dark hair and lovely eyes.
I want a real man!
I don't want some soft and sensitive man. I want a man with stubble on the face and hair on his chest who smells and tastes like a man.
A man who only brings flowers when he feels guilty and always pays for the food when eating at a restaurant. A man who treats me like a woman, without any nonsense. I don't want a man who hovers around me, reads the wishes from my eyes, clears the table and makes breakfast on Sundays.
A real man who comes home dirty from work, and always thinks about sex right away. He doesn't have to talk a lot, but washes the car on the weekend and mows the lawn and watches sports. That makes real men sexy. He should make money and be able to drink. Men are allowed to have hair where it grows.
Nils: Thank you.
How can you keep a blonde busy?
Give her a blank piece of paper and write “please refer to the other side” on both sides.
(Yogi Nils: ) Actually, this takes place with a lot of people because they don’t look beyond their own mental system. They do spiritual exercises for years without thinking about how effective it is.)
A blonde goes to the bank and says to the teller: “ I need to open a new account immediately.” The teller replies: “You already have an account with us.” The blonde: “Yes, but there isn’t any more money in it.”
Why should you write letters to blondes very slowly? Because they can't read so fast.
What do blondes have in their brains? A  piece of paper where it says “brain”.
Why do blondes always eat yoghurt in the supermarket? Because the lid says “open here”.
How can you get a blonde to laugh on Monday morning? Tell her a joke Friday evening.
Play media  Yoga with Positive Thinking, Video 10 min.
Yoga with positive thinking is very helpful for many people. It allows one to quickly overcome negative tendencies and reach a happy and healthy life. Positive thinking and daily meditation are the two basic techniques of enlightenment. All the negative characteristics are ultimately based on attachment (to external pleasures, other people, to his ego) or rejection (of suffering situations, pain). If we accept the suffering in our lifes and let go of our worldly desires and longings, the tensions in our minds resolve. Our inner happiness creates a positiv feeling of life. We get into a life in the light (in a paradise view of life). The main way to overcome the negative qualities is to focus on the positive qualities of wisdom, self-discipline, peace, love and happiness.
Go = Jog on the spot, with your arms moving by your side. Visualize light, turn around and think, "I go the positive way."
Windmill = Straddle your legs apart, bow forward, turn like a windmill into the spinal column and think: "My goal is ...".
Frog = Bring your feet together. Bow your upper body forward. Push yourself up with your hands on the floor and move your buttocks down in a crouch and back up in the air. The head goes up to the sky and down to the earth. Practice the frog several times and think: "I have strength and endurance."
Arm-leg raising = Lie down on your stomach. Raise your left arm and right leg. Bring both back to the earth and lift the right arm and the left leg. Do this several times. Think, "I take things the way they are."
Upper body raising = Lie in the prone position, with your hands on the floor and repeatedly press the upper body up and down. The head goes to the neck and forward. While breathing in and out, think, "I let go of my false desires."
Pelvic rotation = In the prone position, turn your pelvis to the right and then to the left. Your head must lie on your hands. Think, "I am sad because ...".
Feet = Get your feet moving in the prone position. The head lies relaxed on your hands. Think, "I forgive... (my partner / parents / the cosmos / God), that he/she...". Whom do you want to forgive today? Think these words until a feeling of sadness arises in you, of letting go and forgiveness.
Cycling =  Turn on your back, lift your head and move your arms and legs. Think, "My positive thought today is....".
Candle = Stretch your legs to the sky. Your hands support you at the back. Visualize the sky, move your feet and think many times the mantra "Optimism".
Meditation = Roll from the candle into your meditation seat (cross-legged or heel seat). Put your hands in your lap. The back is straight and the stomach is relaxed. Move one hand and wrap them and think, "I send light to ... May all people be happy. May the world be happy." Stop all your thoughts for a minute. Relax.
I talked with an old lady who bakes cake for the old folks for free every Wednesday and serves it about religion. She was Catholic and practiced unconditional love in a Protestant nursing home. I explained that I am a mystic and live in the forest. She said: “ That’s why you look so strange.”
I am finding my role in the nursing home. I accept things as they are and find peace. I live out my grief and come to inner peace. Life is change. Things come and go. Life comes and goes. My mother can only converse to a limited degree because she forgets everything. Her dementia progresses. I practice the art of positive thinking. I am thankful that I still have her and that she is  doing well at the nursing home. I am thankful that I know the path of inner happiness. I go through the forest and then find happiness once more.
Yesterday I was at the Yoga expo. The location where it took place was difficult to find because  the expo center is in Hamburg Schnelsen. It is far away from Hamburg, in fact. I took the U Bahn to Niendorf north and then took the bus through the countryside, through fields and meadows. I almost missed the stop because I forgot to watch the bus stops. The person who gave information out about the event also gave the wrong name for the stop, Mode Centrum instead of Modering. The name sounded so familiar that I asked the bus driver and he told me I should get off at that stop.
So there I was standing in a foreign world and looked for a sign with some indication. Unfortunately, the signs I saw did not provide me with the right information. I wandered around the area and was suddenly standing in front of an entrance where a little poster for the Yoga expo was hanging. I went in and a friendly older woman gave me a golden armband for 7 euros entrance fee. I searched for Yoga people and found a little hall full of stands dealing with esoteric topics. The people working at the stands were happy to have visitors. I got a snack as a greeting along with a big cup containing mango lassi. The visit started well.
I wandered through the stands, but most of them didn't interest me much. It was more for women and wellness. At any rate, there were a lot of free drinks and free treatments. I bought a modern Yoga mat.  A Yoga teacher should own such a thing. I enjoyed a vegetarian meal for 8 euros. Then I went into one of the two lecture halls. The lecture had already started, but I arrived at just the right moment. There was again some free drinks. And raw food, the newest American trend. A young woman talked about the raw diet. A lot of women listened excitedly. The room was almost full. This was where all of the visitors had been hiding. Basically, it dealt with how one took something that that tastes like crap and made decent food out of it. OK, now I am being mean. Raw food is important and healthy. I should eat more of it and not just chow down on cake and chocolate.
Now it was time to do something for the body. Fortunately, it was the course on fasciae Yoga. I sat down on one of the Yoga mats that was in the hall. There were a lot of young women and girls there. Not bad for an old Yogi. Then came the young Yoga teacher and it started. A warm up exercise. After ten minutes I was so tired that I needed a break. The Yoga teacher probably noticed the poor old man in the group. She said kindly,  “Those who want to can rest in child’s pose.” I felt acknowledged and lay down on the Yoga mat. The women around me continued. In the end, I can say the Yoga hour did me good. It was not my style, but I accept all of the styles of Yoga. It was too strenuous for me, too much fitness and not enough enlightenment.
But I can do it better. I decided to offer a free Yoga course at next year’s Yoga expo. A title came to me: “Yoga for beginners and more advanced practitioners. Yogi Nils shows off his popular Yoga series. Over a half million clicks on the American WikiHow.” If no one comes! The hall will probably be full and I will finally be a star again. Yeah, I am already a bestselling author. Finally, I met the organizer, Denis, a nice young man. I asked him if he had a minute for me. He didn’t. I told him I am a bestselling author and am number 1 for Yoga Ebooks on Amazon. That impressed me and so I could talk to him. I told him about my plans for the Yoga expo next year. He was enthusiastic.
I just needed to find the right title for my presentation. What would interest young women? On the way home, I met two young women aged about 30. I started talking to them and found out that they were looking for the meaning of life. They had come to the right place. They had found their guru. I explained to them that the point of life was happiness. The highest happiness is found in enlightenment. They also wanted to be enlightened, of course. They first had to read my books. I had a topic for my lecture now: “ How to be happy? Crazy stories from the life of a little Yogi.”
What is the right point of view? If we see the eternal wars, capitalistic exploitation, poverty, destruction of the environment, outer and inner unhappiness of most people, we would see the world as a hell. The Indian master Sai Baba taught: “There is no hell, the world is hell.” This perspective is useful. Seeing the world as hell helps us to have empathy for others and motivates you as a Bodhisattva to work hard for a happy world, to change the world into paradise. I woke up today and saw my world as hell. Last night there were some cleansing processes and I felt bad. I went for a walk and did my cleansing exercises (visualization, mantras, breathing exercises, hand movements). The Kundalini energy awoke and suddenly my world had changed into a paradise. I saw green trees, beautiful flowers, heard the birds sing and felt the warm light of the sun on the top of my head. How lovely it is to have a bald spot on the top of the head. lol
As long as we put egoism at the center of our lives, then we collectively will destroy ourselves and the world. People are capable of wisdom and love. At some point, the majority of people will recognize that material riches do not truly make a person happy. They will recognize that is good to be healthy, loving and in harmony with the world around them. They will recognize that enlightenment and love are at the core of existence. They will recognize that it is good to orient oneself around the holy, and not the unholy.
If the shit is getting too deep, just breathe deeply and get through it. Then be happy you are alive.
My girlfriend called me Master Nils in the beginning. Now I am just a piece of shit who teaches nonsense to her. But she loves me anyway. And I love her too. The world is full of miracles.
Satisfaction is an important exercise along the path of enlightenment.  (Nils)
If the chakras are activated, the Kundalini energy awakens and peace and happiness arise within the Yogi.
Woman: I am so full of ego. I am never satisfied.
Nils:You are a woman. That is how women are, according to my experience. They want the love of a man. They want attention and energy from their partner. They want a relationship. They are never satisfied. They look out in the world instead of in themselves. You are normal. Don’t worry.
Nils: The little Yogi in the woods, calls to wisdom until it echoes and resonates everywhere. All people large and small should be nice to one another so that there can be peace in the world.
Irene: YES!!! My dear Nils!!
Nils: I am old, pathetic and ugly. I have to be thankful to everyone who smiles at me.
The sun is shining today. The rainy days are over. When I went for a walk, I met an older woman with a white dog and a black one. My daily saying for her is “enjoy  the nice days, the bad ones are surely on their way.”  She laughed hesitantly, but she didn't really like the saying. So I thought of something else. “ For a spiritual person, there really aren't any bad days. Just days of intensive practice and days of joy. A spiritual person is constantly growing in light, until he or she forgets the self and brings light into the world.”
Just a small gesture and the hermit is happy.
Stretch out = Stretch and wiggle however you need in order to feel good. Stretch out the arms up to the sky. You can fold your hands together and then flip them to face the sky. Visualize the sun over you in the sky and think the word “sun” repeatedly as a mantra. Feel how the sun flows into you with each word. Fill yourself up with the energy of the sun. VIsualizing the sun means concentrating on what is positive in life. We see the beauty of the world. We live in God, in the light, in enlightened existence
Healing massage = Massage the light of the sun into your body from the head to the feet. Think the word “light” repeatedly as a mantra. Now you have light on the inside and on the outside. You live in light. You are happy.
Move the feet = Move your feet and toes. Visualize the earth beneath you. Think the word “earth” as a mantra. To ground yourself means to accept things for the way they are. We also see the suffering, the pain and the grief in the world and in our lives. Just repressing the suffering leads to a superficial life. Integrating the suffering means having depth in life. Those who have depth live as philosophers, as wise people, as a Buddha.
Circle the shoulders = Lift the shoulders and then let them go to loosen up tension in the shoulders and neck. Move your shoulders the way you want. Imagine yourself as an enlightened Yogi, a Goddess, a Buddha. Think:” I am a Buddha of light. I live in the light. I take the path of light.”
Move the head = Move your head forward and back. Laugh and say “ hoo, hoo, hoo.” Then move your head to the left and right. Laugh at the people to your left and right. “hee, hee, hee.”
Twist the spine = Twist from the spine gently but as far as possible to the left and to the right. Concentrate on the spine and laugh, “hee, hee, hee”.
Stretch forward = Stretch your arms up high, then bend over with the upper body and touch the earth with your hands. Laugh louder as you look up, and more quiet as you look down. Ha, ha, ha.
Clapping = Sit upright and clap alternatingly in front of the heart chakra and the belly. Laugh “ha, ha, ho, ho.” The “ha, ha” is in resonance with the chest and the “ho, ho” is from the belly. Switch your concentration up between the chest and the belly, until both the heart chakra area and the belly are fully charged with energy. That gives us inner stability.
Blessing = Move your hand into a blessing and think: “May all beings be happy. May there be a happy world.” Laugh at all beings around you. Imagine a happy world full of laughter. Take the path of love. Do good. That will bring you to love.
Meditation = Think the mantra “om” three times. Feel if in your body. Stop all thoughts for a minute.  Then relax.
Poems from Drugpa  Künleg
(Retold from Drugpa  Künleg)
I am happy that I live as a free Yogi. I grow in my inner happiness.
I can have sex with a lot of women. Thus I help them along their path of enlightenment.
On the outside I live as a fool to my pleasures and on the inside according to my clear spiritual system.
On the outside I enjoy wine, women and song. On the inside I work for the well-being of all beings.
On the outside I seem to know no limits, on the inside I do everything at the right moment.
On the outside I am a beggar, on the inside a joyful Buddha in the eternal light.
A young woman derives pleasure  from love.
A young man gets pleasure from sex.
An old man finds enjoyment in his memories.
That is the teaching of the three pleasures.
Those who do not know the truth are confused.
Those who don't have ambition do not create victims.
Those who do not have courage, will not become a Yogi.
That is the teaching of the three missing things.
Even if a person knows the way of wisdom,
Without practice there can be no realization
Even if a master shows you the way,
I practice the way of self-discipline. I meditate every day.
I take the path of unconditional love. I see myself as a mother and father to all beings.
I develop the divinity Yoga. I visualize myself as a Buddha in the light.
I live in attachmentless being. I flow with the joy and suffering as it appears.
I read books from all of the religions and practice everything at the right moment.
The gods prefer life in heaven.
The  devil loves to sin on earth.
The Yogis are happy in their spiritual practice.
The saints do good for their fellow man.
I love the women and they love me.
Happy are they who know the spiritual path.
May all beings be happy.
May there be a happy world.
Through the breathing meditation, we can absorb spiritual energy and fill our bodies with light. Our mind becomes peaceful and positive.
Breathing out = We concentrate on exhalation. We breathe out deeply. We breathe out all of our worries. We give all our worries to the earth (universe, life). Rename all your worries, "My grief, my worries, my problems are ...." Enumerate all of your worries. Breathe out all your worries. Give them to the earth, "I let go of my worries. I take all things the way they are."
Blessing = The back is straight and the belly relaxed. We move a hand in blessing and think, "I send light to ... May all people be happy. May the world be happy."
So Ham = We put the hands in the lap. We think "So" by inhalation and "Ham" during exhalation. So is the sun (light) and Ham is the body. We focus on the breath and the mantra. Thus we fill us a minute by breathing with energy. Our mind becomes calm and positive. We observe one minute just our breath. We breathe in and out normally. We can observe the breath in the abdomen, chest or in the nose. We focus on our breath and stop all thinking. We relax.
There was once a Muslim saint named Mulla Nasrudin. He lived alone in a little hut at the edge of a big city. One day, Mulla Nasrudin did not feel like living alone anymore. He set off to find a woman. He wanted to get married and have a happy marriage. Where was the woman who was right for him?
She should be pretty, clever and have a sense of humor. They should have mutual interests so they could have good conversations and things should also be good in bed. Mulla Nasrudi was looking for a woman who was physically, mentally and spiritually harmonious with him. He was searching for his dream woman.
He looked around in his city. He searched in the countryside. He asked friends and put an ad in the paper. He met a lot of women. But the woman of his dreams was not to be found.
Finally, he travelled to Baghdad to the big marriage market. There he met the perfect woman. There was just one problem. His perfect woman was  searching for the perfect man. And Mulla Nasrudin was not a perfect man. He had some flaws. He was not rich, he was not intelligent, and he was not very attractive. The woman recognized that quickly, since she was not only beautiful, but clever as well.
So the marriage didn't happen. Mulla Nasrudin stayed alone and made God his love.  He didn't find happiness in the world, so he searched for happiness within himself. And one day he could even laugh about his search for the perfect woman.
Those who are not happy with themselves will not find the perfect partner. Something is always missing. Enlightenment means being happy in a world that is not perfect.
The Buddha of Healing sents you from the center of the mandala (unity consciousness) light and power.
Sun = We visualize above ourselves a beautiful sun, raising both hands to the side at head height and think several times the mantra "sun." We let the light of the sun  flow down on us and massage it into the body.
Earth = We visualize the earth below us, rub the earth with our feet and think: "I send light to the earth. May all beings in the world be happy."
Healing Massage = We consider what part of our body needs healing in the moment. We let light flow into it, massage it in circles and think the word "light" as a mantra. By the light massage we resolve the tensions in the particular area of ​​the body and enable it in the self-healing. We can visualize the light in a color  we feel that it heals us. We think the color name as a mantra. We can successively rub the light of healing in several parts of the body, thinking always the mantra "Light".
Cosmos = We visualize the cosmos around us full of stars, make big circles with our arms and think, "Om cosmos. I take the suffering in my life. I consistently walk my way of health and healing."
Buddha of Healing = We visualize before or above us the Buddha of Healing (an enlightened Master). We rub our hands in front of the heart chakra and think, "Om Buddha of Healing. Om inner wisdom. Please guide and help me on my way."
Question of Healing = We focus on a part of our body who needs healing or on a personal problem. What is the way of our healing? What do we have to do? What triggers our problem? We think so long until we are satisfied with the result. When we hear no answer, we are either blocked inside (we don't want to see the real causes of the problem), or we have a bad contact to our inner voice (we sense ourselves poorly). The best way then is slowly to get into thinking about our problem.
Sick people = We move a hand, bless all people with light and think, "May all the people who have the same problem as I be healed. My problem is ... The way of healing is ..."
Om Shanti = We think inhaling "Om" and exhaling "Shanti". We stop all other thoughts. We feel calmness, serenity and peace in us. We stop a minute every thought and move gently our feet. We focus on our feet and move on, until our mind comes completely to rest. Then we linger in a slight meditation. All thoughts and feelings may come and go as they please. We relax.
(Retold from Khalil Gibran’s The Fool)
I awoke from my sleep and realized that my masks had been stolen from me. I walked around without my masks. Many people were afraid. Some laughed about me.  A young boy called:”You are a fool!” Then I found my true self. The inner light went on and the sun kissed me. It surrounded me in light. I was happy that I was a fool. I danced happily through life.
The blade of grass said that he would gladly be a leaf in the wind. The leaf in the wind said he would gladly be  a blade of grass on the earth. Then the sun laughed because both were so dumb.
A blindman and a man who could see discussed together who is the wisest among them. The seeing man said he can see everything and the whole world. The blindman answered that he can feel out things within and know himself.
The gravedigger said to the fool:”You are my favorite among all people. Everyone else is always crying. You come laughing and leave laughing.”
Two hermits lived on a mountain in the desert. They honored God and took the path of unconditional love. They were good to all beings in the world. On the outside they practiced the path of humility. They possessed just one bowl to eat from, which they shared. One day, the one Yogi said to the other: “I want the bowl just for me.” The other Yogi answered full of love:”Take it. I will gladly give you all I have.” The first Yogi got angry and shouted “ Can’t you fight with me just once! You repress your anger. You will never come to God that way.” The second Yogi hit him hard in the face and both were satisfied. From that moment on, they once again peacefully ate from the same bowl. And God was happy about their fight.
Do not take things too seriously. Concentrate on the funny side of life. Go laughing through the day. Practice Laughter Yoga. Laughter is healthy.
Clap your hands = We clap our hands in front of the heart chakra. We focus on the stomach and laugh "Ho, ho." We focus on the chest and laugh "Haha." Third, we change constantly between the abdomen and the chest up and down and shout, "Hoho, Haha, Hoho ...
Body = We lay our hands on the head and laugh in the head "Hehehe." So we can clean the head of tension. Then we lay hands on the chest and shout "Hahaha". We lay hands on the stomach and yell "Hohoho". We concentrate on the feet and trample with our feet on the ground: "Huhuhu".
Laughing Wave = We bow the upper body to the earth. The hands are facing down. We focus on the ground. The hands go to heaven. We wail like a siren: "Hahahaha." We make the laughing wave several times. We connect through our laughter heaven and earth.
Welcome laughter = Within a group, we keep eye contact and laugh, until all people are happy. At home we look in the mirror and welcome ourselves. When we look into the mirror there is always something to laugh about.
Hands to heaven = We extend our hands to the heaven, concentrate on our chest and laugh a minute "Hahaha."
Happy Mantra = We think the mantra: "May all beings be happy. Let there be a world of laughing." We see all people in the world and ourselves as a laughing Buddhas, laughing gods or laughing holinesses.
Retold from the book by Idries Shah
There once was a Sufi who was brought to prison despite his innocence. He lived in a dark cell and meditated. One day, the enlightened Hakim came to the prison. The Sufi felt his enlightened energy through the wall. He longed for the enlightenment and began to cry.
One of the people travelling with Hakim thought that some poor soul in the prison was being tortured. Hakim assured them and explained that it was just a Sufi on the way to enlightenment. His life had been blessed because he finally had enough time to meditate. And today his master had transferred enlightenment energy to him. It is just a question of time until the Sufi realizes his inner happiness.
In truth, the wise are fools and the true fool is really a wise person. Why? What is sold as wisdom at the universities is usually just foolishness. Real wisdom can be simply recognized. Does it make you happy? Does it bring you to peace and unconditional love? Does it help to build a world of peace and love?
Nils the fool: Change yourself! Realize the light within you and the world. Don’t forget to enjoy life!
There once were two Sufis who had been doing their spiritual exercises for decades yet hadn’t had any success. One day they came to a watering hole while they were wandering through the desert. Then an old Sufi came to them. He wore a white turban and had green robes on. He was friendly, and invited them to share a meal with him. After the meal, they meditated a little. The Sufi barely had to assume the meditative position and the happiness began to flow within him and he radiated light and love. Both of the other Sufis were amazed and asked him how long he had practiced in order to reach that point. He told them that he had these results just a short time after he began his spiritual practice.
His friends wanted to know what the secret of his quick success was. The Sufi explained that he thought about Khidr mornings and evenings. Khidr is the transcendental master of all Sufis. Khidr appeared to him in dreams to lead him along his spiritual path. Everything developed so that he grew quickly spiritually. His inner peace, inner happiness and love for all beings grew and grew. The happiness energy within him got increasingly stronger. He only needed to think of Allah and he could feel the beauty of Allah in nature. Allah is everywhere. In him, around him, in people, in animals, plants and stones.
There once was a Sufi who met a sinner. The sinner was stuck in worldly addiction. He strived for material riches, after money, sex and good food. He was also aware that he was going the wrong way in life. He had read the Quran in his youth and knew the way of inner happiness. But he wasn’t able to follow the way of inner wisdom. He couldn’t withstand the temptation of worldly happiness. He secretly admired the Sufi.
The Sufi lived in material poverty, wore simple clothes and prayed to Allah five times a day. He felt he was a great saint. Every time he saw the sinner, he felt even better.
After death, the sinner came to paradise and the Sufi went to hel. The sinner wondered what had happened and asked Allah how that could be. Allah answered that he had indeed lived in material riches, but his mind and spirit were concentrated on the path of the holy. Allah had forgiven his little sins because the mercy of Allah is infinite.
The Sufi complained to the devil about his descent to hell. The devil explained that Allah looks to the inside of a man’s heart and soul and not the outside. He is indeed merciful, but one sin cannot be forgiven: the sin of pride. Those who think they are better and more important than other people is a candidate for hell. Those who don’t have any love or empathy have a lot to learn along the spiritual path. The Sufi learnt his lessons and after a time was brought to the light of Allah.
In a city in the desert there was a lovely mosque. Many pilgrims came in order to pray to Allah. But no one reached enlightenment or a life in the light.
Next to the mosque, there was a soup kitchen. There, many pilgrims as well as the poor of the city were served delicious food. There, a miracle occurred. Many of the visitors to the soup kitchen became famous saints. What was the reason for this miracle?
The food did not taste any different from that which was served in other soup kitchens. There was, however, a cook there who had a special radiance about him. He seldom visited the mosque, but he fully dedicated himself to his service to the poor and the works of mercy. One day he reached unconditional love. The light of Allah appeared in  him and he radiated this light to pall of the other people he came into contact with.
If these people then prayed to Allah every day and gave all they could to the poor and suffering people in the world and did good deeds, then this light intensified with time. They reached peace, love and happiness. Praise Allah who can bring forth such miracles.
There was once a sheikh who was very rich. He had infinite money, a great palace, fast cars and beautiful women. But he was never satisfied. He could buy whatever he wanted. But his wishes grew faster. His riches did nothing for him. He was unhappy on the inside.
The sheikh looked for a person who could help him out of his sickness of disatisfaction. He went to a lot of western psychotherapists.  Unfortunately, deep in their souls they were suffering from the sickness of dissatisfaction, of always wanting more.  They did not know the way to healing. Then the sheikh heard of a poor old Sufi who had a magic bowl. With this magic bowl he could heal all mental illnesses.
The sheikh ordered the Sufi to his palace. The old Sufi threw himself on the ground in front of the sheikh. “Oh, sheikh, what can I do for you?” The sheikh answered:” free me from my dissatisfaction!” The Sufi replied: “Then you must do everything I direct you to, in my bowl.” The sheikh agreed.
First the sheikh had to put all of his money into the bowl of the Sufi. It disappeared miraculously. Then he put his palace, his cars and his women into the bowl. They all disappeared. The sheikh now owned nothing more. Then the Sufi told him to get in the bowl himself. The sheikh was brave and jumped in himself.
His ego dissipated. He became one with the cosmos. He reached the light of Allah. He recognized that he did not need anything material in order to be happy on the inside. On the contrary his worldly wishes hindered his inner happiness. The inner happiness comes from the spirit. And if the mind has the right attitude, then one can keep the inner happiness in every external situation.
The old Sufi turned his magic bowl upside down. Out came the sheikh, his women, his money, his cars and his palace. The sheikh was now rich on the inside and the outside. He worked on the characteristic of satisfaction and stayed happy all the time. He was happy with everything that Allah brought into his life.  Allah is the wisest of the wise. He knows what everyone needs for their individual spiritual path.  Praise be Allah. Praise be everything created by Allah. Praise be the lasting life in light and fulfillment of Allah.
It is good to be happy, and it's not as hard as you think it is. There is a way to happiness for everybody. Try it. Taste it. Realize it.
Hotei (Budai) was a zen master. He lived during the Tang dynasty in China. People also called him the laughing Buddha or the happy Chinaman. Hotei was a follower of the art of doing little. He enjoyed the happiness of enlightenment. He lived in happiness consciousness (Sat-Chid-Ananda). He liked to laugh, eat sweets and play with children. Hotei always had a sack with him, full of nice things which he liked to give children. He was popular with all of the children. And the adults loved to spend time around him because his energy made them feel good.
One day Hotei was asked what enlightenment is. He stretched out his arms into the air, laughed happily and disappeared among the people. He lived in happiness and as a nothing. He followed his spontaneous needs. He rejected being a Zen master or having formal teachings. He was just a happy, fat Buddha. That was enough.
Hotei came through a village. He was known among the people as the "laughing Buddha" because he always and everywhere laughed. Sometimes, however, he just sat under a tree. So also in this village. And he continued without laughing, eyes closed, under the tree. He did not even have a small smile on his face and was completely calm and collected. Someone asked him, "Hotei, why you are not laughing?" He opened his eyes and said: "I am preparing for it." First awaken your enlightenment energy. Then the big laughter is within you.
Meditate. Stop your thinking for one minute. Come to rest. Relax. It is easy to be happy. Avoid stress. Happiness arises from your inside, if you live in inner peace.
Do kundalini-yoga. Activate your kundalini-energie. Find your personal way of activating your energy of inner happiness.
Think positive. Watch your thoughts. Overcome your negativity. What is your negative thought today? What helps you? What solves your problem? What makes you happy? "My positive word is .. (optimism. I am a winner in my life.)"
Have self discipline. Do every day your spiritual exercises. Meditate every day at least for five minutes. Find every day your positive sentence, that keeps your mind positive. Do every day your kundalini-exercises. Read every day a little bit in the book of an enlightened master of your religion (Yoga, Buddhism, Christianity). Don't give up. Never.
Get enlightenment. Find your spiritual role model. Copy a picture of a happy buddha on your desktop. Get the darshan of an enlightened master. Visit personally an enlightened master. See his videos in the internet. Feel connected with him or her every day. So he or she will lead you to enlightenment. Follow your inner voice of wisdom. Then you will find your personal way to inner happiness.
Love all people. Do every day a good deed. Then you grow into the all embracing love. You get a unity consciousness. That is the basis of enlightenment. You will feel one with the cosmos, the life, all beings and yourself. You will realize your higher self. Then bliss arises.
Laugh as much as you can. Practice laughter yoga every day. See the jokes in your life. There is every day a joke in your life, if you see things like a buddha. Get a happy buddha view of life. Live like a happy buddha.
HOTEI, THE LAUGHING BUDDHA
Laughter meditation consists of two steps. First laugh and second come to inner peace. It is helpful to use laughing as a mantra. Laugh in different parts of your body and thus awake the chakras and the kundalini energy. Then the happiness awakes in your inside und you become positive. You see the jokes in the world. Laughter arises in you naturally. You will become a laughing buddha. You will set alight your fellowmen with happiness and good humor.
Head = We think the mantra “Hee, Hee, Hee” mentally. We concentrate on the brain at the same time and so dissolve the tension in the head.
Chest = We mentally repeat the mantra “ Ha, ha, ha” in the chest. We lay the hands onto the heart chakra.
Belly = We think “Ho, ho, ho” in the belly and lay the hands on the belly.
Earth = We think “Hoo, Hoo, Hoo” into the earth. We lay our hands on the legs and move the feet at the same time.
Cosmos = We make big circles with our arms in the air and think the mantra “Ha, Ha, Ha, Ha”. We visualize the cosmos around us. We mentally repeat the mantra until we are one with the cosmos.
Send light = We move a hand in a blessing and send light to all beings. We think: “I send light to… (all beings). May all beings be happy. May  there be a happy world.”
Thought stop = We hum the mantra “Om” in the body. We stop all of the thoughts. We come to a state of calm.
Positive saying = We start the day with  positive resolution and start the day in a good mood. Proceed with optimism.
Wikipedia has related information at Laughter yoga
Play media  Laughter Yoga with Yogi Nils
Benefits of Laughter Yoga with John Cleese
Wikipedia: Guru (Sanskrit) Is a religious teacher in Hinduism, Sikhism and Tantric Buddhism. The teacher is essential in the search for knowledge on the way to salvation. In western language areas the term “guru” is often used in a mocking way used for people who attract followers using religious or philosophic statements. It is also used in a joking manner for people who possess higher than usual knowledge on a given area, exceptional experience in a subject or have a charismatic presence.
With the increasing popularity of the ascetic movement (to live as a solitary yogi) the Samnyasin guru has replaced the other types of gurus. Whereas the Acarya guru (yoga teacher) was still capable of making mistakes and could be criticized, the Samnyasin guru (saint, hermit) represented the already delivered Jivanmukta (Sadguru, enlightened master who lives in God) and the absolute and thus was considered perfect and infallible. By forsaking worldly life and through ascetic discipline he or she is said to achieve supernatural powers and to pass on healing powers to his or her students and to awaken slumbering wisdom.
In the Bhakti and tantric traditions the guru was considered an avatara of God, the incarnation of God, identical with absolute wisdom and highest existence (enlightenment, Sat-Chid-Ananda). The belief in a direct power and healing exchange from the guru to the student plays a central role here.
Nils: Right now I’m reading the Book Roadtrip with Guru. The book is a report of a man who traveled through the western world with an Indian Guru.It is the story of a great love and a great disappointment. The guru was really enlightened and had a strong energy. The man got energy from the guru and felt happy. Then he found out that the guru had had sex with all of his female followers in his inner circle. He was so disappointed he left the guru and didn’t want to know anything more about enlightenment. Luckily he could return to his girlfriend.
The book awakened mixed feelings in me. First I thought it was terrible the guru didn’t uphold western morality. But that’s how enlightened people are. They are above all morals and therefore destroy the attachments their students have to them. That is an important step along the spiritual way. A student has to become his own guru. It s painful, like a child losing his mother. I experienced that myself with my guru Sai Baba. It took many years to work that out.
The second thing was a feeling of envy appeared in me. I’d also like to be a guru with a harem. He could live out completely as a guru and a man. I’m also a  guru with a harem, but only virtual and without real sex. I don’t even have a girlfriend like the man in the book. This morning I woke up feeling sad about my life. At the same time, I know everything is right the way it is. I’m lead by God and need things the way they are for my spiritual development.
The book by Timm Kruse (Roadtrip with Guru) shows how easy it is to get lost along the way of tantric energy. That is particularly true of relationships with several women or men, especially in the west where also psychically sick or instabile people can appear on the spiritual scene. There are also addictive behaviors that might be hard for a guru to overcome. A good guru needs to be a good psychotherapist. Sexuality should always be experienced through the basis of clarity, wisdom and loyalty. The safest way is to stick to relationships with just two people or to live alone.
LaoHu (Yoga Vidya): If a guru has affectionate sex with his followers and then increases his energy, that’s ok for me as long as it is a free decision.
Bhajan Noam: Since the 60’s we thought we had left the stale air of the church behind us and now a lot of people are inviting the worse stink of Hinduism in through the back door via yoga. Yoga is the flowing with the stream of lif.e the real life is beyond morals, but everyone who lets it deep within of course has a conscience. A living person goes with cosmic laws. If you live your life completely, then you don’t have time to get upset or envious about things. It’s as easy as that.
D.Jahnke: It remains true that sadhana and brahmacarya (ascetism) is optimal for energetic transformation.
Nils: What does it mean to completely live out life? Those who live out their addictions end in total chaos. Sex and relationships are basically the way of external happiness which is the opposite of enlightenment. If you want to dance with that as a spiritual person, you should do so carefully and wisely. One can only totally live through enlightenment if inner happiness has been totally developed. At that point, you can rise above the way of material enjoyment. You know how to bring yourself and others forward along the spiritual way.
Nils: Suddenly it was clear that I am a guru. And as a guru, what do you do? You write a book, at best with the title “Light and Love”. I hope the readers won’t take everything too seriously. Particularly the idea of my being a guru. In reality, I am an anti guru. Everyone should listen to the voice of their own wisdom and to take their own individual path. Everyone should contemplate, think about the text, laugh about it and then find their own truth.
The same word can have extremely different meaning for different people. Take for example, the term “guru”. In the western mass media, this term is usually used as an insult. A guru is a sect leader who takes advantage of people. He takes their money, has sex with female students and teaches crazy things that make people get psychically ill.
Of course such ”gurus” exist (for example, John Friend, Anusara yoga). Everyone should examine deeply the teachings they follow. You should not give up your reasoning at the door of spirituality. You should always look closely, take the good and criticize the bad. A good guru can be criticized. He can learn from it and overcome his mistakes. A bad guru forbids criticism. He lives out his ego, power and money only.
A good guru serves his or her students and the world. He or she sacrifices his or her ego in order to increase the happiness of his or her followers. A good guru brings other people with him or her into the light. That is how this term is to be understood in Hinduism. A guru is a spiritual teacher who leads his or her followers from the darkness and into the light. He or she takes them from foolishness to wisdom. He or she brings them from depression to a fulfilling life. He gives them a life of light, happiness, peace and love.
A good guru should be as enlightened as possible. He or she should live in God in order to bring the light of God into the world. She should possess inner peace, light, happiness and love. Only then can he or she authentically bring these values to others. But in the end, a guru is still just a person. We should never forget it. Whenever my gurus are criticized, I look into the criticisms and find my own way of truth and love.
I don’t have that much light and inner peace. I still get angry about the suffering in the world and easily get attached to worldly things. After 26 years as a yogi living on his own more happiness is slowly developing within me.
A year ago, I had a big spiritual crisis. Something transformed in me. Deep-rooted tension and energy blockages released. Strong energy rushed through that me so that I lay in bed every night for three months and could hardly sleep, or not at all. It was a very difficult time. Then things calmed down a bit. I could sleep again, and I had energy to go through the day.
Three weeks ago I went for a walk and I saw two big snakes. I live near the forest where there are fields and swamps. There is a river here, too. Sometimes you can see snakes here. That’s rare because the snakes are rather shy. I had never seen two such big snakes here before.
The snakes were common grass snakes, which are not dangerous for people at all. (For frogs it’s a different story). Frogs are the preferred bounty for the snakes, and not little yogis. Despite this, I had a deep respect for the snakes because they were so big. Grass snakes can grow up to one meter long.
In yoga, snakes are a symbol for happiness. They represent the awakening of the kundalini energy. The yoga god Shiva wears a snake around the neck, thereby expressing that he practices kundalini yoga and has activated his kundalini energy. Happiness energy has been flowing within me for days- Perhaps I’ve been blessed by the yoga God Shiva.
It’s more probable that I automatically visualized the snakes and activated my kundalini energy that way.  In the meditation after the walk, the energy flowed in me and suddenly I was in the light. There are still a lot of cleansing processes taking place. The light then disappears for a few days, but always comes back. Then I’m always happy because the happiness brings me beyond the suffering in the world. Suffering is always there in little gurus, too. Even a guru has to go to the dentist, is dumped by his girlfriend or gets shit on by a bird flying by. That has happened to me too.
I almost forgot. I am not a guru. It’s just a mind game. I am a totally normal man. At least, that’s what a former girlfriend said. She was completely disappointed with me. I always wanted to be just normal, which didn’t really work. Somehow I was always different from others. I practice being normal. The true guru is unassuming, normal and modest.
I’m not enlightened. I am totally unenlightened. I find others to be much more enlightened than I am. However, I have had some enlightenment experiences along my yogic way so I know the goal I am going for and I know what I am talking (writing) about. So that much needs to be said.
I mainly see myself as one who practices spiritually. I practice working on my thoughts and growing more and more in the light. I practice maintaining my inner calm and peace in difficult situations and accepting the suffering in life. I work on developing wisdom and positive thoughts and taking the path of truth with self-discipline.
Professionally, I was a lawyer. After the divorce with my ex-wife I gave up my bourgeois life and became a yogi. I earned money as a yoga teacher at the Hamburg adult higher learning school. I studied to become a psycho therapist and offered positive thinking courses at a health center. I wrote a lot of books and tried to spread spiritual knowledge over the internet. I worked with Wikipedia and WikiHow.   I also started some groups on Facebook in the German language.
On the American WikiHow, I wrote a lot of texts about yoga. I put the best yoga series on the internet for free. Just a few people are interested in them. That frustrates me. I once wanted to be really successful. I considered how I could make a yoga series successful. The most often clicked on yoga texts were for beginners. So I developed a good series for beginners and called it “Yoga for Absolute Beginners” so I could trump all the other yoga series for beginners.
I just thought of it as a joke and it really became a big success on the internet. Up to now, over 473,000 people have clicked on my yoga series. For some people, it’s become something of a kult series, and through a joke I’m suddenly a guru. At least, on the internet and in the US. Here in Germany, hardly anyone gives a crap about me. But that’s how I like it. I have my peace and can live in my forest without getting pestered by overzealous tourists.
Play media  Meditation with the inner voice
Spiritual therapy is a way to heal the body, mind and soul. It recognizes the physical, mental and energetic connections of the illness.
The five rules of health are: healthy diet (a lot of raw vegetables and fruit, vitamins, at least one apple a day), no unhealthy substances (no smoking, alcohol, drugs, and only a little or no meat), regular exercise (going for walks, yoga, bike riding, jogging), enough relaxation (enough sleep, taking breaks, meditation) and positive thinking (to work on negatve thoughts and feelings, paying attention to your inner world).
Positive thinking is best learnt by getting a positive attitude and perspective for the day. An oracle, a positive sentence, a prayer, reading from positive books, enjoy life a little (doing something nice) and communicating with positive people (to talk on the phone or over skype, to chat or write an email).
It’s good to send all beings light every day, to do at least one good deed a day, and to live for a happy world (as a karma yogi/Bodhisattva/father or mother of all beings). If we anchor ourselves in God (in light, in the spiritual way) and live from un-conditional love, then we get a deeper sense of meaning in life and a more positive general feeling.
If I get sick, I try to help myself first. I read a health book or look online. I ask an pharmacist for advice and if all else fails I go to the doctor. At the same time, I connect with my masters (God) and follow the voice of my own wisdom. What does that wisdom advise me to do? What is my way of healing? What options appear when I get informed and contemplate? I then take this path with self-discipline and put my healing plan into action.
I am very familiar with fear, addiction, (relationship addiction) and depression. I’ve suffered all of the above and have tried several ways of healing. I have found my own way of healing. I’ve worked as a psycho-therapist with individual clients and have lead groups in teaching positive thinking. At the moment I just go my way as a yogi and help the people I meet along the way.
A healing practitioner read about me on the internet and wanted to meet me. We talked a little. Then the energy between us grew and we reached a happy silence. We just sat there in a cloud of happy energy. Then she left again. That was all she wanted. After the visit I sensed her aura. I recognized that she had needed healing for herself. She didn’t know that her sick patients were still in her aura and were blocking her energy. I healed her aura, sent light to her patients and let the light flow through and around her.
A woman from an earlier yoga group of mine visited me once a month. We ate something nice together and conversed. One day I felt connected with her hands and feet, after such a visit. Her energy had transferred to me and I healed her from within myself. When I met the woman a month later, she told me happily that her skin problems on the hands and feet had disappeared.
The way I see it is that my masters (God) work through me and do the right thing at the right time. Mu masters see what each person needs and what I can do. They show me how I can heal myself and build up my energy once more.
Sun = We visualize a beautiful sun above us, raise both hands to the level of the head and think the mantra ”sun”. We let the light of the sun flow into us and massage it into the body.
Earth = We visualize the globe underneath us and rub the hands or feet into the earth below and think : “I send light to the whole world. May all beings on earth be happy.”
Healing Massage = We consider which body parts need healing at the moment. We let light flow into that body part, massage it in circles and think the word “light” as a mantra. We use the light massage to release tension from the part of the body, which then enables self-healing. We can visualize light in various colors that have a healing effect. We think the name of the color as a mantra. We can massage light into various body parts one after the other, using this process.
Cosmos = We visualize the cosmos around us full of stars, make big circles with the arms and think: “Om cosmos. I accept the suffering in my life. I take the path of health and healing.”
Buddha of Healing = We visualize a Buddha of healing in front of us or above us. We rub the hands together in front of the heart chakra and think: “Om Buddha of healing. Om inner wisdom. I ask for guidance and help along my way.”
Healing Question = We concentrate on the part of the body in need of healing or on a personal problem. We contemplate what our personal best way to healing is. What does your inner wisdom tell you to do? Which helpful thoughts come to you? Think about the problem long enough to the point you are satisfied with the solution. If we don’t hear an answer then we are either blocked or we are not connected to our inner voice well enough. The best way is to slowly come into a state of contemplation.
Other People = We move one hand in a blessing over the heart chakra and think: “I send light to (person’s name). May all people who have the same problem as I have be healed.” We surround them with light mentally and let light flow into them, and feel connected with them.
Relaxation = Stop thinking for one moment. Relax.
According to the teachings of yoga, depression occurs because of inner tension (samskaras) and energy blockages. A person has a problem and is not finished with it on the inside. Fears are stuck in the psyche. Lasting inner stress can arise, which makes the person sick. His or her energy is blocked and he or she suffer from negative thoughts. The person feels unwell and that affects thoughts and feelings.
Overcoming depression takes place through consistent work on negative thoughts and through releasing inner tension. A depressed person should pay attention to his or her thoughts, stop the negative thoughts and create positive thoughts. Problems should be solved as much as possible. Otherwise, one should learn to accept things and to go through situations in a relaxed way.
In yoga and Christianity, one helps the self by concentrating on what is positive in life. You concentrate on the spiritual way,on spiritual exercises, on God (life in light). Those who live in God as the main focus do not lose themselves to the problems of the world. They do not get too attached to worldly enjoyment and can deal with problems in a laid-back way.
We should know that when we feel troubled by love, that it is God we love above all. Enlightenment is the deeper meaning in life, not the love of a partner. As a yogi, one looks for happiness in oneself. You work on thoughts of happiness, peace, love and wisdom, as well as self-discipline. Using spiritual exercises we bring the self more and more into the light.
That takes place through daily meditation, walking and thought work. (overcoming thoughts of attachment and denial). Buddha said:”life is suffering. There is a way to overcome the suffering. That way is enlightenment.  Through regular meditation and working with the thoughts, one can overcome suffering of the soul. Then peace, acceptance and happiness can come into existence.
Buddha was a great psycho-therapist who had developed a very successful way of healing. The therapy of observation is very helpful toward curing depression. I recommended the book “The Attentive Way through Depression” to a friend of mine and she read it enthusiastically.
My personal way of healing depression and the development of inner happiness consists of lying down and meditating, walking (twice a day going for hour-long walks), reading (the books of my masters), thought work (stopping negative thoughts and creating positive ones), doing good (coming to the energy of unconditional love through good deeds), enjoying life (doing something fun, eating cookies with chocolate). I creatively put these six points into action every day.
I tried to show these methods to my depressed girlfriend at the time. But she refused to let go of her problems, to send all beings light and to strive for the goal of enlightenment. Instead of enlightenment as the goal, we formulated it so that the goal was acceptance and inner wellness. Unfortunately, I couldn’t motivate her to send her enemies light and to do spiritual exercises every day. Through those methods she could have let go of the causes of her depression and would have come to a life in light.
Her biggest problem was self-discipline. Depressed people don’t have much self-discipline. Even I had to force myself to stick to my exercises for two months before I got used to doing them. My girlfriend managed to go for walks sometimes, to meditate sometimes, to stop her depressed thoughts sometimes and to sometimes read an anti-depression’s book. She always managed to talk on the phone with me. The daily phone conversation was the main way to healing. It gave her meaning and strength to live.
She probably would have recovered from her depression more quickly if she had done her exercises regularly. I planned to do the exercises on the telephone with her, but it didn’t happen. Fortunately, she developed a meditation which helped her. As a Christian she had a connection to God. She meditated on God in herself. She could bring her thoughts to rest. It opened the source of happiness within her.
After we broke up, we talked on the phone once more briefly. She said that the break  up was final. In that regard, there was clarity and I could let her go with love. At the same time, she told me she had an experience of God after the break up. God showed her that he is there for her and guides her. My main worry during the break up was that my girlfriend wouldn’t find a way out of her depression. Now I don’t need to worry about her anymore. God is protecting her. She will find her way into the light.
32 years ago, I suffered from burn-out. I was totally burnt out on the inside. Five years of extreme job stress (studies, exams) combined with constant relationship stress had really upset my nerves. I was tenser and tenser on the inside. Fears, aggression and stress dominated my life. I was afraid of giving up and not being successful. I was afraid I wouldn’t be loved and would lose my relationship. I was afraid of life in general which I experienced as generally threatening.
All of that persisted until I had a breakthrough. This breakthrough had two stages .First I lost half my strength. Psycho-somatic illnesses appeared in my life. But I continued to struggle with my career and relationship. Two years later I totally broke down. At that time all of my inner strength was gone and I had extreme depression. I couldn’t experience my relationship as positive and lost my family. Some years later I gave up my career as a lawyer.
First I hoped that the burnout would disappear on its own after a longer period of rest. But the weakness and lack of energy continued. I could overcome the depression through sports and consistent positive thinking.
I asked myself how I could get my old strength back. I read about psychology and took part in psychology retreat weekends.  I met a lot of people who were looking for the way out of burnout. I can remember a 40-year-old woman  especially well. At a Bio-energy workshop she complained that she wanted to feel well and satisfied again. A  50-year-old man said that he was strong and successful earlier and that this state of burn out came after decades of being overwhelmed on the job and now he was plagued by weakness and fear. He was just a shadow of himself and nothing helped.
Psychology still has yet to find a way out of burnout. It recommends preventative measures such as good nutrition, exercise and avoiding stress. But who can avoid stress on the job today? The pressure to succeed is getting bigger and bigger. Individual prevention measures only help a little and sometimes. If burnout is just on the surface, it can sometimes be healed and minimized. A lot of clinics and retreat resorts make a lot of money off of that. But chronic burnout can only seldom be healed. There is no pill against burnout.
All of the psychology techniques failed to help me, so I looked to spirituality. Here I found a convincing healing concept. If the body is cleansed of tension through exercises like yoga, meditation and positive thinking, the chakras open and energy flows again. When enlightened, you have infinite strength, peace and happiness.
I thought out how I could dissolve my tension. Tension was in my body and mind. I needed exercises for the body and for the mind. For the body, doing yoga and going for walks was helpful. I cleansed my mind with thought exercises, positive thoughts, mantras and meditation. I chalked up the deeper causes to inner stress. I didn’t block my feelings anymore, rather I let the rage, sadness and fear run its course. I practiced accepting things as they are, and to free myself of addiction and to orient myself around a positive goal in life.
I lived according to a spiritual daily plan consisting of walking, meditation, reading and unconditional love (doing good). I practiced spiritual exercises so that I would constantly be in a state of inner cleansing. I lived in peace and from the state of calm.
According to Swami Sivananda, enlightenment occurs through a combinationof a lot of rest, all-encompassing love and consistent spiritual practice (yoga, meditation). Kundalini yoga is especially important. With Kundalini yoga, the chakras are cleansed and inner power is awakened. I visualized myself as a Buddha, Shiva and mother to all beings. I thought mantras and sent light to all beings. I used oracle cards and encouraged myself with their positive phrases.
I also looked for a lot of enlightened masters and was blessed by them. They transferred enlightenment energy to me and dissolved energy blockages. I connected with my masters daily through prayer, reading and oracle. I sensed that I was lead along my way and that I got help. It’s necessary, because the path of enlightenment isn’t easy. It requires self-discipline and can cause you to go through difficult inner crisis.
Through the course of the years, my psycho-somatic illnesses disappeared, I got stronger and I was happy more often. But I still haven’t reached my goal. But just a year ago, I went through a great inner change. Some deep tension in my head released in a noticeable way and my sleeping problems healed themselves. I felt how my burnout disappeared. At the moment, half of my old strength is back. I hope that I will be just as strong as before in a few years. I am already looking forward to having immeasurable energy and being able to live in light and love permanently.
Earth = We visualize a bright star. We imagine the earth below us and circle the earth with the star. We think the word  “earth” as a mantra. We circle the earth with our star until the whole earth below us is full of light. We can also rub the ground with the feet at the same time.
Sun = We imagine a beautiful sun above us in the sky. We let our star circle the sun un til the light of the sun flows into us and fills the body with light. We think the mantra “sun” repeatedly.
Body = We circle our own bodies with the star and think the mantra ”body”. We cleanse all of the tension from the body. We surround ourselves completely with light. We can move the feet or toes at the same time.
In the body = We let the star circle around everywhere in the body. We cleans all of the parts of the body of their tension and fill them with light. At the same time, we think the mantra “light”. We circle the head, the chest, the belly, the legs and the feet, especially, with the star.
Sending light = We move the hand in a blessing and send light to all beings: ”I send light to..(name). May all beings be happy. May there be a happy world.”
Om Shanti = We tighten the muscles in the pelvis, in the belly and chest. Then we hold the tension and the then relax. We do it once more. Then we breathe deeply into the belly while thinking “om” while breathing in and when exhaling “shanti”. We reach peace more and more as we repeat the mantra.
Meditation = By doing the star circles, our energy has turned more inward. We open the eyes halfway and concentrate on the energy within us (the light, the chakras or the kundalini channel). This way, the energy of the eyes flow inward and stabilize our meditation. We stop all of our thoughts. We stay in a calm meditation for a while. Then we slowly come back.
Play media  Enlightened Masters. Blessing.
Enlightenment cannot be described. In order to make it possible to comprehend it a little, I will describe it as a staircase path. The first step is experienced as peace, happiness and harmony. You are in harmony with yourself and the world. If you take in spiritual energy, then a consciousness shift takes place. You reach enlightened existence. You lose your ego and your “me” identity. You become pure consciousness and perceive yourself as everything. You think from the unity and not from the ego.
That cannot be comprehended if you only think from the ego. When the ego is gone, you reach great inner peace. You are not really bothered by what happens to you anymore. You don’t consider yourself important. You are now essentially positive, and you think positive.
But even then you can develop further. You can open the chakras and possess infinite inner balance, strength, happiness and love and grow. You can develop abilities like omni-presence. You can connect with other people energetically in order to heal them and send them strength. Then one day you can spiritually help everyone and bring them into the light.
Those who pray to an enlightened being every day will be brought to paradise. The great enlightened beings can also work through other people (their students) and arrange outer situations in helpful spiritual ways. I see this at work around me. I believe that the great enlightened beings use their abilities to help all beings.
Enlightenment is a special type of happiness. I consider it happiness energy. This energy goes beyond worldly experiences of happiness, joy and suffering. You can be full of this joy energy when you are grieving or grieving for someone in empathy. You can feel the worldly suffering and through the enlightenment energy rise above that suffering. An enlightened person experiences rain and sun, but through inner happiness and inner peace is relatively independent in terms of feeling. You live in a higher dimension of light. The word “enlightened” means to be full of light and to live in light.
Don’t suppress your doubt, rather get informed and think about the cause. This way you dissolve the doubts. I’ve experienced enlightenment, and so don’t doubt that it exists. My problem is whether there are higher enlightened beings and what exactly are their abilities. As a former atheist, it’s hard to believe in them. But I’ve had many experiences which suggest that we do get help.
I have slowly come to find the truth.
The first truth is that people wish for happiness and want to avoid suffering. I recognized that at the age of 14. I established the luck-bad luck theory. At the age of 30 I recognized the path of inner happiness. Material life consists of a constant shuffle between joy and suffering. If you want to be happy over the long run, then you have to develop your inner happiness. That is my second truth. My third truth is that enlightenment is the highest form of happiness. That is my truth because I have experienced it myself. Then I searched for a way I could grow in inner happiness. I read up on philosophy, psychology and various religions. I recognized that all of the systems deal with enlightenment. Religions are systems of enlightenment. That is my fourth truth.
I found out that people are different. They need different methods to develop inner happiness and enlightenment. Each person has to look within and figure out exactly what will  help, and what will harm. Yoga, walking, meditation, reading, doing good and connecting with my enlightened masters help me. If you are consistent, then you grow in light. That is my fifth truth and experience.
I hadn’t been to the dentist in five years. I then experienced a little miracle. A tooth hurt a lot, was swollen, and numb. It was a problem even into the root. I was sure that it had to be pulled. But then I pulled the oracle card for healing. And then that evening the tooth healed suddenly. Within an hour, the pain, inflammation and swelling disappeared. I have never experienced such before. I think God had mercy with me because I am such a little, weak yogi.
A year ago, I was often helped a lot by my masters. A lot of miracles took place. The first miracle was that the cleansing processes mostly took place in a way that I could get by. They were in just the right intensity. If they got to be too difficult, my masters obviously intervened. Once I thought I couldn’t go on any longer. And then suddenly the kundalini energy stopped. I could sleep well that night. When I felt like an inner struggle became too difficult after two months, I met a woman. Through her love, I had new strength for living.
Also when people visit me, some miracles occur. Some surprising energy and healing processes take place. It’s amazing how God works through me sometimes. The right people appear at the right moments. They appear when they need me or I need them. They get what is right for them and what helps them along the spiritual path.
According to my experience, supernatural abilities do exist. There are great enlightened masters who can help us with our abilities. The open question is how far these abilities go. I can’t explain that. I can only hope that my enlightened masters will help me when I pray to them.
Nataraja, Dancer with life
Wikipedia on Reincarnation: The term reincornation indicates all types of concepts that a soul or a mental process will manifest once more as another conscious being. The most important faith systems where reincarnation plays a central role are Hinduism with 900 million followers and Buddhism with 400-500 million. The protestant theologue Helmut Obst said: “there isn’t aren’t any clear reincarnation teachings in the bible. However, there a few places which seem to indicate reincarnation and can be interpreted as such. “ The evangelium of Matthew and Mark make it impossible to say that the New Testament has absolutely no mention of the reincarnation idea. It deals with John the Baptist who is thought to be the returned prophet Elija. Ian Stevenson, who attained international fame through his research with children who could remember earlier lives, was the most famous of those discussing this new topic. A step further along this way is the reincarnations therapy that tries to use regressions to find out about earlier lives.
Nils: For me, during the last few years some two thousand earlier live shave popped up. That seems to be over now. I sometimes doubt whether they were real earlier lives. But with another yogi, his lives seem similar. The way the lives appear are proof of the authenticity of the lives and the possibility for reincarnation.
After I had lived as a hermit for seven years, I was suddenly overcome by the wish to know my earlier lives. I sensed back in time and at some point found resonance. It appeared as a sort of inner resistance. Then I sensed exactly there. One after another, mentally four earlier lives appeared. I knew the place, the time and the type of life each one respectively was.
If you dissolve tension systematically in the body and the mind with spiritual exercises, then one day you can access the stress situations from earlier lives, when the time is right. Every highly stressful situation is saved in the soul. When tension is dissolved, then pictures or short scenes (little films) can appear in dreams or when awake. The tension releasing process is often connected with bodily reactions such as restlessness, muscle twitching, heat or cold.
First the tension from my life now dissolved. Then in short scenes I saw the stressful test situations, relationship conflict, and repressed accidents. Because I still had the stress experiences in my memory, there was a context between the spiritual exercises, the dissolving of inner tension and the appearance of dreams. I learnt to differentiate between these special dreams and normal dreams. After eleven years as a hermit, suddenly many earlier lives appeared in mind. First, earlier lives appeared one at a time. Then a lot of earlier lives appeared. After four years, the process slowed down slowly. This was in contrast to the conscious sensing out in my mind toward earlier lives, now there were clear short films.I could see geographic and time related details regarding my environment at the time.
Nils (Online discussion at Jesus.de): Is reincarnation real? What is Christianity’s position toward reincarnation? What would you decide if you had the choice to reincarnate on earth?
Hadie: Many people know that the Bible cannot be taken literally word for word. Reincarnation isn’t a faith question, because if it is real, it’s real independent of whether or not I believe in it. Even Jesus spoke of John the Baptist as the reincarnated Elia.
Nikodemus (Catholic): If reincarnation were proven, then we would have to accept that it exists.
Nils: There’s the case of an English woman who was burnt as a witch in France in the Middle Ages. She knew exactly where the documents were and what they said. That wasn’t known to anyone else anywhere. On TV a few years back there was a series where they depicted regression therapy. In the hypnosis, certain facts were obtained and then the TV team went to the corresponding place. And then it was considered whether the person in question could have known things beforehand or not.
Max: I don’t want to ever come back to earth. I really don’t want to be back to this world with all of its pain, suffering and death…. No thank you!
CoCreator: I’m convinced that the Buddhists and Hindus are closer to reality than the Christian church with their explanations. In a new incarnation there’s a new chance to make right what was done wrong in earlier lives. The promise of deliverance (Jesus died from you) causes people to not take responsibility for their actions since Jesus will simply free them from their sins.
Katrin: There are especially “knowledgeable mystics” who claim to know such. I’m not impressed. Reincarnation doesn’t exist. “People are bound to live once, to die once, and then to be judged.”
Nils: The Bible is a collection of various texts from various authors. Some points are considered thoroughly and some less so. Sometimes certain texts are held back if the church authorities are against it. I think particularly of the Book of Thomas which emphasizes the way of calm and meditation. Through these methods you come to real experiences of your faith. And then earlier lives appear in the frame of your mind, just like it happened with the Christian desert fathers.
Saint Anthony reported that he experienced situations where he was eaten alive from earlier lives. He saw demonic beasts who wanted to eat him. When cleansing the soul, earlier lives appear and they are mostly from stressful situations. Such situations are remembered especially well and block enlightenment energy the most. They must be cleansed, therefore if you want to advance along the spiritual path.
I believe the teachings of paradise and the teachings of reincarnation do not conflict one another. Both are possible. A soul can decide to be reborn on earth or to advance further on the other side. You can ascend to paradise and remain there if you are spiritually advanced enough and pure of heart. It is also possible for a soul to advance to paradise and to return to earth one day in order to help the people on eart spiritually. Jesus also mentioned this regarding Elija.
Even Jesus planned to return to earth. Therefore, he also taught reincarnation and that enlightened masters can incarnate on earth to help others. That is exactly the way of all-encompassing love that Jesus taught. Wikipedia: Christian theologist Parusie considered the return of Jesus as the completion and perfection of the healing history, of the coming of the kingdom of God.
What is scientific proof? For me, observations and contemplation also count. That’s the only way we can really approach the subject life after death. There are many indications. But it is not the only way. Quantum physics shows the possibility physically. Near death research gives us observations. If we want to ask the dead, we need clairvoyants and enlightened people. Many Tibetan masters could see into the other side and see earlier lives. I also know my earlier lives. That’s proof enough for me.
But I admit I am critical and sometimes doubt whether there is life after death. In the end it doesn’t matter- the deeper point of life is enlightenment. And we can reach that in this life. We will experience or not experience everything else after death.
Woman: Hello Nils. Can you help me? I am searching for a master.
Nils: What are you searching for? Are you seriously looking for a master? A master in what? Unfortunately I am no master, just a normal person. Masters for me are the Dalai Lama, Jesus or Mother Meera. They are enlightened and have special spiritual abilities they can help us with. I just have a little knowledge to share with you.
Woman: Your root chakra exercise is totally great. I did it while walking and experienced something like when having an orgasm. It wasn’t the second time, but it still motivates me to exercise.
Nils: Wonderful. I sensed from a distance that you had a big spiritual breakthrough. Keep going. You just need the self-discipline every day to exercise. Then you will come to the light. Now everyone wants to know what this exercise was. I just sensed in your energy field where the energy blockage was and developed a simple exercise for you. The exercise consisted of going for a walk, concentrating on the earth and thinking a mantra. I will tell the mantra to every woman who comes to visit me. Just kidding!
Woman: Most people search for happiness in the context of a relationship.
Nils: Only when enlightened does the search come to an end. Only in enlightenment can lasting happiness be found. Enlightenmen is described through the words Sat-Chit-Ananda. Sat means enlightened being, inner rest and inner peace. Chid is the unity consciousness. Ananda is happiness, inner bliss. All three are related. They are together and all three can be developed by working on each aspect respectively.
The enlightened being is exercised by accepting things as they are. You overcome tendencies toward addiction and develop inner peace. Inner peace can be developed through kundalini meditation and by thinking positively. The unity consciousness is developed by consciously experiencing nature and love for all beings.
I release inner tension using spiritual exercises (walking, meditation, thought work.) Then the energy starts to flow and a feeling of inner wellness and happiness arises. But I still haven’t reached my goal. But I can say that this way works for me. I have a feeling of peace, happiness and wellness.s I am not really searching. I have found my way.
Woman: Isn’t it so that a relationship is more about sex and material needs?
Nils:  I try to take the middle road where some worldly joy can be experienced. I have to be careful not to lose myself along the spiritual way. Even by skyping daily with A. I lost myself in relationship addiction. When she broke up with me, God appeared once more. I was in my own happiness energy once more. I try to find what works for me in just the right amount, when it comes to enjoying things of the world.
Woman: Do you have dreams?
Nils: My dream is to reach a sufficient level of enlightenment so that I can be happy and independent from the suffering of life, so that I can help others and contribute to building a happy world.
Earlier I was addicted to sex, affection, intimacy. Now my inner happiness is developin slowly. I rest in myself and don’t need anything external anymore. I don’t need sex or affection. I can experience it though, when it is there. I couldn’t have believed that earlier. Inner happiness is enough if it is present in a sufficient amount.
I am a yoga teacher who also takes the path of tantra yoga in addition to teaching it. Tantra yoga is multi-faceted. Sometimes it is connected to free love. For me, I realize that faith, love and truth are an important part of my path.
My wisdom is putting God as the center of life. This way one can go with or without a relationship. Without a relationship the way to enlightenment is normally faster than with. But that is not always the case. Some people need to live one way, others another. I need to live as a single, or in the context of a relationship at different points. I grow through both.
I believe God leads me in my life. The right woman always appears when I need a relationship. My relationships have all been very different. There have been relationships with and without sex. The deciding factor of a relationship is love.
Woman: I’m not doing so well today.
Nils: What’s wrong with you? The divine loves you. You are blessed. You are wonderful. You deserve everything good in the world. If someone is hopeless it’s me. I have so many errors and weaknesses.
Woman: I’m so full of ego. I am never satisfied.
Nils: You’re a woman. That’s how women are, according to my experience. They want love from a man. They want attention and energy from their partner. They are addicted to relationships. They’re never satisfied. They look to the outside world instead of within. Therefore, you are completely normal. Don’t worry.
Nils: For me, enlightenment is a flowing process. Enlightenment means that the light of God flows into us and enlightens us. We feel the peace, love, happiness and connection to everyone. I’m satisfied with my life. The sun is shining, it is warm and I don’t have a toothache anymore.
Relaxing= we tense up the muscles of the feet and legs. We hold the tension, stop all thoughts and breathe into the legs. Then we relax. Then we tighten up the muscles of the arms and hands. We breathe into the arms and hands. We relax. We tighten the muscles of the head and face. Then we breathe into the face. Then we relax. Then we tighten the muscles of the entire body. We breathe into the entire body. Then we relax.
Count from 1 to 20= We count from 1 to 20 mentally, concentrate on the head and breathe into the head. Our mind comes to rest. We concentrate on the rib cage breathe into the rib cage and count from 1 to 20. We breathe into the belly and count from 1 to 20. We concentrate on the legs and feet and count from 1 to 20. Then we visualize a ball under the soles of the feet and count from 1 to 20 in the ball.
Surrounded by the light= We surround ourselves with light. We take a golden sunray and let the sunlight circulate around us. Then we repeat the mantra “light”. We let the sunlight into us and fill us with light. We think the mantra “light”. We send light to everyone.
Thought stop= We stop all of our thoughts for a minute and move the feet gently. We concentrate on the feet and move them until the mind is completely calm.
Relaxation= We lay down for a few minutes and just relax. We let the feelings come and go as they please.
R. v. McAuley
R. v. Duerksen
R. v. John
R. v. Ramsdale
R. v. Walbourne
R. v. Frigault
R. v. Irving
R. v. Grenfal
R. v. Campbell
R. v. Davidson
R. v. Stewart
R. v. Auger
R. v. Cairns
R. v. Powers
Break and enter x 2; stole times in purse; developmental disability
R. v. Dunphy-Taylor
R. v. Thomas
36 year old, long record; broke into 6 houses while residents were away; ransacked the places
R. c. Béchard
50 year old with dated record, broke into apartment, stole tools and sold at pawn shop
R. v. MacKenzie
R. v. Smith
R. v. Abaroa-Martinez
R. v. Faulconer
Joint Sub. 2 years
44 years old; plead guilty to B&E x 3; theft; forged documents over 5 weeks; 60 prior convictions
R. v. MacKenzie
R. v. Powis
R. v. Leander Seymour
R. v. Doherty
5 counts of residential B&E. stole electronics and furniture; high value of property; was serving CSO at time
R. v. Downey
Joint Sub. 10 months after 2 months remand
37 year old; plead guilty to B&E into dwelling; record of 37 prior convictions; 14 for Break & Enter; on probation 5 times in past
R. v. Gale
R. v. McKay
Joint Sub. 2 years
Guilty plea to B&E into dwelling; stolen jewellery and electronics; lengthy record with prior federal sentences
R. v. Vincent
R. v. Brideau and St-Onge
R. v. Kennedy
R. v. Lachance
B&E and assault; rejection of CSO
R. v. Lynch
R. v. Micallef
R. v. Arsenault
R. v. Lawson
R. v. Mallory
R. v. Bomba
R. v. Harvey
21 year old accused; 4 prior B&E; planned with friend to break into houses of friends who were away.
R. v. Renouf
R. v. Wakeham
R. v. Bush
R. v. Sayer
R. v. Adams
R. v. Jackson
R. v. Byers
R. v. Arsenault
R. v. Kelly
(1994), 117 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 256
R. v. Moyles
2 breaks into businesses--offender was 20 years old and had a prior record for break and enter
R. v. Powers
2 offenders did 3 breaks (a club, business and church) --offenders had prior records--low value of property stolen--"higher end" sentences
R. v. Keans
R. v. Hillier
R. v. Weaver
R. v. Burry
R. v. Tubrett
R. v. Piercey
R. v. Zong
R. v. Butler
R. v. White
2 breaks into residences, also convicted of escape and possession--offender was 18 years old with prior record--
R. v. Smith
R. v. Palmer
R. v. Goodwin
Offender had 16 prior break convictions, last being 3 years. Described as "career criminal". He had 13 months remand time, it was not credited to 3 year sentence.
R. v. Fraser
R. v. Walbourne
[2012] N.J. No. 171, 2012 CanLII 26671 (NL PC)
R. v. Rao and MacFadden
Qaqasiq v. R.
R. v. Gladue
R. v. L.L.G.
R. v. Omilgoituk
R. v. Shirley
R. v. Serre
R. v. Goundar
R. v. T.J.F.
R. v. Cain
R. v. Hunda
R. v. P. (O.A.)
R. v. Doyle
R. v. Lombardo
R. v. Levandoski
R. v. Dhaliwal
R. v. Snow
45 years old, 29 prior B&E; broke into house with screwdriver ran upstairs and stole jewellery
R. v. Martinez
R. v. Wright
R. v. Turtle
R. v. Vincent
R. v. Carvalho
R. v. Best
R. v. Desrochers
2 residential break-ins; ran away; record was lengthy with property offences; breaches
R. v. Pinch
R. v. Pakoo
R. v. Sharphead
R. v. MacKenzie
R. v. Johnson
R. v. Parlee
R. v. Howard
R. v. Lundrigan
Break into store stealing 3 bags of chips and break into law office for cash box--no record
B&E into pharmacy, used violence against occupants
R. v. O’Neil
R. v. Saunders
R. v. Fitzpatrick
B&E into convenience store; was youthful, no adult record, was drunk at time.
R. v. Adams
R. v. Jeffrey
R. v. Richards
B&E into commercial establishments all on same day; long record
R. v. McAllister
R. v. Korte
R. v. Matychuk
R. v. Bruce
R. v. Cousins
R. v. Hogg
R. v. Desjardins
R. v. Durham
R. v. Lywood
R. v. Knife
R. v. Dieter
R. v. Prasad
R. v. Allison
R. v. Penney
R. v. Ladouceur
R. v. Musqua
R. v. Mitzel
T.V. and video store; long prior record
R. v. Buggins
R. v. Parlee
R. v. Sayer
R. v. G.E.R.
R. v. Zahorejko
R. v. Beney
R. v. Antoine
R. v. Beney
R. v. Jackson
R. v. Badger
R. v. McKay
R. v. Schrader
Offender was 20 years old with  a long youth and adult record, including break and enter.  Good potential for rehabilitation.
R. v. Bursey
Offender was 20 years old with prior convictions, including theft, breach of probation and break and enter.  Impressive rehabilitation efforts
R. v. Weaver
R. v. Armbruster
v • d • e Property and Financial OffencesOffences
Theft  (334), Breach of Trust (336), Unauthorized Use of Computer (342.1), Robbery (343, 344), Break and Enter (348), Possession of Break-in Instruments (351), Possession of Stolen Property  (355), Forgery (366, 367, 368), Fraud  (380), Mischief (430), Arson (433, 434), Counterfeiting (449, 450, 452)Sentencing
Theft  (334), Breach of Trust (336), Unauthorized Use of Computer (342.1), Robbery (343, 344), Break and Enter (348), Possession of Break-in Instruments (351), Possession of Stolen Property  (355), Forgery (366, 367, 368), Fraud  (380), Mischief (430), Arson (433, 434), Counterfeiting (449, 450, 452)
Wikipedia has related information at Levenshtein distance
The implementations of the Levenshtein algorithm on this page are illustrative only. Applications will, in most cases, use implementations which use heap allocations sparingly, in particular when large lists of words are compared to each other. The following remarks indicate some of the variations on this and related topics:
Most implementations use one- or two-dimensional arrays to store the distances of prefixes of the words compared. In most applications the size of these structures is previously known. This is the case, when, for instance the distance is relevant only if it is below a certain maximally allowed distance (this happens when words are selected from a dictionary to approximately match a given word). In this case the arrays can be preallocated and reused over the various runs of the algorithm over successive words.
Using a maximum allowed distance puts an upper bound on the search time. The search can be stopped as soon as the minimum Levenshtein distance between prefixes of the strings exceeds the maximum allowed distance.
Deletion, insertion, and replacement of characters can be assigned different weights. The usual choice is to set all three weights to 1. Different values for these weights allows for more flexible search strategies in lists of words.
D : array(0 .. Left'Last, 0 .. Right'Last) of Natural;
x = matrix[i - 1, j] + cost_del
y = matrix[i, j - 1] + cost_ins
d[i+0*str1len]=$i
d[i+str1len*j]=$( echo -e "$del\n$ins\n$alt" | sort -n | head -1 )
"Calculates the Levenshtein distance between str1 and str2, returns an editing distance (int)."
;; We need to store only two columns---the current one that
;; is being built and the previous one
;; Loop across all chars of each string
The above can be optimized to use O(min(m,n)) space instead of O(mn).  The key observation is that we only need to access the contents of the previous column when filling the matrix column-by-column.  Hence, we can re-use a single column over and over, overwriting its contents as we proceed.
Here's another implementation with usage of only
, so it is not needed to take minimum out of 3 possibilities):
TSizeType previous_diagonal = lev_dist[0], previous_diagonal_save;
Here is implementation of generalized Levenshtein distance with different costs of insertion, deletion and replacement:
TSizeType previous_diagonal = lev_dist[0], previous_diagonal_save;
"Given two characters, the previous row, and a row we are
[char1 char2 prevrow thisrow position]
"Based on the next character from string1 and the whole of string2
[char1 str2 prevrow thisrow]
"Calculate the Levenshtein distance between two strings."
([row-nr prevrow str1 str2]
Another implementation using transient data structure, inspired by Common Lisp version:
(defn levenshtein [str1 str2]
"a Clojure levenshtein implementation using transient data structure"
A simple implementation that can certainly be improved upon.
-- Compute Levenshtein distance between strings `a' and `b'.
Example: Calculate distance between "sitting" and "kitten":
k	i	t	t	e	n
0	1	2	3	4	5	6 <-- set top row to [0 .. m]
Compute top row and left-most columns first. Then go cell-by-cell
(e.g. 1 .. n over 1 .. m), row-by-row, column-by-column, computing:
d[i-1, j] + 1		-- a deletion
d[i, j-1] + 1		-- an insertion
d[i-1, j-1] + 1		-- a substitution
Taking the minimum of each and putting it in its proper place in
Eiffel is a 1-based array system and not 0-based, so do not
i, j, m, n: INTEGER
d[i, j] := d[i-1, j-1]
"Return the edit distance between strings STR1 and STR2."
(error "Argument was not a string: %s" str1))
(error "Argument was not a string: %s" str2))
(funcall tset d i 0 i)
(funcall tset d 0 j j)
The inlined min function gives a big speed boost.
d.[i, j] <- d.[i-1, j-1]
d.[i, j] <-
(d.[i-1, j  ] + 1) // a deletion
(d.[i  , j-1] + 1) // an insertion
(d.[i-1, j-1] + 1) // a substitution
d.[m,n]
| i, j when d.[i,j] <> -1 -> d.[i,j]
d.[i, j] <- dval; dval
This version uses dynamic programming with time complexity of
This version is based on the Java version below
Tested with GHCi.
For large strings, using arrays is much faster
Math.min(matrix[i][j-1] + 1, // insertion
Straightforward recursive implementation. Do not use for large strings!
This implementation seems to be broken; but I am not entirely sure how to fix it.
-- max strlen=255 for this function
-- if any param is NULL return NULL
-- distance is the length of the other one
-- What for syntax of WHILE is that?? MYSQL do not now. Please help.
The implementation below, thanks to Jason Rust at Code Janitor, seems to be more complete.
NSInteger costReplace = [cost[i - 1] integerValue] + match;
NSInteger costInsert = [cost[i] integerValue] + 1;
NSInteger costDelete = [newCost[i - 1] integerValue] + 1;
Or with extensions "and C flavor"
NSUInteger matrix[queryLength + 1][selfLength + 1];
(* Minimum of three integers. This function is deliberately
m' (m' x y) z
Array.init n (function
(* Computes the Levenshtein distance between two unistring.
If you want to run it faster, add the -unsafe option when
(* This function takes two strings, convert them to unistring (int array)
%I think this function generates errors:
%correct answer here is 2, I believe: 1 deletion, 1 replacement?
Copied the PHP version using a single dimensional array
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION levenshtein(s text, t text)
$$ LANGUAGE plpgsql IMMUTABLE
The first version is a Dynamic Programming algorithm, with the added optimization that only the last two rows of the dynamic programming matrix are needed for the computation:
(Note that while very compact, the runtime of this implementation is really poor, making it unusable in practical usage.)
d[i, j] = d[i-1, j-1]
d[i, j] = min(d[i-1, j], d[i, j-1], d[i-1, j-1]) + 1
(Note that while compact, the runtime of this implementation is relatively poor.)
(Note this implementation is O(N*M) time and O(M) space, for N and M the lengths of the two sequences.)
5th, a vectorized version of the 1st, using NumPy.  About 40% faster, on my test case.
However, this numpy vectorized Python version incorrectly returns 5 for levenshtein('aabcc', 'bccdd') (which should be 4 for two 'a' insertions + 2 'd' deletions).  The reason is that the deletion step np.minimum(current_row[1:], current_row[0:-1] + 1) does not handle the case that the minimum for current_row[j] could be current_row[j-2] + 2 due to two consecutive deletions as it is in this example. See Discussion.
(Note this implementation only works if the weight does not depend on the character edited.)
6th version, from Wikipedia article on Levenshtein Distance; Iterative with two matrix rows.
''' From Wikipedia article; Iterative with two matrix rows. '''
v1[j + 1] = min(v1[j] + 1, v0[j + 1] + 1, v0[j] + cost)
"(Note) this is just one of many implementations of the Levenshtein Distance, but I've not been able to get the others to work
i: column 1..n of s, 1st index
j: row    1..m of t, 2nd index
Parse Arg s,t                -- gets 2 strings as parameter
If n = 0 Then
If m = 0 Then
Do i = 0 To n                -- initializes the 1st row
r.i = i
Do j = 1 To m                -- for each row
Do i = 1 To n              -- for each column
r.[i-1] = lc             -- sets previous left column
r.n = lc                   -- sets last current value
This Ruby version is simple, but extremely slow, though it works with any Array with elements that implement '=='.
1 + levenshtein(first: first[1..-1], second: second),
1 + levenshtein(first: first, second: second[1..-1])].min
(1..second.length).each do |j|
(1..second.length).each do |i|
(1..first.length).each do |j|
m, n = first.length, second.length
d[i][j] = first[i-1] == second[j-1] ? d[i-1][j-1] : [d[i-1][j]+1,d[i][j-1]+1,d[i-1][j-1]+1,].min
A faster implementation for the Levenshtein distance of strings (using C bindings) is available here
A simple implementation in Rust (beta2), transposed from the C version. It is a little more general than the bare minimum, in fact it accepts any type that can be converted to a string.
You can test it live on Rust Playpen.
A functional version would likely be far more concise.
;; using the `match' macro as defined in http://synthcode.com/scheme/match.scm
;; where the `define/memoized' special form can be defined in the following way:
(hash-set! cache args result)
"Iterative calculation of the Levenshtein distance between two strings."
"create two work vectors of integer distances"
"initialize v0 (the previous row of distances)
(1 to: (arrayOne size)) do:[ :i | arrayOne at: i put: i-1 ].
" calculate v1 (current row distances) from the previous row v0
" use formula to fill in the rest of the row"
].
Inspired by https://gist.github.com/bgreenlee/52d93a1d8fa1b8c1f38b
Improved with http://stackoverflow.com/questions/26990394/slow-swift-arrays-and-strings-performance
%find the levenshtein distance
% make an array with both words
% initialize array to the length of each word
% calculate total changes
This version is identical to JavaScript and PHP implementations in this article.
Dim i,j,cost,d,min1,min2,min3
' Avoid calculations where there there are empty words
' Since min() function is not a part of VBScript, we'll "emulate" it below
Visual Basic for Applications (no Damerau extension)
This version is identical to JavaScript and PHP implementations in this article. I had problems when I tried to use the other VBA implementation in this article, so I had to adopt the version below.
Application.WorksheetFunction.Min() method is Excel-specific. If you implement it with other VBA-enabled applications, uncomment the conditional block and comment out the Application.WorksheetFunction.Min() line.
Function levenshtein(a As String, b As String) As Integer
' Since Min() function is not a part of VBA, we'll "emulate" it below
' as a method of WorksheetFunction object
Function calculateLevenshteinDistance(byval firstString As String, byval secondString As String) As Integer
'If one of the parameter is null, then the result will be the length of the other parameter...
'Initializing array...
'Deletion...
'Insertion ...
'Actual calculation...
'Calculating Return Value...
.declare singlecall virtual LevenshteinDistance[args(2) string s1, string s2]: out unsigned int
Please note that there is a standard ABAP function distance which calculates the Levenshtein distance without need for the below coding.
RETURNING value(r) TYPE i.
l_m_i     TYPE i,
l_m_j     TYPE i,
l_m_index TYPE i,
l_l_s     TYPE i,
l_l_t     TYPE i.
l_m_i = sy-index - 1.
l_m_j = sy-index - 1.
r = l_cost.
m_get: -1  0 1, 0 -1 1, -1 -1 l_cost.
↑ http://www.php.net/levenshtein
A Wikibookian has nominated this page for cleanup.You can help make it better. Please review any relevant discussion.
Web 2.0 by Darby Christian
This article intends to address what Web 2.0 Tools are and what "Web 2.0" refers to, specifically in an educational realm.  This article also addresses why educators are talking about the issue of Web 2.0 tools and why there is debate about the usefulness of these tools or lack thereof.  The article will briefly discuss the different viewpoints from both sides of the fence regarding using Web 2.0 in the classroom. As we develop deeper into this idea of Web 2.0 we will learn how we can use Web 2.0 in the classroom.
According to Dan Fost, O'Reilly lists seven key components to web 2.0:
-- Using the Web as a platform, where anyone can write software that anyone else can use, instead of having to use Microsoft's Windows platform;
-- Harnessing collective intelligence, such as the way Google links to the most-popular pages and Amazon offers popular books, and the way Wikipedia and blogs use "the wisdom of crowds" to come up with information;
-- Enriching data for a deeper online experience, as seen in mashups like www.housing maps.com, which combines Craigslist apartment data with Google maps;
-- Software as a service, which gets constantly updated online rather than sold in shrink-wrapped packages;
-- Software such as Apple's iTunes, which works seamlessly online, on PCs and on iPods;
-- Rich user experiences, so that Web sites often feel like the software that runs on a PC.
The term Web 2.0 was coined and popularized by Tim O’Reily (Voithofer, 2007), it refers to an evolution of usability of Internet applications by way of collaboration technologies for social uses in different arenas such as business and education. These technologies include, but are not limited to blogs, podcasts and, wikipages (Alexander 2006), that became extremely easy to produce due to the fact that to use them one no longer needs to understand intense html coding (Geraci 2007). Barsky describes, Web 2.0 is ultimately a social phenomenon of users’ experiences of the Web and is characterized by open communication, decentralization of authority, and freedom to share and re-use Web content (2006). This as changed view so that people and collaboration has became the biggest factor of the Internet (O'Reilly 2005).
The previous version, of the Web, referred to as Web 1.0, was best summed as the software, browsers and other applications, being the most important part of the Internet (O'Reilly 2005). Web 2.0 is collaborative in nature, and is a mindset that we are the integral part of these technologies, not the html, coding, and machines (Geraci, 2007). Its collaborative nature also creates the concept of micro content and the idea that now we can access many different items from one single source due to an open sharing among domains, and servers (Alexander 2006). Web 2.0 is a term that encases an idea of using internet technologies for socioeconomic concerns. I mention Blogs,  Podcasts, and Wikis, however we can become more creative and apply this idea to other technologies.  Some of those could be online chats, a digital television recording device, and even RSS feeds (really simple syndication).
Three structural tools of Web 2.0:  Blogs, Podcasts, & Wikipages
Check out this video to get a visual idea of Web 2.0
Web 2.0 according to Michael Wesch
Why Web 2.0?
Why is there a push towards Web 2.0 in the classroom?  Remember that web 2.0 is an idea, not just one thing (Alexander 2006).  Web 2.0 refers to all of us and how we access our internet, our world.  The idea now is to use Web 2.0 to our advantage, specifically in school systems.  The school of thought that is for the usage of Web 2.0 in the classroom believes that it is an asset to education.  Web 2.0 is how “millennials [1]” are accessing the majority of their social world already (Voithofer, 2007). Another idea behind the push for usage in the classroom, is the fact that Web 2.0 tools are what we use everyday to access our world (Voithofer 2007).  The thought is that students need to be aware of these tools, and knowledgeable of how to use them correctly and responsibly. We use Web 2.0 tools everyday, and we probably don’t even notice.  When we express ourselves on our blog pages, when listening to RSS feeds, when we upload photos to a Flickr account we are accessing Web 2.0 .  Our world is changing. We are becoming more collaborative and more creative due to the enlarging capabilities of the technology around us.
According to the Digital Media and Learning Fact Sheet published by the MacArthur Foundation, which sponsors a $50 million program study focused on the successful integration of digital technologies into the nation’s education system, 87% of America’s teens have home access to the Internet, and most spend up to 8.5 hours daily involved with some form of digital technology.  The sheet also sites information gathered from  2005 Kaisor Family Foundation survey that states “the typical 8-18 year-old lives in a home with 3.6 CD or tape players, 3.5 TVs, 3.3 radios, 2.9 VCRs/DVD players, 2.1 video game consoles, and 1.5 computers”
Giving further proof to the inundation of digital media in the lives of U.S. youngsters, MacArthur cites that suggests that  64% of  8-18 year-olds are download music online, 32% have their own Webpage,  66%  instant message; 39% own cell phones; 18% MP3 players; and 13% possess handheld technology with Internet connectivity, and 80% of youth participate in online gaming.
There has been some debate about employing Web 2.0 tools in the classroom. Some feel that Web 2.0 is merely a scheme to market “hot web-start ups” (Geraci, 2007). Corporate businesses use the term "Web 2.0" to target millennials to help publicize new web domains.  Alexander notes,(web 2.0 tools) They are the creations of enthusiasts or business enterprises and do not necessarily embrace the culture of higher education (2006). Another problem presented by Web 2.0 is maintaining intellectual integrity as information is more easily shifted and moved from domain to domain (Alexander 2006).
We need to embrace these technologies in our classroom, so that we can enhance our students’ access of knowledge, and teach them evaluation skills that will be crucial when using these new applications. Dodge defines, A WebQuest is an inquiry-oriented activity in which some or all of the information that learners interact with comes from resources on the internet, optionally supplemented with videoconferencing (1997). Webquests [2] are a great way to involve Web 2.0 in the classroom and keep students on task with the content. Webquests can use several different web 2.0 tools to demonstrate knowledge of content.  For example, the unit being studied could be the lifespan of a butterfly for third-grade science.   The Webquest assigns specific tasks to the students using applications found on the internet.  One task may be to observe a video of the life-span of a monarch butterfly on that was downloaded from unitedstreaming [3].   Another quest after the video could be posting a blog about one’s interests in the life-span of the monarch butterfly.
Finding Web 2.0 Tools You Can Use in the Classroom
Dr. Bernie Dodge who works for the San Diego State University, Department of Educational Technology  has created a Webquest.Org site that teaches how to create Webquests.  In addition, the site provides a search engine to find pre-designed Webquests you can use in your classroom that are grade level and subject specific (Dodge, 2007).  Click on http://webquest.org/index.php  to view the site.
In addition to Webquests, another cooperative Web 2.0 tool that you can use in your classroom is a blog.  The classroom blog is a service created by David Warlick and the Landmark Project.  It is free to all teachers working in an Educational Institution.  It designed to let a teacher create a classroom blog that is completely secluded from the outside world.  You will be able to enter your students’ names, and have the students write articles and reports that are posted for you and their peers to review and comment on (21st, 2008).  To access the Landmark site, click on http://classblogmeister.com/index.php.
Another fun idea for using Web 2.0 is video sharing.  You and your students can download and uploading educational video from Google video (21st, 2008).  Your class could create a video science project on the Monarch butterfly that could be uploaded to Google video.  Producing something that a world-wide audience could view could be a huge motivator for your students.
To access the Google video site, click on http://video.google.com/videosearch?q=Monarch+Butterfly&sitesearch=.
<left>PROS:Easier to access more information.
Web 2.0 is best described as a new version of the internet that focuses on the web as a platform of usability; it also refers to viewing people and the partnership between them as the important part of the web, not machines and codes (O'Reilly 2005).  The world is evolving and we are entering a new frontier where Web 2.0 tools allow us to become more collaborative, communicative and creative. We are embarking on a new era in which many social formalities are completed online. Education of responsible and appropriate use of these tools is a needed area in the classroom.  The children of today and tomorrow will and are becoming more technology saturated.  As educators it is our duty to teach our students integrity and make them accountable for themselves.  We need to adapt to students learning capabilities, and using web 2.0 tools in our classrooms as teaching strategies is the best way to do this.
Links to Web 2.0 Tools
Top 1,000 Web 2.0 Tools
Alexander, Bryan. (2006).  Web 2.0 A new wave of Innovation for teaching and learning?
Retrieved February 2, 2008 from
Barsky, Eugene. (2006).  Introducing Web 2.0: weblogs and podcasting for health librarians. Retrieved February 12, 2008 from
Dodge, Bernie. (1997). Some Thoughts About WebQuests. Retrieved February 19, 2008 from http://webquest.sdsu.edu/about_webquests.html
Dodge, Bernie. (2007). Webquest.Org. Retrieved April 19, 2008 from Webquest.org site: http://webquest.org/index.php.
Geraci, Michael. (2007). Now Playing: Web 2.0. Retrieved February 2, 2008 from
Fost, Dan. (2006). What exactly does Web 2.0 mean? Well... Retrieved February 12, 2008 from
O'Reilly, T. (2005). What Is Web 2.0: Design Patterns and Business Models for the Next
Generation of Software. Retrieved February 2, 2008, from
Wesch, Michael. (2007). Web 2.0 ... The Machine is Us/ing Us. Retrieved February 2, 2008 from
Safer, Morley. (2007). The "Millennials" Are Coming. Retrieved February 13, 2008 from
Voithofer, Rick.(2007). Web 2.0: What is it and how can it apply to teaching and teacher preparation?
Retrieved February 2, 2008 from
Digital Media and Learning Fact Sheet. Retrieved April 24, 2008 from the John T. and Catherine MacArthur Foundation site.  http://digitallearning.macfound.org/atf/cf/{7E45C7E0-A3E0-4B89-AC9C-E807E1B0AE4E}/DL%20FACT%20SHEET.PDF
21st Century Information Fluency Project. (2008, April). Retrieved April 19, 2008 from IMSA (Illinois Mathematics and Science Academy)  site: http://21cif.imsa.edu/resources/links/v1n5_Web2.0_links.html.
The previous version, Web 1.0, is best summed as the browsers, software
Description: Candidates should be able to implement client e-mail management software to filter, sort and monitor incoming user e-mail.
Understanding of Sieve functionality, syntax and operators
Use Sieve to filter and sort mail with respect to sender, recipient(s), headers and size
Organization is key when it comes to putting a group together. Without great organization skills, the club can only go so far until it falls apart. Organization leads to great advertisement and promotion, which is key when trying to attract new members to the club or people to an event. For example, CCF has over 300 members because they have a hired staff to organize all of the events and CCF on Friday nights. Even though Swing Kids does not have a hired staff to organize their events, they have specified leaders who give up  their time to plan Swing Kids and without those leaders there wouldn't be Swing Kids. Organization is key to a vision, goal and purpose within a club.
An effective organizational strategy for any club has a few major components. The first component should be that a club must come to an agreement on the mission or purpose for the group. For example, on the Campus Christian Fellowship (CCF) website, it states "We strive to assist students in their desire to know Jesus Christ and apply his teachings to their lives." CCF does this by reaching out and spreading the news of God and faith to the rest of the student body. The second effective organizational strategy that a club needs is to plan out events or meeting in advance. This strategy is shown through Swing Kids. They plan all of their big events at the beginning of the year in order to be organized and make sure a space or an area is available. Although both of these clubs are vastly different with their intentions and goal they must plan in advance in order to achieve their mission or purpose. A third effective organizational strategy is recruitment. Once a club has been founded, how do you get the word out. Most clubs use the events fair, which is an opportunity at the beginning of the school year to have a booth about a club. This is the way most students learn about different clubs on campus. However, fliers and word of mouth are very prominent recruitment techniques as well. Finally, funding. Although clubs at Western get $50 to start with, many clubs need more than that. So, the organization has to decide whether it will charge its members, focus on donations, or host events.
This page lists some resources to further the knowledge you gained from this introductory book, or clarify something you may not understand.
Don't be afraid to post any resources that helped you, or you think may help others!
Phases of Matter ·
Introduction: A powerful law.
The second law of thermodynamics is based on our common human experience. It didn't begin with complicated apparatus or complex theories, but rather with thinking about how old-fashioned steam engines worked and the first important equation appeared to be very simple: just q/T.
Yet the second law is probably our most powerful aid in helping us understand why the world works as it does both in simple and in complex ways: why hot pans cool down, why ping pong balls don't bounce forever when they are dropped, why gasoline (plus the oxygen in air) makes engines run, why our "engines"—our bodies—run and we continue to live and our bodies stay warm even when it's cold, but also why we die when some chemical reactions within us fail. In fact, the second law helps to explain everything that happens in our physical world. In chemistry, it's especially important because it can tell us whether any chemical reaction that we write on paper will probably be spontaneous and go as we have written it.
Unfortunately, for almost a century and a half, the second law has been expressed by experts in ways that a beginner in chemistry could not possibly understand without a great deal of additional explanation. Here are just three of some 25 explanations that have been most prominent:
"The entropy of the universe increases toward a maximum" (Clausius)
"It is impossible in any way to diminish the entropy of a system of bodies without thereby leaving behind changes in other bodies" (Planck)
"In any irreversible process the total entropy of all bodies concerned is increased." (Lewis)
Entropy, entropy, entropy! But what is entropy? Even some textbooks still say something like "Don't ask about understanding it. Just work the problems that have entropy in them and you'll gradually understand it because you will be able to work with it"!  That's the old way which fortunately has been discarded by most US general chemistry texts. (See list at http://www.entropysite.com/#whatsnew.) The good news of the twenty-first century is that now entropy can be described as a simple idea (no matter how complex to calculate and deal with in advanced courses and research.)  Because of our new conceptual approach, a basic version of the second law can be understood easily.
"Energy of all types changes from being localized to becoming dispersed or spread out, if it is not hindered from doing so. Entropy change is the quantitative measure of that kind of a spontaneous process: how much energy has flowed or how widely it has become spread out at a specific temperature." (http://www.entropysite.com/entropy_isnot_disorder.html)
What does that "energy of all types" and "becoming dispersed" mean? Let's first think about light (which technically is electromagnetic radiation). Does the radiation from a light bulb stay inside that glass of the bulb? Of course not. It spreads out just as far as it can, hindered from dispersing to miles and even farther only by dust or air density differences. What about the sound from a stereo speaker—does it stay inside a dorm room or a car? It disperses farther than other people want to hear it, usually! And what happens to the kinetic energy of a fast moving car if the car should hit a brick wall? It spreads out in a crashing sound, in twisting metal and heating it and tearing apart the bricks of the wall so that they fly around, slightly warmer than they were. Those are just a few examples of different types of energy and some ways in which they become dispersed or spread out.
Energy of all types disperses...if it is not hindered from doing so.
In chemistry, the type of energy in which we are most often interested is the kinetic energy of molecules, molecular motion energy. We know from Kinetic Molecular Theory that molecules are in constant motion if their temperatures are above 0 K. In gases like nitrogen and oxygen, they are moving at an average speed of a thousand miles (1600 km) an hour at 298 K and go about 200 times their diameter before bumping into another molecule[citation needed]. The molecules in liquids may be moving approximately as fast even though they are constantly hitting one another as they move a little here and there. In solids the particles, molecules or atoms or ions, can only "dance in one place" (vibrating in coordination with the other particles in the solid). This is a kinetic energy of vibration that is equivalent to the motion energy of gases or liquids at the same temperature.
The motion energy of molecules consists of their translation, rotation, and vibration (Figure 1 of http://www.2ndlaw.com/entropy.html.) Note that this vibration is vibration inside a molecule and by itself, as though the chemical bonds between atoms were like springs. The vibration in a crystal that we were just talking about is a vibration of a whole molecule or other particle in one place and coordinated with the other molecules in the crystal.
Let's see how the second law helps us to understand our common experience better, to see how so many totally different events really are just examples of energy dispersing or spreading out, i.e., of the second law. A rock will fall if you lift it up and then let go. Hot frying pans cool down when taken off the stove. Iron rusts (oxidizes) in the air. Air in a tire is at a high pressure and shoots out even from a small puncture to the lower pressure atmosphere. Ice cubes melt in a warm room.
A rock has potential energy (PE) localized in it when you lift it up above the ground. The rock is the system; everything else it encounters is the surroundings. Drop the rock and its PE changes to kinetic energy (energy of movement, KE), pushing air aside as it falls (therefore spreading out the rock’s KE a bit) before it hits the ground, dispersing a tiny bit of sound energy (compressed air) and causing a little heating (molecular motion energy) of the ground it hits and in the rock itself. The rock is unchanged (after a minute when it disperses to the air the small amount of heat it got from hitting the ground). But the potential energy that your muscles localized in by lifting it up is now totally spread out and dispersed all over in a little air movement and a little heating of the air and ground.
A hot frying pan? The iron atoms in a hot frying pan (system) in a room (surroundings) are vibrating very rapidly, like fast "dancing in place". Therefore, considering both the pan and the room, the motion energy in the hot pan is localized. That motion energy will disperse—if it is not hindered, according to the second law. Whenever the less rapidly moving molecules in the cooler air of the room hit the hot pan, the fast-vibrating iron atoms transfer some of their energy to the air molecules. The pan’s localized energy thus becomes dispersed, spread out more widely to molecules in the room air.
In a chemical reaction such as iron rusting, i.e., iron plus oxygen to form iron oxide (rust), the reactants of iron and oxygen don't have to be at a high temperature to have energy localized within them. Iron atoms (as -Fe-Fe-Fe-) plus oxygen molecules of the air (O-O) have more energy localized within their bonds than does the product of their reaction, iron rust (iron oxide).
That’s why iron reacts with oxygen—to release energy from their combined total of higher energy bonds and form the lower energy bonds in iron oxide. Then, all that difference in energy becomes dispersed to the surroundings as heat i.e., the reaction is exothermic and makes molecules in the surroundings move faster. But remember how chemical reactions occur! Remember that it requires energy to break bonds and therefore to start any reaction there must be some extra energy, an activation energy supplied somehow to break a bond or many bonds in the reacting substances.  (For information about activation energies, see http://www.2ndlaw.com/obstructions.html) Then, if the bonds that are being formed in the product are much stronger than those being broken in the reactants, that difference in energy (which usually causes greater motion energy of all the molecules) can feed back to break more bonds in the reactants.
However, in the case of iron reacting with oxygen at normal room temperature around 298 K, the process is very slow because only a few oxygen atoms are moving exceptionally fast and hit the iron just right so an Fe-Fe bond and an O-O bond are broken and an Fe-O bond can form. There isn't enough heat (motion energy) localized in nearby iron atoms, and there are no other unusually fast-moving oxygen molecules. It's a slow process depending on collision of the small amount of fast moving oxygen atoms in the surroundings to make it happen.
Therefore, even in moist air (that speeds up another process yielding iron oxide), iron doesn't react very rapidly with oxygen but it steadily does so and in time, both the iron atoms and the oxygen molecule spread out to the surroundings the portion of their bond energy that iron oxide doesn't need for its existence at that temperature.
Air in a tire is at a higher pressure than the atmosphere around it, so it shoots out even from a small hole. What could that have to do with a big deal like the Second Law of Thermodynamics? (Every spontaneous physical or chemical process involves the second law!) Those nitrogen and oxygen molecules in the tire each have motion energy but it is far more localized, compressed in the small volume of the tire, than it would be in the huge volume of the atmosphere. Thus, the second law explains why punctures or blowouts occur: the motion energy of those localized molecules will become dispersed and spread out to the lower-pressure, larger-volume atmosphere if it is no longer hindered by the tire walls from becoming so.
An ice cube melts in a big warm room. How can the melting of a little ice cube in a warm room maybe 200,000 times bigger than it is be an example of the second law? How could that possibly be a spreading out of energy? But the second law has to do with energy dispersal and there's a little spreading out in that 200,001st part of that total of system plus surroundings!
Hotter goes to cooler spontaneously. Always.
Lots of things are happening when molecules of the warm air disperse some of their energy to the molecules that are vibrating (like dancing rapidly in one place) in the ice cube. Right at the surface many hydrogen bonds between the water molecules of the ice are broken by the motion energy of the air molecules being transferred to the those surface molecules. (This doesn't change the amount of motion energy of those molecules and therefore their temperature doesn't change. They increase in potential energy due to the hydrogen-bond breaking.) Now, because the water molecules whose hydrogen bonds to other molecules in the rigid ice structure are broken, they are free to form hydrogen bonds to other water molecules that are liquid—they can exchange partners and move from one to another. The vibrational energy that allowed them to dance in place in the crystal is changed to translational energy in the liquid and the molecules can move just a bit.
Thus, although the true picture is just a bit more complex (i.e., it is the closer energy levels in translation than in solid vibration that make the energy far more dispersed in liquid than solid), we can sense that the movement of molecules in liquid water allows the energy to be more spread out than in crystalline ice, even at melting temperature. It is not a matter of order and "disorder"! (That's as misleading as magic and as obsolete as 1898 fashions. http://www.entropysite.com/order_to_disorder.pdf)
The second law tells us about energy dispersal, and entropy is the word for how that energy dispersal is measured—how spread out the energy becomes in a system, how much more dispersed it has become compared to how localized it was.  Such energy changes and consequent entropy changes are the focus for understanding how and why spontaneous events occur in nature. Only sometimes do the structures or arrangements of molecules in an object help us to see greater or lesser localization of energy (that used to be called "order to disorder").
Now we can understand what scientists have been talking about the last century and a half when they spoke in apparently mysterious sentences like "The entropy of the universe increases toward a maximum."  All they meant was simply that energy, everywhere, spreads out as much as it can (and that spreading out of energy is measured by entropy).
Rocks falling down mountains, hot pans cooling in cool rooms, anything made of iron rusting, anything burning or reacting with oxygen, all these types of spontaneous events and chemical reactions that occur by themselves are due to energy dispersing or spreading out. Entropy is the quantitative measure of how much energy and how much dispersal occurs in a process or a reaction. Therefore, entropy is constantly increasing because spontaneous events continue to occur in our energy-rich universe. Thus, we can decipher the following statement of the second law:
"In any irreversible process the total entropy of all bodies concerned is increased."
That just means: "In any process in which energy becomes spread out, the measure of that spreading out or dispersing (i.e., the total entropy) increases when you include both what happens in the system AND its surroundings.”
Now we can translate "second law language"! It seems very confusing if you read it rapidly, but taking it a few words at a time and knowing what we have just reviewed, the ideas are not complicated.
C# ProgrammingCover | Introduction | Basics | Classes | Advanced Topics | The .NET Framework | Index
The else keyword identifies a else clause of an if statement with the following syntax:
An else clause immediately follows an if-body. It provides code to execute when the condition is false. Making the else-body another if statement creates the common cascade of if, else if, else if, else if, else statements:
Console.WriteLine("This will not be shown because myNumber is not 4.");
Console.WriteLine("This will not be shown because myNumber is not negative.");
Console.WriteLine("This will not be shown because myNumber is not even.");
Console.WriteLine("myNumber does not match the coded conditions, so this sentence will be shown!");
The above example only checks whether myNumber is less than 0, if myNumber is not 4. It in turn only checks whether myNumber%2 is 0, if myNumber is not less than 0. Since none of the conditions are true, it executes the body of the final else clause.
Special C# Identifiers (Contextual Keywords)
A cat picture.
Color histogram of the cat picture above with the horizontal axis representing RGB values and the vertical axis representing the frequency of these values.
This tutorial shows how to compute a color histogram of an image with the help of compute shaders in Unity. In particular, it shows how to use an atomic function such that multiple threads (i.e., multiple calls to a compute shader function) can access the same memory location. It also shows how to use compute buffers. If you are not familiar with compute shaders in Unity, you should read Section “Computing Image Effects” first. Note that compute shaders are not supported on macOS.
An RGB color histogram of an image is a bar chart that shows for each value of the red, green, and blue channel, how many pixels of the image feature that value. For example, how many pixels have a red value of 0, how many pixels have a green value of 0, etc. For a color resolution of 8 bits, there are 256 possible values (0 to 255) of the red, green, and blue channels; thus, a RGB color histogram specifies 3 × 256 = 768 numbers. If an alpha channel is also included, the RGBA color histogram consists of 4 × 256 = 1024 numbers.
To compute such an RGBA color histogram, a program would first initialize the 1024 numbers of the histogram to 0. Then it looks at each pixel of the image and increment (by 1) the four numbers in the histogram for the specific red, green, blue, and alpha values of the pixel. Since the same operations are performed for each pixel, this problem is easy to parallelize, except that two different threads for two different pixels might try to increment the same number of the histogram at the same time, which can lead to problems that are called race conditions. These problems can be avoided if the operation to increment one of the numbers of the histogram is an atomic operation, i.e., if it cannot be interrupted by other threads. This is what we use in the compute shader of this tutorial.
The Big Picture: Calling the Compute Shader
In this tutorial, we start with the C# script that calls the compute shader because it provides the bigger picture. Note that we compute color histograms for any texture image; not only for camera views as in Section “Computing Image Effects”. Thus, you can attach this script to any GameObject.
Debug.Log("Shader or input texture missing.");
The script defines three public variables: public ComputeShader shader which has to be set to the compute shader that is shown below; public Texture2D inputTexture which has to be set to the texture for which the histogram should be computed; and public uint[] histogramData which the script sets to an array of 1024 unsigned ints of the compute histogram.
The three private variables are: ComputeBuffer histogramBuffer which contains the same data as histogramData but can be accessed by the compute shader; int handleMain and int handleInitialize are the indices of the two compute shader functions for the main processing of all pixels and for the initialization of the 1024 numbers of the histogram.
The Start() function sets the two handles with ComputeShader.FindKernel() and creates the histogramBuffer compute buffer and the histogramData array. While the compute buffer is created as an array of 256 elements that each contain 4 unsigned ints, the histogramData is created as an array of 1024 unsigned ints. This difference does not matter since the memory layout is the same for both. Of course, the histogramData could also be defined as an array of 256 structs that each contain 4 unsigned ints. The rest of the Start() function does error checking and sets the texture and compute buffer to the corresponding uniform variables for each compute shader function such that they have access to them.
The OnDestroy() function simply releases the compute buffer since the hardware resources attached to it are not automatically released by the garbage collector.
At the end of each frame, the computed color histogram is available in the public variable histogramData; thus, you can look it in the Inspector Window while running the program.
The Nitty-Gritty Details of the Compute Shader
In this case, the compute shader contains two compute shader functions, one for the initialization and the other one for the main processing of the texels of the texture. Therefore, it also includes two #pragma kernel instructions and two [numthreads()] instructions:
As always, you create a compute shader by clicking on Create in the Project Window and choosing Shader > Compute Shader. You should then copy&paste the code into the new file.
The first two lines #pragma kernel HistogramInitialize and #pragma kernel HistogramMain specify the two compute shader functions (“kernels”) that can be called from a script with the ComputeShader.Dispatch() function.
Texture2D<float4> InputTexture; specifies a uniform variable for a read-only 2D RGBA texture with name InputTexture.
The structure histStruct is then used in RWStructuredBuffer<histStruct> HistogramBuffer; to define a read/write structured buffer that represents the compute buffer histogramBuffer in the C# script. The memory layout matches because the elements of the RWStructuredBuffer is of type histStruct, which consists of 4 uints.
The function HistogramInitialize() uses thread groups of dimensions 64 × 1 × 1, which means that the argument uint3 id : SV_DispatchThreadID runs from uint3(0, 0, 0) to uint3(255, 0, 0) since we use 4 thread groups. Therefore, the function can use id.x to index the 256 elements of the HistogramBuffer when initializing all elements to 0.
The function HistogramMain() uses thread groups of dimensions 8 × 8 × 1. Since we base the number of thread groups on the texture size, the function can use the argument uint3 id : SV_DispatchThreadID to access the texels of the texture with InputTexture[id.xy]. Since the RGBA values are read as floating-point values between 0.0 and 1.0, they are multiplied with 255.0 and rounded down by converting them to unsigned ints in the uint4 col variable. The RGBA values in col are then used to index the HistogramBuffer to increment the counter variables in the buffer, i.e., HistogramBuffer[col.r].color.r for the red value, HistogramBuffer[col.g].color.g for the green value, etc.
To increment the counter variables, the code uses the function InterlockedAdd() which takes a variable as first argument and an integer as second argument. In our case, the latter is 1 because we increment by 1. InterlockedAdd() is one of the atomic functions of HLSL compute shaders; i.e., the GPU makes sure that any race conditions due to multiple threads trying to increment the same variable at the same time are avoided. There are a couple of atomic functions in HLSL; note that all of them work only with integers or unsigned integers.
If you want to observe the effect of the race conditions, you can replace the calls to the atomic function InterlockedAdd() by code like this:
HistogramBuffer[col.r].color.r += 1;
On most GPUs, this will not be an atomic operation and, therefore, there will usually be race conditions when you run this code, which lead to undefined results. You might be able to observe in the Inspector Window that the values in the histogramData array change somewhat randomly due to these race conditions.
You have reached the end of this tutorial! A few of the things that you have learned are:
What color histograms are and how to compute them.
How to create and use Unity's compute buffers in a C# script and how to define a corresponding read/write structured buffer in a compute shader.
How to define and use multiple compute shader functions in one compute shader.
How to use an atomic function in a compute shader.
If you still want to know more
Unless stated otherwise, all example source code on this page is granted to the public domain.
A channel is a communications medium, through which data can flow through. In a wireless network, the channel is the open space between the sender and the receiver through with the electromagnetic waves travel. In a wired network, the channel is the wire through with the electrical signals flow.
Data flowing through a channel is subjected to outside noise interference. In a wireless system, this interference can be a competing transmittor, or even natural phenomena such as lightning or solar radiation. These same kinds of interference can affect wired transmissions as well.
The ratio, in dB (decibels) of the transmitted information power to the noise power in the received signal is known as the signal to noise ratio. The signal to noise ratio, abbreviated "SNR", is an important metric to learn when studying a transmission network, because it affects how much data can be sent and at what speed. If we have a signal with energy E, and a noise density of N, we calculate the SNR as:
The higher the SNR, the more faithful the received signal will be to the sent signal. The lower the SNR, the more likely the received signal is going to contain errors. We won't cover SNR in too much detail in this book. However, the SNR is a very important quantity in a communications system, and there are classes of codes that are designed to help reduce errors in a channel with a low SNR.
Bandwidth is a measurement of a communication's channel, and determines what frequency ranges are transmitted faithfully through the channel, and which ranges are not. We don't need to discuss bandwidth in any detail in this book, but suffice it to say that it is an important quality of a communications channel.
The Shannon Channel Capacity is a formula that relates the bandwidth of a channel, the channel's SNR, and the bit rate.
[Shannon's Channel Capacity]
The channel capacity is the bit rate at which data can be sent along a channel with a negligible error rate. Attempting to send bits faster than this rate will increase the error rate beyond a negligible value. This will have large negative effects on our communications system. Notice that for a fixed bandwidth, as SNR decreases, the bitrate must also decrease.
Because of Shannon's Channel Capacity, we can see a few important facts. The first of which is, the more noise a channel has, the slower our bitrate needs to be. This means that if we want to send data at or above the channel capacity, we will need to have a robust error checking and correcting mechanism.
What we can also see is that for a fixed SNR, more bandwidth means a faster data rate.
In short, to send more information over a channel more quickly, we need to:
Use better coding and error correcting.
The same thing holds of the importation of foreign commodities. Let us revert to our former hypothesis.
The country manufactures ten millions of hats, of which the
For it must produce to the extent of £5,000,000, to enable
And then there remains to each purchaser five shillings saved
Then the aggregate labour of the country will remain what it
It is of no use to try to frighten us by a picture of the sufferings
For, if the prohibition had never been imposed, the labour
If, on the other hand, prohibition has led to an artificial and
At all events, let no one pretend that because an abuse cannot
As you will see in the opening sequence, the Triforce calls Link to Hyrule Castle and warps him to the land of Holodrum. The game starts out with Link waking up in an open field. He will soon meet a dancer named Din (the oracle of seasons). Suddenly after dancing with Din, General Onox will kidnap Din.
Oracle of Seasons can be subdivided into eight main chapter (plus introduction and final chapter). Each chapter is characterized by a dungeon. Anyway, the name of each dungeon appears only once in the game, after the hero found it. On the other hand, during his quest to find the dungeon entrance, Link will be told many times the name of the corresponding surface area instead.
Therefore, it is much more useful to specify not just the dungeon name, but also the name of the area where it is located.
Temple Remains and Sword & Shield Dungeon
Oracle of Seasons first, Oracle of Ages then: all information specific to this option is written in the page Secrets to and from Labrynna
Oracle of Ages first, Oracle of Seasons then: all information specific to this option is written in sidebars in the main guide.
Committee proudly welcome his response.
However, we must go a little deeper into the matter.
But protection is not an isolated favour; it is a system. If,
etc.,—a scarcity, in short, of everything.
Now, if a scarcity of corn tends to enhance its price through
a diminution of supply, the scarcity of all other commodities
a diminution of demand, so that it is not at all certain that
The agriculturist should ask himself whether it would not be
Meat? The people do not eat it. Milk? They must content
Wool? The use of it is dispensed with as much as possible.
Does any one imagine that all the ordinary objects of consumption
What has been said of the agriculturist holds equally true
Ukrainian dance is believed to have originated out of the religious and cultural beliefs, and social customs, of the early Slavic peoples who lived in what is now Ukraine.  In the Twentieth Century, it evolved from a form of social dance into a staged form.  A more detailed account of the development of Ukrainian dance can be found on Wikipedia, or in the books listed in Other Resources.
This section identifies and defines dance terminology that will be used in describing dance steps.
This section discusses the music used in performing Ukrainian dance.
1.1 90944 Demonstrate understanding of aspects of acids and bases
1.2 90945 Investigate implications of the use of carbon compounds as fuels
1.3 90946 Investigate the implications of the properties of metals for their use in society
1.4 90947 Investigate selected chemical reactions
Demonstrate understanding of aspects of acids and bases.
Demonstrate in-depth understanding of aspects of acids and bases.
Demonstrate comprehensive understanding of aspects of acids and bases.
Investigate implications of the use of carbon compounds as fuels.
Investigate, in -depth, implications of the use of carbon compounds as fuels.
Investigate, comprehensively, the implications of the use of carbon compounds as fuels
Investigate the implications of the properties of metals for their use in society.
Investigate, in-depth, the implications of the properties of metals for their use in society.
Investigate, comprehensively, the implications of the properties of metals for their use in society.
Investigate selected chemical reactions.
Investigate, in-depth, selected chemical reactions
Investigate, comprehensively, selected chemical reactions.
In the previous chapter, we saw that Gettier cases provide motivation for the idea that justified, true belief is an insufficient analysis for knowledge. In this chapter, we will consider the possibility that the tripartite analysis does not provide the sufficient conditions for knowledge because it is missing a necessary condition. In other words, we will consider whether adding an extra condition on top of justification, truth and belief will rule out Gettier cases as knowledge.
A natural first thought for a new condition to add to the tripartite analysis might be to rule out beliefs inferred from false premises. A proponent of this view could then argue that Gettier's examples do not count as knowledge because the justified, true beliefs in these examples were inferred from falsehoods and so were not properly formed to count as knowledge.
Summary of the "no false lemmas" analysis
The "no false lemmas" analysis of knowledge: A subject S knows that p if and only if
S believes that p, and
S’s belief that p is not inferred from any false premises
Smith and Jones apply for a job
Smith hears the interviewer say “I’m going to give Jones the job”
Smith also sees Jones count out 10 coins from his pocket
Smith forms the belief “the person who will get the job will have 10 coins in their pocket”
This is justified: Smith has good reason to think Jones will get the job and that Jones has 10 coins in his pocket
But actually Smith gets the job! Unknown to him, he has 10 coins in his pocket!
Smith infers his justified true belief that "the person who will get the job will have 10 coins in their pocket" from the premise that Jones will get the job. However, this premise was false because Smith got the job.
Smith thinks to himself that not only does he have justification for believing Jones owns a Ford but also the belief “Either Jones owns a Ford or Brown is in Barcelona”
He is justified in believing this is true because only one of the parts has to be true to make the whole thing true (and he thinks the first part is true)
But Jones doesn’t own a Ford, He was driving a friend’s car!
Smith infers his justified true belief that “either Jones owns a Ford or Brown is in Barcelona” from the premise that Jones owns a Ford. However, this is false because the Ford he was driving was a friend's and not his own.
As can be seen from the table above, the "no false lemmas" analysis rules out the original Gettier cases provided in Gettier's famous paper. However, there have been Gettier cases that have been provided for the "no false lemmas" analysis. For example, consider the following "fake barn county" example:
Jones is driving through fake barn county
In fake barn county, it is tradition for the locals set up many cardboard cut-outs of barns
Jones sees a lot of fake barns thinking that they’re real barns
Then, Jones happens to see a real barn!
Jones has justified true belief that there is a barn
In this example, Jones has a justified true belief that there is a barn. But not only does he have a justified true belief that there is a barn, he has a justified true belief that is not inferred from any falsehoods. This is because Jones' belief that there is a barn is inferred directly from his visual perception of a barn and so is not inferred from any premises at all. However, Jones could very easily have been looking at a fake barn with the exact same visual justification and his belief would have been false. Therefore, even with the "no false lemmas" condition, there can still be epistemic luck.
Another way we could rule out the Gettier cases as counting as knowledge is by considering their relationship to the truth. The key insight behind adding a sensitivity condition is that knowledge should not only be true, but it should also track the truth. To fix the tripartite analysis, then, we just need to add a sensitivity condition that ensures knowledge must be sensitive to the truth (as shown in the table below). A proponent of this view could argue that we can rule out Gettier's examples as cases of knowledge because the justified, true beliefs in these examples are insensitive to the truth.
The truth-sensitive analysis of knowledge: A subject S knows that p if and only if
S believes that p, and
Smith and Jones apply for a job
Smith hears the interviewer say “I’m going to give Jones the job”
Smith also sees Jones count out 10 coins from his pocket
Smith forms the belief “the person who will get the job will have 10 coins in their pocket”
This is justified: Smith has good reason to think Jones will get the job and that Jones has 10 coins in his pocket
But actually Smith gets the job! Unknown to him, he has 10 coins in his pocket!
If “the person who will get the job will have 10 coins in their pocket” were false (i.e. if Smith didn't have 10 coins in his pocket), Smith would still have believed it anyway because he believed that Jones was going to get the job and saw him count out 10 coins in his pocket. Therefore, this belief is insensitive to the truth.
Smith thinks to himself that not only does he have justification for believing Jones owns a Ford but also the belief “Either Jones owns a Ford or Brown is in Barcelona”
He is justified in believing this is true because only one of the parts has to be true to make the whole thing true (and he thinks the first part is true)
But Jones doesn’t own a Ford, He was driving a friend’s car!
If “either Jones owns a Ford or Brown is in Barcelona” were false (i.e. if Brown was not in Barcelona), Smith would still have believed it anyway because he believed that Jones owned the Ford that he was driving (which he doesn't). Therefore, this belief is insensitive to the truth.
Adding a sensitivity condition, like a "no false lemmas" condition, rules out Gettier's original examples. However, can it also rule out the fake barn county counterexample? Initially we might think that it can. After all, if the barn was not there for Jones to see, he wouldn't believe that there was a barn there. However, what if inside the real barn had been a cardboard cut-out of a barn set up. Then, if there was no barn there for Jones to see, he would have still believed there was a barn there because he would have seen a fake barn and mistaken it for a real barn. Saul Kripke takes this example one step further to show how counterintuitive a sensitivity condition could be. Consider the following case:
Jones is driving through fake barn county
In fake barn county, it is tradition for the locals set up many cardboard cut-outs of barns
Cardboard cut-out barns are always green in fake barn county and real barns are always red
Jones happens to see a real barn (with a cardboard cut-out barn inside)
Jones forms the justified true belief that there is a barn
Jones also forms the justified true belief that there is a red barn
If there had been no real barn there, Jones would still believe there is a barn but he would not have believed there was a red barn
Therefore, in this case, Jones knows that there is a red barn but he doesn't know that there is a barn!
A general problem with JTB+X solutions
Linda Zagzebski has argued that all analyses of knowledge which simply add an extra condition X onto the tripartite JTB analysis to acquire a JTB+X analysis will always be vulnerable to Gettier cases. This is because the fallibility of justification (as well as any added condition) will always be able to be able to be subverted to create Gettier cases. In fact, Zagzebski even provides an easy recipe with which to create a Gettier case for any JTB+X analysis of knowledge:
Find a case of justified false belief which satisfies condition X
You have a Gettier case!
We will discuss Zagzebski's solution to this problem in a later chapter. However, in the next chapter, we will look to a completely new way of analysing knowledge called "reliabilism".
Solution 1: Pointfree version, using List.drop and List.take
In light of the discussion above about ergativity, we just need to note that the Patient and Subject of ergative constructions are marked by a suffixed .Ø. This is the "null" suffix. It means that there is no vocalized marker of the absolutive case. While it might seem silly to attach a "nothing" to words, it is really just an analytical tool so we can clearly delineate which participants in a sentence are performing which tasks.
In (1) above, note that the temple (e) is the thing being built. Hence, it is the Patient of the ergative sentence. So we mark it with the null prefix, and we have e.Ø, signifying that e is in the absolutive case.
This move is derived from gymnastics but it is widely used in freerunning.These are the instructions on how to do it:
Remember:This is a running frontflip.
Take a 3 or 4 running steps.
Do your last hopping step because this is the takeoff
Prepare yourself for the takeoff.Synchronize the following instructions below before the takeoff:
a.Hands up above your head.
b.Look slightly on the ground.
c.Always remember:
Keep your both feet in front of your face.Don't lean because leaning makes your frontflip low and when you landed,it may cause damage to your
After doing the previous set of instructions:
First,throw your hands forward,jump high but straight and not in leaning position.Then,bring your knees to your chest quickly and grab it with
Always think the proper timing.Release your legs if your rotation is about 3/4 or 7/8.
Prepare for landing.Always land on the balls of your feet and not on your heels.Otherwise,it can injure your heels.
PtrTab: ARRAY MaxPtrs OF LONGINT;
RecTab: ARRAY MaxRecs OF OCT.Struct;
Var: IF x.lev = 0 THEN
| Ind: IF x.lev = 0 THEN
z.inx := z.inx*8 + SHORT(x.a2)
z.inx := z.inx * 8 + SHORT(x.a2)
| Con: CASE x.typ.form OF
Undef, Byte, Bool, Char, SInt:
| LInt, Real, Set, Pointer, ProcTyp, NilTyp:
PROCEDURE PutF4*(op: INTEGER; VAR x, y: OCT.Item);
PROCEDURE Put*(F, op: INTEGER; VAR x, y: OCT.Item);
PROCEDURE RestoreRegisters*(gR, fR: SET; VAR x: OCT.Item);
l.mode := Var; l.a0 := y.a0 + y.typ.adr; l.lev := y.lev;
BEGIN (*merge chains of the two operands of AND and OR *)
K, s, s0, refpos: LONGINT;
ObjFile: Files.File;
ComTab: ARRAY MaxComs OF OCT.Object;
FindPtrs(obj.typ, obj.a0)
OutRefBlk(obj.dsc, obj.a2, obj.name)
C. S. Lewis Books with some relativity to morality:
(All Essays can be found in the book Essay Collection and Other Short Pieces not currently published in the United States. Check Amazon.co.uk for availability.)
Why I Am Not a Pacifist (see book The Weight of Glory)
Let us state the fundamental principle of classical dynamics for a material point, or particle[1]. A material point is classically described by its mass
.  It undergoes external actions modelled by forces
The fundamental principle of dynamics (or Newton's equation of motion)
\index{Newton's equation of motion} states that the time derivative of momentum is equal to the sum of all external forces\index{force}:
.
This principle can be taken as the basis of material point classical
Laws of motion does not tell anything about how to model
.
This two last forces expressions directly come from physical postulates. However, for other interactions like elastic forces, friction, freedom given to physicist is much greater.
An efficient method to modelize such complex interactions is to use the energy
(or power) concept. At chapter  chapelectromag, the duality between
At chapters  chapapproxconti and  chapenermilcon, the concept of energy is developed for the description of continuous media.
Let us recall here some definitions associated to the description of interactions by forces. Elementary work of a force
.
Potential energy gained by the particle during time
.
Note that potential energy can be defined only if force field
By extension, every system whose dynamics can be described by equations eqhampa1 and  eqhampa2 is called hamiltonian
It has been seen that Lorentz transformations acts on time. Classical dynamics
Let us impose a linear dependence between the impulsion four-vector and
. Let us call ``relativistic momentum quantity:
Thus, Einstein associates an energy to a mass since at rest:
This is the matter--energy equivalence .
Let us give an example of force four-vector. Lorentz force four-vector is
Let us present how the fundamental dynamics can be retrieved from a
.
Energy is obtained by a Legendre transformation,
.
The most natural way to introduce the dynamics of a free particle in
Consider the fundamental relation  eqcovdiff that defines
(covariant) differentials. It yields to:
.
The shortest path corresponds to a movement of the particle such
Equation eqdynarelatge is an evolution equation for a free
A and B.
Geodesic on a sphere.
General relativity explain have larges masses can deviate light rays
Curvature of a light.
↑ A formulation adapted to continuous matter will be presented later in the book.
.
How to use POSEIDON classes in software applications
Parole is the program whereby offenders are permitted to be released from the correctional facility or penitentiary before the expiration of sentence. Parole is a form of supervised release where their release is conditional on terms set by the Parole Board.
The parole ineligibility runs from the date of arrest.[1]
s. 746; R v Toor [2005] BCJ 1382 (BCCA) at para. 13
Under s. 120 of the Corrections and Conditional Release Act, SC 1992 c 20, the offender are ineligible for release anytime before the one third mark of their sentence or 7 years, whichever is less.
"Statutory release" refers to the eligibility for release of an offender at the two-thirds mark of their total sentence pursuant to the Parole Act. The premise is that an offender was credited with "remission" that gave extra credit for time served in custody.
Under the Corrections and Conditional Release Act, an offender will be releasable after two-thirds of the sentence can be revocable by the Parole Board for those who are serving sentences for offences listed in Schedules I and II of the Act.
Under s. 125 to 126.1 of the Corrections and Conditional Release Act, permitted first time, non-violent offenders to apply for day parole at the one-sixth mark of their sentence and full parole at one-third of their sentence. The Parole Board must be satisfied there are no reasonable grounds to believe that the offender is likely to commit an offence involving violence before the expiration of their sentence.
On March 24th, 2011, the Abolition of Early Parole Act Bill C-59, was assented, repealing s. 125 to 126.1 of the Corrections and Conditional Release Act.
The removal of accelerated parole cannot be retrospective or it will violate s. 11(h) of the Charter.[1]
The court has the power under s. 743.6 [1] to delay the eligibility of parole to either one half of the global sentence or 10 years, whichever is less.
The test for delayed release is whether the court is "satisfied, having regard to the circumstances of the commission of the offence and the character and circumstances of the offender, that the expression of society’s denunciation of the offence or the objective of specific or general deterrence so requires, order that the portion of the sentence that must be served before the offender may be released on full parole is one half of the sentence or ten years, whichever is less."[1]
Any consideration of applying this section must conform with procedural fairness and permit the defence an opportunity to respond to the application. Where possible notice should be given to defence in advance.[2]
A failure of a jury to make a recommendation on parole ineligibility does not restrict a judge from making a decision on parole ineligibility who always has the final say on sentence. [3]
↑  R. v. Zinck [2003] S.C.J. No. 5, 2003 SCC 6
R. v. Cerra, 2004 BCCA 594 (CanLII)
Why does it matter?
Our bones change as we age.
Bone is a living tissue and is always in a process of removing mature bone tissue and forming new bone tissue. Before maximum bone density is reached around our mid-20s to late 30s, this process is balanced in favour of bone growth and bone breakdown is much slower. This allows us to grow taller, stronger bones for support and structure throughout the lifespan. However, after we reach peak bone mass, the balance starts to shift and bone degradation begins to occur at a faster rate than bone formation.
It is an inevitable part of ageing. As our bones age and change, our focus should be on maintaining the bone we have. The most important reason to maintain our bone health is to protect against bone diseases such as osteoporosis and to prevent fractures.
Gender – Oestrogen is essential for bone retention, as women go through menopause and oestrogen declines, bone loss is accelerated. Therefore, women are at greater risk of osteoporosis than men, especially once they reach 54 years (see Figure 1).
Age – The older you are the greater your risk. Once your peak bone mass is reached, turnover increases but bone is not replaced at the same rate as it is being lost, thus leading to a decline in bone mass.
Race – Caucasian and Asian ethnicities are more likely to develop osteoporosis.
Genetics – Family history may indicate low bone densities being an inherited trait. Genetics may also determine someone’s bone structure and body weight. Thin, petite women are at greater risk of poor bone health as they have less to lose in the first place.
Sedentary Lifestyle – Sedentary behaviour increases likelihood of osteoporosis as exercise stimulates bone formation, calcium retention and responds well to physical activity that puts stress on the bone such as running or dancing.
Stressful Lifestyle - A stressful lifestyle and/or inadequate sleep can exacerbate bone loss as the body releases a stress hormone (cortisol) which promotes further bone breakdown. Not getting enough sleep is a problem when the body does not have time to relax and return cortisol levels back to normal because if they stay elevated, bone loss will increase.
Alcohol Intake - Drinking more than the recommended servings of alcohol (see Alcohol Recommendations)
A healthy diet can be achieved when eating a variety of foods from the five food groups. A varied diet as recommended in the Australian Guide to Healthy Eating, will provide the necessary foods to reduce risk of osteoporosis.
For more information on healthy eating and how to maintain a balanced diet visit Eat for Health
Many nutrients contribute to build healthy, strong bones. These nutrients include calcium, vitamin D, phosphorous, magnesium, vitamin A, fluoride, vitamin K and protein. However, more of one vitamin does not substitute for less of another.
Calcium is probably the most well known mineral required for healthy bones as it is a major mineral that makes up our bone tissue. Once calcium is absorbed into the bloodstream it is carried into the bone cells and deposits calcium as necessary.
Fish with edible bones, remember to eat the bones
Dark leafy greens such as spinach or kale
Vitamin D directs the mineralisation of bones. Basically, it tells calcium what to do and where to go in the body. Without enough vitamin D, it is not possible to absorb enough calcium, regardless of the amount consumed.  Adequate sun exposure can ensure adequate vitamin D levels which is necessary for calcium absorption. As we age, our skin’s ability to convert sunlight to vitamin D reduces so it is necessary to get more sunlight. Whilst our main source of Vitamin D is gained from sunlight absorbed through the skin, there are small amounts in some foods.
Fortified foods such as dairy products, juices and cereals
Oily fish such as salmon, herring and sardines
Phosphorous is a major mineral deposited in the bone structure to develop the bone's density and overall strength.
Dairy Products (milk, yoghurt and cheese)
Nuts - cashews, almonds and walnuts
Seeds - pumpkin seeds, sunflower seeds and chia seeds
Wholegrains - quinoa, bran cereal, wholemeal bread and brown rice
Vitamin A assists in making bone proteins that contribute to bone mineralisation.
Orange fruits and vegetables - carrots, sweet potato, pumpkin, capsicum, tomato, mango, pawpaw, peaches and oranges.
Green vegetables - spinach, broccoli, peas and green beans.
Fluoride plays a role in hardening the bone to stabilise it and maintain its strength and integrity.
Vitamin K assists in making bone proteins that contribute to bone mineralisation.
Dark leafy greens - kale, seaweed, Swiss chard, spinach and lettuce.
Cruciferous vegetables - broccoli, cauliflower and cabbage.
Protein is a valuable nutrient  for maintaining muscle mass and helping repair joints after injury. Muscle tissue helps to support the skeleton, maintain stability/balance and prevent falls.
Animal foods - beef, pork, chicken, turkey, fish, eggs, yoghurt and milk.
Legumes - chickpeas, lentils, red kidney beans, soy beans and baked beans.
Nuts and seeds - almonds, cashews, walnuts, linseeds, pumpkin seeds and sunflower seeds.
For more information about bone health, head to Osteoporosis Australia
Kouris, A. (2011). Food sources of nutrients: A ready reckoner of macronutrients, micronutrients and phytonutrients.
Osteoporosis Australia. (2013). Risk factors for osteoporosis. Retrieved from http://www.osteoporosis.org.au/about/about-osteoporosis/risk-factors/
The link below will guide you to a sample article, which shows and explains techniques that will make the creation on a wikibook page much easier.
PAPER 2 - ⇑ Fundamentals of communication and networking ⇑
Serial Data Transmission - Single bits are sent one after another along a single data channel
Data is created by changes in a voltage in a circuit which is then sent down one wire. For one-way communication a single signal wire is needed but additional wires may be needed for grounding. For two-way communication two signal wires are required, one for each direction. This method is usually used long distance, for example, transatlantic data transmission. The idea being that the setup would be cheaper as there would only be one wire to set up that handles the data. As the data is on one channel, and data is lost over the distance it travels, it is easier to recover the original signal.
Parallel Data Transmission - Bits are sent down several data channels simultaneously
Parallel data is preferred for short distance data transmission because the amount of data that can be sent is greater than serial data transmission. However in long range transmission, the data along a wire could get distorted by the voltages from the other wires parallel to the wire. This problem is known as skew. Another reason it is not used over long distances is that the cost of cabling is very high as many wires are required.
Baud rate, bit rate, bandwidth, latency
Baud rate - The rate at which signals on a wire may change
Baud Rate is the rate at which signals on a wire may change. This means that in a second, a signal could change a number of times which is recorded as the baud rate. AQA define the baud rate as the number of signal changes per second. Therefore, 1 baud is defined as one signal change per second. Units for baud rate are per second (/s)
Bit Rate - The number of bits transmitted per second.
Bit rate is measured in bits per second (also written as bps or bits/second). It measures the number of bits that are sent down a channel per second. Baud and bit rate can be different but when the bit rate is equal to the baud rate, one bit is sent between consecutive signal changes. For example, if you had a dripping water tap, the bit rate and baud rate would be equal for that tap because there is a consecutive change between the tap dripping and water not dripping assuming that the tap would only drip one drop at a time.
To calculate bit rate, use the equation:
Bit rate = Bits per signal × baud rate
This can be proven by looking at the units.
Bandwidth - The range of signal frequencies that a transmission medium may transmit
There is a direct relationship between bit rate and bandwidth that you must know . They are directly proportional. The greater the bandwidth, the higher the bit rate. The bandwidth is usually double the bit rate so the relationship can be seen as 2:1 as a ratio.
Latency -  Time delay between the moment something is initiated and the moment its effect begins.
In the context of data communications and electronics, latency is the time that is taken for data to be transmitted from the sender to the receiver. For example, when you're surfing the internet and you make a request, the time that it takes for your request to reach the server is the latency.
Asynchronous data transmission -  The sender and receiver are not permanently synchronised. Instead, start bits and stop bits are used to temporarily synchronise the sender and receiver.
A start bit is used to signal the arrival of data and to temporarily synchronise the transmitter and receiver.
A stop bit is a character in asynchronous data transmission that lets a receiver know that the byte being sent has ended. Stop bits are very important because this is the way most of our information is sent across the internet. Without a stop bit it is possible that a receiving computer will likely prompt an error as it may take in unintended data if the end of the intended data is not given.
A parity bit is a bit that is added to ensure that the number of bits with the value 1 in a set of bits is odd or even. Parity bits are used in the simplest form of error detecting.  For example, if a signal starts off with 3 occurrences of 1 it is in odd parity, once it arrives at its destination and only has 2 occurrences of 1 then the receiver knows there is a problem and will ask for the data to be re-sent
There are two variants of the parity bit, odd and even.
When using even parity, the parity bit is set to 1 if the number of 1s in a set of bits (not including the parity bit) is odd, making the entire set of bits (including the parity bit) even.  For example 1001 0110 (4 bits = even)
When using odd parity, the parity bit is set to 1 if the number of 1s in a set of bits (not including the parity bit) is even, making the entire set of bits (including the parity bit) odd. For example 1000 0110 (3 bits = odd)
In other words, an even parity bit will be set to "1" if the number of 1s + 1 is even, and an odd parity bit will be set to "1" if the number of 1s +1 is odd.
If an odd number of bits (including the parity bit) are transmitted incorrectly, the parity bit will be incorrect and therefore shows an error occurred during transmission. Parity bits can only be used to detect errors, they cannot correct any errors as there is no way to determine which specific bit has been corrupted. The data must be scrapped and re-transmitted.
Handshaking -  An exchange of signals between two devices.
It is usually a process that takes place when a computer is about to communicate with a foreign device to establish rules for communication. When a computer communicates with another device like a modem or a printer it needs to handshake with it to establish a connection. Much like humans greet each other by a handshake to establish a connection.
Handshaking may be used to negotiate parameters that are acceptable to equipment and systems at both ends of the communication channel, including, but not limited to, information transfer rate, coding alphabet, parity, interrupt procedure and other protocol or hardware features.
Handshaking makes it possible to connect relatively heterogeneous systems or equipment over a communication channel without the need for human intervention to set parameters. One classic example of handshaking is that of modems, which typically negotiate communication parameters for a brief period when connection is first established, and thereafter use those parameters to provide optimal information transfer over the channel as a function of its quality and capacity.
A typical handshaking process follows the following steps:
Sending device checks if receiving device is connected and ready to receive.
Sending device informs the receiving device it is sending.
Receiving device confirms that it has received.
Receiver indicates that it is ready to receive again.
Protocol - a set of agreed signals, codes and rules which is used for communication across a network consisting of computers and peripherals
Baseband is a transmission medium used for a network over short distances. Usually, a network is used between several computers so data is sent simultaneously. However, a baseband system only allows one station to be sent at a time. It offers high performance for low cost.
Baseband - Single data signal sent at a time over the full bandwidth of the cable
Broadband is also a transmission medium used for a network but it is a multichannel system which combines several data channels into one so that the bandwidth of the transmission can be shared between several channels. It is mainly used for long distance communication because long-distance wires are difficult to maintain and therefore it would be wasteful to use single channel wires.
Broadband - several data signals sent simultaneously each at a different frequency
A short introduction as to the subject of this wikibook.
Homebrew are applications which run on a system that wasn't designed to let the user program for it. What this means is that even though Sony did not plan to let users develop applications for the PSP, some people managed to find a way around which led to a toolchain which anybody can use to program for the PSP.
There are several reasons a person might want to program for the PSP. First of all, the PSP is a handheld multimedia system, not just designed for games. Another reason is because it has been homebrew capable for quite a while, and thus has quite a community following because of that. Yet another reason, is because one might want to expand their knowledge to other platforms which might have their own limitations which the developer must program around.
In order to program for the PSP you will of course need a PSP. How else would you look at your progress? Your PSP should also be homebrew capable, and you will also need to have a memory card from which you can run your programs. Aside from the material possessions which you will need, you also need to have acquired some knowledge of general programming in the 'C' language. Although this wikibook won't assume you are an expert in 'C' or 'C++', it won't go out of its way to explain to you the fundamentals of programming.
Magnetic Multi-screw/nut driver kit.
Soldering iron, portable.
Flash light, artificial light sources needed when your power is out or it is dark.
MultiTool, I like the Gerber tools that flick out with one hand and deploy a plier.  This allows deployment when holding work or hanging on someplace.  The better choices have scissors and wire crimpers.
Duct tape: so many repair uses.
Electrical tape: cover up wire splices.
Spare glad hand rubbers.
4-Adj hose clamps(2-sm/2-lg)
Spare lights.
Spare fuses of each type used in vehicle (required by law in some countries).
Butt connectors.
Three-way splice connectors.
Male and female disconnect connectors: to make it possible to easily add and remove items like a CB radio.
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
↑ Oxford English Dictionary.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
Often we would like to transfer the most power from a source to a load placed across the terminals as possible. How can we determine the optimum resistance of the load for this to occur?
Let us consider a source modelled by a Thévenin equivalent (a Norton equivalent will lead to the same result, as the two are directly equivalent), with a load resistance, RL. The source resistance is Rs and the open circuit voltage of the source is vs:
The voltage across the load resistor, vL, is found using the voltage divider rule:
We can now find the power dissipated in the load, PL as follows:
We can now rewrite this to get rid of the RL on the top:
Assuming the source resistance is not changeable, then we obtain maximum power by minimising the bracketed part of the denominator in the above equation. It is an elementary mathematical result that
We will get maximum power out of the source if the load resistance is identical to the internal source resistance. This is the Maximum Power Transfer Theorem.
The efficiency can be calculated using the following equation:
The graph below shows the power in the load (as a proportion of the maximum power, Pmax) and the efficiency for values of RL between 0 and 5 times Rs.
It is important to note that under conditions of maximum power transfer as much power is dissipated in the source as in the load. This is not a desirable condition if, for example, the source is the electricity supply system and the load is your electric heater. This would mean that the electricity supply company would be wasting half the power it generates. In this case, the generators, power lines, etc. are designed to give the lowest source resistance possible, giving high efficiency. The maximum power transfer condition is used in (usually high-frequency) communications systems where the source resistance can not be made low, the power levels are relatively low and it is paramount to get as much signal power as possible to the receiving end of the system (the load).
A diagram indicating the equivalent width corresponding to the absorption line, which is shown in red.
The equivalent width of a spectral line is a measure of the of the area of the line on plot of intensity versus wavelength. It is found by forming a rectangle with a height equal to that of continuum emission, and finding the width such that the area of the rectangle is equal to the area in the spectral line. It is a measure of the strength of spectral features that is primarily used in astronomy.[1]
Formally, the equivalent width is given by the equation
The equivalent width is used as a quantitative measure of the strength of spectral features. The equivalent width is a convenient choice because the shapes of spectral features can vary depending upon the configuration of the system which is producing the lines. For instance, the line may experience Doppler broadening due to motions of the gas emitting the photons. The photons will be shifted away from the line center, thus rendering the height of the emission line a poor measure of its overall strength. The equivalent width, on the other hand, "measures the fraction of energy removed from the spectrum by the line," regardless of the broadening intrinsic to the line or a detector with poor resolution.[3] Thus the equivalent width can in many conditions yield the number of absorbing or emitting atoms.[1]
Measurements of the equivalent width of the Balmer alpha transition in T Tauri stars are used in order to classify individual T Tauri stars as being classical or weak-lined.[2] The equivalent width can also be used in studying star formation in Lyman alpha galaxies, as the equivalent width of the Lyman alpha line is related to the star formation rate in the galaxy.[4]
↑ a b Carroll, Bradly; Ostlie, Dale (2007). An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics. Pearson Addison-Wesley. ISBN 0321442849. http://books.google.com/books?id=zaSpQgAACAAJ.
↑ a b c Stahler, Steven; Palla, Francesco (2004). The Formation of Stars. Wiley-VCH. ISBN 3527405593. http://books.google.com/books?id=Cx98QgAACAAJ.
↑ Spitzer, Lyman (1998). Physical Processes in the Interstellar Medium. Wiley-VCH. ISBN 0471022322. http://books.google.com/books?id=YPG3AAAAIAAJ.
↑ Dijkstra, Mark; Westra, Eduard (2010). "Star formation indicators and line equivalent width in Lya galaxies". Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 401 (4):  2343–2348. http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010MNRAS.401.2343D.
Customizing Page Headers and Footers‎
Floats, Figures and Captions
Scientific Reports (Bachelor Report, Master Thesis, Dissertation)
Adding colors to your text is supported by the xcolor package (supersedes package color). Using this package, you can set the font color, text background, or page background. You can choose from predefined colors or define your own colors using RGB, Hex, or CMYK. Mathematical formulas can also be colored.
To make use of these features, the xcolor package must be imported. xcolor starts from the basic facilities of the color package and extends it.
The package allows you to use the names of 19 base colors (black, white, blue, green, yellow, red etc.); these names are always available. Besides, the package has some options to get more predefined colors, which should be added globally. dvipsnames allows you to access more than 60 colors, and svgnames allows access to about 150 colors. If you need more color names, then you may also want to look at the x11names option that offers more than 300 colors.
The table option allows colors to be added to tables.
The simplest way to type colored text is by:
\emph{some black text, \color{red}followed by a red fragment}, going black again.
You can change the background color of the whole page by:
If the background color and the text color is changed, then:
There is also \fcolorbox to make framed background color in yet another color:
There may be other pre-defined colors on your system, but these should be available on all systems.
If you would like a color not pre-defined, you can use one of the 68 dvips colors, or define your own. These options are discussed in the following sections
The 68 standard colors known to dvips
Invoke the package with the usenames and dvipsnames option. If you are using tikz or pstricks package you must declare the xcolor package before that, otherwise it will not work.
This above syntax may result in an error if you are using beamer with tikz. To go around it, include usenames and dvipsnames options when defining the document class.
If the predefined colors are not adequate, you may wish to define your own.
Define the colors in the preamble of your document. (Reason: do so in the preamble, so that you can already refer to them in the preamble, which is useful, for instance, in an argument of another package that supports colors as arguments, such as the listings package.)
You need to include the xcolor package in your preamble to define new colors. In the abstract, the colors are defined following this scheme:
Among the models you can use to describe the color are the following (several more are described in the xcolor manual):
Just one number between 0 (black) and 1 (white), so 0.95 will be very light gray, 0.30 will be dark gray.
Three numbers given in the form red,green,blue; the quantity of each color is represented with a number between 0 and 1.
Three numbers given in the form red,green,blue; the quantity of each color is represented with a number between 0 and 255.
Four numbers given in the form cyan,magenta,yellow,black; the quantity of each color is represented with a number between 0 and 1.
To define a new color, follow the following example, which defines orange for you, by setting the red to the maximum, the green to one half (0.5), and the blue to the minimum:
The following code should give a similar results to the last code chunk.
If you loaded the xcolor package, you can define colors upon previously defined ones.
The first specifies 20 percent blue and 80 percent white; the second is a mixture of 20 percent blue and 80 percent black; and the last one is a mixture of (20*0.3) percent blue, ((100-20)*0.3) percent black and (100-30) percent green.
Normally one would predeclare all the colors as above, but sometimes it is convenient to directly use a color without naming it first. To achieve this,
You may want to use colors that appear on another document, web pages, pictures, etc.
Alternatively, you may want to play around with rgb values to create your own custom colors.
Image processing suites like the free GIMP suite for Linux/Windows/Mac offer color picker facilities to capture any color on your screen or synthesize colors directly from their respective rgb / hsv / hexadecimal values.
Smaller, free utilities also exist:
Linux/BSD: The gcolor2 tool (usually also available in repositories)
Linux/BSD: in newer systems you may want to use gcolor3 tool (usually also available in repositories)
Microsoft Windows: The open-source Color Selector tool.
Apple Macs: Hex Color Picker for creating custom colors and the built-in DigitalColor Meter for capturing colors on screen.
Online utilities: See here for a Wikipedia article with several external links
Spot colors are customary in printing. They usually refer to pre-mixed inks based on a swatchbook (like Pantone, TruMatch or Toyo). The package colorspace extends xcolor to provide real spot colors (CMYK and CIELAB). They are defined with, say:
The Heavenly Stems (HS) and Earthly Branches (EB) of the Year, Month and Day of 1952 in the Hsia Calendar, from January to December.
The last 2 columns give the Month (LM) and the Day (LD) of the corresponding Chinese Lunar Calendar. Where an intercalary month ('leap month' or 'run yue' in Pinyin) is introduced, the numeral representing the Lunar Month (LM) is followed by the letter 'a' or 'b'.
For the purpose of Date Selection, an '(X)' under the 'Month & Day' column indicates an inauspicious day.
Physical activity is a fundamental and valuable human capability that can be described as any bodily movement that enhances or maintains physical fitness and overall health and wellness.[1][2] It is performed for various reasons including strengthening muscles and the cardiovascular system, honing athletic skills, weight loss or maintenance, as well as for the purpose of enjoyment.[1][2] Frequent and regular physical exercise boosts the immune system, and helps prevent the "diseases of affluence" such as heart disease, cardiovascular disease, Type 2 diabetes and obesity.[1][2]
Furthermore my study is based on people affected by dementia: a broad category of brain diseases that cause long term loss of the ability to think and reason clearly that is severe enough to affect a person's daily functioning.[3] The most common form of dementia is Alzheimer's disease (75%).[3] Other forms include Lewy body dementia, vascular dementia, frontotemporal dementia, progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, normal pressure hydrocephalus and Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease.[3] There is no cure for these diseases, which worsen as they progress. A person may live from three to twenty years with dementia, with the average being seven to ten years.
However over the past thirty years, substantial progress has been made in how best to support people with dementia. Perceptively people have viewed dementia as the ‘living death’ about which little could be done beyond watchful care. However new evidence has shown that adequate improvement in physical activity for people with dementia —especially in the early to middle stages—can ease disability from diagnosis to death. This ensures maximum quality of life through empowering an individual with dementia to feel confident in going for a walk, gardening, shopping, doing housework and socially interacting with family, friends and carers; and more so to prevent unnecessary disability and suffering from falls, comorbidities, anxiety, depression and loneliness.[4][5].
Introduction to people with dementia and aims of physical activity
The target population of this study is people in the early to moderate stages of dementia. Most often, dementia is diagnosed in people over 65 years of age,[6] although the less-prevalent early-onset dementia can occur much earlier. In 2006, there were 26.6 million people worldwide with dementia. Dementia is predicted to affect 1 in 85 people globally by 2050.[7] In the early stages the symptoms of dementia can be very subtle. However, it often begins with lapses in memory and difficulty in finding the right words for everyday objects.[8] Other symptoms may include: Persistent and frequent memory difficulties (especially of recent events), vagueness in everyday conversation, apparent loss of enthusiasm for previously enjoyed activities, taking longer to do routine tasks, forgetting well-known people or places, inability to process questions and instructions, deterioration of social skills and Emotional unpredictability.[8] Symptoms vary and the diseases progress at a different pace according to the individual and the areas of the brain affected. A person's abilities may fluctuate from day to day, or even within the one day, becoming worse in times of stress, fatigue or ill-health.[8] We must note that that other conditions such as strokes and depression have similar symptoms as those shown by dementia, so you should never presume, but instead consult a doctor or specialist for a correct diagnosis. Furthermore the requirements for people with early to moderate-stage dementia include: confidence in their surroundings (e.g. being able to sit down, walk up and down stairs, using appliances), engagement in relationships with family or carers, pleasure, communication, and coping as they do to deficiencies and dysfunction.[9]
The aim of my program, which is titled ‘Coping with Dementia’, is to minimise risk of physical and psychological ill-health, improve motivation and commitment to be active and promote optimal quality of life from diagnosis until death. Moreover I have implemented exercises in my program that can be done at home or in care. They focus primarily on improving balance and coordination with the eventual goal of making people with early to moderate-stage dementia to feel confident in their motor skills in order to lessen the anxiety they may feel when moving around the home. The need for keeping the brain active in my patients is of high importance in my programs and this will be achieved through the practice of puzzles, crosswords and social activities by engaging in conversations with friends, family and carers. Furthermore my patients will be required to undertake activities such as gardening which helps remove stress, participating in music or dance which helps with mobility and getting involved in exercise whether that be swimming, water palates, yoga, Thai Chi,  walking or exercises one can do at home. [10] The goal with the activities I have just mentioned will be to empower the person to be motivated and confident in their actions, and have trust in what they are doing.
Benefits of physical activity on people with Dementia
The physical activity intervention is completely evidence based, credible and scientifically knowledgeable. When constructing a physical activity program for patients with early to moderate-stage dementia, relevant and informed material was needed prior to the design. I found that the correlation between physical activity and dementia is a new and ongoing study, although there is emerging signs that physical activity intervention for people with early to moderate-stage dementia may be of significant benefit for cognition and behaviour,[11] which is promising. A review of thirty studies by Patricia Heyn, PhD, Beatriz C. Abreu, PhD, OTR, and Kenneth J. Ottenbacher, PhD, OTR recognised 2020 participants and found that Exercise training increases fitness, physical function, cognitive function, and positive behaviour in people with dementia and related cognitive impairments.[12] Thus this evidence supports my logic for implementing activities such as aqua aerobics, walking, gardening and dancing in my program in order to maintain mobility and allow patients with early to moderate-stage dementia to achieve confidence in simple functional activities with little anxiety in what to do. Furthermore as stated in: Introduction to the target population and aims, most often dementia is diagnosed in people over 65 years of age.[6] Evidence suggests that only a small amount of people who are over the age of 65 (less than 20%), undertake an appropriate level of physical activity and people with dementia this is even less.[13] As a result of this statistic it is significant to implement an exercise program into a person’s lifestyle, during the early to moderate-stages of dementia as it is more likely to be maintained as the condition worsens. This will help broaden the benefits to health and well-being for as long as possible until death. When observing the design process for my program ‘Coping with Dementia’ the need to make people with early to moderate-stage dementia more motivated, confident, understanding, knowledgeable and more physically competent—the main aspects of physical literacy—was my top priority in establishing purposeful physical pursuits as an integral part of their lifestyle and to promote optimal quality of life for the individual.[14]
It is essential that optimal quality of care is given to people with dementia and their families. Any individual with early to middle staged dementia may live with a carer or alone—due to the poor disposition they put on people around them or they are country people trying to deal with bad health, poor finances and daunting distances from home to medical facilities—need to be provided for in order to improve or steady their overall wellbeing. It is important that any specialists or doctors trying to improve this human capability must care for and monitor their patients with dementia from diagnosis until death. This requires comprehensive assessment to identify changes in cognitive functioning—such as memory, day to day functioning, and behaviour—alongside identification and treatment of additional disorders or diseases, in order to prevent unnecessary admissions to hospital and associated excess disability.[9][15] Thus the time constraint for this programme is lifetime and referral to specialist psychological and psychosocial services is integral to provision of high quality care during the process of my physical literacy programme.[9][16] Furthermore this programme is most effective when provided in partnership with organisations in the public and private health sectors, such as Dementia Australia and research institutions such as Australian universities. This sharing of knowledge and skills though collaborative relationships and applied research will ensure that we are able to provide training programmes that will meet the patient’s needs.
My program ‘Coping with Dementia’ focuses on the fundamental and valuable human capability of physical activity in patients with early to moderate-stage dementia. The lesson plans in the program look at positively maintaining motor control, in particular mobility, strength, flexibility and balance. The primary aim of the lesson plans in the program will be to reduce falls and remove anxiety associated with patients with developing early to moderate-stage dementia who may not have trust in themselves to undertake a simple task. This will intentionally result in patients managing their physical fitness—in order to promote optimum quality of life— in due course of degenerative cognitive and functional impairments which is inevitable, as the disease develops. Furthermore a research study was conducted by Alison Bowes, Alison Dawson, Ruth Jepson and Louise McCabe on how physical activity may benefit people with dementia; how and/or if current service provide these benefits; and what support they need to do so.[17] They found that there is potential effectiveness of physical activity for people with early to moderate-stage dementia, including improvements in cognition and mood, behaviour and physical condition.[17] Moreover the social benefits to increased physical activity have also been found to be significant. A study by S Cooper and J D W Greene showed that physical activity undertaken in a group can increase social networks, help in reducing the feelings of loneliness and isolation all common issues associated with people who have dementia.[18] Hence, the benefits for including walking outdoors in my program will be to ascertain a connection with nature and the local community. Additional activities such as gardening and Lawn bowls will help provide enjoyment and feelings of well-being.[10] Definitively these are just a few examples of lesson plans that will be incorporated in my program: ‘Coping with Dementia.’ The first lesson and last lesson will both be comprehensive assessment and evaluation of the patient by a specialist to identify changes in cognitive functioning—such as memory, day to day functioning, and behaviour—alongside identification and treatment of additional disorders or diseases.[9][15] In order to inform myself, other doctors and specialists, certified instructors/carers and the patient’s family the progress or decline of the Dementia patient undertaking my program.
Confidence level at start of session (1 being  low, 10 being high) and confidence level post session
Lesson 1 is an Assessment, which will include the instructor to write down responses to the following questions and whether the patient is correct or incorrect:
Attention—for example, serial sevens, months of the year or WORLD backwards
Memory—for example, address recall, name of prime minister, etc
Language—for example, naming of items, reading, writing, comprehension, repetition
Executive function—for example, letter and category fluency
Praxis—for example, alternating hand movements, imitation of gestures
Visuospatial function—for example, drawing a clock face, overlapping pentagons.
Chair squat: stand with feet-hip width apart.Extend arms, push butt back, squat until bum taps chair, repeat 20 times for 3 sets
Bridge: lie on back with knees bent, heels on floor with toes pointed towards shins. Lift hips of the floor. Lower to start. Repeat 20 times, three sets
Chair squat progression: same as lesson two but progress by lifting left leg a few centimetres, squat. Switch legs. Repeat 10 times three sets
Bridge progression: same as lesson three, but progress by extending left leg, lift hips of the floor 10 reps, 3 sets. Switch legs and then repeat.
Walking: go for a walk outdoors, would be ideal if you could do this with a friend if possible.
Gardening: this can involve mowing, weeding or whatever has to be done at your place
Use the required gardening tools relevant to the work you are doing, for example a trowel for digging out weeds. Note pad and pen
Kicking ball around in a group. This is more of a group session to encourage social interaction
Need at least 3 people for activity to be beneficial, as we are promoting social interaction. Equipment required 3 or more soccer balls. Note pad and Pen
Dancing or a group swimming class (aqua class) or tai chi, to name a few examples. Lesson nine is group orientated which is also promoting social interaction and aerobic exercise
Getting involved in a group class, the instructor will provide equipment necessary. Note pad and Pen
Lesson 10 is an Assessment, which will include the instructor to write down responses to the following questions and whether the patient is correct or incorrect, compare with Lesson 1 plan to see if there is notable improvements
Attention—for example, serial sevens, months of the year or WORLD backwards
Memory—for example, address recall, name of prime minister, etc
Language—for example, naming of items, reading, writing, comprehension, repetition
Executive function—for example, letter and category fluency
Praxis—for example, alternating hand movements, imitation of gestures
Visuospatial function—for example, drawing a clock face, overlapping pentagons.
Figure. 1 Table of lesson plans for ‘Coping with Dementia.’
In applying a physical activity programme, we need to pay as much attention to the essential human worth of person with dementia and their retained capacity for meaningful engagement in relationships, pleasure, communication, and coping as they do to deficiencies and dysfunction.[9][20][21][22] We also need to be aware many people with dementia and their families wait years for a diagnosis, and some never receive one due to socioeconomic, sociocultural and environmental factors.[5] Furthermore more research is being done to see whether links between exercise and dementia can be definitively established and the mechanisms better understood.[10] In the meantime, regular exercise is recommended as a key strategy for maintaining good health and it might also help keep the ageing brain healthy and reduce cognitive decline, minimise risk of physical and psychological ill-health, improve motivation and commitment to be active and promote optimal quality of life.[4][5][9][10][23] Research shows that there are health and lifestyle factors that indicate greater risk of developing dementia.[10] While you may reduce that risk or delay of the advanced staged dementia with physical exercise, mental exercise and improved diet, this program does not guarantee prevention and cure of dementia.[10]
Alzheimer's Australia: https://fightdementia.org.au/
Alzheimer's Australia video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z15-0xZTng4
National Dementia Support Program, Australian Government, 2011. Physical Exercise and Dementia. Alzheimer’s Australia, 1/1, 1-3.
Lautenschlager, Nicola T., 2012. The influence of exercise on brain aging and dementia. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Molecular Basis of Disease, [Online]. Volume 1822, Issue 3, 474-481.
^ Stampfer MJ, Hu FB, Manson JE, Rimm EB, Willett WC; Hu; Manson; Rimm; Willett (2000). "Primary Prevention of Coronary Heart Disease in Women through Diet and Lifestyle". New England Journal of Medicine 343 (1): 16–22. doi:10.1056/NEJM200007063430103. PMID 10882764.
Jump up ^ Hu FB, Manson JE, Stampfer MJ, Colditz G, Liu S, Solomon CG, Willett WC; Manson; Stampfer; Colditz; Liu; Solomon; Willett (2001). "Diet, lifestyle, and the risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus in women". The New England Journal of Medicine 345 (11): 790–797. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa010492. PMID 11556298.
Solomon, Andrew E. Budson, Paul R. (2011). Memory loss : a practical guide for clinicians. [Edinburgh?]: Elsevier Saunders. ISBN 9781416035978.
Knapp M, Prince M, Albanese E, Banerjee S, Dhanasiri S, Fernandez JL, et al. Dementia UK. London: Alzheimer’s Society, 2007.
National Audit Office. Improving services and support for people with dementia London: Stationery Office, 2007.
Brookmeyer R., Gray S., Kawas C.. Projections of Alzheimer's Disease in the United States and the Public Health Impact of Delaying Disease Onset. American Journal of Public Health. 1998;88(9):1337–42.
2006 prevalence estimate: Brookmeyer R, Johnson E, Ziegler-Graham K, MH Arrighi. Forecasting the global burden of Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's and Dementia. 2007;3(3):186–91; World population prospects: the 2006 revision, highlights [PDF]. 2007
Alzheimer's Disease - what is it? | Alzheimer’s Australia. 2014. Alzheimer's Disease - what is it? | Alzheimer’s Australia.
Downs, M, 2008. Caring for people with dementia. BMJ : British Medical Journal, [Online]. 336(7638), 225-226.
National Dementia Support Program, Australian Government, 2011. Physical Exercise and Dementia. Alzheimer’s Australia, 1/1, 1-3.
Lautenschlager, Nicola T., 2012. The influence of exercise on brain aging and dementia. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Molecular Basis of Disease, [Online]. Volume 1822, Issue 3, 474-481.
Patricia Heyn, PhD, Beatriz C. Abreu, PhD, OTR, Kenneth J. Ottenbacher, PhD, OTR, 2004. The effects of exercise training on elderly persons with cognitive impairment and dementia: A meta-analysis. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, [Online]. Volume 85, Issue 10, 1694–1704.
National Dementia Support Program, Australian Government, 2011. Physical Exercise and Dementia. Alzheimer’s Australia, 1/1, 1-3.
Almond, L; Whitehead, M (2012). "Physical Literacy: Clarifying the Nature of the Concept". Physical Education Matters
Silverstein NM, Maslow K, eds. Improving hospital care for persons with dementiaNew York: Springer, 2005.
National Audit Office. Improving services and support for people with dementiaLondon: Stationery Office, 2007.
Alison Bowes, Alison Dawson, Ruth Jepson and Louise McCabe, 2013. Physical activity for people with dementia: a scoping study. BMC Geriatrics, [Online]. 13:129
S Cooper, J D W Greene, 2005. The clinical assessment of the patient with early dementia. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry, [Online]. 6/5, 1.
Dementia: out of the shadows. London: Alzheimer's Society; 2008
Kitwood T. Dementia reconsidered: the person comes first Buckingham: Open University Press, 1997.
Normann HK, Norberg A, Asplund K. Confirmation and lucidity during conversations with a woman with severe dementia. J Advanced Nursing2002;39:370-6.
Clare L. Neuropsychological rehabilitation and people with dementia. Hove, East Sussex: Psychology Press, 2008.
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence/Social Care Institute for Excellence. Dementia: supporting people with dementia and their carers in health and social care. 2006.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
Fig 30.2: Bouncing ball
The string class is a part of the C++ standard library, used for convenient manipulation of sequences of characters, to replace the static, unsafe C method of handling strings. To use the string class in a program, the <string> header must be included. The standard library string class can be accessed through the std namespace.
The basic template class is basic_string<> and its standard specializations are string and wstring.
Declaring a std string is done by using one of these two methods:
This section will deal only with keyboard and text input. There are many other inputs that can be read (mouse movements and button clicks, etc), but these will not be covered in this section, even reading the special keys of the keyboard will be excluded.
Perhaps the most basic use of the string class is for reading text from the user and writing it to the screen. In the header file iostream, C++ defines an object named cin that handles input in much the same way that cout handles output.
The >> operator will cause the execution to stop and will wait for the user to type something. If the user types a valid integer, it will be converted into an integer value and stored in x.
If the user types something other than an integer, the compiler will not report an error. Instead, it leaves the old content (a "random" meaningless value) in x and continues.
This can then be extended into the following program:
Although a string may hold a sequence containing any character—including spaces and nulls—when reading into a string using cin and the extraction operator (>>) only the characters before the first space will be stored. Alternatively, if an entire line of text is desired, the getline function may be used:
Fortunately, there is a way to check and see if an input statement succeeds. We can invoke the good function on cin to check what is called the stream state. good returns a bool: if true, then the last input statement succeeded. If not, we know that some previous operation failed, and also that the next operation will fail.
Thus, getting input from the user might look like this:
As with the scanf() function from the Standard C Library, this statement only takes the first word of input, and leaves the rest for the next input statement. So, if you run this program and type your full name, it will only output your first name.
You may also notice the >> operator doesn't handle errors as expected (for example, if you accidentally typed your name in a prompt for a number.)  Because of these issues, it may be more suitable to read a line of text, and using the line for input — this is performed using the function called getline.
The first argument to getline is cin, which is where the input is coming from. The second argument is the name of the string variable where you want the result to be stored.
In fact, getline is generally useful for getting input of any kind. For example, if you wanted the user to type an integer, you could input a string and then check to see if it is a valid integer. If so, you can convert it to an integer value. If not, you can print an error message and ask the user to try again.
To convert a string to an integer you can use the strtol function defined in the header file cstdlib.  (Note that the older function atoi is less safe than strtol, as well as being less capable.)
If you still need the features of the >> operator, you will need to create a string stream as available from <sstream>.  The use of this stream will be discussed in a later chapter.
To do:Detail the commonly used std::string member functions(partially done)
We will be using this dummy string for some of our examples.
This invokes the default constructor with a const char* argument. Default constructor creates a string which contains nothing, i.e. no characters, not even a '\0' (however std::string is not null terminated).
Will trigger the copy constructor. std::string knows enough to make a deep copy of the characters it
This will copy strings using assignment operator. Effect of this code is same as using copy constructor in example above.
The methods size() and length() both return the size of the string object. There is no apparent difference. Remember that the last character in the string is size() - 1 and not size(). Like in C-style strings, and arrays in general, std::string starts counting from 0.
The shift operators (>> and <<) have been overloaded so you can perform I/O operations on istream and ostream objects, most notably cout, cin, and filestreams. Thus you could just do console I/O like this:
Alternatively, if you want to read entire lines at a time, use getline(). Note that this is not a member function. getline() will retrieve characters from input stream in and assign them to str until EOF is reached or delim is encountered. getline will reset the input string before appending data to it. delim can be set to any char value and acts as a general delimiter. Here is some example usage:
Because of the way getline works (i.e. it returns the input stream), you can nest multiple getline() calls to get multiple strings; however this may significantly reduce readability.
Chars in strings can be accessed directly using the overloaded subscript ([]) operator, like in char arrays:
If you want to do it character by character, you can also use
Not surprisingly, operator+ and operator+= are also defined! You can append another string, a const char* or a char to any string.
You can use the find() member function to find the first occurrence of a string inside another. find() will look for needle inside this starting from position pos and return the position of the first occurrence of the needle. For example:
Will simply print "4" which is the index of the first occurrence of "o" in str. If we want the "o" in "World", we need to modify pos to point past the first occurrence. str.find(find, 4) would return 4, while str.find(find, 5) would give 7. If the substring isn't found, find() returns std::string::npos.This simple code searches a string for all occurrences of "wiki" and prints their positions:
The function rfind() works similarly, except it returns the last occurrence of the passed string.
Would return Hello Human World!
You can use erase() to remove a substring from a string. For example:
Would return Hello!
You can use substr() to extract a substring from a string. For example:
Would return World.
For backwards compatibility with C/C++ functions which only accept char* parameters, you can use the member functions string::c_str() and string::data() to return a temporary const char* string you can pass to a function.  The difference between these two functions is that c_str() returns a null-terminated string while data() does not necessarily return a null-terminated string.  So, if your legacy function requires a null-terminated string, use c_str(), otherwise use data() (and presumably pass the length of the string in as well).
Strings can be concatenated(appended) together by simply using the + operator
Output here will be "Hello World"
Another thing to note is that instead of the + operator or concatenation, the .append(str2) class member function can be used to concatenate one string to another. The str2 object is permitted to be a string object or a C-string. This will add the string in the parenthesis to the string which is calling append.
It should also be noted that the append function can be used to append a string at a specific character location in the string. If a programmer puts  str.append(str2, p, n) , n number of characters from position p in string str2 will be appended to the end of str. For example, in the following code, there are two strings. 5 characters from the second string, starting with position 8 of str2 will be appended to the end of the first string, str.
The code above will append the word  Bears to the end of the first string, and then print Watch out for Bears on the screen.
Sometimes we want to convert strings into numbers. To do so we can use stoi() function which takes a string as an argument and returns the value.
To convert these strings to a number we save the stoi of the string variable in an integer variable.
Before stoi string :12023 and after stoi int: 12023
Before stoi string :1 and after stoi int: 1
Before stoi string :1232 and after stoi int: 1232
If we instead want to do the opposite and convert an integer to a string, we can use the to_string() function, which takes an integer as an argument and returns the integer as a string.
Before to_string int:12023 and after to_string string:12023
Strings can only be appended to other strings, but not to numbers or other datatypes, so something like std::string("Foo") + 5 would not result in a string with the content "Foo5". To convert other datatypes into string there exist the class std::ostringstream, found in the include file <sstream>. std::ostringstream acts exactly like std::cout, the only difference is that the output doesn't go to the current standard output as provided by the operating system, but into an internal buffer, that buffer can be converted into a std::string via the std::ostringstream::str() method.
To do:Template parameters to basic_string etc.
Video Graphics Chipset: Nvidia Quadro FX770M (???MB)
In the early stages of single CPU machines the CPU would typically sit on a dedicated system bus between itself and the memory.  Each memory access would pass along the bus and be returned from RAM directly.  As the speed of CPUs increased the speed of the RAM and the bus speed also increased.  Due to the electronics involved the cycle of memory access and RAM response became a bottleneck forcing the CPU to lose precious computing cycles waiting for the response to be returned (termed latency).
To overcome this latency some designs involved placing a memory controller on the system bus which took the requests from the CPU and returned the results - the memory controller would keep a copy (a cache) of recently accessed memory portions locally to itself and therefore being able to more rapidly respond to many requests involving sequential (such as program code) or locally scattered requests (such as variables regularly accessed by the program code).
As CPUs became even faster, the latency involved in retrieving RAM even from memory controller-cached areas became significantly costly.  The next stage of development would see the memory controller being positioned inside the die cast of the CPU itself (in many cases leaving memory controller on the bus as a duplicate) and thus the CPU cache was born.  As the CPU cache was on the CPU die cast, the bus between the CPU core and the CPU memory controller was far less in length and the memory controller could respond more rapidly, leaving less latency for the CPU until a non-cached element was required.
Still later and further engineering improvements meant the speed of the CPU cache began to mirror the speed of the CPU itself allowing each instruction cycle to go without wait states from it's cache.  Unfortunately the cost of such designs were significant and so a second layer or level of cache was placed onto the die cast and made from the cheaper (older) designs: CPUs now had Level 1 and Level 2 caches.  As the level 2 cache was cheaper it could be die cast in larger quantities than the level 1 cache and retain both reasonable production costs and savings over ordinary RAM access speeds as well as significant savings in populating the limited level 1 cache from the level 2 cache by comparison to RAM access speeds.
With the simplest of multiple MPU designs each MPU has no cache and sits directly on the bus which allows for RAM accesses (direct RAM access or through a memory controller).  Extending from the single-CPU design, a multi-MPU design which only ever reads information can be simply designed: each MPU sends it's request on the bus but needs a way to identify from where the request came.  To this end the request must be extended in some fashion to label the request & the most obvious identification is the slot in which the MPU sits (as indicated by the BIOS during the CPU's boot up process).  Responses coming back to the MPU without it's ID in the response can be safely ignored.  The identification process is often performed by a controller which is not a part of the multi-MPU make-up but instead a separate, specialist, MPU on the bus referred to as the Programmable Interrupt Controller (PIC).
Unfortunately, a system unable to write any data will be very limited in it's flexibility and must therefore be capable of writing the data back to the RAM.  The mechanism for writing back to the RAM becomes, again, a simple extension on that of the single-CPU system: write back the RAM indicating the MPU slot the request came from and any acknowledgement responses can be correctly identified in the same way allowing for any individual MPU to know their write request succeeded.
Alas, there's one significant flaw: what happens if two (or more) MPUs work on the same piece of data at the same time?  Each MPU reads the data from RAM, processes the data based on the program code the individual MPU is working on and writes back the result to RAM.  The issue resides in which MPU performed the write request last as it is that MPU's result which will reside in RAM and not the first.  To illustrate the issue more clearly, consider the following where the activity references the same memory location (a number).
Is instructed to increment RAM location 0001
Is instructed to decrement RAM location 0001
Read data from memory referenced by code
Is instructed to put result to RAM location 0002
Puts the value 2 to RAM location 0002
Puts the value 0 to RAM location 0002
If this were an SMP system, both MPUs would be processing at the same speed and both would reach each phase of the pipeline at the same time.  As a result, each would attempt to write their interpretation of the data back to RAM location 0002 at the same time.  What would be the value of RAM location 0002 afterwards?  Unfortunately, there's no guarantee unless some other method is put in place first to force this race condition not to occur.
In non-caching MPUs the MPU would request on the bus that a set range of memory be locked to prevent other processors from updating the memory region until the locking MPU has completed its own task.  This approach is inefficient as the locking prevents a second (or subsequent) MPU from accessing the memory region.
With the introduction of caches into the processors, the problem at first becomes more prevalent.  Going back to a single-processor architecture with a cache to better illustrate the issue, the cache presents fast-access to a region of memory that has already been accessed.  The MPU begins with a cache which is entirely marked as invalid and from there any request for a byte of RAM will automate a page of RAM to be loaded into the cache (filling only a portion of the cache).  When the processor accesses a different section of non-cached RAM, that page of RAM is also loaded along-side the already cached page(s).  The process continues until the cache is full of valid pages.
Once the cache is full and the processor requires access to a page of RAM not yet cached, it must make a decision as to where in it's cache it will write this new page: wherever the page is written to it will overwrite existing cached RAM.  So, how does the processor decide?  Two basic methods are used: most recent kept and random.  In the first method the MPU's memory controller keeps track of the order in which the cached pages have been most recently accessed and chooses the eldest of the cached pages as the one to overwrite.
In particularly complex algorithms the eldest-accessed cached page may not be the most convenient to be removed: the code may jump around the RAM pages accessing very little from numerous different pages while rarely accessing the data set (by comparison to all program code) or vice versa.  As a result of the jumping around in RAM the cache looses the data set (the most regularly-accessed single page of RAM) from it's cache.  In this scenario, the processor would be better loosing any one of the infrequently accessed program code pages than the data set itself (note that there is a very big argument to state any program behaving in this manner is either poorly programmed or badly compiled).
In addition to the caching of data being read from RAM, the writing of data back to RAM can be similarly cached by the processor and then written as an entire page when the page is flushed.  With a single-MPU system the caching of writes has no effect on other components in the system and can therefore take its time in writing back any modified cached pages (note that the RAM remains unchanged until the CPU writes the modified data back to RAM).  This method is termed lazy write.
Back to a multiple-MPU system and the issue of using caches becomes far more obvious: when any processor writes to a portion of RAM the data is placed into its cache and not back into RAM.  If another MPU attempts to read that same section of RAM the data it receives will be out of date.  It is necessary to have the content of each of the MPU caches to be in tune with each other (or coherent, hence the term cache coherency).  Various methods have been devised to ensure the caches remain as coherent as they can.  The simplest of these methods involves ensuring any write operations push the data immediately back to the RAM via the bus with all MPUs in the architecture monitoring the bus for write operations: when a write operation is seen on the bus the MPU checks it's own cache for that same page of RAM and if it is cached the page is immediately re-loaded from RAM.  This is a very expensive method for large parallel systems using common sub-sets of data: when a single MPU writes the data section each other MPU with the data cached must re-request the data.  The method is vastly improved by the other MPUs reading the data off the bus as it is written back to RAM (termed snooping) thereby negating the need for a potential n - 1 requests for reading the same RAM location.  In more advanced improvements, snooping is applied to all bus packets such that any single read operation can potentially become cached into all MPUs in the architecture.
Whether a cache is in use or not, a directory-based writing technique involves all RAM being controlled by a centrally located memory manager.  The MPUs involved respect only the information given to them by the memory manager and requests for writes can come from the memory manager to an individual MPU requesting for the data to be written back immediately.
More advanced techniques exist for cache coherency and these begin with a similar set of abilities. Almost universally, each of these methods mark all pages of RAM as one of Modified, Shared or Invalid.  More complex methods introduce the markings of Exclusive and/or Owner.  The names of the methods are most commonly referred to by the initials of the methods implemented: MSI, MESI, MOSI and MOESI.
The page is marked as altered and resides in an MPU's cache but there is no valid copy in RAM.  In a method where Owner status is also used, a Modified page is not required by any other MPU.
A complement to the Modified status where an otherwise Modified page is required and in use by other MPUs.  In massively parallel systems the architecture's memory controller(s) hold information on which other MPUs require the page and are thereby able to distribute the necessary page across bus boundaries.
The MPU having the page is the only MPU with the page cached.  No other MPU has requested or retained the page.
A page marked as shared indicates that one or more MPUs have the page in their cache.  If the method utilises Exclusive, then Shared indicates that more than one MPU has the page.
An Invalid cached page is a page which cannot be relied upon for valid data.  An MPU typically starts out with only invalid pages (a few systems pre-load an MPU's cache with simple boot-up code prior to booting).  Some MOESI implementations will mark a page as Invalid when the page is written to RAM.
No matter which of the memory management techniques are used (and many more variations and techniques exist than described above), there remain possibilities to generate invalid data in the caching.  However, these possibilities are due to the nature of poor or misunderstood programming techniques and/or poor compilation.  This is covered in depth under the software chapter.
As the name suggests, Unified Memory Access (UMA) describes a method by which all accesses to memory are performed in a unified, equal, manner.  In a UMA design the RAM is typically pooled together and often a memory controller is available to assist the CPU(s) in accessing the RAM.  UMA is by far the most common method of implementing RAM access in a SMP.
Very popular in massively parallel processing architectures and clusters alike.  The Non-Unified Memory Access (NUMA) architecture is a system (single machine or cluster) which houses a single RAM block which is distributed throughout the system.  For example, a four-processor architecture could be made up of two pairs of processors, each pair having direct access to 2GB of RAM.  In this scenario each pair is attached to a local bus and it's shared 2GB.  Access to the other pair's 2GB is performed through an inter-bus link (typically a memory controller).
A more extreme example of a NUMA system is often employed in clusters which attempt to present a single-system image: each node in the cluster houses a portion of the system RAM with the cluster software being a localised memory controller.  A process existing on one node of the cluster must access a memory portion housed on another node.  By comparison to the first node accessing its own real RAM (through the localised cluster memory controller thereof), attempting to access the RAM portion on the alternate node involves a much more complex scenario: the first node must make the request of the second node to send the RAM across the network; the second node must check whether the portion is already being modified to another (third) node; if being modified, the second node must request the third node relinquishes the RAM access; the third node writes the modifications back to the second node and finally the second node releases the RAM portion to the requesting node.  Should two nodes require frequent modification access to the same RAM portion, the results can impact severely on the cluster's ability to process data in a worthy fashion.  Thankfully, software techniques exist (much the same as those described here) to lessen the impact of such a scenario.
Straw bales are thick and dense enough to keep out many kinds of pests. As well, the outer layer of plaster makes them unattractive or impenetrable to animals and insects. Finally, because straw contains little nutrient value to most animals and insects, it does not attract pests.
Termites like moist damp conditions.  While a wall is kept dry, there is little danger termites would have any interest.  When termites do manage to enter a wall, they tend to bypass the straw and attack any wooden studs.
In North America, termites attacked straw bale houses only very rarely.
Decide what to do with the vocabulary table below.
The tense of the sentence is given with the second verb.
I ate an apple while I watched television.
I watch television while eating an apple.
I talked with my friends on our way to school.
I sang a song while swimming.
I chatted with friends over coffee.
Elizabeth Cary was born in 1585 and became the first English woman to write an entire play alone. The poem was written when Cary was 17 years old, but wasn’t published in London until 1613, almost a decade later.  Despite the lack of focus on this part of her life in more recent biographies, it was an ‘extraordinary achievement for a woman of the Renaissance’ (Pearse, pp. 601, 1977). Most of her written history is based on her conversion to Catholicism. Although occurring very late in her life, it is suspected she may have adopted it decades earlier privately. Her credibility was lost when her husband separated from her and took her children.
The odds were already stacked against her as a female and mother in the creative industry. She was self-taught; as a child, she would stay up all night reading, bribing the servants for candlelight. This led to her early success as a writer but also as a translator – from as young as twelve years of age. When she was five, her parents employed a French teacher and Elizabeth mastered the craft in just over a month. She then learned Spanish, Italian, Latin, Hebrew and Transylvanian without help.
Married at fifteen to Sir Henry Cary, Elizabeth began her often challenging relationships with those close to her. The wedding was arranged by her father, and Henry married her because she was an heiress. He later became Lord (or Viscount) Falkland, and her Lady (or Viscountess) Falkland. They didn’t live together until several years later. She became a successful playwright during this time. After moving in with Henry, her mother-in-law disallowed her to read, so instead she wrote poems as a hobby. Within twenty years had eleven children together. One died in infancy and her eldest child died in 1625, the possible motivator for her religious evolution.
Her devotion to this new-found religion is clear in that she went ahead knowing how it would affect her marriage. She sacrificed her relationship with her parents to make the marriage work earlier on, by using some of her inheritance to assist her husband’s land troubles. This resulted in the jointure being passed forward onto her eldest son instead; she was disowned financially. A year later is when Henry cut ties with her and gained custody of her children. She had very little support. Her husband died in 1633 and she regained custody of her kids. Five of them joined the Catholic Church.
Cary’s most famous play, The Tragedy of Mariam, the Fair Queen of Jewry (1613), was in iambic pentameter, a rhythm popularly favoured by Shakespeare. Given that Cary lived at the same time as Shakespeare, it is fair to assume that he influenced her poetry.  She includes sonnets, couplets and use of irony. Not only was her play progressive because it was written by a woman, but it also contained core feminist ideas of divorce, female agency and revenge plotting. The Tragedy of Mariam was heavily influenced by Queen Elizabeth I and her career of challenging gender norms. An example from the play reads,
I will not to his love be reconcil'd,
With solemn vows I have forsworn his bed (Cary, 1613, pp. III, iii,133-4)
This is a display of Mariam’s defiance and power. It is a ‘revolutionary act’ (Rose, pp. 1-2) and the beginning of a new outlook on life. Most of its fame stems from the last half-century. It was a closet drama, which means it was not written for the stage, but to be read. Closet dramas are already less likely to be popular, and Elizabeth’s was controversial for her time. She knew this when she created it; the good thing about closet dramas is that you can take more risks; be more progressive. The designated audience was liberated women, of whom did not exist in large numbers. This recent buzz is the recognition of The Tragedy of Mariam as an early contribution to the feminist literature movement. However, it is also criticised for its orientalist discourse. Although difficult to apply Said’s Orientalism theory to an historic time, one can see where Elizabeth’s stereotypical character building came into play. One main character showcases this idea: Arabian Silleus, the ‘exotic and erotic lover/seducer’ (Hermes, pp. 60, 2014). The recent re-discovery of the play has led to its presence on the stage even though it is a closet drama. It was performed for the first time in 1994 and has since been produced several times, all over England.
Cary’s daughter Lucy wrote a biography of her mother’s life, titled The Lady Faulkland: Her Life by One of her Daughters. Another of Cary’s daughters, Anne, also became an author and became famous for publishing original translations, psalms and writings. Their mother was a significant influence of them, and it is because of her that women’s literature was so widely published after the 17th century.
Elizabeth Cary died of tuberculosis in 1639, at the age of 54. Cary is known today as a literary hero who was convinced she had followed the religion she truly had faith in, Catholicism. In her daughter’s words, she passed ‘without any agony quietly as a child, being wholly spent by her disease’ (Cary, 1861).
Brown, Susan, Patricia Clements, and Isobel Grundy, eds. “Elizabeth Cary, Viscountess Falkland entry: Overview screen within Orlando: Women's Writing in the British Isles from the Beginnings to the Present”. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press Online, 2006. Accessed 30 Apr. 2021.
Cary, Elizabeth, et al. “The Tragedy of Mariam, the Fair Queen of Jewry.: With, The Lady Falkland: Her Life”. University of California Press, 1994.
Hermes, Nizar F.. ““Consorting With The Base Arabian"; The Tragedie Of Mariam, Fair Queene of Jewry (1613), from discursive ambivalence to orientalist benevolence.” 2014. Accessed 30 Apr. 2021.
GradeSaver. “Critical Reception: The Tragedy of Mariam Wikipedia.” GradeSaver. Accessed 30 Apr. 2021.
Gutenberg, Project. “Elizabeth Cary, Viscountess Falkland.” Elizabeth Cary, Viscountess Falkland | Project Gutenberg Self-Publishing - EBooks | Read EBooks Online, 2008. Accessed 30 Apr. 2021.
Pearse, Nancy Cotton. “Elizabeth Cary, Renaissance Playwright.” Texas Studies in Literature and Language, vol. 18, no. 4, 1977, pp. 601–608. JSTOR. Accessed 30 Apr. 2021.
Rose, G. Kevin. “Dark Moon Rising: Reading the Psychology of The Tragedy of Mariam”. Oregon State University, Corvallis. Accessed 30th Apr. 2021.
Rose, G. Kevin. “Elizabeth Cary (1584-1639): A Biographical Sketch”. Oregon State University, Corvallis. Accessed 30th Apr. 2021.
Twickenham Museum. “Elizabeth Cary, Viscountess Falkland Writer, Translator & Catholic Recusant 1585 - 1639.” Accessed 30 Apr. 2021.
Tea bag Name : Earl Grey
Flavours : Earl Grey,Ceylon Tea
Back Texts :   Pure Ceylon Tea  Packed in Sri Lanka
Flap Texts :   Instructions Use freshly boiled water. Use one tea bag per person ...
Colours : Yellow Dark, Brown,  White
Tea bag Name : Jasmine
Back Texts :   Pure Chinese Tea  Packed in Sri Lanka
Flap Texts :   Instructions Use freshly boiled water. Use one tea bag per person ...
Colours : Green,  Red,  White
Search Tea Bags by Brands :
A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  Q  R  S  T  U  V  W  X  Y  Z  0-9
Search Tea Bags by Countries :
A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  R  S  T  U  V  Y  Z
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Computing » Computer Science » Computer Programming » Ada Programming
This language feature is only available from Ada 2005 on.
Ada.Containers.Indefinite_Vectors is a unit of the Predefined Language Environment since Ada 2005.
This page is a stub. You can improve the Ada Programming wikibook by reading the contributing guidelines and expanding it.
--                     Standard Ada library specification
--   SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause and LicenseRef-AdaReferenceManual
.. Index_Type'Min (Index_Type'Base'Last - 1, Index_Type'Last) + 1;
No_Index : constant Extended_Index := Extended_Index'First;
Empty_Vector : constant Vector;
Index     : Extended_Index)
Process   : not null access procedure (Element : in Element_Type));
Process  : not null access procedure (Element : in Element_Type));
Process   : not null access procedure (Element : in out Element_Type));
Position  :    out Cursor;
Index     : in Index_Type := Index_Type'First)
Index     : in Index_Type := Index_Type'Last)
Search for examples of Ada.Containers.Indefinite_Vectors in: Rosetta Code, GitHub or this Wikibook.
Search for any post related to Ada.Containers.Indefinite_Vectors in: Stack Overflow, comp.lang.ada or any Ada related page.
A.18.10: The Package Containers.Indefinite_Vectors (Annotated)
A.18.11: The Generic Package Containers.Indefinite_Vectors (Annotated)
Specification: a-coinve.ads
Body: a-coinve.adb
Specification: containers/a-coinve.ads
Body: containers/a-coinve.adb
Mesh network basics —
Taxonomy of Mesh Types —
How many radios? —
What layers does it run on? —
Accounting and Billing —
Getting Power to the Node —
Meshes you can build —
A reader has identified this chapter as an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Philadelphia wireless project [1]
"Wireless Philadelphia Blog". http://www.wirelessphiladelphia.org/.
"Wireless Philadelphia FAQ". http://www.phila.gov/wireless/faqs.html.
"Wireless Leiden website". http://www.wirelessleiden.nl.
Sexual Assaults. 271  of the Crim. CodeElection / PleaCrown Election
DO/LTO primary designated offenceReferencesOffence Elements  Sentence Principles  Sentence Digestsview • talk • edit
Everyone who commits a sexual assault is guilty of
(a) an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years and, if the complainant is under the age of 16 years, to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of one year and a maximum punishment of 14 years detention; or
(b) an offence punishable on summary conviction and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 18 months and, if the complainant is under the age of 16 years, to a minimum punishment of imprisonment for a term of 6 months and a maximum punishment of 2 years less a day.
R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 271; R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 10; 1994, c. 44, s. 19; 2012, c. 1, s. 25.
For general principles on sentence for sexual offences, see Sexual Offences
In Saskatchewan, major sexual assaults usually begin at 3 years incarceration.[1]
Sexual assault involving full intercourse of a minor by an adult in a position of trust is usually in the range of 3 to 7 years.[2]
In Alberta, the starting point for a major sexual assault upon a minor by a person in a position of trust is 4 years.[3]
In Manitoba, major sexual assaults committed upon teenagers by person in a position of trust will start at 4 to 5 years.[4]
In Ontario, cases of sexual assault involving forced intercourse with a spouse or former spouse, sentences generally range from 21 months to four years[5]
A sexual assault is inherently violent, having an impact on the emotional and phychological well-being of the vicitms.[6]
It is only in the exceptional or rare cases that a sexual assault on children involving a breach of trust should warrant a conditional sentence.[7]
R. v. Bird, (1993), 105 Sask.R. 161 and
R. v. Cappo, (1994), 116 Sask. R. 1
R. v. R.H., [2003] N.J. No. 336 (C.A.)
R. v. Vokey, 2000 NLCA 14 at 19
R. v. Freake, 2012 NLCA 10 at 25
R. v. B.L., 2011 ABCA 375  at 7
↑  R. v. D. (M.F.) [1991] M.J. No. 479 (MBCA)
R. v. Smith, 2011 ONCA 564 at 87
R. v. Jackson, 2010 ONSC 3910
R. v. M.(B.), 2008 ONCA 645
R. v. Nolan, 2009 ONCA 727
R. v. Toor, 2011 ONCA 114
↑  R. v. Stuckless 1998 CanLII 7143 (ONCA) at p.334
R. v. MacNaughton [1997] O.J. No. 4102 (C.A.), 1997 CanLII 960 (ON CA) at para 7 ("In our view it should only be in rare cases that a conditional sentence be imposed in cases of breach of trust involving the sexual touching of children by adults.")
Factors that courts can be aggravating include:[1]
Voluntariness of a child victim cannot be used as a mitigating factor.[2] Rather, the existence of consent can be used as an absence of a aggravating factor.[3]
↑ see R. v. Atkins 1988 CanLII 201 (NL CA), (1988), 69 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 99 - supports some of the factors listed here
c.f. R v Allen (1989), 77 Nfld. & P.E.I.R. 138 (NLCA)
Section 161 Order (if involving person under age 16)
Section 743.21 no contact order while in custody
No contact with persons under age of 16 (if facts involve victim under the age of 16)
No alcohol or drugs (if facts involve them)
v • d • e Sexual OffencesOffences
Sexual Interference (151), Invitation to Sexual Touching (152), Sexual Exploitation (153), Incest (155), Bestiality (160), Obscenity (163), Child Pornography (163.1), Making Materials Available to Child (171.1), Child Luring (172.1), Agree or Arrange a Sexual Offence Against Child (172.2), Keeping Common Bawdy-house (210), Procuring and Living on the Avails of Prostitution (212), Solicitation (213), Sexual Assault (271), Sexual Assault with a Weapon (272), Sexual Assault Causing Bodily Harm (272), Aggravated Sexual Assault (273)Sentencing
Sexual Interference (151), Invitation to Sexual Touching (152), Sexual Exploitation (153), Incest (155), Bestiality (160), Obscenity (163), Child Pornography (163.1), Making Materials Available to Child (171.1), Child Luring (172.1), Agree or Arrange a Sexual Offence Against Child (172.2), Keeping Common Bawdy-house (210), Procuring and Living on the Avails of Prostitution (212), Solicitation (213), Sexual Assault (271), Sexual Assault with a Weapon (272), Sexual Assault Causing Bodily Harm (272), Aggravated Sexual Assault (273)
Why do computers behave the way they do? And why do some computers behave differently than others? Here we learn about software, the essence that makes computers do what they do.
Some computers do only one thing. For example, the embedded computer inside kitchen scale cares only about measuring weight. Let's look at a few other examples.
To do:Replace the list with a gallery of single-purpose devices powered by embedded computers. Add more examples.
Can you think of other specialized computers that focus on one task?
Other computers, for example smartphones, have some basic functions like calling and sending text messages, but they can also run many apps that do a variety of tasks.
To do:Replace the list with a gallery of apps. Add more examples.
Can you name other apps? Did you use some of them?
Apps have many advantages. You can pack a lot of apps in one device. Apps usually don't cost you anything. And it is easy to replace misbehaving app with a better one.
Apps are also called applications, programs, or software.
Computers are not smart like humans. They cannot think and act with reason. Not yet anyway. But they sometimes come close. Alexa, a kind of smart speaker, is a computer able to answer questions about a number of topics. Many apps can do the same.
To do:Add gallery of intelligent computers/apps/websites, ideally in action.
The advantage of intelligent computers is that you don't have to look for an app that does what you want. You just ask the computer the way you would ask a friend. The disadvantage is that these intelligent computers aren't really very intelligent. They often misunderstand what you want or they simply don't know how to help you. That's why people still prefer apps for most tasks.
Certain websites use artificial intelligence to recommend to you new and interesting products. For example, many people who search for cats on the web like cats and also buy cat clothing. If enough people both search for cats and buy cat clothing, the website starts to take notice. It then will recommend cat clothing to people searching for cats, in an attempt to sell more cat clothing
To do:Maybe add some examples of poor AI performance.
Tax is charged by reference to accounting periods[1]. Often an accounting period coincides with a companies period of account. This is the period for which it draws up accounts[2], except for a life assurance company, where it is the period for which it draws up its periodical return[3]. However, periods of account and accounting periods do not necessarily coincide.
An accounting period begins when[4]:
An accounting period ends on the earliest of the following[6]:
There are further rules to deal with windings up, life assurance companies and lessor companies.
A UK-resident company is treated as coming within the charge to corporation tax (if it has not already come within the charge to corporation tax) when it commences to carry on business[7].
Suppose ABC Ltd, a UK resident company is incorporated on 1 August 20X1. It acquires a source of income (an interest-bearing bank account) on 1 September 20X1 and commences trading on 1 October 20X1 and continues trading throughout all other periods under review. It draws up its accounts for the following periods:
Then ABC Ltd would have the following accounting periods:
1 September 20X1 to 30 September 20X1 (from when it came into charge to corporation tax to the commencement of trade)
If a company carrying on more than one trade draws up accounts of any of them to different dates, and does not make up general accounts for the whole of the company's activities, the company may determine that any one of those dates shall be taken into consideration for the purposes of determining whether an accounting period has ended under the rule in the second bullet point above[8].
If, however, the Board of HMRC is of the opinion, on reasonable grounds, that the date so chosen by the company is inappropriate, they may, if it is reasonable to do so, give notice that the accounting date of another of the company's trades should be used instead[9].
Some companies draw up financial statements to the same day of the week, a Sunday, say, each year. They will therefore have 364 day (52 week) or 371 day (53 week) periods of account. As long as the company draws its accounts up to within four days of a mean accounting date each year, it may, for the purposes of determining its accounting periods, deem its accounts to be drawn up for a twelve month period. For example, when there is a 371 day period of account, instead of having one accounting period of 365 days (in a non-leap year) and another of 6 days, it will prepare its return on the assumption that the period of account was 365 days long.[10]
Where it appears to the tax inspector that the beginning or end of any accounting period is uncertain, he may make an assessment on the company for such period, not exceeding 12 months, as appears to him appropriate. In that event, that period is treated for all purposes as an accounting period unless the inspector sees fit to revise it as a result of receiving further facts, or on an appeal against the assessment in respect of some other matter the company shows the true accounting periods. If on an appeal against an assessment made under this rule the company shows the true accounting periods, the assessment appealed against has effect as an assessment or assessments for the true accounting periods, and assessments may be made for any such periods as might have been made at the time when the assessment appealed against was made.  [11]
An accounting period ends immediately before the day a company enters into administration. For this purpose a company enters administration when it enters administration under Schedule B1 to the Insolvency Act 1986 or is subject to any corresponding procedure otherwise than under that Act (for example, in an overseas jurisdiction). [12].
An accounting period ends when a company ceases to be in administration[13]. For these purposes a company ceases to be in administration when it ceases to be in administration under Schedule B1 to the Insolvency Act 1986 or any corresponding event occurs otherwise than under that Act[14] (for example, in an overseas jurisdiction).
An accounting period ends and a new one begins with the commencement of a winding up. For this purpose a winding up is taken to commence on the passing of a resolution for the winding up of the company, or on the presentation of a winding up petition if no such resolution has previously been passed and a winding up order is made on the petition, or on the doing of any other act for a like purpose in the case of a winding up otherwise than under the Insolvency Act 1986. [15]
After this, an accounting period does not end other than by the expiration of 12 months from its beginning or by the completion of the winding up[16]. However, if the company later enters administration, this rule is disapplied from that point (and with an accounting period ending because the company has entered into administration)[17].
During the course of a winding up, a company may make an estimate of when it will be wound up so that it can prepare tax returns for its final accounting period before that period ends. If the date assumed for the winding up turns out to be before the actual winding up, then an accounting period ends on the date assumed for the winding up, a new accounting period starts, and the immediately preceding paragraph applies as if the winding up had started with that accounting period.  [18].
HMRC will, under certain conditions, allow cooperatives that prepare quarterly and half-yearly accounts to merge a number of periods of account for tax purposes so that they have only accounting date each year[19].
Additionally, there are special rules that apply to life assurance companies from which life assurance business is transferred under and insurance business transfer scheme. Different rules apply depending on whether s444AA ICTA applies. For transfers before 1 January 2007, s444AA applies where the whole of the transferor's long-term insurance business is being transferred and the company. It is proposed that the Finance Bill 2007 will amend this for transfers on or after 1 January, so that s444AA applies where the whole or substantially the whole of the transferor's long-term insurance business is transferred, in which case the transfer time is taken to be the time some business is first transferred[20].
If s444AA does not apply, an accounting period of the transferor company ends with the day of the transfer[21].
If s444AA applies, an accounting period of the transferor company ends immediately before the transfer, and the transferor also has an accounting period covering the instant of the transfer (except for the purposes of calculating the equalisation provision for tax purposes)[22].
Suppose a transferor company, XYZ Life Ltd, has in the past prepared periodical returns for a period encompassing the calendar year. It transfers the whole of its business at 11.59pm on 31 December 20X1, after which it retains some cash on deposit. It agrees with the Financial Services Authority that it does not need to prepare a periodical return for 20X1.
XYZ Life Ltd will have the following accounting periods in 20X1:
An accounting period covering the instant of the transfer (11.59pm on 31 December 20X1)
An accounting period covering the period beginning immediately after the transfer to midnight on 31 December 20X1
If a company carries on a business of leasing plant or machinery, is within the charge to corporation tax in respect of the business and there is a qualifying change of ownership in relation to the company, then an accounting period of the company ends on the day of that qualifying change in ownership, and a new accounting period begins on the following day. There are exceptions to this in Paragraph 40.[23]
Other provisions in the Taxes Acts sometimes deem there to be accounting periods for specific purposes only. This is typically on the introduction of new legislation. For example, when section 75 of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988 was replaced as a result of the Finance Act 2004, companies, if necessary, deemed themselves to have an accounting period ending on 31 March 2004 for the purposes of calculating management expenses that they were entitled to under the rules applying pre-1 April 2004 and post-31 March 2004.
Preceding page: The schedular system of corporation tax
↑ Section 12(1) of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988
↑ Section 832(1) of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988
↑ Section 431 of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988
↑ Section 12(2) of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988
↑ Section 12(6) of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988
↑ Section 12(3) of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988
↑ Section 12(4) of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988
↑ Section 12(5) of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988
↑ Section 12(5A) of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988
↑ ICEAW Technical Release 500
↑ Section 12(8) of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988
↑ Section 12(7ZA) of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988
↑ Section 12(3)(da) of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988
↑ Section 12(5B) of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988
↑ Section 12(7) of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988
↑ Section 12(7ZA) of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988
↑ Section 342(6) of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988
↑ Extra-statutory concession C12
↑ See draft legislation released by HMRC on 6 December 2006[1]
↑ Section 12(7A) of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988
↑ Section 12(7C) of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988
↑ Paragraphs 3, 33, 40 Schedule 10 to the Finance Act 2006
While technically not part of iLife, this feature on all Macs that came with an Apple Remote, lets you enjoy your media from your sofa.
Front Row is a feature on some of Apple's latest Macs that lets you control certain functions of iLife from your sofa using a special remote. This remote is a curvy white rectangle reminiscent of the iPod shuffle and the now-defunct iPod mini. It has only six buttons on it: Play/Pause, +, -, >>, <<, and MENU.
To show Front Row, press the MENU button on your remote. Your Mac desktop flies away into the background and four gargantuan icons rotate into place. Pressing MENU again hides Front Row and brings you back to your desktop, exactly the way you left it.
Just listen to M. de Saint-Cricq:—
"Labour constitutes the wealth of a nation, because labour
"But this abundance must be produced by national labour.
If it were the result of foreign labour, national labour would be
"What course should an agricultural and manufacturing
"And for that purpose, restrain by duties, and, if necessary,
Let us compare this system with that which the Bordeaux
Commodities are there divided into three classes:—
"The first includes provisions, and raw materials upon which no human labour has been bestowed. In principle, a wise economy would demand that this class should be free of duties" Here we
"The second consists of products which have, to some extent, been prepared. This preparation warrants such products being
"The third comprises goods and products in their finished
They demand that the home market should be reserved for
What pattern do you notice if you fold the table across the diagonal?
The numbers are the same on either side of the diagonal; the table is symmetrical.
Explain this pattern mathematically.
We get the same answer when we change the order of the factors. For example, 8*5 = 5*8. This is called the commutative rule of multiplication.
Write this rule in symbolic notation.
What happens when you go across the 4’s row?
What happens when you go down the 7’s column?
...the same thing.
Write this rule in symbolic notation.
...zero.
Write this rule in symbolic notation.
The Heavenly Stems (HS) and Earthly Branches (EB) of the Year, Month and Day of 1904 in the Hsia Calendar, from January to December.
The last 2 columns give the Month (LM) and the Day (LD) of the corresponding Chinese Lunar Calendar. Where an intercalary month ('leap month' or 'run yue' in Pinyin) is introduced, the numeral representing the Lunar Month (LM) is followed by the letter 'a' or 'b'.
For the purpose of Date Selection, an '(X)' under the 'Month & Day' column indicates an inauspicious day.
It has been estimated that a Tour-de-France champion could generate a sustained 510 Watts of power while a healthy young human male (HYHM) can generate about 310 Watts of power. The bicycling champion and HYHM are going to race (on bicycles) up a hill with a 6% upgrade, that is five miles long, and the elevation at the top of the hill is 5000 feet. Both rider/bicycle combinations weigh 170 lbs, with frontal area 0.4m2 and coefficient of drag 0.9 (values being typical of bicyclists in crouched racing positions). The coefficient of rolling resistance for both bicycles is 0.01. Assume
Welcome to the weird and wonderful world of multithreading!
Multithreading effectively allows your programs to do several things at the same time. The word 'thread' in this context means 'thread of execution' - or, the series of instructions, branches and so on executed by your program. Most programs are 'single threaded', meaning there is only one thread of execution. However, more and more programs are using multiple threads.
Multithreading used to be achieved by software trickery, which made threading useful but not really faster - there was still only one CPU pretending to do multiple things at the same time! But these days, multicore CPUs mean that threading can be used to truly do multiple things at the same time (or 'in parallel').
Alas, threading turns out to be rather tricky due to an issue known as 'synchronization'. Synchronization is required when you need to prevent multiple threads from modifying or accessing the same data at the same time. Synchronization usually involves a thread 'blocking'. When a thread blocks, it completely halts execution until another thread does something that causes it to 'unblock' and resume execution.
BlitzMax provides 2 primitives known as 'mutexes' and 'semaphores' to assist with synchronization:
Mutexes provide a simple locking mechanism. Only one thread at a time can lock a mutex (using LockMutex or TryLockMutex), so this is an easy way to protect resources from simultaneous access. If a thread calls LockMutex and the mutex is already locked by another thread, the current thread will block until the other thread releases the mutex using UnlockMutex. So don't forget to UnlockMutex a mutex after you are finished with it!
Semaphores provide a synchronized counting mechanism, and contain an internal integer counter. There are 2 operations you can perform on a semaphore - post and wait. Posting a semaphore (using PostSemaphore) causes the semaphore's internal counter to be incremented, while waiting for a semaphore (using WaitSemaphore) will cause the current thread to block until the semaphore's internal counter is greater than 0. When it is, the counter is decremented and the thread unblocks. Semaphores are very useful for producer/consumer type situations.
Description: Wait For this thread To finish
Returns: The Object returned by the thread.
Description: Check if this thread is running
Function Create:TThread( entry:Object( data:Object),data:Object )
Returns: A thread object representing the main application thread.
Returns: A thread object representing the current thread.
Returns: True if mutex was successfully locked; False if mutex was already locked by another thread.
Function CreateThread:TThread( entry:Object( data:Object ),data:Object )
Returns: A new thread object.
Creates a thread and returns a thread object.
The value returned by the thread entry routine can be later retrieved using WaitThread.
a limit on the number of threads that can be allocated at once.
'Make sure to have 'Threaded build' enabled!
'Custom print that shows which thread is doing the printing
'return a value from the thread
MyPrint "About to start child thread."
'create a thread!
Local thread:TThread=CreateThread( MyThread,"Data passed to child thread." )
'wait for thread to finish and print value returned from thread
Returns: A thread Object representing the Main application thread.
Returns: A thread object representing the current thread.
DetachThread closes a thread's handle, but does not halt or otherwise affect the target thread.
Once one a thread has been detached, it wil no longer be possible to use WaitThread to get its return value.
This allows the thread to run without your program having to continually check whether it has completed in order to close it.
Description: Wait for a thread to finish
Returns: The object returned by the thread entry routine.
WaitThread causes the calling thread to block until the target thread has completed execution.
If the target thread has already completed execution, WaitThread returns immediately.
The returned object is the object returned by the thread's entry routine, as passed to CreateThread.
Description: Check if a thread is running
Returns: True if thread is still running, otherwise False.
Returns: A new thread data object.
Function SetThreadDataValue( data:TThreadData,value:Object )
'Make sure to have 'Threaded build' enabled!
'a global list that multiple threads want to modify
Global list:TList=New TList
'a mutex controlling access to the global list
'simulate 'other' processing...
'lock mutex so we can safely modify global list
Local threads:TThread[10]
Print "Waiting for worker threads..."
'Wait for worker threads to finish
'Note: We don't really have to lock the mutex here, as there are no other threads running.
'Still, it's a good habit to get into.
For Local t$=EachIn list
Returns: True if mutex was successfully locked; False if mutex was already locked by another thread.
'Make sure to have 'Threaded build' enabled!
Global queue$[100],put,get
'add an item to the queue
'increment semaphore count.
'Wait for semaphore count to be non-0, then decrement.
'Get an item from the queue
Local item$=queue[get]
Function WaitCondVar( condvar:TCondVar,mutex:TMutex )
Function CompareAndSwap( target Var,oldValue,newValue )
Atomically replace target with new_value if target equals old_value.
Function AtomicAdd( target Var,value )
Atomically add value to target.
Function AtomicSwap( target Var,value )
Put simply, chemical bonding joins atoms together to form more complex structures (like molecules or crystals). Bonding can occur between atoms of the same element, or between atoms of different elements. There are several types of chemical bonding which have different properties and give rise to different structures.
Ionic bonding occurs between positive and negative ions (charged atoms). This type of bonding seldom occurs between just two atoms, but typically leads to the formation of an ionic solid, in which the ions arrange themselves into a rigid crystal lattice. NaCl (common salt) is an example of an ionic substance.
Covalent bonding occurs when atoms share electrons with each other. This gives rise to two types of structures: molecules and covalent network solids. Methane (CH4) is a covalent molecule and glass is a covalent network solid. In molecules we can distinguish individual covalent bonds between pairs of atoms.
Whether the interaction between two atoms has a covalent or ionic character can be predicted from the atoms' electronegativities:
Metallic bonding occur between metal atoms. In a metallically bonded substance, the atoms' outer electrons are able to freely move around - they are delocalised. In principle, all electrons can behave like delocalized waves, but in substances with covalent or ionic bonding the number of accessible energy states equals the number of electrons and that makes this wave character less apparent. In metals there are far more accessible states than electrons and that leaves the electrons free to move and conduct electrically. Aluminum, tin, lead, silver are all metallically bonded elements, but there are also compounds with metallic bonding, such as alloys and intermetallic compounds.
Chemical bonding is one of the most crucial concepts in the study of Chemistry. In fact, the properties of materials are basically defined by the type and number of atoms they contain and how they are bonded together.
4.1.1 : Ionic bonding - +ve (cations) and -ve (anions) ions are attracted to each other and form a continuous ionic lattice.
What are ions?
Ions are atoms or molecules which are electrically charged. Cations are positively charged and anions carry a negative charge. Ions form when atoms gain or lose electrons. Since electrons are negatively charged, an atom that loses an electron will become positively charged (similarly an atom that gains one or more electrons becomes negatively charged).
Ionic bonding occurs between positive and negatively  charged ions. These oppositely charged ions attract each other and remain close together - they become ionically bonded. The law of electrostatic explains why this happens: opposite charges attract and like charges repel. When many ions attract each other, they form into large, orderly crystal lattices in which each ion is surrounded by ions of the opposite charge. When a metal forms an ionic bond with a non-metal, electrons are transferred from metal element to non-metal. When Ions are formed it is called Ionization
A diagram of an ionic solid should go here
The electron transfer from Na to Cl leading to the formation of ions.
Ions result when metals and non-metals chemically react. Due to its low ionization energy, a metal atom is destabilized only a little if it loses electrons to form a complete valence shell and becomes positively charged. Likewise, a non-metal is stabilized strongly by gaining  electrons to complete its valence shell and become negatively charged. When a metal and a non-metal come into contact, the metal loses electrons by transferring them to the non-metal, which gains them. Consequently, ions are formed, which instantly attract each other. An ionic bond is the electrostatic attraction between cations and anions due to Coulombic forces. The process of attraction typically does not stop with two ions, but proceeds to involve a great many of them that stack in a solid lattice structure, in which individual 'bonds' or individual molecules cannot be distinguished.
4.1.2 : Group 1 metals form +1 ions, group 2 metals form +2 ions, metals in group 3 form +3 ions. Examples : Li+, Mg2+, Al3+...Greater ease of ionisation Li->Cs is due to the increased electron shielding of the nuclear attraction caused by additional inner shells of electrons. The easier atoms are to ionise, the more reactive they will be because less energy is required to ionise them, and so they react more easily.
4.1.3 : Group 6 ions will form 2- ions, Group 7 ions will form 1- ions. Examples : O2-, Cl-...
4.1.4 : The transitions metals (elements from Ti to Cu, ignore Sc and Zn) can form multiple ions (ie Fe2+, Fe3+) (due to proximity of 4s and 3d shells)
4.1.5 : The ionic or covalent nature of the bonding in a binary compound is a result in the difference between their electronegativity...NaCl(s) is ionic, HCl(g) is (polar) covalent (also, covalent molecules tend to be gases/liquids, ionic tends to be solid...except network covalent which will be solid). In general, if the difference between electronegativities is greater than 1.7, the bond will be more than 50% ionic.
4.1.6 : Take the name of the group 1,2, or 3 metal and add...fluoride, chloride, bromide, iodide etc , oxide, sulfide, nitride or phosphide...
One useful model of covalent bonding is called the Valence Bond model. It states that covalent bonds form when atoms share electrons with each other in order to complete their valence (outer) electron shells. They are mainly formed between non-metals (i.e. chlorine, sulfur, carbon etc.).
An example of a covalently bonded substance is hydrogen gas (H2). A hydrogen atom on its own has one electron – there is room for two to complete its valence shell. When two hydrogen atoms bond, each one shares its electron with the other, i.e. the electrons are attracted by two nuclei instead of just one and so releasing energy. Both atoms now have access to two electrons: they become a stable H2 molecule joined by a single covalent bond.
Covalent bonds can also form between other non-metals, for example chlorine. A chlorine atom has 7 electrons in its valence shell — it needs 8 to complete it. Two chlorine atoms can share 1 electron each to form a single covalent bond. They become a Cl2 molecule.
Oxygen can also form covalent bonds; however, it needs a further 2 electrons to complete its valence shell (it has 6). Two oxygen atoms must share 2 electrons each to complete each other's shells, making a total of 4 shared electrons. Because twice as many electrons are shared, this is called a double covalent bond.
Furthermore, nitrogen has 5 valence electrons (it needs a further 3). Two nitrogen atoms can share 3 electrons each (6 in total) to make a N2 molecule joined by a triple covalent bond.
Carbon, contrary to the trend, does not share four electrons to make a quadruple bond. The reason for this is that the fourth pair of electrons in carbon cannot physically move close enough to be shared. The valence bond model explains this by considering the orbitals involved. Also more energy can be released by making 4 single bonds to 4 other carbon atoms to form a diamond structure.
Recall that electrons exist as clouds of electron density (orbitals) in atoms. The valence bond model works on the principle that orbitals on different atoms must overlap to form a bond. There are several different ways that the orbitals can overlap, forming several distinct kinds of covalent bonds.
4.2.1 : Covalent bonds are where two atoms each donate 1 electron to form a pair held between the two atoms...Such bonds are generally formed by atoms with little difference in electronegativity...ie C, H and O in organic chemistry.
4.2.2 : All electrons must be paired...Lewis diagrams are the element symbol with the outer (valence) shell of electrons left over and spare electrons pair up...in general C forms 4 bonds, N forms 3, O forms 2, halogens form 1, H forms 1...(Li would form 1, Be 2, and B 3 but they don't usually...metallic or ionic bonding)
4.2.3 : Electronegativity values range from 0.7 to 4...from bottom left to top right respectively (hydrogen falls B and C with a electronegativity of 2.1...
4.2.4 : When covalent molecules have a difference in electronegativity (between the two bonding atoms) then the pair will be held closer to the more electronegative atom...resulting in a small -ve charge on the more electronegative atom, and a small +ve charge on the other...results in polar bonds
4.2.5 : Shape of molecule with 4 electron pairs depends on number of lone pairs.
3 lone pairs -> linear, 2 lone pairs -> bent, 1 lone pair -> trigonal pyramid, No lone pairs -> tetrahedral
4.2.6 : The polarity of a molecule depends on both the shape and the polarity of the bonds...1) if there are no polar bonds, it's not polar. 2) if there are polar bonds, but the shape is symmetrical, it's not polar (think about it like 3D vector addition...if they add to zero, then it's not polar). 3) if there are polar bonds, and it's not symmetric, then the molecule is polar
4.3.1 : van der Waal's forces -- Electrons will not be evenly spread around an atom/molecule at any given time, meaning the molecule will have a slight positive charge on one end, and a negative at the other. This temporary state may cause attraction between two molecules, pulling them together (also known as London Dispersion Forces). Polar molecules, when properly oriented, will attract each other as a result of Dipole-Dipole forces. Dipole-Dipole forces are stronger than van der Waal's forces. Hydrogen bonding is when hydrogen is bonded to nitrogen, oxygen or fluorine, and a very strong dipole is formed, making the hydrogen very strongly positive. This hydrogen is then attracted to the lone pairs on other similar molecules--nitrogen, oxygen and fluorine all have lone pairs--forming a hydrogen bond, which is stronger than van der Waal's or dipole-dipole forces, but weaker than covalent bonding.
4.3.2 : Structural features -- Nonpolar molecules have van der Waal's forces only. This is also present in all other molecules, though its strength is often insignificant compared to the others. Polar molecules have dipole-dipole forces, which arise from polar bonds and asymmetry in molecules. Hydrogen bonds result from strongly delta positive hydrogen. This results in molecules with hydrogen bonding exhibiting stronger intermolecular forces, i.e. higher boiling/melting points etc. For example, H2O has a higher bp then H2S due to hydrogen bonding. Neutral molecules don't conduct electricity but some polar molecules exchange protons to form ions e.g. 2H2O makes H3O+ and OH-
4.4.1 : The metal atoms lose their outer electrons which then become delocalized, and free to move throughout the entire metal. These -ve delocalized electrons hold the metal cations together strongly. Since these electrons can flow, atoms with metallic bonding exhibit high electrical conductivity. The number of valence electrons involved in the bonding and the strength of the nucleus charge determines the strength.
Unlike ionic bonding, distorting the atoms does not cause repulsion so metallic substances are ductile (can be stretched into wires) and malleable (can be made into flat sheets). The free moving electrons also allow for high thermal conductivity, and the electrons can carry the heat energy rather than it being transferred slowly through atoms vibrating.
Metallic bonds occur among metal atoms. A sea of valence electrons surrounds positive metal ions. The electrons are free to move throughout the resulting crystal. The delocalized nature of the electrons explains a number of unique characteristics of metals: they are good conductors of electricity, they are ductile, meaning they can be made into wires, and they are malleable, meaning they can easily be hammered into thin sheets.
Melting and Boiling point: High with Ionic, Metallic Bonding and Network Covalent.
Low with Covalent Molecular Bonding.
Volatility: Covalent Molecular Substances are volatile, others are not.
Conductivity: Metallic substances conduct. Polar molecular substances conduct, non-polar ones don't. Ionic substances do conduct when molten or dissolved in water but never when solid.
Solubility: Ionic substances --> generally dissolve in polar solvents (like water).
Metallic substances --> soluble in liquid metal.
Non-polar molecules are generally soluble in non-polar solvents, and polar in polar.
Organic molecules with a polar head --> Short chain molecules are solubility in polar solvents but long chains can eventually outweigh the polar 'head' and will dissolve in non-polar solvents.
.
Ionically bonded substances typically have the following characteristics.
High melting point (solid at room temp)
Typically stronger than covalent bonds.
Topic 14 is the additional HL material for Topic 4.
The asteroid belt is a lot of small planets. They move around the Sun between Mars and Jupiter.
Type:InsectBinomial:Icerya purchasiFamily:MargarodidaeOrder: HemipteraMetamorphosis:Simple
Icerya purchasi, the  cottony cushion scale) is a scale insect that feeds on several ornamental species, but is most notoriously known as a pest of Citrus crops.
White scales, found on woody growth.
The presence of large numbers can weaken and even kill the host plant.
Originally from Australia, now present in many other regions.
Organic pesticides: Horticultural Oil, Neem Oil
Predators and parasites: The ladybeetle Rodolia cardinalis has been successfully introduced as a biocontrol in most areas where the scale is present. Chryptochaetum iceryae, a parasitic fly, is also used.
Perl (prior to version 5.10) has an illogical Method Resolution Order (MRO), this becomes apparent when using multiple inheritance dispatching. A fix for MI-dispatching was first popularized with Dameon's NEXT, which turned out to be a buggy hack that failed horribly in many cases. NEXT was unfortunately inducted into the CORE distro with Perl v5.7.3 and remains in the CORE even today. Moose uses the newer jazzier C optimized Class::C3 which is the new non-default standard for proper method-dispatch in all Perl's greater than Perl 5.95.[1]
Before Class::C3 and NEXT, you had SUPER which predates NEXT by approximately six months and thankfully never made CORE. SUPER was goofy and mostly useless because if foo and bar were siblings and subclasses of baz you could not re-dispatch in foo to a method in bar.
Essentially SUPER supported Method Dispatch only for linear patterns. NEXT supported them in a fashion that was quirky and made little sense.[2] Without learning the quirks there is a high probability the new Class::C3 does precisely what the programmer wants - it is intuitive. Class::C3 uses the C3 MRO algorithm which is also employed by Python.
The differences between NEXT and Class::C3 are outside of the range of this book; but, because vanilla Perl doesn't even permit method resolution, and dispatch in the sense of the OO paradigm we will show NEXT in its stead.
^  Perl 5.95 adds a new pragma mro which uses C3 resolution. This pragma is however opt in and makes a few tools available to you, which can all be utilized maintaining reverse compatibility with older Perl, using MRO::Compat.
^  The method that made little sense is called Depth First Search (DFS). DFS was the predecessor MRO to C3 in Perl. Briefly, it did not handle any form of triangle inheritance in a sane fashion.
Module 4.1 Starting a Business
For instructional purpose, it is advised that trainers/lectures use lectures and group and individual exercises as a major means of delivering this module.
Business is both context and product specific. While one kind of business may work in one region or country, the same business may not prosper in another region. The type of product defining ones business also plays an important part in determining whether the business will succeed or not. Thus, when starting a new business, there are many factors to consider, important decisions to be made, rules and procedures to be followed. In simple terms, there is no golden rule one can follow when starting a business. However, this module addresses some new business requirements by identifying some business opportunities one can explore, it discusses how one can set up a business, develop a plan and some business strategies that one can adopt to help set up a FOSS-based business in the African context. The module draws on experiences and practical issues discussed in some of the case studies in Module 2.
Most successful businesses start with a good idea. This idea may be your own or may be drawn from any one of a number of available resources, including the following:
Business contacts and acquaintances. These are people you are known to either by virtue of your current professional activities or through informal interactions.
Business magazines and newspapers: these often contain business success stories, how-to information for would-be small business owners, and lists of start-up opportunities.
Special interest publications: sector-related publications keep entrepreneurs informed of developments in their area of interest.
Trade shows. During such events, there are exhibitors from all walks of life and one could chance upon a brilliant idea by simply interacting with them.
Radio, television and the Internet. With the wealth of information at our finger tips through the various media at our disposal, it is now possible to tap ideas from across the globe without ever setting foot outside your country.
Import goods list: Reviewing a list of the goods imported into an area might provide clues on a wide variety of business opportunities in import replacement and supplier development. If products are not manufactured locally, find out why not.
Trend Analysis: Watch for trends in population, consumer or corporate buying behavior, government legislation, and other trends related to your business sector.
Existing inventions and innovations: Inquire at universities, trade schools and other research centers for opportunities to acquire technologies already developed.
Government departments, agencies and programs: governments departments and agencies are often committed to increasing the volume of federal government purchasing in their area of operation.
Departments and agencies offer studies and reports on business trends and opportunities. Boards of Trade and Chambers of Commerce also compile a number of business and investment opportunities.
Internet and personal blogs where you can search and read about what businesses others are doing, considering or commenting on other FOSS businesses in your region.
The following resources have been identified as essential components for building an effective business.
Finance and Accounting: The lifeblood of a business is money and a concrete understanding how the finances keep a business afloat is critical to the success of a business. Another concept which is closely associated with finance and accounting is bookkeeping.
Bookkeeping is the recording of financial transactions. Transactions include sales, purchases, income, and payments by an individual or organization. Bookkeeping is usually performed by a bookkeeper. Bookkeeping should not be confused with accounting.
Accountancy or accounting can be simply defined as the systematic recording, verifying, and reporting of your company's assets, income, expenses, etc. Accounting has been defined by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) as "The art of recording, classifying, and summarizing in a significant manner and in terms of money, transactions and events which are, in part at least, of financial character, and interpreting the results thereof."
The role and responsibility of book-keepers are appropriately summerized by Biswaroop Todi (2007) thus;
Keep complete, up-to-date, and accurate records of accounts and financial arrangements.
Bookkeepers verify and enter information into journals and ledgers or into a computer.
They periodically balance the books and compile reports and financial statements.
They also receive, record, bank and pay out cash.
They balance checkbooks with monthly bank statements.
They may calculate employee wages from plant records or time cards and issue payroll checks.
Posting accounts receivable and payable, prepare and make bank deposits, record payrolls, maintain inventory records, purchase supplies, prepare purchase orders and do expense reports.
Bookkeepers may also make schedules, sort documents, and file bills.
Role and responsibility of accountants and controller
The role and responsibilities of accountants may vary from one company to another. However, there are some standard practices which must be adopted. For instance, your company accountant will evaluate your business records drawn up by the bookkeeper . Accountants must also be able to draw up a set of financial records and prescribe the system of accounts that will most easily give the desired information (M. Chatfield; 1977 and A. J. Briloff; 1972).
They must be capable of arriving at a comprehensive view of the economic and the legal aspects of a business, envisaging the effect of every sort of transaction on the profit-and-loss statement.
They must recognize and classify all other factors that enter into the determination of the true condition of the business (e.g., statistics relating to production; properties and financial records representing investments, expenditures, receipts, fiscal changes, and present standing). In addition, it is important that the accountant possesses the following skills and is able to carryout the following;
Again the topic and content under it does do justice to components of business skills
Definition: A business plan is a generic model suitable for all types of businesses.
However, you should modify it to suit your particular circumstances. In this case it should accommodate your plan of action; which should aim at sustainability and strategic actions detailing how you should generate revenue from FOSS. Paul Young (2008) listed components which you may consider incorporating into your business plan. The components of a business plan are schematically illustrated in the figure below:
As shown in the figure above, Young (2008) described a business plan as consisting of an executive summary, general company descripion, mission ststement, company goals and objectives, the legal form of ownership of your company, and describing the business opportunities which may exist for your company. In addition to these, you may also want to state or list some of your notable or target clients and consider them as part of your business plan. Young's categorization of the components of a business plan are discussed below:
Write this section last and make it two pages or fewer. Include everything that you would cover in a five-minute interview. Explain the fundamentals of the proposed business: What will your business be? Who will your customers be? Who are the owners? What do you think the future holds for your business and your industry? Make it enthusiastic, professional, complete, and concise. If applying for a loan, state clearly how much you want, precisely how you are going to use it, and how the money will make your business more profitable, thereby ensuring repayment. The table below shows examples of executive summaries from some companies
What business will you be in? The work you are planning to do is not necessarily the business you are in. As an example, if you are planning to setup a hotel, you are actually going into the business of Hospitality i.e. looking after people. That is the actual business and once you understand that, then all your efforts will be on making sure that the hotel 'looks after people' very well.
Definition: A mission statement is a brief description of a company’s fundamental purpose.
A mission statement answers the question, “Why do we exist?” Many companies have a brief mission statement, usually in 30 words or fewer, explaining their reason for being and their guiding principles.
Goals are destinations—where you want your business to be. Objectives are progress markers along the way to goal achievement. For example, a goal might be to have a healthy, successful company that is a leader in customer service and that has a loyal customer following. Objectives might be an annual growth in your customer base and some specific measures of customer satisfaction.
Defining this helps you know what is important to you in business, to whom will you market your products, a brief description of your industry etc. However most of the information here is found in detail in the strategic plan, marketing plan and other sections of the business plan.
Determine what form you want your business to take, that is
Sole proprietorship: is a type of business entity which legally has no separate existence from its owner.
Partnership: is a type of business entity in which partners (owners) share with each other the profits or losses of the business undertaking in which all have invested.
Limited Company: is a corporation whose liability is limited by shares (Ltd), which is the most common form of privately held companies.
Describe the gap that exists in the market. What has given rise to this gap and how can it be filled? One way of finding out what the market or your customers need is to use surveys, as demonstrated by the Linux Holding (Pty) Ltd. Case study in Module 2.4.
A deeper understanding of an opportunity involves systematic research. Paul Young (2008) argued that “It is very dangerous to assume that you already know about your intended local market”. Thus, a form of SWOT analysis (Section 4.1.6) or market research must be undertaken to make sure you’re on track; you know what the business climate is in your region, who your potential customers (e.g. government, private sectors, etc) and competitors are. Use the business planning process as your opportunity to uncover data and ensure that there is a realistic gap in the market for your product or service and that you can be competitive in providing that product or service. “Your time will be well spent“ (Young, 2008).
Market research / competitive analysis: There are two types of market research. Namely, primary research and secondary research.  Primary research involves gathering new information, that are directly from the potential customer. It means collecting new relevant information by interviews or surveys. By this you can learn about the preferences and tendencies of consumers.  As you have to address many people for a professional market research, this type can be very expensive. Therefore you should seek advice from examples and market research success stories in publications.  Secondary research means desk research and involves compiling already existing information, e.g. information and research results in newspapers, magazines, statistical data or demographic profiles from government agencies.  If you want to analyze the market, you have to show sources, statistics, and numbers as exactly as possible. Efficiency of market analysis plays a major role, because it will result into a marketing plan and later into the all-important sales projection.
Industry Analysis and Analysis of barriers to entry:
Young (2008) also listed barriers you may face when entering to a new and emerging market, especially FOSS markets. Some of these barriers may be relevant to your market or region while others may not:
Young (2008) posits that an important factor of your business is whether you customers have the buying power of/over the products you are offering. You must look at your market and ask your self; Do my potential customers have significant choice when buying my product or service? Are there substitute offerings for the product or service that I have? What is the likelihood that customers will switch to the substitute? What products and companies will compete with you?
Will they compete with you across the board, or just for certain products, certain customers, or in certain locations? How will your products or services compare with the competition?
In their “Marketing Tutorials”, KnowThis. Com argued that, the term “product” is often used as a catch-all word to identify solutions a marketer provides to its target market. In essence, a product can be categorized as goods, services, or even an idea. You may find some of the definition of a product may extend beyond your FOSS business: :
Goods – Something is considered a good if it is a tangible item.  That is, it is something that is felt, tasted, heard, smelled or seen. Is you FOSS business offering tangible goods? Are you using non-tangible (software) as an 'enhancer' to the tangible goods in your business? For example, you can install Ubuntu as a dual boot in all the PCs or Laptops you are selling
Services – according to KnowThis.com, something is considered a service if it is an offering a customer obtains through the work or labor of someone else. Services can result in the creation of tangible goods (e.g., a publisher of business magazines hires a freelance writer to write an article) but the main solution being purchased is the service. Unlike goods, services are not stored, they are only available at the time of use (e.g., hair salon) and the consistency of the benefit offered can vary from one purchaser to another (e.g., not exactly the same hair styling each time).
Ideas – Something falls into the category of an idea if the marketer attempts to convince the customer to alter their behavior or their perception in some way (see FOSS advocacy in Module 3.1). Marketing ideas is often a solution put forth by non-profit groups or governments in order to get targeted groups to avoid or change certain behavior. This is seen with public service announcements directed toward such activity as youth smoking, automobile safety, and illegal drug use.
While in some cases a marketer offers solutions that provide both tangible and intangible attributes, for most organizations their primary offering -- the thing that is the main focus of the marketing effort -- is concentrated in one area. So while a manufacturer may offer intangible services or a service firm provides certain tangible equipment, these are often used as add-ons that augment the organization’s main product.
Capital requirements are all the assets needed to begin a business. An astute entrepreneur is able to identify what those assets are and how to pay for them. Forms of Capital;
Debt Financing - Through banks, micro finance institutions, leasing or trade credit.
Equity Financing - Through lenders, personal funds, family and friends or Partners
These two forms of financing are the most readily available capital financing modes in Africa. Ranging from private money lenders to the mushrooming micro finance institutions, there is now a big source of financing for small business people with big plans. The need for extra income has also spurred many gainfully employed people to invest in other people's business ideas as a way of earning a side income and this helps then ends up either as equity financing or debt financing.
The demand for security tends to be outrageous. Some banks require security in form of land titles or buildings owned before they can extend a grant of as low as US$ 2000. This makes it hard for the small businesses to raise cheap money to do business because when you look at the rates of the bank Vs those of the money lenders, the difference is more than 5 times. The only advantage of the money lender is that they do not usually have very stringent terms before lending you.
The lack of documentation makes it hard for one to get credit from the formal sector. A bank for example may require that you have certain documentation before it can lend you money.
When you setup a business plan, often this plan does not operate in a vacuum. There are other external/internal factors which may impact your business. The key elements you identified as part of your business' s internal resources and key capabilities or issues must be matched or assessed against the external environment in which you business operates. The technique which helps you in this endeavour is a process called SWOT analysis. SWOT which stands for Strength, Weakness, opportunities and threats is, according to David and Robert (1998) the most familiar of all [business] performance assessment techniques. A scan of the internal and external environment is an important part of the strategic planning process. Definition: Environmental factors internal to the firm usually can be classified as strengths (S) or weaknesses (W), and those external to the firm can be classified as opportunities (O) or threats (T). Such an analysis of the strategic environment is referred to as a SWOT analysis.The online QuickMBA.com course on “Strategic Management” provides a SWOT analysis framework, shown below, and discusses what you may consider for your business in of the elements in the framework:
Figure 1:compare with s.91, Kahraman, Grengiz: Fuzzy Multi-Criteria Decision-Making, Theory and Application, NY 2008.
A firm's strengths are its resources and capabilities that can be used as a basis for developing a competitive advantage. Examples of such strengths include:
WeaknessesThe absence of certain strengths may be viewed as a weakness. For example, each of the following may be considered weaknesses:
In some cases, a weakness may be the flip side of strength. Take the case in which a firm has a large amount of manufacturing capacity. While this capacity may be considered a strength that competitors do not share, it also may be a considered a weakness if the large investment in manufacturing capacity prevents the firm from reacting quickly to changes in the strategic environment.
OpportunitiesThe external environmental analysis may reveal certain new opportunities for profit and growth. Some examples of such opportunities include:
ThreatsChanges in the external environmental also may present threats to the firm. Some examples of such threats include:
The SWOT MatrixAccording to QuickMBA.com, a firm should not necessarily pursue the more lucrative opportunities. Rather, it may have a better chance at developing a competitive advantage by identifying a fit between the firm's strengths and upcoming opportunities. In some cases, the firm can overcome a weakness in order to prepare itself to pursue a compelling opportunity.To develop strategies that take into account the SWOT profile, a matrix of these factors can be constructed.
S-O strategies pursue opportunities that are a good fit to the company's strengths.
W-O strategies overcome weaknesses to pursue opportunities.
S-T strategies identify ways that the firm can use its strengths to reduce its vulnerability to external threats.
W-T strategies establish a defensive plan to prevent the firm's weaknesses from making it highly susceptible to external threats.
State your competitive advantages and disadvantages with respect to the following:
The sales and marketing divisions of a business have a very important role in securing cash through sales to keep the business vibrant.
Role and responsibility of sales and marketing personnel
Market research of FOSS business potential, competition and self-assessment
Development of a “Preliminary” Marketing Mix
The operation of a company is the glue that pulls all the company divisions together for a common purpose.
Compliance to privacy and other regulatory controls
The HR or personnel department is essential in building the necessary talent pool to perform all the functions of the business.
Specifications of job descriptions and salary levels
Compliance rules for Labour Law,  Fair Recruitment & Selection process
Personnel performance appraisal and organisational effectiveness mapped to business goals and strategy
Assignment 1: List and describe resources (business magazines, ministries, trade shows, Association etc.) in your country which are vital for establishing FOSS business in your country.
Assignment 2: Using your knowledge in Module 4.1.2 identify and list accounting procedures in 3 companies you may know in your country.
Assignment 3: Identify and describe the FOSS opportunities which exist in the market in your country.
Assignment 4: Using the table below, describe the support structures in place in your country which support or finance ICT or any kind of enterprenural[1] initiative.
Commercial bank, Chamber of commerce, ''Asusu'[2]
Kumba enterprise obtained a loan of 2000$ to start Linux training in the Gambia
….............
…..................................
…..............................
…...........
…..................................
…...............................
…...............
….................................
…................................
Business Plan Score Sheet for Case Studies
Exercise 2: List and identify 5 FOSS services and 5 FOSS products commonly used in your country or region
Exercise 3: Based on your knowledge of SWOT analysis in Module 4.1.7 develop a matrix for a FOSS company you may know in your country.
Exercise 4: Develop sales and marketing plan for a particular FOSS solution (database system, CMS, etc) using your local market as the target for business.
Discussion: Possible means of overcoming the barriers to entry to market listed in Module 4.1.3?
↑ Find some reference tor “Technology Incubators“ here: http://www.infodev.org/
↑ Asusu is a 'Fula' word describing a local form of banking where a group of closely knit friends contribute a fix amount every month and give it to a member of the group to start a business.
Previous Chapter | Next Chapter
This is a collection of books about the open source software 3D modeling and animation package Blender. Here is the official site: www.blender.org.
1.2 GROUP B: Frank with partial or no outer border and with the TM incorporated into the frank
Postage meters first appeared in 1930. All stamps have “CHILE” in the frank.
The stamps are grouped according to design and function:
A  - Frank with complete outer border
B   - Frank with partial or no outer border
Small frank with “CHILE CORREOS” in arched panel above large value figure in center.
“PORTE PAGADO” at bottom with M# above. M#s M1 thru M10.
Values:     5, 10, 20, 30 centavos, 1, 3 pesos
Values:     6, 60 centavos     [Add $15]
Nearly identical to Type A1 but inscribed “CORREOS DE CHILE”. M#s M11 to M22 known.
Values:     5, 10, 20, 30, 60 centavos, 1, 3 pesos
a. Printed in blue, violet or black
A3. Universal “Model O”  (Francotyp “C” under license) (MV), 1931.      [$5]
M# at bottom center with a star at each side.
“PORTE PAGADO” above M#. With “Cts.” left of value figures.
Wide spacing containing S# at top between TM and frank.
A4. Universal “Multi-Value”  (MV).
Very similar to Type A3 but spacing much narrower,
A4.1  Francotyp “B” (MV), 1943.      [Very rare, value unknown]
Frank with extended corners each containing a star.
M# 791 below frank. Wide spacing with S# high between TM and frank.
A5.  Universal “Multi-Value”  (MV).
As Type A4 but with “CORREO AEREO/ CHILE” at top.
Very similar to Type A3 but M# with “F” prefix.
With S# at top between TM and frank.
No currency indicator:    0,000     00,00     ,000     ','00 [$5]
a. “Eº” breaks left frame line
Frank with smooth outer frame line and circular corners.
“CORREO AEREO/ CHILE” at top.
Wide spacing, with or without S# at top between TM and frank.
M# with “F” prefix at bottom.
Very similar to Type A7 but date figures have stops.
A8. Francotyp “Cc/Ccm”  (MV).
Similar to Type A6 but narrow spacing between TM and frank M# with “F” prefix.
The date is approximately 13 mm wide with stops after D and before Y.
E or Eº :     0,00     00,00
Very similar to Type A8 but the date is much wider at 14-15 mm
a. With "CORREOS DE CHILE" in a smaller font. Seen on meter 454
Horizontal frank similar to Type A8 but value figures are thicker,
V/F with $ :     00,00     0,000     0.000     000,00
Frank slightly larger than Types A8-A10 and top inscription in two lines.
M# with “H” prefix below lower frame line.
A. TM and frank on same level
B. TM lowered with transaction counter above
Eº :     0000     00,oo     0,0oo     0,00     0,oo
a. With 5-digit S# high left of TM
Very similar to Type A11A but value figures are smaller.
M# with “H” prefix.
V/F with $ :     000     0000     000.00
Tall frank with “CORREOS/ DE CHILE” at top, “Porte Pagado” at bottom.
M# with “H” prefix outside bottom frame line.
Eº :     00,oo     0oo     000,oo
a. “AEREO” in negative letters at far left of TM
A14. Pitney Bowes “Automax”  (MV).
Upright frank with “CORREOS/ CHILE” at top.
M# at bottom with “P.B.” prefix.
a. With “AEREO” in the TM
Similar to Type A14 but with “CORREOS DE/ CHILE” at top.
A. Wide spacing between TM and frank
B. Narrow spacing between TM and frank (pictured)
Very similar to Type A15 but with “CORREO AEREO/ CHILE” at top.
M# with “P” prefix.
A17. Pitney Bowes “R” series (MV).      [$35]
Small frank, 19 mm wide, with simulated perforation border and “CORREOS/ CHILE/ PORTE PAGADO” at top.
M# with “P.B.” prefix between TM and frank.
A. Currency indicator “$” between TM and frank frame
B. Without currency indicator
A18. Pitney Bowes "5000"  series (MV).
Similar to Type A17 but the frank is larger and wider than tall.
M# with "P.B." prefix above.
A.  Frank 25 mm wide
B.  Frank 28-29 mm wide
A19.	Pitney Bowes-GB “5000” series (MV).
Very similar to Type A18A but the date figures are taller and more tightly spaced.
Frank taller than A18A, nearly square.
M# with “P.B.” prefix in line with number.
A20. Pitney Bowes-GB “6300”  (MV).
Similar to Types A17-19 but with “CORREOS CHILE” at top and “PORTE PAGADO” at bottom.
M# with P.B.” prefix breaks bottom frame line.
Value and date figures on same level.
A21. Pitney Bowes-GB “A900” series (MV).
As Type A20 but value figures are larger.
M# with “PBE” prefix breaks bottom frame line.
A22. Hasler "MailMaster” (MV).     [Appears to be extremely rare]
Horizontal rectangle with simulated perforation outer border and straight line inner border.
"CHILE" alone at top, "CORREOS" at bottom.
Below the frank is the meter number with "H" prefix flanked by "PORTE" and "PAGADO".
M# with “PBE” prefix breaks bottom frame line.
GROUP B: Frank with partial or no outer border and with the TM incorporated into the frank
B1. Pitney Bowes “R”  (MV).      [$10]
Horizontal frank with large rayed star in center.
M# with P.B.No” prefix below star.
B2. Pitney Bowes “DM”  (LV-21).      [$25]
Similar to Type B1 but much smaller.
M# with P.B.No” prefix.
B3. Pitney Bowes “DM”  (LV-21).      [$25]
As Type B2 but with star logo removed from center.
M# with P.B.No” prefix.
B4. Pitney Bowes “5000” series (MV).      [$10]
Very similar to Type B1 but “CHILE” is not as tall, and value box is taller.
M# with “P.B.” prefix.
V/F with Eº :     .00
Upright frank with simulated perforation border.
Straight-line TM at left with date and large narrow “R” (for Registration) or “E” (for Express) and number.
M# with “C.T.” prefix at immediate center left of frank.
V/F with "$":     00.00     00,00     00 00
V/F with "E" or "Eº":     0 00     00,0     00 00     00,00     000,00
a. With ornaments at sides of town name (CT23)
Very similar to Type PO1 but “$” breaks left frame line.
Very similar to Type PO2 but "CORREOS DE CHILE" in single line across the top.
PO3. NCR.
Frameless frank printed on self-adhesive labels.
From the top, the elements in the frank are:
The labels have an underprint consisting of multiple small flying bird logos usually in pink but also found in beige.
“PORTE/PAGADO” in red at upper right, and the postal service logo is at upper left.
B. As A, but with small “EMPRESA” between the bird and “CORREOS”
C. As B, but the bird has speed lines added, and “DE CHILE” is positive in capital letters
D. Logo as with A but the label is wider and with small vertical "NCR" logo at lower right
a. With a small oval printer’s mark in red at bottom right
b. Without weight
c. Impression inverted on label
d. Security cutout - bird in lower centre of label
e. Security cutout - rounded rectangle at top left of label
NOTE: Misprints occur due to label misalignment while passing through the printer. The illustration for variety D shows the town name at top.
PO4. Similar to Type PO3 but the frank elements are as follows:
A. As Type PO3C, label with multiple small bird underprint in pink. Flying bird logo with speed lines at upper left.
B. Label without underprint. “CORREOS” in red above “CHILE” in blue, both left of ‘sail’ logo at upper left of label. “PORTE/PAGADO” in blue at upper right.
C. As B but "PORTE/PAGADO" is red instead of blue.
a. With bar code and Registration data added below the frank text
b. Impression inverted on label
Printed in black on plain white self-adhesive label with rounded corners.
Date, time, weight, value figures
A. Text as described, for use on regular mail, blank at bottom for domestic mail, or with country of destination at bottom
B. For use on registered mail, with barcode and registration number in lower half
With this move, White decides to challenge the h1-a8 diagonal immediately and fianchetto his own light-squared bishop to counter black's.
4...Bb7 (Old Main Line), a standard developing move. White can then respond with Bg2 and Nc3. The line continues: 5. Bg2 Be7 6. 0-0 0-0 7. Nc3 Ne4 8. Qc2 Nxc3 9. Qxc3. White now has a spacial advantage, but black's position is solid. Black can choose many ways for counterplay, including 9...c5 (the most common), 9...f5, or 9...Be4. These lines are known for their drawish tendencies and are currently used as drawing weapons. However, there have been developed a few ways to unbalance the play in the Old Main Line:
Nc3, which postpones castling for the e2-e4 and d4-d5 thrusts.
d5!?, which gives up a pawn. However, white can play 8. Nh4, threatening to regain the pawn or play Nf5. If black keeps the pawn, white gets plenty of compensation for it.
Bd2, which defends the knight on c3 and threatens a d4-d5 push.
That was, until, the Modern Main Line came by:
4...Ba6, attacking the c-pawn. This is a bit of a nuisance for white, who cannot comfortably defend the pawn with the natural e2-e3 because the bishop is already committed to g2.
4...Bb4+, echoing the Bogo-Indian and Nimzo-Indian defences. White can interpose with the bishop or knight. However, this leaves black with a slightly passive position. Nevertheless, this is solid as well.
There are other options available, though these are less likely to be encountered:
4...c5, immediately challenging the (central) d-pawn. This leads to pawn structures specific to the Benoni or to variations with a late c5 of the Queen's Indian, if both sides choose to neglect this central challenge and continue to develop
4...c6, leads to a Closed Catalan variation after Black's immediate 5...d5 follow-up
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3
Bb7...
Ba6...
Bb4+...
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
Hyperbolas can be thought of as the "opposite" of ellipses - instead of the sum of distances from two foci, the difference is used. This leads to two curves that point in opposite directions. The major axis is 2a units long, and the transverse axis is 2b units long. When a2 + b2 = c2, eccentricity is again c/a. The foci are at either side of the major axis, c units away from the center.
An "east-west" hyperbola is written as:
For rectangular hyperbolas with the coordinate axes parallel to their asymptotes:
As the curve progresses, it gets closer and closer to two lines called asymptotes. In the second image, the asymptotes are y = ±x. The length of each latus rectum is (..?)
Kylpylä aikuisille.
Onko etelä-suomessa olemassakaan kylpylään missä olisi lähinnä aikuisia (ei nyt ihan eläkeläisiä)?
Naantalin kylpylä voisi olla sellainen, jos se vielä etelä suomeksi kelpaa ;=)) Johtunee tod. näk. heidän epäedullisesta hinnoittelusta lapsiperheille (hinta per nokka eikä huone +lisävuode). Lisäetuna vielä itänaapurin asiakkaiden vähäisyys, mutta länsinaapureita sitten tilalla?
Tampereen kylpylä, on vaan sieltä kalleimmasta päästä
Ympärillä kauniit kävelymaastot ja rauhaa riittää!
Haikossa on myös aikuisille suunnattu tuo tarjonta, katsopa esim web sivuja niin lapsista ei edes mainita mitään
Siellä tulee lasten aika pitkäksi ja ei kaukana ole että aikuistenkin. Ai niin kattoon katsellessa voi samalla yleensä harrastaa itäkielen intensiivikurssia.
pääsiäiseksi Kasnäsin kylpylään. Oletettavasti rauhallinen paikka..?
Vth = 7*leftCurrent + 5*rightCurrent
Determiners are words that specify or point out the context of nouns and other parts of speech.  The English determiner this, for example, specifies a noun for its proximity to the current context.
Determiners in Mirad fall into the following categories:
Furthermore, as for part of speech, determiners can be adjectives, pronouns, or adverbs.  As adjectives, determiners can itemize or classify.  As pronouns, they can refer to one or more persons (male or female) or things.  As adverbs, they can specify time, place, degree, kind, age, frequency, and so forth.
Quantitative determiners act in one of several ways, they:
From these,  pronominalized quantitative determiners for PERSONS and THINGS can be derived.
Inanimate plural pronouns are formed by adding si for A NUMBER OF THINGS
Animate plural pronouns are formed by adding  ti for A NUMBER OF PERSONS.
The following table presents most of these word forms:
At se gla iva.....I am very happy.
Et sa gra uga.....You were too slow.
Twobi dale ge igay vyel toybi.....Men talk as fast as women.
Yat yexe ga igay vyel yet.....We work faster (= more quickly) than you.
Ga nas efwo.....More money will be needed.
Gra nas noxwa.....Too much money was spent.
Adjectives quantifying a plural countable noun (= things or people):
At ayse gro sari.....I've got too few tools.
Gla tami osexwa.....Many houses were destroyed.
Yat efe gla ga valdibuti.....We need many more policemen.
Pronouns referring to a mass amount of something (= stuff):
Gas ilokeye.....More (stuff) is leaking.
Et dileye gras.....You are asking for too much (stuff).
Yat kexo gwas.....We will seek as much (stuff) as possible.
At iba gwes.....I received just the right amount.
Pronouns referring to a countable number of things:
Hisi se fia oy yat fe gasi.....These (items) are good but we want more (items).
At teate drilari oy grosi.....I see pens, but too few.
Pronouns referring to a countable number of people:
Grati xaye vyosi be hia yexem.....Too many (people) have made mistakes at this work site.
Glati dyunwe oy gloti kebiwe.....Many are called but few are chosen.
Numerical determiners are number words that modify nouns, such as one, fifty, a hundred. They are based on the cardinal numbers, which are explained here:
The cardinal numerals are words used in counting.  These words are based on the vowels of Mirad and are crucial to any hierarchical or scalar ordering of lexical concepts.
The unit cardinal numbers are formed from the plain and pre-y-glided vowels:
The cardinal numerals 5-9 are pre-y-glided versions of the vowels that constitute 0-4.
The cardinal numerals are used as ordinal vowels in word-building. An example is the word mer (planet).  Here, the cardinal numbers are added as a secondary ordinal vowel to the stem vowel to create the names of the planets in our solar system:
(See more on this in the section on Vocabulary Formation.
The cardinal numerals are also used in counting, for example, at a sports countdown.
The cardinal numerals are employed in reciting telephone numbers and addresses, for example:
Ata yibdalar sag se 703-842-6190 (pronounced: ye-o-i-yi-u-e-ya-a-yu-o).....My telephone number is....
At tambese 114 Maple Street. (pronouned: a-a-u Maple Street)
They are further used in mathematical operations.  For example:
To make the unit numerals more understandable in contexts such as counting, arithmetic, and telephone communications, the unit formant wa is added to them.  The wa formant is added only when the unit numbers stand alone, not in conjunction with higher numerals, such as the teens, hundreds, etc.  More importantly, the numbers 0-9, when used as adjectival numerical determiners modifying nouns, MUST take this wa formant (see the section below on Integral Numerical Determiners.
Ata kosag se "awa yowa ewa yiwa".....My code is "one five two eight".
Uwa tami.....Four houses.
At bee yuwa tudi.....I have nine children.
The decade formant l + o....zero is used to form the decades, seen below:
By changing the o....zero in lo to other cardinal unit numerals, the numerals within decades can be generated as follows:
...
By adding the hundreds formant s, you get the hundreds:
All the numerals in-between the hundreds, can be generated by modifying the so ending, for example:
The thousands are generated with the formant r:
NOTE: The number categories starting with the thousands on up end in -o and are separated from the rest of a number by a space.
The millions are generated with the formant ml:
The billions are generated with the formant mr;
Trillions etc.
The trillions are generated with the word garale, which means 10 to the positive power of 12 or 10+10.
The trillionths are generated with the word gorale, which means 10 to the negative power of 12 or 10-10.
Even higher numbers are shown in the chart in the next section.
The following chart shows the entire Mirad number scheme:
RADICALCARDINAL ADJECTIVEMULTIPLEPREFIXORDINAL ADJECTIVEMULTIPLEENTITYMULTIPLEPERSONMULTIPLEADJECTIVEMULTIPLEVERBFRACTIONNOUNFRACTIONPREFIXFRACTIONADJECTIVEFRACTIONVERBozeroowazeroon-null-, non-oazerothoonnonentryootnonpersononxernullifyaoneawaonean-uni-,mono-haplo-,singul-solo-, one-aafirst, primaryaonunit,monadaotindividualaonaunitary,haplo-aonxerunifyaynwholeayn-holo-aynawholeaynxerintegrateetwoewatwoen-di-, du-,bi-, bin-, bis-, dupli-, diplo-dis-easecondeonpair,dyad,duplexeotcouple, duo,twineonadouble,two-fold,binaryeonxerdouble, duplicateeynhalfeyn-semi-, demi-, half-. hemi-eynahalfeynxerhalve,cut in twoithreeiwathreein-tri-, triplo-, tris-iathird,terciaryiontriple,triadiottrio,threesome, tripletionatriple,three-foldionxertriple, triplicateiynthirdiyn-terci-,trient-ter-, tern-iynathirdiynxercut three wayufouruwafourun-quadri-,tetra-, tetraplo-uafourth, quaternaryuonquartet,tetraduotquartet, foursome, quadrupletuonafour-fold,quadrupleuonxerquadrupleuynquarter, fourthuyn-quater-, quadrant-uynaquarteruynxerquarter,cut four waysyofiveyowafiveyoon-quinti-penta-, pentaplo-yoafifthyoonquintet,pentadyootquintetfivesome, quintupletyoonafive-fold, quintupleyoonxerquintupleyoynfifthyoyn-quinti-yoynafifthyoynxercut five waysyasixyawasixyaon-sexa-hexa-hexaplo-yaasixthyaonsextet,hexadyaotsextet,sextuple, sextupletyaonasix-fold, sextant-yaonxersextupleyaynsixthyayn-sextant-, sext-yaynasixthyaynxercut six waysyesevenyewasevenyeon-septa-,hepta-yeaseventhyeonseptet,hectadyeotseptet,septupleyeonaseven-foldseptupleyeonxerseptupleyeynseventhyeyn-septant-yeynaseventhyeynxercut seven waysyieightyiwaeightyion-octi-,octa-, octaplo-yiaeighthyionoctet,octadyiotoctet,octuplet, octupletyionaeight-fold, octupleyionxeroctupleyiyneighthyiyn-octant-yiynaeighthyiynxercut eight waysyunineyuvanineyuon-novi-nona-, enneaplo-yuaninthyuonnonadyuotnonet, nonupletyuonanine-foldyuonxernonupleyuynninthyuyn-nonant-novi-yuynaninthyuynxercut nine ways-l-tensalotengaraalon-deci-deca-gara-aloatenthalondecadealotgroup of ten,decimviratealonaten-foldalonxermultiplyby tenaloyntenthaloyn-deci-gora-aloynatenthaloynxerdecimate-s-hundredsasohundredgareason-hecto-gare-asoahundredasoncentury,hundred-foldasothectad,group ofa hundredasonahundred-foldasonxermultiply by a hundredaoyncent, percenthundredthasoyn-centi-gore-asoynahundredthasoynxercut into hundredths-r-thousandsarothousandgariaron-kilo-,gari-aroathousandtharonmillennium,thousand-foldarotgroup of a thousandaronathousand-foldaronxermultiply by a thousandaroynthousantharoyn-milli-gori-aroynathousantharoynxercut into thousanths-ms-millionsamsomilliongaryaamson-mega-garya-amsoamillionthamsonmillion-fold,myriadamsotmyriadamsonamillion-foldamsonxermultiply by a millionamsoynmillionthamsoyn-micro-goryaamsoynamillionthamsoynxercut into millionths-mr-billionsamrobilliongaryuamro-giga-garyu-amroabillionthamronbilliion-foldamrotgroup of a billion peopleamronabillion-foldamronxermultiply by a billionamsoynbillionthamroyn-peta-goryuamroynabillionthamroynxercut into billionthsgaraletrilliongarale-tera-garaleatrillionthgoralena trillionthgorale-pico-garalyoquadrilliongalalyo-petagaralyoaquadrillionthgoralyona quadrillionthgoralyo-femto-garalyiquintilliongaralyi-exa-garalyiaquintillionthgoralyina quintillionthgoralyi-atto-garelasextilliongarela-zettagarelaasextillionthgorelana sextillionthgorela-zepto-gareluseptiliiongaelu-yottagareluaseptillionthgoreluna septillionthgorelu-yocto-
Integral Numerical Determiners are adjectives based on whole numerals that modify a following noun.
The unit integral numerals are combined with the formant wa to form the first ten numerical determiners that are used to quantify a noun.  The noun following the numerical determiner is plural if the number is greater than one.  The wa formant is used on unit numerals when they are stand-alone, not when they are part of a larger number.   Unlike English, "zero" is followed by a singular noun.
In a sequence of noun modifiers, the numerical determiner goes in the same place as in English, eg:
Ata iwa gajaga twidi.......My three older brothers...
The numeral alo is not a unit, so wa is not suffixed.
Integral numerical determiners can be pronominalized as things and persons by suffixing s or t, respectively.  These can, in turn, be pluralized by suffixing i.  Furthermore, person pronouns can be feminized with a y before the t.  The s suffix is short for sun....thing or suni....things.  The t ending is short for aut....person or auti....persons. For example:
Et ayse awa tam.  At gey ayse awas (= awa sun).....You have one house.  I have one too.
At aysa alo dresari.  Hij at ayse anay ewasi (= ewa suni).....I had ten pencils.  Now I only have two.
Esa asoti (= aso auti) yeb ha duzam..... There were a hundred people in the concert hall.
Yat yefe kebier eluyti (= elu auyti) bi huti.....We must choose twenty-four females from those people.
Ordinal numerical determiners like first, second, etc. are formed from the cardinal numerals by adding the adjectival ending a to the cardinal numeral.
The word nap....order can be inserted in these words to make them more comprehensible in speech:
There are other ordinal adjectives that are not based on numbers:
Ordinal numerical determiners and adjectives can be converted into adverbs by adding the suffix y to the adjectival counterparts:
Ordinal numerical determiners can be converted to animate pronouns (persons) with the suffix t and inanimate pronouns (things) with the suffix s.  These, in turn, can be pluralized with the suffix i.  The person pronouns can also be feminized.
Again, in the sequencing of stacked adjectival elements, the order is as in English, that is: <deictic or pronominal determiner> | <ordinal numerical determiner> | <cardinal numerical determiner> | <adjective>
Fractional numerical determiners like half and quarter are formed by adding -yn for those functioning as nouns, -yna for adjectives, -ynay for adverbs, or -yn for prefixes, to the respective cardinal number.
His uxo ha oynxen bi yata mir.....This will cause the anihilation of our world.
Ha ayna mir te ayv et.....The whole world knows about you.
Has se gas ev ha ayn bi hasa goni.....It is more than the whole of its parts.
Fransad se ayn-druna dalyen.....France is a holophrastic language.
Et yafe bier eyn.....You can take half.
Yat yefo eynxer eta yexnix.....We will have to halve your salary.
Hus sa eyn-vyan.....That was a half-truth.
Eso eyn-zyunida dropek.....There is going to be a hemispheric war.
Duven his se eyn-utexea dopar?....Is this a semi-automatic weapon?
Iynxu hua ableyavol.....Cut that pie in thirds.
It yeyfe bixwer ay uynxwer.....He should be drawn and quartered.
Hia nas se aloyn bi has yat aysa zojab.....This money is a tenth of what we had last year.
Ha dep aloynxwu.....The army would be decimated.
Ewa asoyni bi ha dityan baksa.....Two percent (=hundredths) of the citizenry got sick.
Hia tom se anay asoynge aga vyel hua tom.....This building is only a hundredth as big as that building.
The fractional adverbs can be used as in these examples:
Et so aynay dudyefa av eta axi.....You will be wholly accountable for your actions.
Iyt eynay tikabeloka.....She almost (=halfway) threw up.
Words like half of it, a third of them:
Eynas sa fia.....Half of it was good.
Eynasi sa fua.....Half of them (things) were bad.
Esa uwa tobi se hua fukyes.  Eynati toja.....There were four people in that accident.  Half (of them) died.
Iynati bi yet se vyasa.....A third of you are right.
Uynati bi yat yantexe.....A quarter of us agree.
Alo asoynasi bi hia dyesi fyunxwa.....Ten percent of these books were ruined.
Multiplicative numerical determiners like double, triple can be formed by adding -on to the respective cardinal numeral if the numeral is monosyllabic, otherwise just -n.  These noun forms can be adjectivized with the suffix -a. They can also serve as prefixes on  animate nouns, inanimate nouns, and prefixes, as the following chart shows.  The prefix ending, -n is often dropped.
...AS VERB-MAKER
An extra o is added to these prefixes to avoid ambiguity with yan meaning together and yon meaning apart.
The multiplicative noun dozen is expressed by aleon.
Aleoni bi pati yizpapa.....Dozens of birds flew by.
By adding the suffix -at to the noun multiple, we get groupings of people:
By adding the suffix -un instead of -on, we get the following:
Some examples where the above multiple determiners and derivatives are used:
Yat naptyoyapa be eonati yez ha mep.....We marched in twos (= pairs) down the street.
Asonati upo bay yat bu is ovdal.....Hundreds (of people) will come with us to this protest.
Hia ivxel xwe enyabay.....This celebration happens biennially.
Iyt se untubokat.....She is a quadriplegic. (Lit: x 4+limb+loss+person)
Diwe sagu ha auni.....Please count the units.
Yet gafisa aronay!....You all have improved a thousandfold!
Tob se entyoyaba sat.....Man is a bipedal creature.
Note: The prefixes for penta-/quinti- and hexa-/sext- must keep the -on so as to distinguish them from the prefixes yon....apart and yan....together.
Mirad uses the International System of Units|International System of Units (SI)  for rendering measurement units.  These symbols are pronounced as if you were spelling each letter out (see Mirad Grammar/Phonology and Orthography#Alphabet|the alphabet.  Bear in mind that majuscules (uppercase letters are prefaced with the word ag- (big).  Similarly, Greek letters are preceded by the word hel-.
The hyphen in the above "spelled out" words ensure that each syllable gets even stress.
Here are SI derived units with special names and symbols:
SI derived units with special names and symbols
Also, here are some non-SI units that are very convenient and acceptable:
The following chart shows how in Mirad to pronounce coherent derived unit formulae in terms of base units.  Note that the backslash means per or divided by and is pronounced gol.  The symbol x means times and is pronounced gal.  The superscript number is a power and is pronounced gar plus the number (with -wa, if a unit number).  The negative superscript number is pronounced gor plus the number (again, with -wa if a unit number).  See Arithmetical Expressions for further information on these terms.
Examples of coherent derived units in terms of base units
m-gol-so-gar-ewa
The SI has a whole list of prefixes that act as multipliers (macro) or dividers (micro) of the above and other measurement units.  For example, a kilometer is a meter times a 1,000 (macro unit), whereas a millimeter is a meter divided by a 1,000 (micro unit).  Sagon means byte, so garale-sagon is terabyte.  This breaks down to 1012 bytes.  Here is a table showing the Mirad macro and micro prefixes:
*Note: The -n or -on can sometimes be omitted in macro-prefixation, especially where there is no ambiguity. The -n (but NOT the -yn) in the micro prefixes can also sometimes be omitted.
**Note: The gar (to a plus power) and gor (to a minus power) forms are alternatives for the numeric prefixes beyond 100.  For example, billion (109) could be expressed as garyu-(ten) to the 9th power, while billionth could be expressed by goryu ((ten) to the minus 9th power).  The prefix garya- is composed of the positive exponential operator gar (to the power of), followed by the number 6.  The prefix gorale- is composed of the negative exponential operator gor (to the root of), followed by the number 12.
The macro and micro values can also be represented with abbreviated symbols, which can be pronounced in Mirad as spelled out alphabetics.  Greek letter equivalents in Mirad are preceded by hel-.  Upper case equivalents are preceded with ag-.  Here is a table showing grams:
The squared and cubed representations of the above are followed by gar ewa (squared) and gar iwa (cubed), respectively:
There are two ways to form determiners of frequency:
Here is a chart showing the most common frequency determiners:
Hoxag et pe ha tayegoblut?....How often do you go to the barber?
Hogla jodi et akaye hia ekun?....How many times have you won this game?
At teataye hua dyezun iwa ey uwa jodi.....I have seen that film three or four times.
At teataye has huugla jodi (or: huuxag) van at bokxeye.....I have seen it so many times that I am getting sick.
Hus xwaye gaxag vyel et te.....That has happened more often than you know.
The following chart shows verbs from which are formed derivative words relating to mathematical operations:
E gab e gele u.....Two plus two equals four.
E gal i gele ya.....Two times three equals six.
I gar e gele yu.....Three to the second power equals nine.
E gob e gele o.....Two minus two equals zero.
Yu gol i gele i.....Nine divided by three equals three.
Yu gor i gele i.....Nine cubed equals three.
Aso gor e gele alo.....One hundred squared equals ten.
Decimal expressions like 2.5 use the word nod....point as in English.
Hia bavol kyinse ga vyel 10.8 (alo nod yiwa) ki-ge.....This tomato weighs more than 10.8 (ten point eight) kilograms.
The word for calendar is judar.  The sections below explain how calendar expressions are formed and used:
Time is divided using the following basic terms:
Other calendar units are formed through the agglutination of numerical stubs to some of the time units above:
This, next, last, etc. are expressed as follows:
Seasons of the year are expressed by internally scalarizing the word for season jeb:
Months of the year are expressed by internally scalarizing the word for month jib:
Days of the week are expressed by internally scalarizing the word for day jub:
Here are some common terms relating to days of the week:
At tijpa ja majij.....I woke up before dawn.
At iyfe tuyjer be ha jwoa joeymaj.....I like to nap in the late afternoon.
It yexe bi amaryap bu amaryop.....He works from sunup to sundown.
Be gwa jwamoji, at teaxe sinibar.....Most evenings, I watch television.
A date like 2018 can be expressed as twenty eighteen (elo alyi) or two thousand eighteen (ero alyi).
The year is pronounced elo alyi (like English twenty eighteen).
The acronym for B.C. is jaK, short for ja Krist (before Christ).
The acronym for A.D. is joK, short for jo Krist (after Christ).
At yexa hum je gla jabi.....I worked there for [Lit: during] many years.
Ujbu his lojo jiyab.....Finish this by [Lit: not after] May.
Iyt so him ub ha uj bi 2 (ewa) jiab.....She will be here toward the end of January 2nd.
Clock time expressions use mostly the word jwob (hour) or jwobi (hours).
The usual time-of-day question is Se hojwob?....What time is it? [Lit: is what-hour?]
The typical answer is in the format Se aa/ea....jwob gab/gob alo/ali....bi maj/moj. (Lit: (It) is (the) first/second....hour plus/minus ten/eleven...of day/night.)
Se aa jwob.....It is one o'clock.  [Lit: It is (the) first hour.] [NOTE: The article "the" is left unexpressed.]
Se ea jwob.....It is two o'clock.  [Lit: It is (the) second hour.]
Se alea jwob.....It is twelve o'clock.  [Lit: It is (the) twelfth hour.]
Se ia jwob bi maj*.....It is three o'clock A.M.  [Lit: It is third hour of daytime.]
Se aloa jwob bi moj**.....It is ten o'clock P.M.  [Lit: It is tenth hour of nighttime.]
** bi moj (p.m.) can be abbreviated as bmo
Se ua jwob (gab) alo.....It is four ten.  [Lit: It is fourth hour (plus) ten.]
Se iloa jwob gob ali.....It is thirteen minutes til three.  [Lit: It is thirteenth hour minus thirteen.]
Se yoa jwobi gab uyn.....It is quarter after five.  [Lit: It is fifth hour plus a quarter.]
Se yoa jwobi gob uyn.....It is quarter past five.  [Lit: It is fifth hour minus a quarter.]
Se yaa jwobi gab eyn.....It is six thirty.  [Lit: It is sixth hour plus a half.]
Se yaa jwobi gab ilo.....It is six thirty.  [Lit: It is sixth hour plus thirty.]
Se yaa jwobi gob eyn.....It is thirty minutes til six.  [Lit: It is sixth hour minus thirty.]
Se yaa jwobi gob ilo.....It is thirty minutes til six.  [Lit: It is sixth hour minus a half.]
Se vyavay yea jwob gab alo bi moj.....It is exactly 7:10 P.M..  [Lit: It is exactly seventh hour plus ten of nighttime.]
Et sa alo jwoa bey alo jwabi.....You were late by 10 minutes.  [Lit: You were late by ten minutes.]
Has ijo jub 5:30 (= yaa jwob gab ilo) bmo (= bi moj).....It will begin around 5:30 (= five thirty [Lit: five hours plus thirty]) p.m.
Ha yautpar puo hum yeb 10 jwabi.....The bus will arrive there within 10 minutes.
Ha jwobar izeade 2:30 (= ea jwob gab ilo).....The clock says [Lit: indicates] 2:30.
Yit pua be 3a j. be ha nod.....They arrived at 3 on the dot.
Mirad normally uses a 24-hour clock system.
Yanpu at be iloa jwob gab alyo.....Meet me at 13:15. (= 1:15 p.m.)
The word jwob (hour, o'clock) can be abbreviated as j., as in the following:
Yanpu at be 13a j.....Meet me at 13:00 (hours) [Lit: at (the) 13th h.]
The word gab (plus) can be omitted, as in:
At teato et be yoa j. alyo.....I'll see you at five fifteen (~ quarter) past five.
Hia pop efxe 2 1/2 (= ewa gab eyn) jwobi.
This trip takes (Lit: necessitates)  2 1/2 hours.
Many expressions relating to age are built on the Mirad word for age: jag.
Et se hojaga?....How old are you? (Lit. what-aged)
At se eli jaga.....I am twenty-three years old.
At se ilo.....I am thirty.
The following chart shows other age expressions, many of which are agglutinations of the deictic prefixes beginning with h:
Et jagseye fi.....You are aging well.
At voy jogseye hyegla.....I am not getting any younger.
His se taam av ha jagati.....This is a home for the ederly.
Egaku eta jogan!....Regain your youth!
At se ga jaga vyel ha meybi.....I am as old as the hills.
Teaxu ata gwa joga tobot.....Look at my youngest child.
Yat ife yata awajagat.....We love our one-year-old.
Jagseatan se yika joob bi tej.....Adolescence is a difficult period of life.
This section is currency-dependent and remains under construction.
Categories of adjectival, pronominal, and adverbial deictic determiners:
Demonstrative adjectives and pronouns like this, that, those, that one
The definite article the(which is really a kind of demonstrative, like those above.)
Indefinite adjectives and pronouns like any, some, all, something, such, etc.
Adverbs of time like when, now, ever
Adverbs of place like there, here, somewhere
Adverbs of manner like how, thus, somehow
Adverbs of kind like so, age this year old
Adverbs of direction like that way, any which way
Adverbs of reason why?, for that reason, for no reason
Adverbs of frequency like how often, so often, never
Adverbs of age like this old, how old?, of any age
There is a whole set of deictic prefixes, which are joined to category stubs to derive adjectival, pronominal, and adverbial determiners.
The table below shows word stubs that indicate the category of deictic expressions.  They are called stubs, because they are part of a longer word that has been reduced.  The combination of deictic prefixes and category stubs produce a matrix of deictic correlatives, seen later in this chapter.  Use of the stub instead of the long form is a matter of optional economy.  A few categories do not have stubs.
Here is a table showing the deictic determiner prefixes attached to elements ending in -a to form various adjectival deictic determiners:
Note 1: The definite adjectival deictic determiner ha (actually, short for haa) is used as what is more commonly referred to as the definite article....the.
Note 2: The determiner hya is a reduced form of hyaa.
The pronominal deictic determiners can also incorporate gender in such a way that they refer to female or male persons specifically.  This done by inserting the letter w before the characteristic vowel for males and the letter y after the characteristic vowel for females.  Incorporating gender this way is relatively rare and only used in cases with the distinction is relative to the context:
Hwita tam se ga aga.....This guy's house is bigger.
At voy ayse huytia dyuni.....I don't have those women's names.
Usage examples of deictic determiner adjectives derived from:
Hoa tam se etas?....Which house is yours?
Hoa tej et ayse!....What a life you have!
Hoyena dyezuni ifxe et?....What kind of movies do you like?
Hota tef okwa?....Whose hat was lost?
Ha tob ta yata dyuni.....The man knew our names.
Hayena dini at ife, et ufe.....The kind of stories I love, you hate.
Hea mepi egdyunxwo.....Certain streets will be renamed.
Heyena fukyes uxaye purnyan.....Some kind of accident has caused a traffic jam.
Heta abtaf akwa be ha zatem......Someone's coat was found in the foyer.
Hia dyes se ata gafias.....This book is my favorite.
Hiia duni se yofwa.....The following words are prohibited.
Hiiyena xeyen voy afwu.....The following sort of behavior would not be allowed.
Hiyena xeyen voy vayafwo.....This type of behavior will not be tolerated.
Hita tim so yovoza.....This person's room will be blue.
Hua mas efwe egvozilbwer.....That wall needs to be repainted.
Huua dini yufxe toboti.....Such stories scare children.
Huyena duni yeyfwe yixwer za at.....Such words should not be used in front of me.
Hwuta tam magseye.....That guy's house is on fire.
Hyoa din se ga tesika.....No story is more important.
Hyoyena tes tesiyafwe.....No such meaning can be inferred.
Hyota jatexdras sa ga fia.....Nobody's plan is better.
Hya mepi izpe Roma.....All roads lead to Rome.
Hya tob yefe xer ita gon.....Every man must do his part.
Hyayena telami ese be hia mep.....All manner of restaurants exist on this street.
Hyata tej se uka bi yaobi.....Everyone's life is full of ups and downs.
Hyaewa domi agsaye.....Both cities have grown.
Hyea voz so fia.....Any color will be fine.
Hyeyena til se aysyafwa.....Any kind of drink is available.
Hyeta ved se ge ifa vyel atas.....Anyone's guess is as good as mine.
Hyea tim et fe et yafe ayser.....Whatever room you want, you can have.
Hyia/(Ha gea) fukyesi kyese glaxag.....The same accidents occur frequently.
Hyiyena/(Ha geyena) dyezuni teaxuwa zajub.....The same kind of films were shown yesterday.
Hyita/(Ha geta) dyun yixwa gajod.....The same person's name was used again.
Hyua dyezun sa ifuyea.....The other movie was more entertaining.
Hyuyena/(Ogeyena) som teasu ga fia.....Another kind of furniture would look better.
Hyuta/(ogeta) texyen se ge fyia.....Someone else's opinion is equally valid.
Hiytia dyuni voy dodraye.....These women's names have not be make public.
Hwiitia dyuni voy dodrowe.....The following males' names will not be publicized.
If the definite article or any other deictic determiner is omitted before a noun, then it has the effect of the English indefinite article a / an with a singular noun or some with a plural noun. For example:
Yat tilia ha tilyeb bi vafil.....We drank the glass of wine., vs.
Yat tilia tilyeb bi vafil.....We drank a glass of wine.
Yat tilia ha tilyebi bi vafil.....We drank the glasses of wine., vs.
Yat tilia tilyebi bi vafil.....We drank (some) glasses of wine.
Yat tilia awa tilyeb bi vafil.....We drank one glass of wine., vs.
Yat tilia ha awa tilyeb bi vafil.....We drank the one glass of wine.
Yat tilia ewa tilyebi bi vafil.....We drank two glasses of wine., vs.
Yat tilia ha ewa tilyebi bi vafil.....We drank the two glasses of wine., vs.
Yat tilia hya ewa tilyebi bi vafil.....We drank both glasses of wine.
Yat tilia owa tilyeb bi vafil.....We drank no/zero glasses (=not a single glass) of wine.
Yat tilia ea tilyeb bi vafil.....We drank another/a second glass of wine., vs.
Yat tilia ha ea tilyeb bi vafil.....We drank the second glass of wine., vs.
Yat tilia ea tilyebi bi vafil.....We drank second glasses of wine., vs.
Yat tilia ha ea tilyebi bi vafil.....We drank the second glasses of wine.
If an indefinite article sense is needed for clarity, the words awa (one) or hea (some, a certain) can be used, eg.:
At igtease awa tob yiztyoyaber.....I glimpsed a man walk by.
Hwit zoyupo hea juab.....He will come back on a / a certain / some Monday.
The following chart shows deictic determiners used as pronouns.  Note that the suffix -s (short for sun) is used pronouns referring to things, while -t (short for tob) is used for those referring to persons.  The suffix -i pluralized either of these.  The distinction between a form like what? and a selective form like which? is made by using the full adjectival form (with -a-) in the selective forms.  So, for example, hot? is who?, but hoat? is which one? (referring to a person).  The determiners referring to persons can optionally be made specifically male with the insertion of the letter w before the stem vowel or specifically female with the insertion of the letter y before the stem-ending t:
Here is a chart of pronominal deictic determiners of kind formed from the corresponding adjectival determiners of kind (eg. hoyena?....what kind of...?):
Any of the above animate deictic determiners can (though rarely) be made to refer specifically to males or females with the ending -wat or -wati for males and -ayt or -ayti for females.  For example:  any kind of males would be translated with hyeyenwati.....Every kind of female would be translated with hyayenayt.
Selective vs. Non-Selective Forms
The pronominal deictic interrogative determiner hot? means who and contrasts with its selective counterpart hoat?, which means which one?.  All the selective determiners refer to one or more things or persons from a selectable pool of things or persons.
The following sentences illustrate the use of the above pronominal determiners:
Hot aka zajuba ek?....Who won yesterday's game?
Hoat bi ha akuti sa ha gwa fiat?....Which one of the winners was the best?
Hota tam se hus?....Whose house is that?
Hotas se hus?....Whose is that?
Hotia deuzi et gaife?....Whose songs do you prefer?
Hotias et gaife?....Whose do you prefer?
Hos se eta dyun?....What is your name?
Hosi se eta gaifuni?....What are your preferences?
Hoa deuzi se eta gwafiasi?....Which songs are your best?
Hoasi se eta gwafiasi?....Which ones are your best?
Bi hia deuzuti, hoat et gafie?....Of these vocalists, which one do you prefer?
Hiiti yaneko hijub.....The following people will compete today.
Hoati se gwa fia?'....Which ones are best?
Hoti et teexe gwa jodi?....Who (all) do you listen to the most often?
Huat hu at teexe gwaxag draye ejna deuz.....The one I listen to the most has written a new song.
Ejna deuz? At voy teste haas hu et tede.....New song? I don't understand which one you mean.
Hias.....This one.
His se jub av ivxelen.....This is a day for celebration.
Va. Hia jub.  At tese hijub.....Yes. This day.  I mean To-day.
Husi sa ha jubi, ata dat!....Those were the days, my friend!
Hos se eta dyun?....What is your name?
Hot aka ha igpek?....Who won the race?
Hyas uja fi.....Everything ended well.
Hyasi uje.....All things come to an end.
Hyayenasi vey kyesu.....All sorts of things might happen.
Hyos yoka at.....Nothing surprised me.
Hyot ta adut hu ako.....Nobody knew who would win.
Huaytihu fu pier yefe.....Those females who would like to leave may.
Hyet yefe eker hia ifek.....Anyone can play this game.
Huyenasi voy afwo.....Such things will not be permitted.
Hua twob voy taxe hia toyb.....That man does not remember this woman.
Huti yanyexe fi.....Those guys work well together.
Huuyti hyaj yubixe tezex.....Such females always attract attention.
At jay teataye hiyenasi.....I've seen such things before.
Huyenwat voy vabiwu.....A man like that would not be accepted.
Hoyenasi weti iyfe xer je ha maj.....What kinds of things do you guys like to do during the day?
In a sequence of adjectives before a noun, deictic determiners go first, eg.:
Hoa ewa oga nyefi bewe et?....Which two small bags belong to you?
In interrogative sentences, the interrogative deictic determiner (question word) often starts out the sentence, as in English.
Hos se eta dyun?....What is your name?
Hot et teata aay hijub?....Who(m) did you see first today?
Interrogative deictic determiners can also go at the end of sentence:
Eta dyun se hos?....What is your name? Lit. Your name is what?
Sometimes, a deictic determiner specifies numerical information.  This chart shows those forms:
*Hawa and hyawa are short for haawa and hyaawa, respectively.
Examples using the above number-incorporating deictic determiners:
Ohyawat se iva bay eta vaod.....Not everyone is happy with your decision.
Hyaewasi yafwe uxer yata efi.....Both (things) can serve our needs.
Hyeawa tim ivlaxo at.....Either room will satisfy me.
Hyeowas oivlaxo at.....Neither one will dissatisfy me.
Note: Hyua means the other, while hyuawa means another, eg.:
At fu hyua til.....I would like the other drink., vs.
At fu hyuawa til.....I would like another drink.
Similarly, hya means every, all, while hyawa means each, eg.:
Hya dom ayse tebixea suni teaxer.....Every city has interesting things to see.
Hya domi ayse tebixuni.....All cities have things of interest.
Hyawa dom ayse tebixun.....Each city has something of interest.
Also, ha means the, while hawa means the only, eg.:
Hawa twob nazea ata tezex se et.....The only man worth my attention is you.
Ha twob hu at gwa ife se et.....The man I most love is you.
By appending y to hawa, we get the adverb haway....only, solely, eg;
Haway et nize ata tezex.....Only you deserve my attention..
The singular person pronouns in the above chart can be converted into pronominal determiners by adding the adjective suffix a, eg.:
Hyawata tej se ge glatesa vyel hyutas.....Each one's life is as important as another's.
Hyeowata dyun se vyama.....Neither person's name is real.
However, the plural person pronouns in the above chart use the preposition bi (of) to form possessives, eg.:
Ha teji bi hyaiwati se kyebukuwa.....The lives of all three are in danger.
The above singular pronominal determiners can, in turn, be converted into inanimate pronouns with the suffix -s.
Hyawatas se glatesa.....Each one's is important.
Hyeowatas se vyama.....Neither's is real.
The plural pronominal determiners can be nominalized with the use of bi, eg:
Hyaiwasi bi huti se kyebukuwa.....All three of theirs' are in danger.
Correlative Number-incorporating Deictic Determiners are handled as follows:
Hyeawa A ey B....either A or B
Hyeowa A oy B....neither A nor B
Hyaewa A ay B....both A and B
Hawa A, voy B....only A, not B
This tables shows a correlated set of pro-adverbs built through the agglutination of deictic prefixes and catetory stubs.  This is not all-inclusive, because their are other similary-constructed pro-verbs relating to other categories.
Note 1: -nog and -gla forms are synonymous, insofar as expressions of degree are concerned.
Note 2 hoxag? and other frequency forms can be also expressed as hogla jodi?....how many times.
Note 3 hyi- can be substituted by ge-.
Note 4 hyu- can be substituted by oge-.
The longer, expanded forms of pro-adverbs can be used at any time.  For example:
At egteato et hejob.....I will see you again sometime.
Hosun se eta dyun?....What is your name?
Et yeyfe axer hubyen.....You shouldn't act that way.
It should be noted that all of these pro-adverb determiners, unless used as nouns, such as in the sentence Iyt iyfe him.....She likes this place (or) She likes it here., are really abbreviations of longer expressions with mostly the preposition be....at.  For example, At tambeseya hum., meaning I used to live there. is ignoring the preposition be from the longer, more explicit version At tambeseya be hum., lit. I used to live at that-place.  The proper preposition must be explicitly present if something other than be....at is meant.  For example, from where? is expressed as bi hom?  Similarly, up until then would be expressed as byu huj.
Here are some examples of how adverbial determiners are used:
Hom et tambese?....Where do you live?   <   Et tambese be HOa neM?....You live at what place.)
At tame hum.....I live there.
Et tame hum hu ha mep uje.....You live where the road ends.
Hom weti peye?....Where are you guys going?
Et yafe per hyem hu et fu.....You can go anywhere.
Bi hom et se?....Where are you from?
Hoj et taja?....When were you born?
At voy tajaya huj.....I had not been born then.
Et yeyfe duder hiiyen.....You should respond in the following way.
Ot voy yefe daler huuyen.....One must not talk in such a manner.
Et pia hesav.....He left for some reason.
Hoyen et iyfe hia vafil?....How do like this wine?
Voy se fia axer hiyen.....It is not good to act this way.
Hosav et tadsa huunog jwa?....Why did you marry so late?
Ha tob pia hyosav.....The man left for no reason.
Hwat pia hasav hu it efa per hyum.....The guy left because( ~ [for] the reason that) he needed to go elsewhere.
The different, somewhat confusing,  meanings of how are illustrated here:
Hoyen it xa hus?....How did he do that?.... (Equivalent to Be hoa byen...?....In what way...?) (ADVERB OF MANNER)
Hoyen et xeye?....How are you doing?.... (This is the normal way of saying How are you? or How do you do? (ADVERB OF MANNER)
Hoyena sa ha dyezun?.... How was the film?.... (How here is an ADJECTIVE OF KIND, and thus ends in -a.)
Honog (= Hogla) aga it se?....How big is he?.... (ADVERB OF DEGREE)
Huunog (= Huugla) iyfla et se!....How nice you are!.... (ADVERB OF EMPHATIC DEGREE)
The conjunction as is expressed most often using pro-adverbs of manner:
Xu hayen hu at de.....Do as I say. = (in) the way that...
Xu hyiyen hu (or geyen hu) at xe.....Do as I do. = (in) the same way that...
Xu hiiyen:....Do as follows: = (in) this hereby manner...
However, the particle gel (like, as) can be substituted:
Xu gel at de.....Do as I say.
Many of the pro-adverb determiners in the above chart can be relativized by adding the relative marker hu after the base form, eg:
At teaso et haj hu et puo him.....I will see you when you get here.
It xa has hasav hu tosa yefa.....He did it because (for the reason that) he felt compelled.
Hyem hu et po, et so ga iva.....Wherever you go, you'll be happier.
See more about this in the section on relative clauses under Verbs.
The deictic prefixes can be combined with gla to form quantitative expressions acting as adverbial or adjectival determiners, and substantives (pronouns referring to things or people):
Here are some examples showing how these quantitative determiners are used:
Et deuze huugla fi.....You sing so well.
At se hegla booka.....I am somewhat tired.
Hogla pati et teata hijub?....How many birds did you see today?
At teata vyavay hugla tami.....I saw exactly that many houses.
Iyt fe hyiglas vyel et.....She wants the same amount as you.
Hoglati yantexe yet?....How many (people) agree with you?
Hyoglati yantexe.....None agree.
Yit fu heglasi.....They would like some (of them).
Et yafe bier hyeglasi et fe.....You can take however many you want.
At se huugla booka.....I am so tired.
NOTE: The following determiners are synonymous and interchangeable:
The determiners hogla and huugla can be used as exclamatory adverbs, eg.:
Hogla et agsaye!....How you have grown!
Hua twob jagsaye huugla!....That man has aged so much!
Hia jotul se huugla fiteluza!....This dessert is sooo delicioius!
For a discussion of pronominal determiners (or possessive adjectives) like my, mine, yours, our own, etc., see Pronominal Determiners under Pronouns.
The idea behind data abstraction is to identity certain ways or operations data is expressed and manipulated. Once this is done, the goal is then to use only those operations when it comes to manipulating data. Restricting the use of operations, makes it much easier to change the representation of abstract data without changing a program's behavior. [1]
A few examples of abstraction barriers can be found in this table from composing programs.com, which demonstrates how different types of abstraction barriers can handle rational numbers.
Parts of the program that...
Treat rationals as...
The last column 'using only' demonstrates an extraction barrier being enforced.  The functions are called from higher levels then, implented through a lower level of abstraction.
Violations occur when a program that has the ability to use a higher level function, instead uses one in a lower level.
An example would be referring directly to numerators and denominaters in your code rather then just using mul_rational, a function that does not assume anything about how a rational number is implented
Composingprograms.com examples -
Correct: code is simple and makes no assumptions on rational number implentation.
Incorrect: violates one abstraction barrier, by directly referring to numerators and denominaters making code more complex then needed.
Also incorrect due too making extra assumption rationals are represented as two element list. This would be considered two abstraction barrier violations.
In short, abstraction barriers make programs easier to maintain and modify, by using as few functions as possible to represent operations so fewer changes will be needed to be made to the code in order to change it's representation.  Remember simplicity is better then complexity, especially when it comes to abstraction barriers.
Wikipedia has related information at Unit of alcohol
The Rob Roy is a cocktail similar to a Manhattan but made with Scotch whiskey and sweet vermouth instead of rye whiskey.
Fill a mixing glass with ice.
Add bitters, scotch and vermouth and stir.
Strain into a chilled cocktail glass, garnished with a Maraschino cherry.
Serve.
Wikipedia has related information at Rob Roy (cocktail)
When children play with toys, they are trying to practice dealing with the world, and learning how it works.
In one test of this idea, psychologist Aimee Stahl ran an experiment in which infants were shown objects behaving in various ways. One object was shown to defy gravity (it was staged, of course.) When given an opportunity to play with the toy afterward, the infants were more likely to drop it on the ground. Some infants saw toys that appeared to pass walls, and later, when they played with the toy, they would bang it on the table. What we think is happening here is that the infants already had some knowledge that solid objects obey the law of gravity and are unable to pass through walls. So when the kids observed otherwise, they tested this knowledge, and the fact that they used different tests for different objects supports this view. [1]
↑ Stahl, A. E. & Feigenson, L. (2015). Observing the unexpected enhances infants' learning and exploration. Science, 348, 91-94.
Video Graphics Chipset: Nvidia Quattro NVS 110M (???Mb)
I       a        teacher     with            spoke
"HS" refers to Heavenly Stems, "EB" refers to Earthly Branches, and "Hid" refers to Hidden Stems.
Luck Pillars for H7 - E1 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 0] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H7 - E1 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 1] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H7 - E1 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 2] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H7 - E1 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 3] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H7 - E1 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 4] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H7 - E1 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 5] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H7 - E1 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 6] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H7 - E1 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 7] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H7 - E1 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 8] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H7 - E1 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 9] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H7 - E1 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 10] in direction F (forward).
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
Chapter thirteen begins with Esther lying on a beach, discussing a play with a boy named Cal. She had been taken there by her friend Jody and her boyfriend Mark. She says she was hestitating to go with them because they would notice how she's changed, but Jody didn't seem to mind. She asks Cal about ways of committing suicide. He says that if he wanted to do it, he would use his father's shotgun. Unfortunately for Esther, his father lives in England, so the shotgun is out of her reach. When Jody and Mark come back from the water, Esther goes to swim herself, because she can't stand being around so many people. She challenges Cal to a race towards a far-out rock in the water.
The narration skips back to the morning of that day, when Esther attempted to hang herself with a cord from her mother's bathrobe. The attempt falied, as she couldn't find a suitable place to hang the cord, and she couldn't do it with her bare hands. She considers herself incurable and imagines how eventaully she'd end up bankrupting her family and friends and ending up in a cage in some public hospital.
Back at the beach, Cal has to turn around, but Esther dogpaddles on. She tries to drown herself, but finds that the sea keeps pushing her back up to the surface. She turns around, defeated, and swims back to the beach.
Esther then tells the story of when she was a volunteer at a hospital. She was hoping to be put on a ward with gruesome cases that would recognise her well-meaning, but instead she is put on the maternity ward, where she is in charge of distributing flowers to all the mothers. Before she does that, however, she picks out all the dead and dying flowers out of the bouquets and lays them in a basin, imagining it to be a tomb. When she takes the flowers around, however, it turns out that because of Esther's initiative the women don't get the flowers they wanted and complain to the nurse. Esther runs out of the hospital in shame.
She goes to a nearby cemetery where her father was buried. She mentions how she had considered going to the Catholic Church, despite not being a believer, because she was hoping that a priest could convince her not to commit suicide. She buys a raincoat just before finding her father's grave. She collapses crying next to it, but doesn't understand why, before remembering that neither her mother, nor she had ever cried for him before.
Back home, she waits until her mother leaves, then gets a bottle of sleeping pills. She writes a note saying ”I am going for a long walk” and goes into the basement. She crawls into the breezeway, wraps herself in her coat and swallows the pills one-by-one before falling asleep.
How would you explain Esther's sudden decisiveness at the end of the chapter?
Copy context by setting values in the target from those in the source.
/escape -- Choose your own escape char (no escape for block templates)
{Substitutes values into a template string, returning a new string.}
/escape {Choose your own escape char (no escape for block templates)}
/local vals word a b c d
a: any [b: [escape | skip]]
a: any [to char b: char [escape | none]]
Clashach Cove, Scotland. Analysis of the exposed yellow sandstone reveals that this was once a hot arid sandy desert.In this article we shall look at how various kinds of sediment are characteristic of the climates in which they are formed, so that the lithified counterparts of these sediments can be used as an indicator of climatic conditions in the past.
The reader may find it useful to look back at the main articles on deserts, glaciers, paleosols, ooids, and coal to put the remarks below into their proper perspective.
There are a number of types of sediment which are symptomatic of the climatic conditions under which they formed.
Glacial sedimentation and erosion. As was discussed in the article on glaciers, we can detect their former presence by such clues as striations, glacial till, and dropstones. Obviously the former presence of glaciers indicates a former cold climate.
Similarly the presence of aeolian sand, with its distinctive large-scale cross-bedding, pinstripe laminae, etc, indicates an arid and usually a hot climate. The same may be said of features such as playa lakes, indicative of low rainfall and a high rate of evaporation.
Redbeds are sedimentary rocks cemented together chiefly by iron oxides; these are characteristic of a dry climate.
Ooids are formed only in warm, shallow, agitated water, and so are indicators of a warm climate.
Coal requires a peat swamp, and therefore cannot form in an arid climate.
The soil types known as laterites are produced in tropical conditions with seasonal alternation between a monsoon season and a dry season, and so the corresponding paleosols indicate such conditions where they are found in the geological record.
For information about how we know that glacial till is deposited by glaciers, or that coal is lithified peat, and so forth, the reader should refer to the main articles on those topics.
Given that knowledge, the inference from the sedimentary rocks to the climate in which they were formed is a fairly obvious one. It is difficult, after all, to suppose that in times gone past glaciers flowed in conditions of sweltering heat, and it is a downright contradiction in terms to think of a dry swamp. Similar remarks apply to the other sediment types listed above; unless the laws of physics or chemistry were significantly different in the past than they are in the present, it is hard to see how sediments in the past could be characteristic of different climates than the corresponding sediments in the present.
Console.WriteLine("What player are you looking
PlayerName = Console.ReadLine
Console.WriteLine("Yes, they have a top score")
Console.WriteLine("No, they do not have a top
What do you understand by the theory of 'continental drift? Discuss the prominent evidences in its support. (100 words) [2013]
What do you understand by the phenomenon of 'temperature inversion' in meteorology? How does it affect weather and the habitants of the place?
Major hot deserts in northern hemisphere are located between 20-30 deg N latitudes and on the western side of the continents. Why? (200 words) [2013]
There is no formation of deltas by rivers of the Western Ghats. Why? (100 words) [2013]
Explain the formation of thousands of islands in Indonesian and Philippines archipelagos. (150 words) [2014]
3 Solution NMR in Determining Structure of VDAC-1 and Other Integral Membrane Proteins
Mitochondria have been known to be the powerhouse of the eukaryotic cell, possessing the ability to produce ATP which is used as cellular energy for the cell.  However, mitochondria also fulfill other roles within the cell such as in metabolic pathways, apoptosis, cellular differentiation, and control of the cell cycle.  As a result, to these multiple functions, mitochondria have evolved to develop a double membrane that surrounds the mitochondria complex.  This double membrane functions as a high-traffic zone for the cell, possessing the ability to control what molecules go into the mitochondrion and what have to go out.  For example, low-energy metabolites such as ADP have to go inside while high-energy metabolites such as ATP have to go out.  This function of funneling ADP into mitochondria and ATP out of mitochondria is controlled by an integral membrane protein known as the voltage-dependent ion channel (VDAC), or also referred to as the mitochondrial porin.
The structure of VDAC has been examined for quite some time after it was discovered in 1975.  Many structures of VDAC were determined, but the spatial arrangement, the topology, of the structure for the beta-strand could not be determined.  However, in 2008, three long-term efforts to determine the three-dimensional structure of VDAC-1 were determined at atomic resolution.  Three structures of the isoform VDAC-1 were determined by different methods.  One was determined by using NMR spectroscopy alone, another by X-ray crystallography alone, and the last one using a combination of both NMR spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography.  The comparison of these three different structures of VDAC-1 is examined as well as the discussion of the importance of solution NMR to determine the structure of VDAC-1.
Structure of VDAC-1 and Comparison of Three Structures
The structure of VDAC-1 is very unique as it contains a very large beta-barrel.  For all three structures, the number of strands in this beta-barrel and the spatial arrangements of molecules is the same.  In studying the amino acid sequence of VDAC, it has been identified as being conserved from yeast to human.  As a result, the overall folding pattern of the structure is known to be the same in all eukaryotes.  In the three structures of VDAC-1, one of the structures is derived from a mouse while the other two structures are derived from humans.  When comparing the mouse form of VDAC-1 to the human form of VDAC-1, the two forms are highly identical, differing in only four amino acids.  Due to the very small changes in amino acid sequence between the mouse and human forms, the three-dimensional folded structures are very similar.  To further confirm the beta-barrel structure of VDAC-1, denaturation of the VDAC-1 protein was performed to allow it to refold into the detergent LDAO.  The refolded VDAC-1 structure was then placed into a different environment containing bicelles known as DMPC.  By placing the refolded VDAC structure in a different solution environment, the same beta-barrel structure was observed again, and it was concluded that this beta-barrel structure of VDAC-1 is the same no matter what type of environment solution it is placed in.
The beta-barrel structure of VDAC-1 is fairly unique because it is the only structure that is observed in any eukaryotic membrane protein, and it is also the only known beta-barrel membrane protein that contains an odd number of strands.  The rest of the beta-barrel proteins are observed to arrange into anti-parallel beta sheets, and because of this, an even amount of strands is needed to stabilize the entire beta-sheet structure through hydrogen bonding.  It is unknown why a beta-barrel structure is stabilized with an odd number of strands as the folding mechanism of this protein is not fully understood.  The structure of the beta-barrel is defined using two numbers that are the number of strands, n, and the shear number, S.  The shear number in the beta-barrel can be identified as the pairs of alpha-carbon atoms in adjacent strands that lie on a helical trace across the surface of the beta-barrel.  The side chains of the alpha-carbon atoms must be pointed to the same side of the sheet, and following the trace of the helix once around until it arrives back at the first strand a certain number of residues away from the starting point is known as the shear number of the beta-barrel.  In beta-barrels, the shear number is always even in order to have the hydrophobic residues of the protein on the outside of the complex.  Beta-barrel structures usually contain a shear number in the range of n and n+4.
Another comparison that is made to differentiate the three VDAC-1 structures is the residues that branch off the protein that is not part of the beta-barrel.  The 1-23 residues are compared between each of the three structures, but through the use of NMR, only residues 6-10 have been identified to be an alpha-helical structure.  Also, through the use of X-ray crystallography, the structure of mouse VDAC-1 was observed to contain three aliphatic residues: Leucine 10, Valine 143, and Leucine 150.  From the crystallized structure, it was observed that Valine 143 and Leucine 150 are the only hydrophobic side chains that point to the barrel interior from the barrel wall.  Residues 11-20 in the mouse structure and human structure appear to contain similar segments.  However, the conformation of these segments differs between these two structures.  Both structures were analyzed at cryogenic temperatures through the use of NMR.  The conformational changes between these structures are exposed through the use of NMR because as the conformations change, residues of the proteins will end up interacting with other different neighboring residues.  As a result, these conformational changes can lead to multiple resonance lines, reduced signal intensity, or line broadening on the NMR graphs for the structures.
Solution NMR in Determining Structure of VDAC-1 and Other Integral Membrane Proteins
In determining the beta-barrel structure of VDAC-1, researchers have stated that the combination of NMR and X-ray crystallography data were not enough in fully determining the structure.  As a result, the use of solution NMR techniques was used instead to solve the beta-barrel structure of this membrane protein.  In total, nine structures of integral membrane proteins have been solved using solution NMR.  In using solution NMR, two important techniques are used in determining membrane protein structures such as VDAC-1: protein refolding and deuteration of the detergent micelle.
The use of protein refolding from a denatured state has a very low success rate for most membrane proteins, but if the refolding process is successful, there are many benefits that help to study the structure of membrane proteins with much greater ease.  First, the process of protein refolding can lead to a very high yield of the newly folded structure of the protein.  In the case of VDAC-1, an average of 40 mg of VDAC-1 was obtained in a 1 liter solution of an E. coli cell culture.  Second, protein refolding helps to purify the membrane protein to an extremely high degree.  This is extremely important in studying the structure of VDAC-1 as the data obtained from X-ray crystallography and NMR would be accurate in examining the true structure.  Third, protein refolding has a high reproducibility, which goes together with the high purity.  Fourth, because high yield and high reproducibility can be done from protein refolding, efficient perdeuteration and selective isotope labeling can be done.  Finally, since the predeuterated protein goes through a denatured state in the in deuterated-water, all the amide compounds are readily protonated by the deuterated-water, and therefore, the structure of proteins such as VDAC-1 are much easier to identify due to the presence of D’s instead of H’s.
The use of deuterated detergent in solution NMR is the second technique that helps in identifying the structure of large membrane proteins such as beta-barrel of VDAC-1.  From other NMR studies, compounds not placed in deuterated solutions produce very broad resonance lines due to the strong dipole-dipole interactions between different atoms, causing the spectral sensitivity to be reduced an extremely significant amount.  By examining membrane proteins such as VDAC in deuterated solutions, a much more specific NMR graph is observed.  For example, when using the Nitrogen-15-resolved-NOESY spectra, when a deuterated detergent was replaced with a protonated detergent, a decrease of 10-30% in sensitivity was observed.  This decrease in sensitivity is clearly seen when analyzing the spectra of the methyl groups of the aliphatic residues of Isoleucine, Leucine, and Valine.  The NOESY spectra of these groups did not produce a clear spectra identifying these compounds in a protonated detergent, but when a deuterated detergent was used, clear images of these groups were able to be identified, concluding that the use of solution NMR in a deuterated detergent proved to be a powerful method in determining the structures of integral membrane proteins such as VDAC-1.
Hiller, S.  The role of solution NMR in the structure determinations of VDAC-1 and other membrane proteins.  2009, Current Opinion in Structural Biology.  p. 396-401.
When a computer is turned on, it normally begins the process of "booting" by reading software from the system's hard disk (or other non-volatile storage medium), and loading it into memory and then executing it. In this process the kernel is loaded and then various other system programs may be loaded.
A Linux system can be configured to boot up to one of several available "run levels":
The following quote from The Debian GNU/Linux FAQ explains how to add a custom procedure to a Debian or Debian based system boot:
Suppose a system needs to execute script foo on start-up, or on entry to a particular (System V) runlevel. Then the system administrator should:
Enter the script foo into the directory /etc/init.d/.
Run the Debian command update-rc.d with appropriate arguments, to set up links between the (command-line-specified) directories rc?.d and /etc/init.d/foo. Here, '?' is a number from 0 through 6 and corresponds to each of the System V runlevels.
Reboot the system.
The command update-rc.d will set up links between files in the directories rc?.d and the script in /etc/init.d/. Each link will begin with a 'S' or a 'K', followed by a number, followed by the name of the script. Scripts beginning with 'S' in /etc/rcN.d/ are executed when runlevel N is entered. Scripts beginning with a 'K' are executed when leaving runlevel N.
The Debian GNU/Linux FAQ Chapter 11 - Customizing your installation of Debian GNU/Linux
1.1 1. a. List and explain the safety rules
1.2 1. b. Explain the “dangers of falling” chart.
1.3 2. Explain the uses of the following knots:
2.1 3. Draw the diagrams for the setting up of the following abseil descents:
2.2 4. Know the ways to identify safe anchors in various circumstances, e.g. trees, boulders, bollards. Belaying
2.3 5. Explain the various verbal calls.
2.4 6. Explain the principle of belaying and the three methods used, and give the advantages and disadvantages of each method:
3.1 7. List the rules for care of ropes.
3.2 8. Explain the difference between dynamic and static rope.
3.3 9. Know the right type of equipment needed for abseiling.
3.4 10. Know the best way to store your ropes, e.g. coiling and chaining.
4.1 11 a. Know which descending device to use in different abseils.
4.2 11 b. Give reasons why you chose that device, e.g. on/off time, security, heat, versatility, etc.
5.1 12. Know about how to treat a patient for the following injuries:
6.1 13. Explain how to perform the following rescues:
7.1 1. Pass the abseiling exam with a pass mark of 60%. The exam is available from the conference youth ministries office, or through the instructor.
8.1 2. Answer the questions on the following topics:
9.1 3. Perform the following tasks:
10.1 4. From a minimum height of 10 meters, complete two abseils on each of the following devices, and know how to attach them to the rope:
10.2 5. Explain how to do the classic abseil, and over the shoulder abseil, for emergency use.
10.3 6. Be able to prussik a ten-meter cliff.
a. List and explain the safety rules
b. Explain the “dangers of falling” chart.
Ring Bend (Water Knot, Tape Knot)
Use: The water knot (or tape knot) is a knot frequently used in climbing for joining two ends of webbing together, for instance when making a sling.
The ends should be left at least three inches long and the knot should be "set" by tightening it with full body weight. The ends can be taped or lightly sewn to the standing parts to help prevent them from creeping back into the knot. Inspect the knot before each use.
To tie, first form an overhand knot in one end and then follow it with the other end, feeding in the opposite direction.
b. Alpine butterfly
Use: The Butterfly Loop has a high breaking strength and is regarded by mountaineers as one of the strongest knots to attach climbers to the middle of a rope, such that they have room to move around even when the main rope goes tight, and they can be supported in either direction from the main rope. The loop is typically attached to a climbing harness by carabiner.
It can also be used to isolate a worn section of rope, where the knot is tied such that the worn section is used for the center of the loop.
c. Figure of eight loop
Use: This knot is ideal for keeping the end of a rope from running out of tackle or pulley.
Pass end under, then up through the loop.
Draw up tight.
d. Double fishermans
Use: Joining thin, stiff or slippery lines, backing up critical knots such as the Figure-of-eight loop or Figure-of-eight follow through.
Use the double fisherman's knot to tie together two ropes of unequal sizes. This knot and the triple fisherman's knot are the variations used most often in rock climbing, but other uses include search and rescue.
The primary use of this knot in rock climbing is to form high strength loops of cord for connecting pieces of the rock climber's protection system. It is favoured for being compact, and for arranging the line of force in a straight line through the knot.
Another common use for this knot is to back up a critical knot, such as a harness tie-in knot or single-line rappel rigs. In this use, the running end is tied around the standing end of the rope, so that it cannot slip back through the knot.
See illustration.
Draw up tight.
Use: A Prusik (aka Prussik or Prussic) is a friction hitch used in climbing, canyoneering, caving, rope rescue and by arborists to grab a rope (sometimes referred to as a rope-grab).  The term Prusik is used both for the knot, for the loops of cord, and for the action (to prusik).
A Prusik rope is a circular loop with a circumference of 20 to 100 cm depending on its intended use.  Two Prusik ropes are tied to another rope which is anchored above.  When the Prusik knot is under tension, it grabs the rope to which it is tied.  When not under tension, it is easily moved.  The climber places one foot into each loop, and shifts all of his or her weight to one of them, releasing the tension on the other.  The rope without tension is then slid upwards on the vertical rope.  The climber the shifts his or her weight to the other loop and slides the first one up.  This is repeated until the rope has been ascended.
Prusiks will work around two ropes, even two ropes of different diameters.  Prusiks provide a high-strength and relatively fail-safe (i.e., they will slip before damaging the rope or breaking) attachment, and are used in some rope-rescue techniques.  Prusiks are good to use in hauling systems where multiple rope-grabs may be needed, and where mechanical rope-grabs are not available.
Although the Prusik Climb technique may be called old-school by some, the US Army still includes it in its annual Best Ranger competition. Rangers in the competition routinely make it up a 90 foot rope in under a minute.
The Prusik is tied by wrapping the prusik loop around the rope a number of times (depending on the materials, but usually 3-5 times), and then back through itself, forming a barrel around the rope, with a tail hanging out the middle.  When the tail is weighted the turns tighten around the main rope and grab.  When weight is removed the loop can be slid along the rope by placing a hand directly on the barrel and pushing.  The trick is, if it grabs well, then it is hard to slide along the rope. Breaking the Prusik free from the rope after it has been weighted can be difficult, and is easiest done by pushing the bow, being the loop of cord which runs from the top wrap, over the knot to the bottom wrap, along the tail a little.  This loosens the grip of the hitch and makes movement easier.
Locked while holding tension.
Slides readily without tension.
Use: This knot doesn't jam or slip when tied properly.  It can be tied around a person's waist and used to lift him, because the loop will not tighten under load.  In sailing, the bowline is used to tie a halyard to a sail head.
Now pass end up behind the standing part, then down through the loop again.
Draw up tight.
Draw the diagrams for the setting up of the following abseil descents:
a. Single rope technique
b. Canyoning setup
Know the ways to identify safe anchors in various circumstances, e.g. trees, boulders, bollards. Belaying
Explain the various verbal calls.
Explain the principle of belaying and the three methods used, and give the advantages and disadvantages of each method:
a. Body belay
b. Mechanical belay
c. Base belay
List the rules for care of ropes.
Adventist Youth Honors Answer Book/Knot/Care Of Rope
Explain the difference between dynamic and static rope.
Dynamic rope is usually used for climbing activities where stretch to absorb the shock from a leader fall while on belay or climbing while roped with a team is expected. The dynamic function decreases deceleration injury and preserves the rope. After hard falls ropes may need to be retired from leader use.
Static ropes are built with little or no stretch. They are best suited for caving, Abseiling and static safety tied ropes.
Know the right type of equipment needed for abseiling.
A helmet will protect your head from falling rocks or other impacts. Here is what you should look for.
 Fits comfortably on your head and you can forget you’re even wearing soon after you put it on.
Always wear a helmet.
A harness. A wide padded waist belt harness with loops for carrying gear is good.  Tape harnesses are ample but not very comfortable. The harness must be fitted correctly...it should be fitted firmly above the hips around the waist first, then leg loops should be adjusted firmly. There should be no pressure spots, wedging or chaffing from quality harness.
Gloves. Novices such as school groups who do abseiling only while on an instructors safety belay will usually use gloves. Their hands are soft and easily blistered and as a beginner they tend to get rope burn by letting the rope loose then grasping it in fear or excitement. Choose gloves that fit your hand size, and not the one size fits all type garden variety. The perfect glove is a mitten type with padded palms and exposed fingers.
Footwear. Climbing shoes are not necessary but sturdy footwear is recommended.
Ropes...
Belay devices...
Know the best way to store your ropes, e.g. coiling and chaining.
Be aware that moisture, extreme temperatures Ultraviolet light, chemicals, abrasion and dirt can all damage ropes. Keeping them clean, dry and protected is mission critical to a full lifespan of the rope.
11 b. Give reasons why you chose that device, e.g. on/off time, security, heat, versatility, etc.
Know about how to treat a patient for the following injuries:
Hypothermia is caused by continued exposure to low or rapidly falling temperatures, cold moisture, snow, or ice.  Those exposed to low temperatures for extended periods may suffer ill effects, even if they are well protected by clothing, because cold affects the body systems slowly, almost without notice.  As the body cools, there are several stages of progressive discomfort and disability.  The first symptom is shivering, which is an attempt to generate   heat by repeated contractions of surface muscles.  This is followed by a feeling of listlessness, indifference, and  drowsiness.  Unconsciousness can follow quickly.  Shock becomes evident as the victim’s eyes assume a glassy stare, respiration becomes slow and shallow, and the pulse is weak or absent.  As the body temperature drops even lower,   peripheral circulation decreases and the extremities become susceptible  to  freezing.    Finally, death results as the core temperature of the body approaches 80 °F (27 °C).  The steps   for treatment of hypothermia are as follows:
Carefully  observe  respiratory  effort  and  heart beat; CPR may be required while the warming process is underway.
Rewarm the victim as soon as possible.  It may be  necessary to treat other injuries  before the victim can be moved to a warmer place.  Severe bleeding must be controlled and   fractures splinted over clothing before the victim is moved.
Replace wet or frozen clothing and remove anything that constricts the victim’s arms, legs, or fingers, interfering with circulation.
If the victim is inside a warm  place and is conscious, the most effective method of warming is immersion in a tub of warm (100° to 105 °F or 38° to 41 °C) water.  The water should be warm to the elbow - never hot.  Observe closely for signs of respiratory failure and cardiac arrest (rewarming shock).   Rewarming shock can be minimized by warming the body trunk before the limbs to prevent vasodilation in the  extremities  with  subsequent  shock  due to blood volume shifts.
If a tub is not available, apply external heat to both sides of the victim. Natural body heat (skin to skin) from two rescuers is the best method. This is called “buddy warming.”   If this is not practical, use hot water bottles or an electric rewarming blanket.  Do not place the blanket or bottles next to bare skin, however, and be careful to monitor the temperature of the artificial heat source, since the victim is very susceptible to burn injury. Because the victim is unable to generate adequate body heat, placement under a blanket or in a sleeping bag is not sufficient treatment.
If the victim is conscious, give warm liquids to drink.  Never give alcoholic beverages or allow the victim to smoke.
Dry the victim thoroughly if water is used for rewarming.
As  soon  as  possible,  transfer  the  victim  to  a definitive care facility.  Be alert for the signs of respiratory  and  cardiac  arrest  during  transfer, and keep the victim warm.
d. Broken bone
An essential part of the first-aid treatment is immobilizing  the  injured  part  with  splints so that the sharp ends of broken bones won’t move around and cause further damage to nerves, blood vessels, or vital organs.  Splints are also used to immobilize severely injured joints or muscles and to prevent the enlargement of extensive wounds.
Before you can use a splint, you need to have a general understanding of the use of splints. In an emergency, almost any firm object or material can be used as a splint. Such things as umbrellas, canes, tent pegs, sticks, oars, paddles, spars, wire, leather, boards, pillows,  heavy clothing, corrugated cardboard, and folded newspapers can be used as splints.   A   fractured leg may sometimes be splinted by fastening it securely to the uninjured leg. Splints, whether ready-made or improvised, must meet the following requirements:
Be light in weight, but still be strong and fairly rigid.
Be long enough to reach the joints above and below the fracture.
Be wide enough so the bandages used to hold them in place won’t pinch the injured part.
Be well padded on the sides that touch the body. If they’re not properly padded, they won’t fit well and won’t adequately immobilize the injured part.
To improvise the padding for a splint, use articles of  clothing,  bandages,  cotton,  blankets,  or  any other soft material.
If the victim is wearing heavy clothes, apply the splint  on  the  outside,  allowing  the  clothing  to serve as at least part of the required padding.
Although  splints  should  be  applied  snugly, never apply them tight enough to interfere with the circulation of the blood. When applying splints to an arm or a leg, try to leave the fingers or toes exposed. If the tips of the fingers or toes become blue or cold, you will know that the splints or bandages are too tight.  You should examine a splinted part approximately every half-hour, and loosen the fastenings if circulation appears to be cut off. Remember that any injured part is likely to swell, and splints or bandages that are all right when applied may be too tight later.
To secure the limb to the splint, belts, neckerchiefs, rope, or any suitable material may be used. If possible, tie the limb at two places above and two places below the break. Leave the treatment of other types of fractures, such as jaw, ribs, and spine, to medical personnel. Never try to move a person who might have a fractured spine or neck.  Moving such a person could cause permanent paralysis. Don’t attempt to reset bones.
There are two long bones in the forearm, the radius and the ulna.   When both are broken, the arm usually appears to be deformed.  When only one is broken, the other acts as a splint and the arm retains a more or less natural  appearance.  Any fracture of the forearm is likely to result in pain, tenderness, inability to use the forearm, and a kind of wobbly motion at the point of injury. If the fracture is open, a bone will show through. If the fracture is open, stop the bleeding and treat the wound.  Apply a sterile dressing over the wound. Carefully  straighten  the  forearm. (Remember that rough handling of a closed fracture may turn it into an open fracture.)  Apply two well-padded splints to the forearm, one on the top and one on the bottom.  Be sure that the splints are long enough to extend from the elbow to the wrist.   Use bandages to hold the splints in place.   Put the forearm across the chest.  The palm of  the hand should be turned in, with the thumb pointing upward. Support the forearm in this position by means of a wide sling and a cravat bandage (see illustration). The hand should be raised about 4 inches above the level of the elbow.  Treat the victim for shock and evacuate as soon as possible.
The signs of fracture of the upper arm include pain, tenderness, swelling, and a wobbly motion at the point of fracture.  If the fracture is near the elbow, the arm is likely to be straight with no bend at the elbow. If the fracture is open, stop the bleeding and treat the wound before attempting to treat the fracture.
Treatment  of  the  fracture  depends partly upon the location of the break.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the arm near the shoulder, place a pad or folded towel in the armpit, bandage the arm securely to the body, and support the forearm in a narrow sling.
If the fracture is in the middle of the upper arm, you can use one well-padded splint on the outside of the arm.  The splint should extend from the shoulder to the elbow.  Fasten the splinted arm firmly to the body and support  the  forearm  in  a  narrow  sling,  as illustrated.
Another way of treating a fracture in the middle of the  upper  arm  is  to  fasten  two  wide  splints  (or  four narrow   ones)   about   the   arm   and   then   support   the forearm in a narrow sling.  If you use a splint between the arm and the body, be very careful that it does not extend  too  far  up  into  the  armpit;  a  splint  in  this position  can  cause  a  dangerous  compression  of  the blood vessels and nerves and may be extremely painful to the victim. If the fracture is at or near the elbow, the arm may be either bent or straight.   No matter in what position you   find   the   arm, DO NOT ATTEMPT TO STRAIGHTEN IT OR MOVE IT IN ANY WAY. Splint the arm as carefully as possible in the position in which you find it.   This will prevent further nerve and blood vessel damage.   The only exception to this is if there is no pulse on the other side of the fracture (relative to the heart), in which case gentle traction is applied and then the arm is splinted. Treat the victim for shock and get him under the care of a medical professional as soon as possible.
Carefully  straighten  the  injured  limb.  Immobilize the fracture by placing a padded board under  the  injured  limb.  The  board  should  be  at least 4 inches wide and should reach from the but- tock  to  the  heel.  Place  extra  padding  under  the knee and just above the heel, as shown in the illustration.  Use  strips  of  bandage  to  fasten  the  leg  to the board in four places: (1) just below the knee; (2) just above the knee; (3) at the ankle; and (4) at  the  thigh.  DO  NOT  COVER  THE  KNEE ITSELF. Swelling is likely to occur very rapidly, and  any  bandage  or  tie  fastened  over  the  knee would quickly become too tight. Treat the victim for  shock  and  evacuate  as  soon  as  possible.
The  figure-eight  bandage  is used  for dressings  of  the  ankle,  as  well  as  for  supporting a sprain.   While keeping the foot at a right angle, start a 3-inch bandage around the instep for several turns to anchor it.   Carry the bandage upward over the instep and around behind the ankle, forward, and again across the instep and down under the arch, thus completing one   figure-eight. Continue   the   figure-eight   turns, overlapping  one-third  to  one-half  the  width  of  the bandage and with an occasional turn around the ankle, until the compress is secured or until adequate support is obtained.
Shock is a medical condition where the delivery of oxygen and nutrients is insufficient to meet the body's needs.  The main carrier of oxygen and nutrients in the body is the blood, so anytime there is a loss of blood, there is a risk of shock.  Shock is a life-threatening emergency.
Immediate reassurance and comforting the victim if conscious.
If alone, go for help.  If not, send someone to go for help and someone stay with the victim.
Ensure that the airway is clear and check for breathing.  Place the victim in the recovery position if possible.
Attempt to stop any obvious bleeding.
Cover the victim with a blanket or jacket, but not too thick or it may cause a dangerous drop in blood pressure.
Do not give a drink. Moisten lips if requested.
Prepare for cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR).
Give as much information as possible when the ambulance arrives.
Explain how to perform the following rescues:
a. The pulley system
b. The change-over method
Pass the abseiling exam with a pass mark of 60%. The exam is available from the conference youth ministries office, or through the instructor.
Answer the questions on the following topics:
a. Uses of the six abseiling knots
b. What are, and give the meaning of the standard climbing calls
c. Uses of various descenders
d. Give seven rules for are of rope
e. Give seven rules for safety
f. Know about first aid and how to treat patients
g. Give five ways to detect faults of ropes
a. Tie the six knots
b. Set up the single rope setup and canyoning setup
c. Witness a cliff rescue demonstrated by the instructor
d. Coil and chain a rope
e. Set up the belay methods
From a minimum height of 10 meters, complete two abseils on each of the following devices, and know how to attach them to the rope:
a. Whale tail
d. Figure of eight
e. Piton-brake bar
f. Rappel-rack
h. Cross karabiner
Explain how to do the classic abseil, and over the shoulder abseil, for emergency use.
Be able to prussik a ten-meter cliff.
The various tenses of the verb avé can be combined with other verbs' participles to create many different verbal times:
Hi magnate. (You have eaten)
Hive magnate. (You had eaten)
Avisse magnate nzi mmó. (You would have eaten by now.)
Arrì magnate ggia. (You might have eaten by now.)*rarely used, often replaced by conditional.
To identify the data member that throws an exception when initialization of two or more objects in the constructor's initialization list can throw the same exception type
When two or more objects are initialized in a constructor's initialization list and all of them can throw the same exception (std::exception), tracking which one of them failed become a tricky issue as there can be only one try block surrounding the initialization list. Such a try block has a special name called 'constructor try block', which is nothing but a 'function-try block'.
Construction Tracker idiom uses a simple technique to track successful construction on objects in the initialization list. A counter is simply incremented as constructors of objects finish successfully one-by-one. It cleverly uses bracket operator to inject the counter increments in between calls to the constructors all being invisible to the user of the class.
The double parentheses is how the bracket operator is used to place in the assignment to the tracker.
This idiom critically depends upon the constructor of B and C taking at least one parameter. If class B and C does not take parameters, then an adapter class needs to be written such that it the adapter class will accept a dummy parameter and calling the default parameters of B and C. Such an adapter can be written using More C++ Idioms/Parameterized Base Class idiom using mixin-from-below technique. The adapter class can also be completely encapsulated inside class A. In the consturctor of class A, the tracker parameter has a default value and therefore it does no bother the user.
Fairly early in many independent production company's lives a dilemma arises with regards to film equipment - should the company rent or buy?
You will tend to produce more.
You may not shoot as often.
May become outdated.
Expensive upfront costs.
.
Indy film and documentary makers need to be busier than their mainstream counterparts.  Producing films at lower cost with lower margins means one needs to stay active in order to turnover enough "product" to be a viable business.  This should make us more inclined toward the purchase of equipment but we are often deterred by hefty upfront costs and gear often sitting idle due to long development, pre- and post-production periods.
Some producers square the circle by purchasing equipment and renting it to other producers.  This can work but the cost of marketing the service, attendant management overheads, threat of damage and distraction from the core business make this a sub-optimal solution.
This paper proposes an alternate model - collective ownership alongside an innovative financing model.  Herein is a framework for a group of filmmakers or production companies to collectively purchase and share equipment.  The high cost of film equipment, the cyclic nature of film production, and the collaborative nature of the industry make it well suited to such a collective.
Has been on the market for over a year
Has at least 10 bidders on it
Then put in the bid to buy it used. Most likely when you are done with it you can sell it back for roughly the same price you bought it for (used is used).
The longer it has been on the market and the higher the number of bidders for the item, the higher the likelihood that you will be able to sell it at the same price. Save the text and the images from the auction so you can save effort when you decide to resell the item. Also, be sure to follow the typical best practices for eBay: check the seller rating, check shipping rate, etc.
This book intends to serve as an up-to-date character list and index to Schuessler's Minimal Old Chinese and Later Han Chinese: A Companion to Grammata Serica Recensa by providing a list of characters in their CGSR number together with Middle Chinese readings in the system of Baxter 1992. There is also a wiki book that lists character according to Karlgren's GSR and one according to the analysis of Baxter & Sagart.
A list of phonetic series in the analysis of Zhengzhang (2003) is avaiable at
Wiktionary.
-a 01-01, 01-02, 01-03, 01-04, 01-05, 01-06, 01-07, 01-08, 01-09, 01-10, 01-11, 01-12, 01-13, 01-14, 01-15,  01-1, 01-17, 01-18, 01-19, 01-20, 01-21, 01-22, 01-23, 01-24, 01-25, 01-26, 01-27, 01-28, 01-29, 01-30, 01-31, 01-32, 01-33, 01-34, 01-35, 01-36, 01-37, 01-38, 01-39, 01-40, 01-41, 01-42, 01-43, 01-44, 01-45, 01-46, 01-47, 01-48, 01-49, 01-50, 01-51, 01-52, 01-53, 01-54, 01-55, 01-56, 01-57, 01-58, 01-59, 01-60, 01-61, 01-62, 01-63, 01-64, 01-65, 01-66, 01-67, 01-68, 01-69, 01-70, 01-71, 01-72, 01-73.
-ak 02-01, 02-02, 02-03, 02-04, 02-05, 02-06, 02-07, 02-07A, 02-08, 02-09, 02-10, 02-10A, 02-11, 02-12, 02-13, 02-14, 02-15, 02-16, 02-17, 02-18, 02-19, 02-20, 02-21, 02-22, 02-23, 02-24, 02-25, 02-26, 02-27, 02-28, 02-29, 02-30, 02-31, 02-32, 02-33, 02-34, 02-35, 02-36, 02-37, 02-38, 02-39, 02-40
-oj, waj 19-01, 19-02, 19-03, 19-04, 19-05, 19-06, 19-07, 19-08, 19-09, 19-10, 19-11, 19-12, 19-13, 19-14, 19-15, 19-16, 19-17, 19-18, 19-18A, 19-19, 19-20, 19-21, 19-22, 19-23
-at, -as 21-01, 21-02, 21-03, 21-04, 21-05, 21-05B, 21-06, 21-07, 21-08, 21-09, 21-10, 21-11, 21-12, 21-13, 21-14, 21-15, 21-16, 21-17, 21-18, 21-19, 21-20, 21-21, 21-22, 21-23, 21-24, 21-25, 21-26, 21-27, 21-28, 21-29, 21-30, 21-31, 21-33, 21-34, 21-35, 21-36, 21-37
-it, i(t)s 29-01, 29-02, 29-03, 29-04, 29-05, 29-06, 29-07, 29-08, 29-09, 29-10, 29-11, 29-12, 29-13, 29-14, 29-15, 29-16, 29-17, 29-18, 29-19, 29-20, 29-21, 29-22, 29-23, 29-24, 29-25, 29-26, 29-27, 29-28, 29-29, 29-30, 29-31, 29-32, 29-33, 29-34, 29-35, 29-36, 29-37, 29-38, 29-39, 29-40, 29-41, 29-42, 29-43, 29-44
-am, em 36-01, 36-02, 36-03, 36-04, 36-05, 36-06, 36-07, 36-08, 36-09, 36-10, 36-11, 36-12, 36-13, 36-14, 36-15, 36-16, 36-17, 36-18, 36-19, WHERE IS THIRTY SIX TWENTY 36-21, 36-22, 36-23, 36-24, 36-25, 36-26, 36-27
-əm, -im WHERE IS THIRTY EIGHT ONE 38-02, 38-03,  38-04, 38-05, 38-06, 38-07, 38-08, 38-09, 38-10, 38-11, 38-12, 38-13, 38-14, 38-15, 38-16, 38-17, 38-18, 38-19, 38-20, 38-21, 38-22, 38-23, 38-24, 38-25, 38-26, 38-27, 38-28, 38-29, 38-30, 38-31, 38-32
A uvular series.
Baxter & Sagart (personal communication 12 April 2017) combine 01-18 and 01-51.
A uvular series.
Baxter & Sagart (personal communication 12 April 2017) combine 01-34, 01-45 and 01-47.
A uvular series?
A uvular series.
Schuessler (2009: 68) "this series prob. belongs to 02-34." Baxter & Sagart appear to concur.
Baxter & Sagart (personal communication 12 April 2017) combine 02-16, 02-17, 02-18, and 02-29.
02-26/0807b 䠶 zyaeH, zyek, yek
Baxter & Sagart (personal communication 12 April 2017) combine 02-16, 02-17, 02-18, and 02-29.
Schuessler (2009: 73) "this series prob. belongs to 02-14" i.e. GSR 0788. Baxter & Sagart appear to concur.
Acc. to Schuessler (2009: 74) the "phonetic is perhaps 03-64".
Baxter & Sagart (2014: 141, and personal communication from Sagart on 10 February 2017) combine 03-05, 03-06 and 03-39.
03-38/0720i' 𥏫 syang, tshjang
Baxter & Sagart (2014: 141, and personal communication from Sagart on 10 February 2017) combine 03-05, 03-06 and 03-39.
03-65/0742f' 𧧢 xwang, xwangX
03-65/0742h' 㡆 mang, xwang
Baxter & Sagart combine with 26-31, Schuessler hesitatingly assents.
04-41/0982i 𨼏 nuwX, nying
Baxter & Sagart (personal communication 12 April 2017) combine 05-07 and 29-07.
05-26/0923d 䳭 tsik, tsjek
Baxter & Sagart (personal communication 12 April 2017) combine GSR 05-35 and GSR 13-65.
An -r series acc. to Baxter & Sagart
Baxter & Sagart (personal communication 11 April 2017) combine 07-33, 18-03, 18-10, and 18-17.
Sagart & Baxter (2009: 232) appear to combine 08-05 and 29-20
Baxter & Sagart (personal communication 12 April 2017) combine 10-16 and 10-22.
11-12/1224l 䪅 dzyowk, tsyowk
Baxter & Sagart combine with 12-13; Schuessler appears to agree, citing Unger, but does not reflect this decision in the number of his series. A uvular series.
Baxter & Sagart further combine with 12-11. A uvular series.
12-20/1177a 㚇 tsuwng, tsuwngH
12-25/1197l 䋽 paewngX, puwngX
Schuessler (2009: 171. 196) divides into two series, viz. 13-03 and 16-08. Baxter & Sagart (2014: 166-167) unite 13-03 with 13-43.
14-22/1028d 䐹 sjuwk, srjuw
16-01/1129s 㪣 khaew, khaewH
16-02/1244b 䅵 kowk, tsyak
Schuessler (2009: 171. 196) divides into two series, viz. 13-03 and 16-08. Baxter & Sagart (2014: 166-167) unite 13-03 with 13-43.
16-24/1151a 𤋯 ljew, ljewH
16-32/1169b 𠞰 tsjewX, tsrhaew
16-39/1157a 𤐫 phjiew, phjiewH
Baxter & Sagart (personal communication 11 April 2017) combine 07-33, 18-03, 18-10, and 18-17.
An -r series acc. to Baxter and Sagart.
Baxter & Sagart (personal communication 11 April 2017) combine 07-33, 18-03, 18-10, and 18-17.
An -r series acc. to Baxter & Sagart (2014: 257)
Baxter & Sagart (personal communication 11 April 2017) combine 07-33, 18-03, 18-10, and 18-17.
A uvular series.
Schuessler (2009: 221-222) divides GSR 0011 into two series, namely #19-09 and #19-16. Baxter & Sagart regard the x- initial readings as descending from *l̥- via a Western dialect; they explain the s- readings as due to a prefix. In sum, they see this as only one series.
Despite the mixture of glottal and velar readings, Baxter & Sagart appear not to treat as a uvular series.
In addenda et corrigienda Schuessler combines 20-04 and 30-07.
Baxter & Sagart (personal communication 12 April 2017, also see 2014: 80) combine 20-04, 30-01, and 30-07.
Baxter & Sagart (2014: 144) appear to think 35-10 is to be merged with 21-23.
Schuessler (2009: 235-236) includes GSR 0326a and three characters from GSR 0267 to this series.
Although this series mixes -n and -j, Baxter & Sagart do not reconstruct -r. The reason for this is that these -jH originate from -ts. Why one word with final -n should be placed in this series is a bit of a mystery.
A uvular series.
An -r series acc. to Baxter & Sagart.
Schuessler unites GSR 0186a, 0145a, and 0139e' as a single series.
An -r series acc. to Baxter and Sagart.
An -r series acc. to Baxter & Sagart.
Baxter & Sagart (2014: 263-264) hesitate to see as an *-r series, despite some evidence.
Schuessler unites GSR 0186a, 0145a, and 0139e' as a single series. An -r series acc. to Baxter & Sagart.
An -r series.
An -r series acc. to Baxter & Sagart.
Baxter & Sagart (personal communication 12 April 2017) combine 24-19 and 24-46.
An -r series.
A uvular series acc. to Sagart & Baxter (2009: 233).
A uvular series.
An -r series acc. to Baxter & Sagart
An -r series.
An -r series acc. to Baxter and Sagart.
Baxter & Sagart (personal communication 12 April 2017) combine 24-19 and 24-46.
An -r series acc.
An -r series (on the basis of transcriptions)
A uvular series.
An -r series acc. to Starostin (1989).
25-17/0260p 䡝 'jun, 'jwon
An -r series.
26-26/0592j 𨹷 tsej, tsejH
Baxter & Sagart combine with 04-39, Schuessler hesitatingly assents.
Sagart & Baxter (2009: 232) appear to combine 08-05 and 29-20
Baxter & Sagart (personal communication 12 April 2017, also see 2014: 80) combine 20-04, 30-01, and 30-07.
In addenda et corrigienda Schuessler combines 20-04 and 30-07.
Baxter & Sagart (personal communication 12 April 2017, also see 2014: 80) combine 20-04, 30-01, and 30-07.
30-21/0531q 𩎟 meajH, mwojH
An -r series acc. to Baxter & Sagart (2014: 264-265).
33-13/0455i 䢅 dzyin, zyin
An -r series.
34-13/0458f 䩵 hjunH, xjwonH
An -r series acc. to Baxter & Sagart (2014: 263).
34-23/0468s 㕙 tshwin, tswinH
Baxter & Sagart (2014: 144) appear to think 35-10 is to be merged with 21-23.
36-18/0622j 𩑺 nyem, nyemH
Baxter & Sagart (personal communication 12 April 2017) combine 37-08 and 37-17.
37-16/0695l 㕯 nrjwet, nwaet, nwot, nywet
Baxter & Sagart (personal communication 12 April 2017) combine 37-08 and 37-17.
Schuessler combines GSR 0651 and GSR 0652.
Baxter & Sagart (personal communication 12 April 2017) combine GSR 0645, i.e. 38-21, and GSR 0651; but they do not see any link to GSR 0652.
Baxter & Sagart (personal communication 12 April 2017) combine 38-21 and part of 38-03 q.v.
BRICK is a tuple of value: 178.34.34
The Empire at its greatest extent under Justinian I, in 555 CE.
The Byzantine Empire (or Byzantium) was the Roman Empire during Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages, centered on the capital of Constantinople. The state is also referred to as the Eastern Roman Empire, primarily in the context of Late Antiquity, and especially while the Western Roman Empire was still maintained in Italy. Both "Byzantine Empire" and "Eastern Roman Empire" are historiographical terms applied in later centuries. Throughout its existence the state was known simply as the Roman Empire or Romania  and was the direct continuation of the Roman State, maintaining Roman state traditions. As the Western Roman Empire fragmented and collapsed in the 5th century, the Eastern Roman Empire continued to thrive, existing for more than a thousand years until 1453. During most of its existence, the empire was the most powerful economic, cultural, and military force in Europe.
As the distinction between "Roman " and "Byzantine" is a modern convention, it is not possible to assign a single date of transition. However, there are several important dates. In 285, Emperor Diocletian (r. 284–305) divided the Roman Empire's administration into eastern and western halves. In 324, Emperor Constantine I (r. 306–337) transferred the eastern capital from Nicomedia in Asia Minor to Byzantium in Europe on the Bosphorus, which became Constantinople, the "City of Constantine" or alternatively "New Rome". A final period of transition began during the later reign of Emperor Heraclius (r. 610–641) when he entirely transformed the empire by reforming the army and administration by introducing themes and by changing the official language of the Empire from Latin to Greek. The transition was also facilitated by the fact that in Heraclius' and his immediate successors' time, largely non-Greek territories in the Middle East and North Africa were lost to the emerging Arab Caliphate, and the Empire was left with the predominantly Greek-speaking core. As such Byzantium is today distinguished from ancient Rome proper insofar as it was oriented towards Greek culture, characterised by Orthodox Christianity as the state church after 380, rather than Roman polytheism, and was predominantly Greek-speaking rather than Latin-speaking.
Justinian I depicted on one of the famous mosaics of the Basilica of San Vitale, Ravenna, Italy.
During the reign of Justinian I (r. 527–565), the empire reconquered much of the western Mediterranean coast, including north Africa, Italy, and Rome, which the empire held onto for two more centuries. During the mid 6th century, the Plague of Justinian wiped out roughly a third of the empire's population, creating major military and financial difficulties. Nevertheless, during the reign of Emperor Maurice (r. 582–602), the empire's eastern frontier was expanded and its northern frontier stabilised. However, Maurice's assassination in 602 caused a two decade-long war with Sassanid Persia which, despite Emperor Heraclius's spectacular victory, exhausted the empire's manpower and resources, contributing to major defeats and territorial losses during the Byzantine–Arab Wars in the 7th century. Despite these setbacks, the empire recovered during the 10th century under the Macedonian dynasty, rising again to become the most powerful state in Europe and the Mediterranean.
After 1071, however, much of Asia Minor, the Empire's heartland, was lost to the Seljuk Turks. The Komnenian restoration regained some ground and briefly reestablished dominance in the 12th century, but following the death of Emperor Manuel I Komnenos (r. 1183–1185) and the end of the Komnenos dynasty in the late 12th century the Empire declined again. The Empire received a mortal blow in 1204 from the Fourth Crusade, when it was dissolved and divided into competing Byzantine Greek and Latin realms.
Despite the eventual recovery of Constantinople and re-establishment of the Empire in 1261, under the Palaiologan emperors, Byzantium remained only one of many rival states in the area for the final two centuries of its existence. However, this period was the most culturally productive time in the Empire. Successive civil wars in the 14th century further sapped the Empire's strength, and most of its remaining territories were lost in the Byzantine–Ottoman Wars, which culminated in the Fall of Constantinople in 1453 and the conquest of remaining territories by the Ottoman Empire in the 15th century.
"The Byzantine Empire" (Wikipedia) http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Byzantine_Empire
Articles • Nouns • Verbs • Gerunds and participles • Pronouns • Adjectives • Adverbs • Prepositions, Conjunctions and Interjections
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Cabbage is an edible plant. It is a lot like broccoli, cauliflower or Brussels sprouts. Cabbage is eaten in many ways around the world. Coleslaw and sauerkraut are popular foods that use cabbage. It is also used to make kimchi and borscht, and can also be used in salads. Red cabbage juice can be used as a pH indicator. Cabbages are usually green, but they can also be red.
In this information age, you must have heard of Internet or its synonyms like Net, Web or Information Highway. However, you may or may not be familiar with the full potential of this tool. Even though the Internet has been around since the 1960s, it is only in the last two decades that it has become a household word. As with many other inventions, the origin can be traced to army use. The US military created it as a means of sharing information between a number of interconnected computers over a distance. The design then was rather primitive. The Internet in its modern form with various protocols like Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and Internet Protocol (IP) came into being only in the early eighties. The creation of the World Wide Web by Tim Berners-Lee for the European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN) in 1989, has allowed the internet to be used in applications other than for sharing information. These include emails, phone, video messaging, instant messaging etc. The list is an ever expanding one, the only limit being human ingenuity.
The evolution of web communities has been drastic over the decades, ranging from scientists to heavy electronic game players.  The Internet once was the ARPANET, created by the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) as a result of the USSR's launch of the space satellite of Sputnik.  ARPA gave the ARPANET contract to BBN Technologies, and the physical network was built in 1969, linking four nodes: the University of California at Los Angeles, SRI (in Stanford), the University of California at Santa Barbara, and the University of Utah.  In 1972, ARPA renamed "DARPA", or The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.  The first e-mail program was also developed in the same year.  Through the decades, the ARPANET became the DARPANET,
As of December, 2009, the total global internet audience has exceeded one billion visitors (excluding people age 14 and younger).
Worldwide, there were 1,007,730 unique visitors
[1].
Asia seems to be biggest user of the Internet, accounting for 42.2% of Internet users worldwide.  China almost accounts for half of the Internet users in Asia
[2].  Europe comes in at the second biggest body of Internet users, accounting for 24.1% of all Internet users, North America at 15.1% of all Internet users, Latin America and the Caribbean at 10.5% of all Internet users, and finally, the rest 8% Internet users is from Africa, the Middle East, Oceania and Australia
[3].
Prestipino, Peter A. (January 26, 2009). "Size of the Internet Audience". Website Magazine. http://www.websitemagazine.com/content/blogs/posts/archive/2009/01/26/size-of-the-internet-audience.aspx. Retrieved October 23, 2009.
"Asia Internet Usage Stats and Population Statistics". Internet World Stats - Usage and Population Statistics. June 30, 2009. http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats3.htm. Retrieved October 23, 2009.
"World Internet Usage Statistics News and World Population Stats". Internet World Stats - Usage and Population Statistics. June 30, 2009. http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm. Retrieved October 30, 2009.
A reader has identified this chapter as an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Books on Wikibooks are textbooks, and are ultimately designed to provide a free quality alternative to traditional printed textbooks. This is a major benefit to schools and students that cannot afford traditional textbooks.
It should come as no surprise then that some teachers around the world print and use Wikibooks in the classroom.
Books on Wikibooks are generally in a state of construction. Books are never "complete", because they can always be updated, improved, expanded, reformatted. However some of our better books, such as our featured books, are good enough that they should be usable in a classroom.
Finding a free textbook to use for a class on Wikibooks is similar to the process of finding a book to use from a traditional book publisher. First suitable titles must be found from the catalogue. Once found, books need to be read and evaluated to see if they are consistent with your class plans. Then, the book needs to be obtained for the students.
Finding books on Wikibooks is easy, and has been the subject of one of our previous chapters. Keeping in mind that many of our books are in active development, the first best place to look for a new book will be at our list of featured books. These are the books that the Wikibooks community thinks are the highest quality. These aren't the only books in a usable condition, of course, just the best of those.
Wikibooks has a new software feature called "Flagged Revisions", or "flaggedrevs" for short. The Flaggedrevs extension allows each page on the website to be evaluated in terms of its content, its accuracy, and its coverage. When looking at a book, see if the page has been rated previously, and if it has see what other reviewers think about it. Obviously the opinions of the teacher will be more important than those of random internet strangers, but reviews can give a good idea about what other people think about the pages, and what features other people think are important.
As you're evaluating the book, feel free to submit a few page reviews of your own, if you are able. We will discuss the reviewer permissions and processes in a later chapter. Also, feel free to post reviews, questions, or comments on the associated talk pages. This way any problems that you find can be addressed and resolved by other volunteer editors at a later time. Remember that books that aren't perfect for your application yet might very well become perfect for you in the future, if you're willing to write reviews, post suggestions, and maybe make a few edits yourself.
Once you have a book selected for use in your class, you are going to need a way to distribute that book to your students. You could just give them the URL of the book, but that's a naive approach: The book could change on a daily basis, which could make your lesson plans difficult to follow. Plus, your students could be making changes that affect the quality of material that other students see. What you need to do is get a stable version of the book that you and your class can rely on. There are a few methods to do this:
Permanent Links: On the left hand side of the screen, you may need to scroll down to see it, is a link that says "Permanent link". Clicking this will take you to the current specific revision of the page. This revision is preserved in the website database and is never changed. If you go to this link, the page will always look exactly the same even if additional edits or changes are made.
PDF Versions: Some books have a pre-made PDF version that is uploaded to the server. These PDF files are not going to change once you download them, but they also won't reflect any additions or improvements that have been made to the book.
Collections PDF: From a page collection, the software can automatically create a PDF or ODT file for download based on the most recent versions of the pages in the collection. This means that edits, additions, and improvements that you make will be reflected in the generated PDF file. With a collection loaded, go to Special:Collection and click the "download" button.
Collections Print-on-Demand: PDF versions and permanent links are nice if your class has good access to a computer and the internet. However, sometimes it's better to just have a printed book that the students can bring with them into class without needing to bring their computer too. For these cases, Wikibooks has a print-on-demand feature through our publishing partner PediaPress. With a collection loaded, click "Order this book" at Special:Collection to order a copy (or 30) from PediaPress.
Traditionally, books are just static sources of information written in one particular way which may not be very helpful to all students in your class. Instead of teaching from a "Dead" or "Static" book, consider using Wikibooks as an interactive learning resource instead. Several groups and classes have successfully used Wikibooks to host interactive book-writing projects. These class projects are very common on Wikibooks, and our members do everything they can to encourage them. Students from one class can write books for students in future classes, so it's a powerful tool to spread knowledge.
Why use a Wikibooks-based Project?
Wikibooks makes a very attractive platform for class and group projects for a number of reasons:
Not completely insulated: On Wikibooks, you're using the "real" internet, and have the possibility to interact with real people on it in constructive ways. We're relatively insulated from the bad parts of the internet because of our strict focus on educational goals. Learning how to work in very diverse groups, with people from other countries and cultures, is a very good thing in addition to your primary learning objectives.
Helpful community: At wikibooks, we have a large number of volunteer editors who will be willing to help your project succeed. We can help fix problems, improve formatting, and make helpful suggestions along the way. With a little bit of input and feedback, you can create a higher-quality result than you might be able to otherwise.
Integrated monitoring: MediaWiki, the software that runs Wikibooks, has a number of features for keeping track of people and their edits. On Wikibooks, you can view the complete contribution history of each student, and determine when they are making their edits, and what quality each individual edit has. You can see how students are communicating together on talk pages, and you can see how pages dynamically improve as a result of these interactions.
Easy to use: The wikitext markup at Wikibooks is relatively small but powerful, and the vast majority of editing that you and your class will want to do will be simple to implement. Wikitext is much easier than standard HTML, but the two are mixable if more power of expression is needed.
Picking a project for students to do is almost as difficult as doing the project itself. Many teachers underestimate how difficult it can be to write a complete book. It's quite a daunting task! Teachers may also underestimate the amount of time it takes for students to get acclimated on the site. It's important to pick a task that students will be able to complete, so that there is a real sense of accomplishment for them at the end. Here are some suggestions:
Improve an existing book: Take a book that's in good condition, and incrementally improve it by adding examples, images, and notes.
Adopt a forgotten book: Find a book that's been under-developed and try to breath new life into it. Evaluate the quality of existing materials, and write your own to fill in the blanks
Create a new book: This is the hardest task to do. Pick a subject on which Wikibooks does not have an existing book and write one. Make sure to plan it out and try to follow some of our best practices. If you need help or input, our team of volunteers is always ready to help.
The way you manage a project can significantly affect its success. Here are a few methods to consider:
In this situation, you will find that groups are not working until the class reaches their subject. Groups at the end of the book will do less work than groups at the beginning.
In this way, you can have your whole class working on the most recently discussed material. However, with many hands working on a single page, you run the risk of edit conflicts. Also, some students may fall behind because they can't find enough unique work to do that other students aren't doing first.
Each student writes an individual feature of a page, the whole class works on a single page together. A feature can be an example, or a section, or a table, etc. Every student/group has a specific task to complete, but tasks will be asymmetrical.
Students are in charge of writing certain pages or certain features, but are also in charge of reviewing the work of other students. This helps to promote communication and increases overall quality of the produced book. Students spend more time reviewing and less time writing, which can reduce the volume of generated material in the end.
Don't hesitate to break process: it's a wiki, after all. If you've drafted, edited, and revised, feel free to draft another section, or help somebody else with editing and revising.
Keep track of contributions. Keep track of individual student contributions. Students that edit early and often are more likely to produce higher-quality materials than those that try to dump large volumes of content in a single edit.
Use edit summaries. Every edit should have a description. What did you edit? How much did you edit? Did you write new content that needs to be reviewed, or did you review existing content?
Front Page: Radiation Oncology | RTOG Trials | Randomized Trials
Lentigo maligna - type of melanoma in-situ, induced by long-term cumulative UV injury. Slow horizontal growth of atypical melanocytes, that are partially replacing the basal layer of epidermis, with no evidence of dermal invasion
Lentigo maligna melanoma (10-15%) - arise from lentigo maligna precursor lesion. Most benign behavior. Occupational sun exposure, frequently on head and neck. Typically in the elderly
Superficial spreading melanoma (70%) - often arise from a pigmented dysplastic nevus. Associated with intermittent sun exposure, most common on trunk and extremities. Initial radial growth over many years has 5% metastatic potential; following vertical growth has 35-80% metastatic potential
Nodular melanoma (10-15%) - most malignant type. Arises de novo. Early vertical growth.
Acral lentiginous melanoma (5%) - occur on palms, soles, and subungal areas. High incidence in blacks, asians, and hispanics. Commonly metastatic
Desmoplastic melanoma (1-3%) - pronounced neurotropism, and locally aggressive behavior. Frequent local recurrences, but lymph and distal mets are rare. Often amelanotic
NCDB; 1998 (1985-1994) PMID 9781962 -- "The National Cancer Data Base report on cutaneous and noncutaneous melanoma: a summary of 84,836 cases from the past decade. The American College of Surgeons Commission on Cancer and the American Cancer Society." (Chang AE, Cancer. 1998 Oct 15;83(8):1664-78.)
Population study. 84,836 cases of melanom reported to National Cancer Data Base
Outcome: cutaneous 91.2%, ocular 5.2%, mucosal 1.3%, unknown primary 2.2%
Cutaneous: Stage 0 15%, Stage I 48%, Stage II 23%, Stage III 9%, Stage IV 5%
Ocular: uveal 85%, conjunctival 5%, other sites 10%
Mucosal: H&N 55%, female genital tract 18%, anal/rectal 24%, urinary tract 3%
Usually occurs in elderly patients, usually on the face
Slow horizontal growth. May progress to lentigo maligna melanoma
Treatment is surgery with negative margins. When surgery is undesirable, RT or topical Imiquimod may be used
Australia (1992-6) No PMID yet -- "Reduced Melanoma After Regular Sunscreen Use: Randomized Trial Follow-Up" (Green AC, J Clin Oncol online early release 6 December 2010)
1621 pts (ages 25-75) randomized to daily vs discretionary use of sunscreen application to head and arms in combination with beta carotene or placebo supplements. Followed through 2006.
11 new primary melanomas in the daily sunscreen group vs 22 in the discretionary group (HR=0.50). Reduction in invasive melanomas (3 vs 11) was substantial compared with preinvasive melanomas.
Conclusion: Melanoma may be preventable by regular sunscreen use in adults.
EORTC 18952, 2005 (1996-2000) - PMID 16198768 — "Post-surgery adjuvant therapy with intermediate doses of interferon alfa 2b versus observation in patients with stage IIb/III melanoma (EORTC 18952): randomised controlled trial." Eggermont AM et al. The Lancet 2005; 366:1189-1196.
1388 pts. Thickness > 4mm, Stage IIb-III. Randomized to 1) 13 months or 2) 25 months of IFN-alfa-2b vs 3) observation.
Median f/u 4.6 yrs. For 25-month group, 7.2% increase in distant metastases free interval (S.S.) and 5.4% increase in OS (p=0.12); for 13-month, N.S. difference for DMFI and OS. 18% of pts went off study due to toxicity or refusal of treatment.
Conclusion: does not improve outcome.
Hellenic Cooperative Oncology Group, 2006 (1998-2004) — "Prognostic Significance of Autoimmunity during Treatment of Melanoma with Interferon." Gogas H et al. N Engl J Med Feb 16 2006; 354:709-718.
200 pts (subgroup of a larger study) receiving interferon alfa-2b after surgery for Stage IIB, IIC, or III melanoma. Tested blood for the presence of antithyroid, antinuclear, anti-DNA, and anticardiolipin autoantibodies before and after treatment.
Median f/u 45 mo. Autoantibodies in 26% of pts. 108 of 148 pts without autoantibodies had a relapse (median RFS 16 mo) vs 7 of 52 pts with autoantibodies (median RFS not reached). Median time to detection of autoantibodies was after 3 mo of treatment.
Conclusion: development of autoimmunity was an independent prognostic factor for improved RFS and OS.
Randomized. 262 patients, primary malignant melanoma, T1-4N1-2aM0. Arm 1) control vs. Arm 2) six weekly 2-hour sessions of psychoeducation. Replication study of UCLA study
2007 PMID 18089864 -- "Survival after a psychoeducational intervention for patients with cutaneous malignant melanoma: a replication study." (Boesen EH, J Clin Oncol. 2007 Dec 20;25(36):5698-703.)
Outcome: No difference for OS or for recurrence; however, nonparticipants had 2x higher death rate
Randomized. 68 patients. Stage I-II melanoma, surgical treatment only (wide excision, some with LND). Arm 1) controls vs. Arm 2) 6 week structured psychiatric group intervention
1993 PMID 8357293 -- "Malignant melanoma. Effects of an early structured psychiatric intervention, coping, and affective state on recurrence and survival 6 years later." (Fawzy FI, Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1993 Sep;50(9):681-9.)
Outcome: Death rate control 29% vs. intervention 9% (SS); recurrence rate 38% vs. 21%
Poor predictors: male, greater Breslow depth
Conclusion: Psychiatric intervention had beneficial impact on survival
At 5-yrs (needing compressive device, surgery, or medical treatment):
From PMID 16814209, 2006 — "Dispelling the myths surrounding radiotherapy for treatment of cutaneous melanoma." Stevens G et al. Lancet Oncol. 2006 Jul;7(7):575-83.
Moffitt Cancer Center; 2008 PMID 18596675 -- "Radiation therapy as primary and adjuvant treatment for local and regional melanoma." (Berk LB, Cancer Control. 2008 Jul;15(3):233-8.)
Auckland, New Zealand; 2006 PMID 16814209 -- "Dispelling the myths surrounding radiotherapy for treatment of cutaneous melanoma." (Stevens G, Lancet Oncol. 2006 Jul;7(7):575-83.)
Groningen, Netherlands; 2005 PMID 15707701 -- "Radiation therapy following lymph node dissection in melanoma patients: treatment, outcome and complications." (Bastiaannet E, Cancer Treat Rev. 2005 Feb;31(1):18-26. Epub 2004 Nov 18.)
MD Anderson; 2004  PMID 14768409 Full text — "Radiotherapy for cutaneous malignant melanoma: rationale and indications." Ballo MT et al. Oncology (Williston Park). 2004 Jan;18(1):99-107
Recommend RT to primary for: desmoplastic melanoma, positive margins, locally recurrent disease, Brewslow > 4 mm with ulceration or satellitosis
Recommend RT to nodes for: extracapsular extension, >= 4 involved nodes, lymph node >= 3 cm in size, cervical lymph node location, recurrent nodal disease, sentinel lymph node positive but dissection not planned
Dutch Melanoma Working Party, 1999 PMID 10465575 -- "Consensus on the management of malignant melanoma of the skin in The Netherlands. Dutch Melanoma Working Party." (Kroon BB, Melanoma Res 1999 Jun;9(3):207-12.)
CCORE Australia; 2004 PMID 15022299 -- "Estimation of an optimal radiotherapy utilization rate for melanoma: a review of the evidence." (Delaney G, Cancer. 2004 Mar 15;100(6):1293-301.)
Evidence-based estimate for proportion of patients who should receive RT
Estimate: 23%. New South Wales utilization 13%, American College of Surgeons utilization 6%, SEER data 1%
Conclusion: Shortfall in the use of RT in the treatment of melanoma
American College of Surgeons; 2009 (2004-2005) PMID 19826131 -- "National assessment of melanoma care using formally developed quality indicators." (Bilimoria KY, J Clin Oncol. 2009 Nov 10;27(32):5445-51. Epub 2009 Oct 13.)
Development of 26 valid quality indicators assessing structure, process, and outcome. 10 of these assessed at 1249 hospitals using NCDB registry data
Outcome: Adherence at patient level 12-96%, at hospital level 4-83%. Most hospitals adherent with <=50% of indicators
Rush Medical Center; 2008 PMID 18600380 -- "Adverse outcomes associated with noncompliance with melanoma treatment guidelines." (Erickson Foster J, Ann Surg Oncol. 2008 Sep;15(9):2395-402. Epub 2008 Jul 4.)
Retrospective. 327 patients with cN0 melanoma. Compliance with NCCN guidelines assessed. Mean F/U 4.2 years
Outcome: Margin non-compliance 28%, lymph node non-compliance 17%. Postop complications: margin compliance 10% vs noncompliant 30% (SS); lymph node compliant 13% vs. non-compliant 33% (SS). Locoregional recurrence: margin compliant 6% vs non-compliant 24% (SS); lymph node compliant 6% vs non-compliant 33% (SS). 10-year OS margin compliant 84% vs. noncompliant 73% (SS). 10-year OS lymph node compliant 91% vs. noncompliant 47% (SS)
Conclusion: Compliance with NCCN guidelines seems to improve outcome and decrease morbidity
We may need more than just plain coordinates in our program. For instance: colors.
Let's pass RGB color information to OpenGL.
We passed the coordinates using an attribute, so we can add a new attribute for colors.
GLuint vbo_triangle, vbo_triangle_colors;
GLint attribute_coord2d, attribute_v_color;
And our init_resources:
Now in the render procedure, we can pass 1 RGB color for each of our 3 vertices. I chose yellow, blue and red, but feel free to use your favorite colors :)
3,                 // number of elements per vertex, here (r,g,b)
GL_FLOAT,          // the type of each element
GL_FALSE,          // take our values as-is
0,                 // no extra data between each position
0                  // offset of first element
Let's tell OpenGL once we're done with the attribute, at the end of the function:
At this point, if we run the program, we'll get:
Could not bind attribute v_color
Let's now see how to...
Varyings: pass information from the vertex shader to the fragment shader
Instead of using an attribute, we'll use a varying variable. It's:
An output variable for the vertex shader
An input variable for the fragment shader
It's interpolated.
So it's a communication channel between the two shaders.  To understand why it's interpolated, let's see an example.
We need to declare our new varying, say f_color, in both shaders.
A varying declaration needs to be identical in the vertex shader and in the fragment shader.
(Note: if you're using GLES2, check the section on portability below.)
Wow, there's actually more than 3 colors!
OpenGL interpolates the vertex value for each pixel.
This explains the varying name: it varies for each vertex, and then it varies even more for each fragment.
We didn't need to declare the varying in the C code - that's because there's no interface between the C code and the varying.
To better understand the glVertexAttribPointer function, let's mix both attributes in a single C array:
2,                   // number of elements per vertex, here (x,y)
GL_FLOAT,            // the type of each element
GL_FALSE,            // take our values as-is
5 * sizeof(GLfloat), // next coord2d appears every 5 floats
0                    // offset of the first element
3,                      // number of elements per vertex, here (r,g,b)
GL_FLOAT,               // the type of each element
GL_FALSE,               // take our values as-is
5 * sizeof(GLfloat),    // next color appears every 5 floats
It works just the same!
Note that for colors, we start at the 3rd element (2 * sizeof(GLfloat)) of the array, where the first color is - that's the offset of the first element.
Why (GLvoid*)?  We saw that, in early versions of OpenGL, it was possible to pass a pointer to a C array directly (rather than a buffer object).  This is now deprecated, but the glVertexAttribPointer prototype remained unchanged, so we do as if we passed a pointer, but we pass an offset really.
...
Note the use of offsetof to specify the first color offset.
The opposite of attribute variables are uniform variables : they are the same for all the vertices.
Note that we can change them on a regular basis from the C code - but each time a set of vertices is displayed on screen, the uniform will be constant.
Let's say that we want to define the triangle's global transparency from our C code. As with attributes, we need to declare it.
Then we declare it in the C code (still after the program linking):
Note: we could even target a specific array element in the shader code with uniform_name, e.g. "my_array[1]"!
In addition, for uniform, we also explicitly set its non-varying value. Let's request, in render, that the triangle be very little opaque:
Note: if you don't use the uniform in your code, glGetUniformLocation will not see it, and fail.
In the previous section, we mentioned that GLES2 requires precision hints. These hints tells OpenGL how much precision we want for our data. The precision can be:
For instance, lowp can often be used for colors, and it is recommended to use highp for vertices.
We can specify the precision on each variable:
Sadly these precision hints do not work on traditional OpenGL 2.1, so we need to include them only if we're on GLES2.
GLSL includes a preprocessor, similar to the C preprocessor.  We can use directive such as #define or #ifdef.
Only the fragment shader requires an explicit precision for floats. The precision is implicitly highp for vertex shaders. For fragment shaders, highp might not be available, which can be tested using the GL_FRAGMENT_PRECISION_HIGH macro[2].
We can improve our shader loader so it defines a default precision on GLES2, and ignore precision identifiers on OpenGL 2.1 (so we can still set the precision for a specific variable if needed):
SDL_GL_GetAttribute(SDL_GL_CONTEXT_PROFILE_MASK, &profile);
"#  ifdef GL_FRAGMENT_PRECISION_HIGH \n"
"#  define lowp                      \n"
"#  define mediump                   \n"
"#  define highp                     \n"
Keep in mind that the GLSL compiler will count these prepended lines in its line count when displaying error messages.  Setting #line 0 sadly does not reset this compiler line count.
Now it would be quite nice if the transparency could vary back and forth.
To achieve this,
Compile and run...
The animated triangle, partially transparent
We've got our first animation!
It is common that OpenGL implementation wait for the screen's vertical refresh before updating the physical screen's buffer - this is called vertical sync. In that case, the triangle will be rendered around 60 times per second (60 FPS). If you disable vertical sync, the program will keep updating the triangle continuously, resulting in a higher CPU usage.  We'll meet again the vertical sync when we create applications with perspective changes.
↑ It's a bit confusing to have a single example across the two differents concepts of attribute and varying. We'll try to find two separate examples to better explain them.
↑ Cf. "OpenGL ES Shading Language 1.0.17 Specification". Khronos.org. 2009-05-12. http://www.khronos.org/registry/gles/specs/2.0/GLSL_ES_Specification_1.0.17.pdf. Retrieved 2011-09-10. , section 4.5.3 Default Precision Qualifiers
Moves: 1.d4 c6
Queen's Pawn 1...c6
1....c6 this move is playable but has no destination as an opening as it transposes into something else.
Often played to see if White will play 2. e4 and transpose into a Caro-Kann.
c4 or 2. Nf3 Most likely to transpose into a Slav Defence or Semi Slav Defence
e4 This move order arrives at a Caro Kann Defence
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Queen's Pawn
Batsford Chess Openings 2 (1989, 1994). Garry Kasparov, Raymond Keene. ISBN 0-8050-3409-9.
Nunn's Chess Openings. 1999. John Nunn (Editor), Graham Burgess, John Emms, Joe Gallagher. ISBN 1-8574-4221-0.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
Investigating op-amp circuits during Lab 4.
Investigating op-amp circuits during Lab 4.Contents
5.4.1 ...forward LED voltage drop...
We are students from Faculty of Computer Systems, Technical University of Sofia. Our 66 group is divided into two sub-groups; we constitute the first - 66a. Here are our names:
Dafar Shaban, Dilyana Dilova, Irina Hadjieva, Miroslava Hristova, Victor Glavev, Alexandra Georgieva, Danail Dekov, Liliya Bancheva, Elina Lazarova, Mihaela Borisova, Tzvetan Tzvetkov, Hristiana Stancheva, Silviya Nakova, Nataliya Genova, Vasil Tzanov, Ivan Tzvetkov.
Lab 1: Investigating passive resistive circuits by Microlab system
Lab 2: Improving the genuine Ohm's experiment
Tuesday, March 18, 2008, 13.45 h
Welcome to the laboratory. The picture on the whiteboard represents the laboratory setup that your colleagues from group 65a have used for reproducing the genuine Ohm's experiment. You can use the results of their laboratory experiment to introduce the next great idea named voltage diagram. It will help us to visualize the voltages that your colleagues have measured along the resistive film.
Introducing the idea of pressure diagram (an opened water circuit)
The local pressures along the tapped pipe are equal to the input pressure.
By the way, we can derive this idea from the well-known hydraulic analogy (plumbing) that we can see everywhere around us. For example, imagine a large vessel filled of water that supplies a long thin pipe; let's first the pipe to be tapped. The question is: "What is the pressure inside the pipe?" And more precisely speaking, "What are the local pressures along the pipe?"
We can get to know, if we drill small holes at equal intervals along the pipe (if we want to be more precise, we might stick vertically thin glass pipes acting as local manometers). The result is expectable for us: all the water levels (accordingly, all the local pressures along the pipe) are equal. This picture shows the pressure distribution along the pipe; we can name it "pressure diagram".
The pressure diagram of a closed water circuit
The local pressures along the opened pipe decrease gradually (incomplete...)
Now open the pipe; the water will begin flowing. What are the local pressures along the pipe now? At the left end the pressure is maximum; at the right end it is minimum. Our intuition suggests that the local pressures will decrease gradually from left to the right.
Really, the levels of the water bars (accordingly, the local pressures along the pipe) decrease gradually from left to the right. The envelope of the pressure diagram is a triangle.
Conveying the idea of pressure diagram to voltage one
Let's now apply this powerful idea to draw the analogous electrical voltage diagrams. The idea is obvious: if we think of voltage as a kind of pressure, we may present the local voltages by local voltage bars in exactly the same way as we have presented the local pressures along a pipe by a local water bars! As above, the lengths of the voltage bars are proportional to the magnitudes of the local voltages regarding to ground (we might set the zero voltage level at the height of the resistor and then to draw the positive voltage bars above and the negative voltage bars below the resistor's level). The set of these voltage bars forms the whole voltage diagram. We can  use the envelope of the voltage diagram instead the very set of voltage bars, in order to simplify the image.
The local voltages along the resistive film of an opened circuit are the same.
The local voltages along the resistive film of a closed circuit decrease gradually.
Making a computer draw a "living" voltage diagram on the screen
Basic idea. But it is too hard and boring for us, human beings, to draw all the voltage diagrams when the circuit attributes (voltages and resistances) vary. Because these diagrams have to be not static, dead pictures; they have to be "living" diagrams (animations) that change accordingly to the circuit state. So, wee need a computer that "watches" closely what we do with the circuit under test and builds the according "living" voltage diagram on the screen. Then, let's build such a computer-based system and leave it to do this donkey work:). Then we will only look at the picture on the screen and think about the circuit phenomena behind it!
Components.  First at all, we need some computer. It may be humble enough, if only it has some graphical possibilities (for example, the computer that is used in this laboratory to build Microlab system in 1986 is a version of the famous Apple II). Then we have only to connect to the PC buses a few analog-to-digital converters (ADC's) acting as analog inputs and a few analog-to-digital converters (ADC's) acting as analog inputs and our computer-based system Microlab is ready!
How we can carry out a computer-based Ohm's experiment by using Microlab system.
A computer-based system "Microlab"  Visualizing the voltage diagram on the screen
Any point inside a compound voltage source can act as a real ground
Ground. Now, let's say also some words about ground. But what is ground? We can find a possible answer in the Wikipedia article about virtual ground. Shortly, ground is a reference point, regarding to which we measure voltages. The PC power supply that we use is the so-called "split supply". It consists of two 12 V supplies connected in series (- + >>> - +). The middle point serves as ground in this arrangement. The DAC's grounds are connected internally to this ground. We have also to connect the black test ends of our voltmeters to this ground.
Software. More than twenty years ago, I prepared a program that can visualize the voltage diagram on the screen as a "living" animation. For this purpose, the program make computer "interest" in the local voltages in three key points - the left end point, the slider intermideate point and the right end point. Let's then satisfy its curiosity:) by connecting, for a start, the DAC1's output to the ADC1's input and the DAC2's output to the ADC2's input.
Lab 3: Biasing the simple common-emitter transistor amplifier
Tuesday, April 01, 2008, 13.45 h
A biasing "battery" made by a voltage divider.
A biasing "battery" made by a diode.
Measuring the voltage of the biasing "battery".
Mounting the circuit on a prototyping PCB
Investigating the simplest transistor amplifier by Microlab system.
Lab 4: Op-amp circuits with series negative feedback
Tuesday, April 15, 2008, 13.45 h
How to drive and supply an op-amp.
Inputs. Grounded voltage source... What is single-ended input? Floating voltage source... What is differential input? Why do we need a differential input? Input resistance... Do input currents flow? How does a non-inverting input behave? How does an inverting input behave? Can we use an op-amp with a differential input as an op-amp with single-ended (inverting or non-inverting) input? What do we do in these cases?
Output. How the op-amp output is made? What is the idea of a complementary, push-pull emitter follower? Output resistance...
Supplying. The idea of bipolar (split) supply (+12 V and -12 V here)... Why do we need a bipolar supply? Where currents flow? We can imagine the output part of the op-amp consists of two parts - a positive and a negative. Each of them works when its output voltage has the according polarity. By the way, is it possible to supply the op-amp with only one (e.g., positive) voltage and, at the same time, to obtain the opposite (negative) output voltage? And can the op-amp output voltage exceed the supply voltage? Maybe, it would be possible, if there were capacitive or inductive differentiating circuits inside the op-amp... But (for now) an op-amp contains only resistive and active components:(
Gain. Typical value is A > 200000. It seems too high. Can we manage to utilize all this gain? What is the maximum input voltage to keep the op-amp in the active region (assume 10 V maximum output voltage)? Can we use a bare op-amp as an amplifier? Or we can use it as another useful device having analog inputs and descrete output (write its name here)? We may conclude: If we use the op-amp as an amplifier, the voltage difference between its inputs is zero. But if we use it as a comparator, the input voltage might be whatever.
Transfer characteristic. Microlab can help us to obtain this curve on the screen. There is no time in this graphical presentation; there is only input and output quantities. We might discern three regions on this curve: negative saturation (large), active region (narrow) and positive saturation (large).
Investigating a non-inverting comparator by Microlab.
A transfer characteristic on the screen.
Generalization. What does the op-amp actually do? A possible answer is: an op-amp converts the steady power supply into varying voltage source; it acts as a voltage-controlled voltage source.
A negative feedback follower consists of only three components.
Driving: keeping up a constant speed, direction, temperature, volume...
More negative feedback analogies: studying, teaching, keeping up a room temperature (body weight, mental equilibrium...) In all these cases we do all that is possible to realize our goals, to move toward the goal...
So, the simplest negative feedback follower consists of only three components: power (energy) source E, regulating element R and a subtractor (-).
This humble device operates according to a simple algorithm: if X > Y, then increase Y; if X < Y, decrease Y; if X = Y, do nothing. As a result, always X = Y. So, this is an "active copying" principle and this device is an "active follower". This "algorithm" is so simple that humble devices (tubes, transistors, op-amps...) having no any intellect can perform it.
Why do we make followers in this odd way? What are the advantages of this "negative feedback" approach?
A humble wire is the simplest but imperfect voltage "follower".
Now, we have only to convey this powerful idea from real life to electronics. Well, let's begin.
VIN will represent X in our electric follower; accordingly, VOUT will represent Y. But let's first persuade ourselves what is the use of building such an active follower instead a "passive" one.
What is the simplest voltage follower? Of course, a piece of wire can act as a humle voltage follower. It works perfectly, if there is no load (there is no current flowing). Only, is it still a follower, if we connect a big load at the end of the wire (especially, if it is a thin and long wire)? And imagine what happens, if the load and wire resistances vary... For example, the wire length can vary...
Another nasty problem of the passive voltage follower is that the load consumes energy from the input voltage source.; so, it droops when loaded.
No, the bare wire is not a perfect follower in all the cases; so, it is worth the trouble to build an active negative feedback follower...
First, we connect a power supply - a voltage source V representing the power source E from the block diagram. We assume a bipolar input voltage; so, we get a bipolar (split) power supply. Then, we connect an op-amp OA acting as the regulating element R. Finally, we need a voltage subtractor to make the op-amp compare its output voltage VOUT with the input voltage VIN. What is the simplest voltage subtractor? Of course, this is the bare loop (a piece of wire) according to Kirchhoff's voltage law (KVL). In other words, we have to connect the two voltage sources in series and in opposite directions (+ -, - +) traversing the loop, in order to subtract their voltages. Then, we have to cut the loop and to feed the op-amp input by the voltage difference.
An op-amp follower investigated by Microlab (a set up).
Where currents flow? Thinking about current loops.
We are human beings, not computers... It seems strange but, in order to understand what the abstract op-amp really does in this circuit, we have to think of the op-amp as a "slow-thinking" device, not as a fast, non-inertial, instant device... From this human viewpoint, the op-amp compares continuously its output voltage VOUT with the input voltage VIN and changes VOUT in the right direction so that to keep almost zero difference VOUT - VIN = 0. It does exactly the same what we, human beings, were doing in all the analogies above.
Where currents flow in this circuit? Draw them with whole loops in the two cases - at a positive and a negative input voltage. Remember: a current always arrives at the point from where it has gone. Another tip: in the two cases (at positive and negative input voltage) the load current will flow through different power supplies (accordingly, through the positive and negative voltage sources). Imagine also the complementary output emitter follower inside the op-amp: the upper n-p-n transistor will "blows" the output current when the op-amp "wants" to produce a positive voltage and the lower p-n-p transistor will "sucks" the output current when the op-amp "wants" to produce a negative voltage.
Let's now "provoke" our op-amp by various disturbancies to see how it will react:) Firstly, we may introduce and vary a line resistance. Then, we may vary the load resistance. Finally, we might vary both the resistances. If we are curious enough, we can vary the voltages of the power supply as well (the one, the other and both).
Trying to disturb the  op-amp follower by a single resistor.
A single resistor cannot disturb the op-amp follower (waveforms).
A disturbed op-amp follower investigated by Microlab (waveforms).
Output resistance. Can we say that we have realized one eternal dream of electricians - to build a varying perfect voltage source:)? Can we think of an op-amp follower as an (almost) ideal voltage source?
Converting the NFB follower into an amplifier
A non-inverting amplifier is a disturbed follower.
A non-inverting amplifier investigated by Microlab.
A non-inverting amplifier investigated by Microlab (waveforms).
Lab 4a: How to make perfect circuits by series NFB
Is the real diode a perfect component?
A "harmful" voltage VF across a diode.
Diodes are two-terminal semiconductor elements, characterized by allowing the current to flow in the forward direction when the voltage is positive but not in the reverse one when the voltage is negative. So diodes represent the action of a valve and so were they called in the past. However, the diode needs a little (approximately 0.5-0.7V) voltage-push in order the current to start flowing freely. The result is small but noticeable voltage drop - VF. What is this voltage drop - useful or harmful? Sometimes it is useful; other times it is harmful...
"Useful" examples. When we make voltage stabilizers, we need this voltage drop. In these cases we do all that is possible to create and increase this useful voltage drop appearing across various diode component: diodes, LEDs, zeners, multiple diodes connected in series...
"Harmful" examples. In other cases, when we use a diode as a switching element, we do all that is possible to remove and to remove this harmful voltage drop... Then we need an ideal diode without forvard voltage drop VF...
The forward voltage drop VF across a diode disturbs the input source.
A rectifier is an electical element that converts alternating current to direct current. Rectifiers form the basis for electronic power supplies and battery-charging circuits. Furthermore, they are used in signal processing to demodulate radio signals and in the precision conversion of AC to DC voltage in electronic voltmeters. However, keeping in mind that the diode allows a current to flow in one (positive) direction but not in the other (negative), we can easily use the term "rectifier" to name a diode.
So let's make the diode perform as a rectifier and thus participating in a half-wave rectifier circuit (the sircuit diagram is shown on the left). We have a sinusoidal source (for the experiment it is 1V) and a resistive load.
The voltage drop VF enervates the input voltage.
When the source voltage is positive, the diode is in the so-called forward-bias region. If the diode was ideal the source voltage will appear across the load. However, the diode we have is not ideal; so it performs a voltage drop equal to the push-up voltage of the diode (approximately 0.5 - 0.7V). So during the positive wave the output voltage is less than the source voltage (for our example it will be VL = VS - VF = 1 - 0.7 = 0.3V. The result is shown in the diagram on the right.
During the negative wave of the sinusoidal voltage the diode is in its reverse-bias region and no current flows through the load. Thus only the positive half-cycles result on the load, which makes the diode suitable as a rectifier.
Making an "ideal" diode without VF
Deriving the basic idea from our human routine
(describe here all the situations in your daily routine where you have removed all the obstacles standing in your way:) Circuit-fantasist (talk) 08:22, 8 May 2008 (UTC)
Implementing the powerful idea into an electrical circuit
Making an almost ideal "op-amp" series diode rectifier
Compensating the harmful forward voltage drop VF across a real diode by surplus voltage.
What can act as a varying voltage source in our electronic circuit? What can "help" the imperfect diode by adding so much voltage to the input voltage as it loses across the diode? At last Lab 3 we were using transistors for such a purpose; let's now, for the sake of change, use an op-amp...
Investigating the "ideal" diode by Microlab.
Eureka! We have invented an (almost) ideal diode without (any) forvard voltage VF! Let's investigate it by Microlab system.
Firstly, let's remind what an operational amplifier (op-amp) is: it's a device having a differential input (it may be current, voltage, mechanical motion?!?Circuit-fantasist (talk) 18:09, 7 May 2008 (UTC), etc.) and the output that varies according to the input but with a larger amplitude. Almost always they are used with negative feedback (the output signal is returned to the input in opposite direction to the source signal). However, they may be also used with a positive feedback (the output signal that is returned is summed with the input original signal) but much rarely. For ideal OA in a negative-feedback circuit, the network returns a fraction of the output to the inverting input and thus makes the differential input voltage toward zero.
So let's now go back to our experiment. What we are trying to do is to compensate the harmful fordward voltage drop on a real diode with an operational amplifier. But isn't the result of this try an ideal operational amplifier?!
We have a source voltage Vin and at the point named "1" we will have that voltage. However, if we want to compensate the voltage drop across the diode, we should use an op-amp that will have on its output a voltage equal to the source voltage plus an additional amount that is equal to this voltage drop. This will be the voltage we will have at point "2". If this increased voltage is applied before the diode, the voltage after the diode will be the same as our initial source voltage and that is what we have at point "3". Which is our purpose!
Enlarging the powerful "surplus" idea by overcoming...
...forward LED voltage drop...
Compensating the harmful forward voltage drop VF across an LED.
Connecting a load to make the LED light.
Investigating an LED connected in the feedback loop.
The op-amp "raises" its output voltage to compensate the harmful voltage drop across the LED (waveforms).
The op-amp compensates even the voltage of a "positive" battery....
...and the voltage of a "negative" (opposite connected) battery.
A small battery prepared for connecting in the feedback loop.
Investigating a  battery connected in the feedback loop.
The op-amp "lowers" its output voltage to compensate the harmful voltage drop across a "positive" battery (waveforms).
The op-amp "raises" its output voltage to compensate the harmful voltage drop across a "negative" battery (waveforms).
Generalizing the powerful "surplus" idea
Strange things can be put into feedback loop a cheerful animated story (after Tom Hayes's Student manual for the art of electronics).
Biochemistry is the study of the chemistry of, and relating to, biological organisms.  It forms a bridge between biology and chemistry by studying how complex chemical reactions and chemical structures give rise to life and life's processes. Biochemistry is sometimes viewed as a hybrid branch of organic chemistry which specializes in the chemical processes and chemical transformations that take place inside of living organisms, but the truth is that the study of biochemistry should generally be considered neither fully "biology" nor fully "chemistry" in nature. Biochemistry incorporates everything in size between a molecule and a cell and all the interactions between them. The aim of biochemists is to describe in molecular terms the structures, mechanisms and chemical processes shared by all organisms, providing organizing principles that underlie life in all its diverse forms.
Biochemistry essentially remains the study of the structure and function of cellular components (such as enzymes and cellular organelles) and the processes carried out both on and by organic macromolecules - especially proteins, but also carbohydrates, lipids, nucleic acids, and other biomolecules.  All life forms alive today are generally believed to have descended from a single proto-biotic ancestor, which could explain why all known living things naturally have similar biochemistries.  Even when it comes to matters which could appear to be arbitrary - such as the genetic code and meanings of codons, or the "handedness" of various biomolecules - it is irrefutable fact that all marine and terrestrial living things demonstrate certain unchanging patterns throughout every level of organization, from family and phylum to kingdom and clade.
Biochemistry is, most simply put, the chemistry of life.
3' to 5', meaning the 5'hydroxyl group perform a nucleophilic attack on the 3'-phosphoramidite of the incoming monomer. It is different from the regular 5' to 3' synthesize of natural DNA and RNA, where the 3' hydroxyl group attacks the inner most phosphorus atom of 5' triphosphate.
Step two: Using Iodine, I2, the phosphite triester group oxidized to a phosphotriester group.
Step three: The DMT group on the 5' side of the activated monomer is removed by adding dichloroacetic acid (DCA, CHCl2COOH) while the rest of the molecule unchanged.
The oligonulceotide is now extended by one monomer unit and is ready to react with another incoming activated monomer. When the oligonucleotide of the desired length is synthesized, the final product can be obtained by adding ammonia (NH3) to remove all the protecting groups and remove the product from the insoluble support. Because no synthesis is perfect, not all of the growing oligonucleotide will react with the added monomers every time. Some oligonucleoides will be shorter than the other, for some nucleotides are missing. Thus, that considered to be impurities as they do not have the exact sequence carries the exact genes we wanted. The final product is the longest ones. The mixture of newly synthesized oligonucleotides can be separated by gel electrophoresis to get the desired product that was interested at the first place.
After all the synthesis steps, the mixture of product is then put into concentrated ammonium hydroxide, NH4OH, for an hour at room temperature. Next, the mixture with ammonium hydroxide is placed into an ice-bath and transferred to a vial that has a screw-cap afterwards. In order to remove the heterocyclic hase protecting groups, the solution in a vial is heated at 55 oC over night. Next day, the solution would be cooled in an ice-bath and evaporated off to dryness.
Four methods can be used to analyze synthesized DNA.
High pressure liquid chromatography is a technique use to identify or separate compounds. It includes two basic forms, reverse-phase and ion-exchange. The separation and analysis of HPLC are based on the retention time between the stationary phase(chromatographic packing material) and mobile phase(the compounds needed to identify or separate) in the column.
Ion-exchange HPLC is based on the charges between stationary phase and mobile phase. The compound with same charges as stationary phase has a shorter retention time while it has a longer retention time with opposite charges. It is used for oligonucleotides of 10 to 20 bases of nucleotides in length. Two sets of ion-exchange HPLC is used for analyzing DNA. One condition is dNAPac column with 20mM Tris buffer/0.05% acetonitrile and 1M NaCl at a rate of 1.5 mL/min. Another condition is Resource-Q column with 10mM NaOH/80mM NaBr and 10mM NaOH/1.5M NaBr at a rate of 1.5mL/min
Reverse-phase HPLC is based on the affinity between stationary phase and mobile phase. The stationary phase of reverse-phase HPLC is non-polar, a non-polar compound has a longer retention time than a polar compound.
Gel electrophoresis is a technique use to separate DNA, RNA, or protein molecules. For oligonucleotides, 15~20% cross-linked gels are used with 7M urea. The gel electrophoresis takes over 3~6 hours at 50 to 60oC. To see oligonuceotides, a Molecular Dynamics Phosphorimager is used.
Gel electrophoresis can be used to analyze synthesized DNA. It also uses for the purification of synthesized DNA. A longer synthesized DNA is mainly used for cloning and hybridization. Non-full-length synthesized DNA formed during oilgonucleotide synthesis may interfere the applications, so purification is important. Gel electrophoresis is an efficient technique to separate full-length products from other shorter products.
MALDI-TOF is an ionization technique in mass spectrometry. It is used to identify compounds like oligonucleotides by their mass. Oligonucleotide is ionized and given a potential energy in the ion chamber of MALDI instrument. The oligonucleotide is then move to the detector of MALDI instrument by converting potential energy to kinetic energy. E=1/2mv2. Since E(energy) is given and v(velocity) is measured, m(mass) of the nucleotide can be determined and compared to value it should have.
The products dissolved in the mixture solution of snake venom phosphodiesterase, alkaline phosphatase, and buffer solution. The reaction takes 4 hours at 37 oC. After that the mixture is heated to denature the enzymes. The mixture is then diluted with water and centrifuged. Finally, the mixture is analyzed by HPLC.
The advantages of solid support synthesize of oligonucleoside is similar to the one of synthesis of polypeptides. Because the growing nucleotides is attached to a insoluble support, all the soluble impurities can be washed away without loosing any product.
The ability to synthesize oligonucleotide with the exact sequences have important uses. A synthesized oligonuletide can be used in many DNA manipulation techniques.
A synthesized oligonucletide with fluorescent tag can used to locate genes within a very long DNA molecule if the gene sequence in known. Because then we will able to synthesized a new oligonucleotides that is complementary to the gene sequence we want to locate. The labeled oligonucleotide use as probe is very important in exploring new genes. The probe can be used as primer to initiate replication of neighboring DNA by DNA polymerase that have not been map yet. With the fluorescent ability of the probe, we are able to tell where the new gene we are trying to map starts.
The polymerase chain reaction is the technique to amplify specific DNA. In order to amplify specific DNA sequences, pair of primers to hybridize with the target DNA sequences, four deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates, and a heat-stable DNA polymerase are needed. The specific primers for hybridizing the target DNA sequences can be made by Oligonucleotide Synthesis Technique.
The Site-Specific Mutagenesis or Oligonucleotide-Directed Mutagenesis can produce mutant proteins with single amino acid substitutions. The key of this technique is to prepare an oligonucleotide primer that is complementary to the DNA except the region that wants to change amino acid. The mismatch of primers of 1 of 15 bases is tolerable at an appropriate temperature. These specific oligonucleotide primers can be prepared by Oligonucleotide Synthesis Technique.
The Large-Scale Synthesis of oligonucleotide is almost same with the procedure above except a column used in the procedure. The Large-Scale Synthesis uses a packed column rather that a loosely packed cartridge.
Preparation of DNA microarrays on planar glass surfaces
DNA microarrays or gene chips can be used to analyze the pattern and level of pexpression of all genes in a particular cell or tissue. This technique can be done by placing oligonucleotides on a planar glass surfaces. The probes (oligonucleotides) are synthesized on the silicon chip. Thin silicon rubber capillaries are put on a lass slide and the probes are synthesized. Complementary DNA that is fluorescently labeled is hybridized to the gene chips that are made by oligonucleotides. This hybridized gene chips show the expression level for each gene.
Southern blotting is a technique to identify DNA molecules. In order to identify a DNA fragment with a specific sequence, a 32P-labeled single-stranded DNA probe, a specific DNA molecule made by oligonucleotide synthesis, is needed. The probe is hybridized with the complementary sequence of DNA sample. and the specific sequence can be visualized by autoradiography.
Describe is putting words on experience and experience into words.
Describe: the ability to put verbal labels to (internal and external) events is essential for self-control.
Putting words on one’s experience is the first step toward taking control of your mind. Describing is thinking with words and includes your internal dialogue as well as verbal and written expression. This sort of talking to yourself helps you become focused. It is a way to overcome distractions because you learn to redirect your thinking to your here-and-now experience. As you practice describe, you will become clearer about what you are doing and what you want to do.
Time spent describing is an investment. Make consistent use of a journal, to-do list, calendar and organizer.
See Dialectical Behavioral Therapy/Core Mindfulness Skills/Observe
a Kapampangan to English lexicon,
Each of the 40 lessons is organised in four parts plus one optional part:
Part A: presentation of the aspect of the language that we learn in this lesson,
Part B: application of the principles,
Part D: summary and list of newly learned words and phrases,
Part E: extras (optional part): linguistic information related to the lesson's subject for the curious reader that wants to know more about the language or its history, or wants more explanations on grammatical points. You can skip this part if you only wish to understand and speak Kapampangan, and have no other linguistic interest.
Work regularly: if you can spread your work, go through only one lesson per day. It is during your sleep that your brain will organise your new knowledge, but there is only so much that it can organise.
Plan your effort: Allocate in advance your time for learning. This will help not having large periods without any work, which could cause you to forget what you have previously learned, and would cause you to have to double your effort.
Go back: Do some revision with the previous lessons, and redo some exercises. You need to know (and remember) the basics before you can move on.
The alphabet we use here for the purpose of sorting alphabetically Kapampangan words is a,b,d,g,h,i,k,l,m,n (including ng),o,p,r,s,t,u,w,y. [1]
New Kapampangan words are always indicated in bold.
The origin of new words, when they can be identified, is indicated with the following abbreviation the first time that a word is mentioned:
↑ For easier computer processing of word lists, the letter ng is considered to be two separate letters, so are the letters dy, ts and sy. The glottal stop indicated by ' is not used for sorting. This means that the same sorting rules can be used for the English word lists and Kapampangan word lists.
Try to solve the following puzzles to test your four-player chess skills. There are Teams puzzles and FFA puzzles.
Puzzle #1: Blue to move.
1...Qxg3 Bm7 Qxm7 2. fxg3 Nxe13+ Rxe13 Qf14+ 3. Qe12 Ka7#
Puzzle #2: Blue to move.
1...Qxb8 exd11 and bQxa9 next move. If yBxb8??, then gBi11 or gBh12 followed by bNe13#.
Puzzle #3: Green to move.
1...Qj6 This move controls g3 and prepares two checkmates. If rQh4 or rQi5, then bQxi1+ followed by gQxj2#. If h4, then bQh1 followed by gQxh4#. If rQj4, then bQxi1+ followed by gQg3#.
Puzzle #4: Red to move.
Qh2 Red needs to stop the mate threat bQh14+ yKxh14 gQxf14#. rQh2 stops bQh14+, because of the threat rQb8#.
Puzzle #5: Blue to move.
1...Qxf1+ Qxl9 Qxl9+ 2. Rxf1 Nxd11 Rh13 Qxh13+ 3. Qe11 Nf12#
Puzzle #6: Yellow to move.
1...Nxd11 Bxm5 2. h3 Qg13+ Bxg13 Qxi13 3. Bxm5
Puzzle #7: Yellow to move.
1...Bh13 The threat is gQxi3+ with mate following, so Yellow needs a check on Green to stop it.
Puzzle #8: Blue to move.
1...Qxh3+ Nc9+ Ni3+ 2. Ki1 Ka7 Ne8 Nxk2+ 3. Rxk2 Bxg3+ Nc7 Nj5 4. Bxg3 Qxi2+ Nxb9+ Nk3#
Puzzle #9: Green to move.
1...Bi4 2. hxi4 Nxb8 Qxb8+ Qh11+ 3. Kg1 Qxb8 gxh11 and Blue and Green have limited the damage to being down a knight.
Puzzle #10: Red to move.
Qh2 Bxb8 Bg13 Bc9 2. Ql7+ Nxe13+ Kf14#
Puzzle #11: Green to move.
1...Qxh3 2. f3 Qk4+ Bxb8+ Qj1#
Puzzle #12: Yellow to move.
1...Bj4 Bg3 2. Rxb8+ Kxb8 Bxi3 11xi12 The point is that Green cannot take Yellow's bishop, because of rRn5+ yQm5#.
Puzzle #13: Blue to move.
1...Qj7 Qi10 Nxi2+ 2. Kh2 5xc6 simply increasing the advantage. bQxh3 looks tempting, but does not work due to yBd7.
1...7xh8=Q+++## 2. Resigns. Blue gains 81 points (one pawn, a triple check, two checkmates and one resignation) and gets second place. Red stays first by resigning.
Most deaths and injuries relating to fires occur within the home environment.  Cigarettes, lighters, and matches are the leading causes of these fires.  However, some include faulty electical outlets  and overloaded circuits.
A smoke detector is an alarm that sounds when it detects smoke.  A heat detector is an alarm that sounds when the room temperature resis above a certain level.  Every home should have one of these (on each floor) to prevent fire injuries.  Batteries for these alarms need to be checked frequently to ensure that they are working properly.
Have a predetermined plan for getting out and meeting your family.
Practice the plan.
When a real fire happens you should
Alert everyone in the home or building.
Place a wet cloth over the face.
Crawl out of the building on your hands and knees (stay below the smoke).
Feel doors for heat before opening.  Do not open hot/warm doors.  Open cool doors slowly.
Meet family members at the designated meeting place.
Never go back into a burning building.
Tell fire officials if any people or animals are still in the building.
Have ropes or ladders available to help family members escap from two-story houses.
Example34 ... used in wikibook circuit theory .. parallel RLC current source, 2 initial conditions, find current through capacitor leg
This problem is done three different ways, reflecting three different transfer function starting points which imply three different paths to visit the initial conditions. Click on the transfer functions below:
The asclassic stacking window manager is based on afterstep.
Features of the asclassic window manager include:
Titlebars have an icon and menu and close buttons
Hard Plastic is made by taking the standard material (the material created when you hit the "Add New" button) and taking the "Hard" Value under the "Shaders" tab and turning it up to about 12. You can also turn up the "Spec" Value, also located under the "Shaders" tab. Like every other material you can add scratches by making very thin normal maps and very lightly applying them, and maybe make the plastic reflective by turning it to about 0.05.
"Technology Integrated Lesson Plans in English Language Teaching"
Grammar and Pronunciation •
Introduction to Verbs •
Verbs and Tenses •
The below list represents all of the references used for the writing of this wikibook.
Daigle, O., Jules, Rev and Jules Daigle. Cajun Self-Taught. Denver: Swallow, 1992.
Daigle, O., Jules, Rev and Jules Daigle. A Dictionary of the Cajun Language. Denver: Swallow, 1984.
Faulk, James Donald.  Cajun French I.  Abbeville, LA: Cajun Press, Inc., 1977.
Valdman, Albert et.al. Dictionary of Louisiana French: As Spoken in Cajun, Creole, and American Indian Communities. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2009.
Phillips, Hosea. "The Spoken French of Louisiana". published in The Cajuns: Essays on Their History and Culture, Glenn R. Conrad, ed. Center for Louisiana Studies, University of Southwestern Louisiana, Lafayette, Louisiana, 1983.
Savoy, Ann. Cajun Music. Eunice: Bluebird Press, 1984.
Francois, Raymond. Ye Yaille Chere, Traditional Cajun Dance Music. City: Swallow Pubns, 1990.
Wikipedia: The Free Encyclopedia. 23 Oct. 2005. Wikimedia Foundation. 23 Oct. 2005 <http://en.wikipedia.org>.
01 .
02 .
03 .
04 .
05 .
06 .
Petrovs Defence : Cochrane Gambit
Black's priority is to organize his defence and to counter White's attack. Therefore, 5...Nxe4 is bad (moreover, White can win the knight with 6. Qh5+ g6 7. Qd5+).
There are three strategies to build comfortably the defence :
5...c5 tries to regain space by attacking the center from the queen side.
5...Be7 is a first step toward an "artificial castling". This prepares Re8 and Kg8.
5...g6 prepares a fianchetto. Black will leave the e file open and builds another kind of defence with the bishop on g7. But we may wonder if this will resist a White pawn advance on the king side.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nxf7 Kxf7 5. d4
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Petrov Defence
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
Let G be a Group.
Let H be a Subgroup of G.
Then, Cosets of Subgroup H partition Group G.
Overview: G is partition by the cosets if
Cosets of H are Subsets of G
As Subgroup H is Subset of G
By 2., and Closure on G justified by 0. and 3.,
eG is identity of G (usage 3)
Suppose 2 different cosets of H are not disjoint
Let the 2 cosets be g1H and g2H where
By Definition of the Cosets,
As we can exchange g_1 and g_2 and apply the same procedure
Thus, two Cosets of H are either identical or are disjoint.
Hence, the Cosets of H are disjoint.
One important question is "What does it mean for me to have a self?" It is a question that has been given treatment in a number of theories.
Philosophical approaches. Philosopher David Hume regarded the Self as the feeling of continuity of one's experiences, roughly akin to the conscious mind. His theories can be seen as an early prelude to postmodern identity theories (Gergen, Harré) for they both speak of the notion of the Self in very minimal terms. The common rejection of essentialism relies upon the idea that the self is something that is in a state of constant change rather than a fixed trait.
Psychodynamic approach. Psychologist Erik Erikson understood the Self to be composed of a number of different selves, each of which was tailored to fit their own unique demands of social life. These "selves" were sometimes conscious, sometimes not.
Social behaviorism. This is a theory developed by George Herbert Mead that emphasizes the relevant social context of the learning environment.
Social behaviorism is influenced by Darwin's theories, Wilhelm Wundt and the pragmatic philosophy of the Chicago school (James, Dewey, Peirce, Shibutani, etc.). Yet social behaviorism contrasts with cognitive psychology and Darwinian theories in one important aspect. Social behaviorism doesn't consider mind as something that is pre-existing to interaction.
Although this theory carries within it the word behaviorism, it has very little if anything to do with the behaviorism of John B. Watson or B.F. Skinner.
Behaviorism in this wider sense is simply an approach to the study of the experience of the individual from the point of view of his conduct, particularly, but not exclusively, the conduct as it is observable by others. (Mead, 1934)
Other sociocultural theories. The social behaviorist's perspective resembles the work of Lev Vygotsky, which places learning in the context of social interaction.
One of the areas of research in social psychology is personality psychology. It is a subfield that engages in the study of people and the meanings they associate with themselves. Of interest to this area are questions like, "What is my personal identity?" and "What are the factors and influences that make me who I am?". In this article, and by the standards of current research, one's personality is their personal identity, both self-perceived and perceived by others (Cote and Levine). It is a kind of meaning.
Meaning and self-concept. Some researchers use tools borrowed from the symbolic interactionist tradition, such as the notions of self-concept, the looking-glass self and the ideal self. The "self-concept" is the idea that people actually have of a person, while the looking-glass self is the ideas and judgments that the actor thinks others have of them. The ideal self is the standard to which people aspire to be like, often influenced by role models.
Big five personality traits.
Applications. One topic of concern is the manner in which people are susceptible towards becoming dominators or victims because of aspects of their personalities. In order to help explain the effects that personality might have in acts of coercion and violence, social psychologists created the notions of Social Dominance Orientation. This concept has also been used to facilitate critical-political tools, such as that of Right Wing Authoritarianism.
Implicit personality judgments. Another question of earnest importance is, "Why do other people see me the ways that they do?". One answer comes from 'Implicit personality theories. This set of theories postulates that people have abstract ideas about personality traits that they cluster into positive and negative sets, and which are used implicitly to evaluate others. For instance, a person (Bob) may receive some cues from another person (Joe) which reflect a positive or negative trait about them (Joe). If the judger, Bob, makes a judgment about the other (Joe) without reflecting upon their reasons for the judgment, it will often lead to assumptions and true inferences about other unseen personality traits. For example, a person who is wasteful might also be seen as clumsy, unintelligent, or irresponsible; while a person who is skillful might be assumed to be determined, industrious, and intelligent. In effect, then, this model predicts that Bob will implicitly assume that any person who has one negative trait, also has a number of other negative traits.
The sense of community. Involves the subjectively perceived sense of the traits of members of a social group. Is the conceptual center of Community psychology.
Social identity. A person's social identity is their position within a particular social structure. One explanatory attempt in this field has been Social identity theory, which argues that people will cluster themselves and others into meaningful groups. Related notions include roles, which denotes a person's concrete place in a particular organization, and stereotypes, which are a collection of traits that is attributed to members of a certain social set.
Place attachment. An actor feels a bond to a certain place, usually through extensive interaction with it. Through enough exposure to a certain environment, the actor may begin to associate their social and personal identity with that place.
Identity formation strategies. How do people develop their identities? What kinds of identities are there? When will an identity be more resilient across a life-span? These are all questions worth considering.
Writing in a quantitative branch of the psychodynamic tradition is James Marcia, author of the identity status paradigm. He argued that identity across the lifespan of a person could be attributed to two elements: their commitment to an identity, and their conscious choice (involving exploration of alternatives). From these two variables, four identity statuses can be established, which describe actors in varying states of identity consolidation:
Identity Diffusion, when a person has neither chosen nor committed to any identity;
Identity Foreclosures, when a person has committed to an identity to which they never chose;
Identity Moratorium, when a person entertains a number of identity choices, but expresses no commitment; and
Identity Achievement, when a person has committed to an identity of their own choosing.
The formation and development of personal and social identity depends both on biological and environmental conditions. Sometimes, these conditions are not ideal; people grow up with certain functional handicaps and dispositions, or they grow up in poor social environments. In these cases, what results is a malformation of identity. There are three kinds of persons who hold malformed identity strategies:
Refusers, who outright refuse to enter adulthood, and shun any behavior that would place them within a social system;
Drifters, who similarly fail to integrate into a social system, and do not place emphasis upon particular identity traits, but seem to pick up and harness their skills in a discontinuous way; and
Searchers, who are willing to integrate into social systems, but either cannot find an appropriate community, or suffer from low self-esteem which blinds them to the available communities.
There are also two other identity-formation strategies which seem at least overtly functional:
Guardians, who have succeeded at integrating into a social system, but without their personal reflection or consent;
Resolvers, who have both succeeded at integration into a social system and have done so of their own will and cognition. (Cote and Levine)
A different set of identity strategies have been postulated by postmodernist Kenneth Gergen. He identifies:
The strategic manipulator, who feels alienated from previous sources of their identity, and who suffers a burden of having to maintain inauthentic, false impressions with others;
The pastiche personality, who disregards identity altogether, sees identity as a mere tool, and lives instead upon continuous experience in the world; and
The relational self, where the actor is seen as merely a part of a greater social whole.
Topics. Related issues which require explanation are those of race, religion, gender, and sexual orientation.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
The 23rd chapter in the book of Matthew is a notorious chapter that is commonly referred to as The Seven Woes, and entails Jesus criticizing the teachers of the law and the Pharisees (basically the leaders of the Jewish faith). In this chapter we see Jesus with quite a different attitude than he portrays usually. In this chapter, Jesus is openly critical of the Pharisees and seems to have somewhat of an angry demeanor.
{OVERVIEW AND BACKGROUND FOR MATTHEW 23}
This chapter in Matthew is the beginning of what is known as the "Judgment Discourse" in which Jesus gives a speech that stretches through Matthew 25:46. During this chapter, Jesus is believed to be in the Temple, where he has been since Matthew 21:23, and will stay until Matthew 24:1. Throughout this chapter, Jesus is talking to the crowds and his disciples, not actually to the Pharisees and teachers of the law themselves.
Here in the Temple, in chapter 23, we find Jesus challenging the actions Pharisees and the religious leaders. In verse one, we find Jesus speaking “to the crowds and to his disciples.” Jesus is issuing a warning to the people about the “teachers of the law and the Pharisees.” In verses two and three He tells the people to obey these leaders in what they say, because they “sit upon the seat of Moses.”
Here it seems that Jesus is actually accrediting their ability to teach and interpret the Law, and says that the people are to listen to them in this regard. Immediately after this though, Jesus starts in his criticism of the teachers and Pharisees by telling the people not to do as they do, for they are hypocrites. Jesus is basically saying that what they say is good (it is the law of Moses), but they do not do as they say, instead “they tie up heavy loads and put them on men's shoulders, but they themselves are not willing to lift a finger to move them” (v4). That is to say they hold others extremely accountable to the Law, but they themselves to not hold to it nor help others out.
All of this now leads to the beginning of “The Seven Woes,” in which Jesus begins to list the misdeeds of the Pharisee, and which starts in verse 13 with the first of the seven. In each of these “woes,” Jesus charges the teachers and the Pharisees with a different wrong doing. All of these begin with Jesus stating “"Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites!”, with the exception of the third woe which begins, “Woe to you, blind guides!” The literary form of this section of the chapter is known as apostrophe (addressing somebody who is not actually present).
Following the seven woes, Jesus then laments Jerusalem in verses 37-39. These words include Jesus telling the people how their sins fit hand in hand with the destruction of the Temple. This is referred to in verse 38 when he says "Look, your house is left to you desolate". In verse 39, he says "you will not see me again until you say, ‘Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.’” This comes from the fact that the people of Israel were about to reject Jesus as the Messiah and sentence him to crucifixion.
1Then Jesus said to the crowds and to his disciples: 2“The teachers of the law and the Pharisees sit in Moses’ seat. 3So you must obey them and do everything they tell you. But do not do what they do, for they do not practice what they preach. 4They tie up heavy loads and put them on men’s shoulders, but they themselves are not willing to lift a finger to move them.
In the first the verses of chapter 23, Jesus is talking to the crowds and disciples (note how he is not speaking to the Pharisees and leaders directly). Jesus states that they "sit in Moses' seat", which is symbolic of the authority that a rabbi has to teach. In verse 3, it seems as though Jesus wants the people to recognize their authority, and to "obey them and do everything they tell you", but he warns them not do as they do. Here, Jesus makes the acknowledgement that the leaders have the authority and have the ability to interpret the Torah, but the example that the leaders set do not follow their teachings. In verse 4 Jesus speaks about the leaders and how they "tie up heavy loads and put them on men’s shoulders, but they themselves are not willing to lift a finger to move them". This is dealing with how the leaders would not help out those people that were burdened with the rules they enforced. It is important to realize that Jesus is not saying that the leaders did not follow the rules themselves, just that they refused to help those weighed down by them. This way of acting is contradictory to Jesus as seen in Matthew 11:28-30 which says, "28Come to me, all you who are weary and burdened, and I will give you rest. 29Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for your souls. 30for my yoke is easy and my burden is light."
In verse 5, Jesus says that the Pharisees and leaders do things so that other men will see them, that is that they are trying to gain praise from others. It says that "they make their phylacteries wide and the tassels on their garments long". Phylacteries are small cases or boxes that contain slips on which passages were written. The passages used were Ex 13:3-10, 11-16 (as rememberance of the deliverance of Israel from Eygpt and the start of the Passover), Deut. 6:4-9, and Deut. 11:13-21. These phylacteries were attached with straps to the forehead and left arm as reminders to follow God's law. In widening these straps and the tassels of their garments, the Pharisees and leaders stood out and they looked as if they followed the laws very well and were devout men. In verse 6, Jesus says that they love the places of honor and the most importants seats, which were places that were places of honor, and spots where one could be seen by all. As verse 7 says, they loved to be greeted and to be called 'Rabbi', which in Hebrew mean "my lord". The Pharisees and leaders demanded respect everywhere they went and thought of themselves as prestigious individuals.
In verses 8-11 we find Jesus saying that it is wrong for the Pharisee and teachers of the law from trying to be honored by having the term "Rabbi" as a title. He prohibits the term "Rabbi" from being used for the leaders, for there is only on "Master" (or Lord), and "you are all brothers", meaning that they are all equals. The term "father", which was also sometimes used in recognition of a teacher of the law, was also not to be used, as there is only one "Father" (God), as well as the title "teacher" for Christ is the one true Teacher.
The 1st woe (v. 13): Jesus tells the teacher and Pharisees that they “shut the kingdom of heaven in men's faces.”
Here, the "kingdom of heaven" is often thought of being the Gospel of Christ and the teachings of Jesus. Not only do the Pharisees not accept this, they also prevent the people from acquiring this knowledge. There is a conflict between the traditional laws of Jewish leadership and the movement that comes along with Jesus.
The 2nd woe (v. 15): “You travel over land and sea to win a single convert, and when he becomes one, you make him twice as much a son of hell as you are.”
Verse 15 is referring to how hard the Pharisees would try to win a Gentile convert and make them into a proselyte. A proselyte was a pagan convert who was very zealous for the law. These converts that the Pharisees won were referred to as sons of hell because they were hostile towards the followers of Jesus who were less attentive to the law.
The 3rd woe (v. 16-22): To the blind guides, “You say, 'If anyone swears by the temple, it means nothing; but if anyone swears by the gold of the temple, he is bound by his oath.' 17You blind fools! Which is greater: the gold, or the temple that makes the gold sacred? 18You also say, 'If anyone swears by the altar, it means nothing; but if anyone swears by the gift on it, he is bound by his oath.' 19You blind men! Which is greater: the gift, or the altar that makes the gift sacred? 20Therefore, he who swears by the altar swears by it and by everything on it. 21And he who swears by the temple swears by it and by the one who dwells in it. 22And he who swears by heaven swears by God's throne and by the one who sits on it.”
In the 3rd woe of Matthew 23, Jesus is reference the casuistic approach of oaths and vows that was enforced by the Pharisees. These rules, which included avoiding oaths made by holy things because is was as binding as making an oath directly to God, were efforts made by the Pharisees to make sure people correctly followed the law.
The 4th woe (v. 23-24): “You give a tenth of your spices—mint, dill and cummin. But you have neglected the more important matters of the law—justice, mercy and faithfulness. You should have practiced the latter, without neglecting the former. 24You blind guides! You strain out a gnat but swallow a camel.”
In this woe, Jesus is explaining how the teachers and Pharisees try to make themselves look good by tithing seasonings, which were above and beyond what the law required of them, but they neglected the things that really matter such as treating people justice, mercy, and faithfulness. They tithed above what was required in order to look good. Verse 24 makes a reference to straining out a gnat, a practice done to drinks to make them pure. Here Jesus is saying that the Pharisees worry about the small things but neglect the important (swallow a camel).
The 5th woe (v. 25-26): “You clean the outside of the cup and dish, but inside they are full of greed and self-indulgence. 26Blind Pharisee! First clean the inside of the cup and dish, and then the outside also will be clean.”
Here we see the simple case that even though the leaders appear righteous and clean on the outside, they are greedy and corrupt on the inside. Jesus tells them to first take care of the inside and the outside will follow.
The 6th woe (v. 27-28): “You are like whitewashed tombs, which look beautiful on the outside but on the inside are full of dead men's bones and everything unclean. 28In the same way, on the outside you appear to people as righteous but on the inside you are full of hypocrisy and wickedness.”
In this 6th woe, Jesus is making the same point as that in the 5th, that is that the teachers and Pharisees outward appearance gives the impression that they are righteous people, but in their hearts they are wicked. In that time, tombs were whitewashed in order to make them more noticeable so that people could avoid their contact, as contact with the dead was considered impure.
The 7th woe (v. 29-32): “You build tombs for the prophets and decorate the graves of the righteous. 30And you say, 'If we had lived in the days of our forefathers, we would not have taken part with them in shedding the blood of the prophets.' 31So you testify against yourselves that you are the descendants of those who murdered the prophets. 32Fill up, then, the measure of the sin of your forefathers!
In this 7th and final woe, Jesus refers to Israel's rejection of prophets that God had sent them, and tradition had said that these prophets had been murdered. The Pharisees tried to atone for their fathers' sins by building monuments to commemorate the prophets and they claimed that they would have not participated in the killing of prophets like their fathers did. It seems that Jesus, though, is telling them that they are in reality just like their fathers.
The Lament of Jerusalem (v. 33-39): 33“You snakes! You brood of vipers! How will you escape being condemned to hell? 34Therefore I am sending you prophets and wise men and teachers. Some of them you will kill and crucify; others you will flog in your synagogues and pursue from town to town. 35And so upon you will come all the righteous blood that has been shed on earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah son of Berekiah, whom you murdered between the temple and the altar. 36I tell you the truth, all this will come upon this generation.
37“O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, you who kill the prophets and stone those sent to you, how often I have longed to gather your children together, as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, but you were not willing. 38Look, your house is left to you desolate. 39For I tell you, you will not see me again until you say, ‘Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.’”
At the end of this chapter Jesus laments Jerusalem and her people. Jesus says that he is sending them profits, wise men, and teachers, which many believe refer to himself and his disciples that bring the message of Jesus. These men will undoubtedly be persecuted by many and the Gospel will be rejected by the people, just as the Pharisees have rejected it. Because the Israelites will reject Jesus and his teachings, their "house" (believed to be the Temple), will be left desolate. To conclude this chapter, Jesus says, "you will not see me again until you say, ‘Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.’” This is most likely referring to Jesus' second coming, when the people have rejected Jesus will say this, not in joy but in distress for they know they will have to face judgement.
The Pharisees were people from a religious group called Chasidim, which was brought about after the resettling of Jewish people in Judea after Babylonian captivity. The Chasidim followed the Law of Moses, as well as added traditions and observerances to be followed. The Pharisees were the main religious sect in the time of Jesus, and Pharisees thought of themselves as holier than the common people.
Phylacteries were boxes that contained parchment on which parts of the Law were written. These boxes were attached to the forehead and left arm (because it is near the heart) and served as reminders to Jews to keep the Law.
It is easy to read Matthew 23 and think that it cannot apply in our lives today.
Jesus’ speech took place in a culture much different than ours, and today we do not have the Law, or religious leaders such as the Pharisees.
It is important to realize the implications this chapter in Matthew can have for our lives though.
For Christian people, it is important that they do not view themselves as better than and deserving of praise from other people.
Christians should be careful not to boast and they should not believe that they are better humans than the non-believers.
Oftentimes people in the church and leaders in the church act like they are on pedestals and act very selfishly.
Remember, “whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted."
So in all actuality, this verse is a very good reminder that we should be humble and follow the example of Jesus Christ.
The Feast of Purim came into existence as a result of the enemy's attempt to exterminate the Jewish people when they were in exile. The story is related in the Book of Esther of the wicked Haman, a type of Antichrist, who plotted their destruction but was instead exposed and judged for his wickedness.
There are many figurative and prophetic types of the endtime drama in the story which will repeat itself in another Haman whom God will judge and destroy with the brightness of His coming.
Returns TRUE for image values.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
3 suicide bombs have attacked a market on an island on Lake Chad in Chad, killing at least 27 people, and injuring more than 80 others.
3'g zihsha zhahdahn xirji zaih Chad d Chad Hur daao shahng 1'g shihchaang, zhihshaao 27 rern sii, chaoguoh 80 rern shouhshang.
Nobody has claimed it was behind the attacks, but it is believed that were carried out by Boko Haram.
An important function and property of the human cognitive system is the ability to extract important information out of textually and verbally described situations. This ability plays a vital role in understanding and remembering. But what happens to this information after it is extracted, how do we represent it and how do we use it for inferencing? With this chapter we introduce the concept of a “situation model” (van Dijk&Kintsch, 1983, “mental model”: Johnson-Laird, 1983), which is the mental representation of what a text is about. We discuss what these representations might look like and show the various experiments that try to tackle these questions empirically. By assuming situations to be encoded by perceptual symbols (Barsalou, 1999), the theory of Situation Models touches many aspects of Cognitive Philosophy, Linguistics and Artificial Intelligence. In the beginning of this chapter, we will mention why Situation Models are important and what we use them for. Next we will focus on the theory itself by introducing the four primary types of information - the situation model components, its Levels of Representation and finally two other basic types of knowledge used in situation model construction and processing (general world knowledge and referent specific knowledge).
Situation models not only form a central concept in theories of situated cognition that helps us in understanding how situational information is collected and how new information gets integrated, but they can also explain many other phenomena. According to van Dijk & Kintsch, situation models are responsible for processes like domain-expertise, translation, learning from multiple sources or completely understanding situations just by reading about them. These situation models consist, according to most researches in this area, of five dimensions, which we will explain later. When new information concerning one of these dimensions is extracted, the situation model is changed according to the new information. The bigger the change in the situation model is, the more time the reader needs for understanding the situation with the new information. If there are contradictions, e.g. new information which does not fit into the model, the reader fails to understand the text and probably has to reread parts of the text to build up a better model. It was shown in several experiments that it is easier to understand texts that have only small changes in the five dimensions of text understanding. It also has been found that it is easier for readers to understand a text if the important information is more explicitly mentioned. For this reason several researchers wrote about the importance of fore-grounding important information (see Zwaan&Radvansky 1998 for a detailed list). The other important issue about situation models is the multidimensionality. Here the important question is how are the different dimensions related and what is their weight for constructing the model. Some researchers claim that the weight of the dimensions shifts according to the situation which is described. Introducing such claims will be the final part of this chapter and aims to introduce you to current and future research goals.
The VIP: Rolf A. Zwaan
Rolf A. Zwaan, born September 13, 1962 in Rotterdam (the Netherlands), is a very important person for this topic, since he made the most research (92 publications in total), and also because most of our data is taken from his work.
Zwaan did his MA (1986) and his Ph.D. (1992) at the Utrecht University (Netherlands), both cum laude. Since then he collected multiple awards like the Developing Scholar Award (Florida state University, 1999) or the Fellow of the Hanse Institute for Advanced Study (Delmenhorst, Germany, 2003) and became member of several Professional Organisations like the Psychonomic Society, the Cognitive Science Society or the American Psychological Society.
He works as Chair of the Biology & Cognitive Psychology at the Erasmus University in Rotterdam (Netherlands), since 2007.
Why do we need situation models?
A lot of tasks which are based on language processing can only be explained by the usage of situation models. The so called situation model or mental model consists of five different dimensions, which refer to different sources. To comprehend a text or just a simple sentence, situation models are useful. Furthermore the comprehension and combination of several texts and sentences can be explained by that theory much better.
In the following, some examples are listed why we really need situation models.
Integration of information across sentences is more than just understanding a set of sentences. For example:
“Gerhard Schroeder is in front of some journalists. Looking forward to new ideas is nothing special for the Ex-German chancellor. It is like in the good old days in 1971 when the leader of the Jusos was behind the polls and talked about changes.”
This example only makes sense to the reader if he is aware that “Gerhard Schroeder”, “Ex-German chancellor” and “the leader of the Jusos in 1971” is one and the same person.
If we build up a situation model, in this example “Gerhard Schroeder” is our token. Every bit of information which comes up will be linked to this token, based on grammatical and world knowledge. The definite article in the second sentence refers to the individual in the first sentence. This is based on grammatical knowledge. Every definite article indicates a connection to an individual in a previous sentence. If there would be an indefinite article, we have to build a new token for a new individual. The third sentence is linked by domain knowledge to the token. It has to be known that “Gerhard Schroeder” was the leader of the Jusos in 1971. Otherwise the connection can only be guessed.
We can see that an integrated situation model is needed to comprehend the connection between the three sentences.
Explanation of similarities in comprehension performances across modalities
The explanation of similarities in comprehension performances across modalities can only be done by the usage of situation models.
If we read a newspaper article, watch a report on television or listen to a report on radio, we come up with a similar understanding of the same information, which is conveyed through different modalities. Thus we create a mental representation of the information or event. This mental representation does not depend on the modalities itself. Furthermore there is empirical evidence for this intuition.
Baggett (1979) found out that students who saw a short film and students who heard a spoken version of the events in the short film finally produced a structurally similar recall protocol. There were differences in the protocols of the two groups but the differences were due to content aspects. Like the text version explicitly stated that a boy was on his way to school and in the movie this had to be inferred.
Situation models have a deep influence for effects of domain expertise on comprehension. In detail this means that person A, whose verbal skills are less than from person B, is able to outperform person B, if he has more knowledge of the topic domain. To give evidence for this intuition, there was a study by Schneider and Körkel (1989). They compared the recalls of “experts” and novices of a text about a soccer match. In the study were three different grades: 3rd, 5th and 7th. One important example in that experiment was that the 3rd grade soccer experts outperformed the 7th grade novices. The recall of units in the text was 54% by the 3rd grade experts and 42% by the 7th grade novices.
The 3rd grade experts built up a situation model and used knowledge from their long-term memory (Ericsson & Kintsch, 1995). The 7th grade novices had just the text by which they can come up with a situation model.
Some more studies show evidence for the theory that domain expertise may counteract with verbal ability, i.e. Fincher-Kiefer, Post, Greene & Voss, 1988 or Yekovich, Walker, Ogle & Thompson in 1990.
An other example why we need situation models is by trying to explain translation. Translating a sentence or a text from one language to another is not simply done by translating each word and building a new sentence structure until the sentence seems to be sound. If we have a look now at the example of a Dutch sentence:
Now we can conclude that the translation level between Dutch and English is not based on the lexical-semantic level; it is based on the situation level. In this example “don’t do something (action) before you haven’t done something else (another action)”.
Other studies came up with findings that the ability to construct situation models during the translation is important for the translation skill (Zwann, Ericsson, Lally and Hill, in 1998).
People are able to learn about a domain from multiple documents. This phenomenon can be explained by a situation model, too. For example, we try to learn something about the “Cold War” we use different documents with information. The information in one document may be similar to other documents. Referents can be the same or special relationships in the “Cold War” can just be figured out by the usage of different documents. So what we are really doing by learning and reasoning is that we integrate information on the base of different documents into a common situation model, which has got an organized order of the information we’ve learned.
We have seen that we need situation models in different tasks of language processing, but situation models are not needed in all tasks of language processing.
An example is proofreading. A proofreader checks every word for its correctness. This ability does not contain the ability to construct situation models. This task uses the resources of the long-term memory in which the correct writing of each word is stored. The procedure is like:
This is done word by word. It is unnecessary to create situation models in this task for language processing.
Very often, objects that are spatially close to us are more relevant than more distant objects. Therefore, one would expect the same for situation models. consistent with this idea, comprehenders are slower to recognise words denoting objects distant from a protagonist than those denoting objects close to the protagonist (Glenberg, Meyer & Lindem, 1987).
When comprehenders have extensive knowledge of the spatial layout of the setting of the story (e.g., a building), they update their representations according to the location and goals of the protagonist. They have the fastest mental access to the room that the protagonist is currently in or is heading to. For example, they can more readily say whether or not two objects are in the same room if the room mentioned is one of these rooms than if it is some other room in the building (e.g., Morrow, Greenspan, & Bower, 1987). This makes perfect sense intuitively because these are the rooms that would be relevant to us if we were in the situation.
People’s interpretation of the meaning of a verb denoting movement of people or objects in space, such as to approach, depends on their situation models. For example, comprehenders interpret the meaning of approach differently in  The tractor is just approaching the fence than in The mouse is just approaching the fence. Specifically, they interpret the distance between the figure and the landmark as being longer when the figure is large (tractor) compared with when it is small (mouse). The comprehenders’ interpretation also depends on the size of the landmark and the speed of the figure (Morrow & Clark, 1988). Apparently, comprehenders behave as if they are actually standing in the situation, looking at the tractor or mouse approaching a fence.
We assume by default that events are narrated in their chronological order, with nothing left out. Presumably this assumption exists because this is how we experience events in everyday life. Events occur to us in a continuous flow, sometimes in close succession, sometimes in parallel, and often partially overlapping. Language allows us to deviate from chronological order, however. For example, we can say, “Before the psychologist submitted the manuscript, the journal changed its policy.” The psychologist submitting the manuscript is reported first, even though it was the last of the two events to occur. If people construct a situation model, this sentence should be more difficult to process than its chronological counterpart (the same sentence, but beginning with “After”). Recent neuroscientific evidence supports this prediction. Event-related brain potential (ERP) measurements indicate that “before” sentences elicit, within 300 ms, greater negativity than “after” sentences. This difference in potential is primarily located in the left anterior part of the brain and is indicative of greater cognitive effort (Münte, Schiltz, & Kutas, 1998). In real life, events follow each other seamlessly. However, narratives can have temporal discontinuities, when writers omit events not relevant to the plot. Such temporal gaps, typically signalled by phrases such as a few days later, are quite common in narratives. Nonetheless, they present a departure from everyday experience. Therefore, time shifts should lead to (minor) disruptions of the comprehension process. And they do. Reading times for sentences that introduce a time shift tend to be longer than those for sentences that do not (Zwaan, 1996).
All other things being equal, events that happened just recently are more accessible to us than events that happened a while ago.
Thus, in a situation model, enter should be less accessible after An hour ago, John entered the building than after A moment ago, John entered the building.
Recent probe-word recognition experiments support this prediction (e.g., Zwaan, 1996).
As we interact with the environment, we have a strong tendency to interpret event sequences as causal sequences. It is important to note that, just as we infer the goals of a protagonist, we have to infer causality; we cannot perceive it directly. Singer and his colleagues (e.g., Singer, Halldorson, Lear, & Andrusiak, 1992) have investigated how readers use their world knowledge to validate causal connections between narrated events. Subjects read sentence pairs, such as 1a and then 1b or 1a’ and then 1b, and were subsequently presented with a question like 1c:
(1a) Mark poured the bucket of water on the bonfire.
(1a’) Mark placed the bucket of water by the bonfire.
(1b) The bonfire went out.
(1c) Does water extinguish fire?
Subjects were faster in responding to 1c after the sequence 1a-1b than after 1a’-1b. According to Singer, the reason for the speed difference is that the knowledge that water extinguishes fire was activated to validate the events described in 1a-1b. However, because this knowledge cannot be used to validate 1a’-1b, it was not activated when subjects read that sentence pair.
We are often able to predict people’s future actions by inferring their intentionality, i.e. their goals. For example, when we see a man walking over to a chair, we assume that he wants to sit, especially when he has been standing for a long time. Thus, we might generate the inference “He is going to sit.” Keefe and McDaniel (1993) presented subjects with sentences like After standing through the 3-hr debate, the tired speaker walked over to his chair (and sat down) and then with probe words (e.g., sat, in this case). Subjects took about the same amount of time to name sat when the clause about the speaker sitting down was omitted and when it was included. Moreover, naming times were significantly faster in both of these conditions than in a control condition in which it was implied that the speaker remained standing.
Comprehenders are quick to make inferences about protagonists, presumably in an attempt to construct a more complete situation model. Consider, for example, what happens after subjects read the sentence The electrician examined the light fitting. If the following sentence is She took out her screwdriver, their reading speed is slowed down compared with when the second sentence is He took out his screwdriver. This happens because she provides a mismatch with the stereotypical gender of an electrician, which the subjects apparently inferred while reading the first sentence (Carreiras, Garnham, Oakhill, & Cain, 1996).
Comprehenders also make inferences about the emotional states of characters.
For example, if we read a story about Paul, who wants his brother Luke to be good in baseball, the concept of “pride” becomes activated in our mind when we read
Thus, just as in real life, we make inferences about people’s emotions when we comprehend stories.
In the process of language and text comprehension new information has to be integrated into the current situation model. This is achieved by a processing framework. There are various theories and insights on this process. Most of them only model one or some aspects of Situation Models and language comprehension.
A list of theories, insights and developments in language comprehension frameworks:
Capacity Constraint Reader Model (Just, Carpenter, 1992)
Constructivist framework (Graesser, Singer, Trabasso, 1994)
Event Indexing Model (Zwaan, Langston, Graesser, 1995)
Landscape Model (van den Brock, Risden, Fletcher, & Thurlow, 1996)
Capacity-constrained construction-integration Model (Goldman, Varma, Coté, 1996)
The Immersed Experiencer Framework (Zwaan, 2003)
In this part of the chapter on Situation Models we will talk about several models; we will start with some of the early stuff and then go to the popular later ones. We will start with the work of Kintsch in the 70s and 80s and then go on to later research which is based on this.
This model was already developed in the 80s; it is the basis for many later models like the CI-Model, or even the Immersed-Experiencer Framework. According to Kintsch and van Dijk (1978), text comprehension proceeds in cycles. In every cycle a few propositions are processed, this number is determined by the capacity of the Short-Term Memory, so 7 plus or minus 2. In every cycle the new propositions are connected to existing ones, they therefore form a connected and hierarchical set.
This computational model from Miller and Kintsch tried to model earlier theories of comprehension, to make predictions according to these and compare them to behavioural studies and experiments. It consisted of several modules. One was a chunking program: It's task is to read in one word at the moment, identify if it is a proposition and decide whether to integrate it or not. This part of the model was not done computationally. The next part in the input order was the Microstructure Coherence Program (MCP). The MCP sorted the propositions and stored them in the Working Memory Coherence Graph. The task of the Working Memory Coherence Graph was then to decide which propositions should be kept active during the next processing cycle. All propositions are stored in the Long Term Memory Coherence Graph, this decided which propositions should be transferred back in to the Working Memory or it can construct a whole new Working Memory Graph with a different superordinate node. The problem with this Computational Model was that it show a really low performance. But still it led to further research which tried to overcome it's shortcomings.
The Event-Indexing Model was first proposed by Zwaan, Langston and Graesser (1995). It makes claims about how the incoming information in comprehension is processed and how it is represented in the long-term memory.
According to the Event-Indexing Model all incoming actions events are split into five indexes. The five indexes are the same as the five situational dimensions, though Zwaan & Radvasnky(1998) claim that there are possibly more dimensions. These might be found in future research. One basic point of this model is the processing time of integrating new events into the current model. It is easier to integrate a new incoming event if it shares indexes with a previous event. The more contiguous the new event is, the easier it is integrated into the new Situation Model. This prediction made by Zwaan & Radvanksy (1998) is supported by some prior research (Zwaan, Magliano and Graesser, 1995). The other important point of the Event-Indexing Model is the representation in long-term memory. Zwaan & Radvasnky (1998) predict that this representation is a network of nodes, these nodes encode the events. The nodes are linked with each other through situational links according to the indexes they share. This connection does not only encode if two nodes share indexes but it also encodes the number of shared indexes through its strength. This second point already hints what the Event-Indexing Model lacks. There are several things which it does not include. For example it does not encode the temporal order of the events nor the direction of the causal relationships. The biggest disadvantage of the Event-Indexing Model is clearly that it treats the different dimensions as different entities though they probably interact with each other.
Zwaan & Radvansky (1998) updated the Event-Indexing Model with some features. This new model splits the processed information into three types. These three types are the situational framework, the situational relations and the situational content. The situational framework grounds the situation in space and time, and its construction is obligatory. If no information is given this framework is probably built up by standard values retrieved from prior world knowledge or some empty variable would be instantiated.
The Immersed Experiencer Framework (IEF) is based on prior processing framework models (see above for a detailed list) but tries to include several other research findings too. For example it was found that during comprehension brain regions are activated, which are very close or even overlap with brain regions which are active during the perception or the action of the words meaning (Isenberg et al., 2000; Martin & Chao, 2001; Pulvermüller, 1999, 2002). During comprehension there is also a visual representation of shape and orientation of objects (Dahan & Tanenhaus, 2002; Stanfield & Zwaan, 2002; Zwaan et al., 2002; Zwaan & Yaxley, in press a, b). Visual-spatial information primes sentence processing (Boroditsky, 2000). These visual representations can interfer with the comprehension (Fincher-Kiefer, 2001). Findings from (Glenberg, Meyer, & Lindem, 1987; Kaup & Zwaan, in press; Morrow et al., 1987; Horton & Rapp, in press; Trabasso & Suh, 1993; Zwaan et al., 2000) suggest that information which is part of the situation and the text is more active in the reader's mind than information which is not included. The fourth research finding is that people move their eyes and hand during comprehension in a consistent way with the described the situation. (Glenberg & Kaschak, in press; Klatzky et al., 1989; Spivey et al., 2000).
The main point of the Immersed Experiencer Framework is the idea that words active experiences with their referents. For example "an eagle in the sky" activates a visual experience of a eagle with stretched-out wings while "an eagle in the nest" activates a different visual experience. According to Zwaan (2003) the IEF should be seen as an engine to make predictions about language comprehension. These predictions are then suggested for further research.
According to the IEF the process of language comprehension consists of three components, these are activation, construal and integration. Each component works at a different level. Activation works at the world level, construal is responsible for the clause level while integration is active at the discourse level. Though the IEF shares many points with earlier models of language comprehension it differs in some main points. For example it suggests that language comprehension involves action and perceptual representations and not amodal propositions (Zwaan, 2003).
Levels of Representation in Language and Text Comprehension
A lot of theories try to explain the situation model or so called mental model in different representations. Several theories of the representation deal with the comprehension from the text into the situation model itself. How many levels are included or needed and how is the situation model constructed, is it done by once like:
Sentence → Situation Model
Or are there levels in between which have to be passed until the model is constructed?
Here are three different representations shown which try to explain the construction of the situation model by a text.
The propositional Representation claims that a sentence will be structured in another way and then it is stored. Included information does not get lost. We will have a look at the simple sentence:
“George loves Sally”   the propositional representation is [LOVES(GEORGE, SALLY)]
It is easy to see that the propositional representation is easy to create and the information is still available.
This theory says that there exist three levels of representation the surface form, text base and the situation model. In this example the sentence “The frog ate the bug.” Is already the surface form. We naturally create semantically relations to understand the sentence (semantic tree in the figure). The next level is the “Text base”. [EAT(FROG, BUG)] is the propositional representation and Text base is close to this kind of representation, except that it is rather spatial. Finally the situation model is constructed by the “Text base” representation. We can see that the situation model does not include any kind of text. It is a mental picture of information in the sentence itself.
This theory is like the “three levels of representations” theory. But the “Text base” level is left out. The theory itself claims that the situation model is created by the sentence itself and there is no “Text base” level needed.
Further situation model theories directing experiences exist. So not only text comprehension is done by situation models, learning through direct experience is handled by situation models, too.
A unified model by "Prof. Dr." Schmalhofer
One unified model the so called KIWi-Model tries to explain how text representation and direct experience interact with a situation model. Additionally the domain knowledge is integrated. The domain knowledge is used by forming a situation model in different tasks like simple sentence comprehension (chapter: Why do we need Situation Models).
The KIWi-Model shows that a permanent interaction between “text representation → situation model” and between “sensory encoding → situation model” exists. These interactions supports the theory of a permanent updating of the mental model.
Inferencing is used to build up complex situation models with limited information. For example: in 1973 John Bransford and Marcia Johnson made a memory experiment in which they had two groups reading variations of the same sentence.
The first group read the text "John was trying to fix the bird house. He was pounding the nail when his father came out to watch him do the work"
The second group read the text "John was trying to fix the bird house. He was looking for the nail when his father came out to watch him do the work"
After reading, some test statements were presented to the participants. These statements contained the word hammer which did not occur in the original sentences, e.g.: "John was using a hammer to fix the birdhouse. He was looking for the nail when his father came out to watch him". Participants of the first group said they had seen 57% of the test statements, while the participants from the second group had seen only 20% of the test statements.
As one can see, in the first group there is a tendency of believing to have seen the word hammer. The participants of this group made the inference, that John used a hammer to pound the nail. This memory influence test is good example to get an idea what is meant by making inferences and how they are used to complete situation models.
While reading a text, inferencing creates information which is not explicitly stated in the text; hence it is a creative process. It is very important for text understanding in general, because texts cannot include all information needed to understand the sense of a story. Texts usually leave out what is known as world knowledge. World knowledge is knowledge about situations, persons or items that most people share, and therefore don't need to be explicitly stated. Each person should be able to infer this kind of information, as for example that we usually use hammers to pound nails. It would be impossible to write a text, if it had to include all information it deals with; if there was no such thing like inferencing or if it was not automatically done by our brain.
There is a number of different kinds of inferences:
This kind of Inferencing usually connects objects or persons from one to another sentence. Therefore it is responsible for connecting cross-sentence information. E.g. in "John hit the nail. He was proud of his stroke", we directly infer that "he" and "his" relate to "John". We normally make this kind of inference quite easily. But there can be sentences where more persons and other words relating to them are mixed up and people have problems understanding the story at first. This is normally regarded as bad writing style.
This type of Inference is about the tools and the methods used in the text, like the hammer in the example above. Or for example, if you read about somebody flying to New York, you would not infer that this person has built a dragon-flyer and jumped off a cliff but that he or she used a plane, since there is nothing else mentioned in the text and a plane is the most common form of flying to New York. If there is no specific information about tools, instruments and methods, we get this information from our General World Knowledge
Causal Inference is the conclusion that one event caused another in the text, like in "He hit his nail. So his finger ached". The first sentence gives the reason why the situation described in the second sentence came to be. It would be more difficult to draw a causal inference in an example like "He hit his nail. So his father ran away", although one could create an inference on this with some fantasy.
Causal inferences create causal connections between text elements. These connections are separated into local connections and global connections. Local connections are made within a range of 1 to 3 sentences. This depends on factors like the capacity of the working memory and the concentration due reading. Global connections are drawn between the information in one sentence together with the background information gathered so far about the whole text. Problems can occur with Causal Inferences when a story is inconsistent. For example, vegans eating steak would be inconsistent. An interesting fact about Causal Inferences (Goldstein, 2005) is that the kind of Inferences we draw here that are not easily seen at first are easier to remember. This may be due to the fact that they required a higher mental processing capacity while drawing the inference. So this "not-so-easy" inference seems to be marked in a way that it is easier to remember it.
Predictive/Forward Inferences uses the General World Knowledge of the reader to build his prediction of the consequences of what is currently happening in the story into the Situation Model.
The question how models enter inferential processes is highly controversial in the two disciplines of cognitive psychology and artificial intelligence. A.I. gave a deep insight in psychological procedures and since the two disciplines crossed their ways and give two main bases of the cognitive science. The arguments in these are largely independent from each other although they have much in common.
Johnson-Laird (1983) makes a distinction between three types of reasoning-theories in which inferencing plays an important role. The first class gears to logical calculi and have been implemented in many formal system. The programming language Prolog arises from this way of dealing with reasoning and in psychology many theories postulate formal rules of inference, a "mental logic." These rules work in a purely syntactic way and so are "context free," blind for the context of its content.
A simple example clarifies the problem with this type of theory:
If patients have cystitis, then they are given penicillin.
If patients have cystitis and are allergic to penicillin, then they are given penicillin
This is logically correct, but seems to fail our common sense of logic.
The second class of theories postulate content specific rules of inference. Their origin lies in programming languages and production systems. They work with forms like "If x is a, then x is b". If one wants to show that x is b, showing that x is a sub-goal of this argumentation. The idea of basing psychological theories of reasoning on content specific rules was discussed by Johnson-Laird and Wason and various sorts of such theories have been proposed. A related idea is that reasoning depends on the accumulation of specific examples within a connectionist framework, where the distinction between inference and recall is blurred.
The third class of theories is based on mental models and does not use any rules of inferencing. The process of building mental models of things heard or read. The models are in an permanent change of updates. A model built, will be equipped with new features of the new information as long as there is no information, which generates a conflict with that model. If this is the case the model is generally re-built, so that the conflict generating information fits into the new model.
According to many researchers, language is the set of processing instructions on how to build up the Situation Model of the represented situation (Gernsbacher, 1990; Givon, 1992; Kintsch, 1992; Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998). As mentioned, readers use the lexical cues and information to connect the different situational dimensions and integrate them into the model. Another important point here is prior world knowledge. World knowledge also influences how the different information in a situation model are related. The relation between linguistic cues and world knowledge is therefore an important topic of current and future research in the area of Situation Models.
Another important aspect of current research in the area of Situation Models is the Multidimensionality of the Models. The main aspect is here how the different dimensions relate to each other, how they influence and interact. The question here is also if they interact at all and which interact. Most studies in the field were only about one or a few of the situational dimensions.
Ashwin Ram, et al. (1999) Understanding Language Understanding - chapter 5
Baggett, P. (1979). Structurally equivalent stories in movie and text and the effect of the medium on recall. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18, 333-356.
Bertram F. Malle, et al. (2001) Intentions and Intentionality - chapter 9
Boroditsky, L. (2000). Metaphoric Structuring: Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition, 75, 1-28.
Carlson-Radvansky, L. A., & Radvansky, G. A. (1996). The influence of functional relations on spatial term selection. Psychological Science, 7, 56-60.
Carreiras, M., et al. (1996). The use of stereotypical gender information in constructing a mental model: Evidence from English and Spanish. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 49A, 639-663.
Dahan, D., & Tanenhaus, M.K. (2002). Activation of conceptual representations during
Ericsson, K. A., & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term working memory. Psychological Review, 102, 211-245.
Farah, M. J., & McClelland, J. L. (1991). A computational model of semantic memory
Psychology: General, 210, 339-357.
Fincher-Kiefer (2001). Perceptual components of situation models. Memory & Cognition,
29 , 336-343.
Fincher-Kiefer, R., et al. (1988). On the role of prior knowledge and task demands in the processing of text. Journal of Memory and Language, 27, 416-428.
Garrod, S. C., & Sanford, A. J. (1989). Discourse models as interfaces between language and the spatial world. Journal of Semantics, 6, 147-160.
Gernsbacher, M.A. (1990), Language comprehension as structure building. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Glenberg, A. M., & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding language in action. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 9, 558-565.
Glenberg, A. M., et al. (1987) Mental models contribute to
Givon, T. (1992), The grammar of referential coherence as mental processing instructions, Linguistics, 30, 5-55.
Goldman, S.R., et al. (1996). Extending capacityconstrained construction integration: Towards "smarter" and flexible
Goldstein, E.Bruce, Cognitive Psychology, Connecting Mind, Research, and Everyday Experience (2005) -  ISBN 0-534-57732-6.
Graesser, A. C., Singer, M., & Trabasso, T. (1994), Constructing inferences during narrative text comprehension. Psychological Review, 101, 371-395.
Holland, John H. , et al. (1986) Induction.
Horton, W.S., Rapp, D.N. (in press). Occlusion and the Accessibility of Information in
Narrative Comprehension. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
Isenberg, N., et al. (1999). Linguistic threat activates the human amygdala. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 96, 10456-10459.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models: Towards a cognitive science of language, inference, and consciousness. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
John R. Koza, et al. (1996) Genetic Programming
Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1992). A capacity hypothesis of comprehension: Individual differences ih working memory. Psychological Review, 99, 122-149.
Kaup, B., & Zwaan, R.A. (in press). Effects of negation and situational presence on the
Cognition.
Keefe, D. E., & McDaniel, M. A. (1993). The time course and durability of predictive inferences. Journal of Memory and Language, 32, 446-463.
Kintsch, W. (1988), The role of knowledge in discourse comprehension: A construction-integration model, Psychological Review, 95, 163-182.
Kintsch, W., & van Dijk, T. A. (1978), Toward a model of text comprehension and production, Psychological Review, 85, 363-394.
Kintsch, W. (1992), How readers construct situation models for stories: The role of syntactic cues and causal inferences. In A. E Healy, S. M. Kosslyn, & R. M. Shiffrin (Eds.), From learning processes to cognitive processes. Essays in honor of William K. Estes (Vol. 2, pp. 261 – 278).
Klatzky, R.L., et al. (1989). Can you squeeze a
Martin, A., & Chao, L. L. (2001). Semantic memory and the brain: structure and processes.
McRae, K., et al. (1997). On the nature and scope of featural
Mehler, Jacques, & Franck, Susana. (1995) Cognition on Cognition - chapter 9
The dissociation of color from form and function knowledge. Nature Neuroscience, 4, 662-667.
Morrow, D., et al. (1987). Accessibility and situation models in narrative comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language, 26, 165-187.
Pulvermüller, F. (1999). Words in the brain's language. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22,
253-270.
Pulvermüller, F. (2002). A brain perspective on language mechanisms: from discrete
Radvansky, G. A., & Zwaan, R.A. (1998). Situation models.
Schmalhofer, F., MacDaniel, D. Keefe (2002). A Unified Model for Predictive and Bridging Inferences
Schneider, W., & Körkel, J. (1989). The knowledge base and text recall: Evidence from a short-term longitudinal study. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 14, 382-393.
Singer, M., et al. (1992). Validation of causal bridging inferences. Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 507-524.
Spivey, M.J., et al. (2000). Eye movements during
Stanfield, R.A. & Zwaan, R.A. (2001). The effect of implied orientation derived from
Van Dijk, T. A., and W. Kintsch. (1983).Strategies of discourse comprehension.
Yekovich, F.R., et al. (1990). The influence of domain knowledge on inferencing in low-aptitude individuals. In A. C. Graesser & G. H. Bower (Eds.), The psychology of learning and motivation (Vol. 25, pp. 175–196). New York: Academic Press.
Zwaan, R.A. (1996). Processing narrative time shifts. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 22, 1196-1207
Zwaan, R.A. (2003), The Immersed Experiencer: Toward an embodied theory of language comprehension.B.H. Ross (Ed.) The Psychology of Learning and Motivation, Vol. 44. New York: Academic Press.
Zwaan, R. A., et al. (1998). Situation-model construction during translation. Manuscript in preparation, Florida State University.
Zwaan, R. A., et al. ( 1995 ). The construction of situation models in narrative comprehension: An event-indexing model. Psychological Science, 6, 292-297.
Zwaan, R. A., et al. (1995). Dimensions of situation model construction in narrative comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology." Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 386-397.
Zwaan, R. A., Radvansky (1998), Situation Models in Language Comprehension and Memory. in Psychological Bulletin, Vol.123,No2 p. 162-185.
Zwaan, R.A., et al. (2002). Do language comprehenders routinely
Zwaan, R.A., & Yaxley, R.H. (a). Spatial iconicity affects semantic-relatedness
Zwaan, R.A., & Yaxley, R.H. (b). Hemispheric differences in semantic-relatedness
Cognitive Psychology Osnabrück
Summer School course on Situation Models and Embodied Language Processes
Dr. Rolf A. Zwaan's Homepage with many Papers
International Hanse-Conference on Higher level language processes in the brain: Inference and Comprehension Processes 2003
University of Notre Dame Situation Model Research Group
Gramatically, there are different ways of classifying Spanish verb forms (as well as the verbs of any language). The one most people understand is "tense", but another very important classification is the "mood." A "mood" is differentiated from a "tense" in that it does not express time per se (which is what "tense" really means). Unfortunately, "mood" is not really a very good name either because moods do not express moods of the speaker (happy, sad, etc.) The mood is used to classify how the verb is used grammatically in the sentence; that is, how the verb usage works together with the other parts of the sentence. Spanish has the following verb moods:
Indicative (indicativo): Used to express statements of fact as the main verb of a clause
Participial (participio, gerundio): Used to convert a verb into a noun or adjective to express not actions but rather qualities or objects related to the verb
Conditional (potencial): Used together with other clauses to indicate a potential fact.
Subjunctive (subjuntivo): Used together with a main clause to indicate that the subordinate clause is somehow under discussion (mooted).
Imperative (imperativo): Used to express a direct command.
In many cases, along with the name of the mood also goes a tense. A given form of a verb normally has both mood and tense, although when the mood is indicative usually the name of the mood is not stated. This is one thing that makes the concept of moods hard to understand. When we talk about the "present tense" of a verb, we really should say "indicative mood, present tense". This would make it clear that when we say "subjunctive mood, present tense" we're not dealing with anything particularly strange, only a little different.
Spanish | Verbs | Verbs List
The Heroes quest requires 55 quest points and allows access to the Hero's Guild upon completion. Your reward for completing Heroes Quest is the right to use Dragon Mace and Dragon Battle Axe. Heroes requires two people to complete this quest.
Observe: is simply experiencing with awareness your feelings, your thoughts, and sensations directly without the use of words.
The ability to observe yourself requires an ability to step back from yourself.  This process of stepping back, also called Teflon Mind, is a way to re-orient to the present moment.  Teflon mind is based on the idea of the non-stick cooking surface to which food does not stick.  Teflon Mind allows you to not get stuck.
Preoccupation, rumination, and distraction are some of the ways people get stuck.  Observe is important because it helps you become like a blank slate upon which you can write.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
Statements that fall within the traditional categories of hearsay exceptions are presumptively admissible. They can nevertheless be challenged under the principles of necessity and reliability.
The traditional categories of exceptions consist of the following:
Where the statement is an admission by an accused person
When the statement is made against the declarator's interest
When the statement is part of a public or governmental document
Statements made when the declarator was in a state of shock or surprise (Res Gestae)
Statements describing the declarator's physical or psychological condition
Statement conveys "state of mind"
Statement conveys "present intentions"
Statement is part of the narrative of the evidence
R v Starr [2000] 2 SCR 144
R v Mapara 2005 SCC 23 [1]
Generally, admission include “any statement made by a declarant and tendered as evidence at trial by the opposing party.”[1]
Any admission by an accused is admissible as provided that its probative value outweighs its prejudicial effect. [2]
Admission made by the accused as well as statements adopted by the accused in an intercepted communication is admissible as a hearsay exception.[3]
↑ R. v. Violette, [2008]  B.C.J. No. 2781(S.C.) at 63
↑ R. v. Terry, [1996] S.C.J. No. 62 at 28
↑ R v Violette  [2008]  B.C.J. No. 2781(S.C.) at 65
A categorical exception to the hearsay rule is where the accused adopts a hearsay statement by words, conduct, action or demeanor.[1]
The exception involves two elements:[2]
The inference should only be drawn where it is a sufficient “foundation” to so as to reasonably infer that the accused intended to accept “the statement as to make it in whole or in part his own”
A speculative interference based on ambiguous conduct is not sufficient to fit the exception. [5]
A foundation requires at a minimum that:[6]:
Mere presence of the accused at the time of the statement is not sufficient to prove an adoption of the statement.[7]
Instructions to the jury on the issue of whether the accused agreed to the statement should include informing the jury the following:[8]
“if in their view the accused did not assent [...] to the correctness of the statements made in his presence, these statements would have no evidentiary value [...] and should be entirely disregarded”
↑ R v Stein, [1928] SCR 553 at 558 (“It is only when the accused by "word or conduct, action or demeanour" has accepted what they contain, and to the extent that he does so, that statements made by other persons in his presence have any evidentiary value …”)
↑ R v Harrison, [1946] 3 DLR 690, 62 BCR 420 at 430 (BCCA)
↑ R. v. Briscoe, 2012 ABQB 158, a nod in response to an utterance of “I helped with [a murder]”
↑ R v Tanasichuk, 2007 NBCA 76 at para 110
R. v. Tanasichuk, 2007 NBCA 76 (CanLII)
Where a witness has testified that he cannot recall core details of a statements made but that she told the truth whenever speaking to them.  The Court may admit the notes or document if it is satisfied that they meet the Wigmore criteria:
Counsel can then asks the record to be put in as an exhibit.
An example would be where asking a witness to recall a licence plate number that they observed and wrote down in a statement. This statement or note would have been made at a time when the information was fresh in their mind and they made an effort to be accurate.
The witness will be asked about whether they recall the licence plate number. Often they will not recall the number by heart, this will prompt a request to introduce past recollection recorded. Counsel should go through questions establishing the lack of memory; the existence of the record; the circumstances of its creation; and the accuracy of its contents.
R. v. Meddoui, 1990 CanLII 2592 (AB CA)[4]
R. v. Wilks, 2005 MBCA 99 [5]
c.f. present memory revived
R. v. McCarroll, 2008 ONCA 715 - sets out four key critera(CanLII)
A statement of a declarant can be adduced into evidence as a hearsay exception where it explicitly declares the state of mind of the declarant.
Where the declaration can infer the state of mind, it is also admissible but not as a hearsay exception, but rather as circumstantial evidence inferring the state of mind.[2]
↑ R. v. Candir, 2009 ONCA 915, at para. 56 [6]
↑ supra.
Spontaneous or excited utterances are a class of exception to the hearsay rule. An utterance falls in this category where the evidence can characterize it as being a spontaneous exclamation made without premeditation or artifice and before the speaker had time to concoct something.[1]
It has been characterized as words that are contemporanous with some action. Statements are admitted at times as "words brigaded to action".[2]
Requirements to the exception usually include:[3]
The utterance does not need to be strictly contemporaneous "so long as the stress or pressure created by it is ongoing".[4]
R. v. Magloir 2003 NSCA 74
R. v. Slugoski, [1985] BCJ 1835
R. v. Khan, (1988), 42 C.C.C. (3d) 197 at p. 207, aff'd on other grounds 1990 CanLII 77 (SCC), [1990] 2 S.C.R. 531
↑ R. v. Ly (1996), 193 A.R. 149; [1996] A.J. No. 1089 (C.A.) at para. 3
↑  R. v. Hamilton, 2011 NSSC 305 at para. 20
↑ See R. v. Khan, (1988), 42 C.C.C. (3d) 197 at p. 207, aff'd on other grounds 1990 CanLII 77 (SCC), [1990] 2 S.C.R. 531
The co-conspirators' exception to hearsay permits the admission of out-of-court statements made by a co-conspirator.
This exception is not limited or obsolete despite the overlap with the principled approach.[2]
The availability of the co-conspirator is not determinative of whether the exception applies.[3]
↑ See R. v. Carter, 1982 CanLII 35 (SCC), [1982] 1 S.C.R. 938
R. v. Mapara, 2005 SCC 23 (CanLII), [2005] 1 SCR 358 at para. 8 (“Statements made by a person engaged in an unlawful conspiracy are receivable as admissions as against all those acting in concert if the declarations were made while the conspiracy was ongoing and were made towards the accomplishment of the common object”
R. v. N.Y., 2012 ONCA 745 (CanLII)
Dying declaration: A statement made by a person who is certain they are about to die
Must be made when the speaker has lost all hope of living
Must be directed at cause of the death
Similar to state of mind exception, it is permissible to admit statements of a witnesses' future intentions.[1]
↑  Chang 2003 173 CCC 3d 397
See Canadian Criminal Evidence/Documentary_evidence#Admissibility_of_Specific_Types_of_Documents
A record is admissible as hearsay where it is a business record. A business record is a record that is required to kept accurate as part of the normal course of business. The document can be admitted under the Canada Evidence Act or common law.
See Canadian Criminal Evidence/Documentary_evidence#Business_Records -- R v Wilcox 2001 NSCA 45
Documents that are found to be in actual or constructive possession of the accused may be admitted as hearsay. The documents can be used to show knowledge, participation, or state of mind. [1]
Documents in possession are admissible for the truth of its contents where the accused has shown “recognition, adoption or acting upon the documents“[2]
↑ See R v Wood 2001 NSCA 38 at 30
R. v. McCullough, 2001 SKQB 449
Strictly speaking, narrative is not a traditional hearsay exception, and is not fully hearsay at all since it is not being proffered for the truth of its contents.
It is admissible on the basis that it provides context and greater understanding to the trier of fact of the details of the investigation. It is often useful in sexual assault cases in order to determine credibility.
See R v Assoun, 2006 NSCA 47
In the context of recorded phone calls, the “nature of the business” of the calls is not hearsay.[1]
↑  R. v. Williams, [2009] B.C.J. No. 1518
Under s. 715 [7], evidence from either a previous trial or preliminary inquiry may be admitted into evidence where the witness refuses to testify, is dead, is physically or mentally ill, or is out of the country.[1]
It must be proven that the evidence was taken in front of the accused. If so, it is admissible unless the accused didn't have full opportunity to cross examine.[2] There is an exception to this rule under s.715(2.1), where the accused was excused under s. 537(1)(j.1)
See R v Alcantara, 2012 ABQB 219[3]
↑ See also R. v. Potvin, [1989] 1 SCR 525
Video Statement of Under 18 Year Old
Witnesses under the age of 18 who give video-taped statements shortly after the alleged incident may have their statements put in for the truth of their contents under s. 715.1 where the witness is able to adopt the statement in court. Once a video statement is admitted under s.715.1, the absence of the ability to cross-examine the witness only goes to the weight of the evidence and cannot be used to argue its admissibility.[1]
Section 715.1 states:
Evidence of victim or witness under 18
715.1 (1) In any proceeding against an accused in which a victim or other witness was under the age of eighteen years at the time the offence is alleged to have been committed, a video recording made within a reasonable time after the alleged offence, in which the victim or witness describes the acts complained of, is admissible in evidence if the victim or witness, while testifying, adopts the contents of the video recording, unless the presiding judge or justice is of the opinion that admission of the video recording in evidence would interfere with the proper administration of justice.
(2) The presiding judge or justice may prohibit any other use of a video recording referred to in subsection (1).
R.S., 1985, c. 19 (3rd Supp.), s. 16; 1997, c. 16, s. 7; 2005, c. 32, s. 23.
This section was found to not violate section 11(b) and 7 of the Charter on account that the discretion remains with the judge.[2]
Factors to consider include:[3]
The form of questions used by any other person appearing in the videotaped statement;
↑ R. v. R.G.B., 2012 MBCA 5 at 42
↑ R. v. L. (D.O.), [1993] 4 SCR 419 at 463; R. v. F. (C.C.), [1997] 3 SCR 1183
An exception to hearsay is the "voluminous document exception" first outlined by Wigmore.
According to Wigmore, the exception applies where:[1]
a competent witness has examined the documents and summarized them; and
Where the criteria are met, the summary can be admitted without putting in the original records as evidence.[2]
The exception is not applicable where the work product "involve[s] interpretations that may be the subject of legitimate debate".[3]
See also Canadian Criminal Evidence/Documentary Evidence#Summaries of Voluminous Documents
R. v. Agyei, [2007] O.J. No. 3914 at para 26
R. v. Lee, 2011 NSPC 5 (CanLII) at 20
R. v. George, [1993] A.J. No. 798 (Alta. P.C.)
Graph of x = aebt, where b is positive.
Many things are governed by exponential relationships. The exponential relationships which we shall be dealing with are of the following form:
The inverse function of et is the natural logarithm, denoted ln t:
Graph of x = e-bt, showing several different values of b.
When b is positive, an exponential function increases rapidly. This represents the growth of certain variables very well. When b is negative, an exponential function decreases, flattening out as it approaches the t axis. This represents the decay of certain variables.
An exponential relationship occurs when the rate of change of a variable depends on the value of the variable itself. You should memorise this definition, as well as understand it. Let us consider some examples:
A petri dish with bacteria growing on it.
Consider a Petri dish full of agar jelly (food for bacteria) with a few bacteria on it. These bacteria will reproduce, and so, as time goes by, the number of bacteria on the jelly will increase. However, each bacterium does not care about whether there are other bacteria around or not. It will continue making more bacteria at the same rate. Therefore, as the total number of bacteria increases, their rate of reproduction increases. This is an exponential relationship with a positive value of b.
Of course, this model is flawed since, in reality, the bacteria will eventually have eaten all the agar jelly, and so the relationship will stop being exponential.
If you fill a large tank with water, and make a hole in the bottom, at first, the water will flow out very fast. However, as the tank empties, the pressure of the water will decrease, and so the rate of flow will decrease. The rate of change of the amount of water in the tank depends on the amount of water in the tank. This is an exponential relationship with a negative value of b - it is an exponential decay.
A hot object cools down faster than a warm object. So, as an object cools, the rate at which temperature 'flows' out of it into its surroundings will decrease. Newton expressed this as an exponential relationship (known as Newton's Law of Cooling):
We have already said that an exponential relationship occurs when the rate of change of a variable depends on the value of the variable itself. If we translate this into algebra, we get the following:
(where c is the constant of integration)
Simplify Newton's Law of Cooling for the case when I place a warm object in a large tank of water which is on the point of freezing. Measure temperature in °C.
What will the temperature of an object at 40 °C be after 30 seconds? (Take r=10−3 s−1.)
A body is found in a library (as per Agatha Christie) at 8am. The temperature of the library is kept at a constant temperature of 20 °C for 10 minutes. During these 10 minutes, the body cools from 25 °C to 24 °C. The body temperature of a healthy human being is 36.8 °C. At what time was the person murdered?
Suppose for a moment that the number of pages on Wikibooks p can be modelled as an exponential relationship. Let the number of pages required on average to attract an editor be a, and the average number of new pages created by an editor each year be z. Derive an equation expressing p in terms of the time in years since Wikibooks was created t.
Wikibooks was created in mid-2003. How many pages should there have been 6 years later? (Take a = 20, z = 10 yr−1.)
The actual number of pages in Wikibooks in mid-2009 was 35,148. What are the problems with this model? What problems may develop, say, by 2103?
Shacha is a Chaozhou sauce. It is transformed from satay but added other ingredients such as fish and dried shrimp.
Guides for MeGUI.
Basic Guide  - to learn the basics of this program. (Slightly outdated)
iPod Conversion Guide  - for encoding iPod compatible files.
HDTV Transcoding Guide  - a more advanced conversion walkthrough for digital TV caps. (Slightly outdated)
Berrinam's guide is an introduction to automated encoding with MeGUI, with both AutoEncode and One Click Encoder modes. (Very outdated!)
Scope: This Wikibook aims to teach the Spanish language from scratch. It will cover all of the major grammar rules, moving slowly and offering exercises and plenty of examples. It's not all grammar though, as it offers vocabulary and phrases too, appealing to all learners.
Purpose: The purpose of this Wikibook is to teach you the Spanish language in an easy and accessible way. By the end, you should be able to read and write Spanish skillfully, though you'll need a human to help with listening and speaking.
Audience: Anyone who wishes to learn Spanish, though adult and teenage learners are likely to enjoy it more.
Organization: This Wikibook requires no prior knowledge of the subject, and all relevant terms are explained as they are encountered. The book runs chronologically from lesson 1 to lesson 2 to lesson 3 and so on until the end.
Narrative: Generally engaging and thorough, with plenty of examples and exercises to aid learning. Once concepts are introduced, they are repeated, building a base of vocabulary and grammar that will stay in your mind.
Style: This book is written in British English, and the Spanish taught is generally Iberian Spanish (sometimes called Castellano in Spain), though key Latin American differences are explained as we go along. The formatting is consistent throughout, with Spanish in italics and all tables using the same formatting. Each lesson begins with a conversation, including the key grammar and vocabulary in the lesson. At the end, there is a summary, explaining what has been achieved. Exercises are linked throughout, and each new concept or set of vocabulary is accompanied by examples, each with a translation underneath.
You are about to embark on a course learning another language, the Spanish language!
The first lesson begins with simple greetings and covers important ideas of Spanish. Throughout education, methods of teaching Spanish have changed greatly. Years ago, the Spanish language was taught simply by memory. Today, however, it is taught by moving slowly and covering grammar and spelling rules.
Again, this is an introduction. If this is the first time you are attempting to learn Spanish, do not become discouraged if you cannot understand, pronounce, or memorize some of the things discussed here.
In addition, learning a second language requires a basic understanding of your own language. You may find, as you study Spanish, that you learn a lot about English as well. At their core, all languages share some simple components like verbs, nouns, adjectives, and plurals.  Your first language comes naturally to you and you don't think about things like subject–verb agreement, verb conjugation, or usage of the various tenses; yet, you use these concepts on a daily basis.
While English is described as a very complicated language to learn, many of the distinguishing grammar structures have been simplified over the years.  This is not true for many other languages.  Following the grammatical conventions of Spanish will be very important, and can actually change the meaning of phrases.  You'll see what is meant by this as you learn your first verbs estar and ser.
Do not become discouraged!  You can do it.
This handbook is intended to provide guidance on the process required to obtain a special certificate of airworthiness for aircraft in the amateur-built category in Canada. In a nut shell, it documents the documentation process. This is probably the least fun part of building a plane and the most difficult to follow.
In order to better understand all of the processes involved, it's good to get an understanding of where they all come from.
It all starts with Transport Canada.  The following quotes are directly from the Transport Canada Web Site.
"Transport Canada is responsible for transportation policies and programs. It ensures that air, marine, road and rail transportation are safe, secure, efficient and environmentally responsible."
"Transport Canada reports to Parliament and Canadians through the minister of Transportation, Infrastructure and Communities"
Clearly Transport Canada is the Federal Department responsible for air transportation. Transport Canada gets its authority from the Aeronautics Act.  The "Aeronautics Act", Section 4.9 provides the Governor in Council with the ability to make regulations respecting aeronautics and in particular, respecting "the design, manufacture, distribution, maintenance, approval, installation, inspection, registration, licensing, identification and certification of aeronautical products."
The "Canadian Aviation Regulations" (CARs) are regulations created under the Aeronautics Act.  CAR section 507.03 contains the provisions for the issuance of a "Special Certificate of Airworthiness" for amateur-built aircraft. In order to qualify for a Special Certificate of Airworthiness - Amateur-built, the aircraft must meet the criteria found in "Standard 507 - Flight Authority and Certification of Noise Compliance". Appendix D of standard 507 contains the initial standard operating conditions for amateur-built aircraft.
Section 549.01 of the "Canadian Aviation Regulations" contains the requirements for a person who intends to construct an aircraft and obtain a special certificate of airworthiness in the amateur-built category.
Despite the above regulations, there is currently an exemption, issued by the Minister of Transportation, Infrastructure and Communities, which exempts a person applying for special certificate of airworthiness in the amateur-built classification from the requirements of CARs section 549.01 and Chapter 549 of the Airworthiness Manual.  The exemption includes an appendix A which lays out the standards of design and construction for amateur-built aircraft.  The contents of appendix A are similar to the contents of Chapter 549.
MD-RA is short for Minister's Delegate Recreational Aviation. What is this? The Aeronautics Act section 4.3 allows the Minister to authorized any person or class of persons to exercise any powers, duties or functions of the Minister under the Act.  There are some restrictions, but essentially, the Minister can delegate responsibility. An MD-RA Inspector is a person has been delegated by the Minister to perform inspections on aircraft under construction and, upon completion, issue the initial Special Certificate of Airworthiness and a restricted flight authority. MD-RA Inspection services has a website and co-ordinates the work of the MD-RA inspectors.
The exemption from section 549.01 of the CARs and chapter 549 of the Airworthiness Manual - Airworthiness Standards - Amateur-built Aircraft defines the procedures that must be followed.
Appendix A Part I contains the following requirements:
Inform the Minister of the intention to construct the aircraft.
Identify himself or herself as the builder.
Show that the aircraft design meets the requirements of this standard
Confirm that the major portion of the aircraft will be constructed or assembled individually, as a unique project
Have the aircraft inspected during construction so that enclosed areas that will not be accessible after final assembly can be inspected
Have the aircraft inspected when it is fully assembled and equipped, but before the first flight, at the site of the planned test flight.
The first step before building is to file a letter of intent.  A blank Letter of Intent form can be obtained from the MD-RA website.
On the letter of intent you fill in your personel information and the make, model and serial number for the aircraft.  Next you indicate the construction materials by checking off the appropriate boxes.
If you are building your own design or building only from plans you check the appropriate box.  If you are building a kit you need to indicate if the major portion of the aircraft (more than 50%) is fabricated from raw material and assembled by an individual or group of individuals.  This is a requirement of the Airworthiness Manual Chapter 549 (549.5).  Transport Canada maintains a link on their website which points to the FAA list of approved kits.
If your kit isn't listed the inspector will complete the 51% checklist that is available from the MD-RA website while at your shop.  You must meet the major portion rule or your project cannot be registered as an amateur built aircraft.
If you have purchased the project from someone other than the original supplier of the kit or plans, you must provide a bill of sale or a release signed by the vendor giving the MD-RA permission to release information to the new purchaser.  Make sure the make, model and serial number a clearly indicated.
Finally, fill in the payment information and mail or fax the letter of intent to the MD-RA Inspection Service:
London, ON  N5V 3Z9
It may also be possible to email the a scan of the signed form to md-ra@md-ra.com but I would suggest calling them first.
You can now start work on your project.
The newer flag semaphore system uses two short poles with square flags, which a flagperson holds in different positions to signal letters of the alphabet and numbers. The flagperson holds one pole in each hand, and extends each arm in one of eight possible directions. Except for in the rest position, the flags cannot overlap. The flags are colored differently based on whether the signals are sent by sea or by land. At sea, the flags are colored red and yellow. While on land, they are red and white.
The following semaphore characters are presented as one would face the signalman (in other words, pretend you can see the signalman's face in the illustrations).  The letters almost follow a perfect, regular pattern, but don't be fooled by the first several.  J, V, and Y break the pattern.  We present them here in alphabetical order, and then again by position in a series of circles.
When you are first learning semaphores, a good Bible text to practice with is Philippians 4:8, as it repeats the phrase "whatever is" several times.  Since it is so repetitive, You should be able to quickly signal the "whatever is" portion to get your speed up.  This verse contains all the letters of the alphabet except j, q, and z which can be learned afterwards.
Learn some landmark letters first and commit them to memory.  Groups of related letters are a good choice.  For example, these three make straight lines:
These four are made by holding the flags 90° to one another, but all are at 45° to the signaler:
These four are made by holding the flags 45° apart:
Most of these are fairly common letters (except for X), so knowing them will allow you to spell the better part of most words.  Add an A and an S to the mix:
Files using the file ending suffix ".yaws" will be processed by Yaws dynamic compiler where embedded Erlang code can be written amongst the HTML, as such:
An inductor is a device made from a wire conductor with several turns.  This device generates a magnetic field as current passes through it similar to the magnetic field of a magnet.  An inductor stores electrical energy in the form of a magnetic field.
Inductance is defined as the capability to store electrical energy in the form of a magnetic field for a given current which is directly proportional to permability, length of inductor, and number of turns and inversely proportional to cross-sectional area.
When a voltage is applied across the inductor, current generates Electric Field . Change of Electric Field in the turns generates Magnetic Field perpendicular to Electric Field
Inductance is the ability to generartes Magnetic Field B for a given Current
Reactance is defined as the ratio of Voltage over current
Impedance is defined as the sum of Reactance and Resistance of Inductor . Since all conductor has Resistance
Inductor is a device depends on frequency
, Inductor Closed circuit, I ≠ 0
, Capacitor Opened circuit, I = 0
When a Voltage is applied across inductor, current generates magnetic field. Change in current generate change in magnetic field which generate voltage across inductor. Therefore, current will lead voltage
Phase angle relates to time frequency or time and the value of R and L . When there is a change in phase angle Time and frequency also change
If choosing L = 1 and R = 10n then the formulas above become
Induced Voltage is defined as the voltage of the turns which oppose the current flow
For a straight wire with the following dimensions Length l, Area A, and Permitivity u and number of Turns N
Inductors can be connected in series to increase inductance or in parallel to decrease inductance
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Apply concepts of productive efficiency and allocative efficiency to perfectly competitive markets
Compare the model of perfect competition to real-world markets
When profit-maximizing firms in perfectly competitive markets combine with utility-maximizing consumers, something remarkable happens: the resulting quantities of outputs of goods and services demonstrate both productive and allocative efficiency (terms that were first introduced in (Choice in a World of Scarcity) .
Productive efficiency means producing without waste, so that the choice is on the production possibility frontier. In the long run in a perfectly competitive market, because of the process of entry and exit, the price in the market is equal to the minimum of the long-run average cost curve. In other words, goods are being produced and sold at the lowest possible average cost.
Allocative efficiency means that among the points on the production possibility frontier, the point that is chosen is socially preferred—at least in a particular and specific sense. In a perfectly competitive market, price will be equal to the marginal cost of production. Think about the price that is paid for a good as a measure of the social benefit received for that good; after all, willingness to pay conveys what the good is worth to a buyer. Then think about the marginal cost of producing the good as representing not just the cost for the firm, but more broadly as the social cost of producing that good. When perfectly competitive firms follow the rule that profits are maximized by producing at the quantity where price is equal to marginal cost, they are thus ensuring that the social benefits received from producing a good are in line with the social costs of production.
To explore what is meant by allocative efficiency, it is useful to walk through an example. Begin by assuming that the market for wholesale flowers is perfectly competitive, and so P = MC. Now, consider what it would mean if firms in that market produced a lesser quantity of flowers. At a lesser quantity, marginal costs will not yet have increased as much, so that price will exceed marginal cost; that is, P > MC. In that situation, the benefit to society as a whole of producing additional goods, as measured by the willingness of consumers to pay for marginal units of a good, would be higher than the cost of the inputs of labor and physical capital needed to produce the marginal good. In other words, the gains to society as a whole from producing additional marginal units will be greater than the costs.
Conversely, consider what it would mean if, compared to the level of output at the allocatively efficient choice when P = MC, firms produced a greater quantity of flowers. At a greater quantity, marginal costs of production will have increased so that P < MC. In that case, the marginal costs of producing additional flowers is greater than the benefit to society as measured by what people are willing to pay. For society as a whole, since the costs are outstripping the benefits, it will make sense to produce a lower quantity of such goods.
When perfectly competitive firms maximize their profits by producing the quantity where P = MC, they also assure that the benefits to consumers of what they are buying, as measured by the price they are willing to pay, is equal to the costs to society of producing the marginal units, as measured by the marginal costs the firm must pay—and thus that allocative efficiency holds.
The statements that a perfectly competitive market in the long run will feature both productive and allocative efficiency do need to be taken with a few grains of salt. Remember, economists are using the concept of “efficiency” in a particular and specific sense, not as a synonym for “desirable in every way.” For one thing, consumers’ ability to pay reflects the income distribution in a particular society. Thus, a homeless person may have no ability to pay for housing because they have insufficient income.
Perfect competition, in the long run, is a hypothetical benchmark. For market structures such as monopoly, monopolistic competition, and oligopoly, which are more frequently observed in the real world than perfect competition, firms will not always produce at the minimum of average cost, nor will they always set price equal to marginal cost. Thus, these other competitive situations will not produce productive and allocative efficiency.
Moreover, real-world markets include many issues that are assumed away in the model of perfect competition, including pollution, inventions of new technology, poverty which may make some people unable to pay for basic necessities of life, government programs like national defense or education, discrimination in labor markets, and buyers and sellers who must deal with imperfect and unclear information. These issues are explored in other chapters. However, the theoretical efficiency of perfect competition does provide a useful benchmark for comparing the issues that arise from these real-world problems.
A quick glance at the table below reveals the dramatic increase in North Dakota corn production—more than double. Taking into consideration that corn typically yields two to three times as many bushels per acre as wheat, it is obvious there has been a significant increase in bushels of corn. Why the increase in corn acreage? Converging prices.
(Source: USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service)
Historically, wheat prices have been higher than corn prices, offsetting wheat’s lower yield per acre. However, in recent years wheat and corn prices have been converging. In April 2013, Agweek reported the gap was just 71 cents per bushel. As the difference in price narrowed, switching to the production of higher yield per acre of corn simply made good business sense. Erik Younggren, president of the National Association of Wheat Growers said in the Agweek article, “I don't think we're going to see mile after mile of waving amber fields [of wheat] anymore." (Until wheat prices rise, we will probably be seeing field after field of tasseled corn.)
Long-run equilibrium in perfectly competitive markets meets two important conditions: allocative efficiency and productive efficiency. These two conditions have important implications. First, resources are allocated to their best alternative use. Second, they provide the maximum satisfaction attainable by society.
Perfect competition is considered to be “perfect” because both allocative and productive efficiency are met at the same time in a long-run equilibrium. If a market structure results in long-run equilibrium that does not minimize average total costs and/or does not charge a price equal to marginal cost, then either allocative or productive (or both) efficiencies are not met, and therefore the market cannot be labeled “perfect.”
Explain how the profit-maximizing rule of setting P = MC leads a perfectly competitive market to be allocatively efficient.
Think of the market price as representing the gain to society from a purchase, since it represents what someone is willing to pay. Think of the marginal cost as representing the cost to society from making the last unit of a good. If P > MC, then the benefits from producing more of a good exceed the costs, and society would gain from producing more of the good. If P < MC, then the social costs of producing the marginal good exceed the social benefits, and society should produce less of the good. Only if P = MC, the rule applied by a profit-maximizing perfectly competitive firm, will society’s costs and benefits be in balance. This choice will be the option that brings the greatest overall benefit to society.
Will a perfectly competitive market display productive efficiency? Why or why not?
Will a perfectly competitive market display allocative efficiency? Why or why not?
Assuming that the market for cigarettes is in perfect competition, what does allocative and productive efficiency imply in this case? What does it not imply?
In the argument for why perfect competition is allocatively efficient, the price that people are willing to pay represents the gains to society and the marginal cost to the firm represents the costs to society. Can you think of some social costs or issues that are not included in the marginal cost to the firm? Or some social gains that are not included in what people pay for a good?
Index Mundi. n.d. “Wheat Monthly Price—U.S. Dollars per Metric Ton.” Accessed March 11, 2015. http://www.indexmundi.com/commodities/?commodity=wheat.
Knutson, J. “Wheat on the Defensive in the Northern Plains.” Agweek, Associated Press State Wire: North Dakota (ND). April 14, 2013.
SBA Office of Advocacy. 2014. “Frequently Asked Questions: Advocacy: the voice of small business in government.” Accessed March 11, 2015. https://www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/advocacy/FAQ_March_2014_0.pdf.
Here are strategies for winning at Hearts. Although, like any card game, there is some degree of chance involved, there is also a large element of strategy and a smart player will find himself at an advantage over less informed, novice opponents.
One of the most important strategies is knowing how to pass. As a general rule, you want to get rid of the most dangerous parts of your hand and, if possible, short suit(also known as void) yourself (i.e., no cards in one suit) of clubs or diamonds. (However, you may get other cards in that suit passed right back to you by an opponent who also wants to shortsuit himself of it.)
Never short suit yourself of spades below the Queen; always keep spades valued Jack or lower. If you have four or more low spades, then you don't have to worry if you have any of the high spades and should concentrate on discarding another suit.
The most dangerous cards are the Queen, King, and Ace of spades. They become increasingly more dangerous the fewer low spades you have, because if someone leads spades more than a few times you'll have to play them and likely take the Queen. High hearts are also dangerous if you do not have low hearts as well (2-6), and should probably be passed on. Keeping low hearts can actually be advantageous because if anyone leads a heart, you can play a low one and not win the trick.
Bear in mind that you do not always have to pass on the Queen if you have it. If you are rich in low spades, it is safer to keep it, because you always know where it is and have control over when it is discarded. If you do pass the queen, remember to whom you passed it. If, on a trick, you play after him, you can safely take the trick without risking taking the Queen.
An interesting strategy is to pass on the 2 of clubs if you have it. Because that card always starts the game, and the first trick is safe from any point-taking, not having to lead the 2♣ allows you to play a high Club (which you may receive from the other player) "safely".
Pay attention to the cards passed on to you; they might reveal something about your competitor's hand. If you get lots of cards of one suit, that usually means the opponent wants to shortsuit himself of the suit. Receiving the Queen might mean he's low on Spades. If you get suspiciously low, unimportant cards, that might suggest he's trying to hoard all the strongest cards and shoot the moon, which you should consider taking your own steps to defend against (see the Shooting the moon section below).
An elementary strategy in Hearts, as in many Whist-family games, is to void or short-suit a particular suit in their hand; that is, to have very few or no cards of that suit in their hand as play begins. Voiding may be done by passing cards or through play of the first few tricks, or a combination. By voiding a particular suit, when that suit is led you may play any card you choose; you may try to void another suit, or you may play dangerous cards (like the AKQ♠, high Hearts, or face cards of any suit) to get rid of them, in the process possibly foisting off penalty points on another player. By voiding or shorting a suit, you also usually guarantee that someone else will be "long" in the same suit (having many cards of the suit in their hand), which can force that player to take a lot of tricks (and points) if they are forced to lead their "long" suit late in the game after everyone else has voided it. Voiding a suit as early as possible is thus extremely beneficial.
You should NEVER attempt to void Spades by passing them. As stated in the previous section, unless you happen to have the AKQ♠ and no others, there is a chance you may receive one of those cards from another player and be stuck with it as your only Spade (a dangerous situation, as flushing is a very common tactic; see below). It is usually never a problem to be "long" in Spades, especially low Spades, unless your hand is so long (i.e. 8 or more Spades) that it may indicate someone else is already very short or void in them (and so can play penalty Hearts that you may take even with a low led Spade). Voiding Hearts is less risky, but again unless you have only high Hearts it's usually better to save a few low to middle Hearts (especially 2345♥) to guard against being passed a high Heart (and then being forced to "eat" it, possibly with others).
Most players will attempt to void Diamonds and/or Clubs if they are fortunate enough to be dealt a hand with no "risky" cards like high Spades, Hearts, or Aces/Kings. Short-suiting Clubs in order to void them early is a good bet in the most popular ruleset, where the 2♣ must be led on the first trick and Hearts cannot be broken on that trick. By having only one or two Clubs, you can void them in a relatively safe manner early in the game. Diamonds are commonly voided where possible because, unlike Clubs where players will play their highest cards on the first trick to "safely" get rid of them, there are no "safe" Diamond tricks; any trick in which a Diamond is led could have a Heart played on it if a player has managed to void the suit. However, if playing with the common J♦ variant (where the J♦ removes 10 points from your score), voiding Diamonds means you will be unable to capture the J♦ (with this variant in play it is extremely unlikely that a player will simply "sluff" the J♦ off-suit to another trick, unless trying to feed it to another player like the last-place player).
When you're leading a trick early in a round, your priorities should be to either shortsuit or, if you don't have the Queen, King, or Ace of spades, force the Queen to come out by playing lower spades repeatedly (a tactic known as flushing).
If you have the Queen and want to shortsuit yourself, lead with the suit you want to shortsuit at every opportunity, starting with high cards. Because nobody can discard the Queen to you, the worst you can do is collect a heart or two, which is far preferable to taking the Queen.
If you are the last player to play in a trick and you realize you will have to take it no matter what, play the highest card you can. This way, you get rid of a high, potentially dangerous card, without any further damage.
Being able to lead in the first few tricks of a round is generally useful to help control the pace of the game, but remember that as a round progresses, there will be fewer cards left, and it will become increasingly likely someone will be short-suited. Thus, if you end up leading in the last 2-3 tricks of a round, and have cards of only one suit that the other players are out of, you might be "stuck" with the lead, even with very low cards that would normally be safe. This danger can be avoided by opting not to win tricks when the players have fewer than 4 or so cards apiece, wherever possible. You can also try to "plan out" your plays in the early part of the round so that you'll have low cards in 2 suits left towards the end, thus lessening your chance of being stuck.
This is a no-brainer. In an ideal world, you would remember all the cards that have been played, but in practice this is not feasible for most people, so it's better to limit yourself to the most important ones.
Obviously, keep a sharp eye on when the Q♠ comes out, and have a general idea of how many hearts remain (see below section). It's also highly useful to remember when the QKA in clubs and diamonds have been played, so you can determine whether your J♣ is now the most powerful card in that suit, or whether there's still a possibility that someone else will win the trick with a higher card. The lower cards in each suit (2-9) aren't usually worth memorising, unless you're trying to shoot the moon. (More on this later.)
On the first hearts trick after hearts are broken, somebody will most likely lead a low heart, like 4, 3, or 2. If you are leading, lead low. The other players will use up their low hearts trying to lose the trick. If you lead a middle card, it is likely you will get the hearts. On the second heart trick, it is usually safe to lead a middle card, like 5, 6, 7, 8 because the lower cards have been used up. To get rid of the high hearts, discard them on other tricks.
The two and most apparent rules to avoid the Queen are to either avoid having the King and Ace of spades or to get rid of them as quickly as possible by either discarding or playing them when all the other players have already played. You will not have to worry about them if you have a long suit of spades or you have the Queen of Spades, though it may still be useful to get rid of them as they are high cards. In the passing you should never throw away spades below the Queen of Spades.
However, there is one thing you need to watch out for. If people are dealt or passed the QS short (i.e. with few other spades,) they will try to shortsuit and play the Queen when someone leads the suit. This is a good reason not to lay high cards after the first two or three tricks, unless you are shooting the moon and want the Queen or are the last person in the lineup and the QS hasn't been played.
To get the Jack of Diamonds, which subtracts 10 points from your score, you should keep your high diamonds. If you have the Jack, you should not pass it away. While playing, when someone leads a diamond, play one of your lower diamonds. If the Jack appears, you should take it with one of your higher diamonds. If you have the Jack, do not lead it unless all of the higher diamonds have already been played. You will not get the Jack by leading other suits because the holder of it will obviously not discard it unless he is forced to, on the last trick.
Shooting the moon is when you want to win all the hearts and the Queen of spades. If you succeed, you gain no points that round and every other player gains 26 points (in some circles, you have an option to instead take 26 points off your score). A variant is Shooting the Sun, when you win all of the tricks, then the other players get 52 points. This is a very dangerous thing to attempt, because if you miss taking even one heart, you get a very large sum added to your score.
It's difficult to shoot the moon without most of the high hearts (10-A) and a long suit. If you have 7+ cards in one suit besides hearts, including an ace and at least two other high cards, you should consider going for it. Try to trade off low cards in a suit you don't have much of. When someone leads the suit you have a lot of, make sure to win the trick and then repeatedly lead with your highest cards in the strong suit. If pulled off correctly, everyone will eventually run out of that suit and you can win every trick you lead with the suit, even with low cards.
If you suspect that someone else is trying to shoot the moon, you can try to stop them by saving two or three stronger cards for the last tricks, so you can snatch a few hearts away (remember, the loss of one single heart foils a moon-shot). A good indication someone is trying to shoot the moon is if they pass you very low cards that usually aren't considered dangerous, or if they begin repeatedly leading with high cards of one suit once the trick-taking has started and doesn't seem to be cautious about avoiding hearts.
A lateral-thinking question sometimes asked at job interviews is to come up with novel uses for an everyday object, for example,
Quick! Name as many uses for a brick as you can in one minute.[1]
Name five uses for a stapler, without the staples.[2]
The task is actually not too difficult if one thinks logically about the properties of the object. One general approach is to split the possible uses into categories:
Note that some categories may not be represented by a given object, so may be skipped. The following gives example thought processes for the brick (uses are enumerated with Arabic numerals) and stapler (enumerated with Roman numerals).
Bricks are primarily designed for construction, such as in building a house. (1)
Though a stapler is designed to attach together sheets of paper or similar material, this use is inadmissible without staples. We shall skip this category for now.
Some uses of a given object beyond its intended use are quite commonly observed:
Bricks are commonly used to line paths (2), support flowerpots (3) and hold apart planks to make a shelf (4).
Some staplers have projections to remove staples. (I)
Most objects have some monetary value, so both brick and staple can be, for example, sold on eBay (5)(II) or bartered for something of equal value (6)(III).
Additionally, most objects have some educational value, for example, teaching children about their primary uses (7)(IV) or as case studies of product design (8)(V).
Objects that are strong enough can be used to hammer a nail (13)(X), pound cooking ingredients (14)(XI), tenderise meat (15)(XII) or stand on to reach something high up (16)(XIII). Some staplers also have a hinge, allowing them to be used to crack nuts (XIV) or turn bolts (XV).
Consider the surface properties of the object. For example, the shiny metal surfaces of the stapler could be used as a makeshift mirror, say, to check one's appearance (XVI), see around a corner (XVII) or signal for help (XVIII). On the contrary, the brick has rough surfaces on which to grind softer objects (17).
Many artifical objects have straight edges, useful for drawing straight lines (18)(XIX). Similarly, circular objects can be used to draw circles. Hard cylindrical objects may be used as rolling pins or rollers, whereas smooth hard flat surfaces can back flimsy paper on which to write.
Almost anything can be used (modified, painted or otherwise) in a modern art project or simply as surreal decoration (19)(XX). In World's Maddest Job Interview, the panel even accepted the use of a brick as a hat.(20)[3]
Many objects can be taken apart. For instance, the stapler may have a spring which can be used to replace a matching broken one in a pen (XXI).
Finally, the object can be reduced to its constituent material. Bricks can be broken into chips to enhance drainage in a flower bed (21), or ground into dust to use as pigment for painting (22), while staplers can be molten down to steel and plastic, each with its innumerable uses.(XXII)
↑ Crazy job interview questions - Aug. 21, 2012
↑ Job interviewers ask oddball questions - Los Angeles Times
This book is intended for intermediate readers.
This book is intended for advanced readers.
Large numbers, zero
In English (and in many other Indo-European languages) the items being counted by a numeral are found following the numeral, and in the plural form.  In Russian, the syntax is somewhat more complex.  The case of the item must first be considered.  If the item needs to be in the nominative or inanimate accusative case, use the following rule.
2 2003. April 30. Butterflies.
4 10 years from the production of the “Europe” stamps in the Republic of Moldova.
9 Presidency of the Republic of Moldova at the Minister Committee, at the European Council.
Airships.
April 22.
The Tissandier brothers’ airship, France, 1883. The first aerostat with an electric engine.
The “Ucebnîi” airship, Russia, 1908. The first military airship.
The “Count Zeppelin” airships, Germany, 1928. One of the biggest airships. It crossed the Atlantic Ocean 143 times carrying 13110 passages.
April 30. Butterflies.
April 30.
Scarce Swallowtail. Iphiclides podalirius.
Butterflies Tiger Moths. Callimorpha quadripunctaria.
Oak Hawk-moth. Marumba quercus.
Meleager's blue. Polyommatus daphnis.
Miniature sheets 28  Butterflies.Michel Catalogue Number 459-462
Europe 2003. The art of the poster.
June 12.
Poster Assembly “Joc”.
Poster “Mihai Eminescu”.
June 12.
497 - Rustic scenery, Moldova.
Red Cross of the Republic of Moldova.
July 4.
Red Cross Society of the Republic of Moldova – member of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRCRCS).
The shot of an exceptional situation and the emblem “Red Cross of the Republic of Moldova”.
European Youth Olympic Festiva, Paris.
July 25.
Athletics.
Cycling.
Gymnastics.
Terror free world.
October 21.
The painting “Candles”, A. Ahlupin.
The painting “Pax Cultura”, N. Roerich.
Dimitrie Cantemir.
October 24.
“Dimitrie Cantemir”. Engraving XVIII century. Anonymous author.
Presidency of the Republic of Moldova at the Minister Committee, at the European Council.
November 5.
The President of the Republic of Moldova – Vladimir Voronin and the logotype of the presidency of the Republic of Moldova at the Minister Committee, at the European Council.
Famous Personalities.
November 14.
Nicolae Donici (1874-1956). Astrophysicist, the founder of the Astronomical Observatory from Dubăsari Vechi.
Nicolae Dimo (1873-1959). Specialist in agriculture, University teacher.
Nicolai Costenco (1913-1993). Poet and prose writer.
Vincent Van Gogh (1853-1890), self-portrait. Dutch painter.
From the Red Book of the Republic of Moldova: Birds.
December 18.
Mute Swan. Cygnus olor.
Great White Egret.Egretta alba.
Steppe Eagle. Aquila rapax.
The Little Bustard. Tetrax tetrax.
Miniature sheets 30 From the Red Book of the Republic of Moldova: Birds.Michel Catalogue Number 481-484
View from a skyscraper. As long as the background is static and sufficiently far away, it is a good candidate for a skybox.
This tutorial covers the rendering of environment maps as backgrounds with the help of cube maps.
It is based on Section “Reflecting Surfaces”. If you haven't read that tutorial, this would be a very good time to read it.
As explained in Section “Reflecting Surfaces”, a skybox can be thought of as an infinitely large, textured box that surrounds a scene. Sometimes, skyboxes (or skydomes) are implemented by sufficiently large textured models, which approximate an infinitely large box (or dome). However, Section “Reflecting Surfaces” introduced the concept of a cube map, which actually represents an infinitely large box; thus, we don't need the approximation of a box or a dome of limited size. Instead, we can render any screen-filling model (it doesn't matter whether it is a box, a dome, or an apple tree as long as it covers the whole background), compute the view vector from the camera to the rasterized surface point in the vertex shader (as we did in Section “Reflecting Surfaces”) and then perform a lookup in the cube map with this view vector (instead of the reflected view vector in Section “Reflecting Surfaces”) in the fragment shader:
For best performance we should, of course, render a model with only a few vertices and each pixel should be rasterized only once. Thus, rendering the inside of a cube that surrounds the camera (or the whole scene) is fine.
The shader should be attached to a material, which should be attached to a cube that surrounds the camera. In the shader code, we deactivate writing to the depth buffer with ZWrite Off such that no objects are occluded by the skybox. (See the description of the depth test in Section “Per-Fragment Operations”.) Front-face culling is activated with Cull Front such that only the “inside” of the cube is rasterized. (See Section “Cutaways”.) The line Tags { "Queue" = "Background" } instructs Unity to render this pass before other objects are rendered.
Shader "GLSL shader for skybox" {
The shader above illustrates how to render a skybox by rendering a cube around the camera with a specific shader. This is a very general approach. Unity, however, has its own skybox system that doesn't require any game object: you just specify the material with the skybox shader in the main menu Edit > Render Settings > Skybox Material and Unity takes care of the rest. Unfortunately, we cannot use our shader for this system since we have to do the lookup in the cube texture at the position that is specified by the vertex texture coordinates. This is actually easier than computing the view direction. Here is the code:
Shader "GLSL shader for skybox" {
As mentioned above, you should create a material with this shader and drag the material to Edit > Render Settings > Skybox Material. There is no need to attach the material to any game object.
Congratulations, you have reached the end of another tutorial! We have seen:
How to render skyboxes.
How to render skyboxes in Unity without game objects.
If you still want to know more
Unless stated otherwise, all example source code on this page is granted to the public domain.
Pick six of the following to make
A get-well card, and give it to someone
A picture using egg shells or seeds
Covers for an autograph or photo album
A poster inviting people to an event
Give at least two of the above items to
An elderly person in your church or a nursing home
Have an art show.
v • d • e Adventist Adventurer Awards
Bible Friends ·  Community Helper ·  Finger Play ·  Healthy Food ·  Healthy Me ·  Insects ·  Music ·  Special Helper ·  Stars ·  Trains And Trucks ·  Weather ·  Woody Lamb ·  Zoo Animals
Alphabet Fun ·  Animal Homes ·  Animals ·  Beginning Biking ·  Beginning Swimming ·  Bible Friends ·  Birds ·  Crayons And Markers ·  Fire Safety ·  Gadgets And Sand ·  God's World ·  Helping Mommy ·  Jesus' Star ·  Jigsaw Puzzle ·  Know Your Body ·  Left And Right ·  Manners Fun ·  My Community Friends ·  Pets ·  Scavenger Hunt ·  Shapes And Sizes ·  Sponge Art ·  Toys
Artist ·  Bible I ·  Butterfly ·  Buttons ·  Fish ·  Flowers ·  Friend of Animals ·  Friend of Jesus ·  Fruits of the Spirit ·  Guide ·  Health Specialist ·  Home Helper ·  Honey ·  Honeybee ·  Music Maker ·  Reading I ·  Safety Specialist ·  Spotter ·  Swimmer I
Camper ·  Collector ·  Cooking Fun ·  Country Fun ·  Courtesy ·  Feathered Friends ·  Fitness Fun ·  Flowers ·  Friend of Nature ·  Gardener ·  Glue Right ·  Handicraft ·  Ladybugs ·  Reading II ·  Road Safety ·  Skier ·  Trees ·  Whales
Astronomer ·  Bead Craft ·  Build & Fly ·  Building Blocks ·  Cyclist ·  Disciples ·  Early Adventist Pioneer ·  First Aid Helper ·  Gymnast ·  Hand Shadows ·  Homecraft ·  Lizards ·  Magnet Fun ·  Media Critic ·  Olympics ·  Pearly Gates ·  Postcards ·  Prayer ·  Reading III ·  Sewing Fun ·  Swimmer II ·  Temperance ·  Tin Can Fun ·  Troubadour ·  Wise Steward
Basket Maker ·  Bible II ·  Bible Royalty ·  Caring Friend ·  Carpenter ·  Computer Skills ·  Environmentalist ·  Geologist ·  Habitat ·  Hygiene ·  My Church ·  My Picture Book ·  Outdoor Explorer ·  Pearly Gates ·  Prayer Warrior ·  Rainbow Promise ·  Reading IV ·  Reporter ·  Sign Language ·  Steps to Jesus
The Postcards Honor is a component of the Artisan Master Award
.
1 1. Relate briefly the story of the beginning of the postcards in your country.
2 2. How was your country’s postal system affected by the coming of postcards?
3 3. What are the mailing rates for postcards and letters in your country?
5 5. Give a brief description of each of the following eras of postcards
6 6. Briefly describe each type of postcards
7 7. Show and label a picture of a postcard from each of the above eras.
8 8. Have some knowledge of preserving postcards.
9 9. Make a collection of at least 50 postcards. (No two postcards alike.) Your collection MUST include the following
10 10. Arrange the collection of postcards in a suitable display and display at a pathfinder event.
11 11. How were greetings sent in Biblical times?
Relate briefly the story of the beginning of the postcards in your country.
How was your country’s postal system affected by the coming of postcards?
What are the mailing rates for postcards and letters in your country?
Give a brief description of each of the following eras of postcards
Show and label a picture of a postcard from each of the above eras.
Have some knowledge of preserving postcards.
a. Begin your arrangement with a postcard of a religious nature
b. Postcards from at least 10 states/provinces/countries
c. Postcards from at least 2 other countries that are not your own
Arrange the collection of postcards in a suitable display and display at a pathfinder event.
How were greetings sent in Biblical times?
All God’s people here send their greetings. 2 Cor 13:13 (NIV)
Greet all God’s people in Christ Jesus. The brothers and sisters who are with me send greetings. Phil 4:21 (NIV) or
The children of your sister, who is chosen by God, send their greetings. 2 John 1:13 (NIV)
Reads particle information from an NMEA file and injects them as if they had been discovered on the image. This is useful for debugging and testing your own scripts/programs that use the information received from SwisTrack for further processing.
The particles are provided in world coordinates and are injected as if there was an overhead camera (with ideal characteristics) observing them. Particles that lie outside the (virtual) camera image are discarded, whereas particles inside the image are transformed to their respective position on the (virtual) camera image. Note that particles are not distorted in this process. (The pixel size, for example, does not have any influence on the precision of the results.)
None.
Particles.
Path to the file with the particle information. The file must contain NMEA records in the same way SwisTrack outputs them (and can therefore easily be created by dumping the output to a file). Such a file looks as follows:
...
The coordinates are supposed to be world coordinates.
The position (world coordinates) of the upper left pixel of the camera.
The rotation of the camera with respect to the world coordinate system. An angle of 0 means that the camera's X axis is the same as the world's X axis.
The size of a pixel in world coordinates. Pixels are assumed to be square.
The size of the camera image in pixels. The effective size (in world coordinates) of the camera image are these values multiplied by the pixel size.
Anti-stuttering technology: Amplifies vocal fold vibration.
Website: http://www.stutteringcontrol.com/
14% reduction in stuttering in conversations without therapy; greater effectiveness with therapy and for reading aloud.[1]
^ Webster, Ronald. "Manipulation of Vocal Tone: Implications For Stuttering," in Speech Motor Controls and Stuttering, ed. Peters, Hulstijn, and Starkweather, New York: Elsevier, 1991.
Please read Speech-Language Pathology/Stuttering/How to Participate in this Wikibook before adding material.
On July 21, 1911 Herbert Marshall McLuhan was born to Herbert, a real estate agent, and Elsie, an actress, in Edmonton, Alberta (Marchand, 1998). The McLuhan family, which also included Marshall’s younger brother Maurice, made Winnipeg, Manitoba home. McLuhan was not a good student in grade school. But, later McLuhan earned a BA and MA in English at the University of Manitoba and won a University gold metal in arts and science (Marchand, 1998).
McLuhan was raised a Protestant and converted to Roman Catholicism which influenced his life and career (Morrison, 2001). In 1937, McLuhan began his professional career teaching at Catholic institutions staring at St. Louis University, a well respected Jesuit institution (Wolfe, 2004). In 1944, he began teaching at Assumption College, Windsor, Ontario. Finally in 1946, he taught at St. Michael's College, a catholic college in the University of Toronto (Wolfe, 2004). In 1952 he was appoint full professor and retired from teaching in 1979 (McLuhan Associates, ND).
In 1939, McLuhan married Corinne Lewis while he was working on his doctorial disertation on the work of Thomas Nashe and the verbal arts (Morrison, 2001).  The McLuhan’s had six children Eric, Mary, Teresa, Stephanie, Elizabeth and Michael (Marchand, 1998).  In 1965, his son Eric became his assistant and coauthored the book Media: The New Science published in 1988. (McLuhan Associates, 1986).
McLuhan was an instructor of English who later became interested in communication technologies. His work involved linking media and technology to the human body (Kroker, 1995). McLuhan’s work and readings are very difficult because he jumped around and introduced new terminology to explain different concepts (Katz and Katz, 2001). McLuhan’s work influenced him to be a critic of popular culture. Katz and Katz (2001) summarize McLuhan’s views on technology as “…technology (also) works indirectly on society by affecting the ways in which the brain processes information from each new medium, how the mode of processing affects the senses and thus personality, and how personality, in turn, affects social organization” (paragraph 9). This synopsis of McLuhan’s view on technology is consistent with deep and complex thinking McLuhan brings to the field of communication technologies. McLuhan’s concern is how the technology or medium eventual affects society.
The coined phrase “the medium is the message” is McLuhan’s interperation of technology in a few words. The phrase refers to McLuhan’s view that more attention should be given to the medium or technology and less emphasis or focus should be on the content of the medium (Katz and Katz, 2001).  Thus the medium is a roadmap on how to rather than what to think (Katz and Katz, 2001). The underlying meaning is the medium has more influence on society than the content of the medium. As a note McLuhan’s book published in 1967 was titled "The Medium is the Massage” in which message was spelled wrong (massage), by the typesetter (McLuhan Associates, 1986). But McLuhan asked the publisher not to correct the mistake because massage or broken down “Mass Age” was on target (McLuhan Associates, 1986).
McLuhan defines media as technologies that create an extension of the human body (Munday, 2003). McLuhan uses the notion of extension to signify anything, like technology, that extends or uses the human body or mind in a different way (Kappelman, 2001). For example, a shovel is an extension of our hands to dig the earth. With the term extension McLuhan uses the term amputation. Amputation refers to the loss of other extensions due to the new technology (Munday, 2003). For instance the introduction of PowerPoint presentations amputates the use of the chalkboard in the classroom.  The concern McLuhan had with the notion of extension and amputation is the fact that most humans are excited about extensions while amputations are ignored or not thought of (Munday, 2003). An example of ignoring the amputations is the use of fuel to power our vehicles (the technology) is taken for granted, while depleting natural resources (amputation) and potentially harming the environment is not thought at the gas pump.
McLuhan also expressed views on the notion of a “global village”. According to McLuhan's son Eric, the term “global village” was used to describe how the technology of radio in the 1920 brought society closer together through the medium (McLuhan, 1996).  McLuhan authored a book entitled "War and Peace in the Global Village" published in 1968 to discuss the “global village”.
Driedger and Redekop, (1998) explain McLuhan’s meaning of “global village: as  “…media, and television in particular, serve to bring previously marginal groups out of their local villages, and directly in touch with the mainstream of society into a global village characterized by a heightened awareness and sense of collection responsibility” (p. 44). Thus the notion of the global village is the extent that technology has on the society and the demands that users of the medium had on other aspects of life (McIlwraith, 1994). For example, if television were the medium than those who viewed television would require the same level of involvement in different social situations (McIlwraith, 1994).
In addition, to the “global village” McLuhan also discussed the notion of “hot” and “cool” medium. The concept of “hot” and “cool” medium deals with the level of involvement or intensity the medium requires of the participant (Katz and Katz, 2001). Katz and Katz (2001) compare print and television mediom as an example of “hot” and “cool” medium:
“The more intense and unrelenting the stimulus, the less involvement on the part of the audience, [McLuhan] says, classifying print medium …as ``hot because of their technological single-mindedness, and speech and television as ``cool.” [because] McLuhan argued that the television viewer is required to subconsciously connect the dots on his television screen in order to complete the picture, and hence is more involved, more participatory (paragraph 12).
Thus the notion of “hot” and “cool” medium deals with the requirements of the technology and not the content. This is consistant with McLuhan’s point of view. In addition, “hot” and “cool” medium are relative to comparing two mediums infering one medium is “hotter than” another (Katz and Katz, 2001).  Thus in the example above print medium is hotter then television medium.
McLuhan’s work eventually led to a tetrad of questions that basically summed up McLuhan’s work. The four questions in McLuhan’s tetrad are: what does it (the medium or technology) extend?, what does it make obsolete?, what is retrieved?, and what does the technology reverse into if it is over-extended? (Kappelman, 2001). The questions posed provide a framework to analysis the medium or technology and the affects on society. McLuhan’s tetrad of questions is as relevant today as, and probably more relevant, then in the past. The fact is that the fast paced technology driven world we live in today does apply to the rhetoric of McLuhan. If alive today, McLuhan would have had an appealing response and probably would be overloaded with the speed and quantity of technology that is touching ever facet of society.
Driedger, l., and Redekop, P. (1998). Testing the Innis and Mcluhan theses: Mennonite media access and TV use. The Canadian Review of Sociology and Anthropology, 35(1), 43-63.
Gordon T.W. (2002). Marshall McLuhan: Escape into Understanding. Gingko Press.
Gu, B. (2005). Understanding me: lectures and interviews. Technical Communications Quarterly, 14, 230 – 236.
Katz, R., & Katz, E. (1998). McLuhan: Where Did He Come From, Where Did He Disappear? Canadian Journal of Communication [Online], 23(3). Retrieved October 28. 2006 from: http://www.cjc-online.ca/printarticle.php?id=469&layout=html.
Kappelman, T. (2001). Marshall McLuhan: "The Medium is the Message". Retrieved October 28, 2006, from Leadership University Web site: http://www.leaderu.com/orgs/probe/docs/mcluhan.html
Kroker, A. (1995). Digital Humanism: The Processed World of Marshall McLuhan. Ctheory. 5th June. Retrieved October 21. 2006 from: http://www.ctheory.net/text_file.asp?pick=70.
Marchand, P. (1998). Marshall McLuhan: The Medium and the Messenger, a Biography. Revised Edition. Cambridge, MA: MIT.
McIlwraith, R.D. (1994). Marshall McLuhan and the psychology of television. Canadian Psychology, 35, 331-350.
McLuhan Associates. (1986). Herbert Marshall McLuhan: the medium is the message 1911-1980. Retrieved on October 28, 2006 from: http://www.marshallmcluhan.com/cv.html. A website produced by the Estate of Marshall McLuhan.
McLuhan, E. (1996). The Source of the Term, 'Global Village'. McLuhan Studies, 2. Retrieved October 28. 2006 from: http://www.chass.utoronto.ca/mcluhan-studies/v1_iss2/1_2art2.htm.
Morrison, J. C. (2001). The place of Marshall McLuhan in the learning of his time. Counterblast: e-Journal of Culture and Communication, 1(1).  Retrieved October 28. 2006 from: http://www.nyu.edu/pubs/counterblast/issue1_nov01/articles/morrison.html
Mullen, M. (2006). Coming to terms with the future he foresaw: Marshall Mcluhan's understanding media. Technology and Culture, 47, 373 – 380.
Munday, R. (2003). Marshall McLuhan declared that “the medium is the message.” What did he mean and does this notion have any value? Retrieved October 28. 2006 from: http://www.aber.ac.uk/media/Students/ram0202.html.
Wolfe, T. (2004). McLuhan’s new world. The Wilson Quarterly, 28(2), 18-25.
JSON is short for "JavaScript Object Notation. It is not a programming language, but a markup language, just like XML. It is made for quick lightweight data exchange from the server to the client, and is not to make apps, but to supplement them. Unlike XML, JSON is much more lightweight. It is based off JavaScript, but can be read by virtually any programming language that exists, since hundreds of libraries exist. A JSON file is simply a list of variables of data.
Nice and short, this book will be divided into a few sections to go over each part. Due to the nature of JSON, it will be very easy to learn. At the end of this book will be a section with a few exercises. There shall be pictures of the code etc. throughout to show real examples of JSON code. Each page has a header, short introduction, the relevant pictures and information for the section, links to the previous and next sections, and links at the bottom for references and further reading. All source code written in this book will be formatted as so.
Note: Contributors must please follow this structure mentioned above.
What can JSON be used for?
JSON is used mainly for web applications, to exchange quick bits of data in a single file. This is not limited to websites, but also online games, for example. It can also be used for other purposes, like for an application to store its settings in a lightweight file. Or, perhaps, it can be used by a game to store a player's data. All types of JavaScript variables are usable here, from integers to arrays.
How does JSON work?
JSON data is stored in a file, which is left as is. It is not compiled into binary code, just left as is. This is the nature of any markup language, not just JSON. It is up the application to open the file, scan the text and pick out the data it needs, and change whatever it needs to change. A developer would use a 'parser library' to do the work of scanning the text and loading certain variables into memory for the application to use. Variables, such as integers are created here and stored in the file. JSON files end with ".json" and are stored wherever the application needs it to be.
Absolutely not. JSON, for starters is human-readable, so it is easy to get the understanding of it quickly. Syntax is simple and based on JavaScript. It helps to know JavaScript, since JSON is JavaScript. It takes only a day to learn, really, even if you don't know JavaScript.
Are there any prerequisites?
Yes. You need to actually know and understand a programming language, since JSON is only there to compliment your application, not make it. You will need a code editor to continue, like Atom or Visual Studio Code, though any text editor like Notepad will do.
You can download both Visual Studio Code and Atom for free. Finally, for whatever programming language you use, you need a parser library to continue.
Chapter 5: Freshwater – issues and conflicts
Precipitation – The transfer of moisture as dew, hail, rain, sleet or snow to the earth’s surface from the atmosphere.
Interception – the capture of raindrops by plant cover, which prevents directs contact with the soil.
Run-off – precipitation that does not soak into the ground but flows over it into surface waters.
Groundwater – Water held underground in soil or porous rock, often feeding springs or wells.
Evapotranspiration – the loss of water from vegetation and water surfaces to the atmosphere.
The global hydrological cycle is the transfer of water between sea, air and land. It includes evaporation from oceans, water vapour, condensation, precipitation, runoff, groundwater and evapotranspiration.
A set of new, multi-item measures are operationalized. The authors define and measure the salient infrastructural competencies – termed business-to-business seller competence (B2B-SC) – associated with the seller-side of Internet-enabled commerce. They find that the conceptual domain of B2B-SC comprises seven theoretically important dimensions: (1) technical skills, (2) change disposition, (3) conflict management, (4) market acuity, (5) coordinated logistics, (6) knowledge channels, and (7) fluid partnering.
Conflict management is defined as a competence in which the selling firm has a systematic approach to the handling of disagreements with supply chain partners that consists of resolution strategies used to foster a mutually acceptable relationship.
Systems and procedures in place to resolve disputes with supply chain partners. (0.67)
View differences in opinion with partners as an opportunity to improve relationship effectiveness. (0.72)
Settling of disputes is joint responsibility of us and partners. (0.68)
Regularly discuss with supply chain partners any differences in opinion we have with them. (0.85)
Rosenzweig/Roth (2007): B2B seller competence: Construct development and measurement using a supply chain strategy lens. Journal of Operations Management, Vol. 25, No. 6, pp. 1311-1331.
Much efforts have been made by the authors in order to ensure that the new scales exhibit sufficient psychometric properties, which make them quite useful. The items were evaluated on a Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). However, the observed mean value is 3.64 rather than 3. It might therefore be recommendable to change the wording, e.g. "Settling of disputes is ALWAYS joint responsibility of us and partners".
In this book you will learn the history of the modern state of Israel and the people who live in it. The aim of this book is to be easy to read, informative, and unbiased. It uses plenty of primary sources to give you a sense of what people thought at the time. If you have something to add to this book, or you'd like to correct an error, just click "edit this page" and fix it yourself!
Wikipedia has related information at History of Israel
War, Ceasefire and Refugees
Six-Day War, Yom Kippur War, Settlements
1980s: First Lebanon War and Infitada
Daniel Shalom is the pseudonym for a Jewish man living in the United States.
Joanna Kristall works for Yeshiva University.
History of Israel, from 1850-present (pro-Zionist perspective)
Palestinian-Israeli Conflict For Beginners (anti-Zionist perspective)
History of Israel at the Jewish Virtual Library
The search for chemical and physical property data used to be a hunt through multiple volumes of handbooks, dictionaries and treatises. Increasingly, the major resources are being converted to online versions. Many libraries have access, enabling patrons to utilize these vast collections of evaluated, reliable data with relative ease.  However, many of them are very expensive so smaller institutions may not have access.  Fortunately, there are now excellent free data collections that are easily available.
Data searching can be divided into a four-step process.  The first step is to try to locate the desired properties in these free collections. If that fails, then there are many small data collections commonly available in many libraries in print or as online subscription databases. Library catalogs or various online guides can be helpful in locating these resources. Next, there are large data collections, in print or online, that are less widely available. And lastly, there is the search of the general literature using a database such as Chemical Abstracts via SciFinder or STN International interfaces, INSPEC produced by the Institution of Engineering & Technology and available on a number of search systems, Compendex (Engineering Index) from Elsevier or Google Scholar. Only the last database is freely available.
If you are feeling intimidated by the idea of diving into a property search, there are some excellent web sites to help you get started. One example is ‘’Finding Thermodynamic and Physical Property Data’’ from the University of Texas Libraries. Unlike the lists of resources other libraries offer, some of which are mentioned below, this one is a summary of the process with suggestions and even a tutorial to help you get started.
National Institute of Standards and Technology Databases
Any discussion of data has to include the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), the federal agency charged with developing and applying technology, measurements and standards.  In 1963 the National Standard Reference Data System (NSRDS) was established, to be coordinated by the National Bureau of Standards (now NIST). The purpose was to provide optimum access to critically evaluated and compiled quantitative physical data. The project was divided into seven areas, including: Nuclear properties, Atomic and molecular properties, Solid State properties, Thermodynamic and transport properties, Chemical kinetics, Colloid and surface properties, and Mechanical properties of materials. The output of the NSRDS consisted of monographs, loose-leaf compilations, and computer tapes. Most of the monographs are available online from NIST. NIST offers a long list of free, web-based databases accessible through the NIST gateway. These databases provide easy access to NIST scientific and technical data covering a broad range of substances and properties including: solubility, kinetic, spectral, and  thermodynamic.
Perhaps the best known of these databases is the Chemistry WebBook which provides easy access to chemical and physical property data collected by the Standard Reference Data Program and other contributors.  A user can search for chemical species by formula, chemical name, CAS Registry Number, molecular weight, chemical structure, and other concepts such as proton affinity, and reaction. Available data includes gas and condensed phase thermochemistry, phase changes; reaction thermochemistry; gas phase ion energetics; ion clustering; infrared, masss, UV/Visible, vibrational and electronic spectra; diatomic molecular constants; and Henry’s Law. Most data is displayed in tabular form with graphical viewing available for some data types. All properties and collection techniques are extensively referenced. A Guide to the NIST Chemistry WebBook by Peter J. Linstrom contains detailed information about search types and data presentation.
NDRL/NIST Solution Kinetics Database on the Web
Knovel offers a large collection of handbooks, treatises, monographs, and databases integrating technical information with analytical and search tools. Most of these are subscription-based, however, there are some key ones that are available free to academic institutions.
International Critical Tables of Numerical Data, Physics, Chemistry and Technology (1st Electronic Edition)
This classic and well-known reference was originally published from 1926 - 1930 in 7 volumes for the National Research Council. It contains an enormous amount of critical data on inorganic and organic compounds, and pure substances. Featuring physical, thermodynamic, mechanical, and other key properties, it is a major reference source used by those involved in chemistry, physics, and engineering.
In 2003, Knovel undertook the conversion of this publication into full-text searchable electronic format that makes data easily accessible. 7 most important tables were made interactive for increased searchability and user-friendliness.
Rotations and Melting Points of Pure Sugars and Sugar Derivatives Table
Surface Tension Data For Certain Pure Liquids Between 0 and 360°
Surface Tension Data for All Types of Solutions at All Temperatures Table
Heats of Solution of Organic Substances Table
The Electric Conductivity of Pure Non-Metallic Liquids Table
Viscosity of Pure Liquids Table.
KCT features tables of physical properties for commonly used chemical compounds. The original edition included 6,000 compounds, expanded to more than 13,000 in the second edition. Each table is fully interactive and searchable by keyword and numeric property value. The thermodynamic tables feature an Equation Plotter that graphically represents the temperature correlation relationships and allows for easy calculation and plotting of the properties.
This important, interactive Knovel reference contains tables of physical, solvent, and thermodynamic properties. The physical property tables alone include over 21,000 inorganic and organic compounds, and pure substances. The solvent property tables have data for 385 common solvents, and the thermodynamic property tables have data for over 15,000 compounds. Additionally, several tables make use of the interactive Equation Plotter to plot thermodynamic properties as a function of temperature.
Source of the Data: This information was collected from publicly available Internet sources and from non-copyrighted publications. Knovel's internal scientific staff reviewed the data. If there were differences between values for the same compound and/or the same property, the values were either averaged or a range was created.
Originally published by the Smithsonian Institution Press in 1954, this classic reference source comprises 901 tables of common physical and chemical data. The information provided is broad in scope. It is of general interest to scientists and engineers, and of particular interest to those involved with physics in its larger sense. In 2003, Knovel undertook the conversion of this publication into full-text searchable electronic format that makes data easily accessible.
Matmatch is an online platform that helps product designers and engineers to find, evaluate and source materials. With a free of charge database of over 80.000 thousands of materials, an intuitive search tool, and supplier listings.
MatWeb is a searchable database of properties of more than 86,000 materials. There are several online tools available including Unit of Measure Converter, Weight & Moment of Inertia Calculator, and a Metal and Plastic Hardness Converter. The database is comprised of data and spec sheets supplied by manufacturers and distributors.
There are three kinds of searches: Quantitative, Categorized and Text.
The quantitative search allows you to choose a material category (optional) and then select for up to three properties from a long list in pull-down menus or to choose a alloy category and then up to three material compositions from pull-down menus. To do an advanced search you have to register.
The result of all search is a page giving a variety of information including physical, mechanical, electrical, thermal and processing properties, material notes and a list of vendors. The amount of data available depends on what was supplied by the distributor/manufacturer.
ChemSpider is a free chemical database, sponsored by the Royal Society of Chemistry. As of January 2014, it has access to more than 29 million structures and can be searched by name or structure to find properties, spectra, suppliers, and literature references as well as alternate names and SMILES and InChIs.
Both experimental and calculated properties are available including standard ones like specific gravity; melting, boiling, and flash points; refractive index and solubility; as well as appearance, stability, toxicity and safety data. Spectra are also available.
ChemIDplus, from the National Library of Medicine, is a free database of 350000 chemical compounds. Records consist of name, synonyms, CAS number, molecular formula, properties, and direct links to biomedical resources. ChemIDplus can be searched by name, molecular weight or property range, and structure.
There are many smaller handbooks and databases that are familiar and widely available, though not free, should the free resources not provide the needed information. Many have print equivalents.
The old standby CRC Handbook is still available in print, but now also as a CDROM and on the web.  In addition to the familiar table of contents or index, the online version can be searched using a basic keyword search or the Structure/Property search. Data can be displayed as static pdfs or in interactive tables which can be sorted, printed and/or exported. Search help is easily accessed from the table of contents window. The online version contains tables from only the most current edition although there are links to discontinued tables from earlier editions.
The Chapman & Hall company originally published a series of printed and CD-ROM products with titles that begin ‘’Dictionary of ...’’ The works are really data compilations or larger handbooks. The information includes descriptive and numerical data on chemical, physical and biological properties compounds; systematic and common names of compounds; literature references; structure diagrams and their associated connection tables. Particularly significant features of the ‘’Dictionary of Organic Compounds’’ are the structural depictions of the substances and properties of derivatives, as well as references to the original literature for synthesis, spectra, etc. of the compound. These are now available online from the CRC CHEMnetBase. All of the dictionaries are available in a single database, the Combined Chemical Dictionary, which covers:
Dictionary of Analytical Reagents (14,000 compounds)
Dictionary of Inorganic and Organometallic Compounds (106,000 compounds)
Dictionary of Natural Products (226,000 compounds)
Dictionary of Organic Compounds (292,000 compounds)
In general, CCD contains the following compounds: The basic fundamental organic and inorganic compounds of simple structure, including the elements, inorganic binary and ternary compounds (hydrides, halides, oxides, sulfides); virtually every known natural product including those of unknown structure; all currently marketed drugs, including all those listed in generic name compilations; compounds with an established use such as catalysts, solvents, starting materials, synthetic reagents, analytical reagents; important coordination compounds, e.g. amines, phosphines, alkoxy complexes, and major well-characterized bioinorganics; organometallic compounds representative of all important structural types (in the case of ligands with organic substituents, typically the parent member of each series, where known, together with a selection of homologues); important biochemicals and minerals; and other compounds of particular interest because of their chemical, structural or biological properties, including many newly synthesized compounds of active research interest.
Properties of Organic Compounds, an online version of Handbook of Properties of Organic Compounds, a database covering over 27,000 organic compounds that is searchable by structure. In addition to the print version, there is also a CD version.
Polymers: a Property Database which provides scientific and commercial information on over 900 polymers. Includes material class and polymer type information as well as a large variety of properties such as volumetric and calorimetric, surface and solubility, transport, mechanical, electrical, optical and stability.
Merck Index (Merck Sharp & Dohme/Royal Society of Chemistry)
The print Merck Index, now the 15th edition, is still available in many libraries and labs. Online versions are available from database vendors like Dialog, aggregators like Knovel, and other companies like CambridgeSoft. The Royal Society of Chemistry is the publisher of the new print edition and the licensed provider of the online version in the U.S.A. and Canada. Although the focus of Merck is pharmaceutical in nature, many other bioactive and important industrial compounds are covered including:
The online versions can be searched by name, CAS Registry Number, Molecular formula and weight and well as by other features.The Knovel and Cambridgesoft versions are also searchable by structure.
Knovel is a web-based application integrating technical information with analytical and search tools. Knovel’s three key elements – validated content, optimized search, and data analysis tools – enable researchers to not only easily find relevant data, but also analyze, document and incorporate it into their everyday work.
The resource is a searchable database of thousands of handbooks and reference sources from more than 70 science and engineering publishers including some leading societies in 26 subject areas. Although engineering, and more generally applied science, is a major focus of Knovel, also included are: Biochemistry, Biology, and Biotechnology; Chemistry and Chemical Engineering; Food Science; Nanotechnology; Pharmaceuticals, Cosmetics, and Toiletries; and Textiles. Knovel's unique approach offers many advantages, including these features:
Unique search capabilities - quick access to relevant and reliable technical content
Interactive tools - interactive graphs, tables and equations offer your unique teaching and learning opportunities
Note: In the past few years, a few major publishers, in particular Wiley, Springer, and McGraw-Hill have elected to withdraw their content from Knowel, preferring to make that content available on their own platforms. For example, 170 McGraw-Hill handbooks were withdrawn with access transferring to Access Engineering, McGraw-Hill’s own platform. This included classic sources such as Perry's Chemical Engineers Handbook, Lange's Handbook of Chemistry, and the Chemical Properties Handbook. However, Knovel has aggressively pursued replacement content from other publishers to the degree possible.
Knovel continues to offer many invaluable data sources including:
DIPPR Project 801 from the Design Institute of Physical Property
Subscribers can choose all titles, a selection of the subject areas, or individual titles so not all subscribing institutions will have access to all the same resources.
In addition to the few print resources mentioned above in conjunction with online versions, there are many other single and multi-volume handbooks and treatises.  These can be located by a search of a library catlog by title or by a subject search for the desired property plus a subheading such as Tables or Handbooks.  There are also a number of property guides that have been prepared by university libraries.  Some representative ones include:
Arizona State University Index to Physical, Chemical, and Other Property Data
University at Buffalo Materials Properties Locator Database
Vanderbilt University Finding Chemical & Physical Properties
There are three major reference collections of historical importance that are still around in libraries today as well as in online versions. All three are German in origin, which has made the print versions often difficult and frustrating to use, though all three are full of a vast amount of reliable data. The online versions are very expensive and may not be easily available.
Landolt-Börnstein (L-B for short) is the largest printed, critically evaluated compilation of numerical data in existence today, with over 400 volumes. It covers many areas of interest to chemists, but the fact that the earlier volumes were in German has limited its use in the US. There are now English-language subject and chemical substance indexes that assist in locating tables of interest in the many volumes of the set. Despite the appearance of a CD-ROM version of the indexes starting in 1996 (including an Index of Organic Compounds), the printed L-B can still be a challenging set to use. Careful attention must be paid to the table and section notes, indexes, and explanations of codes and abbreviations used for units, literature references, and the like. One must check the front and end matter of each table, section, chapter, and volume to understand the presentation of the data.
Elementary Particles, Nuclei and Atoms
Biophysics.
There is now a subscription database version of L-B, called SpringerMaterials. In addition to the L-B tables, this resource also includes the Dortmund Data Bank Software & Separation Technology, Database on Thermophysical Properties and the Linus Pauling Files, Database on Inorganic Solid Phases, and chemical safety data. The English-language L-B Substance/Property Index can be searched for free on the web by exact name or part of a name, CAS-number, molecular formula or the range of molecular weight (e.g., 50-150), and other options. This at least permits searchers to determine what compounds, the data available, and the location of that data within the volume structure, although access to the actual data requires a subscription or to the print volumes.
Reaxys (Beilstein Handbook of Organic Chemistry and Related Databases)
If you are looking for a physical property of an organic substance or a two-dimensional depiction of it, the printed Beilstein Handbook of Organic Chemistry or Elsevier's Reaxys database that incorporates Beilstein (as well as a patent database, newly added data, and the inorganic/organometallic handbook, Gmelin's, see below) is an excellent place to look. This large resource has been the most significant data collection in organic chemistry. Beilstein covers the beginning of organic chemistry in the late 18th/early 19th centuries to the present. Earlier volumes are in German, while later ones are in English. The emergence of electronic versions of Beilstein has brought this valuable data to a much broader audience. Although the coverage of the print volumes got considerably behind the present date, the currency of the database is quite good, within a year of the current literature. The printed version is no longer published. With the advent of the far more user-friendly electronic versions, many institutions have retired the print volumes to storage. However, the print set can still be found. A useful guide for using print is available from the University of Buffalo libraries: At the end of 2010, the name Beilstein was retired and the resource is now exclusively branded as and updated within Reaxys and licensed to a few other vendors.
There are dozens of physical properties reported in Reaxys, and all values are experimental as reported in the original publication. Today there are more than 300 million scientifically measured pieces of data available in the database.
The capability to search for substances having certain properties or a range of numerical values of properties is inherent in the Reaxys database, so it is of particular use in searching for organic materials with a given set of properties. Think of how valuable this might be when combined with the capability to conduct exact structure or substructure searches across the millions of compounds in the database.
Distributed among more than 320,000,000 experimental facts about the compounds are the following types of information in Reaxys:
Transformation products of unknown structure.
Gmelin Handbook of Inorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
As noted above, Reaxys also includes a significant portion of the content from Beilstein's "sister" publication, Gmelin's Handbook of Inorganic and Organometallic Chemistry. With the same degree of comprehensiveness as Beilstein, Gmelin supplies the largest single source of information and data on inorganic and organometallic compounds. Much of what was said about Beilstein is true of Gmelin. It was originally published in German with later volumes in English and is no longer published in print. All updates are part of Reaxys.
The arrangement of Gmelin is by element. Information includes:
For a given substance, Gmelin provides information on the occurrence, methods of preparation, physical properties, and chemical properties.
Specific compound information from the published volumes of the Gmelin Handbuch through 1975 is indexed in ‘’Reaxys’’. Major sections of prose (e.g. histories of the elements), and graphical information (e.g., phase diagrams, x-ray structures), while often referenced, are not part of the Reaxys data structure. Thus, with Gmelin, it is essential to regularly use the print volumes along with the online database.
Beginning in 1976, Gmelin began indexing the 120 (currently about 60) most important journals in inorganic and organometallic chemistry. This has since been somewhat expanded.
It would seem that journal articles would be excellent sources of physical property data, and for standard data that are routinely reported, they are. The problem is that indexing of physical property data contained in journal articles is not always consistently done by the abstracting and indexing services. There are some journals that are specifically designed to publish data. Two of those are the Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data (1972-) and the Journal of Chemical and Engineering Data (1956-). These journals can be searched via the publishers’ web sites or using one of the indexes mentioned below.
One technique to locate data in journal articles is to perform a search that includes terms in the abstracts of the articles in a bibliographic database such as the Chemical Abstracts via CAPLUS File on STN or SciFinder, INSPEC or Compendex.
In addition to indexing information about data in journal articles, the Chemical Abstracts massive substance database (File REGISTRY) has recently been enriched by the addition of experimental data and spectra, mined from the literature by Chemical Abstracts Service or from property databases licensed from other vendors. This data is now attached to the substance records for most chemical substances, as well as many calculated properties derived using programs from ACD.  Not only does the File REGISTRY include the usual physical properties that one might expect to find in a large handbook, but also many properties of interest to those in the pharmaceutical industry or to bioscientists in general. Examples include bioconcentration factor, number of freely rotatable bonds, number of hydrogen bond donor or acceptor sites on the molecule, LogP, etc.
Using Scifinder, one popular interface to Chemical Abstracts information, a search can be done in any of the three modes, Research Topic, Substance, or Reaction, using chemical name, molecular formula, CAS Registry Number, or structure. STN and other vendor versions of Chemical Abstracts can be searched according to their protocols. Articles retrieved will contain links to records for all the substances mentioned in the articles. A display of the full substance record will give a complete list of all the experimental and calculated properties.
INSPEC and Compendex can also be useful databases for finding properties. Both contain primarily articles in the physical, engineering, and applied sciences. These can be rich in data. Special search features make it easier to locate such information. For example, INSPEC has classification codes and numerical data indexing that can help a user focus in on properties and even property ranges.
Another technique is to search the full text files of the electronic versions of the journals themselves. Most publishers have their own search engines which can be useful, although by using them you limit yourself to the output of a particular publisher. As more and more scientific journals become available in electronic format, this should prove to be an increasingly important approach, especially as programmers, researchers, and vendors find more innovative ways to search across journal titles. Once you find articles of interest, many publishers provide links to other articles references in those papers regardless of where they were published. The practice of putting supporting information, usually data and experimental procedures, in microform has made this information difficult to locate as it has not always been indexed. This supplementary information is now being put online along with the articles. The American Chemical Society (ACS) is an example of a publisher who is now making supplementary information available at their website along with the fulltext of the associated articles.
In addition to journal articles on the web, there is a lot of producer and distributor information available. Although a Google search can return a lot of irrelevant and/or unreliable information, it is also possible to get good data from catalogs or Material Safety Data Sheets from suppliers such as Sigma-Aldrich. A detailed discussion of a selection of these resources can be found in an article by Ben Wagner. A. Ben Wagner, (2001). "Finding Physical Properties of Chemicals", Science & Technology Libraries, 21:3-4, 27-45. There is a revised version that brings the list of sites more up to date.
Keep in mind that you are likely to find different values for physical properties when different sources are consulted. In general, the data from the large organizations that are devoted to data production and analysis (e.g., the US National Institute for Standards and Technology and information analysis centers) have more reliable, critically evaluated data. Whenever possible, seek the largest, most authoritative sources of data, checking the original journal articles when there is suspicion of a transcription error.
Wagner, A. Ben. 2014. “Physical Properties and Spectra,” in Chemical Information for Chemists: A Primer. Currano, Judith & Roth, Dana (Eds.), Cambridge, UK: Royal Society of Chemistry, 146-183.
The Charles and Commonwealth period refers to the period of English history between 1625 and 1660. It is a term that relates to England under under the rule of King Charles I from 1625 to 1649 and the English republican government that ruled the country from 1649 to 1660. Under Charles, England engaged in the two Bishops Wars with Scotland, then suffered through two civil wars as the English Parliament and the King clashed over the direction of the monarchy. England after Charles I's deposition and execution was ruled first by the Rump Parliament (1649-1653), then by the Barebone's Parliament (July-December 1653), then by Oliver Cromwell as Lord Protector (1653-1659), and finally by Richard Cromwell (1659-1660).
Under the rule of Charles I, perhaps as a reflection of the escalating conflict between Charles and the Parliament, the clothing of the period separated into two distinct and polarized styles. Royalist supporters termed 'Cavaliers' were often noble in status, and wore extravagant, colourful clothes. Charles' enemies, the middle-class Puritans, wore clothing that was much more modest.
During the English Civil War, Royalist men were termed 'Cavaliers' by the Parliamentarians. The word Cavalier comes from the Spanish word caballeros, which itself originated in the Vulgar Latin word caballarius, meaning horseman. Cavalier clothing was famed for its magnificence. Men's hats were boldly feathered, and their doublet jackets revealed great expanses of white linen shirting, laced at the neck and wrist. The Doublet also became shorter as it slowly transformed into a coat. Clothing fabrics were beautiful and ornate. Ruffs had given way to a more casual, wider, falling collar of linen or lace over the shoulders. Men's hair was longer in comparison to previous eras. A "lovelock" of hair fell loosely to one side of the head. Breeches were shorter than in previous eras, and also narrower and fringed. Boot tops were often very large and loose. Even before Charles I's reign, since 1618 (the start of the Thirty Year's War), boots had often been fixed with spurs. Men wore jerkins, and their feathered hats were cocked to one side. Sometimes cloaks were worn. This style of dress became distinct and popular, and was even represented in France by the Three Musketeers. The Van Dyke beard, a tuft of facial hair beginning just below the lower lip and extending to the chin, was popular. Mustaches were also popular.
Women largely abandoned the padding and slashing techniques that had gone into their garments since the Gothic era. Instead, female clothing became more loose and casual. Long series of highly-laced collars sloped down over the shoulders, and a sort of vest was cut to reveal a great expanse of bosom, or decollete. Sleeves were wide, elbow length, with a laced cuff, and the skirt was full. Hair was casual, almost messy, as if it had been mussed about over the course of some activity.
In an expression of political and moral disapproval, Puritan men wore black high-crowned, wide-brimmed felt hats. They wore somber coats slightly relieved at the neckline by the wide, plain collar of the shirt. Puritan men wore woolen stocking and clipped their hair short. In many ways, their style was reminiscent of the Dutch style of the time.
Women's dress corresponded to the men's style, but their long, dark gowns revealed stiff underskirts.
Topic 5.8: Acid Deposition
-Acid Deposition: The accumulation of acids or acidic compounds on the surface of the Earth, in lakes or streams, or on objects or vegetation near the Earth’s surface, as a result of their separation from the atmosphere.
-Dry Deposition: Emitted from industrial complexes, vehicles and urban areas.
-Wet Deposition: Acids that dissolve in cloud droplets, (rain, snow, mist, and hail) that reach the ground.
-Acid Rain: rain or any other form of precipitation that is unusually acidic, meaning that it possesses elevated levels of hydrogen ions, can have harmful effects on plants and infrastructure.
-5.8.1: Outline the chemistry leading to the formation of acidified precipitations
*refer to Figure 5.14 on the back*
-5.8.2: Describe three possible effects of acid deposition on soil, water, and living organisms.
(1) increased levels of dissolved metals such as copper, aluminum, zinc, and lead. (2) breaks down lipids in the foliage and damages membranes which can lead to plant death. (3) an impoverished (poor) species structure.
-5.8.3: Explain why the effect of acid deposition is regional rather than global.
*Acid deposition is regional rather than globally because it is predominantly focused in a certain area. Such as in the 1980s and 1990s it affected Sweden, eastern North America, Germany, Belgium, and Norway amongst others.
-5.8.4: Describe and evaluate pollution management strategies for acid deposition.
*burn less fossil fuel (this requires a government initiative in order to switch to nuclear or Hydro-power)
*allow decomposition of plants to return nutrients to the soil and offset the acidification process.
*burn coal in presence of crushed limestone in order to reduce the acidification process
*switch to low sulfur fuel (oil/gas plus high-grade coal)
-Human Activities - Acidification is largely related to human activity. Many countries produce the pollutants and they may be deposited many hundreds of kilometers from their point of origin. However, there are variations within areas receiving acid rain. Some storms produce more acid rain than usual; lime-rich soils and rocks are better able to absorb and neutralize the acidity.
-Natural Sources/Causes - Bog moss secretes acid, heathers increase soil acidity and conifer plantations acidify soils. Litter from conifers is acidic and not easily broken down – the Sitka spruce is non-native to Britain and specialized decomposing bacteria are absent. This leads to the accumulation of an acid humus layer in the soil.
-Volcanoes are also important sources of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide. For example, before the eruption of the Soufriere volcano in 1995, Montserrat had some of the finest cloud forest in the Caribbean.
Punjab and indeed India is a land of festivals. Religious and secular festivals are celebrated with fervour alike. ਦਿਵਾਲੀ(Diwali), the Festival of Lights, is the most sacred Hindu festival while Eid is celebrated by Muslims. The following are the other festivals celebrated in India.
v • d • e PunjabiGurmukhi
Appendix 1 : Phonetics • Appendix 2 : Numbers
Punjabi grammar - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia • Online Punjabi Teaching -- ACTDPL, Punjabi University, Patiala • Omniglot: Useful Punjabi phrasesFurther readings
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is a term used to account for a number of lung conditions that are; irreversible, gradually worsen, and cause breathing difficulties and dyspnea (breathlessness).[1]
What are the Main Types of COPD?[2]
Emphysema - The elastic fibres of the air sacs (alveoli) and breathing tubes (bronchi & bronchioles) are irreversibly destroyed causing an inability to breathe regularly or empty the lungs of air.
Chronic Bronchitis - Increased mucus production (sputum) due to the constant swelling and irritation of the breathing tubes (bronchi & bronchioles).
Causes of COPD[3]
Cigarette smoking - The main cause of COPD. 15-20% of smokers will develop severe lung conditions.
Exposure to pathogens - Long term exposure to fumes, cigarette smoke, chemicals or dust[4]
Genetic - A very rare condition caused by alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency may cause COPD between the ages of 20-50.
Exercise as a Component of Treatment for COPD
If suffering from COPD, exercise can help you learn to use the lung capacity you have more efficiently. Attending exercise groups run by certified Exercise Physiologists can be inexpensive, improve your quality of life and increase your understanding of the disease as well as allowing you to meet people in the same situation and develop a support network. Pulmonary rehabilitation exercise programs are also beneficial as they can help you acquire the tools to be in control of your breathing, instead of your breathing controlling you and causing extra anxiety and stress. This will allow you to retain your independence and complete daily household tasks .[5][6]
What Benefits will I see from Exercise?[7]
Muscular strength, endurance, flexibility & balance
Levels of anxiety, stress and depression
Ability to retain independence and complete household tasks
Recommendations for Exercise[8]
There are four main recommended exercise types:
Cardiovascular / Aerobic Interval Training[10]
Progressive Strength / Resistance Exercises[11]
Pursed Lip Breathing - sealing the lips and breathing through the nose while exercising, this may reduce breathlessness during and post exercise effort.
Diaphragmatic Breathing - method of breathing used to strengthen the diaphragm,decrease breathing rate and therefore oxygen demand and decrease effort needed to breathe.
Guidelines you Should Know Before Getting Started
An exercise evaluation by a certified exercise physiologist(EP) is highly recommended to assess your current cardiovascular capabilities and any other conditions that may be present eg. cardiac issues. The EP will conduct a range of fitness and medical tests and determine an appropriate exercise program tailored just for you!
Further Information / suggested reading / Support Groups
COPD in Australia The Australian Lung Foundation
The COPD-X Plan - Australian and New Zealand Guidelines for the management of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 2012 COPD-X
↑ http://www.asthmaaustralia.org.au/COPD.aspx
↑ Salvi SS & Barnes PJ 2009. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in non-smokers. Lancet 374:733-43
↑ http://www.thoracic.org/clinical/copd-guidelines/for-patients/what-is-chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease-copd.php
↑ http://www.webmd.com/lung/copd/pulmonary-rehabilitation-for-copd
↑ http://my.clevelandclinic.org/disorders/chronic_obstructive_pulmonary_disease_copd/hic_diaphragmatic_breathing.aspx
↑ Puhan, M. A., Schünemann, H. J., Frey, M., Scharplatz, M., & Bachmann, L. M. (2005). How should COPD patients exercise during respiratory rehabilitation? Comparison of exercise modalities and intensities to treat skeletal muscle dysfunction. Thorax, 60(5), 367-375.
↑ Woods, K., Bishop, P., & Jones, E. (2007). Warm-up and stretching in the prevention of muscular injury. Sports Medicine, 37(12), 1089-1099.
↑ O'Donnell, D. E., Webb, K. A., & McGuire, M. A. (1993). Older patients with COPD: benefits of exercise training. Geriatrics, 48(1), 59.
↑ Storer, T. W. (2001). Exercise in chronic pulmonary disease: resistance exercise prescription. Medicine and science in sports and exercise, 33(7; SUPP), S680-S686.
↑ Gosselink, R. (2004). Breathing techniques in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Chronic Respiratory Disease, 1(3), 163-172.
↑ http://www.acsm.org/docs/current-comments/exerciseforpersonswithcopd.pdf
If a value is not found in a series, append it; otherwise, remove it. Returns true if added. (Modifies)
/case -- Case-sensitive comparison
{If a value is not found in a series, append it; otherwise, remove it. Returns true if added. (Modifies)}
/case "Case-sensitive comparison"
VCO, 2 Phase Comparators and Zener diode
File:4046 Functional Diagram.svg
The 4046 contains one Voltage Controled Voltage that require external capacitor and two resistors, two differents phase comparators and a zener diode of 5.2V. Is used like a low frequency synthesizer, frequently used with 4020, 4022, 4024 and others frequency dividers.
Used in applications like FM and FSK demodulators, VCOs, etc.
5 Be responsible for emptying the wastebaskets or trash container for one week. Separate all recyclable materials.
Assist with two of the following chores
b. Preparing a meal
c. Washing the car
d. Grocery shopping
Set the table and help do the dishes four times in one week.
The fork stands alone on the left side of the plate
The knife protects the spoon from the fork on the right side.
Also download this pdf item "Setting the table from Nutrition.wsu.edu
Choose bed linens that are comfortable and beautiful for you. If you like the way a bedskirt makes your room look, then by all means grab your favorite. If you're more minimalistic in your bed linen approach, that's fine too. A bed that is made, however simply, is still a major improvement over a mass of pillows and blankets.
Take off the used linens and put them in the laundry. Shake out any mattress pads, pillow protectors, and comforters that don't need to be laundered.If you use a bed skirt and it needs to be laundered, remove and replace it.
3.Put the Bottom Sheet On
If your bottom sheet is fitted, simply slip the corner pockets onto the ends of the bed and adjust the fitted sheet around the perimeter underneath the mattress pad and mattress. If your bottom sheet is flat, arrange the sheet so that 1 foot of sheet hangs over the edge of the top of your bed. Beginning with the sides of the bed create hospital corners and fold under the mattress and mattress pad. Continue on each side, creasing and folding as you go.
4.Add the Top Sheet
Place the top sheet evenly on the bed, and fold under with hospital corners only at the end of the bed. I like to leave the sides untucked, making it easier to get into the bed, but if it is a guest bed that is only rarely used, or you're a stickler about folding under, you can tuck under the sides as well. Just remember your comforter, quilt, or duvet will likely cover up the little bit of sheet hanging down.
5.Add a Blanket, Comforter, or Duvet
Smooth your choice of blanket evenly over the top of the bed, smoothing the edges as you go.
To place pillows under the blanket, fold the top sheet down over the blanket. Place pillows flat on the top sheet at the head of the bed. Fold blanket over the pillows towards the head of the bed, and smooth. Pillows can also be laid upright against the head of the bed. Do what makes the bed have that finished look that you love.
1.The more days in a row you make your bed, the faster you'll be at it. Before long, you'll rival the fastest bed makers around.
2.Rotate your pillowcases twice a week, and your bottom sheet once a week. These items get the most wear and tear.
3.Use mattress pads and pillow protectors to lengthen the time needed between laundering and protect your linens and mattress.
Demonstrate your ability to do two of the following
a. Vacuum the carpet or beat a rug
b. Dust furniture
c. Sweep or mop
Be responsible for emptying the wastebaskets or trash container for one week. Separate all recyclable materials.
a. Dust window sills
b. Remove spider webs
c. Wash windows
d. Clean woodwork
e. Separate all recyclable materials
Listen to the story of one of these children who helped
a. Samuel - http://www.wholesomewords.org/children/chbible/ch4.html
b. Namaan’s servant girl - http://www.desiringgod.org/ResourceLibrary/Poems/ByDate/1364_Naamans_Servant_Girl/
c. Jesus - http://www.bibleabookoftruth.com/TheExamplesOfJesus.pdf
Etiquete for children "Setting the Table" by Lisa Pietsch. September 6, 2005
Handipoints is a great place to create and print charts, worksheets, arts and craft, etc.
How to make a bed By Sarah Aguirre, About.com Guide. Retrieve May 11, 2010
v • d • e Adventist Adventurer Awards
Bible Friends ·  Community Helper ·  Finger Play ·  Healthy Food ·  Healthy Me ·  Insects ·  Music ·  Special Helper ·  Stars ·  Trains And Trucks ·  Weather ·  Woody Lamb ·  Zoo Animals
Alphabet Fun ·  Animal Homes ·  Animals ·  Beginning Biking ·  Beginning Swimming ·  Bible Friends ·  Birds ·  Crayons And Markers ·  Fire Safety ·  Gadgets And Sand ·  God's World ·  Helping Mommy ·  Jesus' Star ·  Jigsaw Puzzle ·  Know Your Body ·  Left And Right ·  Manners Fun ·  My Community Friends ·  Pets ·  Scavenger Hunt ·  Shapes And Sizes ·  Sponge Art ·  Toys
Artist ·  Bible I ·  Butterfly ·  Buttons ·  Fish ·  Flowers ·  Friend of Animals ·  Friend of Jesus ·  Fruits of the Spirit ·  Guide ·  Health Specialist ·  Home Helper ·  Honey ·  Honeybee ·  Music Maker ·  Reading I ·  Safety Specialist ·  Spotter ·  Swimmer I
Camper ·  Collector ·  Cooking Fun ·  Country Fun ·  Courtesy ·  Feathered Friends ·  Fitness Fun ·  Flowers ·  Friend of Nature ·  Gardener ·  Glue Right ·  Handicraft ·  Ladybugs ·  Reading II ·  Road Safety ·  Skier ·  Trees ·  Whales
Astronomer ·  Bead Craft ·  Build & Fly ·  Building Blocks ·  Cyclist ·  Disciples ·  Early Adventist Pioneer ·  First Aid Helper ·  Gymnast ·  Hand Shadows ·  Homecraft ·  Lizards ·  Magnet Fun ·  Media Critic ·  Olympics ·  Pearly Gates ·  Postcards ·  Prayer ·  Reading III ·  Sewing Fun ·  Swimmer II ·  Temperance ·  Tin Can Fun ·  Troubadour ·  Wise Steward
Basket Maker ·  Bible II ·  Bible Royalty ·  Caring Friend ·  Carpenter ·  Computer Skills ·  Environmentalist ·  Geologist ·  Habitat ·  Hygiene ·  My Church ·  My Picture Book ·  Outdoor Explorer ·  Pearly Gates ·  Prayer Warrior ·  Rainbow Promise ·  Reading IV ·  Reporter ·  Sign Language ·  Steps to Jesus
In essence, MFC is a SDK interface, a library consisting in a set of classes that act as wrappers around portions of the Windows API, so that C++ programmers may program Windows using some concepts of the object-oriented programming (OOP) paradigm and the C++ language (the Win32 API is based on C, as seen in C and Win32 API Section of the book). One should learn the Win32 API or at least have some ideas since some functions are absent from the MFC and would help you to better understand the SDK.
Some tools, such as Microsoft Visual Studio, are capable of automatically generating large amounts of MFC skeleton code for use in a project. Because of this, most MFC tutorials or reference materials will teach the subject using the automated Visual Studio tools, and leave out some of the gritty details. In this book where possible we try to be neutral.
Since the release of Visual Studio 6.0 and the MFC 6.0 little was known of the future support to the MFC since the company was favoring the .NET Framework. Version 7.0, 7.1 and 8.0 were mostly extensions to support the new OSs and to aid developers in migrating to the new framework. Since then information on the future of the MFC could be only extracted from Steve Teixeira, Microsoft Corporation, June 2005 paper - MFC: Visual Studio 2005 and Beyond, on the release of Visual Studio 2008 Service Pack 1, Microsoft seems to once again be actively supporting the MFC.
Many users today find it acceptable for a low complexity program to have a memory footprint of 30-80Mb (this is common in Java or .Net applications), low response times or "outside of your control" applications like the internet now provides. It is therefore debatable if the impact of  use of MFC in small applications outweighs the benefits the libraries provides. Most of the software made specifically for Windows today uses MFC.
You should prefer the Win32 API SDK, or an alternative wrapper for it, if you do not intend to:
Use other libraries that depend on the MFC.
Have a complex install for your application.To distribute MFC-Based project you must build it with static MFC libraries or distribute your project with the needed MFC dlls. There is no guarantee that your customer has the required dlls for your program. Old MFC-Based programs must work with new MFC versions. They should but don't do it always. Your customer will not be very happy if after installing your project some of his old software products begin hanging.
The MFC design principle is an attempt for simplification. The wrapper classes were designed so to simplify some tasks and automates others. Because of those facts, however, a certain amount of fine-tunable control was lost from the raw Win32 API or excessive automation was archived. The MFC has been recognized as having serious design flaws and inconsistencies and has not been actively maintained. The C++ language and best practices have evolved and today this constitutes a barrier for the utilization of the framework.
As MFC predates the STL standardization in to the C++ language, it implements its own versions of the STL containers, not as complete and even inconsistent, this simplistic solutions the MFC implementations tend to be faster, however you should prefers to use the STL when ever you can, it will make the code more C++ standard and permit easier portability in converting the code to multi-platform.
The MFC class library does not use Multiple Inheritance and was not designed with full support for Multiple Inheritance.
Since most MFC classes derive from CObject using Multiple Inheritance will be cause problems of ambiguity (any reference to CObject member functions will have to be disambiguated). Static member functions, including operator new and operator delete must also be disambiguated.
The best option is to avoid the use of Multiple Inheritance with MFC but take a look at Using C++ Multiple Inheritance with MFC (msdn.microsoft.com) for the needed information on how to bypass the limitations.
The MFC uses the Hungarian notation. It uses prefixes, like "m_" to indicate a member variable or "p" to indicate a pointer, and the rest of the name is normally written out in CamelCase (the first letter of each word is capitalized).
CObject as the Root for most MFC Classes
All the significant classes in MFC derive from the CObject class. The CObject does not have any member data, but does have some default functionality.
MFC requires header files that are separate from the standard <windows.h> header file. The core of the MFC system requires the inclusion of <afxwin.h>. Other header files that are of some use are <afxext.h> (for MFC extensions), and <afxcmn.h> (for the MFC common dialog boxes).
Simply changing the header files, unfortunately, is still not enough. The MFC DLL libraries must be linked to by the project, because the DLL files contain the class definitions that will be used throughout every program. To use MFC, you must link to the MFC libraries
Use in the header file of your application class and then include it wherever you need to use theApp.
You could try the AfxGetApp function to get a pointer to theApp, an efficient method of accessing members of your application is to make a pointer to theApp a member variable of the class which needs it -- for example:
First and foremost, it must be mentioned, that MFC is not the brand of C++ programming that "looks like C". MFC makes heavy use of the object-oriented features of C++, which can seem "dense" or even unreadable to a new C++ programmer. It is highly recommended that the reader become very familiar with C++ concepts such as classes and hierarchies now, if they are not familiar concepts yet.
The root class for MFC is the CObject class. CObject itself does not support multiple inheritance, but derivative classes do. Each application begins in a class derived from CWinApp. Every program must have a CWinApp class, and each application may only have one. CWinApp contains a number of functions for initializing an application, and controlling the instance handle (similar to the HINSTANCE member of the WinMain function). Programs that want to display a window must utilize a derivative of the CWnd class.
We will outline here a basic MFC program that will create a simple window, but won't handle any user input. From this basic outline, we will be able to tackle more difficult subjects.
As we see here, we are immediately relying on class definitions and inheritance, so it is a good idea for readers who are not completely familiar with these topics to brush up on them before continuing.
MFC provides a number of global variables, that are instantiated and then utilized in the underlying MFC framework to compile your program. We can see this in our basic example code when we use the variable m_pMainWnd.
The generic solution is PostQuitMessage([exit code]);, but take care to cleanup any lingering resources (closing documents, deallocating memory and resources, destroying any additional windows created etc), on the other hand using AfxGetMainWnd()->PostMessage( WM_CLOSE ); can be a better method in some situations, since it triggers the correct shutdown sequence. This is especially important on MDI/SDI applications because it gives a chance for documents to prompt for save before exit or for the user to cancel the exit.
To display a busy/wait mouse cursor the MFC as added a simple helper class. Instantiate a CWaitCursor class inside a function and a wait cursor is then displayed for the duration of that function, auto destruction of the class will restore the cursor state.
As it should be expected the MFC also wraps the Win32 thread primitives in special classes and functions of its own. For generic information of threads and C++ see the C++ Programming Wikibook section on Multitasking. The MFC devised threads in worker threads and GUI threads.
Worker threads are especially useful to perform background tasks, or any asynchronous work that doesn't require user intervention, a print job, calculations, waiting for an event, etc. To create a worker thread, the simplest way is to implement a function that will perform the desisted work, and then create the thread with AfxBeginThread() that will use that specific function.
Never use TerminateThread() unless you have no other choice to guarantee a thread termination. It is poor practice and dangerous.
A proper thread exit can be archived by a normal return from the thread (completion) or by signaling it to return prematurely. Since we are working on Windows and on a 32 bit bound CPUs (making 32 bits accesses atomic), it is considered safe (but not portable) to use a shared bool variable to indicate to a thread to exit, any other synchronization methods can be used if available.
Since the only issue regarding thread termination is on aborting a job or exiting the program without having threads running, when dealing with worker threads, in the class that created the thread on the destructor you should signal the thread to abort and then use WaitForSingleObject() to wait for the thread to terminate.
The goal of this chapter is to show that every square matrix is similar to one
We now consider the other kind.
Trespassing at Nights. 177  of the Crim. CodeElection / PleaCrown Election
SummarySummary DispositionsAvail. Disp.
6 months jail or $5,000 fineReferencesOffence Elements  Sentence Principles  Sentence Digestsview • talk • edit
Every one who, without lawful excuse, the proof of which lies on him, loiters or prowls at night on the property of another person near a dwelling-house situated on that property is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
R.S., c. C-34, s. 173.
In addition to the essential elements of time, jurisdiction and identity, the crown should prove:
a private dwelling-house is situated on that property
"loitering" is purposeless wandering about the area. It includes standing idly around, hanging around, lingering, sauntering, dawdling.[1]
"prowling" is conduct with a specific unlawful goal.[2]
A "lawful excuse" must include (1) a reason that is permissible under the law of the land to be on the property and (2) he must carry out his purpose in a lawful manner.[3]
The burden is on the defence to prove a lawful excuse.[4]
See also: R. v. Butt, 2010 NLTD 58
R. c. Cloutier, 1991 CanLII 2831 (QC CA) at para. 154
R. v. Lozowchuk 1984 CarswellSask 268
R. v. Dillon, [1964] 3 C.C.C. 205 (Alta. S.C. App. Div.)
R. c. Cloutier, 1991 CanLII 2831 (QC CA)
R. v. Walczak,  2008 ONCJ 70
R. v. Priestap,  2006 CanLII 12288 (ON CA)
↑ R. v. Andsten 1960 128 C.C.C. 311 (BCCA)
↑ R. v. Johnson, 1985 CarswellBC 680 (BCPC)
2 2012 Presidential Campaign: Political Ads and the Public Sphere
2.2 “You didn’t build that.”
Politics and the public sphere are not synonymous, but because the United States has a representative democracy, wherein we elect politicians to represent ordinary citizes in debates about our rights and our path forward as a country, politics is an important component of the public sphere. As Al Gore emphasizes in The Assault on Reason, "We are all responsible for the decisions our country makes." [1]
Political Ads have nearly always played a part in presidential campaigns. Starting first with newspaper cartoons and then progressing to TV commercials in the 1950s, political ads have continuously entered the public sphere via new domains. In this age of the Internet, political ads are able to access more people more frequently than ever. However, their usage has also shifted. Decades ago political ads primarily promoted a particular candidate. Now, they are more regularly used as a means to slander one’s opponent. In Al Gore’s The Assault on Reason, he discusses that our representative democracy relies on a “well-informed citizenry.” These political ads have grown to hurt such a citizenry. Their lack of reason reaches people through television and Internet and transforms the “marketplace of ideas” to a space in which “truths” no longer exist.[2] In the 2012 presidential campaign between President Barack Obama and Republican Senator Mitt Romney, both parties utilized political ads in order to use an opposing candidate’s words against him, to alter the truth, and to influence both the public sphere and the election.
“You didn’t build that.”
During an election campaign stop in Roanoke, Virginia, President Barack Obama gave a speech in which he addressed businesses. The President argued that businesses rely on both individual initiative and public infrastructure. To illustrate his point, he stated:
“If you were successful, somebody along the line gave you some help. There was a great teacher somewhere in your life. Somebody helped to create this unbelievable American system that we have that allowed you to thrive. Somebody invested in roads and bridges. If you've got a business—you didn't build that. Somebody else made that happen.”[3]
President Barack Obama was simply trying to stress the role that the government plays in promoting economic growth. His sentence, “If you've got a business—you didn't build that,” however, was used immediately by Obama opponents as a way to paint the President as an “out-of-touch, big-government liberal." Members of the GOP attacked the statement, assuring business owners that “Yes, you did build that."[4] Furthermore, the statement was used to fuel several conservative political ads. The phrase, “You didn’t build that” appeared in numerous commercials, was used to make memes in the blogosphere, and even became a hashtag on Twitter. Rather than highlighting the positive attributes of Mitt Romney, his campaign committee and fellow republicans chose to instead attack Barack Obama in their ads by taking advantage of this statement.
The President’s words were taken out of context and used against him. The majority of these anti-Obama ads featured his one sentence without including any other parts of the speech. They led Americans to believe that the President was someone who did not appreciate nor acknowledge private business owners and someone who thought the federal government was solely responsible for the success of these businesses. The “You didn’t build that” ads infiltrated the public sphere through television sets in the form of commercials, but also through computers. The phrase was used to make Internet memes, which were shared via Facebook, Twitter, Tumblr, and other blogs and social media sites. It was taken out of context by conservatives and employed to alter the truth about Obama’s feelings on small businesses. While it is unknown how many American citizens have actually read or watched the entire speech, it is clear that many have not. As Manjoo states in True Enough, many Americans have lost their desire to know the truth.[5] People believe what they want to believe, and the “You didn’t build that” political ads in the 2012 campaign are a perfect example. Numerous conservative citizens saw the ads as a way to confirm their prior biases against the President without ever researching the context in which his statement was spoken. The ads entered the public sphere in an attempt to sway public opinion on Barack Obama, and in many cases, succeeded.
2012 campaign ads were used to influence the public sphere by the democrats as well. In the case of the “47 percent” video, Senator Mitt Romney’s words were taken out of context and used to manipulate the truth.
During dinner at a private fundraiser, a member of the wait staff, Scott Prouty, secretly video taped a speech made by Mitt Romney. In the speech, Romney discusses the many American citizens who had already decided to vote for President Barack Obama “no matter what.” Romney stated that there was no use in trying to change these people’s minds because 47 percent of Americans are people who are:
“dependent upon government, who believe that they are victims, who believe the government has a responsibility to care for them, who believe that they are entitled to health care, to food, to housing, to you-name-it. That that’s an entitlement. And the government should give it to them. And they will vote for this president no matter what. … These are people who pay no income tax. My job is not to worry about those people. I’ll never convince them they should take personal responsibility and care for their lives.”[6]
Here, Senator Mitt Romney was attempting to stress the fact that many Americans hold previous biases in favor of the President, that there is no point in trying to win their votes because their minds are already made up. Scott Prouty, however, understood the senator to be claiming that he does not care about 47 percent of American citizens. Thus, Prouty released the tape stating that, “Everybody needed to hear that."[7] Like Prouty, the Obama campaign committee and fellow democrats seized the opportunity to present Romney as someone who does not care about the lower and middle classes, someone who is only concerned about the rich.
Rather than stating that Mitt Romney was not worried about gaining the votes of 47 percent of Americans, the political ads put out by the democrats took his words out of context. His line, “my job is not to worry about those people” was twisted around and presented in a way to make it appear as though the senator had stated that he did not care about 47 percent of the American population as people. Like, the “You didn’t build that” speech, Romney’s words entered the public sphere through television and were also made into memes which spread across the Internet. “47%” also became a hashtag on Twitter in which many people expressed that they were a part of the 47 percent of people that Romney was supposedly not worried about. Again, a politician’s words were taken out of context and presented to the American people in a way that hid the truth of his statements. Again, they were used to strengthen prior biases against him. And again, they influenced public opinion on Mitt Romney in a negative way.
Mitt Romney and Presidential Qualities Valued by Americans
The American Presidency: a job that has become the most powerful position in the world.  It is not surprising that after just a few years on the job, the President’s hair turns significantly grayer.  The President makes decisions that affect the people of the United States and countries around the world from today until well into the future.  So it is clear that selecting the next President of the United States is a big task, and it is one that we cannot take lightly.  We must make the right decision.  Do Americans have a fixed set of evaluative criteria in which we hope our favorite candidates can fit?  The trend through American history shows that nearly every President began his career as a lawyer.  With the exception of Presidents George H.W. Bush and George W. Bush, nearly every previous president in recent history served as an attorney prior to his candidacy.  Why do Americans see the qualities of these men as better “cut out” for the job?  Why do these qualities prevail over the qualities of successful businessmen, for example?  We Americans almost have an instinct from birth that we openly discuss every election year when selecting our next Commander In Chief.  American Presidents qualify for the job by meeting the requirements set in stone through civic discourse, and some make the cut while others like Mitt Romney are unsuccessful.
American companies have been a symbol of successful and stable employment for decades.   It can also be argued that the American dream is embodied by the small-business success story of entrepreneurs finding a niche in the market.  But have we determined that the successful people of the business world simply do not have the same qualities necessary to serve the greater need of the American people as a whole?  Business people fight for the fruits of capitalism and have a personality that helps them do so.  A contributor to WikiAnswers lists a few important qualities of a businessman: power and determination to succeed, intelligence, alertness, leadership, straightforwardness, and firmness in dealing with others [8].  So what’s the problem with them being elected the President?  These qualities seem to translate into any great leader, not only in business.  But it is straightforwardness that may pose a problem in the President’s position.  Oftentimes the President is required to sugarcoat certain matters where revealing the reality of a situation would cause a nationwide panic.
President Bush with New Orleans Mayor Another quality of concern, and perhaps the most important, is the businessman’s profit-based motivation behind his success.  From an early age, Mitt Romney was engaged in his father’s business and he even came from a wealthy family.  To voters, this portrays the former Governor of Massachusetts as greedy and disconnected from the reality of society and the perils of those struggling to feed their families.  This notion was solidified in 2005 in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina when, under the order of President George W. Bush, it took several days before the Federal Government and the National Guard got involved in saving the people of New Orleans.  Bush, a former businessman in the Texas oil industry, faced immense scrutiny for not taking immediate action to use federal funds to bring food, water, and safety to New Orleans residents.  This delayed action may have condemned President Bush’s breed as a qualified personality for the position.
Mitt Romney’s race for the Presidency may have been doomed by President Bush’s handling of Hurricane Katrina because it exposed the disconnected nature of the previous Republican president from the people.  With the help of the media, Americans saw the face of the President concerned, but sitting in a cushy seat on Marine One surveying the devastation of New Orleans.  In defense of Governor Romney, he used his vast financial resources for the ultimate benefit of millions.  His savvy business background led his private equity management firm to save ailing businesses from nearly inevitable bankruptcies.  His firm saved the 2002 Winter Olympics from the Games’ financial distress [9].  The unfortunate fate of the global unification of athletic ability known as the Olympics in 2002 may have become reality without Governor Romney’s support.
VP and 2000 Presidential Candidate Al Gore Despite Romney’s efforts, Americans have lost trust in businessmen as leaders of government.  Enron-era scandals during President Bush’s first term may have contributed to that even further.  Vice President and 2000 Presidential candidate Al Gore agrees.  In his book The Assault on Reason, Gore states his view that capitalism and democracy merely coexist in society.  He believes that a mixing of the two creates separation and is a threat to the public sphere as a healthy “conversation of democracy” [10].  The business leaders of a capitalist society certainly have a niche within the economic processes of government, perhaps as advisors to the president, but maybe not within the realm of America’s Chief Executive.
Governor Mitt Romney With bipartisan agreement, Republicans and Democrats alike can agree that Mitt Romney screwed up.  Al Gore presents the idea of “selective exposure” in his book The Assault on Reason to describe the phenomenon where citizens quite literally selectively expose themselves to reports that support their opinions.  Whether people approve of the former Governor or not, by no means did the majority of people experience selective exposure.  People listened to reports the media’s reports and Romney’s own words and decided he was not the right man for the job.  Voters were not emotionally attached to him, because he simply did not allude to being a loveable figure.  His aristocratic appearance made it difficult to picture him mingling with and comforting his constituents.  As decided through civic discourse, Americans have come to value presidents with an aura of humility and genuine compassion.  We want to see P.O.T.U.S. offering his sincere condolences at the funeral of a fallen war hero, or amidst the destruction following inevitable natural disasters.  This strong quality was one that the American people agree is one of President Obama.  It can be concluded that the People believe that all other Presidential requirements are contingent upon having this born-quality in our President.  Unfortunately, Governor Romney’s almost inhuman and impermeable nature that the business world successfully molded him to be was not well-received by voters in neither 2008 nor 2012.
Americans seek a steady, honest, and consistent President to support.  Much of Governor Romney’s scrutiny stemmed from his ability to become a different person between his days of Governor of Massachusetts and the Presidential campaign trail.  During an interview on NBC’s Meet the Press with Tim Russert in 2007, Governor Romney flip-flopped between his stance on difference issues—even whether he flip-flops or not.  Compared with his viewpoints during his gubernatorial term, Russert exposed that Romney had changed stances on issues like abortion, gun control, Iraq, gay rights, and even Ronald Reagan [11].  Governor Romney appeared quite transparent to voters in this interview, which perhaps lost him a bid for the Republican nomination in the 2008 election.  During the months leading up to that election, Democratic National Committee Communications Director Karen Finney stated in response to Romney’s fumbling on Meet the Press, “No matter how hard he tries to convince them otherwise, voters already know that today’s Mitt Romney bears no resemblance to the one from a few years ago, and that neither can be trusted to provide the American people the honest leadership they need and deserve” [12].  Especially on huge issues of public debate such as these just listed, a candidate cannot unexpectedly change his opinion and anticipate being elected President.  The People do not know who they are electing if the man they elect has changed his views within four years.
His Religion?
Three Witnesses of the Book of Mormon, 1883 Another issue that is important to note, pre-conceived bias or stereotyping can change the course and outcome of an election.  Most would agree that it is in the best interest of the People that the President has a relatively moderate political stance.  Thus, when a candidate has a quality that sets him apart from the majority of voters, it is difficult to view him as moderate.  As he is proud to publicly admit, Mitt Romney is a devout Mormon.  Voters questioned whether his religion would affect his success as President.  The reasoning behind this simply comes from the uncertainty of the Mormon sect of Christianity.  Filmmaker Mitch Davis, a professed Mormon, began a study upon hearing the public’s uncertainty with Romney’s religion prior to the 2008 elections.  The results of a recent L.A. Times/Bloomberg study were also strikingly conclusive.  37% of Americans would not vote for a Mormon [13].  Davis’s study sought to find out why exactly this number was so high.  Davis asked 600 South Carolina registered voters what they knew about the foundations and values of Mormons.  Most could not articulate the differences between Mormonism and protestant Christianity.  The survey indicated that 50% of Americans believe that Mormons only follow the Book of Mormon, and not the Bible.  Others believe Mormons still engage in polygamy, not knowing it was banned by the Mormon Church in 1890 [14].
We can see here that stereotyping from being uninformed can dramatically tilt the results of an election.  We as Americans have traditionally believed that religion is a driving force in a president’s success, but as times and people change, the moderate candidate will appeal to the greatest number of Americans.  President Obama is on-track with this route.  Although the media projects to us that he attends church on Christian holidays, President Obama leaves religious matters out of his policy decisions.  This effective approach appears to be valued by the majority of voters.
How We Have Come to Accept These Qualities as Sovereign
There are a variety of reasons why the ideal qualities of a successful president can be agreed upon by the majority of Americans.  Although candidates like Mitt Romney have strong backgrounds in specialized fields that the opponent lacks, such as business, a common set of characteristics qualify a candidate for the job.  The news media is one outlet that facilitates the spread of these ideals.  Media is a prime source for those in search of information, and outlets frequently praise candidates with the qualities they value.  Effectively, this builds a strong base of support and popularity for candidates that fulfill those qualities that media sources hold to be ideal.
Family values are another huge contributor to instilling in young Americans what older Americans hold to be ideal Presidential qualities.  From an early age, Americans commonly grow up adopting the political positions of our parents, and we keep those throughout our lives.  Older generations typically value a strong religious affiliation in a candidate.  However, the United States is seeing a trend in the opposite direction as the older generations die off and religious affiliation loses prominence in modern society.
Lastly and most importantly, it is the public sphere, as conceptualized by German philosopher and sociologist Jürgen Habermas that facilitates the spread of Presidential ideals.  As discussed above, the media lays the groundwork for discussion that Americans bring home to discuss in personal settings with friends and family.  The diverse background of every American provides a compelling and valuable input towards the “conversation of democracy.”  And it is through the public sphere as a forum in which political participation is enacted through discussion that we form public opinion of ideal presidential qualities.  Since George Washington was elected in 1789, our ideal presidential figure has changed considerably.  It is through the public sphere that ideas flowed over generations and the ideal president evolved.  From the early days of our Republic when the founding fathers empowered citizens to openly engage politically in all realms of life, Americans have been energized by the discussion of political issues.  It is through this public sphere that we have come to adopt the ideals of American presidents.
Without the effectiveness of a strong public sphere by a “well-connected citizenry,” the American Presidency would cease to exist as the operational one-third of our governing body (Gore 2007).  It is made possible through public involvement and interest in the politics that preside over the free world.  Without informed and open discussion of political matters that affect the American public, we are unable to pool our intelligence and elect candidates that will lead our country in the best direction for our present and future needs.  By electing the right candidate for the job, we can be confident that, whether we approve or disapprove of the present administration’s policies, our president acts for the greater benefit of the United States—for what he believes is right and just.
United States’ history is dotted with its fair share of national tragedies, from assassinations to natural disasters to terrorist attacks. Each time, the nation is rocked, and the public sphere shifts dramatically. One of the most notable examples, the September 11 attacks, brought together and mobilized the country, as many national crises do. A more recent example, however, the mass shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School, divided the nation and shook up American politics. Primarily due to the role of smaller special interest groups in the wake of the events at Sandy Hook, the shooting had a nearly opposite effect on the American public sphere and political conversation from the September 11 attacks; in fact, responses to the Sandy Hook shooting even undermined the very ideals of this nation’s democracy.
According to the Pew Research Center’s report six months after the fateful day of September 11, “The events of September 11 have affected public opinion more dramatically than any event since World War II. Clearly the attacks brought unparalleled national unity, and patriotism”[15]. All those who remember the attacks remember seeing American flags on nearly every house, car, and commercial building, a symbol of the changed American psyche. Ten years later, President Obama commented on this phenomenon in an op-ed piece published in USA Today regarding the anniversary of the tragedy. He recounts, “Americans came together in candlelight vigils, in our houses of worship and on the steps of the U.S. Capitol. Volunteers lined up to give blood and drove across the country to lend a hand. Schoolchildren donated their savings. Communities, faith groups and businesses collected food and clothing. We were united, as Americans”[16].
The changes in the American mentality were also highly apparent in public opinion polls in the months following September 11. Americans’ heightened senses of nationalism and patriotism translated into a higher trust in the federal government and the future of the nation as a whole. A December 2001 Gallup poll reported that President Bush had the highest approval rating ever recorded at 86%[17], and a Pew Research study the following March reported 82% approval for the federal government overall[15]. What’s more, the same Pew study yielded that Americans exhibited the highest levels of optimism following September 11 since 1959[15]. The collective American mentality of trust and patriotism allowed politicians to pass a wide variety of legislation with relative ease to address the aftermath of the tragedy.
Following September 11, some 48 terrorism-related bills were signed into law. One such bill, the Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act, which allocated $40 billion for “emergency expenses to respond to the terrorist attacks,” was passed in only four days[18]. Other legislation included the well-known Patriot Act, which passed almost unanimously, as well as laws restricting entry into the United States, heightening airport security, and providing health benefits for soldiers and those working at Ground Zero[19]. Because nearly the entire nation had the same mindset in light of the tragedy, the government faced little opposition and was able to pass these and more acts in an attempt to protect the American people.
Sandy Hook Shooting and the Public Sphere
Much more recently, in December of 2012, the nation faced another great tragedy. This time, twenty elementary school children and six adults were shot and killed at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Connecticut. Because the victims were so young and so many, this event evoked strong emotions from American citizens and lawmakers. However, it did not unify the country like the attacks of September 11 did. Rather, it split the country in two. On one side were those who supported stricter gun legislation, led by the families of Sandy Hook victims, and on the other were the National Rifle Association, who had clearly stated that they “would not budge an inch toward discussion of gun control”[20] and all those in agreement. The struggle between the two groups has not only divided the country, but it has also demonstrated the power of money to override the desires of the public sphere.
Leading the public sphere, the Sandy Hook families give voice to the majority of Americans, creating a grassroots campaign to advocate for national legislation restricting the purchase of guns. Before taking it to the national level, the families were successful in achieving the strictest gun laws in the country in their home state of Connecticut. The law expanded the state’s ban on assault weapons, limited magazine capacity, and required background checks for private gun sales[21]. The state victory was not all that the Sandy Hook families strived for, however.
Barack Obama with relatives of Emilie Parker, a child killed in the Sandy Hook shooting In early April, the parents marched through Washington for a week, speaking with lawmakers and sharing their stories in hopes of catalyzing national gun control legislation. They utilized their emotional appeal to combat the economic power of the National Rifle Association, pulling at the heartstrings of legislators and the president himself. Obama broke his reputation of long deliberation over emotional attachment, expressing strong support for the cause of the Sandy Hook families. Democratic senator Joe Manchin, who had been working toward a bi-partisan gun control agreement, spoke highly of the parents’ campaign as well. He recounted, “They said to me, ‘We know our babies couldn’t have been spared by this legislation.’ ...Their concern was, maybe you can spare one family what we’ve gone through. That’s the most unselfish presentation I’ve ever heard in my life. It just brought me to my knees”[22]. To end the week of campaigning, Obama invited Francine Wheeler, the mother of a six-year-old boy who died int he shooting, to deliver his weekly Saturday address for him, presenting one last emotional appeal [22].
N.R.A. Executive Vice President spoke out publicly against increased regulation on weapons.
The efforts of the families of the Sandy Hook victims paled in comparison to the power wielded by the National Rifle Association, however. All gun control bills, including those proposed to ban military-style assault rifles, limit magazine sizes, and expand background checks, were defeated in the Senate. Not only did the Senate ignore the pleas of the parents whose children had died in the Sandy Hook tragedy, they also “ignored the will of the American people,” said Gabrielle Giffords, a former representative who had been a victim of gun violence herself[23]. In fact, over 90% of Americans supported increased background checks and 56% supported a ban on assault weapons [23]. The national lawmakers, elected to represent the majority of the population's opinion, had done just the opposite. In making sense of the situation, it is necessary to note that the NRA donated $716,596 to candidates in the 2012 election, with Republicans receiving $634,146 [20]. In this instance, the public sphere rose up to combat an issue, but the wealth and power of a small group not only divided the nation; it also undermined the core of democracy.
Al Gore addresses the heart of the issue in his book The Assault on Reason, shedding light on the politics of wealth. According to Gore, “The derivation of just power from the consent of the governed depends upon the integrity of the reasoning process through which that consent is given. If the reasoning process is corrupted by money and deception, then the consent of the governed is based on false premises, and any power thus derived is inherently counterfeit and unjust”[24]. After the September 11 attacks, the country had a unified agenda. Very few spoke out against the mainstream because very few reported possessing beliefs against the mainstream. With relative ease, the government passed numerous laws addressing the aftermath of the terrorist attacks. Conversely, the wake of the Sandy Hook shooting yielded a divide in the public. The majority of Americans, not to mention grieving families and communities, had their desires ignored. Meanwhile, those who could pay hundreds of thousands of dollars had their ideas represented, reflecting the exact phenomenon of which Gore cautions, and reflecting the exact opposite of the intended function of democracy. “Their opinions [became] more important than the opinions of others. The nation’s priorities change[d]” [24].
The Detrimental Effects of Mudslinging on the 2012 Election
As technology rapidly improves, we are quickly learning the power and effectiveness that it holds. Technology is prevalent in most of our daily activities now more than ever. One realm that it holds the most power in is presidential elections. Using technology to reach voters is a great thing when it is used properly. Recently, the amount of negative advertising is blinding voters from choosing a candidate solely based on their opinions of their policies. Mudslinging is the attempt to discredit one’s competitor, opponent, etc., by malicious or scandalous acts [1] , and this act has become one of the most important aspects of winning an election. This past election between Barack Obama and Mitt Romney was one of the fiercest elections of all time. http://www.politico.com/news/stories/1112/83262.htmlThrough October 21st, Romney’s total percentage of negative ads on broadcast and cable television was 79.2%, and Obama’s percentage was 85.5%. These percentages are much higher than both the 2008 and 2004 election. In 2008, Obama had a negative ad percentage of 62.9% and John McCain’s percentage was 75.9%. In the 2004 election, Democratic nominee John Kerry had 44.3% negative ads, and former president George Bush had 72.4% negative ads. These numbers prove that the amount of mudslinging is increasing during every election and has no signs of slowing down. The negativity of presidential elections is increasing, and without a doubt it is changing the public sphere for the worse.
In the 1964 presidential election between Lyndon Johnson and Barry Goldwater, the first substantial case of mudslinging occurred and forever changed campaign tactics. The advertisement made by Johnson’s campaign, known as “Daisy Girl, began with an adorable little girl standing in a field, taking petals off a daisy while attempting to count the petals she had removed. As she is doing this, a frightening and ominous voice begins counting down from ten. When the voice says “zero”, they show a massive nuclear explosion, and conclude the commercial with these words, “These are the stakes, to make a world in which all of God’s children can live, or to go into the dark. We must either love each other, or we must die”. The screen cuts from the explosion, and the words “Vote for President Johnson on November 3” appear on the screen. A voice comes in as this pops up on the screen and says, “Vote for President Johnson on November 3rd. The stakes are too high for you to stay home”. http://michiganjournal.org/2012/10/30/presidential-mudslinging-in-the-past/
This ad frightened its viewers. During the 1960’s, nuclear warfare was becoming more of a threat. A few years earlier was the Cuban missile crisis, and in Goldwater’s campaign he had mentioned an idea of using nuclear weapons against Vietnam. With the threat of nuclear warfare looming in the minds of American citizens, this ad was an effective scare tactic towards voters. Professor Robert Mann, who wrote a book about this commercial titled Daisy Petals and Mushroom Clouds: LBJ, Barry Goldwater and the Ad that Changed American Politics, was quoted saying “His numbers never really went down. What went up though, in the polls, were American fears that if Goldwater were elected he would get us into a nuclear war”. http://thecaucus.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/10/24/revisiting-the-daisy-ad-revolution/ If an ad such as this were to be aired today, the effects would not be as detrimental. American people have become accustomed to seeing negative ads, and today’s viewers would look at one such as this at as ridiculous and far-fetched. Nevertheless, this ad was detrimental to Goldwater’s campaign, and changed the outcome of this election.
Fast-forward to the 2012 election. When in competition, showing any sign of weakness can be detrimental to a campaign. This was evident in the first debate on October 3, 2012 between Mitt Romney and Barack Obama. The questions that were asked by the moderator were related to fixing the economy. This was a huge opportunity for Romney to take a lead in the polls because his campaign revolved around improving the middle class and turning around the financial state of this country. As this debate went on, it became a fierce battle between the two candidates, often going over their allotted time for their statements and rebuttals. According to Jeff Zeleny and Jim Rutenburg, writers for the New York Times, “For much of the debate, the candidates commandeered the stage, taking control away from the moderator, Jim Lehrer of PBS, as they kept trying to rebut one other. At times, the moderator seemed as if he had walked off the stage, a result of new rules that were intended to allow for a deeper and more freewheeling discussion”. [25]
Things were very tense at times, and each candidate debated to the best of their ability. These kind of intense debates are great for elections because it is a one on one battle between the incumbent and the challenger. Negative campaigning strategies such as mudslinging advertisements have no importance in the debating arena. This is where they can show their confidence in their policies, and their intellectual fortitude by being able to think on their feet. Even after such a thrilling debate, each campaign still found it necessary to construct damaging advertisements against their opponent.
A large reason for the increased negativity of the 2012 election was the grounds that each candidate was running on. The incumbent, Obama, could not promote a new economic plan because in his previous four years in office, the economy was not in a good place. According to an article written by Donovan Slack in “Politico”, “Obama couldn’t run on an economic rebound, and some of his biggest accomplishments, such as his health care law, are unpopular in the polls”. Slack goes on to say, “Romney has tried to persuade the American people to fire the incumbent – but has been light on details of his own”. http://www.politico.com/news/stories/1112/83262.html
With this being said, the two candidates felt the need to turn to negative advertisement, and they did so in historic fashion. These actions do not just damage the integrity of the presidential campaign, but the American citizens, as a whole, are starting to lose faith in the whole process. According to an article written by CNN writer Bob Greene, “In 2008, potential voters were asked if both candidates would make good presidents, 25% said yes. This year, (2012) asked the same question, only 12% said yes”. http://www.cnn.com/2012/09/02/opinion/greene-campaign-mud-slinging Greene also goes on to compare current presidential elections to warfare. He says that in war, if both sides know they could each destroy their opponent, the necessary steps are taken to push for a peaceful resolution. In politics, both sides refuse to back down; they are always pushing for the upper hand. Greene says, “A willingness to use any means to win an election will inevitably, in the end, produce a president. But then the president will have to lead a nation that has turned darkly cynical about the entire process”. Since the United States gained its independence, it is known that trust between the American people and its leader is instrumental in building a strong, united nation. In Greene’s article he quotes John Adams, one of our founding fathers, saying, “There must be decency and respect and veneration introduced for persons of authority of every rank or we are undone. In popular government, this is our only way”. http://www.cnn.com/2012/09/02/opinion/greene-campaign-mud-slinging This quote directly applies to the situation we are in now. There need to be drastic changes made to presidential campaigning.
The public sphere is a place of conversation, and fully embodies the American culture. Jurgen Habermas, the man who coined the phrase “public sphere”, describes it as a conversation space where public opinions are formed. In today’s world, the public sphere has, in many ways, been negatively affected by technology. Presidential elections are revolved around who has better campaign ads, and who spends more money. As I previously mentioned, well over half of the campaign ads are degrading in some way. As a result, American citizens are losing faith in who they elect as president. Manipulating voters is not a strategy that our founding fathers advocated. If this trend continues, our country will no longer be unified; it will turn into an “us versus them” mentality and we will be divided. Are the presidential candidates solely to blame for this trend of negativity? Absolutely not. News stations and social media play a huge role in this downfall. For example, a staunchly Republican group called “Bold Republic” released a viral YouTube video interviewing uneducated inner city citizens. They asked simple questions such as, “What kind of benefits are you getting?” One man answered this question saying, “Let’s see, whatever the hell they got to offer. Like, I don’t even know, it ain’t even like they got a checklist”. This video is an extreme example of the propaganda that is used against presidential candidates without the candidate’s approval. This is the kind of social media that is distorting our views of presidential candidates. As these problems continue, it is evident to me that the public sphere is developing a distorted view of what makes a good presidential candidate.
↑ Gore, Al. The Assault on Reason. New York: Penguin, 2007. 2.
↑  Gore, Al. The Assault on Reason. New York: Penguin, 2007. 5-11.
↑ CNN, Wire Staff. "'You Didn't Build That': A Theme Out of Context." 01 Sep 2012. Web. 25 Apr 2013. <http://www.cnn.com/2012/08/31/politics/fact-check-built-this>.
↑ Tapper, Jake. "Did Obama Say, 'If You Have a Business, You Didn't Build That'?." 16 Jul 2012. Web. 25 Apr 2013. <http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/politics/2012/07/did-obama-say-if-youve-got-a-business-you-didnt-build-that/>.
↑ Manjoo, Farhad. True Enough: Learning to Live in a Post-fact Society. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2008.
↑ Video. YoutubeWeb. <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M2gvY2wqI7M>.
↑ Good, Chris. "The Lesson of Mitt Romne'ys 47-Percent Video: Be Nice To The Wait Staff?." 14 Mar 2013. Web. <http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/politics/2013/03/the-lesson-of-mitt-romneys-47-percent-video-be-nice-to-the-wait-staff/>.
↑ [“What are the Qualities of a Good Businessman?” WikiAnswers. <http://wiki.answers.com/Q/What_are_the_qualities_of_a_good_businessman>].
↑ ["Mitt Romney's Key Quandary." Investor's Business Daily. Apr 13 2011. ProQuest. Web. 1 May 2013.].
↑ [Gore, Albert. The Assault on Reason. New York: Penguin, 2007. Print.]
↑ ["Massachusetts Mitt Meets Right Wing Romney on Meet the Press." PR Newswire: 0. Dec 16 2007. ProQuest. Web. 1 May 2013.].
↑ ["Mitt Romney Presidential Candidacy Faces Critical Disadvantage; Mormon Religion Unknown and Misunderstood - New 527 Org - RunMittRun.Org Created to Address it." PR Newswire: 0. Jul 21 2006. ProQuest. Web. 1 May 2013.].
↑ a b c "Public Opinion Six Months Later." Pew Research Center for People and the Press. Pew Research Center, 07 Mar 2002. Web. 25 Apr 2013.
↑ Obama, Barack. "Let's Reclaim the Post-9/11 Unity." USA Today. 08 Sep 2011: n. page. Web. 25 Apr. 2013.
↑ "Latest Summary: American Public Opinion and the War on Terrorism." Gallup. Gallup, Inc., 21 Dec 2001. Web. 25 Apr 2013.
↑ "2001 Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act for Recovery from and Response to Terrorist Attacks on the United States." H.R. 2888 (107th). govtrack.us. Web. 25 Apr 2013.
↑ Villemez, Jason, and Dalia Mortada. "9/11 To Now: Ways We Have Changed." The Rundown: A Blog of News and Insight. PBS, 14 Sep 2011. Web. 25 Apr. 2013.
↑ a b Castillo, Mariano. "NRA clear on gun debate stance: arm schools." CNN U.S.. CNN, 21 Dec 2012. Web. 25 Apr 2013.
↑ Wilkie, Christina. "Connecticut Passes Nation's Strictest Gun Law In Wake Of Sandy Hook Massacre ." Huff Post Politics. Huffington Post, 04 Apr 2013. Web. 25 Apr 2013.
↑ a b Parsons, Christi, Kathleen Hennessey, and Michael A. Memoli. "Sandy Hook and Grief: Gun Control Advocates Plead Their Case." Los Angeles Times 13 April 2013, n. pag. Web. 25 Apr. 2013.
↑ a b Cassidy, John. "Could The N.R.A.’s Big Victory Backfire?." New Yorker. 18 Apr 2013: n. page. Web. 25 Apr. 2013.
↑ a b Gore, Al. The Assault on Reason. New York: Penguin Books, 2007. 73-76. Print.
↑ http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/04/us/politics/obama-and-romney-hold-first-debate.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0
History of the Irish Language (at Wikiversity's Department of Irish Studies)This page is a soft redirect.
You can see things in motion all around you: on a school's playground full of happy students, in cars driving along the streets, in raindrops falling to the ground. Children on swings, going down slides, jumping rope, or playing soccer are all opportunities to make observations about motion. Eventually, the soccer ball will stop rolling, the swing will slow down and come to a stop, and a child may trip and fall to the ground. We can see behavior in motion occurring, but what actually causes the behavior? Is the behavior of motion applied everywhere in the universe? The answer can be found in Newton’s three laws of motion, which he published in 1687.
Sir Isaac Newton was one of the greatest scientists and mathematicians that ever lived. He was born in England on December 25, 1643. He was born the same year that Galileo died. He lived for 85 years. Isaac Newton was raised by his grandmother. He attended Free Grammar School and then went on to Trinity College Cambridge. Newton worked his way through college. While at college he became interested in math, physics, and astronomy. Newton received both a bachelor's and master's degree.
While Newton was in college he was writing his ideas in a journal. Newton had new ideas about motion, which he called his three laws of motion. He also had ideas about gravity, the diffraction of light, and forces. Newton's ideas were so good that Queen Anne knighted him in 1705. His accomplishments laid the foundations for modern science and revolutionized the world. Sir Isaac Newton died in 1727.
"Every object in a state of uniform motion tends to remain in that state of motion unless an external force is applied to it." Force is a push or pull that causes an object to  move, stop, or change direction. In the absence of an unbalanced force, an object in motion will maintain this state of motion. This law is often called "the law of inertia" (inertia is the property of an object that resists movement by a force). This simply means that there is a natural tendency of objects to keep on doing what they're doing, to resist changes in their state of motion, whether that means a resistance to starting or a resistance to stopping. An object either remains at rest or continues to move at a constant velocity, unless acted upon by a force.
This law of motion is qualitative--it describes how things work without providing exact measurements or mathematical formulas. What are some everyday examples of Newton's First Law? How does this apply to wearing seat belts? How does it apply to a game of pool or air hockey? How does it apply to objects in outer space? What about the rotation of our own planet? What about sliding a heavy desk across the room?
If you roll a ball across the gym, it will eventually come to a stop. Is this in violation of the First Law of Motion? Pay attention to the wording "in the absence of an unbalanced force." What forces are acting on the ball? A nice demonstration would be to have a ball sitting in the middle of a wagon. What happens to the ball when you start pulling the wagon? Now that the wagon is rolling, what happens to the ball if you suddenly stop?
Stated simply, the amount of Force needed to change an object's acceleration is dependent upon the mass of the object.
The relationship between an object's mass m, its acceleration a, and the applied force F is F = ma. Acceleration is produced when a force acts on a mass. The greater the mass (of the object being accelerated) the greater the amount of force needed (to accelerate the object). Everyone unconsciously knows the Second Law. Everyone knows that heavier objects require more force to move the same distance as lighter objects. How does the second law apply to lifting weights? To shooting a gun? What about a car accident?
The product of mass and velocity i.e.
The amount of force acting on an object is a product of its mass and acceleration:
If you use the same amount of force to throw a soccer ball and a bowling ball, the soccer ball will experience faster acceleration than the bowling ball, because the soccer ball has less mass.
If you drop a bowling ball and a soccer ball from a ladder, the acceleration due to gravity will be the same (they will travel at the same speed), but due to the increased mass, the bowling ball will hit with greater force.
Imagine you and your friend are moving desks down a hallway and want to move at the same speed so you can talk. One of you is pushing a very heavy desk while the other is pushing a very light desk--the amount of force needed to move at a particular speed varies with the mass of the desk.
For every action there is an equal and opposite reaction. This means that for every force there is a reaction force that is equal in size, but opposite in direction. That is to say that whenever an object pushes another object it gets pushed back in the opposite direction equally hard. If one object A exerts a force Fa on a second object B, then B simultaneously exerts force B on A.
When you jump off a small rowing boat into water, you will push yourself forward towards the water. The same force you used to push forward will make the boat move backwards.
When you lean against the wall, it is pushing against you with the same force that you are pushing against it. This may be more apparent if you have one student lean against another student (the student acting as the wall will have to exert force to keep the other student from falling over).
Ex.  The baseball forces the bat to the left (an action); the bat forces the bat forces the bat to the right (the reaction).
Ex. When air rushes out of a balloon, the opposite reaction is that the balloon flies up.
Professor Dave explains Newton's First Law, Second Law, and Third Law. These are highly recommended!
Here is a Crash Course video on Newton's Laws of Motion
Veritasium exposes a common misunderstanding of the Third Law
Rap-style music videos on Newton's Laws of Motion:
First Law: An object at ___ tends to stay at ________, and an object in ________ tends to keep moving with the same _________ unless an ____________ force acts on it.
Second Law: The amount of ________ needed to make an object change its ____________ depends on the _______ of the object.
Third Law: When one object exerts a ________ on a second object, the second object exerts an __________ and __________ force back on the first object.
True or False?
For a book sitting on the table, all forces acting on it are balanced.
If an object is not accelerating or decelerating, no forces are acting on it
An object's inertia causes it to come to a rest position.
The only way to slow down a moving object is to apply a net force to it.
Objects tend to stay moving because of a force called inertia.
Which Law?
Which of Newton's Laws explains why satellites need very little fuel to stay in orbit?
A frog jumps from a lily pad but instead of continuing in a straight line it is pulled down by gravity, landing in the water.
After starting your car you notice that if you give it more gas by pushing on the accelerator, it goes faster.
You are standing up on a bus and when the bus stops suddenly your body is thrown forwards
Little 5-year old Juan is throwing rocks with his dad, but gets upset that the rocks he throws do not go as far as his dad's rocks.
A swimmer pushes back on the water with her arm, but her body moves forwards.
When I lean against the wall, I do not fall down.
A person is in a car that has no head rest. When the car is hit from behind the person suffers a serious neck injury.
Solve it!
A car with a mass of 1,000 kg is at a stoplight. The light turns green, the driver pushes the gas pedal, and the engine applies a net force of 4,000 Newtons (a Newton is a unit of force). What is the car's acceleration?
A billiard ball and a golf ball travel towards each other at the same speed. What happens when they collide?
[BONUS] When you hit a baseball with a bat, the ball pushes on the bat with an equal but opposite force that the bat exerts on the ball (Third Law). Why is it that the ball changes direction and goes flying away, but that the bat continues moving the same direction it was going? What effect did the ball have on the bat? Can you use the Second Law to explain all the interactions between the bat and the ball? How does the First Law play into all this?
Blood vessels transport blood cells, nutrients and oxygen to body tissues. They also take waste and carbon dioxide away from the tissues.
User in a CAVE. The user's head position is tracked and the graphics on the walls are computed for this tracked position.
This tutorial discusses off-axis perspective projection in Unity. It is based on Section “Vertex Transformations”. No shader programming is required since only the view matrix and the projection matrix are changed, which is implemented in C#.
The main application of off-axis perspective projection are virtual reality environments such as the CAVE shown in the photo or so-called fish tank VR systems. Usually, the user's head position is tracked and the perspective projection for each display is computed for a camera at the tracked position such that the user experiences the illusion of looking through a window into a three-dimensional world instead of looking at a flat display.
Off-axis projection is characterized by a camera position S that is not on the symmetry axis of the view plane.
Off-Axis vs. On-Axis Perspective Projection
On-axis projection refers to camera positions that are on the symmetry axis of the view plane, i.e. the axis through the center of the view plane and orthogonal to it. This case is discussed in Section “Vertex Transformations”.
In virtual reality environments, however, the virtual camera often follows the tracked position of the user's head in order to create parallax effects and thus a more compelling illusion of a three-dimensional world. Since the tracked head position is not limited to the symmetry axis of the view plane, on-axis projection is not sufficient for most virtual reality environments.
Off-axis perspective projection addresses this issue by allowing for arbitrary camera positions. While some low-level graphics APIs (e.g. older versions of OpenGL) supported off-axis projection, they had much better support for on-axis projection since this was the more common case. Similarly, many high-level tools (e.g. Unity) support off-axis projection but provide much better support for on-axis projection, i.e. you can specify any on-axis projection with some mouse clicks but you need to write a script to implement off-axis projection.
Off-axis perspective projection requires a different view matrix and a different projection matrix than on-axis perspective projection. For the computation of the on-axis view matrix, a specified view direction is rotated onto the z axis as described in Section “Vertex Transformations”. The only difference for an off-axis view matrix is that this “view direction” is computed as the orthogonal direction to the specified view plane, i.e. the surface normal vector of the view plane.
The off-axis projection matrix has to be changed since the edges of the view plane are no longer symmetric around the intersection point with the (technical) “view direction.”  Thus, the four distances to the edges have to be computed and put into a suitable projection matrix. For details, see the description by Robert Kooima in his publication “Generalized Perspective Projection”. The next section presents an implementation of this technique in Unity.
The following script is based on the code in Robert Kooima's publication. There are very few implementation differences. One is that, in Unity, the view plane is more easily specified as a built-in Quad object, which has corners at (±0.5, ±0.5, 0) in object coordinates. Furthermore, the original code was written for a right-handed coordinate system while Unity uses a left-handed coordinate system; thus, the result of all cross products has to be multiplied with -1. Also, the code here takes into account that the camera might be seeing the back-face of the Quad object.
Another difference is that the rotation of the camera's GameObject and the parameter fieldOfView are used by Unity for view frustum culling; therefore, the script should set those values to appropriate values. (These values have no meaning for the computation of the matrices.) Unfortunately, this might cause problems if other scripts (namely the script that sets the tracked head position) are also setting the camera rotation. Therefore, this estimation can be deactivated with the variable estimateViewFrustum (at the risk of incorrect view frustum culling by Unity).
If the parameter setNearClipPlane is set to true, the script sets the distance of the near clip plane to the distance between the camera and the view plane plus the value of nearClipDistanceOffset. However, if that value is less than minNearClipDistance then it is set to minNearClipDistance. This functionality is particularly useful when using the script to render mirrors as described in Section “Mirrors”. nearClipDistanceOffset should then be a negative number that is as close to 0 as possible while avoiding artifacts.
Mathf.Rad2Deg / cameraComponent.aspect *
To use this script, choose Create > C# Script in the Project Window, name the script "ObliqueProjectionToQuad", double-click the new script to edit it, and copy & paste the code from above into it. Then attach the script to your main camera (drag it from the Project Window over the camera object in the Hierarchy Window). Furthermore, create a Quad object (GameObject > 3D Object > Quad in the main menu) and place it into the virtual scene to define the view plane. Deactivate the Mesh Renderer of the Quad in the Inspector Window to make it invisible (it is only a placeholder). Select the camera object and drag the Quad object to Projection Screen in the Inspector. The script will be active when the game is started. Add the line
Note that there are probably some parts of Unity that ignore the new projection matrix and that therefore are unusable in combination with this script.
Note that this code was written for the built-in Plane object instead of the Quad object.
Mathf.Rad2Deg / cameraComponent.aspect *
In some applications of off-axis projection (e.g. mirrors, portals, or magic lenses), the off-axis cameras might render into render textures, which are then used to texture surfaces. In the case of stereo rendering, there are usually two render textures (one for each eye). Thus, texturing with the resulting render textures usually has to use the correct render texture. To this end, Unity provides the built-in shader variable unity_StereoEyeIndex which is 0 for the left eye and 1 for the right eye. For example, a shader might read a color leftColor from the render texture for the left eye and a color rightColor from the render texture for the right eye. Then the shader expression lerp(leftColor, rightColor, unity_StereoEyeIndex) computes the correct color when using the render textures for stereo rendering. Complete shader code for this approach is included in Section “Mirrors”.
Unless stated otherwise, all example source code on this page is granted to the public domain.
Welcome to NYC, where, around every corner, there is something on the wall. Each bend you turn there is another piece sprayed or written on the wall. They all vary: KEZ1...SUBJECT...TKZ...You watch people turn their heads in disgust as they look at this vandalism.
I turn and smile at it.
Welcome to the world of graffiti. However, before you turn your head from this page, know this:
If Leonardo da Vinci had painted Mona Lisa on his neighbor's wall, then they would have turned their heads in disgust. But it was a professional canvas painting, and is now famous. But, due to the massive abuse of spray paint on walls, any form of calligraphy that has arrows, dots, stars, and fast curves in it is looked at with disgust. If anyone did that to my house, I'd get them locked up for it.
But as an artform, it's beautiful.
Modern Physics : Constants
This is a brief listing of some constant values that are used in this book. Constants are currently listed in no particular order.
c = 2.99792458 × 108 m·s-1
G = 6.6742 × 10−11 m3·kg-1 s-2
K = 8.988 × 109 N·m2·kg-2
k =  1.3806505 × 10−23 J K-1
R = 8.314472 J·mol-1·K-1
Vmol = 22.41383 m3·kmol-1
Some values from the 2002 CODATA recommended values of the Fundamental Physical Constants.
See Constants Information at NIST.
This page will introduce you to some additional utilities. They are not required to use a grsecurity-enabled system, but are very useful and thus recommended.
Paxctl is a user-space utility for controlling PaX flags of executables (see Appendix/PaX Flags for a list of these flags).
Download the latest version from the PaX website at http://pax.grsecurity.net/. In our case we downloaded paxctl-0.7.tar.bz2. Paxctl packages are not signed. Change into the directory you downloaded the package to and run the below commands.
Installs the paxctl program to /sbin.
Installs paxctl's man pages to /usr/share/man/man1.
If you need to change either of these locations, modify the Makefile.
To display all available command-line switches, run paxctl --help. Read the man page for more detailed information.
PaX control v0.7
Copyright 2004,2005,2006,2007,2009,2010,2011,2012 PaX Team <pageexec@freemail.hu>
-p: disable PAGEEXEC            -P: enable PAGEEXEC
-e: disable EMUTRAMP            -E: enable EMUTRAMP
-m: disable MPROTECT            -M: enable MPROTECT
-r: disable RANDMMAP            -R: enable RANDMMAP
-x: disable RANDEXEC            -X: enable RANDEXEC
-s: disable SEGMEXEC            -S: enable SEGMEXEC
-v: view flags                  -z: restore default flags
-q: suppress error messages     -Q: report flags in short format
-c: convert PT_GNU_STACK into PT_PAX_FLAGS (see manpage!)
-C: create PT_PAX_FLAGS (see manpage!)
Lets query what, if any, PaX flags have been enabled for /usr/bin/vi:
PaX control v0.7
Copyright 2004,2005,2006,2007,2009,2010,2011,2012 PaX Team <pageexec@freemail.hu>
As you can see, paxctl could not display the flags because vi does not have the appropriate program header. We need to convert the header and query the flags again.
Note that paxctl does not make backup copies of the files it modifies. It is recommended that you make backups of the binaries you want to modify.
PaX control v0.7
Copyright 2004,2005,2006,2007,2009,2010,2011,2012 PaX Team <pageexec@freemail.hu>
With the appropriate program header in place, we can query and modify the PaX flags of vi.
The pspax program displays the run-time capabilities of all programs you have permission for. It is part of the pax-utils package. Pax-utils can be found at http://dev.gentoo.org/~vapier/dist/. It contains many useful tools for PaX but is not as critical as paxctl. The pax-utils package is maintained by the Hardened Gentoo Project.
For more information, see the Gentoo Linux guide to pax-utils.
Gentoo Linux and Debian GNU/Linux users (and possibly others) can install the pax-utils package the same way they install any other application in their system. Below are instructions on how to compile and install it from the source.
Download the latest version from http://dev.gentoo.org/~vapier/dist/. In our case we downloaded pax-utils-0.4.tar.xz, the latest stable release at the time of writing. Change into the directory you downloaded the package to and run the below commands.
Installs the pspax, scanelf, dumpelf and scanmacho programs to /usr/bin.
Installs README, BUGS, and TODO files to /usr/share/doc/pax-utils/.
Installs man pages of pspax, scanelf and dumpelf to /usr/share/man/man1.
If you need to change any of these locations, modify the Makefile.
To display all available command-line switches, run pspax --help. Read the man page for more detailed information.
-a, --all         * Show all processes
-e, --header      * Print GNU_STACK/PT_LOAD markings
-i, --ipaddr      * Print ipaddr info if supported
-p, --pid         * Process ID/pid #
-g, --group       * Process group/gid #
-n, --nx          * Only display w^x processes
-w, --wx          * Only display w|x processes
-W, --wide        * Wide output display of cmdline
-v, --verbose     * Be verbose about executable mappings
-C, --nocolor     * Don't emit color in output
-B, --nobanner    * Don't display the header
-h, --help        * Print this help and exit
-V, --version     * Print version and exit
Pspax shows the PaX flags of a single program as a string of characters (e.g. "peMRS"). Lowercase character means the flag is disabled, uppercase means it is enabled. Below is a table that shows these characters and their corresponding PaX flags used by grsecurity. The "Details" column contains a link to a detailed explanation of each flag.
The command pspax -p <process_id> displays information about a specific process, identified by its PID. It is unlikely that you happen to know or remember the PID of a process, so it is easier to refer to them by name. The below example uses the pidof command to find the PID of a process which it then passes on to pspax:
Managing the Executable Stack of Binaries (execstack)
Execstack is a tool to set, clear or query executable stack flag of ELF binaries and shared libraries. It is part of the prelink program, but your Linux distribution may provide it as a separate package.
You are very likely to find the prelink and/or execstack packages using your distribution's package management system. At least Gentoo, Debian, Red Hat and distributions based on them provide a prelink and/or execstack packages.
To display all available command-line switches, run execstack --help. Read the man page for more detailed information. Online version of the man page can be found at http://linux.die.net/man/8/execstack.
Usage: execstack [OPTION...]
-c, --clear-execstack      Clear executable stack flag bit
-q, --query                Query executable stack flag bit
-s, --set-execstack        Set executable stack flag bit
-?, --help                 Give this help list
--usage                Give a short usage message
-V, --version              Print program version
Report bugs to <jakub@redhat.com>.
To check if a library has executable stack enabled, run:
The dash means libcrypto does not require an executable stack. If it did, the line would start with a capital "X" instead of a dash.
To query the status of all libraries in your system, run:
Next Page: Runtime Configuration |
. The Laplace transform of
.
Proof.
.
Using the above and the linearity of Laplace Transforms, it is easy to prove that
!
Fluid statics or hydrostatics is the study of fluids at rest.  It is a sub-field of fluid mechanics.
File:FF4 WT Oa.jpg
Reaching Odin requires that you be able to fly around the overworld, so it is probably best to attempt a battle with Odin after defeating the Giant of Babil.   In addition, you must complete the Cave of Summoned Monsters in order to challenge Odin; otherwise he will simply tell you to come later.
Fly to Baron Castle and enter it.
File:FF4 WT Ob.jpg
Go through the two gates until you reach the first interior room.  In this room, go to the right, and up the staircase.  Continue through the castle, going through the door in the tower at the back right of the castle.  In this next room, go down the staircase on the left, and continue on to the right in this room.  When you go down the staircase at the end of this hall, you will find the King of Baron, who will then fight you as Odin.
File:FF4 WT Oc.jpg
↑ Gifford (1988) 430 translates the term as fetus at birth, which is incorrect.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
Arksey, H., & O'Malley, L. (2005). Scoping studies: towards a methodological framework. International journal of social research methodology, 8(1), 19-32.
Colquhoun, H. L., Levac, D., O'Brien, K. K., Straus, S., Tricco, A. C., Perrier, L., ... & Moher, D. (2014). Scoping reviews: time for clarity in definition, methods, and reporting. Journal of clinical epidemiology, 67(12), 1291-1294.
This section is intended to provide an understanding of how the Kapampangan Language is spoken from the perspective of an English-speaking person who wish to learn Kapampangan. When we speak and write, we use words to express our thoughts and ideas. The Kapampangan language has thousands of words. Following the standard grammatical structure in English of classifying words this grammar text is presented using the eight groups or classes of words known as Parts of Speech.
The names of the Parts of Speech are: Nouns, Pronouns, Verbs, Adjectives, Adverbs, Prepositions, Conjunctions, and Interjections. Here are the equivalent names in Kapampangan.
Words are tools of communications. That is why each group has its special work to do. Nouns are the names of persons, places, and things. Pronouns take the place of nouns. Verbs are words that express action. Adjectives and adverbs help express the ideas that give color and more definite meanings to nouns, verbs, and other words. A preposition is a word used before another word to indicate how that word is being used. Conjunctions are joining or connecting words, and interjections are words that come between words that express different ideas. The most important fact to keep in mind when learning a new word is its function or use in a particular sentence. If you keep this in mind, you will easily learn the word and how it is used in relation with other words in sentences.
The first group or class of the Parts of Speech is the Noun - each group has its special work to do.
A Noun is a word used to name something. It is the word that tells what you are talking about. For example, there are names for persons, animals, places, and objects that can be pointed out and recognized. There are also names for substances, qualities, actions, and measures of time or quantity.
In Kapampangan, like English, nouns and other parts of speech have no gender.
There are several kinds of nouns depending on how they are used.  Some kinds of nouns are common nouns, proper nouns.and collective nouns.
A common noun names any one of a class of persons, places, or things. An example of a common noun is the word 'tau' (person) and the word 'tau' can be used to refer to any person in the world.
However, when we want to refer to a particular person, we must use a special name. The name of a particular person might be 'Juan' or 'Pedro'. These particular names are called proper nouns. A proper noun is the name of a particular person, place, or thing.
A collective noun names a class or group: e.g. aguman, pibale-bale, balayan, kumite, at aliwa pa.
The following list includes examples of different kinds of nouns
Examples of Nouns used in Sentences (the words in bold letters are the nouns):
Ing talaturung i Juan mayap yang kaluguran.
(The teacher John is a good friend.)
Ing asu, ing pusa, ampon ing kabayu mikakaluguran la.
(The dog, the cat, and the horse are friends.)
Ing kakung bale king Menila malapit ya king palengke.
Grove provides integrated solutions to a wide range of facilitation and organization-change challenges. They pioneered creative, visual approaches to traditional organization-change work that consistently stimulate participation, focus big-picture thinking, enhance group memory and win commitment to action.
The Grove's Strategic Visioning™ Process engages an entire organization in combining its best hindsight and foresight in aligned action. It uses large, graphic templates or Graphic Guides® to step groups through the development of traditional strategic analysis, creative visioning work, focused action planning, and organization-communications design. The Strategic Visioning Process illustrates an optimal path through these activities and, like other Grove tools, invites variations and improvisation.
Preparing: Sponsors, process-design teams, and consultants determine the Outcomes, Agenda, Roles and Rules for the process, and plan for involvement of critical stakeholders.
Exploring and Learning: Participants review the history of the organization for insight into values and core competencies, scan the relevant environment, and study industry structures and competitive patterns.
Agreeing on Current Realities: Complete traditional SWOT analysis, trends, assumptions and imperatives, and reviews of existing constraints and givens.
Opening to a Vision: Tap the group's stories about the future—its aspirations and concerns—and find shared themes about future direction.
Creating Strategies: Ground the visions in clear strategies that articulate the bold steps and initiatives needed to move forward.
Implementing Change: Involve the organization in creating action plans for strategies and initiatives, changing processes, and refining value propositions.
Living the Vision: Determine ways to walk the talk every day and keep the vital strategic conversations alive in the organization.
Large 4'x 8' preprinted graphic templates.
Powerpoint templates that match the preprinted, allowing one to easily create a powerpoint slides that capture items recorded during the use of the preprinted templates.
The process must be followed.
Facilitators of the process should avail themselves of the training, though a seasoned facilitator can use the template guides to learn the best use and process for each template.
The results are positive and exciting.
Groups walk away with a vision of the future and elements of the vision which easily can be translated into strategies.
The process itself is quite scalable, and individual templates can be used for many other processes.
Introduction to Sociology is a featured book on Wikibooks because it contains substantial content, it is well-formatted, and the Wikibooks community has decided to feature it on the main page or in other places. Please continue to improve it and thanks for the great work so far! You can edit its advertisement template.
Sociology is the study of human social life. Human social life is complex and encompasses many facets of the human experience.  Because of its complexity, the discipline of sociology has been subdivided over time into specialty areas.  The first section of this book covers the foundations of sociology, including an introduction to the discipline, relevant study methodologies, and dominant theoretical perspectives.  The remaining chapters focus on the different areas of study in sociology.
A PDF version is available.  (info)
Course Adoptions (if you adopt this text for your course, please make a note of it on this page)
Technology, the Internet, and Virtual Worlds
Consumer and community health is the area of health that focuses on acquiring knowledge of laws to protect health, recongnizing rights as a consumer, taking action if consumer rights are violated, making a plan to manage time and money, choosing healthful entertainment, analyzing the ways that messages delivered through technology might affect health status, making responsible choices about health care providers and facilities, evaluating ways to pay for health care, investgating health careers, and investigating public and international health needs.  This chapter provides the health knowledge needed to teach young people important life skills for consumer and community health.
Health Goals For Consumer and Community Health
Acquire knowledge of laws to protect health.
Recognize my rights as a consumer.
Take action if my consumer rights are violated.
Choose healthful entertainment.
Analyze ways messages delivered through technology might affect health status.
Evaluate ways to pay for health care.
Investiage health careers.
Investigate public and international health needs.
Being a consumer we all have rights or privileges that we are guaranteed.  These rights consist of:
The right to satisfaction of basic needs
The right to environmental health.
One of the biggest rights we have is the ability to appeal health related fruads or false information.
Health Fraud - Is the advertising, promotion, and sale of products and services that have not been scientifically proven safe and effective
The food and drug administration (FDA) identified categories in which health fraud is most frequent.  These are:
Nutrtional supplements.
In order for individuals to find information and report suspected health fraud there are several federal agencies that one can contact.
Managing time and money are very important when learning to live a healthy life.
Time management is organizing time to accomplish priorities.  This may include spending time with family and friends have managing time for doing homework.  In order to manage time organization needs to be present.  Here are a few tips for staying Organized.
Keep a calender or organizer as a reminder of when important tasks need to be done.
Keep your room and locker neat.
Managing money is very important in a person life.  People who manage their money have less stress and are not worried about paying bills or over spending. An important aspect of managing money is the use of a budget.
Follow these simple steps to complete a budget that will help you manage your money!!!          * List all income - Income is money that is received. A students income may include, an allowance, money from part time jobs, and money that is given as a gift.
List Expenses - Expenses are the amounts of money needed to purchase or do something.
Keep a balanced budget - A budget is a plan in which a person's income is equal to or more than expenses.
"Comprehensive School Health Education"  5th Edition. Linda Meeks, Philip Heit, Randy Page.
Neo-Quenya has 2 cases that together form the traditional genitive case of an inflected language (e.g. Latin, German or Greek): the genitive and the possessive.
7Ya;Y `B `C7E5nE rocco i aranwa "the king's horse"
This means that the horse at this moment belongs to the king. It has no implications of origin or previous ownership.
Of course this ownership is always related to the tense of the verb: it is the present owner at the moment indicated by the verb:
5#8 aY`C `B `Vm#yE nas coa i eldava "it's the elf's house"
So this house is at this moment the property of that elf.
5$8 qE6t# `B yR2$yE nes parma i vendeva "it was the book of the girl"
In this case the girl was the present owner of the book at the moment of the sentence, but it is quite possible that at this moment she no longer owns it.
The possessive case is also used to denote a property of a person or object:
9lU5$ `B 1.D7RyE huinë i taureva "the gloom of the wood"
`Cj1E7R `B 5$6nE altarë i nerwa "the length of the man"
We also use this case to denote the substance from which something is made:
7T`V 1RjqEyE rië telpeva "the crown of silver"
This meaning is of course related to using an adjective:
`B 1RjqT5# 7T`V i telpina rië "the silver crown"
When we use a possessive case the material from which the crown is made is emphasized (just as can be seen by the English translations).
Subject of nouns with an "about" noun
In situation 6 of the usage of the genitive case we have seen that the words after the preposition "about" are in the genitive. The subject of these words is however in the possessive case. This can again be translated by "of" but in this case "of" is equivalent to the preposition "by":
zR4#j$ `C1E6nE quentalë atarwa "the story of (i.e. by) father"
`VzR,G `B 5.DalYyE equessi i naucoiva "the sayings of (i.e. by) the dwarves"
(for more about this see also Verbal nouns)
The possessive is always put behind the noun to which it belongs:
t~B7T `B 5.DaYyE míri i naucova "the dwarf's jewels"
1~C7T `B `VmlDyE tári i eldaiva "the elves' queen"
A possessive can also be used predicatively:
`B aY6t# 5~C 8.D7Y2$yE i corma ná Saurondeva "the ring is Sauron's"
A noun that is accompanied by a noun in the possessive case normally shouldn't get the article i (however the article is sometimes written for poetic reasons).
So we have to take into account that a noun in the possessive can be translated with either an indefinite or a definite article:
aY`C `Nd1E6nE coa ohtarwa "a house of a soldier"/"the house of a soldier"
aY`C `B `Nd1E6nE coa i ohtarwa "a house of the soldier"/"the house of the soldier"
The basic ending is \hÎD -va after vowels and \nE -wa after consonants.
`Vm# elda "elf" → `Vm#yE eldava
`C7E5 aran "king" → `C7E5nE aranwa
Singular Exceptions: Penultimate + Vowel
Words that end on a vowel and of which the penultimate syllable is short (see Phonology), lengthen the final vowel before adding \yE -va:
1ÎEj%`C tyalië "play" → 1ÎEj%~VyE tyaliéva
`N7Yt$ oromë "hornblower" → `N7Yt~VyE oroméva
1E5^ tano "crafstman" → 1E5~NyE tanóva
Words of two syllables that contain the diphthong -ui in the first syllable and that end in a vowel, also lengthen this vowel before adding the ending:
9lU5$ huinë "gloom" → 9lU5~VyE huinéva
1lUt# tuima "sprout" → 1lUt~CyE tuimáva
(but e.g. zGs# quinga "bow" doesn't contain the diphthong lU ui because z qu stands for cw).
Words that have a stem-form in a vowel (I-stems and U-stems) use this stem-form:
aU7Y curo "device" → aU7UyE curuva
Words that have a stem-form in a consonant use their basic form and not the stem-form:
eT`N5 fion "hawk" → eT`N5nE fionwa (stem-form eT`N2\ fiond-)
1T7T`N8 tirios "burg" → 1T7T`N8nE tirioswa (stem-form 1T7T`N81\ tiriost-)
`Ct%j amil "mother" → `Ct%jnE amilwa (stem-form `Ct%j°\ amill-)
iRj$6 seler "sister" → iRj$6nE selerwa (stem-form iRj°\ sell-)
9R5$1 henet "window" → 9R5$1nE henetwa (stem-form 9R5$1+\ henets-)
1Ej#5 talan "floor" → 1Ej#5nE talanwa (stem-form 1Ej#t\ talam-)
5~B8 nís "woman" → 5%,RyE nisseva (stem-form 5%,\ niss-)
j%8 lis "honey" → j%,RyE lisseva (stem-formj%,\  liss-)
eTj%1 filit "little bird" → eTj%zD filiqua (stem-form eTj%a\ filic-)
5$j$1 nelet "tooth" → 5$j$zD nelequa (stem-form 5$ja\ nelc-)
zR,R1 quesset "pillow" → zR,RzD quessequa (stem-form zR,Ra\ quessec-)
Words with a long vowel that is shortened in the stem-form:
1~Cj tál "foot" → 1EjnE talwa (stem-form 1Ej\ tal-)
5~V6 nér "man" → 5$6nE nerwa (stem-form 5$6\ ner-)
t#aGj macil "sword" → t#aGj%yE maciliva
`Vm# elda "elf" → `VmlDyE eldaiva
(note: this ending forms a diphthong when the noun ends in -a, -o or -u)
Words ending in `V -ë drop this `V -ë and have ~ByE -íva as ending:
j#,R lassë "leaf" → j#,~ByE lassíva
Words ending in `B`V -ië drop this `B`V -ië and have ~ByE -íva as ending:
t^65%`V mornië "darkness" → t^65~ByE morníva
Words ending in `B -i (or with a stem-form in `B -i) also get ~ByE -íva. Any preceding long vowel can be shortened:
The dual is regular: u-duals get \yE -va, t-duals get \nE -wa:
aG7ÎD1 ciryat "a pair of ships" → aG7ÎD1nE ciryatwa (nom.sing.: aG7ÎD cirya)
`Cm& aldu "a pair of trees" → `Cm&yE alduva (nom.sing.: `Cm# alda)
When the nominative partitive plural ends in \j°% -lli, the possessive ends in \j°%yE -lliva:
t#aGj macil "sword" → t#aGj°% macilli → t#aGj°%yE macilliva
When the nominative partitive plural only has a single l before the final i then the possessive ends in -líva:
aG7ÎD cirya "ship" → aG7ÎDj% ciryali → aG7ÎDj~ByE ciryalíva
iD7E1 sarat "sign" → iD7E1Rj% sarateli → iD7E1Rj~ByE saratelíva
Willfulness does not accept reality as it is in the moment. Willfulness hopes that by denying reality reality will somehow change or that someone else will take the action to change reality in the desired direction. Willfulness refuses to tolerate unpleasant emotions and insists that whatever causes the unpleasant emotions shouldn't exist.
German verbs can be classified as weak or as strong. Weak verbs are very regular in their forms, whereas strong verbs change the stem vowel.
With its Anglo-Saxon origin, this notion is also present in English.
Some German verbs have weak and strong forms. This may depend on meaning:
Der Botschafter wurde nach Berlin gesandt.
Der Süddeutsche Rundfunk sendete ein Konzert aus dem Gasteig.
Or on transitive vs. intransitive use:
Das Hemd hing auf der Wäscheleine.
Sie hängte das Hemd auf die Wäscheleine.
Liste der starken und unregelmässigen Verben
A "mixed" verb. Combinationof strong + weak verbs.
Strong (passive) and weak (active)forms: "Ich habe ihn erschreckt."(I scared him.) and"Ich erschrak bei der Explosion."(I was startled/scared bythe explosion.)
Frieren takes the helping verb habenor sein, which depends on itsmeaning. In most cases ("to be cold")is "hat gefroren". However meaning of"to freeze, turn into ice," turns outto be "Der Boden/Das Wasser iststeif gefroren." (The ground/water has frozen solid.)
Also glimmte andhat geglimmt (weak).
Hängen is weak in transit ("Erhängte das Bild an die Wand.") andstrong in intransitive nomances("Das Bild hing an der Wand.").
Past form hieb (strong verb)is used and the meaning becomes"struck (him) with a weapon."
Kennen is a "mixed" verb.Combination of strong andweak verbs.
Können becomes past participle,once added with an infinitive:"Ich habe nicht gehen können."
Liegen (lie, recline, strong)and (sich) legen (lay, put, weak)are not the same.
The past participle ismögen, when used with ainfinitive: "Sie hat nicht gehenmögen."
Weak form quellte.
Weak form hat gequellt.
The verb reiten is onlyused for riding an animal(e.g., horseback riding); toexpress "ride" in atransportation sense (bus, train,etc.), fahren is used.
A "mixed" verb, combiningelements of strong and weakverbs.
The weak forms saugte andhat gesaugt. Mostly the weak form is used.
The strong forms schuf/hatgeschaffen are used when themeaning is "created" ("Sie hat schöneSachen geschaffen.").
To express "accomplished" or "madeit," the weak forms schaffte/hat geschafftare used: "Er hat esgeschafft (ein Tor zu machen)!"
In the sense of "leave" or"depart" scheiden takes sein as ahelping verb: "Karl istaus dem Dienst geschieden."
Although the strong form ispreferred, schleifte and hat geschleift(weak) are also used.
There are two forms of schwellen:Strong (above) for the sense of "toswell up/fill with wind," andWeak to "fill (something) upwith wind/to swell (something) up."
In the sense of "transmit" or"broadcast" only the weak formssendete and hat gesendet are used.The weak forms may also beused in the sense of "send."
With an infinitive, thepast participle is sollen: "Ichhabe nicht gehen sollen."
In some southern German andAustrian dialects, stehen takes seinas a helping verb: "Er istim Eingang gestanden."
In the sense of "drift" or"float" treiben takes sein asa helping verb: "Das Eis istden Fluss entlang getrieben."
In the sense of "to wax"(skis, etc.), wachsen is weak:(wachste and hat gewachst).
In the sense of "to soften"(up), weichen is weak: (weichteand hat geweicht).
Also wendete and gewendet(car, hay, etc.).
As a helping verb inthe passive voice: worden, asin "Ich bin oft gefragt worden."(I have often been asked.)
Wissen is a "mixed" verb,combination of strong and weak verbs
With an infinitive, the pastparticiple is wollen: "Ich habenicht gehen wollen."
Do not confuse with ↑zeihen.↑
Sometimes you will run into verbs such as anrufen, aufräumen, mitkommen. These verbs are examples of Separable Prefix Verbs. When you see these kinds of verbs, it will have a preposition prefix followed by a verb. These verbs separate when they are the main verb of a sentence.
I am calling the butcher.
Ich rufe den Metzger an.
I am trying on the boots.
Ich probiere die Stiefel an.
Reflexive Verbs are verbs involving the reflexive pronoun "sich" and its conjugations that reflect, or refer back, to the performer of the action. There are only accusative and dative reflexive pronouns.
Accusative reflexive pronouns are used when there is no direct object. Dative reflexive pronouns are used when a direct object is present. However, when using a direct object, the possessive is not used.
Accusative: Ich verletze mich. I injure myself.
Dative: Ich verletze mir die Hand. I injure my hand.
Accusative: Er hat sich verbrannt. He burned himself.
Dative: Er hat sich den Daumen verbrannt. He burned his thumb.
1st sg.
1st pl.
2nd sg. or pl. formal; 3rd.
Notice that all reflexives are the same as the Akkusativ and Dativ Pronoun Declensions — except for 3rd Person and 2nd sg./pl. Person formal (man/sie/Sie), in which case all reflexives are sich.
Dürfen means to be allowed/permitted, may.
dürfen (They are allowed to/You (formal) are allowed to)
Darf ich einen Freund zum Fest bringen? May I bring a friend to the party?
Man darf hier nicht rauchen. One is not allowed to smoke here.
Niemand durfte die Stadt verlassen. No one was allowed to leave the city.
können means 'to be able, capable'. It is cognate with the English word 'can'/'could'.
Ich kann das nicht tun. I can't do it.
Wir konnten sie nicht erreichen. We could not reach them.
mögen expresses a pleasure, or desire. In the present tense, it is used transitively with people or food. e.g. 'Ich mag dich' 'I like you' or 'Ich mag Erdbeeren' 'I like strawberries'. The subjunctive (of the past) expresses preference to perform the action of a subordinate clause 'Ich möchte nach Frankreich reisen' I would like to travel to France'. 'mögen' is cognate with the English verb 'may'/'might'.
möchte (I would like to)
möchtest (You would like to)
möchte (He/She/It would like to)
möchtet (You would like to)
möchten (They would like to)
Ich möchte nach Deutschland reisen. I would like to travel to Germany.
Der König sagte: "Er möge eintreten." - The king said: "He may enter.")
müssen expresses something forced on you. It is etymologically related to 'must'.
Ich muss nicht arbeiten. ~ Ich brauche nicht zu arbeiten.  I don't have to work.
Ich darf nicht arbeiten.  I must not work.
Note that the negative nicht müssen is not the English must not, but rather need not or don't have/need to.
There are however some northern German uses like:
Du musst das nicht tun meaning Du solltest das nicht tun.
Although all these modals have a normal perfect:
It holds also for the verbs sehen and hören:
Ich habe ihn kommen sehen - hören.
Use of modal verbs as full verbs
Modal verbs can be used as full verbs indicating motion. In these cases, the infinitive verb is only implied.
Er muss nach Berlin. (implied: gehen or fahren) He must go to Berlin.
The Present Tense is used for..
The Present Tense (="das Präsens") is used to describe situations that are happening and aren't the past.
For Ongoing Action, like I'm swimming in the pool now
Everyday Truths, like The moon and stars will come at night.
Future meaning, if explicitly stated, like I will run tomorrow morning
Actions started in the past and still going on in the present I've been cleaning the house all day
Ich bin am Fahren.
(I am at the driving)
I'm driving.
The person to say this would be driving during the time they say this and they would continue to drive after stating this for some time.
You nominalize the verb ("fahren" (driving) becomes "das Fahren") and add a "am".
You can also do this with forms of the past.
Als er kam war ich gerade am Abwaschen.
(When he arrived i was at "the dishwashing")
I was washing the dishes when he arrived.
So the verb "sein" (to be) includes the information what tense he was doing what he did in.
Here the progressive meaning is also emphasized with the word "gerade" meaning something like: I was JUST ABOUT to wash the dishes(not the same though because it means he is already doing it and not about to start).
The Perfect Tense or das Perfekt of verbs is used to talk about things in the past which have already happened. It is sometimes referred to as "Present Perfect Tense". This can cause confusion. While the formation is similar, the meaning and usage differs.
As in English, the perfect tense consists of two parts. An auxiliary (Hilfsverb) and a past participle (Partizip Perfekt). Compare the examples given below with their English translations.
+ 3rd-person sing.
There are some groups of regular verbs that slightly differ from that pattern.
Some verbs drop the prefix ge-. Like the other regular verbs they end in -t. These are:
Verbs with unseparable prefixes (be-, ent-, er-, empf-, ge-, ver-, miss-, zer-)
Another group is formed by verbs with separable prefixes
With separable verbs, the prefix ge is placed between the prefix and the rest of the verb.
Separable and inseparable verbs are distinguished by the stressed syllable:
Er hat das Buch ins Chinesische übersetzt.
Irregular verbs always end in -en. The vowel can be different from the one in present tense. Look at some examples:
3rd-person sg.
You have to learn these forms by heart. How you can obtain the necessary information and how you should learn them is described in section tips for learning below.
Note that irregular verbs can be combined with the same prefixes as described above. The same rules regarding the prefix ge- apply. Therefore the forms for schreiben, verschreiben and aufschreiben are geschrieben, verschrieben and aufgeschrieben respectively.
A lot of verbs that are irregular in English are irregular in German, too. Unfortunately, this is not always true. It is most likely when the German and the English verb are related (i.e. look similar).
Regular verbs are much more frequent than irregular ones, but a lot of the irregular verbs are used very frequently, for instance haben, sein, gehen, kommen etc.
Whether a verb is irregular or not does not influence the choice of auxiliary.
Most verbs take haben as auxiliary.
A) Verbs which take an accusative object (transitive verbs)
B) Reflexive verbs always take haben as auxiliary.
The auxiliary sein is taken by verbs that describe
C) the relocation from one place to another or
Note: none of the verbs from groups C-E is combined with an accusative object.
In southern German (mostly Bavarian) use, also stehen, sitzen und schwimmen are treated like a (non-)movement:
Aber: Ich habe den See durchschwommen.
Er ist nicht lange geblieben.  He didn't stay long.
Er ist immer nett gewesen.     He has always been nice.
Some of the verbs from group A can be used with an object in accusative case. In this case, they take haben as auxiliary.
Ich bin nach Kalifornien gefahren.                  I drove to California.
Ich bin mit dem Auto nach Kalifornien gefahren.     I drove to California by car (literally: with the car)
Ich habe das Auto (Akk.) nach Kalifornien gefahren. I drove the car to California.
The same applies to fliegen (fly), starten and reiten (ride a horse).
Unlike in English the difference in meaning between Perfekt and Präteritum is rather small. The main difference between those two forms lies in usage. Perfekt is mostly used in spoken language, while Präteritum is mostly reserved for written texts. However, the modals, the verbs haben and sein and the expression es gibt are almost exclusively used in Präteritum - even when speaking. One reason might be the frequency of those verbs, the other reason is most likely the very complex perfect forms for modals.
On the other hand, the perfect tense is used in writing too. The more oral the text is, the more perfect tense you will find (for example in personal letters etc.). If an action has happened very recently, it tends to be in perfect tense too.
Look at the following conversation and concentrate on the distribution of Präteritum and Perfekt.
(1) Anna: Hallo Peter. Wo warst du denn? Ich habe dich schon lange nicht mehr gesehen.
(2) Peter: Hallo Anna. Ich war die letzen zwei Wochen im Urlaub.
(3) Anna: So? Wo warst du denn genau?
(4) Peter: Auf der Insel Elba, in einem fantastischen Hotel. Es gab jeden Abend ein Büffet und man konnte essen, so viel man wollte!
(5) Anna (lacht): Ich glaube dir sofort, dass dir das gefallen hat. Du hast aber nicht nur gegessen, oder? Was hast du denn den ganzen Tag gemacht?
(6) Peter (lacht auch): Nein, natürlich nicht. Ich bin viel geschwommen, ich habe mir die Insel angeguckt und am Abend bin ich immer zum Tanzen in eine Disco gegangen.
(7) Anna: Aha... Und? Hast du jemanden kennen gelernt?
Used forms to talk about past events
How to find the forms in a dictionary
Unless you have a special dictionary for learners, not all the forms will be spelled out. Regular forms are often omitted. The same goes for the auxiliary haben. If no forms are indicated, you may assume that the verb is regular and has the verb haben as an auxiliary. However, if you find the abbreviation itr or i. (for intransitive) behind the verb, the auxiliary is often sein. Intransitve verbs don't have an accusative object and these are often used with sein, while transitive verbs (tr. or t.) are always conjugated with haben.
Sometimes not even the forms of irregular verbs are given in the lexicon entry. Irregular verbs are often indicated by irr. for irregular or a similar abbreviation. In that case, look for a list of irregular verb forms in the index of your dictionary.
To find the past participle of separable verbs you often have to cut the prefix and look for the base form of the verb. If you look for aufstehen (get up), you probably find your answer in the entry of stehen. Remember: The prefix ge goes in between the prefix of the separable verb and the verb itself: auf + ge + standen.
When working online, you might consider using Canoo. Enter an arbitrary form of the word you are interested in into the mask. Hit enter. On the results page, choose the link Flexion behind the appropriate entry (or inflection in the English version). You will get a table of all possible verb forms.
Irregular forms are just that - irregular. Therefore you have to learn them by heart. By learning four forms, you can construct every verb form for a given verb.
Infinitiv    Präsens          Präteritum    Hilfsverb  + Partizip Perfekt
...
All forms - besides the infinitive of course - should be in 3rd-person singular.
A good way to learn those forms is to put them on small cards. On one side you write the infinitive and probably a sentence to illustrate the usage of the verb. On the backside you put the rest of the forms and - if needed - a translation of the verb. When learning, you look at the infinitve and try to remember the forms and the meaning. You can easily verify your hypothesis by flipping the card.
If you encounter a verb you want to learn, look it up in a dictionary. If it is irregular, learn the verb together with its defining forms. Like that, you spare yourself a lot of trouble later on.
The perfect tense consists of two verb forms: an auxiliary and a past participle. Together they form the so called predicate. The predicate consists of all verb parts in one clause.
The sentence structure in perfect behaves as with every two parts predicate (modals plus infinitive, separable verbs etc.)
In a main clause (Hauptsatz), the conjugated verb (the auxiliary in this case) is in the second position and the past participle stands at the end of the clause.
Sein Vater               hat  gestern ein fantastisches Essen gekocht.
Gestern                  hat  sein Vater ein fantastisches Essen gekocht.
Both: Yesterday, his father cooked a fantastic meal.
Ein fantastisches Essen  hat  sein Vater gestern gekocht.*
It was a fantastic meal that his father cooked yesterday.
The third example is correct, although not very frequent. You might use it if you want to stress what exactly his father has prepared or if you have to repeat the sentence because your partner has not understood this particular part of it.
Second position does not equal second word, as you can see above. However, there is only one group of words allowed before the conjugated verb (the auxiliary in this case). Such groups of words are called "phrases". While you can put very long phrases in front of the conjugated verb, you must not use two. Therefore the sentence "Gestern sein Vater hat ein fantastisches Essen gekocht" is wrong.
Subordinated clauses begin with a subordinating conjunction. Well known conjunctions of this kind are
*In spoken language weil is often used like und or aber, which means that it is followed by a main clause. However, after weil, speakers often pause for a little while. There is no pause after either und or aber.
Weil + main clause is not allowed in written language. Therefore you may say: Ich gehe, weil - (little pause) - ich bin müde. But you wouldn't use it in a letter. At least not yet.
In subordinated clauses the conjugated verb, i.e. the auxiliary, stands at the very end of the sentence. The past participle stands directly in front of it. For example:
Ich weiß,         dass  du      das             gemacht     hast.
Ich glaube dir,   weil  du      bisher noch nie gelogen     hast.
Ich glaube dir,   denn  du hast bisher noch nie gelogen.
Ich gehe,         wenn  du                      gegangen    bist.
Regular (or better, weak) verbs take the ending -te. The person endings are added afterwards. Note that the forms for 1st- and 3rd-person singular are the same.
If the stem of a verb (infinitive minus -en) ends in -t (arbeit-en), -d (end-en) or consonant plus m or n (öffn-en, rechn-en) you add an -e before the preterite endings.
The strong verbs belong to this group. The endings are easy to memorize. It is harder to know which vowel to use. The rule mentioned above for t/d, double-consonant + n/m applies also for irregular verbs.
Talking about future with the present tense
German uses the Present Tense to talk about the future whenever it is clear to both speaker and listener that the future is meant. In the dialogue example:
Wenn du zu Hause bleibst, kommen wir dich besuchen.
If you stay at home, we shall come and visit you.
The whole conversation is about the future, so there is no need to indicate it again in the tense of the verb.
Ich schreibe den Brief heute Abend.
I will write the letter this evening.
Wir gehen nächstes Jahr nach Spanien.
We will go to Spain next year.
Where the meaning would not otherwise be clear, and in more formal language, e.g. to express an intention, German talks about the future tense by using werden plus the infinitive at the end of the clause. The forms of werden are:
Ich werde ein Haus bauen.
I shall build a house. (an intention)
Wir werden sehen.
The future can also express some inescapable fate:
Sie werden alle umkommen.
They will all perish.
The Future II is formed with added "sein" oder "haben" and expresses that one action will happen before another one.
Wenn sie das Abendessen gekocht haben wird, werden sie kommen.
When she will have cooked the dinner, they will come.
In the colloquial language expresses the Future II often a speculation about the past.
Sie werden angekommen sein.
Sie werden es gemacht haben.
"they will have done it"
In the colloquial language, the Futur II is normally used when speaking about something that should have happened already, but you are not sure or you can't prove it.
Introduction and overview •
Personal pronouns, formal and informal you, introduction to gender •
Intransitive verbs, verb conjugation, present tense •
Adverbs, V2 word order, Negation of verbs, Sentence adverbs •
Stem-changing verbs, Weak vs. Strong verbs •  Polar questions, V1 word order, Pre- and postambles • Noun gender • Noun plurals • Noun phrases, Articles • Transitive verbs, Accusative case, word order • Pronomial possessives, Possessive determiners, Possessive pronouns, Negation with kein • Irregular verbs, Past-like present verbs • Uninflected adjectives, Predicate phrases, Copulative verbs • Interrogatives, der words • Future tense, The sentence bracket
Adjectives and Adverbs •
Prepositions and Postpositions •
Registers are temporary storage locations inside the CPU that hold data and addresses.
A few CPUs also place special registers such as the PC and the status register in the register file.
Other CPUs keep them separate.
When designing a CPU, some people distinguish between "architectural features" and the "implementation details".
The "architectural features" are the programmer visible parts; if someone makes a new system where any of these parts are different from the old CPU, then suddenly all the old software won't work on the new CPU.
The "implementation details" are the parts that, although we put even more time and effort into getting them to work, one can make a new system that has a different way of implementing them, and still keep software compatibility -- some programs may run a little faster, other programs may run a little slower, but they all produce the same results as on the earlier machine.
The programmer-visible register set has more impact on software compatibility than any other part of the datapath, and perhaps more than any other part in the entire computer.
The architectural features of the programmer-visible register set are the number of registers, the number of bits in each register, and the logical organization of the registers.
Assembly language programmers like to have many registers.
Early microprocessors had painfully few registers, limited by the area of the chip.
Today, many chips have room for huge numbers of registers, so the number of programmer-registers is limited by other constraints:
More programmer-visible registers requires bigger operand fields.
More programmer-visible registers requires more time saving and restoring registers on an interrupt or context switch.
Software compatibility requires keeping exactly the same number, size, and organization of programmer-visible registers.
Assembly language programmers like a "flat" address space, where the full address of any location in (virtual) memory fits in a single address register.
And so the amount of (virtual) memory desired by an architect sets a minimum width to each address register.
The idea of "general registers" -- a group of registers, any one of which can, at different times, operate as a stack pointer, index register, accumulator, program counter, etc. was invented around 1971.[2]
While registers can be implemented as a bank of flip-flop registers, SRAM-based full-custom register files use less area and power.[3][4]
The overall performance of many single-chip CPUs is limited by the speed of the read operation of the register file.[3]
A simple register file is a set of registers and a decoder. The register file requires an address and a data input.
However, this simple register file isn't useful in a modern processor design, because there are some occasions when we don't want to write a new value to a register. Also, we typically want to read two values at once and write one value back in a single cycle. Consider the following equation:
To perform this operation, we want to read two values from the register file, A and B. We also have one result that we want to write back to the register file when the operation has completed. For cases where we do not want to write any value to the register file, we add a control signal called Read/Write. When the control signal is high, the data is written to a register, and when the control signal is low, no new values are written.
In this case, it is likely advantageous for us to specify a third address port for the write address:
Many people choose to use a 3-port register file for their pipelined microprocessor so it can execute such an ALU instructions every cycle.
Every cycle the CPU reads values from 2 registers in the register file to prepare for operating on them as directed by one instruction, and simultaneously the CPU writes the results from some previous instruction into some other register in the register file.
(Superscalar Processors and VLIW require a register file with 6 or more ports).
(Does a microprocessor with  operand forwarding ever read from a register and write to the same register during the same clock cycle?)
Full-custom register files often start with a SRAM design.
Like SRAM chips, SRAM-based register files include a differential pair of bit-lines for each port -- but instead of a single SRAM read/write port, register files typically have at least one dedicated write port and several dedicated read ports.
A typical register file repeats this process every instruction cycle:
First, the two bit-lines of a differential pair of each read port are shorted to each other and charged to Vdd/2 during a pre-charge phase.
Then the word-line connects one bit cell to those lines -- slightly imbalancing the charge on those long bit lines.
Finally, the CPU enables the sense amplifier which magnifies the slight imbalance to normal digital logic levels.[5][3][6][4]
More registers than you can shake a stick at
Consider a situation where the machine word is very small, and therefore the available address space for registers is very limited. If we have a machine word that can only accommodate 2 bits of register address, we can only address 4 registers. However, register files are small to implement, so we have enough space for 32 registers.
There are several solutions to this dilemma -- several ways of increasing performance by using many registers, even though we don't quite have enough bits in the instruction word to directly address all of them.
In almost every CPU, the program counter PC and the status register are treated differently than the other registers, with their own special set of instructions.
Some CPUs have several different groups (or "banks") of registers, rather than one monolithic register file.
One kind of "register banking" is similar to (main memory)  bank switching.
Other kinds of "register banking" allow a CPU to run exactly the same software as a single-bank implementation (invisible to the assembly language programmer), so in in this chapter we'll call them "microarchitectural banked registers" -- these implementation options have various advantages over a monolithic register file implementation.
Consider a situation where the machine word is very small, and therefore the available address space for registers is very limited. If we have a machine word that can only accommodate 2 bits of register address, we can only address 4 registers. However, register files are small to implement, so we have enough space for 32 registers. The solution to this dilemma is to utilize a register bank which consists of a series of register files combined together.
A register bank contains a number of register files or pages. Only one page can be active at a time, and there are additional instructions added to the ISA to switch between the available register pages. Data values can only be written to and read from the currently active register page, but instructions can exist to move data from one page to another.
As can be seen in this image, the gray box represents the current page, and the page can be moved up and down on the register bank.
If the register bank has N registers, and a page can only show M registers (with N > M), we can address registers with two values, n and m respectively. We can define these values as:
In other words, n and m are the number of bits required to address N and M registers, respectively. We can break down the address into a single value as such:
Where p is the number of bits reserved to specify the current register page. As we can see from this graphic, the current register address is simply the concatenation of the page address and the register address.
There are several techniques that divide up the physical registers into several physical register files ("banks"), using control logic to make the CPU as a whole still software-compatible to other implementations of the same CPU architecture that only use one monolithic register file.
In modern high-performance CPU, such techniques are used to build software-compatible CPUs that run at higher speed, use less power, and require less area than implementing the same CPU architecture with a single conventional multiported register file.[8][9]
Replicating the entire register file, as in the POWER2 and the Alpha 21264 and the Alpha 21464,[8][7] is the simplest kind of microarchitectural register banking.
These CPUs implemented their register file internally with 2 copies of the entire (architectural) register file, and connect half the functional units to each copy.
This requires each register file to have the same number of write ports as a monolithic register file (since all writes are sent to *both* copies to keep them in sync),
"Computer architecture: fundamentals and principles of computer design"
"general registers" were invented by C. Gordon Bell and Allen Newell as they were working on their book, Computer Structures: Readings and Examples (1971).
"More Treasured Texts" article.
"IEEE Spectrum" 2003 July.
Larry R. Fenstermaker.
"Current mode sense amplifiers applied to dual port register files by Larry R. Fenstermaker".
Akshay Vijayashekar and Hasan Ali.
"Optimized Register File Implementation".
"The purpose of this thesis is to implement a full custom, low power and area efficient register file for an Atmel 32-bit microcontroller. ...
The size of the register file is 32 words of 32 bits each with two write ports and four read ports."
Norman P. Jouppi and Jeffrey Y. F. Tang
"A 20-MIPS Sustained 32-bit CMOS Microprocessor with High Ratio of Sustained to Peak Performance".
Section "4.2. The Register File Sense Amplifier".
p. 10-12.
Robert Reese.
"Register Files".
"What does banking mean when applied to registers?"
Jessica H. Tseng, and Krste Asanović.
"Banked Multiported Register Files for High-Frequency Superscalar Microprocessors".
Il Park, Michael D. Powell, and T. N. Vijaykumar.
"Reducing Register Ports for Higher Speed and Lower Energy".
Pacific Energy Center - offers educational programs, design tools, advice, and support
Green Office @ Harvard - basic steps to green your office
Northwest Energy Efficiency Alliance - provides a list of various energy efficiency opportunities
A parameter that tells TeX at what point to report badness errors (i.e. underfull and overfull error). [number] ranges from 0 to 10000.
Fluorescence spectroscopy aka fluorometry or spectrofluorometry, is a type of electromagnetic spectroscopy which analyzes fluorescence from a sample. It involves using a beam of light, usually ultraviolet light, that excites the electrons in molecules of certain compounds and causes them to emit light of a lower energy, typically, but not necessarily, visible light. A complementary technique is absorption spectroscopy.
Devices that measure fluorescence are called fluorometers or fluorimeters.
Molecules have various states referred to as energy levels. Fluorescence spectroscopy is primarily concerned with electronic and vibrational states. Generally, the species being examined has a ground electronic state (a low energy state) of interest, and an excited electronic state of higher energy. Within each of these electronic states are various vibrational states.
In fluorescence spectroscopy, the species is first excited, by absorbing a photon, from its ground electronic state to one of the various vibrational states in the excited electronic state. Collisions with other molecules cause the excited molecule to lose vibrational energy until it reaches the lowest vibrational state of the excited electronic state.
The molecule then drops down to one of the various vibrational levels of the ground electronic state again, emitting a photon in the process. As molecules may drop down into any of several vibrational levels in the ground state, the emitted photons will have different energies, and thus frequencies. Therefore, by analysing the different frequencies of light emitted in fluorescent spectroscopy, along with their relative intensities, the structure of the different vibrational levels can be determined.
In a typical experiment, the different wavelengths of fluorescent light emitted by a sample are measured using a monochromator, holding the excitation light at a constant wavelength. This is called an emission spectrum. An excitation spectrum is the opposite, whereby the emission light is held at a constant wavelength, and the excitation light is scanned through a many different wavelengths (via a monochromator). An Emission Map is measured by recording a number of different emission spectra created from different excitation wavelengths, and combining them all together.[1] This is a three dimensional data set, intensity of emission as a function of excitation and emission wavelengths, and is typically depicted as a contour map.
File:Spectrophotomer.JPG  Schematic of a fluorometer with 90° geometry utilizing a Xe light source
Filter fluorometers use filters to isolate the incident light and fluorescent light.
Spectrofluorometers use diffraction grating monochromators to isolate the incident light and fluorescent light.
Both types utilize the following scheme: The light from an excitation source passes through a filter or monochromator, and strikes the sample. A proportion of the incident light is absorbed by the sample, and some of the molecules in the sample fluoresce. The fluorescent light is emitted in all directions. Some of this fluorescent light passes through a second filter or monochromator and reaches a detector, which is usually placed at 90° to the incident light beam to minimize the risk of transmitted or reflected incident light reaching the detector.
Various light sources may be used as excitation sources, including lasers, photodiodes, and lamps; xenon arcs and mercury-vapor lamps in particular. A laser only emits light of high irradiance at a very narrow wavelength interval, typically under 0.01 nm, which makes an excitation monochromator or filter unnecessary. The disadvantage of this method is that the wavelength of a laser cannot be changed by much. A mercury vapor lamp is a line lamp, meaning it emits light near peak wavelengths. By contrast, a xenon arc has a continuous emission spectrum with nearly constant intensity in the range from 300-800 nm and a sufficient irradiance for measurements down to just above 200 nm.
Filters and/or monochromators may be used in fluorimeters. A monochromator transmits light of an adjustable wavelength with an adjustable tolerance. The most common type of monochromator utilizes a diffraction grating, that is, collimated light illuminates a grating and exits with a different angle depending on the wavelength. The monochromator can then be adjusted to select which wavelengths to transmit. For allowing anisotropy measurements the addition of two polarization filters are necessary: One after the excitation monochromator or filter, and one before the emission monochromator or filter.
As mentioned before, the fluorescence is most often measured at a 90° angle relative to the excitation light. This geometry is used instead of placing the sensor at the line of the excitation light at a 180° angle in order to avoid interference of the transmitted excitation light. No monochromator is perfect and it will transmit some stray light, that is, light with other wavelengths than the targeted. An ideal monochromator would only transmit light in the specified range and have a high wavelength-independent transmission. When measuring at a 90 angle, only the light scattered by the sample causes stray light. This results in a better signal-to-noise ratio, and lowers the detection limit by approximately a factor 10000,[2] when compared to the 180° geometry. Furthermore, the fluorescence can also be measured from the front, which is often done for turbid or opaque samples
The detector can either be single-channeled or multichanneled. The single-channeled detector can only detect the intensity of one wavelength at a time, while the multichanneled detects the intensity at all wavelengths simultaneously, making the emission monochromator or filter unnecessary. The different types of detectors have both advantages and disadvantages.
The most versatile fluorimeters with dual monochromators and a continuous excitation light source can record both an excitation spectrum and a fluorescence spectrum. When measuring fluorescence spectra, the wavelength of the excitation light is kept constant, preferably at a wavelength of high absorption, and the emission monochromator scans the spectrum. For measuring excitation spectra, the wavelength passing though the emission filter or monochromator is kept constant and the excitation monochromator is scanning. The excitation spectrum generally is identical to the absorption spectrum as the fluorescence intensity is proportional to the absorption.[4]
At low concentrations the fluorescence intensity will generally be proportional to the concentration of the fluorophore.
Unlike in UV/visible spectroscopy, ‘standard’, device independent spectra are not easily attained. Several factors influence and distort the spectra, and corrections are necessary to attain ‘true’, i.e. machine-independent, spectra. The different types of distortions will here be classified as being either instrument- or sample-related. Firstly, the distortion arising from the instrument is discussed. As a start, the light source intensity and wavelength characteristics varies over time during each experiment and between each experiment. Furthermore, no lamp has a constant intensity at all wavelengths. To correct this, a beam splitter can be applied after the excitation monochromator or filter to direct a portion of the light to a reference detector.
Additionally, the transmission efficiency of monochromators and filters must be taken into account. These may also change over time. The transmission efficiency of the monochromator also varies depending on wavelength. This is the reason that an optional reference detector should be placed after the excitation monochromator or filter. The percentage of the fluorescence picked up by the detector is also dependent upon the system. Furthermore, the detector quantum efficiency, that is, the percentage of photons detected, varies between different detectors, with wavelength and with time, as the detector inevitably deteriorates.
Correction of all these instrumental factors for getting a ‘standard’ spectrum is a tedious process, which is only applied in practice when it is strictly necessary. This is the case when measuring the quantum yield or when finding the wavelength with the highest emission intensity for instance.
As mentioned earlier, distortions arise from the sample as well. Therefore some aspects of the sample must be taken into account too. Firstly, photodecomposition may decrease the intensity of fluorescence over time. Scattering of light must also be taken into account. The most significant types of scattering in this context are Rayleigh and Raman scattering. Light scattered by Rayleigh scattering has the same wavelength as the incident light, whereas in Raman scattering the scattered light changes wavelength usually to longer wavelengths. Raman scattering is the result of a virtual electronic state induced by the excitation light. From this virtual state, the molecules may relax back to a vibrational level other than the vibrational ground state.[5] In fluorescence spectra, it is always seen at a constant wavenumber difference relative to the excitation wavenumber e.g. the peak appears at a wavenumber 3600 cm−1  lower than the excitation light in water.
Other aspects to consider are the inner filter effects. These include reabsorption. Reabsorption happens because another molecule or part of a macromolecule absorbs at the wavelengths at which the fluorophore emits radiation. If this is the case, some or all of the photons emitted by the fluorophore may be absorbed again. Another inner filter effect occurs because of high concentrations of absorbing molecules, including the fluorophore. The result is that the intensity of the excitation light is not constant throughout the solution. Resultingly, only a small percentage of the excitation light reaches the fluorophores that are visible for the detection system. The inner filter effects change the spectrum and intensity of the emitted light and they must therefore be considered when analysing the emission spectrum of fluorescent light.[4][6]
The fluorescence of a folded protein is a mixture of the fluorescence from individual aromatic residues. Most of the intrinsic fluorescence emissions of a folded protein are due to excitation of tryptophan residues, with some emissions due to tyrosine and phenylalanine; but disulfide bonds also have appreciable absorption in this wavelength range. Typically, tryptophan has a wavelength of maximum absorption of 280 nm and an emission peak that is solvatochromic, ranging from ca. 300 to 350 nm depending in the polarity of the local environment [7]  Hence, protein fluorescence may be used as a diagnostic of the conformational state of a protein.[8]  Furthermore, tryptophan fluorescence is strongly influenced by the proximity of other residues (i.e., nearby protonated groups such as Asp or Glu can cause quenching of Trp fluorescence). Also, energy transfer between tryptophan and the other fluorescent amino acids is possible, which would affect the analysis, especially in cases where the Förster acidic approach is taken.  In addition, tryptophan is a relatively rare amino acid; many proteins contain only one or a few tryptophan residues.  Therefore, tryptophan fluorescence can be a very sensitive measurement of the conformational state of individual tryptophan residues. The advantage compared to extrinsic probes is that the protein itself is not changed. The use of intrinsic fluorescence for the study of protein conformation is in practice limited to cases with few (or perhaps only one) tryptophan residues, since each experiences a different local environment, which gives rise to different emission spectra.
Tryptophan is an important intrinsic fluorescent probe (amino acid), which can be used to estimate the nature of microenvironment of the tryptophan. When performing experiments with denaturants, surfactants or other amphiphilic molecules, the microenvironment of the tryptophan might change. For example, if a protein containing a single tryptophan in its 'hydrophobic' core is denatured with increasing temperature, a red-shift emission spectrum will appear. This is due to the exposure of the tryptophan to an aqueous environment as opposed to a hydrophobic protein interior. In contrast, the addition of a surfactant to a protein which contains a tryptophan which is exposed to the aqueous solvent will cause a blue shifted emission spectrum if the tryptophan is embedded in the surfactant vesicle or micelle.[9] Proteins that lack tryptophan may be coupled to a fluorophore.
At 295 nm, the tryptophan emission spectrum is dominant over the weaker tyrosine and phenylalanine fluorescence.
Fluorescence spectrocopy is used in, among others, biochemical, medical, and chemical research fields for analyzing organic compounds. There has also been a report of its use in differentiating malignant, bashful skin tumors from benign.
Atomic Fluorescence Spectroscopy (AFS) techniques are useful in other kinds of analysis/measurement of a compound present in air or water, or other media, such as CVAFS which is used for heavy metals detection, such as mercury.
Fluorescence can also be used to redirect photons, see fluorescent solar collector.
↑ Edinburgh Instruments Ltd, www.edinst.com
↑ Rendell, D. (1987). Fluorescence and Phosphorescence. Crown
Eisinger, J; J Flores (1979-04-01). "Front-face fluorometry of liquid samples". Analytical Biochemistry 94 (1):  15–21. doi:10.1016/0003-2697(79)90783-8. ISSN 0003-2697. PMID 464277. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/464277. Retrieved 2009-02-06.
↑ a b Sharma, A. and Schulman, S. G. (1999). Introduction to Fluorescence Spectroscopy. Wiley interscience.
↑ Gauglitz, G. and Vo-Dinh, T. (2003). Handbook of spectroscopy.
Wiley-VCH.
↑ Lakowicz, J. R. (1999). Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy. Kluwer Academic / Plenum Publishers
↑ Intrinsic Fluorescence of Proteins and Peptides
↑ Vivian JT, Callis PR (2001). "Mechanisms of tryptophan fluorescence shifts in proteins". Biophys. J. 80 (5):  2093–109. doi:10.1016/S0006-3495(01)76183-8. PMID 11325713. PMC 1301402. http://www.biophysj.org/cgi/content/abstract/80/5/2093.
↑ Caputo GA, London E. Cumulative effects of amino acid substitutions and hydrophobic mismatch upon the transmembrane stability and conformation of hydrophobic alpha-helices.
Application service provider (ASP) allows my company to use new applications.
ASP will stimulate new ideas concerning the applications in my firm.
ASP allows us to make big leaps forward in using the new application technologies.
Verwaal et al. (2009): Value Creation and Value Claiming in Strategic Outsourcing Decisions: A Resource Contingency Perspective. Journal of Management, Vol. 35, No. 2, pp. 420-444.
Need a textbook like introduction here.
Chemistry can be a daunting subject for even the best students, and let's face it, statistically, most of us are not the best students. Fortunately for us, there is hope! Chemistry does not have to be a giant confusing pit of pain and despair if we take just a few minutes to break down and understand what the Chemist's mumbo-jumbo ACTUALLY means. "Chemistry for Idiots, Humans and Rebels" is here to provide a resource that explains Chemistry plainly, nicely, and with application.
Here are the topics that have to be included (not an exhaustive list!):
(Please note that the pages on the following topics have been copied from wikipedia. See the talk page for more details!)
What is mass? What is atomic mass? (Preferably with a "duh" style) (for idiots)
Mass Number and atomic mass, the subtle difference. Introduce weighted average. Need a sample problem.
An "investigatory" text - asking the students to look at a table and figure out why Carbon does not have exact 12 as its atomic mass number, but C12 HAS! Introduce C14!
A good reference here can be to carbon 14 - how it matters in carbon dating. Plus more on isotopes and add "see also" links.
Sample problems making clear the following facts :
...
Molecular mass = mass of the molecule! (Duh statement again!)
Maybe a nice way to introduce this would be to question the reader!
What about stuff that is not molecule? Formula mass!
Sample problems on molecular mass.
Need to have a good decription, with an analogy to packages and possibly pop references.
For example a combo meal, or a gadget combo, anything. This is for:
Keeping the students awake!
Making them think about the introduced topics rather than just serve it to them on a platter!
Note : If anyone someday starts collaborating on this project, we will have to figuure out a way for streamlining inputs on text boxes, main text, sample problems, illustrations etc.
A lot of people might not agree with what I have said. A lot of them might counter argue by saying that this is too much, that formula mass/molecular mass is pretty straightforward! Yes it is and yet there is a problem. People fail to imagine it properly. People fail to realiza that it is nothing but elementary calculation that they have already been doing since ages, only difference being that the things in the word problem have different names now!
This in itself might be a good text box!
Molecular masses of water, liquid bromine, sugar, salt and other such relevant and "exotic compounds!
Note : Someone actually needs to start typing these problem sets! That might be me, that might be someone else who comes in at a later stage in the preparation of this book!
The mole is the standard unit of measurement, under the International System of Units (SI), for amount of substance. It is defined as the amount of chemical substance that contains as many representative particles as in 12 grams of Carbon-12.
Tell them bluntly in simpler English.
Ask questions to the reader, that force him to think about the simple terms in the definition.
Add a few introductory questions to exercise their brains, avoiding TMI/Too Much Information!
Difference between number of atoms and moles of atoms.
Avagadro's number and dozen, scores, tens, hundreds, lacs. Possibly a good place for a cartoon.
How small atoms are!
Conversions!
Expand on the case of hot chocolate. More chocolatey and more chocolate powder needed. Good way to introduce concentration and relate it with molalities. (for idiots)
Keep this a recurring theme throughout the intro text and in a few problems.
More acid (can react with more base) and more acidic is a good example.
More base and more basic.
More colour required vs. more strongly coloured solution
Need some sample problems! (for humans)
A box text can be to introduce and relate to density, specific gravity, cost and extrapolating to intrinsic and extrinsic properties. (for rebels)
Molarity Vs. Molality : The whole deal about thermal expansion. (for humans) and their implications in thermodynamics and a few interesting examples (for rebels)
Issue 10 ⇒  Sharing knowledge and resources
⇒ Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability
Play media  R.K.Pachauri - Good governance requires environmental responsibility and global solidarity
Play media  MDG 7: Ensure environmental sustainability
Play media  Kono Rdio - Less affluence and less technology does not mean a lower cultural standard nor a life less worthy
Play media  We will never stop the cooperation with the Syrian people
On YouTube    ⇒  TVP Documentary  episodes
On YouTube  ⇒  MDG7 playlist
Issue 10 ⇒  Sharing knowledge and resources
⇒ Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability
Development Cooperation Stories :
⇒ Valuing Water    On YouTube  ⇒  playlist
⇒   Community Tourism  -   On YouTube  ⇒  playlist
⇒  Unsustainable Growth  -   On YouTube  ⇒  playlist
European Union  Directorate–General  for Development and Cooperation – (EuropeAid)
The Kautilya Society, Varanasi
Ministry of Housing and Construction of the Arab Republic of Syria
Village Association Number2 River, Sierra Leone
3.Foot and Ankle ·
5.Hand and Microsurgery ·
Medial epicondylitis is sometimes known as golfer's elbow.
Golfers Elbow is a problem with the flexor muscle mechanism of the wrist - in other words the group of muscles whose job it is to flex the wrist joint. These muscles are attached to the facet on the anterior aspect of the medial epicondyle at the elbow.
Golfers elbow or medial epicondylitis is much less common than tennis elbow or lateral epicondylitis.
Pain at the medial epicondyle or inner side of the joint
Expect to find normal range of movement on passive testing of the joint
The main "golfers" sign is pain on resisted flexion of the wrist - more so if tested with the elbow held in the extended position during testing.
The site of inflammation is almost invariably at the teno-osseous junction where the common flexor tendon meets the medial epicondyle at its anterior aspect. The teno-osseous junction is the part where the tendon tissue joins with the bone.
The pain may be felt by the patient further down the arm in the muscle belly of the flexors in the forearm - this pattern of referred pain can sometimes cause confusion.
There are three main options for golfers elbow treatment - but keep in mind that the natural history is for spontaneous resolution in the majority of cases
Conservative - Avoid provoking activity or change sports equipment (grip size of tennis racket or golf clubs). Short term anti-inflammatory medication and reassure strongly. Consider using an epicondylar clasp for symptom relief.
Physiotherapy - reasonable success rate although may require several treatments before substantial improvement is seen. Treatment needs to be backed up by education on stretching and prevention of recurrence.
Injection of steroid and local anaesthetic - the most cost effective option. No difference from physiotherapy in long term outcome but works more quickly and is much more cost effective.
Many of the low-level functions in Windows were created using the C programming language. C code tends to be relatively small and fast compared to VB code or even C++ code, and has a shorter development time compared to raw assembly code. All of the DLLs in the Win32 API, and most of the kernel-level structures are implemented in C code.
Visual Basic is essentially a "Windows-only" programming language - although some ports either exist or are in development for other systems, VB is not nearly as popular on other operating systems as it is on Windows. The VB runtime libraries tap into the Win32 API and the MFC libraries, to implement its functionality. The new version of VB, "VB.NET", uses the .NET platform, and therefore will not be covered in this wikibook. Old versions of VB, or "VB Classic" utilize the same Win32 API and MFC interfaces that C and C++ use to communicate with Windows. However, not all of the functions are identical, because VB uses different data types, and stores data differently than C or C++. As we discuss the Win32 API and MFC, we will attempt to show how the same functionality is implemented in VB.
Visual Basic uses the STDCALL calling convention for implementing function calls. Most of the Win32 API uses the STDCALL calling convention as well, so much of the hard work for interfacing the two is done by the compiler. C and C++, on the other hand, do not use STDCALL by default, and if you want to manually link a VB object code file     with a C object file, you will need to explicitly make the C interface a STDCALL one.
Many other programming languages have been implemented on Windows systems, and many of them have some sort of method for interfacing the Win32 API, or the MFC libraries. These interfaces are known collectively as wrappers, because they wrap the functionality of the Win32 API in another programming language. Common wrappers are provided for Perl, Ada, Python, PHP, AutoIT, etc.
A detonation wave is a combustion wave propagating at supersonic speeds. It is composed of a leading shock which adiabatically compresses the reactants, followed by a reaction zone which converts the reactants into products. During this process, a significant amount of heat is released, increasing the temperature and decreasing the pressure and density. The products are expanded in the reaction zone, giving the detonation a forward thrust.
In contrast, a deflagration wave, which can be thought of as a propagating flame, is a combustion wave which propagates at subsonic speeds.A deflagration consist of a precursor shock followed by a reaction zone.  A deflagration propagates via heat and mass diffusion from the reaction zone to ignite the reactants ahead of it. Being a subsonic wave, information downstream can travel upstream and change the initial thermodynamic state of the reactants.
A qualitative difference between these two combustion modes are tabulated below.
According to this table, the burned products (with respect to a stationary combustion wave) experience a deceleration across a detonation wave,and an acceleration in a deflagration wave. The pressure and density rise across the detonation which is why a detonation wave is known as a compression wave. In contrast, the pressure decreases slightly across a deflagration, hence it is considered an expansion wave.
Let’s first treat the detonation as a black box that brings reactants of state 0 to products of state 1.
Figure 1: 1-D steady flow across a combustion wave
The basic conservation equations are applied to relate state 0 to state 1. Considering a one dimension steady flow across the combustion wave, the basic equations are:
Combining the conservation of mass and momentum, the following equation is obtained
.
Remember that the mass flux must be a real number. Therefore, if the numerator is positive so must the denominator and vice versa.
Substituting expressions for the speed of sound of the reactants
,  the above equation can be re-casted as
The above equation defining the thermodynamic path linking state 0 to state 1is also known as the Rayleigh line.
.
The Hugoniot curve represents the locus of all possible downstream states, given an upstream state.  It is also possible to express the Hugoniot curve with respect to the variables x and y, similar to the Rayleigh line, as
.
Note that the case where q=0 corresponds to a non reacting shock wave and the Hugoniot curve will pass by the point (1,1) in the x-y plane. When the Rayleigh line is tangent to the Hugoniot curve, the tangent points are called Chapman-Jouquet (CJ) points. The upper CJ point corresponds to the CJ detonation solution whereas the lower CJ point is referred as the CJ deflagration solution.
Figure 2: CJ detonation and deflagration solution
Note that the CJ theory does not take into account the detailed structure of the detonation wave. It simply links upstream conditions to downstream conditions via steady one dimensional conservation laws.
Assuming a one dimensional steady flow, the Zel’dovich, von Neumann and Döring (ZND) model is an idealized representation of the detonation wave.  The model essentially describes the detonation wave as a leading shock followed by chemical reactions. The leading shock adiabatically compresses the reactants, increasing the temperature, pressure and density across the shock. An induction zone is followed where the reactants are dissociated into radicals and free radicals are generated.  The induction zone is thermally neutral in the sense that the thermodynamic properties remain relatively constant.  When enough active free radicals are produced, a cascade of reactions occurs to convert the reactants into products. Chemical energy is released resulting in a rise in temperature and a drop in pressure and density. The decrease in pressure in the reaction zone is further decreased by expansion waves and creates a forward thrust that will support the leading shock front.  In other words, the proposed propagation mechanism of a detonation wave is autoignition by the leading shock which is supported by the thrust provided by the expansion of the products.
Figure 3: Variation of properties across a ZND  detonation wave
Although the ZND provides a description of the structure of the detonation wave, it does not consider any boundary conditions.  In reality, both the initial conditions ( thermodynamic states, mixture composition) as well as boundary conditions ( geometry, degree of confinement, nature of walls) affect the detonation velocity. Under certain conditions, initial and boundary conditions can even make the propagation of detonations impossible. To-date, no quantitative theoretical model can accurately predict the limits of detonations.
Although the ZND models the detonation in a one-dimensional frame, experimental observations indicate that the detonation front is actually three-dimensional and unstable. Instabilities are manifested in both longitudinal ( pulsating detonation) and transverse directions. The front consists of many curved shocks composed of Mach stems and incident shocks.  At the intersection between these curved shocks, reflected shocks, also referred to as transverse waves, extend into the reacting mixture. The intersection of these three shocks is referred as the triple point. These transverse waves move back and forth sweeping across the entire front.  The trajectories of these triple points can be recorded on a sooth covered surface as the detonation passes by. The wave spacing can be measured from smoked foils and is referred to as the cell size.
There are a few ways to initiate a detonation. Here are some examples:
Deflagration-to-detonation transition (DDT): assuming that a deflagration has already been formed, it needs to accelerate to a certain velocity via turbulence. When conditions permit, the deflagration abruptly transits into a detonation.Few key processes of the development of the detonation wave are summarized as follows:
Generation of compression waves ahead of the propagating flame
Coalescence of the compression wave to form a shock wave.
Creation of blast wave from a local explosion in the reaction zone resulting into a detonation “bubble”. A detonation bubble catches up to the precursor shock and an overdriven detonation is formed.  Transverse pressure waves are generated.
Direct initiation: Method of initiating a detonation bypassing the deflagration phase. A detonation may be formed directly through the use of a powerful ignition source.
Diffraction of a planar detonation into a larger volume to form a spherical detonation.
Detonation limits refer to the critical set of conditions outside of which a self-sustained detonation can no longer propagate.  The detonation velocity is actually affected by initial conditions of the explosive mixture (thermodynamic states, composition, dilution, etc.)  and the boundary conditions (degree of confinement, geometry and dimensions of confinement,  type of wall surface, etc.). For example,  given a set of thermodynamic states and a particular experimental apparatus,  we change the mixture composition rich or lean. At a particular fuel concentration the detonation will cease to propagate. This type of limit approach reveals the composition limit of an explosive mixture.  For given initial conditions, we can also vary the dimensions of the experimental apparatus. Detonation  propagating inside a tube below a critical tube diameter, no detonation can propagate. This yields the critical tube diameter.  It is worth noting that  it becomes more difficult to initiate a detonation as the detonation limit is approached. The critical energy required for initiation increases exponentially. The limit is not a characteristic property of the explosive mixture since it is affected by both initial and boundary conditions.
Since the steady propagation velocity of the detonation depends on initial and boundary conditions, a common observation as the detonation limit is approached is the presence of velocity deficit. Studies in round tubes reveal a velocity deficit of about 15% that of CJ velocity before failure of the detonation wave. Near the limit, longitudinal fluctuation of the velocity has also been observed. Depending on the magnitude of these fluctuations and their duration, different unstable behaviour such as stuttering and galloping can be manifested.
Another characteristic indicating the approach of the limit is the detonation cell size compared to the tube dimension. Away from the limit, the detonation cell size is small compared to the dimensions of the detonation tube. As the limit is approached, there are less transverse waves and the wave spacing increases until a single transverse wave propagates around the perimeter of the tube, indicative of a spinning detonation. The magnitude of the transverse pressure wave oscillations become larger and larger as the limit is approached.
Since it takes less energy to initiate a deflagration, this is the mode of combustion most likely to occur in industrial accidents. Although the key factors required for the formation of a detonation or a deflagration ( explosive mixture and ignition source) may not be eliminated in a chemical plant,  some prevention mechanisms have been developed to stop the propagation of a deflagration and  prevent a detonation from forming. Here are a few examples:
Inhibition of flames : once a flame is detected, flame suppressant is injected. The suppressant will combine with active radicals. By taking away the radical necessary for the chemical reactions to take place, the flame will cease to spread.
Venting :  to avoid formation of a detonation, any pressure build up is released.  However, by actually releasing the pressure, the turbulence created can accelerate the flame.
Quenching :  it is possible to quench (or suppress) the flame, even near detonation velocities.
Lee, J.H.S.,The Detonation Phenomenon, Cambridge University Press, 2008
Kuo, K.K.,Principles of Combustion, John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 2005, 2nd ed.
Fickett, W. and Davis, W.C.,Detonation, University of California Press, 1979
A Detonation database containing a collection of experimental data related to detonations is available online.
An agar plate streaked with microorganisms isolated from a deep-water sponge.
An agar plate is a sterile Petri dish that contains agar plus nutrients, and is used to culture bacteria or fungi.  Generally, 'selecting' substances are also added to the plate, such as antibiotics.
Most types of agar are purchased pre-prepared in powder form, although it is possible to buy a base agar mix and add nutrients separately. For a typical standard mix of Lauria-Bertani (LB) agar, the following is added per litre of distilled water whilst on an automatic stirrer:
10g of an amino acid (usually tryptone or peptone)
15g of agarose (omitting this step produces liquid LB)
It can be helpful to gently boil the mixture to facilitate dissolving: this can be done in a microwave oven, or over a gentle flame. Once dissolved the agar needs to be sterilised, usually by pouring it into a conical (Erlenmeyer) flask, then sealing the top with a cotton wool wad, and finally covering the cotton wool with a loose layer of aluminum foil. This is then autoclaved for 15 minutes. The sterile agar is then allowed to cool to 50 °C: this is just above the setting point of agar and pouring at this cooler temperature helps prevent condensation forming on the lid.  Chemical agents (e.g. antibiotics) are added  at this step to prevent their degradation at the higher temperatures; agar is especially useful in that it may be sterilized at higher temperatures yet since it solidifies at lower temperatures, chemical additives may be added without fear of degradation.
Before the plates are poured, every care is taken not to contaminate them with stray bacteria: sterile technique must be used.
Hands are thoroughly washed with antimicrobial soap and hot water.
The bench is wiped with ethanol or some other disinfectant
A Bunsen burner is set up with a gentle blue flame. This will be used to sterilise the mouth of the flask, and will also provides a reasonably sterile environment in the vicinity. This will also be used to flame plates that develop bubbles from pouring.
The number of plates to be poured are placed on the bench, with their lids still on.
The aluminium foil is removed and discarded. The cotton wool is removed with the little finger. It is held in the little finger the whole time, not put down.
The mouth of the flask is flamed to kill bacteria on the outside of the rim.
The lid of the plate is lifted just high enough to allow the plate to be poured, and the dish is quickly half filled with agar.
The lid is replaced, the plate swirled gently to ensure even distribution of the molten agar, then left to stand on the bench for at least 20 minutes to solidify.
Once all the plates are poured, the flask mouth is reflamed and the cotton wool reinserted. Any unused agar is still sterile.
To allow traceability, a lot number assigned to the flask is written on the plates poured with it.
Before inoculation, important information is written on the bottom of the plates, close to the rim:
The most common method of inoculating an agar plate is streaking.
With this method, a small amount of sample is placed on the side of the agar plate (either with a swab, or as  a drop from an inoculating loop if the sample is a liquid).
A sterile loop (flamed until red hot, then cooled by touching the agar away from the inoculated sample) is then used to spread the bacteria out in one direction from the initial site of inoculation. This is done by moving the loop from side to side, passing through the initial site.
The loop is then sterilised (by flaming) again and the first streaks are then spread out themselves.
This is repeated 2-3 times, moving around the agar plate.
What should happen is that single bacterial cells get isolated by the streaking, and when the plate is incubated, forming discrete colonies that will have started from just one bacterium each.
This pattern is used for culture of urine. A small loop is dipped in the urine, and a single streak is made down the middle of the agar plate. Then the loop is swayed in and out going through the streak multiple times at right-angles to the first streak.
A needle is flamed then immersed in the culture. It is then stabbed into a small sterile jar of nutrient agar. If the bacteria are anaerobic they will grow, otherwise they do not.
A lawn is often used for testing sensitivity to antibiotics, or for work with bacteriophages. What is needed is an even and complete spread of growth all over the agar plate (a "lawn"). Around an antibiotic disc there will be a clear area in which bacterial growth is inhibited; the diameter of this area can be measured to find out whether that bacterial strain is resistant to the antibiotic.
One way to prepare a lawn is to use a 0.5 McFarland suspension of bacteria in saline (this means the saline is made just slightly turbid.) A sterile swab is dipped into this suspension, then it is moved from side to side down the whole agar plate so all the area is covered. The plate is rotated 90 ° and the swab moved side to side perpedicularly to the first time. This is done once more with the swab rotated 45 °.
Once a lawn has been prepared, a small disk of sterile filter paper is soaked in antibiotic and placed on the plate. After incubation there will be a ring of zero growth visible around the filter paper if the lawn bacteria are sensitive to that antibiotic. A collection of small disks each soaked in a different antibiotic, and attached to a larger ring, can be purchased commercially. They are known as antibiotic sensitivity discs or by the name "Mastrings" (a trademark of Mast Group Ltd) and can be used to test the sensitivity of an organism to a range of antibiotics all at once.
Plates are incubated upside down to prevent drops of condensation collecting on the inoculated surface.
Some plates are incubated at 37° C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere: the temperature and conditions at which some of the body's bacteria will grow. Special incubators can maintain these conditions.
Some bacteria must be incubated anaerobically (without any oxygen). These can be placed in containers, along with a substance that removes oxygen, and the tightly sealed container placed in the regular incubator.
Fungi, and some bacteria (e.g. Yersinia sp.), should be incubated slightly cooler. This is usually 30 °C, and room air often is used.
Yoghurt bacteria grow at much higher temperatures (typically ~45 °C). They are therefore particulally safe to use when teaching microbiology, especially to children.
Campylobacter is a difficult bacterial species to grow. It needs special agar plates, plus its own microaerophilic environment.
Blood agar - contains blood cells from an animal (e.g. a sheep). Most bacteria will grow on this medium.
Chocolate agar - this contains lysed blood cells, and is used for growing fastidious (fussy) respiratory bacteria.
Neomycin agar - contains the antibiotic neomycin.
Sabouraud agar - used for fungi. It contains gentamicin and has a low pH that will kill most bacteria.
Thayer-Martin agar - chocolate agar designed to isolate Neisseria gonorrhoeae.
XLD agar - xylose lysine deoxycholate agar. It is used for the culture of stool samples, and contains two indicators. It is formulated to inhibit Gram-positive bacteria, while the growth of Gram-negative bacilli is encouraged. The colonies of lactose fermenters appear yellow.
Nutrient agar - safe to use in school science laboratories because it does not selectively grow pathogenic bacteria.
Hay Infusion agar - used for the culturing of slime moulds.
MacConkey agar - MacConkey agar is both selective AND differential. The medium is used to differentiate between Gram negative bacteria while inhibiting the growth of Gram positive bacteria. The addition of bile salts and crystal violet to the agar will inhibit the growth of most Gram positive bacteria, making MacConkey agar selective. The medium also differentiates between lactose-fermenters and lactose nonfermenters. Lactose and neutral red are added to differentiate the lactose fermenters, which form pink colonies, from lactose nonfermenters that form clear colonies.
Spirit blue agar- medium containing lipids, which lets it test for the presence of lipase. If the bacteria is able to produce lipase in the presence of these lipids, the Spirit blue dye will be digested along with the lipids, which are mixed in as an emulation with the dye. The medium, which is normally opaque and light blue in color, will have halos around colonies of bacteria that make lipase.
Plates, once finished with, must be made safe before throwing away. The usual method is to place inside an autoclave bag and then sterilise by autoclaving at 121 °C, 103 kPa (15 psi) for 15 minutes. Plastic plates will melt (hence the bag). After about 20 minutes the autoclave will have cooled down and the bag can safely be thrown away. If no autoclave is available an ordinary domestic pressure cooker can be used, or, in a hospital or professional lab an incinerator may be used.
Other equipment may be decontaminated by being placed in a suitable disinfectant such as Virkon for 24 hours.
When all manipulations are done, the bench is disinfected once again. The last step should be to wash the hands thoroughly with antimicrobial soap and hot water before leaving the lab.
Abdalla, Laila (1997). Man, Woman or Monster: Some Themes of Female Masculinity and Transvestism in the Middle Ages and Renaissance (Thomas Middleton, Ben Jonson, William Shakespeare). Montreal: McGill University, Ph.D. diss.
Acheson, Katherine O. (2001). "'Outrage Your Face': Anti-Theatricality and Gender in Early Modern Closet Drama by Women". Early Modern Literary Studies: A Journal of Sixteenth- and Seventeenth-Century English Literature 6 (3):  7.1-16. ISSN 1201-2459.
Ajmar, Marta (1999). "Toys for Girls: Objects, Women and Memory in the Renaissance Household". in Marius Kwint, Christopher Breward, and Jeremy Ansyle, eds. Material Memories: Design and Evocation. Oxford: Berg. pp. 75-89.
Amussen, Susan Dwyer (1994). "Elizabeth I and Alice Balstone: Gender, Class, and the Exceptional Woman in Early Modern England". in Betty S. Travitsky and Adele F. Seeff, eds. Attending to Women in Early Modern England. Newark: U of Delaware P. pp. 219-40.
Anderson, Cynthia Ann (2001). 'With Her Own Hands': Household Instructional Texts and the Medieval and Renaissance Woman. Texas A&M U, Ph.D. diss.
Anderson, Randall (2000). ""The merit of a manuscript poem": The Case for Bodleian MS Rawlinson Poet. 85". in Arthur F. Marotti and Michael D. Bristol, eds. Print, Manuscript, and Performance: The Changing Relations of the Media in Early Modern England. Columbus: Ohio State UP. pp. 127-71.
Andrea, Bernadette (2000). "Teaching (Early Modern Women's) Writing". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 266-270.
Andrews, Marian (1972). The Most Illustrious Ladies of the Italian Renaissance. Manchester: Corner House.
Anger, Jane (1589). Jane Anger: Her Protection for Women. 1996. Sunshine for Women.
Antolini, Paola; Commission of the European Communities (1992). 1492, The Role of Women. 37. Brussels: Commission of the European Communities.
Appelt, Ursula (2001). "Introduction". in Barbara Smith and Ursula Appelt, eds. Write or Be Written: Early Modern Women Poets and Cultural Constraints. Women and Gender in Early Modern England. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. ix-xxi. ISBN 1-84014-288-X.
Archer, John Michael (1993). Sovereignty and Intelligence: Spying and Court Culture in the English Renaissance. Stanford: Stanford UP.
Armstrong, Nancy; Leonard Tennenhouse (1987). The Ideology of Conduct: Essays on Literature and the History of Sexuality. New York: Methuen.
Aughterson, Kate (1995). Renaissance Woman: A Sourcebook: Constructions of Femininity in England. New York: Routledge. ISBN 0415120454 0415120462 (pbk).
Bainton, Roland H. (1984). "Learned Women in the Europe of the Sixteenth Century". in Patricia H. Labalme, ed. Beyond Their Sex: Learned Women of the European Past. New York and London: New York University Press. pp. 117-128.
Baker, Susan and Lorena Stookey, eds (1991). "Renaissance Drama: A Bibliography for Feminists". In Another Country: Feminist Perspectives on Renaissance Drama. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press. pp. 302-324. ISBN 0810824183 (acid-free paper).
Barker, Nicholas (1994). "Manuscript into Print". in Randall McLeod, ed. Crisis in Editing : Texts of the English Renaissance: Papers Given at the Twenty-Fourth Annual Conference on Editorial Problems, University of Toronto, 4-5 November 1988. New York: AMS Press. pp. 1-18.
Baron, Helen (1994). "Mary (Howard) Fitzroy's Hand in the Devonshire Manuscript". Review of English Studies: A Quarterly Journal of English Literature and the English Language 45:  318-335.
Barratt, Alexandra (1992). Women's Writing in Middle English. London: Longman.
Barzman, Karen-Edis (2003). "The Subject of "Woman" and the Discipline of Early Modern Studies: Jemima Wilkinson and the Publick Universal Friend". in Margaret Mikesell and Adele F. Seeff, eds. Culture and Change: Attending to Early Modern Women. Newark; London: Delaware UP; Assoc. UPs. pp. 333-360.
Bassanese, Fiora A (1989). "What's in a Name? Self-Naming and Renaissance Women Poets". Annali d'Italianistica 7:  104-115.
Bates, Catherine (2007). "Wyatt, Surrey, and the Henrician Court". in Patrick Cheney, Andrew Hadfield, and Garret A. Sullivan, eds. Early Modern English Poetry: A Critical Companion. Oxford: Oxford UP. pp. 39-47.
Batman, Steven; John Trevisa, trans (1582). Batman vppon Bartholome, his booke De Proprietatibus rerum, newly corrected, enlarged, and ammended. London.
Battigelli, Anna (1998). Margaret Cavendish and the Exiles of the Mind. Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 0813120683.
Bauschatz, Cathleen M. (1991). "Imitation, Writing, and Self-Study in Marie de Gournay's 1595 "Préface" to Montaigne's Essais". in Marie-Rose Logan and Peter L. Rudnytsky, eds. Contending Kingdoms: Historical, Psychological and Feminist Approaches to the Literature of Sixteenth-Century England and France. Detroit: Wayne State University Press. pp. 346-64.
Beal, Peter (2008). A Dictionary of English Manuscript Terminology. London: Oxford UP.
Becker, Lucinda (2001). "The Absent Body: Representations of Dying Early Modern Women in a Selection of Seventeenth-Century Diaries". Women's Writing 8 (2):  251.
Behrendt, Stephen C. (2000). "Teaching Aphra Behn's "The Disappointment"". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 303-307.
Beilin, Elaine V. (1985). "Anne Askew's Self-Portrait in the Examinations". in Margaret P. Hannay, ed. Silent but for the Word: Tudor Women as Patrons, Translators, and Writers of Religious Works. Kent: The Kent State University Press. pp. 77-91.
Beilin, Elaine V. (1990). "Current Bibliography of English Women Writers, 1500-1640". in Anne M. Haselkorn and Betty S. Travitsky, eds. The Renaissance Englishwoman in Print: Counterbalancing the Canon. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. pp. 347-360.
Beilin, Elaine V. (1987). Redeeming Eve: Women Writers of the English Renaissance. Princeton: Princeton University Press. pp. 29-47.
Beilin, Elaine V. (2003). "'The World Reprov'd': Writing Faith and History in England". in Margaret Mikesell and Adele F. Seeff, eds. Culture and Change: Attending to Early Modern Women. Newark; London: Delaware UP; Assoc. UPs. pp. 266-280.
Beilin, Elaine V. (2000). "Writing History". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 72-83.
Bell, Ilona (1997). "Women in the Lyric Dialogue of Courtship: Whitney's Admonition to Al Yong Gentilwomen and Donne's 'The Legacie'". in Claude J. Summers and Ted-Larry Pebworth, eds. Representing Women in Renaissance England. Columbia: University of Missouri Press. pp. 76-92.
Bennett, Judith M. (1994). "Response: Attending to Early Modern Women in an Interdisciplinary Way". in Betty Travitsky and Adele Seeff, eds. Attending to Women in Early Modern England. Newark: U of Delaware P. pp. 96-102.
Benson, Pamela J. (1992). The Invention of the Renaissance Woman: The Challenge of Female Independence in the Literature and Thought of Italy and England. University Park, Pa.: Pennsylvania State University Press. ISBN 0271008121 0271008148 (pbk.).
Benson, Pamela J. (1997). "Translating Italian Thought about Women in Elizabethan England". in Claude J. Summers and Ted-Larry Pebworth, eds. Representing Women in Renaissance England. Columbia: University of Missouri Press. pp. 42-58.
Benson, Pamela J. (2000). "Women Writing Literature in Italy and France". in Susan Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 61-71.
Berman, Ronald (1967). "King Henry the Eighth: History and Romance". English Studies: A Journal of English Language and Literature 48:  112-121.
Berry, Helen (2003). Gender, Society and Print Culture in Late Stuart England: the Cultural World of the Athenian Mercury. Aldershot; Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Bettella, Patrizia (1998). "Discourse of Resistance: The Parody of Feminine Beauty in Berni, Doni and Firenzuola". MLN 113 (1):  192-204.
Bicks, Caroline (2003). Midwiving Subjects in Shakespeare's England. Aldershot; Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Birkenstock, Susan-Marie (1997). Gesturing Toward the Renaissance Woman. University of Florida, Ph.D. diss.
Blanchard, W. Scott (1994). "Skelton: The Voice of the Mob in Sanctuary". in Peter C. Herman, ed. Rethinking the Henrician Era: Essays on Early Tudor Texts and Contexts. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. pp. 123-144.
Blum, Abbe (1990). "'Strike all that look upon with mar[b]le': Monumentalizing Women in Shakespeare's Plays". in Anne Haselkorn and Betty S. Travitsky, eds. The Renaissance Englishwoman in Print: Counterbalancing the Canon. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. pp. 99-118.
Boase, Roger (1977). The Origin and Meaning of Courtly Love: A Critical Study of European Scholarship. Manchester: Manchester UP.
Boffey, Julia (1995). "Annotation in Some Manuscripts of Troilus and Criseyde". in Peter Beal and Jeremy Griffiths, eds. English Manuscript Studies 1100-1700, Volume 5. 5. London: British Library. pp. 1-17.
Boffey, Julia (2007). "From Manuscript to Modern Text". in Peter Brown, ed. A Companion to Medieval English Literature and Culture c. 1350-c. 1500. Blackwell Companions to Literature and Culture (Blackwell Companions to Literature and Culture): 42. Oxford, England: Blackwell. pp. 107-122. ISBN 9780631219736.
Boffey, Julia (1985). Manuscripts of English Courtly Love Lyrics in the Later Middle Ages. Woodbridge: D.S. Brewer.
Boffey, Julia (1998). "The Reputation and Circulation of Chaucer's Lyrics in the Fifteenth Century". in Daniel J. Pinti, ed. Writing After Chaucer: Essential Readings in Chaucer and the Fifteenth Century. Basic Readings in Chaucer and His Time. New York: Garland. pp. 127-144. ISBN 0-8153-2651-3.
Boffey, Julia (1996). "Women Authors and Women's Literacy in Fourteenth- and Fifteenth-Century England". Women and Literature in Britain 1150-1500. Cambridge: Cambridge UP. pp. 159-182.
Bond, E. A. (1871). "Wyatt’s Poems". Athenaeum 27:  654-55.
Bornstein, Diane (1985). "The Style of the Countess of Pembroke's Translation of Philippe de Mornay's Discours de la Vie et de la Mort". in Margaret P. Hannay, ed. Silent but for the Word: Tudor Women as Patrons, Translators, and Writers of Religious Works. Kent: Kent State University Press. pp. 126-148.
Bowden, Caroline (2004). "The Notebooks of Rachael Fane: Education for Authorship?". in Victoria E. Burke, Jonathan Gibson, and Elizabeth Clarke, eds. Early Modern Women's Manuscript Writing: Selected Papers from the Trinity/Trent Colloquium. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 157-180. ISBN 0-7546-0469-1.
Bowerbank, Sylvia (2004). Speaking for Nature: Women and Ecologies of Early Modern England. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins UP. ISBN 0-8018-7872-1.
Brace, Patricia (2002). "Isabella Whitney, A Sweet Nosegay". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. A Companion to Early Modern Women's Writing. Blackwell Companions to Literature and Culture. Oxford; Malden, MA: Blackwell. pp. 98-108.
Brace, Patricia (2000). "Teaching Class: Whitney's "Wyll and Testament" and Nashe's "Litany in Time of Plague"". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 279-282.
Bracher, Tricia (2004). "Esther Inglis and the English Succession Crisis of 1599". in James Daybell, ed. Women and Politics in Early Modern England, 1450-1700. Aldershot; Burlington, VT: Ashgate. pp. 132-146.
Braekman, W. L. (1982). The 'Demaundes off Love'. Brussels: Omirel, UFSAL.
Brink, J. R.; Allison Coudert, Maryanne Cline Horowitz, eds (1989). The Politics of Gender in Early Modern Europe. Sixteenth Century Essays and Studies. 12. Kirksville, MO: Sixteenth Century Journal Publishers. ISBN 0940474123 (alk. paper).
Bronfman, Judith (1990). "Griselda, Renaissance Woman". in Anne M. Haselkorn and Betty S. Travitsky, eds. The Renaissance Englishwoman in Print: Counterbalancing the Canon. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. pp. 211-223.
Brown, Pamela Allen (2003). Better a Shrew than a Sheep: Women, Drama, and the Culture of Jest in Early Modern England. Ithaca, NY; London: Cornell UP.
Bruns, Gerald L. (2002). "Poetic Communities". Iowa Review 32 (1):  1-38. ISSN 0021-065X.
Buccola, Regina M. (2003). "'These So-Called Early Modern Women Writers': Strategies for Integrating Women Writers into English Department Curriculum". Sixteenth Century Journal 34 (1):  147-154. ISSN 0361-0160.
Burgess, Irene (2001). "'The Wreck of Order' in Early Modern Women's Drama". Early Modern Literary Studies 6 (3):  6.1-24. ISSN 1201-2459.
Burke, Mary E; Jane Donawerth, Linda L. Dove, and Karen Nelson, eds (2000). Women, Writing, and the Reproduction of Culture in Tudor and Stuart Britaint. Syracuse: Syracuse UP.
Burke, Victoria E.; Jonathan Gibson, Elizabeth Clarke, eds (2004). Early Modern Women's Manuscript Writing: Selected Papers from the Trinity/Trent Colloquium. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. ISBN 0-7546-0469-1.
Burke, Victoria E. (2009). "Manuscript Miscellanies". in Laura Lunger Knoppers, ed. The Cambridge Companion to Early Modern Women's Writing. Cambridge Companions to Literature (CCtL). Cambridge, England: Cambridge UP. pp. 54-67. ISBN 9780521712422 (pbk.).
Burnley, David (1988). Courtliness and Literature in Medieval England. New York: Longman.
Burrow, Colin (2009). "How to Twist a Knife". London Review of Books 31 (8).
Burt, Richard; John Michael Archer (1994). Enclosure Acts: Sexuality, Property, and Culture in Early Modern England. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, Ph.D. diss. ISBN 0801427452 (alk. paper) 0801480248 (pbk. alk. paper).
Butler, Brian Craig (2003). Manuscript Communities in Seventeenth-Century Verse: Thomas Carew and His Readers. U of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, Ph.D. diss.
Caie, Graham D. (2000). "Hypertext and Multiplicity: The Medieval Example". in Andrew Murphy, ed. The Reniassance Text: Theory, Editing, Textuality. Manchester: Manchester UP. pp. 30-43.
Campbell, Julie Delynn (1997). Renaissance Women Writers: The Beloved Speaks Her Part: Introduction. Texas A & M University, Ph.D. diss.
Cannon, Mary Agnes (1916). The Education of Women During the Renaissance. Catholic Sisters College of the Catholic University of America.
Cappelli, Adriano (1990). Dizionario di abbreviature latine ed italiane. Mailand: Hoepli.
Carlson, Veena (1998). "Imitatio and the Woman Poet: Renaissance Re-writings of Ovid". RLA: Romance Languages Annual 10 (1):  206-15.
Carney, Jo Eldridge (1995). "'God Hath Given You One Face, and You Make Yourself Another': Face Painting in the Renaissance". Lamar Journal of the Humanities 21:  21-34.
Castiglione, Baldassere; Thomas Hoby, trans (1561). The Courtyer of Count Baldessar Castilio. London.
Cavanagh, Sheila T. (2003). "Mystical Sororities: The Power of Supernatural Female Narratives in Lady Mary Wroth's Urania". in Corrine S. Abate, ed. Privacy, Domesticity, and Women in Early Modern England. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 151-165. ISBN 0-7546-3043-9.
Cayley, Emma J. (2002). "Collaborative Communities: The Manuscript Context of Alain Chartier's Belle Dame Sans Mercy". Medium Aevum 71 (2):  226-240. ISSN 0025-8385.
Cerasano, S. P.; Marion Wynne-Davies, eds (1992). Gloriana's Face: Women, Public and Private, in the English Renaissance. Detroit, Mich.: Wayne State University Press. ISBN 0814324266.
Cerasano, S. P.; Marion Wynne-Davies, eds (1998). Readings in Renaissance Women's Drama: Criticism, History, and Performance, 1594-1998. New York: Routledge. ISBN 0415164427 (hbk) 0415164435 (pbk).
Cerasano, S. P.; Marion Wynne-Davies, eds (1996). Renaissance Drama by Women: Texts and Documents. London: Routledge. ISBN 0415098068 0415098076.
Cereta, Laura; Diana Maury Robin, ed. and trans (1997). Collected Letters of a Renaissance Feminist. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0226100111.
Chambers, E. K. (1933). Sir Thomas Wyatt and Some Collected Studies. London: Sidgwick & Jackson.
Chang, Rodriguez Raquel (1998). "Clarinda's Catalogue of Worthy Women in Her Discurso en Loor de la Poesia (1608)". Caliope 4:  94-106.
Chaucer, Geoffrey (1532). The Workes of Geffrey Chaucer (William Thynne, ed.). London.
Chedgzoy, Kate; Melanie Osborne, Suzanne Trill, eds (1997). “Lay By Your Needles Ladies, Take the Pen”: Writing Women in England, 1500–1700. New York: St. Martin's.
Chedgzoy, Kate; Melanie Hansen, Suzanne Trill, eds (1996). Voicing Women: Gender and Sexuality in Early Modern Writing. Keele, Staffordshire: Keele University Press. ISBN 1853311081.
Churchill, Laurie J.; Phyllis R. Brown, Jane E. Jeffrey (2002). Women Writing Latin: From Roman Antiquity to Early Modern Europe, III: Early Modern Women Writing Latin. Women Writers of the World (WWW): 6. New York, NY: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-94185-7 (vol. 3); 0-415-94185-7 (set).
Clark, Ira (1990). "The Power of Integrity in Massinger's Women". in Anne M. Haselkorn and Betty S. Travitsky, eds. The Renaissance Englishwoman in Print: Counterbalancing the Canon. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. pp. 63-79.
Clark, Sandra (2002). "The Broadside Ballad and the Woman's Voice". in Cristina Malcolmson and Mihoko Suzuki, eds. Debating Gender in Early Modern England, 1500-1700. Early Modern Cultural Studies 1500-1700. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 103-120. ISBN 0-312-29457-3.
Clark, Sandra (2003). Women and Crime in the Street Literature of Early Modern England. Basingstoke; New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Clarke, Danielle (2002). "Nostalgia, Anachronism, and the Editing of Early Modern Women's Texts". Text: An Interdisciplinary Annual of Textual Studies 15:  187-209. ISSN 0736-3974.
Clarke, Danielle (2001). The Politics of Early Modern Women's Writing. Harlow: Longman.
Clarke, Elizabeth (2004). "Beyond Microhistory: The Use of Women's Manuscripts in a Widening Political Arena". in James Daybell, ed. Women and Politics in Early Modern England, 1450-1700. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 211-227. ISBN 0-7546-0988-X.
Clarke, Elizabeth (2000). "Women's Manuscript Miscellanies in Early Modern England". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. New York: Modern Language Association of America. pp. 52-60.
Comensoli, Viviana; Anne Russell, eds (1999). Enacting Gender on the English Renaissance Stage. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 0252024230.
Conn, Marie A. (2000). Noble Daughters: Unheralded Women in Western Christianity, 13th to 18th Centuries. Contributions to the Study of Religion. 60. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press. ISBN 0313306699 (alk. paper).
Coolahan, Marie-Louise (2004). "Caitlin Dubh's Keens: Literary Negotiations in Early Modern Ireland". in Victoria E. Burke, Jonathan Gibson, and Elizabeth Clarke, eds. Early Modern Women's Manuscript Writing: Selected Papers from the Trinity/Trent Colloquium. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 91-110. ISBN 0-7546-0469-1.
Copeland, Nancy (2004). "Gender and 'Intertheatricality'". Staging Gender in Behn and Centlivre: Women's Comedy and the Theatre. Aldershot; Burlington, VT: Ashgate. pp. 1-17.
Corporaal, Marguérite (2003). "'Thy Speech Eloquent, Thy Wit Quick, Thy Expressions Easy': Rhetoric and Gender in Plays by English Renaissance Women". Renaissance Forum 6 (2). ISSN 1362-1149.
Cox, John D; David Scott Kastan, eds (1997). A New History of Early English Drama. New York: Columbia UP.
Crane, Mary Thomas (1998). "Women and the Early Modern Canon: Recent Editions of Works  by English Women, 1500-1660". Renaissance Quarterly 51:  942-56.
Cressy, David (1994). "Response: Private Lives, Public Performance, and Rites of Passage". in Betty Travitsky and Adele Seeff, eds. Attending to Women in Early Modern England. Newark: U of Delaware P.. pp. 187-197.
Crewe, Jonathan (1992). Reconfiguring the Renaissance: Essays in Critical Materialism. 35, 2. Lewisburg: Bucknell University Press. ISBN 0-8387-5223-3.
Crewe, Jonathan (1990). Trials of Authorship: Anterior Forms and Poetic Reconstruction from Wyatt to Shakespeare. 9. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-06693-6.
Cuder-Domínguez, Pilar (2002). "'That Dead Commodity, a Wife': Sexual and Domestic Economy in Aphra Behn's Comedies". in Kari Boyd McBride, ed. Domestic Arrangements in Early Modern England. Medieval and Renaissance Literary Studies (MRLS). Pittsburgh, PA: Duquesne UP. pp. 103-123. ISBN 0-8207-0324-9.
Daalder, Joost (1975). Collected Poems. London: Oxford UP.
Daileader, Celia R (1998). Eroticism on the Renaissance Stage: Transcendence, Desire, and the Limits of the Visible. 30. New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521623790.
Dalrymple, Roger (2001). "Reaction, Consolation and Redress in the Letters of the Paston Women". in James Daybell, ed. Early Modern Women's Letter Writing, 1450-1700. Early Modern Literature in History. Basingstoke, England: Palgrave. pp. 17-28. ISBN 0-333-94579-4.
Davidson, Peter; Jane Stevenson, eds (2001). Women Poets: An Anthology. Oxford: Oxford UP.
Daybell, James (2001). "Female Literacy and the Social Conventions of Women's Letter-Writing in England, 1540-1603". Early Modern Women's Letter Writing, 1450-1700. Early Modern Literature in History. Basingstoke, England: Palgrave. pp. 59-76. ISBN 0-333-94579-4.
Daybell, James (2004). "'Suche Newes as on the Quenes Hye Wayes We Have Mett': The News and Intelligence Networks of Elizabeth Talbot, Countess of Shrewsbury (c.1527-1608)". Women and Politics in Early Modern England, 1450-1700. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 114-131. ISBN 0-7546-0988-X.
De Bruyn, Lucy (1979). Woman and the Devil in Sixteenth Century Literature. Tisbury [Eng.]: Compton Press. ISBN 0900193727.
De Groot, Jerome (2004). "Mothers, Lovers and Others: Royalist Women". in James Daybell, ed. Women and Politics in Early Modern England, 1450-1700. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 194-210. ISBN 0-7546-0988-X.
Del Lungo, Isidoro; Mary C. Steegmann, trans (1907). Women of Florence. Chatto and Windvs.
Demers, Patricia (2005). Women's Writing in English: Early Modern England. Toronto: Toronto UP.
Derrett, Duncan M. (1963). "Henry Fitzroy and Henry VIII's 'Scruple of Conscience'". Renaissance News 16 (1):  1-9.
DeZur, Kathryn (2004). "'Vaine Books' and Early Modern Women Readers". in Ian Frederick Moulton, ed. Reading and Literacy in the Middle Ages and Renaissance. Arizona Studies in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance: 8. Turnhout, Belgium: Brepols. pp. 105-125. ISBN 2-503-51396-4.
Dolan, Frances E. (1996). "Reading, Writing, and Other Crimes". in Valerie Traub, M. Lindsay Kaplan, and Dympna Callaghan, eds. Feminist Readings of Early Modern Culture: Emerging Subjects. New York: Cambridge UP. pp. 142-167.
Dowling, Maria (1991). "A Woman's Place? Learning and the Wives of Henry VIII". History Today 41 (6):  38-42.
Dowling, Maria (1984). "Anne Boleyn and Reform". Journal of Ecclesiastical History 35 (1):  30-46.
Dowling, Maria (1986). Humanism in the Age of Henry VIII. London: Croom Helm.
Dubrow, Heather (2003). ""And Thus Leave Off": Reevaluating Mary Wroth's Folger Manuscript, V.a.104". Tulsa Studies in Women's Literature 22 (2):  279-291. ISSN 0732-7730.
Dunnigan, Sarah M. (2003). "Undoing the Double Tress: Scotland, Early Modern Women's Writing, and the Location of Critical Desires". Feminist Studies 29 (2):  299. ISSN 00463663.
Eales, Jacqueline (2003). "Early Modern Women". Literature and History 12 (2):  76-80. ISSN 0306-1973.
Eales, Jacqueline (2001). "Patriarchy, Puritanism and Politics: The Letters of Lady Brilliana Harley (1598-1643)". in James Daybell, ed. Early Modern Women's Letter Writing, 1450-1700. Early Modern Literature in History. Basingstoke, England: Palgrave. pp. 143-158. ISBN 0-333-94579-4.
Eaton, Sara J. (1987). "Presentations of Women in the English Popular Press". in Carole Levin and Jeanie Watson, eds. Ambiguous Realities: Women in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. Detroit, Michigan: Wayne State UP. pp. 165-183.
Edwards, A. S. G. (2004-05). "Manuscripts of the Verse of Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey". Huntington Library Quarterly 67 (2):  283-293. doi:Article. ISSN 00187895.
Ephraim, Michelle Karen (1999). Deborah's Kin: Playing the Jewish Woman on the English  Renaissance Stage (William Shakespeare). Madison: University of Wisconsin, Ph. D. diss.
Estrin, Barbara L. (1994). Laura: Uncovering Gender and Genre in Wyatt, Donne, and Marvell. Durham: Duke University Press. ISBN 0-8223-1500-9.
Estrin, Barbara L. (1994). "Wyatt's Unlikely Likenesses: Or, Has the Lady Read Petrarch?". in Peter C. Herman, ed. Rethinking the Henrician Era: Essays on Early Tudor Texts and Contexts. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. pp. 219-239.
Evans, Robert C.; Anne C. Little, eds (1995). The Muses Females Are: Martha Moulsworth and Other Women Writers of the English Renaissance. 20. West Cornwall, CT: Locust Hill Press. ISBN 0933951639.
Ewan, Elizabeth; Maureen M. Meikle, eds (1999). Women in Scotland: c.1100 - c.1750. East Linton: Tuckwell Press. ISBN 1862320462.
Ezell, Margaret J. M. (2004). "Do Manuscript Studies Have a Future in Early Modern Women Studies?". Shakespeare Studies:  63-65. ISSN 05829399.
Ezell, Margaret J. M. (2001). "'Household Affairs are the Opium of the Soul': Damaris Masham and the Necessity of Women's Poetry". in Barbara Smith and Ursula Ashgate, eds. Write or Be Written: Early Modern Women Poets and Cultural Constraints. Women and Gender in Early Modern England. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 49-65. ISBN 1-84014-288-X.
Ezell, Margaret J. M. (1987). The Patriarch's Wife: Literary Evidence and the History of the Family. Chapel Hill and London: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 0-8078-1741-4.
Ezell, Margaret J. M. (1999). Social Authorship and the Advent of Print. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Ezell, Margaret J. M. (2002). "Women and Writing". in Anita Pacheco, ed. A Companion to Early Modern Women's Writing. Blackwell Companions to Literature and Culture. Oxford; Malden, MA: Blackwell. pp. 77-94.
Ezell, Margaret J. M. (1993). Writing Women's Literary History. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0-8018-5508-X.
Farrell, Kirby; Arthur F. Kinney, Elizabeth Hageman, eds (1990). Women in the Renaissance: Selections from English Literary Renaissance. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. ISBN 0870237276.
Fehrenbach, R. J. (1990). "A Letter Sent By the Maydens of London, 1567 (text)". in Kirby Farrell, Arthur F. Kinney, and Elizabeth Hageman, eds. Women in the Renaissance : Selections from English Literary Renaissance. Amherst: U of Massachusetts P. pp. 28-47.
Felch, Susan M. (2000). "Anne Vaughan Lock". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 127-134.
Ferguson, Margaret W. (1996). "Renaissance Concepts of the 'Woman Writer'". in Helen Wilcox, ed. Women and Literature in Britain, 1500-1700. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 143-168.
Ferguson, Margaret W.; Maureen Quilligan, Nancy J. Vickers, eds (1986). Rewriting the Renaissance: The Discourses of Sexual Difference in Early Modern Europe. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0226243133.
Ferry, Anne (1983). The "Inward" Language: Sonnets of Wyatt, Sidney, Shakespeare, Donne. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Findlay, Alison (1999). A Feminist Perspective on Renaissance Drama. Malden, Ma.: Blackwell Publishers. ISBN 063120508X.
Fischer, Sandra K. (1985). "Elizabeth Cary and Tyranny, Domestic and Religious". in Margaret P. Hannay, ed. Silent but for the Word: Tudor Women as Patrons, Translators, and Writers of Religious Works. Kent: The Kent State University Press. pp. 225-237.
Fisher, Sheila; Janet E. Halley, eds (1989). Seeking the Woman in Late Medieval and Renaissance Writings: Essays in Feminist Contextual Criticism. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press. ISBN 0870495917.
Fisken, Beth Wynne (1985). "Mary Sidney's Psalmes: Education and Wisdom". in Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Silent but for the Word: Tudor Women as Patrons, Translators, and Writers of Religious Works. Kent: The Kent State University Press. pp. 166-183.
Fisken, Beth Wynne (1990). "'To the Angell Spirit...': Mary Sidney's Entry into the "World of Words"". in Anne M. Haselkorn and Betty S. Travitsky, ed. The Renaissance Englishwoman in Print: Counterbalancing the Canon. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. pp. 263-275.
Fitzmaurice, James and Martine Rey (1989). "Letters by Women in England, the French Romance, and Dorothy Osborne". Sixteenth Century Essays and Studies Volume XII. XII. Kirksville, Missouri: Truman State UP. pp. 149-160.
Fleming, Juliet (1994). "Dictionary English and the Female Tongue". in Richard Burt and John Michael Archer, eds. Enclosure Acts: Sexuality, Property, and Culture in Early Modern England. Ithaca: Cornell UP. pp. 290-325.
Fonte, Moderata; Virginia Cox, trans (1997). The Worth of Women: Wherein is Clearly Revealed Their Nobility and Their Superiority to Men. Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0226256812.
Ford, Charita M. (1988). "Flowering a Feminist Garden: The Writings and Poetry of Anne Spencer". SAGE: A Scholarly Journal on Black Women 5:  7-14.
Fox, Alistair (1989). "Literary Patronage: The System and its Obligations". Politics and Literature in the Reigns of Henry VII and Henry VIII. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. pp. 11-24.
Foxwell, Agnes K. (1913). The Poems of Sir Thomas Wiat. London: University of London Press.
Frye, Susan (1993). "Allegory, Instabitlity, and Material Practice". The Competition for Representation. New York: Oxford UP. pp. 33-36.
Frye, Susan (2004). "Anne of Denmark and the Historical Contextualization of Shakespeare and Fletcher's Henry VIII". in James Daybell, ed. Women and Politics in Early Modern England, 1450-1700. Aldershot; Burlington, VT: Ashgate. pp. 181-193.
Frye, Susan (1993). Elizabeth I: The Competition for Representation. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195080238.
Gau, Tracey Marianne (1998). The Re-Presentation of Historical Women in English Renaissance Drama (William Shakespeare, John Webster, Thomas Middleton, Thomas Dekker, Christopher Marlowe). Texas Christian University, Ph.D. diss.
Genette, Gérard; Jane E. Lewin, trans (1997). Paratext: The Thresholds of Textuality. Cambridge: Cambridge UP.
Gibson, Jonathan (2004). "Katherine Parr, Princess Elizabeth and the Crucified Christ". in Victoria E. Burke, Jonathan Gibson, and Elizabeth Clarke, eds. Early Modern Women's Manuscript Writing: Selected Papers from the Trinity/Trent Colloquium. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 33-49. ISBN 0-7546-0469-1.
Gibson, Jonathan (2001). "Remapping Elizabethan Court Poetry". in Matthew Pincombe, ed. The Anatomy of Tudor Literature: Proceedings of the First International Conference of the Tudor Symposium (1998). Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 98-111. ISBN 0-7546-0243-5.
Gibson, Jonathan (2012). "Synchrony and Process: Editing Manuscript Miscellanies". Studies in English Literature 1500-1900 52 (1):  85-100.
Gold, Barbara K.; Paul Allen Miller, Charles Platter, eds (1997). Sex and Gender in Medieval and Renaissance Texts: The Latin Tradition. Albany: State University of New York Press. ISBN 0-7914-3246-7.
Goldberg, Jonathan (1997). Desiring Women Writing: English Renaissance Examples. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Goldberg, Jonathan (1997). "The Female Pen: Writing as a Woman". in Jeffrey Masten, Peter Stallybrass, and Nancy Vickers, eds. Language Machines: Technologies of Literary and Cultural Production. Essays from the English Institute (EEI). New York, NY: Routledge. pp. 17-38. ISBN 9780415918640 (pbk.).
Goldberg, Jonathan (1990). Writing Matter: From the Hands of the English Renaissance. Stanford, Ca.: Stanford University Press. ISBN 0804717435.
Gossett, Suzanne (1988). ""Man-maid, begone!": Women in Masques". Women in the Renaissance: Selections from English Literary Renaissance. Amherst: U of Massachusetts P. pp. 118-135.
Graham, Elspeth (1996). "Women's Writing and the Self". in Helen Wilcox, ed. Women and Literature in Britain, 1500-1700. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 209-233. ISBN 0-521-46777-2.
Gray, Catharine (2002). "Katherine Philips and the Post-Courtly Coterie". English Literary Renaissance 32 (3):  426-451. ISSN 0013-8312.
Greene, Louise; Patricia Herron et al (2003). "The Study of Early Modern Women and the World Wide Web: A University of Maryland Libraries Database". in Margaret Mikesell and Adele F. Seeff, eds. Culture and Change: Attending to Early Modern Women. Center for Renaissance & Baroque Studies.. Newark; London: Delaware UP; Assoc. UPs. pp. 378-380.
Greene, Roland (1994). "The Colonial Wyatt: Contexts and Openings". in Peter C. Herman, ed. Rethinking the Henrician Era: Essays on Early Tudor Texts and Contexts. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. pp. 240-266.
Greenfield, Concetta Carestia (1981). Humanist and Scholastic Poetics, 1250-1500. Lewisburg: Bucknell University Press. ISBN 0-8387-1991-0.
Greer, Germaine (2000). "Aphra Behn". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 204-213.
Greer, Germaine; Susan Hastings, Jeslyn Medoff, Melinda Sansone, eds (1988). Kissing the Rod: An Anthology of Seventeenth Century Women's Verse. London: Virago.
Guild, Elizabeth (1999). "Women as Auctores in Early Modern Europe". in Glyn P. Norton, ed. The Cambridge History of Literary Criticism, III: The Renaissance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 426-432.
Habermann, Ina (2003). Staging Slander and Gender in Early Modern England. Aldershot; Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Hackel, Heidi Brayman (2003). "'Boasting of Silence': Women Readers in a Patriarchal State". in Kevin Sharpe and Steven N. Zwicker, eds. Reading, Society and Politics in Early Modern England. Cambridge; New York: CUP. pp. 101-121.
Hackel, Heidi Brayman (2005). Reading Material in Early Modern England: Print, Gender, and Literacy. Cambridge: Cambridge UP.
Hackett, Helen (1996). "Courtly Writing By Women". in Helen Wilcox, ed. Women and Literature in Britain, 1500-1700. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 169-189. ISBN 0-521-46777-2.
Hackett, Helen (1998). "The Torture of Limena: Sex and Violence in Lady Mary Wroth's Urania". in Kate Chedgzoy, Melanie Hansen, and Suzanne Trill, eds. Voicing Women: Gender and Sexuality in Early Modern Writing. Edinburgh: Edinburgh UP. pp. 93-110.
Hageman, Elizabeth H. (1990). Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. ed. Women in the Renaissance: Selections from English Literary Renaisssance. Amherst: U of Massachusetts P.
Hageman, Elizabeth H. (2000). Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. ed. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association.
Halasz, Alexandra (1994). "Wyatt's David". in Peter C. Herman, ed. Rethinking the Henrician Era: Essays on Early Tudor Texts and Contexts. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. pp. 193-218.
Hall, Kim F.; Gwynne Kennedy (2000). "Early Modern Women Writing Race". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 235-239.
Halley, Janet E. (1989). "Textual Intercourse : Anne Donne, John Donne, and the Sexual Poetics of Textual Exchange". in Sheila Fisher and Janet E. Halley, eds. Seeking the Woman in Late Medieval and Renaissance Writings: Essays in Feminist Contextual Criticism. 1st. Knoxville: U of Tennessee P. pp. 187-206.
Hammond, Eleanor Prescott (1922). "Poems 'Signed' by Sir Thomas Wyatt". Modern Language Notes 37:  505-06.
Hammons, Pamela S. (2001). Poetic Resistance: English Women Writers and the Early Modern Lyric. Women and Gender in Early Modern England. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. ISBN 1-84014-288-X.
Hammons, Pamela S. (2001). "Widow, Prophet, and Poet: Lyrical Self-Figurations in Katherine Austen's 'Book M' (1664)". in Barbara Smith and Ursula Appelt, eds. Write or Be Written: Early Modern Women Poets and Cultural Constraints. Women and Gender in Early Modern England. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 3-27. ISBN 1-84014-288-X.
Hanna III, Ralph (1991). "Annotation as Social Practice". in Stephen A. Barney, ed. Annotation and Its Texts. New York: Oxford UP. pp. 178-184.
Hannay, Margaret P., ed (2000). "Mary Sidney, Countess of Pembroke". Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 135-144.
Hannay, Margaret P. (1994). "'O Daughter Heare': Reconstructing the Lives of Aristocratic Englishwomen". in Betty S. Travitsky and Adele Seeff, eds. Attending to Women in Early Modern England. Newark: U of Delaware P. pp. 35-63.
Hannay, Margaret P. (1985). Silent but for the Word: Tudor Women as Patrons, Translators, and Writers of Religious Works. Kent: The Kent State University Press. ISBN 0-87338-315-X.
Hannay, Margaret P. (2001). "'So May I with the Psalmist Truly Say': Early Modern Englishwomen's Psalm Discourse". in Barbara Smith and Ursula Appelt, eds. Write or Be Written: Early Modern Women Poets and Cultural Constraints. Women and Gender in Early Modern England. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 105-134. ISBN 1-84014-288-X.
Hansen, Carol (1993). Woman as Individual in English Renaissance Drama: A Defiance of the Masculine Code. 156. New York: P. Lang. ISBN 0820420093.
Hanson, Elizabeth (1997). "Boredom and Whoredom: Reading Renaissance Women's Sonnet Sequences". Yale Journal of Criticism 10 (1):  165-91.
Harrier, Richard C., ed. (1975). The Canon of Sir Thomas Wyatt's Poetry. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard UP.
Harrier, Richard C. (1960). "A Printed Source for the 'Devonshire Manuscript'". Review of English Studies 11 (41):  54.
Harris, Barbara J. (2004). "Sisterhood, Friendship and the Power of English Aristocratic Women". in James Daybell, ed. Women and Politics in Early Modern England, 1450-1700. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 21-50. ISBN 0-7546-0988-X.
Harvey, Elizabeth D. (1992). Ventriloquized Voices: Feminist Theory and English Renaissance Texts. London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-12793-9.
Haselkorn, Anne M.; Betty S. Travitsky, eds (1990). The Renaissance Englishwoman in Print: Counterbalancing the Canon. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. ISBN 0-87023-690-3.
Head, David M. (1982). ""Beyn Ledde and Seduced by the Devyll": The Attainder of Lord Thomas Howard and the Tudor Law of Treason". Sixteenth Century Journal 13 (4):  3-16.
Heale, Elizabeth (1998). Wyatt, Surrey and Early Tudor Poetry. Longman Medieval and Renaissance Library. London: Longman. pp. 40-69.
Heale, Elizabeth (2004). "'Desiring Women Writing': Female Voices and Courtly 'Balets' in Some Early Tudor Manuscript Albums". in Victoria E. Burke, Jonathan Gibson, and Elizabeth Clarke, eds. Early Modern Women's Manuscript Writing: Selected Papers from the Trinity/Trent Colloquium. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 9-31. ISBN 0-7546-0469-1.
Heale, Elizabeth (2003). "Misogyny and the Complete Gentleman in Early Elizabethan Printed Miscellanies". Yearbook of English Studies 33:  233-247. ISSN 0306-2473.
Heale, Elizabeth (2012). The Devonshire Manuscript of Courtly Verse: A Woman's Book. Toronto: Iter and the Centre for Reformation and Renaissance Studies.
Heale, Elizabeth (1995). "Women and the Courtly Love Lyric: The Devonshire MS (BL Additional 17492)". The Modern Language Review 90:  296-313.
Hellwarth, Jennifer Wynne (2002). "'I Wyl Wright of Women Prevy Sekenes': Imagining Female Literacy and Textual Communities in Medieval and Early Modern Midwifery Manuals". Critical Survey 14 (1):  44-63. ISSN 0011-1570.
Henderson, Diana E. (1995). Passion Made Public: Elizabethan Lyric, Gender, and Performance. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 0-252-02162-2.
Henderson, Katherine Usher; Barbara F. McManus, eds (1985). Half Humankind:  English Texts and Contexts of the Controversy about Women, 1540-1640. Urbana: Univeristy of Illinois Press. ISBN 0-252-01169-4.
Herman, Peter C. (1994). Rethinking the Henrician Era: Essays on Early Tudor Texts and Contexts. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 0-525-06340-6.
Hill, W. Speed; Renaissance English Text Society (1993). New Ways of Looking at Old Texts: Papers of the Renaissance English Text Society, 1985-1991. 107. Binghamton, N.Y.: Medieval & Renaissance Texts & Studies: Renaissance English Text Society. ISBN 0866981535 (hard).
Hinds, Hilary (1996). God's Englishwomen: Seventeenth-Century Radical Sectarian Writing and Feminist Criticism. New York: Manchester University Press; Distributed exclusively in the USA and Canada by St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0719048869.
Hobby, Elaine (2001). "'Secrets of the Female Sex': Jane Sharp, the Reproductive Female Body and Early Modern Midwifery Manuals". Women's Writing 8 (2):  201-212.
Hodgson-Wright, Stephanie (2002). Women's Writing of the Early Modern Period, 1588-1688: An Anthology. New York, NY: Columbia UP. ISBN 0-231-12785-5.
Hoenselaars, Ton (1998). "Joseph Swetnam, Alias Misogynos, and His Women Readers (1615- 1620)". in Marie Therese Jones-Davies, ed. L'Auteur et Son Public Au Temps de la Renaissance. Paris: Klincksieck. pp. 165-189.
Hoffmeister, Gerhart (1983). German Baroque Literature: The European Perspective. New York: Frederick Ungar Publishing. ISBN 0-8044-2394-6.
Hogrefe, Pearl (1975). Tudor Women: Commoners and Queens. Ames: The Iowa State University Press.
Holderness, Graham (2000). "Biblebable". in Andrew Murphy, ed. The Renaissance Text: Theory, Editing, Textuality. Manchester: Manchester UP. pp. 154-176.
Holm, Janis Butler (1987). "The Myth of a Feminist Humanism: Thomas Salter's The Mirrhor of Modestie". in Carole Levin and Jeanie Watson, eds. Ambiguous Realities: Women in the Middle Ages and Renaissance. Detroit, Michigan: Wayne State UP. pp. 197-218.
Holm, Janis Butler (1991). "Struggling with the Letter: Vives's Preface to The Instruction of a Christen Woman". in Marie-Rose Logan and Peter L. Rudnytsky, eds. Contending Kingdoms: Historical, Psychological and Feminist Approaches to the Literature of Sixteenth-Century England and France. Detroit: Wayne State University Press. pp. 265-297.
Hosington, Brenda M. (2002). "Elizabeth Jane Weston (1581-1612)". in Laurie J. Churchill, ed. Women Writing Latin: From Roman Antiquity to Early Modern Europe, III: Early Modern Women Writing Latin. Women Writers of the World (WWW): 6. New York, NY: Routledge. pp. 217-245. ISBN 0-415-94185-7 (vol. 3); 0-415-94185-7 (set).
Howard, Skiles (1994). "'Ascending the Riche Mount': Performing Hierarchy and Gender in the Henrician Masque". in Peter C. Herman, ed. Rethinking the Henrician Era: Essays on Early Tudor Texts and Contexts. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. pp. 16-39.
Hughey, Ruth (1960). The Arundel Harrington Manuscript of Tudor Poetry. Columbus, Oh: Ohio State University Press.
Hull, Suzanne W. (2000). "Traditional Studies of Early Women Writers". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 348-356.
Hull, Suzanne W. (1996). Women According to Men: The World of Tudor-Stuart Women. Walnut Creek: AltaMira Press. ISBN 0761991190 0761991204 (pbk.).
Hulse, Clark (1986). "Stella's Wit: Penelope Rich as Reader of Sidney's Sonnets". in Margaret W. Ferguson, Maureen Quilligan, and Nancy J. Vickers, eds. Rewriting the Renaissance: The Discourses of Sexual Difference in Early Modern Europe. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp. 272-286.
Hunt, Arnold (2004). "The Books, Manuscripts and Literary Patronage of Mrs. Anne Sadleir (1585-1670)". in Victoria E. Burke, Jonathan Gibson, and Elizabeth Clarke, eds. Early Modern Women's Manuscript Writing: Selected Papers from the Trinity/Trent Colloquium. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 205-236. ISBN 0-7546-0469-1.
Hurley, Anne (2000). "Archival Studies: Retrieving the 'Nonexistent' Women Writers of the English Renaissance". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 253-257.
Hutson, Lorna (1999). Feminism and Renaissance Studies. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0198782446 0198782438 (pbk.).
Ikegami, Robin (2000). "Teaching Aphra Behn's 'The Rover'". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 308-311.
Irish, Bradley J. (2011). "Gender and Politics in the Henrician Court: The Douglas-Howard Lyrics in the Devonshire Manuscript (BL Add 17492)". Renaissance Quarterly 64.1:  79-114.
Jacobs, Fredrika Herman (1997). Defining the Renaissance Virtuosa: Women Artists and the Language of Art History and Criticism. New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521572703.
Jankowski, Theodora A. (2003). "Good Enough to Eat: The Domestic Economy of Woman-Woman Eroticism in Margaret Cavendish and Andrew Marvell". in Corrine S. Abate, ed. Privacy, Domesticity, and Women in Early Modern England. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 83-109. ISBN 0-7546-3043-9.
Jansohn, Christa (1999). Problems of Editing. Teübingen: Max Niemeyer Verlag. ISBN 3484295147.
Jardine, Lisa (1994). "Unpicking the Tapestry: The Scholar of Women's History as Penelope Among Her Suitors". in Betty S. Travitsky and Adele Seeff, eds. Attending to Women in Early Modern England. Newark: U of Delaware P. pp. 123-144.
Jardine, Lisa (1999). "Women Humanists: Education for What?". in Lorna Hutson, ed. Feminism and Renaissance Studies. New York: Oxford UP.
Jones, Ann Rosalind (1981). "Assimilation with a Difference: Renaissance Women Poets and Literary Influence". Yale French Studies 62:  135-153.
Jones, Ann Rosalind (1990). "Counterattacks on 'the Bayter of Women': Three Pamphleteers of the Early Seventeenth Century". in Anne M. Haselkorn and Betty S. Travitsky, eds. The Renaissance Englishwoman in Print: Counterbalancing the Canon. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. pp. 45-62.
Jones, Ann Rosalind (1987). "Nets and Bridles: Early Modern Conduct Books and Sixteenth-Century Women's Lyrics". in Nancy Armstrong and Leonard Tennenhouse, eds. The Ideology of Conduct: Essays on Literature and the History of Sexuality. New York: Methuen.
Jones, Ann Rosalind (1991). "New Songs for the Swallow: Ovid's Philomela in Tullia d'Aragona and Gaspara Stampa". in Marilyn Migiel and Juliana Schiesari, eds. Refiguring Women: Perspectives on Gender and the Italian Renaissance. Ithaca: Cornell UP. pp. 263-277.
Jones, Ann Rosalind (1986). "Surprising Fame: Renaissance Gender Ideologies and Women's Lyric". in Nancy K. Miller, ed. The Poetics of Gender. Gender and Culture. New York: Columbia University Press. pp. 74-95.
Jordan, Constance (1986). "Feminism and the Humanists: The Case of Sir Thomas Elyot's Defence of Good Women". in Margaret W. Ferguson, Maureen Quilligan, and Nancy J. Vickers, eds. Rewriting the Renaissance: The Discourses of Sexual Difference in Early Modern Europe. Women in Culture and Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp. 242-258. ISBN 0226243133.
Jordan, Constance (1998). "Listening to 'The Other Voice' in Early Modern Europe". Renaissance Quarterly 51:  184-92.
Jordan, Constance (1990). Renaissance Feminism: Literary Texts and Political Models. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. ISBN 0801421632 (alk. paper).
Jordan, Constance (1990). "Representing Political Androgyny: More on the Siena Portrait of Queen Elizabeth I". in Anne M. Haselkorn and Betty S. Travitsky, eds. The Renaissance Englishwoman in Print: Counterbalancing the Canon. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. pp. 157-176.
Kamholtz, Jonathan Z. (1978). "Thomas Wyatt's Poetry: The Politics of Love". Criticism 20:  349-365.
Karnes, Christy Dawn (2004). Inspired by Loss: Melancholy and Women's Agency in Early Modern Literature. Miami University, Ph.D. diss.
Kastan, David Scott (1994). "'Holy Wurdes' and 'Slypper Wit': John Bale's King Johan and the Poetics of Propaganda". in Peter C. Herman, ed. Rethinking the Henrician Era: Essays on Early Tudor Texts and Contexts. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. pp. 267-282.
Kastan, David Scott (2001). Shakespeare and the Book. Cambridge: Cambridge UP.
Kay, Sarah (2001). Courtly Contradictions: The Emergence of the Literary Object in the Twelfth Century. Figurae: Reading Medieval Culture. Stanford, CA: Stanford UP. ISBN 0-8047-3079-2.
Kearns, Judith (2004). "Fashioning Innocence: Rhetorical Construction of Character in the "Memoirs" of Anne, Lady Halkett". Texas Studies in Language and Literature 46 (3):  340-362. ISSN 0040-4691.
Kegl, Rosemary (1999). "Theaters, Households, and a 'Kind of History' in Elizabeth Cary's The Tragedy of Mariam". in Viviana Comensoli and Anne Russell, eds. Enacting Gender on the English Renaissance Stage. Urbana: U of Illinois P. pp. 135-153.
Kehler, Dorothea (1991). "A Selective Bibliography of Feminist and Feminist-Related Shakespeare Criticism, 1979-1988". in Susan Baker and Dorothea Kehler, eds. In Another Country: Feminist Perspectives on Renaissance Drama. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press. pp. 261-301.
Kelly, Erna (2000). "Portraits: Self and Other". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 248-252.
Kelly, Joan (1984). Women, History and Theory: The Essays of Joan Kelly. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kelso, Ruth (1956). Doctrine for the Lady of the Renaissance. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 0-252-00693-3.
Kesselring, Krista (1998). "Representations of Women in Tudor Historiography: John Bale and the Rhetoric of Exemplarity". Renaissance and Reformation / Renaissance et Reforme 22:  41-61.
King, Catherine (1998). Renaissance Women Patrons: Wives and Widows in Italy c. 1300-1550. New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0719052882 (hardback) 0719052890 (pbk.).
King, John N. (1994). "Henry VIII as David: The King's Image and Reformation Politics". in Peter C. Herman, ed. Rethinking the Henrician Era: Essays on Early Tudor Texts and Contexts. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. pp. 78-92.
King, John N. (1985). "Patronage and Piety: The Influence of Catherine Parr". in Margaret P. Hannay, ed. Silent but for the Word: Tudor Women as Patrons, Translators, and Writers of Religious Works. Kent: The Kent State University Press. pp. 43-60.
King, John N.; Frances E. Dolan, Elaine Hobby (2000). "Writing Religion". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 84-103.
King, Margaret L.; Albert Rabil, eds (1983). Her Immaculate Hand: Selected Works By and About the Women Humanists of Quattrocento Italy. 20. Binghamton, N.Y.: Center for Medieval & Early Renaissance Studies. ISBN 0866980237.
King, Margaret L. (2005). Humanism, Venice and Women: Essays on the Italian Renaissance. Variorum Collected Studies Series. Aldershot: Ashgate.
King, Margaret L. and Albert Rabil Jr. (1999). "The Other Voice in Early Modern Europe: Introduction to the Series". The Nobility and Excellence of Women, and the Defects and Vices of Men. The Other Voice in Early Modern Europe. Chicago: U of Chicago P. pp. vii-xxvi.
King, Margaret L. (1991). Women of the Renaissance. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0226436179 (alk. paper).
Kinney, Clare R. (2001). "Mary Wroth's Guilty 'Secrett Art': The Poetics of Jealousy in Pamphilia to Amphilanthus". in Barbara Smith and Ursula Appelt, eds. Write or Be Written: Early Modern Women Poets and Cultural Constraints. Women and Gender in Early Modern England. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 69-85. ISBN 1-84014-288-X.
Kinney, Clare R. (1990). "The Queen's Two Bodies and the Divided Emperor: Some Problems of Identity in Antony and Cleopatra". in Anne M. Haselkorn and Betty S. Travitsky, eds. The Renaissance Englishwoman in Print: Counterbalancing the Canon. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. pp. 177-186.
Krisak, Linda A. (1999). Under My Thumb: Women and Authority in the Literature of  Renaissance England (Edmund Spenser, William Shakespeare, Aemilia Lanyer, Mary, Lady Wroth). Lincoln: University of Nebraska, Ph.D. diss.
Krontiris, Tina (1990). "Breaking Barriers of Genre and Gender: Margaret Tyler's Translation of The Mirrour of Knighthood". in Kirby Farrell, Arthur F. Kinney, and Elizabeth Hageman, eds. Women in the Renaissance: Selections from English Literary Renaisssance. Amherst: U of Massachusetts P. pp. 48-68.
Krontiris, Tina (1992). Oppositional Voices: Women as Writers and Translators of Literature in the English Renaissance. New York: Routledge. ISBN 0415063299.
Krontiris, Tina (1990). "Style and Gender in Elizabeth Cary's Edward II". in Anne M. Haselkorn and Betty S. Travitsky, eds. The Renaissance Englishwoman in Print: Counterbalancing the Canon. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. pp. 137-153.
Kwint, Marius; Christopher Breward, Jeremy Aynsley, eds (1999). Material Memories: Design and Evocation. Oxford: Berg.
Lamb, Mary Ellen (2000). "Constructions of Women Readers". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 23-34.
Lamb, Mary Ellen (1985). "The Cooke Sisters: Attitudes Towards Learned Women in the Renaissance". in Margaret P. Hannay, ed. Silent but for the Word: Tudor Women as Patrons, Translators, and Writers of Religious Works. Kent: The Kent State University Press. pp. 107-125.
Larminie, Vivienne (2001). "Fighting for Family in a Patronage Society: The Epistolary Armoury of Anne Newdigate (1574-1618)". in James Daybell, ed. Early Modern Women's Letter Writing, 1450-1700. Early Modern Literature in History. Basingstoke, England: Palgrave. pp. 94-108. ISBN 0-333-94579-4.
Larsen, Anne R. (1997). "Paradox and the Praise of women: From Ortensio Lando and Charles Estienne to Marie de Romieu". Sixteenth Century Journal 28:  759-775.
Larsen, Anne R.; Colette H. Winn, eds (1994). Renaissance Women Writers: French Texts, American Contexts. Detroit: Wayne State University Press. ISBN 0814324738 (alk. paper).
Laurence, Anne (2001). "'Begging Pardon for all Mistakes or Errors in This Writeing I Being a Woman & Doing Itt Myselfe': Family Narratives in Some Early Eighteenth-Century Letters". in James Daybell, ed. Early Modern Women's Letter Writing, 1450-1700. Early Modern Literature in History. Basingstoke: Palgrave. pp. 194-206. ISBN 0-333-94579-4.
Lavoie, Chantel (2003). "Poems by Eminent Ladies: The Encyclopedic Anthology of 1755". 1650-1850: Ideas, Aesthetics, and Inquiries in the Early Modern Era 9:  207-236. ISSN 1065-3112.
Legaré, Anne-Marie (1996). "Reassessing Women's Libraries in Late Medieval France: The Case of Jeanne de Laval". Renaissance Studies: Journal of the Society for Renaissance Studies 10:  209-36.
Lerer, Seth (1997). Courtly Letters in the Age of Henry VIII: Literacy, Culture and the Arts of Deceit. 18. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-59001-9.
Levin, Carole; Jeanie Watson, eds (1987). Ambiguous Realities: Women in the Middle Ages and Renaissance. Detroit: Wayne State University Press. ISBN 081431872X (alk. paper).
Levin, Carole; Debra Barrett-Graves, Jo Eldridge Carney, W.M. Spellman, Gwynne Kennedy, and Stephanie Witham. (2000). Extraordinary Women of the Medieval and Renaissance World: A Biographical Dictionary. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press. ISBN 0313306591 (alk. paper).
Levin, Carole (2000). "Illuminating the Margins of the Early Modern Period: Using Women's Voices in the History Class". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 261-265.
Levin, Carole (1985). "Lady Jane Grey: Protestant Queen and Martyr". in Margaret P. Hannay, ed. Silent but for the Word: Tudor Women as Patrons, Translators, and Writers of Religious Works. Kent: The Kent State University Press. pp. 92-106.
Levin, Carole; Patricia Ann Sullivan (1995). Political Rhetoric, Power, and Renaissance Women. Albany: State University of New York Press. ISBN 0791425452 (alk. paper).
Levin, Carole (1989). "Power, Politics and Sexuality: Images of Elizabeth I". in J.R. Brink, Alison Coudert, and Maryanne Cline Horowitz, eds. The Politics of Gender in Early Modern Europe. Sixteenth Century Essays and Studies. Kirksville, Mo: Sixteenth Century Journal Publishers. pp. 95-110.
Lewalski, Barbara K. (1993). "Defending Women's Essential Equality: Rachel Speght's Polemics and Poems". Writing Women in Jacobean England. London: Harvard University Press. pp. 153-175.
Lewalski, Barbara K. (1985). "Of God and Good Women: The Poems of Aemilia Lanyer". in Margaret P. Hanney, ed. Silent but for the Word: Tudor Women as Patrons, Translators, and Writers of Religious Works. Kent: The Kent State University Press. pp. 203-224.
Lewalski, Barbara K. (2000). "Rachel Speght". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 174-184.
Lewalski, Barbara K. (1986). Renaissance Genres: Essays on Theory, History, and Interpretation. London: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-647-76040-9.
Linton, Joan Pong (2001). "The Plural Voices of Anne Askew". in Barbara Smith and Ursula Appelt, eds. Write or Be Written: Early Modern Women Poets and Cultural Constraints. Women and Gender in Early Modern England. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 137-153. ISBN 1-84014-288-X.
Logan, Marie-Rose; Peter L. Rudnytsky, eds (1991). Contending Kingdoms: Historical, Psychological and Feminist Approaches to the Literature of Sixteenth-Century England and France. Detroit: Wayne State University Press. ISBN 0-8143-2149-6.
Longfellow, Erica (2004). "Introduction". Women and Religious Writing in Early Modern England. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 1-17.
Longfellow, Erica (2004). "Lady Anne Southwell's Indictment of Adam". in Victoria E. Burke, Jonathan Gibson, and Elizabeth Clarke, eds. Early Modern Women's Manuscript Writing: Selected Papers from the Trinity/Trent Colloquium. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 111-133. ISBN 0-7546-0469-1.
Loscocco, Paula (2000). "Theory in the Teaching of Early Modern Women Writers". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 227-234.
Losse, Deborah N. (1994). "Women Addressing Women: The Differentiated Text". Renaissance Women Writers: French Texts/ American Contexts. Detroit, Michigan: Wayne State UP. pp. 11-20.
Love, Harold; Arthur F. Marotti (2002). "Manuscript Transmission and Circulation". in David Loewenstein and Janel Mueller, eds. The Cambridge History of Early Modern English Literature. Cambridge, England: Cambridge UP. pp. 55-80. ISBN 9780521631563.
Love, Harold (1993). Scribal Publication in Seventeenth-Century England. Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 0-19-81129-X.
Lucas, R. Valerie (1990). "Puritan Preaching and the Politics of the Family". in Anne M. Haselkorn and Betty S. Travitsky, eds. The Renaissance Englishwoman in Print: Counterbalancing the Canon. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. pp. 224-240.
Luckyj, Christina (2001). "The Politics of Genre in Early Modern Women's Writing: the Case of Lady Mary Wroth". English Studies in Canada:  253-282. ISSN 03170802.
Macaulay, G.C., ed. (1899-1902). The Complete Works of John Gower. 2 and 3. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Maclean, Ian (1980). The Renaissance Notion of Woman: A Study in the Fortunes of Scholasticism and Medical Science in European Intellectual Life. New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521229065.
Maddern, Philippa C. (2002). "Widows and Their Lands: Women, Lands and Texts in Fifteenth-Century Norfolk". Parergon: Journal of the Australian and New Zealand Association for Medieval and Early Modern Studies 19 (1):  123-150. ISSN 0313-6221.
Magnusson, Lynne (2004). "A Rhetoric of Requests: Genre and Linguistic Scripts in Elizabethan Women's Suitors' Letters". in James Daybell, ed. Women and Politics in Early Modern England, 1450-1700. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 51-66. ISBN 0-7546-0988-X.
Magro, Maria (2004). "Spiritual Autobiography and Radical Sectarian Women's Discourse: Anna Trapnel and the Bad Girls of the English Revolution". Journal of Medieval and Early Modern Studies 34 (2):  405-437. ISSN 1082-9636.
Maguire, Laurie E. (2000). "Composition/Decomposition: Singular Shakespeare and the Death of the Author". in Andrew Murphy, ed. The Renaissance Text: Theory, Editing, Textuality. Manchester: Manchester UP. pp. 135-153.
Malcolmson, Cristina; Mihoko Suzuki, eds (2002). Debating Gender in Early Modern England, 1500-1700. Early Modern Cultural Studies 1500-1700. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 0-312-29457-3.
Mann, Alastair J. (1999). "Embroidery to Enterprise: the Role of Women in the Book Trade of Early Modern Scotland". in Elizabeth Ewan and Maureen M. Meikle, eds. Women in Scotland: c.1100-c.1750. East Linton: Tuckwell Press. pp. 136-151.
Mantel, Hilary (2009). Wolf Hall. New York: HarperCollins.
Marcus, Leah S. (2000). "From Oral Delivery to Print in the Speeches of Elizabeth I". in Arthur F. Marotti and Michael D. Iristol, eds. Print, Manuscript, and Performance: The Changing Relations of the Media in Early Modern England. Columbus: Ohio State UP. pp. 33-48.
Marcus, Leah S. (1996). Unediting the Renaissance: Shakespeare, Marlowe, Milton. New York: Routledge.
Marinella, Lucrezia; Anne Dunhill, trans and ed (1999). The Nobility and Excellence of Women, and the Defects and Vices of Men. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0226505456 (cloth acid-free paper) 0226505464 (paper).
Marotti, Arthur F. (1995). Manuscript, Print, and the English Renaissance Lyric. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. ISBN 0801422914 (cloth alk. paper).
Marotti, Arthur F.; Michael D. Bristol, eds (2000). Print, Manuscript, and Performance: The Changing Relations of the Media in Early Modern England. Columbus: Ohio State University Press. ISBN 0814208452 (alk. paper) 0814250491 (pbk. alk. paper).
Marotti, Arthur F. (1991). "The Transmission of Lyric Poetry and the Institutionalizing of Literature in the English Renaissance". in Marie-Rose Logan and Peter L. Rudnytsky, eds. Contending Kingdoms: Historical, Psychological and Feminist Approaches to the Literature of Sixteenth-Century England and France. Detroit: Wayne State University Press. pp. 21-41.
Mason, Harold A. (1959). Humanism and Poetry in the Early Tudor Period: An Essay. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Mason, Harold A. (1972). Editing Wyatt: An Examination of Collected Poems of Sir Thomas Wyatt. Cambridge: Cambridge Quarterly.
Massai, Sonia (2007). Shakespeare and the Rise of the Editor. Cambridge: Cambridge UP.
Masten, Jeffrey; Peter Stallybrass, Nancy J. Vickers, eds (1997). Language Machines: Technologies of Literary and Cultural Production. New York: Routledge.
Masten, Jeffrey (2001). "More or Less: Editing the Collaborative". Shakespeare Studies 29.
Masten, Jeffrey (1997). Textual Intercourse: Collaboration, Authorship, and Sexualities in Renaissance Drama. Cambridge: Cambridge UP.
Matchinske, Megan (1998). "Connections, Qualifications, and Agendas". Writing, Gender, and State in Early Modern England: Identity Formation and the Female Subject. Cambridge Studies in Renaissance Literature and Culture. 26. New York: Cambridge University Press. pp. 156-165. ISBN 0521622549.
Maulde-La-Claviere, R. de (1901). The Women of the Renaissance: A Study of Feminism. London: S. Sonnenschein & Co.
May, Steven W. (1999). The Elizabethan Courtier Poets: The Poems and Their Contexts. Asheville, NC: Pegasus Press.
May, Steven W.; William A. Ringler (2004). Elizabethan Poetry: Bibliography and First-Line Index of English verse, 1559-1603. London: Thoemmes Continuum.
May, Steven W. (1980). "Tudor Aristocrats and the Mythical 'Stigma of Print'". Renaissance Papers 10.
Maynard, Winifred (1965). "The Lyrics of Wyatt: Poems or Songs?". The Review of English Studies 16 (61):  1-13.
McBride, Kari Boyd (2002). Domestic Arrangements in Early Modern England. Medieval and Renaissance Literary Studies (MRLS). Pittsburgh, PA: Duquesne UP. ISBN 0-8207-0324-9.
McGann, Jerome (1983). A Critique of Modern Textual Criticism. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
McGann, Jerome (1988). "The Monks and Giants: Textual and Bibliographical Studies and the Interpretation of Literary Works". The Beauty of Inflections: Literary Investigations in Historical Method and Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 69-89.
McGrath, Lynette F. (2000). "Isabella Whitney and the Ideologies of Writing and Publication". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 283-289.
McGrath, Lynette F. (2002). "The Subject in the Margin: Women and Poetry in Early Modern England". Subjectivity and Women's Poetry in Early Modern England: 'Why on the Ridge Should She Desire to Go?'. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 1-33. ISBN 0-7546-0585-X.
McKenzie, D.F. (1986). Bibliography and the Sociology of Texts. London: British Library.
McLaren, Margaret Ann (1990). "An Unknown Continent: Lady Mary Wroth's Forgotten Pastoral Drama, 'Loves Victorie'". in Anne M. Haselkorn and Betty S. Travitsky, eds. The Renaissance Englishwoman in Print: Counterbalancing the Canon. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. pp. 276-294.
McLeod, Randall (1994). Crisis in Editing: Texts of the English Renaissance: Papers Given at the Twenty-fourth Annual Conference on Editorial Problems, University of Toronto, 4-5 November 1988. New York: AMS Press. ISBN 0404636748 (acid-free paper).
McLeod, Randall (1982). "UnEditing Shakespeare". Sub-Stance 33-34:  26-55.
Mears, Natalie (2004). "Politics in the Elizabethan Privy Chamber: Lady Mary Sidney and Kate Ashley". in James Daybell, ed. Women and Politics in Early Modern England, 1450-1700. Aldershot; Burlington, VT: Ashgate. pp. 67-82.
Medoff, Jeslyn (2001). "'Very Like a Fiction': Some Early Biographies of Aphra Behn". in Barbara Smith and Ursula Appelt, eds. Write or Be Written: Early Modern Women Poets and Cultural Constraints. Women and Gender in Early Modern England. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 247-269. ISBN 1-84014-288-X.
Mendelson, Sara Heller (1987). "Introduction". The Mental World of Stuart Women. Amherst: U of Massachusetts P. pp. 1-11.
Mendelson, Sara Heller; Patricia Crawford (1998). Women in Early Modern England, 1550-1720. New York: Clarendon Press.
Metzger, Erika A.; Michael M. Metzger (1983). "Courtly and Anticourtly Literature". in Gerhart Hoffmeister, ed. German Baroque Literature: The European Perspective. New York: Frederick Ungar Publishing. pp. 250-269.
Migiel, Marilyn; Juliana Schiesari, eds (1991). Refiguring Woman: Perspectives on Gender and the Italian Renaissance. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press. ISBN 0801425387 (alk. paper).
Mikesell, Margaret (2003). "Introduction". in Margaret Mikesell and Adele F. Seeff, eds. Culture and Change: Attending to Early Modern Women. Center for Renaissance & Baroque Studies.. Newark; London: Delaware UP; Assoc. UPs. pp. 11-37.
Miller, Nancy K. (1986). The Poetics of Gender. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-06310-5.
Miller, Naomi J. (1996). Changing the Subject: Mary Wroth and Figurations of Gender in Early Modern England. Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 0813119642 (alk. paper).
Miller, Naomi J. (1990). "Rewriting Lyric Fictions: The Role of the Lady in Lady Mary Wroth's Pamphilia to Amphilanthus". in Anne M. Haselkorn and Betty S. Travitsky, eds. The Renaissance Englishwoman in Print: Counterbalancing the Canon. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. pp. 295-310.
Miller, Naomi J. (2000). "Writing Society". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 104-115.
Miller, Shannon (2001). "Mary Sidney and Gendered Strategies for the Writing of Poetry". in Barbara Smith and Ursula Appelt, eds. Write or Be Written: Early Modern Women Poets and Cultural Constraints. Women and Gender in Early Modern England. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. pp. 155-176. ISBN 1-84014-288-X.
Milsom, John (1998). "Songs and Society in early Tudor London". Early Music History: Studies in Medieval and Early Modern Music. 16. pp. 235-93.
Moore, Dennis (1987). "Recorder Fleetwood and the Tudor Queenship Controversy". in Carole Levin and Jeanie Watson, eds. Ambiguous Realities: Women in the Middle Ages and Renaissance. Detroit, Michigan: Wayne State UP. pp. 235-251.
Morin-Parsons, Kel (1999). "'Thus crave I mercy‚': The Preface of Anne Locke". in Helen Ostovich, Mary V. Silcox, and Graham Roebuck, eds. Other Voices, Other Views: Expanding the Canon in English Renaissance Studies. Newark: U of Delaware P. pp. 271-289.
Morton, Gerald W. (2003). "'Shape Thy Life by Ther Pattern': The Advice Letters of Lady Mary Fane, Countess of Westmorland". Discoveries: South-Central Renaissance Conference News and Notes 20 (2):  3. ISSN 1097-3494.
Moulsworth, Martha; Robert C. Evans, and Barbara Wiedemann (1993). "My Name was Martha": A Renaissance Woman's Autobiographical Poem. West Cornwall, CT: Locust Hill Press. ISBN 0933951531.
Mounsey, Chris (2001). "'To the Women of Both Sexes': Christopher Smart, Mrs Mary Midnight, and the Voice of the Dissident Woman Writer". Presenting Gender: Changing Sex in Early Modern Culture. Bucknell Studies in Eighteenth-Century Literature and Culture. Lewisburg, PA; London: Bucknell UP; Assoc. UPs. pp. 274-293.
Mueller, Janel (1998). "On Editing Queen Katherine Parr". in W. Speed Hill, ed. New Ways of Looking at Old Texts Papers of the Renaissance English Text Society, 1992-1996. 188. Tempe, AZ: Medieval & Renaissance Texts & Studies in conjunction with Renaissance English Text Society.
Mueller, Janel (2000). "Queen Elizabeth I". in Susanne Woods and Margaret P. Hannay, eds. Teaching Tudor and Stuart Women Writers. Modern Language Association of America: Options for Teaching. New York: The Modern Language Association. pp. 119-126.
Mueller, Janel (1994). "'The Whole Island like a Single Family': Positioning Women in Utopian Patriarchy". in Peter C. Herman, ed. Rethinking the Henrician Era: Essays on Early Tudor Texts and Contexts. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. pp. 93-122.
Muir, Kenneth (1961). Sir Thomas Wyatt and His Circle: Unpublished Poems (Edited from the Blage MS). Liverpool: Liverpool UP.
Muir, Kenneth (1947). "Unpublished Poems in the Devonshire Manuscript". Proceedings of the Leeds Philosophical and Literary Society 6:  253-282.
Muir, Kenneth; P. Thomson, eds. (1969). Collected Poems of Sir Thomas Wyatt. Liverpool.
Muir, Kenneth, ed. (1950). Collected Poems. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Mukherji, Subha (2005). "Women, Law, and Dramatic Realism in Early Modern England". English Literary Renaissance 35 (2):  248. ISSN 00138312.
Mullan, David George (2003). Women's Life Writing in Early Modern Scotland: Writing the Evangelical Self, c.1670-1730. Aldershot; Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Mullaney, Steven (2000). "Reforming Resistance: Class, Gender, and Legitimacy in Foxe's Book of Martyrs". in Arthur F. Marotti and Michael D. Bristol, eds. Print, Manuscript, and Performance: The Changing Relations of the Media in Early Modern England. Columbus: Ohio State UP. pp. 235-251.
Munkhoff, Richelle Marie (2000). Sexual Surveillance and Textual Scapes: Reading and Displacing Women in Early Modern England. University of Wisconsin, Ph.D. diss.
Murphy, Andrew, ed (2000). The Renaissance Text: Theory, Editing, Textuality. New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0719053986 0719059178 (pbk.).
C-terminal domain of the p63 protein PDB rendering based on 1rg6.
↑ a b c d Little, Natalie A; Jochemsen, Aart G (2002). "p63". The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 34 (1):  6–9. doi:10.1016/S1357-2725(01)00086-3.
↑ a b c Graziano, Vincenzo; De Laurenzi, Vincenzo (2011). "Role of p63 in cancer development". Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1816 (1):  57–66. doi:10.1016/j.bbcan.2011.04.002. PMID 21515338.
↑ Melino, G (2011). "P63 is a suppressor of tumorigenesis and metastasis interacting with mutant p53". Cell Death and Differentiation 18 (9):  1487–99. doi:10.1038/cdd.2011.81. PMID 21760596.
↑ Nekulova, Marta; Holcakova, Jitka; Coates, Philip; Vojtesek, Borivoj (2011). "The role of P63 in cancer, stem cells and cancer stem cells". Cellular and Molecular Biology Letters 16 (2):  296–327. doi:10.2478/s11658-011-0009-9. PMID 21442444.
Basic Physics of Nuclear Medicine is a featured book on Wikibooks because it contains substantial content, it is well-formatted, and the Wikibooks community has decided to feature it on the main page or in other places. Please continue to improve it and thanks for the great work so far! You can edit its advertisement template. This book is also available as a  print version  and as a  PDF version.
Nuclear Medicine is a fascinating application of nuclear physics. The first ten chapters of this wikibook are intended to support a basic introductory course in an early semester of an undergraduate program.  They assume that students have completed decent high school programs in maths and physics and are concurrently taking subjects in the medical sciences.  Additional chapters cover more advanced topics in this field. Our focus in this wikibook is the diagnostic application of Nuclear Medicine. Therapeutic applications are considered in a separate wikibook, "Radiation Oncology".
Note that this WikiBooks is well past its use-by date. Some of the basic physics might still be of relevance, but the technologies and applications chapters need substantial updating.
A companion wikibook on the Basic Physics of Digital Radiography is also available.
The principal author of this text is grateful for the expert editorial assistance of Dirk Hünniger during his German translation of the text and his contribution to the section on the Operation of a 99m-Tc Generator.
Applied Imaging Technology, 4th Ed., JCP Heggie, NA Liddell & KP Maher (St Vincent's Hospital Melbourne, 2001)
Basic Science of Nuclear Medicine, 2nd Ed., RP Parker, PHS Smith, DM Taylor (Churchill Livingstone, 1984)
Computed Tomography: Fundamentals, System Technology, Image Quality, Applications, 3rd Ed., WA Kalender (Wiley, 2000)
Introduction to Nuclear Physics, H Enge (Addison-Wesley, 1966)
Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 4th Ed., PA Rinck (Blackwell, 2001)
Nuclear Medicine in Urology & Nephrology, 2nd Ed., HJ Testa, PH O'Reilly & RA Shields (Butterworth-Heinemann, 1986)
Physics in Nuclear Medicine, JA Sorenson and ME Phelps (Grune & Stratton, 1980)
Radioisotope Techniques in Clinical Research and Diagnosis, N Veall and H Vetter (Butterworths, 1958)
Radionuclide Techniques in Medicine, JM McAlister (Cambridge University Press, 1979).
Ethics is the knowledge about the good of the spirit. Epistemology is the knowledge about knowledge. It is an ethical knowledge because knowledge is a good of the spirit.
Inert matter has no duty, or rather it is already what it must be.
The good of life is to persevere in its being. Health is to have fully the means to keep on living. Reproduction is the perpetuation of life. The good of life is to continue to be what it already is. The spirit does not have to prescribe what it must be.
The good of the spirit is to live well as a spirit, therefore to want well, to think well, to feel well, to act well, to perceive well, to pay attention well, to imagine well, to meditate well... Ethics is the knowledge about the good of the spirit, therefore about the good life of the spirit.
A spirit is fulfilled when he lives well, when he lives as he must live.
" Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field which the Lord God had made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?
And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden:
But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.
And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die:
For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.
And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her; and he did eat.
And the eyes of them both were opened " (Genesis, 3, 1-7)
Everyone or almost everyone claims to be rational. Almost no one makes the effort to really respect reason.
The misuse of thought and will causes great suffering. The proper use of thought and will alleviates much suffering.
We believe we know good and evil well, but we do not know them well. Believing that we know good and evil well when we do not know them is the cause of much evil doing. This is the fundamental error, the original sin.
Legend has it that the forbidden fruit is sexual pleasure. Nothing could be further from the truth. The forbidden fruit is the knowledge of good and evil, the ethical knowledge.
The myth of the original sin can be interpreted rationally: if we believe we know good and evil well when we do not know them, we condemn ourselves to misfortune. This warning is not hopeless, because at the same time it states the problem - a poor knowledge of the good - it also indicates the solution: a good knowledge of the good.
A good will is to will the good
A good will is necessarily to will the good, to want to do it as much as one can. If a spirit does not want his own good or that of others, he is misusing his will. It only remains for him to destroy himself, or to destroy others.
A spirit must not destroy himself, he must persevere in his being, he must live for the spirit.
That the spirit must be for the spirit has a very down-to-earth meaning: we must work to have good living conditions. If we do not make efforts, we necessarily live rather badly. If a spirit wants to enjoy life, he must give himself the means, he must work for himself and for others.
The will to persevere in one's being is a necessary condition of good will, but it is not sufficient. The spirit must live for the good of the spirit, not only for the spirit to live. Organized crime lives to continue living and it is not a good of the spirit.
To live well, we have to want to live well. One cannot live well without having a good will. The spirit must want the good of the spirit.
Since a good will is good, we must want the good will to continue when we want the good. It is the circle of the perpetuation of the life of the spirit.
A good will is central and fundamental, because to think well, to act well, to feel well, to perceive well, to pay attention well, to imagine well, to meditate well... is to think, act, feel, perceive, pay attention, imagine, meditate... in accordance with a good will (Kant 1785).
To want the good, to perceive, imagine, think, feel and act for the good is to live for the good.
The good of the spirit is to live for the good. For a spirit, to live well is to live for the good.
The love of the good is desire, knowledge and action. To love the good is to want it, and to perceive, imagine, think, feel and act to achieve it, as far as possible. To love the good is to live for the good.
The good of the spirit is to love the good. A spirit is fulfilled by loving the good, by desire, knowledge and action.
We can make decisions about how we make decisions. A spirit can exercise his will on his way of exercising his will. We can decide to adopt principles that determine the good we must seek. We thus decide to always decide in accordance with the principles that we have adopted. We can decide to always make our decisions by wanting the good.
An action motivated by good will is good, even if it misses its goal, because a good will is good. Conversely, an action which is not motivated by good will is not a good, even if it has beneficial consequences, because the absence of good will is an evil. Intentions are essential for evaluating actions, because a good will is the basic condition for a good life, but it does not mean that we can ignore the consequences: we have a duty to foresee the consequences of our actions, as much as is possible and adapted to the situation.
A remark on circular definitions : principles such as "matter is what interacts with matter", "a natural number is either zero or the successor of a natural number" and "the good is that the spirit lives for the good" are not at fault. They determine the meaning of fundamental concepts. Formally we translate them by axioms. Informally, we can say that they are true by definition, or that they define the fundamental concepts. Circular definitions are forbidden only for derived concepts, defined from basic concepts. But they are not forbidden for fundamental concepts, because axioms can be considered as implicit definitions of fundamental concepts.
Living for the good of all spirits
We cannot do the good of others against their will because we cannot make their decisions for them. Their good is that they have a good will and that they exercise it freely. Since we do not have the duty to do what we cannot do, we could conclude that we never have the duty to do the good of others, that we should only take care of our own good. Can a selfish spirit, who lives only for his own good, without worrying about the good of other spirits, live well?
We cannot do the good of others for them, but we can give them the means to do it, or on the contrary, prevent them from living a good life.
A selfish spirit renounces his social nature. He can be good for other spirits but he gives up this good. He is a withering spirit.
A spirit lives well by being good for himself and his surroundings. But he can also be good for everyone, because the fruits of reason are universal. When a spirit knows reason, he knows at the same time what is good for him and what is good for everyone else. By revealing reason, a spirit proves to himself, and to everyone else, that he can be good for all spirits, because we can all benefit from the fruits of reason.
By refusing to be good for others, a selfish spirit renounces at the same time to be really good for himself, because he deprives himself of the power of reason. We learn at the same time to be good for ourselves and to be good for others. If we do not know how to be good for others, we do not know how to be good for ourselves.
A spirit lives a good life when he lives for the good of all spirits, his own and that of all others. The good of a spirit cannot be separated from the good of all spirits.
"Act in such a way that you treat humanity, whether in your own person or in any other person, always at the same time as an end, never merely as a means" (Kant, 1785). To consider a spirit only as a means is to deliberately ignore his good. To really consider him as an end, we have to want his good.
To love a spirit is to live for his good. Reason prescribes to live for the good of all spirits, therefore to love them.
« You shall love your neighbor as yourself » (Leviticus 19, 18) is not only a religious principle, it is also a rationalist principle. If human beings do not want to help each other, reason can not be among them.
Hatred drives us mad because it is contrary to reason, which prescribes us to always want the good of all spirits. If we want to keep reason, we must "love our enemies" (Matthew 5, 44). We must forgive because hatred prevents us from wanting the good, and therefore from living a good life.
Reason asks us to love all minds, but love cannot be commanded. Emotions are not directly under the control of the will. We do not decide to be moved. We do not choose to love. Loving our enemies may seem impossible or absurd. Yet reason does not demand the impossible.
"He insulted me, he beat me, he defeated me, he stole me". Do they attach themselves to these reproaches: there is no appeasement for their hatred.
"He insulted me, he beat me, he defeated me, he stole me". Do they not attach themselves to these reproaches: appeasement for their hatred.
Certainly, in this world never hatred appeases hatred, but absence of hatred does : eternal law.
Interpretation is part of perception. The perception of reality therefore depends on our decisions. As reality exists for us only from its perception, we make our own reality when we choose our interpretations.
The Buddha awakened when he understood that he was the creator of his perception of reality, like a dreamer who wakes up realizing that he has dreamed.
The perception of reality does not depend only on our decisions. We are not free to invent perceived reality in the same way that we are free to invent any fantasy. We must take into account the testimony of the senses and introspection.
The perception of reality can be more or less adapted to what is not dependent on us, to the external or internal reality that we have not decided.
The interpretation of reality depends on our preconceptions. We give ourselves schemas, systems of preconceptions or principles, which determine our ways of perceiving, how we anticipate the consequences of our actions and how we make our decisions. We need good schemas to adapt to reality. As long as we do not have a schema, we do not know how to interpret what we perceive. But the schemas that we have internalized are not always good. Bad schemas prevent one from adapting to reality, they blind, they weaken, they cause suffering, they make the same mistakes repeat over and over again, they lock up in seemingly hopeless situations, they afflict and condemn. Good schemas reveal the possibilities that reality offers us, they enlighten, they make strong, they alleviate suffering, they show how to learn the lessons of experience, they give the power to avoid or overcome obstacles, they rejoice and give hope.
The schemas method: identify maladaptive schemas and modify or replace them with better ones.
The principle of the schemas method is easy to state but not always easy to apply. Identifying inappropriate schemas always requires conscientious work. Finding the good schemas is not always easy either. A little common sense is enough to solve a lot of problems, but not all of them.
The principle of the schemas method is a principle of common sense. We need good schemas and good principles to perceive well, think well and decide well.
The schemas method of is based on the capacity of the spirit to form himself, to program himself, by making decisions. We are not doomed to suffer the effects of bad schemas. Choosing good schemas, based on good principles, comes down to giving oneself good programs, in order to perceive well, think well, feel well, act well and live well.
The schemas method is applied in many fields, psychotherapy (Jeffrey Young 2003, Jean Cottraux 2001 ...), sexual freedom (Maïa Mazaurette), self-rehabilitation of ex-convicts (Shadd Maruna 2008) ... It can be applied in all areas where human intelligence is exercised, because it invites us to make full use of the powers of intelligence.
The schemas method of cannot be exercised in a tyrannical way. It can only be effective by the will of those who use it. Its power is that of conscience, intelligence and good will. Without real voluntary work of conscience, it cannot bear fruit.
The potential of the schemas method is a priori unlimited. As soon as good principles and good schemas are recognized, they are adopted by all those who understand that they make more competent, stronger, more lucid. If they are really good, really useful, they naturally impose themselves on all those to whom they serve. By inventing or developing good schemas and good theories with good principles, one can make oneself useful for all spirits.
To have a good will, one needs good knowledge. We have to know the good we want and the reality where we are. And we must know them well: perceive well, imagine well the consequences of our decisions, feel well and think well.
To think well, we must not just believe what we like, we must know good reasons to believe what we believe. We must be able to justify what we think we know with good principles, good observations and good reasoning.
We do not always have to be experts to think well, but we always need a minimum of common sense to recognize good principles and apply them correctly.
We know and respect reason when we reason correctly with good principles and good observations.
We recognize good principles by their fruits. They bear fruit when they help us to live a good life.
Reason is good for all spirits. Its fruits are universal. Good observations, good principles and good reasoning are good for everyone.
When we understand that reason is universal, we understand at the same time the great principle on which we can found all rational knowledge. Everything happens just like if reason was a generous divinity, who gives wisdom to those who really want to know it. The first truth about reason is precisely that it is generous. It is not jealous, it does not deprive us of the best. It would not be the best if it deprived any of us of the best. « It is not possible that the divinity be envious. » (Aristotle, Metaphysics, Book A, 983a) Knowing that knowledge can be shared by all, we have the fundamental knowledge which enables us to understand all rational knowledge.
To live well we need to think well. But we do not have in advance all the good principles and all the good schemas that help us make good decisions. We must continually learn new ways of thinking and perceiving.
We need emotions to learn how to live a good life. They signal what is important. They teach us what to look for, when they are pleasant, and what to avoid, when they are not. They warn us about what can help us live well, or on the contrary what prevent us from living well. They give knowledge of reality by giving us the means to assess it.
The same decision can have many consequences, some pleasant, others not. The exercise of a good will requires an overview and a balanced appreciation of the foreseeable consequences. An emotion that is too weak prevents us from realizing what is important. Too strong an emotion stifles other emotions and blinds us too. For emotions to help us live, we need the golden middle way, not too much, not too little (Aristotle, Nicomachean ethics).
Emotions enlighten us by showing us how to assess ends and means. But they can also blind us. A particular emotion only shows one aspect of the situation. If it is strong, it can prevent having a balanced overview and lead us to a biased, intolerant and unfair decision. Emotions are not opposed to reason like enemies, because they enlighten us on the means of a good life, but like particular interests which sometimes oppose the common interest.
Pleasures are indicators of a good life. But a good life is not reduced to the search for pleasures. A good will cannot be reduced to obedience to emotions because it requires a balanced appreciation of all the foreseeable consequences of our decisions. Following the pleasure of the moment is not good will, above all we need good principles and good schemas.
Reason is not above passions, because we need emotions to evaluate our reasoning. Emotions are not against reason, but the emotional imbalance is. Too strong an emotion prevents us from having a balanced judgment. Reason requires us to have a balanced overview. Emotional balance is a necessary condition of reason.
To think well, we have to feel well. But since emotions depend on our thoughts, to feel well we have to think well. There is therefore a virtuous circle of emotions and thoughts: emotional balance promotes the development of balanced thinking that strengthens emotional balance. Conversely, there is a vicious circle of emotional imbalance. Emotional imbalance leads to imbalanced thinking which amplifies emotional imbalance.
Feeling well, having emotions that help us adapt to reality in accordance with a good will, is part of virtue ((Aristotle, Nicomachean ethics, Hursthouse 2001)). Virtue requires emotional balance, but emotions do not obey the orders of the will. How then can we want to feel as we must feel?
The triggering of emotions is not directly under the control of the will, but the emotions are not all powerful against the will. One can voluntarily control the expression of emotions, retain or release them. We can also voluntarily control the conditions, external and internal, which trigger them. In particular, emotions depend on the ways of interpreting reality. We can use our thought to modify our emotional reactions by changing our interpretations. By voluntarily controlling our interpretations, we can gain mastery over our emotions. Through thought, self-consciousness is powerful enough to appease or extinguish the fire of emotions. So we can exercise our good will to learn to feel well, to love and to be balanced.
The Buddha, in the Speech to set in motion the wheel of knowledge (Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta, SN 56,11):
“Here is the Noble Truth known as dukkha. Birth is dukkha, aging is also dukkha, illness is also dukkha, death is also dukkha, to be united with what one does not love is dukkha, to be separated from what one loves is dukkha, not getting what one wants is also dukkha.
Here is the Noble Truth known as the cause of dukkha. It is this "thirst" producing re-existence and re-becoming and which is linked to a passionate greed, which finds a new enjoyment sometimes here, sometimes there, that is to say the thirst for the pleasures of the senses, thirst for existence and becoming and thirst for non-existence.
Here is the Noble Truth known as the cessation of dukkha. It is the complete cessation of this "thirst", it is to abandon it, to give it up, to liberate oneself from it, to get rid of it.
Here is the Noble Truth known as the path leading to the cessation of dukkha. This is the Noble Eightfold Path, namely: right perception, right thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right attention, and right meditation. "
The cause of dissatisfaction is always a "thirst", a craving, a desire or a will. When a desire cannot or must not be satisfied, we can still extinguish our dissatisfaction by suppressing our thirst, renouncing our desire and modifying our will. Nirvana means extinction.
A path of wisdom is not a renunciation of all desires - no wisdom without a desire for wisdom, no good life without a desire to live - but it is not a path of dissatisfaction, because a desire for wisdom is not doomed to frustration. A true desire for true wisdom is the exact opposite of the torment of Tantalus (Homer, Odysseus, XI): it suffices to bend down for clear water to appear, because a true desire for true wisdom is already a true wisdom.
" It is with the understanding: "This Noble Truth known as the path leading to the cessation of dukkha has been walked" that, in the things which had not been heard before, the vision has risen in me, knowledge has risen in me, wisdom has risen in me, science has risen in me, light has risen in me." (Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta)
Virtue is to be always ready to perceive well, pay attention well, imagine well, feel well, think well, want well, act well, meditate well... or almost always. Virtues are special ways of being virtuous.
Virtue is necessary for a good life, but it is not enough. On its own, it does not cure diseases, it does not stop the hand of the torturers, it does not save from misery. To live a good life a spirit needs favorable conditions in addition to virtue: health, peace and prosperity.
Virtue is not given in advance. A spirit must learn to be what it must be. When he learns to be virtuous, a spirit is not yet what he must be, because he must learn it, but in another way he is already what he must be, because he must learn, because the learning phase must be. Learning to be virtuous is already starting to be virtuous, because wanting the good is good. The desire for wisdom is the beginning of wisdom. When we love the good, we love what is already there, not just a good that we desire without having it, because the love of the good is the good. “Whoever drinks this water will never be thirsty again because it is a source from which life springs endlessly." (John 4, 14)
The fulfillment of reason is like the dream of an enlightened: that all spirits find their happiness by living for the happiness of all spirits, that we are all philosophers, all in the love of reason, all virtuous, as if philosophy could be the fundamental music that makes all spirits dance and turns the planet into a paradise.
Dreams come true when they are adapted to reality, when they are within our reach, so that we can naturally find the means to achieve them. By motivating us, these dreams lead us to their realization, they reveal to us the means that enable us to accomplish them. If we had given up the dream, we would never have found the means.
We are all naturally capable of knowing what is naturally possible and how to live a good life. We are all naturally capable of learning to be virtuous and we all have an interest in learning it, because it is the good life. A world where most people are pretty virtuous most of the time, or learn to be so, is naturally possible. Thus understood, a rather fair but not perfect world, the rationalist ideal is adapted to reality.
The nature of the spirit is to dream of the ideal in order to be fulfilled as a spirit worthy of the ideal. This is how he reveals himself fully as a spirit. A spirit is naturally driven by the desire of the ideal and reveals what he really is by realizing this desire. A paradise where all spirits find happiness in the happiness of all is simply a world where all spirits are faithful to their spiritual nature. This is what we are naturally made for, what we are carried to when we want to be true spirits.
After building a pawn center with his first two moves, White begins the development of his minor pieces with 3.Nc3. On c3, the knight controls the d5 and e4 squares. White would like to play e4 at some point to gain even more presence in the center, and 3.Nc3 facilitates this break.
White's dark-squared bishop will likely go to g5 after Black plays Nf6.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Queen's Gambit Declined
Batsford Chess Openings 2 (1989, 1994). Garry Kasparov, Raymond Keene. ISBN 0-8050-3409-9.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
An Xbox Series X with controller.
An Xbox Series S with controller.
Rumors of Project Scarlett began to surface in June of 2018, which predicted a console launch in 2020.[1] On December 12, 2019 the design for the Xbox Series X was revealed in a video which features recordings of philosopher Alan Watts.[2][3][4] Many internet commentators noting the design of the Series X resembles a refrigerator.[5] In response, in late October 2020 a special edition six foot tall refrigerator themed after the Xbox Series X was revealed.[6][5]
In September of 2020 just prior to launch, Microsoft purchases Zenimax Media which gives them ownership of a number of Bethesda and iD software game franchises including Doom, Quake, Wolfenstein, Fallout, and The Elder Scrolls.[7] This acquisition was done to bolster the Game Pass program.[8]
An Xbox Wireless controller in Shock Blue.
Two consoles were announced for launch on November 10th, 2020, the $299 digital only Series S, and the $499 Series X.[9] Within a day the Xbox Series X and Series X broke first day sales records for Xbox consoles.[10] Supply issues would continue to plague the console through January 2021.[11]
On January 22nd, 2021 Microsoft announced a price increase for Xbox Live for the first time in nearly a decade.[12] Facing a large backlash, Microsoft reversed their decision to increase the price by January 23rd, 2021, though they did continue to make free to play games not require a subscription for online play.[13][14]
In early 2021 Microsoft improved it's accessibility program for the Xbox Series, helping game developers confirm their games are playable by those with handicaps.[15]
From launch to the release of a March 2021 patch, controllers for the system had issues maintaining connections with the console.[16][17] An official wireless headset was also released in March 2021.[18][19]
The Xbox Series X uses an 7 nanometer process 8 core AMD Zen 2 CPU clocked at 3.8 gigahertz with simultaneous multithreading off or 3.6 gigahertz with simultaneous multithreading on.[20] The AMD RDNA based GPU has 52 compute units clocked at 1.825 gigahertz with a performance of 12 teraflops.[20]
The Series X has 16 gigabytes of GDDR6 RAM, with 10 gigabytes having a 560GB/s bandwidth and 6 gigabytes having a 336GB/s bandwidth.[20]
The Series X uses an internal custom 1 terabyte non-volatile memory express (NVMe) solid state drive.[20] Storage is expandable.[20] The Series X has a Ultra HD Blu Ray Drive for external storage,[20] as well as a storage expansion slot.
The Series X internals are very modular for a console, and have significant amounts of cooling.[21] A large 130 millimeter fan is used for cooling,[22] in conjunction with a copper vapor chamber.[23] Some have speculated the use of significant cooling by Microsoft is an attempt to not repeat the widespread reliability issues caused by inadequate cooling on previous consoles such as the Xbox 360.[24]
The system uses an HDMI 2.1 port.[25]
The Xbox Series S uses an 7 nanometer process 8 core AMD Zen 2 CPU clocked at 3.6 gigahertz with simultaneous multithreading off or 3.4 gigahertz with simultaneous multithreading on.[26] The AMD RDNA based GPU has 20 compute units clocked at 1.565 gigahertz with a performance of 4 teraflops.[26]
The Series S has 10 gigabytes of GDDR6 RAM, with 8 gigabytes having a 224GB/s bandwidth and 2 gigabytes having a 56GB/s bandwidth.[26]
The Series S uses a custom internal 512 gigabyte non-volatile memory express (NVMe) solid state drive.[26] Internal storage is expandable through a slot,[26] though the console lacks a optical drive.
A small illustration of a Spartan helmet from the Halo series is located on the Series S internal power supply unit casing - A hardware easter egg.[27][28]
The official Xbox Series X developer kit casing is very similar to the project scorpio Dev Kit made in the lead up to the Xbox One X, though there are differences.[29] Prior to launch, developers of UWP apps were advised to simply use a Xbox One X and then validate on Xbox Series X or Series S hardware when they became available.[30]
Standard Xbox Series Consoles can be used for development through a development mode.[31][32]
The Xbox Series X and Series S both support universal windows platform (UWP) applications, with no significant changes from the proceeding Xbox One X console for backwards compatibility reasons.[30]
The Xbox Series X viewed diagonally from the top.
Series X with controller.
Wikipedia has related information at Xbox Series X and Series S
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Xbox Series X and Series S
Xbox - Official website.
Parts of this page are based on materials from: Wikipedia: the free encyclopedia.
↑ Warren, Tom (12 June 2018). "Microsoft’s next-generation Xbox reportedly arriving in 2020" (in en). https://www.theverge.com/2018/6/12/17453174/microsoft-xbox-next-genreation-2020-release-date-rumors. Retrieved 16 November 2020.
↑ "Xbox Series X - World Premiere - 4K Trailer". https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0tUqIHwHDEc. Retrieved 8 November 2020.
↑ "Next Xbox is named Xbox Series X, launches holiday 2020". 13 December 2019. https://newatlas.com/games/xbox-series-x-named-revealed/. Retrieved 8 November 2020.
↑ "We Know The Name Of The Next Xbox And It's Series-ous" (in en-AU). 13 December 2019. https://www.gizmodo.com.au/2019/12/we-know-the-name-of-the-next-xbox-and-its-series-ous/?. Retrieved 8 November 2020.
↑ a b Piper, Daniel. "Microsoft embraces mocking memes with hilarious new Xbox product" (in en). https://www.creativebloq.com/news/microsoft-xbox-fridge.
↑ "Xbox and Snoop Dogg Unveil the Xbox Series X Fridge". 28 October 2020. https://news.xbox.com/en-us/2020/10/28/xbox-and-snoop-dogg-unveil-the-xbox-series-x-fridge/.
↑ Browning, Kellen; Lohr, Steve (21 September 2020). "Microsoft Grabs Some of World’s Biggest Games in $7.5 Billion Deal". https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/21/technology/microsoft-zenimax-video-game-deal.html.
↑ Warren, Tom (11 March 2021). "Xbox boss says Microsoft’s Bethesda deal was all about exclusive games for Game Pass" (in en). The Verge. https://www.theverge.com/2021/3/11/22325757/microsoft-xbox-bethesda-acquisition-game-pass-exclusive-games-phil-spencer-comment.
↑ Spencer, Phil (9 September 2020). "Xbox Series S and Xbox Series X Launch November 10, Starting at $24.99 a Month with Xbox Game Pass Ultimate and EA Play". Xbox Wire. https://news.xbox.com/en-us/2020/09/09/xbox-series-x-and-xbox-series-s-launching-november-10/. Retrieved 24 October 2020.
↑ Kerr, Chris. "Xbox Series X and S deliver Microsoft's biggest ever console launch" (in en). https://www.gamasutra.com/view/news/373624/Xbox_Series_X_and_S_deliver_Microsofts_biggest_ever_console_launch.php. Retrieved 13 November 2020.
↑ Browning, Kellen (29 January 2021). "Still Looking for a New Gaming Console? Here’s Why". The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/29/business/ps5-xbox-console-shortage.html.
↑ Carpenter, Nicole (22 January 2021). "The price of Xbox Live Gold is going up" (in en). Polygon. https://www.polygon.com/2021/1/22/22244203/xbox-live-gold-price-increase-subscription.
↑ Byford, Sam (23 January 2021). "Microsoft backtracks on Xbox Live Gold price hike" (in en). The Verge. https://www.theverge.com/2021/1/23/22245630/microsoft-xbox-live-gold-price-increase-reversed-f2p.
↑ Sanchez, Kait (16 February 2021). "Microsoft starts new program to help make more accessible games" (in en). The Verge. https://www.theverge.com/2021/2/16/22286216/microsoft-xbox-games-tested-accessibility-guidelines.
↑ Peters, Jay (11 March 2021). "Microsoft says the latest Xbox Series X update fixes controller disconnect issues" (in en). The Verge. https://www.theverge.com/2021/3/11/22326224/microsoft-xbox-series-x-controller-disconnect-issues-march-update.
↑ "Xbox Wireless Headset review: Microsoft delivers a high-value option". Windows Central. 15 March 2021. https://www.windowscentral.com/official-xbox-wireless-headset-review.
↑ Faulkner, Cameron (15 March 2021). "Microsoft’s Xbox Wireless Headset is a mic-drop moment" (in en). The Verge. https://www.theverge.com/22325883/microsoft-xbox-wireless-headset-gaming-series-x-s-pc-windows-10-review.
↑ a b c d e f Tuttle, Will (16 March 2020). "Xbox Series X: A Closer Look at the Technology Powering the Next Generation". Xbox Wire. https://news.xbox.com/en-us/2020/03/16/xbox-series-x-tech/. Retrieved 24 October 2020.
↑ "Xbox Series X Teardown" (in en). 11 November 2020. https://www.ifixit.com/Teardown/Xbox+Series+X+Teardown/138451. Retrieved 15 November 2020.
↑ "Xbox Series X stays cool with frosty 49C temps while playing in 120FPS". TweakTown. 15 October 2020. https://www.tweaktown.com/news/75710/xbox-series-stays-cool-with-frosty-49c-temps-while-playing-in-120fps/index.html.
↑ "Xbox Series X teardown reveals the massive cooling system". SlashGear. 11 November 2020. https://www.slashgear.com/xbox-series-x-teardown-reveals-the-massive-cooling-system-11646902/.
↑ "Does Xbox Series X get really hot? We ran thermal tests to find out.". Windows Central. 15 October 2020. https://www.windowscentral.com/how-hot-does-xbox-series-x-get.
↑ "What’s the Deal with HDMI 2.1?" (in en-AU). Kotaku Australia. 16 February 2021. https://www.kotaku.com.au/2021/02/what-is-hdmi-2-1-and-why-is-it-important/.
↑ a b c d e "The all-new Xbox Series S Xbox" (in en). https://www.xbox.com/en-US/consoles/xbox-series-s. Retrieved 24 October 2020.
↑ "Xbox Series S Console Hides Small Halo Easter Egg". 10 November 2020. https://gamerant.com/xbox-series-s-halo-easter-egg-power-supply/.
↑ Zell-Breier, Sam (10 November 2020). "The Xbox Series S Easter egg you probably missed". https://www.svg.com/276215/the-xbox-series-s-easter-egg-you-probably-missed/.
↑ "This Is What The Xbox Series X Devkit Looks Like". 19 March 2020. https://www.purexbox.com/news/2020/03/this_is_what_the_xbox_series_x_devkit_looks_like.
↑ a b Blog, Windows Developer (17 September 2020). "App Compatibility for Xbox Series X and Xbox Series S Consoles". https://blogs.windows.com/windowsdeveloper/2020/09/17/app-compatibility-for-xbox-series-x-and-xbox-series-s-consoles/.
↑ "Xbox One UWP apps and games will be supported on the Xbox Series X and Xbox Series S". 17 September 2020. https://mspoweruser.com/xbox-one-uwp-apps-and-games-xbox-series-x/.
↑ Orland, Kyle (24 November 2020). "How to turn your Xbox Series X/S into an emulation powerhouse" (in en-us). https://arstechnica.com/gaming/2020/11/how-to-turn-your-xbox-series-x-s-into-an-emulation-powerhouse/.
Buying firm's expectation of relationship continuity (alpha = 0.861)
We expect our relationship with this supplier to last a long time.
It is assumed that renewal of agreements in this relationship will occur.
The parties make plans not only for terms of current purchases, but also for the continuance of the relationship.
Krause (1999): The antecedents of buying firms' efforts to improve suppliers. Journal of Operations Management, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp 205–224.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Inflation in the Eurozone has been revised up to 0.1% in October by the EU's statistics agency, Eurostat.
EU toongjih jigouh Eurostat tiaorsheng Eurozone 10-yuehfehn tongzhahng zhih 0.1%.
Pixmaps provide storage for rectangular regions of pixels.
You can create a new pixmap using the CreatePixmap command, or load a pixmap
Pixmaps have 5 properties: width, height, a byte pointer to the pixmap's pixels, pitch and
You can retrieve a pointer to a pixmap's pixels using the PixmapPixelPtr command.
A pixmap's pitch refers to the number of bytes between one row of pixels in the pixmap
A pixmap's pixel format determines how the pixels within a pixmap are stored in memory. This
You can retrieve the format of a pixmap using the PixmapFormat command, and convert pixmaps
You can also use ResizePixmap to resize a pixmap and flip a pixmap horizontally or vertically
Description: A byte pointer to the pixmap's pixels
Description: The width, in pixels, of the pixmap
Description: The height, in pixels, of the pixmap
Description: The pitch, in bytes, of the pixmap
Description: The pixel format of the pixmap
Description: The capacity, in bytes, of the pixmap, or -1 for a static pixmap
Method PixelPtr:Byte Ptr( x,y )
Description: Get memory address of a pixel
Returns: A byte pointer to the pixel at coordinates x, y
Method Window:TPixmap( x,y,width,height )
Description: Create a virtual window into a pixmap
Returns: A static pixmap that references the specified rectangle.
Returns: A new TPixmap object.
Method Paste( source:TPixmap,x,y )
Returns: A new TPixmap object in the specified format
Description: Read a pixel from a pixmap
Returns: The pixel at the specified coordinates packed into an integer
Method WritePixel( x,y,argb )
Description: Write a pixel to a pixmap
Function Create:TPixmap( width,height,format,align=4 )
Function CreateStatic:TPixmap( pixels:Byte Ptr,width,height,pitch,format )
To create a new pixmap loader, you should extend TPixmapLoader and implement the LoadPixmap method.
To install your pixmap loader, simply create an instance of it using New.
Information: This method must be implemented by extending types.
Function CreatePixmap:TPixmap( width,height,format,align_bytes=4 )
Returns: A new pixmap object of the specified width and height
Note that the newly created pixmap will contain random data. ClearPixels can
Function CreateStaticPixmap:TPixmap( pixels:Byte Ptr,width,height,pitch,format )
Description: Create a pixmap with existing pixel data
Returns: A new pixmap object that references an existing block of memory
The memory referenced by a static pixmap is not released when the pixmap is deleted.
See CreatePixmap for valid pixmap formats.
Function ConvertPixmap:TPixmap( pixmap:TPixmap,format )
Description: Convert pixel format of a pixmap
Returns: A new pixmap object with the specified pixel format
See CreatePixmap for valid pixmap formats.
Returns: The width, in pixels, of pixmap
Returns: The height, in pixels, of pixmap
Returns: The pitch, in bytes, of pixmap
Pitch refers to the difference, in bytes, between the start of one row of pixels and the start of the next row.
Returns: The format of the pixels stored in pixmap
See CreatePixmap for supported formats.
Returns: A byte pointer to the pixels stored in pixmap
Function PixmapWindow:TPixmap( pixmap:TPixmap,x,y,width,height )
Information: PixmapWindow creates a 'virtual' window into pixmap.
Function MaskPixmap:TPixmap( pixmap:TPixmap,mask_red,mask_green,mask_blue )
Information: MaskPixmap builds a new pixmap with alpha components set to '0' wherever the pixel colors
Function ResizePixmap:TPixmap( pixmap:TPixmap,width,height )
Returns: A new pixmap object of the specified width and height
Function ReadPixel( pixmap:TPixmap,x,y )
Description: Read a pixel from a pixmap
The returned 32 bit value contains the following components:
Function WritePixel( pixmap:TPixmap,x,y,argb )
Description: Write a pixel to a pixmap
The 32 bit argb value contains the following components:
Sets all pixels in a pixmap to a 32 bit pixel value.
The 32 bit argb value contains the following components:
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
To do physical exercise after dinner can help to digest fats and reduce body weight.
Sub-group PC-B: Franks from Neopost software, ID numbers with 04#N or NO4#N prefix
The stamp designs are quite different from each other. One has a four-pointed star logo, two have a torch in hand logo, and one has no logo. Even the bar codes are dissimilar.
Neopost was the second company to enter the PC postage business with an experimental design sometime in early 1998. Circumstances of the trial remain unknown to us.
Stamps are found both with and without FIM barcode at top left. Examples are not known with slogan or slug.
A. FIRST CLASS LTR
F. PRIORITY ZONE 2
M. INTL LETTER
Aa. 1ST CLASS LTR
G. PRIORITY ZONE 3
N. INTL CAN LTR
B. 1ST CLASS OVERSZ
H. PRIORITY ZONE 4
P. INTL MEX LTR
Ba. 1ST CLASS OVSZ
I. PRIORITY ZONE 5
C. PRIORITY MAIL
J. PRIORITY ZONE 6
R. MEDIA MAIL
D. PRIORITY LOCAL
K. PRIORITY ZONE 7
E. PRIORITY ZONE 1
L. PRIORITY ZONE 8
Mail classes E through L were discontinued in June 2002. Examples are exceptionally rare. Most mail classes except the First Class variations are scarce to very rare.
Neopost PC stamps became available nationally in May 1999.
Experimental design with  star and stamp corner ornament at left and rectangular block at top right containing point-of-sale data.
Point-of-sale date in alternating bands with negative "U.S. POSTAGE" in solid panel at top above meter number in clear panel, the value figures in panel with solid sides, the town line, and the mail class also in a solid panel.
"PDF417" barcode across bottom with date below left.
With or without "FIM" barcode at top left above star and stamp corner ornament.
The stamp was used by two different systems, "Postage Plus" which used a live internet connection, and "PC Stamp" which downloaded postage credit into a rented hardware vault.
The design shows at top right two horizontal bars with "U.S. POSTAGE" above the top one and the town line below the bottom one. Between the bars at right are a torch-in-hand logo left of small "U.S. POSTAGE" reading up. Also between the ars are the class of mail, the value figures (centered), and the date.
"PDF417" barcode across the bottom with "DEVICE and identification number at bottom right.
Identification number with N041N, N041NA, or 041N prefix.
With or without "FIM" barcode at top left.
a. With "CORRECTION" at bottom left
Produced by an internet-connected labeling device.
Similar to PC-B2 with torch-in-hand logo and point of sale data mixed with two horizontal bars, but otherwise quite different.
The stamp is found only on self-adhesive labels with rounded corners and fluorescent red bar across the bottom edge.
"U.S. POSTAGE" is vertical at far right just left of a double line of micro-printing reading "NEOPOSTNEOPOST..." vertically.
Between the bars are the identification number, value figures, and date. Below the bottom bar is the town line, MAILED FROM and ZIP code.
Stamp with "PDF417" bar code.
Large value figures, 4½ to 5mm tall
As Type PC-B3.1 but the value figures have slashed zeros and a tenths of a cent figure.
V/F:  $Ø.ØØø
Produced by an internet-connected labeling device.
Also printed on self-adhesive labels this stamp is much smaller than the PC-B3 stamps and contains the point-of-sale data at left and a square "Datamatrix" bar code at right.
Point-of-sale data have the value figures at top followed by the class of mail, MAILED FROM (ZIP code) town line, "U.S. POSTAGE", date and identification number.
Fluorescent bar at far left just outside two lines of micro-printing reading "NEOPOSTNEOPOST..." vertically.
Identification number with 04#N prefix.
V/F: $Ø.ØØø
As Type PC-B4.1 but the value figures are slightly larger and the text is slightly bolder.
Labels have fluorescent bar at right.
Identification number with 04#N prefix.
V/F: $Ø.ØØø
ZigBee is a short range networking standard designed for inexpensive and simple networking. ZigBee's intended purpose is to connect a variety of home, personal, and commercial automation devices. Approximate range is 33–328 feet. It is designed for applications that require low data transfer rates and several years of battery life. ZigBee is designed to accommodate more that 65,000 devices on a single network at support rates from 20 kbit/s to 250 kbit/s, depending on the frequency being used. ZigBee is most convenient when used in a personal setting.[1]
↑ Understanding Computers Today and tomorrow 13th Edition. By:Deborah Morley and Charles S. Parker
The grouping of the Rosaceae (rose family) taxa used here is based on the Angiosperm Phylogeny Website,[1] Eriksson (2003),[2] and Longhi (2014).[3] The subfamilies Rosoideae and Amygdaloideae are present in New York.
↑ P. F. Stevens (2001 onwards). Angiosperm Phylogeny Website. Version 13, July 2013.
↑ Torsten Eriksson, Malin S. Hibbs, Anne D. Yoder, Charles F. Delwiche, and Michael J. Donoghue (2003). "The phylogeny of Rosoideae (Rocaceae) based on sequences of the internal transcribed spacers (ITS) of Nuclear Ribosomal DNA and the TRN/F region of Chloroplast DNA." Int. J. Plant Sci. 164(2): 197–211.
↑ Sara Longhi, Lara Giongo, Matteo Buti, Nada Surbanovski, Roberto Viola, Riccardo Velasco, Judson A. Ward & Daniel J. Sargent (2014). "Molecular genetics and genomics of the Rosoideae: state of the art and future perspectives." Horticulture Research 1, Article number: 1.
Vulnerable stages:AllDiseases vectored:Viruses, Bacteria, and Phytoplasmas
Hemiptera is an order of insects which includes Aphids, Scales, Hoppers, Bugs, Whiteflies, and Mealybugs, as well as Fleas.
These insects all feed using a piercing-sucking mouthpart.
Pesticides: All hemipterans are vulnerable to applications of Horticultural Oil, in all stages.
Structurally, the Voynich Manuscript is divided into quires - each quire comprises a set of about four bifolios folded down the middle, stitched along the gutter.
Here, then, is a schematic diagram of Quire 1, with clickable links to each of its 16 pages:-
Here is a schematic diagram of Quire 2, with clickable links to each of its 16 (original) pages:-
Here is a schematic diagram of Quire 3, with clickable links to each of its 16 pages:-
Here is a schematic diagram of Quire 4, with clickable links to each of its 16 pages:-
Here is a schematic diagram of Quire 5, with clickable links to each of its 16 pages:-
Here is a schematic diagram of Quire 6, with clickable links to each of its 16 pages:-
Here is a schematic diagram of Quire 7, with clickable links to each of its 16 pages:-
Here is a schematic diagram of Quire 8, with clickable links to each of its 8 remaining pages (originally probably 20):-
B A ! ! !
Here is a schematic diagram of Quire 9, with clickable links to each of its  pages. The two folios fold out to 10 pages altogether:-
/---+--    F67r1/F67r2 / F67v2/F67v1
!
\---+--+-- F68r1/F68r2/F68r3 / F68v3/F68v2/F68v1
Here is a schematic diagram of Quire 10, with clickable links to each of its  pages. The two folios fold out to 6 pages altogether:-
!
Here is a schematic diagram of Quire 11, with clickable links to each of its  pages. The two folios fold out to 8 pages altogether:-
!
\---+--+-- F72r1/F72r2/F72r3 / F72v3/F72v2/F72v1
Here is a schematic diagram of Quire 12, with clickable links to its 2 remaining pages:-
!
Here is a schematic diagram of Quire 13, with clickable links to each of its 20 pages:-
Here is a schematic diagram of Quire 14, with clickable links to its pages. It consists of a single multiple-folded leaf consisting of a complicated 9-rosettes drawing on one side, and 6 individual pages on the other:-
!
Here is a schematic diagram of Quire 15, with clickable links to each of its pages. The four folios fold out to 12 pages altogether:-
! /----     F88r/F88v     A4
! \---+---- F89r1/F89r2 / F89v2/F89v1     A
\-----+---- F90r1/F90r2 / F90v2/F90v1     A
Despite this quire's absence, it almost certainly contains (if the folio numbering system is consistent with the quire numbering system) folios 91 and 92 (i.e. probably a single bifolio).
Here is a schematic diagram of Quire 17, with clickable links to each of its pages. The four folios fold out to 10 pages altogether:-
! /----     F94r/F94v     B5
! \---+---- F95r1/F95r2 / F95v2/F95v1     B5
Despite this quire's absence, it almost certainly contains (if the folio numbering system is consistent with the quire numbering system) folios 97 and 98 (i.e. probably a single bifolio).
Here is a schematic diagram of Quire 19, with clickable links to each of its pages. The four folios fold out to 12 pages altogether:-
! /----     F100r/F100v     A4?
! \---+---- F101r1/F101r2 / F101v2/F101v1     A4?
\-----+---- F102r1/F102r2 / F102v2/F102v1     A
Here is a schematic diagram of Quire 20, with clickable links to each of its remaining 24 pages:-
B B B B B B !
Snowflakes, Fingerprints, and Assignments
Writing assignments in college differ as much as instructors. There is no one guidebook, approach, or set of rules that college teachers will consult when putting together their coursework. Since each assignment will always be unique, it is important to devote time to thoroughly understanding what is being asked of you before beginning. Don't wait until the night before the work is due to begin asking questions and delving in. The sooner you understand and approach the assignment's requirements, the less time you will spend second-guessing (and needlessly revising) your writing.
You will likely encounter many different kinds of writing assignments in college, and it would be nearly impossible to list all of them. However, regardless of genre, there are some basic strategies one can use to approach these assignments constructively.
Read the assignment sheet early and thoroughly.  An assignment sheet may be lengthy, but resist the temptation to skim it. Observe and interpret every detail of the text. Moreover, it is essential to focus on the key words of the subject matter being discussed. It would be unfortunate to hand in an incomplete or misguided assignment because you did not properly read and understand the guidelines. Since you can easily overlook details on the first reading, read the assignment sheet a second time.  As you are reading, highlight areas where you have questions, and also mark words you feel are particularly important. Ask yourself why your professor has given this assignment. How does it relate to what you are studying in class? Pay attention to key words, such as compare, contrast, analyze, etc. Who is your audience? Should the paper be written in a formal or informal tone? Is there documentation required? If a specific number of sources are required, how many must be books vs. online sources? What type of citation is called for: APA, MLA, Chicago, etc.? Is there a page or word count minimum/maximum? Are you required to submit a draft before the final copy? Will there be peer review?
Get answers to your questions.  After thoroughly reading the assignment sheet, you might not have questions right away. However, after reading it again, either before or or after you try to start the assignment, you might find that you have questions. Don't play a guessing game when it comes to tackling assignment criteria--ask the right person for help: the instructor. Discuss any and all questions with the person who assigned the work, either in person or via email. Visit him or her during office hours or stay after class. Do not wait until the last minute, as doing so puts your grade at risk. Don't be shy about asking your professors questions. Not only will you better your understanding and the outcome of your paper, but professors tend to enjoy and benefit from student inquiry, as questions help them rethink their assignments and improve the clarity of their expectations. You likely are not the only student with a question, so be the one who is assertive and responsible enough to get answers. In the worst case scenario, when you have done all of these things and a professor still fails to provide you with the clarity you are looking for, discuss your questions with fellow classmates.
Writing Centers.  Many colleges and universities have a writing center. Tutors are helpful consultants for reviewing writing assignments both before and after you begin. If you feel somewhat confident about what you need to include in your writing assignment, bring your completed outline and/or the first draft of your paper together with your assignment sheet. Tutors can also review your final draft before its submission to your professor. Many writing centers allow you to make appointments online for convenience and may also have "walk-in" availability. It is a good idea to check out the available options a week or so in advance of when you will actually need the appointment, or even longer if it will be during mid-term or finals week.
Create a timeline.  Set due dates for yourself, whether they be to have a topic picked or a whole rough draft completed. Procrastination rarely results in a good paper. Some school libraries offer helpful computer programs that can create an effective assignment timeline for you. This is a helpful option for new, inexperienced writers who have not yet learned the art of analyzing assignments, and who are not familiar with the amount of time that is required for the college writing process. Remember, late papers may or may not be accepted by your instructor, and even if they are your grade will likely be reduced. Don't sell yourself short with late submissions.
Every writing assignment from every discipline requires the formulation of complex ideas. Thus, once the assignment guidelines have been thoroughly considered, you should begin to explore how you plan structure your work in order to meet them. While this is often considered to be the start of the writing process, it is also an essential part of assignment analysis, as it is here that the assignment is broken down into the most digestible parts. Such a process can be done either individually or in a group, depending on the situation.
Prewriting.  The first and foremost stage of the individual writing process is that of Prewriting. Often overlooked by inexperienced writers, this is essentially the architectural stage of the writing/analysis process, where the foundations of an assignment are first laid out and constructed. Free-writing, outlining, diagramming, and mapping are all possible approaches to this stage of development, where the goal is to organize one's ideas around the requirements of the task at hand. Many people begin this right on the assignment sheet, as it can be helpful to highlight what the instructor is specifically asking for while simultaneously adding one's own understanding to the ideas. Eventually though, you will want to move to a separate page. If you are free-writing, you should start by writing out an assignment related question or main concept, and then proceed to freely (with or without punctuation or formality) write anything that comes to mind in relation to it. If you are outlining, you are essentially breaking down the main ideas of the assignment and your response to them in a linear format (by paragraph, subject, section, subsection etc.). If you are diagramming, your prewriting can take many different forms, but always as a visual representation of your response to some/all of the assignment constituents. Lastly, if you are mapping, you are essentially outlining in a more visual way, using both linear and non-linear representation to organize your ideas about the assignment. Research can also be conducted during this stage of the writing/analysis process, as it is sometimes helpful to know more about a topic before you make the commitment to writing about it. You may even choose to use more than one of these approaches if you find it helpful in developing your understanding of the assignment.
Brainstorming.  Similar to prewriting, brainstorming takes place in the space between analysis and drafting, the difference being that brainstorming generally involves group discussion. The size of a brainstorming group varies according to task, but ideally consists of smaller odd numbers (3, 5, or 7) when there is no assigned mediator present. There are obviously many pitfalls to such group discussion, and many divergent possibilities (distractions, freeloading, repetition, etc.) that can lead to counter-productivity. Nonetheless, if all members are devoted to the task of analysis and development, the variety of perspectives can prove to be most rewarding. If all goes well, each member of the group takes turns posing questions related to the assignment being discussed, to which the other members respond openly and freely. When positive attitudes and constructive criticism can manage to be maintained, each member of the group will have his or her own critical thinking expanded upon and enriched by the understanding of the other group members.
As discussed earlier, instructors will come up with any number of assignments, most of which will stress different types of composition. In each section below, there are sample assignment directions and suggestions on how to proceed. What follows is not meant to be a comprehensive list of assignments, but rather a short list of the most common assignments you can expect to see in an introductory English course. Many assignments not listed here are simply creative variations of these basic directives. For example, you could approach a visual analysis the same way you would a rhetorical analysis; an argument paper is similar to a research paper, perhaps with a shorter argument. The techniques you use in writing a narrative can also translate into writing a short story or observational essay.
For this paper, you will take a position on a topic of either local or national interest. Research the topic thoroughly, making sure you know all sides of the debate, and decide what your position will be.
Your task is to write an 8 to 10 page research paper convincing your audience of your point of view. You are required to use at least 8 sources, 4 of which should be scholarly (peer reviewed). You will use MLA format for your in-text citations and Works Cited page. Remember, the key to a good debate is knowing the opposition. Therefore, some of your sources and paper should be dedicated to such. Use this as an opportunity to show how your viewpoint is conclusive.
You will likely have to write a research paper of a significant length during college. Students are usually overwhelmed by the page count and the struggle to come up with a paper topic. Sometimes, in an attempt to make sure he or she reaches the page minimum, students choose very broad research categories like welfare or the death penalty. Believe it or not, these extensive topics generally do not make for great papers, simply because there is too much information to cover. Narrow topics allow for more in-depth research and writing. Choosing a topic takes time and research, so don't be surprised if your instructor requires your topic ahead of time. This is to make sure you do not leave all of your research until the last minute. Look online for topics that interest you and write down a few notes about what is going on in that field. Since a research paper generally involves an argument, you must pick a topic that has two sides. One-sided, fact-based arguments such as "smoking is bad for your health," are not suitable for research papers.
Look at the assignment sheet for key words. What is the purpose of the paper? To argue. What are your requirements? Not only are there page requirements, but also source requirements. What are scholarly sources? How do you judge the credibility of a source? Are you familiar with MLA?
There is one mistake that is very easy to make: confusing an argumentative research paper with an expository one. Don't let your argumentative research paper become an informational report where you simply list information on a topic (expository writing). Unless explicitly stated, that is not your assignment.
A narrative can be defined as a story or account of an experience or event. Think of a moment or experience that you found to be particularly important, meaningful, humorous, etc., and describe this event. Events do not have to be extraordinary large or dramatic to be important and fun to read--a snapshot of what happened while you were sitting at a stoplight can be just as entertaining as a story about being in a tornado.
Narratives are a favorite first assignment for instructors, as it is assumed that most people find it easiest to write about what they are familiar with. At the same time, the idea of self-reflective writing can be very intimidating. Most students have fantastic stories to tell, but inevitably edit themselves too early by worrying that their stories might not be "important" enough.
However, the assignment clearly states that you should not worry about your narrative concerning a large event. One of the key words is "describe." Therefore, the most important part of the assignment is your use of description ("show, don't tell"). Prewrite and describe a few ideas you might want to talk about. Pick one of them and start writing down as many descriptive details as you can think of about the event. Who were you with? Where were you? What was the weather like? What did the building look like? What were you thinking? How did you feel? What did you learn? Recording these concrete details will help guide you through your narrative. Don't forget to include as many sensory perceptions (taste, touch, sight, sound, and smell) as possible to paint the clearest picture of what you are trying to describe to your reader.
At this point, you still might be worried about the "importance" of the story. While it is true that your story should come to some sort of point, themes usually develop naturally in a story. If you begin your story with an agenda, you'll often find yourself describing the theme and not the event itself. Allow the themes to develop, and do not try to force them unto the page.
A rhetorical analysis calls for students to closely read a text and determine several characteristics about it (author, context, purpose, emotional appeal/effects, etc). For this assignment, you will read "A Modest Proposal" by Jonathan Swift and write a rhetorical analysis. Remember, this is not a reflection piece, but rather a deep look at the tone, style, and intended audience, as well as ethos, logos, and pathos.
At first, a rhetorical analysis sounds somewhat difficult. However, analyzing just means making a conscious effort to read each word carefully and think about what the author is doing. The first step would be to read the piece, not once, but two or three times. Highlight important passages and take notes. For this assignment, the instructor wanted students to write about ethos, logos, and pathos, which are rhetorical terms you should become familiar with. Pay attention to specific word choices that may evoke emotion, or any facts the author may have put forward in the text. Look at the background of the author as well as the time period in which he or she was writing. Consider the tone of the piece. Is it formal/informal/serious/humorous? These are all things to keep in mind while reading. Make an ongoing list of the author's rhetorical techniques that you may want to discuss in your paper.
Remember to be mindful of your essay's organization. It is easy to discuss three different topics in one paragraph and jump back and forth from one idea to the next, but this makes it difficult for your reader to follow. Also, do not forget that this is not a reflection. For this assignment, the instructor isn't concerned with your reaction to the text, or your ability to summarize; he or she wants to gauge your analytical skills.
Read Martin Luther King Jr.'s "Letter from Birmingham Jail." Give a brief summary of the article and a response. Cite specific examples and avoid generalizations.
Before writing a summary, it is important to use your critical reading skills. Plan on reading the article at least two, but preferably three times.
First, read the article from the beginning to the end to get a general sense of its main ideas.  You don't have to understand every word at this point.  After you've read the whole article, write down a few sentences that explain its main ideas in your own words.
Second, read the article again, this time more slowly. Annotate as you read.  "Annotate" means that, as you read, you mark up the text by underlining, highlighting, or circling sentences or phrases that seem important or revealing.  Annotating also involves taking notes, either in the margin of the article or on a separate piece of paper.  You could begin by writing down the main point of each paragraph in the margin next to it. "Converse" with the text by asking questions, making connections to other things you've read, and noting areas of confusion.
Third, continue your conversation with the article by reading it a third time.   This time, read very slowly and carefully.  Try to answer the questions you asked during the second reading.  You don't need to find the right answer.  Actually, it's likely that there is no one absolutely correct answer.  But let your own ideas respond to your questions as you layer this set of notes over your first set.  Your answers will really be more like suggestions.  Think about how the different pieces of the article fit together to form a unified whole.  Go back to the summary you wrote after your first reading and revise it to reflect your deeper understanding and consideration of the author's ideas.
Now you are ready to summarize the article.  In a summary, you use your own words to describe the author's main points.  This means that the author's minor ideas will be left out.  If you choose to include some of the author's exact words, remember to enclose them in quotation marks.  Every summary needs a citation because, while the words are your own, the ideas are not.
While writing a summary may be a familiar assignment from high school, college instructors will frequently require a response. Writing a response is explaining your reaction to the text. However, statements such as "I did/did not like it" are not sufficient. Not only must you be more thoughtful and academic with your response, but you should also support what you say. For example, if you think that the author did not think sufficiently explain one of his main ideas, find the exact places in the text where the author's writing is weak, incomplete, or confusing.  In the same way, describe your positive reactions to the text as well.
Your summary and response should be in at least two different paragraphs; don't combine the author's ideas and your reactions in a single paragraph. However, your instructor doesn't want two huge paragraphs, so divide the summary and/or the response into multiple paragraphs if necessary.  Shorter paragraphs help you, as a writer, stay organized and helps the reader follow your ideas. The summary and response should each be about one page.
Remember, no matter what the assignment, identifying key words in guidelines can help you determine what type of thinking and ability the professor wants you to demonstrate. The following six areas of competencies are from Bloom's Taxonomy. To learn more, visit: http://jerz.setonhill.edu/writing/style/taxonomy.htm.
Knowledge:  This becomes evident in how well you remember the subject matter, such as the major ideas, dates, places, events, etc. Questions may begin with: Identify, describe, examine, when, where, who.
Comprehension: How well you understand the information presented. Can you describe the information in your own words? Questions may begin with: Interpret, contrast, predict, discuss.
Application:  Can you use the principles learned to solve other problems in different situations?  Questions may begin with: Illustrate, examine, modify, experiment, relate.
Analysis: Can you recognize hidden meanings, see patterns, identify the underlying parts? Questions may begin with: Separate, order, connect, classify, divide, explain.
Synthesis:  Can you relate knowledge from different areas to draw conclusions? Questions may begin with: Modify, rearrange, substitute, design, invent, generalize.
If you need clarification on what your instructor is looking for, do not hesitate to ask. After you have finished your paper, be sure to double-check that you have fulfilled all the requirements. Proofread your paper multiple times before handing in the final copy.
This move tries to cage White's Queen on a8. White's queen will soon get trapped. Black is guarding b8 and b7 with his queen so that Bb7 is possible after Qxa8. Of course, the only move is Qxa8, as else white will lose a piece for nothing.
...
General hints | Levels 1-20 | Levels 21-40 | Levels 41-60 | Levels 61-80 | Levels 81-100 | Levels 101-120 | Levels 121-140 | Levels 141-149 | Passwords
Levels 1-20 | Levels 21-40 | Levels 41-60 | Levels 61-80 | Levels 81-100 | Levels 101-120 | Levels 121-140 | Levels 141-149 | Passwords
This is a continuation of the walkthrough for Chip's Challenge. Levels 81 (WRITERS BLOCK) through 100 (COLONY) will be discussed on this page.
Every block, save nine or so, needs to be pushed into water to get a chip. The only exception is the corners, where two blocks are needed. The hardest part of this is the middle section:
[B|B|B|B|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B]
[_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_]
[_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|B|_|_]
[_|_|B|_|_|B|B|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|B|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|_]
[_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|B|_|_]
[_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_]
[_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B]
As you can see, this forms the word "THINK". Starting in the west, push the north two blocks into water. Then, push a block in and push the middle of the blocks next to the water into water. It then becomes:
[_|_|B|B|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B]
[_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_]
[_|_|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|B|_|_]
[_|_|B|_|_|B|B|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|B|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|_]
[_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|B|_|_]
[_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_]
[_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B]
Use the remaining part of the "T" to get six or seven more chips (depends on if you went to a corner). You can also push the block next to the "H" north through the passage that the other block made. The figure becomes:
[_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B]
[_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|B|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|B|B|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|B|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|B|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B]
Push the second block from the north in and the west half of the middle of the "H" south two.
[_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|B|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|B|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|B|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|B|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|B|B|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B]
You can now use the west half of the "H". Do so and push the third block from the north west. Use the rest of the "H", except this one block, and go over to the east.
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|B|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|B|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|B|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B]
Push the two blocks farthest east into their respective water squares. Do the same with the next four, continuing west.
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|B|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|_]
Push the third block from the north west two. Use the rest of the "K", except this block.
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B|_|_|_|_|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|_|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|_|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|B|_|B|_|_|_|_|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|_|_|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B|_|_|_|_|_|_|_]
You cannot get the eight blocks that are in the two clumps. Push the second block in and the middle block south. Then, use the block farthest SE. What's left looks like:
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B|_|_|_|_|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|B|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|_|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|_|B|_|_|_|_|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|B|B|B|_|_|_|_|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|_|_|_|_|_]
You now can utilize the east side of the "N", save the clump of four.
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|B|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|_|_|_|_|_]
Push the block that sticks out south two, then go around and push it east. Push the block in the middle west two.
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_]
[_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|_|B|_|_|B|_|_|B|B|_|_|_|_|_|_|_]
You now can use all of the blocks except for the two clumps. These, paired with the two you started with, will give you all of the chips you need. The exit is to the north of this area.
This level is impossible if you don't know where to go. It is easy when you do. Just go 2R 17U 24L 4D L and down to a gravel area. The level is cake from here on out. Go south on the gravel. A teeth monster can easily be killed in the water. Head all the way north to the top and down again to the last row. The teeth monster guarding the finish will come; push the block up and lose him in the bugs. Push it 4 up and go L 2D; wait for him to go left, then go R and D as he is going up. Continue down, right, and up to the exit (the bug has drowned).
Note: You will surely see the area you just got out of. Be thankful that those chaotic bugs and balls are not where you are, and for your 969 seconds.
Go around the forcefields to get the block. Push it west, then north and east, lining it up with the forcefield. Go east, south, and west into the glider area. Follow the gliders to the center, then go freely straight north. Go around to the forcefield leading to the block and go on it. Push the block all the way east, then all the way south. Go back around and into the glider area. Get through them and go all the way east this time. Go on the forcefield next to the block and push the block all the way west almost into the glider area.
One glider will deflect off the block; push the block left to catch another. Continue until all the gliders are going left. Push the block one square SW of the gravel and watch the gliders blow up!
When all the gliders have blown up bombs, push the block all the way south of the gravel. Only one bomb remains; push the block into it. Go to the west side, then follow one of the gliders north to a couple of chips. Get them and follow the glider back south. Go over all the way to the east, get the two chips there, then go up, getting all of the free chips. Push the block south to the first opening. Catch the second, third, fourth, and fifth gliders on the block. They blow up the bombs to the chips and then open a shortcut back down. Get out of there, get the chips you left behind and wander on back to the exit in the NW corner. You have scored 297 seconds using only blocks!
Push the block directly west, avoiding the pink balls (one can bounce off of the block). Keep pushing it to a point five squares west of the closest pink ball. Push it north, wait for two bugs to pass by, then push it up one and left one. You are free to take the chips. The exit is to the NW of the former bug area. You have won the war and score 580 seconds as your booty.
Go all the way west, south, a little west, and south through the forcefield. Go west and north to get the blue key and south, almost all the way east, north, east and south through the forcefield to get to the blue keyhole.
Go through the blue keyhole and get the chip. Go through each teleport these directions, getting the chip each time: U L L D L D L U D L R R L. Now go right and left through the teleport. Get the red key and go UDUDUDUDUDUDU through the teleports, pausing when necessary to avoid being hit. Timing is CRUCIAL - if you miss the beat, you will miss the top time of 236. Get the last chip and exit the telenet. Go back to the blue keyhole, except go up through the chip socket and exit.
Go northwest and push the block five squares above the cloner, next to the wall. Press the red button 11 times, watching out for the ball, and go to the bottom. The gliders should be commiting suicide on the bombs. Exit the level for 381 seconds.
Go north to the first big room. To get the chip in the SW corner of the room, push the closest block directly NE of the chip south. Press the green button and go to the space open toggle block. Push the two blocks north and west of the spot north and west one square, respectively. Press the green button again. Push the block closest to the chip south and get the chip.
To get the chip on the east side, press the green button once more. Push the closest block directly NW of the chip east. Press the green button again and push the other block directly NW of the chip east. Get the chip. To get the chips on the north wall, push the first and third blocks north, pressing the green button when necessary. Push the middle block to one side and get each chip.
Now you need to use the chips. Open the exit if necessary. Push the first block straight into water. Push the next block to the spot one space to the north of that. Push yet another block north to get the chip and another into the isolated water tile next to the wall.
You can now start to get the chips on the north side. Push the blocks to the north end and keep pushing them west. When you get the chip in the corner, don't push any more blocks to the top row. Fill in the second row - the row of all water, not the third - with more blocks. When this is done, push each block down this row and south when you get to the end. Get all of the chips on the west side this way, including the corner.
Push the rest of the blocks into the two columns closest to the wall. Then, push more blocks down the west one of these two and before you get to the one-cell-wide passage, push them west to get the chips. Use all of the remaining blocks for this.
Eventually, you will run out of the blocks in the columns. You need to utilize the blocks around the toggle walls. The SW corner is like this:
[W|B|T|B|B|B|_|_|_]
[W|_|_|t|B|t|B|_|_]
[W|_|B|B|T|B|T|B|_]
[W|W|W|W|W|W|W|W|W]
Push the block that juts out north and use it. Press the green button and use the block one tile to the west (you have to press the button again to open the exit) The area becomes
[W|B|T|B|B|B|_|_|_]
[W|_|_|t|B|t|B|_|_]
[W|_|B|B|T|B|T|B|_]
[W|W|W|W|W|W|W|W|W]
Use the block farthest north and press the green button. Push the second block from the east south. Pressing the green button once more, utilize the available block.
[W|B|T|B|B|_|_|_|_]
[W|_|B|B|T|B|B|B|_]
[W|W|W|W|W|W|W|W|W]
Push a block west and push the block to the north of where the first block was north (a toggle block will pop out).
[W|B|T|B|T|_|_|_|_]
[W|_|B|B|T|B|B|B|_]
[W|W|W|W|W|W|W|W|W]
Press the green button and use the north of the two available blocks (pressing the green button to open the exit). Press the green button, push the last block east, press it again, and push the last block east four more spaces to use it.
To utilize all of the blocks in the east area, first use the one that is farthest west. Use the blocks NE and SE of that, too. Press the green button and use the block two tiles west of where the chip used to be. Do the same for both blocks directly SW of where the chip was and the block one square west and three squares south of where the chip was. To get the final block, press the green button, then push a block east onto an open toggle block. Use the block directly south of where it was (press the green button) to get the final chip.
More challenges await. Go south to the one-cell-wide passage. Push the block south and follow it. Push it one more square north, then push the block to Chip's right one to the east. Go back to the first block and push it in two. Quickly jump to the south, as the block will rebound. Push it north, take the chip, go on the forcefield, and repeat until you get to the north end. This time, go back south without a block, and you will push the block that you set up. Go back on the ice.
The last part is too complicated to explain with ASCII-art, thus I will explain by simply telling you the way.  U=Up/North, D=Down/South, R=Right/East, L=Left/West.  Enter the gate and go: 4R, D, 2R, U, 3R, D, 3R, U, R, 3D, L, 5D, R, 2D, 4L, U, L, 2U, R, 3U, L, U, 5L, D, 2L, 2D, R, D, 2R, D, R, D, L, D, L, D, 2L, 3D, 3R, D, 3R, 3U, 5R, 2D, U, R, D, R, U, R, D and HOME!
This maze-like level not only differs between the Windows and Atari versions of the game, but also between Windows versions, as there are two different ones! The two Windows versions differ only on this level. Most Windows versions are not like the Atari one. These are the ones in BOWEP and some copies of WEP 4. In other copies of WEP 4, however, this level is virtually impossible (like on the Atari)!
In the windows version, the level is far simpler, and can be solved quickly by going right from the start and following the path. At the first and second intersections, go straight across. On the third intersection, go west and collect the chip, then go back to the third intersection and go south. Go south again at the fourth intersection. Go west at the fifth intersection. Go right across the remaining intersections until you are near the exit. Move south so that you are beside the chip socket, then head west to get the final chip. At this point, head back to the chip socket to finish the level. You score 317 seconds.
In the other version, when you get near the exit to the final chip, you are blocked off just above the exit. This version requires a much longer path (and much riskier). Go D D D U D L R R D R L L L at each intersection. If you can manage to avoid the walkers (pay big attention to the "manage"!), you will score 300 seconds.
Go R U R D 2U. Push the block right when it arrives. Go D 2U and push the block right again. Go D 2R and U to push the block in the water. Push the topmost button to make another block. Push it into the water and get the red key. Go back down, 3L U L and push the new block right. Push U 2D U D (this is another timing part) and go R U (if you die here, try again. This route is based on "slide delay", the phenomenon of speed distortion on ice when a lot of things are on ice at once) L D. Now a block should be available to push into the water and get the green key. Get the chip behind the green locks. Now get the next chip and go through the next green and red locks. Get the chip and follow the path until you reach some clone buttons. Run across all the clone buttons and you will need to follow the path *through the ice* while avoiding the moving blocks. Then you will need to go down through the ice while avoiding the blocks again. Be careful not to push any blocks! Continue following the path and soon you will have to face more blocks. Those blocks have a pattern and you will need to have a quick mind to follow the pattern and get past the blocks. Getting past these blocks requires some really good luck. After that, continue following the path. You get another chip and now face more blocks. This time you want to push the blocks because you need to bridge to the exit. Try staying to the right when pushing the blocks. You get a reward of 402 seconds for busting the blocks.
Use the blocks to build a path to the force floors. Don't use the upper right block because it has fire under it, but build the bridge one square NE of here. Ride the force floors and go left. From the lower left corner of the area: 2U 2L U 2L U, then get the yellow key and chips. Now return to the part where the force floors brought you. You need to push the blocks into the water to form a path 2 blocks thick. To do this: Push the two middle blocks forward, push the two outside blocks forward, push the remaining blocks to the center, and push them forward. Do everything except push the block on the left before you go left. Cross your path (touch only one recessed wall) and go through the yellow lock to collect the chips and a blue key. Now go out of this area through your path. Go a little to the right and find the opening in the wall of blue blocks below you just under the hanging blue wall. Go right and cross the ice for some chips, then go all the way to the left and go through the blue lock. Slide down the ice path. Get the nine chips and the green key at the top. There is no way to get the ice boots and the chip (you don't need them anyway). Slide back on the ice path and get out of the pink ball area. Go to your far left and up through the green lock. Push the first block all the way to the left (aligned with the other block) and use the blocks to cross the water. Get all those chips that spell "GOOD LUCK". Then go past the fire (you have the fire boots) to get even more chips. Go through the green lock that leads to the chips (not to the pink balls) and collect the remaining chips you need. Go through the chip sockets and into the exit square. You score 318 seconds.
This is possibly the most difficult level in the game. It must be completed quickly before the player is overwhelmed by the walkers. Go up and left for 2 chips. Go to the top and then to the top left corner (16 left). Go down and get the nearest chip on the right, then down again (13 left). Go back up and right to the top center, picking up 3 chips. About now you should be seeing some walkers. Go right and down (8 left). Go down to the pair of chips and get the bottom first. Go up, right, and down (1 left). Go to the right and get the last chip. You may die here, but try again. Go down to the bottom and get to the exit. Luckily you have more seconds (367) than walkers!!
Follow these directions at the very start: L 2U 2R D R 3D 5L 2U 2L 3D 4L U 2L 3U (A) 2R 2U 5R U 2R U R 4U R 5U. Now there is a walker at the space to your right and there is a fireball at your upper-right. Clear the blue block at the bottom of the walker's area to free him (be careful not to get hurt). Then go up to the fireball area and get the blue key from there, careful not to get hit by the fireball. Now get out of this monster place! Go back to A, go under the green key, and pick it up (behind the recessed wall). You don't need it, but...... Continue forward and circle around with the fireballs. Get the chip when you reach it, then go deeper and deeper into the center of this place while collecting the chips. You will reach a teleport at the center- go up (crossing over it) and down through it to get a chip. Go back through the teleport and make your way to the outer ring of fireballs. Collect that chip at the bottom, through the blue lock and chip socket... finished! 444 seconds left.
Get the block to the right (on the peninsula). Put it where you started. From that spot go U 3L D and left until you see the block. Hit the toggle button a couple times and push the block down. Push it to the right, down, and right again. Go near the chip socket and push one down, then go up. Detonate one bomb and put the other block where the bomb was. Go to the top center, get the chip (the balls should be trapped), and bring the block to the start area. Push it above the other block and push the lower block below the gravel. Push the block in the force floors down to the penultimate opening, go around the force floors, and push the readied block into the water at the top. Get the other block at the right, push it just under the gravel, and push the other block through the maze 2L 3U 2L 2D 6L 2D 3R 3U, leaving it there. Push the second block up through the gliders and in the water. Get the chip at the right of the area. Bring the last block through the maze 2L 2U 4R and up to the top. Push it into the water at the left to get the last chip. The exit is by the start. Yield to gliders! You should not lose your way to 650.
B: Starting Position, U: Unknown Tiles, #: Wall, C: Chips, X: Socket, O: Exit Square
This level will fool most players on their first few runs. Most will attempt to get the chips locked in the doors in the enterance area, but a different method is required. First, head south into the teleporter and push the block down once. Head west and get the red key, and then push the block above into the teleport. Follow it and push it into the water, but don't step on it yet. Go back through the teleporter the way you came out, open the walker room, and get the chip at the right. If you survived, get the other key and push the block down into the teleporter. Follow it through and go south and west through the red door to get the yellow key. Step on the old dirt and go through the yellow door to the exit. You have become the king and score 335.
The key to this level is the fire boots. They are not needed, but save 17 seconds.
Chase the first tank and grab the first two chips. Wait for it to pass and grab the third chip and blue key. Go over the blue button twice after getting the key to send the tank towards you. Go into the third chip's crevice and wait for the tank to pass, then run west and go through the door. Collect the first chip below, then press the blue button. Wait for the tank to pass underneath and move down. Press the blue button again at the same time as the above tank presses its blue button. Grab the red key and fire boots. Collect the nearby chip, and press the blue button and collect the last chip in the row. When the tank passes, go up and west and throught the red door. Cross the ice through the fire and head up and around. When you reach the recessed wall, wait until the bee passes and go down twice, east once, and down twice so that you are southeast of the jutting wall. Wait for the bee to move onto the square southwest fo you, and go down to the recessed wall. If you went this far without misstep, you should be able to collect all of the chips in the next part without interference. If not, use the fires to avoid the balls.
When you reach the paramecium part, go north through the second channel and collect the chips counter-clockwise from the southwest chip. Head north after collecting the fourth chip and through the recessed wall. Avoid the balls in the next part and collect the top four chips on the east side, then head back to the top, and collect all the chips on the west side. At the bottom, go west and north and get the red key. Head back and collect the remaining two chips on the east side of the balls. Head back around the east wall and go up through the red door.
In this final area, the bugs follow an invisible set of walls shaped similar to an 'X' but with no centre. Collect four chips along the south wall, then go north into the fire, and east and collect two more. Head north four space after the second chip, then east (Avoiding bugs). Collect four chips to the east, and go counter-clockwise around the outer wall and collect four chips to the north, and four to the west before heading through the western exit to the chip socket and finish. You score 320 seconds for scaring everything.
Open the dirt below you and bring a block at the right to this same spot. The tricky part: From the old dirt spot, go D L D (wait) 3R (wait) D (wait) R 2U (wait) 3R exit. Despite the huge instability, you are safe in the exit and score 290 seconds.
Spiral through the circling balls, right, down, left, up, and right, to get the chips at each of the first seven areas and then the exit. Wait before the fourth, fifth, and sixth areas, and when leaving the seventh. Hurry, the clock is shrinking! Score: 338.
Go up and right, getting the blue key. Go through the blue door and get two yellow keys. Go through the one at the right and get the red key. Go through the other door and get another red key. Go to the top and get the chips through the red door. Get the blue key at the top right. Go back down through the two red doors and chips, and then get another red key at the left. Go through another door and get two more chips. Get another blue key. Go to the center, through the green and blue doors, and exit.
There is a faster way, but it requires treading on the random force floors and risking being hit by the blocks. Just to the right of the trapped bees, push the first block up and the second right. You should hopefully go right. Get the chips at the top and circle around the red door. Get the two chips and go down. Get the red key and go to the bottom. Push the block onto the force floor. Hopefully it will go up and you will go right. Get the blue key, go through the green door above, and repeat the pattern. You will only need one of the blue keys, adding 6 seconds in total for a score of 380 seconds.
@: Starting Position, #: Wall, L: Gliders (turns left), R: Fireballs (turns right),
C: Chips (collect these), X: Socket, O: Exit square
Considered to be the best move, this frees the b4-square for the c3-knight and prepares to round up c4 with Bxc4. Black should prevent this with 4...b5. This also sets a deep trap for white. This leads to very complicated variations on the queenside.
In Legend of Zelda: Link's Awakening you control a hero, Link, in a quest across the fantasy world of Hyrule. During the game, Link can progressively acquire several weapons and armors, but also many other items and a wide array of spells.
Link's Awakening is an action-adventure video game, but it's often considered also a role-playing video game. Specifically, it belongs to the sub-genre of action-RPVGs (Action Role Playing Video Game).
Three aspects that can define the genre of RPGs are listed here, and they apply to Link's Awakening as well:
Text is an essential part of the game, and the characters have to talk and interact with non-evil characters to proceed in the adventure;
There are permanent upgrades, in the form of enhancements of the various attributes of the characters (attack, strength, magic etc.);
There is freedom of exploration, all the areas are connected by an "overworld", and areas that have been previously cleared can usually be re-visited; in other words, the game is non-linear.
Older Japanese-style RPVGs (focused more on the plot) and American-style RPVGs (focused more on exploration and roleplaying custom characters) typically feature turn-based battles, while the slightly more recent action-RPVGs like Link's Awakening feature a continuous flow action between exploration and battle. Nevertheless, all three aspects listed above are present in every RPG.
Returns a copy of the spec of a function.
SPEC-OF is a function value.
"Returns a copy of the spec of a function."
'else [cause-error 'script 'cannot-use reduce ['reflect type? :value]]
a neutron being ejected from the nucleus
Z decreases by 4 and A decreases by 2
Z decreases by 2 and A decreases by 4
Z decreases by 4 and A decreases by 4
a proton and two neutrons
Z increases by 1 and A remains the same
Z decreases by 1 and A remains the same
Z remains the same and A decreases by 1
Z remains the same and A increases by 1
a proton and a neutron
Periodic sequences.
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
An enzymatic cascade is a sequence of successive activation reactions involving enzymes, which is characterized by a series of amplifications stemming from an initial stimulus. The product of each preceding reaction catalyzes and is consumed in the next reaction. An example of an enzymatic cascade includes blood clotting, where a timely response is needed. The cascade first activates a clotting factor, followed by the activation of the next clotting factor and so forth until the final cross-linked fibrin clot is formed.
Another example of enzymatic cascade occurs following the binding of allergen to a receptor bound Ig on the mast cell.  Spleen tyrosine kinases (Syk) plays an important role in this immunoglobulin E (IgE) signaling pathway. Using knowledge of the cascade and the role Syk plays, Syk inhibitors have been developed to inhibit IgE- driven mast cell degranulation, as well as to inhibit the release of inflammatory cytokines, thereby inhibiting an allergic response.
Enzymatic cascades can also play roles in the immune system.  Complement cascade works with the body’s innate immunity by cleaning pathogens from an organism. It proceeds though three major pathways; classical (CP), alternative (AP) and mannose-binding-lectin (MP). The end product results in large scale amplification of cell killing membrane attack complex.
Blood coagulation is an example of this; each enzyme activates the next until a fibrin clot is formed.  There are two pathways by which the clotting can proceed: intrinsically or extrinsically. Intrinsic clotting is activated by the exposure of anionic surfaces of blood vessels that is damaged by the trauma, while extrinsic clotting is initiated by the exposure of tissue factors (TF). Tissue factors are integral glycoprotein.
File:Blood clotting.jpg
Inactive forms of clotting factors =pink
Activated forms = yellow
The final portion of the pathway is the same for both intrinsic and extrinsic cascades, in which factor X is activated. Once the Prothrombin is activated and catalyzed into thrombin, it catalyzes the conversion of fibrinogen into fibrin. Thrombin cleaves fibrinopeptides at the central globular region, the globular domains at the carboxyl-terminal ends of the beta and delta chains interact with the exposed regions of the chains at the amino terminal.  This cross linking reaction forms fibrin clots.  It should be noted that thrombin is also involved in the activation of enzymes in previous steps, such as factors VII and VIII, providing a positive feedback loop on the cascade. This fibrin clotting process must be fast acting and precisely regulated, it can only act on damaged tissues. Fibrin can't be flowing in the blood vessels to cause blood clots. This precise regulation is owe to the fact that cloting factors are short-lived and diluted in blood vessels. They are quickly removed by the liver.
File:Blood clot final path.jpg
Berg, Jeremy M. John L. Tymoczko. Lubert Stryer. Biochemistry Sixth Edition. W.H. Freeman and Company. New York, 2007.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Muhammad Ali, a famous boxer, has died at the age of 74. He was suffering from a respiratory illness, a condition that was complicated by Parkinson's disease.
If Choice = "C" Or Choice = "c"
If Choice = "F" Or Choice = "f"
Output "You must enter C to convert to Celsius or F to convert to Fahrenheit!"
Assign fahrenheit = celsius * 9 / 5 + 32
Function DisplayResult (Real temperature, String fromScale, Real result, String toScale)
Output temperature & "° " & fromScale & " is " & result & "° " & toScale
Output "Enter F to convert to Fahrenheit or C to convert to Celsius:"
Output "Enter " & scale & " temperature:"
Enter C to convert to Celsius or F to convert to Fahrenheit:
You must enter C to convert to Celsius or F to convert to Fahrenheit.
Ancient democracies are probably the biggest myths created during the Middle Ages or at the beginning of the modern period. This was useful for the ruling sections to claim that they are sharing their powers, and yet manipulate the state in the manner in which they wish to their benefit.
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
President Donald Trump in the White House.
Donald John Trump was elected the 45th US President on November 8th, 2016.[1] As President he lead the Republican Party in a different direction.[2]
8 2019 College Admission Scandal
An important point in Donald Trump's 2016 campaign for president was the promise of nominating conservative judges to the Supreme Court.[3][4]
In early 2016, Supreme court justice Antonin Scalia died.[5] Following the controversial decision of the Senate not to consider Obama's nomination of Merrick Garland,[6] the seat was left vacant until 2017 until President Trump appointed Neil Gorsuch.[7]
Following the retirement of Justice Anthony Kennedy, President Trump nominated Brett Kavanaugh, which was controversial due to sexual assault allegations made against him during the confirmation process.[8] The vote to confirm Kavanaugh was among the closest in American history, with only 51.02% of senators voting to approve his nomination.[9][10]
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg died in September 2020, saying on her deathbed "My most fervent wish is that I will not be replaced until a new president is installed.".[11]
President Donald Trump nominated Amy Coney Barrett to the Supreme Court in late September 2020.[12] Amy Coney Barrett was confirmed by the Senate just over a week before the 2020 election.[13][14]
During the talks, President Trump became the first president to enter North Korea.
From 2017 to 2018 the North Korean Government sped up its nuclear program, causing a crisis.[15]
On a January morning in 2018 an accident triggered the emergency warning system in Hawaii, with messages blaring from cell phones radios, and televisions of impending nuclear attack, leading to real panic as people rushed for cover, and attempted to make peace with a harrowing future.[16]
During this time, the US saw it's first publicly traded company, Apple , reach a value of 1 trillion dollars in 2018.[17] Apple then became the first American publicly traded company to reach a value of two trillion in 2020, again Apple.[18]
In 2018 the administration began a trade war with China, where both nations placed tariffs on the goods of the other nation. The trade war was caused in part by a growing trade deficit with China, as well as controversy surrounding protection of technology and intellectual property. The trade war resulted in economic damage to both economies[19], as well as the shifting of some supply chains away from China to other areas of the world.[20]
The national debt grew significantly under the Trump administration, even before the COVID-19 pandemic required additional spending.[21]
A self driving car navigates Mountain View, California in 2017.
Many of the technology trends that started in the George W. Bush or Obama Presidencies continued to mature during the Trump administration. More importantly, many technologies had left the realm of enthusiasts and labs, and began really impacting society by 2016 once their adoption had become significant enough. Voice and Facial Recognition technology began seeing widespread use in the field. Electric Cars became a status icon widely available in the mass market, with a number of competing manufacturers vying to release electric vehicles.[22][23] VR headsets became more affordable and higher quality than ever before, though struggled in the market.[24][25] Renewable energy costs continued to decline.[26] More automation found its way into society with smarter cars and more customer facing automation finding its way into metro areas.[27][28]
Many controversies surrounded the use of technology during this time. Concerns were raised about algorithmic bias, as well as the potential to misuse large datasets such as in the Facebook–Cambridge Analytica data scandal. Other concerns were raised about counterfeit products being more commonly sold online[29], as well as technology companies conflicting with local and state level regulators.[30][31] Near the end of 2020 a few major technology companies see significant antitrust action from various parts of the American Government, threatening to break up companies that used their monopolies improperly.[32][33][34]
The 2010's in space were hallmarked by a number of private space companies backed by billionaires like Jeff Bezos or Elon Musk competing for achievements in privately run space ventures.[35] This came to be known as the Billionaire space race.
In December of 2019, the Space Force was established as a separate service branch, instead of operating under the Air Force, as its preceding organization had since 1982.[36] In December of 2020 members of the space force are named Guardians.[37]
In 2018 SpaceX sent an automobile from its sister company Tesla into space. This served as both a dummy payload, and a successful advertisement.[38]
Space Force members attending an officer graduation ceremony in April, 2020.
The last state to fly a flag with blatant confederate imagery, Mississippi, redesigns their flag in 2020 without such imagery following calls from citizens.[39]
Immigration issues were a key point of President Trump's 2016 campaign, including a promise to replace preexisting fencing and barriers on the US Mexico border with a wall.[40]
In 2017 Trump signed an executive order which restricted travel from certain countries.[41] Similar bans would be implemented throughout the Trump administration, with many protesting the decisions.[42]
The family separation policy pursued by the administration proved to be very controversial, as the policy resulted in families split, often with no way put in place to reunite them.[43][44][45] Harsh immigration policies continued to result in American Veterans waiting for expedited citizenship promised to them being deported.[46]
President Trump signs Executive Order 13780, one of several of his travel bans.
Caged sleeping area at the Usula detention center in 2018.
Caged holding cell at McAllen Station in 2019.
In late 2017 Hurricane Maria devastated Puerto Rico, with much of the island damaged two years after the hurricane.[47][48]
Notable shootings from this time include the 2017 Las Vegas shooting, Stoneman Douglas High School shooting / Parkland Shootings, and the 2019 El Paso shooting.
Notable Protests, Demonstrations, and Riots
Aided by social and mass media, protesting was widespread and visible during this time, with many protests ranking among the largest in American history.[49]
The day following the inauguration of President Trump, the 2017 Women's March occurred, which was the largest single day protest in American history to that point.[50][51][52]
Fearing that a pipeline could endanger their water source, a number of indigenous people protested the construction of a pipeline in North Dakota.[53]
The Unite the Right Rally.
The Unite the Right rally held in Charlottesville attracted nationwide attention and controversy following an attack on counter protesters that killed one and injured at least 19 more.[54][55]
The March for Our Lives, March for Science, 2018 Women's March,Telegramgate, Juggalo March and the September 2019 climate strikes were other major protests against the administration during this time. The Mother of All Rallies, the Trump Free Speech Rally, and the March 4 Trump were notable rallies in favor of President Trump during this time.
On May 25, 2020[56] George Floyd was killed in Minneapolis.[57] Video of the event sparked nationwide protests, that dwarfed the size of the previous largest protest, the 2017 Women's March.[58]
By May 31st, 2020 credentialed journalists across the United States attempting to cover the events were being targeted by members of a number of police departments,[59][60], with many calling these targeted attacks violations of the First Amendment.[61] By the 14th of July federal police began forcing protestors into unmarked vehicles with no warning or explanation.[62] Critics called the detainments by officers who did not identify themselves unlawful, while proponents of the action said it was needed to protect a courthouse.[63] The arrival of paramilitary forces fueled even larger protests, leading to their withdrawal.[64]
Memorial for George Floyd outside the store where he was killed.
Graffiti on a Robert E. Lee Monument.
Minneapolis State Patrol in riot gear.
President Trump at St. John's Episcopal Church. The removal of the peaceful protestors for the purpose of a photo op upset protestors and church officials.[65]
A policeman in Philadelphia takes the knee.
In 2019 a college admissions bribery scandal broke, when it became publicly known that many wealthy Americans had paid for their children to gain unfair advantages when applying to well ranked schools.[66] The scandal fueled feelings of racial injustice in education[67], as well as economic inequality between the wealthy elite and the average low income or middle class American.[68]
Following a number of controversies and impeachment by the House of Representatives, President Trump was put on trial for impeachment by the Senate in early 2020. He was acquitted by the Senate, and remained president.[69]
At the beginning of 2020 the World Health Organization began monitoring a disease emerging near Wuhan, China.[70][71] By early 2020 the pandemic had spread across the globe, including to the United States of America.[72]
On March 13, 2020 President Trump declared a national emergency, allowing the Federal government to more effectively respond to the pandemic.[73] By late March a bipartisan two trillion dollar stimulus bill was passed, the largest in American history at the time.[74] The CARES Act included one time direct payments of $1,200 to many, but not all, individuals who made less then $75,000, and added an extra $600 a week to anyone on unemployment for a period of four months.[75]
Despite the S&P500 and NASDAQ reaching all time highs in February 2020[76], the pandemic caused a significant economic downturn.[77] A number of anti-lockdown protests occurred as a result of the economic damage from lockdown measures, with President Trump supporting a number of the protests.[78][79]
A US Navy Comfort Ship docked in New York City during the pandemic.[80]
President Trump visiting the National Institute of Health during the Pandemic.
A Colorado National Guardsman offering food aid in Denver.
An anti-lockdown protestor in Columbus, Ohio.
Deceased in New Jersey being loaded into a makeshift morgue.
Empty shelves in a Texas store.
On October 2nd, 2020 President Trump announced that he had tested positive for COVID-19.[81] President Trump would recover from COVID-19 later that October.[82]
On December 13th, 2020 the first COVID-19 vaccines approved for widespread use began being distributed across the United States.[83]
The 2020 census encountered a number of difficulties owing to the unique circumstances surrounding the year 2020.[84]
The 2020 Electoral College results. Trump won states shaded in red, while Biden won states shaded in blue.
In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Biden Campaign focused on virtual events, as opposed to the Trump Campaign use of in person events.[85]
Early on in 2020 the recently appointed Postmaster Dejoy ordered a number of existing postal sorting machines to be removed without a reason given.[86] Many industry professionals questioned this, as it would have been easier to just turn the machines off.[86]
During the election a number of issues with Election mail occurred as a result of cuts to the United States Postal Service early in 2020.[87]
Joe Biden won the election receiving 74 million votes and winning the Electoral College.[88]
President Trump made a number of attempts to challenge the election results. Notably, in December of 2020 President Trump requested that the Supreme Court overturn 2020 election results in several key states where he lost, a request which the Supreme Court rejected.[89][90]
A Georgia Runoff election for control of the Senate gained national attention.[91] The results of this runoff election ended a Republican senate majority.[92]
Joe Biden and Kamala Harris during the campaign.
A poll worker sanitizes an election booth in California.
People celebrating the election results in Washington DC.
Donald Trump falsely tweeted that he won the election on November 7th, 2020.
Following the Election, President Trump refused to concede and contested many of the results in court.[93][94]
On November 17th, 2020 following a statement that the election was secure by federal cybersecurity official Christopher Kerbs, President Trump announced he had fired him on Twitter.[95]
Following a inciting speech by President Trump,[97] on January 6th, 2021 the US Capitol building was stormed by a pro-trump mob as Congress tallied electoral college votes.[98] As a result of this event President Trump was impeached by the House for a second time on January 13th, 2021, notably with greater support from House Republicans then during the previous impeachment.[99]
Supporters of President Trump storm the Capitol building.
A gallows set up outside the capitol during the storming.
The second Impeachment of President Trump.
National Guardsmen secure the Capitol building in preparation for President elect Joe Biden.
Wikipedia has related information at Presidency of Donald Trump
↑ "Donald Trump Is Elected President in Stunning Repudiation of the Establishment" (in en). https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/09/us/politics/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-president.html. Retrieved 20 September 2020.
↑ "Union Of Trump And GOP Cemented On Final Night Of Convention" (in en). NPR.org. https://www.npr.org/2016/07/22/487001888/union-of-trump-and-gop-consummated-on-final-night-of-gop-convention.
↑ "President Trump has kept his promise to remake the federal bench, including the Supreme Court" (in en). www.usatoday.com. https://www.usatoday.com/in-depth/news/politics/elections/2020/10/27/amy-coney-barrett-trump-campaign-pledge-supreme-court/5922995002/.
↑ "Trump Offers Conservatives a Deal on Supreme Court". Time. https://time.com/4266700/donald-trump-supreme-court-nominations/.
↑ Moravec, Eva Ruth; Horwitz, Sari; Markon, Jerry (14 February 2016). "The death of Antonin Scalia: Chaos, confusion and conflicting reports". Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/texas-tv-station-scalia-died-of-a-heart-attack/2016/02/14/938e2170-d332-11e5-9823-02b905009f99_story.html. Retrieved 20 September 2020.
↑ "What Happened With Merrick Garland In 2016 And Why It Matters Now" (in en). NPR.org. https://www.npr.org/2018/06/29/624467256/what-happened-with-merrick-garland-in-2016-and-why-it-matters-now. Retrieved 20 September 2020.
↑ Davis, Julie Hirschfeld; Landler, Mark (31 January 2017). "Trump Nominates Neil Gorsuch to the Supreme Court". The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/31/us/politics/supreme-court-nominee-trump.html. Retrieved 20 September 2020.
↑ "Brett Kavanaugh's nomination: A timeline". www.cnn.com. https://www.cnn.com/interactive/2018/10/politics/timeline-kavanaugh/. Retrieved 20 September 2020.
↑ Stolberg, Sheryl Gay (6 October 2018). "Kavanaugh Is Sworn In After Close Confirmation Vote in Senate". The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/06/us/politics/brett-kavanaugh-supreme-court.html. Retrieved 20 September 2020.
↑ "Senate vote on Kavanaugh was historically close". Los Angeles Times. 7 October 2018. https://www.latimes.com/nation/la-pol-scotus-confirmation-votes-over-the-years-20181005-htmlstory.html. Retrieved 20 September 2020.
↑ "Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Champion Of Gender Equality, Dies At 87" (in en). https://www.npr.org/2020/09/18/100306972/justice-ruth-bader-ginsburg-champion-of-gender-equality-dies-at-87. Retrieved 21 September 2020.
↑ "Amy Coney Barrett: A Dream For The Right, Nightmare For The Left" (in en). https://www.npr.org/2020/09/28/917554001/amy-coney-barrett-a-dream-for-the-right-nightmare-for-the-left. Retrieved 9 November 2020.
↑ "Amy Coney Barrett: Who is Trump's Supreme Court pick?". 27 October 2020. https://www.bbc.com/news/election-us-2020-54303848. Retrieved 9 November 2020.
↑ "Amy Coney Barrett Confirmed To Supreme Court, Takes Constitutional Oath" (in en). https://www.npr.org/2020/10/26/927640619/senate-confirms-amy-coney-barrett-to-the-supreme-court. Retrieved 9 November 2020.
↑ "North Korea Nuclear Weapons Threat Nuclear Proliferation North Korea NTI". https://www.nti.org/learn/countries/north-korea/. Retrieved 20 September 2020.
↑ Nagourney, Adam; Sanger, David E.; Barr, Johanna (13 January 2018). "Hawaii Panics After Alert About Incoming Missile Is Sent in Error". The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/13/us/hawaii-missile.html. Retrieved 20 September 2020.
↑ "Apple Becomes World's 1st Private-Sector Company Worth $1 Trillion" (in en). NPR.org. https://www.npr.org/2018/08/02/632697978/apple-becomes-worlds-1st-private-sector-company-worth-1-trillion. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
↑ "Apple Is Worth $2 Trillion — 1st American Company To Hit Milestone" (in en). NPR.org. https://www.npr.org/2020/08/19/903858871/apple-is-1st-2-trillion-american-company. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
↑ "Has The Trade War Taken A Bite Out Of China's Economy? Yes — But It's Complicated" (in en). NPR.org. https://www.npr.org/2019/10/10/768569711/has-the-trade-war-taken-a-bite-out-of-china-s-economy-yes-but-its-complicated. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
↑ Tan, Huileng (20 February 2020). "Coronavirus outbreak in China spurs supply chain shifts that began during trade war" (in en). CNBC. https://www.cnbc.com/2020/02/20/coronavirus-outbreak-spurs-supply-chain-shifts-started-by-us-china-trade-war.html. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
↑ "Donald Trump Built a National Debt So Big (Even Before the Pandemic) That It’ll Weigh Down the Economy for Years" (in en). ProPublica. https://www.propublica.org/article/national-debt-trump.
↑ Wayland, Michael (23 November 2019). "Here's how the Ford Mustang Mach-E earned the iconic pony badge, after the company scrapped years of work on other designs" (in en). CNBC. https://www.cnbc.com/2019/11/23/heres-how-the-ford-mustang-mach-e-earned-the-iconic-pony-badge.html. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
↑ Davies, Alex (11 January 2016). "How GM Beat Tesla to the First True Mass-Market Electric Car". Wired. https://www.wired.com/2016/01/gm-electric-car-chevy-bolt-mary-barra/. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
↑ Rubin, Ross. "Vendors face the tough reality of affordable VR" (in en). ZDNet. https://www.zdnet.com/article/vendors-face-the-tough-reality-of-affordable-vr/. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
↑ Roose, Kevin (16 September 2020). "This Should Be V.R.’s Moment. Why Is It Still So Niche?". The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/30/technology/virtual-reality.html. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
↑ "Costs Continue to Decline for Residential and Commercial Photovoltaics in 2018 | News | NREL". https://www.nrel.gov/news/program/2018/costs-continue-to-decline-for-residential-and-commercial-photovoltaics-in-2018.html.
↑ Wayland, Michael (9 December 2020). "GM's Cruise begins testing autonomous vehicles without human drivers in San Francisco" (in en). CNBC. https://www.cnbc.com/2020/12/09/gms-cruise-begins-testing-autonomous-vehicles-without-human-drivers-in-san-francisco.html.
↑ Metz, Cade; Griffith, Erin (20 May 2020). "A City Locks Down to Fight Coronavirus, but Robots Come and Go". The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/20/technology/delivery-robots-coronavirus-milton-keynes.html.
↑ Semuels, Alana (20 April 2018). "Amazon May Have a Counterfeit Problem". The Atlantic. https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2018/04/amazon-may-have-a-counterfeit-problem/558482/. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
↑ Lazo, Luz. "Dockless bike, scooter firms clash with U.S. cities over regulations". Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/trafficandcommuting/dockless-bike-scooter-firms-clash-with-us-cities-over-regulations/2018/08/04/0db29bd0-9419-11e8-a679-b09212fb69c2_story.html. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
↑ Siddiqui, Faiz. "Uber and Lyft to continue operating in California". Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2020/08/20/uber-lyft-shutdown/. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
↑ Kelly, Makena (17 December 2020). "Google accused of search manipulation in third major antitrust lawsuit" (in en). The Verge. https://www.theverge.com/2020/12/17/22186994/google-search-antitrust-lawsuit-colorado-nebraska-state-ags.
↑ Wakabayashi, Daisuke (20 December 2020). "The Antitrust Case Against Big Tech, Shaped by Tech Industry Exiles". The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/20/technology/antitrust-case-google-facebook.html.
↑ Shepardson, Diane Bartz, David (21 October 2020). "U.S. says Google breakup may be needed to end violations of antitrust law" (in en). Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/article/tech-antitrust-google-idUSKBN2751PB.
↑ https://money.cnn.com/2017/04/04/technology/billionaire-space-race/index.html
↑ Barbier, Reid. "The Purpose and Mission of the Space Force" (in en). https://www.american.edu/sis/centers/security-technology/the-purpose-and-mission-of-the-space-force.cfm. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
↑ "Space Force Members Will Be Called 'Guardians'" (in en). NPR.org. https://www.npr.org/2020/12/19/948375055/space-force-members-will-be-called-guardians.
↑ https://www.popsci.com/spacexs-falcon-heavy-launch-was-joyful-success/
↑ "Why Mississippi voted to change its flag after decades of debate" (in en). NBC News. https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/why-mississippi-voted-change-its-flag-after-decades-debate-n1232607.
↑ Stenglein, Elaine Kamarck and Christine (6 December 2019). "What do we need to know about the border wall?". https://www.brookings.edu/policy2020/votervital/what-do-we-need-to-know-about-the-border-wall/. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
↑ "Timeline: President Trump’s Executive Order on Immigration" (in en). https://www.hamilton.edu/offices/dos/international-student-services/immigration-resources/timeline-president-trump-s-executive-order-on-immigration. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
↑ "Biden Has Promised to End Trump's Muslim and African 'Travel Ban'.". Time. https://time.com/5907628/muslim-african-ban/.
↑ "Here Are the Facts About President Trump's Family Separation Policy". Time. https://time.com/5314769/family-separation-policy-donald-trump/.
↑ "Trump's Executive Order On Family Separation: What It Does And Doesn't Do" (in en). NPR.org. https://www.npr.org/2018/06/20/622095441/trump-executive-order-on-family-separation-what-it-does-and-doesnt-do.
↑ CNN, By Tal Kopan (29 June 2018). "Government never had specific plan to reunify families, court testimony shows" (in en). CNN Digital. https://www.cnn.com/2018/06/29/politics/family-separations-reunification-never-plan-court/index.html.
↑ "Deported U.S. Veterans Feel Abandoned By The Country They Defended" (in en). NPR.org. https://www.npr.org/local/309/2019/06/21/733371297/deported-u-s-veterans-feel-abandoned-by-the-country-they-defended.
↑ "'I Don't Feel Safe': Puerto Rico Preps For Next Storm Without Enough Government Help" (in en). NPR.org. https://www.npr.org/2019/07/03/737001701/i-don-t-feel-safe-puerto-rico-preps-for-another-maria-without-enough-government. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
↑ Mazzei, Patricia; Rosa, Alejandra (20 September 2019). "Hurricane Maria, 2 Years Later: ‘We Want Another Puerto Rico’". The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2019/09/20/us/puerto-rico-hurricane-maria.html. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
↑ https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2018/05/31/these-are-the-four-largest-protests-since-trump-was-inaugurated/
↑ https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/21/us/womens-march.html
↑ https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2019/02/01/the-2019-womens-march-was-bigger-than-you-think/
↑ https://americanhistory.si.edu/creating-icons/women%E2%80%99s-march-2017
↑ https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/02/22/514988040/key-moments-in-the-dakota-access-pipeline-fight
↑ https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/ohio-man-sentenced-life-prison-federal-hate-crimes-related-august-2017-car-attack-rally
↑ https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-40912509
↑ https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/31/us/george-floyd-investigation.html
↑ https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2020/may/26/george-floyd-killing-police-video-fbi-investigation
↑ https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/07/03/us/george-floyd-protests-crowd-size.html
↑ https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2020/05/31/journalists-blinded-injured-arrested-covering-george-floyd-protests/5299374002/
↑ https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2020/may/29/black-cnn-reporter-arrested-on-air-minneapolis-protests-george-floyd-killing
↑ https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2020/06/03/george-floyd-protests-minneapolis-police-violated-1st-amendment-suit/3132796001/
↑ https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2020/jul/17/portland-protests-federal-officers-george-floyd
↑ https://www.npr.org/2020/07/17/892277592/federal-officers-use-unmarked-vehicles-to-grab-protesters-in-portland
↑ https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2020/jul/29/trump-administration-portland-protests-federal-agents
↑ https://www.npr.org/2020/06/01/867532070/trumps-unannounced-church-visit-angers-church-officials
↑ https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/12/us/college-admissions-cheating-scandal.html
↑ https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/13/us/college-admissions-race.html
↑ https://www.cnbc.com/2019/03/22/college-applicants-from-families-in-the-1-percent-have-a-big-edge.html
↑ https://www.nytimes.com/2020/02/05/us/politics/impeachment-vote.html
↑ https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/cdcresponse/about-COVID-19.html
↑ https://www.who.int/westernpacific/emergencies/covid-19
↑ https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/22/us/coronavirus-sequencing.html
↑ https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/13/us/politics/coronavirus-national-emergency.html
↑ https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/26/us/coronavirus-senate-stimulus-package.html
↑ https://www.npr.org/2020/03/26/821457551/whats-inside-the-senate-s-2-trillion-coronavirus-aid-package
↑ Imbert, Fred (19 February 2020). "S&P 500 and Nasdaq jump to record highs, Dow climbs more than 100 points" (in en). CNBC. https://www.cnbc.com/2020/02/19/stock-market-wall-street-in-focus-amid-coronavirus-outbreak.html. Retrieved 22 September 2020.
↑ https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/08/business/economy/us-economy-recession-2020.html
↑ https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/us-politics/trump-lockdown-protest-twitter-video-reporter-journalist-a9518296.html
↑ https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-expresses-support-for-angry-anti-shutdown-protesters-as-more-states-lift-coronavirus-lockdowns/2020/05/01/25570dbe-8b9f-11ea-8ac1-bfb250876b7a_story.html
↑ https://www.npr.org/sections/coronavirus-live-updates/2020/04/28/847457974/hospital-ship-usns-comfort-scheduled-to-sail-from-new-york-city
↑ "Covid: Donald Trump and Melania test positive". 2 October 2020. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-54381848. Retrieved 9 November 2020.
↑ Jansen, Bart. "As cases spike, Trump's ad strategy targeting senior citizens: I recovered from COVID-19, so can America". https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/elections/2020/10/17/election-2020-trump-touts-his-own-covid-recovery-pitch-seniors/5967676002/. Retrieved 9 November 2020.
↑ "UPS Executive: Vaccine Shipments Will Reach Distribution Centers Monday Morning" (in en). NPR.org. https://www.npr.org/2020/12/13/946101104/ups-executive-vaccine-shipments-will-reach-distribution-centers-monday-morning.
↑ "Economic Consequences Of The Census : The Indicator from Planet Money" (in en). NPR.org. https://www.npr.org/2020/10/19/925576324/economic-consequences-of-the-census.
↑ "4 Differences In How Biden And Trump Campaign Right Now" (in en). https://www.npr.org/2020/09/15/913137954/4-differences-in-how-biden-and-trump-campaign-right-now. Retrieved 20 November 2020.
↑ a b "The Post Office Is Deactivating Mail Sorting Machines Ahead of the Election" (in en). https://www.vice.com/en/article/n7wk9z/the-post-office-is-deactivating-mail-sorting-machines-ahead-of-the-election. Retrieved 20 November 2020.
↑ Broadwater, Luke; Fuchs, Hailey (29 October 2020). "Lingering Mail Problems Worry Voters in Final Week of Election". https://www.nytimes.com/2020/10/29/us/politics/post-office-mail-voting-2020-election.html. Retrieved 20 November 2020.
↑ "US election: Joe Biden vows to 'unify' country in victory speech". 8 November 2020. https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/election-us-2020-54859636. Retrieved 9 November 2020.
↑ "Supreme Court Spurns Partisanship in Trump Election Case" (in en). Bloomberg.com. 13 December 2020. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-12-13/supreme-court-spurns-partisanship-in-denying-trump-election-case.
↑ "US Supreme Court rejects Trump-backed bid to overturn election". BBC News. 12 December 2020. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-55283024.
↑ "'Don't Game Our System': How The Race To Georgia Senate Runoff Is Heating Up" (in en). https://www.npr.org/2020/11/20/936826277/dont-game-our-system-how-the-race-to-georgia-senate-runoff-is-heating-up. Retrieved 20 November 2020.
↑ "Jon Ossoff Wins Georgia Runoff, Handing Democrats Senate Control" (in en). NPR.org. https://www.npr.org/2021/01/06/952417689/democrat-jon-ossoff-claims-victory-over-david-perdue-in-georgia-runoff.
↑ Ramey, Deanna Paul, Brent Kendall and Corinne (9 November 2020). "Election 2020: What Are the Trump Legal Claims?". https://www.wsj.com/articles/election-2020-what-are-the-trump-legal-claims-11604876612. Retrieved 9 November 2020.
↑ "Donald Trump’s refusal to concede is harming America". The Economist. 21 November 2020. https://www.economist.com/united-states/2020/11/21/donald-trumps-refusal-to-concede-is-harming-america. Retrieved 20 November 2020.
↑ Sanger, David E.; Perlroth, Nicole (18 November 2020). "Trump Fires Christopher Krebs, Official Who Disputed Election Fraud Claims". https://www.nytimes.com/2020/11/17/us/politics/trump-fires-christopher-krebs.html. Retrieved 20 November 2020.
↑ "'This Was A Scam': In Recorded Call, Trump Pushed Official To Overturn Georgia Vote" (in en). NPR.org. https://www.npr.org/2021/01/03/953012128/this-was-a-scam-in-recorded-call-trump-pushed-official-to-overturn-georgia-vote.
↑ Tan, Rebecca; Jamison, Peter; Flynn, Meagan; Cox, John Woodrow. "Trump supporters storm U.S. Capitol, with one woman killed and tear gas fired". Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/trump-supporters-storm-capitol-dc/2021/01/06/58afc0b8-504b-11eb-83e3-322644d82356_story.html.
↑ "Capitol Reels After Pro-Trump Mob Breaches Building; Woman Is Killed" (in en). NPR.org. https://www.npr.org/sections/congress-electoral-college-tally-live-updates/2021/01/06/954028436/u-s-capitol-locked-down-amid-escalating-far-right-protests.
↑ Ballhaus, Natalie Andrews, Kristina Peterson and Rebecca (14 January 2021). "President Trump Impeached by the House for Second Time". Wall Street Journal. https://www.wsj.com/articles/trump-to-face-impeachment-vote-over-capitol-riot-11610543781.
This is an analysis of the journal article "Exercise and Respiratory Training Improve Exercise Capacity and Quality of Life in Patients With Severe Chronic Pulmonary Hypertension by Mereles, et al., (2006) [1]
Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is an increase of blood pressure in the arteries of the lungs [2].
. This means the arteries that lead to the lungs are hard and narrow. This leads to the heart having to work harder to pump blood through the body [2].
This reduced blood flow to the lungs means less oxygen available for the body to use. This can lead to shortness of breath, tiredness, chest pain, swelling of the legs and a fast heart beat [2] [3].  Due to these symptoms quality of life is reduced and exercise is more difficult.
PH onset is gradual [4]. There is no cure [2]. and the cause is often unknown [4]. Treatment depends on the type of disease [5]. Some measures can be used such as oxygen therapy, diuretics and medication to prevent clotting[6].
The study was conducted in Germany. The informed consent for this study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of Heidelberg [1].
The study was a 15-week randomized controlled trial. Patients were randomly assigned to either a primary training group or a sedentary control group using a permuted block randomization procedure [1]. After the 15 weeks the sedentary control group became the secondary exercise group and performed the same exercise program as the primary exercise group.
What did the Research Involve?
30 Patients with severe chronic PH participated. Participants were required to be stable and compensated under optimized medical therapy (such as endothelin antagonists, iloprost, sildenafil, calcium channel blockers, anticoagulants, diuretics, and supplemental oxygen) for at least 3 months before entering the study.
Participants were required to be aged between 18 and 75 years (participants ranged from 19-72).
Most fit under World Health Organization (WHO) functional class II to IV.
Participants could have no recent syncope, and no skeletal or muscle abnormalities prohibiting participation in an exercise program [1].
Patients in each group resided in the hospital for the initial 3 weeks of the study period and continued with a program at home for another 12 weeks. Medication remained the same.
Patients were evaluated at baseline, week 3, and week 15.
Primary end points were the changes from baseline to week 15 in the distance walked in 6 minutes and in scores of the Short Form Health Survey quality-of-life questionnaire. Changes in WHO functional class, Borg scale, and parameters of echocardiography and gas exchange also were assessed.
The control group followed a common rehabilitation program based on a healthy diet and physical therapy such as massage and muscular relaxation without the use of exercise.
The exercise group performed a low intensity (10 to 60 W) interval bicycle ergometer session 7 days a week. 60 minutes of walking was performed 5 days a week and 30 minutes of dumbbell training was performed with light weights (500-1000g) 5 days a week [1].
What were the Basic Results?
At week 15, patients in the primary and secondary training groups had an improved 6-minute walking distance; the mean difference between the control and the primary training group was 111 m (95% confidence interval, 65 to 139 m; P<0.001). Exercise training was well tolerated and improved scores of quality of life, WHO functional class, peak oxygen consumption, oxygen consumption at the anaerobic threshold, and achieved workload [1].
Systolic pulmonary artery pressure values at rest did not change significantly after 15 weeks of exercise and respiratory training (from 61±18 to 54±18 mm Hg) within the training group. This suggests exercise is not a cure for PH, rather it adds additional benefits to medication [1].
Figure 1 shows Quality of life values before and after exercise (sf-36 questionnaire). All values were rated higher in the exercise group apart from the mental health section.
What Conclusions Can We Take From This Research?
It is commonly believed that physical activity or training may have a negative effect for patients with Advanced[7]. Due to this fact often times doctors tend to shy away from or even advise against exercise for those with advanced PH due to the high risk[8]. Little is known about the affect of life style changes such as exercise on patients with advanced PH. This is the first prospective, controlled, randomized study investigating an exercise program and shows low intensity exercise as a promising, powerful and safe adjunct therapy for patients with PH.
Practical Advice?
It is important to keep in mind risks and limitations that the illness may cause. In this study physiological markers were closely monitored to maintain levels in a perceived safe zone. It is important to seek expert advice and supervision undergoing an exercise program. As research continues a better understanding will be gained on what should, and should not, be done. It is clear that lifestyle changes can and will continue to be an effective method to improve health and well being, including for those with chronic illness and disease.
This study shows similar improvements for patients with Inoperable or Residual Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0041603.
This is a study on the Efficacy and Safety of Exercise Training for Patients with PH: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26185169
For more information regarding the practical side of exercise and PH (Pulmonary Hypertension Association) visit: https://phassociation.org/patients/living-with-ph/exercise-and-ph/
↑ a b c d e f g  Mereles, et al., (October 2, 2006)"Exercise and Respiratory Training Improve Exercise Capacity and Quality of Life in Patients With Severe Chronic Pulmonary Hypertension".114:1482-1489 Retrieved from:http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/114/14/1482.full
↑ a b c d "What Is Pulmonary Hypertension? – NHLBI, NIH". NHLBI. 2 August 2011. National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. Retrieved from: https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/health-topics/topics/pah.
↑ "Pulmonary arterial hypertension". Genetics Home Reference. October 10, 2017. Retrieved from: https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/condition/pulmonary-arterial-hypertension. Retrieved 30 July2017.
↑ a b "How Is Pulmonary Hypertension Diagnosed? – NHLBI, NIH". NHLBI. 2 August 2011. National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. Retrieved from: https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/health-topics/topics/pah/diagnosis.
↑ "How Is Pulmonary Hypertension Treated? – NHLBI, NIH". NHLBI. 2 August 2011. National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. Retrieved from: https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/health-topics/topics/pah/treatment.
↑  Anna R. Hemnes "Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension – NORD (National Organization for Rare Disorders)". NORD. 2015. Retrieved from: https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/pulmonary-arterial-hypertension/.
↑ Badesch DB, Abman SH, Ahearn GS, Barst RJ, McCrory DC, Simonneau G, McLaughlin VV. Medical therapy for pulmonary arterial hypertension: ACCP evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. Chest. 2004;  126:  35S–62S. CrossRefPubMed
↑ Gaine SP, Rubin LJ. "Primary pulmonary hypertension".Published: 03 May 2003. Lancet. 1998;  352:  719–725. CrossRefPubMed. Retrieved from: http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(03)13167-4/fulltext
THE UTOPIAN FREE-TRADER.
"If I were but one of His Majesty's ministers! …
"Well, what would you do?
"I should begin by—by—faith, by being very much at a loss.
For it is clear I could only be a minister in consequence of
I lost the favour of the majority, I should be no longer one of
His Majesty's ministers."
"But suppose yourself already a minister, and that you
"I should inquire on what side justice lay."
"I should inquire on what side utility lay."
"I should inquire whether justice and utility were in harmony, or ran counter to one another."
"And if you found they were not in harmony?
Template:Gap"Je dirais au roi Philippe;
Template:Gap Reprenez votre portefeuille.
Mais ne voyez-vous pas que cela vaut bien mieux
"But if you found that the just and the useful were one and the same thing?"
"Then I should go straight forward."
"True; but to realize utility by means of justice, a third thing is needed."
"In assuming that I had the majority on my side."
"A most dangerous concession, I fear; for it implies that the
"And if they see clearly all this, good results will work themselves out, so to speak, of their own accord."
"You always bring me back to this, that no reform is possible apart from the progress of general intelligence."
"Assuming this progress, every needed reform will infallibly follow."
"True; but this presupposed progress is a work of time.
Suppose it accomplished, what would you do? I am anxious
"I should begin by reducing the rate of postage to a penny."
"I have heard you speak of a halfpenny."[1]
"Yes, but as I have other reforms in view, I should proceed
"Fine prudence, to be sure! You have already landed yourself in a deficit of 30 millions of francs."
"Then I should reduce the salt-tax to 10 francs."
↑ See chap. xii. of Sophismes, second series, post’.
Numerous Universities offer courses on the design and programming of Operating Systems Kernels. This textbook is designed for the students of such courses. Please note, however, that while this book is aimed at individuals who hope, either professionally or as a hobby, to work on programming operating systems in the future, it should not be used as an organisational space for creating a new operating system. Rather, this book is aimed at discussing key issues in the design of Operating Systems, and existing theories about doing so effectively, from a Neutral Point of View.
Also, this Wikibook is focused on single-box operating systems. None of the Wikipedia:TOP500 computers are like that — most of them distribute their operating system in the way described in the Building a Beowulf Cluster Wikibook (many boxes in one building), and even more widely geographically distributed systems are also becoming important.
If you are interested in creating new operating systems you might want to check out...
How to Make a Computer Operating System
C# Open Source Managed Operating System
A long list of academic OS development projects
"So if I wanted to try and make my own operating system how would I go about it?"
A few links and tips: "Create your own Operating System!"
Previous: Contents — Next: Introduction
Computing » Computer Science » Computer Programming » Ada Programming
This language feature is available from Ada 95 on.
Ada.Float_Text_IO is a unit of the Predefined Language Environment since Ada 95.
This page is a stub. You can improve the Ada Programming wikibook by reading the contributing guidelines and expanding it.
--                     Standard Ada library specification
--   SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause and LicenseRef-AdaReferenceManual
Search for examples of Ada.Float_Text_IO in: Rosetta Code, GitHub or this Wikibook.
Search for any post related to Ada.Float_Text_IO in: Stack Overflow, comp.lang.ada or any Ada related page.
A.10.9: Input-Output for Real Types (Annotated)
Specification: a-flteio.ads
Specification: textio/a-flteio.ads
This is a template for new guides and recipes. Make a brief statement about the purpose of this specific guide you're making. Remember that no copyrighted material can be added to this book without the authors explicit accept and please ackowledge sources of information and ideas with links to websites and references.
Status for this guide: Finished, Not yet finished, Check recipes...(leave the appropriate)
Choose a fitting safety class for this description
Too dangerous! (We do not make this experiment because …)
Very dangerous (Should only be attempted after careful training)
Dangerous - Please be aware of this or the other thing... (Untrained people can do this experiment under supervision and guidance)
Harmless (The most dangerous thing is this insignificant little petitesse)
The show performer: Glasses / Lab coat / Nothing / Fire extinguisher / Wet towel and a bucket of water / Eye flushing bottle
Audience/participants: Safety screens / Hearing protection (a finger in the ear is often a help).
You'll need the following - make a list
Preparation time, Performance time, Clean-up time.
End with explaining how to properly get rid of waste products
Now the reader knows the experiment, give a closer description of possible dangers.
What other things can sometimes affect the result of the experiment. Maybe the humidity or cleanliness of the glass ware is an issue.
What to consider when preparing. How to make it more spectacular. What can be difficult to achieve 'on stage' that normally is easy when practising.
What other experiments are good to that have in relation to this one?
What should you beware of that can make the experiment boring?
Here you can give a more quantitative and mathematical description of what happens. What fundamental laws are involved or demonstrated by this experiment etc. Remember to explain jargon/expressions from the laboratory.
Do you meet things like this in daily life - give examples!
Things we do not yet know and should find an answer to - maybe how it actually works etc.
Websites with more info the end.
This is just a guide and it can contain both errors and omissions. Always make experiments in small versions before proceeding to larger quantities where things could become dangerous. Ask around if you have any doubts before starting and do not start on a procedure you do not feel you understand and is qualified to perform.
Undo (Ctrl+Z) working in the Alignment Wizard. (Alessandra Muzzi)
Alignment: Able to align more than two languages at a time. (Johan Kok)
Alignment window: Find and replace function. (Johan Kok)
Alignment window: A button to "Close and return later". Also to remember the position. (Johan Kok)
An option to display the AutoSearch window when aligning files so that you can see which terms are already in the DVTDB and to avoid sending/creating duplicate DVTDB entries. (??)
Note: The more polite or formal forms of some phrases — those which make use of the word pô — should generally be used when speaking to persons of authority and seniority, or to show reverence to the person to whom spoken. With friends and in casual situations, pô need not be used. Also, in modern written Filipino/Tagalog, diacritical marks are not essential, and are omitted.
Hello/How are you?
I’m fine, and you?
(ma-BU-ti na-MAN, iKAW?)
That one (object far from person spoken to)
That one (object near to/held by person spoken to)
How much?
Where's the bathroom?
Nasaán ang banyo?
(NA-sa-AN ang BAN-yoh?)
Anó ang pangalan mo?
(ah-NOH ang pa-NGA-lan MOH?)
/hɪn"di ko (po) ʔa"lam/
/hɪn"di ko (po) na"iɪntindihan/
(hin-DI ko (PO) na-I-in-tin-di-han)
Nakalimutan ko.
I forgot.
Masamâ (pô) ang pakiramdám ko (literally, “I’m not feeling well”)
(ma-sa-MAH po ang pa-ki-ram-DAM ko)
Do you speak English?
Marunong ka bang magsalitâ ng Ingglés?
Height: 1.2m/3'11"
Weight: 47kg/104.0lb
Gender Distribution: 50% Male
Move types which are good on Absol: Bug, Fighting
Move types which are bad on Absol: Dark , Ghost
Move types which don't effect Absol: Psychic
All other move types are normal effectiveness on Absol.
Ruby / Sapphire Emerald XD / Colosseum
RS/FL: Aerial Ace, Attract, Blizzard, Calm Mind, Cut, Double Team, Facade, Fire Blast, Flamethrower, Flash, Frustration, Hail, Hidden Power, Hyper Beam, Ice Beam, Iron Tail, Protect, Rain Dance, Rest, Return, Rock Smash, Sandstorm, Secret Power, Shadow Ball, Shock Wave, Snatch, Strength, Sunny Day, Taunt, Thief, Thunder, Thunderbolt, Torment, Toxic, Water Pulse
The return statement causes execution to jump from the current function to whatever function called the current function. An optional a result (return variable) can be returned. A function may have more than one return statement (but returning the same type).
Within the body of the function, the return statement should NOT return a pointer or a reference that has the address in memory of a local variable that was declared within the function, because as soon as the function exits, all local variables are destroyed and your pointer or reference will be pointing to some place in memory which you no longer own, so you cannot guarantee its contents.  If the object to which a pointer refers is destroyed, the pointer is said to be a dangling pointer until it is given a new value; any use of the value of such a pointer is invalid.  Having a dangling pointer like that is dangerous; pointers or references to local variables must not be allowed to escape the function in which those local (aka automatic) variables live.
However, within the body of your function, if your pointer or reference has the address in memory of a data type, struct, or class that you dynamically allocated the memory for, using the new operator, then returning said pointer or reference would be reasonable:
{           //allocated memory address is valid code
In most cases, a better approach in that case would be to return an object such as a smart pointer which could manage the memory; explicit memory management using widely distributed calls to new and delete (or malloc and free) is tedious, verbose and error prone. At the very least, functions which return dynamically allocated resources should be carefully documented.  See this book's section on memory management for more details.
In this case the SOMETYPE object pointed to by the returned pointer may not be modified, and if SOMETYPE is a class then only const member functions may be called on the SOMETYPE object.
As a general rule methods should be const except when it's not possible to make them such. While getting used to the semantics you can use the compiler to inform you when a method may not be const -- it will (usually) give an error if you declare a method const that needs to be non-const.
The iscntrl() function returns non-zero if its argument is a control character (between 0 and 0x1F or equal to 0x7F). Otherwise, zero is returned.
Stokes shift is the difference (in wavelength or frequency units) between positions of the band maxima of the absorption and emission spectra (fluorescence and Raman being two examples) of the same electronic transition. It is named after Irish physicist George G. Stokes.
When a system (be it a molecule or atom) absorbs a photon, it gains energy and enters an excited state. One way for the system to relax is to emit a photon, thus losing its energy (another method would be the loss of heat energy). When the emitted photon has less energy than the absorbed photon, this energy difference is the Stokes shift.  If the emitted photon has more energy, the energy difference is called an anti-Stokes shift; this extra energy comes from dissipation of thermal phonons in a crystal lattice, cooling the crystal in the process. Yttrium oxysulfide doped with gadolinium oxysulfide is a common industrial anti-Stokes pigment, absorbing in the near-infrared and emitting in the visible portion of the spectrum.
Stokes fluorescence is the re-emission of longer wavelength photons (lower frequency or energy) by a molecule that has absorbed photons of shorter wavelengths (higher frequency or energy). Both absorption and radiation (emission) of energy are unique characteristics of a particular molecular structure. If a material has a direct bandgap in the range of visible light, the light shining on it is absorbed, causing electrons to become excited to a higher energy state. The electrons remain in the excited state for about 10-8 seconds. This number varies over several orders of magnitude, depending on the sample and is known as the fluorescence lifetime of the sample. The electron returns to the ground state and energy is emitted.
Lakowicz, J.R. 1983. Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, Plenum Press, New York. ISBN 0-387-31278-1.
Guilbault, G.G. 1990. Practical Fluorescence, Second Edition, Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York. ISBN 0-8247-8350-6.
2.9 ·ese, ·eso, ·esa
Hodie John va viagear a Comto Dracula. Il vide in li hotel li hotelero, e vide un lettre in li manu del hotelero de Comto Dracula. Il di in german: "Salute, ples dar me li lettre." Li hotelero da le li lettre.
Poy il questiona in german: “Quo es li lettre? Quo scrit Dracula in li lettre?” Ma li hotelero di: “Yo ne parla german, yo ne parla german.” Jonathan pensa: “Strangi! Yer yo parlat con li hotelero in german, e nu il di que il ne parla german! Pro quo?” Il questiona li hotelero: “Esque vu save qui es Comto Dracula?” ma nu li hotelero ne parla.
Jonathan pensa: “Strangi! Yo parlat con li hotelero in german. Il deve parlar german, ma il di que il ne parla it! Yo deve questionar le plu, ma yo ne have témpor. Yo deve departer.”
Nu Jonathan es in su chambre in li hotel. Pos un hora il deve departer. Ma vi! Un old fémina venit a su chambre.
Jonathan: “Yo es bon, yo ea vider un amíco. Ples ne parlar pri mal coses.”
Li old fémina: “Ples ne departer! Ples ne departer!”
Jonathan: “No, yo deve departer. Ples ne plorar.”
Jonathan: “Ah...li angleses ne ama crucifixes...ma mersí. Ples ne plorar.” Jonathan pensa: “In Anglia noi ama cruces, ma ne crucifixes. In Rumania li persones ama crucifixes, ne cruces.”
Jonathan esset in Anglia e eat a Rumania.
Jonathan parlat al hotelero in german, ma li hotelero dit que il ne parla german.
Ili ne have un, du, li...: pensar, plorar, vi, ma, ples...ili ne es coses.
Un old fémina quel da crucifixes
Un old fémina qui da crucifixes
Jonathan ne have témpor; il deve departer.
Ma li hotelero save german; il deve parlar german!
Jonathan pensa que li hotelero deve parlar german. Il di: ples parlar german!
Jonathan vide li hotelero: il vide le.
Li hotelero da Jonathan li lettre: il da le li lettre.
Jonathan questiona li hotelero pro quo il ne parla german. Il questiona le.
Omnicos es bon = ne hay un mal cose (hay deci coses, e deci coses es bon)
Omnicos es mal = ne hay un bon cose (hay deciquin coses, e deciquin coses es mal)
Yo save omnicos = ne hay un cose quel yo ne save
Lingwa de planeta - neutral language for international communication
What should an international communication language look like?
Perhaps it should be neutral. That is, it should not belong to any special nation (like English, for example). Perhaps it should be easy from the point of view of grammar. That is, it shouldn't contain many different forms to be learned (like Russian, for example). Perhaps it should be easy from the point of view of pronunciation. That is, its sound should be easy for native speakers of different languages to pronounce. It should be, perhaps, euphonious. That is, the speech in it should sound beautiful, and the language itself should be pleasant to speak because of that. Perhaps it should contain international and other widely spread words - as they are international indeed. Also it should perhaps be quite natural, without excessive schematization. And finally, it should perhaps resemble the native language for the speaker of any native language... Just to be an ideal international language indeed.
Lingwa de planeta, or Lidepla for short, is such a language. It meets all the above-mentioned claims. It was created as a harmonious whole on the basis of the most widespread modern languages (English, German, French, Spanish and Portuguese, as well as Chinese, Russian, Hindi and Arabic).
Certainly, today it is rather difficult to find a Lidepla-speaking person in a foreign country. But the language, and the learning of it, can still be rather useful. Really, you are going to learn how to express yourself clearly in a non-native language, and this is one of the principal tasks that a person learning their first foreign language has to solve. (It is well known that every new language is easier to learn than the previous one.) Also, you are going to learn about 500 words that are very similar (both in phonetics and in meaning) to really frequent words of the most widely spoken modern languages.
So one can even claim that Lingwa de planeta is not a conlang, but rather a whole planet Creole language.
The alphabet of Lidepla is based on the Latin script. It contains 25 letters ("q" isn't used, "c" occurs only in "ch"):
Lidepla letters are read the same way in all positions.
In Lidepla there are 17 basic consonants and 5 vowels.
The letters "i" and "y" mean the same sounds, but "y" is never stressed: "pyu" (more). Also "y" on the end of the word shows that the word is not a verb:  krai (to cry) - skay (sky) .
All the consonants are pronounced in the same way in any position.
Letter "x" means the "ks" combination, but can be a little voiced when between vowels: examen (exam), before a consonant may be pronounced as "s": expliki (to explain).
The general rule is as follows: the vowel before the last consonant or "y" is stressed.
In combinations  ao; au, eu; ai, oi, ei the first vowel is stressed.
There are some exceptions though, as Lidepla tries to keep the pronunciation close to widespread patterns. You don't need to memorize the rule, just read the examples attentively. You can also watch the short special video. (In the manual all the special cases are specially marked.)
In some special cases the non-standard stress is indicated by doubled vowel: kwantitaa quantity, kwalitaa quality (and all the abstract nouns with suffix –(i)taa); namastee how do you do, hello, adyoo bye, bifoo before, malgree in spite of.
The stress doesn't change when forming the following:
Compound words retain the stress of the components.
The Photography Honor is a component of the Artisan Master Award
.
1 1. Explain the principles of camera construction, what the camera lens does, the effect of light on light-sensitive film, and the action of developers.
2 2. What is meant by the "speed" of the film? What does ASA/ISO mean?
3 3. How are shutter speed, lens aperture, and film speed related?
4 4. Give the principal uses of photography.
5 5. Take print or slide pictures illustrating at least eight of the following techniques. Use comparison pictures for illustration
6 6. Do one of the following
6.1 a. Tell how black and white film is developed into negatives and print eight of your own pictures.
Explain the principles of camera construction, what the camera lens does, the effect of light on light-sensitive film, and the action of developers.
Principle of a pinhole camera. Light rays from an object pass through a small hole to form an image.
A pinhole camera is a camera without a conventional glass lens. An extremely small hole in a very thin material can focus light by limiting all rays from a scene through a single point. To produce a reasonably clear image, the aperture has to be a small pinhole on the order of 0.5 mm (0.02 inches) or less. The shutter of a pinhole camera usually consists of a hand operated flap of some light-proof material to cover and uncover the pinhole. Pinhole cameras require much longer exposure times than conventional cameras because of the small aperture; typical exposure times can range from 5 seconds to hours or days.
Surprise! A camera is nothing more than:
a chemical element, or, the film.
a mechanical element, usually the camera body.
In our pinhole camera, light from various points of the tree travels through the tiny pinhole and reaches the back of our pinhole camera where the image of the tree is upside down. The trick is to correctly expose the film which is at the back of the camera.
A camera lens usually has an aperture adjustment mechanism to control the amount of light that may pass. It also has a shutter, to control the length of time during which light may pass through the lens.
Effect of more light (read: longer exposure) on film
Photographic film is a sheet of plastic which is coated with an emulsion containing light-sensitive silver halide salts with variable crystal sizes that determine the sensitivity and resolution of the film. When the emulsion (in this film) is subjected to sufficient exposure to light it forms an invisible image.
In black-and-white photographic film there is usually one layer of silver salts. When the exposed grains are developed, the silver salts are converted to metallic silver, which block light and appear as the black part of the film negative.
Color film uses at least three layers. Dyes added to the silver salts make the crystals sensitive to different colors. Typically the blue-sensitive layer is on top, followed by the green and red layers. During development, the silver salts are converted to metallic silver, as with black and white film. The by-products of this reaction form colored dyes. The silver is converted back to silver salts in the bleach step of development. It is removed from the film in the fix step. Some films, like Kodacolor II, have as many as 12 emulsion layers, with upwards of 20 different chemicals in each layer.
In film developing, photographic developer (or just developer) is a chemical that makes the latent image on the film (or print) visible. It does this by reducing the silver halides that have been exposed to light to metals of elemental silver in the gelatine matrix. As a generalisation, the longer a developer is allowed to work, the greater the degree of reduction of the silver halide crystals to silver and therefore the darker the image.
What is meant by the "speed" of the film? What does ASA/ISO mean?
Film speed is the measure of a photographic film's sensitivity to light. Stock with lower sensitivity (lower ISO speed rating) requires a longer exposure and is thus called a slow film, while stock with higher sensitivity (higher ISO speed rating) can shoot the same scene with a shorter exposure and is called a fast film.
The standard known as ISO 5800:1987 from the
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) defines both a linear scale and a logarithmic scale for measuring film speed.
In the ISO linear scale, which corresponds to the older ASA scale, doubling the speed of a film (that is, halving the amount of light that is necessary to expose the film) implies doubling the numeric value that designates the film speed.  In the ISO logarithmic scale, which corresponds to the older DIN scale, doubling the speed of a film implies adding 3° to the numeric value that designates the film speed.  For example, a film rated ISO 200/24° is twice as sensitive as a film rated ISO 100/21°.
How are shutter speed, lens aperture, and film speed related?
Example of photos taken at different shutter speeds
Shutter speed is the time for which the shutter is held open during the taking of a photograph to allow light to reach the film or image sensor (in a digital camera).
Combined with adjusting of the lens aperture, the shutter speed regulates how much light the camera will record. For a given exposure, a fast shutter speed demands a larger aperture to avoid under-exposure, just as a slow shutter speed is offset by a very small aperture to avoid over-exposure. Long shutter speeds are often used in low light conditions, such as at night.
Shutter speed is measured in seconds. A typical shutter speed for photographs taken in sunlight is 1/125th of a second. In addition to its effect on exposure, shutter speed changes the way movement appears in the picture. Very short shutter speeds are used to freeze fast-moving subjects, for example at sporting events. Very long shutter speeds are used to intentionally blur a moving subject for artistic effect.
Film speed is the measure of a photographic film's sensitivity to light. Stock with lower sensitivity (lower ISO speed rating) requires a longer exposure and is thus called a slow film, while stock with higher sensitivity (higher ISO speed rating) can shoot the same scene with a shorter exposure and is called a fast film.
Give the principal uses of photography.
Photography gained the interest of  many scientists and artists from its inception. Scientists have used photography to record and study movements, such as Eadweard Muybridge's study of human and animal locomotion in 1887. Artists are equally interested by these aspects but also try to explore avenues other than the photo-mechanical representation of reality, such as the pictorialist movement. Military, police and security forces use photography for surveillance, recognition and data storage. Photography is used to preserve memories of favorites and as a source of entertainment.
Take print or slide pictures illustrating at least eight of the following techniques. Use comparison pictures for illustration
When we use our eyes, we see the world in three dimensions. The biggest reason for this is because we have two eyes about 1 1/2" apart that give us "two photos" that our brain then interprets as being three-dimensional—big objects are closer than small objects.
However, cameras only have one "eye" the lens, so we have to intentionally take pictures that are "extra" 3-dimensional. One way we can do this by Framing.
Framing uses some element in the photograph to act as a foreground or middle-distance frame which overlaps or highlights the main subject of your photo.
For example, if you're taking a picture of rolling hills, give your picture "depth" by putting a tree or fence post that is closer to you on the right or left hand side of the photograph.
Other examples of Frames include: a tree branch, rocks on a seashore, a friend or an archway.
b. Camera steadiness
Have you ever gotten pictures developed and all you see is a "blur" that was supposed to be a family member? Maybe you've taken a picture through the window of a car while its been moving. This is called camera blur and is most often caused when you're using a "fancy" SLR camera where the exposure setting is 1/125th of a second or slower. However, it can also happen when you don't practice good "camera posture" when composing your photograph.
When you're taking pictures, is very important that the camera doesn't wiggle as you take the picture! Some helpful hints for keeping this from happening are:
Use both hands to steady the camera. One-handed picture taking is hazardous to your photographic health!
If you're using a fancy SLR camera, be sure your exposure time is set equal to or greater than your film speed (ex. If you're using 200 speed film, have it set to 1/250, 1/500, or 1/1000). Otherwise use a table, wall or something else steady to steady yourself as you take the photo.
Most point-and-shoot cameras have this film/exposure time ratio "built-in" to their cameras.**
The best way to hold a camera in a comfortable position but rigidly is to form an imaginary tripod with the camera pressed against your forehead and your elbows against your body. Take a breath, partially exhale, and gently press the shutter button.
Be careful not to get any of your fingers or the camera chord in front of the flash or the lens!!
c. Direction of lighting - front, backlighting, side
Direction of lighting,
Quality of Lighting, & Rule of Thirds
Quiz question (not really. . .) Should the sun be behind the subject you're photographing, beside the subject, or shining on the subject?
People used to think that you could only take good pictures if the sun was behind the photographer (YOU!) shining on the subject they were taking a picture. But that's not true.
For instance, if you want to take a sunset picture and want your framing subject (such as a person walking down the beach) to be a silhouette, the sun should be behind him, shining toward you (back lighting).
Front lighting is best when you want to see the details, like if you're taking a close-up of someone's face. A downfall is, that if the lights too bright, such as in the middle of the day, there might be "glare" in your subject.
Side lighting is great for bringing out shapes and textures, such as a rocky mountain cliff or tree bark.
These two photos are from Mono Lake In California. Notice how different the same rocks look depending on where the light is coming from?
Back lighting is lighting from behind the subject, tends to hide the subject, forming a silhouette. Some good places to use back lighting are a camporee flagpole at sunset, a cow/horse grazing at sunset, or a playground after everyone has gone home for the evening.
Quality of Lighting - Time of Day, shading, etc.
The best light conditions are 1 1/2 hours before sunset or the first hour after sunrise. The reason is that the light isn't SO BRIGHT that it washes out the colors in your picture, but at the same time the shadows are long (which makes side lighting pictures look extra special). Also, the sunset or sunrise gives off a kind of "pink" or "orange" light, which makes many nature pictures look very friendly & special. If you want to know when sunrise and sunset are going to be, check out www.adventist.org's sunset calendar!
Be careful of evening shadows when photographing people. long shadows on faces hide features and expressions!
Pictures taken during the middle of the day will be "stark" with hard lines and minimal shadows. Buildings & some landscapes such as mountains look especially regal or majestic during the middle of the day. Just remember that if you take a picture during the middle of the day, shade the top of the lens of your camera by placing one of your hands or a piece of paper horizontal about 2" above the lens to form a "shade for the lens. This will keep pink & blue "sparks" from showing up on your photos.
When there is no sunshine (on a rainy day) don't give up on taking pictures! Zoom in close on flowers and other colorful objects. The color will be extra deep since its not being "washed out" by the sun. Fog which often accompanies soft rain also makes a very nice soft hazy look. Just be sure to protect you lens from specks of rain!
d. Panning - background blurred with subject in focus
Blurred background with the subject in focus
This technique moves the camera at the same speed of your subject while the picture is being taken. For example, if you are taking a picture of a runner going from your left to your right, you would 'pan' or move your camera with the runner (subject) in your viewfinder and take the picture. This causes the background of your picture to blur because of the camera movement, however, since your subject is moving at the same speed as your camera, your subject will be in focus.
e. Rule of thirds
A Picture looks best when you imagine a tic-tac-toe board on top of your picture you're going to take. Remember that we're wanting a photo to look 3 dimensional! Part of that is arranging it in combination with "Framing" and "Leading Lines" techniques, but putting objects in "3rds" on the photo.
For example: In a mountain scene the landscape in the bottom screen—maybe even a tree or rock to help it look "more 3-D"—the mountains in the middle 3rd, and the sky in the top third.
Another Illustration: If you're taking a picture of a landscape with puffy clouds, take one picture where 2/3 of the picture is composed of the clouds and the landscape fills the bottom 1/3. Then try with 1/3 clouds and 2/3 landscape. Notice how different this same landscape looks with the "3rds" changed from top to bottom!
f. Angle - eye level, high and low angle
Subjects look different depending on where you are in relation to them when you take the picture.
You'll need three photos for this requirement, though they don't have to be of the same object. A High-angle, Mid-angle, and Low-angle photograph.
High angle means: looking down on your subject
Mid-angle means: looking at your subject straight on.
Low-angle means: looking up at your subject
For this requirement, take a subject, such as some tall straight trees, and take a picture looking straight at them, then another one by laying on the ground looking up through the trees. Did the angle make a difference?
g. Level horizon
h. Distance from subject - fill the frame
Have you ever taken a picture of a beautiful flower or some animals but when the photo came back, you had to explain to friends "that dot is a pretty rose," and "that dot over there is a buffalo."?
Filling the frame is all about making your subject (what you're taking a picture of) fill up most of the picture frame. This means standing closer to the subject than you're ordinarily used to doing and making sure there's not a lot of "green space" around your subject.
Take a picture of your whole youth group. Be sure there are some standing and some standing/sitting in front of them. Then, get close enough so that there is almost NO "background green space" around them. You'll be impressed with how nice it is to have a photo that shows the expressions on everybody's face.
Take a picture of your best friend while they're eating at a campout or lockin. Don't try to take a picture of the whole room, but zoom in on their upper body and the top of the table with the plate of food. You'll both laugh when you see the photo that shows how shocked your friend was at your "surprise" picture.
i. Use of leading lines
Leading lines are anything in a photograph that will help lead your eyes towards the main subject. For example, do you want people eyes to travel "down the road into the sunset, just like the bus is doing? Or, do you want people to see the big cafeteria on the hill where you and your fellow pathfinders ate all weekend?
Leading Lines also help your photograph's "depth." If your eyes are able to wander into the picture, then your brain will think the picture looks more real, like the real 3-D world we live in.
Roads: take a picture of a windy road that leads to nowwhere; The road that leads to camporee or the road into the campsite you're staying at this weekend may also be a good leading line.
Tall buildings or tall trees. Take pictures straight up, and use those tall lines to guide your eyes to a Mountain peak, or to the sun / moon shining overhead.
j. Quality of light - shade, sunlight, and time of day
The best light conditions are 1 1/2 hours before sunset or the first hour after sunrise. The reason is that the light isn't SO BRIGHT that it washes out the colors in your picture, but at the same time the shadows are long (which makes side lighting pictures look extra special). Also, the sunset or sunrise gives off a kind of "pink" or "orange" light, which makes many nature pictures look very friendly & special. If you want to know when sunrise and sunset are going to be, check out www.adventist.org's sunset calendar!
Be careful of evening shadows when photographing people. long shadows on faces hide features and expressions!
Pictures taken during the middle of the day will be "stark" with hard lines and minimal shadows. Buildings & some landscapes such as mountains look especially regal or majestic during the middle of the day. Just remember that if you take a picture during the middle of the day, shade the top of the lens of your camera by placing one of your hands or a piece of paper horizontal about 2" above the lens to form a "shade for the lens. This will keep pink & blue "sparks" from showing up on your photos.
When there is no sunshine (on a rainy day) don't give up on taking pictures! Zoom in close on flowers and other colorful objects. The color will be extra deep since its not being "washed out" by the sun. Fog which often accompanies soft rain also makes a very nice soft hazy look. Just be sure to protect you lens from specks of rain!
k. Correct exposure - underexposed, overexposed, and correctly exposed
l. Use of flash - distance and reflective objects
Most flashes should be used no closer to a subject than 6 feet. and more than 20 feet away. Any closer and it will "wash out" your subject, (depending on flash), and any farther away, the light won't even reach.  For example: Have you ever seen people use a flash at a football game, or in a large stadium in hopes of getting photos of the people on the field? The flash won't help because its too far away!
Don't try to use a flash when there is a reflective object directly in front of the lens. For example, a mirror or window behind your friends, or the fishtank glass between you and that shark at SeaWorld. Move off to the side diagonally a little, so that the light, when it flashes off the reflective object, won't bounce directly back to your lens, but instead will bounce into empty space beside you!
Use the flash to fill in shadows. If your subject has side-lighting erasing the features on its face that you want to capture on film, use the flash to erase the shadows. BE SURE you're far enough away, or the whol picture will be blotted out!
Try using a flash when your friends are in a dark cave or room. Arrange them 6 feet away from your camera, then take 2 pictures. One with a flash and one without. Notice the difference. Now take one with your friend(s) only 3 feet away. What happened?
At your next campout, just before sunset grab some friends and have them stand in front of camp, with the sunlight coming from one side, casting shadows on their faces. Take 2 pictures. One with fill-in flash, and one without. What was the difference?
a. Tell how black and white film is developed into negatives and print eight of your own pictures.
Photographic film is a sheet of plastic (polyester, nitrocellulose or cellulose acetate) which is coated with an emulsion containing light-sensitive silver halide salts (bonded by gelatin) with different crystal sizes that determine the sensitivity and resolution of the film. When this emulsion is subjected to sufficient exposure to light, it forms a latent (invisible) image. Chemical processes are then applied to the film to create a visible image, in a process called film developing.
In black-and-white photographic film there is usually one layer of silver salts. When the exposed areas are developed, the silver salts are changed to metallic silver, which block light and appear as the black part of the film negative.
Here is additional information on negatives for a more complete perspective on film & negatives
In photography, a negative may refer to 3 different things, although they are all related.
Film for common 35mm cameras comes in long narrow strips of chemical coated plastic. As each image is captured by the camera onto the film strip, the film strip advances so that the next image is projected onto unexposed film. When the film is developed it is a long strip of small negative images. This strip is often cut into sections for easier handling. In larger cameras this piece of film may be as large as a full sheet of paper, or even larger, with a single image captured onto one piece. Each of these negative images may be referred to as a negative and the entire strip or set of images may be collectively referred to as negatives. These negative images are the master images, from which all other copies will be made, and they are treated with care and handled with caution.
A positive image is a normal image. A negative image is a tonal inversion of a positive image, in which light areas appear dark and vice versa. A negative color image is additionally color reversed, with red areas appearing cyan, greens appearing magenta and blues appearing yellow.
Due to happenstance, many photographic processes create negative images: the chemicals involved react when exposed to light, and during developing these exposed chemicals are retained and become opaque while the unexposed chemicals are washed away. However, when a negative image is created from a negative image (just like multiplying two negative numbers in mathematics) a positive image results  (see Color print film, C-41 process). This makes most chemical based photography a two step process. These are called negative, films and processes. Special films and development processes have been devised such that positive images can be created directly from film, these are called positive, or slide, or (perhaps confusingly) reversal film (see Transparency, Black and white reversal film, E-6 process).
b. Tell how slides are made and develop one roll of film.
Slides (otherwise called transparency) is a still, positive image created on a transparent base using photochemical means. This is opposite of negatives.
The earliest color photography was the Autochrome process. This used an additive 'screen-plate' method which produced a color slide, but was fairly dim and the color resolution was limited by the fineness of the screen-plate.
When developing a slide, the film is first developed to a negative image and then reversed to a positive image.
Eventually, a practical method using a 'subtractive' method was the Kodachrome process, the first commercially successful amateur color film, introduced in 1935. It produced much brighter color transparencies. The Kodachrome K-14 developing process is very complicated and requires technicians with extensive chemistry training, as well as large machinery which is extremely difficult to operate.  This complexity discourages use by home amateurs or small laboratories. In the early 1990s Kodak offered the "K-Lab" process to small labs in an attempt to increase the availability of the K-14 process, but ultimately this was not successful; with the final two K-Lab -equipped labs (Horiuchi Color in Tokyo and Kodak's own plant in Lausanne) shutting down and Kodak discontinuing the "B-I-B" (bag-in-box) K-14 chemistry required for the K-Lab.
After K14 processing was discontinued, Ektachrome and Fujichrome slide films are the only remaining color reversal films that can be readily processed in many cities and larger professional photo studios.
The E-6 process is used for developing Ektachrome, Fujichrome, and other color reversal (slide) photographic film.
Here's the more technical conventional six step processing.
WHEAT is a tuple of value: 245.222.129
Mainstream statistics recognises four levels or scales of measure.  These are
Ratio (combined with Interval as Scale in SPSS)
These are in order from most name-like to most number-like.
Each level has its own characteristics and association with a set of permissible statistical procedures.  Below, the level will be characterised and associated with one or more measures of central tendency, viz., mode, mean, and median.
The Nominal level of measure is used for categorical data, where each value has each been assigned to a discrete category.  For instance, eye color of participants in a study might be nominally (from Latin nomen for name) categorised into groups
The only procedure for quantitative analysis of these data is counting, to discover frequencies of occurrence.  That is, how many individuals are assigned to each category.  The categories are often coded numerically (i.e., assigned a unique number) and named (using the values attribute of the variable).
The only measure of central tendency for nominal data is the mode, which is the most frequently occurring category.  Note that there is no guarantee that a sample will produce a unique modal value.
The Ordinal level of measure is used for data which form discrete categories and can be naturally ranked on some scale.  This ranking is a weak ordering of the data in that two values may share the same rank: the relative rank of a and b is
This is totally wrong, do not use as it is incorrect on 11/11/2018.
An example of ordinal data is income grouping.  While income might be treated as a scalar variable, it is often useful to create categories out of income ranges.  For example, the following groupings have been suggested by the Office of National Statistics[1]
(I might add a ninth band to deal with all cases with income over £51,999)
As with nominal data, these groupings might each be represented by a numeric code.
The central tendency in ordinal data may be represented by the mode (defined above) and by the median, the value that divides the data into equal halves.  This is the middle value when the cases are odd-numbered.  Else, the median is usually taken to be the arithmetic mean (see below) of the two middle values.
The differences between the rank levels of this scale cannot be measured or compared:  while we know that, of ordinal data points a, b, and c, a<b, b<c, and a<c, we do not know if the distance ab is equal to the distance bc.
Interval data values can be ordered and the distances between them compared.  However, the zero point of interval data is arbitrary.  An oft quoted example is the measure of temperature on the Celsius scale.  Here, the freezing point of water is arbitrarily assigned the value zero and the boiling point of water is arbitrarily assigned the value 100.  While 50° is indicated half way between these two marks on the scale, it is not coherently half the boiling point of water. You cannot, for example, logically modify a recipe by halving the indicated oven temperature and doubling the cooking time.
Ratio data is all of: ordered, of comparable distance (successive, integral points on the scale are equally spaced), and on a scale with a true zero point.
For example, consider the measurement of height in meters: some objects have no elevation, which naturally maps to a height of zero meters.
The values can also form ratios, such that any value can be expressed as a ratio of other values.  If we find, for example, three people of heights 1.5m, 1.75m and 2m, we can express any one of these as a multiple of any other.
The central tendency in scale data can be indicated by the mode, the median and the  arithmetic mean.
The first two are discussed above.
The arithmetic mean is the sum of all the data values divided by the number of data points.  In other words, it is what is commonly referred to as the average.
Stevens, S. S.. [http://www.ons.gov.uk/about-statistics/harmonisation/secondary-concepts-and-questions/S4.pdf Harmonised Concepts and Questions for Social Data Sources:
Secondary Standards]. http://www.ons.gov.uk/about-statistics/harmonisation/secondary-concepts-and-questions/S4.pdf.
Continue to Using SPSS and PASW/Understanding the missing values dialog >>
The history of Edmeston, New York: 1940 through 1949
In 1941 the entire New Berlin branch of the New York Ontario & Western Railway (NYO&W) was sold to the Unadilla Valley Railway which ran the branch until 1960 when operations stopped. The New Berlin branch ran from Cooperstown Junction, (just north of Sidney) to New Berlin, and had been extended north to Edmeston in 1895, when the Wharton Valley Railroad agreed to lease the line to the NYO&W.
Table of Contents• Glossary
Applicable Blender version: 2.49.
Due to rapid updates in Blender, some menu items may be different from those mentioned here.
If the menus don't agree then just do what seems logical.
Softbody makes each individual vertex its own object that falls according to gravity and reacts to outside forces like fields. By adjusting the settings, you change the behaviour of the edges that connect the vertices. For example, you can make it so edges can stretch really far (aka elasticity), allowing the vertices to become distant, or you can make the edge stiff, so the vertices will always stay the same distance apart.
To put this in perspective, picture two cloths, one elastic and one cotton. The elastic one has edges that can extend, so if you view them in wire-frame (with vertices and edges visible) you would see the edges are more extended than an equal distance. The cotton one would only stretch a little bit, so the vertices would stay essentially the same distance apart.
We are going to make a big rubber ball, but not a big bouncy one, a flat (and somewhat lifeless) one. Start with a sphere. I would use a cube sphere or an icosphere, UV spheres don't deform well as they have too few vertices. A cube sphere is made by subdividing a cube and doing a "To Sphere" in the Edit window, under Mesh Tools.
Move the sphere up and place a plane below it. Make sure to do this in the right views so that it is aligned properly. Gravity acts on the z-axis (sphere should be above the plane relative to the z axis).
Now for the soft body select the ball and go to the object tab then the physics subtab or whatever your version has. Click "enable softbody" and then turn up 'Grav' to 9.8.  Click off use goal. Press the > arrow key (a few times) and you should see the ball fall. The center will remain in place but this is not a problem. If you are on a slow machine you will notice lag. This is because blender moves it vert by vert, not efficient.
Note: in Blender 2.49, you must deselect the "Use Goal" button to release the center of the ball. Otherwise, it will just hang there.
When it reaches the plane it will pass through. To fix this we must make the plane affect the softbody. To do this make the plane deflect in its physics buttons.
Noob Note: To do this in version 2.49 select the plane, go to object buttons -> physics context -> collision subcontext and select Collision.  The variables you can play with here are under the Soft Body and Cloth Interaction.
Now the ball collapses into a strange quivering wreck after impact. To fix this, you need to turn on the stiff quad button, but set the edge stiffness down a bit, so its more bouncy. You can use the bake function to solidify the settings see below
Noob Note: You might have to turn up the Rigidity Level to 0.100 (in the Soft Body Tab) as well in order to prevent the object from collapsing. (I used a subdivided cube as Object)
What I recommend to do before rendering as animation: In the Bake Settings (Soft Body Tab) Set Interval to 2 or 1, so the object will not start deforming too early before impact. This will slow down the bake process - just slightly - but make the object bounce more dynamically. Then bake again.
Noob note: In blender 2.46 you have to adjust the value of Be in the soft body tab, I changed it to 0.4
I invite you to correct and expand these definitions:
Friction: creates a resistance to movement of the whole object, like being submerged in a viscous fluid
Grav: the rate of velocity change due to gravity. Results in a constant -z force.
Mass: (Force = mass × acceleration) affects everything by making the object heavier.
Speed: tweaks the simulation to run faster or slower.
ErrorLimit: raise it and the simulation will solve faster but strange things might happen. Save frequently, as blender might go nuts with this or any physic simulation (but less so after 2.4)
Goal: makes the object try to return to its original position, useful at times, in the tutorial you could turn gravity off and key the ball falling and use this to keep it a ball.
Table of Contents• Glossary
Option B – Human Biochemistry - SL
Amino acid: A compound in which an amino group and a carboxylic acid group are present. There are 20 aa that occur naturally. Can be polymerized to form proteins. Exists as a zwitterion at their isoelectric point. All except glycine can show optical activity.	aa
Amino acids, essential: Aa’s that our body is not able to produce and we need to have them as nutrients. There are 10 of these.
Amino-acids, non-essential: Aa’s that we are able to produce in our body.
Anabolic steroids: All steroids contain characteristic four-ring structure. Have similar structure to testosterone. Build up muscle.
Anabolic: Processes in which complex molecules are made from simpler ones, such as in photosynthesis.
Calorie: The energy required to raise the temperature of 1g of water by 1 oC.
Calorific value: The energy content of food.
Carbohydrates: Produced by photosynthesis in plants. Used to
Catabolic: Processes in which molecules are broken down into simpler ones, such as aerobic respiration.
Denaturation: When the three-dimensional conformation of the structure is destroyed, and the protein becomes biologically inactive. Denaturing agents are:
Diet: Well-balanced diet consists of about 60% carbohydrate, 20-30% protein and 10-20% fat. Should include essential vitamins and fifteen essential minerals. Amount of food required depends on age, weight, gender, and daily activity.
Fats: Solid triglycerides at room temperature. Contain only saturated carboxylic acid groups. Uses of fats:
Fatty acid: Long chain carboxylic acids.
Feedback mechanism: When a product of a process or a hormone reaches a certain level, it inhibits (negative feedback) or promotes (+ feedback) a further response.
Food calorimetry: Measuring the energy content of food.
Furanose: Five membered ring containing an oxygen atom, such as in fructose.
Glucose: A hexose monosaccharide. Form of glucose found in nature is D-glucose, which can exist in two separate crystalline forms:
-D-glucose (OH groups are down, down, up, down; following carbon chain);
-D-glucose (up, down, up down). 	C6H12O6
Glycosidic link: Link between two sugar in a polysaccharide, formed by condensation reaction.
GM food: Genetically modified food. Benefits: Improve flavor, nutritional value, and shelf life. Could incorporate anti-cancer substances. Could make plant more resistant to disease. Concerns: unpredictable outcome. May cause antibiotic-resistance. May alter balance of ecosystems.
Hard water: Contains Mg2+ or Ca2+. Prevents soap from working efficiently as it reacts with the anion of the soap, producing a precipitated salt.
Hormone, adrenalin: Responsible for ‘fight or flight’ response (goose bumps, increased pulse/BP). Produced in adrenal medulla.
Hormone, insulin: Made up of 51 aa residues. Decreases glucose levels in blood by making liver absorb glucose in the form of glycogen. Insulin produced in -cells of Islets of Langerhans.
Hormone, thyroxine: Regulates metabolism. Produced in thyroid gland. Hypothalamus releases local hormone which tells anterior pituitary to release thyroid SH (+ feedback). TSH tells thyroid glands to release thyroxine (+ feedback). When the concentration of thyroxin reaches a certain level, a – feedback is sent to hypothalamus, ceasing production of the local hormone.
Hormones, sex: Responsible for development of secondary sexual characteristics. Both estrogen and testosterone produced in testes (males) and ovaries (females). They are all steroids  contain characteristic four-ring structure.
Hormones: Chemicals produced in glands and transported to specific target cell by blood stream, and binds to a receptor site on or within the target cell  produces a specific physiological response. Glands are controlled by pituitary gland, which in turn is controlled by the hypothalamus. Hormones act as chemical messengers.
Hydrophilic: Describing part of molecule that is attracted to water.
Hydrophobic: Describing part of molecule that repels water.
Iodine number: Number of grams that reacts completely with 100g of a triglyceride. The higher the iodine number, the more unsaturated the triglyceride.
Isoelectric point: The pH value at which the average charge on the molecules of a compound is zero.
Lactose: Disaccharide in which -D-galactose and -D-glucose are joined by glycosidic link.
Lipids: Biological substances that are soluble in non-polar solvents (generally). Lipases in digestive system degrade lipids.
Menstrual cycle: Pituitary gland releases follicle SH, which travels to ovaries causing release of estradiol. Two weeks later, – feedback stops release of FSH and triggers release of luteinizing hormone, which travels to ovaries and releases progesterone. Progesterone causes egg to be transported to uterus. If egg is fertilized, it embeds itself on uterine wall and hormone levels rise dramatically, otherwise hormone levels fall and menstruation occurs.
Metabolism: The network of biochemical reactions that supports life.
Micelle: The particle formed when the hydrophilic tail dissolves in oil or grease.
Ninhydrin: An organic dye. Causes coloration of aa’s. Used to see how far aa’s have moved in both paper chromatography and electrophoresis.
Nutrient: Substances that are required by an organism as food.
Oils: Liquid triglycerides at room temperature. Contain at least one double bond, i.e. they are unsaturated. The more unsaturated, the lower the m.p. due to its inability to pack so closely together  the surface area decreases  decrease in the van der Waals’ forces between the molecules. Number of C=C bonds can be determined by addition reactions with I2. See IODINE NUMBER.
Oral contraceptives: Most common ‘pill’ contains a mixture of estradiol and progesterone  mimics the high hormonal levels of pregnancy, in turn preventing the release of more eggs.
Phospholipid: Form major part of plasma membranes. Phosphate group is hydrophilic while lipid part is hydrophobic.
Polyunsaturated oils: An oil containing several double bonds.
Protein structure, electrophoresis: Electrophoresis is carried out on a medium called PAGE. Sample is placed in center of gel, and a potential difference is applied across it. The movement of the aa depends on the pH of the buffer: at low pH, the amine group will be protonated, while at high pH, the carboxylic acid is deprotonated. At the isoelectric point – characteristic for each aa – the aa exists as a zwitterion, and will not move (charges balanced). When satisfactory separation is complete, the aa can be sprayed with ninhydrin, and their isoelectric points can be compared.
Protein structure, paper chromatography: When a piece of chromatographic paper containing a small sport of the unknown aa is placed in an eluent, the eluent rises up the paper (capillary action). The different aa’s spread out to different extents, and move up the paper at different rate.
Proteins: Large macromolecules of chains of 2-amino acids. Formed by aa’s bonding to each other by peptide bonds.
The primary structure of the proteins is their strict sequence of aa residues.
The secondary structure describes how the chain folds itself due to intramolecular hydrogen bonding (can be -helix -– hydrogen bonds within single chain, causing spiraling – or -pleated – hydrogen bonds between chains).
The tertiary structure describes overall folding of the chain, giving the protein its three-dimensional shape (may be due to hydrogen bonds, van der Waals’, and ionic attraction. Two Cys residues can form disulphide bridges).
The quaternary structure results from the interactions between separate polypeptide chains.
Many are enzymes;
Pyranose: Six-membered monosaccharides such as glucose.
Retention factor: The ratio of the distance traveled by the sample to the distance traveled by the solvent in paper chromatography. Each aa has a specific Rf value.
Saccharide, mono-: Simple sugars. Empirical formula CH2O. Water soluble. Two families:
Saccharide, oligo-: Containing 2-9 monosaccharides.
Saccharide, poly-: Polymers of monosaccharides. Formed by condensation reactions, forming glycosidic links.
Saponification: The process in which a triglyceride is hydrolyzed, forming soap. Reverse of esterification.
Soap: The sodium or potassium salt of the fatty acids produced from the saponification process. Functions because of hydrophilic head and hydrophobic tail. The tail dissolves in oil or grease to form a micelle. Surrounded by hydrophilic heads, which makes it soluble in water.
Starch: Polymer of -D-glucose. Exists in two forms:
Structure-function relationship: The structure of a chemical compound is adapted to its function by evolution.
Sucrose: Disaccharide in which -D-glucose and -D-fructose are joined by glycosidic link between the C1 from the glucose and the C2 from the fructose.
Synthetic detergents: Soap molecules of which the calcium or magnesium salts are soluble  that they can work well in hard water as well. Cause more pollution than soaps.
Triglyceride: Formed from condensation reaction between glycerol and fatty acids.
Vitamin A: Retinol. Found in cod liver oil, green vegetables and fruit. Fat soluble despite OH group, due to long hydrocarbon chain. Not broken down readily by cooking. Aids night vision. Retinol is oxidized to retinal in body. Retinal combines with  protein opsin to form rhodopsin, the active agent for converting light signals into electrical signals that travel along optical nerve to brain. Deficiency  xerophtalmia or night-blindness.
Vitamin C: Ascorbic acid. Found in fresh fruit and vegetables. Water soluble. Involved in biosynthesis of the protein collagen (found in connective tissue). Deficiency  scurvy.
Vitamin D: Calciferol. Found in fish liver oils and egg yolk. Can be formed on surface of skin by UV light reacting with 7-dehydrocholesterol. Involved in uptake of Ca2+ and PO43+ ions from food, and in formation of bone structure. Deficiency  rickets.
Vitamins, fat soluble: A, D, E, F and K. Characterized by long non-polar hydrocarbon chains or rings.
Vitamins, water soluble: C and the 8 B’s. Contain NH or OH groups  has ability to hydrogen bond to water. Do not accumulate in body.
Vitamins: Vitamin D is the only vitamin that the body is capable of synthesizing. Can be defined as: 1) fat soluble or 2) water soluble. Vitamins containing C=C bonds and OH groups are readily oxidized. Refrigeration slows this process.
Water equivalent: The equivalent addition of energy to water as released when burning 1.00g of a food, causing a temperature increase.
Zwitterion: Ion with + and – charge. Aa’s exist as zwitterion at their isoelectric point.
Option B – Human Biochemistry - HL
Active site: The part of the protein that is involved in the catalysis.
ADP: Adenosine diphosphate. Made of base A, ribose, and two phosphate groups. Addition of another phosphate group makes ATP.
ATP: Adenosine triphosphate. Made up of base A, ribose, and three phosphate groups bonded together by high-energy phosphate bonds. Breaking the last of these bonds releases energy for use in cells, leaving ADP.
Chromosome: A structure composed of DNA and associated proteins.
Codon: Each of 64 permutations of the triplet code.
Coenzyme: Organic cofactors. Example: B-vitamins. Two types:
Cofactor: A substance that is a part of the active site, and that is involved in the catalysis. Can be:
Concentration, effect of: 1) Increasing concentration of the substrate: proportional increase in rate, but eventually evens out as all active sites of enzyme become saturated. 2) Increasing concentration of enzyme: proportional increase in rate.
Cyanide: A poison which works by blocking cytochrome oxidase, which is vital for aerobic respiration.
Cytochrome: Oxidizing enzymes in mitochondria. Contain Cu2+/Cu+.
Deoxyribose: The pentose sugar found in DNA.
DNA profiling: Using a small amount of cellular material, DNA is extracted and broken down into minisatellites using restriction enzymes. Splits where there are no coded messages in the base sequence are unique to the person giving the sample, and so this can be used to identify them.
DNA replication: DNA in cell begin to partly unzip as hydrogen bonds between the bases break. New sugar base units are taken up from the aqueous solution. Due to set pairs (AT and CG), the new strands will be identical to the original one.
DNA: Deoxyribonucleic acid. Double-stranded. Made up of nucleotides. Have – charge due to phosphate group. Cannot penetrate nucleus.
Electron transport: Occurs in inner membrane of mitochondria, which contains different proteins and enzymes, incl. cytochromes. The H+ ions from the NADH2 (product from the citric acid cycle) move along cytochromes by repeated redox reactions, due to presence of stronger oxidizing agents. Enzyme cytochrome oxidase causes H+ ions, e- and O2 to react to form water, releasing energy in the process.
Enzyme saturation: When all the active sites of the enzymes are occupied by a substrate. At this saturation, increasing substrate concentration has no effect.
Enzyme, factors affecting: 1) Enzyme concentration;
Enzyme: Proteins that act as biological catalysts, for specific substrates.
Gene: A specific sequence of DNA which codes for the synthesis of a protein.
Glycolysis: First phase of breakdown of glucose in respiration. Occurs in cytoplasm.
Haemoglobin: Found in RBC’s. Contains four large polypeptide groups and four Fe2+ ions surrounded by hem groups. At high oxygen concentrations, oxygen bonds onto the iron in hem group as an extra ligand. At low concentrations, the reverse occurs. 	Hb
Heavy metal ions, effect of: Can poison enzymes by reacting with –SH groups replacing the hydrogen atom with a heavy metal atom or ion. Enzyme is denatured.
Induced fit theory: The active site can alter its shape to allow for a better fit with the substrate. An enzyme-substrate complex is created, and the catalyzed reaction takes place, leaving an enzyme-product complex. The products are released, and the enzyme reverts to its original shape.
Inhibition, competitive: Reversible inhibition. Resemble the substrate in shape, but cannot react. Slow down reaction by occupying active site. Does not affect Vmax but does affect Km.
Inhibition, irreversible: The inhibitor reacts with a part of the enzyme, and a covalent bond is formed between the inhibitor and enzyme. Enzyme activity is permanently destroyed. Example: nerve gases work by alkylation of an OH-group in the active site of an enzyme.
Inhibition, non-competitive: Reversible inhibition. Prevents enzyme reactions by binding to another part of the enzyme than the active site. This causes the enzyme to alter its shape and be unable to receive its substrate. Does not affect Km but does affect Vmax.
Inhibition, reversible: The inhibitor makes weak (intermolecular) bonds with the enzyme. The enzyme can become biologically active again. Two types:
Metal ions: Examples of important ions: Na+ and K+ (nerve impulses and water balance); Ca2+ (bones and teeth); Cu2+ (enzymes); Co2+ (vitamin B12); Fe2+ (Hb). All depend on one of the following:
Michaelis-Menten constant: The substrate concentration when the rate of the reaction is at ½ Vmax. The constant will always be the same for a particular enzyme and particular substrate.	Km
mRNA: Messenger of genetic information (transcription).
Nucleotide: Repeating base-sugar-phosphate units that make up the nucleic acids. The base can be one of four nitrogen-containing bases, adenine (A), guanine (G), cytosine (C) or thymine (T). In RNA, uracil (U) replaces T. The phosphate bonds to the C4, while the base bonds to the C1.
pH, effect of: The pH value affects the tertiary structure. Enzymes have an optimum pH; outside of this, they can be denatured. More subtly, pH affects the electrostatic charge of the enzyme, which may affect the binding of substrate to enzyme, or the chemistry of the active site.
Phosphodiester bond: Bonding between nucleotides in a polynucleotide. Each nucleotide is joined between the C3 of the sugar and the neighboring phosphate group.
Phosphorylation: Addition of phosphate group. Phosphorylation in the sodium-potassium pump causes shape of pump to change.
Ribose: The pentose sugar found in RNA. Same as deoxyribose, except with an extra O bonded to the C2.
Ribosome: Particle that causes protein synthesis. Sequence of aa’s determined by nucleotide sequence in mRNA.
RNA: Ribonucleic acid. Single stranded. Contains base U instead of DNA’s base T. Two functions:
Sodium-potassium pump: Protein structure in cell membrane act as valves pumping Na+ ions out of cell and K+ ions into the cell. Works due to difference in charge density between Na+ and K+. The Na+ binds to three sites on the protein molecule. Energy is extracted from ATP by hydrolyzing to ADP, and the phosphorylation causes the pump to change its shape. Na + ions are expelled, and K+ ions bind to two sites on the protein molecule. The loss of the phosphate causes the pump to change its shape again, expelling the K+ ions into the cell.
Substrate: The substance on which an enzyme acts.
Temperature, effect of: Increasing temperature will initially increase rate of enzyme-catalyzed reactions (greater proportion of reactants will have the minimum activation energy). Optimum temperature for most enzymes is ca. 40C. Above this temperature enzymes rapidly denature.
Transcription: Copying of DNA onto a strand of RNA by unwinding temporarily due to the action of RNA polymerase. Takes place in nucleus.
Translation: The reading of the base sequence of the mRNA by ribosomes to make a sequence of aa’s to form a polypeptide.
Triplet code: A sequence of three bases that represents one aa.
tRNA: RNA that brings the right aa’s to the ribosomes.
Vmax: The maximum rate at which enzyme activity can occur, given a constant enzyme concentration. This is when the active sites of the enzyme are saturated.
Option D – Medicine and Drugs - SL
Addiction: Problem with opiates, in which a dependency on a drug is created.
Adrenaline: A naturally occurring hormone and stimulant. Released during stress. Responses:
Alginates: Often combined with antacids. Prevent acid in stomach from rising into esophagus and causing ‘heartburn.’
Amine: Primary amines have one R group attached to N atom. Secondary have two on at least one N atom. Tertiary have three on at least one N atom.
Amphetamine: Fat soluble molecule which mimics noradrenaline. Similarity is so strong that it can replace noradrenaline in its storage sites, resulting in a flood of displaced noradrenaline molecules that bind to other neural proteins and set of a number of signals  euphoria.
Analgesic, mild: Have triad of properties:
Analgesic, strong: Analgesics that bind with specific chemical receptors in brain that receive pain messages  stopping the transmission of pain. They are almost all related to morphine. Family is called the opium alkaloids.
Analgesic: A drug which relieves pain without the aid of sleep. Two types:
Antacids: Bases that neutralize excess acid. They are just barely soluble  neutralize gradually.
Antibiotics, broad spectrum: Antibiotics that are effective against a wide range of bacteria. This is initially prescribed until the specific diagnosis is found.
Antibiotics, narrow spectrum: Antibiotics only effective against certain types of bacteria. Prescribed once the specific diagnosis is found.
Anti-coagulant: Has blood-thinning properties.
Trojan Horse (joins the replication process, inhibiting replication of the virus. Selectively toxic as it is activated by viral enzyme);
Retrovirus inhibitor (inhibits RNA from acting as a template for DNA replication);
Aspirin: Derived from salicylic acid, which was unpleasant to use due to its acidity. The phenol group is substituted with an acetyl group in aspirin, but it is still acidic due to its alkanoic acid group. Has anti-coagulant properties, but there can be allergic reactions to it and it can induce Reye’s Syndrome in children, a potentially fatal liver and brain disorder.
Bacteria: Have slightly different structure to mammalian cells: have a cell wall. Penicillin prevents this wall from being made, and the internal pressures within the cell builds up and causes it to burst.
Benzodiazepenes: Class of depressants, including valium, prozac and mogadon. Benzodiazepenes work on chemical receptors in brain by binding to a special protein at the synapse of nerve junctions, causing gap between nerves to widen  prevents nerve cell from producing signal. The ethanol works on a different part of the same protein. The synergistic effect of these two working together can result in neural shutdown.
Blood-brain barrier: Can only by passed by fat soluble molecules.
Caffeine: A tertiary amine. Can
Cephalosporins: Variants of penicillin created to overcome the action of penicillinases. Broad spectrum antibiotics.
Codeine: Derived from morphine by replacing H in one of alcohol groups with methyl group.
Depressant: Drugs which depress CNS by interfering with transmission of nerve impulses in the neurons. Effects depend on dosage: no effect  tranquilizing effect  sedative  sleep-inducing  lethal.
Designer drugs: Modifications to structure of natural drugs.
Dimethicone: An anti-foaming agent often used with antacids. Allow gas bubbles to coalesce and be expelled.
Patches (absorbed directly through skin barrier, allow absorption to take place gradually).
Drug development: A disease is selected, and targets along the disease process are identified, which may be vulnerable to interference by a drug. Lead molecules are considered, and selected according to the drugs which seem most effective, easiest to manufacture, have an advantage over existing drugs and are profitable. Phase I trials assess toxicology of drug. Phase II trials are clinical; the efficacy and dosage are determined. Phase III trials give the drug to thousands of closely monitored patients. If approved at this stage, drug is launched, after which comes the Phase IV trials, which is the post-launch monitoring of drug, which may lead to product extension.
Drug: A chemical which does one or more of the following:
Endorphins: Pain killers produced in the brain. Explain how people under great trauma feel little pain despite terrible injuries. Withdrawal symptoms of a heroin addict might be behavior of body without any endorphins at all.
Ethanol: Mild depressant in which side effect mask the main effect in moderate doses.
The amount of alcohol that can be safely drunk depends on
Gas chromatography: Test for ethanol. Under pressure, sample can be passed through thin tube containing inert material. Components of sample separate and can be identified.
Heroin: Derived from morphine by replacing H’s from both alcohol groups with acetyl (-COCH3) groups. More soluble in fatty tissue due to removal of both -OH groups.
HIV: Human Immunodeficiency Virus. Specific proteins on HIV bind to receptor protein on certain WBC’s called T cells. Quick mutation.
In vitro: Testing potency of molecule and selectivity; done in a laboratory environment.
In vivo: Meaning “in life.” Tests conducted in living species, to test for side effects and the effect of the body on the drug.
Intoximeter: Test for ethanol. Work by infrared spectroscopy, where the vibration of OH bond in ethanol can be detected.
LD50 value: The Lethal Dose of a substance that kills of 50% of a population. The lower the number the more toxic the substance.
Maximum daily tolerance: How much of a chemical can be taken into the body before undesirable symptoms occur. Related to rate at which body’s biochemistry is able to get rid of the same agent. Minimum doses should be used due to body’s increasing tolerance to drug.
Medicine: A drug used to cure a disease.
Nicotine: Sympathomimetic. Quickly reaches CNS.
Increased pulse and BP;
Risk of heart disease;
Noradrenaline: Variation of adrenaline which is produced in the brain. A neurotransmitter which sends signals to brain by binding with neural proteins.
Opiate: Cause addiction and lead to tolerance.
Paracetamol: Has none of the side effects of aspirin given that the correct does is used. If doses are exceeded, it can induce massive liver damage. Acetaminophen.
Parenteral: Administering drugs by injection. Can be administered locally  reducing dose necessary and also possibility that body will alter molecular structure. Often required medically trained staff to administer. Three types:
Pathogen: Organism or virus that causes disease.
Penicillin: Discovered by Alexander Fleming, who noticed that some of the bacteria in his petri dish had died off after some foreign appearance. Prevent cell walls from being made in bacteria; does not affect mammalian cells or viruses as they do not have a cell wall  selectively toxic. [Relatively] narrow spectrum antibiotic.
Penicillinases: New enzymes produced by bacteria to counter the action of penicillin. Degrade penicillin molecule.
Physiological state: Includes consciousness, activity level and co-ordination.
Placebo effect: A drug with no chemical effects. Used to test brain’s ability to influence physiology and to test the efficacy of new drugs.
Prostaglandins: Local action hormones which have a range of functions in body. One of these may be pyrogenic (raise body temperature). Also responsible for altering of signals across synapse junctions of nerves. Mild analgesics are believed to work by blocking the synthesis of these prostaglandins.
Retrovirus: Virus that contains RNA instead of DNA.
Selective toxicity: The process of inhibiting processes vital to the pathogen, but absent in the host (see PENICILLIN).
Side effects: Unwanted effects of a drug. Risk-to-benefit ratio has to be considered. Thalidomide had an unacceptable ratio, while chemotherapy – causing hair loss and nausea – still has life-saving potential.
Stimulant: Drugs that increase a person’s state of mental alertness.
Sympathomimetic amine: Amines which mimic chemical behavior of hormones of the CNS.
Synergistic effect: Creating a cumulative effect greater than the sum of each individual effect. Benzodiazepenes have synergistic effect with ethanol. Ethanol also has synergistic effect with aspirin (may cause stomach bleeding).
Thalidomide: Morning sickness drug sold in many countries (1958-1962) until severe side-effects were discovered. Early clinical trials had shown no problems. Later withdrawn, but many children had been born with absent or malformed limbs (phocomelia). Currently used for treatment of some cancers, leprosy and other conditions where its inhibition of blood vessel formation is beneficial.
Tolerance: The body’s adaptation to the action of a drug, resulting in a requirement for larger doses to achieve original effect.
Toxicology: Poisonous effect of drug.
Trial, blind: A trial of drugs where half of the patients are given the real drug and the other half a placebo. The administering doctors know which patient receives which drug.
Trial, double blind: Similar to blind trial except that neither the administering doctor nor the patient knows which patient receives which drug.
Virus: Contains DNA but cannot replicate by itself. Works by sticking to the outside of a cell, and inject its own DNA, effectively causing cell to replicate the virus for it. New viruses break through cell and infect other cells. All viruses have a central core of DNA or RNA surrounded by a capsid of regularly packed protein units (capsomeres). Have no nucleus or cytoplasm.
Option D – Medicine and Drugs - HL
Anesthetic, general: An anesthetic that renders the patient unconscious so that they can feel no pain. First anesthetic to be used was ether. This was highly inflammable, so later chloroform and nitrous oxide (laughing gas) was used. Chloroform was found to possibly lead to liver damage, while nitrous oxide was not very efficient. Objectives for anesthetic:
Halothane was found to satisfy these requirements, but it is a CFC, which can cause damage to ozone layer.
Anesthetic, local: An anesthetic that blocks pain in a specific area without affecting overall level of consciousness.
Cannabis, arguments for/against: 		1) Cannabis addictive: contested.
May lead to harder drugs.
Toxic.
If cannabis legalized  demands to legalize other drugs.
Should be legalized to remove profits from criminals.
Ensure correct dosage.
Chiral auxiliary: The main component of a technique used to obtain only a desired enantiomer. Attaching an auxiliary which is itself optically active creates the stereochemical conditions for the reaction to form only one enantiomer.
Cisplatin: Cis form of a chemical which is highly effective in the treatment of testicular and ovarian cancers. Transplatin is not as effective an anti-cancer drug. Causes alteration in the cancer cell’s DNA  cannot replicate properly.
Cocaine: First anesthetic to be used. Work by suppressing nerve transmissions. Side effects:
Combinatorial library: A technique to form a library of combinations of aa or other types of active molecules, by use of mix and split process.
Form, cis-: Geometric isomer where the similar groups are on the same side.
Form, trans-: Geometric isomer where the similar groups are on different sides.
Hallucination: Distortions in sound and visual perceptions.
Hallucinogen: Causing hallucinations.
Indole ring structure: A common structure in many hallucinogenic drugs such as LSD and psylocybin.
Isomers, geometric: Stereoisomerism where the isomers differ in positions of a group relative to the double bond.
LSD: Does not occur naturally. Believed to work by blocking serotonin, one of the compounds responsible for transmitting impulses across synapses in brain.
Marijuana: Cannabis when dried. Not based on indole ring. Causes feeling of relaxation and enhanced auditory and visual perception. Synergistic effect with depressants.
Mescaline: One of oldest known hallucinogens. Causes hallucinations, and decrease in appetite. Synergistic effect with alcohol.
Mix and split: Coupling resulting in a combination of active molecules. Gives all permutations possible.
Partial pressure: The pressure a gas would exert if it occupied the total volume on its own. Found by mole fraction of gas multiplied by total pressure.
Procaine and lidocaine: Derivatives of cocaine.
Psilocybin: Mildly hallucinogenic. Tolerance may develop but it is not addictive. Biggest danger lies in inability to recognize “magic mushrooms” correctly; similar looking fungi are poisonous.
Racemic mixture: A mixture containing equal amounts of both enantiomers.
Thalidomide: One enantiomer helped against morning sickness, while the other was responsible for causing fetal deformities.
Virtual library: Modeling permutations virtually.
They are not equivalent. Specialising the type of runMaybeT to work with MaybeT (State s), we get:
Doing the same for runStateT and StateT s Maybe, we obtain:
In the first case, we get a State computation that returns a Maybe a. In the second, we get a function which, from an initial state of type s, might give back a result and a new state or not, as the result type is Maybe (a, s). A Nothing amidst a MaybeT (State s) destroys merely the returned result, while in a StateT s Maybe it destroys the final state as well. This comparison can illustrate some general remarks:
When a composed monad is unwrapped, the effect of the inner monad has priority over the one of the base monad.
Failure-handling layers such as MaybeT and ExceptT usually go on the top of transformer stacks, so that the effects of the other involved monads are preserved in case of failure.
1.2 GROUP B: Large horizontal frank with faux-perforation outer border and single straight-line inner border.
1.6 GROUP E: Horizontal frank with straight line outer border incorporating the town mark.
1.7 GROUP F: Small horizontal frank with faux-perforation outer border and separate circular town mark
The stamps are grouped according to appearance of the frank:
A - frank with columns at sides
B - large frank with faux-perforation outer frame
C - frameless horizontal design with flying goose
D - vertical design with flying goose above value box
E - horizontal frank with straight line outer frame incorporating town mark
F - small frank with faux-perforation outer frame
G - upright frank with straight line outer frame
H - horizontal frank with straight line outer frame, with separate circular town mark
J - frank of horizontal lines only
K - frameless design with town mark at right
NOTE: Dates on Chinese meter stamps can be confusing. The founding of the Republic of China in 1911 was officially designated Year One in political and business affairs. About half the meter stamps found from 1947 through 1949 show the year of the Republic (36, 37, or 38) instead of a western year date. Since no stamp except Type A1 was issued in the 1930s, any year date starting with a 3 can be assumed safely to be a year of the Republic. Use of the Year of the Republic in meter stamps was abandoned after the ascendancy of the Peoples Republic of China in late 1949.
For specialized information about the meter stamps of China, see The Postage Meter and Postpaid Machine Stamps of China, by Richard Stambaugh, China Stamp Society, USA, 2001.
GROUP A: Early experimental meter stamps with columns at sides.All franks have frames with columns at the sides and a sun emblem at top center. This frame design resembles the Martyrs issue adhesive stamps of 1932-1934.
A1. Universal "Multi-Value" (MV), June 1936. Value $5000
Upright frank. Value figures within inner frame line.
A2. Universal "Multi-Value" (MV), September 1947. Value $3000
Similar to Type A1 but wider. No inner frame line around the value figures.
A small double lined box containing two Chinese characters is below and to the right of the value figures.
A3. Universal "Teltax" (MV), 1947. Extremely rare, value unknown.
Very similar in appearance to Type A2 but without the small box below the value figures.
A fixed zero is incised into the frame at right. M# T1.
NOTES: 1) See explanation of Year of the Republic dates in the introduction above.
The town mark in the illustration is hand drawn and not original to the stamp.
GROUP B: Large horizontal frank with faux-perforation outer border and single straight-line inner border.Stamps before 1950 have flying goose logo. Starting in mid-1950 the goose is removed.
BA1. Universal "Multi-Value" (MV), July 1948. Value $700
Meter number with "U" prefix reading up at lower left.
Machine ID number (assigned starting from 1 in each city) horizontal at lower left with "NO." prefix.
NOTE: The leftmost digit of the four variable digits in the center of the value figures prints an asterisk () when in the "zero" position. This is not part of the prefix and can print the numbers 1 through 9 when required. This applies to all Group B stamps.
BA2. Universal "Multi-Value" (MV), November 1948.
Similar to Type BA1 but without meter number.
E. V/F: $ 000 + 00 . Value $700
G. V/F: $ 000 + 000 . Value $1000
I. V/F: $ 000 + 0000 . Value $400
a. As B but with overprint showing the characters for silver and fen above and below the yuan character. Value $1000
b. As B but with fen character overprinted on top of the yuan character. Value $1200
BA3:1949, Universal "Teltax" (MV). Extremely rare, value unknown.
As type BA2 but gothic value figures and with town mark lowered.
BB1:July 1949, Universal "Multi-Value" (MV).
As Type BA2 but with East China inscription.
BC1. Universal "Multi-Value" (MV), 1950.
With 4 character inscription (Peoples Postal Service) at top left, flying goose at upper right.
BC2. Universal "Multi-Value" (MV), 1950. Value $500
As Type BC1 but with 6 character inscription (Chinese Peoples Postal Service) at top left.
With flying goose at upper right.
BC3. Universal "Multi-Value" (MV), 1950.
As Type BC2 but flying goose removed, and Chinese inscription enlarged across top.
E. V/F: $000+00 . Value $300
a. Portion of goose’s wing remains in upper right corner. Value $150
b. TM inverted. One seen, as A, dated 24.1.51. Extremely rare, value unknown.
BC4. Universal "Teltax" (MV), 1951. Value $600
As Type BC3 but value figures are angular instead of oval.
The date figures are smaller than on BC3.
BC5. Universal "Multi-Value" (MV), 1951.
As Type BC3 but with star added at upper right.
C. Hollow star. V/F: 000 (no suffix) . Value $300
BC6. Universal "Multi-Value" (MV), 1955.
A. Hollow star at left. Value $40
BC7. Universal "Teltax" (MV). Value $40
Similar to Type BC6 but value figures angular, and town mark lowered with small date figures.
With solid star at left.
BC8. Universal "Multi-Value" (MV), 1960. Very rare, value unknown.
Asterisk at left of value figures.
BC9. Universal "Multi-Value" (MV).
A. With hollow star at left. Value $300
B. With asterisk at left. Value $150
BD1. Universal "Multi-Value" (MV), 1958. Extremely rare, value unknown.
One cover known.
GROUP C: Frameless horizontal design with flying goose in centerbetween circular town mark at left and value box at right.
CA1. Pitney Bowes "R" (MV), March 1949. Value $1200
Value figures with dollar sign prefix and characters for gold yuan as suffix.
CA2. Pitney Bowes "R" (MV), April 1949. Value $500
Very similar to Type CA1 but value figures with asterisk prefix and with characters for 100 yuan as suffix.
A. Large asterisk prefix and flat topped ‘3’ in M#
B. Small asterisk prefix and rounded ‘3’ in M#
CA3. Pitney Bowes "R" (MV). Value $300
As type CA2 but machine ID number in Chinese between parenthesis.
CB1. Pitney Bowes "R" (MV), June 1949. Value $300
Value figures with asterisk prefix and informal yuan character as suffix.
CB2. Pitney Bowes "R" (MV), September 1949.
Similar to Type CB1 but zero over informal yuan suffix.
CB3. Pitney Bowes "R"  (MV), March 1950. $250
As Type CB1 but suffix is characters for 100 over informal yuan.
CC1.  Pitney Bowes "R" (MV), April 1950.
Suffix is characters for 100 over informal yuan.
CC2. Pitney Bowes "R" (MV), July 1954. Value $500
a. TM with Chinese text only
GROUP D: Vertical design with large flying goose above framed value boxSingle circle town mark at left.
DA1. Hasler "F88" (MV), 1949. Extremely rare, value unknown.
One meter installed in late 1948 or early 1949.
One example known. M# "NO. 6" at right of goose.
DB1. Hasler "F88" (MV). Extremely rare, value unknown.
As Type DA1 except for inscription.
Known from proof only. No examples used on mail have been reported.
DC1. Hasler "F88" (MV), 1950. Value $1000
As Type DA1 except for inscription.
DC2. Hasler "F88" (MV), 1951. Value $1000
As Type DC1 but M# in Chinese, and $ prefix replaced by yuan symbol (¥).
DC3. Hasler "F88" (MV), 1957. Value $1000
Similar to Type DC2 but serrated outer frame around value box removed.
GROUP E: Horizontal frank with straight line outer border incorporating the town mark.
E1:1955, Pitney Bowes "R" (MV), 1955. Value $75
Four machines in Shanghai printed these stamps.
GROUP F: Small horizontal frank with faux-perforation outer border and separate circular town mark
F1. Pitney Bowes "R" (MV), 1957. Value $100
One meter used in the Beijing International Post Office printed these stamps.
Two machines in Shanghai produced these stamps.
A. Frank 29 x 31 mm. Inner frame around value figures is complete. Value $150
B. Frank 27 x 31 mm. Inner frame around value figures is open at the sides. Value $200
Frank 30 mm wide with panels at top and bottom.
Yuan symbol, ¥, left of value figures.
A. Frank 26-27 mm tall
B. Frank 28-29 mm tall
C. With meter ID number at right of value figures, with or without town character above
D. With solid block at right of value figures
E. Empty at right of value figures
a. With large “2” in heavy frame at right of value figures
b. Yuan symbol (¥) very large, two character town name at right without ID number
c. With slogan
d. Value figures and TM only, without frame. All seen have V/F all zeros and appear to be applied to adhesive stamped mail. Purpose unknown:D
NOTES: Examples of these stamps are known without value figures, some with town mark at right instead of left of frank.
Starting in 1988 for special occasions China Post issued commemorative covers franked with Type H1 stamps on illustrated tape.
As Type H1A but frank is wider, 33 x 27 mm.
HA3. Hasler "Mailmaster" (MV). Value $25
Similar to Type HA1 but with inner frame line around value figures.
Yuan symbol between outer and inner frame lines at left.
HA4. Hasler “Mailmaster”  (MV). Value $50
Large frank without with inner box but without panels at top and bottom.
HA5. 1984, Pitney Bowes-GB "5300" (MV). Value $25
Frank 30 x 23 mm. Panel at top only. Characters for POST PAID vertical at right.
Meter ID number between frank and TM. Value figures lower than date figures.
HA6:Pitney Bowes-GB "5300" (MV).
Wide frank 36 x 26 mm. Value figures are lower than the date figures.
Panels at both top and bottom, bottom panel thin with small characters.
HA7. Pitney Bowes-GB "6300”  (MV).
Similar to Type HA1 but shorter frank, 29-31 x 23-24 mm.
A. With meter ID number with or without town character above at right of value figures
B. With solid block at right of value figures
C. Blank at right of value figures
HA8. Pitney Bowes-GB “6300”  (MV). Value $25
Small frank at 28 x 23/24 mm, slightly smaller than Type H8.
Without panels at top or bottom. With inner frame line around value figures.
HA9. Pitney Bowes-GB “6300”  (MV).
Very wide frank, 37-38 x 23-24 mm.
HA10. Pitney Bowes-GB “A900”  (MV), 1996.
Value figures large.
Frank 29 x 26 mm, similar is size to Type HA1 but TM very large and date figures narrower. : TM: SC
HA12. Francotyp-Postalia “T1000" (digital).
Small frank, only 27 mm wide, with value figures closer to right side than to left.
Frank 30 x 27 mm. “¥” at left, location code at right.
a. Characters at top close together
b. Value figures close to left side of frank
As Type HB1B but frank wider at 32 mm.
HB3. Pitney Bowes-GB “6300”  (MV). Value $20
HB4. Pitney Bowes-GB “6900”  (MV).
Frank 30-31 x 23 mm, much narrower than Type HB3.
HB5. Pitney Bowes “Paragon”  (MV).
Frank 31 x 24 mm. Panels at top and bottom thin with small characters.
Value figures with “¥” at left and location code at right.
HB6. Pitney Bowes-GB “A900”  (MV).
Similar in size to Type HB5.
Top and bottom panels not as thin, and characters in panels are larger.
Value figures are large with “¥” at left and location code at right.
Very similar to Type HB1 but with large “¥” at left and without location code.
Date figures are widely spread.
A. Empty at right of value figures
B. With notched unengraved block at right
Small frank 26-27 x 23-24 mm.
Date figures have stops centered between D and M and after M. “¥” at left, location code at right.
HB9. Guilin Putian Telecommunication Equipment Factory "YG02”  (digital).
Printed in cherry-red color through a mylar ribbon.
HB10. Institute of Postal Science, Hangzhou (MV).
Date figures very small as ‘YY.M/MM.DD’. Stops low between Y and M and M and D.
Very large date figures, larger than value figures.
Both date and value figures large and somewhat narrow.
Top and bottom panels tall with relatively narrow center panel.
With “¥” character at left and single location character at right.
Large value figures of variable thickness.
Date figures small as ‘YY.M/MM.DD’.
Thin value figures close to the yuan (¥) character.
Panels at top and sides with four characters for Postage Paid vertical at right above town identification character (within parenthesis at bottom right).
“¥” in left panel. Date figures slightly higher in relation to value figures.
Same format as Type HB15 but frank is wider and value figures are italicized.
Date figures slightly taller and thinner.
Nearly square frank 29-30 x 27 mm. “¥” at left, blank at right.
HC2. Pitney Bowes “Paragon”  (MV).
Frank 31-32 x 24-26 mm. “¥” at left of value figures, blank at right.
HC3. Pitney Bowes “A900”  (MV).
Frank 29-30 x 24 mm. Value figures large and widely spaced.
“¥” at left, blank at right.
A. Frank 29-30 mm wide
B. Frank 32-33 mm wide
Small frank, 26-27 x 23-24 mm.
Date figures with stops centered.
“¥” at left, blank at right.
HC5. Shanghai Institute, National Post Bureau "YSZ301" (MV).
Small frank, 27 x 22-23 mm. “¥” at left, blank at right.
HC6. Hunan Post-Telecommunication Equipment Factory "YZ03"  (MV).
Frank 31-32 x 24-25 mm. “¥” at left, blank at right.
All seen are crude impressions printed in black.
A. Black impression, TM at left
B. Black impression, TM at right
C. Red impression, TM at left
D. Red impression, TM at right
a. TM sideways with date vertical
b. As B, used as surcharge on postal cards
c. Hour figure at right of date
HC7. Shanghai Institute, National Post Bureau "YSZ301"  (MV).
Frank 30 x 27 mm. Value figures widely spaced.
“¥” at left, blank at right. Date as ‘YY.MM.DD’.
All seen are crude impressions printed in red.
HC8. Francotyp-Postalia “EFS3000”  (digital).
Value figures narrow. Yuan (¥) character thick.
HC9. Francotyp-Postalia “JetMail”  (digital).
With 8-digit number vertical between TM and frank.
HC10. Pitney Bowes “DM300”  (digital).
With three columns of numbers stacked between TM and frank.
Date as ‘YYYY.MM.DD’.
A. Line above ID number at bottom
B. Without line above ID number at bottom
Frank very similar to Type HC1 but date figures are widely
Inscription in top panel is large nearly touching the frame and panel lines.
Value figures lowered, not centered, closer to the bottom panel line.
HC13.  Pitney Bowes “DM100”  (digital).
Narrow spacing between TM and frank.
Inscriptions in lower panel quite large.
HC14.  Pitney Bowes “DM800” (digital).
Frank nearly identical to Type HC13.
Differs only in the value figures which are more
HC15. Francotyp-Postalia “EFS3000” (MV).
Frank does not have bottom panel.
The ID number is below the frank.
One seen with ID number without prefix.
Printed thermally onto self-adhesive labels.
The lower panel is taller than the top panel.
Very narrow spacing, about 1 mm, between TM and frank.
Yuan sign (¥) is much smaller than the value figures.
Sub-group HD: “TAXEPERCUE” across top
HD1. Hasler “F88”  (MV). Value $25
As Type HA1 but inscriptions in French instead of Chinese.
With large "2" right of value figures.
As Type HB1 but with 5-character inscription at bottom.
I1. Hasler "Mailmaster" (MV), 1988. Value $100
Found used only in the town of Chang Chun.
Two machines are known to have used this stamp.
J1. Pitney Bowes-GB “6300" (MV). Extremely rare, value unknown.
Apparently this was a test die that somehow found its way onto a live meter.
One example seen.
K1. Beijing Institute of Postal Science “YJY-99”  (digital), 1997.
Self-service vending machine stamp.
TM at right with postage and other data at left.
Printed in black on plain white labels with square corners.
A. Stamp for routine mail. Value $20
B. Stamp for registered mail, with bar code and data added at bottom. Value $50
K2. 1999, Sino Science and Technology (digital).
Post Office stamp for bulk mail processing.
Very similar in appearance to Type K1 but the corners of the label are rounded.
A. Printed in black on plain white labels. Value $10
B. Printed in black on label with pre-printed green Postal logo.
K3:Sino Science and Technology (digital).
Post Office stamp for bulk mail processing.
As Type K2B but the sides of the die cut label spell out “CHINA POST”.
a. Postal logo applied in black on top of pre-printed green logo (error)
NOTE: The stamps shown here appear to be press-printed rather than applied by a postage meter. Several stamps like these have been used for special commemorative purposes.
This group of propulsion methods expel solid particles as reaction mass, or accelerate cargo directly.
2 46 Coilgun Engine/Launcher
3 47 Railgun Engine/Launcher
Description: A one or two stage rotary mechanism mechanically accelerates a small amount of reaction mass, then releases it. In the two stage version, top speeds of ~6 km/s are possible.  The advantage is to be able to use any available material as reaction mass.  The disadvantage is the relatively low ejection velocity.  There is an opportunity to mechanically augment another type of thruster by having it moving backwards relative to the vehicle center when running, thus adding up to 6 km/s to whatever the native exhaust velocity is. The duty cycle of the augmented thruster would be limited to about 25%, because the rest of the time it would be moving in the wrong direction to add velocity.  This raises the issue of many on-off cycles of the thruster.
Status: Centrifuges and flywheels have long been in use.  Versions optimized for ejecting mass at high velocity are still in the concept stage.
Description: This is a type of electromagnetic accelerator. A carrier, or bucket, is accelerated by interaction of magnetic fields from 'driver' coils. The carrier holds a reaction mass/cargo, which is released. The bucket is slowed down and reused.  There is no theoretical limit to velocity of this type of device - particle accelerators have reached near lightspeed - but practical limits are likely to be on the order of 10 km/s.  As a vehicle engine it is not dramatically different than other electric thrusters in performance, aside from the benefit of using any bulk mass as propellant.  As a fixed launcher for bulk materials, a large power supply and rapid recycling of the buckets allows very high mass delivery rates to orbit velocity.  Unassisted bulk material will have an orbit that intersects the launch point, so a device in orbit will have to catch the cargo lots and add some velocity to them.
Status: This method was extensively studied as part of the "Space Colony" studies of the ~1970's, and prototype parts were built and tested.
Schematic of railgun operation.
Description: A railgun consists of two current-carrying rails, and a projectile that creates a short circuit between the rails.  The rails create a vertical magnetic field between them, as the current goes in opposite directions in each rail.  The interaction of the field with the current in the short circuit creates a Lorentz force forward that accelerates a projectile.  In a large version this would be used to launch vehicles in their entirety.  In a smaller version it would eject a reaction mass and function as a propulsion engine.
Status: Railguns have been under development as replacements for conventional artillery, but are not yet operational as such.  For launch vehicle acceleration, a much larger power supply would be needed, and this has so far been merely a concept
Hone your ability to recognize capturable stones and groups here. For each of these diagrams, say if either player can capture and if so, where he'd have to play to do so.
Un leon qui have nullcos a far.
Yo prendet li plazza de Van Helsing in li vigilantie sur Lucy. Noi dit Arthur que anc il mey dormir, ma il dit no. Poy noi dit le que durant li die noi vell besonar le, ne nu, e que noi besonat un bon dormit Arthur – il finalmen dit yes.
Van Helsing esset tre amabil, e dit le: “Veni, mi infante, veni con me. Tu es malad e debil, trist e manca sangue. Tu ne deve esser sol – esser sol significa timer. In li grand chambre es un grand foy e du sofas, e noi va auxiliar unaltru, mem sin parlar durant que noi dormi.”
Ye six horas Van Helsing venit por vigilar la. Arthur hat indormit se, e il lassat le continuar dormir. Quande il videt li visage de Lucy yo audit li rapid inhalation e il dit me in un acut susurrada (susurrar = chuchotar ma plu rauc): "leva li persianes; yo vole luce!" Poy il inclinat se con su visage tre proxim a ti de Lucy. Il removet (remover = mover for) li flores e li nas-linette (nas-linette = micri pezze de vestiment) de su col. Surprisat, il criat: "Mein Gott!", quel in german significa mi Deo! Anc yo observat la.
Li vúlneres sur su col hat in tot desaparit.
Van Helsing observat la durant quin minutes. Poy il tornat se a me e dit:
Yo intrat li manjatoria e avigilat le. Il videt li luce del sole e esset surprisat ma yo dit le que Lucy dormit ancor, e que e yo e Van Helsing timet que li fine de Lucy aproximat se. Il covrit su visage con su manus e pregat durant un moment. Yo levat se per li epoles. "Veni", yo dit, "car mann, usa tui tot forties. It va far li cose plu facil por la."
Quande noi intrat li chambre noi videt que Van Helsing hat preparat omnicos. Il hat mem brossat (brossar = far li capilles bell) li capillatura (capillatura = li tot capilles) de Lucy, quel portat li aspecte de aurin undes. Quande noi intrat li chambre ella apertet su ocules e chuchotat lenimen:
"Arthur! Oh, mi amore, quam felici yo es vider te!"
Il volet besar la ma Van Helsing fat un geste con li manu. "No," il susurrat, "ancor ne! Prende li manu de ella; to va auxiliar la plu."
"Ne fa it, jamá! Per li vivent animes de tu e de ella!" E il stat quam un leon avan le.
Arthur esset surprisat e incolerat, ma dit e fat nullcos.
Sur li visage de Lucy noi videt un movement de colere e li acut dentes cludet se. Poy ella cludet li ocules.
Pos to ella apertet su ocules, queles denov monstrat li ver dulcitá de Lucy, e ella prendet li manu de Van Helsing e besat it. "Mi ver amico", ella dit con un debil e trist voce, "Li ver amico de yo, e de il! Oh, protecte (protecter = far ne vulnerar)  le, e da mi pace!"
"Yo jura it!" (jura = un fort promesse) il dit, levante su manu. Poy il tornat se a Arthur e dit: "Veni, mi infante, prende su manu e besa la sur li fronte, solmen un vez."
Il fat talmen, e talmen ili partit. (partir = devenir ne junt)
Poy li respiration de Lucy devenit denov rauc, e subitmen it cessat.
Yo prendet li brasse de Arthur e noi intrat li salon (salon = chambre por parlar, leer, fumar...), e il covrit su visage con li manus e plorat in un maniere quel presc fat me far sam.
Yo reintrat li chambre e trovat Van Helsing observante li povri Lucy, con un seriosissim visage. Li morte hat redat la su bellesse; mem li bocca ne esset tam blanc. It esset quam si li sangue, nu ne necessi por li cordie, hat intrat li altri partes del córpor por far la plu bell.
"Dormiente, noi pensat la mort,
e moriente, noi pensat la dormient."
Yo stat apu Van Helsing, e dit: "li povri puella. Finalmen ella ha trovat pace. It es li fine!"
Il tornat se a me e dit: "Vé! It es solmen li comense!"
Yo questionat le ma il solmen fat un geste con li cap e dit: "Nu noi posse far nullcos; solmen atender."
Quande on fa un fals cose, on erra.
Yo pensat que ella havet duant annus ma yo errat; ella have mult plu quam duant.
Capille = un sol capille. On brossa li capilles de su cap. Ma quande on parla pri li tot capilles e qualmen ili vide se, on usa li parol capillatura.
This book is about the Wikimedia Foundation, its goals, websites, criticisms and culture and how people can contribute to it.
What are namespaces?
The Wikis of Wikimedia, and What Goes Where
The creators of Wikibooks, those who contributed financially and so generously of their time, the administrators who assist in copyright compliance, layout and copyediting, the co-editors this book is expected to attract, and most of all the readers whom, though they may not edit, contribute by reading and pondering the writing, for, without readers, there would be no point to writing. In particular, Adrignoli was very helpful with an earlier book by this book's lead author, and by establishing a tone of genuine academic and bibliophilic collegiality, made wikibooks a true refuge in a wikiworld often full of wicked ways.
In the wikipaediae outside of wikibooks, James Neill, an administrator and bureacrat at wikiversity has really been a very positive and welcoming force which is reciprocally quite welcome indeed. On Wiktionary, User: Internoob has been a sage and innovative source of information, insight and encouragement in often contentious debates.
Please feel free to peruse Things to Do on the discussion page. You are also invited to the discussion page to suggest possible ways to handle the layout, which is at this time under study. Contributors are requested to read the text, unless making grammatical corrections,adding citations, or similar contributions which are not contingent upon understanding the overall vision of the book. The purpose of this request is to establish the unity which underlies that which is, in fact, a book, and to help contributors establish a feel for what this book is about. Of course, suggestions are always welcome for those who do not have the time to read the whole book but who have a burning desire to contribute an insight. Comments are also welcome on this request, whether it is regarded as draconian, or as an invitation to a reckless free for all of under-qualified editorial experiments!
Wikipaediae is the evolving culture of collaborative internet creativity utilizing wiki software. It includes the various projects of Wikimedia Foundation and separate groups which utilize similar software and collective protocol. It includes an ever-expanding array of projects, which in turn has fostered a subset of projects to provide intellectual[1] and technical,[citation needed][2] infrastructure and support. Sometimes these are referred to as backstage projects.[3]Included are variants of Wikipedia in multiple languages, but also collaborative media which utilize similar or derivative software and interactional models. These include wiktionary,
Other species of wikipaediae provide support to Wikipedia and its offshoots. These include wikicommons, which provides content, and mediawiki,which provides developer support in utilizing the software. The latter is not to be confused with Wikimedia,which hosts strategic planning papers and discussion.
Different wikis or projects necessarily encounter different issues depending upon the underlying structure of the wiki, its language, audience, contributors and administrators.
Disputes inevitably arise and the mechanisms for disposing of disputes itself has an effect upon the contributors and content attracted.
An underlying ethic across wiki projects is well expressed by the strategic planning motto:
"Imagine a world in which every single human being can freely share in the sum of all knowledge."
Consistent with this motto, many wikipaediae are interested in proliferating the benefits of their project. This reaches across linguistic barriers, a difficulty facilitated by translation software. Wikiversity Beta is a multilingual hub for the coordination of Wikiversity projects in different languages.
Wikimedia projects have divergent policies with regard to content and administration. For instance, the rule of thumb on Wikipedia is to encourage contributions based upon primary sources. Commensurately, Wikipedia discourages original research. However, throughout the world of wikipaedie, there are different views in this matter. For instance wikinews, which aspires to a specific vision of journalism, has a policy page titled "Original reporting" which establishes guidelines for preparing material which is novel in the world of publishing.
Wikiversity specifically encourages original research as long as it is consistent with its guidelines.
Shared Structures, Different Functions
Portals are designed as an easy user interface to facilitate reading. They originated in the Polish and German Wikipedias. In early 2005, the concept was imported to the English Wikipedia.
Projects are similar to portals in that they aggregate content but they are not as user friendly and are more apt to be used by editors.
Wikipaediae, not unlike frontiers in the gold rush days, is disproportionately comprised of men. Many Wikimedia projects report under-representation of women in its editorial and administrative teams.
Editor retention is also a frequently discussed problem area.[citation needed]
Wikimedia projects tend to emphasize non-ideological, policy-neutral approaches to content, but with regard to the fundamental social contract which is the matrix of its operations, Wikipedians of all type can be fiercely protective. Free speech, censorship and public policy which impacts internet infrastructure are issues of concern across all WMF projects and other internet enterprises.
The wikigame is a competition to see who can reach a "homebase" or destination wiki article from a random starting point solely by clicking links within wiki articles. [7]
Wikimedia Outreach is an offshoot of WikiMedia and is focused on building the numerical strength of foundation projects. It purports to serve as a home for multiple outreach and collaborative initiatives with "a bookshelf, a collection of best practices, and a coordination point for any activity that is directed to the public, to cultural institutions or to universities."[8]
Strategic planning for Wikimedia projects is an outgrowth of metawiki. In July 2009, the project began the first strategy-development project with the intention of producing a five-year strategic plan for the entire Wikimedia movement. More than 1,000 people from around the world contributed in more than 50 languages. Technologies deployed included IRC, [[Skype, mailing lists and wiki pages. The Bridgespan Group provided data andanalysis. Other important participants included Eugene Eric Kim of Blue Oxen Associates and  Wikipedian Philippe Beaudette.[9]
MediaWiki[10] provides software documentation and technical discussion for projects utilizing wiki software. Meta-focused wikis such as Wikimedia Outreach and Wikimedia Strategy are specialized projects that have their roots in Meta-Wiki.
Bugzilla is a bug tracker for MediaWiki. To use bugzilla you need to create an account. [11]
Incubator is a project for potential new language versions of wiki projects.
Wikimedia Mailservices administers Wikimedia Mailing Lists.
Wikitech is similar to mediawiki but includes server issues and overall Wikimedia technical documentation.
Test Wikipedia is for testing software changes
Wikistats is for collecting and processing Wikimedia statistics.
Wikimedia Laboratories is for developing new extensions and features.
Appendix A: List of Wikimedia Foundation Projects
Appendix B: List Non-WMF Wiki Projects (Non-Profit)
Geoffery Bard initiated this wikibook and all content in the first post was based upon a Wikipedia article of which he was, at that time, the sole contributor. Much of the information was found at the introductory pages of various WMF projects.
Adrignoli is an active administrator at Wikibooks and it is anticipated that Adrignoli will provide/has provided the usually excellent support and technical oversight of this project.
Other contributors are welcome but are requested to read all text and contributor notes in place and as they may arise, including the discussion page, in order to maintain consistency of style and relevance to the topic.
Please comply with the following, taken from Wikimedia website:
"Attribution: To re-distribute a text page in any form, provide credit to the authors either by including a) a hyperlink (where possible) or URL to the page or pages you are re-using, b) a hyperlink (where possible) or URL to an alternative, stable online copy which is freely accessible, which conforms with the license, and which provides credit to the authors in a manner equivalent to the credit given on this website, or c) a list of all authors. (Any list of authors may be filtered to exclude very small or irrelevant contributions.) This applies to text developed by the Wikimedia community."
CC-BY-SA 3.0 License and the GFDL. By using this text, you agree to provide a hyperlink or URL back to this wikibook or a lawful successor site and that is sufficient attribution under the Creative Commons license.
↑ "Communication Projects Group". http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Communication_Projects_Group. Retrieved May 14, 2011.
↑ "interwiki". http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Interwiki_map. Retrieved May 14, 2011.
↑ "Wikimedia projects". http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Wikimedia_projects. Retrieved May 14, 2011.
↑ "http://beta.wikiversity.org/wiki/Main_Page". http://beta.wikiversity.org/wiki/Main_Page. Retrieved May 14, 2011.
↑ http://strategy.wikimedia.org/wiki/Wikimedia_Movement_Strategic_Plan_Summary
↑ http://strategy.wikimedia.org/wiki/Advocacy_agendas
↑ http://webtrends.about.com/od/wiki/a/wiki_game.htm
↑ "Wikimedia Outreach". http://outreach.wikimedia.org/wiki/Main_Page. Retrieved May 14, 2011.
↑ "Board approved summary". http://strategy.wikimedia.org/wiki/Wikimedia_Movement_Strategic_Plan_Summary. Retrieved May 14, 2011.
↑ "MediaWiki contributors, "MediaWiki," MediaWiki, The Free Wiki Engine,". http://www.mediawiki.org/w/index.php?title=MediaWiki&oldid=65192. Retrieved May 14, 2011.
↑ "omitted". https://bugzilla.wikimedia.org/docs/en/html/myaccount.html. Retrieved May 14, 2011.
Corn can stop the hardening of blood vessels. The amount of fat and magnesium in corn is 5-6 times higher than that of rice or noodle. Its fat content consists of up to more than 60% of omega-6. It also consists of vitamin E, lecithin, and etc. It reduces the cholesterol in blood. It prevents and treats high blood pressure, and stops the hardening of arteries. And it prevents cell aging, and stops the declination in brain functions. Magnesium can help to relax blood vessels, and keeps the proper functions of the heart muscle.
Do not put specific Vehicle Identification Codes on this page. They will be removed.
Nissan uses following format for North America:
Nissan uses following format for Europe and the rest of the world:
JN1 - Nissan Motor Co. Ltd., Nissan Passenger Vehicle, Complete
JN3 - Nissan Motor Co. Ltd., Nissan Passenger Vehicle, Incomplete
JN6 - Nissan Motor Co. Ltd., Nissan Truck & Van
JN8 - Nissan Motor Co. Ltd., Nissan Multi-Purpose Vehicle
1N4 - Nissan Motor Mfg. Corp. USA, Nissan Passenger Vehicle
1N6 - Nissan Motor Mfg. Corp. USA, Nissan Truck & Van
5BZ - Nissan Motor Mfg. Corp. USA, Nissan Truck & Van
5N1 - Nissan Motor Mfg. Corp. USA, Nissan Multi-Purpose Vehicle
5N3 - Nissan Motor Mfg. Corp. USA, Infiniti Multi-Purpose Vehicle
3N1 - Nissan Mexicana SA de CV, Nissan Passenger Vehicle
94D - Nissan Do Brasil Automoveis Ltda., Nissan Multi-Purpose Vehicle
Sometimes things will happen in a system when the processor is simply not ready. In fact, sometimes things change that require immediate attention. Can you imagine, sitting at your PC, that you were to hit buttons on the keyboard, and nothing happens on your computer?
Maybe the processor was busy, and it just didnt check to see if you were hitting any buttons at that time. The solution to this problem is something called an "Interrupt." Interrupts are events that cause the microprocessor to stop what it is doing, and handle a high-priority task first. After the interrupt is handled, the microprocessor goes back to whatever it was doing before. In this way, we can be assured that high-priority inputs are never ignored.
There are two types of interrupts: Hardware and Software. Software interrupts are called from software, using a specified command. Hardware interrupts are triggered by peripheral devices outside the micro-controller. For instance, your embedded system may contain a timer that sends a pulse to the controller every second. Your micro-controller would wait until this pulse is received, and when the pulse comes, an interrupt would be triggered that would handle the signal.
Interrupt Service Routines (ISR) are the portions of the program code that handle the interrupt requests. When an Interrupt is triggered (either a hardware or software interrupt), the processor breaks away from the current task, moves the instruction pointer to the ISR, and then continues operation. When the ISR has completed, the processor returns execution to the previous location.
Many embedded systems are called interrupt driven systems, because most of the processing occurs in ISRs, and the embedded system spends most of its time in a low-power mode.
Some people split an ISR into two parts: top-half (fast interrupt handler, First-Level Interrupt Handler (FLIH)) and bottom-half (slow interrupt handler, Second-Level Interrupt Handlers (SLIH)). Top-half is a faster part of ISR which should quickly store minimal information about interrupt and schedule slower bottom-half at a later time.
We discuss two-level interrupt handling and other ways of writing interrupt handlers in interrupt architecture.
The "Interrupt Vector Table" is a list of every interrupt service routine.
(Some processors expect the interrupt vector table to be a series of "call" instructions, each one followed by the address of the ISR.
Other processors expect the interrupt vector table to hold just the ISR addresses alone.)
You must make sure that every entry in the interrupt vector table is filled with the address of some actual ISR, even if it means making most of them point to the "do nothing and return from interrupt" ISR.
The PIC18 and PIC16 series of processors have a single interrupt handler,
a single global interrupt enable bit, and a whole array of bits in the interrupt hardware.
Each possible source of interrupts has a pair of bits in the interrupt hardware—a "flag" bit that is set whenever some piece of hardware wants attention, as if it's waving a flag trying to attract attention,
(Confusingly, some people refer to both bits as "flags"—in this section, we refer to the "request attention" bits as flag bits, and the "ignore or not" bits as enable bits).
When an interrupt occurs on an 8-bit PICmicro (PIC18 or PIC16), the hardware clears the global interrupt enable bit, then starts running the one and only interrupt handler.
The interrupt handler software must somehow check all the things that could have possibly caused the interrupt—typically by checking each interrupt flag one by one—and handle each one (if necessary).
The 680x0 and x86 and dsPIC and PIC24 and many other processors have many interrupt vectors.
When some piece of hardware requests attention on such a processor,
Many people write interrupt routines in C.
Alas, there is no standard way to write interrupt handlers in portable C.
Every C compiler seems to use its own keywords
Even with gcc, the favored interrupt declaration varies from one processor to another.[2][3]
Other programmers use C compilers that do not support
They are forced to write the interrupt handler in assembly language,
An interrupt routine typically begins with a bunch of boilerplate code
That boilerplate code is very different from one processor family to another—and has some key differences from the normal
The compiler (or an assembly language programmer) writes in the interrupt vector table a pointer to that interrupt handler.
One extremely common problem is trying to do "too much" in an interrupt routine.
Alas, often the symptoms only occur when two different interrupt routines are triggered more-or-less simultaneously, leading to difficult-to-debug intermittent errors and a lot of finger-pointing. Unfortunately, the person who wrote one interrupt routine points out that his routine works fine when run alone, and the person who wrote the other interrupt routine points out that his routine works fine when run alone, and all too often they each blame the other person for the problems that occur when both interrupts occur.
One common symptom of an interrupt routine (possibly the UART interrupt handler, but often some other seemingly unrelated interrupt routine) taking "too long" is losing some, but not all of the characters in a stream of characters coming in over the UART.[4]
Because it is difficult to calculate how much time an interrupt handler will take,
One popular debugging technique is to write interrupt handlers such that
An o'scope attached to that pin shows the actual execution time of that interrupt handler.[4]
"Writing interrupt service routines in C for the Texas Instruments MSP430"
"writing interrupt handlers in C for the Atmel AVR"
Robert Ashby.
"Catching the Overrun".
Embedded Control Systems Design/Operating systems#Interrupts
Embedded Control Systems Design/Real Time Operating systems#Interrupt servicing
Embedded Control Systems Design/Design Patterns#Interrupts
Serial Programming/8250 UART Programming#Interrupt handlers
Tight waist, Far Ankle
Chop The Arm, Grab The Ankle.
Suction is life-saving here clients are unable to maintain their own airway. Nurses must take responsibility for checking function of suction apparatus, where it is kept. Airway management may be as simple as reminding narcotised clients to take a deep breath occasionally, or keeping the clients head in a neutral or even extended position to prevent lingual obstruction (tongue blockage).
This section will contain a list of definitions of physical variables used in this book.
Internal energy is the total energy needed to create a system. It can be divided into the sum of two other energies (internal kinetic energy and internal potential energy).
Enthalpy is a thermodynamic variable which corresponds to the total energy of the system and the energy required to create a volume. It has units of energy and can be calculated using the equation H = U +pV
The thermal energy transferred from the surroundings to the system.
The energy corresponding to the expansion of the system against the surroundings.
Changes in the state of a system can also involve a change in the degree of disorder in the system and surroundings. The thermodynamic function entropy corresponds to this disorder.
The change in energy found within a canonical ensemble. This can be calculated by the following equation: A = U - T x S
The change in energy found within an isothermal-isobaric ensemble. This can be calculated by the following equation: G = H - T x S
The moment of inertia is what the rotation of an object depends on.
The sum over all states of a system. It is used in the denominator of the Boltzmann distribution.
For the canonical ensemble, the chemical potential, is the Helmholtz free energy change when a particle is added to the system.
Fraction of Molecules at a Given Speed
The fraction of molecules within a range of speed (F) is an integral over the probability distribution.
The mean free path is the average distance that a molecule can travel before it will undergo a collision.
The drag force per unit area.
The rate that momentum passes through a plane per unit area, per unit second
File:LOZ Hyrule 3.png
In this very important cave, you can obtain the White Sword, but only if you have at least 5 Heart Containers in your Life Meter.  The White Sword has double the power of the Wooden Sword.
Reach this area to find the entrance to the fifth dungeon, but beware; the distance you must hike up the hills to reach the top can be deceptive.
The waterfall hides a secret cave where information can be bought.  The more you pay, the better the info.
These are the Lost Hills.  Unprepared wanderers can feel as if they are making no progress through this area, but persistent climbers know that the only way to reach the top is to keep climbing.
If you bomb the north wall all the way to the right, you will uncover the entrance to a medicine woman. If you have shown her the letter, she will sell you a Red Potion for 68 rupees or a Blue Potion for 40 rupees.
Just before the entrance to the desert, burn the lower rightmost tree to reveal a stairwell.  Down the stairs is a Moblin that will donate 30 rupees to your cause.
Inside the tree, you will discover level one.
Travel west along the bridge to find the entrance to the first dungeon.
Right next to the cave with the White Sword, but a great journey away, Link can obtain the Magic Sword if he has at least 12 total heart containers.  Push the left most boulder to reveal the stairwell that leads to the sword.
In this very important cave, you can obtain the White Sword, but only if you have at least 5 Heart Containers in your Life Meter.  The White Sword has double the power of the Wooden Sword.
By climbing to the very top of the Lost Hills, you will find a well deserved life giving fairy.
If you have the ladder, you can bomb the cliff wall along the right side of this area to reveal a cave.  Inside you will find a medicine woman who will sell you the Red Potion for 68 rupees or the Blue potion for 40 rupees if you have already shown her the letter.
If you have the ladder, bomb the left side of the cliff wall to reveal the entrance to the eighth dungeon.
The waterfall hides a secret cave where information can be bought.  The more you pay, the better the info.
These are the Lost Hills.  While the top contains a fairy lake, it is more important to push the rightmost boulder to reveal the entrance to the fourth dungeon.
Just before the entrance to the desert, burn the lower rightmost tree to reveal a stairwell.  Down the stairs is a Moblin that will donate 30 rupees to your cause.
The desert in the 2nd Quest holds many more secrets which must be revealed by using the Whistle.  If you blow the whistle here, you will reveal a stairwell where you can find a medicine woman who will sell you the Red  or Blue potions if you have already shown her the letter.
The whistle unlocks many desert secrets.  Blow the whistle here and a staircase will be revealed.  Descend down the stairs to find a Moblin that will give you 10 rupees.
Inside the tree, you will discover level one.
Travel west along the bridge to find the entrance to the first dungeon.
The whistle is a far more important tool in the 2nd quest.  By blowing the whistle in this area, you will discover a staircase.  Travel down the stairs to find one of the rare Heart Containers.
This module contains functions for accessing the I2C interfaces of the Alcor6L CPU.
Only master I2C mode is implemented in eLua (and Alcor6L).
Setup the I2C interface.
(i2c-setup id speed)
Send a START on the specified I2C interface.
Returns: NIL.
Send a STOP on the specified I2C interface.
Returns: NIL.
Send an address on the I2C interface.
(i2c-address id address direction)
Writes data to a slave that has already acknowledged an i2c-address call.
(i2c-write id any1 [any2] ... [anyn] )
(i2c-read id numbytes)
Reads a number of bytes from a slave that has already acknowledged an i2c-address call. It acknowledges all the bytes received except for the last one.
a_abbrv: anylang/string (ss)
a_abbrv: anylang/array (aa)
a_aka:   list simple_sequence
An associative array is a mapping of keys to values. This is also known as a Hash, Hashtable and Dictionary.
↑ "Associative_array". http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Associative_array. Retrieved 2010-05-01.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Associative_array
↑ From "Dive into Python" Note
A dictionary in Python is like a hash in Perl. In Perl, variables which store hashes always start with a % character; in Python, variables can be named anything, and Python keeps track of the datatype internally.
Cryptographic protection of databases, mailinglists, memberslists.
A straightforward protection scheme: One-way hash function with symmetric encryption.
Encrypt the index field with a one-way hash function
Use the value of step 1 as the cipher key to encrypt the data fields.
Symmetric encryption algorithim — the same cipher key is used to encrypt and decrypt data
Look for the hashed value in the index field of the database and for each matching entry decrypt the data fields using the index field as the cipher key.
Some very easy php pseudocode to protect your data by encrypting your databases with a one-way hash and blowfish symmetric encryption.
Using a one-way hash and blowfish symmetric encryption.
Get the encrypted record of user John Doe and decrypt the data.
$aRecord['email']       =       "johndoe@anisp.localhost"; // The Primary key
$cipher_key = crypt( $aRecord['email'] , "A_SECRET_COMPANY_SALT");
Get the encrypted record of user John Doe and decrypt the data.
$primary_key = "johndoe@anisp.localhost";
$cipher_key = crypt(  $primary_key , "A_SECRET_COMPANY_SALT");
This page or section of the Cryptography book is a stub. You can help Wikibooks by expanding it.
The first picture on the Web was taken of a parodistic music group before it performed today in 1992 at the CERN Hardronic Festival and was published by Berners-Lee soon after. With this picture he hinted at another potential future for his young hypertext information system, after it had previously only been pitched for more serious matters like scientific collaboration.
Kinetic energy is the energy of motion regardless of the direction. Any object (with mass) in motion has kinetic energy. There are several types of kinetic energy. It should be noted that many times several of these types of kinetic energies occur simultaneously.
This is the energy due to motion from one location to another. It is defined by the integral of momentum with respect to velocity:
This is the energy due to rotation around one point (the center). It is defined by the integral of angular momentum (
) with respect to angular velocity (
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
5 Participate in a physical game or outdoor activity depicting one of the parables of Jesus.
Read and discuss Matthew 13:44.
“The kingdom of heaven is like treasure that was hidden in a field. When a man found it, he hid it again. He was very happy. So he went and sold everything he had. And he bought that field.” (NIRV)
Ask - “If you could find a treasure, what would you hope to find?  Why would that treasure be so special to you?” “What would you be willing to give away to buy the treasure?” “Since Jesus told parables as a special way to tell us about spiritual things, what do you think Jesus meant?  Do you think the treasure represents something else?  What?”
What is a parable? Why and how did Jesus use parables?
a simple story used to illustrate a moral or spiritual lesson.
Jesus spoke in parables - earthly stories with a heavenly meaning. He did so that his disciples would comprehend his teachings and that unbelievers would be without comprehension. Those interested in understanding the truth of his message would understand while those not interested would remain without understanding
"Therefore I speak to them in parables, because seeing they do not see, and hearing they do not hear, nor do they understand" (Matthew 13:13).
Name and learn the meaning of a parable Jesus told from each of the 4 gospels.
PLEASE NOTE:  Most commentators don't see any parables present in the gospel of John.
NOTE:  Most commentators, including SDA Bible Commentary, don’t see parables as being present in the gospel of John.  The Good Shepherd, while not technically a parable would work for the purposes of this award. (John 10:1-5) Lesson:  If we follow Jesus, we will know His voice and thus our conscience is less likely to be deceived.
The parable of the lamp - Matthew 5:14-16 Lesson Children who love Jesus will not be afraid to show His love to other people.
The Good Samaritan - Luke 10:25-37 - Lesson:  Children who take care of those that other people ignore are a blessing to everyone.
The Unwilling Party Guests - Luke 14 - Lesson:  Children who love Jesus will want to invite other people to know Jesus too, even if some people say “no thank you” to their invitation.  Sometimes the people we invite to love Jesus won’t look or act like people we might think Jesus wants to have in His kingdom, but Jesus loves whomever accepts His invitation.
The Sower and the Seed - Mark 4 - Lesson:  Choosing to accept Jesus’ love is like being good soil so that the seeds of Jesus’ love can sprout in our lives.
Sower of seeds : Matthew 13:3-8, 18-23. Mark 4:3-8, 14-20. Luke 8:5-8,11-15.
Lost sheep: Matthew 18:12-14; Luke 15:3-7.
Prodigal son: Luke 15:11-32.
Wise and foolish servants: Matthew 24:45-51, Luke 12:42-48.
Mustard seed: Matthew 13: 31-32, Mark 4:30, Luke 13:18-19.
After reading the parables for previous requirements and brainstorming other parables Jesus tells, divide children and their adults into teams.  Give them 15-20 minutes to go out into the woods (outside near the church, on a trail, maybe even on a park field trip).  They can collect materials from nature (nothing fake or manufactured) to make a "picture frame diorama" of a scene from one of Jesus' parables.  After they return they have an additional 10-15 minutes to make the diorama.  BE SURE that adults help kids and not the other way around!
Participate in a physical game or outdoor activity depicting one of the parables of Jesus.
Teaching Idea: Seed Sowing (Matthew 13, Mark 4, and Luke 8)
Materials:  Quick sproat large seeds (Sweet alyssum, celosia, cornflower or bachelor button, marigold and cosmos sprout within five to seven days. Zinnias, sunflowers and morning glories bring even more color and quick growth, while fast-growing nasturtiums multitask as garden beauties that you can add to salads or as dinner-plate garnishes.)
Procedure:  In this activity, you collect some seeds and take the Sunbeams outside. Have them scatter the seeds across the parking lot, yard, and other outside locations. Then help them plant some seeds in a small pot. As they scatter and plant, tell them about the parable of the sower. The following week, ask the children if they see any of their seeds outside. Ask them about the seeds in their pot. Use the answers to talk about the parable of the sower.
Teaching Idea: The Unwilling Party Guests (Luke 14)
Materials:  paper. Masking tape, and large dark crayons one per Sunbeam.
Procedure:  Read the passage.  Highlight how the people who finally came to the party were happy, even if at the beginning they weren’t sure they should be invited.
Tape a piece of paper on each Sunbeam’s back.  Give each a crayon.  Tell them that Jesus is inviting them to a party, but that in order for everyone to be ready for the party, they need to race.  They need to work on drawing smiles on EVERYONE ELSE’S back before anyone else does.  This will not take long!  At the end, ask “count your smiles on your page.  How many do you have?”  “did you find that you got about as many smiles as you gave?  How is going to heaven with as many smiling friends as possible like this game?
v • d • e Adventist Adventurer Awards
Bible Friends ·  Community Helper ·  Finger Play ·  Healthy Food ·  Healthy Me ·  Insects ·  Music ·  Special Helper ·  Stars ·  Trains And Trucks ·  Weather ·  Woody Lamb ·  Zoo Animals
Alphabet Fun ·  Animal Homes ·  Animals ·  Beginning Biking ·  Beginning Swimming ·  Bible Friends ·  Birds ·  Crayons And Markers ·  Fire Safety ·  Gadgets And Sand ·  God's World ·  Helping Mommy ·  Jesus' Star ·  Jigsaw Puzzle ·  Know Your Body ·  Left And Right ·  Manners Fun ·  My Community Friends ·  Pets ·  Scavenger Hunt ·  Shapes And Sizes ·  Sponge Art ·  Toys
Artist ·  Bible I ·  Butterfly ·  Buttons ·  Fish ·  Flowers ·  Friend of Animals ·  Friend of Jesus ·  Fruits of the Spirit ·  Guide ·  Health Specialist ·  Home Helper ·  Honey ·  Honeybee ·  Music Maker ·  Reading I ·  Safety Specialist ·  Spotter ·  Swimmer I
Camper ·  Collector ·  Cooking Fun ·  Country Fun ·  Courtesy ·  Feathered Friends ·  Fitness Fun ·  Flowers ·  Friend of Nature ·  Gardener ·  Glue Right ·  Handicraft ·  Ladybugs ·  Reading II ·  Road Safety ·  Skier ·  Trees ·  Whales
Astronomer ·  Bead Craft ·  Build & Fly ·  Building Blocks ·  Cyclist ·  Disciples ·  Early Adventist Pioneer ·  First Aid Helper ·  Gymnast ·  Hand Shadows ·  Homecraft ·  Lizards ·  Magnet Fun ·  Media Critic ·  Olympics ·  Pearly Gates ·  Postcards ·  Prayer ·  Reading III ·  Sewing Fun ·  Swimmer II ·  Temperance ·  Tin Can Fun ·  Troubadour ·  Wise Steward
Basket Maker ·  Bible II ·  Bible Royalty ·  Caring Friend ·  Carpenter ·  Computer Skills ·  Environmentalist ·  Geologist ·  Habitat ·  Hygiene ·  My Church ·  My Picture Book ·  Outdoor Explorer ·  Pearly Gates ·  Prayer Warrior ·  Rainbow Promise ·  Reading IV ·  Reporter ·  Sign Language ·  Steps to Jesus
Height: 3.5m/11'6"
Weight: 950kg/2,094.0lb
Move types which are good on Groudon: Grass, Ice, Water
Move types which are bad on Groudon: Poison, Rock
Move types which don't effect Groudon: Electric
All other move types are normal effectiveness on Groudon.
Ruby / Sapphire Emerald XD / Colosseum
RS/FL: Aerial Ace, Brick Break, Bulk Up, Cut, Dig, Double Team, Dragon Claw, Earthquake, Facade, Fire Blast, Flamethrower, Frustration, Hidden Power, Hyper Beam, Iron Tail, Overheat, Protect, Rest, Return, Roar, Rock Smash, Rock Tomb, Safeguard, Sandstorm, Secret Power, Shock Wave, Solarbeam, Strength, Sunny Day, Thunder, Thunderbolt, Toxic
Plastic ZIP Ties (as found for tying cables together) can be used to hold various components in place such as servos and push rod sleeves.
In the Environment module we introduced the idea of an environment variable as a general way of storing small pieces of data. In this module we take an in-depth look at using those variables: 'variable expansion', 'parameter substitution' or just 'substitution'.
The reason that using a variable is called substitution is that the shell literally replaces each reference to any variable with its value. This is done while evaluating the command-line, which means that the variable substitution is made before the command is actually executed.
The simplest way of using a variable is the way we've already seen, prepending the variable name with a '$'. So for instance:
The value JoeSixpack is substituted for $USER before the echo command is executed.
Of course, once the substitution is made the result is still just the text that was in the variable. The interpretation of that text is still done by whatever program is run. So for example:
Just because the text came from a variable, doesn't mean the file exists.
Basic variable expansion is already quite flexible. You can use it as described above, but you can also use variables to create longer strings. For instance, if you want to set the log directory for an application to the "log" directory in your home directory, you might fill in the setting like this:
And if you're going to use that setting more often, you might want to create your own variable like this:
And, of course, if you want specific subdirectories for logs for different programs, then the logs for the Wyxliz application go into directory
The Bourne Shell has a number of different syntaxes for variable substitution, each with its own meaning and use. In this section we examine these syntaxes.
We've already talked at length about basic variable substitution: you define a variable, stick a '$' in front of it, the shell substitutes the value for the variable. By now you're probably bored of hearing about it.
But we've not talked about one situation that you might run into with basic variable substitution. Consider the following:
Adding some text to a variable's value
One duck, two
Uhhh.... we're missing something...
So what went wrong here? Well, obviously the shell substituted nothing for the ANIMAL variable, but why? Because with the extra 's' the shell thought we were asking for the non-existent ANIMALs variable. But what gives there? We've used variables in the middle of strings before (as in '/home/ANIMAL/logs'). But an 's' is not a '/': an 's' can be a valid part of a variable name, so the shell cannot tell the difference. In cases where you explicitly have to separate the variable from other text, you can use braces:
Adding some text to a variable's value, take II
One duck, two ducks
That's better!
Both cases (with and without the braces) count as basic variable substitution and the rules are exactly the same. Just remember not to leave any spaces between the braces and the variable name.
Since a variable can be empty, you'll often write code in your scripts to check that mandatory variables actually have a value. But in the case of optional variables it is usually more convenient not to check, but to use a default value for the case that a variable is not defined. This case is actually so common that the Bourne Shell defines a special syntax for it: the dash. Since a dash can mean other things to the shell as well, you have to combine it with braces — the final result looks like this:
*Where varname is the name of the variableand default is the value used if varname is not defined
Again, don't leave any spaces between the braces and the rest of the text. The way to use this syntax is as follows:
Without colon a variable will be substituted only if it is not defined:
As an extension to default values, there's a syntax that not only supplies a default value but assigns it to the unset variable at the same time. It looks like this:
*Where varname is the name of the variableand default is the value used and assigned if varname is not defined
As usual, avoid spaces in between the braces. Here's an example that demonstrates how this syntax works:
Without colon a variable will be assigned only if it is not defined:
This substitution is sort of a quick test to see if a variable is defined (and that's usually what it's used for). It's sort of the reverse of the default value syntax and looks like this:
*Where varname is the name of the variableand substitute is the value used if varname is defined
This syntax returns the substitute value if the variable is defined. That sounds counterintuitive at first, especially if you ask what is returned if the variable is not defined — and learn that the value is nothing. Here's an example:
So what could possibly be the use of this notation? Well, it's used often in scripts that have to check whether lots of variables are set or not. In this case the fact that a variable has a value means that a certain option has been activated, so you're interested in knowing that the variable has a value, not what that value is. It looks sort of like this (pseudocode, this won't actually work in the shell):
Default value assignmentif ${SPECIFIC_OPTION_VAR:+optionset} == optionset then ...
Without colon a variable will be substituted also if it is empty:
This final syntax is sort of a debug check to check whether or not a variable is set. It looks like this:
*Where varname is the name of the variableand message is the printed if varname is not defined
With this syntax, if the variable is defined everything is okay. Otherwise, the message is printed and the command or script exits with a non-zero exit status. Or, if there is no message, the text "parameter null or not set" is printed.
You can use this syntax to check that the mandatory variables for your scripts have been set and to print an error message if they are not.
-sh: SOMEVAR: has not been set
-sh: SOMEVAR: parameter null or not set
With colon variable will be checked for emptiness also:
-sh: EMPTY_VAR: has not been set or empty
-sh: ABSENCE_VAR: has not been set or empty
Next Page: Control flow |
If 1... Kg4 then 2. e4+ Kh4 3.g3#
Note that h4 is the only place on the board where the black king is mated so quickly.
Water is excreted from the body in multiple forms; including urine and feces, sweating, and by water vapour in the exhaled breath. Therefore, it is necessary to adequately rehydrate to replace lost fluids.
Early recommendations for the quantity of water required for maintenance of good health suggested that 6–8 glasses of water daily is the minimum to maintain proper hydration.[32] However the notion that a person should consume eight glasses of water per day cannot be traced to a credible scientific source.[33] The original water intake recommendation in 1945 by the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Research Council read: "An ordinary standard for diverse persons is 1 milliliter for each calorie of food. Most of this quantity is contained in prepared foods."[34] More recent comparisons of well-known recommendations on fluid intake have revealed large discrepancies in the volumes of water we need to consume for good health.[35] Therefore, to help standardize guidelines, recommendations for water consumption are included in two recent European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) documents (2010): (i) Food-based dietary guidelines and (ii) Dietary reference values for water or adequate daily intakes (ADI).[36] These specifications were provided by calculating adequate intakes from measured intakes in populations of individuals with “desirable osmolarity values of urine and desirable water volumes per energy unit consumed.”
For healthful hydration, the current EFSA guidelines recommend total water intakes of 2.0 L/day for adult females and 2.5 L/day for adult males. These reference values include water from drinking water, other beverages, and from food. About 80% of our daily water requirement comes from the beverages we drink, with the remaining 20% coming from food.[37] Water content varies depending on the type of food consumed, with fruit and vegetables containing more than cereals, for example.[38] These values are estimated using country-specific food balance sheets published by the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations.
The EFSA panel also determined intakes for different populations. Recommended intake volumes in the elderly are the same as for adults as despite lower energy consumption, the water requirement of this group is increased due to a reduction in renal concentrating capacity.[36] Pregnant and breastfeeding women require additional fluids to stay hydrated. The EFSA panel proposes that pregnant women should consume the same volume of water as non-pregnant women, plus an increase in proportion to the higher energy requirement, equal to 300 mL/day.[36] To compensate for additional fluid output, breastfeeding women require an additional 700 mL/day above the recommended intake values for non-lactating women. Dehydration and over-hydration - too little and too much water, respectively - can have harmful consequences. Drinking too much water is one of the possible causes of hyponatremia, i.e., low serum sodium.
In this article we shall look at the most significant way in which geologists classify rocks. The reader should recall from the article on minerals that a rock is an aggregate of one or more minerals or mineraloids.
Igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic rocks
The rock cycle.There are all sorts of ways that we might classify rocks. We might, for example, divide them up according to chemistry: and indeed the distinction between silicates and carbonates is a useful one. We might also classify rocks according to whether they contain felsic or mafic minerals, and as we shall see this is a good way to classify certain rocks. But the most fundamental way in which geologists classify rocks is to label them as igneous, sedimentary, or metamorphic.
Igneous rocks are rocks formed by the cooling and setting of molten rock.
Sedimentary rocks are formed by sediment (for example, sand or mud) turning into rock (such as sandstone or mudrock).
Metamorphic rocks are formed when rocks are subjected to heat, to pressure, to chemical reactions, or to any combination of these three, in such a way as to change the properties of the original rock in some way.
The three types of rock can be converted on into the other by geological processes. Metamorphism can turn igneous and sedimentary rocks metamorphic; erosion can turn igneous and metamorphic rocks into sediment which can then become sedimentary rock; and sedimentary and metamorphic rocks can be melted down into molten rock which can then cool to form igneous rock.
The relation between the various kind of rocks can be summarized by a diagram of the rock cycle. One representation of it is shown to the right.
At this point we are beginning to touch on the main theme of this textbook. For to classify rocks as igneous, sedimentary, or metamorphic is implicitly to classify them not by their directly observable properties such as color or density or chemical composition, but by their history as inferred from their present-day properties. The reader will therefore want to know how this history is inferred. This question will be answered in separate articles on igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic rocks.
In the meantime, let us observe how intrinsically historical geology is. After we've got past the most basic of considerations such as defining a mineral and defining a rock, we are plunged into historical considerations. And this is not just because this course is about historical geology: it would be the same if it was an introduction to how to find oil. Geology is so intrinsically a historical science that if we tried to do without historical inferences we might as well classify rocks by how pretty they are for all the good it would do us.
Moving up the Food Chain:  Become comfortable with questioning our own / the system’s assumptions and traditions about the way education should work.
Moving Beyond “Wrong” = “Bad”:  Realize that mistakes are not purely bad.
Redefining “Cheating”:  Last century’s definition is no longer necessarily the best one.
Knowing What You Don’t Know vs. Knowing What You Know:  Understand that the former is probably more important.
Feedback and Isolation in Digital Environments:  When isolation can be physical and/or psychological, what can be done to allow for meaningful feedback?
The Digital Divide:  The various issues that surround access to technology play a major impact on the extent to which and ways in which technology can be effectively employed in today’s educational system in American and beyond.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Foods are about satisfying normal physiological and biochemical energy needs of the body, substances that also can sustain normal lifespan. For the human body, substances that can satisfy the needs of normal life activities and help with the prolonging of life are known as foods.
A special ability is either extraordinary, spell-like, or supernatural in nature.
Extraordinary Abilities (Ex): Extraordinary abilities are nonmagical. They are, however, not something that just anyone can do or even learn to do without extensive training. Effects or areas that negate or disrupt magic have no effect on extraordinary abilities.
Spell-Like Abilities (Sp): Spell-like abilities, as the name implies, are spells and magical abilities that are very much like spells. Spell-like abilities are subject to spell resistance and dispel magic. They do not function in areas where magic is suppressed or negated (such as antimagic field).
Supernatural Abilities (Su): Supernatural abilities are magical but not spell-like. Supernatural abilities are not subject to spell resistance and do not function in areas where magic is suppressed or negated (such as antimagic field). A supernatural ability's effect cannot be dispelled and is not subject to counterspells. See below for a summary of the types of special abilities.
Dispel: Can dispel magic and similar spells dispel the effects of abilities of that type?
Spell Resistance: Does spell resistance protect a creature from these abilities?
Antimagic Field: Does an antimagic field or similar magic suppress the ability?
Attack of Opportunity: Does using the ability provoke attacks of opportunity the way that casting a spell does?
Various attacks cause ability score loss, either ability damage or ability drain. Points lost to ability damage return at the rate of 1 point per day (or double that if the character gets complete bed rest) to each damaged ability, and the spells lesser restoration and restoration offset ability damage as well. Ability drain, however, is permanent, though restoration can restore even those lost ability score points.
While any loss is debilitating, losing all points in an ability score can be devastating.
Strength 0 means that the character cannot move at all. He lies helpless on the ground.
Dexterity 0 means that the character cannot move at all. He stands motionless, rigid, and helpless.
Constitution 0 means that the character is dead.
Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets
The ghoul, while not exactly the best looking of all magical creatures, isn't all that dangerous. It occupies attics or barns owned by wizards, and resembles a buck-toothed ogre. The most harm it can cause is to growl at someone who unluckily comes across it. It often groans and throws things around.
Beginner warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
In Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, it is mentioned that there is a Ghoul living in the attic of The Burrow, the Weasley home; Ron is rather dismissive of it, saying that it is nowhere near as good as having a house-elf. There is mention of a "murderous old ghoul" elsewhere in the books, which would imply that ghouls can also become dangerous as they get old; possibly, like many animals, they get senile.
In the case of the Weasleys' attic, the ghoul is used as part of the ongoing illustration of the Weasley family's relative poverty; the idea, one supposes, is that rich families have house-elves to take care of them. Ron does find out that having a house-elf can be a double-edged sword, though, when he has to deal with Kreacher.
Ghouls are also mentioned in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows. Ron, with the help of his father, changes his ghoul into a replica of himself with "Spattergroit", so that he can search for the Horcruxes with Harry and Hermione.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
What do ghouls eat? Boggarts feed off our fears and so act to inspire fear; what would Ghouls feed off that would cause them to prefer noise? Could it be irritation?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Amides, like esters, are carboxylic acid derivatives. This is the last class of carboxylic derivatives.
Unlike amines, which are decent bases, amides are weak bases. The conjugate acids of amides have pKa values of around -0.5. The reason amides are not as basic is due to the presence of the carbonyl groups. The carbonyl groups are inherently electron withdrawing and thus pull electron density away from the nitrogen group. Furthermore, resonance delocalizes the electron density from the nitrogen. The lone pair on the nitrogen in the amine can form a double bond with the carbon while the carbonyl bond breaks, giving oxygen a negative charge. Because the nitrogen’s lone pair is being shared with oxygen, it’s electron density is less and thus, does not have the electron density to be a good base.
However, comparative to other functional groups such as esters, aldehydes, and ketones, amides are decently basic.
Amides can also hydrogen bond because they contain an N-H bond. Thus, amides can be H-bond acceptors. Because of their ability to hydrogen bonds, they can hydrogen bond with water and other polar solvents. Because they are able to interact with other polar solvents, they can – up to a certain extent – be soluble in these solutions. They override the hydrophobic character of the alkyl groups attached to the carbonyl carbon.
Amides are the most unreactive of all carboxylic acid derivatives.  This is because of its slight double bond characteristic that reduces the leaving group ability of the nitrogen.  This resonance form is more prevalent among amides than it is for carboxylic acids, esters, or anhydrides.  This is because nitrogen is the least electronegative, which allows this resonance form to occur more often, since the lone pairs are "more free" so to speak.  Since the double bond resonance form occurs more often, the amide bond is the least reactive and the most stable of the carboxylic acid derivatives.
Amide hydrolysis, unlike its other carboxylic acid derivative counterparts, requires strong heating in a concentrated acid or base.  The mechanism is the usual nucleophilic addition-elimination with acid or base catalysis.  In acid catalysis, the nitrogen attacks a proton, making it have a positive charge making it a better leaving group.  Water attacks the carbonyl carbon, and through a tertiary intermediate, the nitrogen leaves as an amine.
Amides can be reduced to amines using Lithium Aluminum Hydride, LiAlH4, or reduced to aldehydes using DIBAL, a less reactive version of LAH.
This reaction is particularly important to organic chemistry.  Basically this reaction removes the whole carbonyl group of the amide transforming the substrate into an amine with one less carbon.  This reaction requires a halogen, NaOH, and water.  The Hoffman rearrangement begins with a base deprotonating the nitrogen to form an amidate ion.  The amidate ion is monohalogenated, and once again deprotonated by base, creating an N-Haloamidate intermediate.  The Halide is then eliminated creating an acyl nitrene.  The next step in the mechanism is called the rearrangement mechanism.  In this step, the alkyl group "slides" over from the carbonyl carbon to the nitrene nitrogen.  During this step, chirality is maintained.  This rearrangement step creates an isocyanate, which is then hydrated creating a carbamic acid.  The carboxylic acid group leaves as CO2, leaving the amide with one less carbon behind.
The most common way of forming amides is by nucleophilic attack, where amines are the nucleophile. The mechanism is detailed as follows.
Amines react with carboxylic acids as bases and nucleophiles: This mechanism proceeds similar to those mentioned above for forming esters and carboxylic acids. The amines are excellent nucleophiles because the nitrogen contains a pair of lone electrons. When the nitrogen attacks, the double bond between the carbon and oxygen breaks, resulting in a negatively charged oxygen. At this point, the nitrogen bears a positive charge due to the four bonds. In order to relieve the nitrogen of its positive charge, the terminal alcohol groups removes a hydrogen from the amine, thereby forming a neutral molecule of water. This water molecule is now an excellent leaving group. The loan pair on the oxygen comes back down to form the double bond and the water molecule leaves.
File:Nomenclature.gif  Amide Bond Formation.
Dicarboxylic acids react with amines to gives imides: Dicarboxylic acids are molecules that contain two carboxylic acid groups. Each of these carboxy groups reacts twice with the amine nitrogen of ammonia. This creates imides.
Amino acids cyclize to form lactams: Other amines undergo cyclize intramolecularly in order to form lactams.  Cyclic amides are known as lactames.
Note if you get lost then do the texturing tutorial here first that goes into more detail.
First we need a texture file kuid 86627:2491 Leopold Lane has a suitable texture file.  It is actually larger than we need for a simple house but does have the roof and stone work we need.
None essential information:  The texture is laid out for tiling in Blender, the house and roof are actually mirrored in the center so they will tile seamlessly.  The garden wall can either be used under the house if the house is extended below ground level useful for hills or it can be used separately as the garden wall texture.  If you build a terrace then by adding planes over the existing doors you can change the colour of the doors to vary the terrace.  The planes are mapped to the doors in the texture below.  Note also that the night mode texture or lit windows are included in the main texture.
After starting Blender, open the house we have already created in the previous tutorial.
Life is easier if we can see the model and the texture file at the same time so we'll split the screen.  Right click the mouse to get the split screen option then left click to split the screen.
Now under the image tab, press 'load' then navigate to your image file. Double click the image file and its name appears in the navigation widow. Press 'select image' and the details and confirmation will appear in the image tab.
F5 to change the map input to UV
We have to unwrap the image so change from object mode to edit mode.
Note you may need to select the texture file in the UV/Image editor window, note the word view, then image and a double arrow.  Click on the double arrow to select which texture file to make active.  In this screenshot you can see only terrace .tga is available.
Blender has different views for texturing to see which face is being selected to be textured more clearly wireframe works best.  Note the drop down menu next to the object / edit menu.
Type U to unwrap, selecting 'Unwrap (smart projections)'.
Accept the defaults.
Now we need to map a face to the texture.  There are three symbols to the lower right of the screen, you may have to <Crtl><up arrow> to see them.  The four dots is the vertex select, the triangle is the face select.  First toggle the selection to nothing by typing "A". Select the triangle or faces one.  Right click our house to select the face, in wire frame mode. If the image doesn't show then select it with the up / down arrow next the letters UVs.
Then change mode to texture to view the result.
Mouse to the UV/Image editor (the one with the texture) Select vertex (four dots).  Select each vertex with the RMB (right mouse button)  move it to the desired location on the texture then LMB (left mouse button) click to accept.
After mapping the first face use 1 (top keyboard number), 3, <Shift>1, <Shift>3 to bring up each face in turn and to map it.
When finished return to object mode.
To map the roof you can either go through the process again or after noting it's X, Y, Z dimensions and location delete it, clone the house with <Shift>D, <esc> then feed in the numbers for the height, width, location you used for the roof into the properties tab and adjust the mapping on the texture file.
When finished return to object mode and save the file.
Overview of Scientific Books and Magazines that publish nomen novum.
Magazine publishing 6 times a year. Scope:terrestrial and aquatic ecology, vegetation science, phytogeography and paleoecology, plant taxonomy, cryptogamic botany, and related subjects. [1]
Applied and Environmental Microbiology publishes a substantial share of the most significant current research in the areas of biotechnology, microbial ecology, food microbiology, and industrial microbiology. Highlighting research findings applicable to the development of new processes or products, AEM is a broad-based journal that is indispensable to those whose basic work has implications of near-term practical benefit. [2]
Quarterly magazine by the American Bryological and Lichenological Society, Inc. Started in 1898, it is the second oldest botanical journal. [3]
Now well over two hundred years old, Curtis's Botanical Magazine is the longest running botanical periodical featuring colour illustrations of plants. Each four-part volume of the Magazine contains 24 botanically precise plant portraits reproduced from watercolour originals by some of the world's leading botanical artists. [4]
Edited by M.C. Cooke
International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology
International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology (IJSEM), formerly International Journal of Systematic Bacteriology (IJSB), is the official journal of record for novel prokaryotic taxa. The papers deal with all phases of the systematics of prokaryotes, yeasts and yeast-like organisms, including taxonomy, nomenclature, identification, phylogeny, evolution, biodiversity, characterization and culture preservation. Its scope covers phylogenetic and evolutionary aspects of all micro-organisms, including the protists such as protozoa and algae, and it also publishes molecular environmental papers with a strong systematics content. [5]
The Journal of Clinical Microbiology publishes the most current research on the microbiological aspects of human and animal infections and infestations, with emphasis on their etiologic agents, diagnosis, and epidemiology. [6]
An academic publication providing coverage and analysis of science and math.
The Records of the Australian Museum (ISSN 0067-1975) publishes the results of research on Australian Museum collections and of studies that relate in other ways to the Museum's mission. There is an emphasis on Australasian, southwest Pacific and Indian Ocean research. The Records are released annually as three issues of one volume. Monographs are published occasionally as Records of the Australian Museum, Supplements. [7]
Publishes reports of original research relevant to fungal taxonomy, systematics, evolution, structure, development, ecology, pathology (plants, animals, humans), and biotechnological applications. One volume of the journal, comprising two issues, is published each year. The official journal language is English. [8]
World's foremost journal in systematic zoology, publishing more taxonomic papers/monographs each year than any other journal. [9]
, etc.
.
(We usually omit the subscript because
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
These functions perform various tests on characters.  They require the
The character is represented as an "int" and the functions return an "int".
They return 0 if the test is false and non-0 if the test is true:
The library also contains two conversion functions that also accept and
On September 15, 1924, two weeks after Ruth went home; Idgie takes Julian's car and drives to Valdosta, Georgia. She stops in a grocery store and inquires about Frank Bennett, Ruth's fiance. She tells the clerk she is Ruth's cousin. The clerk tells her Frank is a decent guy and everyone loves Ruth. He asks if she is staying with Ruth and Idgie says she isn't. She tells him she is a representative of a perfume company and is passing through on business. Idgie tells him that the family was worried and she wanted to check Frank out. She asks him not to tell Ruth because she doesn't want Ruth upset. She leaves without finishing her strawberry drink.
Idgie is again experiencing loss and loneliness. She misses Ruth and wants to check out the man Ruth will be marrying. She travels all the way to Georgia to make sure he is a good man & that Ruth will be happy, which shows that even though is in no way happy that Ruth is going to be with someone else she does want Ruth to be happy & safe.
We have already seen the Alphabet. But now We are going to learn how to pronounce and how to write Sinhalese letters, with examples.
අ is the first letter of the Alphabet. it is basically pronounced as a in 'what'. It is only used at the beginning of a word as well as all the other vowels. Let's see some example words begin with this letter.
අකුරු (akuru) - Letters of the alphabet/Fonts
ආ is the second letter of the alphabet. It's like a longer version of the first letter අ. ආ is pronounced as a in 'smart'. This letter is also can be seen only at the beginning of a word. Let's see some example words begin with this letter.
The third vowel in the alphabet. it sounds like a in cat. This letter is also can be seen only at the beginning of a word. Let's see some example words begin with this letter.
The forth vowel in the alphabet. It sounds like a in 'ash' or 'jam'. This letter is also can be seen only at the beginning of a word. Let's see some example words begin with this letter.
The fifth vowel in the alphabet having the fine, sharp sound of i in 'his' or 'pin'. This letter is also can be seen only at the beginning of a word. Let's see some example words begin with this letter.
The sixth vowel in the alphabet. It is sounded like ee in 'feel'. This letter is also can be seen only at the beginning of a word. Let's see some example words begin with this letter.
The seventh vowel in the alphabet. It sounds like u in 'put. This letter is also can be seen only at the beginning of a word. Let's see some example words begin with this letter.
The eighth vowel in the alphabet. It sounds like u in 'rule'. This letter is also can be seen only at the beginning of a word. Let's see some example words begin with this letter.
ඌර්ධව - high/above/upper/uppermost
The octet rule refers to the tendency of atoms to prefer to have eight electrons in their valence shell.
The main exception to the rule is hydrogen, which is at lowest energy when it has two electrons in its valence shell.
Other notable exceptions are aluminum and boron, which can function well with six valence electrons; and some atoms beyond group three on the periodic table that can have over 8 electrons, including sulfur.  Additionally, some noble gasses can form compounds when expanding their valence shell.
The other tendency of atoms with regard to their electrons is to maintain a neutral charge. Only the noble gasses have zero charge with filled valence octets. All of the other elements have a charge when they have eight electrons all to themselves. The result of these two guiding principles is the explanation for much of the reactivity and bonding that is observed within atoms; atoms seeking to share electrons in a way that minimizes charge while fulfilling an octet in the valence shell.
The one dimensional acoustic wave equation is described by the following second order partial differential equation.
It can be solved using separation of variables also known as the Fourier method. Suppose the pressure is the product of one function only dependent on space and another function only dependent on time.
This substitution leads to two homogeneous second order ordinary differential equations, one in time and one in space.
The time function is expected to be dependent on the angular frequency of the wave.
Substituting and solving for the constant which is define as the wave number, K.
The wave number is an important quantity relating the angular velocity of the wave to its propagation speed in the medium. It can be expressed in different forms.
The second differential equation can be solved using the wave number. The spacial function is given a general form.
.
The solution of the 1-D acoustic wave equation is obtained.
The real and imaginary parts of the solution are also solutions to the 1-D wave equation.
The actual solution is recovered by taking the real part of the above complex form. The value of the constants above is determined by applying initial and boundary conditions. In general, any function of the following form is a solution for periodic waves.
This strategy guide was originally written on StrategyWiki. You can access their strategy guide and walkthrough at Phoenix Wright: Ace Attorney/Episode 3: Turnabout Samurai/Day 2 - Trial.
Gumshoe takes the stand and describes the events of the day of the murder with the help of the Guidemap.
In the morning three people were in the Employee Area until noon: Jack Hammer, Will Powers, and Penny the assistant.
After lunch, Jack Hammer went to Studio One, and after that, at 1:00 PM, the security lady arrived at her post.
At 5:00 PM the production staff went to Studio One to perform a rehearsal, where they found the body.
The time of death was 2:30 PM.
The Samurai Spear is added to the Court Record as the murder weapon.
You will have the option to listen to Gumshoe’s description again, or skip it and continue. Either option is fine. Once you continue, Edgeworth calls Wendy Oldbag to the stand. Wendy will get flustered with Edgeworth and likes to talk non-stop before starting her testimony. Can you handle her testimony?
On the day of the murder, I arrived at the guard station at 1:00 PM.
Poor old Hammer and the rest had been doing a run-through there since the morning.
I, well, I had some errands to run that morning.
Anyway, it was 1:00 when I got to the guard station.
I was at the main gate from then until 5:00!
Now, the murder happened at 2:30 PM, right?
Interesting to me, because a certain man walked right by me at 2:00 PM.
It was Powers! That man right there, and he was heading toward the studio!
Looking at the photo presents a problem for the prosecution; they can’t prove that Will was in the costume. Present Powers’s(?) Photo against her 7th or 8th statement. Oldbag will now claim she has proof that it was Will inside the costume.
Oldbag's Testimony: The Man in the Photo
I never say anything I don't mean, mind you!
That morning, during the run-through of the action scene…
I saw Powers trip and fall!
He broke one of the props, it was a big mess.
Apparently, he sprained his ankle pretty bad.
Now, look at that picture! (On the 3DS Trilogy, this statement isn't available)
You can see he's dragging his leg! See? Clear as day!
That's how I knew it was Powers. Happy?
Press the 4th statement. Oldbag will inform the court that it was the Samurai Spear that was broken, and that she fixed it with some duct tape. The Samurai Spear will be updated in the Court Record. Also press the 2nd or 3rd statement. It becomes clear that the assistant, Penny, wasn’t watching the action sequence, meaning she didn't know Powers sprained his ankle.
Once you have the information about the assistant and the spear, cycle through the statements until Edgeworth stops you. The judge wants to know what happened to the Steel Samurai costume, but no one's found it. Edgeworth will say that there is no doubt that it was Will. It doesn't matter what you choose, as the judge doesn't seem so sure. Oldbag will continue her testimony.
Oldbag's Testimony: Witness's Account (cont.)
The time of poor Hammer's death was 2:30 PM, true?
The only person I saw go to the studio before then was Will Powers!
No one else went there!
If they had, I would have seen them!
Witness's Account (cont.): Cross-examination
If you look at the photo again, it’s numbered Photo #2, which means that someone else must have walked past the camera before this photo was taken. Present Powers’s(?) Photo against the 4th statement.
Oldbag gets angry and then suddenly remembers something important. Time for another testimony from her.
Every day, after I finish my guard duties, I have one other important job to do.
I go through the photos recorded on the security computer and check them.
I throw out any photos that aren't suspicious lookin', you see.
Come to think of it, now I remember throwing out one photo that day!
Discuss the case with Maya and Will, but no one has any ideas. Anyone could have walked into the Dressing Room and taken the costume while Powers was sleeping. You have to try to extend the trial for an extra day, and your best shot is to accuse someone else. If you choose wrong, it will mean disaster.
When you return to the courtroom, you will have to accuse someone of the murder. Your choices are Penny the assistant, Oldbag or the fanboy kid.
Choose "The security lady", since Penny didn't know Powers would be limping and the boy was too weak to heft the spear. Choosing the assistant or the fanboy kid will get a hilarious reaction in the court and yes, penalize you for accusing the innocent. Life can be cruel sometimes.
The court will realize that Oldbag has no alibi and that she knew about Will’s ankle. Press further when you have the option. Oldbag tries to say that the kid could have done it. That statement is absurd, because the kid could not have done it. For example, isn't the spear heavy? Also, how did the kid get into the building? A key card is required. Present the Samurai Spear or the Cardkey at this point to prove the kid's innocence.
Oldbag is not happy about being implicated, and decides to tell the court about the information she was previously hiding. She was told not to mention that there were other people present at the studios on the day of the murder. Time for one more testimony from Oldbag.
Global Studios wanted me to keep quiet about something.
There were… some other people at the studios on the day of the murder.
They said they had "nothing to do with it", see?
So they told me to just pretend they "hadn't been at the studios that day".
But if you're going to go accusing me, I'm not letting them get away scot free!
So there were other people there that day. You need to find out exact information from her. Press her on the 2nd statement or alternatively 5th statement. She will state that the director and the producer were at the studio. The director was apparently at the action sequence rehearsal when Will injured his ankle! After the rehearsal, he met with the producer and went to the Studio Two Trailer.
You have the option to continue the cross-examination or take a break. Choose "Take a break". The judge will end the case for the day so that further investigation can be done regarding the director and the producer.
Day 1 - TrialEpisode 2: Turnabout Sisters
Day 1 - Investigation • Day 2 - Trial • Day 2 - Investigation • Day 3 - Trial • Day 3 - Investigation • Day 4 - TrialEpisode 5: Rise from the Ashes
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
This is a critique of the article titled "Evidence for a Causal Role of Low Energy Availability in the Induction of Menstrual Cycle Disturbances during Strenuous Exercise Training" by NANCY I. WILLIAMS*, DANA L. HELMREICH†, DAVID B. PARFITT†,
What is the background to this research?
Throughout recent decades, women have become increasingly physically active. Despite the extensive health benefits of exercise and physical activity, intensive, strenuous exercise can subject female athletes to an entirely unique set of risks.[2]
Despite these factors contributing to exercise induced reproductive dysfunction, an accumulation of evidence from a variety of studies conducted on both humans and animals, suggests that negative energy balance is the leading cause. Negative energy expenditure refers to energy expenditure exceeding energy intake, which can result in the secretion reproductive hormones being suppressed and infertility after extended lengths of undernutrition.[5][6]
The article under review takes into consideration previous studies that simply suggests a correlation between negative energy balance and reproductive dysfunction as opposed to firm evidence about the causal relationship. Considering this, the article analyses exercise-induced amenorrhea in non-human primates while having complete control over dietary intake and exercise. Testing to confirm if reproductive dysfunction was developed as a result of increased energy expenditure from daily vigorous exercise or from a different factor of exercise by determining exercise induced amenorrhea was reversed by increasing energy intake while completing the same exercise schedule.
Williams, Helmreich, Parfitt, Caston-Balderrama and Cameron conducted their research at the University of Pittsburgh, Pensylvania and had their research published in The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism (JCEM).
The 8 cynomolgus monkeys used for the study were housed at the University of Pittsburgh Primate Research Laboratory.
Credibility here is maintained as editors at JCEM may not take part in the editorial management of any reports of their own research or or close relation to their own research
What kind of research was this?
Nancy I Williams, Dana L. Hemlreich, David B. Parfitt, Anne Caston-Balderrama and Judy L. Cameron conducted a longitudinal study over a 7-24month time period to examine the development and reversal of exercise induced amenorrhea, focussing on the role of low energy availability.
Longitudinal studies generally follow a particular population or individual over an extended period of time, generating data that has no external influence. They are useful for determining relationships between risk factors and disease development and treatment outcomes over time.[7]
What did the research involve?
The research involved observing 8 non-human primates and their changes in reproductive hormones throughout the development of exercise induced amenorrhea. This was done by conducting two experiments. First, they tested energy utilisation  during vigorous exercise resulted in reproductive hormone suppression by determining whether exercise induced amenorrhea was reversed by increasing energy intake.[8] The second text examined the link between changes in the hormone T3 and reproductive function during the development and reversal of exercise induced amenorrhea.[9]
Eight 2.10 kg - 3.45 kg adult female cynomolgus monkeys were used (housed at university of Pittsburgh Primate research Laboratory)
Temperature in lab remained at 24 degrees +/- 2 degrees.
All monkeys received the same daily meal of approximately 300kcal at 1600h each day.
" All experiments were performed in compliance with the regulations of the animal care and use committee of the University of Pittsburgh "
Blood samples for LH, FSH, E2 and progesterone measurements were collected from the animals every other day, before exercise and feeding.
Hematocrit was measured every 6wks and remained within normal range in all monkeys for the duration of the study.
Prior to commencement of study, the monkeys were familiarised with daily checks for menses which consisted of swabbing the vaginal area.
Before the study commenced, several normal menstrual cycles were documented.
A monkey was determined to be amenorrheic if at least 3 menstrual cycles were missed with low levels of E2 and progesterone.
Monkeys were trained on standard treadmills.
When fully trained, they ran for 2hr/day, 7days/week with a 3 min break every 30 minutes.[10]
Overfeeding face to reverse exercise induced amenorrhea
It is unclear whether or not this methodology was the best approach as study was conducted in a small scale  using non-human test subjects. They did, however, use an approach that measured variables in both the development and reversal of exercise induced amenorrhea to test their hypothesis and determine the primary cause.
What were the basic results?
Mean body weight increased during overfeeding period  (6%)
LH, FSH and E2 levels increase from late amenorrhea to surge
LH and FSH decreased over development of amenorrhea
During period of amenorrhea T3 levels decreased by ~20%
During reversal period all 4 overfed monkeys had increased T3 levels
What conclusions can we take from this research?
This study provides strong evidence that exercise induced amenorrhea is caused by a negative energy balance created by the increased energy expenditure of a regular, vigorous exercise schedule and low energy availability.
Spontaneous resumption of menstrual cycles in animals with exercise induced amenorrhea has not been witnessed in previous studies. It can be concluded that the primary cause of exercise induced reproductive dysfunction is energy cost in relation to exercise rather than physical or psychological stresses. This is because if any other factors had a significant role in the development of amenorrhea, caloric increase alone would not be enough to reverse the state of amenorrhea.
T3 levels decreased during the amenorrheic stage and dramatically increased during the overfeeding phase of the experiment and the reinstating of normal menstrual cycles.
The researchers have expanded on the findings of previous studies by including the extra experimental approach relating to the reversal of amenorrhea and how it can be achieved by increasing caloric intake.
More research into the involvement of T3 in changes in energy expenditure and the impact of metabolic efficiency on exercise induced reproductive dysfunction is needed for a greater understanding of the role that each has in mediating thefunction of the reproductive axis.
With the increasing number of women participating in exercise and physical activity, if is becoming continually more important that women are aware of the potential risks associated with constant, vigorous exercise and a negative energy balance.
Exercise induced reproductive dysfunction can have long term effects if left untreated, so it is important that the athlete, coach and nutritionist are working together for prevention/treatment. This will include monitoring susceptible athletes and encouraging them to keep a diary so they are aware of any irregular cycles and providing information about energy balance.
The Effects of Physical Exercise on the Female Reproductive System
The Effects of Intense Exercise on the Female Reproductive System
↑ Williams NI, Helmreich DL, Parfitt DB, Caston-Balderrama A, Cameron JL. Evidence for a causal role of low energy availability in the induction of menstrual cycle disturbances during strenuous exercise training. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism. 2001 Nov 1;86(11):5184-93.
↑ Warren MP, Perlroth NE. The effects of intense exercise on the female reproductive system. The Journal of endocrinology. 2001 Jul;170(1):3-11.
↑ Cannavò S, Curto L, Trimarchi F. Exercise-related female reproductive dysfunction. Journal of endocrinological investigation. 2001 Nov 1;24(10):823-32.
Kendrick J, Limacher MC 1992 The reproductive system and exercise in women. Med Sci Sports Exerc 24:S288–S293
↑ Knuth UA, Hull MG, Jacobs HS 1977 Amenorrhea and loss of weight. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 84:801–807
↑ Vigersky RA, Andersen AE, Thompson RH, Loriaux DL 1977 Hypothalamic dysfunction in secondary amenorrhea associated with simple weight loss. N Engl J Med 297:1141–1145
↑ Williams NI, Helmreich DL, Parfitt DB, Caston-Balderrama A, Cameron JL. Evidence for a causal role of low energy availability in the induction of menstrual cycle disturbances during strenuous exercise training. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism. 2001 Nov 1;86(11):5184-93.
Cameron JL, 2001 Longitudinal changes in reproductive hormones and menstrual
Wikipedia has related information at Japanese-Vietnamese relations
When the United States withdrew from Vietnam in 1973 and South Vietnam fell to the North Vietnamese Army in 1975, US leadership in Asia suffered a severe blow.  The power equation in Asia again shifted in 1978, when President Carter announced diplomatic normalization with China and Tokyo signed the Peace and Friendship Treaty (PFT) with Beijing.  When Vietnam invaded Cambodia in December 1978, under claims of protecting ethnic Vietnamese, Tokyo's reaction diverged from the responses of Washington and Beijing.  Because of the changing power relationships in East Asia, Japan's foreign policy toward Vietnam differed from the US policy when Tokyo acted in its own self interest to steer a course among the United States, China, The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), and Vietnam.  An investigation of Japan's foreign policy toward Vietnam during this period could provide an understanding of the larger bilateral relationships of Tokyo and Washington and Tokyo and Beijing, while highlighting regional and domestic factors that caused Tokyo to choose this independent middle course.
Thesis |Chapter 1 | Chapter 2 | Chapter 3 | Chapter 4 | Chapter 5
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Man is naturally endowed with sincerity; and born with innate goodness. With sincerity, one can get into the heart of others, whoever they are. And goodness will always serve things right, whatever they are. Beautiful appearance may perhaps impress people, yet only sincerity can move their heart. An overbearing tone may perhaps succeed to bring people into agreement; yet only act of kindness can win their heartfelt support. Being genuine is not hypocritical, wishy-washy or worldly wise; whilst goodness makes him tolerant, respectful and compromising. Only when he does not throw away his roots, give up his original intent, does he walk with composure and stand firmly.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
President Barack Obama has rejected sending US ground troops to Syria.
Barack Obama zoongtoong juhjuer paih US dihmiahn buhduih daoh Syria.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
You can use the JSON output method to convert XML to JSON format. (For an important note on this article, see https://stackoverflow.com/questions/48876292/how-to-use-the-xslt-xquery-serialization-namespace-to-export-to-json/.)
The activity Counting to 20 (Deutsch: Bis 20 zählen) is part of the collection of interlingual energizers. See a list of all activities.
Let's play a game about listening to each other. It has been a very loud day. It's time to calm down a bit.
Lasst uns ein Spiel speilen, in dem es darum geht aufeinander zu hören. Es war ein sehr lauter Tag. Es ist Zeit, dass ein bisschen Ruhe einkehrt.
Please close your eyes.
We're going to try to count to 20. Only one person can speak at the same time.
If several people say something at the same time we start again from zero.
Bitte schließt eure Augen.
Wir werden versuchen bis 20 zu zählen. Es darf immer nur eine/einer zur selben Zeit sprechen.
Wenn mehrere zur selben Zeit etwas sagen, fangen wir wieder bei null an.
This game can easily be used to learn the numbers in a foreign language.
The European Commission support for the production of this publication does not constitute an endorsement of the contents which reflects the views only of the authors, and the Commission cannot be held responsi­ble for any use which may be made of the information contained therein.
A Wikibookian has nominated this page for cleanup.You can help make it better. Please review any relevant discussion.
File:Sevii Island.jpg  A map of the Sevii Islands
A map of the Izu Islands, a real life location which inspired the Sevii Islands.
According to an old lady on Quest Island, the islands were named such because they were formed in seven days. The name is probably a portmanteau of "seven" and VII (Roman numerals for seven).
These islands are accessible after the player defeats the seventh gym leader, Blaine. At that time, Bill will give the player a Tri-Pass at Cinnabar Island. The islands can be revisited by using the Tri-Pass in Vermillion City where the S.S. Anne was docked. No Johto Pokémon can be obtained from Islands 1-3 until the player has defeated the Elite Four.
To the north is a place called Mount Ember. In FireRed and LeafGreen, the Legendary Pokémon Moltres has moved to this location. The Ruby item is also in Mount Ember. After beating the Elite Four, Slugma can be caught on Mount Ember.
Three Island or Kin Island has a biker gang called the Kanto Rider Federation that the player needs to defeat. The player is searching for a lost girl named Lostelle on this island. After venturing into the forest, the player finds Lostelle under attack by Hypno. After saving the girl, the player can access the mini-games on Two Island. After Beating the Elite 4, Dunsparce can be found in a previously inaccessible patch of grass.
These islands are accessible after defeating the Elite Four, getting the National Pokédex, and getting the Ruby from One Island. Celio will give the player a Rainbow Pass.
Five Island or Chrono Island is very small. This island is home to the Team Rocket Warehouse. After obtaining the Sapphire item in the Dotted Hole, the player must chase it back to the Warehouse where a Team Rocket professor who stole it from the player is keeping it. It is vital for compatibility with Ruby, Sapphire and Emerald. South of the Warehouse is a memorial pillar for a boy's dead Onix. Five Island has a sea route known as Water Labyrinth in which Hoppip can be found. In this area, the player can receive an egg which hatches into Togepi. East of the Water Labyrinth there is an expensive resort called "Resort Gorgeous".
This island also is host to the Rocket Headquarters, where the handful of remaining Team Rocket members reside. They are surprised to learn that the player has defeated Giovanni and that the Team Rocket syndicate has been disbanded.
The Sapphire item is originally located in the Dotted Hole on this Island.
In the Trainer Tower the player battles through a number of opponents to get a prize at the end. There are four different types of battles: Single, Double, Knockout, and Mixed. Every time one clears all the trainers on one floor, Pokémon can be healed on the first floor before proceeding.
To the south, the Island contains Sevault Canyon, a location with high-level Pokémon and trainers. Further on south is Tanoby Ruins, where wild Unown reside. The player must first complete a puzzle in the Tanoby Key for the Unown to appear.
There is also a house in the main town that looks plain enough, but inside there is a stack of boxes blocking a doorway. In the Japanese versions, the door is not obstructed, and is used for e-Reader compatibility.
These two islands are only accessible through special events. The player must have gone to a Nintendo event, or they can alternatively use a cheating device such as a Gameshark or Action Replay - although the latter may cause corrupted game files if used with the North American version of the game. These islands are also accessible in Emerald.
Players need the Mystic Ticket to enter this island. Navel Rock has only one cave, inside of which there are two Legendary Pokémon: a level 70 Ho-Oh and a level 70 Lugia. Ho-Oh is found on the summit of the tall island, while Lugia is on the bottom, in a pool deep underground.
Players need the Aurora Ticket to access this island. Birth Island is shaped like a triangle, and on it there is a smaller triangle which the player can move around. After solving this puzzle, a Deoxys (Level 30) appears. It will have an attack stat increased for FireRed, defensive stat increased for LeafGreen, and a speed stat increased for Emerald. Deoxys will change form depending which game it is in. This is also one of the few places in Pokémon where background music does not play, alongside to the Cave of Origin in Ruby and Sapphire.
Pokémon regions and locations
This Paper is a review of the article 'High volume‐low intensity exercise camp and glycemic control in diabetic children' (Ruzic et. al, 2007).[1]
This paper looked at the effects of high volumes of low intensity programmed exercise on the improvement of glycemic control in children diagnosed with diabetes mellitus (type 1). Glycemic control is characterised as maintaining euglycemic (normal) blood glucose levels, which in a diabetic child ranges from 4-9 mol/L depending on exercise and time of day.[2]
While it is well understood that exercise is an extremely effective tool to help control blood glucose and other glycemic characteristics,[3][4] there are still significant numbers of diabetic children who do not engage in sufficient amounts of physical activity.[1] With much literature suggesting that exercise in diabetic patients comes with increased risks of hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia;[4] particularly the former, it is understandable that children and their carers may be hesitant to engage in exercise and organised physical activities.
Summer camps have become an increasing popular exercise intervention with this particular population. With their increasing popularity there have been several studies based out of these camps investigating exercise and its effect on diabetes. Most of these studies do not achieve exercise volumes as large as this study investigates.[1]
This study was published in the journal of paediatrics and Child health,[1] coming from the Faculty of Kinesiology at the University of Zagreb, Zagreb Croatia. It was completed in partnership with the Croatia Association for Diabetic Societies and the Paediatric branch of the University of Zagreb Hospital (also known as Sisters of Charity).[1] It's Authors Dr Lana Ruzic, Professor Goran Sporis and Branka Matkovic have an immense amount of experience in the sport and exercise science industry, as well as significant publishing experience.[5]
What kind of research was this?
This study was an intervention based observational study. This means, the same group of participants were monitored before and after the particular intervention, and their initial and final results compared. In this study 185 participants were invited the camp based upon selection criteria.[1] 28 participants were then selected, only 20 were used for the data analysis. Participants were already members of the Croatian Association for Diabetic Societies and had been treated at the Vuk Vrhovac clinic.[1]
What did the research involve?
For this particular study 28 participants aged 9 –16, participated in a summer camp on an island in Croatia for 15 days. On each day of the camp the participants completed approximately 4 hours of exercise, based on a strict schedule. The exercises varied in intensity and type, all exercise was prescribed by an exercise physiologist in conjunction with a kinesiologist. Exercise and the intensity are as follows:
Throughout the camp the children participated in a range of activities. These activities were set on a five-day cycle and repeated three times.
Stretching, gymnastics, pilates, low intensity aerobics.
Swimming (30 minutes across every afternoon session), Volleyball, handball, soccer, basketball, surfing/water activities, racquet sports.
Walking, Nordic Walking, cycling, skating.
Throughout the exercise, heart rate blood glucose were Monitored. Blood glucose was also recorded at varying times of the day. Calorie intake was also predetermined and set for each individual and adjusted if needed. At the conclusion of the camp each participant received a recommended exercise program, to continue on with.
The study took measurements of the participants HbA1c, on the first day of before the camp, 10 days after the camp and two months after the camp.
The summer camp setting allowed for a lot of biases and variables to either be eliminated or controlled, for example insulin dosage and calorie intake. The structure of the program was also designed off heart-rate models making physical exertion, and energy expenditure slightly more normalised. The exercises in the program were also very consistent, however contained enough variability to ensure proper adherence.
The final hour of exercise completed at the end of each day, was potentially completed too late at night. It has been well researched that exercise increases incidence of hypoglycemia and nocturnal hypoglycemia,[6] exercising right before bed and without blood glucose checks throughout the night, there was the potential for participants to experience a severe nocturnal hypoglycaemic event.
The measurement of HbA1c, was an effective measurement,[7] and given it is a historical measurement was measured at appropriate times.[7] However for this particular study results were taken at 10 days after the camp, where they HbA1c reduction was very evident and then at 2 months when results had to basal levels. This gives us a general trend, however had more data been collected we may have a more accurate idea of how long the adaptions caused by the intervention lasted.
What were the basic results?
p.
Note: significant p-value <0.05
Overall this type of intervention achieved the desired results. The number of children achieving a predetermined satisfactory HbA1c result (<7.5%) doubled (to 8) when measured 10 days after the camp, the average values for HbA1c also dropped significantly.  The researchers also found a drop in blood glucose (when measured after meals) in many of the participants in the final days of the camp.[1]
The researches of this paper deemed this intervention a short-term success. They found that the exercise prescription achieved the desired results, however these adaptions where not as long lasting as they hoped, with results reverting to baseline measures at around two months after the termination of exercise.
With low incidence of hypoglycemia (only two recorded cases) and significant improvements in glycemic control this study illustrates the effectiveness of high volume and low intensity exercise. With the final results measured after two months showing regression back to initial data this study also highlights the importance of continued and habitual exercise and exercise behaviours in the ongoing management of diabetes mellitus.
Recent research would suggest that whilst continual aerboic based low-moderate intensity exercise is an effective tool to improve glycemic control, introducing high-intensity bouts of exercise can help reduce the risk of hypoglycemia[8] and particularly nocturnal hypoglycemia.[9]
This type of exercise was very effective in a controlled environment, however once the camp ended not one participant reported adherence to exercise recommendations for the end of the study.
Organised participation will receive the best adherence (particularly in children) and help build habitual exercise behaviours.
Ongoing organised programs e.g. built into school curriculums or through clubs with the support of parents will be the best chance of using this type of intervention in the long term.
↑ a b c d e f g h Ruzic L. Sporis G. Matkovic BR.  High volume-low intensity exercise camp and glycemic control in diabetic children. Journal of Paediatrics and Child health. 2007; 44(3): 122-128
↑ Diabetes.co.uk. Blood Sugar Level Ranges [internet]. place unknown. diabetes.co.uk. n.d. available from: https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes_care/blood-sugar-level-ranges.html
↑ Robertson K. Adolfsson P. Scheiner G. Hanas R. Riddell MC. Exercise in children and adolescents with diabetes. Pediatric Diabetes. 2009; 10(12): 154-168
↑ a b American Diabetes Association. Care of Children and Adolescents With Type 1 Diabetes, Diabetes Care. January 2005; 28(1): 186-212
↑ Lietuvos Sportos Universitetas. Professor Goran Sporis (Croatia) visited LSU [internet]. split croatia. Lietuvos Sportos Universitetas. 04 December 2014. available from: https://www.lsu.lt/en/professor-goran-sporis-croatia-visited-lsu/
↑ Robertson K. Riddell MC. Guinhouya BC. Adolfsson P. Hanas R. Exercise in children and adolescents with diabetes. Pediatric Diabetics. 2014; 15(20):203-223
↑ a b Sherwani SI. Khan HA. Ekhzaimy A. Masood A., Sakharkar MK. Significance of HbA1c Test in Diagnosis and Prognosis of Diabetic Patients. Biomark insights. 2016; 11: 95-104.
↑ Tonoli C. Heyman E. Roelands B. Buyse L. Cheung S.S Berthoin S. Meeusen R. Effects of Different Types of Acute and Chronic (Training) Exercise on Glycaemic Control in Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus. Sports medicine. 2012 December; 42(12): 1059-1080
↑ Iscoe KE. Riddell MC. Continuous moderate‐intensity exercise with or without intermittent high‐intensity work: effects on acute and late glycaemia in athletes with Type 1 diabetes mellitus. Pathophysiology. 2011; 28(7): 824-832
One of the main points and features of a filesystem is abstraction. With a filesystem, we can organize our data into files, directories, and other constructs, and manipulate them in various ways. To open a file, you need only its path; it's not necessary to figure out the exact location on disk and instruct the hard drive controller to move the read head to that position.
This data abstraction is important for several reasons:
Portability; it's not necessary to port every program for all hardware, only the device drivers need to be changed.
Security; the user is not relied on ‒ or even allowed ‒ to access the drive directly.
Convenience; files don't actually exist as separate entities on disk, but it sure makes it easier for people to use computers.
Object Lifetime Management is the concept of controlling the number of instances a configured service will have and the duration of the lifetime of those instances. In other words, it allows you to determine how returned instances are cached.
In the real world, factories are used to make stuff (e.g. automobiles).  In OO programming, factories also make stuff; specifically, OO factories "make" (instantiate) objects.
At least in Java, a constructor is unable to return a reference to an existing object—it MUST return a brand-new object.  This can cause two problems—too many object instances, and identical objects that are duplicates—not the exact same object.
Factories are generally implemented as a public static method inside a class that has only private constructors.  In this way, only the factory can create instances "Guaranteeing[1]" that all instances of the object have been created by the factory.
The factory most often has an internal "Cache" of objects.  Whenever a user asks the factory for a new object, the cache is consulted first and one of the cached objects are returned if it is identical—otherwise a new instance is created, added to the cache and returned.
Factories can also be used to inject user code into an "Unmodifiable" library.  It is possible to save and restore a user object that implements some important functions of a library object.  The library then uses that factory to get instances of the users object, and doesn't even know that the user has replaced a core component with completely new code.
As an example... Say the library uses Library objects all over the place. The library user can create a class (let's call it User) that extends Library. The user then calls LibraryFactory.set(User.class), and the factory stores it.  Inside the library, whenever the library wishes to use a Library object, it calls the LibraryFactory.Factory() function to get a new instance.  Without changing any code, the user can now completely change the way the library functions by overriding one or more methods in his User class.
This is used in various places inside the Java SDK to allow you to change how chunks of the SDK works without rewriting any of the code.
↑ In Java, just having private constructors does not truly guarantee that all your objects came from the factory. Serialization and reflection can still create new instances without going through the constructor.
Reference counting is a programming technique of storing the number of references, pointers, or handles to a resource, such as an object, a block of memory, disk space, and others.
Garbage collection refers to freeing of heap-allocated memory.  The heap memory must be freed eventually.  Either the programmers code must explicitly free it, or some automatic system mechanism is required.
The most common mechanism is mark and sweep.  This is where the system knows of certain top-level classes (Threads and windows mostly).  It follows all the references from these "Known" classes to every class that can be reached and marks each class.  When it's done, it "sweeps" (gets rid of) every unmarked class.
Garbage Collection is a huge enabler of Object Oriented development—it completely changes the way you design.  With code-based memory management it is necessary to have some way to track an object.  If it is created on the stack, it will be deleted when the method exits (so instances passed outside your method will become invalid).  If it is created on the heap, some object must delete it manually—so if your method is going to create an object and pass it to two other objects that both retain the object, you have a problem.  Who deletes the object? The original method can't because it will have exited before the two objects are finished with it, and the two objects shouldn't know anything about each other.
This type of problem is often solved with "Reference counting" which is another form of garbage collection, but a manual one.  It also leads to fewer long-lived, free-roaming classes being created since they have to be tracked.
GC solves  problem, that of ownership.  If you are programming in a language with Garbage Collection, you may create classes on the fly, pass them off, retain a copy or forget about it...  You really can't go wrong.  When all instances have been "Forgotten", the class disappears.
The drawback is that GC tends to take a solid chunk of time.  This is less true lately as at least Java has threaded GC and the ability to limit the amount of time GC will run.  There are actually dozens of tuning and reporting options and the ability to select from multiple GC systems to fit your need.
GC Implementations run from trivial (instance counting) to amazingly complex.  The current default Java VM uses a multi-tiered system with different mechanisms for new, middle-aged and old objects.  For instance, since almost all new objects tend to die almost instantly, the first section (Eden) is divided in half.  When one half becomes full, the currently referenced objects are copied to the other side.  The system switches to using the "new" side  and completely forgets about the old half.  There is no explicit code invoked to delete objects that are already gone.
This means that GC can actually be more efficient than traditional allocation/free since there is no free operation for nearly all objects.
Garbage collection should be considered essential to OO Design.
Persistence is simply the act of having objects that "Stick around" between invocations of your program.
This can be trivial (Just serializing an object out when exiting, serializing it back in when loading) to a full OO-database implementation.
Hibernate is a good program that sits between your application and a database and ensures that your objects are properly persisted.
Serialization is converting an object to a stream of bytes that can then be saved to a file or transmitted over a network.
Welcome to the Dragon programming language!
In this chapter we are going to discuss the goals behind the language design and implementation.
Bacteria are prokaryotes, which means they are unicellular and have no nucleus. They come in various shapes: rodlike, spherical or spiral. Bacteria are very small. A typical one is only several micrometres in size. 1 billion could fit on 1 square centimeter of space on the human gums, and 1 gram of digested food has 10 billion bacteria.
Because they are such small organisms, light microscopes can only let us see their shape, and how they move. Under an electron microscope, we can see the details of their external parts and perhaps a blurred center due to their genetic material not being within a nucleus.
Bacteria have a cell wall that can be either thick or thin. The chemical test, the Gram Staining technique, can help a researcher to determine this characteristic for keying out and idenficaton purposes. A thin-walled bacteria will appear to be purple for a positive Gram-staining, while bacteria will be pink if they are Gram-negative.
Bacteria can have external locomotive structures called flagella or pilli. Locomotive structures are those that allow the organisms to move around in its environment.
Under ideal conditions, one bacterium duplicates itself in about 20 mins, i.e. every 20 minutes, the number of bacteria doubles. In one day, from one bacterium, it can reproduce to 2^72 new organisms (which is 4,722,366,482,869,645,213,696). In one 43 hours, their population is about 2^130 organisms. One bacterium weighs about 10-12g. 2130 bacteria weighs over 6 x 1024 kg, which is the weight of the Earth!
Because they can reproduce so fast, their populations can adapt to new environments; they evolve to meet the demands of any new localized stressors. They can change so that they can use other substances as their food and can develop a resistance to antibiotics. An important note to the above calculation is it is often that those bacteria don't have enough food to reach that population. They also have a lot of enemies. They die as fast as they duplicate.
How should teachers teach ethics?
To laugh often and much; to win the respect of intelligent people and the affection of children; to earn the appreciation of honest critics and endure the betrayal of false friends; to appreciate beauty; to find the best in others; to leave the world a bit better, whether by a healthy child, a garden patch, or a redeemed social condition; to know even one life has breathed easier because you have lived. This is to have succeeded.
—Robert Waldo Emerson, Ryan & Bohlin, 1999
What are Ethics?
Before we can begin this philosophical journey of education, we need to define the word itself.  What are ethics?
Ethics deal with a human philosophy, with respect to what is right and wrong, good and bad, and the motives behind those actions (Dictionary.com).
As I looked into this subject I had to define morals, values, and character because they all flow evenly through each other and build upon one another.
Morals are the principles or habits with respect to right and wrong conduct
Values are the beliefs of a person or social group in which they have an emotional investment (either for or against something)
Character is a moral or ethical quality in respect to honesty, courage, or integrity (Dictionary.com).
It is not the brains that matter most, but that which guides them- the character, the heart, generous qualities, progressive ideas.
—Fyodor Mikhaylovich Dostoyevsky, Ryan & Bohlin
Throughout history there have been varying thoughts on the purpose of teaching.  Plato debated whether teaching was to provide students with practical skills or to make them virtuous people.  Today, “teaching is essentially a moral endeavor, in that the purposes of teaching - to make people more knowledgeable, more skillful, more thoughtful – mean making them better than they were before,” (Hansen, 1993).
The purpose of ethics is to rationalize morality.  This forefront of values and rules, guide the choices and actions of individuals within a larger community (Ethics and Policy Integration Centre, 2003).  Schools can contribute to this development by first expanding our children's knowledge of personalities. During school, children are able to interact with people whose families differ from their own.  Secondly, they are exposed to new group norms and institutional practices (Thorkildsen & Walberg, 2004).
Sometimes we teach one specific subject, and the results of our teaching are unintended.  Many morals that are taught are unanticipated.  For example, an act as simple and common as raising one’s hand establishes order and teaches us to take turns (Hansen, 1993).  You do not have to write a lecture in order to teach ethics.  There is no VA-SOL curriculum to follow.  Ethics are all around us, everyday.  It is up to teachers to develop their own philosophy of ethics and determine the best way to introduce them into their classroom.  There is no question; teachers can teach ethics through the application of our daily school requirements and routines.
If we as teachers are going to be responsible for teaching ethics, it is important be aware of our personal beliefs, what we value and treasure in human nature.  It may be helpful to define a teaching philosophy or character guidelines that you want to be the foundation of your classroom.  It is important to be aware of our values and biases, and it is our duty as teachers to present both sides of the spectrum and not to reflect all of our personal beliefs onto our students.  Only then can we truly guide our students to define their own.
In the American school system, there is established distinction between morality and religious dogma.  The idea of teaching religion and morals in public schools causes many teachers and administrators to feel uneasy.  Because many moral convictions are common to popular faiths, some social scientists believe that teaching morals is to promote the establishment of religion.  On the other hand, some church leaders conclude that ethical behavior will disappear if religious beliefs are not taught to all young people (Zakariya, 1987).  The battle between religion and moral principles does not need to deter teachers from providing our nation's youth with positive character traits.
Treat others the way you want to be treated.
When I think of this topic, a title of a book continues to echo in my head.  Robert Fulgram wrote the book, All I Really Need to Know I Learned in Kindergarten.  As I pondered all the ways in which teachers regularly teach ethics, I decided that ethics, like all other subjects, begins in kindergarten and we elaborate on them each year.  There are 5 character traits that we learn early in school and build upon for the rest of our lives:
Honesty – “Did you hit Johnny?” This is a common kindergarten question, which challenges children's first instincts to lie to their teachers.  This is why we create consequences, like the loss of privileges.  These same choices will continue through life, only the loss of playground time could turn into jail time.
Responsibility – “It is your job to feed the hamster every morning this week.”  In the first years of school we are taught that animals, plants, and people need each other.  Even being the line leader gives us the feeling that our class might not make to art without us.  In a sense, it is our first feeling that society depends on our help.
Sharing – “Can you share the doll with Sally?”  Giving something that belongs to you, or that you initially possessed, is a challenge for children and even many adults.  We teach that life isn’t fair, and quickly learn that if we share with someone then they might share with us.  As children grow, the scope of their sharing becomes larger, and we encourage our students to collect food for the homeless or volunteer for an organization.  Learning to help those less fortunate is a fundamental characteristic of our society.
Respect – “It is not nice to tease people; please stop.”  It is necessary for teachers to create a safe, comfortable environment for all of their students.  This entails role modeling acceptance and tolerance for all races, ethnicities, religions, and genders.  It is important that students know that they are an important part of the class; they learn respect for themselves.  “Please do not write on the desks.”  This is the beginning of respecting others people's property.
Success – “Tommy, that is a wonderful picture you have drawn.”  From the beginning of our lives we need to be nurtured.  As we become little people, we begin to have a desire to be praised.  And quickly this feeling forms into an aspiration to succeed.  We continue through life with this desire.  We wouldn’t be here without it.
As we aim to become the best teachers that we can be, it is important to define our moral ground.  Our students will need our guidance and direction when it comes to the skills they acquire and the people they become. We cannot control the decisions of our children, for that is human nature.  We can provide them with all the information they need to become the remarkable members of our captivating society.
Click to reveal the answer.
A. A sizable group of people with a common, distinctive racial, national, religious, linguistic, or cultural heritage.
B. Laws of a country
D. A human philosophy, with respect to what is right and wrong, good and bad, and the motives behind those actions.
D. A human philosophy, with respect to what is right and wrong, good and bad, and the motives behind those actions.D. A human philosophy, with respect to what is right and wrong, good and bad, and the motives behind those actions.
Who questioned whether teaching was to provide students with practical skills or to make them virtuous people?
A. Homer Simpson
B. PlatoB. Plato
According to the article, what do some religious leaders believe about ethics in schools?
A. It should be the only subject taught.
B. Ethical behavior will disappear if their particular religion is not taught to all young people.
C. Math has Wrath
D. Morals are a joke
B. Ethical behavior will disappear if their particular religion is not taught to all young people.B. Ethical behavior will disappear if their particular religion is not taught to all young people.
Johnny tells Joe to steal the candy bar from the grocery store. Johnny refuses and says, “I wouldn’t want someone to steal from me!” What is this an example of?
A. Being honest
B. Being respectful
C. The Golden Rule
D. All of the above
D. All of the aboveD. All of the above
Name a character trait we learn in kindergarten and build upon for the rest of our lives?
D. All of the above
D. All of the aboveD. All of the above
Click to reveal sample responses.
If you were the speaker at a high school graduation, what 5 character traits would you want to impart upon the students? Explain why.
High school seniors are ending one large portion of their lives and preparing to embark on a sometimes scary journey into the "real world."  If I were to leave them with 5 character traits that would help them on their expedition I would choose trust, responsibility, success, forgiveness, and respect.
Trust is an important trait that people should acknowledge.  These young adults should remember that you cannot trust everyone, but allow everyone to trust you.  Knowing that someone can depend on you is one of the most valuable assets in the workforce.
This leads into responsibility.  I am sure that this word has echoed in the heads of all of these students for the past 12 years.  "Don't forget your homework! It is your responsibility!"  Well now, it is your life that you are responsible for, and that may seem scary.  You all have taken responsibility to make it this far.  Continue on this path, you hold this in your hands.  Hopefully your parents and teachers have guided you in the right direction.
Next we have success because without the desire to succeed, no one would ever amount to anything.  None of you would be here, including your parents and teachers.  This is something that is innate, you are born with. Don't be scared because you will be amazed on how your instincts will kick in!
We also need to have forgiveness.  I want to pass this trait onto you because you should always remember, we are all human.  This means we are imperfect.  We will not succeed at everything and someone you love will disappoint you.  The most important thing to remember is to forgive yourself and forgive your loved ones.  Life is too short to waste your time hating people, including yourselves.
Last but not least I want to leave you with respect.  Never let someone take advantage of you, respect yourself.  But make sure that you are respectful when asserting respect for yourself.  Don't burn bridges that you may want to cross later.
Having the responsibility to speak at graduation is a grave one that is often not taken seriously.  Not only do you have to worry about stand in front of a group of your peers and their families, but you also have to think of something to say that will be uplifting without sounding too cliché.  There are many aspects that you want to convey about going into the future, however you yourself can only guess what the future will be like.  If I were giving the speech, I would want to convey the characteristics of honesty, responsibility, sharing, respect, and success.  These lessons are learned at an early age, and just grow as we do.
Honesty is one of the most important ones.  We must be honest with ourselves to get were we want to go in life.  Although it seems that we live in a some what corrupt world, it is important to carry the trait of honesty.  It makes the quality of life better.  If you live an honest life, you are more likely to succeed in your every endeavor.
The next would be responsibility.  This too is a very important part of life.  Now that one is out of high school, they are beginning a new life that Mom and Dad are less in control of.  If you get a bad grade, you have to deal with your teacher.  If you get thrown in jail, it’s on your record for life.  Al; of your actions from this point on you are responsible for.  It’s time to step up to the plate!
Third, sharing, is often forgotten now a days.  People are so consumed with self that they forget to think of others.  It can be something as easy as sharing the sugar with a next door neighbor, or something larger like helping people less fortunate than yourself.  It is important to remember that we do not exist in the world alone, and to co-exist harmoniously, we must appreciate and share with each other.
Respect is a very important issue that is a necessity in our society.  It goes along with sharing.  We must all learn to respect each other in order for us to live the best way.  Finally, success.  I believe that if you have all four characteristics above, you will be successful.  Its important to know success is not defined by money or what you have but instead by what you accomplish.  Stay humble! —Jamie LaCava
I thought that the concept of the question was quite good, however when I think of character traits that I would desire to impart upon the young people of tomorrow, I thought about five entirely different traits.  I determined that being a graduate about 8 years ago, and being a graduate in the years to come will be an entirely different journey for young students to embark on.  With that in mind, I chose perseverance, awareness, focus, strength, and lastly assertiveness.  Now while some of the traits could possibly be interchangeable, I felt that the overall sense of what our children will need is strength.  I did not feel that the traits listed in the above essay were necessarily character traits.
Essentially I agree with your thought that this world is not all peaches and cream, however if you really want them to make their mark, they will have to assert that mark.  Privileges are not being handed out, and an individual with a lot of resolve will go a long way.  Ultimately I feel that we can hope to assert all of these personality traits in our students while they are in out class, but ultimately we can also guide them academically and make them deferential, and intellectual beings.High school seniors are ending one large portion of their lives and preparing to embark on a sometimes scary journey into the "real world."  If I were to leave them with 5 character traits that would help them on their expedition I would choose trust, responsibility, success, forgiveness, and respect.
Trust is an important trait that people should acknowledge.  These young adults should remember that you cannot trust everyone, but allow everyone to trust you.  Knowing that someone can depend on you is one of the most valuable assets in the workforce.
This leads into responsibility.  I am sure that this word has echoed in the heads of all of these students for the past 12 years.  "Don't forget your homework! It is your responsibility!"  Well now, it is your life that you are responsible for, and that may seem scary.  You all have taken responsibility to make it this far.  Continue on this path, you hold this in your hands.  Hopefully your parents and teachers have guided you in the right direction.
Next we have success because without the desire to succeed, no one would ever amount to anything.  None of you would be here, including your parents and teachers.  This is something that is innate, you are born with. Don't be scared because you will be amazed on how your instincts will kick in!
We also need to have forgiveness.  I want to pass this trait onto you because you should always remember, we are all human.  This means we are imperfect.  We will not succeed at everything and someone you love will disappoint you.  The most important thing to remember is to forgive yourself and forgive your loved ones.  Life is too short to waste your time hating people, including yourselves.
Last but not least I want to leave you with respect.  Never let someone take advantage of you, respect yourself.  But make sure that you are respectful when asserting respect for yourself.  Don't burn bridges that you may want to cross later.
Having the responsibility to speak at graduation is a grave one that is often not taken seriously.  Not only do you have to worry about stand in front of a group of your peers and their families, but you also have to think of something to say that will be uplifting without sounding too cliché.  There are many aspects that you want to convey about going into the future, however you yourself can only guess what the future will be like.  If I were giving the speech, I would want to convey the characteristics of honesty, responsibility, sharing, respect, and success.  These lessons are learned at an early age, and just grow as we do.
Honesty is one of the most important ones.  We must be honest with ourselves to get were we want to go in life.  Although it seems that we live in a some what corrupt world, it is important to carry the trait of honesty.  It makes the quality of life better.  If you live an honest life, you are more likely to succeed in your every endeavor.
The next would be responsibility.  This too is a very important part of life.  Now that one is out of high school, they are beginning a new life that Mom and Dad are less in control of.  If you get a bad grade, you have to deal with your teacher.  If you get thrown in jail, it’s on your record for life.  Al; of your actions from this point on you are responsible for.  It’s time to step up to the plate!
Third, sharing, is often forgotten now a days.  People are so consumed with self that they forget to think of others.  It can be something as easy as sharing the sugar with a next door neighbor, or something larger like helping people less fortunate than yourself.  It is important to remember that we do not exist in the world alone, and to co-exist harmoniously, we must appreciate and share with each other.
Respect is a very important issue that is a necessity in our society.  It goes along with sharing.  We must all learn to respect each other in order for us to live the best way.  Finally, success.  I believe that if you have all four characteristics above, you will be successful.  Its important to know success is not defined by money or what you have but instead by what you accomplish.  Stay humble! —Jamie LaCava
I thought that the concept of the question was quite good, however when I think of character traits that I would desire to impart upon the young people of tomorrow, I thought about five entirely different traits.  I determined that being a graduate about 8 years ago, and being a graduate in the years to come will be an entirely different journey for young students to embark on.  With that in mind, I chose perseverance, awareness, focus, strength, and lastly assertiveness.  Now while some of the traits could possibly be interchangeable, I felt that the overall sense of what our children will need is strength.  I did not feel that the traits listed in the above essay were necessarily character traits.
Essentially I agree with your thought that this world is not all peaches and cream, however if you really want them to make their mark, they will have to assert that mark.  Privileges are not being handed out, and an individual with a lot of resolve will go a long way.  Ultimately I feel that we can hope to assert all of these personality traits in our students while they are in out class, but ultimately we can also guide them academically and make them deferential, and intellectual beings.
Dictionary.Com. 2007. Lexico Publishing Group, LLC. 9 Feb. 2007 <dictionary.reference.com>.
"Ethics, Especially Organizational Ethics, and How It Relates to Economics and Politics." Ethics and Policy Integration Centre. 2 May 2003. 9 Feb. 2007 <http://www.ethicaledge.com/quest_1.html>.
Fulghum, Robert. All I Really Needed to Know I Learned in Kindergarten. New York: Villard Books, 1989.
Hansen, David T. (1993). From Role to Person: the Moral Layeredness of Classroom Teaching [Electronic Version]. American Education Research Journal, 4, 651-674. Retrieved Feb. 8, 2007 from JSTOR database.
Ryan, Kevin, and Karen E. Bohlin. Building Character in Schools. 1st ed. San Fransico: Jossey-Bass, 1999. 5.
Thorkildsen, Theresa A., and Herbert J. Walberg, eds. New York: Springer, 2004. 137.
Zakariya, Sally B., ed. (1987). Religion in the Curriculum [Electronic Version]. Journal of the American Academy of Religion, 3, 570-571. Retrieved Feb. 8, 2007 from JSTOR database.
Postage stamps and postal history of Canada
An SDS gel being visualized under UV
SDS-Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis is a technique to separate proteins according to electrophoretic mobility - a function of polypeptide chain length or protein mass). SDS-Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis can also be used to separate DNA and RNA molecules.
SDS stands for sodium dodecyl sulfate. "SDS is an anionic detergent that disrupts non-covalent interactions in native proteins." SDS is used to create denaturing conditions to separate proteins by molecular weight and also confers negative charge to the proteins in proportion to its mass. By denaturing the proteins with SDS, proteins can be separated by their mass alone; without SDS, other molecular properties, such as a charge and shape, would interfere with the separation process (proteins that are strongly negative, for example, would move faster down a gel, even if they were larger, without SDS). In addition, a loading dye is introduced that helps bind the protein to the gel and make it more recognizable when exposed by UV light.
SDS-PAGE gives an estimates of the mass of dissociated polypeptides by the anions of SDS binding to the main chains of the polypeptide at a ratio of one SDS anion for every two amino acid residues.
SDS-PAGE is unlike sedimentation-equilibrium technique because denaturing of the proteins is applied for SDS-PAGE for mass determination.
This technique is used to test the purity of interest proteins and the percentage of interested protein in the sample solution.
This technique is rapid, sensitive and capable of high resolution compared to Gel-Electrophoresis because it can give a distinct band with as little as 0.1 micrograms of the protein when stained with Coomassie Blue and proteins that differ by 2% can still be separated.
SDS-PAGE can also be combined with Isolectric Focusing to obtain very high resolution separations. Proteins are first isolated by their net charge accordingly, then simultaneously run a SDS-PAGE adjacent to the filtering compartment.
Detergents are widely used to interrupt the hydrophobic interactions which can then destroy the lipid bilayer. Detergents are the most common types of agents used to solubilize transmembrane proteins.
Detergents are small amphiphilic molecules that are more soluble in water than lipids. Sometimes their hydrophilic heads (polar side) can be charged as in SDS but can be nonionic  like octylglucoside and Triton. Detergents are monomeric in low concentration but form micelles in high concentration, after overcoming the critical micelle concentration. In order to keep the detergent monomer concentration constant, individual detergents go in and out of micelles. Detergents are very condition specific because they depend on the pH, salt concentration, and the temperature. Therefore detergents are very complicated to study.
Detergents help break the lipid bilayer by acting as a substitute. When the detergents are mixed with the lipids, the hydrophobic part of the detergent attaches to the hydrophobic head of the lipid bilayer making them soluble. If the detergent concentration decreases, the protein would not remain soluble.If more phospholipid were to be introduced, membrane proteins would form liposomes. Since the opposite side of the detergent is polar, the binding brings the membrane proteins into the solution as detergent-protein complexes. In this sense, the detergents acts as a capsule/substitute for the lipid membrane.
SDS, a strong ionic detergent, can solubilize even the most hydrophobic membrane proteins by attacking the hydrophobic core itself, which ultimately denatures the protein and can be used in a procedure known as SDS polyacrylmide-gel electrophoresis. The study of the protein function seems almost frivolous with the protein denatured but studies have showed that the protein can be renatured once the detergents are removed. Detergents are used commercially today to remove stains or proteins that stained clothes. By making the protein soluble, it is able to remove direct and other proteins from the clothes.
Similar to SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, blue native-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis is another useful method of protein purification that has allowed scientists to analyze membrane protein complexes in mitochondria, chloroplasts, microsomes, and bacteria.[1]
"Biochemistry." Sixth Edition - Jeremy M. Berg, John L. Tymoczko
"Molecular Biology of THE CELL." Fifth edition- Alberts, Johnson, Lewis, Raff, Roberts, Walter
↑ http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6VS6-4SP05KW-2&_user=4429&_coverDate=08%2F31%2F2008&_rdoc=1&_fmt=high&_orig=search&_origin=search&_sort=d&_docanchor=&view=c&_acct=C000059602&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=4429&md5=50079a074f8ef867263bd29c67b195f4&searchtype=a
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
This module is part of Animation:Master Features.
Although the right to choose religious circumcision for one's self is non-controversial, the right of a caregiver to consent on behalf of a child for non-therapeutic surgery is more contested.
Generally there are two types of argument:  Supporters and Opponents.
Supporters: Caregivers have a fundamental right to make religious decisions on behalf of children under their care.  The state has no right to limit this in any way.
Opponents: Circumcision is sexual assault and is therefore beyond the caregiver's rights of action against another person.  Religious freedom must be limited when health decisions are made on behalf of a minor.
A lot of the power of Rebol comes from its concept of dialects. A dialect is a sub-language used for a specific purpose (also called a domain specific language).
It's like buying a Volkswagen Bug. Once you own one, you start to see them everywhere. That's true for dialects as well. And, even better, once you know what they are, you start to add them to your code and use them to gain greater programming leverage in writing applications.
You use dialects a lot in Rebol, even though you may not realize it. For example, when you write:
The block that follows the func word is actually a dialect. It is not "normal Rebol code" (also called the Do dialect), it is a special little language that is used for defining the arguments of functions.
Similarly, when you create GUI you often write it in VID, the visual interface dialect. A snip of VID might look like this:
You may not realize it, but you use a dialect when you tell the parse function how to parse strings or blocks:
When you want to control the security for your program, you also use a dialect:
So, there are many such dialects in Rebol.
That is, for a dialect to be valid, you must be able to use the load function to load it into Rebol. The dialect must be a valid lexical expression of Rebol. If a string cannot be loaded, then it is not a dialect (it might be a valid language of some kind, but it is just not a dialect).
For example, this code shows that a given string is a valid dialect of Rebol because it can be loaded:
But, the example below is not a valid dialect. It cannot be loaded.
** Syntax Error: Invalid date -- 100-200
Nor is this line of C code a valid dialect:
** Syntax Error: Missing ) at end-of-script
These examples contain character sequences that are not valid in Rebol; therefore, they are not dialects of Rebol.
This loadability factor is part of what makes dialecting so special in Rebol. You don't need to write a lexical string scanner. You get to skip that part and get to the meat of your special language.
Not Just Code, Data Too
Dialects are not only useful for code expressions, they are equally productive for data storage (and data exchange over the net).
It is important to recognize that a dialect does not require that you write a parser or any other complex method to interpret the meaning of the data.
Even a block as simple as this is considered to be a dialect:
"Bob" 21 bob@example.com $100
This is a dialect because it is a loadable Rebol string. The way you interpret it is up to you, but it can be as simple as using a multivariable assignment:
Here is a more complex data dialect that is used for holding data about students in a REBOL-based class reunion program. This is a single record, but we've broken it into separate lines so you can see the details:
37 "Bob" "Smith" "1000 Example Dr." "Example" "CA" "90000"
The words in this dialect (like spouse, phone, package) are used for optional fields of the record.
P2P networking is a networking style that does not need the use of a centralized server to share files between computers. This style of networking means that an individual does not need to rent server space to share files with other people on the internet. Ethically and morally, this style of networking tends more towards pirating of anything that is on a person’s computer. It also allows for the passing of viruses. In the eyes of the law, the passing of files over P2P networks that were not bought by the person holding the file, is illegal, but it is very hard for the authorities to track downloads over such networks.
Another paradigm shift that one believes is the most devastating of all is the ability to deceive the general public with editing software.  Since the invention of programs like Photoshop, Final Cut Pro, Adobe Audition, and Apple Logic Pro it’s a fairly simple process to take a breaking news story and edit out key parts of the broadcast to make it appear as though something didn’t happen the did or take what a person said out of context.  It happens frequently in news stories and it used as a way to spice up a dull story or to try to start some controversy.  Whatever the reason, this shift from explaining the news just as it happens to spicing up the news for the sake of ratings is a sad move for our culture and society.  It not only doesn’t keep citizens accurately informed but also ruins reputations and could potentially destroy a person’s creditability.
On the more computer tech 'savvy' side of multimedia, a paradigm that affected the actual hardwre and computing capabilities which enable multitudes of projects to be done or even conceived, is that of virtualization.
Today’s powerful x86 computer hardware was originally designed to run only a single operating system and a single application, but virtualization breaks that bond, making it possible to run multiple operating systems and multiple applications on the same computer at the same time, increasing the utilization and flexibility of hardware.
Virtualization lets you transform hardware into software. Use software such as VMware ESX Server to transform or “virtualize” the hardware resources of an x86-based computer—including the CPU, RAM, hard disk and network controller—to create a fully functional virtual machine that can run its own operating system and applications just like a “real” computer. Multiple virtual machines share hardware resources without interfering with each other so that you can safely run several operating systems and applications at the same time on a single computer.
Possibilities of this technology are practically limitless and can be applied to all areas, not just multimedia. Many schools and universities are switching to this technology because it is cheaper and also much more hardware efficient.
Smart Drugs: Better Performance Through Biochemistry- In the future, people will take medicine designed not only to prevent, but also to enhance their bodies. According to futurist Dr. James Canton (founder of the think tank Institute for Global Futures), more than half of all Americans are currently using some kind of drug. Over 33% of these individuals take medication with the express purpose of altering their moods or alleviating such things as stress and depression. According to the Philips Health Index, an estimated 15-25% of people take these mentality-shifting drugs (such as Prozac) with the intent to create a heightened sense of alertness and increased performance on the job. Imagine a time when you may find yourself at a competitive disadvantage if you choose not to take enhancement mediation.
The Extreme Future, James Canton, pg. 141-143
The cardiovascular exam consists of four portions:
1.Inspection:
A thorough inspection includes examination of the precordium.  The patient should be at about a 30 degree angle to the ground.  The examiner should look at the neck and note the pulsations of the jugular vein, which can be told apart from carotid pulsations by applying pressure distally and noting a cessation of pulsation.  The examiner should also measure the height of the jugular venous pulse from the sternum.  An abnormally high JVP may indicative of right heart failure.
2.Palpation:
Palpation is done in different areas of the precordium ( Mitral area, Tricuspid area, pulmonary area, Aortic area ), the carotid pulasations and epigastric area.
3.Percussion:
Percussion is done to define the borders of heart. This is not an improtant part of the cardiovascular examination.
4.Auscultation:
Ausculation is important part of CVS examination. It includes auscultation of heart sounds and murmurs in all the four areas of precordium.
Postage stamps and postal history of Barbados
This cookbook was created by Dan McCreary in the Spring of 2008.  The XRX label was created by Dan soon after the December 2007 XTech meeting in Boston.  Dan found many people there that all came to the same conclusion: using XForms and a native XML database offered some huge advantages.  He also found that his related cookbook (the XForms cookbook) started to have many examples that used not just XForms but also XQuery as a back end.  In order to keep the XForms cookbook general and still appeal XForms developers, many of the XForms/XQuery examples were migrated to this Wikibook.
Many XRX fans feel XRX to be a superior web application architecture, a natural consequence of XML being used both in the client, as a data transmission standard, and in the server.
We hope you find this book useful and we hope you contribute to the examples.
When we are making the cricket game we are allow the user to use their own die or a random number die built into the program.  We are now going to look how the random number feature works:
To start using random numbers are need to set up the randomize function.  This is a little like throwing a million dice in the air at once and storing all their results, we can then use these 'random' results in our program
The next thing we need to do is to allocate a number from one to six for the dice role.  Remember we have two dice, one for the bowler and once for the batter:
To get a random number we use the Rnd() function (remember a function returns a value).  Unfortunately the Rnd() function returns a value between 0.000000 and 0.9999999.  So we need to convert this to a number between 1 and 6.
To do this, we can multiply the number by 6, this will give us values between 0.00000 and 5.99999. These are obviously not whole numbers so we need to round them off to be integers Using the Int() function.  Giving us a number between 0 and 5.  Still not perfect as we need something between 1 and 6.
So we need to be a little smarter and add 1.  This will now give us a number between 1 and 6.
Draw a graph of displacement for a critically damped oscillation.
How would you critically damp an oscillating pendulum?
Grab the weight, move it to its equilibrium position, and stop it moving.
How would you damp an oscillating pendulum using only a weighted polystyrene block?
Put the block in the path of the pendulum, which will bounce off the weight, losing a bit of energy each oscillation.
What would the displacement graph look like for this oscillation, before and after damping began?
If k doubles, the e-kt will be squashed to half its size along the t-axis, so as k increases, the rate of damping increases.
The Garden of Eden. Living in God.
With this meditation, we purify our mind of stress. We learn something about the way to Paradise. We get into a life in the light. We realize happiness in our life. We become a master of life and awaken our enlightenment energy.
Blessing Jesus Christ.
We concentrate on our bodies and through this process bring the spirit into a state of peace. We sense this through our legs and feet as we let the light circulate through our lower limbs. We think of the word “light” as our mantra. We let the light then circulate through our arms and hands while envisioning the word “light”. We then wrap our entire bodies in a vision of light and think of the word at the same time. Then we relax.
We begin our ascent to heaven. First we enter the astral world. We become a soul. We then visualize a cloud composed of very fine energy which encircles the body. We are this cloud. We concentrate on the cloud and not our bodies. We leave the body and think of the mantra “I am a cloud. I am a soul. I am independent from my body.” We think of this mantra until we can feel this cloud.
We visualize the entire cosmos around us as full of stars. Our souls can travel anywhere they so desire. We meditate on the cosmos. We think of the mantra “stars”. We make large circles with the arms until we feel at one with the cosmos. We feel secure with our place in the world, we are at one with the world.
Hieronymus Bosch - Paradise.
Over the positive souls are the blessed souls. We are now in paradise. We imagine that all our wishes have been fulfilled. What do you wish? Fulfill them or let go of them here. Define the point where you have reached enough. Create contentment with your life. “My way to contentment is...”
Above the world of the happy souls lies the world of the enlightened. We become sons and daughters of God, Gods and Goddesses, enlightened Buddhas. We wish for a happy world. We envision the following: “I send light to... May all people be happy. May the world be a happy world.”
We move our hand to bless the entire cosmos with love and light. We move light into all areas of suffering. We send all suffering beings light. We surround them with light and think of the mantra “I send light to all suffering beings”. We think of all the problems in our lives and surround these problems with light. We integrate our problems into our life. We become masters of our lives. We surround all our life’s situations with light.
We come to the seventh heaven. We visualize a sun with strong energy composed of peace, love and happiness. The hands lay relaxed in the lap. We think of the mantra, “Om sun, peace, love, happiness, living in the light.“ We fill our souls with peace, love, happiness and light, and rest in the light of God (in bliss, in the enlightenment energy).
Blessing.
We connect ourselves with the angels, Jesus or God. We rub the palms of our hands in front of the heart chakra and think, "Dear God (Om all enlightened Masters, Angels). Om inner wisdom. Please guide me and help me on my way.”
We move our feet slowly, then stretch and wiggle a bit. We then return to earth and our daily lifes. We are filled with peace, love and optimism.
Open with a right click in a new tab and listen while meditating:
Joan Baez - We shall overcome (Music Video, 4 min.)
100,000 Angels (Meditation Music Video, 2 min.)
Fairytales meditation (Meditation Music Video, 8 min.)
Relaxation Meditation Nature Sounds (Meditation Music Video, 5 min.)
A guided meditation "OPENING TO PARADISE" (8 min.)
Wikipedia has related information at Garden of Eden, Heaven, Paradise  and Valhalla
Some of the earliest science was a combination of practical wisdom, basic arithmetic, observations, and mysticism. Many early civilizations used supernaturalism to explain natural phenomena, which helps to explain why these early civilizations had such a broad and varied mythos. Every new phenomena required the creation of a new god, goddess, spirit, or demon for explanation.
The sun was not a burning sphere in space, but instead it was the god Apollo on a burning, flying chariot. Desert mirages were not an optical and psychological occurrence, it was a trick played by an evil jinn. Natural disasters represented the wrath of an angered deity.
The rise of Greece and Rome created an environment where philosophical minds could consider the natural world more readily and easily than was possible in previous times. The philosophical tradition began with Thales of Miletus, who posited that the world was made of water. While it's obvious to us now that the world is not made of water, it does give insight into the conceptual framework that the earliest scientists had. It is clear that the world is not immutable, that is that it changes over time. Water is also known to take multiple forms of ice (solid) and vapor (gas).
After Thales, there was a long line of scientific thinkers: Anaximenes (who held that the world was made of air, not water), Pythagoras, Heraclitus, Democritus, and Euclid. Aristotle, one of the last great Greek philosophers was said to know all of the science by the time he died.
After the fall of the Roman empire, Europe descended into a period known as the dark ages. Religious oppression and oppression by feudal lords led to a sharp decline in scientific thought.
The renaissance or the "rebirth" was a period where great thinkers challenged the power of the church and opened up the way for science to grow once again. Much of science at the beginning of the renaissance was centered around observational science, such as astronomy (with Galileo, Copernicus, and Kepler). However, Mathematics was going through a rebirth of its own, and many great thinkers had begun formalizing mathematical tools and applying them to physical problems. Rene Descartes, a preeminent philosopher, scientist, and mathematician created the first version of the scientific method and employed it to study various subjects in science and philosophy.
Best known for this period, although certainly not the only great thinker was Isaac Newton, who used the new mathematics of Calculus to unify the study of physics and astronomy.
The industrial revolution was a time when machines were used to a much greater extent than they had ever been. Many processes were automated through the use of mechanical machines, and many great inventions, including the steam engine, were created. It was during this time that many great scientists began to study electricity and magnetism, effects that were poorly understood and not explained by the theories of newton.
While the world of the industrial revolution was about mechanics and machines, the modern world has been dominated by the study and application of electricity. Starting with the equations of Maxwell, many great thinkers such as Heaviside, Edison, Tesla, and Hertz began to invent new technologies that we still use today: Telephones, Electrical power distribution, and electrical communications. With the advent of the vacuum tube and silicone transistor, the computer revolution has pushed science and technology further and faster than it has ever been.
Entrez, mes enfants     (French) Enter, my children.[1] Lenehan, as usual, cannot resist lapsing into French.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
Phases of Matter ·
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
Harry enters the kitchen where Aunt Petunia is serving Dudley a grapefruit quarter. Dudley has been on a diet since his school wrote a letter saying they did not have any knickerbockers large enough to fit him. To make it easier for Dudley, Aunt Petunia has put the entire family on a diet. A hungry Harry had requested help by owl post and has received snacks from Hagrid, Hermione, and Ron that he stashed under the floorboard upstairs. They and Sirius Black had also each sent him cakes for his birthday, now two weeks past, and he still has two left.
A letter arrives from Molly Weasley, which was surprisingly sent through Muggle mail rather than by owl post. To Uncle Vernon's dismay, the envelope is nearly completely covered in stamps, and the postman has rung because this is unusual. Mrs. Weasley invites Harry to attend the Quidditch World Cup with the Weasley family, and suggests he stay with them until school starts. This creates a quandary for Uncle Vernon: if he lets Harry go, it will be something fun for him, which he always tries to prevent; however, it also means Harry would be gone a good two weeks earlier than Vernon and Petunia could have hoped for.
After a long discussion, Uncle Vernon is about to forbid Harry to go the Weasleys when Harry deliberately mentions that he has to finish his letter to Sirius Black. He says his godfather has not heard from him in a while and might be getting worried. Suddenly afraid, Uncle Vernon grants Harry permission to go to the Weasleys. When Harry returns to his room, he finds owls waiting. Ron sent a letter via his tiny owl, saying that they will come and get him whether the Dursleys like it or not. Harry sends a reply saying that he has permission. Hedwig, his own owl, has returned from hunting, so Harry finishes his message to Sirius, explaining where he is going, and gives it to Hedwig.
While the story is advanced somewhat, it is cousin Dudley and Uncle Vernon that are highlighted here. In addition to his increasingly abusive and bullying personality, Dudley, who rarely exhibits restraint in anything, has grown so fat that he is unable to fit into his school clothes. (For US readers, we note that knickerbockers are a particular type of short trousers, evidently forming part of the school uniform and possibly only available through the school.) Mortified, Petunia not only puts Dudley on a diet, but the entire family as well, feeling that Dudley should not have to suffer alone, even though Harry is perpetually under-nourished. Without his friends' assistance, Harry might literally starve. Additionally, there are some visible changes in Uncle Vernon's behavior; as Harry grows older, Vernon, knowing what wizards are capable of, begins showing fear, if not necessarily respect, towards Harry. His underlying motivation continues to be to make Harry's life as miserable as possible, but now he does so with more passive-aggressive behavior. Aware that his status in the household has begun to increase, Harry is not averse to using his new-found power judiciously to obtain what he wants, though from what we see here, he does so sparingly and apparently not in a malicious or harmful manner.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Why does Aunt Petunia insist on putting the entire family on a diet when it is Dudley who is overweight?
Why is Uncle Vernon conflicted over giving Harry permission to visit the Weasleys?
Why does Harry mention that he is writing to his godfather? What is Uncle Vernon's reaction?
How and why has the relationship between Harry and Uncle Vernon changed?
Why did Molly Weasley send the Dursleys a letter using Muggle mail service rather than Owl Post? Does it make a difference?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
There is surprisingly little in this chapter that has any bearing on what will happen in the future of this book or of the series. It is true that Harry's letter, when it reaches Sirius, will cause him to try to return to England to confer directly with Harry; and similarly, and as we now expect, Harry will attend the Quidditch World Cup. Apart from that, the only change that might be signaled by events in this chapter is in Dudley: over the next year, his diet will prove effective in causing him to lose weight, but true to his nature as a bully, he will take up boxing and become an urban tough.
Eg. Mui Goawt jangnor (I am going to home) Ami Goawt Jeeir (We are going to home)
Eg. Tui Goawt jawtene? (Are you are going to home?) Tumi Goawt Jawtene? (Are you   going to home?)
Eg. Te Goawt jar (He is  going to home) Tha Goawt Jaron (They are going to home)
This Wikibook is an outgrowth of the EARTHTIME Initiative.  EARTHTIME is supported by:
European Union Seventh Framework Programme (Marie Curie People Action)
RAI1 broadcasts the Speciale TG1 with the news documentary on our project
Franco, the cameraman from the Italian TV had been with us in about half of the locations we had been, the rest of the footage had been shot by Gauri, the youngest of the team.
Finally Francesco put  assembled a 55 minutes documentary, utilizing the footage shot by Franco, by Gauri and also by hired local cameramen  in Syria, India and Colombia. Finally, in July 2011 it was broadcast as a “TG1 Speciale”, the most authoritative news magazine of the Italian public network. So at the end we had done it!  We had managed to get the television to cover the MDGs!  We could now write to Brussels and say: “project objective achieved”.
What was finally broadcast was weak and uninspiring. Francesco had titled it "the last page" and throughout the narration he praised himself for bringing up the  issues that, he said, other journalists were putting down and down in the news priorities.  The narration was proceeding for about an hour on the basis of the mostly eye catching images moving from project to project, from continent to continent, without bringing about any coherent vision of the whole. Very little space had been given to the voices of the testimonials: the speaker was Francesco's voice, trying to evoke some sort of pietistic sympathy for the suffering humanity. It showed poverty; but the sense of global challenge for a coordinated action against poverty"  was missed in the reportage.
Francesco had warned us before, throughout the project, that he had to concede to the news stereotypes of the Italian television.  But that was too much!  He had moved safely, avoiding the controversial stories and telling only what was reinforcing the typical western presumptions. So we were quite disappointed.
The good think was that once RAI had broadcast the videos, we were free to use all the footage in the way we wanted. In the contract it was agreed that RAI had the right to the first usage of the footage for a single broadcast. Then we were becoming the sole proprietors of the whole material and we could use it the way we wanted.  RAI had aired their product and the job of the two journalists was over. And for us that was the time for a new start.
We decided to re-edit it all.  And take full advantage of the Internet platform.
In the months before we had already  edited  the interviews and had collected the different opinions under 10 major development cooperation issues. We had also edited the "backstage dialogues" within the team.  We could not before share the "development stories" on the Net because first RAI had to use that footage (they were not much concerned about the "talks").  At this point  we  edited each story independently and put them on the Internet, so that the project stakeholders could use them independently..
Finally we weaved together the stories, interviews and our own "backstage" story.
We edited eight episodes of 40 minutes each.
Then the work started for trying to find distributors for the television market.
Next  ⇒ Distribution as a another story
On Youtube ⇒  Utilisation of collected resources for TV broadcast - playlist
The Golgi apparatus, or Golgi complex, functions as a factory in which proteins received from the ER are further processed and sorted for transport to their eventual destinations: lysosomes, the plasma membrane, or secretion. In addition, as noted earlier, glycolipids and sphingomyelin are synthesized within the Golgi. In plant cells, the Golgi apparatus further serves as the site at which the complex polysaccharides of the cell wall are synthesized. The Golgi apparatus is thus involved in processing the broad range of cellular constituents that travel along the secretory pathway.
Primary Assessment & Basic Life Support —
Medical Conditions & Poisoning —
Schematic of the human heart.
The human heart is an electro-mechanical pump, circulating nourishing blood throughout the body. If beating stops, the brain, lungs and even the heart itself stop receiving oxygen and perish. Rescuers can use a technique called chest compressions to squeeze the heart from outside the patient's chest, helping to circulate blood around. When performing chest compressions during CPR, you are helping move the oxygen you delivered through rescue breathing where it is needed.
Chest compressions are often started before any other intervention in an emergency setting, because even blood that has already passed through the body has oxygen remaining to be used. Using compressions to pump that existing blood around can help buy the patient more time. This is the reason that CPR can be done "compression only", or without rescue breathing. Once compressions start, they must continue for as long as possible.
The goal is always to compress in the center of the chest, regardless of the shape or size of the patient.  This means that compressions are to performed on the sternum or breastbone of the patient, in line with the casualty's armpits or nipple line.
Compressions for infant CPR are done with two fingers only.
For adults (>8) - place the heel of one hand in the centre of the chest, approximately between the nipple line (on adult males - for females, you may need to approximate the ideal position of this line due to variations in breast size and shape).  You may also use the bottom of the casualty's armpits as a reference mark. Bring your other hand to rest on top of the first hand, and interlock your fingers.  Bring your shoulders directly above your hands, keeping your arms straight. You should then push down firmly onto the heel of the lower hand, depressing the chest 5–6 cm (2-2.5inches).
For children (1-8) - place the heel of one hand in the centre of the chest, approximately between the nipple line.  Bring your shoulder directly above your hand, with your arm straight, and perform compressions to at least one third (1/3) the depth of the chest with one arm only.
For infants (<1yr) - Use your forefinger and middle finger only.  Place your forefinger on the centre of the child's chest between the nipples, with your middle finger immediately below it on the chest, and push downwards using the strength in your arm, compressing the chest at least one third (1/3) of its depth. For newborns and small infants, you can hold the child in your opposite arm (head in your palm, feet at your elbow) for easier access.
Give 30 compressions in a row, and then two (2) rescue breaths.
Then restart your next cycle of compressions
You MUST allow the ribs to come all the way back out after each compression, followed by a brief pause.  This allows the heart's chambers to refill.  Spacing compressions too close together will lead to them being ineffective.
You are aiming for a rate of 100 compressions per minute, which includes the time to give rescue breaths.  In practice, you should get just over 2 cycles of 30 compressions in along with breaths per minute.
Almost everyone compresses the chest too fast - Experience shows that even well trained first aiders tend to compress the heart too fast.  The rate you are aiming for is only a little over one per second.  The best equipped first aid kits should include a Metronome with an audible 'beep' to match your speed to.  Many public access defibrillators have these included in their pack. If one is not available, count the number of compressions with the word 'and' between them. When you press down on the chest, say the number, when the chest rises say 'and'. this way, you will be saying 'one-and-two-and-three...'
The patient should be on a hard surface - If the patient is in bed or a similar cushioned area, moving them to the floor will help assure you are compressing their chest and not the mattress or couch cushions. If moving the casualty is impractical, a hard, flat board can be placed behind them to make compressions more effective.
Keep your arms straight - A lot of television and films show actors 'performing CPR' bending their elbows.  This is not effective - you should always keep your arms straight, with your elbows locked and directly above your hands.
It often helps to count out loud - You need to try and get 30 compressions per cycle, and it helps to count this out loud or under your breath. In such a stressful situation, you will be anxious and unable to count out loud for the duration, but ensure you keep counting, even if it's in your own mind.
If you lose count, don't stop, just estimate - It is important to carry on once you've started, so if you lose count, don't panic, and simply estimate when 30 compressions is over, and do 2 breaths, then start over counting again. Avoid any interruptions in CPR.
You are likely to break ribs - When performing compressions, especially on the elderly, you may find yourself breaking the patient's ribs. This often feels like flicking the finger of one hand against the palm of another. This is to be expected during CPR, and you should carry on regardless.  It is a sign that you are performing good, strong compressions. Oftentimes the cracking sound you will hear is just the cartilage of the ribs and sternum breaking, and not the bones themselves. If bystanders are concerned about injury to the patient, you may want to remind them of the life over limb principle and assure them that it is a normal occurrence, and what you are doing is critically important.
Chest compressions are tiring - This is especially true if you are performing both rescue breathing and compressions by yourself. Studies show that the efficacy of CPR drops when one rescuer performs compressions for an extended time. Hospital emergency rooms switch personnel performing compressions often for this reason. If you are with someone else trained in CPR, rotate between compressions and rescue breaths
You should continue giving the patient CPR until:
The casualty starts breathing spontaneously - This occurs very infrequently, and does not include gasping, called agonal breathing.  Patients are also likely to make sighing noises or groans as you perform chest compressions - this is just the sound of air trapped in the lungs being forced out, and you should not stop CPR if these noises are heard.
The patient vomits - This is an ACTIVE mechanism, meaning the patient moves and actively vomits.  Not to be confused with regurgitation, where stomach contents make their way passively in to the mouth. If the casualty vomits, roll them to their side, clear the airway once they're done vomiting and reassess ABCs. Vomit is obviously undesirable for the person performing CPR. Attempt to clear the mouth with your fingers (preferably while wearing a barrier device) and continue CPR. If you are without barrier device and feel uncomfortable giving rescue breaths, give chest compressions only.
Qualified help arrives and takes over.  This could be a responder with a defibrillator, the ambulance service or a doctor.  DO NOT STOP until instructed to.  They are likely to require time to set up their equipment and evaluate the patient (as you did at first) and you should continue with CPR until instructed to stop.  The emergency medical personnel are used to working around people, and may do things like place defibrillator patches while you continue. By continuing CPR, you are keeping the medical personnel free to perform other tasks.
You are unable to continue - CPR is physically very demanding, and continued periods can be exhausting.  Try to change places frequently with another trained rescuer to lessen the chance of exhaustion.
You put yourself in danger by continuing - Hazards may change, and if your life is endangered by a new hazard, you should stop CPR. If possible, remove the patient from the hazardous situation as well, but never at the risk of your own life or health.
Emergency First Aid & Initial Action Steps —
The Pest and Disease list pages should always be included on the genus or genera page.
These lists should eventually be replaced by a "troubleshooting" section.
(This notice will not appear on printouts or on the including page.)
w:Foxglove Pug (on flowers)
w:Lesser Yellow Underwing (on leaves)
Fusarium spp.
Plan the work of the Key Contributors
Collect Stories of Learning and Case Studies of knowledge transfer via patterns (in and across disciplines)
Design Figures - including icons, images and illustrations (on-going)
When a volume looks to have a solid collection of sections and chapters, drive the process more proactively to complete the volume and publish a "milestone" snapshot.
ROSE Continuous integration using Git and Jenkins (Code Review Omitted for simpler explanation)
Without automated continuous integration, we had frequent incidents like:
Developer A commits something to our central git repository's master branch. The commits contain some bugs which break our build and take a long time to have a fix. Then the central master branch is left to a corrupted state for weeks so nobody can check out/in anything.
Developer A does a lot of wonderful work offline for months. But her work later is found to be incompatible with another developer's work. Her work has unsolvable merge conflicts.
The ROSE project uses a workflow that automates the central principles of continuous integration in order to make integrating the work from different developers a non-event. Because the integration process only integrates with ROSE the changes that passes all tests we encourage all developers to stay in sync with the latest version.
A high level overview of the development model used by ROSE developers.
Step 1: Taking advantage of the distributed source code repositories based on git, each developer should first clone his/her own repository from our central git repository (or its mirrors/clones/forks).
Step 2: Then a feature or a bugfix can be developed in isolation within the private repository. The developer can create any number of private branches. Each branch should relate to a feature that this developer is working on and be relatively short-lived. The developer can commit changes to the private repository without maintaining an active connection to the shared repository.
Step 3: When work is finished and locally tested (make, make check, and make distcheck -j#n), she can pull the latest commits from the central repo's master branch
Step 4: She then can push all accumulated commits within the private repository to his branch within the shared repository. We create a dedicated branch within the central repository for each developer and establish access control of the branch so only an authorized developer can push commits to a particular branch of the shared repository.
Step 5-6 (automated): Any commits from a developer’s private repository will not be immediately merged to the master branch of the shared repository.
In fact, we have access control to prevent any developer from pushing commits to the master branch within the shared repository. A continuous integration server called Jenkins is actively monitoring each developer’s branch within the central repository and will initiate comprehensive commit tests upon the branch once new commits are detected. Finally, Jenkins will merge the new commits to the master branch of the central repository if all tests pass. If a single test fails, Jenkins will report the error and the responsible developer should address the error in his private repository and push improved commits again.
As a result, the master branch of the central git repository is mostly stable and can be a good candidate for our external release. On top of the master branch of the central git repository, we further have more comprehensive release tests in Jenkins. If all the release tests pass, an external release based on the master branch will be made available outside.
We use Jenkins ( http://hudson-rose-30:8080/ ) to test commits added to developer's release candidate branches at the central git repository.
The tests are organized into three categories
Integration: tests used to check if the new commits can pass various "make check" rules, compatibility tests, portability tests, configuration tests, and so on. If all tests pass, the commits will be merged (or integrated) into the master branch of the central repository.
Release: tests used to test the updated master branch of the central repository for additional set of tests using external benchmarks. If all tests pass, the head of the master will be released as a stable snapshot for public file package releases(generated by "make dist").
Others: for informational purpose now, not being used in our production workflow.
So for each push (one or more commits to a -rc branch), it will go through two stages: Integration test and Release test stage.
It is each developer's responsibility to make sure their commits can pass BOTH stage by fixing any bugs discovered by the tests.
Here we list software packages installed and used by Jenkins
Yices: /export/tmp.hudson-rose/opt/yices/1.0.34
__rose__JAVA_VERSION_HOME=/nfs/casc/overture/ROSE/opt/rhel6/x86_64/java/jdk/1.7.0_51
It is possible to manually tracking down how you commits are doing within the test pipeline within Jenkins (http://hudson-rose-30:8080/). But it can be tedious and overwhelming.
So we provide a dashboard ( http://sealavender:4000/) to summarize the commits to your release candidate branch(-rc) and the pass/fail status for each integration tests.
Note: It's possible that all of your testing jobs (finally) pass, but the actual integration is not performed.  This typically occurs when one of your jobs have a system failure, for instance, so it has to be manually re-started.  If you see that all of your jobs have passed, but your work has not been integrated, please let the Jenkins administrator know.
See details at ROSE Compiler Framework/Jenkins Failures
In reality, most LLNL developers are now asked to push things to Github Enterprise for code review first instead of directly pushing to our central git repository.  The synchronization between the Github Enterprise's code review repositories and our Central Git repo are automated.
Auto pull: we have another Jenkins at (https://hudson-rose-30:8443/jenkins/) which serves as the bridge between Github Enterprise and our main production Jenkins.
For each private repositories on Github Enterprise, we have a Jenkins job to monitor the master branch for approved pull (merge) request. If there is any new approved commits, the job will transfer the commits to the central repository's -reviewed-rc branch for that developer.
Build Trigger: Poll SCM , schedule "* * * * *"
Auto push: A Jenkins job is responsible for propagating latest central master contents to all private repositories on github.llnl.gov
Git: /nfs/casc/overture/ROSE/git/ROSE.git
Branches to build: */master
Build Trigger: Build after other projects are built: Commit
( git push git@github.llnl.gov:"$user"/rose.git origin/master:refs/heads/master 2>"$tmpfile" ) || true
Assume one failed job is https://hudson-rose-44.llnl.gov:9443/jenkins/job/development-compile-with-autotools-default-EDG-RHEL6/892/gcc=4.4.7,label=RHEL6,rhel=6/parameters/
First, find the node used for the failed Jenkins job from its log
./jenkins-build-scripts/development/development-compile-with-autotools-default-EDG-RHEL6.sh $gcc || exit 1
Now manually check out the commit and run the script with the right gcc version and rhel version passed
../jenkins-build-scripts/config/env-Linux.sh "4.4.7" 6
../jenkins-build-scripts/development/development-compile-with-autotools-default-EDG-RHEL6.sh 4.4.7
Add a pre-screening job before manual code review kicks in. the pre-screening job can make sure the code to be reviewed will be compiled with minimum warning messages and with required make check rules to run tests.
Initial two jobs: spec cpu benchmark + NPB Fortran benchmarks
Avoid the Auto Push failure due to pending commits on private repo's master branch.
Look into how others are doing this Github+ Jenkins integration
Third Party software installed for testing in Jenkins.
Yices (http://yices.csl.sri.com/)
Download Yices1, the lasted version is better.
Type --with-yices=YICES_INSTALL with ROSE/configure option
Files used to generate the figure: feel free to add new versions as new slides: link
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Networks have a variety of connection patterns
Strategic links (arterials) connect contiguously in most road networks. The geometric patterns of arterials at a collective level play a profound role in shaping traffic pattern and urban landscape.
Existing graph theoretic measures of network topology and connectivity do not identify and quantify connection patterns of networks, such as shown in the image on the right.
Discontinuity examines travelers’ perceptions of inconvenience associated with transferring between different levels of roads.
= hierarchies of the upstream link and downstream link
= The shortest path between any given O-D pair;
= The length of the shortest path.
= The discontinuity along the shortest path.
The measure of discontinuity evaluates the quality of a road network based on the travelers’ perception, which can be extended to account for many “discontinuous” factors, such as the delay at traffic signals or ramp meters, the toll paid entering a toll road, etc.
These measures of aggregate network properties can be used to provide common yardsticks to compare contemporary network structures, and to trace the structural change of networks over time. They could also become useful guidance for urban planners in the design of collective patterns of urban roads.
Xie, Feng and David Levinson (2007) Measuring the Structure of Road Networks. Geographical Analysis 39(3) pp.336-356
Black has a large number of options here. In line with the typical Caro-Kann theme of playing for c5, black usually responds with either 5...Nd7, or 5...c5. Interestingly, highlighting the solidity of the Caro-Kann, the unorthodox moves, except for the tempo-wasting 5...Bg4, and 5...a6, unsuccessfully debuted by Karpov against Anand in 1991, have all shown reasonable success for black.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
1.e4 c6 2.d4 d5 3.e5 Bf5 4.Nf3 e6 5.Be2
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Nunn's Chess Openings. 1999. John Nunn (Editor), Graham Burgess, John Emms, Joe Gallagher. ISBN 1-8574-4221-0.
Modern Chess Openings: MCO-14. 1999. Nick de Firmian, Walter Korn. ISBN 0-8129-3084-3.
Batsford Chess Openings 2 (1989, 1994). Garry Kasparov, Raymond Keene. ISBN 0-8050-3409-9.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
The Universe is commonly defined as everything that exists.
Yuuzhouh yiban dihngyih weir suooyoou curnzaih de dong'xi.
It includes all kinds of physical matter and energy, the planets, stars, galaxies, and all the contents of space.
Danish Gambit, Collijen Defense
The Danish Gambit, Collijen Defense is popular among club players, but not so popular at the highest level.  That is because, it is easy for black to fall into one of the many traps on this line, but if black knows what to do, white can get no more than equality out of the opening.
White has two main options from this position:
Although it may have been known earlier, Danish player Severin From essayed the gambit in an 1867 Paris tournament and he is usually given credit for the opening.  The Danish gambit was popular with masters of the attack including Alexander Alekhine, Frank Marshall, Joseph Henry Blackburne, and Jacques Mieses, but as Black's defenses improved it lost favor in the 1920s.  Today it is rarely played in top-level chess.
White will sacrifice one or two pawns for the sake of rapid development and attack.  With care, Black can accept one or both pawns safely, or simply decline the gambit altogether.
e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. c3 dxc3
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Danish Gambit
Batsford Chess Openings 2 (1989, 1994). Garry Kasparov, Raymond Keene. ISBN 0-8050-3409-9.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
This group of tables contains the following tables:
Go is played on a 19x19 square grid of points, by two players called Black and White.
Each point on the grid may be colored black, white or empty.
A point P, not colored C, is said to reach C, if there is a path of (vertically or horizontally) adjacent points of P's color from P to a point of color C.
Clearing a color is the process of emptying all points of that color that don't reach empty.
Starting with an empty grid, the players alternate turns, starting with Black.
A turn is either a pass; or a move that doesn't repeat an earlier grid coloring.
A move consists of coloring an empty point one's own color; then clearing the opponent color, and then clearing one's own color.
The game ends after two consecutive passes.
A player's score is the number of points of her color, plus the number of empty points that reach only her color.
The player with the higher score at the end of the game is the winner. Equal scores result in a tie.
The most common criticism of Tromp-Taylor rules is that they do not describe a method for removing "dead stones" from the board. If both players are required to play until all stones on the board are alive2,
NOTE: According to Tromp-Taylor rules no stones are removed after two consecutive passes!
After two consecutive passes, stones which both players agree could eventually be captured are removed from the board. But what if there are stones on the board that one player believes could eventually be captured, but the other player disagrees?
Note: in practice, disagreements between humans are extremely rare. Novice players frequently make mistakes in determining which stones could eventually be captured, but they do not typically disagree. It is a considerably more significant problem in Computer Go, where novice programs are less skilled than any human. Programs which pass and then do not agree on which stones are alive make Computer Go look ridiculous to most human players.
The simplest solution is to use a third-party in cases of disagreement. This third-party could be a human judge, or a computer program that is capable of automatically determining which stones could eventually be captured.
The third-party may be incorrect or biased, especially if the third-party is a computer program
It may be too time-consuming or take too many resources to have a third-party judge (for example in large tournaments, or on automated servers where hundreds of games end every minute)
There may not even be a third-party available
After two consecutive passes, if there is a disagreement, the disagreement must be settled by further actual play. In a programmatic environment, this may look something like this:
Both players provide a list of all the stones they believe could eventually be captured.
If the lists differ, play continues, starting with the player who first passed.
If both players immediately pass again (thus making four consecutive passes), the game is over and all stones on the board are considered alive.
If later in the game both players again pass, the process is repeated.
Note that this can never result in an infinite loop, because each time through this process another stone must be added to the board or the game ends.
In timed games, one player may run out of time and lose while trying to capture stones that are obviously dead. In some circumstances, "clean-up" moves can involve life-and-death problems that take considerable time, especially for computer programs, to play through properly.
After two consecutive passes, disagreements must be settled by further play, much like Chinese rules. However, since this may alter the score of the game under territory scoring, the board position that existed at the end of the two passes must be copied to a second board, and the disputed position resolved on that board. The resultant state of any disputed group(s)—alive or dead—is then applied to the group on the original board, and the second board discarded.
In addition to the problems with the Chinese rules solution, it is inconvenient to duplicate the board position in order to play out disputed positions. Most computer programs are not designed to do this sort of dispute resolution, and most protocols are not designed to support it.
The KGS Computer Go Tournament rules are in essence identical to the Chinese rules, except that, after the first disagreement, the players are advised to manually capture all stones they believe are dead. After the next two consecutive passes, rather than repeating the process, the game is immediately considered over and all stones on the board are counted alive and scored as such. See: http://www.weddslist.com/kgs/rules.html#gep
Note: this protocol has been proposed but is not currently in use for KGS Computer Go Tournaments; currently disputes are resolved by third-party mediation.
When attempting to develop a sensible method of resolving the issue of dead stone disagreement, it may be helpful to keep a few points in mind:
Some Go engines are very simplistic and do not or cannot produce an accurate list of dead stones. Any solution should not penalize such programs; it should elegantly fall back on the default Tromp-Taylor method of counting all stones on the board as alive.
In the case where the two players are never able to agree on which stones could eventually be captured, the method should not allow an infinite loop, nor should it prevent a player from capturing stones that can indeed be captured.
A solution should be able to resolve situations where all groups on the board are unsettled (for example, if there are only two or three stones on the board)
a player has one of their opponent's groups marked as dead when their opponent doesn't
a player has one of their own groups marked as dead when their opponent doesn't
It is feasible that a computer program (or a player) might:
These sorts of abusive behaviors "make sense" under many rulesets, but they are very annoying to humans in general. Tactics like these should be considered rude, but they should primarily be opposed socially, not programmatically. However, it is worthwhile to make sure that a proposed solution doesn't overly reward such behavior.
John's Go Page. http://tromp.github.io/go.html
For the purposes of this page, "alive" means stones that are counted as points at the end of the game, and "dead" means stones that would eventually be captured if play continued.
Tianjin is a city in Northern China. It has a population of 11,760,000. It has an area of 11,917.3 square kilometers. Built in 1403, Tianjin has been named by Yongle Emperor in memory of his success in occupying Ming capital Beijing through the harbor of Tianjin. It locates on the banks of the Hai He River, west of Bo Hai Sea, south of Yan Shan Mountains, east of Beijing. The distance between Tianjin and Beijing is 137 kilometers and it’ll take you only half an hour to go from Tianjin to Beijing by the Beijing–Tianjin Intercity Railway.
Design and manage SQL Server Integration Services (SSIS) packages.
Construct complex SSIS packages.
Design security for accessing packages.
Restart failed packages.
Troubleshoot or debug packages.
Deploy and move packages.
Schedule package execution.
Move packages to different servers.
Enforce data quality according to business requirements.
Establish the business requirements for quality.
Create queries to inspect the data.
Use checksum.
Clean the data.
Design data integrity.
Reconcile data conflicts.
Assign data types to control characteristics of data stored in a column.
Design a strategy to manage data across linked servers.
Set up and manage linked servers.
Design a strategy to manage replication.
Design alerts.
Design a maintenance plan to monitor health, latency, and failures.
Verify replication.
Design a plan to resolve replication conflicts.
Design a plan to modify agent profiles.
Tune replication configuration.
Optimize a database control strategy to meet business requirements.
Verify that database change control procedures are being followed.
Identify all database objects related to a particular deployment.
Returns TRUE for any-string values.
ANY-STRING? is an action value.
The Earth and Moon revolve around each other as they orbit the Sun. As planet Earth rotates and revolves, we experience cycles of day and night as well as seasons. Earth has a very large moon for an inner planet. We are the only inner planet that does, so how did the Moon form and what is the surface of the Moon like? We revolve around an average, ordinary star, the Sun. It does not look like any of the other stars we see in the sky. What can we discover about our amazing Sun?
Recognize that Earth is a sphere, and describe the evidence for this conclusion.
Describe what gravity is, and how it affects Earth in the solar system.
Explain what causes Earth's magnetism, and the effects that magnetism has on the Earth.
Earth's Shape, Size, and Mass
Every day you walk across some part of Earth's surface, whether that surface is your yard or the sidewalks by your school. For most of us, a walk outside means walking on fairly flat ground. We don't usually stop and realize that the Earth is a sphere, an object similar in shape to a ball. How do we know that Earth is a sphere? How could you convince someone that even though the surfaces we walk on look flat, the Earth as a whole is round?
One of the most convincing pieces of evidence for a spherical Earth are the pictures we have of it from Space. Astronauts aboard the Apollo 17 shuttle took one of the most famous photographs in history, called "The Blue Marble" (Figure 24.1). This outstanding image shows Earth as it looks from about 29,000 kilometers (18,000 miles) away in Space. The picture shows us that Earth is spherical and looks like a giant blue and white ball. Hundreds of years before humans ever made it into space, we knew the Earth was round. What ways have you been able to see this for yourself?
Figure 24.1: Photograph entitled "The Blue Marble" taken by Apollo 17 crew.
The Sun and the other planets of our Solar System are also spheres. The Sun is found in the center of the solar system, and the planets travel around the Sun in regular paths called orbits. Earth is the third planet from the Sun, and its mass is approximately 6.0×1024 kilograms. In contrast, the volume of planet Jupiter is about 1,000 times greater than Earth's volume, and the Sun's volume is about 1,000 times greater than Jupiter's (Figure 24.2).
Figure 24.2: Planets and dwarf planets of the solar system.
While the outer planets in the Solar System are giant balls of swirling gas with very low densities, Earth is an inner planet. The inner planets are relatively small, denser, rockier planets than the outer planets. Three-fourths of Earth's rocky surface is covered with water. As far as we know, Earth is also the only planet that carries liquid water, another important requirement for life. The entire planet is also surrounded by a thin layer of air called the atmosphere. Earth's atmosphere is unique in the solar system in that it contains just the right amount of oxygen to support animal life. Therefore, Earth is the only planet in the solar system on which life is found. The Solar System chapter will discuss the features of other planets in more detail.
When describing Earth, it's useful to name and define the many components of our planet. Since Earth is a sphere, the layers that make it up are also referred to as spheres (Figure 24.3).
Figure 24.3: Earth has a hydrosphere, lithosphere, atmosphere, and biosphere.
Atmosphere—the thin layer of air that surrounds the Earth.
Hydrosphere—the part of Earth's surface that consists of water.
Biosphere—the part of the Earth that supports life. The biosphere includes all the areas where life is found.
Lithosphere—the solid part of the Earth. The lithosphere consists of mountains, valleys, continents and all of the land beneath the oceans. Only one-fourth of Earth's surface is land, but solid rock makes up more than 99% of Earth's total mass.
Earth's layers all come into contact with each other and interact. Therefore, Earth’s surface is constantly undergoing change.
We know that the Earth orbits the Sun in a regular path (Figure 24.4). The Earth's Moon also orbits the Earth in a regular path. Gravity is the force of attraction between all objects. Gravity keeps the Earth and Moon in their orbits. Isaac Newton was one of the first scientists to explore the idea of gravity. He understood that the Moon can only circle the Earth because some force is pulling the Moon toward Earth's center. Otherwise, the Moon would continue moving in a straight line off into space. Newton also came to understand that the same force that keeps the Moon in its orbit is the same force that causes objects on Earth to fall to the ground.
Figure 24.4: The planets orbit the Sun in regular paths. (Illustration is not to scale.)
Newton defined the Universal Law of Gravitation, which states that a force of attraction, called gravity, exists between all objects in the universe (Figure 24.5). The strength of the gravitational force depends on how much mass the objects have and how far apart they are from each other. The greater the objects' mass, the greater the force of attraction; in addition, the greater the distance between the objects, the smaller the force of attraction.
Figure 24.5: The force of gravity exists between all objects in the universe; the strength of the force depends on the mass of the objects and the distance between them.
Figure 24.6: Earth's magnetic field.
Figure 24.8: A compass; one end of the needle is pointing to the north.
Earth has a magnetic field (Figure 24.6). It may be helpful to imagine that the Earth has a gigantic bar magnet inside of it. A bar magnet has a north and south pole and a magnetic field that extends around it. Earth's magnetic field also has a north and south pole and a magnetic field that surrounds it. Scientists believe Earth's magnetic field arises from the movements of molten metals deep inside Earth’s outer liquid iron core. Iron and nickel flow within the Earth's core, and their movement generates Earth's magnetic field. Earth's magnetic field extends several thousand kilometers into space.
Earth's magnetic field serves an important role. It shields the planet from harmful types of radiation from the Sun (Figure 24.7). If you have a large bar magnet, you can tie a string to it, hang it from the string, and then watch as it aligns itself in a north-south direction, in response to Earth's magnetic field. This concept allows a compass to work, so that people can navigate by finding magnetic north (Figure 24.8).
Figure 24.7: Earth's magnetic field protects the Earth from radiation from the sun; Earth, on the right, is tiny by comparison to the Sun.
The Earth and other planets in our solar system are rotating spheres, that also revolve around the Sun in fixed paths called orbits.
The inner four planets are small, dense rocky planets like Earth. The next four planets are large, gaseous planets like Jupiter.
The balance between gravity and our motion around the Sun, keep the planets in orbit at fixed distances from the Sun.
Earth has a magnetic field, created by motion within Earth’s outer, liquid iron core that shields us from harmful radiation.
When you watch a tall ship sail over the horizon of the Earth, you see the bottom part of it disappear faster than the top part. With what you have learned about the shape of the Earth, describe why this happens.
What are two reasons that Earth is able to support life?
The planet Jupiter is gaseous and lacks a solid surface. How does this compare to Earth?
Give one example of how Earth's lithosphere and hydrosphere can interact, and can exchange material.
How do mass and distance influence the force of gravity?
Why are we able to use magnets to determine north-south directions on Earth?
The thin layer of air that surrounds the Earth.
All parts of the Earth that supports life.
An attractive force that exists between all objects in the universe; gravity is responsible for planets orbiting the Sun, and for moons orbiting those planets.
The layer of Earth consisting of water.
The solid layer of Earth, made of rock.
A region of space surrounding an object, in which an attractive magnetic force can be detected.
The path of an object, such as a planet or moon, around a larger object such as the Sun.
An object similar in shape to a ball.
What would other planets need to have if they were able to support life?
Would life on Earth be impacted if Earth lost its magnetic field?
Could a large gas planet like Jupiter or Saturn support life?
In Iran, Nasta'liq is usually written with a somewhat thick reed pen (with a tip of about 5mm), and a special kind of carbon ink. In Pakistan, various kinds of pens and inks are used, because of the higher usage of the style.
Producing high quality Nasta'liq in print is a demanding process. For example, Monotype's attempt to implement Nasta'liq for photo composer typesetting resulted in a glyph repertoire of 20,000 different glyphs.  See explanation below:
This is due to the vertical displacement of characters when they are joined together.  As more characters join together (usually 2-5), each one of the previous ones moves slightly up.  The OTF font specification can handle this and beautiful nasta'liq is now possible on regular rendering engines such as the Windows Uniscribe engine that ships with Microsoft Windows 2000 onwards.
As Khowar fontography is evolving, a number of issues with its Unicode representation have been raised.  At the moment, the font that complies best with Unicode and OTF is Nafees Nasta'liq, produced by CRULP (Center for Research in Khowar Language Processing)
[1].
If you have Nafees Nasta'liq installed, the text and image below should be identical. Note the previous letters being shifted up:
Puzzles | Lateral puzzles | 7
Explain...
The following information is a critique of Broman-Fulks, J. J., Berman, M. E., Rabian, B., & Webster, M. J. (2004). Effects of aerobic exercise on anxiety sensitivity.[1]
What is the background to this research?
Anxiety sensitivity refers to the fear of anxiety and arousal-related sensations.[2] In Australia, one in seven people are currently experiencing and anxiety disorder. Of the one in seven, more women experience anxiety than men.[3]
There were various test completed by the participants to determine anxiety sensitivity. The Anxiety Sensitivity Index (ASI) used was a 16 item scale. The test contains 16 questions that specify different concerns that subject could have concerning their anxiety.[4] The subjects answers each question by selecting one of five phases; each phase has a point attached to it:
The higher the subjects score, the greater anxiety sensitivity.
The Body Sensations Questionnaire is compiled of 18 questions to determine which specific body sensations occur when the subject is put in a nervous or stressful situation.[5] The subjects answer all of the questions using one of five phrases:
The State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) is used to assess levels of state and trait anxiety. This is done through the subject answering 40 questions, 20 relating to state anxiety and 20 relating to trait anxiety. State anxiety refers to the emotional status that results from situational stress. Trait anxiety refers to how a person reacts in stressful situations.[6]
The research was conducted by Joshua J. Broman-Faulks, Mitchell E. Berman, Brian A. Rabian and Michael J. Webster at the University of Southern Mississippi. The paper was then published in February 2004 in Faculty Publications by The Aquila Digital Community.
What kind of research was this?
The study is a randomized-control trial (RCT). A RCT aims to create a comparison of results between two or more different groups/treatments. It is important that participants in RCT’s are as similar as possible; for this trial they are of similar age, health status and ASI result. The participants are allocated a group at random to decrease bias in the results.[7]
What did the research involve?
The purpose of the study is to examine different rates of physical activity and how it effects the participants mood. 54 participants were selected for the trial, 41 women and 13 men. Although there isn't an equal amount of men and women who participated in the study, it is more accurate of a general population as more women have reported to suffer from anxiety disorders than men. To be included in the study, participants must meet the specific criteria:
Achieve a score of ≥25 on the ASI
Be at least 18 years or age
They have a health condition that would not allow for exercise to be completed
Have current involvement in an aerobic exercise program
Volunteers who were seen to meet the criteria were given the Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaire (PAR-Q) to determine if medical clearance was necessary before the commencement of exercise. The chosen participants were then randomly assignment to either a high-intensity (HI) aerobic exercise condition (n=29) or a low-intensity (LI) walking comparison condition (n=25). Participants completed a STAI, BSQ and ASI tests over three different sessions: before the first exercise session, after the five minute cool-down after the final session, and during the one week follow up.
The participants completed a total of 6x20 minute sessions over the span of two weeks, with 2-4 sessions completed per week. The warm-up for each session consisted of two minutes of stretching and two minutes on the treadmill. The HI exercise group were asked to walk or jog on the treadmill at a speed that will produce heart rates of 60-90% of their age predicted maximum heart rate. The participants were encouraged to increase their treadmill speed with each following session but were required to stay beneath 90% of maximum heart rate. Following the completion of the session, participants completed a five-minute active cool-down. The LI group followed the same protocol as the HI group however, their treadmill speed was set continuously at one-mile per hour. Participants heart rates were monitored during every session with the use of a heart rate monitor.
What were the basic results?
The researches hypothesised that both the HI exercise group and the LI exercise group would show improvements in anxiety sensitivity, however the HI group would have a greater improvement at the follow-up appointment.
Group means and standard deviations at pre-treatment and follow-up for outcome measures
What conclusions can we take from this research?
The results show that there is a positive relationship between exercise and anxiety sensitivity. The data shows that if the participants are able to exercise within 60-90% of their age-predicted maximum heart rate, there are better results when aiming to reduce anxiety sensitivity than when the participants are to keep their heart rate below 60% of their age-predicted maximum heart rate. This shows that both the HI exercise group and the LI exercise group a positive affect on anxiety sensitivity when compared to pre-treatment data, however the HI exercise group had a greater decrease in ASI results than the LI exercise group. This is what was predicted by the researches prior to the commencement of the trail.
The HI exercise group is the only group that showed significant reduction of fear of anxiety-related sensation, when comparing BSQ scores. The BSQ scores for the HI exercise group begins to decrease at the beginning of the second sessions. This shows that it was effective at rapid reduction of fear of anxiety-related sensations. There have been previous studies that have found aerobic exercise to reduce state anxiety (STAI scores).[8] However, his study was unable to use aerobic exercise to reduce state anxiety. This could be due to participants not having been chosen based on high general anxiety scores. There is no evidence to suggest an association between ASI scores and STAI scores. However, there was evidence to suggest and association between ASI sores and BSQ scores.
The study found that 20 minutes of HI exercise was the most effective intensity of exercise to decrease anxiety sensitivity. However, it also showed that even 20 minutes of LI exercise had a positive effect on anxiety sensitivity. This could include simple activities such as walking to work, walking around during lunch, taking the dog for a walk 3 times per week to have a  very positive impact on how people are feeling in their every day life.
Full Research Article (Refer to Reference 1)
↑ Broman-Fulks, J. J., Berman, M. E., Rabian, B., & Webster, M. J. (2004). Effects of aerobic exercise on anxiety
↑ Zvolensky MJ, Garey L, Fergus TA, Gallagher MW, Viana AG, Shepherd JM, Mayorga NA, Kelley LP, Griggs JO, Schmidt NB. Refinement of anxiety sensitivity measurement: The Short Scale Anxiety Sensitivity Index (SSASI). Psychiatry research. 2018 Nov 1;269:549-57.
↑ https://www.beyondblue.org.au/media/statistics#:~:text=Message%3A%20One%20in%20six%20Australians,in%20the%20past%2012%20months.&text=This%20is%20equivalent%20to%203.2%20million%20people%20today.
↑ https://dionysus.psych.wisc.edu:5001/sharing/mpfN5dTA1
↑ https://cpb-us-w2.wpmucdn.com/web.sas.upenn.edu/dist/6/184/files/2017/03/BSQ-1jyd7yz.pdf
↑ https://www.cdc.gov/me-cfs/pdfs/wichita-data-access/stai-doc.pdf
↑ What is a Randomised Clinical Trial? London, Uniter Kingdom: Clinical Trials Unit;  [updated 12/11/2018. Available from: https://www.ctu.mrc.ac.uk/patients-public/about-clinical-trials/what-is-a-randomised-clinical-trial/.
↑ McEntee DJ, Halgin RP. Cognitive group therapy and aerobic exercise in the treatment of anxiety. Journal of College Student Psychotherapy. 1999 May 14;13(3):37-55.
↑ https://www.beyondblue.org.au/
↑ https://www.blackdoginstitute.org.au/
Use: A slip knot is one that will tighten under load, and which can be easily untied by pulling on the running end.  This knot is typically a component of more complicated knots, and is generally not used by itself.
A slip knot can be tied by starting an overhand knot, but instead of passing the running end through the loop, pass a bight through instead.
WARNING: If tied as shown in the illustration, the running end (on the right) will pull through the loop if even the slightest load is applied to the standing end (on the left).  If one reverses the standing end and running ends in the illustration, the knot is far more stable.  As shown, the knot will hold a load on the running end, but not on the standing end.
The questions posed in Chapter 2. Plant cells are discussed further on this page. Remember, some questions are intended to be thought-provoking and more than one answer may be "correct". Students and contributors are encouraged to expand upon the discussions here.
Can you think of reasons why macroscopic organisms are multicellular?
Although multicellular organisms are not exactly like brick houses, think of how the advantages of building structures out of bricks can be advantageous properties for an organism as well.
We believe that life arose as contained chemical reactions in very small structures that reproduced. It is hard to imagine that anything else would be regarded as "living". Chemical reactions in an open environment, although more or less identical with the reactions carried out within a cell, simply lack permanence or continuity: the reactions run their course until reactants are used up. Our definition of life requires control over such chemical reactions, and the complexity of reactions involved in living systems requires boundaries that separate the life reactions from the outside environment. However, with a membrane (a separating boundary) the area enclosed cannot efficiently increase in size indefinitely.  The larger the volume inside (the bigger the "cell"), the further from the membrane reactions near the middle become. Since reactions inside require access to substances in the environment outside and perhaps removal of useless or harmful substances from inside to outside, a living cell cannot just grow to a large size.
Topic 11: Nerves, Muscles and Movement
Outline the general organization of the human nervous system including the CNS and the PNS
The brain, or central nervous system (CNS), is connected by the spinal cord to the peripheral nervous system (PNS).
The peripheral nervous system is divided into two categories:
Sensory input (afferent division) - senses external and internal environmental conditions.
Motor output (efferent division): Self explanatory.
Somatic nervous system - conscious, controlled response
Autonomic nervous system - functions automatically.
Parasympathetic division - relaxed state.
Sympathetic division - excited state.
The nervous system is divided into two main parts: the central nervous system (CNS), and the peripheral nervous system (PNS). The organs of the CNS, the brain and the spinal cord, are located within and protected by, respectively, the skull and the vertebral column. The PNS is composed of nerves that branch from the CNS and connect the CNS to the rest of the body. The CNS receives impulses from the nerves of the PNS and interprets them, and transmits the corresponding signals back to the origin through the PNS, thus controlling the functions of the entire body.
Draw the structure of a motor neuron
Define resting potential and action potential"
Resting potential is the membrane potential energy of a neuron membrane when not conducting an impulse. The charge of a membrane during resting potential is -70 mV, which means that the charge within the cell membrane is relatively negative to the outside charge.
Action potential is the state of the cell membrane while conducting an impulse, meaning the rapid depolarization and repolarization of the cell membrane. The charge on the membrane typically reaches up to +40 mV, meaning the inside of the cell is positively charged relative to the outside.
Explain how a nerve impulse passes along a non-myelinated neuron (axon).
In resting neurons, there exists an imbalance of ions inside and outside of the cell membranes. The important ions are K+ (potassium) and Na+ (sodium). K+ is more concentrated inside the cell and therefore tends to diffuse out of the cell. It is this diffusion that causes the charge potential across the plasma membrane (in resting neurons it is about -70 mV). Na+ is more concentrated outside of the cell and thus tends to diffuse into the cell, but at a very slow rate due to the low permeability of the plasma membrane to Na+. Sodium-potassium pumps embedded in the plasma membrane work against both ions' diffusion gradients in order to preserve the gradients and the membrane potential.
When a graded nerve impulse traveling from a dendrite reaches threshold potential (usually about 15 to 20 mV more positive than resting potential) and comes to the axon hillock, it triggers an action potential. Action potentials are non-graded events, meaning the amplitude of the potential remains more or less constant in all situations. When threshold potential is reached, voltage-gated sodium and potassium channels at the axon hillock are stimulated. The sodium channels each have two gates, a fast-acting activation gate and a slow-acting inactivation gate. Normally the activation gate is closed and the inactivation gate is open. However, since it takes BOTH gates to be open for Na+ to freely move through the channel, normally these sodium channels are closed. The potassium channels have only one gate, which is slow acting and is normally closed. The voltage stimulus from the threshold potential cause all gates to reverse their position; if they were closed, they open, and if they were open, they close. The fast-acting sodium activation gates are the first to respond, opening and  allowing Na+ to diffuse freely into the neuron. This large, rapid influx of Na+ causes the charge potential across the plasma membrane to become positive. This is called depolarization. Most neurons will depolarize up to +40 mV, and it is this depolarization that leads to the action potential, or nerve impulse. By the time the voltage peaks, sufficient time has passed for the inactivation gates to close, preventing further Na+ from entering the cell. At the same time, the potassium gates finally open, which cause K+ ions to rapidly diffuse out of the neuron along the charge gradient, increasing its negativity. This is the repolarization phase. The channel gates eventually return to their resting positions, but the slow-acting potassium gates take longer to close, which cause an excess of K+ to diffuse out of the cell, resulting in a temporary hyperpolarization, or undershoot (membrane potential drops below resting potential). For a brief period following repolarization, both the sodium activation and inactivation gates remain closed, since the inactivation gates are slow-acting and take time to return to their open resting position. During this time, called the refractory period, this particular region of the neuron is incapable of depolarization. Once the sodium inactivation gates are open again, the region will again be able to depolarize.
As the axon hillock of the neuron depolarizes, it stimulates the next region of the axon to depolarize since the membrane potential goes beyond threshold potential during depolarization to the action potential. In this manner, action potentials are triggered repeatedly, each time in successive regions further and further down the axon. Action potentials only travel in one direction; this is achieved through the effects of the refractory period. The regions immediately behind the location of an action potential cannot be stimulated to depolarize because they themselves have just recently depolarized and repolarized and cannot do so again until the refractory period has passed.
Explain the principles of synaptic transmission.
Synapses are the locations where a neuron communicates with either another neuron or another type of cell, such as a muscle cell. The cell from which the nerve signal originates is the presynaptic cell and the cell receiving the signal is the postsynaptic cell. There are two types of synapses, electrical and chemical. Electrical synapses contain gap junctions that link the two cells and allow action potentials to travel between the two cells uninterrupted. Much more common are chemical synapses, which contain a narrow gap, called the synaptic cleft, separating the presynaptic and postsynaptic cells. Action potentials cannot directly jump the gap, and instead the cells must rely on chemical signals to propagate the nerve impulse.
As an action potential reaches the end of an axon and the synaptic terminal, it depolarizes the presynaptic membrane. Here, voltage-gated calcium channels open and allow Ca2+ ions to diffuse into the neuron. The sudden increase in Ca2+ concentration causes synaptic vessels, filled with neurotransmitters, to fuse with the plasma membrane and release the neurotransmitters into the synaptic cleft. Neurotransmitters can be any number of chemicals, including acetylcholine (ACh), norepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin. These chemicals, once released, quickly diffuse across the synaptic cleft and reach the postsynaptic membrane. On the postsynaptic membrane are numerous specialized receptor proteins, which bind to specific neurotransmitters and open specific ion channels. Depending on the neurotransmitter that was received, ion channels may open up to let Na+, K+, Cl-, or other ions to diffuse in or out of the cell. Depending on which channels were opened, the postsynaptic membrane will either depolarize or hyperpolarize. Depolarization of the postsynaptic membrane is called an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP), and hyperpolarization is called an inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP). EPSPs make it easier for the postsynaptic cell to generate an action potential while IPSPs make it harder. The effects of EPSPs and IPSPs are cumulative, meaning that the effects of multiple EPSPs, IPSPs, or a combination of the two, will stack, a phenomenon known as summation. Summations can either be spatial, meaning the potentials overlap spatially (e.g. they are close together on the neuron), temporal, meaning the potentials overlap in time (e.g. multiple potentials within a very short period of time), or both. Back at the synaptic cleft, the neurotransmitters that were released quickly disappear, either by simple diffusion or by enzymatic breakdown, such as when cholinesterase breaks down ACh. If the cleft has not been cleaned by the time the next action potential reaches the synapse, the neurotransmitters released by the potential will not be able to bind to the receptors on the postsynaptic membrane and the effects of the signal will not be propagated to the postsynaptic cell.
Outline the great diversity of locomotion in the animal kingdom as exemplified by the movement in an earthworm, swimming in a bony fish, flying in a bird, and walking in an arthropod.
An earthworm slides forward by contracting and expanding alternate segments of its body.  A bony fish beat tail from side to side creating a forward motion.  It controls it buoyancy using an air bladder that grows or shrinks in size to force the fish up or down in the water.  A bird flaps its wings up and down to create an upward force.  Once the bird is in the air, it glides using air currents, occasionally flapping its wings to maintain its altitude.  Arthropods extend and flex muscle segments in it legs to move forward.
Describe the roles of nerves, muscles and bones in producing movement or locomotion.
Bones provide the frame that holds up muscles.  Signals are sent from the locomotion center of the brain (medulla) along nerves which synapse with certain muscles.  This synapse causes myosin and actin filaments to slide over each other, causing the muscle to contract and resulting in locomotion.
Draw a diagram of the human elbow joint.
Outline the functions of the main structures in the human elbow joint.
Draw the structure of skeletal muscle fibers as seen in an electron micrograph.
Explain how skeletal muscles contracts by the sliding of filaments.
Using ATP, actin and myosin filaments slide over each other, causing sarcomeres in the myofibrils to become shorter, ultimately creating a contraction in skeletal muscles.
Myosin forms a bridge with binding sites on actin filaments
ATP binds with myosin heads causing them to break the cross bridge by detaching from the binding site
ATP loses a phosphate molecule, releasing energy, leaving ADP + P+ and changing the angle of the myosin head.  This is known as a cocked myosin head.
The angled head attaches to a new binding site on actin that are further back in the line of actin binding sites
ADP + P+ is released, causing the heads push filaments inwards toward the sarcomere, resulting in a sliding of myosin and actin filaments over one another.
James (1899). William James: Reproduction of his Entry on "Telepathy" in Johnson's Universal Cyclopædia, 1899. (William James, in The Will to Believe (New York, Longmans Green & Co, 1897), stated, on p. 10, "Why do so few 'scientists' ever look at the evidence for telepathy, so-called? Because they think, as a leading biologist, now dead, once said to me, that even if such a thing were true, scientists ought to band together to keep it suppressed and concealed. It would undo the uniformity of nature and all sorts of other things without which scientists cannot carry on their pursuits."
People like to carry on about 2 cases of subject fraud to "discredit", early SPR work. They concern Blackburn and Smith, and the Creery sisters. Of the Creery sister experiments, Hamilton notes, on pp. 119-120 of Immortal Longings, the feeling of SPR members that in the early experiments fraud was ruled out, and that critics complaints do not apply to the whole case. He notes after Gurney's discovery of the code, "From then on, Sidgwick rigorously excluded all their results as possible evidence for telepathy. [William] Barrett strongly protested at this, pointing out that the code only covered situations when the sitters were in sight of each other and that there was plenty of other evidence that telepathically occurred when these conditions did not obtain. [...] The girls performed well on these and other tests but Barrett felt it was obvious what had happened. The girls had become bored and were also worried that their abilities fluctuated, so they invented the code in order not to disappoint their important visitors." Frank Podmore also refutes critical attacks regarding the Creery sisters in his 1894 article  What Psychical Research Has Accomplished. He noted that cheating was detected by members of the community themselves, and argued that those tests considered by members of the Society for Psychical Research to be of value precluded the opportunities for cheating of the later fraudulent performances.
For evidence that William Barrett, a researcher associated with the early experiments, was not as credulous as his detractors believed, see his book Psychical Research (Henry Holt and Company, 1911), pp. 44-51, for his defense of S.P.R. experiments, see pp. 52-81. For corroboration of these results from a skeptic, see W.W. Baggally (1917/1920) Telepathy: Genuine and Fraudulent, with a forward by Oliver Lodge. Frank Podmore came to increasingly favorable conclusions about telepathy - while Tuckett, in p. 307 of his book, quotes some reserved comments about it from "Modern Spiritualism", he wrote about it at length in Telepathic Hallucinations: The New View of Ghosts (for WF Prince's rebuttal to Ivor Lloyd Tuckett's dismissal of this, see p. 99 of The Enchanted Boundary, Tuckett relies on Innes' attack on Phantasms of the Living which has been rebutted (see the rebuttal and especially the discussion accompanying it), the attacks of Simon Newcomb (refuted below - this, and WF Prince's accompanying argument, removes the weight from the argument Tuckett is trying to make), and arguments of the kind that Prince spends some time challenging in the later part of his text - the British Medical Journal review of Tuckett's book attacks William Barrett for not mentioning the critical work of Frank Podmore, yet he mentions it in connection with a case and on p. 251 of the text in his bibliography, he highlights Podmore's text "Modern Spiritualism". Regarding the validity of the text, the reader will find James Hyslop's review to be of interest).
Regarding Blackburn and Smith - Blackburn argued fraud, Smith denied it - in Immortal Longings by Trevor Hamilton, it is written, in the context of a review of all the counter-arguments, on p. 120 "After all this time it is not possible to state whether Smith was fraudulent or not. There just is not enough evidence." I think that the evidence is in favor of Smith, but I recommend Hamilton's 2016 SPR article Smith and Blackburn prior to pursuing my arguments. In should be noted though that Gauld stated in the aforementioned The Founders of Psychical Research, p. 180n, that "Blackburn'e career and character are obscure, but they do not seem to have been such as to inspire confidence in his 'confessions', see J.S.P.R. [Journal of the Society for Psychical Research] XLIII (1965), pp. 222-3." An extended discussion of the case is given by WF Prince in The Enchanted Boundary, pp. 108-113. He pointed out that the original report suggested the "possibility of a code" to explain the results, that Blackburn's testimony concerning tests was in conflict with the descriptions of tests in the original reports, and that the results of the tests with Blackburn and Smith were not considered to be of sufficient value to be included as evidence of telepathy in Gurney and Myers' text Phantasms of the Living.
Contrast this to what we discover about Smith in JSPR vol. 15 (1911-12), p. 130:
An interview with Mr. Feilding [whom Eric Dingwall, who critics of the SPR like to cite, greatly admired, though see above on Dingwall] was published on Sept. 7th, in which he "endorsed the statement of Mr. Smith published in the "Daily News" on Monday [Sept. 4th], and paid a tribute to him as a careful, painstaking experimenter who was interested in telepathy, but was at the same time always slightly sceptical about experiments."
"How these experiments could be faked interested Gurney and Smith very much," said Mr. Feilding, "and they used to make experiments in faking and then, in testing an exposition, try every means to obviate the methods they had discovered. Gurney was extraordinarily ingenious in discovering means of communication, and some of the things which Mr. Blackburn says actually happened were only invented in order to prevent them being used.......
"I am perfectly satisfied with the possibility of [telepathy] taking place, and should like to say that in the event of any readers of this correspondence believing themselves able to show telepathic power, I should be grateful, on my return from abroad, to have the opportunity of conducting experiments with them."
In "The Search for Psychic Power", C.E.M. Hansel wrote that "Sir Horatio Dokin (1854-1927), a physician and a prominent critic, stated in the Westminster Gazette of November 26, 1907, that he had been told of two occasions when outside observers were invited to see Smith and Blackburn in action. Once, precautions taken to prevent possible auditory communication put a stop to the thought transference. On the other occasion, precautions against visual communication had a similar effect. Donkin pointed out that no mention was made in the published accounts of the presence of these observers or of the tests that were applied and the effects that were observed." Hamilton noted in his aforementioned SPR article that "In articles published in 1907-8, critics argued that evidence indicative of deception during the Smith-Blackburn experiments had been suspected by one or more of the observers and that, when extra precautions were taken against the use of secret codes – such as Smith being enclosed in a pillow-case - the experiments failed. In fact, these assertions were at odds with the published report, which stated the reverse: no cheating was observed and the trial in which the pillow-case had been used produced significant results."
For more details, we can look at Ruffles, Tom.(2011). George Albert Smith (1864-1959): From Stage to Screen. Unpublished PhD thesis. Anglia Polytechnic University, where we find that:
"The first hint of a problem was a letter by Donkin in The Westminster Gazette on 26 November 1907. He said that two friends had on separate occasions attended experiments during the winter of 1882-3, and they had told him at the time that they had guarded against auditory and visual communications, whereupon phenomena had ceased. Donkin pointed out that neither was mentioned in the SPR’s reports. Mrs Sidgwick, the SPR’s Hon Secretary, replied in the issue of 29 November 1907. She dissected Donkin’s letter, noting that he was not present himself; he had not named the alleged participants, nor the experimenters or subjects; and was recalling events of twenty-five years before. Donkin responded with a further letter published on 18 December. He now gave details: the experiments had occurred in December 1882, January 1883 and April 1883. The witnesses were the alienist Sir James Crichton-Browne and Dr A Hughes Bennett. The experiments were carried out by Smith and Blackburn. He added that the reports did not mention either of these individuals, nor the effects of their presence.[1]
Crichton-Browne then weighed in with a letter to the Gazette, published on 29 January 1908. [2] He confessed that he was writing from memory, but recalled that also present were G J Romanes, Francis Galton, Henry Sidgwick and Frederic Myers. [3] He and Romanes suspected that Smith and Blackburn were using a code which could convey a verbal description of the picture target so they introduced squiggles that could not be described verbally. Smith was unable to reproduce these. They also improved Smith’s sensory isolation with cotton-wool, ear plugs and a head cover. All experiments conducted under these conditions failed, according to Crichton-Browne. There was a lady present whom he believed to be Mrs Blackburn. This lady has been the subject of rather pointless controversy. She was not Mrs Blackburn as he never married. Hall believed her to be Smith’s sister Alice. Broad thought this ‘flimsy’, based as it was on the ancient recollection of Smith’s niece, Mrs Ford, that Blackburn was “walking out” with Alice, but he considered it unimportant. [4] Hall was probably right as one of Smith’s sisters is mentioned in the ‘First Report of the Committee on Mesmerism’ as having mesmerised Mr Wolferstan. Either way, Crichton-Browne thought that she might have participated in the transmission of codes between Blackburn and Smith. Broad believed that the lack (as he thought it) of any such individual either meant that the SPR report was “culpably defective” by omission, or Crichton-Browne’s 25-year old memories were in error, his money clearly being on the latter while Hall’s was on the former. However, while each was wrong, this point which Broad thought unimportant actually gives credibility to Crichton-Browne’s account. Yet Nicol skewers Crichton-Browne by pointing out that none of the witnesses present detected any signals, and no cheating was found. The experiment with the coverings was actually a success, contrary to Crichton-Browne’s claim. An outside possibility regarding the identity of the mystery lady is that she was Mrs Fanny Parsons, the auctioneer’s wife with whom Blackburn had an affair. She had stayed in hotels with him, presumably calling herself Mrs Blackburn, in August and September 1883 and February 1884, and Blackburn was cited as co-respondent in the subsequent divorce action.
[1] The absence of these names may seem surprising, and it is clearly a weakness, but as Nicol, 1968, p.3, points out, this occurred frequently; William James’s attendance at a Brighton session, for example, was not included in the report. Nicol makes the valid point (p.4) that if the report had misrepresented the facts, then given the numbers present at the experiments they would surely have requested a correction, but nobody did.
[2] A long extract is given by Hall, The Strange Case of Edmund Gurney, 1964, pp.111-15; a shortened version is given by Ivor Tuckett, ‘Psychical Researchers and the Will to Believe’, Bedrock, July 1912, pp197-8. See also Oppenheim, The Other World, 1985, pp.285-6. Crichton-Browne returned to the experiments in his much later The Doctor’s Second Thoughts, 1931, pp.58-64. The title did not relate to this particular subject.
[3] Romanes (who died in May 1894) was a member of the Committee on Mesmerism (he was joint secretary with Podmore - Circular No 1, February 1883), so may well have been present. Francis Galton (who died in January 1911) does not seem – as far as the published accounts indicate – to have participated in the SPR’s experimental work, and was not a member, but he may have been present as a guest. He and Romanes certainly knew each other: they had both been members of an ad hoc committee which had investigated Washington Irving Bishop and reported in Nature (Romanes, ‘Thought-Reading’, 23 June 1881; Oppenheim, The Other World, 1985, p.295). This committee was referred to in the SPR’s ‘First Report on Thought-Reading’, Proc.SPR Vol. 1, p.14 and it is possible that Crichton-Browne was confusing the two events. Luckhurst probably was as well when he said that Galton attended SPR sessions, giving Proc.SPR Vol. 1 as his source (‘Passages in the Invention of the Psyche: Mind-reading in London, 1881-84. In Luckhurst, Roger and Josephine McDonagh (eds.), Transactions and Encounters: Science and Culture in the Nineteenth Century, 2002b, p.127). Crichton-Browne, perhaps surprisingly, had joined the SPR in 1904. Andrew Lang recounted an incident when they were testing dowsing (Longman’s Magazine, November 1897). Crichton-Browne insisted that cotton wool be used on the dowser, who objected, and when the dowser asked, “Don’t you believe my word?”, Crichton-Browne replied, “I believe nothing but what I see” which Lang dismissed with “not a very scientific posture, I fear” (reported by Barrett in ‘On the So-called Divining Rod’, Proc.SPR, Vol. 15, p.282, published in 1900). Crichton-Browne was clearly a firm believer in the efficacy of cotton wool, and may have nursed a sense of grievance in 1908. Lang was SPR President in 1911.
[4] Hall, The Strange Case of Edmund Gurney, 1964, p.95, fn1.pp.186-7. Nicol points out that Hall does not say how Mrs Ford came by this information, which occurred before she was born. (Nicol, ‘The Silences of Mr Trevor Hall’, 1966, p.30. Nicol is scathing about the quality of “Browne’s” memory (the hyphen was an affectation linking his middle and surnames)."
Particular attack on Trevor Hall's insinuations regarding the significance of the Blackburn and Smith work in the life of the psychical researcher Edmund Gurney, alleging that this contributed to his suicide, is provided in Nicol, F. (1966). The silences of Mr Trevor Hall. International Journal of Parapsychology 8: 5-59 (c.f.  Hall, T. H. (1968). The Strange Case of Edmund Gurney. Some comments on Mr. Fraser Nicol’s review. International Journal of Parapsychology 10: 149-164. and Nicol, F. (1968 unpublished). A Rejoinder ... and Some New Facts Papers, SPR Archive, Cambridge University Library; Nicol, F. letters to Broad, 31/5/1968, 16/2/1970, D1/17/38-51, in Broad, C.D. Papers, Wren Library, Trinity College, Cambridge. See also Coleman (1992). The Death of Edmund Gurney, which discusses the unreliability of Trevor Hall's account, and how former associates of Hall distanced themselves from him).
Critics of the Creery sisters and Blackburn-Smith experiments overlook the Guthrie experiments, profiled by FWH Myers in Human Personality and Its Survival of Bodily Death, beginning on p. 601, described by Alan Gauld in his 1968 book The Founders of Psychical Research, p. 357, as follows, "The agents included Mr. Guthrie and various other persons of repute in the Liverpool district; also Gurney. A drawing would be prepared in a room apart, and then brought into a room where the blindfolded percipient sat. It would then be placed on a wooden stand where the percipient could not have seen it even if she had not been blindfolded. The agent, or agents, would then look at it until the percipient indicated that she ready to try to reproduce it. A number of very striking successes were obtained." Harry Price in The Story of ESP (below) actually spoke positively about the Guthrie experiment, and so did Morton Prince. Rosalind Heywood, in a chapter in Science and ESP (J R Smythies, ed. Routledge, Apr 15, 2013) entitled "Notes on Changing Mental Climates", on p. 55n3, wrote that "[S]imilar experiments have been done, with a considerable degree of success, by Dr. Carl Bruck in Germany, René Warcollier in France, and Upton Sinclair in America. And in England, Whately Carington did a number of successful series with randomly chosen targets and widely scattered percipients."
These were followed-up by Oliver Lodge (from Gauld, op. cit., p. 357, we find that these experiments were "[A} continuation, with positive results, of the preceding [Guthrie] experiments." - see also Lodge's article in Nature:  https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=iau.31858011503509;view=1up;seq=169 (on Lodge, Oliver Lodge is attacked by some on account of his alleged credulity in uncritically believing that the mentalist David Devant was demonstrating powers that had no naturalistic explanation. This, however, is a mere allegation, since, as a review in the Psypioneer Journal, Vol. 1, January 2013, on p. 16, of the book "The Thought Reader Craze", entitled "Thought Reading Reconsidered" states: "In a 1935 article, for example, the illusionist David Devant recalled how in 1909 he (or rather his assistant Dora) had read a sealed letter on stage (p.146ff.). Sir Oliver Lodge, who was in the audience, was quoted as publicly declaring to the audience that supernatural power was being exercised to do this, and is said to have persisted in this belief even when assured it was an illusion. Colleagues have located for Wiley a 1909 letter from Maskelyne responding to one from Lodge, seeking to know how the trick was done. That does not suggest Lodge thought it paranormal (the word which Lodge might have used in preference to “supernatural”).": http://www.woodlandway.org/PDF/PP9.1%20January%202013.pdf), and for more experiments, see descriptions on p. 601n of Human Personality and Its Survival of Bodily Death, and pp. 614-636 of that text.
An abridgement of Whately Carington's paper on quality ESP experiments providing early evidence for the phenomenon can be found in JSPR vol. XXX, p. 295ff. And Harry Price stated in Fifty Years of Psychical Research, "Most of the extrasensory research work has been done in England, though certain foreigners have experimented in the field. Among these are Max Dessoir of Berlin, who sent his results to the compilers of Phantasms of the Living, where they are illustrated and discussed(25); Rene Warcollier(26) of Paris; John Edgar Coover(27) of Stanford University, who obtained 10,000 guesses with 100 students using playing cards; Naum Kotik(28), the Russian, and many others. The reader can conveniently study the work of all these experimenters in the Journal and Proceedings of the SPR. The brilliant results with Ossowiecki have already been mentioned in these pages(29). The most impressive experiments, in the opinion of Mr. S. G. Soal, who is the greatest authority on everything pertaining to ESP, were those conducted by Professor H. J. F. W. Brugmans, the late Professor G. Heymans, and Dr. A. A. Weinberg with the subject van Dam in the Department of Psychology at Groningen University. In these experiments, the subject was seated behind a curtain, blindfolded, and was only able to push his hand under the curtain to move a piece on a chessboard that was numbered and lettered in the Continental fashion. Brugmans and his assistants sat in a darkened room above and watched van Dam through a glass pane in the ceiling. The experimenters 'willed' van Dam to move the piece to a certain square determined by a random draw of a letter and number from two sets of cards. Nothing of van Dam could be seen except his hand. In 187 trials the subject obtained 60 successes as against 4 that chance would suggest. It was found that alcohol increased the percentage of successes. In the oft-quoted Experimental Telepathy and Clairvoyance in England, Soal remarks that 'the English experimenters in telepathy have produced no positive investigations which are at all comparable in scientific precision' with the experiments carried out by Professor Brugmans and his colleagues(30)." The Brugmans experiments can still be defended - they are featured below.)
Newcomb. (1909). Modern Occultism. (for a reply, see Lodge (1909). The Attitude of Science to the Unusual. (See also WF Prince's discussion of Simon Newcomb, and Hyslop's counters to attacks on the work of Lodge in the Survival of Consciousness After Bodily Death section)
Sommer (2011). Professional Heresy: Edmund Gurney (1847–88) and the Study of Hallucinations and Hypnotism.
Gurney (1887). Tertium quid: chapters on various disputed questions, Vol. I.
Myers (1903). Human Personality and Its Survival of Bodily Death. (Landmark psychical research text, accumulates evidence for psi that existed during the time period, and integrates this with a study of abnormal psychological phenomena, to provide a comprehensive survey of human consciousness - arguing that the normal personality is like an island on a vaster body of subliminal processes, which ultimately point to the survival of consciousness. Some material on this text appears here: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Frederic_W._H._Myers&diff=812252450&oldid=804172321#Human_Personality_and_Its_Survival_of_Bodily_Death (removed by others but archived here http://archive.is/aQvaq - scroll down to section "Human Personality and Its Survival of Bodily Death")
Trevor Hamilton, in Immortal Longings: F.W.H. Myers and the Victorian Search for Life After Death (2009), p. 275, summarizes the nature of this text as follows, "Myers' approach in the book was to provide a survey of the range of humankind's faculties before culminating in a section that these faculties in their highest form demonstrated the independence of the mind, the individuality, from the brain, and its ultimate capacity, bodiless, to survive death. [...] He was particularly concerned to counter the argument of Leaf and others (Oppenhiem 1985: 260) that all he had done was to describe the  His aim was not to destroy personality, but to demonstrate the " (in other words, he attempted to demonstrate an underlying unity of consciousness, a prerequisite for acceptance of a soul, which this book is an attempt to empirically validate the existence of). Alan Gauld noted, in his Oxford Dictionary of National Biography article on Myers, "The development of his theory of the subliminal self can be traced through numerous lengthy articles in the Proceedings of the SPR, and a more popular book, Science and a Future Life (1893), to its fullest, though still incomplete, expression in his posthumous Human Personality and its Survival of Bodily Death (2 vols., 1903). Myers regards each human personality as consisting of a number of distinct streams of consciousness, which he sometimes compares to geological strata. These are in some sense modifications of the same soul, and have the potential for unification. But normally they remain separate, and one, the ordinary ‘supraliminal’ stream of consciousness, has evolved to cope with the problems of everyday living. Others, however, may possess faculties, for instance telepathy, of less immediate practical relevance. Waking telepathic experiences may be regarded as leaks or messages from these ‘subliminal’ streams of consciousness, and telepathy is most likely to occur when such streams are tapped, as in dreams or hypnosis, or become to an extent detached and autonomous, as in automatic writing or secondary personality. This theory had for a while great influence within psychical research, and some outside it. Whether it could be made credible or even wholly coherent might be doubted. None the less Human Personality—despite the rhapsodical style in which some passages are written—remains an impressive attempt to systematize a vast quantity of interesting materials." - Alan Gauld, ‘Myers, Frederic William Henry (1843–1901)’, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004; online edn, May 2011 accessed 17 Oct 2014
Gauld would later collaborate on a defense of Myers' ideas entitled Irreducible Mind (see below)
Carlos Alvarado below, in his review of Myers, "Studying the Life and Work of Frederic W.H. Myers", cites a review crediting Myers for "having rejuvenated animism and with providing a scientific framework for its support. This entailed bringing together mysticism and an empirical approach, something that made Myers a "positivist Swedenborg."" The edition of the book cited, in its preface, states, "The fundamental soundness of Myers's work has been abundantly confirmed by a century of further empirical research on its central topics, as demonstrated in a companion volume, recently produced under the auspices of Esalen's Center for Theory and Research, entitled Irreducible Mind: Toward a Psychology for the 21st Century." Myers coined the term "telepathy", and in an essay in Irreducible Mind by Emily Williams Kelley, entitled F.W.H. Myers and the Empirical Study of the Mind-Body Problem, we find an overview of his views and an argument for his relevance.
William James said of Myers that "through him for the first time, psychologists are in possession of their full material, and mental phenomena are set down in an adequate inventory." For reviews of his work by James and others see this. As for James, in his essay "The Confidences of a Psychical Researcher", he stated, "Out of my experience, such as it is (and it is limited enough) one fixed conclusion dogmatically emerges, and that is this, that we with our lives are like islands in the sea, or like trees in the forest. The maple and the pine may whisper to each other with their leaves, and Conanicut and Newport hear each other’s foghorns. But the trees also commingle their roots in the darkness underground, and the islands also hang together through the ocean’s bottom. Just so there is a continuum of cosmic consciousness, against which our individuality builds but accidental fences, and into which our several minds plunge as into a mother-sea or reservoir. Our “normal” consciousness is circumscribed for adaptation to our external earthly environment, but the fence is weak in spots, and fitful influences from beyond leak in, showing the otherwise unverifiable common connection. Not only psychic research, but metaphysical philosophy, and speculative biology are led in their own ways to look with favor on some such “panpsychic” view of the universe as this. Assuming this common reservoir of consciousness to exist, this bank upon which we all draw, and in which so many of earth’s memories must in some way be stored, or mediums would not get at them as they do, the question is, What is its own structure? What is its inner topography? This question, first squarely formulated by Myers, deserves to be called “Myers’s problem” by scientific men hereafter. What are the conditions of individuation or insulation in this mother-sea? To what tracts, to what active systems functioning separately in it, do personalities correspond? Are individual “spirits” constituted there? How numerous, and of how many hierarchic orders may these then be? How permanent? How transient? And how confluent with one another may they become? What again, are the relations between the cosmic consciousness and matter? Are there subtler forms of matter which upon occasion may enter into functional connection with the individuations in the psychic sea, and then, and then only, show themselves? —So that our ordinary human experience, on its material as well as on its mental side, would appear to be only an extract from the larger psychophysical world?"
It should be noted that corroboration of the filter view of consciousness comes from the following article on a man acquiring previously non-existent artistic talents after a stroke: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1190002/Masterstroke-Man-draw-stickmen-wakes-life-saving-brain-surgery--artist.html
Also, here is a New Scientist story about a man with an almost non-existent brain, who nevertheless had a normal life: http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn12301-man-with-tiny-brain-shocks-doctors.html
Some corroboration for Myers' view on genius is provided by Schwartz (2011), below:
"Johannes Brahms described his own moments of creative breakthroughs this way: In this exalted state I see clearly what is obscure in my ordinary moods; then I feel capable of drawing inspiration from above as Beethoven did…. Those vibrations assume the form of distinct mental images…. Straightaway the ideas flow in upon me…and not only do I see distinct themes in the mind’s eye, but they are clothed in the right forms, harmonies, and orchestration. Measure by measure the finished product is revealed to me when I am in those rare inspired moods (as cited in Abell, 1964, pp. 19-21).
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart and Aaron Copland also seem to have had similar experiences (in Abell, 1964). In Mozart’s case the connection was so clear and strong the pages of his compositions show few alterations; they appear to be finished transcriptions.
Remote viewers say of their experiences: “I kind of space out,” or “It’s sort of like focusing my mind at some middle distance” (Schwartz, 2007, p. 34). They describe the moment itself by saying, “It came in a flash,” or, “It was like a hologram…. Images are all there... as if it were a hologram hanging in my mind” (Schwartz, 2007, p. 34).
Poincare’ described his work on a mathematical problem in the same vein: “One day, as I was crossing the street, the solution of the difficulty which had brought me to a standstill came to me all at once” (Goldenberg et al., 2009, p. 3)."
Frank Podmore, in The Newer Spiritualism, p. 28-29, criticizes this book's acceptance of phantasms of the dead (apparitions) and higher mesmeric phenomena. On the subject of phantasms of the dead, Podmore's concerns had been previously dealt with by Myers in his Defense of Phantasms of the Dead. On the subject of higher mesmeric phenomena, Podmore's views have been superseded by the 4 volume set Abnormal Hypnotic Phenomena. As regards Major Buckley's experiments, Dingwall, in Abnormal Hypnotic Phenomena IV, overviews the case, criticizing it for lack of proper reporting, stating (p . 108), "this effect appears to show clear paranormal ability, but as we cannot be surethat any of the relevant details are accurate and that others have not been omitted,we must leave it as it is." - he maintains high skepticism, but overviews hypotheses of fraud and discusses the factors contributing to their implausibility. Podmore's attack on the X+Y=Z case relies on speculation and omission of the examples of clairvoyance (not just telepathy, search "Bentley" for this), and Podmore is maintaining contradictions, because he admits to the validity of the "Remote Viewing" feats of Alexis and Adolphe Didier on p. 153, while attributing Didier's results he is suspicious of, those with Houdin, not to fraud, but to automatism and hyperesthesia, and the former are stronger validations of Myers' thesis than the items Podmore attempts to shoot down.
Regarding Myers' work, the eminent scholar and psycho-folklorist Andrew Lang recommended the work as giving insight into the basis of animism from super-normal experiences, and he wrote: "To myself, after reading the evidence, it appears that a fairly strong presumption is raised in favor of a 'phantasmogentic agency' set at work, in a vague unconscious way, by the deceased, and I say this after considering the adverse arguments of Mr. Podmore, for example, in favor of telepathy from living minds, and all the hypotheses of hoaxing, exaggerative memory, mal-observation, and so forth — not to mention the popular nonsense about 'What is the use of it?' Why is it permitted?' What is the use of argon? Why are cockroaches permitted?
To end with a confession of opinion: I entirely agree with Mr. Myers and Hegel, that we, or many of us, are in something, or that something is in us, which does not know the bonds of time, or feel the manacles of space."
Critics, once you begin to discuss Myers, will say - "his views were not accepted by the Scientific community." But how valid was his reception among critics? In this area, we need to proceed with caution, because Andrew Lang, for instance, in his article "The Nineteenth Century" and Mr. Frederic Myers, noted some misrepresentation of the work by critics (though Lang did not wholeheartedly endorse all of Myers' ideas, he rejected, for instance, Myers idea of "possession" (see here), on that, see some of Gauld's commentary).
Jenny Hazelgrove. (2000). Spiritualism and British Society Between the Wars. Manchester University Press. pp. 194-195, merely states the following, which does not really help us to understand the objection to Myers' work, and seems to provide a distorted view (see Irreducible Mind, pp. 61-62). Hazelgrove writes:
"Psychical research attracted those members of the intelligentsia who were dissatisfied with the limitations imposed upon scientific knowledge by dominant materialist explanations of the cosmos and of mind. Simultaneously, most researchers looked to the 'scientific method' as a means of transcending these perceived limitations. This paradigmatic cleavage had been present since the founding of the SPR by a group of Cambridge scholars in 1882. In its trend towards integration, or 'participating consciousness', psychical research responded to what Myers and his followers perceived as a living, vital universe imbued with Divine consciousness. For Myers, the individual was linked to transcendent realities through the hidden life of the 'subliminal self'. Here the consciousness of everyday life was but one layer in multiple layers of consciousness - a fraction of a larger whole. To the surface layer Myers accorded 'no primacy'; it was the hidden life in its union with the Divine - a  union that had expressed itself through time in outpourings of genius and in the religious instinct - that he considered of momentous importance for humankind. Myers strove until his death in 1901 to make the reality of subjective experience objectively comprehensible to himself and to a largely hostile scientific community [emphasis added - this is the only such statement, it does not illuminate the problem]. But it was in intuitive religious experience and personal intimacies - in, for instance, the warmth of his relationship with Josephine Butler and her evangelical Christianity, or his ecstatic love affair with his cousin, Annie Marshall - that Myers was really sure that there was something in existence that was 'striving upwards into life divine'[see discussion of Alan Gauld's refutation of the claim of sexual affairs between Myers and Marshall below, in commentary to a review of Trevor Hamilton's book on him]."
After this, in that text, there is a discussion of other scientists and philosophers on the convergence of science and mysticism, and then ether theories and Spiritualism, beginning with the phrase "Scientists of the nineteenth century did not always view this sense of mystical involvement with the cosmos as inimical to science[...]." But it does not give us the specific reasons Myers was rejected, except for allusion to the dominant materialistic trends. Janet Oppenheim. (1985). The Other World: Spiritualism and Psychical Research in England, 1850-1914. Cambridge University Press. pp. 254-262, is a bit better in helping to clarify the opposition. She wrote, on pp. 262: "It is hardly surprising that contemporary psychologists were not, for the most part, impressed with Myers' fully elaborated theory of the subliminal self. They dismissed the role Myers wanted psychology to play in the modern world. and disliked the assurance with which he claimed the authority of science for his personal beliefs. There were, ofcourse, a few psychologists, like James and Flournoy, who shared Myers' close involvement in psychical research and were deeply sympathetic to his aims, but not even all Myers colleagues at the SPR accepted his hypotheses. Andrew Lang, for one, rejected outright Myers's [sic] theory of possession [use of the term "outright" creates a slight exaggeration in tone against a subject she dislikes], while Gerald Balfour, in his 1906 address to the SPR, had to confess "in all humility" that he had "never yet succeeded in forming a clear idea" of what Myers intended by the subliminal self. The most crushing review of Human Personality, because the best informed, the most clearly argued, and the least ill-tempered, came from G.F. Stout, professor of logic and metaphysics at St. Andrews, and not a member of the SPR. In the Hibbert Journal for October 1903, Stout explained how Myers's theory of the subliminal self diverged sharply from earlier doctrines of subconscious or unconscious mental states, and how the common understanding of the "subliminal factor" in mental life did not necessitate a secondary personality or alternative self.[Stout was engaging in misrepresentation, see below] Stout could only regard "the hypothetical agency called the 'Subliminal Self' as an addition to his ignorance rather than to his knowledge." As a hypothesis, it was "baseless, futile, and incoherent.""
... and then she went on to discuss a mixed review by William McDougall, though previously, n earlier pages, she had cited positive reviews by Flournoy and James. She concluded her overview of the psychological aspect of SPR work as follows (p. 266): "Decades of further research into the workings of the brain have suggested alternatives to the stark choice between determinism and free will, which psychologists thought they faced at the turn of the century. In the 1980s, it appears that even the most elaborate mechanistic model may not be able to impose rigidly predictable patterns and order on the random activities of the brain's individual neurons. In the still fierce debate among philosophers, physicists, neuroscientists, and computer specialists, it is just possible that indeterministic physics may yet leave some slight area of choice, intent, and purpose among the complex machinery and chemical codes of the brain. The possibility may prove illusory, but it is more than Gurney and Myers had to work with. given the limits of their knowledge and the intellectual conventions in which they worked, the members of the SPR who tried to contribute to psychology before 1914 deserve credit for the way they conducted their inquiries. Their goals were enormous, for they sought to resolve the mind-body puzzle by finding a via media between Cartesian dualism and a monism that threatened to eliminate mind entirely. It comes as no surprise that they failed, nor that only a small group of professional psychologists valued their attempt. But to those particular psychologists, the work of the SPR mattered tremendously."
But such a perspective derives from her bias disguised as scholarship, which manifests in many ways - e.g. - in the book, she cites (p. 375) CEM Hansel's criticism of Piper, when she knows that Alan Gauld demonstrated it to be based on fraudulent sources - Braude offers other criticism here. While her book can certainly be compared favorably to Ruth Brandon's The Spiritualists, the book Irreducible Mind is a direct repudiation of her perspective, arguing that Myers and the SPR had established a robust body of evidence and that advances in the 20th century only further developed and refined their initial efforts.
McDougall's review was in many ways positive and is given here, his main objection though was: "The main difficulty is not in any way touched by the hypothesis. It is this: Our sensations are caused by changes in the brain-matter, and there are irresistibly strong reasons for believing that similar material changes, or transformations of physical energy in the brain, are essential conditions of all our states of consciousness; and there is equally good reason to believe that memory is conditioned, in part at least, by changes produced in the disposition of the matter, or in the state of the matter, of parts of the brain. How then can the procession of states of consciousness continue and the store of memory-images persist undisturbed when the matter of which the brain was composed has been scattered to the four winds of heaven? Myers admits these facts, yet he has not realised the difficulty presented by them for survival (as is proved by his statement that there is no great step from telepathy to possession, i., p. 250) and his hypothesis of the “subliminal self” does not attempt to deal with it.
These considerations forbid me to agree with the estimate of the conception of the “subliminal self” expressed by Prof. James and Sir Oliver Lodge, and I confess that if any man should tell me that this hypothesis is no great conception and effects no profounder synthesis but is an elaborate and gratuitous mystification, a monstrous confusion of things that are by nature disparate and distinct, the creation of a mind too passionately centred upon the establishment of one great thesis, I should be at a loss to answer him."
As regards McDougall's views, see Irreducible Mind, p. 580, see also chapter 4 of Irreducible Mind, on Memory, by Alan Gauld. As regards Stout's views, put forth in a review given here, Kelley notes Stout's caricatures and misrepresentations of what Myers was actually saying in his review on pp. 578-579 of Irreducible Mind.
I strongly suggest reading the highlighted excerpt from Irreducible Mind, because they undermine the objections that have been presented. Andreas Sommer's article on Hugo Munsterberg and his upcoming article on G. Stanley Hall also demonstrates the skulduggery that leading psychologists engaged in to "demarcate" psychical research from "respectable" psychology.
The rest of Irreducible Mind is recommended, perhaps more than Myers' text, as a modern exposition and development of the theory).
Mason (1903). Life After Death: First Article and Life After Death: Second Article (positive review of the work of F.W.H. Myers in the New York Times)
Grosso (2010). Reflections on Frederic Myers' Romantic Psychology
Sommer (2011). Review of "Immortal Longings: F.W.H. Myers and the Victorian Search for Life after Death" by Trevor Hamilton (positive review of book that, among other things, counters Trevor Hall's allegations concerning Myers, and other attacks against Myers)
Alvarado (2012). Studying the Life and Work of Frederic W.H. Myers.
Carrington (1921). The problems of psychical research; experiments and theories in the realm of the supernormal.
Prince (1930). The Enchanted Boundary: Being a Survey of Negative Reactions to Claims of Psychic Phenomena, 1820-1930. (discusses errors and distortions in many notable anti-psychic texts)
Flammarion (1900). L'inconnu: The Unknown.
Boirac (1918). Psychic science; an introduction and contribution to the experimental study of psychical phenomena.
Richet (1923). Thirty Years of Psychical Research. (vindication of Richet against his critics appears in documentation in bibliographies of relevant articles of the [psi-encyclopedia.spr.ac.uk SPR encyclopedia], and for vindication of Geley see here)
Sommer (2012). Policing Epistemic Deviance: Albert von Schrenck-Notzing and Albert Moll. (critics like to attack Schrenck-Notzing as allegedly being duped by Ladislas Lasslo, but this issue is dealt with in an article by Schrenck-Notzing in Psychische Studien, Feb. 1924, p. 97: http://dl.ub.uni-freiburg.de/diglit/psychische_studien1924/0101?sid=191c6da8f30f60fdab2ac0feb2ab47ba
"3. Trotz der an sich guten Kontrollmaßregeln mehrten sich fürmich in den vier Sitzungen die Verdachtsmomente derart, daß ich nach
Standpunkte für gänzlich unzureichend erklärte und eine
Wegnahme der Materialisationsprodukte, d. h. eine Entlarvung des
Mediums empfahl, wie sie tatsächlich am 27. Dezember 1923 erfolgt
The following item controverts the viewpoint that S-N was "duped" by Kraus: https://translate.googleusercontent.com/translate_c?depth=1&hl=en&prev=search&rurl=translate.google.com&sl=de&sp=nmt4&u=http://dl.ub.uni-freiburg.de/diglit/zs_para1933/0108/image%3Fsid%3Dd850175cbc116fe45de41a5e8f73ae6a&usg=ALkJrhjVxiM083Zpmxje2PAWkMdmOt4CkQ)
Rhine (1934). Extra-Sensory Perception. (defense of Rhine occurs here: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Joseph_Banks_Rhine&diff=812613998&oldid=812613105#Reception (removed by others but archived here: http://archive.is/dxhkw - scroll down to "reception" section)
Also, here are some helpful citations:
The item on Rhine that people like to use as a means of stating he is credulous is the "Lady Wonder" horse incident, however, the Richmond-Times Dispatch states (Lady Sparked Wonders About Her Intelligence by Larry Hall, Times-Dispatch Librarian/Researcher, 7/16/2003), "Rhine later altered his assessment slightly, saying he sometimes had detected subtle signals from Claudia Fonda that the horse may have responded to, although he never explained how the horse was able to give correct responses to things Fonda could not have known.
": http://archives.blogs.timesdispatch.com/2013/08/30/lady-wonder-1952/
For some remarkable incidents with Lady Wonder, see Is Your Pet Psychic?: Developing Psychic Communication with Your Pet by Richard Webster (Llewellyn Worldwide, Jul 8, 2012): [3]
These are excerpts from Rhine's article which provide a more innocuous understanding. In the article itself, he notes that  "Fortunately the culprits have thus far been caught (at least in the "known"cases) before serious damage has been done. Then, too, as time has passed our progress has aided us in avoiding the admission of such risky personnel even for a short term. As a result, the last twenty years have seen little of this cruder type of chicanery. Best of all, we have reached a stage at which we can actually look for and to a degree choose the people we want in the field. Finally, as will be seen in a few more pages, we have been able to do quite a lot to insure that it is impossible for dishonesty to be implemented inside the well-organized psi laboratory today. So after one further step into the background of the deception problem, I will be ready for the search for solutions."
"Was this really cheating? Perhaps a sufficient answer can be found in the fact that it was done surreptitiously. I do not need to say (or wish to imply) that they actually were biased by this leaked information in their final analyses, but at least the results were not approved for publication and the individuals were not encouraged to continue work at the center."
"What was wrong here? Everyone urged going on to see what emerged with further patient variation, everyone but E-l himself; he left, and fortunately the experimental results had not been published so that no one was misled by this particular instance. "
However we do have this, where things are more ambiguous:
"In the editing of a report of this experiment special analyses were made of the data that showed an interesting hit distribution on the record sheets; this in turn suggested a further investigation of the actual test conditions, and this revealed a rather simple trick. A few spaces on E-l's hand copy of the subject's calls were left blank (as though by accident) until the actual checkup when they could be filled in as hits by E-l himself. The use of duplicate sets of records to be exchanged by E-l and E-2 at the checkup time had been omitted, evidently by E-l's intention. Completely mutual vigilance in the joint checking procedure was also obviated. With a well-trained and more watchful E-2 on the job, this cheating could not have occurred." Rhine was very diligent in dealing with the fraud of Levy - for a positive overview of his actions in this area, see this.  [cite William J. Broad, Nicholas J. Wade. "Betrayers of the Truth: Fraud and Deceit in the Halls of Science" (Simon and Schuster, 1983), for the overall soundness of experiments during the Rhine era]
Some interesting overview of criticism is in Price (1939). The Story of ESP, a chapter of Fifty Years of Psychical Research, which is extremely informative. As Whately Carington noted however, in a review of it, a truly relevant text on this subject is Pratt et al (1940/1966). Extra-sensory perception after sixty years., where responses to criticism  are given. There is the misperception fostered by Milbourne Christopher that once Rhine took precautions in response to criticisms of his methods, he was unable to find any high-scoring subjects, and there is the misperception fostered by James Alcock that due to methodological problems, parapsychologists no longer utilize card-guessing studies. This will be dealt with as follows:
Palmer & Rao, in the seminal 1987 Brain & Mind Sciences Bulletin article "The Anomaly Called Psi: Recent Research and Criticism" (given below) noted:
They continued on p. 602: "In fact, in the present debate there is some agreement about the fundamental difficulty of defining what would be considered an acceptable level of replication and about the fact that no one experiment alone can suffice. There is further agreement that psi experiments are replicable in the general or "weak sense" of the basic findings being confirmed by others, but not in the "strong sense" of being able to tell the critic how he himself should go about getting positive results. Naturally, for Alcock such weak replication as exists can merely reflect replication of errors. In this sense, the theme of such exchanges between critics and proponents of parapsychology is not new; it is only the players who have changed. In the late 1930s, J. L. Kennedy (1939) debated with Gardner Murphy (1938) the possibility of sensory cues and motivational errors as explanations for psi. The American Psychological Association's Review Committee (1939) actually repudiated this as a viable explanation, and it is now generally accepted even among critics that fraud is the only "normal" alternative explanation for the early findings of Rhine et al. (1940) and Pratt, and Woodruff (1939)."
See also Dean Radin's The Noetic Universe (Corgi Books, 2009), p. 99 and 110 for information on high-security ESP card tests involving sealed envelopes, opaque screens, distance separation, and time displacement exceeding the chance hit rate of 20%.
Carington (1945). Telepathy: An Outline of its Facts, Theory and Implications. (Broad had positive words about this book)
Soal & Bateman (1955). Modern Experiments in Telepathy (interesting only for historical purposes. However, According to Hyman, the scenarios envisioned by Price and Hansel for how Soal committed fraud did not reflect the actual means by which he did so: https://books.google.com/books?id=TPFJgZZmzSgC&pg=PA119#v=onepage&q&f=false (though see above regarding possible rehabilitation of Soal)
On Soal, see this pro-parapsychology edit: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Samuel_Soal&diff=680855344&oldid=680851287
Comments on possible vindication of Soal are provided here:
Murphy (1961). Challenge Of Psychical Research
Broad (1962). Lectures on Psychical Research.
Price (1955). Science and the Supernatural. (see also D.W. (1956) Extrasensory Perception, Soal (1956) On "Science and the Supernatural", Rhine (1956). Comments on "Science and the Supernatural", Meehl and Scriven (1956). Compatibility of Science and ESP, Bridgman (1956). Probability, Logic, and ESP, Price (1956).  Where Is the Definitive Experiment?, Rhine (1956). The Experiment Should Fit the Hypothesis - c.f. Price (1972). Apology to Rhine and Soal.)
Hansel vs Rhine, Pratt, & Woodruff (1961). Controversy over charges of fraud in ESP (dispute between CEM Hansel and Rhine, Pratt, & Woodruff over the Pearce-Pratt & Pratt-Woodruff experiments) (see, regarding Hansel's follow up work, Honorton (1967). ESP: A Scientific Evaluation, C.E.M. Hansel, Review. (there is an interesting statement on p. 80 of this document - when discussing Hansel's critique of the Pearce-Pratt experiment, Honorton notes: "It is puzzling that Hansel was unable to obtain the plans in view of the fact that Pratt was able, at a later time, to procure them without difficulty or delay. It also seems strange, at least to this reviewer, that Hansel would publish a plan which, in his own estimation (i.e. "not to scale"), was not accurate. Certainly he would agree that it is necessary for the critic to be as judicious in appraising research findings as the investigator must be in carrying out these experiments. It is unfortunate, therefore, that he published his "not to scale" plan; for while it would allow for the possibility of subject-fraud in line with his hypothesis, the correct scale plans, obtained from Duke by Pratt, do not. The crucial door (Room 311) was displaced so far away from the window in Pratt's room, that there can be no doubt as to the inadequacy of Hansel's hypothesis, to say nothing of the accuracy of his plan.")
Stevenson (1967). An Antagonist's View of Parapsychology. A Review of Professor Hansel's ESP: A Scientific Evaluation (Extensive, detailed corroboration of Honorton regarding the Pearce-Pratt experiment. However, this should be read alongside K.R. Rao's comments, to realize that Hansel's work on this issue is fraudulent - as follows, from Rao 1981, pp. 191-194:
Dr. D. J. West in his fine review of C. E. M. Hansel's ESP and Parapsychology: A Critical Re-Evaluation (1980) (Journal No. 787) seems to accept too readily the implications of Professor Hansel's alleged discovery of discrepancies in the reporting of the Pearce—Pratt experiment in various places. Since the Pearce-Pratt experiment is one of the highly evidential studies we have in parapsychology and since Hansel is apparently successful in creating the impression—even among such unbiased scientists as Dr. West—that there was something seriously wrong with it, I wish briefly to examine Hansel's arguments and his credibility as a responsible critic. The points made against the Pearce—Pratt experiment are: ( 1 ) that it was not reported in adequate detail at the time it was carried out; (2) that there were discrepancies in its different published versions; and (3) that the experimental conditions were such that the subject, Pearce, could have cheated in a number of possible ways.
The hypothesis of fraud to explain away the results of such experiments as the Pearce-Pratt series is essentially sterile and non-falsifiable. As I pointed out elsewhere (Rao, 1981), the argument that it is more parsimonious to assume fraud rather than the existence of 'impossible' phenomena such as ESP is as logically false as it is historically untrue.
Much was made of the fact that the original report of the Pearce-Pratt experiments did not give all the details of procedure and experimental conditions that we now consider necessary. West and some other parapsychologists appear to be ready to blame Rhine for this failure. Stevenson (1967), for example, writes, 'Rhine had already published informal reports [of the Pearce—Pratt experiment] in two of his popular books and it is doubtful procedure in science to announce one's results first to the general public and then (in this case many years later) present a detailed report for scientists' (p. 259). I believe these accusations are unfair.
It is not the case that Rhine announced his results first to the public. The results of the Pearce—Pratt experiment were first published in The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology (Rhine, 1936) and were only subsequently mentioned in his popular books. (The first of these, New Frontiers of the Mind, appeared in 1938.) The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology is a respected journal in mainstream psychology and Rhine had no editorial control over it. Does this not clearly imply that the additional details that we now consider necessary were not considered so then by the psychologists who refereed his paper and the editors who published it? The Journal of Parapsychology was in existence then and if Rhine published his report in it with inadequate details, we might have had some reason to blame him for not giving them all. The truth is that details of the sort that we now require of parapsychological reports were simply not found necessary then. When it became increasingly clear that further details of the experimental procedure were called for, Rhine and Pratt published a detailed report in 1954.
It would appear that a few of the individual scores as given in the footnote for the 1936 article were misprinted and that one score was inadvertently left out. The footnote gives only 43 scores when there should have been 44.
While it is regrettable that there were errors in the first report, though inconsequential in themselves, I wonder how many of us can honestly say that we make no such errors. As I have pointed out, Hansel himself commits a few. To give a few more, reference 8 on page 119 which has to do with Extra-Sensory Perception After Sixty Years refers on page 123 to (The) Reach of the Mind (incidentally, The was omitted); reference 9 to The Reach of the Mind on page 119 is listed in the notes on page 123 as New World of the Mind. On page 121 Hansel mentions Frontiers of the Mind by J. B. Rhine. He obviously means New Frontiers of the Mind.
In evaluating Hansel's critique, we should bear in mind that the records of the Pearce-Pratt experiment are still in existence, and that they were examined in the past by others and re-checked by Stuart, Greenwood and Murphy. Again, Hansel himself was at Duke with Rhine and Pratt and they would have easily clarified these matters, if Hansel had raided them then. Hansel (1961) did not refer to these discrepancies in his first critique of this experiment published in the Journal of Parapsychology.
In summary, then, Hansel's criticism of the Pearce-Pratt experiment is not entirely reliable. But the fact that his words have been taken seriously by such persons as Dr. West makes me wonder whether there is some truth in the saying that if someone shouts long and loud enough he will be heard without regard to what he says."
See also Medhurst (1968). The Fraudulent Experimenter: Professor Hansel's Case Against Psychical Research. (This review notes several misrepresentations with regards to psychical research, and also establishes that Hansel took a shotgun approach, so occasionally he got some things right, but his critique of Samuel Soal was invalid, and other, unrelated discoveries led to an actual case against him (see also Child's 1980 review below) - Medhurst also notes Hansel's misrepresentation of the Ownbey-Turner experiment.)
Mackenzie (1981). The Place of J.B. Rhine in the History of Parapsychology.
Palmer (1978). Extrasensory Perception: Research Findings.
Gardner & Wheeler (1979). Quantum Theory and Quack Theory / "Drive the Pseudos Out of the Workshop of Science". (c.f. Beauregard et al vs. Gardner (1980). Parapsychology: An Exchange, and Kennedy (1981). Skepticism and Negative Results in Borderline Areas of Science).
Palmer (1983). In Defense of Parapsychology: A Reply to James E. Alcock. (in Zetetic Scholar, 1983, 11, pp. 39-70) (c.f.  Stanford (1982). Is Scientific Parapsychology Possible? Some Thoughts on James E. Alcock's Parapsychology: Science or Magic?. (and to note, some of these critics like to cite parapsychologists' recourse to "experimenter effects" when dealing with some aspects of the field as reasons for dismissing the field. For a counter to this, see the overview of experimenter effects by John Palmer in New Frontiers of Human Science: A Festschrift for K. Ramakrishna Rao (McFarland, Jan 1, 2002), p. 142, as well as Thalbourne (1985). An Essay Review of James Alcock's Parapsychology: Science or Magic? A Psychological Perspective.))
Project Alpha was a hoax in which psychical researchers were allegedly duped by conjurors - Relevant overview is on p. 89 of Marcello Truzzi's critique of Project Alpha 'Reflections on Project Alpha....', which begins on p. 73 of the skeptical text "Zetetic Scholar", Nos. 12/13: - https://web.archive.org/web/20160303201222/http://www.tricksterbook.com/truzzi/ZS-Issues-PDFs/ZeteticScholarNos12-13.pdf
"Not all psi researchers were put on the defensive by Alpha. Dennis Stillings, director of a Minneapolis groupcalled the Archaeus Project, which puts out a newsletter by that name, was outraged and initiated a retaliatory hoax which started as a small joke but escalated into something more significant. Stillings felt that Randi was trying to reap advantage from lies told to the psi researchers and was, in effect, blaming the victims. Stillings believed that any person could be deceived by lies and that Randi was just as susceptible to such human error as anyone. So, Stillings (1983a) issued a phony,one page, special issue of his group's newsletter (of which only two copies were mailed out and these to Edwards and Shaw with the expectation that they would show it to Randi). The ersatz issue contained a short, two paragraph, fraudulent announcement that the Archaeus Project had just been given "a fund of $217,000...as seed money for a program in PK research and education" It said the funds were for "grant money to PK investigators, especially those interested in 'metal bending"' and for "developing a program of educating children in the range and nature of parapsychological phenomena." Finally, it said that "Those applying for grants, as well as those gifted with paranormal abilities" should write to Stillings. Stillings also separately wrote a letter to Shaw telling him that since shaw was a fraud, he should not apply for any of the money.To stretch the joke even further, Stillings also published a warning "Advisory Notice (Krueger, 1983)--to parallel Randi's similar advisory notes--in a previous real issue of his group's newsletter.
Though Stillings' original prank struck me as being a bit silly (after all, Randi never claimed to be immune to trickery, and conjurors fool one another all the time), what happened next went far beyond Stillings' expectations and turned the matter into a significant episode. upon seeing the phony announcement, and apparently without properly checking things out, Randi decided to give one of his annual psi-mocking "Uri Awards" to this receipt of a phony grant. Thus, on April 1, 1983, Randi's Discover news release gave a "Uri" in the funding category: "To the Medtronics Corporation of Minneapolis, who gave $250,000 to a Mr.Stillings of that city to fund the Archaeus Project, devoted to observing people who bend spoons at parties. Mr.Stillings then offered financial assistance to a prominent young spoon-bender who turned out to be one of the masquerading magicians of Project Alpha--a confessed fake." In this incredible award statement, Randi managed to falsely identify a major corporation as the funding source (when no source was ever mentioned in the original announcement), escalated the award from $217,000 to $250,000, misdescribed the purpose of the phony award, and falsely claimed one of his associates had been offered funds!
Stillings and other foes of Randi, particularly Walter Uphoff, had a field day with Randi's big blunder. With headlines in psi publications like "'Non-Magician Fools Conjuror" (New Frontiers Center Newsletter) and "Researcher Fools Randi Into Making Fictional Award" (Psychic News), the "Amazing" Randi was portrayed as merely "Amusing." Randi, however, was apparently not amused. He has thus far not publicly acknowledged his mistake, although he did write an apology to Medtronics and admitted his mistake in private correspondence (including a letter sent to Stillings which Stillings managed to get Randi to write him by posing as a third party). In fact, when his Uri Award list was reproduced in The Skeptical Inquirer, Randi's award to Medtronics was simply omitted without comment. Although Stillings had only intended his prank to demonstrate that Randi, too, could be fooled, it actually ended up displaying the fact that Randi is capable of gross distortion of facts and in this case, at least, shot from the hip (and here managed to hit his own foot). This naturally might lead some to question Randi's reporting accuracy in the past and should caution us to look more carefully at the past cries of "foul" that opponents have hurled at him."
The claim that project alpha "discredited" testers relies on omission of relevant facts, see "Science Versus Showmanship: A History of the Randi Hoax": http://www.aiprinc.org/para-c05_Thalbourne_1995.pdf
Alexander (1980). [www.wanttoknow.info/mk/alexander-new-battlefield.pdf The New Mental Battlefield].
Palmer (1985). An Evaluative Report on the Current Status of Parapsychology.
CHILD, I. L. (1987). Criticism in experimental parapsychology, 1975–1985. In S. Krippner (Ed.), Advances in Parapsychological Research 5 (pp. 190–224). Jefferson, NC: McFarland. (important reference as regards the vary biased at often inaccurate attitude in some of the major skeptical literature. This is useful to read alongside Gerd Hövelmann. (1985). "Skeptical Literature in Parapsychology: An Annotated Bibliograpy". In Paul Kurtz. A Skeptic's Handbook of Parapsychology. Prometheus Books. pp. 449-491. Other items of varying importance, mostly book reviews, include include Grosso (fix date). Review of Search for the Soul by Milbourne Christopher (interesting discussion of Christopher's misrepresentations), Beloff (fix date). Review of Science and the Supernatural by John Taylor, Palmer (1988). Review of A Skeptic's Handbook of Parapsychology., Parker (1988). A Skeptical Evaluation of 'A Skeptic's Handbook', Bauer & Lacadou (1991). A strawman called “psi”—Or: What is Professor Bunge afraid of? Honorton (1993). Rhetoric Over Substance: The Impoverished State of Skepticism ,Hansen (1992). CSICOP and the Skeptics: An Overview. (covers, among other things, misleading statements by James Randi regarding the Targ-Puthoff/Geller experiments), Radin (1997). A Field guide to Skepticism., Truzzi (1998). On Some Unfair Practices towards Claims of the Paranormal., Truzzi (2001). Review of Why People Believe Weird Things by Michael Shermer., Hansen (2002). Review of "QUANTUM LEAPS IN THE WRONG DIRECTION" by Charles M. Wynn and Arthur W. Wiggins.
Stevenson (1971). The Substantiability of Spontaneous Cases.
Stevenson (1987). Why Investigate Spontaneous Cases?
Hyman vs. Honorton (1985). The Ganzfeld Debate. (c.f. Rosenthal (1986). Meta-Analytic Procedures and the Nature of Replication: The Ganzfeld Debate, Alcock (1986). Comments on the Hyman-Honorton Ganzfeld Controversy, Scott (1986). Comment on the Hyman-Honorton Debate, Child (1986). Comments on the Ganzfeld Controversy, Hövelmann (1986).Beyond the Ganzfeld Debate, McClenon (1986). Scientific Rhetoric and the Ganzfeld Debate, Stokes (1986). Replication as a Political Process.
The 1986 Joint Communque between Honorton and Hyman stated "We agree that there is an overall significant effect in this data base that cannot reasonably be explained by selective reporting or multiple analysis. We continue to differ over the degree to which the effect constitutes evidence for psi, but we agree that the final verdict awaits the outcome of future experiments conducted by a broader range of investigators and according to more stringent standards."
In Bem & Honorton (1994). Does psi exist?, the authors noted, regarding  the Ganzfeld debate between Hyman and Honorton, etc, "none of the contributors to the subsequent debate concurred with Hyman’s conclusion, whereas four nonparapsychologists—two statisticans and two psychologists—explicitly concurred with Honorton’s conclusion (Harris & Rosenthal, 1988b; Saunders, 1985; Utts, 1991a). For example, Harris and Rosenthal (one of the pioneers in the use of meta-analysis in psychology) used Hyman’s own flaw ratings and failed to find any significant relationships between flaws and study outcomes in each of two separate analyses: “Our analysis of the effects of flaws on study outcome lends no support to the hypothesis that Ganzfeld research results are a significant function of the set of flaw variables” (1988b, p. 3; for a more recent exchange regarding Hyman’s analysis, see Hyman, 1991; Utts, 1991a, 1991b).
In 1988, the National Research Council (NRC) of the National Academy of Sciences released a widely publicized report commissioned by the U.S. Army that assessed several controversial technologies for enhancing human performance, including accelerated learning, neurolinguistic programming, mental practice, biofeedback, and parapsychology (Druckman & Swets, 1988; summarized in Swets & Bjork, 1990). The report’s conclusion concerning parapsychology was quite negative: “The Committee finds no scientific justification from research conducted over a period of 130 years for the existence of parapsychological phenomena” (Druckman & Swets, 1988, p. 22).
An extended refutation strongly protesting the committee’s treatment of parapsychology has been published elsewhere (Palmer et al., 1989). The pertinent point here is simply that the NRC’s evaluation of the ganzfeld studies does not reflect an additional, independent examination of the ganzfeld database but is based on the same meta-analysis conducted by Hyman that we have discussed in this article.
Hyman chaired the NRC’s Subcommittee on Parapsychology, and, although he had concurred with Honorton 2 years earlier in their joint communiqué that “there is an overall significant effect in this data base that cannot reasonably be explained by selective reporting or multiple analysis” (p. 351) and that “significant outcomes have been produced by a number of different investigators” (p. 352), neither of these points is acknowledged in the committee’s report.
The NRC also solicited a background report from Harris and Rosenthal (1988a), which provided the committee with a comparative methodological analysis of the five controversial areas just listed. Harris and Rosenthal noted that, of these areas, “only the Ganzfeld ESP studies [the only psi studies they evaluated] regularly meet the basic requirements of sound experimental design” (p. 53), and they concluded that it would be implausible to entertain the null given the combined p from these 28 studies. Given the various problems or flaws pointed out by Hyman and Honorton...we might estimate the obtained accuracy rate to be about 1/3...when the accuracy rate expected under the null is 1/4.(p.51)"
Of relevance is Blackmore vs. Sargent (1987). Dispute over Carl Sargent's Ganzfeld Experiments.
Blackmore claims, citing no source: http://www.csicop.org/SI/show/what_can_the_paranormal_teach_us_about_consciousness/ - "I would not refer to this depressing incident again but for one fact. The Cambridge data are all there in the Bem and Honorton review but unacknowledged. Out of twenty-eight studies included, nine came from the Cambridge lab, more than any other single laboratory, and they had the second highest effect size after Honorton's own studies. Bem and Honorton do point out that one of the laboratories contributed nine of the studies but they do not say which one. Not a word of doubt is expressed, no references to my investigation are given, and no casual reader could guess there was such controversy over a third of the studies in the database."
In response to this, Daryl Bem wrote to me (Tue, Jul 22, 2014 at 9:23 PM), "Chuck (Honorton) and I were well aware of Blackmore’s accusations of cheating by Sargent, and we discussed at length how to treat the issue without taking sides on the accusation itself, so we chose to display an analysis of the studies when  those by Sargent and those by Honorton were excluded.  This way readers aware of Blackmore’s charges could would be satisfied that the database still held up, and readers unaware of her charges would see it as our simply being conservative by excluding the two labs with the largest data pools, including the author’s own studies."
Blackmore seems to be referring to earlier work by Honorton, since Bem & Honorton (1994). Does psi exist? dealt with autoganzfeld studies, of which there were 11 (see Honorton et al (1990). Psi Communication in the Ganzfeld: Experiments With an Automated Testing System and A Comparison With A Meta-Analysis of Earlier Studies - for the original meta-analysis of these studies). The 28 studies are mentioned as earlier Ganzfeld studies, and are addressed in Palmer, Utts', and Honorton's reply to the National Research Council as Honorton, C. (1985). Meta-analysis of the psi ganzfeld research: A response to Hyman. Journal of Parapsychology, 49, 51-91. Palmer, Utts, and Honorton note on p. 48 of their reply that "the disposition of the Sargent studies affects neither the effect size nor the statistical significance of the Ganzfeld database.": https://www.academia.edu/35265744/Reply_to_the_National_Research_Council_Study_on_Parapsychology_-_John_Palmer_Charles_Honorton_Jessica_Utts
It should be noted that Daryl Bem started out as a skeptic - on this, see footnote 96 on p. 72 of Zingrone (2006). From Text to Self: The Interplay of Criticism and Response in the History of Parapsychology.)
Rao & Palmer (1987). The anomaly called psi: Recent research and criticism. (discusses controversies over Helmut Schmidt's micro-PK experiments, and opens up a debate with others as to the validity of parapsychology as a field)
Hyman & Alcock (1988). Enhancing Human Performance: Issues, Theories and Techniques: Part VI: Parapsychological Techniques (see also Harris & Rosenthal (1988). Human Performance Research: An Overview: Human Performance Technologies and Expectancy Effects: Parapsychology, Harris & Rosenthal (1988). Postscript to Human Performance Research: An Overview, Palmer, Honorton, & Utts (1988). Reply to the National Research Council Study on Parapsychology. (also here: https://www.cia.gov/library/readingroom/docs/CIA-RDP96-00789R002200420001-1.pdf, this also contains a rebuttal of Hyman's comments on the postscript of the Harris & Rosenthal document), and Alexander (1989). Enhancing human Performance: A Challenge to the Report.)
Office of Technology Assessment (1989). Report of a Workshop on Experimental Parapsychology (also here: https://www.cia.gov/library/readingroom/docs/CIA-RDP96-00789R002200450001-8.pdf).
Utts (1991). Replication and Meta-Analysis in Parapsychology. (This is a very important text, as it completely refutes the antagonists' view that "Many studies seeking to detect, understand, and utilize telepathy have been done, but no replicable results from well-controlled experiments exist."
See also Bayarri & Berger (1991). Replication and Meta-Analysis in Parapsychology: Comment, Dawson (1991). Replication and Meta-Analysis in Parapsychology: Comment, Diaconis (1991). Replication and Meta-Analysis in Parapsychology: Comment, Greenhouse (1991). Replication and Meta-Analysis in Parapsychology: Comment, Hyman (1991). Replication and Meta-Analysis in Parapsychology: Comment, Morris (1991). Replication and Meta-Analysis in Parapsychology: Comment, and Utts (1991). Replication and Meta-Analysis in Parapsychology: Rejoinder)
Utts (1995). An Assessment of the Evidence for Psychic Functioning. (see also Hyman (1995). Evaluation of a Program on Anomalous Mental Phenomena, and Utts (1996). Response to Ray Hyman's Report)
May (1996). The American Institutes for Research Review of the Department of Defense's STAR GATE Program: A Commentary (see below for detailed information on this))
Targ (1996). Remote Viewing at Stanford Research Institute in the 1970s: A Memoir
Mishlove (1997). Psychokinesis (discusses controversies with PEAR RNG-PK experiments, etc)
Radin & Rebman (1997). Seeking Psi in the Casino.
Josephson (1999). Unfounded criticism of a parapsychology book in Nature.
Alcock (2003). Give the null hypothesis a chance.
Parker & Brusewitz (2003). A compendium of the evidence for psi. (this paper commits a glib error in claiming that Wiseman defended the Bill Delmore tests against George Hansen when he merely rejected one of Hansen's hypotheses, otherwise it is useful. Wiseman's article is here, and though he does not specifically state that Hansen's other criticisms are valid in the paper, neither does he reject them, so Parker errs in extending refutation of one item to refutation of all items. Appraisal of the Delmore case requires first reading Hansen's criticism of it, and then the counter-arguments of proponents (1,2,3,4), and not stopping with the Wiseman article which only rebuts one criticism and doesn't comment on the others, and pretending that it is a defense. Wiseman is not in any way a psi proponent, he has made concessions (1), however, even though he has been rebutted in various exchanges with others, he could never be described as having made explicitly positive claims. In his book The Heretics: Adventures with the Enemies of Science (2011), (p. 325), Will Storr after interviewing Wiseman noted that "Wiseman's career as a celebrity Skeptic is predicated on there being no such thing as paranormal phenomena. He admits to never having had 'any interest in investigating if it's true because I've always thought it isn't.'").
Stokes (2006). Consciousness and the Physical World
Zingrone (2006). From Text to Self: The Interplay of Criticism and Response in the History of Parapsychology.
Jahn & Dunne (2008). Change the Rules!
Watt (2004). Reporting of Blind Methods: An Interdisciplinary Survey. (Parapsychology is found to have drastically higher use of Blind Methods than the physical sciences, confirming the results of a previous survey).
Smith (2009). Is Physicalism "Really" True? (overviews remote viewing controversies, among other things (DMILS, etc.),contains the statement, on p. 212: "When the first edition of Marks’ and Kamman’s Psychology of the Psychic was published in 1980, there may have been some reason to question the original remote viewing research and replications, since there was still only a relatively small number of 212 trials (certainly not yet even 200) available in only a few publicly accessible studies. However, by the time Marks published the second edition of the book in 2000 (some years after Kamman’s death), there was much less justification – and justification has grown even less in the intervening years since that time.").
Wiseman (2010). ‘Heads I Win, Tails You Lose’: How Parapsychologists Nullify Null Results.
Carter (2010). "Heads I lose, tails you win", or, how Richard Wiseman Nullifies Positive Results, and what to do about it.
Crabtree (2012). Parapsychology. (article on the subject in the Encyclopedia of the History of Psychological Theories, 2012)
Derakhshani (2011). An alternative take on ESP.
Pigliucci (2012). On Parapsychology. (Pigliucci here presents himself as a balanced observer on this issue, however, here he reveals a priori debunking obligations)
Davidson (2011). Review of The Logical Leap by David Harriman (a critique of a Randian objectivist text. This is of tangential relevance to the topic of discussion, because Randian objectivism implies steadfast adherence to the perspective of materialist monism, and adherent of that perspective would reject data such as is presented here no matter how compelling. There is an attraction in Rand's militant rejection of irrationalism, because in this day and age, with postmodernist nonsense, ethical relativism, and decadence, Rand is a breath of fresh air, asserting that principles of reason, sound philosophy, and science, should be our guides. But her framework is partially based on a priori perspectives that can be challenged, and she misunderstands the perspective of those she attacks. The best introduction to this is in the article from the skeptic Michael Shermer, entitled The Unlikliest Cult in history, as well as George V. Walsh's paper Ayn Rand and the Metaphysics of Kant, which shows that the Objectivist objection to Kant is based on misunderstandings (and this also makes some interesting references to Aristotle - as an aside, the alleged basis of Objectivism in Aristotle turns out to be spurious when you realize that contrary to Libertarianism, Aristotle in his Politics derived an Organic framework for society). Acquaintance with Aristotle is important, and Will Durant provides a relevant overview, additionally, The Metalogicon of John of Salisbury is very important in helping us to acquire the gift of Aristotelian reason. But as to accurate overviews of Kant, we will need again to refer to Will Durant. Likewise, refer to Durant's overviews of German Philosophy: 1789-1815 (Fichte, Schelling & Hegel), Schopenhauer, Nietzsche (see also Abir Taha's 2013 text Nietzsche's Coming God or the Redemption of the Divine), and finally Henri Bergson, a one time President of the Society for Psychical Research, who offered a solution to Kant, though one not embracing materialist monism.
Davidson notes in his review, "In the final chapter, Harriman turns his attention to quantum theory.
“As a mathematical formalism, quantum theory has been enormously successful. It makes quantitative predictions of impressive accuracy for a vast range of phenomena, providing the basis for modern chemistry, condensed matter physics, nuclear physics and optics. It also made possible some of the greatest technological innovations of the twentieth century, including computers and lasers. Yet as a fundamental theory of physics it is strangely empty… It gives a mathematical recipe for predicting the statistical behavior of particles but fails to provide causal models of subatomic processes.” (p248)
According to Harriman, the necessity of supposing that a single reality exists, that the human mind has a reasonably clear access to it, and that the scientist can explain it, has been surrendered not by reference to experimental facts (“the knowledge gained by experimental discovery of facts can never lead to the denial of knowledge and fact.”) but by the influence of post-Kantian philosophy,
“an enemy that operated behind the front lines and provided the corrupt framework used to misinterpret facts. By rejecting causality and accepting the unintelligibility of the atomic world, physicists have reduced themselves to mere calculating machines (at best) – and thus they are unable to ask further questions or to integrate their knowledge.”
Harriman does not discuss the double-slit experiment, the EPR experiments of Alain Aspect and others, the quantum Zeno effect, quantum computation and the various other puzzling phenomena in quantum physics. Harriman himself seems to be ‘theory stealing’ here in that he is willing to accept the benefits he lists from quantum theory without subscribing to the theory itself, nor addressing the really puzzling experimental facts on which the theory is based. There is no explanation of why quantum mechanics gives such precise answers whilst it does not correspond to reality."
Many of the strangest conceptions related to quantum theory have been validated in mainstream experiments - see the ScienceNews February 27, 1998 article Quantum Theory Demonstrated: Observation Affects Reality, and the ScienceAlert June 1, 2015 article Reality doesn’t exist until we measure it, quantum experiment confirms.  Henry Stapp, in "Mindful Universe" (Springer-Verlag, 2nd edition, 2011), p. 15, notes in layman's terms how the following perspective inductively derives from empirical observations related to the double-slit experiment, stating, of of the Copenhagen interpretation it evolved from, and then, of the Von Neumann interpretation itself, "In this initial version of the theory the brains and bodies of the experimenters, and also their measuring devices, are described fundamentally in empirical terms: in terms of our experiences/perceptions pertaining to these devices and their manipulations by our physical bodies. However, the boundary between our empirically described selves and the physically described system we are studying is somewhat arbitrary. The empirically described measuring devices can become very tiny, and physically described systems can become very large, [sic] This ambiguity was examined by von Neumann (1932) who showed that we can consistently describe the entire physical world, including the brains of the experimenters, as the physically described world, with the actions instigated by an experimenters stream of consciousness acting directly upon that experimenter's brain. The interaction between the psychologically and physically described aspects in quantum theory thereby becomes the mind-brain interaction of neuroscience and neuropsychology." Following this, one of the most informed apologists, Inspiring Philosophy, who has collaborated with the physics student Johanan Raatz, has produced an exhaustively documented overview of The Measurement Problem citing papers removing contradictions and leading therefore not to solipsism, but to an animistic perspective. This can be followed by an overview of The Introspective Argument, which, when combined with the Leibnizian Cosmological Argument, provides a basis for Panentheism.
Davidson's paper challenging Harriman's The Logical Leap contains this valuable excerpt: "I am skeptical about his insistence that physics must conform to some pre-ordained form (which might be construed as ‘cognitive fixation’). As Neils Bohr said in response to Einstein’s insistence that “God does not play dice with the universe,”: “Do not tell God what to do.”")
Schwartz (2011). The Antique Roadshow: How Denier Movements Debunk Evolution, Climate Change, and Nonlocal Consciousness
Dossey (2011). Why Are Scientists Afraid of Daryl Bem? (see also this article)
Dossey (2013). Unbroken Wholeness: The Emerging View of Human Interconnection
Baptista & Derakhshani (2014). Beyond the Coin Toss: Examining Wiseman's Criticisms of Parapsychology. (attempts to establish that Ganzfeld results are consistent)
Beauregard et al (2014). Manifesto for a Post-Materialist Science.
Watt and Kennedy (2015). Lessons from the first two years of operating a study registry.
Dossey (2015). The Sandy Island Syndromes: On Seeing What Is Not There and Not Seeing What Is There.
Zahran (2017). What is Psi? From Anti-Parapsychology to Psi as a Next Scientific Revolution: Theoretical Reviews and Hypothesized Vision
Why swim?
Why would someone decide to swim? Why spend your time and effort into a sport? Swimming is a sport that requires skill, motivation, and effort. Swimming has to do with a team, but most of swimming comes individually. Being able to master swimming mentally, physically, and emotionally, you will be successful and enjoy swimming to its fullest.Also because it to keep your self hydrated so you don't faint because you didn't have water
1.5 Considerations of enterprise standard operating environment (SOE) vs. allowing Bring Your Own Device(BYOD)
2.1 Classify information types into levels of CIA – Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability based on organization/industry
3 Explain the importance of preparing for and supporting the incident response and recovery process
3.4 System design to facilitate incident response taking into account types of violations
4 Implement security and privacy policies and procedures based on organizational requirements
4.1 Policy development and updates in light of new business, technology and environment changes
4.2 Process/procedure development and updated in light of policy, environment and business changes
4.3 Support legal compliance and advocacy by partnering with HR, legal, management and other entities
Analyze the security risk implications associated with business decisions
Risk management of new products, new technologies and user behaviors
Impact of de-perimiterization (e.g. constantly changing network boundary)
Considerations of enterprise standard operating environment (SOE) vs. allowing Bring Your Own Device(BYOD)
Execute and implement risk mitigation strategies and controls
Classify information types into levels of CIA – Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability based on organization/industry
"CVSS Implementation Guidance". http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2014/NIST.IR.7946.pdf. Retrieved 2014JUN26.
"Common Weakness Scoring System (CWSS™)". http://cwe.mitre.org/cwss. Retrieved 2014JUN26.
Determine minimum required security controls based on aggregate score
"Information Security Continuous Monitoring (ISCM) for Federal Information Systems and Organizations". http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-137/SP800-137-Final.pdf. Retrieved 2014JUN30.
"Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments". http://www.nist.gov/customcf/get_pdf.cfm?pub_id=912091. Retrieved 2014JUN30.
"risk assessment". http://www.ready.gov/risk-assessment. Retrieved 2014JUN30.
"Factors for Estimating Likelihood". https://www.owasp.org/index.php/OWASP_Risk_Rating_Methodology#Step_2:_Factors_for_Estimating_Likelihood. Retrieved 2014JUN30.
Decide which security controls should be applied based on minimum requirements
"Critical Security Controls". http://www.sans.org/critical-security-controls. Retrieved 2014JUL07.
Explain the importance of preparing for and supporting the incident response and recovery process
"Computer Security Incident Handling Guide". http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-61rev2/SP800-61rev2.pdf. Retrieved 2014JUL14.
Electronic inventory and asset control=
System design to facilitate incident response taking into account types of violations
Establish and review system event and security logs
Implement security and privacy policies and procedures based on organizational requirements
Policy development and updates in light of new business, technology and environment changes
Process/procedure development and updated in light of policy, environment and business changes
Support legal compliance and advocacy by partnering with HR, legal, management and other entities
Use common business documents to support security
Use general privacy principles for PII – Personally Identifiable Information/ Sensitive PII
Support the development of policies that contain
Visual instructions may or may not include text. Generally, it is good to have both being that there are different learning styles. However, it can often vary depending on the intended use of the instructions. Visual instructions serve to clarify a concept that is difficult to explain using only words. Graphics may be used to show how something looks, how something should look once the step has been completed, how something is done or constructed, show trends or relationships, add liveliness to the project or simply organize information. Graphics are useful since almost everyone (including children and others of a different language) can understand visual instructions. It also eliminates the cost of having to translate and print text instructions in multiple languages. Graphics are useful in instructions because people can see exactly what they need to complete.
Minimize language barriers.
Speeds up the learning curves.
Minimize human variability.
Reduce product returns.
Ease technical support.
Visualize and generalize data into understandable trends
Connect prior knowledge and new concepts.
Provide structure for thinking, writing, discussing, analyzing, planning, and reporting.
Focus thoughts and ideas, leading to understanding and interpretation.
Help students to clarify thoughts, organize and analyze information, integrate new knowledge, and think critically.
Graphics have been used for communicating a message or story long before written text. Graphics have a deeper impact across cultures due to their ability to create their own meaning from the picture not words. Although words may be a part of the Graphic, the images themselves produce the desired response or understanding in the intended audience. Cave paintings and maps are some of the oldest that we know of and anyone that looks upon them can see what the graphic means and what it is for. A map from today would naturally look different from one in the 18th century, but the message would still be the same. The sea routes from England to Africa or the Caribbean would consist of different names, boundaries, and possessions but the audience would still find the same meaning.
File:Visualinstructions.jpeg  An example of visual instructions.
While there are a number of benefits of visual instructions, there are also some drawbacks. When there are no words included people may interpret graphics differently. Some graphics can be unclear, and this can confuse the intended audience if the process is very detailed and requires pieces that look identical. When the pictures include a lot of different peices it is also necessary to zoom in on difficult parts in order to see them better. Also, if each peice is not drawn to scale, then a circle could represent the top of a table or a washer. There are also certain graphics that not everyone understands. If you work in a field that employs specialized graphics, use these graphics only when communicating with readers in your field who will understand and expect them. If you are using the graphics for a wide audience (such as a board game that may be used for young children to senior citizens), make sure that the graphics you choose can be understood by all.
This "Tips" page is the local manual style (WB:LMOS) for the Energy Efficiency Reference wikibook.
Below you'll find some tips for contributing to this wikibook.
Check your links to make sure they are pointing the correct place, and if you need examples look at past work.
Keep formatting consistent and clean. We want the explanations clear for everyone (not just the author!)
If you can't figure out the wiki code, check out the local help pages or the ones at the MediaWiki wiki.
In physics, a state of matter is one of the distinct forms that matter takes on. Four states of matter are observable in everyday life: solid, liquid, gas, and plasma. Many other states are known to exist only in extreme situations, such as Bose–Einstein condensates, neutron-degenerate matter and quark-gluon plasma, which occur in situations of extreme cold, extreme density and extremely high-energy color-charged matter respectively. Some other states are believed to be possible but remain theoretical for now. Matter is anything that has mass and takes up space.  Atoms, molecules and ions is the matter that makes up all physical substances. Matter is anything that has mass and takes up space. If you are new to the idea of mass, it is the amount of stuff in an object. Matter exists in states: the classical solid, liquid, and gas; as well as the plasma.
The elements in the periodic table appear, at standard situations (P and T) as solid, liquid, or gas (rare elements which have uncertain state are marked with  yellow)
Each substance has physical properties that are different from other substances which include the following:
Physical properties can be observed or measured without compromising the matter.
Chemical properties of matter can be described as "potential" to undergo a chemical change or reaction. For example:
Iron gets rust(iron oxide) when exposed to water. Iron gets run when reacts with oxygen in presence of water or air moisture.
A substance that reacts with another substances is consider active. While the substance that does not react with another substance is inert.
Solids can be considered to be hard as a rock or soft as fur. The key to a solid is that it holds its shape and won't flow like a liquid. A rock will always look like a rock unless something happens to it. The same goes for a diamond. A solid can hold it's shape because they have particles (ions, atoms or molecules) that are closely packed together. In a solid, particles are packed tightly together so they are unable to move about very much. Particles of a solid have very low kinetic energy. The electrons of each atom are in motion, so the atoms have a small vibration, but they are fixed in their position. Solids have a definite shape. They do not conform to the shape of the container in which they are placed. Solids can only change their shape by force, as when broken or cut. They also have a definite volume. The particles of a solid are already so tightly packed together that increasing pressure will not compress the solid to a smaller volume. Solids can be transformed into liquids by melting, and liquids can be transformed into solids by freezing. Solids can also change directly into gases through the process of sublimation, and gases can likewise change directly into solids through deposition.
Example: A cubed ice would be considered a solid
Liquids are a state found between a solid and a gas. An example of a liquid at room temperature are water, blood, and even lemonade.
A liquid is a nearly incompressible fluid that conforms to the shape of its container but retains a (nearly) constant volume independent of pressure.
If you have different types of molecules dissolved in a liquid, it is called a solution. Lemonade is a solution of water, sugar, and lemon, a combination of molecules. In the liquid phase, the particles of a substance have more kinetic energy than those in a solid. The liquid particles are not held in a regular arrangement, but are still very close to each other so liquids have a definite volume. Liquids, like solids, cannot be compressed. The volume is definite if the temperature and pressure are constant. When a solid is heated above its melting point, it becomes liquid, given that the pressure is higher than the triple point of the substance. Particles of a liquid have just enough room to flow around each other, so liquids have an indefinite shape. A liquid will change shape to conform to its container. Force is spread evenly throughout the liquid, so when an object is placed in a liquid, the liquid particles are displaced by the object.
Example:  taking the cubed ice and letting it melt into water would be considered a liquid
Gases are everywhere. A gas can be considered as a compressible fluid. Solid molecules are tightly compacted together, and liquid molecules are little spread out. Gas molecules are very spread out and are full of energy floating around randomly. Gas molecules can fill up any container with no consideration to size or shape. Gas particles have a great deal of space between them (much greater than the molecular size) and have high kinetic energy. The effect of intermolecular forces is small (or zero for an ideal gas). If unconfined, the particles of a gas will spread out indefinitely; if confined, the gas will expand to fill its container. When a gas is put under pressure by reducing the volume of the container, the space between particles is reduced, and the pressure exerted by their collisions increases. If the volume of the container is held constant, but the temperature of the gas increases, then the pressure will also increase. Gas particles have enough kinetic energy to overcome intermolecular forces that hold solids and liquids together, thus a gas has no definite volume and no definite shape. A liquid may be converted to a gas by heating at constant pressure to the boiling point, or else by reducing the pressure at constant temperature.
Example: From the ice cube forming it into a liquid then waiting for it to evaporate would be considered gas
A plasma is a hot ionized gas consisting of approximately equal numbers of positively charged ions and negatively charged electrons. Plasma consists of highly charged particles with extremely high kinetic energy. Positively charged ions swim in a "sea" of freely-moving disassociated electrons, similar to the way such charges exist in conductive metal. In fact it is this electron "sea" that allows matter in the plasma state to conduct electricity. Like a gas, plasma does not have definite shape or volume. The characteristics of plasmas are significantly different from those of ordinary neutral gases so that plasmas are considered a distinct "fourth state of matter." Unlike gases, plasmas are electrically conductive, produce magnetic fields and electric currents, and respond strongly to electromagnetic forces. Plasma is not a common state of matter here on Earth, but may be the most common state of matter in the universe. The plasma state is often misunderstood, but it is actually quite common on Earth, and the majority of people observe it on a regular basis without even realizing it. Lightning, electric sparks, fluorescent lights, neon lights, plasma televisions, some types of flame and the stars are all examples of illuminated matter in the plasma state. The noble gases (helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon and radon) are often used to make glowing signs by using electricity to ionize them to the plasma state. Stars are essentially superheated balls of plasma.
A gas is usually converted to a plasma in one of two ways, either from a huge voltage difference between two points, or by exposing it to extremely high temperatures.
Kunal Saha was a medical doctor retained by the World Bank to examine a program designed to combat the spread of HIV/AIDS in India [1]. However, in May of 2007, Dr. Saha alleged that the kits, paid for by the World Bank and distributed by the National AIDS Control Organization (NACO), frequently produced false negatives and HIV contaminated blood was deemed clean and suitable for distribution [2].
Dr. Saha has initiated efforts to combat poor medical treatment in India and is a self-proclaimed crusader for patients. His involvement with the World Bank and HIV testing kits is only one example of his efforts to safeguard the Indian public. He also serves as an associate professor at Columbus Children's Hospital in Ohio. [3] He consistently travels between Cleveland, OH and Calcutta to make his case against medical negligence. [4]  Dr. Saha founded an organization called People For Better Treatment following the decision of the Supreme Court of India on the medical negligence of doctors in Kolkata, India in the wrongful death of his wife, Anuradha. This organization provides legal support for victims of medical negligence as well as oversees the public health system in India. Dr. Saha fights for both of these causes as he has witnessed the unethical treatment of patients in India.
In 1999, the World Bank allocated $191 million to India for the Second National HIV/AIDS Control Project. The project was aimed at reducing the spread of HIV infection in India and strengthening India's capacity to respond to HIV epidemic on long term basis, specifically targeting high risk groups like female sex workers and injecting drug users, promoting awareness campaigns, and strengthening local hospital and clinic infrastructure. [5] The Second National HIV/AIDS Control Project was administered by NACO, an agency within the Government of India’s Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. NACO delegates responsibilities to local agencies, State AIDS Control Societies, that purchase supplies such as HIV testing kits from independent suppliers. The selection of these partner organizations was supposed to be competitive and transparent to ensure their credibility, yet the evidence suggests corruption in the awarding of supplier contracts.[6] Dr. Saha was asked by the Department of Institutional Integrity to serve as an investigator to examine the status of the Second National AIDS Control Project with respect to HIV/AIDS testing in India and to assess the controls for corruption. [7]
Monozyme India Ltd. was founded on 7th July, 1989 and launched commercial operations on 15th May, 1991. It initially functioned as a private company but converted to a public Ltd. company in 1991. The company has been manufacturing and importing substitute diagnostic kits for the Indian market since the early 90s.[8] In 2006, Monozyme allegedly used genuine blood-test kits as decoy to deceitfully obtain a government supply contract.[9] In 2007, however, the Government of West Bengal claimed that the quality of medical kits supplied by Monozyme were standard. [10] Ironically, the National AIDS Control Organization (NACO) had claimed the complaints about HIV testing kits were confined to  West Bengal in 2006. [2] Furthermore, in the Detailed Implementation Review (DIR) released by the World Bank in 2007, Monozyme was listed as an example of fraudulent and corrupt practices on local contracts. [6] The review stated that the Mumbai District AIDS Control Society (MDACS) awarded the manufacturing contracts of HIV testing kits to Monozyme despite their non-compliant bid submission and fraudulent certificate of good manufracturing practice. MDACS also neglected another company’s offer of a lower-priced bid for the exact same product. [6] Monozyme was involved in corruption and fraudulent acts, demonstrating the poor integrity of government organizations in India which greatly endangered the public health of India.   HIV Test Kits
In late 2006, the Indian media reported that expired HIV testing kits were distributed in West Bengal.[11] The media also reported that pregnancy testing kits and kits designed for other purposes were also distributed as tools to diagnose HIV. [12] According to the Calcutta police, Monozyme was believed to have distributed nearly 200,000 kits to West Bengal hospitals and blood banks starting in April 2006. [12] In addition, the World Bank confessed in their 2007 DIR that 43 facilities in Mumbai, the most populous city in India, had also received the Monozyme test kits, and the MDCAS also received complaints from five different voluntary counseling and testing centers since 2004. [6]
The World Bank’s 2007 DIR revealed that physicians and professors had filed complaints about the Monozyme HIV testing kits as early as in 2004. [6] One of the most common defects reported was that the control band of the testing kit failed to show. Faint testing results and high frequency of false negative results were also observed. In addition, NACO also received complaints about HIV testing kits supplied by Span Diagnostics back in 2002 and by Zhongshan in 2004. [6] Even after these complaints and the media reports in late 2006, NACO and the World Bank did not take action. A NACO spokesperson claimed that the problem was confined in West Bengal that year and NACO had resolved the issue; however, the test data that Dr. Saha collected showed that Monozyme testing kits were still being used in central India six months after NACO’s previous claim. [2] NACO and the World Bank’s negligence and failure in furthering the investigation of the defective HIV testing kits indicated poor ethical standards and lack of professionalism in these organizations.
Dr. Saha presented his findings to the Department of Institutional Integrity at the World Bank, which had retained Dr. Saha. After the presentation, the Senior Institutional Integrity Officer had initially expressed concern over Dr. Saha's findings. [2] The World Bank, instead of investigating Dr. Saha's claims, dismissed allegations in the press. Kees Kostermans, the World Bank's lead public health specialist in South Asia at the time, said in an interview that he believed Saha was "mistaken" and that there was no public health threat associated with the kits. [1]
The World Bank and the Government of India solicited a statement from Dr. Robert Martin, Associate Director at the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) speaking to the kits' accuracy and therefore acceptance for use prior to transfusions. [13] The Press Bureau of the Indian Government cited Dr. Martin’s statement indicating that there was no evidence of use of poor quality HIV test kits in India. [14] However, less than two months after Dr. Martin’s claims, the World Bank issued a Detailed Implementation Report (DIR) in which the World Bank was forced to acknowledge the validity of Dr. Saha’s claims. The DIR also revealed key facts suggesting that the World Bank knew the prevalence of faulty HIV testing kits; one hospital had two years of test results showing that the Monozyme kits yielded an extremely high false negative rate, testing centers had logged complaints that the kits were producing invalid results, and other evidence indicated corrupt procurement practices with regards to test kits and blood bank equipment. [6][15]   Center for Disease Control
Moreover, in 2008, the Government Accountability Project obtained internal documents from the CDC showing that Dr. Martin expressed a number of concerns about the amount of data he was given to refute the Dr. Saha's claims. Dr. Martin was worried that he would give the impression that NACO was purchasing and validating the kits in an appropriate manner, referring to previous conversations he had with NACO on their issues with fraud. One week later, he issued statements to the contrary, criticizing Dr. Saha. These statements strongly suggested that Dr. Martin had been pressured to change his mind. [16]
Since HIV is transmitted through various bodily fluids, the defective kits led to thousands of undiagnosed cases. People who received a false negative test result for the virus spread it to their sexual partners, children, and recipients of their blood (via transfusion), magnifying the original problem rather than reducing the incidence of the disease. In one instance, a 13 year old boy received an HIV and Hepatitis B infected blood transfusion while being treated for lung cancer in an Indian hospital; this instance inspired suo moto legal action by the National Human Rights Commission [17].
Dr. Saha discovered the defective kits while reviewing the World Bank’s Second National AIDS Control Project (NACP-II). The DIR of the NACP-II conducted by the World Bank Group identified the major sources of error leading to the distribution of HIV/AIDS test kits. The DIR revealed deficiencies in recording of financial data by NACO and the regional offices and Non-governmental Organizations (NGOs) that report to NACO, leaving room for bribes, corruption, and fraud. Many factors led to the distribution of invalid HIV/AIDS test kits including lapses in inventory management, and improper transportation and storage of the kits; suspiciously, only a very few number of companies won contracts to distribute kits relative to the number of companies bidding as well [6]. Identification of these errors helped guide the World Bank in the implementation of its subsequent Third National AIDS Control Project (NACP-III), which set strengthening the infrastructure of treatment programs and management of information as two of its major goals [18].
Dr. Saha's organization, People for Better Treatment, has filed a lawsuit against one manufacturer of the HIV testing kits Monozyme India Ltd [19]. Similarly, People For Better Treatment has filed a Public Interest Litigation in Calcutta High Court against members of the West Bengal Health Ministry, as many children received HIV-infected blood transfusions in this area [20].   Supreme Court of India
Dr. Saha also took his complaints to the Delhi High Court, where he filed a lawsuit against the National AIDS Control Organisation. [21]. The Delhi High Court ordered NACO to ensure that they comply with the recommendations made by Professor John Parry in his review of the NACO program after Dr. Saha made his allegations. However, Dr. Saha argues that NACO cannot conduct a fair investigation of itself with a history of minimizing, dismissing, or ignoring the allegations waged against it. Thus, Dr. Saha has field a Special Leave Petition with the Supreme Court of India. [22]
Dr. Saha performed his duty to the highest of his ability. In assessing the NACP-II program, he reported his findings to his superiors at the World Bank, and in doing so, expected them to remedy the situation. When the World Bank did not, he made the case public and found his superiors soliciting statements to protect the reputation of the World Bank and the Indian government. Dr. Saha's reputation was put on the line, but he acted as a true professional in coming forward when he believed there was wrongdoing.
↑ a b Carrie Johnson. (2007). Doctor Presses Bank on HIV Tests. The Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/09/27/AR2007092702320.html.
↑ a b c d Government Accountability Project. (2008). India & HIV. http://whistleblower.org/program-areas/international-reform/world-bank/india-a-hiv.
↑ http://www.whistleblower.org/program-areas/international-reform/world-bank/india-a-hiv
↑ http://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2002-03-09/kolkata/27107893_1_medical-negligence-anuradha-saha
↑ http://www.nacoonline.org/About_NACO/
↑ a b c d e f g h World Bank Group Department of Institutional Integrity. (2008). Detailed Implementation Review, India Health Sector. Retrieved February 26, 2012, from http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTDOII/Resources/WB250_Web_Vol2_012408.pdf
↑ http://www.whistleblower.org/program-areas/international-reform/world-bank/india-a-hiv
↑ Dion Global Solutions Limited. (2008). Monozyme India Company Background. http://www.moneycontrol.com/company-facts/monozymeindia/history/MI17#MI17
↑ Ghanshyam Sarda. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ghanshyam_Sarda
↑ Calcutta Reporter. (2007). Central Lab Gives Clean Chit To Test Kits in Ghanshyam Sarda Vs. Government of West Bengal Case. http://www.pressbox.co.uk/detailed/Legal/Central_Lab_Gives_Clean_Chit_To_Test_Kits_in_Ghanshyam_Sarda_Vs._Government_of_West_Bengal_Case_125823.html
↑ Obsolete diagnostic kits sold to city blood bank. (2006). The Times of India. http://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2006-09-29/kolkata/27813119_1_diagnostic-kits-sarda-group-govind-sarda
↑ a b Two accused over 'fake' HIV tests. (2006). BBC News. http://news.bbc.co.uk/go/pr/fr/-/2/hi/south_asia/6099064.stm
↑  Government Accountability Project (2008). World Bank Corruption: WB Action “Too Little, Too Late” to Correct HIV Corruption Bank Uses CDC in Cover-Up; India Project Riddled With Wrongdoing. UNDP Watch. http://undpwatch.blogspot.com/2008/03/world-bank-corruption-wb-action-too.html
↑ Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (2007). HIV Counselling and testing under the National AIDS Control Programme. Press Information Bureau, Government of India. http://pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=34037
↑ http://www.whistleblower.org/program-areas/international-reform/world-bank/india-a-hiv
↑ Robert Martin (2007). http://www.whistleblower.org/storage/documents/keycdcfoiadocs.pdf
↑ National Human Rights Commission. (2009). NHRC takes suo-motu cognizance of media reports on boy getting HIV infected blood at a Delhi Hospital. Retrieved April 22, 2012, from http://nhrc.nic.in/disparchive.asp?fno=1667
↑  West Bengal State AIDS Prevention & Control Society. (2010). Annual Report 2009-10. Retrieved February 26, 2012, from http://www.wbhealth.gov.in/wbsapcs/report/Annual%20Report09-10Final.pdf
↑ People for Better Treatment. (2011). HIV Infection Of Children Through Contaminated Blood Transfusion: PBT Urges World Bank And Indian Government To Act. Retrieved April 23, 2012, from http://pbtindia.com/archives/1187
↑ Indian Health News. (2007). Patient Rights Body Seeks Immediate Probe Into Bogus HIV-kits Scam in Bengal. Retrieved April 23, 2012, from http://www.medindia.net/news/Patient-Rights-Body-Seeks-Immediate-Probe-into-Bogus-HIV-kits-Scam-in-Bengal-25658-1.htm
↑ Kunal Saha. (2008). Bogus HIV Kits: A Historic Case Filed Against NACO. Retrieved April 23, 2012, from http://www.nriinternet.com/NRIdoctors/A_USA/A_Z/S/Kunal_Saha/2008/11_Bogus_HIV_kit.htm
↑ http://www.whistleblower.org/program-areas/international-reform/world-bank/india-a-hiv
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inflammatory disease charecterised by joint swelling, joint tenderness and destruction of synovial joints, leading to severe disability.[1] In Australia the estimated prevalance of RA is 0.6%[2] of total population with approximately three quarters of the patients being female and a significantly higher rate of RA in patients aged 65–74 years (0.8 per 100 encounters).[1] Although rheumatoid arthritis is not intrinsically fatal, life expectancy is reduced by an average of 3 to 18 years,[3] and 80% of patients with rheumatoid arthritis are disabled after 20 years with the disease.[4] Deaths from infection occur twenty times more frequently in patients with rheumatoid arthritis [5] The most frequent causes of death in patients suffering rheumatoid arthritis is cardiovascular disease and cancer.
Physical exercise is the most important and clinically relevant countermeasure against rheumatoid arthritis, but must be prescribed with the patient’s disease status, overall health, and safety in mind. Skeletal muscle strength training with weights has been shown to be particularly effective for countering the loss of muscle strength and concomitant functional losses caused by rheumatoid arthritis.[6]
Improved muscle strength and tone to protect your joints from injury. It also helps you maintain flexibility and balance and helps you remain independent as you age.
Weight management and increased muscle-to-fat ratios as you gain muscle, your body burns more kilojoules when at rest.
Greater stamina as you grow stronger, you won’t get tired as easily.
Prevention or control of chronic conditions such as diabetes, heart disease, arthritis, back pain, depression and obesity.
Pain management.
Improved mobility and balance.
Improved posture.
Decreased risk of injury.
Increased bone density and strength.
Improved sense of wellbeing resistance training may boost your self-confidence, increased self-esteem and improve your body image and your mood.
Improved sleep and avoidance of insomnia.
Enhance performance of everyday tasks.[7]
Resistance training should only be prescribed to patients with a well controlled case of rheumatoid athritits to avoid further joint swelling/damage and pain. All patients should complete a pre-exercise screening under the guidance of a clinical physician. Exercise intensity and weight progression should be in constant consultation with the patients current disease status and their level of pain, stop resistance training immediately if flaring or excessive swelling occurs.
Body weight exercises- E.g. Push ups, Sit ups, Lunges, Body weight squats.
Free weights- E.g. Bench press, Dumbell shoulder press, Deadlifts.
Weight machines- E.g. Seated row, Lat pull down, Leg extensions.
Resistance bands- E.g. Theraband shoulder rotations, VMO single leg squats.
Isometric exercises- E.g. Plank bridge, Isometric bicep curl, Isometric shoulder raise.
Skeletal muscle strength training goal for people suffering RA is 80% of maximum amount of weight that can be lifted with each muscle group in one-repetition.[8]
Patients should be shown correct technique to avoid further damage or injury's.
All resistance training should be undertaken with the guidance of a qualified physician or personal trainer.
To continue the improvement and benefits from resistance training the following principles must be applied;
Increase the number of repetitions.
Increase your workout by 10 or 15 minutes.
Increase the frequency of workouts, keeping in mind that each muscle needs at least 48 hours of recovery time.
Switch to different exercises – for example, focus on exercises that use multiple muscle groups and that are functional or specific in nature, meaning that they relate to activities of daily living.
Increase the weight by about five to 10 per cent.
Change your workout about every four to eight weeks to keep your muscles guessing.[7]
Every person with RA should have a regular exercise program specifically tailored to their abilities and needs. The goal of regular exercise is to achieve and maintain optimal health and physical functioning. Regular exercise, including exercises for strengthening muscles, stretching (range of motion), building endurance, and improving coordination and balance, can be useful in managing many of the symptoms that commonly affect people with RA, including fatigue, stiffness, pain, and weakness. Regular exercise is an important key for maintaining joint and bone health.[9] Resistance training should be used in conjuction with aerobic exercise and flexibility or range of movement training but to achieve maximum benefits from strength training the patient needs to be completing a strength based session two to three times a week. The primary goal of resistance training in patients suffering from RA is to improve their life quality and daily functioning therefore all resistance exercise should show a direct relation to an everyday function E.g. single leg squats to improve the ability to get on and off the couch.
Arthritis organisation Australia: http://www.arthritis.org.au/
My Joint pain: https://www.myjointpain.org.au/
Rheumatoid arthritis: http://rheumatoidarthritis.net/exercise/
Arthritis foundation: http://www.arthritistoday.org
↑ a b Charles, J., Britt, H. & Pan, Y. 2013, "Rheumatoid arthritis", Australian Family Physician, vol. 42, no. 11, pp. 765.
↑ Harrison C, Britt H, Miller G, Henderson J. Prevalence of chronic conditions in Australia. PLoS ONE 2013;8:e67494
↑ T. Pincus, L.F. Callahan. Taking mortality in rheumatoid arthritis seriously—predictive markers, socioeconomic status and comorbidity. Rheumatol, 13 (1986), pp. 841–845
↑ D.L. Scott, D.P. Symmons, B.L. Coulton, A.J. Popert. Long-term outcome of treating rheumatoid arthritis: results after 20 years. Lancet, 1 (1987), pp. 1108–1111
↑ D.P.M. Symmons. Mortality in rheumatoid arthritis. Br J Rheumatol, 27 (1988), pp. 44–54
↑ Walsmith, J. & Roubenoff, R. 2002, "Cachexia in rheumatoid arthritis", International journal of cardiology, vol. 85, no. 1, pp. 89-99.
↑ a b Better health channel. 2014. Resistance training health benefits . [ONLINE] Available at: http://www.betterhealth.vic.gov.au/bhcv2/bhcarticles.nsf/pages/Resistance_training_the_health_benefits. [Accessed 01 October 14].
↑ L.C. Rall, R. Roubenoff. Benefits of exercise for patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Nutr Clin Care, 3 (2000), pp. 209–215
↑ .Rheumatoid arthritis.net. 2013. Exercises for Rheumatoid arthritis . [ONLINE] Available at: http://rheumatoidarthritis.net/exercise/. [Accessed 01 October 14].
In other worlds, as in ours, gods, spirits and beings have fates due to the actions they take based on their own will and wisdom.
I know that I hung on Yggdrasil
Consecrated to Oðin
And from that tree I fell.
Runes you shall know, and readable staves,
Very powerful staves, Very great staves
Graven by the mighty one who speaks
Alvitter (all-knowing) among etins,
Know how to carve,  know how to read,
Front Page: Radiation Oncology | RTOG Trials | Randomized Trials
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma: Main Page  | Randomized
Diffuse large B-cell |
Nodal marginal zone |
Anaplastic large cell |
Can present either as Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) or as lymphoblastic lymphoma (LBL)
Lymphoblastic lymphoma seen more commonly in children and adolescents -- account for 1/2 of pediatric lymphomas.
May spread to gonads or CNS "sanctuary sites.
Can be either T-cell precursor or B-cell precursor:
Most commonly presents as ALL, rarely as LBL
Commonly bone marrow failure; clinical signs pallor, fatigue, bleeding, fever, infection; labs cytopenias
Extranodal sites commonly involved (hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, CNS disease, testicular enlargement, cutaneous infiltration)
Adverse features: very high WBC, symptomatic CNS disease, unfavorable cytogenic abnormalities (eg t(9;22))
Commonly high WBC counts, mediastinal mass, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly
Can present with bone marrow failure, although typically less severe than precursor B-cell ALL/LBL
Common presentation is young men with mediastinal mass/pleural effusions
The command line interface (CLI or terminal) may seem intimidating at first, but it's important to remember that the command line is really, truly your friend. An army of tools are at your disposal that can take what would be a tedious and lengthy job (like removing the last four characters from every line of a lengthy file) and turn it into a two minute job.
For every Linux distribution the command line prompt will look a little different. For example, on one system you might see your username, the '@' symbol, the machine name, your current directory and the prompt.
This is a very common prompt. You may also see your username, a space, the fully qualified domain name of the computer, the full path to your present working directory followed by the prompt. In the example above 'user' is the username and 'linux' is the name of the host(computer) you are logged on.
The prompt varies from system to system based on a number of things. For example, it may be the default configuration set by the creators of your particular Linux distribution. It could also have been configured by the person who administors the computer. Maybe you, yourself, configured how you wanted your prompt to look.
The way you configure the look of your command prompt depends on what shell you use and the shell is the piece that most people commonly refer to as "the command line" when, in reality, it is simply a piece of software that provides an interface to the services of a kernel. The distinction between a 'shell' and the 'command line' is simply that a shell refers to a specific piece of software (e.g BASH, Tch, ksh, etc) that provides a command line interface. Most modern Linux systems use BASH (Bourne Again SHell) as the default shell.
The commands used at the command line may seem a little cryptic due to their tendency to be very short. This is because the roots of the Linux command line are from systems where a single letter entry could take a significant amount of time to travel from a terminal, to a central server and back to the terminal where it was printed onto a roll of paper. In those old systems, the shorter the input was, the better as it meant less time waiting to issue your command and receive output. The best thing you can do to remember what commands stand for is to find out what word the command is an abbreviation for. This can go a long way to remembering the command later.
For help about a command, try man <command> which will bring up the manual for it. Note that some commands are built into your shell and do not have a man page, use your interpreter internal command (should be help <command>).
Afilez  Report.doc  aFilea  finances.xls  myPic.jpg  report1.doc  vacation pictures
You may notice from the example, default output of 'ls' that the files are not in strict alphabetical order. This is because the output is sorted on the numeric ASCII value of each letter. Because upper case letters have a lower ASCII value than lowercase letters, the returned result will always be files starting with upper case letters first. For example, if we add the file AZTRIP to the directory we will get 'AZTRIP' as the file listed first followed by 'Afilez' because the ASCII value of 'Z' is numerically lower than the ASCII value of 'f'.
If the ASCII values of letters has you confused, the important thing to remember here is that uppercase letters trump lowercase letters and will appear first in listings. The result is that files are first sorted by case and sorted alphabetically second.
The default output of ls isn't as useful as it could be. For example, given the output in the example, we don't know what are files and what are directories. We can likely guess that "Afilez", "aFilea" and "vacation pictures" are all directories as they don't have an extension after the file name. To confirm this, we can pass the 'l' parameter to 'ls' to get "long listing format" output.
-rw-r--r-- 1 adrong mkgroup-l-d 163328 Jul 24 11:42 AZTRIP
-rw-r--r-- 1 adrong mkgroup-l-d  11264 Jul 24 11:42 Afilez
-rw-r--r-- 1 adrong mkgroup-l-d  22528 Jul 24 11:43 Report.doc
-rw-r--r-- 1 adrong mkgroup-l-d  24576 Jul 24 11:42 aFilea
-rw-r--r-- 1 adrong mkgroup-l-d 300032 Jul 24 11:43 finances.xls
-rw-r--r-- 1 adrong mkgroup-l-d  47104 Jul 24 11:41 myPic.jpg
-rw-r--r-- 1 adrong mkgroup-l-d  17920 Jul 24 11:43 report1.doc
The first character in the output above indicates the file type; where a dash indicates a file and the letter 'd' indicates a directory. From this output we see that the only directory is "vacation pictures"
Most systems have an alias on the ls command to include the '--color' flag so that the command highlights different file types with different colors. Directories are commonly shown in blue. If the output of your 'ls' command is always the same color, try "ls --color".
Another common parameter (also known as an "argument") to the ls command is 'a' which shows all files including any hidden files and folders that start with a period. Arguments may also be combined together in a single block of letters. For example, "ls -l -a" can also be expressed as "ls -la".
The cd command lets you navigate from directory to directory on your system. The first thing you may need to know when using the cd command is that, unlike windows, Linux does not use the concept of drive letters. Instead, everything is somewhere within the root directory, '/', including other disk drives.
There's a couple ways to use cd to navigate to the directory you want. These are known as "full path" and "relative path".
Full path always begins with the root directory '/'. For example, if we're in our home directory '/home/user' and we want to navigate to the 'vacation pictures' directory, we would issue the following command.
You may note that our prompt changed a little to indicate the directory we're currently in. This will be the case on most systems, but as previously discussed, this depends on how your shell is configured. You may also note the backslash between "vacation" and " pictures". This backslash is known as the "escape character" and tells the cd command that the space is part of the directory name. If we omitted the backslash, the cd command would error and tell us that it could not find the directory "vacation". If you don't like typing backslash or have a directory name with many spaces in it, you can use quotation marks around the path.
Relative path can start a number of ways, but always describes how to get to a specific directory from the directory you're currently in. To do this, we need to know how to move to directories that immediately surround the directory. These directories are parent directories and sub-directories
A sub-directory is any directory that is contained within the directory we're currently. Given the output below of "ls -l", we see that chicago, florida and "new york" are all sub-directories to the "vacation pictures" directory.
A parent directory is the directory that contains the folder that we are in. This makes the "vacation pictures" folder the parent of the "chicago", "florida" and "new york" directories.
To cd to a sub-directory, you can start the path name with "./" which indicates the directory we're already in, or you can immediately start with the name of the sub-directory. For example, both of the following commands will change you to the "florida" directory.
To cd to a parent directory, you always specify "../". The following command will return us to the "vacation pictures" directory.
If we are already in the "chicago" directory and want to cd to "new york", we must first tell the system we want to go up one level to the parent directory and then to the "new york" directory. We can do this by saying "cd ../" and then "cd new\ york" or we can do it as one step using the command below.
Notice how we used quotation marks around the path to cd to the "new york" directory. We could have, instead used the backslash before the space and omitted the quotes to get the same result.
Similar to "./" and "../", there's also "~/" which indicates the home directory of the user we're logged in as. If we wanted to cd to the "vacation pictures" folder while in the "/usr/lib" directory, we could do this with any of the following commands.
Using the cd command without specifying a directory will return you to your home directory.
$cp -frvp /source /destination
-copy file named "exam" to directory named "test"
-copy file named "exam" to current directory (note period at end of command line)
-copy all files beginning with "p" to reports directory
-can reverse p* to *p for files ending with "p"
X = execute only if user already has execute
s = set user or group id on execution
u = permission granted to user who owns file
g = permissions granted to group members
o = permissions granted to users other than "u" or "g"
4 = read                   examples: 7 = 4+2+1  will show "rwx"
1 = execute                          5 = 4+1    will show "r-x"
Usage:  chmod 755 FileName          <--- change file permissions
Usage:  chmod -R 755 DirectoryName  <--- change directory permissions recursively
Note: first character in permissions show what kind of file
b, c, or q = device files
Usage: chmod g+w filename
In addition, three extra permission may be assigned:
u +-= s  : Set UserID, run as if file-owner
g +-= s  : Set GroupID, run as if file-group
o +-= t  : Set "sticky bit", keep executable in swap-space - can only be set by root (no longer supported by Linux-kernel)
g +-= s  : Set GroupID, files in directory inherits directory's group
o +-= t  : Set "sticky bit", limits the ability to remove a file in a world-writeable directory (like /tmp) to the file's owner.
VI/M uses 2 modes in which to process text.  To process the various commands available
Start Vi     vi     [From command line]
Usage:  :wq  [will save and exit document]
Useful tid bit to remove EOL characters from DOS file
[use key sequence "<ctrl v><ctrl m>" together for EOL char]
:1,.   = All lines from start of file to current (included)
:.,$   = All lines from current to end of file (inclusive)
:.-2   = Single line 2 lines before current line
:10,20 w abc <enter>    = Write lines 10,20 to new file abc
:r abc       <enter>    = Reads contents of file abc into working file
:set number             to disable  :set nonumber
:1,10w abc     [puts lines 1~10 into file abc]
Change working file from current to file abc [be sure to save first]
Read abc file into working file after cursor
:!cmd    [where cmd is could be a bash command]
Example ->    :r !date   [inserts time and date at prompt]
Enable syntax option for programming source text highlighting
:syntax enable      To disable = :syntax off
0  [zero] = Move to beginning of line
G         = Go to end of file
5G        = Move to beginning of 5th line
.         = Repeat last command
A         = Append input at end of line [same as above, but one less key stroke]
/         = Bottom of screen type search string and <enter> will move
-#  Number of copies [example "-2" for 2 copies]
-c  Make copy before print
-d : forces double spacing
-l : Change number of lines per page | default=66
Disk space usage: du -h <dir>
File System (mounted) Disks space usage: df
List partitions: fdisk -l <disk>
See next article: Future/Emergence of India2.
The Republic of India could be considered as one of the emerging future superpowers [1]
[4]. However, facing many problems, it has a long way to go to realise its potential.
Bollywood - India's film industry, often known as "Bollywood", produces more feature films than any other (though not all of great quality) [5]. In a year, it sold 3.6 billion tickets, more than any other film industry in the world ( In comparison, Hollywood sold 2.6 billion tickets in a year) [6].
Unity in Diversity of world view - The scale of multi-ethnic, multi-lingual, multi-religious people trying  to cohabitate here is unparalleled in the world. The subcontinent's long and diverse history has given it a unique eclectic culture, claimed to be one of its great intangible assets. It is also often associated with spirituality. India's diversity forces it to either evolve strong foundations of tolerance and survive, or face break-up. The Indian public is now also accepting western influences in their society & media - and what is emerging is a confluence of its past local culture with the new western culture ("Social Glocalisation"). For some futuristic social thinkers, the miscegenation of diverse ancient culture with modernity, spirituality with science/technology, eastern with western world-view is potentially making India a social laboratory for the evolution of futuristic global-unity consciousness [9] [10][11]. If, and only if, everything evolves right, then South Asia could emerge as a soft super-power, by being the biggest melting pot of human ethnicities, languages, cultures, religions, ideologies & world view.
People and things · Les gens et les choses
Grammar · Gender of nouns, definite and indefinite articles, liaison
To be · Être
Grammar · Subject pronouns, introduction to verbs, être, de    , à
Grammar · Adjectives, demonstrative adjectives
Grammar · Avoir, possession, possessive adjectives    , questions
Grammar · -er verbs, le, la, and les, lui and leur
Grammar · Habiter, faire, me, te, nous, and vous
Grammar · Negation, aller, à
Grammar · -ir verbs, prendre, de    , possessive adjectives
Grammar · Regular -re verbs, beau, nouveau, and vieux
Grammar · Questions, conjunctions, lui and leur
When the noun is understood in the context, it can be omitted – but adjectives can't stand alone. In these cases, demonstrative pronouns are used. As shown below, demonstrative pronouns are almost exactly the same as demonstrative adjectives – but there's an accent on the stressed syllable. These accents are actually optional.
Sometimes a demonstrative pronoun refers to something abstract, not referring to any specific noun. Thus it doesn't have a gender, so neither can the demonstrative pronoun: the neuter form is used. Notice that the neuter form does not have accent marks.
Observing the Sky from 30°S
Celestial map for July 1, 10:00 pm, from 30°S. South is up and North is down. On the left there is the detailed map, on the right there is an illustration of the sky as it appears.
The gmtime() function returns the given time in Coordinated Universal Time (usually Greenwich mean time), unless it's not supported by the system, in which case NULL is returned. Watch out for the static return.
Evaluation team fully considered our organization's core competencies.
Evaluation team had a clear understanding of our core and non-core capabilities.
Great care was taken to ensure the outsourcing decision was consistent with the business unit's competitive and operations strategy.
Consideration was given to capabilities that may be important in the future.
The extent to which the outsourcing decision would impact future strategic options or alternatives was fully evaluated.
Handley/Benton (2009): Unlocking the business outsourcing process model. Journal of Operations Management, Vol. 27, No. 5, pp. 344–361.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
Messier 110[1]Observation data (w:J2000 epoch)Constellation
Andromeda[2]Right ascension
00h 40m 22.1s[3]Declination
E5 pec[3]Apparent magnitude (V)
Messier 110 (also known as M110 and NGC 205) is a w:dwarf elliptical galaxy that is a satellite of the w:Andromeda Galaxy.[4]  M110 contains some dust and hints of recent star formation, which is unusual for dwarf elliptical galaxies in general.[4]
M110 was serendipitously discovered on August 10, 1773 by w:Charles Messier, who was making observations of the Andromeda Galaxy at the time.[5]  The galaxy was independently discovered by w:Caroline Herschel on August 27, 1783; her brother w:William Herschel described her discovery in 1785.[5]  Although the galaxy was not originally included in Messier's first catalogue, it was later added by w:Kenneth Glyn Jones in 1966.[5][6]  M110 remains the last object added to the Messier catalog.
↑ McConnachie, A. W.; Irwin, M. J.; Ferguson, A. M. N.; Ibata, R. A.; Lewis, G. F.; Tanvir, N. (2005). "Distances and metallicities for 17 Local Group galaxies". Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 356 (4):  979–997. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2004.08514.x. http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-bib_query?bibcode=2005MNRAS.356..979M.
↑ R. W. Sinnott, editor (1988). The Complete New General Catalogue and Index Catalogue of Nebulae and Star Clusters by J. L. E. Dreyer. Sky Publishing Corporation and Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-933-34651-4.
↑ a b c d e f g h "NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database". Results for NGC 205. http://nedwww.ipac.caltech.edu/. Retrieved 2006-11-29.
↑ a b A. Sandage, J. Bedke (1994). Carnegie Atlas of Galaxies. Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Institution of Washington. ISBN 0-87279-667-1.
↑ a b c K. G. Jones (1991). Messier's Nebulae and Star Clusters (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-37079-5.
↑ Hartmut Frommert and Christine Kronberg (w:August 30, w:2007). "Messier Object 110". Students for the Exploration and Development of Space. Archived from the original on 1999-04-20. http://web.archive.org/web/19990420030114/http://seds.org/messier/m/m110.html. Retrieved 2007-10-14.
↑ van den Bergh, Sidney (April 2000), "Updated Information on the Local Group", The Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific 112 (770):  529–536, doi:10.1086/316548, http://adsabs.harvard.edu/cgi-bin/nph-bib_query?bibcode=2000PASP..112..529V
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Messier 110
v • d • e Messier Index
M1 • M2 • M3 • M4 • M5 • M6 • M7 • M8 • M9 • M10 • M11 • M12 • M13 • M14 • M15 • M16 • M17 • M18 • M19 • M20 • M21 • M22 • M23 • M24 • M25 • M26 • M27 • M28 • M29 • M30 • M31 • M32 • M33 • M34 • M35 • M36 • M37 • M38 • M39 • M40 • M41 • M42 • M43 • M44 • M45 • M46 • M47 • M48 • M49 • M50 • M51 • M52 • M53 • M54 • M55 • M56 • M57 • M58 • M59 • M60 • M61 • M62 • M63 • M64 • M65 • M66 • M67 • M68 • M69 • M70 • M71 • M72 • M73 • M74 • M75 • M76 • M77 • M78 • M79 • M80 • M81 • M82 • M83 • M84 • M85 • M86 • M87 • M88 • M89 • M90 • M91 • M92 • M93 • M94 • M95 • M96 • M97 • M98 • M99 • M100 • M101 • M102 • M103 • M104 • M105 • M106 • M107 • M108 • M109 • M110
Figure 1. Example of a ScriptsMap
A "ScriptsMap" is a tool for sequencing individual scripts into a well-coordinated plan for a group model building workshop. It serves as a framework for "effectively combining particular sequences of scripted activities, products, and deliverables into a formal network" which facilitators can utilize to design appropriate and effective workshops based on their desired outcomes (Hovmand et. al., 2011; Ackermann et. al., 2010).
While the 'ScriptsMap' provides the framework for organizing individual scripts into a well-integrated plan, it is important to be clear of the design logic underlying the sequencing of those scripts. The design logic refers to the rationale for arranging individual scripts in a particular order. Ideally, the ordering of scripts should be aligned with the final outputs of the workshop that the facilitating team hopes to produce. In some cases, the facilitating team might also consider alternating divergent scripts and convergent scripts so as to allow discussion related to the participants' mental models, and then to facilitate consensus-building.
Ackermann, Fran, David F. Andersen, Colin Eden, and George P. Richardson. (2010). ScriptsMap: A tool for designing multi-method policy-making workshops. Omega, 39, 427-434.
Hovmand, P., Rouwette, E. A. J. A., Andersen, D. F., Richardson, G. P., Calhoun, A., Rux, K., & Hower, T. (2011). Scriptapedia: a handbook of scripts for developing structured group model building sessions.
The Los Angeles metropolitan area hosts a number of rail transportation systems, the most notable of which are Metro Rail (operated by LACMTA, the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority), Metrolink (a commuter rail system serving the greater Los Angeles area), and Amtrak Pacific Surfliner (an Amtrak line serving San Diego, Los Angeles, and San Luis Obispo).
This book is designed to instruct readers on how to get around Los Angeles by rail.
Metro Rail Stations  (this is a redirect to /Metro Rail/Stations)
Metrolink Stations (this is a redirect to /Metrolink/Stations)
San Diego Sprinter & Coaster Tourist Attractions
Any additional categories would be appreciated.
This project is coming along very well.  In this section, major achievements are listed by month.  This timeline was last updated September 14, 2011.
Metro Rail developed to 50% (current stage)
Metro Red Line, Metro Purple Line, Metro Green Line, Metro Blue Line, Metro Gold Line developed to 25%
Stations developed to 25%
Metro Rail Transfer Stations, Imperial/Wilmington, 7th Street/Metro Center developed to 25% (current stage)
Metro Green Line, Metro Blue Line, Metro Gold Line developed to 50% (current stage)
Stations developed to 75% (current stage)
Metro Red Line and Metro Purple Line developed to 50% (current stage)
Metro Rail Transfer Stations, Imperial/Wilmington, 7th Street/Metro Center improved to 50% (current stage)
Metro Rail currently has an acceptable amount of information for now (expansions are always welcome).  At the moment, it might be preferable to start the Metrolink pages.
However, Metro Rail still lacks information about the fares in "/The Savvy Traveler/Fares and Passes" and an article about the tourist attractions in LA County at "/Major LA Tourist Attractions/Metro Rail Tourist Attractions."
Finally, route maps need to be implemented across the book on most pages that discuss lines (e.g. Green Line and 91 Line (future).
Thanks for all your help!
v • d • e Getting around Los Angeles by RailMetro Rail
7th Street/Metro CenterCommuter Rail
San Diego Sprinter & Coaster Tourist AttractionsThe Savvy Traveler
Wikipedia has related information at Fencing (sport)
The modern sport of fencing is played at many levels, from students learning at a university to professional and Olympic competition. The sport is primarily played in a duel format, one fencer dueling another.
These duels usually take place at tournaments. The early rounds of a competition which establish seeding for the final round will usually be "five touch" bouts, meaning the first fencer to score five touches on the other fencer wins the bout. From the first round fencers will be seeded and the knockout round of the competition will commence.  In this it is normal to fence until the first fencer reaches 15.  However both the seeding round or rounds and the final will have a time constraint and so a bout may finish without the full number of points scored.  The winner is then the fencer with the highest score.
The foil is the lightest of the three weapons. It will be the weapon that most instructors will expect students to master before they move to any other weapon.
Foil fencing introduces the concept of 'right of way.'  An attacker must establish right of way before scoring a valid point. One establishes right of way by extending the blade in a straight line toward the opponent's target area.  Until the opponent is able to regain right of way, he/she is on the defensive.  Right of way can be gained by parrying (redirecting the opponent's thrust) outside the target area and then extending one's own blade toward the opponent.  This counter-attack is termed a 'riposte.'  A fencing point often consists of an attack, a riposte, a counter-riposte, and further counter-ripostes in series until a point is scored.  Reflecting the dueling origins of modern (European) fencing, action stops after a valid touch and the fencers return to their original position at the center of the strip.
In modern sabre, which is modeled after the cavalry sabre, touches are scored with hits to the head, torso and arms (hands and groin are specifically not target though). Sabre is a slashing weapon, therefore the edge of the blade is generally used to score points, though the point can be used also. This weapon is also governed by the rules of right-of-way, interpreted in the same way as the foil.
The sabre tends to be the fastest and most athletic of the three modern weapons. Fencers engage each other very quickly and the engagements rarely go beyond a few actions. Sabre fencers have had to adapt their tactics to a semi-recent rule that forbids them to bring the rear foot forward of the front. This prevents a type of attack called the fleche, which is a combination of a leap and a run. Fencers have adapted by creating the "flunge,' which is essentially jumping at your opponent. Many sabre matches consist of the two fencers leaping at each other, the weapon is dominated by the quickest and most effective motions.
Epee is the heaviest of the three weapons and beginners, used to foil, often find this an issue in moving to this weapon.  The lack of right-of-way rule also requires unlearning.
Epee fencing is a bit of a departure from foil and sabre fencing. Epee was created as a reaction to foil fencing with the idea of creating a competition more like a "real" duel. The rules are modeled after the French practice of dueling to first blood drawn; touches may be scored anywhere on the body. Because no system exists for establishing the priority of an attack, both fencers may score a point simultaneously, called a 'double-touch,' as long as the hits arrive within .5 seconds of each other.
This is a topical index to the Muggles' Guide.  You can improve the Muggles' Guide by indexing more topics. A list of all modules in this wikibook can be found here.
Top - 0–9  A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
Crouch, Barty Jr.
Barty Crouch Jr.
Grubbly-Plank, Wilhelmina
Lovegood, Xeno / Xenophilius
Number 4 Privet Drive, Little Whinging, Surrey
Office of Detection and Confiscation of Counterfeit Defensive Spells and Protective Objects
Riddle Manor, Little Hangleton
Maggots Maggots, Flies and Midges
A maggot is the larval stage of the fly life cycle, though sometimes "maggot" is used to refer to the larval stage of any insect. Many maggots feed on carrion and other wastes, but some are crop pests and others are predators and parasites.
Maggots are generally 4 to 12 mm in length depending on their stage of growth.  Most maggots range from an off-white color to a light brown, though some can be a yellow or reddish color.  Maggots have one pair of tiny hook-like parts to aid in feeding and have no legs.
The adults are easily recognized since this is the only order of insects that has only one pair of wings ("Diptera" meaning 2 wings).
Pest maggots can be leaf or root feeders, borers, or leaf miners.
The fly life cycle is composed of four stages: egg, larva (commonly known as a maggot), pupa, and adult. Most feeding is done in the maggot stage.
MCS-052 Principles of Management and Information Systems
Front -- also called the top plate, table, or belly. It is the top of the violin when the strings are facing upward. The front is often carved from spruce.
Back -- also called the back plate. This component is opposite the front. The back of the violin acts as a soundboard, resonating the vibrations from the instrument and bouncing the sound waves back to the front through the sound holes. The back is typically made of maple.
Ribs -- are the walls connecting the front and back of the violin.
Body -- of the violin refers to the front, back and ribs of the violin.
Purflings -- are inlays running around the edge of the spruce top that provide some protection against cracks originating at the edge. It also allows the top to flex more independently from the rib structure.
Scroll -- is the decoratively carved part above the pegbox.
Pegbox -- holds the tuning pegs, and within it, each violin string is coiled around a tuning peg.
Tuning Pegs -- are turned to tighten or loosen the violin string which raises or lowers the pitch of the string respectively. The tuning pegs are located on either side of the pegbox.
Fingerboard -- is a wood piece under the strings that extends from the pegbox to the area before the bridge. A player's fingers press the string against the fingerboard to change the note being played.
Neck -- is the area between the pegbox and the violin's body. A player's left hand reaches around the neck while playing.
Bridge -- is a carved wood piece that suspends the violin's strings over the fingerboard. The top of the bridge, which holds the strings, is arced which allows the strings to be bowed individually. The bridge stands on two feet and has a heart-shaped hole in its center. It is set directly between the two center notches in the F-holes.
F-Holes -- also called sound holes, they are f-shaped holes in the violin's front plate on either side of the bridge that allow the resonating sound inside the violin to escape.
Tailpiece -- holds the strings. Its other end is attached to the button on the bottom of the violin. The tailpiece can be installed with fine tuners.
Fine Tuner --  is a little screw mechanism that can be attached to the tailpiece and holds one end of a violin string. Fine tuners allow small adjustments to be made to the tension of the violin's strings in order to tune precisely. Not all violins have fine tuners installed. Advanced players may have a single fine tuner on the E string or none at all.
Chinrest -- This is where the chin of the musician is placed. It is important to support the violin against the shoulder/collarbone of the musician.
The text of this book is released under the following license:
Beginner warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Chapter 9: The Writing on the Wall
The second book in the Harry Potter series, Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets is written from the point-of-view of the now-12-year-old Harry Potter. The book's title refers to a chamber which was, according to legend, created somewhere in Hogwarts castle by one of the founders, Salazar Slytherin, when he departed Hogwarts; much of the book's action revolves around that chamber, and what may be inside it, if, in fact, it actually exists.
In Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, we begin to see the darker side of the wizarding world that we were introduced to in Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone. In this story, Harry is not seen only as The Boy Who Lived by his fellow students, but instead as a suspect, as many believe him to be the heir of Slytherin, and thus the force behind attacks on students in the school. Further darkening the atmosphere is the history of Hogwarts itself, including some highlights of arguments between the Founders. We find that while Hogwarts has become, in a way, Harry's new home, his safety is not assured there, as this new threat comes from within the castle itself.
New places visited: Whomping Willow, The Burrow, Knockturn Alley, Slytherin common room, Chamber of Secrets
New characters met: Dobby, Mr. Weasley, Gilderoy Lockhart, Moaning Myrtle, Colin Creevey, Lucius Malfoy
Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher: Gilderoy Lockhart
Title refers to: the Chamber of Secrets.
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
Harry has returned to the Dursleys for the summer holiday, and things are hardly going well. On Harry's birthday, Uncle Vernon berates and shouts at Harry during breakfast, triggered by Dudley commanding Harry to pass him the bacon. Harry retorts that Dudley forgot to say the magic word. Merely mentioning the word magic is enough to send Uncle Vernon into a towering rage.
Uncle Vernon launches into his plans for that evening, entertaining a prospective client, Mr. Mason. Harry's role is simple: he will remain in his room, making no noise, pretending not to be there.
While in the yard later that day, Harry, looking at the hedge, sees two large, green eyes staring back at him. Before he can investigate further, Dudley nastily reminds Harry it is his birthday and asks why all his "weird friends" have not bothered to send any cards or presents. In retaliation, Harry says he is trying to magically set the garden hedge on fire, though he privately remembers that underage wizards are forbidden to practice magic outside school. Dudley tattles to Aunt Petunia, and, as a punishment for mentioning magic, Harry must clean the house all day.
That evening, as Mr. and Mrs. Mason arrive, Harry is sent to his bedroom. Harry is shocked to find someone sitting on the bed.
As will become the series' usual framework, the first chapter recaps the previous book, while the Dursleys, earlier called "the worst sort of Muggles" by Professor McGonagall, reinforce the contrast between Harry's magical world and his family's mundane Muggle household. Although Harry now has his own bedroom (Dudley's "spare" one) rather than sleeping in the cupboard under the stairs, his overall life has hardly improved. Here, we see how his enforced non-magical life causes him spiritual poverty and deprivation, as he endures the long weeks before he can return to school. He is still physically mistreated, being nearly starved while Dudley grows even fatter. The Dursleys, crueler than ever, make his life as miserable as they can away from Hogwarts, a place he not only loves, but one which represents a world where he is not only celebrated for his (unwanted) fame, but valued for his own self and individual talents. In the Wizarding world, he is among his own kind, and is not considered as a freak. However, once he returns to Privet Drive, his magical abilities again make him strange and abnormal to his family, and anything tying him to that world is forbidden or securely locked away. Even Hedwig must remain in her cage.
Harry has coped with his abusive treatment in various ways: by ignoring his family as they ignore him, and occasionally standing up for himself. A slight change in Harry's personality can be seen here, however. A year ago, his rebellions were limited to minor jabs at Dudley; he would never have deliberately provoked Vernon or Petunia, fearing reprisals. Now he deliberately taunts them. Harry's demeanor and self-confidence will continue to develop throughout the series, and his position within the household gradually changes as Harry becomes less passive-aggressive and more assertive in his self-defence. It is also gradually dawning on him that being a wizard makes him a powerful being that his family will eventually come to fear. Undermining all this right now is Harry's unhappy homelife being made even more glum when it seems his new-found Hogwarts friends have already abandoned him.
Another aspect of the Dursleys is exposed—they are scheming social climbers. Their ambitious plans for entertaining the Masons, as we, and Harry, see, are extremely sycophantic, and would irritate any person with even a near-average intelligence. One wonders how Vernon was ever able to earn a living, if this represents the quality of his sales pitch. This also indicates Vernon's shallow thought processes. Believing that he would like to be treated in such a condescending manner, he assumes Mr. Mason would prefer the same.
It is unknown yet who or what the green eyes belong to, but it is likely related to the Wizarding realm creeping into Harry's enforced Muggle confinement. Whether or not there is any imminent danger to Harry remains to be seen, though he is alert to that possibility.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Have Dudley, Uncle Vernon, and Aunt Petunia changed from the previous year? If so, how?
Why is Harry's even mentioning the word "magic" sufficient reason for him to be punished?
Harry notices large, green eyes staring at him from the hedge. What or who might Harry think this could be?
Why have Harry's friends not written and ignored his birthday?
Now that Harry has completed his first year at Hogwarts, has his relationship with the Dursleys changed? If so, how? Explain how and why it might continue to change.
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
The green eyes in the hedge belong to Dobby, a House-elf. Dobby, who is even now sitting on Harry's bed, will be an important character in this book and throughout the series.
This chapter focuses on the Dursleys, Harry's family that he must live with each summer. We see how they remain stolidly pinned to the fabric of everyday Muggle life, and are slaves to the impression they can make on their neighbours and associates. As the series progresses, we will see some positive character growth and change in cousin Dudley, as he eventually realizes there may be some good in magic, and even in Harry. Vernon and Petunia will remain stubbornly convinced that magic is an abomination, although, over time, we will see that their distaste becomes overwhelmed by fear. Petunia's hatred of the Wizarding world is actually motivated by jealousy and rejection, as revealed in the last book. Vernon likely became Petunia's husband because he was the least magical person she could find.
We learn much later why Harry had to return to the Dursleys every summer: the protection that had resulted from his mother dying for him would only remain in force as long as he had a home protected by his mother's blood, in this case Petunia. While this protection remains with Harry into the seventh book of the series, it is only in the fifth book that it is explained. And while the protection in question underpins the entire series, and is hinted at as early as the first chapter of the series, it is only in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix and Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows that it is explicitly mentioned.
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
The strange, small creature on Harry's bed has large, green eyes, pointy ears, and is wearing a ragged pillowcase. He introduces himself as Dobby, a House-elf. Harry realizes that the mysterious pair of eyes in the hedge had belonged to the elf. Dobby is unable to reveal the Wizarding family that owns him, and hits himself uncontrollably each time he tries. He also punishes himself for speaking badly about his masters and for leaving his home without permission, which he did to deliver a dire warning: Harry must not return to Hogwarts because terrible events will happen at the school. Dobby is once again unable to provide more details. When Harry ignores his warning, Dobby taunts him about his friends not writing to him all summer. When Harry asks how Dobby knew that, Dobby admits having intercepted Harry's letters hoping Harry would think his friends no longer cared about him, and so would not return to school.
Furious, Harry chases Dobby downstairs, where the Dursleys are dining with the Masons. Dobby levitates Aunt Petunia's cake. When Harry refuses his demand to stay away from Hogwarts, Dobby drops the cake, splattering cream over Petunia's spotless kitchen before vanishing. The Dursleys blame Harry, and Uncle Vernon attempts to pacify the Masons, telling them his nephew is slightly disturbed. However, when a messenger owl arrives, Mrs. Mason becomes frightened, dashing Uncle Vernon's hopes for a lucrative business deal.
The owl-borne letter is from Mafalda Hopkirk, an official at the Ministry of Magic, stating that Harry has violated the Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery. Any further magic on Harry's part while away from school may be grounds for expulsion from Hogwarts. Uncle Vernon locks Harry into his bedroom and bars the window, now knowing he is unable to use magic to escape.
Three days later, a rattling on the window bars awakens Harry; in the moonlight, Harry sees Ron peering in at him.
Harry is once again manipulated by forces he is unable to control. A House-elf wants to prevent his return to Hogwarts, nominally for Harry's own protection, though no specific information is provided as to what peril could be there. Harry, believing in his own strength, never considers any real danger awaits at Hogwarts, at least nothing serious enough to compel him to remain at the Dursleys. Dobby probably would have revealed additional information if he could, but as he appears to be a slave, he is likely prohibited from saying more. Of course, there is no definitive proof yet that the House-elf's warning is genuine, and there could even be some sinister motive behind his actions, though that seems unlikely — Dobby's character and actions seem too simplistic and transparent for such a deception, and the deception he does admit to, intercepting Harry's letters, seems almost child-like in its execution and expectation.
If Dobby is indeed being truthful, then his emotional reaction to Harry's respectful manner provides a glimpse into the Wizarding world beyond what Harry, and readers, have seen so far. Dobby's reaction suggests that non-human magical creatures are probably poorly treated in Wizarding society. Also, Dobby's reverential treatment toward Harry re-enforces his fame, and indicates it is even more wide-spread than Harry realized. Harry is still uncomfortable with the unwanted attention, and the knowledge that everyone knows more about him than he does. This fame, at least while he must stay at the Dursleys, is anything but an asset, resulting in his family treating him even more disdainfully as the magical world they so detest increasingly seeps into the Dursley household.
The Ministry's letter clearly surprises Harry. While he had been warned against using magic at home, he was unaware the Ministry could monitor him. However, they obviously are unable to detect just who performed the magic, as it was assumed it was Harry who cast the Hover charm. Harry's obvious fear while in the kitchen with Dobby was concern that Vernon would punish him for disobeying his orders, rather than the Ministry detecting him using magic. Harry knows Vernon still has significant power over him and can make his life even more miserable. Harry may also fear that Vernon will attempt to prevent him returning to Hogwarts, a fear that seems justified when Harry's bedroom becomes a jail cell.
Tension gradually mounts as Harry's chances to return to the place he loves grow ever more remote. While Ron's appearance at the window brings some immediate relief, it also raises questions: though Ron knows Harry's situation, how can he, also being underage, help Harry? And how, in fact, did he reach Harry's room without triggering a similar Ministry warning?
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Why can't Dobby reveal what the danger is to Harry?
Why does Uncle Vernon lock Harry in his bedroom?
Why would Dobby want to help Harry?
How could Dobby know something bad might happen to Harry at Hogwarts? What danger might that be?
How could Dobby, as a slave in another wizard household, be able to stop Harry's mail for all that time without his masters' noticing his absence?
Can Dobby be trusted, or could he be involved in a plot to harm Harry? Explain.
Why does the Ministry believe it was Harry who cast the Hover charm?
Why did the Ministry notice Dobby's magic at the Dursley house, but not the magic that Hagrid used in the first book?
What does Dobby's reaction to the way Harry treats him indicate?
Why has Ron appeared at Harry's window? How can Ron, also too young to use magic, help Harry?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Dobby, we will eventually learn, is the Malfoy family's House-elf; we, like Harry, don't yet know this for certain, as he is restricted from revealing anything to Harry. Perhaps unsurprisingly, Dobby's poor condition reflects how the Malfoys generally treat anyone they consider beneath them, just as Harry's physical condition reflects how badly the Dursleys treat him. We have already seen the Malfoys' disdain for those they consider their inferiors, as shown by Draco's treatment of Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Neville, treatment that will continue throughout the series. It is Dobby's similarly shabby treatment, compared with how Ron, Hermione, and Harry are treated by Draco, that leads the reader to guess, possibly before Harry, that Dobby is the Malfoy's House-elf.
Dobby is a minor character, though he proves extremely useful to Harry throughout the series. Here, he is violating orders by speaking to Harry; we gather this is because Dobby knows how House-elves' lots improved since the Dark Lord's fall following his encounter with Harry, and, aware that the Malfoys are planning some mischief at Hogwarts, has taken it upon himself to warn Harry. Dobby's freely-given loyalty to Harry will continue, and is returned with Harry's respect and treatment due an equal. The contrast between Dobby responding to Harry's needs, and his response to the Malfoys' demands, is a lesson in the difference and value of loyalty that is freely given as opposed to it being demanded.
It should be noted here that Dobby's expectations for ill-treatment from humans seems common among House-elves; we will see it again in Kreacher, and to a lesser extent in Winky. Later, we see that Ron, though treating House-elves benignly, also considers them as menials, while Harry and Hermione feel differently; Hermione is even moved to create a student organization, S.P.E.W., that advocates elf rights. Harry and Hermione have both been raised in non-magical households, and so only recently learned that House-elves existed and are enslaved. Raised as Muggle children, Harry and Hermione were isolated from the prevailing belief that House-elves are an under-class, and should be treated accordingly. Ron, having been raised in the magical world, believes it is morally acceptable to enslave these creatures, and agrees with the generally-held view that most elves are treated well, and are happy only when they have masters to serve. While this may actually be an accurate assessment, it could have resulted from centuries of selective breeding and behavioral conditioning. Bigotry towards House-elves, other non-human magical creatures, and also Muggle-born wizards and witches is a recurring theme throughout the series.
What Lucius Malfoy is planning to send into the school is Tom Riddle's Diary. It is always uncertain whether Malfoy knows exactly what the result will be, or even what the Diary is (Voldemort's Horcrux). The Diary, we later learn, was likely given to Lucius with information that it was an anti-Mudblood weapon, though without details as to how precisely how it would act. If Malfoy had known that the weapon was barely controllable and largely indiscriminate, he might have balked at putting it in such close proximity to his son, Draco, or would at least have issued Draco a stronger warning.
Interestingly, Dobby seems to be better aware of the threat's precise nature than Lucius Malfoy, who is orchestrating it. When Harry asks if the threat is connected to "He Who Must Not Be Named", Dobby claims it is not, but seems to be hinting at something. In the book's final chapter, Dobby states it was not precisely "He Who Must Not Be Named", as the threat was actually from before he stopped using the name Tom Marvolo Riddle in favour of the tabooed "Lord Voldemort". Dobby is clearly aware this early in the book that the threat, as embodied by the Diary and its embedded Horcrux, is Tom Riddle, who only later adopted his new, self-imposed title. We hear later that Lucius had told his son, Draco, that he did not know who the Heir of Slytherin was. We cannot know if Lucius was lying, but whether or not he knew that the Heir was Tom Riddle, he was probably ignorant about the precise nature of the weapon embedded in the Diary; if he had known that it was a Horcrux, he likely would have been far more careful about what he did with it, and would have known that the plan to attack Hogwarts with it would have to be placed in abeyance until Voldemort had returned and could give the go-ahead.
While Dobby knew Tom Riddle would be the threat's agent, it is unlikely he knew how the threat would be carried out. Dobby is probably unaware of what had happened the previous time the Chamber was opened, as Lucius was a student significantly after that sequence of events. (Tom Riddle had attended Hogwarts some fifty years before this; Lucius Malfoy, only about twenty years previous.)
It is mentioned elsewhere that stories involving magic have a drawback: by making anything possible and largely effortless, it becomes too easy for the hero to succeed, thus making the story uninteresting. The Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery is an intriguing method for the author to impose limitations on using magic. Harry certainly could make his life easier by judiciously using magic during his summer vacations, but that would remove an interesting plot point. The Dursleys, annoying as they are, will remain useful as a contrast to Harry's life at Hogwarts, and his means of coping with his aunt and uncle without using magic becomes a ruler by which to measure his growing character and maturity.  There is an exception to this in the next book when Harry reacts against his family using magic, though it is entirely unintentional, driven by extreme emotions after provocation.
The Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery is significant later in the series. The decree states that it is a  "reasonable" restriction, indicating that circumstances exist under which a minor can use magic, presumably in an emergency situation. While Harry is only issued a warning for the Hover charm, which he did not even cast, later, in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, when Harry and cousin Dudley are attacked by Dementors intending to suck out their souls, Harry casts a Patronus charm to repel them. However, the Ministry of Magic immediately suspends Harry from Hogwarts and charges him with a crime, forcing him to attend a full Ministry hearing. Their sole motive at that time is to permanently expel him not only from Hogwarts, but wizard society, thus removing him as an impediment to the Ministry's official agenda regarding Voldemort. The Ministry misuses the Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery solely to achieve this; Harry is forced to prove that his using magic in that situation is, in fact, reasonable, in the face of a court biased strongly against him.
The Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery is here mentioned for the first time by name. It is earlier mentioned in the previous book and in the first chapter of this book without being named. Concerns about violating this Decree will cause Harry to bolt early in the next book, only to be effectively pardoned in the following chapter. The Decree is mentioned again in the fifth book, and it is used later in that book as a weapon against Harry, at which it proves inadequate. Finally it is mentioned that the Trace enforcing the Decree has been terminated on the morning of Harry's 17th birthday.
"Harry Potter" is the first thing Dobby says in the series. It will be also the last thing he says in the series, before he dies.
The warning letter was sent by Mafalda Hopkirk. Mafalda will send Harry two more letters when he uses magic to protect himself and Dudley from Dementors. Later, when the Trio breaks into the Ministry, Hermione will be disguised as Mafalda by using Polyjuice Potion.
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
Ron Weasley and his brothers, Fred and George, are outside Harry's window in a flying Ford Anglia. There to rescue Harry, they pull the bars off the window with the car. Fred and George gather Harry's Hogwarts belongings that are locked in the cupboard under the stairs, and load them into the car.
Hedwig screeches, reminding Harry she is being left behind. This awakens Uncle Vernon, who barges into Harry's room as Harry is half way out the window. Grabbing Harry's ankle, he attempts to pull him back in, but Harry yanks free, and he, Ron, Fred, and George head to the Weasleys' home, The Burrow.
Harry tells Ron, Fred, and George about Dobby, and they speculate about who owns him, eventually concluding that he could belong to the Malfoys. Harry learns that Draco Malfoy's father, Lucius Malfoy, once supported Lord Voldemort.
They arrive at The Burrow, an oddly crooked house. Molly Weasley is waiting, furious that they "borrowed" the car. After yelling at the Twins and Ron, Mrs. Weasley warmly greets Harry. During breakfast, Harry glimpses Ginny, Ron's younger sister, who is apparently too shy to speak.
As punishment, the Twins and Ron must de-Gnome the garden, using Gilderoy Lockhart's Guide to Household Pests technique in his book. Curious, Harry assists, even though he does not have to. He attempts to gently drop the leathery Gnomes over the fence, but after being bitten, he flings them like the Weasley boys, who first twirl them until they are too dizzy to find their way back.
Ron's father, Arthur Weasley, who works for the Ministry of Magic, arrives after a long night's work, searching for illegal and Dark magical objects. Mr. Weasley loves Muggle technology and gadgets, and he is clearly intrigued with his sons' adventure in the car until Mrs. Weasley sternly chastises him. Ron shows Harry his bedroom, which is plastered in Quidditch posters. He apologizes for his home's disorderliness, but Harry thinks it is all wonderful, and, as he watches the gnomes making their way back into the garden, looks forward to spending the remaining summer with the Weasleys.
In the last chapter we asked: how can Ron help Harry? Ron is underage, as are Fred and George, and capable though they may be, they are prevented from using magic to free Harry. However, apart from the flying car, which apparently does not violate the prohibition against underage magic, no magic is used to liberate Harry. Instead, the bars are pulled off the window with the car, and Fred and George pick both the bedroom's and the cupboard under the stairs' locks with a common Muggle hairpin. The same hairpin is used to open Hedwig's cage, freeing her for the first time all summer. It is never made clear why casting a spell triggers the prohibition trace, but using a charmed object like the flying car does not; for some speculation on this matter, please see the article on The Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery.
It is worth noting how quickly Harry settles in to the Weasley household. The reader gets the feeling that Harry feels at home almost instantly, even before Mrs. Weasley tips a few extra sausages onto his breakfast plate. Some of this, no doubt, is due to the existing friendship with Ron, but that alone is not sufficient to explain it. We can speculate that part of Harry's increasing comfort in The Burrow is due to acceptance of his magical ability, and part to the healthy communication between Weasley family members. This straightforward relationship is something Harry has been hunting for during almost all of his time at the Dursleys', and has never found.
The author often mentions a character by name before they are actually seen. Gilderoy Lockhart, who plays a large role in the book, is introduced here, by name only. He is apparently handsome ("'Mum fancies him,' said Fred in a very audible whisper"), and his solutions for problems may look good on paper, but only seem to work temporarily when employed. By sunset, Harry observes the Gnomes sneaking back into the garden one-by-one through the Weasley's hedge.
Ginny Weasley is reintroduced, though she only glances at Harry from afar; every time she sees him (twice in this chapter), she squeaks and runs away. Says Ron, "You don't know how weird it is for her to be this shy, she never shuts up normally . . ." She may have a classic schoolgirl crush, building Harry up in her mind as some heroic figure, then, when physically in his presence, is too timid to speak.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
What caused Ron and the Twins to go to Privet Drive?
What leads the boys to suspect that Dobby is owned by the Malfoys?
Why does Mrs. Weasley punish her boys? Why does Harry volunteer to take part?
Why would Gilderoy Lockhart's methods only work temporarily?
Why is Mrs. Weasley cross with Mr. Weasley? Is he acting appropriately?
Compare and contrast life at the Weasleys' home to the Dursley household. How do these similarities and/or differences affect Harry?
Based on what is seen and heard in this chapter, give a description of what Gilderoy Lockhart may be like.
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
The boys have correctly surmised that Dobby belongs to the Malfoys, though Harry will be uncertain until the book's end. Simply because Dobby is the Malfoys' property, his actions, though supposedly meant to protect Harry, would actually seem suspicious and likely motivated by that family for some sinister purpose. However, Dobby has risked his own life to warn Harry that he is in grave danger should he return to Hogwarts. Because Dobby is the Malfoys' slave, he has become aware that Draco's father, Lucius Malfoy, is behind the plot to unleash a monster within Hogwarts. Because Dobby is magically bound to protect the Malfoy family's secrets, his warning to Harry is so vague that Harry mostly disregards it. Even were Dobby able to be more explicit, however, nothing could dissuade Harry from returning to Hogwarts, the only place he feels he fits in.
Ginny's reaction to Harry makes it seem unlikely that they would ever have a significant relationship. Oftentimes, a schoolgirl crush simply fades over time, and Ginny's feelings seem more like superficial hero-worship than romantic interest. Ginny, however, will be thrust into several events that force her to mature quickly, and her feelings for Harry deepen as she gradually understands who he really is. Starting even before this chapter, a study of Ginny's character will be rewarding, as the author writes a very realistic maturation for her, ending with a true romantic relationship with Harry.
Several other minor plot points occur in this chapter. Gilderoy Lockhart soon appears, true to our expected image: physically attractive, charming, seemingly plausible, but ultimately unreliable. This tendency to believe in someone simply because they have certain desirable attributes is illustrated by other characters, notably Tom Riddle, a former Slytherin student, who, fifty years earlier, falsely implicated Hagrid in opening the Chamber of Secrets and unleashing a monster. Even though Riddle was behind the attacks, he was considered believable mainly because he was handsome, intelligent, personable, and fully human. (Hagrid, we will find out in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, is half-Giant.)
The gnomes making their way back into the garden is actually a point in understanding Lockhart's character. Though we have not yet met him, this vignette is a classic example of Lockhart's style: flashy, plausible, initially appearing to work, but ultimately failing. We will see the same in the man himself and in his magic later in this book.
The flying Ford Anglia will also make a few more appearances; notably, it will carry Ron and Harry to school when they find they can't reach Platform Nine and Three Quarters, and it will save Harry and Ron when they get into trouble in the Forbidden Forest later in this book.
Arthur Weasley mentions someone named Mundungus Fletcher, who tried to jinx him when his back was turned. Mundungus reappears in the fourth book, as shady as this brief mention leads us to expect, and in each book after that. We never find him to be trustworthy, though he is an Order of the Phoenix member and apparently loyal to Dumbledore and the Order.
Mr. Weasley's job with the Ministry will also prove important, not only because it gives him the authority to investigate other characters for Dark magic, but because it showcases his apparent unambitious nature, as he actually enjoys what he does and stays with it, foregoing the traditional career-advancing track to achieve status and more money that other Ministry employees seek; this unusual trait apparently attracts unwelcome attention from the likes of Lucius Malfoy.
Also, as is typical of how the author introduces something or someone long before it plays a part in the series, it is mentioned that the Weasleys have a Ghoul in the attic. This Ghoul will play an important role in the final book, though it remains unseen to readers until then.
The ghoul in the Weasley's attic will be made up to look like Ron with a case of Spattergroit, to explain his absence from Hogwarts when he leaves the Burrow with Harry in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows.
Arthur Weasley's lack of ambition will be a point of friction with his son Percy. Percy, also working for the Ministry, is extremely ambitious, and cannot accept that his father is happy in what seems to him to be a dead-end job. The issue that finally results in Percy's estrangement from the family is marginally based on this. The official Ministry position, at the end of Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, is that Dumbledore and Harry are lying about Voldemort's return, and Arthur refuses to reject his faith in Dumbledore for the chance to improve his Ministry position. Percy severs relations with his family to prevent any hindrance in his career that would spring from his family's support for Dumbledore.
While we generally do not mention characters in the Connections section, this chapter's mention of Mundungus Fletcher is worthy of note. Fletcher, who will reappear next in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, and will play a substantial role in each succeeding book, is worth mention here as an indication that the author had already begun to plan for a Wizarding underworld, not allied with either side of the principal conflict, but rather out for what they could get for themselves. Fletcher will develop into a small-time con-man, thief, and dealer of contraband and stolen goods, but will have a significant role to play because of his situation at the edge of respectability. When we see him next, he will be making an inflated damages claim, for the destruction of a twelve-room tent that he had never owned.
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
Life for Harry has never been this good, far better than Privet Drive. Finally, he has found a family that accepts him, and treats him as one of their own, rather than as an inferior intruder. True, he is still not allowed to perform magic, but it surrounds him, and is a natural part of life.
The letters from Hogwarts, including Harry's, arrive at the Burrow. As always, the letter has a reminder that the term starts September 1st, and include the school booklist.
"The Standard Book of Spells, Grade 2", by Miranda Goshawk
"Break With A Banshee", by Gilderoy Lockhart
"Gadding with Ghouls", by Gilderoy Lockhart
"Holidays with Hags", by Gilderoy Lockhart
"Travels with Trolls", by Gilderoy Lockhart
"Voyages with Vampires", by Gilderoy Lockhart
"Wandering with Werewolves", by Gilderoy Lockhart
"Year with the Yeti", by Gilderoy Lockhart
Based on the list's content, Fred surmises that the new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher is a witch and a fan of Lockhart. George has a more practical thought: "This lot won't come cheap." Mrs. Weasley says they will manage, though Harry notices she seems worried. Ginny's school supplies can be picked up secondhand; she is starting at Hogwarts this year.
Hermione sends an owl suggesting they all meet in Diagon Alley. She questions the use of Errol as messenger, as he is so old and worn out. Ron says that Percy had refused to loan him his owl. The Twins mention that Percy, who is normally stuffy and annoying, has been acting odd, often remaining shut up in his room.
On the appointed day, the Weasleys head to Diagon Alley via the Floo Network, a magical transportation system that connects fireplaces throughout the Wizarding realm. Harry, choking on ash in the Weasley's fireplace, unfortunately mispronounces, "Diagon Alley," landing him one grate too far in what appears to be a Dark magic shop. Draco Malfoy and his father are there. Mr. Malfoy appears to be selling some magical items to the proprietor, Borgin.
Exiting undetected, Harry discovers he was at Borgin & Burkes in Knockturn Alley, an unsafe area frequented by Dark wizards and other unsavory characters. Fortunately, Hagrid appears, and steers Harry back to Diagon Alley, where he locates the Weasleys and Hermione. They proceed to Gringotts Bank, where, inside, Harry is embarrassed by the wealth stored in his vault, particularly after seeing the meager sum the Weasleys have.
Later, the group arrives at Flourish & Blotts bookstore, where the popular author, Gilderoy Lockhart, is signing copies of his autobiography, Magical Me. Recognizing the famous Harry Potter, Lockhart presents him with a complete set of his autographed books while posing for photos. Lockhart then announces that he is the new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher for Hogwarts.
Staggering away from the limelight, Harry dumps the Lockhart books into Ginny's cauldron. Draco Malfoy, observing this byplay, taunts Harry. Ginny fiercely defends him, but then goes scarlet when Malfoy says "You've got yourself a girlfriend!" Mr. Malfoy suddenly appears, and makes rude comments about Ginny's second-hand book before returning it to her cauldron. Mr. Weasley begins arguing with Mr. Malfoy. As the argument becomes physical, Hagrid drags the Weasleys away while the Malfoys stalk off. The Weasleys, Hermione, and Harry return to the Leaky Cauldron, then head home.
After only a few days at The Burrow, Harry learns what a functional, loving family is supposed to be like and how it interacts within itself. He feels at home here, realizing what he has been missing and has yearned for all these years, and will continue to desire throughout the series. Hogwarts, we have already seen, has become a surrogate home to Harry, a place where he knows everyone and everyone knows him, and where his abilities are not feared and hated but welcomed and considered normal. However, good as it is, there is no real family there; the teachers must remain, to a large extent, professionally remote. The one exception is Hagrid. who is not a teacher, and who also lacks a true family; Harry becomes a substitute for that. Here, in The Burrow, people care about Harry, he is well fed and physically comfortable, and is made to feel wanted. Harry now fully realizes just what he has always lacked. And though he is happily content amongst the Weasleys, it will perhaps be even harder to return to the Dursleys', a place that is little more than a roof over his head, where he barely has enough to eat, and offers no love or comfort.
Gilderoy Lockhart makes his first appearance. Handsome and charismatic, he has a legion of fans, comprised largely of middle-aged witches like Mrs. Weasley. He is also a vain, opportunistic fame-seeker who exploits Harry to get his photo onto the Daily Prophet's front page. Lockhart is famous for his many exciting adventures that he recounts in his books. He apparently believes that Harry is as fame-obsessed as he. When the fight erupts between Lucius Malfoy and Arthur Weasley, Lockhart is heard planning to spin it to promote himself in the paper.
Ginny Weasley's true character also becomes more evident here. When Draco insults Harry for attracting attention in Flourish & Blotts, Ginny defensively says that Harry did nothing to warrant the attention. This shows us that, despite Ginny's schoolgirl crush on Harry, she is sensitive to his distaste for the fame that his history with Voldemort heaps on him. While it is possible she fears her attention will be misinterpreted as being rooted in Harry's fame, rather than in himself, it is more typical for a schoolgirl's crush to render her too shy to speak to the boy she likes.
Another Malfoy is introduced: Lucius Malfoy. Proud, rich, and arrogant, he is a strict and demanding parent who holds a tight rein on Draco. In the bookstore, he is insulting and bullying towards Ginny Weasley. It seems odd that his attention should fall on her, and there may be some reason behind it.
It is learned that the Malfoys and the Weasleys, both old pure-blood wizarding families, have "very different ideas about what disgraces Wizardkind." The argument that erupts between Lucius Malfoy and Mr. Weasley focuses attention on a great division among the story's characters. Malfoy, already disdaining the Weasleys for their poverty, is clearly scornful that Mr. Weasley endlessly lobbies on Muggles' behalf, where Mr. Weasley is affronted by Malfoy's belief that his ancestry is superior, as well as his suspected affiliation to Dark wizards. What is highlighted here is that some wizards feel superior to others due to their breeding, there being no non-Magical people in their bloodlines. This group believes anyone unable to perform magic is somehow sub-human, and those wizards choosing to fraternize with them or protect them are traitors to this blood purity. While the Weasley family is as old and pure a bloodline as any other, to some "pure-blood" wizards, their ongoing commerce with Muggles is considered demeaning, if not downright disloyal. This snobbery also, of course, extends to Harry, who is a Half-blood, and particularly Hermione, who is Muggle-born, and explains much of Draco's behavior to them. It also extends to Ron, who Draco, taking a cue from his father, looks down on, along with the entire Weasley family.
Fred's guess that the new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher must be a witch who is a fan of Gilderoy Lockhart was likely based on his seeing how Mrs. Weasley, and apparently many female fans, idolize him. Fred is wrong, of course, but a class requiring only Lockhart's books should have tipped off the reader as to who the new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher will be, and possibly some clue about Lockhart's character.
Harry's hiding in the cabinet in Borgin and Burkes' is worthy of extra study. We will see later that some story-related events would have occurred had Harry actually closed the door to that cabinet; to the student of writing, we recommend study of that passage to see how the author misdirects us into the belief that Harry has closed himself in, while actually explicitly not allowing Harry to close the door of the cabinet.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Why is Lucius Malfoy selling objects to Borgin? What might they be?
Why do Lucius Malfoy and Mr. Weasley get into an argument?
Why does Lockhart grab Harry in Flourish & Blotts?
Based on what has been seen and heard so far, give a short analysis of Lockhart's character.
Compare and contrast what Mr. Malfoy and Mr. Weasley might think disgraces wizardkind.
Why would Mr. Malfoy want to inspect Ginny's books?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Three items shown in Borgin & Burkes are seen again in a later book, Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince. Draco uses the Hand of Glory while he is departing the Room of Requirement. The opal necklace with the note warning that it was cursed is used in an attempt to kill Dumbledore, in October of that year. Also, the cabinet in which Harry is hiding has a twin at Hogwarts that will make an appearance.
Lucius Malfoy's inspecting Ginny's book is an excuse to slip Tom Riddle's Diary into her cauldron. As we later learn, Voldemort left this Diary with Lucius, intending it as a weapon against Hogwarts. Lucius, not knowing exactly what the Diary was, had apparently decided that, given his son's discouraging school marks (as mentioned to Borgin), it was time to create problems for the school.
While not seen explicitly yet, we can already guess that Voldemort recruited many allies from pure-blood wizard families, though there are also some Half-blood followers. Lucius is returning some Dark magic items to Borgin & Burkes, claiming it is too dangerous to keep them around in the event of Ministry raids on his house. Lucius' disdain towards anyone considered to have inferior bloodlines is seen here, as well as his annoyance that Draco, pureblood though he is, is unable to surpass Hermione's grades. In the previous chapter, we learned that Lucius is believed to be a Voldemort supporter. His possessing Dark magical objects lends credence to this, as we have been told that Voldemort was a Dark wizard. This suggests strongly that Voldemort may have been playing on the pure-blood belief in their own superiority to fuel his initial rise to power.
It is particularly interesting to note how many items mentioned in this chapter will reappear in the sixth book of the series. It is apparent that the story arc was plotted out at least as far as the sixth book in some detail when the second book was written.
Borgin and Burkes appears in Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, when Draco visits the shop to demand advice from Borgin on repairing something.
Three items that Harry sees in Borgin and Burkes will appear later.
The Hand of Glory is used by Draco as he is leading Death Eaters through magically-created darkness, out of the Room of Requirement and into Hogwarts proper. We learn about this from Ron after the attack.
The cursed opal necklace is sent to Dumbledore by way of Katie Bell on a Hogsmeade weekend in mid-October of Harry's sixth year. Sent in an attempt to kill Dumbledore, it fails when Katie touches the necklace and is cursed by it.
Considering the Disappearing Cabinet that Harry hides in, and the one at Hogwarts, as a unit, we will see them again several times. The Hogwarts cabinet is dropped and broken by Peeves, at Nearly Headless Nick's request, to distract Filch, later in this book. Fred and George Weasley stuff Montague into it in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix. Draco learns of its linkage to the one at Borgin and Burkes from Montague, and demands assistance in its repair from Borgin; the other cabinet of the pair is actually partially hiding Draco from the Trio as they watch Draco make this demand. Draco then spends all of his spare time throughout the next year attempting to repair it. Late in the year, Harry actually sees the Cabinet in the Room of Requirement where Draco has been trying to repair it. Finally, the repaired cabinet is the way that Draco smuggles Death Eaters into the school to support him while he tries to carry out his assignment from Voldemort.
Tom Riddle's diary will be destroyed at the end of this book, but it will be mentioned again in Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, where we learn that it was a Horcrux.
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
Summer ends quickly, and it is time to return to Hogwarts. After several false starts, everything is loaded into Mr. Weasley's car, the flying Ford Anglia. Mr. Weasley has apparently charmed the car so that everyone fits in easily, though Mrs. Weasley apparently thinks it is normal for Muggle vehicles to be this large inside. With the trouble getting started, by the time they arrive at King's Cross Station, it is nearly time for the Hogwarts Express to depart. Everyone but Harry and Ron are on the platform. Something is now blocking the passageway. The clock strikes 11:00 a.m and the train has left, stranding Harry and Ron at the station.
Harry suggests waiting by the car, but Ron is worried his parents may be unable to return (except in the US edition, where Ron states that his parents can Apparate). In a panic, Ron suggests flying to Hogwarts in the car. They take off, soaring above the clouds, dipping below occasionally to see where the Hogwarts Express is. The flight is uneventful until they reach the school. On the final approach, the car loses power and crashes into the Whomping Willow, the impact breaking Ron's wand. The massive tree seemingly comes alive, violently pounding the car. The battered Ford extricates itself and lands on the ground, ejecting Harry, Ron, and their luggage, before wildly driving off into the Forbidden Forest.
Peering through a window into Great Hall, Harry and Ron see the Sorting ceremony underway. Unable to locate Professor Snape at the staff table, they speculate on why he is absent, only to find him standing behind them. In his office, Snape demands an explanation and wants to know where the car is—the Evening Prophet has reported that several Muggles saw a flying car. Snape fetches Professor McGonagall, who asks why they did not send an owl. Harry admits he never thought of that.
Professor Dumbledore enters, and, on hearing the story, says he will be writing their parents, though Harry and Ron will not be expelled. Their House Head, Professor McGonagall, will determine their punishment. After Snape and Dumbledore leave, Professor McGonagall assigns them detention but does not deduct any House points. She also mentions that Ginny was sorted into Gryffindor House. The boys are provided sandwiches before heading to their dormitory.
Hermione meets them outside The Fat Lady's portrait and gives them the password ("wattlebird"). Though she is unhappy at what they have done, as are Harry and Ron, the other Gryffindors in the Common room applaud their audacity for driving a flying car into the Whomping Willow.
Something or someone has acted to prevent Harry from getting to the Hogwarts Express. This could be related to Dobby's previous warning that Harry must not return to Hogwarts, though there is no direct proof yet to support that. Harry is starting to tie these clues together, however. Harry and Ron's reaction to this incident shows the boys' immature, illogical, and linear thinking here. Rather than go and wait by the car or return to The Burrow to see if Mr. and Mrs. Weasley return there, Ron's panicked solution is to fly directly to Hogwarts. Harry simply goes along with this ill-conceived plan, having no better idea about what they should do.
The Whomping Willow incident affects Harry and Ron in different ways. Unfortunately for Ron, in addition to being punished, it results in his wand being broken. It takes some effort to select a new wand, and they are costly. Ron, probably in serious trouble for taking and wrecking his father's car, is unlikely to admit to his parents that he also broke his wand. Just how effectively a damaged wand can perform is unclear. Even though Hagrid's wand was snapped in two after he was expelled, as mentioned in Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, the broken pieces hidden in his umbrella still seem able to cast spells. How that compares to Ron's wand is unknown yet, though Ron will certainly have to make temporary repairs and carry on as best he can with a damaged instrument.
Harry is also punished, though he was mostly a passive participant. For him, the incident brings more unwanted attention, resulting in Hermione's stern disapproval while the other Gryffindors are mostly delighted by what they consider to have been a deliberately orchestrated prank to make a grand entrance. Rather than basking in his House's enthusiastic approval, Harry is utterly humiliated.
Snape, meanwhile, dearly wants Harry gone, and he is hoping that McGonagall or Dumbledore will expel him, along with Ron. Snape is disappointed that Dumbledore requires that he leave Harry and Ron alone with McGonagall—Snape obviously wanted to witness, and probably have some role in setting, Harry's punishment. McGonagall, though never losing her sternness, wants to be fair. She likely knows Ron will be strongly disciplined by his parents, and lightens her own punishment accordingly, even though this allows Harry to get off relatively easily.
Two nominally-inanimate objects play an important role in this chapter. The Ford Anglia initially seems only to be a vehicle that has been enchanted to fly, probably by Mr. Weasley. However, after dumping the boys onto the ground, it appears to be much more than that, tearing off into the Forbidden Forest like a wild animal suddenly set free. This indicates it may have become somewhat sentient, though Mr. Weasley probably never intended that. Also, the Whomping Willow is, obviously, no ordinary tree. It reacts violently when the flying car crashes into it, attempting to smash it, and Harry and Ron, to bits. No explanation is given for its behavior, though it may also have been charmed in some way. It is curious that neither boy seemed aware that the tree, planted in a very visible and accessible location on the castle grounds, has this capacity. If it is that dangerous, then why are students never warned to keep away from it? One has to wonder why such a dangerous tree is there at all.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
What kind of tree do Harry and Ron crash into?
What House is Ginny sorted into?
Why does McGonagall give Harry and Ron such light punishments, considering how serious their actions were?
What or who would prevent Harry and Ron from passing through the barrier at King's Cross? Give possible reasons why.
Why would a tree attack Ron and Harry?
Why would such a dangerous tree be planted on Hogwarts' grounds? What is its purpose? Who might have planted it there?
How can the car drive itself off into the Forbidden Forest? Why does it go there?
Why did Ron fly directly to Hogwarts? Was his explanation to McGonagall believable? What should he and Harry have done instead?
Why is Hermione angry at Harry and Ron while the other Gryffindors applaud them? Which is right?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Ron's broken wand will be a useful plot element, as it produces humorous effects throughout the story, finally backfiring at an opportune time, rendering a major threat harmless to Ron and Harry. Ron receives a new wand after his father wins a contest at the beginning of the next book.
Also, the flying Ford Anglia, which takes on a life of its own, probably due to Mr. Weasley's spells on it, later plays an important role in this book, saving Ron and Harry from a colony of Acromantulae. It will never be seen after that time, however, presumably roaming wild in the Forbidden Forest.
The Whomping Willow is also an important plot element in the next book, though no explanation will be given for its violent behavior until near the end of that book. Unlike the Flying Car, the tree will be seen again, and it is learned later that it was planted over an entrance to a tunnel leading from the castle grounds to the Shrieking Shack, where, as a student,  Remus Lupin, a Werewolf, was confined during every full moon. This tunnel, which proved useful some thirty years before the series began, and becomes an important plot device in the third book, is also utilized in the final book.
It is interesting that Snape seems to believe that Harry and Ron arrived at Hogwarts by Flying Car solely to gain attention. We will see shortly that Gilderoy Lockhart shares this misunderstanding about Harry's motives. With Lockhart this is understandable, as his main motivation is fame, but it is unclear why Snape believes this; in almost every other respect, Snape disagrees with and opposes Lockhart as best he can.
The Whomping Willow, seen here for the first time, will be explained in Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban. The Willow, and the passage it guards, will appear again in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows.
The way wands behave when broken, and how and whether they can be mended, is touched upon throughout this book. We see mention of this also in Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, in the context of Hagrid's wand having been snapped, and in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, when it is Harry's wand which is nearly destroyed.
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
The next day begins less appealingly. Errol, the Weasleys' decrepit owl, delivers a Howler for Ron during breakfast in the Great Hall. Neville urges Ron to open it, warning that ignoring it is worse. Ron opens it, and Mrs. Weasley's amplified voice scolds him for taking the car and jeopardizing his father's job, leaving Ron utterly humiliated as his bemused classmates look on.
Professor McGonagall hands out timetables; first class is double Herbology with the Hufflepuffs. Hermione, apparently no longer annoyed by Harry and Ron's antics, accompanies them to class. Professor Sprout arrives late. She was tending the Whomping Willow, "assisted" by Professor Lockhart who gave "valuable pointers."
As a disgruntled Professor Sprout directs the class to Greenhouse Three, which contains the more interesting and dangerous plants, Professor Lockhart draws Harry aside. He says he understands why he and Ron took the flying car—for fame and recognition. Lockhart blames himself for giving Harry a taste of fame at Flourish & Blotts and ignores Harry's protest that he and Ron only wanted to get to school.
The class prepares to transplant Mandrake seedlings. Mature Mandrakes have restorative properties, but their cry is fatal without ear protection. The Trio is joined by Justin Finch-Fletchley, a Hufflepuff, who casually mentions that he is Muggle-born and was headed for Eton before getting his Hogwarts letter.
Next class is Transfiguration with Professor McGonagall.  Harry seems to have forgotten all he learned last year and is unable to Transfigure his beetle into a coat button. Ron is having problems with his wand. Although he repaired it with magical tape, it is producing grey smokey clouds and strange noises.
After lunch, Harry is cornered by little Colin Creevey, who wants to take Harry's picture to show his parents that he has actually met "Harry Potter." Overhearing this, Draco badgers Harry about signing photos. Lockhart comes over and forces Harry to pose for a photo, then hauls him away for some "fatherly advice" on handling fame. They enter Defence Against the Dark Arts class together, although Harry hides in the back.
Lockhart sets a test to see how much the students know about him. Predictably, Hermione, who apparently thinks Lockhart is wonderful, gets a perfect score. Next, Lockhart releases Cornish Pixies into the classroom, but he is unable to control them. At the bell, he flees, leaving it to Harry, Ron, and Hermione to get the remaining Pixies back into their cage. Ron and Harry are now suspicious about how truthful Lockhart's books really are, though Hermione still seems to suffer from hero worship.
Harry's disdain for fame is reinforced here, and it is a stark contrast to Lockhart, who can never have enough. As in Flourish & Blotts, Harry is uncomfortable with his celebrity, particularly as expressed by Colin Creevey, a rabid fan. Creevey, in his enthusiasm at meeting Harry, is oblivious that Harry may prefer to avoid being photographed, or that he dislikes fame. Of course, others take it out of context: Draco Malfoy makes noise, in his usual way, about Harry signing autographs, while Lockhart, plainly believing Harry is as fame-mongering as he, lectures Harry on going too fast with his career as a celebrity. The self-centered Lockhart assumes no one would deliberately shun the limelight, and so disregards Harry's preference to avoid being photographed. Lockhart has blatantly overstepped his bounds when he insists Harry be photographed with him, exploiting a chance meeting solely to garner even more publicity for himself.
Also, back at Hogwarts, Ron and Harry are having doubts about their Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher. If Gilderoy Lockhart has accomplished so many incredible things, why was he unable to handle something as simple as the Cornish Pixies? One wonders how he was able to even catch them for the demonstration. Hermione, who may have developed a crush, defends Lockhart, claiming he has accomplished many things. Ron shows insight here when he astutely remarks that Lockhart never offers any real proof about anything apart from his word. One must wonder why Hermione is so blind to Lockhart's deficiencies, even at this early stage. Readers can see for themselves that Lockhart's charm and charisma are coupled with his arrogant and condescending behavior to the other faculty, blatantly offering advice to those more expert than he. We suspect that the faculty are fast becoming annoyed and are certainly wondering just how competent he actually is.
Readers should perhaps take notice that Professor Sprout is able to tend the Whomping Willow's injuries in, apparently, complete safety. This certainly indicates that the tree's violent behavior can be managed when needed. This begs the question that if the tree can be controlled in this way, then why is it allowed to attack anything that comes within close proximity to it?
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Does the spell Professor Lockhart uses to control the Pixies work? If not, why? Is there anything strange about it?
Why is Professor Sprout so annoyed?
Why does Ron receive a Howler? Who sent it?
How was Professor Sprout able to "bandage" the damaged Whomping Willow without being injured herself?
Is Gilderoy Lockhart's teaching likely to be useful to Harry, Ron and Hermione? Explain.
What does Ron have to say about Lockhart's claims in his books? Is there evidence to suggest that he may be right?
Why would Lockhart give a test that only has questions about himself?
Why does Hermione seem to believe everything Lockhart claims about himself in his books, despite emerging evidence to the contrary?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Hermione's trust in Lockhart's abilities continues unabated throughout much of the book, despite significant evidence he is a sham. He will never again demonstrate Defensive magic, while the Dueling Club he starts proves to be a travesty, and his attempt to heal Harry's broken arm results in it being de-boned, among other less-than-stellar accomplishments. Why then, does Hermione persist in believing in his abilities? The author provides us few clues, but Ron, who is often an astute observer, speculates in later years that Lockhart's good looks enthralled Hermione (as well as many other females), and that certainly seems what is happening here. Also, Hermione has a subconscious trust in books, and a belief that if something is documented in writing, it must be true. In this chapter, she does comment, "Look at all the things he's done!" Ron, more skeptical, seems to doubt that what is printed in the books must be accurate. We will see this blind faith in published works again as late as Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, where Hermione stubbornly sticks to the text in her Advanced Potion-Making textbook, despite the hand-written marginal notes in Harry's copy that produce far better results.
The Whomping Willow, which plays little further part in this book, will have a significant role in Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, and will reappear briefly in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows.
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
During the first week of classes, Harry has avoided Professor Lockhart with some success and Colin Creevey with less, only to be awakened far too early Saturday morning by Oliver Wood who wants to start Quidditch practice before the other House teams. At the pitch, the team finds they have been preempted by Slytherin, armed with Professor Snape's note giving them permission to use the Pitch to train their new seeker: Draco Malfoy. Also, Draco's father has donated new Nimbus 2001 brooms that are even faster than Harry's Nimbus 2000.
Ron and Hermione arrive to watch the practice. As Draco mocks Gryffindor's brooms, Hermione comments that nobody on the team had to buy his way in, they made it on pure talent. Malfoy, angered by the aspersion, calls Hermione a "filthy mudblood." When Ron retaliates by casting a jinx at Malfoy, his broken wand backfires, jinxing him instead. Hermione and Harry carry him, belching slugs, to Hagrid's hut. Hagrid uncharacteristically criticizes Professor Lockhart, suggesting that his books may not be entirely truthful. He also mentions that Lockhart was the only applicant for the Defence Against the Dark Arts job. Apparently word is out that the position may be jinxed.
Hagrid is shocked that Malfoy called Hermione a mudblood, which Ron explains is a most insulting term used to denigrate a Muggle-born's ancestry. Hagrid also says Lockhart was annoyed when he told him that Harry was more famous than Lockhart would ever be. Hagrid then shows the Trio his pumpkin patch. Apparently, despite being prohibited from performing magic, he has used an Engorgement charm. The pumpkins, with a month to go before Hallowe'en, are the size of small boulders.
Professor McGonagall assigns Harry and Ron their detentions. Ron will be polishing silver with Mr. Filch without using any magic; Harry has to help Professor Lockhart answer his fan mail.
That evening, Harry arrives at Professor Lockhart's office, which is decorated with pictures of Lockhart. As midnight nears, Harry, worn out with stuffing envelopes, hears a low voice muttering violently. Jerking to attention, Harry strains to understand the words. Lockhart hears nothing, but noticing the late hour, dismisses Harry.
Ron arrives at the dormitory soon after. He had one final slug attack on a Special Award for Services to the School. Ron thinks it odd that Harry could hear the voice and Lockhart could not, particularly since the door had remained closed. Even if someone was invisible, they would need to open the door to get in.
Several main plot points are highlighted. The first is Draco's addition to the Slytherin Quidditch team, and the team's new brooms, which are probably related. Slytherin House students are known to use any advantage to achieve their goals, and it is likely that Draco, wanting to oppose Harry in Quidditch, used his father's influence to be made Seeker, while the team willingly accepts the Malfoys' generous terms to gain a competitive edge with superior racing brooms. Likely Draco's plan was to humiliate Harry by out-flying him. We do not yet know how well this will work.
Bigotry, a recurring theme throughout the books, is brought into focus here by Draco's animosity towards those he perceives as inferior. Though the Weasley family is pure-blood, Draco despises them for their poverty and their concern for Muggles, in a pattern he almost certainly learned from his father. Similarly, he taunts Hermione about her Muggle parentage, calling her a "Mudblood," a term so derogatory that it shocks Ron and Hagrid, though neither Harry nor Hermione are sure what it means. Hermione, on the other hand, accuses Draco of buying his way onto the Slytherin team through his father's gift, using money and influence, rather than talent and hard work, to obtain what he wants. Although he would claim otherwise, Hermione's words apparently do sting Draco, and his ongoing resentment is likely as much about his jealousy over Hermione's superior intellect and Harry's fame and talents, as about their Muggle antecedents. Being an only child with a cold, disciplinarian father, Draco may even subconsciously envy Ron's large, loving family and the close friendship he enjoys with Harry and Hermione. Draco lacks true friends, instead garnering hangers-on like Crabbe and Goyle, who he also considers inferior to himself, and as little more than lackeys to support him. Ironically, Draco is likely talented enough to have become Slytherin's Seeker on his own merits, but rather than work hard to make the team, he instead opts for a short-cut method to immediately achieve what he thinks he already deserves.
Mr. Malfoy's "gift" also reflects much about his character. Rather than teaching his son to work hard to achieve his goals on his own merits, and already dismayed by Hermione, a Muggle-born, outperforming Draco academically, as well as Harry's superior talents, he freely abused his position to elevate his son's prestige, as well as enhance the Malfoy family's image; now Mr. Malfoy can brag about Draco's "accomplishments".
Another point is Ron's damaged wand. Even after mending it with Spell-o-Tape, it performs unpredictably, producing gray smoke clouds and odd noises, and now we see it may not cast spells in the desired direction, even when it does work. Ron, naturally, is frustrated, not only because he is unable to perform magic correctly, further lowering his confidence, but with knowing that, as poor as his parents are, he will probably have to make do with a damaged wand that was already a shoddy hand-me-down, for a long time to come.
Solidarity is shown among the faculty, and one teacher will rarely criticize another. This is stated explicitly in a later book, but has been only implied so far. Given that Hagrid mentions that Lockhart's books might not be entirely truthful, one gathers that there is probably much suspicion in the staff room that Lockhart is far less competent than he claims. Given this, and Ron's previous comment that Lockhart offers no proof to back his claims, readers may surmise that Lockhart's abilities are suspect.
Lockhart's personality is served up in large quantity as Harry performs detention. Lockhart clearly believes Harry is as celebrity-driven as he, and therefore needs tips on how to handle fame. Lockhart revels in being famous, to the extent that spending hours every week sending out multitudes of autographed pictures is tolerable. Possibly, Lockhart's self-image is fueled by the belief that, being so widely known, he is universally loved, and he is unable to conceive that anyone is not similarly craving affirmation by the masses.
This also marks the mysterious voice's first appearance. Something seems murderously angry in the castle, and Harry is concerned enough that he needs to discover what it is, despite his worries that only he can apparently hear it.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Why would Snape give the Slytherin team permission to use the Pitch, even though it was previously reserved for Gryffindor?
Why is Lockhart unable to hear the voice that Harry can? Where is the voice coming from?
Why would Hagrid be forbidden to perform magic?
Why does Hagrid believe Lockhart's books may not be entirely truthful? What evidence is there?
Why does Draco consider the Weasley family inferior, even though they are pure-blooded wizards like himself? Is there more than one reason? If so, what?
Why would Harry and Hermione take Ron to see Hagrid, rather than to the Hospital Wing, after he accidentally curses himself?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
The Award for Special Services to the School is specifically singled out in later chapters because it was the one given to Tom Riddle. Tom plays a large part later in this book, and a significant part in the overall series.
The voice Harry heard in Lockhart's office was the Basilisk, the monster in the Chamber, which has been released and is roaming the school. Only Harry can hear the voice because he is a Parselmouth; to everyone else, the sound is a low and undefined hissing noise. Interestingly, Harry perceives Parseltongue as English, something that is an important plot point later in the series.
When Hermione learns Harry can understand snakes, knows the Monster's effect, and determines it is probably using the plumbing to move through the castle, she eventually concludes it is a Basilisk. Harry is able to obtain this information from her after she has been Petrified.
It is also important to note that Ron's wand backfired, jinxing him, rather than Malfoy, the intended target. While we have seen Ron's wand produce unintended strange sounds and smoke, producing the wrong spell, this is the first time a wand malfunctioning this way has been shown. This plays a big part when Harry, Ron, and Professor Lockhart delve into the Chamber of Secrets to rescue Ginny.
It is also interesting to note, though it is unrelated to the plot, that Hagrid's wand, which Harry correctly suspects is hidden within Hagrid's umbrella, was snapped in two when he was expelled from Hogwarts. However, even in its severed state, it appears to work reasonably well when he has occasionally been seen using it, while Ron's badly damaged and barely intact wand performs quite poorly, even when wrapped with Spell-O-Tape. Also, when Harry's wand is severely damaged by Hermione's ricocheting spell in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, it becomes totally unusable, though it will later be repaired with singularly powerful magic. It is unknown why Hagrid's wand continued to work and the others did not, though the way in which each was damaged likely had some effect. While Ron's and Harry's wands are broken beyond normal repair, the inner core in Hagrid's wand may only have been slightly damaged when the wand was snapped in two. Hagrid, in fact, comments that his broken wand is less powerful than he expects it to be. It has been suggested that, as Dumbledore's wand seems to be capable of mending Harry's broken wand in the final book, Dumbledore, who never believed that Hagrid was the one who opened the Chamber, may have mended Hagrid's wand on condition that Hagrid keep it secret. Harry's wand does regain its full power after being mended, but we can assume that Hagrid's, being deliberately snapped, was more thoroughly broken, and so the repair might not have been as effective. This would explain why Hagrid's broken wand does not show the same random behaviour as Ron's, or the complete failure of Harry's.
The effects of a wand being broken are noted here. This will be important later in this book, and will also play a part in the final book.
Harry's being unable to distinguish between Parseltongue and English, which we first see in this chapter, will be noted again twice in this book, in The Dueling Club and the chapter named The Chamber of Secrets. This also proves to be a plot point in the final book.
When Professor Lockhart reappears in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, the only part of his persona which remains intact seems to be his handling of his fan mail. As he has done in this chapter with Harry, he immediately co-opts the Trio and Ginny to address envelopes for him.
Hagrid's almost-overlooked comment that the Defence Against the Dark Arts position may be jinxed, and that there are few applicants for it, is part of a larger and as yet unrevealed pattern. In Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, the twins run down the list of the four incumbents in that position during Harry's career at Hogwarts, and note that all four of them have lasted only one year. By early in the school year of Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, it is common knowledge, apparently, that Professor Snape dearly wants that post, but despite Professor Dumbledore's reported difficulty filling the position not only in Harry's second year, as reported here by Hagrid, but in his fifth year, as reported by the Twins, it is only in Harry's sixth year that Dumbledore appoints Snape to it. It is also in Harry's sixth year that we learn of Dumbledore's belief that the post has been jinxed by Voldemort. Clearly, Dumbledore expected that Snape would also only last a year in that post, and, as Snape was at that point secretly Dumbledore's ally against Voldemort, Dumbledore did not want to risk his going mad, dying, or otherwise losing his ability to help Dumbledore after the year was complete. It is only in the final book in the series that we learn Dumbledore planned to have Snape become Headmaster upon Dumbledore's death, fated to happen at the end of Harry's sixth year, which was also Snape's first and only year as teacher of Defence Against the Dark Arts. Dumbledore apparently believed that once he was gone, Voldemort would place one of his own stooges in that post and would vacate the jinx on the post, thus, probably, saving Snape to carry on Dumbledore's mission after his death.
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
October is marked by continuous rainstorms; the lake rises, the flowerbeds turn into muddy streams, and Hagrid's pumpkins have grown as big as garden sheds. Oliver Wood, however, sees no reason to let up on Quidditch practice, so it is hardly surprising that Harry is soaked and dripping mud as he heads to Gryffindor Tower after practice. On the way, he meets Nearly Headless Nick, and they discuss their respective troubles: Nick is upset because his application to join the Headless Hunt has been rejected again; being only nearly headless disqualifies him. Harry, meanwhile, dreads the coming game with the Slytherin Quidditch team, mounted on their new Nimbus 2001 brooms. Mrs. Norris, Filch's cat suddenly appears, and Nick warns Harry that Filch is in a bad mood. Filch's sudden appearance through a tapestry thwarts Harry's escape attempt. Incensed by the water and mud dripping off Harry's Quidditch robes, Filch orders him to his office where he fills out a form recommending punishment for "befouling the castle." A loud noise interrupts him, and Filch charges off after Peeves, hoping he has done something unforgivable that will permanently ban him from Hogwarts. During Filch's absence, Harry notices an envelope on his desk for a correspondence course called "Kwikspell," for home-study magic. When Filch returns, he notices the envelope has been moved and, embarrassed, lets Harry go.
On exiting Filch's office, Harry meets Nearly Headless Nick again. Nick arranged for Peeves to tip over a black and gold cabinet to distract Filch. Nick invites Harry to his Deathday Party to celebrate the five hundredth anniversary of his death, which occurred 31 October, 1492. He also invites Ron and Hermione, who are both keen to attend.
On Hallowe'en, the Trio descend to the Dungeons and are met by Nick and a panoply of ghosts, including Moaning Myrtle and Peeves. The gathering is rather uncomfortable for the living, and when Peeves insults Moaning Myrtle, causing her to run off sobbing, Harry, Ron, and Hermione decide it is time to leave.
As they exit the dungeon, Harry hears the same voice as in Professor Lockhart's office. He follows it, with Hermione and Ron tagging behind, through the Entry Hall to the first floor. Sloshing through water covering the hallway's floor, he sees writing on the wall: "The Chamber Of Secrets Has Been Opened. Enemies Of the Heir, Beware." Mrs. Norris is hanging from a torch bracket, apparently dead. Before the Trio can react, students leaving the Hallowe'en Feast surround them. Malfoy's voice rings out: "Enemies of the Heir, beware! You'll be next, Mudbloods!"
The Deathday Party gives readers a rare glimpse into how Hogwarts' ghosts interact with one another, as well as with the living. Even in death, they appear to be a typical community, behaving and interacting much the same as living people, socializing, arguing, cooperating, and even deliberately annoying and upsetting one another, as Peeves (who is a poltergeist) does when he insults Myrtle, causing her to rush off sobbing. The Ghosts generally like Harry and welcome the Trio's presence at the party, though it all seems rather odd to Harry, Hermione, and Ron. The ghosts, and Nick, in particular, always appear willing to help Harry whenever he needs it, such as when Peeves and Nick distracted Filch. Whether or not Ghosts can actually be happy in their dead state is unclear, but they appear to adapt and some find useful roles for themselves, such as the mascots for the school Houses, and Professor Binns, who continues teaching at Hogwarts after his death, apparently unaware at first that he had died. Moaning Myrtle, however, remains perpetually morose, possibly over her premature death, though it is not entirely clear why. It is also unclear, just yet, why some people become ghosts and remain within the living world, while others, such as Harry's parents, apparently do not. Harry must also wonder why this is, as well as what happens to those who are not ghosts. Also, Nick's Deathday party must be making Harry somewhat uncomfortable, it being the same day, October 31, that his parents were murdered by Voldemort.
The author excels at what is called "the set-up and the pay-off", the ability to write something that begs a question, then is followed later by an answer that illuminates more than the question asked. This chapter contains a small example: on Filch's desk is an envelope for a correspondence course that apparently teaches basic magic. Filch is horribly embarrassed when it is seen. Why?
And though it had been apparent only to Harry and readers that unusual events have been unfolding at Hogwarts, the bloody writing on the wall is the first concrete evidence that something sinister is underway. While this apparently strikes fear in most students, Malfoy, as smug as usual, seemed unsurprised and uses it as an opportunity to threaten those he considers inferior. It is unclear if he is in any way involved, though his earlier insult to Hermione, calling her a Mudblood, and his callous attitude now, indicates that while he may not be directly responsible, he may know something about what has happened.
This is the first concrete date given in the books for when the series is taking place. Unfortunately, it conflicts with many days of the week reported in the story; specifically, for instance, in Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, we learn that Harry was orphaned on October 31. If his second year at Hogwarts starts in September 1992, as here implied by the date given for Nearly Headless Nick's Deathday, then he must have turned 11 on 31 July 1991. As his birth date then would be 31 July 1980, he would have been orphaned on October 31, 1981. The book explicitly states that the next day was a Tuesday; but November 1, 1981 was a Sunday. Similarly, days of the week are given for Hallowe'en and for all three tasks in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, but do not line up with the days of the week in 1994 and 1995.
These failures of correspondence between the series timeline and our physical calendar are unimportant to the story's overall sweep, so while they may be mentioned, they are provided more as a curiosity than as something the scholar need concern himself with.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Why do Peeves and Nick create a distraction? Is it effective?
Why does Nick invite Harry, Ron, and Hermione to his Deathday Party? Why might this be particularly unpleasant for Harry?
Why does Moaning Myrtle run off sobbing? Is she over-reacting?
Why does Filch suddenly seem embarrassed?
What does "Enemies of the Heir beware" mean?
Who or what attacked Mrs. Norris? Why?
Does Draco know something about the message on the wall? Explain.
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
The voice Harry hears is, as mentioned in the Greater Picture section of the previous chapter, the voice of the Monster in the Chamber, now temporarily released. We will learn that the Monster is a Basilisk, navigating within the walls by means of the pipes, and entering the school via Moaning Myrtle's bathroom. It is no accident that the writing on the wall and Mrs. Norris' body are found outside Myrtle's bathroom, but this is never mentioned, even when Harry later guesses that the entrance to the Chamber of Secrets lies there.
It is also mentioned that Professor Lockhart does not hear the voice, despite its obvious anger and violence, when Harry hears it in Lockhart's study. We note that in this chapter, neither Ron nor Hermione can detect it either; they simply follow Harry's lead, bemused. Ron will remark that, even among wizards, hearing voices nobody else can hear is a sign of insanity; this will have some effect on Harry's actions in a later chapter, when Professor Dumbledore asks him if there is anything else Harry wants to mention.
Moaning Myrtle departing the party proves somewhat critical for reasons explained later in this book. Because Peeves upset her, Myrtle deliberately floods the hallway outside her bathroom. While we do not see the bathroom here, in a later instance, when someone "throws a book through Myrtle's head," Harry and Ron enter the bathroom, finding all the taps turned on, the gushing water overflowing onto the bathroom floor and into the hall. As an aside, a popular slang term for crying is "turning on the waterworks;" it seems Myrtle takes the expression literally. We will shortly find that Mrs. Norris is petrified, rather than dead; if the hallway had not been flooded, the Basilisk's glance would have killed her. Because Mrs. Norris saw the Basilisk's reflection from the water, rather than looking at it directly, she was spared. Mrs. Norris is the first to avoid directly sighting the Basilisk, and through luck or design, the Basilisk's other victims all avoid direct eye contact, saving their lives. However, fifty years earlier, another victim met a different fate.
Harry has inadvertently discovered something generally unknown about Filch: he is a Squib. Squibs are born into Wizarding families but have no magical abilities themselves. Filch is apparently hoping to overcome this "accident-of-birth" by taking a correspondence magic course. While Harry now knows that Filch is trying to learn magic, he does not yet understand this fact's import. Ron explains the details to Harry in the next chapter.
It is worth noting that though the cabinet that Peeves knocks over to distract Filch is insignificant to this book's storyline, it reappears in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, and in Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince it is a major plot device. In both appearances, its being broken is important.
The Disappearing Cabinet that Peeves knocks over and breaks here is twin to the one that Harry hid inside at Borgin and Burkes earlier. The twins will force Montague into it in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix; Montague will sense, somehow, that the other cabinet of the pair is the one in Borgin and Burkes, and Draco will get that information from him. Draco will then spend most of Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince attempting to repair it; once he succeeds, he will use it to allow Death Eaters to enter the school, avoiding the school's protective spells.
While Neville had previously mentioned that he was "almost a Muggle", the discovery that there is a market for courses to teach magic is our first indication that Neville's lack of magical ability may be common enough to make commercial exploitation of it possible. In the next chapter, we will learn that "squibs", non-magical offspring of magical families, exist. In Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix we will learn that they are sometimes employed by people in the Wizarding world. And in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows we will learn that having a Squib child was, in the past, considered somehow shameful, a prejudice that likely remains active to some degree even at the time these books are set.
Chapter 9: The Writing on the Wall
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
Filch appears and immediately accuses Harry of killing his cat. The arrival of Professor Dumbledore and several other teachers defuses the situation. Professor Lockhart volunteers his office so Dumbledore can examine Mrs. Norris. Professor Dumbledore asks Filch, Harry, Ron, and Hermione to accompany him, while Professors Lockhart, McGonagall, and Snape tag along. While Lockhart babbles on about deaths he has prevented, Dumbledore examines Mrs. Norris, concluding she is still alive, but petrified, and that someone other than Harry is responsible. Filch still believes that Harry must be involved because he knows Filch is a Squib, though Harry has no idea what that is. Snape suggests that while Harry, Ron, and Hermione were possibly just in the wrong place at the wrong time, their absence during the Hallowe'en feast is suspicious. They explain that they were at the Deathday party. Harry, wanting to avoid revealing that he heard voices, gives a rather flimsy excuse for why they skipped the Feast afterwards. Snape, suspecting he is lying, suggests punishment for dishonesty, but is overruled by McGonagall and Dumbledore, much to Filch's disappointment. Ron explains to Harry later that a Squib is a non-magical person born to wizard parents.
The Chamber's possible opening causes some students to behave differently: Justin Finch-Fletchley now seems to be avoiding Harry, and Hermione, among other things, spends even more time in the library than usual. Harry goes there to speak with Ron and finds Hermione is upset because there are no copies of Hogwarts: A History available. In their next class, History of Magic with Professor Binns, she persuades the old ghost to recount the Chamber of Secrets legend. Binns explains that over a thousand years ago, the school's four founders, Godric Gryffindor, Salazar Slytherin, Rowena Ravenclaw, and Helga Hufflepuff had a falling out over whether Muggle-borns and Muggles' descendants (half-bloods) should be admitted to Hogwarts. Slytherin alone believed only pure-bloods should learn magic, and he left the school when the others rejected his beliefs. According to the legend, he created a secret Chamber beneath Hogwarts and hid a monster within it. Only Slytherin's true Heir can open the Chamber or control the monster. Although the Chamber has never been found, Binns is unable to convince the class it does not exist.
While passing between classes, little Colin Creevey mentions that someone said Harry could be the Heir; Harry realizes this probably explains why Justin, who is Muggle-born, avoided him earlier. At the spot where Mrs. Norris was petrified, the Trio spies a clutch of spiders scurrying away, frightening Ron, who suffers from arachnophobia. Water flowing from Moaning Myrtle's bathroom covers the floor. The unused bathroom is in disrepair; it is also very wet, evidently because a moping Myrtle causes floods whenever she is upset. She is less than communicative with them. Percy catches the three leaving the bathroom and docks Gryffindor five House points.
During a later discussion, Ron thinks that, logically, Malfoy is the Heir. Hermione suggests they find out by using Polyjuice Potion to impersonate someone else. To get the formula, Hermione needs a teacher's signature to check out Moste Potente Potions from the library's restricted section. "But what teacher," asks Ron, "would be so thick?"
Although Filch is a minor character, he serves an important function in this chapter for several reasons. First, we see the pay-off to the set-up the author made when Filch's Kwikspell course was previously discovered. Filch is a Squib, born into a Wizarding family but lacking any magical powers, which is why he bought a beginner's magic course. While Filch is lucky to have employment at Hogwarts, it has left Filch a bitter man. Year after year, he sees children, possibly some from his own family, enter Hogwarts, be trained in the magic he can never know, then leave for careers he possibly once dreamed of, while he always remains behind. Being a Squib is a horrible half-life, knowing the magic world exists, being surrounded by it, but unable to participate magically. And while Filch's attempt to learn magic seems a desperate act, it may not be entirely futile; the author has mentioned in interviews that in rare instances, a person's magical ability can suddenly appear later in life. Filch may be harboring such a hope, though, at his age, that possibility seems virtually non-existent, and the author has stated that Filch's attempt is doomed to failure.
Filch's character also spotlights the multi-layered class divisions that exist within wizard society; human wizards top the hierarchy, while Squibs and non-human magical creatures occupy the descending levels. Readers have also seen that some wizards, like the Malfoys, believe an even finer distinction exists within the wizard strata, with pure-blooded wizards superior to Half-bloods and Muggle-borns. And among purebreds, there seems to be the belief that those with wealth and power reside at the apex. Harry, Ron, Hermione, and other characters continually encounter these social and racial prejudices.
The story's core plot line is also revealed here. Though Binns states the Chamber of Secrets is non-existent, and that multiple headmasters spent years searching for it without finding so much as a Broom-closet of Secrets, it is evident to the reader, as well as the students, that the Chamber does exist and a monster dwells within. There could be few, if any, other possible explanations for Mrs. Norris being Petrified.
A bit more insight into Gilderoy Lockhart is offered here. Inside his office, we see his pictures whisk themselves from their frames, hiding, when Harry and the others enter; some, overcome by curiosity, reappear later, and Harry notes a few are wearing hairnets. This may reflect something about Lockhart's true nature. Lockhart himself, rather than helping with the investigation, babbles on about deaths he has supposedly prevented. When Mrs. Norris is found to be not dead, but merely Petrified, Lockhart suggests that he could whip up a restorative potion in short order, though he never does so. This boast irritates Snape, who of course, as Potions master, would assume any potion-making task to be his.
This also highlights Snape's dislike for Lockhart, who has probably been dismissed as a fraud by most teachers at this point; Snape likely shares that opinion. We suspect Professor Dumbledore is also aware, and he may have hired Lockhart only because he was the lone applicant (according to Hagrid). We should also note that Snape was particularly irritated by Harry's fame in the previous book; it was Harry's celebrity that Snape dwelt on in Harry's first Potions lesson. Harry avoids the spotlight, but Lockhart chases it, and almost everything he does is aimed at gaining him more attention. This can only increase Snape's dislike of Lockhart, a dislike heightened even more by Lockhart's self-serving attempt to usurp Snape's duties.
Considering that Snape, according to rumour, has always desired the Defence Against the Dark Arts position, it seems curious that Dumbledore would instead hire someone as incompetent as Lockhart rather than appoint Snape. The reader may begin to wonder about this; it likely will be revisited as the series progresses.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Why did Salazar Slytherin leave Hogwarts?
Why does Filch accuse Harry of Petrifying Mrs. Norris? Is there any truth to his accusations?
Why would anyone want to Petrify a cat?
Since Mrs. Norris is just a cat (not an Animagus), why would she be the first victim?
Why is Harry suspected as being the Heir of Slytherin? Is the evidence credible or merely coincidental? Explain.
What does Hermione hope to find in the library?
Why would Percy dock the Trio House points for being in a bathroom?
Despite evidence, why has no one been able to locate the Chamber of Secrets?
What kind of monster might be in the Chamber? How can it be controlled?
Why do Lockhart's pictures run and hide when someone enters the room, and what does that say about him?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
While Harry, Hermione and Ron are examining the area where Mrs. Norris was found, they notice some strangely-behaving spiders. Ron admits he fears spiders, which is confirmed later in this book, and also in the next two books: by his Boggart in Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, and his behavior during Mad-Eye Moody’s Unforgivable Curse demonstration in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire. The spiders' peculiar behavior here gives a clue about the monster Slytherin concealed within the Chamber.
Percy claims that he is penalizing Harry and Ron House points despite Prefects lacking this power. It is possible, however, that anyone challenging Percy's over-inflated ego and self-importance, as Ron does here, causes Percy to react by threatening that he is docking House points. It may also be that the prefects, reporting any misbehavior to the House Head, can recommend docking points. While that may be what Percy intended, technically, he apparently has overstepped his bounds. In an interview, the author stated that Percy is more likely to be right than Ron, who says in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix that prefects could not dock House points; she also reinforced this statement on her official web site. Against this, however, we must mention that Draco Malfoy, a prefect in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, agreed that prefects lacked the authority to dock House points. One can be sure that if Draco were able to dock House points from Gryffindors, he would, as later, as a member of Dolores Umbridge's Inquisitorial Squad, he acquires that power and freely abuses it. In this particular case, however, it makes more sense that Percy is merely overstepping his boundaries through over-officiousness, a very Percy-like trait, than to have Draco later refrain from abusing a power he has been given.
One must wonder about Professor Binns' vehement denial that the Chamber of Secrets exists. We will learn that the Chamber had been opened some fifty years previously, and Headmaster Dippet considered closing the school as a result. While it is possible this was before Professor Binns joined the school, that seems unlikely; Binns' apparent refusal to teach anything later than about the nineteenth century argues for his having been a teacher for many more years than a mere fifty, and indeed suggests that his curriculum may have stopped changing when he died.
There is an interesting side note to this. Professor Binns tells the class that, according to the legend, only the true Heir of Slytherin can open the Chamber of Secrets. This  part, at least, will be proved wrong. Not only does Harry open it later in this book by speaking Parseltongue (snake language), but presumably Ginny Weasley, controlled by Tom Riddle's memory, must have been instructed by Riddle on how to open it. Much later in the series, in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, Ron will also open the Chamber by repeating the same Parseltongue words he heard Harry speaking when he unlatched Slytherin's Locket Horcrux. This suggests a great conceit by Slytherin, in that he apparently believed that only his heirs would be able to speak Parseltongue. And while it could technically be argued that Voldemort's small soul portions residing within Harry and Ginny—Harry through Voldemort's attempt to murder him, and Ginny through the Diary—gave them this ability, Ron had no such connection. Considering how interconnected the many Wizarding families are, some, including Harry and the Weasleys, could be descended from Salazar Slytherin's family. Even though this connection may be quite diluted and even indirect, it may still be enough to open the Chamber. Ron, however, attributes his limited ability to simply mimicking what Harry had done to unlatch Slytherin's Locket Horcrux.
This conceit will be furthered mirrored later by Voldemort, who, smugly believing only he knows about the Room of Requirement at Hogwarts, uses it to hide a Horcrux. Dobby, however, will suggest to Harry (in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix) that he use this room for his secret Dumbledore's Army meetings, which he does. Dobby gives the impression that this room is well-known to the other Hogwarts House-elves.
While Mr. Filch seems consumed with bitterness over being a Squib, not all such non-magical persons are so resentful; presumably some even marry witches or wizards and can produce magical offspring, just as a Muggle married to a magical spouse can. Mrs. Figg, Harry's neighbor, is also a Squib who, unbeknown to Harry just yet, has been helping to guard him since his arrival at Privet Drive. It will be learned much later that she also belongs to the Order of the Phoenix, a secret organization dedicated to fighting Voldemort. It is uncertain whether Squibs are encouraged to integrate themselves into Muggle society, as the only two we see are Filch and Mrs. Figg, both of whom have presumably been kept in the Wizarding world by direct or indirect action of Professor Dumbledore. Mrs. Figg has apparently adjusted to her non-magical status and is useful to Dumbledore, apparently eking out a living in the Wizarding world by breeding her unusual cats, which may be Kneazles or cat-Kneazle crossbreeds, that she presumably sells to wizards. Hermione's cat, Crookshanks, that she purchases in the next book, is likely such a creature, and plays an important role in that book.
Filch's character also highlights another recurring theme: how easily innocent and vulnerable people (and non-humans) are accused of and punished for crimes they never committed. Here, Filch, in a rush to judgment and already biased against Harry (and most students), claims that Harry petrified his cat, Mrs. Norris, even though there is no evidence other than Harry's early arrival on the scene. Fortunately, the Hogwarts faculty dismiss Filch's unfounded accusations. However, later in the series, Harry will again find himself implicated in various incidents based on faulty evidence, or accusations that he is an attention-seeking liar, by an indifferent and complacent Ministry of Magic. This injustice later extends to other characters, who, betrayed or manipulated, are disbelieved and/or punished for crimes they never committed. Harry continually finds himself confronting a legal system that seems bent on obtaining image-enhancing results rather than uncovering inconvenient truths. He will also learn that individuals who wield power and wealth are usually considered more credible than their everyday counterparts, often enabling them to influence events to their advantage. Readers can also see that merely making an accusation can often bias others into accepting it as fact, as when students almost immediately begin forming opinions regarding Harry as the Heir of Slytherin.
In this chapter we learn of the existence of Polyjuice Potion. This potion will be used again, by Barty Crouch, in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire. It will also be used repeatedly in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, by members of the Order of the Phoenix, and by the Trio.
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
Following the rather disastrous Pixies episode, Professor Lockhart now mostly re-enacts scenes from his books with Harry's unwilling assistance. Today Harry is being a Werewolf, and he plays along only to stay on Lockhart's good side. After class, Hermione asks Lockhart to sign a note for a library book to help her understand something in one of his works; he readily signs it, then offers to provide Harry advice on being a Quidditch Seeker. Madam Pince somewhat reluctantly accepts the note, and gives Moste Potente Potions to Hermione.
Shortly thereafter, Hermione, Harry, and Ron gather in Moaning Myrtle's bathroom where they are unlikely to be disturbed. Hermione reports that she needs Boomslang skin and Bicorn horn for the potion, ingredients unavailable in the student supplies cupboard. The potion will take about a month to brew, and Hermione, surprisingly, not only is willing to take some risks, but convinces Harry and Ron that they must also.
Just before the Quidditch match against Slytherin starts, Wood assures the team they can beat Slytherin, despite their faster brooms. He tells Harry to do whatever he can to catch the Snitch.  As the match is underway, a rogue Bludger immediately targets Harry. Despite Fred and George's best efforts to block it, the Bludger seems determined to knock Harry off his broom; as the team is being slaughtered by the other Bludger and the Slytherin Beaters, Harry tells Fred and George to only concentrate on the game, he can handle the rogue. Malfoy, meanwhile, is so intent on sneering at Harry's frantic efforts to dodge the rogue Bludger, that he fails to notice the Snitch is right by his head. Harry spots it and takes off, but as reaches for the golden ball, the rogue Bludger smashes into his arm, breaking it. Harry catches the Snitch with the other hand, landing hard on the ground intact, then faints. He regains consciousness to see Lockhart standing over him. Lockhart promptly casts a "mending" spell to repair Harry's arm, but it instead removes all the bones.
In the hospital wing, Madam Pomfrey is furious—she can easily fix broken bones, but regrowing them will be a painful, overnight job. The Gryffindor team arrives to celebrate the win over Slytherin but Madam Pomfrey promptly ejects them.
Later that night, Harry is awakened by Dobby sponging his forehead. Dobby admits that he closed the barrier at Kings Cross station to prevent Harry returning to the school, and also enchanted the Bludger, hoping Harry would be injured enough to be sent home. He explains that a House-elf can only be freed if his Master gives him clothing, which is why he wears a ragged pillowcase. He also mentions that the Chamber of Secrets was opened once before, though he punishes himself for having revealed something he ought not. Hearing a noise, he vanishes. Professor Dumbledore and Professor McGonagall bring in a Petrified Colin Creevey. Colin's camera is completely melted inside; Dumbledore says this proves that the Chamber is open again, but the main question is not who, but how?
Lockhart's magical ineptness is becoming more apparent. Now, rather than teaching self-defence charms, Lockhart merely re-enacts scenes from his books, seemingly to avoid another Cornish Pixies-type incident. And, despite his claim he is adept in healing magic, his attempt to repair Harry's arm only results in a worse injury. One must wonder why Hermione, normally so logical, again rejects any suggestion that Lockhart is incompetent. It is perhaps telling that after Ron rhetorically asks aloud which teacher would be thick enough to grant a second-year student permission to check out a Restricted book, that Hermione chooses Lockhart to obtain just such a signature. Could she, despite her infatuation, perhaps now see that he is not quite as brilliant as he claims? Does she believe it is easier to hoodwink a new teacher rather than one who has been at Hogwarts much longer? Or is she simply becoming aware of his vanity, and chooses to play on that to get what she wants, while still retaining some belief in his competence?
The rogue Bludger initially seems to confirm Dobby's warning that Harry is in danger. Only after the game is it learned that it was Dobby who unleashed it, in an effort to convince Harry he should leave Hogwarts; Dobby knows the Chamber was opened relatively recently and that Harry's life is in peril. His misguided attempts to keep Harry away from Hogwarts have been laughable and child-like. Dobby first tried tricking Harry into believing his friends no longer cared about him by intercepting their letters. When that failed, he created havoc in the Dursley house, though he never predicted the fallout: the Ministry of Magic's owl and Uncle Vernon locking Harry in his room, resulting in Ron and the Twins coming to Harry's rescue. Dobby's blocking the barrier to the train station platform also failed when Harry and Ron instead took the Flying Car to Hogwarts, and now this latest attempt to injure Harry badly enough to send him home has similarly failed. All these acts seem poorly planned and executed. Does Dobby actually believe that Muggle medical care is better than what Hogwarts can offer? Or does he believe that Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia would allow magical healing in their house? Dobby seems oblivious that Harry's house is not his home, and that Hogwarts, no matter how dangerous it might be, is far more welcoming than Privet Drive.
The Quidditch match is revealing in other ways. Here Slytherin again shows their true nature. Whereas Gryffindor has trained long and hard to win by skill and fair play, Slytherin not only relies on the superior brooms Lucius Malfoy provided the team, but they also use the rogue Bludger to their advantage, easily racking up more points as Gryffindor's defences are divided by fending off both the Slytherin team and the menacing ball that is attacking Harry. Any other team would probably have halted the playing until the rogue was eliminated, then restarted the game, but Slytherin exploits any opportunity. Draco, meanwhile, rather than focusing on being a team member and helping Slytherin win, is instead so pre-occupied with himself and jeering at Harry as the rogue Bludger chases him, that he is oblivious to the Snitch hovering next to him. We suspect that the Slytherin team captain will have some rather harsh words for Draco following Harry's winning the match due to Draco's inattention.
Despite its being placed at the very end of the chapter, in a position of prominence, it is far too easy to overlook Dumbledore's statement that the operative question about the re-opening of the Chamber of Secrets is not who, but how. This should indicate, to the attentive reader, that Dumbledore knows the identity of the Heir and is only wondering how he managed to get the chamber re-opened.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Why did Lockhart choose Harry to participate in the class demonstration?
Knowing what we do about Lockhart, why did he insist on "repairing" Harry's broken arm?
Who charmed the Bludger to attack Harry, and why?
Why did Hermione choose Professor Lockhart to sign a permission slip to check out a restricted book? Why does he sign it?
Why does Dobby tell Harry that he has been trying to force him to leave Hogwarts? Why does he then punish himself for revealing this?
What does Dumbledore mean when he says it not important to know "who" opened the Chamber of Secrets, but rather "how"?
What does the Slytherin team's actions in the Quidditch match say about Slytherin House in general?
What does Draco's performance as the Slytherin Seeker say about him?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
After stating that the Chamber of Secrets has been reopened, Dumbledore comments that the question should not be who opened it, but how.  This implies that Dumbledore rejects the commonly-held belief that it was Hagrid who opened it before, and that Tom Riddle caught him in the act and prevented it. If Dumbledore suspects Riddle opened the Chamber fifty years ago, and believes he has reopened it now, Dumbledore may have already formulated theories about Horcruxes. Until the Diary is revealed, any such theory would be tentative, though any suspicions will be further bolstered in the next chapter when it is revealed that Harry is a Parselmouth. This extremely rare ability to speak to snakes is shared by Voldemort's family, and Dumbledore will rightly surmise that Harry did not inherit this skill naturally. Dumbledore no doubt also remembers the previous year when Voldemort's shade was riding Professor Quirrell, and he may be wondering if the Dark Lord has found another mount, despite rumours placing him in Albania.
It seems Dobby understands the Diary's nature better than Lucius Malfoy, who sent it into the school as a weapon. We will learn that Hogwarts employs several hundred House-elves, and House-elf society likely communicates amongst themselves. It is possible that even if Dobby does not know what the Chamber of Secrets conceals, he is at least aware that Lucius has provided the means to reopen it, fifty years after its previous opening when a student died. It is almost certainly fear for Harry's life that causes Dobby to employ these feeble attempts to return Harry "home" to Privet Drive.
Having revealed that he tried to force Harry to leave Hogwarts, and having been fiercely rebuffed, Dobby will not make any further attempts. Dobby is likely aware that attempting to trick Harry again is useless, as he will immediately be suspected, rendering any action on Dobby's part ineffective.
The potion Madam Pomfrey provides to re-grow the bones in Harry's arm, "Skele-grow", reappears in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, where it is apparently used as part of Griphook's treatment.
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
By morning, Harry's arm is healed, and he is discharged from the hospital wing. He finds Ron and Hermione in Moaning Myrtle's washroom, already brewing the Polyjuice Potion. Harry tells them about Dobby's visit; Ron observes that if Dobby continues to help Harry, Dobby will likely kill him.
News about Colin Creevey's Petrification has spread, and Ginny, who is in Colin's class, is distraught; also, there is a brisk business in Talismans and other supposedly magical protective objects. Neville, despite being a Pureblood, believing his weak magical ability makes him a target, buys many, claiming, "they went for Filch first."
Harry, Ron, and Hermione elect to stay at the school over Christmas after hearing that Malfoy is doing the same. But the Polyjuice potion is nowhere near ready, and they need to raid Professor Snape's private stores for ingredients. Surprisingly, Hermione volunteers to steal them if Harry or Ron can create a diversion. During the next Potions class, Harry tosses a firecracker into Goyle's Swelling Solution, splattering students. While Snape administers Deflating Draughts to everyone, Hermione sneaks into Snape's office and retrieves Boomslang skin and Bicorn horn. Hermione adds the new ingredients, saying the potion will be ready in a fortnight.
A week later, a notice is posted about a Dueling Club. Reckoning it will be useful, all three troop to the Great Hall, only to find that Professor Lockhart is running it, assisted by Professor Snape. In the first demonstration, Professor Snape tosses Professor Lockhart across the room using the Expelliarmus jinx. Lockhart then breaks students into pairs; Harry is paired with Malfoy, Ron with Seamus, and Hermione with Millicent Bullstrode. Mayhem ensues: Malfoy jinxes Harry before the start signal, but Harry retaliates; Ron's wand misfires, doing something horrible to Seamus. Hermione and Millicent have dropped their wands and are wrestling—Harry frees Hermione from Millicent's headlock. Lockhart suggests just one pair on stage, and selects Neville and Justin Finch-Fletchley; Snape overrules him and suggests Malfoy and Harry. When Malfoy conjures a snake that slithers towards Harry, Lockhart's attempts to eliminate it fails. As it seems poised to attack Justin, Harry yells at it to leave Justin alone. Surprisingly the snake obeys. Justin escapes the Great Hall as Snape destroys the snake. Ron drags Harry out exclaiming, "I didn't know you were a Parselmouth!" A Parselmouth, Harry learns, possesses the rare ability to talk to snakes, and it is what Salazar Slytherin was famous for and why Slytherin House's symbol is a serpent. Now Harry wonders—could he be the Heir of Slytherin?
The next day, Harry wants to explain everything to Justin, but Justin, believing Harry is the Heir of Slytherin, has gone into hiding, fearing Harry would Petrify him for being Muggle-born. Ernie claims Harry was speaking Parseltongue and chasing the snake towards Justin. Furious, Harry stalks out, smacking into Hagrid, who is on his way to Dumbledore's office to report that something is killing his roosters. Leaving Hagrid, Harry trips over a Petrified Justin Finch-Fletchley and finds himself staring at a smoldering and apparently Petrified Nearly Headless Nick. Spiders are fleeing.
Discovering Harry, Peeves sounds the alarm. Professor McGonagall arrives, and assigns Ernie Macmillan to take Nick to the Hospital Wing while Professor Flitwick and Professor Sinistra take Justin. Professor McGonagall escorts Harry to Professor Dumbledore's office.
The dueling club shows Gilderoy Lockhart's continuing ineptness, as he is unable to block Snape's simple spell, control the student duels, or eliminate Draco's conjured snake. By now, we should be wondering whether Gilderoy is a wizard at all, or merely a very good self-promoter. It is curious that Hermione still seems infatuated with him. Snape sees through Lockhart, of course, and Harry observes that if Snape looked at him like he did Lockhart, he would run for cover.
During the dueling club, Harry's ability to talk to snakes is revealed to the school, though readers first saw this when Harry and the Dursleys visited the zoo in Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone. We learn here that it is an extremely rare ability, linked only to Salazar Slytherin and his descendants. Given that the school fears "the Heir of Slytherin's" ongoing depredations, this is a major concern, of course. Proof that there is a connection between Salazar Slytherin and Harry could not be any plainer, and Harry, who knows little about his ancestry, is unable to disprove, even to himself, that he could be the Heir. The only mitigating factor is that Harry was absent during the petrifications. Harry knows this, but is unable to prove it.
This whole episode throws Harry into confusion. The Sorting Hat had wanted to place him into Slytherin House; he plainly remembers that the only reason it did not was because he asked not to be. Obviously, the Hat detected the link to Slytherin that is now made manifest by Harry's Parseltongue ability. Though Harry loves Gryffindor, is he there under false pretenses? This uncertainty, to a greater or lesser extent, will likely prey on Harry at least until the book's end.
Hermione's ongoing unbending is also shown when she raids Snape's stores. Her willingness to break the rules is hardly surprising to readers, who have seen her gradually grow more pliable through this and the previous book; however, it is quite a shock to Ron, who clearly continues to believe that Hermione is entirely rule-bound, despite increasing evidence to the contrary.
Also, Neville's fearing that he may be targeted, even though he is a pure-blood, is probably justified. The series increasingly parallels real-life history, including totalitarian rulers, particularly Nazi Germany. Even within their own society, it was common practice to weed out those considered as "undesirables", including the aged, infirm, or anyone with physical or mental handicaps, leaving only the fittest and healthiest to pass on their "superior" genes to the next generation. If Voldemort should ever return to power, it seems likely that in addition to his strict "pure-blood" ethos, he would only recruit the strongest, brightest, and most magically proficient wizards for his new order. Neville, and other "unworthy" pure-bloods, could become victims under such a regime.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Why does Hermione have Harry and Ron create a distraction in Snape's class? Was it successful?
Why does Lockhart start a Dueling Club? What does his performance in it say about him?
Why was Harry paired with Draco?
Why was Ron allowed to duel with a known faulty wand?
How could Harry be unaware he was speaking snake language?
Is Neville right to be concerned that he might be Petrified, even though he is a pure-blood? Explain.
Why would a ghost be Petrified?
What might be killing Hagrid's roosters and why?
What evidence is there for and against Harry being descended from Salazar Slytherin?
Consider what we know at this point about Salazar Slytherin's beliefs, and Voldemort's. Is it possible that Voldemort could be an heir of Slytherin's?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Colin Creevey is the first student who is Petrified. His being Ginny's classmate is sufficient reason to cause her distress, but her concern is actually the slowly-dawning realization that she may be responsible, as she was unable to remember what she was doing when it happened, or on the earlier occasion when Mrs. Norris was attacked. We have no way of realizing this at this point; all we know is that Harry was not present at either earlier petrification, or at the double petrification that happens in this chapter. The final attack will largely prove his innocence; but that does not occur for several months yet.
Professor Snape disarms Professor Lockhart with the Expelliarmus jinx. We don't know if Harry has been taught this spell previously, but it is the first time we have seen it in the series; by his demonstration, Snape may have unknowingly exposed Harry to possibly the most important spell of his life. The Disarmament Jinx, to give it its other name, will allow Harry to defeat Voldemort twice: once at the cemetery in Little Hangleton, and again at the end of the final battle.
The wrestling match between Hermione and Millicent Bullstrode is useful to our plot, as it is here that Hermione collects a hair she will use in her Polyjuice Potion portion. This will turn into a disaster for Hermione, as the hair is not Millicent's.
Harry again observes spiders fleeing the scene of the latest activity by the monster in the Chamber. This will provide an important clue for Hermione, who will determine what the monster is, but will be struck down before she can pass that information to Harry and Ron. Hagrid's roosters being killed will also form part of that pattern.
In Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, it is learned that Harry's ability with Parseltongue is due to a link with Slytherin; it will be a sideways link, though, as it is related to Voldemort's soul shard that adhered to Harry and remains within him. Voldemort is, in fact, the last living heir of Slytherin, through his mother's father, Marvolo Gaunt. The author has confirmed in a later interview that Harry's parseltongue ability vanished when that soul shard was destroyed, and he has not missed it since.
Dumbledore later quiets Harry's doubts by showing him that the sword he retrieved from the Sorting Hat was Godric Gryffindor's. "Only a true Gryffindor could have pulled that out of the Hat, Harry." While Dumbledore likely already knows about Voldemort's soul shard within Harry, it is something he believes Harry is unprepared to hear about yet. It is only at the end of Harry's fifth year that Dumbledore finally reveals the prophecy to Harry, which states that either he or Voldemort must die. Dumbledore, however, understands that Harry will have to die in order to destroy the soul shard he carries; Dumbledore believes, probably correctly, that, at age twelve, Harry is too young to carry that destiny's weight. Dumbledore actually never reveals the soul shard's existence to Harry, instead passing that task to Snape before his death, and charging Snape to conceal its existence until Voldemort realizes his Horcruxes are being destroyed.
In a later book, Snape notes that some quantity of Bicorn horn and Boomslang skin are missing from his private stores, and suggests that Harry might have stolen them. Harry cannot answer this charge, knowing that Hermione had stolen these ingredients from him two years earlier. We later learn that Barty Crouch, Jr. had been making Polyjuice Potion for his own disguise, and surmise that the theft Snape is talking about was, in fact, not Hermione's past activities but Crouch's more recent ones. It is our, and Harry's, knowledge of this earlier instance that prevents us wondering if these potion ingredients were actually stolen in the later instance by Crouch, who was, Harry believes, in Snape's office shortly before the accusation.
Note Harry's confusion in this chapter; Harry tells the snake to leave Justin alone, and is confused by Justin's response. Harry is unable to perceive that he has spoken in anything except English, and so doesn't realize that Justin did not understand what he was saying to the snake. Harry's inability to tell the difference between English and Parseltongue is a key point in this book, as he perceives the Monster's voice at several points and does not recognize that the Monster is not speaking in English. Harry's ability to speak to snakes is first seen in the first book of the series, and no mention is made there of whether Harry perceives that the snake is not speaking English. This confusion will reappear later in this book, when Harry has a need to speak Parseltongue and finds it difficult to switch, and will be a minor plot point in the final book.
The Expelliarmus spell is introduced to the readers, and possibly also to Harry, in this chapter. Harry will find this spell extremely useful, starting later in this book, first to disarm Malfoy and retrieve Riddle's diary, then later to disarm Lockhart during the book's ending chapters.  In Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, he, Ron and Hermione will together use it to disarm Snape. He will use the jinx on Voldemort in the cemetery duel in book 4, which will allow him to escape Voldemort unharmed; it will be the first spell taught to Dumbledore's Army in book 5; it will be noted at the beginning of book 7 that it has become something of a "signature spell" for Harry, and at the end of that book will be used again to disarm Voldemort.
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
After depositing Harry in the Headmaster's office, Professor McGonagall departs. Looking around, Harry sees small intricate mechanisms on the many tables, portraits of sleeping past Headmasters and Headmistresses on the walls, and the Sorting Hat on a shelf behind a desk. Harry puts on the Hat, asking it if it still believes he should be in Slytherin. The Hat responds that Harry would have been great there. Returning it to the shelf, Harry says it is wrong. Harry then notices an ill-looking bird on a perch. It suddenly bursts into flames, crumbling into ashes. Professor Dumbledore enters, and, unperturbed about the bird, explains, "Fawkes is a Phoenix, Harry. Phoenixes burst into flames when it is time for them to die and are reborn from the ashes." Lifting a chick from the ashes, Dumbledore says Phoenixes are extremely beautiful, except on a burning day. Also, "they can carry extremely heavy loads, their tears have healing powers, and they make highly faithful pets."
Hagrid suddenly bursts in, loudly proclaiming Harry's innocence. Dumbledore assures Hagrid that he does not suspect Harry of anything. Abashed, Hagrid leaves the office. Dumbledore then asks if Harry wants to tell him anything, but recalling Ron's words that hearing voices no one else can, even in the Wizarding world, is a bad thing, Harry says nothing about it. Dumbledore dismisses him, and he returns to his dormitory.
Nearly the entire school believes Harry is the Heir; Fred and George, however, joke about it, loudly proclaiming that a "seriously evil wizard" is approaching whenever Harry walks down the hall. While Harry appreciates their humorous gesture, Ginny seems distraught.
The term ends, and there are a few stayovers for Christmas, including Draco Malfoy, and his cronies Crabbe and Goyle. On Christmas morning, Hermione barges into the boys' dormitory, waking them up and letting them know the Polyjuice Potion is ready. Harry receives Christmas presents from the Weasleys, while the Dursleys have sent him a toothpick. After the magnificent Christmas feast, Hermione gives Harry and Ron two small cakes loaded with Sleeping Potion. They place them where Crabbe and Goyle will find them after leaving the Great Hall. Crabbe and Goyle promptly eat them; Ron and Harry drag the unconscious pair into a closet, gather a few hairs, and head for Moaning Myrtle's washroom where Hermione awaits with the potion.
Hermione has already plucked a hair from Millicent Bullstrode's robes. After adding the hairs and drinking the potion, Ron and Harry painfully transform into Crabbe and Goyle's likenesses. From a cubicle, Hermione tells Harry and Ron to go without her—something seems amiss, but she does not elaborate.
Ron and Harry have difficulty finding where the Slytherin common room is located. They even ask a Ravenclaw student for directions. Percy suddenly appears and threatens the two with detention for being out after hours. Draco intervenes just in time, and leads the impostors to the entrance to Slytherin's common room. He gives the password, "pure blood", and heads in. Ron, barely able to contain himself, becomes infuriated when Malfoy shows him an article in the Daily Prophet about Mr. Weasley being fined for having an enchanted Muggle car. Draco discusses the Chamber of Secrets, saying it was opened once before. A girl was killed by the Monster, and the person who released it is likely still in Azkaban. Draco also mentions that there is a secret chamber beneath Malfoy Manor's drawing room containing many Dark objects. Although he does not know who the Heir is, he wishes it was himself. His father has instructed him to stay uninvolved in the matter, however.
As the potion starts wearing off, Harry and Ron rush back to the washroom. Moaning Myrtle is laughing wildly at Hermione. Apparently, the hair Hermione used in her potion belonged to Millicent Bullstrode's cat. Hermione now has a furry face, pointed ears, and a bushy tail. As Polyjuice Potion is not intended for species transformations, it will not wear off on its own.
Much is learned in this chapter. Our introduction to Dumbledore's office here gives insight into the Headmaster's nature, and perhaps Headmasters in general. The Put-Outer, which we saw in book 1's first chapter, clearly belongs in Dumbledore's collection, being the same type of magical / mechanical hybrid as the devices which fill Dumbledore's office. It may be that Dumbledore actually invents these objects, rather than simply collecting them.
Once again, the Sorting Hat states that Harry would be great in Slytherin House. By now Harry has seen hints that a link exists between him and Slytherin, notably Harry's ability to speak Parseltongue. This has left him unsure whether or not he is the Heir of Slytherin, as he is unable to fully trace his ancestry, though no one in the Potter family, unlike Slytherin's heirs, was known for speaking Parseltongue. There must be some other explanation for Harry having this ability. Despite vehemently denying the Hat's belief, however, Harry, already troubled by this possibility, must be even more upset at the Sorting Hat's insistence on this link.
Harry's ability to speak Parseltongue not only sets him apart from everyone else, but it causes many students to suspect and fear him. Based on his comments after bringing the Petrified Colin Creevey, the reader should guess that Dumbledore does not believe Harry is the Heir, but he is hoping Harry can shed some light on recent events. Hogwarts is a place where being a wizard is considered "normal," and, for the first time, Harry is allowed to fit in with others like himself. Now he finds he is once again disdained and ostracized because he has an ability others lack. He does not tell Dumbledore about the voice because he fears that admitting to others that he hears voices others cannot will only further ostracize him.
Dumbledore's emphasis on the Phoenix's abilities also seems more telling than we would expect, and it is likely foreshadowing. These birds are extremely loyal, can lift heavy weights, and have healing tears; how could these abilities assist Harry?
Harry and Ron, meanwhile, were unable to find the answer they were seeking, but they have gained some valuable information from Draco, who is so self-absorbed he cannot even detect that "Crabbe" and "Goyle" are acting oddly, even for them. Now Harry and Ron know definitively that someone other than Draco is the Heir of Slytherin, though Draco wishes it was him, a stark contrast to Harry, who still fears that he is the Heir. Draco's behavior is telling, not only about himself, but also Slytherins in general who, known for embodying stealth, cleverness, determination, and ambition, will often take the shortest and easiest available path to reach what they want. Draco desires to be Slytherin's Heir not only because he believes it will bestow enormous prestige on him, but because he can obtain it merely through an "accident of birth", basking in the reflected glory, rather than anything he deliberately worked hard at to achieve on his own. This is the polar opposite to Harry, who did inherit his fame by fate rather than by his own design—a fame that dismays him, and that he feels is undeserved and propels him to prove himself in other ways. Meanwhile, Harry and Ron also learn that the Malfoy family is hoarding Dark objects at their mansion, information Ron will likely share with Mr. Weasley as soon as possible.
The information that Harry and Ron do learn is thanks to Hermione's efforts, though she, unfortunately, pays a price. Despite her clever planning and meticulous effort in brewing the Polyjuice Potion, her one tiny mistake (assuming the stray hair was Millicent's) has resulted in a huge furry problem, landing her in the Hospital Wing. It seems likely, knowing Hermione's nature, that she is probably more upset that she made an error, than what resulted from it. Regardless, her role here shows how vitally important she is becoming to "The Trio."
Also, Slytherin's password, "pure blood," is certainly revealing, and it could be considered as their creed. It clearly re-enforces Slytherin House's belief that they are separate (and superior) to the other Houses. This belief in pureblood superiority becomes even more extreme and wide-spread as the series progresses.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Why does Harry feel the need to put the Sorting Hat on? What does it tell him and why does Harry disagree?
Why did Draco's father order him to stay out of what is happening at Hogwarts? What does this indicate about Mr. Malfoy?
Should Harry have told Dumbledore about hearing voices? What would Dumbledore have done?
Why would Dumbledore have a Phoenix as a pet, and is that what Fawkes actually is? If not, what exactly is he?
What are Fawkes' unique qualities, and how could that be valuable to Dumbledore?
Why would Draco wish that he was the Heir of Slytherin? What does this say about his character?
Is the ability to speak Parseltongue sufficient proof that Harry is the Heir of Slytherin? Give evidence both for and against this argument.
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Harry meets Fawkes, Professor Dumbledore's Phoenix familiar. Fawkes plays an important part later in the year, twice saving Harry's life (once by blinding the Basilisk, then using his tears to cure Harry of the Basilisk venom). Additionally, his other abilities are necessary, because it is his loyalty to Dumbledore that summons him to Harry's defence, and his ability to lift heavy weights returns Harry and his co-adventurers to the surface after the battle. Fawkes will prove helpful both to Harry and to Dumbledore throughout the series.
In Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, Harry learns that the Phoenix feather core of his holly wand, and of Voldemort's yew wand, both come from Fawkes. These are the only two tail feathers Fawkes has ever donated.
Draco's admission that he does not know who the Heir of Slytherin is, and that his father has told him nothing other than to stay uninvolved, is somewhat telling. Knowing what the Diary actually is, we can see that the Heir of Slytherin is, as Dumbledore has suggested, the same person as last time, Tom Riddle. However, that Lucius has given Draco no instructions, except to stay clear, again indicates that Lucius may lack a clear idea of what he has unleashed. If he does know more, Lucius may be withholding information from Draco because he believes Draco is still too young and irresponsible to be entrusted with Dark matters. Considering Draco has already blabbed what little he does know to the bogus Crabbe and Goyle, this is probably a correct assumption.
Having been to the Slytherin common room, Harry will be able to describe it accurately when claiming to be Vernon Dudley from Slytherin after the Snatchers catch him.
Ginny being distraught by the Twins' joking is worth mentioning. We believe Ginny has a crush on Harry, and presumably this alone would be enough to upset her; the Twins seem to be mocking Harry, and that may upset Ginny, despite Harry's appreciation that at least two people find any association between him and Slytherin laughable. Likely, though, Ginny's dismay is probably due to her dawning realization that she may acting as the Heir. Clearly she has begun to note that she is unable to remember anything during the intervals when the petrifications happened, and, as the Riddle Horcrux tells us later, Ginny fears she may be losing her mind. We should note that Ginny's attempt to discard the Diary will happen shortly before Hermione's release from the Hospital Wing in early February; this chapter of the story, encompassing the start of Christmas break, clearly is late December. As Ginny will attempt to flush the diary down Myrtle's lavatory in about a month, she must, in this chapter, already be very near the limit of stress she can take from the effects of the diary.
The sleeping headmasters' and headmistresses' portraits will play an active part starting from Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix. The reader must be curious why these portraits seem so sleepy, when the portraits in the school proper are talkative and interact with students and faculty. Their apparent drowsiness is actually a means of concealment.
It will turn out that the Ravenclaw girl and Percy turning up in such proximity is not happenstance. We will learn later that she is Penelope Clearwater, a Prefect, and Percy's girlfriend. Penelope will be Petrified, and while we will see Percy's deep dismay at that occurrence, we will be carefully misled into believing that it is simply because Percy had previously believed Prefects to be invulnerable to attack.
Fawkes, first actually seen here, is a minor character and not properly a connection. However, his characteristics are important and do form connections.
It is mentioned in Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone that Harry's wand and Voldemort's share a core, each containing one of only two tail feathers ever given by one phoenix. In Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, we will learn that the phoenix in question is Fawkes. We do see Fawkes leaving feathers as markers of one sort or another in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, but we must assume those are not tail feathers and so possibly not usable for making wands.
"They can carry extremely heavy loads": Later in this book, Fawkes will carry Harry, Ron, Ginny, and Lockhart up from the Chamber of Secrets. In Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, Fawkes will carry Dumbledore to safety.
"Their tears have healing powers": Later in this book, Fawkes' tears will heal Harry's Basilisk-envenomed wound. After the battle in the cemetery , as Harry tells his story to Dumbledore in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, Fawkes' tears will heal Harry's leg injury.
"They make highly faithful pets": Very nearly all of Fawkes' activities throughout the series are due to this loyalty. It is Harry's expression of loyalty to Dumbledore that summons Fawkes to his aid in the Chamber of Secrets later in this book.
The calming effect of phoenix song is not mentioned here, but we see this effect in the Chamber of Secrets in this book, in Dumbledore's office in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, and finally after Dumbledore's death in Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince.
The portraits of the sleeping headmasters will play parts in a number of subsequent books. We will first see them awake in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, and we learn there that they can travel from those portraits to other portraits of themselves scattered around the world. The occupants of the portraits will thereafter generally play some part in any visit Harry makes to Dumbledore's office, and quite often to places where other portraits of headmasters are located. This will also prove a vital channel of communication for the Trio, as they will be carrying the portrait of Phineas Nigellus Black, a past headmaster, with them through much of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows.
The small, intricate mechanisms on Dumbledore's tables will play a part in later books. In Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, one of them will be used to analyze the attack on Mr. Weasley. In that same book, the attempt to arrest Dumbledore will result in several of the mechanisms getting damaged. At the end of that book, Harry will be returned to Dumbledore's office, which he will find repaired; in his anger at Dumbledore he will destroy one of the tables and the mechanism on it. In this book, when the diary is sharing T. Riddle's memories, Harry recognizes that it is a memory in part because of the absence of mechanisms on tables in the Headmaster's office.
Earlier in this book, Ron laments that Percy is not willing to allow the family to use his owl, Hermes, leaving the Weasley family dependent on the aging Errol for their communication. Ginny will later tell us that Hermes is carrying letters back and forth to Penelope Clearwater, Percy's girlfriend. We see Penelope in this chapter, though she is not identified. She will be petrified by the basilisk later in this book. Percy keeping Hermes exclusively to himself will be mentioned in a later book, so we can assume that he keeps this pattern going through the intervening two years.
Harry's visit to the Slytherin common room in this chapter will aid him in the final book of the series. Captured, Harry will use this knowledge when claiming to be Vernon Dudley from Slytherin, and so will avoid immediate identification.
Malfoy mistakenly calling Percy "Peter Weasley" may actually be foreshadowing for the next book in the series, when Ron mentions that his pet rat, Scabbers, used to belong to Percy. As it turns out much later, there is more to Scabbers than meets the eye.
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
Returning to Gryffindor tower after visiting Hermione in the Hospital Wing, Harry and Ron hear Filch yelling, and they cautiously investigate. Water from Moaning Myrtle's washroom has flooded the floor near Filch's usual post, the hallway where Mrs. Norris was petrified. Ron and Harry, entering the washroom, find Myrtle more distraught than usual. A book was thrown at her while she was in her favorite U-bend pipe. Her watery reaction washed the book, a worn-out diary, onto the floor. It is dated fifty years previously; the name "T. M. Riddle" is barely etched on the front page, but the pages are blank. Ron remembers during his detention seeing an award that was presented to T. M. Riddle for Special Services to the School fifty years ago.
In early February, Hermione, now fur-free and tailless, leaves the Hospital Wing. When Harry tells her about Riddle's Diary, she notices a correlation between its date and the Chamber being opened fifty years ago. Thinking the Diary may contain information about the Chamber, she attempts several revealing spells, but it remains stubbornly blank. Harry visits the Trophy Room for information about Riddle, but other than his award, and his name on the Head Boys list, there is none. Harry keeps the Diary, hoping to learn about Riddle.
The school's mood is lighter; the attacks have ceased and spring is approaching. The Mandrake plants are nearing maturity, and can soon be harvested to make a potion that will treat the Petrified victims. The only dark cloud is Professor Lockhart claiming credit for halting the attacks. Lockhart proposes a little "morale-booster:" having dwarves dressed as Cupids deliver live Valentines around the school on February 14. One corners Harry to deliver a Valentine (most likely from Ginny). In the resulting fracas, Harry's bag is ripped open, breaking his ink bottle and spilling ink on everything. Malfoy grabs the Diary, waving it around. Ginny seems terrified, and Harry reclaims it with a disarming jinx. Harry notices that there are no ink stains on the pages, though Ron, preoccupied with his recalcitrant wand, ignores Harry pointing this out.
That night, Harry discovers that when he writes in the Diary, it responds with Tom Riddle's written words. When Harry asks about the Chamber of Secrets, the Diary shows him the events of 13 June, fifty years back. Tom Riddle asks then-headmaster, Professor Dippet, if he can remain at Hogwarts for the summer, rather than return to his orphanage "home." Professor Dippet says because the Chamber of Secrets has been opened, that is impossible, and the school may close permanently. In a hallway, Harry sees a much younger and auburn-haired Professor Dumbledore telling Riddle to return to his dorm. Harry follows Riddle to the dungeons, where Riddle secretly watches another student sneak in to care for an unknown large creature. It is Hagrid, then a third-year student. Tom confronts Hagrid and accuses him of releasing the Monster from the Chamber. As the creature scuttles away, Harry is suddenly ejected from the memory. He tells Ron what he saw, and that Hagrid was expelled for opening the Chamber of Secrets fifty years ago.
This chapter is significant in that it not only introduces us to Tom Riddle through his Diary, but re-confirms that the Chamber was opened fifty years before, and a girl died then. Hermione points out that Draco Malfoy had mentioned this earlier, though he is unaware who was responsible. Lucius Malfoy, Draco's father likely attended Hogwarts some twenty years before Harry, but that would be thirty years after the Chamber was previously opened, so he could not be the Heir who previously opened the Chamber. And while Lucius may not know who the Heir is, as he told Draco, he may have some suspicions.
Filch's new usual post, where Mrs. Norris and the bloody message were found, is close to Moaning Myrtle's washroom, the source of the water on the hallway. We have seen that Peeves' insults chased a distraught Myrtle back to her washroom; her turning on the water taps on that occasion, and the resulting flood, clearly are a fairly common occurrence.
While inside Riddle's memory, Harry sees the much younger Dumbledore, and though the present-day Headmaster is older and greyer, he is no less powerful. It is hinted that Dumbledore alone may have considered Tom Riddle's actions suspect, despite his later Award for Special Services to the School. It is unknown if Dumbledore shared his suspicions about Riddle with Dippet. Even if he did, Hagrid's fate remained the same.
Truth, and how it is perceived and or manipulated by others, is an ongoing theme throughout the series. Viewing other peoples' memories, either through a diary, or other magical means that will be seen in later books, can sometimes be misleading, especially when taken out-of-context. Riddle's memory clearly implicates Hagrid, but does it tell the whole story? Is it possible to alter or edit these stored memories? While that remains unanswered here, the memory Harry is watching ends extremely abruptly, leaving it open to interpretation, though it seems to be steering Harry, and us, to a specific conclusion. With Muggles, memories can be faulty, biased, and sometimes dead wrong. Can that be the case with preserved wizard memories? Whether it is or not, Harry will have to come to the realization that the truth cannot always be determined by one person's viewpoint alone.
Truth can also be contaminated by prejudice, another ongoing theme, and it seems that Tom Riddle is perceived by the school authorities as being more truthful solely because he is charming, handsome, and eloquent. He is also fully human, whereas the unsophisticated and less-articulate Hagrid is not; Hagrid is suspect because his character is believed to be tainted by his giant ancestry. Only Dumbledore seems able to look beyond Riddle's charismatic façade, suspecting a darker persona may lurk within.
Another recurring theme in the series is how people (living or dead) can still affect others through their past actions, even though they may no longer be physically present. The memories show us how previous generations have impacted Hogwarts, leaving faint footprints that through the years have been tread upon, again and again, but are never completely erased. Hogwarts is a legacy of the many students and teachers who have lived there, and who can continue to influence the school in some indirect but meaningful way. As the series progresses, this becomes particularly significant in regards to Harry. Not only is his character continually shaped by those currently surrounding him, but it is increasingly affected by his late parents, who have left their own legacy.
When the attacks stop, life at Hogwarts seems to return to normal. However, this is likely a false sense of security, an "eye of the storm," that foreshadows worse events soon to come. Meanwhile, Lockhart's "mood lightener" to mark the occasion shows how little he understands people, though it does indicate how other teachers regard him. While this is little surprise to the reader, and initially seems to do little for the story, we find that it is an essential plot element, as it causes Harry to wonder why the spilled ink did not stain the Diary's pages. It is because of his curiosity about the way ink behaves, and in part because of Ron's distraction with his wand, that Harry learns how to communicate with the entity in the diary.
This is the first, but probably not the last, experience Harry has inside other peoples' memories. Note that Harry is initially confused that Dippet fails to react to him, a key indicator he is within someone's memories, which are unchanging and can only be observed, not participated in. One possibly confusing issue is that if we are in Tom's memory, as stated, how can we see what Dippet is doing before Tom arrives? This is never completely explained. The author has said that when you are in someone else's memory, what you see is what actually happened, not what they perceived. It is possible that the charm has an effective range that retrieves the memory, such that anything happening within 30 feet (10M) or so of the memory's owner can also be retrieved.
The author also interjects a little humor by again focusing attention on the rather human-like Mandrake plants. Their life-cycle nearly parallels the Hogwarts students, starting from infancy and childhood, through a moody, secretive early adolescence, on into a rebellious and rather wild teenaged period (with some even suffering from acne), and finally, adulthood. In this case, however, the poor plants are to be chopped up for a potion after reaching maturity.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Why is Moaning Myrtle so upset?
Why would a cat be Petrified?
Why would someone throw a diary into the toilet? Who might this have been?
Ginny apparently sent the Valentine to Harry. Is the confusion around its delivery sufficient to explain her apparent reaction or is something else responsible for her behavior? Explain.
Why might Tom Riddle want to stay at Hogwarts for the summer?
Who might the girl who was killed have been? Give evidence for your conclusion.
Why have the attacks suddenly stopped? Could they start again? If so, why?
Based on what is seen, was Hagrid responsible for releasing the monster in the Chamber of Secrets? Give reasons both for and against his being guilty.
Are the memories that Harry sees truthful? Explain.
What does the younger Dumbledore's interaction with Tom Riddle reveal?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
This is a pivotal chapter in the book. As mentioned, Filch's usual post is a chair near Myrtle's bathroom, and under the writing on the wall where Mrs. Norris was found. While Harry and Ron never consciously make the connection between Mrs. Norris and the bathroom, it may help Harry solve the riddle to the Chamber's entrance later in the story.
An important plot point in the Harry Potter series is also shown here: this is Harry's first contact with Tom Riddle's Diary, which we learn in Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince was the first-found of six Horcruxes believed to be created by Voldemort (whose birth name is Tom Marvolo Riddle). Riddle's soul shard opens the Chamber by controlling Ginny. Because Ginny finally connects the Diary with the odd occurrences, she attempts to flush it down the toilet in Moaning Myrtle's washroom, thus arousing Myrtle's ire and attracting Harry and Ron's attention. The episode with Draco Malfoy waving the Diary particularly disturbs Ginny because she recognizes it as the one she had disposed of, and now is deathly afraid Harry might learn how to communicate with it, learning the secrets that she entrusted to it. We are led to believe, however, that she is actually mortified because she sent the Valentine greeting delivered to Harry.
It is because Ginny no longer has the Diary, and thus is no longer being controlled by it, that the attacks cease. Ginny will eventually retrieve the Diary from Harry's dorm, and the attacks will immediately start up again, though nobody makes the connection between the two events.
Though the memory was incomplete, Harry learns that Hagrid was involved in the Chamber of Secrets' opening fifty years ago. However, we will shortly learn that the pet Tom Riddle saw him with was an Acromantula, a large spider capable of speech. While Hagrid and the Acromantula will prove to be unconnected with the Chamber, this Acromantula, Aragog, gives Harry a vital clue to finding the Chamber of Secrets' entrance.
While the memory Tom Riddle shows Harry is accurate, it is incomplete and slanted to imply Tom's innocence and reinforce Hagrid's guilt in opening the Chamber. Harry, like the school in Tom's day, is taken in by this. It was Hagrid's exposure, and the Monster never being released after Hagrid's expulsion, that led Headmaster Dippet and the school to believe that Tom correctly identified the culprit who opened the Chamber. For this, Tom received the Special Services award. It is likely that the only school member not sharing this belief is Professor Dumbledore.
Of course, Tom is Slytherin's heir; we will discover in the sixth book that Tom's mother, Merope Gaunt, claimed and could prove descent from Salazar Slytherin. Tom explored the castle extensively and found and opened the Chamber, controlling the Monster within. It is unclear how he was able to find it when many others, including Ghosts who can pass through solid barriers, were unable to. One possibility is that the Chamber is charmed to be invisible to all but Slytherin's descendants; however, this is unlikely, as Ron and Lockhart are quite able to see it once it is opened. Another possibility is that it is simply charmed to be unmappable. We never see any ghosts in the Room of Requirement, which is apparently also unmappable; perhaps the charm also prevents ghosts from entering.
It should be noted that memories can be edited; we will see an instance in Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince where Professor Slughorn had edited his memory before giving it to Professor Dumbledore. Though Slughorn's editing was clumsily done, we are led to believe that Tom Riddle was more adept at magic involving memories. Unlike Slughorn, Riddle does not try to replace memory segments he wants to remain hidden; instead he simply leaps over them.
It should also be noted that while memories can be altered, as in Slughorn's case, their accuracy in general might be questioned by readers. Are the strands that a volunteer surrenders an exact recording of what was actually seen, or are they as tainted by the individual's imperfect recollections as our own memories are? The author has stated in an interview, perhaps in response to this possible discrepancy, that memories retrieved in this manner are the actual events that occurred at the time; however, if they can be edited consciously, we have to assume that they may also be edited unconsciously. It should also be considered that Riddle may have had much more leeway to manipulate his memories by recording them in an enchanted diary, rather than them being directly taken from his mind and deposited into a Pensieve, which is how Harry will view other peoples' recollections later in the series.
It is in this book, looking back from the series end, that we first see Dumbledore's habit of holding his cards close to his vest. From early on, Dumbledore had suspicions about Riddle, suspicions that either were allayed by Riddle's behaviour, or simply did not occur to others who were blinded by his glamour. Dumbledore likely suspected Riddle was being evasive when he exposed Hagrid as the one who opened the Chamber, and clearly retained this suspicion through the intervening fifty years. Dumbledore now believes Riddle is again opening the Chamber, and as seen in an earlier chapter, only wonders how he is doing it.
As a point of irony, one might note a statement Ron makes in this chapter. While the Trio wonder why Tom Riddle received his award, Ron jokingly suggests that Riddle received it because maybe he is the person that killed Myrtle. The irony here is that Riddle did, in fact, kill Myrtle, and then received the award for stopping killing people. However, we will not come to this realization until the book's final chapters.
Aragog, who we see later in this book, will be mentioned again in the sixth book, where he passes away. Aragog's offspring will have a small role in the final book, also.
We will see Tom Riddle's orphanage in Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince. Professor Dumbledore will take Harry to view a memory in Dumbledore's Pensieve to illuminate Riddle's early influences.
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
Harry, Ron, and Hermione discuss this revelation endlessly—none want to believe that Hagrid would have anything to do with a monster. And yet, he was expelled from Hogwarts, and he has an affection for large, terrifying creatures, like Norbert the Dragon, and "Fluffy," the giant three-headed dog that guarded the Philosopher's Stone the previous year. The attacks must have stopped after Tom Riddle turned in Hagrid. Otherwise, Tom would not have received the Special Services award. They decide to do nothing unless there are more attacks. The school seems to be returning to normal, and the Mandrake plants are maturing and nearly ready for treating the Petrified victims.
Starting in their third year, Hogwarts students can attend elective courses, so over Easter Break, the second-years are to select their third-year classes. Hermione eventually decides she wants to take everything. Harry seeks advice from Percy, who pompously tells him to stay with his strengths. Feeling his only strength is Quidditch, Harry decides to take the same courses as Ron so they can work together.
Returning from Quidditch practice, Harry discovers his dorm has been ransacked and Riddle's Diary is gone. Harry surmises that a Gryffindor must have taken it; nobody else knows the password to the tower.
While heading to the Quidditch pitch for the match against Hufflepuff, Harry hears the voice again. Ron and Hermione hear nothing, but something suddenly occurs to Hermione and she runs to the library, while Ron and Harry head to the Pitch. Just before the game starts, Professor McGonagall announces it has been canceled and orders everyone to their House Common room. She singles out Harry and Ron to follow her to the infirmary. There has been a double attack: Penelope Clearwater, a Ravenclaw Prefect, and Hermione have been Petrified. Both were found near the library, Hermione clutching a small mirror. Percy is in shock that Penelope was attacked, apparently believing Prefects were immune.
In an attempt to protect the students from the monster, several restrictions are announced. Among them are a 6:00 PM curfew, which has the additional result of banning all evening activities outside the House dormitories. Further, students are to be escorted from class to class by teachers. If the monster is not found and dealt with, the school may have to be closed permanently.
Hidden under the Invisibility Cloak, Harry and Ron sneak out to Hagrid's hut to ask him about the Chamber of Secrets. Before he can reveal anything, a knock on the door sends Harry and Ron diving back under the Cloak; Professor Dumbledore and Minister for Magic Cornelius Fudge enter. Fudge, apparently believing Hagrid had previously opened the Chamber, and ignoring Dumbledore's protests, is sending Hagrid to Azkaban, the wizard prison, as a precaution. Lucius Malfoy suddenly arrives with an Order signed by the Governors of Hogwarts calling for Dumbledore's removal as Headmaster. Fudge objects to Dumbledore's removal, as does Hagrid, but Malfoy insists that it is an internal affair and no concern of the Ministry. As he is leaving, Dumbledore, staring directly at where Harry and Ron are huddled under the Cloak, says, "I will only truly have left the school when none here are loyal to me. You will also find that help will be given at Hogwarts to those who ask for it." As Hagrid is led away by Fudge, he calls out that if anyone wants to find answers, they should just follow the spiders, and to also feed Fang.
That Hagrid may be involved with the Chamber's opening is clearly a hard revelation for Harry. But the proof seems incontrovertible, and in the memory Harry actually saw Hagrid being discovered. Harry's trust in Hagrid has been shaken, but not fatally; it is only after the attacks start again that Harry felt he must approach Hagrid about the events resulting in his expulsion.
Meanwhile, the Diary has been stolen; Harry believes it was a targeted theft, as nothing else was taken. Harry and Ron also conclude it was a Gryffindor who stole it, as someone would need to know the password to get into the dormitory. Both facts may be significant. One thing is certain: Harry can no longer use it to learn more about Hagrid's expulsion from Hogwarts.
If Harry had braced Hagrid about those events, almost certainly Harry would also have had to explain how he had seen them, and the author revealing the Diary's role early on would have significantly weakened the plot. Thus, Hagrid's arrest, or some means, stronger than the easily-breached curfew, that renders Hagrid unavailable, is necessary to the story line. Hagrid's arrest also introduces us to Azkaban Prison, and how much wizards fear it. From the next book's title, Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, we can assume Azkaban will figure largely in it; and as it has been at least mentioned now in both this and the previous book, Azkaban will likely reappear in future books as well.
Lucius Malfoy is seldom, if ever, straightforward in his motives. In this case, he claims the Board of Hogwarts is suspending Dumbledore for failing to prevent the student attacks. We are aware that Malfoy's motives are usually something other than what they appear, and his machinations are extensive. It is a safe assumption that he has coerced the board into suspending Dumbledore; his smug satisfaction when delivering the document speaks to that. However, we are left wondering exactly what he hopes to gain by this action. Is hatred of Dumbledore sufficient reason for this level of action against him? Or is there something more to discover?
Hagrid is careful to tell Harry and Ron about the spiders, though we have no idea yet as to why. The spiders near Moaning Myrtle's bathroom were acting odd, however.
Readers should take note that when Hermione ambitiously states she wants to take every class in Year 3, this may foreshadow future events, as well as being an example of be careful what you wish for.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Before he leaves, Dumbledore seems to look directly at Harry and Ron, though they are under the Invisibility Cloak. Can Dumbledore actually see them? If so, how?
Why does Hermione suddenly go to the library?
Is Hagrid's being sent to Azkaban justified?
Who might have taken the Diary? How did they know about it, and why was it taken?
What evidence is there that Hagrid opened the Chamber of Secrets? Is it believable or merely circumstantial? Explain.
Can Harry trust what he sees in the Diary? Explain why or why not.
When Harry and Ron go to Hagrid for an explanation about the Chamber of Secrets, can they trust what he will tell them? Explain.
Why would Hagrid tell Harry to follow the spiders? Where might they lead?
Is Dumbledore's removal as headmaster justified or is there another reason behind it? Explain.
As he is leaving Hagrid's hut, what might Dumbledore's words to Harry mean?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
It should be noted that a new attack occurs immediately after the diary is stolen. It is certain that the diary had been deliberately disposed of; carrying something into a disused bathroom and flushing it down the toilet is hardly accidental. It is likely that the diary, in the hands of its original owner, was somehow connected to the attacks, and the recurrence of the attacks so shortly following the theft of the diary would imply that the original owner has reclaimed it. Harry, while not understanding why the diary has been stolen, suspects the thief is a Gryffindor student. This would probably also lead Harry to speculate, probably surprisingly, that a Gryffindor, rather than someone connected to Slytherin House, could be the Heir. We will discover in the final chapters that the Diary is directly associated with the attacks and that a Gryffindor student is involved, though that person is not the Heir of Slytherin.
The Twins' comments lead us to surmise that Percy is distressed only because a prefect has been attacked. Percy quite plainly believed that prefects were invulnerable. Even so, his reaction appears extreme, until we learn at the end of this book that Ginny had caught him kissing Penelope Clearwater. This romantic entanglement's revelation makes Percy's shock understandable at last.
Hermione's running to the library after Harry hears "the voice" again is perhaps what most helps Harry to once again save the day: connecting Harry to being the only person who can hear the voice inside the walls, Hermione correctly concludes that the monster is a Basilisk. Harry can hear it because he is a Parselmouth, possessing the rare ability to speak to snakes. A Basilisk's gaze is lethal to anyone looking directly into its eyes. However, no one has died because each saw the monster indirectly: Mrs. Norris saw it reflected in the water outside Myrtle's bathroom, Colin through his camera, Justin through Nearly-Headless Nick (who sees it directly, but since he is already dead, cannot be killed again), and Hermione and Penelope reflected in a mirror Hermione was carrying. Hermione also correctly guesses that the Basilisk uses the plumbing to move through the school's walls unmolested.
Lucius' motives in getting Dumbledore suspended are never entirely explained, but some understanding may come from knowing that Lucius engineered the attacks, even though he apparently remains uncertain what mechanism is involved. Knowing that Lucius provided the weapon, we can see that his orchestrating Dumbledore's suspension is a means to give that weapon free rein. Only three teachers at Hogwarts seem to believe that there might be a Chamber of Secrets containing a monster: Dumbledore, who was at Hogwarts at the time it was last opened; McGonagall, who accepts Dumbledore's word; and Lockhart, who is utterly ineffectual. By removing Dumbledore, Lucius is effectively halving the forces countering the monster.
Hagrid's final words as he is being taken away indicate strongly that Hagrid is more aware than we had thought of what is going on. What we will find out is that the spiders, in fear of the Monster, are heading for safe territory, the Forbidden Forest home of Aragog and the Acromantulae. Hagrid's suggestion that Harry and Ron should do likewise would argue that Hagrid has spoken with Aragog about the Monster, and that Hagrid believes Aragog can shed some light on current events. In retrospect, this is not too surprising; the Monster was last active at Hogwarts when Hagrid was caring for the then-juvenile Aragog, and it is to be expected that Hagrid would discuss the events at the school with Aragog. As Aragog is unable to name the Monster for Harry and Ron, we can assume that he is unable to name it for Hagrid either, and so Hagrid may not know exactly what the Monster is, but he does know that Aragog knows about it, and apparently believes that Aragog will be able to help Harry identify it.
Also, while Hermione's claim that she wants to take "every" third-year class seems like childish hyperbole, she is actually quite serious. She will arrange with McGonagall to do just that, and how she is able to accomplish this feat will play a major role in the next book. As a result, Hermione will painfully learn that sacrifices must be made to obtain so much knowledge and that there are limitations as to just how much one person can learn. She will, however, turn her misstep into an advantage.
Though Harry and Ron have previously noted spiders acting oddly in this book, this is the first concrete mention that their actions are related to the Monster. The spiders, of course, will lead us to Aragog shortly. Aragog will not be seen again until Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, at his funeral. However, his descendants will appear in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, and Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows.
Hermione's signing up for every possible third year course will result in her being issued a Time-turner, which she carries for the duration of the next book. This device would prove so useful in the final battle that it must be destroyed before the end of the series. That destruction happens in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, but we don't learn about its import until Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince.
In particular, Hermione's selection of Ancient Runes is connected to key plot point in the final book. Dumbledore will bequeath a book to Hermione, The Tales of Beedle the Bard, which will be written in ancient Runic. It will be Hermione's puzzling over the runes, and particularly over one particular symbol that she doesn't recognize, that will lead Harry to gradually understand the import of the Deathly Hallows. The symbol that Hermione can't understand is not a rune at all, but the sigil of the Hallows, and it will be to decipher the meaning of this sigil that the Trio will visit Xeno Lovegood. Xeno will explain the Tale of the Three Brothers and how it relates to the Hallows. The book's being in runes, and Hermione's high marks in that course through the years, likely caused Dumbledore to leave the book to Hermione; and her lengthy efforts to decipher the runes are essential to the timing of the visit to Xeno Lovegood.
Dumbledore's statement that he "will only truly have left Hogwarts when none here are loyal to me" will be echoed later in this book, and in Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince. A variant of this, where Harry agrees that he is "Dumbledore's man through and through", appears in that same book twice, at Christmas and after Dumbledore's funeral.
We will mention here that Cornelius Fudge's character is consistent throughout. In this instance, we can see that he is taking action to prevent a perceived threat; the action, we believe, is wrong, but Fudge feels he must do something to alleviate the worries of his constituents. We will see his political nature again almost every time we see him, next in July in Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, then in December in that same book, and again in June of Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire. Looking back at Fudge's actions from the end of the series, we can see that he is ever the consummate politician, acting always to attempt to retain power, doing what looks good rather than determining what would be best done.
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
Security is tighter than ever. Harry and Ron are unable to visit Hermione in the infirmary. Teachers shepherd students around in little groups. Most students are upset and frightened, though Draco is seemingly pleased over his father's having played some role in Dumbledore's removal.
About a fortnight later in Herbology, Ernie Macmillan, the Hufflepuff who had earlier accused Harry of being the Heir of Slytherin, apologizes and asks Harry if he believes Malfoy could be the Heir. Harry points out some spiders to Ron, the first they have seen since Hagrid's arrest. They appear to be headed for the Forbidden Forest. Ron is hardly cheered over this news. As they are escorted to their next class, Defence Against the Dark Arts, Harry says that in order to follow the spiders, they will need his Invisibility Cloak, and they should take Fang. Professor Lockhart bounds into the classroom, gaily announcing that with Hagrid arrested, the danger has passed. Ron wants to dispute that, but Harry reminds him that they were not actually there. Harry decides they should follow the spiders that night.
Waiting until past midnight for the Common room to clear, Harry and Ron make their way through the halls, avoiding teachers and Ghosts searching for the Monster. They collect Fang from Hagrid's hut and, making their way into the Forest, follow the spiders by wand light. Hearing something large moving, they investigate. It is the Ford Anglia, Mr. Weasley's flying car, roaming the Forest. As they check on it, giant spiders catch and drag them to a hollow among the trees. There they meet Aragog, the patriarch of a huge colony of giant spiders. Aragog, cranky at having his sleep disturbed, tells his children to kill Harry and Ron. Harry forestalls this by saying they are Hagrid's friends, and he is in trouble, arrested again for apparently opening the Chamber. Aragog admits he was mistakenly believed to be the Monster. The Monster is another creature, an enemy to spiders, and such that he cannot even name it. Aragog was blamed for killing a girl, but the girl died in a bathroom, a part of the Castle he was never in. Hagrid kept him in a cupboard in the dungeon. As Aragog is unable to help them further, Harry says they will just go. Aragog says no, his children will not harm Hagrid on his command, but he has too little control over them to protect Hagrid's friends. As the spiders start their attack, the Ford Anglia screeches into the hollow. Harry and Ron bundle themselves and Fang into it, and it carries them back to Hagrid's hut, deposits them there, and returns to the Forest.
Back in the Gryffindor dorm, Harry has a sudden thought: was the girl killed in the bathroom Moaning Myrtle?
Hermione's Petrification, as alarming as it is, does provide some benefits. Until now, it was suspected that Harry was the Heir of Slytherin, based partly on his arriving first on the scene at other previous incidents, partly on his uncertain parentage and apparent power, but largely on his ability to talk to snakes. Now, though, even Harry's most suspicious classmates agree that Harry could not have instigated the attacks, as he would never injure Hermione. Ernie, in particular, announces he believes Malfoy, not Harry, is the Heir; Ron's evident amusement over this claim is probably due to Harry and Ron having had the same suspicion several months previously.
The truth to Hagrid's utterance that "if people wanted to learn some stuff, they should follow the spiders," is shown here. Whenever we have seen the spiders, Harry noted that they appeared to be running away from something. Now they seem headed towards something—the Forbidden Forest, perhaps feeling the Acromantula colony will afford some protection.
In fact, Harry does learn "some stuff" by following the spiders to Aragog and his children, though it seems Hagrid seriously misjudged the extreme danger he was sending Harry and Ron into. It is from Aragog that Harry and Ron gather at least some truth about Hagrid's expulsion from Hogwarts. And Aragog also provides Harry a clue to where the Chamber's entrance is located.
It had seemed uncertain whether Harry would be able to use this knowledge, being surrounded by masses of inimical and hungry spiders. The flying car's timely arrival is not only fortuitous, but illustrates the author's deftness at preparing situations to pay off in future chapters (and future books). We were led to believe that, having delivered Harry and Ron to Hogwarts before driving off to roam the Forest, the flying car's role was done; we are pleased that the aging and ailing car can still do something important for Harry. While it certainly seems odd to assign a personality to a machine, the car shows just that, and that personality is consistent from its arrival at Hogwarts through to this chapter. Mr. Weasley's charm on it must have had a much greater effect on it than he had ever intended.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
The monster has Petrified Mrs. Norris, Colin Creevey, Justin Finch-Fletchley, Nearly Headless Nick, Hermione, and Penelope Clearwater. Are these random targets or do the victims share a connection?
Who does Harry believe the Monster killed fifty years ago? What brings him to this conclusion?
What "stuff" does Harry learn from Aragog? How will this help him?
Why does the flying car come to Harry and Ron's rescue?
Why would spiders be heading into the Forbidden Forest?
Why would Aragog allow his children to kill Harry and Ron, who he knows are Hagrid's friends? How would Hagrid have reacted if that had happened?
Why does the flying car always retreat back to the forbidden forest ?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Very little in this chapter carries forward to later books. Harry's guess that the girl who died is Moaning Myrtle is correct, and we learn later how she died. Lockhart's character is further illuminated, while Aragog's existence is also revealed. However, rather than laying groundwork for future books, this chapter is almost entirely devoted to moving this book's story forward to its conclusion.
Aragog's fate is revisited in Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, when he dies from old age and brings Hagrid, Professor Slughorn, and Harry together to mourn him. Hagrid will be surprised that Aragog's offspring no longer grant him free passage, but actually try to attack him. Given their experiences in this chapter, neither Harry nor Ron is at all surprised by their behaviour.
Aragog's children will appear again in the closing chapters of the last book, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, and Hagrid will once again assume that they are less dangerous than they are.
The flying car is never seen again, and while Moaning Myrtle appears throughout the series, the circumstances surrounding her death are unimportant after this book.
Aragog will be seen again in Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, at his funeral. His descendants will be mentioned then, and will appear in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, and Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows.
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
With increased security, sneaking into Moaning Myrtle's bathroom will be difficult, but Harry and Ron need to talk with Myrtle to learn if their guess is correct.
Professor McGonagall reminds students that exams are starting next week, which apparently catches everyone by surprise. Considering the serious situation, it seemed unlikely that exams would be held. Three days later, it is announced that the Mandrakes are ready to be harvested, and the Petrified victims will be revived that night. Ginny, who appears somewhat upset, apparently has something important to tell Harry and Ron, but Percy arrives after a night's patrolling, and interrupts, causing her to run off. Ron is angry, believing Ginny may have wanted to tell them something about the Chamber of Secrets, but Percy claims it had nothing to do with the Chamber, and deflects further questions.
While the mystery may possibly be solved with Hermione's revival, Harry still wants to see Moaning Myrtle. An opportunity arises that morning: as Professor Lockhart escorts students to History of Magic class, Harry and Ron suggest there is no need to guard them any longer as Hagrid has been arrested. Lockhart agrees and goes off to take a nap. Harry and Ron head for Myrtle's bathroom, but Professor McGonagall intercepts them. Harry lies smoothly, saying they had intended to visit Hermione in the hospital wing. Touched by their apparent concern, McGonagall grants permission, which forces them to actually go to the infirmary. While there, they find a torn-out book page clutched in Hermione's petrified hand describing Basilisks. A Basilisk kills with its gaze, but no one had died because they weren't looking directly at it. Mrs. Norris saw a reflection in the water on the floor. Colin Creevey was looking through his camera lens. Justin saw it through Nearly Headless Nick, and, of course, Hermione had her mirror. This explains both the fleeing spiders and the killed roosters — spiders fear the basilisk, and a rooster's crow is fatal to it, so presumably whoever has been controlling it has also been killing the roosters. Harry hears the voice because he is a Parselmouth— the Basilisk is a snake. Hermione had guessed that it has been traveling through the walls and ceilings using the plumbing; the page in her hand has "Pipes" written in the margin. It occurs to Ron that, if Myrtle was the Basilisk's victim fifty years ago, the Chamber's entrance may be in her washroom.
Harry and Ron sprint to the staff room to report their findings to Professor McGonagall but find it empty. Professor McGonagall makes an announcement, ordering all students to their Houses and summoning the faculty to meet in the staff room. Harry and Ron hide so they can overhear what has happened. The staff arrive, and McGonagall reports that Ginny Weasley was taken into the Chamber. Lockhart arrives belatedly, and, after he is briefed, the other teachers challenge him to back his boasts by opening the Chamber and defeating the Monster. He excuses himself to go to his office and "prepare". Having gotten rid of him, the remaining instructors plan how to inform the students and discuss the school's future.
Harry and Ron rush to Lockhart's office to share what they know, but find him hastily packing. He confesses that he never actually performed the feats in his books. Rather, he took credit for other witches' and wizards' accomplishments, and erased their memories with a charm. He threatens Harry and Ron with a memory charm, but Harry disarms him, and Ron tosses his wand out the window. They force Lockhart to Moaning Myrtle's lavatory.
Myrtle reveals that when she was a student, she went into the washroom to have a bit of a cry. Hearing a boy's voice, she looked outside the cubicle and saw big yellow eyes—then she died. She points to one particular basin. Harry addresses it in Parseltongue, and it opens to reveal a vertical shaft. Ron and Harry push Lockhart down it first, then follow.
At the bottom of the shaft, they discover a giant snake skin on the ground. Lockhart pretends to faint, and as Ron approaches, he grabs Ron's wand. Lockhart says he will tell everyone that he defeated the monster, using the snake's skin as proof, and that Harry and Ron were tragically rendered insane upon seeing Ginny's dead body. He casts a memory charm, but Ron's broken wand backfires and explodes, erasing Lockhart's memory and causing the ceiling to collapse. Harry and Ron are unhurt, but the fallen rubble separates them. Harry leaves Ron to clear the rock fall while he explores the tunnel further ahead. Finding a door engraved with shimmering serpents, he opens it by speaking Parseltongue.
Throughout the series, Harry constantly succeeds because he is aided by friends and allies: he is the sum of many parts. With his friends' help, the mystery is nearly solved as the puzzle pieces fall into place. Hermione, through her usual diligent research, gathering information, and patiently working to understand what it all means, has discovered what the monster is and how it navigates throughout the school. It is by sheer luck that she was still clutching the torn-out book page when she was petrified, allowing Ron and Harry to find it. Ron's steadfast loyalty and Wizarding knowledge have aided Harry throughout. Hagrid also provided an important clue (through Aragog), while Moaning Myrtle gave valuable information when Ron and Harry's hunch that she was the victim who died 50 years ago proves correct. It is still unknown who the Heir of Slytherin is, though the tunnel Harry is about to enter will likely lead him to the answer.
Harry's ability to dissemble, possibly part of the reason the Sorting Hat wanted to place him in Slytherin, shows through in this chapter when he deceives Professor McGonagall in order to keep their plans secret.  However, he does not frequently exploit this skill, instead, he uses it on impulse or when he deems it necessary.
Also, as one mystery is nearly solved another arises: Ginny. Unlike the apparent Muggle-borns that were targeted, she is a pure-blood. Why then was she taken into the Chamber? Is Neville correct that certain pure-bloods are being targeted? Rather than becoming another petrified victim, however, she likely plays some other integral part in this evil plot, judging by her recent odd behavior and her earlier urgent attempt to reveal something important to Harry and Ron. Just what her role is also remains unknown, but it should be assumed that she is someone's innocent pawn. It may be that this person would only use a pure-blood to execute his plan, though Ginny may be considered "disposable" once she is no longer useful. We should note that Percy's behavior may have seemed suspicious when he prevented Ginny from speaking to Harry and Ron, but from his comments afterwards we can guess it was probably unrelated to the monster or the Chamber of Secrets.
Lockhart is finally unmasked as the fraud we have always believed him to be, and the bogus claims in his books are now confirmed to be other wizards' accomplishments. After stealing their stories, he claims to have altered their memories. Magically he seems quite weak, except for Memory charms, and Harry easily disarms him, as Professor Snape had in the Dueling Club. Lockhart is likely somewhat transparent to other wizards; he is certainly not held in particular esteem by any Hogwarts instructor, so it is entirely possible that those whose stories he stole may have deliberately given him misinformation. This could explain his confidence in the ineffectual Pixie-banishing charm he used in the first Defence Against the Dark Arts class. Of course, he likely never attempted it before, merely borrowing it from a more accomplished wizard.
With this revelation, it is worthwhile re-examining the technique the Weasley children used for de-gnoming the garden earlier. While we are never explicitly told that this technique came from Lockhart's book, the reference to Gilderoy Lockhart's Guide to Household Pests hints at that being the source. That the technique is, ultimately, ineffectual, is the same pattern that we have seen in Lockhart's activities to date, and so would suggest Lockhart was the originator. It is unlikely that Lockhart would have been able to publish a book on household pests under his own name unless he was already famous for his writings, so we can safely assume that several of his earlier works were already doing well in the magical bookstores. More competent magicians would have realized by that time, from reading his books, that his stories were questionable, and so when Lockhart, doing his "research", consulted a trained pest-removal wizard for information on removal of household pests, likely he would have been deliberately given misinformation. It is perhaps a shame that the wizards who provided the information would then have their memory modified, as it would prevent them from properly appreciating the joke they had played on Lockhart.
This is a particularly telling comment about celebrity's nature and those seeking fame. Lockhart, who the author has stated was modeled on a real person, is clearly willing to sacrifice anyone and anything to keep his own star bright. Harry, who Hagrid had earlier said is more famous than Lockhart would ever be, clearly is uninterested in the fame he has fallen into; throughout this book he tries, often futilely, to shun the limelight. In contrast to Harry, who remains a solid, sympathetic character despite his renown, Lockhart has fashioned himself into a glossy, empty shell, and the reader cannot help but be pleased to see him hoist by his own petard.
As they approach the Chamber, Ron's broken wand finally does something well: when Lockhart grabs it and, unconcerned whether Ginny may still be alive, attempts to erase Harry and Ron's memories, it backfires and Obliviates him, as well as causing a small explosion. We have seen this particular misbehaviour before, when Ron tried to jinx Draco and ended up jinxing himself. This backfire ends Lockhart's plan to claim he found the Chamber and destroyed the monster, at the cost of Ginny's life and Ron and Harry's sanity. With his memory erased, he has received the same as what he inflicted on other wizards—a fitting punishment. However, the explosion has separated Harry from Ron. Now, Harry must search for Ginny alone, without his friend's help.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Why do Harry and Ron want to talk to Moaning Myrtle?
Why are the roosters being killed? Do we know who or what is doing it?
Why are the spiders fleeing the castle?
What might Ginny have wanted to tell Harry and Ron? Why does she seem so upset?
Why does Percy prevent Ginny from speaking to Harry and Ron?
Why was Ginny, a "pure-blood", abducted when most of the other victims were Muggle-born?
Why do the teachers really challenge Lockhart to open the Chamber of Secrets and fight the monster?
How did Hermione deduce that the monster is actually a Basilisk? Trace her steps in figuring this out and state the facts she found.
Why did Lockhart use Ron's wand, knowing it was damaged?
Professor McGonagall says the Petrified victims will be cured later that evening. Why are Harry and Ron unable to wait until then to talk to Hermione? What do they do instead, and would it have been better if they had waited?
How was Lockhart able to maintain his charade for so long?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
The backfired memory charm's effects on Lockhart will be long-term, and Lockhart has yet to recover when we meet him again, some three years later. This is to be expected, in a way; Lockhart intended for the charm he cast at Ron to be everlasting, so when it backfired, it is to be expected that it would permanently affect him.
Even this early, the main characters' future romantic entanglements are seen. Ginny, having something important she needs to tell someone, approaches Harry first, rather than her brothers. Of course, earlier in the book, Ginny showed the classic schoolgirl crush on Harry. A person is often too shy or awed by the one she has a crush on to ever approach him. That Ginny can now go to Harry may indicate that her feelings have matured and deepened, possibly beyond the crush level. Despite several side roads on both Harry's and Ginny's part, this relationship will persist, off and on, throughout the entire series.
We also see the first of several progressively-larger hints the author drops about a budding relationship between Ron and Hermione. While Ron is upset over the Monster's depredations, he is far more affected by Hermione being petrified than anyone else, excepting his sister, Ginny. True to his character, though, Ron will be unable to recognize the basis of his concern for several years yet.
It is mentioned that Harry has to speak to the basin twice to get it to open; the first time, Ron tells him that he was speaking English. That Harry is unable to tell whether he is speaking English or Parseltongue should hardly be surprising, as he is unable to differentiate between the two languages when hearing them; no one else can understand the Basilisk, because to them its speech is a low, indistinguishable hissing, while to Harry it sounds like plain speech. This will be a plot point in the series' final book.
As a sidenote, in Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, Harry again enters an unknown tunnel (to the Shrieking Shack), following a friend (Ron) who has been taken against his will, that seemingly leads him to disaster, but results in another mystery being solved.
Harry's ability to speak to snakes is first seen in the first book of the series, and no mention is made there of whether Harry perceives that the snake is not speaking English. We noted Harry's inability to tell the difference between English and Parseltongue in an earlier chapter. This is a key point in this book, as he perceives the Monster's voice at several points and does not recognize that the Monster is not speaking in English. We see this confusion again in this chapter, when Harry has a need to speak Parseltongue and finds it difficult to switch, and it will be a minor plot point in the final book.
Basilisk venom, and basilisk fangs, will be found to be of use in completing Harry's series-long mission. Having learned of the existence of the Chamber in this book, and hearing the relatively simple Parseltongue password, Ron will later open the Chamber himself in order to retrieve some basilisk fangs.
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
Harry enters a long chamber; at the opposite end is a giant wizard statue, with an ancient, monkey-like face, a long thin beard, and wearing sweeping robes. Ginny is lying on the floor. As Harry tries to revive her, a tall, black-haired boy identifying himself as Tom Riddle approaches. Riddle, carrying Harry's dropped wand, explains he is a memory, preserved in his Diary for fifty years. He opened the Chamber of Secrets fifty years ago, intending to purge Muggle-borns and Half-bloods from the school. However, when the attacks were about to close the school and because Dumbledore (then the Transfiguration teacher) kept such a close watch on him, he halted the attacks and framed Hagrid. He left behind a Diary containing his sixteen-year-old self's memory in hopes it would, one day, fall into an unsuspecting victim's hands to help finish his work.
Ginny had been writing in the Diary all year. Riddle answered sympathetically, and Ginny confessed her fears, hopes, and feelings to him, partially pouring her soul into him during the process, which was exactly what he wanted. Gradually growing more powerful, he eventually poured a portion of his own soul back into her, possessing her and using her body to strangle the school roosters, write on the walls, and open the Chamber of Secrets. He tells Harry how Ginny related Harry's entire history and how happy he was when Harry found the Diary after Ginny, becoming fearful, threw it away. He was disappointed when Ginny reclaimed it. Seeing Harry with the Diary on Valentine's day, she feared it would reveal her secrets, and so she ransacked Harry's room to retrieve it. Tom forced Ginny into the Chamber for two purposes: first, to sap her remaining life force and fully return to life; and second, to lure Harry Potter there so he could meet him directly.
Tom wants to know how Harry, an ordinary baby wizard, could have defeated Lord Voldemort, the most powerful wizard of the age. Harry wonders why Tom cares. Riddle reveals he is a Half-blood. His mother named him Tom after his Muggle father and Marvolo after his wizard grandfather, a descendant of Salazar Slytherin. He scrambled his name to create a new one—Lord Voldemort, a name he knew people would fear when he became the most powerful Wizard in the world. It was also a way to eliminate his Muggle father's name. Harry states Voldemort was not the most powerful wizard, Albus Dumbledore is. He says Dumbledore probably saw right through Tom when he was at school and is still stronger than Voldemort. When Tom says Dumbledore was driven from the school by Tom's memory, Harry retorts that Dumbledore may be closer than Tom realizes.
Fawkes, Dumbledore's Phoenix, suddenly appears in a burst of fire and drops the Sorting Hat at Harry's feet, then perches on his shoulder. Tom is openly contemptuous: a songbird and an old hat. This is what Dumbledore sends to his allies? Tom again demands to know how Harry defeated him when he was only a baby. Riddle's form is becoming more solid as Ginny's life force ebbs. Harry must act quickly if he is to defeat him and save Ginny. Harry tells Riddle that by sacrificing her life for her son, his mother saved him from Voldemort and reduced him to an ineffectual remnant.
Containing his rage, Tom agrees that that indeed would be a powerful protection. He then summons the monster—a Basilisk. Harry avoids its deadly gaze, as Fawkes takes flight. Harry is smashed against the wall by the snake's coil but is not bitten. Fawkes blinds the Basilisk, and Tom again orders the serpent to kill Harry, telling it to smell him. The thrashing snake has swept the Sorting Hat into Harry's arms. He puts it on, thinking, "Help me!" The Hat constricts sharply and something bumps his head. Removing it, Harry finds a sword inside. As the Basilisk strikes, Harry impales it through the roof of its mouth and into its brain, killing it. But a single venomous fang pierces his arm.
Harry removes the fang, but it is too late. As the venom spreads, Harry dimly sees Fawkes land beside him. Riddle says Harry will soon be dead, even Dumbledore's weeping bird knows it. But suddenly remembering that Phoenix tears heal wounds, Riddle attempts a Killing Curse. Before he can strike, Fawkes drops the Diary into Harry's lap, and Harry stabs it with the fang, destroying Tom Riddle.
As Riddle vanishes, Ginny, gasping, awakens. Now sobbing, she had wanted to tell Harry that the Diary was controlling her, but Percy prevented her. Harry leads her from the Chamber to where Ron is clearing away rocks. Ron explains that Lockhart has forgotten everything, even his own name.
Remembering that Phoenixes can lift amazingly heavy loads, Harry has everyone join hands with him while he grasps Fawkes' tailfeathers. Fawkes lifts them from the Chamber to Moaning Myrtle's washroom. Myrtle seems mildly disappointed that Harry has survived, saying she'd be willing to share her toilet with him if he died. Fawkes then leads everyone to Professor McGonagall's office.
In Harry Potter and The Philosopher's Stone, Harry, attempting to find and protect the Stone, was aided by his friends until they reached a certain point, then Harry was forced to confront Voldemort alone. Once again, Harry must follow a dangerous, unknown path by himself that he hopes leads to a solution: saving Ginny. As before, his friends' assistance brought him only so far, then circumstances forced him to continue on alone. This time, Harry also placed his faith into what he believed was an ally, that being Tom Riddle's memory, only to be betrayed when Riddle reveals himself as Lord Voldemort's younger self who lured Harry into a trap. Harry, still young and innocent, will likely never again be as trusting.
Riddle reveals the hidden back story to the recent events only because he arrogantly assumes Harry is about to die and no longer poses a threat. For Harry, obtaining this knowledge nearly cost him his life, and it is only Harry's loyalty to Dumbledore that saves him and Ginny. It is the expression of that loyalty which summons Dumbledore's Phoenix, Fawkes, who brings the Sorting Hat. In what becomes a common trait, Voldemort reacts with supreme overconfidence in himself, derisively dismissing the Hat's importance, considering it a harmless artifact rather than an instrument that delivers Dumbledore's potent power – power that is extended to Harry through the Sword of Gryffindor. The Sword becomes a recurring symbol throughout the series, representing justice, courage, and strength when wielded by a heroic figure, in this case, Harry. Voldemort, of course, vastly underestimated Harry's abilities. Though Riddle depended on Harry's cleverness to lead him into the Chamber, he never considered him capable enough to slay the Basilisk or the Diary. But even as Voldemort is apparently gaining strength, so Harry grows stronger and cleverer each time he confronts and thwarts the Dark Lord. And though Tom Riddle's Diary has been destroyed, Harry does not assume this is the last time he will encounter Lord Voldemort.
It should be noted that Tom Riddle's memory acted independently, taking over another person's life force (Ginny) to reanimate itself and manipulating events inside the school from the Chamber. This proves an unusual enough characteristic to warrant special attention. It certainly indicates that Voldemort, who still lacks a human body, can manifest himself in different forms, each apparently equally powerful.
Throughout this chapter Voldemort demonstrates his cruelty, and how it manifested even when he was only in his teenage years. (The version of Riddle's persona entrapped in the diary would not age, and clearly retains the characteristics of his 17-year-old self.) It more than proves that while he definitely hates Muggles, Muggle-borns, Half-bloods, and Squibs, what he wants, more than the recognition of his own pureblood self-righteousness, is his own personal power. If he needs to manipulate purebloods to get it, then that's what he'll do. The so-called Purity of Blood is certainly more important to a man like Lucius Malfoy than to Voldemort.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
How is Harry able to look at the Basilisk without it killing him?
Why was Ginny taken into the Chamber?
How and why does the Sword of Gryffindor suddenly appear in the Sorting Hat? Where did it come from?
How was the Diary able to deceive Ginny?
Why did Ginny begin to fear the Diary, prompting her to throw it away?
How does Harry know to stab the Diary?
What caused Fawkes to suddenly appear in the Chamber bearing the Sorting Hat?
How is Fawkes able to blind the Basilisk without being killed?
How can Tom Riddle look into the Basilisk eyes without being affected?
Why does Riddle ridicule Fawkes and the Sorting Hat?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Riddle repeatedly says the Diary contains Tom's memory, which is what Harry sees and talks to. However, in Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, Professor Dumbledore points out that Riddle's Diary does far more than a memory should be able to - it can independently think and respond, possess a person to do its bidding, and it can sap a person's life force to create a body for itself. This strongly indicates that the Diary actually is a Horcrux, a soul shard that renders a person immortal as long as the Horcrux remains intact. Or rather, this was a Horcrux until Harry destroyed it. At the time, Dumbledore expresses concern that the way the Horcrux was treated, as a weapon, is not how one would expect someone's sole chance at immortality to be handled; one would expect that an object containing a Horcrux would be hidden away safely. This one's apparent design argues that Voldemort has several Horcruxes... but how many?
In Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, it is revealed that Harry has lucked into one of the few methods to destroy a Horcrux: Basilisk venom. It is learned that a Horcrux will act to protect itself; to destroy one, its physical container must be irrevocably damaged beyond ordinary magic's ability to repair. Also in that chapter, it will be revealed that the only known cure for Basilisk venom is Phoenix tears. Phoenixes are extremely rare creatures, so their tears are certainly outside the realm of ordinary magic.
This creates an apparent problem: a Phoenix is in close proximity shortly before Harry stabs the Diary. Could not the Diary, using ordinary magic such as the Accio charm, summon Fawkes' tears? Possibly, but the author has stated in an interview given after Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows was published, that she carefully distanced the Phoenix before the death blow. And looking at the sequence of events, we see that Riddle attempted to Curse Fawkes, driving him away, before Harry stabbed the Diary.
Readers should also pay attention to the Sorting Hat delivering Gryffindor's Sword to Harry. During the final battle at Hogwarts in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, another worthy Gryffindor, Neville Longbottom, also extracts the Sword from the Hat, using it to destroy a Horcrux. This time, however, it is Voldemort himself who summons the Hat from the Headmaster's office, using it as a means to torture Neville, and apparently unaware that it can produce the weapon.
Ron will also wield the Sword when, after heroically saving Harry and recovering the Sword from a frozen pond where it was hidden, he destroys a Horcrux with it in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows. It will be learned that Dumbledore also uses the blade to destroy a Horcrux.
There are several other useful items mentioned. Thinking Harry will shortly be dead, Riddle reveals his grandfather's name, Marvolo, something Voldemort had taken pains to conceal. While this is not particularly useful information to Harry, Dumbledore, who also knows it, uses it to unearth another Horcrux: given the approximate age, and Marvolo being an uncommon name in the Wizarding world, plus the name Riddle associated with a wizard-caused death in Tom's youth, Dumbledore is able to locate and retrieve a Horcrux hidden where Tom's mother had lived. Tom also mentions what is likely his greatest shame: that despite being Slytherin's last heir, he is descended from a Muggle, one of the very half-bloods he so despises. Harry is able to cause some dissension among the Death Eater ranks he faces in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, just before the Battle in the Ministry when he reveals that fact.
We will meet Marvolo, Tom's paternal grandfather, in a later book. Interestingly, perhaps, despite Tom's never knowing his grandfather or mother, he seems to very closely mirror the "pureblood" beliefs that grandfather espoused. At the same time, we will meet Tom's mother, and be very briefly exposed to his father.
The Chamber of Secrets, and the remains of the Basilisk, will reappear in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, when Ron and Hermione retrieve Basilisk fangs to destroy a Horcrux.
We will learn that the Sword of Gryffindor is a Goblin-forged blade, charmed to accept any foreign material that will strengthen it, and reject anything that does not. Harry's using this Sword to kill the Basilisk will result in the Sword absorbing Basilisk venom, thus empowering it to destroy Horcruxes. We will learn then that Dumbledore had used it to destroy a Horcrux; Ron will also destroy a Horcrux with it, and so will Neville. The Sword will be come something of a disputed item, with the Goblins claiming ownership; but the Sorting Hat will ultimately deliver it to Neville when he is in need.
We note as an aside that in this chapter Ginny states she "wanted to go to Hogwarts ever since Bill came". Charlie had been out of Hogwarts at least one year before Harry arrived, as the twins told Harry that the Gryffindor team "hadn't won since Charlie left". Even if Charlie had left early, after his sixth year, Bill, who is older still, must be either two or three years out of Hogwarts by the time Harry entered. Given that Bill was Head Boy, an office only open to seventh-year students, Bill must be either nine or ten years older than Harry, and thus ten or eleven years older than Ginny. As it is unlikely that Ginny would be able to formulate this sort of wish at the age of one, it is more likely that she would have said that she had wanted to go to Hogwarts ever since she can remember. The author has said that she has always had trouble with math, which is likely the reason for this small misstatement. (The scattering of errors of this sort have become known as "flints" on the fan sites.)
Spoiler warning: Plot and/or ending details follow.
Inside Professor McGonagall's office,  Mr. and Mrs. Weasley immediately sweep Ginny into a hug. As they, and also Professor Dumbledore and Professor McGonagall, listen, Harry recounts what happened, omitting Ginny's role and the Diary as much as possible. Professor Dumbledore wonders how Lord Voldemort enchanted Ginny, as he is believed to be currently hiding in Albania. Harry is relieved, as Dumbledore clearly knows Ginny was not at fault, and explains how Ginny was controlled by Riddle's Diary. Harry has brought the diary, along with the Sword and the Sorting Hat. Dumbledore confirms that Riddle and Voldemort are one and the same, a fact that is known to very few people. Mr. Weasley chastises Ginny: "Never trust anything that can think for itself if you can't see where it keeps its brain!" Dumbledore says there will be no punishment for Ginny. "Older and wiser wizards than she have been hoodwinked by Lord Voldemort." He sends her to the Hospital Wing, saying that Madam Pomfrey will still be there, dispensing the Mandrake juice to the Petrified students. He recommends bed rest and also recommends Ginny have hot chocolate, something that always cheers him. Ron is relieved to hear that Hermione will not suffer any permanent damage. As Mr. and Mrs. Weasley leave with Ginny, Dumbledore dispatches Professor McGonagall to alert the kitchens to prepare a feast.
Professor Dumbledore awards Ron and Harry Special Awards for Services to the School plus two hundred House points each. Noticing Professor Lockhart's vacant gaze, Dumbledore has Ron take Lockhart to the hospital wing. When Professor Dumbledore and Harry are alone, Harry admits he is distressed by Riddle, noting their similarities: both are orphans, dark-haired, and speak Parseltongue. Dumbledore believes Voldemort transferred some of his powers, including the ability to speak Parseltongue, when his curse on the one-year-old Harry failed. Harry says the Sorting Hat saw Slytherin's power in him and wanted to place him in Slytherin House. When Dumbledore notes it put him in Gryffindor instead, Harry says it was only because he asked it to. Dumbledore replies that, "It is our choices, Harry, that show what we truly are, far more than our abilities." He then shows Harry the sword. Engraved on the blade is, Godric Gryffindor. "Only a true Gryffindor could have pulled that out of the Hat, Harry."
The door bursts open and Lucius Malfoy strides in, accompanied by, to Harry's amazement, Dobby. Lucius is furious that Dumbledore has returned after being suspended. Dumbledore replies that after Mr. Weasley's daughter was attacked, the other Governors asked him to return. Some were under the impression that Malfoy would curse their families if they refused to expel Dumbledore. Lucius demands to know if the culprit has been found. Dumbledore responds it was the same as last time, via the diary, and most ingeniously. If the plot had succeeded, Ginny Weasley would have been blamed, reflecting badly on Arthur Weasley and his Muggle Protection Act. Behind Mr. Malfoy's back, Dobby is performing a charade, which Harry suddenly understands: Malfoy gave the diary to Ginny at Flourish & Blotts. Lucius demands that they prove this accusation. Dumbledore says that is impossible with the diary destroyed, but if other such artifacts are passed to anyone, Arthur Weasley will be sure to trace them to Lucius Malfoy. Lucius stomps off, kicking Dobby along the way. Harry takes Riddle's diary, wraps it in one of his socks, and runs to return it to Lucius. Lucius angrily strips the sock off, tossing it aside. Dobby catches it, and, having been given clothes by his master, is free at last. Malfoy, enraged, lunges at Harry, but Dobby magically hurls Lucius backwards. Lucius leaves Hogwarts, defeated on all fronts. When Dobby asks how he can repay Harry, he replies he wants Dobby to never try to save his life again.
The feast is an odd one, even for Hogwarts, with everyone in pyjamas, lasting all night, and enlivened by the Petrified students' and Hagrid's return. Everyone, except Hermione, is further cheered when it is announced that exams are canceled.
The remaining year is peaceful. The only grim face is Draco Malfoy's, as Lucius was fired from the school's Board of Directors. On the train back home, Harry asks Ginny about what Percy did not want her to tell anyone. Ginny reveals that Percy has a girlfriend, the same Penelope Clearwater who was Petrified with Hermione. She saw Percy and Penelope snogging (US: kissing). Fred and George intend to have some fun with Percy about this over the summer, while Harry, not expecting to have any fun at all, asks Hermione and Ron to telephone him so they can arrange to meet. And then the train pulls into Platform Nine and Three Quarters.
Having used the time-honoured technique, where the villain explains to the hero exactly what happened, in the previous chapter, the author completes the story by laying out the parts that the other characters played in the events. We learn here that the Diary originated with Lucius Malfoy, and that Dobby, as suspected, was his House-elf. We also suspect that Dumbledore perhaps knew much about what had been going on, but may have been constrained from acting, possibly by forces still unknown to us. Finally, we also see, with almost breakneck speed, the Basilisk victims' recovery, Hagrid's return, the school year's closing days, and the return trip to London on the Hogwarts Express. Ginny is naturally quite distraught over her role in helping Tom Riddle, even though she was entirely blameless due to her being possessed by Riddle's Diary. It is unknown whether or not Lucius Malfoy specifically chose her before setting his plan into motion or if he only happened upon an opportune moment to slip Ginny the Diary while at Flourish & Blotts in Diagon Alley. Other than it being a convenient time to pass on the Diary, he may also have been motivated to use Ginny based on his disdain for the Weasley family in general, and his dislike for Mr. Weasley in particular. Overall, it seems a poor choice by Malfoy, considering how close Harry has become to the Weasleys; once Harry became aware that something was amiss with one of the Weasley children, he could more easily trace this back to Voldemort.
It is interesting to note that Tom Riddle, Ron, and Harry all received Special Awards for Services to the School for closing the Chamber of Secrets. Fifty years on, other students may be wondering what Ronald Weasley did to merit this award. It is unlikely that Harry's role will be questioned: after all, he is the famous Harry Potter.
A guiding principle in the series is voiced by Dumbledore: "It is our choices, Harry, that show what we truly are, far more than our abilities." Although another character, such as Percy Weasley, speaking those words would seem overly sententious, Dumbledore can utter this without pontificating, partially, perhaps, because he is considered eccentric. It is perhaps worthwhile to review just what choices Harry has been given, and which decisions he made. Harry has seldom taken the easy path, often choosing the more difficult route because he believed it was right. It will be instructive to see if Harry maintains this habit.
This particular instance is interesting in another direction. Throughout this book, we have seen Harry's increasing doubt that he was meant to be sorted into Gryffindor House. When he meets Tom Riddle, this doubt is echoed again, though it has no effect on his course of action. It is Dumbledore's pronouncement about making choices, coupled with the Sword being Gryffindor's, that finally removes Harry's uncertainty about the Sorting Hat's decision. We can safely assume that Harry will never be troubled by this matter again.
Many students are probably suited to more than one House. Hermione, for instance, would seem destined for Ravenclaw. Instead, the Sorting Hat, perhaps detecting her strong personality and willingness to act upon her beliefs, placed her in Gryffindor where, influenced by her Housemates, she is developing abilities she might otherwise have underutilized or completely ignored. Another such student is Neville Longbottom, perhaps the most timid and frightened student at Hogwarts. Though we still have no idea why he was also sorted into Gryffindor, it should be assumed he has unseen abilities, including non-magical ones. It is prudent to realize that courage comes in many forms; we recall Dumbledore's statement at the end of the previous year, where he said, specifically of Neville's actions, "it takes courage to stand up to our friends."
Harry also failed to consider that even if he was Slytherin's descendant, then so was one half of his family, yet both his parents were sorted into Gryffindor. Just how and why the Sorting Hat makes a final determination regarding which House a student is sorted into is not entirely understood, though the students' individual preferences are apparently considered, as well as family tradition. It appears most students are generally satisfied with the Sorting Hat's choice. Whether or not a student can request a change of House after being Sorted is unknown, but interesting to consider.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Why does Ginny think she will be expelled? Have her actions warranted that?
What does Dumbledore mean when he tells Harry it is choices rather than abilities that make a person what they are? Give examples.
Compare and contrast Tom Riddle's and Harry's personalities, backgrounds, abilities, and the choices each one chooses to make.
Does having similar characteristics to someone automatically mean you will become exactly like that person? Explain.
How could a restorative potion be administered to Nearly Headless Nick, who is a Ghost? How could it have any effect on him?
Why was Harry still so troubled that the Sorting Hat had wanted to put him in Slytherin House? Is he convinced he is a true Gryffindor?
What led Dumbledore to suspect that Lucius Malfoy was responsible for the Diary being given to Ginny? Give specific examples to prove or disprove this.
What might Lucius Malfoy have done to Harry if Dobby had not intervened?
If House-elves are so magically powerful, how did Wizards enslave them?
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
Curiously, that Voldemort is currently believed to be hiding in Albania will prove germane to the overall story arc. Voldemort had found an artifact there that he used to create a Horcrux, and had apparently returned there as a disembodied spirit after his initial encounter with Harry. This is where Professor Quirrell likely encountered him, and Peter Pettigrew will rejoin him there between books three and four. One wonders what attracted Voldemort to Albania, or what the author intended him to find there.
In the sixth book, we discover that this "memory of Tom Riddle" is a Horcrux, greatly troubling Dumbledore when he discovered it, though that is not seen here: Dumbledore, throughout this story, seems as imperturbable as ever. Later, however, Dumbledore tells Harry that the Diary Horcrux's discovery worried him. As long as a Horcrux remains intact, its creator remains alive, the Horcrux tethering his soul to the living world. Thus, a Horcrux's primary purpose is immortality, and the wizards who create them invariably protect them as they would their own lives. Yet the Diary was apparently also crafted as a weapon, to be placed into an unsuspecting accomplice's hand—in this case a naive schoolgirl. Dumbledore concludes that this is not Voldemort's only Horcrux, and attempts to determine how many there might be. Harry secures a memory suggesting that Tom Riddle saw seven as the most magical number, and so Dumbledore concludes, correctly, that Voldemort had intended to have seven soul shards: one remaining within himself, and six stored in Horcruxes.
We can see immediately that Harry freeing Dobby from servitude, and Dobby's gratitude for that, will affect Harry's future when Dobby rejoins the story in the fourth book, helping Harry solve a major problem he is set. True to Harry's request, Dobby will never again attempt to save Harry's life until directed to do so by another person late in the seventh book; but in the meanwhile, Dobby will assist Harry in his work with Dumbledore's Army in Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, and his attempts to determine Draco's mission in Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince.
Voldemort's affinity for Albania is first seen here, and revisited in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, and again in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows. In the last book, we learn that Rowena Ravenclaw's lost diadem had been stolen by her daughter and hidden in a tree in Albania; and also that Voldemort had retrieved it from there. It is possible his attachment to Albania was due to his having found the Diadem, one of the few remaining artifacts of the Founders of Hogwarts. We note that Hogwarts was founded roughly a thousand years ago; there is no discussion on exactly what sort of tree would have remained solid enough to hide an artifact for a thousand years, even in Albania.
Riddle's diary is the first Horcrux we see, and is where we discover some of the abilities of these soul fragments. Horcruxes will form a major part of the plot in Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince and Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows.
It is Percy's letters to Penelope that had kept Percy's owl Hermes busy all the previous summer. The ongoing romance between the two of them may only continue through the next book; it is mentioned early in that book, but makes no appearance after that.
Dobby becoming a Free Elf will be a lesser plot point in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, and his ongoing gratitude for his rescue from the Malfoys will result in Dobby helping Harry and the Trio in that and all succeeding books. Dobby's freedom will also bolster Hermione's efforts to free House Elves in general from slavery; her first efforts in that direction include the creation of a charitable organization, the Society for the Promotion of Elfish Welfare.
Today in 1991 Tim Berners-Lee went public with his World Wide Web, featuring a server, the Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), URLs (the web address scheme), and the first browser.
A double-quoted string (also known as a double-quoted string literal) has the purpose of including a string into a program, with variable substitution.  For example, the string "$foo on you" will appear as  on you if $foo is not defined; if $foo contains the value 'Poo', then the resulting string will appear as Poo on you when output to the user’s web browser.
A virtual private network (VPN) is a network that uses primarily public telecommunication infrastructure, such as the Internet, to provide remote offices or traveling users access to a central organizational network.
VPNs typically require remote users of the network to be authenticated, and often secure data with encryption technologies to prevent disclosure of private information to unauthorized parties.
VPNs may serve any network functionality that is found on any network, such as sharing of data and access to network resources, printers, databases, websites, etc. A VPN user typically experiences the central network in a manner that is identical to being connected directly to the central network. VPN technology via the public Internet has replaced the need to requisition and maintain expensive dedicated leased-line telecommunication circuits once typical in wide-area network installations.
Virtual Private Network technology reduces costs because it does not need physical leased lines to connect remote users to an Intranet. [1]
The protocols used to tunnel the traffic
The tunnel's termination point, i.e., customer edge or network provider edge
Whether they offer site-to-site or remote access connectivity
The OSI layer they present to the connecting network, such as Layer 2 circuits or Layer 3 network connectivity
Some classification schemes are discussed in the following sections.
Secure VPNs use cryptographic tunneling protocols to provide confidentiality by blocking intercepts and packet sniffing, allowing sender authentication to block identity spoofing, and provide message integrity by preventing message alteration.
IPsec (Internet Protocol Security) was developed by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), and was initially developed for IPv6, which requires it. This standards-based security protocol is also widely used with IPv4. Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol frequently runs over IPsec.  Its design meets most security goals: authentication, integrity, and confidentiality.  IPsec functions by summarizing an IP packet in conjunction with a surrounding packet, and encrypting the outcome.
Transport Layer Security (SSL/TLS) can tunnel an entire network's traffic, as it does in the OpenVPN project, or secure an individual connection. A number of vendors provide remote access VPN capabilities through SSL. An SSL VPN can connect from locations where IPsec runs into trouble with Network Address Translation and firewall rules.
Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS), is used in Cisco's next-generation VPN product, Cisco AnyConnect VPN, to solve the issues SSL/TLS has with tunneling over UDP.
Microsoft Point-to-Point Encryption (MPPE) works with their Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol and in several compatible implementations on other platforms.
Microsoft introduced Secure Socket Tunneling Protocol (SSTP) in Windows Server 2008 and Windows Vista Service Pack 1. SSTP tunnels Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP) or Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol traffic through an SSL 3.0 channel.
MPVPN (Multi Path Virtual Private Network). Ragula Systems Development Company owns the registered trademark "MPVPN".[2]
Secure Shell (SSH) VPN -- OpenSSH offers VPN tunneling to secure remote connections to a network or inter-network links. This should not be confused with port forwarding. OpenSSH server provides a limited number of concurrent tunnels and the VPN feature itself does not support personal authentication.[3][4][5]
Tunnel endpoints must authenticate before secure VPN tunnels can be established.
User-created remote access VPNs may use passwords, biometrics, two-factor authentication or other cryptographic methods.
Network-to-network tunnels often use passwords or digital certificates, as they permanently store the key to allow the tunnel to establish automatically and without intervention from the user.
Tunneling protocols can be used in a point-to-point topology that would theoretically not be considered a VPN, because a VPN by definition is expected to support arbitrary and changing sets of network nodes.  But since most router implementations support a software-defined tunnel interface, customer-provisioned VPNs often are simply defined tunnels running conventional routing protocols.
Depending on whether the PPVPN (Provider Provisioned VPN) runs in layer 2 or layer 3, the building blocks described below may be L2 only, L3 only, or combine them both. Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) functionality blurs the L2-L3 identity.
RFC 4026 generalized the following terms to cover L2 and L3 VPNs, but they were introduced in RFC 2547.[6]
A device at the customer premises, that provides access to the PPVPN. Sometimes it's just a demarcation point between provider and customer responsibility. Other providers allow customers to configure it.
A PE is a device, or set of devices, at the edge of the provider network, that presents the provider's view of the customer site. PEs are aware of the VPNs that connect through them, and maintain VPN state.
A P device operates inside the provider's core network, and does not directly interface to any customer endpoint. It might, for example, provide routing for many provider-operated tunnels that belong to different customers' PPVPNs. While the P device is a key part of implementing PPVPNs, it is not itself VPN-aware and does not maintain VPN state. Its principal role is allowing the service provider to scale its PPVPN offerings, as, for example, by acting as an aggregation point for multiple PEs.  P-to-P connections, in such a role, often are high-capacity optical links between major locations of provider.
This section deals with the types of VPN considered in the IETF; some historical names were replaced by these terms.
Virtual private wire and private line services (VPWS and VPLS)
In both of these services, the service provider does not offer a full routed or bridged network, but provides components to build customer-administered networks. VPWS are point-to-point while VPLS can be point-to-multipoint.  They can be Layer 1 emulated circuits with no data link .
The customer determines the overall customer VPN service, which also can involve routing, bridging, or host network elements.
An unfortunate acronym confusion can occur between Virtual Private Line Service and Virtual Private LAN Service; the context should make it clear whether "VPLS" means the layer 1 virtual private line or the layer 2 virtual private LAN.
A Layer 2 technique that allows for the coexistence of multiple LAN broadcast domains, interconnected via trunks using the IEEE 802.1Q trunking protocol. Other trunking protocols have been used but have become obsolete, including Inter-Switch Link (ISL), IEEE 802.10 (originally a security protocol but a subset was introduced for trunking), and ATM LAN Emulation (LANE).
Developed by IEEE, VLANs allow multiple tagged LANs to share common trunking. VLANs frequently comprise only customer-owned facilities.  Whereas VPLS as described in the above section (OSI Layer 1 services) supports emulation of both point-to-point and point-to-multipoint topologies, the method discussed here extends Layer 2 technologies such as 802.1d and 802.1q LAN trunking to run over transports such as Metro Ethernet.
As used in this context, a VPLS is a Layer 2 PPVPN, rather than a private line, emulating the full functionality of a traditional local area network (LAN).  From a user standpoint, a VPLS makes it possible to interconnect several LAN segments over a packet-switched, or optical, provider core; a core transparent to the user, making the remote LAN segments behave as one single LAN.[7]
In a VPLS, the provider network emulates a learning bridge, which optionally may include VLAN service.
PW is similar to VPWS, but it can provide different L2 protocols at both ends. Typically, its interface is a WAN protocol such as Asynchronous Transfer Mode or Frame Relay. In contrast, when aiming to provide the appearance of a LAN contiguous between two or more locations, the Virtual Private LAN service or IPLS would be appropriate.
A subset of VPLS, the CE devices must have L3 capabilities; the IPLS presents packets rather than frames. It may support IPv4 or IPv6.
This section discusses the main architectures for PPVPNs, one where the PE disambiguates duplicate addresses in a single routing instance, and the other, virtual router, in which the PE contains a virtual router instance per VPN. The former approach, and its variants, have gained the most attention.
One of the challenges of PPVPNs involves different customers using the same address space, especially the IPv4 private address space.[8] The provider must be able to disambiguate overlapping addresses in the multiple customers' PPVPNs.
In the method defined by RFC 2547, BGP extensions advertise routes in the IPv4 VPN address family, which are of the form of 12-byte strings, beginning with an 8-byte Route Distinguisher (RD) and ending with a 4-byte IPv4 address.  RDs disambiguate otherwise duplicate addresses in the same PE.
PEs understand the topology of each VPN, which are interconnected with MPLS tunnels, either directly or via P routers. In MPLS terminology, the P routers are Label Switch Routers without awareness of VPNs.
The Virtual Router architecture,[9][10] as opposed to BGP/MPLS techniques, requires no modification to existing routing protocols such as BGP. By the provisioning of logically independent routing domains, the customer operating a VPN is completely responsible for the address space. In the various MPLS tunnels, the different PPVPNs are disambiguated by their label, but do not need routing distinguishers.
Virtual router architectures do not need to disambiguate addresses, because rather than a PE router having awareness of all the PPVPNs, the PE contains multiple virtual router instances, which belong to one and only one VPN.
Some virtual networks may not use encryption to protect the data contents. While VPNs often provide security, an unencrypted overlay network does not neatly fit within the secure or trusted categorization. For example a tunnel set up between two hosts that used Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE) would in fact be a virtual private network, but neither secure nor trusted.
Besides the GRE example above, native plaintext tunneling protocols include Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol (L2TP) when it is set up without IPsec and Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol (PPTP) or Microsoft Point-to-Point Encryption (MPPE).
Trusted VPNs do not use cryptographic tunneling, and instead rely on the security of a single provider's network to protect the traffic.
Multi-Protocol Label Switching (MPLS) is often used to overlay VPNs, often with quality-of-service control over a trusted delivery network.
Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol (L2TP)[11] which is a standards-based replacement, and a compromise taking the good features from each, for two proprietary VPN protocols: Cisco's Layer 2 Forwarding (L2F)[12] (obsolete as of 2009[update]) and Microsoft's Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol (PPTP).[13]
From the security standpoint, VPNs either trust the underlying delivery network, or must enforce security with mechanisms in the VPN itself. Unless the trusted delivery network runs among physically secure sites only, both trusted and secure models need an authentication mechanism for users to gain access to the VPN.
Mobile VPNs are used in a setting where an endpoint of the VPN is not fixed to a single IP address, but instead roams across various networks such as data networks from cellular carriers or between multiple Wi-Fi access points.[14] Mobile VPNs have been widely used in public safety, where they give law enforcement officers access to mission-critical applications, such as computer-assisted dispatch and criminal databases, while they travel between different subnets of a mobile network.[15] They are also used in field service management and by healthcare organizations,[16] among other industries.
Increasingly, mobile VPNs are being adopted by mobile professionals and white-collar workers who need reliable connections.[16] They are used for roaming seamlessly across networks and in and out of wireless-coverage areas without losing application sessions or dropping the secure VPN session. A conventional VPN cannot survive such events because the network tunnel is disrupted, causing applications to disconnect, time out,[14] or fail, or even cause the computing device itself to crash.[16]
Instead of logically tying the endpoint of the network tunnel to the physical IP address, each tunnel is bound to a permanently associated IP address at the device. The mobile VPN software handles the necessary network authentication and maintains the network sessions in a manner transparent to the application and the user.[14] The Host Identity Protocol (HIP), under study by the Internet Engineering Task Force, is designed to support mobility of hosts by separating the role of IP addresses for host identification from their locator functionality in an IP network. With HIP a mobile host maintains its logical connections established via the host identity identifier while associating with different IP addresses when roaming between access networks.
↑ Feilner, Markus. "Chapter 1 - VPN—Virtual Private Network". OpenVPN: Building and Integrating Virtual Private Networks: Learn How to Build Secure VPNs Using this Powerful Open Source Application. Packt Publishing.
↑ Trademark Applications and Registrations Retrieval (TARR)
↑ OpenBSD ssh manual page, VPN section
↑ Unix Toolbox section on SSH VPN
↑ Ubuntu SSH VPN how-to
↑ E. Rosen & Y. Rekhter (March 1999). "RFC 2547 BGP/MPLS VPNs". Internet Engineering Task Forc (IETF). http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2547.txt.
↑  Ethernet Bridging (OpenVPN), http://openvpn.net/index.php/access-server/howto-openvpn-as/214-how-to-setup-layer-2-ethernet-bridging.html
↑ Address Allocation for Private Internets, RFC 1918, Y. Rekhter et al.,February 1996
↑ Layer Two Tunneling Protocol "L2TP", RFC 2661, W. Townsley et al.,August 1999
↑ IP Based Virtual Private Networks, RFC 2341, A. Valencia et al., May 1998
↑ Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol (PPTP), RFC 2637, K. Hamzeh et al., July 1999
↑ a b c Phifer, Lisa. "Mobile VPN: Closing the Gap", SearchMobileComputing.com, July 16, 2006.
↑ Willett, Andy. "Solving the Computing Challenges of Mobile Officers", www.officer.com, May, 2006.
↑ a b c Cheng, Roger. "Lost Connections", The Wall Street Journal, December 11, 2007.
Kelly, Sean (August 2001). "Necessity is the mother of VPN invention". Communication News:  26–28. ISSN 0010-3632. http://web.archive.org/web/20011217153420/http://www.comnews.com/cgi-bin/arttop.asp?Page=c0801necessity.htm.
"VPN Buyers Guide". Communication News:  34–38. August 2001. ISSN 0010-3632.
JANET UK "Different Flavours of VPN: Technology and Applications"
Virtual Private Network Consortium - a trade association for VPN vendors
Creating VPNs with IPsec and SSL/TLS Linux Journal article by Rami Rosen
How to setup VPN in iOS, Android, Windows, MacOS Step by step users guide
Using VPN to bypass internet censorship in How to Bypass Internet Censorship, a FLOSS Manual, 10 March 2011, 240 pp
STRUCTURE SEARCHING utilizes a graphic depiction of the chemical structure as input for a search. Such searches are generally run against structural data in online chemical substance files, such as STN's Registry File, Reaxys, or the freely available ChemSpider. Depending on the type of structure search allowed by the system, the complete molecule or any compound containing the embedded structure of the molecule will be retrieved as an answer set. Unlimited substitution of the input molecule may be allowed at free sites on the molecule (a FULL SUBSTRUCTURE SEARCH) or substitution may be limited to certain sites (a CLOSED SUBSTRUCTURE SEARCH). On the STN system, once an answer set is formed in the Registry File, it can be crossed over to the CAPlus or other literature database files to conduct further subject searches of the compounds thus isolated in a structure search. In these cases, it is actually the CAS Registry Numbers (a unique identification number for each chemical) for the compounds that is being searched in the crossover files. The ability to access additional information about compounds such as toxicity, spectra, and literature references is a common feature of nearly all databases providing structure searching.
Note that it is now possible to conduct a search that takes into account the stereochemistry of the chiral centers and double bonds. Stereo searching can also be performed in the Registry File and the REAXYS File on STN or on the Reaxys system (that includes both the older Beilstein and Gmelin content as well as significant newer material). A SIMILARITY SEARCH finds target molecules that are like the query structure in some respects. That might be some biological property such as drug absorption or toxicology, with respect to metabolism. Often, it is the similarity in functional groups that is measured. Finally, MARKUSH STRUCTURE SEARCHING, an important technique in patent searches that allows for considerable variability in the structures retrieved, is another option in some files.
Why Use Structure Searching?
There are many reasons to do a substructure search, among them:
Particular structural features can be focused on.
Unwanted features can be excluded.
The complexities of nomenclature can be avoided.
The novelty of a compound can be assessed.
The structure(s) can be correlated with chemical or physical properties or biological activities.
The structure(s) can be linked to chemical reaction databases to see model compounds or to look for specific reaction conditions.
Competitive products or market leads can be found.
In combination with other types of searches, structure searching is a very powerful supplement.
Structure Searches in the STN Registry and Other Files
As of December 31, 2013, over 78 million registered chemical substances and over 65 million biosequences appear in the Chemical Abstracts Service Registry File. Most of those have been registered since 1965, but, of course, not all of the compounds in the Registry File were discovered since that date. In 2002, Chemical Abstracts Service embarked on a project to retrospectively index all documents in the CA database. Thus, many compounds that have had no new information published about them since the establishment of the CA or CAplus Files (i.e., since 1967) have now been added to the Registry File.
Most of the millions of compounds in the Registry File have their Registry Numbers linked to the databases on the STN system. The LC (File Locater) field of a Registry File record tells in which STN databases the Registry Number is found. In addition to the Registry File, structure searches can be conducted in such databases on STN as REAXYSFILE, CASREACT, and others. A similar file locater function is included in other chemical dictionary files, such as NLM's ChemIDplus.
There are several types of structure searches possible in the Registry File, as well as different options for views of the molecules and different methods of inputting the structure. SciFinder masks to a certain extent the relationship between the Registry File and the CAplus File, CASREACT, and other databases intertwined with its software.
Within the SciFinder search stage itself, considerable information can be gleaned about the answer set to be retrieved. In the Preview option, the sample answer set can be analyzed by atom attachments, or, if the drawn structure contains them, by system-defined or user-defined variable groups. Once the structure is built and the answer set is retrieved, such information can also be found for the full answer set. At this point, the search can proceed as it would if the compounds had been identified by name or molecular formula searches, allowing you to "Get References" from the CAPlus part of the SciFinder system or to link to any of the icons in the retrieved Registry File records.
The structure search can be further refined with additional structural features or by limiting it to commercially available
The following types of structure searches are possible on STN:
EXACT SEARCH--retrieves the substance as drawn plus any stereoisomers, ionic substances, or homopolymers, as well as isotopically labeled compounds with that structure
FAMILY SEARCH--retrieves the same set of compounds as the EXACT search, but will also retrieve any multi-component compounds represented in the Registry File (salts, mixtures, or copolymers)
CLOSED SUBSTRUCTURE SEARCH--allows variable nodes at certain defined positions only
FULL SUBSTRUCTURE SEARCH--retrieves any record in the file that has the structure input as the search key.
For more details on structure searching of STN databases, see the STN training web site.
With SciFinder, EXACT, SUBSTRUCTURE, SIMILARITY, AND MARKUSH searches are possible. Again for more details, visit the SciFinder training web site.
There are actually several stages of a Registry File structure search. The first stage involves a screening of the huge file for compounds that have the requisite substitutents and other features, without regard to their position on the molecule. The much more computer-intensive iteration stage involves an atom-by-atom, bond-by-bond look at the candidate molecules isolated in the screen search. Since this stage requires so much of STN's computer resources, there are limits on the number of compounds that can be looked at during the iterative stage. A sample search must be run on approximately 5% of the file, after which a prediction as to whether the full file search will run to completion is given. Assuming the prediction is favorable, the candidate molecules found in the screening of the full file can be compared to the structure. Otherwise, the structure must be modified to be able to run to completion. With SciFinder, there is some built-in intelligence that offers to "autofix" a molecule that might give the system trouble.
It is also possible to do very precise structure searching on Elsevier's Reaxys system, which contains the vast majority of the legacy information from the Beilstein Handbook of Organic Compounds and the Gmelin Handbook of Inorganic and Organometallic Compounds, a patent database segment, and on-going indexing of substances, reactions, and property data in the current chemical literature. Reaxys provides extensive coverage of chemical research from the 18th century to the present.  As of November 2013, the Reaxys database contained more than 22 million compounds, 35 million reactions, and 45 million literature references.
Reaxys Structure Editing Screen with Isatin Molecule (above) and Two of the Search Results (below)
Reaxys has very similar structure drawing and search options to SciFinder. Exact and substructure searches can be executed.  Variable groups and atoms can be included in the structure. Specific sites can be locked preventing any additional atoms being attached to that atom. As with most vendors, Elsevier provides a number of excellent training videos and guides including this Reaxys guide, Creating Structure Queries for Substances and Reactions.
As a general rule, vendor training material should be consulted for the most up-to-date information for all the resources described anywhere in this Chemical Information Sources wikibook. It simply is not feasible to go into great detail on the mechanics of searching each of the sources described and even if this was done within the wikibook, it would quickly go out of date due to the frequency of changes and new features added to these search systems and databases.
Beilstein and Gmelin are two classic print compendiums of chemical information. Most of the information in the print volumes was converted to electronic form and for a period of time existed as separate databases. All of the digital information from these two sources as well as other databases have now been merged into a unified database system created and maintained by Elsevier, Reaxys, which is also available on STN International as the REAXYSFILE. Large academic research libraries often have significant print holdings that still have value for the patient, diligent searcher.  Chemistry librarians at such institutions maintain helpful guides to the print runs, for example, the University at Buffalo (Beilstein, Gmelin) and the University of Texas at Austin (Beilstein, Gmelin).
Beilstein is for organic compounds, whereas Gmelin is for inorganic and organometallic compounds.  Beilstein covers compounds containing carbon along with the following elements:
Li, Be              B, C,  N,  O,  F
Na, Mg                 Si, P,  S,  Cl
K,  Ca                     As, Se, Br
Rb, Sr                     Te, I
Compounds can be single components or salts and mixtures (if they have at least one organic component). Peptides are covered if they contain twelve or fewer amino acids. Polymers or polycondensation products are not treated. The following are not typically treated as Beilstein compounds, but would be found in Gmelin:
Carbonic acid and its thio analogs along with their salts with inorganic cations
HCN, HOCN, HSCN and the corresponding iso-acids and all the metal salts and complexes of these acids
Metal salts of formic acid, acetic acid, and oxalic acid
Gmelin covers compounds not covered in Beilstein, i.e., inorganic and organometallic chemistry as well as related fields such as mineralogy and metallurgy. Compounds are indexed with terms such as coordination compounds, alloys, ceramics, and inorganic polymers.
Compounds in the Beilstein database are also indexed by a number that indicates various structural features. That is the Lawson Number. It represents certain structural fragments and can be used for structural similarity searches. In general, the smaller the Lawson Number, the more common the fragment. Every substance in Beilstein has at least one Lawson number assigned to it. Dividing the Lawson Number by 8 puts you roughly in the Beilstein system number for the printed Beilstein volume that contains the compound. The compounds are divided into 3 major groups in the printed Beilstein Handbook:
Acyclic Compounds, Volumes 1-4; System Numbers 1-449
Isocyclic Compounds, Volumes 5-16; System Numbers 450-2358
Heterocyclic Compounds, Volumes 17-27; System Numbers 2359-4720.
Unfortunately, the Beilstein Institute never published the meanings of the 4,720 system numbers used to classify organic compounds.  However, the Lawson Number Descriptions can now be found on the web.  The Lawson Number is effective when used in combination with other search keys, such as molecular formula, element ranges, etc. It is also useful when combined with NOT in substructure searches.
Chemisches Zentralblatt is the oldest abstracting journal in the field of chemistry. It covers the chemical literature from 1830 to 1969.  In the course of those 140 years, Chemisches Zentralblatt published 900,000 pages, including 2 million abstracts.  Chemisches Zentralblatt introduced formula indexes using the Richter system (different from the Hill system) in 1925. In 1956 it changed to the Hill system. The previous title Chemisches Central-Blatt (1856-1906) has only author, subject, and patent number indexes.  InfoChem has performed automatic chemical named entity recognition of the entire text of this abstracting journal to produce the Chemisches Zentralblatt Structural Database which is structure-searchable.  The database is offered either as a Web application or for in-house loading.  It links to digitized versions of the original paper product that were produced by FIZ-Chemie.
Structure searching considerably expands the ability of a chemist to retrieve information from a database since the search key is the "native language" of the chemist, the chemical structure.  Any chemist, regardles of his or her native tongue, understands a chemical structure.  Thus, the structure searching systems speak the universal language of chemistry.  The development of graphical user interfaces that allow easy drawing of the desired structure on a computer screen was a major advance in chemical searching.  There are now several commercial databases such as Chemical Abstracts and Reaxys (Beilstein/Gmelin) that have this capability, as do public systems such as PubChem and ChemSpider.  It may take some time to explore and learn all of the capabilities of the structure searching systems, but the reward in enhanced search retrieval is well worth it.
Long-term peacebuilding and conflict-management capacities can be built through participatory training, workshops on key issues, exposure visits to existing programmes, and ongoing coaching, combined with monitoring and evaluation. Minimal resources would be required to support small projects or peace-related events or activities. The programmes would be responsive rather than prescriptive, incorporating the flexibility to adapt according to local conditions. Rather than imposing values or preconceived processes, they would encourage self-analysis and would focus on building human capital.
Peacebuilders, within communities and otherwise, need to possess a specific skill set
Key skills, required in peacebuilders, include:
HTTP::Engine is made by Kazuhiro Osawa (yappo). It is an generalized interface for application developers that makes it easy to deploy under different kinds of server configurations, including CGI, FastCGI, mod_perl and standalone pure-Perl HTTP Server. It is not, however, a full-stack Web application framework, but it'll be easy to write a framework based on it.
For example, this is a little application just outputs "Hello World":
The run method here takes an instance of HTTP::Engine::Request as its input, and returns an HTTP::Engine::Response object as its output. This sub-routine is the first-handler from HTTP server. In a more complex application, it usually just dispatches the real work to some other sub-routine based on the URI or parameters.
To deploy it as a CGI script, you then write an "hello.cgi" like this:
If someday, you need to deploy this application under mod_perl environment, you can just write a MyApp::ModPerl handler class with code like this:
Your core application code does not need to be modified, so long as you only use HTTP::Engine::* classes to construct your response.
You might question that why bother having an abstraction layer instead of just choose stick to a good deploy environment. One good answer is that might not be easy to test the app without this abstraction layer.
If your deployment configuration of choice is like mod_perl, then your test programs would need to start up an apache httpd with mod_perl.so loaded, and then try to hit it with maybe Test::WWW::Mechanize. That would work, too, but it's too troublesome.
HTTP::Engine comes with a specialized Test interface that makes this very easy. To test if our "Hello World" application works, you write a test program like this:
If you compared the construction statement of $engine object, you will see the only difference is the "module" value. This "Test" module makes the $engine object a totally mocked-up environment that basically just prepares every environment variables needed, and just execute your application code.
This makes it very lightweight and easy to run and write the test program. You can then write functional tests just like that way you write unit tests.
The color = il colore
Light blue = azzurro
Turquoise blue = turchese
Navy blue = blu marino
Menus, Buttons etc. are marked like this
"Double click" always refers to the left mouse button
"Context menu" always refers to the popup menu that appears on clicking with the right mouse button
GENtle is © 2004-2008 by Magnus Manske, licensed under GPL
This manual is © 2004-2008 by its authors, licensed under GFDL
Introduction to the Science of Biology -
What are living creatures made of? (Cells) -
How can you see things that are really small? (Microscopes)-
How are living things named? (Taxonomy) -
What is everything made of? (Atoms and Molecules) -
How do plants make food? (Photosynthesis) -
How does Photosynthesis work? (Light and Dark Reactions) -
Tell me more about Photosynthesis. (Photosystems, C4 plants and CAM) -
What's really going on in there? (Metabolism) -
How are food molecules broken down to make energy? -
What are the steps in the breakdown of glucose for energy? -
How do living things grow? -
How are babies made? (Human reproduction) -
How are babies made? (Human reproduction)
How do parents pass things on to their children? (Genetics) -
Why do species change over time? -
How do viruses make people sick? -
Some topics have pages with more than one difficulty level. The Leaf Icons show what levels are available for each topic.
Easy - These topics can be easily understood by a young or casual reader.
Intermediate - More advanced topic may require more outside knowledge.
Advanced - Covers material at level of College Biology Majors
Audio version available.
The important thing to remember when assessing a very young child is that they probably don't want to be there (especially if they're in hospital).  In fact, most adults don't want to be there either but at least they're able to recognise that it's probably in their best interests to attend.  A child attends because somebody made them.
Play is going to be an important aspect of your assessment (as well as your treatment).  If you can distract them with balls, trampolines, toys and wedges you'll get a lot further than with instructions, commands and regimes.  Children want to climb up onto things.  They want to throw balls and hang from beams.  If you can make their trip to you a little more fun and a little less scary, you'll end up not only getting a better response to your treatment, but you may find yourself enjoying your job!
(Keywords)Throwing, kicking, rolling, sitting, bouncing.  Postural control, strengthening, co-ordination.
(Keywords)Wedges are good for stretching muscles, placing limbs into normal positions and props for climbing over, under and around.
There is some controversy over the use of mini-trompolines (Rebound therapy) in rehabilitation programmes for children.  Research in the US, UK and New Zealand has shown that the number of A&E admissions after trompoline-related injury is staggeringly high.  Most conclude with a statement calling for a complete ban on the sale of recreational trampolines.  However, they also found that most injuries came about as a result of unsupervised activity, which hopefully would never occur in a physio gym.  The use of trampolines has (perhaps surprisingly) been shown to be effective in assisting with sputum clearance, among other, more well-documented effects.
(Keywords)Rolling, tumbling, falling safely, clean.
Zoph 0.9 is a stable release. It's equal to v0.9pre2, except for an updated Italian translation.
Updated Italian translation, by Francesco Ciattaglia
There are no known bugs in this version.
Zoph 0.9pre2 is the second release candidate for Zoph 0.9. Zoph is now completely feature-frozen for the 0.9 release, only bugfixes will be made.
Bug#3471099: Map not displaying when looking at photo in edit mode
Bug#3471100: On some pages, title contains PHP warning
Zoph 0.9pre1 is the first release candidate for Zoph 0.9. Zoph is now completely feature-frozen for the 0.9 release, only bugfixes will be made.
Bug#3420574: When using --autoadd, zoph CLI import sometimes tries to create new locations or photographers even though they already exist in the database.
Bug#3427517: Share this photo feature does not work
Bug#3427518: Not possible to remove and album or category from a photo
Bug#3433687: Not possible to remove album or category from photo (bulk)
Bug#3431130: Share this photo doesn't show links in photo edit mode
Bug#3433810: Popup for albums, categories, people and places doesn't always disappear when moving mouse away.
Removed a warning that in some cases caused images not to be displayed.
Added a few missing strings, reported by Pekka Kutinlahti.
Updated Italian translation, by Francesco Ciattaglia
Updated Dutch, German, Canadian English and Finnish
Got rid of a lot of PHP warnings
Got rid of a lot of PHP strict messages
Cut down on the number of global variables
Removed support for magic_quotes
Bug#3435181: Variable inside quotes
Zoph 0.8.4 is the final pre-release for Zoph 0.9.
This version adds several feature improvements. More features have been added the new CLI import, which was introduced in v0.8.2. The 'bulk edit' page has been improved, both in features as in loading speed (100x faster in some cases!). The 'tree view' and 'thumb view' overview pages have been improved. Several coding style modernisation changes have been made.
Req#1985439: Adding albums, categories, places and people via the CLI
Req#1985439: Automatically adding albums, categories, places and people via the CLI
Req#3042674: Recursive import of directories
Req#1985439: Setting album, category, person, photographer, path from import dir.
Req#1491208: Show more info in thumbnail overview
Added autocomplete support to bulk edit page
Changed the photo edit page to automatically add new dropdowns to albums, categories and people.
Removed 'people_slots' functionality
Changed add people on bulk photo edit page to use multiple dropdowns
Add multiple albums, categories, persons on both single and bulk  photo edit.
Req#2871210: Added 'share photo' feature.
Zoph now stores a hash of a photo in the database
Bug#3312029: MAGIC_FILE cannot be empty
Fixed an issue that caused the 'search' button for geocoding on the edit location page to be misplaced.
Fixed a typo that caused the 'track' screen to no longer work
Zoph has started its life in the era of PHP3, while the current version of PHP is version 5.3. In between a lot has been changed in PHP. I have started to adopt PHP5-style programming some time ago for new development. I have now also started to refactor the other code to a new coding style. Currently, Zoph still has a lot of global functions and I am slowly moving almost all of them to static methods.
Made several changes to function names to accommodate new coding style
Refactored photo->update_relations() to merge with the similar photo->updateRelations() that the new import introduced.
Moved get_root_...() functions into static functions.
Refactor of zoph_table object (now called zophTable)
Changed the date and time field to type 'date' and type 'time', which are new types for HTML5. Tested in Chromium.
Removed deprecated IMAGE_SERVICE setting. IMAGE_SERVICE is now always on.
Renamed image_service.php to image.php
Improved loading speed of the 'tracks' page by using a different, better cachable SQL query
Zoph 0.8.3 is a pre-release for Zoph 0.9.
This version adds several feature improvements, mostly related to mapping. The most important addition is the support for geotagging. This version also fixes several bugs.
Zoph 0.8.3 is beta release, I tested it as well as possible on my system, but it should not be considered a "stable" version. I would, however, very much appreciate if people could test and give feedback on this release and the updated documentation, in this way I can make sure that the stable (v0.9) version will be as bug-free as possible.
Req#2974014: Search for location
Geocoding: finding lat/lon location from city, county.
Req#2974016: Additional mapping resources
Req#3077944: When adding a new place, or editting a place with no location (lat/lon) set, zoph will zoom the map to the parent location.  If a photo is editted, and the photo has no lat/lon, but it's location does, the map is zoomed to the location's lat/lon.
Getting rid of a NOTICE regarding unset DB_PREFIX constant
Several small changes to decrease the number of NOTICE messages.
In photo edit mode, moved maps to bottom of page, to fix a bug with Openlayers maps
Better error handling when UPLOAD_DIR does not exist.
Zoph.ini: Added quotes around values, PHP fails if they contain special characters. As suggested by scantron.
Bug#3237112: Rating counts are incorrect with new import
Bug#3237012: There is no "next" link on the bulk edit page, although a "previous" link is present.
Switched from Mapstraction 1.x to Mapstraction 2.0.15
Bug#3104632: Various changes for PHP 5.3 compatibility
Refactor of zophcode, tag, smiley and replace objects to new coding style, including added PHPdoc comments.
Added a copyright note to Openlayers maps
Refactor of the admin class & move admin page to a template.
Dutch and Canadian English have been updated and are completely up to date
Zoph 0.8.2.1 is a bugfix release for Zoph 0.8.2.
Many changes were made in Zoph 0.8.2 and with so many changed lines of code, a few bugs is almost inevitable. This release fixes all known bugs in v0.8.2.
Bug#3064940: HTML in dropdown menu's. (This bug was previously fixed in Zoph 0.8.0.5, but the fix was not correctly ported to the development branch)
Bug#3094182: New CLI does not store location and photographer
Bug#3094198: New CLI does not always look up location name correctly.
Bug#3094201: New CLI does not exit when it encounters an error (album, category, ... not found)
Bug#3102078: Webimport of archives fails with no error
Bug#3102148: New CLI --field gives an error
Fix for an issue that caused javascript errors when an apostroph would appear in a title of a place.
Bug#3108196: Translation not working in Zoph 0.8.2
Zoph 0.8.2 is the second pre-release for Zoph 0.9.
Zoph 0.8.2 features a completely rewritten import system. The webinterface has been modernized. Error handling and user-friendliness have been improved. The CLI interface prior to v0.8.2 was written in Perl, because the rest of Zoph was written in PHP, a lot of duplicate work needed to be done whenever something needed to be changed in the import system. As of this version, the CLI interface has been rewritten in PHP as well.
Zoph 0.8.2 is beta release, I tested it as well as possible on my system, but it should not be considered a "stable" version. I would, however, very much appreciate if people could test and give feedback on this release and the updated documentation, in this way I can make sure that the stable (v0.9) version will be as bug-free as possible.
Bugfixes from v0.8.0.5 have been included in this release.
Configuration of database connection has been moved from config.inc.php (webinterface) and .zophrc (CLI interface) to /etc/zoph.ini, for both the webinterface and the CLI interface.
HTML documentation (docs directory) is no longer included in the release. Maintaining this documentation cost a lot of time. The scripts I wrote to convert the Wikibooks documentation into offline documentation could not handle images and the documentation I wrote for the new webimport contains a lot of pictures.
Zoph 0.8.0.5 is a bugfix release that fixes a few bugs in Zoph 0.8.0.4
Bug#3049203: Rating links on search page do not work.
Bug#3054562: HTML in rating dropdown on search page
Bug#3066174: Rotation not working in auto edit mode
Bug#3064937: SQL error when inserting a place with no timezone.
Bug#3072586: Latitude is misspelled as "lattitude"
Zoph 0.8.1.2 is a bugfix release that fixes a few bugs in Zoph 0.8.1.1.
A few cases of duplicate encoding, causing HTML code to appear instead of being interpreted by the browser
A bug that caused markers not to work correctly
A bug that caused Zoph to loose timezone information when using the 'assign timezone to children' functionality.
Zoph 0.8.0.4 is a bugfix release that fixes a few bugs in Zoph 0.8.0.3.
A few cases of duplicate encoding, causing HTML code to appear instead of being interpreted by the browser
Zoph 0.8.1.1 is a security release that fixes a number of Cross Site Scripting (XSS) issues of which most were found by VUPEN Security. I would like to thank VUPEN for reporting these bugs.
Zoph 0.8.1.1 does not fix any other bugs.
Several XSS scripting issues found by VUPEN Security
Several XSS scripting issues found during fixing of the above bugs
Zoph 0.8.0.3 is a security release that fixes a number of Cross Site Scripting (XSS) issues of which most were found by VUPEN Security. I would like to thank VUPEN for reporting these bugs.
This release also fixes all the bugs found since the 0.8.0.2 release.
Several XSS scripting issues found by VUPEN Security
Several XSS scripting issues found during fixing of the above bugs
Bug#2901852: Fatal error when a photo without a photographer is displayed on the map
Bug#2902011: zophImport.pl cannot find people with no last name.
Bug#2925030: Last modified time is not displayed correctly
Bug#2925498: NULL entries in the database change to 0.000 after rotating an image causing fake map entries to appear. Fix by Jason Taylor.
Bug#2925508: Thumbnail covers actionlinks on people page. Fix by Jason Taylor.
Bug#2925506: Count of places is wrong. Fix by Jason Taylor.
Bug#2982051: editting photo does not work when using "auto edit".
Zoph 0.8.1 is the first feature release for v0.9. This release introduces a new logging system, that should allow users and developers to control more granular which debugging messages Zoph displays, more information can be found on this page. The other major change is that Zoph is now completely UTF-8 based, this should fix issues users had with international characters. This last change requires some manual changes to the MySQL database.
Zoph 0.8.1 is beta release, I tested it as well as possible on my system, but especially the UTF-8 conversion is very dependent on specific situations on your system; therefore it should not be considered a "stable" version. I would, however, very much appreciate if people could test and give feedback on this release and the upgrade documentation, in this way I can make sure that the stable (v0.9) version will be as bug-free as possible.
Bug#1985449: Zoph should be UTF-8
Bug#2901852: Fatal error when a photo without a photographer is displayed on the map
Bug#2902011: zophImport.pl cannot find people with no last name.
Bug#2925030: Last modified time is not displayed correctly
All the bugfixes from Zoph 0.8.0.1 and 0.8.0.2
Zoph 0.8.0.2 is a bugfix release for Zoph 0.8.
Bug#2876282: Not possible to create new pages.
Bug#2873171: fatal error when autocomplete is switched off.
Bug#2873171: Javascript error in MSIE when trying to change the parent place using the autocomplete dropdown.
Bug#2873171: Timezone autocomplete does not work in MSIE
Bug#2881212: Not possible to unset timezone.
Bug#2889934: No icons in admin menu when using MSIE8
Bug#2888263: Unintuative working of bulk edit page could lead to dataloss
Bug#2890387: Saved search does not remember the "include sub-albums/categories/places" checkbox and the state of the "AND/OR" dropdown.
Added a Russion translation created by Sergey Chursin and Alexandr Bondarev
Changed deprecated mysql_escape_string() into new mysql_real_escape_string().
Zoph 0.7.0.8 and Zoph 0.8.0.1
Security fixes for 0.7 and 0.8.
Fixes a security bug that caused a user to be able to execute admin-only pages.
Final 0.8 release. Only small changes compared to 0.8pre3:
Fixed a bug that caused users of PHP 5.1.x get an error about non-existant DateTime class.
Added a few long-existing but overlooked and therefore not documented configuration settings
Added a troubleshooting section ("Solving Problems")
This is the third pre-release for 0.8, it fixes the bugs discovered since v0.8pre2, including the security bug. It also updates several translations.
Bug#2841196: PHP error when logging in as non-admin user
Bug#2841296: Not possible to download 4.2GB ZIP files
Bug#2841357: Save search fails without an error in some cases
Bug#2841373: Saved search does not always work correctly when saving a photo collection that was not the result of a search action.
Fix for a cross site scripting bug (the same as the 0.7.0.7 release)
Bug#2845750: zophImport.pl fails when --path contains multiple dirs
Dutch, Danish, French, Italian, Norwegian Bokmål and Swedish chef have been updated and are fully up to date.
Removing very old changelog and upgrade instructions. They can still be read in the online (wikibooks) version.
Adding long existing but until now not documented options DEFAULT_ORDER and DEFAULT_DIRECTION
Herring's blush     (proverbial) It would make a red herring blush is used proverbially to describe something very shameful. Bloom, however, is misusing the phrase to describe Davy Byrne's rosy cheeks.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
This section covers some of the differences between BlitzMax and 'classic' BASIC, and introduces features that help overcome some of classic BASIC's shortcomings.
Classic BASIC allows you to declare variables 'on the fly'. For example, consider a program consisting of:
For k=1 To 10
This program automatically creates 2 local variables: 'k' and 'sum'. However, this behaviour can often lead to unexpected bugs. For example, if you mistyped one of the 'sum' variables, the program would not work as expected. No error would be given - a new variable would simply be created.
By default, BlitzMax will allow you to automatically declare variables like this. However, you can use the Strict command to override this behaviour.
Strict must appear at the top of your program before any actual program code and puts your program into 'strict mode'. Strict mode forces you to declare all variables before use. For example, rewriting the above program in strict mode results in:
Local sum,k
For k=1 To 10
If you were to mistype one of the variable names in this program, you would receive an 'identifier not found' error when compiling, allowing you to easily find and correct the problem.
Blitzmax does not support the Dim statement for array creation. Instead, arrays in BlitzMax are real types - they can be passed to functions, returned from functions and placed in variables.
To create a classic BASIC style array in BlitzMax, use a global variable. For example:
Global my_array$[100] 'create a 100 element string array
Also note that arrays in BlitzMax are not '1 bigger' than their dimensioned size - the 100 element array above contains 100 elements, numbered 0 through 99 inclusive.
BlitzMax also does not support a 'Redim' operation. Instead, you can use slices. For example:
Global my_array$[100]  'create a 100 element string array
BlitzMax does not support the Gosub command. Use functions instead.
The Goto command is supported, but only in non-strict mode. Goto labels should be prefixed with a # character. For example:
For k=1 To 10
If a<5 Then Goto LessThan5
If a>5 Then Goto GreaterThan5
Data, Read and Restore are supported but have been renamed to DefData, ReadData and RestoreData. Data labels must also be prefixed with a # character.
BlitzMax allows objects to be assigned to integer variables, and integer variables to be passed to functions expecting objects. This is mainly for the benefit of beginners, as it reduces the size and complexity of code, but is also great for lazy pro's! For example:
DrawImage image,0,0               'integer image parameter is converted back to an object
This is achieved using an object handle system, and such handles should be released using the Release command when they are no longer needed. For example:
DrawImage image,0,0               'integer image parameter is converted back to an object
Release image                     'image no longer needed - release it
Failing to release an object handle will result in memory leaks. However, all objects are released at program exit anyway, so for quick 'n' dirty jobs you don't have to bother.
When declaring variables and function return types, BlitzMax allows you to use BASIC style 'type tags'. These are as follows:
~!
For example, a string variable can be declared in two ways:
Local a_string:String
Local another_string$
Mac users whose keyboards do not feature the # character should use 'Alt 3'.
A parallelogram is a geometric figure with two
The opposite sides are equal in length and the opposite angles are also equal.
The area is equal to the product of any side and the distance between that
The following properties are common to all parallelograms (parallelogram, rhombus, rectangle, square)
A rhombus is a parallelogram with four congruent sides.
The diagonals of a rhombus are perpendicular.
Each diagonal of a rhombus bisects two angles the rhombus.
A rhombus may or may not be a square.
A square is a parallelogram with four right angles and four congruent sides.
A square is both a rectangle and a rhombus and inherits all of their properties.
Chapter 1. Geometry/Points, Lines, Line Segments and Rays
Chapter 2. Geometry/Angles
Chapter 3. Geometry/Properties
Chapter 4. Geometry/Inductive and Deductive Reasoning
Chapter 5. Geometry/Proof
Chapter 6. Geometry/Five Postulates of Euclidean Geometry
Chapter 7. Geometry/Vertical Angles
Chapter 8. Geometry/Parallel and Perpendicular Lines and Planes
Chapter 9. Geometry/Congruency and Similarity
Chapter 10. Geometry/Congruent Triangles
Chapter 11. Geometry/Similar Triangles
Chapter 12. Geometry/Quadrilaterals
Chapter 13. Geometry/Parallelograms
Chapter 14. Geometry/Trapezoids
Chapter 15. Geometry/Circles/Radii, Chords and Diameters
Chapter 16. Geometry/Circles/Arcs
Chapter 17. Geometry/Circles/Tangents and Secants
Chapter 18. Geometry/Circles/Sectors
Appendix A. Geometry/Postulates & Definitions
Appendix B. Geometry/The SMSG Postulates for Euclidean Geometry
Two and Three-Dimensional Geometry and Other Geometric Figures
Geometry/Area Shapes Extended into 3rd Dimension Linearly to a Line or Point
Geometry/Coordinate Systems  (currently incorrectly linked to Astronomy)
Geometry/An Alternative Way and Alternative Geometric Means of Calculating the Area of a Circle
Nora and Dora Chance are the illegitimate daughters of Melchior Hazard officially known as the daughters of Peregrine (Perry) Hazard . Their mother is apparently Pretty Kitty who died in childbirth, there are implications to suggest that Grandma Chance is their actual mother, but it isn't said out right that she is. Dora says 'Nature over nurture, ducky' when talking about their similarities with Grandma Chance.
Melchior and Perry Hazard are the sons of Estella and Ranulph Hazard, although questions of whether Ranulph is their real father are raised, and whether Melchior and Perry are in fact the sons of Cassius Booth ('Horatio').
Saskia and Imogen Hazard are the daughter's of Melchior's first wife, Lady Atlanta Hazard, née Lynde (aka Lady A or Wheelchair). They are legally Melchior's daughter's but Biologically the result of an affair Lady A had with Perry.
Tristram and Gareth Hazard are the offspring of Melchior and his third wife Lady Margerine. Although Dora even suggests that these children may not be Melchiors.
Gareth had an affair with an unknown woman and produced the two twins, one boy and one girl (descirbed as a first in the family, Nora and Dora adopt the twins at the  at the end of the novel.
Note how the paternity of three sets of twins (Melchior and Peregine, Tristram and Gareth and Saskia and Imogen) is questioned. In Contrast,  Dora refutes suggestions over who is her mother and she also knows who the mother of Tristram and Gareth's baby.
The line "a father is a hypothesis but a mother is a fact" sums up the above paragraph.
Solid lines indicate biological relationships; dotted lines indicate other relationships, e.g. non-married couple or adoptive children.
The C POSIX library is a language-independent library (using C calling conventions) that adds functions specific to POSIX systems. POSIX (and the Single Unix Specification) specifies a number of routines that should be available over and above those in the C standard library proper. It was developed at the same time as the ANSI C standard and is closely related to C. Some effort was made to make the C and POSIX libraries compatible, but there are a few POSIX functions that were never introduced into ANSI C.
Facilities are often implemented alongside the C standard library functionality, with varying degrees of closeness. For example, glibc implements functions such as fork within libc.so, but before NPTL was merged into glibc it constituted a separate library with its own linker flag. Often, this POSIX-specified functionality will be regarded as part of the library; the C library proper may be identified as the ANSI or ISO C library.
Asynchronous input and output.
Definitions for internet operations.
Magic numbers for the cpio archive format.
Allows the opening and listing of directories.
File opening, locking and other operations.
Message display structures.
Filename-matching types.
File tree traversal.
Pathname pattern-matching types.
User group information and control.
Codeset conversion facility.
Language information constants.
Definitions for pattern matching functions.
Monetary types.
Definitions for ndbm database operations.
Sockets local interfaces.
Definitions for network database operations.
Internet address family.
Definitions for the Internet Transmission Control Protocol (TCP).
Data types.
Definitions for the poll() function.
Defines an API for creating and manipulating POSIX threads.
Passwd (user information) access and control.
Regular expression matching types.
Execution scheduling.
Search tables.
Semaphores.
Create a new process to run an executable program.
String operations.
Definitions for XSI resource operations.
Main sockets header.
File information (stat et al.).
Time and date functions and structures.
File access and modification times structure.
Various data types used elsewhere.
Definitions for vector I/O operations.
Definitions for UNIX domain sockets.
Status of terminated child processes.
Definitions for system error logging.
Magic numbers for the tar archive format.
Allows terminal I/O interfaces.
Tracing.
Various essential POSIX functions and constants.
File access and modification times.
User accounting database definitions.
Word-expansion types.
Headers that overlap/extend the C standard.
Verify program assertion.
Complex arithmetic.
Character types.
Floating-point environment.
Floating types.
Fixed size integer types.
Alternative spellings.
Implementation-defined constants.
Category macros.
Mathematical declarations.
Stack environment declarations.
Signals.
Handle variable argument list.
Boolean type and values.
Standard type definitions.
Integer types.
Standard buffered input/output.
Standard library definitions.
String operations.
Type-generic macros.
Time types.
Wide-character handling.
Wide-character classification and mapping utilities.
Official List of headers in the POSIX library on opengroup.org
Description of the posix library from the Flux OSKit
Gallmeister, Bill (January 1, 1995), POSIX.4 Programmers Guide: Programming for the Real World (1st ed.), O'Reilly Media, pp. 564, ISBN 1565920740, http://oreilly.com/catalog/9781565920743/
The project to build the Wikibook to Final Fantasy VII started in August 18, 2005.
Restored to Wikibooks 15 years later, on June 16th, 2021.
The following people have contributed things to the guide to any substantial amount:
Urpo Lankinen, aka wwwwolf: Originator, overall organizing, most of the meat of the walkthrough sections, and generally a lot of small tweaks.
Joey Roe, some story/character background/item/appendix sections, Battle Square, Training
BigCow, filled in some of the enemy skills, I'm playing through the game for the second time on the PC and will try to work on the walkthrough and other sections as they come up. Filled in the "events during the game" section as well, trying to explain the plot in a comprehensible manner.
Kestrel (68.2.151.59) original text of the Ancient Forest.
Aassem, (contributions) (68.150.88.124 for now, contributions) contributed the Motorcycle chase minigame original text, did some work on Wall Market walkthrough (notably the items and chices), and did some Wutai area, Northern Cave area training info on my IP (forgot to log in, darn)
And also a lot of other smaller contributors and other anonymous tweakers, but I think that's all of the people who have so far added much anything. A few anonymous tweakers might get recognition here, though: User:216.170.63.150 for doing Shin-Ra HQ warehouse floor and User:70.118.33.42 for Wutai Pagoda quest. However, if you plan to do any serious contributions to this guide, I really recommend to get an user account. It's easy.
If the eigenvalues for the characteristic equation are real and distinct, mathematically, nothing is really wrong.  Thus, by our guess and the existence and uniqueness theorem, for an n-size square matrix, the solution set is determined by:
.
Then since the linear combination of two solutions is also a solution (which can be verified directly from the structure of the problem), we can form the general solution as such:
.
What's interesting is when the eigenvalues are not so simple.
v • d • e Linear Algebra with Differential EquationsBook's main Page: Linear Algebra with Differential EquationsHomogeneous Linear Differential Equations
Real, Distinct Eigenvalues Method • Imaginary Eigenvalues Method • Repeated Eigenvalue MethodHeterogeneous Linear Differential Equations
Diagonalization • Method of Undetermined Coefficients • Variation of Parameters • Laplacian Transforms
Non-Linear Differential EquationsThis template is to be used on all pages of the book Linear Algebra with Differential Equations.
The very beginnings of Western philosophy have included discussions about the status of women. Plato spoke of women's roles in The Republic. He claimed that while there are some obvious physical differences between men and women, there are some women that are taller, stronger, etc. than most men. Furthermore, Plato claimed that there are no differences between men and women's ability to understand reality and make reasonable judgements about it. [1]
Conversely, Plato's student, Aristotle held a very low opinion of women. Aristotle in his work, Politics claims that women ought to be treated as property. Furthermore, the best a woman can achieve is to rear a fine family. [2]
Feminism within philosophy is a very large field; the topic encompasses most, if not all, disciplines that philosophy covers. Feminists have an interest in subjects ranging from Aesthetics to the Philosophy of Religion, thus it would be dishonest to say that Feminist philosophers study one particular subject or intersection. We can, however, safely say that Feminist philosophers are interested in how gender, race and class (among other things) affect and are affected by philosophy.
Below is a general list of topics that have prominent Feminist interest.
↑ Kemerling, Garth (2006-08-01). "Plato: The Republic 5-10". http://www.philosophypages.com/hy/2h.htm. Retrieved 2006.
↑ Roberts, Andrew (2006-08-01). "Aristotle on reason, the state, slavery and women". http://www.mdx.ac.uk/www/study/xari.htm. Retrieved 2006.
Many of Oracle's most important De Facto PL/SQL standards have now been implemented by IBM.  IBM is aiming to compete on performance, usability, high end  features and (of course) price.  This Wikibook compares and contrasts Oracle (v9i, 10g or 11g) with DB2 (v9.7 for Linux, UNIX, and Windows).  Oracle and DB2 are both enterprise-class databases worthy of consideration for the most demanding tasks and this book aims to be factual and impartial in helping the user to compare and contrast them.
Generally, anyone who has knowledge of one of these databases will see how equivalent core functionality is implemented in the other. Specifically, you will see how DB2 implements Oracle compatibility and how Oracle data and applications written against this data work in DB2.  It is important to note that while it is possible to replace an Oracle implementation, it is also possible to develop heterogeneous systems, the so-called ‘Sidecar Strategy’. Examples of this are master slave replication where an Oracle master is replicated to DB2 slaves.
As an example, both databases work in shared memory and use data caching for speed, they also have the following similar functionality:
Packages, Procedures and Triggers
While there is similarity in these areas, the underlying implementation is different. This list is a standard requirement for most commercial DBMSs, but in addition Oracle has its own set of specific features. Anyone considering Oracle compatibility needs to know how features that they have taken advantage of in their existing implementation are handled in their target implementation.
Database migration is relatively straightforward, it happens every day, however the devil is in the details. When specific implementation differences are known, there are known solutions. Problems arise when differences are ‘discovered’ once a migration strategy has been embarked on.
An understanding of Oracle compatibility is the first step. The practical implementation of a successful strategy is outside the scope of this document and is something that should involve the experienced.
?
!
.
?
Create template with either table of all entries at top, or back and forwards buttons linked to parent and children pages, also with links to glossary.
Read through existing material and edit what is needed for Biology
Create and write up Sc1 page on investigations (skills POAE)
Write up glossary pages - possibly re-site the pages for ease of access??
Find someone to translate glossary into Afrikaans, Xhosa, Zulu, etc.
Research, create and write up page on useful websites - e.g. Kevinsplayroom, etc., that have games/ additional helps.
Check whether all content is actually required (i.e. is some of it covered in Geog, so would be duplicated here?) and edit as necessary
Cut and paste info as possible (LOTS of editing needed for ESL audience) from other Wiki Life Sciences books (Acknowledge authors in contributors)
Write up missing sections not cut and pasted.
Find diagrams and images to use (copyright free)
Function type and namespace reference for OpenGL gl.h glu.h glut.h
OpenGL basic testing app to use with examples in this section
GLboolean glAreTexturesResident (GLsizei n, const GLuint *textures, GLboolean *residences);
Much effort has been invested in ensuring validity, reliability, and cross-cultural measurement equivalence of a new personal cultural orientations scale. Consumer ethnocentrism and consumer innovativeness for ensuring nomological validity of this scale.
We should not buy foreign products, because it hurts our economy. (0.77)
Only products that are unavailable in our country should be imported. (0.75)
Purchasing foreign products allows other countries to get rich off of us. (0.73)
It may cost me in the long run but I support my own country’s products. (0.68)
Sharma (2010): Measuring Personal Cultural Orientations: Scale Development and Validation. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 38, No. 6, pp. 787–806
It is not feasible to cover every single use-case of Azure, and hence we link to some useful tutorials on the Internet which you may wish to consult if you are using Azure for a specialised purpose. We do not guarantee accuracy in the content of any of these tutorials.
Azure Custom Vision service for object recognition
Azure Tips and Tricks for Visual Studio 2019
Using Data Science techniques to analyse popular TV
Using Azure Custom Vision to convert handwritten text to HTML markup
Recognising voices with Speaker Recognition APIs in Azure Cognitive Services
How have mobile devices unified communications?
Modern communications has come a long way from the invention of the telephone in the 1880's to the introduction of data communications in the 1960's. Modern communications have evolved to the point where communication is automated and immediate. The immediacy or as Philip Howard of Bloor Research puts it: is the reduction of human 'latency' to improve the processes of communication (Elliot, 2008). The improvement in communication and the technologies behind these improvements falls under one concept: Unified Communication. This article will discuss the benefits and challenges of Unified Communications. But before we begin, let us define Unified Communication.
Unified Communications (UC) encompasses many modern methods of communications: from instant messaging, email, voice mail, to VOIP (voice-over-internet-protocol). Unified communication is the merging of multiple messages types across multiple communication points (Evans, 2004). It is also with the purpose to improve communication; to be able to reach out and receive information; to collaborate (Presence Management) with business partners, associates, clients and personal, any time, anywhere. Since consumers and business individuals can be reached 24 hours a day 7 days a week; UC is often associated with boosting productivity (Evans, 2004). There are several benefits that businesses can enjoy under Unified Communications:
Regardless of the type of message received; business users can access these messages from anywhere or from one central location. Keeping inline with the definition of UC, messages can be received and sent using any method: be it email, instant messages, video conferencing, or voice mail; businesses can retrieve important information from any of these mediums. UC also provides users effective ways in differentiating personal and business messages, by providing them with means for “broadcasting messages” using classified contact lists (Evans 2004). By having the messages automatically filter by categorization, business users can benefit by accessing important and/or relevant information immediately.
“Rich Internet Applications” (RIA) with embedded streaming-video and/or streaming content provides users a vivid “experience” to businesses products or services (Doyle, 2008). Since these applications are loaded on continuously running web-serves, businesses are made available to customers 24 hours a day. In addition to these applications, other UC methods like chat-rooms, instant messaging and forums that are embedded in businesses online assets provides users a rich environment where both consumers and businesses can reach out to each other in real-time. Despite the many benefits that UC provides for both users and businesses, there are many pitfalls in the implication, usage and adoption of Unified Communications. We will now focus our attention in discussing these challenges in Unified Communications.
According to Dagny Evan’s (2004) article on Unified Communications, the technology and its applications are not “mature enough” for quick adoption. The problem lies within the existing IT infrastructure of the business. Since many UC technologies are proprietary based, businesses are force to adopt their standards of communication instead of blending (or customizing) it within their existing IT infrastructure (Evans 2004).  In addition to implementing UC many users “find that the categorization, search, and retrieval functions are often cumbersome.” Businesses may find that implementing UC technologies; from training employees in their usage of UC applications and technologies to purchasing UC equipment may find it too corrosive in capital expenditures (Evans 2004). Since UC is co-dependent on the internet to transmit data and messages, UC may be susceptible to “IP-network attacks” such as “eavesdropping, altering conversations and fraud” (Greene, 2008).
Despite these setbacks in UC, UC is finding itself in many aspects of business life: from providing technical support to customers within online chat-rooms to addressing supplier concerns over an email, Unified communication provides its users a single-point of instantaneous access and availability to businesses and consumers.
Doyle, J. (2008). Are You Ready For UC 2.0? Communications News , 26-27.
Elliot, B. (2008). The Valuse of Unified Communications. Network World , 24.
Evans, D. (2004). An Introduction to unified Communications: Challenges and Opportunities. New Information Perspectives, Volume 56 , 308-314.
Greene, T. (2008). Beware of UC Security Threats. Network World , 36-37.
Saccharomyces cerevisia (Sir2) is an NAD+-dependent histone deacetylase. It's role within the cell is to link chromatin silencing to genomic stability, cellular metabolism, and lifespan regulation. For example, in mice, if there is a deficiency for SIRT6 (family member of Sir2), the mice experience genomic instability, metabolic defects, and degenerative pathologies in terms of aging, everything opposite of the roles of Sir2. With new insights to the previously ambiguous SIRT6, scientists have discovered that SIRT6 is a very substrate-specific histone deacetylase that promotes proper chromatin function in things like telomere stabilization and DNA repair.
Sir2 is the founding member of the family of proteins called sirtuins. These proteins provided the first link between chromatin regulation and aging. Sir2 favors chromatin silencing at sub-telomeric DNA, silent mating-type loci, and rDNA repeats. These effects of Sir2 on chromatin is mediated by having Sir2 catalyzing the deacetylation of lysine residues on the amino terminal ends of histones H3 and H4 and also on the globular core of histone (all by NAD+-dependent histone deacetylase activity). Deacetylation of H4 lysine 16 and H3K56 mediate the silencing effects of Sir2.
Example: In budding yeast, Sir2 regulates replicative lifespan through a couple of chromatin-silencing processes.
First, Sir2 suppresses recombination between rDNA repeats and this prevents
Second, H4K16 acetylation levels increase at telomeres when replicative age increases; Thus, Sir2 protein levels decrease. These chromatin changes create defects in telomere position-dependent transcriptional silencing and trigger replicative senescence.[1]
A few studies have shown that there are aging-related Sir2 functions that might be chromatin-independent, making the relationship between Sir2 and lifespan regulation even more complex.
For example,Sir2 asymmetrically segregates damaged proteins to the yeast mother cell during cell division; this asymmetry can age the mother cell by forming toxic protein aggregates. Also, Sir2 can block lifespan extension in response to nutrient deprivation of mutations in nutrient-sensing pathways.
Mammalian sirtuin proteins: venturing out from chromatin
SIRT1 is the most closely related to year Sir2 out of the seven SIR2 family members. However, Sir2 appears to deacetylate histones exclusively  while SIRT1 appears to more than 40 substrates. SIRT1 deacetylates many non-histone proteins and impacts on many phsysiologic processes like apoptosis.
SIRT1, SIRT6, and SIRT7 are concentrated in different sub-nuclear patterns; SIRT2 is cytoplasmic; SIRT3, SIRT4, and SIRT5 reside in the mitochondria.
SIRTching for a function through knockout mice
SIRT6-deficient mice appear normal when born, but after a couple of weeks, they start to develop degenerative phenotypes like osteoporosis. They also experience metabolic defects - so much that with such low levels of the insulin-like protein IFG-1, these mice die by 1 month.
Through experiments, it was found in vitro that SIRT6 promotes mono-ADP-ribosylation, an alternative NAD+-depdendent reaction in sirtuins. Another breakthrough occurred to further understand SIRT6 function through discovery of the enzymatic activity and the first substrate of SIRT6: NAD+-depdendent deacetylation of histone H3 lysine 9. SIRT6 specifically deacetylates H3K9, but lacks activity on a lot of other histone tail residues due to its intense specificity.
Two groups were identified independently as the second substrate for SIRT6: lysine 56 of histone H3 (H3K56Ac).
To the core and beyond: biochemical dissection of SIRT6 function
Sirtuin proteins have a conserved central "sirtuin domain" flanked by N- and C- terminal extensions. The sirtuin domain supposedly has an enzymatic core and understanding this domain can show scientists the physiologic regulation of sirtuin proteins.
For SIRT6, a recent study showed that the N- and C- terminal domains regulate SIRT6 function by having the C terminus require proper nuclear localization (but is dispensable for enzymatic activity) and then the N terminus is beneficial for chromatic association and intrinsic catalytic activity.
It could be possible that histone deacetylation by SIRT6 might be able to stabilize SIRT6 availability at chromatin or it can promote propagation of SIRT6 molecules along chromatin.
At the ends of chromosomes: SIRT6 regulates telomeric chromatin
SIRT6 plays an important role in the chromatin-regulatory context by keeping the integrity of telomeric chromatin stable. Telomeres are specialized DNA-protein structures which protect chromosome ends that are linear from degradation and fusion. SIRT6 plays a huge role at telomeres in humans for a couple of reasons:
First, telomere structures need to be correct in order to maintain genomic stability; chromosomal instability is apparent in cancer cells.
Also, telomere length decreases with cellular age. This shows that SIRT6's role at telomeres correlates with aging.
With many experiments and discoveries, SIRT6 has been determined as a site-specific histone deacetylase, playing very important roles in keeping up telomere integrity, honing aging-associated gene expression programs, preventing the genome to become unstable, and maintaining metabolic homeostasis.
Not only does SIRT6 function at specific sites in the genome, it plays a role in binding to additional gene promotors. Also, there might be interactions between SIRT6 and other sirtuin proteins.
Lastly, SIRT6 might have an impact on cancer due to the fact that there have been links between SIRT6 and cancer by the SIRT6 chromosomal locus.
Tennen, Ruth I., and Katrin F. Chua. "Chromatin regulation and genome maintenance by mammalian SIRT6." Trends in Biochemical Sciences 36.1 (2011) 39-46. Academic Search Complete. Web. 05 December. 2012.
Plasmids are almost always purified from liquid bacteria cultures, usually E. coli, which have been transformed and isolated. Virtually all plasmid vectors in common use encode one or more antibiotic resistance genes as a selectable marker (Ex :kanamycin, Ampicillin), which allows bacteria that have been successfully transformed to multiply uninhibited.
When bacteria are lysed under alkaline conditions both DNA and proteins are precipitated. Some scientists reduce the concentration of NaOH used to 0.1M in order to reduce the occurrence of ssDNA. After the addition of acetate-containing neutralization buffer the large and less supercoiled chromosomal DNA and proteins precipitate, but the small bacterial DNA plasmids can renature and stay in solution.
Kits are available from varying manufacturers to purify plasmid DNA, which are named by size of bacterial culture and corresponding plasmid yield. In increasing order, these are the miniprep, midiprep, maxiprep, megaprep, and gigaprep. The plasmid DNA yield will vary depending on the plasmid copy number, type and size, the bacterial strain, the growth conditions, and the kit.
Minipreparation of plasmid DNA is a rapid, small-scale isolation of plasmid DNA from bacteria. It is based on the alkaline lysis method invented by the researchers Birnboim and Doly in 1979. The extracted plasmid DNA resulting from performing a miniprep is itself often called a "miniprep". Minipreps are used in the process of molecular cloning to analyze bacterial clones. A typical plasmid DNA yield of a miniprep is 20 to 30 µg depending on the cell strain.
The starting E. coli culture volume is 15-25 ml of LB broth and the expected DNA yield is 100-350 µg.
The starting E. coli culture volume is 100-200 ml of LB broth and the expected DNA yield is 500-850 µg.
Small scale preparation of plasmid DNA or Miniprep
Ampicillin: A stock solution of 100 mg/ml ampicillin was made in sterile double-distilled water. Working concentration was 100 µg/ml. (concentration may vary lab to lab)
Kanamycin: A stock solution of 50 mg/ml ampicillin was made in sterile double-distilled water. Working concentration was 50 µg/ml.(concentration may vary lab to lab)
The QtWebKit Module is a module which allows a developer to embed web content in a Qt application using the Webkit engine. For instance, it could be used to display HTML or SVG content over a video, as an overlay. It can also allow to interpret web content directly inside an application.
If you use QtCreator as IDE, then you can see that it is possible to add QtWebKit as a widget into your application.
Books on this shelf are physics study guides: books that prepare students for standardized exams on physics, as well as texts that follow a specific curriculum covering physics.
This is a critique of a journal article 'Effectiveness of High-Intensity interval training for the rehabilitation of patients with coronary artery disease'[1] Darren E.R Warburton, Donald C. McKenzie, Mark J. Haykowski, et al.
What is the background to this research?
Coronary artery disease (CAD) can be described as the narrowing or blockage of the coronary arteries (blood vessels that carry blood and oxygen to the heart)[2]. It occurs when plaque builds up, it narrows your coronary arteries, decreasing blood flow to your heart.
Research into the effects of high intensity interval training (HIIT) on individuals rehabilitating from coronary artery disease is imperative. This is a result of the large scale affect CAD has globally as it is one of the leading causes for mortality and morbidity in both men and women. In 2008 it was estimated that 1 in 13 Americans over the age of 18 had CAD[3]. The morbidity and mortality rates of this disease make timely accurate diagnosis and cost-effective management of CAD of the utmost importance. Current studies have shown the positive benefits aerobic fitness and other forms of exercise have on the rehabilitation of CAD patients. Due to this the implication of the HIIT on rehabilitating CAD patients must be investigated and researched in order for adaptations and progressions that could help in treating the disease.
The research was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Council of Canada, the Canada Foundation for Innovation, the British Columbia Knowledge Development Fund, and the Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research, Canada[1]. The research was published in the American journal of cardiology a very reputable source for health and sciences. It was published by Elsevier, a information and analytics company that focuses on technology and science.
The main author Darren E.R Warburton has an significant publication record in leading peer-reviewed journals. His work includes publications in journals such as the Canadian Medical Association Journal, the American Journal of Physiology, the American Journal of Cardiology, and the Journal of Physiology[4]. One article published by Darren Warburton in the Canadian Medical Association Journal has already been cited more than 2400 times since its publication in 2006. This article is used a required reading for many agencies, medical training programs, and certifications from around the world[4].
What kind of research was this?
Darren Warburtnon et al, conducted a randomized control trial (RCT). RCT is considered the gold standard for research testing. This study shows low levels of bias as the patients are apart of one population group and were all asked to perform the same test. However this article has a large bias as only men were asked to complete this study. For this reason the study is mostly not applicable to females as it is unknown if females would have the same adaptations as the males
What did the research involve?
This study involved fourteen men with CAD who had undergone bypass surgery or angioplasty, were stratified and randomly assigned to traditional or interval training.[1] All individuals were chosen from a group of patients who had a negative stress test and a VO2peak >9 METs.
The traditional cardiac rehabilitation model and interval training model were carried out over a 16-week period. Both groups were given specific instructions on the task they would be completing and were made to perform the same standardized 10-minute warm-up, resistance training and cool-down. The individuals completing the traditional training performed 30 minutes of continuous aerobic exercise at 65% of heart rate/VO2 reserve.[1] The Interval training group exercised using 2-minute, high-intensity work phases (90% of heart rate/VO2 reserve [range 85% to 95%]) followed by 2-minute recovery bouts (40% of heart rate/VO2 reserve [range 35% to 45%]). Both groups were required to train for 30 minutes/day, two days/week for 16 weeks[1].
All participants were assessed on two separate days after 16 weeks of aerobic training. The first day of testing involved individuals performing a symptom-limited, incremental to maximal exercise treadmill test (Bruce protocol) to assess VO2peak.[1] During the second day of testing, the participants completed a high-intensity time to exhaustion test on a treadmill at 90% of heart rate reserve.[1] Each participant had previously engaged in 1 familiarization time to exhaustion test.
What were the basic results?
According to the authors, the key finding of this study was that high-intensity interval training results in similar improvements in aerobic fitness and a greater tolerance to an anaerobic challenge in comparison to traditional continuous aerobic exercise training[1].
The study found, sixteen weeks of cardiac rehabilitation (both traditional and interval training) did not result in significant changes in resting measures of heart rate, systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, pulse pressure, and rate–pressure product, and maximal exercise measures of heart rate, systolic blood pressure, and rate–pressure product. However, there were extensive improvements in resting and maximal exercise oxygen pulse, VO2peak, Bruce treadmill time, and time to exhaustion after both training programs.
The study showed that it was important to maintain the average training intensity of 65% of VO2 reserve between the traditional and interval training groups. As both intensity and duration have independent effects on cardiovascular function[1].
What conclusions can we take from this research?
This research provides evidence that shows high-intensity interval training can be completed with limited risk to highly functional male patients with CAD. However, the research conveys there are no significant benefits of conducting a HIIT program over traditional program in the rehabilitation of male patients with CAD. Studies that have been conducted recently have displayed evidence that shows HIIT is not superior to other forms of endurance
HIIT has been proven to provide an effective means to improve the cardiovascular fitness and health status of highly functional patients with coronary artery disease.
However, HIIT has been proven to have many positive benefits for the rehabilitation of male CAD patients, recent studies have shown that endurance based training incites adaptations that are more beneficial.
What is Coronary artery disease? http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/Conditions/More/MyHeartandStrokeNews/Coronary-Artery-Disease%E2%80%94Coronary-Heart-[5]
What is HIIT? http://www.popsugar.com.au/fitness/What-HIIT-41016932[6]
↑ a b c d e f g h i  Darren E.R Warburton, Donald C. McKenzie, Mark J. Haykowski, et al. Effectiveness of High-Intensity interval training for the rehabilitation of patients with coronary artery disease. The American Journal of Cardiology 2005;95:(9): 1080-1084
↑ Mayo Clinic (2018) 'Coronary artery disease' https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/coronary-artery-disease/symptoms-causes/syc-20350613
↑ American college of cardiology (2008) ' Heart disease statistics' https://www.cardiosmart.org/Heart-Basics/CVD-Stats
↑ a b Physical Activity Promotion and Chronic Disease Prevention Unit (2018) 'Dr. Darren Warburton' http://www.healthandphysicalactivity.com/directors/dr-darren-warburton/
↑ American heart association (2015) 'Coronary Artery Disease' http://www.heart.org/en/health-topics/consumer-healthcare/what-is-cardiovascular-disease/coronary-artery-disease
↑ Susi May (2016) ' What is HIIT?' https://www.popsugar.com.au/fitness/What-HIIT-41016932
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Today in 2009 the first CrisisCamp barcamp started. It spawned the Random Hacks of Kindness hackathons that produce Open Source Software for charities, non-profit organizations and social enterprises.
An equipment is a machine that can work.
Computing » Computer Science » Computer Programming » Ada Programming
The begin keyword in Ada is almost synonymous with the { in C/C++/Java.  In the paradigm of structured programming languages, a keyword or symbol is often needed to delimit the beginning of the body from the element (i.e. if, elsif, for loop, while loop) to which it pertains.
The begin keyword is always closed with the end keyword. The opposite is not true in Ada.
“Life has many different meanings, as outlined in any dictionary. It is not possible to find one universal definition covering all meanings. The best one can hope for is to find a common denominator for all these different meanings.“
Biology is centered around the phenomenon of life. As it is mostly concerned with the scientific study of life forms, biology does not lend itself to a definition of what life actually is. There are at least as many definitions of life as there are biology text books (of authors that do not simply reproduce what they have read somewhere else before). There is consensus, however, that there is no single property that delineates living from non-living systems. Life seems to rather express itself in a variety of attributes that are common to all living beings.
The exhibition of some kind of order (via a process of self-organization). For some authors this is the most remarkable aspect of life, as the general tendency within the universe is the reduction of order (i.e., an increase degrees of freedom or, physically speaking, entropy). Hence, they characterize life as negentropy - a phenomenon that temporarily and locally counteracts the universal trend of increasing entropy.
Movement/Growth/Development. That is, existence of a certain nonstationarity of biological systems over time. This includes the finite nature of an individual's existence.
Reaction/Adaptation. This evolution is another most central aspect of life. Darwinian evolution is, however, not restricted to living beings (e.g., cultural evolution).
Energy conversion/Metabolism. While this is certainly an important aspect of life (and not directly delineable from point 1), there are some biological organisms (e.g.. virii, viroids, prions that do not show any metabolism. For some authors this is reason enough to declare that a virus is a non-living entity (whose scientific study nonetheless falls into the domain of biology).
Reproduction. All known life forms (with the disputable exception of prions maybe) are based on a genetic code, with DNA as its material basis. Virus particles also consist of DNA, but are incapable of sustaining a metabolism (and hence reproduction) of their own.
Life is characterized by diversity - a product of its evolution. Thus, "life" is an abstraction of all living phenomena that share a common origin.
This book is written from a Visual Basic 6.0 perspective although much of what is said is also valid for Visual Basic 5.0 and Visual Basic 4.0. It does not cover VB.NET, a rather different language. It covers many different techniques and topics including object oriented programming, optimization of programs and coding guidelines.
A PDF version is available.  (info)
This book's sole purpose is to help people better understand Visual Basic.
A timeline of Visual Basic's history.
VB6 IDE (Integrated Development Environment) is highly useful for developing GUI (Graphical User Interface) applications.
Introduction to calculating and operands with Visual Basic.
Branching occurs when the program makes a decision.  The flow of execution follows a particular branch like a fork in the road.
Loops are control structures used to repeat a given section of code a certain number of times or until a particular condition is met.
Strings hold printable characters. They are very useful for communicating with human beings and for transferring data between programs and machines in text files and web pages.
Strings can be manipulated using simple string functions.
Complex string matching and manipulation can be achieved using a fairly sophisticated technique of regular expressions.
Arrays are used to group data items of the same type together, to make it easier to search and sort through this data.
Array-like containers.
Sets of key, value pairs.
A datatype is a specification of the kind of information that a variable can hold, for example, a number or a piece of text.
A function is a calling procedure or small part of a program that performs some specific task and returns a result; for example the cosine function.
Errors can be caught, handled and raised.
While programming, you may want to at some point save data so they may be accessible for further use. This is where file I/O comes in. Visual Basic allows us to perform most operations available in Windows Explorer and DOS command line.
Dates and time need to be formatted, added, etc.
Visual Basic supports creation of Graphical User Interfaces, which generally consists of one or more Forms that contain text boxes, labels, buttons, picture boxes, etc.
Visual Basic can easily be used to draw simple graphics such as line drawings and diagrams.
Windows dialogs are useful when one requires standard interfaces, including opening files, saving files, choosing color and/or font, specifying printer settings.
Visual Basic can connect to databases in many different ways.
APIs, short for "application programming interface", allows you to access a wide array of functions and methods exposed by the operating system or other applications (DLLs), performing operations not normally implemented by the standard virtual machine that Visual Basic provides.
Visual Basic hides the details of all the messages that Windows sends to an application but you can get at them if you really need to.  Then you can do things that plain Visual Basic cannot.
There is a lot of complicated talk about Object Oriented Programming but in essence it is quite simple.
It isn't enough that the program work, you must be able to maintain it as well.  Effective programmers can read their code as well as write it.
An idiom is a sort of template or generic method of expressing an idea.  In the same way that idioms in a human language make life easier for the both speaker and listener good idioms in computer programming make life easier for the programmer.  Naturally what is idiomatic in one language might not be in another.
It is often desirable that your program not only does what you want it to do, but it also does it fast and with low memory footprint. Optimizing aims to improve the latter two requirements.
This section contains a number of ready made code examples for your use.  They vary from short snippets to complete modules and short demo applications.
Regular Expression Tester: A small, almost throwaway application that demonstrates that useful application do not need to be either large or complicated.
This section summarizes the syntax of Visual Basic and describes all the key concepts that of Visual Basic.  It also notes some features that exist in other languages but do not exist in Visual basic.
Consistent style in coding helps everyone to maintain a program whether the maintainer is the original author or not.
This section serves as guide to the commands that can be used in Visual Basic.
Brief explanations of various important, difficult or otherwise interesting words and phrases with links to longer explanations in the body of the text.
Various unfinished pages.  Please look here for anything obscure or difficult.
Programs operate on data so knowledge of effective data structures is very important.
Many algorithms were described long before computers were available and many have both naive inefficient forms and sophisticated efficient forms.  In many cases this is independent of the implementation language.
2D-PAGE is a form of gel electrophoresis  in which separation and identification of proteins in a sample are done by displacement in 2 dimensions oriented at right angles to one another(orthogonal). This technique is also used to compare two or more samples to find differences in their protein expressions.
In this technique proteins are separated by two different physicochemical properties. In the first dimension proteins or polypeptides are separated on the basis of their net charges by isoelectric focusing and in the second dimension they are separated on the basis of their molecular masses by electrophoresis. Because it is unlikely that two molecules will be similar in both properties, molecules are more effectively separated in 2-D electrophoresis than in 1-D electrophoresis.
The goal of sample preparation is to solubilize maximum number of proteins and maintain their solubility throughout the process. The materials for sample should be carefully collected, snap frozen and ground under liquid nitrogen in the presence of protease inhibitors. After extracting proteins from source material they are then solubilized and denatured by means of chaotropes, detergents, and reducing agents. Hydrogen-bonds in the sample proteins are disrupted by chaotropes urea and thiourea. Uncharged detergents are used to disrupt hydrophobic interactions. Detergents such as CHAPS, Triton X-100, sulfobetaine SB3-10, and amidosulfobetaine  are IEF-compatible additives. Disulfide bonds
Sequential extraction is done to categorize proteins based on their solubility. This is an example of pre-fractionation to enrich low abundance proteins. Proteins are sequentially extracted into chaotrope/detergent solutions of increasing solubilization power. First, proteins are treated with an aqueous buffer, the insoluble proteins remaining from this extraction are treated with urea/CHAPS/TBP, and the insoluble proteins remaining from this step are then treated with urea/thiourea/CHAPS/SB 3-10/TBP.  2-D PAGE is then done to separate the proteins in each of the supernatants. The remaining insoluble material from the final extraction can be taken up in SDS-PAGE sample solution and run in a one-dimensional gel.
In IEF, proteins are separated by electrophoresis in a pH gradient based on their isoelectric point(pl). A pH gradient is generated in the gel and an electric potential is applied across the gel. At all pHs other than their isoelectric point, proteins will be charged. If they are positively charged, they will move towards the more negative end of the gel and if they are negatively charged they will move towards the more positive end of the gel. At its isoelectric point, since the protein molecule carry no net charge it accumulates or focuses into a sharp band.
Immobilized pH Gradeint (IPG) and IEF run
Immobilized pH gradients are used for IEF because the fixed pH gradients remain stable over extended run times at very high voltages. The pH gradients of IPGs are generated by means of buffering compounds that are covalently bound into polyacrylamide gels. IPGs are cast strips with plastic backing sheets and are commercially available in different pH ranges and lengths. They offer high resolution, great reproducibility, and allow high protein loads. Isoelectric focusing is run in the same solutions that are used to extract or solubalize the proteins. The IPG strips with the protein sample must be rehydrated in the rehydration/sample buffer during with protein samples are loaded into the strips. Rehydration can be active or passive. To load larger proteins active rehydration in small voltage is applied. After the run in IEF cell, the proteins focus as bands on the strip according to their isoelectric points. The focused strips can be frozen for storage
The proteins in the focussed IPG strips are uncharged because they are at their pI and so they will not move into the SDS- PAGE gel. So the strips are treated with SDS (sodium dodecyl sulfate), an anionic detergent which denatures  the protein by breaking the disulfide bonds and gives negative charge to each protein in proportion to its mass. Without SDS, different proteins with similar molecular weights would migrate differently due to differences in folding, as differences in folding patterns would cause some proteins to better fit through the gel matrix than others. SDS  linearizes the proteins so that they may be separated strictly by molecular weight. The SDS binds to the protein in a ratio of approximately 1.4 g SDS per 1.0 g protein (although binding ratios can vary from 1.1-2.2 g SDS/g protein), giving an approximately uniform mass:charge ratio for most proteins, so that the distance of migration through the gel can be assumed to be directly related to only the size of the protein.
Proteins may be further treated with reducing agent, such as dithiothreitol (DTT) or TRP(Tributyl phosphine to break any reformed disulfide bonds and then alkalated with iodoacetamide to prevent reformation of disulfide bonds. A tracking dye like bromophenol blue may be added to the protein solution to track the progress of the protein solution through the gel during the electrophoretic run.
The equlibrated IPG strip is placed on the top of the SDS-PAGE gel  submerged in a suitable buffer and sealed in place with agarose gel. An electric current is applied across the gel, causing the negatively-charged proteins move out of the gel and migrate across the gel. Depending on their size, each protein  move differently through the gel matrix. Smaller proteins travel farther down the gel, while larger ones remain closer to the point of origin. The proteins separate roughly according to size and therefore by molecular weight. It is common to run "marker proteins" of known molecular weight in a separate lane in the gel, in order to calibrate the gel and determine the weight of unknown proteins by comparing the distance traveled relative to the marker.
After electrophoresis the gel is stained to visualize the separated proteins. Commonly used stains are Coomassie Brilliant Blue or SYPRO Ruby or silver stain. different proteins will appear as distinct spot within the gel. Coomassie Brilliant Blue or SYPRO Buby are compatible with Mass Spectrometry. Coomassie Brilliant Blue has detection limit about 10ng of proteins per spot and the gel images of spots can be captured by scanning densitometer which operate in visible light[[1]]. SYPRO Ruby can detect 1ng of proteins per spot and since it is fluorescent , the sopts are visualized by a fluorescent imager. Silver stain can detect spots containing proteins less than 1 ng and is the most sensitive non – radioactive protein visualization method.Laser devices for image capturing are useful for fluorescently stained gels.
Image of the gel after 2D-PAGE run
The images can be further analyzed using image –analysis softwares. These softwares quantify proteins spots, match images and compare corresponding spots intensites of related gels, prepare gel data reports, remove background patterns, and integrate image information to databases.Alternately the proteins separated can be obtained from the gel can be analyzed by MS for protein identification. 2D- PAGE can be used to study differential protein expression by comparing images from  2D –PAGE gels samples labeled with stable isotopes or fluorescent dyes.
Using 2D-PAGE,100 –1000’s of polypeptides can be analyzed in a single run. The proteins can be separated in pure form the spots. The spots can be quantified and also analyzed by MS. In this method polypeptides can be probed with antibodies and also
Beranova-Giorgianni, S.  (2003)  Proteome analysis by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry:  strengths and limitations.  TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry 22(5), 273-281.[[2]]
Stephen J Fey* and Peter Mose Larsen(2001)2D or not 2D. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 2001, 5:26–33[[3]]
Wayne F Patton*, Birte Schulenberg and Thomas H Steinberg(2002) Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis; better than a poke in the ICAT?. Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 13:321–328[[4]]
David E. Garfin(2003)Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis: an overview.Trends in Analytical Chemistry, Vol. 22, No. 5
The mechanism of sound production in speech and singing would be the results of airflow in the human lung system, and is also connected to the digestive system.  The diaphragm action from the lungs pushes air through the vocal folds, and produces a periodic train of air pulses. This pulses train is shaped by the resonances in the vocal tract, and has various frequencies and loudness. Vocal formants are basic resonances, and can be changed by the movements of the articulators to produce different vowel sounds. To produce different vowel sounds, the vocal mechanism is controlled to produce the resonances of the vocal tract is produced the vocal formants. The vocal tract can be considered to be a cavity resonator, and the soft palate position, the area of opening, the tongue positions an shape, and the position of jaw would established the shape of this cavity. More specifically, voice articulation is the movement of the tongue, pharynx palate, jaw or lips that changes the volume of cavity, area of opening, and port length, which determine the frequency of the cavity resonance. The voice mechanism can be modeled as the lung and diaphragm being the power source, along with the larynx, pharynx, mouth and nose. At the end of the tubular larynx rest the vocal folds, also known as vocal cords. During speech and singing, the larynx is connected to pharynx, and is covered by epiglottis during swallowing. The vocal tract acts as a resonator.
Vocal folds are twin infoldings of mucous membrane that act as a vibrator during phonation. Phonation is the process by which the energy from the lungs in the form of air pressure is converted vibration that is perceivable to the human ear. There are two methods to phonation. One is by the air pressure setting the elastic vocal folds into vibration, which is called voicing. The other is air passing through the larynx to vocal tract, where airstream gets modified as produces transient of aperiodic sound waves. In aperiodic phonation, the transient or aperiodic sound waves generates plosive sound, /t/, where sound is produced by blocking the airstream and suddenly releasing the built-up air pressure, fricative sound, /sh/, where a continuous noise type sounds is made by forcing air through a constricted space, affricate sound, /ch/, which is a combination of plosive and fricative sound, and a voiced consonant, /d/, which is a plosive sound followed by a voiced sound. While vocal folds are open for breathing, the folds are close by the pivoting of the arytenoid cartilages for speech of singing. Positive air pressure from the lungs forces the vocal folds to open but the high velocity air produces a lowered pressure due to the Bernoulli equation which brings them back together. In an adult male, the vocal folds are 17-23 mm long, and it is around 12.5-17 mm in an adult female. Due to the action of muscles in the larynx, the vocal folds can be stretched 3 to 4 mm.  The frequency of the adult male speaking voice is typically 125 Hz, while the frequency of the adult female voice is about 210 Hz. Children’s voice is around 300 Hz. In comparison to a piano keyboard, the men’s voice would be 1 octave lower than a women’s voice, and a child’s voice would be 1 octave higher than an adult women’s voice. The front end of the vocal folds is attached to the thyroid cartilage. The back end is attached to the arytenoid cartilages, which separates the folds for breathing.
The vibration model of vocal folds, and the acoustic impedance model of the vocal can be represented as electrical circuit representation. A gyrator can be used to combine the acoustic impedance model and the vibration model, so that the velocity(as potential) from the mobility analogy for the vibration model can be transferred to the velocity(as current) in the acoustic impedance model, and where pressure would be force divided by surface area of the vocal folds tube.
The scene returns to the Rose Terrace Nursing Home on August 15, 1986. Evelyn is not visiting, but Mrs. Threadgoode is speaking to Geneene, the black nurse. Geneene is in their room having a cigarette and Ninny tells her that Evelyn is going through menopause. She has even thought of smashing his head with a baseball bat. Mrs. Threadgoode says that is what happens when a couple is together for a long time; they get on each other's nerves. Even Ruth and Idgie had problems once and Ruth moved in with Ninny and Cleo for a while. She tells Geneene about Towanda and Evelyn's fantasies. Ninny doesn't think it's up to people to judge, only God.
Ninny Threadgoode is concerned about her friend. She expresses her concerns to the nurse. This chapter is the first time the reader hears of problems between Ruth and Idgie.
Attraction's Force of the Earth to attract any object toward the Earth
r1bqkb1r/p1p2ppp/2n2n2/1p1Pp1N1/2B5/8/PPPP1PPP/RNBQK2R
1.1 5 ... b5.
5 ... b5.
The defining move for the Ulvestad Variation. Black challenges the strong bishop on c4 by offering a pawn.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bc4 Nf6 4.Ng5 d5 5.exd5 b5
Bf1 62%, Bxb5 28%, dxc6 6%, Bb3 2%, Qe2 1%
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Two Knights Defence
Nunn's Chess Openings. 1999. John Nunn (Editor), Graham Burgess, John Emms, Joe Gallagher. ISBN 1-8574-4221-0.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
Artificial Intelligence is an algorithm designed to replicate the logical response of humans to improve the autonomy of technology. Artificial Intelligence has a robust history and multiple applications and functions beyond improving the efficiency and function of applications, big data analytics etc. There has recently been a development of public interest in Artificial Intelligence widely due to the moral, societal and legal consequences of the AI’s actions and decisions. It brings into question the societal and moral ramifications of the decision and ethical considerations surrounding this technology. This distinction can not only help determine the extent to which we trust in AI as a society, but will also help to determine the impact and trust in AI.
In 1950 English mathematician Alan Turing published his famous “Computer Machinery and Intelligence” paper. In this document, he wishes to prove if machines could exhibit intelligence similar to that of humans
[1]. Turing proposes the Turing Test to prove wherever or not computers could think. This publication was the world’s first introduction to artificial intelligence, but it would not become official until the 1956 Dartmouth Conference [1]
This conference was better known as the Dartmouth Summer Research Project on AI and is credited to be the birthplace of Artificial Intelligence. The term “Artificial Intelligence” was first seen used when five of the future attendees submitted a proposal for the event the previous year [2]. This group of five consisted of: John McCarthy, Marvin Minsky, Nathaniel Rochester, and Claude Shannon.
At the beginning AI was the central topic of conversation and caught the attention of the US government and received funding [1]. One of the first successful projects was the Early Natural Language Processing Computer Program or ELIZA between 1964-1966 (Wortzel, 2007). Spearheaded by German-American computer Scientist Joseph Werizenbaum at MIT. This became one of the world's earliest renditions of a chatterbot. Despite the primitive design behind it, it was able to pass the Turing test (Wortzel, 2007). In 1974, due to slow progress the United States dropped out of the race for AI, and brought the field to an abrupt stop. This standstill period lasted from 1974-1980 and became known as the first Winter of AI [1]. This project then became picked up by the British government but then got dropped in 1987. From 1987 to 1993 there was another standstill in the progress and known as the second Winter of AI. It would be until 1996 the first breakthrough occurred with IBM’s Deep Blue.
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a description of a field that has many different subfields and classifications. Not all artificial intelligence is created equal. AI classification is an important part of AI ethics, as different types of AI are capable of different things, and some, do not even exist yet.
AI classification can be broken down into two types, the first type is a more practical and tangible definition of AI, what it can do, and how it is able to think. The second classification is more theory-oriented.
This first classification can be broken down into 4 different types, or subclasses. Reactive machines, limited memory machines, theory of mind, and self-aware machines.
Reactive machines are able to react to a set of input parameters, which are limited. They are not able to “think” in the sense of being able to handle inputs that are not already known. They are “without memory and past experience, they analyze possible situations and choose the most strategic/suitable move” [3].  This is why, one of the great examples of reactive machines was Deep Blue, the IBM supercomputer that was able to defeat the current world champion at the time, Gary Kasparov.
Limited memory machines build upon reactive machines, where they are able to use past experiences and information to make future decisions. In a sense, these machines are able to “think” and not just react to predefined inputs and perform pre-programmed outputs. Autonomous vehicles use this system for some of their features [3].
Theory of mind refers to artificial intelligence systems that are expected to run under the assumption that decisions taken by others are impacted by their own beliefs, desires, and intentions. [3]. They do not exist yet, as this requires machines to be able to process complex human emotions and thought processes.
Self-aware machines are the final stage of Artificial Intelligence, which currently are only theoretical. These are AI systems that are comparable to the human brain where they have developed self-awareness [4].
The second type of Artificial Intelligence classification has three subcategories. Artificial Narrow Intelligence, Artificial General Intelligence, and Artificial SuperIntelligence.
An Artificial Intelligence is classified as an Artificial Narrow Intelligence (ANI) if it is specialized in a specific area, and is a reactive machine. IBM’s deep blue is classified as an ANI, since it is reactive, and specializes in playing chess. Some modern-day examples of ANI’s are personal assistants that are built into smartphones, such as Siri or Google Assistant, as well as “videogames, search engines, social networks, web cookies, online advertising services, data miners and data scrapers, autopilots, traffic control software, automated phone answering services and so on” [5].
Artificial General Intelligence is representative of “Human-Level AI’s”, that are computers as smart as humans in every aspect and are capable of performing all intellectual tasks that humans can” [5]. Currently, AI’s are extremely good at performing complex tasks and calculations extremely quickly, however human-level tasks such as voice and image recognition are very difficult, due to the difficulty of presenting certain predetermined conditions for these AI’s to identify when external conditions appear random. AI Scientists estimate that humanity will develop an AGI around the year 2030 [5].
While AGI’s are Artificial Intelligence that matches human-level cognitive abilities, artificial Superintelligcnes (ASI’s) is artificial intelligence that is far smarter than humans in practically every field, including scientific creativity, general wisdom, and social skills [6] These are the types of artificial intelligence depicted by science fiction, and what many folks are worried about regarding developing computers that are far smarter than humans. The point in time at which ASI’s are created is when the idea of the singularity comes to fruition. This is a point in time where technological progress becomes uncontrollable, due to discoveries being made by ASI’s themselves faster than humans ever could research.
Many of the practical use cases for artificial intelligence bring about ethical concerns. While having the potential to be extremely powerful and beneficial for humanity, artificial intelligence can also be used by malicious actors. Ethical debates are complex, and to understand them, must be broken down by category. This section will discuss practical use cases for Artificial Intelligence, and then the ethical concerns that come with each.
Data privacy is a hot topic in today’s age of online presence and social media. Billions of people globally are on multiple social media platforms. These people generate extreme amounts of data and metadata that are used by companies in data mining practices. “Data mining is related to machine learning, information retrieval, statistics, databases, and even data visualization” [7].
Features generated by people using social media platforms can be used by artificial intelligence to find correlations and make predictions. This was first seen in politics during the 2008 presidential election, where social media sites were first used as a significant method for candidates to reach voters [8]. The information gathered by these online interactions, allowed researchers from MIT to find correlations between the amount of social media used by candidates, and the outcome of the 2008 election [9]
Thus, the information generated by online use can be extremely valuable, and there is much ethical debate over how social media companies can use this data, or even if they should be storing it at all. The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) was the first of its kind to introduce sweeping data privacy legislation for European citizens, as they believe that people should have rights over their online data.
Another ethical concern, is the transparency of these AI systems when they are finding correlations and making predictions, especially if they have real-world implications. Many AI systems follow a closed and black-boxed approach, meaning that only the developers understand how the AI is structured and how the algorithms are functioning. This leaves an opportunity for algorithmic biases that can go undetected. With some machine learning techniques, algorithms are even opaque for the experts who are working on them, making it difficult to spot these biases as well.
Algorithmic bias is a huge ethical concern for artificial intelligence. There are extremely important and real-world implications of AI systems. Artificial intelligence is used in financial, medical, and even political decision-making. This will continue to increase as AI systems become more advanced.
That is why the ethical debate of AI bias is important in tandem with transparency concerns. If artificial intelligence is going to be making decisions that impact many different people, then it is argued that it is of the utmost importance for those systems and algorithms to be developed and reviewed by a diverse group of people, in hopes of minimizing algorithmic bias, and then correcting it when needed.
Bias brings up the debate of the inevitability of algorithmic bias, and who is responsible for the decisions that the AI makes while in operation.
One prime example of artificial intelligence algorithmic bias and transparency issues was seen in 2015, with the Google Photos application. This photo application used artificial intelligence to tag people, places, and objects in photos. This is an example of an AI system that processes large amounts of data, just like how facial recognition systems work that are used by police apartments and other government agencies. The google photos application was caught labeling African Americans as “gorillas”, and overall showed biases against women and people of color. These systems were quoted to be too complex for anyone to be able to predict what they will ultimately do [10].
As seen in all the milestones stated previously, AI has made leaps and bounds of progress. With such an undeniable power, safeguards must be implemented. The first step to ensure the safe and ethical management of IT is developing guidelines for AI safety. To guarantee the proper use of Artificial Intelligence in form (physical/digital) companies are to create a framework that considers the moral side of using such technology.
This would include regulations to create a relationship between software engineers, users, and other parties involved with AI. The usage of artificial intelligence must be compliant with the governance system. Companies need to remain aware of the responsibility they hold in making sure that AI doesn't remain harmful to society [11]. Since this artificial machine will be holding data in the billion bytes it remains important that users maintain the integrity of this data. The data must remain fair, and non-discriminatory to maintain the trust of the public [11]. This includes the implementation of safeguards to protect and detect any malicious characters on the system [11]. To assist in making sure the AI developed by a party won’t be harmful extensive testing is required from the system before being publicized.
The convergence of Artificial Intelligence with the advancements in sensor technology has facilitated the realization of autonomous vehicles. Many safety features that have been developed for the purpose of collision avoidance have evolved into sensors capable of providing the sensory information required for AI control units to navigate a vehicle without driver input [12]
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) had defined 6 levels of autonomy, Level 0 meaning no automation and Level 5 meaning full automation. Level 5 means that the occupants do not need to pay attention to the operation of the vehicle and there may not even be manual controls, such as a steering wheel, within the vehicle [13] While there can be tremendous benefits in the automation of the driving function in terms of the efficient use of the roadway and the immeasurable benefit of lives saved by removing the human factor from the equation, great care must be taken in the development and implementation of such a system in terms of liability [14]
The classic “Trolly problem” where now the AI control unit is deciding between two undesirable outcomes. The AI control unit that undergoes machine learning, will have to be trained on what is considered to be the more desirable outcome. On what authority would developers have to train on life and death decisions?
There is the potential for sensor, hardware, and software failures that will need to be addressed with contingency procedures for a fully autonomous vehicle to be viable. Even with lesser levels of automation, education and a complete understanding of the functionality are critical for the safety of the occupants and surrounding persons. If a driver “believes” they have invoked the autopilot functionality and hop into the back seat, when in fact the autopilot was not engaged, where does the responsibility lie [15]?
There are tremendous benefits to be had with automation, but careful consideration of the safety of the occupants and surrounding persons needs to outweigh being first to market and the leader in the deployment of AV.
Missiles, Drones, Self-correcting ammunition, and weapons have enabled servicemen and women to stay out of harm’s way while continuing to bring the fight to the enemy. This imbalance in the scales of human conflict, however, has brought up some ethical concerns. There is a great burden we place on an armed service’s personal by asking them to take a human life in accordance with rules of war. Because the consequences of their actions can be felt for a lifetime, their actions are not entered into lightly. Whereas a machine that has no remorse may be unethical for militaries to use to do their bidding. [16]  [17]
Ground system specific ethical concerns currently include the use of robotic droids used to deliver and detonate explosives on human targets as seen in the downtown Dallas shootout on July 7th, 2016. Other issues include the introduction of artificial intelligence into robotics. For instance, whether an emotional bond with a robot is desirable, particularly when the robot is designed to interact with children or the elderly. This concept of managing artificial intelligence within robotic frame is currently the most important issue facing both robotics and artificial intelligence and will remain so moving forward. Everything from the coding of AI behavior, to the safety parameters for shutting down a robot equipped with AI deserve intense scrutiny under the provision that they do not harm humans and obey orders.
Issues specific to Aerial systems include surveillance and application for the use of taking human life. Drone strikes under the Obama administration killed up to 117 civilians worldwide. 526 drone strikes were ordered under the Obama administration. Surveillance specific issues include illegal audio and video recording of private citizens.
The sales of drones risen steadily over the last couple of years. Drone sales are expected to grow from 2.5 million this year to 7 million in 2020, according to report released this week by the Federal Aviation Administration. Hobbyist sales will more than double from 1.9 million drones in 2016 to 4.3 million in 2020, the agency said. Meanwhile, business sales will triple over the period from 600,000 to 2.7 million (Vanian 2016 Pg. 1).  It is already common practice to restrict the flight of drones from airfields, stadiums, and other various public events. Drones are already equipped with applications that allow it to follow a designated user. The user can be snowboarding, golfing, or hiking through the woods. The natural ethical implications that arise relate this application, still include weaponization in addition to surveillance. The FAA believes that 2017 will be the big turning point in drone adoption by businesses, which use them for everything from scanning power lines to inspecting rooftops for insurance companies. Commercial sales are expected to reach 2.5 million, after which sales will increase only slightly for the next few years.   Currently, companies must obtain FAA certification to fly drones for business purposes. Some businesses and drone lobbying groups have grumbled that the regulation is partly to blame for preventing the drone industry from taking off in the United States. As of March of 2016 the FAA has granted over 3,000 business class drone licenses [18].
Aquatic robotic ethical concerns are related to surveillance and warfare. Current issue includes the seizure of an American submarine drone in December of 2016 by China. The drone was eventually returned, but future incursions are guaranteed. It is also possible to weaponize a drone similar to its aerial counterpart and deliver lethal strikes.
Exoskeletons having been developed for the purposes of treating persons with limb injuries or disorders are also now becoming “smarter” using AI. Using AI in conjunction with the exoskeleton can provide control and stability functions that the patient lacks. [19].
Ethical considerations are the ability of this convergence to provide an unfair advantage in its use or the misuse of the technology for illegal or immoral purposes. This unfair advantage can be seen in simple mechanical advantage arguments as in the case of Blake Leeper losing the appeal to allow the use of prosthetic legs in the 2021 Tokyo Olympic Games [20]
Neurotechnology is a growing area of research that initially was aimed at helping with neurological disorders and injuries such as quadriplegic patients. The connection between the human and computer is being tested with Elon Musk’s Neuralink company creating an implant that can wirelessly transmit brain activity [21]. This connection is an enabler to applications and technology that can utilize brain activity to be converted into actions in the physical world. This is a step toward cyborgs where humans become part human and part machine. The ethical questions are also some religious questions as to what level of medical intervention transcends prolonging life and become “playing God”?
AI used in treatments in the mental capacity also should carefully weigh the ethical issues with the intended benefits. Technology has been used to create a virtual presence of a deceased love that allows survivors to have interactions with the digital version in order to provide closure in dealing with the loss. In the era of Covid-19, where many have lost the ability to grieve at the bedside of a dying loved one, technology has attempted to bridge the gap. Video conferencing with those in the hospitals where visitors are not allowed due to the pandemic has helped some with closure. Bridging AI technology with the psychology of humans can be a very beneficial but also a very dangerous tool [21].
“Anthropomorphism” The issue of Anthropomorphism comes into play when robots become, act and feel more human than ever before and when humans begin to take on these new bots as pets and significant others, even family members. Although most are oblivious to the fact that just alone in the manufacturing and industrial workplace robots dominate our most tedious tasks. But when you assign a face, speech recognition and a few pet-like features the tables will turn, and emotions become a factor.  The attribute of human traits or emotions or intention to a non-human entity is considered to be an innate tendency of human psychology. A good example of this human characteristic can be observed and witnessed in the peculiar case of a robot named (HitchBot). In 2015 ‘Hitchbot’, a Hitchhiking robot was set off as an experiment to hitchhike across the country. The poor robot traveled a considerable number of miles, but along the way was ultimately vandalized beyond repair. The story of this tragic incident made headlines, and there was an outpouring of sympathy and emotions for the little hitchhiking robot. There were many tweets nationwide in response to this atrocious act of violence that many considered cruel and inhumane, such as “Sorry lil Guy for the behavior of some humans whom are bad people” and others showing grief and sorrow in their tweets. Let us also consider the case of ‘Spot’, a new dog-like robot created by Boston Dynamic, a Google-owned company.  There was a video online demonstrating how stable the robot dog was by kicking it hard over and over as it trotted along, showing its ability to maintain its composure. People were outraged and even contacted. P.E.T.A, the animal cruelty association, with the attempt to shame the company for its abuse towards a ‘dog like’ Robot!
Ethics in end users concerns about how the designed AI is used. It addresses how the technology is to be used. For example, how the autonomous AI military weapon is used, in what scenario, and under what circumstances because it would raise a moral concern if an autonomous AI-based weapon kills an innocent individual. With the vast majority of models being trained by human employees, it’s vital that users know the information it needs to provide for the goal of usage to be reached, so that alerts of any anomalies can be as accurate as possible.
Ensuring trust from end-users not only requires clarity but also transparency. Making users know what unusual activities can be found with the use of that particular AI is necessary. Some Artificial intelligence makes mistakes like Alexa’s response to audio requests to play Spotify tunes, but this mistake is something that does not make much difference, unlike self-driving/ auto-pilot cars. One would like to be certain about how self-driving cars work so that they know how secure they will be while driving in autopilot mode.
This can be either misuse of technology or a mistake made by technology. Robots now work along with humans like in factories, hospitals, banking, and even flying aircraft and performing surgeries. Unlike human robots cannot differentiate between pain and pleasure, what is wrong or what right, whether it is justifiable or not, performing surgeries on a human patient is the matter of life and death if the algorithm or command provides goes slightly wrong who will be responsible? A robot? As the surgery was performed using AI.
Any misuse of artificial intelligence systems can potentially cause disruptions and unprecedented results. AI systems also help in analyzing integral data and perform predictions of a large number of data that can be misused by cybercriminals for ill- gain. Another popular abuse of AI is deep fakes which uses Ai techniques to manipulate audio or video content and make it look authentic. Deep Fakes are tough to differentiate from legitimate content, even with the use of the technological solution. As an example, involving a UK- based energy firm that was tricked into transferring around 200,000 British pounds approximately around $270,000 to the Hungarian bank account after a malicious individual used deepfake audio technology to impersonate the voice of the firm’s CEO to authorize the payment.
Another concern is the unintended consequences of the technology when demonstrating or eliciting emotion. One such endeavor was the virtual recreation of deceased loved ones or family members so that the survivors could have some closure when deprived of the opportunity at the time of death. The potential issue is if the virtual version of the deceased behaves in a way that is contrary to the real person would have behaved. This could therefore have the counter effect of closure but create heartache [22].
Should there be a procedure to override the AI decision as a safeguard? It can be argued that the reason for AI making the decisions in the first place is to remove the sleep-deprived caffeine-addicted near sighted emotional human from the equation in the first place. However, if controls do not exist for intervention, then how can the AI decision be altered or correct in the case of an error?
There is already a widespread interest going on when it comes to robots or artificial intelligence. One of the issues often debated in artificial intelligence is whom to hold responsible when an algorithm predicts poorly? Especially in the medical and automotive industry. There has been a discussion going on where some suggest an individual engineer should be held responsible as the impact of their model has affected other lives, so they are at fault. In extreme hypotheses, it has also been argued that the advanced level of AI may have the potential to destroy human life.
While companies developing AI for commercial use like Amazon, Microsoft, Google, IBM, Facebook, and Apple have undertaken individual as well as collective efforts in building safeguards around AI, academic institutions like the University of California, Berkeley, Harvard, and the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge have also shown commitment towards working on a set of universal ethics and safety standards in Artificial Intelligence. (Archana Khatri Das)
When we give artificial intelligence our rights, we also hand them some of our unwanted responsibilities. There are some nations who are working on giving robots rights as we humans have, the European Union is exploring the possibility of granting AI “personhood”. Many nations already have advanced by giving non-human rights. Here are some examples of non-human entities enjoying some degree of what previously human rights were listed below:
Shibuya Mirai, a civil-servant chat-bot with the “personality” of a small boy for the Shibuya neighborhood of Tokyo, Japan was given “official residency” by the city
Sophia the robot was given actual citizenship by Saudi Arabia.
Erica the fembot was given a job.
There is even an American Society of Prevention of Cruelty to Robots, the ASPCR (“Robots are people too! Or at least they will be someday “). Estonia has gone a step further and promised to grant full human rights to any entity that can pass the so-called Kratt Law test, which is named after a mythological creature made out of household objects that gains sentience after its “creation”.
One of the best-known fictional work entitled “Run-around” by Isaac Asimov, published in Astounding Science Fiction in March 1942 (Asimov 1950) set out his “three laws of robotics”
First Law: A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm.
Second Law: A robot must obey the orders given to it by human beings, except where such orders would conflict with the First Law.
Third Law: A robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does not conflict with the First and Second Laws.
In addition to this Asimov added “Zeroeth Law” in 1983 to [recede the other three laws by providing that a robot may not harm humanity, or, by inaction, allow humanity to come harm” but many scholars have pointed out deficiencies in Isaac Asimov laws. What rights and responsibilities should be given to robotics is still an ongoing discussion. According to Christopher Stone, there should be some criteria satisfied for anything to be a holder of legal rights.
The value of utilizing AI comes from its ability to improve human lives, while policies and procedures are set to guide the development and deployment of AI in order to avoid major concerns and lower risks. AI needs to be designed to be easy to understand and trustworthy. Policies need to be in place to implement AI in a safe manner as there is debate around AI deployment that involves how privacy is protected and whether AI bias can lead it to performing harmful acts. For example, with the advancement in driverless car technology governments have begun to develop regulations to guide or restrict the testing and usage of self-driving vehicles. “The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) has issued a preliminary statement of policy which advises states against authorizing members of the public to use self-driving vehicle technology at this time”. The updated preliminary statement of policy would facilitate and encourage wherever possible the development and deployment of technologies with the potential to save lives. When it comes to AI such as autonomous vehicles, the United States has been active in producing policies and regulations. Twenty-nine states have enacted legislation related to autonomous vehicles and eleven governors have issued executive orders related to them. While the benefits of AI are significant, it is important to take a calculated approach to AI through the use of policies, procedures and regulations.
It is no secret that AI has changed the workforce, and that the use of AI will only grow over time. Artificial Intelligence has both helped create jobs and unfortunately also contributed to job disappearance. It is important to remember that the jobs that are created from technological advancement will require a different skill set from those that disappear. Edward Tenner notes that “Computers tend to replace one category of worker with another…You are not really replacing people with machines; you are replacing one kind of person-plus-machine with another kind of machine-plus-person” [19].For example, the use of robots in the workforce has led to an increase for the need of designers, operators, technicians who can repair the robots. In addition, Smith and Anderson’s survey results find that “half of the experts who responded (52%) expect that technology will not displace more jobs than it creates by 2025.”[17].
As much as the job creation potential there is sought with the integration of AI into our modern-day society, there are still a few losses. One of the most important is that of them replacing our current human employees. Al guru Kai-Fu Lee, current CEO of Sinovation Ventures expects for AI to be able to replace that 50% of the job market will be taken up by AI in the next fifteen years (Stein, 2018). This includes industries such as healthcare to agriculture (Stein, 2018). While this will leave billions displaced this will help raise the standard for people to achieve higher education in hopes of getting a job. The implementation of AI is still not possible without the assistance of people, for at the end of the day the humans will be managing these intelligent machines.
Social media today has undoubtedly become the world’s widest range of keeping communication with others. Companies had not missed a beat in implementing AI in their artificial intelligence in their applications for enhancing user experience and to rake in more users. One example is face recognition software utilized by Facebook to better target advertisement to users (Heller, 2019). Another approach is LinkedIn’s, a popular social networking site for job searching, deploys artificial intelligence to connect employers and employees based on interest in their feed (Ivanschitz & Korn, 2017). Just as much as AI can help the user, it can also be turned to manage the users on the platform. A use of this would be blacklisting keywords and filtering texts that do go against the standards of the company [23].
In the world of computing, a common occurrence is of software developers opening their projects to the public to let them manage, change, and distribute their software. By programmers making their code or program open source it allows for development to be made by the community. [24]. Artificial intelligence is no exception to this trend, as it too has become available to the public. A company that has been managing the distribution has been OpenAI whose mission is developing AI that benefits humanity as a whole. While there are plenty of benefits to be reaped by publicizing one’s code there are still plenty of repercussions that the industry has to be aware of [24]. One of these dangers is that of deep fakes, which can manipulate the image or voice to appear like someone else. Any malicious author could take advantage of this and reap damage to companies and individuals [24]. This is the only example of many with opening the source code to the millions of users of the internet.
“These systems utilize machine learning and facial recognition software to create a catalog of frequent visitors to your home. This allows the system to identify strangers instantly. AI-powered security is an initial step toward home automation, which offers many other useful features, such as notifying you the moment children arrive home from school or tracking the movements of pets. These systems can even notify emergency services autonomously, which makes them a great alternative to other similar subscription-based services” [25]
When someone thinks of their own home, they want it to be the most secure place for them. AI technology has been used in home automation and this helps keep everyone one step ahead of any kind of crime that can occur. Tracking and knowing anything that can occur is extremely beneficial especially when the possibility of a home invasion can happen.
“Machine learning has vast potential in the entertainment industry, and it is already used in streaming services like Netflix, Google Play, and Amazon Prime. These sites employ algorithms that act like neural networks to eradicate low-quality playback and buffering, offering you top quality from your internet service provider. Algorithms that are powered by AI also assist in media production. News stories are already being produced by AI algorithms to increase efficiency” [25].
Almost every kind of platform that is used today for our day to day needs has AI implementation. The algorithms are understanding and learning the kind of movies or music we like to entertain ourselves with. Not only that, the help of AI technology is being used to help with quality and any other features that may keep us tied in.
“AI technology is hastening the development of self-driving cars. In fact, according to research by Google, AI-powered cars already surpass human drivers when it comes to safety, as AI allows self-driving cars to adapt immediately to changing conditions and learn from new situations. Currently, most car manufacturers are looking to integrate AI technology in future product offerings.”
Self-driving cars are the future of any type of automobile. We want to believe that a car will be able to perform as high as a very safe driver. Using AI to stay ahead of the curve, will allow us to get even closer to actual self-driving cars. The safety mechanisms are expected to work for us so that we will be able to get to our destination much more safely.
“Ride-sharing services like Uber employ AI to determine the time needed to transport users to their desired locations. The technology lets users know details such as when their driver will arrive, when they will arrive at their destination, and how long it will take for food to be delivered. Uber also uses AI to set prices depending on what they think you are willing to pay. According to The Independent, Uber also uses AI to determine if a rider is drunk before a driver accepts a pickup. It does this by analyzing and comparing factors like walking speed and typing patterns.”
Ride-sharing applications are only getting more advanced. These applications are using AI technology to know how much food will cost or even how long it will take for the food to arrive. AI technology is also understanding what kind of atmosphere we are coming from. AI being able to comprehend the comparison of a sober person compared to a drunk person might seem very out of the ordinary. In fact, this may help an Uber driver be better prepared for any type of situation that may arise since the customer may be under the influence.
“Banks are using AI to send mobile notifications to help detect fraud. For instance, if an unusually large transaction is posted to your account, you might receive a warning notification on your phone, or if purchases occur in a location far from your home, your account might be flagged and you may be asked to confirm the purchases. AI enables such warnings by analyzing your typical daily transactions to identify unusual patterns in your spending behavior.”
AI is here to help improve our daily needs. Banking is one of the most apparent forms of keeping our money “safe”. Since the banking industry has a great deal of responsibility, it is obvious that they would set forth stricter analysis over the accounts of their customers. This will create a much better trust between the bank and its customers.
“AI-powered systems are well trained to perform every task that is done by humans. Marvelous work efficiency is ensured using AI technology. AI machines rectify human errors and deliver the best business results. Moreover, AI-based machines can operate 24/7. For instance, AI Chatbot can understand and respond to client queries at any time. Thus, AI chat assistants will improve the company’s sales.”
One of the biggest perks of having AI technology is the fact that it improves work efficiency. The work that is done by humans heavily depends on the performance of the person working. Some days may differ from others. AI technology is there to create a much easier and efficient quality of work. AI machines will make a much more consistent type of work environment. Having a machine creating less errors and understanding the different types of needs that may arise for clients will only help businesses thrive.
“Using Machine Learning (ML) algorithms such deep learning and neural networks, the systems can perform repetitive tasks efficiently. Also, ML-driven systems eliminate the need to write code every time to learn new things.Machine Learning can optimize machine abilities to learn new patterns from the information. Thus, compared to humans, AI machines can reduce operational costs. For example, AI machines can perform tasks repeatedly without any breaks or variations in results.”
Machine learning focuses on allowing systems to work much more efficiently. Creating this type of environment will help businesses save a great amount of money. This helps with saving businesses money and focuses more attention on fixing other issues. However, this could potentially be a threat to employees.
“Artificial Intelligence is used to train machines to perform work more efficiently than humans. AI systems can do critical tasks and solve complex solutions and obtain accurate results.
Because of this advantage, AI is highly adopting by the healthcare sectors. Robots are detecting life-threatening diseases accurately and also performing surgeries to save human lives.Moreover, AI in healthcare is greatly influenced radiology and digital consultation applications.”
AI technology can possibly create a very solid work environment. The tasks that can be completed with AI machines are more concrete. To further explain this concept, an AI machine can potentially work much better than a standard employee. The accuracy especially can be much greater since the repetitive tasks are learned and deployed at a greater rate. Not only that, AI machines are creating a much more competitive environment. AI machines are known to surpass an employees accuracy.
“By the above AI benefits, it was proved that AI-powered machines automate the end-to-end work process. AI machines securely process the given data. In addition, valuable insights into data are delivered. Next, new opportunities will open up to businesses. Thus, overall business performance is increased. Many researchers are agreed that AI can do all tasks that are performed by humans. For instance,
AI-powered machines can automate the work process across all industries
AI robots can exhibit human emotions like happiness/sad and love/hate”
Clearly with all the above benefits, AI technology is continuing to thrive and prosper in many business related functions. Business professionals are trying their very best to get their hands on any type of AI that will successfully perform any need the business may need. Businesses are going to continue to create a better understanding of AI in order to implement it into their own business. Could AI potentially be taking over?
“With the increasing adoption of AI, the concerns of artificial intelligence technology are also rising in humans in many ways. For instance, the misuse of AI-powered autonomous weapons could cause mass destruction. This means that, if the autonomous weapons are in the wrong hands, they become against humans. Thus, AI is a major threat to humans in the future.”
AI technology could potentially fall into the wrong hands at any given moment or time. People have used AI to create a much more efficient working environment, but the possibilities of people having a more malicious intent is very high. The power of AI technology is endless and could potentially be very dangerous.
“Super-intelligent machines can gather, store, and process vast amounts of user data. But, the drawback is, these machines can use your personal information without your permission. AI will be giving many benefits to society, but unfortunately, its advanced capabilities are also used to perform harmful or dangerous actions.”
When taking a look at a much more advanced kind of AI is Artificial Super-Intelligence (ASI). This kind of intelligence could cause many problems especially if it is not created in a proper way. It is upsetting to see that the possibility of having such advanced technology is in our reach, but people with bad intentions can create a world of terrible events. ASI is much too powerful to explore, the timeline is not definite according to many sources, but it may not be too far.
“AI is a trend in the market. The experts are estimating that AI eliminates approximately 75% of employment in the future. Most of the industries are already using AI machines, devices, and apps. Thus, the replacement of humans with AI-machines can lead to global unemployment.
Driven by the usage of AI, the human workforce has to depend on machines at large extent. Thus, employees lose their creative power.”
One of the biggest benefits that were explained was the fact that AI technology can perform much higher than a standard human. The accuracy, efficiency and other factors pertaining to work is done at a much higher level. This can cause an increase in job loss and create much more difficulties. The competition is already very tough and adding an almost near perfect machine to do a job will only increase unemployment rates.
“Artificial Intelligence is obviously making humans lazy with its app automating most of the tasks. There are chances for humans to get addicted to these advanced technologies which may create a problem for future generations.AI machines can’t think out of the box. They can only do what they programmed. Though they can do the task easier and faster, AI-machines cannot touch the power of human intelligence.
AI-devices can store vast information and draw patterns, but cannot map the data with the requirements without minimum human intervention.”
One of the biggest challenges facing the advancement of AI is creating a world of much more laziness. People are getting too comfortable with allowing machines to do what they want for them. Creating this laziness is making creativity less important. Instead of focusing on getting better at a particular task, it is much easier to have an intelligent machine do the work for someone. This is making laziness much more apparent and any out of the box thinking extinct. It is very important for people to educate themselves on AI machines before fully adapting to that kind of lazy lifestyle.
“The development of AI systems requires immense costs, as they are complex machines. Next, the maintenance of AI machines also requires enormous costs. The in-built software programs in AI machines have to be upgraded to provide the best results. In this case, if any severe breakdowns to the systems, then the code recovering process might waste time and costs.”
AI is very expensive, but that is not stopping corporations from adapting these machines to their business needs. As technology is constantly evolving, the only way is up. AI technology will get less expensive as years go on with more implementation. As with any kind of technology, this may be one technology that will forever change the way businesses function.
↑ a b c d Benko, A., & Lányi, C. S. (2009). History of artificial intelligence. In Encyclopedia of Information Science and Technology, Second Edition (pp. 1759-1762). IGI Global.
↑ Flasiński, M. (2016). History of artificial intelligence. In Introduction to Artificial Intelligence (pp. 3-13). Springer, Cham.
↑ a b c Maity, S. (2019, September 20). Identifying opportunities for artificial intelligence in the evolution of training and development practices. Retrieved April 18, 2021, from https://www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/JMD-03-2019-0069/full/html
↑ Hassani, H., Silva, E., Unger, S., TajMazinani, M., & Mac Feely, S. (2020, April 12). Artificial intelligence (AI) or intelligence Augmentation (IA): What is the future? Retrieved April 18, 2021, from https://www.mdpi.com/2673-2688/1/2/8/html
↑ a b c Gurkaynak, G., Yilmaz, I., & Haksever, G. (2016). Stifling artificial intelligence: Human perils. Computer Law & Security Review, 32(5), 749-758. doi:10.1016/j.clsr.2016.05.003
↑ Bostrom, N. (1998, January 01). Nick Bostrom, how long BEFORE Superintelligence? - PhilPapers. Retrieved April 18, 2021, from https://philpapers.org/rec/BOSHLB
↑ Larose, D. T. (2004). Discovering knowledge in data. doi:10.1002/0471687545
↑ E. Qualman. Socialnomics. Knopf Books for Young Readers, New York,2009.
↑ P. Gloor, J. Krauss, S. Nann, K. Fischbach,  and D. Schoder.   Web sci-ence  2.0:  Identifying  trends  through  semantic  social  network  analysis.volume 4, pages 215 –222, aug. 2009.
↑ Metz, C. (2019, November 11). We Teach A.I. Systems Everything, Including Our Biases. Retrieved April 18, 2021, from https://people.eou.edu/soctech/files/2020/12/BERTNYT.pdf
↑ a b c Leslie, D. (2019). Understanding artificial intelligence ethics and safety: A guide for the responsible design and implementation of AI systems in the public sector. The Alan Turing Institute. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3240529
↑  Artificial intelligence driving autonomous vehicle development. (2020, January 30). Retrieved from IHS Markit: https://ihsmarkit.com/research-analysis/artificial-intelligence-driving-autonomous-vehicle-development.html
↑ Lynberg, M. (n.d.). Automated Vehicles for Safety. Retrieved from National Highway Traffic Safety Administration: https://www.nhtsa.gov/technology-innovation/automated-vehicles-safety.
↑ Bogost, I. (2018, March 20). TECHNOLOGY Can You Sue a Robocar? Retrieved from The Atlantic: https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2018/03/can-you-sue-a-robocar/556007/.
↑  Pietsch, B. (2021, April 18). 2 Killed in Driverless Tesla Car Crash, Officials Say. Retrieved from The New York Times:
.
↑  US military adopts 'ethical' AI guidelines https://www.dw.com/en/us-military-adopts-ethical-ai-guidelines/a-52517260
↑ a b Armed robots, autonomous weapons and ethical issues http://centredelas.org/actualitat/armed-robots-autonomous-weapons-and-ethical-issues/?lang=en.
↑ Vanian, J. (2016, March 25). Federal Government Believes Drone Sales Will Soar By 2020. Retrieved May 02, 2017, from http://fortune.com/2016/03/25/federal-governmen-drone-sales-soar/
↑ a b Researchers Working on AI for Exoskeletons. (2021, March 22) Retrieved from Paint Square:
↑ Blake Leeper loses appeal to use prosthetic legs in Olympics bid. (2020, October 26) Associated Press Retrieved from ESPN
↑ a b Waltz, E. (2020, August 28) Elon Musk Announces Neuralink Advance Toward Syncing Our Brains With AI. Retrieved from IEEE Spectrum: https://spectrum.ieee.org/the-human-os/biomedical/devices/elon-musk-neuralink-advance-brains-ai
↑ Manley, J. (2020, November 26). The Ethics of Rebooting the Dead. Retrieved from Wired: https://www.wired.com/story/ethics-reviving-dead-with-tech./
↑ Ivanschitz, R., & Korn, D. (2017). Digital Transformation and Jobs: Building a Cloud for Everyone. The University of Miami Inter-American Law Review, 49(1), 41-50. Retrieved April 30, 2021, from https://www.jstor.org/stable/26788342
↑ a b c Etzioni, A., & Etzioni, O. (2017). Should Artificial Intelligence Be Regulated? Issues in Science and Technology, 33(4), 32-36. Retrieved April 30, 2021, from http://www.jstor.org/stable/44577330
↑ a b Kevin Gardner (n.d.). Six Ways AI Improves Daily Life. Digitalist Magazine. https://www.digitalistmag.com/improving-lives/2019/05/28/6-ways-ai-improves-daily-life-06198539/.
This section rigorously and in standard mathematical language describes the logical system which rationalizes sorting in computer programs.  Many of these results are obvious, and some of the notation might be found in assorted computer-science textbooks.  Anyone who finds any flaw with the following is invited to improve it.
The mathematics the first author applies here is sophisticated, but hardly complicated.
NOTE:  The conventional approach to these proofs rests on slightly shakier assumptions.  It employs a device called a "loop invariant," which is defined in terms of underlying program structure.  Proofs constructed this way can be found in most good algorithmics textbooks.
It is impossible to order an unordered set; but sorting usually concerns itself not with sets, but with sequences.  Let us define, then, precisely what sequences we may sort, and what the results may entail.  Let S be any set with a total ordering (
...)  Let A be a finite subset of that set.  Let J be a finite subset of
, the natural numbers.  Now draw up a function
.  The set J induces a so-called permutation group, Sym(J), the set of all bijections from J back onto J.  Now let
.  A little consideration will convince the reader that the set hereupon described is exactly the set of possible arrangements of the elements of a sequence.  Of course,
There are several subsets of the calculator commands. They are presented here along with a short summary of their features.
This section is currently incomplete. The status of each sub-section is written in italics below its link.
Current status: 0 of 4 commands completed. (0%)
The aplet commands are the commands used for building aplets (not applets) on the calculator. Most of these are fairly advanced, and you should have mastered other programming skills before you use the aplet commands, as they work on existing programs.
Current status: 4 of 5 commands completed. (80%)
The branch commands are used to set the program to do different tasks depending on a certain situation. More information on branching (or "jumping") in programming can be found at Wikipedia: Jump instruction.
Current status: 7 of 7 commands completed. (100%)
The drawing commands are used for drawing images on the screen. They are differentiated from graphic commands by the fact that they interface with the display, not graphic objects (GROBs). That is to say, using a command such as ARC will draw on the screen, not in a GROB.
Current status: 6 of 12 commands completed. (50%)
The graphic commands are used for creating and modifying GROBs - GRaphic OBjects. These are essentially variables on the calculator from G0 to G9 that can contain graphic information, ie. a 1-bit bitmap.
Current status: 0 of 4 commands completed. (0%)
The loop commands are used to set the calculator to keep performing an action until a certain condition is satisfied. For example, to display all the numbers from 1 to 100, you could use a loop command, rather than individually writing code to display each number.
Current status: 1 of 10 commands completed. (10%)
The matrix commands are used to edit and modify matrices, ie. the variables M0 to M9.
Current status: 0 of 3 commands completed. (0%)
The print commands are used to send information to HP's separately-sold infrared printer. They are generally not very useful.
Current status: 7 of 10 commands completed. (70%)
Prompt commands are used to ask the user for information, or alert the user to some fact. These are amongst the most important commands available for your use.
Current status: 0 of 7 commands completed. (0%)
The stat commands are actually two groups of commands, Stat-One and Stat-Two. These two groups represent one-variable and two-variable statistics modes, respectively. They are used for editing statistics and performing statistical functions.
Current status: 8 of 8 commands completed. (100%)
An "easter egg" is a common term used to refer to "hidden" or undocumented features in a program or operating system, in this case, the calculator. The commands documented here are not in the CMDS menu, and they are not documented by HP. Most of them don't serve any useful purpose.
This book is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Lymphomas make up only 2% of all thyroid gland malignancies. Thryoid gland lymphomas make up only 2% of extranodal lymphomas.
Nearly all thyroid lymphomas are B-cell Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma; Hodgkin's lymphoma of the thyroid and T cell lymphomas have been reported but are very rare.
60-80% are DLBCL; 30% are extranodal marginal zone lymphoma; <10% follicular lymphoma.
Extranodal marginal zone lymphoma (MALT type) is most commonly associated with Hashimoto's.
50% - Stage IE (limited to thyroid gland)
45% - Stage IIE (limited to thyroid gland and regional nodes)
Royal Marsden Hospital; 2005 (1936-96) PMID 15845932 -- "Management of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the thyroid: the Royal Marsden Hospital experience." (Harrington KJ, Br J Radiol. 2005 May;78(929):405-10.)
91 pts, retrospective. Stage I-II in 91% (38%/53%). Path = not reviewed or reclassified. 91% were intermediate or high grade.
Treatment: 89 pts received RT. 27 pts received chemotherapy (13 planned, either prior to or following RT; 14 for relapse after RT; 2 chemo alone). RT was EFRT (modified mantle) in 64, IFRT (thyroid + neck) in 25. Dose: median 40 Gy.
5-yr OS 48%, median RFS 34 mo. Multivariate analysis for OS: Stage, Debulking Surgery, EFRT (HR=0.45) vs IFRT. Dose was not significant for OS but was sig. for LC. 52% of pts with IFRT had LRF (20% local alone, 32% L+D) vs 26% for EFRT (9% local alone, 17% L+D).
Conclusion: IFRT should be abandoned in favor of EFRT. Suggest dose of 40 Gy in 20 fractions. EFRT alone is effective for Stage I but not Stage II. For Stage II or higher, chemotherapy followed by EFRT is recommended.
51 pts, retrospective. Stage I-II (41%/59%). Path = Working Formulation: DLCL in 60%; 96% were intermediate or high grade. A subset(n=13) of pts were retroactively classified by immunophenotype and 28 were reclassified according to the WHO classification.
Treatment: 24 chemo+RT, 18 pts surgery+RT, 5 chemo alone, 4 surgery alone. RT was modified mantle in 34, involved field in 8. Dose: median 42 Gy in 21 fractions.
Median f/u 10 yrs (23 yrs for RT alone, 8 yrs for CMT). OS 5 yrs 64%, 10 yrs 49% (Stage I 80%@5y,55%@10y; Stage II 53%/45%); CSS 75%/75%; FFS 76%/76% (Stage I 88%/88%; Stage II 68%/68%). FFS at 5 and 10y was 91% for CMT, 76% for RT alone, and 50% for chemo alone (NS).
Conclusion: excellent prognosis for Stage I/II pts treated with CMT. Distant recurrence is common. IPI was a significant prognostic factor.
Princess Margaret Hospital; 1993 PMID 8226154 -- "Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the thyroid gland: prognostic factors and treatment outcome. The Princess Margaret Hospital Lymphoma Group." (Tsang RW, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1993 Oct 20;27(3):599-604.)
Royal Marsden Hospital; 1986 PMID 3759532 -- "Primary lymphoma of the thyroid: clinical features, prognostic factors, and results of treatment." (Tupchong L, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1986 Oct;12(10):1813-21.)
1986 PMID 2428787 -- "Thyroid lymphomas stages IE and IIE: comparative results for radiotherapy only, combination chemotherapy only, and multimodality treatment." (Vigliotti A, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1986 Oct;12(10):1807-12.)
Mayo; 1985 PMID 3918965 -- "Radiotherapeutic management of primary thyroid lymphoma." (Blair TJ, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1985 Feb;11(2):365-70.)
AFIP; 2000 PMID 10800981 -- "Malignant lymphoma of the thyroid gland: a clinicopathologic study of 108 cases. (Derringer GA, Am J Surg Pathol.  2000 May;24(5):623-39.)
Royal Marsden Hospital / British National Lymphoma Investigation (BNLI); 1994 PMID 7826922 -- "The significance of MALT histology in thyroid lymphoma: a review of patients from the BNLI and Royal Marsden Hospital." (Laing RW, Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 1994;6(5):300-4.)
Christie Hospital (UK); 1992 PMID 1555984 -- "Primary malignant lymphoma of the thyroid: a clinicopathological analysis." (Logue JP, Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1992;22(5):929-33.)
1985 PMID 3906977 -- "Malignant lymphoma of the thyroid gland: a clinical and pathologic study of twenty cases." (Rasbach DA, Surgery.  1985 Dec;98(6):1166-70.)
University of Calgary; 2007 PMID 17235456 -- "An evidence-based approach to the treatment of thyroid lymphoma." (Mack LA, World J Surg. 2007 May;31(5):978-86.)
Yale; 1994 PMID 8275426 Full text -- "Thyroid lymphoma. The case for combined modality therapy." (Doria R, Cancer.  1994 Jan 1;73(1):200-6.)
In many ways, campaign and organization websites function as an intermediary between older forms of online communication (like email) and new media tools (like social media).[1] The conventional view of political websites is that people visit them to learn basic information about a campaign or organization. To some extent, they do; however, visitors have no reason to return to your site unless it contains new content. Posting regular, topical updates connects your organization to a network of people with similar interests and increases your visibility to news outlets.[2] Therefore, you should regularly post pertinent news and information about your cause.
Quite a bit has been written about the basic structure and function of informational websites elsewhere; therefore, this chapter should only be considered as a brief overview of political websites. More information on this subject can be found in the websites section of the "Further reading" chapter.
Generally speaking, posts on candidates' websites more often focus on acclaims for the candidate; negative accusations for the other side are more likely to be released through the website of a political organization.[3] When writing basic site information (such as an "About Us" page) or new entries, use the general writing and opinion guidelines. Ask supporters to use the information and opinions you post in their own entries. Even if the supporter's blog is typically nonpolitical in nature, these "stealth" messages can be an effective tool to incorporate your message into a larger network.[4]
Website content management systems (CMS) vary considerably in their interfaces, and will take time and dedication to master, but there are some general formatting points to note for any political website:
Whenever appropriate and possible, considering providing inline links to your sources for more controversial claims. Your reader may not visit your source to see if your statement is factual or to learn more, but the presence of a link to a reliable source can boost his or her trust in your organization. When linking to an external source, use a link that will open a new browser tab.
Though detailed statistics may not be appropriate in a letter or op-ed, a clear and accurate chart or graph can aid your argument on a website post.
Consider writing and editing new posts as a group with a cloud-based office suite like Google Docs. This avoids the confusion that often surrounds the editing process when writers send attachments through email or hard copy.
When writing blog posts with a What You See is What You Get (WYSIWYG) web editor, using copy and paste (Ctrl+C and Ctrl+V, or ⌘+C and ⌘+V on a Mac) sometimes results in awkward formatting. Work around this issue by using Google Chrome as a browser and pressing Ctrl+Shift+V (⌘+Shift+Option+V on a Mac) to perform an unformatted paste.
One of the major benefits of using digital media formats correctly is that many services allow an organization to learn specific demographic information about its supporters. Use a website tracking tool such as Open Web Analytics to measure website traffic and visitor habits. Review this information carefully to see which posts and pages your readers are visiting more often.
↑ Nielsen, "Mundane Internet Tools", 755.
↑ Drezner and Farrell, "Power and Politics", 23.
↑ Wicks et al., "Tracking the Blogs", 651.
↑ Kaid and Postelnicu, “Credibility of Political Messages on the Internet”, 162.
Puzzles | Geometric puzzles | Connecting Stars
In the above picture cross all the stars with 4 straight lines and without taking the pencil off the paper (or screen;)!
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
a province is an administrative division of a country.
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
Barrett, Cameron. “Anatomy of a Weblog.”  Camworld.  26 Jan 1999. Link.
Blood, Rebecca. "The blogosphere: How blogging software reshapes the online community." Commun. ACM 47 (December 2004): 53-55. (Blood 2004).
Weblogs are distinct from simple web pages because they allow commentary and often permit the audience to contribute ideas to the site. Blood discusses the importance of permalinks as a means of putting content into context. Finally, trackbacks allow weblogs to ping one another to place a reciprocal link and keep track of responses to comments. Software has enabled blogging with need of coding the entries.
Blood, Rebecca. The Weblog Handbook: Practical Advice on Creating and Maintaining Your Blog.  Perseus Publications, 2002. (Blood 2002).
As one of the first comprehensive looks at weblogs,   Blood's contribution to the academic scholarship is a solid one. From a   review of the history of blogging to explanations for the neophyte on how to   set up their own site, Blood's dedication to her craft shines clear. As a   frequently cited author, her new media research helped prepare bloggers to   engage their audiences with proper 'netiquette' and an engaging message.
Bolter, David Jay and Richard Gursin. Remediation: Understanding New Media.  Cambridge: MIT Press, 1998.
Bush, Vannevar. “As We May Think.” Atlantic Monthly 176.1 (July 1945). Link.
Dawkins, Richard. The Selfish Gene. New York : Oxford University Press, 1976.
Delong, Brad. “Google and Larry Page.” Brad Delong’s Webjournal. 14 Feb 2003. Link.
Eisenstein, Elizabeth. The Printing Press as an Agent of Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979. Vol 1.
Farkas, Meredith G. Social Software in Libraries: Building Collaboration, Communication, and Community Online. Information Today, Inc., March 2007.
This is a useful source for educators and librarians new to the Web 2.0 phenomena. It provides practical advice on how to use a variety of tools such as blogs, wikis, podcasting and gaming in academic settings. This book helps put the discussion of social software in proper perspective as way to encourage public collaboration and sharing of ideas. Farkas provides anecdotal evidence of the effectiveness of these new technologies.
Gillmor, Dan. “Google Buys Pyra: Blogging Goes Big-Time.”  Silicon Valley. 15 Feb 2003. Link.
Herring, S. C., I. Kouper, J. C. Paolillo, L. A. Scheidt, M. Tyworth, P. Welsch, E. Wright, and Ning Yu. "Conversations in the Blogosphere: An Analysis "From the Bottom Up"." 2005, 107b-107b.
Link.
This research provides a cogent examination of blog communications research. While conversations occur frequently among a subset of users with common interests, the greater blogosphere expands and contracts as new works are added and others deleted. Popular blogs drive traffic to their sites while others selectively link to blogs who comment frequently on their pages.
Herring, Susan C., Lois A. Scheidt, Elijah Wright, and Sabrina Bonus.  "Weblogs as a bridging genre."  Information Technology & People  18 (February 2005): 142-171.  Link.
This study examines weblogs as an evolving genre of   computer-mediated communications. The research points to blogger's role in   constructing their interpretive community. The writer selects meaningful   content and creates an online audience for their research. Thus, blogging plays both public as well as private roles in the new media.
Landow, George. Hypertext 2.0.  The Convergence of Contemporary Critical Theory and Technology.  Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997.
His second edition is a creative examination of the changes wrought by electronic authorship via hypertext. The audience of readers were at once capable of rewriting as well as remixing the text (fan fiction comes to mind). In cyberspace, writing was transformed into a participatory art form as the author's work was 'decentered' by a new consumptive aesthetic derived from popular culture.
McLuhan, Marshall. Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964.   As the groundbreaking scholarly work that helped   redefine new media in the electronic age, McLuhan's explorations of 'hot" and   "cool media" helped define emergent modes of communication. As human beings   continue to grapple with tribal vs. collective interests, hypermedia provides   a ground for cultural exchange within the 'global village'. McLuhan   acknowledged the reciprocal relationship of people being shaped by the very   tools they create. Social software provides further proof of this concept.
MLA Ad Hoc Committee on the Future of Scholarly Publication. “The Future of Scholarly Publication.” Profession 2002.  172-186.
Murray, Janet Horowitz. Hamlet on the Holodeck: The Future of Narrative in Cyberspace. New York: Free Press, 1997.
Nardi, Bonnie et al. "Blogging as social activity, or, would you let 900 million people read your diary?" Proc. of the 2004 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work, Chicago. 6-10 November, 2004. 222-231.  Link.
Nardi's ethnographic research on blogging as an   innovative epistemological genre which relates the individual with his social   world through permalinks, comments and trackbacks. She shows how this network   evolves depending on the depth and nature of the communicative interaction.   Software which facilitates user accessibility affords greater opportunities   for bloggers.
Nielsen, Jakob. "Interface Standards and Design Creativity."  UseIT.com.  22 Aug 1999.Link.
Turkle, Sherry. Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet.
New York: Simon and Schuster, 1995. (Turkle 1995).
This study examines weblogs as an evolving genre of computer-mediated communications. The research points to blogger's role in constructing their interpretive community. The writer selects meaningful content and creates an online audience for their research. Thus, blogging plays both public as well as private roles in the new media.
Walker, David. “How David Siegel Joined the Nielsen Camp.” Shorewalker.  [1998?] Link.
This Wikibook is based on an answer key produced by Textkit forum members. The original contributors were Textkit forum members Skylax, Episcopus, Keesa, Mariek, jsc01, Tim, and of course, Jeff.
The references are to the paragraph numbers (§ N) and the original page numbers (p. N) of Latin for Beginners. These numbers are unlikely to coincide with page numbers of a PDF file, in case you're using one of those. The page numbers of a PDF file are often just a running pagination number whereas the original page numbers of Latin for Beginners used do not consider the front cover of a book and index, for example, as being part of the numbering.
Copies of the book can be found online at
Va'-de ad for-mi'-cam, O pi'-ger, et con-si'-de-ra vi'-as ei'-us et dis'-ce sa-pi-en'-ti-am: quae cum non ha'-be-at du'-cem nec prae-cep-to'-rem nec prin'-ci-pem, pa'-rat in aes-ta'-te ci'-bum si'-bi et con'-gre-gat in mes'-se quod co'-me-dat.
America est patria mea.America subject, noun; est copula; patria noun; est patria mea predicate.
Agricolam fīliam amat.Agricola subject, noun; filiam object, noun; amat verb; filiam amat predicate.
Iūlia aquam portat.Iulia subject, noun; aquam object, noun; portat verb; aquam portat predicate.
Rosam in comis habet.Rosam object, noun; comis noun; habet verb; in comis habet predicate.
Iūlia est puella pulchra.Iulia subject, noun; est copula; puella noun; est puella pulchra predicate.
Domina fīliam pulchram habet.Domina subject, noun; filiam object, noun; habet verb; filiam pulchram habet predicate.
Nauta portat, nautae portant.
Dominae portant, domina portat.
The sailor fights / is fighting / does fight, the sailors fight / are fighting / do fight.
The girl loves, the girls love.
The farmer carries, the farmers carry.
The daughter labours, the daughters labour.
The sailor is announcing, the sailors announce.
The ladies love, the lady loves.
Diana and Latona are goddesses.
Diana is the goddess of the moon.
Latona loves Diana.
Diana is the goddess of the woods/forests.
Diana loves the wood/forest.
Diana carries arrows.
Diana kills the wild beasts of the wood/forest.
The wild beasts of the lands are fighting.
Nauta fugam puellārum nuntiat.
Quis silvam amat?Who loves the forest?Diāna silvam amat.
A direct object is italicised, an indirect object is underlined, and the genitive of the possessor is bolded.
Who gives money to the sailors?
The daughters of the farmer are giving/give money to the sailors.
Who announces/is announcing the fortune of the battle.
Galba is announcing the fortune of the battle to the farmers.
To whom does the mistress of the house/lady tell the story?
The mistress of the house/lady tells the story to the farmer's daughter.
Who is giving the wreath to Diana? / Who gives Diana a crown?
The girl is giving the wreath to Diana because she loves Diana. / The girl gives Diana a crown because she loves Diana.
The goddess of the moon carries arrows and kills wild beasts of the forests.
Galba is announcing the sailor's victory.
Cui puellae corōnam dant?
Agricola fīliae aquam dat.
Galba: Diana, Julia, is the beautiful goddess of the moon and woods/forests.
J: Whose daughter, Galba, is Diana?
G: Diana is Latona's daughter, Julia.
J: What does Diana carry?
G: Diana carries arrows.
J: Why does Diana carry arrows?
G: Diana carries arrows, Julia, because she kills the bad wild beasts of the large/big forest.
J: Does Latona love her daughter?
G: She does, and her daughter loves Latona.
J: What does your little daughter carry?
G: My little daughter carries pretty wreaths / beautiful crowns.
J: To whom does your daughter give these pretty wreaths / beautiful crowns?
G: She gives the wreaths / crowns to Diana.
G: She is not alone; my little daughter is with my maidservant.
The farmer lives with his daughter in the cottage.
The farmer's good daughter prepares dinner.
Dinner is pleasing to the farmer, and the farmer praises his good daughter.
Then the farmer's daughter calls the hens to dinner.
The hens love the farmer's daughter.
Bad daughters do not prepare good dinners.
The daughter of the farmer is pleasing to the lady/mistress of the house.
The lady lives on a large island.
The lady gives money to the good little girl.
Ubi agricola habitat?
Quis cum agricolā habitat?
Agricola bonam cēnam laudat.
Emphatic words are italicised.
Longae nōn sunt tuae viae.Your ways are not long.
Quid ancilla tua portat? Ancilla mea tubam novam portat.What does your maidservant carry? My maidservant carries a new trumpet.
Galba: Who, O Marcus, is the lieutenant with the spear and the trumpet?
Marcus: The lieutenant, O Galba, is Sextus.
G: Where does Sextus live?
M: Sextus lives in the town with his daughters.
G: Do the townspeople like Sextus?
M: The townspeople like Sextus and praise him, because he fights with great firmness.
G: Where, O Marcus, is your maidservant? Why is she not preparing dinner?
M: My maidservant, O Galba, is giving water and grain to the lieutenant's horse.
G: Why doesn't Sextus' slave care for his master's horse?
M: Sextus and his slave are hastening to the town's wall. The townspeople are preparing for war.
The fatherland of the good slave, the village of the good servants, O good people.
The people of the great town, in the large town, in the great towns.
With long spears, to long spears, to the wide walls.
O wicked lieutenant, friends of the bad lieutenant / of the friend of the bad lieutenant, dinners pleasing to the good lord.
Wheat of the small horses, O good lord, to the famous lieutenants.
Sextus, the lieutenant, carries a long spear.
The good townspeople give money to Sextus, the renowned lieutenant.
The bad slaves kill the good horse of Marcus, the master.
Galba, the farmer, and Julia, his good daughter, are labouring.
Marcus, the sailor, lives on the island of Sicily.
Quis equum bonum Galbae agricolae cūrat?
Ubi, Mārce, est Lesbia ancilla?
Ad casam parvam Iūliae filiae agricolae properat.
Sextus is a friend of the good sailor.
Sextus gives a helmet to the good sailor.
The Roman people praise the good sailor.
Sextus carries the booty with the good sailor.
Where, good sailor, are the arms and offensive weapons of the Roman  lieutenant?
The good sailors are hastening to war.
The reputation of the good sailors is clear.
Battles are pleasing to good sailors.
The townsmen are caring for the good sailors.
Why, good sailors, are the wicked farmers hastening to the Rhine?</  li>
The bad farmers are fighting with the good sailors.
Lesbia nautam bonum ad cēnam vocat.
Ubi, Sexte, est galea mea?
The grain of the good land, of the bad sword, of the long war.
Great firmness, great garrisons, o famous Vergil.
O bad servant, o famous town, o bad son, (o) bad sons, of the bad    son.
Of the long river, the long rivers, of the long rivers, the fame of  the great garrison.
With small swords, with the famous goddesses, to the famous sailors.
Of the many battles, of great spoils / to great spoils, to the hard  battles.
Germany, the fatherland of the Germans, is a famous land. In Germany there are many rivers. The great and wide Rhine is a river of Germany. In the wide   forests of Germany there are many wild beasts. Many Germans live in great      towns and in small villages and many are good farmers. The wars of the Germans are great and famous. The people of Germany love war and battles, and they     often fight with their neighbours. The river Rhine is near to many famous      towns.
Great is the fame of Italy, the fatherland of the Romans, and famous is Rome
Italia are long and wide. Neighbouring Italy is the island of Sicily.
Marcus: He is not in Italy, O Cornelius. He is hastening to the river Rhine with the Roman troops because there is a rumour of a new war with the Germans. The free people of Germany do not love the Romans.
C: Is your son a lieutenant of the Roman troops?
M: A lieutenant he is not, but he is among the legionary soldiers.
C: What (kind of) arms does he bear / carry?
M: He bears a large shield and a hard coat of mail and a beautiful helmet.
C: What (kind of) weapons of offense does he bear / carry?
M: He bears a sword and a long spear.
C: Does the lieutenant love your son?
M: He does, and he often gives my son beautiful rewards and many spoils.
C: Where is the land of the Germans?
M: The land of the Germans, O Cornelius, is beside the Rhine, the great and deep river.
Marcus accounces his plan to his friend Sextus.
My friends are praising the good dinner of your maidservant.
Your coat of mail, O my son, is hard.
Our shields and spears, my friend, are in the Roman camp.
Are not the men of your fatherland free? Yes, they are.NB: liberi could also mean "children", but then the sentence wouldn't make sense.
Where, O Cornelius, is your beautiful helmet?
Julia loves her beautiful hens and the hens love their mistress.
There is plenty of booty / an abundance of spoils in your camp.
Your friends often give food and money to the wretched and sick.
Castra sunt mea, sed tēla sunt tua.
The Romans, the famous people of Italy, are preparing for war. Out of
Romans, armed with helmets, coats of mail, shields, swords, and spears,
Ubi, Sexte, est Lesbia ancilla tua?
The teacher gives a reward to no bad boy.
Some men love the water, others love the land.
Galba works alone with zeal.
Lesbia is the maid of one of the lords, Tullia is the maid of        another lord.
Lesbia prepares dinner alone.
The dinner of no other maid is good.
Lesbia gives dinner to no other man.
Alia oppida sunt magna, alia parva.
Gallus arma sua laudat.
Gallus arma eius laudat.
Marcus: Who is the man, Cornelius, with the little boy? Is he Roman and free?
Cornelius: He isn't a Roman, Marcus. That man is a slave and his dwelling place is in the forests of Gaul.
M: Is the boy a son of this slave or another?
C: The boy is the son of neither. He is the son of the lieutenant Sextus.
M: Where does the boy hurry to with that slave?
C: He is hurrying to Sextus' wide fields with the slave. All the grain is already ripe and a large number of slaves are working in the fields of Italy.
M: Are the Gauls farmers and do they plough the fields of their fatherland?
C: They aren't farmers. The Gauls love war, not agriculture. Among them the men fight and the women, with the help of the children, plough fields and      prepare food.
M: Our teacher often tells us boys and girls pleasing stories of the Gauls, and he often praises them.
C: Bad is their fate and the wretched slaves often long for their fatherland with many tears.
Sextus: Where are you, Marcus? Where is Quintus? Where are you, friends?
Marcus: I am with Quintus in the forest, Sextus. We are not alone; there are many other boys in the forest.
S: Now you are happy, but recently you weren't happy. Why were you wretched?
M: I was wretched because my friends were in another village and I was alone. Now I am among my companions. Now we are and will be happy.
S: Have you been to school today?
S: Will you be in school soon.
M: My friends will be there, but I will not be.
S: Why won't you be there? The teacher, often angry, doesn't praise your lack of zeal and industry.
M: I was recently ill and now I am weak.
Es, estis, erātis, eris, eritis.
Sum, eram, erō.
Est, erat, erit.
Sumus, erāmus, erimus.
Sunt, erant, erunt.
Nūper erat nauta, nucn est agricola, mox erit magister.
Niobe, queen of the Thebans, was a beautiful woman yet proud. She was proud not only because of her beauty
I shall announce, we shall carry, I shall order
Apollo and Diana were children of Latona. The Thebans prepared frequent sacrifices to/for them. The townspeople
Latona, angry because of these words, calls her children. Apollo and Diana fly to her, and destroy the wretched
The Romans have land fit for agriculture.
The Gauls were hostile to the Roman troops.
To whom was the goddess Latona not friendly?
The goddess Latona was not friendly to the proud queen.
Our food, Marcus, will be pleasing to the armed men.
What was annoying to the people of Italy?
The long wars with the Gauls were annoying to the people of Italy.
The fields of the Germans were neighbouring to the Rhine river.
The Romans moved the camp to the forest close to the town.
Not only the beauty of the queen but also her pride was great.
Soon the beautiful queen will be sick with sorrow.
Why was Niobe, the queen of the Thebans, happy? Niobe was happy because of her many sons and daughters.
Among the ancient ladies, Cornelia, daughter of Africanus, was especially famous. Her sons were Tiberius
Gracchus and Gaius Gracchus. These boys lived with Cornelia in the town of Rome, the most famous town of
Italy. There Cornelia took care of them and there she taught them with great zeal. Cornelia was a good
Who is driving? Why does he come? Whom does he send? Whom are you leading?
What do they send? To whom do they come? Whose camp do they fortify?
Whom do they drive? We are coming. What does the boy find?
Whom do we send? Whose horse are you (pl.) leading? What do they say?
We are fortifying, you (pl.) are coming, he says.
We are driving, you (pl.) find, you (sg.) are fortifying.
Quid reperiunt? Quem audiunt? Cūr venit?
Next to the dwelling place of Cornelia was the abode of the beautiful Campana. Campana was proud
“Do you have any jewels, Cornelia?” she says. “Where are your jewels?” Then Cornelia calls her sons
Tiberius and Gaius. “My boys”, she says, “are my jewels. For good children always are especially
They were driving, they were sending, you were leading, they were fortifying.
We were sending, you were leading, they were saying.
We were fortifying, you were coming, you were saying.
You were finding, you were coming, you were hearing.
Do you believe the words of the allies? Many don’t believe their words.
My neighbours do not favour your advice, because they are eager for war.
Tiberius and Gaius did not resist the hard discipline and they obeyed Cornelia.
The goddess was hostile to the seven daughters of the queen.
A hard punishment and perpetual sorrow will not persuade the queen.
Recently she was resisting and now she resists the power of Latona.
Soon the arrows will fly and injure the wretched children.
He will say, you will lead, we shall fortify.
They will say, you will say, we shall send.
They will fortify, they will come, they will send, they will drive.
He will lead, you will send, he will come, he will drive.
He will fortify, you will find, we will drive.
I shall send, we shall come, they will rule.
You will hear, you will come, you will find.
He will find, I shall drive, we shall lead, he will send.
You will see, I shall sit, we shall call.
Reperiam, audiet, venient.
Veniam, reperiēmus, mittent.
They will flee, they do, he threw.
Destroy, announce (pl.), they flee.
Come (pl.), say, you will make.
Lead (pl.), I shall throw, they fled.
We shall flee, they will throw, you will seize.
They will find, you seized (pl.), they do harm.
Fly to many lands and give help.
I will take my weapons and I will destroy many wild beasts.
Who will believe your story?
Be good, boys, and hear the pleasing words of the teacher.
Dea arma rapiet et tēla iaciet.
It will be given, he will give, you are seen, you see.
He called, he was called, you will destroy, you will be destroyed.
He was prepared, he prepared, you care for, you are cared for.
They were carried, they carried, we will be seen, we will see.
You are ordered, you order, you were praised, you praised.
You will be moved, you will move, they were given, they were giving.
Perseus was the son of Juppiter, the greatest of the gods. The poets tell many stories about him.
The gods favour him, they give him magical armour and wings. Armed with these weapons and supported
Ethiopia is a land of Africa. Cepheus rules this land. Neptunus, the greatest god of the waters,
He drove, he was driven, he sent, he was sent, he led.
They drive, they are driven, they are sent, they send, they fortify.
I am sent, I will be sent, I shall send, you will be led, you are led.
He is led, you (pl.) are led, we are found, I shall be found, he is driven.
We drove, we were driven, you are found, you will be found.
You are fortified, I was coming, I was led, it will be said.
You are sent, you sent, you will be sent, you are sent, you were driven.
It is said, he says, they are fortified, they will find, they will be heard.
Then the oracle answers as follows: “Bad is your fortune. Neptunus, the great god of the waters,
(who is) hostile to the land of Ethiopia, sends these punishments. But prepare a suitable offering
Andromeda is pleasing to the monster. Give her to the monster. Save your dear fatherland and the
Then Perseus with his wings will fly to many lands.
The savage monster hastens through the waters and will soon devastate our fields.
If, however, Cepheus will hasten to the oracle, the oracle will answer as follows.
Who will be conquered by the weapons of Perseus? Many monsters will be conquered by his weapons.
With great cares and many tears the farmers are driven from their dear homes.
Many places will be laid waste and many towns will be destroyed.
The monster is strong, yet it will be overcome.
Will you always believe the words of the oracle? I will not always believe them.
Will Cepheus obey the oracle? The words of the oracle will persuade them.
If we will not flee, the town will be taken and the townsmen will be killed.
The men, (who are) tired because of lack of food, will leave from that place.
The Germans approached the Roman camp, nevertheless the lieutenant kept the troops from the battle.
Many towns of the Gauls will be taken by the Romans.
Then the Romans will kill all the people of these towns with swords and spears.
The townsmen will resist the Romans, but they will flee, tired from the long battle.
Many fled out of Gaul and lived in the villages of the Germans.
The wretched sailors are wounded by savage enemies and are in need of food.
Leave and give the men grain and plenty of wine.
Our troops were kept from the battle by the lieutenant Sextus.
That town was far away from the Roman province.
Marcus: Where have you been, Titus and Quintus?
Titus: I've been to my school and Quintus has been to his school. We've been good boys. Has Sextus been in the village today?
M: He has. He was hurrying through the fields near the river recently. There he and Cornelius have a boat.
T: A boat, you say? Tell someone else that story!
M: Yes, truly, a beautiful new boat.
Quintus: With whose money do Sextus and Cornelius prepare that boat? Who gives them the money?
M: The friends of Cornelius have much gold and the boy doesn't lack money.
T: Where will the boys sal to? Will they sail far from land?
M: Their plans are doubtful. But today, I believe, if the wind is (will be) suitable, they will sail to the biggest island. They have been there before already. Then, however, the wind was treacherous and the boys were in great danger.
Q: Water moved by the wind is always hostile to sailors, and often the treacherous wind seizes the boats and drives and destroys them. Those boys, if they won’t be very careful, will be overcome by the angry water and strong wind and thus be killed.
Quis ita dīcit? Marcus.
Cepheus, moved very much by the adverse fortune, has left and has told the words of the oracle to
Then the friends of the poor girl went far away and waited a long time for the savage monster.
Then Perseus, supported by wings, flew by chance over Ethiopia. He saw the people, Andromeda,
You have had, they have moved, they had sent.
He has seen, you will have said, to have led.
You have sent, they have obeyed, we had left.
He has strengthened, I had given, I will have sent.
We will have had, I have destroyed, he has obeyed, to have been.
You had given, you will have strengthened, you had come, to have sent.
You had come, to have made, you had given, you will have carried.
Who had the words of the oracle moved? The words of the oracle had moved the people.
To whom will Cepheus have told the words of the oracle? Cepheus will have told the words of the oracle to Perseus.
Her friends shall have gone away from Andromeda.
The fierce monster had destroyed many dwelling places.
Where have you seen the monster? We have seen it in the water.
What will the monster do? The monster will kill Andromeda.
Perseus was always eager for battle and he answered: “Your words are very pleasing,” and gladly* he
Perseus killed the monster and carried back the victory. Then he came to the stone, freed Andromeda,
The story of Andromeda was told.
Many stories have been told by the teacher.
The field had been plowed by the strong farmer.
The fields had been plowed by the strong farmers.
The gold will have been carried by the treacherous slave to his (own) dwelling place.
Our weapons were praised by the lieutenant. Who has praised your weapons?
We were called to dinner by your maid.
Andromeda was not given to the monster because the monster had been killed by Perseus.
Did Cornelia not have the ornaments of gold? Yes, she did.
Sextus was not holding a shield on his left arm, was he? Not on the right; but Sextus was holding his shield on his left arm.
Many wars had been waged in vain by the Gauls.
When the town was occupied by the treacherous Sextus, the wretched townsmen were slain by the sword (put to the sword).
This town was full of grain.
Did Sextus not demand grain from the townsmen? Yes, but they refused to give him grain.
The townsmen were weary and lacked weapons.
They did not attempt flight, did they? Not at all.
The school’s teacher ordered the children to work with diligence.
To be without food and wine is annoying for the men.
The armed men forbade the Gauls to pitch camp in that place.
When our men began to flee, the lieutenant was captured by your men.
The Gauls had stormed the fort there, where the garrison was weak.
Some were trying to fight, others were attacking the gates.
The women were sitting in front of (their) dwelling places and were not able to resist the strong Gauls.
War is savage; it favours neither the weak nor the wretched.
But the men demanded weapons and were eager to drive the Gauls down from the walls.
For this fort to be occupied by Gauls will not be pleasing to the Romans.
The Gauls, when conquered by the Romans, ceased to be free.
You can not live long without water.
Sed oppidum capere nōn poterant.
Once upon a time the Sabines were waging war with the Romans and had gained many victories. Already they
“Lead the Sabine forces within the gates, O Tarpëia, and very great will be your rewards.”
Whose shield do you have? I have the shield that the lieutenant sent to the fort.
To whom will the lieutenant give his shield? He will give the shield to my son.
Where did the ancient Germans live? The ancient Germans lived on the land that is next to the Rhine.
With whom were the Germans in the habit of waging war? The Germans used to wage war with the Romans, who were eager to overcome them.
Which men are pitching camp? These are the men by whose arms the Germans were conquered.
Which weapons do your forces lack? Our forces lack swords and spears.
By whom was the left gate being held? The left gate was being held by (our) allies.
Which provinces have been occupied by the Romans. Many provinces have been occupied by the Romans.
Which men will the Gods favour? The Gods will favour good men.
Tarpëia, excited because of the Sabines’ beautiful ornaments, could not resist and replied:
“Give the ornaments that you wear on (your) left arms to me, and I shall quickly lead your
Neither the foot-soldiers nor the cavalrymen were able to take possession of the Roman fort.
With extremely great they attacked the high walls daily.
The feet of the soldiers were often wounded by the stones that were being thrown down from the wall.
Which new plan did the leader make?
He tempted the faithless girl with beautiful ornaments.
What did the girl do?
The girl, excited by the gold, led the soldiers through the gates.
Yet she did not gain the rewards that she had asked for with the greatest eagerness.
Among the ancient Romans Tarpëia was not praised.
Do you hear the trumpets, Marcus? Not only do I hear the trumpets, but I can also see the rows of soldiers and the wagons full of baggage.
What legions do we see? These legions have recently come from Gaul.
What have they done there? Were they eager to fight or were they without courage?
They have fought many battles and have brought back great victories and many prisoners.
Who is the commander in chief of these legions? Caesar, the greatest general of the Romans.
Who is the horseman who is wearing a beautiful wreath? That horseman is my brother. The wreath has been given to him by the consul because he had fought with the greatest courage and had saved our fatherland from barbarians.
When the savages took Rome, they destroyed the greatest works of the kings.
The Romans have received (suffered) many defeats from the savages.
When the fear among the townspeople was greatest, their doubtful (wavering) spirits were strengthened by the famous orator.
Rome is on the bank of a big river.
When Caesar, the commander in chief, ordered his soldiers to take their weapons, they could not be restrained from the battle.
When the battle was fought, the general could not be found.
The general had been wounded by a arrow in the head and could not stand.
A foot soldier has carried him from the battle with great labour (effort).
He has held the general with his arms and saved him from the greatest dangers.
For his courage the good soldier has received a crown from the general.
Patriam servāre opus magnum erat.
Once upon a time the Cimbri and the Teutons, people of Germany, had approached Italy with their
Then/at that time Manlius, the orator, strengthened the hearts/spirits of the people as follows:
“We have taken (received) a great defeat. Our towns are taken by the Cimbri and the Teutons,
Rome. If we, therefore, do not fight a new battle (or: and so unless we fight a new battle) with
At that time, Marius was waging war in Africa. He has been called from Africa to Italy without
The Roman citizens had strengthened their city with high towers and long walls.
The winds prevented the men- of-war from approaching the territory of the enemies.
The general has received golden spurs and other decorations from his retainers.
The Roman soldiers have waged fierce wars with/against the enemies and have conquered/defeated them with great slaughter.
Some animals love the land, others the sea.
The men-of-war that were carrying aid to the general have been destroyed by the enemies with fire.
In this sea we have seen many birds that had flown far away from land.
Haven’t you seen the men-of-war of the enemies and the fires that our city was being destroyed with? Yes, but we have seen neither the slaughter of the citizens nor the flight of the retainers.
Birds and other animals have quickly begun to seek safety by flight when they saw the fire.
The judge didn’t stand in the ranks of foot soldiers, did he? Not at all, the judge was among the horsemen and his horse wore a beautiful decoration.
-es (also a horseman is a masculine)
The safety of the allies was always dear to the Romans. Once upon a time, the Gauls,
Castra ad pulchum fontem posuimus.
Once the Roman foot soldiers with the swift horsemen made a journey to the
Sextus placed the baggage on the top of the hill. The battle was heavy and
Summum montem occupāre erat difficile.
Before the arrival of Caesar, the swift horsemen of the enemies had made a fierce attack on the camp.
To restrain the army from the battle was not easy.
After his arrival, Caesar ordered the legionary soldiers to be led out of the camp.
Before the camp there was a fight with the enemies’ cavalry.
After a short time the cavalry fled across the river where the enemies’ camp was situated.
Then the victorious commander in chief (apposition: victor, commander in chief) laid waste the fields and burned the villages of the enemies.
However, he has not stormed the camp, because the soldiers were tired and the place difficult.
The enemies did not cease to throw spears, which have injured only a few.
After the adverse fight, the chiefs of the Gauls were eager to send ambassadors to Caesar, but they could not persuade the people.
Pulchrum est animal et vīs habet magna.
In Corinth all decorations of gold had been seized by victorious leaders.
Caesar has led the army to Geneva with long (large) marches.
Which bridge had the enemy burnt? The enemy had burnt the bridge over the Rhine.
At Pompeii you can see many houses of the Romans.
The consul hastened from Rome to the country on (with) a swift horse.
Many people were sitting in the house of the consul.
The general had ordered the lieutenant to sail to Athens with many men-of-war.
Before the walls of the city are rows of high trees.
Because of the high trees we have not been able to find the lake and the harbour.
Caesar drilled his legions that were in Gaul with many battles.
Daily he pitched camp in a suitable place and fortified (it).
Nuper Athenis eram (fui) locumque vidi ubi sedebant iudices.
Crete is an ancient island that is beaten by the high water of the great sea.
There Minos once upon a time was king. Daedalus, who was fleeing out of his
Daedalus began to long for his dear native land. He was eager to hasten home,
Galba the farmer. Galba the farmer lives in the country. Every day he begins
Then Daedalus, moved by heavy troubles (heavily troubled), spoke as follows to his
–īs) and makes a wonderful plan. For he places feathers in a row and makes true
My mother is dear to me and your mother is dear to you.
Your letters were pleasing to us and our letters were pleasing to you.
The messenger of the king, who is with us, will answer nothing.
The messengers have demanded peace and friendship for them and their companions.
If you will take up arms, I will seize the kingdom.
Who of you both is a Roman citizen. Neither of us.
At that time many suffered punishment because they had attacked the kingdom.
Inflict punishment on the fierce enemies of our native land, Caesar.
At daybreak some intrusted themselves to flight, moved by fear; others, however, sustained the attack of our army with great courage.
When the sister of the king heard about the adverse (outcome of the) battle, she killed herself at Pompeii.
The boy, Icarus, stood next to him (lit. stood in the same place) and saw his
You and I are living in the same town.
We are not afraid of the journey itself, but of the fierce wild beast that are said to be in the dense forest.
Once upon a time we ourselves made the same journey.
At that time we saw many wild beasts.
But they have not injured us.
Caesar himself snatched a shield out of the hands of a soldier and hastened to the very line of battle.
Therefore the soldiers threw their spears into the enemies’ bodies with the greatest courage.
The Romans too received severe wounds.
Finally the enemies retreated and fled in all directions.
The same hour a letter was sent to Rome by the general himself.
The same month the prisoners were also sent to Italy.
But many refused to make the difficult journey across the mountains because of their wounds, and were said to be in Geneva.
When Tarquin the Proud, the seventh and last king of the Romans was expelled into
Soon Porsena cam to Rome with great forces, and the city itself was in great danger.
In the whole region the Roman army had been conquered. The king had already seized
That brave leader of the Germans called together his men, and strengthened
Practise that ancient courage and you will conquer.”
Cantatne avis ista?
One part of the city seemed sufficiently fortified by walls, the other part by the river.
But there was a bridge over the river that nearly presented a way for the enemies. Then
Horatius Cocles, a brave man, shouted (said with a great voice), “Cut down the bridge,
Romans! Shortly Porsenna will lead his troops across (it) into the city.” Already there
Someone fell from the bridge down into the river but he has been saved without any danger.
Not even any of the soldiers has stayed in the camp.
If you see anyone at my house, order him to leave.
If anyone holds the bridge, not even such a great army can take the city.
The city was not sufficiently fortified and at midday a certain king had almost led his troops across the bridge.
Finally a certain soldier leaped down in the waves (while) armed and turned his eyes to the other bank unharmed.
Everyone ought to give that brave soldier something.
Such courage has in fact always pleased the Romans.
Once upon a time Corinth was a large enough city and almost equal to Rome itself; now, however, the walls have fallen down and just a few remains of that town can be found.
Everyone loves liberty, and in fact the name of the king is hateful to anyone.
Quisque opus suum laudābat / Suum quisque laudabat opus.
Soon, when (only) a small part of the bridge remained, Horatius ordered his comrades to
Finally the bridge fell down into the water with a great splash (noise). Then indeed did
Horatius retreat and leaped armed into the waters. The enemies hurled many spears towards
What were the scouts seeking for? The scouts were seeking for the most opportune time for the march.
In the middle of the wood we made fires as frequent as possible, because we had never before seen wild beasts so audacious.
In ancient times the Germans were braver than the Gauls.
Caesar was more famous than the enemies who killed him.
Each person carried a huge shield and quite a long spear.
Among the foreigners the Germans were the boldest and the bravest.
The mind of men is quicker than their body.
The men of some lands are very unfortunate.
The bodies of the Germans were more huge (bigger) than those of the Romans.
The very keen leaders of the Gauls led their very quick horses across a certain river without any delay.
A certain commander in chief has asked (from) the scouts about the recent arrival of the men-of-war.
Quaedam animālia celerior sunt quam equus celerrimus.
No one saw soldiers more spirited than the Romans.
The general ordered immediately messengers as swift as possible to carry letters to Rome.
Many rivers are more gentle than the Rhine.
Among the Romans who was more famous than Caesar?
I have seen no city more beautiful than Rome.
Suddenly a great number of very bold (soldiers) joined, with much clamour, the quite violent battle.
Your horse is not slow, is it? No, it isn't slow but faster than the eagle.
Certain women wished to give grain to the soldiers.
The king prohibited the citizens from leaving the city at night.
That boy is more slender than this woman.
The scouts showed two routes, one easier, the other more difficult.
Quam urbem Roma pulchriorem vidisti/vidistis?
Galli Germanis alacriores non erant/fuerunt.
Aquila equo tardior non est.
Mulier alacris noctu iter facere non timebat/timuit.
Multitudinis animi/mentes leniores amicioresque erant.
Sed regis mens dissimillima erat.
Rex nobili patri suo similis non erat.
Colles illi humiliores sunt quam finium nostrorum ingentes montes.
The remaining enemies, who had joined the battle on the right flank, fled from the higher ground and retreated into the largest forest.
In the outermost part of the forest had been pitched the enemy's camp.
Many prisoners were led to Caesar by the horsemen.
However, Caesar ordered them to be delivered to slavery.
In the next day a great multitude of women was discovered, in the lowest valley, by the Romans.
These women, terrified throughly because of Caesar's arrival, were eager to kill themselves.
They too had heard many stories about the crimes of the Roman army.
The reputation of those soldiers was not the best.
In the buildings of the barbarians quite large a wealth of grain was found.
No one is able to fight frequent battles without any danger.
Mulieres reliquae ex aedificiis suis fugerunt seque abdiderunt.
Terrebantur neque capi cupiebant neque in servitutem tradi.
Nihil servitute peius esse potest.
Servitus morte peior est.
In Romano imperio multi occisi sunt quia "servi esse"/servire recusabant (recusabant
Patriam tradere pessimum scelus est.
The barbarians decided to join the battle that much more because the Romans were seen to be weak.
My plan is much better than yours because it is much easier.
This road is much wider than that (road there).
The barbarians weren't at all slower than the Romans.
Your horse is a little faster than mine.
Those who were a bit stronger restrained the rest from abandoning the entrance.
Among those nations Germany has the best soldiers.
The nearer road which leads through the valley is between the port and the lake.
The slaves, who inhabited the nearer fields, did not wish to abandon their former masters because they liked them.
The more remote parts of Germany never came under the protection of the Romans.
For it was much more difficult for the Roman army to go across the Rhine.
Servitūs morte nihilo melior (potior) est.
No affair has been managed better than the famous battle in which Marius with a much smaller army put to flight the much larger army of the Germans.
The enemy fiercely made an assault upon the Roman cohorts.
Nevertheless, Marius most bravely kept back them all.
The barbarians weren't stronger than the Romans.
At first the barbarians seemed to be victorious, then the Romans fought more violently.
Finally, when the battle had been fought for a very long time, as I may say, the barbarians strove to flee.
A certain (tribe) of the German tribes, as soon as they heard the rumour of that loss, hid themselves into the farthest regions of their lands.
The Romans prevailed more often than the enemy because they had a better armour.
Among all nations the Romans were most powerful.
These cohorts, as soon as they had retreated to a more level territory, pitched camp without any trouble.
Aliquae gentēs ab hostibus (suis) facile superantur.
Neque fugere neque pugnāre poterat.
Caesar set file to the most (the largest part) of the buildings.
A large part of the fortification was destroyed with water of the river.
The Gauls of these parts (this region) had assembled five thousand men.
Two of my brothers heard the same rumour.
Which of the Romans was more famous than Caesar?
The five cohorts of that legion were defending the camp most bravely.
This place equally far away from Caesar's camp and the camp of the Germans.
Caesar, as soon as arrived, requested more supplies from (his) allies.
Didn't the merchants know the size of the island? They knew the length but not the width (of it).
A few of the enemies occupied the hill which our scouts saw.
Caesar tribus legiōnibus urbem ipsan oppugnavit.
Caesar waged war in Gaul for seven years. In the first year he subdued the Helvetii, and in the same year many German tribes
Against Caesar's expectation, three of the ambassadors were afraid to travel through the enemy's territory.
Who has encouraged them? The general has encouraged them and he attempted to persuade them, but was unable (to persuade them).
What has thoroughly terrified the ambassadors? Either the fear of the enemy, who were pressing hard upon (them) on all sides, or because the length of the march terrified them.
Nevertheless, almost all very much more afraid of Caesar than the enemy.
The bravest tribes of Gaul originated from the Germans.
For which reason were they brave? Because they did not suffer to carry with them neither wine nor other (things) which destroy manliness.
Caesar asked the merchants about the island Britannia, but could learn nothing (from them).
Thus he decided to proceed to that land himself, and almost in the middle of the summer set out with many warships.
He completed the journey with great speed and embarked in the most suitable place.
The barbarians, with their best men, attempted to keep them off the island.
He, however, pursued the barbarians for many miles; nevertheless, without a cavalry he could not overtake them.
They come to lead/send/see/hear/be led/be sent/be seen/be heard.
We escape in order not to be captured/be handed over/see/be killed/be seized/resist.
He sent the messengers to speak/hear/come/tell/be heard/sit in the assembly.
They fortify the camp in order to more easily to defend themselves/to sustain an attack/to overcome the enemy/the seek safety.
They had come to lead/send/see/hear/be led/be sent/be seen/be heard.
He was feeling that he might not be captured/be betrayed/be seen/be killed/be seized/be opposed.
He sent messengers in order to for them to speak/hear/come/tell/be heard/sit in the assembly.
They have fortified the camp in order to more easily defend themselves/sustain an attack/defeat the enemy/seek safety.
He asked and encouraged him to speak himself.
Caesar gave orders to the Helvetii that they are not to travel through the province.
Caesar did not order the Helvetii to travel through the province.
He persuaded (his) fellow citizens to part from their country.
Caesar will advice the second line of soldiers not to join the battle.
He required them not to wage war with the Helvetii nor their allies.
I asked them not to set out.
He was unable to persuade them to stay at home.
Quis Caesarem iter facere iussit? Quis imperavit ut Caesar iter faceret?
Caesar feared that the punishment of prisoners would not be pleasing to the Gauls.
The Romans themselves feared greatly that the Helvetii would travel through the province.
They feared lest it would be possible to send enough grain supplies.
I fear that I am unable to sustain the enemy's attack.
He feared lest the baggage had been captured by the enemy.
Caesar never feared that the legions would be defeated.
The legionnaires were not afraid to fight.
Verēmur ut veniant.
Verēbantur multum ut castra defendi possit.
A boy who was frightened fled in order that he would not be captured.
The eagle, aroused with anger, had begun to kill the other birds.
The soldiers who were hard pressed by the enemy were unable to throw (their) spears.
Caesar, about to praise the 10th legion, has advanced to the first line of the march(ing army).
The general, having encouraged the horsemen in order that they'd fight more bravely, gave the signal for battle.
The soldiers, having pursued the enemy for eight miles, returned to the camp with many prisoners.
By the sunrise many were killed. (The rising sun saw many killed.)
The Romans, suspicious of the foolhardy plan, did not join themselves with the barbarians.
You (sg.) prefer, you (sg.) are unwilling, you (pl.) are willing, we are unwilling.
That he would be unwilling, that we would have been unwilling, that he would prefer.
Be (sg.) unwilling, to be willing, to have been unwilling, to prefer.
He is willing, that he would have been unwilling, be (pl.) unwilling.
With the sun rising, the birds began to sing.
Having heard loud calls, the barbarians refused to advance.
With Caesar exhorting the legions, the soldiers fought a little more bravely.
When these matters were known, the Helvetii persuades (their) neighbours to march with them.
With the works being completed, the soldiers asked Caesar to give them rewards.
When the assembly had been called together, the leaders responded accordingly.
With the leader tarrying for many days in the enemy's country, he set fire to many villages.
When the number of the Germans was known, some of the Romans were afraid.
When the merchants were questioned, Caesar could not learn anything more.
Caesare duce iter facere volēbant.
He becomes, that he might become, we were becoming.
I become, you (sg.) will become, that they might have become, to become, they become.
You (pl.) become, that we might become, you (sg.) become, we will become.
The soldiers were so slow that they did not arrive to the camp before night.
The sun makes everything beautiful.
Their methods were dangerous in order that no one might wish to depart.
The enemy's horsemen fought with our cavalry; however, in every direction our troops were superior.
The bravery of our soldiers caused that the enemy sustained not even one attack.
The men were so foolhardy that they couldn't be kept together in any way.
The distance was so small that the soldiers could not throw spears easily.
When that battle was finished, the barbarians were so throughly terrified that from the furthest tribes ambassadors were sent to Caesar.
That battle was fought in order that ambassadors would not be sent to Caesar.
In the forests of Germany there are many kinds of wild beasts which are not seen in other places.
There were two routes by which the Helvetii could depart their country.
There was no band of men, no town, no garrison which could defend itself with arms.
With all of grain seized, at home there was nothing to keep off death.
The Romans made Galba (their) leader and marched with greatest haste.
Neither was there in so large a crowd anyone who wished to tarry.
These Germans were not those were afraid of Caesars approach.
The consuls who wished to make him king were struck down.
With the peace confirmed, there was no one who was unwilling to give up arms.
Among Helvetii who was nobler than him?
At the time of our fathers the Helvetii had departed their country and they had put the consul's army to flight.
When Caesar came to Gaul, the Helvetii were attacking other domains.
Although Caesar was in the nearer (parts of) Gaul, yet he was kept informed of the plans of the Helvetii.
Because the Helvetii were most notorious in war, Caesar refused to let them march through the province.
When the lieutenant had heard this, he informed Caesar.
Because the leaders exchanged hostages, the Romans prepared for a war.
Caesar, when it was made known, hastened to depart from the city.
In courage the Gauls were not at all equals to the Germans.
That war begun when Caesar was a consul.
When Caesar was waging the war in Gaul, he favoured mostly the soldiers of the 10th legion because they were the most experienced in the matters of war.
He employed the allies to take care of the grain supplies.
The ambassadors came not only to listen but also to speak.
The general ordered the scouts to find a spot suitable for fortifying.
Recently these tribes were eager for a revolution; soon I will persuade them so that they surrender themselves and all their property to Caesar.
The battle having been fought, some of the enemy came to ask for peace.
There were (some) who were unwilling to give up arms.
The enemy advanced so swiftly that no opportunity for throwing spears at them was given.
There was no time neither for taking up arms nor for seeking of help.
Ducis est aciem dūcere.
He goes, we go, go (pl.)!, to go.
For the one going, to have gone, they will go, they go.
Of going, that they would go, you (pl.) will go, you (sg.) go.
Lest they would have gone, go (sg.)!, they were going, they had been going.
Caesar learned through scouts that the Gauls have crossed the river.
The Romans heard that the Germans will go forth from their territories at the beginning of summer.
The ambassadors responded that no one before Caesar had visited that island.
The leaders of the Gauls said that they will not begin any plan against Caesar's command.
We think that the power of the queen is greater than citizens'.
The Romans deny that they will take away freedom of the Gauls.
These things having been known, we felt that the ambassadors hadn't come to seek peace.
The Helvetii know that the Romans remember the previous victories.
When the allies perceived that many were wounded, they decided to return to their own territory.
Someone announced that Marcus had been made a consul.
Puer tardus est. Dicit puerum tardum esse, fuisse, futūrum esse.
Gildersleeve's Latin Grammar mentions: "With abesse and distare, an abl. of measure may also be used[.]"
Carry (sg.)!, they will carry, that they'd carry, they are carrying.
Carry (pl.)!, that they'd have carried, to have carried, they had carried.
We carried, carrying, to have been carried, to carry.
When the ships were approaching the island, the barbarians, stirred by fear, began to retreat.
The Gauls were annoyed of the Romans laying waste their fields.
Caesar ordered (his) allies not to make war upon their neighbours.
The scouts, who ran up to Caesar, told that the enemy's army, exhausted because of the wounded, had gathered to another location.
The enemy knew that the Romans lacked grain and that this matter would put Caesar in great peril.
With the baggage being gathered in one place, other soldiers no longer were able to cross the river.
This king exhorted that they'd go to the oracle and report back with things heard (there).
Whom did the general put in command of this legion? Publius was put in the charge of the legion.
When Caesar was in Cisalpine Gaul, numerous reports were brought to him that the Gauls were exchanging hostages among themselves, and with letters too was he informed (about this matter).
The king asked what the ambassadors desire and why they had come.
He too asked didn't they remember the recent injuries and the uncertain friendship of the Romans.
Do you see which town the enemy has besieged?
Don't you know why the Gauls united their troops at the foot of the mountain?
We heard that the Germans had inflicted injuries upon you.
About the third watch the general sent men who were to find out the mountain's character.
The orator spoke on behalf of them and asked why the consuls would wish to send ships to a place of numerous,
The ambassadors having been called together, he showed what he wished to be done.
A messenger reported back what was said about giving up arms at the Gauls' meeting.
I advice lest you'd lead the foot soldiers and the cavalry across the river in the future.
He asked why these troops were left behind. They responded that the(se) troops are for protection of the camp.
Caesar sent scouts to choose a place for a camp.
Everyone reckoned that just the name of Caesar will be a great dread for the Gauls.
At the daybreak the same army swiftly joined the battle, but their gravely wounded were of great trouble for the general.
The king replied that the friendship of (the people of) Rome ought to be a badge of honour and aid for himself.
Who had the charge of the cavalry which the allies sent for aid to Caesar?
To some prosperity is for the greatest disaster and misfortune of a great advantage.
(Having) to fight was for a great hindrance for the Gauls because the cavalry were pressing hard on the(ir) right flank.
For us the memory of recent victories were no less useful than the enemy's fear.
The forest was so thick that they could not advance.
The soldiers built a ditch ten feet deep through their territory.
The leader of the Helvetians, a man of greatest courage, gave his sisters in marriage to leaders of the neighbouring tribes.
He wished to strengthen the alliance of those, in order that they'd more easily make war upon the Romans.
The Germans and the Gauls weren't of the same tribe.
Nearly all Germans were men with large bodies.
The Gauls, who were defending the town bravely, were throwing large rocks down from the city walls.
When Caesar asked from the scouts who inhabited that town, the scouts responded that the inhabitants were men of highest courage and great determination.
On the right side ramparts twenty feet high and on the left side a river of great depth protected the town.
When Caesar had arrived to Gaul, there were rumours that the Helvetii intend to march through the Roman province.
Caesar, in order that could keep them away from the Roman territories, constructed walls many miles long.
The soldiers, whom we saw, said that the command of war was Caesar's, the general's.
The Helvetii decided to collect as many horses and carts as possible.
Of all Gauls The Helvetii were the strongest.
Fighting went of fiercely for many hours, and no one was able to see the enemy fleeing.
The very brave men pursued the enemy for ten miles.
Caesar persuaded the people to make him a consul.
A victory of the army was always most pleasing to the general.
They marched for three days and reached Geneva, a town of the enemy.
Caesar heard that the Germans had made war upon the Gauls.
The soldiers were of great advantage to Caesar because they had been employed in prior battles by himself.
Castra existimō decem milibus passuum abesse.
The Gauls, having occupied the higher ground, tried to keep the army from marching.
All townsfolk, having came out from the town, began to seek safety with flight.
Caesar himself shows that the soldiers are more dear (to him) than the keeping of his own life safe.
Since he had arrived by everyone's opinion swiftly, the enemies sent hostages to him.
This tribe excels many tribes among Gauls in bravery and in the number of men.
The second watch left the camp neither in proper order or by an order.
Having left two legions in Geneva, he set out to home with the rest.
There were two routes which the Helvetii could set out from their lands.
The king was very bold and (his) influence among the people great.
The Gauls, stirred by the fear of slavery, were getting ready for war.
Caesar advised the lieutenants to restrain the soldiers, lest they'd advance too far because of their eagerness to fight or because of the hope of plunder.
The war with the Gauls was waged most swiftly by Caesar.
Caesar, when he had arrived, encouraged the soldiers lest they would give up the plan of seizing the town.
The king, with the camp had been pitched near the town, sent scouts in order that they'd learn where the army of the Romans were.
The messengers saw that a vast number of armour had been thrown down from the walls into the trench.
The commander ordered his men to cross the river. However, the crossing of the river was most difficult.
Though the Romans were annoyed by this defeat, they refused to flee.
When this rumour was heard, so great terror seized everyone's mind that they indeed weren't willing to join the battle very heartily.
There were those who reckoned that the time of the year was not suitable for marching.
So fiercely were they engaged from both flanks that many thousand men were killed.
What do you fear? I fear that the Romans plan to subdue all of Gaul and to inflict wrongs upon us.
A Latin word has as many syllables as it has vowels and dipthongs.
Latin words are divided into syllables as follows:
A single consonant between two vowels goes with the second (e.g. fa-ci-li-us).
In a combination of two or more consonants a consonant followed by a liquid (l or r) goes with the liquid (e.g. pu-bli-cus, pe-re-gri-nus) unless the combination contains a prepositional compound or a double liquid (ll or rr); otherwise the first consonant of the combination goes with the preceding vowel (e.g. ab-rum-po, hos-tis, fer-rum).
The ultima is the last syllable of a word (e.g. cus in ba-si-lis-cus is the ultima).
The penultima is next to the last syllable of a word (e.g. lis in ba-si-lis-cus is the penultima).
The antepenultima is the syllable before the penultima (e.g. si in ba-si-lis-cus is the antepenultima).
A syllable is short if it ends with a short vowel.
Words with less than three syllables are accented on the first syllable, and the words with more than two syllables are accented on the penultima if it is long, otherwise the accent rests on the antepenultima.
The predicate is what is said about the subject, and it contains at least a verb and possibly modifiers of the verb.
The object is the what is being acted upon or affected by the subject.
The copula -- ie. the verb to be -- is a verb which connects the subject of a sentence with one or more modifiers.
Inflection is the change of forms of words indicating a change in meaning or sense.
The form of a noun shows the number and case.
The cases of Latin are: nominative, genitive, dative, accusative, ablative, and vocative (a few exceptions have the locative case).
For the subject the nominative case is used.
For the direct object the accusative case is used.
For the possessor the dative case (the dative of possessor) is used.
By the dative case is expressed the relations conveyed by the English prepositions to, towards, and for when the relation is not one of physical motion (e.g. she was pleasant to the horse would be expressed by the dative case in Latin).
Questions are answered by repeating the verb (and other essential words) in the answer.
A predicative adjective is an adjective which is part of the predicate of a sentence ie. a predicative adjective is linked with the noun it describes by a verb (e.g. magna in nāvis magna est is a predicative adjective).
An attributive adjective is an adjective directly related to a noun, without a connecting verb (e.g. magna in nāvis magna natat is an attributive adjective).
Words are in agreement when they agree in one or more grammatical aspects. For example, a verb agrees with its subject: nautae pugnant -- sailors fight, nauta pugnat -- a sailor fights.
The adjectives agree in gender, number, and case with the nouns they describe.
The ablative case of Latin expresses the same relations as the English prepositions from, with or by, and in or at.
The base is the part of a word which does not change when the word is inflected.
The grammatical gender is a gender ascribed to a noun apart from the real sex or gender (e.g. poeta, a poet, is a masculine noun, regardless of the gender or a sex of the person writing or performing a poem).
Nouns belonging to the first declension are feminine unless they denote males. E.g. alga (seaweed) is feminine, but nauta, sailor is masculine.
The general principles of the Latin word order is to put the most important word or words, usually the subject, at the beginning of a sentence, followed by its modifiers, an indirect object, a direct object, and at the end of a sentence an adverb, if any, and the (main) predicate verb. Often the Latin word order is subject - modifiers of the subject - indirect object - object - adverb - verb.
Latin has five declensions.
The (grammatical) gender, number, and case of a noun has to be known before it can be declined.
The nominative, accusative, and vocative cases of neuter nouns are alike, and in plural they end with -a.
The plural dative and accusative cases of all nouns are alike.
In the singular of the second declension when the nominative ends with -us.
The predicate noun agrees with the subject.
An appositive is a noun which explains or names another noun. E.g. "husband" in "Mark, the husband, is treacherous.", "conjunx" in "Mārcus conjunx perfidus est".
The appositive agrees with the noun it explains.
Whether a noun in -er is declined like puer or ager is determined by looking at the genitive singular form, which displays the base.
To determine whether an adjective in -er is declined like līber or pulcher is determined by looking at the nominative singular of the feminine, which shows the base.
In nauta bonus the adjective agrees in (grammatical) gender, number, and case with the noun, whereas in nauta bona the adjective does not agree in (grammatical) gender with the noun it describes.
The Latin possessive pronouns are: meus, tuus, suus, noster, and vester.
The Latin possessive pronouns are declined like the adjectives in the first and second declension.
The possessive pronouns agree with the thing possessed in (grammatical) gender, number, and case.
Vester is used when there are multiple possessors, and tuus is used when there is only one possessor.
Because suus regularly refers back to the subject.
The four uses of the ablative case corresponding the use of "with" in English are: Denoting causality, means, accompaniment, and manner.
An example of the ablative of means: Mārcus pedibus suis cucurrit. (Lacking a horse, Mark had no other option but to run with his own feet.)
The ablative of accompaniment regularly has cum.
The ablative of manner sometimes has cum.
The ablative of cause and the ablative of means never have cum.
Is as a demonstrative adjective or pronoun is used for the English personal pronoun he/she/it.
A mood indicates the manner of the action of a verb. For example, something may be stated as a fact or as a wish.
Indicative, subjunctive, imperative, and infinitive.
The indicative mood is used when making a statements of fact or asking questions about something assumed as a fact.
Present, future, imperfect, perfect, pluperfect, and future perfect.
The personal endings of verbs indicate the person and number of a verb, whereas in English this is usually indicated with a noun or a personal pronoun. E.g. Nautae pugnant. vs. The sailors are happy and they fight.
-m/-ō, -s, -t, -mus, -tis, -nt.
In Latin there are four regular conjugations.
The present stem is found by dropping -re from the present infinitive.
The present, future, and imperfect tenses.
The tense sign of the imperfect is -bā-.
The imperfect is used when describing habitual or continuous action in the past or when describing conditions of affairs or situations in the past.
The tense sign of the future in the first two conjugations is -bi-.
The tense sign of the future in the third and fourth conjugation is -e-.
A vowel is always short before -nt and a final -m/-t.
I fight, I am fighting, I do fight.
The present indicative 1st person singular, the present indicative 3rd person plural, and all forms of the imperfect and the future.
All the rest (see the previous answer).
The imperative mood expresses commands.
The present active imperative in singular is identical to the present stem.
The present active imperative in plural is formed by adding -te to the present stem.
-r, -ris, -tur, -mur, -minī, -ntur.
The -r is sometimes called the passive sign because it occurs in all but one of the personal endings of the passive voice.
The principal parts of a verb are the present infinitive first person singular, the present active infinitive, the perfect active indicative first person singular, and the perfect passive participle.
The three conjugation stems are the present stem, the perfect stem, and the participial stem.
The present stem can be found by dropping -re from the present active infinitive; the perfect stem can be found by dropping -ī from the perfect active indicative first person singular; and the participial stem can be found by dropping -us from the perfect passive participle.
The tenses of the indicative are present, future, imperfect, perfect, pluperfect, and future perfect.
The tenses of the infinitive are present, future, and perfect.
The present.
From the present stem the following forms are built: present active indicative, imperfect active indicative, future active indicative, present passive indicative, imperfect passive indicative, and future passive indicative.
From the perfect stem the following forms are built: perfect active indicative, pluperfect active indicative, and future perfect active indicative.
From the participial stem the following forms are built: perfect passive indicative, pluperfect passive indicative, and future perfect passive indicative.
The tense sign for pluperfect active indicative is -erā-.
The tense sign for future perfect active indicative is -eri- (1st person singular -erō).
The present active infinitive is the second of the principal parts of a verb.
The present passive infinitive is formed from the present stem by adding -rī.
The present active imperative in singular is the present stem and in plural it's formed by adding -te to the present stem.
The present passive imperative in singular is formed by adding -re to the present stem and in plural it's formed by adding -minī to the present stem.
The perfect active infinitive is formed by adding -isse to the present stem, e.g. laudāvisse.
The perfect passive infinitive is formed by combining the perfect passive participle with the infinitive of sum, e.g. laudātus esse.
A participle is partly verb and partly adjective, thus it has a tense and voice, yet it is declined and agrees with it's main word in number, gender and case.
The participles in -us are declined like the adjectives of the second declension-
The passive forms of the perfect, pluperfect, and future perfect are formed by using sum as an auxiliary verb with the perfect passive participle.
The separative ablative is used with verbs expressing separation or deprivation.
Words expressing separation or deprivation require an ablative to complete their meaning.
The word expressing the person from whom an action starts, when not the subject, is put in the ablative with the preposition ā/ab.
The ablative of means is never accompanied by a preposition where as the ablative of personal agent is always accompanied with the preposition ā/ab.
The perfect definite denotes a completed action at a definite point in time.
The perfect indefinite denotes a completed action at some, but not definite, point in time.
The difference between the imperfect and the perfect indefinite is that the imperfect describes situations and circumstances in a narrative whereas the perfect indefinite marks forward steps in a narrative.
The accusative and the ablative can be governed by a preposition in Latin.
When governing the accusative, the preposition in means to, into or against, e.g. in casam - into the hut.
The three interrogatives used to introduce yes-and-no questions are: -ne, nōnne, and num.
Questions introduced with -ne makes no assumptions about the answer, nōnne expects the answer yes, and num expects the answer no.
Ubi can be used as an interrogative pronoun for where or when, and it can also be used as a relative pronoun for where or when.
An infinitive is a verbal noun.
The case of the subject of the infinitive in Latin is accusative.
Certain verbs, verbs of incomplete predication, don't express a predication without a complementary verb, and such verbs require a complementary infinitive to complete their meaning. E.g. Cornelia currere potest, without currere the sentence would lack meaning.
The case of happy in the sentence "The bad boy cannot be happy." (Malus puer esse bonus non potest.) is nominative.
A predicative adjective completing a complementary infinitive agrees in gender, number, and case with the subject of the main verb.
A relative pronoun must agree with its antecedent in gender and number, but it's case is determined by the way it is used in its own clause.
The interrogative can be used as an interrogative pronoun or as an interrogative adjective.
The base of a noun is the part to which the case endings are added.
Yes, the stem and the base of a noun can be identical. The consonant stems in the third declension have identical bases and stems, e.g. cōnsul is the base and the stem.
In Latin there are five declensions of nouns.
The first or ā-declension.
The second or o-declension.
The third or i-declension.
The fifth or ē-declension.
The nouns of the third declension have either an i-stem and a consonant stem.
The consonant stems are divided into stems which add -s to the base when forming the nominative singular and the stems which add no termination to the nominative singular.
Nouns in -ēs, -is, -ns, -rs, -e, -al, and -ar have i-stems.
The rules for gender in the third declension:
Words denoting males are masculine and words denoting female are feminine as usual.
Nouns in -or, -ōs, -er, and -es are masculine; except arbor (f.) and iter (n.).
Nouns in -e, -al, -ar, -n, -ur, and -us are neuter; caput is also neuter.
Latin adjectives are declined by the first, second, and third declension.
Nearly all adjectives of the third declension have i-stems.
Adjectives of the third declension are divided into:
Adjectives of three endings,
Adjectives in -er have three endings, those in -is have two endings, and the rest have one ending.
The nominative endings in the fourth declension is -us for masculines and -ū for neuters.
By exception feminines are domus, manus, and a handful of others.
The names of towns and small islands as well as rūs all omit the prepositions in expressions of place. E.g. Agamemnon Spartam properat. -- Agamemnon hurries to Sparta; Ulixes Ilio Aeaeae maturat. -- Odysseus hurries from Troy to the island Aeaea.
The locative case expressed the place relation -- expressed in English by the prepositions at and in -- formerly in Latin.
The singular of names of towns and small islands belonging to the first or second declension have a locative case.
The form of locative case is identical to the genitive singular.
A long ē is shortened before m.
The time when is expressed by the ablative without a preposition.
Personal pronouns express the person spoken to or spoken of;
For the first person the personal pronoun ego and for the second person the personal pronoun tū are used as reflexive pronouns as well.
The reflexive pronoun for the third preson is suus/sua/suum.
Ipse is used to emphasise a noun or a pronoun.
Īdem is used as a demonstrative pronoun denoting that two (or more) objects are in fact the same object; hic is used to denote a definite object near the speaker, ille is used to denote a definite object not near the speaker nor the listener, and iste is used to denote a definite object near the listener.
Wikipedia has related information at Curl (programming language)
Curl is a language for creating web documents with almost any sort of content, from simple formatted text to complex interactive applets.
The goal of Curl is to provide a smoother transition between formatting and programming.
Curl, the programming language, is often confused with cURL.
The cURL open source download utility is a completely different and independent project.
Curl (programming language) is a web content language from the DARPA project at MIT which resulted in the WWW organization (w3c.org).
Curl was spun off by MIT as a corporation but is now owned by SCSK Corporation with home pages at Curl.com (http://www.curl.com) and at http://www.curlap.com
Curl is a hybrid functional language supporting declarative layout (as in HTML), styling as in CSS, scripting (as in JavaScript/ECMAScript),  and is object-oriented (as in C++/Java/Smalltalk but also has multiple inheritance) and yet is also multi-paradigm (classes are optional) and permits anonymous procedures (closures, as in Smalltalk, JavaScript, Ruby and Groovy); it also has macros as in other functional languages.
Curl shares the feature of LISP, Scheme and Rebol being homoiconic: Curl can itself be consumed by Curl as structured data or as functions and other declarations.
Without some historical context, Curl might look like an integration of Java, HTML, JavaScript and flash to create a simple language suitable for next generation on line client sided computing.
Support for real time ray tracing and quaternion functions
Very simple, comparable to text editing HTML, unlike Lisp and 'C' (dependent on skill level of user)
Script is compiled on the user/client side
Multi-paradigm web-content language with classes, functional programming and declarative features resulting in a language comparable to combined JavaScript+CSS+HTML+Java
Fast client-side computing with client-side persistent data
Accessible to beginners yet capable of advanced programming and linking to other languages
Curl is named after a pair of curly braces these . . . {}
It is a programming language designed for such things as
Curl has some similarities with Java and JavaScript but is expression-based like Icon or Rebol.
Curl applets can serve as a replacement for HTML web pages.  Curl applets can also be embedded.  Curl could be viewed as HTML+CSS+JavaScript+Java - but all rolled into one language and combined in a unified environment with a multi-paradigm semantics including the Declarative, Procedural and Object-Oriented.
HTML (the text file web page language which browsers obtain from servers to display most pages on the web) can be comprised of JavaScript, CSS, Flash, scriptlets,  XML among other elements.  Curl was designed to be one language equivalent to all of the former.  It can provide rich Internet application (RIA) with AJAX and live in an SOA (Curl comes with a SOAP API.)
Curl can display as well as Adobe Acrobat PDF (increasingly being used) and of course is dynamic and interactive and is an alternative to ADOBE Flex(FLASH + ActionScript), Microsoft Silverlight or SUN JavaFX.
Curl is a mature web content platform now available as Curl6 (but known internally as Curl7.) Curl is used in both Japan and Korea and announced a re-launch in North America in 2007 but it does require a browser plugin, the SURGE RTE (Runtime Engine) and had license restrictions.
In 2008, internet users may have become more accustomed to web browser plugins than they were in 2001 when Curl Corporation formed.
Curl content requires Curl software in order to be displayed.  Just as HTML pages need a browser or PDF files need the Acrobat plug-in, Curl applets need the Curl Surge Plug-in and Runtime Environment.  Once you have the plug-in you can load Curl load pages from web servers rather as you would load HTML pages and using the same HTTP protocol (in IE7, running at the WinInet level.)
The nearest equivalents may be Zope, .NET, Java or Javascript.
Graphs - diagrams modelling relationships between objects of a certain collection, consisting of edges (lines) and  vertices (dots)
When there are two vertices connected by an edge, the two vertices are called neighbours. The degree of a vertex is how many other vertices it is connected to (or how many neighbours it has).  Graphs are used to record relationships between things.  Popular uses of graphs are mapping, social networks, chemical compounds and electrical circuits.  We are going to focus on mapping where graphs will be used to model some East Anglian towns and find the shortest distance between two locations, for example in your direction finding GPS application on your phone.  Below is an undirected graph (it has no arrows) showing a simplified map of East Anglian Towns:
In the graph above we have 7 vertices and 11 edges.  Dunwich is neighbour with Blaxhall and Harwich. Clacton has 3 edges directly connecting it to 3 other vertices, it therefore has a degree of 3.
How many edges and vertices on the following graph:
A Labelled Graph is almost the same as the graph above, but with something (usually numerical values) attached to the edges. This is useful in mapping applications when you want to find the shortest distance or time between vertices.
What is the shortest distance between Harwich and Feering?
Harwich to Tiptree = 31
Tiptree to Feering = 3
What is the shortest distance between Blaxhall and Clacton?
Blaxhall to Harwich = 40
Harwich to Clacton = 17
What is the shortest distance between Maldon and Dunwich?
Maldon to Feering = 11
Feering to Blaxhall = 46
Blaxhall to Dunwich = 15
Maldon to Tiptree = 8
Tiptree to Feering = 3
Feering to Blaxhall = 46
Blaxhall to Dunwich = 15
Picking best routes is a very complicated task
Directed graphs are much like normal graphs, but unsurprisingly they have directions.  You should treat them a little like a road system in a town or city.  Some roads will be one-way street and others bi-directional.  How does this affect our East Anglian Transport system:
What is the shortest distance from Maldon to Dunwich?
Maldon to Tiptree = 8
Tiptree to Feering = 3
Feering to Blaxhall = 46
Blaxhall to Dunwich = 15
There is now only one solution to this problem.
What is the shortest distance from Harwich to Clacton?
Harwich to Tiptree = 31
Tiptree to Clacton = 29
What is the shortest distance from Dunwich to Maldon?
Undirected graphs don't include arrows, there are no one way streets.  Undirected graphs can be weighted and unweighted:
A simple graph with threevertices and three edges.Each vertex has degree two,so this is also a regular graph.
Undirected graphs allow you to travel both directions down each edge, it works in the same way as a directed graph with two edges between each vertices.  See Blaxhall and Dunwich above.
Before we can define a simple graph we need to know what loop and multi-edge are:
a loop is a vertex with a connection edge to itself
a multi-edge is where there are two or more connections between each vertex
This a simple graph as there are no loops or multiedges
This is NOT a simple graph A loop in the above example is where someone going on a walk from Dunwich ends up back in Dunwich without visiting any other vertices. There is a multi-edge between Harwich and Blaxhall, as you could take the ferry, or drive
Simple Graphs - an undirected graph that has no loops and no more than one edge between any two different vertices
In a simple graph with n vertices every vertex has a degree that is less than n.
Give the definition of a simple graph
It is an undirected graph that has no loops and no more than one edge between any two different vertices.
Which of the following graphs are simple graphs?
No as it has a loop (on 1)
No as it has a multiedge (FN) and is directed
So far we have seen how to draw graphs using edges and vertices.  If we want to store them as digital data we have to think of a computer friendly way as computers aren't very good at reading hand-drawn diagrams.  We are going to look at two methods: the adjacency matrix and the adjacency list.
An adjacency matrix records the relationship between every vertex to all other vertices.  It records both when there is an edge between two vertices and when there isn't an edge:
Good for graphs with more edges than nodes
Bad for graphs with less edges than nodes, as it will be very inefficient and will take up a lot of memory
An adjacency list records the relationship between every vertex to all relevant vertices.  It records only when there is an edge between two vertices.
Good for graphs with fewer edges than nodes
Bad for graphs with more edges than nodes, as it inefficient and takes up a lot of memory
Draw an Adjacency List and an Adjacency Matrix for the following graph:
Draw a graph for the following Adjacency List:
Draw a graph for the following Adjacency Matrix:
Draw a graph for the following Adjacency Matrix
When might you use an adjacency list instead of an adjacency matrix?
An adjacency list takes up less space for graphs with smaller number of connections.
When might you use an adjacency matrix instead of an adjacency list?
An adjacency matrix is preferable when the graph has lots of connections.
Thieves are adventurers who make their living by their agility and cunning.   This has ensured that their reputation as heroes is always challenged; however, many thieves do indeed use their skills (mostly) in the defense of the common good. Nevertheless, it does not pay to relax one's guard when near anyone with as much stealth as a thief possesses.
Having a thief in the party increases the chances of striking enemies first and decreases the chance of being ambushed.  The thief's quickness often allows him to strike the first blow in a battle.  However, the thief is not able to cast any spells and cannot use most of the stronger equipment.
The Thief upgrades to the Ninja. Despite the Thief's weakness early on, the Ninja is possibly the best upgrade of the six character classes.
Thieves depend mainly on Luck to get them through battles.  They are average in most of their other statistics, with a minor boost in Agility.
The echo time (TE) is defined as the time interval between an excitation pulse and data aquisition. It is usually expressed in milliseconds.
The gradient echo is generated through immediate changes of the magnetic field directly after the RF pulse (gradient pulse -). It means that the magnetic field gets smaller in one direction
By reversing the polarity of the gradient from - to +, the spins will be in-phase again, they rephase! We measure an echo during the rephasing of the FID.
The echo time TE has to be considerable shorter for a gradient echo sequence than for a spin echo technique. The underlying mechanism for that is like followed.
The 180 degree pulse is omitted in gradient echo technology. This means that the static T2* dephasing mechanism is not cancelled as in spin echo technology. Instead gradient pulses are used to
↑ Schneider und Fink: "Funktionelle MRT in Psychiatrie und Neurologie", Hrsg. Gereon R. Fink, Heidelberg, 2 Auflage, 2013 S.69
There are several ways to express giving and receiving depending on which side the speaker is on, but also depending on whether someone of higher or lower rank is being addressed.
This schematic illustrates the various verbs for giving and receiving.
When expressing that someone gives to someone else (but not you), use the form of:
When others give you, use either:
When expressing that someone receives from someone else, use a form of:
Examples for giving, "I washed the car for her," or, "I did the laundry for him." Here are some examples in Japanese:
Examples for receiving, "The dentist examined my teeth for me," or "Mom cleaned up my room for me." Here are some examples:
Moves: 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 c5 3.d5 b5
White accepts the initial gambit. Black usually now plays ...a6, taking back with the bishop if white accepts.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. cxb5
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Benko Gambit
Batsford Chess Openings 2 (1989, 1994). Garry Kasparov, Raymond Keene. ISBN 0-8050-3409-9.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
Molesworth, James Thomas. (1857). A dictionary, Marathi and English. (2 ed.) Bombay. Bombay Education Society's press.
The HTML Help Workshop is a tool for creating compiled HTML help applets, that are common on many platforms. The compiled Help modules may then be used as stand-alone information sources, or as help-modules from inside a program. HTML help modules are relatively easy to create, and only require a knowledge of basic HTML to get started.
HTML Help modules can be separated by topic, and the HTML Help Workshop will automatically compile a table of contents, and create an option to search, if specified.
The HTML Help Workshop can be obtained from Microsoft as a free download. The HTML Help SDK should contain all the header files, library files, and object files that are needed to link help files into existing applications.
1.6 2D Game Development
1.7 3D Game Development
Status: This class project has finished, a thorough review is needed.
This book is a collection of tutorials on game creation with Microsoft's XNA framework.  It  is a class project, started by students of international media informatics at HTW Berlin.
Game Creation with XNA has a collection  for ordering a
This book is intended for intermediate readers.
Marketing, Making money, Licensing
...
Use the distributive property to estimate products, and then to correct your estimate.
Find and use patterns in the multiplication table.
You have $80 in your wallet. You want to buy 3 DVD's for $19.95 each. (Fortunately, you are in Oregon where there is no sales tax.)
Approximate the price a DVD to the nearest whole dollar.
Estimate the cost of the three DVD's.
Estimate how much money you will have in your wallet after the purchase.
What do you need to add or subtract from your approximate price of a DVD to get the actual price?
What do you need to add or subtract from your estimate of the cost of the three DVD's to get the actual cost?
Exactly how much money you will have in your wallet after the purchase?
Explain how your estimation and calculation is related to the following application of the distributive property. Be specific about why you are adding or subtracting.
...
Phases of Matter ·
Solutions, Liquids, Gases
Equilibrium, for a reaction
ERXLog4j.Observer
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Definition 12.1:
, called the group ring of
(which is a ring), by taking the fundamental set
.
It is a straightforward exercise to show that this is, in fact, a ring. The same construction can be carried out with monoids instead of rings; it is completely the same with all definitions carrying over. In this case, we speak of the monoid ring.
Exercise 12.1.1: Prove that a group ring and a monoid ring is, in general, a ring.
2-5% of male germ cell tumors are extragonadal.
Multi-institutional; 2002 (1975-96) PMID 11919246 -- "Extragonadal germ cell tumors of the mediastinum and retroperitoneum: results from an international analysis." (Bokemeyer C, J Clin Oncol. 2002 Apr 1;20(7):1864-73.)
Retrospective. 635 pts. 11 institutions (US, Europe).
341 pts (54%) primary mediastinal EGCT, 283 (45%) retroperitoneal EGCT. 83% nonseminoma, 16% seminoma. Median age 30 yrs. Treatment was platinum-based chemotherapy.
Seminoma: Chemotherapy alone 74%, RT alone 9%, chemo + RT 17%. CR in 65%. Secondary surgical resection in 25 (24%). 5-yr PFS 88% (mediastinal) and 77% (retroperitoneal). OS 88% (both).
Non-seminoma (mediastinal): Chemotherapy 98%. RT in <1%. Favorable response (PR or CR with normal tumor markers) in 64%. 49% underwent secondary resection. PFS 44%. OS 45%.
Non-seminoma (retroperitoneal): Chemotherapy 98%. RT in <1%. Localized disease in only 24%. Response rate 68%. 45% underwent secondary resection. PFS 45%. OS 62%.
Conclusion: Outcome is inferior for pts with nonseminomatous EGCTs.
The preferred (best, second best, and third best) locations of aquariums in Period 7 houses are given in the following table:
South West 2 or South West 3
North West 2 or North West 3
North East 2 or North East 3
South East 2 or South East 3
Ref: Yap, Joey. "Your Aquarium Here". JY Books Sdn. Bhd. Malaysia.
If you press the Power button while the Toppy is recording it will give you a "Power Off" prompt asking you to confirm this choice. If you select "Yes" then it will stop all current recordings and go into standby. If you select "No" (or press Exit) then it will cancel the power off and remain on. But there is a third option: leave the prompt alone. If you do this it will automatically go into standby once all recordings have completed.
Another option is to use the Sleep Timer to do a timed shutdown. Ordinarily the Toppy will power off once the set time has elapsed, but if there are recordings in progress it will wait for them to complete first.
At the base of the identity of an organisational is its organizational culture.
A culture is comprised of the shared values, customs, traditions, rituals, behaviours and beliefs shared by a social group (national, ethnic, organizational, etc.) and also its business philosophy, civility of intra and inter communication of staff, supply chain members and customers.  Cultures also share languages, or ways of speaking.  From a communication perspective, cultures are made and remade through the words we use to describe our world. Culture represents a common set of values (“shared meanings”), shared by members of a population, an organization, a project/programme purpose unit or a profession (e.g., engineers versus scientists).   Culture change with the times but the speed at which the culture of different institutions change varies widely.
Organizational culture plays several important roles.
Culture boosts company image, public trust as well as customer confidence
It can be easily traced in any growing,innovative companies. A close interaction with such companies tends to rub in their attitude, interaction style on us!
Organizations (e.g., project/programme oriented business organizations) develop their own culture.  The culture of a organization consists of elements that are valued and practiced. The emerging challenges for communicating and organizing in a global/local operational environment ('think globally, act locally') are based on understanding the interrelationships among cultural differences, communication behaviors, and organizational relationships both within and outside of the organization. The challenge for a manager is to examine the current culture and style of communication operating within an organization and to develop communication skills that will allow for the insight, sensitivity, vision, versatility, focus, patience, and global-localism called for in today’s complex work environment.
The following list outlines some of the key elements of organizational culture:
Organization's or the promoter's or promoter team's) signed and declared Vision and Mission Statements.
Values(also known as 'shared values' or 'core values'): Operational guidelines, business philosophies. Corporate Governance Rules/Policies   The goals, the strategies that an organization shares.
Programme purpose environment -  see  the projectized organization
Rites and Rituals: Celebrations, performances, and activities that foster and reinforce teamwork, esprit de corps, and a sense of inclusion. They are what make employees feel part of something bigger than themselves, that that something is worth being a part of. These can include annual parties, sales meetings, organizational retreats, or any other group activities..  see  Organizationally sanctioned Social events
"Heroes/Champions": Members of the organization who personify its values and highlight its vision.
Communication Networks: Informal channels that relay both work and social messages. These networks not only convey information necessary to get the job done, but also provide for necessary social interaction among employees. Even though the primary task in any organization is to do our jobs, the organization is also a social outlet. It is important to acknowledge and even nurture the social interaction that is part of any organizational or organizational culture.  Communication networks also indoctrinate new members into the culture, and reinforce the cultural messages in the organization.
Norms: The ways of doing things in an organization; the rules, tasks and standards of the organization.  Examples: Dress codes or ways of addressing superiors/subordinates, leading ethics, etc.
Stories, Myths, and Legends: The organizational history and other stories that embody the organizational culture and emphasize what the organization values.  .
'Small Group Activities' or 'Quality Circles' also contribute to strong and healthy development of employees' unity, sense of purpose of being a member of the organization, product/service quality, leading to a delighted clientele.
Organizational Communication Climate:  The atmosphere of either supportiveness or defensiveness that people feel within the organization itself. Do they feel safe? Protected? Appreciated? Are they confident that their opinions count? Do they know that when they have something to say, they have a way to say it so that it will be heard, and that people will listen and take their ideas or comments seriously?  The overall organizational climate also includes the organization’s communication climate—how free people feel to communicate at work, especially about bad news or negative information.  When people feel they cannot communicate bad news for fear of reprisal, the organization loses valuable information about how it operates. more in ⇒ [[Development Cooperation Handbook/Communication and Knowledge Management/The communication climate in Organizations and Teams|communication climate].
Values as the Elements generating a Strong and Healthy Culture
Both internal and external stakeholders benefit from a strong organizational culture.  In the most general sense:  A strong organizational culture provides work community identity, a sense of uniqueness, and sense of connection for all members within the organization.
Internal stakeholders benefit emanates from a strong organizational culture because people are a organization’s greatest resource and the way to manage them is by the subtle cues of culture; strong culture helps employees do their jobs better.  A strong culture fosters better employee motivation because internal stakeholders are better able to understand what is expected of them and are able to more strongly identify with the organization when the culture is strong.
External stakeholders benefit from an organization’s healthy culture as well.   The organizations and organizations that do the best job thinking through what they are all about, deciding how and to whom these central messages should be communicated and executing the communication plan in a quality way, invariably build a strong sense of esprit within their own organization and among the many constituents they serve.  Knowledge about an organizational culture—again, when it is healthy and strong—gives internal and external members a sense of purpose and importance within the organization because they adopt the organization’s shared meaning.  As an organizational undergoes change, as your organization is now doing, the issue of culture becomes even more critical because it is generally called into question.  Nonetheless, managers are still faced with the challenge of providing some cultural continuity as change is initiated and as an organization grows.
Organizations with strong cultures place a great emphasis on values  values and have some fundamental characteristics in common:
The organization stands for something.  They have a clear and explicit philosophy about how they go about accomplishing their program purpose objectives.  The values explicit in their philosophy help create the identity of the organization and characterize and differentiate it from others organizations.
Management focuses a great deal of attention to determining and fine-tuning these values.  This is done so that the organization’s values conform to its project/programme purpose environment.  Such a focus also helps communicate these values to people who work in the organization.
Values are understood and shared by all people who work for the organization. Everyone from production workers to the senior management team is familiar with and accepts the values of the organization.  The organization’s values create a reality for those who work in the organization.  This reality allows employees to cooperate and collaborate to make the shared values effective in their interactions and how they perform their jobs.
Fundamental to value definition and management is the approach to organization development  and its focus upon learning in the organization, the communication climate and the modality to  generate a team spirit  amongst employees at various levels.
Strong cultures foster better employee motivation because employees are better able to understand what is expected of them and are more able to strongly identify with the organization. They are “part of” something bigger than themselves. Not only that, but they know what it is they are “part of,” and how they contribute to its overall operations and goals. It gives them a sense of purpose and importance within the organization because they adopt the organization’s values, or values to be accepted, behavior,  consistent with messages about values that are extensively shared.   There are two general principles one can follow to set the stage for matching promises and behavior.
1  visibly show values through action  :    internal and external stakeholders will believe what you say when you DO what you say and say what  you are going to do!
2  set a performance standard  :  establish and enforce a standard of performance that everyone in the organization would be expected to maintain, including yourself.  Let external stakeholders such as beneficiaries, investors and the media know you by how well you take care of their interests.
Once, a visible and healthy cultural change starts emerging, let the 'champions'('heroes') sit with their teams and draft and finalise an operating manual,especially for fostering the good  culture established, and release this in a glitzy internal function introducing each and every  member who contributed to this manual.
A basic assumption of this manual is that the best managerial style for a development aid organization  is of designing and managing itself and its culture in such a way as to make itself :
a projectized organization;
The combination of these three factors the nurturing of a communication climate such as to work strategically, collaboratively and cost-effectively, being innovative and accountable.
Without using calculus, we can only take an approximation of I from values as close together as possible on either side of the point at which we wish to calculate the current. By using calculus, we can calculate the exact value of the current at a given point. For example, if Q = 2t (i.e. 1 coulomb every 2 seconds):
C# ProgrammingCover | Introduction | Basics | Classes | Advanced Topics | The .NET Framework | Index
The const keyword is used in field and local variable declarations to make the variable constant. It is thus associated with its declaring class or assembly instead of with an instance of the class or with a method call. It is syntactically invalid to assign a value to such a variable anywhere other than its declaration.
Special C# Identifiers (Contextual Keywords)
Elbow Sheep Wildland Provincial Park and nearby areas
The Effects of Standardized Testing on School Curriculum
Studies show that intensive supervision of instructors âplays a key role in promoting student achievementâ (Glanz, 23).
How do you know when a child has mastered a subject matter? Is it when the child can regurgitate the information on a test formulated by the teacher, or is it when the child can apply the knowledge learned to a broader test such as the SAT?  These are the questions that one must consider when determining the usefulness of standardized tests.  As the title suggests, standardized testing refers to the use of a standard test on a given subject matter that is dispensed and scored in a uniform manner. Whether it is the No Child Left Behind initiative at the federal level or the Virginia Standards of Learning at the state level, testing has become an important measure in establishing what students have learned in their school curriculum.  School curriculum plays a major part in what information a child will learn in the classroom.  When shaping school curriculum one must consider many aspects of learning such as the teacher, coursework, textbook, work sheets, lesson plans, and grading guide.  All of these factors come together as a means of teaching children new information.  A standardized test serves as a means of determining if this information has been successfully retained by the student.  The importance placed on these test determine how the results will be used.  For the purpose of this paper the focus will be on the effects that standardized testing has on school curriculum.
Supporters of standardized tests note that there are several positive aspects of testing students in a uniform manner.  Since school curriculum plays such an important role in a childâs learning, there has to be a way to hold the creators and facilitators of the curriculum accountable.  The idea of accountability establishes a sense of responsibility to those that participate in the learning process (Guifgoyle, 5).  This includes teachers, students, administrators, and the school system as a whole.  In theory if everyone effectively plays his or her part, then the desired outcome of learning will be achieved.  For example if the teacher draws up the lesson plan and teaches the information, the teacher gets supplies from the administration, and the students study the material, the  students should be able to pass any test on that subject matter.  If there is a breakdown at any of those levels then a standard test can determine the cause and hold those accountable. Studies show that intensive supervision of instructors âplays a key role in promoting student achievementâ (Glanz, 23).  Not only do standardized test hold educators accountable, they also provide data about student strengths and weaknesses.  Supporters of standardized tests argue that the tests help determine if students are âinternalizing the information presentedâ (Fisher, 1).  If it is determined by the tests that students are not learning the specified information then steps can be taken to rectify the situation. For example the United States Department of Education came to the conclusions that as a nation student in grades 3-8 were behind in mathematics and reading. To resolve the situation legislation was passed which stated that students in grades 3-8 must be tested every year to insure that they are learning the desired material (Guifgoyle, 4). Holes and Gaps on the curriculum can also be identified by standardized tests.  Testes offer an inexpensive way to âprovide a wealth of information that teacher can use to improve instructionâ (Guifgoyle, 5).  Standardized test also serve as a ârelatively inexpensive way provide visible resultsâ (Camacho, 4).
While Standardized test have many good qualities there are still those that oppose the idea of having standardized tests. One such argument centers on narrowing school curriculums to the test. Both educators and parents have raised the issued of âtest based teachingâ (American Federation of Teachers, 10). By focusing on only on what will be on the test students miss out on the opportunity to gain a broad body of knowledge.   Just because a certain subject matter is not on a test does not mean that that information is not important.  Research also suggests that narrowing the curriculum would eliminate challenging coursework.  By limiting challenging coursework, students will be ill prepared for the future.  Students need to learn more than information on a particular test.   Students need to focus on the concept knowledge so that it can be called upon later on in life. Not only do students need to understand the concepts learned in a classroom for a test (American Federation of Teachers, 10). They must be able to apply that knowledge.  Along with narrowing the curriculum, tests also cater to certain subjects.  When tests focus mainly on a few subjects, the test does not fully measure what a child has learned.  The arts are a good example of the kinds of courses that are ignored by standardized tests.  Standardized tests can also yield results that are not always accurate.  For example, after the first year of a standardized test, test scores seem to go up, giving impression that students are learning more.  The reality may be that teachers are âre aligning their lessons and curriculum to better match test objectivesâ (Camacho, 4). Not only do administrators and teachers feel the pressure of test taking, but students also feel a tremendous amount of pressure to perform.  With students being subject to numerous tests at the state and local levels, students may feel test fatigue. Standardized tests can also be disproportionately unfair to minorities.  There are many socio economic factors that effect test scores. For example, studies showed that there is a âdisparity in standardized mathematic test scores between Mexican-origin and White studentsâ (Morales, 350).  School districts that are in low income areas are at a disadvantage when it comes to preparing schools.  They may lack the resources to compete with other schools.
IV. Standardized Testing effects on Preparation for College and Work
While standardized tests may have its strengths and weaknesses, but the question remains how will standardized tests help prepare students for life post secondary education.    In todayâs technology driven society we rely heavily on âquantitative proof that our public schools are meeting the expectations of the stakeholdersâ (Camacho, 3).   Instead of focusing on just one standardized test many schools are shifting their curriculum focus to college preparedness.  This is the case for the Poway Unified School District in California which has âadopted the goal of preparing all students for collegeâ (Camacho, 9).  While the school district continues to use standardized testing to measure the achievements of its students, the curriculum is not based on the standardized test.  The Poway district asserts that if the goal is to prepare students for college then the âinstructional program should be designed backwards from this goalâ (Camacho, 9).  Whether the intended path is college or entering the workforce, each school district must adopt a successful path for students to be âprepared to reach their intended goalâ (Camacho, 11).
In his article, "Testing: The Good, The Bad, and It Could Get Ugly!" Professor Ronald A. Berk discusses the pros and cons to standardized testing. Mr. Berk is a professor and Assistant Dean for Teaching in the school of Nursing at The Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland. He points out that there are an equal amount of negative and positive aspects to the common standardized type of testing, to any testing really. However, as with many aspects of life, our education system will never be able to satisfy everyone. Some people will always see the bad in certain parts of education while others will be more willing to accept change. Mr. Berk shows his audience this exact theory. âIt is impossible to please everyone.â The fact is, standardized testing has shown its benefits, which seem to weigh out its complaints. In any case, the best interest of the students should be considered. Whether one supports or opposes the use of standardized tests the ultimate goal is to effectively educate students so that they become successful adults.  For good or for bad, test results generate media attention.  This media attention can in turn be used to shine a light on problems facing school curriculums.   While it is beneficial to point out these problems it is also important to solve them in an effective manner.  In an ideal situation tests would be used to promote the learning process instead of driving it.
If I were presenting a presentation for the school board in favor of standardized testing, which point would not aide in my argument?
A. Testing holds teachers accountable
B. Testing narrows curriculum
C. Testing points out student strengths and weaknesses
If a minority groups performs less than average on a standardized test this is an example of?
A. Disparity among minorities
C. Increased accountability
D. Equality among ethnic group testing
If I were going to the state legislature to present a proposal for a new state standardized test, which state test would I site as an example?
A. The Virginia SOL
B. The ACT
C. The SAT
D. The GRE
Sally has just entered the third grade; she has to take a federally mandated test in mathematics and            reading under which initiative?
A. The Virginia SOL
B. The Iowa Test of Basic Skills
C. No Child Left Behind
D. The Child Equality Act
Fourth grade students in a school district perform poorly on a standardized test in social studies. What           would the test tell the school district?
A. A problem with the teacher's
B. Curriculum Gap
D. A need for more parental involvement
Answers: 1. B   2. A   3. A   4. C   5. B
American Federation of Teachers. June 2003. âWhere We Stand: Standards â Based Assessment and Accountabilityâ Educational Issued Department. Item Number 39-0246. 1-32 www.aft.org.
Camacho, Dawn.  Cook, Vickie. âStandardized Testing: Does it Measure Preparation for College and Work? â
Spring 2007 Essays in Education,   Vol. 20 p1-13.
Fisher Bradley J., Myer, James A., Pear Peggy S.â Students Perception of the Value of a Self-Study Writing Assignmentâ. Journal of Instructional Psychology. Vol. 34 No 4, 234-241.
Glanz, Jeffrey; Shulman, Vivian; Sullivan, Susan. âImpact of Instructional Supervision and Student Achievement: Can We Make the Connectionâ. Online Submission, Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association (AERA) (Chicago, IL, Apr 13, 2007). 2007 28 Page1-28.
Guifgoyle, Christy. NCLB: Is Their Lifeâ November 2006. Educational Leadership1-7.
Morales, M. Cristina; Saenz, Rogelio. 2007 âCorrelates of Mexican American Students' Standardized Test Scores: An Integrated Model Approach Hispanicâ. Journal of Behavioral Sciences, Vol. l29 No.3 p349-365.
Berk, Ronald A. "Testing: The Good, The Bad, and It Could Get Ugly!" Accessed on April 26, 2008. http://www.nesinc.com/PDFs/2001_09Berk.pdf
Rate This!
With higher end graphics cards, Celestia 1.6.0 gives you several choices for Vertex Shading by using this command.
To see Vertex Shading, you must have an appropriate graphics card that renders shading via the Open GL process.
Each card manufacturer results in slightly different shading choices.
Many render features within Celestia are only visible if OpenGL 2.0 is enabled..
String, that corresponds with one of the available render paths. Must be one of:
"vp" for Open GL vertex program.
"vp-nv" for Open GL vertex/Nvidia Combiners.
"glsl" for Open GL 2.0.
Example:Use renderpath "glsl" for Open GL 2.0.
Speech recognition software, often referred to as Voice recognition software is very useful for people who are better at speaking than writing. A piece of software that recognises what you are actually saying and transcribes it for you, gone are the days of messy handwriting! Think about it, a computer has no problems with spelling and presents your thoughts and idea's perfectly for you. You would not have to write and then manually type out your thoughts ever again.
Speech recognition is an area that has progressed rapidly over the last few years. However, it still has its limitations. For example the dyslexic website bring it to our attention that in order to use the piece of software people have had to go through an often lengthy process, sometimes taking up to an hour for the software to recognise your own voice (Dyslexic Website 2006)
This process may be appealing to people that have a speech impediment, however, for someone who is an avid or fluent reader this can be a very painstaking way of getting the computer to discriminate between your voice and someone else’s.
We must remember that computers cannot recognise and transcribe a conversation. The text needs to be dictated, which is an art form in itself. The computer cannot recognise "uums" and "ahhs" and so each spoken word must be clearly dictated to the machine.
The more recent dictation software that has been developed by Dragon, who are the world leaders in speech recognition software estimate full stops and commas for the dictator. This is a major breakthrough for speech recognition software users. The most used software being the ‘Dragon Naturally Speaking’, its developers Dragon claim that it allows you to speak up to 160 words per minute whilst maintaining 99% accuracy (Speech Recognition Website 2006)
There are various ways that you can dictate to a computer, for example the most common method used is to dictate directly into your PC using a headset microphone connected into the soundcard or USB. The Dragon product allows complete mobility and users can even dictate into hand held devices such as PDAs or a Tablet PC and then synchronize the mobile device to a PC so the software can transcribe the voice file into a normal text document.
Originally the early versions of speech recognition software were aimed at people with disabilities such as dyslexia. The new pieces of software such as ‘Naturally Speaking’ can create 900 word documents in less than 6 minutes. So the advantages are endless and more and more professions are choosing this purely to increase the efficiency of their business.
Wikipedia has related information at Halo 2
Foundation Hidden map, unlocked through glitch, XBL download, or Halo 2 Map Pack.
Backwash Obtained through XBL download, or Halo 2 Map Pack.
Containment Obtained through XBL download, or Halo 2 Map Pack.
Elongation Obtained through XBL download, or Halo 2 Map Pack.
Gemini Obtained through XBL download, or Halo 2 Map Pack.
Relic Obtained through XBL download, or Halo 2 Map Pack.
Sanctuary Obtained through XBL download, or Halo 2 Map Pack.
Terminal Obtained through XBL download, or Halo 2 Map Pack.
Turf Obtained through XBL download, or Halo 2 Map Pack.
Warlock Obtained through XBL download, or Halo 2 Map Pack.
1.6.1 Sub-group SR-A: Horizontal frank with sides forming doubled outward-projecting arcs. Inscribed “SAARGEBIET” at top
Part 3 covers special use stamps, Post Office, Parcel Post, PC/internet, Public self-service, Official, and Saar before incorporation into Germany. See Parts 1 and 2 for commercial, general-use meter stamp types.The stamps are grouped according to design and function:PC – Internet/PC stamps
SR – Stamps used in the SAAR before incorporation into Germany
NOTE:  For specialized information about the meter stamps of Germany, see Die deutschen Post- und Absenderfreistempel, by Heiner Dürst and Gerd Eich, 1996, published by the German meter stamp collectors society, Forschungsgemeinschaft Post- und Absenderfreistempel e.V.
GROUP  PC: Stamps produced by Internet/PC systemsSub-group  PC-A: Stamps from stand-alone computer systems, mostly mainframes
Simple frameless line showing the postage value and date (MM.YY).
The only example known of this stamp was lost, and today it is known only by photocopies.
Experimental stamp.
Pre-printed frank frame 23 x 24 mm with “DEUTSCHE BUNDESPOST” at top, post horn at bottom.
Date and value figures preceded by tiny post horn added digitally through a ribbon.
Frame and TM in red or orange with date and value figures in blue or black.
a. Used on parcel post forwarding cards without frank frame, showing only town mark and date/postage line.
NOTE: This stamp was in use by three companies for about four years. Few examples exist.
Pre-printed rectangular frank frame approximately 50 x 25 mm with three horizontal panels.
Date and value figures preceded by tiny post horn added digitally through a ribbon.
Frame and TM in red or orange with date and value figures in black.
a. Town name also added digitally
b. Without post horn next to value figures
c. Bottom panel reads “Deutsche Bundespost Berlin”
d. Bottom panel reads “Deutsche Post”
e. With modern post horn (See Type PC-A4 below.)
The date can be D/M or M/Y as well as D/M/Y.
Data such as weight, class of mail, etc. often appears outside the frank frame.
Varieties abound.
Pre-printed rectangular frank frame approximately 52 x 25 mm with three horizontal panels printed in red, orange, black and occasionally other colors.
Center panel contains “Freimachung (EDV) im Fenster” (postage amount shown in window).
Date, post horn and value figures are printed digitally on the enclosure above the address which is folded so that they show through the envelope’s window.
A. Date/value line on the enclosure is framed (shown at right)
B. Date/value line on the enclosure unframed (not shown)
V/F: 0,00 0.00 0 00 A
a. Without post horn next to value figures
b. “Freimachen” instead of “Freimachung”
c. Bottom panel contains “DeutschePost AG” instead of “DEUTSCHE BUNDESPOST”
The date can be D/M, D alone, M/Y as well as D/M/Y.
Varieties abound.
As Type PC-A4 but “Freimachung (EDV) im Fenster” appears in a simple frame without panels.
a. Without post horn next to value figures
Pre-printed orange rectangle approximately 94 x 11 mm with point-of-sale data added in black.
Point-of-sale data includes class of mail, month, weight, post horn and value figures.
Printed on self-adhesive labels of variable sizes.
Pre-printed rectangle of variable size but usually about 50 to 60 x 25 mm divided into three horizontal panels.
Date and value figures in center panel.
Frame usually found in red, orange or black with date/postage line added in black or orange.
A. Date and value line on the enclosure is text only
B. Date and value line on the enclosure includes the postal logo and a 2D barcode
a. Without post horn next to value figures
The date can be D/M or M/Y as well as D/M/Y.
Data such as weight, class of mail, etc. can appear in the center panel, sometimes displacing the date, and/or outside the frank frame.
Varieties abound.
As Type PC-A4 but with Port payé” above “Freimachung (EDV [or] DV) im Fenster”.
The frame printed on the envelope is variable in size and color. (shown at left)
The postage line that is printed on the enclosure and appears through the window is unframed. (shown at right)
A. Date and value line on the enclosure is text only with return address above
B. Date and value line on the enclosure includes the postal logo and a 2D barcode
C. As B but without "Deutsche Post"
a. Return address is underlined (shown on illustration of A)
Format similar to Type PC-A3 but the entire frank is printed digitally.
Town line in top panel, date and value figures in center panel, and Deutsche Post and post horn in bottom panel.
Below and outside the bottom frame line are the billing code and origin post code.
Outside the frame line at left is a 5-digit customer identification number.
A. "Deutsche Poste" with modern post horn in bottom panel
B. "Deutsche Poste AG" with older style post horn in bottom panel
C. Bottom panel as with A. V/F without "EUR", no customer number at left. The billing/origin code is moved to above the address. (shown at right)
Sub-group  PC-B: Stamps from small or home PC internet systems
PC-B1. Stampit, trial version, and release 1.0 (digital), May 2001.
Square 2D barcode at left.
“Deutsche Post”, large post horn, and value in euros across top
“STAMPIT”, identification number, and date across bottom
The recipient's address is printed below the frank.
A. Recipient's address in multiple lines below the frank (blurred in the illustrations)
B. Recipient's address in single line in small letters below the frank (for use on pre-addressed mail)
Stamp redesigned to allow more space below the frank for the address.
Square 2D barcode at right.
Text in one line: "Deutsche Post", post horn, "PC", "STAMPIT" above ID number, value figures above date.
The recipient's address is printed below the frank (blurred in the illustrations).
The mailer's address can be printed optionally above the frank (shown below left and at right, partially blurred).
A. Recipient's address in multiple lines below the frank (blurred in the illustrations)
B. Recipient's address in single line in small letters below the frank (for use on pre-addressed mail)
a. With “HAUPT” added to indicate the ‘home’ version
b. Used for Registered mail, with large “R” and bar code below the inscriptions
c. With "Deutsche Post" and post horn missing due to software error
The system allows users to include a graphic image (company logo, etc.) in color above the first address line.
The Stampit system was ended by German postal authorities on 30 September 2011. Existing Stampit accounts were transferred to the "Internetmarke" online postage system. (See the NOTE in green at the bottom of the page.)
Special PC stamp for parcel post.
The stamp is a large address label (148 x 105 mm) with  "PAKETMARKE" (parcel stamp) above "Produced by STAMPIT" at top left.
"DHL Express" logo at top right.
Square 2D barcode at upper center with mailer's address at left and large linear barcode (parcel number) at right.
Addressee at bottom center with linear barcodes at both left (destination parcel center) and right (vertical, mail identification number).
Value figure at near center as "weight = 0,00 EUR"
NOTE: See the second note below Type PC-B2.
The system allows users to buy postage by cell phone.
The user sends an SMS message with "Brief" (letter) or "Karte" (post card) to phone nuber 22122.
The immediate reply contains a 12-digit code in three lines which the user writes at the top right corner of his envelope or card which is then deposited in a street mailbox.
During postal processing a label is generated and applied that both confirms the validity of the handwritten code and prevents re-use.
"Deutsche Post" and post horn at top above "HANDYPORTO"
Identification code at left, 2D barcode at right.
Web address at bottom.
NOTE: Shown below are stamps from Deutsche Post's "Internetmarke" online postage system, introduced in June 2008.
The system offers customers the option of including an image from about 200 pre-selected photo-illustrations.
Although the stamps show the month of purchase they are valid indefinitely and thus are more like traditional stamps rather than meter stamps.
Stamp label used only for registered mail. Small upright Group N style frank abutting framed registration information at left.
Straight-line town name at bottom of registration area.
One machine was used on a trial basis for short periods in two post offices.
A. “Frankfurt (Main) 1”, first used in 1957
NOTE: The stamps were ejected attached at the top of a receipt (shown at right).
Short-lived experimental system used to frank registered mail at various post offices in Southern Germany.
Self-adhesive label.
Similar to Group S stamp with square 2D barcode at left.
The stamps are wider with the date right of the post horn and “FILIALE” (branch) and identification number below "Deutsche Post".
a. With barcode and special service indicator in lower half (registration and international express shown)
The stamp previously cataloged as Type PO4 has been re-cataloged as Type PV7C.
PO5. Bixolon (Republic of Korea), June 2016.
Almost identical in appearance to Type PO3 with same labels and printing method.
Most easily identified by the use of a period instead of a comma in the value figures.
a. With barcode and special service indicator in lower half
PO6. Zora, January 2018.
Similar to Types PO3 and PO5 but narrower frank with the date and value figures below "Deutsche Post" and post horn logo.
Instead of "Filiale" the stamps show the abbreviation "FI".
At bottom are two lines of code in 2-4-4 format uniquely identifying the stamp.
Value figures stand along, not accompanied by currency indicator "EUR".
a. Printed in blue instead of black
Two formats for registered mail stamps are known. One has the "R" and registration barcode at bottom (shown at right). The other has the "R" at upper left above the registration barcode.
The system also can produce a registration label without postage for prepaid mail.
GROUP  PP: Special stamps used to frank Parcel Post forwarding cardsSub-group PP-A:  Straight-line franksThis number shape chart can help with identification.
Frank elements from left to right: colorless embossed Imperial eagle, PO name, day and month, control number, value figures.
The colorless embossed eagle is positioned with head at top.
Frank about 75 mm wide excluding the embossed eagle.
Printed in red to red-violet.
Date month in letters as JAN, MRZ, DEZ, etc.
V/F: 000 [Add $25]  (can be confused with underinked 0.00 with decimal too light to see)
V/F: 0000  00000[Add $100]
Frank elements from left to right: date, control number, PO name (often in two lines), value figures, colorless embossing.
The date figures are 4 to 5 mm in height, taller than the control number figures at 3 mm.
Excluding the colorless embossing the frank is 56 to 62 mm wide.
Printed in red to red-violet.
A. Horizontal Imperial eagle [Add $5]
B. Vertical Imperial eagle (head at right)
C. Horizontal Nazi eagle above small swastika [Add $5]
D. Vertical Nazi eagle above small swastika
a. Date month in numbers as '18 10- 44' (BERLIN S42 only) [Add $10]
b. Printed in blue-violet [Add $5]
Starting in 1926 the machine printed a receipt line 11-11.5 mm above the frank line. The receipt line contains just the post office name and date and prints in blue violet. It was intended to appear on the receipt tab but on larger format parcel post cards both lines appear on the main card. See below right (for Type PP-A3).
The embossed design can be quite light, occasionally undetectable.
As Type PP-A2 but the date and control number figures are the same height, 3 mm.
The frank excluding the embossing is generally wider than for Type PP-A2, 62 to 69 mm.
Normally printed in red to red-violet.
A. Horizontal Imperial eagle [Add $5]
B. Vertical Imperial eagle
C. Horizontal Nazi eagle above small swastika [Add $5]
D. Vertical Nazi eagle above small swastika
E. Nazi eagle with swastika removed (no earlier than 1945) [Rare, value unknown]
F. Post horn (1945 only) [Rare, value unknown]
V/F:  0 000 [Extremely rare, value unknown]
a. Printed in blue-violet [Add $5]
NOTE: Types PP-A2 and PP-A3 dating either from before World War Two or in 1945 are much scarcer than those from 1942 to 1944.
Frank elements from left to right: date, post office name in one or two lines, value figures.
The frank is doubled with one impression about 25 mm above the other.
Without embossing.
a. Upper impression with "" or "=" right of the value figures (shown)
As Type PP-A4 but with the town name between the two date/postage lines.
An impression counter (serial) number is between the date and value figures.
As Type PP-A4 but the date is above the post office name.
Wide frank with elements from left to right: post office name, date, impression counter number, value figures.
The frank is doubled with one impression about 40 mm above the other.
Only two prints are known from Secura parcel post franking machines, both used in East Germany.
A. Frank line with V/F and date: B 002.50 – 9 XII 71 (This may be incomplete)
B. Frank line with date, serial number, and value figures: 11 V 1846  (?)00,60
Sub-group  PP-B: Frank resembles Group B stamps* Often with double town mark which was used on domestic mailings only. The leftmost town mark was toggled off for foreign destination parcels.
As Type B3 but with two single-circle town marks.
With impression counter number high between right town mark and frank.
Nine machines of this type were fielded. Just two survived for use after World War Two. (See Type PP-D1.)
Catalog values are for examples showing both or parts of both town marks. Examples showing only one town mark are worth considerably less.
Sub-group  PP-C: Octagonal frank* Often with double town mark which was used on domestic mailings only. The leftmost town mark was toggled off for foreign destination parcels.
Octagonal frank with two town marks.
Without impression counter number.
a. Date only in place of right town mark. Left town mark normal double circle.
These stamps were produced by Francotyp "C" machines with non-standard 64-66 mm distance between the centers of the right date figures and the value figures.
Nine machines of this type were fielded. Those that survived World War Two were used to produce Type PP-D2 stamps.
The catalog value is for examples showing both or parts of both town marks. Examples showing only one town mark are worth considerably less.
Sub-group  PP-D: Frank resembles Group L stamps* Often with double town mark or double date which was used on domestic mailings only. The leftmost town mark or date was toggled off for foreign destination parcels.
Frank as Type L4, but with two single-circle town marks.
With impression counter number high between right town mark and frank.
These stamps were produced by the two machines that survived World War Two that originally produced Type PP-B1 stamps.
The catalog value is for examples showing both or parts of both town marks. Examples showing only one town mark are worth considerably less.
As Type PP-D1, but with two double-circle town marks and with narrower spacing between right town mark and the frank.
With impression counter number high between right town mark and frank.
These stamps were produced by machines surviving World War Two that originally produced Type PP-C1 stamps.
The catalog value is for examples showing both or parts of both town marks. Examples showing only one town mark are worth considerably less.
Frank with double-circle town mark at far left and with additional boxed date between it and the frank.
The town name is present below the frank as well as in the circular town mark.
At far left town name above the value figures and date, repeated, in a row.
Frank with double-circle town mark at far left and with additional boxed date between it and the frank.
The town name is present below the frank as well as at left.
Town name below the frank.
Date at left, high.
Town name below the frank.
Date about 3 cm below the post office name.
Value figures are narrow.
Sub-group  PP-E Frank resembles Group N stamps* The double town mark or double date was used on domestic mailings only. The leftmost town mark or date was toggled off for foreign destination parcels.
Two double-circle town marks at left.
Date in box, left of double-circle town mark.
At far left are the town name above the value figures and date, repeated, in a row.
An additional town name is below the frank.
a. The inner date is closer to the right than to the left.
b. Used without frank frame
NOTE: Examples of this stamp as b (without frank frame) but with zero-cent value figures were used, apparently, for inventory purposes at a post office in Hamburg.
As type PP-E3 but without the value figures and other data at far left.
The town line is below the frank, and the date is high at left.
a. Printed in black instead of red. [$20]
Both town line and date are below the frank with the date about 3 cm below.
Value figures are narrow.
As Type PP-E3 but with “BERLIN” added below “BUNDESPOST”.
As Type PP-E4 but with “BERLIN” added below “BUNDESPOST”.
As Type PP-E5 but with "BERLIN" added below "BUNDESPOST".
As Type PP-E2 but with “SAARLAND” added below “BUNDESPOST”.
This stamp is known by proof only and may not have been used.
Sub-group  PP-F:  Frank resembles Group P stamps* Often with double town mark or double date which was used on domestic mailings only. The leftmost town mark or date was toggled off for foreign destination parcels.
At far left are the unframed value figures left of the town line and date.
The date is duplicated at lear leftr.
The town line is repeated below the frank.
As Type PP-F1 but without the data at far left.
As Type PP-F1 but with “BERLIN” added below “BUNDESPOST”.
Octagon design which closely resembles bulk mail machine stamps of the period. Type PV1 has single line date instead of the dual-line date/hour as found on the bulk mail machine stamps.  (See the NOTE below Type PV2.)
The machine remained in use till 1937.
As Type PV1 but single value machine franking 6 pfennig stamps only.
Town mark reads "BERLIN-SWANSEE 3 / (STRANDSBAD)" .
One machine used in multiple locations with two different town marks.
A. “BERLIN-CHARLOTTENBURG 5. [$500]
B. “BERLIN-WANNSEE 3” [Extremely rare, only two examples known, value uncertain]
NOTE: Common bulk mail machine stamps of the period are easily misidentified as the very rare Types PV1 and PV2.
They can be distinguished most easily by the town mark which has a time range in hours below the date on the bulk mail stamps.
The much rarer Types PV1 and PV2 have date only without time of day. Pictured at right is a typical bulk mail machine stamp town mark.
PV3. Autofranc (FV-1), 1938. [Extremely rare, value unknown]
This stamp is from the same machine that produced Type PV2.
One machine used in a youth hostel in Berlin during parts of 1938 and 1938.
The stamp is nearly identical to bulk mail machine stamps of the period and can be identified by
“(HAUS DER JUGEND)” at bottom of the town mark and by the date which has no hour figure.
NOTE: See the NOTE below PV2. The same situation occurs with PV3 except the bulk mail machine stamps have the hour figure right of the date, as:  00.00 00. –00
Upright frank with old post horn at bottom and ”DEUTSCHE POST/ BERLIN” at top.
Spacing 51 mm between centers of date and value figures.
In use for ten months only.
A. “BERLIN W15”, 24 August 1954 to 20 January 1955
B. “BERLIN NEUKOLN”, 22 February to end of June,1955
PV5. ABAS automatic franking systems (digital), 1995.
From December 1995 to mid-1997 four configurations of self-service digital franking systems were tested at various locations.
The four systems were manufactured by Siemens-Nixdorf, Olivetti, Nagler. and IBM.
The stamps are very similar in appearance and can be distinguished most easily by the town name. The fonts are different for each manufacturer.
Loose stamps were not vended.
The basic stamp is a horizontal rectangle with simple outer frame line and two panels printed in black.
The smaller top panel contains a post horn and the value figures, and the bottom panel contains the town mark and “Deutsche Post AG”.
The stamps are often accompanied by a service indicator at left usually printed in red and black (registered, express) but also black alone (economy, airmail).
A. Siemens-Nixdorf (Bonn, Bremen, Bottrop, Köln, Wiesbaden, Dortmund). Frank applied thermally to a plain white label affixed to the cover. These stamps fade rapidly. Most impressions are already lost.
B. Olivetti (Braunschweig, Cottbus, Leipzig) Frank applied by inkjet directly to the cover
C. Nagler (Augsburg, Nürnberg, Pforzheim, Regensburg). Frank applied by inkjet to transparent label affixed to the cover
D. IBM (Darmstadt, Ludwigsburg, Lübeck). Frank applied by inkjet directly to the cover
a. Service indicator at left
The machines produced both ATM-style automat stamps and meter stamps.
The meter is a Francotyp-Postalia model and produces a stamp that closely resembles Group S stamps but has “BRIEF-/STATION” in place of “FRANKIT”.
The test ended in the Spring of 2008.
a. With large "R" and “Deutsche Post” plus post horn above barcode at left of frank (shown). Used for Registered mail.
PV7. PDL-Automat (Post Dienst Leistung) Samkyung "PASS" (Postal Automatic Service System)  (digital), March 2002 to 4 November 2003.
This stamp was previously cataloged erroneously as a Post Office stamp, Type PO4.
Two types of stamps were vended, one for small items (letters, post cards, etc.) and one for parcels.
White self-adhesive labels with square corners, bar code at top, and a yellow bar across the bottom with the Deutsche Post logo at left.
A. Self-adhesive label for smaller articles, short bar code centered
B. Self-adhesive label for parcels, tall bar code at left, "POSTPAKET" at right
This system was first trialed in Bonn in March 2002. From April through December it was placed in sixteen different locations throughout Germany. The system did not operate as well as hoped and all kiosks were removed from service during 2003 with the last machine unplugged on 4 November.
The text on the stamps is light sensitive and tends to fade over time.
GROUP  OO: Stamps used for Official government mail only.* With “ZENTRALER” at top and “KURIERDIENST” at bottom
Used in East Germany (DDR) only.
Spacing between centers of date and value figures is 60 mm.
Date figures without stops.
Spacing between centers of date and value figures is 75 mm.
Date figures with stops.
Spacing between centers of date and value figures is 78 mm.
Date figures without stops.
Wide spacing.
Value figures are small and narrow.
As Type OO4 but spacing is narrow.
OO6. Francotyp “Cc”  (MV). [Value unknown]
Similar to Type OO3 but date figures have stops after D and before Y.
Spacing between centers of date and value figures is 78 mm.
OO7. Francotyp “D”  (MV). [Value unknown]
Spacing between centers of date and value figures is 66-67 mm.
Date without stops.
GROUP SR: Stamps used in the Saar before being absorbed into GermanySub-group SR-A: Horizontal frank with sides forming doubled outward-projecting arcs. Inscribed “SAARGEBIET” at top* Used from 1926 until incorporation into Germany in 1935.
Spacing between centers of date and value figures is 60 mm.
With impression counter  either high or in middle between TM and frank.
Date figures without stops.
Spacing between centers of date and value figures is 75 mm.
With impression counter  either high or in middle between TM and frank.
Date with stops.
Francotyp model “C” spacing With impression counter  high between TM and frank.
Small frank with very narrow spacing between TM and frank.
Sub-group SR-B: Frank is upright rectangle inscribed “SAAR” at bottom
With double inner frame around value figures.
Used after WW2 under temporary French control (1947-1951) and semi-independence (1951) until merged back into Germany in 1959.
Spacing between centers of date and value figures is 60 mm.
Date figures without stops.
With impression counter  high between TM and frank.
a. Without "F" after value figures [Rare, value unknown]
NOTE: The illustration does not show the "F" but it is there, faintly, in the inner right margin.
Spacing between centers of date and value figures is 75 mm.
With impression counter  either high or in middle between TM and frank or nil.
Date with stops.
V/F: 000 F (A,G)
a. Without "F" after value figures[$30]
Spacing between centers of date and value figures is 78 mm.
Date figures without stops.
Impression counter  high or nil.
A. “F” right of V/F does not break frame lines (as pictured)
B. “F” breaks inner frame lines at right.
a. As B but without “F”. Empty broken spot in the frame lines at right.
Similar to Type OO3 but date figures have stops after D and before Y.
Spacing between centers of date and value figures is 78 mm.
Spacing between TM and frank is 66-68 mm.
Date without stops.
A. “F” in inner frame lines at right
B. “F” between margins at left
a. As A but without “F”. Empty broken spot in the frame lines at right.
NOTE: After the Saar was absorbed into Germany in 1957 a meter of this type was used for a short time without a frank frame before it was fitted with a new German frank. This is cataloged as Type L4b. (See Part 1)
Small frank with very narrow spacing between TM and frank.
Wide spacing between TM and frank.
Value figures narrow and thin.
A. “F” in inner frame lines at right
B. Fixed zero and “F” at right
Month in date either in letters (as shown) or as Roman numerals.
Frank has two post horns in upper corners.
Large “F” precedes value figures.
Two machines known using this frank.
All examples seen are from 1950.
Narrow spacing between TM and frank.
TM: DC without horizontal lines above and below date.
V/F: 000 F 0000 F 00000 F
Sub-group  SR-C: Frank is upright octagon* Used to frank parcel post forwarding cards
TM at far left with boxed date repeated between TM and frank.
This part of the walkthrough deals with Liberation Mission 8, where Nebula Area 3 is liberated.
Again, the first time you go through with this, MegaMan will warn you.  Enter, and there will be another cutscene.
ShadowMan and TomahawkMan will have 600 HP, while NumberMan has 550 and ToadMan has 500.  The SplitUp S will have a rating of 100, the TomahawkSwing T will have a rating of 120, the NumberTrap will have a rating of 140, while the S-Melody T will have a rating of 80.
This is a mission where order points will come at a premium, so we should try to conserve them.  In any case, we will have to take out the first Dark Hole before proceeding.  Have ShadowMan one-turn on the clean panel ahead, then use two navis to clear a path to the Dark Hole.  The fourth navi should clear it, and then use NumberMan to clear the stun trap between the barrier panels.
The two TonHawks will move towards you, while the Bladia will attack NumberMan for a whopping 120 damage.
Have one navi immediately clear out the Bladia, then use the LifeMelody liberation on ShadowMan so that he can clear a path towards the second Dark Hole from the bottom side (this is not as much for reaching the Dark Hole, but really for getting the first key, which is in the large item panel area nearby).  Now, to conserve order points, just have NumberMan and TomahawkMan do normal liberations.
TinHawks will again move closer to your position, and the closer one will attack either NumberMan or TomahawkMan (whichever liberated second) for 70 damage.
Now we only have one order point left, which is fine as last turn we exposed an item panel containing three order points.  To make it easier, though, use the order point on ToadMan so ShadowMan can get the first key (he will also get a heart if you liberated on the column with two item panels last turn and one-turned this one, but will set off a damage trap, which do 100 damage - the heart is retrieved before the trap is set off, which kinda sucks).  Have your three remaining navis take out the second Dark Hole using normal liberations (the first navi, if he one-turned, should get the order points.
The remaining TinHawk should get closer, but not attack.
This one is tricky, but the next Dark Hole is surrounded on seven sides by stun traps, and the eighth is occupied by the Bladia.  Use the LifeMelody liberation on the column leading to the Bladia, then two-turn the Bladia and clear the Dark Hole.  Then, NumberCheck to clear the traps to your left.
Darkloid phase will actually see the TinHawk attack anyone other than ToadMan (unless you moved ToadMan up).
Use your last order point to TomahawkSwing the panels cleared by NumberMan (it's a good thing that you don't trip the traps behind you this time), and then use three of the navis to clear the Dark Hole (make sure the first navi avoids the stun trap, while the second navi will trip two damage traps unless he two-turns).  From clearing the Dark Hole you should get one BugFrag and three order points.  With the last navi, go through to the next area and one-turn liberate the bottom row (we will have to go around the barrier panels).
More harassment by the TinHawk this turn, either at TomahawkMan or whoever cleared the path to the Dark Hole.
Use LifeMelody on ShadowMan again, and have him clear the turnoff from where the Bladia is so that he can get the second key next phase (he will get a heart and 2000 zennys).  Then, use your remaining navis to make your way to and clear the last Dark Hole with normal liberations (you will also get order points, but it's not important, as you will have all you need).
The Bladia will claim a panel and attack ShadowMan.
Get ShadowMan to claim the key, then use another navi to clear the way to a group of clean panels (avoid the item panel, it's a stun trap).  Then, use the LifeMelody liberation to clear the path leading to CloudMan, and use your last navi to destroy the Bladia (rather than lose him due to CloudMan's attack - you will also prevent ShadowMan from getting cut off).
TomahawkSwing so you get the four-column advantage, and deal with CloudMan.  You still have a good six phases, so take your time.
Congratulations, the mission was a success.  Here's your reward:
Front Page: Radiation Oncology | RTOG Trials | Randomized Trials
Cisplatin 100 mg/m2 D1, D29 + C.I. 5-FU 1000 mg/m2 D1-4, D29-32
Bolus 5-FU 400 mg/m2 + LV 20 mg/m2 first 4 and last 3 days of RT
C.I. 5-FU 250 mg/m2 daily
C.I. 5-FU 225 mg/m2 daily
C.I. 5-FU 1000 mg/m2 D1-4, D29-32; mitomycin 10 mg/m2 D1 and D29
Lupron 7.5 mg IM every month and flutamide 250 mg TID
Cisplatin 70 mg/m2 and C.I. 5-FU 1000 mg/m2 Q3W
Vincristine 1.5 mg/m2 weekly
Cisplatin 50 mg/m2 D1,8,29,36 and etoposide 50 mg/m2 D1-5,29-33
Cisplatin 60 mg/m2 D1 and etoposide 120 mg/m2 D1-3 Q3W
Data_Analysis/ Interpretation
8.1 Classification and Identification of Bacteria by Mass Spectrometry and Computational Analysis
8.2 A Density-Based Proteomics Sample Fractionation Technology: Folate Deficiency–Induced Oxidative Stress Response in Liver and Brain
The process of protein identification through mass spectrometry is done in two main ways:
Peptide mass fingerprinting typically uses the masses of peptides derived from a spectrum as to check against a database of predicted peptide masses.  These predicted masses are recorded from digestion of a list of well documented proteins. If a protein sequence has a significant number of predicted masses that match the experimental values, there is a excellent chance that the given protein is present in the sample.  Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization - Time of Flight(MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometers are the instrumentation that is commonly used for this type of peptide analysis.
The other technique that is typically used is Tandem MS.  This technique utilizes collision-induced dissociation.  This process breaks proteins within the peptide backbone and because of this fragmentation, comparisons between the observed fragment sizes and the database of predicted masses is possible.  A very similar method to the Tandem MS approach is peptide fragmentation fingerprinting or 'PFF'.  Instead of utilizing collision-induced dissociation, this method uses enzymatic digestion of a single peptide to generate a fragmentation pattern.  These fragments are analyzed and compared to a database of observed fragments for the particular enzyme in a method similar to the Tandem MS approach.  Tandem MS and and peptide fragmentation fingerprinting can also be used for protein sequencing.
Only about four to five peptides are adequate to accurately identify a protein with a known amino acid sequence.  Surprisingly, as the identification information contained within databases increases, the amount of information required to identify a specific protein increases.  Over time, the number of peptides required to identify a protein has risen.  In some cases, a specific peptide fragment or a few fragments in rare combination are unique to a particular type or class of protein.  This fragment or group of fragments can be used as signature peptides to identify the presence of the particular protein.  These signature fragments exist for both collision-induced dissociation and enzymatic digestion.  The recognition of a fragment as an effective signature fragment requires a significant amount of background information.
Tandem MS can be used in conjunction with fragmentation methods such as trypsin digestion. This allows a sample to generate overlapping peptides of varying length. This method works in a similar fashion to the approach taken by genome sequencers, when they  generate overlapping DNA sequence fragments and assemble into the genome. On the mass spectra, the mass difference between two overlapping peaks can be used to determine the difference in sequence based on the well documented data on the weights of the amino acids. Sequences are usually determined using one or more search algorithms linked to an appropriate database, such as the International Protein Index (IPI) at the European Bioinformatics Institute or the nr (non-redundant) protein sequence database provided by NCBI. Commonly used search algorithms include SEQUEST, X! Tandem, and MASCOT.
There are several methods available for the quantitation of proteins using mass spectrometry. These typically involve some labeling method to differentiate between two different cell types.  In isotopic labeling, heavier isotopes are introduced to one sample while lighter isotopes are used to label the other. Before mass spectrometry analysis, these two differentially labeled samples are mixed. The peptide fragments associated with the samples can be differentiated based on their mass differences. The quantification is made by the comparison of the peak ratio of the intensities on the mass spectrum to derive the relative abundance. Multiple methods currently exist which are widely employed in quantitative proteomics, including stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture, isotope-coded affinity tags and metal coded tags.
The objective of quantitative proteomics is to determine quantitative information about a particular protein sample. Although qualitative provide insights that are of value, quantitative datasets give a larger understanding. Quantitative proteomics is a cellular technique that is based on the use of mass spectrometry. Such quantitative technique enables the detection of quantitative changes in proteins and their post-translational modifications in biological systems.
Generally, major quantitative proteomics methods assist in carrying out the analysis of protein complexes, where the priority is to gain access to information on the bona fide interactions of affinity tagged protein of interest. This action is crucial in providing a certain understanding to the novel interactions with known proteins, which can unravel the mysteries of unknown proteins. The bona fide protein interactions can be examined with bait proteins and protein complexes that are usually carried out with or without stable isotopes. The study of the interactions of protein complexes have been made possible by affinity purification and specific quantitative proteomics techniques -such as the combination of cleavable ICAT, iTRAQ, and DNA-affinity purification.
Quantitative proteomic analyses of protein complexes also serve the purpose of determining the changes in protein-protein interactions within a protein complex under various cellular conditions. For example, an approach based on SILAC (Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino acid in Cell culture) is used to examine the mechanics of the TATA binding proteins along with their phosphorylation states during the cell cycle. Moreover, SILAC provides an analysis of the circadian rhythm mechanistic features and the extracellular signal regulation of kinases interactions under certain conditions.
Profoundly, quantitative proteomics has grown a useful application in the analysis of protein interaction networks. Despite the advanced technological approaches in discovering the protein complexes, these complexes mostly function with other protein complexes and most proteins inhabit in more than one distinct complex. Quantitative proteomic therefore has the ability to confirm the many functions of protein complexes when interacting with protein complexes, and to address questions in determining the probability of protein-protein interactions.
Proteomics research is usually categorized into discovery and targeted proteomics. Discovery proteomics optimizes the identification of the protein by dedicating more time per protein sample and limiting the number of samples. On the contrary, targeted proteomics limits the number of features that will be analyzed, and then efficiently perform chromatography to obtain the highest sensitivity through many samples.
Furthermore, the use of mass spectrometry does not inherently produce quantitative results due to the ionization efficiency of the peptide sample. Because of this, relative and absolute abundance quantitative proteomics developed as sub-categorized techniques. Relative quantitation can be obtained by examining samples individually by mass spectrometry and comparing the spectra in order to actuate the peptide abundance in one sample in comparison to another.  Often times, relative proteomic quantitation requires a labeling process involving stable isotope; this allows the mass spectrometer to distinguish between identical proteins into separate samples. Absolute proteomic quantitation utilizes isotropic peptides that evoke known concentrations of synthetic, dense isotopopgoues of target peptides into a sample and then performing liquid- chromatography- mass spectrometry. Like relative quantitation, absolute proteomic quantitation uses isotropic labels. However, the experimental target peptide sample is compared to heavy peptide and reverse- calculated to the starting concentration of the standard with the help of a pre-determined standard curve to allow for the quantitation of the target peptide.
Quantitative proteomics is a constantly developing and highly renewable field of study. Because of quantitative proteomic analysis, a large variety of biological problems have been solved and resolved.
Mass spectrometry has been applied as a tool for bacterial recognition by "fingerprinting" species based on their proteomic inventory, though until recently work using this method was hindered by the procedure's reliance on high resolution data and the consequently high cost of sufficiently accurate instruments. Recent work in making the method more accessible has seen success by using MALDI (Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization) mass spectrometry, which uses comparatively low energy nitrogen lasers for ionization and also stabilizes large, fragile protein species by supporting them on a matrix. These modifications help minimize fragmentation of protein species and ultimately reduces the complexity of the resulting mass spectrum, lessening the need for high-resolution data and thus making the process possible using less expensive mid-range spectrometers.
Mass spectrometry-based bacterial identification is preferable to current differentiation methods which generally involve multiple tests to identify species based on physiological, serological, chemotaxonomic, and overall biochemical characteristics, each of which requires time consuming culturing steps. In contrast, mass spectrometry methods generally take on the order of a few hours and require a single culturing step to increase cell counts and purity.
Identification is achieved using databases not unlike those used currently to identify unknown chemical compounds. Multiple spectra of a specific bacterial species are taken and averaged to remove noise, and the resulting averaged spectra is used as the species' proteomic fingerprint. This is then stored in a public database, and when an unknown is tested its spectra is compared via statistical algorithms specific to the database and identified based on closeness of fit to members of the database inventory.
Within pharmaceuticals, mass spectrometry is being used to due to the complicated mixtures of samples such as blood, urine, lymph, and is used with high sensitivity methods to measure low doses and long time point data. The most commonly used technique is LC/MS coupled to a triple quadrupole mass analyzer.
The sensitivity of mass spectrometry affords the capability to carry out measurements of microdosing experiments which minimize the necessity of animal experimentation, with approximately a 70% congruence between observed effects of the compound between microdosing and animal model experimentation.
Research has shown that tumors can introduce proteins into various bodily fluids which might not normally exist at those concentrations in those locations. This has led to the interest in the study of mass spectrometry in the use of clinical early detection of cancer through analysis of these fluids. These disease-associated molecules are known as  biomarkers. The issues associated with clinical usage of such analytical methods is the problem of false positives and false negatives. There are investigations into whether a protein signature composed of multiple proteins can be capable of providing a diagnostic measure of sufficient quality for use in a clinical setting.
There are a number of hurdles that exist for this type of mass spectrometry analysis.
Variations in the protein content of samples between individuals and even between the same person make the construction of a disease signature very complex
High dynamic range of protein concentrations are present, possibly with biomarkers existing on the fringes of that range
Accuracy and reproducibility of the mass spectrometry method(most frequently SELDI TOF)
Edge Fractionation Technology provides a powerful density based separation and enrichment method for rapid screening of potential Biomarkers.  This method was used in a study, A Density-Based Proteomics Sample Fractionation Technology: Folate Deficiency–Induced Oxidative Stress Response in Liver and Brain, on biomarkers for oxidative stress, glutathione peroxidase 1 (GPx1) and glucose-regulated protein 75 (GRP75), as a result of folate deficiency.
Hopper S, Johnson RS, Vath JE, Biemann K., Glutaredoxin from rabbit bone marrow. Purification, characterization, and amino acid sequence determined by tandem mass spectrometry. [1]
Shotgun identification of protein modifications from protein complexes and lens tissue [2]
Hunt DF, Yates JR, Shabanowitz J, Winston S, and Hauer CR, Protein Sequencing by Tandem Mass Spectrometry
N Bandeira, H Tang, V Bafna, P Pevzner, Shotgun Protein Sequencing by Tandem Mass Spectra Assembly
Clarke W, Zhang Zhen, Chan DW. The application of clinical proteomics to cancer and other diseases. Clin Chem Lab Med 2003;41(12):1562-1570.
Clinical proteomics: Are we there yet?
Wagner M, Naiky D, Pothenz A, Protocols for Disease Classification from Mass Spectrometry Data
Lan W, Guhaniyogi J, Horn MJ, Xia JQ, Graham B. J Biomol Tech. 2007 September 18(4): 213–225. A Density-Based Proteomics Sample Fractionation Technology: Folate Deficiency–Induced Oxidative Stress Response in Liver and Brain
Sauer, S, et al. Classification and Identification of Bacteria by Mass Spectrometry and Computational Analysis. PLoS ONE 3(7): e2843.doi:10.1371/pournal.pone.0002843
Classification and Identification of Bacteria by Mass Spectrometry and Computational Analysis
Sauer, S, et al. Classification and Identification of Bacteria by Mass Spectrometry and Computational Analysis. PLoS ONE 3(7): e2843.doi:10.1371/pournal.pone.0002843
An alternative methodology coupled with database design in order to make bacterial identification with mass spectrometry more accessible.
The intention of Sauer et al.  was to expand the use and improve the efficiency of mass spectometry-based microbiological identification procedures. Such procedures have been shown to be successful before, but the generally high cost of the equipment was exacerbated by the need for high-resolution data in identifying bacterial species based on their proteome. Consequently, the field of mass-spec microbe identification is not often used and is therefore both ill-developed and unproven in extensive field tests. However, the authors note that the potential of mass spec identification is appealing; current methods involve labor-intensive culturing and processing based on an assortment of tests used to elucidate the biochemical properties of the sample species, which takes considerable time and preparation. Genetic differentiation based on the 16S ribosome RNA sequence is possible and common, but requires pre-defined sequence data. In contrast, the authors’ described method can (ignoring culture times) be performed in 90 minutes or so, and requires only that a proteome “fingerprint” be established beforehand for comparison.
Common bacterial plating method used to distinguish between species of bacteria.
The proposed method centers on three key components which are intended to make the use of mass spec identification more accessible and accurate. First, the use of matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) mass spectrometers allows for the identification of large, often fragile particles (specifically proteins or DNA fragments) by first fixing them on a supportive matrix and then ejecting them with comparatively low energy lasers (nitrogen based). This method allows for much larger fragments to be maintained than are generally possible with other mass spec methods, which in turn allows for much simpler mass spectra data and consequently a decreased reliance on resolution. Thus, a lower resolution (and therefore more affordable) mass spec system can be used for identification.
The second implemented change was the use of single nucleotide polymorphism’s (SNPs) to differentiate between species with very similar proteomes (in the case of this study, to differentiate between European and North American strains of Erwinia amylovora). This was accomplished by sequencing the galE gene of the two strains and then using PCR to amplify this sequence using the necessary primers. This results in an amplified concentration of the galE gene, which could then be identified through MALDI mass spec as well. In this way it was now possible to differentiate between these species with approximately identical proteomes.
The third and most crucial component to the broad-range use of mass spectrometric identification is the generation of a database of bacterial fingerprints. By generating mass spec data for a species twenty times, the data were averaged to give the most common spectrum for the species, which could then be compared to field results via statistical software to give a closeness of fit result not unlike the methods currently used for BLAST searches. The authors note that the database is available for free online, and that in addition to the 2800-plus strains already fingerprinted a global effort is anticipated which should allow the database to grow rapidly, particularly for species of interest in particular fields, such as plant infection.
With full implementation, the authors’ method for species identification is accomplished by first sampling a particular microbe species (such as a pathogen) and then culturing it to both increase the cell number and to allow for purification (minimizing the number of species being analyzed in a particular sample). Next, this culture can be fixed on the MALDI matrix and tested, possibly multiple times to allow for greater confidence levels. Assuming the species has already been fingerprinted, the resulting spectrum is statistically compared to those of the database and a closest fit is applied; with sufficiently high closeness values, a definitive identification can be made. In the event that the species is proteomically identical to other bacterial strains, database entries would also include SNP analysis results to allow this extra level of differentiation.
Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectroscopy; mass spec. method in which large, fragile molecules (such as proteins or DNA) are ionized by a “gentle” laser (such as nitrogen) and supported by a matrix surface, making them resistant to fragmentation. ( http://www.sigmaaldrich.com/analytical-chromatography/spectroscopy/maldi-mass.html )
Single Nucleotide Polymorphism; DNA sequence variation in which a genetic sequence is modified at one specific nucleotide, resulting in identical sequences with the exception of one pairing. ( http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_nucleotide_polymorphism )
Act of attaching bacterial species to a slide or stage, often with heat; in the case of this article, the act of attaching them to the support matrix. (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robust)
Genes expressed over any conditions of treatment of an organism (non-conditional expression). (http://www.biology-online.org/dictionary/Housekeeping_genes)
Tree diagram used to illustrate gene clustering. (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dendrogram)
This work is of considerable value in the study of metabolism given that it functions by establishing “fingerprints” of microbiological species which contain data from their entire proteome. While this “big picture” approach appears effective for differentiation between species, it is conceivable that mass spec identification using MALDI could be used to differentiate between different conditions of the same species; for example, between a microbe in aerobic vs. anaerobic conditions. This procedure is currently undertaken using SDS-PAGE or similar approaches, but these methods are difficult to automate and very time consuming. Mass spectrometry has shown itself to be easily automated, and with established methodology can be done very quickly.
A Density-Based Proteomics Sample Fractionation Technology: Folate Deficiency–Induced Oxidative Stress Response in Liver and Brain
Lan W, Guhaniyogi J, Horn MJ, Xia JQ, Graham B. J Biomol Tech. 2007 September 18(4): 213–225.
Folate is important in both brain and liver and using it as a factor to force disease in rats it is possible to identify unique proteins and potential biomarkers for identifying the disease outside a controlled experiment.
Folate is a cofactor in biosynthetic pathways crucial for DNA synthesis, DNA repair and various methylation reactions. Most mammals including humans can not synthesize folate and must attain it from their diet.  Folate deficiency is linked to stroke, Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, depression, cancer and cardiovascular disease.   The process of protein fractionation. Folate deficiency disrupts one-carbon metabolism, increasing the level of homocysteine, a cytotoxic amino acid that can induce DNA strand breakage, apoptosis and induce oxidative stress, which will cascade DNA damage, alter one-carbon metabolism and trigger multiple organ damage and neurodegenerative disorders. Oxidative Stress and oxidative damage can alter protein functions in many ways, including directly modifying catalytic amino acids, changing critical amino acid residues in binding or regulatory sites, and altering proteolytic susceptibility and states of aggregation. In animals the liver is an important organ for folate storage and metabolism. Two groups of four rats each were given a folate-defined diet for two weeks, and then the experimental group was switched to a folate deficient diet. After four more weeks their organs were harvested. The proteins obtained from the organs were separated into 11 samples based on density using Edge 200 Fractionation.  Fractionation is used to increase the visibility of less prevalent proteins.  Each of these samples were measured with mass spectrometry to determine at which densities folate and biomarkers indicative of oxidative stress occur. In folate deficient rats, GPx1, a protein involved in the control of oxidative stress, was increased in abundance by 50 to 70% compared to rats with a diet containing folate. Oxidative stress induced by folate deficiency is less in brain tissue than in liver tissue. Several proteins related to oxidative stress were found in the experimental rats. Changes in many proteins of unknown function or unknown relation to folate deficiency were also observed in the experimental rats. Western blot results show changes in the relative percentage distribution of markers in each fraction, indicating their potential translocation in the cell.
Non-denaturing front-end sample fractionation technology. It works by suspending the particles in an initial medium of known density. The suspension is pelleted and the supernatant is saved as the first sample. The remaining pellet is resuspended in a medium of increased density and the process is repeated for as many fractioned samples desired.
An imbalance between the production of reactive oxygen and a biological system's ability to readily detoxify the reactive intermediates or repair the resulting damage.([3] 04-12-09)
Study of factors affecting the health and illness of populations.([4] 04-12-09)
Latin for “at one's pleasure”([5] 04-12-09)
Frozen by dipping in liquid nitrogen.([6] 04-12-09)
Peripheral Nervous System, resides outside the central nervous system(brain and spinal cord).([7] 04-12-09)
One of the biggest problems in Proteomics is separating specific proteins from a sample.  This article shows the use of Edge 200 Fractionation to separate all the proteins in a sample to a user specified number of density specific samples.
Ranish J. http://www.systemsbiology.org/technology/Data_Generation/Mass_Spectrometry_Analysis  (3-20-09)
Use of Mass Spectrometry to find Post translational modification (PTM) of proteins which play a key role in the control of a wide range of biological functions and activities is enhanced by increasing the concentrations of the PTMs.  Post Translational Modification of Insulin
Analysis of Post Translational Modified (PTM) proteins is difficult because the modified proteins exist in far lower concentrations than the unmodified versions of the proteins and the modification itself is a hinderer to mass spectrometry.  By increasing the concentration of modified form of the protein and using computational algorithms designed specifically for the analysis of the unique MS/MS fragmentation patterns generated by post-translationally modified peptides, the chances of identifying the modified peptide during mass spectrometric analysis are greatly improved.  Enriching methods include purification to homogeneity and conjugation to a solid support using hydrazide chemistry and stable isotope labeling.  Further advances in defining PTMs are being developed such as; Peptide mixtures to be methyl esterified to block carboxylates from further reaction in subsequent steps, and to introduce stable isotopes for quantitative analysis, elution and bonding to polyamine.
The chemical modification of a protein after its translation. It is one of the later steps in protein biosynthesis for many proteins. (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Post_translational_modification 4-12-09)
A PTM involving the attaching or detaching of Small Ubiquitin-like MOdifier proteins (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SUMOylation 4-12-09)
Multiple Steps Mass Spectrometry with some form of fragmentation occurring in between the stages (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MS/MS 4-12-09)
An amount to small to calculate the relationships between reactants and products. (http://www.answers.com/topic/stoichiometry 4-12-09)
Reactions involving binding to organic compounds sharing a common functional group characterized by a nitrogen to nitrogen covalent bond with 4 substituents with at least one of them being an acyl group. (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hydrazide 4-12-09)
A large hurdle in proteomics is finding and isolating proteins of very low concentration.  This website contains methods for surpassing this problem.
National Center of Biotechnology Information Taxonomy Database
Establishing an expansive, freely accessible resource for the cataloging of current and future biological data.
The National Center of Biotechnology Information acts as a global center for accumulation of biotechnology-related information in the form of publicly accessible databases, and their Taxonomy database is maintained to be as up-to-date as possible in terms of the current classification of various organisms based on collaborative data. As data are generated by an assortment of independent research bodies, submission of this data to the NCBI website benefits authors in two ways in particular: by confirming their work through comparison to data in existence both before and after publication, and by making it available for citation.
For the general scientific community, the NCBI website is just one of many separate attempts to publicize and make both available and searchable the vast amounts of incoming scientific data published every year.  All fields benefit from easy access to relevant data, but nowhere is this more apparent than the field of biology, in which new data is being constantly accrued over time as new methods are proven and then applied. The vast number of known organisms coupled with the continuous improvement of analytical methods ensures that a limitless amount of data will always remain to be gathered, for species and systems both newly and previously studied.  Further, as the much of the global community continues to improve in terms of education and economic status, the number of individual outfits generating data is continuously increasing. This influx of data would be impossible to archive effectively in the methods of the past several centuries; individual genomes would fill entire volumes, and even these would need to be updated with such regularity that printing would need to occur more than annually. Most importantly, this data would be incredibly hard to access in terms of both cost and searching.  Single procedures often necessitate the use of data gathered by anywhere between dozens and hundreds of sources, which would make locating this information incredibly difficult, and much data (such as protein or DNA sequence comparisons) requires the comparison of thousands of data points (base pairs), making computer application an absolute necessity.
For all of these reasons the NCBI Taxonomy website has been created and has quickly become an incredibly useful source for biological and related studies. The site allows for the searching of any species currently known and archived, and for each offers tabular summations of current works available, such as genome sequences or projects, known protein and/or other biochemical structures, and even the number of times a particular species has been cited in PubMed databases. Even more importantly, all of these references and data points are linked, allowing for incredible amounts of data to be accessed in moments. It is safe to assume that without NCBI and other public databases, many of our most recent biological and biochemical breakthroughs would have taken much longer, or may have been altogether impossible.
Gene Expression Omnibus; a public database based at NCBI containing microarray and ChiP-chip data. (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/)
ChiP-on-chip; microarray method used to observe interactions between DNA and DNA-binding proteins. (http://www.chiponchip.org/)
Collection of DNA which as been sequenced for statistical comparison of populations' evolutionary similarities. (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?db=popset)
Short Read Archive; archive for incomplete sequences of DNA from a particular organism generally containing several million base pairs each. (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?db=sra&cmd=Search&dopt=DocSum&term=txid562[Organism%3Aexp])
Automated gene homologue detecting system; compares sequence data against completed genomes of eukaryotic organisms to detect shared gene characteristics. (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/homologene)
The value of websites like the NCBI Taxonomy website cannot be overstated in the current, ever-expanding state of biology, for both its usefulness in research ventures and its crucial archival functions.
Navigate Getting Started topic: ( v • d • e )
A Java IDE (for Integrated Development Environment) is a software application which enables users to more easily write and debug Java programs. Many IDEs provide features like syntax highlighting and code completion, which help the user to code more easily.
Eclipse is a Free and Open Source IDE, plus a developer tool framework that can be extended for a particular development need. IBM was behind its development, and it replaced IBM VisualAge tool. The idea was to create a standard look and feel that can be extended via plugins. The extensibility distinguishes Eclipse from other IDEs. Eclipse was also meant to compete with Microsoft Visual Studio tools. Microsoft tools give a standard way of developing code in the Microsoft world. Eclipse gives a similar standard way of developing code in the Java world, with a big success so far. With the online error checking only, coding can be sped up by at least 50% (coding does not include programming).
Give a standard IDE for developing code
Give a starting point, and the same look and feel for all other more sophisticated tools built on Eclipse
IBM's WSAD, and later IBM Rational Software Development Platform, are built on Eclipse.
Standard window management (perspectives, views, browsers, explorers, ...)
Error checking as you type (immediate error indications, ...)
Help window as you type (type ., or <ctrl> space, ...)
Automatic build (changes in source code are automatically compiled, ...)
Source code generation (getters and setters, ...)
Searches (for implementation, for references, ...)
Plugin-based architecture (ability to build tools that integrate seamlessly with the environment, and some other tools)
...
More info: Eclipse and Plugincentral.
The NetBeans IDE is a Free and Open Source IDE for software developers. The IDE runs on many platforms including Windows, GNU/Linux, Solaris and Mac OS X. It is easy to install and use straight out of the box. You can easily create Java applications for mobile devices using Mobility Pack in NetBeans. With Netbeans 6.0, the IDE has become one of the most preferred development tools, whether it be designing a Swing UI, building a mobile application, an enterprise application or using it as a platform for creating your own IDE.
More info: netbeans.org
JCreator is a simple and lightweight JAVA IDE from XINOX Software. It runs only on Windows platforms. It is very easy to install and starts quickly, as it is a native application. This is a good choice for beginners.
More info: http://www.apcomputerscience.com/ide/jcreator/index.htm or JCreator
Processing is an enhanced IDE. It adds some extra commands and a simplified programming model. This makes it much easier for beginners to start programming in Java. It was designed to help graphic artists learn a bit of programming without struggling too much. Processing runs on Windows, GNU/Linux and Mac OS X platforms.
More info: Processing.
BlueJ is an IDE that includes templates and will compile and run the applications for you. BlueJ is often used by classes because it is not necessary to set classpaths. BlueJ has its own sets of libraries and you can add your own under preferences. That sets the classpath for all compilations that come out of it to include those you have added and the BlueJ libraries.
BlueJ offers an interesting GUI for creation of packages and programs. Classes are represented as boxes with arrows running between them to represent inheritance/implementation or if on is constructed in another. The source code is generated by the UML diagram or vice-versa. BlueJ adds all those classes (the project) into the classpath at compile time.
By default it doesn't display the line numbers, so this should be ticked into Options\Preferences...
Kawa is basically a Java editor developed by Tek-Tools. It does not include wizards and GUI tools, best suited to experienced Java programmers in small and midsized development teams. It looks that there is no new development for Kawa.
JBuilder is an IDE with proprietary source code, sold by Embarcadero Technologies. One of the advantages is the integration with Together, a modeling tool.
More info: Embarcadero.
DrJava is an IDE developed by the JavaPLT group at Rice University. It is designed for students.
For more information see DrJava.
Setu Eye Saving Lightweight(fast)C,C++,JAVA IDE
Ribonucleotide reductase (or RNR) is the enzyme responsible for catalyzing the reduction of ribonucleotides to deoxyribonucleotides. These deoxyribonucleotides can then be utilized by the cell in DNA replication. Additionally, because of the role RNR plays in the formation of deoxyribonucleotides, RNRs are responsible for regulating the rate of DNA synthesis within the cell.[1]
Classes of RNR[2]
Despite the differences in structure and electron donor, all three classes of RNR proceed via a free radical mechanism.[4] Ultimately RNR catalyzes a reaction which results in the replacement of the 2'-hydroxyl group of the ribose with a hydrogen atom resulting in a deoxyribose moiety.
Metallocofactor Assembly in Class I RNR[5]
Although the Class I RNR’s (Ia, Ib, and Ic) have comparable structures and pathways, the metallocofactors necessarily involved in the activity of RNRs to catalyze the conversion of nucleotides to deoxynucleotides differ remarkably. The mechanisms which generate these cofactors, both in vitro and in vivo, and examining how damaged cofactors are repaired show the significance of each subgroup’s dependence on different cofactors. Studies of the pathways and activation of these metallocofactors have helped our understanding of how biology prevents mismetallation from occurring and configures cluster formation in high yields. All three class I RNR share a common catalytic mechanism in which the metal cofactor is involved directly or indirectly in the oxidation of the conserved cysteine in the active site of alpha to thiol radical S•). Class I RNR oxidation occurs by the Y• in Ia and Ib.
There exists problems with proper metal loading within the three subunits of Class I RNR. In the class Ia RNR, it requires a FeIIIFeIII-Y• cofactor, but the protein tends to bind MnII more tightly than FeII. In e.coli, correct metallation of NrdB relies on the necessity of free MnII and FeII present, while iron chaperones are also present to overcome the preference to bind MnII. The issue in class Ib RNR is that it may bind to either FeIIIFeIII-Y• and MnIIIMnIII-Y• cofactors, but only the manganese cofactor was found to be relevant in vivo. Ib binding is dependent on the preference of individual organisms and the concentrations of each metal that they possess inherently. The class Ic RNR complicates metallocofactor assembly since it requires two different metals with similar affinities for the same protein. Regulation of both levels of the metal is important in order to prevent mismetallation and its success depends on the presence of both types of metals. In C. trachomatis, the absence of MnII or at a lower than required rate may lead to diiron cluster formation instead. Thus if these levels are not regulation, low activity and improper metallation occurs. In general, if there is trouble regulating the levels of any of the required metals in each class I RNR, this leads to low activity and improper metallation and ultimately DNA synthesis is affected.
Biosynthesis and Repair of Metal Cofactors in Class I RNR[6]
Certain general principles and challenges exist when studying the metllocofactor formation with different metals and levels of complexity, as summarized below. Physiological expression conditions are taken into account in studies of metalloenzymes to confirm if the form of protein studied in vitro is the same as its active form in vivo. Class I RNRs can control the concentration of the active metal cofactors through biosynthetic and repeair pathways.
Cofactors of metal proteins are generated by specific biosynthetic pathways.
The proteins involved in the biosynthetic pathway are often associated with the operon of the metalloprotein of interest, and certain factors can be analyzed by comparing genomic sequences.
To facilitate the exchange of ligands and protein factors, metals are transferred in their reduced state.
There exists a variety of protein factors which include: metal insertase or chaperone to deliver the metal to the active site, specific redox proteins which control the oxidation state of the metal, and GTPases or ATPases which aid in the folding and unfolding processes to allow the metal to be inserted in the active site.
Due to biological redundancy that affect pathway factors, multiple deletions of genes are required in order to identify phenotypes within a gene deletion experiment.
A hierarchy of metal delivery to proteins and its regulation is inferred but not completely understood.
Compartmentalization (e.g. periplasm vs cytosol in prokaryotes) and affinities of proteins to bind certain metals preferentially are two likely factors that contribute to prevent mismetatallion at the cellular level.
Several proteins have not been isolated from their native source and form heterologous expression systems and leading to mismetallation. Since the optimum level of activity is not fully known, incorrect clusters corresponding to low activity may not be recognized.
Certain oxidants can cause damage to the metal clusters (e.g. NO and O2) and specific pathways are used in their repair.
During changes of oxidaion states, protons are typically required for this metal oxidation. Ligands to metal binding can reorganize easily and rearrangement of the carboxylate ligands are critical to the cluster assembly process.
One of the biggest complications is that the metal required for activity is often not the metal that has the highest affinity for binding to a specific protein. The Irving-Williams series (MnII < FeII < CoII < NiII < CuII > ZnII) best describes the relative affinities of proteins for divalent metals, in addition to the dependence on the particular protein coordination environment where the binding takes place. For the latter metals in the series, chaperone proteins exist to aid their movement to the active sites, while intracellularly they are likely to exist as "free" metals at a low concentration. These chaperone proteins also have another function beside delivery, which is to help maintain low levels of free concentration of these metals to prevent mismetallation and binding between other proteins that require MnII and FeII. Compartmentalization can overcome a protein's binding preference, as certain activities occur in different parts of the cell which have and require varying amounts of a metal. In cyanobacteria, it was found that MnII dependent perisplasmic protein must fold in the cytosol where MnII exists freely in a higher amount than ZuII, CuI, and CuII.
Techniques to Study RNR Activity[7]
There are several techniques used in the laboratory that are used to monitor the activity of the RNR metallocofactors. This contributes to identifying accurate proposed mechanism, generation, and function of these cofactors in vitro and in vivo by studying their movement.
Whole-Cell Electron Paramagnetic Resonance: EPR was used in studying FeIIIFeIII-Y• biosynthesis in S. cerevisae. It was found that Y• levels were sufficiently high and detectable at endogenous levels in various growth conditions, meaning that the Y• is not modulated as a function of the cell cycle. A small molecule or protein factor must be needed to rapidly reduce the Y• in cell lysates, indicating the presence of a metallocofactor which was later identified to be iron.
Mossbauer Spectroscopy: This type of spectroscopy monitors iron movement from oxidized and reduced iron pools into the RNR cofactor. It allows for the detection of all oxidation states of iron simultaneously and is sensitive to the surrounding electronic environments of the iron species present. In order for this technique to be accurate, cells first need to be labelled with the Fe57 isotope.
↑ Herrick J, Sclavi B. (2007) Ribonucleotide reductase and the regulation of DNA replication: an old story and an ancient heritage Mol Microbiol. 63:22–34
Nordlund P, Reichard P (2006). Ribonucleotide Reductases  Annu Rev Biochem, 75:681–706
↑ Cotruvo, Joseph, Jr.,  and Stubbe, JoAnne. (2011). Class I Ribonucleotide Reductases: Metallocofactor Assembly and Repair In Vitro and In Vivo Annual Review of Biochemistry, 80: 733-767
↑ Eklund H, Eriksson M, Uhlin U, Nordlund P, Logan D (1997). Ribonucleotide reductase--structural studies of a radical enzyme Biol Chem. 378:821–825
↑ Cotruvo, Joseph, Jr.,  and Stubbe, JoAnne. (2011). Class I Ribonucleotide Reductases: Metallocofactor Assembly and Repair In Vitro and In Vivo Annual Review of Biochemistry, 80: 733-767
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
Membrane fission is the process in which a cellular membrane that is initially incessant is split into two distinct membranes. This activity is important in normal processes such as exocytosis and cellular reproduction and is used to separate and transport molecules from organelles with a cell to the lipid bilayer and vice versa. Membrane fission is also the direct opposite of membrane fusion and has separate proteins that will facilitate its process.
To make a separate membrane-bound subunit without changing the original bilayer, the lipid bilayer needs to be changed and distorted locally. This must be done without creating any leakages of the carrier’s insides, thus, a fission pathway with the formation of a hemifission state is required. This hemifission state involves forming a narrow neck pathway, merging the monolayers as an intermediate, and decaying the intermediate to complete the fission reaction. The entire formation requires bending, tilting, or curving of the bilayer.
The changing of position of the lipids lead to elastic stresses, storing elastic energy in the bilayer. An outside force is needed in order to stretch, compress, tilt or bend a piece of membrane. For membrane fission to happen energetically, the total free energy (external energy plus internal energy) needs to be lower after the fission process finishes. [1]
Membrane fission begins when a cellular membrane that is initially continuous begins to form a membrane neck. This neck is similar to a fusion pore and decreases in width until it fully deteriorated and the resulting two membranes form. Energy to distort the membrane and form the membrane neck is provided by the GTPase Dynamin.
The formation of the membrane neck is related to the creation of protein coats (membrane scaffolding) performed by protein complexes. The formation of protein coats can eventually lead to a membrane neck which is then narrowed by the constant construction of these protein coats. Proteins that are involved in this include CHMP2 and CHMP3 which are both charged multivesiclar body proteins. The formation of the membrane neck can also be facilitated by the insertion of hydrophobic and amphipathic proteins into or next to the cell membrane. Examples of these proteins include the BAR-domain and Dynamin family proteins which are placed onto the cell membrane.
ESCRT-III can catalyze membrane fission similarly to Dynamin family proteins except it assemblies inside the membrane which causes it to tighten and eventually start a fission. This protein is not only important for cell membrane fission, but also cytokinesis suggesting the relationship between cell membrane fission and cell reproduction.[2]
Membrane fission shares many similarities to membrane fusion as it is the opposite process, but also has some unique features. Both will lead to the formation of a pore like structure with a membrane neck. However for fusion, this neck will expand and eventually align linearly while for fission the neck will narrow until it is fully degraded and form two membranes are more bent in nature. The reasoning for the difference in alignment is that for fusion, the end result is a longer piece of membrane while for fission the result is two shorter pieces of membrane from the starting one.
Forces that favor membrane fission will inhibit membrane fusion while the opposite will occur for forces that inhibit it. Forces that will promote membrane bending will encourage membrane fission. This is due to the increased ability for the membrane to form the membrane neck structure created in membrane fission. Forces that decrease the membrane fluidity will have the opposite effect and as a side effect, promote membrane fusion. The membrane will not be able to form the neck used for fission as readily but the neck used for fusion in which another membrane attaches to the structure and eventually straightens out.
Dynamin family proteins, which are highly involved in several membrane fission initiations as noted, are also involved in some membrane fissions initiations. An example is in the mitochondrial cell membrane in which the Dynamin family proteins restructure the membrane by starting fission and fusion processes. For this, Dnm1 and Drp1 are the main Dynamin family proteins involved in fission while Fzo1 and Mgm1 are involved in fusion.[3]
↑ Campelo, Felix; Malhotra, Vivek (2012). "Membrane Fission: The Biogenesis of Transport Carriers". Annual Review of Biochemistry 81:  407–27. doi:10.1146/annurev-biochem-051710-094912. PMID 22463692.
↑ Peel, Suman; Macheboeuf, Pauline; Martinelli, Nicolas; Weissenhorn, Winfried (2011). "Divergent pathways lead to ESCRT-III-catalyzed membrane fission". Trends in Biochemical Sciences 36 (4):  199–210. doi:10.1016/j.tibs.2010.09.004. PMID 21030261.
↑ Kozlov, Michael M.; McMahon, Harvey T.; Chernomordik, Leonid V. (2010). "Protein-driven membrane stresses in fusion and fission". Trends in Biochemical Sciences 35 (12):  699–706. doi:10.1016/j.tibs.2010.06.003. PMID 20638285.
A kitten is a baby cat.
The best way to learn to play the piano is, like most other things, practicing it daily or at least regularly. It is good to initially practice scales and chord cadences.
To put your right hand in the position to play the C-G notes, put your fingers on the keyboard in the order shown in the image below:
(Your thumb is 1, your little finger is 5. String players' note: 1 does not start on your index finger.)
You should memorize the notes in relation to black keys: B is not the seventh key from C, but it's the key on right side of the three black keys.
Additionally, you should sit at the front of the bench (or chair, although it is recommended for you to get a piano bench or something that resembles it) and place the middle c key right in front of your bellybutton. The middle c key in the keyboards containing 61 keys is the white key after 3 sets of black keys (meaning that you'll count ten black keys starting from the left and put the white key right before the black one to the right in front of your navel) For regular pianos (88 keys), add an extra 6 black keys to the set of ten.
Sit down and play around for a bit; experiment, have fun.  (Keep your wrists straight and relaxed.)  It's best to have a real piano for this, but if one isn't available, at least make sure the keyboard you're using has touch sensitivity.
Your wrists should be straight and but your hand should be relaxed. Let your arm fall to your side, relaxed and parallel to the keys. Make your hand into a fist and then extend your fingers straight. Then relax and let your fingers fall. The result is the correct hand position. Of course this is only the starting position, in real playing it immediately flies out of the window. A relaxed hand has fingers that are slightly curved, a bit like how a hand looks resting over a computer mouse. This will allow you to play the black and white keys easily.
The first things you'll probably notice (if you don't know already) is that keys on the left are low, and keys on the right are high; also that playing two adjacent keys simultaneously sounds dissonant.
The number of keys may seem overwhelming at first, but their organization is simple -- they're in a repeating pattern of octaves, one of which is pictured above.  Try finding one of the C notes in the middle of the keyboard. Now play another C above or below it -- you'll hear immediately why they have the same name.
The black keys are chromatic notes and used when the key requires notes that sound 'in-between' what you get when playing on the white keys.
4.-type of attack-DARK
"Consumer Artificial Intelligence (AI)" refers to products and systems that utilize artificially intelligent machines and software that is readily available for purchase by the public. This category of AI is implemented into a number of subgroups that each interact with the user/consumer to fulfill a consumer need.
AI research was founded on the idea that human intelligence could be studied, fully comprehended, and thus, simulated by machines. Since the field gained traction, it has faced a number of ethical and philosophical questions. That said, it is an ever-growing industry that manifests itself in everyday life.
Computer programs used to simulate a human dialogue partner. One can interact with them via text. Some usages include customer service, info gathering (Search for user keywords and make choice) chat rooms.[2] Chatbots often use complex natural language processors to thoroughly and accurately listen for and respond to user input. Some simpler designs use a database to scan for user input (words) and automatically select the best response given the input received.
Help Bots: In terms of customer services chatbots, there are chatboxes that may appear as you are browsing a web page. You may have realized that there would be a prompt asking if you would like any help or if you had any questions. If you typed into the chatbox, an automated system will reply to you depending on whether the keywords you typed in matches any of their pre-programmed responses.
Cleverbot[3]: An AI developed by Rollo Carpenter to chat with people on the internet about anything. As with any AI’s that require personal interaction, this chat AI learns from what others say to it. Sometimes conversations will make sense and it’ll feel like you’re speaking to an actual human, but then there are times when Cleverbot says something completely random.
Another use of voice-aided AI comes in the form of "intelligent personal assistants (IPA)". In other words, systems that work with other applications and programs to execute user requests. Nowadays, one can easily have access to a virtual personal assistant whether it is through their mobile devices, tablets, or laptops. These personal assistants can perform many tasks such as tell the weather, jokes, and news, per a user's request.
Siri (Speech Interpretation and Recognition Interface) [5]: Apple's iOS IPA that pulls from a natural language database to complete requests made by users. Utilized on Apple devices (i.e. Mac, iPhone, iPad). Offers one a more convenient way to have hands-free interaction with your Apple devices. Over time, it becomes quicker and more personalized based on patterns and habits of the user. It also learns to recognize the voice patterns of the user better through consistent use. Can be activated with "Hey Siri." Siri also has access to the built-in Apple apps on your device such as Maps and Mail. If requested, these apps can be opened by Siri and the features utilized.[6]
Google Now[7]/Google Assistant[8]: (Google Assistant is an upgrade and extension of Google Now). Google-developed IPA that can be used by Apple's iOS or any Android device and made available through the Google Search application. Like Siri, Google Now utilizes a natural language database and is also predictive given users habits. Can be activated with "OK Google" and "Hey Google."
Microsoft Cortana[9]: Similar to Siri and Google Assistant, Cortana is Microsoft's version of an intelligent personal assistant. Cortana can be found on Windows devices such as a Windows 10 PC. Can be activated with "Hey Cortana" or brought up through the search button in the taskbar. There is also an integration with Microsoft Edge, Microsoft's web browser, where Cortana goes with it. You can type in a question and Cortana will give you a response back.
Chatbots have a number of implementations that are often used to gather information from users, however, there has been a growing concern over chatbots that are found in recreational settings, such as toys. Concern over what data is being collected and where the data is going lingers around chatbot usage. In addition to that, with most IPA's, the devices are always actively listening in order to see if you'd say the command to open them up so that brings up a privacy concern because it's always listening to what you say.
Home Automated systems are nothing new but recently there has been a lot product development of such systems. Each Home A.I. system is unique in its functionality and design but the most common characteristic that defines a Home Automated System is the function to link all your electronics and systems in your home through a single interface and control them remotely or automatically. Most of these systems are voice-controlled and come equipped with an A.I. similar to iPhone’s personal assistant Siri, or Google’s Google Assistant.
Devices & Benefits/Features[10]There are many competing products in this market but one of the most talked about is Amazon’s Echo.
Amazon Echo (Alexa)[11]: Echo is a cylindrical shaped device that has a voice-controlled interface, and has much of the same functionality as a smartphone virtual assistant. Can be activated with the word "Alexa." She is always actively listening for the wake word, however there is an option for you to mute the microphone for privacy. It can do many things that a personal assistant can do: like answer questions tell you the weather, or play music. But it can also be used to communicate with third party hardware, allowing you to control electronics like your light switches and thermostats. Some devices even come equipped with security features. Similar to the IPA's, Alexa can learn to recognize your voice patterns. There is a "Skills" store that Alexa can "learn." Afterwards, you are able to use the skill with whatever command that is programmed with it. There are many categories within the Skills like Music, Travel, and Food.
Branto: A spherical home assistant can show you a 360 view of its surroundings, which you can view remotely. Its software will also alert you when it detects suspicious movements while you're away.
EmoSPARK: More focused on the artificial intelligence aspect. EmoSPARK uses facial recognition to sense your emotions. So if it detects that you’re sad it will try to cheer you up by telling you jokes or playing cheerful music. When you don’t want EmoSPARK to respond to your voice, you can always put it in privacy mode which is a feature that is not available in the other Home A.I. systems
Google Home[8]: A Chromecast enabled-speaker. Can be used with Google Assistant. Pairs with third party apps and devices like Philips Hue light bulbs to turn on your lights if desired. Very similar features with Amazon Echo. Convenient with Android devices and gear.
An advantage of a Home A.I. assistant is its ease of access. It is very convenient as it can control the lighting within your house or thermostat with just a simple command. Security cameras can also be activated with just one command. Because Home A.I. assistants are voice-controlled, they are simple to use for people of all ages and groups. Furthermore, it gives you the feeling of having an actual personal assistant where you can easily get access to information regarding either your personal life or what is happening around the world.
One of the disadvantages with all of these Home A.I. assistants is its lack of portability. You can’t carry it around like a smartphone, it is only meant for the home and can only be accessed from one room. There are also some serious issues that comes with owning a Digital Home assistant. Some owners for example have expressed concerns that their privacy is being violated. One couple, for example, were baffled when Echo unexpectedly responded with “That’s not very nice to say” when Echo heard them arguing. This couple also were shown an advertisement for diapers a few days after they were discussing about babies. Additionally, Home AI consoles like Amazon Echo were reported to have security vulnerabilities. It would be unlikely but very possible that someone could hack into your system through man-in-the-middle or other means. Once they have access to your system they could potentially unlock your automated door or eavesdrop on your conversations.
Although a lot of these Home Automated Systems offer a lot of great services that can improve your quality of life, it seems you have to sacrifice privacy for ease of living. When purchasing one of these devices a consumer has to decide whether they are willing to allow possible violation of privacy for convenience.
Though it may not seem like it, much of the Artificial Intelligence we know today have been integrated through video games. AI have been integrated into games to help players navigate through an alternate reality that have simulated real-life situations. Through this, many game developers have used specialized game monitoring software to track a player’s action, thoughts, and predictions through the game engine’s telemetry. This has caused a variety of moral and ethical concerns, as it is an invasion of ones' privacy.
An example of this in research would be Crowdsourcing Human-Robot Interaction.[12] The research on human-robot interaction was over whether it was possible to use online games as a means of generating large-scale information. By developing a small game of task-management without any strict assignment of social roles between a human user and a robot, the researchers were able to encapsulate the decisions of 82,479 actions and analyze how humans would react to different situations.
The other equally difficult ethical concerns that this raises are the moral obligations of society toward its robotic counterpart which include the right to life and liberty, freedom of thought and expression and equality before the law.[13] The other ethical concern would be the overall transparency over creating these agents; AI developers are representatives of future humanity and thus have an ethical obligation to be transparent in their efforts.[14]
Games have been around since the beginning of mankind, but electronic games are relatively new, historically speaking. In the 20th century we saw the rise of Artificial Intelligence which has been used in many different facets of society from food production, to medicine, to entertainment.
One such entertainment use is in playing against humans. IBM was working on a machine named Deep Thought (later renamed Deep Blue) that could calculate chess moves in advance, and could compete against human chess players. To show off its skill, IBM challenged a world champion chess player, Garry Kasparov, to a chess match. The first game it won was in 1996, where Deep Blue won the first match,but lost with a score of 2-4. IBM would make upgrades to their machine, and in 1997, hold a rematch against Kasparov. This time, Deep Blue won the match by making what Kasparov referred to as a deeply intelligent move. This left Kasparov angry at the end, accusing IBM of cheating. IBM denied this accusation. Kasparov then asked for a rematch. IBM denied him this request, and simultaneously shutdown and dismantled Deep Blue. It revealed 15 years later that, the completely unexpected move by Deep Blue back in 1997 was actually a bug in the programming. Deep Blue was unsure of what to do as a first move, so it randomly made a play – which happened to be a good one that threw Kasparov off his game.
AlphaGo began as a research project around 2014 to test a form of machine learning called deep learning on the game called Go. While working on this project, programmers decided to test their AI against 2-dan Go player Fan Hui, and beat him in 2015. This marked the first time that a machine has beaten a professional player, unhandicapped at Go. The game of Go is considered a difficult game for machines to win at, because it involves a very large number of possible moves that a machine has trouble deciding what its next move should be. A year later in 2016, AlphaGo beat 9-dan professional player Lee Sedol.
AlphaZero, a repurposed version of AlphaGo, can play games like shigo and chess. Because of machine learning, it doesn't require any human input or knowledge in order to play a game like chess. All it needs are the rules of the game and it is good to go. AlphaZero took just four hours to learn the entirety of chess and beat the world's best chess-playing program. The separating difference with AlphaZero and other competitive AI's is that it doesn't need any prior knowledge with its machine learning. It learns from its mistakes as it plays.
While the advancement of AI to a level where it can beat humanity’s greatest champions may be hailed as a great testament to our technological prowess, we need to consider what implications (if any) this means for the future. One of the biggest questions about AI, is what if they act outside their parameters? What if they make decisions that we didn’t intend? In the case of DeepBlue, the machine was created to win at chess by following an expansive algorithm. What ended up happening was DeepBlue winning at chess by not following the algorithm. This bug caused debate about the legitimacy of the win. What if this machine had a more dangerous task, such as target shooting with a gun, and a bug decided that the “closest” target is a stack of unused targets directly behind it, between the robot and a crowd of people. This calls into questions several issues, but one of which is whether or not
t’s acceptable to make an AI capable of out-performing a human at the expense of safety or regulation.
Cars are also in the field of AI Consumer technologies. One of the most prominent fields of development on autonomous technologies is the automobilistic. The idea of self-driving cars is one of the most common amongst human beings when talked about how the future should be. As the idea completely changes the concept of how transportation will be developed, new companies have emerged to compete with the classic players that have been in the industry since the beginning. In most of the cases, these new companies are not in possession of the car itself but rather have created the technology behind them to make them autonomous. Some of these companies pushing towards self-driven cars are Waymo, Tesla, Uber or Aptiv.[17]
It is important to notice that there are different levels depending on how important is the figure of the driver and how much he/she is required to control the car.[18]
Level 0: No self-driving features.
Level 1: Cars may have one or more systems that can control speed or steering.
Level 2: Cars that can control steering and speed simultaneously, without driver interaction for short periods of time.
Level 3: Cars can control a car in all situations and the car is constantly monitoring the road but in case of a failure will require the driver to take control of the car.
Level 4: No driver interaction is needed and the car will stop itself if the systems fail. From this level and above, things like steering wheel or brakes for a driver are not needed but can be included in the car.
Level 5: These cars are not supposed to be driven by people in any circumstances. They can monitor every aspect of the road and condition such as roads with no clear lines for example.
Autonomous vehicles[19] can change the way we communicate through transport taking it to a whole new level. Now that the figure of the driver disappears, the number of possibilities on what to do in your driving routines multiply. One of these possibilities can be the ability to attend calls, work on your projects or simply admiring the views of a ten-hour journey with no necessity of being concentrated on the road. Another important aspect will be that everyone will be able to use a car since the figure of the diver disappears.It will also create a safer atmosphere for the driving community. People often cannot communicate properly or let their emotions get the best of them which can lead to issues on the road. Since cars[20] are controlled by software, driving becomes safer and more efficient since randomness is removed. This is the basic idea to create networks of cars. All the cars in the road are interconnected between them, which makes everyone aware of what movements are going to be made which should make the cars on a road act like an accordion synchronize between them. As a consequence, traffic jams will disappear or at least be reduced to a higher amount which results also in a positive impact for the environment.
The main problem with autonomous cars is the security of their passengers. Any small failure in the system could result in the death of people and that reason make the development of the algorithms critic since life is in danger. Security also becomes one of the key aspects of autonomous cars because if an attacker is able to get access to someone’s car could control the car the way he wants being able to kill the passenger if needed. There is also a technological barrier in the case of the car networks we talked about since they need practically no delay because of our initial problem. A small fraction of a second in taking the decision could result in tragedy. It is believed that with the introduction of 5G and its own specification[20], it would be possible to develop this kind of networks. IT is important to notice that autonomous cars bring a problem of transitioning due to having to change everyone in the world or even a country to fully adopt the autonomous car to have a perfect and unison network. When they are fully established, people will become more dependent of machines which will lead to many people to loss driving jobs like taxis, and truck drivers.
Privacy concerns[21] are also a problem with this evolution since now car manufacturers will be able to know where we are moving at all times. Autonomous cars also bring one big ethical and law-related problem. Imagine the situation in which someone crosses the street when it is not permitted and a car is approaching the position. What should the car do? Should it keep the same route and kill the person crossing, or should it crash itself killing the person inside the car? In both cases, who is responsible for the death of that individual or group of individuals? These are some of the questions that need to be addressed regarding autonomous vehicles and AI technology in general because it brings great possibilities for everyone to improve life quality, but also big questions that could not happen due to the non-existence of technology similar to this.
Technology is spreading at a rapid pace and so is its outreach. With every day that passes, the more people that gain access to computers or computer-like devices. This spread and access to technology poses a risk and many threats to individuals and companies alike. These risks come in the form of malicious content such as viruses and malware. To combat these threats, anti-viruses have been produced to protect the users of the technology we hold today.[22]
Standard Antivirus Methods[22]
Many antiviruses today use several strategies in order to mitigate the risks of attacks and malware that can affect a computer system such as:
Signature-based detection: Files, programs, and applications (especially .EXE files) are checked against a known list of malware.
Heuristic-based detection: A commonly used method that utilizes signature-based detection as it can try to detect similar variants of known malware or new malware similar to known viruses.
Behavioral-based detection: This method is used more to detect malware based on the characteristics and behavior of malware during its execution. It can detect if the program performs malicious actions but only during execution.
Sandbox detection: This method works almost the same way as the behavioral-based detection but is different as it runs the suspected program in a separate virtual environment where it can be safely tracked.
The Purpose of AI Antivirus[23] [24]
The methods above have been somewhat effective for the past several decades but as the technology age grows and grows, it may not be enough to mitigate new threats that we see everyday.  This marks the beginning of a new generation of anti-virus methods which integrates AI and machine learning in order to try to effectively reduce the damage of zero-day attacks and new viruses as well as variants of other types of malware. AI’s role in this market is to identify new threats and patterns on its own and be able to add that information to existing databases. This would decrease the time it would take to identify risks massively. Companies like Microsoft are getting into AI in antiviruses because as they said “Microsoft sees artificial intelligence as the next solution for security as attacks get more sophisticated. ‘If we're going to stay on top of anything that is changing that fast, you have to automate,’ Lefferts said. About 96 percent of detected cyberattacks are brand new, he noted.” AI is here to decrease the human intervention in antiviruses and automate as antiviruses would then be able to identify threats by themselves. Lots of time will be saved and mostly like a lot of damage could be reduced. This all stems to the fact that the AI themselves are faster and more efficient that humans are in this area of expertise and many humans cannot keep up against them.
There are several methods of AI antivirus detection that are being utilized right now or are being considered. Many of these methods go beyond the nature and complexity of current antiviruses. They are:
Heuristic Technology: This technology is very similar to the heuristic methods of standard antiviruses as it detects unknown viruses using previous learned instruction sequences or sets of previously known malware to new variants or new viruses altogether.
Data mining techniques: This technique tries to utilize the act of data mining, or the examination of big data to generate new information to learn if a program is malicious or not. Data mining is supposedly be able to detect double the amount of new malicious executables.
Agent Technology: This methodology is hoping to have computers automatically and efficiently respond to new viruses before they are able to spread rapidly and do major damage without any holdback. Effectively, the agent technology is a collection of “agents”, which can be anything from small forms of artificial life to simple computer programs. The whole system is similar to an immune system as the agents function like antibodies. The agents perform simple tasks individually and together can perform intelligent and complex tasks. Such tasks include copying/moving files, opening files, and executing files. Once a irregulrity is detected on a system by an agent, because they do simple tasks to find them, different agents come to capture samples, then more agents approach to remove the virus, and more agents come to report the incident and compile those reports.[26]
Artificial Immune Technology: This technology is very similar to agent technology and uses many of the same concepts such as the immune system of a human and agents. It is mainly based on biological strategies made by our immune system. The major difference is that this system is more complex and acts more like the biological immune system. It is able to evolutionary improve itself.
Artificial Neural Networks: This methodology uses the concept of neural networks of humans and animals and how we think. It is a popular concept as it allows for associate memory and real-time calculations to detect malicious code in real-time. It uses a large-scale parallel and distributed processing and storage that is self-organized by the system, adapts, and has self-learning technology.
These methods of antivirus AI are implemented or considered in order combat the rising increase of new viruses everyday.
The ethical issues involved in this are similar to ethical issues of AI in other markets and areas. As human interaction and intervention decreases, how do we decide how the AI should proceed according to our standards? AIs will make the decisions in terms of the security of our technology and devices and this is an issue as they have a lot of power because of those decisions. A decrease of human intervention and interaction and increased automation in our technology will result in increased AI authority. There is a great many people in our world today with access to phones or computers that have access to the Internet. Every person who holds any piece of technology is subject to malicious code and malware. Every piece of tech is vulnerable in some way and that means that it can be attacked with malicious intent. This is what many people hope AI will help with. But this also puts a lot of responsibility on the shoulders of the AI as well.
Artificial Intelligence (AI), where computers perform undertakings that are typically expected to require human intelligence, is as of now being discussed in almost every area of science and engineering. AI has been around us for decades, and the increasing adoption of artificial in healthcare solves a variety of problems for the patients, hospital and the industry overall. Major scientific competitions like ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenges are giving proof that computers can accomplish human-like competence in image recognition. AI has likewise empowered huge advance in speech recognition and natural language processing. These advances open questions regarding how such abilities can support, or even improve, human decision making in health and healthcare.
We are entering a new era of health – Modern health where systems can treat and cure more diseases than ever before. New technology is bringing innovation to old treatments. Yet significant quality, access and cost issues remain, and our health systems are becoming increasingly unsustainable.  The emergence and increasing use of artificial intelligence (AI) and robotics will have a significant impact on healthcare systems around the world. The potential for both AI and robotics in healthcare is huge. Much the same as in our consistently lives, AI and robotics, both are progressively a part of our healthcare ecosystem.
AI is getting progressively advanced at doing what people do, however more effectively, more rapidly and at a lower cost. Also, the AI health market is seeing explosive growth. Development opportunities in healthcare are difficult to find substantial investment, yet artificial intelligence (AI) is a self-running engine for the development in healthcare. As per Accenture analysis, whenever combined, key clinical well-being AI applications can possibly make $150 billion in yearly investment funds for the United States medicinal services economy by 2026. AI is exploding in popularity with the immense power to release upgrades in cost, quality, and access. Development in the AI health market is anticipated that would reach $6.6 billion by 2021—that is a compound annual development rate of 40 percent. In only the following five years, the health AI market will develop more than 10x. Development is as of now quickening, as the number of healthcare-focused AI deals went up from less than 20 in 2012, to nearly 70 by mid-2016.[27]
Artificial intelligence and robotic technologies have long been seen as promising areas for healthcare. The explosion of healthcare data combined with the rise in demand from aging populations around the world, rising costs, and a shortage of supply – both in the number of healthcare professionals needed to treat and care for an increasing number of sick people and the availability and access to a broader range of necessary services than ever before – has left a monumental gap that only technology can fill.[28]
Mining medical records within minutes in the age of Big Data, it is no doubt how important patient information is. At the point when such tech giants as Google or IBM show up in the field of patient information mining, everybody knows, it is something worth doing.
1.) Google Deepmind Health: Recently, the AI explore the branch of the organization launched its Google Deepmind Health project, which is utilized to mine medicinal records keeping in mind the end goal to serve better and speedier health services. Google Deepmind can process a huge number of restorative data inside minutes. In spite of the fact that exploration into such information reaping and machine learning is in its initial stage, right now Google is participating in the Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust to enhance eye treatment. Additionally, Verily, the life sciences arm of Google's umbrella organization, Alphabet is chipping away at its hereditary information gathering activity, the Baseline Study. It plans to utilize a portion of similar calculations that power Google's popular pursuit catch keeping in mind the end goal to investigate what makes individuals sound. This likewise incorporates exploring different avenues regarding malady checking advances, including a computerized contact focal point that could identify glucose levels.[29]
2.) IBM WatsonPaths: IBM Watson propelled a venture called WatsonPaths in a joint effort with the Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of Case Western Reserve University. WatsonPaths comprises of two subjective processing advancements that can be utilized by the AI calculation, Watson, which are relied upon to enable doctors to settle on more educated and exact choices quicker and to separate new bits of knowledge from electronic therapeutic records (EMR).[29]
In the course of recent years, the rapid development of technology has begun to satisfy this guarantee and it's just the beginning. As these technologies grow, quicker and better diagnoses; and the sky is the limit from there powerful medications will spare more lives and cure more diseases, what's more, we will have more open doors empowered by this technology to live more beneficial and healthier lives. In any case, whether we like, or dislike AI and robotics are the future of human care. “Access to quality, affordable healthcare, and better healthcare for everybody is the ultimate goal.” The financial and social preferences to be picked up from integrating AI and robotics flawlessly into our current healthcare systems, and afterward making new models of healthcare based on these technology, are gigantic. However, healthcare stays individual, and we must not lose sight of the human component. This will mean rethinking the different parts of healthcare professionals and guaranteeing that the new fundamental abilities are understood and taught in medical schools.
↑ "Chatterbot." Wikipedia. Wikimedia Foundation, n.d. Web. 27 Apr. 2016.
↑ Coldewey, Devin. "What Are Chatbots? And Why Does Big Tech Love Them So Much?" NBC News. NBC Universal, 11 May 2016. Web. 24 Apr. 2018.
↑ Saenz, Aaron. "Cleverbot Chat Engine Is Learning From The Internet  to Talk Like A Human." SingularityHub. Singularity Education Group, 13 Jan. 2010. Web. 24 Apr. 2018.
↑ Beal, Vangie. "IPA - Intelligent Personal Assistant." Webopedia. QuinStreet Inc., (n.d.). Web. 24 Apr. 2018.
↑ "Siri." Wikipedia. Wikimedia Foundation, n.d. Web. 27 Apr. 2016.
↑ O'Boyle, Britta & Grabham, Dan. "What Is Siri? Apple's Personal Voice Assistant Explained." Pocket-lint. Pocket-lint Limited, 9 Feb. 2018. Web. 24 Apr. 2018.
↑ "Google Now." Wikipedia. Wikimedia Foundation, n.d. Web. 27 Apr. 2016.
↑ a b Betters, Elyse. "What Is Google Assistant, How Does It Work, and Which Devices Offer It?" Pocket-lint. Pocket-lint Limited, 26 Jan. 2018. Web. 24 Apr. 2018.
↑ Fee, Tyler & Grabham, Dan. "Cortana in Windows 10: How It Works on the Taskbar and in Microsoft Edge." Pocket-lint. Pocket-lint Limited, 8 Mar. 2018. Web. 24 Apr. 2018.
↑ Carroll, Rory. "Goodbye Privacy, Hello Alexa: Here's to Amazon Echo, the Home Robot Who Hears It All." The Guardian. Guardian News and Media, 21 Nov. 2015. Web. 27 Apr. 2016.
↑ O'Boyle, Britta & Grabham, Dan. "Amazon Alexa Review: What Is Alexa and What Can Amazon Echo Do?" Pocket-lint. Pocket-lint Limited, 2 Mar. 2018. Web. 24 Apr. 2018.
↑ [The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition
↑ [Open Source AI. Bill Hibbard. 2008 proceedings of the First Conference on Artificial General Intelligence, eds. Pei Wang, Ben Goertzel and Stan Franklin.]
↑ Gibbs, Samuel. "AlphaZero AI Beats Champion Chess Program After Teaching Itself in Four Hours." The Guardian. Guardian News and Media, 7 Dec. 2017. Web. 24 Apr. 2018.
↑ Greenblatt, Nathan A. 2016. “Self-driving cars and the law.” IEEE Spectrum 53, no. 2: 46-51. Academic Search Complete EBSCOhost (accessed April 27, 2016).
↑ "Self-Driving Technology" CES. CES, n.d. Web. 9 Apr. 2018. https://www.ces.tech/Show-Floor/Marketplaces/Self-Driving-Technology.aspx
↑ Aaron Cole. “What are the different levels of self-driving cars?” Washington Post. 21.February.2017. Web. 9 April 2018 https://www.washingtonpost.com/cars/what-are-the-different-levels-of-self-driving-cars/2017/02/21/444a2a80-f877-11e6-aa1e-5f735ee31334_story.html
↑ Filipe Mutz, Lucas P. Veronese, Thiago Oliveira-Santos, Edilson de Aguiar, Fernando A. ➞Auat Cheein, Alberto Ferreira De Souza, Large-scale mapping in complex field scenarios ➞using an autonomous car, Expert Systems with Applications, Volume 46, 15 March 2016, Pages 439-462, ISSN 0957-4174, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2015.10.045
↑ a b Ludovic Lassauce.”The future of mobile and the autonomous vehicle network” Tata Communications blog. Tata Communications, 11 Jan. 2018. Web 8.Apr.2018
↑ Le Vine, S., Zolfaghari, A., & Polak, J. (2015). Autonomous cars: The tension between occupant experience and intersection capacity. Transportation Research: Part C, 521-14.
↑ a b How Antivirus Works? | How Antivirus Software Detect Virus. (2017, October 05). Retrieved April 22, 2018, from https://antivirus.comodo.com/how-antivirus-software-works.php
↑ Rahman, H. (2017, June 30). Artificial Intelligence Techniques To Power Antivirus Detection: Identify A Threat By Just Seeing It. Retrieved April 22, 2018, from https://www.eyerys.com/articles/artificial-intelligence-techniques-power-antivirus-detection-identify-threat-just-seeing-it
↑ Ng, A. (2017, June 27). Microsoft is using 400 million PCs to build antivirus protection. Retrieved April 22, 2018, from https://www.cnet.com/news/microsoft-build-smart-antivirus-using-400-million-computers-artificial-intelligence/
↑ Wang, X., Yang, G., Li, Y., & Liu, D. (2008). Review on the application of artificial intelligence in antivirus detection systemi. 2008 IEEE Conference on Cybernetics and Intelligent Systems. doi:10.1109/iccis.2008.4670733
↑ Trently, C. M. (n.d.). Computer Virus Response Using Autonomous Agent Technology. Mitretek Systems,1-10. Retrieved April 22, 2018.
↑ ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI): Healthcare’s New Nervous System. (2017). Accenture.com. Retrieved 24 April 2018, from https://www.accenture.com/us-en/insight-artificial-intelligence-healthcare
↑ Why AI and robotics will define New Health. (2017, June). Pwc.com. Retrieved 23 April 2018, from https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/industries/healthcare/publications/ai-robotics-new-health/ai-robotics-new-health.pdf
↑ a b Top Artificial Intelligence Companies in Healthcare to Keep an Eye On - The Medical Futurist. (2018). The Medical Futurist. Retrieved 23 April 2018, from https://medicalfuturist.com/top-artificial-intelligence-companies-in-healthcare/
Here are some examples of Equational sentences in English:
So now we have the words boy and big.
A big boy.
But we wanted to say "The boy is big", we did not want to say "a big boy". Let's try again. I must have forgotten something. Can you guess what it is.
(al-wa-lad—ka-biir)
The first word means "the boy" the second means "big". So how come there was no word meaning "is" in the sentence, you might ask. This is because in Arabic "is" is not used for such sentences, it is understood, by the sentence structure (the way the words are placed).
Now here are some examples, memorize these, and practice building your own:
(ar-ra-jul—ka-biir)
(ar-ra-jul—ra-jul)
(al-im-ra-a--im-ra-a)
Once an \hbox has been declared that can grow arbitrarily wide, the mode that is invoked is the Restricted Horizontal Mode.
One example of being within a restricted horizontal mode occurs when you use \multirow command from within a table.
No use of any symbols or escape sequences or even attempt to type parentheses or other special characters.
High Speed Rail (HSR) is a mode of rail transport that uses specially designed infrastructure and rolling stock to transport goods (usually passengers) at speeds higher than conventional rail.  There is not one single definition of HSR in use throughout the world.  The European Union defines HSR in Directive 96/48 as encompassing three elements[1]:
Infrastructure: track built specifically for high-speed travel of at least 250 km/h or track upgraded for high-speed travel of at least 200 km/h.
Rolling Stock: technologically advanced rolling stock capable of safe, uninterrupted travel at speeds of at least 250 km/h.
System Compatibility: rolling stock and infrastructure characteristics must have excellent compatibility.
The International Union of Railways, from which data was obtained for the quantitative portion of this assessment, generally relies on the EU definition, noting that HSR is more about the combination of all the elements that constitute the system (infrastructure, rolling stock, operating conditions) than about a train traveling above a certain speed[2].
High Speed Rail has several advantages as a transportation option:
Capacity: HSR has the potential to move large amounts of people quickly and safely, mitigating congestion on road and air infrastructure[3].
Safety and Reliability: HSR is less impacted by weather conditions than air or road transport[4] and has proven to be a very safe mode of travel for riders[5].
Environmental Benefits: HSR uses less energy per passenger kilometer than road or air transport[6].
The market for HSR is generally to connect large, closely-spaced urban areas where there is a high demand for transport.  It is generally thought that HSR competes best at distances between markets of 200 kilometers to 800 kilometers, although some suggest that depending on regional characteristics, they could be competitive at longer distances[7].
In many countries after WWII, automobile and airplane travel became the dominant modes.  While passenger train travel continued to be popular in many places, roads and airports were filling up with congestion and authorities were looking for ways relieve this.  Several countries had experimented with running trains at high speeds before WWII, but it wasn't until after the war that serious effort was put forth for implementation.
The first true High-Speed Railway was the Shinkansen in Japan, which began operations in 1964.  It connected Tokyo with Osaka, a distance of 515 km.  Due to Japan's mountainous terrain, the country's rail lines had a narrow gauge (1067 mm) and sharp curvature that were not suited well for higher speeds.  Because of this, a completely new line was built at standard gauge and with many tunnels and bridges to afford high rates of speed and greater capacity.  Continuous welded rail was used to increase comfort of passengers and decrease wear and tear on track joints.  The initial design for the system and rolling stock allowed for a top speed of 250 km/h, however, the World Bank, which was financially supporting the project, was concerned that the technology had not proven itself and therefore limited the top speed to 210 km/h.  A few years later this restriction was lifted as the technology proved to be safe and reliable.[8]
The first High-Speed Railway in Europe that operated with a top speed above 250 km/h was the French TGV on the Paris-Lyon route.  After success in Japan, officials and researchers in France began looking at implementing high speed trains.  Initially, the plan was to use gas turbine engine technology to power the trains.  However, the 1973 oil shock considerably raised prices and made it clear that electrification was the way to go.  This forced researchers to develop pantographs that would be able to withstand speeds above 250 km/h.  It was decided that the initial route for implementing this new technology would be the Paris - Lyon corridor, as it was already at capacity and was one of the busiest corridors in the country.  A completely new rail line would be built, like the Shinkansen, that would use very gentle curvature along with bridges and tunnels.  Once this was accomplished and testing completed, the line opened for service in 1981.  One advantage that the TGV has over the Shinkansen is that it uses the same track gauge as the rest of the rail lines in France.  This means that it has the ability to use existing infrastructure to access crowded places without a completely new rail line needing to be built.  Also, if there is an incident on the HSR line, trains can be routed on other tracks and still reach their final destination.[9]
Early HSR lines in both Japan and Europe were a success and quickly became very popular.  Their ability to significantly decrease travel time compared to driving, as well as be time competitive with air travel, allowed them to gain a large market share.  The original market niche for HSR was a heavily traveled corridor between two large urban areas that were not too close but also not too far apart.  It was in these places where the added capacity of HSR as well as decreased travel time and increased comfort really made them popular and well utilized.
The Role of Policy in Birthing Phase
One policy that helped with the birthing phase of HSR in Europe was the heavy regulation of airlines during this time.  Airlines operating in Europe were bound by a host of operating agreements between nations that dictated everything from fares to frequency to capacity.  There was very little room for competition.[10]  As more HSR lines were implemented and passengers shifted from air to train on these routes, there was almost nothing the airlines could do to try and use fare prices to compete with HSR and gain back passengers.  This has since changed as the air market in Europe was liberalized in the early 1990's, and now airlines have almost complete freedom to decide fares, frequencies, aircraft sizes, and routes.[11]  However, during the birthing phase, this heavy regulation on airlines helped prop up new HSR lines.
Growth of HSR continued steadily from its birth between the mid 1960's and early 1980's.  Determining exactly when it went from the birth to the growth phase is a little tricky.  If it is assumed that the birthing phase ends when 10% of the saturation level (K) is reached, this happened right around the year 2000 (see the quantitative analysis below).  However, a quick look at the chart below shows the steady rise through the 90's and 00's and then the sudden explosive growth starting in 2009.  So it could be argued that this is when the growth phase really began.  This huge, sudden growth in the kilometers of HSR is mostly due to the opening of new lines in China.  China has been building new HSR lines at a frantic pace since the mid 00's and by the end of 2013, had over 10,000 kilometers of lines in operation - the largest network in the world.[12]  In addition, over 7,500 more kilometers are under construction and another 3,000 kilometers are in the planning stages.  Almost all of these lines have top speeds between 250 and 350 km/h.
For many years, HSR was exclusive to Europe and East Asia (unless one counts the Northeast Corridor in the U.S. as HSR, which the author does not agree with).  Recently however, countries elsewhere have begun implementing HSR technology.  Turkey opened their first HSR line in 2009 and now has almost 700 km in operation, with another 400 under construction.[13]  They plan to eventually have a network of almost 3,000 kilometers that would connect almost all parts of the country.  Saudi Arabia is also constructing a HSR line between Medina and Mecca that is set to begin operations in 2015.  Morocco is building a new HSR line that will be the first one on the African continent.
In the United States, HSR has had a tough time catching popularity with politicians and other government authorities.  Despite President Obama providing $8 billion in stimulus funds in 2009 for HSR projects, energy behind it has been hard to come by as of late.  California voters approved initial funding for a line between LA and San Francisco, but this has since been bogged down in legal and financial messes that may end up derailing (no pun intended) the entire project.  As the technology continues its trajectory through the growth phase worldwide and every year gets one step closer to a mature system, spending the enormous capital costs required for HSR will become more and more questionable.
Worldwide, High Speed Rail has not reached the mature phase yet.  It is still a growing technology, with many kilometers of track being added annually and thousands more kilometers in the planning stages.  According to the quantitative analysis below, it is estimated that HSR will reach maturity sometime around 2050, although future growth is highly dependent on governments being able to take on the massive capital costs and debt associated not only with constructing a HSR line, but also operating and maintaining it.  So far, governments have been willing to undertake this as the benefits of HSR have been seen to outweigh the enormous costs.  As the technology enters the mature phase, investing huge amounts of capital will bring diminishing returns on investment.  Many of the ideal markets for HSR will already have lines and thus, new lines will be located in markets that are not quite as ideal and will likely struggle to capture enough ridership to cover costs.  Also, much of the technology by that time will be locked-in, discouraging innovation that could potentially benefit the system.
Data obtained for the quantitative analysis portion of this assessment came from the International Union of Railways[14], which keeps track of worldwide HSR development.  The metric used for analysis was total kilometers of HSR lines in the world.  Only lines in operation by 2013 or earlier were used.  Lines under construction or in the planning stages were excluded.
In order to analyze the life cycle of high speed rail, the following equation was used: S(t) = K/[1+exp(-b(t-t0)]
K = saturation status level
t0 = inflection time (year when 1/2 K is achieved)
Since HSR has not reached maturity, K was unknown and needed to be estimated.  This was done using an ordinary least squares regression, with different values of K used to do each regression.  The regressions gave values of r-squared, which measures the goodness-of-fit of the estimate with the actual data.  The closer the r-squared is to 1, the better the fit.
This chart shows actual total kilometers and predicted total kilometers of high speed rail.
Using the above method, a K value of 50,000 kilometers was determined.  The r-squared value was 0.95, which shows that using 50,000 for K will match the actual data quite well.  This K value was also chosen because it coincides with data from the International Union of Railways, who added up all the HSR lines in the world that are either in operation, under construction, or in planning.  The total for this came to about 54,000 kilometers[15].  With this in mind, K = 50,000 seems like a reasonable estimate of the saturation of HSR kilometers, as some of those planned lines will probably not get built while others that are not currently being planned may eventually be constructed.  Using 50,000 for K gives an inflection time (t0) of 2023.  This is the year when the total kilometers of HSR will stop increasing at an increasing rate.  It is also the year when HSR will be approximately half way through its growth phase, with each additional year beyond this getting closer to the mature phase.  Assuming that the mature phase begins at about 90% of K, this will occur right around the year 2050.  Assuming that the birthing phase ends at about 10% of K, this occurred in the year 2000, although explosive growth would not start occurring for about 9 years.
↑ http://www.uic.org/spip.php?article971
↑ Rodrigue, Jean-Paul (2013). The Geography of Transport Systems. New York: Routledge, 416 pages.
↑ http://www.uic.org/spip.php?article443
↑ Rodrigue, Jean-Paul (2013). The Geography of Transport Systems. New York: Routledge, 416 pages.
↑ http://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/infrastructure/studies/doc/2010_high_speed_rail_en.pdf
↑ Smith, Roderick A. (2003). “The Japanese Shinkansen”, The Journal of Transport History (Imperial College, London) 24/2: 222–236.
↑ http://www.railway-technology.com/projects/frenchtgv/
↑ http://scholarlycommons.law.northwestern.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1543&context=njilb
↑ http://www.uic.org/IMG/pdf/20140901_high_speed_lines_in_the_world.pdf
Hardware recommendations, optimization issues, known problems and resolutions, purchasing guides (but not just a brand advertising, it should be brand-independent, general guide, if you name a particular brand it should be based on your experience)
This page includes all the material you need to deal with strings in R. The section on regular expressions may be useful to understand the rest of the page, even if it is not necessary if you only need to perform some simple tasks.
This page may be useful to :
In this page, we learn how to read a text file and how to use R functions for characters. There are two kind of function for characters, simple functions and regular expressions. Many functions are part of the standard R base package.
However, their name and their syntax is not intuitive to all users. Hadley Wickham has developed the
Keywords : text mining, natural language processing
See CRAN Task view on Natural Language Processing[2]
See also the following packages tm, tau, languageR, scrapeR.
R can read any text file using readLines() or scan().  It is possible to specify the encoding of the imported text file with readLines(). The entire contents of the text file can be read into an R object (e.g., a character vector). scan() is more flexible. The kind of data expected can be specified in the second argument (e.g., character(0) for a string).
We can write the content of an R object into a text file using cat() or writeLines(). By default cat() concatenates vectors when writing to the text file. You can change it by adding options sep="\n" or fill=TRUE. The default encoding depends on your computer.
Before reading a text file, you can look at its properties. nlines() (parser package) and countLines() (R.utils package) count the number of lines in the file. count.chars() (parser package) counts the number of bytes and characters in each line of a file. You can also display a text file using file.show().
Wikipedia has related information at Character encoding
R provides functions to deal with various set of encoding schemes. This is useful if you deal with text file which have been created with another operating system and especially if the language is not English and has many accents and specific characters. For instance, the standard encoding scheme in Linux is "UTF-8" whereas the standard encoding scheme in Windows is "Latin1".  The Encoding() functions returns the encoding of a string. iconv() is similar to the unix command iconv and converts the encoding.
The following example was run under Windows. Thus, the default encoding is "latin1".
See also the Wikibook Regular expressions.
Wikipedia has related information at Regular expression
A regular expression is a specific pattern in a set of strings. For instance, one could have the following pattern : 2 digits, 2 letters and 4 digits. R provides powerful functions to deal with regular expressions.
Two types of regular expressions are used in R[3]
Perl-like regular expressions used by ‘perl = TRUE’.
There is a also an option called ‘fixed = TRUE’ which can be considered as a literal regular expression. fixed() (stringr) is equivalent to fixed=TRUE in the standard regex functions.
These functions are by default case sensitive. This can be changed by specifying the option ignore.case = TRUE.
If you are not a specialist in regular expression you may find the glob2rx() useful. This function suggests some regular expression for a specific ("glob" or "wildcard") pattern :
Functions which use regular expressions in R
See also gsubfn() in the gsubfn package.
"." stands for any character.
"[ABC]" means A,B or C.
"[A-Z]" means any upper letter between A and Z.
"[0-9]" means any digit between 0 and 9.
Here is the list of metacharacters  ‘$ * + . ? [ ] ^ { } | ( ) \’. If you need to use one of those characters, precede them with a doubled backslash.
Here are some classes of regular expressions :
For numbers :
‘[:digit:]’ Digits: ‘0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9’.
For letters :
‘[:alpha:]’ Alphabetic characters: ‘[:lower:]’ and ‘[:upper:]’.
‘[:upper:]’ Upper-case letters.
‘[:lower:]’ Lower-case letters.
For other characters :
‘[:space:]’ Space characters: tab, newline, vertical tab, form feed, carriage return, and space.
‘[:blank:]’ Blank characters: space and tab.
‘[:cntrl:]’ Control characters.
For combination of other classes :
[:alnum:] Alphanumeric characters: ‘[:alpha:]’ and ‘[:digit:]’.
‘[:graph:]’ Graphical characters: ‘[:alnum:]’ and ‘[:punct:]’.
‘[:print:]’ Printable characters: ‘[:alnum:]’, ‘[:punct:]’ and space.
‘[:xdigit:]’ Hexadecimal digits: ‘0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B C D E F a b c d e f’.
You can quantify the number of repetition by adding after the regular expression the following characters :
‘?’ The preceding item is optional and will be matched at most once.
‘*’ The preceding item will be matched zero or more times.
‘+’ The preceding item will be matched one or more times.
‘{n}’ The preceding item is matched exactly ‘n’ times.
‘{n,}’ The preceding item is matched ‘n’ or more times.
‘{n,m}’ The preceding item is matched at least ‘n’ times, but not more than ‘m’ times.
^ to force the regular expression to be at the beginning of the string
If you want to know more, have a look at the 2 following help files :
>?regexp # gives some general explanations
This section is a stub.You can help Wikibooks by expanding it.
It is also possible to use "perl-like" regular expressions. You just need to use the option perl=TRUE.
If you want to remove space characters in a string, you can use the \\s Perl macro.
Counting the number of characters in a string
Detecting a pattern in a string ?
Counting the occurrence of each pattern in a string ?
> string <- "blabla 23 mai 2000 blabla 18 mai 2004"
Extracting the position of a substring or a pattern in a string
Extracting the position of a substring ?
Extracting the position of a pattern in a string ?
> string <- "blabla 23 mai 2000 blabla 18 mai 2004"
Extracting a fixed width substring ?
Extracting the first word in a string ?
Extracting a pattern in a string ?
> string <- "blabla 23 mai 2000 blabla 18 mai 2004"
Named capture regular expressions can be used to define column names in the regular expression (this also serves to document the regular expression). Install the namedCapture package via devtools::install_github("tdhock/namedCapture") to use str_match_all_named(). It uses the base function gregexpr(perl=TRUE) to parse a Perl-Compatible Regular Expression, and returns a list of match matrices with column names:
In the following example, we have a French date. The regular pattern is the following : 2 digits, a blank, some letters, a blank, 4 digits. We capture the 2 digits with the [[:digit:]]{2} expression, the letters with [[:alpha:]]+ and the 4 digits with [[:digit:]]{4}. Each of these three substrings is surrounded with parenthesis. The first substring is stored in "\\1", the second one in "\\2" and the 3rd one in "\\3".
In the following example, we compare the outcome of sub() and gsub(). The first one removes the first space whereas the second one removes all spaces in the text.
> str_replace_all("abc.def.ghi.jkl","\\.","_")
> padding("abc",10," ","center") # adds blanks such that the length of the string is 10.
Note that str_pad() is very slow. For instance for a vector of length 10,000, we have a very long computing time. padding()does not seem to handle character vectors but the best solution may be to use the sapply() and padding() functions together.
== returns TRUE if both strings are the same and false otherwise.
Few packages implement the Levenshtein distance between two strings:
A benchmark comparing the speed of levenshteinDist() and stringdist() is available here: [1].
If 'value = TRUE', this returns the value of the string
If 'value = FALSE' this returns the position of the string
[1] "a"   "a.1" "a.2"
↑ Hadley Wickham "stringr: modern, consistent string processing" The R Journal, December 2010, Vol 2/2,  http://journal.r-project.org/archive/2010-2/RJournal_2010-2_Wickham.pdf
↑ http://cran.r-project.org/web/views/NaturalLanguageProcessing.html
Since basic regular expressions (‘extended = FALSE’) are now obsolete, the extended option is obsolete in version 2.11.
sìom!
sìi!
The form with v instead of r in imperfect is archaic or dialectal.
Remember that desinences -om and -ov can be replaced by -em and -ev.
Levels of Analysis —
The general frameworks (GF) are the equivalent to the general learning outcomes of the biological, cognitive, and sociocultural levels of analysis.
GF1: To what extent do biological, cognitive and sociocultural factors influence behaviour in sport?
GF2: Evaluate psychological research (that is, theories and/or studies) relevant to the study of sport psychology.
Note that any example responses are not necessarily worth full marks, but exist simply to provide an idea of how an example looks.
To what extent do biological, cognitive and sociocultural factors influence behaviour in sport?
There is no example response yet for this outcome.
There are no additional notes yet for this outcome.
Evaluate psychological research (that is, theories and/or studies) relevant to the study of sport psychology.
There is no example response yet for this outcome.
There are no additional notes yet for this outcome.
Psychology of Human Relationships —
Emotion and Motivation —
Skill Development and Performance —
One of the notable characteristics of the human species today is its great variability. Human diversity has long fascinated people, but unfortunately it also has
What are the causes of physical variability in modern animals?
Is the concept of race useful for studying human physical variation?
Are there differences in intelligence from one population to another?
Human genetic variation generally is distributed in such a continuous range, with varying clusters of frequency.
Ex. Our hair is curly or straight, our skin is lightly to heavily pigmented, and in height we range from short to tall.
Many behavioral traits are learned or acquired by living in a society; other characteristics, such as blue eyes, are passed on physically by heredity. Environment affects both.
The physical characteristics of both populations and individuals are a product of the interaction between genes and environments.
Ex. One's genes predispose one to a particular skin color, but the skin color one actually has is strongly affected by environmental factors such as the amount of solar radiation.
For most characteristics, there are within the gene pool of Homo sapiens
In the color of an eye, the shape of a hand, the texture of skin, many variations can occur.
This kind of variability, found in many animal species, signifies a rich potential for new combinations of characteristics in future generations. A species faced with changing environmental conditions has within its gene pool the possibility of producing individuals with traits appropriate to its altered life. Many may not achieve reproductive success, but those
A major expansion into new environments was under way by the time Homo erectus appeared on the scene. Populations of this species were living in Africa, Southeast Asia, Europe and China. The differentiation of animal life is the result of selective pressures that, through the Pleistocene, differed from one region to another. Coupled with differing selective pressures were geographical features that restricted or prevented gene flow between populations of different faunal regions.
Ex. The conditions of life were quite different in China, which lies in the temperate zone, than they were in tropical Southeast Asia.
Genetic variants will be expressed in different frequencies in these geographically dispersed populations.
Ex. In the Old World, populations of Homo sapiens living in the tropics have a higher frequency of genes for dark skin than do those living in more northerly regions.
In blood type, H. sapiens shows four distinct groups (A, B, O or AB):
The frequency of the O allele is highest in Native Americans, especially among some populations native to South America;
The highest frequencies of the allele for Type A tend to be found among certain European populations;
The highest frequencies of the B allele are found in some Asian populations.
Early anthropologists tried to explore the nature of human species by systematically classifying H. sapiens into subspecies or races, based on geographic location and physical features such as skin color, body size, head shape and hair texture. Such classifications were continually challenged by the presence of individuals who did not fit the categories.
The fact is, generalized references to human types such as "Asiatic" or "Mongoloid", "European" or "Caucasoid", and "African" or "Negroid" were at best mere statistical abstractions about populations in which certain physical features appeared in higher frequencies than in other populations.
No example of "pure" racial types could be found.
These categories turned out to be neither definitive nor particularly helpful. The visible traits were found to occur not in abrupt shifts from population to population, but in a continuum that changed gradually. Also one trait might change gradually over a north-south gradient, while another might show a similar change from east to west.
Human skin color becomes progressively darker as one moves from northern Europe to central Africa, while blood type B becomes progressively more common as one moves from western to eastern Europe.
To understand why the racial approach to human variation has been so unproductive, we must first understand the race concept in strictly biological terms.
In biology, a race is defined as a population of a species that differs in the frequency of different variants of some gene or genes from other populations of the same species. Three important things to note about this definition:
As a device for understanding physical variation in humans, the biological race concept has serious drawbacks:
"race" exists as a cultural, as well as a biological, category. In various ways, cultures define religious, linguistic and ethnic groups as races, thereby confusing linguistic and cultural traits with physical traits;
There has been a lot of debate not just about how many human races there may be, but about what "race" is and is not. Often forgotten is the fact that a race, even if it can be defined biologically, is the result of the operation of evolutionary process. Because it is these processes rather than racial categories themselves in which we are really interested, most anthropologists have abandoned the race concept as being of no particular utility. Instead, they prefer to study the distribution and significance of specific, genetically based characteristics, or else the characteristics of small breeding populations that are, after all, the smallest units in which evolutionary change occurs.
Not only have attempts to classify people into races proven counterproductive, it has also become apparent that the amount of genetic variation in humans is relatively low, compared to that of other primate species.
Nonetheless, human biological variation is a fact of life, and physical anthropologists have learned a great deal about it. Much of it is related to climatic adaptation. A correlation has been noted between body build and climate:
Generally, people native to regions with cold climates tend to have greater body bulk (not to be equated with fat) relative to their extremities (arms and legs) than do people native to regions with hot climates, who tend to be long and slender. Interestingly, these differences show up as early as the time of Homo erectus.
Certain body builds are better suited to particular living conditions than others.
People with larger body bulk and shorter extremities may suffer more from summer heat than someone whose extremities are long and whose body is slender. But they will conserve needed body heat under cold conditions. The reason is that a bulky body tends to conserve more heat than a less bulky one, since it has less surface relative to volume;
People living in hot, open country, by contrast, benefit from a body build that can get rid of excess heat quickly so as to keep from overheating; for this, long extremities and a slender body, which increase surface area relative to volume, are advantageous.
Anthropologists have also studied such body features as nose, eye shape, hair textures and skin color in relation to climate.
Ex. Subject to tremendous variation, skin color is a 	function of four factors: transparency or thickness of the skin, distribution of blood vessels, and amount of carotene and melanin in a given area of skin. Exposure to sunlight increases the amount of melanin, darkening the skin. Natural selection has favored heavily pigmented skin as protection against the strong solar radiation of equatorial latitudes. In northern latitudes, natural selection has favored relatively depigmented skins, which can utilize relatively weak solar radiation in the production of Vitamin D. Selective mating, as well as geographical location, plays a part in skin color distribution.
In the course of their evolution, humans in all parts of the world came to rely on cultural rather than biological adaptation for their survival. Nevertheless, as they spread beyond their tropical homeland into other parts of the world, they did develop considerable physical variation from one population to another.
Although much of this physical variation can still be seen in human populations today, the increasing effectiveness of cultural adaptation has often reduced its importance. Cultural practices today are affecting the human organism in important, often surprising, ways.
The probability of alterations in human biological makeup induced by culture raises a number of important questions. By trying to eliminate genetic variants, are we weakening the gene pool by allowing people with hereditary diseases and defects to reproduce? Are we reducing chances for genetic variation by trying to control population size? We are not sure of the answers to these questions.
Should you go to jail for making your PS3 run your own programs?
Module 4.2 Defining Target Market
For instructional purpose, it is advised that trainers/lectures use lectures and group and individual exercises as a major means of delivering this module.
The current market downturn demonstrates that one of the most fluid aspects of the world's economy and indeed the economies of individual nations is the market. Defining a target market is like defining a moving target. As Module 4.1 established some basic foundations necessary to start a business, this module builds on those concepts to list some steps, based on expert experience, to help news businesses define a niche for their markets and products.
Five Steps to Defining Your Target Market
Is your target market "anyone who will pay you for your product or services?" or are you focusing your efforts on a tightly defined market niche with an identified need for your business' offerings? If it's the former, you will do well to define your target market.
Briefly state your target market and the needs you will be fulfilling: Ask yourself why you choose this particular business, which your products/services are meant for, who you want to do business with, and what is unique about your product. Let's say you are planning to sell products used in automotive detailing. You decide that vehicle owners are your broad target market. Your business will help them keep their vehicles clean and shiny.
Next, break this large market down into smaller sections (segmentation): There are people who restore classic automobiles. There are people who drive an old clunker and run it through the car wash occasionally. There are people who own "status" automobiles. There are truck owners, motorcycle owners. Your job is to consider various subgroups and decide upon your niche market. Remember, there are auto owner who don't care about keeping the vehicle clean and shiny. Then there are those who care, but lack the time and the interest to do the work themselves. They take their vehicle to a shop. Others only worry about auto detailing when it is time for a trade in. You reject these segments as unsuitable for your niche market. After consideration, you decide that your market segment will be automobile owners who have both the time and the interest to do their own detailing work -- people who enjoy puttering with their vehicles, who have the time to spend, and who take pride in their vehicle's appearance.  Do you think that there are enough potential customers in that group to support your business? Are you supplying a service that is not readily available to them from other sources? If yes, move to step three.
Develop your customer profile: Describe your potential customers as fully as you can. What do you know about them? Where are they situated geographically? What do they spend on car detailing? What are they likely to spend? Where do they shop? What is their annual income? What languages do they speak? What kind of automobiles do they drive? If you are selling online, what methods do they prefer for online payment? What type of web sites do they visit? How do they want their product delivered? Identify your customer profile before you do your market planning.
Now that you have fully identified your target market, do your research to verify that there will be enough business in this group to support your company in its growth. This is where you verify that the need actually exists, and was not "wishful thinking" on your part. Use both primary and secondary sources in your research. You might consult business directories, obtain statistics regarding automobile owners and their car care practices, locate newspaper articles and magazine stories written on the subject, or conduct your own research using market research techniques such as surveys, focus groups, online searches, etc.
Lastly, do research to determine the market size and your potential market share.
In other words, use primary and secondary sources to find out how many potential customers there are in the geographic area you have defined, and how many businesses are directly or indirectly competing with you. Your market share will be the number of customers that are likely to buy from you rather than your competition.
Having defining your target market as described by (Campbell, 2000), you are now better positioned develop a marketing plan that will reach your potential customers and perhaps your sales will start to rocket immediately.
Assignment: Write an essay of 200-350 words describing the status of the FOSS market in your country.
Previous Chapter | Next Chapter
“Venus de Milo”, a famous ancient Greek sculpture. Note the complex lighting environment.
This tutorial introduces image-based lighting, in particular diffuse (irradiance) environment mapping and its implementation with cube maps.
This tutorial is based on Section “Reflecting Surfaces”. If you haven't read that tutorial, this would be a very good time to read it.
Consider the lighting of the sculpture in the image to the left. There is natural light coming through the windows. Some of this light bounces off the floor, walls and visitors before reaching the sculpture. Additionally, there are artificial light sources, and their light is also shining directly and indirectly onto the sculpture. How many directional lights and point lights would be needed to simulate this kind of complex lighting environment convincingly? At least more than a handful (probably more than a dozen) and therefore the performance of the lighting computations is challenging.
This problem is addressed by image-based lighting. For static lighting environments that are described by an environment map, e.g. a cube map, image-based lighting allows us to compute the lighting by an arbitrary number of light sources with a single texture lookup in a cube map (see Section “Reflecting Surfaces” for a description of cube maps). How does it work?
In this section we focus on diffuse lighting. Assume that every texel (i.e. pixel) of a cube map acts as a directional light source. (Remember that cube maps are usually assumed to be infinitely large such that only directions matter, but positions don't.) The resulting lighting for a given surface normal direction can be computed as described in Section “Diffuse Reflection”. It's basically the cosine between the surface normal vector N and the vector to the light source L:
Since the texels are the light sources, L is just the direction from the center of the cube to the center of the texel in the cube map. A small cube map with 32×32 texels per face has already 32×32×6 = 6144 texels. Adding the illumination by thousands of light sources is not going to work in real time. However, for a static cube map we can compute the diffuse illumination for all possible surface normal vectors N in advance and store them in a lookup table. When lighting a point on a surface with a specific surface normal vector, we can then just look up the diffuse illumination for the specific surface normal vector N in that precomputed lookup table.
Thus, for a specific surface normal vector N we add (i.e. integrate) the diffuse illumination by all texels of the cube map. We store the resulting diffuse illumination for this surface normal vector in a second cube map (the “diffuse irradiance environment map” or “diffuse environment map” for short). This second cube map will act as a lookup table, where each direction (i.e. surface normal vector) is mapped to a color (i.e. diffuse illumination by potentially thousands of light sources). The fragment shader is therefore really simple (this one could use the vertex shader from Section “Reflecting Surfaces”):
It is just a lookup of the precomputed diffuse illumination using the surface normal vector of the rasterized surface point. However, the precomputation of the diffuse environment map is somewhat more complicated as described in the next section.
This section presents some JavaScript code to illustrate the computation of cube maps for diffuse (irradiance) environment maps. In order to use it in Unity, choose Create > JavaScript in the Project View. Then open the script in Unity's text editor, copy the JavaScript code into it, and attach the script to the game object that has a material with the shader presented below. When a new cube map of sufficiently small dimensions is specified for the shader property _OriginalCube (which is labeled Environment Map in the shader user interface), the script will update the shader property _Cube (i.e. Diffuse Environment Map in the user interface) with a corresponding diffuse environment map. Note that the script only accepts cube maps of face dimensions 32×32 or smaller because the computation time tends to be very long for larger cube maps. Thus, when creating a cube map in Unity, make sure to choose a sufficiently small size.
The script includes only a handful of functions: Awake() initializes the variables; Update() takes care of communicating with the user and the material (i.e. reading and writing shader properties); computeFilteredCubemap() does the actual work of computing the diffuse environment map; and getDirection() is a small utility function for computeFilteredCubemap() to compute the direction associated with each texel of a cube map. Note that computeFilteredCubemap() not only integrates the diffuse illumination but also avoids discontinuous seams between faces of the cube map by setting neighboring texels along the seams to the same averaged color.
"Do you want to process the cube map of face size "
+ originalTexture.width + "x" + originalTexture.width
+ "? (This will take some time.)",
Vector3.Dot(originalFaceDirection,
Vector3.Dot(filteredDirection,
As an alternative to the JavaScript code above, you can also use the following C# code.
C# code: click to show/hide
Debug.LogError("'_OriginalCube' not found on shader. "
+ "Are you using the wrong shader?");
"Processing of Environment Map",
"Do you want to process the cube map of face size "
+ originalTexture.width + "x" + originalTexture.width
+ "? (This will take some time.)",
Cubemap filteredCubeMap = new Cubemap(originalCubeMap.width,
Vector3.Dot(filteredDirection,
3, i, maxI, 5, maxI - i, maxI);
0, maxI, maxI, 3, maxI, maxI, 5, 0, maxI);
As promised, the actual shader code is very short; the vertex shader is a reduced version of the vertex shader of Section “Reflecting Surfaces”:
Shader "GLSL shader with image-based diffuse lighting" {
Changes for Specular (i.e. Glossy) Reflection
The shader and script above are sufficient to compute diffuse illumination by a large number of static, directional light sources. But what about the specular illumination discussed in Section “Specular Highlights”, i.e.:
First, we have to rewrite this equation such that it depends only on the direction to the light source L and the reflected view vector R
With this equation, we can compute a lookup table (i.e. a cube map) that contains the specular illumination by many light sources for any reflected view vector R
. In order to look up the specular illumination with such a table, we just need to compute the reflected view vector and perform a texture lookup in a cube map. In fact, this is exactly what the shader code of Section “Reflecting Surfaces” does. Thus, we actually only need to compute the lookup table.
It turns out that the JavaScript code presented above can be easily adapted to compute such a lookup table. All we have to do is to change the line
. This allows us to compute lookup tables for any specific shininess. (The same cube map could be used for varying values of the shininess if the mipmap-level was specified explicitly using the textureCubeLod instruction in the shader; however, this technique is beyond the scope of this tutorial.)
Congratulations, you have reached the end of a rather advanced tutorial! We have seen:
What image-based rendering is about.
How to compute and use a cube map to implement a diffuse environment map.
How to adapt the code for specular reflection.
If you still want to know more
Unless stated otherwise, all example source code on this page is granted to the public domain.
Crawling is described as the bare area(s) in which the molten glaze does not cover during the glaze firing. The severity of the defects may vary from case to case from the isolated area (pin hole) to more serious cases such as 'beading' which it is akin to forming beads of water on waxed surfaces. Generally, it is caused by surface tension forces (particular in molten glaze) overcoming the adhesion forces.
Underglazes decorations may cause crawling due excess of the medium (in underglaze decoration) or insufficient fluxes.
Excessive mediums cause the greasy surfaces causing glazes unable to stick to the underglaze decoration. Hardening (about 600 C) should burn away the medium and will cause colour to sinter and bonded firmly to the ceramic ware.
Insufficent flux can be remedied by adding flux (borax frit) in 5%-50% or SCMC binders in 1%-3% to colour pigment may help for the glazes to attach to underglaze decorations.
Area may be contaminated with grease, specks of dust or similar materials which will cause lack of adhesion glaze which causing the glaze to roll back during glaze firing
Thick glazes may aggravate the problems since minute cracks may be formed during firing which is then healed leading to the formation of large cracks in molten glaze producing crawling. It is usually seen in inside holloware and around handle joints. Thin the glaze by using water or adding a bit of binder (to increase adhesion)
Consider using spray glazing instead of manual dipping as this has several advantages
Overgrinding glazes may produce dusty glazes with poor adhesion. Also due to the chemical compositions, it will become more viscous increases crawling risks
Zircon opacified glazes, zinc oxides, high alumina and leadless glazes are considered as highly viscous glaze. Highly viscous glaze may be corrected using extra additives such as flux (borax flit)  or firing at higher temperatures.
Glaze recipes formed partly of colemanite by Asian sources which generate voluminous gases which cause patches of glazes ejected from wares. Adding flux calcium borate frit to the glaze or slower rate firing (increase soaking time) may reduce the crawling to ensure the gasses had ample times to escape.
Computational Thinking is a very powerful problem solving method. As a practice, Computational Thinking is widely considered an artistic approach. It combines the thought processes of de-composition, abstraction, pattern recognition and pattern generalisation. Creative engagement in these processes will promote the generation of the innovative ideas necessary for designing algorithms.
Just like most other creative practices, programming involves plans, materials and tools:
The plans are represented as	algorithms.
The materials are the		data.
The tools are the			control structures.
The aim of this section is to show how the data (the raw material) can be manipulated by the control structures (the tools) to create solutions in form of algorithms.
Parsing is the problem of transforming a linear sequence of characters into a syntax tree. Nowadays we are very good at parsing. In other words, we have many tools, such as lex and yacc, for instance, that helps us in this task. However, in the early days of computer science parsing was a very difficult problem. This was one of the first, and most fundamental challenges that the first compiler writers had to face.
If the program text describes a syntactically valid program, then it is possible to convert this text into a syntax tree. As an example, the figure below contains different parsing trees for three different programs written in our grammar of arithmetic expressions:
There are many algorithms to build a parsing tree from a sequence of characters. Some are more powerful, others are more practical. Basically, these algorithms try to find a sequence of applications of the production rules that end up generating the target string. For instance, let's consider the grammar below, which specifies a very small subset of the English grammar:
<noun> ::= student | professor | book | university | lesson | programming language | glasses
Below we have a sequence of derivations showing that the sentence "the student learned the programming language with the professor" is a valid program in this language:
⇒ the student learned the programming language <prepositional phrase> .
⇒ the student learned the programming language <preposition> <noun phrase> .
⇒ the student learned the programming language with <noun phrase> .
⇒ the student learned the programming language with <determiner> <noun> .
⇒ the student learned the programming language with the <noun> .
⇒ the student learned the programming language with the professor .
Using Input Text in Flash Professional 8
Input text fields are very similar to dynamic text fields.  Instead of using outside sources, the input text field gets its content from the user at runtime.  This could take form of bulletin posts, usernames, user comments, forms, and other means where user input is necessary.  Just as dynamic text, input text area is called a “field” instead of a “text box.”  The area of the field is defined by the author of the movie. Creating an input text field works exactly as a dynamic text field in that the expanding or fixed width indicator is in the lower right corner.  Input text fields can be set to scroll.  When the text field is full and set to scroll, the width handle indicator changes from white to black.
There are a few options which are unique to input and dynamic text.  The HTML option in the properties inspector will allow the text field to interpret HTML tags.  The text border option creates an outline around the field and is an easy way to create a dynamic or input “text box.”  Also, both dynamic and input text fields can be assigned instance names in order to have ActionScript applied.
These two spells can be cast when Palom and Porom use their "Twin" Ability.  Both must be alive from when the spell is cast until when it is completed, or else it will fail.
This spell is a mini version of the spell Meteo(r).
File:FF4 ST Comet.jpg
This spell is a mini version of the spell Nuke.
File:FF4 ST Flare.jpg
Why do I get an error message when I try to publish my Quiz to Tracker?
Go to Introduction, Basic Navigation, Publishing, Controlling and Monitoring Access, Results
This course design is focused on the self-directed learning. So, the key understanding of developing a course design for self-directed learners is to understand first what the term self-directed learning is.
There are many ways of defining the term self-directed learning. So to simply understand it, Hiemstra (1994, p. 1) provided different seven aspects of self-directed learning such as: (a). individual learners can become empowered to take increasingly more responsibility for various decisions associated with learning endeavor, (b). self-direction is best viewed as a continuum or characteristics that exist to some degree in every person and learning situation, (c). self-direction does not necessary mean all learning will take place in isolation from others, (d). self-directed learners appear able to transfer learning in terms of both knowledge and study skill, from one situation to another, (e). self-directed study can involve various activity and resources such as self-guided reading, participation in study groups, internships, electronic dialogues, and reflective writing activities, (f). effective roles for teachers in self-directed learning are possible, such as dialogue with learners, securing resources, evaluating outcomes and promoting critical thinking, (g). some educational institutions are finding ways to support self-directed study through open-learning groups, individualized study options, non-traditional course offerings, and innovative programs. With these aspects of self-directed learning, it will provide a clear understanding to embark on developing a course design for self-directed learners.
Importance of Course Design for Self-Directed Learning
Good self-directed learners are able to: design their objectives, identify resources for achieving the objectives, chose appropriate learning methods, and evaluate their performance (Merrienboer & Sluijsmans, 2008; Moore & Kearsley, 2011). Abilities to direct their own learning are especially important for online learners in that online learners have geographical distance with their instructors and peers.
Therefore, course design which can help online learners direct their own learning is important (Lee, Barker, & Kumar, 2015).
For example, course designers should analyze the difficulties that self-directed learners are facing, design some learning objectives that encourage and support self-directed learning, develop some lecture materials that exercise learner's autonomy, implement their teaching plans that encourage learners to be self-directed learners, and evaluate their course design whether it is good enough to support self-directed learning.
Learner motivation is essential for self-directed online learning (Kim, 2009).
According to Kim's (2009) qualitative study about motivational challenges of self-directed online course takers, learners feel motivational challenges when they take
a course with less interactivity of the course content (such as animations that move in response to a learner's action, simulations that learners need to respond to a set of different situations, and drag-and-drop quiz activities)
a course with less human interaction
a course with less use of applications (such as applications that enable learners to have simulated experiences of something)
a course with less external motivation
To conclude, for designing self-directed online courses, designers have to keep in mind the interactivity of course content, human interaction, use of applications, and external motivation.
There are other previous studies about self-directed online learners.
For example, Lai (2011) examined self-directed online learners' self-directed learning readiness and network literacy. Lai (2011) pointed out that active learning, love of learning, and independent learning are the three key components of self-directed learning readiness. Also, Lai (2011) showed that internet skill and information evaluation construct learners' network literacy. The study would indicate that designers of online courses should also keep in mind the need of analyzing learners' readiness and network literacy.
Course Design for Self-Directed Learning in JMOOC
In this section, I would like to evaluate whether JMOOC has course designs that help self-directed learning. Since the previous studies showed five key points that designers of online self-directed courses should keep in mind (interactivity of course content, human interaction, use of applications, external motivation, and analysis of learners' readiness and network literacy), I would like to evaluate JMOOC's course designs by checking they have the five points.
Interactivity of course content: Since I cannot check all courses offered in JMOOC, it is difficult to conclude, but it seems that few courses have interactivity of course content (such as animations that move in response to a learner's action, simulations that learners need to respond to a set of different situations, and drag-and-drop quiz activities)
Human interaction: JMOOC provides online discussion pages for each course. In addition, JMOOC has a study meeting system called ‘meet-up’ where course takers gather face-to-face and study together. Moreover, some courses provide course takers opportunities to take the course lecture’s face-to-face class (JMOOC, n.d.).
Use of applications: Again, it is difficult to conclude since I cannot check all courses, but it seems that few courses use applications with which learners can have simulated experiences.
External motivation: JMOOC provides certificates of completion free of charge (JMOOC, n.d.), which would be external motivation for learners.
Analysis of learners' readiness and network literacy: JMOOC actively gathers learning active data and conducts research for the advancement of online courses, establishment of learning support technology, and promotion of a continuous learning (JMOOC, n.d.). Findings from such data would provide some information about learners' readiness and network literacy.
Hiemstra, R. (1994). Self-directed learning. In T. Husen & T. N. Postlethwaite (Eds.), The International Encyclopedia of Education (2nd ed.), Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Kim, K. J. (2009). Motivational challenges of adult learners in self-directed e-learning. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 20
Lai, H. J. (2011). The influence of adult learners' self-directed learning readiness and network literacy on online learning effectiveness: A study of civil servants. Educational Technology and Society, 14(2), 98-106.
Lee, S., Barker, T., & Kumar, V. S. (2015). Effectiveness of learner-directed model for e-learning. Educational Technology and Society, 19(3), 221-233.
Merrienboer, J. J. G., & Sluijsmans, D. M. A. (2008). Toward a synthesis of cognitive load theory, four-component instructional design, and self-directed learning. Educational Psychology Review, 21, 55-66. doi: 10.1007/s10648-008-9092-5
Moore, M. G., & Kearsley, G. (2011). Course design and development. In Distance education: A systems view on online learning. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing.
Goggin, Maureen Daly and Elenore Long. "A Tincture of Philosophy, A Tincture of Hope: The Portrayal of Isocrates in Plato's Phaedrus." Rhetoric Review. 11.2 (Spring 1993): 301-324.
In Phaedrus 279A, Plato seems to be praising Isocrates, and concludes the passage by asserting that “For that mind of his, Phaedrus, contains an innate tincture of philosophy.”  Experts are divided as to whether this passage is “underhanded and sarcastic” (301) or meant to be taken at face value.  Goggin and Long maintain that Plato is all too easily reduced to sets of binaries, but that his view of rhetoric in the Phaedrus is not a binary but a continuum.
The authors show that the elements of the soul represented by the bad horse—emotion, irrationality, and probability—are to be “harness[ed], not banished” (303).
Plato demonstrates in the Phaedrus that the dialectic is actually a tool of rhetoric (317)—a change of heart from his position in Gorgias.  This reversal, which is attributed to Plato’s growing realization that for humans most knowledge, even of Truth, is contingent, is the ground for commonality between Plato and Isocrates.
Although the Myth of the Soul places the sophists in the lowest possible position, save for the tyrants, the authors of this article believe that Plato’s thinking is refined enough to exempt Isocrates from the rest of the group of the sophists—in other words, “sophists” does not refer to all of those known primarily as rhetors, but only to those who “were insensitive to the dangerously manipulative potential of rhetoric and who were ready to build arguments for argument’s sake, oblivious to whether their speeches offend the divine or social order” (319).
Depression is a condition that affects one in five Australians between 16- 85[1]. There are varying degrees of depression ranging from very mild to clinically depressed individuals that cannot even manage to get out of bed and many even have suicidal thoughts. Generally depression does not result from a single event, and whilst the exact cause is not known, a combination of recent events and other longer-term or personal factors are usually associated with its development.[2] There are many treatment options available for individuals with depression with exercise being a commonly used form or treatment that has shown to be very effective. [3]
Lowered self Esteem (self-worth) [4] [5]
Changes in sleep patterns, insomnia or broken sleep
There are numerous treatments for individuals affected by depression, however the main forms of treatment are:
Exercise stimulates the release of endorphins within approximately 30 minutes from the start of activity which assists in mood enhancement [9]
Exercise activates molecular and cellular cascades that support and maintain brain plasticity
Promotes brain vascularization, neurogenesis (or the creation of new neurons), functional changes in neuronal structure and neuronal resistance to injury.
Resistance Training is exercise that increases strength by making your muscles work against a weight or force.  Resistance or strength training includes free weights, machines, resistance bands or your own body weight. Generally resistance exercise is categorised as a Low to moderate intensity type of exercise, which is recommended by health experts for those suffering depression, however it can also be included as part of high intensity training such as circuit training.
Research indicates that resistance exercise can have positive effect on individuals suffering from depression. The general consensus among health professionals is that as long as an individual is participating in some form of moderate exercise there are usually positive effects on individuals affected by depression
Reduces sensitivity to stress[10]
The Australian department of health recommends that adults aged between 18 -64 follow the following guidelines in relation to exercise. [11]
↑ Facts and Figures about mental health and mood disorders, Black Dog Institue pdf, 2012, www.blackdogintitute.org.au (accessed 26 September 2014
↑ What causes Depression, http://www.beyondblue.org.au/the-facts/depression/what-causes-depression (accessed 21 September 2014)
↑ The Benefits of Exercise for the Clinically Depressed, Lynette L. Craft, Ph.D. and Frank M. Perna, Ed.D., Ph.D., Primary Care Companion to The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 2004 6 (3) 104-11
↑ Depression Explained , http://www.blackdoginstitute.org.au/public/depression/depressionexplained/index.cfm (accessed 21 September 2014)
↑ Signs and Symptoms,  http://www.beyondblue.org.au/the-facts/depression/signs-and-symptoms (accessed 21 September 2014)
↑ Psychological treatments for depression, http://www.beyondblue.org.au/the-facts/depression/treatments-for-depression/psychological-treatments-for-depression, (accessed 29 September 2014)
↑ Medical treatment for Depression, http://www.beyondblue.org.au/the-facts/depression/treatments-for-depression/medical-treatments-for-depression (accessed 29 September 2014)
↑ Other Sources of Support, http://www.beyondblue.org.au/the-facts/treatment-options/other-sources-of-support, (accessed 29 September 2014)
↑ The Effects of Exercise on the Brain, MK McGovern, http://serendip.brynmawr.edu/bb/neuro/neuro05/web2/mmcgovern.html (accessed 21 September 2014)
↑  EFFECTS OF PHYSICAL EXERCISE ON ANXIETY, DEPRESSION, AND SENSITIVITY TO STRESS: A UNIFYING THEORY; Peter Salmon; University of Liverpool; Clinical Psychology Review, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 33–61, 2001
↑ Physical Activity Guidelines, http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/F01F92328EDADA5BCA257BF0001E720D/$File/brochure%20PA%20Guidelines_A5_18-64yrs.PDF, (accessed 17 September 2014)
As Rutgers is a state university, the main priority is research. This is good in that professors are experts in their fields. For example, the philosophy department consistently ranks in the top 3 in the United States. The negative is that teaching is not valued as much. Expect introductory classes to contain 200 or more students, with the professor using a microphone and homework graded by a TA.
(Q).Using the method of induction,show that for all n € N,
L.H.S.=n ,  R.H.S.=n(n+1)/2
.°. L.H.S.=R.H.S,so,the statement given is true for n=1
Let,the statement be true for n=k
Again,Let the statement be true for n=k+1
Now,adding k+1 to both the sides of eqn (i).
Hence,the statement given for n=k+l is also true.
So,it is true for all n € N
r1bqk1nr/ppp1bppp/8/4p3/2B1P3/8/PPP2PPP/RNBQK2R
This is the obvious recapture. The only move to gain an advantage for white is 7.Qh5.
Sometimes you may want to calculate the age of a StudySubject, for example at the date on which the Informed Consent is signed.
You can do this by using the following script, which uses three CRF-items:
The jscript uses three variables it reads from the CRF-items, but before it can do that, we must label them in the CRF. We do this by using the <spanid=xxx>-tag.
We put these labels in either the left- or the right-item-text.
Here is the script and you can put it for example in the instructions column of the section with the items.
<script src="//ajax.googleapis.com/ajax/libs/jquery/1.9.1/jquery.min.js"></script>
The code begins by including jQuery 1.9.1. You could also point to the one OpenClinica provides.
<script src="//ajax.googleapis.com/ajax/libs/jquery/1.9.1/jquery.min.js"></script>
Furthermore, to prevent a possible conflict with OpenClinica's code, we add the noConflict statement:
The script takes the two dates and creates two date objects, based on the day, month and year. The months are compared with the array of available months, which is declared in the start of the script. As you can see these are given in the English notation, so change these abbreviations if your users have another browser language. The script converts the given name to lowercase and then finds the ordinal number of the month and uses the number to set the month:
It then calculates the age by subtracting the years and comparing the months and if necessary days:
The age is calculated when we leave the date of birth field, the sign field, or when we press one of the two save buttons, called "srh" and "srl":
After Effects is a variable, mathematic-based animation program that has the ability to make use of click and drag animation. After Effects also has built in scripting abilities through its expressions language to allow for animation without key frames.  After Effects can also make use of many third party plug-ins to extend its abilities to include 3D animation, advanced particle systems and much more. Although After Effects uses a similar interface to other Adobe Creative Suite products it does have a significant learning curve; however there are many free training resources available online to help a new user get started.  Both PC and Mac platforms are supported by AE, and at the moment it's the industry standard for motion graphics editing..
Motion is a loop-based animation program (can also be linear if desired) that primarily utilizes click and drag animation. The platform is Mac only and it uses various particle systems and basic movement animation to bring projects to life. Motion also allows keyframing in its simple key frame editor which lets you draw out your animation curves. Like After Effects, Motion keyframing allows you to edit many different aspects of your animation such as opacity, position, rotation, and many others. Motion has many time-saving features. Unlike After Effects, Motion allows you to click and drag your animation into Final Cut without having to render, export, and import. Motion is also able to send animations to After Effects 7 as a nested composition..
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
A Shipwrecked Man cast up on the beach fell asleep after his struggle with the waves. When he woke up, he bitterly reproached the Sea for its treachery in enticing men with its smooth and smiling surface, and then, when they were well embarked, turning in fury upon them and sending both ship and sailors to destruction. The Sea arose in the form of a woman, and replied, “Lay not the blame on me, O sailor, but on the Winds. By nature I am as calm and safe as the land itself: but the Winds fall upon me with their gusts and gales, and lash me into a fury that is not natural to me. ”
Genes, Technology and Policy
Ownership Of and Access to Biotechnology —
About the Author —
2 There have been reports about modifying rice to address problems of deficiency in Vitamin A. Is this true, and will the technology be available to developing countries?
3 How is modern biotechnology in agriculture different from traditional plant breeding techniques? Is modern biotechnology simply a more advanced stage in the biotechnology development continuum?
8 A few years ago, there was a controversy around the effect of genetically modified corn on Monarch butterflies. What was that controversy all about and did it have scientific basis?
10 A previous study of the adverse effect of GM potatoes on rats is cited by critics of biotechnology as evidence that GM products are unsafe. What happened to that study?
11 Does the possible transfer of antibiotic resistance marker genes from ingested GM food to gut microbes pose a significant hazard to human beings?
14 Should it wish to do so, how should a government regulate the use of modern biotechnology?
What are the applications of modern biotechnology in agriculture?
There are many applications of biotechnology in agriculture.
Improved yield from crops. Using the techniques of modern biotechnology, one or two genes may be transferred to a highly developed crop variety to impart a new character that would increase its yield. [30]  However, while increase in crop yield is the most obvious application of modern biotechnology in agriculture, it is also the most difficult one. Current genetic engineering techniques work best for effects that are controlled by a single gene. Many of the genetic characteristics associated with yield (e.g., enhanced growth) are controlled by a large number of genes, each of which has a minimal effect on the overall yield. [31]  There is, therefore, much scientific work to be done in this area.
Reduced vulnerability of crops to environmental stresses. Crops containing genes that will enable them to withstand biotic and abiotic stresses may be developed. For example, drought and excessively salty soil are the two most important limiting factors in crop productivity. Biotechnologists are studying plants that can cope with these extreme conditions in the hope of finding the genes that enable them to do so and eventually transferring these genes to the more desirable crops. One of the latest developments is the identification of a plant gene, At-DBF2, from thale cress, a tiny weed that is often used for plant research because it is very easy to grow and its genetic code is well mapped out. When this gene was inserted into tomato and tobacco cells, the cells were able to withstand environmental stresses like salt, drought, cold and heat, far more than ordinary cells. If these preliminary results prove successful in larger trials, then At-DBF2 genes can help in engineering crops that can better withstand harsh environments. [32]
Researchers have also created transgenic rice plants that are resistant to rice yellow mottle virus (RYMV). In Africa, this virus destroys majority of the rice crops and makes the surviving plants more susceptible to fungal infections. [33]
Increased nutritional qualities of food crops. Proteins in foods may be modified to increase their nutritional qualities. Proteins in legumes and cereals may be transformed to provide the amino acids needed by human beings for a balanced diet. [34]  A good example is the work of Professors Ingo Potrykus and Peter Beyer on the so-called Goldenrice™(discussed below).
Improved taste, texture or appearance of food.Modern biotechnology can be used to slow down the process of spoilage so that fruit can ripen longer on the plant and then be transported to the consumer with a still reasonable shelf life. This improves the taste, texture and appearance of the fruit. More importantly, it could expand the market for farmers in developing countries due to the reduction in spoilage.
The first genetically modified food product was a tomato which was transformed to delay its ripening. [35]  Researchers in Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, Philippines and Vietnam are currently working on delayed-ripening papaya in collaboration with the University of Nottingham and Zeneca. [36]
Reduced dependence on fertilizers, pesticides and other agrochemicals. Most of the current commercial applications of modern biotechnology in agriculture are on reducing the dependence of farmers on agrochemicals. For example, Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) is a soil bacterium that produces a protein with insecticidal qualities. Traditionally, a fermentation process has been used to produce an insecticidal spray from these bacteria. In this form, the Bt toxin occurs as an inactive protoxin, which requires digestion by an insect to be effective. There are several Bt toxins and each one is specific to certain target insects. Crop plants have now been engineered to contain and express the genes for Bt toxin, which they produce in its active form. When a susceptible insect ingests the transgenic crop cultivar expressing the Bt protein, it stops feeding and soon thereafter dies as a result of the Bt toxin binding to its gut wall. Bt corn is now commercially available in a number of countries to control corn borer (a lepidopteran insect), which is otherwise controlled by spraying (a more difficult process).
Crops have also been genetically engineered to acquire tolerance to broad-spectrum herbicide. The lack of cost-effective herbicides with broad-spectrum activity and no crop injury was a consistent limitation in crop weed management. Multiple applications of numerous herbicides were routinely used to control a wide range of weed species detrimental to agronomic crops. Weed management tended to rely on preemergence—that is, herbicide applications were sprayed in response to expected weed infestations rather than in response to actual weeds present. Mechanical cultivation and hand weeding were often necessary to control weeds not controlled by herbicide applications. The introduction of herbicide tolerant crops has the potential of reducing the number of herbicide active ingredients used for weed management, reducing the number of herbicide applications made during a season, and increasing yield due to improved weed management and less crop injury. Transgenic crops that express tolerance to glyphosphate, glufosinate and bromoxynil have been developed. These herbicides can now be sprayed on transgenic crops without inflicting damage on the crops while killing nearby weeds. [37]
From 1996 to 2001, herbicide tolerance was the most dominant trait introduced to commercially available transgenic crops, followed by insect resistance. In 2001, herbicide tolerance deployed in soybean, corn and cotton accounted for 77% of the 62.6 million hectares planted to transgenic crops; Bt crops accounted for 15%; and stacked genes for herbicide tolerance and insect resistance used in both cotton and corn accounted for 8%. [38]
Production of novel substances in crop plants.Modern biotechnology is increasingly being applied for novel uses other than food. For example, oilseed is at present used mainly for margarine and other food oils, but it can be modified to produce fatty acids for detergents, substitute fuels and petrochemicals. [39]  Banana trees and tomato plants have also been genetically engineered to produce vaccines in their fruit. If future clinical trials prove successful, the advantages of edible vaccines would be enormous, especially for developing countries. The transgenic plants may be grown locally and cheaply. Homegrown vaccines would also avoid logistical and economic problems posed by having to transport traditional preparations over long distances and keeping them cold while in transit. And since they are edible, they will not need syringes, which are not only an additional expense in the traditional vaccine preparations but also a source of infections if contaminated. [40]
Figure 7 provides a panoramic view of other potential applications of modern biotechnology in agriculture.
Figure 7.
There have been reports about modifying rice to address problems of deficiency in Vitamin A. Is this true, and will the technology be available to developing countries?
Yes, there are efforts to improve the nutritional quality of rice. This staple food for two billion people is usually milled to remove the outer layers to prevent their high oil content from causing spoilage. The remaining grains are low in B-carotene, the chemical precursor of vitamin A. Some 400 million people worldwide suffer from vitamin A deficiency while over 3.7 billion people are iron-deficient. Vitamin A deficiency causes five million deaths annually, and blindness in a further 500,000 people, while iron deficiency causes anemia and birth defects.
Golden Rice™is a transgenic crop created by Dr. Ingo Potrykus and his colleagues to improve the nutritional quality of rice by increasing the quantities of beta carotene (the precursor of vitamin A) and improving the crop’s iron content. Several genes have been inserted into the rice genome, including a daffodil gene, allowing the endosperm (the part that remains after milling and polishing) to produce B-carotene. Additionally, a phytase gene (which produces an enzyme to release chemically-bound iron), a gene to increase organic iron, and a gene to aid iron absorption in the digestive tract have been added. The presence of beta carotene in the endosperm of the transgenic rice gives it a golden color. Hence, the name “golden rice”.
The research, which was funded by the Rockefeller Foundation, the Swiss government and the European Union, hopes to provide a cheap form of vitamin supplementation. If it is later proven to be viable and safe, Golden Rice will be distributed in developing countries, with no patents blocking access to it. [41]  The introduction of vitamin A-producing beta carotene into the rice gene has the potential of addressing the vitamin A problem, especially among those who are too poor to diversify their diets with green vegetables. [42]
How is modern biotechnology in agriculture different from traditional plant breeding techniques? Is modern biotechnology simply a more advanced stage in the biotechnology development continuum?
Yes and no. Yes, because both traditional and modern biotechnology involve the transfer of genes from one organism to another. Traditional breeding techniques typically involve the repeated mixing of thousands of genes over several years and many generations of plants to achieve a desired trait. Modern biotechnology accelerates this lengthy process by allowing scientists to insert selected genes directly into a plant. [43]  This makes modern biotechnology less of an iterative process compared to traditional plant breeding techniques. In this sense, modern biotechnology is simply an extension of traditional breeding.
No, because unlike traditional breeding techniques, modern biotechnology can move genes across species, even family, boundaries to produce novel organisms that do not normally occur in nature. To cite a simplistic example, a brown cow that mates with a yellow cow may produce a calf of a completely new color, but reproductive mechanisms limit the number of new combinations. Cows must breed with other cows or their very near relatives. A farmer cannot breed for a purple cow using traditional sexual reproduction techniques because the necessary purple genes are not available in cows or their near relatives. In contrast, the biological barrier is not as steep, at least in theory, to a genetic engineer. If purple genes are available in another species, say in an iris plant, those genes could be mixed with the genes of the cow to produce purple cows. [44]
How are genes inserted into plants using modern biotechnology?
There are currently two commonly used methods for introducing genes into plants genomes:
Using a plasmid vector. As previously discussed, a vector, like the plasmids of Agrobacterium tumefaciens, may be used to introduce the gene or genes of interest into the plant DNA. The resulting cells are then screened to identify those that have successfully expressed the new trait. The modified seeds are sown in the field and grown like any other crop. [45]
Particle bombardment techniques. The DNA to be introduced into plant cells is coated onto tiny particles, which are then physically shot into the plant cells. Some of the DNA comes off and are incorporated into the DNA of the target plant.
Are transgenic crops now commercially available?
Yes, genetically modified crops are now available in the market. If you eat corn or soya products, chances are you are consuming genetically modified products. In the United States, it is estimated that 70-85% of all processed/packaged foods contain one or more ingredients that are derived from transgenic crops. [46]
James (2002) estimated the global area planted to transgenic crops in 2002 at 58.7 million hectares. More than one-quarter of this area, or 13.5 million hectares, is in six developing countries, namely, China, India, Indonesia, Argentina, South Africa, and Mexico. India, the largest cotton growing country in the world, commercialized Bt cotton for the first time during the year. However, four countries continue to account for 99% of the global transgenic crop area. The USA grew 66% of the global total, followed by Argentina with 23%, Canada with 6%, and China with 4%. China had the highest year-on-year percentage growth, with a 40% increase in its Bt cotton area. [47]
The adoption rate for transgenic crops is the highest in the history of agriculture. [48]  From 1996 to 2000, 15 countries contributed to a more than 25-fold increase in the global area of transgenic crops, from 1.7 million hectares in 1996 to 44.2 million hectares in 2000. [49]
Which transgenic crops dominate in terms of acreage?
In 2001, the principal transgenic crops were soybean, with 62% of the global area, followed by corn at 21%, cotton at 12%, and canola at 5%. More than three-quarters of the transgenic crops were modified for herbicide tolerance. The balance was mostly for pest resistance, [50]  with a few areas planted to potato and papaya with inserted genes for delayed ripening and virus-resistance. [51]
Most of the concerns revolve around the effect of biotechnology products on the environment and on human health.
Like all new technologies, genetic engineering, if not properly studied and regulated, can adversely impact on the environment. However, we need to review the impact on a case-by-case basis. Biotechnology by itself is not good or bad. As with all technologies, it is how people use it that can be good or bad, risky or beneficial. Each biotechnology product must be evaluated in terms of whether it is useful, beneficial and safe. To date, there is no scientific proof that the use of modern biotechnology has an adverse effect on the environment and on human health.
The major issues that have been raised so far against the environmental impact of genetically engineered agricultural products and the corresponding scientific consensus are summarized below:
Increased weediness. One concern is that altered plants may have increased fitness to survive their environments and might grow unaided by human beings in places where they could have unwanted effects. In unmanaged environments, they could displace natural flora and upset entire ecosystems. [52]  However, in a 10-year study to answer the question of whether transgenes conferring herbicide tolerance or insect resistance on crop plants also confer weediness or invasiveness, it was found that genetically modified crops (those that are commercially available) have no more tendency to become weeds than their conventionally bred counterparts. Apparently, more genes are needed to convert a plant into a weed. Another study also showed that biological invasions have extensive time lags that range from 30-150 years and require the chance concordance of favorable conditions before taking off. The question, however, is whether transgenes would hasten this process. [53]  This is why potential invasiveness of GM plants is evaluated before any decision to release them into the environment is made.
Unintended gene flow. There is also the concern that if relatives of the altered crops are growing near a field with their conventional counterpart, the new gene could move by means of pollen transfer into the latter. There is merit in this concern. This is why studies have to be done on a case-by-case basis to determine the potential environmental risks due to unintended gene flow. The European Science Foundation and European Environment Agency (2002) recently released their report on the significance of pollen-mediated gene flow from six major crop types that have been genetically engineered and are close to commercial release in the European Union, namely, oilseed rape, sugar beet, potatoes, maize, wheat and barley. They found, among others, that oilseed rape is high-risk for crop-to-crop gene flow and gene flow from crop to wild relatives. Potatoes, wheat, and barley are low-risk crops. Maize and sugar beet are both medium- to high-risk for crop-to-crop gene flow, with the latter having the same level of risk for gene flow from crop to wild relatives. There are no known wild relatives of maize in Europe with which it can hybridize. [54]
On the other hand, there is much research on developing alternative measures to mitigate unintended gene flow. At present, seed producers of conventional crops can devise mechanisms to isolate their crop lands from related plants in order to maintain the purity of their lines. In addition, several biotechnology measures to prevent horizontal gene flow, such as apomixis, chloroplast transformation, chromosome-specific cytogenetic system, and transgenetic mitigation, have been suggested. The most controversial is the Technological Protection System (TPS) [55]  developed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture and Delta & Pine. The technique, commonly called GURT (for Genetic Use Restriction Technology), involves a system of three genes that interact to control the fertility of seeds by the seed producer. The objection to TPS has to do with the possibility of pollen dispersal to adjacent fields of the same crop, inadvertently causing the latter to produce sterile seeds. This would also have a severe impact on the common practice of seed saving among small farmers in developing countries. [56]
Change in herbicide use patterns. It has been pointed out that widespread use of herbicide-tolerant crops could lead to the rapid evolution of resistance to herbicides in weeds, either as a result of increased exposure to the herbicide or as a result of the transfer of the herbicide trait to weedy relatives of the crops. [57]  However, to date there is no evidence that this phenomenon is taking place.
Squandering of valuable pest susceptibility genes. Many insects contain genes that render them susceptible to pesticides. Often these susceptibility genes predominate in natural populations of insects. These genes are a valuable natural resource because they allow pesticides to remain as effective pest-control tools. The more benign the pesticide, the more valuable the genes that make pests susceptible to it. It is feared that crops that have been altered to contain the pest-resistance Bt gene can adversely affect the continued susceptibility of pests to the Bt toxin. The continuous exposure of pests to the Bt toxin in altered crops selects for the rare resistance genes in the pest population and in time will render the Bt pesticide useless, unless specific measures are instituted to avoid the development of such a resistance. [58]  It should be noted, however, that there is really no such thing as permanent resistance to pests and diseases and that insect resistance happens under the current practice of using pesticides or even in nature.
A few years ago, there was a controversy around the effect of genetically modified corn on Monarch butterflies. What was that controversy all about and did it have scientific basis?
Monarch butterfly larvae feed exclusively on the leaves of milkweed plants, which are commonly found in cornfields in the U.S. Pollen from nearby corn can become distributed on the leaves of these plants, and can therefore be eaten by the larvae. In 1999, two studies showed that Monarch butterfly larvae and larvae from related species that were fed leaves dusted with Bt-corn pollen had lower survival rates, compared to those fed leaves dusted with non-Bt corn pollen. These studies were used to suggest that Bt corn was responsible for the recently observed decline in the Monarch butterfly population.
However, subsequent investigations revealed that while a large percentage of Monarch butterfly larvae may feed on milkweed found in the corn belt region of the U.S., there is no overlap between their breeding time and the time of pollen shed through most of this region. Other studies have shown that corn pollen settling on an area decreases rapidly with distance. This and the toxicity studies showing low toxicity of many major Bt-corn strains indicate that pollen densities that could represent significant exposure to feeding larvae are found only within five meters of cornfields, and then rarely. [59]  The current scientific consensus is that the adverse impact of Bt-corn pollen observed in the laboratory does not occur in the fields. Hence, Monarch butterflies are safe from Bt corn.
Are GM foods safe to eat?
At present, there are no studies to indicate that any of the commercially available GM foods are any less safe than their non-modified counterparts. This, of course, does not mean that all products of biotechnology are safe. Hence, the need for regulations. In fact, GM food products are subjected to more tests than their conventionally-bred counterparts.
The concerns raised about the safety of genetically engineered food products fall into the following categories:
There is a concern that transgenic crops could introduce new allergens into foods. However, it is important to keep in mind that eating conventional food is also not risk-free; allergies occur with many new and even known conventional foods. For example, the kiwi fruit was introduced into the U.S. and the European market in the 1960s with no known human allergies; today, there are people allergic to this fruit. [60]  In February 2002, the Royal Society issued a policy report titled Genetically Modified Plants for Food Use and Human Health—An Update. [61]  The report concluded that there is currently no evidence that GM foods cause allergic reactions and “the allergenic risks posed by GM plants are in principle no greater than those posed by conventionally derived crops or by plants introduced from other areas of the world.” [62]
Modern biotechnology often uses genes for antibiotic resistance as “selectable markers”. Early in the genetic engineering process, these markers help select cells that have taken up the foreign genes. Although they have no further use, the genes continue to be expressed in plant tissues. Critics of modern biotechnology argue that the presence of antibiotic-resistance genes could have two harmful effects. First, eating food containing these genes could reduce the effectiveness of antibiotics to fight disease when these antibiotics are taken with meals. Antibiotic resistance genes produce enzymes that can degrade antibiotics. If a tomato with an antibiotic-resistance gene is eaten at the same time as an antibiotic, it could destroy the antibiotic in the stomach. Second, the resistance genes could be transferred to human or animal pathogens, making them impervious to antibiotics. If transfer were to occur, it could aggravate the already serious health problem of antibiotic-resistant disease organisms.
However, unmediated transfers of genetic material from plants to bacteria are highly unlikely. Moreover, several strategies have been developed to avoid the inclusion of antibiotic resistance genes in the commercial transgenic variety.
Many organisms have the ability to produce toxic substances. For plants, such substances help to defend stationary organisms from many predators in their environment. But there is concern that the addition of new genetic material through genetic engineering could trigger the production of toxic substances within plants. This could happen, for example, if the on/off signals associated with the introduced gene were located in the genome in places where they could turn on the previously inactive genes. [63]
Human beings typically eat several grams of DNA in their diet each day. Hence, the transgene in a genetically engineered plant is not a new type of material to our digestive systems. It is also present in extremely small amounts. In transgenic corn, for example, the transgenes represent about 0.00018 of the total DNA. Decades of research indicate that dietary DNA has no direct toxicity. In fact, exogenous nucleotides have been shown to play important beneficial roles in gut function and the immune system. Likewise, there is no compelling evidence showing the incorporation and expression of plant-derived DNA, whether a transgene or not, into the genomes of a consuming organism.
Defense processes have evolved, including extensive hydrolytic breakdown of the DNA during digestion, excision of integrated foreign DNA from the host genome, and silencing of foreign gene expression by targeted DNA methylation, that prevent the incorporation or expression of foreign DNA. Thus, there is a minimal possibility of adverse effects arising from the presence of foreign DNA by either direct toxicity or gene transfer.
Concerns have been raised regarding the possible adverse effect of genetic engineering technology on the nutritional content of food. This is a legitimate concern for regulators. In the U.S., for example, the Food and Drug Administration ensures that the nutritional composition of GM foods is substantially equivalent to that of their conventional counterparts. Studies are performed to determine whether nutrients, vitamins and minerals in the modified food occur at the same levels as in the conventionally-bred food sources. For example, seeds and toasted soybean meal from Roundup Ready™soybeans have been compared to conventional soybeans in terms of protein, oil, fiber, ash, carbohydrates, moisture content, amino acid and fatty acid composition. The results showed that the composition of transgenic lines is equivalent to that of conventional soybean cultivars, except for the trypsin inhibitors in non-toasted soybean meal, which is not consumed. In addition, the equivalence of the feeding value of the transgenic grains was demonstrated in rats, chickens, catfish and dairy cattle.
Some of the new genes being added to crops can remove heavy metals like mercury from the soil and concentrate them in plant tissue. The purpose of creating such crops is to make possible the use of municipal sludge as fertilizer. Sludge contains useful plant nutrients but often cannot be used as fertilizer because it is contaminated with toxic heavy metals. The idea is to engineer plants to remove and sequester those metals in inedible parts of plants. In a tomato, for example, the metals would be sequestered in the roots. Turning on the genes in only some parts of the plant requires the use of genetic on/off switches that turn on only in specific tissues, like roots. Such products could pose the risk of contaminating foods with high levels of toxic metals if the on/off switches are not completely turned off in edible tissues. There are also environmental risks associated with the handling and disposal of the metal-contaminated parts of plants after harvesting. Regulations have to address the peculiar functions of GMOs being used as bioremediation agents.
A previous study of the adverse effect of GM potatoes on rats is cited by critics of biotechnology as evidence that GM products are unsafe. What happened to that study?
The study was found to be inconclusive.
Dr. Arpad Putztai, a senior scientist at the Rowett Institute in Aberdeen, Scotland, came to international attention when he announced to the media that eating genetically modified potatoes depressed rat immune systems and caused changes in their intestinal tract. Dr. Putztai and his co-workers compared rats fed genetically modified potatoes with rats fed non-modified potatoes, with and without added GNA. The genetically modified potatoes appeared to cause changes in the rats’ immune response and the structure of the intestinal lining.
But there was a flaw in the experiment. While its design was apparently correct for this type of feeding study, rats do not like to eat raw potato. As a result, a standard 110-day trial had to be abandoned after only 67 days because the rats were starving. Starvation affects gut histology, and even the lining of the guts of rats eating unmodified potatoes was shown to be abnormal. The presence of other potato toxins could also have had a confounding effect on cells in the intestine, especially since the potato lines were not substantially equivalent
Does the possible transfer of antibiotic resistance marker genes from ingested GM food to gut microbes pose a significant hazard to human beings?
Organisms that contain DNA encoding for antibiotic resistance proteins are common and are becoming more prevalent in the environment. However, there is no documented evidence that the antibiotic resistance markers in GM foods contribute to antibiotic resistance in gut bacteria. Should there be such a contribution, it is expected to be extremely small for several reasons, including the efficient destruction of the resistance gene in the human gut and the extremely low intrinsic rate of plant-microbe gene transfer.
Furthermore, resistance genes occur quite widely already and the antibiotics involved are not widely used in medical practice. Finally, the technology is now available to omit the use of such selections devices and their use is therefore likely to diminish.
What is the “principle of substantial equivalence”?
The term “substantial equivalence” was first mentioned in 1993 in connection with food safety in a report of the OECD Group of National Experts on Safety in Biotechnology. The members of the group agreed that the most practical approach to determining the safety of foods derived by modern biotechnology is to consider whether they represent a substantial equivalent to analogous traditional products. The term substantial equivalence and the underlying approach were borrowed from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration’s definition of a class of new medical devices that do not differ materially from their predecessors and thus do not raise new regulatory concerns.
According to the OECD definition, the concept of substantial equivalence is based on the idea that existing products used as foods or food sources can serve as a basis for comparison when assessing the safety and the nutritional value of a food or food ingredient that is new or that has been modified by modern biotechnological methods. If a novel food or novel food component is found to be substantially equivalent to an existing food or food component, it can be treated in the same manner with respect to safety. No additional safety concern would be expected. If a novel food or novel food ingredient is not found to be substantially equivalent to its conventional counterpart, this does not imply that it is unsafe. It must simply be evaluated on the basis of its unique composition and properties. [64]
The “precautionary principle” traces its origins to Principle 15 of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, which provides that:
In order to protect the environment, the precautionary approach shall be widely applied by the States according to their capabilities. Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation.
The use of the precautionary principle is to be based to the fullest extent possible on scientific evidence of a given problem. However, it is not always possible to move towards a decision on a purely scientific assessment; any assessment must also involve economic, social and ethical aspects. The precautionary principle is thus more of a political norm than a clearly defined concept. [65]
Critics of the precautionary principle have argued that it is poorly defined, not sufficiently grounded in science, stifles development of technology, and hinders trade. It is claimed that it is not a valid principle for evaluating scientific evidence as it distorts reality and leads to the acceptance of false beliefs. Opponents are also concerned that the precautionary principle’s focus on hypothetical risks will distract consumers and policy makers from the policies needed to address known food-borne threats to human health. [66]
The precautionary principle has been invoked to justify a prohibition of GM crops. The justification for a ban allegedly considers the potential public health and environmental benefits of the banned GM crop. However, it ignores the probable public health and environmental benefits that would necessarily be foregone as a result of the ban. A comprehensive application of the precautionary principle indicates that a GM crop ban, contrary to the claims of its advocates, would increase overall risks to public health and to the environment, especially in developing countries. Thus, it would be more prudent to study, develop, and possibly commercialize GM crops than to ban such crops, provided reasonable caution is exercised through the regulatory agencies.
Should it wish to do so, how should a government regulate the use of modern biotechnology?
The purpose of a biosafety (short for “biological safety”) system is to control the risks associated with the products of modern biotechnology. An integrated national biosafety system has the following elements: [67]
National policy, strategies and research agenda regarding biosafety. The development of a national biosafety system should begin with the elaboration of a national biosafety policy consistent with a country’s other policy objectives on food, agriculture, the environment and sustainable development. This policy will serve as the basis for the crafting of specific legislation and/or regulations on biosafety. It should articulate a framework where competing goals, such as economic, regional development and environmental protection, may be integrated and communicated as a single national vision.
National inventory and evaluation. This is a means to identify and characterize the available resources and regulatory infrastructure in a country, assess their adequacy for supporting a biosystem, and identify gaps where capacities need to be strengthened. The inventory should include the following factors:
Knowledge, skills and capacity base to develop and implement a biosafety system. A strong base of scientific knowledge to support the regulatory system and the development of competencies in product evaluation is critical to any biosafety system. A limited knowledge and skills base will tend to produce regulations that are highly protective, at the expense of innovation.
Some countries have implemented a system of expert advisory committees, while others have relied primarily on scientists and professionals working within government agencies. The advantage of independent advisory committees is that they generally have more transparent accountability frameworks because the expertise and academic credentials of their membership are usually published. However, they may suffer from the part-time volunteer nature of their membership. A combination of these two approaches—expert advisory committees and government scientists and professionals—may be the best arrangement. Product evaluations performed by competent scientists within a regulatory agency could be supplemented by the results of issue-specific expert panel consultations.
Box 3. Risk Assessment
Risk assessment is a method by which science can be used to address environmental and human health safety concerns. It is broadly defined as the use of scientific data to rank or measure hazards, assess exposure and characterize risks involved in a food-related activity or product. However, risk assessments do not specifically determine whether a product is “safe” or “unsafe”. The use of risk assessment in the development of regulations is related to the expected impact of a particular environmental or food safety problem, the expected impact of protective mitigation measures, and the levels of urgency and controversy surrounding an issue.
What are the principles of risk assessment as applied to GMOs?
There are four basic principles that have found international acceptance. These are embodied in Annex III of the Cartagena Protocol:
Risk assessment should be carried out in a scientifically sound and transparent manner, and can take into account expert advice of, and guidelines developed by, relevant international organizations.
Lack of scientific knowledge or scientific consensus should not necessarily be interpreted as indicating a particular level of risk, an absence of risk, or an acceptable risk.
Risks associated with living modified organisms or products thereof, namely, processed materials that are of living modified organism origin, containing detectable novel combinations of replicable genetic material obtained through the use of modern biotechnology, should be considered in the context of the risks posed by the non-modified recipients or parental organisms in the likely potential receiving environment.
Risk assessment should be carried out on a case-by-case basis. The required information may vary in nature and level of detail from case to case, depending on the living modified organism concerned, its intended use and the likely potential receiving environment.
What are the limitations of scientific risk assessment?
In risk assessment analysis, the use of science is not as clear-cut and simple as it may appear initially. First, since scientific knowledge constantly changes and evolves, the best available science about food or environmental issues may be different from one year to the next.
Another complicating factor in the application of science to risk assessment analysis is the disagreement among scientists about conclusions from key influential studies. Ideally, scientists conduct research in a manner that produces precise and accurate results so that study conclusions are authoritative and nonbiased. However, it is not unusual for scientists to disagree about an experiment’s design and conclusions, especially if the results alter the conventional knowledge about a subject. These disagreements may require years of debate and further experimentation in other laboratories before results are accepted by most scientists. Regulations based on professionally disputed scientific studies may not be scientifically defensible once the controversy is resolved through additional data gathering and analysis.
Given the above limitations, should one continue to use scientific risk assessment in evaluating biotechnology products?
Yes, there is no other internationally accepted standard by which one can effectively assess the risks, if any, posed by GM products. One should, however, be cognizant of the above limitations in arriving at a decision involving GMOs.
Development of regulations. A country may adopt either voluntary guidelines or mandatory regulations. Voluntary guidelines are more quickly put in place and are more flexible for the adoption of revisions incorporating new information requirements. However, the public may not be as confident with voluntary guidelines as they would be with mandatory regulations. Thus, there may be value in adopting mandatory regulations.
If a country elects to develop mandatory regulations, it can do so in one of two ways: (1) it can develop a new act and regulations to specifically address GMOs; or (2) it can regulate GMOs using existing legal instruments such as acts, regulations, and presidential decrees. The former has the advantage of establishing a system that specifically addresses the product or process to be regulated, of being crafted to allow flexibility in the face of new technical advances, and of being perceived by the public as a positive response to addressing the concerns about safety of GMOs. However, it could take long to develop such a new act or regulation, especially with the political controversy that GMOs have generated. Also, this could result in GMOs being regulated in perpetuity even if the scientific basis for the separate regulation has long been eroded.
If a mandatory system is adopted, the policy maker should also decide on whether the system should take any of the following forms: [68]
a negligence rule, which is a combination of the ex ante regulation and ex post facto liabilities.
The biosafety policy developed in most countries emphasizes the ex ante regulatory approach. This approach has the major benefit of providing information to both the producer and consumer of biotechnology products. If a biotechnology organization produces new products according to the regulations, it is less likely to be fined ex post facto. Thus, regulation and product standards reduce risk and thereby allow the market to work more smoothly as the participants are better informed about the rules of the game.
Ultimately, the development of biosafety policy will depend on several factors including the nature of risks, the goal of public policy, the institutional and judicial framework, and the involvement of the private sector in biotechnology research.
Regardless of the type of regulatory framework chosen, care must be taken not to overregulate. An unreasonably stringent regulatory system can prevent beneficial products from being made available to the public.
Implementation of regulations. The final step of putting the system into operation requires the following elements:
The regulations or guidelines clearly define the structure of the biosafety system.
People are knowledgeable and well trained.
The review process is based on up-to-date scientific information.
Feedback mechanisms are used to incorporate new information and revise the system as needed.
What international agreements are relevant to modern biotechnology?
Issues related to modern biotechnology have been raised in a number of international fora, including the following:
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
There are also a number of international agreements that relate to modern biotechnology. The most important are the:
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity
Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures
What is the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety?
The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity is the first international legally binding tool regarding biosafety in biotechnology. It seeks to contribute to ensuring that there is an adequate level of protection in the safe transfer, handling and use of GMOs resulting from modern biotechnology, especially those that may have adverse effects on the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity. It also takes into account risks to human health, and specifically focuses on transboundary movements.
The Protocol was adopted in Montreal on January 29, 2000, but will take effect only after at least 50 States have ratified it. In summary, the Protocol:
Establishes an Advance Informed Agreement procedure for imports of LMOs intended for release into the environment;
Establishes a simplified procedure for notification and information exchange for LMOs intended for food, feed or for processing, such as agricultural commodities;
Establishes regimes for assessing and managing risks to biodiversity;
Details information and documentation requirements; and
Includes provision for capacity-building and financial resources. [69]
Box 4. The Advanced Informed Agreement Procedure
A Party1 exporting a living modified organism (LMO) to another Party for intentional introduction into the latter’s environment is required to comply with the advance informed agreement procedure laid down by the Cartagena Protocol. The Advance Informed Agreement, which is the heart of the Cartagena Protocol, is as follows:
Prior to the intentional transboundary movement of the LMO, the Party of export should notifies, or requires the exporter2 in its jurisdiction to ensure notification, in writing, to the competent national authority3 of the Party of import. The notification should contain the following minimum information4:
a. Name, address and contact details of the exporter;
b. Name, address and contact details of the importer5;
c. Name and identity of the LMO, as well as the domestic classification, if any, of the biosafety level of the LMO in the State of export;
d. Intended date or dates of the transboundary movement, if known;
e. Taxonomic status, common name, point of collection or acquisition, and characteristics of recipient organism or parental organisms related to biosafety;
f. Centers of origin and centers of genetic diversity, if known, of the recipient organism and/or the parental organisms and a description of the habitats where the organisms may persist of proliferate;
g. Taxonomic status, common name, point of collection or acquisition, and characteristics of the donor organism or organisms related to biosafety;
h. Description of the nucleic acid or the modification introduce, the technique used, and the resulting characteristics of the LMO;
i. Intended use of the LMO or products thereof, namely, processed materials that are of LMO origin, containing detectable novel combinations of replicable genetic material obtained through the use of modern biotechnology;
j. Quantity or volume of the LMO to be transferred;
k. A previous and existing risk assessment consistent with the risk assessment principles and methodology set forth on the Protocol;
l. Suggested methods for the safe handling, storage, transport and use, including packaging, labeling, documentation, disposal and contingency procedures, where appropriate;
m. Regulatory status of the LMO within the State of export (for example, whether it is prohibited in the State of export, whether there are other restrictions, or whether it has been approved for general release) and, if the LMO is banned in the State of export, the reason or reasons for the ban;
n. Result and purpose of any notification by the exporter to other States regarding the LMO to be transferred; and
o. A declaration that the above-mentioned information is factually correct.
Within ninety days from receipt of the notification, the Party of import acknowledges such receipt in writing. The acknowledgment should state the following:
a. the date of receipt of the notification;
b. whether the notification, prima facie, contained the required minimum information listed above; and
c. whether the notifier should proceed according to the domestic regulatory framework of the Party of import (which must be consistent with the Cartagena Protocol) or according to the Decision Procedure laid down by the Cartagena Protocol itself.
The failure by the Party of import to acknowledge receipt of a notification within the 90- day period does not imply consent to the transboundary movement.
If the Party of import requires the notifier to comply with the Decision Procedure of the Protocol, then:
a. within the same period required to acknowledge the notification, the Party of import informs the notifier, in writing, whether the transboundary transfer may proceed either: (a) only after the Party of import has given its written consent; or (b) after no less than ninety days without a subsequent written consent; and
b. within two hundred seventy days from receipt of notification, the Party of import should communicate, in writing, to the notifier and to the Biosafety Clearing-House6 of its decision:
i. approving the import, with or without conditions, including how the decision will apply to subsequent imports of the same LMO;
Failure by the Party of import to inform the notifier of its decision within the 270-day period does not imply consent to the transboundary movement.
The Advance Informed Agreement applies only for the first intentional introduction of the LMO into the environment of the Party of import, as is the case when, for instance, the LMO is being imported for use in field trials. It does not apply in instances where the LMO is:
1 A State or a regional economic integration organization may be Party to the Cartagena Protocol. A “regional economic integration organization” means “an organization constituted by sovereign States of a given region, to which its member States have transferred competence in respect of matters governed by [the] Protocol and which has been duly authorized , in accordance with its international procedures to sign, ratify, accept, approve or accede to it.” (Cartagena Protocol, Art. 4). One, and thus far the only, example for purposes of the Protocol is the European Union.
2 An “exporter” is “any legal or natural person, under the jurisdiction of the Party of export, who arranges for a living modified organism to be exported.” (Id., Art. 3(d)).
3 Each party to the Protocol is required to designate one or more competent national authorities that will be responsible for performing the administrative functions required by the Protocol (Art. 19.1). These functions include the receipt of notifications for purposes of the advance informed agreement procedure.
5 An “importer” is “any legal or natural person, under the jurisdiction of the Party of import, who arranges for a living modified organism to be imported.” (Id., Art. 3(f)).
6 The Cartagena Protocol established Biosafety Clearing-House to “facilitate the exchange of scientific, technical, environmental and legal information on, and experience with, living modified organisms.” It is also meant to assist the Parties in their implementation of the protocol, “taking into account the special needs of the developing country Parties, in particular the least developed and small island developing States among them, and countries with economies in transition as well as countries that are centers of origin and centers of genetic diversity.” (Art. 20; emphasis supplied)
7 The number of days that the Party of import has to wait for additional relevant information is not included
Box 5. Procedure for Transboundary Movement of LMOs Intended for Direct Use as Food or Feed, or for Processing
The Cartagena Protocol requires a Party making a final decision regarding the domestic use (including placement in the market) of a LMO that may be subject to transboundary movement for direct use as food or feed, or for processing, to inform the other parties, through the Biosafety Clearing-House, of its decision within fifteen days therefrom.1 The notification submitted to the Biosafety Clearing-House should contain the following minimum information2:
a. The name and contact details of the applicant for a decision for domestic use;
b. The name and contact details of the authority responsible for the decision;
c. Name and identity of the LMO;
d. Description of the gene modification, the technique used, and the resulting characteristics of the LMO;
e. Any unique identification of the LMO;
f. Taxonomic status, common name, point of collection or acquisition, and characteristics of recipient organism or parental organisms related to biosafety;
g. Centers of origin and centers of genetic diversity, if known, of the recipient organism and/or the parental organisms and a description of the habitats where the organisms may persist of proliferate;
h. Taxonomic status, common name, point of collection or acquisition, and characteristics of the donor organism or organisms related to biosafety;
i. Approved uses of the LMO;
j. A risk assessment report consistent with Annex III of the Protocol
k. Suggested methods for the safe handling, storage, transport and use, including packaging, labeling, documentation, disposal and contingency procedures, where appropriate;
However, a Party may decide to regulate the importation of LMOs intended for direct use as food or feed, or for processing, under its domestic regulatory framework, provided that it is consistent with the Protocol.3 If a developing country Party has no such domestic regulatory framework, and in the exercise of its domestic jurisdiction, it may declare through the Biosafety Clearing-House that its decision prior to the first import of a LMO intended for direct use as food or feed, or for processing, will be taken according to (i) a risk assessment undertaken in accordance with Annex III of the Protocol; and (ii) a decision made within a predictable timeframe, not exceeding two hundred and seventy days.4 Failure by the developing country to communicate its decision within the said period does not imply consent or refusal to the import of the LMO, unless it is otherwise specified by such country.5
What is the Codex Alimentarius Commission?
Food standard setting at the international level is done by the Joint FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC). This is an intergovernmental body established to protect consumer health and ensure fair practices in the food trade. The 23rd Session of the CAC, held in 1999, agreed to create an Ad Hoc Intergovernmental Task Force for Foods Derived from Biotechnology to develop standards, guidelines and recommendations regarding the safety and nutritional aspects of genetically modified foods.
The elaboration of food standards by the CAC follows a step-wise procedure, as shown below:
Step 1: Authorization of the elaboration of a text as new work
Step 2: Preparation of a proposed draft
Step 3: Circulation of the proposed draft for comments by governments and observers
Step 4: Consideration of the proposed draft by a Committee or a Task Force
Step 5: Provisional adoption as a draft by the CAC
Step 6: Circulation of the draft for comments by governments and observers
Step 7: Consideration of the draft by a Committee or a Task Force
Step 8: Final adoption by the CAC70
Once a text is adopted at Step 8, it is given the status of an international benchmark under the Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) Agreement. While the SPS Agreement requires its Members to base their risk management measures on scientific risk assessment, Members applying recognized international standards such as those of the Codex Alimentarius are deemed to be in compliance with their obligations under the SPS Agreement. There is thus a strong incentive for governments to use Codex standards as a basis for national regulations. In doing so, they can strengthen their food control system while avoiding unnecessary trade disputes.
The Ad Hoc Intergovernmental Task Force for Foods Derived from Biotechnology has recently released, at Step 8 of the Elaboration Procedure, the “Draft Principles for the Risk Analysis of Foods Derived from Modern Biotechnology” and the “Draft Guideline for the Conduct of Food Safety Assessment of Foods Derived from Recombinant-DNA Plants”. Both documents are available at www.codexalimentarius.com, and countries wishing to regulate GM foods are well advised to review them.
What is the Technical Barriers to Trade (“TBT”) Agreement?
The TBT Agreement is one of the agreements under the administrative supervision of the WTO. It recognizes that countries should not be prevented from taking regulatory measures necessary to pursue various “legitimate objectives” such as, inter alia, national security requirements, the prevention of deceptive practices, and protection of human health or safety of animal or plant life or the environment. Governments are, however, required to apply technical regulations and standards in a non-discriminatory manner and ensure that they do not restrict trade.
The TBT Agreement incorporates a fundamental principle of general trade law that is relevant to products of modern biotechnology: “like” products should be similarly treated. The intention is to avoid applying different regulatory measures to products with similar characteristics on the ground that they have been produced differently. This is designed to avoid arbitrary and deliberate discrimination against imported products which, although similar, may have been produced with techniques different from those used for domestically produced products. However, there is as yet no formal interpretation as to whether, under the TBT Agreement, products produced using modern biotechnology are “like” their conventional counterparts.
What is the Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) Agreement?
The SPS Agreement, like the TBT Agreement, is one of the WTO agreements. It applies to all sanitary and phytosanitary measures that may affect international trade. Sanitary and phytosanitary measures are international standards or regulations established to protect human, animal or plant health on quarantine and food safety grounds and cover such concerns as the presence of microbial contaminants, toxins, heavy metals and pesticide residues in food and quarantine risks posed by pests weeds and pathogens that are applied domestically.
In the context of trade in agricultural products, these measures are to be applied only to the extent necessary to protect human life or health and “to protect human life or health from the risk arising from additives, contaminants, toxin or disease causing organisms in foods.” The SPS Agreement removes the right of countries to arbitrarily restrict access to markets on health and safety grounds. It also calls on members to harmonize sanitary and phytosanitary measures on a global basis by adopting international standard guidelines and recommendations, where these exist. Sufficient scientific evidence must be provided if members wish to maintain SPS measures at levels above relevant international standards.
The scientific requirement of the SPS Agreement is important because it provides a more objective approach in determining what is a justified trade restriction and what is hidden protectionism. On the other hand, the agreement may seem inadequate to tackle restrictions introduced on the basis of consumer sentiments in relation to food production methods such as genetic engineering.
When scientific evidence is unavailable or insufficient for a final judgment about the safety of a product or process to be made, Article 5.7 of the SPS Agreement explicitly allows WTO member states to take precautionary measures based on available pertinent information. Members are, however, obliged to seek additional information so that a more objective evaluation of the risks related to the relevant product or process can be made within a reasonable period of time. [71]
Input: Report prototypes, data mart prototype and information architecture
Activities: Bring technical infrastructure together into one system
What's a research paper?
A paper involving hands-on or library-based research, or both. Expectations for research papers differ depending on discipline.
For specific guidance for history, see How to Write a Research Paper in History.
What do you really care about (in school or out of school)?
If you had all the time in the world, what would you spend your time doing? Studying?
What do you want to learn more about?
Your answers may range from the very academic (e.g., plant science, Gettysburg Address) to non-academic subjects (e.g., car mechanics, basketball, etc.).
Once you have narrowed down a subject matter to study more thoroughly, you need to pose an analytical question about the subject or topic. Using “why” or “how” often works much better than “what,” and promotes better critical thinking.
Use open-ended questions, such as:
I have always wondered why _________________________________________.
I have always wondered how _________________________________________.
I wonder why/how ______________________ about _____________________.
What about __________________________would you like to learn more about?
Step Three: Take it a Step Further
Fill in the blanks for the subject, and then focus on the content to be learned.
I wonder how ___________________________________________ about the Civil War.
Student Response: I wonder how soldiers on one side of the battle were able to gain information about the other side during the Civil War when computers, radar and military intelligence were not available as they are today.
Step Four: Finding the Current “Academic Conversation”
Whatever the subject, there is probably a conversation occurring about it (or a conversation has occurred sometime in the past). Whether the topic is highly academic or only slightly in the academic circle, there is most likely something people have already said about the issue. Find it! Research!
As you read your research, you are drawing conclusions and making inferences; ultimately you are forming an opinion – a position! You will defend your position in a thesis statement.
Citing your sources serves several purposes: it shows where you drew information from, it enables interested readers to find out more by giving them the tools to find those sources, and it gives credit to the authors whose work you used. It is also a crucial part of preventing plagiarism.
Proteins are important macromolecules in living organisms because they are structurally. Therefore, they can take on essential roles in a wide variety of biological processes and functions. Protein structure can be described on several different levels. The primary structure of protein refers to the sequence of amino acids in the polypeptide chains. Different amino acids contain different functional groups.  The secondary structure of protein deals with the fact that polypeptide chains fold into a regularly repeating structure, such as an alpha-helix and beta-sheet. The tertiary structure of proteins gives the overall structural arrangement of one single subunit polypeptide chain. The quaternary structure of protein refers to the arrangement and interaction of several subunit polypeptide chains to form a protein molecule. The structural diversity and complexity of proteins enable them to perform a diverse variety of functions. A protein is made up of many amino acids through peptide bonds between a carboxyl group and an amino group of another adjacent amino acid. This makes the protein form long chains. Some proteins are known to function alone; however, there are many proteins that work together to form complexes (for example: ribosomes, lipids, nucleic acids, etc.). This creates functionality of cells, and organisms all together.  The main function of proteins depends on the amino acids that make up the protein as well as the way it folds.
Some of these functions are given below:\
Antibodies are proteins that participate in the immune response by defending the body against antigens (foreign invaders). Antibodies travel through the blood stream and are utilized by the immune system to identify and defend against bacteria, viruses, and other foreign intruders. Certain antibodies destroy antigens by immobilizing them so that the white blood cells can destroy the antigens. An antibody is made up of 2 heavy and 2 light chains. The two chains are connected by disulfide bonds. There is a variable region and constant region. The variable region is the region where the antigens bind to. Because its variable, different antigens can bind to these regions.
Contractile proteins are the proteins that involved in movement. They include myosin and actin, which participate in muscle contractions and movement. Actin filaments are the major components of the network. Other contractile proteins interact with these filaments in order to create structural rigidity and movement. Contractile proteins's structure and function are striated muscles and well characterized; thus,they contribute a great example of nonmuscle cells. Moreover, the interaction of contractile proteins of various cells may be unique. The study of contractile proteins in cells other than muscle has distinct difficulties. For example, the proteins are presented in a lower concentration than in muscle, and only a few cell types are obtainable for study in quantities comparable to muscle. Also, proteolysis and other detriments may be more severe in nonmuscle cells. Other example can be that the organization of contractile proteins is difficult to define in nonmuscle cells. Nevertheless, the ubiquity of contractile proteins and the importance of their interactions presages increase relevancy for physiology and medicine.
Structural proteins are the proteins that are generally fibrous and stringy. They are the most abundant class of proteins in nature. Their main function is to provide mechanical support. Examples of structural proteins can be keratin, collagen, and elastin. Keratins are found in hair, quills, feathers, horns, and beaks. Collagens and elastin are found in connective tissues such as tendons and ligaments. Collagen is recognized as the most abundant mammalian protein. Structural proteins such as collagen, fibronectin and laminin are utilized in cell culture applications as attachment factors. Sigma offers the most comprehensive collection of structural proteins for extracellular matrix and cytoskeletal research as well as tools for cell culture and material science applications.
Enzymes are the proteins that regulate biochemical processes. They are often called catalysts because they function to lower the activation energy of the reaction and thereby increases the rate of the reaction. Essentially, enzymes are able to do so because they can stabilize the transition state. Lactase and pepsin are examples of enzymes. Lactase is involved in the breakdown of lactose, which are present in milk. Pepsin, on the other hand, helps break down proteins in food. Enzymes are biological catalysts or assistants. Enzymes consist of various types of proteins that work to drive the chemical reaction required for a specific action or nutrient. The chemicals that are transformed with the help of enzymes are called substrates. In the absence of enzymes, these chemicals are called reactants.
Hormonal proteins are the proteins that act as signaling proteins, which help regulate biological activities in the body. Insulin, oxytocin, and somatotropin are examples of hormonal proteins. Insulin is involved in the regulation of glucose metabolism by controlling the blood-sugar concentration. Oxytocin is responsible for stimulating contractions in women during childbirth. Lastly, somatotropin stimulates protein production in muscle cells.  Somatotropin
Storage proteins are the proteins that act as storage for amino acids or specific ligands, such as biologically important metal ions. They include ovalbumin and casein. The former is present in egg whites while the latter is found in milk. Another example is myoglobin, which function as the storage of oxygen for tissues.
Transport proteins are the proteins that are responsible for moving molecules from one place to another. For example, the protein hemoglobin is responsible for the transport of oxygen in the blood. Another example is cytochromes, which acts as electron carrier proteins in the electron transfer chain.
Membrane proteins are the proteins that are found in biological membranes. They can either be peripheral or integral. They may act as biological markers or regulatory channels for ions and molecules.
The fputs() function writes an array of characters pointed to by str to the given output stream. The return value is non-negative on success, and EOF on failure.
Drinking a reasonable amount of, though not too much, plain, clean water can help control weight gain.[1][2]
A warm, but not super hot, cup of tea contains polyphenols, which can help a body fight off free radicals.[3]
Chicken Soup with vegetables can help relieve nasal congestion and sore throats.[4]
Turmeric is a healthy ingredient, that can give you a slight edge when fighting off inflammation.[5][6]
Sweating in a Sauna regularly can help prevent, but not cure, colds.[7]
Consuming Thulasi, also known as Holy Basil may assist in reducing stress and contains a number of nutrients.[8]
The smell of Oregano oils can be beneficial for your skin.[9]
If you are otherwise healthy and don't have conditions like diabetes or circulation issues, you may consider wrapping your feet in a cold soaked towel for ten to fifteen minutes, then go to sleep while wearing dry socks on top of cold socks to decrease congestion and promote sleep.[10]
Cut a heated onion in half and clasp it around the ears for a smoothing effect.[11] Still, this is just a supplementary treatment to a doctor's attention, so please go see a doctor anyway. Untreated ear infections can cause severe scarring of the eardrums and lead to increasing deafness over time!
You should not use Sweet Oil in your ears. It does ease pain briefly, however can feed fungi in your ear, making the problem worse.[12] See a doctor.
Sucking on popsicles or ice cubes can be a cheap and effective way to make sure your throat is moist, soothing the soreness somewhat.[13]
Again, a visit to the doctor is not negotiable, you might need antibiotics.
↑ Marshall, Mallika (26 May 2016). "The big benefits of plain water". https://www.health.harvard.edu/blog/big-benefits-plain-water-201605269675.
↑ "How much water should you drink?". Harvard Health Publishing. https://www.health.harvard.edu/staying-healthy/how-much-water-should-you-drink.
↑ "Tea" (in en-us). 26 July 2019. https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/food-features/tea/.
↑ "The Healing Powers of Chicken Soup | Student Affairs". https://studentaffairs.duke.edu/blog-entry/healing-powers-chicken-soup.
↑ "Explaining turmeric’s health benefits and limitations" (in en). https://wexnermedical.osu.edu/blog/explaining-turmerics-health-benefits-and-limitations.
↑ "Benefits of Turmeric" (in en). https://healthcare.utah.edu/healthfeed/postings/2020/02/turmeric.php.
↑ "Can you actually sweat out a sickness? SiOWfa16: Science in Our World: Certainty and Controversy". https://sites.psu.edu/siowfa16/2016/12/02/can-you-actually-sweat-out-a-sickness/.
↑ College, Acupuncture & Massage. "Basil May Slow Aging Process" (in en-us). https://www.amcollege.edu/blog/basil-may-slow-aging-process.
↑ "How and why to use essential oils" (in en). https://wexnermedical.osu.edu/blog/essential-oils.
↑ "A Surprising Cold Remedy for the Post Holiday Months" (in en). https://health.bastyr.edu/news/health-tips/2017/01/surprising-cold-remedy-post-holiday-months.
↑ "Find the Cause of Your Child's Ear Infection" (in en). https://bastyr.edu/news/health-tips/2011/09/find-cause-your-childs-ear-infection.
↑ School, McGovern Medical. "Swimmer's Ear Discussion" (in en). https://med.uth.edu/orl/online-ear-disease-photo-book/chapter-11-swimmers-ear/swimmers-ear-discussion/.
↑ "Sore Throat? Here's What to Do University Health Service". https://uhs.umich.edu/strep.
The java.lang.Float class is the nominal wrapper class when you need to store a float value but an object reference is required.
The ablative corresponds to the preposition "from".
So it is used for origins that involve motion:
1Uj&yE5 `B aG7ÎEj°^ tuluvan i ciryallo "I shall come from the boat"
1UyU5$8 `B t#j1E `B aY2&j°^ tuvunes i malta i cundullo "he received the gold from the prince"
The ablative is also used with following words:
The verb 7Ua\ ruc- "fear", to express what is "feared":
`B 9~B5# 7Uf$ `B 9lU5$j°^ i hína runcë i huinello "the child feared the shadow"
The preposition `V1 et "out, out of":
`B eR`C 1Uj°$ `V1 `B `NjqRj°^ i fëa tullë et i olpello "the spirit came out of the bottle"
The basic ending is \j°^ -llo after vowels and \`Vj°^ -ello after consonants.
j#,R lassë "leaf" → j#,Rj°^ lassello
yR2$ vendë "girl" → yR2$j°^ vendello
`C7E5 aran "king" → `C7E5$j°^ aranello
`C1E6 atar "father" → `C1E7Rj°^ atarello
iD7E1 sarat "sign" → iD7E1Rj°^ saratello
Words that have a stem-form use this stem-form:
5~B8 nís "woman" → 5%,Rj°^ nissello
aU7Y curo "device" → aU7Uj°^ curullo
Words ending in \j -l contract with the ending:
t$5$j menel "heaven" → t$5$j°^ menello
Providing no duplicate words arise, endings in \6 -r, \5 -n, \8 -s lose this final consonant before adding \j°^ -llo:
1EyE8 tavas "woodland" → 1EyEj°^ tavallo
When using these rules you have to look at the final letter of the stem-form (and not at the final letter of the nominative):
1Ej#5 talan "floor" → 1Ej#t$j°^ talamello (stem-form 1Ej#t\ talam-)
5~V5 nén "water" → 5$j°^ nello (stem-form 5$5\ nen-)
The ablative of contracted stems (see Stem-forms) doesn't use the stem-form but the nominative singular:
9C7E5 haran "leader" → 9C7Ej°^ harallo (stem-form 9C65 harn-)
Doubled L-stems also use the nominative singular:
`Ct%j amil "mother" → `Ct%j°^ amillo (stem-form `Ct%j°\ amill-)
(For these nouns, the genitive and ablative singular are identical.)
The ending is \j°^5 -llon after vowels and \`Bj°^5 -illon after consonants.
t%2^5 mindon "tower" → t%2^5%j°^5 mindonillon
`Vm# elda "elf" → `Vm#j°^5 eldallon
(note: sometimes the plural endings \j°^6 -llor and \`Bj°^6 -illor are seen, but these are not preferred. They may have something to with nouns having an -r plural form.)
Words ending in \j -l contract with the ending:
t#aGj macil "sword" → t#aGj°^5 macillon
`Ct%j amil "mother" → `Ct%j°^5 amillon (stem-form amill-)
U-duals get \j°^ -llo onto the nominative dual plural of the noun:
`Cm& aldu "a pair of trees" → `Cm&j°^ aldullo (nom.sing.: `Cm# alda)
In t-duals the final \1 -t is replaced by \j1Y -lto:
aG7ÎE1 ciryat "a pair of ships" → aG7ÎEj1Y ciryalto (nom.sing.: aG7ÎE cirya)
`C7E5$1 aranet "a pair of kings" → `C7E5$j1Y aranelto (nom.sing.: `C7E5 aran)
We add \j°^5 -llon or \j°^ -llo to the nominative partitive plural of the noun:
aG7ÎEj% ciryali "some ships" → aG7ÎEj%j°^5 - aGÎEj%j°^ ciryalillon/ciryalillo (nom.sing.: aG7ÎE cirya)
(the ending \j°^5 -llon is preferred, and again sometimes \j°^6 -llor is seen.)
The alphabet of the language contains 26 letters: five vowels, and twenty-one consonants.
The five vowels are a, e, i, o, u. The 21 consonants are b, c, d, f, g, h, j, k, l, m, n, p, q, r, s, t, v, w, x, y, z. It is highly recommended to write the letters in a manner that avoids confusion between the capital letters F and T or C, and I and J. In printing pay attention that Ido doesn't become Jdo. In general, and especially for addresses, take care to form the letters in the best and most readable manner.
Previous | Contents | Next
The key components of a computer can be categorized into the following:
An input device allows a user to 'input' data into a computer.
Find out more about input devices here.
A user receives information from the computer via an output device.
Find out more about output devices here.
The part of the computer that processes the data input as per the instruction given.
Find out more about processors here.
This is where the computer keeps data input and calculations temporarily. This is stored only until the computer is switched off, when it is then lost.
Find out more about memory here.
This is where the computer stores applications and files in the longer term.
Find out more about processors here.
Learn all about computer networks and connectivity here.
It's a good idea to explain how the different components work by relating it to something familiar to the students.
One example is the human body - you might say the computer's processor (CPU) is like the human brain, the power supply is like the human heart, the RAM is like human short term memory, the hard drive like our long term memory, etc. It makes it easier for students to remember, and lots of fun activities you can use to help students remember the different components.
Video discussing the key components inside a computer
An implementation of the Little Man Computer
"HS" refers to Heavenly Stems, "EB" refers to Earthly Branches, and "Hid" refers to Hidden Stems.
Luck Pillars for H2 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 0] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H2 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 1] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H2 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 2] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H2 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 3] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H2 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 4] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H2 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 5] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H2 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 6] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H2 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 7] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H2 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 8] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H2 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 9] in direction F (forward).
Luck Pillars for H2 - E10 (Heavenly Stem - Earthly Branch) starting from [Age 10] in direction F (forward).
Angling or Fishing overs a dizzying array of possible baits, tools and equipment to catch ones fish. A basic approach is the general technique and equipment one uses.  How does on master a given technique or peice of equipment.  By seeking other people's advice, gaining experience with it and experimenting with it, noting what works and what doesn't.  Probably the biggest single reason fishermen don't progress is that they fail to keep track of what works, when and what they are doing.  They have an approach, but they aren't keeping track of is working and what isn't.  Thus a basic fishing log is an important first step to gaining more mastery at fishing.
When It comes to fishing, we find (irrespective of species) three major means of fishing using a rod and a hook. There are;
Bait fishing;  fishing utilizing live or dead baits on a hook.
Lure fishing;  fishing utilizing hook(s) molded into a small device or lure.
Fly fishing; fishing utilizing hook(s) camouflaged by lightweight materials or fly.
Welcome to the Navajo language Wikibook. This book is in progress. Please contribute to make a really good book on the Navajo language.
It seems that "transsubjective" means "across subjectivities" in the sense of not necessarily being restricted to any specific individual(s) (e.g., may include nonparticipants), while "intersubjective" means "between individuals" and also entails the ability to take the other person’s position.  In that case, the reference to “intersubjective understanding about things and events” posits that persons actually involved in a situation have a capacity to reach mutually insightful and empathic understandings among themselves.
That capacity is contrasted, here, against a "capacity for decentered perception and manipulation of things and events."  If my understanding of Piaget is correct, the concepts of decentering and internality, which were borrowed from him (p. 14), refer, respectively, to the ability to take the perspective of another person and the transition, in the developing child, from external (physical) to internal (mental, symbolic) representations. Here, however, Habermas evidently wants to construe decentering, not as evoking anything resembling an increased capacity for empathy or interpersonal insight, but rather as enhancing one’s ability to take an objectivist, impersonal view from nowhere.
Internality, in this context, seems to mean, not Piaget’s concept of developing ability to engage in mental manipulation of symbols, but rather that which is seen through the eyes of the participant as distinct from an outsider’s perspective.  Alternately, the reference to "internal relations" may mean to emphasize "relations," not "internal"; that is, the point may be that decentering and manipulation are related to a capacity for intersubjective understanding -- that, in other words, development of an objectivist perspective toward the world results, not merely from highly individualistic interactions with things, but also as a result of a social or community context.
This project was started in April 2008, to try and replace the no-longer-updated site Pass the FRACP.  It is intended to be a reference for candidates for the written and clinical examinations, and provide a source of:
Exam wisdom from those that have gone before
Resources for candidates (study notes etc).
Before adding anything, please read the Disclaimers, but other than that - jump right in.
Surreal numbers are a fascinating mathematical structure, built from a few simple rules but giving rise to marvellous complexity. The surreal numbers contain all the real numbers with which we are familiar, as well as an infinitude of new quantities. We will discover surreal numbers that are greater than any positive integer, and ones that are infinitesimally small. Concepts like the square root and the reciprocal of infinite quantities will not only be defined, but we will find that they show logical and beautiful behaviour.
The Surreal numbers were invented by mathematician John H. Conway as part of an investigation into endgames in the game of Go, an oriental board game that also produces complex behaviour from a small set of simple rules. They were presented to the world in the form of a small novelette by Donald E. Knuth, in which a young couple on holiday discover a rock inscribed with Conway's rules and proceed to derive the entire theory.
Wikipedia has related information at Surreal numbers
We will begin the same way, beginning with the initial axioms and working our way up to the entire vast structure. Along the way we will prove that all the familiar properties of real numbers (such as the transitive law of inequality, and the commutative law of addition) all hold. A basic familiarity with set theory is assumed; for a refresher, see Set Theory.
This book is intended for advanced readers.
Around the House •
Days of the Week •
Eenchpess ess?
Eenchbess ess?
Eenchpess ek?
Eenchbess ek?
I'm fine, thank you (formal)
Yes lav em, Shnorhakalootyoon
Yes lav em, shnorhagalem
I'm fine, thank you (informal)
Shnorhagal em, shnorhagalootyoon
The RIG-I-like receptor family (RLRs) is comprised of RIG-I (retinoic acid inducible gene 1), MDA5 (melanoma differentiation associated gene 1), and LGP2 (laboratory of genetics and physiology 2) which functions as an intracellular PRR (pattern recognition receptor) sensor that act as the first line of defense against RNA viruses through the detection of viral replication by direct interaction with dsRNA. These RLRs are in most tissues that initiate immune activation in cell types such as myeloid cells, epitheal cells, and cells in the central nervous system. They are able to control infections by detecting RNA located in the cytoplasm through immunity and inflammation. RLRs usually exist in low levels, but increase when exposed to IFN and viral infections. The RLR family or SF2 subfamily is also related to mammalian Dicer and motor proteins involved in gene silencing.
RIG-I is a 925 residue, 106kDa protein composed of two N-terminal tandem caspase activation and recruitment domains (CARD), a Zn2+-containing regulatory C-terminal domain (CTD), and a central DECH-box RNA helicase. N- and C-terminal RecA-like domains (Hel1 and Hel2 respectively) contain conserved sequence motifs implicated in ATP/nucleic acid binding and ATP hydrolysis, indicating that RIG-I functions as a dsRNA-dependent ATPase. RIG-I and MDA-5 share a conserved helicase core as well as similar signaling pathways and adaptor molecules whereas LGP2 lacks N-terminal CARDs.
The CTD is most notable for its 5’triphosphate (5’-ppp) electrostatic binding via RNA loop-binding groove. The helicase interacts with the 3’ strand while CTD interacts mainly with the 5’ extremity, which includes 5’ppp. CTD is flexibly linked to the helicase and without strong interactions with the remainder of the protein, it acts as a sensor for 5’ppp dsRNA due to its higher affinity and longer off-rate for 5’ppp dsRNA compared to 5’OH ds-RNA.
Structural Domains of RLR Family and IPS-1 Adaptor Protein
Since the RNA binding occurs via 3 separate protein domains, large conformational changes are induced upon binding to dsRNA.  Free RIG-I has an extended, multipart shape that collapses into a compact variant upon binding. Oligomerization of RIG-I is thought to be essential for activation and is triggered by RNA binding and dependent on dsRNA length.
Autoinhibited RIG-I is held in closed configuration by casein kinase II phosphorylation and via interactions with repressor domain in the C-terminus, prevents CARD binding. Engagement of 5’ppp RNA and K63-linked polyubiquitination through TRIM25 and RING finger protein allows for RIG-I activation through helicase/CTD enclosure of RNA and the outward exposure of CARD.
RIG-I is activated by both positive-strand and negative-strand RNA viruses such as Rabdoviridae, Orthomysoviridae, Paramyxoviridae, and Hepacivirus genera. In vitro activation of RIG-I requires either blunt-ended, base-paired region of 18-20 nucleotides with a 5’ppp end or dsRNA of longer length (>200bp). RNA binding to RIG is thought to be mediated by both the CTD and helicase domain. The presence of 5’PPP end on RNA substrates acts as a non-self marker or pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) that can be differentiated from autoantigens.  The CTD binds blunt-end 5’ppp-dsRNA and induces conformational changes that exposes CARDs and allows polyubiquitination of Lys 172 via E3 ligase, which recruits IPS-1 adaptor and allows for induction of type I IFN production.
Sequence composition of RNA ligands may also contribute to activation of RIG-I-dependent signaling as well. Preferential IFN signaling has been noted in response to polyuridine motifs containing interspersed C nucleotides (poly-U/UC) such as that in hepatitis C viral genome. Also, RNA cleavage products  generated by 2’, 5’-linked oligoadenylate-activated RNase L, which produce 3’ monophosphates instead of 5’ppp, can trigger RIG-dependent IFN production.  It is thought that PAMP RNA sequence composition in tandem with 5’ppp are vital determinants for RIG-I binding.
Inflammatory Cascade of dsRNA Binding to RIG-I
Regulation of the inflammatory response is vital to prevent uncontrolled interferon production that may lead to autoimmunity or immune toxicity. RIG-I, an essential antiviral PRR, is regulated through various mechanism such as its C-terminal portion which contains a repressor domain and inhibits RIG-I signaling in steady state. LGP2, which may function as both a positive and negative regulator,  encodes a functional repressor domain that can suppress RIG-I signaling through interactions with RIG-I and MDA5.
Posttranslational modifications such as ubiquitination and deubiquitination also control both positive and negative regulation events. TRIM25 mediates K63-linked polyubiquitination at Lys 172 and stabilizes interactions between RIG-I and IPS-1. K63-linked polyubiquitination binding is thought to act as a second ligand for RIG-signaling activation. However, phosphorylation at Ser 8 or Thr 170 residues inhibit the TRIM25-RIG-I interface. RNF125 is another ubquitin ligase that acts as a negative feedback loop in concert with E2 ligase HbcH5c to conjugate K48-linked ubiquitin to RIG-I for proteasomal destruction.
Bowzard, J. B.; Davis, W.; Jeisy, V.; Ranjan, P.; Gangappa, S.; Fujita, T.; Sambhara, S.  PAMPer and tRIGer: Ligand-Induced Activation of RIG-1. Trends in Biochem. Sci. 2011, 36, 314-319.
Kowalinksi, E.; Lunardi, T.; McCarthy, A. A.; Louber, J.; Brunel, J.; Grigorov, B.; Gerlier, D.; Cusack, S. Structural Basis for the Activation of Innate Immune Pattern-Recognition Receptor RIG-I by Viral RNA. Cell. 2011, 147, 423-435.
Loo, Y. M.; Gale, M. Immune Signaling by RIG-I-like Receptors. Immunity. 2011, 34, 680-692.
Luo, D.; Ding, S.; Vela, A.; Kohlway, A.; Lindenbach, B.; Pyle, M. A. Structural Insights into RNA Recognition by RIG-I. Cell. 2011, 147, 409-422.
Takeuchi, O.; Akira, S. MDA5/RIG-I and Virus Recognition. Curr. Opin. in Immun. 2008, 20, 17-22.
This book is divided into the following chapters and appendices:
Introduction This chapter introduces the Lua language and gives a brief overview of its purpose and history. It also introduces some programming concepts.Expressions This chapters provides comprehensive coverage of expressions, operators and types.Statements This chapter describes the statements available in Lua.Functions This chapter explains the purpose and usage of functions and describes the syntax for function definitions.Tables This chapter covers table constructors, metatables, iterators and sorting.Standard libraries This chapter describes the functionality offered by the standard libraries.Appendix: Software testing This appendix gives information about testing programs written in Lua.Glossary This glossary contains accurate definitions of all significant terms used in the book and relevant to the subject.Index This index contains a list of all the topics and functions covered in the book and references to the locations in the book where these topics and functions are described.
Initiating and Elaborating a "Causal Loop Diagram" or "Stock and Flow" Model (Vennix and Rouwette)
This script is used to get an initial idea of central concepts and their relationships at the beginning of a project. If the aim of the project is to construct a formal simulation model, it is recommended to build a stock and flow model. In addition, when accumulations are important in the issue (for instance, when the problem is on a production chain or in human resources that are moving through different states), a stock and flow model is recommended.
Either three flip charts, OR wall space on which several flip charts are taped, OR a whiteboard, markers and flip chart, OR a projector and laptop with Vensim. Note that in the last case a second person is needed to draw the diagram in Vensim, while in the other situations one person may guide the group.
Interim output/product: increased consensus on dynamic hypothesis, or a possible structural explanation for observed behavior
Deliverable: a causal loop diagram which may be described either in a report (in the case that only a qualitative model is built), or be used as a dynamic hypothesis on the basis of which formal modeling starts
Facilitator/modeler with experience in drawing causal loop diagrams, and preferably with experience in building formal models
Remind the group of the problem variable, preferably sketched as a reference mode of behavior. Remind the group of the list of variables elicited before. Place the list of variables in such a way that it is visible to the group of participants. Write the problem variable in the center of the white board.
Build the model by following steps a, b, and c below (cf. Vennix, 1996: 120).
(a) Ask participants which variable from the collected list is a cause for changes in the problem variable. When someone makes a suggestion, include this in the drawing of the model in order to visualize what is meant. Then check to see if everyone agrees with the proposed relation. If someone disagrees, ask for clarification and try to determine what the group thinks the relationship should be. If a discussion goes on too long, you can choose to temporarily 'park' this item and continue with another part of the model. Hopefully, there will not only be variables that have a direct relationship with the problem variable, but you will also build a few logical chains of reasoning (via intermediate variables) into the model. In addition, check the polarity (positive or negative) of the relationship.
(b) After spending some time doing this, proceed to the consequences of changes in the problem variable.
(c) At the point where a feedback chain becomes closed, check with the entire group to see if the chain as a whole is correct. Check again to see if a loop is positive or negative. The "Ratio Exercise" script may be used to draw out loops.
In the last part of the session, analyze the model by checking the feedback loops one more time. Before you close the group session, make sure you do the following:
If there is a list of 'parked' issues, go through them.
State once more what has been done and what will happen with the final products.
Formulate a few concise conclusions. As Andersen and Richardson (1997) say: "End with a bang!"
Improvement in quality of communication, insight, consensus on the problem, and commitment with regard to actions
Improved causal loop diagram (see Figure 1)
Jac Vennix 1996, used for bachelor (undergraduate) course by Etiënne Rouwette from September 2007
Explained steps in more detail for bachelor students with limited experience in modeling. Title of the script was revised to reflect the possible outputs more clearly.
Andersen DF, Richardson GP, 1997. Scripts for group model building. System Dynamics Review 13(2): 107-129.
Vennix JAM. 1995. Building consensus in strategic decision making: insights from the process of group model building. Group Decision and Negotiation 4: 335 – 355.
Vennix JAM. 1996. Group model building: facilitating team learning using system dynamics. Chichester: Wiley.
Vennix JAM, Akkermans HA, Rouwette EAJA. 1996. Group model building to facilitate organisational change: an exploratory study. System Dynamics Review 12(1): 39 – 58.
The process may reproduce current group dynamics, with members with more powers being more vocal in the process, (e.g. in Step 2a). Careful and inclusive group facilitation would be useful.
The second part drawn looks like a washing motion or the "wax on, wax off" motion from The Karate Kid.
Can sound like an n, ng, or m sound, depending on what consonant follows it (for example, if a "p" follows, this sound will be an "m").  Because there is little differentiation between these sounds in Japanese, using n for all examples will still be clearly understood.
N - It looks like a badly drawn n from the Roman alphabet. The stem is too long and the tail extends too far.
Case Study 1 - a Simple Interpreter
The purpose of this is to provide a gentle introduction to some compilation techniques, and to introduce a few more computer science concepts.
Interpreters are used rather than compilers since they don't have such a steep learning curve. Later chapters and case studies will delve more into compilers.
The language being interpreted is a very small subset of Basic, even smaller than Tiny Basic.
The purpose of this case study is to use simple interpreters to provide a gentle introduction to some compilation. There are three chunks of code in this chapter:
Simple line-mode IDE, which can be used with either interpreter.
Interpreter for Very Very Tiny Basic.
Interpreter for Very Tiny Basic.
The VVTB interpreter only allows integer variables,
(just enough to write simple programs with,
The VTB interpreter allows both integer and string variables,
The two interpreters use different methods for
Note that the code presented here is intended to be
Those readers unfamiliar with C++ may like to consult Appendix A
The line-mode 'editor' is also very simple:
Just typing a line number without any code causes any existing line with that number to be deleted.
If the line number you use is the same as that of some previously typed line then the earlier line is discarded.
Letter       ::= 'A' | 'B' | 'C' | 'D' | 'E' | 'F' | 'G' | 'H' | 'I' |
'J' | 'K' | 'L' | 'M' | 'N' | 'O' | 'P' | 'Q' | 'R' |
'S' | 'T' | 'U' | 'V' | 'W' | 'X' | 'Y' | 'Z' ;
'IF' Test 'THEN' LineNumber |
'PRINT' [ [ PrintItem ] Separator ]* |
'IF' Test 'THEN' LineNumber |
'PRINT' [ [ PrintItem ] Separator ]* |
'FOR' Variable '=' Expression 'TO' Expression ['STEP' Expression] |
Line numbers must be non-zero.
Terminate the IDE.
List the current source code.
Obey the current source code.
Programs in Very Very Tiny Basic are very simple.  Programs in Very Tiny Basic are still simple, but they can do more complex things.  Neither language allows any user input.
REM This is a sample VVTB program.
REM This is a sample VTB program.
REM A sub-routine will return to where it is called from.
The code which follows may seem quite short,
The reason it is so short is the use of the C++ <map>,
Did you try to play it slower? Try to listen to it more often, whilst humming to the tune.
Back to lesson 01.
Competitive Intelligence is the art of analyzing competition — their historic and current moves and predicting how they are likely to behave in the future. It's a critical component for understanding how to create and maintain competitive advantage in the market.
On Recent Trends in Competitive Intelligence via Technical Virtuosity
This book was initially started as a collaboration effort of the Competitive Intelligence class at UC Irvine's Paul Merage School of Business. All business schools academics and practitioners are invited to contribute to this book to make this a practical guide. Thank you for your contributions!
You have already learnt how to use one dimensional arrays in your computer programs.  You should be familiar with code such as:
This is great for storing lists of things, but what about if we want to simulate something more complex such as a game board or a map?  Wouldn't it be great if we could use a two-dimensional array?
Most major programming languages allow you to use two-dimensional arrays. They work in much the same way as a one-dimensional array but allow you to specify a column index and a row index.
Treat a 2D array like a grid, the location of a cell is shown above
Depending on the language you are writing in, the format of an array address can change. In VB.NET it is, as shown in the diagram above, with y,x
We can create the two-dimensional array shown above and assign values by doing the following:
The code would also output the value B
Two-dimensional arrays are very useful and a good place to get started is to create your own version of the game Battleships with a 4 cell by 4 cell grid.  See if you can win, or even break it!
We are modelling the following board using the two dimensional board variable:
Dim x, y As Integer
For z = 1 To 3
Console.WriteLine("This is guess number " & z)
Declare an array to make a small checkers board of type char, 3 squares by 3 squares
A much smarter way is to use a loop, this will allow for you to quickly create an board of any size you wish. There is a question coming up that will want you to build this!
Write a sub routine to display this board (HINT: you need loops), that takes checkBoard as a parameter
Declare a chessBoard (8*8 squares), programmatically colour it in with b for black and w.  You might want to look for a pattern in the colour assignments for the checker board above and make friends with the MOD function
You might also go a little loopy trying to answer this question
If you've done this you might want to get the program to print some massive boards, whatever floats your boat.
Using the following two-dimensional array, grid(4,4):
Write code to output the name CRAIG
Another game you might play on a 2D grid is the popular game of noughts and crosses:
To do this we need to build a 3 by 3 grid:
Next we need a subroutine to display the grid, passing the board as a parameter
For i = 0 To 3
For j = 0 To 3
We need the ability to check whether the game has been won and who has won it.  We'll do this by building a win check that returns true if the specified player has won, or false otherwise.  We need to pass it some values to check, namely the board - b() and the player you are checking for - p.  Both are passed byVal as we don't need to change them:
Function win(ByVal b(,) As Char, ByVal p As Char)
' this needs more rules, it only has 2 at the moment and one of them doesn't work!  Could you use a loop instead?
It's a bit of a rubbish game so far, so we better let someone move:need the ability for players to play a move:
Sub move(ByRef b(,) As Char, ByVal p As Char)
Dim x, y As Integer
Console.WriteLine(p + " - make your move in the format: x,y")
Console.WriteLine("Invalid move!  Miss a turn")
We need to end the game in a draw if all the spaces have been taken
Dim c As Integer = 0 ' set a counter to keep track of how many spaces there are
For i = 0 To 3
For j = 0 To 3
If c = 9 Then
Console.WriteLine("Draw, game over!")
'array declaration from earlier...
If togo = "x" Then
Fix the program above so that an incorrect move allows the user to try again:
x - make your move in the format: x,y
Fix the program above so that is checks rows, columns and diagonals for a winning position.  Try to keep your answer below 19 lines and 550 characters.
You have met one and two dimensional arrays so far, but this isn't the limit to the number of dimensions that you can use.  For example you might want to model a three dimensional world by using a 3D array
Dim space(2, 2, 2) As integer ' 3 dimensional array
Many physiological and behavioral actions of angiotensin II (AngII) are mediated by the AngII Type 1 (AT1) receptor. Specifically, mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids regulate rennin-angiotensin system components, which include the AT1 receptor. Corticosterone and dexamethasone have been proven to increase AT1 receptor levels via glucocorticoid receptor (GR) activation. This activation results in increased AngII-induced inositol triphosphate (IP3) formation. Aldosterone – an endogenous mineralocorticoid – and deoxycorticosterone-acetate (DOCA) – a synthetic mineralocorticoid – have been proven to stimulate AT1 binding at high levels but not at physiological levels. AT1 binding increases via GR activation, and without activating a mineralocorticoid receptor (MR). Although, high doses of mineralocorticoids do not significantly affect AngII-induced IP3 formation. Researchers have theorized that this is possibly a result of insufficient coupling of the AT1 receptor to its post-receptor signaling factors.
Cortisol, otherwise known as glucocorticoids, structure is shown here. This important hormone is secreted by the adrenal gland during periods of stress.
Glucocorticoids have been proven to increase mineralocorticoid-induced actions. It has been discovered that physiological levels of dexamethasone increase AT1 binding and IP3 formation, and that physiological levels of aldosterone are primarily responsible for MR activation. However, low level combinations of each of these do not increase the effect of dexamethasone on AT1 binding. However, there has been no observed synergy between aldosterone and dexamethasone at the AT1 binding sites or in IP3 formation levels.
Articles and Web Pages for Review and Inclusion
The goal of this book is to have a community documentation providing extensive and up-to-date instructional information about how to use the open-source ROSE compiler framework, developed at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory .
While the ROSE project website (http://www.rosecompiler.org) already has a variety of official documentations, having a wikibook for ROSE allows anybody to contribute to gathering instructional information about this software.
Again, please note that this wikibook is not the official documentation of ROSE. It is the community efforts contributed by anyone just like you.
Fix typos and grammar of existing pages for quality, clarity, and readability.
Add new pages about ROSE-specific tutorials, how-tos, FAQ, and workflow
Start discussions on the Discussion tab of an existing page about new suggestions of how things can be done better
Rewriting existing documentation, link to it instead if necessary
Link http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/ROSE_Compiler_Framework/Sandbox
Add figures by uploading your file with
Left menu -> Toolbox->upload file
Is my content providing information that other ROSE users will find helpful?
Link http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/ROSE_Compiler_Framework/Print_version
Technical names, identifiers, etc. should be enclosed in teletype, <samp></samp> The FooBar class can be found in the foobar.cpp file.
Source code should use a highlighted code block:
(Enclosing code in a <pre></pre> block is also okay, but the highlighted code block is preferred.)
Capitalize all words e.g. "Graph Processing"
Learn how to "Track Changes": http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Help:Tracking_changes
Enable Email Notifications for Changes to this book
If you want to be notified of changes to this book, WikiBooks provides email notifications for changes to Wiki pages that you explicitly choose to watch.
Create an account with WikiBooks: http://en.wikibooks.org/w/index.php?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=Main+Page&type=signup
Login to WikiBooks and set your preferences (top right corner of the web page) for both email notifications and your watch list:
Preferences-> User profile-> E-mail notifications -> E-mail me when a page on my watchlist is changed (check this on)
Caveat: we don't know if wikibooks supports users to watch one entire book.  So far, you have to do this one page after another by editing them at some points.
What exactly is "BookCat" for? It is a category tag automatically added by wiki robot scripts.
Should "BookCat" be at the end of the document? Any position in the page should be fine. Having it at top may be better so it won't be accidentally deleted when we add new things at the bottom.
A reader requests expansion of this book to include more material.You can help by adding new material (learn how) or ask for assistance in the reading room.
This text is intended to provide a overview of the area of patent law in Canada.
Julia's ans is functionally basically identical, though note that it is available only at the REPL.
Human activity has harmed Nature even in the antiquity, for example, many trees have been cut down and the elephants have disappeared from North Africa. But since the Industrial Revolution, the development of humankind has become so much quicker that it endangers not only Nature, but humankind itself too. In the Cold War, the opposing forces hoarded so many weapons of mass destruction that could have destroyed humankind in case of another world war. Since then, there were more and more countries which were able to create such weapons, so the danger has not ended in the beginning of the 21st century either. Afterwards, as technology advanced, newer sources of danger have appeared, for example, if someone created a virus deadly for humankind with the use of artifical intelligence and gene technology. But not only the extinction of humankind should be feared, but the rise of human suffering too. In the beginning of the 21st century we entered an age when the detrimental effects of global warming appear, the cheaper energy sources of humankind run out, the soil and freshwater run down more and more, the natural life of the oceans and primeval forests is going to lose areas more and more, human population would continue to rise and the rich get even more technological power. In human society, the mentioned problems could cause famines, maybe wars, and an economic crisis bigger than the previous ones. It is possible that the international environmentalist agreements will not be observed in the crisis, and this could make the problems more serious. Thus humankind who have gone far from Nature will probably suffer much, and even cannibalism can happen, but there is a great chance for the survival of the species. If humankind does not go extinct in the short term, small pests could cause problems in agriculture in the long term. What can we do in this situation?
We can start living more friendly to the environment, we can join to the environmental movement, and we can even be activists in order to reduce the future suffering in some degree. This is just like symptomatic treatment in many cases. However, if we do not only want a temporary solution, then we should find the root of the problems, and we should deactivate them. It is obvious enough that the world has changed much because of humankind's scientific and technological advancements, and problems have become greater because of overpopulation and mandkind's extravagant lifestyle. Humankind should realize sooner or later that population size should be limited, otherwise it will be limited by something worse, which comes with greater suffering. Sooner or later the irresponsible wastage, like the wastage of one-time use packaging material should be lessened to the minimum too, because it is not sustainable. For the sake of environmentalism, it would be better to lessen them sooner, and we too can make smaller steps in order to diminish them. By the way, the most important goal now is survival, and for this purpose it should be made sure that the countries which can create nuclear weapons do not use them, and people do not use other fatal technologies either, if possible. It is not enough to just disarm nuclear weapons, because people could quickly recreate them again in case of a war. Instead, such an educational and political situation should be created where the production and usage of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction becomes difficult and meaningless. Humankind should learn to forget what is worth forgetting, and it should deal with the people of Earth's different nations more and more justly.
The environmental consciousness is present in humankind, but it is a sad experience that both the private economy and the democratic politics served short-term interests, because buyers and voters have chosen the better standard of living instead of sustainability. If it goes on this way, we will probably not be able to prevent the expected crisis, and we have to take care of our own survival. We should understand what dangers are waiting for us, and how we can avoid them in our own lives. There are people who tend to prepare for a sudden, complete collapse, and their movement is called survivalism in English. They learn about emergencies much, store food and learn to use guns. There are also people who tend to prepare for a great economic crisis instead, and learn such a profession that will be needed in the crisis too. There are poorer ones who might better not beget children. There are richer people too, and they have more opportunities to prepare for the crisis. It is worth for a rich person of being surrounded by such allies whom the rich person supported before, they being grateful to the rich person. The rich person might do it well if he/she prepares to be self-sufficient and self-defensive with these people. Besides self-sufficiency, producing means of sustenance might be a way to go too. Concerning this issue, it is interesting that if someone prepares for his/her own survival, by that he/she probably helps the survival of humankind too. Because if someone prepares for the collapse, then he/she would like to reduce his/her dependent situation, and if dependence on trade lessens in the world, then the consumption which harms the environment probably lessens too.
U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency - Worldwide Effects of Nuclear War (1975)
Lester R. Brown - World on the Edge: How to prevent Environmental and Economic Collapse? (Earth Policy Institute, 2011)
Paul R. Ehrlich, Anne H. Ehrlich - Can a collapse of global civilization be avoided? (Proceedings of the Royal Society, Biological Sciences, 2013)
Jorgen Randers (Report to the Club of Rome) - 2052 - A Global Forecast for the Next Forty Years (Chelsea Green Publishing, 2012)
There is evidence that eating too much sugar can cause high blood pressure and high blood lipid and increase the risk of diabetes.
Multithreading is an area where interpreted languages such as Perl 5 have had some problems in the past. Perl 5, as a prime example, had a very buggy and non-robust implementation of threads that was not scalable.
In contrast to Perl 5, Perl 6 is including advanced multithreading and concurrency features in the core language. To support all these advanced features of the Perl 6 language, Parrot must provide those same features as well.
While not technically "multithreading", coroutines represent a simple form of concurrency that will find many interesting uses as they catch on with mainstream programmers. Coroutines are like subroutines which use a yield statement instead of a return statement. The .yield statement causes the coroutine to return a value to the caller. However, .yield does not cause the coroutine to exit, disappear, or lose its current state. The next time the caller calls the coroutine, the coroutine will pick up where it left off the last time. Here is an example:
The output of the function MyCaller will be:
Coroutines are immediately useful in places where a persistent state needs to be maintained, but where it might be difficult to coordinate that state between multiple callers, or multiple threads. One such example is in file or database access where a coroutine can serialize accesses, and maintain persistent state information about the size of the file and locations of certain features in the file.
Coroutines are also called "continuations" in other places, or even "continuation sandwich" in others.
Parameters to a coroutine are only passed the first time the coroutine is called, or any time the coroutine is called after having a .return statement. Here is an example:
.param int a
.sub 'main' :main
This code will print the following result, even though the parameter to the MyCoroutine function changes with each call:
This is where the heart of the coroutine system is located, the coroutine PMC. The coroutine PMC is an object that stores the state of the coroutine so that it can be called multiple times in a row. A continuation PMC, which is a superclass of the coroutine, is a stored interpreter state. The coroutine operates by storing a continuation when a .yield directive is called, and invoking that continuation when the coroutine is called again.
Threading in Parrot is not currently implemented, although it is being worked on by developers actively. Material in this section is mostly speculation based on the Parrot Design Documents. Once concurrency is implemented officially, this information will all be updated.
Internally, Parrot supports multiple different methods to perform threading. Luckily, all of these different methods are abstracted and the details are hidden from the HLL programmer. Parrot's concurrency system is modular, so new multithreading technologies can be added to Parrot later, and HLL programmers will be able to benefit from these changes and additions without having to make any changes to their code.
The scheduler is an instance of the Scheduler PMC type. However, you don't use the scheduler PMC directly, Parrot uses it for you.
There are four basic operations that can be used to create and manage a new thread. In Parrot, threads are all abstracted in the Task PMC. To create a new thread, you first create a new Task PMC, and then you add it to the scheduler.
It is one thing to swim physically, but it is another thing to swim mentally. Swimming mentally means that you are ready to swim. That you are mentally ready to get in the pool and swim your workout. Swimming mentally is what wins races.
What does swimming mentally do?
While swimming an event, lets say the 50 freestyle, the main mentality is that you want to win. In order to win an event, you have to beat your opponents. Many people give up trying when they notice that their opponent is far ahead and uncatchable. Before standing on the blocks, before going to the swimming meet, before even practice, a swimmer needs to prepare for the meet mentally.
The activity Samurai (Deutsch: Samurai, română: Samurai, español: Samurai) is part of the collection of interlingual energizers. See a list of all activities.
This game is named after ancient Japanese warriors. All of us will get in the role of one of these fighters now. We have to be focussed to protect ourself and our friends and when we attack others.
This games works without touching each other. We don't really "attack" ourself. We'll just send impulses to each other.
When I want to attack you I'll do this movement and shout "Ha".
You (the person I just attacked) receive the impulse, do this movement and shout "Ha".
Now the two persons next to you defend you. They do this movement and shout "Ha".
At the end you attack somebody else by doing this movement and shouting "Ha".
It's very important that moving and shouting happens with a certain rhythm. It should be "Ha" – "Ha" – "Ha" – "Ha"…
Lasst uns einen Kreis machen.
Dieses Spiel funktioniert komplett, ohne sich zu berühren. Wir werden uns also nicht wirklich angreifen, sondern bloß Impulse zu einander senden.
Wenn ich dich angreifen möchte, mache ich diese Bewegung und rufe "Ha".
Du (die Person, die ich gerade angegriffen habe) empfängst den Impuls, machst diese Bewegung und rufst auch "Ha".
Jetzt verteidigt ihr zwei (die beiden neben der/dem Angegriffenen) die- oder denjenigen, die/der gerade angegriffen wurde. Ihr macht diese Bewegung und ruft "Ha".
Am Ende greifst du (die Person, die ich angegriffen habe) jemand anderen an und machst dabei diese Bewegung und rufst "Ha".
The end of the game is also available in 1 other languages: Deutsch
I think we got pretty tired. Let's take a break.
Ich denke wir sind ziemlich müde. Lasst uns eine Pause machen.
Play media  advanced version with "Ho" – "Ha" – "He"
As soon as the group improves you can start to eliminate people when they make mistakes.
A more advanced version of this game is Kinsenseis Kimonoo.
The European Commission support for the production of this publication does not constitute an endorsement of the contents which reflects the views only of the authors, and the Commission cannot be held responsi­ble for any use which may be made of the information contained therein.
Final Fantasy VI -> Terra's Scenario
This is by far the easiest of the three scenarios. You have three party members and no bosses to fight. You begin exactly where you left off with Terra, Edgar, and Banon on the Lete river. Use the standard strategy of always having Banon heal. After fighting a few monsters you will be dropped off just east of Narshe.
You can get kicked out of the main entrance, restore your health at the training center, but eventually just hug the left wall of town until you find the wall with the secret entrance. Continue making your way through the cave until you reach a security checkpoint. This part is tricky, just trace the route with your finger and you'll get it eventually. If you mess up and step off the path you'll see whether your path will be blocked and if it is you'll have to fight two monsters which need to be killed with fire magic. This is actually a decent way to build levels since all the other monsters are very weak. After you get through the room and walk some more you'll pass a cave opening. It will take you to the room where you moogles helped you at the start of game, then to the moogles home. Talk to some moogles, grab the chest, and get going. Steamroll your way through the remaining enemies and retrace your steps to the same house where you began the game.
Once you are done you can complete either of the other scenarios, although once again I'd recommend saving Sabin's scenario for last.
Chapter 3, Locke's Scenario
Chapter 5, Sabin's Scenario
File:Piranha Plant.jpg  Piranha Plant
Piranha Plants typically hide within pipes, periodically emerging and ensnaring unwary passersby. There are two varieties of normal Piranha Plants: green and red. Often they have big white lips around enormous, toothed maws. Green Piranha Plants don't attack people that are touching their pipes, but the faster-moving Red Piranha Plants (which originated in the Japanese Super Mario Bros. 2, a.k.a. Super Mario Bros.: The Lost Levels) will emerge even if someone is standing next to or on the very edge of their pipes. Pipes infested with such plants are usually vertical, but horizontally dwelling Piranha Plants are not unknown, and some even hang from the ceiling. They are most dangerous when their pipes are the only platforms across a ravine. Some species can also spit fireballs (such as the Venus Fire Trap in Super Mario Bros. 3), or even jump all the way out of their pipes (the Jumpin' Piranha Plant from Super Mario World). Others live entirely outside pipes, being either rooted in the ground or even walking about on rootlike legs. Although they are immune to jump attacks, Piranha Plants are vulnerable to projectiles, such as fireballs, Troopa shells, and hammers.
File:Smb1 piranha plant.png  In Super Mario Bros., Mario encounters the first Piranha Plant in World 1-2.
Piranha Plants originally appeared in Super Mario Bros., being, in fact, the third enemy Mario encounters; and they have otherwise changed little since their first appearance.
They were absent from the American Super Mario Bros. 2, due to the game's unusual origins, unless one counts the fire-spouting, non-carnivorous Panser Plant, which may very well be a relative of the underwater Lava Lotus and land-dwelling Volcano Lotus (Ponkey in Japan). The Panser came in three colors: red ones who would shoot their fireballs in an angle towards its enemies, gray ones who would shoot their fireballs in a straight-upward kind of pattern, and pink ones who also shot fireballs in an angle, but also had the ability to walk and chase their enemies.
Super Mario Bros. 3 introduced several new Piranha Plant species: Venus Fire-Trap (spits fireballs), Ptooie Plants (which could blow spiked balls), and two sub-species: the hopping Nipper and the indestructible Muncher. Additionally, the king of World 7 in Super Mario Bros. 3 is transformed into a Piranha Plant in the original NES game.
The Jumping Piranha Plant (P-Pakkun in Japan) and other Piranha Plants are replaced by the jumping Pumpkin Plant (also known as P-Pakkun in Japan) and other such plants once the Special World is completed in the video game Super Mario World.File:Piranhaplant.jpg  The Common Piranha plant.
Super Mario World 2: Yoshi's Island had introduced another change in the Piranha Plant's design, which was used later in Paper Mario, Paper Mario: The Thousand-Year Door, Super Mario 64, Yoshi's Island DS, and other games. There was also a boss called Naval Piranha, which is a regular Piranha Plant powered up by Kamek, causing it to protude many vines and grow in size.  Yoshi's Story was the first to introduce towering, tree-sized Piranha "Stalks" (in other words, their stems were tall, thorned, beanstalk-like stalks), which the Piranha Grove swarmed with.  Yoshi's Story also introduced the juvenile Piranha Plants and baby Piranha Plants:  Flying juveniles called Piranha Pests and walking seedlings called Piranha Sprouts.
Naval Piranha makes a reappearance in Tetris Attack, the Super Nintendo puzzle game remade from the Japan-only Panel de Pon, which is basically the same game with different characters. The Naval Piranha is the tenth boss out of twelve overall, but is the final boss of Easy mode. Naval Piranha replaces the original tenth boss of Panel de Pon, the Dragon. Naval Piranha gained a voice in this game as well.
Super Mario RPG showcased Piranha Plants in their usual red, white, and green, as well as a few different palette-swapped forms. The regular variety is referred to as Piranha Plant; others include Chewy and the boss Smilax.
In Super Mario 64, they appear in three variants - the first, and most commonly seen is the sleeping Piranha Plant. They will become annoyed when Mario (or anyone) awakens them, snapping wildly at them. Then they go back to sleep once Mario goes away. The next two are large and small Piranha Plants, which appear on Tiny-Huge Island. The visuals of the Piranha Plants were upgraded in Super Mario 64 DS.
Although normal Piranha Plants did appear as enemies in Super Mario Sunshine in Bianco Hills, most of this game's Piranha Plants were huge and paint-covered. A lot of the goopy Piranha Plants seem to be actually made of paint, but a variant of them (a humongous, goopy Piranha Plant head that rolls) suggests that they may be actually Piranha Plants, because when sprayed it reveals normal colors underneath. This game also introduced Petey Piranha and supported the fact that Piranha Plants can be squirted in the mouth to defeat them, and "organic" ones can be fattened up on water.
In Paper Mario, Piranha Plants come in many shapes and forms, including the Chapter Boss, Lava Piranha. In the sequel, Paper Mario: The Thousand-Year Door, the Piranha Plant is actually the strongest form of the species, and appears only in the Pit of 100 Trials, while the weakest is the Pale Piranha. Oddly, in the Japanese version, the Pale Piranhas are called Pakkun Flower (the real name of regular Piranha Plants) while the Piranha Plants in the Pit are called Killer Pakkun. Pirahna Plants return in Super Paper Mario in their familiar in-pipe form.
Piranha Plants appear in New Super Mario Bros., in and out of pipes, and also as fire-spitting Venus Fire Traps and large Super Piranha Plants. They both make a weird cry when they are defeated.
Piranha Plants also appear in the Mario Party series as obstacles in the mini-games and boards or as non-playable characters.
The Piranha Plant also appears in The Legend of Zelda: Link's Awakening.
Piranha Plants are omnivorous and will eat anything they can get their sharp teeth on. They are very infamous for popping out of pipes when the player least expects it, causing harm to Mario or Luigi. In Super Mario Bros., the Piranha Plants would not attack if Mario was up against the pipe or standing on it, but in the Japanese Super Mario Bros. 2 there was a red variety that would bite no matter what. In Yoshi's Island, they would wait for Yoshi to get too close and hold him in their mouths for a few seconds while Baby Mario floated about in a bubble. In Yoshi's Story, there is a special type of Piranha Plant that would hover around in the air and follow Yoshi. If Yoshi was caught, he would be spit out in a shrunken form, unable to use eggs for a short time.
Piranha Plants are most well-known for living in the pipelines in the Mushroom Kingdom, especially in the underground segments.
Piranha Plants also thrive on Yoshi's Island. In Yoshi's Story, a large swampy area was very heavily inhabited by Piranha Plants of many kinds, aptly called Piranha Grove. It was mentioned that no Yoshi that went in had ever come out alive, because there were too many Piranha Plants for one Yoshi to handle without becoming lunch, but the Yoshi kids in Yoshi's Story got through.
In Paper Mario, Piranha Plants thrive in Forever Forest. There are also Putrid Piranhas that live in Jade Jungle of Lavalava Island. A new species, Frost Piranha, is found in the cold Shiver Snowfield and on Shiver Mountain. The Lava Piranha lives in the fiery volcano, Mt. Lavalava, where it guards Misstar for Bowser.
In Paper Mario: The Thousand-Year Door, monochromatic Pale Piranhas live in the Boggly Woods and in the Great Tree. Putrid Piranhas can be found in the jungle on Keelhaul Key, and Frost Piranhas are located on the path to Fahr Outpost. The original red, white-spotted Piranha Plants are much stronger and are deep in the Pit of 100 Trials.
In Super Mario RPG, Piranha Plants live in Bean Valley, far away from the Mushroom Kingdom. The Shy-Away working for Valentina waters them with special nutrients to create Smilax and MegaSmilax to stop Mario from reaching Nimbus Land.
On Isle Delfino, Piranha Plants can be found near the lake in Bianco Hills. They explode when over watered by Mario's FLUDD and spit sludgy brown paint-like goo similar to (if not the same as) the subtstance Shadow Mario/Bowser Jr. has used to pollute the island.
File:Naval Piranha screenshot.png  Naval battles Yoshi
Naval Piranha (Big Pakkun in Japan) is a magically empowered Piranha Plant who first appeared in the video game Super Mario World 2: Yoshi's Island with many vines growing out of her.
Naval Piranha has three attacks, the first of which is a ramming attack. In the second attack, Naval shoots Nipper spores out of her mouth which become Nippers if they touch the ground to make Yoshi's fight more difficult. For Naval's last attack, she sends her vines to attack Yoshi. Her weak point is her belly button.
Naval Piranha also appears in the video game Tetris Attack, as the second of four bosses. She appeared as a villain along with Hookbill the Koopa, while Raphael Raven had turned good. This game confirmed her gender, through hearts she would litter her speech with.
Naval Piranha also made a small appearance in Mario Party Advance as a boss. In the closing credits it says she now lives and thrives in the desert.
Naval Piranha is not to be confused with the Lava Piranha boss from Paper Mario, despite the two looking almost identical.
The easiest way to beat her is to have an egg, stand on the leftmost edge of the bridge (if you go past the first wooden plank of the bridge it doesn't work) carefully aim at the Piranha Plant (which becomes Naval Piranha), and destroy it without Kamek starting the transformation. This produces an amusing reaction from Kamek, who screams "OH MY!!!" and flees. You then get the key. To destroy her after she transforms, Yoshi must stand on either side of the platform and bank an egg off the wall to hit the bandaged swollen spot on her stem. Doing this several times causes her to explode.
Lava Piranha is the boss of the fifth chapter of Paper Mario. He is assisted by two Lava Buds, who have eight HP each. If you don't leave them alone, the Lava Buds will summon a small fireball, which is registered as a character in the fight (called a Petit Piranha) and has 1 HP, but takes away 6 HP from Mario. The Lava Piranha himself has a flame attack that takes away five HP, and he has 40 HP.
After defeating Lava Piranha (Lava Buds and fireballs are not needed to win), it looks like you've won the chapter. You even get Star Points. But suddenly, the ground rumbles, and the Lava Piranha and the Lava Buds burst out of the ground, with fire on their heads. They all have the same HP as before. Now, many attacks from you and your partners will not damage them and get 1 point of damage themselves, unless you have specific badges that protect you from the fire.
Lava Piranha's flame attack is now 7 HP of damage. Almost everything is stronger.
After defeating him, he will be gone for good, and you will have almost finished chapter 5. Now that Misstar is freed, Mario flees the volcano (after some humorous cutscenes). The Lava Piranha is seemingly gone for good.
Lava Piranha has a loose grip on English, but it is a wonder he can speak an understandable language in the first place.  The Lava Piranha actually has a worse grip at English than its underlings, the Putrid Piranhas.  While the Putrid Piranhas speak as if they were in the military, the Lava Piranha speaks in broken sentences, ex. "ME GUARD STAR SPIRIT.  MARIO WANT STAR SPIRIT.  MARIO BAD.  HUCK HUCK HUCK!"
File:Petey Piranha.jpg
Petey Piranha is a goop spewing Piranha Plant that first appeared in Super Mario Sunshine. Since then he has become a regular in the Mario series, reappearing in Mario Pinball Land, Mario and Luigi: Partners in Time,  New Super Mario Bros and Super Princess Peach as a boss, and becoming a playable character in Mario Golf: Toadstool Tour, Mario Power Tennis, Mario Kart: Double Dash!!, Mario Superstar Baseball and Mario Strikers Charged. This makes Petey the first playable Piranha Plant character in the Mario series (unless one counts Naval Piranha in Tetris Attack). His lips are green instead of white like most Piranha Plants. (In Super Mario Sunshine, the original Super Mario 64, and Mario Party 1-6, however, all Piranha Plants' lips are green.)
Smilax is a larger species of Piranha Plant found in Super Mario RPG. He started out as what appeared to be an ordinary Piranha Plant, but, with the help of Shy Away became a huge, 3-headed plant similar to Lava and Naval Piranha called Megasmilax.
Big Bungee Piranha is the fourth boss of Yoshi's Island DS. Although it originated as a standard Bungee Piranha, help from Kamek's magic supersized it into a monstrous purple Piranha Plant dangling from the ceiling, eager to be fed. Its two largest vines extended over two screens, attempting to snare Yoshi, while the Big Bungee Piranha itself occasionally paused to extend downwards to take a bite out of the dino.
To defeat it, you would have to roll a rock when it targets you where it targets.
It's teeth will crack and it would open its mouth (Presumably, in pain) and you wouuld have to smack its dangling tonsil.
Repeat three times to defeat this boss.
Mom Piranha is the tenth boss of Mario & Luigi: Superstar Saga.  After destroying the regular piranha plants scattered around Beanbean Airport, the egg in the center of the runway opens up revealing the larger, red Mom Piranha.  Mom Piranha appears with two other piranha plants that may be either red or blue, depending on which attack they are weak against.  Mom Piranha will periodically change colors from red to blue and vice versa.  Like all enemies in this game, her attacks can be either dodged or deflected with proper timing.
On the television series based on Super Mario Bros., Piranha Plants made various appearances, usually acting as obstacles for the heroes, much as they do in the games. In the Super Mario Bros. 3 cartoon, Venus Fire Traps and Ptooie plants were used in a manner similar to guns. Additionally, a Super Mario World episode called "Fire Sale" featured a vociferous, wise-cracking Venus Fire Trap named Mama Fire Plant, whom Kootie Pie kidnaps in order to heat her domain in Iced Land.
Enemies similar to Piranha Plants also appear frequently in the Crash Bandicoot series of video games. In these games, their only means of self-defence is biting and swallowing any living creature who approaches them, though some forms in Crash 2 can spit explosive projectiles through their mouth instead. Unlike their Mario counterparts, they can only be killed by spinning or jumping on them, or belly flopping on their heads, or not at all in Crash Team Racing. They may appear in a purple, red or orange colour, depending on its native environment. These forms of Pirhana Plants appear in Spyro: A Hero's Tail, virtually unchanged. A harmless piranha plant also appears in Naughty Dog's first PlayStation 2 game, Jak and Daxter: The Precursor Legacy in Samos the Sage's hut, as a nod to the Crash franchise. Some not-so harmless piranha plants also appear in Daxter. Several appear in Pinobee: Wings of Adventure. In the SNES/GBA game Mr. Nutz, there were Piranha Plant lookalikes. In the second level, the plants were small from far away, but grew large when the player would get close to them.
Furthermore, it is said that the Deku Babas from The Legend of Zelda series resemble Piranha Plants; this is directly exemplified in the Hyrule Circuit stage of Mario Kart 8, in which Deku Babas try and bite at passing racers (something that Piranha Plants do in the Yoshi Circuit stage of Mario Kart: Double Dash!!).
Bowser | Bowser Jr. | Cackletta | Donkey Kong | Fawful | Kamek | Kammy Koopa | King Boo | Koopalings | Shroob | Smithy Gang | Tatanga | Wario | Wart
Birdo | Chief Chilly | Donkey Kong Jr. | Eyerok | Fryguy | Goomboss | Gooper Blooper | Mouser | Petey Piranha | Tryclyde | Valentina | Waluigi
Albatoss | Big Bertha | Blooper | Bob-omb | Boo | Bullet Bill | Buzzy Beetle | Cataquack | Cheep-Cheep | Chomp | Dry Bones | Goomba | Hammer Bro | Koopa Troopa | Lakitu | Magikoopa | Monty Mole | Piranha Plant | Pokey | Shy Guy | Snapjaw | Snifit | Thwomp | Ukiki | Whomp | Wiggler
Quantitative methods...
An investigation into developing trust in the rideshare industry
Why make a conworld?
Why do people conworld? Why do people conlang? People go about doing these things for very different reasons, and not surprisingly, the results can also be widely different.
Some people micromanage when they conworld. They draw detailed maps of plate tectonics and then synchronize these with enormous evolutionary trees; they derive meticulously all of their languages from common ancestor languages, tweaking every single irregular verb; their maps are covered with carefully shaded mountainsides and hydrologically plausible drainage systems. For these people, that final satisfaction of everything fitting together perfectly is where the fun lies. But others disagree; their continents are broad strokes of geometrical wonder that utterly defy geological explanation; their flora and fauna are wondrously improbable; their forests are enchanted with magical beings. How did these magical beings originate? Who cares? For what is the fun of conworlding if you can't have some freedom?
Some people willingly and deliberately inject ideas from the real world into their conworld, using their conworld as a kind of test bed for political and philosophical theory (what if an anarchist society existed in ancient times or subjective idealism had practical implications for technology?). People may feel passionately about a real-world culture, or philosophy, and they reflect it into their conworld, when their nations, perhaps, come to resemble greatly those of Medieval Europe, or Arabia, or the Mayans. But others want to create something that is utterly new and completely unlike anything that has ever existed. To them, the real world is boring — and it's what's in your mind that's really unique and interesting!
Some people make their conworlds utopias.  Their political beliefs are reflected in their conworlds; all of their citizens are happy, productive, prosperous members of what they think would be a perfect society.  Along a similar vein, some people make their conlangs poetic and melodic, their conreligions noble and benevolent.  But there are others who take on a more realist, even pessimistic view.  These people have conworlds filled with slavery, poverty, lawlessness, and war; their conlangs are quirky, if not downright unpleasant; their conreligions initiate bloody conquests and massacres.  And what kind of conworld itself constitutes a utopia is as varied as the religious and political beliefs of the utopians who create these conworlds: a world bordering on the modern and futuristic with beeping electronic technology and commerce and endless entertainment; a medieval world in whose Chain of Being everyone lives beneath a Good King figure; an anarchy; a realization of Christian ideals or Sharia; a peaceful, pastel-colored butterfly-inhabited island where there are no wars; a working model of Communism in which citizens greet their comrades; a theocracy below a God Emperor with tight gender roles into which everyone neatly and dutifully falls to please their ancestors.
Some people conworld for another, different purpose. They are perhaps hosting a role-playing game and need to construct a background with richness and detail; perhaps they are writing a novel and need some place to set it; or perhaps the conworlds exist for the very purpose of expositing their conception of a utopia. And then there are others to whom the conworld itself is the purpose. To them, the creation is the conworld; if they do eventually turn it into the setting of a novel, then the novel is merely an exposition of the great masterpiece behind it — the conworld.
Introduction to Philosophy > Logic > Paradoxes
The simplest way to think about the paradox is as something that can not exist without itself. Generally, it is an event perpetrated in such a way as to remove or render impossible the perpetration of said event. There are many forms of paradoxes. Three such are the predestination paradox, the ontological paradox, and the grandfather paradox.
A predestination paradox, or causal loop, is a paradox of time travel. It exists when a time traveller is caught in a loop of events that "predestines" him to travel back in time. This paradox is in some ways the opposite of the grandfather paradox.
The following are two examples of a predestination paradox:
As an example, say there is James, a time travelling android. He was created by Mark, who found the plans to make James on his dresser one day and worked from those. The issue at hand is that the plans were written and placed there by James after he was made. The obvious difficulty is the fact that, at some point, the cycle has to have an outside factor as a beginning.
Say that Irwin was born as a result of Nick dying in an assassination. Irwin has always believed that Nick's death was a terrible loss to humanity, and he goes back in time to prevent it. In a universe of diverging realities, this may make sense, as Irwin is actually travelling from reality A to reality B, where he can prevent the assassination and maintain his existence. Likewise, there may be a universal principle that prevents such paradoxes from occurring that holds him back from doing anything, however, in the constraints and for the purposes of this discussion, we will assume there is no such principle. Irwin warns Nick (or pushes him down, or shoots the sniper, or removes Nick from the situation), thereby erasing his birth from existence. The question raised is, how was Irwin born to go back in time in the first place, as he was not born at all supposing that the cause of his birth (Nick's death) has been removed? As such, he couldn't have protected Nick from assassination, else he would not be born. This, in turn, would lead to him being born, which would mean that he went back in time and saved Nick, and the same process would be repeated ad nauseam.
An ontological paradox is similar to a predestination paradox in that it is nested in causation, but raises the ontological questions of where, when and by whom the schematics were created. Time loop logic operates on similar principles, sending the solutions to computation problems back in time to be checked for correctness without ever being computed "originally."
One example is seen in Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan and Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home. In Star Trek II, Captain Kirk receives antique eyeglasses from Dr. McCoy. In Star Trek IV, Captain Kirk pawns the glasses (nearly three hundred years in the past, in the late 20th century) given to him by Dr. McCoy, who will, again, buy the glasses for Kirk in the 23rd century.
The grandfather paradox is a paradox of time travel, supposedly first conceived by the science fiction writer René Barjavel in his book "Future times three" ("Le voyageur imprudent", 1943). Suppose you travelled back in time and killed your biological grandfather before he met your grandmother. Then you would never have been conceived, so you could not have travelled back in time after all. Now did you travel back or not? The grandfather paradox has been used to argue that backwards time travel must be impossible. However, other resolutions have also been advanced.
A place where ERP information is stored.  Data tables consists of one or more records each of which has one or more fields.  Each record has a unique primary key consisting of one or more fields. There can be several other keys as well.  Some tables are used throughout the ERP; others are specific to one module. Some tables such as those that store the Accounts Receivable invoices are large, complex and constantly changing.  Others such as the one that stores the enterprise's Accounts Receivable terms have only a few records with only a few fields and change only rarely. There are hundreds of small tables like these.  Most of these small tables are managed by the Maintain Module Information function. Contrast with Parameter.
"Records" are sometimes referred to as "rows" and "fields" are sometimes referred to as "columns".
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Some parameters and data tables are used by every module.  These are maintained by Systems Administration.  But, every module has some parameters and/or data tables that it alone uses.  Systems Administration can change this information but each module has a function "Maintain Module Information" that can change it as well.  This allows segments of systems administration to be delegated to the senior person in charge of a particular module.
In a calorimeter experiment, the food is completely combusted. The energy released is used to heat a sample of water. The heat energy can be calculated using this equation:
H is the heat released (J)
m is the mass of water heated (g)
The value calculated by this equation will typically need to be divided by the number of moles, or the number of grams of the food which has been burnt.
Example: 0.547 g of sucrose, C12H22O11, was completely combusted in a food calorimeter. The heat evolved was equivalent to increasing the temperature of 250 g of water from 22.22 °C to 30.81 °C.
Calculate the calorific value of sucrose (in kJ g-1 and kJ mol−1) given the specific heat capacity of water in Table 2 of the Data Booklet.
Using the formula H = m cp T
H is the heat released (J)
m is the mass of water heated (250 g)
This is due to combustion of 0.547 g of sucrose.
Dividing by this mass gives us: 16.4 kJ g-1.
1 mole of sucrose has a mass of 342 g, so the molar enthalpy change is 5612 kJ mol-1.
(342 g x 16.4 kJ g-1 or 8.98 kJ ÷ 1.60 x 10-3 mol.)
03NS3 C1. (a) State how genetically modified food differs from unmodified food. [1]
(b) List two benefits and two concerns of using genetically modified crops. [4]
C2 (d) 1.00 g of sucrose, C12H22O11, was completely combusted in a food calorimeter. The heat evolved was equivalent to increasing the temperature of 631 g of water from 18.36 °C to 24.58 °C.
Calculate the calorific value of sucrose (in kJ mol−1) given the specific heat capacity of water in Table 2 of the Data Booklet. [3]
05MS3 C1. (c) The energy content of a vegetable oil was determined using a calorimeter. A 5.00 g sample of the oil was completely combusted in a calorimeter containing 1 000 g of water at an initial temperature of 18.0 oC. On complete combustion of the oil, the temperature of the water rose to 65.3 oC.
Calculate the calorific value of the oil in kJ g−1 [4]
2-aminopropanoic acid shows the essential structure shared by all 2-amino acids:
The –CH3 group can be changed for one of 19 other groups to make the 20 amino acids encoded in our genes.
The –NH2 group of one amino acid can join to the –COOH group of another. This condensation reaction forms a peptide bond and a water molecule.
To use either of these techniques the peptide bonds in the proteins must first be hydrolysed to release individual amino acids. Include the use of Rf values in paper chromatography. Given isoelectric points, students should be able to determine a suitable pH to achieve good separation in electrophoresis.
The amino acids of a protein can be identified if the protein is hydrolysed. Hydrolysis usually involves refluxing the protein with acid or alkali to give the separate amino acids.
Chromatography separates the amino acids according to whether they prefer to dissolve in a solvent, or remain attached to a solid. Careful choice of solid and solvent allow amino acids to be separated as the solvent moves over the solid.
The ratio of the movement of the amino acid, to the movement of the solvent, is called the Rf value.
Example: Using paper as the solid phase and a 8:1:1 mix of ethanol:water:ammonia as the solvent, the Rf values of Aspartic acid, lysine and leucine were found to be 0.13, 0.35 and 0.84 respectively. Draw a chromatogram showing the expected pattern of spots for the three pure amino acids and a mixture of all three.
Electrophoresis uses an electric field to separate the amino acids. Positively-charged amino acids will tend towards the cathode and negatively charged amino acids will move towards the anode.
Each amino acid has an isoelectric point, given in table 20 of your data book. This is the pH which gives the amino acid an overall neutral charge. Above this pH, the amino acid is negative (deprotonated) and below this pH the amino acid is positive (protonated).
For example, at pH 5.4:
Charge	Structure	Movement
Note how neutral amino acids form zwitterions.
The sequence of amino acids in a protein is called its primary structure. The sequence is given from the free amine end (N-terminal) to the free acid end (C-terminal).
The backbone of the protein can form two regular patterns due to hydrogen bonding. These are called secondary structures:
A single chain can form an -helix. Hydrogen bonds form between the C=O of one amino acid and the H-N of the amino acid four residues further down the chain.
When two chains run alongside one another, the C=O groups of one chain and N-H groups of the other chain can be aligned and hydrogen bonds form. This forms a -sheet.
Tertiary structure is the folding of the protein into its final shape. The main driving force is for oily amino acids to be buried within the structure and polar amino acids to be exposed on the surface. Other forces involved are hydrogen bonds, salt bridges (ionic bonds between acidic and basic amino acids) and disulphide bridges (covalent bonds between cysteine residues).
A fictional peptide showing two disulphide bridges, a salt bridge, and inter-residue hydrogen bonding.
Some proteins may be formed from multiple polypeptide chains. The assembly of two or more chains to form one protein is called quaternary structure. Like tertiary structure, the bonding may involve hydrophobic, ionic, covalent and hydrogen bonding.
These are structure, biological catalysts (enzymes) and energy sources.
Proteins are involved in holding biological structures together (e.g. collagen, keratin)
Enzymes are biological catalysts which control metabolism. They are all proteins.
Protein can be used as a source of energy but is generally only used if fat and carbohydrate is not available.
06MS3 C1. (a) (i) Deduce the structure of one of the dipeptides that can be formed when the two aminoacids below react together.[2]
(ii) State the name given to this type of reaction and identify the other product of the reaction. [2]
(b) Describe how a mixture of aminoacids can be analysed using electrophoresis. [4]
(c) (i) Explain what is meant by the primary structure of proteins. [1]
(iii) Identify three types of interactions responsible for the tertiary structure of proteins. [2]
Monosaccharides contain a carbonyl group (C=O) and at least two -OH groups, and have the empirical formula CH2O.
Monosaccharides are organic molecules with three or more carbon atoms in a straight chain. Each carbon has a single –OH group, except one which has a C=O group.
Aldose sugars have an aldehyde group (i.e. C=O is on carbon number 1). Ketose sugars have their C=O in the middle of the chain.
Note that glucose and galactose are identical except that one chiral centre is different:
Having four chiral centres, glucose has seven isomers which differ in the orientation at one or two of the chiral centres. Galactose is just one these.
Glucose has an enantiomer (L-glucose) which differs at all four chiral centres.
You need to know the straight-chain formula of glucose.
Monosaccharides in solution form a ring structure involving the C=O group:
You need to know these formulae of glucose.
The –OH group on carbon 1 of -glucose can link to the –OH group on carbon 6 of fructose. H2O is lost and a bridging –O- links the two molecules. This disaccharide is called sucrose.
If the –OH group on carbon 1 of -galactose links to the –OH group on carbon 4 of glucose, a similar reaction occurs resulting in the disaccharide lactose.
A chain of -glucose molecules linked carbon 1 to carbon 4 is called amylose. It is part of starch and glycogen.
Amylose chains can be linked together by connecting the carbon-1 at one end to the carbon-6 of another chain. This branched polymer is called amylopectin and it is the second component of starch and glycogen.
These are energy sources, energy reserves (eg glycogen) and precursors for other biologically important molecules.
Glucose is broken down into water and carbon dioxide to yeld metabolic energy. Other carbohydrates are converted into glucose and metabolized in a similar manner.
Starch and glycogen are used as stores of glucose in plants and animals respectively.
Carbohydrates are used in other roles but are usually modified beforehand e.g. as glycoproteins, glycolipids, hormones.
03NS3 C2. (a) Draw the straight chain structure of glucose. [1]
(c) Glucose molecules can condense to form starch which can exist in two forms, amylose and amylopectin. Describe the structural differences between the two forms. [2]
05NS3 C1. (a) The equilibria which exist in an aqueous solution of glucose is shown in the structures below.
(ii) State, with a reason, whether or not the two ring forms of glucose are enantiomers. [1]
(iii) In structure B identify, by stating the numbers, the carbon atoms which are not chiral. [1]
(c) State one major function of polysaccharides such as starch and glycogen. [1]
Lipids generally do not dissolve in water.
There are 3 different kinds of lipids in the human body:
Fats and oils (collectively known as lipids) have a variety of chemical structures, but they are all insoluble in water.
The most common lipid structure is the triacylglyceride (TAG) which is an ester. Three long-chained acids form ester bonds to a single molecule of glycerol (propane-1,2,3-triol).
Saturated fatty acids have no C=C double bonds. Unsaturated fatty acids have one or more C=C double bonds. Polyunsaturates have more than one C=C.
Saturated fatty acids tend to have higher melting points. The intermolecular bonds must be greater. This is due to the more efficient van der Waals' forces that are possible when the flexible saturated chains lie alongside one another – the contact surface is maximised.
In unsaturated fatty acids the double bonds reduce the flexibility of the molecules, and this prevents the molecules aligning so efficiently.
Margarine manufacturers use unsaturated vegetable oils and hydrogenate them until they become saturated enough to have the right semi-solid consistency at room temperature.
The number of C=C bonds can be determined from the number of moles of I2 which add to one mole of fat.
Like Br2 in the test for alkenes, I2 will add to the C=C double bonds in unsaturated fatty acids. Unlike Br2 it only reacts with C=C bonds.
The iodine number is the mass of iodine which reacts with 100 g of a lipid.
For saturated fatty acids such as palmitic acid (C15H31COOH) the iodine number is zero.
For unsaturated fatty acids like hexadecadienoic acid C15H27COOH the iodine number is calculated as follows:
The number of double bonds is calculated by comparing the fatty acid to the appropriate saturated fatty acid. For every two hydrogens missing, there must be one double bond.
In this case, compare C15H27COOH with C15H31COOH: There are four missing hydrogens and therefore two C=C bonds.
Calculate the molar mass of the fatty acid and the iodine:
C15H27COOH	252 g mol-1
Every C=C will react with one iodine, so:
Hydrolysing TAGs into glycerol and fatty acids is achieved by refluxing with sodium hydroxide.
The fatty acid salts which result acts as soaps. The ionic salt end is water-soluble but the long alkane chain is oily. The molecule can therefore bridge between water and oily impurities.
C.4.5 List the major functions of fats in the body.
These are energy sources, insulation and cell membranes.
Fats are used as a source of energy. They are more slowly broken down than carbohydrates so they are not as useful in an emergency as glycogen. On the other hand, fats do not accumulate water so they are more efficient energy stores, pound for pound, than glycogen.
Fat is a good thermal insulator (blubber).
-phosphate chain.
It is amphipathic meaning the head, glycerol is polar but the chains are not.
Phosopholipids form bilayers.
Examples of steroids are: Vitamins, hormones and cholesterol.
C3. Linoleic acid (C17H31COOH, Mr = 280) and stearic acid (C17H35COOH, Mr = 284) both contain eighteen carbon atoms and have similar molar masses.
(a) Explain why the melting point of linoleic acid is considerably lower than the melting point of stearic acid. [3]
(b) Determine the maximum mass of iodine (I2 Mr = 254) that can add to
(i) 100 g of stearic acid: [1]
(ii) 100 g of linoleic acid: [2]
(c) (i) Draw the simplified structural formula of a fat containing one stearic acid and two linoleic acid residues. [1]
(ii) Give the formulas of the products formed when this fat is hydrolyzed by sodium hydroxide. [1]
05MS3 C1. (a) A brand of vegetable fat consists of 88 % unsaturated fats and 12 % saturated fats. State the major structural difference between unsaturated and saturated fats. [1]
(b) Linoleic acid, CH3(CH2)4CH=CHCH2CH=CH(CH2)7COOH, and palmitic acid, CH3(CH2)14COOH, are components of vegetable fat. Explain why palmitic acid has the higher melting point. [3]
(d) List two functions of fats in the human body. [2]
06MS3 C2. (a) The formula of oleic acid is CH3(CH2)7CH=CH(CH3)7COOH. Using R to represent CH3(CH2)7CH=CH(CH3)7, show the structure of the triglyceride formed from this acid. [1]
(b) Explain why some triglycerides that are liquid at room temperature become solids when they are completely hydrogenated. [3]
05NS3 C2. (a) The general formula for saturated fatty acids is CnH2nO2. The molecular formula of linoleic acid is C18H32O2.
(i) Determine the number of carbon to carbon double bonds in linoleic acid. [1]
(ii) Iodine number is defined as the number of grams of iodine that adds to 100 g of a fat or an oil in an addition reaction. Determine the iodine number of linoleic acid. [2]
(b) (i) State one structural similarity between fats and oils. [1]
(ii) Explain, by referring to their structures, why fats are solid at room temperature, but oils are liquid. [3]
(c) When a fat is reacted with aqueous sodium hydroxide, soap and one other product are formed.
(i) State the condition required for this reaction. [1]
(ii) Draw the structural formula of the other product. [1]
B.5 Micronutrients and Macronutrients
B.5.1 - Outline the difference between micronutrients and macronutrients
Micronutrients are substances required in very small amounts (mg or ug) and that mainly function as a co-factor of enzymes (<0.005% body weight). Examples include vitamins and trace minerals (Fe, Cu, F, Zn, I, Se, Mn, Mo, Cr, Co and B).
Macronutrients are chemical substances that are required in relatively large amount (>.005% body weight). Examples include proteins, fats, carbohydrates, and minerals (Na, Mg, K, Ca, P, S and Cl)
B.5.2 - Compare the structures of retinol (vitamin A), calciferol (vitamin D) and ascorbic acid (vitamin C)
Vitamin C - Has hydroxyl groups (4), Ester within in the ring, polar because hydroxl groups make it easy to dissolve in water.
Vitamin A - Only 1 hydroxyl group, long polyene chain. Has small polar parts, but overall non-polar (therefore doesn't dissolve in water, fat soluable)
Vitamin D - Only one hydroxyl group. Some alkene groups, small parts are polar areas but overall no big difference. Overall non-polar due to the carbon  chains and cyclocarbons.
B.5.3 - Deduce whether a vitamin is water or fat soluable from its structure
Water soluble molecules have a high proportion of electronegative atoms in their structures. Fat soluble vitamins are relatively non-polar and consist mainly of hydrocarbon.
Fat-soluable are vitamins A, D, E, K
B.5.4 - Discuss the causes and effects of nutrient deficiencies in different countires and suggest solutions.
Providing food rations that are composed of fresh and vitamin -and mineral- rich foods
Adding nutrients missing in commonly consumed foods
Providing selenium supplements to people eating foods grown in selenium-poor soil
04MS3 C1. (a) The structures of three important vitamins are shown in Table 22 of the Data Booklet. State the name of each one and deduce whether each is water-soluble or fat-soluble, explaining your choices by reference to their structures. [5]
(b) Identify the metal ion needed for the maintenance of healthy bones and state the name of the vitamin needed for its uptake. [2]
(c) State the name of the vitamin responsible for maintaining healthy eyesight and the name of the functional group which is most common in this vitamin. [2]
(d) Identify one major function of vitamin C in the human body and state the name of the most common disease caused by deficiency of this vitamin. [2]
(e) Fresh fruits and vegetables are good sources of vitamin C. Explain why some meals made from these foods may contain little vitamin C. [2]
05NS3 C3. (a) State the name of a disease which results from the deficiency of each of the following vitamins. [2]
(b) A person consumes an excess of both vitamin A and C. State, with a reason, which one is more likely to be stored in the body and which is more likely to be excreted. [2]
06MS3 C3. The structures of vitamins A and C are shown in Table 22 of the Data Booklet. State, with a reason, whether each is fat soluble or water soluble. [3]
04MS3 C2. The structures of two sex hormones, progesterone and testosterone, are shown in Table 22 of the Data Booklet.
(a) State the names of two functional groups that are present in both hormones. [2]
(b) Identify which of the two hormones is the female sex hormone and where in the human body it is produced. [2]
(c) Outline the mode of action of oral contraceptives. [3]
05MS3 C2. (a) By referring to Table 22 of the Data Booklet, identify one vitamin that is water soluble and one vitamin that is fat soluble. Explain the differences in solubility in terms of their structures and intermolecular forces. [4]
(b) Vitamins C and D are vital in a balanced diet. State one major function of each of these vitamins and state a disease that results from the deficiency of each one. [4]
B.8 Nucleic Acids
Maximum depth of a box. The default is \maxdimen.
Congestion Pricing is the practice of charging motorists during peak demand hours to curb traffic congestion. By shifting rush-hour traffic away during peak times, pricing enables traffic to flow much smoother5. Such policy arouses public indignation as the charge transfers wealth and power between social groups.
A Federal Highway Administration report said, "In 2003, congestion in the top 85 U.S. urban areas caused 3.7 billion hours of travel delay and 2.3 billions gallons of wasted fuel, for a total cost of $63 billion." "In the 10 most congested areas, each rush hour traveler "pays" an annual "congestion tax" of between $850 and $1,600 in lost time and fuel and spends the equivalent of almost 8 workdays each year stuck in traffic" 5.
Efficient congestion pricing is made possible by technology. Vehicles may be equipped with transponders or "tags" which automatically register at the electronic tool both as the vehicle passes at highway speeds 5. GPS systems allow tolls to be collected anywhere. Cameras identify vehicles without tags or GPS systems. Cameras also deter violators through video enforcement 5.
Parking meters have been called "The Congestion Pricing Controversy of 1932"10.  Like roadways, parking spaces were a common good in which demand exceed supply:
Parking on city streets today is a cinch compared with the 1930s, when free, unlimited parking was considered every American's constitutional right. Just as their grandparents had tied their horses to the general store's rail, American drivers expected handy curb space for their cars when they went to town. By the 1930s, however, there were too many cars and too few curbs"  3.
Despite the parking shortage problem, not everyone supported the installation of parking meters.  "This is just a combination of an alarm clock and a slot machine which is being used for further socking the motorist, who is already paying enough in taxes," argued William Gottlieb of the Automobile Club of New York3. Despite public resistance, "by the early 1940s, there were more than 140,000 parking meters operating in the U.S."3. Today, Chicago alone had 36,000 parking meters7.
Our scope for this topic is restricted to land traffic. As we are part of the land use section of the Lentis book, we felt that examples of congestion pricing in air and ship travel were outside of our topic's range. More specifically, we are looking at congestion pricing examples, the social groups that are important to the examples, and the experts opinions on the topic and examples.
Stockholm ran a congestion trial period from January to July of 2006. As a result of the trial, public approval ratings rose from 30% to 55%. Measured benefits included a 22% drop in trips, decreased travel times, 9% more bus ridership, and a 14% reduction in emissions. On September 17, 2006, a public referendum permanently reinstated congestion pricing5.
Singapore introduced pricing in 1975, resulting in a significant reduction in congestion. In 1988, electronic road pricing and cameras fully automated the process and enabled variable pricing throughout the day. The system has reduced traffic by 13 percent and increased average vehicle speed 22%5.
In January 2005, Germany began collecting autobahn tolls from trucks weighing in excess of 12 tons. GPS systems are installed all trucks and charge them a rate per mile driven. The GPS systems cost each trucker $500, but provide additional benefits to the trucking industry such as improved navigation and fleet management. Revenue collected is allocated towards funding for transportation infrastructure5. Annual registrations in the 10- to 12-ton class soared from 4,946 units in 2003 to 7,381 units in 2008, presumably to avoid charges8.
On the State Route 91 express lanes in Orange County, California, traffic during rush hours moves at over 60 mph, while the traffic in adjacent lanes crawls at average speeds of 15 mph or less5. Since 1998, the I-15 has included HOT lanes, where tolls vary dynamically throughout the day in 25-cent increments5.
London implemented a congestion pricing policy on February 17, 2003.  Motorists were charged 8 pounds per day to travel within the designated zone during business hours.  The effect was a 15% reduction in traffic volume and a one-third reduction in waiting time on buses. The system is enforced by cameras which view vehicles' license plates without requiring them to stop5.
"When London introduced a congestion-charging zone in early 2003 (charging five pounds per day to drive into the city center), after a year, car rides fell by a third."  15% more bus rides, 20% more motorcycle rides, 30% more bicycle rides, 25% drive around congestion zone, 55% switch to public transport, 20% use bicycles, carpool, or telecommute2,6.
Michael Bloomberg, mayor of New York City since 2002, tried to implement congestion pricing in his city but failed to gather the necessary political support.  After its failure, he wrote the next day:
Our City Council approved congestion pricing last week. And it had the support of four of the five top leaders in our state: Governor Paterson, who submitted a congestion pricing bill, the majority and minority leaders of the State Senate, and the minority leader of the lower house of the State Legislature, the Assembly.14
Richard Brodsky, democratic majority leader of the Assembly, did not agree with the policy out of sympathy for the poor:
The revenues raised by the mayor’s proposal disproportionately and unfairly target people of low and moderate income, especially those who live in the Bronx, Queens and Brooklyn.15
Because Bloomberg failed to rally necessary political support, the congestion pricing policy failed to be implemented in New York City.  His words the next day, citing poor leadership on their part:
But unfortunately, as most of you know, yesterday the majority caucus in the Assembly chose not to bring the governor’s congestion pricing bill to a vote – effectively killing it. They complained about the inconvenience – even though most New Yorkers don’t drive. They said it hadn’t been studied enough – despite an entire years’ worth of analysis, following a process they had established. And ultimately, they didn’t even have the courage to vote on it – they just killed it in a back room. That's not leadership.14
Congestion pricing has come under assault as it is often interpreted as a regressive tax that disproportional burdens the poor more than any other social group. Matt Yglesias of Think Progress believes congestion pricing will benefit those with lower incomes. "..what kinds of people need to be at work on time. For a normal professional, that isn't a big deal. But for shift workers, who tend to be further down the economic totem pole, showing up late will get you fired."13 His argument centers around the fact that lower amounts of congestion on widely-traveled roads will allow people with lower incomes the ability have a higher probability of getting to work on time. William Vickery, who is considered to be the father of congestion pricing, agrees with Yglesias thoughts. He believes that it is those with low income who will receive the biggest benefit. He agrees that the lowering of congestion will benefit non-users as well as users. In addition, he thinks that congestion pricing will lower the taxation required to support the roadways and cost of living through lower shipping costs, both benefiting the poor11.
Only 1% of Manhattan residents would lack a viable alternative to paying a congestion fee or toll
Commuters are the social group affected the most by congestion pricing because they are directly affected by an increased price to use a road.
A worker in Los Angeles county wrote a letter to an editor on the blog Eschaton: "I work in LA county and commute to Irvine [Distance is approximately 2 hours during traffic]. Without good public transportation, how would congestion tolling not favor the wealthy." The owner of the blog responds that "...there's too much congestion", which is indicative by the commute from Los Angeles to Irvine. He also suggests that people are already paying in time so adding a tax will add efficiency to the current infrastructure.
In London a commuter advocacy group, The Driver's Alliance, express their feelings on the congestion charge. When commuters unite, there is more pressure on the legislature to reexamine and/or change current policies.
City governments tend to favor congestion pricing as a means to solve troublesome congestion issues, raise revenue, and appease environmentalists. Ken Livingstone, Mayor of London from 2000 to 2008, was the chief proponent of the city's congestion charge.  "Congestion charging", he said, "has produced millions of pounds worth of benefits to London"16. New York City's PlanNYCis a comprehensive governmental response to the failed congestion pricing strategy and is proposed by Mayor Bloomberg. His plan suggests improvements in efficiency and accessibility of public transportation as well as a congestion charge during rush hour. With the changes in public transportation, the government hopes to quell the cries of social groups who feel negatively affected by the higher price of driving. The plan should be finished in 2030. Federal governments tend to support congestion pricing for the same reasons. The United States Federal Highway Administration advocates pricing. They claim drivers and businesses will benefit through reduced delays and guaranteed reliable trip speed and travel time5.
Businesses risk losing business as a result of the reduced traffic volume. Such a case occurred along Oxford Street, London. Retailers claim to have lost 5.5% of sales16. "A 5pc drop in sales is significant for any retailer, particularly smaller businesses, and the mayor needs to take the concerns of retailers seriously when considering further changes to the scheme", said Sir Stuart Rose, executive chairman of Marks & Spencer16. This is in contrast to a survey done by Guardian correspondent Andrew Clark which polled 500 London business firms and found that they thought the impact of congestion charges on their business was neutral. In addition, 57% of retailers believed that the congestion charge had improved London's reputation1.
Economists tend to support congestion pricing as a market-based tool to alleviate congestion.  In his book The Undercover Economist, Tim Harford argues that congestion pricing is the best solution to road congestion6. He contends that reduced congestion will increase productivity, lower shipping costs, and consequently, boost GDP.  Jonathan Leape, professor at the London School of Economics agrees with this stance, contending that the revenues generated from pricing offset any initial implementation costs, make it a sound choice from the perspective of government budgets9.
"Well-designed congestion charges, for instance, are the most efficient way to achieve an given reduction of road use... Congestion charging would increase GDP because people would get to work more quickly and produce more, and prices in stores would be lower because of more efficient distribution." - Tim Harford
A useful link for pros and cons of congestion pricing (approximately 40 minutes)
Felix Salmon provides an overview of the 40 minute debate. Below are three different views on congestion pricing12.
Charles Komanoff asserts that a city's residents and visitors can benefit in subtle ways. In New York City, for example, enhanced transportation may increase demand for Broadway plays. He also contends that the most congested cities also tend to have the best transit access, so public transportation is a feasible substitute to driving.
"Even though it’s true that congestion pricing needs to have subways and very dense cities and preferably large cities, the idea of per-mile road pricing, in urban areas and in metropolitan areas, is extremely viable. The average person who has a car is making 1,500 trips a year. It’s not as though every one of those 1,500 trips has equal value to that person. So as we impose the per-mile charges, everyone will prioritize his or her own trips." - Charles Komanoff12
Corey Bearak stresses alternative modes of transportation if congestion taxes are implemented. Komanoff agreed alternatives are essential even though the subway use in London dropped after congestion charges were implemented12.
Skymeter's Kamal Hassan has a different view on congestion pricing because they use "Financial-grade GPS" to charge tolls. He would like to see a per-mile charge that changes gradually to solve boundary-effects. Kamal also suggests alternative ways to influence traffic patterns and flows: parking charges and parking policies. Skymeter is concerned about the business aspects of congestion charges12.
In general, when any policy proposal shifts power between social groups, conflict will arise between stakeholders. Those who stand to lose power will cling to the status quo, while those who could profit will push for change. A policy that may have a net benefit to society can be thwarted by a single dissenting social group. Full political support is required before government can implement a radical new policy.
In the case of congestion pricing, Stockholm's successful negotiation of the political terrain was paramount to its success.  New York failed because it could not rally legislators, who were defending the interests of the poor.
Clark, A. (2004). London companies learn to love the congestion charge. The Guardian. February 16, 2004.
"Congestion Charging Six Months On." Transport for London, October 2003.
Crossen, C. (2007). When Parallel Parking Was New and Meters Seemed Un-American. Wall Street Journal. Retrieved from  http://online.wsj.com/article/SB118574808780081653.html?mod=hps_us_editors_picks
Eschanton (2009). On the merits of Congestion.  Eschanton Blog. Retrieved from http://www.eschatonblog.com/2009/03/on-merits-of-congestion-tolling.html
Federal Highway Administration. (2006). Congestion Pricing. Washington, DC: Office of Transportation Management, HTOM. Retrieved from http://www.ops.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/congestionpricing/congestionpricing.pdf
Harford, T. (2005). The Undercover Economist. UK: Little, Brown.
Joravsky, B. & Dumke, M. (2009) Fail, part one: chicago's parking meter lease. Chicago Reader April 9th, 2009.
Knorr, A., Heinemann, A., & Eisenkopf, A. (2010). Germany's Autobahn Toll for Heavy Goods Vehicles after Four Years: Experiences and Perspectives. Retrieved from: https://editorialexpress.com/cgi-bin/conference/download.cgi?db_name=serc2009&paper_id=49
Leape, J. (2006). The London Congestion Charge. Journal of Economic Perspectives. (Vol. 20., No. 4, pp. 157-176)
Naparstek, A (2007). "Parking Meters: The Congestion Pricing Controversy of 1932". Streetsblog.org Retrieved from http://www.streetsblog.org/2007/07/30/2250/
Vickery, W. (1968). Congestion charges and welfare. Journal of Transport Economics and Policy 2(1), 107-125.
Slamon, F. (2010). The congestion pricing debate, cont. Reuters. Retrieved from http://blogs.reuters.com/felix-salmon/2010/06/04/the-congestion-pricing-debate-cont/
Yglesias, M (2009). "L.A.'s "Congestion Pricing" Gaining National Attention." Thinkprogress.org Retrieved from http://yglesias.thinkprogress.org/2009/03/distributional_consequences_of_congestion_pricing_in_los_angeles/
Bloomberg, M. (2008) "Mayor Bloomberg Delivers Keynote Address at Newsweek's Second Annual Global Environment Leadership Conference." News from the Blue Room.
Brodsky, L. (2007) "An Inquiry into Congestion Pricing as Proposed in PlaNYC."
Muspratt, C. (2004) "Congestion charge cost 300m, says Oxford St. traders", The Telegraph April 22nd, 2004.
A Wikibookian questions the neutrality of this book.You can help make it neutral, request assistance, or view the relevant discussion.
A Wikibookian believes this page should be split into smaller pages with a narrower subtopic.
You can help by splitting this big page into smaller ones. Please make sure to follow the naming policy. Dividing books into smaller sections can provide more focus and allow each one to do one thing well, which benefits everyone.
You can ask for help in dividing this book in the assistance reading room.
A picture of the "armored egg of life" (brynfjöregg).
An equivalent concept can be seen in the High French (Haut français) project.
The woman and child of the mountains
During the last months of 2005 Braekmans and a few neologist poets created Saga Fjallbarnssins ‘The saga of the Mountain child’.  In this story the High Icelandic symbolism is explained.
Brynfjöregg: The armored fjöregg (vital egg).  A 'vital egg' (fjöregg) is the equivalent of a ‘life-thread’ in Icelandic symbolism.   It is a familiar motif in Icelandic folklore, where one can destroy trolls, giants, etc., by finding where their "life-egg" (fjöregg) is hidden and hurling it at them so that it hits them in the face, or on the temple or nose, or (most frequently) between the eyes or on the forehead. These life-eggs came in a variety of colors,  some were golden.  Many Icelanders still consider their language as the ‘vital egg’ of their culture.  When it breaks, the thing it symbolizes dies.  The High Icelandic ‘brynfjöregg’ is composed of two viking-helmets forming an oval armor around the egg, symbolizing language protection.
Fjallbarn: The so-called linguisticly immaculate child of the mountains (Hið slettulausa Fjallbarn) of Fjallkonan (Woman of the mountains), the female incarnation of the Icelandic nation, and Bergrisinn (The Rock-giant), one of the four protectors of Iceland.  In High Icelandic symbolism, a child born on the national holiday and whose mother takes the trouble to make this happen at Thingvellir is called a ‘fjallbarn’.
Erlendu-brúða: Barbie doll.  The name Barbie is derived from Barbara, which means ‘foreign’ in Greek.
bænahöll: palace of prayer, a cathedral.
Brosmærin: Mona Lisa, the ‘smiling maiden'.
Eirey: Cyprus, composed of ‘eir’ (copper) and ‘ey’ (island).  The name of the metal was derived from Cyprus.
Guðbrynmey: Jeanne d’Arc, composed of  Guð- (‘God-‘, prefix in Icel. pers. names) + bryn- (‘armored’, prefix in Icel. pers. names) + -mey (‘maiden’, suffix in Icel. fem. pers. names).
Guðmey: Mary, from 'Guð' (God and prefix in Icelandic proper names) and '–mey' (virgin and suffix in Icelandic proper names).
Guðshersir: Bishop, from ‘guð’ (god) and ‘hersir’ (a noble-man comparable to a count).
Hlautland: Mexico, composed of  ‘hlaut’ (sacrificial blood) and ‘land’ (land, country).
Hlynland: Canada, from 'hlynur' (maple) and 'land' (country).  The country is named after the maple-leaf in the flag.
kæliblöðungur: peppermint, composed of the verb ‘kæla’ (cool, refresh) and ‘blöðungur’, derived from ‘blað’ (leaf).
Langahaf: atlantic Ocean, composed of ‘langur’ (long) and ‘haf’ (sea).  The atlantic is the longest sea.
Miðvesturfljót: The Midwest River, the Mississippi.
Morguneyjar: The Morning-Islands, Japan.
nýgarn: nylon, because it was the first truly synthetic fiber, developed in the modern ("NÝtísku") age.
Nykrafljót: river of hippopotamuses, the Nile.
Rauðheimur: Mars, from  ‘rauður’ (red) and ‘heimur’ (world).
Roðlandur: Brazil, from ‘roða’ (redden) and ‘land’ (country).  Brazil is derived from Portuguese brasil, meaning ember-colored.
Roðaborg: Brasilia, from ‘roða’ (redden) and ‘borg’ (town).
Sjöhæðir: 'Seven-Hills', Rome.
sómaherji: honorable warrior, a samurai.
Systurvetrarbrautin: Andromeda Nebula, from ‘systur’ (sister) et ‘vetrarbraut’ (galaxy).
sætungur: sugar, from ‘sætur’ (sweet).
Þakland: 'roof-land', Tibet
töggur: caramel (old neologism).
Verblaka: Batman, from ‘ver’ (man) and ‘-blaka’ used in names of different bat-species (leðurblökur).
Vindís: Venus.  The Icelandic ‘vinur’ and Latin ‘Venus’ are related.
ýborð: go (chinese board-game), from ‘ýr’ (yew) and ‘borð’ (board).  Traditional go-boards are made from the Japanese nut-yew.
þjálefni: plactic, from ‘þjall’ (flexible) and ‘efni’ (matter)
Þurrgarður: Sahara, comosed of ‘þurr’ (sec, aride) and ‘garður’ in the old meaning of ‘world’ (e.g.  ‘Miðgarðr’).
öskungur: human being, from Askur, name of the first man in Nordic mythology.
English - High Icelandic names of the chemical elements
The daughter of protactinium (freyjublý, because it has properties of elements of the vanadium group (freyjujárn) and because it ends as lead. Hnoss was the daughter of Freyja.
Aluminum is the metal in ‘clay’. This idea was once expressed in nowadays obsolete terms like the 18th century Swedish ‘lerjord’ (literally ‘clay-earth’ but designating ‘alum-earth’) or the Dutch expression ‘het zilver in klei’ (the silver in clay). These references to ‘clay’ exist even in present day-nomenclatures. An example of this is the Polish word for aluminum ‘glin’,which derives from ‘glina’ (clay). In Icelandic we can found a term upon the same idea: ‘leirmálmur’.
The continent is named after Amerigo Vespucci.  The name amerigio is the early-medieval Italian form of the German name "Heinrich" (earlier: "Heimerich" from: Old German heim = "home, estate" + Old German ric = "force, power, government"). The truly Icelandic name of America is HEIMRÍKI.
‘Eye-lid tin’. The term ‘kohl’ (antimony trisulfide), is a Semitic word used in early Biblical references and is the Arabic word for antimony sulfide, a fine cosmetic powder, used as eye make-up by women of the Middle East. In such countries as India and Yemen, they even went so far as to throw the powder directly into their eyes to increase their brilliance or sparkle. The word ‘surma’, which denotes the same product has become the name for antimony in most Altaic and some slavic languages. The native Mongolian term for this element ‘budag’ also means ‘eye-pigment’.
The metalloid historically known for its deadly poisons. Although selenium and tellurium form exceedingly toxic compounds, it is arsenic that will always be associated with its killing properties, due to the classical reputation of its deadly toxic minerals.
The instable halogen.
The metal in ‘heavy earth’. The term ‘heavy earth’(þungjörð) was used for barium oxide.). Examples in other languages: Old Dutch ‘zwaaraarde-metaal’ (heavy-earth metal)
‘Birkiló’ is the Icelandic etymological equivalent of ‘Berkeley’
The former name of Beryllium is glucinum, from Greek glykos ‘sweet’.  Beryllium salts have a sweet taste.
Very unusual (and very useful) is the fact that solid bismuth has a lower specific gravity as liquid bismuth. So solid bismuth floats on its own melt like ice on water and expands when crystallizing.). This effect is furthermore only known from water(ice), gallium and germanium.
The very poisonous metal in the neighbourhood of silver.
Calcium is situated on the same period as iron so the rules of cross-wise positioning aren’t broken. In Icelandic ‘KELKI’, an i-shift derivation of ‘KALK’ is possible.
The element was named after the nick-name of California: The 'golden' or 'gold' state. It was named after the great gold rush.
The lighter brother of ‘þórsblý’ (Thorium), which is also, like ‘tin’ tetravalent.
When free from surface contamination, the metals Li, Na, K and Rb are silver-bright and lustrous. Cesium, however, is PALE GOLD in color in both solid and liquid states. Because cesium is an incredible reactive metal, it was believed to be always contaminated by oxygen. Only recent techniques of purification proved its genuine golden color. Many reference works, who mentioned cesium as a ‘silvery-white’ metallic element, are beginning to correct this mistake. The most unnoble metal has the same color as the (only symbolically) noblest metal.
In Europe the term ‘halogen’ (salt-builder) has once been taken under consideration as a name for chlorine for it was the single known member of the halogen series. In some eastern countries like Japan, chemists preferred to derive the element’s name from ‘salt’, which in its original meaning stood for the chlorine-containing NaCl compound, rather than referring to the color, which underlay the creation of the Western term: en-so. The old Czech name for chlorine was ‘solík’, derived from ‘s?l‘ (salt). In Icelandic, related words are often differentiated (in the root syllable) by the i-shift. Some names of elements are i-shift derivations of names of their chief sources: e.g. ‘loft’ (air) became ‘lyfti’ (nitrogen), eldur (fire) has been converted into ‘ildi’ (oxygen) and from ‘vatn’, the equivalent for hydrogen ‘vetni’ was derived. Analogous to these examples ‘selti’ would be the name for chlorine.
This term refers to the bleaching properties of elemental chlorine and its compounds. The name of the preceding element ‘brennisteinn’ served as a model for the coining of this neologism. The first part of the compound is a verbal derivation, designating a characteristic property (brenni, bleiki), the second part is a noun, refering to the state of aggregation of the element (steinn, loft). The word is based on the old Hungarian name ‘halvany’, derived from ‘halványit’ (to take the color out of, to bleach).
Although an alkaline substance, bile has some characteristics in common with chlorine. It has a greenish-yellow color and has corrosive properties. There’s also an etymological connection. The Greek translation of bile (khole) is related to ‘khlorós’ (greenish-yellow), which is the root of the name ‘chlorine’.
Armor-shine. A metal known for its high luster. It is the hardest of all metals. It equals corundum in hardness (9 on Mohs’scale).
The only metallic element found in a vitamin (B12)
The existing name.  The synonym ‘kopar’ is foreign and can’t exist in High Icelandic.
The central ‘nuclear gold’.  Curium is the central element in the actinide series.
Dysprosium comes from Greek ‘dysprositos’ and means ‘hard to get at’ was discovered in 1886 by Lecoq de Boisbaudran. The name is based on the difficultness of separation of the element. Neither the oxide nor the metal was available in relatively pure form until the 1950s following the development of ion-exchange separation and metallographic reduction techniques. The Greek prefix ‘dys-‘ is related to Icelandic ‘tor-‘.
????
This element is for the time being untranslatable.
Fluorine is a pale yellow gas that is a powerful oxidizing agent. It is the most reactive and electronegative of all the elements and reacts with practically all substances.
Gadolinium is unique in being ferromagnetic up to room temperature. No other chemical elements except iron, cobalt and nickel are ferromagnetic.
Gallium exhibits the unique property of melting at an ordinary temperature (29°C) and the liquid metal can exist in the supercooled state at a temperature as low as 0°C. The metal expands on solidifying like ice. As a consequence, solid gallium floats on its own melt like ice on water and expands when crystallizing. It shares this property only with two other metals (bismuth and germanium). At extremely high levels of purity, the metal takes on a glassy white appearance. In earthly temperate environments gallium is, like ice, a thawing substance.
The German name ‘hahn’ means ‘cock’
Indium and tin produce the so-called tin-cry if a bar of the pure metal is bent. Indium is situated more closely to silver than is tin.
The old Czech name of the element was ‘chaluzík’, derived from ‘chaluha’ (sea-weed). We can also refer to the original source of iodine, the seaweeds, from which it has been recovered on a commercial scale for a long time: ‘þengi’.
Because of the variety of its colors, the metal was called after Iris, the godess of the rainbow. We can use ‘gull’ because the metal is known as a silvery white metal but with a yellowish cast.
The icelandic name means ‘secret metals’, which is close enough to the idea expressed by the word lanthanein (to be conceiled, which is the origin of ‘lanthanum’.
The best-known metallic element in psychopharmaceuticals.
Because manganese ores were confounded with magnetic iron ores.
Mendeleev means ‘descendent of Mendel’. In German the name ‘Mendelsohn’ is the Germanic equivalent of the Russian name. Mendel is a Yiddish pet form of ‘Menahem’, which means ‘ comforter’ in Hebrew. The closed Icelandic name that sounds alike is ‘Mundill’, mentioned in the orðsifjabók. It is the name of a sea-king. It also exists as the first member in the mythological name Mundilfari. The Russian ‘-ev’ ending means the same as ‘-son’ in Icelandic patronymic names. The suffix ‘leifur in proper names means ‘descendant of’ and is semanticly similar with the ‘ev’ ending. The name Mendeleev (German spelling ‘Mendelejeff’) in High Icelandic is MUNDILLEIFUR (descendant of Mundill (Mendel)).
Molybdenium is the only element on the period of silver that has a biological function.
Coined after the Maori word ‘haukura’ (hau = air, gas + kura (red glowing). The brightness of the discharge of neon is the most intense of all noble gases. In Icelandic the reddish-orange color can be translated by ‘gló-‘. It is the only totally inert element and the most noble element of the periodic table.
The heavier brother of ‘Freyjujárn’ on the period of silver.
The stinking metal. Of the platinum metals, osmium is the most rapidly attacked by air. The powdered metal, even at room temperature, exudes the characteristic odor of the poisonous, volatile tetroxide.
The gas that make things burn. The word is derived from ‘eldur’ (fire).
Icelandic ‘loft’   + ‘líf’.  A calque of the 18th century term of the English chemist Robert Boyle: ‘vital air’.
After the first name 'aerial noctiluca', coined by the British chemist Robert Boyle.  Noctiluca was named ‘hélog’ in the 19th century but the term became obsolete.  In High Icelandic it is revived in the meaning of phosphorus.
Named after the Nordic equivalent of the name Pluto
Substances, valuable to men are often compared to gold as appears from some alternative designations: e.g. the black gold (coal), the liquid gold (gasoline), the soft gold (fur) and so on. This way of name-giving is also applicable to plutonium for it was the first and still is the most important element used in nuclear power industry. Uranium was known before people knew about its fissionability.
The lead in the group of ildi, brennisteinn (surtsgull), the “elements of fire”.
The lanthanide in the leek-green earth, also sometimes called ‘green twin earth’): grænburajörð (praseodymium).
Promethium stole the fire of the gods.
The element that desintegrates into lead which has the properties of elements in the Vanadium group (freyjujárnsflokkur).
Radium-isotopes are mostly alpha-decay products of Thorium-isotopes. Magni was the first son of Thor. He inherited Mjölnir.
The noblest metal on the period of silver. Rhodium has been used for honors, or to symbolize wealth, when more commonly used metals such as silver, gold, or platinum are deemed insufficient. In 1979 the Guinness Book of World Records gave Paul McCartney a rhodium-plated disc for being history's all-time best-selling songwriter and recording artist. Guinness has also noted items such as the world's "Most Expensive Pen" or "Most Expensive Board Game" as containing rhodium.
The unnoble, alkali counterpart of silveron the same period but in the A series.
The terms ‘muriatic acid’ and ‘marine acid’ were synonymous terms for what is now called ‘hydrochloric acid’, thus signifying its relation to the sodium contained in brine (Latin: muria) or sea (Latin: mare). Since sodium is the most abundant metallic element in sea water we could refer to it as the ‘marine metal’ (sæmálmur). An example of the use of this particular compound is Maori: ‘konutae’ (sea-metal, konu-, prefix denoting a natural metal, tae, sea.
The bone-metal on the period of silver.
The gold of Surtr, the fire giant
The oxide Ta2O5 is insoluble in acid, and was unable, just as the mythological Tantalos in the Hades, "to quench his thirst".
The artificial element on the same period as silver.
The prefix ‘Múspells-‘ is used for elements of the chalcogen familily. The chalcogens are ‘the elements of fire’. Fluorine and Chlorine are more aggressive, but they are much rarer than their periodical predecessors. They could never have become the large part of a breathable atmosphere on a planet. So it was oxygen that was named after ‘fire’ instead of F and Cl. This is visible in the names ‘ildi’ (oxygen, the element that eables burning), ‘brennistein’ or ‘surtsgull’ (sulfur), the fire-colored burning element, which was considered to be earthy equivalent of fire in Alchemy.
Its oxides (earths) are chocolate in color. chocolate = mógæti.
Thallium is always described as resembling soft lead. I can’t imagine a better description for this element. In the neighbourhood of lead on the periodic table only one applies to the description ‘soft lead’: thallium.
Named after the minerals thorite and thorianite.
The light metal on the iron-group of transition elements.  Scandium rather belongs to the so-called rare-earth elements.
Tunsten has the highest boiling point (5660°C) of all substances). The Icelandic ‘wolfram’ is a foreignism and ‘þungsteinn’ is a loan-word from Swedish.
Metallic element having the two heaviest of the three so-called parent isotopes, which could also be called forefathers in the radioactive series. I used the term ‘áablý’ (forefather lead) because the planet-name Uranus, from which the name of the element is derived, was originally the name of the forefather of all Greek gods.
The name originates from ‘Vanadís’(the fairy of the Vanir), which was a nick-name of the godess Freyja.
The name Ytterby is composed from ytter = outer (Icelandic ‘ytri’), and by = village (Icelandic ‘bær’, genitive ‘bæjar’), and means ‘outer village’.
The brother of lanthanum (leyndarmálmur) on the period of silver.
In 1677, a chemist called Kunckelin pronounced that cadmia (zinc ore) is a metallic calx and that it gives the copper a golden-yellow copper by giving its metal up to it. Zinc is the ‘golden-yellow-maker’ of copper.
The equivalent of tin in the group of transition elements
þursund: billion.  From 'þurs-hund-rað'.  The word 'þurs' means 'giant' and is a translation of 'giga-' (which is related to English 'giant'.)
v • d • e Scandinavian languages
<< Regulated and other highly invasive plants at the SCA
2.2 2. Biological characteristics and dispersal ability
2.3 3. Ecological amplitude and distribution
2.4 4. Difficulty of control
Burning bush (Euonymus alatus) is widely planted for its bright fall foliage and can easily naturalize in wooded areas, where it often becomes invasive.
Invasiveness ranking for Euonymus alatus (burning bush)
In New York State (2008) burning bush has been ranked as Very Highly Invasive with a score of 65/80 = 81.25%.[1] and is regulated by New York State law.[2]
↑ M.J. Jordan, G. Moore & T.W. Weldy (2008). Invasiveness ranking system for non-native plants of New York. Unpublished. The Nature Conservancy, Cold Spring Harbor, NY; Brooklyn Botanic Garden, Brooklyn, NY; The Nature Conservancy, Albany, NY. Euonymus alatus assessed by Jinshuang Ma, Gerry Moore, March 12, 2008; September 28, 2008.
↑ New York Codes, Rules and Regulations, Title 6 Section 575.4 - Regulated invasive species
Observations of Euonymus alatus (burning bush) at the SCA
The following photographs and corresponding iNaturalist observations of tttt were made at or very near the Skaneateles Conservation Area.  Click on images to enlarge and read details on Wikimedia Commons or on the "iNat obs" links to view the corresponding observations at iNaturalist.
Euonymus alatus, Skaneateles Conservation Area, dd mmm yyyy. iNat obs
Tttttt SCA-yymmdd nn.jpg
Peptide biosensors are used to determine phosphorylation activities in cells. A biosensor is a device that provides information about the composition, structure and function of biological analytes such as isolated enzymes, immonosystems, tissues, and organelles by  converting a biological response into an electrical, thermal, or optical signals. The biosensors that are mainly used for the analysis of phosphorylation events incorporate the use of a synthetic fluorophore, the portion of a molecule that illuminates the color of the molecule. When the fluorophore interacts with a phosphorylated peptide or protein domain, the fluorescence properties of the complex changes. Fluorscence are dyes that emit a certain color when a molecule is exposed to light. In general, the emitted light is usually longer than that of the incident light. The complex causes an enhancement in fluorescence and this property is used to determine the phosphorylation event of an analyte.
An environmentally sensitive biosensor detects phosphorylation activities that occur between a solute and a solvent molecule that forms relatively weak covalent bonds. In general, a domain that has a high affinity for binding to a phosphospecific amino acid attaches to a phosphorylated peptide or protein. This complex changes the polarity of the solvent in the fluorophore which increases the fluorescence of the molecule and the complex illuminates a noticeable color.  Environmentally Sensitive Biosensor
A deep-quench biosensor utilizes a quencher that interacts with the fluorophore in the peptide. When this complex is phosphorylated, the biosensor employs a domain that has a high affinity for binding to a phosphospecific amino acid to separate the quencher from the fluorophore. This separation causes an increase in the fluorescence in the molecule.  [3]
A self-reporting sensors is a type of sensor that does not require the use of a domain that has a high affinity for binding to a phosphospecific amino acid in order to detect the presence of phosphorylated amino acid. This type of sensor is only applicable for amino acids that are aromatic, usually tyrosine. The pi bonds in the molecule enable the amino acid to quench the fluorophore in the peptide biosensor. When the molecular is phosphorylated, the aromatic amino acid cannot quench the flouorophore again.
Metal chelation-enhanced fluorescence detects the presence of a phosphorylation event via Sox, a gene that encodes for a transcription factor that binds to the DNA. In addition being a sequence known the HMG box, Sox is also a fluorophore which can be intensified by chelation. Due to this unique property, Sox is used to determined phosphorylation activities in a system. In addition, metal chelation-enhanced fluorescence do not require the use of an acid-binding domain that has a high affinity for a phosphoamino acid.
In the presence of a serine or threonine residue, Sox is capable of recruiting a phosphate group to gather, which elicits phosphorylation to occur. Once the serine or threonine residue has been phosphorylated via Sox, the peptide acquires a higher ability to bind to Mg2+ peptides. The binding of the Mg2+ to the phosphorylated serine or threonine residue generates a fluorescent signal. In addition, several probes such as PKC, Cdk2, and PKA have been created to increase the intensity of the fluorescent signal.
↑  Tarrant, M.K.; Cole, P.A.; The Chemical Biology of Protein Phosphorylation." Annu. Rev. Biochem. 78 (2009): 797-825.
Brewing various materials together to make white tea leaf.
.
We need to show that a subset
. However, the if part is obvious, from the facts that the elements in
. By the axiom of choice, we may simultaneously for each
. The union of all of them indeed is
. Thus, any open set can be formed as a union of sets within
.
a collection of subsets of
. There exists a topology
.
Remark : Note that the first condition is equivalent to saying that The union of all sets in
.
a collection of subsets of
.
, prove that the collection of all
.
r1bqkb1r/p1p2ppp/5n2/1p1Pp1N1/3n4/2P5/PP1P1PPP/RNBQKB1R
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation.
1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bc4 Nf6 4.Ng5 d5 5.exd5 Nd4 6.c3 b5 7.Bf1
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Two Knights Defence
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
R. v. Fraser, 2012 NSCA 118 -- 3 years
R. v. House, 2012 NLCA 41 -- discharge
R. v. Wells,  2006 NSSC 313 -- 3 years
R. v. Monteiro and Ford,  2005 BCSC 1201 -- 3.5 years
R. v. Savard,   2005 ABCA 432 -- 4 months
R. v. Mattice,  2003 BCCA 370 -- 18 months
R. v. Barnes  2004 NSSC 257 -- 2 years
{                   /* next level of scope starts here */
{                 /* innermost level of scope of this program starts here */
}                 /* innermost level of scope of this program ends here */
}                   /* next level of scope ends here */
}                     /* next and outermost levels of scope end here */
Draw a view parallel to OC and draw a circle with A and C as the points of the diameter.
Find where O intersects the circumference of the circle.
Draw a circle in first view with O as the center point and a radius of OB. The point where this circle meets OC is B’.
Draw a circle in first view with O as the center point and a radius of OA. The point where this circle meets OC is A’.
Bring prime letters to auxiliary view to meet with the unit circle that has O as its center point.
Bring these points down into the original view and draw an arbitrary line from these lines parallel to the folding line to meet with the transfer line of O. These are the graphic scales.
This function is used when the user doesn't know the supplier's number or name but does know some information about the supplier.  They enter what they know and the ERP displays all the suppliers that match the criteria.  This function becomes more and more useful as the size of the enterprise increases.
Father says "Mow the Lawn."
You try, but the Lawnmower will not start. You report back.
Mother intercepts and says "Fix it."
You say "Can you show me?"
Dad wants to help, but mom looks him away. You say "I don't know how."
Mother says "Figure it it out."
You stare at the lawnmower for an hour. You try again with your parents. Looks like you are going to spend the weekend staring at the lawnmower. After a while, bored, you start taking it apart. You check the gas. You take the spark plug out. You clean it. It starts!
Computing » Computer Science » Computer Programming » Ada Programming
The Ada package is only an anchor or namespace for Ada's standard library. Most compilers will not allow you to add new packages to the Ada hierarchy and even if your compiler allows it you should not do so since all package names starting with Ada. are reserved for future extensions.
The following library units (packages and generic subprograms) are descendents of the package Ada.
This package is available since Ada 2005.
This package is available since Ada 2012.
Ada.Asynchronous_Task_Control
Ada.Calendar.Time_Zones (Ada 2005)
Ada.Characters.Handling
Ada.Characters.Latin_1
Ada.Command_Line
Ada.Complex_Text_IO (Ada 2005)
Ada.Containers.Bounded_Doubly_Linked_Lists (Ada 2012)
Ada.Containers.Bounded_Hashed_Maps (Ada 2012)
Ada.Containers.Bounded_Hashed_Sets (Ada 2012)
Ada.Containers.Bounded_Multiway_Trees (Ada 2012)
Ada.Containers.Bounded_Ordered_Maps (Ada 2012)
Ada.Containers.Bounded_Ordered_Sets (Ada 2012)
Ada.Containers.Bounded_Priority_Queues (Ada 2012)
Ada.Containers.Bounded_Synchronized_Queues (Ada 2012)
Ada.Containers.Bounded_Vectors (Ada 2012)
Ada.Containers.Doubly_Linked_Lists (Ada 2005)
Ada.Containers.Generic_Array_Sort (Ada 2005 generic procedure)
Ada.Containers.Generic_Constrained_Array_Sort (Ada 2005 generic procedure)
Ada.Containers.Generic_Sort  (Ada 2012)
Ada.Containers.Hashed_Maps  (Ada 2005)
Ada.Containers.Hashed_Sets  (Ada 2005)
Ada.Containers.Indefinite_Doubly_Linked_Lists (Ada 2005)
Ada.Containers.Indefinite_Hashed_Maps (Ada 2005)
Ada.Containers.Indefinite_Hashed_Sets (Ada 2005)
Ada.Containers.Indefinite_Ordered_Maps (Ada 2005)
Ada.Containers.Indefinite_Ordered_Sets (Ada 2005)
Ada.Containers.Indefinite_Vectors (Ada 2005)
Ada.Containers.Indefinite_Holders (Ada 2012)
Ada.Containers.Indefinite_Multiway_Trees (Ada 2012)
Ada.Containers.Multiway_Trees (Ada 2012)
Ada.Containers.Ordered_Maps (Ada 2005)
Ada.Containers.Ordered_Sets (Ada 2005)
Ada.Containers.Synchronized_Queue_Interfaces (Ada 2012)
Ada.Containers.Unbounded_Priority_Queues (Ada 2012)
Ada.Containers.Unbounded_Synchronized_Queues (Ada 2012)
Ada.Direct_IO
Ada.Directories.Hierarchical_File_Names (Ada 2012)
Ada.Dispatching.Non_Preemptive (Ada 2012)
Ada.Dispatching.Round_Robin (Ada 2005)
Ada.Dynamic_Priorities
Ada.Execution_Time.Interrupts (Ada 2012)
Ada.Execution_Time.Timers (Ada 2005)
Ada.Execution_Time.Group_Budgets (Ada 2005)
Ada.Float_Text_IO
Ada.Float_Wide_Text_IO
Ada.Float_Wide_Wide_Text_IO (Ada 2005)
Ada.Integer_Text_IO
Ada.Integer_Wide_Text_IO
Ada.Integer_Wide_Wide_Text_IO (Ada 2005)
Ada.Interrupts.Names
Ada.IO_Exceptions
Ada.Numerics.Complex_Arrays (Ada 2005)
Ada.Numerics.Complex_Elementary_Functions
Ada.Numerics.Complex_Types
Ada.Numerics.Discrete_Random
Ada.Numerics.Elementary_Functions
Ada.Numerics.Float_Random
Ada.Numerics.Generic_Complex_Arrays (Ada 2005)
Ada.Numerics.Generic_Complex_Elementary_Functions
Ada.Numerics.Generic_Complex_Types
Ada.Numerics.Generic_Elementary_Functions
Ada.Numerics.Generic_Real_Arrays (Ada 2005)
Ada.Numerics.Real_Arrays (Ada 2005)
Ada.Real_Time
Ada.Real_Time.Timing_Events (Ada 2005)
Ada.Sequential_IO
Ada.Storage_IO
Ada.Streams.Stream_IO
Ada.Strings.Bounded
Ada.Strings.Bounded.Hash (Ada 2005 generic function)
Ada.Strings.Fixed
Ada.Strings.Fixed.Hash (Ada 2005 generic function)
Ada.Strings.Hash (Ada 2005 generic function)
Ada.Strings.Hash_Case_Insensitive (Ada 2012 generic function)
Ada.Strings.Less_Case_Insensitive (Ada 2012 generic function)
Ada.Strings.Maps
Ada.Strings.Maps.Constants
Ada.Strings.Unbounded
Ada.Strings.Unbounded.Hash (Ada 2005 generic function)
Ada.Strings.UTF_Encoding (Ada 2012)
Ada.Strings.UTF_Encoding.Conversions (Ada 2012)
Ada.Strings.UTF_Encoding.Strings (Ada 2012)
Ada.Strings.UTF_Encoding.Wide_Strings (Ada 2012)
Ada.Strings.UTF_Encoding.Wide_Wide_Strings (Ada 2012)
Ada.Strings.Wide_Bounded
Ada.Strings.Wide_Bounded.Wide_Hash (Ada 2005 generic function)
Ada.Strings.Wide_Fixed
Ada.Strings.Wide_Fixed.Wide_Hash (Ada 2005 generic function)
Ada.Strings.Wide_Hash (Ada 2005 generic function)
Ada.Strings.Wide_Maps
Ada.Strings.Wide_Maps.Wide_Constants
Ada.Strings.Wide_Unbounded
Ada.Strings.Wide_Unbounded.Wide_Hash (Ada 2005 generic function)
Ada.Strings.Wide_Wide_Bounded (Ada 2005)
Ada.Strings.Wide_Wide_Bounded.Wide_Wide_Hash (Ada 2005 generic function)
Ada.Strings.Wide_Wide_Fixed (Ada 2005)
Ada.Strings.Wide_Wide_Fixed.Wide_Wide_Hash (Ada 2005 generic function)
Ada.Strings.Wide_Wide_Hash (Ada 2005 generic function)
Ada.Strings.Wide_Wide_Maps (Ada 2005)
Ada.Strings.Wide_Wide_Maps.Wide_Wide_Constants (Ada 2005)
Ada.Strings.Wide_Wide_Unbounded (Ada 2005)
Ada.Strings.Wide_Wide_Unbounded.Wide_Wide_Hash (Ada 2005 generic function)
Ada.Synchronous_Task_Control
Ada.Synchronous_Task_Control.EDF (Ada 2012)
Ada.Tags.Generic_Dispatching_Constructor (generic function)
Ada.Task_Attributes
Ada.Task_Identification
Ada.Text_IO
Ada.Text_IO.Bounded_IO (Ada 2005)
Ada.Text_IO.Complex_IO
Ada.Text_IO.Decimal_IO (Nested package of Ada.Text_IO)
Ada.Text_IO.Editing
Ada.Text_IO.Enumeration_IO (Nested package of Ada.Text_IO)
Ada.Text_IO.Fixed_IO (Nested package of Ada.Text_IO)
Ada.Text_IO.Float_IO (Nested package of Ada.Text_IO)
Ada.Text_IO.Integer_IO (Nested package of Ada.Text_IO)
Ada.Text_IO.Modular_IO (Nested package of Ada.Text_IO)
Ada.Text_IO.Text_Streams
Ada.Text_IO.Unbounded_IO (Ada 2005)
Ada.Unchecked_Conversion (generic function)
Ada.Unchecked_Deallocate_Subpool (Ada 2012 generic procedure)
Ada.Unchecked_Deallocation (generic procedure)
Ada.Wide_Characters.Handling (Ada 2012)
Ada.Wide_Text_IO
Ada.Wide_Text_IO.Wide_Bounded_IO (Ada 2005)
Ada.Wide_Text_IO.Complex_IO
Ada.Wide_Text_IO.Decimal_IO (Nested package of Ada.Wide_Text_IO)
Ada.Wide_Text_IO.Editing
Ada.Wide_Text_IO.Enumeration_IO (Nested package of Ada.Wide_Text_IO)
Ada.Wide_Text_IO.Fixed_IO (Nested package of Ada.Wide_Text_IO)
Ada.Wide_Text_IO.Float_IO (Nested package of Ada.Wide_Text_IO)
Ada.Wide_Text_IO.Integer_IO (Nested package of Ada.Wide_Text_IO)
Ada.Wide_Text_IO.Modular_IO (Nested package of Ada.Wide_Text_IO)
Ada.Wide_Text_IO.Text_Streams
Ada.Wide_Text_IO.Wide_Unbounded_IO (Ada 2005)
Ada.Wide_Wide_Characters (Ada 2005)
Ada.Wide_Wide_Characters.Handling (Ada 2012)
Ada.Wide_Wide_Text_IO (Ada 2005)
Ada.Wide_Wide_Text_IO.Wide_Wide_Bounded_IO (Ada 2005)
Ada.Wide_Wide_Text_IO.Complex_IO (Ada 2005)
Ada.Wide_Wide_Text_IO.Decimal_IO (Nested package of Ada.Wide_Wide_Text_IO)
Ada.Wide_Wide_Text_IO.Editing (Ada 2005)
Ada.Wide_Wide_Text_IO.Enumeration_IO (Nested package of Ada.Wide_Wide_Text_IO)
Ada.Wide_Wide_Text_IO.Fixed_IO (Nested package of Ada.Wide_Wide_Text_IO)
Ada.Wide_Wide_Text_IO.Float_IO (Nested package of Ada.Wide_Wide_Text_IO)
Ada.Wide_Wide_Text_IO.Integer_IO (Nested package of Ada.Wide_Wide_Text_IO)
Ada.Wide_Wide_Text_IO.Modular_IO (Nested package of Ada.Wide_Wide_Text_IO)
Ada.Wide_Wide_Text_IO.Text_Streams (Ada 2005)
Ada.Wide_Wide_Text_IO.Wide_Wide_Unbounded_IO (Ada 2005)
The Reference Manual allows compiler vendors to add extensions to the Standard Libraries. However, these extensions cannot be directly children of the package Ada, only grandchildren—for example Ada.Characters.Latin_9.
Currently, only the implementation defined library units of the GNAT compiler are listed here. You can help Wikibooks by adding implementation dependent packages of other compilers:
Extended package implemented by GNAT.
Extended package implemented by ObjectAda.
Extended package implemented by IBM/Rational APEX.
Ada.Characters.Wide_Latin_1 (GNAT)
Ada.Characters.Wide_Latin_9 (GNAT)
Ada.Characters.Wide_Wide_Latin_1 (GNAT)
Ada.Characters.Wide_Wide_Latin_9 (GNAT)
Ada.Command_Line.Environment (GNAT)
Ada.Command_Line.Remove (GNAT)
Ada.Direct_IO.C_Streams (GNAT)
Ada.Exceptions.Is_Null_Occurrence (GNAT child function)
Ada.Long_Float_Text_IO (GNAT)
Ada.Long_Float_Wide_Text_IO (GNAT)
Ada.Long_Integer_Text_IO (GNAT)
Ada.Long_Integer_Wide_Text_IO (GNAT)
Ada.Long_Long_Float_Text_IO (GNAT)
Ada.Long_Long_Float_Wide_Text_IO (GNAT)
Ada.Long_Long_Integer_Text_IO (GNAT)
Ada.Long_Long_Integer_Wide_Text_IO (GNAT)
Ada.Numerics.Long_Complex_Elementary_Functions (GNAT)
Ada.Numerics.Long_Complex_Types (GNAT)
Ada.Numerics.Long_Elementary_Functions (GNAT)
Ada.Numerics.Long_Long_Complex_Elementary_Functions (GNAT)
Ada.Numerics.Long_Long_Complex_Types (GNAT)
Ada.Numerics.Long_Long_Elementary_Functions (GNAT)
Ada.Numerics.Short_Complex_Elementary_Functions (GNAT)
Ada.Numerics.Short_Complex_Types (GNAT)
Ada.Numerics.Short_Elementary_Functions (GNAT)
Ada.Sequential_IO.C_Streams (GNAT)
Ada.Short_Float_Text_IO (GNAT)
Ada.Short_Float_Wide_Text_IO (GNAT)
Ada.Short_Integer_Text_IO (GNAT)
Ada.Short_Integer_Wide_Text_IO (GNAT)
Ada.Short_Short_Integer_Text_IO (GNAT)
Ada.Short_Short_Integer_Wide_Text_IO (GNAT)
Ada.Streams.Stream_IO.C_Streams (GNAT)
Ada.Strings.Unbounded.Text_IO (GNAT)
Ada.Strings.Wide_Unbounded.Wide_Text_IO (GNAT)
Ada.Strings.Wide_Wide_Unbounded.Wide_Wide_Text_IO (GNAT)
Ada.Text_IO.C_Streams (GNAT)
Ada.Wide_Text_IO.C_Streams (GNAT)
Ada.Wide_Wide_Text_IO.C_Streams (GNAT)
A.2: The Package Ada (Annotated)
Basic Syntax basic syntax using simple books example
CSS Equivalents CSS and JQuery equivalent expressions
General hints | Levels 1-20 | Levels 21-40 | Levels 41-60 | Levels 61-80 | Levels 81-100 | Levels 101-120 | Levels 121-140 | Levels 141-149 | Passwords
Levels 1-20 | Levels 21-40 | Levels 41-60 | Levels 61-80 | Levels 81-100 | Levels 101-120 | Levels 121-140 | Levels 141-149 | Passwords
This is a continuation of the walkthrough for Chip's Challenge. Levels 41 (I. C. YOU) through 60 (SCOUNDREL) will be discussed here.
Level 41:I. C. YOU
As you might have guessed, the hint is a code. "R" means to go right (east), "L" means to go left (west), "D" means to go down (south) and "U" means to go up (north). These come into play when going through the teleport. The code is "1st rdul 2nd lulu" (for reference). The code saves you a lot of time. Since you need all the chips, you need to go the right direction.
Teleport up to the starting area. According to the hint, you must go east into the teleport right next to the hint, push the block and get the chips. Then go south into the port and get the next four chips. From the l, go UD through the teleport to get to the west side and start the lulu.
Now all that remains is to get the chips around the bugs. You have to be quick to do this. Once you get back to the bug area(going left from the last u, find a gap in the bugs north of you and follow them all the way around the loop until you get to the middle. You have the exit right there. Go in. You score up 172 seconds.
OK, this is the level to introduce the four "regular" creatures. The fireballs and gliders go straight until they hit anything. Fireballs turn left and gliders turn right. Bugs and paramecia stay on one side of a wall. Bugs turn left as much as possible and paramecia turn right.
The monsters will come at you in this order: paramecia, fireball, bug, glider, paramecia. Only when dodging paramecia will you go to the outside. Otherwise, occupy the space where the chip was.
To complete the level, you have to go west to the chip, take it, and move to the corner before the paramecia gets there. After he passes, go south and take the chip before the fireball goes past. You should be able to take three chips before the bug comes. When he does, stay in the chip spot (he will turn left). Then take the next chip before the glider comes. Again, stay in the chip spot. Take another chip and go to the outside before the paramecia comes. He is the last monster.
The level is easy after this, but not giveaway. The glider survives the water and starts to head back. On the way, he intercepts the paramecia and the two come after you, covering every square. Keep getting chips and wind your way to the middle. To beat the level, you cannot waste time after the last paramecia. You wouldn't do so anyway if you attempted to get the top time of 187 seconds!
Go south and then east from the onset. When the ball bounces, follow it and jump off to the right. When it passes by, take the key. Follow it back, get out of the way, and go back west.
Follow the path to an area with four blocks. Push the first one north and go back east. Push the third block north and go across to get the fire boot and blue key (the other two blocks have fire under them). Go west and north and you come to the first "lock block". DO NOT touch the recessed wall.
For each of the five lock blocks, you need a key. The three blocks are used to bridge across a section of water and you get to another lock block. To solve each lock block, open the keyhole to release the blocks. Then align the blocks so only one is in line with the water and push it in. Stamp the dirt and align the back block with the water. Push it in and get the final block in to complete the lock block.
Once you have finished the first lock block, take the path off to the west. Go along the recessed walls, get the key, and take the forcefield back. Unlock the next lock block and go across.
You need a key for the next lock block. To get it, ride the forcefield down, dodge the ball and take the key. Go over the recessed wall and get back to where you were. Unlock this lock block and go south. Since you have the fire boots, get the red key. Unlock the last two lock blocks to get to the finish and score up another 126 seconds.
This is a very simple level. However, simple levels tend to be tedious (with this one taking over half the time to complete, leaving you with only 292 refracted seconds.......ok, so it's a lame joke, 146 seconds). Start by going to the SE quadrant and getting the left chips, followed by the right chips. Go to the NE quadrant and get the right chips, then the left chips. Step on the tank button and get the right chips, then left chips. Go back to the SE quadrant and get the upper left chip, followed by the right chips, then get the lower left chip. Now go to the NW quadrant and get the right chips, then the left. Go to the SW quadrant and get the upper right chip, then the left chips, then the lower right. Hit the tank button and get the left chips, followed by the right. Go back to the NW quadrant and get the left chips, followed by the right. Go back to the center and exit. Noticed the refraction between the top and bottom areas?
This level is very fun. To beat the level, you need to neutralize all random activity, i.e. the monsters. First, go northwest to the bugs. Clone a block and shove it three spaces north of the clone machine. Use three more blocks to get the suction boots and fire boots.
You now need to neutralize the tanks. Go northwest again to another block clone machine. Push two blocks in the water to bridge to the blue button. Press it once and go south. Turn east after the passing the trapped bugs and go north at the intersection. Walk across the forcefield and you will see another block clone machine. Clone and push four blocks into the water. Then use a fifth block to stop the pink balls. Go back the way you came (since you have the suction boots) to the intersection.
One more monster group needs to be neutralized. Get a block from the block clone machine on the east side and stick it in front of the fireball clone machine on the south side. You might have to press the green button once to get out. Go back to the beginning. Then go over the thief to the area with the trapped walkers. Clone a block, push the green button, and push the block into the main area. Wait for any stray walkers to go in the water, then push the block in and go straight to the exit.
There is a much faster way to beat this level, but it requires a cool head and lots of time. Go down to the walker area, clone a block, push it into the water, and run through the walkers. It takes thousands of tries to do it this way, but the dividends are very high (a score of 291 or 292 as compared to 190-200 the long way).
There are two ways to beat this level.
The "long" way: Grab red key. Go down and pick up fire boots and green key. Step up. Go to the left and grab flippers, blue key and chip. step left, go up and grab red key. step right, go up and grab 3 chips and yellow key. return to start and head down force field tracks. Open blue door, get blue key, chip and suction boots. Go up, through yellow door, collect chips, grab yellow key, head for start. Go through doors, through teleport, and choose far left aisle to
The "short" way: Get the red key. Go down the left side and get the fire boots and green key. Go west across the ice, getting the flipper and blue key. Go back to the top. Now go down the ice on the right. You will splash into some water. Go through the blue keyhole, get the stuff and go through the green keyhole. Touch the green button. Go back the way you came (over the forcefields). Enter the monster area (hopefully, you will survive), and go to the top and left. Go over the recessed wall on the left and exit. You don't need the chips, but you do need to have 222 on the clock to have the top score.
There are seven blocks on this level. You need to push the blocks north from the very south end of the lake. There is only one line that this will work with. That line is marked with X's below:
[~|~|~|~|O|O|O|~|~]   ~=water
[~|~|~|~|I|#|#|I|~]   I=ice
[~|~|~|~|I|#|#|I|~]   O=land
[~|~|~|~|X|I|I|~|~]   X=where you put the blocks
[O|O|O|O|O|~|~|~|O]
[O|O|O|O|O|O|O|O|O]
[O|O|O|O|I|I|I|I|O]
Block 1: a few moves right from the start. Push down all the way but one and left to the end of the ice slab, but leave it there for now.
Block 2: to the right of here. Push it one UR of Block 1 and push up into the water. Push Block 1 2U R and up into the water.
Block 3: to the lower left. Push 4U 5R and up into the water.
Block 4: to the far left. Push all the way right and up into the water.
Block 5: to the upper left, about at the center left. Push 6D, to the right, and up into the water.
Block 6: at the top, lower of two blocks. Push 10D, right, and up into the water.
Block 7: to the right of the upper ice slab. Push U 4L 12D, right, and up into the water. Get the chips and exit to catch ferry 231.
Get the chip to the north in the walker room. DO NOT get the ice skate. Go onto the thief and avoid this ice skate too. Move once to the south from there. You will go through the teleport to an ice rink. Again, only get the chip here. You will need the flippers later.
Go back to the thieves. You pick up some flippers. Move one to the west from there. You will end up near a swimming pool. Get both of the chips and return to the thieves. Get the fire boot and move one square to the north from there. You will be forced into the fire arena. Get the chips, but not the suction boots (they are safer but also a few seconds slower). Go through the thieves and get the chip. Walk to the Step right and force yourself down through the force field to go up through the teleport. Get the flippers and go back down through the teleport. Immediately step left. You will override the up force floor and be forced into the pool again. Go to the exit located off of the swimming pool. You will end the game with only the flippers, but a proud 277 seconds.
Go 3L 3D 6L 4U 8L 4D and get the remaining keys in order as you go to the right. Go down the line of red keyholes in the east as the pink balls attack. Go south over the brown button (it doesn't do anything, due to the lack of a controller) and collect all of the chips. From the nearest chip, go: 4L 2R 3D R 3D L 3D R 9L 3U 5R 3U 5L 3U 3L 5D R D 3L 2R 4D U 5L 3U 2L 2U 4R 2L and up. The exit is in the west. Due to the controller bug, you can escape this level with 162 seconds and no problems.
First of all, if you try to jump in and get the chips, you will end up with a whole lot of bugs and paramecia on your tail. You need to be very fast and go straight through the square or dodge to the side if necessary. This is very simple to do. Dodge to the left (as you are facing the "nest") if it's a bug, or right if it's a paramecia. On the first, third, and ninth squares, enter from the sides, as going straight through can screw things up. Notice that the paramecia and bugs are not following the chip. There are sixteen chips you need to get. Turn from the start: 2U R 3D L U L D L 3U R 2D R. Run for your life and 318 seconds!
Move like this when you are on solid ground:
Go to the area south of the teeth monster. When there is a gap in the bugs, go across the forcefield and jump off in the middle. This should cause the teeth monster to press the green button once without you going to the other side. Get out of the bug line and go north to where the fireballs used to go. Go to the top and near the ball cloning the fireballs. Push against the wall above the clone button and return back to the original area. Follow the recessed wall path (pressing the button and getting the chip) and pass through the (empty) corridor.
Do the same thing you did at the beginning with the teeth monster and bugs. Cross the forcefield to the other side. Go all the way to the north end and go through the recessed wall path to get the final chip. Push the block into the water below and exit, taking your 382 seconds with you.
This level is the first one in quite a while that actually teaches something, despite that half the level is worthless. Simply travel along the fire and water paths to the southeast corner of the arena. Go on the forcefield across the ice and press the button. On your way back, it teaches you that you can force past a backwards forcefield when you slide on ice (though this has no doubt helped you already). Journey on back to the start where you'll find the exit wide open. You receive 478 seconds for a pass to the next level.
Go to the right and down over the random force floor (if it doesn't work, try again) to get the green key. Go to the right and get the chips. Teleport yourself to the other side and get the remaining chips. Go back to the north end of this area and go in the teleport. Circle around the next teleport and go right, left, and right through the teleports. Keep forcing yourself right and go through the green keyhole to the chip socket and exit. You get 326 seconds for finding the Holy Grail.
Push the block to the east into the bomb. Get the chip. Go north, dodge the tanks and get the fire boot and blue key. Go to the bottom and push the bottom block to the right; get that chip, too. Head back over to the west and walk along the fire to get the chips there. Go through the keyhole and get those chips, too (and the fire boot again). Slide on the ice to the gravel. Dodge the balls and invisible walls to get the five chips there. At the end, push the blocks in on either side of the chip and push the block in front of the chip north or south. Get the final chip and run across the pink balls to the exit. Speed is essential, for you have only 70 seconds left even with the best route.
Go to the east and get the first chip on the right. Wait to get the chips on the south side. Go to the west side (at the bottom) and take the bottom entrance. You get a chip. Go to the top entrance to the west. Once you've pressed the button once, go back the way you came. You can push over the force field.
Go in the left opening on the top ice and get the chip. Follow the ball and go through the middle opening on the north side of the eastern ice to get three chips. Again, go back the way you came. Jump in just ahead of the ball and get the chip to the right. Now go in the middle opening on the south side of the northern ice. Get a chip. Get the other chips to the left You now shouldn't need any more chips. Go to the chip socket ice and into the middle. Get the ice skate and return to the starting ice. Skate through to the exit for your reward of 162 seconds.
An old-fashioned maze in with some strange "walls". Every type of monster trapped, chip sockets, water, fire, bombs, normal and fake walls, and traps make up the walls of the level. To beat it, go to the left and get the chip. Turn left first and get 7 chips. Then turn down and left for 7 chips. Go right from your left turn and get 12 chips. Go back to the start and go right twice for 3 chips. Turn right around the walkers to the top for 4 chips. Go left below you and get the last chip in the socket maze. Go through all the chip sockets and return to the start to exit. Strangely, you score 229.
Go around an invisible block to the teleport in the north. You will end up next to the chip socket. Go north to the ice. Let yourself go through the teleport. When you get to the east side, shove yourself in. Go around the ball and water and get the flipper. Go around to the other side and get the chip. Go back in the force floors. On the northern side of this section, get in and clear a whole line of fake walls. Go on the force floors and get in on the east side. Go around the water and enter from the west. Return to the forcefields. When you get to the path you cleared, go south to the other forcefield.
Enter in the one forcefield you haven't gone yet. The entrance to this area is in the north. Make sure you get out of the way of the pink ball. Go to the west side of the area and swim to the chips. Go back to the forcefield and you will go through the teleport. This time, shove past the fake walls right away. Get in from the north and get the chips. When you're done, go in the exit. You score 550 loop seconds.
There are two ways to beat it: go to the exit from the north or the south.
To get to the exit from the south, go south on the ice and north to the green button. Press it when the fireballs are in the west part of the "cell". Quickly go on the ice in the north, take the red key, and go back to near the green button. Go down the back door, taking all of the chips. Watch out for the gliders as you go on through and take the three boots. Go back up, press the green button and slide on the ice. Enter in the ring of fireballs when there is a gap of two, and get out of it on the east the same way. Walk straight into the finish with the three boots. This allows for a maximum of 360 seconds.
To exit from the teleport, do the same, but continue on the path without getting any of the chips. Quickly go north in the lower right chamber, dodging the walker, and go into the teleport from the recessed wall on its south side. This tends to be the faster way. If you go out the red door, try again. You should not be getting the red key. Since you have nowhere to go, you slide across the teleport and you can just go down through again for an exit and a 368 second score.
A glitch in the Microsoft version allows you to win without actually doing the level. Go all the way south to the exit and force yourself in. Push yourself east at the random forcefield in the west. This leaves you with 288 seconds.
To do it the long way, go 5D (this is A) 2L U and go to the yellow key. Go 6L 2D 2L and get the chip. Go 2R 2D 4R 2D and right to the chip. Go back to A and go 3R 2U and go to the chip. Return to A and go down, right through the toggle door, and down to the wall. This is B. Go 9R 2U 2R (blue key) 3L (chip) 3L 2U R (chip) Return to B and go 4L 4U 2L 2D (chip) L 2D 6L 2D 4L. You are now on the force floor strip. Get off at the next exit and go R 2U 3R 2U 2R (chip) 2R 2D. You don't need the flippers. Return to the force strip and go to the top. Retrace your steps to B and go 2L and down; open the yellow door. Continue right to the blue door. Get the chips. Retrace your steps and go down again. Go into the beehive and get the two single chips. The others are walled off. Now go to the exit. The best time for this route is 233.
Here is a short tutorial to use a stateless session EJB using Eclipse.
In Eclipse, right-click on the Project Explorer view.
On "Project name", type helloworld-ejb .
Click on Finish.
Right-click on the Project Explorer view.
On "Java package", type org.wikibooks.en .
On "Class name", type MyFirstEJB . Leave the other options as it is.
Click on Finish.
On the same package, create a new interface MyFirstEJBRemote .
Add the following method signature inside it:
Add the following annotation above the signature of the interface:
Open the class MyFirstEJB.
Remove the annotation @LocalBean .
Right-click on the project.
Choose a location for the destination.
Click on Finish .
Go on the folder where you have created your JAR.
Right-click on the Project Explorer view.
On "Project name", type helloworld-ear .
Click on Next .
Click on Finish . You should have a new project called helloworld-ear. Among other things, it should contain Deployment Descriptor: helloworld-ear/Modules/EJB helloworld-ejb.jar .
Right-click Export -> EAR file, choose a destination and click on Finish.
Create a copy of the EAR file and change the extension to .zip .
Explore the content of the ZIP file.
Copy/paste your EAR file in the deployment folder of your application server.
Start your application server.
Now your EJB is usable. Unfortunately, we don't know how to use it yet.
Shutdown your application server.
Reuse the WAR project that you created in this page.
Right-click on Java Resources/src .
On name, type org.wikibooks.en .
Right-click on the new package.
On Class name, type EJBServlet .
If you are using another application server than JBoss, you should have to change the lookup java:global/experience4/experience3/MyFirstEJB .
Open the file web.xml in WebContent/WEB-INF .
Before the first markup <servlet>, type the following code:
Before the first markup <servlet-mapping>, type the following code:
Right-click Export -> EAR file.
For the destination, choose the deployment folder of the application server.
Click on Finish.
Start your application server.
Go on the URL http://localhost:8080/helloworld/servlet .
To do:Add explanations.
In 1963, Edmund Gettier released one of the most influential philosophy papers of the 20th century entitled Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?. Maybe deciding he should quit while ahead, he has never released another paper on epistemology since. In the previous chapter, each of the conditions of the tripartite analysis of knowledge were scrutinised to see if they are really necessary for knowledge. In this chapter, we will study the critique that Gettier made of justified true belief. In his paper, Gettier presents two counterexamples to the JTB analysis of knowledge which purported to show cases in which a person could have a justified true belief that fails to be knowledge. These examples and other similar examples which attack the sufficiency of the JTB conditions are now referred to as "Gettier cases".
Smith doesn't know how many coins are in his pocket
In his first counterexample, Gettier gives us the case of two people applying for a job:
Smith and Jones apply for a job
Smith hears the interviewer say “I’m going to give Jones the job”
Smith also sees Jones count out 10 coins from his pocket
Smith forms the belief “the person who will get the job will have 10 coins in their pocket”
This is justified: Smith has good reason to think Jones will get the job and that Jones has 10 coins in his pocket
But actually Smith gets the job! Unknown to him, he has 10 coins in his pocket!
So his justified belief has turned out to be true by random chance and satisfies the JTB conditions for knowledge
In the last chapter, we discussed why most philosophers see epistemic luck as a deadly blow for any analysis of knowledge and this is exactly what Gettier has shown can happen for the tripartite analysis of knowledge. In his next case, Gettier utilises the idea of disjunction to arrive at the same result. Disjunction is when you combine two propositions (1) and (2) together to make the proposition "(1) or (2)" which is made true if either one (or both) is true.
In his second counterexample, Gettier gives us another case involving Smith and Jones:
Smith thinks to himself that not only does he have justification for believing Jones owns a Ford but also the belief “Either Jones owns a Ford or Brown is in Barcelona”
But Jones doesn’t own a Ford, He was driving a friend’s car!
Once again, Gettier has provided an example where Smith has justified true belief by a complete coincidence – can this possibly be considered true knowledge?
Previously to Gettier's paper in 1963, Bertrand Russell provided this example in his 1948 book Human Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits:
Jones owns a very precise, reliable clock
Jones comes downstairs in the morning to check the time from his trusty clock
It shows the time to be 10 o'clock
Jones forms the belief “It’s 10 in the morning”
Justified: his clock has always been reliable and precise in the past
However, last night at 10pm, the clock stopped and hadn’t moved since
If Jones had gotten down the stairs even a minute later, he would have been wrong
This example not only shows that there are possible cases of justified true belief which fail to be knowledge, but also that such cases can even be uncomplicated everyday cases of belief!
How to respond to the Gettier cases
Most contemporary philosophers agree that justification, belief and truth are not sufficient for knowledge precisely because of the type of examples that Gettier presents. This leaves epistemology in big trouble, if this common sense analysis of knowledge isn't enough, what can we replace it with? We will briefly consider one obvious response.
Simply adding a condition ruling out epistemic luck solves the problem of Gettier cases. However, it is not a solution favoured by philosophers. This is because this solution is ad hoc. Something is called ad hoc when it is created to solve a problem and for which we have no other independent reason for creating. This is a problem because it means that this solution is trivial and uninteresting; it tells us nothing new about how knowledge works and why it is not lucky. A good analysis of knowledge would rule out epistemic luck without needing to add a "no epistemic luck" rule because it would tell us something substantive about how and why our knowledge is not lucky.
The "no epistemic luck" analysis of knowledge: A subject S knows that p if and only if
S believes that p, and
S’s belief that p was not formed as the result of epistemic luck
In the following chapters of this section, we will explore the various ways in which philosophers have responded to Gettier cases. We will discuss the prospects of adding an extra condition to the JTB analysis (sometimes called JTB+X), then the views of those philosophers who have argued that this kind of analysis of knowledge has been doomed from the start, ending finally on the consideration that maybe all attempts to analyse knowledge are doomed, maybe knowledge is simply unanalysable.
The Dodecahedron as rendered from the example.
An icosahedron can be created from three orthogonal golden-ratio rectangles inside a hull() operation, where the golden ratio is
.
The icosahedron and its internal structure as rendered from the example.
This icosahedron renders in an edge-up orientation. Rotating this icosahedron by
(distance between opposite faces) by
.
An upside-down half-pyramid is a useful shape for 3D printing a support for an overhang protruding from a vertical wall. With sloping sides no steeper than 45°, no removable support structure needs to be printed.
While a half-pyramid can be made with a 4-sided cone (using the cylinder primitive) and subtracting a cube from half of it, the shape can be easily made in one operation by a scaled linear extrude of a rectangle having the middle of one edge on the origin.
The half-pyramid as rendered from the example.
Linear Extrude with Scale as an interpolated function
Example Linear Extrude of a rectangle with scale following part of a sine curve function
Linear Extrude with Twist as an interpolated function
Example Linear Extrude of a rectangle with twist following part of a sine curve function
Linear Extrude with Twist and Scale as interpolated functions
Example Linear Extrude of a rectangle with twist and scale following part of a sine curve function
A rocket using rotate_extrude()
Horns, by translation and twisting.
See the Strandbeest example here.
R. v. Violette
Offender also sentenced for possession of firearm (2 years). He was a member of the Hells Angels criminal organization.
R. v. Ste. Marie
R. v. Vonhiltgen
R. v. Rode
R. v. R.L.B.
R. v. Li (Y.H.)
R. v. Adrian
Criminal Law of the Armed Forces Republic of China (Taiwan) Law2001
A person who is in active military service offences the law shall be punished according to the Code.
The Code also applies to the following kinds of offences committed by a soldier who is not in active service in wartime:
Offences of the provision as specified in Article 16;
Offences of the provision as specified in Article 72 causing the loss on military.
The Code shall apply to a soldier who forfeited the position of soldier after an offence was committed.
The Code shall apply to an offence committed by a soldier beyond the territory of the Republic of China, and an offence in Article 2 committed in wartime by a soldier who is not in active service are as well.
If an offence in the Criminal Law of Republic of China or other laws committed by a soldier within the occupied territory of the army of Republic of China will be considered　an offence committed within the territory of the Republic of China.
The words "soldier" in the Code denotes a person who is in active service of officers, Sergeants, and privates under the law of military service or other laws.
The word "commander" in the Code denotes an officer or Sergeants that has the authority to command or the superior position;
The word "senior officer" in the Code denotes an officer or Sergeant that has the superior official rank.
The word "troops" in the Code denotes the Ministry of National Defense and forces, academies, and organizations its.
The word "enemy" in the Code denotes any country or organization that engages in or whose force confronts with the Republic of China.
The Code shall apply to the period and area that the president declares the war according to the provisions of wartime, and as well as the period and districts under martial laws for the war or the revolt. If the Legislative Yuan doesn’t approve the proclamation of war or the martial law, this Code does not apply.
An act is not punishable when committed for maintaining the momentous profit on national defenses or military affairs in desperation. Provided, If the act was excessively improper, punishment may be reduced or remitted.
The Code shall apply to the General Provisions of the Criminal Code if not against each other.
A person who commits an overt act with intent to destroy the organization of the State, seize State territory, change the Constitution, or overthrow the Government by strong-arm means or threatening with force shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than ten years; an ringleader shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than ten years, death or imprisonment for life.
A person who prepares to commit an offence specified in the preceding paragraph shall be sentenced to imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years.
A person who conspire to commit with violence an offence specified in the preceding paragraph shall be sentenced to imprisonment for not less than seven years or for life; an ringleader shall be sentenced to death or imprisonment for life.
A person who prepares or conspires to commit an offence specified in the preceding paragraph shall be sentenced to imprisonment for not less than three years and not more than ten years.
A person who incites the soldier in active service to riot by writing, drawing, speech and any other means specified in paragraph I of Article 14 shall be sentenced to imprisonment for not less than seven years.
A person who commits an offence specified in one of the following circumstances shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life:
Giving the military facilities or the materials for military use to an enemy in paragraph I of Article 58 or paragraph I of Article 59;
Committing an act of espionage for an enemy or rendering aid to an enemy's spy;
Semaphoring or, sending or transmitting telecommunication to an enemy;
Rendering aids to an enemy to invade a military post, an airport, a naval base, or any other military places or structures; or to guide an enemy or to indicate the geographical features for an enemy;
Committing an act with violence, threats, or intimidation to a commander or a senior officer to surrender to an enemy;
Seizing or letting go the captured vessels, aircrafts, or captives for an enemy.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the preceding paragraph is punishable.
A person who prepares or conspires to commit an offence specified in paragraph I shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years.
If the offence committed in the three preceding paragraphs was slight, the punishment may be reduced.
A person who profited an enemy intentionally, and commited an offence specified in one of the following circumstances shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life:
Destroying,or damaging the military facilities and materials for military use in paragraph I of Article 58 or paragraph I of Article 59;
Obstructing the way in the land and water, or destroying, damaging the bridge, beacon, signs or other things to interfere the military traffic;
The commander leads the troups not to go to the assigned defensive place or causes the troups to have unauthorized departure from the arranged deployment;
Dispersing the troups or tempting the troups　to disorder so that interference the communication and gathering;
An act of causing the lack of arms, ammunition, food, coverlets and clothes and other important materials for military use;
Committing an offence specified in paragraph I or paragraph IV of Article 16.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the preceding paragraph is punishable.
A person who prepares or conspires to commit an offence specified in paragraph I shall be sentenced to imprisonment for not less than six months and not more than five years.
If the offence committed specified in the three preceding paragraphs was slight, the punishment may be reduced.
A person who renders military aids to an enemy or causes injury to the military interests of the Republic of China or an ally of the Republic of China with means excluding the two preceding articles shall be sentenced to imprisonment for ten years, death or imprisonment for life.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the preceding paragraph is punishable.
A person who prepares or conspires to commit an offence specified in paragraph I shall be sentenced to imprisonment for not less than six months and not more than five years.
If the offence committed specified in the three preceding paragraphs was slight, the punishment may be reduced.
A person who discloses or delivers a document, plan, information, electromagnetic record, or other things of a secret nature concerning the defence of the Republic of China shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than three years and not more than ten years. That if he committed the offence in wartime shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than seven years or imprisonment for life.
A person who discloses or delivers to an enemy the military secrets in the preceding paragraph shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in one of the two preceding paragraphs is punishable.
A person who commits the offence unpremeditatedly in the preceding paragraph shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than three years, detention, or a fine of not more than 300,000 yuan. That if he committed the offence in wartime shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than ten years.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in paragraph I or II shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than five years.
A person who discloses or delivers military confidential information in the preceding paragraph which he had knowledge or possession because of his official position may be punished for such an offence increased by one second.
A person who searches out or gathers military confidential information in paragraph I of Article 20 shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years. That if he committed the offence in wartime shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than three year and not more than ten years.
A person who searches out or gathers intelligence for an enemy in paragraph I of Article 20 shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than five years and not more than ten years. If he committed the offence in wartime shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than seven year or imprisonment for life.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in one of the two preceding paragraphs is punishable.
A person who commits the offence unpremeditatedly in the preceding paragraph shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than two years, detention, or a fine of not more than 200,000 yuan.
A person who without authority enters into or remains in a strategic military
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the preceding paragraph is punishable.
A person who commits the offence premeditatedly in the preceding paragraph shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than two years, detention, or a fine of not more than 200,000 yuan.
A person who surrenders to an enemy will be sentenced to death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than ten years.
A person who derelicts duty and surrenders to an enemy will be punished with imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the two preceding paragraphs is punishable.
A person who commits the offence premeditatedly in the preceding paragraph shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than six months and not more than five years.
A person who is punished for voluntary surrendering may have the punishment reduced or remitted, and if such person confesses during investigation or trial, the punishment may be reduced.
A commander that starts wars without cause will be punished with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than ten years.
A person who takes the duty of medical affairs in wartime deserts injured soldiers and will be punished with imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years.
If the death results from the commitment of the offence, the offender shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than seven years; if serious bodily harm results, the offender shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than three years and not more than ten years.
A person who takes the duty of service on the military vessel, aircrafts, tank, gun tank, armored vehicles, arms, ammunition, or other important military facilities and materials do not fulfill the duty, or know the damage of the machinery without report and put the executants in danger shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than five years.
If the death of the executants results from the commitment of the offence of the preceding paragraph, the offender shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than seven years; if the executants have serious harmful results, the offender shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than three years and not more than ten years.
A person who provides the troops with harmful food or other things will be punished with imprisonment for not more than seven years.
If the death of the executants results from the commitment of the offence against the preceding paragraph, the offender shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than seven years; if the executants have serious harmful results, the offender shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than three years and not more than ten years.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the first paragraph is punishable.
A person who discards a document, plan, information, electromagnetic record, or other things shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than three years, detention, or a fine of not more than 300,000 yuan.
A person who discards the materials in the preceding paragraph to an enemy shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than seven years.
A person who commits the offences in the two preceding paragraphs unpremeditatedly and causes injury to the military interests shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than two years, detention, or a fine of not more than 200,000 yuan.
A person who commits the offence in the two preceding paragraphs in wartime shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than seven years; if the offence caused injury to military interest shall be punished with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than ten years; a person who commits the offence in the third paragraph shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years.
A person who takes the duty of supplying or transporting arms, ammunition, food, coverlets and clothes and other important materials for military use causes the lack or delay without reasons and causes the injury of the military shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years.
A person who commits the offences in the preceding paragraphs unpremeditatedly shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than three years, detention, or a fine of not more than 300,000 yuan.
A person who commits the offence in the first paragraph in wartime shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than seven years; if he committed the offence in the second paragraph in wartime shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than three years and not more than ten years.
A person, the prisoner in custody and sets free or facilitates his escape shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years.
A person who commits the offences in the preceding paragraphs unpremeditatedly shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than one year, detention, or a fine of not more than 100,000 yuan.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the preceding paragraph is punishable.
A guard, sentry, or a person who takes the duty of guarding on the alert neglects the duty for sleep, drunkenness or other similar situations and causes injury to military interests shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than five years.
A person who commits the offence in the preceding paragraph in wartime shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years; if the offence causes the injury to the military shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than seven years.
A person who commits the offences in the first paragraphs unpremeditatedly in wartime shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than three years, detention, or a fine of not more than 300,000 yuan.
A guard, sentry, or a person who takes the duties of guarding on the alert, transmitting or dispatching orders makes unauthorized absence or departure form the duty shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than one year, detention, or a fine of not more than 100,000 yuan. If the offence caused the injury to the military shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years.
A person who commits the offences in the preceding paragraphs unpremeditatedly and caused the injury to the military shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than six months, detention, or a fine of not more than 50,000 yuan.
A person who commits the offences in the first paragraphs in wartime shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than five years. If the offence caused the injury to the military shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years.
A person who commits the offences in the first paragraph unpremeditatedly in wartime shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than three years, detention, or a fine of not more than 300,000 yuan.
A person who is against the regulations prevent those personsfrom on duty　handing over the duty shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than one year, detention, or a fine of not more than 100,000 yuan. If the offence caused the injury to the military shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years.
The code shall apply to the offender who cause to be against other duty.
A person who pretends to be sick,　hurt, or other acts of malingering to escape the duty shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the preceding paragraph is punishable.
A person who by fraud or other illegal means avoids all or part of important military duties shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than three years, detention, or a fine of not more than 300,000 yuan.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the preceding paragraph is punishable.
A person who tries to get rid of military service over a long period of time or to escape to assume service shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than five years; if the escaping person return within six days may have the reduced punishment reduced.
A person who commits the offences in the preceding paragraph in wartime shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not more than ten years.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the two preceding paragraphs is punishable.
Article 40.
A person who leaves the position in service without reasons or does not assume his /her service over six days shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than three years, detention, or a fine of not more than 300,000 yuan.
A person who leaves the position in service without reasons or does not assume service over six days in wartime shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than three years and not more than ten years.
A person who leaves the position in his /her without reasons or does not to assume service over thirty days or of which over six days in wartime shall be punished according to the preceding regulation.
A person who takes out military armaments, ammunition or other materials and leaves the position in service without reasons or does not assume service shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than seven years. If the person who commits the offences in the preceding paragraph in wartime shall be sentenced to death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than ten years.
A person who commits the offences in the preceding paragraph confesses the crime and surrenders the arms may have his /her punishment reduced or remitted; if such person confessed during investigation or trial and surrenders the arms may have the reduced punishment.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the first paragraph is punishable.
A commander who leaves the subordinate, leaves the assigned defensive place or move the post without authorization shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years.
If the above-mentioned offence committed in wartime shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than seven years.
If the offence caused the injury to the military shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life.
A commander who deserts the injured subordinate without reasons shall be punished with imprisonment for not less without reasons than one year and not more than seven years.
If the death of a soldier results from the commitment of the offence, the commander shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than seven years; if the soldier is seriously harmed , the commander shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than three years and not more than ten years.
A commander who punishes the subordinate’s act which the commander knows is not punishable shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than three years, detention, or a fine of not more than 300,000 yuan.
A commander who punishes the subordinate without the regulations category and limitation as the Code shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than one year, detention, or a fine of not more than 100,000 yuan.
A commander who by violence, threat, or fraud obstructs the subordinate to present a petition, complaint, litigate, state and plead shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than three year, detention, or a fine of not more than 300,000 yuan.
A person who takes the duty of examining or informing and the offence of the preceding paragraph is also punishable.
A person who disobeys the military orders of which transmitted or announced from higher authorities or within the commander's　powers shall be punished imprisonment for not more than five years.
A person who commits the offences in wartime shall be punished with death or the imprisonment for life.
A person who commits the offence unpremeditatedly and causes the injury to the military interest shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than five years and not more than twelve years.
If the offender voluntarily and timely executes the duty that needn’t be executed immediately when the offence of the first paragraph was committed may have the punishment reduced or remitted.
A person who participates in an open assembly with offence of the first paragraph shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years; the ringleader shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than three years and not more than ten years.
If the offence in the preceding paragraph committed in wartime shall be punished with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than ten years; the ringleader shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life.
A person who uses violence, threat to a commander or puts the commander in fear shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years.
A person who commits the offence of the preceding paragraph in wartime shall be punished with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than ten years.
A person who commits the offence in the first paragraph to the senior officer shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than three year, detention, or a fine of not more than 300,000 yuan. If the offence committed in wartime shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than seven years.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the three preceding paragraphs is punishable.
A person who participates in an open assembly and commits the offence of the preceding paragraph shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years; the ringleader shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than seven years; a person who actually commits shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than five years.
A person who is involved and commits the offence of the preceding paragraph in wartime shall be punished with death, imprisonment for life; the ringleader shall be punished with death, imprisonment for not less than seven years; a person who actually commits shall be punished with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than ten years.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the two preceding paragraphs is punishable.
A person who commits the offence in the two preceding paragraph may have the reduced punishment because of extenuating circumstances.
A person who publicly insults a commander shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than two years, detention or a fine of not more than 200,000 yuan.
A person who publicly insults a senior officer shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than one year, detention or a fine of not more than 100,000 yuan.
A person who by circulating a writing, drawing, speech or other means commits an offence specified in the two preceding article shall have the punishment increased up to one half.
Prosecution for an offence specified in the three preceding articles may be instituted only upon complaint.
A person who by violence, treats or other ways kidnaps military vessel, aircraft or controls its navigation shall be punished with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than ten years.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the preceding paragraphs is punishable.
A person who prepares to commit an offence specified in paragraph I shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than six months and not more than five years.
A person who attacks hospital, medical installation, medical transportation or medical staff with reasons shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years. The Code also applies to a person who attacks a negotiation representative or a field correspondent.
A person who grabs belongings of the dead or the injured soldiers from his own country, friendly country or the enemy without reason shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the preceding paragraphs is punishable.
A person who goods and materials, installation or financial resources of the people without following the requisitions　shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than three years and not more than ten years.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the preceding paragraphs is punishable.
A person who destroys military airport, harbor, tunnel, blockhouse, strategic point, military vessel, aircraft, vehicle, arms, ammunition, radar, signal communication, information facilitates and equipments, or other important military facilitates and materials for war, or otherwise making the military facilities useless and material for military use shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than seven years.
A person who commits the offence negligently shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than three years, detention, or a fine of not more than 300,000 yuan.
A person who commits an offence specified in paragraph I in wartime shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life; a person who commits paragraph II may have the punishment increased up to one half.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the paragraph I and III is punishable.
A person who prepares to commit an offence specified in paragraph I shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than three years, detention, or a fine of not more than 300,000 yuan.
If the offence of the four paragraphs is committed the punishment may be reduced.
A person who destroys, damages or causes a military factory useless, depot, dock, bridge, road and waterway, oil, army provisions, raw materials for producing arms, ammunition or other important military facilitates shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than three years and not more than ten years.
If the offence of the four preceding paragraphs is committed shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than three years, detention, or a fine of not more than 300,000 yuan.
A person who commits the offence negligently shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than two years, detention, or a fine of not more than 200,000 yuan.
A person who commits an offence specified in paragraph I in wartime shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than seven years; a person who commits paragraph II may have the punishment increased up to one half.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the paragraph I and III is punishable.
If the offence of the three preceding paragraphs is committed the punishment may be reduced.
A person who destroys, damages or causes the military facilitates useless against the two preceding paragraph shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than three years, detention, or a fine of not more than 300,000 yuan.
Prosecution for an offence specified in the preceding articles may be instituted only upon complaint.
A person who endangers public or military security by losing arms, ammunition or other materials military operations shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than three years, detention, or a fine of not more than 300,000 yuan.
A person who damages historic monuments or historical cultural relics without reason in wartime shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than five years.
If the offence of the four preceding paragraphs is committed under serious circumstances shall be punishment with imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven year.
A person who exports, interferes, changes electromagnetic records or hinders its accuracy by other illegally means shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than five years.
If the offence committed in wartime shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than three years and not more than ten years. If the offence caused the injury to the military shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than seven years.
A person who illegally occupies military arms or ammunition shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than three years and not more than ten years.
A person who commits the offence of the preceding paragraph with intent to commit a crime for him self or for others shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than ten years.
A person who illegally occupied military materials that were not mentioned in the preceding paragraph shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the three preceding paragraph is punishable.
If the offence of preceding paragraph I and III is committed shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than five years.
A person who manufactures, sales or transports military arms or ammunition without authorization shall be punished with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than ten years.
A person who commits the offence of the preceding paragraph with intent to facilitate himself or others to commit a crime shall be punished with death or imprisonment for life.
A person who manufactures, sales or transports the main components of military arms or ammunition without authorization shall be punished with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than seven years.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the three preceding paragraph is punishable.
A person who commits violence, threats, or intimidation to a guard, sentry, or a person who takes the duty of guarding on the alert or on transmission shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than six months and not more than five years.
A person who is involved and commits the offence of the preceding paragraph shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than three years, detention, or a fine of not more than 300,000 yuan; the ringleader shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than three years and not more than ten years; a person who actually commits shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the two preceding paragraph is punishable.
A person who commits violence, threats, or intimidation to a person who takes the duty that is not mentioned in the preceding paragraph shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than three years, detention, or a fine of not more than 300,000 yuan.
A person who is involved at present and commits the offence of the preceding paragraph shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than two years, detention, or a fine of not more than 200,000 yuan; the ringleader shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than one year and not more than seven years; a person who actually commits shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than six months and not more than five years.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the two preceding paragraph is punishable.
A person who forms a gang more than three persons and occupies a government office, railway, highway, railway station, port, airport, broadcasting station, television station, telecommunication station or other similar places forcibly shall be punished with imprisonment for not less than three years and not more than ten years.
An attempt to commit an offence specified in the preceding paragraph is punishable.
A person who insults a guard, sentry, or a person who takes the duty of guarding on the alert or on transmission presently or insults the duty that is in execution publicly shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than one year, detention, or a fine of not more than 100,000 yuan.
A person who defrauds a guard, sentry, or a person who takes the duty of guarding on the alert to pass the place on the alert, or to pass with recalcitrance shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than one year, detention, or a fine of not more than 100,000 yuan.
A person who intends to influence a person who has the power to appoint, propose, deliberate, ratify the decision of appointment, promoting, degradation and sends fake information which is disadvantageous to others anonymously shall be punished with imprisonment for for not more than one year, detention, or a fine of not more than 100,000 yuan.
A person who knows the anonymous information is fake still offers a person who has the power of investigation or the authority of personnel office as referring shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than six months, detention, or a fine of not more than 50,000 yuan.
A person who openly without authority wears the uniforms or badges or makes use of the military titles of a soldier shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than one year, detention, or a fine of not more than 100,000 yuan.
A person who commits the offence of the preceding paragraph and exercises powers as such shall be punished with imprisonment for not more than five years.
A soldier who is in the military service commits the following offences of Criminal Code will be punished according to it　as provided in this Code:
Offences against the External Security of the Nation in Article 109 to 112 of chapter II.
Chapter of Offences of Malfeasance in Office.
A person commits Offence against Public Safety intentionally in Article 173 to 177, paragraph I,II and IV of Article185, paragraph I of Article 190 and paragraph I of Article 191.
Chapter of Offences of Forging Instruments or Seals.
Chapter of Offences of Homicide.
Offences of paragraph II in Article 277 and paragraph II Article 278 in Chapter of Offences of Causing Bodily Harm.
Chapter of Offences against Sex Liberty.
Offences of Larceny committed in the area of military base, vessel and structures.
Chapter of Offences of forcible Taking, Robbery and Piracy.
Chapter of Offences of Intimidation and Kidnapping for Ransom.
The offences of the preceding paragraphs will follow the special provision if other law or order prescribes the punishment.
The offences of the two preceding paragraphs are committed in war time, the punishment may be increased up to one half.
A soldier who is in the military service offences the Regulations of Prevention and Cure to the Drugs shall be punished according to the Code.
The Ministry of National Defense shall provide the category, extent and level of electromagnetic of writing, drawing, and information, electromagnetic record or other similar materials about the military of the Republic of China or superintends the Ministry of National Defense.
↑ "Criminal Code of the Armed Forces". Laws & Regulations Database of The Republic of China. Ministry of Justice (Taiwan). 2017-04-19. https://law.moj.gov.tw/ENG/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?PCode=F0120001. Retrieved 2019-11-21.
Current Opinion in Drug Discovery & Development (BioMed Central)
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling (ACS)
Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation (ACS)
Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling (Elsevier)
Molecules, A Journal of Synthetic Chemistry and Natural Product Chemistry
Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics (Wiley)
Chemical Informatics Letters (Jonathan M. Goodman)
CHMINF-L Chemical Information Sources Discussion List Sponsored by the ACS Division of Chemical Information, RSC Chemical Information Group, SLA Chemistry Division, ASIS&T SIG on Scientific and Technical Information
Annual Review of Biophysics and Biomolecular Structure
International Chemical Information Conference and Exhibition
International Conference on Chemical Structures (Noordwijkerhout)
Laboratory Informatics Summer School 2006 (LIMS Institute)
eCheminfo Applications of Cheminformatics and Molecular Modelling to Drug Discovery
Information and Communication: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century (NAP, 2003)
Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chemical Engineering (NAP, 2003)
The Environment: Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century (NAP, 2003)
A.5.3 Building the Syndicalist Unions
Just before the turn of the century in Europe, the anarchist movement began to create one of the most successful attempts to apply anarchist organisational ideas in everyday life. This was the building of mass revolutionary unions (also known as syndicalism or anarcho-syndicalism). The syndicalist movement, in the words of a leading French syndicalist militant, was "a practical schooling in anarchism" for it was "a laboratory of economic struggles" and organised "along anarchic lines." By organising workers into "libertarian organisations," the syndicalist unions were creating the "free associations of free producers" within capitalism to combat it and, ultimately, replace it. [Fernand Pelloutier, No Gods, No Masters, vol. 2, p. 57, p. 55 and p. 56]
While the details of syndicalist organisation varied from country to country, the main lines were the same. Workers should form themselves into unions (or syndicates, the French for union). While organisation by industry was generally the preferred form, craft and trade organisations were also used. These unions were directly controlled by their members and would federate together on an industrial and geographical basis. Thus a given union would be federated with all the local unions in a given town, region and country as well as with all the unions within its industry into a national union (of, say, miners or metal workers). Each union was autonomous and all officials were part-time (and paid their normal wages if they missed work on union business). The tactics of syndicalism were direct action and solidarity and its aim was to replace capitalism by the unions providing the basic framework of the new, free, society.
Thus, for anarcho-syndicalism, "the trade union is by no means a mere transitory phenomenon bound up with the duration of capitalist society, it is the germ of the Socialist economy of the future, the elementary school of Socialism in general." The "economic fighting organisation of the workers" gives their members "every opportunity for direct action in their struggles for daily bread, it also provides them with the necessary preliminaries for carrying through the reorganisation of social life on a [libertarian] Socialist plan by them own strength." [Rudolf Rocker, Anarcho-Syndicalism, p. 59 and p. 62] Anarcho-syndicalism, to use the expression of the I.W.W., aims to build the new world in the shell of the old.
In the period from the 1890's to the outbreak of World War I, anarchists built revolutionary unions in most European countries (particularly in Spain, Italy and France). In addition, anarchists in South and North America were also successful in organising syndicalist unions (particularly Cuba, Argentina, Mexico and Brazil). Almost all industrialised countries had some syndicalist movement, although Europe and South America had the biggest and strongest ones. These unions were organised in a confederal manner, from the bottom up, along anarchist lines. They fought with capitalists on a day-to-day basis around the issue of better wages and working conditions and the state for social reforms, but they also sought to overthrow capitalism through the revolutionary general strike.
Thus hundreds of thousands of workers around the world were applying anarchist ideas in everyday life, proving that anarchy was no utopian dream but a practical method of organising on a wide scale. That anarchist organisational techniques encouraged member participation, empowerment and militancy, and that they also successfully fought for reforms and promoted class consciousness, can be seen in the growth of anarcho-syndicalist unions and their impact on the labour movement. The Industrial Workers of the World, for example, still inspires union activists and has, throughout its long history, provided many union songs and slogans.
However, as a mass movement, syndicalism effectively ended by the 1930s. This was due to two factors. Firstly, most of the syndicalist unions were severely repressed just after World War I. In the immediate post-war years they reached their height. This wave of militancy was known as the "red years" in Italy, where it attained its high point with factory occupations (see section A.5.5). But these years also saw the destruction of these unions in country after county. In the USA, for example, the I.W.W. was crushed by a wave of repression backed whole-heartedly by the media, the state, and the capitalist class. Europe saw capitalism go on the offensive with a new weapon—fascism. Fascism arose (first in Italy and, most infamously, in Germany) as an attempt by capitalism to physically smash the organisations the working class had built. This was due to radicalism that had spread across Europe in the wake of the war ending, inspired by the example of Russia. Numerous near revolutions had terrified the bourgeoisie, who turned to fascism to save their system.
In country after country, anarchists were forced to flee into exile, vanish from sight, or became victims of assassins or concentration camps after their (often heroic) attempts at fighting fascism failed. In Portugal, for example, the 100,000 strong anarcho-syndicalist CGT union launched numerous revolts in the late 1920s and early 1930s against fascism. In January 1934, the CGT called for a revolutionary general strike which developed into a five day insurrection. A state of siege was declared by the state, which used extensive force to crush the rebellion. The CGT, whose militants had played a prominent and courageous role in the insurrection, was completely smashed and Portugal remained a fascist state for the next 40 years. [Phil Mailer, Portugal: The Impossible Revolution, pp. 72–3] In Spain, the CNT (the most famous anarcho-syndicalist union) fought a similar battle. By 1936, it claimed one and a half million members. As in Italy and Portugal, the capitalist class embraced fascism to save their power from the dispossessed, who were becoming confident of their power and their right to manage their own lives (see section A.5.6).
As well as fascism, syndicalism also faced the negative influence of Leninism. The apparent success of the Russian revolution led many activists to turn to authoritarian politics, particularly in English speaking countries and, to a lesser extent, France. Such notable syndicalist activists as Tom Mann in England, William Gallacher in Scotland and William Foster in the USA became Communists (the last two, it should be noted, became Stalinist). Moreover, Communist parties deliberately undermined the libertarian unions, encouraging fights and splits (as, for example, in the I.W.W.). After the end of the Second World War, the Stalinists finished off what fascism had started in Eastern Europe and destroyed the anarchist and syndicalist movements in such places as Bulgaria and Poland. In Cuba, Castro also followed Lenin's example and did what the Batista and Machado dictatorship's could not, namely smash the influential anarchist and syndicalist movements (see Frank Fernandez's Cuban Anarchism for a history of this movement from its origins in the 1860s to the 21st century).
So by the start of the second world war, the large and powerful anarchist movements of Italy, Spain, Poland, Bulgaria and Portugal had been crushed by fascism (but not, we must stress, without a fight). When necessary, the capitalists supported authoritarian states in order to crush the labour movement and make their countries safe for capitalism. Only Sweden escaped this trend, where the syndicalist union the SAC is still organising workers. It is, in fact, like many other syndicalist unions active today, growing as workers turn away from bureaucratic unions whose leaders seem more interested in protecting their privileges and cutting deals with management than defending their members. In France, Spain and Italy and elsewhere, syndicalist unions are again on the rise, showing that anarchist ideas are applicable in everyday life.
Finally, it must be stressed that syndicalism has its roots in the ideas of the earliest anarchists and, consequently, was not invented in the 1890s. It is true that development of syndicalism came about, in part, as a reaction to the disastrous "propaganda by deed" period, in which individual anarchists assassinated government leaders in attempts to provoke a popular uprising and in revenge for the mass murders of the Communards and other rebels (see section A.2.18 for details). But in response to this failed and counterproductive campaign, anarchists went back to their roots and to the ideas of Bakunin. Thus, as recognised by the likes of Kropotkin and Malatesta, syndicalism was simply a return to the ideas current in the libertarian wing of the First International.
Thus we find Bakunin arguing that "it is necessary to organise the power of the proletariat. But this organisation must be the work of the proletariat itself . . . Organise, constantly organise the international militant solidarity of the workers, in every trade and country, and remember that however weak you are as isolated individuals or districts, you will constitute a tremendous, invincible power by means of universal co-operation." As one American activist commented, this is "the same militant spirit that breathes now in the best expressions of the Syndicalist and I.W.W. movements" both of which express "a strong world wide revival of the ideas for which Bakunin laboured throughout his life." [Max Baginski, Anarchy! An Anthology of Emma Goldman's Mother Earth, p. 71] As with the syndicalists, Bakunin stressed the "organisation of trade sections, their federation . . . bear in themselves the living germs of the new social order, which is to replace the bourgeois world. They are creating not only the ideas but also the facts of the future itself." [quoted by Rudolf Rocker, Op. Cit., p. 50]
Such ideas were repeated by other libertarians. Eugene Varlin, whose role in the Paris Commune ensured his death, advocated a socialism of associations, arguing in 1870 that syndicates were the "natural elements" for the rebuilding of society: "it is they that can easily be transformed into producer associations; it is they that can put into practice the retooling of society and the organisation of production." [quoted by Martin Phillip Johnson, The Paradise of Association, p. 139] As we discussed in section A.5.2, the Chicago Anarchists held similar views, seeing the labour movement as both the means of achieving anarchy and the framework of the free society. As Lucy Parsons (the wife of Albert) put it "we hold that the granges, trade-unions, Knights of Labour assemblies, etc., are the embryonic groups of the ideal anarchistic society . . ." [contained in Albert R. Parsons, Anarchism: Its Philosophy and Scientific Basis, p. 110] These ideas fed into the revolutionary unionism of the I.W.W. As one historian notes, the "proceedings of the I.W.W.'s inaugural convention indicate that the participants were not only aware of the 'Chicago Idea' but were conscious of a continuity between their efforts and the struggles of the Chicago anarchists to initiate industrial unionism." The Chicago idea represented "the earliest American expression of syndicalism." [Salvatore Salerno, Red November, Black November, p. 71]
Thus, syndicalism and anarchism are not differing theories but, rather, different interpretations of the same ideas (see for a fuller discussion section H.2.8). While not all syndicalists are anarchists (some Marxists have proclaimed support for syndicalism) and not all anarchists are syndicalists (see section J.3.9 for a discussion why), all social anarchists see the need for taking part in the labour and other popular movements and encouraging libertarian forms of organisation and struggle within them. By doing this, inside and outside of syndicalist unions, anarchists are showing the validity of our ideas. For, as Kropotkin stressed, the "next revolution must from its inception bring about the seizure of the entire social wealth by the workers in order to transform it into common property. This revolution can succeed only through the workers, only if the urban and rural workers everywhere carry out this objective themselves. To that end, they must initiate their own action in the period before the revolution; this can happen only if there is a strong workers' organisation." [Selected Writings on Anarchism and Revolution, p. 20] Such popular self-managed organisations cannot be anything but "anarchy in action."
Returns TRUE if the first value is greater than the second value.
Documentation is the process of leaving information about your code.  The two mechanisms for doing this in Python are comments and documentation strings.
There will always be a time in which you have to return to your code.  Perhaps it is to fix a bug, or to add a new feature.  Regardless, looking at your own code after six months is almost as bad as looking at someone else's code.  What one needs is a means to leave reminders to yourself as to what you were doing.
For this purpose, you leave comments.  Comments are little snippets of text embedded inside your code that are ignored by the Python interpreter.  A comment is denoted by the hash character (#) and extends to the end of the line.  For example:
As you can see, you can also use comments to temporarily remove segments of your code, like the second print statement.
The following guidelines are from PEP 8, written by Guido van Rossum.
Comments that contradict the code are worse than no comments.  Always make a priority of keeping the comments up-to-date when the code changes!
Comments should be complete sentences.  If a comment is a phrase or sentence, its first word should be capitalized, unless it is an identifier that begins with a lower case letter (never alter the case of identifiers!).
If a comment is short, the period at the end can be omitted.  Block comments generally consist of one or more paragraphs built out of complete sentences, and each sentence should end in a period.
You should use two spaces after a sentence-ending period.
When writing English, Strunk and White applies.
Python coders from non-English speaking countries: please write your comments in English, unless you are 120% sure that the code will never be read by people who don't speak your language.
An inline comment is a comment on the same line as a statement.  Inline comments should be separated by at least two spaces from the statement.  They should start with a # and a single space.
Inline comments are unnecessary and in fact distracting if they state the obvious.  Don't do this: x = x + 1  # Increment x
But sometimes, this is useful: x = x + 1  # Compensate for border
Fortunately, Python has such a capability.  Documentation strings (or docstrings) are used to create easily-accessible documentation.  You can add a docstring to a function, class, or module by adding a string as the first indented statement.  For example:
"""Example of using documentation strings."""
An example class.
"""Prints the argument given."""
The convention is to use triple-quoted strings, because it makes it easier to add more documentation spanning multiple lines.
To access the documentation, you can use the help function inside a Python shell with the object you want help on, or you can use the pydoc command from your system's shell.  If we were in the directory where docstringexample.py lives, one could enter pydoc docstringexample to get documentation on that module.
The main role of phospholipids in cells and organelles is to help create the permeable bilayer that separates everything inside the cell and organelles with things outside. The lipid bilayer is a support structure that is crucial for proteins involved in many diverse and important cellular processes. The diverse nature of lipid structures allows for a diverse set of chemical and physical properties within the membrane bilayer. These properties include, but are not limited to, hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces and electric potential that affects the folding and orientation of membrane proteins. All of these properties make it difficult to define the function of lipids in cellular processes because altering the membrane lipid composition could result in negative consequences. These difficulties have forced most studies of membrane protein topogenesis to treat the lipid bilayer as a passive amphipathic structure rather than to consider what its role is in protein organization.
Properties of Lipids that Affect Topology and Function
There any many structural, chemical, and phase-forming features of lipid molecules that are important during topogenesis. In the case of E. coli, large-scale changes to its original lipid composition has no affects on viability. The introduction of foreign lipids into the membrane of E. coli is also not only tolerated but actually improves the growth and functional properties of strains that do not have native lipids. These studies give light to the possibility of studying the properties of lipids that support native topology of other domains that are lipid sensitive. Through studies of charge retention, it is shown that the property most important to the governing of topology is the membrane bilayer's ability to balance anionic and neutrally charged lipids.
Specific Role of Membrane Lipids in Topogenesis
The discovery of a specific role for membrane lipids during topogenesis is mostly due to experiments with strains of E. coli. Certain strains of E. coli were developed with the intention of controlling the membrane phospholipid composition of the strain while maintaining the viability of the cell. The first indication that lipid-protein interactions affect topogenesis was made apparent when studies showed that the net charge of the E. coli phospholipid bilayer could be changed in a mutant. This gene was controlled and further studied to suggest that charge interactions between lipids and proteins help decide protein topology. In this way, it is shown that lipids appear to help membrane protein refolding in vitro and folding in vivo into a native conformation. This is achieved through interactions that are close to those of other protein chaperones.
Dowhan, William, and Mikhail Bogdanov. "Lipid-Dependent Membrane Protein Topogenesis." Annual Review of Biochemistry. 78 (2009): 515-40. Web. 1 Dec. 2011. <http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/pdf/10.1146/annurev.biochem.77.060806.091251>.
The Updated Modernity Version (Parallel, Annotated) John 12
12:1 Then Jesus six days before the   passover came to Bethany, where Lazarus was, which had been dead, whom he raised from the dead.
1 Jesus, however, six days before the Passover, came to Bethany which was the village of Lazarus whom He had raised from the dead.
12:2 There they made him a supper; and Martha served: but Lazarus was one of them that sat at the table with him.
2 So they gave a dinner there in honor of Jesus, at which Martha waited on the table, and Lazarus was one of the guests who was with Him.*                                             *
12:3 Then took Mary a pound of ointment of spikenard, very costly, and anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair: and the house was filled with the odour of the ointment.
3 Mary then took oil of genuine nard, a pound weight, very precious, and anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped His feet with her hair, so that the house was filled with the fragrance.
12:4 Then says one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, which should betray him,
4 Then said Judas the Iscariot, one of the twelve—the one who afterwards betrayed Jesus,
12:5 Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to the poor?
5 "Why was that anointment not sold for 300 denarii and the money given to the poor?"
12:6 This he said, not that he cared for the poor; but because he was a thief, and had the bag, and bare what was put therein.
6 The reason he said this was not that he cared for the poor, but that he was a thief, and having the money-box, he would take away what was put into it.
12:7 Then said Jesus, Let her alone: against the day of my burying has she kept this.
7 But Jesus interjected, "Leave her alone," saying emphatically, "she kept it for the time of my burial preparation.
12:8 For the poor always all of you have with you; but me all of you have not always.
12:9 Much people of the Jews therefore knew that he was there: and they came not for Jesus' sake only, but that they might see Lazarus also, whom he had raised from the dead.
9 Now a great many of the Judeans knew that Jesus was there; and they came not only on His account, but also to see Lazarus whom He had brought back to life.
12:10 But the chief priests consulted that they might put Lazarus also to death;
12:11 Because that by reason of him many of the Jews went away, and believed on Jesus.
11 for because of him many were drawn away from the Judean crowd and became believers in Jesus.
12:12 On the next day much people that were come to the feast, when they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,
12 The next day many of those who had arrived at the Festival, hearing that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,
12:13 Took branches of palm trees, and went forth to meet him, and cried, Hosanna: Blessed is the King of Israel that comes in the name of the Lord.
13 took branches of the palm trees and went out to meet Him, shouting as they went, "HOSANNA! BLESSINGS ON HIM WHO COMES IN THE NAME OF THE LORD (PS. 118:26), the King of Israel"(1).
12:14 And Jesus, when he had found a young ass, sat thereon; as it is written,
12:15 Fear not, daughter of Sion: behold, your King comes, sitting on an ass's colt.
12:16 These things understood not his disciples at the first: but when Jesus was glorified, then remembered they that these things were written of him, and that they had done these things unto him.
16 His disciples did not understand the meaning of this at the time; but after Jesus was glorified they recalled that this was written about Him, and that they had done this to honor Him.
12:17 The people therefore that was with him when he called Lazarus out of his grave, and raised him from the dead, bare record.
17 Then a considerable number of people who had been present when He called Lazarus out of the tomb and brought him back to life, related what they had witnessed.
12:18 For this cause the people also met him, for that they heard that he had done this miracle.
18 That was also the reason the crowd came to meet Him, because they had heard He performed this miracle.
12:19 The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, Perceive all of you how all of you prevail nothing? behold, the world is gone after him.
19 The result was that the Pharisees said among themselves, "Observe how all your efforts are futile! See, the world is gone after Him!"
12:20 And there were certain Greeks among them that came up to worship at the feast:
12:21 The same came therefore to Philip, which was of Bethsaida of Galilee, and desired him, saying, Sir, we would see Jesus.
21 They came forward to Philip, who was from Bethsaida in Galilee, with the request, "Sir, we wish to see Jesus."
12:22 Philip comes and tells Andrew: and again Andrew and Philip tell Jesus.
12:23 And Jesus answered them, saying, The hour has come, that the Son of man should be glorified.
23 His answer was to proclaim, "The time has come for the Son of Man to be glorified.
12:24 Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abides alone: but if it die, it brings forth much fruit.
24 In all truthfulness, I tell you that unless a kernel of grain falls to the ground and dies, it remains a single grain; but if it dies, it has greater yield.
12:25 He that loves his life shall lose it; and he that hates his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal.
25 The person who holds life dear, will lose it; but the one who makes life of no account in this world will keep it to eternal Life.
12:26 If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there shall also my servant be: if any man serve me, him will my Father honour.
26 If anyone wishes to be my servant, then follow me; and where I am, there too shall my servant be. Again, if anyone wishes to be my servant, the Father will honor such a person.
12:27 Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour.
27 Now my soul is disturbed; and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour. But on this account I have come to this hour.
12:28 Father, glorify your name. Then came there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again.
28 Father, glorify your name." Then a voice came from the sky, "I have glorified and will glorify it again."
12:29 The people therefore, that stood by, and heard it, said that it thundered: others said, An angel spoke to him.
29 The crowd that stood by and heard, said that there had been thunder. Others said, "An angel spoke to Him."
12:30 Jesus answered and said, This voice came not because of me, but for your sakes.
30 "This voice did not come for my benefit," said Jesus, "but for your benefit.
12:31 Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this world be cast out.
12:32 And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me.
12:33 This he said, signifying what death he should die.
12:34 The people answered him, We have heard out of the law that Christ abides for ever: and how says you, The Son of man must be lifted up? who is this Son of man?
34 The crowd answered Him, "We have heard out of the Law that the Christ remains forever. How do you say that the Son of Man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of Man?"
12:35 Then Jesus said unto them, Yet a little while is the light with you. Walk while all of you have the light, lest darkness come upon you: for he that walks in darkness knows not where he goes.
35 "Yet a little while," He replied, "the light is among you. Walk while you have the light, for fear darkness should overtake you; for anyone who walks in the dark does not know where he (or she) is going.
12:36 While all of you have light, believe in the light, that all of you may be the children of light. These things spoke Jesus, and departed, and did hide himself from them.
36 While you have the light, believe in the light, so that you may become Children of Light." Jesus said this, and departed and hid Himself from them.
12:37 But though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him:
37 Though He had performed so many [miraculous] signs in their presence, they did not believe in Him:
12:38 That the saying (o. logos) of Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, which he spoke, Lord, who has believed our report? and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?
38 That the words of Isaiah the Prophet might be fulfilled, `LORD, WHO HAS BELIEVED OUR MESSAGE? AND THE ARM OF THE LORD—TO WHOM HAS IT BEEN REVEALED?´ (IS. 53:1).
12:39 Therefore they could not believe, because that Isaiah said again,
12:40 He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart; that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them.
40 `HE HAS BLINDED THEIR EYES AND MADE THEIR HEART CALLOUS, THAT THEY SHOULD NOT SEE WITH THEIR EYES AND NOT UNDERSTAND WITH THEIR MIND, AND BE TURNED, AND I SHOULD HEAL THEM´ (IS. 6:9,10).
12:41 These things said Isaiah, when he saw his glory, and spoke of him.
12:42 Nevertheless among the chief rulers also many believed on him; but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the synagogue:
42 However, even among the Rulers many believed in Him. But because of the Pharisees they did not acknowledge Him, for fear they should be removed from the synagogue.
12:43 For they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God.
43 For they loved to be glorified by such men rather than receive the glory which comes from God.
12:44 Jesus cried and said, He that believes on me, believes not on me, but on him that sent me.
44 But Jesus cried aloud, "Anyone who believes in me, believes not in me, but in HIM who sent me;
12:45 And he that sees me sees him that sent me.
12:46 I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believes on me should not abide in darkness.
46 I have come as light into the world, in order that no one who believes in me may remain in the darkness.
12:47 And if any man hear my words, (o. rhema) and believe not, I judge him not: for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.
47 And if anyone hears my teachings and does not believe, I do not judge that person; for I did not come to judge the world, but to save the world.
12:48 He that rejects me, and receives not my words, (o. rhema) has one that judges him: the word (o. logos) that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day.
48 The person who disregards me, and does not receive my teachings is not left without a judge: the words of truth I have spoken will judge him (or her) on the last day;
12:49 For I have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak.
49 Because I have not spoken on my own regard; but the Father who sent me, HE gave me a command what to say and what words to speak.
12:50 And I know that his commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak.
50 And I know that HIS command is Life eternal. Therefore what I speak, I speak just as the Father has instructed me."
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Data Manipulation Language is used to modify the records in the database.  It never modifies the schema of the database (table features, relationships, ...).  It describes three statements: INSERT, UPDATE and DELETE.
Its description is "Meeting with Mr. SPENCER",
We need to plan the project.
Presentation of the project.
Explanation to the new beginner.
A new software version has been installed.
VALUES (7, 'Job interview', 'Meeting with Mr. SPENCER', B, 1, 2009-10-28, 18:30:00, 30, 23, NULL);
We need to plan the project.
Presentation of the project.
Explanation to the new beginner.
A new software version has been installed.
Meeting with Mr. SPENCER
The INTO clause contains the name of the table where the record needs to be inserted.  It can be followed by a list of columns in brackets.  The VALUES clause contains the values to insert in brackets.  If the column names are omitted, the VALUES clause must contains as many values as the number of columns of the table.  The values are inserted in the table columns in the same order that the order in which the columns have been declared in the table.  If the column names are mentioned, there must be as many column names as values.  The values are respectively inserted into the named columns.  If a column in the table is omitted, a NULL value is inserted instead.
The VALUES clause can be replaced by an inner SELECT statement.  In this case, the INSERT statement can insert several rows in the table.  For example, we want to plan twice all the reunion with a B priority level, one year later:
We need to plan the project.
Presentation of the project.
Explanation to the new beginner.
A new software version has been installed.
Meeting with Mr. SPENCER
We need to plan the project.
Presentation of the project.
Explanation to the new beginner.
A new software version has been installed.
Meeting with Mr. SPENCER
Explanation to the new beginner.
A new software version has been installed.
Meeting with Mr. SPENCER
The UPDATE statement is used to modify already existent records in a table.  The UPDATE clause is followed by the table name in which the rows need to be changed.  The SET clause is followed by couples of column name and value.  The values will be inserted in the given columns.  The WHERE clause contains predicates.  If the predicates are true for an existent row, this row will be modified.
For instance, we want to change the date, the hour and the description of the reunion with id 14:
We need to plan the project.
Presentation of the project.
Explanation to the new beginner.
A new software version has been installed.
Meeting with Mr. SPENCER
Explanation to the new beginner.
A new software version has been installed.
Meeting with Mr. SPENCER
SET description = 'Meeting with Ms. JOHNSON', date = '2010-02-11', hour = '08:00:00'
We need to plan the project.
Presentation of the project.
Explanation to the new beginner.
A new software version has been installed.
Meeting with Mr. SPENCER
Explanation to the new beginner.
A new software version has been installed.
Meeting with Ms. JOHNSON
The DELETE statement is used to remove specific rows in a table with conditions.  The FROM clause is followed by the table name in which the rows need to be removed.  The WHERE clause contains predicates.  If the predicates are true for an row, this row will be removed.  If the predicates are false for all the rows, the statement do nothing.  A DELETE statement without WHERE clause empties the table.
For example, we want to remove all the reunions that last two hours:
We need to plan the project.
Presentation of the project.
Explanation to the new beginner.
A new software version has been installed.
Meeting with Mr. SPENCER
Explanation to the new beginner.
A new software version has been installed.
Meeting with Ms. JOHNSON
We need to plan the project.
Explanation to the new beginner.
Meeting with Mr. SPENCER
Explanation to the new beginner.
Meeting with Ms. JOHNSON
Now you can use an already existing database schema to handle your own data.
Meaning(s), Literal and Figurative
a bad personal characteristic
a ghost; a good friend; lit. good brother
a hot girl (lit. 'spicy girl'); the Spice Girls
a beautiful girl, pretty girl
(try to) hook up with girls, on the prowl for women; lit ‘steep/soak girls’
(trying to hook up by) starting a conversation (with a stranger)
a man with strong sexual desires, a satyr, a sex addict; lit. appearance wolf
a sexual pervert; lit. metamorphosis, abnormal
a one-night stand; lit. love for one night
a mutiny; a relationship that breaks up during military service; lit. military change
a woman that steals another woman's man; lit. a fox spirit
a dominant wife; lit. mother tiger
a police officer; a strip (esp. of paper), a note
a scallywag, a do-nothing; a guy who lives off his girlfriend; lit. a rice container
Wikipedia has related information at Mandarin slang
Chinese Chat Codes - This page contains numeric codes used in chatting or pager messages similar to English acronyms like LOL (Laughing Out Loud) or BRB (Be Right Back).
Chinese Slang Dictionary - A dictionary of Chinese slang, colloquialisms, curses, vulgarities, dialects, and street talk that Chinese characters, pinyin romanization, and an English version.
Step 1: Put your fingers on the middle row, and move the middle finger up to e to type e.
Outline principles that define the sociocultural level of analysis and explain how they are demonstrated in research. Discuss why those research methods are used, and the ethical implications of those methods.
Humans are social animals with an inherent need to belong.
This is demonstrated in studies such as the Asch Line Study. Asch had a group of people judge comparative line length, and then report their judgments. Only one person in the group was a participant; the rest were confederates of the researcher. They judged line length three times. All the confederates reported before the participant, and all gave the correct answer the first two times; the third time, they unanimously gave the wrong response. In the critical (last) condition, participants gave the group’s wrong answer 33% of the time. This indicates the willingness of humans to go against their personal beliefs to maintain group belonging.
This is an experiment. Experiments are used because they allow researchers to manipulate one variable while holding others constant to determine the impact of that variable on behavior. In sociocultural research, this allows psychology to be more science based; otherwise, this perspective relies largely on observational and correlational research that cannot establish cause and effect.
An ethical concern is that experiments require consent, which is crucial to obtain. A concern specific to conformity research is that the study is very likely to cause distress, as participants are confused and stressed when all of the confederates give the wrong answer.
Culture influences behavior.
Hoefstede used surveys and correlational research to identify various culture dimensions that influence individual behavior. For example, one cultural dimension he identified is individualistic/ collectivistic. A country’s position on this scale can influence people’s tendency to conform; Smith and Bond did a meta-analysis that found higher levels of conformity in more collectivistic societies.
These studies use surveys and correlational research. This allows researchers to study situations and variables that cannot be practically manipulated; no researcher will ever be able to create their own cultures to manipulate and study. By using correlational research, researchers can at least establish a relationship between variables, even if they cannot establish cause. It also allows for the creation of theories that can then, perhaps, be studied experimentally.
An ethical concern is that correlational studies may allow people to draw discriminatory conclusions about people and/or cultures even though the correlational research can
People construct a social identity for themselves.
This happens as a part of group membership, even when the group in question is marginal, as the Sherif’s Robber’s Cave Study. In the Robber’s Cave Study, boys who did not know each other were assigned to one of two groups, the Eagles or the Rattlers. Quickly, the boys established group identities and norms, even though they did not know each other before the study began. They also behaved antagonistically toward the other group, displaying out-group hostility as a result of competition for sports prizes. This hostility was only overcome because of goals which required cooperation (superordinate goals).
This study combines covert observation with experiment. Covert observation allows a researcher to study situations that would by their very nature be changed by being observed, such as groups who are illegal (gangs, drug dealers). It also allows researchers to study groups that would refuse to be studied if asked (cults).
An ethical concern is that these studies, by their very nature, require deception of the participants and cannot involve informed consent.
People's worldviews are resistant to change.
Even in the face of contrary evidence, people hold on to established beliefs, as did the subjects of Festinger’s Doomsday Study. Festinger went undercover into a doomsday cult to study their reaction when the predicted end of the world did not come to pass. When the world continued, the group members displayed rationalization, saying that the world had been spared due to their prayers. Instead of changing their beliefs, this  actually strengthened them. Members had to hold onto their beliefs despite contrary evidence because to do otherwise would harm their self-esteem.  (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/When_Prophecy_Fails)
This is a covert participant observational study. Covert participant observation allows a researcher to study situations that would by their very nature be changed by being observed. It also allows researchers to study groups that would refuse to be studied if asked.
An ethical concern is that these studies, by their very nature, require deception of the participants and cannot involve informed consent.
Describe the role of situational and dispositional factors in explaining behavior.
Situational factors are ways of explaining a behavior/event based on external factors, attributes of the event. Situational factors are generally used when explaining an event that the person is involved in. This is because, since the person is in the event, they have a clearer understanding of the external reasons for the outcome. This is a result of actor-observer effect.
Dispositional factors are explanations that attribute an event to something internal, inherent to the person. Outside observers tend to use dispositional factors to explain an event. Since they are not involved, they do not see the situational factors. This is a result of actor-observer effect.
The use of these explanations is impacted by several attributional biases/errors (see below).
Fundamental attribution error is the tendency to overestimate the impact of dispositional factors when explain behavior, especially other people’s behavior, while underestimating or ignoring the impact of situational factors. This is likely because, while people are privy to their own internal decision making process, which considers the situation, they cannot get inside other people’s heads, and thus attribute actions to fixed characteristics of the person rather than changeable aspects of situation. This error is especially common in individualistic cultures, where the individual rather than the group/situation is blamed for events.
Self-serving bias is when people credit themselves for success but blame external factors for failure. This protects self-esteem.
Modesty bias is the tendency in collectivist cultures to attribute failure to personal factors. This is because their self-esteem is based on group, not individual, performance, and so they protect the group by blaming themselves for failure.
Evaluate social identity theory, making reference to relevant research studies.
Social identity theory says that group belonging is a source of self-esteem. This leads people to try to join successful groups, to praise their own group, and to form negative views of out-groups.
Cialdini has shown this in football supporters, who are more likely to were team insignia after success than defeats, supporting self-esteem by identifying with a group that is successful while minimizing identification with unsuccessful groups.
Tajfel et al. (1971) finds that groups need not be based on any significant factors; minimal groups still show patterns of in-group/out-group bias, even when they are only thrown together based on painting preference.
This is more a descriptive than a predictive theory.
It does not explain why sometimes, personal identity overpowers group identity.
It also does not consider environment as an explanation for personal and group behavior (cultural expectations, potential rewards, poverty).
Explain the formation of stereotypes and their effect on behavior.
A stereotype is a social perception of an individual based on their group membership.
Stereotypes are formed based on personal experience and on information received from gatekeepers like parents and the media.
Two explanations for how stereotypes are formed are:
The grain of truth hypothesis (Campbell, 1967), which states that one experience with an individual (meeting a girl who is bad at math) causes that conclusion to be generalized to a group (all girls are bad at math). This means that stereotypes are based, loosely, on reality.
Illusory correlation is seeing a relationship between two things when none exists. This is particularly likely to happen when two rare events co-occur, such as crime and blackness.
David Hamilton and Richard Gifford (1976) examined the role of illusory correlation in stereotype formation. Subjects were read descriptions of behaviors performed by members of groups A and B. Negative behaviors were rare, and group B was small, making making both relatively infrequent and distinctive. Participants were then asked who had performed a given behavior: a person of group A or group B. Results showed that subjects overestimated the frequency of the two distinctive events, membership in group B and negative behavior, co-occurring, and evaluated group B more negatively. This despite the fact the proportion of positive to negative behaviors was equivalent for both groups and that there was no actual correlation between group membership and behaviors. The impact is more pronounced for negative than positive traits.
Once a stereotype is formed, confirmation bias protects and propagates it. This means people will pay particular attention to evidence that confirms their beliefs, however rare or unlikely, and ignore evidence that challenges the belief, however common or persuasive.
Snyder and Swann studied this by telling female college students to prepare a list of questions for either an introvert or an extrovert. They tended to create questions that would confirm their beliefs about what an introvert/extrovert is like.
They impact behavior both of the person who has the stereotype and the person being stereotyped.
The person with the stereotype will treat other people according to assumptions, rather than according to reality.
Stereotypes will change how members of the stereotyped group interpret outside feedback. They can attribute it either to personal shortcomings, such as lack of ability or poor effort, or the evaluator's stereotypes and prejudice toward their social group. Alternatively, positive feedback can either be attributed to personal merit or discounted as a form of sympathy or pity.
Crocker et al. (1991) showed that when black participants were evaluated by a white person who was aware of their race, black subjects mistrusted the feedback, attributing negative feedback to the evaluator's stereotypes and positive feedback to the evaluator's desire to appear unbiased. When the black participants race was unknown to the evaluator, they were more accepting of the feedback.
In situations where the stereotyped characteristic is relevant, stereotype threat will negative impact performance. This is because people are afraid of being judged stereotypically or of confirming the stereotype.
Steele and Aaronson (1995) found that African Americans do worse than European Americans on tests of verbal ability, but they do the same on tests of problem solving strategies-even though the tests are identical.
Explain social learning theory, making reference to two relevant studies.
Social learning theory is the process by which people are assumed to learn through observation of models, without extrinsic motivation.
Models can be live (a real person), verbal (verbal instructions) or symbolic (TV, books).
There are four factors necessary for social learning to occur:
Attention: the learner must pay attention to the model’s behavior.
Retention: the learner must remember the behavior.
Reproduction: the learner must have the ability to reproduce the behavior.
Motivation: including consistency, identification with the model, rewards/punishment, liking the model
Kimball and Zabrack (1986) found that children became more aggressive after TV was introduced to their Canadian towns. However, this does not indicate a causal relationship.
Discuss the use of compliance techniques.
The asker secures agreement to a request and then reveals additional added cost; because the person has already agreed to the small request, they will carry through despite the hidden costs.
Study: Cialdini (1978) asked students 1) if they would participate in a 7 am study or 2) if they would participate in a study. In the first case, most people said no. In the second case, people who said yes were told the study occurred at 7 am; most people still showed up. They had committed to something small, and kept committing despite the added burden.
Explanation: this may be a result of cognitive dissonance. Festinger theorized that people want their behavior and their views of self to remain consistent, protecting self-esteem. To reduce tension as a result of a mismatch, we may change beliefs, actions, or perception of the action. In this case, people see themselves as committed, but are annoyed at the added burden; to remain consistent, they will change their view of the burden.
Requester makes a small request, secures agreement, and to be consistent the agreer will agree to the subsequent larger, real request.
Study: Sherman (1980) called people to ask if they would theoretically volunteer for 3 hours for the American Cancer Society. Then three days later they were called back and asked to actually give time; those who hypothetically said yes were more likely to actually volunteer (31% vs. 4% just called and asked for time).
Explanation: self-perception theory (Bem 1972) says that people infer their attitudes from their actions, and so when people agreed theoretically, they decided they were helpful people, and helpful people then said yes to actually volunteering time.
A large request is made and refused, so, feeling bad, the person agrees to a subsequent smaller, real request.
Study: Cialdini (1975) asked participants if they would escort delinquent children on a field trip; most people said no. Another group was asked if they would mentor children 2 hours/week for 2 years; again, most said no. The third group was first asked to mentor, said no, and the request was lowered to just chaperoning the field trip; 50% said yes this time.
Explanation: this may be a result of the norm of reciprocity, meaning we reciprocate favors done towards us. Lowering the request is seen as a favor, so people do a favor in return and volunteer their time.
Evaluate research on conformity to group norms.
Asch had a group of people judge comparative line length, and then report their judgments. Only one person in the group was a participant; the rest were confederates of the researcher. They judged line length three times. All the confederates reported before the participant, and all gave the correct answer the first two times; the third time, they unanimously gave the wrong response. In the critical (last) condition, participants gave the group’s wrong answer 33% of the time. This indicates the willingness of humans to go against their personal beliefs to maintain group belonging.
All the participants were white males; the high levels of conformity could thus be a reflection of the participants’ culture; the 1950’s were a very homogeneous, conformity heavy time.
Perrin and Spencer (1981) reproduced the experiment with college science majors, and found drastically lower rates of conformity. However, an issue with this research is that science majors may have been trained to be more independent in their judgments.
Discuss factors influencing conformity.
Group size: the larger the group of people giving the wrong answer, the stronger the effects of conformity, up to a point; past 4-5, conformity stays the same or drops, possibly because people become suspicious.
Presence of dissenters: in another study, Asch (1951) added a dissenting confederate to the group, and found that that reduced conformity by 80%.
Culture: Smith and Bond (1996) conducted a meta-analysis of conformity studies and found that conformity is higher in collectivist cultures than in individualist cultures. Individualism implies a strong personal identity based on one’s unique features whereas collectivism implies commonality and interconnections with others. Also, compared to people in individualist cultures people in collectivist cultures are more concerned about their relationships with others, value tradition more highly, and define themselves more in terms of their social roles. All these factors should increase conformity in collectivist cultures compared to individualist cultures.
Define the terms “culture” and “cultural norms”.
Matsumoto describes culture as a changing system of rules, explicit and implicit, that groups establish to ensure survival and unity.
Hoefstede describes culture as a set of internalized, group schemas that influence thinking, emotions and behavior. It is learned through group interaction.
Cultural norms are behavior patterns typical of a group. They may also be defined as group beliefs about how people should behave in a given context.
Examine the role of two cultural dimensions on behavior.
Smith and Bond (1996) conducted a meta-analysis of conformity studies and found that conformity is higher in collectivist cultures than in individualist cultures. Individualism implies a strong personal identity based on one’s unique features whereas collectivism implies commonality and interconnections with others. Also, compared to people in individualist cultures people in collectivist cultures are more concerned about their relationships with others, value tradition more highly, and define themselves more in terms of their social roles. All these factors should increase conformity in collectivist cultures compared to individualist cultures.
However, just because a culture tends to be collectivist does not prove that a group will conform. Conformity is strongly predicted/influenced by other factors, for example, collectivist cultures will conform more if they are in a group to which they have real ties (ex: a group of family, friends, coworkers) vs. a group of randomly chosen people (Williams and Sogon, 1984).
Hall (1966) describes a cultural dimension of need for personal space. Cultures have varying norms on how close people can stand to one another, and on who is allowed in peoples’ bubbles. Americans tend to feel comfortable with much more personal space than people in other cultures, leading them to feel uncomfortable when a person from another cultures stands “too close”.
Using one or more examples, explain “emic” and “etic” concepts.
Emic concepts are concepts considered meaningful in a single culture, and so emic research considers only one country/culture.
Fancy definition:  Emic constructs are accounts, descriptions, and analyses expressed in terms of the conceptual schemes and categories that are regarded as meaningful and appropriate by the members of the culture under study.  Am emic construct is correctly termed “emic” if and only if it is in accord with the perceptions and understandings deemed appropriate by the insider’s culture.  The validation of emic knowledge thus becomes a matter of consensus- namely, the consensus of native informants, who must agree that the construct matches the shared perceptions that are characteristic of their culture.  Note that the particular research technique used in acquiring anthropological knowledge has nothing to do with the nature of that knowledge.  Emic knowledge can be obtained either through elicitation or through observation, because it is sometimes possible that objective ob- servers can infer native perceptions.
Etic concepts are descriptions of behavior from outside observers that allow cross-cultural comparisons; they attempt to avoid any cultural bias or limiting perspective.
Fancy definition: Etic constructs are accounts, descriptions, and analyses expressed in terms of the conceptual schemes and categories that are regarded as meaningful and appropriate by the community of scientific observers.  An etic construct is correctly termed “etic” if and only if it is in accord with the principles deemed appropriate by science (i.e., etic constructs must be precise, logical, comprehensive, replicable, falsifiable, and observer independent).  The validation of etic knowledge thus becomes a matter of logical and empirical analysis--in particular, the logical analysis of whether the construct meets the standards of falsifiability, comprehensiveness, and logical consistency, and then the empirical analysis of whether or not the concept has been falsified and/or replicated.  Again, the particular research technique that is used in the acquisition of anthropological knowledge has no bearing on the nature of that knowledge.  Etic knowledge may be obtained at times through elicitation as well as observation, because it is entirely possible that native informants could possess scientifically valid knowledge.
Example: An example of research in cross-cultural psychology is Mead’s ( 1935 ) study of gender development in three different tribes in New Guinea. She found that the Mundugumor tribe exhibited ‘masculine’ characteristics as both men and women were aggressive. The Arapesh tribe exhibited’ feminine ‘ traits as both men and women were emotional and nonaggressive. Amongst the Tchambuli people she found a gender reversal. The men ran the household whilst the women ran the village. Such ethnographic studies illustrate the role of culture on behavior. Mead argued that gender roles are culturally determined rather than biologically determined by innate sex differences as believed in the West, noting that behavior regarded as masculine in one culture could be considered feminine in another. This study may also demonstrate an imposed etic in research. An imposed etic is a technique or a theory which is rooted within the personal culture of the researcher and is then used to study other cultures. Mead’s study could be considered an imposed etic in that she was using Western notions of masculinity/femininity to document gender roles in nonwestern cultures. To describe the Arapesh people as ‘feminine’ attaches a western construct to a set of behaviours which may be unique to the Arapesh people.
Mise en place for bacon peanut brittle
4chon was the birthplace of the culture and memes of /pol/, and kept /r9k/'s culture alive long enough for it's later reintegration. SaveTheInternet (STI) created 4chon.net to hold the /r9k/ and /new/ (news) boards after they were deleted by Moot in early 2011.
The site had a fairly strong following of almost 20,000 posters at it's prime and several million posts in it's heyday, and STI's Tinyboard script was the basis of 8chan's code.
However, STI was infamous for his strange money-making schemes, disinterest in 4chon, extreme right-wing beliefs (totally satire. totally.), and obsessive harassment campaigns against anyone who even looked at him the wrong way. These character flaws became his own undoing, and led to 4chon's demise.
1.4 8chan Bribery Incident
SaveTheInternet (STI), when he was 15, founded 4chon in the wake of Moot's deletion of /new/ (a controversial right-wing news board) and /r9k/ on 4chan.
Moot states in his Final Q&A that STI often tried to harass him over email, which he simply ignored. This drove STI up the wall, but the way Moot sees it is that "getting involved in unnecessary arguments is not a healthy way to live your life". This proved prescient in light of STI's obsessive slander and harassment campaigns against many other victims.
Moot also stated that many of the "anti-4chan" boards he's seen in his lifetime have gone kaput as a result of the admins repeating the policies that they fought against, or simply the fact that a volatile community that defines itself through hate will inevitably meet a ghastly end.
SaveTheInternet was infamous for his deep incompetence, mishandling of funds, cringeworthy attempts at trolling, and poor judgment. Leaked IRC conversations show the level of dysfunctional management that he showcased, as his moderation team watched agape at his total disregard for his site, and his community. He would later play it off as "trolling", since "jokes on them, I was simply... Pretending".
Once Moot restored /r9k/ and created /pol/, anons began migrating back to 4chan. By 2013, 4chon dwindled to a few holdouts and tripfags as the moderation team went into full meltdown. More information can be found in the leaked 4chon IRC logs.
4chon was shut down in December 2014, perhaps because STI was no longer a fan of communities "driven by misogyny and racism" and had made 4chon a honeypot for law enforcement.
4chon.net now redirects to Stopnerds.org, some kind of lame self-insertion satire that identifies "being a nerd" or having libertarian leanings as a mental disease, and commands "sufferers" to vote Obama in 2012, buy a Mac, and watch Kim Possible.
STI's Tinyboard imageboard script was later used to create 8chan (to his chagrin), and the surviving community congregates at 8chan's /4chon/ board.
On February 13, 2015:  SaveTheInternet, in one of his very characteristic, bewildering gaffes, told 8chan's admin Hotwheels on IRC  to shut down 8chan. He stated that starting 4chon was a "mistake" and was triggerred when he discovered that his Tinyboard script was used for 8chan's /gamergate/ board.
He even tried to bribe 8chan's admin with $5,000-$10,000 to shut down the site (where the hell does he even get that kind of money?). STI is probably now trying to shove briefcases of cash into Jim Watkin's face to buy 8ch.net.
It is unknown whether this conversation is one of STI's infamous tantrums, a lame long con attempt at "trolling", or a serious change of heart by a madman who deeply regrets his past destructive lifestyle (and sure deserves to). An unverified 8chan post by STI states that he had a college professor who "enlightened him" with social opinions that ran counter to 4chon's beliefs. From these posts, he seems to give off this blind, unsettling insistence that's highly reminiscent of born-again Christians.
Perhaps the world may never know.
8ch /4chon/ - STI, former owner of 4chon.net asks Hotwheels to close 8chan
8ch /newspaper/ - STI, former owner of 4chon.net asks Hotwheels to close 8chan
This table contains permissions available to users.
Null Allowed?
Key?
I'll need to look closer at the code to see how this is used.
Some tools are either seldom used in construction or very specific to straw bale construction. Here's a list of the most common ones.
When building with straw bales, you will often need to split bales. Pushing twine through the middle of the bale requires a bale needle.
A bale needle is a steel pin of about 80 cm long and 10 to 12 mm wide. It has two holes or hooks near the top, and a handle perpendicular to other end of the pin.
Straw bale structures, especially load bearing structures, are often reinforced with hazel pins. It's important for these pins to be pointed and free of bark. That's where a drawknife and a shaving horse come in handy.
You want to know if your bales are sufficiently dry. A hay moisture meter can help you with that. Example: http://www.delmhorst.com/Moisture-Meters/Agriculture/Hay/FX-2000 .
A big wooden hammer is really handy for putting the bales in place.
A plastic strapping tensioner is needed in load bearing wall construction to compress the bales between base and top plate into a more stable structure.
Bales need to be protected from the elements as soon as possible. This can be done by hand, but a stucco sprayer is _so_ much faster to work with. Any hints on particular features you're looking for in a sprayer? Please add them here!
Here's an image: http://imgur.com/C0AJNwp .
Sometimes, you can't find sufficiently compressed bales. Or you need a different size or shape. That is when a straw baler can come in handy. Have a look at these plans:
. Their continuity.
.
84,85 Problem of Euler illustrating the preceding article.
Article 74.
In Chapter II we considered examples of special variations. The method followed provided for the displacement of a curve in one direction only, in the direction parallel to the
-axis, and is consequently applicable only to the comparison of integrals along curves obtained from one another by such a deformation.
We shall now give a more general form to the variations employed and shall seek strenuous methods for the solution of the general problem of variations proposed in Chapter I. After deriving the necessary conditions we shall then proceed to discuss the sufficient conditions. In order to develop the conditions for the appearance of a maximum or a minimum of the integral
, we transform the first curve into another regular curve. This second curve is neighboring the first curve if we make sufficiently small the quantities
.
Article 75.
The following is one of the methods of effecting this result. Let
.
. Further, the function
. For the convergence of this series, it is necessary that
. We thus restrict, in a great measure, the arbitrariness of the indefinitely small variations of the curve, and thus exclude a great many neighboring curves from the discussion. However, there exist among all the possible neighboring curves also such which satisfy the above conditions, and with these we shall first establish the necessary conditions and later show that the necessary conditions thus established are also sufficient for the establishment of the existence of a maximum or a minimum value of the integral. (See Arts. 134 et seq.)
Article 76.
We have instead of one neighboring curve a whole bundle of such curves if we make the substitutions
, a quantity independent of the variables in
.
!
.
Article 77.
[that is, within the portion of curve considered no sudden change enters in the direction of the curve] , the first variation of the integral
.
In a similar manner it may be shown that
.
Article 7.
.
The following proof, due to Prof. Schwarz, is a geometrical interpretation of a method due to Heine.[1]
. Then owing to the continuity of
.
The second integral on the right hand side may be written
.
-axis.
, we have as the two roots (two branches)
.
-axis, and for values of
, the ordinate of any point of the curve is greater than the corresponding ordinate of the parabola.
It follows then that for the curve we must have
. For the lower branch
Instead of the integral last written, take the integral which has the same value
.
, and as above, it follows that
.
Hence, on the supposition that
But as this integral was supposed to be zero for all functions
, it follows that we must have
.
Article 79.
!
.
, it follows from the above lemma that, in order for
.
, and will afford the required curve if such curve exists. We note that it is independent of the manner of variation, as the quantities
From the relation (see Art. 77)
.
Among all possible variations there are those for which
.
. Hence the equations
Article 80.
The curvature at any point of a curve is denoted by
It is thus seen that through the equation
, a definite relation is expressed between the curvature of a curve at a point, the coordinates and the direction of the tangent of the curve at this point.
Article 81.
.
.
Then from analytical geometry,
.
These expressions substituted in the formula for
.
From this it is seen that only the component of the variation which is in the direction of the normal enters under the integral sign.
Article 82.
By means of the formula below we will prove that the variation in the direction of the tangent brings forth only such terms for the first variation that are free from, the sign of integration.
.
Hence, if we make a sliding of the curve by the substitution
Article 83.
The expression for the first variation has been obtained on the hypothesis that the elements of integration have for each point of the path of integration a one-valued meaning. In case the path involved, discontinuities, it could be resolved into a finite number of portions of regular curve, and along each portion
. This assumption is already implicitly contained in the assumption of the possibility of the development of
That these assumptions have been made is due to the fact that otherwise the curve could not be the object of a mathematical investigation, since there are no methods of representing irregular curves in their entire generality. If therefore one is contented with the rules of differentiation and integration, he must extend these considerations over only such functions to which the rules may be applied, that is, to the functions having the properties above. There are many problems in geometry and mechanics for which the above hypotheses cannot be made.
Article 84.
The following problem proposed by Euler illustrates what has just been said:
Required a curve connecting two fixed points such that the area between the curve, its evolute and the radii of curvature at its extremities may be a minimum.
The analytical solution of this problem is the arc of a cycloid, if indeed there exists a minimum. We shall now show that such is not the case. For join the two fixed points
All the radii of curvature of each semi-circle, i.e., of each portion of curve which is to be a minimum, intersect on the line
. From this it is evident that there is not present a minimum surface area.
Article 85.
The same result would have been obtained, if instead of the straight line
But in spite of the not improbable possibility that the curve which is to satisfy a given proposition is irregular, we must make the hypothesis that the curve is regular, since we come to analytical difEerential equations only by limiting our investigations to such regular curves, and the most general theory of functions teaches that in turn through these diflEerential equations are defined the analytical functions which in their whole extent have existing derivatives.
Article 86.
To avoid any misunderstanding, we repeat what we have already said in the previous Chapter: it is not asserted that there is anything in the nature of the problem whereby one may a priori conclude that the required curve must be regular. Having these hypotheses, we fix our ideas and draw deductions. After the solution of the problem has been effected, we have to make in addition a special proof that the derived curve has all the required properties, and that this curve is the only one which has them.
The chief difficulty in all such problems, as we have shown above in the special problem of approximation (or of the passing to a limit), consists in showing that the regular curve that has been found, found indeed from the necessary conditions, also at the same time satisfies the sufficient conditions, and therefore satisfies all the requirements of the problem.
↑ Heine, Crelle, bd. 54, p. 338.
↑ See also Moigno et Liadelof , Calcul de Variations, p. 252.
Dehydration means your body does not have as much water and fluids as it should. This can be caused by losing too much fluid, not drinking enough water or fluids, or both. Vomiting and diarrhea are common causes.
Infants and children are more susceptible to dehydration than adults because of their smaller body weights and higher turnover of water and electrolytes. The elderly and those with illnesses are also at higher risk.
Dehydration is classified as mild, moderate, or severe based on how much of the body's fluid is lost or not replenished. When severe, dehydration is a life-threatening emergency.
Dry or sticky mouth.
Low or no urine output; concentrated urine appears dark yellow.
Not producing tears.
Sunken eyes.
Markedly sunken fontanelles (the soft spot on the top of the head) in an infant.
Lethargic or comatose (with severe dehydration).
In addition to the symptoms of actual dehydration, you may also have:
Drinking fluids is usually sufficient for mild dehydration. It is better to have frequent, small amounts of fluid (using a teaspoon or syringe for an infant or child) rather than trying to force large amounts of fluid at one time. Drinking too much fluid at once can bring on more vomiting.
Electrolyte solutions or freezer pops are especially effective. These are available at pharmacies. Sport drinks contain a lot of sugar and can cause or worsen diarrhea. In infants and children, avoid using water as the primary replacement fluid.
Intravenous fluids and hospitalization may be necessary for moderate to severe dehydration. The doctor will try to identify and then treat the cause of the dehydration.
Treatment includes starting NS@20ml/kg slow push until signs of severe dehydration disappear. Avoid Ringer Lactate till patient passes urine. Maintenance fluid depends on body weight. Either DNS or RL  may be used
10–20 kg           1000mL+50ml/kg
20+ Kg             1500ml+ 20 ml/kg
It may be advisable to give half the calculated fluid in the first 8 hours and the remaining over the next 16 hours
Chills may occur due to fluid administration rule out infectious causes
Most cases of stomach viruses (also called viral gastroenteritis) tend to resolve on their own after a few days.
The nucleus of the cell contains chromosome and this chromosome are made up of organic molecules called Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA)
Good ciphers often attempt to have the following traits.
Kerckhoffs's principle, also called Kerckhoffs's law:
A cryptosystem should be secure even if everything about the system, except the key, is public knowledge.
In the words of Claude Shannon, "The enemy knows the system." (Shannon's maxim).
Say something about "security through obscurity" here.
Perhaps also something about Kerckhoff's other 5 principles.
Having good diffusion means that making a small change in the plain text should ideally cause as much as possible of cipher text to have a fifty percent possibility of change.
For example a Caesar cipher has almost no diffusion while a block cypher may contain lots of it.
For good confusion the relationship between the cypher text and the plain text should be as complex as possible.
Wikipedia has related information at  Kerckhoffs's principle
As you put together professional documents and begin working in the “real” world, you must understand what could easily lead to your downfall in your professional workplace. The Paul Anderson text claims that at work in a professional setting, there at least three major “sources of guidance”:
The code of ethics already developed by your field’s professionals,
The ethical code set in place by your company, and
Your own personal ethics.
Some companies have decided to have employees keep their personal ethics at home. In reality, companies that try to keep personal ethics at home find that employees are occasionally asked to perform actions that they do not condone at home. In professional settings we would like to assume that companies would not act unethically, so why should we even pay attention?
The truth is, companies do act unethically whether it is disposing of toxic waste incorrectly or price gouging to name a few. The same goes for writing professional documents. You should keep them clean and standardized to save yourself from damaging a possible job opportunity and the name you represent.
Resumes present a unique case in professional writing as they relate to ethics. In the work place, it is considered unethical if you do not present all the information related to a given project, good and bad. However when writing your resume, there is a common understanding that only good information will be included. While not including negative aspects is acceptable on a resume, including extra items that you did not accomplish is not.
When writing your resume, it is obvious that you should not lie. In today’s time, it is very easy for a prospective employer to go online, call a current or past employer, or call a reference to find out what kind of work you did. Lying in your resume will hurt you. Not only could you be rejected for a job, you could also be selling yourself for a position that you are not qualified for. For example, writing that you are experienced with Microsoft Office 2007 even if you have little experience could lead to frustration at work, poor performance reviews, or even losing your job.
Here are tips for keeping your resume within ethical boundaries:
List only the jobs you have actually held and what you did at the job.
Do not elaborate on your education. State only the schools you attended and the degrees you have completed.
Provide correct statistics about positions you have held. If you do not know the actual data, give a plausible range of data.
Do not take credit individually for something accomplished as a team.
Do not write in a way that is intended to mislead the reader.
Do not provide references that have not agreed to be listed as one.
A) worked for them, and
B) what type of employee you were, if the possible future employer wishes.
NEVER lie on your resume! It is one of the first impressions you are able to make on a potential employer, and you obviously want to leave a lasting impression. Lying on your resume or even stretching facts will not help you in the long run. Remember that you are the brand you are selling. Nothing is more important than the image you want to project.
When writing any professional document, it is important to identify the potential stakeholders. A stakeholder is anyone who will be affected by what you are intending on writing. How you choose to word your document or even the choice to write the document becomes an ethical matter to  stakeholders. It is crucial to consider your main objective(s) before writing. If you are writing a document that would be used to harm other living things (like writing a manual for a handgun) you have to weigh the implications to all stakeholders impacted. According to the Paul Anderson text, there are three types of stakeholders: direct, indirect, and remote.
The direct stakeholders are those initially impacted by what you write. For instance, if you are writing about opening a new waste disposal area, the stakeholders clearly include the company you are writing to. However, disposal companies that might use this waste area in the future are also considered direct stakeholders. Their future business will be impacted based on whether your proposal is accepted or declined.
The indirect stakeholders are those that are not impacted until a later time. Using the previous example of the waste disposal, citizens in the area would be indirect stakeholders. The stakeholders don't necessarily need to be people. The nearby eco-systems would be indirect stakeholders to this same proposal. If toxic waste is dumped there, it would harm the animals, rivers and plant life nearby.
Finally, the remote stakeholders are not affected until far into the future. One example following our hypothetical waste disposal area, is future generations. While it may seem far-fetched, historically, there have been instances where toxic or poisonous things have been disposed of  incorrectly and the run-off that went into lakes and streams caused birth defects. While this  is remote, it must be considered when writing a document.
Once on the job, you will be assigned to create many documents throughout your professional career. Some may be simple and straightforward, some may be difficult and involve questionable objectives. Overall, there are a few basic points to adhere to whenever you are writing a professional document:
This has more than one meaning to the professional writer. The main point is clear. When writing persuasively, do not write something that can cause the reader to believe something that isn't true. This can be done by lying, misrepresenting facts, or just "twisting" numbers to favor your opinion and objectives. This is clearly different from the resume ethics. Once you are on the job, you cannot leave out numbers that show you're behind or over-budget on a project, no matter how well it may work once it is completed. Facts are facts and they must be represented in that way. Be cautious when using figures, charts and tables, making sure they are not misleading. While this may seem easy to read about, when the pressure is on and there are deadlines to meet, taking shortcuts and stretching the truth are very common.
The other, less frequently used component is plagiarizing. While it may seem like this is something students learn to avoid after they graduate, it remains an important guideline for all professionals. Plagiarizing is misrepresenting the source or facts, most commonly when you claim the ideas you are writing about are yours. When you are researching professional documents, make sure you are using material with permission. If you are writing about what you've researched, make sure you are citing the sources of your information and giving credit to all the necessary researchers. This rule also extends beyond writing to what is referred to as intellectual property. Intellectual property includes the following:
Patents - Items whose credit for creation is protected
Trademarks - Company names (WalMart), logos (the Target bulls-eye), or slogans (I'm lovin' it)
Copyright law - Items whose distribution is protected by law (books, movies, or software)
None of these things can be used without proper recognition of or approval from the appropriate company or individual involved.
This law extends beyond the major companies. Any written document in your own company is copyrighted by law once produced. That means if you are borrowing a good idea from a friend at another company, you must cite them as a source. Also, although not required by law, it is a good idea to cite sources from inside your own company as well. You wouldn't want some one else taking credit for your ideas. Why should you treat others any differently?
The legal consequences are most notable when one considers writing in the professional world. While plagiarizing may give you a failing grade in a class, plagiarizing in the workplace can not only get you fired, but could result in a costly lawsuit or possibly even jail time. It is not only ethical to follow these rules, it is an enforced law. Make sure you properly document all sources so as not to mislead a reader.
If you are holding a professional job, it is understood that you have a decent ability to write persuasively, even if your first persuasive document was your resume. Do not use your ability to persuade people to do what is not in their best interest.  While this may not always seem easy, a good writer with a bad motive can twist words to make something sound like it is beneficial to all parties. The audience may find out too late that what you wrote only benefited you and actual ended up hurting them. This goes back to the stakeholders. Make sure they are not only considered and cared for when writing a persuasive document. It is easy to get caught up in the facts and forget all the people involved. Their feelings and livelihood must be considered with every appropriate document you create.
Most stereotyping takes place sub-consciously now since work places are careful to not openly discriminate. It is something we may not even be aware we are doing, so it is always a good idea to have a peer or coworker proofread your documents to make sure you have not included anything that may point to discriminatory assumptions.
Many times in the professional setting, workers find it difficult to deal with unethical practices in their company. First, begin by bringing the unethical practice to the surface, which is usually the hardest part. Paul Anderson's text reviews three ways that you can bring your company's practices to the surface. It is easiest to first start asking questions. Asking questions may seem too simple but it is an effective way of bringing attention to your company's problems. Ask questions about who their decisions are affecting and why they are making those decisions. This will not put you on the spot for being the bad guy, but it will allow you to voice your opinion.
The second idea Anderson describes as being helpful in revealing unethical practices is to use facts or reason, instead of accusation. Before you raise questions about your company's unethical practices, make sure you have cold hard facts instead of accusations.  Many times accusations are made about situations where people truly do not know the reason those decisions were being made. If you base your thoughts around true facts, your company will assume you looked into the situation and will take your thoughts more seriously.
The third helpful way to bring your company's unethical practices to the surface is to remain open to others ideas. What this allows you to do is base a solution around many different sides instead of just your own. Since people usually have different ethical values, your own stance may not coincide with everyone elses'. Make sure you identify possible values of others when considering possible solutions.
In professional writing, ethical dimensions begin to surface especially in persuasive writing. When you are trying to persuade other people to make a certain decision or to take action, stay clear of manipulation and misconceptions. At times, you may be misleading someone unintentionally. In persuasive writing, you must respect the readers values and viewpoints. Do not use false or skewed facts or argue from such premises because you may deceive the reader(s) and cause them to make an unlawful decision.
Avoiding manipulation when writing persuasively is also key. Sometimes you may be aware of the readers point. If so,  you must make sure not to use this personal information against them in your writing. It is unethical to persuade readers to make a decision that benefits yourself and not them. Most times, people try to manipulate others to receive some type of reward or gain.
To avoid using misleading or manipulating words and phrases, it is important to be open to alternative viewpoints. In preparing any type of persuasive writing, you will come across conflicting viewpoints, so being aware of other views should not be hard. Keep your readers' ideas and goals in mind and consider what lies behind their concerns. To help solve these problems it may also be good to make statements based on human values. Discussing several opinions and ideas on the subject will make you more persuasive, because most viewpoints will be included to prevent you from appearing biased.
This section presents information about legal aspects of communication which will help ensure that your writing is free of legal concerns.
This section discusses the importance of considering diversity when writing because our world is multicultural, and your writing needs to reflect our world in that regard.
What is the nature of the ethical dilemma?
What are the specific aspects of this dilemma that make you uncomfortable?
What are your competing obligations in this dilemma?
What advice does a trusted supervisor or mentor offer?
Does your company's code of conduct address this issue?
Does your professional association's code of conduct address this issue?
What are you unwilling to do? What are you willing to do?
How will you explain or justify your decision?
This function is similar to the VAL function, but it can only evaluate a string which represents an integer. The advantage of using VAL& is that it executes more quickly than VAL.
VAL& ignores leading spaces in string$, and it stops evaluating the string when it encounters a character that is not part of standard integer notation. Note that this means VAL& will stop evaluating the string when it encounters a decimal point or an "E" exponent indicator. That means that certain strings which represent integers will be evaluated differently by VAL than by VAL&. For example, the string "24.61E2" will be evaluated as 2461 by VAL, but as 24 by VAL&.
Appendix C: Data Types and Data Representation
Front Desk Protocol:  What do I do at the Front Desk?
N °-SEEDS/GR.
GERMINATION, TEMPERATURE OPTIMA
Choose Applications > System > Menu Editor.
Navigate to where you want to add your selection.
Click on the symbol which looks like a piece of paper with a star in it.
Now come over to the Command: type box and click on the small file folder on the right.
The browser window will now open.
Click on My Linux, and then click on All File Systems
You should now be in /usr/bin directory
Locate the name of the program you want to add to the menu selection and click on it.
You're almost done. Now press CTRL S or click on floppy symbol to save.
You now have a menu selection added that you can run your program you just installed.
If you wish to put a menu item on the desktop as a shortcut then click on Launch.
Click on item from menu. While holding down left mouse button drag it to the desktop.
Annotations to James Joyce's UlyssesPreceding Page | Page Index | Next Page
Play media  The scope of this handbook
Managing, Evaluating and Communicating
Sharing knowledge and tools for cooperation and dialogue
How you can participate and make a difference
Development Cooperation in Action: steps and tools
How do we Monitor and Evaluate Projects and Programmes?
The Communication Challenge in International Cooperation for Development
1 -  MDG 1 - Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
2 -  MDG 2: Achieve universal primary education
3 -  MDG 3: Promote gender equality and empower women
4 -  MDG 4 Reduce child mortality
5 -  MDG 5: Improve maternal health
6 -  MDG 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
8 -  MDG 8: Develop a Global Partnership for Development
Other Handbooks, Manuals, Tools
Play media  We hope we have been able to communicate the values of those who fight for the rights of the underprivileged
General introduction: the scope of this handbook
Overview of the Content of this handbook
The video resources linked to this handbook
Linking relief, rehabilitation and development
Actors and Other Stakeholders - Who is "on board" and why?
The Millennium Development Goals and the International Development Agenda
National and International commitments to MDGs -  (Doc 1)
How can local policy actors contribute to the achievement of global policy objectives? - (Doc 6)
NGOs as development actors: their role, their  challenges - (Doc 4)
Can we, as individuals, contribute to the achievement of the Global Development Agenda?
Cooperation - How?
Do developed and developing nations agree on the road map for global development? - (Doc 3)
Does international aid really benefits the target populations? - (Doc 2)
What is the relationship between "Global" and "Local" agendas and responsibilities? - (Doc 8)
How to design and manage successful cooperation programmes? -  (Doc 5)
Communication - How?
Media and the international communication climate.
Sharing knowledge and resources - (Doc 7)
This wikibook is the result of a collective effort; the Kautilya Society is a Non Governmental Organization taking on a facilitator role in managing the project that promotes the collection and sharing of knowledge resources that form the basis of this handbook. The principal editors of the articles are  Stefano De Santis and Vrinda Dar. Contribution from all sources are  welcome, in line with the   Wikimedia founding principles.
Please send an e-mail message if you'd like to provide feedback, criticism, correction, suggestions etc. regarding this wikibook or share any resource and tool that can be linked to it
⇒   The Vrinda Project Channel
⇒ The Development cooperation stories
⇒  The development Cooperation Issues
⇒  The stories related  to the specific  MDGs
⇒   The backstage dialogues
More in ⇒  The video resources linked to this handbook
⇒  Kautilya Society for Intercultural Dialogue
⇒  The Vrinda Project Channel on YouTube
⇒   The Vrinda Project Page  on Facebook
⇒   TVP Channel Page on Google+
Do you speak Bulgarian?
Go-'vo-ree-teh lee 'buhl-gar-ski?
Please, enter!
Enter!
The 'Bit_Order attribute is not intended to convert data between a big-endian and a little-endian machine (it affects bit numbering, not byte order). The compiler will not generate code to reorder multi-byte fields when a non-native bit order is specified.[1][2][3]
↑ AI95-00133-01 (1996-05-07). "Controlling bit ordering". Class: binding interpretation. Ada Rapporteur Group. http://www.ada-auth.org/cgi-bin/cvsweb.cgi/ais/ai-00133.txt?rev=1.17. "Bit_Order clauses are concerned with the numbering of bits and not concerned with data flipping interoperability."
↑ ISO/IEC 8652:2007. "13.5.3 Bit Ordering (9/2)". Ada 2005 Reference Manual. http://www.adaic.com/standards/05rm/html/RM-13-5-3.html#I4589. Retrieved 2008-06-02. "Bit_Order clauses make it possible to write record_representation_clauses that can be ported between machines having different bit ordering. They do not guarantee transparent exchange of data between such machines."
↑ Thomas Quinot (January 2013). "Gem #140: Bridging the Endianness Gap". AdaCore. http://www.adacore.com/adaanswers/gems/gem-140-bridging-the-endianness-gap/. Retrieved 2013-01-31. "the order in which the bytes that constitute machine scalars are written to memory is not changed by the Bit_Order attribute -- only the indices of bits within machine scalars are changed."
What characterizes a Knowledge Building teacher?
Moderator: (structuring or orchestrating the plenary discussions. Should the students ideally be doing this). Is the ultimate goal that the teacher can leave the classroom and students are still able to do great work?
GM: Well, there’[re] bricks, which are still opaque. But they’re not reflective. But I don’t know what they are called, like that kind of opaque. JL (2:20)
JL: I think all opaque materials are reflective, except not all of them reflect light back. … OK, let’s just say um like…a yellow carpet… your eyes would be able to see the yellow of it because it would only reflect yellow light. That means like that sort of like a tissue for example that would only reflect white, except the yellow carpet, since it’s like green mixed with red, I believe. Then the beam of red [and green] light would touch us and your eyes would take it in as yellow. (2:31)
Teacher: So you’re saying everything is reflective then. Every opaque object is reflective to some degree. Oh, I hear some people disagree. Can you pass it on? [JL: SG.] (3:58)
FJ: I think if wood is shiny and polished, you could see your reflection. I think it’s mostly just shiny objects so it depends on what kind of wood you have, what kind of table you have, if you see your reflection. SG. (4:53)
Teacher: The question is: Are all opaque objects reflective? Have we answered that? … Do all opaque objects reflect light? Anyone has a theory or evidence to support that? So, SG, it’s yours to pass. [SG: DN.] (5:16)
DN: Um, actually all opaque objects do reflect light, because they reflect their own color. So we see them as whatever color they are. TS. [inaudible student talking] (5:35)
Teacher: Hold on, let’s hear him talk. (5:57)
TS: If they didn’t reflect their own color, you wouldn’t see a brick of red, or someone’s t-shirt as purple or whatever. RP. (5:59)
Teacher: Don’t throw it back to him. Give your theory. (6:14)
RP: I don’t think black reflects. I think that black might reflect light, but it might not. Because we had a reading today that um all the colors of the rainbow make white light and there is a note in the database about that, and everything reflects its own color. But it didn’t say anything about black. EY. (6:18)
Assessment: (peer review or should the teacher assess the students?). What about assessing the class´ collective performance?
Statistical tools.
Facilitating idea development: How do you locate good ideas? Who located them? The teacher or the student? Usual that teacher chooses a broad topic and within this framework students can develop their own ideas?
Idea development in Knowledge Forum (other online environments) and in the class discussion?
In principle, will idea development be the same in all school subjects? Or different in natural science comparet to social science? Will social science be more influenced by critical pedagogy? Implications for teacher collaboration?
Authority: (relationship with the students): More a team member with extra qualifications that the person who knows the answer.
Professional development (production of material related to Knowledge Building in practice) (text, video, presentations etc.). Portfolio? Participation in online workshops related to Knowledge Building pedagogy.
Collaboration with other teachers: Guiding beginning teachers, learning from other teacher´s practice.
Discussing Knowledge Building pedagogy: Both group meetings and online environment?
What teacher training does the Knowledge Building pedagogy require?
What kind of skill, knowledge, attitude. Do you need to be very competent in the school subject you are teaching? More classroom lessons with colleagues in interdisciplinary projects.
How much do you need to discuss examples vs principles?
Need communicative competence. Also recommend some communication techniques? (e.g. students picking next speaker, not teacher). Need to explicitly train strategies that are different from IRE?  Do you have to learn Knowledge Building as rules first or can start to work as an expert at once (Dreyfus model of skill acquisition). To what degree is the knowledge tacit and not possible to explain as procedures? (Elliot W. Eisner on connoisseurship).
Analyze Knowledge Building discourse to increase sensitivity (video and text transcriptions).
Are student teachers at OiSE required to read articles about Knowledge Building?
What characterizes a Knowledge Building mentor teacher?
Co-development of ideas with beginning teacher/student teacher
Participation in a local or global Knowledge Building community is recommended (either with other colleagues at school or another school). How do you encourage establishment of such communities?
Not enough to share ideas, teachers should also develop ideas together. Face-to-face communication or online enviroment?
Sharing of lession plans, videos, texts in open or closed online environment? Wikibook?
Zhang, J., & Messina, R. (2010). Collaborative productivity as self-sustaining processes in a Grade 4 knowledge building community. In K. Gomez, J. Radinsky, & L. Lyons (Eds.), Proceedings of the 9th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 49-56). Chicago, IL: International Society of the Learning Sciences.
This wiki fact sheet is based on the journal article "Increasing Physical Activity in Individuals With Autism"[1]
Sustaining physical activity engagement in those with autism
What is the Background for this research
Autism is a complex neurobiological disorder that spans for the entirety of the sufferers life. Autism sufferers have difficulties with social and communication skills which lead to numerous behavioural challenges. It is a lifelong developmental condition effecting the way individuals relate to environments and other people. Sufferers have difficult ways of learning, paying attention and reacting to stimuli. Autism is part of a group of disorders known as ASD Autism Spectrum Disorder. Most causes for the disorder are unknown and it’s estimated that 1 in 100 people are diagnosed with the disorder and require specialist support. It is estimated that almost 230,000 Australians suffer from the disorder with boys almost 4 times higher in numbers than girls.[2][3]
This research was conducted at a Canadian school for individuals with severe disabilities both outdoors on a standard soccer field and indoors on rainy days.[1] This research was conducted by Teri Todd, MA, (Doctoral candidate at McGill University.) and Greg Reid, PhD, (A professor of kinesiology and physical education at McGill University)[1]
What kind of research was this?
This was a 6-month outdoor physical activity program using a changing conditions design.[1]
What did the research involve?
In this 6 month outdoor physical activity program, the researchers used a changing conditions design.[1] The program was divided into 6 phases with 28 sessions where reinforcers were used during certain sessions.[1] Verbal cuing(positive reinforcements) , self-monitoring board(sticker chart to emulate success) and edible reinforcements(gummie bears,chips,lollies) were used in the study.[1] Participants "snow shoed" (walking in snow shoes), walked and jogged for 30-min sessions throughout the program.[1]
What were the basic results?
Basic results were very similar with each participant seeing an increase towards sustaining physical activity throughout the program.[1]
The three test participants Tom, Mike and Robert each increased the number of completed circuits with all increasing the distance walked/jogged throughout the 28 weeks of the program.[1]
Toms snowshoeing distance increased by 200m over 9 sessions with the distance walked/jogged increasing from 840m to 2100m which is an increase of 1200m over 21 sessions with decreased edible reinforcements.[1]
Mikes snowshoeing also increased by 200m over 9 sessions and doubled the distance walked/jogged from 1140m to 2280m which is an increase of 1140 km over the 17 sessions remaining.[1]
Robert doubled his snowshoeing distance from 200m to 400m over the first 9 sessions he also increased his distance walked/jogged from 410m to 1240 km over a 30 minute session for the remainder of his sessions.[1] Robert did not cover the same distance overall as the other participant having missed sessions through illness.[1] However the results clearly show increases in sustained physical activity with uses of edible reinforcements, verbal cueing and a self monitoring board to project pride in successful accomplishments.[1]
How did the researchers interpret the results?
The researchers determined that light exercise with verbal cuing, edible reinforcements and self monitoring boards were associated with increasing the results of sustaining physical activity engagement in the autistic participants.[1]
The researchers determined that those with autism lack the motivation to exercise for sustained durations meaning they do not acquire the health benefits from 30 minutes of sustained exercise which is proven to be highly beneficial to ones cardio vascular health and fitness.[1] By adding the elements of cuing, lollies and stickers the researchers produced positive results in engaging and sustaining physical activity with the participants.[1]
What conclusions should be taken away from this research?
The conclusion that should be taken away from this research is that physical activity is beneficial to ones health and no matter what body type, age or disability there are massive benefits in finding the motivational structures to enable anyone to engage in physical activity for a sustained duration. To promote health and well being in those with autism this research in particular provides a window into ways in which even those with behavioral, motivational & social disabilities can engage and benefit from sustained physical activity over a duration of 6 months leading to a better healthier life. With this research being completed in 2006 and not yet 10 years old, its not clear if this is the most beneficial way to engage those with autism into physical activity for sustained durations with this research only having 3 participants. However there are more papers on similar types of studies that have produced similar results but I believe more research needs to be conducted to know if this is in fact the most beneficial way to sustain physical activity engagement in those with autism.[4]
What are the implications of this research?
This research gives an implication that given the amount of data collected from the three participants using the
Self Monitoring Boards[1]
To collect more accurate data a larger population size is needed and a wider range of physical activities would suggest a stronger conclusion to the results.
Future studies should include a larger population to draw data from and investigate whether this approach is sustainable for a participants who are doing this method in home based environment.
↑ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v Todd, T., and G. Reid. 'Increasing Physical Activity In Individuals With Autism'. Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities 21.3 (2006): 167-176. Web
↑ Autismspectrum.org.au,. 'What Is Autism? | Autism Spectrum'. N.p., 2015. Web. 18 Sept. 2015.
↑ Better Health Channel,. 'Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) - Better Health Channel'. N.p., 2015. Web. 18 Sept. 2015.
↑ Shepard, Roy J. 'Curricular Physical Activity And Academic Performance'. Pediatric Exercise Science 9 (1997): 113 -126. Print.
Type:InsectFamily:CicadellidaeOrder: HemipteraMetamorphosis:SimpleDamaging stages:Nymphs and adultsDiseases vectored:Some species serve as vectors
Leafhopper is a common name applied to any species from the family Cicadellidae. Leafhoppers, also known as hoppers, are minute plant-feeding insects in the superfamily Cicadelloidea in the homopterous division of the order Hemiptera. Recent classification within the Hemiptera has changed the old term 'Homoptera' into two new suborders: Sternorryncha (aphids, whiteflies, scales, psyllids...) and Auchenorryncha (cicadas, leafhoppers, treehoppers, planthoppers...) with the suborder: Heteroptera containing a large group of insects known as the 'true-bugs', (gnat bugs, pond skaters, shore bugs, toad bugs, water boatmen, backswimmers, etc...)
Leafhoppers are found all over the world, and it is the second largest family in the Hemiptera; there are at least 20,000 described species. Leafhoppers have piercing sucking mouthparts, they feed on plant sap and can transmit plant-infecting viruses and bacteria. Species that are significant agricultural pests include the potato leafhopper, beet leafhopper, white apple leafhopper, two-spotted leafhopper, and glassy-winged sharpshooter. A Leafhoppers' diet commonly consists of plant sap from a wide and diverse range of plants. Leafhoppers mainly consume vegetation but have been known to indulge in small insects.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Cicadellidae
Carver, M, FG. Gross, and TE. Woodward. 1991. Hemiptera (bugs, leafhoppers, cidadas, aphids, scale insects, etc.) In: The Insects of Australia - a Textbook for Students and Research Workers Volume 1. Melbourne University Press, Melbourne, Australia".
Red-banded leafhopper Graphocephala coccinea - diagnostic photographs and information
You're almost there! If you haven't taken your SATs yet, do so ASAP. Start visiting prospective colleges, and don't fall prey to "senioritis". Work hard in AP classes so you can skip lower level classes in college.
The program that draws the picture from the file must do all the things that we have done in the opposite order. The width and the height of the picture and the quality factor(s) must be read from a header.
Let us sum up what must be done in the construction of the data part of the file:
For each point, convert the RGB values to YCbCr values
For the Y, Cb and Cr component, cosine transform the s2 numbers
Order these 3 x s2 numbers after the zigzag principle
Replace the first number of an s2-sequence (the DC term) by its derivation from the analogues number for the preceding square
In the resulting sequence of integers, replace each unbroken sequence of zeros by its length (possibly 0)
Write each integer as a sequence of bits (having two parts: a code and a digit expression), so that the sequences can be joined together into a continuous stream of bits.
After the header (stating the width and the height and the quality factor) has been read, we must convert each read byte of the file to an 8-block of bits, and then decode the resulting stream of bits. Each sequence of bits determining an integer consists of two parts. The first part forms a code, which is designed so that we can see where it ends. We decode it, and in this way get a natural number m. The second part of the sequence is the next m bits in the stream, and these m bits are the binary digit expression of an integer. However, if this sequence begins with 0, this indicates that the integer is negative, and the 0 must be replaced by 1. Every second integer (being non-negative) states a number of zeros, and we (imagine that we) write down these zeros. We do this until we have numbers enough to draw an sxs-square of the picture, namely 3 x s2 numbers. These 3 x s2 numbers are obtained by cosine transform and by quantization of the s2 colour values for the three components. They must first be de-quantized by multiplying by the numbers we have divided by. After this the very first number of each s2-sequence (the DC term) must be added to the corresponding number for the preceding sxs-square, as these numbers represent differences. By the inverse zigzag procedure, each of the three s2-sequences is converted to a sxs-matrix of numbers g(u, v), u, v = 0, 1, ..., s-1, and to this matrix the inverse cosine transform is applied, giving a matrix f(i, j), i, j = 0, 1, ...,s-1, of colour values for the Y, Cb and Cr component. For each point (i, j) in the sxs-square, the three colour values f(i, j) make up an YCbCr triple, which is converted to a RGB triple, and the point in the picture corresponding to the point (i, j) in the square is coloured with these RGB values.
The BlitzMax StandardIO module contains commands for reading and writing text to the standard IO (Input/Output) stream.
The standard IO stream is generally connected to a 'console', allowing you to interact with an application in a very simple way.
Global StandardIOStream:TStream=TTextStream.Create( New TCStandardIO,TTextStream.UTF8 )
Description: BlitzMax Stream object used for Print and Input
Information: The Print and Input commands can be redirected by setting the StandardIOStream Global to an alternative Stream Object.
Description: Write a string to the standard IO stream
Information: A newline character is also written after str.
Use the Print command to output BlitzMax strings to the Console window.
Description: Receive a line of text from the standard IO stream
Use the Input command to read user input from the console to a BlitzMax String.
.
The following feasibility problem should be solved as sufficient condition for the stability of the above Lur'e system.
If the feasibility problem with LMI constraints has solution, then the Lure's system is stable.
The LMI is only a sufficient condition for the existence of a Lur’e Lyapunov function that proves stability of Lur'e system . It is also necessary when there is only one nonlinearity, i.e., when
.
LMI Methods in Optimal and Robust Control - A course on LMIs in Control by Matthew Peet.
LMI Properties and Applications in Systems, Stability, and Control Theory - A List of LMIs by Ryan Caverly and James Forbes.
LMIs in Systems and Control Theory - A downloadable book on LMIs by Stephen Boyd.
This function returns a substring or subcontainer of string$ or container$$, consisting of characters which begin at position startPos within string$ or container$$. If you specify numChars, then a maximum of numChars characters are returned; otherwise, all the characters from startPos to the end of string$ or container$$ are returned. If startPos is less than 1, then it's treated as 1. If startPos is greater than the length of string$ or container$$, then a null (zero-length) string is returned.
You may not use complex expressions that include containers on the right side of the equal sign. Instead of using:
Lyrics  |  Manuscript  |  Authors and Composers
Appendix 1: Lyrics by Occasion/Theme  |  Appendix 2: Textual/Musical Witnesses  |  Appendix 3: Bibliography
Hey nowe nowe.
As in Farthing’s “Hey now now” (H 16), below, the words of this piece are given to a round but possibly with different lyrics (absent from the text of H) intended. There is little room left among the musical notation for additional text. In the list of contents for the manuscript, the title “hey now of Kempe” is given, though the latter two words appear in a script varying from the former.[1] Stevens (MCH8 16), without stated explanation, gives the text presented below in italics, which is from Robbins (Secular Lyrics #141):
Merry a time I tell in May
When bright blossoms breaks on tree,
“Hey nowe nowe” appears to have been a common song burden (see, for example, Stevens M&P 47–48).  See also Daggere’s “Downbery down” (H 16.5, and note).
“Hey nowe nowe” is indexed, as with Farthing’s piece, in Robbins Index & Suppl. 1214.6 and Ringler MS TM594.  The piece is reprinted in Stevens M&P 390 and Stevens MCH8 16.
↑ This script is also used to correct the list’s exclusion of the work falling between its numbers 8 and 10, “perdon amoy.” Not actually a separate work, “perdon amoy” is the second stanza of Cornish’s “Adew mes amours et mon desyre” (H 6), the text of which is given below also.
The arts are vast subdivision of culture. The words “art” and “artist” usually refer to the visual arts. Art, as understood in many engineering schools is effete, marginal and perhaps useless. It is a “soft” subject lacking the rigor of the hard sciences. But in reality, there is very little difference.
The economics of engineering projects evolved from patrons, commissions and grants just like art. Joseph B. Strauss spent eight years campaigning unsuccessfully for financial and political support until he switched from a bascule to a suspension bridge. Then he was made chief engineer on the Golden Gate Bridge. Even today engineers depend upon government grants/contracts, commercial investment or work for hire to finance projects.
Visual art is a huge part of engineering. Engineers imagine and draw. The original engineers were graphic artists. Ax users had improvement ideas. The engineer/artist would listen and draw. Then the engineer/artist would take the drawings to a blacksmith. A new ax would be made and tested.
As late as the 60's, the first engineering class was engineering drawing. Thomas E. French's textbook "A Manual of Engineering Drawing" set the drawing standards for over 50 years. It was published as late as 1994 (14th edition). It is still a great way to teach K-12 drawing. Most engineering colleges today expect engineering students to learn 3D modeling software such as ProE Wildfire, SolidWorks, AutoDesk Inventor, or Google Sketchup for a project.
Successful artists are not arbitrary, whimsical or undisciplined. Artists can not be arbitrary otherwise they will not get financial support. Engineers also want freedom from people telling them what to do. Artists can not be whimsical or they will never develop a style that is unique. So does an Engineer develop a reputation of working successfully with particular technologies. An artist can not be undisciplined otherwise art never gets done. Both engineers and artists have “style.”
The best artists don't work alone. Inspiration comes from rubbing against the sharp edges of other people .. and from creating edges in an otherwise homogenous boredom. This is true of engineering. Managers feel most confident after seeing engineers disagree and then work to a consensus. Engineers learn that music, movement, talking, changing the medium (paper, whiteboard, computer) all help get homework or project work done just like artists.
Art is not more open ended than engineering. Engineers start with ill-defined problems that have no single “right” answer, but many. Some problems are over-constrained (too many conflicting requests/requirements). Others are under-constrained (too few requests/requirements, don't know where to start). Some have no solutions. How does one prove this? Some solutions are better than others. Making wrong choices is the same kind of game as making right choices because often the neither has been done before. Nobody knows what the right or optimum design because nobody knows yet what optimum is. For example, a bicycle is slightly unstable in one dimension. This makes it easy to turn. It took 30 years after Wright brother's first powered flight for pilots and engineers to find the optimum aircraft stability/instability.
The work of an engineer appears precise but concealed are information choices, inarticulate judgments, acts of intuition, and assumptions about the way the world works. The information an engineer conveys is overwhelming visual: not verbal, not numerical. Behind the drawings and screen shots are numbers, instructions, programs and application stories, just like visual art.
Modern engineering projects still require engineering artists. As engineering has moved closer to science, specialized artistic professions that combine elements of engineering have emerged. These include architects, industrial design, and environmental design. The 1999 ABC NightLine episode "DeepDive" captures the industrial design part of engineering perfectly.
A frustrated engineer has several choices. One is to find a different starting point. Another is to do the same thing over and over again until bored. Then sink into the boredom until the playful spirit can be found.
.. just stare at the machine. There is nothing wrong with that. Just live with it for a while.
Watch it the way you watch a line when fishing and before long, as sure as you live, you'll get a
Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, Part III 26
A third way, the way of symmetry, pattern and matching is that of art. Some engineers see a Fink Truss" when looking at a snake rib cage. Some engineers create a circuit without the QMC design method by merely being guided by beauty.
"Poets say science takes away from the beauty of the stars - mere globs of gas atoms. I too can see the stars
a part... What is the pattern, or the meaning, or the why? It does not do harm to the mystery to know a little
Engineers know that when their creation is truthful, beautiful and good they have a winner. It is called "elegant". Practice this while doing homework. Skip the design rules of the moment. Focus on beauty. Test whether the result meets all the technical requirements.
This can lead to a study of "form follows function, form factor, and ultimately the Greek philosophy of form".
Something can be Truthful (does what it claims), Good (helps improve the world), and not sell because it is ugly. Something can be a fraud, useless (Pet Rock), and still sell because it is beautiful. Some engineers restore old iron bridges (art) for a living. Others create companies manufacturing and selling electronic art supplies or exotic, expensive wood working tools. They get involved in music videos and commercials. Some freshman engineering classes only encourage Rube Goldberg type projects.
The practice of engineering are the activities of students and working engineers, the books they read, the honors they receive, the tools they invest in, and the service they render.
Visual artists have juried shows and "hangings" where their work is displayed. The Royal Society of Arts has been awarding prizes for solutions to particular problems since the 1700s. Solving these problems is called a "competition" in the US. Competitions are sponsored by the US Federal Government(DARPA, NASA), state governments and industry. Some of these competitions start with seed money to jump start projects and award enough prize money each year to keep the going nationally. Others require raising money. Competitions are sponsored by engineering associations, by local museums and independent non-profits. There are so many competitions, that schools with several teams entering several competitions has a chance to win.
All engineering colleges hang project posters. Some hangings last years, others are setup for a day. At some colleges, Projects day] starts off with poster sessions and then transitions in to presentations. The audience consists of freshman and parents making a decision to come to the college, all engineering students standing by their poster ready to explain their project, and professors entertaining potential project clients (businesses) that are going to pay for projects to be done at the college.
At a community college, the minimum is to set up a poster session for a couple of days. Put some folding tables up in a hall way, lean some foam board against the wall and begin marketing the event. Include any scientific papers.
Even small communities have engineers displaying their farm equipment, carriages, old cars, old tractors, old electronics. There are museums of industry, science museums, air and space, and history museums. Some museums are boxes full of show and tell items demonstrated in schools. Some are merely clubs that fly RC aircraft or ham radio operators practicing disaster response. The best vision of these museums are in science fiction book "The Mote in God's Eye." These institutions are always need the attention of youth.
The importance of physical models that describe how things work has been diminished by the physics of games and web sites such as how stuff works. However, first hand experience with models jump starts engineering intuition. Certain museums specialize in these models such as the Rode Island Steam Museum steam. The importance of models was recognized in the 1700s. There is a museum in Sweden with 412 models built before 1800. They include the "mechanical alphabet" which includes levers, wedges, screws, pulleys, winches, etc. Today's plastic models are a good starting point for kids.
Today's tool kits are Legos and the DIY arduino world. Back in the 80's, old mechanical tool kits were abandoned in the name of "high tech." The old mechanical tool kits were associated with gears, belts, alignment, engines, and movement in general. The next wave of tool kits are biological.
Many early rags to engineering/science riches stories all start with a young person working in a book store.
Before 1995, engineers could be defined by what technical manuals and books they collected. The Pirotechnia (1540) includes 85 wood engraves on metallurgy. The Theatrum Machinarum, published between 1724 and 1739, distilled the mechanical repertoire of that time into 10 volumes and nearly 500 engraved plates. The Mechanick-Exercises (1683) describes the trades of printing, smithing, joinery, turning, and bricklaying.
Perry's handbook has recipes for just about any unit process a chemical engineering could want. Don Lancaster's cookbooks jump started the careers of many electrical engineers. Civil engineering has so many empirical design books (soil, oceans, traffic, etc.) that many other engineering disciplines feel Civil engineers are not "scientific" or "mathematical" enough. This is not true. See science in this text.
Most engineering books are as expensive as text books. In fact they begin to look like textbooks. And like text books, they are slowly moving into the public domain. Many are emerging as expensive simulation software. Older versions are moving onto the net. Find them. Read the books. Learn the simulation software just like Hoover, Faraday and .. would have done.
Engineering books are just tools. A hammer inspires smashing. Paintbrushes inspire painting. Engineering books and simulation software inspire much more.
Many engineers collect junk. Anything broken is taken apart, not thrown away. A good junk pile is inspirational. Junk piles are useful in a freshman engineering class to transition students from playing, through doing things first, to design. Reuse of the junk is a selling point during presentations because the audience already has an understanding of form, function, and life cycle.
Reuse is highlighted in Rube Goldberg projects. For example, a rube goldberg project on laser printers would expose all the motors, relays, switches and re-purpose them. The laser would be replaced with a bright LED and the mirror would distribute it's light. Rube Goldberg projects are great freshman projects because they are open-ended. Here open ended means there are no expectations in the sense of maximizing artistic freedom:
He experimented further. In one class he had everyone write all hour about the back of his thumb. Everyone gave him
Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, Part III, 16
FONT-SERIF is a string of value: "times"
Of the first 10 B Class broadcasting stations announced on 15 November 1924 as having been licensed by the Postmaster-General, only three were to be based in Sydney. The Sydney licensees were AWA, a conglomerate of radio interests and Electrical Utilities. The AWA station was never implemented as the combine elected to focus on equipment supply. The radio interests conglomerate was the first to commence (2BE Sydney), but failed in the late 1920s in the context of the great depression. But the Electrical Utilities station commenced quietly on 26 January 1925 under the stewardship of Cecil Vincent ("Pa") Stevenson and with minimum capital expenditure and low ongoing costs. It survives today as 2UE Sydney, the oldest presently licensed commercial radio station and as one of the strongest and most popular radio stations in Australia.
More than 150 key articles relevant to 2UE, mainly from the NLA's Trove Digitised Newspapers have been transcribed for ease of reference here: 2UE Transcriptions and Notes
Macquarie Sports Radio 954  (some early historical inaccuracies to be corrected)
[[1]]  (refer January 26 for summary details of 2UE)
[[2]]  (Brief overview of Stevenson and 2UE, focus on equipment)
"Stevenson, Cecil Vincent (Pa)". The Dictionary of Sydney. https://dictionaryofsydney.org/person/stevenson_cecil_vincent_pa. Retrieved 2018-07-28.
"Index to Registers of Firms". NSW State Archives. https://www.records.nsw.gov.au/archives/collections-and-research/guides-and-indexes/business-and-company-records. Retrieved 2018-07-29.
Books, theses & major articles
Carty, Bruce. Australian Radio History (4th ed. Sydney, 2013) [3]
Crawford, Robert. But wait, there's more...: a history of Australian advertising, 1900–2000 (Melbourne Univ. Press, 2008) [4]
Cunningham, Stuart, and Graeme Turner, eds. The Media & Communications in Australia (2nd ed. 2010) online
Curnow, Geoffrey Ross. "The history of the development of wireless telegraphy and broadcasting in Australia to 1942, with especial reference to the Australian Broadcasting Commission: a political and administrative study". online
Elliot, Hugh. "The Three-Way Struggle of Press, Radio and TV in Australia". Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly (1960) 37#2 pp: 267–274.
Geeves, P. "The Dawn of Australia's Radio Broadcasting". online
Given, Donald Jock. "Transit of Empires: Ernest Fisk and the World Wide Wireless". (Melbourne, 2007) [5]
Griffen-Foley, Bridget. Changing Stations the story of Australian commercial radio [6]
Griffen-Foley, Bridget. "Australian Commercial Radio, American Influences—and The BBC". Historical Journal of Film, Radio and Television (2010) 30#3 pp: 337–355. online
Griffen‐Foley, Bridget. "From the Murrumbidgee to Mamma Lena: Foreign language broadcasting on Australian commercial radio, part I". Journal of Australian Studies 2006; 30(88): 51–60. part 1 online; part 2 online
Hadlow, Martin Lindsay. "Wireless and Empire ambition: wireless telegraphy/telephony and radio broadcasting in the British Solomon Islands Protectorate, South-West Pacific (1914–1947): political, social and developmental perspectives". (Martin Hadlow, Brisbane, 2016) [7] [8]
Harte, Bernard. When Radio Was The Cat's Whiskers (Rosenberg Publishing, 2002) [9]
Jolly, Rhonda. Media ownership and regulation: a chronology (Canberra, 2016) [10]
Jones, Colin. Something in the air : a history of radio in Australia (Kenthurst, 1995) [11]
Kent, Jacqueline. Out of the Bakelite Box: the heyday of Australian radio (Sydney, 1983) [12]
Langhans, Ron. The First Twelve Months of Radio Broadcasting in Australia 1923–1924 (R. Langhans, 2013) [13]
Mackay, Ian K. Broadcasting in Australia (Melbourne University Press, 1957) [14]
MacKinnon, Colin. Australian Radio Publications and Magazines (Ian O'Toole, 2004) online
Moran, Albert, and Chris Keating. The A to Z of Australian Radio and Television (Scarecrow Press, 2009) [15]
Muscio, Winston T. Australian Radio, The Technical Story 1923–1983 (Kangaroo Press, 1984) [16]
Potts, John. Radio in Australia (UNSW Press, 1989) [17]
Ross, John F. Radio Broadcasting Technology, 75 Years of Development in Australia 1923–1998 (J. F. Ross, 1998) [18]
Walker, R. R. The Magic Spark: 50 Years of Radio in Australia (Hawthorn Press, 1973) [19]
Ward, Ian (1999). "The early use of radio for political communication in Australia and Canada: John Henry Austral, Mr Sage and the Man from Mars". Australian Journal of Politics & History 45 (3):  311–330. doi:10.1111/1467-8497.00067. https://www.questia.com/library/journal/1G1-56182731/the-early-use-of-radio-for-political-communication.
Wireless Institute of Australia (editor Wolfenden, Peter). Wireless Men & Women at War (Wireless Institute of Australia, Melbourne, 2017) [20]
Young, Sally (2003). "A century of political communication in Australia, 1901–2001". Journal of Australian Studies 27 (78):  97–110. doi:10.1080/14443050309387874. https://www.questia.com/library/journal/1G1-110806188/a-century-of-political-communication-in-australia.
"Sea Land and Air". (1918 to 1923) [21]online
"Australasian Radio Review". (1923 to 1924) online
"Radio in Australian and New Zealand". (1923 to 1928) online
"Queensland Radio News". (1925 to 1933) online
"Broadcasting Business" & "Commercial Broadcasting". (1934 to 1947) online
"Australasian Radio World". (1936 to 1950) online
"Radio and Hobbies". (1939 to 1965) online
"Radio Trade Annual of Australia". (1933 to 1937) online
"Broadcasting Business Year Book". (1936 to 1939) online
"Broadcasting and Television Year Book". (1958 to 1990+) online
Australia, Postmaster-General's Department. "Annual Reports 1910–1975" NLA
Australia, Department of the Media. "Annual Reports 1973–1976" NLA
Australia, Postal and Telecommunications Department. "Annual Reports 1978–1980" NLA
Australia, Department of Communications (1). "Annual Reports 1981–1987" NLA
Australia, Department of Transport and Communications. "Annual Reports 1988–1993" NLA
Australia, Department of Communications and the Arts. "Annual Reports 1994–1998" NLA
Australia, Department of Communications, Information Technology and the Arts. "Annual Reports 1999–2007" NLA
Australia, Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy. "Annual Reports 2008–2013" NLA
Australia, Department of Communications (3). "Annual Reports 2014–2015" NLA
Australia, Department of Communications and the Arts (2). "Annual Reports 1999–2007" NLA
Australian Broadcasting Control Board. "Annual Reports 1949–1976" NLA online
Australian Telecommunications Commission T/as Telecom Australia. "Annual Reports". 1976–1991 NLA 1993 – present NLA
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal. "Annual Reports 1977–1992" NLA online
Australian Broadcasting Authority. "Annual Reports 1993–2005" NLA
Australian Communications and Media Authority. "Annual Reports 2006–present" NLA
This section of the book, Mining the Web, shows you step by step how to start mining global data from the World Wide Web to meet personal needs such as those in job search. You should have by now picked up all the basic concepts in PlanoTse along The Shortest Route, which is Part I of this book. Those basic concepts are necessary for comprehension of the following chapters.
Chapter 6. Web Search Automation Process
Chapter 7. Discovering Search Boundary
Chapter 8. Constructing Domain Templates
Chapter 9. Developing Search Logic
Chapter 10. - Driving Web Search
Moves: 1.e4 h6
A reversed St. George Defense, (Chess Opening Theory/1. e4/1...a6), this defense is considered a very weak response to the King's Pawn Opening, as not only does it not open any lines for development and allow White quick and easy development, it additionally weakens Black's king position slightly and is a time wasting move. Black often follows up with g5, Bg7, d6, and Bg4 or Bf5. Generally, Black castles queenside in the Carr Defense.
For explanation of theory tables see theory table and for notation see algebraic notation
e4 h6?!
d4e5?!
When contributing to this Wikibook, please follow the Conventions for organization.
Wikipedia has related information at Carr Defense
Eric Schiller (2002). Unorthodox Chess Openings (Second Edition ed.). Cardoza. ISBN 1-58042-072-9. , p. 104
Modern Chess Openings: MCO-14. 1999. Nick de Firmian, Walter Korn. ISBN 0-8129-3084-3.
v • d • e Chess Openings1. e4 e5
Sicilian Defence · Closed Sicilian · Taimanov · Sveshnikov · Kan Sicilian · Sicilian Dragon ·  Scheveningen · Najdorf · Alapin1. e4 other
French Defence · Caro-Kann Defence · Pirc Defence · Alekhine Defence · Modern · Scandinavian · Nimzowitsch 1. d4 Nf6
Indian Defence · King's Indian · Nimzo-Indian · Queen's Indian · Grünfeld · Benoni · Budapest · Catalan1. d4 d5
Closed Game · Queen's Gambit · Queen's Gambit Accepted · Queen's Gambit Declined · Chigorin · Slav · Semi-Slav · Marshall1. d4 other
Macros (documents with suffix .mdl) have an icon with three modules linked together, and are self-contained structures that hold other patched-together objects (including instruments, other macros, and modules), just like instruments.
The difference is that macros don't have their own snapshots or panels. They're designed to organize various parts of a complex instrument or ensemble into sub-devices, all of which will be controlled by a single snapshot taken by the containing instrument. An outline around a portion of the controls on a R panel tells you you're looking at a macro that's inside the structure of that instrument, if the panel designer chose to make the macro outline visible, using the Properties window described later in this tutorial.
Modules are R documents at the lowest level. They're the basic building blocks of all the other objects. Each module has its own unique icon, if there's room for an icon on it.
Modules can't be opened and they don't have structure windows; they are configured using the properties window (Mac/PC: F4), as you'll see in the Properties portion of this tutorial. Reconfigured modules can only be saved by saving an object that contains them, not on their own, but once reconfigured, they can be copied and pasted.
All other R components can be opened and altered in a new structure window by double-clicking on them.
Step 8. Configuring Simulation
Model simulation has a set of specific settings. A group of model settings is called an experiment, and experiments are displayed at the bottom of the model branch in the workspace tree. You can create several experiments for the same model with alternative model settings. One experiment is created by default and named Simulation.
It is a simulation experiment, enabling model simulation with customized parameter values.
There are also other types of experiments (optimization, risk assessment, parameter variations experiment), used when the model parameters play a significant role and you need to analyze how they affect the model behavior, or when you want to find optimal parameters of your model.
If we start the model, it will work 100 time units and then will stop. Since we want to observe only how the model behaves when the adoption process takes place, we need to stop the model when the system comes to equilibrium. The adoption process in this model lasts something over 10 years.
Set the model to stop at time 10
In the Project view, click the Simulation:Main experiment item.
On the Model Time tab of the Properties window, choose Stop at specified time from the Stop drop-down list. In the edit box on the right, type 10. The model will stop after 10 model time units elapse.
Before running the model, we will set the real time mode to control the execution speed and, consequently, animation speed. In real time mode, the model is executed regarding the physical time.
In the Project view, click the Simulation experiment.
On the Presentation page of the Properties view, go to the Execution mode section and choose the Real time with scale option.
Specify the model execution speed, i.e., how many model time units will be executed in one second. In the edit box to the right, type 2.
Tablature and standard notation are two ways that musical information is shared. Sight-reading of standard notation is a requisite skill for teaching careers, session work, and the theater orchestra. Reading music increases your knowledge of music and allows you to notate your musical ideas. Each notation system has its advantages and disadvantages. Tablature does not convey timing and pitch information as well as standard notation does though it is more useful for showing bends and to what degree (1/4, 1/2 or full) they should be executed and other worded instructions such as pick scrapes and whammy bar effects. For these reasons many guitar transcriptions for rock, jazz and blues, use both standard notation and tablature.
You do not need to know how to read music to use tablature. Each string is represented by a line and on those lines numbers are used to indicate which fret to press down.
In the lower section of the example above, the top line represents the thinnest string of the guitar (high e) and the lowest line represents the thickest string of the guitar (low E). Each number on a line represents a fretted note on that string. The number zero is an open string, the number one is the first fret, and so on.
The tab is divided into measures using bar-lines but the duration of the notes is not indicated. You can figure out the duration of the notes using the standard notation in the upper section. You can also work out the note values using the time signature; which in this example is four-four time. This means that there are four quarter-notes in each measure. The tempo or style, which is given at the top of a piece of sheet music, is also an indicator of how a song should be played.
The key signature is not shown in the example. Key signatures show which sharps , naturals, and flats are to be used; represented by #'s and b's. Each sharp or flat is shown on their respective line and space after the time signature.
The upper section of the example above is in standard notation and shows that the first bar has eight notes. Each note is represented by an oval note-head which indicates which note pitch is to be played. A stem with tails is used to indicate notes duration (how long the note is to be held). In standard notation only the whole-note is written without a stem. Because the notes in the first bar are all eighth notes with one tail they are connected with a single beam as shown in the example. The beaming of the same notes in a bar allows for easier reading. In a bar of music with mixed note values a single eighth note would be shown with a single tail. Sixteenth notes have two tails so a double beam is used when grouping.
The vertical bar-line after the last eighth note marks the end of one complete count of the time-signature. Bar-lines are used to show the pulse of the music and taken overall allows us to describe the form of a piece of music. The usefulness of using bar-lines to describe form is self-evident in the twelve bar blues whose title states that a cyclic group of twelve bars is to be performed. It is common to find musicians describing one complete thirty-two bar cycle of a jazz standard as a chorus. The term chorus is used to indicate how many times a song is to be repeated. A vamp on the thirty-two bar Jazz standard "Misty", written by the pianist Erroll Garner, would by convention start with all the musicians stating the melody with the following choruses dedicated to solo improvisation. The last chorus usually has the musicians stating the melody again without improvisation. The convenience of using the term chorus can be illustrated by imagining a four piece Jazz quartet with piano, saxophone, double bass and drums. If each musician is given a chorus to improvise over and the convention of all the musicians stating the melody on the first and last chorus is utilized then the song will have six choruses. The original hit recording of "Misty" as sung by Sarah Vaughan consisted of only one chorus with a four bar intro. Be aware that four and eight bar codas and intros are very common in Jazz and Blues and need to be taken into account when working out how many bars a chorus contains.
In some forms of music there is a strong emphasis placed on the first beat of each bar. This is easily demonstrated by the Waltz time signature where the first beat of a count of three is emphasized for the dancers benefit in accord with the dance steps to be performed. If a note is tied over the bar-line with a curved tie-line then the note duration is held over to the next bar. Bars never have more notes in them than is indicated by the time signature. In the next bar there is a whole note which is a white oval with no stem. The two vertical black lines at the end are called a double bar-line indicating that the piece of music has ended.
There is a very informal and loose standard of "Internet Tablature" using only ASCII characters. The above example would be written like this:
It has the same disadvantages of tab and contains much less information than the standard notation of the upper section. Rhythm can only be suggested by spacing or by adding symbols above each note (such as Q for quarter note). Much Internet tablature does not even contain bar lines. The timing must be discerned by listening to the original piece. This is the major flaw of online tabs and this style of tab in general.
However, online tabs are often much more convenient than standard notation for precisely conveying a specific finger positioning. Especially with alternate tunings this is a clear advantage.
Here are the notes as they appear in standard notation. The set of lines and spaces that run horizontally across the page is called the staff (plural - staves). Notes can be written on the lines and in the spaces. A common mnenomic for remembering the notes of the Treble Clef is:
"Every Good Boy Deserves Fudge" and the word "FACE"
The musical alphabet starts at the letter A and ends on the letter G. There are twelve sounds in music and seven letters to represent them. The other five sounds are the sharps or flats of these seven notes. Each step up the staff is the next letter, so it goes A, B, C, etc.  The first symbol on the staff is always the clef; which in this case is the treble clef. The word clef is French for key and gives you the position of the first note. The treble clef shown here is also called the G clef. It is drawn so that the note G is indicated as being on the second line.
Getting Started: Different Types of Guitars | Anatomy of a Guitar | Buying a Guitar | Buying an Amplifier | Tuning the Guitar | Tablature | Lead Guitar and Rhythm Guitar
For Beginners: The Basics | Intervals and Power Chords | Open Chords | Muting and Raking | Learning Songs | Song Library
Lead Guitar: Picking and Plucking | Scales | Arpeggios and Sweep Picking | Slides | Hammer-ons, Pull-offs, and Trills | Bending and Vibrato | Harmonics | Vibrato Bar Techniques  |  Tapping
Rhythm Guitar: Chords | Barre Chords | Chord Progressions | Alternate Picking | Tremolo Picking | Rhythm
Playing Styles: Folk Guitar | Blues | Slide Guitar | Rock Guitar | Country and Western | Metal | Jazz | Classical Guitar | Flamenco
General Guitar Theory: Tone and Volume | Singing and Playing | Writing Songs | Playing With Others | Recording Music |Tuning Your Ear | How to Continue Learning
Equipment: Guitar Accessories | Effects Pedals | E-Bow | Cables | Bass Guitar | Harmonica and Guitar Combo
Maintenance: Guitar Maintenance and Storage | Adjusting the Guitar | Stringing the Guitar
Appendices: Dictionary | Alternate Tunings | Chord Reference | Blanks
3.2 8086 I/O ports
5.2.3.4 /etc/serial.conf
8.2.3 "Stop-and-wait ARQ"
Serial Programming: Introduction and OSI Network Model
-- RS-232 Wiring and Connections
-- Typical RS232 Hardware Configuration
-- MAX232 Driver/Receiver Family
-- Hayes-compatible Modems and AT Commands
-- Error Correction Methods
-- Packet Recovery Methods
-- Practical Application Development
-- IP Over Serial Connections
Welcome to the wonderful world of serial data communications.  This is a part of a series of articles that will cover many aspects of serial data communications.  We begin with fundamentals and follow a layered approach. By the end of the book, the reader should be able to transfer almost any data over wires between computers.  Some forms of wireless communication will also be addressed.
There are so many aspects about this subject that sometimes it is a very hard nut to crack.  I'm going to dive down and try to start with the basics and introducing the RS-232 serial data communications standard.
Why Serial Communication?
A Wikibookian has nominated this page for cleanup because:bad form/style (too conversational) near "I will"You can help make it better. Please review any relevant discussion.
First of all, the basic standards that will be described here are, from the perspective of computer technology, positively ancient.  Some of you reading this could perhaps find your grandparents or even great-grandparents using this protocol when they were in College.  At the same time, it is so solid in concept that the reason for abandoning it should always be questioned.  Indeed, there have been several other data transmission methods that have been developed since the RS-232 serial data protocol was established, but this workhorse is still widely used and seems to go through a rebirth every once in a while.
Serial communication means transmission of one bit at a time.  It could be compared against parallel communication where multiple bits are transmitted in parallel at a time.  Parallel communication enable higher speed of communication than serial communication but requires more data wires than serial communication which only requires one data wire.
When all else fails, RS-232 serial communication can be relied upon.  When you are trying to get two pieces of computer equipment together, sometimes newer communications methods have hard limitations that can't be worked out due to number of connections, RF interference, distance limitations, being behind physical barriers, in sensitive areas like medical equipment where stray voltages can be a problem, or that you absolutely need to rely upon the data being transmitted.  A sister protocol to RS-232, the RS-422 protocol, even allows transmissions for several miles of cable.
Serial data communication is widely implemented.  While it is sometimes presumed that a PC can deal with just about any problem you want to throw at it, there are a number of electronic devices that are full of data which needs to be recorded.  In part because of the age of this protocol, there are many legacy devices that have RS-232 serial data as the only access to the outside world. But even many of the latest network devices have RS-232 "console" ports to facilitate initial configuration and provide a means of troubleshooting when the network itself is broken.  Because the hardware is so widely implemented and available, together with many software tools, it is also relatively cheap to develop equipment and software using this system.  Particularly when transmission speed isn't important, but data needs to be sent on a regular basis.  RS-232 serial data is a very reasonable solution instead of a more expensive 10BASE-T TCP/IP solution or high-speed fiber optics.
Serial data communication is also versatile.  While the usual method of transmission is over copper wires between two fixed points, recently there have been some converters that transmit serial data over fiber optic lines, wireless transmitters, USB devices, and even over TCP/IP networks.  What is really surprising here is that all of these transmission methods are totally transparent to the device receiving or transmitting the serial data.  It can also be a carrier for TCP/IP, and be used for private networks.
While serial data communication is not strictly a network communication protocol, it is still important to understand the layered communications model when dealing with any sort of communications protocols.  Often people implementing serial data software have to build multiple layers of this model, even if they are not totally aware of it when they are doing it at the time.
Often serial data communication does not implement all of these different layers, and even more often these different layers are combined in the same module or even the very same function. This model was originally developed by the International Organization for Standards (ISO) in 1984 to help give a good idea of where different networking structures could be separated and intermingled. The point here is to know that you can separate different parts of communications sub-systems to help with the debugging process, and to move structures from one sub-system to another.
If your software is well written using a model similar to this one, the software subroutines in layers above and below do not have to be rewritten if the module at a particular layer is changed. To achieve this you need to establish strong standards for the interface between the layers, which will be covered in other sections of these articles. For example, a web browser does not need to know if the HTML is being sent over fiber optic cables, wireless transmissions, or even over a serial data cable.
For serial data communication, I see this layer model as more common:
In the case of many serial data applications, not all of these layers are implemented.  Often it is just raw packets being transmitted in one direction, but sometimes even just a signal of any kind can indicate some action take place on a computer, regardless of content.  It is possible to simply take the logic level of a raw RS-232 signal in your software, but at some point the data does need to be converted and the voltages involved with RS-232 can damage hardware, so this is very seldom done.
I don't want to get into a holy war over programming languages with this series of articles.  For the moment, I'm going to be using Turbo Pascal and Delphi as the programming languages, if for no other reason then the fact that I am most comfortable programming in this development environment.  If a good C/C++ guru would like to "translate" these routines, I would welcome that, as well as other programming languages where applicable.  Serial communication is complicated enough so please avoid esoteric languages like Intercal or Malbolge.  A good BASIC implementation would be welcome, as would LISP.  I'll try to avoid language-specific features and simply deal with functions in a generic sense, which good programmers should be able to translate to the language of their choice.
These articles are meant to teach you the basics of serial data communication, not to be a functioning serial data driver.  Still, all code examples will be checked and sent through an actual compiler before being listed in the articles, and hopefully fully debugged.  There is no one single way to accomplish these steps and tasks, so I am going to encourage a hands-on approach to dealing with software and setting up networks.
While I've had quite a bit of experience in dealing with several serial data protocols (on the packet level), I am by no means the topmost expert at this.  As I said earlier, I have considerable experience in dealing with communications at many levels, and I'd like to share some of my very hard-won knowledge.
While I am only a Software Engineer and don't have the "formal" credentials necessary for making an educational textbook, I do believe that there is much that could be taught about computer networking by students experimenting with serial data communication.  The audience that I am aiming for with these articles are the High School hackers/computer geeks and undergraduate CS majors.  A High School teacher that wanted to tackle a subject like this, or if you wanted to cover a special topic course in a university setting where students could get some very hands-on experience with communications protocols.  Every layer of the OSI model could be demonstrated in a manner that students would learn from first-hand experiences why certain rules/systems have been implemented on the Internet, what standards documents mean, and perhaps even participate in creating standards documents.
If you are a professor or High School instructor interested in using this text, I would be particularly interested in adapting this text to better suit your needs, or working with you in covering this subject.
From a professional perspective, this is a topic that is seldom taught at a university, and usually only in passing when they are rushing through a whole bunch of other protocol suites.  Software developers are usually introduced to this topic by having their supervisor dump a bunch of specification documents on their desk, a driver disk with API documentation, and perhaps a typically short deadline in order to get something working that should have been working sometime last year.  Software developers who really understand serial data communication are worth gold, and often even these developers only learn just enough to get the immediate job done.
I've also found that skills learned from developing serial data communications also translate into other projects and give a deeper understanding of just about any data transmission system.  In addition to the other groups I mentioned, I am also aiming for those unfortunate software engineers who are trying to learn just about anything about this very difficult subject and don't know where to begin.  Documentation about serial communication is sparse, and sometime contradictory.
This doesn't have to be that complicated of a subject, and it is possible for mere mortals to be able to understand how everything works.
Cisco explanation of the OSI model(Page Removed)
University of Indiana / Unix Support Group explanation of OSI(Page Removed)
Serial Programming: Introduction and OSI Network Model
-- RS-232 Wiring and Connections
-- Typical RS232 Hardware Configuration
-- MAX232 Driver/Receiver Family
-- Hayes-compatible Modems and AT Commands
-- Error Correction Methods
-- Packet Recovery Methods
-- Practical Application Development
-- IP Over Serial Connections
Serial Programming: Introduction and OSI Network Model
-- RS-232 Wiring and Connections
-- Typical RS232 Hardware Configuration
-- MAX232 Driver/Receiver Family
-- Hayes-compatible Modems and AT Commands
-- Error Correction Methods
-- Packet Recovery Methods
-- Practical Application Development
-- IP Over Serial Connections
RS-232 is a standard for serial data communication between computing equipment. This standard dates back to 1962 but has been substantially revised over the years to accommodate changes to communications technology. At a minimum, an RS-232 connection may consist of a single wire connected between two pieces of equipment. The simplest connection in common usage contains three wires: transmit (tx), receive (rx), and ground (gnd). However, a fully implemented connection can contain as many as 25 wires. Early RS-232 connections were commonly used to connect terminal equipment to modems, so these topics are often intertwined.
In the world of serial communications, there are two different kinds of equipment:
In practice, the distinction between Data Terminal Equipment (DTE) and Data Communications Equipment (DCE) is simply a matter of function. This is an instance where the subjects of modems and serial communication equipment have been mixed together. Here, the modem can be thought of as the DCE and the terminal that faces a user is the DTE. Years ago, when the use of timeshare computing systems was common, the user would dial a telephone, place the telephone's handset against an acoustical modem, and that modem would be connected to a simple dumb terminal with an RS-232 cable. The typical connection speed was usually 50 baud or 110 baud, though very fast connections could reach 300 baud.
As a side note, when the very first IMPs (Interconnection Message Processors) that formed the first nodes/routers of ARPAnet (the ancient predecessor of the Internet), this was exactly the connection system they were using. This later gave way to other communication systems, but this was the beginning of the Internet.
In a more modern setting, imagine a piece of equipment in a very dangerous place, like in a steel processing mill that measures the temperature of the rollers or other steel processing equipment.  This would also be a form of what we now refer to as a piece of "Data Communication Equipment" that we would also want to be able to control remotely.
The PC that is used in a control room of the mill would be the Data Terminal Equipment.  There are many other similar kinds of devices, and RS-232 connections can be found on all kinds of equipment.
The reason this is called a "straight" connection is because when the cabling is put together, each wire on each end of the connection is connected to the same pin.
Often you don't always want to connect a piece of equipment to a computer, but you would also like to connect two computers together.  Unfortunately, when connecting two computers with a "straight" serial connection, the two computers are fighting each other on the same wires.
Now imagine if these two computers are in the very same room.  Instead of going through the physical modems, they go through a "null modem", or a modem that really doesn't exist.  In order to make this work you have to "cross" some of the wires so when you transmit some information on one end, the other computer is able to detect and receive that same information.
In addition to simply allowing a computer to communicate and transmit data to another computer, a null modem connection can be used to "simulate" the behavior of DCE equipment.  This will be particularly important later on with some of the discussion in this series of articles, where you can experiment with writing some of your own serial communication software.  In my own experience, I've had to write these "emulators" in many instances, either because the equipment that I was trying to communicate with wasn't finished, or it was difficult to obtain a sample of that equipment and all that I had available to me was the communication protocol specification.
Sometimes instead of trying to communicate with another computer, you would like to be able to test the transmission equipment itself.  One practical way of doing this is to add a "loopback" connector to the terminal device, like a PC with a serial data connection. This connector has no cable attached, but loops the transmit lines to the receive lines.  By doing this, you can simulate both the transmission and receiving of data.  Generally speaking, this is only done for actually testing the equipment, but can be used for testing software components as well.  When this sort of connector is used, you will receive every byte that you transmit.  If you separate out the transmission subroutines from the data capture subroutines, it can provide a controlled system for testing your application.
When it starts to get very difficult to examine the serial data being transmitted by the equipment, sometimes it is nice to be able to take a "snapshot" of the information being transmitted. This is done with a protocol analyzer of one kind or another.
What is done is a modification of the cabling that allows for a third computer to be able to simply read the data as it is being transmitted.  Sometimes the communication protocol can get so complicated that you need to see the whole exchange, and it needs to be examined in "real-time" rather than going through some sort of software debugger.  Another purpose of this is to examine the data exchange for purposes of doing some reverse engineering if you are trying to discover how a piece of equipment works.  Often, despite written specifications, the actual implementation of what is occurring when transmitting data can be quite a bit different than what was originally planned.  Basically, this is a powerful tool for development of serial communications protocols and software, and should not be ignored.
There are common ways to connect a protocol analyzer, which are discussed in the following.
One of the most convenient tool to monitor and analyze serial port data is RS232 Protocol Analyzer. This software allows to intercept all serial control codes and record detailed information about them. The data captured can be viewed in all 4 different views simultaneously that is, table, line, dump or terminal mode with each display providing a unique way of representing RS232 analyzer captured data.
A Y "Cable" is not just some cable, but also contains electronics - assuming it is not a low quality cable. It is supposed to be placed in between a serial line and it mirrors all signals on a third connector. This third connector can then be connected to a protocol analyzer (e.g. a PC with some display software):
It is recommended not to use a passive Y cable. Such a cable overloads the transmitters at the DTE and DCE, which might result in the destruction of the transmitters. The RS-233 standard requires that transmitters are short-circuit safe. However, modern, highly integrated equipment might no longer be compliant to that particular aspect of the standard.
Often, the line going to the analyzer is also just a serial line, and the analyzer is a PC with a serial interface and some display software. The disadvantage of such a simple Y cable solutions is that it only supports half-duplex communication. That is, only one site (DTE or DCE) can talk at any time. The reason for this is that the two TX lines from the DTE and DCE are combined into one TX line going to the analyzer. If the DTE and the DCE both send at the same time, their signals get mixed up on the third line going to the analyzer, and the analyzer probably doesn't see any decode-able signal at all.
See http://www.mmvisual.de/fbintermdspy.htm for an example of some simple circuitry for a Y cable.
More advanced Y cable solutions provide the TX data from the DTE and DCE separately to the analyzer. Such analyzers are capable of displaying full-duplex communication. Advanced professional systems not only display the decoded digital information, but also monitor the analog signal levels and timing.
In this scenario the analyzer sits in the middle between the DTE and DCE. It is basically some device (e.g. a PC) with two serial interfaces. The analyzer mirrors each signal from one site to the other site, and also displays the traffic.
In principle, a simple version of such an analyzer can be built with any PC with two serial interfaces. All that is needed is some software, which is not too difficult to write. Such a device will, however, lack a convenient feature. Professional analyzers are able to auto-sense the speed of the serial communication. A home made solution needs to be configured to match the speed of the serial communication. Professional devices are also optimized to ensure minimal delay in the circuitry. Also, a simple homegrown, PC-based analyzer can't be used to analyze faults due to signal voltage level problems. Nevertheless, any kind of protocol analyzer is much better than nothing at all. Even the most simple analyzer is very useful.
See Setting up a Development Environment (for modem development) for some more information.
A typical breakout box with LEDs, patch field and DIL switches
An RS232 breakout box (a BOB) is a rather nifty piece of hardware which usually combines a number of functions into one. It basically consist of two RS232 connectors, and a patch field (or switches) which allows to change the wiring between the connectors. A patch field and small pieces of wires are preferable over (DIP) switches alone, since the patch field allows access to the signals for other purposes, too.
A breakout box is very useful if the pinout (DTE/DCE) of a particular device is not known. The patch field allows to quickly change the wiring from a straight connection to a null modem connection, or to set up a loopback connection.
Since the patch field provides access to all signals it also allows to use the breakout box to connect a protocol analyzer or an oscilloscope. Better breakout boxes also provide some signal level information on their own, by having LEDs who inform about the signal voltage. This information is useful when trying to identify an unknown pinout. High-end BOBs contain circuitry to measure ground potential difference and pulse traps circuitry to find signal glitches.
Commercial breakout boxes are available in many varieties. It is also possible to build a useful BOB from a handful of simple parts on a circuit board. The patch field can be made from DIL IC sockets, and the wiring of the LEDs is simple if 2-pin dual-color LEDs are used (3-pin LEDs will not work). Each signal line should be connected via such an LED and a 680 Ohm resistor in serial to GND (Signal Ground). The home-made breakout-box is completed with a couple of RS232 connectors, possibly also one to attach a protocol analyzer and some simple metal or plastic case.
Another nifty piece of hardware and/or software which is useful for developing and testing serial applications and  equipment is a character sequence generator. Such a generator produces a repeated sequence of serial line data. For example such a generator might repeat the famous "The quick brown fox ..." sentence in an an endless loop. Another common test sequence is the generation of all 8-bit codes from 0x00 to 0xFF in a loop. Such a loop contains all 7-bit ASCII and 8-bit ISO Latin 1 characters, plus the first 32 non-printable control characters and can e.g. reveal decoding errors or transmission errors. Also very common is a modem test sequence, using generic modem commands (Serial Programming:Modems and AT Commands) to build up a modem connection, send some data and tear the modem connection down in a loop.
Commercial hardware character generators provide a heap of additional features, often combined with a protocol analyzer. As such they are rather expensive. However, just like with a BOB, it is possible to build a useful DIY character sequence generator for small cash. This can either happen with software on a normal computer (some simple endless software loop sending the same data again and again to a serial interface), or with a few pieces of cheap electronic components. Some small stand-alone hardware is often more convenient in the field and in development for quick tests than e.g. a PC or laptop with some software.
A simple classic hardware character generator basically consists of a baud-rate generator, a UART (Serial Programming:8250 UART Programming), an (E)EPROM, a binary counter and a line driver (Serial Programming:MAX232 Driver Receiver). Typically, each of these components is a simple single IC. The (E)EPROM is supposed to contain the character sequence(s). The baud-rate generator drives the UART and the binary counter. The binary counter drives the address lines of the (E)EPROM. The result is that the character sequence is produced at the data lines of the (E)EPROM. These data lines are feed into the UARTs input. The UARTs output is connected to the serial line driver. All this can be easily fitted on a small prototype board in a simple case.
A more modern hardware character generator can be build around one of these small micro controllers (e.g.
Atmel AVR). This is particularly easy, since these micro controllers already contain serial interfaces, and just require a little bit of serial programming - which is the topic of this book.
If you wanted to do a general RS-232 connection, you could take a bunch of long wires and solder them directly to the electronic circuits of the equipment you are using, but this tends to make a big mess and often those solder connections tend to break and other problems can develop.  To deal with these issues, and to make it easier to setup or take down equipment, some standard connectors have been developed that are commonly found on most equipment using the RS-232 standards.
These connectors come in two forms:  A male and a female connector.  The female connector has holes that allow the pins on the male end to be inserted into the connector.
The female DE-9 connector is typically used as the "plug" that goes into a typical PC.  If you see one of these on the back of your computer, it is likely not to be used for serial communication, but rather for things like early VGA or CGA monitors (not SVGA) or for some special control/joystick equipment.
This is the connector that you are more likely to see for serial communications on a "generic" PC.  Often you will see two of them side by side (for COM1 and COM2).  Special equipment that you might communicate with would have either connector, or even one of the DB-25 connectors listed below.
This is a female DB-25 connector (also known as DB25S):
This DB25S is what you normally find on an IBM compatible PC used as the parallel (printer) port.  It is also on the computer end of a modem cable in older PCs that have 25 pin serial port connectors. This connector type is also used frequently for equipment that conforms to RS-232 serial data communication as well, so don't always assume if you see one of these connectors that it is always parallel.  When the original RS-232 specification was written, this was the kind of connector that was intended, but because many of the pins were seldom if ever used, IBM PC compatible serial ports were later switched to the DE-9 DE9S connectors carrying all the required signals as on the DB connectors in the original IBM-PC. (Yes, this is comparatively recent equipment for this standard).
This is a male DB-25P connector (also known as DB25P):
Male DB-25 connectors are usually used on one end of a PC printer cable for parallel data communication, which is beyond the scope of this series of articles.  The DB25P is also used on the modem end of an external modem cable.  You should be aware that this connector is also used for serial communications on many different types of equipment, using many different types of communications protocols.  In fact, if you have a random piece of equipment that you are trying to see how it works, you can presume that it is a piece of serial equipment.  Hacking random connectors is also beyond the scope of this document, but it can be an interesting hobby by itself.
Some digital cameras and calculators come with a cable that has a mini-stereo plug connector on the end the plugs into the camera, and a DE-9 connector on the end that plugs into the PC.
It is a poor connector, as it short circuits segments while being plugged/unplugged.
The "PicAXE" systems use [1]
1: base ring: ground (pin 5 of DE9)
2: middle ring: serial output from PicAXE to serial input of PC (pin 2 of DE9)
3: tip of pin: serial output of PC to serial input of PicAXE (pin 3 of DE9)
The "LANC" systems often use a 2.5 mm stereo jack:
[9].
(RS-232 on a RJ45 modular jack is also known as "EIA/TIA - 561")
Paul Campbell says "I wired the GND to the yellow line, TXD to the black line and RXD to the red line."
Russell McMahon mentions several different "standards" for wiring RS-232 to the 4 pins of a RJ11 connector or the 8 pins of a RJ45 connector.
The wiring of RS-232 devices involves first identifying the actual pins that are being used.
Please note also that in the "PC COMx Port context" end of things some signals are 'inputs' while others are 'outputs' while in the "Modem context" those same signal names referred to now become as 'outputs' where they were just before 'inputs' and vice versa. That is where much confusion has arisen from over the years, as the 'Input' or 'Output' -sense- nature is not noted in most diagrams on the subject in general,  yet in the real world two 'Out' pins seldom can ever work in harmony in RS-232 related ±[3–10] V stuff where the range from -3 V to +3 V is not a true high or low, except to possibly burden drivers towards their undesired burnout.
Here is how a female DE-9 connector is numbered (Note, the connector on a computer is usually a male connector, so it is mirrored compared to the following image):
If the numbers are hard to read, it starts at the top-right corner as "1", and goes left until the end of the row and then starts again as pin 6 on the next row until you get to pin 9 on the bottom-left pin.  "Top" is defined as the row with 5 pins.
Here are what each pin is usually defined as on the PC COMx end of things:
One thing to keep in mind when discussing these pins and their meaning, is that they are very closely tied together with modems and modem protocols.
Whenever interconnecting any serial ports it will be well to note that whatever the case, it should always follow that only one <output> should ever be tied to one or more <inputs> generally speaking.  Further, be it noted that signal names at the COMx end will generally be opposite of the <in>-<out> -sense- at the modem end of things, even though carrying the same mnemonic names.
Often you don't have a modem attached in the loop, but you still treat the equipment as if it were a modem on a theoretical level.  At least such that you minimally have an <output> going to every <input> in some manner, with no two <outputs> in conflict or without any 'floating' <inputs> tied to no <output> at all.
The following are more formal explanations regarding each signal function in the general sense of its use:
This is a signal to indicate from the communications equipment (DCE) that the phone line is still "connected" and receiving a carrier signal from the modem at the other end.  Presumably well-written software or serial equipment could detect from this logic state when the telephone has been "hung up" on the other end.  Null-modems often tie DCD to DTR at each end since there is no carrier signal involved.
Input to receive the data from another transmitter.
The reverse of RX, this is where the terminal equipment (DTE) is transmitting serial data, using the same format and protocol that the receiver is expecting.  More on the exact protocol further below.  Like RX, think along the lines of "Terminal Transmit" when designing equipment that will be using this pin.
Basically a signal from the DTE that says "Hello!, I'm ready if you are".  This is a general indicator to the DCE that the terminal is ready to start sending and receiving data.  If there is some initialization that needs to happen in the communications equipment, this is a way for the terminal equipment to "boot" the receiving equipment. In a null modem setup this signal is often connected to DCD, so the device signals itself that an (imaginary) carrier has been detected, indication that the transmission line is up.
This is an interesting pin to look at.  What it does is try to make a common "ground" reference between the equipment that is being connected to compare the voltages for the other signals.  Normally this is a good thing, because sometimes different pieces of equipment have different power supplies and are some distance away.  The not so pleasant thing about this wire is that it usually is a physical piece of copper that can conduct electricity that is not normally supposed to go down the wire, like a short-circuit or worse yet a bolt of lightning (it happens far more often that you would normally think for this sort of equipment).  That can fry both the DCE as well as the DTE.  Things like fiber converters and ground isolators can help prevent this from happening, but can still be something to worry about.  Over short distances this is generally not a problem.
This is the counterpart to DTR with the communications equipment (or computer peripheral on the serial line).  When the DTR is sent as a signal, the communications equipment should change this signal to logic "1" to indicate that it is ready to communicate as well.  If the DCE goes through a "boot" sequence when the DTR gets signaled, it should not signal DSR until it is complete. But many connectors "hard wire" this pin to be directly connected to the DTR pin at each end to reduce the number of wires needed in the cable. This can be useful for connecting devices using existing telephone wires, but prevents applications from using the DTR and DSR for handshaking.
Setting the RTS signal to logic "1" indicates to the DCE that the DTE wants to send it data. Resetting the RTS signal to logic "0" indicates to the DCE that the DTE has no more data to send.
This is the response signal from the DCE regarding if the terminal equipment should be transmitting any data.  When this signal is at logical "1", the terminal is "permitted" to transmit data.  Like the DTR/DSR pins, this one can be directly connected to the RTS pin to reduce the number of wires needed, but this eliminates the possibility of hardware flow control.  Some software ignores this pin and the RTS pin, so other flow control systems are also used.  That will be explained when we get to actual software.
Again, thinking back to a telephone modem, this is a signal that indicates that the telephone is "ringing".  Generally, even on a real telephone modem, this is only occasionally set to -15 V for the signal.  Basically, when you would normally be hearing a "ring" on your telephone, this pin would be signaled.  On Null-modems, often this wire isn't even connected to anything.  If you really are connected to a real modem, this does have some strong uses, although there are other ways to have the terminal equipment (like a PC connected to an external modem) be informed that there are ways to communicate this information through the data pins as well.  This will be covered lightly in the software section.
There are other pins that the DB-25 has implemented that the DE-9 doesn't normally use, such as a secondary transmit and receive pin, Secondary CTS/RTS for those alternate pins, a -15 V signal for power, a clock, and a couple of other good ideas as well.  The problem with implementing all of these pins is that you also need to run separate wires, and a full set of DB-25 connectors would also mean having 25 physical wires going the full distance between the DTE and DCE.  If this is more than a foot or so, it gets to be a big hassle, particularly if you are going through walls or in a more permanent setting.  If the wrong wire gets clipped in the bundle, the whole thing must be restrung again, or you must go through wire testing like the old-fashioned telephone linemen used to have to do when fixing a phone distribution box.  Often only three physical copper lines are used to connect the DTE to DCE, and that is simply RX, TX, and GND.  The rest can be easily "faked" on the connector end in a manner sufficient for most software and hardware applications.
Baud and BPS (Bits Per Second) are usually not the same thing, although they are often used interchangeably, particularly in marketing literature. There are several ways to determine what the actual data rate of a particular piece of equipment is, but in popular marketing literature, or even general reference texts, they will almost always refer to "Baud Rate", even if they are referring to bits per second.
Baud means the number of changes to the transmission media per second in a modulated signal. If each transmission event contains more than one bit of information, then Baud and BPS are not the same. E.g. if each event contains two bits (two bits modulated in an event), then the BPS of such a transmission would be twice as large as the Baud rate. This is not a theoretical case. Typical "high speed" modems use sophisticated modulation on the telephone line, where the bit rate and Baud rate differ significantly on the line. It is important to know this when you build measurement equipment, decoders (demodulators), encoders (modulators), and all sorts of transmission equipment for a particular protocol.
However, software developers typically like to ignore the difference of bit rate and baud rate, because a bit can either have the value true or false - an "event" (a bit) always only has two possible states. They have no basic unit which can e.g. hold four different states. In other words, on the software side the modulation has already been flattened by the demodulator. If a modulation was used which can e.g. transmit 8 bits in an event, the software developer sees them already as a series of 8 consecutive bits, each either true or false. The demodulator took care of that. When it got an event it turned the single 8-bit event into eight single-bit events. Software developers don't see the original single entity with 256 different states (voltages, phases). Since the modulation has been flattened they don't experience the difference between Baud rate and bit rate any more. This is not the fault of the people who defined  a Baud or a BPS. It is just a (welcome) limitation of digital computer hardware.
Baud is actually a shortened term named in honor of Émile Baudot, a French inventor of early teleprinter machines that replaced the telegraph key using Morse Code.  Basically two typewriters that could be connected to each other with some wires.  He came up with some of the first digital character encoding schemes, and the character codes were transmitted with a serial data connection.  Keep in mind this was being done largely before computers were invented.  Indeed, some of these early teleprinter devices were connected to the very first computers like the ENIAC or UNIVAC, simply because they were relatively cheap and mass-produced at that point.
In order for serial data communication to happen, you need to agree on a clock signal, or baud rate, in order to get everything to be both transmitted and received properly.  This is where the language purists get into it, because it is this clock signal that actually drives the "baud rate".  Let's start more at the beginning with Émile Baudot's teleprinters to explain baud rate.
Émile's early teleprinters used 5 data bits and 1 stop bit to transmit a character.  We will go onto formatting issues in a second, but what is important is that six signals are sent through a wire in some fashion that would indicate that a character is transmitted.  Typically the equipment was designed to run at 50 baud, or in other words the equipment would transmit or receive a "bit" of data 50 times per second.  Not coincidentally, French power systems also ran on an alternating current system of 50 Hz, so this was an easy thing to grab to determine when a new character should be transmitted.
Teleprinters evolved, and eventually you have Western Union sending teleprinter "cablegrams" all around the world.  If you hear of a TELEX number, this is the relic of this system, which is still in use at the present time, even with the Internet.  By rapidly glossing over a whole bunch of interesting history, you end up with the United States Department of Justice (DOJ) in a lawsuit with AT&T.  Mind you this was an earlier anti-trust lawsuit prior to the famous/infamous 1982 settlement.  The reason this is important is because the DOJ insisted that Western Union got all of the digital business (cable grams... and unfortunately this got to be read as computer equipment as well), and AT&T got modulated frequencies, or in other words, you could talk to your mother on Mother's Day on their equipment.  When computers were being built in the 1950s, people wanted some way to connect different pieces of computer equipment together to "talk" to each other.  This finally resulted in the RS-232 standard that we are discussing on this page.
While Western Union was permitted to carry digital traffic, often the connections weren't in or near computer centers.  At this time AT&T found a loophole in the anti-trust settlement that could help get them into the business of being a "carrier" of computer data.  They were also offering to transmit computer data at rates considerably cheaper than Western Union was going to charge.  Hence, the modem was born.
The long description of a modem is a "Modulator/Demodulator", and this description is important.  Since AT&T could only carry "tones", like music from a radio network or the voice of your mother, they created a device that would electronically create "music" or "tones" that could be carried on their network.  They would then take a computer "1" or "0" and "modulate" the bit to a frequency, like say 2600 Hz.  (The exact tones varied based on baud rate and other factors, but there were exact frequency specs here.)  A matching device would be able to look for that "note" or "tone" in the "music" and be able to convert that back to a computer "1" or "0", or in other words, demodulate the music.  Since all you and your buddy on each end of the telephone are only playing music to each other, it was legal for AT&T to have that music on their network.  That only computers could possibly understand this music is besides the point, and the DOJ turned a blind eye on the whole practice, despite objections from Western Union.
The original modems you could rent were AT&T Bell 103 modems.  These were clunky boxes about the size of a shoe box that had a bunch of switches on the outside and an RS-232 cable that connected to the computer equipment you were using.  These boxes were designed for the old-fashioned handset telephones and had pieces of rubber that would go around the "speaker" and "mic" portion of the telephone (no direct copper connection to the telephone equipment back then).  If you wanted to dial the telephone, you had to use the rotary dial on the phone itself... the computer didn't have access to that sort of equipment.  Keep in mind that the FCC regulated just about everything that happened with phone equipment, and AT&T owned everything related to telephones.  You even had to "rent" the modem from AT&T, and that rental charge was on your monthly phone bill.
The Bell 103 was originally 110 baud, although it eventually had a switch to "move up" to 220 baud.  300 baud modems were also fairly common throughout the 1960's and 1970's.  Keep in mind that AT&T (or your local phone company) was the only company you could even rent a modem from, whether you wanted one or not.  By 1982, modems were so commonly used and the POTS telephone network so widespread that this same system of sending "music" over the telephone has been preserved, even though the legal reasons for doing it are no longer valid.  With the advent of ISDN and DSL lines, this is no longer the case and the phone companies are now sending pure digital signals instead.  This is also why DSL lines can carry much more data than an ordinary phone line, even though it is the same pair of copper wires going into your home.
When modems started going to very high speeds, they hit a brick wall of sorts.  It was decided back in the 1950's that telephone equipment would only have to carry tone signals going to about 10kHz.  For normal voice conversations this is sufficient, and you can even tell the difference between a man and a woman on the telephone.  The problem comes in that this means the highest normal "baud rate" that you can send over a home telephone network is about 9600 baud, usually about 4800 baud, because the telephone equipment itself is going to be dropping "bits" as you switch from one tone to another.  Without going into the heavy math, you need to have at least one full "sound wave" in order to be able to distinguish one tone or note from another.  Modem manufacturers did think of something else that could be done to overcome this limitation, however.  Instead of just sending one tone at a time, you could play a whole "chord", or several distinct tones at the same time.  Finally back to baud vs. bits per second.  With higher speeds, instead of simply sending only one bit, you are sending two or as many as sixteen bits at the same time with varying "chords" of "music".  This is how you get a 56K BPS modem, even though it is still only transmitting at 9600 baud.
More about modems in Serial Programming:Modems and AT Commands.
There are four sets of transmission bits that are used in the RS-232 standard.  The positioning of these bits in the RS-232 data stream is all that distinguishes one bit from the other.  This is also where serial communication really hits the "metal", because each bit follows in a sequence, or in a serial fashion.  All of the other wires, pins, baud rate, and everything else is to make sure that these bits can be understood.  Keep in mind that at this point the entire protocol is based on the transmission of a single character.  Multiple characters can be sent, but they are a sequence of single character transmission events.  How the characters relate is based on what the software does with the data on the next protocol "layer".
When a transmission line is not sending anything, it remains in a logical state of "1", or -15 V on the wire.  When you want to send a character, you start by changing the voltage to +15 V, indicating a logical "0" state.  Each subsequent bit is based on the baud rate that is established for communication between each device.  This bit signals that the receiving device should start scanning for subsequent bits to form the character.
This is the primary purpose of serial communications, where the data actually gets sent.  The number of bits here can vary quite a bit, although in current practice the number of bits typically transmitted is eight bits.  Originally this was five bits, which was all that the early teleprinters really used to make the letters of the Alphabet and a few special characters.  This has implications for Internet protocols as well, because early e-mail systems transmitted with only seven bits when they were connected over some RS-232 links.  This worked because the early character encoding schemes, mainly ASCII, only used seven bits to encode all characters commonly used for the English language.  Because computer components work best on powers of 2 (2,4,8,16,32, etc.), eight bits became more commonly used for data storage of individual characters.  Unicode and other coding schemes have moved this concept forward for languages other than English, but eight bits still is a very common unit for transmitting data, and the most common setting for RS-232 devices today.
The least significant bit (LSB)  is transmitted first in this sequence of bits to form a character.
To help perform a limited error check on the characters being transmitted, the parity bit has been introduced.  Parity can detect some transmission errors but not correct.  The value of the parity bit depends on the number of bits set to "1" in the string of data bits.
There are four different kinds of parity configuration to consider:
When the sum of bits ends up coming up with an odd number (like the sequence 01110101), this bit will be set to a logical state of "0".
This uses the formula of trying to determine if there are an even number of bits set to "1".  In this regard, it is the exact opposite state of the Odd Parity. For e.g., for a frame with seven bits that has an odd number of ones, the parity bit will be set to one.  So essentially, the entire byte, including parity must have an even number of ones for even parity.
Using this concept, the transmission protocol is essentially ignoring the parity bit entirely.  Instead, the transmission configuration is sending a logical "1" at the point that a parity bit should be sent, regardless of if the sequence should have an odd or even count.  This configuration mode is useful for equipment that may want to be testing parity checking software or firmware in the receiving equipment.
The opposite of Mark parity, this sends a logical "0" for the parity checksum.  Again, very useful for equipment diagnostics.
This isn't really a parity formula, but rather an acknowledgment that parity really doesn't work, so the equipment doesn't even check for it.  This means the parity bit isn't even used.  This can cause, in some circumstances, a slight increase in the total data throughput.  More on that below.
This really isn't a bit at all, but an agreement that once the character is sent that the transmitting equipment will return to a logical "1" state.  The RS-232 specification requires this logical state of "1" to remain for at least one whole clock cycle, indicating that the character transmission is complete.  Sometimes the protocol will specify two stop bits.  One reason that this might be done is because the clock frequencies being used by the equipment might have slightly different timing, and over the course of hundreds or thousands of characters being transmitted the difference between two clocks on the two different pieces of equipment will cause the expected bits to be shifted slightly, causing errors.  By having two stop bits the transmission is slightly slower, but the clock signals between the two pieces of equipment can be coordinated better.  Equipment expecting one stop bit can accept data transmitted by equipment sending two stop bits.  It won't work the other way around, however.  This is something to try if you are having problems trying to get two pieces of equipment to communicate at a given baud rate, to add the second stop bit to the transmitter.
We got into a discussion of baud rate vs. bits per second.  Here is where baud as the number of bits being transmitted is still off, even if the nominal bits per second is also the same as the baud rate.  By adding start bits, stop bits, and parity bits, that is going to add overhead to the transmission protocol.  All digital transmission protocols have some sort of overhead on them, so this shouldn't be that much of a surprise.  As we get more into data packets and other issues, the actual amount of data being transmitted will drop even further.
Keep in mind that if you are transmitting with 6 data bits, 2 Stop bits, and Even Parity, you are transmitting only six bits of data and four other bits of extra information.  That means even with 9600 baud, you are only transmitting 5,760 bits of data per second.  This really is a big difference, and that is still only raw bits once it gets through the actual serial communications channel.  A more typical 8 data bits, 1 Stop Bit, No Parity will be a little bit better at 9600 baud, with eight bits of data and only two bits used for overhead.  That gives a total throughput of 7,680 bits per second.  A little bit better, but you can't simply presume that the baud rate indicates how much data is going to be transmitted.
Relationship of Baud Rate to Maximum Distance
There are physical limits to how far serial data communication can occur over a piece of wire.  When you apply a voltage onto a wire it takes time for that voltage to traverse the wire, and there are other unstable conditions that happen when you send a "pulse" down the wire and change voltages too quickly.  This problem is worse as wires become longer and the frequency (i.e. baud rate) increases.  This distance can vary based on a number of factors, including the thickness of the wires involved, RF interference on the wires, quality of the wires during the manufacturing process, how well they were installed... e.g., are there any "kinks" in the wires that force it into a sharp bend, and finally the baud rate that you are transmitting the data.
This table presumes a fairly straight and uniform cable that is typical for most low-voltage applications (i.e., not a power circuit that uses 110 V to run your refrigerator, toaster, and television).  Typically something like a CAT-5 cable (also used for local networks or phone lines) should be more than sufficient for this purpose.
The distance limitation can be mitigated.  There are "short haul modems" that can extend this distance to several miles of cable.  There are also telephone lines, or conventional modems, and other long-distance communications techniques.  There are other ways to handle data in situations like this, and those signals can be converted to simple RS-232 data formats that a typical home computer can interpret.  Distance still can be a limiting factor for communication, although when you are talking about distances like to Saturn for the Cassini mission, serial data communication has other issues involved than just data loss due to cable length.  And yes, NASA/ESA is using serial data communication for transmitting those stunning images back to Earth.
Serial Pinouts (D25 and D9 Connectors) (also has more technical information about the UARTs used in PCs)
RS232 Connections, and wiring up serial device has several diagrams, including one showing how to let one PC monitor the serial communication between 2 other RS232 devices.
Lammert Bies, RS232 Specifications and standard Includes technical specs on RS-232 signals and more detailed information about parity checking.
Tronisoft's Printable ASCII  Serial Port Crib Sheets
jSSC library (Java Simple Serial Connector). Work under Win32 and Win64
Serial Programming: Introduction and OSI Network Model
-- RS-232 Wiring and Connections
-- Typical RS232 Hardware Configuration
-- MAX232 Driver/Receiver Family
-- Hayes-compatible Modems and AT Commands
-- Error Correction Methods
-- Packet Recovery Methods
-- Practical Application Development
-- IP Over Serial Connections
Serial Programming: Introduction and OSI Network Model
-- RS-232 Wiring and Connections
-- Typical RS232 Hardware Configuration
-- MAX232 Driver/Receiver Family
-- Hayes-compatible Modems and AT Commands
-- Error Correction Methods
-- Packet Recovery Methods
-- Practical Application Development
-- IP Over Serial Connections
Finally we are moving away from wires and voltages and hard-core electrical engineering applications, although we still need to know quite a bit regarding computer chip architectures at this level.  While the primary focus of this section will concentrate on the 8250 UART, there are really three computer chips that we will be working with here:
Keep in mind that these are chip families, not simply the chip part number itself.  Computer designs have evolved quite a bit over the years, and often all three chips are put onto the same piece of silicon because they are tied together so much, and to reduce overall costs of the equipment.  So when I say 8086, I also mean the successor chips including the 80286, 80386, Pentium, and compatible chips made by manufacturers other than Intel.  There are some subtle differences and things you need to worry about for serial data communication between the different chips other than the 8086, but in many cases you could in theory write software for the original IBM PC doing serial communication and it should run just fine on a modern computer you just bought that is running the latest version of Linux or Windows XP.
Modern operating systems handle most of the details that we will be covering here through low-level drivers, so this should be more of a quick understanding for how this works rather than something you might implement yourself, unless you are writing your own operating system.  For people who are designing small embedded computer devices, it does become quite a bit more important to understand the 8250 at this level.
Just like the 8086, the 8250 has evolved quite a bit as well, e.g. into the 16550 UART. Further down I will go into how to detect many of the different UART chips on PCs, and some quirks or changes that affect each one.  The differences really aren't as significant as the changes to CPU architecture, and the primary reason for updating the UART chip was to make it work with the considerably faster CPUs that are around right now.  The 8250 itself simply can't keep up with a Pentium chip.
Remember as well that this is trying to build a foundation for serial programming on the software side.  While this can be useful for hardware design as well, quite a bit will be missing from the descriptions here to implement a full system.
We should go back even further than the Intel 8086, to the original Intel CPU, the 4004, and its successor, the 8008. All computer instructions, or op-codes, for the 8008 still function in today's Intel chips, so even port I/O tutorials written 30 years ago are valid today. The newer CPUs have enhanced instructions for dealing with more data more efficiently, but the original instructions are still there.
When the 8008 was released, Intel tried to devise a method for the CPU to communicate with external devices.  They chose a method called I/O port architecture, meaning that the chip has a special set of pins dedicated to communicating with external devices.  In the 8008, this meant that there were a total of sixteen (16) pins dedicated to communicating with the chip.  The exact details varied based on chip design and other factors too detailed for the current discussion, but the general theory is fairly straightforward.
Eight of the pins represent an I/O code that signaled a specific device.  This is known as the I/O port.  Since this is just a binary code, it represents the potential to hook up 256 different devices to the CPU.  It gets a little more complicated than that, but still you can think of it from software like a small-town post-office that has a bank of 256 PO boxes for its customers.
The next set of pins represent the actual data being exchanged.  You can think of this as the postcards being put into or removed from the PO boxes.
All the external device has to do is look for its I/O code, and then when it matches what it is "assigned" to look for, it has control over the corresponding port.  An pin signals whether the data is being sent to or from the CPU.  For those familiar with setting up early PCs, this is also where I/O conflicts happen: when two or more devices try to access the same I/O port at the same time.  This was a source of heartburn on those early systems, particularly when adding new equipment.
Incidentally, this is very similar to how conventional RAM works, and some CPU designs mimic this whole process straight in RAM, reserving a block of memory for I/O control.  This has some problems, including the fact that it chews up a portion of potential memory that could be used for software instead.  It ends up that with the IBM PC and later PC systems, both Memory-mapped I/O (MMIO) and Port-mapped I/O (PMIO) are used extensively, so it really gets complicated.  For serial communication, however, we are going to stick with the port I/O method, as that is how the 8250 chip works.
When you get down to actually using this in your software, the assembly language instruction to send or receive data to port 9 looks something like this:
When programming in higher level languages, it gets a bit simpler.  A typical C language Port I/O library is usually written like this:
For many versions of Pascal, it treats the I/O ports like a massive array that you can access, that is simply named Port:
Warning!! And this really is a warning.  By randomly accessing I/O ports in your computer without really knowing what it is connected to can really mess up your computer.  At the minimum, it will crash the operating system and cause the computer to not work.  Writing to some I/O ports can permanently change the internal configuration of your computer, making a trip to the repair shop necessary just to undo the damage you've done through software.  Worse yet, in some cases it can cause actual damage to the computer.  This means that some chips inside the computer will no longer work and those components would have to be replaced in order for the computer to work again.  Damaged chips are an indication of lousy engineering on the part of the computer, but unfortunately it does happen and you should be aware of it.
Don't be afraid to use the I/O ports, just make sure you know what you are writing to, and you know what equipment is "mapped" to for each I/O port if you intend to use a particular I/O port.  We will get into more of the specifics for how to identify the I/O ports for serial communication in a bit.  Finally we are starting to write a little bit of software, and there is more to come.
x86 port I/O extensions
There are a few differences between the 8088 CPU and the 8086.  The most notable that affects software development is that instead of just 256 port I/O addresses, the 8086 can access 65536 different I/O ports.  However, computer configurations may use less than 16 wires for the I/O address bus ; for example on the IBM PC, only 10 wires were used, making only 1024 different ports.  Higher bits of the port number being ignored, this made multiple port number aliases for the same port.
In addition, besides simply sending a single character in or out, the 8086 will let you send and receive 16 bits at once.  The 16-bit word bytes is read/written in little endian using consecutive port numbers.  The 386 chips will even let you send and receive 32-bits simultaneously.  The need for more than 65536 different I/O ports has never been a serious problem, and if a device needed a larger piece of memory, the Direct Memory Access (DMA) methods are available.  This is where the device writes and reads the RAM of the computer directly instead of going through the CPU.  We will not cover that topic here.
Also, while the 8086 CPU was able to address 65536 different I/O ports, in actual practice it didn't.  The chip designers at Intel got cheap and only had address lines for 10 bits, which has implications for software designers having to work with legacy systems.  This also meant that I/O port address $1E8 and $19E8 (and others... this is just an example) would resolve to the same I/O port for those early PCs.  The Pentium CPUs don't have this limitation, but software written for some of that early hardware sometimes wrote to I/O port addresses that were "aliased" because those upper bits were ignored.  There are other legacy issues that show up, but fortunately for the 8250 chip and serial communications in general this isn't a concern, unless you happen to have a serial driver that "took advantage" of this aliasing situation.  This issue would generally only show up when you are using more than the typical 2 or 4 serial COM ports on a PC.
The 8086 CPU and compatible chips have what is known as an interrupt line.  This is literally a wire to the rest of the computer that can be turned on to let the CPU know that it is time to stop whatever it is doing and pay attention to some I/O situations.
Within the 8086, there are two kinds of interrupts:  Hardware interrupts and Software interrupts.  There are some interesting quirks that are different from each kind, but from a software perspective they are essentially the same thing.  The 8086 CPU allows for 256 interrupts, but the number available for equipment to perform a Hardware interrupt is considerably restricted.
Hardware interrupts are numbered IRQ 0 through IRQ 15.  IRQ means Interrupt ReQuest.  There are a total of fifteen different hardware interrupts.  Before you think I don't know how to count or do math, we need to do a little bit of a history lesson here, which we will finish when we move on to the 8259 chip.  When the original IBM-PC was built, it only had eight IRQs, labeled IRQ 0 through IRQ 7.  At the time it was felt that was sufficient for almost everything that would ever be put on a PC, but very soon it became apparent it wasn't nearly enough for everything that was being added.  When the IBM-PC/AT was made (the first one with the 80286 CPU, and a number of enhancements that are commonly found on PCs today), it was decided that instead of a single 8259 chip, they would use two of these same chips, and "chain" them to one another in order to expand the number of interrupts from 8 to 15.  One IRQ had to be sacrificed in order to accomplish this task, and that was IRQ 2.
The point here is that if a device wants to notify the CPU that it has some data ready for the CPU, it sends a signal that it wants to stop whatever software is currently running on the computer and instead run a special "little" program called an interrupt handler.  Once the interrupt handler is finished, the computer can go back to whatever it was doing before.  If the interrupt handler is fast enough, you wouldn't even notice that the handler has even been used.
In fact, if you are reading this text on a PC, in the time that it takes for you to read this sentence several interrupt handlers have already been used by your computer.  Every time that you use a keyboard or a mouse, or receive some data over the Internet, an interrupt handler has been used at some point in your computer to retrieve that information.
We will be getting into specific details of interrupt handlers in a little bit, but now I want to explain just what they are.  Interrupt handlers are a method of showing the CPU exactly what piece of software should be running when the interrupt is triggered.
The 8086 CPU has a portion of RAM that has been established that "points" to where the interrupt software is located elsewhere in RAM.  The advantage of going this route is that the CPU only has to do a simple look-up to find just where the software is, and then transfers software execution to that point in RAM.  This also allows you as a programmer to change where the CPU is "pointing" to in RAM, and instead of going to something in the operating system, you can customize the interrupt handler and put something else there yourself.
How this is best done depends largely on your operating system.  For a simple operating system like MS-DOS, it actually encourages you to directly write these interrupt handlers, particularly when you are working with external peripherals.  Other operating systems like Linux or MS-Windows use the approach of having a "driver" that hooks into these interrupt handlers or service routines, and then the application software deals with the drivers rather than dealing directly with the equipment.  How a program actually does this is very dependent on the specific operating system you would be using.  If you are instead trying to write your own operating system, you would have to write these interrupt handlers directly, and establish the protocol on how you access these handlers to send and retrieve data.
Before we move on, I want to hit very briefly on software interrupts.  Software interrupts are invoked with the 8086 assembly instruction "int", as in:
From the perspective of a software application, this is really just another way to call a subroutine, but with a twist.  The "software" that is running in the interrupt handler doesn't have to be from the same application, or even made from the same compiler.  Indeed, often these subroutines are written directly in assembly language.  In the above example, this interrupt actually calls a "DOS" subroutine that will allow you to perform some sort of I/O access that is directly related to DOS.  Depending on the values of the registers, usually the AX register in the 8086 in this case, it can determine just what information you want to get from DOS, such as the current time, date, disk size, and just about everything that normally you would associate with DOS.  Compilers often hide these details, because setting up these interrupt routines can be a little tricky.
Now to really make a mess of things.  "Hardware interrupts" can also be called from "software interrupts", and indeed this is a reasonable way to make sure you have written your software correctly.  The difference here is that software interrupts will only be invoked, or have their portion of software code running in the CPU, if it has been explicitly called through this assembly opcode.
The 8259 chip is the "heart" of the whole process of doing hardware interrupts.  External devices are directly connected to this chip, or in the case of the PC-AT compatibles (most likely what you are most familiar with for a modern PC) it will have two of these devices that are connected together.  Literally sixteen wires come into this pair of chips, each wire labeled IRQ-0 through IRQ-15.
The purpose of these chips is to help "prioritize" the interrupt signals and organize them in some orderly fashion.  There is no way to predict when a certain device is going to "request" an interrupt, so often multiple devices can be competing for attention from the CPU.
Generally speaking, the lower numbered IRQ gets priority.  In other words, if both IRQ-1 and IRQ-4 are requesting attention at the same time, IRQ-1 gets priority and will be triggered first as far as the CPU is concerned.  IRQ-4 has to wait until after IRQ-1 has completed its "Interrupt Service Routine" or ISR.
If the opposite happens however, with IRQ-4 doing its ISR (remember, this is software, just like any computer program you might normally write as a computer application), IRQ-1 will "interrupt" the ISR for IRQ-4 and push through its own ISR to be run instead, returning to the IRQ-4 ISR when it has finished.  There are exceptions to this as well, but let's keep things simple at the moment.
Let's return for a minute to the original IBM-PC.  When it was built, there was only one 8259 chip on the motherboard.  When the IBM-AT came out the engineers at IBM decided to add a second 8259 chip to add some additional IRQ signals.  Since there was still only 1 pin on the CPU (at this point the 80286) that could receive notification of an interrupt, it was decided to grab IRQ-2 from the original 8259 chip and use that to chain onto the next chip.  IRQ-2 was re-routed to IRQ-9 as far as any devices that depended on IRQ-2.  The nice thing about going with this scheme was that software that planned on something using IRQ-2 would still be "notified" when that device was used, even though seven other devices were now "sharing" this interrupt.  These are IRQ-8 through IRQ-15.
What this means in terms of priorities, however, is that IRQ-8 through IRQ-15 have a higher priority than IRQ-3.  This is mainly of concern when you are trying to sort out which device can take precedence over another, and how important it would be to notified when a piece of equipment is trying to get your attention.  If you are dealing with software running a specific computer configuration, this priority level is very important.
It should be noted here that COM1 (serial communication channel one) usually uses IRQ-4, and COM2 uses IRQ-3, which has the net effect of making COM2 to be a higher priority for receiving data over COM1.  Usually the software really doesn't care, but on some rare occasions you really need to know this fact.
The 8259 has several "registers" that are associated with I/O port addresses.  We will visit this concept a little bit more when we get to the 8250 chip.  For a typical PC Computer system, the following are typical primary port addresses associated with the 8259:
This primary port address is what we will use to directly communicate with the 8259 chip in our software.  There are a number of commands that can be sent to this chip through these I/O port addresses, but for our purposes we really don't need to deal with them.  Most of these are used to do the initial setup and configuration of the computer equipment by the Basic Input Output System (BIOS) of the computer, and unless you are rewriting the BIOS from scratch, you really don't have to worry about this.  Also, each computer is a little different in its behavior when you are dealing with equipment at this level, so this is something more for a computer manufacturer to worry about rather than something an application programmer should have to deal with, which is exactly why BIOS software is written at all.
Keep in mind that this is the "typical" Port I/O address for most PC-compatible type computer systems, and can vary depending on what the manufacturer is trying to accomplish.  Generally you don't have to worry about incompatibility at this level, but when we get to Port I/O addresses for the serial ports this will become a much larger issue.
I'm going to spend a little time here to explain the meaning of the word register.  When you are working with equipment at this level, the electrical engineers who designed the equipment refer to registers that change the configuration of the equipment.  This can happen at several levels of abstraction, so I want to clear up some of the confusion.
When we are talking about device register, keep in mind these are not the CPU registers, but instead memory areas on the devices themselves.  These are often designed so they are connected to the Port I/O memory, so when you write to or read from the Port I/O addresses, you are directly accessing the device registers.  Sometimes there will be a further level of abstraction, where you will have one Port I/O address that will indicate which register you are changing, and another Port I/O address that has the data you are sending to that register.  How you deal with the device is based on how complex it is and what you are going to be doing.
In a real sense, they are registers, but keep in mind that often each of these devices can be considered a full computer in its own right, and all you are doing is establishing how it will be communicating with the main CPU.  Don't get hung up here and get these confused with the CPU registers.
One area that you have to interact on a regular basis when using interrupt controllers is to inform the 8259 PIC controller that the interrupt service routine is completed.  When your software is performing an interrupt handler, there is no automated method for the CPU to signal to the 8259 chip that you have finished, so a specific "register" in the PIC needs to be set to let the next interrupt handler be able to access the computer system.  Typical software to accomplish this is like the following:
This is sending the command called "End of Interrupt" or often written as an abbreviation simply "EOI".  There are other commands that can be sent to this register, but for our purposes this is the only one that we need to concern ourselves with.
Now this will clear the "master" PIC, but if you are using a device that is triggered on the "slave" PIC, you also need to inform that chip as well that the interrupt service has been completed.  This means you need to send "EOI" to that chip as well in a manner like this:
There are other things you can do to make your computer system work smoothly, but let's keep things simple for now.
Before we leave the subject of the 8259 PIC, I'd like to cover the concept of device masking.  Each one of the devices that are attached to the PIC can be "turned on" or "turned off" from the viewpoint of how they can interrupt the CPU through the PIC chip.  Usually as an application developer all we really care about is if the device is turned on, although if you are trying to isolate performance issues you might turn off some other devices.  Keep in mind that if you turn a device "off", the interrupt will not work until it is turned back on.  That can include the keyboard or other critical devices you may need to operate your computer.
The register to set this mask is called "Operation Control Word 1" or "OCW1".  This is located at the PIC base address + 1, or for the "Master" PIC at Port I/O Address $21.  This is where you need to go over bit manipulation, which I won't cover in detail here.  The following tables show the related bits to change in order to enable or disable each of the hardware interrupt devices:
Assuming that we want to turn on IRQ3 (typical for the serial port COM2), we would use the following software:
Port[$21] := Port[$21] and $F7; {Clearing bit 3 for enabling IRQ3}
And to turn it off we would use the following software:
If you are having problems getting anything to work, you can simply send this command in your software:
Serial COM Port Memory and I/O Allocation
Now that we have pushed through the 8259 chip, lets move on to the UART itself.  While the Port I/O addresses for the PICs are fairly standard, it is common for computer manufacturers to move stuff around for the serial ports themselves.  Also, if you have serial port devices that are part of an add-in card (like an ISA or PCI card in the expansion slots of your computer), these will usually have different settings than something built into the main motherboard of your computer.  It may take some time to hunt down these settings, and it is important to know what these values are when you are trying to write your software.  Often these values can be found in the BIOS setup screens of your computer, or if you can pause the messages when your computer turns on, they can be found as a part of the boot process of your computer.
For a "typical" PC system, the following are the Port I/O addresses and IRQs for each serial COM port:
Common UART IRQ and I/O Port Addresses
If you notice something interesting here, you can see that COM3 and COM1 share the same interrupt.  This is not a mistake but something you need to keep in mind when you are writing an interrupt service routine.  The 15 interrupts that were made available through the 8259 PIC chips still have not been enough to allow all of the devices that are found on a modern computer to have their own separate hardware interrupt, so in this case you will need to learn how to share the interrupt with other devices.  I'll cover more of that later when we get into the actual software to access the serial data ports, but for now remember not to write your software strictly for one device.
The Base Port I/O address is important for the next topic we will cover, which is directly accessing the UART registers.
The UART chip has a total of 12 different registers that are mapped into 8 different Port I/O locations.  Yes, you read that correct, 12 registers in 8 locations.  Obviously that means there is more than one register that uses the same Port I/O location, and affects how the UART can be configured.  In reality, two of the registers are really the same one but in a different context, as the Port I/O address that you transmit the characters to be sent out of the serial data port is the same address that you can read in the characters that are sent to the computer.  Another I/O port address has a different context when you write data to it than when you read data from it... and the number will be different after writing the data to it than when you read data from it.  More on that in a little bit.
One of the issues that came up when this chip was originally being designed was that the designer needed to be able to send information about the baud rate of the serial data with 16 bits.  This actually takes up two different "registers" and is toggled by what is called the "Divisor Latch Access Bit" or "DLAB".  When the DLAB is set to "1", the baud rate registers can be set and when it is "0" the registers have a different context.
Does all this sound confusing?  It can be, but lets take it one simple little piece at a time.  The following is a table of each of the registers that can be found in a typical UART chip:
Abbrv.
The "x" in the DLAB column means that the status of the DLAB has no effect on what register is going to be accessed for that offset range.  Notice also that some registers are Read only.  If you attempt to write data to them, you may end up with either some problems with the modem (worst case), or the data will simply be ignored (typically the result).  As mentioned earlier, some registers share a Port I/O address where one register will be used when you write data to it and another register will be used to retrieve data from the same address.
Each serial communication port will have its own set of these registers.  For example, if you wanted to access the Line Status Register (LSR) for COM1, and assuming the base I/O Port address of $3F8, the I/O Port address to get the information in this register would be found at $3F8 + $05 or $3FD.  Some example code would be like this:
Result := Port[COM1_Base+LSR_Offset];
There is quite a bit of information packed into each of these registers, and the following is an explanation for the meaning of each register and the information it contains.
Offset: +0 .
The Transmit and Receive buffers are related, and often even use the very same memory.  This is also one of the areas where later versions of the 8250 chip have a significant impact, as the later models incorporate some internal buffering of the data within the chip before it gets transmitted as serial data.  The base 8250 chip can only receive one byte at a time, while later chips like the 16550 chip will hold up to 16 bytes either to transmit or to receive (sometimes both... depending on the manufacturer) before you have to wait for the character to be sent.  This can be useful in multi-tasking environments where you have a computer doing many things, and it may be a couple of milliseconds before you get back to dealing with serial data flow.
These registers really are the "heart" of serial data communication, and how data is transferred from your software to another computer and how it gets data from other devices.  Reading and Writing to these registers is simply a matter of accessing the Port I/O address for the respective UART.
If the receive buffer is occupied or the FIFO is full, the incoming data is discarded and the Receiver Line Status interrupt is written to the IIR register. The Overrun Error bit is also set in the Line Status Register.
Offset: +0 and +1 .
The Divisor Latch Bytes are what control the baud rate of the modem.  As you might guess from the name of this register, it is used as a divisor to determine what baud rate that the chip is going to be transmitting at.
In reality, it is even simpler than that.  This is really a count-down clock that is used each time a bit is transmitted by the UART.  Each time a bit is sent, a count-down register is reset to this value and then counts down to zero.  This clock is running typically at 115.2 kHz.  In other words, at 115 thousand times per second a counter is going down to determine when to send the next bit.  At one time during the design process it was anticipated that some other frequencies might be used to get a UART working, but with the large amount of software already written for this chip this frequency is pretty much standard for almost all UART chips used on a PC platform.  They may use a faster clock in some portion (like a 1.843 MHz clock), but some fraction of that frequency will then be used to scale down to a 115.2 kHz clock.
Some more on UART clock speeds (advanced coverage):  For many UART chips, the clock frequency that is driving the UART is 1.8432 MHz.  This frequency is then put through a divider circuit that drops the frequency down by a factor of 16, giving us the 115.2 KHz frequency mentioned above.  If you are doing some custom equipment using this chip, the National Semiconductor spec sheets allow for a 3.072 MHz clock and 18.432 MHz clock.  These higher frequencies will allow you to communicate at higher baud rates, but require custom circuits on the motherboard and often new drivers in order to deal with these new frequencies.  What is interesting is that you can still operate at 50 baud with these higher clock frequencies, but at the time the original IBM-PC/XT was manufactured this wasn't a big concern as it is now for higher data throughput.
If you use the following mathematical formula, you can determine what numbers you need to put into the Divisor Latch Bytes:
That gives you the following table that can be used to determine common baud rates for serial communication:
Divisor Latch Byte Values (common baud rates)
One thing to keep in mind when looking at the table is that baud rates 600 and above all set the Divisor Latch High Byte to zero.  A sloppy programmer might try to skip setting the high byte, assuming that nobody would deal with such low baud rates, but this is not something to always presume.  Good programming habits suggest you should still try to set this to zero even if all you are doing is running at higher baud rates.
Another thing to notice is that there are other potential baud rates other than the standard ones listed above.  While this is not encouraged for a typical application, it would be something fun to experiment with.  Also, you can attempt to communicate with older equipment in this fashion where a standard API library might not allow a specific baud rate that should be compatible.  This should demonstrate why knowledge of these chips at this level is still very useful.
When working with these registers, also remember that these are the only ones that require the Divisor Latch Access Bit to be set to "1".  More on that below, but I'd like to mention that it would be useful for application software setting the baud rate to set the DLAB to "1" just for the immediate operation of changing the baud rate, then putting it back to "0" as the very next step before you do any more I/O access to the modem.  This is just a good working habit, and keeps the rest of the software you need to write for accessing the UART much cleaner and easier.
One word of caution:  Do not set the value "0" for both Divisor Latch bytes.  While it will not (likely) damage the UART chip, the behavior on how the UART will be transmitting serial data will be unpredictable, and will change from one computer to the next, or even from one time you boot the computer to the next.  This is an error condition, and if you are writing software that works with baud rate settings on this level you should catch potential "0" values for the Divisor Latch.
Here is some sample software to set and retrieve the baud rate for COM1:
Port[COM1_Base + LCR_Offset] := Port[COM1_Base + LCR_Offset] or $80; {Set DLAB}
Port[COM1_Base + Latch_High] := DivisorLatch shr 8;
Port[COM1_Base + Latch_Low] := DivisorLatch and $FF;
Port[COM1_Base + LCR_Offset] := Port[COM1_Base + LCR_Offset] and $7F; {Clear DLAB}
Port[COM1_Base + LCR_Offset] := Port[COM1_Base + LCR_Offset] or $80; {Set DLAB}
DivisorLatch := (Port[COM1_Base + Latch_High] shl 8) + Port[COM1_Base + Latch_Low];
Port[COM1_Base + LCR_Offset] := Port[COM1_Base + LCR_Offset] and $7F; {Clear DLAB}
Offset: +1 .
This register allows you to control when and how the UART is going to trigger an interrupt event with the hardware interrupt associated with the serial COM port.  If used properly, this can enable an efficient use of system resources and allow you to react to information being sent across a serial data line in essentially real-time conditions.  Some more on that will be covered later, but the point here is that you can use the UART to let you know exactly when you need to extract some data.  This register has both read- and write-access.
The following is a table showing each bit in this register and what events that it will enable to allow you check on the status of this chip:
The Received Data interrupt is a way to let you know that there is some data waiting for you to pull off of the UART.  This is probably the one bit that you will use more than the rest, and has more use.
The Transmitter Holding Register Empty Interrupt is to let you know that the output buffer (on more advanced models of the chip like the 16550) has finished sending everything that you pushed into the buffer.  This is a way to streamline the data transmission routines so they take up less CPU time.
The Receiver Line Status Interrupt indicates that something in the LSR register has probably changed.  This is usually an error condition, and if you are going to write an efficient error handler for the UART that will give plain text descriptions to the end user of your application, this is something you should consider. This is certainly something that takes a bit more advanced knowledge of programming.
The Modem Status Interrupt is to notify you when something changes with an external modem connected to your computer.  This can include things like the telephone "bell" ringing (you can simulate this in your software), that you have successfully connected to another modem (Carrier Detect has been turned on), or that somebody has "hung up" the telephone (Carrier Detect has turned off).  It can also help you to know if the external modem or data equipment can continue to receive data (Clear to Send).  Essentially, this deals with the other wires in the RS-232 standard other than strictly the transmit and receive wires.
The other two modes are strictly for the 16750 chip, and help put the chip into a "low power" state for use on things like a laptop computer or an embedded controller that has a very limited power source like a battery.  On earlier chips you should treat these bits as "Reserved", and only put a "0" into them.
Offset: +2 .
This register is to be used to help identify what the unique characteristics of the UART chip that you are using has.  This chip has two uses:
Identification of why the UART triggered an interrupt.
Identification of the UART chip itself.
Of these, identification of why the interrupt service routine has been invoked is perhaps the most important.
The following table explains some of the details of this register, and what each bit on it represents:
Reading Interrupt Identification Register(IIR) or Writing to Transmit Holding Buffer(THR)
When you are writing an interrupt handler for the 8250 chip (and later), this is the register that you need to look at in order to determine what exactly was the trigger for the interrupt.
As explained earlier, multiple serial communication devices can share the same hardware interrupt.  The use of "Bit 0" of this register will let you know (or confirm) that this was indeed the device that caused the interrupt.  What you need to do is check on all serial devices (that are in separate port I/O address spaces), and get the contents of this register.  Keep in mind that it is at least possible for more than one device to trigger an interrupt at the same time, so when you are doing this scanning of serial devices, make sure you examine all of them, even one of the first devices did in fact need to be processed.  Some computer systems may not require this to occur, but this is a good programming practice anyway.  It is also possible that due to how you processed the UARTs earlier, that you have already dealt with all of the UARTs for a given interrupt.  When this bit is a "0", it identifies that the UART is triggering an interrupt.  When it is "1", that means the interrupt has already been processed or this particular UART was not the triggering device.  I know that this seems a little bit backward for a typical bit-flag used in computers, but this is called digital logic being asserted low, and is fairly common with electrical circuit design.  This is a bit more unusual through for this logic pattern to go into the software domain.
Bits 1, 2 & 3 help to identify exactly what sort of interrupt event was used within the UART to invoke the hardware interrupt.  These are the same interrupts that were earlier enabled with the IER register.  In this case, however, each time you process the registers and deal with the interrupt it will be unique.  If multiple "triggers" occur for the UART due to many things happening at the same time, this will be invoked through multiple hardware interrupts.  Earlier chip sets don't use bit 3, but this is a reserved bit on those UART systems and always set to logic state "0", so programming logic doesn't have to be different when trying to decipher which interrupt has been used.
To explain the FIFO timeout Interrupt, this is a way to check for the end of a packet or if the incoming data stream has stopped.  Generally the following conditions must exist for this interrupt to be triggered:  Some data needs to be in the incoming FIFO and has not been read by the computer.  Data transmissions being sent to the UART via serial data link must have ended with no new characters being received.  The CPU processing incoming data must not have retrieved any data from the FIFO before the timeout has occurred.  The timeout will occur usually after the period it would take to transmit or receive at least 4 characters.  If you are talking about data sent at 1200 baud, 8 data bits, 2 stop bits, odd parity, that would take about 40 milliseconds, which is almost an eternity in terms of things that your computer can accomplish on a 4 GHz Pentium CPU.
The "Reset Method" listed above describes how the UART is notified that a given interrupt has been processed.  When you access the register mentioned under the reset method, this will clear the interrupt condition for that UART.  If multiple interrupts for the same UART have been triggered, either it won't clear the interrupt signal on the CPU (triggering a new hardware interrupt when you are done), or if you check back to this register (IIR) and query the Interrupt Pending Flag to see if there are more interrupts to process, you can move on and attempt to resolve any new interrupt issue that you may have to deal with, using appropriate application code.
Bits 5, 6 & 7 are reporting the current status of FIFO buffers being used for transmitting and receiving characters.  There was a bug in the original 16550 chip design when it was first released that had a serious flaw in the FIFO, causing the FIFO to report that it was working but in fact it wasn't.  Because some software had already been written to work with the FIFO, this bit (Bit 7 of this register) was kept, but Bit 6 was added to confirm that the FIFO was in fact working correctly, in case some new software wanted to ignore the hardware FIFO on the earlier versions of the 16550 chip.  This pattern has been kept on future versions of this chip as well.  On the 16750 chip an added 64-byte FIFO has been implemented, and Bit 5 is used to designate the presence of this extended buffer.  These FIFO buffers can be turned on and off using registers listed below.
Offset: +2 .
This is a relatively "new" register that was not a part of the original 8250 UART implementation.  The purpose of this register is to control how the First In/First Out (FIFO) buffers will behave on the chip and to help you fine-tune their performance in your application.  This even gives you the ability to "turn on" or "turn off" the FIFO.
Keep in mind that this is a "write only" register.  Attempting to read in the contents will only give you the Interrupt Identification Register (IIR), which has a totally different context.
Writing a "0" to bit 0 will disable the FIFOs, in essence turning the UART into 8250 compatibility mode.  In effect this also renders the rest of the settings in this register to become useless.  If you write a "0" here it will also stop the FIFOs from sending or receiving data, so any data that is sent through the serial data port may be scrambled after this setting has been changed.  It would be recommended to disable FIFOs only if you are trying to reset the serial communication protocol and clearing any working buffers you may have in your application software.  Some documentation suggests that setting this bit to "0" also clears the FIFO buffers, but I would recommend explicit buffer clearing instead using bits 1 and 2.
Bits 1 and 2 are used to clear the internal FIFO buffers.  This is useful when you are first starting up an application where you might want to clear out any data that may have been "left behind" by a previous piece of software using the UART, or if you want to reset a communications connection.  These bits are "automatically" reset, so if you set either of these to a logical "1" state you will not have to go and put them back to "0" later.  Sending a logical "0" only tells the UART not to reset the FIFO buffers, even if other aspects of FIFO control are going to be changed.
Bit 3 is in reference to how the DMA (Direct Memory Access) takes place, primarily when you are trying to retrieve data from the FIFO.  This would be useful primarily to a chip designer who is trying to directly access the serial data, and store this data in an internal buffer.  There are two digital logic pins on the UART chip itself labeled RXRDY and TXRDY.  If you are trying to design a computer circuit with the UART chip this may be useful or even important, but for the purposes of an application developer on a PC system it is of little use and you can safely ignore it.
Bit 5 allows the 16750 UART chip to expand the buffers from 16 bytes to 64 bytes.  Not only does this affect the size of the buffer, but it also controls the size of the trigger threshold, as described next.  On earlier chip types this is a reserved bit and should be kept in a logical "0" state.  On the 16750 it make that UART perform more like the 16550 with only a 16 byte FIFO.
Bits 6 and 7 describe the trigger threshold value.  This is the number of characters that would be stored in the FIFO before an interrupt is triggered that will let you know data should be removed from the FIFO.  If you anticipate that large amounts of data will be sent over the serial data link, you might want to increase the size of the buffer.  The reason why the maximum value for the trigger is less than the size of the FIFO buffer is because it may take a little while for some software to access the UART and retrieve the data.  Remember that when the FIFO is full, you will start to lose data from the FIFO, so it is important to make sure you have retrieved the data once this threshold has been reached.  If you are encountering software timing problems in trying to retrieve the UART data, you might want to lower the threshold value.  At the extreme end where the threshold is set to 1 byte, it will act essentially like the basic 8250, but with the added reliability that some characters may get caught in the buffer in situations where you don't have a chance to get all of them immediately.
Offset: +3 .
Setting the Divisor Latch Access Bit (DLAB), allowing you to set the values of the Divisor Latch Bytes.
Setting the bit patterns that will be used for both receiving and transmitting the serial data.  In other words, the serial data protocol you will be using (8-1-None, 5-2-Even, etc.).
The first two bits (Bit 0 and Bit 1) control how many data bits are sent for each data "word" that is transmitted via serial protocol.  For most serial data transmission, this will be 8 bits, but you will find some of the earlier protocols and older equipment that will require fewer data bits.  For example, some military encryption equipment only uses 5 data bits per serial "word", as did some TELEX equipment.  Early ASCII teletype terminals only used 7 data bits, and indeed this heritage has been preserved with SMTP format that only uses 7-bit ASCII for e-mail messages.  Clearly this is something that needs to be established before you are able to successfully complete message transmission using RS-232 protocol.
Bit 2 controls how many stop bits are transmitted by the UART to the receiving device.  This is selectable as either one or two stop bits, with a logical "0" representing 1 stop bit and "1" representing 2 stop bits.  In the case of 5 data bits, the UART instead sends out "1.5 stop bits".  Remember that a 'bit' in this context is actually a time interval: at 50 baud (bits per second) each bit takes 20 ms. So "1.5 stop bits" would have a minimum of 30 ms between characters. This is tied to the "5 data bits" setting, since only the equipment that used 5-bit Baudot rather than 7- or 8-bit ASCII used "1.5 stop bits".
Another thing to keep in mind is that the RS-232 standard only specifies that at least one data bit cycle will be kept a logical "1" at the end of each serial data word (in other words, a complete character from start bit, data bits, parity bits, and stop bits).  If you are having timing problems between the two computers but are able to in general get the character sent across one at a time, you might want to add a second stop bit instead of reducing baud rate.  This adds a one-bit penalty to the transmission speed per character instead of halving the transmission speed by dropping the baud rate (usually).
Bits 3, 4, and 5 control how each serial word responds to parity information.  When Bit 3 is a logical "0", this causes no parity bits to be sent out with the serial data word.  Instead it moves on immediately to the stop bits, and is an admission that parity checking at this level is really useless.  You might still gain a little more reliability with data transmission by including the parity bits, but there are other more reliable and practical ways that will be discussed in other chapters in this book.  If you want to include parity checking, the following explains each parity method other than "none" parity:
Odd ParityEach bit in the data portion of the serial word is added as a simple count of the number of logical "1" bits.  If this is an odd number of bits, the parity bit will be transmitted as a logical "0". If the count is even, the parity bit will be transmitted as a logical "1" to make the number of "1" bits odd.
Even ParityLike Odd Parity, the bits are added together.  In this case, however, if the number of bits end up as an odd number it will be transmitted as a logical "1" to make the number of "1" bits even, which is the exact opposite of odd parity.
Mark ParityIn this case the parity bit will always be a logical "1".  While this may seem a little unusual, this is put in for testing and diagnostics purposes.  If you want to make sure that the software on the receiving end of the serial connection is responding correctly to a parity error, you can send a Mark or a Space parity, and send characters that don't meet what the receiving UART or device is expecting for parity.  In addition for Mark Parity only, you can use this bit as an extra "stop bit".  Keep in mind that RS-232 standards are expecting a logical "1" to end a serial data word, so a receiving computer will not be able to tell the difference between a "Mark" parity bit and a stop bit.  In essence, you can have 3 or 2.5 stop bits through the use of this setting and by appropriate use of the stop bit portion of this register as well.  This is a way to "tweak" the settings on your computer in a way that typical applications don't allow you to do, or at least gain a deeper insight into serial data settings.
Space ParityLike the Mark parity, this makes the parity bit "sticky", so it doesn't change.  In this case it puts in a logical "0" for the parity bit every time you transmit a character.  There are not many practical uses for doing this other than a crude way to put in 9 data bits for each serial word, or for diagnostics purposes as described above.
Bit 6, when set to 1, causes TX wire to go logical "0" and stay that way, which is interpreted as long stream of "0" bits by the receiving UART - the "break condition". To end the "break", set bit 6 back to 0.
Offset: +4 .
This register allows you to do "hardware" flow control, under software control.  Or in a more practical manner, it allows direct manipulation of four different wires on the UART that you can set to any series of independent logical states, and be able to offer control of the modem.  It should also be noted that most UARTs need Auxiliary Output 2 set to a logical "1" to enable interrupts.
Of these outputs on a typical PC platform, only the Request to Send (RTS) and Data Terminal Ready (DTR) are actually connected to the output of the PC on the DB-9 connector.  If you are fortunate to have a DB-25 serial connector (more commonly used for parallel communications on a PC platform), or if you have a custom UART on an expansion card, the auxiliary outputs might be connected to the RS-232 connection.  If you are using this chip as a component on a custom circuit, this would give you some "free" extra output signals you can use in your chip design to signal anything you might want to have triggered by a TTL output, and would be under software control.  There are easier ways to do this, but in this case it might save you an extra chip on your layout.
The "loopback" mode is primarily a way to test the UART to verify that the circuits are working between your main CPU and the UART.  This seldom, if ever, needs to be tested by an end user, but might be useful for some initial testing of some software that uses the UART.  When this is set to a logical state of "1", any character that gets put into the transmit register will immediately be found in the receive register of the UART.  Other logical signals like the RTS and DTS listed above will show up in the modem status register just as if you had put a loopback RS-232 device on the end of your serial communication port.  In short, this allows you to do a loopback test using just software.  Except for these diagnostics purposes and for some early development testing of software using the UART, this will never be used.
On the 16750 there is a special mode that can be invoked using the Modem Control Register.  Basically this allows the UART to directly control the state of the RTS and DTS for hardware character flow control, depending on the current state of the FIFO.  This behavior is also affected by the status of Bit 5 of the FIFO Control Register (FCR).  While this is useful, and can change some of the logic on how you would write UART control software, the 16750 is comparatively new as a chip and not commonly found on many computer systems.  If you know your computer has a 16750 UART, have fun taking advantage of this increased functionality.
Offset: +5 .
This register is used primarily to give you information on possible error conditions that may exist within the UART, based on the data that has been received.  Keep in mind that this is a "read only" register, and any data written to this register is likely to be ignored or worse, cause different behavior in the UART.  There are several uses for this information, and some information will be given below on how it can be useful for diagnosing problems with your serial data connection:
Bit 7 refers to errors that are with characters in the FIFO.  If any character that is currently in the FIFO has had one of the other error messages listed here (like a framing error, parity error, etc.), this is reminding you that the FIFO needs to be cleared as the character data in the FIFO is unreliable and has one or more errors.  On UART chips without a FIFO this is a reserved bit field.
Bits 5 and 6 refer to the condition of the character transmitter circuits and can help you to identify if the UART is ready to accept another character.  Bit 6 is set to a logical "1" if all characters have been transmitted (including the FIFO, if active), and the "shift register" is done transmitting as well.  This shift register is an internal memory block within the UART that grabs data from the Transmitter Holding Buffer (THB) or the FIFO and is the circuitry that does the actual transformation of the data to a serial format, sending out one bit of the data at a time and "shifting" the contents of the shift register down one bit to get the value of the next bit.  Bit 5 merely tells you that the UART is capable of receiving more characters, including into the FIFO for transmitting.
The Break Interrupt (Bit 4) gets to a logical state of "1" when the serial data input line has received "0" bits for a period of time that is at least as long as an entire serial data "word", including the start bit, data bits, parity bit, and stop bits, for the given baud rate in the Divisor Latch Bytes.  (The normal state of a serial line is to send "1" bits when idle, or send start bit which is always one "0" bit, then send variable data and parity bits, then stop bit which is "1", continued into more "1"s if line goes idle.)  A long sequence of "0" bits instead of the normal state usually means that the device that is sending serial data to your computer has stopped for some reason.  Often with serial communications this is a normal condition, but in this way you have a way to monitor just how the other device is functioning.  Some serial terminals have a key which make them generate this "break condition" as an out-of-band signaling method.
Framing errors (Bit 3) occur when the last bit is not a stop bit.  Or to be more precise the stop bit is a logical "0".  There are several causes for this, including that you have the timing between the two computer mismatched.  This is usually caused by a mismatch in baud rate, although other causes might be involved as well, including problems in the physical cabling between the devices or that the cable is too long.  You may even have the number of data bits off, so when errors like this are encountered, check the serial data protocol very closely to make sure that all of the settings for the UART (data bit length, parity, and stop bit count) are what should be expected.
Parity errors (Bit 2) can also indicate a mismatched baud rate like the framing errors (particularly if both errors are occurring at the same time).  This bit is raised when the parity algorithm that is expected (odd, even, mark, or space) has not been found.  If you are using "no parity" in the setup of the UART, this bit should always be a logical "0".  When framing errors are not occurring, this is a way to identify that there are some problems with the cabling, although there are other issues you may have to deal with as well.
Overrun errors (Bit 1) are a sign of poor programming or an operating system that is not giving you proper access to the UART.  This error condition occurs when there is a character waiting to be read, and the incoming shift register is attempting to move the contents of the next character into the Receiver Buffer (RBR).  On UARTs with a FIFO, this also indicates that the FIFO is full as well.
Some things you can do to help get rid of this error including looking at how efficient your software is that is accessing the UART, particularly the part that is monitoring and reading incoming data.  On multi-tasking operating systems, you might want to make sure that the portion of the software that reads incoming data is on a separate thread, and that the thread priority is high or time-critical, as this is a very important operation for software that uses serial communications data.  A good software practice for applications also includes adding in an application specific "buffer" that is done through software, giving your application more opportunity to be able to deal with the incoming data as necessary, and away from the time critical subroutines needed to get the data off of the UART.  This buffer can be as small as 1KB to as large as 1MB, and depends substantially on the kind of data that you are working with.  There are other more exotic buffering techniques as well that apply to the realm of application development, and that will be covered in later modules.
If you are working with simpler operating systems like MS-DOS or a real-time operating system, there is a distinction between a poll-driven access to the UART vs. interrupt driven software.  Writing an interrupt driver is much more efficient, and there will be a whole section of this book that will go into details of how to write software for UART access.
Finally, when you can't seem to solve the problems of trying to prevent overrun errors from showing up, you might want to think about reducing the baud rate for the serial transmission.  This is not always an option, and really should be the option of last choice when trying to resolve this issue in your software.  As a quick test to simply verify that the fundamental algorithms are working, you can start with a slower baud rate and gradually go to higher speeds, but that should only be done during the initial development of the software, and not something that gets released to a customer or placed as publicly distributed software.
The Data Ready Bit (Bit 0) is really the simplest part here.  This is a way to simply inform you that there is data available for your software to extract from the UART.  When this bit is a logical "1", it is time to read the Receiver Buffer (RBR).  On UARTs with a FIFO that is active, this bit will remain in a logical "1" state until you have read all of the contents of the FIFO.
Offset: +6 .
This register is another read-only register that is here to inform your software about the current status of the modem.  The modem accessed in this manner can either be an external modem, or an internal modem that uses a UART as an interface to the computer.
When we get to the section of AT modem commands, there will be other methods that can be shown to inform you about this and other information regarding the status of a modem, and instead this information will be sent as characters in the normal serial data stream instead of special wires.  In truth, these extra bits are pretty worthless, but have been a part of the specification from the beginning and comparatively easy for UART designers to implement.  It may, however, be a way to efficiently send some additional information or allow a software designer using the UART to get some logical bit signals from other devices for other purposes.
The "Data Set Ready" and "Clear To Send" bits (Bits 4 and 5) are found directly on an RS-232 cable, and are matching wires to "Request To Send" and "Data Terminal Ready" that are transmitted with the "Modem Control Register (MCR).  With these four bits in two registers, you can perform "hardware flow control", where you can signal to the other device that it is time to send more data, or to hold back and stop sending data while you are trying to process the information.  More will be written about this subject in another module when we get to data flow control.
A note regarding the "delta" bits (Bits 0, 1, 2, and 3).  In this case the word "delta" means change, as in a change in the status of one of the bits.  This comes from other scientific areas like rocket science where delta-vee means a change in velocity.  For the purposes of this register, each of these bits will be a logical "1" the next time you access this Modem Status register if the bit it is associated with (like Delta Data Carrier Detect with Carrier Detect) has changed its logical state from the previous time you accessed this register.  The Trailing Edge Ring Indicator is pretty much like the rest, except it is in a logical "1" state only if the "Ring Indicator" bit went from a logical "1" to a logical "0" condition.  There really isn't much practical use for this knowledge, but there is some software that tries to take advantage of these bits and perform some manipulation of the data received from the UART based on these bits.  If you ignore these 4 bits you can still make a very robust serial communications software.
Offset: +7 .
The Scratch Register is an interesting enigma.  So much effort was done to try and squeeze a whole bunch of registers into all of the other I/O port addresses that the designers had an extra "register" that they didn't know what to do with.  Keep in mind that when dealing with computer architecture, it is easier when dealing with powers of 2, so they were "stuck" with having to address 8 I/O ports.  Allowing another device to use this extra I/O port would make the motherboard design far too complicated.
On some variants of the 8250 UART, any data written to this scratch register will be available to software when you read the I/O port for this register.  In effect, this gives you one extra byte of "memory" that you can use in your applications in any way that you find useful.  Other than a virus author (maybe I shouldn't give any ideas), there isn't really a good use for this register.  Of limited use is the fact that you can use this register to identify specific variations of the UART because the original 8250 did not store the data sent to it through this register.  As that chip is hardly ever used anymore on a PC design (those companies are using more advanced chips like the 16550), you will not find that "bug" in most modern PC-type platforms.  More details will be given below on how to identify through software which UART chip is being used in your computer, and for each serial port.
Just as it is possible to identify many of the components on a computer system through just software routines, it is also possible to detect which version or variant of the UART that is found on your computer as well.  The reason this is possible is because each different version of the UART chip has some unique qualities that if you do a process of elimination you can identify which version you are dealing with.  This can be useful information if you are trying to improve performance of the serial I/O routines, know if there are buffers available for transmitting and sending information, as well as simply getting to know the equipment on your PC better.
One example of how you can determine the version of the UART is if the Scratch Register is working or not.  On the first 8250 and 8250A chips, there was a flaw in the design of those chip models where the Scratch Register didn't work.  If you write some data to this register and it comes back changed, you know that the UART in your computer is one of these two chip models.
Another place to look is with the FIFO control registers.  If you set bit "0" of this register to a logical 1, you are trying to enable the FIFOs on the UART, which are only found in the more recent version of this chip.  Reading bits "6" and "7" will help you to determine if you are using either the 16550 or 16550A chip.  Bit "5" will help you determine if the chip is the 16750.
Below is a full pseudo code algorithm to help you determine the type of chip you are using:
Set the value "0xE7" to the FCR to test the status of the FIFO flags.
Read the value of the IIR to test for what flags actually got set.
Else you know the chip doesn't use FIFO, so we need to check the scratch register
Set some arbitrary value like 0x2A to the Scratch Register.
You don't want to use 0xFF or 0x00 as those might be returned by the Scratch Register instead for a false postive result.
Read the value of the Scratch Register
If the arbitrary value comes back identical
When written in Pascal, the above algorithm ends up looking like this:
Port[COM1_Addr + FCR] := $E7;
Test := Port[COM1_Addr + IIR];
Port[COM1_Addr + SCR] := $2A;
We still havn't identified between the 8250, 8250A, or 8250B; but that is rather pointless anyway on most current computers as it is very unlikely to even find one of those chips because of their age.
A very similar procedure can be used to determine the CPU of a computer, but that is beyond the scope of this book.
While the 8250 is by far the most popular UART on desktop computers, other popular UARTs include:
"bit-banging" a UART: ... [10]
Serial Programming: Introduction and OSI Network Model
-- RS-232 Wiring and Connections
-- Typical RS232 Hardware Configuration
-- MAX232 Driver/Receiver Family
-- Hayes-compatible Modems and AT Commands
-- Error Correction Methods
-- Packet Recovery Methods
-- Practical Application Development
-- IP Over Serial Connections
Serial Programming: Introduction and OSI Network Model
-- RS-232 Wiring and Connections
-- Typical RS232 Hardware Configuration
-- MAX232 Driver/Receiver Family
-- Hayes-compatible Modems and AT Commands
-- Error Correction Methods
-- Packet Recovery Methods
-- Practical Application Development
-- IP Over Serial Connections
It is now time to build on everything that has been established so far.  While it is unlikely that you are going to be using MS-DOS for a major application, it is a good operating system to demonstrate a number of ideas related to software access of the 8250 UART and driver development. Compared to modern operating systems like Linux, OS-X, or Windows, MS-DOS can hardly be called an operating system at all.  All it really offers is basic access to the hard drive and a few minor utilities.  That really doesn't matter so much for what we are dealing with here, and it is a good chance to see how we can directly manipulate the UART to get the full functionality of all aspects of the computer.  The tools I'm using are all available for free (as in beer) and can be used in emulator software (like VMware or Bochs) to try these ideas out as well.  Emulation of serial devices is generally a weak point for these programs, so it may work easier if you work from a floppy boot of DOS, or on an older computer that is otherwise destined for the trash can because it is obsolete.
For Pascal, you can look here:
Turbo Pascal [11] version 5.5 - This is the software I'm actually using for these examples, and the compiler that most older documentation on the web will also support (generally).
Free Pascal [12] - *note* this is a 32-bit version, although there is a port for DOS development.  Unlike Turbo Pascal, it also has ongoing development and is more valuable for serious projects running in DOS.
FreeDOS [13] Project - Now that Microsoft has abandoned development of DOS, this is pretty much the only OS left that is pure command line driven and following the DOS architecture.
Hello World, Serial Data Version
In the introduction, I mentioned that it was very difficult to write computer software that implements RS-232 serial communications.  A very short program shows that at least a basic program really isn't that hard at all.  In fact, just three more lines than a typical "Hello World" program.
All of this works because in DOS (and all version of Windows as well... on this particular point) has a "reserved" file name called COM1 that is the operating system hooks into the serial communications ports.  While this seems simple, it is deceptively simple.  You still don't have access to being able to control the baud rate or any of the other settings for the modem.  That is a fairly simple thing to add, however, using the knowledge of the UART discussed in the previous chapter Programming the 8250 UART.
To try something even easier, you don't even need a compiler at all.  This takes advantage of the reserved "device names" in DOS and can be done from the command prompt.
What you are doing here is taking input from CON (the console or the standard keyboard you use on your computer) and it "copies" the data to COM1.  You can also use variations of this to do some interesting file transfers, but it has some important limitations.  Most importantly, you don't have access to the UART settings, and this simply uses whatever the default settings of the UART might be, or what you used last time you changed the settings to become with a serial terminal program.
Finding the Port I/O Address for the UART
The next big task that we have to work with is trying to find the base "address" of the Port I/O so that we can communicate with the UART chip directly (see the part about interface logic in the Typical RS232-Hardware Configuration module for information what this is about).  For a "typical" PC system, the following are usually the addresses that you need to work with:
Looking up UART Base Address in RAM
We will get back to the issue of the IRQ Number in a little bit, but for now we need to know where to start accessing information about each UART.  As demonstrated previously, DOS also keeps track of where the UART IO ports are located at for its own purpose, so you can try to "look up" within the memory tables that DOS uses to try and find the correct address as well.  This doesn't always work, because we are going outside of the normal DOS API structure.  Alternative operating systems ( FreeDOS works fine here ) that are otherwise compatible with MS-DOS may not work in this manner, so take note that this may simply give you a wrong result altogether.
The addresses for the serial I/O Ports can be found at the following locations in RAM:
Those addresses are written to memory by the BIOS when it boots. If one of the ports doesn't exist, the BIOS writes zero to the respective address. Note that the addresses are given in segment:offset format and that you have to multiply the address of the segment with 16 and add the offset to get to the physical address in memory.  This is where DOS "finds" the port addresses so you can run the first sample program in this chapter.
In assembler you can get the addresses like this:
...
In Turbo Pascal, you can get at these addresses almost the same way and in some ways even easier because it is a "high level language".  All you have to do is add the following line to access the COM Port location as a simple array:
ComPort: array [1..4] of Word absolute $0040:$0000;
The reserved, non standard, word absolute is a flag to the compiler that instead of "allocating" memory, that you already have a place in mind to have the computer look instead.  This is something that should seldom be done by a programmer unless you are accessing things like these I/O port addresses that are always stored in this memory location.
For a complete program that simply prints out a table of the I/O port addresses for all four standard COM ports, you can use this simple program:
HexDigits: array [$0..$F] of Char = '0123456789ABCDEF';
ComPort: array [1..4] of Word absolute $0040:$0000;
HexDigits[Hi(Number) and $F] +
Assuming that the standard I/O addresses don't seem to be working for your computer and you haven't been able to find the correct I/O Port offset addresses through searching RAM either, all hope is still not lost.  Assuming that you have not accidentally changed these settings earlier, you can also try to look up these numbers in the BIOS setup page for your computer.  It may take some pushing around to find this information, but if you have a conventional serial data port on your computer, it will be there.
If you are using a serial data port that is connected via USB (common on more recent computers), you are simply not going to be (easily) able to do direct serial data communications in DOS.  Instead, you need to use more advanced operating systems like Windows or Linux that is beyond the scope of this chapter.  We will cover how to access the serial communications routines in those operating systems in subsequent chapters.  The basic principles we are discussing here would still be useful to review because it goes into the basic UART structure.
While it may be useful to try and make IRQs selectable and not presume that the information listed above is correct in all situations, it is important to note that most PC-compatible computer equipment usually has these IRQs and I/O port addresses used in this way because of legacy support.  And surprisingly as computers get more sophisticated with even more advanced equipment like USB devices, these legacy connections still work for most equipment.
Now that we know where to look in memory to modify the UART registers, let's put that knowledge to work.  We are also now going to do some practical application of the tables listed earlier in the chapter 8250 UART Programming.
To start with, let's redo the previous "Hello World" application, but this time we are going to set the RS-232 transmission parameters to 1200 baud, 7 databits, even parity, and 2 stop bits.  I'm choosing this setting parameter because it is not standard for most modem applications, as a demonstration.  If you can change these settings, then other transmission settings are going to be trivial.
First, we need to set up some software constants to keep track of locations in memory.  This is mainly to keep things clear to somebody trying to make changes to our software in the future, not because the compiler needs it.
Next, we need to set the DLAB to a logical "1" so we can set the baud rate:
In this case, we are ignoring the rest of the settings for the Line Control Register (LCR) because we will be setting them up in a little bit.  Remember this is just a "quick and dirty" way to get this done for now.  A more "formal" way to set up things like baud rate will be demonstrated later on with this module.
Following this, we need to put in the baud rate for the modem.  Looking up 1200 baud on the Divisor Latch Bytes table gives us the following values:
Now we need to set the values for the LCR based on our desired setting of 7-2-E for the communication settings.  We also need to "clear" the DLAB which we can also do at the same time.
Clearing "Set Break" flag = 0 * 64
Are things clear so far?  What we have just done is some bit-wise arithmetic, and I'm trying to keep things very simple here and to try and explain each step in detail.  Let's just put the whole thing together as the quick and dirty "Hello World", but with adjustment of the transmission settings as well:
ComPort: array [1..4] of Word absolute $0040:$0000;
Port[ComPort[1] + LCR] := $16
This is getting a little more complicated, but not too much.  Still, all we have done so far is just write data out to the serial port.  Reading data from the serial data port is going to be a little bit trickier.
In theory, you could use a standard I/O library and simply read data from the COM port like you would be reading from a file on your hard drive.  Something like this:
There are some problems with doing that with most software, however.  One thing to keep in mind is that using a standard input routine will stop your software until the input is finished ending with a "Enter" character (ASCII code 13 or in hex $0D).
Usually what you want to do with a program that receives serial data is to allow the user to do other things while the software is waiting for the data input.  In a multitasking operating system, this would simply be put on another "thread", but with this being DOS, we don't (usually) have threading capabilities, nor is it necessary.  There are some other alternatives that we do in order to get the serial data brought into your software.
Perhaps the easiest to go, besides simply letting the standard I/O routines grab the input) is to do software polling of the UART.  One of the reasons why this works is because serial communications is generally so slow compared to the CPU speed that you can perform many tasks in between each character being transmitted to your computer.  Also, we are trying to do practical applications using the UART chip, so this is a good way to demonstrate some of the capabilities of the chip beyond simple output of data.
Looking at the Line Status Register (LSR), there is a bit called Data Ready that indicates there is some data available to your software in the UART.  We are going to take advantage of that bit, and start to do data access directly from the UART instead of relying on the standard I/O library.  This program we are going to demonstrate here is going to be called Echo because all it does is take whatever data is sent to the computer through the serial data port and display it on your screen.  We are also going to be configuring the RS-232 settings to a more normal 9600 baud, 8 data bits, 1 stop bit, and no parity.  To quit the program, all you have to do is press any key on your keyboard.
ComPort: array [1..4] of Word absolute $0040:$0000;
Writeln('Serial Data Terminal Character Echo Program.  Press any key on the keyboard to quit.');
Port[ComPort[1] + Latch_Low] := $0C;
This program really isn't that complicated.  In fact, a very simple "terminal" program can be adapted from this to allow both sending and receiving characters.  In this case, the Escape key will be used to quit the program, which will in fact be where most of the changes to the program will happen.  We are also introducing for the first time direct output into the UART instead of going through the standard I/O libraries with this line:
The Transmit Holding Register (THR) is how data you want to transmit gets into the UART in the first place.  DOS just took care of the details earlier, so now we don't need to open a "file" in order to send data.  We are going to assume, to keep things very simple, that you can't type at 9600 baud, or roughly 11,000 words per minute.  Only if you are dealing with very slow baud rates like 110 baud is that going to be an issue anyway (still at over 130 words per minute of typing... a very fast typist indeed).
ComPort: array [1..4] of Word absolute $0040:$0000;
Writeln('Simple Serial Data Terminal Program.  Press "Esc" to quit.');
Port[ComPort[1] + Latch_Low] := $0C;
The software polling method may be adequate for most simple tasks, and if you want to test some serial data concepts without writing a lot of software, it may be sufficient.  Quite a bit can be done with just that method of data input.
When you are writing a more complete piece of software, however, it becomes important to worry about the efficiency of your software.  While the computer is "polling" the UART to see if a character has been sent through the serial communications port, it spends quite a few CPU cycles doing absolutely nothing at all.  It also get very difficult to expand a program like the one demonstrated above to become a small section of a very large program.  If you want to get that last little bit of CPU performance out of your software, we need to turn to interrupt drivers and how you can write them.
I'll openly admit that this is a tough leap in complexity from a simple polling application listed above, but it is an important programming topic in general.  We are also going to expose a little bit about the low-level behavior of the 8086 chip family, which is knowledge you can use in newer operating systems as well, at least for background information.
Going back to earlier discussions about the 8259 Programmable Interrupt Controller (PIC) chip, external devices like the UART can "signal" the 8086 that an important task needs to occur that interrupts the flow of the software currently running on the computer.  Not all computers do this, however, and sometimes the software polling of devices is the only way to get data input from other devices.  The real advantage of interrupt events is that you can process data acquisition from devices like the UART very quickly, and CPU time spent trying to test if there is data available can instead be used for other tasks.  It is also useful when designing operating systems that are event driven.
Interrupt Requests (IRQs) are labeled with the names IRQ0 to IRQ15.  UART chips typically use either IRQ 3 or IRQ 4.  When the PIC signals to the CPU that an interrupt has occurred, the CPU automatically start to run a very small subroutine that has been previously setup in the Interrupt Table in RAM.  The exact routine that is started depends on which IRQ has been triggered.  What we are going to demonstrate here is the ability to write our own software that "takes over" from the operating system what should occur when the interrupt occurs.  In effect, writing our own "operating system" instead, at least for those parts we are rewriting.
Indeed, this is exactly what operating system authors do when they try to make a new OS... deal with the interrupts and write the subroutines necessary to control the devices connected to the computer.
The following is a very simple program that captures the keyboard interrupt and produces a "clicking" sound in the speaker as you type each key.  One interesting thing about this whole section, while it is moving slightly off topic, this is communicating with a serial device.  The keyboard on a typical PC transmits the information about each key that you press through a RS-232 serial protocol that operates usually between 300 and 1200 baud and has its own custom UART chip.  Normally this isn't something you are going to address, and seldom are you going to have another kind of device connected to the keyboard port, but it is interesting that you can "hack" into the functions of your keyboard by understanding serial data programming.
There are a number of things that this program does, and we need to explore the realm of 16-bit DOS software as well.  The 8086 chip designers had to make quite a few compromises in order to work with the computer technology that was available at the time it was designed.  Computer memory was quite expensive compared to the overall cost of the computer.  Most of the early microcomputers that the IBM-PC was competing against only had 64K or 128K of main CPU RAM anyway, so huge programs were not considered important.  In fact, the original IBM-PC was designed to operate on only 128K of RAM although it did become standard with generally up to 640K of main RAM, especially by the time the IBM PC-XT was released and the market for PC "clones" turned out what is generally considered the "standard PC" computer today.
The design came up with what is called segmented memory, where the CPU address is made up of a memory "segment" pointer and a 64K block of memory.  That is why some early software on these computers could only run in 64K of memory, and created nightmares for compiler authors on the 8086.  Pentium computers don't generally have this issue, as the memory model in "protected mode" doesn't use this segmented design methodology.
This program has two "compiler switches" that inform the compiler of the need to use what are called far procedure calls.  Normally for small programs and simple subroutines, you are able to use what is called relative indexing with the software so the CPU "jumps" to the portion of RAM with the procedure by doing a bit of simple math and "adding" a number to the current CPU address in order to find the correct instructions.  This is done especially because it uses quite a bit less memory to store all of these instructions.
Sometimes, however, a procedure must be accessed from somewhere in RAM that is quite different from the current CPU memory address "instruction pointer".  Interrupt procedures are one of these, because it doesn't even have to be the same program that is stored in the interrupt vector table.  That brings up the next part to discuss:
The word "interrupt" after this procedure name is a key item here.  This tells the compiler that it must do something a little bit different when organizing this function than how a normal function call behaves.  Typically for most software on the computer, you have a bunch of simple instructions that are then followed by (in assembler) an instruction called:
This is the mnemonic assembly instruction for return from procedure call.  Interrupts are handled a little bit differently and should normally end with a different CPU instruction that in assembly is called:
In this case, Turbo Pascal (and other well-written compilers having a compiler flag like this) takes care of these low-level details for you with this simple flag.  If the compiler you are using doesn't have this feature, you will have to add these features "by hand" and explicitly put them into your software.  That doesn't mean the compiler will do everything for you to make an interrupt procedure.  There are more steps to getting this to work still.
These instructions are using what is called a procedure variable.  Keep in mind that all software is located in the same memory as variables and other information your software is using.  Essentially, a variable procedure where you don't need to worry about what it does until the software is running, and you can change this variable while your program is running.  This is a powerful concept that is not often used, but it can be used for a number of different things.  In this case we are keeping track of the previous interrupt service routine and "chaining" these routines together.
There are programs called Terminate and Stay Resident (TSRs) that are loaded into your computer.  Some of these are called drivers, and the operating system itself also puts in subroutines to do basic functions.  If you want to "play nice" with all of this other software, the established protocol for making sure everybody gets a chance to review the data in an interrupt is to link each new interrupt subroutine to the previously stored interrupt vector.  When we are done with whatever we want to do with the interrupt, we then let all of the other programs get a chance to use the interrupt as well.  It is also possible that the Interrupt Service Routine (ISR) that we just wrote is not the first one in the chain, but instead one that is being called by another ISR.
Again, this is Turbo Pascal "hiding" the details in a convenient way.  There is a "vector table" that you can directly access, but this vector table is not always in the same location in RAM.  If instead you go through the BIOS with a software interrupt, you are "guaranteed" that the interrupt vector will be correctly replaced.
This table gives you a quick glance at some of the things that interrupts are used for, and the interrupt numbers associated with them.  Keep in mind that the IRQ numbers are mainly reference numbers, and that the CPU uses a different set of numbers.  The keyboard IRQ, for example, is IRQ1, but it is numbered as interrupt $09 inside the CPU.
There are also several interrupts that are "generated" by the CPU itself.  While technically hardware interrupts, these are generated by conditions within the CPU, sometimes based on conditions setup by your software or the operating system.  When we start writing the interrupt service routine for the serial communication ports, we will be using interrupts 11 and 12 ($0B and $0C in hex).  As can be seen, most interrupts are assigned for specific tasks.  I've omitted the software interrupts mainly to keep this on topic regarding serial programming and hardware interrupts.
There are several other parts to this program that don't need too much more explanation.  Remember, we are talking about serial programming, not interrupt drivers.  I/O Port $60 is interesting as this is the Receiver Buffer (RBR) for the keyboard UART.  This returns the keyboard "scan code", not the actual character pressed.  In fact, when you use a keyboard on a PC, the keyboard actually transmits two characters for each key that you use.  One character is transmitted when you press the key down, and another character when the key is "released" to go back up.  In this case, the interrupt service routine in DOS normally converts the scan codes into ASCII codes that your software can use.  In fact, simple keys like the shift key are treated as just another scan code.
The sound routines access the internal PC speaker, not something on a sound card.  About the only thing that uses this speaker any more is the BIOS "beep codes" that you hear only when there is a hardware failure to your computer, or the quick "beep" when you start or reboot the computer.  It was never designed for doing things like speech synthesis or music playback, and driver attempts to use it for those purposes sound awful.  Still, it is something neat to experiment with and a legacy computer part that is surprisingly still used on many current computers..
I'm going to go back to the serial terminal program for a bit and this time redo the application by using an interrupt service routine.  There are a few other concepts I'd like to introduce as well so I'll try to put them in with this example program.  From the user perspective, I would like to add the ability to change the terminal characteristics from the command line and allow an "end-user" the ability to change things like the baud rate, stop bits, and parity checking, and allow these to be variables instead of hard-coded constants.  I'll explain each section and then put it all together when we are through.
This isn't that much different from the polling method that we used earlier, but keep in mind that by placing the checking inside an ISR that the CPU is only doing the check when there is a piece of data available.  Why even check the LSR to see if there is a data byte available?  Reading data sent to the UART is not the only reason why the UART will invoke an interrupt.  We will go over that in detail in a later section, but for now this is good programming practice as well, to confirm that the data is in there.
By moving this checking to the ISR, more CPU time is available for performing other tasks.  We could even put the keyboard polling into an ISR as well, but we are going to keep things very simple for now.
There is one minor problem with the way we have written this ISR.  We are assuming that there is no FIFO in the UART.  The "bug" that could happen with this ISR as it is currently written is that multiple characters can be in the FIFO buffer.  Normally when this happens, the UART only sends a single interrupt, and it is up to the ISR to "empty" the FIFO buffer completely.
Instead, all we are going to do is simply disable the FIFO completely.  This can be done using the FCR (FIFO Control Register) and explicitly disabling the FIFO.  As an added precaution, we are also going to "clear" the FIFO buffers in the UART as a part of the initialization portion of the program.  Clearing the FIFOs look like this:
We will be using the FIFOs in the next section, so this is more a brief introduction to this register so far.
Up until this point, we didn't have to worry about working with the Programmable Interrupt Controller (the PIC).  Now we need to.  There isn't the need to do all of the potential instructions for the PIC, but we do need to enable and disable the interrupts that are used by the UART.  There are two PICs typically on each PC, but due to the typical UART IRQ vector, we really only have to deal with the master PIC.
This adds the following two constants into the software:
After consulting the PIC IRQ table we need to add the following line to the software in order to enable IRQ4 (used for COM1 typically):
Port[MasterOCW1] := Port[MasterOCW1] and $EF;
When we do the "cleanup" when the program finishes, we also need to disable this IRQ as well with this line of software:
Port[MasterOCW1] := Port[MasterOCW1] or $10;
Remember that COM2 is on another IRQ vector, so you will have to use different constants for that IRQ.  That will be demonstrated a little bit later.  We are using a logical and/or with the existing value in this PIC register because we don't want to change the values for the other interrupt vectors that other software and drivers may be using on your PC.
We also need to modify the Interrupt Service Routine (ISR) a little bit to work with the PIC.  There is a command you can send to the PIC that is simply called End of Interrupt (EOI).  This signals to the PIC that it can clear this interrupt signal and process lower-priority interrupts.  If you fail to clear the PIC, the interrupt signal will remain and none of the other interrupts that are "lower priority" can be processed by the CPU.  This is how the CPU communicates back to the PIC to end the interrupt cycle.
The following line is added to the ISR to make this happen:
This is perhaps the most non-obvious little mistake you can make when trying to get the UART interrupt.  The Modem Control register is really the way for the UART to communicate to the rest of the PC.  Because of the way the circuitry on the motherboards of most computers is designed, you usually have to turn on the Auxiliary Output 2 signal in order for interrupts to "connect" to the CPU.  In addition, here we are going to turn on the RTS and DTS signals on the serial data cable to make sure the equipment is going to transmit.  We will cover software and hardware flow control in a later section.
To turn on these values in the MCR, we need to add the following line in the software:
We are still not home free yet.  We still need to enable interrupts on the UART itself.  This is very simple, and for now all we want to trigger an interrupt from the UART is just when data is received by the UART.  This is a very simple line to add here:
Here is the complete program using ISR input:
ComPort: array [1..4] of Word absolute $0040:$0000;
Writeln('Simple Serial ISR Data Terminal Program.  Press "Esc" to quit.');
Port[ComPort[1] + Latch_Low] := $0C;
Port[MasterOCW1] := Port[MasterOCW1] and $EF;
{Put the old ISR vector back in}
Port[MasterOCW1] := Port[MasterOCW1] or $10;
At this point you start to grasp how complex serial data programming can get.  We are not finished yet, but if you have made it this far you hopefully understand each part of the program listed above.  We are going to try and stay with this one step at a time, but at this point you should be able to write some simple custom software that uses serial I/O.
There are a number of different ways that you can "scan" the parameters that start the program.  For example, if you start a simple terminal program in DOS, you can use this command to begin:
C:> terminal COM1 9600 8 1 None
C:> terminal COM4 1200 7 2 Even
Obviously there should not be a need to have the end-user recompile the software if they want to change something simple like the baud rate.  What we are trying to accomplish here is to grab those other items that were used to start the program.  In Turbo Pascal, there is function that returns a string
One interesting "parameter" is parameter number 0, which is the name of the program that is processing the commands.  We will not be using this parameter, but it is something useful in many other programming situations.
For the sake of simplicity, we are going to require that either all of the parameters are going to be in that format of baud rate, bit size, stop bits, parity; or there will be no parameters at all.  This example is going to be mainly to demonstrate how to use variables to change the settings of the UART by the software user rather than the programmer.  Since the added sections are self-explanatory, I'm just going to give you the complete program.  There will be some string manipulation going on here that is beyond the scope of this book, but that is going to be used only for parsing the commands.  To keep the user interface simple, we are using the command line arguments alone for changing the UART parameters.  We could build a fancy interface to allow these settings to be changed while the program is running, but that is an exercise that is left to the reader.
Serial Programming: Introduction and OSI Network Model
-- RS-232 Wiring and Connections
-- Typical RS232 Hardware Configuration
-- MAX232 Driver/Receiver Family
-- Hayes-compatible Modems and AT Commands
-- Error Correction Methods
-- Packet Recovery Methods
-- Practical Application Development
-- IP Over Serial Connections
Serial Programming: Introduction and OSI Network Model
-- RS-232 Wiring and Connections
-- Typical RS232 Hardware Configuration
-- MAX232 Driver/Receiver Family
-- Hayes-compatible Modems and AT Commands
-- Error Correction Methods
-- Packet Recovery Methods
-- Practical Application Development
-- IP Over Serial Connections
The Classic Unix C APIs for Serial Communication
This page is about the classic Unix C APIs for controlling serial devices. Languages other than C might provide appropriate wrappers to these APIs which look similar, or come with their own abstraction (e.g. Java). Nevertheless, these APIs are the lowest level of abstraction one can find for serial I/O in Unix. And, in fact they are also the highest abstraction in C on standard Unix. Some Unix versions ship additional vendor-specific proprietary high-level APIs. These APIs are not discussed here.
Actual implementations of classic Unix serial APIs do vary in practice, due to the different versions of Unix and its clones, like Linux. Therefore, this module just provides a general outline. It is highly recommended that you study a particular Unix
Linux, or any Unix, is a multi-user, multi-tasking operating system. As such, programs usually don't, and are usually not allowed to, access hardware resources like serial UARTs directly. Instead, the operating system provides
The low-level driver not only maps the device into the file system with the help of the kernel, it also encapsulates the particular hardware. The user often does not even know or care what type of UART is in use.
Classic Unix systems often provide two different device nodes (or minor numbers) for serial I/O hardware. These provide access to the same physical device via two different names in the /dev hierarchy. Which node is used affects how certain serial control signals, such as DCD (data carrier detect), are handled when the device is opened. In some cases this can be changed programmatically, making the difference largely irrelevant. As a consequence, Linux only provides the different devices for legacy programs.
Device names in the file system can vary, even on the same Unix system, as they are simply aliases. The important parts of a device name (such as in /dev) are the major and minor numbers. The major number distinguishes a serial port, for example, from a keyboard driver, and is used to select the correct driver in the kernel. Note that the major number differs between different Unix systems. The minor number is interpreted by the device driver itself. For serial device drivers, it is typically used to detect which physical interface to use. Sometimes, the minor number will also be used by the device driver to determine the DCD behavior or the hardware flow control signals to be used.
The typical (but not standardized, see above) device names under Unix for serial interfaces are:
Normal, generic access to the device. Used for terminal and other serial communication (originally for teletypes). More recently, they are also used in modem communication, for example, whereas the /dev/cuaxxx was used on older systems.
See the following module on how terminal I/O and serial I/O relate on Unix.
The xxx part in the names above is typically a one or two digit number, or a lowercase letter, starting at 'a' for the first interface.
To summarize, when programming for the serial interface of a Unix system it is highly advisable to provide complete configuration for the device name. Not even the typical /dev path should be hard coded.
Note, devices with the name /dev/ptyxxx are pseudo terminal devices, typically used by a graphical user interface to provide a terminal emulator like xterm or dtterm with a "terminal" device, and to provide a terminal device for network logins. There is no serial hardware behind these device drivers.
Serial I/O under Unix is implemented as part of the terminal I/O capabilities of Unix. And the terminal I/O capabilities of Unix were originally the typewriter/teletype capabilities. Terminal I/O is not limited to terminals, though. The terminal I/O API is used for communication with many serial devices other than terminals, such as modems and printers.
The terminal API itself has evolved over time. These days three terminal APIs are still used in Unix programs and can be found in recent Unix implementations. A fourth one, the very old one from Unix Version 6 exists, but is quite rare these days.
V7, 4BSD, XENIX style device-specific ioctl-based API,
A newer one (although still already a few decades old), which is called termios (note the additional 's').
The newer termios API is based on the older termio API, and so the two termio... APIs share a lot of similarities. The termios API has also undergone changes since inception. For example, the method of specifying the baud rate has changed from using pre-defined constants to a more relaxed schema (the constants can still be used as well on most implementations).
Systems that support the newer termios often also support the older termio API, either by providing it in addition, or by providing a termios implementation with data structures which can be used in place of the termio data structures and work as termio. These systems also often just provide one man page under the older name termio(7) which is then in fact the termios man page, too.
In addition, some systems provide other, similar APIs, either in addition or as a replacement. termiox is such an API, which is largely compatible with termio and adds some extensions to it taken from termios. So termiox can logically be seen as an intermediate step between termio and termios.
The terminal I/O APIs rely on the standard system calls for reading and writing data. They don't provide their own reading/writing functions. Reading and writing data is done via the read(2) and write(2) system calls. The terminal I/O APIs just add functions for controlling and configuring the device. Most of this happens via the ioctl(2) system call.
Unfortunately, whichever of the standard APIs is used, one fact holds for all of them: They are a slight mess. Well, not really. Communication with terminals was and is a difficult issue, and the APIs reflect these difficulties. But due to the fact that one can do "everything" with the APIs, it is overwhelming when one "just" wants to do some serial communication. So why is there no separate serial-I/O-only API in Unix? There are probably two reasons for this:
Terminals/teletypes were the first, and apparently very important, serial devices which were connected to Unix. So that API was created first.
Once the API was there, there was no need to create a separate one for serial I/O only, since a large part of terminal I/O is serial I/O, and all needed features were already there in the terminal I/O API.
So which API should one use? There is one good reason to use the old V7 API. It is the simplest among the APIs - after going through some initialization woes on modern Unix systems. In general, however, the newer termios API makes the most sense, although it is the most complex one.
When programming serial interfaces on Unix, there is one phrase - line discipline - which can drive programmers crazy. The line discipline provides the hardware-independent interface for the communication between the computer and the terminal device. It handles such things as editing, job control, and special character interpretation, and performs transformations on the incoming and outgoing data.
This is useful for terminal communication (e.g. when a backspace character should erase the latest character from the send buffer before it goes over the wire, or when different end-of-line character sequences between the terminal and the computer need to be converted). These features are, however, hardly useful when communicating with the plethora of other serial devices, where unaltered data communication is desired.
Much of the serial programming in Unix is hitting the line discipline which is in use over the head so it doesn't touch the data. Monitoring what actually goes over the wire is a good idea.
Unix Bell Version 6 with the programmer's workbench (PWB) was released in 1975 to universities. It was the first Unix with an audience outside AT&T. It already had a terminal programming API. Actually, at that point it was the typewriter API. That API is not described here in depth.
The usage of this API can in theory be identified by the presence of the following signature in some source code:
In theory, because at that time the C language was still a little bit different.
See Serial_Programming:Unix/termios
Serial I/O on the Shell Command Line
It is possible to do serial I/O on the Unix command line. However, the available control is limited. Reading and writing data can be done with the shell I/O redirections like <, >, and |. Setting basic configuration, like the baud rate, can be done with the stty (set terminal type) command.
There is also libserial for Linux.  It's a simple C++ class which
The Unix command stty allows one to configure a "terminal". Since all serial I/O under Unix is done via terminal I/O, it should be no surprise that stty can also be used to configure serial lines. Indeed, the options and parameters which can be set via stty often have a 1:1 mapping to termio/termios. If the explanations regarding an option in the stty(1) man page is not sufficient, looking up the option in the termio/termios man page can often help.
On "modern" (System V) Unix versions, stty changes the parameters of its current standard input. On older systems, stty changes the parameters of its current standard output. We assume a modern Unix is in use here. So, to change the settings of a particular serial interface, its device name must be provided to stty via an I/O redirect:
On some systems, the settings done by stty are reverted to system defaults as soon as the device is closed again. This closing is done by the shell as soon as the stty parameters < /dev/com0 command has finished. So when using the above command, the changes will only be in effect for a few milliseconds.
One way to keep the device open for the duration of the communication is to start the whole communication in a sub shell (using, for example, '( ... )'), and redirecting that input. So to send the string "ATI0" over the serial line, one could use:
Interweaving sending and receiving data is difficult from the command line. Two processes are needed; one reading from the device, and the other writing to the device. This makes it difficult to coordinate commands sent with the responses received. Some extensive shell scripting might be needed to manage this.
A common way to organize the two processes is to put the reading process in the background, and let the writing process continue to run in the foreground. For example, the following script configures the device and starts a background process for copying all received data from the serial device to standard output. Then it starts writing commands to the device:
If there is a chance that a response to some command might never come, and if there is no other way to terminate the process, it is advisable to set up a timeout by using the alarm signal and trap that signal (signal 14), or simply kill the process:
It is possible to provide a serial line with a default configuration. On classic Unix this is done with entries in the /etc/ttytab configuration file, on newer (System V R4) systems with /etc/ttydefs.
The default configurations make some sense when they are used for setting up terminal lines or dialup lines for a Unix system (and that's what they are for). However, such default configurations are not of much use when doing some serial communication with some other device. The correct function of the communication program should better not depend on some operating system configuration. Instead, the application should be self-contained and configure the device as needed by it.
The ttytab format varies from Unix to Unix, so checking the corresponding man page is a good idea. If the device is not intended for a terminal (no login), then the getty field (sometimes also called the program field, usually the 3rd field) for the device entry should be empty. The init field (often the 4th field) can contain an initialization command. Using stty here is a good idea. So, a typical entry for a serial line might look like:
This section is a stub.You can help Wikibooks by expanding it.
/etc/ttydefs provides the configuration as used by the ttymon program. The settings are similar to the settings possible with stty.
TODO: Provide info to set up all the sac/sacadm junk.
This section is a stub.You can help Wikibooks by expanding it.
A Linux-specific way of configuring serial devices using the setserial program.
It is a simple program for establishing a terminal connection with a remote system over a serial line. tip takes the necessary communication parameters, including the parameters for the serial communication, from a tip-specific configuration file. Details can be found in the tip(1) manual page.
To start the session over the first serial interface (here ttya):
Uucp (Unix-to-Unix-Copy) is a set of programs for moving data over serial lines/modems between Unix computers. Before the rise of the Internet uucp was the heart and foundation of services like e-mail and Usenet (net news) between Unix computers. Today uucp is largely insignificant. However, it is still a good choice if two or more Unix systems should be connected via serial lines/modems.
The uucp suite also contains command line tools for login over a serial line (or another UUCP bearer to a remote system. These tools are cu and ct. They are e.g. useful when trying to access a device connected via a serial line and when debugging some serial line protocol.
An ACU is kind of a modem. Modern modems work slightly different and don't provide separate serial interfaces for dialing and communicating with the remote side. Instead they do both over the same serial interface, using some kind of inband signaling. See Serial Programming:Modems and AT Commands.
This section is a stub.You can help Wikibooks by expanding it.
Serial Programming: Introduction and OSI Network Model
-- RS-232 Wiring and Connections
-- Typical RS232 Hardware Configuration
-- MAX232 Driver/Receiver Family
-- Hayes-compatible Modems and AT Commands
-- Error Correction Methods
-- Packet Recovery Methods
-- Practical Application Development
-- IP Over Serial Connections
Implementation of serial port programming for Python programmers.
Serial Programming: Introduction and OSI Network Model
-- RS-232 Wiring and Connections
-- Typical RS232 Hardware Configuration
-- MAX232 Driver/Receiver Family
-- Hayes-compatible Modems and AT Commands
-- Error Correction Methods
-- Packet Recovery Methods
-- Practical Application Development
-- IP Over Serial Connections
Because of Java's platform-independence, serial interfacing is difficult. Serial interfacing requires a standardized API with platform-specific implementations, which is difficult for Java.
Unfortunately, Sun didn't pay much attention to serial communication in Java. Sun has defined a serial communication API, called JavaComm, but an implementation of the API was not part of the Java standard edition. Sun provided a reference implementation for a few, but not all Java platforms. Particularly, at the end of 2005 Sun silently withdrew JavaComm support for Windows. Third party implementations for some of the omitted platforms are available. JavaComm hasn't seen much in the way of maintenance activities, only the bare minimum maintenance is performed by Sun, except that Sun apparently responded to pressure from buyers of their own Sun Ray thin clients and adapted JavaComm to this platform while dropping Windows support.
This situation, and the fact that Sun originally did not provide a JavaComm implementation for Linux (starting in 2006, they now do) led to the development of the free-software RxTx library. RxTx is available for a number of platforms, not only Linux. It can be used in conjunction with JavaComm (RxTx providing the hardware-specific drivers), or it can be used stand-alone. When used as a JavaComm driver the bridging between the JavaComm API and RxTx is done by JCL (JavaComm for Linux). JCL is part of the RxTx distribution.
Sun's negligence of JavaComm and JavaComm's particular programming model gained JavaComm the reputation of being unusable.
RxTx - if not used as a JavaComm driver - provides a richer interface, but one which is not standardized. RxTx supports more platforms than the existing JavaComm implementations. Recently, RxTx has been adopted to provide the same interface as JavaComm, only that the package names don't match Sun's package names.
So, which of the libraries should one use in an application? If maximum portability (for some value of "maximum") is desired, then JavaComm is a good choice. If there is no JavaComm implementation for a particular platform available, but an RxTx implementation is, then RxTx could be used as a driver on that platform for JavaComm. So, by using JavaComm one can support all platforms which are either directly supported by Sun's reference implementation or by RxTx with JCL. This way the application doesn't need to be changed, and can work against just one interface, the standardized JavaComm interface.
This module discusses both JavaComm and RxTx. It mainly focuses on demonstrating concepts, not ready-to-run code. Those who want to blindly copy code are referred to the sample code that comes with the packages. Those who want to know what they are doing might find some useful information in this module.
jSSC (Java Simple Serial Connector) should also be considered
There is also another library called jSerialComm that includes all its platform specific files in its jar, this makes it truly portable as there is no installation necessary.
Learn the basics of serial communication and programming.
Have the documentation of the device you want to communicate with (e.g. the modem) ready.
Set up all hardware and a test environment
Use, for example, a terminal program to manually communicate with the device. This is to be sure the test environment is set up correctly and you have understood the commands and responses from the device.
Download the API implementation you want to use for your particular operating system
Both JavaComm and RxTX show some installation quirks. It is highly recommended to follow the installation instructions word-for-word. If they say that a jar file or a shared library has to go into a particular directory, then this is meant seriously! If the instructions say that a particular file or device needs to have a specific ownership or access rights, this is also meant seriously. Many installation troubles simply come from not following the instructions precisely.
It should especially be noted that some versions of JavaComm come with two installation instructions. One for Java 1.2 and newer, one for Java 1.1. Using the wrong one will result in a non-working installation. On the other hand, some versions/builds/packages of RxTx come with incomplete instructions. In such a case the corresponding source code distribution of RxTx needs to be obtained, which should contain complete instructions.
Many linux distributions offer a RxTx package in their repositories (ArchLinux - 'java-rxtx', Debian/Ubuntu - 'librxtx-java'), these packages include only the platform specific parts of the library, but are generally ready to use.
It should be further noticed that it is also typical for Windows JDK installations to come with up to three VMs, and thus three extension directories.
One as part of the JDK,
Some even claim to have a fourth JRE somewhere in the \Windows directory hierarchy.
JavaComm should at least be installed as extension in the JDK and in all public JREs.
A general problem, both for JavaComm and RxTx is, that they resist installation via Java WebStart:
JavaComm is notorious, because it requires a file called javax.comm.properties to be placed in the JDK lib directory, something which can't be done with Java WebStart. This is particularly sad, because the need for that file is the result of some unnecessary design/decision in JavaComm and could have easily been avoided by the JavaComm designers. Sun constantly refuses to correct this error, citing the mechanism is essential. Which is, they are lying through their teeth when it comes to JavaComm, particular, because Java for a long time has a service provider architecture exactly intended for such purposes.
The contents of the properties file is typically just one line, the name of the java class with the native driver, e.g.:
The following is a hack which allows to deploy JavaComm via Web Start ignoring that brain-dead properties file. It has serious drawbacks, and might fail with newer JavaComm releases - should Sun ever come around and make a new version.
First, turn off the security manager. Some doofus programmer at Sun decided that it would be cool to again and again check for the existence of the dreaded javax.comm.properties file, even after it has been loaded initially, for no other apparent reason than checking for the file.
Then, when initializing the JavaComm API, initialize the driver manually:
String driverName = "com.sun.comm.Win32Driver"; // or get as a JNLP property
RxTx on some platforms requires changing ownership and access rights of serial devices. This is also something which can't be done via WebStart.
At startup of your program you could ask the user to perform the necessary setup as super user.
Further, RxTx has a pattern matching algorithm for identifying "valid" serial device names. This often breaks things when one wants to use non-standard devices, like USB-to-serial converters. This mechanism can be overridden by system properties. See the RxTx installation instruction for details.
jSerialComm in contrast to both RxTx and JavaComm is ready to use on many operating Systems and Platforms (e.g. Windows x86/x86_64, Linux x86/x86_64, ARM, and even android - full list in the specific library jar) without any changes. However it still needs permissions to access the device (more information on the jSerialComm Homepage).
SerialPundit is another feature rich library for accessing serial port in Java. It includes features like detecting when a USB-UART device like FTDI232 has been plugged into system , automatically identifies operating system and CPU architecture, does not require any installation, comprehensively documented, well tested and have a support/discussion group as well.
The official API for serial communication in Java is the JavaComm API. This API is not part of the standard Java 2 version. Instead, an implementation of the API has to be downloaded separately. Unfortunately, JavaComm has not received much attention from Sun, and hasn't been really maintained for a long time. From time to time Sun does trivial bug-fixes, but doesn't do the long overdue main overhaul.
This section explains the basic operation of the JavaComm API. The provided source code is kept simple to demonstrate important point. It needs to be enhanced when used in a real application.
The source code in this chapter is not the only available example code. The JavaComm download comes with several examples. These examples almost contain more information about using the API than the API documentation. Unfortunately, Sun does not provide any real tutorial or some introductory text. Therefore, it is worth studying the example code to understand the mechanisms of the API. Still, the API documentation should be studied, too. But the best way is to study the examples and play with them. Due to the lack of easy-to-use application and people's difficulty in understanding the APIs programming model, the API is often bad-mouthed. The API is better than its reputation, and functional. But no more.
The API uses a callback mechanism to inform the programmer about newly arriving data. It is also a good idea to study this mechanism instead of relying on polling the port. Unlike other callback interfaces in Java (e.g. in the GUI), this one only allows one listener listening to events. If multiple listeners require to listen to serial events, the one primary listener has to be implemented in a way that it dispatches the information to other secondary listeners.
Sun's JavaComm web page points to a download location. Under this location Sun currently (2007) provides JavaComm 3.0 implementations for Solaris/SPARC, Solaris/x86, and Linux x86. Downloading requires to have registered for a Sun Online Account. The download page provides a link to the registration page. The purpose of this registration is unclear. One can download JDKs and JREs without registration, but for the almost trivial JavaComm Sun cites legal and governmental restrictions on the distribution and exportation of software.
The Windows version of JavaComm is no longer officially available, and Sun has - against their own product end-of-live policy - not made it available in the Java products archive. However, the 2.0 Windows version (javacom 2.0) is still downloadable from here.
Follow the installation instructions that come with the download. Some versions of JavaComm 2.0 come with two installation instructions. The most obvious of the two instructions is unfortunately the wrong one, intended for ancient Java 1.1 environments. The information referring to the also ancient Java 1.2 (jdk1.2.html) is the right one.
Particularly Windows users are typically not aware that they have copies of the same VM installed in several locations (typically three to four). Some IDEs also like to come with own, private JRE/JDK installations, as do some Java applications. The installation needs to be repeated for every VM installation (JDKs and JREs) which should be used in conjunction with the development and execution of a serial application.
IDEs typically have IDE-specific ways of how a new library (classes and documentation) is made known to the IDE. Often a library like JavaComm not only needs to be made known to the IDE as such, but also to each project that is supposed to use the library. Read the IDE's documentation. It should be noted that the old JavaComm 2.0 version comes with JavaDoc API documentation that is structured in the historic Java 1.0 JavaDoc layout. Some modern IDEs are no longer aware of this structure and can't integrate the JavaComm 2.0 documentation into their help system. In such a case an external browser is needed to read the documentation (a recommended activity ...).
Once the software is installed it is recommended to examine the samples and JavaDoc directories. It makes sense to build and run one of the sample applications to verify that the installation is correct. The sample applications typically need some minor adaptations in order to run on a particular platform (e.g. changes to the hard-coded com port identifiers). It is a good idea to have some serial hardware, like cabling, a null modem, a breakout box, a real modem, PABX and others available when trying out a sample application. Serial_Programming:RS-232 Connections and Serial_Programming:Modems and AT Commands provide some information on how to set up the hardware part of a serial application development environment.
The first three things to do when programming serial lines with JavaComm are typically
Enumerating and selecting the desired port identifier is typically done in one loop:
...
System.err.println("Could not find serial port " + wantedPortName);
...
JavaComm itself obtains the default list of available serial port identifiers from its platform-specific driver. The list is not really configurable via JavaComm. The method  CommPortIdentifier.addPortName() is misleading, since driver classes are platform specific and their implementations are not part of the public API. Depending on the driver, the list of ports might be configurable / expendable in the driver. So if a particular port is not found in JavaComm, sometimes some fiddling with the driver can help.
Once a port identifier has been found, it can be used to acquire the desired port:
"name", // Name of the application asking for the port
10000   // Wait max. 10 sec. to acquire port
System.err.println("Port already in use: " + e);
...
The initialization of a serial port is straight forward. Either individually set the communication preferences (baud rate, data bits, stop bits, parity) or set them all at once using the setSerialPortParams(...) convenience method.
As part of the initialization process the Input and Output streams for communication will be configured in the example.
...
System.err.println("Can't open input stream: write-only");
Writing to a serial port is as simple as basic Java IO. However there are a couple of caveats to look out for if you are using the AT Hayes protocol:
Don't use println (or other methods that automatically append "\n") on the OutputStream. The AT Hayes protocol for modems expects a "\r\n" as the delimiter (regardless of underlying operating system).
After writing to the OutputStream, the InputStream buffer will contain a repeat of the command that was sent to it (with line feed), if the modem is set to echoing the command line, and another line feed (the answer to the "AT" command). So as part of the write operation make sure to clean the InputStream of this information (which can actually be used for error detection).
When using a Reader/Writer (not a really good idea), at least set the character encoding to US-ASCII instead of using the platform's default encoding, which might or might not work.
Since the main operation when using a modem is to transfer data unaltered, the communication with the modem should be handled via InputStream/OutputStream, and not a Reader/Writer.
Explain how to mix binary and character I/O over the same stream
If you correctly carried out the write operation (see above) then the read operation is as simple as one command:
Problems with the simple Reading / Writing
The simple way of reading and/or writing from/to a serial port as demonstrated in the previous sections has serious drawbacks. Both activities are done with blocking I/O. That means, when there is
Unless the application is a very primitive one, freezing of the application is not acceptable. For example, as a minimum some user interaction to cancel the communication should still be possible. What is needed is non-blocking I/O or asynchronous I/O. However, JavaComm is based on Java's standard blocking I/O system (InputStream, OutputStream), but with a twist, as shown later.
The mentioned "twist" is that JavaComm provides some limited support for asynchronous I/O via an event notification mechanism. But the general solution in Java to achieve non-blocking I/O on top of the blocking I/O system is to use threads. Indeed, this is a viable solution for serial writing, and it is strongly recommended to use a separate thread to write to the serial port - even if the event notification mechanism is used, as explained later.
Reading could also be handled in a separate thread. However, this is not strictly necessary if the JavaComm event notification mechanism is used. So summarize:
The following sections provide some details.
The JavaComm API provides an event notification mechanism to overcome the problems with blocking I/O. However, in the typical Sun manner this mechanism is not without problems.
In principle an application can register event listeners with a particular SerialPort to be kept informed about important events happening on that port. The two most interesting event types for reading and writing data are
Only one single event listener per SerialPort can be registered. This forces the programmer to write "monster" listeners, discriminating according to the event type.
OUTPUT_BUFFER_EMPTY is an optional event type. Well hidden in the documentation Sun states that not all JavaComm implementations support generating events of this type.
Before going into details, the next section will present the principal way of implementing and registering a serial event handler. Remember, there can only be one handler at all, and it will have to handle all possible events.
Listener to handle all serial port events.
However, for demonstration purposes this example implements a
Handle serial events. Dispatches the event to event-specific
@param event The serial event
<- other events, not implemented here */
Handle output buffer empty events.
NOTE: The reception of this event is optional and not
@param event The output buffer empty event
Handle data available events.
@param event The data available event
Once the listener is implemented, it can be used to listen to particular serial port events. To do so, an instance of the listener needs to be added to the serial port. Further, the reception of each event type needs to be requested individually.
...
<- other events not used in this example */
This section is a stub.You can help Wikibooks by expanding it.
Setting up a separate Thread for Writing
This section is a stub.You can help Wikibooks by expanding it.
Using a separate thread for writing has one purpose: Avoiding that the whole application blocks in case the serial port is not
A simple, thread-safe Ring Buffer Implementation
Using a separate thread for writing, separate from some main application thread, implies that there is some way to hand off the data which needs to be written from the application thread to the writing thread. A shared, synchronized data buffer, for example a byte[] should do. Further, there needs to be a way for the main application to determine if it can write to the data buffer, or if the data buffer is currently full. In case the data buffer is full it could indicate that the serial port is not ready, and output data has queued up. The main application will have to poll the availability of new space in the shared data buffer. However, between the polling the main application can do other things, for example updating a GUI, providing a command prompt with the ability to abort the sending, etc.
At first glance a PipedInputStream/PipedOutputStream pair seems like a good idea for this kind of communication. But Sun wouldn't be Sun if the a piped stream would actually be useful. PipedInputStream blocks if the corresponding PipedOutputStream is not cleared fast enough. So the application thread would block. Exactly what one wants to avoid by using the separate thread. A java.nio.Pipe suffers from the same problem. Its blocking behavior is platform dependent. And adapting the classic I/O used by JavaComm to NIO is anyhow not a nice task.
In this article a very simple synchronized ring buffer is used to hand over the data from one thread to another. In a real world application it is likely that the implementation should be more sophisticated. E.g. in a real world implementation it would make sense to implement OutputStream and InputStream views on the buffer.
A ring buffer as such is nothing special, and has no special properties regarding threading. It is just that this simple data structure is used here to provide data buffering. The implementation is done so that access to this data structure has been made thread safe.
Synchronized ring buffer.
Suitable to hand over data from one thread to another.
Construct a RingBuffer with a default buffer size of 1k.
Construct a RingBuffer with a certain buffer size.
@param size   Buffer size in bytes
Clear the buffer contents. All data still in the buffer is lost.
Note: While the value is correct upon returning, it
@return currently amount of data available in buffer
Another thread might have filled the buffer or emptied
@return currently available free space
? size + start - end
Write as much data as possible to the buffer.
@param data   Data to be written
@return       Amount of data actually written
Write as much data as possible to the buffer.
@param data   Array holding data to be written
@param off    Offset of data in array
@param n      Amount of data to write, starting from <code>off</code>.
@return       Amount of data actually written
System.arraycopy(data, off, buffer, end, i);
Read as much data as possible from the buffer.
@param data   Where to store the data
@return       Amount of data read
Read as much data as possible from the buffer.
@param data   Where to store the read data
@param off    Offset of data in array
@param n      Amount of data to read
@return       Amount of data actually read
System.arraycopy(buffer, start, data, off, i);
With this ring buffer one can now hand over data from one thread to another in a controlled way.  Any other thread-safe, non-blocking mechanism would also do. The key point here is that the write does not block when the buffer is full and also does not block when there is nothing to read.
Using the Buffer together with Serial Events
Usage of OUTPUT_BUFFER_EMPTY Event in Writing
Referring to the skeleton event handler presented in the section Setting up a serial Event Handler, one can now use a shared ring buffer from section A simple, thread-safe Ring Buffer Implementation to support the  OUTPUT_BUFFER_EMPTY event. The event is not supported by all JavaComm implementations, therefore the code might never be called. However, in case the event is available it is one building block for ensuring best data throughput, because the serial interface is not left idle for too long.
The skeleton event listener proposed a method outputBufferEmpty(), which could be implemented as it follows.
Handle output buffer empty events.
@param event The output buffer empty event
This section is a stub.You can help Wikibooks by expanding it.
The following example assumes that the data's destination is some file. Whenever data becomes available it is fetched from the serial port and written to the file. This is an extremely simplified view, because in reality one would need to check the data for an end-of-file indication to, for example, return to the modem command mode.
...
Handle serial event.
...
This section is a stub.You can help Wikibooks by expanding it.
JavaComm is strictly concerned with the handling of a serial interface and the transmission of data over that interface. It does not know, or provide, any support for higher-layer protocols, e.g. for Hayes modem commands typically used to control consumer-grade modems. This is simply not the job of JavaComm, and not a bug.
Like with any other particular serial device, if the control of a modem is desired via JavaComm the necessary code has to be written on top of JavaComm. The page "Hayes-compatible Modems and AT Commands" provides the necessary basic generic information to deal with Hayes modems.
Some operating systems, e.g. Windows or certain Linux distributions provide a more or less standardized way how modem control commands for a particular modem type or brand are configured for the operating system. Windows modem "drivers", for example, are typically just registry entries, describing a particular modem (the actual driver is a generic serial modem driver). JavaComm as such has no provisions to access such operating-system specific data. Therefor, one either has to provide a separate Java-only facility to allow a user to configure an application for the usage of a particular modem, or some platform-specific (native) code needs to be added.
This section is a stub.You can help Wikibooks by expanding it.
Due to the fact that Sun didn't provide a reference implementation of the JavaComm API for Linux, people developed RxTx for Java and Linux [14]. RxTx was then further ported to other platforms. The latest version of RxTx is known to work on 100+ platforms, including Linux, Windows, Mac OS, Solaris and other operating systems.
RxTx can be used independent of the JavaComm API, or can be used as a so called provider for the JavaComm API. In order to do the latter, a wrapper called JCL is also needed [15]. JCL and RxTx are usually packaged together with Linux/Java distributions, or JCL is completely integrated into the code. So, before trying to get them separately, it is worth having a look at the Linux distribution CD.
There seems to be a trend to abandon the JavaComm API, and using RxTx directly instead of via the JCL wrapper, due to Sun's limited support and improper documentation for the JavaComm API. However, RxTx's documentation is extremely sparse. Particularly, the RxTX people like to make a mess of their versions and package contents (e.g. with or without integrated JCL). Starting with RxTx version 1.5 RxTx contains replacement classes for the public JavaComm classes. For legal reasons they are not in the java.comm package, but in the gnu.io package. However, the two currently available RxTx versions are packaged differently:
RxTx version supposed to be used as a JavaComm provider. This one is supposed to have its roots in RxRx 1.4, which is the RxTx version before the gnu.io package was added.
RxTx version with a full gnu.io package replacement for java.comm. This version is supposed to have its roots in RxTx 1.5, where gnu.io support started.
So, if one wants to program against the original JavaComm API one needs
Sun's generic JavaComm version. As of this writing this is in fact the Unix package (which contains support for various Unix versions like Linux or Solaris). Even when used on Windows, the Unix package is needed to provide the generic java.comm implementations. Only the part implemented in Java is used, while the Unix native libraries are just ignored.
RxTx 2.0 in order to have a different provider below the generic generic JavaComm version than the ones coming with the JavaComm package
However, if one just wants to program against the gnu.io replacement package, then
So, if you belong to the large group of people who have been let down by Sun when they dropped Windows support for JavaComm, you are in need to convert a JavaComm application to RxTx. As you can see from the above, there are two ways to do it. Both assume that you manage to install a version of RxTx first. Then the options are either
Using RxTx 2.0 as a JavaComm provider
Porting the application to RxTx 2.1
The first option has already been explained. The second option is surprisingly simple. All one has to do to port some application from using JavaComm to using RxTx 2.1 is to replace all references to java.comm in the application source code with references to gnu.io. If the original JavaComm application was properly written there is nothing more to do.
RxTx 2.1 even provides the tool contrib/ChangePackage.sh to perform the global replacement on a source tree under Unix. On other platforms such a global replacement is easy to do with IDEs supporting a decent set of refactoring features.
jSerialComm Homepage on github - with information on how to use it - Javadoc
Java Comm Serial API How-To for Linux
jSSC - java serial port library. Work under Win32(Win98-Win7), Win64(x86-64), Linux x86, Linux x86-64
RxTx Home Page (Files are accessible with FTP only (May 2017))
jRxTx on github - a new Wrapper to RxTx with a "new improved API compared to that of RXTX"
Unofficial Java Web Start/JNLP FAQ - How can I use Web Start and Comm API together?
SerialIO has a free trial version of their SerialPort package
Ben Resner has a free download of his SimpleSerial package and a newer version without the C++ code
Serial Programming: Introduction and OSI Network Model
-- RS-232 Wiring and Connections
-- Typical RS232 Hardware Configuration
-- MAX232 Driver/Receiver Family
-- Hayes-compatible Modems and AT Commands
-- Error Correction Methods
-- Packet Recovery Methods
-- Practical Application Development
-- IP Over Serial Connections
Serial Programming: Introduction and OSI Network Model
-- RS-232 Wiring and Connections
-- Typical RS232 Hardware Configuration
-- MAX232 Driver/Receiver Family
-- Hayes-compatible Modems and AT Commands
-- Error Correction Methods
-- Packet Recovery Methods
-- Practical Application Development
-- IP Over Serial Connections
Just about every idea for communicating between computers involves "data packets", especially when more than 2 computers are involved.
The idea is very similar to putting a check in an envelope to mail to the electricity company.
We take the data (the "check") we want to send to a particular computer,
A packet of data starts with a preamble, followed by a header, followed by the raw data, and finishes up with a few more bytes of transmission-related error-detection information -- often a  Fletcher-32  checksum.
We will talk more about what we do with this error-detection information in the next chapter, Serial Programming/Error Correction Methods.
The accountant at the electricity company throws away the envelope when she gets the check.
She already knows the address of her own company. Does this mean the "overhead" of the envelope is useless ? No.
In a similar way, once a computer receives a packet, it immediately throws away the preamble. If the computer sees that the packet is addressed to itself, and has no errors, then it discards the wrapper and keeps the data.
The header contains the destination address information used by all the routers and switches to send the complete packet to the correct destination address,
Most protocol use a header that, like most paper mail envelopes, also include the source address and a few other bits of transmission-related information.
Unfortunately, there are dozens of slightly different, incompatible protocols for data packets, because people pick slightly different ways to represent the address information and the error-detection information.
... gateways between incompatible protocols ...
Protocol designers pick a maximum and minimum packet size based on many tradeoffs.
Unfortunately, it is impossible for any communication protocol to have all these nice-to-have features:
8-bit: only uses 8-bit bytes.
Some communication protocols break transparency, requiring extra complexity elsewhere -- requiring higher network layers to implement work-arounds such as w:binary-to-text encoding or else suffer mysterious errors, as with the w:Time Independent Escape Sequence.
Some communication protocols break "8-bit" -- i.e., in addition to the 256 possible bytes, they have "extra symbols". Some communication protocols have just a few extra non-data symbols -- such as the "long pause" used as part of the Hayes escape sequence; the "long break" used as part of the SDI-12 protocol; "command characters" or "control symbols" in 4B5B coding, 8b/10b encoding; etc. Other systems, such as 9-bit protocols,[5][6][7][8][9][10][11]
Typically the first 9-bit symbol of a packet has its high bit set to 1, waking up all nodes; then each node checks the destination address of the packet, and all nodes other than the addressed node go back to sleep. The rest of the data in the packet (and the ACK response) is transmitted as 9 bit symbols with the high bit cleared to 0, effectively 8 bit values, which is ignored by the sleeping nodes.
(This is similar to the way that all data bytes in a MIDI message are effectively 7 bit values; the high bit is set only on the first byte in a MIDI message).
Alas, some UARTs make it awkward,[12][13]
Some communication protocols break "unique start" -- i.e., they allow the no-longer-unique start-of-packet symbol to occur elsewhere -- most often because we are sending a file that includes that byte, and "simple copy" puts that byte in the data payload. When a receiver is first turned on, or when cables are unplugged and later reconnected, or when noise corrupts what was intended to be the real start-of-packet symbol, the receiver will incorrectly interpret that data as the start-of-packet. Even though the receiver usually recognizes that something is wrong (checksum failure), a single such noise glitch may lead to a cascade of many lost packets, as the receiver goes back and forth between (incorrectly) interpreting that data byte in the payload as a start-of-packet, and then (incorrectly) interpreting a real start-of-packet symbol as payload data.
Even worse, such common problems may cause the receiver to lose track of where characters begin and end.
Early protocol designers believed that once synchronization has been lost, there must be a unique start-of-packet character sequence required to regain synchronization.[14]
Later protocol designers have designed a few protocols,
In order to keep the "unique start" feature, many communication protocols break "simple copy". This requires a little extra software and a little more time per packet than simply copying the data -- which is usually insignificant with modern processors.
The awkwardness comes from (a) making sure that the entire process -- the transmitter encoding/escaping a chunk of raw data into a packet payload that must not include the start-of-packet byte, and the receiver decoding/unescaping the packet payload into a chunk of raw data -- is completely transparent to any possible sequence of raw data bytes, even if those bytes include one or more start-of-packet bytes, and (b) since the encoded/escaped payload data inevitably requires more bytes than the raw data, we must make sure we don't overflow any buffers even with the worst possible expansion, and (c) unlike "simple copy" where a constant bitrate of payload data bits results in the same constant goodput of raw data bits, we must make sure that the system is designed to handle the variations in payload data bitrate or raw data bit goodput or both.
Some of this awkwardness can be reduced by using consistent-overhead byte stuffing (COBS).[16]
Calculate the CRC and append it to the packet *before* encoding both the raw data and the CRC with COBS.[17]
The first transmitter sends just enough preamble bits for this hop's receiver to lock on. Then it sends the packet. That receiver, once it knows it needs to forward the packet another hop, transmits a fresh new full-size preamble over the next hop, followed by the data packet. The benefit is that a relatively short, fixed-length preamble is adequate no matter how many hops the data packet jumps over.
The first transmitter sends a much longer preamble, much longer than is really necessary for this hop's receiver to lock on. Then it sends the packet. That receiver, as soon at it detects the preamble, immediately transmits each incoming bit out the other port(s) until it gets to the end of the packet. The benefit is that relay nodes can be extremely simple, since they don't have to store any data. Preamble consumption (w:5-4-3 rule#Preamble consumption) makes the preamble get shorter and shorter after each hop -- too many bits lost and eventually there is not enough preamble bits to lock on and the entire packet is lost.
Wikipedia has related information at  automatic baud rate detection
Say a few words about automatic baud rate detection (autobaud).
(Is there a better section of the Serial Programming book to discuss autobaud implementation?)
Andy McFadden.
Gabriel Bouvigne.
"MPEG Audio Layer I/II/III frame header"
Predrag Supurovic.
"MPEG Audio Frame Header"
uLan: 9-bit message oriented communication protocol, which is transferred over RS-485 link.
Pavel Pisa.
"uLan RS-485 Communication Driver"
"9-bit message oriented communication protocol, which is transferred over RS-485 link."
Peter Gasparik.
"9-bit data transfer format"
Stephen Byron Cooper.
"9-Bit Serial Protocol".
"Use The PC's UART With 9-Bit Protocols".
Wikipedia: multidrop bus (MDB) is a 9-bit protocol used in many vending machines.
ParitySwitch_9BitProtocols: manipulate parity to emulate a 9 bit protocol
"Use The PC's UART With 9-Bit Protocols".
Electronic Design.
1998-December.
Thomas Lochmatter.
"Linux and MARK/SPACE Parity".
J. Robinson.
"Reliable link layer protocols".
"once a header error has been detected, the count field
"Consistent Overhead Byte Stuffing" by Stuart Cheshire and Mary Baker, 1999.
Jason Sachs.
"Help, My Serial Data Has Been Framed: How To Handle Packets When All You Have Are Streams".
Optical and radio receivers usually require a preamble of some minimum length in order to synchronize bit clocks. For detailed information on calculating exactly how long (how many transitions) the preamble needs to be, see Clock and Data Recovery/Structures and types of CDRs/The CDR based on a first order PLL.
VSCP - Very Simple Control Protocol http://www.vscp.org/ "The protocol is free"
"Protocol Design Folklore" by Radia Perlman. Jan 15, 2001. http://www.awprofessional.com/articles/article.asp?p=20482
"Devices that play together, work together: UPnP defines common protocols and procedures to guarantee interoperability among network-enabled PCs, appliances, and wireless devices." article by Edward F Steinfeld, EDN, 9/13/2001 http://www.reed-electronics.com/ednmag/index.asp?layout=article&articleid=CA154802&spacedesc=readersChoice&rid=0&rme=0&cfd=1
CAN bus http://computer-solutions.co.uk/ http://computer-solutions.co.uk/gendev/can-module.htm
"CMX-MicroNet is the first system that allows TCP/IP
... [including] AVR, PIC 18, M16C."
"byteflight is a high speed data bus protocol for automotive applications" http://byteflight.com/
Nagle's rule ... The Nagle algorithm. "Nagle's rule is a heuristic to avoid sending particularly small IP packets, also called tinygrams. Tinygrams are usually created by interactive networking tools that transmit single keystrokes, such as telnet or rsh. Tinygrams can become particularly wasteful on low-bandwidth links like SLIP. The Nagle algorithm attempts to avoid them by holding back transmission of TCP data briefly under some circumstances." -- http://www.tldp.org/LDP/nag/node45.html
Beej's Guide to Network Programming Using Internet Sockets by Brian "Beej" Hall 2005-11-05
"RF Link Using the Z86E08" describes yet another "simple" packet protocol ... also mentions a preamble to train the RF receiver just before the rest of the packet.
... other packet protocols ? ...
Serial Programming: Introduction and OSI Network Model
-- RS-232 Wiring and Connections
-- Typical RS232 Hardware Configuration
-- MAX232 Driver/Receiver Family
-- Hayes-compatible Modems and AT Commands
-- Error Correction Methods
-- Packet Recovery Methods
-- Practical Application Development
-- IP Over Serial Connections
There are 3 main types of handling errors:
Each packet is checked by the receiver to make sure it is "good".
If it *is* good, the receiver (eventually) tells the sender that it came through OK -- it acknowledges (ACK) the packet.
.
How does the receiver know it's good ?
The sender calculates a checksum or CRC for the entire packet (except for the footer), then appends it to the end of the packet (in the footer/trailer).
The typical CRC is 32 bits, often a  Fletcher-32  checksum.
Aside: Note that the checksum or CRC are forms of hashing, ie, irreversibly shrinking data.  Checksums and CRCs are weaker algorithms than "cryptographically strong" message authentication code algorithms such as MD5 or SHA variants.  Cryptographically strong algorithms can detect errors better than checksums or CRCs, but they take more time to calculate.
Whenever the receiver receives a packet, the receiver calculates exactly the same checksum or CRC, then compares it to the one in the footer/trailer. If they match, the entire packet is (almost certainly) good, so the receiver sends an ACK.
When there's even the slightest question that the packet has any sort of error (which could be *either* in the actual data *or* in the header *or* in the checksum bits -- there's no way for the receiver to tell), the receiver discards it completely and (in most cases) pretends it never saw it.
If it's not good, the sender sends it again.
How does the sender know it wasn't good ?
It never got the ACK. (So either the packet was corrupted, *or* the ACK was corrupted -- there's no way for the sender to know).
The simplest version of ACK-NAK is "Stop-and-wait ARQ".
The sender sends a packet, then waits a little for an ACK.
As soon as it gets the ACK, it immediately sends the next packet.
If the sender doesn't hear the ACK in time, it starts over from the beginning, sending the same packet again, until it does get an ACK.
The receiver waits for a packet. If the packet passes all the error-detection tests perfectly, the receiver transmits an ACK (acknowledgment) to the sender.
If the receiver receives the packet perfectly, but the ACK message is delayed too long, then the transmitter sends another copy of the message (a "communication echo").
Imagine the packet contained the message "deduct $11,000 from Fred's account.".
When the receiver gets this second copy of the packet, what should it do?
Certainly it should send an ACK (otherwise the transmitter will keep trying to send this packet over and over).
Either or both of the following problems could occur:
The delayed first ACK could hit the transmitter after it transmits the second copy of the message, so it transmits the next packet. Then the second ACK hits the transmitter, tricking the transmitter into thinking that "next packet" has been successfully received, when it hasn't.
When the receiver gets 2 identical consecutive packets saying "deduct $11,000 from Fred's account", are these 2 legitimate independent transactions, and so it should deduct $22,000 from Fred's account? Or is it really just 1 transaction, with a bit of echo, and so should deduct a total of only $11,000 from Fred's account?
Both of these problems can be solved by adding a "sequence number".
The transmitter keeps a count of how many independent packets it has transmitted to that receiver, and puts that sequence number in the header of each packet.
But when it re-transmits a packet, it re-transmits that same identical packet with that same identical sequence number.
Also, the receiver, rather than sending a generic "ACK" message, specifies which particular packet it is responding to by putting its sequence number in the ACK message.
When there is a communication echo, the receiver sees the same sequence number, so ACKs that sequence number (again) but then discards and ignores the extra, redundant copy of a packet it already received.
When the transmitter is sending a new packet that merely happens to contain the same data, the receiver sees a different sequence number, so it ACKs that new sequence number, and takes another $11,000 out of Fred's account. Poor Fred.
A 1-bit sequence number (alternating 1 - 0 - 1 - 0 for each new packet, and ACK1 ACK0 ACK1 ACK0 in response) is adequate for a stop-and-wait system.
But as we will see, other ARQ protocols require a larger sequence number.
Some early protocols had the receiver send a NAK (negative acknowledgment) to the sender whenever a bad packet was received, and the sender would wait indefinitely until it received *either* an ACK *or* a NAK.
Imagine what happens when (a) a little bit of noise made a bad packet, so the receiver sends the NAK back to the sender, but then (b) a little bit of noise made that NAK unrecognizable.
Alternatively, imagine a shared-medium network with 1 sender and 2 receivers. What happens when a little noise messes up the "destination" field of the packet ?
With "Stop-and-wait ARQ", the sender and the receiver only needs to keep 1 packet in memory at a time.
The sender sends a packet, then the next packet, then the next, without waiting.
As it sends each packet, it puts a copy of that packet in a "window".
(The sequence number must be at least large enough to uniquely identify every packet in the window).
... turn-around time ... bouncing off geostationary satellites ...
The receiver occasionally transmits an acknowledgment ("I got all packets up to 8980", "I got all packets up to 8990").
If the receiver is expecting packet number 9007, but it receives a packet with an *earlier* number (that it had already received successfully), it transmits (or possibly re-transmits) a "I got all packets up to 9006" message.
When the sender receives an acknowledgment of any packet in the "window", it deletes that copy.
When the sender's window gets full, it waits a little, then tries re-sending the packets in the window starting with the oldest.
So when the sender suspects an error in some packet, it resend *all* packets starting with the erroneous packet. This guarantees that the receiver will (eventually) receive all packets in order.
If the receiver is expecting packet number 9007, but it receives packet number 9008, it may transmit a negative acknowledge (NAK) for 9007, and ignores any higher packet numbers until it gets packet 9007.
When the sender receives a NAK for any packet in the window, it re-starts transmission with that packet (and keeps it in the window).
With "streaming ARQ", the sender needs to keep the entire window of packets in memory at a time.
But the receiver still only needs to handle 1 packet at a time, and handles them in consecutive order.
(Some people think of "streaming" as one big packet the size of the window using "stop-and-wait" protocol, divided into smaller "sub-packets").
A selective repeat ARQ system is a kind of streaming ARQ.
But instead of the receiver only handling 1 packet at a time, and discarding all packets higher or lower than the one it is looking for, the receiver tries to keep a copy of all packets it receives in a window of its own, and negotiates with the sender to try to resend *only* the erroneous packets.
If you have only one-way communication,
You transmit the data, then (instead of a CRC) you transmit "check bits" that are calculated from the data.
... NASA space probes ... compact disks ...
The simplest kind is "repeat the message".
If I send the same packet twice, and noise only corrupts one of them, *and* the receiver can tell which one was corrupted, then no data was lost.
If I send the same packet 3 times, and noise corrupts any one of them, then the receiver can do "best 2 out of 3". The "check bits" are 2 copies of the data bits.
In fact, noise could corrupt a little bit of *all three* of them, and you could still extract all the data -- align the 3 packets next to each other,
There are some very clever kinds of FEC (Hamming codes, Reed-Solomon codes) that can correct all kinds of common errors better than "best 2 out of 3", and only require the same number of "check bits" as there are data bits.
A sender often streams audio and video live, in real-time.
What should a receiver do when a packet gets mangled ?
If it sends a message back to the sender, asking it to resend that packet,
It's too late to use that information.
Rather than pausing the entire movie until the request makes a round-trip, it's far less jarring to the audience if the receiver silently accepts some signal degradation while drawing attention away from it. The receiver discards the mangled packet, does its best to guess the data that would have been in the packet, and continues on as if nothing had happened. For example, it might fill a space with nearby pixels' colors. A receiver employing a strategy like this should log how often it had to fill in gaps, so that the user can troubleshoot a connection that isn't capable of consistent exact reproduction.
Even when they have 2-way communication, sometimes people use FEC anyway. That way small amounts of noise can be corrected at the receiver. If a packet is corrupted so badly that FEC cannot fix it, the protocol falls back on ACK-NAK retransmission (or on Pretend It Never Happened).
a detailed description of one ACK-NAK protocol:
"XModem / YModem Protocol Reference"
a detailed description of one streaming protocol:
"The ZMODEM Inter Application File Transfer Protocol"
"Data Link Error Detection / Correction Methods"
Hamming codes, Fire codes, Reed-Solomon codes, Viterbi decoding, etc.
Communication Networks/Error Control, Flow Control, MAC
On-line CRC calculation and free CRC library
Serial Programming: Introduction and OSI Network Model
-- RS-232 Wiring and Connections
-- Typical RS232 Hardware Configuration
-- MAX232 Driver/Receiver Family
-- Hayes-compatible Modems and AT Commands
-- Error Correction Methods
-- Packet Recovery Methods
-- Practical Application Development
-- IP Over Serial Connections
This content is part of the Serial Programming book. It covers the programming of Hayes and Hayes-compatible telephone modems. Such types of modems are the norm in consumer applications, as well as many professional applications - basically, wherever modems are still used.
Modem programming is slowly becoming a lost art, particularly with the widespread migration of users from dial-up lines to DSL for very obvious performance reasons. Nevertheless, modems are used for many applications. In recent times, modems can be found in new areas where they were previously not seen. For example, embedded modems in machines are used to automatically  "call home" to the manufacturer in case the machine is in need of some service. Often this is done via a wireless phone system, where the wireless module still provides a Hayes-compatible interface for dialing and data transmission.
The original Hayes modem command set is exclusively used as a reference in this module. Vendor specific extensions are not covered, and do not belong into this module. The module explains the origin of the term Hayes, and the related AT commands. It also includes some principal information about what a modem is, and how the signaling with a modem happens. The module then continues with a description of the basics of modem programming, including the set-up of a development environment.
Further, the module provides detailed (but incomplete) programming information, and an incomplete reference of the original Hayes command set and registers.
This section particularly addresses potential authors. Please note:
This module is not a dumping ground for random modem programming information and folklore.
This module is operating-system–agnostic. The Programming Serial Data Communications book provides other modules for such information.
This module deals with generic Hayes modems, not with any vendor-specific extensions. If you really want to see your particular love-child covered, provide an Appendix with that vendor-/brand-specific information.
Do not assume that just because something works on your particular modem it is the standard and other modems do it the same way. If you have no firsthand experience that something is done the same way on "almost" all Hayes-compatible modems, then leave it out, or mark it at least as doubtful.
The reason why this module sticks with the original Hayes command set is to have a defined boundary. This module is not intended as a reference manual. Once someone has mastered the basic set, and implemented the code, it is rather straightforward to deal with vendor-specific extensions. Other extensions, e.g. the very rough and basic FAX extensions, require some deep insight into the involved protocols (e.g. in the case of FAX the detailed encoding, compression and timing of fax data on the phone line). This is out of the scope of this book. If you know how to handle the FAX extensions, write your own book.
Hayes Microcomputer Products, Inc. was a modem manufacturer from the beginning of the 1980s until the end of the 1990s, with its heyday in the early '90s. The name Hayes still exists as a brand name, owned by Zoom Telephonics, Inc. (as of Fall 2004).
In 1981, Hayes developed the Hayes Smartmodem.  This was a unique product at the time, because this modem was no longer simply a "dumb" device blindly converting serial data to and from audio tones, but contained some "intelligence". It was possible to send commands to the modem to configure it, to execute certain operations (such as dialling a number, quieting the speaker, hanging up, etc.), and to read the current status of the connection. Hayes developed and published a command set to control the modem over a serial line. This command set became popular among consumer modem manufacturers, and was cloned by many different manufacturers. Known as both the "Hayes command set" and the "AT command set", it has long been the de facto standard for controlling consumer modems and also many professional modems. Modems which support this command set are called Hayes-compatible.
The commands were standardised at some point in time, however, as it is typical with standards, there are several standards. Plus, of course, there are still vendor-specific extensions and implementations in different modems vary slightly. Some of these enhancements were required to support at that time emerging features, such as data compression and FAX support. As a result, the command sets of modern modems are not fully compatible with each other. The original Hayes commands, however, should still work, and still form the core of almost all consumer modem command sets.
The basic set of commands was at some point in time standardised as TIA/EIA-602 and the syntax as EIA/TIA-615. But as already mentioned, modem manufacturers added their extensions. A larger extended set, particular under the pressure from cell phone manufacturers, was standardised as ITU V.250 (old name V.25ter). That one usually forms the base for professional Hayes-compatible modems, and cell phones with build in data modems. ITU V.250 further referes to a bunch of other standards (e.g. V.251, V.252, V.253) for particular applications and extensions, and also has some supplements. Plus, of course there are the many standards defining other aspects of a modem, like compression and transmission.
What are AT Commands?
Almost all of the Hayes modem commands start with the two letter sequence AT - for getting the modem's attention. Because of this, modem commands are often called AT Commands. This still holds for many of the manufacturer specific command set extensions. Most of them also start with AT, and are called AT Commands, too. Please note, that just because an AT command contains a & does not make it an extensions. & commands were already part of the original Hayes command set.
The exact usage of the term AT command set slightly varies from manufacturer to manufacturer, often subject to marketing blurbs. In general, it can be assumed that a modem with an AT command set
A modem in the classic sense is a modulator/demodulator for transmitting digital information over analog wires, such as the analog telephone system's two-wire or four-wire lines. The term has come to be used as acceptable slang for many communication devices used to link a computer to either another computer, or a wide-area network (Wikipedia:WAN).  For example, the Ricochet radio data transceivers were commonly known as "Ricochet modems".
This module deals with the classic type of smart modems, designed to convert data from/to a serial interface to/from an analog line. The module also applies to modems which provide the classic serial interface but connect over a different physical layer, such as a digital line, as well as devices providing a serial modem-like interface for other purposes. For our purpose, the modem is a classic DCE (data communications equipment) device, controlled via serial line by a classic DTE (data terminal equipment) device (such as a computer).
Depending on the type of modem, the modem can use a number of different technologies and speeds to transmit the data over the analog line. The details of these technologies are of no particular interest here, other than to note that it is possible with most modems to specify these communication parameters (for example, to disable compression, or to change modulation techniques).  The data this module deals with is not the data on the analog line, but the data as it appears on the serial interface between the DTE and DCE. I.e. the data as read and written by a device like a computer.
(Smart) Modems also provide auxiliary services, such as dialling a particular number to set up a connection. As a consequence, a modem can be in a number of different states and modes, which are not always orthogonal. It is possible, for example, for a modem to be in the command mode while still keeping a connection (see the +++ sequence for details).
The original RS232C/V.24 specification contained a TX wire for transmitting data and a RX wire for receiving data, and other completely separate wires for transmitting control information between the DTE and DCE, the idea being to separate data and control information. In telecommunication jargon this is called outband signalling.
Hayes-compatible modems use almost none of these RS232C/V.24 features. Instead, communication with the modem is done almost exclusively via the same RX/TX lines which are used for transferring the data. This mechanism is called inband signalling.
Inband signalling has significant disadvantages. At any point in time, both the DTE and DCE must know if information sent or received via the TX and RX lines is for signalling purposes, or if it is data, which should be handled transparently.  Therefore, the DTE and DCE must operate in sync. If they get out of sync, either data will be lost, data will be incorrectly interpreted as commands, or signalling information will be interpreted as data, effectively destroying the original data.
Inband signalling has the advantage that the wiring between the DTE and DCE is simpler, and also that, at least at first glance, the communication software in the DTE is simpler.
As it has been said, Hayes-compatible modems use almost none of the RS232 control lines. But only almost. For example, they often drive DCD (data carrier detect). This, however creates the situation that modem-driving software now has to take care not only of the inband, but also the outband signalling with a modem. This slightly complicates the communication software's state machine.
Further, especially with the rise of cell phone modems, manufacturers have again started to introduce more outband signaling. Such modems provide multiple virtual serial interfaces. Some of these interfaces are exclusively dedicated to data transport, controlled by another serial interface which is either used exclusively for signalling (i.e. outband signalling) or can still also be used in the more conventional inband signalling scenario. In such cases the communication software needs to manage even more complex states.
With respect of controlling the modem a Hayes-compatible modem is in one of two main states:
The modem interprets data from the DTE as modem commands. The modem can be in command state while still keeping a connection with a remote party.
The modem interprets data from the DTE as payload and transmits it to the other party. This state requires that a connection to the remote site has been established.
Inside these main states are a number of sub states. Also, with respect to other issues a modem has a number of communication states, e.g. if a remote carrier has been detected or not.
A modem in originating mode is a modem which is setting up a connection, e.g., by dialing the number of a remote station and initiating the negotiation of protocols.
A modem in answer mode is a modem waiting to be contacted and ready to "answer the phone".
A modem is supposed to send a response for almost all commands it receives. These responses can either be in the form of ASCII strings, or numeric values. The response type can be switched with a command, but it is typical to use the ASCII responses.
Responses need to be tracked by the DTE with great care. Among other things they inform the DTE if the dialling of the remote site was successful or not, and if the modem switches from command state to on-line state or not.
Unfortunately, the set of response messages has been greatly enhanced since the original Hayes modems and are often configurable via additional AT commands. It is suggested to not strictly parse response messages but to forgivingly check if they contain interesting keywords, like CONNECT. It is also suggested to study the manual of a particular modem very carefully.
The so called S-registers are also a Hayes heritage which all Hayes-compatible modems support. They are registers in the modem which contain various settings. And like the AT commands, they have been extensively enhanced by different modem manufacturers.
The reason why they are called S-Registers is a little bit unclear. Some say the S stands for modem settings. Some say they are just called like this, because      they are set and read with ATS... commands.  In the common vernacular they were usually termed storage registers because they permanently stored the values even through power-off.
Several of the other AT commands also change values of particular S-Registers. There is usually no difference in setting a value directly via an S-Register or via another AT command. It depends on the particular situation which way of setting a register is better.
In order to program for an actual modem it is a rather good idea to obtain the command reference for that particular modem. Unfortunately, it has become quite common for no-name modems to ship without any kind of usable command reference. Thanks to Windows' Plug & Play feature it is no longer necessary on Windows to know the individual commands. Instead, all that is needed for a modem to run on Windows is to be shipped with the necessary .inf files (often hidden inside some "installer" software, and called a "driver" which is technically not the case, Windows already contains the necessary drivers).
If the modem doesn't come with a command reference the next logical step is to search the web. However, unfortunately, a lot of modem information has vanished from the surface of the earth and the web in recent years. With the rise of broadband Internet connections, modems have become old fashioned devices and many sources are no longer available. It has become more and more difficult to find basic information about particular modem types. Even for modern modems like cell phone modems it can be difficult to find the necessary information.
There are a number of alternatives to obtain a command reference if one doesn't come with the modem:
Maybe the distributor provides one on its website
Maybe the OEM manufacturer provides one.This requires to identify the OEM manufacturer. A possible way is to use the FCC number of the device, and then looking the original manufacturer up on the FCC web site.
Maybe the chipset manufacturer provides one.Consumer modems are often just build around "off-the-shelf" modem chipsets from larger hardware manufacturers. The cheaper the modem, the more likely it is that the modem manufacturer didn't change anything in the firmware and is using the original example software from the chipset manufacturer. Some chipset vendors provide command references for their modems.
By looking into the corresponding Windows .inf files it is possible to at least obtain the basic commands
By using the generic Hayes command reference in this Wikibook module.
Obtaining the previously mentioned standard documents if there is an indication a particular modem complies to such a command standard.
Using some kind of sniffer program to monitor the communication between the modem and the DTE and reverse engineering the commands using the obtained information. This requires that (a) reverse engineering is legal in your jurisdiction and (b) that there is some DTE communication software available that handles the particular modem so there is some valid communication to sniff.
It is highly recommended to spend some preparation time setting up a suitable development environment before starting to write drivers or software for a modem. Most of this consists of hardware set-up.
It is suggested to set up a small network with a "remote" computer and a second modem in answer mode. "Remote" computer in this case means a computer sitting right next to the development machine, but connected via the modems. If a terminal program is being developed, the "remote" computer should run some small BBS software (for example), so there is always someone ready to answer, and/or protocol analysis/data dump software. Developing modem software without such a setup can be extremely frustrating. Such a set-up pays off a hundred times in reduced development time and lower stress.  Likewise, the modems used should have real speakers, and support ATMn commands well enough that you can leave the speaker on for the entire connection process (and ideally have the option to leave it on, period).  "Debugging by ear" can be a reality with modems, particularly during compatibility testing.
If possible, a hardware protocol analyser, or at least an RS-232 breakout box, should be obtained.  These can be placed between the computers and modems, if needed, to troubleshoot the serial link and ensure that data is, in fact, being transferred between the modem and the computer -- a sanity check which comes in handy far more often than you might expect.  Actual hardware protocol analysers are surprisingly expensive, however; old Wyse terminals are not, and are almost as useful for this purpose.  If you find one, pick it up.  Terminals that support automatic baud-rate detection are particularly useful.
If dialing with the modem also needs to be tested, a small analog PABX for home usage is needed.  These PABX units are dirt cheap; an analog PABX for four internal lines and one external line should cost no more than US$50. If dialing is not needed, then the modems should be capable of directly driving a two-wire or four-wire line in leased-line mode; otherwise, the PABX is still needed.
c) Leased-Line Mode with Protocol Analyser
Other combinations are of course also useful. And being able to easily reconnect the protocol analyser, e.g. between Modem B and the BBS Computer is helpful, too.
Operating System, Programming Language & Communication Basics
Before dealing with the details of handling a modem, a few basics should be in place. First of all, the communication with the serial interface should be in place. This includes that the APIs as provided by the particular operating system for serial communication - if any - should be understood. If the operating system doesn't provide such APIs, then it is recommended to first implement the UART access and wrap it into a library, if the serial UART in some hardware is supposed to be programmed directly. Alternatively, a programming language which provides convenient access to a serial interface can be used.
Whatever is used, it should be tested before starting to program for the modem. There is nothing more annoying than not knowing if a particular misbehaviour is caused by a failure in the serial communication with the modem, or is a problem with the modem (usually with the commands sent to it).
Unless in the most simple case, it is suggested to use hardware handshaking with the modem - particularly for speeds greater then 2400 bit/s or 9600 bit/s. Therefore, the used low-level serial communication software and hardware should support hardware handshake. If the UART supports some FIFO, like the 16550 UART, the FIFO should be enabled (both for sending and receiving data).
It is undecided if data reception via polling or via interrupts is better. If every incoming byte raises an interrupt there are many interrupts at high communication speeds, and, as surprising as it might sound, polling the UART might be more efficient in such cases.
Communication as supported by a modem is usually half-duplex. Either the DTE or the DCE talks, the other side is supposed to listen. The communication with the modem should best be done with
See the next section for speed information.
Helpful Hint!
An issue which can be very confusing is the difference between the line speed (the data transfer speed on the telephone line) and the speed on the serial line between the DTE (computer) and the DCE (modem).
First, there is always some general confusion about the line speed, because some line speed is given with taking compression into account, while other data is given without taking compression into account. Also, there is a difference between bps and Baud due to the modulation schema used on the line. In addition, marketing blurbs obscure the picture. We will not make any attempt to clean up the long-standing Baud vs. bit/s confusion here (it is hopeless :-)). It is just recommended that whenever the modem returns information about line speed the above mentioned differences are taken into account to avoid any misinterpretation.
Second, the speed on the telephone line does not necessarily have to be the same as the speed on the serial line. In fact, it usually isn't on modern modems. It is recommended to set the DTE/DCE speed to a fixed speed instead of following the line speed. Logically, the fixed DTE/DCE speed should be large enough to cope with the highest expected line speed. V.90 modems should e.g. be accessed via 115200 bit/s or higher on the serial interface.
Setting the DTE/DCE speed on modern modems is quite simple. They all use autosensing on the serial interface. That is, they themselves detect the speed of data as received from the DTE and use the same speed to return data to the computer. They usually also autosense the parity, and 7 bit / 8 bit data length. Usually modems assume one stop bit when autosensing the serial interface. Therefore it is enough to just configure the serial interface on the DTE to the desired DTE/DCE communication parameters and let the modem figure it out on its own.
Autosensing can fail in rare cases and some modems might have broken autosensing. If a modem tends to fail autosensing it can help to start the initial communication after the DTE is configured with one or more nop AT commands
When a modem sets up a connection with a remote party it can report the used speed. In fact, it can report the line speed or just the DTE speed (some modems can report both). The end user is most probably interested in the line speed, and not the DTE/DCE speed. So from this point of view, it is best to set the modem to report the line speed, and e.g. write the received information to a log file.  However, some old communication software or modem drivers interpret the response from the modem as a request to change the DTE/DCE speed. In such cases the modem must be set to always return the DTE/DCE speed. Since this DTE/DCE speed will be the same as detected via autosensing there will be no speed change.
In the rare case that the DTE/DCE speed should indeed follow the line speed, the responses from the modem should of course be set to return the line speed. Then the DTE software has to evaluate the response, and change the DTE/DCE speed accordingly. This is really not recommended these days.
See the #W: Negotiation Progress Message Selection command for details on how to set which response to get.
Commands sent to the modem, and textual responses are supposed to be in the ISO 646 character set. ISO 646 is just another name for the  familiar 7-bit ASCII character set. Typically, modems chop off any 8th bit in commands they receive anyhow. They interpret the result as if the command has been sent using only 7-bit characters. However, it is not recommended to rely on this, but instead ensure that commands are only sent using 7-bit characters.
Commands are not case sensitive, assuming a modern modem. Some early modems insisted on uppercase-only commands. Still, a generic driver could do worse than ensuring that all commands are sent in uppercase, and all responses are interpreted case-independent. Typically, both letters of the AT command prefix must be of the same case. So AT and at are acceptable, while At and aT are not.
Modem programming means to tap into the world of telecommunications. This is an unknown field for most amateur, as well as professional programmers. Telecommunication is heavily centered around state-machines. And in fact, it is rather difficult or impossible to program a modem without using a state-machine. The modem is at any time in a particular state, and any DTE software which tries to control and use the modem needs to track the state of the modem - in its own state machine. This is necessary, because a Hayes-compatible modem can only do certain things when it is in a certain state. E.g. it can only dial out if it is not already connected to some remote site.
Part of a modem's state can be tracked via particular RS-232 lines. E.g. DCD (data carrier detect) can be used to figure out if the modem has detected a remote modem's carrier signal. Other information is provided by the flow-control lines. However, some states, and associated data need to be tracked via interpreting the modem's result codes.
People unfamiliar with the theory and practice of state machines often try to circumvent the issue by "tough coding". Which means, they throw more and more code onto the problem (wrapped in a heap of if/the/else/otherwise/maybe/... statements), until things seem to work - sort of. If they are lucky they have implicitly managed to create a state machine which works. If they are unlucky, they end up with a partial state machine, which breaks down should something unusual happen in the communication. This usually comes with the problem that the software was not designed to recover if things break down. So such software tends to hang or crash.
It is much more efficient to first spend a few hours to to learn the basics of simple state machines, and then spending a few more hours to describe the communication with the modem as a state machine. The result of this planning serves as a nice template for implementing the DTE software.
To do:Provide a complete state machine, describing all the usual modem and communication states, and the possible transitions
A slow device needs a way to tell its peer that currently, it is busy, so further incoming data must be stopped until this slow device tells otherwise. This mechanism is provided by flow control.
There are two ways of doing flow control: by hardware or software.
Hardware flow control is usually implemented using the CTS (Clear To Send) and RTS (Request To Send) lines, which needs separate hardware data lines between devices. This is allocated in the RS-232 cable specification.
Hardware flow control based on DSR (Data Set Ready) and DTR (Data Terminal Ready) is uncommon, particular for modems. It can usually be found at serial printers. Again, DSR/DTR hardware flow control requires additional hardware data lines between devices.
From a programming point of view there is usually not much difference in programming CTS/RTS or DSR/DTR hardware flow control. The hardware has to provide means to drive/read the corresponding signals in the serial interface. If the hardware supports both, CTS/RTS and DSR/DTR flow control, then it is recommended to support both and provide the user with a configuration option.
It should be noted that some hardware or operating system drivers do not provide means to drive/read the less common DSR/DTR combination. If the remote device insists on DTR/DSR flow control a common workaround is to use CTS/RTS in the software, but rewire the cabling so the CTS/RTS wires are in fact connected to DSR/DTR.
This kind of flow control doesn't need extra signal line(s) like hardware flow control, but instead uses special control characters within the data content.  To stop further incoming data, the receiving device sends the XOFF character.  To enable more data, an XON character will be sent.
However, since the data being sent cannot contain these characters (unless you know that the receiving device ignores such information), binary (non-ASCII) data cannot be transmitted this way.  Software flow control is typically used for communications to terminals and other character-based devices.  Binary data should not be sent this way as it could, randomly, contain these characters.  Hardware flow control using RTS/CTS is usually used.
Helpful Hint: Realizing that the Control Key is a special "shift" key that chops off the 100 bit (octal), it is easy to remember that the ASCII character used for sending XOFF is a Control-S (23 Octal) while the character for XON is a Control-Q (21 Octal).  [Think of "S" for Stop and "Q" for Qontinue... don't you spell it that way?]
Changing the state from command state to on-line state or vice versa is either straightforward or a great mystery. This module covers the more obscure ways.
It is of course possible to switch from on-line state to command state by dropping the connection (going on-hook in modem terminology). It is also possible to temporarily switch into command state while keeping the connection.
Going on-hook programmatically (and not via dropping a modem control line) requires to first switch into command state while keeping the connection, too.
Switching into command state, while in fact in the middle of transferring data (nothing else is meant with on-line state) requires to send a certain escape sequence as part of the data. This escape sequence is detected by the modem and the modem changes state. Since this character sequence might also be part of the normal data, an additional mechanism is needed to separate the escape sequence from normal data. This is the curse of inband signalling.
The separation of the escape sequence is done by using a so called guard time, which was once patented by Hayes. As a result, some modem manufacturers eliminated the guard time using an alternate escape sequence called the Time Independent Escape Sequence. Anyway, the escape sequence is only recognized by the modem when there was no other data from the DTE (terminal) for at least the duration of the guard time, and when there was no other data from the terminal after the escape sequence for at least the duration of the guard time, too.
An escape sequence consists of three times the same particular character. The character, as well as the guard time is configurable. By default, the character is +, and the guard time is one second. So, with the default configuration, a change to command state requires
If the connection should be dropped, this escape sequence should be followed by the AT command to go on-hook, which is ATH0:
The usual way to go from command state to on-line state is via dialing the remote site (see D command). But if the connection already exists, and the modem has been switched to command mode via the escape sequence, the way is different.
If the connection should not be dropped, but instead data transmission should be continued, the ATO0 (letter o, digit zero) command is needed:
Sync. vs. Async. Interface
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
The following list is the list of the original Hayes commands. Different modems use slightly different commands. However, this list is supposed to be as "generic" as possible, and should not be extended with modem specific commands. Instead it is recommended to provide such command lists in an Appendix.
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Here is a summary of the format and syntax of AT commands. Please note that most of the control characters are configurable, and the summary only uses the default control characters.
AT commands are accepted by the modem only when in command mode. The modem can be forced into command mode with the #+++: Escape Sequence.
Commands are grouped in command lines.
Each command line must start with the #AT: Command Prefix and terminated with #<CR>: End-of-line Character. The only exception is the #A/: Repeat Last Command command.
The body of a command line consists of visible ASCII characters (ASCII code 32 to 126). Space (ASCII code 32) and ASCII control characters (ASCII code 0 to 31) are ignored, with the exception of #<BS>: Backspace Character, #<CAN>: Cancel Character, and #<CR>: End-of-line Character.
All characters preceding the #AT: Command Prefix are ignored.
Interpretation / execution of the command line starts with the reception of the first (and also command-line terminating) #<CR>: End-of-line Character.
Characters after the initial #AT: Command Prefix and before the #<CR>: End-of-line Character are interpreted as commands. With some exceptions, there can be many commands in one command line.
Each of the basic commands consists of a single ASCII letter, or a single ASCII letter with a &prefix, followed by a numeric value.  Missing numeric values are interpreted as 0 (zero).
The following commands can't be followed by more commands on the command line. They must always be the last commands in a command line. If they are followed by other commands, these other commands are ignored. However, some of these commands take command modifiers and it is possible that a following command is accidentally interpreted as a command modifier. Therefore, care should be taken to not follow these commands with any more commands on the same command line. Instead, they should be placed in an own command line.
A command line can be edited if the terminating #<CR>: End-of-line Character has not ben entered, using the #<BS>: Backspace Character to delete one command line character at a time. The initial #AT: Command Prefix can't be edited/deleted (it has already been processed, because upon reception of the #AT: Command Prefix the modem immediately starts command line parsing and editing, but not execution).
The modem echoes command lines and edits when #E: Command State Character Echo Selection is on (surprise, surprise :-)).
When echo is on, #<BS>: Backspace Characters are echoed with a sequence of <BS> <BS> (backspace, space, backspace) to erase the last character in e.g. a terminal program on the DTE.
A command line can be cancelled at any time before the terminating #<CR>: End-of-line Character by sending the #<CAN>: Cancel Character. No command in the command line is executed in this case.
The #A: Answer Command and #D: Dial Command can also be cancelled as long as the handshake with the remote site has not been completed. Cancellation is done by sending an additional character. In theory, it doesn't matter which character. But care has to be taken that cancellation is not attempted when the handshake has already completed. In this case the modem has switched to on-line state (#Command State to On-line State) and the character will be send to the remote side. A save way to avoid this problem is to always use the #+++: Escape Sequence followed by going on-hock with the #H: Hook Command Options. If the modem is already in the on-line state, this will drop the connection. If the modem is still in the handshake phase the first character of the #+++: Escape Sequence will cancel the command (and the rest will be interpreted as a normal command line, doing no harm).
Command line execution stops when the first command in the command line fails, or the whole command line has been executed. Every command before the failed command has been executed. Every command after the failed command and the failed command in the command line has not been executed.
There is no particular indication which command in a command line failed, only that one failed. It is best to repeat the complete command line, or to first reset the modem to a defined state before recovering from a failure.
A modem only accepts a new command line when the previous command line has been executed (half-duplex communication). Therefore, care should be taken to only send the next command line after the result code from the previous command line has been received.
To be removed when all commands are documented.
<The syntax of the command, when necessary in EBNF>
<Description of the command, including information about the purpose and effects>
Parameter was valid <description of success>
<Link list of related commands and registers>
See Special Commands and Character Sequences Reference
Modern consumer modems provide a number of additional features which were originally uncommon for a modem, but became standard features over time. This section provides an overview about how to program these features.
This page or section is an undeveloped draft or outline.You can help to develop the work, or you can ask for assistance in the project room.
Serial Programming: Introduction and OSI Network Model
-- RS-232 Wiring and Connections
-- Typical RS232 Hardware Configuration
-- MAX232 Driver/Receiver Family
-- Hayes-compatible Modems and AT Commands
-- Error Correction Methods
-- Packet Recovery Methods
-- Practical Application Development
-- IP Over Serial Connections
This article consists of a short introduction to the underlying concepts of plate tectonics. Detailed discussion will be deferred to subsequent articles; but it is a good idea for the reader to have a grasp of the big picture in order to understand the relevance of the details.
The essential idea of plate tectonics is very simple. The lithosphere of the Earth is divided into plates, as shown in the map to the right: and these plates move. Plate tectonics is the study of the motion of the plates in the present and in the past.
Observing that the plates shown on the map interlock with no gaps between them, you might at first guess either that they couldn't move at all, or that they would have to do so as a body, with no movement of the plates relative to one another.
However, there are two mechanisms which allow this relative motion. The first is subduction: at one edge, a plate can be forced underneath another and into the mantle. The second is sea-floor spreading: plates can move apart at a rift which is continuously filled up by intruding magma produced by partial melting of the underlying mantle, creating a continuous supply of fresh oceanic crust.
This means that a plate can move along like a conveyor belt: it can move along from east to west (for example) if it is being subducted into the mantle at the west end and spreading at the east end.
A deeper theory?
There is a great deal of disagreement among geophysicists as to the exact nature and the relative importance of the mechanisms driving spreading and subduction.
The essential mechanism is agreed to be convection. The mantle is hotter at the bottom, near the core, than it is at the top, near the crust. What's more, the mantle below the lithosphere is ductile. Given the temperature difference and the viscosity of the mantle, it is possible to prove that the mantle must convect: that is, hot material must rise to the top, cool there, and sink to the bottom again. Since it cannot rise and sink in the same place, the mantle must flow laterally below the lithosphere.
The emphasis of this textbook is however on historical geology: if we can establish that the plates do move in the present and have moved in the past, this is quite sufficient for our purposes.
Plate tectonics: how do we know?
The fact that plates are moving now can be confirmed by direct measurement, as will be discussed in the next article. To demonstrate their past motion, and the mechanisms operating now and in the past, it is necessary to study many diverse categories of evidence: too many, indeed, to compress into the space of a single article. In the following articles we shall look at the evidence piece by piece.
For more information about Shakespeare and his work than we have given you here, don't hesitate to consult your teacher or your library.
Kott, Jan. Shakespeare our Contemporary
Bloom, Harold. Shakespeare and the Invention of the Human
Lamb, Charles and Mary. Tales of Shakespeare
(condensed versions of the stories).
Wikisource : Home of every play found within
Talk to William Shakespeare - Have a real conversation with the William Shakespeare chatbot, bot active multiuser chatroom and bot-forum; bard-bot-tastic!
All of the texts of Shakespeare's plays are available at this Wikisource page. Please link to the scene in question when creating wiki commentary pages.
See also: List of archaic English words and their modern equivalents
The range maps presented here are color-coded, with yellow indicating the summer range, blue indicating the winter range, and green indicating the year-round range.  Some of the range maps do not follow this color code, but it is not difficult to decode them.
The Northern Mockingbird builds a twig nest in a dense shrub or tree, which it aggressively defends against other birds and animals, including humans. When a predator is persistent, Mockingbirds from neighboring territories, summoned by a distinct call, may join the attack. Other birds may gather to watch as the Mockingbirds harass the intruder.  This bird is mainly a permanent resident, but northern birds may move south during harsh weather.  Mockingbirds have a strong preference for certain trees such as maple, sweetgum, and sycamore. They generally avoid pine trees after the other trees have grown their leaves. Also, they have a particular preference for high places, such as the topmost branches of trees.  Although many species of bird imitate other birds, the Northern Mockingbird is the best known in North America for doing so. It not only imitates birds but also other animals and mechanical sounds.
During the breeding season, the adult males grow distinctive black feathers on their heads; after the breeding season they lose this eye-catching plumage.
Bird callThe American Robin has gray upperparts and head, and orange underparts, usually brighter in the male.  Robins are frequently seen running across lawns, picking up earthworms by sight. In fact, the running and stopping behavior is a distinguishing characteristic. When stopping, they are believed to be listening for the movement of prey.
Bird callThese birds are permanent residents, sometimes moving south in winter.
They forage on the trunk and large branches of trees, and are well-known for descending head first, a behavior unique to the white-breasted nuthatch. Their principal diet consists of insects and a few varieties of seeds. They often travel with small mixed flocks in winter.
These are one of the relatively few thrush genera to be restricted to the Americas. As the name implies, these are attractive birds with blue, or blue and red, plumage. Female birds are less brightly colored than males, although color patterns are similar and there is no noticeable difference in size between sexes.  There are three species of bluebird; the Eastern Bluebird, the Mountain Bluebird, and the Western Bluebird. The Western Bluebird is very similar to the Eastern Bluebird in appearance.
Bird callThe Red-winged Blackbird, Agelaius phoeniceus, is a passerine bird found in most of North and much of Central America. It breeds from Alaska and Newfoundland south to Florida, the Gulf of Mexico, Mexico and Guatemala, with isolated populations in western El Salvador, northwestern Honduras and northwestern Costa Rica. It may winter as far north as Pennsylvania and British Columbia, but northern populations are generally bird migration, moving south to Mexico and the southern United States.
The common name for this species is taken from the mainly black adult male's distinctive red shoulder patches, or "epaulets", which are visible when the bird is flying or displaying. At rest, the male also shows  a pale yellow wingbar. The female is blackish-brown and paler below. The female is considerably smaller than the male, at 17-18 cm (7 inches) length and 36 g weight, against his 22-24 cm (9.5 inches) and 64 g. Young birds resemble the female, but are paler below and have buff feather fringes. Both sexes have a sharply pointed bill.
The Red-winged Blackbird feeds primarily on plant seeds, including weeds and waste grain, but about a quarter of its diet consists of insects, spiders, mollusks and other small animals, considerably more so during breeding season (Srygley & Kingsolver 1998). In season, it eats blueberries, blackberries, and other fruit. These birds can be lured to backyard bird feeders by bread and seed mixtures.
When migrating north, these birds travel in single-sex flocks, and the males usually arrive a few days before the females. Once they have reached the location where they plan to breed, the males stake out territories by singing. They defend their territory aggressively, both against other male Red-winged Blackbirds and against birds they perceive as threatening, including crows, Ospreys, hawks, and even humans.
Red-winged Blackbirds prefer marshes, but will nest near any body of water. Pairs raise two or three clutches per season, in a new nest for each clutch. The nests are cups of vegetation, and are either built in shrubs or attached to marsh grass. A clutch comprises three to five eggs. These are incubated by the female and hatch in 11-12 days. Red-winged Blackbirds are hatched blind and naked, but are ready to leave the nest ten days after hatching.
Red-winged Blackbirds are polygynous, with territorial males defending up to 10 females. However, females frequently copulate with males other than their social mate and often lay clutches of mixed paternity.
When the breeding season is over, Red-winged Blackbirds gather in huge flocks, sometimes numbering in the millions. In some parts of the United States, they are considered to be pests because these flocks can consume large amounts of cultivated grain or rice. This bird's numbers are declining due to habitat loss and the use of poison to prevent this loss of crops.
Despite the similar names, the Red-winged Blackbird is not related to the European Redwing or the Old World Blackbirdthrushes (Turdidae).
The American Crowis a common bird found throughout North America. Entirely black, it is an easily recognized bird.
The American Crow is a distinctive bird with iridescent black feathers. Its legs, feet and bill are also black. Several regional forms are recognized and differ in bill proportion and overall size from each other across North America, generally being smallest in the southeast and the far west. Averaging 18 inches (46 cm) in length, it is smaller than the Common Raven. American Crows have a lifespan of 7 to 8 years. Captive birds are known to have lived up to 30 years.
Crows live in virtually all types of country from wilderness, farmland, parks, open woodland to towns and major cities. The crow is generally a permanent resident, but many birds in the northern parts of the range migrate short distances southward. Outside of the nesting season, these birds often gather in large communal roosts at night. American Crows are protected by the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918.
The American Crow is omnivorous. It will feed on invertebrates of all types, carrion, scraps of human food, seeds, eggs and nestlings, stranded fish on the shore and various grains. American Crows are active hunters and will prey on mice, frogs, and other small animals. In winter and autumn, the diet of American Crows is more dependent on nuts and acorns. Occasionally, they will visit bird feeders.
Like most crows, they will scavenge at rubbish dumps, scattering garbage in the process. Where available, corn, wheat and other agricultural crops are a favorite food. These habits have historically caused the American Crow to be considered a nuisance. However, it is suspected that the harm to crops is offset by the service the American Crow provides by eating insect pests.
American Crows are monogamous cooperative breeding birds. Mated pairs form large families of up to 15 individuals from several breeding seasons that remain together for many years. Offspring from a previous nesting season will usually remain with the family to assist in rearing new nestlings. American Crows do not reach breeding age for at least two years. Most do not leave the nest to breed for four to five years.
American Crows build bulky stick nests, nearly always in trees but sometimes also in large bushes and, very rarely, on the ground. They will nest in a wide variety of trees, including large conifers, although oaks are most often used. Three to six eggs are laid and incubated for 18 days. The young are fledged usually by about 35 days.
Despite attempts by humans in some areas to drive away or eliminate these birds, they remain widespread and very common. The number of individual American Crows is estimated by Birdlife International to be around 31,000,000. The large population, as well as its vast range, are the reasons why the American Crow is considered to be of least concern, meaning that the species is not at immediate risk.
The Gray Catbird is a medium-sized perching bird.
Adults are dark gray with a slim, black bill and dark eyes. They have a long dark tail, dark legs and a dark cap; they are rust-colored underneath their tail.
Their breeding habitat is semi-open areas with dense, low growth across most of North America. They are found in urban, suburban, and rural habitats. They build a bulky cup nest in a shrub or tree, close to the ground. Eggs are light blue in color, and clutch size ranges from 1-5, with 2-3 eggs most common. Both parents take turns feeding the young birds.
They migrate to the southeastern United States, Mexico and Central America.
These birds forage on the ground in leaf litter, and love freshly worked earth.  Some may even visit a freshly turned garden while the gardener is still present. They mainly eat insects and berries.
In the United States, this species receives special legal protections under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918.
The catbird is named for its cat-like call, but it also mimics the songs of other  birds.  A catbird's song is easily distinguished from that of the Northern Mockingbird or Brown Thrasher because the mockingbird repeats phrases 3-4 times, and the brown thrasher usually repeats each phrase twice, whereas the catbird sings each phrase only once.  The catbird's song is usually described as more raspy and less musical than a mockingbird.
In contrast to many songbirds which choose a prominent perch from which to sing, the catbird often chooses to sing from inside a bush or small tree, where they are obscured from view by the foliage.
The syrinx of gray catbirds has an unusual structure that not only allows them to make mewing sounds like that of a cat but also allows them to imitate other birds, tree frogs, and even mechanical sounds that they hear. Their unusual syrinx also allows them to sing in two voices at once.
Gray catbirds are not afraid of predators and respond to them aggressively to them by flashing their wings and tails and by making their signature mew sounds. They are also known to even attack and peck predators that come too near their nests.
A Brown-headed Cowbird egg in an Eastern Phoebe nest.
Adults have a short finch-like bill and dark eyes. The adult male is mainly iridescent black with a brown head. The adult female is grey with a pale throat and fine streaking on the underparts.
Breeding in open or semi-open country across most of North America, this bird is a brood parasite: it lays its eggs in the nests of other small perching birds, particularly those that build cup-like nests, such as the Yellow Warbler. The young cowbird is fed by the host parents at the expense of their own young.
Brown-headed Cowbirds are permanent residents in the southern parts of their range; northern birds migrate to the southern United States and Mexico. They often travel in flocks, sometimes mixed with Red-winged Blackbirds or European Starlings.
These birds forage on the ground, often following grazing animals such as horses and cows to catch insects stirred up by the larger animals. They mainly eat seeds and insects.
At one time, the Brown-headed Cowbird followed the bison herds across the prairies. Their parasitic nesting behavior complemented this nomadic lifestyle. Their numbers expanded with the clearing of forested areas and the introduction of new grazing animals by settlers across North America. Brown-headed Cowbirds are now commonly seen at suburban birdfeeders.
Brown-headed Cowbird females can lay 36 eggs in a season. Over 140 different species of birds are known to have raised young cowbirds. Host parents may sometimes notice the cowbird egg. Different species react in different ways. Gray Catbirds destroy the egg by pecking it. Some species may simply build a new layer over the bottom of the original nest. Brown-headed cowbird nestlings are sometimes expelled from the nest.
The Red-headed Woodpecker, Melanerpes erythrocephalus, is a small or medium-sized woodpecker.
Adults have a black back and tail with a red head and neck. Their underparts are mainly white. The wings are black with white secondaries.  Non-birders often mistakenly identify the Red-bellied Woodpecker as this species.
Their breeding habitat is open country across southern Canada and the eastern-central United States. They nest in a cavity in a dead tree or a dead part of a tree.
Northern birds migrate to the southern parts of the range; southern birds are often permanent residents.
These birds fly to catch insects in the air or on the ground, forage on trees or gather and store nuts. They are omnivorous, eating insects, seeds, fruits, berries and nuts.
Once abundant, populations have seriously declined since 1966 due to increased nesting competition from starlings and removal of dead trees (used as nesting sites) from woodlands. Many Northeastern states no longer have nesting red-headed woodpeckers.
To see and hear the Red Headed Woodpecker please click this link,    http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ic6YPqC2wfU
The red-headed woodpecker is listed as a vulnerable species in Canada and as a threatened species in some states in the US. The species has declined in numbers due to habitat loss caused by harvesting of snags, agricultural development, channeling of rivers, a decline in farming resulting to regeneration of eastern forests, monoculture crops, the loss of small orchards, and treatment of telephone poles with creosote.
The Pileated Woodpecker (Dryocopus pileatus) is a very large North American woodpecker.
Adults (40-49 cm long, 250-350 g weight) are mainly black with a red crest and a white line down the sides of the throat. Adult males have a red line from the bill to the throat and red on the front of the crown. In adult females, these are black. They show white on the wings in flight. The only North American birds of similar plumage and size are the Ivory-billed Woodpecker of the Southeastern United States and Cuba, and the related Imperial Woodpecker of Mexico. Both of those species are extremely rare, if not extinct.
Their breeding habitat is forested areas with large trees across Canada, the eastern United States and parts of the Pacific coast. They usually excavate large nests in the cavities of dead trees, and often excavates a new home each year, creating habitat for other large cavity nesters.
This bird is usually a permanent resident.
These birds mainly eat insects (especially beetle larvae and carpenter ants) as well as fruits, berries and nuts. They often chip out large and roughly rectangular holes in trees while searching out insects.
The pileated woodpecker is also commonly known in the south as an "Indian Hen"
The roost of a Pileated Woodpecker usually has multiple entrance holes.
The sound that a Pileated Woodpecker makes when boring a hole in a tree is so loud that it can be heard over long distances.
Pileated Woodpeckers make such large holes in dead trees that sometimes the holes can cause a small tree to break in half.
Pileated Woodpeckers have been observed to move their eggs which have fallen off the nest to another site. This is a rare habit in other birds.
The Whip-poor-will or whippoorwill, Caprimulgus vociferus, is a medium-sized (22-27 cm) nightjar, a type of nocturnal bird. The Whip-poor-will is commonly heard within its range, but less often seen. It is named after its call.
Adults have mottled plumage: the upperparts are grey, black and brown; the lower parts are grey and black. They have a very short bill and a black throat. Males have a white patch below the throat and white tips on the outer tail feathers; in the female, these parts are light brown.
The Whip-poor-will's breeding habitat is deciduous or mixed woods across southeastern Canada, eastern and southwestern United States, and Central America. They nest on the ground, in shaded locations, among dead leaves, and usually lay two creamy eggs. This bird does not normally flush from the nest unless it is underfoot.
Northern birds migrate to the southeastern United States and south to Central America. Central American races are largely resident.
These birds forage at night, catching insects in flight. They normally sleep during the day.
Galliformes (turkeys, chickens, grouse, quails, and pheasants)
Rock Pigeon near the shore in Connecticut
The Rock Pigeon (Columba livia), is a member of the bird family Columbidae, doves and pigeons. The bird is also known by the names of feral pigeon or domestic pigeon.  In common usage, this bird is often simply referred to as the "pigeon".  The species was commonly known as Rock Dove until the British Ornithologists' Union and the American Ornithologists' Union changed the official English name of the bird in their regions to Rock Pigeon.
The Rock Pigeon has a restricted natural resident range in western and southern Europe, North Africa, and into South Asia. Its habitat is natural cliffs, usually on coasts. Its domesticated form, the feral pigeon, has been widely introduced elsewhere, and is common, especially in cities, over much of the world. In Britain, Ireland, and much of its former range, the Rock Pigeon probably only occurs pure in the most remote areas. A Rock Pigeon's life span is anywhere from 3-5 years in the wild to 15 years in captivity, though longer-lived specimens have been reported.
The Rock Pigeon is 30-35 cm long with a 62-68 cm wingspan. The white lower back of the pure Rock Pigeon is its best identification character, but the two black bars on its pale grey wings are also distinctive. The tail is margined with white. It is strong and quick on the wing, dashing out from sea caves, flying low over the water, its white rump showing well from above.
The head and neck of the mature bird are a darker blue-grey than the back and wings; the lower back is white. The green and lilac or purple patch on the side of the neck is larger than that of the Stock Dove, and the tail is more distinctly banded. Young birds show little luster and are duller.  Eye color of the pigeon is generally orange but a few pigeons may have white-grey eyes. The eyelids are orange and are encapsulated in a grey-white eye ring. Feet are red to pink.
When circling overhead, the white under wing of the bird becomes conspicuous. In its flight, behavior, and voice, which is more of a dovecot coo than the phrase of the Wood Pigeon, it is a typical pigeon.  Although it is a relatively strong flier, it also glides frequently, holding its wings in a very pronounced V shape as it does.  Though fields are visited for grain and green food, it is nowhere so plentiful as to be a pest.
The nest is usually on a ledge in a cave; it is a slight structure of grass, heather, or seaweed. Like most pigeons it lays two white eggs. The eggs are incubated by both parents for about 18 days.
The nestling has pale yellow down and a flesh-coloured bill with a dark band. It is tended and fed on "crop milk" like other doves. The fledging period is 30 days.
The Stock Pigeon (Columba oenas) (formerly Stock Dove) is a member of the family Columbidae, doves and pigeons.
In the northern part of its European and western Asiatic range the Stock Pigeon is a migrant, elsewhere it is a well distributed and often plentiful resident.
The three western European Columba pigeons, though superficially alike, have very distinctive characters; the Wood Pigeon may at once be told by the white on its neck and wing, but the Rock Pigeon and Stock Pigeons are more alike in size and plumage.
The former, however, has a white rump, and two well-marked black bars on the wing, but the rump of the Stock is grey, and the bars are incomplete.
The haunts of the Stock Pigeon are in more or less open country, for though it often nests in trees it prefers parklands to thick woods. It is common on coasts where the cliffs provide holes.  Its flight is quick, performed by regular beats, with an occasional sharp flick of the wings, characteristic of pigeons in general.
It perches well, and in nuptial display walks along a horizontal branch with swelled neck, lowered wings, and fanned tail. During the circling spring flight the wings are smartly cracked like a whiplash.
The Stock Pigeon is sociable as well as gregarious, often consorting with Wood Pigeons, though doubtless it is the presence of food which brings them together.
Most of its food is vegetable; young shoots and seedlings are favoured, and it will take grain.
The Band-tailed Pigeon, Patagioenas fasciata, is a medium-sized bird of the Americas.
It ranges from British Columbia, Utah, and Colorado south in higher elevations through Mexico and Central America to northern Argentina. In autumn it migrates out of the part of its range north of California, New Mexico, and west Texas. Populations from Costa Rica south are sometimes considered a separate species, the White-naped Pigeon, C. albilinea. It is found at altitudes from 900 m to 3600 m, generally in oak, pine-oak, and coniferous forests. It feeds on seeds, notably acorns.
It is the biggest pigeon in North America, averaging 34 to 36 cm long and weighing 250-450 grams. The plumage is gray, somewhat darker above. The head and underparts have a faint pink cast, especially in the adult male; the belly is nearly white. The distal half of the tail is also pale (except in the subspecies of Baja California), whence the English name. The bill and feet are yellow, good identification marks at sufficiently close range. Adults have green iridescence on the back of the neck, adjacent to a thin white collar on the nape. Juvenile birds have white feather edges above, giving a scaly appearance.
This species is relatively quiet for a pigeon.  Its voice is low-pitched and owl-like, often in two-syllable calls that rise and than fall (huu-ooh) with even spacing between calls.
It builds a rudimentary platform nest out of twigs, in which it lays one or two eggs.  Outside the breeding season it forms flocks, sometimes over 50 birds, and often becomes nomadic, following the acorn crop or moving to lower altitudes or other areas outside its breeding range.  It often visits bird feeders.
The White-tipped Dove (Leptotila verreauxi) is a large New World tropical dove. It is a resident breeder from the southernmost Texas in the USA through Mexico and Central America south to western Peru and central Argentina. It also breeds on the offshore islands of northern South America, including Trinidad and Tobago.
The White-tipped Dove inhabits scrub, woodland and forest. It builds a large stick nest in a tree and lays two white eggs. Incubation is about 14 days, and fledging another 15.
The White-tipped Dove has an approx. length of 28 cm (11 in) and a weight of 155 g (5½ oz). Adult birds of most races have a grey tinge from the crown to the nape, a pale grey or whitish forehead and a whitish throat. The eye-ring is typically red in most of its range, but blue in most of the Amazon and northern South America. The upperparts and wings are grey-brown, and the underparts are whitish shading to pinkish, dull grey or buff on the chest. The underwing coverts are rufous. The tail is broadly tipped with white, but this is best visible from below or in flight. The bill is black, the legs are red and the iris is yellow.
The White-tipped Dove resembles the closely related Grey-fronted Dove, Leptotila rufaxilla, which prefers humid forest habitats. The best distinctions are the greyer forehead and crown, which contrast less with the hindcrown than in the Grey-fronted Dove. In the area of overlap, the White-tipped Dove usually has a blue (not red) eye-ring, but this is not reliable in some parts of Brazil, Argentina, Bolivia, Paraguay and Uruguay, where it typically is red in both species.
The White-tipped Dove is usually seen singly or in pairs, and is rather wary. Its flight is fast and direct, with the regular beats and clattering of the wings which are characteristic of pigeons in general.
Falconiformes (eagles, falcons, and hawks)
The Bald Eagle (Haliaeetus leucocephalus) is a bird of prey found in North America, most recognizable as the national bird of the United States.
The species was on the brink of extinction in the US late in the 20th century, but now has a stable population and is in the process of being removed from the U.S. federal government's list of endangered species.
An immature Bald Eagle has speckled brown plumage, the distinctive white head and body developing 2-3 years later, before sexual maturity. This species is distinguishable from the Golden Eagle in that the latter has feathers which extend down the legs. Also, the immature Bald Eagle has more light feathers in the upper arm area, especially around the 'armpit'.
Adult females have an average wingspan of about 7 feet (2.1 meters); adult males have a wingspan of 6 ft 6 in (2 meters). Adult females weigh approximately 12.8 lb (5.8 kg), males weigh 9 lb (4.1 kg). The smallest specimens are those from Florida, where an adult male may barely exceed 5 lb (2.3 kg) and a wingspan of 6 feet (1.8 meters). The largest are the Alaskan birds, where large females may exceed 15.5 lb (7 kg) and have a wingspan of approximately 8 feet (2.4 meters).
Bald Eagles are powerful fliers, and also soar on thermal convection currents.
In the wild, Bald Eagles can live about 20-30 years, and have a maximum life span of approximately 50 years. They generally live longer in captivity, up to 60 years old.
Bald Eagles build huge nests out of branches, usually in large trees near water. The nest may stretch as large as eight feet across and weigh up to a ton (907kg). When breeding where there are no trees, the Bald Eagle will nest on the ground.
Bald Eagles are sexually mature at 4 or 5 years old. Eagles produce between one and three eggs per year, but it is rare for all three chicks to successfully fly. Both the male and female take turns sitting on the eggs. The other parent will hunt for food or look for nesting material.
The Golden Eagle (Aquila chrysaetos) is one of the best known birds of prey in the Northern Hemisphere.
A pair of Golden Eagles remains together for life. They build several eyries within their territory and use them alternately for several years. The nest consists of heavy tree branches, upholstered with grass.
Old eyries may be 2 meters in diameter and 1 meter in height, as the eagles enlarge their nests every year. If the eyrie is situated on a tree, supporting tree branches may break because of the weight of the nest.
The female lays two eggs between January and May (depending on the area). After 45 days the young hatch. They are entirely white and are fed for fifty days before they are able to make their first flight attempts and eat on their own. In most cases only the older chick, which takes most of the food, survives, while the younger one dies without leaving the eyrie.
Adult Golden Eagles have an average length of 75-85 cm, a wingspan of 150-210 cm, and a weight of 3-5 kg. As in all birds of prey, the females are generally slightly larger than the males.
The plumage colors range from black-brown to dark brown, with a striking golden-buff crown and nape, which give the bird its name. The juveniles resemble the adults, but have a duller more mottled appearance. Also they have a white-banded tail and a white patch at the carpal joint, that gradually disappear with every moult until full adult plumage is reached in the fifth year.
Golden Eagles often have a division of labor while hunting: one partner drives the prey to its waiting partner. They have very good eyesight and can spot prey from a long distance. The talons are used for killing and carrying the prey, the beak is used only for eating. The talons of a Golden Eagle are thought to be more powerful than the hand and arm strength of any human being.
The Peregrine Falcon (Falco peregrinus), sometimes formerly known in North America as Duck Hawk, is a medium-sized falcon about the size of a large crow: 38-53 cm long. The English and scientific species names mean "wandering falcon", and refer to the fact that some populations are migratory. It has a wingspan of about 1 meter. Males weigh 570-710 grams; the noticeably larger females weigh 910-1190 grams.
The Peregrine Falcon is the fastest creature on the planet in its hunting dive, the stoop, in which it soars to a great height, then dives steeply at speeds in excess of 320 km/h into either wing of its prey, so as not to harm itself on impact. In its stoop, the Peregrine Falcon attains the highest speed of any animal. The fastest speed recorded is 390 km/h.
The fledglings practice the roll and the pumping of the wings before they master the actual stoop.
Peregrine Falcons live mostly along mountain ranges, river valleys, coastlines, and, increasingly, in cities. They are widespread throughout the entire world and are found in all of the continents except Antarctica.
Peregrines in mild-winter regions are usually permanent residents, and some birds, especially adult males, will remain on the breeding territory. However, the Arctic subspecies  migrate; tundrius birds from Alaska, northern Canada and Greenland migrate to Central and South America, and  all calidus  birds from northern Eurasia move further south or to coasts in winter.
Australian Peregrine Falcons are non-migratory, and their breeding season is from July to November each year.
Peregrine Falcons feed almost exclusively on birds, such as doves, waterfowl and songbirds, but occasionally they hunt small mammals, including bats, rats, voles and rabbits.  Insects and reptiles make up a relatively small proportion of their diet.  On the other hand, a growing number of city-dwelling Falcons find that feral pigeons and Common Starlings provide plenty of food. Peregrine Falcons also eat their own chicks when starving.
Peregrine Falcons breed at approximately two or three years of age.  They mate for life and return to the same nesting spot annually.  Their courtship flight includes a mix of aerial acrobatics, precise spirals, and steep dives. The male passes prey it has caught to the female in midair. To make this possible, the female actually flies upside-down to receive the food from the male's talons.  Females lay an average clutch of three or four eggs in a scrape, normally on cliff edges or, increasingly, on tall buildings or bridges.  They occasionally nest in tree hollows or in the disused nest of other large birds.
The average life span of a Peregrine Falcon is approximately eight to ten years, although some have been recorded to live until slightly more than twenty years of age.
The Red-tailed Hawk (Buteo jamaicensis) breeds from western Alaska and northern Canada to Panama and the West Indies. Males are typically smaller than females, generally weighing between 800–1100 grams and measuring 45–56 cm in length. Females typically average between 1100–1300 grams and measure 50–65 cm in length.
This is one of three species colloquially known in the United States as the "chickenhawk". It is the most common North American hawk and the raptor most frequently taken from the wild (and later returned to the wild) for falconry in the United States.
Birds of this species have a dark mark along the leading edge of the underwing, between the body and the wrist. Most, but not all color variations have a dark band across the belly. In most, the adults' tails are rusty red above, and juveniles have narrow brown and pale bands. The main western North American population has bands on the adults' rusty tails as well and has varied plumage, organized into three main color types or morphs.
Immature birds, or birds that are only a few years old, can also readily be identified by having yellowish irises. As the bird attains full maturity over the course of 3–4 years, the iris slowly darkens into a reddish-brown hue.
The breeding habitat is open country with high perches. They build a stick nest in a large tree, in a cactus, or on a cliff ledge 35 m or higher above ground; they may also nest on man-made structures.  Both sexes build the sturdy nest, made of different sized twigs and sticks, lined with fresh green foliage and evergreen sprigs.  The fresh sprigs are regularly replaced during incubation.  Up to four eggs may be laid at daily intervals.  The shells are colored a dull or bluish-white with a granulated or smooth surface, never glossy.  There may be some splotches of various shades of brown.   Incubation is by the female from 28 to 35 days, during which time she is fed by the male.  The young are able to fly at about 45 days.
In most of the United States, Red-tailed Hawks are permanent residents, but northern breeding birds migrate south in winter.  Throughout their range in the U.S., Red-tailed Hawks receive special legal protections under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918. They have a complex relationship with humans, capable of both controlling rodent and other mammalian pests, and on occasion taking valuable fowl (which has led to them being one of the species described as a Chickenhawk).
Red-tailed Hawks prefer to wait on a high perch and swoop down on prey; they also patrol open areas in flight. They mainly eat small mammals, birds and reptiles.  Their favorite prey varies with regional and seasonal availability but includes most types of rodents, rabbits, pheasant, grouse, quail, rattle snakes, copperheads, lizards, and, when near the water's edge, carp and catfish. Those that live in cities may prefer pigeons and starlings, both of which are plentiful in many urban areas.
In flight, these hawks soar with wings in a slight dihedral, flapping as little as possible. They sometimes hover on beating wings and sometimes "kite", or remain stationary above the ground by soaring into the wind.  When soaring or flapping their wings, they typically travel from 30 km/h to 65 km/h, but when diving may reach speeds as high as 195 km/h.
The Red-tailed Hawk is common and widespread, partly because it has benefited from the historic settlement patterns across North America.  The clearing of trees in the east of North America provided hunting areas, and the practice of sparing woodlots left nest sites. Conversely, the planting of trees in the west provided nest sites where there had been none. The construction of highways with treeless medians and shoulders and with utility poles alongside provided perfect habitat for perch-hunting, so Red-tailed Hawks are now a common sight along highways.
A certain recording of the cry of the Red-tailed Hawk is probably one of the most often heard cinematic sound clichés. This high, fierce scream is often featured in the background of adventure movies to give a sense of wilderness to the scene.  However, the cry is more commonly used for the Bald Eagle, whose own vocalizations are quite different.
A North American Osprey preparing to dive.
Bird callThe Osprey, Pandion haliaetus is a medium-large raptor which is a specialist fish-eater with a worldwide distribution. It occurs in all continents except Antarctica, but in South America only as a non-breeding migrant. It is often known by other colloquial names such as fishhawk, seahawk or Fish Eagle.
The Osprey is 52-60 cm long with a 152-167 cm wingspan. It has mainly white underparts and head, apart from a dark mask through the eye, and fairly uniformly brown upperparts. Its short tail and long, narrow wings with four long "finger" feathers (and a shorter fifth) give it a very distinctive appearance.
Juvenile birds are readily identified by the buff fringes to the upperpart plumage, buff tone to the underparts, and streaked crown. By spring, wear on the upperparts makes barring on the underwings and flight feathers a better indicator of young birds. Adult males can be distinguished from females from their slimmer bodies and narrower wings. They also have a weaker or non-existent breast band than the female, and more uniformly pale underwing coverts. It is straightforward to sex a breeding pair, but harder with individual birds.
The Osprey is particularly well adapted to its fish diet, with reversible outer toes, closable nostrils to keep out water during dives, and backwards facing scales on the talons which act as barbs to help hold its catch. It locates its prey from the air, often hovering prior to plunging feet-first into the water to seize a fish. As it rises back into flight the fish is turned head forward to reduce drag. The 'barbed' talons are such effective tools for grasping fish that, on occasion, an Osprey may be unable to release a fish that is heavier than expected. This can cause the Osprey to be pulled into the water, where it may either swim to safety or succumb to hypothermia and drown.
The osprey breeds by freshwater lakes, and sometimes on coastal brackish waters.  The nest is a large heap of sticks built in trees, rocky outcrops, telephone poles or artificial platforms. In some regions with high Osprey densities, such as Chesapeake Bay, USA, most ospreys do not start breeding until they are five to seven years old, and there may be a shortage of suitable tall structures. If there are no nesting sites available, young ospreys may be forced to delay breeding. To ease this problem, posts may be erected to provide more sites suitable for nest building.
Male (note the long black plume at the back of the head)
Bird callThe Great Blue Heron, Ardea herodias, is a wading bird of the heron family, common all over North and Central America as well as the West Indies and the Galápagos Islands, except in deserts and high mountains where there is no water for it to wade in. The Great Blue Heron is the largest heron in North America.
Adults have blue-grey wings and back and a white head with a black cap and a long black plume. The face is white, with a black streak extending from behind the eye to the back of the head. They have a long neck, streaked with white, rust-brown, and black, which is generally held in a s-curve while wading, and a short tail. The beak is yellow, long, and and tapers to a point. Legs are long, and greenish-yellow in color.
In flight, the head is held close to and aligned with the body by a downward bend in the long neck. The long legs trail behind. This bird flies with strong deliberate wing beats.
The males and females appear relatively similar, but males have a puffy plume of feathers behind their heads, and tend to be slightly larger than females.
It is found throughout most of North America, including Alaska, Quebec and Nova Scotia. The range extends south through Florida, Mexico and the Caribbean to South America. Great blue herons can be found in a range of habitats, in fresh and saltwater marshes, mangrove swamps, flooded meadows, rivers, lake edges, or shorelines, but they always live near bodies of water. Generally, they nest in trees or bushes that stand near water.
It feeds in shallow water or at the water's edge during both the night and the day, but especially around dawn and dusk. Herons locate their food by sight and generally swallow it whole. Herons have been known to choke on prey that is too large.It uses its long legs to wade through shallow water, and spears fish or frogs with its long, sharp bill. Its diet can also include insects, snakes, turtles, rodents and small birds.
It is generally a solitary feeder. Individuals usually forage while standing in water, but will also forage in fields or drop from the air, or a perch, into water. As large wading birds, Great Blue Herons are able to feed in deeper waters, and thus are able to exploit a niche not open to most other heron species.
This species usually breeds in colonies, in trees close to lakes or other wetlands; often with other species of herons.  These groups are called heronry (more accurately than "rookery"). The size of these colonies may be large, ranging between 5 – 500 nests per colony, with an average of approximately 160 nests per colony.
Great Blues build a bulky stick nest, and the female lays three to six pale blue eggs. One brood is raised each year.  If the nest is abandoned or destroyed, the female may lay a replacement clutch. Reproduction is negatively affected by human disturbance, particularly during the beginning of nesting. Repeated human intrusion into nesting areas often results in nest failure, with abandonment of eggs or chicks.
Both parents feed the young at the nest by regurgitating food. Parent birds have been shown to consume up to 4 times as much food when they are feeding young chicks than when laying or incubating eggs.
Eggs are incubated for approximately 28 days and hatch over a period of several days. The first chick to hatch usually becomes more experienced in food handling and aggressive interactions with siblings, and so often grows more quickly than the other chicks.
Birds east of the Rocky Mountains in the northern part of their range are bird migratory and winter in Central America or northern South America. From the southern United States southwards and on the Pacific coast, they are year-round residents.
The Great Egret Ardea alba, also known as the Great White Egret, White Heron, or Common Egret,  is a wading egret, found in most of the tropical and warmer temperate parts of the world, although it is very local in southern Europe and Asia.  It is called Kōtuku in New Zealand.  It should not be confused with the Great White Heron, which is a white morph of the Great Blue Heron found in Florida.
The Great Egret is a large bird with all white plumage, as much as 101 cm long and weighing up to 950 grams. It is only slightly smaller than the Great Blue or Grey Herons. Apart from size, the Great Egret can be distinguished from other white egrets by its yellow bill and black legs and feet. It also has a slow flight, with its neck retracted. This is characteristic of herons and bitterns, and distinguishes them from storks, cranes and spoonbills, which extend their necks.
The Great Egret feeds in shallow water or drier habitats, spearing fish, frogs or insects with its long, sharp bill. It will often wait motionless for prey, or slowly stalk its victim. It is a conspicuous species, usually easily seen.
Charadriiformes (waders, gulls, and auks)
The Herring Gull, Larus argentatus, is a large gull which breeds across North America, Europe and Asia. Some herring gulls, especially those resident in colder areas, migrate further south in winter, but many are permanent residents, e.g. those on the lower Great Lakes, on the east coast of North America or at the North Sea shores.  Herring Gulls are also abundant around inland garbage dumps, and some have even adapted to life in inland cities.
Adult Herring Gulls are similar to Ring-billed Gulls but are much larger, have pinkish legs, and a much thicker yellow bill with more pronounced lower bill. First-winter Herring Gulls are much browner, but second and third-winter birds can be confusing since soft part colors are variable and third-year Herring Gull often show a ring around the bill. Such birds are most easily distinguished by the larger size and larger bill of Herring Gull.
Adults are easily identified by their size, pale grey back and the red spot on the beak. Legs are pink at all ages. The bird depicted is the western European race Larus argentatus argenteus.  The Scandinavian race L. a. argentatus is slightly larger and darker, with more white in the wing tips.
The North American American Herring Gull is similar to argentatus, except that immature birds tend to be darker and more uniformly brown.
These are omnivores like most Larus gulls, and will scavenge on rubbish tips and elsewhere, as well as seeking suitable small prey in fields or on the coast, or robbing plovers or lapwings of their catches.
The Semipalmated Sandpiper, Calidris or Erolia pusilla, is a very small shorebird.
Adults have black legs and a short stout straight dark bill. The body is dark grey-brown on top and white underneath. The head and neck are tinged light grey-brown. This bird can be difficult to distinguish from other similar tiny shorebirds, in particular the Western Sandpiper; these are known collectively as "peeps" or "stints".
Their breeding habitat is the southern tundra in Canada and Alaska near water. They nest on the ground. The male makes several shallow scrapes, the female chooses one and adds grass and other material to line the nest. The female lays 4 eggs; the male assists in incubation. After a few days, the female leaves the young with the male; the young feed themselves.
They are long distance migrants and winter in coastal South America with some going to the southern United States. They migrate in flocks which can number in the hundreds of thousands, particularly in favored  feeding locations such as the Bay of Fundy and Delaware Bay. This species is a rare but regular vagrant to western Europe.
These birds forage on mudflats, picking up food by sight and feel (bill). They mainly eat aquatic insects and crustaceans.
Although very numerous, these birds are highly dependent on a few key stopover habitats during their migration, notably, Shepody Bay, an arm of the Bay of Fundy.
During the months of July and August you can go to one of two information centers run by the Nature Conservancy of Canada about the shorebirds in either Johnson's Mills or Mary's point.
Anseriformes (ducks, geese, and swans)
Bird callThe Canada Goose (Branta canadensis) belongs to the Branta genus of geese, which contains species with largely black plumage, distinguishing them from the grey species of the Anser genus.
The black head and neck with white "chinstrap" distinguish this goose from all except the Barnacle Goose, but the latter has a black breast, and grey, rather than brownish, body plumage. There are seven subspecies of this bird, of varying sizes and plumage details, but all are recognizable as Canada Geese. Some are hard to distinguish from the Cackling Goose (Branta hutchinsii), with which the Canada Goose was long assumed to form one species; the name Lesser Canada Goose is, confusingly, often applied to B. hutchinsii.
This species is 90-100 cm long with a 160-175 cm wing span. Males weigh 3.5–6.5 kg, and can be very aggressive in defending territory. The female looks virtually identical but is slightly lighter at 3–5.5 kg, and has a different honk. Exceptionally, weights of 11.3 kg and a wingspan of 224 cm have been recorded in the largest race.
These birds feed mainly on plant material. When feeding in water, they submerge their heads and necks to reach aquatic plants, sometimes tipping forward like a dabbling duck. Flocks of these birds often feed on leftover cultivated grains in fields, especially during migration or in winter.
During the second year of their lives, Canada Geese find themselves a mate. Most couples stay together all of their lives. If one is killed, the other may find a new mate. The female lays 4-8 eggs and both parents protect the nest while the eggs incubate, but the female spends more time at the nest than the male. During that time, they lose their flight feathers, so that they cannot fly until after their eggs hatch. This period lasts for 25-28 days.
Adult geese are often seen leading their goslings in a line, usually with one parent at the front, and the other at the back of the "parade". While protecting their young, parents often violently chase away nearby creatures, from small blackbirds to other geese, to humans that approach, after warning them by giving off a hissing sound.  The young do not leave their parents until after the spring migration, when they return to their birthplace.
This well-known species is native to North America. It breeds in Canada and the northern United States in a variety of habitats. However, the nest is usually located in an elevated area near water, sometimes on a beaver lodge. The eggs are laid in a shallow depression lined with plant material and down. The Great Lakes region maintains a very large population of Canada Geese.
Like most geese, the Canada goose is naturally migratory with the wintering range being most of the United States. The calls overhead from large groups of Canada Geese flying in V-shaped formation signal the transitions into spring and autumn. In some areas, migration routes have changed due to changes in habitat and food sources. In mild climates, such as the Pacific Northwest, due to a lack of former predators, some of the population has become non-migratory.
Bird callThis dabbling duck is strongly migratory and winters further south than its breeding range, as far as the equator. It is highly gregarious outside the breeding season and forms large mixed flocks with other ducks.
Brewing various materials together to refine nutmeg.
Pinyin#Pinyin tone marking
Myanmar's opposition National League for Democracy has won a landslide election victory, officials say.
Myanmar faanduihpaih National League For Democracy xuaanjuu dahshehng, guanfang shuo.
See also true.
Computing » Computer Science » Computer Programming » Ada Programming
This language feature is only available from Ada 2005 on.
Ada.Strings.Wide_Wide_Maps.Wide_Wide_Constants is a unit of the Predefined Language Environment since Ada 2005.
This page is a stub. You can improve the Ada Programming wikibook by reading the contributing guidelines and expanding it.
--                     Standard Ada library specification
--   SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause and LicenseRef-AdaReferenceManual
Control_Set           : constant Wide_Wide_Character_Set;
Graphic_Set           : constant Wide_Wide_Character_Set;
Letter_Set            : constant Wide_Wide_Character_Set;
Lower_Set             : constant Wide_Wide_Character_Set;
Upper_Set             : constant Wide_Wide_Character_Set;
Basic_Set             : constant Wide_Wide_Character_Set;
Decimal_Digit_Set     : constant Wide_Wide_Character_Set;
Hexadecimal_Digit_Set : constant Wide_Wide_Character_Set;
Alphanumeric_Set      : constant Wide_Wide_Character_Set;
Special_Set           : constant Wide_Wide_Character_Set;
ISO_646_Set           : constant Wide_Wide_Character_Set;
Character_Set         : constant Wide_Wide_Character_Set;
--   Contains each Wide_Wide_Character value WWC such that
Wide_Character_Set    : constant Wide_Wide_Character_Set;
--   Contains each Wide_Wide_Character value WWC such that
Lower_Case_Map        : constant Wide_Wide_Character_Mapping;
-- Wide_Wide_Maps to lower case for letters, else identity
Upper_Case_Map        : constant Wide_Wide_Character_Mapping;
-- Wide_Wide_Maps to upper case for letters, else identity
Basic_Map             : constant Wide_Wide_Character_Mapping;
-- Wide_Wide_Maps to basic letter for letters, else identity
Search for examples of Ada.Strings.Wide_Wide_Maps.Wide_Wide_Constants in: Rosetta Code, GitHub or this Wikibook.
Search for any post related to Ada.Strings.Wide_Wide_Maps.Wide_Wide_Constants in: Stack Overflow, comp.lang.ada or any Ada related page.
A.4.8: Wide_Wide_String Handling (Annotated)
Specification: a-szmzco.ads
Specification: strings/a-szmzco.ads
To continue, your computer must display Persian. The box below should show these Persian letters on the far right:
If they are different or in the wrong order, see Persian Computing.
In this lesson, you will learn about the comparative and superlative forms of Persian adjectives.
This page of the Persian Language Wikibook is under construction.It may be incomplete or contain errors. See Persian/Planning or this module's talk page for discussion.
... and... are talking....
... Missing audio. If you are fluent in Persian, record and upload your voice.
...:
...  Missing audio. If you are fluent in Persian, record and upload your voice.
...:
... and ....
Comparative adjectives:(To check your answers, click “[show ▼]”.)
Use the comparative form of the adjectives below to make ...:
This exercise is incomplete.  Help the English Wikibooks Persian Language course by completing it.
Superlative adjectives:(To check your answers, click “[show ▼]”.)
Translate the following phrases into Persian.
Translate the following Persian phrases into English.
In this lesson, you learned comparative and superlative adjectives.
...s:
This section of the Persian Language Wikibook is a stub.You can help Wikibooks by expanding it. (See the Persian course Planning page.)
Articles • Nouns • Verbs • Gerunds and participles • Pronouns • Adjectives • Adverbs • Prepositions, Conjunctions and Interjections
"A doing word."
Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets
The Whomping Willow is a large tree located on the Hogwarts grounds. It seems to be unique, it is certainly very rare; it can move its limbs, and does so with great speed and violence when it feels threatened.
Beginner warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
The Whomping Willow destroys the flying car in which Harry and Ron arrive at Hogwarts in their second year; it apparently manages to injure itself slightly in this event. The Herbology teacher, Professor Sprout, is seen to have been tending it. At the same time, we learn something about Professor Lockhart, who has been "advising" her; tellingly, Professor Sprout is carrying all the tools and equipment, has been injured in the endeavor, and is looking nettled, while Professor Lockhart has not even a hair out of place.
We find out in the third book that the Whomping Willow was planted specifically to guard the entrance to a secret passage. It was actually brought to Hogwarts when Remus Lupin was a student at school. The tree hid a secret tunnel that led to the Shrieking Shack in Hogsmeade; when the full moon caused Lupin to transform into a werewolf, he could lock himself into the Shack and so avoid harming his fellow students. This particular willow can be temporarily stilled by pressing a specific knot at its base; this is the technique used by Lupin (and others) to enter the secret tunnel that it conceals between its roots. The presence of this knot is revealed to Harry and Hermione by Crookshanks; we also later see Lupin and Professor Snape using it. It is possible that Sprout knows about this, but was prevented from using it while tending the tree's injuries because of Lockhart's presence; this would explain not only her injuries, but part of her visible annoyance with him. Most of her annoyance, likely, would have been caused by his staying out of range and shouting unnecessary and probably incorrect advice, while Sprout was actually doing the hard and dangerous work.
In Harry's third year, the tree destroys Harry's Nimbus 2000 broom. We are never told whether the Willow has a particular antipathy to brooms, but it does reduce Harry's treasured broom to splinters.
Finally, we see that the Trio have to pass the Willow to reach the Shrieking Shack, where Voldemort has established his field headquarters for the attack on Hogwarts. In this instance, it is Ron who triggers the knot that stills the tree. How he knows about the knot and its function is not explained, as Sirius had already dragged him into the tunnel when Crookshanks revealed its operation to Harry and Hermione;
There is a technique of tree-trimming much practiced in England, and places following the English model, where major branches of a tree are cut quite short and repeatedly. This results in a tree with stubby branches and large round growths on the ends of its branches. These, looking like knuckles on the ends of the branches, could easily inspire the idea of a tree that acts as if it has fists.
Like many of the obstacles Harry faces in his endeavors, the Whomping Willow is impersonal; it neither likes nor dislikes Harry, it simply defends its secret against all comers. Other similar obstacles are Fluffy, the three headed dog, and most of the other barriers between Harry and the chamber where the Philosopher's Stone is kept in the first book. We suspect these challenges are intended to illustrate to the reader how not all obstacles are malign; they would, and do, act the same no matter who is challenging them. Harry's reaction, showing dismay, for instance, when his broom is destroyed, without having the urge to destroy the Willow, shows maturity and likely is intended to teach that sort of mature response to adversity. It is to the author's credit that the lesson is not belaboured, as that makes it much more likely to be accepted.
Study questions are meant to be left for each student to answer; please don't answer them here.
Intermediate warning: Details follow which you may not wish to read at your current level.
In the final book of the series, Voldemort uses the Shrieking Shack as a command post. As he attended Hogwarts before Lupin, the tunnel to the school may not have existed in his day, and the Whomping Willow certainly did not. The Trio have to pass the Willow and traverse the tunnel in order to determine what Voldemort is doing. Voldemort is clearly unaware of the tunnel, as the Trio do not encounter any difficulty other than the Willow in reaching the room where Voldemort is holding court.
The effort to pass the Willow results in a bit of byplay between Ron and Hermione that echoes an event in the first book. As mentioned in the Extended Description section, there is no explanation for how Ron knows to still the tree, as he was dragged into the tunnel before Crookshanks demonstrated the operation of the knot. We suspect that having Ron still the Willow was done specifically to allow that echo from the first book, and his not having earlier seen the knot being used was an oversight on the author's part.
By the end of this lesson, the EMT-Basic should be able to:
Describe the structure and function of the respiratory system.
State the signs and symptoms of breathing difficulty.
Describe the emergency medical care of the patient with breathing difficulty.
Recognize the need for medical direction to assist in the emergency medical care of the patient with breathing difficulty.
Describe the emergency medical care of the patient with breathing distress.
Establish the relationship between airway management and the patient with difficulty breathing.
List the signs of adequate air exchange.
State the generic name, medication forms, dose, administration, action, indications, and contraindications for the prescribed inhaler.
Distinguish between the emergency medical care of the infant, child, and adult patient with breathing difficulty.
Differentiate between upper airway obstruction and lower airway disease in the infant and child patient.
Defend EMT-Basic treatment regimens for various respiratory emergencies.
Explain the rationale for administering an inhaler.
Demonstrate the emergency medical care for breathing difficulty.
Perform the steps in facilitating the use of an inhaler.
This image illustrates the difference between bitmap and vector images. The bitmap image is composed of a fixed set of dots (pixels), while the , that will run on a mobile phone and a home console. What type should you use and why?
Answer:Vector, as it allows for scaling without distortion and retaining its file size. You would only need one image to use on all the different systems.
You want to take an image of a local cat stuck in a tree. What type should you use and why?
Answer:Bitmap as it is better for photographs.
Moving water does much of the work of erosion that shapes the land surface of our Earth. Wind also flows over the Earth's surface, sometimes carrying particles long distances before they are deposited. Wind blows from areas of high pressure to areas of lower pressure. The erosive power of wind varies with the strength of the winds that blow, but usually wind transports smaller particles like silt and clay. Somewhat larger particles may be bumped or rolled along by the wind. Wind can carry particles across ocean basins and to great heights within our atmosphere. Wind is a stronger erosional force in arid regions than humid areas for two reasons. In arid regions, temperatures change greatly from night to day, which produces wind. Even strong winds in humid areas are less effective erosional agents because the ground is wet, so soil particles are heavier and less likely to be removed or transported by wind.
Describe the ways particles are carried by wind.
Discuss several ways that wind erosion changes land surfaces.
Describe how sand dunes form.
Describe the type of deposits formed by windborne silts and clays.
Figure 10.24: Saltation moves sand-size particles along the desert floor or on sand dunes.
Wind is able to transport the smallest particles of sediment, like silt and clay, over great distances and areas. Once these particles become mixed into the air, wind can keep them suspended for hours or maybe even days at a time. If nothing disturbs these tiny particles, wind would have trouble picking them off the ground surface. This is because very close to the ground, there is very little motion due to wind. Look behind a car or truck as it drives over an unpaved road. You will see a big cloud of dust that wasn't there before the truck disturbed the ground surface. Once these fine particles are disturbed, wind easily picks them up and distributes them.
Just as water carries different size particles in various ways, wind also transports particles as both bed load and suspended load. For wind, sand sized particles make up the bed load. These sand grains are moved along by the wind in a bump, roll and jump kind of motion. First, a grain of sand gets knocked into the air. It is too heavy to have wind carry it for long in suspension, so it falls back to the ground, possibly knocking another sand grain into the air as it hits the ground. This starts the process all over again. This process is called saltation, which comes from a Latin word meaning 'to leap' (Figure 10.24). The suspended load for wind will always be very small particles of silt and clay, which are still able to be carried suspended in the air by wind.
As wind moves sand sized particles, they will remain close to the ground, usually less than a meter from the ground even in the strongest winds. In a sandstorm, about a quarter of the particles are sand which moves as bed load. In arid regions, a sandstorm actually moves much smaller particles than sand in the winds. Wind can carry these small particles high into the air and these particles can infiltrate cracks around windows and doors in a dust storm (Figure 10.25).
Figure 10.25: A dust storm approaches Al Asad, Iraq.
Sometimes these small particles are deposited in areas relatively close to their original source, but often silts and clays have been carried halfway across a continent or from desert areas on one continent across an entire ocean basin. Wind is more effective at erosion in arid regions because in humid regions smaller particles are held together by the moisture in the soil and by plant roots from the vegetation. Where it is dry, plants don't grow as well, so both these factors increase the ability of wind to transport particles, eroding the landscape.
The process of smaller particles being selectively transported by the wind is called deflation (Figure 10.26). This means the ground surface gets lower and rockier, as more and more small particles are blown away. Eventually, most of the smaller particles will have been removed and the rockier surface left behind is called desert pavement. This surface is covered by pebbles and gravel sized particles that are not easily moved by wind. If no disturbance from vehicles or animals disrupts the surface, deflation will stop once this rocky surface has formed.
Figure 10.26: This desert pavement formed in the Mojave Desert as a result of deflation.
All the particles moved by wind, whether as suspended load or by saltation as bed load, do the work of abrasion. As one particle hits another, each grain erodes another. You may have seen workers sandblasting the front of a building in order to remove paint or dirt. In the natural situation, erosion by wind polishes surfaces of rock. In the desert, rocks or boulders develop different polished flat surfaces as wind blows from different directions. These polished stones are called ventifacts (Figure 10.27).
Figure 10.27: A polished stone called a ventifact, is produced by abrasion from sand grains.
Exposed rocks in desert areas often develop a dark brown to black coating called desert varnish. This coating forms on stable rock surfaces that don’t get much precipitation. The first part of the process is the transport of clay sized particles by wind which chemically react with other substances at high temperatures. The coating is formed of iron and manganese oxides. Ancient people carved into these darkened surfaces to make petroglyphs (Figure 10.28).
Figure 10.28: These petroglyphs were carved into desert varnish near Canyonlands National Park in Utah.
Figure 10.29: This sand dune in Morocco shows secondary sand ripples along its slip face.
When you think of a desert or perhaps even a beach, the image that comes to mind might include sand dunes (Figure 10.29). In coastal regions, you will find sand dunes in the landward direction of the beach. Sand dunes form here as sand is blown from the shore inland. The sand dunes along a beach are likely to be composed of individual grains of the mineral quartz, unless the beach is in a tropical area. In humid regions, other minerals break down readily to form clays, leaving behind only the more resistant quartz. In the tropics, sand dunes may be composed of calcium carbonate. In a desert, the sand dunes may be composed of a variety of minerals. This is because a desert region, by definition, has very little water. This means that mostly mechanical weathering and very little chemical weathering occurs here. So desert sand dunes will include even unstable minerals.
Just as water waves are very selective about the size particles they carry and deposit, so will the size of the sand grains in a dune be very uniform. The sand dunes are formed of a particular size particle which is too heavy for the wind to transport. This process is sometimes so selective that wind will transport and carry rounded grains of sand, which roll easily, more readily than angular grains.
The faster and stronger the wind, the more particles it can carry. As wind slows down, it will drop off the heaviest particles first. This often happens as wind moves over some type of obstacle, such as a rock or an area of vegetation. As the wind moves up and over the obstacle, it increases in speed, but as soon as it passes the article, wind speed decreases. That is why you will often see deposits of sand on the downwind side of an obstacle. These deposits are the starting material for formation of sand dunes. This is the first condition needed for dunes to form.
In order for sand dunes to form, two more conditions must be met. The first of these conditions is that there is an abundant supply of sand. The last condition is that there are steady winds. As steady winds blow over an ample supply of sand, sand grains will bump and roll along, moving by saltation up the gently sloping, upwind side of the dune. As a grain of sand reaches the crest of the dune, it cascades down the steeper, downwind side of the dune, forming the slip face of the dune. The slip face is steep because it forms at the angle of repose for dry sand, which is about 34° (Figure 10.30).
Figure 10.30: Sand dunes have a gently sloping face in the upwind direction. Downwind, a steeper slip face forms.
So as wind erodes and transports sand grains along the gently sloped upwind side of a dune, it deposits sand along the downwind slip face. As each new layer of sand falls down the slip face of the dune, cross beds are formed. Cross beds are named for the way each layer is formed at an angle to the ground. Some of the most beautiful sandstones are crossbedded sandstones (Figure 10.31). These sandstones preserve sands originally deposited as sand dunes in deserts millions of years ago.
Figure 10.31: These beautiful rocks are crossbedded sandstones from the Canyons of the Escalante in Utah.
Sand is always moving up the gently sloped side of a dune, and depositing on the downwind side, which means that dunes themselves slowly migrate in the downwind direction. This means that over a period of years, sand dunes will move many meters downwind. This is something that beach house owners need to consider if they live near coastal sand dunes. Once a sand dune becomes stabilized by vegetation, such as sea grasses, its migration will stop. Beach goers need to be careful not to disturb these grasses when they go to and from the beach.
Reducing Wind Erosion – Types of Sand Dunes
There are several different forms that sand dunes will take. The differences are due to the amount of sand available to be moved, the character and direction of the wind and the type of ground the sand is moving over. The most usual crescent shaped dune is called a barchan dune (Figure 10.32). This type of dune forms when there is an adequate amount of sand being moved by constant winds that blow from one direction over hard ground. The crescent shape will curve in the direction the wind blows. In an area of constant winds with an abundant supply of sand, barchan dunes blend together into large scale sand ripples called transverse dunes. Many coastal dunes are this type of dune. Desert areas that are completely sand covered can join many transverse dunes together into a sand sea. Dunes mainly occur in the interior of deserts and along low-lying coasts.
Figure 10.32: This crescent shaped dune forms from constant winds moving sand over hard ground.
Figure 10.33: These vertical cliffs are formed from fine-grained, windblown silt and clay.
Much of the fine grained mud that covers the deepest parts of the ocean floor comes from silts and clays brought there by winds from the land. These tiny particles are easily carried long distances by wind. Once they are deposited on the water surface, they settle ever so slowly to the deep ocean floor, forming brown, greenish or reddish clays. Another source of windborne particles is volcanic activity. Explosive volcanoes eject volcanic ash and dust high into the air, sometimes reaching the stratosphere. Once these fine grained particles are airborne, they can travel hundreds or thousands of kilometers. Regions closest to the volcano are the areas with thickest deposits, but volcanic ash has even completely circled the Earth in extremely violent eruptions like Krakatau in 1883. Windborne volcanic ash can produce spectacularly beautiful sunsets, as well as decreasing worldwide temperatures, as ash and dust block out incoming sun's rays.
Wind can carry small particles like sand, silt, and clay.
Wind erosion produces sand blasting of surfaces and produces desert pavement, ventifacts, and desert varnish.
Sand dunes are some of the most common wind born deposits, which come in many different shapes and sizes.
Loess is a very fine grained, wind borne deposit that is important to soil formation in many regions.
Discuss suspended load and bed load transport by wind.
Describe how desert pavement forms.
Discuss the factors necessary for sand dunes to form.
Name four types of sand dunes that form in desert areas.
Name one type of wind deposition.
Why is wind erosion more important in arid regions than humid areas?
Crescent shaped dune that forms in regions of ample sand, constant winds, and hard ground.
The portion of sand carried by wind as grains roll, bump, and jump along the ground surface.
The process of wind removing finer grains of silt and clay; causes the ground surface to subside.
Rocky, pebbled surface created as finer silts and clays are removed by wind.
Dark mineral coating that forms on stable, exposed rock surfaces as windborne clays are deposited.
Extremely fine-grained, windborne deposit of silts and clays; forms nearly vertical cliffs.
Rock carvings formed by cutting into desert varnish of exposed rock surfaces.
Movement of sand sized particles by rolling, bumping, and jumping along the ground surface.
Deposit of sand formed in regions of abundant sand and constant winds.
Steeper, downwind side of a dune; region where sand grains fall down from the crest of the dune.
Particles of silt and clay carried in the air by the energy of winds.
Polished, faceted stones formed by abrasion of sand particles.
Do you think strong hurricane winds along a coastline would produce wind related erosion?
What would be needed to convert a desert area back to a productive region for farming?
Do you think wind could sculpt exposed rocks? Explain how this might happen.
This page includes material about some utilities. Most of the functions presented here have nothing to do with statistical analysis but may be useful when working on a project. Many functions are just similar to standard unix functions.
Some examples :
You can convert an image from to PS to PNG using the unix convert function of your computer. If you want to know more about this function, open a Terminal application and type man convert (This should work on Mac OS and Linux).
You can open Stata and run a program.
You can run pdflatex from R and directly open the pdf in a pdf browser.
Removing files with a specific pattern :
> browseURL("http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/R_Programming")
To see the default browser, use getOption()
We can change the default browser using the options() command. It is safer to store the options before.
You can download a file from the internet using download.file(). Note that very often you don't need to download a file from the internet and you can directly load it into R from the internet using standard functions. For instance, if you want to read a text file from the internet, you can use read.table(), scan() or readLines().
If you perform computer intensive task you may want to optimize the computing time.
Two functions are available system.time() and proc.time(). Both returns a vector of values.
The first is the standard CPU time.
Sys.sleep() stop the computation during a few seconds.
It is possible to stop the computing process if a logical condition is not true using stopifnot().
See the R.utils package[1]
↑   Henrik Bengtsson (2009). R.utils: Various programming utilities. R package version
1.1.7. http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=R.utils
This function takes a single parameter of type complex and returns a result of type double.
A = creal(Z) is the real part
B = cimag(Z) is the imaginary part
The USB port on the Khepera III robot can be used to establish a network connection between the robot and a Linux computer. Start by connecting your robot and your computer with a USB cable.
If you just bought your Khepera III robot, the USB network interface is disabled. To enable it, connect your robot with a serial cable (using a KoreConnect, for example), log in with username "root" and type:
The first line loads the driver, while the second line configures an IP address. On your computer, you can now set a corresponding IP address by typing
Connecting after the install scripts have been run
On a Khepera III robot on which the install scripts have been run, the USB network interface will automatically appear with IP address 192.168.1.2 when you connect the cable. Hence, you only need to configure your computer by typing
To test if the connection works, type
If you are working with more than one robot, or if you want to communicate with your Khepera III while it is running an experiment, you will probably put a WLAN card in the available CompactFlash slot. This adds a new network interface, which is not configured by default. There is an install script, however, which automatically adds the necessary configuration and configures the interface with an IP address 192.168.141.ID, where ID corresponds to the robot ID.
1 1. Repeat the theory and practical requirements for the Abseiling Honor
2 2. Pass the exam with 80% pass mark.
3 3. Abseil over a knot in the rope.
4 4. Abseil over an overhang or cave.
5 5. Demonstrate the pulley method of cliff rescue.
Repeat the theory and practical requirements for the Abseiling Honor
Instructions and tips for earning the Abseiling honor can be found in the Recreation chapter.
Pass the exam with 80% pass mark.
Abseil over a knot in the rope.
Abseil over an overhang or cave.
Demonstrate the pulley method of cliff rescue.
Only one design is known, with country inscription “Poste Lao”.
See FRENCH INDOCHINA for issues before 1992.
Inscribed in Laotian at top and with “Poste Lao” at bottom.
Without meter number.
Count rates from GRB 050904 by strength over two seconds.
Gamma-Ray Bursts (GRBs) are bright flashes of highly energetic light, ranging from one keV to many GeV, which last from a few milliseconds to several minutes. They can have a rise times as fast as 10−4s, and exponentially decay. Gamma-ray bursts are detected about once per day from random directions in the celestial sphere.
They have luminosities of 4.4 × 1044 W, making them shine hundreds of times brighter than a typical Supernova and are about 1018 times more luminous than our Sun.
They can have total energy releases of 1052 ergs or 1045 J.
Gamma-Ray Bursts are the brightest objects known in the Universe, many orders of magnitude brighter than any Quasars.
They typically originate outside our galaxy in the farthest reaches of the universe.[1]
Gamma Ray Burst detecting Satellite Vela.The mystery of GRB’s started in the 1960s.  GRBs were first detected by a group of U.S. military satellites named Vela.  The Vela spacecraft were designed to monitor the compliance of the Soviet Union and other nuclear capable states with the 1963 Partial Test Ban Treaty.[1] The original Vela satellites were equipped with six gamma-ray detectors, which looked for sudden bursts of gamma rays, possibly from nuclear weapon detonation.[5]
On July 2, 1967, Vela 4 and Vela 3 detected flashes of gamma radiation that were not characteristic of any known nuclear weapons.[5] Nuclear Bombs produce intense burst of gamma rays for less than 10−6s.  The gamma rays then gradually fade as nuclei decay.  The gamma ray burst detected in 1967 did not have an intense initial flash or a steady fading.[6] In 1969 the data were analyzed by a Physicist named Ray Klebasabel.  Klebasabel found a spike in the data, a dip, a second spike, and a long, gradual tail off.  Klebasabel said “One thing that was immediately apparent was that this was not a response to a clandestine nuclear test."  His team checked for possible solar flares and supernovae that could be reasonable and found none.[5]
On May 23, 1969 Vela 5 was launched.  Vela 5 was more sensitive and had more accurate time resolution then Vela 4.
Vela 5 found twelve GRBs which had not coincided with any solar flares or supernovas.[5] On April 8, 1970 Vela 6 was launched, which was synchronized with Vela 5 to within 1/64th of a second.[5] The orbits of Vela 6 satellites were made to be as far away from Vela 5 as possible in order to determine the direction of the source of the GRBs.[7][8] This could be done because the GRBs would arrive at different times for each satellite.  By analyzing the arrival times, Klebesadel and his team traced sixteen GRBs.[5] The GRBs were found to be randomly distributed across the celestial sphere.  This made it clear that the bursts were coming from outside our solar system.  In 1973 this information was released to the public.[1]  A collection of various GRB profiles over time .
A position plot of all the detected GRB on the celestial sphere.
↑ a b c d Dale A. Ostlie, and. Carroll, Bradley W. Introduction to Modern Stellar Astrophysics. Boston: Addison Wesley Company, 2006.
↑ Guetta, Dafne, Tsvi Piran, and Eli Waxman. "THE LUMINOSITY AND ANGULAR DISTRIBUTIONS OF LONG-DURATION GAMMA-RAY BURSTS." The Astrophysical Journal (2005): 412-19. IOP. The Institute of Physics. 1 Apr. 2009 <http://www.iop.org/EJ/article/0004-637X/619/1/412/59430.web.pdf?request-id=950fd8ab-be45-4323-ae6f-8ab1902ab873>.
↑ T, Piran. "Gamma-ray bursts and the fireball model." Physics Reports 314 (1999): 575-667. http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1999PhR...314..575P
↑ Paczynski, B. "Gamma-ray bursters at cosmological distances." Astrophysical Journal 308 (1986): L43-46. The SAO/NASA Astrophysics Data System. Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. 1 Apr. 2009 <http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1986ApJ...308L..43P>.
↑ a b c d e f "Original discovery of gamma-ray bursts." NASA - Science@NASA. 27 Feb. 2009 <http://science.msfc.nasa.gov/newhome/headlines/ast19sep97_2.htm>.
↑ Katz, Johnathan I. (2002). The Biggest Bangs. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-514570-4. Page 4 to 5.
↑ a b Govert Schilling (2002). Flash! The hunt for the biggest explosions in the universe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-80053-6. Page 11 and page 15-16
↑ a b Caplan, Ron. "Cosmic Gamma-Ray Bursts." Sumseq. <http://www.sumseq.com/grb.htm>.
A new transportation project is proposed to the city.  This project is a form of "guide wire", where cars can hook to these moving, below-ground wires and be transported for free around town.  This project is proven to reduce gas consumption by $5 million in its completion year.  The city's preferred contractor says that it will take 10 years to build the thing and cost $500,000 a year, which is "perfect" because costs would add up to the benefit.  Knowing that inflation is 3 percent, as an expert evaluator, is this a wise decision?
Tobacco oil comes from the Nicotiana tabacum plant. It has a earthy scent. It has an antiseptic and sedative effect.
Wikipedia has related information at Nicotiana tabacum
User support is now a crucial part of most commercial packages available today. As software becomes more and more complex, users require support in order to use the software.
A good level of support will cost the company more money, but this can be passed on in either the purchase costs, or in a yearly subscription. However, the company's reputation will improve if it has a reputation for good support.
A help desk is a form of expert system, or knowledge base. It contains a clever search system, and users can also browse categories to see if their problem has been documented. All common problems, and a lot of not-so-common problems are documented on a help desk.
This is a telephone support line manned by real people, who normally access a knowledge base and walk people through procedures.
Technical support lines are often manned by experts who may have difficulty communicating with managers and business users.
This is normally context sensitive. For example, pressing F1 will bring up the help screen for the task you're currently attempting to perform.
Also, on-screen tutorials and wizards exist to make the package easier to use by walking the user through tasks.
This is where the developers attend on-site to assist people with their software installations. This only typically happens with large/complex orders, or with custom software, as the cost of such support is very high.
If a company discovers a bug in their software, they may release a patch that fixes that image. Patches are typically distributed over the Internet, or on CD-ROM from a technical support line.
This is where usergroups exist (mainly on forums or Usenet) who help people with problems.
This is an area of the Internet where files and upgrades to items are shared, there are typically also message boards here where peer support and also technical support takes place
Similar to a message board, if you subscribe to a mailing list, then you receive a copy of all e-mails sent to it.
There are different levels of documentation for different levels of user. This is typically paper or PDF based.
System documentation (explanation on dataflows, database schema, etc.)
Software documentation (how to use specific features)
Operational documentation (day-to-day running of the system)
A company needs well-trained employees who can execute their job efficiently. Training can either be for new employees (induction training) or existing employees (if jobs change, there's new technology or new procedures).
Well trained employees are more likely to get promoted (and are therefore better motivated) and have a better-defined career path. Training can lead to:
Different levels of users need different levels of training (workers, middle management, senior management, etc.).
Senior managers who understand ICT are more likely to make better informed decisions than their less well informed colleagues on matters such as the corporate IS strategy.
Middle managers need to ensure that IT systems are used efficiently, and also implement the IS strategy.
For workers, the level of training depnds on their level of responsibility and skill. They can use
Even experienced users need to learn new skills if the system changes, so skill-refreshing is also an important part.
Computer based - this it is often very cost effective for large groups of people and ensures a consistent standard of training. Users can also work at their own pace and when work is slow.
Instructor based - delivered by experienced instructors and has a personal touch, meaning people are more motivated.
There are other training methods, mainly:
Qi & Yin deficiency causing excessive sweating
Bo He - disperses Wind-Heat, promotes expression of rashes, sweat-inducing (1)
Niu Bang Zi - disperses Wind-Heat, promotes expression of rashes, sweat-inducing (2)
Chan Tui - disperses Wind-Heat, promotes expression of rashes, sweat-inducing (3)
Sang Ye - disperses Wind-Heat and clears Liver Fire, stronger dispersing
Ju Hua - disperses Wind-Heat and clears Liver Fire, stronger clear Liver Fire, clear vision
Mu Zei - clears vision, removes membrane causing visual obstructions
Dan Dou Chi - mildly vents and disperses exterior pathogens at any level, relieves constraint
Ge Gen - releases exterior & raises Yang Qi, disperses heat Yang Ming muscle level, promotes expression of rash (w/ Sheng Ma)
Chai Hu - releases exterior & raises Yang Qi, most effective in reducing fever, intermitent chills & fever, raises Yang (with Sheng Ma)
Sheng Ma - releases exterior & raises Yang Qi, effective raises Yang action, relieves Heat Toxicity, promotes expression of rash (with Ge Gen), raises Yang (with Chai Hu)
Wikibooks Modern HistoryPopulation, Governance, Philosophy, Invention, Weapons, Combat, Trade, Exploration
Current status: This book does not yet contain much content. Work for expansion is beginning. Creation of stubs linking to Wikisource and Wikipedia is in progress.
Contributors: If you copy (instead of link) content from elsewhere into this book, for example content from Wikipedia or public domain sources, then you MUST CREDIT the source of such copied text.
The Roman Catholic Church was very much in control of early astronomy.
Sputnik, a small metal ball with instruments attached to it, was the first man-made object to leave earth and orbit it. It was really technologically, simple, and would set the tone for much of the Soviet Union's space exploration program.
The first satellites were launched by the Soviet Union at the end of the 1950's. If they can put a satellite into space, they can launch a warhead at the United States. This was what spurred the United States to start their own space program to challenge the perceived "Soviet Superiority", and start academically challenging students to be successful in Math and the Sciences.
Other languages...
Connective forms and negation •
Around the house •
Using the telephone •
Enzyme is a substance in a living thing. It helps to activate a chemical reaction in the body.
Economics as a discipline would not exist without scarcity.
This is the fundamental problem that all societies face. It refers to the excess of human wants over what can actually be produced to fulfil these wants. Human wants are unlimited. On the other hand, the means of fulfilling these human wants are limited because the resources available are limited. As a result, choices have to be made.
For example, society cannot enjoy all the books and all tables it wants because the number of trees required to produce these goods is limited. It somehow has to decide how many books and how many tables it wants to produce. If more tables are produced then fewer books will be enjoyed and vice versa. We define as the opportunity cost of a choice, the value of the next best alternative sacrificed. If, for example, by giving (or more correctly, "allocating") a tree to table production, one extra table is produced but 25 books need to be sacrificed, we say that the opportunity cost of producing one more table is 25 books.
Resources are also referred to as factors of production. They include all inputs used in the production of a good or service. They are typically separated into the following categories.
These are inputs into production that are provided by nature, for example agricultural and non-agricultural land, forests, pastures, mineral deposits, oil, natural gas, lakes, and rivers. The world's land area and raw materials are limited. Some resources, such as oil and coal deposits, are non-renewable: if they are used now, they will not be available in the future. Other resources, for example forests (timber) and the stock of fish, are renewable.
Labour includes all forms of human input, both physical and mental, into current production.  The labour force is, at any point in time, limited both in number and in skills.  The total number of people available for work is referred to as the labour force or working population.
Physical capital includes manufactured resources; in other words, goods used to produce other goods. The world has a limited stock of capital (limited supply of factories, machines, tools, and other equipment). Note that the meaning of capital in economics is different from that used in ordinary speech where people refer to money as capital.
Entrepreneurship is related but not identical to management. When a new venture is being considered, risks exist. They involve the unknown future. Someone must assess these risks and make judgements about whether or not to undertake them. The people who do so are called entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurship refers to the willingness and ability of certain individuals to take risks and to mobilise the remaining factors of production.
In addition to the idea, of physical capital already mentioned, it is useful to include natural capital and human capital.
Natural capital can be thought of as natural resources which may be improved upon or may be depleted. Thinking in terms of natural capital can easily accommodate another related concept, sustainability, which refers to the idea of preserving and even increasing or improving upon the available stock of natural resources.
Labour may also be improved upon, in that the labour force may become more productive. The term human capital refers to the education, training and skills embodied in the labour force of a country. Even if the size of the labour force of an economy is constant over time, the stock of human capital may increase.
Disciplines that systematically study human behaviour form different perspectives. Economics, psychology, anthropology, political science, sociology, and history we all considered social sciences.
We saw that the scissors were not suited for clipping portals, because scissors can only clip a rectangle.  However, scissor clipping is much faster than stencil buffer clipping (it's just a coordinates comparison, rather than a complete screen buffer access).
We can use the scissors to optimize the performances, by doing a first rough clipping, before using the stencil buffer.
This will also allow us to detect when a sub-portal is completely hidden and break from the recursive loop.
File:FF4 WT 8a.jpg
Leave the throne room, then in the next room head to the staircase on the right.  In that room you can buy some upgraded weapons and armor if you would like.  After you do that, head to the stair case in the upperleft of the room.  In this room go left and in the middle of the room you will see a Gnome in front of a secret room.  Speak to him and he will open up the Underground Passage for you.  Continue through the passage and you will eventually find yourself outside.
File:FF4 WT 8b.jpg
File:FF4 WT 8c.jpg
Once outside, go to the left of the door and head along the coast as far as possible.  Now head straight up (ignoring all splits in the road and continuing north) until you can see some tanks.  Head to the right side of the tanks.  The tanks will attack the tower, allowing you to get through.
File:FF4 WT 8d.jpg
Inside the tower head straight through into the door ahead of you.  In the next room follow the path until you get to the first door you come to.  Go inside, the chest contains monsters, who drop a Blizzard Spear when you defeat them.  This will be important for fighting Rubicant.  Continue on to the door above you to the right.  This will be a chest with monsters who drop the Ice sword.  Continue on to the only other door in the room.
File:FF4 WT 8e.jpg
In the next room you will need to go to the right and take the first path north available. Continue all the way around until you reach the next door.
File:FF4 WT 8f.jpg
In the next room is a save point directly to the left when you enter. Use the opportunity to save your game and continue on past the next 3 doors, across the bridge and into the final door.  In the next room, go all the way to the bottom, all the way to the right and all the way up to the next door.  When in the next room, there is only one door to enter, so go through it.
File:FF4 WT 8g.jpg
In this room there are two paths on the right.  If you take the top path you will get to a save point.  The bottom path will take you forward in the tower.  Continue on to the middle of the room where you will see Dr. Lugae speaking with Rubicant.
File:FF4 WT 8h.jpg
File:FF4 WT 8i.jpg
After some dialogue, Dr. Lugae will attack the party. You'll be faced against the doctor and his robot. If you beat the doctor first, the robot will self destruct and bomb one of your characters for far more damage than they're probably able to survive. Attacking him first is thus not recommended. If you beat the robot first; the doctor will take direct control of it to continue fighting. Either way; once the fight is over, the doctor will turn into a new boss for you to fight. In his new form, he mostly prefers to drown the party in sleep and poison status effects.
File:FF4 WT 8j.jpg
Go backwards, down several levels and you will find the room with doors on the left and right side, and in the middle a bridge leading to a locked door.  Use the key on this door, and you can get inside to stop the Cannon.  After a few simple battles with guards, Yang will sacrifice himself to stop the cannon.  Now you can continue all the way to the entrance of the tower.
File:FF4 WT 8k.jpg
When you are about to exit the tower, Golbez tries to kill you, but Cid saves you with his airship.  Once You are in his ship, he will jump out of the ship, sealing the entrance to the underground, letting you escape.  He tells you to return to Baron and speak to his engineers.
File:FF4 WT 8l.jpg
In order to reach Eblana, your next destination, you must use the hovercraft.  Go into Baron Castle, and go down the stair case on the right.  When you find yourself on the interior of the castle, speak to the engineers who will adjust the aircraft for you.  Using the new airship, locate the hovercraft, which probably is still at Mt. Hobs.  Position the airship above it and press the action button to pick it up.
I am not a very tech-oriented type of guy, so it's fair to say that when I was approached about working on this project, I was scared—not just a little scared, but VERY scared.  I could not envision myself editing a real website.  Just the same, I jumped in with all three feet.  From the first time I edited a Wikipedia article, (the same day I created our class Wikibook), I have been amazed at the user-friendly nature of the software.  The designers of the software have considered the fact that most users are not going to be computer engineers, so they have, by necessity, made it easy to do what you want to do!  Many times I catch myself thinking, "Man, can I really be posting something that can be read by folks all over the world?"  The answer is, of course, "Yes!"  With this privilege comes a certain degree of responsibility but, at the same time, it is important to note that a Wiki environment allows one to take bold steps without the fear of major, life-changing consequences.  This is because there is a huge support network in place, (literally hundreds of thousands strong), that will catch you when you make a big mistake and validate any points that are correct but about which you're just not sure.  I guess, in short, I used to be scared of the Wiki.  Now, the Wiki is my friend! :)  Pete 20:41, 20 November 2006 (UTC)
This Chapter is built to guide you through the most direct basics of what is contained in this course. To continue beyond this point you will need a "lab notebook." This can be any type of small notebook that can contain all the parts of the experiments done in this course. In the first section you will learn all about the different methods used to record lab data and procedures. This knowledge can then be used to record all future experiments in your lab notebook. You will also need the following materials for this chapter
Balance (Equal arm, Tri Arm, not Electronic)
Mass Standards (If Using an Equal-Arm Balance)
Nulli se dicit mulier mea nubere malle
My woman says that she prefers to be married to no one
She says that she would prefer to be married to Catullus and no one else.
This is emphatic. Jupiter was well known for his 'collection' of marriages and was the hardest suitor to refuse.
This is an hypothetical subjunctive that expresses the action as possible in the present time.
Convey his doubts of Lesbia's loyalty to him.
This is a direct reference to Catullus. The poet is showing how only the heart has been leading him up to this point, and as such, he has been 'blinded' by it. Lines 3-4 are a rational evaluation of the situation, as he steps back into a detached state.
This is a metaphor for her declarations of love. Any writing that was written on wind or water would disintegrate immediately. Therefore, we understand that the poet regards Lesbia's statements as fleeting, said in the moments of passion; in truth they are unreliable and fickle.
Catullus 70 Another Translation of Catullus 70
You want to create a timeline of event data.  Timelines show events in a horizontal scrolling view.
We will use the JavaScript client Timeline widgets provided by the Simile-Widgets project.  In this example we will be using the timeline 2.2.0 API calls.
To do this we need to transform a list of event dates into the proper formats and then create an HTML page that includes calls to the Simile JavaScript libraries.
View HTML template that loads XML file
Create XQuery Function that generates the HTML template and loads the appropriate XML data file
Our first example will use a list of non-Duration Events (Instant Events).  We will explore duration events and other events in a future chapter.
We will then create a simple XQuery module with a single function that loads a simple timeline.
Sample XML File Using Standard XML Date Formats
Most XML dates use ISO 8601 coding.  To use this format you must put in a date format attribute in the data file.
First Day of the Feb, 2009
Note that the data file must specify the ISO8601 date formats that are used as the XML date format.
The sample HTML file shows how this XML file is loaded using the Timeline.loadXML() function.
<script src="http://static.simile.mit.edu/timeline/api-2.2.0/timeline-api.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
This page uses Javascript to show you a Timeline. Please enable Javascript in your browser to see the full page. Thank you.
Sample XML Event File Using Non-Standard XML Date Formats
First Day of the New Year</event>
First Day of the Feb</event>
The best error message is no error message. But error messages can not always be prevented.
Error messages should be correct and helpful. It is recommended to use systematic methods for predicting all the errors that may occur in a software system and make sure each error generates a correct error message. Thorough testing is necessary because there may be unpredicted errors which fail to generate appropriate error messages.
An error message should explain the nature and origin of the error. Avoid reference to software line numbers or addresses that are useless to the user who has no access to the source code.
A short error message may be supplemented with a Help button that gives a more detailed explanation of the error and possible remedies for solving the problem.
An error message may be followed by a menu of choices for how to recover from the situation. Assume, for example, that the user wants to save a file to a removable disk, and the system gives this error message:
"Error writing file E:\hello.txt: Disk defective or not formatted."
In this situation the system may present the user to the following choices:
Redundant error messages should be avoided. If a particular situation generates a hundred errors of the same type then the system should not print a hundred identical error messages. If errors are signaled by a message box popping up then the system should make a single message box with multiple messages rather than multiple message boxes with one message each in case of multiple simultaneous errors.
This is a short dialogue between Socrates and Euthyphro and is a very good introduction to typical aspects of Plato's thought and the Socratic method. The Greek language of Euthyphro is less difficult than that in longer works such the Symposium or the Republic. This dialogue is placed first in the Oxford Classical Texts 'Platonis Opera'. In general this is a good place to start with Plato if you have at least a year's worth of classical Greek.
Overall the piece is an interesting introduction to Greek theology and has an exact parallel in modern Christian theology, still being commented on in the twentieth century by writers such as C.S. Lewis as a live question. In essence the question put is, 'Does God command that we do or not do things because they are good or bad in themselves, or because God is good? And if the right commands are 'good' in themselves, does God obey these laws or does he make them?' Socrates has himself been summonsed to court by his political enemies and while waiting meets Euthyphro there, who is bringing a charge of manslaughter (of a slave) against his father. Socrates finds this remarkable, but Euthyphro maintains that 'a crime is a crime', and as family relations do not come into it, he is merely doing the right and proper thing. Socrates enquires how he is so sure of himself, and Euthyphro replies that he is an expert on morality as he understands piety toward the gods so well.
Socrates proceeds to tie poor Euthyphro up in knots with his gentle questions, which however amount to the typical Socratic skewering and dissection of self-proclaimed experts. He asks, 'are the gods themselves good and righteous and holy?' The religious and pious Euthyphro thinks so. He asks, 'are the gods to be emulated because they are good?'. The religious and pious Euthyphro thinks so. But, Socrates asks, 'why then, accoding to the poets, do the gods do so many things that we humans disapprove of - such as, stealing, making war, and adultery?' Euthyphro is at a loss to talk his way out of this fuzzy thinking and self-contradictions: he is left defeated but still defiant. The answers may not have been presented 'on a plate', but the clarity of the right question is now indisputable. This first dialogue strongly presages the 'Apology' of Socrates in which he defends himself against the charges brought in his famous court defence speech.
Brief overview of European history (before 1492)
The Early Years of the Constitutional Republic (1787 - 1800)
Westward Expansion and Manifest Destiny (1824 - 1849)
Farewell to the Star-Spangled Banner (1860 - 1861)
The Age of Invention and the Gilded Age (1877 - 1900)
World War I and the Treaty of Versailles (1914 - 1920)
The Roaring Twenties and Prohibition (1920 - 1929)
The Great Depression and the New Deal (1929 - 1939)
World War II and the Rise of the Atomic Age (1939 - 1945)
Truman and the Cold War (1945 - 1953)
Eisenhower, Civil Rights, and the Fifties (1953 - 1961)
Ford, Carter and Reagan presidencies (1974 - 1989)
Bush and Clinton presidencies,1st Gulf War (1989 - 2001)
George W. Bush, September 11, 2nd Gulf War, and Terrorism (2001-2006)
Appendix Alpha: Presidents and Vice Presidents of the United States
Appendix Beta: Chief Justices of the United States Supreme Court
This textbook is based on the College Entrance Examination Board test in Advanced Placement United States History. The test is a standard on the subject, covering what most students in the United States study in high school and college, so we treat it as the best reference.
The text was reorganized and edited in November 2008 to be closer to the content and organization the college board requires.  The content was carefully chosen for significance and interest.  We welcome reader feedback and suggestions for improvement.
Enjoy!
The AP Course Description can be found here.
This is, to the best of our knowledge, the world's first open content US History Textbook.
This is, to the best of our knowledge, the world's first  open content US History Textbook. The users are invited to tweak and refine this book until there is nothing better available. The authors are confident that this will happen because of the success of the Wikipedia site.
Brief overview of European history (before 1492)
The peoples of Europe have had a tremendous effect on the development of the United States throughout the course of U.S. history. Europeans "discovered" and colonized the North American continent and, even after they lost political control over its territory, their influence has predominated due to a common language, social ideals, and culture.  Therefore, when endeavoring to understand the history of the United States, it is helpful to briefly describe their European origin.
The first significant civilizations of Europe formed in the second millennium BCE. By 800 BCE, various Greek city-states, sharing a language and a culture based on slavery, pioneered novel political cultures. In the Greek city of Athens, by about 500 BCE, the male citizens who owned land began to elect their leaders. These elections by the minority of a minority represent the first democracy in the world. Other states in Greece experimented with other forms of rule, as in the totalitarian state of Sparta. These polities existed side by side, sometimes warring with each other, at one time combining against an invading army from Persia. Ancient Athens is known for its literary achievements in drama, history, and personal narrative. The individual city-states did not usually see themselves as a single entity. (The conqueror Alexander the Great, who called himself a Greek, actually was a native of the non-Greek state of Macedon.) The city-states of Greece became provinces of the Roman Empire in 27 BCE.
The city of Rome was founded (traditionally in the year 753 BCE). Slowly, Rome grew from a kingdom to a republic to a vast empire, which, at various points, included most of present-day Britain (a large part of Scotland never belonged to the empire), France (then known as Gaul), Spain, Portugal, Italy, Greece, Turkey, Iraq, Palestine (including the territory claimed today by the modern state of Israel), Northern Arabia, Egypt, the Balkans, and the entire north coast of Africa. This empire was maintained through free-born or adoptive citizenship, citizen education and indoctrination, a large and well-drilled army, and taxes directed by a large bureaucracy directed by the emperor. As each province produced more Roman citizens, the state became hard to maintain. Whole kingdoms in the north and east, and the invading peoples we know as the Germanic tribes (the Ostrogoths and Visigoths and the Franks) sat apart from the system.
After the death of one emperor in 180 CE, power struggles between the army and a succession of rulers of contested origins produced anarchy. Diocletian (243 - 316) reinstated the Empire by 284. Rome regained territory until 395, when the Empire was so large that it had to be divided into two parts, each with a separate ruler. The two halves sat uneasily together. The East, which considered itself the heir of Alexander the Great, spoke Greek or a dialect, while the West spoke Latin. The Eastern Empire survived until 1453, but the system to maintain the Western Empire broke apart. Plagues and crop failures troubled the world. In 476, Germanic tribes deposed the boy who was then the Emperor. Roman roads fell into disrepair, and travel became difficult. Some memories remained in the lands which had once known Roman rule. The supreme rulers of various tribes called themselves king, a distortion of the Roman word Caesar.
The Roman Empire to the Holy Roman Empire
A mitred Adhémar de Monteil carrying the Holy Lance in one of the battles of the First Crusade
After Rome's fall, monks from Ireland (which had never known Rome) spread Catholic Christianity and the culture and language of the Western Roman Empire across Europe. Catholicism eventually spread through England (where the Germanic tribes of the Angles and the Saxons now lived)and to the lands of the post-Roman Germanic tribes. Among those tribes, the Franks rose to prominence.
Charlemagne (742 - 814), the King of the Franks, conquered great portions of Europe. He eventually took control of Rome. The senate and the political organs of Rome had disappeared, and Charlemagne did not pretend to become the head of the Church. Charlemagne's domain, a confederation of what had been Roman Gaul with Germanic states, was much smaller than  Diocletian had known. But prestige came with identity with the past, and so this trunk of lands became The Holy Roman Empire. Charlemagne's descendants, as well as local rulers, took their sanction from the Church, while the Church's pope influenced both religious and political matters.
The result of political stability was technological advance. After the year 1000, Western Europe caught some of the East's discoveries, and invented others. In addition to vellum, Europeans now started making paper of rags or wood pulp. They also adopted the wind and water mill, the horse collar (for plows and for heavy weights), the moldboard plow, and other agricultural and technological advances. Towns came into being, and then walled cities. More people survived, and the knights and kings over them grew restive.
In the eighth century, pushed from their homes in Scandinavia by war and population expansion, Norsemen, or Vikings, began settling parts of the Faeroe, Shetland, and Orkney Islands in the North Atlantic. They went where ever treasure was, trading as far as Byzantium and Kiev in the East. In the West they raided from Ireland and England down to the Italian peninsula, sailing into a port, seizing its gold, and murdering or enslaving its people before fleeing. They began settling Iceland in approximately 874 CE. A Viking called Erik the Red was accused of murder and banished from his native Iceland in about 982. Eric explored and later founded a settlement in a snowy western island. Knowing that this bleak land would need many people to prosper, Eric returned to Iceland after his exile had passed and coined the word "Greenland" to appeal to the overpopulated and treeless settlement of Iceland. Eric returned to Greenland in 985 and established two colonies with a population of nearly 5000.
Leif Erikson, son of Erik the Red, and other members of his family began exploration of the North American coast in 986.  He landed in three places, in the third establishing a small settlement called Vinland. The location of Vinland is uncertain, but an archeological site on the northern tip of Newfoundland, Canada (L'anse aux Meadows) has been identified as the site of a modest Viking settlement and is the oldest confirmed presence of Europeans in North America. The site contains the remains of eight Norse buildings, as well as a modern reproduction of a Norse longhouse. But the settlement in Vinland was abandoned in struggles between the Vikings and the native inhabitants, whom the settlers called Skraelingar. Bickering also broke out among the Norseman themselves. The settlement lasted less than two years. The Vikings would make brief excursions to North America for the next 200 years, though another attempt at colonization was soon thwarted.
By the thirteenth century, Iceland and Greenland had also entered a period of decline during the "Little Ice Age." Knowledge of their exploration, in the days before the printing press, was ignored in most of Europe. Yet the Vikings are now considered the true European discoverers of North America. The influence of their people outlasted even the terrible raids, and their grandchildren became kings and queens. For example, a branch of Viking descendants living in France, the Normans, conquered England from the Anglo-Saxons in 1066.
Danish seamen, painted mid-12th century.
A painting depicting Leif Erikson spotting land in North America.
A recreation of a viking village in Newfoundland.
Burial of bodies during the black death
The Little Ice Age led to European famines in the years 1315-1317 and in 1321. In the year 1318 sheep and cattle began to die of a contagious disease. Farmers could not support the growing population. And then, in 1347, some Genoese trading ships inadvertently brought a new, invasive species of rat to Europe. These rats carried bubonic plague.
Plague was also called the Black Death, from the darkened skin left after death and from its deadly reach. It had three strands: bubonic, pneumonic, and septicemic.[1] In bubonic plague fleas carried by the rats would leave their hosts and bite people. The masses of bacteria would flow through the human system, killing cells and leaving their refuse in lymph nodes in the armpit, groin, and neck. These nodes would swell and turn black, creating bubos. Infection could also spread into the lungs, so that a person might cough or sneeze the germ into the air. This created pneumonic plague, spreading disease into spaces where people gathered and where rats dared not go. It also spread through contamination of food. The last form of disease, and its most deadly, was septicemic. This attacked the blood, leaving stretches of pale skin looking black, and killing the person within hours.
Surviving laws of cities and guilds regulate public cleanliness and penalize adulteration of food. They cannot show how strictly these laws were applied. And they show no knowledge, of course, of germ theory and the need for sterilization. Older systems such as the few public baths which remained from the days of colonial Rome were seen as sinful and dangerous, invitations to the plague. The dwelling places of survivors of pre-Christian Rome, the Jews who were forced to live apart, were attacked by mobs who attributed the Black Death to their poisoning Christians' wells.
The responses to plague can be seen in the records left by survivors -- one third of the population of Europe died in repeated waves of disease -- and in the subsequent changes in society. Airplanes and satellites show the foundations of plague-era towns which were emptied by the disease. In just one square mile of pre-plague Europe there are reports of there being 50,000 people.[2] In large cities, families would flee or lock themselves away, trying to keep themselves from death. Other families were locked in by city authorities. This is the beginning of the modern system of quarantine.[3] Some branches of the family would not be among those so helped. The Black Death seemed erratic, sometimes taking people deemed good and pious, sometimes not. One priest or church prelate might die, and another survive. And a living priest might give no aid to other survivors. Some critiques of the Church which had become spread through most of Europe date from this era.
Although some lands became waste through lack of tilling, those people who survived grasped the property of those who had not. Europe then had a land-based economic system. Rich people became richer. There began a labor shortage: the farmers who survived needed hands to take in their crops. The wages of farm hands began to rise. In the surviving towns they needed people to guard the gates: in the courts they began to look for rising young men. Cities became more powerful in the depleted lands, and authority grew more centralized.
Doctors meeting at the university of Paris
During the Middle Ages Western society and education were heavily shaped by Christianity as expressed through the Roman Catholic Church. Towns, courts, and feudal manors had their priests, monasteries and nunneries had their scriptora or libraries, and after the 11th century CE, a few cities had Universities, schools to educate men to be high-ranking clerics, lawyers, or doctors. Where children had schools, their parents paid a fee so that they might learn Latin, the language St. Jerome had used for his translation of the Bible. Latin was the language of the Church. It was also learned, along with military tactics and the rules of chivalry, by men who trained to be knights. A smattering of Latin was necessary, along with Math, even for the elementary schools which sprang up in some cities. There both boys and girls were taught literacy and math, prerequisite for acceptance as an apprentice in many Guilds.  Latin across Europe created a European-wide culture: a doctor from Padua could talk to his fellow from Oxford in Latin.
As in the Greek and Roman eras, only a minority of people went to school. There were not enough books, little travel, and no means of spreading standardized education. Schools were attended first by persons planning to enter religious life. Occasionally a cleric would reach out to educate a very bright peasant boy. This was one of the few ways peasants could rise in the world. But the vast majority of people were serfs who served as agricultural workers on the estates of feudal lords. They were, in effect, tied to the fate of the land. From the serf up to some high princes, the vast majority of people did not attend school, and were generally illiterate.
In the rise of the Universities in the 11th century, the Church translated several manuscripts of the ancient Greek writer Aristotle into Latin. From Aristotle's emphasis upon human reason, philosophy and science, and the Church's emphasis upon revelation and the teachings of Christ, medieval scholars developed Scholasticism. This was an philosophical and educational movement  which attempted to integrate into an ordered system both the natural wisdom of Greece and Rome and the religious wisdom of Christianity. It was dominant in the medieval Christian schools and universities of Europe from about the middle of the 11th century to about the middle of the 15th century, though its influence continued in successive centuries. The idea of Man in the middle of ordered nature, and yet dominant over nature, bore fruit in the observation of natural phenomena, the beginnings of what the Western World knows as science. It also led to the exultation of system over observation, and the persistence of the Ptolemaic theories such as geocentrism among formally educated people.
Noble girls were sometimes sent to live in nunneries in order to receive basic schooling. Nuns would teach them to read and write and the chores necessary to run their establishments, including spinning and weaving. (Cloth-making was a major national industry in the Middle Ages.) They taught them their manners and their prayers. Some of these girls later became nuns themselves.
Christianity, Islam, Judaism
A medieval illustration of Jerusalem, an important city in all Abrahamic religions, including Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.
During the centuries after the fall of Rome, various flavors of Christian churches spread from Northern Africa and Armenia westward. This changed after Mohammed established Islam in 610 CE. Like Christianity, it spread through conversion and conflict. At its height it was also a faith of Europe, from Spain to Albania and Bosnia and their sister states. Both Prince and Caliph held that their state must have one faith, and no other belief was encouraged. When Jerusalem was reconquered by the Seljuq Turks, Christians were no longer able to go on religious pilgrimages to the Holy City.
At the end of the eleventh century, Pope Urban II inaugurated the Crusades, urging Western European kings and great nobles to begin what would be a century and a half of warfare. Christian armies fought first to reconquer and then to hold part of the Kingdom of Jerusalem. The Crusaders ultimately failed in the face of resurgent Muslim forces. Western Europeans within Church and State argued for and against the Crusades.
Despite the failure of the Crusades, militant Western Christianity persisted in Spain in an effort known as the Reconquista (the "reconquest"), which purged the land of the Muslims who had arrived there in 711.  By the fifteenth century, the Muslims were confined to the kingdom of Granada, which bordered the Mediterranean Sea in the southern side of the Iberian Peninsula.  Granada finally fell in 1492 to the Spanish Christians, ending the reconquista.
Rome had destroyed Israel in 70 CE, but allowed a remnant of her people to survive. Fortified by rabbinic culture and centered on the Torah, they became a resilient group. They survived as the known world became Christian. They spread, as traders, through East and West. However, Christian relationships with Jews were punctuated by hatred. They were held to be guilty of Jesus' death, and they were supposed to be evil because they had not converted to Christianity. They were forced into the notorious ghettos, usually built on waste or undesirable land. They were forced to wear strange clothing which marked them off, and to pay heavy taxes.[4] Christians spread rumors that Jewish officials sometimes kidnapped and killed young boys for their sacrifices. Sometimes a mob might break into the ghetto, killing some people. Individuals were sometimes forced to convert. One of the effects of European nationalism was the expulsion of a country's Jewish population. England was the first, in the 13th century; later, a reviving France; later still, Spain and Portugal. Some men crewing the ships in the Age of Exploration were Jews, often practicing their faith in hiding.
For a period in the late Twelfth century there two sets of Popes, a line in Rome and another in the French city of Avignon under the sway of that Court. In reaction against this, the Church centralized its powers in parallel to what nations were doing. There had been dissension before, in medieval England's Lollards and later with the Czech priest John Hus. However, it was only in an age after the printing press, when people began printing the Bible in their own languages, when Martin Luther founded the Protestant church. England's King Henry VIII, who had won the title "Protector of the Faith" for a work defending the Pope, later left it to become the head of the Church of England. This division of Western Christianity created religious minorities, who were persecuted throughout Europe. Among these were the Pilgrims, who helped settle America.
The School of Athens a famous Renaissance fresco by Raphael that depicted ancient Greek philosophers.
Another, more humble result of the plague was the accumulation of rags left over from clothing. These were quickly used to make paper. Books were very rare during the Middle Ages, and the monks who made them chained them to their shelves. It took one year for a man to make one book. In that climate Bibles took priority: we have only one copy of Democritus's most famous work surviving from this period. As rag paper replaced velum, books began to become more plentiful. The supply was augmented by Europe's adoption of Johannes Gutenberg 's fixed-type printing press in the 15th century.[5]
There had been earlier leaps in culture, including the wave of population and technological adaptation in the 12th century. This left its mark in increased population and the Roman Catholic Church's adoption of Aristotle. Yet the press made it possible for knowledge to have a foothold in society. Inventions in one place could be explained and adopted across a continent. The Greeks fleeing the fall of Byzantium brought their knowledge of ancient Greek culture to the West. The Bible, the basic book of Christendom, could be pored over by laypeople, and reading it could be learned by more people than ever before. Learning was no longer solely the province of the Church.
If the Bible was first off of the presses, pseudo-science and science followed soon after. The European witch trials were one result of the new medium. The questioning of scientific consensus was another. Andreas Vesalius published his observations about the circulatory system. Books discussing the theories of Nicolaus Copernicus and Galileo Galilei demolished the old geocentric theory of the cosmos. The arts were not neglected. Giorgio Vasari's biographical Lives introduced such new artists as Leonardo Da Vinci and Michelangelo Buonarroti to the larger world.
A later time called this growth of knowledge the Renaissance. They said it began in the Italian city-states, spreading throughout most of Europe. The Italian city of Florence was called the birthplace of this intellectual movement.
Books spread the Crusader's newly found experience and knowledge of the Mediterranean, a region whose technology was at that time superior to that of western Europe. Books written about traders, adventurers, and scholars spread knowledge of Chinese technology such as gunpowder and silk. They spread writings of the ancient world which had been lost to Europe, and nurtured a taste for new foods and flavors. They spread pictures of ancient Greek statues, Moorish carpets, and strange practices.
In the fifteenth century, the Mediterranean was a vigorous trading area.  European ships brought in grains and salts for preserving fish, Chinese silks, Indian cotton, precious stones, and above all, spices. White cane sugar could be used to preserve fruit and to flavor medicine. Cinnamon was medicine against bad humors as well as preservative and flavoring, part of the mysterious poudre douce, and now available even to some European common people.
The great age of exploration was undertaken by nation-states, cohesive entities with big treasuries who tended to use colonization as a national necessity. When such nations as Portugal, England, Spain, and France became stronger, they began building ships.
The Italian peninsula dominated the world because of its position in the Mediterranean Sea. Universities in Padua, Rome, and elsewhere taught men from East and West. Above all, principalities such as the Republic of Venice and Florence controlled trade. Genoa and Venice in particular ballooned into massive trading cities. Yet there was at yet no nation of Italy, so each city's riches belonged only to that city. Individual cities used their monopoly to raise the price of goods, which would have been expensive in any case, because they were often brought overland from Asia to ports on the eastern Mediterranean. The mad prices, in turn, increased the desire of purchasers to find other suppliers, and of potential suppliers to find a better and cheaper route to Asia.
Portugal was just one of many potential suppliers, with a location which extended its influence into the Atlantic and down, south and east, to Africa.  Prince Henry, son of King John I, promoted the exploration of new routes to the East. He planned Portugal's 1415 capture of Ceuta in Muslim North Africa. He also sponsored voyages that pushed even farther down the West African coast. By the time of his death in 1460, these voyages had reached south to Sierra Leone.
Under King John II, who ruled from 1481 to 1495, Bartolomeu Dias finally sailed around the southernmost point of Africa to the Cape of Good Hope (1487-1488).  In 1497-1499 Vasco da Gama of Portugal sailed up the east coast of Africa to India.
The Portuguese colonized and settled such islands in the Atlantic as Madeira, Cape Verde, the Azores, and Sao Tome. These islands supplied them with sugar and gave them territorial control of the Atlantic. West Africa was more promising, not only unearthing a valuable trade route to India, but also providing the Portuguese with ivory, fur, oils, black pepper, gold dust, and a supply of dark skinned slaves who were used as domestic servants, artisans, and market or transportation workers in Lisbon. They were later used as laborers on sugar plantations on the Atlantic.
France, England, And The Hundred Years' War
An idealized painting of Joan of Arc at the siege of Orléans
King Harold of England faced William the Norman usurper after defeating the last Viking forces holding the North of England. And when William the Norman became William the Conqueror, he held England by consolidating the nation. His army was ruled from newly built castles, and had the best technology of the time. His sons and their sons fought the original inhabitants of their country in Scotland and Wales, pushing their boarders. They also claimed the right to their ancestral Normandy, in what is now France. (There had long been rivalry between England and France over the wool trade.) By a English king's marriage to an former queen of France, Eleanor of Aquitaine, the king subsequently claimed Aquitaine. During the years of 1337 to 1453, the kings of England claimed the whole of France and beyond, fighting The Hundred Years' War there and in the Low Countries. For some years the English threatened Paris, and there was a question whether the small area of France proper would be entirely conquered. The early stages of the war marked by English victory against a demoralized French people and their Prince. But around 1428, a young peasant girl from Lorriene, France named Joan of Arc approached a garrison of the French army. She told them that  Saint Michael, Saint Catherine, and Saint Margaret had told her to lead the army to victory. She said that God had come to her in a dream, and told her how to defeat the English. She claimed that God said Prince Charles of France needed to be crowned in order for France to claim victory over the English.[6] After gaining the new French king, support of the populace, and several key victories, Joan was sold to the English for treason and as an appeasement. Yet France had been renewed. It pushed back against the invaders, and took back most of the land. In the next few centuries it was to remove England from Continental Europe.
The Hundred Years' War devastated both countries. But it ultimately turned both of them into stronger, colonial powers. The Hundred Years' War created opportunities for wealth and advancement for the knights of both countries. The Chivalric code showed great influence during this period. France absorbed Aquitaine, Castile, and Normandy itself, prosperous areas. The twin strokes of the plague and the Inquisition weakened opposition to the French king's rule. And English centralization continued as its own royalty sought service of serf and Baron. A group of new dialects, Middle English, came out of the tug between Norman lord and Anglo-Saxon peasant. If the nation could not get new land in Europe, it could use its ships to sail elsewhere.
Explain how one of these late medieval devices affected prosperity: the wind mill; the horse collar; the printing press.
How did the plague infect individuals? How did mass death affect society?
What was the importance of these four men to the Renaissance? Galileo Galilei, Nicolaus Copernicus, Andreas Vesalius, Leonardo Da Vinci.
↑ Massachusetts Medical Society, New England Surgical Society. Boston medical and surgical journal, Volume 149, Issue 2. 1903
↑ Gottfried, Robert S. The Black Death: Natural and Human Disaster in Medieval Europe. Simon and Schuster, 1985. 64.
↑ Hunter, Susan S. Black death: AIDS in Africa. Palgrave Macmillan, 2003. 115.
↑ (Charing pg. 18-23). Charing, Douglas. Judaism. New York, NY: DK Pub., 2003.
↑ Elizabeth Eisenstein, The printing press as an agent of change: communications and cultural transformations in early modern Europe (2 vols. ed.). Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press. 1979. ISBN 0-521-22044-0
↑ Warner, Marina. Joan of Arc: The Image of Female Heroism.  University of California Press, 1999
Artist depiction of the Kincaid Mounds Site in the Pre-Columbian era.
Human civilization in the Americas probably began in the last ice age, when prehistoric hunters crossed a land bridge between the Asian and North American continents.[1] Civilizations in North America, Central America, and South America had different levels of complexity, technology, and cohesiveness.
Some of the most powerful and organized societies occurred in South and Central America.  These cultures developed writing, allowing them to spread and dominate. They created some of the largest cities in the Ancient world.
North American cultures were more fragmented and less unified. The tribe was often the major social unit, with exchanges between tribes creating similar societies over vast distances. Tribal dwellings as large as European towns flourished in the rugged desert of southwestern North America.
European-descended historians have difficulty referring to these cultures as a whole, as the native people did not have a unified name for themselves. At first, Europeans called natives "Indians". This term came from the belief by Christopher Columbus that he had discovered a new passage to India.[2] Despite Amerigo Vespucci ascertaining that the Americas were not actually India, Indian continued to be used as the 'de facto' name for native inhabitants until around 1960.[2] Starting in the 1960s, the term "Native American" was used. Yet this term may be too problematic: The name America derives from Amerigo Vespucci, an Italian who had little to do with the native people.[2] There is also "American Indian". This is too general a term for a group having little in common other than skin tone and non-European language. In Canada, the term "First People" is used. All these terms for the native people of America show just how diverse Pre-Columbian America was and the disagreement continues between scholars today about this period.
A map depicting the crossing of the people into the Americas from Asia.
American history does not begin with Columbus's 1492 arrival. The Americas were settled long before the first European arrived.[3] Civilization began during the last ice age, some 15 to 40 thousand years ago.[3] Huge ice sheets covered the north, so sea levels were much lower, creating a land bridge between Asia and North America.[3] This was the Bering land bridge, a gap in two large ice sheets creating a connection from lands near present day Alaska, through Alberta, and into the continental United States.[3]
Nomadic Asians following herds of wild game traveled into the continental United States. A characteristic arrow point was found and first described near the present day town of Clovis, NM. Specialized tools and common burial practices are seen in many archaeological sites through North America and into South America.
The Clovis people are one of North America's earliest civilizations. It is not clear if the finds represent one unified tribe, or many tribes with a common technology and belief. Their trek across 2000 rugged miles is one of the great feats of pre-history. Their culture disappears dramatically from the archaeological record 12,900 years ago, with widespread speculation about what caused their disappearance. Theories range from the extinction of the mammoth, to sudden environmental changes caused by a comet, to flooding caused by the break of a massive freshwater lake, Lake Agassiz.
There is controversy about Pre-Clovis settlement of North and South America.  Comparisons of culture and linguistics offer evidence of the influence of early America by several different contemporary cultures.  Some genetic and time-dating studies point to the possibility that ancient Americans came from other places and arrived earlier than at the Clovis sites in North America.  Perhaps some ancient settlers to the hemisphere traveled by boat along the seashore, or arrived by boats from the Polynesian islands.
As time went on, many of these first settlers settled down into agricultural societies, complete with domesticated animals.  Groups of people formed stable tribes and developed distinct languages of their own, to the point that more distant relatives could no longer understand them.  Comparative linguistics -- the study of languages of different tribes -- shows fascinating diversity, with similarities between tribes hundreds of miles apart, yet startling differences with neighboring groups.
At times, tribes would gain regional importance and dominate large areas of America.  Empires rose across the Americas that rivaled the greatest ones in Europe. For their time, some of these empires were highly advanced.
Meso-American civilizations are among some of the most powerful and advanced civilizations of the ancient world.  Reading and writing were widespread throughout Meso-America, and these civilizations achieved impressive political, artistic, scientific, agricultural, and architectural accomplishments. Many of these civilizations gathered the political and technological resources to build some of the largest, most ornate, and highly populated cities in the ancient world.
The Mayans were a sophisticated civilization, who had great skill in the arts.
The aboriginal Americans settled in the Yucatan peninsulas of present-day Mexico around 10,000 BCE.  By 2000 BCE, the Mayan culture had evolved into a complex civilization.  The Mayans developed a strong political, artistic and religious identity among the highly populated Yucatan lowlands.  The classic period (250-900 CE) witnessed a rapid growth of the Mayan culture and it gained dominance within the region and influence throughout present-day Mexico.  Large, independent city-states were founded and became the political, religious, and cultural centers for the Mayan people.
Mayan society was unified not by politics, but by their complex and highly-developed religion. Mayan religion was astrologically based, and supported by careful observations of the sky. The Mayans had a strong grasp of astronomy that rivaled, and, in many ways, exceeded that of concurrent European societies. They developed a very sophisticated system for measuring time, and had a great awareness of the movements in the nighttime sky. Particular significance was attached to the planet Venus, which was particularly bright and appeared in both the late evening and early morning sky.
Mayan art is also considered one of the most sophisticated and beautiful of the ancient New World.
The Mayan culture saw a decline during the 8th and 9th century.  Although its causes are still the subject of intense scientific speculation, archaeologists see a definite cessation of inscriptions and architectural construction.  The Mayan culture continued as a regional power until its discovery by Spanish conquistadors.  In fact, an independent, non-centralized government allowed the Mayans to strongly resist the Spanish conquest of present-day Mexico.  Mayan culture is preserved today throughout the Yucatan, although many of the inscriptions have been lost.
The Aztec culture began with the migration of the Mexica people to present-day central Mexico.  The leaders of this group of people created an alliance with the dominant tribes forming the Aztec triple alliance, and created an empire that influenced much of present-day Mexico.
The Aztec confederacy began a campaign of conquest and assimilation.  Outlying lands were inducted into the empire and became part of the complex Aztec society. Local leaders could gain prestige by adopting and adding to the culture of the Aztec civilization.  The Aztecs, in turn, adopted cultural, artistic, and astronomical innovations from its conquered people.
The heart of Aztec power was economic unity.  Conquered lands paid tribute to the capital city Tenochtitlan, the present-day site of Mexico City.  Rich in tribute, this capital grew in influence, size, and population.  When the Spanish arrived in 1521, it was the fourth largest city in the world (including the once independent city Tlatelolco, which was by then a residential suburb) with an estimated population of 212,500 people. It contained  the massive Temple de Mayo (a twin-towered pyramid 197 feet tall), 45 public buildings,  a palace,  two zoos, a botanical garden, and many houses.  Surrounding the city and floating on the shallow flats of Lake Texcoco were enormous chinampas -- floating garden beds that fed the many thousands of residents of Tenochtitlan.
While many Meso-American civilizations practiced human sacrifice, none performed it to the scale of the Aztecs.  To the Aztecs, human sacrifice was a necessary appeasement to the gods.  According to their own records, one of the largest slaughters ever performed happened when the great pyramid of Tenochtitlan was reconsecrated in 1487.  The Aztecs reported that they had sacrificed 84,400 prisoners over the course of four days.
With their arrival at Tenochtitlan, the Spanish would be the downfall of Aztec culture.  Although shocked and impressed by the scale of Tenochtitlan, the display of massive human sacrifice offended European sensitivity, and the abundant displays of gold and silver inflamed their greed.  The Spanish killed the reigning ruler, Montezuma in June 1520 and lay siege to the city, destroying it in 1521, aided by their alliance with a competing tribe, the Tlaxcala.
Machu Picchu, the "Lost city of the Incas".
With the ascension of Manco Capac to emperor of a tribe in the Cuzco area of what is modern-day Peru around 1200 BCE, the Incan civilization emerged as the largest Pre-Columbian empire in the Americas.
Religion was significant in Inca life. The royal family were believed to be descendants of the Inca Sun God. Thus, the emperor had absolute authority, checked only by tradition. Under the emperors, a complex political structure was apparent. The Incan emperor, regional and village leaders, and others were part of an enormous bureaucracy. For every ten people, there was, on average, one official. The organization of the Empire also included a complex transportation infrastructure. To communicate across the entire empire, runners ran from village to village, relaying royal messages.
In 1438, the ambitious Pachacuti, likely the greatest of the Incan emperors, came to the throne. Pachacuti rebuilt much of the capital city, Cuzco, and the Temple of the Sun. The success of Pachacuti was based upon his brilliant talent for military command (he is sometimes referred as the "Napolean of the Andes") and an amazing political campaign of integration.  Leaders of regions that he wanted to conquer were bribed with luxury goods and enticed by promises of privilege and importance. As well, the Incans had developed a prestigious educational system which, not incidentally, just happened to extol the benefits of Incan civilization. Thus, much of the expansion throughout South America was peaceful.
At its height of power in the late 15th century, Incan civilization had conquered a vast patchwork of languages, people and cultures from present-day Ecuador, along the whole length of South America, to present-day Argentina.Cuzco, the capital city, was said by the Spanish to be "as fine as any city in Spain".  Perhaps the most impressive city of the Incan empire, though,  was not its capital, Cuzco, but the city Machu Picchu.
This mountain retreat was built high in the Andes and is sometimes called the "Lost City of the Incas."  It was intended as a mountain retreat for the leaders of the Incan empire and demonstrates great artistry -- the abundant dry stone walls were entirely built without mortar, and the blocks were cut so carefully that one can't insert a knife-blade between them.
The Spanish discovered the Inca during a civil war of succession and enjoyed great military superiority over the slow siege warfare that the Incan empire had employed against its enemies.  Fueled by greed at the opportunity to plunder another rich civilization, they conquered and executed the Incan emperor.  The Incan empire fell quickly in 1533, but a small resistance force fled to the mountains, waging a guerrilla war of resistance for another 39 years.
The Meso-American Empires were undoubtedly the most powerful and unified civilizations in the new world.  Writings were common in Meso-America and allowed these cultures to spread in power and influence with far more ease than their counterparts in north America.  Each of these civilizations built impressive urban areas and had a complex culture.  They were as 'civilized' as the Spanish who conquered them in the 15th and 16th centuries.
Native Americans adapted the arid desert southwest.  A period of relatively wet conditions saw many cultures in the area flourish.  Extensive irrigation was developed that were among the biggest of the ancient world. Elaborate adobe and sandstone buildings were constructed.  Highly ornamental and artistic pottery was created. The unusual weather conditions could not continue forever, though, and gave way, in time, to the more common drought of the area. These dry conditions necessitated a more minimal way of life and, eventually, the elaborate accomplishments of these cultures were abandoned.
Cliff Palace, a structure of the Ancestral Puebloans.
One prominent group were the Ancestral Puebloans, who lived in the present day Northeastern Arizona and surrounding areas.  The geography of this area is that of a flat arid, desert plain, surrounded by small areas of high plateau, called mesas.  Softer rock layers within the mesas eroded to form steep canyons and overhangs along their slopes.
The Ancestral Puebloans culture used these cave-like overhangs in the side of steep mesas as shelter from the brief, fierce southwestern storms.  They also found  natural seeps and diverted small streams of snow melt into small plots of maize, squash and beans.  Small seasonal rivers formed beds of natural clays and dried mud.  The Ancestral Puebloans used hardened dry mud, called adobe, along with sandstone, to form intricate buildings that were sometimes found high in the natural overhangs of the mesas.  The Ancestral Puebloans were also skilled at forming the natural clays into pottery.
Between 900 - 1130 CE a period of relatively wet conditions allowed the Ancestral Puebloans to flourish.  Traditional architecture was perfected, pottery became intricate and artistic, turkeys were domesticated, and trade over long distances influenced the entire region.  Following this golden period was the 300 year drought called Great Drought.  The Ancestral Puebloan culture was stressed and erupted into warfare.  Scientists once believed the entire people vanished, possibly moving great distances to avoid the arid desert.  New research suggests that the Ancestral Puebloans dispersed; abandoning the intricate buildings and moving towards smaller settlements to utilize the limited water that existed.
Casa Grande Ruins, sheltered by a modern roof.
Bordering the Ancestral Puebloan culture in the north, a separate civilization emerged in southern Arizona, called the Hohokam.  While many native Americans in the southwest used water irrigation on a limited scale,  it was the Hohokam culture that perfected the technology (all without the benefit of modern powered excavating tools).  The ability to divert water into small agricultural plots meant that the Hohokam could live in large agricultural communities of relatively high population density.  This was particularly true in the Gila River valley, where the Gila River was diverted in many places to irrigate large fertile plains and numerous compact towns.  The bigger towns had a 'Great House' at their centers, which was a large Adobe/stone structure.  Some of these structures were four stories in size and probably were used by the managerial or religious elites.  Smaller excavation or pits were enclosed by adobe walls and used as primary residences.  Smaller pit rooms and pits were used for many different functions.
The successful use of irrigation is evident in the extensive Casa Grande village.  Situated between two primary canals, the Casa Grande site has been the focus of nearly 9 decades of archaeological work.  The original town was built around a Great House and incorporated open courtyards and circular plazas.  By the 10th century neighboring settlements had been built to accommodate a large, highly developed region.  The scale of this community can be seen in the results of one excavation of part of it in 1997.  The project identified 247 pit houses, 27 pit rooms, 866 pits, 11 small canals, a ball court, and portions of four adobe walled compounds.
The Hohokam culture disintegrated when they had difficulty maintaining the canals in the dry conditions of the drought.  Small blockages or collapses of the canal would choke the intricate irrigation networks. Large towns and extensive irrigation canals were abandoned.  The people gave up their cultural way of life and dispersed into neighboring tribes.
Native Americans in the Eastern Continental United States developed mound-building cultures early in North American History.  Groups of native Americans became more stratified as time went on and developed into tribes.  These tribes participated in long networks of trade and cultural exchanges. The importance of trade routes developed urban cities of great influence.
The mound-building people were one of the earliest civilization to emerge in North America. Beginning around 1000 BCE cultures developed that used mounds for religious and burial purposes. These mound-building people are categorized by a series of cultures that describe distinctive artwork and artifacts found in large areas throughout the present-day eastern United States.
The burial mound was the principle characteristic of all of these societies. These large structures were built by piling baskets of carefully selected earth into a mound. Mounds were pyramid shaped with truncated tops. Sometimes small buildings were built on top of them. Some of these mounds were quite large. The Grave Creek Mound, in the panhandle of present day West Virginia, is nearly 70 feet tall and 300 feet in diameter. Other mounds have even been shown to be oriented in a way that allows for astronomical alignments such as solstices and equinoxes.
Mound building cultures spread out in size and importance. The first culture, the Adena, lived in present-day Southern Ohio and the surrounding areas. The succeeding cultures united to create an impressive trade system that allowed each culture to influence the other. The Hopewell exchange included groups of people throughout the continental Eastern United States. There began to be considerable social stratification within these people. This organization predates the emergence of the tribe as a socio-political group of people that would dominate later eastern and western native American civilization.
The climax of this civilization was the Mississippian culture. The mound-building cultures had progressed to social complexity comparable to Post-Roman, Pre-Consolidation Tribal England.  Mounds became numerous and some settlements had large complexes of them. Structures were frequently built on top of the mounds.  Institutional social inequalities existed, such as slavery and human sacrifice.  Cahokia, near the important trade routes of the Mississippi and Missouri rivers, became an influential and highly developed community. Extensive trade networks extended from the Great Lakes to the Gulf of Mexico.
Cahokia was one of the great centers of Mississippian culture and its largest settlement of Mississippi.  The focal point of the settlement was the ceremonial mound called Monk's Mound.  Monk's Mound was the largest mound ever constructed by mound-building people and was nearly 100 feet tall and 900 feet long. Excavation on the top of Monk's Mound has revealed evidence of a large building - perhaps a temple - that could be seen throughout the city. The city was spread out on a large plain south of Monks mound.
Monk's Mound located at the Cahokia site near Collinsville, Illinois.
The city proper contained 120 mounds at varying distances from the city center.  The mounds were divided into several different types, each of which may have had its own meaning and function.  A circle of posts immediate to Monk's Mound marked a great variety of astronomical alignments.  The city was surrounded by a series of watchtowers and occupied a diamond shape pattern that was nearly 5 miles across.  At its best, the city may have contained as many as 40,000 people, making it the largest in North America.
It is likely the Mississippian culture was dispersed by the onslaught of viral diseases, such as smallpox, which were brought by European explorers.  Urban areas were particularly vulnerable to these diseases, and Cahokia was abandoned in the 1500's.  The dispersal of tribes made it impractical to build or maintain mounds and many were found abandoned by European explorers.
Graph of the population population of Mexico, with major epidemics marked.
European contact brought immediate changes in many tribes of North America.  One of the most significant changes to all Indian tribes was the introduction of viral diseases and epidemics.[4][5]  Smallpox was probably the single biggest scourge to hit North America.  Infected contagious Indians spread the plague far inland almost immediately after early encounters with European settlers.  It is estimated that around 90% of all Native Americans died from diseases soon after first contact.[6] The effects traumatized many powerful and important cultures.  Urban areas were particularly vulnerable and Native American culture adapted by becoming more isolated, less unified, and with a renewed round of inter-tribal warfare as tribes seized the opportunity to gain resources once owned by rivals.
On the other hand, Europeans brought invasive plants and animals.[7][8] The horse was re-introduced to America[9] (as original paleo-American populations of wild horses from the Bering land bridge were extinct) and quickly adapted to free range on the sprawling great plains. Tribes of nomadic Native Americans were quick to see the horse's value as an increase in their mobility;[10] allowing them to better adapt to changing conditions and as a valuable asset in warfare.[11] Along with Europeans bringing plants and animals, the Europeans were able to take several plants such as corn, potatoes, and tomatoes back to their native countries.[12]
Give two names for the indigenous peoples living in America, and name the circumstances behind each name.
What evidence do we have for the Inca, Mayan, and Aztec cultures?
What in the climate contributed to the rise and fall of the indigenous peoples of South-West North America?
↑ Gerszak, Fen Montaigne,Jennie Rothenberg Gritz,Rafal. "The Story of How Humans Came to the Americas Is Constantly Evolving" (in en). Smithsonian Magazine. https://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/how-humans-came-to-americas-180973739/.
↑ a b c "American Indians and Native Americans". https://www.umass.edu/legal/derrico/shoshone/indian.html. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
↑ a b c d "Migration of Humans into the Americas (c. 14,000 BCE)". https://www.science.smith.edu/climatelit/migration-of-humans-into-north-america/. Retrieved 23 September 2020.
↑ "Conclusion :: U.S. History". https://www.dhr.history.vt.edu/modules/us/mod01_pop/conclusion.html.
↑ "Columbian Exchange" (in en). Immigration History Research Center College of Liberal Arts. 16 June 2015. https://cla.umn.edu/ihrc/news-events/other/columbian-exchange.
↑ "Guns Germs & Steel: Variables. Smallpox PBS". https://www.pbs.org/gunsgermssteel/variables/smallpox.html.
↑ "APWG: Background Information". https://cybercemetery.unt.edu/archive/nisic/20110630090151/http://www.nps.gov/plants/alien/bkgd.htm.
↑ "Escape of the invasives: Top six invasive plant species in the United States" (in en). Smithsonian Institution. https://www.si.edu/stories/escape-invasives.
↑ "History of Horses in America". https://www.belrea.edu/a-history-of-horses-in-america/.
↑ "Wealth & Status A Song for the Horse Nation - October 29, 2011 through January 7, 2013 - The National Museum of the American Indian - Washington, D.C.". https://americanindian.si.edu/static/exhibitions/horsenation/wealth.html.
↑ "Warfare A Song for the Horse Nation - October 29, 2011 through January 7, 2013 - The National Museum of the American Indian - Washington, D.C.". https://americanindian.si.edu/static/exhibitions/horsenation/warfare.html.
↑ "Columbian Exchange (1492-1800)" (in en). https://mypages.unh.edu/hoslac/book/columbian-exchange-1492-1800.
Who were the Vikings?
Map showing area of Scandinavian settlements during the 9th to 10th centuries. Also the trade and raid routes, often inseparable, are marked.
The Norsemen (Norwegians) who lived around the beginning of the second millennium are today more commonly known as Vikings. The Vikings were farmers who "traded" during the slow months. Now, "trading" doesn't mean "I'll give you five sheep for that cow." It means "I'll give you five sheep for that cow. If you don't want to trade, I'll kill you." These people loved to travel in boats from one place to another, and this led to the second discovery of North America (Native Americans first, Vikings second, and Columbus third). Although Irish monks, most famously Brendan, and other European explorers had voyaged in the western waters, the Vikings established a settlement, the remains of which can be seen today at L'Anse aux Meadows, Newfoundland.
The Norse are believed by some to have descended from the Huns, a people of uncertain ancestry. The Norse are believed by some to be the ancestors of the Goths and of modern Germans. There is no proof for these claims.
Eric "the Red" and his Children
Eric "the Red" fled Norway to Iceland to avoid facing a murder charge, and later was banished from Iceland for yet another murder. His children would have great impact on the discovery and explorations of North America.
Bjarni travelled around trading in his little knarr. A knarr is a small Norwegian boat that only fits about three to five people. Bjarni sighted Vinland (modern Newfoundland).
Explored from 1004 to 1005 AD.
Traveled from 1008-1009 AD. He bravely took cattle with him on his knarr, hoping to settle in Greenland. "Greenland" is a misnomer, since it's covered in ice; his cattle died.
Freydis was Eric's daughter, his fourth child. Since Freydis was a woman, there were many restrictions put upon her, but she wanted to make a name for herself.  In 1013 AD, she explored with 2 Icelandic men, and killed them and their men upon arriving in Vinland (North America).
Leif Ericson did further exploration of Vinland and settled there. In 986, Norwegian-born Eirik Thorvaldsson, known as Eirik the Red, explored and colonized the southwestern part of Greenland. It was his son, Leiv Eiriksson, who became the first European to set foot on the shores of North America, and the first explorer of Norwegian extraction now accorded worldwide recognition.
The date and place of Leiv Eiriksson's birth has not been definitely established, but it is believed that he grew up on Greenland. The Saga of Eric the Red relates that he set sail for Norway in 999, served King Olav Trygvasson for a term, and was sent back to Greenland one year later to bring Christianity to its people.
By the 15th Century European trade for luxuries such as spices and silk had inspired European explorers to seek new routes to Asia. The fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Empire in 1453 had closed a crucial trade corridor. Trade throughout the Ottoman Empire was difficult and unreliable. Portugal was in the lead in exploration, slowly exploring the shores of the African Continent in search of a better route to the spices and luxuries of the Orient.
Then the Italian Christopher Columbus submitted plans for a voyage to Asia by sailing around the world. By the late 15th century most educated Europeans knew the world was round. The Greek mathematician Eratosthenes had accurately deduced that the world was approximately 25,000 miles in circumference. Many of the experts studying Columbus's plans on behalf of the European monarchies he approached for funding realized that this was too far for any contemporary sailing ship to go. Columbus contested the measurements, claiming that the world was much smaller than was widely believed.
After approaching the monarchies of several Italian city-states, and repeated appeals to the English and Portuguese monarchies, the Spanish King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella finally decided to give Columbus a chance. King Ferdinand thought Columbus might find something to compete with the neighboring kingdom of Portugal. Columbus set out on August 3rd, 1492. Five weeks later, after almost being thrown overboard by his own crew, the long voyage ended when land was sighted. This was an island called Guanahani (now known as San Salvador, in the island chain called the Bahamas). During this voyage Columbus also explored what is now considered the northeast coast of Cuba and the northern coast of Hispaniola. On his return to Spain, news of the new lands spread throughout Europe. Columbus was to make three more voyages to the New World between 1492 and 1503, exploring the Caribbean and the mainland of Central and South America. He imported sugar cane to the Americas, beginning an important industry.
Columbus was granted authority by the Spanish Monarchy to claim land for the Spanish, begin a settlement, trade for valuable goods or gold, and explore. He was also made governor of all the lands which he found. Columbus become an increasingly savage and brutal governor in the course of his four voyages. He enslaved and stole from the natives, at one point threatening to cut off the hands of any native who failed to give him gold. He was retired, and to the end of his life he believed that he had reached Asia.
It took another Italian explorer for Spain, Amerigo Vespucci, to correct this error. Amerigo described the lands around his islands and tried to deduce their proximity to Asia. From his voyages, Amerigo deduced that Columbus had found a new Continent. This new continent would be named America.
A painting of Jacques Cartier meeting with the Iroquoian people of Stadacona.
Christopher Columbus's voyages inspired other European powers to seek out the new world as well.  Jacques Cartier, a respected mariner in his native France, proposed a trip to the North to investigate whether Asia could be reached from another route. His trip in 1534 retraced much of the voyages of the vikings and established contacts with natives in modern-day Canada. He explored some of northern Canada, established friendly relations with the American Indians, and discovered that the St Lawrence river region neither had abundant gold nor a northwest passage to Asia.
During the 16th century, the taming of Siberian wilderness by the Russians established a thriving fur trade which created a great demand for fur throughout Europe. France was quick to realize that the North held great potential as a provider of fur. Samuel de Champlain settled the first permanent settlement in present-day Canada and created a thriving trade with the Native Americans for beaver pelts and other animal hides.
Meanwhile, in the South, Early French Protestants, called Huguenots, had the opportunity to leave hostile European lands while advancing French claims to the new world. Settlements in present-day Florida and Georgia would create tension with Spanish conquistadors, who after conquering Caribbean lands would begin to expand their search for new lands. In contrast to these French Protestant colonies, in the 17th century French members of the Catholic order of Jesuits organized a settlement in what would become Maine, and began missionary efforts in what would become lower Canada and upper New York State.
Claims made by the Spanish Empire during the Rule of Phillip II, Phillip III, and Phillip IV. Claims and real control of an area could be different.
The Spanish conquistador Ponce de Leon was an early visitor to the Americas, traveling to the new world on Columbus's second voyage. He became the first governor of the present-day area of Puerto Rico in 1509. However, upon the death of Christopher Columbus, the Spanish did not allow Christopher's son to succeed. Like his father, he had committed atrocities against the Native Americans of the Caribbean. The two governors were released and replaced with successors from Spain.
Ponce De Leon, freed of his governorship, decided to explore areas to the north, where there was rumored to be a fountain of youth that restored the youth of anyone drinking from it.  Ponce de Leon found a peninsula on the coast of North America, called the new land 'Florida' and chartered a colonizing expedition. His role was brief: attacked by Native American forces, he died in nearby Cuba.
By the early 16th century, Spanish conquistadors had penetrated deep into the Central and South American continents. Native American cultures had collected large troves of gold and valuables and given them to leaders of these prosperous empires. The conquistadors, believing they held considerable military and technological superiority over these cultures, attacked and destroyed the Aztecs in 1521 and the Incas in 1532.
The wealth seized by the Spanish would lead to piracy and a new wave of settlements as the other colonial powers became increasingly hostile towards Spain. Many areas that had been colonized by Spain were inundated with French and English pirates.
By 1565, Spanish forces looked to expand their influence to the New World by attacking the French settlement of Fort Caroline. The Spanish navy overwhelmed 200 French Huguenot settlers, slaughtering them even as they surrendered to Spain's superior military might. Spain formed the settlement of St. Augustine as an outpost to ensure that French Huguenots where no longer welcome in the area. St. Augustine is the oldest continuously occupied European-established city in North America.
In 1587 a Spanish Galleon landed in what is currently California with Filipinos aboard, making them among the first Asians to land in what would become the modern United States.[1]
Catholicism was introduced to the American colonies by the Spanish settlers in what is now present day Florida (1513) and the South West United States.[2] The first Christian worship service was a Catholic mass held in Florida in 1559, in what we now identify as Pensacola. Spain established the first permanent European Catholic settlement in St. Augustine, Florida in 1565, to help the settlers complete the "moral imperative" which was to convert all the Native peoples to Christianity, and to also to help support the treasure fleets of Spain.[3] During the time period of 1635-1675 Franciscans operated between 40 and 70 mission stations, attempting to convert about 26,000 "Hispanicized" natives who organized themselves into 4 provinces, Timucua, in central Florida, Guale, along the coast of Georgia, Apalachee on the northeastern edge of the Gulf of Mexico, and Apalachicola to the west.
England funded an initial exploratory trip shortly after Christopher Columbus's first voyage. Departing England in 1501, John Cabot explored the North American continent. He correctly supposed that the spherical shape of the earth made the North, where the longitudes are much shorter, a quicker route to the New World than a trip to the South islands Columbus was exploring. Encouraged, he asked the English monarchy for a more substantial expedition to further explore and settle the lands which he had found.  The ships departed and were never seen again. England remained preoccupied with political affairs for much of the 16th century. This was despite the insistence of the author Richard Haklyt, who translated some of the accounts of exploration into English. He wrote that England ought to seek colonies in America, specifically in Virginia.
By the beginning of the 17th century, England, Scotland, and other English possessions had formed the nation of Great Britain and was becoming a formidable foe on the world's stage. The quickly expanding British navy was preparing for a massive strike upon the Spanish armada.
Sir Walter Raleigh, who had gained considerable favor from Queen Elizabeth I by suppressing rebellions in Ireland, sought to establish an empire in the new world. His Roanoke colony would be relatively isolated from existing settlements in North America. He funded the colony with his own money, unlike the previous explorers who had been funded and sponsored by monarchies. It is assumed that the colony was destroyed during a three year period in which England was at war with Spain and did serious damage to the Spanish navy.
The war left the British monarchy so drained of money and resources that the monarchy sold a charter containing lands between present-day South Carolina and the US-Canada border to two competing groups of investors, the Plymouth Company and the London Company. The two companies were given the North and South portions of this area, respectively. There was an overlapping area of development in the middle of the two Companies, a place both could exploit provided one Company's settlement wasn't within a hundred miles of the other's settlement. The Northern Plymouth settlement in Maine failed and was abandoned, but the London company established a Jamestown settlement in 1606.
The ruins of Jamestown still stand to this day.
The new area was named Virginia, after both the organizing Virginia Company of London and Queen Elizabeth, "the Virgin Queen." Founded in 1607 with a charter from the Virginia Company, Jamestown was the first permanent English colony in the Americas. However, the swampy terrain was a breeding ground for mosquitoes, which carried dysentery, malaria, and smallpox, diseases that the English did not know. Many of the settlers fell sick and died shortly after.
In addition, Virginia's first government was weak, and its individuals frequently quarreled over policies. The colonists frantically searched for gold, silver, and gems, ignoring their own sicknesses. Indian raids further weakened defense and unification, and Jamestown began to die off. By the winter of 1609-1610, also known as the Starving Time, only 60 settlers remained from the original 500 passengers.
Two men helped the colony to survive: John Smith and John Rolfe. Smith, who arrived in Virginia in 1608, introduced an ultimatum: those who did not work would not receive food or pay. The colonists at last learned how to raise crops and trade with the nearby Indians, with whom Smith had made peace. In 1612, the English businessman Rolfe discovered that Virginia had ideal conditions for growing tobacco. This discovery, and the breeding of a new, "sweeter" strain, led to the plant becoming the colony's major cash crop. Tobacco was then used as medicine against the plague. With English demand for tobacco rising, Virginia had found a way to support itself economically.
In 1619, Virginia set up the House of Burgesses, the first elected legislative assembly in America. It marked the beginnings of self-government, replacing the martial law that was previously imposed on the colonists. However, at the same time Virginia was declared a "crown colony." Its charter was transferred from the Virginia Company to the Crown of England, which meant that Jamestown was now a colony run by the English monarchy. While the House of Burgesses was still allowed to run the government, the king also appointed a royal governor to settle disputes and enforce certain British policies.
Name the areas associated with these explorers: Christopher Columbus, Jacques Cartier,
John Cabot, Sir Walter Raleigh.
Name three motives behind Columbus's voyages.
↑ https://migrationmemorials.trinity.duke.edu/items/landing-first-filipinos
↑ Death in Early America.  Margaret M. Coffin.  1976
↑ American Catholics, James Hennesey, S.J.  1981
Christopher Columbus and three ships - the Niña, the Pinta, and the Santa Maria - set sail on August 3, 1492. On October 12, a lookout cried out that he had sighted land. The crew set foot on an island that day, naming it San Salvador. It is unknown which exact island was discovered by Columbus. (Note that the island presently called San Salvador is so-called in honor of Columbus' discovery; it is not necessarily the one on which Columbus set foot.)
The Native Americans inhabiting the islands were described as "Indians" by Columbus, who had believed that he had discovered the East Indies (modern Indonesia). In reality, he had found an island in the Caribbean. He continued to explore the area, returning to Spain. Columbus' misconception that he found Asia was corrected years later by the Italian explorer Amerigo Vespucci, after whom America may be named.
In Europe, the power of the Pope and the influence of Catholicism was undoubted. The Catholic religion affected every aspect of politics on the continent. However, in the sixteenth century, the conditions were ripe for reform. Gutenberg's printing press made the spread of ideas much easier. The influence of nationalism grew, and rulers began to resent the power possessed by the Pope.
The Protestant movement may have commenced earlier, but the publication of Ninety-Five Theses by Martin Luther in 1517 spurred on the revolution within the Church. Luther attacked the Church's theology, which, he believed, misrepresented The Bible and placed too much authority in the hands of the clergy, and wished to reform the Church. After being excommunicated, Luther published many books on Reform. Luther's works were most
Persons other than Luther championed the cause of Reform. In Switzerland, Huldreich Zwingli advanced Protestant ideas, which mostly affected his home country. Similarly, Frenchman John Calvin helped the spread of Protestantism in France and the Netherlands.
English Protestantism resulted from the direct influence of the British monarch.  Henry VIII (1509-1547) sought to divorce his wife, Catherine of Aragon, because she had failed to produce a viable male heir to the throne.  When his divorce led to excommunication by the Pope, Henry simply declared the entire country free of Catholic domination and a bastion of Protestantism.  Henry reasoned that England could survive under its own religious regulation (Anglican) and he named himself head of the church.
After Henry VIII died, he was succeeded by his son Edward VI (1547-1553) who reigned briefly before dying.  Edward's death led to the ascension of Henry's daughter by Catherine, Mary I (1553-1558).  A staunch Catholic, Mary sought to return England back to the Catholic church.  Her religious zeal and persecution of Protestants earned her the nickname, "Bloody Mary."  After a short reign, she was succeeded by her half-sister, Elizabeth.  Elizabeth I (1558-1603) was the daughter of Henry's second wife, Anne Boleyn.  Her ascendency to the throne resulted when neither of her half siblings, Edward and Mary, produced an heir to the throne.
Under her siblings' reign, the nation constantly battled religious fervor as it sought to identify itself as either Protestant or Catholic.  Henry VIII had severed ties with the Roman Catholic Church upon his excommunication after divorcing Catherine of Aragon.  He established the Church of England (the precursor to the Anglican Church) as the official state religion and named himself, not the Pope, as its head.  Under Mary, the country returned to Catholic rule.  The Elizabethan Age brought stability to English government. Elizabeth sought a compromise (the Elizabethan Settlement) which returned England to a nation governed by Protestant theology with a Catholic ritual.  Elizabeth called Parliament in 1559 to consider the Reformation Bill that re-established an independent Church of England and redefined the sacrament of communion.  Parliament also approved the Act of Supremacy, establishing ecclesiastical authority with the monarch.
Elizabeth's far more important response was to stabilize the English economy following the 1551 collapse of the wool market.  To respond to this economic crisis, Elizabeth used her power as monarch to shift the supply-demand curve.  She expelled all non-English wool merchants from the empire.  Her government placed quotas on the amount of wool that could be produced while also encouraging manors to return to agricultural production.  She also started trading directly with the Spanish colonies in direct violation of their tariff regulations.  This maritime violation would later result in an attack on England by the Spanish Armada in 1588.
Queen Elizabeth was a very popular monarch.  Her people followed her in war and peace.  She remained unmarried until her death, probably through a reluctance to share any power and preferring a series of suitors.  This gave her the name,  the Virgin Queen, and in honor of her, a colony was named Virginia a few years after her death.
In the aftermath of the Armada's overwhelming defeat and building on the development of a strong fleet started by Henry VIII, England began to gain recognition as a great naval power. Nationalism in England increased tremendously. Thoughts of becoming a colonial power were inspired. These thoughts were aided by the fact that the defeated Spanish lost both money and morale, and would be easy to oppose in the New World.
In 1584, Richard Hakluyt proposed a strong argument for expansion of English settlement into the new world.  With his Discourse Concerning Western Planting, Hakluyt argued that creating new world colonies would greatly benefit England.  The colonies could easily produce raw materials that were unavailable in England.  By establishing colonies, England would assure itself of a steady supply of materials that it currently purchased from other world powers.  Second, inhabited colonies would provide a stable market for English manufactured goods.  Finally, as the economic incentives were not enough, the colonies could provide a home for disavowed Englishmen.
The English had already begun the exploration of the New World prior to the Armada's defeat. In 1584, Queen Elizabeth granted Sir Walter Raleigh a charter authorizing him to explore the island of Roanoke, which is part of what is now North Carolina.
Between 1584 and 1586, Raleigh financed expeditions to explore the island of Roanoke and determine if the conditions were proper for settlement. In 1586, about a hundred men were left on the island. They struggled to survive, being reduced to eating dogs. They were, however, rescued- except for fifteen men whose fate remained a mystery.
After another expedition in 1587, another group of men, women, and children- a total of more than one-hundred people- remained on the island. Governor John White of the Roanoke colony discovered from a local Native American tribe that the fifteen men who were not rescued were killed by a rival tribe. While attempting to gain revenge, White's men killed members of a friendly tribe and not the members of the tribe that allegedly killed the fifteen men.
Having thus strained relations with the Natives, the settlers could not survive easily. John White decided to return to England in 1587 and return with more supplies. When he returned, England faced war against Spain. Thus delayed, White could not return to Roanoke until 1590. When he did return, White discovered that Roanoke was abandoned. All that gave clue to the fate of the colony was the word Croatan, the name of a nearby Native American tribe, carved out on to a tree. No attempt was made to discover the actual cause of the disappearance until several years later.
There are only theories as to the cause of the loss of Roanoke. There are two major possibilities. Firstly, the settlers may have been killed by the Natives. Second, the settlers may have assimilated themselves into the Native tribes. But there is no evidence that settles the matter beyond doubt.
Use the content in this chapter and/or from external sources to answer the following questions. Remember to properly cite any sources used.
Identify or explain the significance of the following people:(a) Christopher Columbus(b) Martin Luther(c) King Henry VIII(d) Richard Hakluyt(e) Elizabeth I(f) Sir Walter Raleigh
What primary factor(s) led to the shift from Catholicism to Protestant belief in England?
Why did King Henry VIII establish the Church of England?  How did this influence the English Reformation?
Differentiate between Elizabeth I's policies and Henry VIII's. What attitudes did the English have toward Elizabeth and her rule?
What did the defeat of the Spanish Armada symbolize to all of Europe?
What difficulties did the colonists of Raleigh face between 1584 and 1587? What was the fate of the colony?
The islands of Great Britain changed greatly in the Renaissance, resulting in the Church of England, the British Civil War, and total transformation of economic, political, and legal systems. Yet through this time, despite pressure from other nations and America's own Natives, a diverse set of English colonies were planted and thrived.
These new colonies were funded in three different ways. In one plan, corporate colonies were established by joint stock companies. A joint stock company was a project in which people would invest shares of stock into building a new colony. Depending on the success of the colony, each investor would receive profit based on the shares he had bought. This investment was less risky than starting a colony from scratch, and each investor influenced how the colony was run. These investors often elected their own public officials. (An example of a joint stock company on another continent was the British East India Company.) Virginia was settled in this way.
Proprietary colonies were owned by a person or family who made laws and appointed officials as he or they pleased. Development was often a direct result of this ownership. Charles II granted William Penn the territory now known as Pennsylvania. Penn's new colony gave refuge to Quakers, a group of millennial Protestants who opposed the Church of England. (Quakers did not have ministers and did not hold to civil or religious inequality, making them a dangerous element in hierarchical societies.) Penn was an outspoken Quaker and had written many pamphlets defending the Quaker faith. He also invited settlers from other countries and other Protestant minorities, and even some Catholics.
Finally, royal colonies were under the direct control of the King, who appointed a Royal Governor. The resulting settlement was not always identical to England. For example, England had broken with Catholicism during the reign of Henry the Eighth, and the Old Faith was seen not only as religious heresy but the prelude to domination by other countries. Yet Maryland's grant of toleration of Catholics was granted as a boon from the British Crown. In 1634, Lord Baltimore appointed George Calvert of England to settle a narrow strip of land north of Virginia and south of Pennsylvania as a Catholic colony via a royal charter. Fifteen years later, in 1649, he signed the Act of Toleration, which proclaimed religious freedom for its colonists. Despite the original charter, Protestants later became the majority faith. After Lord Baltimore's death several years later, Margaret Brent, the wife of an esteemed landowner in Maryland, executed his will as governor of the colony. She defied gender roles in the colonies by being the first woman of non-royal heritage to govern an English colony.
The Massachusetts Bay Colony, another corporate colony, was founded as a place far from England where its religious dissenters could live. The Puritans, a group of radical Protestants who wanted what they called a return to the faith of the Bible, suffered torture and execution because they disagreed with the official Church of England. In 1620, forty-one Puritans (who called themselves Pilgrims) sailed for the new world. Their own contemporary accounts show that the Pilgrims originally intended to settle the Hudson River region near present day Long Island, New York. Once Cape Cod was sighted, they turned south to head for the Hudson River, but encountered treacherous seas and nearly shipwrecked. They then decided to return to Cape Cod rather than risk another attempt to head south. After weeks of scouting for a suitable settlement area, the Mayflower's passengers finally landed at Plymouth in present-day Massachusetts on December 26, 1620. They called it Massachusetts after the name of the Indian tribe then living there.
Passengers of the Mayflower signing the "Mayflower Compact"
William Bradford, who was selected as a governor after the death of John Carver, wrote a journal that helps us to better understand the hardships colonists endured, encounters with the Native Americans, and ultimately, the success of the colony. The Pilgrims agreed to govern themselves in the manner set forth in the Mayflower Compact, which signed on the Pilgrims' ship, The Mayflower. After two years they abandoned the communal form of partnership begun under the Compact and in 1623 assigned individual plots of land to each family to work.
Ten years later, the joint-stock Massachusetts Bay Company acquired a charter from King Charles of England. The colony of Plymouth was eventually absorbed by Massachusetts Bay, but it remained separate until 1691.
A large group of Pilgrims later migrated to the new colony of Massachusetts Bay. In keeping with its mother Church of England, the colony did not provide religious freedom. It only allowed (male) Puritans the right to vote, established Puritanism as the official religion of the colony in The Act of Toleration, and punished people who did not go to their Church.
Other countries used the joint-stock company to fund exploration. In 1609, the Dutch East India company discovered a territory on the eastern coast of North America, from latitude 38 to 45 degrees north. This was an expedition in the yacht Halve Maen ("Half Moon") commanded by Henry Hudson. Adriaen Block and Hendrick Christiaensz explored the territory from 1611 until 1614. In March of 1614 the States General, the governing body of the Netherlands, proclaimed exclusive patent for trade in the New World. The States General issued patents for development of New Netherland as a private commercial venture. Ft. Nassau was swiftly built in the area of present day Albany to defend river traffic and to trade with Native Americans. New Netherland became a province of the Dutch Republic in 1624. The northern border was then reduced to 42 degrees north, as the English had encroached north of Cape Cod.
According to the Law of Nations, a claim on a territory required not only discovery and charting but settlement. In May 1624 the Dutch completed their claim by landing thirty Dutch families on Noten Eylant, modern Governors Island.
In the next few decades incompetent directors-general ran New Netherland. The settlers were attacked by Native Americans, and British and Dutch conflicts seemed destined to destroy the colony. All that changed when Peter Stuyvesant was appointed Director-General in 1647. As he arrived he said, "I shall govern you as a father his children". He expanded the colony's borders. He oversaw conquest of the one settlement of northernmost Europe, New Sweden, in 1655. He resolved the border dispute with New England in 1650. He improved defenses against Native American raids, and the population of the colony went from 500 in 1640 to 9,000 by 1664. But in August of 1664, four English warships arrived in New York Harbor demanding the surrender of the colony. At first, Stuyvesant vowed to fight, but there was little ammunition and gunpowder. He received weak support from the overwhelmed colonists, and was forced to surrender. New Netherland was subsequently renamed New York, in honor of the British Duke of York.
In an attempt to gain supremacy over trade, the English waged war against the Dutch in 1664. The English took control over the Dutch harbor of New Amsterdam on the Atlantic coast of America. James, the brother of King Charles II, received the charter for New Amsterdam and the surrounding Dutch territory.
In 1673 the Dutch, lead by Michiel de Ruyter, briefly reoccupied New Netherland again, this time naming it New Orange. After peace was made, ending the Third Anglo-Dutch War, they agreed to return it to the English.
Patterns of Colonization in the Other Early Colonies
The territory of Carolina, named after the British King Charles I, was granted as a proprietary colony to eight different nobles. The proprietors divided Carolina into two separate colonies -- North Carolina and South Carolina.
Four colonies were formed by division from already extant larger territories. When New Holland was taken to become New York, King James granted a portion of the territory, present-day New Jersey, to Lord Berkeley and Sir George Cartaret, while retaining present-day New York for himself as a proprietary colony. Sir George had come from the Isle of Jersey, and the new colony was named accordingly. Another portion of the territory became the crown colony Connecticut. This colony was also named for its native tribe of Indians. A corner of Pennsylvania which was not peopled by Quakers separated in 1704 to become the colony of Delaware. This was given the name of Thomas West, Third Baron De La Warr, a nobleman under Queen Elizabeth and a noted adventurer.
Rhode Island was a unique experiment in religious and political freedom. Massachusetts banished Roger Williams after he began asserting that Jesus Christ meant for the Church to be separate from the governing authority. This dissenter from the Church of England, and then from the Puritans, became the first American Baptist. After many adventures in other colonies, he bought land from the Narragansett Indians for a new settlement. Providence was meant to be a colony free from religious entanglements and a refuge for people of conscience. He was later followed by Anne Hutchinson. She had outraged Boston divines because she was a woman who preached, and because she believed that one's works were not always tied to grace, unlike the Puritans. She also bought land from the Indians. On this was the settlement subsequently named Portsmouth, and afterward a dissident sister town, Newport. The colony was partially based upon Aquidneck Island, later called Rhode Island for unknown reasons, and the entire establishment eventually took its name from that place.
Georgia was another proprietary colony, named after King George I, with a charter granted to James Oglethorpe and others in 1732. It was intended as a "buffer" colony to protect the others from attacks from the Florida Spanish and the Louisiana French. Because of this, Georgia was the only colony to receive funds from the Crown from its founding. The laws in Great Britain put people in prison for debt. Many of these people were shipped from overcrowded jails to freedom in the wilds of Georgia colony. America was already seen as a land of prosperity, and Oglethorpe hoped that the ex-prisoners would soon become honest and rich. However, few of the prisoners of London jails knew how to survive in the new wilderness.
The Colonies are often considered as three groups: New England (New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut), the Southern Colonies (Maryland, Virginia, the Carolinas, and Georgia), and the Middle Colonies (New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Delaware).  Sometimes the Carolinas and Georgia are counted as separate from the Chesapeake Colonies.
Each group had geographic and economic characteristics. New England's rocky soil only encouraged small farms, and its agricultural opportunities were limited. Thus it focused on fishing, forestry, shipping, and small industry to make money.[1]
Richer land in the Southern colonies was taken over by individual farmers who grasped acreage. This created large plantation farms that grew tobacco, and later cotton. Farms in the Carolinas also farmed sugar, rice, and indigo. In the 17th century, these were farmed by indentured servants, people who would work for a period of years in return for passage to America and land. Many of these servants died before their indentures ended. A group of indentured servants rose up in Bacon's Rebellion in 1676. After Bacon's Rebellion, plantations began using African slaves instead. Even after release from indenture, many of these white people remained in the economic lower classes, though not subject to the slave codes, which became more harsh as time passed, denying almost all liberty to slaves in the southern colonies. By the American Revolution, one in five colonists was an African slave. And the products produced by slavery in the South were consumed and traded by towns in the Middle Colonies and New England. Few people questioned the slave economy.
The Middle Colonies had medium-sized farms. These colonies also had people from many different cultures with many different beliefs. Individuals in these states used indentured servants, and later slaves, but there was not the concentration of masses of slave labor found in the Southern colonies.
Another distinction lies in religious practices. New England was mostly Congregationalist, with some admixture of Presbyterian congregations and the religious non-conformists who called themselves Baptists. These were all descendants of dissenters before and during the British Civil War. The South was mostly Anglican, cherishing religious and secular traditions and holidays. The Middle Colonies held small groups of people from Holland, German lands, and even Bohemia, and they brought a welter of Catholic and Protestant faiths.
Among the whites sent to the colonies by English authorities were many Scots-Irish people from Ulster. These had been Calvinist Protestants in the middle of a Irish Catholic majority, at odds both with them and with England. This minority settled in the frontier region of the Appalachian Mountains and eventually beyond in the Ohio and Mississippi country. In America their desire for land and freedom pushed the colonial boundary westward at little cost to the government, and provided an armed buffer between the eastern settlements and Native American tribes which had been driven away from the seaboard. Colonial frontiersmen endured a very harsh life, building their towns and farms by hand in a dense wilderness amid economic deprivation and native attack.
Each colony developed its own areas of edification and amusement, depending upon the local faith and the local capacities. The culture of the South recorded early interest in musical theater, with Charleston, South Carolina and Williamsburg, Virginia as hubs of musical activity. A performance of Richard III, the first professional production of Shakespeare in America, took place in New York City in 1750. And preachers, lecturers, and singers entertained the colonists.
Their commonalities were stronger than their differences. All three regions shared a population mostly derived from the British Isles. All had terrible roads, and all had connections to the Atlantic Ocean as a means of transportation. And all were tied to the Atlantic economy. Atlantic merchants used ships to trade slaves, tobacco, rum, sugar, gold, silver, spices, fish, lumber, and manufactured goods between America, the West Indies, Europe and Africa.[2]  New York, Philadelphia, Boston, and Charleston were the largest cities and main ports at that time.[3]
The first wave of colonists used hand labor to cultivate their farms, and established such land-based crafts such as pottery and tanning. As later ships brought cattle and horses, draft animals became part of the economy. Indentured servants, and then slaves kidnapped from Africa, were imported. This was when larger plantations began to be founded. In the latter part of the eighteenth century small-scale machine-based manufacturing began to appear. Individuals started to dig for coal and iron ore. New England used the latter to begin making building tools and horseshoes. A new textile industry arose, dependent in part upon Southern cotton. Powered by wood or coal and fed by the need for strong metal, household forges pioneered new techniques of iron-making. The blacksmith and the tinsmith became part of large settlements. Colonies started making mechanized clocks, guns, and lead type for printing.
Silver beaker made around 1670 by Jeremiah Dummer, the first American born silversmith.
Painting of the first slave auction in New Amsterdam held in 1655. (Painting from 1895)
The Mount Vernon Plantation, built in 1758. As Washington rebelled against the British, he kept his own slaves who were also dissatisfied with their lack of freedom.[4]
Mercantilism, Salutary Neglect and British Interference
The American colonies, entirely new societies separated by an ocean from Great Britain, believed they had the right to govern themselves. This belief was encouraged by Great Britain's Glorious Revolution and 1689 Bill of Rights, which gave Parliament the ultimate authority in government. A policy of relatively lax controls or Salutary Neglect ended in increased British regulation resulting from the policy of mercantilism, and seen through the Lords of Trade and the later Navigation Acts.
Parliament placed controls on colonial trade in obedience to the economic policy of mercantilism. This was the idea that a nation's economic power depended on the value of its exports. A country could use its colonies to create finished goods, rather than raw materials. These could be traded to other countries, thus increasing the strength of the colonizing nation. This policy had been put forth by a Frenchman named Jean-Baptiste Colbert. It seemed tailor-made for Great Britain. Spain had American gold as its economic base, and France had American furs. England had neither of these. But it had American cotton, molasses, and tobacco, as well as its state-of-the-art ships.  Prior to the mid-1700's, the colonies had enjoyed a long period of "salutary neglect", where the British largely let the colonies govern themselves. This now ended.
In an attempt to enforce mercantilism policies, King Charles II created the Lords of Trade as a new committee on the Privy Council. The Lords of Trade attempted to affect the government of the colonies in a manner beneficial to the English, rather than to the colonists.
The Lords of Trade attempted to convert all American colonies to royal ones so that the Crown could gain more power. Under King James II, the successor to Charles II, New York, New Jersey, and the Puritan colonies were combined into the Dominion of New England in 1687.
However, the Dominion only lasted a brief time. King James II, a Catholic, was seen as a threat by British Protestants. James was overthrown (he was technically held abdicated by Parliament) in the bloodless Glorious Revolution of 1688. In 1689, James' daughter Mary II and her husband William III took the throne as joint rulers. However, the British Parliament actually held the power. The Dominion of New England was dissolved, the various separate colonies were reestablished, and the Lords of Trade were abandoned (replaced by a Board of Trade, a purely advisory body).
Beginning in 1660, the Parliament of England passed the Navigation Acts to increase its benefit from its colonies. The Acts required that any colonial imports or exports travel only on ships registered in England, meaning that only England could have the shipping power and the fees derived from them. They forbid the colonies to export tobacco and sugar to any nation other than England. (Tobacco was then used as medicine, and sugar was used to make alcohol, also a medicine.) And the colonies could not import anything manufactured outside England unless the goods were first taken to England, where taxes were paid, and then to the colonies.
In the 1730s, The Sugar Act established a tax of six pence per gallon of sugar or molasses imported into the colonies. By 1750, Parliament had begun to ban, restrict, or tax several more products.  It tried to curtail all manufacture in the colonies. This provoked much anger among the colonists, despite the fact that their tax burdens were quite low, when compared to most subjects of European monarchies of the same period.
Colonists hated the Navigation Acts because they believed they would be more prosperous and rich if they could trade on their own behalf. They also believed that some vital resources would not be found in Britain.
Today, the area where the Indians of all the Great Plains lived is located from the Rocky mountains to the Mississippi River. During the 1700s, there were about 30 tribes that lived on the Great Plains. These tribes tended to rely on buffalo as their food source as well as other daily needs, such as clothing. Not only did Indians, specifically women, make their clothing out of buffalo, but also out of deer. Women would soak the deer or buffalo and scrape off the hair of the dead animal.[5]
Also, Indian tribes traded with one another. The number of horses an individual owned was a sign of wealth; Indians would trade their horses for food, tools, weapons(such as guns), and hides. Since the tribes spoke many different languages from one another, they had to use sign language to be able to trade with each other.[5]
A riot broke out on election day in Philadelphia in 1742 as a result of the Anglican population disagreeing with the Quaker majority.  The riot stemmed over a power struggle between the Anglican and Quaker population.  The Quakers had a history of political dominance over Philadelphia.  The German population backed the Quaker vote because of the Quaker Pacifism which would protect from higher taxes and ultimately the draft.  On election day, the Anglicans and sailors fought with the Quakers and Germans.  The Quakers were able to seek shelter in the courthouse and complete the election.  The Anglican party lost the election and 54 sailors were jailed following the riot.
As the three sections of the colonies through the 1700s were made up of people with different interests, they provided differing sorts of education for their children. Although there were commonalities -- a rich family in any of the three regions might send a son to Europe for his education -- people in different colonies tended to educate in differing ways.
New England's motives for education were both civil and religious. The good citizen had to know his or her Bible. The Massachusetts General School Law of 1647 stated that if more than 50 families lived in a community, a schoolteacher must be hired. This law gave a justification: "It being one chief project of that old deluder, Satan, to keep men from the knowledge of the Scriptures, as in former times by keeping them in an unknown tongue, so in these latter times by persuading from the use of tongues, that so that at least the true sense and meaning of the original might be clouded and corrupted with love and false glosses of saint-seeming deceivers; and to the end that learning may not be buried in the grave of our forefathers, in church and commonwealth, the Lord assisting our endeavors." This was the Pilgrim ethos, set up in opposition to what they saw as the ignorance imposed by tyrants. Both boys and girls were often taught to read the Bible by their parents, perhaps with the aid of a horn book, an alphabet and syllabary page covered by a protective layer of horn.
In addition to being able to read the Bible, a Christian ought to be able to govern in his society. (His society: for government was the province of godly, property-holding men, rather than women.) To obtain this youths had to gain a classical education -- that is, one based thoroughly on Latin. The 1647 law was the beginning of the American grammar school, which initially taught Latin, but later included practical subjects such as navigation, engineering, bookkeeping, and foreign languages.[6] Most of the schools opened in the colonial era were private. [7] However, they had been preceded by the first public-supported school, the Boston Latin School, in 1635. It had a rigorous education, and as a result, few students. Harvard was the first university in America, founded in 1636 and originally intended to teach Protestant clergy. Because of the small number of people graduating from the classical curriculum, attendance was low. Some people jumped directly from the classical curriculum to the University, sometimes entering Harvard as young as 14 or 15 years old. Cotton Mather graduated Harvard at 15, an exception only because of his extreme precocity. In private schools, boys and girls learned penmanship, basic Math, and reading and writing English. These fed the various trades, where older children were apprenticed. Girls who did not become servants were often trained for domestic life, learning needlework, cooking, and the several days-long task of cleaning clothes.
Like New England, the Middle Colonies had private schools which educated children in reading and writing. However, the basics were rarer. The further west one lived, the less likely one was to be able to go to school, or to read and write at all. Ethnic and religious sub-groups would have their own private schools, which taught their own children their own folk-ways. In none of the colonies was higher education certain. Secondary schools were very rare outside of such major towns as Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and Charleston.[8]
The Chesapeake experience was different again. Children could only could only read and write if their parents could.[9] And the South had few schools, of any kind, until the Revolutionary era. Children in wealthy families would study with private tutors. Though wealthy girls might learn 'the womanly arts,' they would not have the same curriculum as their brothers. Martha Washington's granddaughter Eliza Custis was laughed at by her stepfather when "[I] thought it hard they would not teach me Greek and Latin because I was a girl -- they laughed and said women ought not to know those things, and mending, writing, Arithmetic, and Music was all I could be permitted to acquire."[10] Middle class children might learn to read from their parents, and many poor children, as well as all black children, went unschooled. The literacy rates were lower in the South than the North until about the 19th century.[11]
In 1693 the College of William & Mary was founded, Virginia's first University. As the 18th century wore on, it specialized not in theology for clergymen but in law.[12] In 1701, the Collegiate College was founded. In 1718 it received funds from a Welsh governor of the British East India Company, Elihu Yale, and was renamed Yale College. These were later joined by several other universities, including Princeton in 1747. In the 18th century, astronomy, physics, modern history and politics took a bigger place in the college curriculum. Some colleges experimented with admitting Native American students in the 18th century, though not African-Americans.[13]
In 1640, The whole Booke of Psalms Faithfully Translated into English Metre, commonly known as the Bay Psalm Book, was printed in Cambridge, Massachusetts. It was the first book written in the new world. The Bay Psalm Book was the first metrical English translation of the Biblical psalms.[14] This famous and influential songbook was succeeded by a whole New England publishing industry. Sometime after 1687 the first New England Primer was published as an aid to childhood reading and spelling.
An alternative to the classical curriculum emerged in Benjamin Franklin's American Academy, founded in Philadelphia in 1751. This body represented something closer to the modern American high school, offering vocational education. This sort of school later outnumbered the classical secondary school. However, Franklin's Academy was private as well, making such learning open only to those who could afford it.
During this period colonists attempted to convert Native Americans to Christianity.[15]
Choose one of the following colonies: New York, Virginia, Massachusetts, Georgia. In which of the three areas is it located? Why and how was it initially colonized? How did its immigrants and the religions they adhered to affect it?
Why did the British interfere with the colonies?
↑ Morison, Samuel Eliot (1972). The Oxford History of the American People. New York City: Mentor. pp. 199–200. ISBN 0451-62600-1.
↑ Kurlansky, Mark. Cod: A Biography of the Fish That Changed the World. New York: Walker. ISBN 0-8027-1326-2.
↑ U.S. Census Bureau. "Earliest Population Figures for American Cities". http://www.census.gov/population/www/documentation/twps0027/tab02.txt. Retrieved 2010-08-29.
↑ "Resistance and Punishment" (in en). https://www.mountvernon.org/george-washington/slavery/resistance-and-punishment/. Retrieved 19 September 2020.
↑ a b Englar, Mary. The Great Plains Indians: Daily Life in the 1700s. Mankato, MN: Capstone, 2006. Print.
↑ A People and a Nation, Eighth Edition
↑ http://www.excite.com/education/education/history-of-american-education
↑ A People and a Nation Eighth Edition
↑ Edmund S. Morgan. Virginians At Home: Family Life in the Eighteenth Century. Charlottesville, VA: Dominion Books, 1962(1952). P. 17
↑ A People and a Nation, Eighth Edition
↑ Morgan, p. 27.
↑ A People and a Nation, Eighth Edition
↑ Farris, Jean Americans Musical Landscape, Volume 5
↑ http://www.encyclopedia.com/doc/1G2-2536600517.html
(The following text is from Wikipedia)
The French and Indian War (1754–1763) was the North American chapter of the Seven Years' War.[1] The name refers to the two main enemies of the British, the royal French forces and the various American Indian forces allied with them. This conflict, the fourth such colonial war between the kingdoms of France and Great Britain, resulted in the British conquest of all of New France east of the Mississippi River, as well as Spanish Florida. France ceded control of French Louisiana west of the Mississippi to its Spanish ally, to compensate it for its loss of Florida. By the end of this war France kept only the tiny islands of Saint Pierre and Miquelon north of the Caribbean. These colonies today still allow France access to the Grand Banks.
In Great Britain and France, the North American theatre of the Seven Years' War war usually has no special name, and so the entire worldwide conflict is known as the Seven Years' War (or the Guerre de sept ans). The "Seven Years" refers to events in Europe, from the official declaration of war in 1756 to the signing of the peace treaty in 1763. These dates do not correspond with the actual fighting in North America, where the fighting between the two colonial powers was largely concluded in six years, from the Jumonville Glen skirmish in 1754 to the capture of Montreal in 1760.[2]
Elsewhere the conflict is known by several names. In British North America, wars were often named after the sitting British monarch, such as King William's War or Queen Anne's War. Because there had already been a King George's War in the 1740s, British colonists named the second war in King George's reign after their opponents, and thus it became known as the French and Indian War.[3] This traditional name remains standard in the United States, although it obscures the fact that American Indians fought on both sides of the conflict.[4] American historians generally use the traditional name or the European title (the Seven Years' War), and have also invented other, less frequently used names for the war, including the Fourth Intercolonial War and the Great War for the Empire.[5] Canadian francophones and English speakers both refer to it as the Seven Years' War (Guerre de Sept Ans) or the War of the Conquest (Guerre de la Conquête), as the war in which New France was conquered by the British and became part of the British Empire. This war was also known as the Forgotten War.
A French fur trader. Economic interests were one of the main drivers of the war.
The French and Indian War began less than a decade after France and Great Britain had fought on opposing sides in the European War of the Austrian Succession (1740–1748). One cause for the conflict was territorial expansion. Newfoundland's Grand Banks were fertile fishing grounds and coveted by both sides. Both sides also wanted to expand their territories for trapping furs to trade, and for other pursuits that aided their economic interests. Both the British and the French used trading posts and forts to claim the Ohio Country, the vast territory between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River, from the Great Lakes to the Gulf of Mexico. English claims resulted from royal grants with no definite western boundaries. La Salle had claimed the Mississippi River for France: its drainage area includes the Ohio River Valley. Both Great Britain and France took advantage of Native American factions to secure these claims, to protect their territories, and to keep the other from growing too strong.
A second cause was political & religious ideology. The English Protestant colonists  feared papal influence in North America. New France was administered by French governors and Roman Catholic hierarchy. French missionaries included Armand de La Richardie. English history was told as a story of freedom from Catholic (i.e., foreign) influence. French control over North America represented a threat to Great Britain. In their turn, the French feared English  anti-Catholicism, in a time when Catholics were still being persecuted under English law.
Céloron's expedition consisted of 213 soldiers of the Troupes de la marine (French Marines) transported by twenty-three canoes. The expedition left Lachine on June 15, 1749, and two days later reached Fort Frontenac. It then continued along the shoreline of present-day Lake Erie. At Chautauqua Portage (Barcelona, New York), it moved inland to the Allegheny River.
On March 17, 1752, Governor-General de la Jonquière died. His temporary replacement was Charles le Moyne de Longueuil. It was not until July 1, 1752 that Ange Duquense de Menneville arrived in New France to take over the post.
In the spring of 1752, Longueuil dispatched an expedition to the Ohio River area. The expedition was led by Charles Michel de Langlade, an officer in the Troupes de la marine. Langlade was given 300 men, some French-Canadians, and others members of the Ottawa tribe. His objective was to punish the Miami of Pickawillany for continuing to trade with the British. At dawn on June 21, 1752, the war party attacked the British trading center at Pickawillany, killing fourteen people of the Miami nation, including "Old Britain." The expedition then returned home.
On September 3, 1753, Tanaghrisson (d. 1754), Chief of the Mingo, arrived at Fort Le Boeuf. One tradition states that Tanaghrisson hated the French because they had killed and eaten his father.  Tanaghrisson told Marin, "I shall strike . . .",[8] threatening the French. The show of force by the French had alarmed the Iroquois in the area. They sent Mohawk runners to William Johnson's manor in Upper New York. Johnson, known to the Iroquois as "Warraghiggey", meaning "He who does big business", had become a respected member of the Iroquois Confederacy in the area. In 1746, Johnson was made a colonel of the Iroquois, and later a colonel of the Western New York Militia.
At Albany, New York, there was a meeting between Governor Clinton of New York and Chief Hendrick, as well as other officials from a handful of American colonies. Chief Hendrick insisted that the British abide by their obligations and block French expansion. When an unsatisfactory response was offered by Clinton, Chief Hendrick proclaimed that the "Covenant Chain", a long-standing friendly relationship between the Iroquois Confederacy and the British Crown, was broken.
The earliest authenticated portrait of George Washington shows him wearing his colonel's uniform of the Virginia Regiment from the French and Indian War. However, this portrait was painted years after the war in 1772.
Governor Robert Dinwiddie of Virginia found himself in a predicament. Many merchants had invested heavily in fur trading in Ohio. If the French made good on their claim to the Ohio Country and drove out the British, then the Virginian merchants would lose a lot of money.
Dinwiddie could not possibly allow the loss of the Ohio Country to France. In October 1753 he wrote a letter to the commander of the French forces in the Ohio Country, Jacques Legardeur de Saint-Pierre, demanding an immediate French withdrawal. To deliver it he delegated Major George Washington of the Virginia militia. Major Washington left for Fort Le Boeuf on the 31st of October, along with his interpreter Jacob Van Braam and several other men.
A few days later, Washington and his party arrived at Wills Creek (Cumberland, Maryland). Here Washington enlisted the help of Christopher Gist, a surveyor who was familiar with the area. They arrived at Logstown on November 24, 1753. At Logstown, Washington met with Tanaghrisson, who was angry over the French military encroachment upon his land. Washington convinced Tanaghrisson to accompany his small group to Fort Le Boeuf.
On December 12, 1753, Washington and his men reached Fort Le Boeuf. Commander Saint-Pierre invited Washington to dine with him that evening. Over dinner, Washington presented Saint-Pierre with the letter from Dinwiddie. Saint-Pierre was civil in his response, saying, "As to the Summons you send me to retire, I do not think myself obliged to obey it."[9] The French explained to Washington that France's claim to the region was superior to that of the British, as René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de a Salle (1643–1687) had explored the Ohio Country nearly a century earlier.[10]
Washington's party left Fort Le Boeuf early on December 16, 1753. By January 16, 1754, they had arrived in Williamsburg, Virginia.  In his report, Washington stated, "The French had swept south."[11]  They had constructed and garrisoned forts at Presque Isle, Le Boeuf and Venango.
The French and Indian War was the last of four major colonial wars between the British, the French, and their Native American allies. Unlike the previous three wars, the French and Indian War began on North American soil and then spread to Europe, where Britain and France conti hhhbvfthg itain officially declared war on France on May 15, 1756, marking the beginnings of the Seven Years' War in Europe. Native Americans fought for both sides, but primarily alongside the French (with one exception being the Iroquois Confederacy, which sided with the American colonies and Britain). The first major event of the war was in 1754. Lieutenant Colonel George Washington, then twenty-one years of age, was sent to negotiate boundaries with the French, who did not give up their forts. Washington led a group of Virginian (colonial) troops to confront the French at Fort Duquesne (present day Pittsburgh). Washington discovered the French troops at the Battle of Jumonville Glen (about six miles or ten kilometers North-West of soon-to-be-established Fort Necessity). In the ensuing skirmish, a French Officer, Joseph Coulon de Jumonville, was killed. Washington pulled back a few miles and established Fort Necessity. The French forced Washington and his men to retreat. Meanwhile, the Albany Congress was taking place as means to discuss further action.
Edward Braddock led a campaign against the French at Fort Duquesne in 1755. Washington was again among the British and colonial troops. Braddock employed European tactics -- bold, linear marches and firing formations -- and employed heavy cannon. This led to disaster at the Monongahela. The French and natives were heavily outmanned and outgunned. But they used superior tactics, taking cover behind trees and bushes to gun down and rout the British. Braddock was killed. Despite four close calls, Washington escaped unharmed and led the survivors in retreat. This stunning British defeat heralded a string of major French victories over the next few years, at Fort Oswego, Fort William Henry, Fort Duquesne, and Carillon, where veteran Montcalm famously defeated five times his number. The sole British successes in the early years of the war came in 1755, at the Battle of Lake George, which secured the Hudson Valley; and in the taking of Fort Beauséjour (which protected the Nova Scotia frontier) by Lieutenant Colonel Robert Monckton. A consequence of this last battle was the subsequent forced deportation of the Acadian population of Nova Scotia and the Beaubassin region of Acadia.
In 1756 William Pitt became Secretary of State of Great Britain. His leadership, and France's continued neglect of the North-American theater, eventually turned the tide in favor of the British. The French were driven from many frontier posts such as Fort Niagara, and the key Fortress Louisbourg fell to the British in 1758. In 1759, the Battle of the Plains of Abraham gave Quebec City to the British, who had to withstand a siege there after the Battle of Sainte-Foy a year later. In September of 1760, Pierre François de Rigaud, Marquis de Vaudreuil-Cavagnal, the King's Governor of New France, negotiated a surrender with British General Jeffrey Amherst. General Amherst granted Vaudreuil's request that any French residents who chose to remain in the colony would be given freedom to continue worshiping in their Roman Catholic tradition, continued ownership of their property, and the right to remain undisturbed in their homes. The British provided medical treatment for the sick and wounded French soldiers, and French regular troops were returned to France aboard British ships with an agreement that they were not to serve again in the present war.
In 1752 the French and their Native allies raided a trading outpost sited at modern day Cleveland rid the area of Pennsylvanians. In 1754 General George Washington attacked French soldiers and then became trapped in his poorly built, Fort Necessity in Great Meadows Pennsylvania and more than one-third of Washingtons's men shortly became casualties. Twenty-two year old Washington and his men surrendered and were allowed to leave back to Virginia. In July 1755, a few miles south of Fort Duquensne in Pennsylvania, the combined forces of French and Natives attacked British colonial troops that were preparing a to assault the fort. The aftermath that ensued would result in a British defeat and General Edward Braddock would be killed. Once London heard of this Britain declared war upon France and formally began the seven years war. After this the British feared that France would attempt to retake Nova Scotia and that the 12,000 French Nova Scotians would break their neutrality, so the British military forced around seven thousand French Nova Scotians from their homeland. This was history's first large-scale modern deportation, the French would be sent from Louisiana to the Caribbean and families would become torn apart. In July of 1758 The British had recaptured the fort at Loiusberg winning control of the St. Lawerence River. This would cut the major French supply route and open up more supply lines for the British. In the fall of 1758 the Shawnee and Delaware Natives accepted peace offerings from the British and the French abandoned Fort Duquesne. A decisive attack would happen in the fall of 1759 when General James Wolfe's forces defeated the French on the Plains of Abraham and thus taking Quebec. A year after this event the British would capture Montreal and the North American stage of the war would be over.
The descent of the French on St. John's, Newfoundland, 1762.
Though most of the North American fighting ended on September 8, 1760, when the Marquis de Vaudreuil surrendered Montreal — and effectively all of Canada — to Britain (one notable late battle allowed the capture of Spanish Havana by British and colonial forces in 1762), the war officially ended with the signing of the Treaty of Paris on February 10, 1763. The treaty sealed France's loss of all its North American possessions east of the Mississippi except for Saint Pierre and Miquelon islands off Newfoundland. All of Canada was ceded to Britain. France regained the Caribbean islands of Guadeloupe and Martinique, which had been occupied by the British. The economic value of these islands to France was greater than that of Canada at the time, because of their rich sugar crops; and the islands were easier to defend. However, the British were happy to take New France: defense was not an issue, and they had many sources of sugar. Spain gained Louisiana, including New Orleans, in compensation for its loss of Florida to the British.
French Canada contained approximately 65,000 French-speaking Roman Catholic residents. Early in the war, in 1755, the British had expelled French settlers from Acadia. (Some of these eventually fled to Louisiana, creating the Cajun population.) Now at peace, and eager to secure control of its hard-won colony, Great Britain made concessions to its newly conquered subjects with the Quebec Act of 1774. The history of the Seven Years' War, particularly the siege of Québec and the death of British Brigadier General James Wolfe, generated a vast number of ballads, broadsides, images, maps and other printed materials, which testify to how this event continued to capture the imagination of the British public long after Wolfe's death in 1759.[12]
The European theatre of the war was settled by the Treaty of Hubertusburg on February 15, 1763. The war changed economic, political, and social relations between Britain and its colonies. It plunged Britain into debt, which the Crown chose to pay off with tax money from its colonies. These taxes contributed to the beginning the American Revolutionary War.
Battle of Jumonville Glen (May 28, 1754)
Battle of Fort Necessity, aka the Battle of Great Meadows (July 3, 1754)
Braddock Expedition (Battle of the Monongahela aka Battle of the Wilderness) (July 9, 1755)
Battle of Fort Duquesne (September 14, 1758)
Battle of Fort Ligonier (October 12, 1758)
Battle of Fort Oswego (August, 1756)
Battle of Fort Bull (March 27, 1756)
Battle of Sabbath Day Point (July 26, 1757)
Battle of Fort William Henry (August 9, 1757)
Battle of La Belle-Famille (July 24, 1759)
Battle of the Thousand Islands, 16-25 August, 1760
Battle of Great Cacapon (April 18, 1756)
Battle of Fort Beauséjour (June 16, 1755)
Battle of Fort Frontenac (August 25, 1758)
Battle of the Thousand Islands, 16-25 August, 1760
Battle of the Plains of Abraham (September 13, 1759)
Battle of Sainte-Foy (April 28, 1760)
Battle of Signal Hill  September 15, 1762
(The following text is taken from the Wikipedia article)
A portion of eastern North America; the 1763 "Proclamation line" is the border between the red and the pink areas.
The Royal Proclamation of 1763 was issued October 7, 1763 by George III following Great Britain's acquisition of French territory in North America after the end of the Seven Years' War. The purpose of the proclamation was to make sure Britain could control its new territory for its  The Proclamation in essence forbade Americans from settling or buying land west of the Appalachians. Colonists were angry because many already had land in that area. Additionally, the Proclamation gave the Crown a monopoly in land bought from Native Americans.
In the fall of 1763, a royal decree was issued that prohibited the North American colonists from establishing or maintaining settlements west of an imaginary line running down the crest of the Appalachian Mountains. The proclamation acknowledged that Native Americans owned the lands on which they were then residing and white settlers in the area were to be removed.
However, provision was made to allow specially licensed individuals and entities to operate fur trading ventures in the proscribed area. There were two motivations for this policy:
To avoid warfare with the Indians. Neither side evidenced any affection for the tribes, but Indian conflicts were very expensive, and the British hadn't yet deployed enough soldiers in the West to keep the peace. Some Indians welcomed this policy, believing that separation from the colonies would allow them to resume their traditions. Others realized that the proclamation would, at best, only provide breathing room before the next onslaught of settlers.
To concentrate colonial settlements on the seaboard where they could be active parts of the British mercantile system. British trade officials took it as a first priority to populate the recently secured areas of Canada and Florida (referring to the Treaty of Paris), where colonists could reasonably be expected to trade with the mother country. Settlers living west of the Appalachians would be highly self-sufficient and have little opportunity to trade with English merchants.
The reaction of colonial land speculators and frontiersmen was immediate and negative. They believed their fight in the recent war had been "rewarded" by the creation of a vast restricted native reserve in the lands they coveted. Most concluded that the proclamation was only a temporary measure: a number ignored it entirely and moved into the prohibited area. Almost from its inception, the proclamation was modified to suit the needs of influential people with interests in the American West, both high British officials and colonial leaders.
Beginning in 1764, portions of the Proclamation Line were adjusted westward to accommodate speculative interests. Later, in 1768, the first Treaty of Fort Stanwix formally recognized the surrender of transmontane lands claimed by the Iroquois.
The Proclamation of 1763 was a well-intentioned measure. Pontiac’s Rebellion had inflicted a terrible toll on the frontier settlements in North America and the British government acted prudently by attempting to avoid such conflict in the foreseeable future.
The colonists, however, were not appreciative and regarded the new policy as an infringement of their basic rights. The fact that western expansion was halted at roughly the same time that other restrictive measures were being implemented, made the colonists increasingly suspicious
Almost immediately, many British colonists and land speculators objected to the proclamation boundary, since there were already many settlements beyond the line (some of which had been temporarily evacuated during Pontiac's War), as well as many existing land claims yet to be settled. Indeed, the proclamation itself called for lands to be granted to British soldiers who had served in the Seven Years' War. Prominent American colonists joined with land speculators in Britain to lobby the government to move the line further west. As a result, the boundary line was adjusted in a series of treaties with Native Americans. The Treaty of Fort Stanwix and the Treaty of Hard Labor (both 1768) and the Treaty of Lochaber (1770) opened much of what is now West Virginia and Kentucky to British settlement.
Besides regulating colonial expansion, the proclamation dealt with the management of newly ceded French colonies. It established government for four areas: Quebec, West Florida, East Florida, and Grenada. All of these were granted the ability to elect general assemblies under a royally appointed governor or a high council, which could then create laws and ordinances specific to the area in agreement with British and colonial laws. In the meantime, the new colonies enjoyed the same rights as native-born Englishmen, something that British colonists had been fighting over for years. An even bigger affront to the British colonies was the establishment of both civil and criminal courts complete with the right to appeal--but those charged with violating the Stamp or Sugar Act were to be tried in admiralty court, where the defendant was considered guilty until he or she could prove his or her innocence.
The influence of the Royal Proclamation of 1763 on the coming of the American Revolutionary War (1775–1783) has been variously interpreted. Many historians argue that the proclamation ceased to be a major source of tension after 1768, since the aforementioned treaties opened up extensive lands for settlement. Others have argued that colonial resentment of the proclamation contributed to the growing divide between the colonies and the Mother Country.
In the United States, the Royal Proclamation of 1763 ended with the American Revolutionary War, because Great Britain ceded the land in question to the United States in the Treaty of Paris (1783). Afterwards, the U.S. government also faced difficulties in preventing frontier violence, and eventually adopted policies similar to those of the Royal Proclamation. The first in a series of Indian Intercourse Acts was passed in 1790, prohibiting unregulated trade and travel in Native American lands. Additionally, the U.S. Supreme Court case Johnson v. M'Intosh (1823) established that only the U.S. government, and not private individuals, could purchase land from Native Americans.
The Royal Proclamation continued to govern the cession of aboriginal land in British North America, especially Upper Canada and Rupert's Land. The proclamation forms the basis of land claims of aboriginal peoples in Canada – First Nations, Inuit, and Metis. The Royal Proclamation of 1763 is thus mentioned in Section Twenty-five of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
The Boston Massacre in 1770 worsened American opinions of British rule.
In 1764, George Grenville became the British Chancellor of the Exchequer (minister of finance). He allowed customs officers to obtain general writs of assistance, which allowed officers to search random houses for smuggled goods. Grenville thought that if profits from smuggled goods could be directed towards Britain, the money could help pay off debts. Colonists were horrified that they could be searched without warrant at any given moment. Also in 1764, with persuasion from Grenville, Parliament began to impose several taxes on the colonists. The Sugar Act of 1764 reduced the taxes imposed by the Molasses Act, but at the same time strengthened the collection of the taxes. It also provided that British judges, and not juries, would try cases involving that Act.
The next year, Parliament passed the Quartering Act, which required the colonies to provide room and board for British soldiers stationed in North America; the soldiers would serve various purposes, chiefly to enforce the previously passed acts of Parliament.
Following the Quartering Act, Parliament passed one of the most infamous pieces of legislation: the Stamp Act. Previously, Parliament imposed only external taxes on imports. But the Stamp Act provided the first internal tax on the colonists, requiring that a tax stamp be applied to books, newspapers, pamphlets, legal documents, playing cards, and dice. The legislature of Massachusetts requested a conference on the Stamp Act; the Stamp Act Congress met in October that year, petitioning the King and Parliament to repeal the act before it went into effect at the end of the month, crying "taxation without representation."
The act faced vehement opposition throughout the colonies. Merchants threatened to boycott British products. Thousands of New Yorkers rioted near the location where the stamps were stored. In Boston, the Sons of Liberty, a violent group led by radical statesman Samuel Adams, destroyed the home of Lieutenant Governor Thomas Hutchinson. Parliament did indeed repeal the Stamp Act, but additionally passed the Declaratory Act, which stated that Great Britain retained the power to tax the colonists, even without substantive representation.
Believing that the colonists only objected to internal taxes, Chancellor of the Exchequer Charles Townshend proposed bills that would later become the Townshend Acts. The Acts, passed in 1767, taxed imports of tea, glass, paint, lead, and even paper. The colonial merchants again threatened to boycott the taxed products, reducing the profits of British merchants, who in turn petitioned Parliament to repeal the Townshend Acts. Parliament eventually agreed to repeal much of the Townshend legislation. But Parliament refused to remove the tax on tea, implying that the British retained the authority to tax the colonies despite a lack of representation.
In 1773, Parliament passed the Tea Act, which exempted the British East India Company from the Townshend taxes. Thus, the East India Company gained a great advantage over other companies when selling tea in the colonies. The colonists who resented the advantages given to British companies dumped British tea overboard in the Boston Tea Party in December of 1773.
In retaliation for the Boston Tea Party, Parliament passed the Coercive Acts, which were in the colonies known as the Intolerable Acts. Parliament reduced the power of the Massachusetts legislature and closed the port of Boston. Also, the Quartering Act was extended to require private individuals to lodge soldiers. Furthermore, Parliament allowed royal officials accused of crimes to be tried by a British, rather than a colonial, jury.
In order to debate a response to the Intolerable Acts, all American colonies except for Georgia sent delegates to the First Continental Congress at Philadelphia. The Congress met in September 1774 and issued a Declaration of Rights and Grievances. When the Congress adjourned, it stipulated anoth
